
THE 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


LONDON 


PRINTED  BY  SAMUEL  BENTLEY, 

Dorset  Street,  Fleet  Street. 


RamUd  by  Sir  Joshua-  Reynolds.  E no  raved  by  WiU.Wor thing  con,. 


11?S1  ©411ISI. 


Zondotv.Rubttshed-  by  JZenry  Colburn- &  Richard  3 trMcy.JSc. 


SL-M6 


THE 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 

DAVID 

WITH  THE 

MOST  CELEBRATED  PERSONS  OF  HIS  TIME; 

NOW  FIRST  PUBLISHED  FROM  THE  ORIGINALS, 

AND 

ILLUSTRATED  WITH  NOTES, 

AND 

A  NEW  BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR  OF  GARRICK. 

BtconH  iSftiteon. 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  I. 


OF 


GARRICK 


LONDON: 

PUBLISHED  FOR  HENRY  COLBURN 

BY  R.  BENTLEY.  SOLD  BY  ALL  BOOKSELLERS. 


MDCCCXXXV. 


r 

m .  on, 

6/93  . 

a  if l 

teas' 

/./ 


' 


/H  V 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR 


OF 

DAVID  GARRICK. 


INTRODUCTORY. 

The  papers  which  form  the  present  collection  were  selected  and  preserved  by  Mr.  Garrick  him¬ 
self;  whether  as  the  materials  of  any  auto-biography,  cannot  be  absolutely  determined,  although 
that  is  highly  probable.  The  mind  of  Mr.  Garrick  was  one  of  great  activity,  and  in  the  retirement 
which  his  bodily  health  required,  he  might  look  with  pleasure  to  such  an  occupation  of  his  time. 
The  composition  of  a  calm  and  authentic  narrative  of  his  busy  life  would  make  him  in  some  degree 
renew  the  long  period  of  his  public  and  private  engagements,  and  enjoy  the  memory  without  the 
passions  of  the  scene. 

Nor  was  he  at  a  loss  for  the  “  sweet  remembrancer”  at  his  side,  to  prompt  or  correct  his  record. 
Mrs.  Garrick  will  be  seen  by  the  present  “  correspondence,”  to  have  taken  more  than  the  usual  share 
in  the  interests  of  her  husband;  to  have  mixed  herself  up  with  much  of  his  business,  and  all  of  his 
society,  and  to  have  enjoyed  equal  love  and  respect  with  himself,  in  the  wide  and  splendid  circle  of 
his  friends.  Dear  as  his  fame  was  to  him,  there  is  full  proof  that  it  was  not  dearer  than  this  incom¬ 
parable  partner ;  from  whom,  he  says  himself,  he  had  never  been  separated  for  a  single  day, 
during  their  fortunate  and  happy  union. 

Mr.  Burke  was  accustomed  to  style  his  friend  Garrick,  one  of  the  deepest  observers  of  man  ;  and 
indeed  such  unbounded  powers  in  the  display  of  human  character  cannot  be  possessed  without  the 
most  subtle  and  unceasing  observation  of  daily  life.  It  was  this  practical  study  of  our  nature,  that 
rendered  him  one  of  the  most  instructive,  as  well  as  delightful,  companions  that  ever  existed  ;  and 
his  death  impoverished  equally  the  stock  of  social  and  public  gratification.  The  mention  of  this 
may  tend  to  show  the  value  he  could  have  imparted  to  such  a  work  had  he  lived  to  compose  it. 
But  if  we  have  lost  the  sketches  which  so  great  a  master  could  have  given  of  “  the  age  and  body  of 
his  time,”  he  has  preserved  to  us  much  in  which  they  are  not  slightly  indicated ;  and  the  acuteness 
of  his  discernment,  seasoned  by  his  peculiar  pleasantry,  is  a  very  prominent  feature  in  those  replies  to 
his  correspondents,  of  which  he,  for  adequate  reasons,  troubled  himself  to  keep  a  literal  copy.  He 
is  seen  frequently  in  contest  with  great  literary  characters  ;  but  he  is  never  second  in  the  keenest  en¬ 
counters  of  wit. 

It  has  been  thought,  therefore,  not  entirely  devoid  of  utility,  that  a  few  pages  in  this  \\  ork 
should  be  spared  to  a  Memoir  of  Mr.  Garrick,  what  the  French  call  a  precis  liistorique  ,  in  \\hkh 
the  known  and  undisputed  facts  of  his  life  should  receive  their  illustration  from  the  present  corre¬ 
spondence  ;  and  as  of  counsel  in  the  cause,  the  present  biographer  will  take  especial  care  that  all 

VOL.  I.  B 


5446 


II 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


he  advances  in  favour  of  his  client  be  strictly  borne  out  by  the  evidence  produced  in  court.  The 
result  he  feels  confident  will  be,  that  the  moral  and  intellectual  eminence  of  this  great  man  will 
be  held  in  still  higher  veneration  ;  he  will  be  proved  entitled  to  a  lastingyiwie  among  the  renowned 
of  his  species  ;  as  he  fortunately  possessed,  while  living,  an  influence,  perhaps  superior  to  that  of  any 
contemporary,  from  the  brilliant  and  inexhaustible  fertility  of  his  popular  endowments. 


SECTION  THE  FIRST. 

From  1716  to  1746. 

David  Garrick,  the  great  ornament  of  the  stage,  was  born  on  the  20th  of  February  1716,  at 
the  Angel  Inn,  Hereford,  the  quarters  of  his  father,  Captain  Peter  Garrick,  (who  was  then  on  the 
recruiting  service  ;)  and  baptized  on  the  28th  of  the  same  month,  as  appears  by  the  register  of  the 
church  of  All  Saints  in  that  city.*  The  family,  though  Protestant,  was  originally  French,  being 
driven  to  this  country  by  the  absurd  and  cruel  revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantz.  The  maiden  name 
of  Mr.  Garrick’s  mother  was  Clough  ;  she  was  the  daughter  of  one  of  the  Vicars  of  Lichfield  Cathe¬ 
dral.  His  parents  are  said  to  have  been  uniformly  courted  for  their  amiable  tempers  and  attractive 
manners,  and  enjoyed  the  unreserved  intimacy  of  the  first  families  in  Lichfield. 

The  youth  of  the  future  actor  was  graced  by  no  prodigies.  He  was  the  son  of  interesting 
parents,  vrhom  he  resembled,  as  his  faculties  ripened,  in  their  powers  of  entertainment ;  he  was 
sprightly  and  eccentric,  and  the  sallies  of  his  fancy  were  noticed  with  partiality  by  his  future  patron, 
Gilbert  Walmesley,  Registrar  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  at  Lichfield.  In  the  tenth  year  of  his  age 
he  was  placed  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Hunter,  master  of  the  Grammar  School  of  that  city.  A  vast 
deal  of  nonsense  has  been  written  upon  Garrick’s  inattention  to  his  studies  during  this  period,  but  he 
must  have  laid  early  the  foundation  of  his  classical  knowledge,  which  Dr.  Johnson  always  maintained 
to  be  considerable  ;  and  if  the  love  of  the  stage  displayed  itself  soon  in  him,  it  was  no  thoughtless 
pursuit ;  and  his  very  amusement  contributed  to  strengthen  his  understanding.  Besides,  the  slow 
acquisitions  of  the  school  pass  unobserved  ;  but  a  play  acted  in  private  excites  a  domestic  sensation, 
and  is  remembered  as  an  indication  of  the  future  comedian.  Had  Garrick  become  a  chief-justice, 
the  Serjeant  Kite  of  his  youth  would  have  dropt  into  oblivion. 

Mr.  Pope,  like  Garrick,  when  a  mere  boy,  patched  up  a  play  from  Ogilby’s  Homer,  and  in  such 
a  choice  the  future  translator  of  the  Iliad  may  be  seen  or  fancied.  Garrick  selected  for  his  private 
theatrical  the  Recruiting  Officer  of  Farquhar,  to  which  he  was  naturally  directed  by  his  father’s 
profession,  and  his  gay  and  agreeable  manners.  To  this  performance  Samuel  Johnson  was  requested 

*  “  David  Garrick,  the  son  of  Peter  and  Arabella  Garrick,  was  baptized  the  28th  of  February  1716. 
Taken  from  the  Register-Book  belonging  to  the  parish  of  All  Saints,  in  the  city  of  Hereford,  September 
29th  1761,  “  By  me  John  Eity,  Parish  Clerk.” 

This  first  notice  of  Garrick  is  thus  blundered  by  Murphy-  All  Saints  he  has  made  All  Souls,  and  the  real 
date  of  his  baptism  is  changed  into  that  of  his  birth,  the  20th  of  February, — though  the  biographer  knew 
nothing  distinctly  of  either. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


in 


to  contribute  a  prologue ;  but  he  was  destined  to  supply  bis  young  friend  on  a  more  interesting 
occasion,  when  the  vision  of  the  boy  should  be  realised,  and  the  confirmed  actor  was  become  the 
manager  of  Drury-lane  Theatre.  In  the  year  1747  Garrick  spoke  this  prologue  by  Johnson,  which 
is,  on  every  account,  the  best  of  which  the  stage  could  ever  boast. 

Serjeant  Kite  was  acted  by  Garrick  in  the  year  1727.  Soon  after  this  he  paid  a  visit  to  his 
uncle,  a  wine-merchant  settled  at  Lisbon;  and  the  English  residents  in  that  capital  invited  their 
sprightly  countryman  to  their  tables,  which,  after  the  cloth  was  removed,  not  seldom  presented  a 
ready  stage  to  him  ;  and  his  friends  enjoyed  in  young  Garrick  a  very  agreeable  revival  of  their  the¬ 
atrical  amusements.  Nor  was  his  acquaintance  confined  to  the  English  merchants  in  Lisbon;  many 
youthful  Portuguese  of  rank  and  distinction  became  delighted  with  his  accomplishments.  When 
the  Duke  D’Aveiro  suffered  death,  long  after,  for  conspiring  against  the  King  of  Portugal,  Garrick 
used  to  relate  to  his  friends,  that  he  had  often,  when  a  youth,  been  in  his  company,  and  would  draw 
a  very  interesting  picture  of  the  strong  contrast  between  the  youth  and  the  maturity  of  that  nobleman. 

But  Garrick’s  stay  in  Lisbon  was  not  a  long  one,  for  the  next  year  saw  him  returned  to  Mr. 
Hunter’s  care,  and  his  time  was  spent  betw  een  the  school  and  the  capital.  In  the  one  he  advanced 
his  classical  acquirements,  and  in  the  other  indulged  his  passion  for  the  theatre.  In  these  visits  to 
tow'n  he  had  opportunities  of  studying  the  art  as  it  was  exhibited  by  Quin  and  Cibber,  and  Macklin. 
The  houses  he  could  frequent  were  then,  as  now,  Drury-lane  and  Covent-garden  theatres  ;  that  in 
Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields;  that  in  Goodman’s  Fields,  which  he  soon  enriched  himself ;  and  Aaron  Hill’s 
rooms  in  Villiers-street,  where  the  Zara  wras  first  tried,  of  which  he  afterwards  became  the  enchant¬ 
ing  Lusignan.  But  notwithstanding  the  interruption  given  to  his  studies  by  these  trips  to  London, 
there  is  full  evidence  that  his  progress  in  the  school  had  been  far  from  a  slow  one.  Johnson  had 
assisted  in  his  studies  but  a  few  months,  and  therefore  to  Hunter  much  praise  is  due  for  fixing  so 
mercurial  a  spirit.  In  his  eighteenth  year  his  friend  Walmesley  writes  of  him,  that  he  w  as  not  only 
an  amiable  young  gentleman,  but  a  “  good  scholar;”  in  other  words,  the  grammar-school  had  done 
him  justice.  As  his  father  could  not  afford  to  send  him  to  the  University,  he  was  to  study  philo¬ 
sophy,  the  mathematics,  and  polite  literature,  under  Mr.  Colson,  then  residing  at  Rochester  in  Kent. 
To  show  at  once  all  that  w  as  required  ;  “  Few  instructions,”  says  Walmesley  to  his  friend,  “  on  your 
side  will  do,  and  in  the  intervals  of  study  he  will  be  an  agreeable  companion  for  you.’  Thus  we 
see  Colson  was  to  be  to  Garrick,  what  Johnson,  less  calculated  for  tuition,  had  recently  been,  and 
the  master  and  the  scholar  were  to  live  in  a  friendly  intimacy  together. 

And  this  leads  us  to  the  celebrated  journey  to  London,  by  Samuel  Johnson  and  David  Garrick, 
from  the  same  place,  with  views,  however,  widely  different ;  the  scholar  to  work  his  way  ultimately 
at  the  bar,  and  the  master  to  produce  his  genius  upon  the  stage.  4  he  result  is  well  known  to 
the  reader;  Johnson  acquired  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Laws,  and  the  intended  lawyer  became  the 
sovereign  of  the  stage; — happy  both  of  them  in  this,  that  in  their  respective  walks  they  were  alike 
transcendant ;  Johnson  the  first  name  in  literature  of  his  age,  and  Garrick  the  first  actoi  of  hi>  own, 
if  we  may  not  rather  think,  of  any  age. 

The  opportunity  may  be  here  taken  of  offering  a  very  fewr  remarks  upon  the  objects  of  Garrick  > 
fellow-traveller,  as  they  are  described  by  Gilbert  Walmesley:  “  Mr.  Johnson,  with  that  most  foi- 
lorn  of  all  hopes  to  a  stranger,  “  to  try  his  fate  with  a  tragedy’’  upon  the  stage ;  and  to  to  git 

B 


o 


IV 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


himself  employed  in  some  translation,  either  from  the  Latin  or  the  French.”  He  goes  on  without 
the  slightest  affectation  ;  “  Johnson  is  a  very  good  scholar  and  poet,  and  I  have  great  hopes  will 
turn  out  a  fine  tragedy  writer.  If  it  should  any  wray  lie  in  your  way,  I  doubt  not  but  you  would 
be  ready  to  recommend  and  assist  your  countryman.”  Regard  for  the  profound  critic  and  moralist 
may  induce  us  to  regret  that  his  rewards  should  have  fallen  so  far  short  of  his  friend’s.  The  sage, 
like  another  Cato,  gives  law's  to  a  little  senate  of  his  admirers,  and  struggles  through  life,  almost  in 
vain,  to  be  above  want.  The  actor  is  the  arbiter  elegantiarum,  the  “  observed  of  all  observers,”  the 
man  to  welcome  whom  the  proudest  rank  drops  its  barrier,  and  intreats  an  intimacy  as  a  boon.  He 
is,  almost  at  his  outset,  Patentee  and  Proprietor  of  the  first  Theatre  in  Europe;  and,  living  a  life  of 
splendour,  more  valuable  by  its  liberality,  bequeaths  at  his  death  property  considerably  beyond  one 
hundred  thousand  pounds  ! 

To  return  to  Mr.  Walmeslev’s  introduction.  In  the  proper  place  it  has  been  noticed  how  very 
imperfectly  Davies  had  given  the  two  letters,  addressed  by  him  to  his  friend  Colson.  Among  the 
passages  omitted,  is  the  following  relative  to  Garrick. 

“  This  young  gentleman,  you  must  know,  has  been  much  with  me,  ever  since  he  was  a  child, 
almost  every  day,  and  I  have  taken  a  pleasure  often  in  instructing  him,  and  have  a  great  affection 
and  esteem  for  him  ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  soon  have  the  like,  if  it  suit  with  your  con¬ 
venience  to  take  him  into  your  family.”  Who  but  must  rejoice  that  this  venerable  man  lived  to  en¬ 
joy  the  full  affluence  of  Garrick’s  fame,  and  to  see  that  his  pains,  so  humanely  and  affectionately 

taken,  were  destined  to  produce  a  thousand-fold  ! 

» 

L  pon  Garrick’s  coming  to  town  in  the  month  of  March  1736-7,  he  almost  immediately  entered 
himself  of  the  Honourable  Society  of  Lincoln’s  Inn.  But  he  did  not  yet  find  his  finances  sufficiently 
strong  to  defray  even  the  moderate  chai'ge  for  boarding  and  studying  with  Mr.  Colson.  In  this 
dilemma  his  father’s  brother  arrived  from  Lisbon,  with  a  view  to  close  his  life  in  England.  His 
nephew,  of  course,  made  his  circumstances  known  to  his  uncle,  and  gently  referred  to  a  fruitless 
voyage,  taken  at  his  instigation,  to  Portugal.  The  old  gentleman  generously  remembered  this  dis¬ 
appointment,  and  left  to  David,  by  will,  a  larger  legacy  than  to  any  of  his  brother’s  children.  His 
benevolence  became  almost  immediately  effective,  for  he  died  a  very  short  time  after  his  arrival  in 
London. 

Garrick  now  sawT  himself  master  of  a  thousand  pounds,  and  applied  the  interest  of  his  capital  to 
the  best  use,  in  realizing  the  plan  as  to  Mr.  Colson’s  instructions.  With  that  gentleman  he  there¬ 
fore  nowr  took  up  his  residence,  resolving  to  apply  himself  to  the  abstruse  sciences.  But  the  theatre 
had  got  too  strong  a  hold  upon  his  affections  to  allow  its  claim  to  be  disputed  ;  he  was  not  intended 
to  rival  the  great  mathematicians,  yet  demonstration  assisted  to  strengthen  his  powers  as  a  reasoner ; 
and,  indeed,  his  letters  show'  occasionally  that  he  had  the  talent  of  the  logician  to  sober  his  fancy 
and  convince  his  antagonist  or  convict  him.  He  wrote  in  haste,  but  not  without  plan. 

The  biographers  of  Mr.  Garrick  have  been  greatly  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  situation  of  his  father, 
Captain  Garrick,  who  about  this  time  returned  to  England  from  Gibraltar.  The  fact  was  this:  that 
gentleman  had  been  some  years  upon  half-pay,  when  he  availed  himself  of  an  opportunity  that 
offered  to  go  upon  full-pay,  by  exchanging  with  an  officer  who  was  anxious  to  come  home  from 
Gibraltar.  It  is  probable  that  he  paid  no  difference,  and  enjoyed  the  full-pay  with  its  arduous 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


v 


service,  while  the  officer  with  whom  he  exchanged,  was  equally  happy  with  the  half-pay  of  the  same 
rank,  and  the  pleasures  of  home.  Such  exchanges  were  frequent  in  the  British  army.  Being  now 
a  captain  on  full-pay,  with,  it  is  likely,  the  brevet  rank  of  major,  Captain  Garrick  imagined  that  he 
would  be  allowed  to  sell  his  company  on  his  return  for  the  benefit  of  his  family  ;  but  having  gone 
on  full-pay  without  giving  any  difference,  and  being  considered  as  exchanging  merely  with  a  view 
to  realise  ;  the  permission  to  sell,  though  sometimes  granted,  was  refused,  and  the  expected  resource 
to  the  family  fell  to  the  ground.  Upon  Captain  Garrick’s  return  to  this  country,  it  soon  became 
apparent  that  his  constitution  had  been  deeply  injured  ;  and  during  the  residence  of  young  Garrick 
with  Mr.  Colson,  this  kind  father  and  amiable  man  was  snatched  from  his  family — a  numerous  one, 
and  but  slenderly  provided  for.  His  widow  followed  her  lamented  husband  in  about  a  twelvemonth 
after  his  decease. 

In  casting  about  for  some  profession,  the  Captain’s  sons  thought  of  that  of  their  benevolent 
uncle  ;  and  David,  in  conjunction  with  his  brother  Peter,  commenced  business  as  a  wine-merchant, 
and  hired  vaults  accordingly  in  Durham-yard.  The  convivial  gaiety  of  David  would,  it  may  be 
imagined,  produce  no  mean  flow  of  orders  for  wine  to  the  firm,  and  the  steadier  partner  might 
reasonably  have  excused  his  brother's  volatile  habits,  in  consideration  of  the  profit  that  in  some 
degree  attached  to  them.  But  that  indulgence  to  habits  different  from  our  own,  is  not  very  usual 
in  business ;  method  and  irregularity  are  opposite  poles  to  each  other ;  the  brothers  differed  so 
frequently  and  so  seriously,  that  at  last  the  interference  of  their  common  friends  became  necessary, 
and  the  partnership  between  them  was  dissolved. 

Garrick  led  now  a  life  into  which  the  students  of  our  Inns  of  Court  have  long  shown  a  disposi¬ 
tion  to  plunge : — he  got  introduced  to  managers,  he  became  the  coffee-house  acquaintance  of  players, 
— he  studied  their  profession  infinitely  more  than  the  Statutes,  became  the  faithful  mimic  of  their 
various  manners,  and  wrote  criticisms  upon  their  performances,  which  gave  him  the  newspaper 
celebrity  of  diurnal  wit.  He,  who  can  perfectly  imitate  the  excellence  or  the  oddities  of  stage- 
actors,  has  no  great  difficulty  in  believing  that  he  could  act  himself ;  Garrick  determined  to  make  a 
provincial  trial  of  what  he  could  do  in  the  profession,  and  joined  the  Ipswich  Company  in  the  year 
1741,  then  under  the  direction  of  William  Giffard  and  John  Dunstall. 

Previously  to  his  leaving  London  for  this  experiment,  he  had  the  pleasure  of  witnessing  some 
concurring  circumstances  in  this  memorable  dramatic  year.  On  the  29th  of  January  the  monument 
to  his  beloved,  it  might  almost  be  said,  his  paternal  Shakspeare,  wras  opened  in  Westminster  Abbey. 
The  subscription  in  honour  of  Shakspeare  was  very  properly  a  public  one,  to  which  the  donors  con¬ 
tributed  otherwise  than  by  visiting  the  theatres :  they  entered  their  names  in  books  opened  for  the 
purpose  at  Tom's  Coffee-House  in  Covent-Garden,  Dick's  at  Temple-bar,  Tom's  in  Cornhill,  11  kite's 
in  St.  James’s-street,  and  the  Cocoa-tree  in  Pall-Mall,  and  our  fair  countrywomen  also  were  invited 
to  send  the  contributions  of  their  love  for  the  poet,  who  had  best  delineated  their  virtues.  Nor 
wfas  the  marble  monument  all  that  honoured  his  memory. 

“  Even  from  the  tomb  the  voice  of  Nature  cries." 

It  was  heard  by  Macklin,  and,  for  the  first  time  at  that  theatre,  on  the  14th  of  the  following  month, 
[February,]  the  Jew's-place  travesty  was  banished  for  ever,  and  Drury-Lane  exhibited  the  iniginal 


VI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


“  Merchant  of  Venice.”  Macklin  was  the  Shylock,  Quin  the  Antonio,  Mrs.  Clive  the  Portia,  and 
Mrs.  Pritchard,  the  Nerissa. 

Such  were  the  events  that  ushered  in  the  debut  of  Garrick  at  Ipswich,  under  the  assumed  name 
of  Lyddal.  Although  Aboan  is  not  written  up  to  the  enchanting  Oroonoko,  yet  there  is  spirit, 
fire,  affectionate  attachment,  love  of  freedom,  and  a  black  mask  to  conceal  the  candidate  ;  and  Mr. 
Garrick  chose  it  in  preference  to  a  more  arduous  character.  He  became  at  once  the  delight  of  the 
town  of  Ipswich;  and  they  crowded  the  theatre  to  his  Chamont,  his  Captain  Brazen,  and  his  Sir 
Harry  Wildair:  among  his  achievements  there,  he  put  on  the  jacket  of  Harlequin,  and  his  agility 
equalled  his  humour.  They  long  continued  at  Ipswich  to  value  him  as  the  first  of  actors,  and  them¬ 
selves  as  the  first  of  critics  for  having  encouraged  him. 

But  the  winter  season  brought  Garrick  to  London,  along  with  his  friends  Giffard  and  Dunstall, 
to  act  with  them  at  the  late  theatre,  as  it  was  called,  in  Goodman’s  Fields.  Here  the  bills  an¬ 
nounced  a  concert  of  vocal  and  instrumental  music,  between  the  two  acts  of  which  a  play  was 
performed,  and  a  farce,  by  persons  for  their  own  diversion  :  there  was  even  an  entertainment  of 
dancing.  The  concert  began  at  six  o’clock,  and  the  prices  were  three  shillings,  two  shillings,  and 
one  shilling.  To  such  an  audience  as  this  treatment  could  collect,  in  the  eastern  part  of  the 
metropolis,  David  Garrick  acted  Richard,  in  Shakspeare’s  tragedy  of  Richard  III.  for  the  first 
time,  on  the  19th  October  1741.  The  success  of  the  new  actor  was  great  beyond  all  precedent 
there  ;  but,  though  strengthened  by  the  curiosity  of  Garrick’s  personal  friends,  the  audiences  for 
some  time  were  not  numerous.  One  writing  with  the  treasury  receipts  before  him  acknowledges 
that  the  amount  taken  at  the  doors  in  seven  ni°jits  was  but  216/.  7s.  Still  Giffard  found  his  account 
in  repeating  the  tragedy,  and  he  judged  correctly,  that  the  genius  of  his  young  friend  would  soon 
be  greatly  admired  and  universally  followed. 

On  the  28th  of  October  he  acted,  for  the  first  time,  Clodio,  in  the  Fop’s  Fortune,  and  on  the  6th 
of  November,  Chamont,  in  the  Orphan,  for  the  first  time  in  London.  It  is  a  character  exactly 
suited  to  the  ardent  and  marking  style  of  Garrick.  He  now  thought  he  might  venture  something 
that  should  lend  additional  credit  to  his  powers  as  an  actor,  and  accordingly,  on  the  30th  of 
November,  exhibited  a  first  time  his  own  farce  of  the  Lying  Valet,  taken  from  a  piece  of  Motteux’s, 
called  Novelty.  This  farce  has  been  always  popular. 

The  2nd  of  December  1741,  was  assigned  to  him  for  his  benefit.  On  that  night  we  begin  to  feel 
his  growing  attraction.  The  concert,  probably,  was  now  but  a  “  hollow  blast  of  wind,” — the  real 
magnet  was  the  new  actor.  On  that  occasion  he  performed  Lothario  in  the  Fair  Penitent,  his 
first  appearance  in  that  character.  The  pit  and  boxes  were  then  laid  together  at  four  shillings,  and 
even  the  gods  condescended  to  attest  his  merit  with  an  additional  sixpence.  Tickets,  moreover,  for 
this  “benefit  of  Mr.  Garrick,  who  performed  King  Richard,”  were  announced  to  be  had  at  the 
Bedford  Coffee-house,  Covent-Garden,  Tonis  in  Cornhill,  Cary's  in  the  Minories,  and  at  the  actor’s 
lodgings,  in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman’s  Fields ;  nay,  the  stage  itself,  on  that  evening,  was  commo- 
diously  built  in  the  manner  of  an  amphitheatre,  and  servants,  allowed  to  keep  places  in  it,  were 
desired  to  be  there  by  three  o’clock. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  the  Rev.  Thomas  Newton,  (as  it  appears  in  the  Correspondence  at  page 
3.)  began  to  attend  to  Garrick’s  public  performances.  He  saw  him  in  the  character  of  Richard  on 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


vii 

the  loth  of  December,  and  had  to  traverse  from  Grosvenor-square  to  Well  close-square,  nearly  the 
extreme  length  of  London,  to  the  place  of  exhibition.  His  remarks  upon  his  friend’s  performance 
are  open  to  our  animadversion,  with  all  the  respect  due  to  a  name  of  much  critical  celebrity.  The 
rule  of  Shakspeare  or  his  Hamlet  is  unquestionable, — “  Suit  the  action  to  the  word,  with  this  special 
observance,  that  you  o’erstep  not  the  modesty  of  nature.”  But  surely  suiting  the  action  to  the  word 
does  not  mean  imitative  action.  The  words  “  I  would  have  some  friend  to  tread  upon  them,” 
(Richard’s  two  spiders,  his  nephews,)  need  not  the  enforcement  of  the  actor’s  foot  to  be  intelligible. 
“  Garrick,”  says  Newton,  “  used  only  his  hand  on  this  occasion  and  I  for  one  admire  him  that 
he  did  so.  The  less  of  these  explosive  stamps  we  hear  in  tragedy  the  better.  The  hand  is  the 
true  index  for  the  actor,  and  wonderfully  it  may  assist  the  most  expressive  language ;  but  even 
with  that  beautiful  vane  of  passion,  “  do  not  saw  the  air  too  much,”  says  our  teacher  of  his  own 
art,  “but  use  all  gently.”  The  depression  of  Richard’s  hand  to  Buckingham  is  the  true  inforce- 
ment  of  his  desire  for  their  destruction.  The  minister,  Mr.  Pulteney,  was  anxious  to  see  him,  with 
Newton’s  party;  and  the  great  tragedian  Mrs.  Porter,  who  had  quitted  the  scene  herself,  pro¬ 
phetically  announced  his  future  fame. 

Perhaps  the  greatest  honour  that  was  paid  to  him,  if  the  honour  is  to  be  measured  by  the  talent 
which  bestow  s  it,  wras  the  attendance  of  Mr.  Pope  to  see  his  Richard.  “  As  I  opened  the  part,” 
says  Garrick  himself,  “  I  saw  our  little  poetical  hero,  dressed  in  black,  seated  in  a  side-box  near 
the  stage,  and  viewing  me  with  a  serious  and  earnest  attention.  His  look  shot  and  thrilled  like 
lightning  through  my  frame,  and  I  had  some  hesitation  in  proceeding,  from  anxiety  and  from  joy. 
As  Richard  gradually  blazed  forth,  the  house  was  in  a  roar  of  applause,  and  the  conspiring  hand 
of  Pope  shadovred  me  with  laurels.” 

The  Poet  was  so  struck  with  the  performance,  that  turning  to  Lord  Orrery,  he  said,  “  That 
young  man  never  had  his  equal  as  an  actor,  and  he  will  never  have  a  rival."  Pope’s  eye  was  re¬ 
markably  keen  and  brilliant ;  he  would  in  Garrick  find  a  similar  perfection.  The  force  and  finish 
of  the  actor’s  utterance  too,  would  strike  the  most  pointed  and  perfect  of  our  poets.  We  have  said 
thus  much  to  obviate  a  remark  of  the  Malevoli,  that  Pope  praised  Garrick  from  his  desire  to  mor¬ 
tify  Cibber.  It  will  be  remembered  too,  that  Pope  said  this  with  a  perfect  knowledge  of  Betterton, 
whose  portrait  he  had  painted,  or  it  may  be  only  copied.  Garrick  himself  related  to  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Rackett,  that  Pope  expressed  his  alarm  “  lest  he  should  become  vain,  and  be  ruined  by  the  applause 
he  received.” 

Among  his  early  characters  in  town  we  find  the  Ghost  in  Hamlet ;  it  might  be  well  for  a  great 
genius  in  the  art,  to  show  how  awe  was  to  be  inspired  by  the  action  and  utterance  of  such  a  mys¬ 
terious  being;  but  Garrick’s  true  character  in  the  play  was  the  Prince  of  Denmark,  a  part  which  we 
find  him  incessantly  studying,  and  perfecting  to  the  last.  But,  with  his  characteristic  spirit,  he  de¬ 
termined  to  Jill  the  public  mind,  which  he  had  so  fixed  ;  and  he  fortunately  possessed  a  genius 
“  universal  as  his  theme,”  and  exhibited  a  diversity  of  powers,  which  seemed  to  embrace  every  thing 
that  was  characteristic  in  the  drama.  In  a  few-  weeks  we  find  him  acting  Fondlewife  in  the  Old 
Bachelor,  Costar  Pearmain  in  the  Recruiting  Officer,  his  Aboan  again,  II  itwoud  in  Congreves 
Way  of  the  World,  and  on  the  3rd  of  February,  Bayes  in  the  Rehearsal.  On  the  :22nd  ot  the 
same  month,  he  acted  Master  Johnny,  a  lad  of  fifteen,  in  the  Schoolboy;  and  soon  after,  for  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


viii 

benefit,  on  the  18th  of  March,  he  amazed  the  town  by  repeating  it  after  his  performance  of 
King  Lear. 

“  ’Tis  much  he  dares, 

And  to  that  dauntless  temper  of  his  mind, 

He  hath  a  wisdom  that  doth  guide  his  valour 
To  act  in  safety.” 

The  farce  of  the  School-Boy  was  written  by  Colley  Cibber,  who  was  still  living;  and  he  might, 
and  very  probably  did,  see  that  wonderful  junction  of  eighty-four  and  fifteen  by  the  same  actor; 
and  it  would  have  been  worse  than  invidious  not  to  say,  as  he  did  to  Mrs.  Bracegirdle,  “  Why,  faith, 
Bracey,  the  young  fellow  is  clever .” 

However,  Garrick  performed  Lear  first  for  the  house,  before  he  thought  of  himself ;  that  pro¬ 
bably  greatest  of  all  his  characters,  he  acted  on  the  11th  of  March  1742;  and  on  the  15th  of 
the  same  month,  he  assumed  Cibber’s  own  creation,  Lord  Foppington,  in  the  Careless  Husband. 
Upon  some  of  these  appearances  the  “  Correspondence ”  again  throws  light,  and  we  have  an  authentic 
criticism  under  the  hand  of  Dr.  Newton,  to  which  we  gladly  recur.  His  opinions  are  valuable  for 
what  they  give  and  what  they  suggest. 

Dr.  Newton  then  was  of  opinion  that  Garrick  far  exceeded  Booth  in  Lear,  and  even  equalled 

Betterton.  Such  was  the  dawn  of  that  bright  day.  But  he  appears  to  be  most  struck  with  his 

friend’s  variety  as  an  actor.  “  You  are,”  says  he,  “  a  totally  different  man  in  Lear  from  what  you 

are  in  Richard.  There  is  a  sameness  in  every  other  actor.”  Newton  does  not  seem  to  have  thought 

* 

his  Lord  Foppington  equal  to  Cibber’s,  and  had  advised  him  rather  to  take  Sir  Charles  Easy  in  the 
Careless  Husband.  As  to  his  performance  of  low  or  trivial  characters,  we  have  assigned  the  true 
reason  as  a  note  to  the  critic’s  objection.  He  acted  Duretete  for  Yates’s  benefit,  and  Pierre  for 
Miss  Hippisley’s,  and  another  military  hero  of  his  first  choice,  the  Recruiting  Officer,  Captain 
Brazen,  for  Betson  and  Dunstall.  He  even  came  to  Drury-Lane  Theatre  to  assist  Mrs.  Harper, 
and  performed  Chamont  for  her  benefit,  by7  which  she  recovered  her  failure  on  a  former  occasion. 
The  season  in  Goodman’s  Fields  closing  on  the  24th  May,*  Mr.  Garrick  agreed  to  appear  three 
nights  at  Drury-Lane  Theatre,  and  there  exhibited  his  astonishing  powers  in  Bayes,  in  Lear,  and  in 
Richard,  dividing  liberally  enough  the  profits  of  these  performances  with  Fleetwood  the  patentee ; 
immediately  after  which  he  set  off  for  Dublin,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  Woffington. 

The  scandalous  chronicles  of  that  time  hint  at  a  somewhat  more  than  friendly  intimacy  between 
Garrick  and  this  delightful  woman.  It  may  be  so.  Woffington  decidedly  preferred  male  society, 
and  Hoadley  remembered  to  have  read  some  of  his  dramatic  trifles  to  Garrick  at  Woffington’s 
breakfast-table.  The  strength  or  weakness  of  this  partiality  it  would  be  idle  to  estimate;  such 
irregular  attachments  are  only  regular  in  their  close.  She  has  been  accused,  moreover,  of  infidelity  ; 
but  she  violated  no  pledge ;  these  are  the  unions  of  mere  convenience  or  desire,  and  are  dissolved 
by  either  interest  or  satiety. 

The  Irish  gentry  are  extremely  fond  of  the  theatre ;  but  it  has  no  perennial  support  among 

*  From  the  19th  of  October  1741,  to  May  23rd  1742,  Mr.  Garrick  acted  a  hundred  and  fifty-nine  nights, 
and  performed  eighteen  different  characters. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


IX 


them  :  they  crowd  a  novelty  while  it  is  novel,  and  no  longer;  and  certainly  any  thing  so  strikingly 
new  as  Garrick  never  at  any  time  approached  their  shores.  They  followed  him  so  ardentlv  at 
Dublin,  that  the  Garrick  Fever  soon  became  no  mere  metaphor.  The  excessive  heat  of  the  summer 
and  the  fulness  of  the  houses  brought  on  an  epidemic  disorder,  by  which  many  of  his  followers  lost 
their  lives. 

Hamlet  had  long  been  meditated  devoutly  by  Garrick,  and  he  ventured  to  submit  his  impressions 
of  that  beautiful  and  perfect  delineation  to  a  Dublin  audience.  The  Correspondence  will  show,  at 
page  12,  a  very  clever  letter  from  a  native  admirer,  in  which  (with  the  customary  errors  as  to  what 
is  intended  by  the  English  sound  of  the  vowels,)  there  is  a  great  deal  of  just  and  useful  criticism  on 
Mr.  Garrick’s  fine  performance.*  With  a  delightful  accession  to  his  fame,  and  a  splendid  addition 
to  his  fortune,  full  of  gratitude  for  the  hospitality,  as  well  as  generosity  of  the  nobility  and  gentry, 
and  the  learned  of  Dublin,  Mr.  Garrick  quitted  that  capital  to  resume  his  winter  engagements  in 
London. 

The  season  of  1742-3  witnessed  the  return  of  that  pathetic  actress,  Airs.  Cibber,  to  the  stage. 
She  had  not  acted  in  London  since  the  year  1738,  and  now  opened  Covent-Garden  theatre,  on  the 
22nd  of  September  in  the  character  of  Desdemona ;  Othello  by  Air.  Quin.  To  check,  in  some  degree, 
this  tragic  success  of  the  rival  theatre,  Fleetwood  brought  forward  the  prodigy  Garrick  ;  and  Airs. 
Pritchard  was  his  heroine  in  tragedy — they  made  their  first  appearance  for  the  season  on  the  5th  of 
October,  in  Otway’s  Chamont  and  Monimia.  On  the  19th,  Garrick  performed  Captain  Plume  in 
his  old  favourite,  the  Recruiting  Officer  ;  and  having  now, 

“  Settled  and  bent  up 
Each  corporal  agent  to  that  terrible  feat,” 

on  the  16th  November  he  trusted  his  Hamlet,  a  first  time,  to  the  eager  criticism  of  a  London 
audience. 

Hamlet  has  always  been  the  darling  of  the  English  ;  not  so  much  because  he  is  Shakspeare’s 
Prince  of  Denmark,  as  that  his  nomination  imports  a  being  with  whom  the  character  of  the  English 
instinctively  sympathises.  His  “  weakness  and  his  melancholy”  speak  for  him  as  much  as  the 
unnatural  wrongs  he  has  sustained.  The  “glass  of  fashion,  and  the  mould  of  form,”  the  “observed 
of  all  observers,”  has  dropt  into  a  dejection,  which  has  blighted  his  pleasantry,  banished  the  gentle¬ 
manly  exercises  in  which  he  excelled,  rendered  the  earth  on  which  he  declines,  a  “  sterile  promon¬ 
tory,”  and  the  majestical  roof  above  it,  “  fretted  with  golden  fire,”  no  other  thing  to  him  than  a 
“  foul  and  pestilent  congregation  of  vapours.”  He  is  deeply  and  constantly  sensible  of  injury,  and 
yet,  tardy  in  his  vengeance  ;  he  deliberates  until  the  time  for  action  is  gone  by.  He  is  fully  alive, 
also,  to  the  quick  susceptibility  of  honour ;  has  cause,  and  will,  and  means  “  to  make  oppression 
bitter”  to  his  enemy  ;  yet  such  is  his  indecision,  that,  until  his  own  destruction  is  assured,  and  he 
feels  the  treacherous  contrivance  of  the  usurper  at  his  heart,  he  delays  to  strike  the  blow,  that 
avenges  his  father,  his  mother,  his  mistress,  and  himself. 

*  Could  one  believe,  but  for  Ibis  record,  that  Hamlet,  after  drawing  his  sword  on  the  platform,  and 
following  the  Ghost  to  a  more  removed  ground,  no  sooner  hears  the  terrific  words,  “  I  am  thy  lathers 
spirit,”  than,  instead  of  letting  the  weapon  drop  from  his  palsied  hand,  he  absolutely,  with  a  respectful  bow, 
returned  it  into  the  scabbard  ? 


VOL.  I. 


c 


X 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


“It  will  make  you  melancholy,  Monsieur  Jacques,”  says  Amiens,  in  As  you  Like  It. 

“  I  thank  it,”  replies  the  moralist — “  more;  I  pr’ythee,  more  !”  The  poet,  in  this  single  speech 
of  Jacques,  has  painted  the  mind  of  his  countrymen.  We  will  not  say,  with  a  most  acute  critic, 

“  Hamlet  is  every  man,"  for  there  are  even  whole  nations  who  have  little  of  him  :  but,  speaking  to 
Englishmen,  it  may  be  said,  “  It  is  WE  who  are  Hamlet."  Hamlet  is  therefore  more  important  to 
us  than  any  of  Shakspeare’s  heroes ;  the  play  is  oftener  acted,  and  more  read,  than  Lear,  than 
Macbeth,  than  Othello,  than  even  the  play  of  free-men,  Julius  Caesar.  Davies,  who  saw  this  first 
performance  of  Hamlet,  was  himself  an  actor,  and  might  have  given  such  particulars  as  discriminated 
Garrick  from  other  performers  of  the  character  ;  but  he  contents  himself  with  describing  him  in 
the  first  scene  with  the  Ghost,  to  the  same  effect,  and  almost  in  the  same  words,  as  Cibber  had 
bestowed  upon  Betterton  there  ;  and  adds,  what  might  be  strictly  true,  that  the  applause  upon  Gar¬ 
rick’s  exit  continued  until  his  re-entrance ;  an  effect  chiefly  owing,  it  may  be  conceived,  to  the 
astonishing  expression  of  his  countenance,  and  the  beauty  and  grace  of  his  action.  Through  the 
haze  of  glowing  but  general  admiration,  one  point  of  value  is  discriminated.  Of  the  Soliloquies,  that 
beginning  “  Oh  what  a  wretch  and  peasant  slave  am  I,”  pleased  Davies  the  most;  the  reason  was, 
that  it  best  suited  the  quick  and  ardent  nature  of  the  actor.  It  abounds  in  passionate  exclamations, 
sudden  resolves,  and  striking  contrasts.  Johnson,  we  should  always  remember,  pronounced  against 
the  philosophic  To  be,  or  not  to  be.  After  all,  perhaps,  the  importance  of  the  topics  revolved  by 
Hamlet  demands  more  from  an  actor  than  it  is  possible  to  give — to  utter  such  mental  struggles, 
at  all,  is  to  parade  the  thoughts,  which  debases  them.  The  actor,  with  Shakspeare’s  King  John, 
might  say  to  the  audience  before  him, 

“  If  that  thou  couldst  see  me  without  eyes, 

Hear  without  ears,  using  conceit  alone, 

I  would  into  thy  bosom  pour  my  thoughts." 

The  play  of  Hamlet  has  received  more  comment,  the  character  of  its  hero  has  undergone  more 
dispute,  the  excellence  of  his  representatives  excited  more  variety  of  estimation  than  we  can  remem¬ 
ber  to  have  attended  any  other  drama.  With  respect  to  Mr.  Garrick’s  performance,  it  occupied  the 
mind  of  every  thing  critical  among  us,  and  the  “  Correspondence”  preserves,  about  this  date,  much 
ingenious  remark  upon  his  manner  and  his  conception  of  Hamlet’s  character;  to  these  the  reader  is 
leferred,  with  a  single  caution,  that  the  most  ingenious  critic  does  not  always  accurately  describe; 
the  most  attentive  hearer  sometimes  mistakes  the  sense  conveyed  by  the  speaker’s  emphasis  or  ca¬ 
dence.  W  here  Mr.  Garrick  preserves  his  reply  to  a  critic,  we  come  at  the  exact  fact,  a  correction 
of  a  mode  liable  to  misconception  ;  a  justification  of  his  own  manner  ;  or  a  frank  admission  that  his 
anonymous  estimator  is  both  friendly  and  right. 

The  performance  of  Archer,  so  early  as  the  month  following,  was  succeeded  by  Hastings  in  Jane 
Shore,  for  his  second  benefit ;  he  played  Sir  Harry  Wildair  for  Woffington’s,  and  for  Macklin, 
on  the  21st  of  March,  he  displayed  one  of  the  most  finished  studies  of  low  humour,  that  the  world 
ever  saw,  by  acting  Abel  Drugger  in  Ben  Jonson’s  Alchymist.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  neatness 
in  the  following  contemporary  criticism.  The  writer  thus  describes  Mr.  Garrick. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XI 


“  Abel  Drugger’s  first  appearance  would  disconcert  the  muscular  economy  of  the  wisest.  His 
attitude,  his  dread  of  offending  the  doctor,  his  saying  nothing,  his  gradual  stealing  in  farther  and 
farther,  his  impatience  to  be  introduced,  his  joy  to  his  friend  Face,  are  imitable  by  none.  Mr. 
Garrick  has  taken  that  walk  to  himself,  and  is  the  ridiculous  above  all  conception.  When  he  first 
opens  his  mouth,  the  features  of  his  face  seem,  as  it  were,  to  drop  upon  his  tongue  ;  it  is  all  caution  ; 
it  is  timorous,  stammering,  and  inexpressible.  When  he  stands  under  the  conjuror  to  have  his 
features  examined,  his  teeth,  his  beard,  his  little  finger,  his  awkward  simplicity,  and  his  concern, 
mixed  with  hope  and  fear,  and  joy  and  avarice,  and  good-nature,  are  above  painting.” 

When  we  look  at  the  skeleton  text,  which  the  genius  of  the  actor  has  invested  with  such  comic 
life  and  action,  it  must  increase  the  very  profession  in  our  esteem. 

The  critic  next  notices  the  eager  running  up  to  inform  Subtle,  that  he  himself  sells  the  tobacco 
which  the  philosopher  commended  ;  the  struggle  to  make  his  intended  present  two  pound.  His 
breaking  the  bottle  in  the  Doctor’s  absence,  while  curiously  examining  the  implements  around  him. 
His  beating  off  Surley,  disarming  him,  and  throwing  away  the  sword  with  contempt.  He  does 
not  know  friend  from  foe  in  his  triumphant  perambulation,  and  is  going  even  to  strike  his  favourite 
Captain  Face.  Garrick  seemed  to  say,  to  the  very  side  scenes,  “  Will  you  fight  me  ?"’ 

And  this  is  the  “  Lear”  and  the  “  Hamlet”  who  agonised  and  astonished  us  a  few  nights  before ! 
Again  we  disclaim  Dr.  Newton’s  genteel ,  but  narrow  basis.  We  would  have  him  be  the  interpreter 
of  all  Nature ! 

About  this  time,  Mr.  Thomas  Sheridan  appeared  at  the  theatre  in  Smock  Alley,  and  his  success 
was  even  beyond  expectation.  The  “  Correspondence”  presents  us  with  his  reply  to  Garrick’s  in¬ 
vitation  to  act  with  him,  which  he  prudently  declines  in  a  metaphorical  compliment.  “  A  well-cut 
pebble  may  pass  for  a  diamond,  till  a  fine  brilliant  is  placed  near  it,  and  puts  it  out  of  counte¬ 
nance.”  He  has  no  objection  to  divide  the  two  kingdoms  between  them ;  to  be  the  alternate  So¬ 
vereigns  of  London  and  Dublin.  “  Farthest  from  him  is  best.” 

The  summer  of  1743  was  distinguished  by  one  of  those  professional  combinations,  at  which 
“  authority”  always  looks  grave.  But  an  actor  is  peculiarly  circumstanced.  If  he  is  engaged  to  a 
profligate  and  needy  manager,  enjoying  a  Patent  Right,  he  may  suffer  much,  and  yet  hardly  ven¬ 
ture  to  seek  redress.  To  be  refractory  with  just  ground,  may  only  end  in  his  own  expulsion,  not 
merely  from  a  profitable  engagement,  but  from  the  town  friends,  and  settled  habits  ot  life,  to  which 
so  much  credit  and  comfort  necessarily  attach.  The  ardent  temper  of  Garrick  led  him  into  a  con¬ 
federacy  of  this  sort;  and  he  stood  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  brothers,  solemnly  bound  to  eacli  othei, 
to  bring  Fleetwood  to  reason  or  shut  up  his  theatre.  The  conspirators  against  him  had  “  all  the 
talents”  among  them.  Garrick,  Macklin,  Havard,  Berry,  Blakes,  Mrs.  Pritchard,  Mrs.  C  live,  with 
Mills  and  his  wife,  all  determined  to  secede  and  support  each  other  in  their  resistance. 

The  chamberlain  of  the  period,  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  gave  them  but  slender  counte¬ 
nance.  He  asked  simply  the  amount  of  their  salaries;  and  finding  that  a  “  mere  player  could  get 
500/.  a-year,  while  the  defender  of  his  country  might  bleed  or  perish  upon  less  than  half  tin 
amount,  he  forgot  the  honour  of  bearing  the  King’s  commission  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  iauiu» 
of  great  stage  talent  on  the  other,  and  very  unlike  his  witty  predecessor,  the  Duke  of  Dot  set,  po>i- 


c  2 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xii 

tivelv  refused  to  interfere  in  their  favour.  The  patentee  now  assumed  courage  to  face  his  enemies; 
and  collecting  in  the  provincial  towns  such  recruits  as  he  could  find,  and  having  secured  Paul 
Whitehead  to  compose  his  manifesto  and  defend  his  cause,  he  took  the  field,  as  usual,  in  September, 
with  “  his  tattered  host  of  mounted  scare-crows."  The  literary  champion  of  the  actors  was  W  illiam 
Guthrie,  the  historian  and  translator. 

But  actors  without  a  house,  and  still  worse,  without  a  patent,  could  not  long  stand  cut,  and  at 
length,  mutual  iuterest  brought  them  to  return  to  their  old  engagements.  The  patentee,  however, 
determined  to  have  a  victim ;  and  thinking,  in  which  he  was  right,  Charles  Macklin  to  have  been  the 
very  soul  of  the  conspiracy,  he  treated  him  as  Richard  the  Second  did  Thomas  Mowbrav,  though  he 
resigned  his  sceptre  to  the  man  he  preferred  to  him — 

“  The  hopeless  word  of  never  to  return 
He  breathed  against  him.” 

Mr.  Garrick  had  a  difficult  part  to  act  here.  Macklin  urged  the  compact,  and  insisted  upon  the 
strict  fulfilment  of  its  stipulations.  Garrick,  as  a  fair  man,  never  for  a  moment  denied  that  Macklin 
had  a  right  to  make  this  demand ;  but  it  did  not  suit  him  to  flv  from  his  own  vantage  ground,  and 
he  offered  all  that  money  could  do,  to  make  Macklin  forego  his  claim.  He  proposed  a  weekly  sum 
out  of  his  own  salary,  to  be  secured  to  Macklin  ;  and  got  a  promise  from  Rich  to  engage  his  wife. 
Charles  Macklin  never  was  guilty  of  a  meanness ;  and  he  disdained  to  commute  a  right  for  a  pen¬ 
sion  ;  and  sink  into  a  dependant  upon  the  very  man  who  had  deserted  him.  In  this  state,  Garrick 

* 

renewed  his  engagement  with  Fleetwood,  at  an  increased  salary ;  and  Macklin’s  friends  arranged 
their  forces  to  annoy  him  the  first  time  he  should  appear  upon  the  stage  of  Drurv-lane  theatre. 
Fleetwood  conjectured  that  the  parties  would  come  to  blows,  and  provided  accordingly.  He  had  a 
taste  for  boxing,  and  Hockley-in-the-Hole  sent  out  the  Fancy  to  support  its  Patron.  On  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick's  appearance  in  Bayes,  on  the  6th  of  December  1743,  he  was  saluted  with  the  usual  cries  of 
“  Off !  off !“  sounds  so  unusual  to  him,  and  entreated  to  be  heard  in  vain.  The  rioters  and  their 
leaders  seemed  more  bent  upon  battle  than  explanation.  By  a  missile,  quite  forgotten  now,  they 
showered  peas  upon  the  stage,  to  prevent  anv  walking  on  to  trouble  them  with  addresses,  and  for 
two  nights  together  enjoved  all  “  the  current  of  a  heady  fight.”  At  length  the  manager  and  his 
champions  of  the  cudgel  and  the  fist  shouted  victory  !  In  other  words,  the  public  impatience  to 
eniov  the  performances  of  Garrick  prevailed,  and  the  disturbance  ceased.  But  it  was  not  until  the 
19th  of  December  1744,  that  Macklin  returned  to  Drury  Lane. 

Mr.  Garrick,  now  in  perfect  possession  of  the  town,  on  the  1th  of  January  1744,  acted  3 Iacbeih 
for  the  first  time.  This,  as  long  as  Mrs.  Pritchard  lived,  was  one  of  his  finest  parts. 

His  ascendency  was  now  great  indeed.  It  was  thought  advisable  for  the  late  school  of  acting 
to  return  out  of  the  purgatory  to  which  he  had  consigned  it,  and  old  Cibber  was  brought  forward 
in  Fondlewife ,  Sir  John  Brute ,  and  Justice  Shallow.  Quin  had  his  admirers  in  the  heavy  senten¬ 
tious  characters,  to  which  he  had  been  accustomed ;  and  sometimes,  considering  Garrick,  like  YThit- 
£eld,  as  a  new  religion,  prophesied  the  “return  of  the  people  to  church  again.”  But  the  new 
actor  was  a  poe:  also,  and  demolished  this  sarcasm  bv  the  wittiest  epigram  that  ever  was  composed 
bv  insulted  genius. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xiii 

“  Pope  Quin,  who  damns  all  churches  but  his  own, 

Complains  that  heresy  infects  the  town  ; 

That  Whitfield  Garrick  has  misled  the  age. 

And  taints  the  sound  religion  of  the  stage; 

Schism,  he  cries,  has  turned  the  nation’s  brain; 

But  eyes  will  open,  and  to  church  again ! 

Thou  great  infallible,  forbear  to  roar, 

Thy  bulls  and  errors  are  revered  no  more; 

When  doctrines  meet  with  general  approbation, 

It  is  not  heresy,  but  reformation.” 

As  to  the  Macbeth  of  Quin,  Garrick  has  himself  left  its  absurdities  upon  record.  In  the  dagger 
scene  Quin  did  not  rivet  his  gaze  to  the  imaginary  object,  but  showed  an  unsettled  motion  in  his 
eye,  like  one  not  quite  awaked  from  some  disordering  dream.  His  hands  and  fingers  were  not  im¬ 
movable  but  restless,  and  he  accompanied  the  words  “  Come  let  me  clutch  thee ”  not  by  one  motion,  but 
by  several  successive  catches  at  the  dagger,  first  with  one  hand  and  then  with  the  other,  preserving 
the  same  motion,  at  the  same  time,  with  his  feet,  like  a  man  who,  out  of  his  depth,  and  half  drowned 
in  his  struggles,  catches  at  air  for  substance.  In  the  Banquet  scene,  when  Banquo’s  ghost  got 
possession  of  Macbeth’s  chair,  and  the  latter,  frighted  at  his  appearance,  by  words  and  actions, 
says,  Which  of  you  have  done  this  ?  Quin  turned  his  head  from  the  Ghost,  sitting  in  his  chair,  to  the 
guests  sitting  at  their  supper,  and  asked  them  the  question  by  his  eye  as  well  as  tongue.  Again, 
on  the  second  app  earance  of  the  Ghost,  when  Quin  pronounced  the  words  “  Dare  me  to  the  desert 
with  thy  sword,”  he  drew  his  own  and  put  himself  in  a  posture  of  defence.  At  the  exclamation 
“  Hence,  horrible  shadow  !”  he  made  a  home  thrust  at  him,  recovered  himself  upon  the  Ghost’s  mov¬ 
ing,  and  kept  passing  at  him,  till  he  got  him  quite  out  of  the  room.  However,  all  this  was  after  a 
slow,  manly,  folding  up  of  his  faculties,  his  body  gradually  gathering  up  at  the  vision,  his  mind 
keeping  the  same  time,  denoting  by  the  eyes  its  strong  workings  and  convulsions.  He  did  not  dash 
the  goblet  of  wine  to  the  ground,  but  let  it  gently  fall  from  him,  as  if  utterly  unconscious  of  having- 
such  a  vehicle  in  his  hand.  Mr.  Garrick  finishes  his  dissection  of  Quin’s  Macbeth,  with  tht 
following  tribute,  to  Shakspeare  himself. 

“  Shakspeare  was  a  writer  not  to  be  confined  by  rule ;  he  had  a  despotic  power  over  all  nature. 
Laivs  would  be  an  infringement  of  his  prerogative ;  his  sceptered  pen  waved  control  over  every  pas¬ 
sion  and  humour  ;  his  royal  word  was  not  only  absolute,  but  creative ;  ideas,  language,  and  sentiment 
were  his  slaves,  they  w’ere  chained  to  the  triumphal  car  of  his  genius ;  and  when  he  made  his  entry 
into  the  temple  of  fame,  all  Parnassus  rung  with  acclamations ;  the  Muses  sung  his  conquests, 
crowned  him  with  never-fading  laurels  and  pronounced  him  immortal.  Amen.” 

Mr.  Garrick  wrote  the  above  as  early  as  the  year  1744,  in  the  youthful  freshness  and  vigour 
of  his  mind — it  well  marks  the  keenness  of  his  observation,  and  the  fervour  of  his  fancy. 

Again  for  the  benefits  of  others,  Mr.  Garrick  studied  new  characters,  or  reconsidered  his  first 
thoughts  of  them.  To  Mrs.  Woffington’s  Lady,  he  acted  Lord  Toivnley,  and  for  his  friend  Gilfard 
he  performed  Biron  in  Southerne’s  Isabella.  The  next  novelty  was  his  Sir  John  Brute  on  the 


% 


XIV 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


16th  of  November  1744.  As  he  was  now  shortly  to  visit  Ireland  again,  the  struggle  in  favour  of 
our  fair  sisters  could  not  at  any  time  have  tended  more  to  their  profit  and  their  amusement,  than 
what  we  find  conceded  by  public  advertisement  in  December,  by  the  proprietors  of  the  Dublin 
Theatre.  Here  is  a  copy  of  it. 

Several  gentlemen  and  ladies  of  distinction  having  applied  to  the  Proprietors  of  the  Theatre,  that  ladies 
might  be  admitted  into  the  pit  at  the  same  price  as  the  gentlemen  are,  which  is  the  custom  in  London,  and 
in  every  town  in  Ireland  but  Dublin,  the  said  Proprietors,  being  willing  to  oblige  all  persons,  who  encourage 
theatrical  performances,  have  given  orders  that,  for  the  future,  Ladies  will  be  admitted  into  the  pit  ac¬ 
cordingly . 

While  the  Irish  were  thus  establishing  a  practice  tending  materially  to  order  in  Dublin,  the  Eng¬ 
lish  nearly  demolished  the  inside  of  Drury-lane  theatre,  on  account  of  an  advance  of  the  prices  on  the 
nights  of  new  pantomimes  and  farces.  As  soon  as  temper  returned,  Mr.  Garrick  acted  Scrub,  in  the 
Beaux  Stratagem  ;  and  revived  Shakspeare’s  King  John  for  them  at  Drury-lane,  as  a  requiescat  to 
old  Cibber’s  alteration,  called  Papal  Tyranny,  at  the  other  house.  Garrick  himself  acted  John, 
Delane  the  Bastard,  and  Mrs.  Cibber,  Constance.  On  the  7th  of  March  1745,  he  performed 
Othello  for  the  first  time,  and  repeated  it  two  days  after  for  his  own  benefit. 

Mr.  Davies  thinks  that  Garrick  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Lyttelton  at  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  Thomson’s  Tancred  and  Sigismunda  in  1743.  It  was  first  acted  on  the  18th  of  March 
1745,  and  Garrick  and  Cibber  established  it  in  the  public  favour,  far  beyond  any  kindred  produc¬ 
tion  of  its  tender  and  amiable  author.  Perhaps  politics  had,  rather  more  than  poetry,  to  do  with 
the  condescension  above-mentioned.  It  was  something  new  to  see  an  acting  manager  of  the  great 
drama  of  life,  superintending  the  mimic  interest  of  the  stage.  The  appearances  of  such  statesmen 
among  the  actors  was  very  important  indeed  to  Thomson  ;  and  no  doubt  their  remarks  were  re¬ 
ceived  with  sufficient  docility.  What  critical  benefits  might  be  derived,  either  as  to  the  play  or  its 
performance,  must  be  left  to  the  reader's  imagination.  After  the  ninth  night,  during  which  he  was 
taken  ill,  Mr.  Garrick  acted  no  more  that  season.  This  might,  in  some  degree,  arise  from  his 
quarrel  with  the  Patentee,  which  we  shall  brieflv  explain. 

Fleetwood  had  something  about  him,  that  reminds  us  of  Sir  Richard  Steele,  and  found  his 
creditors  the  cruelest  scoundrels  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  was  at  length  induced  to  sell  the 
few  years  remaining  of  his  patent,  to  relieve  him  from  his  embarrassments ;  and  two  bankers,  whose 
names  were  Green  and  Amber,  became  purchasers.  Air.  James  Lacy  undertook  the  management 
of  the  concern,  and  was  to  be  a  proprietor  to  the  extent  of  on  e-third ;  for  the  purchase-money  of 
which,  he  executed  a  mortgage,  to  be  liquidated  by  his  proportion  of  the  profits.  They  paid 
3200/.  for  what  remained  unexpired  of  Fleetwood’s  patent.  The  prudence  of  Garrick  could  not  be 
tempted  on  this  occasion.  The  fortune  he  had  so  rapidly  acquired  by  his  genius,  was  not  to  be  at 
the  mercy  of  accidents,  if  it  could  be  avoided.  England  was  threatened  with  a  rebellion,  Scotland 
was  already  in  a  flame;  in  this  juncture  he  therefore  resolved  to  pay  another  visit  to  Ireland.  Lacy 
was  greatly  annoyed  at  this  defection  of  Garrick  from  his  standard  ;  and  wrote  the  impressions  of  his 
disappointment  to  the  proprietors  of  the  Dublin  Theatre.  This  Garrick  resented,  as  ungentlemanly 
and  unjust.  His  friend,  Thomas  Sheridan,  however,  was  now  absolute  manager  in  the  concern,  and 
finding,  on  his  arrival,  that  he  could  not  carry  his  constant  plan  of  acting  upon  a  certain  sum  for  so 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XV 


many  nights,  but  that  the  wary  actor  insisted  upon  dividing  with  him  the  profit  or  loss  of  their 
united  representations,  Garrick  at  length  yielded  the  point,  and  they  entered  cordially  on  the  con¬ 
ditions  for  their  mutual  advantage. 

It  was  only  late  in  his  life,  that  the  author  of  the  present  sketch  could  know  any  thing  of 
Sheridan  ;  but  his  utterance  seemed  so  harsh,  and  his  features  so  very  inflexible,  that  all  the 
opinion  that  his  countrymen  could  entertain  of  his  elocution,  and  more  than  the  influence  even  of 
management,  seem  necessary  to  elevate  such  a  man  into  rivalry  with  Garrick.  However,  he  was 
certainly  a  correct  and  sensible  speaker.  They  now  alternately  performed  the  principal  characters 
in  the  drama,  and  they  often  appeared  together  in  the  same  pieces.  The  accomplished  politician, 
Lord  Chesterfield,  was  Lord-Lieutenant  at  this  time ;  and,  with  his  accustomed  finesse ,  became 
Irish  “  from  top  to  toe.’1  When  Sheridan  and  Garrick  waited  upon  him  to  and  from  his  box,  he 
paid  his  whole  attention  to  Sheridan,  as  a  native  of  Ireland.  The  allusion,  which  one  so  flattered 
recently  made  to  the  “ pebble  beside  the  diamond ,”  in  regard  to  the  acting  of  himself  and  Garrick, 
now  might  seem  to  be  excusable  only  as  the  language  of  compliment — but  we  would  not  invade  the 
recesses  of  self-love.  Ireland,  a  little  before  this  era,  had  produced  an  actor  of  whom  she  could  long 
and  allowably  boast.  We  allude  to  Spranger  Barry;  who,  though  confined  in  his  excellence,  was 
by  nature  accomplished  to  be  the  great  lover  of  the  stage.  His  first  appearance  was  in  Othello,  at 
Aungier-street  theatre,  on  the  15th  February  1744  ;  his  second  character  was  Varanes,  and  his 
third  Pierre.  To  this  great  actor’s  merit  Mr.  Garrick  bore  a  willing  and  effectual  tribute  ;  and  his 
opinion  and  his  friendship  went  together.  Lacy  hastened  over  to  Dublin,  expressly  to  see  him  ; 
and  might  be  said  to  have  engaged  the  only  man,  who  could  at  all  compensate  to  him  the  loss  of 
Garrick.  That  greatest  of  all  actors,  in  the  month  of  May  1746,  returned  to  England,  with  con¬ 
siderable  additions  to  his  fame  and  fortune  ;  having  moreover  laid  the  bases  of  a  number  of  friend¬ 
ships  among  the  most  enlightened  of  that  generous  nation,  which  we  shall  see  continuing  through 
life  to  increase  the  stock  of  honour  and  happiness  of  this  singular  and  favoured  man. 

The  “  Correspondence”  will  present  to  the  reader,  a  little  before  this  journey  to  Ireland,  a 
variety  of  letters  from  Mrs.  Cibber,  and  some  gay  inferences  of  Lord  Rochford’s  as  to  the  gallantry 
of  Garrick.  The  fair  actress  may  be  allowed  to  explain  her  own  sentiments.  There  seems  no 
reason  to  question  her  sincere  attachment  to  Mr.  Sloper ;  and  it  should  be  remembered  that,  after¬ 
wards,  Mrs.  Garrick,  who  well  knew  the  dishonourable  conduct  of  her  husband,  Theophilus  Cibber, 
always  continued  to  know  and  respect  his  wife.  The  very  winter  of  1745-6  was  rebellious  ;  and  the 
army  in  Scotland  had  suffered  most  severely.  Mrs.  Cibber  proposed  to  Rich  to  act  Polly  three 
times  for  the  veterans  ;  and  he  paid  to  the  Guildhall  Committee  the  proceeds  accordingly,  amounting 
to  602/.  7s.  Her  friend  Garrick  acted  this  winter  six  characters  with  Rich,  at  Covent  Garden 
Theatre,  namely,  Lear,  Hamlet,  Richard,  Othello,  Archer,  and  Macbeth.  But,  either  as  to  house 
or  manager,  he  was  now  out  of  his  sphere,  deliberately  and  with  confidence  expecting  a  return  to  his 
own  stage,  with  increased  power  to  render  it  the  first  in  Europe. 

We  are  now  arrived  at  a  very  important  event  in  the  life  of  Mr.  Garrick.  We  allude  to  the 
appearance  in  this  country  of  a  young  lady  under  the  name  of  Yiolette,  who  had  been  born  at 
Vienna,  and  educated  as  a  dancer  ;  the  uncommon  graces  of  whose  person  and  manners  procured  for 
her  the  warm  patronage  of  Richard  Boyle,  fourth  Earl  of  Cork,  and  third  of  Burlington,  and  the 


XVI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


ladies  of  his  Lordship’s  family.  Her  name  was  Yiolette,  not,  as  it  has  been  usually  written, 
Yioletti,  and  she  assumed  it  by  command  of  the  Empress  Queen  Maria  Theresa, — the  name  of  her 
family  being  Yeigel,  which,  in  Vienna  patois,  signifies  Violet.  She  was  introduced  at  the  court  of 
Vienna  in  all  probability  by  the  Maitre  de  Bullet,  M.  Hilferding,  with  other  young  ladies,  to  dance 
with  the  children  of  Maria  Theresa ;  for  it  does  not  appear  that  she  ever  danced  on  the  public 
stage  at  Vienna.  Mademoiselle  Yiolette  came  to  this  country  accompanied  by  a  family  named 
Rossiter,  who  visited  England  to  look  after  some  property.*  How  soon  she  arrived  in  England,  or 
when  Mr.  Garrick  first  saw  her,  we  have  not  ascertained.  She  had  occupied  much  fashionable 
attention  before  the  summer  of  1746,  and  had  been  a  sufficient  time  in  the  Burlington  connexion  to 

r 

have  given  some  slight  umbrage  to  her  accomplished  patron.  Walpole,  the  Antoine  Hamilton  o1 
his  day,  thus  mentions  the  young  lady,  in  a  letter  to  his  friend  Montague,  dated  the  otli  of  June 
1746.  He  is  a  somewhat  “  prophane  and  liberal  censurer  and  these  epithets,  when  she  read  his 
book,  Mrs.  Garrick  was  at  least  as  readv  to  apply  to  him  as  Desdemona  herself  to  the  scurri¬ 
lous  Iago. 

“  The  fame  of  the  Yiolette  encreases  daily.  The  sister  Countesses  of  Burlington  and  Talbot  exert  all  their 
stores  of  sullen  partiality  and  competition  for  her.  The  former  visits  her,  and  is  having  her  picture,  and 
carries  her  to  Chiswick;  and  she  sups  at  Lady  Carlisle’s,  and  lies — indeed  I  have  not  heard  where,  but  I 
know,  not  at  *  *  *  [Leicester]  House,  where  she  is  in  great  disgrace  for  not  going  once  or  twice  a  week  to  take 
lessons  of  Denoyer,  as  he  bid  her.  You  know  that  is  politics,  in  a  court  where  dancing-masters  are  ministers.” 

With  whatever  tuition,  she  notwithstanding  made  her  first  appearance  at  Drury  Lane  Theatre 
on  the  3rd  of  December  1746,  and  Signor  Salomon  made  his  entre  at  the  same  time.  She  was 
greatly  admired  and  applauded.  On  the  16th  of  January  1747,  the  following  notice  respecting  her 
shows  that,  notwithstanding  the  competition  of  Countesses,  she  had  been  well  advised  not  to  trifle 
with  the  public  favour.  At  the  foot  of  the  playbill  we  read — 

“  Mademoiselle  Violette  humbly  begs  leave  to  acquaint  the  public  that  she  is  very  much  concerned  to 
hear  that  she  is  charged  with  having  been  the  occasion  of  the  noise  at  the  play-house  in  Drury-Lane  on 
Wednesday  night. 

“  As  she  was  entirely  ignorant  that  three  dances  had  been  advertised  untd  it  was  too  late  to  prepare 
herself,  and  as  she  cannot  possibly  be  guilty  of  an  intention  to  disoblige  or  give  offence  to  an  English 
audience,  (from  whom  she  has  received  so  much  applause,)  she  presumes  to  hope  they  will  not  impute  to 
her  a  fault  which  she  is  not  capable  of  committing,  and  especially  where  she  had  met  with  so  much 
indulgence,  for  which  she  retains  all  possible  gratitude.” 

She  probably  resided  at  this  time  at  Burlington-house,  and  iudeed  so  precious  had  she  become 
there,  that  the  Countess  herself  attended  her  to  the  theatre,  and  with  maternal  care  used  to  throw 

*  A  lady  of  fashion,  to  whom  Mrs.  Garrick  bequeathed  a  token  of  remembrance,  told  the  reverend 
gentleman,  her  executor,  that  she  had  the  following  account  of  the  journey  to  England,  both  from  her  own 
mother  and  others.  “  The  Empress  Queen,  perceiving  that  her  husband,  the  Emperor  Frederick  I.  regarded 
Mademoiselle  Violette  with  marked  attention,  to  prevent  any  unpleasant  consequences,  proposed  this  journey 
to  England,  and  forwarded  powerful  recommendations  in  her  favour.”  It  was,  no  doubt,  owing  to  such 
introduction  that  His  Majesty  George  the  Second  commanded  the  play  on  her  first  appearance,  and  honoured 
her  benefit  also  in  1748  with  his  presence. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XVII 


her  pelisse  over  her  when  she  came  off  the  stage.  Mrs.  Garrick  herself  remembered  to  have  been 
taken  by  her  to  Lord  Lo vat’s  trial  in  April  1747. 

How  it  should  ever  have  been  imagined  that  Garrick  brought  out  his  future  wife  during  his 
management,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  Garrick  was  himself,  on  her  debut,  acting  at  Covent-garden 
theatre,  where  he  produced  his  farce  of  Miss  in  her  Teens,  on  the  17th  of  January.  It  was  scarcely 
ever  equalled  in  its  effects.  The  martial  swaggerer  of  the  coffee-houses,  Captain  Flash,  was  admi¬ 
rably  given  by  Woodward  ;  and  the  incorporation  of  an  essence,  the  effeminate  Fribble,  so  acted  by 
Garrick,  as  positively,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  abate  that  unmanly  nuisance.  Rich  complimented  the 
author  with  the  fifteenth  night  of  this  piece,  in  addition  to  the  third,  to  which,  by  custom,  he  was 
entitled.  While  Garrick  was  thus  serving  under  Rich,  his  friend  Benjamin  Hoadlv  brought  out  there 
his  fine  acting  comedy  of  the  Suspicious  Husband  ;  in  this  play  he  was  the  brilliant  and  eccentric 
Ranger,  which  he  acted  twelve  times,  when  he  was  taken  ill,  and  the  Hat  and  Ladder  devolved 
upon  Chapman.*  This  illness  was  severely  felt  during  the  benefits  at  Covent-Garden  theatre ; 
and  Quin,  who  had  at  first  been  churlish  as  to  Garrick,  had  depended  upon  his  aid  like 
others. 

On  the  27th  of  March,  at  the  top  of  the  advertisement  for  his  night,  appeared  the  following 
letter  to  him  from  Garrick. 

“  Sir, — I  am  sorry  that  my  present  bad  state  of  health  makes  me  incapable  of  performing  so 
long  and  laborious  a  character  as  Jaffier,  this  season.  If  you  think  my  playing  in  the  Farce  will  be  of  the 
least  service  to  you,  or  any  entertainment  to  the  audience,  you  may  command  your  humble  servant, 

March  25th  1747.  “  David  Garrick.” 

To  return  to  Mademoiselle  Yiolette.  LTpon  first  perusing  the  “  Correspondence,”  the  impression 
arises,  that  both  Lord  Rochford  and  Mrs.  Cibber  alluded  to  this  lady,  for  Cibber  thus  expresses 
herself  on  the  1st  of  January  1746.  “  Your  wife  sends  her  duty:  she  is  the  greatest  coquette  in 

England,  and  has  half  a  dozen  husbands  in  bank  in  case  of  your  death.”  On  further  consideration, 
however,  it  appears  that  these  allusions  had  another  object,  and  that  there  was  certainly  then  a 
greater  distance  between  the  parties. 

But,  a  month  before  Mr.  Garrick  married  Mademoiselle  Yiolette,  on  the  18th  of  May  1749, 
Walpole  again  refers  to  them  both,  in  his  usual  Iago  style.  He  is  describing  a  grand  entertain¬ 
ment  given  at  Richmond. 

“  There  was  an  admirable  scene,”  (says  this  Hogarth  of  description,)  “  Lady  Burlington  brought 
the  Violette,  and  the  Richmonds  had  asked  Garrick,  who  stood  ogling  and  sighing  the  whole  time, 
while  my  lady  kept  a  most  fierce  look-out.  Sabbatini"f*  asked  me  ‘  And  who  is  that?'  It  was  a  dis¬ 
tressing  question;  after  a  little  hesitation,  I  replied  “  Mais,  c'est  Mademoiselle  Violette  T  Ft 
comment  Mademoiselle  Violette!  J'ai  connu  une  Mademoiselle  Violette  par  exemple. — I  begged 
him  to  look  at  Miss  Bishop.” 

*  This  play  had  a  very  unusual  effect  upon  George  the  Second.  He  absolutely  sent  the  author  a  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  for  amusing  him. — Ed. 

t  Sabbatini  was  a  diplomatist,  and  most  probably  father  of  his  namesake,  whom  Cumberland,  in  17S0, 
saw  architect  to  the  King  of  Spain. 


d 


xviii  BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 

Perhaps  Sabbatini  meant  to  express  bis  astonishment  that  one,  whom  he  had  known  a  dancer, 
should  have  been  brought  into  an  assembly  of  the  highest  rank  in  England.  This  is,  however, 
mere  conjecture.  The  very  extraordinary  favour  shown  this  lovely  creature  by  the  Burlington 
family,  gave  rise  to  a  story,  that  she  was  really  the  daughter  of  the  Earl,  by  a  lady  of  the  greatest 
merit  at  Florence ;  and  when  afterwards  a  portion  of  six  thousand  pounds  was  given  with  her  hand 
to  Garrick  in  marriage,  the  story  seemed  to  be  confirmed  past  reasonable  doubt ;  nay,  it  was  said 
his  Lordship  had  acknowledged  her  to  Mr.  Garrick  as  his  child.* 

There  is  still  something  to  be  added  to  Mr.  Garrick’s  performances  for  Rich.  It  was  on  the 
14th  of  November  1746,  that  Richard  Cumberland,  then  a  scholar  in  the  sixth  form  of  Westminster 
School,  was  permitted  to  occupy  a  seat  in  the  front  row  of  the  gallery  of  Covent-Garden  play¬ 
house,  and  to  witness  the  performance  of  Rowe’s  Fair  Penitent.  His  very  description  of  it  is  dra¬ 
matic  ;  Quin,  Horatio;  Ryan,  Altamont ;  Mrs.  Cibber,  Calista;  Mrs.  Pritchard,  Lavinia. 

‘  Quin  presented  himself  upon  the  rising  of  the  curtain  in  a  green  velvet  coat,  embroidered 
down  the  seams,  an  enormous  full-bottomed  periwig,  rolled  stockings  and  high-heeled  square-toed 
shoes ;  with  very  little  variation  of  cadence,  and  in  a  deep  full  tone,  accompanied  by  a  sawing  kind 
of  action,  which  had  more  of  the  Senate  than  of  the  Stage  in  it,  he  rolled  out  his  heroics  with  an  air 
of  dignified  indifference,  that  seemed  to  disdain  the  plaudits  that  wrere  bestowed  upon  him.’ 

‘  Mrs.  Cibber,  in  a  key  high-pitched,  but  sweet  withal,  sung,  or  rather  recitatived  Rowe’s 
harmonious  strain,  something  in  the  manner  of  the  improvisatories  :  it  was  so  extremely  wanting 
in  contrast  that,  though  it  did  not  wound  the  ear  it  wearied  it ;  when  she  had  once  recited  two  or 
three  speeches,  I  could  anticipate  the  manner  of  every  succeeding  one  :  it  was  like  a  long  old 
legendary  ballad  of  innumerable  stanzas,  every  one  of  which  is  sung  to  the  same  tune,  eternally 
chiming  on  the  ear  -without  variation  or  relief.’ 

‘  Mrs.  PRITCHARD  was  an  actress  of  a  different  cast,  had  more  nature,  and  of  course,  more 
change  of  tone  and  variety  both  of  action  and  expression  :  in  my  opinion  the  comparison  was  decid¬ 
edly  in  her  favour.’ 

*  She  was  bom  at  Vienna,  on  the  29th  February  1724-5,  as  appears  by  the  registry  of  her  baptism  in  the 
Cathedral  Church  of  St.  Stephen.  She  was  one  of  three  children  of  Mr.  Johann  Veigel,  a  respectable  inha¬ 
bitant  of  that  city,  and  named  after  her  mother  Eva-Maria.  Her  brother,  Ferdinand  Charles,  showing  like 
herself  talents  for  dancing,  became  attached  to  the  Corps  de  ballet. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  this  warm  attachment  of  the  Burlington  Family  to  a  young  lady,  however  highly 
honoured  in  her  introduction  to  them,  when  it  proceeded  so  far  as  domesticating  her  in  their  residence,  su¬ 
perintending  her  studies,  and  even  condescending  to  attend  her  in  her  public  exhibition  of  her  talents,  that 
she  might  remain  as  pure  as  she  was  captivating, — gave  rise  to  a  romantic  fable  that  she  had  been  really  the 
offspring  of  an  attachment  of  the  Earl  before  marriage,  at  Florence,  and  that  thus  circuitously  he  had  resum¬ 
ed  the  guardianship  of  his  own  daughter.  But  all  this  affiliation  is  dispelled  in  a  moment.  In  the  first  place, 
the  young  lady’s  parents  were  citizens  of  Vienna,  not  Florence,  and  at  Vienna  she  was  accordingly  born  in 
the  year  1724.  Now,  as  to  the  attachment  before  his  marriage,  the  Earl  really  had  already  been  married  two 
years,  when  Mademoiselle  Violette  was  born.  And,  moreover,  his  Lordship,  from  the  period  of  his  union, 
passed  several  years  uninterruptedly  in  England,  and,  as  appears  by  the  Journals  of  the  House  of  Lords, 
constantly  attended  his  duty  in  Parliament.  The  patronage  therefore  is  to  be  attributed  solely  to  the  sense 
entertained  of  the  young  lady’s  merits,  and  with  a  bounty  equal  to  their  care  of  her,  they  gave  her  a  portion 
in  marriage,  as  if  Mr.  Garrick  had  really  taken  a  daughter  of  the  House  of  Burlington.  They  gave  her 
6000/.  to  which  Mr.  Garrick  added  4000/. — and  to  the  marriage  settlement  Lady  Burlington  became  a 
party. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xix 


‘  But  when,  after  a  long  and  eager  expectation,  I  first  beheld  little  Garrick,  then  young  and 
light  and  alive  in  every  muscle  and  in  every  feature,  come  bounding  on  the  stage,  and  pointing  at 
the  wittol  Altamont  and  heavy-paced  Horatio — Heavens,  what  a  transition  !  it  seemed  as  if  a  whole 
century  had  been  stept  over  in  the  transition  of  a  single  scene ;  old  things  were  done  away,  and  a 
new  order  at  once  brought  forward,  bright  and  luminous,  and  clearly  destined  to  dispel  the  barba¬ 
risms  and  bigotry  of  a  tasteless  age,  too  long  attached  to  the  prejudices  of  custom,  and  superstiti- 
ously  devoted  to  the  illusions  of  imposing  declamation.’ 

How  unconscious  were  these  two  great  and  excellent  men  at  that  time,  one  that  he  should  ever 
write,  the  other  that  he  should  ever  receive,  such  a  Comedy  as  the  “  West  Indian.”  Cumberland 
was  tc  a  scholar,  and  a  ripe  and  good  one he  excelled  in  many  departments  of  literature,  and 
contributed  largely  to  the  delight  and  improvement  of  his  fellow  creatures.  We  remember  standing 
by  the  grave  to  which  his  mortal  remains  had  but  a  moment  ago  been  consigned — we  saw  the 
venerable  Vincent  close  the  book  of  the  burial  service,  and  then  turn  himself  to  the  spectators  with 
a  modest  and  faithful  enumeration  of  the  dead  man’s  merits, — we  saw  the  tear  of  friendship  fall 
upon  the  marble  floor  beneath  the  speaker,  and  beheld  him  supported  from  the  scene,  which  his  own 
keen  feelings  had  rendered  almost  too  much  for  his  great  age. 

As  the  season  of  1746-7  terminated  Mr.  Garrick’s  connexion  with  Covent-Garden,  and  the  next 
saw  Drury-lane  open  under  the  management  of  Garrick  and  Lacy,  we  here  make  a  pause  in  his 
theatrical  history,  and  close  the  first  section  of  these  Memoirs. 


SECTION  THE  SECOND. 

From  1747  to  1763. 

Mr.  Lacy  was  turned  to  business,  and  applied  himself  to  realize  the  property  which  had  fallen 
under  his  management.  At  the  period  we  are  now  entering  upon,  the  old  patent  had  only  six  years 
to  run,  and  the  lease  of  the  theatre  itself  expired  in  about  five  years.  1  o  make  his  property  an 
object  in  the  market,  it  became  essential  to  secure  a  renewal  of  his  lease,  and  this  object  he  abso¬ 
lutely  accomplished  by  hunting  with  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  By  compensating  Green  and  Amber, 
the  bankers,  and  doing  something  for  Fleetwood,  he  could  now  tender  to  Garrick  one  halt  of  the 
present  and  future  property  of  Drury-Lane  theatre,  and  upon  very  moderate  terms.  1  lie  agree¬ 
ment  was  perfected  on  the  Oth  of  April  1747.  The  results  are  these  : — If  the  existing  encumbrances 
were  more  in  their  amount  than  12,000/.  the  excess  was  to  be  settled  by  Lacy  out  of  his  share  of  the 
profits;  to  the  yearly  annuities  of  500/.  to  Fleetwood,  and  of  300/.  to  a  Mr.  Cawthorpe,  the  two 
partners  were  equally  liable.  The  sum  of  500  guineas  per  year,  and  a  clear  benefit,  veie  to  be 
given  to  Mr.  Garrick  as  an  actor,  and  each  party  was  entitled  to  draw  out  of  the  concern  a  sum  not 
exceeding  500/.  per  annum  for  private  expenses,  and  under  the  title  of  managers.  W  hen  the  piofits 
did  not  yield  that  sum,  the  future  were  to  make  good  what  was  over  taken  of  the  past,  and  the 

d  2 


XX 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


party  taking  such  exceeding,  was  made  debtor  for  the  same,  with  interest  until  it  was  repaid — his 
share  of  the  patent  being  the  security  to  the  other  party.  In  the  “  Correspondence,”  at  page  50, 
the  reader  will  find  a  literal  copy  of  this  important  agreement. 

This  business  being  happily  arranged,  the  necessary  improvements  of  the  house  determined, 
and  a  general  notion  settled  as  to  the  company  to  be  engaged,  Mr.  Garrick  left  town  to  visit 
his  friends  at  Lichfield.  In  coming  to  town  he  caught  cold  at  Dunstable  by  sleeping  in  damp 
sheets,  but  quickly  recovered  and  prepared  himself  for  taking  the  field  in  September,  with  every 
strength  that  could  be  attached  to  a  theatre.  It  was  not  to  be  imagined  that  all  things  would 
work  smoothly  at  once.  He  had  engaged  the  Pritchards,  and  found  they  had  been  rendered  un¬ 
easy.  Mrs.  Pritchard  thought  she  would  be  mortified  by  the  triumph  of  one  haughty  woman, 
Woffington,  and  that  with  this  lady  and  Mrs.  Cibber  only  in  tragedy  would  Mr.  Garrick  ever  be 
allowed  to  play.  Garrick,  in  a  very  manly  and  judicious  letter,  dated  11th  July  1747,  explained 
the  system  he  should  act  upon ;  and  disclaiming  all  partialities,  showed  that  his  interest  would  be 
best  promoted  by  the  best  actors  being  together ;  which  measure  he  thought  the  most  advisable 
for  them  also.  Quin  did  not  engage  with  him,  nor  acted  against  him,  and  as  Rich  never  supposed 
his  great  actors  of  any  importance  to  his  management,  Garrick  had  his  choice  nearly  of  every  body 
that  he  deemed  valuable  to  a  stage.  In  opposition  to  other  accounts,  we  prefer  to  rely  upon  the 
accuracy  of  Isaac  Reed.  Drui-y-Lane  theatre  opened  under  Gai-rick  and  Lacy,  oxx  the  15th  of  Sep¬ 
tember  1747,  with  the  play  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  to  which  the  great  actor  himself  spoke  a 
prologue,  written  for  the  occasion  by  Samuel  Johnson,  and  Mrs.  Woffington  delivered  an  epilogue 
from  the  pen  of  Garrick  himself.  We  have  already  expressed  an  opinion  of  this  prologue. 

Garrick  revived  Albumazai’,  which  had  been  acted  before  James  the  First,  in  1614,  by  the 
gentlemen  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Dryden,  who  wi'ote  a  great  deal  about  Ben  Jonson,  in  his 
time,  has  arraigned  him  for  stealing  his  Alchynxist  from  this  play  ;  and  the  prologue  of  accusation 
by  that  great  man,  was  spoken  by  Garrick  now.  But  he  revived  x'eally  the  carelessness  of  Dryden 
in  such  matters ;  for  Jonson’ s  play  was  acted  by  the  same  King’s  servants,  in  the  year  1610,  and  as 
Jonson  was  a  scholar,  and  read  by  scholars,  and  himself  of  St.  John’s  in  the  same  university,  it  is 
quite  clear,  (if  there  was  any  stealing  in  the  case,)  that  Toinkis,  the  author  of  Albumazar,  stole 
from  Old  Ben,  who  published  his  Alchymist  the  very  year  in  which  it  was  first  acted. 

Rich  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  staggered  at  first  by  Garrick’s  braving  the  field  so  early  ; 
he  did  not  open  the  doors  of  Covent-Garden  till  the  29th  of  October,  and  then  he  played  the  coarse 
immorality  of  the  London  Cuckolds.  Mi’s.  Pritchard  made  her  first  curtsey  under  the  new  ma¬ 
nagement,  in  the  character  of  Lady  Lui’ewell  in  the  Constant  Couple.  George  Dandin,  a  farce  taken 
from  Moliei’e,  was  acted  by  Shutei’,  Mrs.  Macklin,  Mrs.  Gi’een,  and  Mrs.  Clive.  Garrick  revived 
also  Shakspeare’s  Hem-y  the  Fifth,  giviixg  the  King  to  the  heroic  Bai'ry,  and  condescending  himself 
to  speak  the  Chorus. 

Rich  again  shut  up  his  house  from  the  25th  of  November,  to  the  4th  of  December. 

After  Henry  the  Fifth,  Bari-y  acted  Shore,  and  Horatio,  the  favoui'ite  character  of  the  tardy- 
gaited  Quin.  Dr.  John  Hoadly,  in  his  correspondence  with  Garrick,  here  preserved,  and  terminated 
only  by  his  death,  reminds  him,  that  Bridgewater  alone  had  made  a  part  of  Strickland  in  his  bro¬ 
ther  Ben’s  comedy.  That  modest  man  now  took  it  for  his  benefit,  and  at  the  bottom  of  his  bill. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xxi 


(“  He  was  not  for  the  fashion  of  these  days !”)  writes  simply  thus  :  “  The  kind  reception  I  have 
met  with  in  the  character  of  the  Suspicious  Husband,  has  emboldened  me  to  hope  for  the  farther 
encouragement  of  the  town  on  my  benefit  night ;  especially  as  I  have  not  troubled  them  on  such  an 
occasion  for  several  seasons.” 

Barry  acted  Orestes  for  his  benefit  this  season  ;  and  to  prove  really  to  Mrs.  Pritchard  how  vain 
her  fears  had  been,  Mr.  Garrick  appeared  on  her  night  in  an  Epilogue,  of  which  she  was  the  Cla- 
rinda  and  he  the  Ranger.  In  April,  Quin  came  up  from  Bath  to  act  for  the  sufferers  by  a  dread¬ 
ful  fire  in  Cornhill,  and  his  Othello  at  Covent  Garden  brought  them  218/.  12s.  4 d.  The  rival  play 
at  Drury,  Lear,  pi-oduced  208/.  Is.  The  army  had  already  been  permitted  to  benefit  by  this 
strange  resource. 

The  only  addition  made  by  Mr.  Garrick  this  season  to  his  performances  in  town,  was  the  part 
of  Jaffier,  which  he  acted  for  the  first  time  on  the  8th  of  February  1748.  Among  the  memora¬ 
bilia  of  his  management,  we  may  class  the  dexterity  of  Macklin,  in  exciting  attention  to  Ford’s  play 
of  the  Lover's  Melancholy ;  some  idea  of  which  may  be  formed  from  the  disquisition  written  by  Mr. 
Malone,  and  printed  in  his  Shakspeare.  His  recent  dispute  with  Garrick,  and  the  sturdy  indepen¬ 
dence  of  his  character  at  all  times,  made  him  determine  not  to  ask  that  great  man  to  act  for  his 
benefit  ;  and  he  wrote  in  the  newspapers  perhaps  more  matter  than  the  play  itself  contained,  to  in¬ 
duce  the  public  to  go  and  see  it.  He  had  every  body  in  the  cast  except  Garrick,  and  I  shall  pre¬ 
serve  the  list  of  his  performers  as  a  curiosity.  Barry,  Sparks,  Berry,  Winstone,  Macklin,  Blakes, 
Delane,  Havard,  Neale,  Mrs.  Macklin,  Mrs.  Green,  Mrs.  Bennet,  and  Mrs.  Pritchard. 

Thus  closed  the  first  season  of  the  new  management — upon  which  it  may  be  sufficient  to  remark  5 
that  the  sleeping  muses  of  either  Tragedy  or  Comedy  had  not  yet  roused  from  their  lethargic  slum¬ 
ber.  No  author  of  genius  had  yet  tempted  Mr.  Garrick’s  liberality  by  strong  dramatic  skill.  He 
had  a  full  magazine,  however,  of  admirable  old  stock,  so  that  he  could  wait  the  revival  of  dramatic 
talent  among  us,  and  was  content  to  do  so. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  record  that  the  humility  or  the  avarice  of  our  actors  submitted,  at 
this  period,  to  the  triumphant  St.  Bartholomew  ;  and  Yates  had  a  booth  at  the  fair  in  Smithfield,  at 
which  he  presented  the  moral  lessons  of  the  immortal  Hogarth  dramatised.  This  droll  was  called 
“  The  consequences  of  Industry  and  Idleness,  or  the  Apprentice’s  Guide.”  At  a  rival  booth  they  dis¬ 
played  “  The  Northern  Heroes,  with  the  Adventures  of  Roderick  Random  and  his  friend  Strap.” 

So  truly  did  Johnson  exhibit  the  course  of  the  world  when  he  wrote,  to  justify  his  own  Shak¬ 
speare, — “  In  which,  at  the  same  time,  the  reveller  is  hasting  to  his  wine,  and  the  mourner  burying 
his  friend,” — that  in  this  season  of  revelry  to  thousands,  James  Thomson  expired,  the  author  of 
the  Seasons,  the  interpreter  of  silentNature,  the  favourite  bard  of  the  Castle  of  Indolence. 

In  Mr.  Garrick’s  second  season,  1748-9,  Woodward  returned  to  Drury-lane,  after  an  absence  of 
seven  years;  and  Mrs.  Woffington,  after  a  similar  absence,  returned  to  Covent-Garden,  where  Quin 
also  renewed  his  engagement.  We  have  already  hinted  at  the  inducements,  of  a  mixed  character, 
which  led  the  AVoffiogton  from  Garrick  and  his  theatre.  It  w7as  at  one  time  supposed  that  Garrick 
had  really  married  her;  and  she  herself  told  Murphy,  that  he  had  gone  so  far  as  to  try  on  the 
wedding-ring.  It  seems  not  to  have  jitted  perfectly.  He  was  now  decidedly  in  earnest  pursuit  of 
the  A  iolette ;  destined,  as  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  form,  if  not  the  most  splendid,  t lie  most  intimate  and 


XXII 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


valued  charm  of  his  existence.  Garrick’s  attachment  was  at  first  only  matter  of  surmise,  and  when 
known,  was  hardly  approved  at  Burlington  House,  as  the  young  lady  had  one  or  more  offers  from 
persons  of  family  and  fortune.  Garrick,  it  should  be  here  remarked,  was  a  stranger  at  this  time  to 
the  Burlington  family,  who  only  knewr  him  in  his  profession.  Mrs.  Garrick  herself  used  to  relate, 
that  once  her  future  husband  disguised  himself  in  woman’s  clothes,  in  order  to  convey  a  letter  into 
her  chair. 

It  may  be  well  here  to  notice  the  first  appearance  of  Tom  King  on  Drury-Lane  stage,  on 
the  19th  of  October  1748.  He  then  shone,  in  spite  of  Churchill,  neither  “  in  brass”  nor  copper; 
but  took  his  station  exactly  where  he  was  wanted,  and  cultivated  his  useful  talent  under  the  great 
master ;  who  knew  him  during  his  dramatic  reign  for  the  steadiest  of  his  adherents,  and  presented 
him  with  his  sword  when  he  quitted  the  stage.  King’s  trial  part  was  only  Allworth  in  the  New 
Way  to  Pay  Old  Debts ;  with  such  succeeding  characters  as  Trueman,  in  the  Squire  of  Alsatia, 
and  Salanio  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice ;  besides  an  occasional  serious  attempt  at  Barnwell, 
dropping  without  a  murmur  to  Ross  in  Macbeth,  or  dozing  to  the  sweet  music  of  Milton’s  verse 
in  the  younger  brother  in  his  Comus. 

On  the  14th  of  November  Mr.  Garrick  first  appeared  in  Benedick  in  Much  Ado  about  Nothing, 
a  performance  of  most  exquisite  humour,  in  which  he  was  never  seen  without  sympathy  and  laugh¬ 
ter  equally  irresistible.  Whether  in  contemplation  of  his  intended  marriage,  and  to  disperse  the 
“  odd  quirks  and  remnants  of  wit  that  might  be  broken  on  him,”  he  spoke  this  scenical  prologue  to 
his  real  wedding,  can  only  be  gathered  from  his  practice  of  thus  anticipating  through  life.  To  show 
his  real  desire  to  swell  the  sails  of  Barry’s  popularity  to  his  heart’s  content,  Garrick  got  up  Romeo 
and  Juliet ;  and  the  enchanting  lover  of  the  stage  now’  acted  Romeo  to  the  Juliet  of  Mrs.  Cibber,  on 
the  29th  of  the  same  month.  Garrick  here  introduced  a  scene,  the  hint  of  which  is,  we  believe,  from 
Otway.  He  makes  Juliet  awake  in  the  tomb  before  the  death  of  Romeo;  a  judicious  improvement 
to  the  catastrophe  of  the  play.  He  altered  and  improved  his  own  lively  farce  of  Lethe,  not  yet  how¬ 
ever  enriched  by  his  Lord  Chalkestone.  He  kept  it  as  a  canvass  on  which  he  could  at  pleasure  rub 
out  or  paint  in  any  figure  in  its  shades,  and  constantly  heighten  its  attractions.  At  this  revival,  he 
himself  acted  the  poet,  the  drunken  man,  and  the  Frenchman;  the  fine  gentleman  he  allotted  to 
Woodward  ;  the  lady  to  the  inimitable  Clive. 

During  the  summer  of  1748,  Foote  commenced  an  entertainment  at  the  Haymarket,  in  the  fore, 
noon,  called  an  “  A  uction  of  Pictures the  wit  and  extraordinary  personations  of  that  eccentric 
genius  brought  great  numbers  to  the  sale — the  pictures,  as  they  in  truth  were,  being  all  warranted 
originals,  and  entirely  new.  This  auction  he  renewed  on  the  1st  of  December  following.  In  the 
midst  of  his  success,  however,  some  impudent  rascal  absolutely  got  possession  of  the  house,  with  a 
view  to  ascertain  how  far  the  English  curiosity  or  credulity  might  be  tempted.  His  advertisement 
of  the  iGth  of  January  1749,  announced  that  “  A  person  then  and  there,  before  the  audience,  would 
take  a  common  walking-cane  from  any  one  of  the  spectators,  on  which  he  would  play  the  music  of 
every  instrument  then  in  use.” 

And  this,  with  more  or  less  accuracy,  clearly  may  be  done. 

“  He  next  will  present  a  common  wine-bottle  to  be  examined  by  the  spectators.  This  bottle  being 
placed  on  a  table,  he  will  then,  without  any  equivocation,  go  into  it,  aud  sing  while  there.  During  which  time 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR.  xxiii 

any  person  may  handle  it,  and  see  that  it  does  not  exceed  a  common  tavern  bottle.  Those  who  come  in 
masked  habits  to  this  entertainment  will,  if  agreeable  to  them,  be  told  by  the  performer  who  they  are." 

Stage  7s.  6d.  Boxes  5s.  Pit  3s.  Gallery  2s.  To  begin  at  half  an  hour  after  six  o’clock. 

After  the  above,  as  he  well  might  do,  in  a  private  room,  and  for  a  fresh  gratuity,  he  undertook 
to  show  the  dead  ;  tell  you  the  thoughts,  however  secret,  of  your  past  lives;  and  give  a  full  view  of 
the  persons  who  have  injured  you,  dead  or  alive. 

Most  of  the  crowned  heads  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Europe,  had,  of  course,  seen  these  performances, 
though  he  never  appeared  in  public  anywhere  but  once.  It  was  added — 

“  There  will  be  a  proper  guard  to  keep  the  house  in  due  decorum.” 

Foote  saw  in  this  impudent  business  a  design  to  ruin  him  by  implication  ;  he  therefore  took  care 
to  make  Potter,  the  proprietor  of  the  house,  appoint  his  own  receiver ;  that  he  might  be  able  to 
return  their  money  to  the  fools  who  had  paid  it  for  entrance,  and  leave  to  their  folly  nothing  beyond 
the  loss  of  their  time.  He  publicly  announced  what  he  had  done  by  advertisement  on  the  18th,  two 
days  after  the  hoax;  and  thus  finished  the  affair  of  the  Bottle  Conjuror!  —  the  most  disgraceful 
attack  that  was  ever  made  upon  the  common  sense  of  the  metropolis. 

On  the  6th  of  February  1749,  Mr.  Garrick  brought  out  the  tragedy  written  by  his  friend  John¬ 
son,  under  the  title  of  Mahomet  and  Irene.  It  was  acted  only  nine  nights.  Nature  seems  to  have 
denied  to  that  great  man,  as  she  did  to  Milton,  the  true  power  of  a  dramatic  writer.  It  was  more 
calculated  for  the  meridian  of  Paris  than  London.  It  is,  as  he  himself  said  of  Comus,  a  drama  “  in¬ 
elegantly  splendid  and  tediously  instructive.” — The  speeches  have  but  one  tune,  and  the  moralist 
prevails  over  the  poet.  Garrick  is  said  to  have  acted  Demetrius  finely  ;  and  Aaron  Hill  discover¬ 
ed  great  want  of  skill  in  the  Mahomet  of  Barry.  Mrs.  Pritchard  and  Mrs.  Cibber  are  said  to  have 
been  effective  in  their  characters  ;  and  Garrick,  to  be  sure  of  one  of  the  springs  of  tragedy,  terror , 
strangled  Irene  in  the  face  of  the  audience;  but  the  due  preparation  for  such  a  stroke  was  wanting; 
it  was  only  shocking ;  and  was  subsequently  obliged  to  be  removed  from  the  eyes  of  the  spectators. 

Barry  presented  his  friends  with  Othello  at  his  benefit ;  and  Garrick,  who  did  every  thing  to 
serve  him,  studied  and  played  lago  to  him  for  the  first  time.  In  this  part,  it  is  probable,  that  the 
nearest  approach  to  him  was  made  by  Henderson,  who  had  the  freedom  and  the  variety  of  Garrick ; 
but  the  look ,  the  voice ,  “  these  are  in  the  land  where  all  things  are  forgotten.” 

With  Hill’s  “  MeropeC  a  free  translation  from  Voltaire,  in  which  Mr.  Garrick  himself  acted 
Eumenes ,  (Dorilas,)  the  season  made  a  brilliant  close. 

Hill  did  not  long  survive  the  success  of  his  tragedy,  for  he  died  in  the  February  following. 

On  the  22nd  of  June  1749,  David  Garrick  w'as  married  to  Eva  Maria  Yiolette,  by  Mr.  Franck- 
lin,  at  his  chapel  near  Russell-street,  Bloomsbury ;  and  afterwards,  on  the  same  day,  according  to 
the  rites  of  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Blyth,  at  the  chapel  of  the  Portuguese 
embassy,  in  South  Audley-street. 

Something  mav  here  be  added  as  to  the  Burlington  patronage  of  the  lady.  The  charming  1  io- 
lette  had  entirely  sympathised  with  her  ardent  lover,  and  Lady  Burlington,  during  an  indisposition, 
had  extorted  from  her  that  sort  of  declaration,  which  she  anticipated.  Mr.  Garrick  now  wrote  a 
very  respectful  and  proper  letter  to  Lady  Burlington,  making  his  proposals  in  due  form  :  they  were 
accepted.  All  reserve  and  distance  thus  happily  got  over,  Mr.  Garrick  became,  as  was  to  be  expect- 


XXIV 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


ed,  a  great  favourite  at  Burlington-house.  On  one  occasion  Lady  Burlington  made  him  a  present 
ol  her  Prayer-book,  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Rackett,  in  which  Mr.  Garrick  wrote  the 
following  lines. 

“  This  sacred  book  has  Dorothea  given, 

To  show  a  straying  sheep  the  way  to  Heaven : 

With  forms  of  righteousness  she  well  may  part, 

Who  bears  the  Spirit  in  her  upright  heart.” 

Foote,  this  summer,  resumed  his  public  breakfasting  in  the  Haymarket,  and  threw  down  the 
gauntlet  to  Harry  Woodward,  who  was  neither  unable  nor  unwilling  to  take  it  up.  The  reader  will 
see,  at  pages  54  and  55  of  “  The  Correspondence,”  how  idly  he  presses  Garrick  into  this  quarrel,  by 
a  gross  and  wanton  imputation  of  parsimony ;  and  how  temperately  the  prudent  manager  replies.  A 
time  arrived  when  Garrick  showed  him  the  most  friendly  sympathy,  at  the  moment  when  it  was 
most  grateful  to  him.  He  was  always  among  the  warmest  admirers  of  Foote’s  genius. 

Barry  now  began  to  grow  spoiled  by  success,  and  frequently  was  absent  from  his  duty,  under 
the  plea  of  bad  health.  He  assured  the  public  by  advertisement,  that  “  he  scorned  all  trick  and 
evasion,  and  that  nothing  but  real  illness  had,  or  should  ever  oblige  him  to  decline  his  duty  as  an 
actor."  If  ever  one  man  was  indebted  to  another,  Barry  was  indebted  to  Garrick;  his  acquirements 
from  study  were  very  slender.  Garrick,  in  fact,  thought  for  him,  and  taught  him  the  proper  use  of 
his  very  fine  powers.  He,  however,  could  no  longer  bear  to  be  second,  where  it  was  yet  impossible 
he  should  be  first.  He  at  length  very  modestly  desired  to  choose  his  own  nights  of  performance. 
This  Garrick  permitted.  But  the  Hamlet  of  Mr.  Garrick  drew  greater  houses  than  Barry’s.  This 
it  was  impossible  to  remedy  ;  and,  where  no  remedy  can  be  found,  the  patient  must  try  another  cli¬ 
mate.  From  the  close  of  the  season,  Mrs.  Cibber  and  he  both  engaged  themselves  to  Rich.  They 
had  permission  to  get  up  what  plays  they  chose,  and  play  what,  and  when  they  pleased.  Quin  and 
Barry  might  sometimes  contest  a  point,  but  of  Quin’s  opposition,  the  close  might  be  speedily  ex¬ 
pected.  They  thought  they  could  very  materially  annoy  their  old  master. 

We  shall  see  the  result  of  this  removal  soon.  To  conclude  the  present  season,  W.  Shirley’s 
Black  Prince  was  produced  on  the  6th  of  January,  and  Garrick  kept  it  living  the  usual  nine  nights, 
and  on  the  22nd  Foote’s  dreaded  Friendship  in  Fashion ;  in  the  Malagene  of  which  Woodward 
had  threatened  to  dress  at  him,  and  take  him  off- — a  favour  Foote  had  conferred  upon  hundreds,  who 
were  not,  like  himself,  fair  public  game.  Foote  was  relieved  by  the  damnation  of  the  play.  The 
Homan  Father  of  William  Whitehead  was  brought  out  on  the  24th  of  February,  by  Garrick,  and 
has  been  rarely  long  absent  from  the  stage.  The  author  wanted  the  elevation  of  our  true  tragic 
style,  but  he  has  occasional  passages  that  a  great  actor  will  always  render  popular.  On  the  5th  of 
April,  Comus  was  acted  by  Garrick  for  the  benefit  of  Mrs.  Foster,  a  grand-daughter  of  our  epic 
wonder,  Milton  ;  and  she  hardly  understood  the  means  by  which  her  age  was  rendered  comfortable. 
This  was  the  last  movement  of  a  season  of  great  activity  and  skill. 

In  the  recess,  Garrick  had  turned  himself,  with  his  usual  vigour,  to  supply  the  chasm  left  by 
the  desertion  of  Barry  and  Mrs.  Cibber.  For  the  one,  even  as  a  lover,  he  thought  himself  a  full 
match.  He  had  taught  Barry  how  he  himself  conceived  Romeo.  To  oppose  Cibber,  the  pathetic 
Cibber,  was  more  difficult ;  however,  as  Rich  no  longer  wanted  her,  he  took  Miss  Bellamy,  a  very 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXV 


promising  young  actress,  and  by  infinite  pains,  brought  her  up  to  his  idea  of  Juliet — his  preparation 
had  been  silent,  but  was  complete  :  he  opened  the  season  of  1750,  on  the  8th  of  September,  with  the 
Merchant  of  Venice,  and  an  occasional  prologue  by  himself.  Covent  Garden  started  on  the  24th, 
with  Macklin  in  the  Miser,  his  first  appearance  on  that  stage ;  and  when,  four  days  afterwards, 
Rich  put  up  Romeo  and  Juliet,  the  Drury  Lane  play -bill  announced  it  also. 

Competition  is  undoubtedly  the  life  of  theatres.  In  the  managers  of  them,  however,  a  false 
point  of  honour  sometimes  tends  to  their  prejudice :  what  was  begun  by  interest  is  protracted  by 
obstinacy.  They  repeat  the  food  till  the  appetite  can  bear  it  no  longer.  Garrick  played  Romeo  a 
thirteenth  night,  when  Barry,  or  rather  Rich,  closed  his  run  of  the  play  on  the  12th.  Shakspeare, 
by  the  mouth  of  his  Mercutio,  had  furnished  the  wits  with  an  epigram  exactly  suited  to  the  occa¬ 
sion,  the  wearied  town  exclaiming  sincerely — 

A  plague  on  both  your  houses  !” 

The  female  part  of  the  audience  might  rather  incline  to  the  silver  sweetness  of  Barry  and  Cibber, 
and  indulge  their  weakness,  or  their  remembrance,  in  silent  and  copious  tears.  Garrick  seized  upon 
the  agonies  of  love,  and  convulsed  his  audience  with  alarm,  with  frenzy  and  despair.  Every  look 
called  upon  the  painter,  every  attitude  upon  the  statuary.  Macklin  was  the  Mercutio  of  Covent 
Garden,  and  Woodward  his  representative  at  Drury  Lane.  Garrick  was  able  to  repress  the  ten¬ 
dency  of  Woodward  to  extravagance.  At  Macklin  it  is  likely  nobody  ever  smiled — his  notion  of 
the  character  would  be  satirical  and  critical,  derisory  and  contemptuous. 

Now  began  the  singular  eminence  of  Mrs.  Pritchard  in  tragedy  ;  she  had  been  considered  only 
a  valuable  second  to  Cibber  and  Woffington.  She  now  became  the  partner  of  Garrick  on  the  scene; 
and  on  the  3rd  of  December  they  acted  together  for  the  first  time,  Osmyn  and  Zara  in  the  Mourn¬ 
ing  Bride  of  Congreve.  Soon  after  this,  Dr.  Burney  appeared  as  a  Composer  for  the  stage  in  a 
musical  entertainment  called  Robin  Hood.  It  was  written  by  Moses  Mendez,  a  Jew,  a  Stock¬ 
broker,  a  Poet,  and  a  man  of  immense  property. 

Mr.  Garrick  kindly  permitted  a  daughter  of  Farquhar’s  in  bad  circumstances,  to  issue  tickets 
for  that  great  comic  writer’s  Stratagem,  and  strengthened  the  play  by  his  own  performance  on  the 
19th  of  December,  1750.  He  also  permitted,  for  it  is  to  be  hoped  some  charitable  purpose,  the 
performance  of  Othello  at  his  house  on  the  7th  of  March,  1751.  Othello ,  logo,  and  Cassio,  by 
members  of  the  Delaval  family.  Desdemona  and  Emilia  were  sustained  by  Mrs.  Quin  and  Mrs. 
Stevens.  These  gay  people  played  the  tragedy  for  their  “  own  diversion.”  It  is  to  be  feared  that 
they  might  unluckily  divert  the  audience,  unless  indeed  they  were  over-awed  by  the  attendance  in  state 
of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  the  Princess  Amelia,  Prince  George, 
(George  III.)  and  his  sister  Augusta,  who  by  her  marriage  with  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  V  olf- 
enbuttel,  gave  birth  to  the  consort  of  his  late  Majesty.  In  one  fortnight  after  this  gracious 
appearance  of  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  he  himself  quitted  the  great  stage  ol  life,  and  the 
theatres  were  closed  by  order  till  the  8th  of  April.  rI  he  only  other  event  at  all  remai  kable, 
was  the  final  retirement  of  Quin,  wdio  became  not  less  eminent  in  society  for  voluptuous  hunioiu , 
than  he  had  been  upon  the  stage  itself.  He  w'as  the  Falstajjf  of  Bath,  and  scarcely  infeiioi  to 
the  original. 


VOL.  I. 


e 


XXVI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


Ireland  has  been  observed  to  have  supplied  the  stage  with  rather  more  than  its  quota  in  the  two 
congenial  elasses  of  Wits  and  Actors.  The  production  of  Barry  had  not  exhausted  her :  in  the 
winter  of  1749,  another  great  actor  made  his  first  appearance  at  the  Dublin  theatre.  This  was 
Henry  Mossop,  who  appears  to  have  enjoyed  among  us  a  kindred  fame  with  the  admired  Le  Kain 
of  the  French  theatre.  Mossop’s  three  first  characters  were  Zanga,  Olliello ,  and  Cassius.  To  this 
gentleman  Mr.  Garrick  threw  open  the  doors  of  Drury  Lane  Theatre,  and  he  determined  upon  the 
part  of  Richard  the  Third,  notwithstanding  the  transcendant  powers  of  Mr.  Garrick  in  the  character. 
Richard’s  deformity  concealed  Mossop’s  want  of  figure  and  graceful  motion  ;  and  it  gave  full 
scope  to  his  dreadful  energy,  and  the  wonders  of  a  voice  which  through  an  amazing  range  of  tones 
was  the  soundest  that  ever  predominated  upon  the  stage.  It  was  this  perfection  which  electrified 
every  audience  in  the  famous  burst  of  Zanga  from  the  cloud  of  hypocrisy,  when  he  withers  the 
wretched  Alonzo  with  the  avowal  of  his  vengeance.  To  Mossop’s  debut  of  the  26th  of  September 
succeeded,  the  following  week,  a  milder  star,  in  the  accomplished  David  Ross.  In  him  the  public 
saw  a  feature  which  the  stage  so  seldom  displays,  the  unaffected  gentleman.  A  third  candidate 
from  the  Irish  stage  appeared  in  the  person  of  a  gentleman  named  Dexter.  His  first  performance 
of  Oroonoko  excited  expectations  which  he  was  fated  to  disappoint. 

Mr.  Garrick  had  long  meditated  the  revival  of  Ben  Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  his  Humour.  He 
now  altered  it  very  judiciously  for  the  modern  stage,  and  acted  himself  the  character  of  Kitely.  It 
may  be  questioned  whether  even  Burbage,  with  the  author  by  his  side,  could  have  stood  the  com¬ 
parison  with  him  in  that  striking  effort  of  his  skill.  The  very  night  before  he  had  revived  the 
Phaedra  and  Hippolytus  of  Edmund  Smith,  and  shown  the  full  activity  of  able  management. 

But  the  winter  patentees  then,  as  in  our  own  times,  were  liable  to  the  invasion  of  enterprising 
genius  ;  and  from  the  Castle  Tavern  in  Paternoster  Row,  instead  of  her  bookseller’s,  Mother  Mid¬ 
night’s  Magazine ,  conducted  by  Foote,  was  published  on  the  3rd  of  December  1751.  As  a  fashion¬ 
able  work,  it  was  soon  removed  to  the  Haymarket,  and  the  delivery  of  it  to  the  public  occupied  the 
press,  without  interruption,  for  thirty-two  days.  The  January  following  he  brought  out  a  two  act 
comedy  at  Drury  Lane,  which  he  gave  to  his  friend  Worsdale  the  painter,  who  acted  Lady  Pent- 
weasle  in  it.  The  piece  was  called  Taste,  and  adopted  the  outcry  of  modern  artists  against  the 
affected  admirers  of  maimed  sculpture  and  invisible  pictures. 

With  the  accession  of  such  a  man  as  Garrick  to  the  management  of  a  theatre,  a  new  order  of 
things  might  be  expected  to  arise ;  genius,  sure  of  being  appreciated,  would  naturally  shake  off  the 
slumber  of  despondency,  and,  rousing  its  faculties,  struggle  against  the  fame  of  former  writers. 
The  genius  could  not  be found ; — it  was  dreaming  over  the  classics,  and  creating  only  school-boy 
imitations.  What  was  not  Greek  in  our  writers,  was  French ;  an  Apollo  in  the  dress  of  Louis  the 
Fourteenth.  Such  dramatists  were  Francis,  and  Whitehead,  and  Francklin,  and  Thomson,  and 
Mallet,  and  Glover,  and  Brown,  and  the  spes  altera  Tonne,  Murphy.  The  genius  for  acting  of 
Garrick  was  fashioned,  and,  indeed,  wisely  devoted,  for  the  most  part,  to  the  poets  of  a  former 
and  a  better  age.  He  was  not  suited  to  mediocrity,  and  his  interest  only  at  any  time  bowed 
him  to  season  insipidity.  Finding  no  character  among  the  living,  he  raised  the  dead,  and  ren¬ 
dered  Shakspeare,  and  Jonson,  and  Fletcher  contemporaries  and  brothers  to  himself. 

Having  exhibited  the  character  of  this  great  man’s  management  in  detail  sufficient  for  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXVI 


reader’s  information,  we  shall  now  confine  our  brief  sketch  to  events  of  remarkable  consequence 
to  himself  or  his  theatre.  “  Perhaps,”  said  the  sagacious  Johnson, 

“  Perhaps  (for  who  can  guess  the  effects  of  chance  ?) 

Here  Hunt  may  box,  or  Mahomet  may  dance.’' 

This  profanation  of  a  stage  actually  took  place  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  on  the  2nd  of 
November  1 752 ;  but  the  Christian  name  of  the  intruder  was  Maddox,  a  dancer  upon  the  slackwire. 
Mr.  Garrick  permitted  Woodward  to  introduce  some  additional  scenes  into  his  pantomime  of 
Harlequin  Ranger,  in  ridicule  of  this  innovation,  from  Sadler’s  Wells.  During  the  performance 
Woodward  was  assailed  with  a  tempest  of  provocation.  He  was  carried  as  Harlequin  in  a  sedan 
chair  across  the  stage,  it  seems,  and  while  so  in  motion  an  apple  broke  the  glass  of  the  vehicle. 
This  Woodward  took  up,  and  politely  bowing  to  a  gentleman  whose  vehemence  in  the  stage-box 
particularly  caught  his  eye,  he  said  audibly,  “  Sir,  I  thank  you.”  This  gentleman  was  the  cele¬ 
brated  Richard  Fitzpatrick,  who  became  the  mortal  enemy  of  Garrick,  and  was  elevated  by  the 
manager,  under  the  style  and  title  of  Fizgig,  to  the  chair  of  the  Fribbleriad.  It  appears  that  he 
himself,  or  Dr.  Hill  in  the  Inspector,  charged  Woodward  with  coming  up  to  him,  where  he  sat 
in  the  stage-box,  and  saying  to  him,  in  his  Harlequin’s  jacket  from  the  stage,  “  I  have  noticed  you 
in  particular,  and  I  shall  meet  with  you  again.”  By  public  advertisement  Fitzpatrick  declared 
this  to  be  the  fact,  upon  his  honour.  Woodward  confirmed  his  own  speech  upon  oath,  before 
Henry  Fielding.  Nor  did  Fitzpatrick  avoid  the  same  test,  but  also  made  oath,  on  the  17th  of 
November,  before  Mr.  Lediard,  as  soon  as  he  had  read  Woodward’s  deposition.  Thus,  with 
perjury  as  a  goad  hanging  awkwardly  between  them,  originated,  on  Fitzpatrick’s  side,  a  perse¬ 
cution  of  both  the  actor  and  his  manager,  which  annoyed  Mr.  Garrick  with  malignant  criticism 
on  his  acting,  and  satirical  contempt  for  him  as  a  man,  for  many  years. 

It  is  but  justice  to  Woodward  to  add,  that  his  version  of  the  address  to  this  person,  was  attested 
by  the  affidavit  of  Cross  the  prompter ;  and  he  farther  alleged,  that  his  assailant,  when  he  got  into 
the  Bedford  Coffee-house  after  the  play,  then  charged  him  with  saying  no  more  than  the  words, 
“  Sir,  I  thank  you.”  However,  Woodward  now  vindictively  took  a  personal  liberty  with  Dr.  Hill; 
and  when  he  next  performed  the  mock  doctor,  he  dressed  the  character  exactly  in  the  Inspector  s 
style,  to  the  annoyance  of  the  critical  cabal,  and  the  diversion  of  the  spectators. 

Mr.  Garrick  now  ventured  to  quit  business  for  a  few  months,  and  passed  the  summer  of  1752  with 
Mrs.  Garrick  in  Paris.  He  there  became  acquainted  with  the  celebrated  performers  on  the  French 
stage ;  and  saw  and  admired  Clairon,  the  most  studious  artiste,  and  one  of  the  most  captivating 
women  of  France.  The  great  actor  preferred  her  then  to  all  her  competitors,  and  on  account 
of  that  very  art,  which  was  objected  to  her  by  many  critics. 

No  period  could  be  better  chosen  than  this  of  Garrick’s  journey.  He  arrived  among  the 
literati  of  France  at  a  moment  when  they  disposed  of  every  thing  that  society  had  to  give,  and 
filled  themselves  with  the  love  of  liberty  ;  an  illustrious  Englishman,  like  Garrick,  was  welcomed  as 
a  sort  of  test  of  what  the  cultivation  of  great  talent  in  the  soil  of  freedom  could  produce. 

Literature  had  made  the  lion’s  effort,  and  freed  itself,  in  a  great  measure,  of  the  most  jealous 
restraints  of  a  corrupt  and  bigoted  government. 

e  2 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xxviii 

But,  with  whatever  serious  concerns  beset  occasionally,  French  society  is  usually  gay,  and  the 
presence  of  Garrick  added  to  its  gaiety.  He  spoke  the  language  without  difficulty,  and  his  wife 
was  a  foreigner — Garrick’s  family  was  originally  French  ;  and  he  was  thus  every  way  at  home, 
and  by  competition  every  where  caressed.  He  perhaps  quitted  Paris  with  reluctance;  but  the 
opening  of  the  house  summoned  him  again  to  Drury. 

We  are  next  to  notice  the  first  appearance  of  a  gentleman,  who  became  very  intimate  with  Mr. 
Garrick,  and  whose  letters  frequently  occur  in  his  “  Correspondence.”  We  allude  to  the  late  Mr. 
William  Smith,  whom  robust  exercises  of  all  kinds  kept  living  to  a  great  age;  and  who,  after  his 
great  master,  stood  in  no  mean  rank  with  the  public.  Smith  could  swim  his  league  out  to  sea  and 
back  ;  ride  his  thirty  miles  an  end  ;  dine  with  a  club  of  foxhunters  ;  and  study  equally  hard.  Nor 
did  he  neglect  his  classical  acquirements  of  college  ;  nor  the  pleasures  of  a  still  more  captivating 
character.  All  our  readers  have  at  least  heard  of  his  Charles  in  the  School  for  Scandal.  Mr.  Smith 
came  out  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  on  the  8th  of  January  1753,  in  Lee’s  Theodosius ;  an  approved 
trial-part,  it  seems  ;  for  long  after,  it  was  also  Kemble’s.  The  manly  beauty  of  the  actor’s  person 
and  manners  soon  made  an  important  conquest  among  the  fair  sex;  for  he  married  on  the  31st  of 
May  1754,  the  Honourable  Mrs.  Courtenay,  sister  to  Lord  Sandwich. 

We  have  always  considered  the  touch  of  nature  upon  the  stage,  to  be  the  sine  qua  non ;  and  who 
shall  deny  it  to  the  Gamester,  a  tragedy  written  by  Edward  Moore,  and  which  had  the  high  praise 
of  Dr.  Young?  It  was  first  acted  on  the  7th  of  February  1753.  How  shall  we  credit  the  fact 
that,  notwithstanding  the  utmost  efforts  of  Mr.  Garrick  himself  in  Beverley,  the  reception  was 

t 

equivocal,  or  rather,  its  success  languid  ? 

That  the  play  did  little  then  at  Drury-Lane  must  be  confessed  ;  for  in  a  “  little  month”  it  gave 
place  to  Dr.  Young’s  tragedy  of  the  Brothers,  which  had  been  rehearsed,  but  never  acted,  twenty- 
five  years  before. 

The  season  of  1753-4  saw  Mrs.  Cibber  again  at  Drury-Lane,  with  her  old  friend,  Mr.  Garrick  ; 
and  her  substitute  in  the  Juliet  business,  Miss  Bellamy,  returned  to  Covent  Garden;  Bellamy,  in 
fact,  had  failed  miserably  in  the  Brothers ;  and,  as  a  general  heroine,  was  faint  and  inefficient. 
Tragedies  now  were  like  the  regal  spectres  in  Macbeth,  whose  great  representative  uttered  to  them 
unwillingly — 

“  Come  like  shadows  !  so  depart.” 

Thus  it  wras  with  the  Boadicea  of  Glover,  and  the  Virginia  of  Crisp,  and  the  Cr'eusa  of  Whitehead. 

The  writer  of  this  epitome  remembers  that  Murphy,  with  whom  he  passed  an  evening  at  his  old 
haunt,  Slaughter’s  Coffee-house,  gave  the  party,  after  supper,  a  notion  of  Garrick  in  the  character 
of  Yirginius,  in  Crisp’s  tragedy.  Appius  being  seated  on  his  tribunal,  Claudius,  the  villainous  tool 
of  the  Decemvir,  claims  Virginia  as  a  slave  born  in  his  house.  During  this  declaration,  Garrick 
stood  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  stage,  with  his  arms  folded,  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  ground,  mute  and 
motionless  as  a  statue.  By  slow  degrees,  he  at  length  raised  his  head — after  a  slight  pause,  during 
which  the  spectators  could  read  the  struggle  within  him  in  a  face  that  kept  no  secrets — he  turned 
round  slowly,  till  his  eyes  rested  upon  Claudius;  then,  in  the  low,  smothered  voice  of  anguish,  tears 
gushing  as  he  spoke  the  words,  his  broken  heart  sobbed  out,  “  Thou  traitor  !”  The  audience  was, 
for  once,  electrified  without  noise;  and  the  applause  became  abundant  and  universal.  Such  things 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXIX 


atone  for  much  wearisome  length  of  blank  song.  However,  Garrick’s  reception  of  Virginia  was 
secured  by  the  irresistible  sweetness  of  the  beautiful  Lady  Coventry,  who  patronized  the  reverend 
author  of  the  play. 

We  now  enter  upon  a  subject  which  was  attended  with  events  highly  illiberal,  and  surely  un¬ 
provoked.  It  must  be  confessed,  whether  we  like  to  hear  it  or  not,  that  the  English  know  less  of 
both  music  and  dancing  than  some  other  nations;  and  what  admits  of  easier  proof,  perform  in  them 
worse.  Singing  is  the  charm  of  Italy  ;  as  dancing  is  of  France.  Indeed  the  fact  appeared  almost 
to  have  received  our  ow  n  assent ;  and  so  common  was  it,  from  time  to  time,  to  exhibit  French  dancers 
at  either  Theatre,  that  we  passed  them  over,  as  habitual  garnish,  in  our  theatrical  entertainments. 
Mr.  Garrick  had  used  this  privilege  as  much  as  Rich,  but  not  more.  The  skill  of  Mrs.  Garrick  as  a 
dancer  might  have  led  her  husband  to  think  more  of  such  attraction  than  his  usual  system  would 
have  suggested  to  him  ;  he  now  began  to  treat  it  as  a  grand  feature ;  and  to  possess  it  without  a 
rival,  he  proposed  terms  to  Monsieur  Noverre ,  then,  we  believe,  confessed  to  be  the  first  ballet- 
master  in  Europe.  The  French  part  of  the  present  “  Correspondence”  will  open  to  the  reader  the 
views  of  that  classical  artist,  and  show  the  interest  which  he  took  in  advancing  the  success  of  Drury  - 
lane  Theatre.  Garrick  opened  the  treaty  with  Noverre  in  September  1754;  the  artist  w:as  invited 
to  the  Court  of  Bavaria,  but,  as  he  says  very  ingenuously,  “  knowing  Mr.  Garrick  to  have  superior 
talent,  and  that  his  judgment  would  ensure  the  suffrages  of  the  English  nation,  his  own  interest 
and  the  delight  of  that  country  induce  him  to  give  his  representations  in  preference  there.”  One 
sees,  in  the  correspondence  of  all  these  illustrious  persons,  that  the  English  are  rather  barbarians  in 
their  esteem  ;  but  there  is  always  one  redeeming  and  master  spirit  among  us,  to  avert  the  curse  of 
taste  from  lighting  upon  our  heads ;  and  that  happy  being  is  the  director  of  a  Theatre  Royal. 
At  Paris  on  the  5th  of  February  1755,  J.  G.  Noverre  signed  the  following  conditions  of  an  engage¬ 
ment  for  a  single  season.  At  his  own  cost,  he  was  to  transport  himself  to  London  by  the  15th  of 
October,  with  his  sister,  who  was  to  be  seconde  danseuse.  Monsieur  was  to  have  350  guineas, 
or  Louis,  d' appoint emeus,  and  his  sister  100.  In  addition  to  this,  he  was  to  have  a  benefit,  on 
paying  the  usual  charge  for  the  house,  and  Mr.  Garrick  was  to  act  for  him.  If  an  accident  he  had 
met  with  permitted  him  to  dance  in  person,  he  was  to  dance,  but  the  salary  suffered  no  abatement 
so  as  he  performed  his  duty  of  Ballet-master.  Every  thing  being  now  concluded  to  his  mind,  the 
artist  sums  up  to  Garrick  in  the  true  French  style,  on  the  24th  of  May  1755.  “  In  fact,”  says  he, 

“  you  are  a  divine  man ,  and  all  the  artists  and  the  learned  (so  he  classes  them)  of  this  country 
desire  the  happiness  of  your  acquaintance.” 

Among  the  latter,  Monsieur  Freron,  the  hornet  of  Voltaire,  through  Patu  the  advocate,  pro¬ 
cured  an  introduction  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  tendered  his  journal  to  the  manager  for  any  critical  im¬ 
pressions  he  might  wish  to  give  foreign  countries  of  his  own ,  either  as  to  his  stage  or  the  writers  of 
it.  Noverre  had  made  a  liberal  display  at  Paris  of  his  consequence  with  Garrick,  and  the  com¬ 
missions  he  had  to  execute  for  him  and  his  wife,  and  Noverre  excited  the  hopes  of  every  thing  dra¬ 
matic  in  France;  they  considered  England  already  as  a  Province  to  their  genius;  and  a  sure  market 
for  the  refuse  of  the  Theatre  Fran^ais.  Mr.  Garrick  would  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  translate 
these  chefs  (Tceuvre ,  and  London  would  speedily  become  another  Paris.  We  must  leave  them  to 
their  imagination  for  the  present,  and  notice  some  occurrences  at  home. 


XXX 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


On  the  18th  March  1754,  Mr.  Garrick  presented  Mrs.  Pritchard  with  his  alteration  of  Shak- 
speare’s  Shrew,  which  she  acted  for  her  benefit — and,  on  Mossop’s  night,  he  appeared  a  first  time 
in  the  character  of  Lusignan,  one  scene  of  which  the  actor  raised  to  a  level  with  the  tenderness  of 
his  own  Lear.  He  also  acted  Aletes  in  Cretisa,  a  classical  play  by  his  friend  Whitehead  and  Mrs. 
Pritchard  exerted  her  great  powers  with  but  slender  effect.  It  was,  in  fact,  the  Ion  of  Euripides, 
deprived  of  the  terrible  beauty  of  its  catastrophe. 

During  the  season  of  1754-5,  Mr.  Barry  left  Covent-Garden  Theatre  for  Ireland,  and  in  his  cast 
of  character  appeared  a  gentleman,  who  was  destined  subsequently,  as  an  author,  to  give  Mr. 
Garrick  very  considerable  aid,  and  no  slight  annoyance ;  this  was  Arthur  Murphy,  with  whom  the 
readers  of  the  “  Correspondence”  will  soon  contract  a  pretty  close  intimacy.  That  as  an  actor  he 
was  inferior  to  his  countryman  Barry,  may  be  admitted  without  disgrace  to  him.  He  had  a  similar 
lofty  and  graceful  person,  and  an  understanding  perhaps  among  the  first  of  his  time.  The 
outrageous  scoff  of  Churchill  merits  little  attention  ;  he  was  bent  upon  an  oblation  of  every  thing  to 
Garrick,  and  found  our  friend  Murphy  within  the  reach  of  his  sacrificial  axe.  Murphy  first  tried 
the  stage,  on  the  18th  of  October  1754,  in  the  part  of  Othello ;  and  he  followed  that  part  by  Jaflier, 
Young  Bevil,  Archer,  Hamlet,  Richard  the  Third,  Zamor,  Biron,  and  Macbeth.  The  following 
season,  on  Mossop’s  going  to  Ireland,  Murphy  came  under  the  management  of  Garrick  at  Drury- 
Lane.  As  an  Actor,  Murphy  found  that  his  writings  in  the  Gray’s  Inn  Journal  had  laid  him  open 
to  suspicion  ;  he  therefore  publicly  declared  that  since  the  close  of  that  periodical,  he  had  not 
written  a  line  in  any  paper  whatever. 

On  the  17th  December  1754,  Mr.  Gai'rick  brought  out  Barbarossa  for  Doctor  Brown,  playing 
himself  the  character  of  Achmet,  and  writing  for  him  both  prologue  and  epilogue,  by  the  latter  of 
which  he  offended  his  vanity  ;  such  was  the  false  estimate  that  this  really  clever  man  was  accustomed 
to  make  of  the  services  of  his  friends.  The  “  Correspondence”  will  show  him  in  his  own  glass,  and 
the  more  accurate  mirror  of  Bishop  Warburton.  Gai’rick,  delighting  to  act  with  Airs.  Pritchard, 
revived  Vanbrugh’s  comedy  of  the  Mistake  for  her  benefit,  and  the  wrangling  scene  between  Carlos 
and  Leonora  was  deemed  the  perfection  of  true  comedy.  During  the  summer  of  1755,  Miss 
Barton,  afterwards  Mrs.  Abington,  showed  her  almost  infant  powers  in  such  a  range  of  characters  as 
Kitty  Pry,  Desdemona,  Sylvia,  and  Prince  Prettyman.  Mrs.  Graham,  too,  afterwards  the  accom¬ 
plished  Yates,  acted  at  Drury  Lane  a  few  nights,  when  she  retired  into  the  country,  and  returned 
the  wife  of  the  modern  Dogget. 

The  8th  of  November  1755  was  the  night  memorable  for  the  first  performance  of  the  Chinese 
Festival,  the  long  expected  effort  of  Monsieur  Noverre.  Every  thing  that  the  Ballet-master  required 
in  the  way  of  scenery,  and  dress,  and  decoration,  was  supplied.  The  performers  were  a  mixture  of 
many  nations — some  French,  some  Italians,  some  English,  some  Irish. 

Between  the  composition  of  Noverre’s  ballet  and  its  performance,  hostilities  had  taken  place 
between  France  and  this  country,  and  as  Mr.  Bull  is  extremely  patriotic,  and  usually  disposed  to 
consider  foreigners  as  either  locusts  or  spies,  he  determined  to  take  our  Government  under  his  own 
immediate  protection,  and  allow  the  French  Ministers  to  know  no  more  of  the  state  secrets  than  he 
did  himself.  He  became  perfectly  outrageous  on  the  subject  of  French  dancers!  The  higher  orders 
among  us,  as  a  mark  of  discrimination  from  the  vulgar,  at  all  times  affect  an  admiration  of  foreign 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXXI 


artists.  The  question  soon  alters  its  shape  in  the  contests  of  this  nature,  and  it  is  no  longer  whether 
French  dancers  shall  be  encouraged  that  they  debate,  but  whether  the  gentry  shall  dictate  to  the 
populace,  or  the  people  to  the  great.  Garrick  was  prescient  of  the  coming  storm,  and  he  thought 
he  saw  one  way  of  composing  it,  which  it  will  not  be  astonishing  that  Virgil  should  have  seen  before 
him ;  we  mean,  in  the  midst  of  the  fray,  to  bring  before  the  crowd  a  venerable  man  of  singular 
virtue  and  unsuspected  attachment — 

“  Ille  regit  dictis  animos,  et  pectora  mulcet.” 

Now,  though  Neptune  really  effected  this  for  the  preservation  of  Eneas  and  his  followers,  it  was 
positively  more  than  His  Gracious  Majesty  George  the  Second  (no  inferior  sovereign  of  the  ocean) 
could  carry  in  the  cause  of  Noverre,  against  the  fury  of  his  own  subjects.  We  confess  ourselves 
pleased  with  the  figure :  at  the  same  time  it  may  be  proper  to  explain  that  Garrick  procured  a 
royal  command  for  the  Chinese  Festival ;  and  the  good-humoured  monarch,  before  named,  enjoyed  a 
very  sincere  laugh  at  the  disproportionate  rage  of  his  people. 

Had  they  condemned  this  as  a  spectacle,  they  would  have  been  right ;  it  was  every  way  con¬ 
temptible  ;  nobody  ever  did  pretend  to  like  it :  but  to  persecute  the  performance  for  its  performers 
only ,  was  so  illiberal,  that  every  thing  refined  and  generous  revolted  at  it.  During  a  contest  of  five 
nights,  gentlemen,  sword  in  hand,  charged  the  bludgeon  men  in  the  pit,  and  the  gentle  sex,  leaning 
over  the  boxes,  pointed  out  to  them  the  prominent  offenders  there  who  had  interrupted  their 
amusement. 

“  All  side  in  parties,  and  begin  the  attack ; 

Fans  clap,  silks  rustle,  and  tough  whalebones  crack : 

Heroes’  and  Heroines’  shouts  confus’dly  rise, 

And  base  and  treble  voices  strike  the  skies.” 

At  last  the  combatants,  ashamed  of  the  straw  for  which  they  had  been  fighting,  devoted  it  as  a 
peace-offering ; — they  demolished  scenes,  tore  up  benches,  broke  lustres  and  girandoles,  and  left  the 
two  proprietors  to  repair  the  ravage  at  their  leisure,  and  add  to  the  expense  already  incurred  in 
vain,  a  second  expense  that  did  not  produce  a  spectacle  good  or  bad,  but  merely  enabled  them  to 
receive  their  visitors  when  they  should  condescend  to  be  in  better  temper.  Lacy  would  have 
yielded  the  point  to  the  mob  at  first ;  Garrick  stood  obstinately  against  their  sentence,  and,  like 
“  Kent,"  called  upon  them  at  his  own  peril,  “  to  check  the  hideous  rashness,  and  reverse  their 
doom.”  They  accordingly  broke  the  windows  of  his  dwelling-house  in  Southampton  Street,  and  his 
person  hardly  could  be  safe  from  their  thirst  for  vengeance,  on  account  of  the  insult  he  had  dared  to 
offer  to  the  public. 

Garrick  about  this  time  seriously  meditated  a  farce  upon  the  subject  of  Archibald  Bower,  a 
Scotch  Jesuit,  a  soi-disant  convert  from  Popery.  Garrick  thought  this  man  an  impostor,  and  shut 
his  doors  against  him.  Bower  vindicated  the  manager  by  attacking  his  wife,  and  the  manager 
determined  to  show  him  up  ludicrously  to  the  public.  Lord  Lyttelton,  however,  from  some 
motive  too  indulgent  to  the  offender,  prevailed  upon  Mr.  Garrick  to  hold  his  hand  ; — but  the 
lash  was  not  spared  on  that  account.  Dr.  Douglas,  the  detector  of  Lauder,  advanced  to  the 
detection  of  Bower,  and  his  History  of  the  Popes  soon  sunk  into  contempt.  We  return  to  a  better 
author  and  a  better  man. 


XXXll 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


Murphy  now  added  to  his  attraction  a  charm  more  lasting  than  his  performance.  On  the  2nd 
of  January  1756,  his  farce  of  the  Apprentice  began  its  long  term  of  popularity.  The  prologue  (a 
fault  then  not  infrequent,)  was  too  good — in  very  brilliant  verse  it  anticipated  all  that  was  to  be 
done  by  the  hero.  Woodward  was  quite  delighted  with  Dick.  In  our  own  day,  who  has  not  been 
delighted  by  John  Bannister? 

On  the  21st  of  the  same  month,  Mr.  Garrick  produced  his  alteration  of  the  Winter’s  Tale,  which 
now,  shrunk  into  three  acts,  became  more  consistent  and  less  romantic.  By  the  “  Correspon¬ 
dence”  *  it  will  be  seen  that  Bishop  Warburton,  one  of  Shakspeare’s  editors,  approved  of  his  work. 
Shall  we  be  pardoned  for  saying  that,  in  our  own  opinion,  all  alterations  of  Shakspeare  have  been 
injurious  to  him  ?  The  only  truly  fine  addition  was  made  by  Cibber  in  Richard  III. — and  that  was 
not  necessary  either  to  the  hero  or  the  play.  Mr.  Garrick  next  altered  the  “  Tempest,”  and  revived 
“  All’s  well  that  ends  well.”  Foote  was  at  present  acting  with  Garrick,  and  in  perfect  harmony 
with  him.  Mother  Midnight  had  not  yet  borrowed  the  manner  of  the  great  manager,  to  enliven 
any  of  her  conversations. 

Mr.  Garrick  then,  for  Woodward’s  benefit,  carefully  looked  over  Fletcher’s  fine  Comedy  of 
Rule  a  Wife,  and  it  was  acted  the  first  of  numberless  times  on  the  25th  of  March  1756.  Leon,  the 
Copper  Captain ,  and  Estifania,  by  Garrick,  Woodward,  and  Mrs.  Cibber.  The  true  unthought  of 
Estifania  was  now,  in  the  person  of  Miss  Barton,  a  mere  Virgin  Unmasked,  romping  away  at  Rich¬ 
mond  play-house  for  any  body’s  benefit  that  would  ask  her.  Now  also,  for  the  excellent  Clive,  Mr. 
Garrick  added  Lord  Chalkstone  to  the  visitors  of  Lethe ;  by  playing  which  himself,  he  probably 
sowed  in  Tom  King  the  seeds  of  the  celebrated  Lord  Ogleby. 

Murphy  had  now  rashly  resolved  to  combat  reviewers,  and  the  day  before  his  Englishman  from 
Paris  appeared,  he  issued  the  following — 

“  Card  to  the  Authors  of  the  Critical  and  Monthly  Reviews. 

“  The  Author  of  the  ‘  Apprentice’  sends  his  compliments  to  the  Authors  of  the  Critical  and  Monthly 
Reviews  ;  is  extremely  obliged  to  them  for  the  favours  they  have  done  him  ;  and  if  they  will  attend  to-mor¬ 
row  night  at  Drury-Lane  Play-house,  he  will  in  a  prologue  to  the  ‘  Englishman  from  Paris’  return  them 
thanks  in  person  for  their  candour  and  ingenuity.  N.B.  Mr.  Varny  has  directions,  if  they  will  send  their 
names  and  places  of  abode,  to  give  them  Tickets  gratis.” 

The  reader,  who  knows  mankind,  will  at  once  and  rightly  exclaim,  “  Oh,  I  perceive  the  Eng¬ 
lishman  was  damned.” 

The  season  of  1756-7  opened  propitiously  enough — Mossop  returned  to  Drury-Lane  Theatre, 
and  Murphy  resolved  to  go  to  the  Bai\  We  have  already  noticed  the  prodigy  Miss  Barton — she 
acted  at  Richmond,  Mons.  le  Medicin  in  the  Anatomist,  for  Cibber,  and  for  Mrs.  Chapman’s  benefit ; 
Mrs.  Sullen,  with  the  Fine  Gentleman  and  Frenchman  in  Lethe,  and  carried  herself  fairly  to  Drury- 
Lane,  where  she  acted  Lady  Plyant  to  the  Maskwell  of  Mossop,  and  Miss  Lucy  in  the  Virgin  Un¬ 
masked.  On  the  28th  of  October,  Mr.  Garrick  improved  his  Lear,  by  striking  out  the  sophistica¬ 
tions  of  Tate,  and  using  Shakspeare’s  own  language,  wherever  it  was  practicable  to  do  so — that  is, 
consistently  wfith  the  love-interest  of  Edgar  and  Cordelia,  and  the  allowing  old  Lear  “  to  be  a  King 


*  Vol.  i,  page  88. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR.  xxxiii 

again.”  On  the  6th  of  November,  this  untiring  genius  for  the  stage  revived  Mrs.  Centlivre’s  ad¬ 
mirable  comedy  of  The  Wonder;  Lissardo,  Woodward,  Yiolante,  Miss  Macklin,  Garrick  himself 
acted  Don  Felix;  and  so  favourite  a  part  did  it  become,  with  both  the  actor  and  the  town,  that, 
twenty  years  after,  he  chose  it  to  close  his  theatrical  life. 

Dr.  Hawkesworth  made  an  excellent  alteration  for  Garrick  of  Dryden’s  Amphitryon,  and  Bishop 
Warburton,  in  the  “  Correspondence,”  shrewdly  inquired  “  Whether  he  had  that  easy  elegance  that 
comic  dialogue  requires,  especially  in  a  travestied  Mercury  ?  “  I  remember,”  he  adds,  “  he  was 
generally  on  the  stretch  in  the  Adventurer ;  but  perhaps  his  subject  or  his  readers  required  it.” 
This  was  generously  put  by  the  Bishop ;  but  style  is  the  image  of  the  mind,  and  it  was  truly 
said  to  Dr.  Johnson  by  Boswell  in  reference  to  Fables,  “  Sir,  if  you  were  to  make  little  fishes  speak, 
they  would  talk  like  whales .” 

We  have  now  to  mention  a  writer  of  greater  genius  than  Hawkesworth,  the  celebrated  Dr. 
Smollet ;  who,  when  the  admirers  of  Fielding  have  done  their  utmost,  is  certainly  the  man  who  has 
approached  the  nearest  to  Cervantes,  and  not  servilely  followed  Sancho  the  great  by  Strap  and  by 
Clinker.  Smollet  had  pursued  Garrick  with  great  inveteracy,  for  not  bringing  out  his  tragedy  of 
the  Regicide  ;  he  had  coupled  Quin  with  him  in  his  attacks  upon  the  potentates  of  the  stage ;  and 
thus  the  matter  stood  when  he  tendered  to  the  former  his  farce  of  The  Reprisal.  But  Garrick  seeing 
that  there  was  really  humour  in  the  farce,  though  there  had  been  nothing  but  extravagance  in  the 
tragedy,  accepted  it  in  spite  of  Random  and  Pickle,  and  brought  it  out  with  every  advantage.  He 
now  had  brought  his  enemy  to  his  feet,  and  overwhelmed  him  by  a  complimentary  return  of  twenty 
guineas,  which  the  treasury  had  deducted  from  the  author’s  night,  more  than  the  good  old  charge 
of  sixty  guineas.  Smollet,  in  fact,  absolutely  found  a  niche  for  the  manager  in  his  History  oj  Tug- 
land ;  thus  making  a  public  atonement,  in  a  work  of  truth,  for  the  wrongs  he  had  done  him  in  a 
work  of  fiction. 

Smollet’s  Reprisal,  which  was  not  followed  by  the  town,  gave  place  to  the  Author  by  Foote. 
The  latter  could  do  nothing  now  that  did  not  excite  the  alarm  of  some  oddity  or  other ;  for  as  he 
scrupled  little  when  he  wanted  to  raise  laughter,  and  knew  that  even  to  hint  that  he  was  personal, 
was  to  increase  his  chance  with  the  million,  he  would  advertise  that  all  his  characters  -were fictitious 
and  general,  in  the  full  certainty,  or  at  least  the  hope,  of  not  being  credited.  Cadwallader  was 
really  a  gentleman  of  family  and  fortune,  named  Aprice,  who  was  laughed  at  so  egregiously  among 
his  friends,  that  he  at  length  procured  an  order  for  the  suppression  of  the  piece.  In  the  mean  time, 
the  admirable  performance  of  Foote  himself  drew  nightly  crowds  to  judge  of  the  resemblance. 

Incidentally  we  would  inform  the  reader  of  one  error  in  the  judgment  of  Mr.  Garrick.  The 
tragedy  of  Douglas,  which  he  could  not  be  persuaded  to  like,  on  the  14th  of  March  1757  was  acted 
with  brilliant  success  at  Covent  Garden  theatre. 

This  season  Mrs.  Woffington  gave  her  last  acknowledgments  to  her  friends,  in  the  character  of 
Lothario,  for  her  benefit ;  and  took  a  general  leave  of  the  public  on  the  17th  of  May,  in  Rosalind, 
a  favourite  part  of  hers,  which  adopts  the  male  attire,  in  which  she  was  fond  of  displaying  herself, 
and  resumes  the  female  habiliments  just  to  “  make  curtesy  and  bid  farewell.  She  did  not  long 
survive  her  exit  from  the  scene,  for  she  died  on  the  28th  of  March  1760,  in  her  forty-second  year, 
and  was  buried  on  the  3rd  of  April,  at  Teddington.  She  had  all  the  polish  of  high  birth,  and  the 

f 


VOL.  I. 


XXXIV 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


cool  superiority  of  offended  wit.  The  beauties  of  her  face  and  person  are  admitted  to  have  been 
unrivalled  to  the  last;  and  old  Cibber,  at  seventy,  was  delighted  to  fancy  himself  her  gallant. 
Having  in  her  youth  been  taught  by  Madame  Violante  all  that  a  dancer  of  the  first  reputation 
could  teach  her,  she  had  accustomed  herself  to  French  society  ;  and,  upon  a  visit  to  Paris,  Dumes- 
nil  willingly  imparted  toiler  all  that  she  herself  possessed  of  the  dignified  passion  of  the  French 
drama.  It  begot  in  Mrs.  Woffington  a  tendency  to  the  pompons  manner  which  preceded  Garrick’s, 
in  which  she  was  sure  to  be  confirmed  by  Cibber.  Her  preference  of  male  society,  as  she  main¬ 
tained  her  delicacy  of  language,  may  be  pardoned  to  one,  whom  that  portion  of  her  own  sex, 
which  she  must  have  coveted,  probably  declined  to  receive. 

On  the  11th  of  August  1757,  Mr.  Garrick  lost  his  friend  Dr.  Benjamin  Hoadly,  the  author  of 
the  Suspicious  Husband  ;  a  man  in  whom  the  comedy  of  Farquhar  seemed  to  have  almost  revived  ; 
but  the  specimen  was  never  followed  up  by  others  of  equal  quality.  His  brother,  Dr.  John  Hoadly, 
also  had  a  mind  dramatically  disposed,  and  by  his  “  Correspondence,”  here  faithfully  preserved, 
contributed  essentially  to  cheer  the  mind,  and  at  times  influence  the  conduct,  of  Mr.  Garrick. 

The  lovers  of  St.  Bartholomew  and  his  fair  enjoyed  this  year  in  the  Boarium ,  idly  called  Smith- 
field,  the  combined  drolleries  of  Yates  and  Shuter.  Mr.  Garrick  altered  the  Fatal  Marriage,  and 
Shirley’s  Gamesters  for  his  theatre. 

On  the  11th  of  December  of  the  present  year,  Colley  Cibber  expired  in  the  86th  year  of  his  age. 
His  exit  was  so  gentle,  that  it  appeared  the  mere  dropping  of  the  curtain.  His  life,  for  it  needed 
no  formal  apology,  has  been  written  so  admirably  and  candidly  by  himself,  that  we  know  of  no 
addition  either  warrantable  or  desirable.  It  is  the  eternal  model  of  stage  biography  ;  and  like  his 
Careless  Husband,  and  his  part  of  the  Provoked  Husband,  unapproachable.  Mr.  W  illiam  White- 
head  was  now  appointed  Poet-laureate. 

Mr.  Garrick  had  at  this  time  made  those  improvements  at  Hampton  House,  which  rendered  it  a 
delightful  retirement  in  the  summer  months,  and  a  relief  even  in  the  theatrical  season,  from  bustle 
and  constant  visitors,  who  besieged  him  in  his  theatre  and  his  town-house.  It  was  his  practice  to 
take  down  with  him  in  the  carriage,  such  new  plays  as  required  his  critical  investigation — indeed  he 
never  dismissed  a  candidate  without  delivering  more  than  a  general  sentence  upon  his  work.  Our 
“  Correspondence”  affords  very  lively  and  sufficient  proof  that  he  was  no  hasty  or  contemptuous 
reader. 

The  21st  of  February  1758  produced  Garrick’s  amende  honorable  to  the  author  of  Douglas, 
the  production  of  his  tragedy  called  Agis,  on  the  Drury  Lane  stage.  The  poet  Gray  said  of  it,  in 
a  letter  to  his  friend  Warton,  “  It  is  all  modern  Greek  :  the  story  is  an  antique  statue,  painted 
white  and  red,  frizzed  and  dressed  in  a  negligee  made  by  a  Yorkshire  mantua-maker. 

Mr.  Garrick  acted  on  Woodward’s  night  the  character  of  the  Fourth  Henry,  in  the  second  part 
of  Shakspeare’s  play  so  called.  Bobadil  on  that  night  tried  to  resemble  I  alstaff ;  and  Mossop  was 
obliged  to  his  friend  Murphy  for  the  first  use  of  his  admirable  farce  the  Lpholsterer. 

At  the  end  of  the  season,  Mr.  Garrick  lost  the  assistance  of  M  oodward,  whom  Barry  inveigled 
into  a  joint  speculation  of  building  a  new  theatre  in  Crow-street  Dublin,  and  forcing  old  Sheridan  to 
share  with  them,  or  abdicate.  The  adventurers  lost  their  money,  as  Garrick  had  predicted  they 
would,  and  Woodward  was  rendered  wretched  by  the  very  steps  taken  to  make  his  fortune. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXXV 


The  “  Correspondence”  will  show  the  dispute  with  Dodsley  about  Cleone,  which  Garrick  had  re¬ 
fused,  and  on  the  first  night  of  its  representation  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  the  great  actor,  per¬ 
haps  unnecessarily,  appeared  himself  for  the  first  time  in  the  character  of  Marplot.  We  will  add 
nothing  to  the  letters  which  are  before  the  reader,  except  that  we  deem  the  contempt  expressed  by 
Mr.  Garrick’s  friends  so  readily,  to  have  been  equally  wanton  and  unweighed.  They  had  none  of 
Garrick’s  provocations.  On  the  20th  of  December  1758,  Dr.  John  Hill’s  farce  of  the  Rout,  said, 
in  the  style  of  Addison’s  day,  to  be  written  by  a  “  person  of  honour,'"  was  acted  at  Drury  Lane  for 
the  benefit  of  the  General  Lying-in  Hospital.  It  was  damned,  even  out  of  charity ;  and  remem¬ 
bered,  out  of  resentment ,  in  an  epigram  by  Garrick,  that  was  in  every  mouth.  Dr.  Hill  and  his 
abortions  were  inseparable. 


For  physic  and  farces,  his  equal  there  scarce  is ; 

His  farces  are  physic,  his  physic  a  farce  is. 

The  Doctor,  in  his  heavy  motion,  tried  to  return  the  compliment  by  an  attack  upon  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick’s  orthoepy.  They  who  have  critically  examined  the  English  vowels,  are  not  to  be  told,  that 
the  letter  i  is  sometimes  allowably  an  usurper  upon  the  letter  u.  Dr.  Hill,  however,  maintained 
otherwise  ;  but  to  his  “  petition  of  the  letter  I,  in  behalf  of  herself  and  her  sisters,”  Mr.  Garrick 
wrote  the  following  quietus ;  among  the  most  urbane  and  witty  epigrams  in  the  world. 

If  'tis  true,  as  you  say,  that  I ’ve  injur’d  a  letter, 

I  ’ll  change  my  note  soon,  and  I  hope  for  the  better  : 

May  the  just  right  of  letters,  as  well  as  of  men, 

Hereafter  be  fix’d  by  the  tongue  and  the  pen  ; 

Most  devoutly  I  wish  that  they  both  have  their  due, 

And  that  I  may  be  never  mistaken  for  yo U. 

The  year  1759  opened  in  fact  with  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  which  Capell,  Shakspeare’s  Editor, 
had  merely  abridged  for  his  friend  Garrick.  Antony  was  not  much  to  the  great  actor’s  mind,  for 
reasons  which  Mr.  Steevens  long  after  suggested  to  him  ;  “  being  deficient  in  those  short  turns  and 
coachmanship'"  in  which  he  excelled  all  men.  The  Ambitious  Stepmother  of  Rowe,  and  Euridice 
by  Mallet,  were  revived.  In  the  month  of  April,  two  musical  events  occurred,  one  of  which  pro¬ 
duced  some  important  results  as  to  Air.  Garrick's  interest.  Handel  the  great  composer  died,  and 
Miss  Brent  made  her  first  appearance  in  character,  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre.  This  lady’s  talents 
inspired  Dr.  Arne  with  the  Opera  of  Artaxerxes,  and  reversing  Dr.  Johnson’s  recommendation, 

“  To  chase  the  charms  of  sound,  the  pomp  of  show, 

For  useful  mirth,  and  salutary  woe;” 

they  absolutely  made  it  advisable  for  Air.  Garrick  to  seek  for  health  and  relaxation  in  a  tour  through 
the  polite  parts  of  Europe.  The  “  Correspondence”  again,  by  many  a  smart  and  angry  letter,  will 
have  prepared  the  reader  for  the  performance  of  Alurphy’s  Orphan  oj  China,  in  which  Air.  Ganiik 
acted  Zamti,  on  the  21st  of  April. 

During  the  summer  of  1759,  Aliss  Barton  married  Air.  Abington. 

f  2 


In  the  winter  season, 


UXV1 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


old  Drurv  suffered  dreadfully  by  the  run  of  Beard  and  Miss  Brent  in  Macheath  and  Polly  in 
the  Beggar's  Opera  ;  it  was  played  fifty-two  times. 

Garrick  now  produced  the  farce  called  High  Life  Belotc  Stairs,  in  which  the  newly-married 
Abington  acted  Lady  Bab's  servant  four  nights,  and  then  went  to  Ireland.  Miss  Pope  had  just 
made  her  first  womanly  appearance  in  the  Corinna  of  A  anbrugh  s  Confederacy.  On  the  1st  of  De¬ 
cember,  Garrick  himself  acted  Oroonoko,  dropping  his  old  trial-part  Aboan.  He  also  brought  out 
a  pantomime  of  his  own  composition,  the  last  day  of  the  year,  called  Harlequin's  Invasion.  Mur¬ 
phy,  now  again  having  it  all  his  own  way,  brought  out  his  Desert  Island  and  Hoy  to  Keep  Him, 
on  the  same  night,  the  24th  of  January  1760.  The  Island  was  soon  deserted  ;  the  Way  to  Keep 
Him  grew  more  sure  of  doing  so,  when  enlarged  by  its  author  afterwards  to  five  acts. 

Garrick  reappeared  in  Pierre  and  Sir  Harry  Gubbin  for  O  Brien  s  benefit.  In  October  1760, 
Sheridan  came  to  Drury  Lane  from  Ireland.  The  theatres  were  closed  three  weeks  on  the  death 
of  his  Majesty  George  the  Second. 

Colman's  Jealous  Wife  was  acted  for  the  first  time  at  Drury-lane  on  the  12th  of  February  1760. 
For  Holland’s  benefit  this  season,  Mr.  Garrick  acted  Mercutio  for  the  first  time.  In  the  summer, 
Murphy  and  Foote  hired  Drury-lane  theatre,  and  began  on  the  15th  of  June  with  a  new  cornedv  bv 
the  former,  called  All  in  the  Wrong.  He  followed  this  next  month  by  his  Citizen  and  Old  Maid. 
This  summer  adventure  closed  on  the  3rd  of  August. 

At  the  opening  of  the  winter  season,  Garrick  produced  the  Coronation ,  an  old  scene,  in  all  the 
old  and  tawdry  frippery  that  the  wardrobe  had  collected  in  thirty-five  years.  It  was  a  mean  and 

i 

laughable  attempt.  But  he  treated  the  spectators,  by  opening  the  back  of  his  house,  with  the  view 
of  a  real  bonfire  in  Drury-lane.  and  suffocated  everybody  on  the  stage  and  off,  with  the  smoke  : 
it  moreover  subjected  the  performers  to  the  peril  of  severe  colds  for  forty  nights  together. 

Rich  laid  out  his  money  liberally,  and  was  crowded  by  the  town  for  sixty-seven  nights.  But  he 
had  not  long  to  enjoy  his  triumph  over  his  great  rival,  for  he  died  on  the  26th  of  November  1761, 
and  was  buried  at  Hillingdon.  Rich  was  extremely  illiterate,  but  not  without  talent.  He  was  the 
creator  of  the  English  harlequin,  a  being  very  distinct  from  the  prosing  Hero  of  the  Jacket  upon 
the  Continent.  To  this  restless  and  jumping  animal,  Rich  had  the  genius  to  impart  gestures  and  in¬ 
flexions  of  the  body  so  various  and  expressive,  that  a  very  able  judge  was  doubtful  whether  the 
action  of  Garrick  himself  upon  the  stage  was  more  natural  or  more  graceful.  After  his  death,  Gar¬ 
rick  paid  him  a  tribute  of  respect  under  the  title  of  Lun ,  and  introduced  a  speaking  Harlequin,  to 
supply  the  want  created  by  his  loss  of  action,  that  needed  no  tongue. 

The  Hecuba  of  Dr.  Delap,  The  School  for  Lovers ,  by  Whitehead,  were  soon  dispatched,  if  we 
iudge  bv  their  effects.  The  Farmer's  Return  from  London,  presented  by  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Pritchard 
for  her  benefit,  was  one  of  the  most  fortunate  trifles  that  ever  his  pen  supplied  to  his  own  matchless 
acting. 

The  late  John  Palmer,  a  delightful  comedian,  made  his  first  appearance,  on  the  20th  of  August 
1762,  in  the  character  of  Buck  in  the  Englishman  in  Paris,  for  the  benefit  of  his  father,  the  pit- 
door  keeper,  and  others;  and  Parsons  and  his  wife,  from  Edinburgh,  were  presented  to  a  London 
audience  bv  Garrick,  in  the  characters  of  Filch  and  Mrs.  Peachum,  to  A  ernon’s  Macheath.  Love 
also  opened  his  career  in  Falstaff,  under  the  eye  of  Mr.  Garrick.  A  name  dear  to  sportive  song, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXXVll 


here  claims  a  short  and  passing  tribute.  Miss  Catley  this  season  appeared  a  first  time  in  the 
pastoral  Nymph  of  Milton's  Comas.  In  January  1763,  Mr.  Garrick  lost  the  treasurer  of  his  theatre, 
Mr.  Pritchard,  the  husband  of  that  great  ornament  of  the  stage  in  both  tragedy  and  comedy, 
Mrs.  Pritchard. 

As  we  will  not  introduce  a  very  valuable  lady  in  the  midst  of  a  riot,  we  shall  previously  notice  the 
performance  of  Mrs.  Sheridan’s  comedy  of  the  Discovery.  Sir  Anthony  Branville  was  a  character 
which  nothing  but  the  skill  of  Garrick  can  render  endurable.  He  is  the  solemn  coxcomb  of  the 
order  of  the  Solitaire  and  the  Steinkirk.  His  faded  delicacy  and  faint  explanations  excited  abundant 
laughter,  and  Sir  Anthony  was  followed  to  the  last.  The  first  performance  was  on  the  3rd  of  Febru¬ 
ary  1763,  and  it  was  the  last  part  Garrick  ever  acted  in  a  new  play. 

Of  the  contest  which  now  took  place  between  Fitzpatrick  and  Moody,  the  occasion  was  this : — 
The  custom  had  long  been,  to  refuse  to  admit  half-price  during  the  first  run  of  a  new  piece ;  and 
even  to  add  a.  farce  to  the  evening’s  entertainment  was  not  obligatory  on  the  part  of  the  managers 
after  an  opera.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1763,  Benjamin  Victor,  who  succeeded  Pritchard  in 
the  treasury  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  theatre,  altered  Shakspeare’s  Tivo  Gentlemen  of  Verona  for  the  house. 
To  call  this  new,  at  all,  was  somewhat  whimsical.  On  the  25th  of  January  it  was  to  be  acted  for 
Victor’s  benefit.  Among  the  taverns  and  coffee-houses  of  the  capital,  a  printed  paper  was  indus¬ 
triously  circulated,  to  obtain  the  necessary  attendance  of  the  public  in  their  own  cause ;  and  compel 
Mr.  Garrick  to  admit  half-price  after  the  third  act.  In  the  evening  the  operations  began,  as  soon  as 
the  curtain  rose  and  discovered  O’Brien  and  Holland  upon  the  stage.  Mr.  Garrick  instantly  came 
forward  and  attempted  to  address  the  audience.  A  riot  immediately  commenced,  and  the  ladies 
being  first  withdrawn,  their  meditated  violence  soon  tore  up  the  benches,  and  dismantled  the 
lustres;  and  having  covered  the  stage  with  the  broken  fragments,  about  nine  o’clock  they  retired, 
taking  with  them,  at  the  doors,  the  money  they  had  paid  for  the  privilege  of  so  much  diversion.  At 
the  other  house,  redress  was  promised  as  soon  as  it  was  demanded ;  and  the  audience  submitted 
graciously,  to  be  amused  and  quiet. 

On  the  Wednesday,  Mallet’s  Elvira  being  the  play,  the  savage  clamour  was  renewed,  and  Mr. 
Garrick  spoke  to  the  cabal  in  vain.  The  friends  of  the  manager  called  loudly,  “  Hear  him !”  the 
opposition  vociferated,  “  Hear  the  pit  ”  He  was  asked,  from  that  important  station,  “  Whether  he 
would  answer  the  few  questions  which  should  be  put  to  him  ?”  He  replied  respectfully,  “  That  he 
would."  They  then  put  their  first  question  thus — “  Will  you,  or  will  you  not,  give  admittance  for 
half-price  after  the  third  act,  except  during  the  first  winter  of  a  new  pantomime  ?”  Garrick  wanted 
to  explain.  An  explicit  “Yes  or  No”  was  demanded.  Garrick  at  length,  with  indignant  agony, 
(like  poor  Canning,  in  a  less  amusing  theatre,)  in  a  loud  tone,  answered  “  \  ES.”  A  tremendous 
clapping  of  hands  announced  the  victory  of  the  town.  They  now  began  to  recollect  that,  on  the 
former  night,  their  dignity  had  been  offended,  and  they  first  demanded  an  apology  from  Ackman 
the  actor.  The  poor  man  complied.  They  then  demanded  Moody,  for  the  same  purpose.  He 
was  not  rightly  understood  in  what  he  said,  and  imagining  him  refractory,  they  insisted  that  he 
should  “  ask  pardon  upon  one  knee."  Moody  properly  refused  to  obey  this  insulting  command ; 
and  Garrick,  when  he  came  off  the  stage,  took  him  in  his  arms,  and  praised  his  manly  spirit.  He, 
however,  prudently  told  the  audience,  that  Mr.  Moody  should  not  appear  again,  while  he  laboured 
under  their  displeasure. 


XXXV1I1 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


Moody,  however,  had  an  account  to  settle  with  Fitzpatrick,  and  called  upon  him  at  his  chambers 
in  the  Temple.  After  a  few  preliminary  speeches,  the  actor  charged  the  orator  with  demanding 
that  he  should  dishonour  himself  by  going  upon  his  knees ,  and  asking  pardon  for  having  actually 
prevented  a  wretch  from  setting  fire  to  the  house,  and  having  espoused  the  cause  of  a  gentleman  in 
whose  service  he  was  enlisted.  Fitzpatrick  did  not  understand  being  thus  treated  in  his  own  house. 
“  Sir,”  said  Moody,  “1  will  attend  you  where  you  please ;  but  be  assured  I  will  not  leave  you  till 
you  have  satisfied  me,  one  way  or  other.”  The  altercation  finished  by  Fitzpatrick’s  writing  an 
apology  to  Garrick,  and  assuring  him  that  he  and  his  friends  would  attend  the  house  to  receive 
Moody  into  favour,  whenever  Mr.  Garrick  thought  proper  to  introduce  him  again.  This  service  he 
very  faithfully  performed. 

Covent  Garden  Theatre  had  yielded  at  first  to  the  demands  made  by  the  reformers.  But 
Beard,  upon  reflection,  began  to  imagine  that  HE  stood  upon  different  ground  from  Garrick.  An 
opera,  like  Artaxerxes,  he  thought,  was  similar  to  an  Oratorio,  and  required/W/ price  for  every  note 
of  it.  But  Fitzpatrick  and  his  followers  determined  at  least  to  be  impartial  in  their  injustice,  and 
they  carried  their  point  with  him  also,  in  their  usual  manner.  The  house  could  not  open  again  till 
the  2nd  of  March,  in  consequence  of  the  injury  it  had  sustained.  As  to  the  right  footing  between 
the  public  and  the  actor,  “  Lo  !  I  am  thy  servant  !”  ought  to  disarm  all  Power  offended.  The 
actor,  on  the  other  hand,  should  see  nothing  before  the  curtain  but  the  public.  To  talk  to  any 
individual  in  the  house  is  indecent  and  unbecoming.  The  public,  like  the  performer,  is  subject 
to  the  law ;  and  that  law  ought  to  be  sufficiently  strong  to  protect  property,  as  well  as  to  punish 
injury.  A  breach  of  the  peace  is  in  no  situation  to  be  suffered.  The  exact  mode  of  coercion  is 
a  subject  not  for  Bow  Street,  but  St.  Stephen’s. 

Whoever  shall  have  endeavoured,  by  these  pages,  to  form  any  thing  like  the  measure  of  Mr. 
Garrick’s  labours  as  an  actor  and  a  manager,  will  have  some  difficulty  to  conceive  how  his  health 
and  spirits  were  maintained  for  the  fifteen  years  detailed  in  the  present  section.  His  very  popu¬ 
larity  had  at  times  been  shaken  ;  and  he  had  more  than  one  chronic  disorder,  which  called  at 
least  for  peace  and  change  of  climate.  Lacy  was  fully  competent  to  his  own  share  of  the  manage¬ 
ment,  and,  in  the  literary  department,  he  could  rely  upon  his  friend  Colman’s  assistance.  He 
therefore,  without  further  delay,  now  prepared  for  a  tour  to  the  Continent ;  and,  with  Mrs.  Garrick, 
set  out  for  Dover,  on  the  loth  of  September  1763,  in  order  to  pass  over  to  Calais.  His  favourite 
brother,  George,  in  attention  to  his  interest,  was  another  self,  and  kept  him  regularly  informed  of 
what  happened  during  his  absence ;  and  Mr.  Lacy  soon  was  enabled  to  communicate,  what  was 
consolatory ,  if  not  flattering,  that  they  succeeded  so  well  in  his  absence,  that  he  might  pursue 
either  health  or  amusement  as  long  as  he  chose,  without  the  dread  that  his  share  of  theatrical 
profit  would  be  at  all  lessened  by  his  travels.  We  shall  thus  close  our  second  section. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


XXXIX 


SECTION  THE  THIRD. 

FROM  THE  YEAR  1763,  TO  HIS  DEATH  IN  1779- 

Mr.  Garrick’s  friends  had  every  disposition  to  make  his  continental  tour  agreeable  to  him. 
Voltaire,  in  mentioning  him  to  his  correspondent  Camp,  at  Lyon,  says,  “  You  will  do  me  the  greatest 
favour  to  inform  him,  that  if  he  has  ever  the  goodness  to  pass  by  Ferney?  he  will  there  find  admirers 
as  interested  in  his  person  as  his  talents.”  Algarotti  writes  to  him  from  Pisa,  with  a  warmth  of 
regard  that  two  such  men  could  not  but  entertain  for  each  other.  He  also  introduced  him  to 
his'  friend  General  the  Marquis  Monvi  at  Bologna.  There  lie  would  be  sure  to  meet  with  the 
Marchioness  Scappi,  my  Lord  the  Cardinal,  and  a  coterie  of  illustrious  persons,  devoted  to  great 
talents,  rather  in  the  style  of  France  than  that  of  Italy,  where  the  rank  of  Comedian  is  lower  than 
in  most  countries.  However,  the  sounding  classicality  of  the  “  Roscius  of  the  Age”  abated  some¬ 
thing  of  the  Italian  haughtiness  in  his  respect.  Roscius  !  indeed,  was  only  the  half  of  Garrick,  the 
dimidium  Menandri ;  Our  wonder  of  the  stage  combined  Esopus  the  tragedian,  with  the  comedian 
Roscius  ;  and  had  a  face,  compared  with  which,  it  might  be  said  that  it  was  fortunate  for  the  friend 
of  Cicero  that  he  wore  a  mask.  Among  the  illustrious  persons  for  whom  Mr.  Garrick  obligingly 
exhibited  his  talents  in  society,  (a  French  rather  than  English  fashion,)  was  the  Duke  of  Parma. 
His  manner  was,  first  to  tell  the  story  of  Macbeth,  and  then  speak  the  soliloquy;  his  eye  creat¬ 
ing  for  the  spectators  the  imaginary  dagger ;  and  leading  himself,  and  them,  to  the  royal  closet, 
where  the  intended  victim  of  assassination,  fatally  secure,  became  the  prey  of  horror-struck  ambi¬ 
tion.  The  Italians  are  a  people  of  gestures;  an  Italian  can  tell  anything  himself  in  action,  and  a 
glance  is  sufficient  to  the  quickness  of  his  genius.  The  company  present  all  felt  the  kindred  powers 
of  Shakspeare  and  Garrick.  The  Duke  presented  a  very  elegant  gold  enamelled  snuff-box  to  Mr. 
Garrick,  as  a  mark  of  his  esteem. 

In  returning  from  Italy  by  the  Tyrol,  Mr.  Garrick  was  seized  at  Munich  with  a  malignant  fever, 
which  brought  him  to  the  very  brink  of  the  grave.  The  air,  the  society  of  Paris,  soon  advanced 
his  restoration,  and  he  gave  himself  willingly  up  to  the  enchanting  freedom,  the  “  unbought  grace” 
of  life,  which  Hume  and  Gibbon,  men  of  colder  temperaments,  alike  found  to  discriminate  the  parties 
of  Paris,  from  those  of  all  other  capitals.  What  the  French  thought  of  him,  need  not  be  judg¬ 
ed  of  by  what  they  said  to  him.  We  may  rely  more  firmly  upon  what  they  said  of  him.  Baron 
Grimm  and  Diderot  were  in  correspondence  with  a  foreign  Prince,  to  whom  they  gave,  in  perfect 
sincerity,  the  following  picture  of  Garrick.  “  He  is  the  first  and  only  actor,  says  the  Baron, 
“  who  comes  up  to  the  demands  of  my  imagination  :  he  realises  my  notion  of  what  is  perfect  in 
his  art.  His  great  power  is  the  instantaneous  possession  which  all  characters  take  of  the  whole  man 
in  their  turns,  and  by  a  simple  volition  on  his  part.  Nor  does  any  change  disfigure  him  ;  the  per¬ 
fection  of  it  becomes  a  beauty  even  to  his  features.  It  was  as  a  thing  inspired,  that  lie  gazed  on 
the  dagger  in  Macbeth:  the  stage,  observe,  contributed  nothing  to  make  up  the  illusion  ;  he  va>  in 
his  own  sitting-room,  and  in  his  ordinary  dress.  As  he  followed  the  suspended  dagger  with  his 
eye,  in  its  aerial  progress,  he  became  so  beautiful  a  terror,  as  to  excite  the  most  rapturous  cries  ot 


xl 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


admiration  from  all  who  saw  him.  As  a  full  contrast  to  this,  he  exhibited  a  gaping  apprentice, 
who  drops  his  master’s  pastry  in  the  mud,  becomes  stupified  at  first  with  terror,  and  then  gives  him¬ 
self  up  to  tears.” 

It  was  this  facility,  that  suggested  the  idea  to  Carmontel  of  exhibiting  the  comic  Garrick,  be¬ 
tween  folding  doors,  surprising  bis  serious  half  in  tragedy,  and  enjoying  the  detection. 

One  of  the  stories  that  Garrick  used  to  tell  in  action,  was  of  a  man  in  Leman-street  Goodman's 
fields,  at  the  commencement  of  his  career,  who  playing  with  his  child  at  an  open  window,  saw  the  in¬ 
fant  by  a  sudden  spring  escape  from  bis  arms,  and  be  killed  upon  the  pavement  of  the  street  on  which 
it  had  fallen.  One  of  bis  biographers  says,  “  He  saw  this  in  one  of  the  provinces  of  France.”  The 
other,  that  it  was  in  Leman-street  as  above,  and  that  he  then  learned  from  the  unfortunate  father 
howr  King  Lear  was  to  be  exhibited  on  the  stage.  He  probably  varied  the  locality,  which  was  im¬ 
material  to  the  fact,  to  suit  the  story  the  better  to  his  audience.  In  Paris  he  said  nothing  of  either 
France  or  its  provinces.  Grimm,  while  the  agony  it  occasioned  was  fresh  in  his  heart  and  brain, 
thus  relates  what  after  all  might  be  Garrick’s  pure  invention  : — *  “  He  heard  one  day,  that  a  man  in 
Ireland,  in  playing  with  his  child,  had  the  misfortune  to  let  it  fall  out  of  the  window,  and  be  killed 
upon  the  pavement  before  his  eyes.  The  wretched  father  on  the  instant  lost  his  speech  and  went 
mad.  It  became  necessary  to  confine  him.  Several  years  after  his  accident,  Garrick  went  to  see 
him.  I  have  never  beheld  any  thing  more  terrific  than  the  state  of  this  man, —  I  say  that  I  have 
seen  him,  for  Garrick  presented  him  in  a  way  to  make  one  shudder  as  at  reality  itself." 

How  any  story  like  the  present  should  teach  the  mode  of  representing  Lear  on  the  stage  is  dif¬ 
ficult  to  conceive.  The  causes  of  insanity  are  so  totally  different.  The  horror  of  the  father,  who 
has  beheld  the  immediate  fate  of  his  child,  loses  his  speech,  and  going  mad,  for  ever  renews  and  re¬ 
peats  his  accident  and  his  agony, — is  a  very  striking  CONTRAST  to  the  moral  wounding  of  a  father’s 
heart,  the  filial  ingratitude  and  savage  cruelty  of  daughters  whom  he  had  rendered  Sovereigns,  who 
turn  out  his  venerable  head  to  the  war  of  elements  as  merciless  as  themselves.  Lear  bears  up  stiffly 
against  all  these  accumulating  evils,  till  his  body  and  mind  alike  sink  under  his  rage ,  and  he  can 
defy  his  dreadful  persecutors  no  longer.  In  his  subsequent  deliquium  he  is  not  mad.  When  Lear 
becomes  feeble,  his  perceptions  are  restored  to  their  accuracy. 

But  what  nature  may  suggest  to  a  great  artist  must  not  be  looked  for,  perhaps,  in  parallel  lines 
— nor  the  acknowledgment  of  the  aid  be  too  narrowly  scrutinized.  The  true  expression  of  any 
great  calamity  may  be  serviceable  as  to  ALL. 

Garrick  did  not,  in  compliment  to  French  taste,  affect  to  disguise  his  disgust  at  the  treatment  of 
Shakspeare  by  Voltaire ;  neither  did  he  forbear  to  bestow  on  the  author  of  Zaire,  notwithstanding, 
the  palm  of  French  tragedy.  The  Virgil  of  their  writers,  Racine,  so  pure,  so  harmonious  in  his 
xrerse,  he  said  “  could  not  be  acted,”  because  he  wrote  everything,  and  left  nothing  for  the  actor  to  do. 
The  very  nature  of  his  verse  too  compelled  the  speaker  into  a  tune,  very  far  removed  from  the  true 
and  natural  declamation.  “  We  were  soon  in  the  train  of  Roscius  Garrick,”  adds  the  Baron,  “  on 

*  We  suffer  our  conjecture  to  stand,  though  we  learn  from  an  intimate  friend  of  the  family,  that  he 
himself  heard  Garrick  mention  the  circumstance,  and  he  thinks  before  Victor  his  Treasurer  and  others,  who 
knew  the  fact.  At  any  rate,  the  tale  is  so  varied  in  its  versions,  that  much  must  have  been  added  to  the 
substratum  of  naked  truth. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xli 


all  these  points — We,  who  are  a  small  flock  of  true  believers,  and  acknowledge  Homer,  Eschylus 
and  Sophocles,  for  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  we  who  are  enthusiasts  in  the  gifts  of  genius  whereso¬ 
ever  bestowed,  without  excepting  any  language  or  nation — the  English  Roscius  has  been  the  religion 
and  the  church  of  our  slender  flock.” 

The  readers  of  Voltaire’s  theatre  will  see,  upon  comparing  his  best  tragedies  with  those  of  his 
illustrious  rivals,  how  much  more  he  is  impassioned  and  fond  of  quickening  the  dramatic  action. 
How  he  sought,  among  foreign  people,  a  liberty  of  varying  his  sentiment  and  diction ;  as  new  as  the 
manners  of  the  strangers,  whom  he  brought  to  Paris  from  America,  and  even  from  China.  With 
the  settled  laws  of  French  versification  he  could  take  no  other  liberty,  than  frequently  to  break  his 
lines  by  bold  apostrophes  and  startling  exclamations. 

Clairon  is  said  to  have  done  herself  full  justice  in  the  friendly  competitions  of  skill  she 
occasionally  had  in  society  with  Mr.  Garrick,  and  he  now  proclaimed  that  his  prophecy  in  1752 
was  fulfilled.  She  was  without  a  rival  in  French  tragedy;  but  Grimm  shrewdly  remarks,  that 
if  Garrick  was  right ,  when  he  said  that  “  there  must  be  comedy  in  the  perfect  actor  of  ti'agedy,” 
then  Clairon  was  imperfect,  for  she  could  never  sustain  a  comic  part  in  a  way  to  be  even  endured. 
But  Mr.  Garrick  spoke  of  the  tragedy  of  nature,  Shakspeare’s ;  and  his  observation  is  a  sound 
and  just  one. 

Mr.  Garrick  passed  six  months  happily,  even  busily,  in  Paris.  Mrs.  Garrick  was  greatly  ad¬ 
mired  and  courted.  The  established  gallantry  of  French  manners  occasioned  some  raillery  with  her 
husband,  who  ingenuously  confessed  that  he  thought  he  was  born  with  a  tendency  to  jealousy.  Ma¬ 
dame  Riccoboni  thus  pleasingly  remembers  their  loss.  “  Que  je  vous  regrette  beaucoup,  et  que  j’ai 
toujours  devant  les  yeux  cette  belle  et  grande  lady,  si  bien  faite,  si  jolie,  et  l’heureux  mari  dont  les 
regards  lui  disent  sans  cesse,  I  love  you.  Je  repete  mille  propos  flateurs  a  votre  portrait,  et  quand 
je  me  rappelle  la  vivacite  de  celui  qu’il  represente,  je  ne  scaurois  assez  m’etonner  de  le  voir  immobile 
et  dans  la  mcme  place.”  But  even  in  Paris,  Mr.  Garrick  was  not  entirely  engrossed  by  these  amiable 
people.  His  interest,  as  an  actor  and  a  manager,  led  him  to  think  seriously  of  his  re-appearance 
upon  the  stage ;  and,  in  his  mornings,  he  amused  himself  with  a  light  and  sportive  effusion,  which 
he  sent  over  to  England  as  he  composed  it,  and  which  was  printed  in  his  absence,  with  a  design  to 
prepare  the  public  for  his  return.  He  called  it  The  Sick  Monkey. 

It  is  necessary  that  we  should  now  look  at  the  cause  of  the  brilliant  success  which  had  attended 
Mr.  Lacy  during  the  absence  of  his  partner.  This  was  the  appearance  of  "YV  illiam  1  owell  upon  the 
stage,  a  young  man  from  Sir  Robert  Ladbroke’s  counting-house  in  the  cityr;  with  slender  education, 
few  means  of  study,  not  striking  in  his  person,  but  possessing  an  ardent  love  for  acting,  and  the 
faculty  of  strongly  interesting  the  passions  of  an  audience.  It  is  obvious  to  remark,  that  mote  than 
all  this  ”  had  even  wearied  the  town  ;  nay,  the  highest  perfection,  in  every  quality  oj  the  aitoi ,  had 
been  compelled  to  retreat  before  the  influence  of  song.  And  now  a  mere  change  of  the  vehicle,  not 
the  subject,  tragedq  still,  with  an  inferior  representative,  drew  crowds  to  a  theatre,  so  recently 
almost  deserted. 

Powell,  though  hardly  graceful,  had  ease  in  his  deportment ;  he  had  a  quick  and  powerful  ima¬ 
gination,  profound  sensibility,  and  a  voice  equally  extensive  and  harmonious.  No  > oung  .utor  had 
ever  been  nurtured  with  so  much  judgment.  That  he  might  avoid  comparison,  at  least  in  the  outsit, 

g 


VOL.  I. 


xlii 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


Mr.  Colman  revived  Philaster  for  his  trial  part,  a  character  which,  as  he  said  in  the  beautiful  pro¬ 
logue  that  introduced  him,  had  in  a  former  and  brilliant  period  “  supplied  the  place  of  Hamlet." 
Powell’s  Philaster  was  supported  by  the  Bellario  of  Mrs.  Yates,  who  acted  that  lovely  offspring  of 
Fletcher,  with  even  all  the  author’s  tenderness  and  grace  and  delicacy. 

It  was  not,  as  Murphy  dreams,  in  January  1764,  that  Powell  first  appeared  in  Philaster;  he 
had  made  his  debut  in  the  part  three  months  before — the  real  date  being  8th  of  October  1763.  He 
followed  this  by  Jaffier,  on  the  22nd  of  November,  and  by  Posthumus  the  1st  of  December  ;  and  he 
was  studying  Lusignan  in  Zara,  at  the  time  assigned  by  Murphy  for  his  first  appearance.  The 
“  Correspondence”  will  present  to  the  reader  Powell’s  grateful  communication  of  his  success  and  pros¬ 
pects  to  his  great  master ;  and  the  advice  which  Mr.  Garrick  wrote  to  him,  as  soon  as  his  recovery, 
from  a  dreadful  fever,  permitted  him  to  hold  the  pen.  Powell  followed  Lusignan  by  Shakspeare's 
Henry  IV.,  by  Castalio  in  the  Orphan,  Lord  Townley,  Alexander  the  Great  ;  by  Publius  Horatius 
for  his  friend  Holland’s  benefit ;  and  on  the  31st  of  March  1764,  Othello  for  his  own. 

The  success  of  the  season  was  chiefly  attributable  to  him,  and  the  treasurer’s  books  exhibit 

The  receipts  at  ....  £29,023  9  6 

The  disbursements  ....  22,488  8  6 

Profits  .  .  6,535  1  0 

Mr.  Colman  this  season  produced  the  most  popular  of  his  farces,  the  Deuce  is  in  him;  it  greatly 
aided  the  attraction  of  Powell.  The  characters  were  admirably  supported  by  O’Brien,  King,  and 
Miss  Pope.  Murphy  rather  rashly  brought  forward  several  inferior  pieces,  that  ought  not  to  de¬ 
tain  us.  O’Brien  now  quitted  the  stage  on  a  matrimonial  speculation,  and  married  Lady  Susan 
Strangways,  a  daughter  of  Lord  Ilchester,  and  niece  of  Lord  Holland.  Robert  Dodsley,  the  author 
of  Cleone,  departed  this  life  on  the  21st  of  September  1764,  while  at  Durham,  on  a  visit  to  Spence  ; 
leaving,  we  will  not  doubt,  the  kind  heart  of  Garrick  to  regret  that  he  had  ever  treated  so  clever  a 
man  contemptuously.  Powell,  in  the  season  of  1764-5,  added  to  his  achievements,  Lothario — Orestes 
— Lear — Herod — Leontes.  The  return  of  Mr.  Garrick  to  England,  in  April  1763,  from  the  Con¬ 
tinent,  probably  checked  the  lavish  waste  of  ardour  on  the  part  of  Powell,  unsanctioned  by  the 
proper  ripeness  of  study. 

The  c(  Correspondence”  so  frequently  referred  to,  is  peculiarly  copious  in  the  most  entertaining 
variety  of  letters  to  Mr.  Garrick  during  the  considerable  period  before  he  reappeared  upon  the 
stage.  He  was  in  truth  an  admirable  manager  ;  and  on  this  occasion  his  skill  was  transcendent. 
He  procured  a  royal  command  to  reinstate  him  ;  and  on  the  14th  of  November,  as  soon  as  the 
theatres  opened  after  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  their  Majesties  commanded  Much  ado 
about  Nothing,  and  Benedick  again  delighted  the  public.  He  spoke  an  address  quite  masterly  in 
its  topics,  ending  with  the  happy  allusion  to  the  veteran  soldier  : — 

“  Should  the  drum  beat  to  arms,  at  first  he’ll  grieve 
For  wooden  leg,  lost  eye,  and  armless  sleeve ; 

Then  cocks  his  hat,  looks  fierce,  and  swells  his  chest ; 

’Tis  for  my  Kixg  ! — and  zounds,  I  ’ll  do  my  best !” 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xliii 


They  who  remember  George  III.,  and  have  witnessed  his  enjoyment  of  the  stage,  will  conceive  how 
the  last  line  was  heard  by  himself  and  his  subjects. 

During  the  wdiole  of  Garrick’s  absence,  Murphy  had  bestowed  the  attractions  of  Mrs.  Abington 
upon  his  theatre;  but  he  ascertained  nothing,  and  risked  all.  She  had  not  acted  in  London  for 
five  years ;  and  came  back  because  he  had  returned,  and  appeared  for  the  first  time  on  the  27th 
November,  in  Murphy’s  own  comedy,  44  The  Way  to  keep  Him.”  Mrs.  Cibber,  agreeably  to  her 
promise,  came  up  to  join  the  inimitable  actor,  but  just  acted  Lady  Brute  to  his  Sir  John,  and 
“  vanished  from  our  sight.”  On  the  31st  of  the  following  January  she  died  at  her  house  in 
Scotland-yard.  Quin  preceded  her  at  Bath  by  just  ten  days,  in  the  seventy-third  year  of  his  age. 
When  Garrick  heard  of  her  death,  he  said,  44  Barry  and  I  still  remain,  but  Tragedy  is  dead  on  one 
side.”  He  afterwards  saddened  the  prologue  to  the  Clandestine  Marriage,  by  the  couplet  which 
embraced  them  both : 

“  Oh  let  me  drop  one  tributary  tear 
On  poor  Jack  Falstaff’s  urn,  and  Juliet's  bier!” 

At  page  thirty-four  of  his  second  volume,  Murphy,  noticing  Cibber’s  death  in  January,  says 
that  Quin  followed  her  in  the  month  of  March,  (he  had  actually  gone  before  her,)  and  at  page  310, 
he  says  rightly  they  both  died  in  January.  But  we  have  done  with  his  contradictions  and  his 
carelessness. 

The  incidental  allusion  to  the  Clandestine  Marriage,  recalls  the  singular  dispute  between  the 
Beaumont  and  Fletcher  of  that  popular  comedy.  Mr.  Colman  opens  his  charge  by  a  very  abrupt 
anecdote.  44  Since  my  return  from  Bath  I  have  been  told,  but  I  can  hardly  believe  it,  that  in  speaking 
of  the  4  Clandestine  Marriage,’  you  have  gone  so  far  as  to  say,  4  Colman  lays  a  great  stress  on  his 
having  wrritten  this  character,  ( Lord  Ogleby,)  on  purpose  for  me  ;  suppose  it  should  come  out  that 
/  wrote  it  ?’”  The  reader,  however  will  turn,  in  the  1st  volume  of  the  44  Correspondence,”  to 
page  209,  and  he  will  there  find  the  letter  of  Colman  to  Garrick,  followed  by  Garrick’s  reply,  and 
Colman’s  masterly  rejoinder.  Their  friendship  was  soon  to  be  still  more  severely  shaken,  by  the 
collision  of  their  pecuniary  interests. 

It  was  on  the  20th  of  February  1766,  that  the  Clandestine  Marriage  was  first  performed  at 
Drury-Lane  theatre.  Powell,  this  season,  acted  King  John  for  Holland’s  benefit,  and  Mark  Antony 
for  his  own.  Kenrick,  the  base  enemy  of  Garrick,  gave  Love,  the  actor,  his  play  of  Falstaj)  ’s 
Wedding  on  his  night.  It  had  great  merit ;  but  the  public  thought  themselves  bound  to  forbid 
any  unhallowed  attempt  to  drag  poor  Falstaj)  from  the  grave,  in  which  he  had  been  so  decently 
interred  by  his  great  Originator. 

The  44  Correspondence”  now  presents  us,  under  the  date  of  February  13th  1766,  Garricks  letter 
to  poor  Foote,  whom  a  fall  from  his  horse  had  compelled  to  submit  to  the  amputation  of  a  fractured 
leg.  Foote’s  answer  is  peculiarly  touching  from  such  a  man.  A  short  time  after  this,  King,  a 
greater  actor,  broke  his  thigh  by  a  fall  also  from  his  horse ;  but  fortunately  did  not  in  consequence 
become  a  cripple.  Mrs.  Abington  now  literally  took  her  full  range  in  Comedy.  The  Barrys  this 
summer  came  to  town,  Mrs.  Barry  under  the  name  of  Dancer,  which  she  retained  for  some  time  ; 
they  played  their  principal  characters  with  amazing  success  in  Foote’s  company,  then  performing  at 


xliv 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


the  King’s  Theatre  in  the  ITaymarket.  Our  favourite.  King,  after  his  accident,  married  Miss  Baker, 
and  returned  in  November  1766  to  Garrick  and  Lord  Ogleby.  It  lias  been  asserted,  a  hundred 
times,  that  Mr.  Lacy  and  Mr.  Garrick  never  had  a  difference  during  their  partnership.  The  “  Cor¬ 
respondence”  will  show  Mr.  Paterson  happily  mediating  between  them,  and  conciliating  both  gen¬ 
tlemen.  During  the  summer  of  1767,  there  are  some  letters  from  Colman  to  Garrick,  which  show 
that  their  little  cloud  had  passed  away,  and  young  Colman  was  then  living  with  Garrick,  while  his 
parents  were  at  Paris.  But  there  was  another  storm  impending. 

Dr.  Johnson’s  line  is  brought  forcibly  to  one’s  mind.  “  She  saw  great  Faustus  lay  the  ghost  of 
wit.”  This  Woodward  accomplished  at  Covent-Garden  by  his  alterations  of  Harlequin  Dr. Faustus, 
which  he  brought  out  there  on  the  18th  of  November.  Drury-Lane,  the  following  month,  produced 
Dr.  Francklin’s  “  Earl  of  Warwick  a  good  acting  play,  in  whose  heroine,  Mrs.  Yates  even  extended 
her  reputation,  as  a  consummate  mistress  of  all  that  is  magnificent  and  majestic  in  the  art. 
Garrick’s  splendid  idleness,  called  Cymon,  soon  followed,  and  has  been  frequently  revived,  in  spite 
of  criticism. 

Before  commencing  the  solemn  succession  of  tragedies  at  Drury-Lane,  we  would  note  with 
suitable  commendation  the  production  of  Mr.  Colman’s  English  Merchant,  on  the  21st  of  February 
1767.  It  produced  an  amiable  interchange  of  compliments  between  Voltaire  and  the  author. 
Drury-Lane  theatre  now  was  enlarged  so  as  to  hold  337/. — instead  of  its  former  receipt  of  220/.  It 
had  been  the  practice,  moreover,  to  leave  every  new  play,  on  its  own  footing,  unsupported  by  farce. 
This  Garrick  thought  injudicious,  because  the  performance  was  thus  over  by  nine  o’clock.  He 
therefore  proposed  to  add  to  all  new  productions  of  five  acts,  a  weak  farce,  or  a  strong  two  act 
comedy,  as  the  case  might  require ;  and,  on  both  grounds,  charged  the  authors  who  took  their 
benefit  nights,  seventy  guineas,  instead  of  the  former  sixty,  for  the  house.  Colman  demurred,  and 
took  the  old  course,  but  he  repented  it,  for  his  boxes  were  weak,  though  King  and  Mrs.  Abing- 
ton  did  all  that  art  and  friendship  could  accomplish  : — the  play  was  more  praised  than  followed. 

Margaret  of  Anjou  was  not  sufficient  to  the  fame  of  Mrs.  Yates;  but  Leonidas  Glover  presented 
her  with  his  “  Medea”  for  her  benefit.  There  is  still  a  fine  Mezzotinto  print  to  be  had  very  like 
her  regal  and  classical  form  and  figure,  “  to  give  the  world  assurance  of  her  power.”  “  Dido,” 
another  classical  Heroine,  followed ;  written  by  Reed,  the  rope-maker.  Garrick  made  King  a 
present  of  Linco’s  Travels  for  his  benefit;  in  short,  invention  and  friendship  were  now  alike 
tasked,  to  render  the  benefits  of  the  actors  a  most  valuable  addition  to  their  weekly  salaries. 

We  are  now  to  explain  to  the  reader  the  storm,  which,  as  we  have  said,  threatened  so  boisterous 
an  assault  upon  the  roof  of  Drury-Lane  theatre.  It  was  no  other,  than  the  detaching  Powell 
from  his  great  master,  by  a  temptation  of  sharing  the  patent  of  Covent-Garden  theatre,  with  Colman 
and  others.  Garrick  writes  from  Bath  to  his  brother  George  ;  we  shall  abridge  the  communications. 
“  Colman  and  Changuion  are  arrived  (from  France)  :  we  pulled  off  our  hats,  but  did  not  smile. 
Our  friends  here  will  stir  heaven  and  earth  to  bring:  us  together  :  make  the  best  of  it,  it  will  be  but 
a  darn .”  Again — “  Give  my  best  wishes  and  services  to  my  partner ;  and  tell  him  that  I  believe 
his  suspicions  are  well-founded.  He  may  be  well  assured,  that  I  would  not  suggest  the  smallest 
hint  of  what  I  know  to  Colman.  Do  not  imagine,  Mr.  George,  that  I  am  such  a  booby.  Colman 
has  told  me  that  he  has  an  affair  to  open  to  me,  but  we  have  always  been  interrupted  ;  so  I  have  not 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xlv 


yet  had  the  whole ;  and  which  he  has  some  qualms  in  bringing  out.  However,  I  am  prepared,  and 
he  will  be  surprised  at  my  little  concern ,  and  ease  on  the  occasion.  I  am  sure  there  is  something  in 
it ;  and  yet  the  more  I  think  of  it,  the  more  I  am  puzzled.  Who  finds  money  l  What  is  the  plan  ? 
Who  are  the  Directors  ?  What  !  has  Holland  no  hand  in  this  ?  Is  he  hummed  ?  I  have  not  the 
least  idea  of  the  matter ;  nor  have  I  the  least  notion  of  their  doing  any  thing  to  give  us  one  moment 
of  uneasiness.”  Garrick  is  very  candid:  he  says,  “  I  cannot  think  Colman’s  joining  Powell,  when  he 
and  I  were  at  variance,  and  from  an  offer  of  Powell  and  his  confederates,  blameable.  As  for  Powell, 

he  is  a  sc - ,  and  Colman  will  repent  his  conjunction  in  every  vein  :  nay,  he  does  repent  it,  and 

wishes  the  affair  was  broke  up :  but  I  believe  it  is  gone  too  far.  I  hope  to  God  that  my  partner  has 
not  talked  with  Powell  of  any  agreement,  or  a  friendly  intercourse  between  the  houses ;  that  would 
be  ruin  indeed  !  I  cannot  forgive  Powell !  You  surprise  me  about  Holland ;  I  should  think 
the  contrary.” 

The  result  was,  that  on  the  14th  of  September  1767,  Covent-Garden  theatre  opened,  under  the 
management  of  Colman,  Powell,  Harris,  and  Rutherford,  with  a  prologue,  which  Powell  spoke, 
written  by  W.  Whitehead.  It  promises  the  classic,  and  Old  English  drama  ;  such  wit  as  can  be 
met  with;  and  OPERA  not  totally  devoid  of  meaning;  and  such  pantomimes,  moreover,  as  were 
held  “  no  bad  epilogues  to  plays,”  in  the  days  of  good  King  Rich.  The  Yateses  went  to  Covent- 
Garden  on  this  occasion — so  did  Bensley  and  Mrs.  Lessingham. 

Reddish  came  to  Drury-Lane,  and  also  the  Barrys ;  ample  compensation  to  Garrick  for  all  that 
he  had  lost.  Powell  began  with  Romeo  as  his  novelty ;  but  the  death  of  his  Royal  Highness  the 
Duke  of  York,  suspended  the  hostilities  of  the  playhouse  for  one  week.  Mrs.  Barry,  a  memorable 
night,  made  her  first  appearance  on  the  stage  of  Garrick,  in  the  character  of  Sigisminida,  on  the 
14th  of  October  1767.  And  on  the  21st  of  the  same  month,  Barry  himself  came  forward,  after  an 
absence  of  some  years,  in  King  Lear.  Mrs.  Abington,  in  November,  appeared,  for  the  first  time, 
in  the  Country  Girl.  It  was  on  the  23rd  of  January  1768,  that  Hugh  Kelly’s  comedy  of  False 
Delicacy  was  acted  for  the  first  time  at  Drury-Lane  theatre.  It  was  unrivalled  in  popularity,  and 
translated,  on  its  publication,  into  all  the  European  languages. 

Murphy,  after  some  teasing  correspondence  with  Garrick,  as  usual,  brought  out  Zenobia,  in 
which  the  Barrys  produced  amazing  effect.  The  first  night  was  the  27th  of  February  1768  ;  about 
the  middle  of  March,  Murphy  hears  at  Northampton,  that  his  play  is  stopped  on  account  of  Mrs. 
Dancer’s  indisposition  :  and  yet  finds  her  well  enough  to  perform  in  another  successful  piece.  With 
great  simplicity,  he  writes  to  Garrick,  that  “  he  would  have  betted  considerable  odds  Mrs.  Dancer 
never  would  have  served  him  so.”  An  innocent  at  his  time  !  and  who  had  himself  been  an  actor ! 
The  ink  of  his  praises  of  her  friendly  skill  was  hardly  dry  at  this  time  upon  the  printed  book. 
“  But  to  trust  her  again ,  oh,  that  was  never  to  be  done.”  Such  is  the  condition  of  a  dramatic 
author  among  the  princesses  of  the  stage.  The  whole  of  this  affair  is  rather  unaccountable.  1  he 
receipts  on  his  nights  were,  by  the  account  rendered  to  him,  687/.  16s.  6<7.  from  which,  if  the  nightly 
charge  of  73/.  10s.  for  the  three  nights  be  deducted,  Murphy’s  profits  were  467/.  6s.  6d. ;  with  at 
least  200/.  from  the  bookseller.  It  was  when  theatres  were  constructed  to  hold  seven  hundred 
pound  audiences,  that  authors  were  rewarded  with  nine  times  33/.  6s.  8 d.,  or  as  many  repetitions 
of  this  lawyer’s  item,  as  the  manager  chose  to  allow  the  play.  But  this  is  mercy,  and  to  afford 


X I VI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


the  poor  wretch  something ;  for  be  it  observed,  if  he  brought  as  much  money  into  the  theatre  as 
Murphy  did  in  the  year  1768,  namely  690/.  it  would  all  be  swallowed  up  by  the  nightly  expense 
of  the  present  amphitheatrical  and  blessed  houses,  about  230/. 

Airs.  Pritchard  acted  Lady  Macbeth  for  the  last  time,  on  the  25th  of  April  1768;  and  wept 
her  acknowledgments  to  the  public,  in  lines  extremely  appropriate,  written  for  her  by  Air.  Garrick, 
the  farewell  poet  of  the  theatre.  The  first  couplet  was  excellent,  and  deeply  felt ;  — 

“  The  curtain  dropped,  my  mimic  life  is  past ; 

That  scene  of  sleep  and  terror  was  my  last.” 

This  great  woman  retired  to  Bath,  and  died  on  the  20th  of  the  following  August,  after  an  illness 
of  only  ten  days.  It  was  in  the  summer  of  1768,  that  Airs.  Dancer  became  the  wife  of  Barry. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  season  1768-9,  the  doors  of  both  theatres,  which  had  previously 
opened  at  four  o’clock,  borrowed  an  hour’s  delay  of  the  public,  and  for  the  future  were  opened  at 
five.  It  is  necessary  to  explain  that  the  performances,  as  far  back  as  1738,  began  at  six,  and  thus 
two  hours  might  be  passed  by  the  audience  in  amusements  of  their  own  interrupted  only  by  first 
and  second  music. 

On  the  3rd  of  October  in  this  year,  Dibdin,  by  his  music,  and  still  more  by  his  acting  in  a  comic 
opera,  called  the  Padlock,  produced  that  degree  of  sensation  in  the  public  which  is  called  a  rage. 
The  object  of  this  passion  was  a  black  servant,  named  Mungo,  well  enough  drawn,  and  speaking 
English  as  the  African  negro  invariably  does ;  for  the  rest,  frolicsome,  drunken  and  faithless,  and 
always  ludicrous.  A  common  question  in  life  was  soon  answered,  “No  Alassa” — “  me  lilly  tire v 
displaced  “  I  am  a  little  tired” — the  weary  porter  sat  down  to  rest  upon  his  load,  with  the  excla¬ 
mation  of  Alungo — “  You  damn  hamper  !  you  carry  me  now.”  Nay,  the  very  Senate  roared  with 
laughter,  when  an  honourable  member  ejaculated  the  darling  sounds,  “  Alungo  here,  Alungo  there." 

The  King  of  Denmark  was  now  in  London,  and  commanded  Garrick  several  times.  He  acted 
Ranger,  Sir  John  Brute,  Richard  the  Third,  and  Hamlet,  for  the  Royal  visitor.  The  connexion 
of  Denmark  with  Scotland  by  the  marriage  of  the  Princess  Anne,  with  our  James  the  First,  sug¬ 
gested  Shakspeare’s  Macbeth  as  a  play  which  it  might  be  desirable  to  represent  before  the  royal 
visitor ;  and  Garrick  allowed  it  to  be  talked  about  at  least.  His  friend,  Airs.  Griffith,  who  had 
never  seen  him  in  the  character,  writes  to  him  to  beg  a  couple  of  places  in  the  house,  anywhere,  so 
as  she  could  see  but  him.  But  Air.  Garrick  never  could  make  up  his  mind  to  any  Lady  Alacbeth 
after  Airs.  Pritchard  left  the  stage :  so  far  was  he  from  desiring  comparative  inferiority  by  his 
side. 

As  so  many  people  imagine  themselves  to  have  seen  Garrick  in  Alacbeth,  which,  after  Airs. 
Pritchard  left  the  stage,  it  is  impossible  they  should  have  done,  we  add  from  the  highest  authority, 
that  Airs.  Garrick,  not  to  trust  to  her  own,  though  clear  and  unclouded  recollection,  a  short  time 
before  her  death,  ascertained  the  fact,  by  a  reference  to  the  books  of  the  theatre.  A  reverend  gen¬ 
tleman,  to  whom  the  author  of  this  sketch  is  greatly  indebted,  states,  that  when  a  boy,  he  saw  the 
last  performance  of  Garrick  in  Alacbeth,  and  that  it  left  so  strong  an  impression  upon  his  mind, 
that  he  can  confirm  all  that  Baron  Grimm  has  written  of  the  “  beautiful  terror,’  of  the  dagger 
scene.  Garrick  once  himself  assured  the  gentleman  just  alluded  to,  that  so  eager  was  Charles  Fox 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xlvii 


for  the  revival  of  Macbeth,  that,  to  induce  Garrick  to  do  it,  he  vowed  he  would  himself  act 
the  part  of  Banquo,  upon  Drury-Lane  Stage.  At  the  close  of  the  2nd  Act  of  Garrick’s  Lear,  after 
the  agonies  inflicted  by  the  two  daughters,  when  he  closed  his  threats  of  vengeance  by  the  dreadful 
apostrophe — “  O  God,  I  shall  go  mad  !”  Fox  was  seen  in  the  side  boxes,  holding  up  his  hands 
with  the  most  animated  gesture,  to  denote  to  his  friends  the  admiration  and  astonishment  with 
which  he  had  regarded  the  performance. 

On  the  22nd  of  October  1768,  Miss  Younge  made  her  first  appearance  on  any  stage,  in  the 
part  of  Imogen  in  Cymbeline,  which  she  followed  by  Jane  Shore.  Garrick’s  correspondent,  Mrs. 
Griffiths,  so  persuaded  him  to  accept  her  School  for  Rakes,  which  opened  on  the  4th  of  February, 
1769 ;  this  was  the  Eugenie  of  Beaumarchais,  which  Garrick  sent  to  her,  and  watched  attentively 
in  its  progress  :  it  was  very  favourably  received  for  thirteen  nights,  a  rare  occurrence  then.  Home 
by  his  Fatal  Discovert/  soon  after  proved,  that  the  author  of  Douglas  could  never  again  rise  to  so 
masterly  a  performance. 

A  most  excellent  woman,  and  probably  the  greatest  comic  actress  of  any  age,  Mrs.  Catherine 
Clive,  anticipating  her  farewell  night,  she  writes  thus  to  Garrick,  ten  days  before  it — “  I  am  glad  you 
are  well,  for  the  sake  of  my  audience,  who  will  have  the  pleasure  to  see  their  own  Don  Felix. 
What  signifies  fifty-two  P  they  had  rather  see  the  Garrick  and  the  Clive  at  a  hundred  and  four, 
than  any  of  the  moderns  ;  the  ancients,  you  know,  have  always  been  admired.”  After  acting  with 
Garrick  in  the  Wonder  and  Lethe,  she  took  her  leave  on  the  24th  of  April  1769,  with  an  epilogue 
written  by  her  friend  Horace  Walpole.  Her  correspondence  cheered  and  delighted  her  only  rival, 
Garrick,  to  the  last. 

The  departure  of  Mrs.  Clive  from  the  theatre  was  soon  followed  by  the  death  of  William  Powell, 
who  had  been  able  in  some  respects  to  supply  the  place  of  Garrick  himself.  This  extraordinary 
man  died  on  the  7th  of  July  1769,  at  Bristol,  of  a  rheumatic  fever,  and  sore  throat.  We  shall  ven¬ 
ture  to  make  room  for  a  few  circumstances  respecting  him.  Powell,  like  Garrick,  was  born  at 
Hereford,  a  coincidence  that  materially  urged  on  his  love  of  the  stage.  He  was  on  the  foundation 
of  Christ’s  Hospital,  and  educated  for  business.  Sir  Robert  Ladbroke,  then  a  Governor,  took  him 
into  his  counting-house,  and  made  him  acquainted  with  distillery.  “  Smit  with  the  muse,  the  ledger 
he  forgot.”  Like  Murphy’s  apprentice,  he  was  the  hero  of  the  spouting  clubs  in  his  neighbour¬ 
hood  ;  one  of  which  Sir  Robert  absolutely  procured  to  be  put  down  in  a  vain  attempt  to  reclaim 
him  ;  in  the  language  of  the  city,  to  save  him.  As  soon  as  Mr.  Powell  was  out  of  his  apprentice¬ 
ship,  he  married  a  Miss  Branston,  the  daughter  of  a  reputable  citizen  ;  by  this  lady  he  had  two 
daughters  who  survived  him.  On  his  marriage,  he  removed  from  Sir  Robert  s  house,  but  not  from 
his  service;  he  remained  his  clerk  until  he  secured  an  engagement  at  Drury-Lane  Theatre.  1  hi> 
was  in  the  summer  of  1763,  when  Holland  presented  him  to  Mr.  Garrick,  who  heard  him,  told 
him  “  he  had  not  mistaken  his  profession,”  and  gave  him  instruction  which  he  needed,  and  a  decent 
income,  which  he  had  long  desired.  His  first  salary  was  three  pounds  per  week  for  three  years.  In 
Garrick’s  absence,  Mr.  Lacy,  with  the  concurrence  of  Mr.  George  Garrick  for  his  brother,  raised  it 
to  ten.  The  professional  course  of  this  fine  actor  is  already  before  the  reader.  The  heirs  ot  Mr. 
Rich  wanting  to  realise  his  property,  Mr.  Harris  and  Mr.  Rutherford,  both  of  them  men  of  busi¬ 
ness,  became  the  purchasers  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre ;  they  were  merely  men  of  business,  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xlviii 

made  overtures  to  Powell.  The  actor  had  no  money,  and  knew  nothing  of  management.  The  first 
was  supplied  by  a  nobleman,  at  the  instance  of  a  beautiful  mistress,  and  he  lent  Mr.  Powell  11,000/. 
at  four  per  cent,  and,  if  he  wanted  more,  told  him  he  should  have  it.  Powell  now  provided  with 
one  of  his  deficiencies,  recommended  Mr.  Colman  to  his  colleagues  to  supply  the  other.  He  came 
into  the  measure  with  some  reluctance,  in  opposition  to  his  friend  Garrick  “  Et  voila  la  guerre  al- 
lumee.”  But  with  respect  to  poor  Powell,  it  was  soon  succeeded  by  a  lasting  peace ;  he  closing 
his  brief,  but  very  fortunate  career,  at  the  age  of  thirty-four  years  ;  perhaps  the  victim  of  convi¬ 
viality  and  great  professional  exertion,  to  be  supported  by  a  remarkably  weak  constitution.  Mr. 
Colman,  bis  friend  Holland,  indeed  all  the  principal  persons  of  the  theatre,  followed  him  to  the 
grave.  The  inhabitants  of  Bristol  took  the  deepest  interest  in  this  loss.  He  was  a  pleasing,  rather 
than  a  great  actor — but  he  was  very  pleasing. 

A  great  deal  of  clamour  was  long  kept  up  against  Mr.  Garrick,  for  levying  the  1000/.  bond 
given  by  Powell,  after  he  so  unhandsomely  left  him.  But  let  us  consider  the  case  a  little.  The 
entertainments  of  the  stage  are  guarded  by  patent,  that  they  may  b e  permanent  as  well  as  becoming. 
If  any  vulgar  adventurer,  wffio  may  have  either  copper  or  brass  enough  to  become  a  lessee,  is  at 
liberty,  from  the  vanity  or  cupidity  of  actors,  to  inveigle  away  the  great  supports  of  a  stage,  the 
theatre  will  soon  be  ruined.  Performers,  so  tempted,  easily  remind  themselves  of  grievances  long 
buried ;  and  either  revive  them,  or  imagine  new  ones,  to  show  a  plea  that  does  not  look  covetous. 
The  adventurer  will  promise,  and  for  a  time  may  pay,  enormous  salaries ;  but  what  is  to  bind  him 
to  the  spot,  if  the  speculation  turn  out  unprofitable,  which  at  last  it  must  be? 

We  now  arrive  at  the  most  favourite  scheme  that  Garrick  ever  nourished  in  his  mind — the 
celebration  of  his  idol  Shakspeare  at  his  native  Stratford-upon-Avon.  He  had  been  employed 
upon  it  assiduously  for  months.  His  spirits  w-ere  in  so  much  harmony,  that  Edmund  Burke,  fol¬ 
lowing  FalstafF s  example,  made  “  no  apology”  for  wishing  he  could  let  him  have  a  “  Thousand 
Pounds' ’  upon  his  bond,  for  a  twelvemonth.  The  “  Correspondence”  now  before  the  reader  has 
many  references  to  the  Jubilee;  a  design  more  suited  to  the  French  than  the  English  taste;  and 
which,  after  all,  must  be  a  performance  of  the  theatre,  if  any  thing  is  to  be  done.  When  we  call  to 
mind  Mr.  Garrick’s  understanding,  we  must  believe  that  his  interest  suggested  quite  as  audibly  as  his 
love  on  this  occasion.  He  had  long  been  associated  with  the  genius  of  Shakspeare  ;  he  now  bore  his 
own  effigy  into  the  very  hall  of  his  birth-place,  and  taught  the  boors  of  Stratford  to  couple  together 
the  names  of  Shakspeare  and  Garrick.  He  meditated,  in  addition,  a  splendid  show  for  his  theatre  ; 
where  a  temperate  sky  always  hangs  from  the  borders,  and  the  painter  can  secure  the  blue  ethereal : 
whereas  at  Stratford  the  jealous  Jupiter  damped  all  the  arrangements  out  of  doors,  and  the  inn¬ 
keepers  and  the  ribbon-weavers  alone  had  really  a  fine  time  of  it.  The  5th  and  6th  of  September 
pretty  well  collected  all  the  strangers  that  were  expected.  On  the  Tth  public  worship  was  cele¬ 
brated  with  great  magnificence,  but  the  association  was  profane,  and  yet  it  was  unavoidable.  The 
crowd  of  idolaters  sought  the  sanctuary  itself  for  the  doggrel  epitaph  of  the  Poet,  and  at  three  o’clock 
were  more  substantially  regaled  by  a  dinner  in  the  rotunda.  At  five  the  musicians  mounted  the 
orchestra,  and  the  verse  of  Garrick,  set  very  beautifully  by  Dr.  Arne,  was  given  with  suitable  effect.* 
Mr.  Garrick  then  recited  the  ode  he  had  composed  :  though  he  could  not  soon  compose  the  critical 
*  Garrick  paid  Dr.  Arne  sixty  guineas  for  the  copy-right  of  this  music. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


xlix 


clamour,  which  it  excited.  After  this  powerful  recitation,  the  company  rose  to  enjoy  the  beauties 
of  the  Avon.  Foote,  recovered  from  his  accident,  and  as  buoyant  as  a  cork  leg  could  keep  him, 
sallied  forth  in  all  the  temptation  of  cheerfulness  and  humour,  to  find  metal  more  attractive  than 
declamation.  He  was  immediately  recognized,  and  a  tall  and  corpulent  gentleman,  splendidly 
dressed  and  extremely  important,  advanced  from  the  circle,  to  enjoy  a  personal  intercourse  with  the 
wit.  Foote  well  knew  how  to  throw  a  vain  man  off  his  guard,  by  a  compliment ;  and  said  to  him, 
“  Pray,  Sir,  has  the  County  of  Warwick  the  honour  of  giving  birth  to  you,  as  well  as  Shak- 
SPEare?”  “  No,”  said  the  uncouth  gentleman;  “  I  come  out  of  Essex.”  “  Where,  Sir?”  “  I 
come  out  of  Essex.”  “Out  of  Essex  !”  said  Foote,  “and  who  drove  you?”  Roars  of  laughter 
immediately  drove  the  over-fed  and  unwieldy  animal  out  of  the  field  he  had  so  rashly  pre¬ 
sumed  to  occupy. 

But  Foote  afterwards  thus  characterised  the  whole  business.  “  A  Jubilee  is  a  public  invitation, 
circulated  by  puffing,  to  go  post  without  horses,  to  a  Borough  without  representatives,  governed 
by  a  Mayor  and  Aldermen,  who  are  no  magistrates,  to  celebrate  a  great  Poet,  whose  own  works 
have  made  him  immortal,  by  an  ode  without  poetry,  music  without  melody,  dinners  without  victuals, 
and  lodgings  without  beds ;  a  masquerade  where  half  the  people  are  bare-faced,  a  horse-race 
up  to  the  knees  in  water,  fire-works  extinguished  as  soon  as  they  were  lighted,  and  a  gingerbread 
amphitheatre,  which,  like  a  house  of  cards,  tumbled  to  pieces  as  soon  as  it  was  finished”  But 
the  description  of  a  wit  is  not  written  upon  oath. 

To  resume  the  facts  themselves.  On  the  8th  of  September,  there  was  a  splendid  ball  in  the 
rotunda ;  and  on  the  following  day,  a  grand  procession  was  intended  through  the  town,  to  consist  of 
the  principal  characters  of  Shakspeare’s  plays,  of  which,  though  the  dress  was  in  character,  the  cha¬ 
racter  frequently  was  not  in  the  dress ;  but  a  violent  tempest  of  wind  and  rain  soon  scattered  this 
fond  pageant.  The  jubilee  ended  abruptly,  and  the  wet  and  weary  multitude  left  the  place  with  all 
possible  precipitation. 

We  have  just  hinted  the  clamour  excited  against  Garrick’s  Ode.  Scholars  are  always  sufficiently 
indulgent  to  their  studies,  to  think  them  of  the  highest  importance.  That,  as  an  actor,  penetrating 
by  a  sort  of  intuition  the  power  of  character  in  Shakspeare,  Garrick  should  have  been  deemed  his 
“  best  living  commentator ,”  was  sufficiently  mortifying  to  men,  who  were  struggling  with  each  other 
for  the  fame  of  ascertaining  what  he  really  wrote  in  a  thousand  passages  ?  and  by  very  extensive, 
miscellaneous,  and  very  irksome  reading,  settling  his  meaning  and  illustrating  his  fugitive  allusions. 
They  thought  the  actor  knew  no  more,  than  any  other  able  man  perceived  equally  with  himself- 
Here  they  imagined  they  had  caught  the  mimic  out  of  bounds — he  was  invading  the  regions  of  the 
sublimer  poetry.  The  greater  ode  among  us  had  been  tried  by  Cowley,  achieved  by  Dryden,  faintly 
though  beautifully  ventured  by  Pope,  and  appropriated,  if  his  own  University  could  be  credited,  b\ 
Gray.  Garrick’s  friends,  many  of  them,  here  gave  him  up,  shall  we  say  not  unwillingly  ?  Johnson 
said,  “  his  Ode  defed  criticism.'’  Hurd  called  it  a  “ portentous  production;’’  and  Bishop  M  ar- 
burton,  his  great  and  friendly  admirer,  chimed  in  with  the  commentator  on  Horace.  The  two  \\  ar- 
tons  seemed  to  have  asked  each  other  how  they  were  to  acknowledge  the  compliment  of  the  author 
of  the  Ode,  in  sending  it  to  them  ?  Even  the  hard  mouth  of  old  Macklin  mumbled  over  this  un¬ 
happy  Ode;  and  Garrick  was  idle  enough,  to  endeavour  to  make  him  swallow  it.  Alter  all,  it  does 

h 


VOL.  I. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


not  appear  ill-suited  to  the  occasion,  and  is  sufficiently  obvious  in  its  topics — its  measures  had  an 
almost  boundless  variety,  and  it  was  exactly  such  an  Ode  as  an  actor  would  delight  to  speak,  afford¬ 
ing  full  scope  to  his  tendency  to  imitate  what  he  recites. 

But  we  must  return,  like  the  idolaters  from  the  Avon,  and  record  the  appearance  of  the  Jubilee 
at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  on  the  14th  of  October  of  the  same  year.  Mr.  Garrick  having  previously 
recited  his  Ode  there,  on  the  30th  of  September,  as  soon  as  he  returned  to  town,  he  pressed  his 
whole  company,  male  and  female,  for  years  into  the  procession,  and  walked  himself  at  their  head  ; 
which,  as  he  was  soon  told,  he  could  do  without  losing  credit.  The  present  writer  saw  it  when  a 
boy,  from  the  Two  Shilling  Gallery,  and  remembers  Moody’s  Irishman  with  great  distinctness  in 
the  “  first  floor  of  a  post-chaise.”  The  procession,  which  wTent  beyond  imagination,  he  still  thinks 
the  only  one.  Talk  of  a  coronation,  indeed  !  it  means  nothing. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Waldron  first  appeared  at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  in  the  character  of  Scrub. 
He  was  greatly  addicted  to  the  study  of  true  English  poetry,  and  rendered  the  more  adventurous 
critics  of  his  time  essential  aid.  No  man  better  understood  the  art  of  the  actor.  In  reply  to  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  comparison  between  Mr.  Kemble  and  Mr.  Garrick  in  some  characters,  he  frankly  spoke  out. 
“  No  man  admires  Mr.  Kemble,  Sir,  more  than  I  do — he  is  a  great  man  !  a  very  great  man  !  but, 
Mr.  Garrick,  Sir  !  bless  my  soul !  it  was  quite  a  different  sort  of  thing.'’ 

Though  especially  bound  to  the  standard  of  Garrick,  we  notice  the  appearance  of  his  future 
friend  Cumberland’s  first  comedy,  the  Brothers,  at  Covent  Garden,  on  the  2nd  of  December  1769- 
It  was  well  received.  On  the  7th  of  the  same  month,  Charles  Holland,  who  had  so  recently  attend¬ 
ed  Powel  to  the  grave,  was  hurried  to  his  own  by  the  small-pox  :  he  was  a  zealous  follower  of  Gar¬ 
rick,  and  had  caught  as  much  of  his  great  master  as  he  had  powers  to  convey.  His  last  character 
was  Prospero,  which  he  played  on  the  20th  of  November.  He  too  soon  “  abjured  the  magic  of  his 
art,”  buried  with  him  at  Chiswick,  on  the  15th  of  the  following  month. 

The  “  Correspondence”  will  show  the  regard  Mr.  Garrick  had  for  Hugh  Kelly,  whose  Word  to 
the  Wise  he  produced  at  his  theatre  on  the  3rd  of  March  1770.  It  was  driven  from  the  stage  on 
the  second  night.  After  the  author’s  decease,  it  was  revived  one  night  for  the  benefit  of  his  family. 
Hear  the  tender,  the  beautiful  moralist,  Johnson,  to  the  assembled  audience:  — 

“  Yet  still  shall  calm  reflection  bless  the  night 
When  liberal  pity  dignified  delight; 

When  pleasure  fired  her  torch  at  virtue’s  flame, 

And  mirth  was  bounty  with  an  humbler  name.” 

It  may  be  proper  at  the  close  of  Garrick’s  season  of  1769-70  to  register,  that  the  Jubilee  had 
been  acted  ninety-one  nights.  Old  Sheridan  had  performed  at  the  Haymarket  the  last  two  sum¬ 
mers.  Foote  took  the  Edinburgh  management  now  upon  him,  and  carried  with  him  Woodward, 
his  old  enemy,  and  Weston.  Miss  Younge  had  left  Garrick  for  Dublin. 

Mrs.  Celesia,  the  daughter  of  Mallet,  will  be  found  among  Air.  Garrick’s  enlightened  correspon¬ 
dents:  he  brought  out  a  tragedy,  which  she  called  A/mida  :  it  was,  in  fact,  the  Tancrede  of  Vol¬ 
taire  ;  but  Airs.  Barry  bore  it  triumphantly  upon  her  shoulders.  A  week  after  this  play,  Air.  Gar¬ 
rick  pi'oduced  Cumberland’s  master-work,  the  West  Indian,  on  the  19th  of  January  1771.  It  is 
really  worth  all  the  notice  that  its  author  lias  bestowed  upon  it.  It  was  written  in  a  small  closet  at 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


li 


the  back  of  the  bishop’s  palace  at  Clonfert,  with  a  turf-stack  in  prospect,  to  keep  the  mind  from 
wandering.  The  moderns  may  try  four  bare  walls  with  some,  if  not  equal  effect.  Cumberland 
offered  this  play  to  Garrick  for  a  copy  of  a  Holy  Family  by  Andrea  del  Sarto,  that  hung  over  his 
chimney-piece  in  Southampton-street ;  and  the  manager  would  have  closed  on  those  terms,  but  the 
picture  had  been  a  present  from  Lord  Baltimore.  That  being  the  case,  Evans  the  treasurer,  after 
the  author’s  nights  were  over,  came  to  him  in  a  hackney-coach,  with  his  profits  all  in  gold,  which  he 
seemed  to  spread  delighted  upon  the  author’s  table ;  it  being  to  a  larger  amount  than  he  had  ever 
before  conveyed  to  a  dramatic  writer.  The  West  Indian  ran  twenty-eight  nights.  Griffin,  who 
published  it,  sold  12,000  copies.  Garrick  himself,  in  the  St.  James' s  Evening,  wrote  in  praise  of  the 
comedy,  and  skilfully  too. 

The  “  Correspondence,”  at  page  440  of  the  present  volume,  will  present  the  reader  with  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick’s  difference  with  the  irascible  Junius.  The  politician  was  of  opinion,  that  the  player  had  made 
suit  to  recommend  himself  by  a  discovery.  But  Garrick  is  confirmed  in  his  assertion,  by  Woodfall 
the  printer,  who  confesses  that  he  told  him  “Junius  would  write  no  more,”  without  any  injunction 
to  secresy ;  and  accordingly,  Garrick  mentioned  it  to  Ramus,  and  to  others.  Junius  again  said  to 
Woodfall,  “  the  king  understood  that  Garrick  had  found  it  out”  by  his  own  dexterity  and  clever¬ 
ness.  They  may  both  be  right ;  for  Ramus,  to  grace  his  friend  Garrick,  might  have  garnished  his 
intelligence  by  a  fancied  dexterity  that  had  obtained  it.  How  the  satirist  knew  so  quickly  what  His 
Majesty  understood ,  so  as  to  be  informed  of  all  the  particulars  the  next  day,  is  still  the  wonder  that 
checks  every  hypothesis  as  to  the  real  writer. 

In  the  season  of  1771-2,  Miss  Younge  returned  to  her  best  friend’s  theatre.  The  masque  of  the 
Institution  of  the  Garter,  now  brought  out  by  Garrick,  exposed  him  to  a  correspondence  with  Mr. 
Gentleman,  who  looking  about  him  for  supplies,  remembered  that  ten  years  back  he  had  himself 
composed  a  garter  entertainment  from  West’s  poem  in  Dodsley’s  collection.  Timonoj  Athens,  with 
additions  by  Cumberland,  was  now  urged  on  by  him  to  the  injury  of  his  reputation.  His  Amelia 
received  alterations  too,  and  from  the  Summer's  Tale,  became  a  winter  one,  with  some  success ;  but 
as  he  stood,  from  the  West  Indian,  not  worth  the  trial.  He  was  now  a  mark  for  those  benevolent 
gentlemen,  who  write  criticisms  instead  of  comedies,  for  the  town’s  amusement ;  and  his  Fashionable 
Lover,  “  eo  nomine”  a  dull  being,  afforded  their  shafts  full  scope.  Cumberland,  moreover,  as  Gar¬ 
rick  told  him,  was  a  man  without  a  skin.  He  might  be  a  Marsyas,  but  where  was  the  Apollo  in  wit, 
who  had  a  right  to  fay  him  ? 

“  Quod  petis  me  EST — ”  perhaps  Murphy  might  have  thought ;  especially  after  the  success  of  his 
Grecian  Daughter,  which  was  brought  out  on  the  26th  of  February  1772.  Murphy  forgetting 
Zenobia,  happily  for  his  fame,  “  again"  trusted  Mrs.  Barry  ;  and  Garrick  reluctantly  relinquished 
Evander  to  Barry.  Even  such  an  actor  as  Barry  could  say  on  this  occasion,  “  Let  him  play  it ;  it 
will  come  to  me  at  last,  and  I  shall  be  able  to  act  it  better,  after  having  seen  him.  I  he  author, 
however,  thought  Barry  the  finest,  feeble  venerable  monarch  that  imagination  could  conceive.  Not 
that  he  quite  expresses  this  to  the  great  manager.  The  praise  of  Barry  is  thus  lowered  to  meet  the 
eye  of  the  still  jealous  monarch  of  the  stage.  “  I  regret  but  one  thing  in  this  business,  and  that  i>. 
though  Mr.  Barry  acts  finely,  that  the  play  was  not  in  readiness  while  YOU  appeared  in  new  charac¬ 
ters.  In  that  case,  I  know  what  Evander  would  have  been."  He  wrote  the  superlative  praise  of 

h  2 


Iii  BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 

Barry,  above  recited,  many  years  after  the  performance,  and  perhaps  to  propitiate  old  Mr.  Coutts,  to 
whom  he  dedicates  his  hook.  To  this  wealthy  critic  he  mentions  his  opinion,  no  doubt  the  banker’s 
also,  that  Barry  was,  in  some  parts,  a  “  formidable  rival,”  if  not  “  superior  even  to  Garrick.”  Such 
are  the  lessons  we  gather  in  our  researches.  Whoever  looks  narrowly  into  human  nature  will  detect 
much  of  this  pitiful  disingenuousness,  which  auto-biography  is  seldom  just  enough  to  record.  When 
Murphy  writes  to  Garrick  after  his  success,  he  determines  to  lead  a  life  of  jealousy  no  longer  ;  hut  to 
trust  implicitly  to  the  manager’s  friendship.  A  more  interesting  scene  than  this  is  opened  in  “  The 
Correspondence,”  at  pages  458-9,  where  the  letters  between  Garrick  and  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham, 
will  delight  the  admirers  of  those  distinguished  men. 

Mr.  Garrick  had  now  a  loss  which,  from  ludicrous  association,  excites  a  smile.  His  chief  num- 
berer,  and  under-treasurer,  was  John  Hardham,  of  Fleet  Street,  the  celebrated  maker  of  the  snuff 
No.  37,  and  the  Maecenas  of  all  candidate  actors  and  actresses.  Like  Garrick,  he  was  both  Abel 
Drugger  and  Hamlet ;  and  from  uttering  to  a  recruit  in  his  back  parlour,  “  speak  the  speech  as  I 
pronounced  it  to  you,  trippingly  on  the  tongue,”  he  would  bolt  out  to  an  amateur  of  the  pure 
Nicotian  at  the  counter,  and  assure  him  that  HE  never 

“  Sophisticates  it  with  sack-lees,  or  oyle. 

Nor  washes  it  in  muscadel  and  grains, 

Nor  buries  it  in  gravel,  under-ground; 

But  keeps  it  in  fine  lilly-pots,  that  open’d 

Smell  like  conserve  of  roses,  or  French  beans.’’ — Alchemist,  Act  i.  Sc.  iii. 

» 

Such  were  the  honours  of  Hardham,  who  lived  at  the  Red  Lion  in  Fleet  Street,  and  died  on  the 
25th  of  September  1772.  While  George  Steevens  was  daily  visiting  Johnson,  on  the  subject  of  the 
edition  of  Shakspeare,  jointly  published  in  1773,  he  every  day  filled  his  box  with  37  at  the  counter 
of  a  man  w7ho  had  been  many7  y7ears  the  butt  of  his  pleasantry. 

Henderson,  a  worthy  follower  of  Garrick,  made  his  first  appearance  on  any  stage,  at  Bath,  in  the 
character  of  Hamlet,  on  the  26th  of  October  1772  ;  and  on  the  20th  of  the  same  month,  at  Ealing, 
in  Middlesex,  died  Henryr  Giffard,  the  manager  of  the  theatre  in  Goodman’s  Fields,  who  had  wit¬ 
nessed  the  dawn  of  Garrick’s  day7,  and  lived  to  enjoy7  the  brightest  parts  of  it.  The  arbitrary 
licensing  act  took  Giffard’s  profession  from  him,  or  made  it  illiberal.  Ministers  promised  him  com¬ 
pensation,  but  they  failed  him. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  farce  of  the  Irish  Widow  afforded  Mrs.  Barry7,  on  the  23rd  of  October  1772,  an 
opportunity7  to  display  her  comic  talent.  She  spoke  the  brogue  very  humorously7,  and  her  vivacity 
never  flagged.  Sir  Patrick  O'Xeale,  by  Moody,  was  at  least  upon  a  par  with  her  Widow  Brady. 
Garrick  also  revived  Shirley’s  Gamesters,  but  the  critics  objected  to  his  omissions  as  injurious  to  the 
piece.  We  have  noticed  the  retreat  and  marriage  of  O’Brien ;  his  farce  called  Cross  Purposes 
succeeded  at  Covent  Garden  on  the  5th  of  December,  and  his  comedy7  called  the  Duel  was  totally 
lost  at  Drury  Lane  on  the  8th. 

A  report  had  been  spread  that  a  new  comic  opera,  brought  out  by  Mr.  Garrick  on  the  1st  of  Feb. 
1773,  was  written  by  the  wretched  Bickerstaff;  it  was  called  the  Wedding  Ring.  A  dreadful  riot 
ensued,  but  Charles  Dibdin  declaring  himself  the  author  of  both  words  and  music,  it  was  at  length 
endured.  We  cannot  stop  a  rapid  narrative  like  this  by7  the  accusations  of  a  ruffian  like  Kenrick ; 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


liii 


the  annoyance  to  Mr.  Garrick  is  amply  remembered  in  the  “  Correspondence''*  about  this  date,  to 
which  we  gladly  refer. 

On  the  15th,  Foote  opened  the  Haymarket  with  an  entertainment  called  the  “  Primitive  Puppet 
Show.”  In  a  life  of  Foote  we  should  willingly  dilate  upon  the  wut  he  then  displayed  ;  but  our  business 
is  with  Garrick,  whose  peculiar  manner  he  imitated  exactly,  when  refusing  to  engage  in  his  company 
Punch’s  wdfe  Joan.  To  Foote’s  Piety  in  Pattens,  James  Boswell  has  an  allusion,  as  will  be  seen  bv 
his  letter  in  the  “  Correspondence.” 

Notwithstanding  Murphy’s  dismissal  of  all  his  jealousy  of  Garrick  upon  the  success  of  his 
Grecian  Daughter,  he  carried  his  Alzuma  to  Covent  Garden  on  the  23rd  Feb.  1773,  and  chose 
to  forget  it  in  his  Life  of  Garrick  altogether.  Home’s  Alonzo ,  brought  out  the  same  month  at  Drury 
Lane,  was  thought  to  be  not  unworthy  of  the  author  of  Douglas.  Mrs.  Barry’s  Ormisinda  was  equal 
to  any  thing  she  ever  did  upon  the  stage.  She  had  a  genius  which,  with  the  most  melting  tenderness, 
delighted  in  the  wild  and  the  romantic. 

Garrick’s  friend  Dr.  Goldsmith,  on  the  15th  of  March  1773,  brought  out  his  comedy  “  She 
stoops  to  Conquer,”  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre.  The  next  month  Garrick  revived  the  Chances, 
with  alterations,  and  played  Don  John  himself,  so  as  to  rank  it  with  his  Benedick.  His  pupil, 
John  Bannister,  has  a  fine,  indeed  a  brilliant,  picture  by  Loutherbourg,  of  his  great  master  in  this 
character. 

It  is  amusing  to  see  the  partiality  of  men  to  particular  subjects,  unprofitable  as  they  may  have 
been.  Garrick  still  thought  Mallet’s  play  on  the  subject  of  Alfred  worth  reviving;  and  touched 
upon  it  slightly  in  October  1773.  The  German  style  of  writing  would  suit  such  a  subject.  Schiller 
could  have  given  that  first  of  kings  a  place  in  the  mimic  world  not  disgraceful  to  his  fame  in  our 
historical  records.  At  length  William  Lewis  arrived  in  London  from  Dublin  ;  but,  in  spite  of  all 
Cumberland’s  efforts  to  secure  him  for  Garrick,  he  made  his  first  appearance  at  Covent  Garden 
theatre,  under  Mr.  Harris,  in  the  character  of  Belcour,  in  the  West  Indian,  on  the  15th  of  October 
in  the  present  year.  On  the  23rd  began  the  enjoyment  of  the  wits,  the  performance  of  Macbeth  at 
Covent  Garden,  by  Macklin.  His  manner  wras  naturally  heavy,  and  Macbeth  was  for  once  falsely 
accused  of  “  murdering  sleep  .”  The  Drury  Lane  actors  treated  it  (poor  Reddish  in  particular,) 
as  treason  against  both  Shakspeare  and  their  master. 

It  is  with  regret  that  we  find  a  difference  starting  up  with  such  a  man  as  Dr.  Hawkesworth 
about  his  not  having  admitted  Becket  into  the  property  of  his  great  work.  J  he  worthy  booksellei 
used  to  busy  himself  incessantly  in  Garrick’s  concerns,  and  even  deliver  letters  for  him.  He  de¬ 
lighted  to  be  considered  as  the  medium  of  negociation  foreign  and  domestic  ;  and  the  manager  some¬ 
times  endorsed  his  long  and  anxious  letters  “  Becket  about  nothing  ”  I  he  great  success  of  the  pool 
doctor's  voyages  absolutely  feasted  him  to  death.  He  died  on  the  1  i  th  of  November  1  .  < 3,  gnutU 
regretted.  He  was  no  mean  imitator  of  the  lofty  sense  and  sounding  period  of  the  autlioi  of 

“  Rasselas.” 

Hugh  Kelly  had  grown  unpopular,  and  therefore  Mr  Garrick,  on  thellth  of  Decembei,  biought 
out  his  School  for  Wives.  A  Mr.  Addington  was  named  as  the  author,  but  he  resigned  at  once  the 
laurel  of  success,  though  he  would  have  worn  the  absinth  of  failure  to  serve  a  persecuted  man. 
Garrick’s  Christmas  Tale  is  whimsically  noticed  in  the  “  Correspondence. 


liv 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


This  month  was  destined  to  inflict  a  very  severe  loss  upon  Mr.  Garrick  in  the  death  of  his  worthy 
partner,  James  Lacy,  Esq.  on  the  23rd  of  January  1774.  Mr.  Murphy  extends  his  life,  by  some 
poetic  privilege,  to  March,  but  calls  the  year,  erroneously,  1773.  There  seem  to  be  few  traces  of 
difference  between  the  two  patentees ;  a  point  attributable  to  the  wisdom  which  limited  their  re¬ 
spective  provinces  at  the  outset,  and  the  natural  deference  that  a  plain  man  pays  to  great  genius, 
when  he  has  just  sense  enough  to  understand  it. 

Garrick  now  probably  determined  to  get  out  of  the  concern,  which  was  really  becoming  too  much 
for  him.  He  had  long  declined  all  new  study  ;  played  chiefly  in  comedy,  when  he  did  appear,  and 
seldom  then  without  the  gout  to  annoy  him. 

If  there  be  any  one  act  of  his  management  which  we  should  wish  to  blot  out  from  these  pages, 
it  is  his  rash  violation  of  the  whole  scheme  of  Shakspeare’s  Hamlet.  On  the  8th  of  February  1774, 
Mr.  Garrick’s  alteration  of  that  noble  play,  was  acted  for  the  first  time.  All  the  contrivances  of 
Shakspeare,  by  which  he  added  absence  from  the  scene  to  the  melancholy  irresolution  of  the  cha¬ 
racter,  were  rendered  abortive.  It  became  as  much  a  Monodrame  as  Timon  ;  and  the  passive  Ham¬ 
let  was  kept  on  the  rack  of  perpetual  exertion.  His  very  speeches  were  trimmed  up  with  startling 
exclamations,  and  furious  resolves  ;  and  even  Yorick  himself  was  thrown  out  of  the  play,  to  render 
the  wit  and  pathos  of  Sterne  inapplicable  and  unintelligible.  It  was  an  Actor's  mutilation  of  all 
parts  but  his  oivti.  So  Cibber  contrived  that  his  Richard  the  Third  should  never  rest  himself  in  the 
green-room  ;  he  must  be  always  ready  at  the  wing,  if  he  was  not  on  the  stage.  We  have  noticed  in 
the  “  Correspondence”  that  Steevens  encouraged  Garrick  in  his  design,  as  to  this  sacrilege.* 

The  French  complimented  Garrick  outrageously  upon  his  success.  He  had  sanctioned  their 
criticism.  He  had  admitted  Shakspeare  to  be  a  barbarian ,  who  must  be  polished,  before  he  could 

*  “  When,”  writes  Mr.  Garrick,  on  a  particular  occasion,  “  I  was  busied  about  that  foolish  hobby-liorse 
of  mine,  the  Jubilee,  my  good  friend  Master  Steevens  was  busying  himself  every  other  day  in  abusing  me 
and  the  design.  He  first  desired  a  Mr.  Zachary  Steevens,  in  Chancery  Lane,  to  assure  me  upon  his  ■word 
and  honour  that  he  did  not  write  those  things  which  I  had  particularly  marked  out  as  personal  and  slanderous  ; 
but  confessed  he  was  the  author  of  the  Parody  of  Dryden’s  Ode,  the  Witches  Cauldron,  and  one  other.  Some 
time  after,  he  totally  forgot  that  he  had  given  his  honour  to  the  above,  and  bragged,  to  the  partners  of  the 
St.  James’s  Chronicle,  that  he  had  written  them  all,  thirty-five  or  forty  in  number,  with  this  liberal  addi¬ 
tion,  that  it  was  ‘  fun  to  vex  me.’  In  the  midst  of  a  most  friendly  correspondence,  he  began  an  abuse  on 
Mr.  Colman  and  me  in  the  St.  James’s  Chronicle  ;  after  which,  I  would  never  converse  with  him,  but  have 
spoken  of  him,  and  will  always  treat  him,  as  such  a  pest  of  society  merits  from  all  men.” 

Master  Stephen  got  again  into  Kitely's  house,  however,  wre  know,  and  above,  we  may  fancy  to  wThat  pur¬ 
pose.  But  Garrick  had  obtained  a  pension  from  government  for  Ralph,  the  political  wviter,  who  had  libelled 
him  and  his  family  ;  and  relieved,  himself,  the  distress  of  Paul  Hiffernan,  another  genius  of  the  same  order  : 
and  it  wras  therefore  a  trifle  to  look  over  the  fun  of  Steevens,  who  was  far  above  want ;  and,  if  mischievous, 
at  least  uniformly  so.  He  pledged  himself  to  Garrick,  in  the  mean  time,  “  that  the  name  of  no  other  actor 
should  ever  find  a  place  in  his  commentaries  upon  Shakspeare  a  pledge  which  he  redeemed,  in  his  fashion, 
by  a  panegyric  upon  Henderson,  in  the  character  of  Richard  the  Third.  His  concluding  note  to  the  tra¬ 
gedy  has  these  words.  “  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  discriminating  powers  of  a  Burbage,  a  Garrick, 
and  a  Henderson,  should  at  different  periods  have  given  it  a  popularity  beyond  other  dramas  of  the  same 
author.”  Whether  the  known  difference,  between  Mr.  Garrick  and  Mr.  Henderson,  had  any  share  in  this 
dexterous  attempt  to  place  them  upon  a  level,  those  who  are  aware  of  his  love  of  “  fun”  will  have  no  difficuity 
in  determining. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


lv 


be  suffered  in  good  company — his  fossoyers  and  his  ossemens  with  “  wisdom  crying  out  from  the 
grave”  were  cut  off,  agreeably  to  the  standard  lit  de justice  of  Procrustes  Voltaire.  Another  attack 
might  probably  displace  the  midnight  ghost  in  Hamlet ;  and  leave  the  noon-day  spectre  of  Ninus  a 
clear  stage ;  banish  the  bloody  Ba/icjuo  from  the  feast  of  Macbeth  ;  and  keep  the  somnambulism  of 
the  murderous  Queen  from  erring  beyond  her  chamber,  under  the  rigid  coercion  of  her  doctor, 
her  nurse,  and  the  strait  waistcoat. 

Sethona,  on  the  19th  of  the  same  month,  settled  the  pretensions  of  Colonel  Dow  in  tragedy. 
This  play  and  Zingis  are  alike  the  inspirations  of  Ossian  ;  the  admission  of  such  rubbish  to  his 
theatre,  was  among  the  frailties  of  Garrick. 

Dr.  Goldsmith  died  on  the  4th  of  April,  1774.  A  notice  of  his  funeral  will  be  found  as  a  note  to 
the  “  Correspondence ”  before  the  reader. 

On  the  26th  of  May,  at  the  close  of  the  season,  Mr.  Colrnan,  who,  as  Garrick  had  predicted, 
found  himself  unhappy  at  Covent  Garden,  sold  his  share,  and  retired  from  the  management.  Mr. 
Harris  was  by  this  time  become  perfectly  conversant  with  stage  business.  He  continued  a  manager 
full  half  a  century. 

On  the  22nd  of  September  1774,  Smith  made  his  first  appearance  at  Drury  Lane,  in  Richard 
the  Third.  He  and  Mrs.  Hartley  had  been  to  Ireland  in  the  summer.  The  “  Correspondence"’ 
exhibits  him  as  an  Oroondates,  or  the  Passionate  Lover. 

The  Earl  of  Derby,  whose  sister  was  the  wife  of  General  Burgoyne,  on  the  23d  of  June,  1774, 
married  Lady  Elizabeth  Hamilton,  only  daughter  of  the  sixth  Duke  of  Hamilton ;  such  a  union 
became  an  object  of  infinite  importance  in  the  eyes  of  all  connexions  of  the  two  noble  families.  The 
General  tried  his  dramatic  talent  in  an  entertainment  for  the  stage,  which,  like  Garrick’s  Jubilee, 
was  to  echo  the  Fete  Champetre  given  for  days  together  at  Lord  Derby’s  seat  called  the  Oaks.  It 
made  its  first  appearance  at  Drury  Lane,  on  the  5th  of  November  of  the  same  year,  and  produced  a 
very  brilliant  effect ;  it  was  called  the  Maid  of  the  Oaks.  Mrs.  Aldington,  in  Lady  Bab  Lardoon, 
gave  to  the  stage  the  finished  woman  of  fashion. 

The  success  of  the  theatre  was  somewhat  damped  by  the  death  of  Henry  Mossop  at  Chelsea,  on 
the  27th  of  December.  There  is  in  the  “  Correspondence”  a  very  affecting  account  of  his  last  mo¬ 
ments,  addressed  to  Garrick  by  a  friendly  clergyman,  who  was  laudably  desirous  he  should  know  that 
the  dying  man  did  justice  to  his  virtues. 

Mossop  had  good  reason  to  think  that  it  was  on  his  account  chiefly,  Mr.  Garrick  had  been  at¬ 
tacked  by  David  Williams,  in  a  pamphlet  written  with  consummate  ability.  The  reader  of  even 
middle  age  may  remember  the  tall  person  and  placid  countenance  of  this  Unitarian  lecturer,  and  the 
bright  purple  suit,  which  invested  his  really  venerable  figure.  Did  Williams,  however,  deny  the 
splendid  talents  of  Garrick  ?  far,  very  far  from  it.  He  denies  much  to  him,  it  will  be  readily  admitted. 
“  Rouge  and  powder,”  says  he,  “  cannot  give  the  bloom  of  youth — mere  quickness  of  motion 
cannot  give  the  appearance  of  agility.  An  old  man,  let  him  move  ever  so  briskly,  moves  in  straight 
lines,  and  turns  almost  at  right  angles.  Your  eyes  have  lost  the  power  of  imitating  softness,  it  ever 
they  had  it.  That  fine,  bewitching  liquid,  which  passion  sends  out  to  the  eye  of  youth,  cannot  be 
imitated  by  any  old  man.  Your  mouth  has  no  sweetness  ;  your  voice  is  growing  hoarse  and  hollow  ; 
your  dimples  are  furrows,  &c.” 


lvi 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


Eut  what,  ex-cathedra,  are  we  told  of  the  merits  of  the  man,  who  never  indeed  sat  for  the  above 
portrait  ?  These  then  are  the  merits  of  Mr.  Garrick  in  the  opinion  of  David  Williams  : — 

“  You  have  been,  deservedly,  for  above  thirty  years,  at  the  head  of  your  profession.  The  justice 
with  which  you  conceive,  and  exhibit  the  poet’s  meaning,  are  in  general  masterly.  You  act  with 
much  greater  truth,  spirit,  and  variety,  than  ANY  MAN  I  ever  saw.  It  may  be  said,  I  take  you  at 
a  disadvantage  in  the  decline  of  life.  I  believe  not.  In  those  tragic  parts  where  your  organs  seem 
to  have  had  a  power,  almost  peculiar,  to  represent  the  poet’s  meaning,  your  execution  is  masterly. 
It  is  much  improved  within  a  few  years.  Your  province  lies  principally  where  the  passions  are  ex¬ 
hibited  by  the  poet,  as  agitated,  or  wrought  up  to  a  high  degree ;  your  perfection  consists  in  the 
extreme.  In  exaggerated  gesture,  and  sudden  bursts  of  passion,  given  in  a  suppressed  and  under 
manner,  you  are  inimitable.  In  the  struggles  and  conflicts  of  contradictory  passions  ;  or  in  their 
mixture  and  combination  ;  and  when  their  effects  are  drawn  by  the  author  to  a  point  of  instant  and 
momentary  expression;  there  you  are  often  excellent.  But  the  expression  must  be  in  the  extreme, 
or  you  are  not  Garrick.” 

Mossop  outlived  the  period  assigned  to  him  by  Davies,  a  whole  year ;  and  was  buried  at  Chelsea  on 
the  1st  of  January  1775,  attended  to  the  grave  by  Baddely,  James  Aickin,  Johnston,  and  the  under 
prompter.  Gentleman,  who  was  at  school  with  him,  said  he  was  born  in  the  year  1729- 

The  Barrys  were  this  year  at  Covent  Garden ;  and  Garrick’s  tragedies,  therefore,  depended  upon 
Mrs.  Yates  and  Reddish.  In  addition  to  the  company  that  Mr.  Harris  had  now  got  together,  a 
great  WIT  seemed  to  have  started  on  his  side,  who,  if  he  could  have  been  contented  with  one  pro- 

t 

vince,  might  have  maintained  there  an  almost  exclusive  possession.  The  reader  sees  that  we  mean 
Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan,  whose  indolence  produced,  in  the  same  year,  the  comedy  of  the  Rivals 
on  the  17th  of  January,  and  the  comic  opera  of  the  Duenna  on  the  21st  of  November  1775. 

Dr.  Francklin,  the  translator,  (for  the  philosopher  and  politician  was  a  very  different  person.) 
will  be  seen,  in  the  “  Correspondence,”  to  keep  his  hold  upon  Garrick,  though  both  petulant  and 
avaricious.  The  manager  brought  out  his  Matilda  on  the  21st  of  January,  and  it  met  with 
sufficient  encouragement  from  the  public.  But  on  the  17th  of  the  following  month,  an  author 
started,  new  to  the  stage,  who  is,  perhaps,  the  best,  if  not  the  only  writer  of  modern  tragedy.  We 
allude  to  Captain  Robert  Jephson,  author  of  Braganza,  Avho  enjoyed  the  office  of  Master  of  Horse 
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland. 

The  activity  of  Garrick’s  mind  perfectly  dazzles  one;  most  seasons  he  opened  with  a  new 
prelude :  he  assisted  the  compositions  of  every  other  writer,  and  wrote  himself  at  least  equally  with 
others.  He  finished  his  farce  of  Bon  Ton  this  year,  and  gave  it  to  Tom  King  for  his  benefit, 
on  the  1 8th  of  March  1775. 

The  following  season  was  honoured  with  the  first  appearance  of  Mrs.  Siddons  on  the  stage  of 
Drury  Lane  theatre,  in  the  character  of  Portia.  Mrs.  Clive  used  to  mimic  Dunning  in  the  trial 
scene.  No  wonder  Mrs.  Siddons  seemed  flat  to  the  gods  !  It  was  like  Shylock,  without  the  “Jew¬ 
ish  gaberdine”  to  muffle  his  tongue,  heard  without  the  old  roar  of  laughter.  She  thought  Garrick 
very  terrible  in  Richard  when  she  played  with  him  ;  and  indeed  seems  to  have  alarmed  herself 
beyond  the  power  of  being  Mrs.  Siddons  there  ;  for  in  the  country  she  had  produced  great  effect. 
She  accordingly  dropped  into  the  ivalking  gentlewoman ;  and,  at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  was  not  per- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR.  lvij 

rnitted  a  long  walk  before  she  became  the  Runaway.  We  allude  to  Mrs.  Cowley’s  beautiful 
comedy,  so  named;  the  last  new  play  brought  out  by  Mr.  Garrick. 

Upon  the  subject  of  Mrs.  Siddons,  we  would  just  notice  the  impression  upon  some  minds  that 
Garrick  was  not  friendly  to  her.  “  At  the  request  of  Garrick,”  (says  a  particular  friend,)  “  I  went 
to  the  theatre  on  the  first  night  of  her  appearance  in  Portia  ;  and  I  have  often  reflected  with  satis¬ 
faction  on  the  report  I  made  to  him  next  morning.  I  was  charmed  with  her  feeling  and  just  decla¬ 
mation.  I  can  vouch  that  Garrick  was  disposed  to  bring  her  forward — he  assigned  Lady  Anne  to 
her,  that  she  might  appear  with  himself  before  a  polite  and  fashionable  audience.  But  the  true 
secret  of  her  wrant  of  success  was,  that  Mrs.  Yates  and  Miss  Younge  were  in  possession  of  all  the 
capital  parts ;  and  Garrick  at  that  time  did  not  want  to  create  new  theatrical  squabbles.” 

The  safe  policy  in  such  cases,  is  never  to  visit  the  metropolis  until  there  is  a  void,  and  one  is 
wanted  to  fill  it — that  was  precisely  the  position,  when  this  great  woman  reappeared  at  Drury 
Lane,  on  the  10th  of  October  1782.  Her  old  rivals  were  both  of  them  engaged  then  at  Covent 
Garden  theatre. 

Though  losses  in  the  profession  had  of  late  accumulated  about  Mr.  Garrick,  he  knew  his  own 
attraction,  and  determined  upon  making  brilliant  the  season  he  had  settled  should  he  his  last.  He 
revised  carefully  the  tragic  characters  which  he  had  long  discontinued,  and  baffled  even  the  gout 
itself,  to  be  “  every  inch  a  king”  in  Richard  and  in  Lear.  His  partial  friends  thought  even  “ young 
Hamlet ”  as  perfect  as  ever ;  and  in  comedy  he  had  discontinued  very  few  of  his  original  parts. 
The  £<  Correspondence”  preserved  will  show  the  first  people  in  the  land  begging  on  these  nights  a 
station  as  an  alms,  where  they  could  but  just  see  him  ;  and  the  keeper  of  the  box-book,  this  season, 
had  more  applications  for  places,  with  the  offer  of  tempting  douceurs  too,  than  any  first  Lord  of 
the  Treasury  in  the  corruptest  times.  His  closest  correspondent,  and  very  ingenious  friend,  Dr. 
John  Hoadly,  the  chancellor  of  Winchester,  died  of  gout  on  the  16th  of  March  1776;  and  Garrick 
confessed  that  he  grew  tired  of  his  cap  and  bells.  He  therefore  fixed  upon  the  10th  of  June,  to 
shut  the  scene  up  for  himself;  and  chose  Don  Felix  (after  some  struggle  between  comedy  and 
tragedy  for  his  last  breath)  to  close  the  long  succession  of  his  triumphs  as  an  actor.  As  the  profits 
of  the  night  were  for  the  Actors’  Fund,  so  the  bounty  of  his  last  act  seems  to  have  cheered  his  mind 
under  the  sense  of  his  personal  retirement ;  for  he  improved,  and  actually  spoke  one  of  his  most 
diverting  addresses  on  the  melancholy  night  of  his  departure.  Thus  he  jests  with  his  own  kindness 
to  the  veterans  of  the  stage : 

Shan’t  I,  who  oft  have  drench'd  my  hands  in  gore, 

Stabb’d  many,  poison’d  some,  beheaded  more, 

Who  numbers  slew  in  battle  on  this  plain, 

Shan’t  I,  the  slayer,  try  to  feed  the  slain ? 

Brother  to  all,  with  equal  love  I  view 
The  men  who  slew  me,  and  the  men  I  slew. 

After  a  brilliant  performance  of  Don  Felix,  in  the  Wonder,  Mr.  Garrick,  alone,  advanced  slowly 
to  the  front  of  the  stage,  to  address  the  audience  for  the  last  time — “  attention  held  them  mute.” 
Groups  of  the  performers  stood  on  the  stage  at  a  respectful  distance ;  and  the  side  scenes  displayed 
the  anxiety  of  others  to  witness  the  greatest  event  of  their  theatrical  time.  After  a  short  pause, 
and  an  involuntary  shock  which  he  subdued,  he  thus  expressed  himself 


l 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


Iviii 


“  Ladies  and  Gentlemen, 

“  It  has  been  customary  with  persons  under  my  circumstances,  to  address  you  in  a  farewell 
epilogue.  I  had  the  same  intention,  and  turned  my  thoughts  that  way;  but  indeed  I  found  myself 
then  as  incapable  of  writing  such  an  epilogue,  as  I  should  be  now  of  speaking  it. 

“  The  jingle  of  rhyme,  and  the  language  of  fiction,  would  but  ill  suit  my  present  feelings. 

“  This  is  to  me  a  very  awful  moment ;  it  is  no  less  than  parting  for  ever  with  those  from  whom 
I  have  received  the  greatest  kindness  and  favours,  and  upon  the  spot  where  that  kindness  and  those 
favours  were  enjoyed.  [ Here  for  a  moment  he  teas  unable  to  proceed  until  relieved  by  a  flood  of 
tears .] 

“  Whatever  may  be  the  changes  of  my  future  life,  the  deep  impression  I  have  of  your  kindness 
will  always  remain  here,  [putting  his  hand  to  his  breast ]  fixed  and  unalterable 

“  I  will  very  readily  agree  to  my  successors  ha%ing  more  skill  and  ability  for  their  station  than 
I  have  had  ;  but  I  defy  them  all  to  take  more  sincere,  and  more  uninterrupted  pains  for  vour 
favour,  or  to  be  more  truly  sensible  of  it,  than  is  your  most  obedient  and  grateful  servant.” 

He  then  bowed  respectfully  and  repeatedly,  to  all  parts  of  the  house  ;  and  with  much  hesi¬ 
tation,  and  a  lingering  step,  withdrew  for  ever  from  their  presence.  Bv  the  consent  of  his  partner, 
Mr.  Willoughby  Lacy,  Mr.  Garrick  paid  over  to  the  Actors1  Fund  the  whole  of  the  monies  received 
on  this  memorable  night.  He  gave  their  committee  a  house  in  Drury  Lane,  for  transacting  the 
business  of  the  concern  ;  and  defrayed  the  serious  expense  of  their  parliamentary  incorporation. 
Even  in  his  will  he  did  not  forget  his  quondam  subjects. 

“  Here  was  a  Caesar;  when  comes  such  another  ?- 

It  will  now  be  proper  to  notice  the  change  which  shortly  took  place  in  the  property  of  Drury 
Lane  Theatre.  Mr.  Garrick,  in  the  month  of  December  1775,  from  old  friendship,  offered  Mr. 
Colman  the  refusal  of  his  share.  Colman’s  answer  was  a  very  proper  one.  He  said  that  Garrick 
was  the  only  partner  he  could  think  of  taking.  “  If,  he  continues,  “  you  are  enabled  to  treat  for 
the  whole ,  or  mean  to  reserve  your  own  half,  we  must  talk  farther.  But  if  the  gentleman  you 
speak  of  is  ready  and  willing  to  buy  your  part  only,  and  there  is  no  more  upon  sale,  let  who  will 
buy  for  me,  and  I  wish  the  purchaser  a  merry  Christmas.”  The  parties  with  whom  Mr.  Garrick 
treated,  were  R.  B.  Sheridan,  Thomas  Linley,  and  Richard  Ford,  Esquires;  and  they  paid  over  to 
him  35,000/.  for  his  moiety,  on  the  24th  of  June  1776. 

The  absolute  fact  was  that  Sheridan  succeeded  Garrick,  and  soon  showed  that  he  intended 
to  be  the  only  manager  of  the  concern.  He  applied  himself  in  earnest  to  his  task,  and  if  he  did  not 
answer  every  man’s  expectation  by  writing  answers  to  letters,  he  exceeded  all  expectation  when  he 
at  last  produced  the  comedy,  which  so  fairly  excused  him.  The  new  concern  opened  on  the  21st  of 
September,  with  a  diverting  prelude  by  Colman,  called  iSew  Brooms.  But  mortality  now  raged 
among  the  professors  of  the  stage.  Tom  Weston,  whose  last  character  was  Hurry,  in  the  Maid  of 
the  Oaks,  led  the  funeral  train  on  the  12th  of  January.  Ned  SHUTER  died  on  the  1st  of  Novem¬ 
ber  1776  ;  on  the  11th  of  January  1777,  Spranger  Barry  also  expired  at  his  house  in  Norfolk 
Street,  and  was  buried  in  the  cloisters  of  Westminster  Abbey  ;  and  on  the  17th  of  April  died  the 
not  less  celebrated  Harry  Woodward,  who  has  been  but  imperfectly  followed  in  his  principal 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


lix 

characters.  Woodward  was,  however,  sixty-three,  and  had  a  rather  active  life,  for  he  succeeded, 
a  juste  titre ,  to  all  the  honours  of  Rich  in  Harlequin. 

But  Mr.  Garrick’s  retirement  from  the  management  did  not  estrange  him  from  the  interests  of 
the  stage,  and  he  undertook  to  become  “  the  prompter  before  the  curtain,”  by  a  series  of  essays  so 
signed,  which  his  friend  Bate  published  in  the  Morning  Post,  at  the  close  of  the  year  177G.  He 
insinuates  his  complaints  in  the  course  of  an  attack  upon  the  late  manager,  Mr.  Garrick.  “  The 
capriciousness,  unfeeling  importance,  and  pretended  indispositions''1  of  the  performers,  are  ascribed  to 
his  too  great  indulgence.  “  Had  he  been  political  or  resolute  enough  to  have  crushed  the  mischief 
in  the  birth,  we  should  not  now  have  an  actor  or  actress  dare  to  make  excuses  for  not  playing  parts 
they  have  long  acted,  and  others  withdrawing  themselves  from  characters  in  which  they  have  long 
pleased  ;  by  quitting  which  to  inferior  performers,  they  only  indulge  the  vanity  of  comparison, 
while  they  destroy,  with  the  public  entertainment,  the  property  of  their  employers.  Had  Air. 
Garrick  at  first  done  what  Air.  Sheridan  is  now  obliged  to  do  from  necessity, — bring  the  culprit  to 
the  bar  of  the  public,  instead  of  stopping  the  gap  HIMSELF,  he  would  have  transferred  to  the  pur¬ 
chasers  a  property  of  double  the  value. 

“  Mrs.  Cibber  (who  had  really  an  ill  state  of  health)  began  the  fashion.  Airs.  Clive  and  Airs. 
Pritchard,  with  great  deference  to  the  present  ladies,  were  both  inimitable  actresses,  and  never 
copied  Airs.  Cibber  in  disappointing  the  public ; — they  performed  their  characters  whenever  called 
upon,  without  notice  or  murmuring;  nor  were  any  frivolous  excuses  made  to  incense  the  audiences 
and  discredit  the  theatre.” 

Sheridan’s  course  in  the  management  was  exceedingly  characteristic  of  his  bold  and  manly 
nature.  The  modern  Congreve  absolutely  brought  himself  into  a  close  competition  with  his  only 
rival,  by  reviving,  after  a  necessary  purification,  the  Old  Bachelor,  Love  for  Love,  and  the  Wai/  of 
the  World.  He  also  altered  Vanbrugh’s  Relapse,  which  became  the  Trip  to  Scarborough.  On  the 
8th  of  Alay  1777,  the  School  for  Scandal  was  acted  for  the  first  time;  and  the  season  closed,  on 
the  7th  of  June,  with  its  twentieth  representation.  Even  the  genius  of  Sheridan  had  submitted 
his  play  to  Garrick’s  judgment,  with  rational  deference.  The  late  manager  spoke  of  it  every¬ 
where  with  pride,  and  attended  the  rehearsals,  as  if  it  had  been  his  own.  Mr.  Garrick  and  Air. 
Colman,  in  friendly  and  witty  competition,  wrote  his  prologue  and  epilogue,  and  his  play  was 
acted  with  a  rare  assemblage  of  perfection  in  all  its  characters.  Of  the  original  cast  the  repre¬ 
sentative  of  Maria  (Mrs.  Kemble)  is  still  living,  and  she  alone.  The  biographer  of  Air.  Garrick 
will  not  quit  the  subject  till  he  has  delivered  his  opinion  that  his  friend  Colman  here  certainly 
bore  off  the  palm.  The  epilogue  was  triumphant  every  way,  for  it  was  delivered  by  Airs.  Abington, 
the  finest  possible  speaker  of  point. 

The  retirement  of  Mr.  Garrick  was  dignified  by  every  charm  that  rank  and  accomplishments 
could  confer  upon  it.  One  of  the  first  of  ladies,  Lady  Georgiana  Spencer,  considered  him  as  her 
most  brilliant  guest.  The  hospitalities  of  the  gay  Rigby  awaited  him  at  Alistley,  and  Lord 
Camden  hailed  a  period  with  joy  when  he  could  profit  by  his  visits,  without  encroaching  upon  his 
business.  Nor  were  these  invitations  unreturned.  Garrick  had  rendered  Hampton  a  scene  of 
peculiar  enjoyment  :  as  a  companion  Air.  Garrick  hit  the  true  medium  ;  nothing  could  exceed  his 
love  of  the  bagatelle,  and  he  told  a  characteristic  story  with  all  his  professional  power.  Garrick's 

i  2 


Ix 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


wit  secured  his  friendships;  the  wit  of  Foote  rendered  his  society  unsafe.  You  laughed  with 
Garrick  without  pain  ;  the  wit  of  Foote  was  a  sacrifice,  and  there  was  always  a  victim  smoking 
upon  the  altar.  Garrick  had  studied  human  nature  thoroughly.  A  mansion  in  the  country  is 
nothing  without  a  feature.  Pope  brought  all  the  world  to  wonder  at  his  grotto,  which  he  feigned 
to  have  inspired  equally  the  patriotism  of  Marchmont  and  the  pensive  philosophy  of  St.  John. 
Garrick  had  raised  in  his  grounds  a  temple  to  Shakspeare ;  and  the  chisel  of  Roubiliac  at 
Hampton  inspired  an  interest  scarcely  less  intense  than  the  willows  of  Twickenham.  The  high 
priest  was  at  hand,  moreover,  to  expound  the  divinity.  Pope  was  a  fine  and  critical  “  essay  upon 
man."  Shakspeare  was  himself  human  nature  in  all  its  infinite  variety. 

Hannah  More,  with  great  dexterity,  had  contributed  to  the  popularity  of  Hampton,  by  an 
address  to  Dragon,  the  house-dog  of  Mr.  Garrick  :  that  it  might  be  in  every  hand,  it  was  published 
at  the  price  of  sixpence.  It  denied  the  pert  sarcasm  of  the  witling,  “  that  his  master  would  soon 
tire  of  solitude,  and  that  an  avarice  of  either  applause  or  money  would  carry  him  to  the  stage 
again  and  sums  up,  both  fairly  and  poetically,  the  rich  possessions  he  enjoys  “  in  wit,  in  sense, 
and  a  fame  that  cannot  die.” 

We  devote  a  single  paragraph  to  the  death  of  Foote,  which  occurred  at  Dover  on  the  20th  of 
October  1774.  He  had  let  his  theatre  happily  to  Colman.*  Foote  had  defeated  a  daring  attack 
upon  him  by  a  loose  woman  of  quality.  He  had  recovered  from  a  paralytic  affection,  which  first 
seized  him  upon  the  stage,  and  had  arrived  at  Dover,  intending  to  proceed  immediately  to  Calais. 
He  was,  however,  driven  to  his  bed  by  a  second  attack,  which  lasted  three  hours.  The  vital  powers 
were  now  stifled ;  he  breathed  one  deep  sigh,  and  expired.  Dover  still  preserves  a  tablet  placed 
there  to  his  memory  by  Jewell;  but  he  was  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey,  on  the  3rd  of  November 
following. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  health  had  continued  sufficiently  good  to  enable  him  to  enjoy  the  society  of  his 
friends  at  Hampton  in  the  fine  weather,  and  in  the  Adelphi  during  the  winter.  He  occasionally 
visited  the  House  of  Commons,  and  one  night,  during  a  stormy  debate,  the  standing  order  was 
enforced  to  clear  the  gallery.  Mr.  Garrick  kept  his  place  by  acclamation  of  the  whole  house  ;  and 
the  member  for  Shropshire,  who  moved  it,  underwent  the  castigation  of  Burke,  who  there  called  Mr. 
Garrick  the  great  master  of  elocution,  by  whose  lessons  they  had  all  profited.  Garrick  avenged 
himself  of  the  tasteless  member  by  some  verses,  which  reminded  him  of  that  unlucky  animal,  whose 
bray  every  hearer  of  delicacy  and  refinement  instinctively  flies. 

He  does  not  seem  to  have  troubled  himself  with  the  theatre  in  any  remarkable  degree.  He 
wrote  a  prologue  or  two,  gave  the  younger  Bannister  some  instructions  in  Zaphna ;  and  his  pupil 
acted  it  with  great  applause  to  Mrs.  Robinson’s  Palmyra.  That  beautiful  and  fascinating  woman 
has  long  quitted  us  :  but  Bannister  is  living  happily  and  vigorously,  and  would  be  young  Bannister 
still,  but  for  a  lameness  in  one  of  his  feet,  that  affects  his  gait,  it  is  true,  but  spares  his  gaiety. 

Mr.  Colman  was  to  pay  him,  during  his  life,  eight  hundred  pounds  every  half  year.  A  consideration 
was  to  be  made  for  his  services  as  an  actor  also.  Colman  bought  his  copyright  of  pieces  unpublished  at  the 
liberal  price  of  500/.  If  it  turned  out  favourably  for  Colman,  by  the  speedy  death  of  Foote,  he  was  to  shift 
for  himself  as  to  patent;  that  expired  with  Foote.  A  licence  he  might  think  he  could  obtain,  and  in  fact  he 
did  so,  and  to  the  present  time  the  Theatre  Royal  in  the  Haymarket  is  held  by  annual  licence  from  the  Lord 
Chamberlain. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


lxi 


The  reader  of  the  “  Correspondence”  will  be  rather  surprised  that  Mr.  Garrick  did  not  accept 
Henderson  at  once ;  but  the  truth  was,  the  latter  had  been  told  so  many  stories  of  young  actors 
hampered  by  his  management,  that  he  guai'ded  himself  with  all  the  jealousy  of  a  rival  negociation. 
The  great  manager  would  not  yield  a  particle  of  his  authority,  and  thus  Henderson’s  affair  dropped 
for  a  time.  But  this  was  not  the  worst  of  it.  The  Bath  actor  thought  himself  injured,  and  made 
his  friends  and  others  merry  with  Mr.  Garrick’s  peculiarities ;  and  as  he  really  possessed  an  admira¬ 
ble  vein  of  pleasantry,  he  invented  matter,  so  perfectly  in  his  style,  that  his  fancies  were  taken  by 
many  for  facts.  Garrick  lived  in  a  whispering  gallery,  and  these  freedoms  were  slammed  into  his 
ears  painfully  by  those  who  paid  their  court  to  him,  and  widened  the  breach,  that  better  men  would 
have  closed.  Henderson  however  arrived  in  town,  and  made  his  first  appearance  at  Colman’s,  on  the 
11th  of  June  1777,  in  the  character  of  Shylock.  Succeeding  eminently  there,  he  was  engaged  by 
Sheridan  without  difficulty. 

Garrick  now  lost  the  composer  of  his  J ubilee,  the  brother  of  his  heroine,  Mrs.  Cibber,  the  great 
Dr.  Arne,  who  expired  on  the  5th  of  March  1778.  Soon  was  developed  the  full  policy  of  Sheridan  ; 
the  theatre  had  fallen  into  dreadful  perplexities — a  call  of  the  prompter,  upon  any  actor  to  perform, 
caused  a  violent  cold,  and  an  impossibility  to  be  heard  across  the  pit.  Lacy,  therefore,  sold  his 
share  to  Sheridan  and  his  friends,  and  the  actors  miraculously  recovered.  At  the  close  of  the  sea¬ 
son,  on  the  28th  of  May,  the  School  for  Scandal  had  been  acted  sixty-five  times. 

The  readers  of  the  present  “  Correspondence,”  from  the  fulness  of  the  last  years  of  it,  will  tho¬ 
roughly  feel  the  degrees  of  estimation  in  which  Garrick  stood  with  a  great  variety  of  characters — 
generally  speaking,  they  all  did  themselves  honour.  Mr.  Garrick  had  none  to  acquire.  He  had 
literally  exhausted  the  whole  vocabulary  of  compliment. 

Two  incidents,  however,  call  for  notice,  and  for  reprobation  of  very  different  strength.  At  a 
dinner  of  the  Actors’  Fund,  Mr.  Garrick,  to  do  them  honour,  visited  his  former  friends,  elegantly 
dressed,  and  expecting  both  to  give  and  receive  pleasure  by  his  company.  As  to  himself,  Mr. 
Garrick  saw  no  signs  of  cordiality;  as  to  each  other,  the  actors  were  split  into  parties ;  and  where  it 
had  been  a  virtue  to  practise  the  dissimulation  of  the  stage,  they  indulged  themselves  in  exposing 
their  natural  infirmities.  Tom  King’s  explanation  and  apology  to  Garrick  are  at  least  well  intend¬ 
ed.  The  mortification  felt  by  Mr.  Garrick  he  in  fact  shows  by  his  letter  to  that  gentleman.  The 
other  occurrence  is  of  a  graver  die.  At  the  very  time  that  a  fatal  malady  was  dragging  him  to  the 
grave,  the  villanous  enmities  that  persecuted  him  were  threatening  his  moral  destruction,  and  endea¬ 
vouring  to  practise  upon  his  solicitude  for  his  reputation.  The  weapon  of  the  assassin  is  preserved 
in  the  “  Correspondence the  villain  himself  has  escaped  the  infamy  to  which  we  should  joyfully 
have  consigned  him. 

Having  closed  such  notice  of  the  stage  as  was  called  for  by  the  personal  interest  taken  in  it  by 
Mr.  Garrick,  our  attention  must  be  henceforth  confined  to  himself,  who  was  justly  considered  its 
most  distinguished  ornament. 

Mr.  Garrick  had  passed  the  Christmas  with  his  beloved  friends,  the  Spencers,  and  at  their  seat 
of  Althorp  in  Northamptonshire,  he  was  seized  with  a  severe  fit  of  the  complaint,  which  he  hail 
always  considered  to  be  the  stone.  The  eruptions  of  an  attendant  herpes  were  considered  of  no 
moment  by  the  faculty,  though  they  naturally  alarmed  Mrs.  Garrick  exceedingly.  He  soon  rallied, 


lxii 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


and  proceeded  gently  to  town,  with  the  best  hopes  of  an  early  and  complete  restoration.  On  Friday 
the  15th  of  January  1779,  he  reached  his  house  in  the  Adelphi.  The  Saturday  forenoon,  on  the 
arrival  of  Mr.  Lawrence,  his  apothecary,  Mr.  Garrick  detailed  the  symptoms  of  his  complaint.  Mr. 
Lawrence  told  him  not  to  be  uneasy  ;  but  finding  that  the  obstruction  continued,  he  called  Dr. 
Cadogan’s  attention  to  it,  who,  with  true  manly  sincerity,  told  his  patient,  that  the  issue  of  such 
attacks  was  extremely  uncertain,  and  if  he  had  any  worldly  affairs  to  settle,  he  had  better  arrange 
them  as  soon  as  possible.  Mr.  Garrick  assured  him  that  no  care  of  that  sort  remained  upon  his 
mind,  and  that  he  was  “  not  afraid  to  die  l”  Dr.  Heberden  and  Dr.  Warren  were  now  called  in, 
and  when  his  old  friend  Dr.  Schomberg  also  entered  the  apartment,  he  took  his  hand  with  a  placid 
smile,  and  saluted  him  in  the  language  of  Brutus : — 

“  Though  last,  not  least  in  love.” 

During  the  few  days  he  survived,  with  much  heavy  stupor  upon  the  brain,  he  had  intervals  of 
ease  and  perfect  composure,  and  conversed  with  his  wonted  ability  and  pointed  neatness.  Indeed 
such  is  the  eagerness  of  hope,  or  the  benevolence  of  nature,  that  he  felt  confident  he  should  recover , 
and  expressed  himself  to  that  effect  to  those  around  him.  But  such  a  delusion  is  common  to  the 
patient,  and  cheers  the  mind,  though  it  cannot  restore  the  frame.  He  died  on  Wednesday  morning, 
January  the  20th  1779,  at  eight  o’clock,  without  a  groan. 

When  we  call  to  mind  the  sensation  caused  by  the  death  of  this  great  man,  what  can  we  add  on 
such  an  occasion,  to  the  tears  of  his  friends,  Camden  and  Spencer  and  Rigby  ?  to  the  audible  sor¬ 
rows  of  Johnson  and  Burke,  equally  incapable  of  restraining  their  emotion  ?  to  the  deputations 

t 

from  the  two  theatres,  headed  by  Mr.  Harris  and  Mr.  Sheridan  ? 

Of  Mr.  Garrick’s  family,  his  brother  George  was  now  confined  by  his  last  illness,  to  follow  him 
speedily,  a  corpse  himself.*  His  nephews,  Carrington  and  Nathan  Garrick,  were  the  chief  mourn¬ 
ers.  Mr.  Garrick’s  remains  were  placed  at  the  base  of  Shakspeare’s  statue,  in  Poet’s  Corner,  on 
Monday  the  1st  of  February  1779.  The  monument,  long  after  erected  to  his  memory  there,  by 
Albany  Wallis,  seems  to  be  a  translation  into  marble ,  of  Sir  Joshua’s  famous  picture  of  Garrick 
between  Tragedy  and  Comedy.  It  has  some  verses  by  Pratt,  which  we  have  never  yet  read,  often 
as  we  have  mused  over  his  ashes.  What  we  have  read,  and  which  does  true  honour  to  both  the 
actor  and  the  man,  admits  of  some  happy  extracts,  and  we  shall  by  them  enrich  our  confined,  but 
we  hope  not  imperfect  memoir.  Mr.  Sheridan  seizes,  we  may  be  sure,  the  grand  points  of  impres¬ 
sion  attending  the  interment. 

“  The  throng  that  mourn’d,  as  their  dead  favourite  pass’d, 

The  grac'd  respect  that  claim’d  him  to  the  last ; 

While  Shakspeake’s  image  from  its  hallow’d  base, 

Seem’d  to  prescribe  the  grave  and  point  the  place.” 

But  he  speaks  of  the  actor’s  powers,  and  paints  them  from  the  life,  better  than  even  Reynolds 
has  done  : 

*  He  died  on  the  3rd  of  February,  two  days  after  the  funeral  of  his  brother.  Mr.  George  Garrick’s  first 
question  on  his  entering  the  theatre  after  a  temporary  absence  was  invariably,  “  Has  my  brother  wanted  me?” 
Old  Charles  Bannister,  with  a  sort  of  tender  pleasantry,  when  he  heard  of  his  death,  said,  “  His  brother 
wanted  him.” 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


lxiii 


“  The  Grace  of  Action — the  adapted  Mien 
Faithful  as  nature  to  the  varied  scene  ; 

The  expressive  glance — whose  subtle  comment  draws 
Entranc’d  attention,  and  a  mute  applause ; 

Gesture  that  marks,  with  force  and  feeling  fraught, 

A  sense  in  silence,  and  a  will  in  thought ; 

Harmonious  speech,  whose  pure  and  liquid  tone 
Gives  verse  a  music,  scarce  confess’d  its  own  ; 

Passion’s  wild  break — and  Frown  that  awes  the  sense, 

And  every  charm  of  gentler  eloquence — 

All  perishable.” 

It  was  ill-judged  to  recite  this  from  the  stage.  Audiences  go  to  theatres  to  be  amused ,  and  they 
must  take  their  amusement  from  such  actors  as  exist :  to  remind  them  of  Garrick  there ,  is  useless  to 
the  dead,  and  prejudicial  to  the  living.  The  manager  misled  the  poet. 

As  an  Actor,  Mr.  Sheridan  has  done  him  justice.  As  a  Manager,  he  appears  to  have  been 
liberal  to  his  authors,  and  friendly  to  his  actors.  The  profits  to  the  first,  greatly  exceed  what  they 
can  now  obtain  ;  when  the  theatre,  too,  held  at  most  330/.  His  performers  had  weekly  salaries  that 
seem  now  moderate,  but  were  at  that  time  sufficient ;  he  besides  wrote  for  their  benefits  and  never 
refused  to  act  for  them.  He  only  could  fill  the  house.  He  encouraged  of  either  authors  or  actors 
such  talent  as  he  could  find,  and  cherished  it,  until  they  alike  tried  to  invade  his  province  as  a  Ma¬ 
nager.  The  authors  were  for  subduing  his  judgment  to  the  fellow-feeling  of  their  brethren,  and  the 
actors  were  for  choosing  their  own  nights  for  performing,  and  would  discard  or  resume  whatever 
characters  became  obnoxious  or  desirable  from  their  whims  or  their  jealousies. 

As  a  Man,  perhaps  he  was  not  equally  perfect.  He  saw  his  object  singly,  and  perhaps  too 
fondly.  Sir  John  Hawkins,  we  believe,  tells  us  that  he  once  gave  Mr.  Garrick  some  intelligence 
very  material  to  his  interest,  but  he  could  not  secure  his  attention ;  a  new  pantomime  engrossed 
every  moment  of  his  time.  He  paid  great  regard  to  the  press,  he  even  meddled  with  newspaper 
property,  he  anticipated  attack  sometimes,  was  irritated  by  it  at  others,  and  never  practised  the 
policy  of  being  silent.  But  his  self-love  as  an  actor  was  not  alone  to  account  for  this.  He  wras  a 
proprietor  of  a  concern,  that  flourishes  but  by  the  “  popular  breath  to  engage  the  public  mind, 
therefore,  about  himself  and  his  theatre ,  was  essential  to  the  triumph  of  both.  He  had  writers  who 
were  engaged  in  his  interest  in  such  vehicles,  and  he  wrote  in  them  himself. 

Such  was  his  avarice  of  fame ;  but  his  love  of  money  seems  to  have  been  more  disputable  ;  or 
rather,  he  loved  affluence  for  its  independence,  and  the  power  it  bestow-ed  of  obliging  the  great,  and 
relieving  the  humble.  He  does  the  kindest  things  in  the  handsomest  way.  What  friend,  or  man 
of  merit,  ever  suffered  a  refusal?  We  have  their  letters  now  before  us.  His  bounties  to  those, 
who  could  not  solicit,  we  may  be  sure  were  equally  considerable,  though  never  recorded.  As  a 
man  of  fortune,  he  wras  occasionally  splendid,  but  never  profuse.  The  elements  of  his  friendship, 
wer e fidelity  and  truth.  If  an  improper  pledge  had  been  made,  in  the  view  to  do  him  service, 
however  his  friend  mistook  the  means,  he  ratified  his  engagement. 

When  we  speak  of  him  as  a  Husband,  he  is  a  model  to  every  lover  of  home ;  and  his  taste  as 
to  Mrs.  Garrick,  was  sanctioned  wherever  she  wras  seen  and  known,  in  the  first  societies  in  Europe. 
As  a  Master ,  his  servants  were  his  children.  As  a  Companion,  he  was  the  delight  ot  all ;  nor  did 
he  disdain  to  divert  even  the  poor  black  who  wraitcd  upon  him,  and  enjoyed  his  humour  as  much 


1  x  i  v 


BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR. 


on  the  staircase,  as  his  master  had  done  his  wit  in  the  company,  when  the  champagne  itself 
did  not  sparkle  brighter. 

Mr.  Garrick  was  one  of  the  most  accomplished  men  of  his  time.  He  had  the  classical  know¬ 
ledge  of  a  gentleman  well  educated  ;  and  he  cultivated  the  belles  lettres  assiduously  all  his  life.  He 
was  acquainted  with  the  Spanish,  the  Portuguese,  and  the  Italian  languages;  the  French  he  spoke, 
and  even  wrote,  with  elegance.  He  moved  with  the  utmost  ease  ;  he  fenced  with  much  neatness,  and 
danced  so  as  to  he  distinguished  even  among  the  most  graceful.  His  manners  were  suited  to  the 
occasion ;  and  he  was  a  master  in  all  the  science  of  address :  he  could  mould,  in  conversation,  the 
most  restive  to  his  purposes;  and  many  who  came  to  a  meeting,  that  they  might  unfold  their 
grievances,  quitted  him  without  a  hint  of  their  nature,  or  with  a  feeling  that  they  must  have  been 
imaginary. 

As  a  Writer,  we  can  hardly  tell  what  to  say  of  his  powers  :  we  do  not  know,  touching  either 
character,  thought,  or  expression,  how  much  was  really  his  in  the  plays  of  others.  The  two-act 
comedy  at  least  was  his  own.  Prologue  was  his  chief  province,  and  his  fertility  in  such  composi¬ 
tions,  inexhaustible.  Epigram  he  made  vigorous  court  to  ;  and  Epitaph ,  in  some  instances,  owned 
no  superior.  In  the  light  measures  of  Prior,  he  frolics  like  that  poet  himself,  or  Voltaire,  or 
Gresset  in  the  enchanting  Ver-  Vert.  To  sum  up  his  character  : — when  we  consider  the  space  he  oc¬ 
cupied  in  life,  his  fame  in  other  countries,  his  predominance  in  his  sphere,  the  numerous  circles  of 
which  he  may  be  said  to  have  been  the  idol,  the  illustrious  men  who  mixed  his  talents  with  their 
own  ;  that  he  was  never  subjected  to  a  single  reverse  of  fortune,  never  involved  in  any  touching 
calamity  ;  that  he  was  spared  the  pangs  of  family  connexion,  and  rejoiced  that  he  was  icithout 
children ;  in  spite  of  severe  annoyances  from  the  malignant,  and  some  chronic  disorders,  that  clung 
equally  to  him  in  his  course  ; — we  cannot  but  regard  him  as  having  enjoyed  one  of  the  happiest 
lots  that  ever  gratified  the  ambition,  or  rewarded  the  energy  of  a  human  being. 

We  have  but  little  more  to  add.  His  widow,  after  an  hourly  regret  of  forty-three  years,  sleeps 
with  him  in  the  same  sanctuary.  Mrs.  Garrick  distributed  in  the  year  1815,  among  the  descendants 
of  her  sister,  nearly  all  that  she  had  saved  out  of  her  income,  during  the  six-and-thirty  years 
elapsed  since  her  husband’s  death.  It  amounted  to  something  like  twelve  thousand  pounds. 
She  left  by  her  will  and  two  codicils,  the  amount  of  her  marriage  portion,  with  some  additions, 
in  legacies  amongst  her  friends,  to  her  servants,  and  to  various  charitable  institutions ;  bequeathing 
the  residue  to  her  niece  Madame  Elizabeth  de  Saar  of  Vienna,  for  her  life,  with  a  remainder  to  that 
lady’s  grand-children.  Madame  de  Saar,  was  the  Mademoiselle  Fiirst,  the  only  child  of  Mrs. 
Garrick’s  sister  Theresa,  who  visited  her  in  England  in  1776,  where  she  remained  till  Mr.  Garrick’s 
death,  and  had  a  legacy  of  1000/.,  under  his  will. 

The  executors  of  Mrs.  Garrick  were,  the  Rev.  Thomas  Rackett,  Rector  of  Spettisbury,  in 
Dorsetshire,  and  George  Frederick  Beltz,  Esquire,  Lancaster  Herald.  Her  remains,  agreeably  to 
her  direction,  were  deposited  privately  on  the  25th  of  October,  1822,  in  Westminster  Abbey,  near 
the  Cenotaph  of  Shakspeare,  and  in  the  same  grave  which  contains  those  of  her  husband. 

She  died  on  the  16th  of  October,  at  her  house  on  the  Adelphi  Terrace,  in  the  ninety-eighth 
year  of  her  age,  retaining  the  full  perfection  of  her  faculties,  to  the  last.  She  had  intended  to  oc¬ 
cupy  her  box  on  the  opening  of  Drury  Lane  Theatre,  and  absolutely  expired  in  her  chair,  after  a 
slight  indisposition. 


CONTENTS 


OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


Page 

Page 

Gilbert  Walmesley  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Colson 

1 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

.  42 

Ditto  Ditto 

2 

Ditto  Ditto 

. 

43 

Rev.  T.  Newton  to  Mr 

Garrick  . 

.  3 

Gilbert  Walmesley  to  Ditto 

• 

.  44 

Ditto 

Ditto 

4 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto  . 

• 

45 

Ditto 

Ditto 

.  5 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

.  47 

Ditto 

Ditto 

6 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

. 

48 

Ditto 

Ditto 

.  7 

Agreement  between  James  Lacy 

and  Ditto 

.  50 

Ditto 

Ditto  . 

8 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Pritchard 

. 

53 

Ditto 

Ditto 

.  9 

Mr.  S.  Foote  to  Mr.  Garrick 

•  • 

.  54 

To  Mr.  Garrick 

, 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Foote 

. 

55 

Ditto 

•  •  • 

.  10 

J.  Cleland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

.  56 

Ignoto  to  Ditto 

,  , 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Hogarth  . 

• 

59 

To  Mr.  Garrick  . 

•  •  • 

.  12 

The  Marquis  of  Hartington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  60 

Mr.  T.  Sheridan  to  Ditto 

15 

Ditto 

Ditto 

61 

Mrs.  Frances  Sheridan  to  Mrs.  Victor 

.  16 

Ditto 

Ditto 

.  62 

To  Mr.  Garrick 

19 

Rev.  W.  Warburton  to 

Ditto 

ib. 

J.  B.  to  Ditto 

•  •  • 

.  20 

Ditto 

Ditto 

.  64 

To  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

21 

Arthur  Murphy  to 

Ditto 

65 

L.  M.  N.  to  Ditto 

.  22 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Arthur  Murphy 

.  66 

P.  W .  to  Ditto 

23 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

67 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

•  •  • 

.  24 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

.  68 

To  Mr.  Garrick 

,  , 

26 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

• 

69 

Ditto 

. 

.  28 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Paul  Vaillant,  Esq.  . 

.  70 

L.  M.  N.  to  Ditto 

,  , 

29 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

71 

Henry  Aston  to  Ditto 

•  •  • 

.  30 

Spranger  Barry  to  Ditto 

• 

.  ib. 

The  Duke  of  Bedford  to  Ditto 

31 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

• 

72 

R.  M.  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

.  73 

A.  B.  to  Ditto 

#  . 

32 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Ditto  . 

• 

ib. 

Margery  Pinch  wife  to  Ditto 

.  33 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

.  74 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto  . 

34 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

• 

76 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Ditto 

.  79 

Lord  Rocbford  to  Ditto 

35 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  R.  Dodsley 

• 

ib 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto 

.  36 

Mr.  R.  Dodsley  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

38 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  R.  Dodsley 

• 

80 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

39 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

• 

81 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  40 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  82 

Spranger  Barry  to  Ditto 

41 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

• 

83 

VOL.  I. 


A 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Page 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

84 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Mr.  Garrick 

120 

Mr.  J.  Beard  to  Mr.  T.  Neville  . 

.  ib. 

Joseph  Reed  to  Mrs.  Dancer 

.  ib. 

Mr.  T.  Neville  to  Mr.  T.  Beard 

85 

Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  Garrick 

121 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  86 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  121 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

87 

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Ditto 

122 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Ditto 

.  88 

Arthur  Murphy’s  Note 

.  123 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Ditto 

89 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Lyttelton 

ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Charles  Holland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  124 

Ditto  Ditto 

90 

Dr.  John  Delap  to  Ditto 

125 

Ditto  to  the  Managers  of  Drury  Lane 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  126 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

91 

Joseph  Reed  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  92 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  127 

Ditto  Ditto 

94 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

128 

Rev.  Dr.  Robertson  to  Ditto 

.  95 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

.  129 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Ditto 

96 

The  Duke  of  Newcastle  to  Mr.  Garrick 

130 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

97 

Dr.  J.  Brown  to  Ditto 

131 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  98 

H.  H.  to  Ditto 

.  132 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  H.  H. 

135 

Rev.  Mr.  Mason  to  Rev.  Dr.  Warburton 

.  99 

H.  H.  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  137 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

ib. 

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Ditto 

138 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  100 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Palmer 

.  139 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Mr.  Garrick 

141 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  . 

.  102 

Charles  Holland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  142 

Francis  Gentleman  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

'  James  Love  to  Ditto  . 

ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  104 

The  Mulberry-tree  at  Stratford  . 

.  145 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

ib. 

Dr.  J.  Brown  to  Mr.  Garrick  • 

146 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  105 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  147 

Rev.  Dr.  Warburton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Dr.  T.  A.  Arne  to  Ditto 

148 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  . 

.  106 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Arne 

.  149 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

T.  B.  to  Mr.  Garrick 

150 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  107 

Dr.  Delap  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Dr.  J.  Brown  to  Ditto 

152 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  108 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  154 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

To  Mr.  Garrick  .... 

.  109 

Henry  Mossop  to  Mr.  George  Garrick 

.  155 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

111 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Garrick 

156 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  . 

.  112 

Dr.  Fordyce  to  Ditto 

.  157 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

113 

Mr.  Hall  to  Ditto 

159 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Hall 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Quin 

160 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  . 

.  114 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  161 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

ib. 

Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  George  Garrick  . 

.  115 

Mr.  Davies  to  Mr.  George  Garrick 

.  162 

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Davies  . 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Davies  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

116 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Davies 

163 

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Ditto 

.  117 

Mr.  Davies  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  164 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Dr.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

167 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  118 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

119 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

168 

CONTENTS. 


Page 

Page 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  168 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Foote 

• 

221 

Mr.  Powell  to  Ditto 

169 

Mr.  Foote  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Ditto 

.  170 

Mr.  Paterson  to  Ditto 

223 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lady  Spencer 

171 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Paterson 

.  ib. 

Signor  Joseph  Baretti  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  172 

Ditto  to  Arthur  Murphy 

224 

Ditto  Ditto 

173 

Mr.  Love  to  Mr.  Hopkins 

.  ib. 

Mr.  J.  Minifie  to  Ditto  . 

.  174 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Love 

225 

Signor  Joseph  Baretti  to  Ditto 

175 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  226 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Arden 

.  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Robert  Brompton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

176 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  E.  Griffith  . 

.  227 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Powell 

.  177 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Dr.  J.  Brown  to  Mr.  Garrick 

178 

Sheridan  Davenport  to  Ditto 

.  228 

Count  Marsili  to  Ditto 

.  180 

Mr.  George  Garrick  to  Mr.  Love 

229 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

182 

Mr.  Love  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  R.  Jephson  . 

.  183 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Love 

230 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Dr.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Colman  to  Ditto 

231 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Johnson  . 

186 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  232 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  an  English  Gentleman  at 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  E.  Griffith 

233 

Paris  to  his  friend  in  London 

.  .  ib. 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

.  234 

Edmund  Burke  to  Mr.  Garrick 

188 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  E.  Griffith 

235 

Mr.  G.  Graham  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  B.  Victor  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Edmund  Burke  to  Ditto 

189 

The  Rev.  T.  Kennedy  to  Ditto 

237 

Mr.  Garrick  to  General  Fitzwilliams 

.  .  190 

Mr.  Garrick’s  note  as  to  Victor’s  Tragedy 

.  238 

Dr.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

191 

Mr.  B.  Victor  to  Mr.  Garrick 

239 

General  Fitzwilliams  to  Ditto 

.  192 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

.  240 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Graham  . 

193 

Mr.  C.  Yorke  to  Ditto 

241 

Mr.  G.  Graham  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  .  ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Graham  . 

195 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

242 

Mr.  Samuel  Sharp  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  196 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  243 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto 

197 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

244 

Dr.  Brown  to  Ditto 

.  198 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Dr.  Hoadly  to  Ditto  . 

199 

Ditto  Ditto 

245 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto 

.  200 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Cibber  . 

201 

Mr.  J.  Shebbeare  to  Ditto 

246 

Robert  Bristow  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  202 

Mr.  C.  Yorke  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Robert  Turbutt  to  Ditto 

202 

Mr.  Potter  to  Ditto  . 

247 

C.  Clive  to  Ditto 

.  203 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Potter 

.  248 

Dr.  J.  Brown  to  Ditto 

204 

Dr.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

ib. 

Mr.  Clutterbuck  to  Ditto 

.  205 

John  Wilkes  to  Ditto 

.  249 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto 

207 

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Townshend  to  Ditto 

251 

Edmund  Burke  to  Ditto 

.  208 

Mi.  J.  Reed  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mrs.  Cibber  to  Ditto 

209 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick  . 

.  252 

G.  Colman,  Esq.  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

253 

Mr.  Garrick  to  George  Colman,  Esq. 

212 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  254 

Mr.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  214 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  George  Steevens  to  Ditto 

216 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  255 

Dr.  Brown  to  Ditto 

.  218 

Ditto  Ditto 

t 

250 

Dr.  Franklin  to  the  Printer  of  the  St.  James’s 

Dr.  Shebbeare  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  257 

Chronicle 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Shebbeare 

• 

ib. 

Dr.  J.  Brown  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  219 

Mr.  C.  Dingley  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  258 

A  2 


CONTENTS. 


Mr.  C.  Dingley  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  James  Love  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Griffiths 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  James  Love  . 

Mr.  J.  Reed  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lady  Camden 
Lady  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Lady  Camden 
Mr.  G.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  H.  Kelly  to  Ditto 
Thomas  King  to  Ditto 
Rev.  T.  Francklin  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Colman 
Mr.  H.  Kelly  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Griffith 
Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  W.  Whitehead  to  Ditto 
Lord  Pomfret  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Wilkes  to  Ditto 
Dr.  Warner  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Bickerstaff 
Rev.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto  . 

Lord  Pomfret  to  Ditto 
Dr.  Wrarner  to  Ditto 
Mr.  G.  S.  Carey  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto  . 

Mr.  H.  Kelly  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Barry  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Pomfret 

Mr.  Charles  Yorke  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  George  Garrick 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  . 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  George  Garrick 

Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  George  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 
Mr.  Richard  Cumberland  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Richard  Cumberland 
Mr.  Richard  Cumberland  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Ditto 
Lord  Pembroke  to  Ditto 
Rev.  T.  Beigbton  to  Ditto 
Rev.  T.  Beighton  to  Sir  Edward  Hawke  . 
Mrs.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  Walker  to  Ditto 
Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Joseph  Baretti  to  Ditto  . 


Page 

Mr.  Joseph  Baretti  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  292 

Mr.  Richard  Cumberland  to  Ditto  .  .  293 

Lord  Pembroke  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Mansfield  .  .  ib. 

Lord  Mansfield  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  294 

To  Captain  Thomas  Riddell  of  Pocock  .  295 

Mr.  Sharp  relative  to  Baretti  .  .  .  296 

Mr.  M.  Frampton  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  298 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Charles  Yorke  .  .  .  298 

Mr.  W.  Mason  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  299 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Kean  O'Hara  to  Ditto  .  .  .  300 

Lord  and  Lady  Mansfield  to  Dr.  Turton  .  .301 

Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto  ....  302 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  .  .  303 

Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Spranger  Barry  .  .  304* 

Mr.  Richard  Rigby  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  .  .  .  305 

Ditto  Ditto  •  .  .  306 

Mr.  A.  Dow  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  ib. 

The  Earl  of  Bute  to  Ditto  .  .  .  307 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  308 

Thomas  Gainsborough  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Ditto  .  .  .  309 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  .310 

Mr.  Paterson  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Paterson  .  .  .311 

T.  G.  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Paterson  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick  .  .  .312 

Rev.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  313 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto  ....  314 
Mr.  Alexander  Dow  to  Ditto  .  .  .  315 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto  .  .  .  3] 6 

Mr.  Alexander  Dow  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .317 

Antonio  Carara  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  Lennox  to  Ditto  .  .  .319 

Mr.  Charles  Yorke  to  Ditto  .  .  .  320 

Mrs.  Catherine  Clive  to  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  E.  Griffiths  to  Ditto  .  .  .321 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  E.  Griffith  .  .  jb. 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  322 

Mr.  Wheler  to  Ditto  ....  ib. 

A  copy  of  the  freedom  of  a  Burgess  given  to  Ditto  323 
Umbra  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Ditto  .  .  .  324 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  326 


Page 

259 

ib. 

260 

ib. 

261 

262 

263 

ib. 

ib. 

264 

265 

ib. 

266 

267 

268 

ib. 

269 

270 

271 

272 

ib. 

273 

ib. 

274 

ib. 

275 

ib. 

276 

ib. 

277 

ib. 

ib. 

279 

ib. 

280 

281 

ib. 

283 

ib. 

284 

ib. 

ib. 

285 

ib. 

286 

287 

288 

ib. 

289 

290 

292 


CONTENTS. 


Charles  Macklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Page 

327 

Mr.  Hopkins  to  Mr.  Barry 

Page 
.  369 

Dr.  J.  Delap  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

ib. 

Mr.  Gainsborough  to  Ditto 

328 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Spranger  Barry 

.  370 

Antonio  Carara  to  Ditto  . 

• 

329 

Mr.  N.  Ramus  to  Mr.  Garrick 

371 

Arthur  Murphy  to  I.  Bickerstaff,  Esq. 

ib. 

Mr.  J.  Reed  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

• 

330 

Mr.  A.  Dow  to  Ditto 

373 

Mr.  Burke  to  Ditto  . 

331 

Frank  Aickin  to  Ditto 

.  374 

To  David  Garrick,  Esq.  with  a  Wax  Reel 

. 

332 

Mr.  Sturtz  to  Ditto  . 

375 

Mr.  Burke  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Ditto  . 

.  376 

Mr.  J.  Sharp  to  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

333 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

334 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Mr.  Garrick 

•  377 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  T.  Francklin 

• 

335 

Mr.  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

378 

Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 

336 

Rev.  C.  Jenner  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  J.  Sharp  to  Ditto 

. 

337 

Mrs.  Celesia  to  Ditto 

379 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

338 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  380 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

. 

339 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

381 

Mrs.  Clive  to  Ditto  . 

341 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Dr.  Scrope  to  Ditto 

. 

342 

Rev.  C.  Jenner  to  Ditto 

382 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  King 

343 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  383 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

384 

The  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Burgesses  of  the  town 

Mr.  W.  Elsden  to  Ditto  . 

.  385 

of  Stratford-upon-Avon  to  Mr.  Garrick, 

345 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Ditto 

,  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  the  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and 

Bur- 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

.  386 

gesses  of  the  town  of  Stratford-on-Avon 

. 

ib. 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

387 

Mr.  Sturtz  to  Mr.  Garrick 

346 

An  Anonymous  Adviser  . 

.  388 

An  account  of  “  Zenobia,” 

• 

347 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Dr.  Hiffernan  to  Ditto 

.  390 

Mr.  J.  Sharp  to  Ditto 

• 

348 

Mr.  Foote  to  Ditto 

391 

Mr.  West  to  Ditto 

350 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Foote 

.  392 

Mr.  T.  Davies  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Mr.  Garrick 

393 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Havard  to  Ditto 

. 

351 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Mr.  Garrick 

394 

Mr.  J.  Ward  to  Ditto 

352 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

.  395 

Mr.  Smith  to  Ditto 

. 

353 

Ditto  Ditto 

396 

Mr.  Burke  to  Ditto  . 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mrs.  Celesia  to  Ditto 

. 

354 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Mr.  Garrick 

397 

Mr.  WTarton  to  Ditto 

355 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  398 

Mr.  Sturtz  to  Ditto 

• 

356 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  as  to  Mdlle.  Clairon 

358 

Mrs.  Celesia  to  Ditto 

.  399 

Mr.  H.  Sturtz  to  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

359 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

400 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Charles  Macklin 

361 

Mr.  R.  Burke  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  401 

Mr.  Sharp  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

362 

Sir  E.  Hawke  to  Ditto 

Cl 

o  : 

Mr.  Smith  to  Ditto 

363 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  E.  Hawke 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

364 

Dr.  Burney  to  Mr.  Garrick 

403 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Clutterbuck,  &c. 

365 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto  . 

.  405 

ib. 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

A.  B.  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Griffith 

366 

Lady  Spencer  to  Ditto 

.  407 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

. 

367 

Mr.  Garrick  to  *  *  *  *  * 

408 

Rev.  R.  Jago  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

ib. 

Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Rev.  Dr.  Warton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

368 

Rev.  E.  A.  Loyd  to  Ditto 

.  409 

Mr.  Thomas  Warton  to  Ditto 

369 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

.  41 1 

CONTENTS. 


The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Page 

412 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  413 

The  Archbishop  of  York  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Eaves  to  Mr.  Wheler 

.  414 

Lord  Suffolk  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

415 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Celesia  to  Ditto 

415 

Lord  Pembroke  to  Ditto 

.  416 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

417 

Mr.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

418 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  418 

Mr.  Thomas  Warton  to  Ditto 

420 

Mr.  W.  Mickle  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Clutterbuck  to  Ditto 

.  422 

Mr.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  T.  Kynaston  to  Ditto 

.  423 

Mr.  H.  Cooper  to  Ditto 

424 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  425 

Mr.  Richard  Rigby  to  Ditto  . 

427 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Willmot  to  Ditto 

428 

jyjr.  R.  Burke  to  Ditto 

.  429 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

430 

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  to  Ditto 

.  431 

Dr.  Beattie  to  Ditto  . 

432 

Lord  Lyttelton  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

433 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  434 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Ditto 

435 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  437 

Mr.  F.  Gentleman  to  Ditto  . 

438 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  F.  Gentleman 

.  439 

Lord  Lyttelton  to  Mr.  Garrick 

440 

Mr.  Garrick  to  R.  W.  Hawkins  . 

.  ib. 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Mr.  Garrick 

442 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Junius  to  Ditto 

443 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Woodfall 

.  ib. 

Mr.  H.  S.  Woodfall  to  Mr.  Becket 

444 

Mr.  Brooke  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  445 

Mrs.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Ditto 

.  446 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

447 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto  . 

.  448 

Mr.  Garrick  to  *  *  *  *  * 

449 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  ib. 

To  Mr.  Steevens 

450 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

451 

Page 

Mr.  J.  Palmer  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  455 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  T.  Francklin 

456 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  457 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Chatham 

458 

Lord  Chatham  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  459 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

460 

Dr.  Beattie  to  Ditto 

.  461 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Francklin 

463 

Dr.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  464 

A  Surgeon  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

The  Managers  of  the  Calcutta  Theatre 

to  Mr. 

Garrick  .... 

.  465 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Cleland  to  Ditto 

.  466 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Cleland 

469 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  470 

Mr.  W.  Hillas  to  Ditto  .  . 

471 

Mr.  Gainsborough  to  Ditto 

.  472 

Isaac  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  John  Fielding 

.  474 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  to  Mr.  Garrick 

475 

Lord  Hyde  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Col.  Dow 

ib. 

Col.  Dow  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  476 

Mr.  J.  Moody  to  Mr.  George  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  477 

Mr.  Stanley  to  Ditto 

479 

Mr.  J.  Wallis  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  T.  Fitzmaurice  to  Ditto 

480 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

.  482 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  483 

Mr.  Burke  to  Ditto 

484 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Camden 

.  485 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Barry 

ib. 

Mr.  T.  Fitzmaurice  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  486 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

487 

Mr.  D.  W - s  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Thomas  Linley  to  Ditto 

488 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

489 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Ditto 

.  490 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  King 

494 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  495 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Mr.  Garrick 

496 

Mr.  J.  Wickins  to  Ditto 

.  499 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  500 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

503 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Ditto 

.  503 

Mr.  T.  Gainsborough  to  Ditto 

504 

CONTENTS. 


Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Ditto  Ditto 

Rev.  P.  Stockdale  to  Ditto 
Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto  , 

Dr.  William  Robertson  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Henderson 

Rev.  P.  Stockdale  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Spranger  Barry 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Mr.  George  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Spranger  Barry  . 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy 
Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Read 
Mr.  T.  Fitzmaurice  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Henderson  to  Ditto 
Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  R.  Kelly  to  Hugh  Kelly,  Esq. 

Dr.  Goldsmith  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 
Mr.  T.  Wilkes  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Woodfall 
Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Colman  to  Ditto  .... 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  E.  Griffith 
Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Dr.  Hawkesworth  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Hawkesworth 
Rev.  Mr.  Maty  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

Dr.  Beattie  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Ditto  .  .  .  . 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto 
Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  His  Excellency  Richard  Penn,  Esq 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Smith 

To  Mr.Garrick  Mr.  Cleland’s  respects 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Smith 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Mr.  J.  Clutterbuck  to  Ditto 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 


Mr.  Cumberland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Page 

551 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Cumberland 

.  552 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Dr.  Berkenhout  to  Ditto 

.  553 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

.  o  5  4 

Earl  Clanricarde  to  Ditto 

.  555 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

•  556 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Foote 

557 

Mr.  Foote  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  558 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Smith 

.  559 

Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  N.  Cowper  to  Ditto 

.  560 

Rev.  P.  Stockdale  to  Mr.  Garrick 

561 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

.  562 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

563 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Shelburne 

.  564 

Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Smith 

.  565 

Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Ditto 

.  566 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Smith 

.  567 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  568 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

J.  Home,  Esq.  to  Ditto 

569 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  570 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  571 

Ditto  Ditto 

573 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lady  Hertford 

.  574 

Rev.  P.  Stockdale  to  Mr.  Garrick 

575 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  576 

Lady  Hertford  to  Ditto 

577 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Cautherly 

.  ib. 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  578 

Mr.  G.  Faulkner  to  Ditto 

.  579 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

5S0 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  581 

Lady  Hertford  to  Ditto 

582 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

583 

Mr.  W.  Woodfall  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Woodfall 

.  5S4 

Mr.  W.  Woodfall  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  585 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

586 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

588 

Mr.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

589 

Page 

504 

505 

ib. 

506 

507 

508 

509 

510 

511 

512 

513 

514 

516 

517 

ib. 

518 

519 

ib. 

521 

522 

ib. 

524 

525 

526 

527 

528 

530 

531 

532 

ib. 

533 

ib. 

534 

535 

536 

ib. 

ib. 

538 

539 

ib. 

542 

.  ib. 

543 

544 

545 

546 

547 

548 

ib. 

549 

550 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  590 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto  .  .  .  591 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  592 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto  .  .  .  594 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto  .  .  .  595 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto  .  .  .  596 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  597 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  G.  C.  Swan  to  Ditto  .  .  .598 

Mr.  David  Ross  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  600 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  D.  Ross  .  .  .601 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Lawrence  .  .  .  602 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  T.  Francklin  .  .  608 

Mrs.  C.  Clive  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  604 

Mr.  Madan  to  Ditto  .  .  .  605 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto  .  .  .  606 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  607 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Shirley  to  Ditto  .  .  .  609 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Hopkins  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  P.  Stockdale  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  C.  Clive  to  Ditto  .  .  .  610 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  Grey  Cooper  .  .611 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Lacy  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .612 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Lacy  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Lacy  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto  .  .  .613 

Censor  Dramaticus  to  *****  *  .  .  ib. 

Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  614 

Note  from  Mr.  Garrick  to  his  brother  on  the  above  615 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Campbell  .  .  .  ib. 

Dr.  Campbell  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  T.  Francklin  .  .616 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Ditto  .  .  .618 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto  .  .  .619 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Ditto  .  .  .621 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Yates  .  .  .  623 

Mrs.  Yates  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Yates  .  .  .  ib. 


Instruction  for  Drawing  Mrs.  Yates’s  articles  . 
Agreement  with  Mrs.  Abington,  &c. 

Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  Hopkins  . 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

Ditto  Ditto 

Mrs  Yates  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Yates 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Delap 
Mrs.  Pye  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Rev.  Mr.  Nott  to  Ditto 
Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Ditto 
Theatrical  Fund 
Mr.  D.  Ross  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  D.  Ross 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  T.  Francklin 
Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mrs.  Mary  Latter  to  Ditto 
Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 
Mr.  G.  C.  Swan  to  Ditto 
Mr.  P.  Stockdale  to  Ditto 
Mr.  W.  Brereton  to  Ditto 
Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto  .  ... 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto  . 

Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  to  Ditto 
Critique  on  his  Nephew’s  tragedy 
Mrs.  Charlotte  Lennox  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 
Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 
Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  F.  Aickin  to  Ditto 
Mr.  J.  F.  Richardson  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  F.  Aickin 
Mr.  F.  Aickin  to  Ditto 
Mr.  J.  Whitehead  to  Ditto 
Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  F.  Aickin 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Cumberland  . 

Mr.  W.  Hawkins  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Answer  to  the  preceding 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 
Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Mr.  Garrick 


Page 

624 
ib. 

625 
ib. 

626 
ib. 
ib. 

627 

628 

629 

630 
ib. 

631 
ib. 

632 
ib. 

633 

635 

636 

638 
ib. 

639 

641 
ib. 

642 

643 

644 

645 

646 
ib. 

647 
ib. 

648 

649 
ib. 

650 

651 
ib. 

652 
ib. 

653 

654 

655 
ib. 

656 

657 

658 
ib. 

659 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


OF 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


GILBERT  WALMESLEY  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  COLSON. 

[When  Davies  published  his  Life  of  Mr.  Garrick,  he  gave  such  copies  of  Mr.  Walmesley’s  letters  as  he 
found  in  print.  But  he  did  not  know  the  date  of  the  first  of  the  two,  and,  as  the  reader  will  now  see,  had 
not  more  than  about  half  of  it  to  publish.  Mr.  Garrick’s  friend,  Dr.  Sharp,  conferred  upon  him  the  favour 
of  placing  in  his  own  possession  the  originals  themselves,  from  which  they  are  now  correctly  printed.  The 
portion  which  Davies  did  give,  I  should  add,  is  not  accurately  copied,  and  some  of  the  terms  used  by  the 
writer  affectedly  changed. 

The  claims  of  the  great  men  of  the  last  age  have  yet  suffered  little  inattention.  We  still  linger  with 
fond  delight  upon  their  excellencies,  mental  and  moral ;  and  their  harmless  peculiarities  as  often  become  the 
theme  of  conviviality  as  the  eccentricities  of  their  literary  or  scientific  successors.  Among  such  worthies,  the 
praise  of  Johnson  has  assigned  a  place  to  the  wise  and  amiable  Registrar  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  at 
Lichfield,  Gilbert  Walmesley.  Such  is  the  return  which  genius  can  make  for  early  favours.  Walmesley 
sowed  benevolence,  and  reaped  immortality. — Ed.] 


Lichfield,  Feb.  5,  1736. 

MY  DEAR  OLD  FRIEND, 

Haying  not  been  in  town  since  the  year  thirty-one,  you  will  the  less  wonder  at 
seeing  a  letter  from  me.  But  I  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  of  you  sometimes  in 
the  prints,  and  am  glad  to  see  you  are  daily  throwing  in  your  valuable  contributions 
to  the  Republic  of  Letters. 

But  the  present  occasion  of  my  writing  is  a  favour  I  have  to  ask  of  you.  My 
neighbour,  Captain  Garrick,  (who  is  an  honest,  valuable  man,)  has  a  son,  who  is  a 
very  sensible  young  fellow,  and  a  good  scholar,  and  whom  the  Captain  hopes,  in  some 
two  or  three  years,  he  shall  be  able  to  send  to  the  Temple,  and  breed  to  the  Bar. 
But,  at  present,  his  pocket  will  not  hold  out  for  sending  him  to  the  Lniversity.  1 
have  proposed  your  taking  him,  if  you  think  well  of  it,  and  your  boarding  him,  and 
instructing  him  in  mathematics,  and  philosophy,  and  humane  learning.  He  is  now 

B 


VOL.  i. 


9 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


nineteen,  of  sober  and  good  dispositions,  and  is  as  ingenious  and  promising  a  young 
man  as  ever  I  knew  in  my  life.  Few  instructions  on  your  side  will  do,  and  in  the 
intervals  of  study,  he  will  be  an  agreeable  companion  for  you.  His  father  will  be 
glad  to  pay  you  whatever  you  shall  require,  that  is  within  his  reach;  and  I  shall 
think  myself  very  much  obliged  to  you  into  the  bargain.  This  young  gentleman, 
you  must  know,  has  been  much  with  me,  ever  since  he  was  a  child,  almost  every 
day  ;  and  1  have  taken  a  pleasure  often  in  instructing  him,  and  have  a  great  affection 
and  esteem  for  him  ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  soon  have  the  like,  if  it  suit 
with  your  convenience  to  take  him  into  3rour  family.  You  will  be  so  good,  as  soon 
as  you  have  considered  of  this  affair,  to  write  to  me. 

Having  changed  my  condition  of  life,  (being  tired  since  the  death  of  my  brother 
of  living  quite  alone,)  my  chances  for  seeing  London  are  now  become  more  hazardous 
than  ever.  But  you  know  I  never  came  thither  in  my  life,  without  enquiring 
after  you  ;  and  therefore  I  am  not  without  hopes,  especially  if  Davy  Garrick  comes 
to  be  37our  pupil,  but  you  will  contrive  to  spend  a  month  or  six  weeks  writh  me  at 
Lichfield  in  the  summer.  I  shall  ahvays  have  a  bed  for  you,  and  a  stall  for  your 
horse ;  and  nothing,  I  do  assure  you,  in  life  will  give  me  a  greater  pleasure. 

Captain  Garrick,  and  the  young  gentleman,  beg  your  acceptance  of  their  com¬ 
pliments  ;  and  I  am  ever,  with  the  greatest  truth,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  old  friend,  and  humble  servant, 

Gilbert  Walmesley. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Colson, 

At  his  house  in  Rochester,  Kent. 

By  way  of  London.  A  single  sheet. 


GILBERT  WALMESLEY  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  COLSON. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lichfield,  March  2,  1736-7. 

I  had  the  favour  of  yours,  and  am  extremely  obliged  to  you ;  but  cannot  say 
I  have  a  greater  affection  for  you  upon  it  than  I  had  before,  being  long  since  so  much 
endeared  to  you,  as  well  by  an  early  friendship  as  by  your  many  excellent  and  valu¬ 
able  qualifications ;  and  had  I  a  son  of  my  own,  it  would  be  my  ambition,  instead 
of  sending  him  to  the  University,  to  dispose  of  him  as  this  young  gentleman  is. 
He  and  another  neighbour  of  mine,  one  Mr.  Johnson,  set  out  this  morning  for 
London  together  :  Davy  Garrick  to  be  with  you  early  the  next  week  ;  and  Mr. 
Johnson  to  try  his  fate  with  a  tragedy,  and  to  see  to  get  himself  employed  in  some 
translation,  either  from  the  Latin  or  the  French.  Johnson  is  a  very  good  scholar 
and  poet,  and  I  have  great  hopes  will  turn  out  a  fine  tragedy  writer.  If  it  should 
any  ways  lie  in  your  way,  I  doubt  not  but  you  would  be  ready  to  recommend  and 
assist  your  countryman. 

If  I  cannot  be  so  happy  as  to  see  you  here  this  summer,  I  shall  depend  upon 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


3 


it  the  next ;  and  your  pupil’s  coming  hither  then,  will,  I  hope,  be  an  inducement. 
I  am  ever,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged,  and  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Gilbert  Walmesley. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Colson, 

At  his  house  in  Rochester,  Kent, 

By  way  of  London.  Endorsed,  “Mr.  Walmesley’s  Letters  about 

me  and  Mr.  Johnson.” 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[It  is  a  very  pleasing  feature  in  this  correspondence,  that  shows  the  “  graced  respect”  which  opened  Mr. 
Garrick’s  career,  as  well  as  that  which,  in  Sheridan’s  language,  “  claim’d  him  to  the  last.”  For  this  he  was 
partly  indebted  to  the  place  he  came  from.  The  Reverend  Thomas  Newton  (afterwards  the  celebrated 
Bishop),  had  received  the  early  part  of  his  education  at  the  Free-school  of  Lichfield,  and,  as  Garrick’s  towns¬ 
man,  very  anxiously  attended  his  performances  in  Goodman’s-fields.  This  learned  person,  as  the  tutor  to 
Lord  Carpenter’s  son,*  enjoyed  an  easy  and  unrestrained  intercourse  with  persons  of  great  distinction  ;  and  in 
these  letters  we  behold  him  exerting  every  influence  he  possessed,  to  swell  the  train  of  his  young  friend  with 
those  whose  approbation  was  the  best  sort  of  fame.  But  highly  as  he  admires  the  genius  of  Garrick,  he 
views  him  with  a  critical  eye,  and  allows  no  trivial  error  to  sully  long  the  general  merit  of  his  performance. 

Mr.  Garrick  preserved  these  letters  from  motives  of  respect  and  gratitude;  respect  for  the  accuracy  of 
their  remarks,  and  gratitude  for  the  regard  which  dictated  so  unsparing  a  zeal  for  his  perfection.  The 
reader  will  love  the  reverend  critic  for  his  reproof  of  the  young  genius,  for  not  punctiliously  obeying  a  wish, 
indeed  a  command,  from  Mr.  Pulteney.  He  will  be  entertained  too  with  seeing  Grosvenor-square  in  motion 
to  occupy  Goodman’s-fields ;  and  admire  the  charm  that  could  make  people  of  the  first  distinction  send 
their  footmen  near  four  miles,  to  keep  places  in  a  subordinate  play-house,  rather  than  lose  a  look  or  a  gesture 
of  the  great  actor. 

The  reverend  writer  of  the  letters  was  at  this  time  reader  and  afternoon  preacher  at  Grosvenor  Cha¬ 
pel,  South  Audley-street,  and  assistant  preacher  at  St.  George’s,  Hanover-square,  to  Dr.  Trebeck,  whose 
eldest  daughter  he  married  in  the  year  1747.  There  is  an  allusion  to  his  sacred  duties  in  the  intimation  to 
Mr.  Garrick,  that  the  party  cannot  attend  him  on  the  Saturday  evenings.  The  Editor  has  a  pleasure  in 
showing  our  bigots,  that  he,  who  wrote  the  dissertation  on  the  Prophecies,  did  not  consider  Shakspeare  and 
Garrick  unworthy  of  his  serious  attention. — Ed.] 


Grosvenor-square,  Dec.  16,  1741. 

DEAR  SIR, 

I  thank  you  for  our  entertainment  last  night,  for  it  fully  answered  report,  and 
my  friends’  and  my  expectations.  Though  your  friend,  yet  I  endeavoured  to  find 
all  the  fault  I  could ;  but  with  all  my  criticisms  there  are  two  or  three  things  only, 
and  those  hardly  worth  insisting  upon,  which  I  could  wish  otherwise.  As  1  know 
you  will  take  in  good  part  what  I  say,  I  will  mention  them.  In  the  fifth  act,  when 
Richard  lies  down  upon  the  couch,  I  thought  you  started  up  rather  too  soon  : 


*  This  young  gentleman,  in  1748,  married  Frances  Coote,  daughter  of  the  Earl  ot  Bellamont;  and  in 
1761,  he  was  made  Earl  of  Tyrconnell  and  Viscount  Carlingford. 

B  2 


4 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


“  Ha !  what  means  that  dismal  voice !” 

He  is  composing  himself  to  sleep,  and  should  not  start  up  as  soon  as  ever  he  is 
laid  down,  but  after  some  little  time,  as  it  were  between  sleeping  and  waking. — In 
the  last  scene  between  Richard  and  Lady  Ann,  there  is  one  thing  that  I  think 
you  did  not  speak  quite  properly,  though  I  am  somewhat  doubtful.  She  says 

“  What  have  I  done  ?  what  horrid  crime  committed  ? 

Rich.  To  me  the  worst  of  crimes — outliv’d  my  liking.” 

In  the  latter  part,  outliv’d  my  Hieing,  you  spoke  with  the  same  voice,  only  exalting  it ; 
whereas  I  imagine  it  should  have  been  with  an  alteration  of  voice,  more  peevishly 
and  angrily. — Richard  says  to  Buckingham,  comparing  the  young  Princes  to  spiders, 

“  I  would  have  some  friend  to  tread  upon  them.” 


Your  action  there  was  only  with  your  hand,  but  surely  it  should  rather  have  been 
with  a  little  stamp  of  your  foot  to  tread  upon  them.  These  I  cannot  call  faults,  they 
are  omissions  which  might  be  occasioned  by  absence  of  thought  at  the  instant ;  but 
though  it  is  easy  to  reckon  up  these  little  oversights,  for  these  are  all  I  could  ob¬ 
serve,  it  is  not  easy  to  count  your  beauties  and  excellencies,  which  are  indeed  in¬ 
numerable.  All  that  we  wanted  was  to  see  more  of  your  face  and  the  expression  of 
your  countenance ;  and  therefore  beg  you  will  remember  to  secure  for  us  that  stage- 
box,  where  we  may  see  your  looks  in  the  ‘scene  with  Lady  Ann,  and  as  you  lie  upon 
the  couch,  that  is,  that  we  may  sit  with  the  stage  on  our  right  hand,  and  the  pit 
on  our  left.  And  I  hope  in  the  mean  time,  you  will  spare  yourself  as  much  as  you 
can,  till  you  are  recovered  from  your  cold,  and  your  voice  may  appear  in  perfection. 
Cura  ut  valeas  is  often  the  conclusion  in  Latin  epistles,  and  it  shall  finish  that  of 

Yours  in  great  haste, 

Thos.  Newton. 


To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman’s-fields. 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


Grosvenor-square,  Dec.  28,  1741. 


I  am  to  thank  you  in  the  name  of  our  company  for  our  entertainment  last 
Wednesday.  Our  ladies  are  almost  in  love  with  Richard  as  much  as  Lady  Ann. 
And  for  us  men,  we  like  him  better  the  second  time  than  even  the  first :  your  voice 
was  more  in  tune  and  order ;  and  I  reckon  we  liked  you  better  too,  as  we  saw  more 
of  you  than  we  did  above,  though  really  the  people  upon  the  stage  incommoded  us 
very  much.  The  front  boxes,  I  believe,  are  the  most  commodious,  and  pray  let  us 
have  one  of  them  for  the  “Orphan”  and  “  Lying  Valet,”  and  let  it  be  taken  in  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


name  of  Mrs.  Deanes.  She  and  I  are  to  come  from  this  end  of  the  town,  with 
another  lady  or  two ;  and  Mrs.  Porter,  with  another  lady  or  two  in  the  City,  is  to 
meet  us.  You  know  it  is  to  be  after  the  holidays,  and  it  might  be  next  week,  or 
rather,  if  you  please,  the  week  following  ;  and  be  so  good  to  give  me  as  early  notice 
as  you  possibly  can  of  the  day,  because  no  less  a  man  than  Mr.  Pulteney  desires  to 
be  of  our  party,  and  to  have  a  place  in  our  box  ;  and  the  earlier  notice  is  necessary, 
that  he  may  not  be  otherwise  engaged.  If  I  find  that  one  night  is  more  agreeable 
to  our  company  than  another,  you  shall  hear  from  me  again,  who  am  in  haste, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  sincere  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

Thos.  Newton. 


To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman-fields. 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


Grosvenor-square,  Monday,  Jan.  18th. 


I  am  sorry  it  happened  so  that  you  could  not  oblige  us  with  the  “  Orphan”  and 
the  “  Lying  Valet”  last  week ;  and  it  appears  the  more  unlucky,  as  you  was  able  to 
act  the  Lying  Valet  and  something  else  almost  every  night.  It  would  certainly 
have  been  a  very  great  honour  to  you,  if  of  no  other  advantage,  for  such  a  person 
as  Mr.  Pulteney  to  come  so  far  to  be  one  of  your  audience ;  and,  if  I  had  been  in 
your  capacity,  I  should  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  have  strained  a  point,  or 
done  almost  any  thing,  rather  than  have  disappointed  him.  I  would  have  acted 
that  night,  if  I  had  spared  myself  all  the  rest  for  it.  To-day,  you  know,  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  meets  again,  and  to-morrow  an  Election  of  consequence  is  to  be  heard  at  the 
bar  of  the  House ;  so  that  it  will  be  impossible  for  Mr.  Pulteney  to  attend  you 
to-morrow  night,  as  it  is  likewise  for  another  principal  person  of  our  party,  who  is 
engaged  to-morrow  night  in  such  a  manner,  that  she  cannot  put  off  her  engagement, 
and  therefore  the  box  need  not  be  kept  for  us  ;  and,  if  you  please,  we  will  defer  the 
play  a  week  or  fortnight,  in  hopes  that  one  night  or  other  Mr.  Pulteney  will  be  able 
to  come  with  us  ;  but  whether  we  can  have  his  company  or  not,  the  rest  of  us  will 
come,  and  I  hope  you  will  favour  us  with  the  play  at  any  time  upon  two  or  three 
days’  notice.  I  am  sorry  for  these  disappointments,  but  I  was  almost  angry  with 
you,  to  see  your  name  last  week  in  the  bills  for  Costar  Pearmain.  I  am  not  fond 
of  your  acting  such  parts  as  Fondlewife,  or  even  Clodio,  nor  should  be  of  the  Lying 
Valet,  if  it  was  not  of  your  own  writing.  You  who  are  equal  to  the  greatest  parts, 
strangely  demean  yourself  in  acting  any  thing  that  is  low  and  little  ;  and  not  only  I, 
but  really  all  who  admire  you  and  wish  you  well,  that  is  all  who  know  you,  are 
grieved  and  wonder  at  it. 

There  are  abundance  of  people  who  hit  off  low  humour,  and  succeed  in  the  cox- 


6 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


comb  and  the  buffoon  very  well ;  but  there  is  scarce  one  in  an  age  who  is  capable  of 
acting  the  hero  in  Tragedy,  and  the  fine  gentleman  in  Comedy.  All  who  have  seen 
you  say  you  have  talents  for  all  this ;  and  when  you  can  reap  this  field  of  fame  alone 
without  a  rival,  why  should  you  be  content  with  only  surpassing  Chapman,  or  Mack- 
lin,  or  young  Cibber  ?  Though  you  perform  these  parts  never  so  well,  yet  there  is 
not  half  the  merit  in  excelling  in  them  as  in  the  others.  If  I  was  an  actor,  surely 
I  would  rather  endeavour  to  be  a  Betterton,  than  a  Nokes,  or  Dogget ;  as  if  I  was  a 
painter,  I  would  rather  wish  to  be  a  Raphael  than  a  Hogarth  ;  or  if  I  was  a  poet,  I 
would  choose  infinitely  rather  to  be  a  Milton  than  a  Hudibras  *  I  hope,  dear  Sir,  I 
need  make  no  apology  for  the  freedom  of  what  I  have  said  ;  you  may  be  sure  I 
should  not  have  said  it,  if  I  had  not  been 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

Thomas  Newton. 

To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman’s-fields. 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Grosvenor-square,  Wednesday,  Feb.  17. 

DEAR  SIR, 

Lowe  and  I  were  most  highly  pleased  with  Bayes :  he  thinks  young  Cibber  in¬ 
sufferable  in  comparison ;  and  I  think  you  exceed  old  Cibber  in  many  things,  and 
fall  short  of  him  in  nothing ;  and  your  imitations  of  the  actors  are  inimitable.  But 
this  was  not  the  purport  of  my  writing.  Mr.  Pulteney  was  asking  Mrs.  Deanes  the 
other  night  when  we  were  to  go  to  Goodman’s-fields  ;  and  as  they  understand  that 
we  cannot  go  till  the  third  night  of  “  Richard,”  and  as  it  is  very  uncertain  when  that 
will  be,  and  as  “  Lear”  in  all  probability  will  be  acted  before,  we  beg  of  you  to  un¬ 
bespeak  Mrs.  Deanes’  box  for  the  third  time  of  “  Richard,”  and  to  take  one  in  her 
name  for  the  third  time  of  “  Lear,”  or  any  night  after  the  third ;  and  only  be  so 
good  to  inform  me  what  night,  and  we  will  attend  you.  You  will  excuse  this  trou¬ 
ble,  and  believe  me,  dear  Sir, 

Your  ever  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

Thomas  Newton. 


*  The  illustration  does  not  quite  meet  the  demand  upon  it.  Raphael  could  not  have  been  Hogarth  ;  Mil- 
ton  could  not  be  Butler.  The  universality  of  Garrick  was  his  great  distinction.  It  is  readily  granted 
that,  in  higher  life,  the  comedian  is  seldom  ranked  with  the  tragedian.  The  reason  seems  to  be,  that  his 
habits  are  commonly  lower,  and  that  he  cannot  ascend,  by  any  strain,  to  the  dignity  of  tragic  manners. 
The  voluntary  descent  of  the  tragedian  to  comedy  only  proves,  that  he  has  made  his  studies  in  all  the  classes 
of  life ;  and  can  put  on,  for  the  moment,  whatever  character  he  wishes  to  become.  The  extent  and  variety 
of  the  power  render  its  exercise  greatness. 

As  a  commentator,  Newton  followed  his  rule, — he  illustrated  Milton,  and  left  Butler  to  Grey. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


7 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


Monday,  April  19th. 


I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  before  of  writing  to  you,  to  tell  you  how  highly 
I  was  pleased  with  your  acting  of  King  Lear ;  and  it  is  not  only  my  opinion,  but 
several  good  judges  I  know,  and  particularly  one  of  the  Masters  of  Westminster 
School,  and  one  of  the  chief  Clerks  in  the  Treasury,  say  that  you  far  exceed  Booth 
in  that  character,  and  even  equal  Betterton.*  The  thing  that  strikes  me  above  all 
others,  is  that  variety  in  your  acting,  and  your  being  so  totally  a  different  man  in 
Lear  from  what  you  are  in  Richard.  There  is  a  sameness  in  every  other  actor. 
Cibber  is  something  of  a  coxcomb  in  every  thing ;  and  W olsey,  and  Syphax,  and 
Iago,  all  smell  strong  of  the  essence  of  Lord  Foppington.  Booth  was  a  philoso¬ 
pher  in  Cato,  and  was  a  philosopher  in  every  thing  else.  His  passion  in  Hotspur  and 
Lear  was  much  of  the  same  nature,  whereas  yours  was  an  old  man’s  passion,  and  an 
old  man’s  voice  and  action  ;  and  in  the  four  parts  wherein  I  have  seen  you,  Richard, 
Chamont,  Bayes,  and  Lear,  I  never  saw  four  actors  more  different  from  one  another 
than  you  are  from  yourself.  But  at  the  same  time  that  I  commend  you  so  much 
and  so  deservedly  for  this,  I  must  tell  you  as  a  friend,  that  I  do  not  hear  you  equally 
applauded  for  Lord  Foppington  ;  and  it  was  my  opinion,  you  know,  at  the  first, 
that  Sir  Charles  Easy  was  the  properer  part  for  you.  And  I  could  wish  that  you 
had  chosen  Jaffier  rather  than  Pierre,  that  being  a  part  of  greater  compass  and 
variety ;  and  Lowe  concurs  with  me,  though  he  commends  you  in  Pierre  mightily. 
I  am  very  sincerely  your  friend  and  well-wisher,  and  I  think  I  show  it  in  the  friendly 
freedoms  I  take  with  you.  But  now  to  my  business.  Mrs.  Deanes  (whose  servant 
is  the  bearer)  and  another  lady,  are  very  desirous  of  seeing  you  in  Richard,  which 
we  hear  is  to  be  acted  on  Wednesday  night.  I  am  afraid  it  is  too  late  to  apply 
for  places,  but  if  you  can  only  accommodate  us  with  three  tolerable  good  ones,  you 
will  greatly  oblige  us  ;  and  I  can  assure  you,  you  cannot  oblige  two  better  judges, 
nor  greater  lovers  of  fine  acting,  among  all  the  ladies.  We  shall  come  in  Mrs. 
Deanes’  coach,  but  will  send  a  servant  before  to  keep  the  places,  if  you  can  provide 
any  for  us ;  and  as  this,  in  all  probability,  will  find  you  at  the  house,  you  will  be 
able  to  return  your  answer  by  the  bearer  to,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Newton. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  at  Goodman’s- fields. 


*  From  this  letter  it  appears  that  Garrick’s  Lear  was  transcendent  from  the  first  hour  he  played  it.  I  hat 
he  shonld  thoroughly  have  felt  a  character  of  such  amazing  force  and  variety,  passion  and  sufiering,  at  hv< 
and  twenty,  is  much  ;  but  that  he  should  possess  such  absolute  mastery  over  himself,  as  to  preserve  the  damp 
of  age  in  the  fire  of  insanity,  neither  drivel  like  an  imbecile,  nor  totter  like  a  paralytic, — be  in  short,  then, 
Shakspeare’s  own  Lear,  is  truly  wonderful ;  and  yet  I  entirely  believe  it! — Ed. 


8 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR  Grosvenor-square,  Monday,  April  26th. 

I  thought  Richard  almost  perfect  at  the  first,  but  every  time  I  find  him  still 
better  and  better ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  express  the  pleasure  I  felt  in  seeing  you 
perform  so  well,  and  hearing  you  on  all  hands  so  highly  applauded ;  for  it  was  not 
only  a  trial  of  your  acting,  but  in  some  measure  a  trial  of  my  judgment.  The  two 
ladies  who  were  with  me,  and  my  Lord  and  Lady  Carpenter,*  and  the  rest  of  the 
company  who  were  with  them,  all  believed  that  I  must  be  a  little  partial  to  my 
townsman,  and  no  young  actor  in  the  world  could  deserve  all  the  fine  things  I  said 
of  you  ;  but  now  they  are  convinced,  and  are  all  in  raptures ;  they  declare  they 
never  saw  such  acting  before,  and  you  have  not  only  answered  all  their  expecta¬ 
tions,  but  have  exceeded  every  thing  that  they  could  have  conceived.  And  Mrs. 
Porter f  is  no  less  in  raptures  than  the  rest ;  she  returned  to  town  on  purpose  to  see 
you,  and  declares  she  would  not  but  have  come  for  the  world.  You  are  born  an 
actor,  she  says,  and  do  more  at  your  first  appearing,  than  ever  any  body  did  with 
twenty  years’  practice ;  and,  Good  God,  says  she,  what  will  he  be  in  time !  And 
when  somebody  in  company  mentioned  your  not  doing  Lord  Foppington  so  well, 
she  made  answer,  that  she  was  sure  it  was  impossible  for  you  to  do  any  thing  ill ; 
you  might  perhaps  excel  less  in  that,  but  you  must  excel  in  every  thing.  I  shall 
long  to  see  you  in  that  character,  and  especially  as  you  have  been  so  obliging  as  to 
promise  the  “  Lying  Valet”  with  it ;  and  I  could  wish  it  might  be  this  week,  if  it 
was  not  inconvenient,  because  one  of  our  gentlemen  goes  into  the  country  next 
Monday  ;  but  whenever  it  suits  your  convenience  there  will  be  enough  of  us  to  fill  a 
box,  and  if  we  can  have  one  of  the  stage  boxes,  we  shall  choose  it  rather.  I  should 
be  glad  to  know  too,  whether  “  Lear”  is  to  be  acted  again,  and  when  ;  for  my 
Lady  Carpenter  and  the  two  ladies  who  were  with  me,  talk  of  coming.  I  give  you 
a  deal  of  trouble,  but  you  can  oblige  nobody  who  loves  and  admires  you  more  than, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Newton. 

To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman’s-fields. 


*  This  was  George,  the  second  Lord  Carpenter. 

t  This  was  Mrs.  Porter,  the  actress,  who  had  retired  from  London,  and  the  Stage.  She  spoke  a  very 
clever  Epilogue  at  Drury  Lane  Theatre,  written  by  the  Honourable  James  Noel,  on  the  2Sth  of  April,  1738, 
after  the  play  of  Julius  Csesar,  acted  gratuitously  and  gratefully,  I  may  add,  by  the  Company  of  Comedians 
there  ;  and  the  receipts  of  the  Theatre,  200/.,  were  applied  towards  defraying  the  expense  of  the  statue 
erected  to  Shakspeare  in  the  Abbey  Church  of  Westminster. 

Of  this  great  actress,  Dr.  Johnson  told  Mrs.  Siddons,  that  “  in  the  vehemence  of  tragic  rage  he  had 
never  seen  her  equalled.”  Her  candid  opinion  of  Mr.  Garrick  was  highly  to  be  valued.  She  had  seen  what 
twenty  years  had  done  for  others  in  the  art  she  professed,  and  she  lived  to  know  what  the  same  probation 
could  do  for  Garrick,  who  started  with  their  excellence.  She  was  too  wise  not  to  feel  that  the  genius  before 
her  must  be  greater  by  practice. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


9 


REV.  T.  NEWTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Lord  Carpenter’s,  Grosvenor-square, 

DEAR  SIR,  Monday,  Dec.  7. 

You  need  make  no  apology  for  your  profession,  at  least  to  me*  I  always 
thought  that  you  was  born  an  actor,  if  ever  any  man  was  so ;  and  it  will  be  your  own 
indiscretion  (and  I  hope  and  believe  you  will  hardly  be  guilty  of  such  indiscretion)  if 
coming  upon  the  stage  hurts  your  reputation,  and  doth  not  make  your  fortune.  As 
great  talents  are  required  for  acting  well,  as  for  almost  any  thing ;  and  an  excellent 
actor,  if  at  the  same  time  he  is  an  honest  worthy  man,  is  a  fit  companion  for  any 
body.  You  know  Roscius  was  familiar  with  Cicero,  and  the  greatest  men  of  his 
time  ;  and  Betterton  used  frequently  to  visit  Bishop  Sprat  and  Atterbury,  and  other 
divines,  as  well  as  the  best  of  the  nobility  and  gentry,  not  as  a  mimic  and  buffoon,  to 
make  diversion  for  the  company,  but  as  an  agreeable  friend  and  companion. 

I  am  sorry  for  your  cold,  and  that  we  cannot  have  “  Richard  the  Third”  so  soon 
as  desired ;  for  the  greater  part  of  our  company  fix  upon  Richard,  and  there  being- 
three  or  four  young  ladies  of  the  party,  you  need  not  be  told  that  they  are  very 
impatient  of  delays  and  disappointments,  when  their  hearts  are  set  upon  any  pleasure. 
You  will,  therefore,  be  so  obliging  as  to  secure  one  of  the  stage  boxes  for  us,  as  soon 
as  ever  they  can  be  at  liberty  ;  and  only  write  me  a  line  of  information,  and  we  shall 
be  ready  to  attend  you  any  night  except  Saturday,  for  a  reason  that  you  may  easily 
conceive.  But  it  may  probably  happen  that  I  shall  see  you  in  the  mean  time,  in¬ 
tending  to  take  the  very  first  opportunity  I  possibly  can  of  coming  to  Lothario  and 
the  Lying  Valet ;  and  I  make  no  question  I  shall  be  pleased  both  with  the  tragedy 
and  comedy,  and  equally  approve  the  actor  and  author,  being  his  friend,  countryman 
and  servant, 

Thomas  Newton. 


To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman’s-fields. 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

In  a  book  called  “  Recherches  sur  les  Theatres  de  France,”  printed  at  Baris  in 
1735,  are  the  two  following  passages  : — 

The  author,  speaking  of  Baron’s  appearing  again  on  the  French  stage,  says,  “  Sa 
rentrie  en  1720  fut  doublernent  avantageuse  a  ses  camarades,  elle  leur  attira  de  nom- 
breuses  assemblies,  et  les  guerit  de  cette  declamation  forcenie  que  Beaubourg  avoit 
introduite,  et  qui  avoit  passi  jusqu’aux  femmes  :  il  faut  en  excepter  Mademoiselle  Le 

*  The  first  sentence  of  the  present  letter  is  honourable  to  the  writer,  who  places,  however,  his  own  liberal 
feeling  in  admirable  company.  Ed. 

VOL.  I. 


C 


10 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Couvreur,  qui,  forcde  par  la  foiblesse  de  ses  organes  k  s’en  tcnir  a  la  declamation  natu- 
relle,  devint  excellente,  parce  qu’elle  lie  pouvoit  devenir  mauvaise.”  2  Tom.  p.  424. 

In  another  place,  speaking  of  Monsieur  La  Grange,  he  says,  “  Quoique  sa  taille  ne 
passat  gueres  la  mediocre,  elle  6toit  bien  prise.  II  avoit  l’air  libre  et  degage :  c’^toit 
un  bon  acteur,  soit  pour  le  serieux,  soit  pour  le  comique.  II  n’y  avoit  point  de  role 
qu’il  n’executat  de  bonne  grace.”*  3  Tom.  p.  3G9. 

To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  Mansfield-street,  Goodman’s-fields. 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

The  alterations  made  in  Shakspeare’s  Plays  have  rarely  been  judicious.  Even 
the  character  of  Richard  the  Third,  as  now  drawn,  is  not  quite  consistent.  However, 
it  must  be  owned  to  be  better  adapted  than  the  original  to  give  scope  to  that 
inimitable  action  that  has  so  charmed  the  public,  and  at  once  triumphed  over  all 
the  impotent  efforts  of  ignorance,  prejudice,  and  envy,  to  lessen  its  merit. 

Notwithstanding  that  summons, 

“  Awake,  Richard,  awake,  to  guilty  minds 
A  terrible  example — ” 

ought  not  he  to  lie  asleep  some  little  time  after  the  disappearing  of  the  ghosts,  and 
give  signs  of  farther  commotions  in  his  mind  ?  for  must  we  not  here  suppose,  as  is 
usual  in  dreams,  the  scene  then  suddenly  to  change,  presenting  to  his  fancy  himself 
engaged  in  battle  ?  because,  on  his  waking,  he  breaks  out  into  that  exclamation — 

“  Give  me  a  horse — bind  up  my  wounds — ” 


IGNOTO  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Jan. 

If  I  had  resolved,  Sir,  to  communicate  to  you  all  the  beauties  that  I  observed 
in  your  acting  the  part  of  Hamlet  to-night,  the  task  would  be  almost  infinite ;  but 
my  present  design  of  telling  you  what  I  disliked  is  so  very  short,  that  I  am  tempted 
by  that  consideration  to  execute  it  ;  so,  without  the  preamble  of  any  apology, 

*  Mr  Garrick  himself  thought  fit  to  preserve  some  of  the  anonymous  criticisms,  with  which  he  was 
privately  honoured.  A  few  such  papers  follow,  and  discover  no  mean  talent  in  the  writers.  The  Irish  critic 
who  censures  Mr.  Garrick  for  pronouncing  an  a  like  an  e,  is  merely  himself  unacquainted  with  the  long  and 
slender  sound  of  the  former  letter  peculiar  to  the  English. 

In  my  youth,  our  literary  coffee-houses  rang  with  debates  upon  the  true  way  of  sounding  the  name  of  the 
great  patriot  Cato — whether  it  should  be  Cato,  as  in  Kate,  or  Cato,  as  in  cart?  The  lovers  of  “  Imperial 
Tragedy,”  and  its  turgid  declamation,  found  more  dignity  in  the  open-mouthing  of  the  word ;  but  Cato  has 
at  length  undisturbed  possession  of  the  scene. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


11 


which  I  am  persuaded  you  will  not  think  necessary  from  one  who  takes  this  liberty 
merely  from  a  benevolence  to  you  which  your  merit  demands,  I  will  observe  to  you, 
that  repeating  these  words — “  Methinks  I  see  my  father — ”  you  express  as  much 
concern  in  the  pronunciation  and  look  that  attends  them,  as  if  Hamlet  spoke  them 
in  the  meaning  Horatio  understands  him ;  which  you  know  very  well  is  not  the 
case.  I  leave  it,  therefore,  to  your  judgment  to  determine  whether  a  little  less  emo¬ 
tion  would  not  become  that  passage  better,  as  Hamlet  knows  he  is  only  speaking 
of  his  own  imagination,  though  Horatio  supposes  very  naturally,  from  what  he  had 
seen,  that  he  speaks  of  the  visible  apparition  of  his  father.  I  own  it  is  difficult  to 
distinguish  between  that  emotion  which  would  naturally  arise  from  his  picturing  a 
deceased  parent  to  his  own  mind,  and  that  which  would  result  from  a  fancy  that  he 
really  saw  him ;  but  yet  there  is  such  a  real  difference  as  I  am  assured  you  can  ex¬ 
press  without  difficulty.  Will  you  forgive  my  being  so  minute,  as  to  remark  some¬ 
thing  that  seems  to  me  wrong  in  the  pronunciation  of  a  single  word  ?  It  is  tropi¬ 
cally.*  That  o,  I  imagine,  should  be  pronounced  short,  as  we  pronounce  the  o  in 
logical ;  and  both  for  the  same  reason,  because  the  vowel  in  the  original  words,  from 
whence  they  are  derived,  is  in  both  an  o,  not  an  w — a  short  o,  not  a  long  one.  I 
believe  you  will  find  custom  to  be  on  this  side  of  the  question — Quem  penes  arbitrium 
est.  You  cannot  help  observing  what  petitesses  I  am  forced  to  take  notice  of,  who 
undertake  to  show  you  any  thing  that  may  be  corrected  in  yourself.  This  I  am  sure 
of,  that  it  is  all  well-meant ;  there  is  no  ostentation  in  it ;  for  you  may  believe  me, 
upon  my  honour,  that  nobody  knows  I  have  dared  to  take  this  liberty  with  you,  or 
ever  shall  know.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  constant  admirer, 

Ignoto. 

Do  you  think,  Sir,  Hamlet  would  address  himself  to  the  Grave-digger  so  very 
seriously  ?  His  discourse  with  Horatio  before  that  point  of  time,  and  his  reflections 
afterward,  are  out  of  the  question.  But  does  not  that  droll  character  he  talks 
with  require  a  behaviour  something  more  light  and  degage ,  than  when  he  moralizes 
with  his  friend,  who  is  a  high  character  in  comparison  ?f  I  see  not  how  these  guesses 
of  mine  should  require  any  answer;  yet  if  you  should  have  any  curiosity  to  ask 
any  other  questions  on  this  subject,  it  is  in  your  power  by  directing  to  Mr.  Tomlin¬ 
son,  at  Dobyns’s  Coffee-house,  Conduit-street.  I  wish  you  your  health  very  heartily, 
and  once  more  take  my  leave. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  at  the  Bedford  Coffee-house, 
under  the  Piazza,  in  Covent-Garden. 

*  Tropically. — Mr.  Garrick’s  reason,  unquestionably,  was  to  mark,  that  it  derived  from  (rope,  and  that 
he  would  be  understood  to  mean  Jiguratixely ;  and  so  avoid  any  tendency  of  the  hearer  to  the  line  at  which 
the  sun  turns  back  — 

“  And  either  tropic  now 

’Gan  thunder,  and  both  ends  of  heav’n.” — M  i  lton.  L E D- 1 

+  We  see  afterwards,  that  Mr.  Garrick  became  less  solemn  with  Goodman  Delver.  Ed. 

C  2 


12 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Dublin,  Saturday,  Aug.  the  14th,  1743. 

SIR, 

As  1  am  entirely  unknown  to  you,  I  take  the  liberty  to  give  you  my  opinion 
upon  some  few  things  that  I  have  taken  notice  of  in  your  public  performances, 
most  of  which  I  have  attended,  and  do  really  think  that  you  will  in  time,  and  with 
a  little  more  experience,  be  the  best  and  most  extraordinary  player  that  ever  these 
kingdoms  saw.  I  cannot,  therefore,  but  with  regret  observe  some  things,  that  not 
only  displease  me,  but,  I  am  pretty  sure,  offend  the  most  judicious  and  discerning 
part  of  your  audience. 

The  first  thing  that  I  shall  mention  (and  which  I  insist  upon  that  you  reform) 
is  your  false  pronunciation  of  several  words,  which  can  be  owing  to  nothing  but 
custom  and  prejudice,  in  a  man  of  sense,  as  I  am  sure  you  are.  In  your  last  per¬ 
formance  I  took  notice  of  several  false  pronunciations,  many  of  which  I  have  for¬ 
gotten.  The  words  that  I  chiefly  remember  are  these : — matron,  Israel,  villain, 
appal,  Horatio,  wind ;  which  you  pronounced,  metron,  Iserel,  villi n,  appeal,  Horetio ; 
and  the  word  wind  you  pronounced  short.  I  cannot  imagine  what  your  objection 
can  be  to  the  letter  a,  that  you  should  change  it  into  an  e,  both  in  the  English  lan¬ 
guage  and  the  Latin  ;  or  what  fault  you  can  find  with  the  English  word  matron, 
that  you  should  be  obliged  to  make  it  Greek.  Does  not  Horatio  sound  much 
better  than  the  little  word  Horetio  f  It  is  said  that  Horatius  Codes,  when  he  could 
no  longer  withstand  the  fury  of  his  enemies,  leaped  into  the  Tiber.  But  what  did 
he  this  for?  Was  it  not  for  a  name?  Yes,  surely;  but  never  for  the  name  of 
Horetius.  Should  we,  in  the  Latin  tongue,  generally  change  the  letter  a  into  e,  the 
language  would  certainly  lose  much  of  its  force  and  grandeur. 

But  above  all  things  what  I  can  least  excuse,  is  the  absurd  manner  that  some  peo¬ 
ple  have  got  of  pronouncing  the  word  wind.  What  reason  can  you  allege  for  your 
pronouncing  the  i  short  ?  Look  into  the  poetry  of  the  best  English  authors,  and,  if 
you  find  any  one  example  of  it,  I  shall  readily  acknowledge  myself  in  the  wrong : 
as  well  may  you  pronounce  short  the  words  mind,  kind,  blind,  and  many  others  that 
chime  to  them.  I  myself,  when  a  schoolboy,  was  a  hero  in  a  tragedy,  and  I  remem¬ 
ber  at  a  rehearsal,  when  I  repeated  these  words  in  my  part,  “  That  they  pass  by  me 
as  the  idle  wind  which  I  regard  not,”  notwithstanding  my  master  had  frequently 
told  me  of  it,  yet  I  pronounced  the  word  wind  short,  upon  which  he,  who  understood 
polite  learning  as  well  as  any  person,  and  could  not  bear  to  hear  the  word  abused, 
took  up  his  rod  and  made  my  poor  hand  smart  for  it. 

In  these  lines  of  Mr.  Addison’s — 

“  Pleas’d  the  Almighty’s  orders  to  perform, 

Rides  in  the  whirlwind  and  directs  the  storm — ” 

I  appeal  to  yourself,  Sir,  if  the  word  whirlwind,  when  pronounced  short,  is  half 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


13 


so  expressive,  or  carries  that  beauty  in  it  that  the  verse  deserves.  I  beg  that  you 
would  reform  this  entirely.  I  cannot  believe,  Sir,  that  it  is  allowed  upon  the  English 
stage  ;  so  that  you  must  certainly  have  learned  it  from  the  sailors  in  your  passage 
from  England  hither. 

I  went  the  other  night  to  see  you  perform  the  part  of  Hamlet,  and  do  indeed 
think  that  you  got  a  great  deal  of  deserved  applause.  I  doubt  whether  the  famous 
Betterton  did  the  part  half  so  well  the  first  time  he  attempted  it.  The  character  of 
Hamlet  is  no  small  test  of  a  man’s  genius,  where  the  action  is  inconsiderable,  and 
the  sentiment  so  prevailing  and  remarkable  through  the  whole.  I  own,  that  upon 
your  first  encounter  with  the  Ghost,  I  observed,  with  some  astonishment,  that  it  was 
a  considerable  time  before  you  spoke.  I  beg  of  you,  Sir,  to  consider  that  these  words, 

“  Angels  and  Ministers  of  grace  defend  us  !” 

follow  upon  the  first  surprise,  and  are  the  immediate  effects  of  it.  I  grant  you,  that 
a  little  pause  after  that  is  highly  proper ;  but  to  repeat  them  at  the  same  time,  and 
in  the  same  tone  of  voice  with  the  speech 

“  Be  thou  a  Spirit  of  health,  &c.” 

is  very  improper,  because  they  are  by  no  means  a  part  of  that  speech.  You  certainly 
kept  the  audience  in  a  strange  suspense,  many  of  whom,  I  suppose,  were  afraid,  as 
well  as  I,  that  you  wanted  the  assistance  of  the  prompter.  There  is  one  thing 
that  I  must  mention,  which  I  think  has  but  a  very  ridiculous  appearance,  although  it 
has  been  practised  by  every  one  that  I  have  seen  in  that  character ;  and  it  is  this : 
when  the  Ghost  beckons  Hamlet  to  follow  him,  he,  enraged  at  Horatio  for  detain¬ 
ing  him,  draws  his  sword,  and  in  that  manner  follows  the  Ghost ;  presently  he  returns, 
Hamlet  still  following  him  sword  in  hand,  till  the  Ghost  says 

“  I  am  thy  Father’s  spirit!” 

at  which  words,  Hamlet  with  a  very  respectful  bow,  sheaths  his  sword  ;  which  is  as 
much  as  to  say,  that  if  he  had  not  been  a  Ghost  upon  whom  he  could  depend,  he 
dare  not  have  ventured  to  put  up  his  sword.  The  absurdity  of  this  custom  is  plain 
from  the  nature  of  spirits,  and  from  what  Marcellus  a  little  before  says,  that  “it  is  as 
the  air  invulnerable.”  I  think  it  would  be  much  better  if  Hamlet  should  at  these 
words, 

“  By  Heaven  !  I  ’ll  make  a  ghost  of  him  that  lets  me !” 

only  put  his  hand  to  his  sword,  and  make  an  attempt  to  draw  it. 

The  scene  between  Hamlet  and  Ophelia,  and  likewise  that  with  the  Queen,  you 
played  so  inimitably  well,  and  with  such  strict  justice,  that  I  never  saw  any  thing 
equal  to  it  in  my  life  ;  and  indeed  I  can  almost  say  the  same  of  the  whole  character. 

I  do  not  understand  your  leaving  aside  that  beautiful  part,  his  directions  to  the 
Players ;  and  unless  it  was  an  unskilful  person  that  was  conscious  to  himself  that 


14 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


lie  could  not  keep  lip  to  the  nicety  of  his  own  rules,  I  know  no  reason  for  it ;  but 
that,  I  am  sure,  you  need  not  fear.  I  wish  that,  instead  of  it,  you  would  omit  that 
abominable  soliloquy,  that  is  such  a  terrible  blot  and  stain  to  a  character,  that,  were 
it  not  for  that,  would  be  complete  ;  I  mean  that  part  where  Hamlet  comes  in  with 
a  resolution  to  kill  his  Uncle,  but,  finding  him  at  his  prayers,  he  says  he  will  not  do 
it,  lest  he  should  do  him  a  piece  of  service  and  send  him  to  Heaven. 

“  Up  sword  and  know  thou  a  more  horrid  time  ; 

When  he  is  drunk,  asleep,  or  in  a  rage, 

Or  in  the  incestuous  pleasures  of  his  bed  ; 

At  gaming,  swearing,  or  about  some  act, 

That  has  no  relish  of  salvation  in  it ; 

Then  trip  him,  &c.” 

All  this  is  so  cruel  and  detestable,  that  I  wish  it  had  never  come  into  Shakspeare’s 
thoughts,  to  make  it  a  part  of  the  character. 

I  think  I  should  do  you  great  injustice,  if  I  concluded  this  long  epistle  without 
taking  notice  of  another  thing,  which  is  by  so  much  the  more  commendable  in  you, 
as  it  is  a  thing  not  thought  on  by  the  generality  of  players ;  and  that  is  your  great 
decency  in  the  performing  your  parts.  I  must  needs  say  that,  although  we  meet  with 
obscene  expressions  frequently  in  Shakspeare’s  plays,  yet  this  is  an  artifice  mostly  used 
by  poets  and  players  that  have  nothing  else  for  it,  and  is  never  agreeable  to  any  but 
to  the  worst  and  most  insignificant  part  of  the  audience. 

Till  you  came  upon  the  stage  to  let  us  know  that  the  music  would  not  attend  you, 
I  never  thought  of  it ;  and  as  it  was  formerly  said  of  Milton’s  poetry,  that  it  was  so 
sublime  and  grand  in  itself,  that  it  needed  not  the  embellishments  of  rhyme,  so  can  I 
say  of  you  in  the  part  of  Hamlet,  that  the  satisfaction  I  received  from  thence  was  so 
great,  that  music  could  not  have  added  any  thing  to  make  it  more  complete  than  it 
was.  With  this  I  conclude,  that  if  you  find  any  thing  here  that  you  think  worthy 
of  your  observation  and  practice,  the  end  I  proposed  will  be  fully  answered ;  if  not, 
yet  I  shall  still  remain  your  constant 

Well-wisher  and  admirer. 

I  hope  you  intend  to  entertain  the  town  again  with  Hamlet  before  you  leave  the 
kingdom. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


15 


MR.  T.  SHERIDAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[Mr.  Thomas  Sheridan,  whose  father,  the  doctor,  was  the  companion  of  Swift,  and  whose  son,  Richard 
Brinsley,  gave  to  Congreve  a  rival  in  the  wit  of  Comedy,  and  to  Burke  a  proof  that,  with  full  preparation, 
on  a  favourite  subject,  there  was,  at  least,  one  of  his  contemporaries,  who  could  be  as  copious,  as  splendid 
as  surprising,  and  more  triumphant  than  himself.  We  have,  fortunately,  Burke’s  speech  on  the  India  Bill  • 
but  Sheridan  judiciously  avoided  any  printed  comparison  of  their  powers  ;  for  of  his  efforts  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  and  in  Westminster-liall  against  Hastings,  there  is  no  authentic  publication. _ Ed.] 

SIR,  April  21st,  1743. 

I  am  almost  ashamed  to  acknowledge  that  it  is  more  than  a  fortnight  since  I  was 
favoured  with  the  receipt  of  your  obliging  letter,  and  delayed  so  long  to  answer  it ; 
but,  I  believe,  I  shall  stand  readily  excused  with  you,  when  I  assure  you,  that  in 
that  fortnight  I  had  three  new  characters  to  study,  as  well  as  to  play, — Othello  being 
one  of  them.  I  thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation  to  me,  to  pass  the  summer  with 
you  at  Walton,  though  I  could  wish  you  had  not  mentioned  it,  for  it  has  given  me 
no  small  concern  that  the  posture  of  my  affairs  will  not  permit  me  to  enjoy  that 
happiness.  It  is  not  improbable  but  that  I  may  see  London  about  the  middle  of 
May,  though,  if  I  do,  I  shall  not  stay  above  three  weeks  there ;  I  intend  it  only 
as  a  jaunt  of  pleasure,  and  the  hope  of  seeing  you  is  not,  I  assure  you,  my  least 
inducement.  I  have  not  as  yet  fixed  any  scheme  for  the  next  winter,  but  I  have 
been  offered  such  advantageous  terms  for  the  next  winter,  as  will,  I  believe,  detain 
me  here  till  January  at  least.  As  to  your  proposal  of  our  playing  together,  I  am 
afraid  I  have  too  many  powerful  reasons  against  it ;  a  well-cut  pebble  may  pass 
for  a  diamond  till  a  fine  brilliant  is  placed  near  it,  and  puts  it  out  of  countenance. 
(A  bold  metaphor  that ;  or,  as  Bayes  says,  “  Egad  that ’s  one  of  my  bold  strokes.”) 
Besides,  we  should  clash  so  much  in  regard  to  characters,  that  I  am  afraid  it  is  im¬ 
possible  we  can  be  in  the  same  house.  Richard,  Hamlet,  and  Lear,  as  they  are  your 
favourite  characters,  are  mine  also;  and  though  you  were  so  condescending  to  say  I 
might  appear  in  any  part  of  your’s,  yet  I  question  whether  the  town  would  bear 
to  see  a  worse  performer  in  one  of  your  characters  in  the  same  house  with  you, 
though  they  might  endure  him  in  another.  I  have  a  scheme  to  propose  to  you, 
which  at  first  view  may  seem  a  little  extraordinary  to  you,  but  if  rightly  considered, 
must  turn  to  both  our  advantages :  if  you  could  be  brought  to  divide  your  immor¬ 
tality  with  me,  we  might,  like  Castor  and  Pollux,  appear  always  in  different  hemi¬ 
spheres  ;  (now  I  think  on’t,  I  don’t  know  whether  the  old  simile  of  the  two  buckets 
would  not  do  as  well,  but  that  is  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  tragedian  :)  in  plain 
English,  what  think  you  of  dividing  the  kingdoms  between  us  ;  to  play  one  winter 
in  London,  and  another  in  Dublin  ?  I  have  many  reasons  to  offer  in  favour  of  this 
scheme,  which  will  not  come  within  the  compass  of  a  letter ;  I  shall  only  say,  that 
it  will  make  us  always  new  in  both  kingdoms,  and  consequently  always  more 
followed  ;  and  I  am  satisfied  that  Dublin  is  as  well  able  to  pay  one  actor  for  the 


16 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


winter  as  London.  But  more  of  this  when  I  have  the  pleasure  of  meeting  you. 
Pray  remember  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  \\  offington  :  I  should  own  myself  unpar¬ 
donable  in  not  having  wrote  to  her,  were  it  in  my  power ;  but  I  have  been  already 
sufficiently  punished  in  the  loss  of  so  agreeable  a  correspondence,  for,  I  assure  you, 
I  have  a  long  time  envied  her  pretty  Chronon  that  pleasure  :  as  soon  as  I  have  a 
moment  to  spare,  I  intend  to  do  myself  the  honour  to  write  to  her. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Yours  sincerely, 

Thomas  Sheridan. 

I  flatter  myself  that,  as  you  were  so  good  as  to  begin  it,  you  will  still  continue  to 
me  the  pleasure  of  your  correspondence.  Tommy  Philips  desires  me  to  present  his 
best  respects  to  you  and  Mrs.  Woffington. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  at  the  Theatre  Royal 
in  Drury  Lane,  London. 


MRS.  FRANCES  SHERIDAN  TO  MRS.  VICTOR. 


Blois,  Nov.  16th,  1743. 

DEAR  MADAM, 

*  * 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  punctuality  in  writing  to  me  under  the  chas¬ 
tisement  of  two  blisters.  You  did  it,  I  am  sure,  with  a  design  to  deliver  me  from  a 
very  disagreeable  sensation,  called  suspense  ;  under  which,  I  must  nevertheless  assure 
you,  1  laboured  not  at  that  time  ;  for  I  was  very  sure  that  had  the  Comedy  been  even 
approved,  (about  which  you  know  I  was  not  over-sanguine)  it  was  too  late  to  be  re¬ 
ceived  ;  and  the  only  thing  with  which  I  flattered  myself  was,  that  perhaps  between 
this  and  next  season  there  might  be  time  to  mend  what  should  be  thought  most  to 
want  amendment ;  and  it  was  with  this  view  you  may  remember  I  told  you  I  should 
(and  indeed  I  endeavoured  to)  send  it  over  as  early  as  possible.  I  am  very  sorry 
that  you  and  your  good  man  have  had  so  much  ineffectual  trouble  about  it ;  but  1 
know  you  neither  of  you  begrudge  to  take  a  little  pains  for  your  friends. 

Thank  Mr.  Garrick  in  my  name  for  delivering  his  sentiments  so  frankly  ;  it 
shows,  at  least,  that  he  has  some  opinion  of  my  philosophy,  though  he  has  none  of 
my  genius.  I  thank  you  for  transmitting  them  to  me  so  faithfully  ;  and  must  now 
in  my  turn  beg  you  will  be  so  kind  as  to  let  him  know  what  I  have  to  say  on  the 
subject. 

It  is  but  a  disagreeable  task  to  defend  one’s  own  writing,  but  in  the  present  case 
I  think  my  honour  at  stake,  and  that  I  am  bound  to  justify  myself  to  you  and  Mr. 
Victor,  for  having  put  (as  it  appears  upon  the  face  of  the  evidence)  a  worthless 
stranger  under  your  care,  with  no  other  recommendation  than  that  of  its  own  natu¬ 
ral  parent,  and  who,  upon  trial,  has  had  so  unfavourable  a  verdict  returned,  that  per¬ 
haps  you  may  condemn  the  poor  culprit  according  to  law,  to  return  from  whence  it 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


17 


came,  and  thence  to  the  place  of  execution  (the  fire),  without  vouchsafing  it  a  second 
hearing. 

I  have  the  utmost  deference  for  Mr.  Garrick’s  opinion ;  I  think  extremely  well 
of  his  wit,  and  still  better  of  his  discernment  in  judging  what  will,  or  will  not  suc¬ 
ceed  with  the  public ;  and  for  his  abilities  in  his  own  profession,  you  know  how 
highly  I  rate  them  :  yet  notwithstanding  all  this,  and  that  I  live  too  at  present  in  a 
Roman  Catholic  country,  I  allow  not  infallibility  to  mortal  man.  People  of  the  best 
understandings  may  differ  Avidely  in  their  sentiments  of  one  and  the  same  thing : 
Ave  have  all  a  certain  perception  which,  for  AArant  of  another  name,  goes  by  the  general 
one  of  taste,  and  Avhich  if  the  subject  to  be  decided  on  does  not  hit,  A\7e  are  apt 
sometimes  to  AA7ithhold  the  suffrage  of  our  judgments,  and  to  confound  one  Avith 
the  other,  though  they  are  in  fact  distinct  things,  hoAvever  one  (to  be  perfect)  ought 
to  be  founded  on  the  other.  I  haA7e  heard  Johnson  decry  some  of  the  prettiest  pieces 
of  AArriting  Ave  have  in  English  :  yet  Johnson  is  an  honourable  man — that  is  to  say, 
he  is  a  good  critic,  and  in  other  respects  a  man  of  enormous  talents  ;  but  the  AA7orks 
I  speak  of  haA7e  not  been  to  his  gout ,  and  he  has  indiscriminately  condemned  the 
Avhole,  which,  though  perhaps  not  perfect,  had  still  merit  enough  to  save  them  from 
general  condemnation. 

From  Avhat  I  have  here  said,  I  AA7ould  be  only  understood  to  mean,  that  I  be¬ 
lieve  Mr.  Garrick,  not  having  leisure  to  give  more  than  a  very  hasty  perusal  to  my 
play,  and  not  finding  himself  pleased  upon  the  Avhole,  could  not  alloAv  himself  the 
time  to  separate  the  good  from  the  bad ;  but,  in  the  AA7armth  of  his  disappointment, 
passed  at  once  on  it  such  a  sentence,  as  put  me  in  mind  of  your  husband’s  ever  me¬ 
morable  description  of  Rantavan,  \iz.  that  he  found  there  neither  meat,  drink,  AA7ash- 
ing,  nor  lodging,  which  reduced  our  friend  B.’s  house  to  a  desert,  as  my  poor  Co¬ 
medy  is,  to  something  A\rorse  than  the  desert  Island. 

There  are  four  heavy  accusations  laid  against  it :  any  one  of  which  being  suffi¬ 
cient  to  AA7eigh  the  stripling  doA\7n,  I  think  it  a  maternal  duty  to  exculpate  my 
child,  as  far  as  it  is  in  my  poAver,  from  so  many  complicated  faults,  more  especially 
as  these  vices  have  not  been  acquired  by  e\ril  communications,  but  Avere  born  Avith 
it,  and  consequently  take  their  rise  originally  from  myself. 

Imprimis,  the  play  is  without  fable ;  secondly,  all  the  scenes  are  detached  ;  third¬ 
ly,  there  is  nothing  to  interest  the  audience ;  and  lastly,  it  has  no  humour,  fell 
Garrick  I  have  thrown  my  gauntlet  doAvrn,  and  am  going  to  defend  myself. 

To  the  first  charge,  I  plead  not  guilty,  and  will  maintain  that  the  fable  is  fully 
sufficient  to  build  a  series  of  eA7ents  upon, — that  there  is  as  much  as  most  of  our  co¬ 
medies  have,  and  more  than  in  many  which  have  been  aa7c11  receded. 

For  the  second,  I  canot  pretend  to  say  (contrary  to  the  opinion  of  so  good  a 
master  of  his  art)  whether  the  scenes  are  laid  with  that  rigorous  exactness  that 
theatrical  architecture  may  require;  but  thus  much  I  will  venture  to  assert,  that  theii 
succession  is  regular  and  natural,  and  that  they  all  tend  to  the  main  pm  pose  of  tin. 
drama,  which  is  comprised  in  the  ttvo  or  three  last  lines  of  the  play. 

D 


VOL.  i. 


18 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


For  the  third  objection,  perhaps,  I  may  be  singular  in  my  opinion ;  but  I  own, 
I  do  not  think  it  absolutely  necessary  to  interest  the  passions  in  a  comedy ;  in  a  tra¬ 
gedy  it  is  indispensable ;  but  if  the  Comic  Muse  can  excite  curiosity  enough  to 
keep  up  the  attention  of  the  audience,  she  has,  in  my  mind,  acquitted  herself  of  her 
duty  ;  and  I  think  this  seems  to  be  the  general  style  of  some  of  our  most  entertaining 
comedies,  and  the  one  in  question,  1  should  hope,  is  not  entirely  void  of  this  merit ; 
as  the  fate  of  an  unworthy  project  against  two  innocent  young  people,  artfully  carried 
on,  on  one  side,  by  a  designing  pair,  and  ridiculously  supported,  on  the  other,  by  an 
absurd  pair,  is  not  decided  till  the  very  last  scene. 

As  for  the  fourth  charge,  I  shall  leave  it  as  I  found  it ;  for  unless  I  were  to  use 
Bayes’s  expressions,  I  should  be  at  a  loss  for  words  to  defend  it — I  promised  you 
but  pleasantry,  and  if  I  have  utterly  failed  in  that,  I  am  more  unfortunate  than 
I  expected  to  be.  Just  give  me  leave  to  add,  what  I  think  will  not  be  denied  me, 
that  there  is  a  good  moral,  and  some  character,  in  this  piece.  The  latter  of  these 
two  articles  seems  to  be  growing  fast  out  of  fashion  :  the  late  writers  treating 
the  taste  of  the  times  as  physicians  do  the  stomachs  of  their  sick  patients,  which, 
finding  two  weak  for  substantial  food,  they  supply  with  slops.  But  the  reason  of 
this  is  obvious  :  our  present  race  of  poets  not  abounding  with  invention  of  their 
own,  have  taken  stories  they  found  ready  to  their  hand,  which  never  having  been 
intended  for  representation,  the  authors  did  not  think  themselves  tied  down  to 
rules  with  which  the  stage  ought  not  to  dispense  ;  yet  I  thought  that  Mr.  Garrick, 
who  himself  knows  so  well  how  to  support  this  grand  requisite  of  dramatic  works, 
would  willingly  have  encouraged  every  effort  which  had  the  least  pretensions  to 
merit  of  this  kind. 

I  have  but  just  room  left  to  thank  you  for  the  verses  on  the  Mummy,  which  I 
think  an  excellent  epigram.  Mr.  Sheridan  joins  me  in  best  wishes  to  you  and 
Victoribus. 

I  am,  dear  Mrs.  Victor, 

Yours  sincerely, 

F.  S.* 

Be  so  good  as  to  inform  my  brother  that  I  have  received  his  of  the  29th  of  Octo¬ 
ber,  for  which  I  thank  him ;  and  as  I  had  written  to  him  just  before  by  the  hands  of 
Captain  Walcott,  I  may  take  my  time  to  answer  his  last. 

To  Mrs.  Victor,  at  Mr.  Woodifield’s  in 
Maiden-lane,  Southampton-street, 

Covent-garden,  London. 

Franc  a  Paris. 


*  Mrs.  Frances  Sheridan,  the  wife  of  Thomas,  and  the  mother  of  Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan :  a  lady 
of  great  acquirements  and  striking  ingenuity.  Garrick  acted  in  her  Discovery,  and  every  body  has  read  her 
Nourjahad. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


19 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Jan-  17,  1743-4. 

I  once  writ  you  a  letter,  in  which  I  gave  you  my  opinion  of  your  perform¬ 
ance  in  the  character  of  Hamlet.  I  saw  you  act  it  again  soon  after,  and  could  not 
help  flattering  myself  that  you  paid  some  regard  to  what  I  had  said.  If  I  should 
now,  or  at  any  time  hereafter,  give  you  to  understand  that  I  am  not  fully  satisfied 
with  any  particular  part  of  your  action,  don’t  think  it  proceeds  from  a  pleasure  I 
take  in  censuring,  or  a  fondness  of  showing  my  judgment ;  but  attribute  it  to  an 
extreme  passion  for  the  stage,  and  the  opinion  I  have  of  your  ingenuity  of  temper. 

I  saw  you  last  week  act  Macbeth,  and  was  very  well  pleased  with  your  per¬ 
formance  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  Acts  ;  but  can’t  say  the  same  of  the  three  first.  You 
did  not  seem  to  me  to  hit  the  character  of  the  man ;  for  you  almost  everywhere  dis¬ 
covered  an  excessive  dejectedness  of  mind,  whereas  Shakspeare  represents  him  as  a 
very  bold  and  daring  fellow.*  I  ’ll  grant  you  that,  as  he  is  not  naturally  malicious, 
as  he  bears  no  hatred  to  the  man  he  kills,  and  is  excited  by  his  ambition  only,  the 
stings  of  conscience  fill  him  with  horror,  and  he  appears  greatly  disturbed.  But  the 
passion,  as  you  managed  it,  had  more  the  appearance  of  grief  than  horror  :  and  all 
those  long  pauses,  those  heart-heavings,  and  that  melancholy  countenance  and  slack 
carriage  of  body,  were  by  no  means  proper  to  express  remorse  in  a  man  so  warm 
and  full  of  courage.  Macbeth  being  by  nature  intrepid  and  seeming  born  to  com¬ 
mand,  his  behaviour  ought  to  have  something  great,  even  when  he  is  most  stung 
with  his  guilt ;  and  therefore  the  sorrowful  face  and  lowly  gestures  of  a  penitent, 
which  have  ever  a  mean  and  pitiful  look,  however  commendable  the  temper  of  mind 
may  be  from  which  they  proceed,  are  quite  incompatible  with  his  character. 

To  cite  every  place,  in  which  I  thought  this  sort  of  action  had  a  bad  effect,  would 
be  endless ;  and  therefore  I  shall  content  myself  with  one.  When  Macbeth,  over¬ 
come  with  the  horror  of  the  intended  murder  of  the  King,  tells  his  wife  he  ’ll  pro¬ 
ceed  no  farther  in  the  business,  she  makes  him  a  speech,  in  which  she  reproaches 
him  with  cowardice,  to  which  he  answers, 

“  Prithee,  peace. 

I  dare  do  all  that  may  become  a  man  : 

Who  dares  do  more  is  none.” 

This  is  one  of  the  finest  speeches  in  all  Shakspeare  ;  but  I  could  not  help  think¬ 
ing  that,  by  your  manner  of  uttering  it,  the  beauty  of  it  was  entirely  lost.  Macbeth, 
without  doubt,  while  his  wife  is  taxing  him  with  cowardice,  should  look  at  her  with 

*  I  interrupt  the  criticism  for  a  moment,  merely  to  afford,  by  a  single  sentence,  a  clue  to  the  real  cha¬ 
racter  of  Macbeth,  and  Garrick’s  exhibition  of  it. 

“  Thou  may’st  be  valiant  in  a  better  cause, 

But  now  thou  seem’st  a  coivakd.  Ed. 

D  2 


20 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


a  settled  countenance,  and  something  stern  ;  for  nothing  can  be  more  grating  to  a 
man  of  courage  than  to  hear  himself  called  coward  ;  and  though  he  afterwards  comes 
into  her  measures,  he  first  answers  her  in  a  rough  way,  “  Prithee  peace,  &c.”  which 
answer  is  rather  occasioned  by  his  indignation  at  her  reproach,  than  the  remorse  he 
feels  at  the  thought  of  the  King’s  murder.  You  did  not  seem  to  conceive  it  in  this 
light ;  but  I  fancy,  if  you  reflect  a  little  upon  it,  you  ’ll  find  there's  something  of 
reason  both  in  this  and  what  I  have  said  above. 

I  said  1  would  mention  but  one  thing  of  all  those  I  had  disliked;  but  I  have  since 
recollected  another  part  of  the  play,  that  is  of  too  much  consideration  not  to  be 
spoken  of. 

The  most  beautiful  scene  in  Macbeth,  is  that  of  the  ghost  of  Banquo ;  but  it  was 
acted  to  very  little  advantage.  In  the  first  place,  as  to  the  general  behaviour  of  Mac¬ 
beth,  I  think  his  pronunciation  should  be  more  loud  and  quick,  especially  in  the 
speech  that  begins — “  Avaunt  and  quit  my  sight !” — for  a  man  who  is  naturally  very 
bold,  does  not  speak  in  a  faint  manner,  when  he  is  frightened ;  on  the  contrary,  he  is 
louder  and  more  quick  than  at  another  time,  unless  his  fear  be  so  great  as  to  deprive 
him  of  speech  and  motion.  In  the  next  place,  I  see  no  reason  for  pronouncing  the 
speech  that  begins  with  “  Blood  hath  been  shed  ere  now,”  aside ;  for  if  Macbeth  were 
sufficiently  master  of  his  reason  to  take  care  the  company  should  not  hear  him,  ’tis 
probable  he ’d  recollect  himself  so  as  to  say  nothing  at  all,  but  go  immediately  and 
compliment  his  guests,  without  losing  more  time  in  a  speech  of  eight  or  ten  lines, 
when  he  has  already  given  ’em  so  much  cause  to  wonder  at  his  behaviour.  Lastly, 
Banquo,  who  performed  his  part  very  poorly,  should  have  stepped  back  much  quicker 
at  last ;  such  excessively  slow  motions  are  preposterous  and  unnatural,  and  keep  the 
spectator  in  a  painful  suspense.  Macbeth  should  likewise  have  followed  him  step  for 
step.  I  remember  to  have  seen  it  acted  in  that  manner,  and  it  had  a  very  good  effect. 

To  Mr.  Garrick, 
at  the  Playhouse,  in  Drury-lane. 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick, 

“  Upon  my  acting  Macbeth,  Jan.  1743.” 


J.  B.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Monday  Mom. 

ul  II  <| 

Amongst  other  obligations  you  confer  on  the  public,  that  of  restoring  Shakspeare 
to  the  stage  is  not  the  least ;  men  of  real  discernment  and  true  taste  observe 
your  attention  here,  with  particular  pleasure  and  applause ;  and  are  glad  to  see 
his  “  Anthony  and  Cleopatra”  without  the  trimmings  of  Dryden,  or  the  varnish  of 
any  inferior  hand.  Shakspeare’s  poetry,  like  the  sensitive  plant,  shrinks  at  any 
other  touch,  and  only  opens  itself  fully  to  the  sun.  The  strokes  of  true  passion 
and  perfect  nature,  to  be  found  in  his  Anthony  and  Cleopatra,  make  ample  amends 
for  the  violation  of  unities,  the  cant  charge  against  this  immortal  man :  common 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


21 


talents  should  measure  their  ground  and  their  time  exactly — the  coldest  genius  may 
observe  that ;  but,  if  you  would  give  ’em  the  whole  world,  they  cannot  reach  one 
scene  of  Shakspeare ;  and  yet  would  damn  his  whole  performance,  because  he  lays 
his  scene  in  two  or  three  parts  of  it. 

The  only  disappointment  I  received  on  the  first  appearance  of  this  piece,  was 
the  want  of  a  prologue :  your  own  talent  in  these  short  prefatory  poems  has  been 
often  shown,  and  we  should  have  been  glad  to  receive  another  instance  of  it ;  but,  as 
you  have  not  gratified  us,  I  have  ventured  to  inclose  you  one — it  was  mostly  thrown 
off  the  very  night  on  returning  from  Anthony  and  Cleopatra  ;  the  sentiments  are  such 
as  naturally  arise  in  a  breast  warm  for  liberty  and  mankind,  when  he  views  the 
struggles  of  ambition  that  brought  Rome  to  utter  ruin.  These  private  vices  are 
far  from  being  public  benefits,  according  to  the  strange  political  system  of  a  certain 
philosopher ;  and,  for  my  own  part,  I  admire  that  Providence,  who  often  punish- 
eth  these  troublers  of  the  world  by  their  own  passions,  and  defeats  their  purposes,  by 
sinking  them  in  some  way  or  other,  so  as  to  make  them  victims,  and  thus  avenge  an 
injured  world.  Such  as  the  prologue  is,  it  is  at  your  service.  You  may  alter  or  sup¬ 
press  it  as  you  think  proper.  The  reflections  are  general  in  favour  of  liberty,  and 
without  the  least  couched  satire  against  any  man  living. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

J.  B. 

P.  S.  If  you  favour  me  with  a  line,  direct  it  to  be  left  with  Bradshaw  Esq.  at  the 
Seven  Stars,  in  Fleet-street. 

Endorsed,  “  Letter  from  an  unknown  about 

For  David  Garrick,  Esq.  Shakspeare’s  Antony  and  Cleopatra.” 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Jan.  13. 

SIR, 

I  thank  you  for  your  letter,  and  the  candid  manner  in  which  you  received  my 
poor  conjectures  on  what  must  be  with  you  the  most  tender  subject ;  it  is  with 
every  man  that  has  the  laudable  ambition  of  excelling. 

I  observed  with  pleasure  to-night,  that  you  were  something  easier  with  Good¬ 
man  Delver :  the  melancholy  essential  to  the  character  in  general,  should,  I  think, 
have  hindered  the  great  author  from  representing  him  engaged  in  that  trifling  dia¬ 
logue ;  but,  as  Hamlet  must  quibble  with  the  peasant,  surely  you  can  never  be 
censured  for  putting  on  that  air  and  countenance,  which  is  agreeable  to  the  sen¬ 
timents  you  are  uttering.  You  may  remember  too,  that  whatever  degree  ot  ease  is 
expressed  in  talking  with  the  clown  is  supposed  to  be  put  on,  and  not  real,  so  that 
the  melancholy  essential  to  the  character  is  not  thereby  violated,  any  more  than  by 
the  madness  which  is  assumed  before. 


22 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  am  glad  you  have  changed  the  pronunciation  of  that  word  I  made  bold  to 
mention,  as  I  am  convinced  you  are  right  in  it,  and  as  it  was  such  a  kind  of  fault  as  is 
level  to  the  capacity  of  every  coxcomb,  who  has  not  attention  enough  to  compare 
the  particular  sentiments  and  actions  together,  and  to  judge  of  their  fitness. 

You  are  either  too  complaisant  in  telling  me  we  were  of  the  same  opinion  as  to 
these  words — “  Methinks  I  see  my  father — ”  or  you  did  not  express  what  you  in¬ 
tended  by  your  action  at  that  passage.  The  eyes  intently  fixed  on  one  point,  and 
the  stretched-out  arm  directed  to  the  same  point,  is  a  very  expressive  and  proper 
attitude,  if  you  speak  the  words  in  a  literal  sense.  But  these  actions  limit  the 
words  to  this  sense  ;  and  are  therefore  improper  to  them,  if  their  meaning  be  figu¬ 
rative,  as  I  said  in  my  last  it  seemed  to  be  to  vie :  and  so,  I  dare  say,  you  will  think, 
upon  recollecting  that  Hamlet’s  thoughts  are  then  employed  in  the  admiration  of  his 
father ;  to  raise  the  idea  of  which  admiration,  he  uses  this  poetic  hyperbole  ;  the 
plain  meaning  of  which,  in  prose,  is  surely  no  more  than  if  he  had  said,  “  I  have  a 
clear  remembrance  of  all  my  father’s  virtues  at  this  moment.”  Believe  me,  it  is  no 
obstinacy  that  makes  me  persist  in  this  opinion,  but  the  apparent  truth  of  it.  There 
is  this  comfort,  that  if  you  are  mistaken  in  this  passage,  the  mistake  reaches  not 
the  million.  But  you  know  how  some  things  decrease  in  value  by  the  least  flaw  dis¬ 
cernible  to  learned  eyes.  It  is  only  for  this  reason  1  have  ventured  these  guesses 
upon  the  small  errors  that  appeared  to  me :  whether  I  am  right  or  no,  you  are  still 
the  judge. 

I  am. 

Your  sincere  admirer.* 

Mr.  Garrick,  at  the  Bedford  Coffee-house, 

Co  vent  Garden. 


L.  M.  N.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR, 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  send  you  two  copies  of  a  little  poetical  Essay  not 
yet  published  ;  one  of  them  I  beg  you  will  do  me  the  honour  of  accepting  yourself, 
the  other  must  be  indebted  to  you  for  a  conveyance  to  Mr.  Ansty,  as  I  am  at  a 
loss  for  his  address.  I  flatter  myself  I  shall  receive  a  line  from  both  of  you,  to 
inform  if  the  Essays  come  safe  to  hand.  I  have  not  the  vanity  to  suppose  so  trifling 
a  performance  can  entitle  me  to  any  great  share  of  applause  from  two  gentlemen 
whose  taste  the  most  elegant  authors  and  most  refined  conversation  have  contributed 
to  form.  It  will  be  an  ample  gratification  to  me  to  hear,  that  you  did  not  think  the 
quarter  of  an  hour  spent  in  perusing  it  wholly  lost. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient, 

L.  M.  N. 

At  Mr.  Ridley’s,  Bookseller,  St.  James’s-street. 

*  I  may  be  allowed  to  add,  “  and  very  rational  admirer.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


23 


P.  W.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


John’s  Coffee-house,  Gray’s  Inn,  Feb.  20,  1744. 

As  you  seem  to  me  to  be  a  very  good  judge  of  Shakspeare,  and  have  often  given 
us  his  true  sense  and  meaning  where  his  learned  editors  could  give  us  neither,*  1 
shall  submit  to  your  judgment  a  line  in  “  Hamlet, ’’  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  wrong- 
placed  in  all  the  editions  that  I  have  seen  ;  and  though  it  may  seem  of  no  great  con¬ 
sequence  to  common  judges,  I  believe  it  will  not  appear  so  to  you.  The  line  I  mean 
is  inserted  in  the  Ghost’s  speech,  where  he  gives  Hamlet  an  account  how  he  was  poi¬ 
soned  in  the  orchard,  and  comes  after  these  lines : — 

“  Thus  was  I  sleeping,  by  a  brother’s  hand, 

Of  life,  of  crown,  of  queen,  at  once  dispatch’d  ; 

Cut  off  even  in  the  blossoms  of  my  sin, 

No  reckoning  made,  but  sent  to  my  account 
With  all  my  imperfections  on  my  head.” 

These  lines,  properly  pronounced,  are  enough  to  make  one’s  blood  run  cold,  and 
(as  Shakspeare  expresses  it)  to  “  harrow  up  the  soul,”  &c.  Now,  I  make  no  doubt 
but  the  next  line,  which  is  absurdly  given  to  the  Ghost,  was  intended  by  the 
author  for  Hamlet — 


“  Oh  horrible!  oh  horrible  !  most  horrible  !” 

This  exclamation  comes  very  properly  and  naturally  from  Hamletf  in  this  place  ; 
and  in  my  opinion,  when  justly  spoken,  would  add  very  much  to  the  solemnity 
and  horror  of  this  dreadful  scene ;  and  the  Ghost’s  pause  in  this  place  would  give  the 
audience  a  stronger  idea  of  the  lines  above-mentioned,  especially  when  assisted  with 
proper  action  and  gesture.  Besides,  if  you  consider  that  the  narrative  part  of  the 
Ghost’s  speech  ends  at  those  lines,  it  seems  absurd  that  Hamlet  should  say  nothing 
in  this  place  ;  what  follows  is  only  advice  to  Hamlet  how  to  proceed. 

“  If  thou  hast  Nature  in  thee,  bear  it  not ; 

Let  not  the  royal  bed,”  &c. 

I  make  no  doubt  but  that  you  are  already  convinced  by  what  I  have  said  that 


*  We  have  had  so  much  jargon  of  this  sort,  that  it  demands  some  good  humour  to  reply  to  it  .  but 
men  love  to  compliment  their  own  sagacity  at  the  expense  of  their  teachers.  Mr.  Garrick,  as  a  rival  com¬ 
mentator,  had  one  great  advantage — he  could  in  various  ways  render  evident  how  he  understood  a  pas¬ 
sage,  and  by  the  beauty  of  utterance,  and  the  aid  of  action,  carry  the  hearers  judgment  along  with  him. 
Drily  in  print  to  expound  a  difficult  passage,  requires  talents  of  another  kind,  and  is  only  valued  as  we 
begin  to  study  accuracy. — Ed. 

t  It  does  so;  and  nothing  but  the  want  of  authority  from  the  old  copies  to  give  it  to  him,  continues  it  in 
the  speech  of  the  Ghost. — Ed. 


24 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  line  in  question  ought  to  be  given  to  Hamlet;  yet,  to  put  it  in  a  clearer  light, 
you  will  please  to  observe,  that  almost  all  that  Hamlet  says  in  this  interview  with  the 
Ghost  is  exclamatory— Alas,  poor  ghost !  Oh,  Heaven!  Oh,  my  prophetic  soul!  Oh, 
all  you  host  of  Heaven  !  &c.  Another  advantage,  in  my  opinion,  would  attend  this 
alteration :  it  would  give  you,  as  an  actor,  an  opportunity  of  varying  your  attitude 
when  you  speak  the  line  ;  which,  as  it  is  now  acted,  must  needs  be  very  troublesome 
to  you  during  that  long  speech. 

If  you  think  this  hint  worth  following,  I  may  perhaps  send  you  some  other 
remarks  on  this  play. 


To  Mr.  Garrick, 

At  the  Theatre  in  Drury-lane. 


I  am,  Sir, 

Your  sincere  well-wisher,  and  humble  servant, 

P.  W. 

Endorsed,  “  This  Letter  is  answered.” 


P.  W.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sunday  evening,  21st  March. 

Your  very  obliging  reply  to  the  few  cursory  remarks  I  sent  you,  subjects  you 
to  other  impertinences  of  the  same  kind:  like  civilities  done  to  a  pressing  client, 
which  are  sure  to  tempt  him  to  become  more  importunate.  Instead  of  pleading  the 
merit  of  obligation,  I  find  myself  to  have  contracted  a  large  debt  of  honour  :  this 
I  know  not  how  I  shall  discharge,  as  I  can  hardly  pretend  to  have  conferred  a  favour. 
But  you  will  do  me,  Sir,  the  justice  to  believe,  that  what  I  wrote  proceeded  from  a 
motive  of  esteem,  and  the  high  regard  which  I  entertain  of  your  performances  in  a 
public  character.  Your  business,  I  confess,  in  life  is  attended  with  many  perverse 
circumstances,  which  are  incident  likewise  to  other  stations  of  the  like  public  notice. 
It  is  extremely  hard,  indeed,  that  while  you  are  entertaining  the  world  by  a  painful 
and  laborious  employment,  you  should  be  considered  only  as  a  mark  set  up  for  every 
bolt ;  exposed  to  the  senseless  cavils  of  all  the  little  word-catchers  who  lie  in  wait  for 
syllables  and  feedmpon  a  slip  of  inadvertency.  You  are  pleased  to  exempt  me  from 
this  number :  a  compliment  I  esteem  the  more  agreeable,  as  no  prepossession,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  could  get  the  better  of  your  judgment.  As  you  appeared  not  displeased  with 
the  first  fruits  of  my  reflections,  they  are  followed  by  others  of  the  same  nature  ; 
and  I  would  flatter  myself,  they  will  give  you  no  occasion  to  alter  your  opinion. 

First  then,  Sir,  I  will  take  the  freedom  to  point  out  a  line  in  “  Hamlet,’  wherein 
I  differ  from  your  manner  of  speaking. 

“  My  father — methinks  I  see  my  father!” 

If  I  mistake  not,  you  generally  pronounce  this  in  a  sharp  accent,  and  accompany 
it  with  a  start,  as  if  it  was  occasioned  by  a  sudden  surprise,  and  you  had  a  sensible 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


25 


representation  of  him  before  your  eyes  ;  whereas  it  appears  from  what  follows,  that 
you  are  supposed  to  have  only  the  idea  of  him  in  your  imagination,  or  the  mind’s 
eye :  this  being  granted,  it  may  be  delivered,  perhaps,  not  amiss  by  a  tender  com¬ 
posure  of  the  countenance,  and  in  a  languid  affectionate  tone  of  voice  :  this  manner 
of  pronunciation  may  be  justified  from  that  air  of  melancholy  which  characterizes 
Hamlet  at  the  beginning  of  the  play. — You  will  excuse  me,  Sir,  if  I  mention  after 
this,  a  slight  conjecture  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  same  scene,  which,  being  proposed 
to  you  only  as  such,  you  are  at  liberty  to  treat  as  it  deserves. 

Ham.  “  My  father’s  spirit  in  arms  !  all  is  not  well,”  &c. 

The  usual  method  of  pronouncing  this,  as  authorized  by  all  the  copies,  is  to  stop 
at  arms  !  but  I  would  point  the  line  in  this  manner : — 

“  My  father’s  spirit !  in  arms  !*  all  is  not  well,”  &c. 

This,  you  will  perceive,  occasions  a  double  pause,  and  throws  a  little  more  life  into 
the  verse.  Hamlet  begins  to  ruminate  on  the  relation  he  had  heard  :  the  first  thing 
which  naturally  strikes  him  is  the  appearance  of  his  father’s  spirit,  from  whence  he  is 
led  to  reflect  upon  his  garb  and  habit :  upon  this  he  seems  to  lay  some  stress,  as  he 
was  before  particularly  inquisitive  about  it.  I  have  troubled  you  too  long  with  a 
trivial  alteration,  which  if  it  cannot  support  itself,  has  not  merit  enough  to  deserve 
your  notice. — The  entrance  of  the  Ghost  comes  next  under  consideration.  Here  I 
cannot  perceive  any  necessity  for  your  being  held  immediately  by  Marcellus  and 
Horatio.  The  agony  of  amazement,  I  suppose,  does  not  require  you  to  be  thus  sup¬ 
ported  at  the  first.  It  would  probably  be  more  natural  for  them,  though  perhaps  not 
altogether  so  easy,  to  fall  into  an  attitude  of  terror  and  consternation  during  the  time 
you  are  addressing  the  Ghost.  I  think  this  action  the  more  necessary  to  he  observed, 
because  it  gives  you  at  the  same  time  no  opportunity  of  making  those  several  strug¬ 
gles  to  get  loose  when  you  are  speaking,  and  which  appear  to  me  equally  improper, 
whilst  you  are  yet  ignorant  of  the  Spirit  s  intention,  and  are  entirely  lost  in  fear  and 
surprise.  When  you  come,  indeed,  to  this  line, 

“  It  will  not  speak  :  then  will  I  follow  it 

an  effort  to  advance  is  just,  and  it  is  then  proper  for  the  soldiers  to  prevent  it  by 
seizing  your  arms. — There  is  a  small  grammatical  error  about  the  end  of  this  act, 
which  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  acquaint  you  with,  as  I  remember  it  escaped  you  on  the 
stage : — 

“  That  you  at  such  times  seeing  me,  never  shall 
With  arms  encumbered  thus — to  note,”f  &c. 


*  This  exactly  suited  the  quick  impassioned  style  of  Garrick,  and  he  adopted  the  improvement.  — Ed. 
t  To  note  is  the  text  of  Shakspeare  ;  who  seems,  by  irregular,  involved  construction,  to  hint  tin 
tumultuous  condition  of  Hamlet’s  thoughts. — Ed. 


VOL.  I. 


F. 


26 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Common  sense  and  construction  require  we  should  read  denote. — Suffer  me  to  make 
a  transition  to  “  Venice  Preserved,”  and  to  propose  a  question  about  the  following 
lines : — 

“  I  have  now  not  fifty  ducats  in  the  world, 

Yet  still  I  am  in  love,  and  pleased  with  ruin.” 

If  you  understand  by  love  Jaffier's  affection  for  Belvidera,  you  spoke  with  propriety 
in  pausing  at  that  word,  and  laying  a  distinct  emphasis  upon  the  last ;  but  if  you 
think  with  me  that  it  refers  to  ruin,  it  would  be  juster  to  sink  the  pause  by  connect¬ 
ing  it  with  pleased,  and  gradually  falling  the  voice  at  the  end  of  the  verse. 

If  these  remarks  may  be  deemed  worthy  an  answer,  you  may  be  pleased  to  con¬ 
tinue  your  first  address  to, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

P.  W  * 

P.  S.  I  must  not  omit  to  thank  you  for  the  great  entertainment  you  gave  me 
in  Macbeth  ;  and  though  I  observed  you  with  all  the  malice  of  a  friend,  my  gleanings 
in  this  way  were  very  inconsiderable,  through  your  extraordinary  performance.  Such 
however  as  they  are,  they  shall  be  transmitted  to  you  at  another  opportunity. 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Saturday  night,  Dec.  4. 

SIR, 

Three  or  four  friends  of  us  saw  you  act  Hamlet  the  second  night  of  your  per¬ 
forming  it;  and  though  you  delivered  many  speeches  with  all  the  grace  and  justness 
that  could  be  desired,  yet  we  all  agreed  at  the  conclusion  of  the  play,  whatever  accla¬ 
mations  had  been  made  by  the  audience,  that  upon  the  whole  you  had  acted  the 
part  ill.  Our  reason  was,  that  you  had  not  entered  into  the  true  character  of  Hamlet ; 
in  whom,  notwithstanding  the  present  affliction  of  his  mind,  there  is  a  certain  dry 
humour  and  quaintness  of  temper,  that  you  had  by  no  means  hit  upon.  Instead  of 
that  lovely,  unfortunate  creature,  in  whose  happiness  the  reader  so  warmly  interests 
himself,  and  whose  misfortunes  he  looks  upon  as  his  own,  you  exhibited  a  hot  testy 
fellow,  for  ever  flying  into  a  passion,  even  where  there  was  no  provocation  in  the 
world.  Some  of  us  were  mentioning  this  last  Wednesday  in  a  large  company,  where 
every  one  happened  to  be  of  our  opinion.  But  a  gentleman  present  assuring  us  you 
mended  greatly  every  time,  and  that  you  then  acted  the  part  incomparably  better 
than  you  had  done  at  first,  we  all  agreed  to  go  the  next  night.  Accordingly  we 
went,  and  were  not  a  little  surprised  to  see  what  an  improvement  you  had  made 

*  [  presume  Paul  Whitehead,  whom  these  letters  might  introduce  to  Garrick’s  intimacy  and  friend¬ 
ship. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


27 


in  so  short  a  time.  But  we  still  thought  you  in  many  places  too  warm,  and  that,  hy 
being  so,  you  instilled  a  certain  meanness  into  the  character,  that  the  poet  assuredly 
never  intended.  To  give  you  an  instance.  In  that  part  where  Polonius  tells  Hamlet 
the  actors  are  come,  and  Hamlet  stops  his  mouth  with  crying  Buz,  what  mighty 
crime  had  the  old  fellow  committed,  that  the  other,  who  is  supposed  to  be  a  generous 
and  good-natured  man,  should  resent  it  with  such  a  passionate  look  and  action  as 
you  there  use  ?  It  is  true,  Hamlet  thinks  him  a  tiresome  old  wretch  :  but  that  does 
not  warrant  his  resenting  an  innocent  speech  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  himself 
appear  of  a  choleric  temper.  Again,  where  Polonius  tells  him  he  will  use  the  actors 
according  to  their  deserts,  which  is  certainly  a  very  rational  speech,  why  must  Ham¬ 
let  contradict  him  in  that  pettish  manner  ?  Is  it  not  more  reasonable  to  suppose  he 
does  it  in  a  mild  and  grave  way  ? 

But  there  is  a  speech  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  play,  in  which  you  run  into 
a  contrary  extreme.  Where  Hamlet,  who  knew  nothing  of  Ophelia's  death,  learns 
all  at  once  that  it  is  for  her  the  grave  he  has  been  so  long  looking  at  is  dug,  he 
breaks  out  into  this  exclamation, 

“  How  !  the  fair  Ophelia  !” 

Now,  considering  the  interest  he  has  in  Ophelia,  and  the  suddenness  with  which  he 
learns  the  news  of  her  death,  is  not  it  to  be  supposed  he  is  seized  with  horror,  and 
breaks  out  into  a  loud  exclamation  ?  Or  if  the  violence  of  his  grief  be  imagined  so 
great  as  to  take  away  his  strength,  his  concern  might  be  shown  in  a  faint  and  trem¬ 
bling  voice  :  and  I  own  I  should  prefer  this  last  manner.*  However,  one  way  or 
other,  he  ought  to  show  himself  pierced  to  the  quick.  The  presence  of  the  King 
and  Queen  can  be  no  restraint  upon  him,  since  he  is  supposed  to  be  at  a  distance  from 
them,  and  not  perceived  by  them.  It  is  a  little  surprising  that,  having  generally  too 
much  fire,  you  should  be  so  very  calm  in  this  place :  for,  certainly,  if  you  were  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  a  hired  mourner,  and  to  be  paid  for  repeating  the  sentence,  you  could  not 
do  it  with  more  seeming  unconcern. 

I  have  two  or  three  words  more  to  say  to  you,  and  then  I  have  done.  That  scrap 
of  Latin  in  the  last  scene  of  the  first  act  is  thought  mighty  silly  :  and  it  would  be 
much  better  to  leave  it  out. 

Your  accompanying  the  player,  by  acting  the  speech  while  he  repeats  it,  is  judged 
to  have  too  mean  a  look  for  the  son  of  a  king. 

I  saw  you  last  night  act  Fondlewife,  and  could  not  help  thinking  it  a  good  deal 
over-acted,  especially  in  that  sort  of  feeble  trot  you  seemed  to  affect  so  much.  A 
part  over-acted  ever  makes  the  actor  look  foolish. 

Don’t  think  from  any  thing  I  have  here  said  that  I  am  not  your  great  admire  1. 

I  assure  you  I  am  ;  and  not  only  look  upon  you  as  infinitely  superior  to  an)  tiling 

*  This  passage  has  been  rather  slighted  by  every  body  except  Henderson,  who  made  it  tin'll  tluougi' 
every  bosom.  The  writer  of  the  present  letter  was  a  critic  who  merited  attention.  Ed. 

E  2 


28 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


we  have  had  for  many  years  ;  but  believe,  that  with  proper  care,  you  may  prove  as 
great  an  actor  as  ever  England  produced. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  at  the  Playhouse 
iu  Drury  Lane. 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

What  demon  possessed  Theophilus  Cibber,  that  he  should  attempt  Richard? 
Was  not  his  ill-acquired  reputation  for  acting  sinking  fast  enough,  but  he  must  thus 
at  once  precipitate  its  ruin  ?  He  performed  the  part  infinitely  worse  than  his  father, 
who  was  only  supposed  to  do  it  well,  because  he  was  generally  allowed  to  act  a  villain 
to  perfection.  But  besides  other  deficiencies,  he  had  not  in  him  the  least  portion  of 
that  divine  energy  which  has  now  made  this  character  so  illustrious.  An  ingrateful 
grovelling  behaviour  used  to  attend  him  under  all  the  different  passions  he  ought  to 
have  assumed,  insomuch  that  I  know  many  were  formerly  so  disgusted  with  the  part 
on  that  account,  as  they  could  not  prevail  on  themselves  to  see  it  again,  even  some 
time  after  it  had  been  the  wonder  of  the  town,  and  its  fame  spread  through  the  whole 
nation.  I  saw  Theophilus  do  Bayes  ;  because,  I  heard,  he  had  got  a  reputation  from 
that  part ;  but  now  as  he  performed  it  execrably  ill,  so  he  met  with  no  applause.  Did 
this  arise  from  his  being  so  awed  by  the  presence  of  one  of  his  spectators,  that  he  omit¬ 
ted  many  of  those  grimaces,  that  used  to  delight  the  multitude  ?  Or  have  the  people 
learned  to  judge  better  from  having  of  late  oft  beheld  this  part  acted  so  inimitably  ? 

Old  Cibber  used  to  do  it  with  great  applause  ;  and  indeed,  as  he,  according  to  cus¬ 
tom,  did  himself,  and  his  own  character  often  falling  in  with  that  of  Bayes,  he  had 
merit.  But  were  he  to  do  it  at  present  as  well  as  ever,  the  town  would  readily  dis¬ 
cern  how  far  he  fell  short  of  that  perfection  they  now  so  justly  admire.  He,  in 
acting,  could  never  thoroughly  divest  himself  of  his  own  temper,  which  mixing  in 
some  degree  with  the  characters  he  Avas  thought  to  do  the  best,  such  as  Duretete, 
Fondlewife,  &c.  they  appeared  less  natural  in  him,  than  we  have  seen  them  of  late. 
Is  the  form  of  the  hat  well  adapted  to  the  character  of  Bayes  ?  When  it  covers  that 
foretop  of  his  wig,  is  not  a  great  share  of  his  gravity  departed  from  him  ?  Would 
not  an  old  beaver,  whose  narrow  brims  lay  somewhat  flat,  make  a  more  grotesque 
figure  ?  Why  are  the  spectacles  omitted  in  perusing  the  inscription  that  was  fastened 
to  the  coffin  ?  The  excuse  he  makes,  that  he  uses  them  from  the  badness  of  the 
writing,  agrees  well  with  his  boasting,  at  the  beginning  of  the  play,  of  his  being  able 
to  toil  as  a  Beau  garcon. 

The  acting  of  Hamlet  has  convinced  every  one  they  never  saw  it  performed 
before.  But  how  does  an  additional  colour  in  the  countenance  suit  with  one  supposed 
to  be  of  a  very  melancholy  cast  of  mind  ?  If  any  censure  the  delivery  of  the  solilo¬ 
quies,  they  must  want  judgment ;  for  certainly  that  enthusiasm,  which  forces  a  bur¬ 
dened  soul  to  clothe  its  most  retired  thoughts  in  words,  must  compel  it  to  look  on 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


29 


all  the  surrounding  objects  as  witnesses  to  its  distress,  though  it  makes  no  direct 
appeal  unto  them. 

In  Archer,  all  must  own,  there  never  appeared  so  genteel  a  footman,  or  a  com¬ 
pleter  gentleman ;  the  one  fit  to  triumph  over  the  pert  airs  of  an  innkeeper’s  fair 
daughter,  the  other  inspired  with  that  happy  impudence,  so  timely  corrected  by  a 
most  profound  respect,  as  not  to  be  resisted  by  the  finest  woman  in  the  world,  lan¬ 
guishing  under  the  neglect  of  a  brutal  husband.  But  did  Archer  reply  with  quick¬ 
ness  enough,  when  Mrs.  Sullen  asked  whether  he  intended  to  be  rude  ?  “  The  Lyin<>- 
Valet”  used  to  astonish  every  one,  when  it  was  acted  after  a  grand  character ;  and 
the  endeavour  in  some  sort  to  imitate  it,  has  acquired  to  a  noble  youth  great  com¬ 
mendation  in  the  part  of  Syrus.* 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  in  the  Piazzas,  Covent  Garden. 


L.  M.  N.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Old  Slaughter’s  Coffee-house, 

St.  Martin’s-lane. 

SIR, 

You  may,  perhaps,  remember  some  time  ago  receiving  two  little  pamphlets  under 
the  name  of  “  The  Bagatelle one  you  did  the  author  the  honour  of  accepting  of 
yourself,  the  other  you  were  kind  enough  to  undertake  to  transmit  to  Mr.  Ansty :  as 
the  author  has  no  doubt  of  your  having  performed  your  promise,  and  as  not  the  least 
notice  was  taken  by  that  gentleman  of  the  receipt  of  the  book,  he  cannot  help  saying 
that  Mr.  Ansty’s  behaviour  in  this  affair  does  not  exactly  square  with  his  notions  of 
good-breeding ;  for  had  his  judgment  excluded  any  compliment  to  the  author’s  abili¬ 
ties,  still  his  good-nature  might  have  acknowledged  some  small  obligation  to  his 
intentions.  Did  Mr.  Ansty  suppose,  if  he  had  strained  his  politeness  to  say  a  civil 
thing  which  his  understanding  could  not  have  subscribed  to,  that,  like  the  opinion 
of  a  Critical  Reviewer,  it  would  have  served  as  a  tail-piece  to  the  advertisement  of  the 
pamphlet  ?  or  did  he  imagine  the  dedicator’s  translation  of  pretium  dicere  muneri  was 
“  Sir,  the  loan  of  five  guineas  would  confer  a  lasting  obligation  on  me  ?”  Neither  of 
these  surmises,  however,  would  have  been  true ;  the  author’s  attention  to  the  ftness 
of  things  would  have  prevented  him  making  an  improper  use  of  Mr.  Ansty’s  name, 
and  the  easiness  of  his  circumstances  would  have  put  him  above  casting  any  oblique 
glances  towards  his  purse.  The  pamphlet  was  published,  but  immediately  called  in  ; 
not  as  a  rickety  bantling  that  was  tottering  for  the  want  of  support  of  Mr.  Ansty’s 
avowed  protection,  nor  from  any  coolness  of  reception  it  met  with  from  the  public, 
but  from  the  author’s  being  convinced  (on  a  more  mature  consideration)  that  the  task 
he  had  undertaken  was,  at  best,  but  an  invidious  one,  and  that  the  most  unprofitable 

*  A  character  in  the  “  Heautontimorunienos”  (Self-tormentor)  of  Terence,  acted,  I  suppose,  as  the 
Westminster  play  of  the  year. 


30 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


species  of  knight-errantry  was  the  encountering  other  people’s  absurdities.  Perhaps 
you  will  not  deny  that  a  young  man  might  have  acted  a  less  wise  part,  when  he  tells 
you  that  on  this  conviction  he  resolved  to  change  a  propensity  to  point  out  qualities 
which  are  objects  of  indignation  and  ridicule  in  others,  into  a  habit  of  correcting 
whatever  might  deserve  the  name  of  vice  or  folly  in  himself.*  He  begs  leave  to 
subscribe  himself, 

With  unfeigned  respect, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

L.  M.  N. 

To  David  Garrick,  Esq. 

Adelphi-buildings. 


FROM  HENRY  ASTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

From  a  Sick-bed  in  New  Bond-street,  March  9th,  1744-5. 

MY  DEAR  DAVY, 

Having  seen  a  gentleman,  yesterday  in  the  evening,  who  was  at  Drury-lane 
Playhouse  the  night  before,  and  on  whose  judgment  I  know  I  may  rely,  I  asked  him 
how  he  had  been  entertained  with  my  friend  Garrick,  in  the  character  of  Othello  ? 
His  answer  was — Sunt  queedam  mediocria,  sunt  bona  plura ;  no  mention  at  all  of 
any  mala.  This  led  me  to  inquire  what  were  the  particular  instances  in  which  he 
thought  you  erred.  He  told  me,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  play,  when  you  are 
called  before  the  Senate,  what  you  had  to  say  there  was  delivered  with  such  an  exact 
propriety  of  emphasis  and  accent,  as  he  had  scarce  ever  heard  ;  but  that  your  action 
was,  in  his  opinion,  a  little  exceptionable.  Not,  said  he,  that  there  was  too  much  of  it, 
but  that  it  was  not  suitable  to  the  occasion ;  for  when  a  man  is  pleading  in  his  own 
behalf,  before  judges  who  are  his  superiors,  the  dignity  of  his  action  consists  in 
modesty,  not  in  pomp  ;  and  that  therefore  it  could  not  be  too  gentle  and  serene. 
That,  though  he  was  certainly  the  hero  of  the  drama,  that  part  of  his  character  was 
for  a  while  to  be  suspended ;  and  that  his  deportment  would,  very  well,  have  become 
Othello,  had  he  been  under  trial,  as  a  captive,  at  some  foreign  tribunal.  But  he  said, 
that  all  the  different  modulations  of  your  voice  in  that  recital,  (which  required 
many)  were  observed  with  a  justness  greatly  beyond  any  thing  he  had  known. 

The  propriety  of  your  action  he  farther  questioned  with  regard  to  the  expression 
of  your  jealousy,  and  the  indignation  naturally  and  necessarily  accompanying  it ; 
alleging  that  little  wincings  and  gesticulations  of  the  body  were  much  below  it ; 
that  they  were  fitter  for  a  man  under  the  impressions  of  fear,  or  on  whom  some 
bodilv  torture  was  inflicting,  than  one  labouring  under  the  emotions  of  such  tumul- 
tuous  passions,  which  were  best  expressed  by  the  change  of  countenance,  the  shaking 
of  the  head,  and  the  swoln  breast. 

*  The  writer  concludes  his  letter  with  a  sentence,  which  few  satirists  ever  passed  upon  their  wit  for 
the  amendment  of  their  manners. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


31 


He  added,  that  though  he  was  no  admirer  of  Mr.  Quin,  lie  should  be  glad  if  you 
would  deign  to  imitate  him  in  your  dismissing  of  Desdemona  with  the  following 
words  : — “  Away, — away,— away  !”  which  he  utters  very  affectingly,  by  a  melancholy 
murmur  in  his  voice,  very  expressive  of  that  mixture  of  love  and  anguish  conflicting 
in  his  mind.  He  told  me  you  was  guilty  of  two  or  three  grossly  false  accents,  but 
observed,  at  the  same  time,  that  in  the  flood  of  speech  that  must  happen  sometimes 
to  every  player  in  the  world ;  and  as  they  could  not  be  errors  of  judgment  in  you, 
he  concluded  they  would  be  rectified  as  soon  as  the  part  became  more  familiar  and 
easy  to  you. 

I  have,  my  dear  Davy,  transmitted  this  conversation  to  you,  as  well  as  I  am  at 
present  able  to  recollect  it,  conceiving  that  it  might  be  of  some  use  to  you,  to  whom 
I  wish  well  in  this,  and  all  other  your  undertakings. 

My  informant  farther  observed  in  your  favour,  that  you  have  so  eclipsed  your 
rival,  that  he  may  be  able  to  say,  like  Othello,  “  his  occupation’s  lost.”  My  dear 

Davy,  adieu.  Observe  this  chasm, - but  don't  waggishly  cry  out,  (as  you  were 

pleased  facetiously  to  christen  him  the  other  day)  that  my  old  friend,  the  hack- 
apostle,  has  been  communicating  his  observations  on  profane  subjects,  upon  holy 
paper,  or  paper  with  a  hole  in  it ;  it ’s  all  one,  you  know,  good  Mr.  Bayes.  So  once 
more  adieu ! 

Yours  most  affectionately, 

Henry  Aston.* 


THE  DUKE  OF  BEDFORD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Woburn  Abbey,  Sept.  17th,  1744. 

SIR, 

Inclosed  I  send  you  my  note  on  Mr.  Child  and  Co.  for  48/.  2s.  10r/.  and  am 
much  obliged  to  you  for  the  trouble  you  have  given  yourself  in  getting  the  scenes, 
and  other  things  necessary  for  our  plays. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Bedford. 


R.  M.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Wednesday,  3d  April,  1745. 

MR.  GARRICK, 

Though  I  have  not  the  pleasure  to  be  known  to  you,  I  believe  I  have  as  great 
an  esteem  and  admiration  for  you  as  any  man  living.  I  take  this  opportunity  ot  in¬ 
forming  you,  that  I  am  a  young  officer,  the  son  of  noble  parents,  and  born  to  a  pretty 

*  With  the  family  of  Aston  Mr.  Garrick  was  intimately  connected  ;  and  in  the  decline  ot  life,  his  triend 
Gilbert  Walmesley  took  to  wife  a  daughter  of  that  respectable  house. — Ed. 


32 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


good  fortune  :  this  is  all  I  hope  you  "will  expect  to  hear  of  me  at  present,  for  I  shall 
go  to  Flanders  with  the  Duke  on  Friday  :  after  the  campaign,  I  shall,  with  your 
permission,  do  myself  the  pleasure  to  make  myself  known  to  you.  The  reason  of 
this  epistle  is  this,  that  I  have  a  long  time  studied  you,  and,  in  most  of  your  inimita¬ 
ble  performances,  have  not  been  able  to  admire  you  without  sorrow  to  see  you 
exhaust  your  spirits  so  much.  I  saw  you  last  night  in  the  character  of  Tancred. 
and  though  I  was  concerned  for  the  Count,  my  grief  was  inexpressible  for  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick.  You  have  now  performed  it  for  nine  nights ;  consider  the  part,  and  whether 
nature  can  well  support  the  frequent  repetition  of  such  shocks.  Your  fame  is 
sufficiently  established  as  an  incomparable  actor;  you  cannot  well  increase  it.  Upon 
the  whole,  permit  me  to  advise  you  to  resolve  not  to  act  upon  any  account  above 
three  times  a  week ;  if  the  town  should  take  it  ill  at  first,  a  modest  apology  from 
so  celebrated  a  man  as  you,  will  have  such  an  effect  upon  the  audience,  as  their 
humanity  cannot  resist.  This  is  the  counsel  which  I  take  upon  me,  perhaps  too 
boldly,  to  give  you  for  your  own  sake.  I  wait  with  impatience  to  become  the 
acquaintance  of  a  man  who  is  endowed  with  such  amiable  qualities,  in  whose  favour 
I  am  so  strongly  prejudiced,  and  who  will,  I  hope,  pardon  this  presumption  in  his 

Eternal  admirer  and  most  hearty  well-wisher, 

R.  M. 

P.  S.  That  this  opinion  of  mine  may  not  appear  in  so  strange  a  light  as  it 
otherwise  might,  I  must  inform  you  that  I  claim  my  judgment  in  plays  from  a 
great  delight  which  1  always  took  in  them.  I  have  also  performed  the  parts  of 
Hamlet,  Cato,  Caled,  and  Tamerlane,  with  great  applause  :  in  which  last  character, 
it  is  my  opinion,  you  would  greatly  shine. 

To  Mr.  Garrick, 

at  his  Lodging,  in  or  near  Covent  Garden. 


A.  B.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


If  the  following  information  is  of  any  use  to  your  theatrical  state,  it  will  answer 
my  intent :  I  have  it  from  a  third  person,  for  whose  sake  I  beg  you  will  never  men¬ 
tion  your  receiving  any  such  account  as  this ;  and  if  you  keep  this  secret,  it  is 
possible  I  may  have  farther  accounts.  Lately  as  Mr.  Rich  and  a  friend  or  two 
were  talking  how  he  could  strengthen  his  company  against  the  next  season,  for  if 
he  did  not  break  the  knot  at  Drury-Lane  he  must  be  ruined  ;  he  said  he  could  easily 
do  it,  if  he  had  but  a  woman,  for  he  could  then  have  men  enough.  They  advised 
him  to  engage  Mrs.  Cibber  early  ;  but  he  said  that  would  not  do,  he  could  have  had 
her  this  year  if  he  would,  but  in  his  situation  he  must  have  a  woman  that  would 
do  in  comedy  as  well  as  tragedy,  and  one  that  could  go  through  the  business  ;  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


33 


Mrs.  Cibber  was  worth  nothing  in  comedy,  and  could  not  or  would  not  play  in  many 
tragedies  ;  that  she  could  make  up  a  company,  but  not  make  a  company  ;  that, 
could  he  have  kept  Mrs.  Pritchard,  he  had  not  cared.  They  told  him  they  were 
afraid  he  had  been  too  sparing,  or  he  might  have  kept  her ;  but  he  said  he  had 
offered  her  more  than  any  actor  could  be  worth,  or  could  be  afforded  ;  and  that  he 
offered  her  what  he  gave  Mr.  Cibber,  and  she  turned  up  her  nose  at  it,  and  he 
would  never  give  more  than  that,  if  he  never  opened  his  doors;  and  as  to  asking 
her,  he  would  never  do  it,  if  his  family  was  starving  :  on  which  one  of  his  friends 
said  he  would  undertake  to  manage  it,  and  get  her  at  that  price,  on  this  condition, 
that  he  must  indemnify  her  from  her  articles, — but  that  they  must  all  join  in  the 
affair,  which  was  this,  to  endeavour  by  all  hands  to  blow  up  Mr.  Pritchard,  by  say¬ 
ing  what  a  difference  was  made  between  Mrs.  Cibber  and  his  wife,  by  Mr.  Garrick’s 
always  playing  with  Mrs.  Cibber  and  seldom  with  Mrs.  Pritchard  ;  that  Mrs.  Cib¬ 
ber’s  name  never  appears  in  the  bills  but  in  principal  parts,  and  her  name  always 
in  the  largest  letters;  as  this  has  been,  it  is  likely  it  may  be  so  offered,  and  we  must 
watch  all  advantages  ;  this  will  fire  him,  for  he  loves  her,  and  will  run  all  hazards  to 
remove  it.  This  is  the  affair.  I  would  sign  my  name,  but  that  may  discover  my 
author,  so  I  will  leave  that  till  I  see  how  you  can  keep  a  secret. 

Yours,  A.  B. 

To  Mr.  David  Garrick,  at  his  Lodgings 
at  Mr.  West’s,  Cabinet-maker,  in 

King-street,  Covent-Garden.  Endorsed  “  Finlay.” 


MARGERY  PINCHWIFE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Sunday  morning,  May  1st,  1745. 

I  am  very  glad  to  hear  you  are  better,  and,  if  you  dare  venture  out,  shall  be  glad 
of  your  company  at  dinner.  As  you  are  an  invalid,  pray  send  me  word  what  you 
can  eat,  and  at  what  hour  you  will  dine.  I  shall  send  to  Tom*  to  meet  you,  and  am, 
Sir  David, 

Your  most  humble  friend  and  servant 
to  command  till  death, 

Margery  Pinchwife. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  in  the  great  Piazza. 


*  Tom  is  her  brother  Thomas  Augustine  Arne.  Margery  Pinchwife  is  Mrs.  Susannah  Maria  Cibber, 
the  charming  friend — stage  wife,  sister,  mistress  of  Garrick — the  most  pathetic  actress  of  her  time,  and  as 
to  figure  and  countenance,  the  female  counterpart  of  the  great  master. — Ed. 


VOL.  I. 


F 


34 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SjR>  Woodhay,  near  Newbury,  Berks,  July  18,  1745. 

I  wrote  to  you  immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  but  as  I  did 
not  receive  it  till  the  8th,  I  was  fearful  you  would  be  gone  out  of  town,  so  directed 
it  to  Mrs.  Smith,  and  ordered  her  to  carry  it  to  your  lodgings  :  she  did  so,  and  sent 
me  word  by  the  next  post,  that  she  left  it  there  for  you,  and  that  you  was  not  gone 
out  of  town  ;  but  as  I  have  never  heard  from  you  since,  I  conclude  you  never 
received  it.  The  purport  of  it  was  to  thank  you  for  your  favour,  and  to  invite  you 
to  spend  part  of  your  summer  here,  that  we  might  talk  over  stage  affairs  at  leisure. 

I  am  sorry  it  did  not  meet  with  you,  as  it  is  likely  it  has  lost  me  the  pleasure  of 
your  company ;  however,  if  you  come  to  town  before  me,  I  shall  still  be  glad  to  see 
you  here :  it  will  be  but  a  day’s  journey  for  you,  and  I  flatter  myself  you  will  find 
this  a  most  sweet  place,  and  of  service  to  your  health.  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  direct 
this  to  you,  so  shall  inclose  it  to  my  mamma,  who  will  endeavour  to  find  you  out, 
that  you  may  be  assured  I  have  not  been  remiss  in  answering  your  letter. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

t 

P.  S.  I  want  to  know  if  you  don’t  deserve  to  be  huffed,  for  not  telling  one  where 
to  direct  to  you. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  DAVID  GARRICK. 


Woodhay,  July  18th. 

I  have  often  heard,  that  the  only  way  to  make  a  coward  fight,  is  to  make  him 
believe  you  think  he  has  courage ;  and  when  you  say  I  have  wit,  or  something  bet¬ 
ter,  I  suspect  you  are  trying  if  flattery  will  have  the  same  effect  in  this  light ;  but 
I  am  sorry  to  tell  you  it  won’t  do :  if  I  attempt  any  thing  in  that  style,  I  shall  only 
be  some  degrees  stupider ;  so  that  it  is  your  interest  to  let  me  go  on  in  my  old  way, 
and  if  you  are  contented  with  my  usual  folly,  you  are  welcome  to  my  letters. 

I  must  write  what  comes  uppermost  ;  so,  without  farther  ceremony,  I  must  tell 
you  that  I  hear  we  are  both  to  be  turned  out  of  Drury  Lane  Playhouse,  to  breathe 
our  faithful  souls  out  where  we  please.  But  as  Mr.  Lacy  suspects  you  are  so  great 
a  favourite  with  the  ladies  that  they  will  resent  it,  he  has  enlisted  two  swinging 
Irishmen  of  six  feet  high  to  silence  that  battery.  As  to  me,  I  am  to  be  brought  to 
capitulate  another  way,  and  he  is  to  send  a  certain  hussar  of  our  acquaintance  to 
plunder  me. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


35 


In  this  melancholy  situation,  what  think  you  of  setting  up  a  strolling  company  ? 
Had  you  given  me  timely  notice  of  your  going  to  Buxton,  I  am  sure  the  landlord 
of  the  Hall  Place  would  have  lent  us  a  barn,  and  with  the  advantage  of  your  little 
wife’s  first  appearance  in  the  character  of  Lady  Townley,  I  don’t  doubt  but  we  could 
have  pick’d  up  some  odd  pence  :  this  might  have  given  a  great  turn  to  affairs,  and, 
when  Lacy  found  we  could  get  our  bread  without  him,  it  might  possibly  have  al¬ 
tered  these  terrifying  resolutions. 

But  joking  apart,  I  long  till  you  come  that  we  may  consult  together :  don’t  let 
the  charms  of  Buxton  make  you  break  your  word ;  and  since  I  am  to  be  plun¬ 
dered,  you  need  not  grudge  the  expense  you  put  me  to  in  victuals  and  drink.  In 
the  mean  time,  be  assured,  I  am  very  well  contented  with  your  intellectual  larder, 
and  that  the  friendship  you  say  you  have  been  so  solicitous  for,  ever  since  you 
knew  me,  is  very  sincerely  at  your  service,  and  that  I  am  always, 

Sir, 

Your  hearty  well-wisher  and  very  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

To.  Mr.  David  Garrick, 
at  Buxton  Hall, 

near  Chapel-le-Frith,  Derbyshire. 


LORD  ROCHFORD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  GARRICK,  Monday  morning,  Oct.  17,  about  1745. 

Though  I  was  glad  to  hear  from  you,  your  last  letter  was  an  unwelcome  guest, 
since  it  brought  me  the  account  of  your  indisposition,  which  grieved  me  doubly,  first 
on  the  score  of  friendship,  and  secondly  for  fear  of  not  hearing  little  Roscius  again 
in  public,  and  I  believe  in  this  last  I  sympathize  with  all  mankind ;  but  I  hope  by 
this  time  Dr.  Thompson*  has  shown  the  utmost  efforts  of  his  art,  and  perfectly  re¬ 
covered  you,  as  well  as  shown  he  is  no  empiric,  which  latter  task  I  believe  he  will 
have  some  difficulty  to  do.  But  how  agreeably  you  surprise  me  in  telling  me,  we 
shall  see  you  and  Mrs.  Cibber  together;  but  how  will  Wofff  relish  that?  or,  to 
speak  more  properly,  how  will  you  relish  it  ?  for  to  tell  you  my  mind,  I  believe  the 
other  party  can  wean  themselves  much  easier  than  you  can,  or  I  have  no  skill  in 
woman’s  flesh.  But  don’t  play  me  [booty]  and  blab  now  to  PlassyJ  what  1  say. 
Though  I  have  heard  you  say  you  have  a  retentive  quality,  or  else  I  would  not 
venture  to  speak  my  mind :  for  believe  me,  David,  it  is  a  hard  task  to  conceal  our 


*  Dr.  Thompson,  a  quack  of  that  time,  who  in  the  vulgar  slang  was  “  a  wonderful  man,"  and  made 
some  fortunate  mistake  occasionally. — Ed. 

+  Mrs.  Woffington. 

+  Plassy,  perhaps  may  be  an  affectionate  corruption  of  Placida,  and  allude  to  the  fine  temper  of  Mrs. 
Garrick, 

F  2 


36 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


thoughts  from  those  we  love,  there  is  such  a  pleasure  in  disburdening  one’s  self  of  a 
secret  to  one  we  are  sure  will  treasure  it  up ;  for  unless  we  are  sure  of  that,  I  grant 
it  is  better  trusting  nobody  but  one’s  self ;  but  such  are  the  wonderful  effects  of  love, 
that  we  even  believe  those  we  love  possessed  of  a  virtue  which  we  want  ourselves ; 
but  love  is  a  mere  riddle,  and  thus  ends  my  nonsense. 

My  Lady  desires  her  compliments,  and  is  obliged  to  you  for  the  trouble  you  have 
been  at  in  getting  her  the  tincture.  She  continues  to  ride,  and  is  in  [good]  spirits, 
which,  I  agree  with  you,  are  the  essential  happiness,  not  only  of  Easton,  but  to 
every  place  else.  I  don’t  know  why,  but  when  I  see  a  man  of  a  gloomy  disposi¬ 
tion,  I  am  apt  to  suspect  he  has  done  something  wrong;  and  I  have  made  it  my 
observation,  that  men  of  a  cheerful,  gay  disposition,  seldom  turn  out  very  great 
villains.  Give  me,  as  Caesar  says,  men  that  sleep  a’nights.  I  make  a  great  difference, 
though,  between  men  that  are  naturally  gloomy,  sans  scavoir  pourquoi ,  and  those 
who  have  met  with  distresses  and  accidents  in  life :  they  indeed  are  to  be  pitied. 
I  can’t  help,  since  I  am  upon  this  subject,  describing  to  you  a  sort  of  men  that  I 
have  met  with  in  my  lifetime,  that  are  my  utter  aversion ;  and  such  are  they  who 
are  not  melancholy  enough  to  hate  society  (for  then  one  should  at  least  be  rid  of 
them),  but  when  they  are  in  it,  become  observers  of  one's  words  and  actions,  and 
never  communicate  any  thing  they  know  themselves,  not  even  to  those  they  call 
their  dearest  friends.  Such  men  are  born  natural  spies,  and  I  believe  the  Devil  had 
a  hand  in  their  creation  ;  but  to  describe  more  strongly  to  you  the  sort  of  man  I 
hate,  I  must  without  flattery  tell  you  he  is  the  reverse  of  you. 

I  heard  from  Wyndham  last  week,  and  he  tells  me  he  is  going  to  Bath  along  with 
you.  How  that  can  be,  and  you  going  to  play  in  London,  requires  a  brighter  ge¬ 
nius  than  mine  to  comprehend. 

I  am  obliged  to  you  for  the  songs ;  they  are  very  pretty,  but  they  are  set  in  a 
wrong  key,  and  I  was  obliged  to  transpose  them  before  1  could  play  them. 

Poor  Mr.  Thompson  has  broke  his  collar-bone  by  a  fall  from  his  horse,  but  is 
likely  to  do  well.  Adieu,  believe  me  yours  sincerely, 

Rochford. 

Mrs.  Younge  and  my  brother  desire  their  compliments. 

To  Mr.  Garrick, 

in  James-street,  Covent-garden,  London. 

Free.  Rochford. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Craven-street,  Oct.  24th,  1745. 

I  thank  you  for  your  long  letter,  which  I  did  not  receive  till  late  last  night. 
I  am  sorry  to  find  you  do  not  propose  coming  to  town,  because  nothing  farther  can 
be  done  in  the  affair  I  mentioned  to  you  without  your  being  here.  The  Rebellion 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


37 


is  so  far  from  being  a  disadvantage  to  the  playhouses,  that,  I  assure  you,  it  brings 
them  very  good  houses  ;  and  the  masters  receive  so  much  profit  from  the  ]STon-juror, 
that  I  wish  it  does  not  give  them  a  respect  for  the  name  the  rest  of  their  lives. 

I  am  partly  of  your  opinion,  that  the  masters  would  refuse  our  proposal :  the  thing 
came  into  my  head  as  I  was  writing  to  you,  so  I  mentioned  it  without  farther  re¬ 
flection  ;  but  upon  second  thoughts  I  think  I  have  found  a  much  better  scheme. 
There  will  be  no  Operas  this  year  ;  so  if  you,  Mr.  Quin,  and  I,  agree  to  play  without 
any  salary,  and  pick  up  some  of  the  best  actors  and  actresses  that  are  disengaged, 
at  what  salary  you  both  think  proper,  I  make  no  doubt  we  shall  get  a  licence  to 
play  there  for  fifty,  sixty,  or  any  number  of  nights  you  agree  upon.  Mr.  Heidegger 
shall  pay  scenes,  &c.  and  pay  those  that  receive  wages  ;  and  deliver  the  overplus  to 
some  proper  person  to  enlist  men  to  serve  in  any  of  the  regiments  of  Guards,  at 
five  pounds  per  man ; — this  is  the  service  St.  Martin’s  Parish  puts  the  money  to  that 
they  collect, — and  I  mention  it,  because  it  is  thought  the  most  serviceable  to  the 
Government,  of  any  scheme  yet  proposed.  Should  we  not  get  a  licence,  I  don’t 
think  you  will  have  reason  to  grudge  your  coming  to  town,  were  it  only  to  attempt 
it.  If  we  succeed,  which  I  have  very  little  doubt  of,  I  desire  nothing  better  than  us 
three  playing  at  the  head  of  any  company  of  actors  we  can  get  together.  I  believe 
we  shall  convince  the  whole  town  that  we  have  not  been  unreasonable  in  the  salaries 
we  have  demanded. 

I  did  not  know  of  Mr.  Quin’s  being  in  England  till  since  I  came  to  town,  I 
hear  he  is  in  the  country,  and  refuses  to  engage  yet  awhile.  I  have  not  seen  him, 
and  shall  say  nothing  of  this  affair  to  him,  or  any  creature  living,  till  I  have  your 
answer,  which  I  desire  you  will  send  by  the  return  of  the  post,  and  let  it  be  positive 
one  way  or  other  :  if  you  agree  to  it,  I  beg  you  will  come  to  town  directly.  I  must 
beseech  you  not  to  think  of  not  making  Mr.  Quin  the  offer  ;  the  friendship  I  have 
received  from  him,  makes  it  impossible  for  me  to  act  in  such  a  manner,  and  though  I 
apprehend  his  esteem  for  me  is  greatly  lessened,  yet  as  I  am  conscious  I  have  never 
done  any  thing  he  ought  to  take  ill,  I  shall  always  behave  with  the  same  friendship 
towards  him  that  I  ever  did. 

It  may,  perhaps,  have  been  unnecessary  to  have  said  what  I  have  done  about  Mr. 
Quin,  but  I  was  not  sure  but  you  might  imagine  there  would  be  some  difficulties 
about  parts,  and  that  might  make  an  objection  ;  but  I  think  for  so  short  a  time 
as  we  propose  our  playing,  that  affair  may  be  easily  settled  when  we  meet. 

Your  assurances  of  friendship  are  very  agreeable  to  me;  you  may  depend  upon 
my  never  forgetting  it  knowingly.  I  think  we  do  our  duty  in  attempting  this 
thing:  if  it  succeeds,  we  shall  gain  great  credit ;  and  as  far  as  merit  in  the  intention 
will  go,  I  desire  it  may  be  equal.  I  am  pleased  that  I  have  an  opportunity  of  con¬ 
vincing  you  that  I  have  a  confidence  in  you  ;  for  I  own,  to  tell  you  plainly,  1  think 
you  might  turn  this  to  your  own  advantage  with  the  manager,  and  that,  to  break 
this  scheme,  he  will  give  you  any  terms  you  will  demand. 


38 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  have  wrote  so  much  about  this  tiling,  that  I  have  not  time  to  say  any  more 
but  that  your  wife*  is  well,  and  in  town,  and  sends  her  love  to  you. 

I  am 

Your  most  affectionate  mother, 

S.  Cibber. 

To  Mr.  David  Garrick, 

At  Lichfield,  Staffordshire. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


October  30,  1745. 

I  had  the  favour  of  yours  on  Monday ;  and  yesterday  Mr.  Draper  called  upon 
me,  but  we  concluded,  as  you  did  not  come  to  town,  and  it  was  uncertain  how  you 
might  be  obliged  to  dispose  of  yourself,  that  it  was  best  to  drop  the  affair  I  men¬ 
tioned  to  you,  so  I  shall  think  no  more  of  it. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  you  propose  going  to  Ireland  without  calling  at  London.  I 
should  think  it  would  be  right  to  see  your  friends  here  first.  You  don’t  know 
what  events  may  happen  in  your  absence  ;  as  I  have  no  notion  the  theatre  can 
go  on  long  in  the  way  it  now  is.  I  should  have  been  very  glad  to  have  had  two 
or  three  hours’  conversation  with  you  before  your  journey ;  but  if  I  have  not  that 
pleasure,!  I  heartily  wish  you  your  health, — I  won’t  say  a  word  of  success,  because 
cela  va  sans  dire. 

I  am, 

Your  most  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

To  David  Garrick,  Esq.  Litchfield, 

Staffordshire. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIr5  November  9,  1745. 

I  had  a  thousand  pretty  things  to  say  to  you,  but  you  go  to  Ireland  without 
seeing  me,  and  to  stop  my  mouth  from  complaining,  you  artfully  tell  me  I  am  one 
of  the  number  you  don’t  care  to  take  leave  of.  And  I  tell  you  I  am  not  to  be 
flammed  in  that  manner. 

You  assure  me  also  you  want  sadly  to  make  love  to  me;  and  I  assure  you,  very 
seriously,  I  will  never  engage  upon  the  same  theatre  again  with  you,  without  you 
make  more  love  to  me  than  you  did  last  year.  I  am  ashamed  that  the  audience 

*  Sportive  stage  relationship. 

f  The  reader  may  perhaps  recollect  Lord  Rochford’s  gay  hint ;  but  surely  not  to  the  disadvantage  of  this 
accomplished  and  amiable  woman,  who  explains  herself  admirably  in  the  next  letter. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


39 


should  see  me  break  the  least  rule  of  decency  (even  upon  the  stage)  for  the  wretched 
lovers  I  had  last  winter.  I  desire  you  always  to  be  my  lover  upon  the  stage,  and  my 
friend  off  of  it. 

I  have  given  over  all  thoughts  of  playing  this  season  ;  nor  is  it  in  the  power 
of  Mr.  Lacy,  with  all  his  eloquence,  to  enlist  me  in  his  ragged  regiment.  I  should 
be  very  glad  to  command  a  body  of  regular  troops,  but  I  have  no  ambition  to  head 
the  Drury-lane  militia.  What  I  wanted  to  speak  to  you  about  was,  a  letter  sent 
me  a  fortnight  ago.  The  purport  of  it  was,  supposing  the  remainder  of  the  patent 
was  to  be  sold,  would  you  and  Mr.  Garrick  buy  it,  provided  you  could  get  a  pro¬ 
mise  of  its  being  renewed  for  ten  or  twenty  years  ?  As  I  was  desired  to  keep  this 
a  strict  secret,  I  did  not  care  to  trust  it  in  a  letter,  but  your  going  to  Ireland  obliges 
me  to  it.  After  this,  it  is  needless  to  beg  you  not  to  mention  it  to  any  body  ;  but 
let  me  know  what  you  think  of  it,  because  I  must  return  an  answer. 

I  have  no  theatrical  news  to  tell  you,  but  that  they  have  revived  the  tragedy  of 
“  Lady  Jane  Grey”  at  Drury-lane ;  and  that  Macklin  has  wrote  a  play,  which  I  hear 
is  shortly  to  make  its  appearance.  I  accept  the  pleasure  of  your  promise  of  writing 
to  me  when  you  are  in  Ireland ;  and  am.  Sir, 

Most  sincerely  your  friend  and  very  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

I  have  no  commands,  but  my  best  compliments  to  every  body  that  is  so  kind 
to  inquire  after  me. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Feb.  26,  1745-6. 

That  I  may  be  sure  not  to  omit  putting  the  date  to  this  letter,  you  see  I  be¬ 
gin  with  it ;  but  I  think  it  was  not  altogether  so  judicious  in  you  to  remind  me  that 
I  forgot  it  in  my  last ;  why  would  you  not  wait  and  see  if  the  next  would  be  a 
billet-doux  ?  You  must  have  given  me  the  hint  by  way  of  prevention,  so  1  have 
now  laid  aside  all  thoughts  of  writing  in  that  style. 

I  despise  your  vanity,  when  you  imagine  my  danger  was  as  great  from  Mrs. 
Copin,  as  yours  from  Perkin  Warbeck  :  my  rival  met  with  disgrace  the  first  night 
of  her  appearance;  and  my  not  naming  her  when  I  writ  to  you  about  Perkin,  was  a 
piece  of  generosity  scarcely  to  be  met  with  in  the  female  sex,  for  my  rival  was  then 
dismissed  the  house.  I  think  you  are  now  silenced  on  this  subject. 

My  love  to  Ireland  is  as  great  as  yours  can  be,  and  I  always  think  with  respect 
and  gratitude  of  the  favours  I  received  there. 

As  I  have  quite  left  off  wine,  I  can  only  drink  Lord  Blessington  and  Doctor 
Barry  in  small  beer,  but  to  make  amends,  I  remember  them  the  oftener  :  I  assure  you 
I  take  large  draughts,  and  that  you  may  not  despise  the  liquor,  please  to  remember 
that  Shakspeare  has  made  one  of  his  greatest  heroes  repine  after  that  poor  creature. 


r 


40 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


as  he  calls  it.  1  tell  people  here  that  I  shall  go  to  Ireland  next  year,  but  between 
friends  1  cannot  muster  up  courage  enough  even  to  think  of  crossing  the  sea,  so  that 
if  there  is  not  a  thorough  revolution  of  affairs  here,  I  shall  be  an  idle  person  again 
next  season.  I  am  glad  to  find  you  continue  resolute  against  engaging  with  them  ; 
another  season  must  shut  up  the  house,  if  the  job  is  not  already  done  ;  and  giving 
them  a  lift  after  the  unhandsome  usage  we  have  met  with,  would,  1  think,  be  a  mean, 
as  well  as  an  impolitic  thing.  There  has  been  no  office*  these  three  weeks  at  Drury  - 
lane,  but  I  imagine  the  Manager  pays  what  he  calls  his  principal  actors,  but  the 
others  make  a  virtue  of  necessity,  and  wait  his  leisure. 

I  suppose  you  will  hear  of  my  refusing  getting  five  hundred  pounds  for  playing 
the  “  Beggar’s  Opera”  twelve  times.  It  is  too  tedious  to  relate  in  a  letter,  but  I  ’ll 
tell  you  the  whole  affair  when  I  see  you. 

You  will  by  this  post  receive  a  glove,  and  if  you  will  get  me  ten  dozen  made 
exactly  of  the  same  size,  and  bring  them  over  with  you,  I  shall  take  it  as  a  particular 
favour. 

I  suppose  by  your  next  I  shall  know  when  you  intend  to  set  out  for  England  : 
come  as  soon  as  you  can,  I  beseech  you,  for  I  grudge  the  time  I  lose  in  London. 
Make  my  best  compliments  to  all  who  do  me  the  honour  to  inquire  after  me,  and  in 
particular  to  my  good  friend  Dr.  Barry,  and  assure  him  a  letter  from  him  will  be 
most  welcome. 

I  am  most  sincerely, 

Sir, 

Your  friend  and  very  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

April  8th,  1746. 

This  will  be  but  a  very  short  letter,  for  I  hope  you  will  have  left  Ireland  before 
this  can  get  there  :  I  have  the  favour  of  yours  of  the  22d.  of  March,  and  am  sorry  to 
find  you  have  put  off*  your  journey.  My  brother  is  to  thank  you  for  my  playing  for 
him,  for  had  you  come  to  England  according  to  your  first  design,  I  had  been  in  the 
country  before  this. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  ordering  my  gloves  ;  but  whether  they  are  to  be 
worn  out  at  a  playhouse  or  not,  is  yet  an  uncertainty,  for  I  will  never  put  them 
on  to  be  soiled  by  what  hands  the  Manager  pleases.  If  this  should  meet  with  you 
in  Dublin,  direct  to  me  at  the  Centre  House  in  Golden  Square,  for  I  have  left 
Craven-street ;  and  pray  let  me  know  the  day  you  think  you  shall  be  in  town. 
Tom  Arne  sends  his  service  :  he  is  forced  to  put  his  pit  and  boxes  together,  which 
I  reckon  will  be  no  advantage  to  him,  ladies’  hoops  taking  up  more  room  than  the 

A  theatrical  phrase  for  the  treasury  being  open  on  the  Saturdays,  to  pay  the  actors  their  salaries.— Ed. 


X- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


41 


difference  of  price.  Pray  remember  me  to  all  friends.  Though  you  have  used 
ill  in  keeping  me  so  long  in  town,  yet  I  think  I  must  conclude  myself, 

Sir, 

Your  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 


To  Mr.  David  Garrick, 

To  be  left  at  the  Post-house  in  Dublin,  Ireland. 


me 


SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  GARRICK,  Dublin,  June  6,  1746. 

Since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  I  have  been  distressed  beyond  all 
measure.  The  moment  I  was  disengaged  from  the  difficulty  I  laboured  under  when 
you  were  here,  I  was  attacked  by  another  in  the  same  shape ;  I  had  no  other  means 
of  relieving  myself  from  the  latter,  but  by  making  use  of  your  goodness  as  a  shield 
to  defend  me  from  utter  ruin ;  and  to  complete  my  distresses,  by  the  intrigues  of 
Prest,  I  never  received  a  penny  of  my  salary  since  you  left  Dublin.  Thus  circum¬ 
stanced,  overwhelmed  with  anxiety  of  mind,  being  totally  unable  to  remit  the  money 
you  so  kindly  advanced,  what  could  I  write  ?  or  what  could  I  say  ?  daily  soliciting 
and  hourly  expecting  my  money  from  the  proprietors.  These  are  the  reasons,  dear 
Garrick,  that  prevented  my  writing :  however,  I  have  got  a  promise  from  them  to 
pay  me  in  a  few  days,  and  you  shall  then  find  me  a  troublesome  correspondent. 

I  know  you  have  had  an  account  of  Sheridan’s  late  deserved  success  ;  he  played 
the  “  Merchant  of  Venice”  to  18  ;  the  “  Orphan,”  he  contrived  to  put  off  the  morn¬ 
ing  of  the  play,  by  advertising  that  some  of  the  performers  were  ill :  without  the  gift 
of  prophecy,  he  well  knew  how  the  evening  would  turn  out.  The  hero’s  own  benefit 
was  to  have  been  “  Harry  the  Fourth,”  advertised  [as]  being  positively  the  last  time 
of  his  performing  in  this  kingdom.  Mr.  Watson,  who  was  to  have  played  the  part  of 
Poins,  was  fortunately  taken  ill ;  Ten  pounds  in  the  house  at  seven  o’clock  ;  and 
finding  Sheridan  desirous  of  laying  hold  of  Watson’s  illness  as  an  excuse  to  put  off 
the  play,  I  proposed,  in  the  presence  of  many  of  his  collegiate  admirers  then  in  the 
green-room,  to  read  the  part  of  Poins,  as  it  did  not  interfere  with  the  scenes  of  Hot¬ 
spur  :  he  thanked  me  and  refused  it,  saying  he  must  have  it  performed  according  to 
his  advertisement,  or  not  at  all,  for  he  must  keep  his  word  with  the  town  ;  and  so 
dismissed  the  house.  This  occasioned  a  pleasant  scene,  for  immediately  a  terrible 
“Row”  ensued,  between  the  few  who  paid  ready  money  and  those  who  brought  in  his 
benefit-tickets.  The  doorkeepers,  not  being  able  to  distinguish  the  real  proprietors  ot 
the  cash,  would  not  refund  a  penny  to  either  party.  After  some  cuffs  and  blows,  the 
doors  were  shut  in  a  great  hurry,  and  all  parties  dispersed  with  great  dissatisfaction. 

I  had  like  to  have  forgot  to  tell  you,  that  this  little  incident  of  my  offering  to 
read  Watson’s  part,  has  drawn  Sheridan  into  a  dilemma,  which  Prest  makes  an  ex- 
VOL.  i. 


G 


42 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


cellent  handle  of;  lie  has  infused  it  into  the  proprietors’  heads,  that  the  play  might 
have  been  performed  by  my  reading  Watson’s  part,  and  that  Sheridan  dismissed  the 
house  wantonly,  and  therefore  ought  to  pay  the  thirty  pounds  agreed  upon  :  this 
knotty  point  is  likely  to  be  determined  by  a  lawsuit.  A  bad  affair,  eh,  eh  ? 

Sparks,  if  I  mistake  not,  is  come  here  as  Lacy’s  ambassador.  lie  has  made  new 
proposals — proposals  vastly  higher  than  my  merit  is  entitled  to  :  a  hundred  pounds 
in  hand,  by  way  of  present,  to  engage  me  for  one  or  more  seasons  as  I  shall 
think  proper, — nay,  every  reasonable  advantage  I  can  ask.  I  desired  time  to  con¬ 
sider  of  it,  and  told  him  that  my  answer  would  probably  be  a  refusal  of  his  terms : — 
when  I  consider  you  as  my  guardian  angel,  I  can  resist  any  temptation. 

Whatever  your  views  are,  my  inclinations  and  wishes  strongly  direct  me  to  pro¬ 
mote  them.  You  have  already  made  me  happy  by  your  friendship  ;  it  shall  be  the 
business  and  pleasure  of  my  life  to  endeavour  to  deserve  it,  and  I  would  willingly 
make  it  the  basis  of  my  future  fortune. 

To  remain  here  next  winter  useless,  which  must  be  the  case  in  our  present  cir¬ 
cumstances,  will  be  a  situation  most  irksome  to  me  :  if  you  return,  I  cannot  desire 
to  be  more  happy,  or  if  I  can  contribute  to  promote  any  scheme  of  yours  in  England. 
Tell  me,  then,  what  I  shall  do :  though  you  well  know  how  variously  my  mind  is 
apt  to  be  agitated,  yet  be  assured  it  will  be  as  firm  as  a  rock  wherever  you  fix  it ;  and 
believe  me  to  be,  dear  Garrick,  as  well  from  inclination  as  gratitude,  most  sincerely 

Your  affectionate  friend. 

And  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry.* 

I  delivered  your  Poems  neatly  bound  to  Mrs.  Butler,  the  week  after  you  left 
Dublin  :  I  dined  there  since,  and  she  gave  me  a  d — d  unlike  print  of  you  published 
here,  which  I  send  you  inclosed  with  a  note  from  Miss  Butler ;  she  was  very  uneasy 
at  finding  so  few  poems  in  the  book,  and  desires  you’ll  send  the  rest.  Your  red 
feather  I  have  not;  Hurry  came  for  it  after  I  wore  it,  and  got  it  from  my  wife. 
All  your  friends  here  are  well,  and  desire  to  be  remembered  to  you.  AVrite  to  me 
soon.  I  received  a  very  affectionate,  kind  letter  from  ATctor,  which  I  shall  answer 
soon.  Pray  remember  me  to  him.  Nancy  desires  her  compliments,  &c. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Woodhay,  June  S,  1746. 

I  was  really  afraid  you  were  sick,  dead,  or  returned  to  Ireland,  but  your  letter 
has  eased  me  of  my  apprehensions,  and  I  am  glad  to  find  that  you  have  only  been 
wheedling  your  uncle  all  this  while.  I  hope,  however,  you  do  not  design  to  quit 
the  stage  if  he  makes  you  his  heir. 

*  This  letter  is  highly  honourable  to  Barry,  whom  Garrick,  and  every  body  else,  pronounced  to  be  the 
best  lover  upon  the  English  stage. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


43 


I  take  it  very  kindly  your  informing  me  of  what  you  heard,  but  am  under  no 
manner  of  uneasiness  for  any  thing  in  that  person’s  power  to  do. 

I  am  not  sorry  you  did  not  come  as  soon  as  you  designed  ;  the  weather  has  been 
intolerable  for  this  fortnight  past ;  but  I  desire  you  will  dispatch  your  brother  as 
soon  as  possible.  I  think  you  need  be  in  no  pain  for  his  virtue ;  the  innocence  of 
the  town,  and  the  honesty  of  the  profession  he  is  entering  into,  are  surely  sufficient 
guards  without  your  care. 

If  you  design  riding  when  you  are  here,  why  would  you  send  back  your  horses  ? 
As  for  your  man,  you  may  put  him  in  your  pocket,  if  he  is  the  same  I  remember ; 
a  little  crumpling  won’t  spoil  him.  The  chaise  shall  meet  you  at  Reading  or  New¬ 
bury,  whichever  you  choose ;  but  am  sorry  I  cannot  make  a  favour  of  it,  as  it  will 
be  no  manner  of  inconvenience.  Don’t  forget  what  the  Prince  of  Hesse  said  to 
you  at  Ranelagh,  for  I  shall  expect  every  word  from  you.  Bring  fine  weather, 
health  and  spirits  with  you,  and  stay  a  good  while  when  you  are  here,  and  you 
will  be  the  most  welcome  man  alive.  Believe  me 

Your  most  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibbeii. 

The  farmer  sends  you  his  compliments.  My  mother  is  very  much  yours. 

To  Mr.  David  Garrick,  at  a 

Periwig-maker’s,*  the  corner  of  the  Great 
Piazza,  Covent  Garden,  London. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR  Woodhay,  June  29,  1 746. 

I  never  heard  of  your  playing  till  the  post  before  you  wrote,  and  was  afraid 
some  accident  had  happened  that  prevented  my  having  a  letter  from  you.  1  am 
sincerely  glad  you  found  every  thing  answerable  to  your  expectations,  though  I  could 
not  have  doubted  of  your  success.  The  first  word  I  saw  about  you  in  the  news¬ 
papers,  was  the  same  post  I  received  yours :  a  foolish,  invidious  paragraph,  which  I 
suppose  came  from  your  friends  at  Drury-lane,  and  put  in  the  Whitehall  Evening- 
Post  of  June  24. 

If  you  are  serious  about  staying  here  but  a  few  days  only,  I  desire  you  will  not 
come ;  the  farmer  bids  me  tell  you  the  same :  the  only  amends  I  think  you  can  make 
for  disappointing  us  last  year,  is  the  staying  a  good  while  now,  and  I  desire  you  will 
bring  your  servant,  and  what  other  conveniences  you  think  proper.  Can  you  ima¬ 
gine  his  coming  would  be  any  inconvenience  here,  that  you  talk  of  leaving  him 
behind?  I  beg  for  the  future  you  will  behave  to  me  with  a  friendly  confidence 
and  freedom. 

*  In  this  age  of  landless  esquires,  the  reader  will  smile  at  the  invariable  Air.  before  the  name  of  Garrick, 
and  wonder  perhaps  at  the  barbarous  plainness  of  the  present  address. — Ed. 

G  2 


44 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Leave  mv  gloves  at  your  lodgings,  or  I  shall  have  the  trouble  of  bringing  them 
to  town  ;  and  when  I  have  any  commands  beyond  the  compass  of  your  understanding, 
I  will  write  them  to  my  Lord  Chancellor.  I  am  very  glad  to  find  you  did  not  per¬ 
petrate  your  horrid  design  upon  poor  Mrs.  Horton.  All  compliments  attend  you,  and 
I  beg  you  to  believe  me 

Sir, 

Your  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

What  cruel  weather  we  have  had  for  these  three  weeks  past ! 


GILBERT  WALMESLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVY,  Bath,  Nov.  3,  1746. 

We  got  well  to  this  place  more  than  a  month  since.  But  I  have  not  yet  begun 
to  drink  the  waters,  as  knowing  they  are  sure  to  give  me  a  fit  of  the  gout ;  though, 
I  believe,  I  shall  venture  to  do  it  soon.  We  propose  staying  here  the  whole  winter, 
so  that  I  have  time  enough  before  me.  I  thank  you  for  your  letter  from  Chel¬ 
tenham  :  it  entertained  us  very  agreeably.  I  see  by  the  prints  you  are  engaged 
with  Mr.  Rich.  I  hope  you  will  take  care  not  to  hurt  your  health,  by  playing 
more  than  you  can  well  bear ;  for  that  would  be  the  worst  husbandry  in  the  world. 
I  should  be  [miserable]  here,  but  for  the  coffee-house  and  a  good  bookseller’s  shop. 
The  public  rooms  I  go  to — but  he  that  does  not  play,  is  a  very  insignificant  person 
here  ;  and,  therefore,  I  look  over  the  best  whist-players,  in  order  to  learn  the  game, 
that  I  may,  at  least,  be  able  now  and  then  to  make  one  with  the  ladies  ;  for  farther 
than  that  I  never  shall  pretend  to  go.  But  I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you  what  Lord 
Chesterfield  says  of  you.  He  says  you  are  not  only  the  best  tragedian  now  in  the 
world,  but  the  best,  he  believes,  that  ever  was  in  the  world  ;  but  he  does  not  like  your 
comedy,  and  particularly  objects  to  your  playing  Bayes,  which  he  says  is  a  serious, 
solemn  character,*  &c.  and  that  you  mistake  it.  He  spoke  much  in  praise  of  Barry’s 
handsome  figure,  but  made  a  joke  of  his  rivalling,  or  hurting  you.  When  I  hoped 
his  Lordship  would  give  you  his  protection,  his  answer  was,  you  wanted  no  protec¬ 
tion  :  what  led  me  to  say  so,  was  his  expressing  himself  as  if  he  intended  doing  all 
the  good  offices  in  his  power  for  Barry.  But,  in  fine,  his  Lordship  concluded,  Barry 
was  so  very  handsome  he  could  not  continue  long  upon  the  stage,  but  that  some  widow 
or  other  would  take  him  off  soon.  This  was  at  the  Coffee-house,  and  the  only 
time  I  ever  saw  Lord  Chesterfield  there.  I  was  sitting  and  talking  with  his  brother, 
Mr.  Stanhope,  when  my  Lord  came  in.  I  wanted  to  have  had  more  discourse  with 

*  If  Bayes  was  meant  for  Dryden,  which  I  have  no  doubt  of,  Lord  Chesterfield  is  right ;  but  the  truth 
is,  the  character  had  become  a  mere  vehicle  for  mimicry,— an  object  of  rude  laughter  rather  than  salutary 
criticism. 

“  Who  pepper’d  the  highest  was  surest  to  please.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


45 


his  Lordship  upon  the  subject,  but  never  had  another  opportunity.  After  we  saw 
you  in  your  return  from  Ireland,  I  had  the  gout  in  my  right  hand  for  two  or 
three  months,  which  quite  disabled  me  from  writing :  and  now  it  is  with  some  pain 
I  do  it. 

When  you  see  Mr.  Johnson,  pray  [give]  my  compliments,  and  tell  him  I  esteem 
him  as  a  great  genius — quite  lost  both  to  himself  and  the  world* 

You  know,  a  line  or  two  nowr  and  then,  dear  Davy,  carelessly  "wrote,  as  this  is, 
will  be  the  most  agreeable  present  in  the  world,  to 

Your  old  affectionate  friend  and  humble  servant, 

Gilb.  Walmesley. 

My  fire-side  send  their  best  services ;  as  does  Captain  Hepburne,  who  is  now  upon 
duty  here. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  (Endorsed)  “  A  letter  from  my  old  friend 

At  the  Bedford  Coffee-house,  Mr.  Walmesley,  from  Bath,  where  he 

Covent-Garden,  London.  saw  Lord  Chesterfield,  and  gives  me 

his  opinion  of  my  acting.  How  differ¬ 
ent  from  Lord  Holland  !” 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

S1R)  Dec.  11,  1746. 

The  great  hurry  I  have  been  in  will,  I  hope,  excuse  my  not  having  answered  your 
letter  sooner ;  and  if  you  read  the  public  papers,  you  will  see  the  occasion  of  that 
hurry.  The  advertisements  against  me  have  been  found  to  be  sent  to  the  printer’s 
by  Mr.  Lacy’s  porter,  and,  as  I  am  assured,  are  the  united  works  of  Lacy,  Macklin, 
and  Giffard;  so  much  wit,  honesty,  and  good-nature,  can  scarce  be  the  product 
of  a  single  person.  The  morning  my  first  advertisement  came  out,  I  wrote  Lacy 
a  very  civil  letter,  desiring  to  know  if  he  consented  to  my  proposal,  repeating  what 
I  had  advertised,  and  that  I  begged  an  answer  in  writing  if  he  agreed  to  it  ;  also 
that  he  would  acquaint  me  with  the  charge  of  his  house,  that  I  might  lodge  the 

*  This,  we  know,  was  exactly  the  fact.  His  attachment  to  Savage  had  done  him  great  injuiv.  Between 
the  years  1745  and  6,  he  literally  wrote  nothing.  The  rebellion,  that  was  then  raging,  perhaps  inspired  him 
with  the  hopes  that  attached  to  his  political  principles.  He  loved  the  house  of  Stuart,  and  in  the  success 

of  the  Pretender  might  anticipate  his  own  independence. 

The  reader  will  be  delighted  with  this  letter  from  the  venerable  Walmesley.  He  returns  upon  John¬ 
son,  like  the  mighty  shade  of  Denmark,  to  admonish  him  in  his  course  and  stimulate  his  exertions— 

“  Do  not  forget :  this  visitation 

Is  but  to  whet  thy  almost  blunted  purpose.” 

It  is  obvious  that  Walmesley  had  been  anxiously  expecting  from  his  friend  performances  adequate  to  lus 
powers,  but  at  length  almost  despaired  that  he  could  ever  be  roused  to  activity,  and  uselul  stienuous  oe 
cupation  of  his  time. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


46 

money  in  the  treasurer’s  hands.  He  told  my  servant  he  was  too  busy  to  send  an 
answer ;  but  at  half  an  hour  after  ten  at  night,  a  dirty  fellow  came  to  my  house,  and 
left  word  I  might  do  it,  but  it  must  be  put  off  a  day  longer  than  I  proposed.  I  heard 
that  night  that  the  Green-room  was  in  an  uproar  :  I  was  cursed  with  all  the  elegance 
of  phrase  that  reigns  behind  the  scenes,  and  Mrs.  Clive  swore  she  would  not  play 
the  part  of  Lucy.  The  next  morning  Mr.  Rich  sent  me  an  offer  of  his  house,  that 
he  would  give  the  whole  receipts  to  the  veteran  scheme,  and  that  he  should  always 
esteem  it  a  great  obligation  done  to  him  ;  that  he  had  sent  to  Mr.  Cibber,*  who  pro¬ 
mised  he  would  never  come  near  the  house  during  the  rehearsals,  or  performances, 
and  that  Mr.  Rich  would  answer  with  his  life  he  should  keep  his  word  :  so  I  con¬ 
cluded  it  the  same  day,  which  was  Sunday.  The  next  morning  came  out  the 
advertisement  of  my  being  a  rigid  Roman  Catholic,  &c.  The  answer  I  made  to 
it  might  have  been  much  better  wrote,  but  I  had  nobody  to  consult  but  myself : 
the  honest  printer  of  the  General  Advertiser  thought  proper  to  alter  the  beginning 
of  it,  but  I  send  you  inclosed  the  true  copy  of  it  as  it  was  published  in  the  London 
Courant. 

Though  Mr.  Rich  had  no  performance  at  his  house  the  night  of  the  “  Recruiting 
Officer,”  Drury-lane  Playhouse  was  not  above  half  full  till  the  latter  account ;  then 
it  was  a  good  house,  but  not  near  so  great  as  we  had  all  last  winter  to  the  “  Or¬ 
phan.”  He  had  built  up  the  stage,  but  as  nobody  came  there,  he  shut  in  a  flat  scene 
to  hide  it,  and  the  next  day  he  played  the  “  Tender  Husband”  to  fifteen  pounds. 

I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  I  had  a  letter  on  Monday  from  Lacy,  in  which  he  makes 
fresh  offers  of  engaging  me :  it  is  a  long  silly  letter,  but  I  will  show  it  you  when  I 
see  you.  My  answer  was  to  desire  him  to  save  himself  that  trouble,  for  that  I  should 
never  engage  at  any  theatre  which  he  had  the  direction  of ;  and  I  contradicted  some 
falsehoods  he  had  inserted  in  his  letter  about  my  demands.  1  rehearsed  yesterday 
at  Covent  Garden,  and  am  to  rehearse  again  to-morrow,  and  on  Saturday  I  play  it ; 
what  success  it  will  meet  with  is  more  than  I  can  tell  you  at  present,  but  you  shall 
know  as  soon  as  it  is  over.  I  have  had  a  visit  from  Mr.  Rich,  who  says,  he  sent  you 
word  -when  the  patent  was  to  be  sold,  and  wonders  we  did  not  buy  it ;  it  appears 
to  me  it  must  soon  change  hands  again.  I  wish  you  would  let  me  know  your  real 
intention  about  it ;  I  am  ready  to  join  with  you  in  any  undertaking  of  that  sort,  and 
am  sure,  if  it  can  be  worth  any  body’s  buying,  it  must  be  worth  ours. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  yet  to  give  you  an  answer  about  your  proposal  of 
my  coming  to  Dublin  ;  but  I  am  so  fearful  of  crossing  the  sea,  that  I  hardly  believe 
I  shall  prevail  with  myself  to  venture,  and  besides  that,  the  expense  of  removing 
a  family  is  so  great,  that  it  can  scarce  be  worth  my  while. 

I  am  quite  blind  with  writing  this  long  letter,  but  I  cannot  conclude  without 
thanking  you  for  the  fine  things  you  said  of  me  in  Ireland.  I  am  greatly  obliged 
to  every  body  for  their  desire  of  seeing  me  there  again,  and  must  trouble  you 

*  Her  husband  Theophilus. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


47 


with  my  sincere  respects  to  good  Doctor  Barry,  and  Lord  Mountjoy,  and  any  friends 
that  are  so  kind  to  inquire  after  me. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

P.  S.  I  have  cut  out  all  the  advertisements  for  you  that  I  could  find. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  December  19,  1746. 

I  promised  you  an  account  in  my  last  of  the  success  of  the  “  Beggar’s  Opera,” 
and  I  take  the  first  opportunity  of  sending  it  you.  I  played  it  Saturday,  Monday, 
and  Tuesday  last,  to  the  fullest  houses  that  were  ever  seen;  but  I  cannot  let  you 
know  till  my  next  what  the  receipts  were,  for  they  are  not  yet  settled.  Mr.  llich 
has  pressed  me  of  all  things  to  engage  there  this  year ;  but  as  there  is  no  Tancred, 
I  am  resolved  they  shall  have  no  Sigismunda,  so  have  refused  him. 

You  could  scarce  believe  the  malice  and  inveteracy  of  Drury-lane  against  me ; 
but  I  have  the  pleasure  of  assuring  you,  that  instead  of  hurting  me,  it  has  served  me 
as  much  as  my  best  friends  could  have  done.  I  must  also  acquaint  you,  that  there 
is  a  pamphlet  preparing  by  Mr.  Lacy's  friends  against  your  honour  and  me ;  and  I 
am  confident  from  what  I  heard  of  it,  that  it  will  be  absolutely  necessary  to  write  an 
answer  to  it  as  soon  as  possible.  He  has  persuaded  multitudes  of  people,  and  a 
great  many  gentlemen  amongst  the  rest,  that  we  have  both  treated  him  with  the 
greatest  insolence,  and  that  we  have  increased  our  demands  of  salary  to  such  a  price, 
that  it  is  impossible  for  any  house  to  afford  giving  it.  The  not  denying  this  pub¬ 
licly,  would  be  looked  upon  as  a  tacit  consent  to  the  truth  of  it.  For  my  own 
part,  I  am  determined  to  contradict  any  falsehoods  that  are  published  relating  to 
me ;  and  as  you  are  not  now  upon  the  spot  to  defend  yourself,  I  should  think  it 
proper  that  you  should  send  over  a  short  account  of  the  real  matters  of  fact,  with 
Mr.  Lacy’s  original  letter  to  you,  or  else  a  copy  of  it  to  your  friend  Mr.  Draper: 
and  in  case  there  are  any  falsehoods  inserted  against  you  in  the  pamphlet,  which  1 
imagine  will  shortly  appear,  you  may  desire  Mr.  Draper  to  come  to  me,  and  we 
will  consult  together  about  what  is  necessary  to  be  said  relating  to  you ;  and  you 
may  depend  upon  it,  T  shall  not  take  the  liberty  of  mentioning  any  thing  con¬ 
cerning  you  without  his  approbation. 

I  know  you  reckon  yourself  a  very  politic  prince  with  your  journey  to  Ire¬ 
land;  and  I  think  the  great  Garrick  never  acted  so  simply  since  I  had  the  honour 
of  knowing  him.  You  are  out  of  the  way  at  the  very  time  that  the  late  ol  the 
stage  is  depending  ;  nor  would  you  let  me  see  you  before  you  went,  though  l 
wanted  to  ask  you  many  questions  of  great  consequence  to  us  both.  An  answer  m 
writing  to  them  would  be  of  no  service,  for  1  must  know  your  real  sentiments 


48 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


about  them,  which  T  shall  never  desire  but  by  word  of  mouth.  It  would  be  very 
imprudent  in  you,  to  give  any  answer  in  writing  that  I  could  hurt  you  by,  was  1  to 
betray  it ;  and  in  time  you  may  know  me  well  enough  to  be  assured  that  such  a 
trust  would  be  painful  to  me  from  any  person  that  was  not  well  enough  acquainted  to 
be  convinced  that  nothing  could  ever  make  me  reveal  it.  Therefore  these  questions 
must  remain  in  suspense  till  I  see  you  ;  and  pray  let  me  know  how  soon  that  may 
be  expected.  In  the  mean  time,  I  wish  you  would  tell  me  upon  what  terms  you 
were  offered  the  patent,  and  how  far  you  Avould  care  to  go  if  it  was  now  to  be 
sold,  and  that  we  should  join  in  the  purchase — I  mean,  to  commence  from  the  end 
of  this  season,  and  only  for  the  remainder  of  the  patent. 

I  must  desire  you  will  be  very  particular  in  your  answer,  and  hope  you  will 
remember  your  promise  of  studying  the  capital  characters  in  tragedy  and  corned)', 
in  which  we  can  have  the  advantage  of  being  often  on  the  stage  together. 

I  believe  you  begin  to  fret  at  having  entered  into  so  tiresome  a  correspondence. 
Consider  it  is  all  your  own  fault ;  and  what  is  worse  than  all  this,  you  must  know 
I  imagine  I  am  doing  you  a  favour  all  the  while.  Would  you  believe  it  ?  I  hate 
writing.  Adieu. 

Your  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

P.  S.  If  there  are  any  particular  parts  that  you  would  have  me  study,  send  me 
word. 

Mr.  Rich  has  just  now  brought  me  the  account  of  the  three  nights,  which 
amounts  to  upwards  of  600/.* 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SI]^?  Perhaps  January  1746-7. 

You  were  so  long  without  answering  my  two  last  letters,  that  I  would  not  write 
this  fortnight,  if  I  thought  it  would  be  any  punishment  to  you  ;  but  as  I  have  reason 
to  think  the  contrary,  I  shall  do  it  to  plague  you.  It  is  near  a  week  since  I  received 
yours  of  the  30th  of  December.  I  suppose,  if  you  were  sober  enough  to  read  it 
over,  you  imagined  the  wine  made  you  write  like  an  angel.  The  bad  success  Lacy 
had  in  his  advertisements,  has  made  him  drop  his  design  of  attacking  us  both.  I 
send  you  this  news  to  cure  you  of  the  sweats  you  have  been  in  about  my  an¬ 
swer,  and  now  I  have  no  occasion  to  write  one ;  I  tell  you  it  was  very  impertinent 
in  you  to  be  under  such  apprehensions  for  me,  and  that  my  answer  would  have  been 
a  good  one. 

Mr.  Draper  called  upon  me  a  day  or  two  before  I  had  your  letter,  and  told  me 
you  proposed  Mr.  Quin  should  be  one  of  the  triumvirate ;  that  you  were  studying 
parts  in  a  different  cast,  and  that  you  were  willing  to  make  every  thing  easy  to  him. 
This  has  given  me  great  pleasure  ;  it  was  about  him  that  I  wanted  to  ask  you  all 


*  The  exact  sum  received  was  602/.  7s. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


49 


those  questions;  I  thought  it  not  fair  to  propose  them  in  writing  :  I  did  not  know 
whether  you  would  give  up  any  of  your  parts,  and  if  it  was  likely  you  could  live  in 
friendship,  playing  them  alternately.  He  is  an  honest,  worthy  man,  and  besides  being 
a  great  actor,  he  is  a  very  useful  one,  and  will  make  the  under  actors  mind  their  bu¬ 
siness.  I  have  not  set  eyes  of  him  since  he  came  to  England,  and  was  I  to  see  him,  I 
should  not  mention  this  affair  to  him.  If  you  continue  in  the  same  resolution,  I  de¬ 
sire  it  may  come  from  you ;  it  may  be  a  means  of  a  friendship  between  you,  which 
is  necessary  in  such  an  undertaking.  At  the  same  time,  I  must  tell  you,  I  have 
apprehensions  of  his  not  engaging  in  it  ;  for,  some  years  ago,  talking  of  the  bad  ma¬ 
nagement  of  the  theatre,  somebody  in  company  said,  they  wondered  the  head  actors 
did  not  undertake  it  themselves,  and  if  I  do  not  mistake  very  much,  Mr.  Quin  de¬ 
clared  he  would  never  have  any  thing  to  do  with  it ;  but  as  this  was  said  at  a  time 
when  there  was  no  opportunity  of  buying  it,  I  hope  the  different  situation  of  affairs 
may  make  an  alteration  in  his  opinion.  It  is  surprising  that  Drury -lane  Playhouse 
goes  on  acting ;  one  night  with  another,  to  be  sure,  they  have  not  received  above  forty 
pounds :  the  actors  are  paid  only  three  nights  a  week,  though  they  play  every  night. 
But  the  top  stroke  of  all  was  Macklin’s  Play  !  *  it  was  entirely  new  dressed,  and  no 
expense  saved  in  the  clothes.  I  shall  say  nothing  of  the  piece,  because  you  may  read 
it;  but,  be  as  vain  as  you  will  about  your  playing  Bayes,  you  never  made  an  audience 
laugh  more  than  Harry  the  Seventh  has  done.  There,  for  the  first  time,  I  saw  your 
rival,  Mr.  Goodfellow  ;  I  should  have  said,  the  rival  Mr.  Lacy  wants  to  make  you  :  do 
not  be  quite  dispirited  about  it,  for  Perkin  Warbeck  is  much  below  any  thing  I  ever 
yet  saw.  Here  I  must  ask  Mr.  Stevens’s  pardon,  to  whom  I  have  done  injustice,  for  I 
think  he  may  dispute  the  pass  down-stairs  with  Perkin,  and  as  his  head  seems  to  be 
the  heaviest  of  the  two,  I  think  he  has  the  best  right  to  it. 

I  do  not  doubt  I  have  by  this  time  convinced  you  that  I  love  writing  passion¬ 
ately,  and  that  I  am  the  reverse  of  Witwou’d’s  character  of  Petulant ;  but  if  I  at¬ 
tempted  to  be  laconic,  I  must  either  omit  what  I  wanted  to  say,  or  run  the  risk  of 
expressing  myself  so  as  not  to  be  understood  ;  besides,  my  mother  taught  me  when 
I  was  very  young,  that  the  farthest  way  about  was  the  nearest  way  home,  and  you 
see  the  force  of  education. 

I  have  been  afflicted  this  week  past  with  my  old  complaint  in  my  stomach  ;  as 
soon  as  I  am  well  again,  I  shall  give  Mr.  Rich  one  night  of  the  “Beggars  Opera,’ 
the  Prince  and  Princess  having  desired  to  see  it :  and,  if  it  was  not  for  waiting  your 

*  This  was  a  tragedy  called  “  Henry  \  II.  or  the  Popish  Impostor,  i.e.  Perkin  Warbeck  ;  who  might 
be  an  impostor,  but  whom  nothing  but  the  literature  of  a  bam  would  have  called  Popish  in  the  reign 
of  the  Seventh  Henry.  Macklin,  I  suppose,  with  his  sturdy  importance,  undertook  to  make  the  fortune 
of  the  theatre;  and  the  wise  management  that  preceded  Garrick's  gave  him  carte  blanche.  So  the 
wardrobe  turned  forth  its  treasures,  and  all  outside  was  glittering  and  sumptuous.  The  modest  author  wrote 
this  five-act  tragedy  in  six  weeks,  and  it  was  read  and  studied  act  by  act,  as  it  was  sent  to  the  players. 
The  task  of  Genius  is  not  to  be  performed  by  lower  minds,  either  as  to  quality  or  time.  Forde  has 
treated  this  subject,  and  no  doubt  suggested  it  to  Macklin  ;  who  alterwards  got  up,  toi  a  benefit,  the 
“  Lover’s  Melancholy”  of  the  same  author,  and  considerably  enlarged  on  that  occasion  the  usual  art  oi  puffing  ; 
which  brought  on  the  veteran’s  head  the  detection  of  forgery,  established  by  Malone,  past  all  question.— En. 

VOL.  I.  H 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


50 

return  to  England,  I  should  go  into  the  country  as  soon  as  that  was  over  ;  but  I 
think  this  affair  of  too  much  consequence  to  be  neglected,  and  I  hope  you  are  of  the 
same  opinion,  and  that  you  will  return  as  soon  as  you  possibly  can.  l)o  not  imagine, 
because  I  write  so  much,  that  I  cannot  hold  my  tongue.  I  shall  take  Mr.  Draper’s 
advice  in  every  thing  relating  to  the  scheme  we  have  in  hand,  but  beg  you  will  come 
to  England  the  moment  your  agreement  is  out. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  sincere  friend,  and  very  humble  servant, 

As  well  as  affectionate  mother, 

S.  Cibbeii. 

1  do  not  wish  you  joy  of  your  success,  because  it  could  not  be  otherwise. 

Your  wife  sends  her  duty :  she  is  the  greatest  coquet  in  England,  and  has  half-a- 
dozen  husbands  in  bank,  in  case  of  your  death. 


AGREEMENT  BETWEEN  JAMES  LACY  AND  DAVID  GARRICK,  ESQS. 

[The  following  paper  exhibits  the  terms  upon  which  Mr.  Garrick  became  Joint  Patentee  of  Drury-lane 
Theatre.  In  common  with  Mr.  Lacy,  he  drew  5001.  yearly  on  account  of  the  profits  of  the  concern,  and  he 
was  paid  a  yearly  salary  of  500  guineas  as  an  actor,  with  a  clear  benefit.  Never  were  about  8000/.  em¬ 
ployed  better,  either  for  the  actor  or  the  public. 

Mr.  Garrick  through  life  resided  constantly  near  the  playhouse.  The  Great  Piazza,  James-street,  South- 
ampton-street,  the  Adelphi,  were  in  succession  rendered  happy  by  possessing  him.  There  was  a  fondness 
for  him  in  this  neighbourhood,  that,  as  he  passed  through  it,  darted  electrically  from  shop  to  shop  ;  and  his 
name  was  oftener  resounded  in  Covent  Garden  than  that  of  any  other  human  being. 

After  reading  the  letters  of  that  charming  woman,  the  reader  may  feel  some  regret  that  Mrs.  Cibber  did 
not  obtain  the  object  of  her  fondest  wish, — to  be  joined  with  David  Garrick  in  the  patent  of  Drury-lane 
Theatre. — Ed.] 

April  9,  1747. 

Agreement  made  the  9th  of  April,  1747?  between  James  Lacy,  of  Great 
Queen-street,  near  Lincoln’s-Inn-fields,  in  the  county  of  Middlesex,  gentleman,  of 
the  one  part ;  and  David  Garrick,  of  James-street,  Covent  Garden,  gentleman,  of 
the  other  part. 

Whereas  it  is  alleged  by  the  said  James  Lacy,  that  he  is  possessed  of  or  entitled 
unto  the  present  patent  under  which  plays  are  exhibited  at  the  Theatre  in  Drury- 
lane,  in  the  county  aforesaid,  for  the  remainder  of  a  term  whereof  there  are  now  six 
years  to  come,  and  of  and  unto  the  scenes  and  wardrobe  belonging  to  or  used  at  the 
said  theatre,  and  also  to  a  lease  of  the  said  house  or  theatre  for  the  remainder  of  a 
term  whereof  there  are  now  about  five  years  to  come,  subject  nevertheless  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  trust,  incumbrances,  and  debts,  viz. 

A  Trust  as  to  two  equal  third  parts  of  the  said  patent,  scenes,  wardrobe,  and 
lease  for  Messrs.  Green  and  Amber,  late  of  the  Strand,  in  the  county  aforesaid, 
banker, s  or  for  their  creditors. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


.51 


A  Mortgage  from  the  said  Lacy  to  the  said  Green  and  Amber,  for  2250/.  and 
interest,  with  a  covenant  for  sharing  any  new  patent  that  should  be  obtained,  the 
whole  valued  at  4000/. 

A  Mortgage  to  Hutchenson  Meure,  whereon  the  principal  and  interest  that  will 
be  due  at  the  end  of  this  acting  season  is  computed  to  amount  to . 

The  Debts  that  will  then  remain  due  to  the  actors  and  performers  of  the  said 
theatre,  also  computed  at  about . 

The  Debts  that  will  then  remain  due  to  the  tradesmen,  &c.  belonging  to  the  said 
theatre,  which  are  also  computed  at  about . 

The  Debts  that  will  then  remain  due  from  the  said  Lacy  to  others,  and  shall  have 
been  by  him  borrowed  and  applied  for  discharging  any  of  the  arrears  due  to  the  said 
actors,  performers,  and  tradesmen,  &c.  since  the  end  of  the  last  season,  and  which 
are  also  computed  at  about . 

An  Annuity  of  300/.  to  Mr.  Cawthorpe. 

An  Annuity  of  500/.  to  Charles  Fleetwood,  Esq. 

And  whereas  it  is  alleged  by  the  said  James  Lacy,  that  he  can  and  will  before 
the  end  of  the  next  month  procure  a  new  patent  for  twenty-one  years  to  commence 
from  the  expiration  of  the  former,  without  any  other  gratuity  or  expense  than 
the  common  and  ordinary  fees,  and  to  be  subject  only  to  a  like  annuity  of  300/.  to 
Mr.  Cawthorpe,  or  some  other  person  :  and  that  he  can  and  will  within  the  time 
aforesaid  procure  a  good  and  sufficient  assignment,  release,  or  other  conveyance,  of  all 
the  right,  title,  and  interest,  both  equitable  and  legal,  of  the  said  Messrs.  Green  and 
Amber,  and  of  their  creditors,  assigns,  or  representatives,  and  all  other  persons 
claiming  under  them  in  and  to  both  the  said  patents,  lease,  wardrobe,  and  scenes, 
for  the  said  sum  of  4000/. 

And  that  all  the  above-stated  incumbrances,  (including  the  said  4000/.,  and  the 
common  and  ordinary  fees  of  procuring  the  said  new  patent,  but  exclusive  of  the 
said  Mr.  Cawthorpe’s  and  Mr.  Fleetwood’s  annuities)  will  not  exceed  the  sum  of 
12,000/.  in  the  whole. 

Now  it  is  hereby  agreed,  that  in  case  the  said  James  Lacy  shall  and  does  within 
the  time  aforesaid  procure  such  a  new  patent,  on  the  terms  aforesaid,  in  the  joint 
names  of  the  said  James  Lacy  and  David  Garrick,  and  also  such  assignment,  release, 
and  conveyance  as  aforesaid,  on  the  terms  aforesaid,  to  them  the  said  James  Lacy  and 
David  Garrick  :  they  the  said  James  Lacy  and  David  Garrick,  their  executors,  ad¬ 
ministrators  and  assigns  shall,  and  will,  from  the  end  of  this  present  acting  season, 
become,  and  be  jointly  and  equally  possessed  of  and  interested  in  the  said  two  several 
patents,  and  the  said  lease,  wardrobe,  and  scenes,  subject  to  the  respective  incum¬ 
brances  aforesaid,  for  the  several  terms  that  will  remain  and  be  in  the  said  patents 
respectively,  but  without  any  benefit  of  survivorship ;  and  shall  and  will  enter  into 
and  execute  proper  articles  of  copartnership  for  the  carrying  on  and  managing  the 
business  of  the  said  patents  for  their  joint  and  equal  benefit. 

And  that  as  soon  as  such  new  patent  and  right  in  the  old  patent,  <kc.  shall  be 

H  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


52 

procured  as  aforesaid,  the  same  shall  be  immediately  conveyed  to  two  persons,  of 
which  each  of  the  said  parties  shall  name  and  appoint  one,  upon  trust,  as  a  security 
from  each  of  the  said  parties  to  the  other  for  the  performance  of  their  respective 
agreements  and  covenants,  both  in  these  presents  and  in  the  said  articles  of  copart¬ 
nership  to  be  contained. 

That  the  said  incumbrances  on  the  said  patents  shall  be  paid  off  and  discharged 
as  soon  as  may  be,  by  and  out  of  the  profits  to  arise  in  the  said  copartnership,  or 
equally  by  and  between  the  said  parties. 

Provided,  that  in  case  the  said  incumbrances  (exclusive  of  the  said  annuities) 
shall  exceed  the  said  sum  of  12,000/.  the  difference  or  excess  shall  be  made  good,  paid 
and  discharged  by  the  said  James  Lacy,  or  his  assigns ;  or  out  of  his  or  their  moiety 
of  the  said  profits  ;  and  the  said  David  Garrick,  and  his  assigns,  and  his  or  their 
moiety  of  the  said  patents,  &c.  are  to  be  fully  indemnified  therefrom. 

Provided  also,  that  each  of  the  said  parties  shall  or  may,  weekly  or  otherwise, 
take  and  retain  for  their  private  expenses,  and  under  the  title  of  managers,  out  of 
the  money  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Treasurer  or  Cashier  of  the  said  copartner¬ 
ship,  any  sum  not  exceeding  the  rate  of  .500/.  per  annum  each. 

Provided  also,  that  in  case  the  profits  shall  at  any  time  fall  short  of  the  said  two 
sums  of  500/.  per  annum,  to  each  of  the  said  parties,  and  either  of  the  said  shall, 
notwithstanding,  have  occasion  for  and  actually  draw  out  or  receive  on  account 
of  the  said  allowance,  more  than  his  share  of  the  net  profits  then  in  the  treasury  or 
office  shall  amount  unto,  then  and  in  every  such  case,  the  said  party  shall  be  made 
debtor  for  the  sums  by  him  so  drawn  out  or  received,  together  with  legal  interest, 
until  his  share  of  the  net  profits  shall  be  sufficient  to  answer  the  same,  and  in  the 
mean  time  his  share  of  the  patent,  &c.  shall  stand  charged  therewith  as  a  security  to 
the  other  of  the  said  parties. 

Provided  also,  and  it  is  expressly  agreed,  that  the  said  David  Garrick  shall  have 
and  be  paid  a  clear  salary  of  500  guineas  per  annum  as  an  actor,  with  a  clear  benefit, 
or  shall  have  such  better  terms  as  shall  at  any  time  during  the  said  copartnership  be 
given  to  any  actor  or  actress ;  but  the  said  David  Garrick  shall  not,  during  the  time 
of  his  being  interested  in  the  said  patents,  or  either  of  them,  act  or  perform,  except 
for  the  joint  benefit  of  the  parties  concerned  in  the  said  patents. 

Provided  also,  that  in  settling  the  incumbrances  aforesaid,  the  said  James  Lacv 
is  to  account  for  the  receipts  of  this  present  season,  it  being  the  intent  of  the  parties 
that  the  arrears  due  to  the  actors,  performers,  and  tradesmen,  at  the  end  of  the  last 
season,  are  to  be  the  bases  of  their  respective  accounts,  from  or  to  which  the  profits 
or  loss  of  this  present  season  are  to  be  respectively  subtracted  or  added. 

Provided  also,  that  if  either  party  shall  discharge  any  of  the  said  debts  or  in¬ 
cumbrances,  or  lend  or  advance  any  money  to  or  for  the  said  copartnership  more 
than  the  other  of  the  said  parties,  then  and  in  every  such  case  the  party  so  lending  or 
advancing,  shall  have  and  be  allowed  legal  interest  in  the  account  of  the  said  copart¬ 
nership,  until  the  other  party  shall  have  advanced  his  proportion. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


53 


Provided  also,  that  if  either  party  shall  be  minded  to  sell  or  dispose  of  his  share, 
the  other  party  shall  have  the  refusal  thereof  at  such  price,  as  two  persons,  one  to  be 
named  by  each  party,  shall  value  the  same  at. 

Lastly,  if  any  dispute  or  differences  shall  happen,  the  same  are  hereby  agreed  to 
be  referred  to  two  arbitrators,  each  of  the  parties  to  name  one  within  twenty -four 
hours  after  notice  from  the  other.  In  witness  whereof,  the  parties  have  signed  these 
presents  the  day  and  year  first  above  written. 

(Signed)  James  Lacy, 

David  Gaiirick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  PRITCHARD. 

SIR,  July  11,  1747. 

I  returned  from  Lichfield  last  night,  and  found  your  letter  upon  the  table.  I  am 
obliged  to  you  for  the  concern  you  express  to  Mr.  Draper  about  me,  and  he  would 
have  answered  yours,  had  I  not  been  here  to  do  it  myself.  I  was  taken  ill  at 
Coventry  with  a  very  sorry  throat,  caught,  as  I  imagine,  by  lying  in  damp  sheets 
at  Dunstable,  but  by  an  immediate  bleeding,  purging,  &c.  &c.  &c.  I  am  now  perfectly 
recovered  and  in  statu  quo.  I  am  very  sorry  any  of  your  friends  (if  they  really 
are  such)  trouble  you  with  letters  of  that  sort  you  have  sent  me  in  abstract,  nor  do 
I  well  know  the  reason  of  your  sending  it  me :  that  Mr.  Rich  may  be  uneasy  you 
have  left  him,  I  can  believe,  and  that  his  friends  may  endeavour  to  alarm  you  and 
Mrs.  Pritchard  is  very  natural ;  but  that  any  of  these  artifices  should  disturb  your 
quiet  (as  you  are  well  versed  in  theatrical  policy,)  surprises  me  much.  Whatever 
proofs  your  letter-writer  may  pretend  to  give  you  of  my  partial  opinion  to  any  body 
else,  I  appeal  to  yourself  whether  or  no  the  bias  of  my  actions  has  not  inclined  to 
your  family :  I  have  dealt  by  you  as  one  of  my  own  family,  and  I  think  your  situa¬ 
tion,  with  regard  to  me,  should  dispel  suspicions  and  uneasinesses. 

I  have  not  engaged  Mrs.  Cibber  as  yet,  and  if  I  should,  you  may  depend  upon 
it  that  no  such  stupid  article  as  playing  with  her  [solely]  shall  be  part  of  the  agree¬ 
ment.  If  you  will  consider  the  falsehood,  you  may  know  that  such  clauses  are 
incompatible  with  my  interest  and  inclination,  and  I  am  sorry  they  should  be 
thrown  out  to  spoil  the  harmony  I  intend  shall  subsist  in  our  company. 

Mrs.  Pritchard  may  depend  upon  the  strictest  justice  to  the  best  of  my  judg¬ 
ment  :  nor  shall  it  be  in  the  power  of  any  haughty  woman  to  injure  her,  nor  can 
I  apprehend  what  is  meant  by  that  impudent  insinuation  of  deceiving  you  by  ap¬ 
pearances.  It  is  my  interest,  (putting  friendship  out  of  the  case,)  that  your  wife 
should  maintain  her  character  upon  the  stage ;  if  she  does  not,  shall  not  the  ma¬ 
nagers  be  great  losers  ?  I  have  employed  my  power  to  fix  you  in  the  best  station 
I  could,  and  what  I  think  will  put  you  upon  the  footing  you  should  desire ;  have 
I  done  this.  Sir,  do  you  think,  to  deceive  you  with  appearances  ?  or  to  show  you 


54 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


my  opinion  of  you,  and  inclination  to  you  ?  I  am  sorry  I  have  occasion  to  say 
thus  much,  because  I  thought  we  were  settled  together  in  such  a  manner,  that  no 
artifices  or  suspicions  could  disconcert  us.  1  have  a  great  stake,  Mr.  Pritchard,  and 
must  endeavour  to  secure  my  property  and  my  friends  to  the  best  of  my  judgment. 
I  shall  engage  the  best  company  in  England  if  I  can,  and  think  it  the  interest  of  the 
best  actors  to  be  together:  1  shall,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  do  justice  to  all,  and  I 
hope  Mr.  Pritchard  and  his  friends  will  be  the  last  to  impeach  my  conduct,  or  be 
uneasy  that  I  should  follow  the  bent  of  my  judgment  in  my  future  management 
of  the  stage.  I  do  not  find  that  there  is  at  present  much  talk  about  the  theatre ;  how¬ 
ever,  I  flatter  myself,  (and  on  good  reasons,)  that  the  world  will  not  think  you  have 
acted  wrong  by  your  engaging  with  us,  and  that  you  run  as  little  risque  of  ill  treat¬ 
ment  from  the  present  managers  as  from  your  former  :  however,  if  you  have  any 
doubts  about  you,  and  you  had  rather  choose  Covent  Garden  than  Drury-lane,  let 
me  know  it  immediately,  (the  very  next  post,)  and  I  will  do  my  endeavours  with 
Mr.  Lacy,  (for  I  will  not  let  him  know  it  till  then.)  to  discharge  you  from  any 
agreement  that  may  make  you  and  Mrs.  Pritchard  uneasy.  I  am  just  come  from 
the  house ;  we  are  in  the  midst  of  alterations  and  mortar,  so  you  must  excuse  this 
scrawl.  Pray  my  best  service  to  your  wife  and  all  friends  ;  let  me  know  your  mind 
(for  I  am  vexed  a  little),  and  you  shall  hear  from  ‘me  soon  again. 

I  am,  your  friend  and  servant, 

<  D.  Garrick.* 

P.  S.  Pray  let  Mr.  Havard  know  I  wrote  a  letter  to  him  to  engage  him  in 
our  company,  if  he  chooses  it,  and  should  be  glad  of  his  answer. 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick. 

“  Copy  letter  to  Mr.  Pritchard, 

at  Bristol.  11th  July,  1747.” 


MR.  S.  FOOTE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  In  1749. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  conceal  a  piece  of  intelligence  that  I  have  received  this 
minute  from  either  a  friend  or  an  enemy. 

I  am  told,  that  on  the  revival  of  a  comedy  called  “  Friendship  in  Fashion,”!  a  very 

*  As  this  letter  opens  the  management  of  Mr.  Garrick,  I  am  sincerely  glad  that  he  preserved  a  copy 
of  it.  It  was  a  fine  earnest  of  that  dignified  frankness  and  straight-forward  integrity,  which,  upon  the  fullest 
proof,  I  aver  to  have  been  the  characteristics  of  this  manager.  The  reader  will  anon  see  by  what  very  oppo¬ 
site  qualities  they  were  met,  on  the  part  of  authors  and  actors. — Ed. 

•f  This  comedy  sullies  the  name  of  the  great  tragic  writer,  Otway.  At  its  revival,  in  1749,  its 
profligacy  drove  it  for  ever  from  the  stage.  To  see  the  general  mimic,  Foote,  shrinking  from  Woodward’s 
intended  exhibition  of  him,  would  be  only  pitiable,  did  he  not  threaten  as  well  as  remonstrate.  The  great 
humourist  never  discovered  that  he  had  himself  lived  in  what  he  calls  a  “  state  of  nature,”  that  is  of  satirical 
warfare,  with  society,  during  his  whole  public  existence. 

Garrick  should  not  have  retorted  the  miserable  Jive  shillings  upon  this  occasion. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


contemptible  friend  of  yours  is  to  appear  in  the  character  of  Malagene,  habited  like 
your  humble  servant.  Now,  I  think  it  is  pretty  evident  that  I  have  as  few  appre¬ 
hensions  from  the  passive  wit  of  Mr.  Garrick,  as  the  active  humour  and  imitation  of 
Mr.  Woodward  ;  but  as  we  are  to  be  in  a  state  of  nature,  I  do  conceive  that  I 
have  a  plan  for  a  short  farce  that  will  be  wormwood  to  some,  entertaining  to  many, 
and  very  beneficial  to,  Sir, 

Yours, 

Samuel  Foote. 

If  your  boxkeeper  for  the  future  returns  my  name,  he  will  cheat  you  of  a  sum 
not  very  contemptible  to  you,  viz.  five  shillings. 

To  Mr.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOOTE. 

SIR,  In  1749. 

I  am  very  much  surprized  to  find  you  so  uneasy  and  hurt  at  the  intelligence 
given  you  last  night,  but  as  you  were  doubtful  whether  you  received  it  from  a 
friend  or  an  enemy,  I  think,  in  prudence,  you  should  have  considered  twice  before 
you  had  put  pen  to  paper.  The  sudden  feeling  you  had  at  the  news  (whether  true  or 
false)  has  hurried  you  a  little  into  the  unintelligible — for  what  you  can  mean  by 
W oodward’s  active  humour  and  my  passive  wit,  unless  like  Bayes,  for  the  sake  of 
the  antithesis,  I  cannot  possibly  comprehend.  I  assure  you  I  neither  have,  nor  will 
set  my  wit  to  yours,  either  in  your  active  or  passive  sense,  for  I  confess  myself 
incapable  of  engaging  with  you  at  your  usual  weapons.  I  cannot  but  think  you 
are  very  imprudent  in  saying  Woodward  is  contemptible,  for  it  is  certainly  lowering 
yourself  to  call  him  contemptible,  who  has  made  no  contemptible  figure  as  your 
antagonist.  What  he  intends  in  the  character  of  Malagene  I  am  a  stranger  to ;  he 
has  desired  to  be  free  with  me,  as  other  folks  have  been,  and  so  little  sensible  am  I 
of  the  consequence,  that  he  has  an  unlimited  power  to  use  me  as  he  pleases; — but 
pray.  Sir,  would  you  have  me,  supposing  he  has  a  design  to  be  pleasant  with  you, 
interfere  in  the  affair,  while  there  is  a  mimical  war  betwixt  you,  and  first  declared  on 
your  side?  If  I  did,  would  not  he  justly  complain  of  unfair  treatment,  and  say,  that 
I  am  holding  his  hands,  while  you  are  beating  him  ?  But  should  he  dress  at  you  in 
the  play,  how  can  you  be  alarmed  at  it,  or  take  it  ill  ?  the  character  of  Malagene, 
exclusive  of  some  little  immoralities,  which  can  never  be  applied  to  you,  is  that  of 
a  very  smart,  pleasant,  conceited  fellow,  and  a  good  mimic.  If  you  really  imagine,  as 
you  politely  insinuate,  that  I  have  so  great  a  regard  for  five  shillings,  sure  then  my 
giving  you  the  liberty  of  the  house  was  still  a  greater  favour,  and  therefore  l 
wonder,  or  rather  l  do  not  wonder,  that  you  should  make  me  such  a  return  for  it ; 
however,  to  convince  you  that  you  are  a  little  mistaken  in  that  particular,  1  pro- 


56 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


mise  you  if  the  wormwood  farce ,  you  mention  in  terrorcm ,  should  not  prove  so 
entertaining,  or  beneficial  as  you  imagine,  that  I  will  pay  to  you,  or  to  your  order, 
the  aforesaid  sum  of  five  shillings,  whenever  you  shall  call  or  send  for  it. 

I  am,  &c. 

David  Garrick. 

Foote’s  Letter  and  my  Answer, 

About  Woodward’s  dressing  at  him. 


J.  CLELAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[John  Cleland,  the  writer  of  the  present  letter,  was  the  son  of  the  Colonel  of  that  name,  who  was  the 
friend  of  Pope.  He  lived  to  the  great  age  of  eighty-two,  and  died  ten  years  after  Mr.  Garrick.  He  is  the 
author  of  a  work  of  which  the  title  is  infamous,  and  whose  literary  merits,  therefore,  I  shall  not  here  estimate, 
lest  they  should  invite  readers.  His  “  Memoirs  of  a  Coxcomb,”  though  licentious,  are  said  to  be  well  written. 

The  play,  in  whose  behalf  he  here  addresses  Mr.  Garrick,  was  his  tragedy  of  “  Vespasian,”  which  he  printed 
the  year  following,  without  much  effect.  Cleland  is  one  of  those  writers,  who  have  taken  confidence  for 
power ;  and  being  ingenious  enough  to  frame  petty  objections  to  the  works  of  other  men,  falsely  conclude 
that  their  own  must  be  exempt  from  the  vices  they  can  so  easily  detect.  Roscius  seems  to  have  left  this 
letter  as  a  lesson,  and  indeed  a  model  to  disappointed  dramatists. — Ed.] 


London,  the  31st  of  July,  1754. 

I  flattered  myself,  Sir,  with  the  hopes  of  waiting  on  you,  before  your 
excursion  to  Norfolk,  but  debarred  as  I  find  myself  of  that  pleasure,  by  a  very 
unexpected  accident,  I  comfort  myself  with  this  being  one  of  the  least  troublesome 
forms  into  which  importunity  may  be  put,  and  it  is  determinately  the  last  you  have 
to  dread  from  me,  on  a  subject  which  cannot  be  more  disagreeable  to  you,  than  it  is 
grown  to  me  :  on  that  condition  of  never  returning  to  it,  I  shall  presume  your 
patience  and  leave  for  subjoining  a  few  thoughts  that  occur  to  me  on  your  opinion 
of  that  dramatic  essay  of  mine,  not  by  way  of  contradiction  to  your  judgment,  for 
which,  not  to  have  the  highest  deference,  I  should  think  the  highest  injury  to  my 
own  ;  but  purely  by  way  of  appeal  to  yourself  from  yourself,  and  for  the  sake  of 
truth,  the  light  of  which  is  often  struck  out  of  a  collision  of  sentiments,  which  would 
otherwise  lie  dormant  in  a  peaceable  agreement  of  them. 

Acquiescing,  then,  most  resignedly  in  what  I  had  for  a  thousand  reasons  antici¬ 
pated,  your  non-acceptance  of  the  piece  now  on  tender,  I  own  I  was  not  so  entirely 
prepared  for  your  objections.  Think  but  of  the  extent  of  my  mistake  with  respect 
to  this  piece  !  The  plan  I  had  judged  the  master-piece  of  dramatic  poetry:  the  plots 
of  two  excellent  plays,  Cinna  and  Andromache,  and  only  the  better  for  their  noto¬ 
riety,  being  wove  artistly  into  one,  and  by  that  contexture  rendered  so  full  of  busi¬ 
ness,  as  to  exclude  all  declamation,  all  flourish  of  sentiment,  but  what  rise  naturally 
and  necessarily  out  of  the  situations,  which  are  numerous,  and  some  of  them  appeared 
to  me,  at  least,  singularly  theatrical.  The  time  precisely  that  of  the  action.  The 
underplot  incorporated  in  due  subordination,  and  the  incidents  of  it  calculated  to 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


57 


heighten  the  main  distress  :  the  foibles  of  Sextus  not  too  glaringly  contrasted,  but 
thrown  into  a  gentle  shade,  that  shows  Vespasian  in  such  a  mildness  of  light,  as  to 
render  tolerable  the  almost  romantic,  though  strictly  historical  impeccability  of  his 
character.  The  catastrophe  of  it  only  the  more  pleasing  for  wanting  the  stale  and 
hackneyed  last-shift  of  the  dagger  or  bowl.  In  all  this  I  praise  nothing  that  is  my 
own  ;  I  mean  only  to  defend  in  some  measure  my  choice  of  this  plan,  out  of  at  least 
two  thousand  Spanish,  Italian,  and  French  pieces,  to  say  nothing  of  the  Ancients. 
In  short,  my  fond  partiality  to  it  was  so  great,  as  to  make  me  even  overcome  a 
capital  objection,  of  which  you,  perhaps,  rather  good-naturedly  spared  me  the  men¬ 
tion,  than  overlooked  :  its  sounding  ridiculous  to  transform  an  Italian  Opera  into  an 
English  Tragedy,  and  that  a  patch-work  at  second-hand  from  two  French  authors. 
Let  me  observe  that  this,  well  considered,  only  supposes  a  more  thorough  digestion. 

For  the  rest,  as  nothing  can  be  more  obvious  than  that  the  conspiracy  of  Sextus 
is  taken  from  “  Cinna,”*  so  is  it  equally  certain,  that  the  situation  in  the  fifth  act  was 
never  scenefied  before.  It  is  absolutely  new  and  original,  and  the  effect  of  it  (on 
the  word  of  one  whose  heart  sets  him  as  much  above  a  falsity,  as  your  understanding 
sets  you  above  the  suspicion  of  its  passing  on  you,)  was  such  as  to  draw  tears  from 
eyes  not  much  used  to  the  melting  mood  ;  and  this,  though  I  read  it  myself, — I  who, 
at  best,  read  ill  others’  works,  but  much  more  my  own,  from  that  ridicule  I  fancy 
inseparable  from  such  rehearsal-scenes,  when  Bayes  (and  what  dramatic  author  has 
not  much  or  little  of  Bayes  in  him  ?)  gives  in  fact  a  comedy  in  the  emphasis  natural 
for  him  to  bestow  on  the  reading  his  tragedy.  Yet  surely  none  could  push  the  joke 
of  laughing  at  me  so  far  as  tears ;  and  as  to  flattery,  I  thank  Heaven  I  am  fully 
defended  from  it  by  my  situation.  That  this  scene,  however,  made  no  such  great 
impression  on  you,  it  is  without  impeaching  your  taste,  that  I  do  not  at  all  wonder 
at  it.  The  very  necessary  and  just  prejudice  of  a  manager,  upon  whom  a  piece  was 
attempted  to  be  obtruded  in  the  manner  mine  was  on  you,  in  scorn  of  any  recom¬ 
mendation  but  its  own,  was  enough  to  cover  your  mind  with  a  seven-fold  armour, 
without  even  yourself  feeling  its  having  it  on. 

The  “  calm  admirable”  is,  as  you  most  justly  indeed  observe,  unconstitutional  to 
tragedy,  which  delights  in  storms ;  but  then  those  storms  must  be  the  work  of 
Nature,  letting  them  loose  on  a  subject  great  and  worthy  of  their  fury, — the  deep, 
in  short ;  not  like  those  paltry  blasts  of  art  employed  in  raising  storms  in  a  tea-cup, 
such  as  tragedizing  trivial  or  even  ludicrous  situations,  as  for  example,  the  Adven¬ 
tures  of  a  London-Prentice,  or  the  whine  of  a  true  [girl]  like  Demetrius,  in  the 
Brothers.  Who,  when  for  the  sake  of  a  half-jade,  half-ideot,  he  strikes  a  dagger  to 
his  heart,  who  can  feel  the  blow  ?  or  rather,  who  is  not  readier  to  burst  with  laughter 
than  into  tears  ?  Who  is  there,  in  any  History  above  the  dignity  of  a  Modern 
Romance,  that  ever  killed  himself  for  sheer  love  ?  unless  a  confessed  fool !  and 
can  fools  be  characters  worth  theatrical  embalming  ? 

*  A  tragedy  by  the  great  Corneille. 


VOL.  I. 


I 


58 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


As  to  the  striking !  the  pathetic !  the  terrible  !  the  blending  of  which  you  like¬ 
wise  justly  recommend,  as  the  very  sine  qua  non  of  tragedy,  I  subscribe  without 
reserve  to  your  sentiment.  If  this  piece  of  mine  is  faint,  or  deficient  in  those  points, 
I  have  nothing  more  to  urge  in  its  defence,  or  what  is  even  less  than  nothing,  my 
fond  presumption  of  having  avoided  the  abuse  of  them,  of  having  in  short  tem¬ 
pered  the  dose  of  them  just  sufficient  for  its  health  and  vivacity,  so  as  to  exhibit 
the  colouring  of  Nature,  which  I  have  vainly,  it  seems,  preferred  to  the  more 
striking  ornaments  of  modern  tragedies,  which  appear  for  the  most  part  tawdried 
out,  like  some  pale  hags  of  quality,  with  paint,  patches,  and  false  brilliants  of 
French-paste. 

That  1  may  not,  however,  seem  strained  or  affected  in  this  my  profession  of  my 
shunning  that  infection  from  a  false  taste,  of  which  I  can  scarce  name  that  dramatic 
author  who  has  not  died  his  theatrical  death  for  these  fifty  years  past,  I  shall 
succinctly  touch  on  the  abuses  of  those  three  qualities  you  require,  in  which  abuses 
alone,  that  falsity  of  taste  I  contend  against,  appears  to  me  to  consist. 

As  to  the  striking !  are  rants  to  be  called  so  ?  or  those  sonorous  expressions 
which  fill  the  ear,  and  leave  the  head  empty  ?  And  yet,  do  not  these  compose  the 
blow-bladder  style  of  most  of  our  modern  tragedians,  whose  jrieces  have  not  been 
unjustly  damned,  if  but  for  containing  so  many  of  those  horrid  sins  against  Nature, 
which  true  wit  never  commits. 

The  pathetic.  Where  is  the  modern  play  in  which  it  is  to  be  found  ?  Is  it  in 
a  man's  making  high  love  to  bis  own  dear  wife,  as  in  the  “  Earl  of  Essex  ?”  or  as  in 
“  Boadicea,”  Dumnorix  expending,  for  two  or  three  acts,  his  whole  stock  of  pathos, 
in  persuading  his  to  take,  very  unnecessarily,  a  cup  of  poison,  when  all  he  says  might 
be  reduced  to  these  two  or  three  kind  words :  “  I  prithee  die,  my  dear  /” 

The  terrible !  What  can  be  less  so,  than  the  catastrophes  of  nine-tenths  of  our 
modern  tragedies?  I  have  already  mentioned  one  example;  and  how  many  more 
could  I  name,  which  are  all  rendered  ridiculous,  by  ending  violently  with  a  pair  or 
two,  in  any  sense,  of  most  barbarous,  most  inhuman,  and  bloody  murthers  ! 

Thus  sensible  of  the  absurdities  of  others,  I  was  also  too  sensible  of  my  own 
insufficiency  to  try  the  stream  upon  my  own  bottom  ;  and  for  my  first  essay,  adopted 
a  ready  cut  and  dry  plan,  from  the  greatest  dramatic  genius  now  living,  who  is  the 
worthy  pupil  of  Gravina,  and  who  boasts  his  forming  himself  upon  Shakspeare  and 
Milton,  or  rather,  in  imitation  of  them,  upon  Nature ;  and  you  see  how  I  have  not 
succeeded.  Since,  then,  I  find  the  very  points  on  which  I  built  my  feeble  hopes  of 
success,  are  precisely  those  from  which  you  teach  me  to  despair  of  it,  I  shall  make 
but  one  faint  hopeless  effort  towards  getting  it  on  the  other  Theatre ;  there  failing, 
I  renounce  for  ever  the  vain  thought  of  wearing  the  buskin.  I  shall  leave  to  happier 
authors  the  by  me  unenvied  task  of  elevating,  surprising,  and  frothing  up  that 
wonderful  sublime,  which  is,  it  seems,  so  necessary  to  secure  the  acceptance,  if  not 
to  make  the  fortune,  of  a  new  play.  Let  who  will,  for  me,  supply  with  their  drugs 
the  poison-shops  of  taste ;  for  should  it  even  be  true,  that  the  public  was  so  eat  up 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


59 


with  that  green  sickness,  that  craving  for  trash,  which  is  imputed  to  it,  and  which  I 
never  observed  ;  (for  to  me  it  ever  seemed  rather  to  good-naturedly  endure,  than  to 
palate  it,  for  want  of  better  fare  being  set  before  it;)  still  those  authors,  who  against 
their  better  judgment  and  taste  would  nurse  the  distemper,  for  the  sake  of  their  gain 
by  it,  can  with  no  better  grace  excuse  themselves  than  the  Florentine,  who,  being- 
condemned  to  death  for  coupling  with  a  she-goat,  pleaded  that  it  was  not  for  the 
sin-sake  he  had  committed  the  fact,  but  in  the  hopes  of  its  producing  a  monster,  for 
him  to  get  an  honest  livelihood  by  making  a  show  of  it. 

As  to  the  barely  yet  embryo  of  a  production,  the  “  Clown  polished  by  Love,”  I 
hold  myself  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  the  great  encouragement  you  give  me,  and 
which  will  probably  conquer  the  repugnance  I  have  to  proceed  in  it ;  but  the  truth 
is,  that  I  do  not  foresee  to  myself  ease  and  tranquillity  enough  of  head  to  finish  it  as 
it  ought  to  be  by  the  next  season,  though  I  have  long  had  all  the  materials  for  it, 
ready  to  put  together. 

The  principal  character  is,  as  you  will  have  readily  bespoke  it,  a  young,  raw, 
untutored  rustic,  with  good  sense  at  bottom ;  a  diamond  in  the  rough ;  a  Cymon,  in 
short,  in  comic  life,  who  having  taken  a  sudden  love  for  a  young  beauty,  his  natural 
talents  burst  open  at  once,  unfold  and  shine  forth  in  several  incidents,  so  managed 
and  prepared  as  to  make  him  preferred  to  his  rival,  who  is  a  character  contrasted  to 
his,  one  of  those  detestably  gay,  double-refined  fops,  one  sees  daily  and  pesterably 
swarm  about  town  and  Court.  I  say  nothing  now  of  the  plot,  as  it  wrould  require 
too  long  an  exposition,  nor  of  the  dialogue,  than  that  I  shall  take  it  directly  from  the 
characters  such  as  I  imagine,  or  rather  know  them  to  exist  in  Nature.  I  wish  you. 
Sir,  the  most  perfect  enjoyment  of  health,  and  of  all  the  delights  of  the  season  and 
country  ;  and  am  with  the  most  grateful  sense  of  your  friendly  procedure,  as  well 
as  with  the  utmost  esteem  and  respect. 

Sir, 

Your  most  obliged,  and 

Most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  Cleland. 


FROM  MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  HOGARTH. 

DEAR  HOGARTH, 

Our  friend  Wilson  hinted  to  me  the  last  time  I  saw  him,  that  I  had  of  late  been 
remiss  in  my  visits  to  you — it  may  be  so,  though  upon  my  word  I  am  not  conscious 
of  it ;  for  such  ceremonies  I  look  upon  as  mere  counters,  where  there  is  no  remission 
of  regard  and  good  wishes.  As  Wilson  is  not  an  accurate  observer  of  tilings,  not 
even  of  those  which  concern  him  most,  I  must  imagine  that  the  hint  came  from 
you,  and  therefore,  I  shall  say  a  word  or  two  to  you  upon  it. 

Montaigne,  who  was  a  good  judge  of  human  nature,  takes  notice  that  when 

i  2 


60 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


friends  grow  exact  and  ceremonious,  it  is  a  certain  sign  of  coolness,  for  that  the 
spirit  of  friendship  keeps  no  account  of  trifles.  We  are,  I  hope,  a  strong  exception 
to  this  rule.  Poor  Draper,  whom  I  loved  better  than  any  man  breathing,  once 
asked  me  smiling, — “  How  long  is  it,  think  you,  since  you  were  at  my  house?” — 
“  How  long? — Why  a  month,  or  six  weeks.”  —  “A  year  and  five  days,”  replied 
he ;  “  but  don’t  imagine  that  I  have  kept  an  account ;  my  wife  told  me  so  this 
morning,  and  bid  me  scold  you  for  it."  If  Mrs.  Hogarth  has  observed  my  neglect, 
I  am  flattered  by  it ;  but  if  it  is  your  observation,  woe  betide  you  !  Could  I  follow 
my  own  wishes,  I  would  see  you  every  day  in  the  week,  and  not  care  whether  it  was 
in  Leicester-fields  or  Southampton-street ;  but  what  with  an  indifferent  state  of 
health,  and  the  care  of  a  large  family,*  in  which  there  are  many  froward  children,  I 
have  scarce  half  an  hour  to  myself. 

However,  since  you  are  grown  a  polite  devil,  and  have  a  mind  to  play  at  lords 
and  ladies,  have  at  you. 

I  will  certainly  call  upon  you  soon,  and  if  you  should  not  be  at  home,  I  will 
leave  my  card. 

Dear  Hogarth, 

Your’s  most  sincerely, 

D.  Garrick. 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  HARTINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  May  21st,  1755. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  favour  of  your  letter,  and  return  you  many 
thanks  for  your  good  wishes.  I  hope,  as  you  do,  that  the  weather  here  may  not 
prove  as  it  did  at  sea ;  for  we  set  out  in  very  fair  weather,  but  wiien  we  had  almost 
reached  our  port,  a  storm  arose  that  had  very  near  driven  us  back  again ;  so  at 
present  on  shore  it  is  all  sunshine,  and  though  1  think  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt 
success,  yet  I  foresee  some  little  squalls  arising  that  may  be  disagreeable,  but  not  of 
any  consequence,  and  wiiat  will  easily  be  got  over,  though  perhaps  with  some  incon¬ 
venience  to  myself. 

I  think  Miss  Betty’s  f  business  seems  to  be  done :  what  wTill  her  ladyship  do  with 
her  ?  if  she  turns  her  adrift,  wiiat  will  become  of  her  ?  I  cannot  help  pitying  her  a 
little,  though  she  certainly  deserves  it.  I  am  very  glad  that  you  and  yours  are  so 

well  at  B - house,!  as  I  am  sure  that  is  the  happiest  thing  that  can  be  for  her 

Ladyship.  John  Moody  is  an  honest  fellow,  and  generally  in  the  reet. 

I  am  surprised  that  I  have  never  heard  either  from  Mr.  Arundel  or  Mr.  Collins 
relating  to  the  purchase  with  the  Duke  of  Queensbury,  and  therefore  I  desire 

*  Drury-lane  Theatre. 

t  His  Lordship  is  somewhat  clearer  in  a  letter  which  follows,  dated  21st  Oct.  1755. 

J  Burlington  House. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


61 


you  will  not  keep  your  money  idle,  for  I  take  for  granted  I  shall  not  want  it,  and 
insist  upon  it  that  you  should  lay  it  out,  and  am  as  much  obliged  to  you  as  if  I 
had  it.  I  am  glad  to  hear  the  little  ones  are  well.  1  hope  her  Ladyship  will  soon 
go  to  Chiswick,  when  they  will  be  in  the  air  enough  ;  I  should  be  sorry  there  should 
be  the  least  difference  about  them  or  any  thing  else.  My  best  respects  to  Mrs. 
Garrick ;  tell  her  I  wish  she  would  now  and  then  talk  to  Mrs.  Hewett,  if  she  can 
contrive  it  without  giving  jealousy  to  her  Ladyship,  by  which  means  if  there  is  any 
thing  wrong,  she  may  help  to  set  it  right.  I  congratulate  her  upon  Mrs.  Biddy’s* 
happy  nuptials,  and  hope  that  Sweet-lips  has  performed  his  part  to  her  satisfaction. 
I  have  been  once  at  the  play ;  they  sent  me  a  list  of  tragedies,  so  I  preferred  Sir 
Fopling  Flutter.  I  wish  by  that  means  I  may  not  have  affronted  the  great  Mr. 
Barry  :  it  was  a  woeful  performance.  I  am  in  great  haste,  so  must  conclude. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Most  faithfully  yours, 

HARTINGTON.f 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  HARTINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  June,  1755. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  favour  of  yours  of  the  22nd  of  May,  which 
I  received  at  Limerick,  and  during  my  expedition  my  time  was  so  much  taken  up, 
that  I  really  could  not  return  you  my  thanks  for  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you. 
I  have  received  a  letter  from  Collins  that  the  Duke  of  Queensbury  proposes  to  have 
the  estate  in  Yorkshire  valued,  and  must  suffer  a  recovery,  which  will  take  up 
a  great  deal  of  time ;  so  I  hope  you  have,  as  I  desired  you  in  a  former  letter,  laid  out 
your  money.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  good  wishes ;  I  hope  every  thing 
will  go  well ;  if  they  do  but  keep  their  words,  it  cannot  fail  to  do  so,  and  I  have 
resolved  to  stay  here,  that  they  may  have  no  pretence  to  be  out  of  humour.  As  to 
Claret,  I  avoid  it  as  much  as  possible,  but  I  am  obliged  often  to  drink  more  than  I 
choose ;  however,  I  think  it  agrees  tolerably  well  with  me.  Lady  Burlington  -writes 
me  word  that  she  is  pretty  well  again,  and  going  to  settle  at  Chiswick  soon.  I  hope 
the  poor  little  ones  are  well.  I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Madam  Garrick,  and  am 

Dear  Sir, 

Most  sincerely  yours, 

Hartington. 


*  Mrs.  Garrick’s  lapdog.  Biddy  bad  the  misfortune  to  be  unknown  to  G.  Colman  the  younger, 
who  in  a  note  upon  one  of  Garrick’s  letters  to  his  father,  sportively  written,  says, — “  I  know  nothing  of 
Biddy.”— Ed. 

+  The  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


62 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  HARTINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Dublin,  October  21,  1755. 

I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  kind  letter  which  I  received  this 
morning.  I  am  very  sensible  of  the  kind  and  friendly  part  which  both  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick  take  in  whatever  concerns  me,  and  your  partiality  gives  me  more 
merit  than  I  deserve,  or  ought  to  take.  My  work  is  begun  tolerably  well,  but  there 
have  some  awkward  circumstances  attended  it,  and  more  will  arise,  I  am  afraid, 
before  the  Session  is  over ;  however,  I  flatter  myself,  I  shall  be  able  to  steer  through 
all  my  difficulties,  and  if  I  do,  I  shall  have  the  satisfaction  to  think  I  have  done  the 
King  some  service.  I  am  quite  ashamed  that  I  have  been  so  long  without  writing 
to  you  ;  if  you  knew  the  hurry  I  live  in.  and  the  quantity  of  letters  that  I  write,  you 
would  excuse  me  :  do  not  think  it  is  for  want  of  regard  and  esteem  for  you,  or  that 
I  grow  cool, — I  do  assure  you  it  is  not, — both  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  are  entitled 
to  my  affection  and  friendship,  and  you  shall  always  have  it  in  the  strongest 
manner  I  can  show  it.  As  to  the  coolness  at  Burlington  House,  I  am  sorry,  but 
cannot  blame :  I  wish,  upon  all  accounts,  that  you  -were  well  there,  and  hope  it 
will  come  about  again.  I  am  not  strait-laced,  bat  it  really  is  indecent  to  have  an 
affair  of  that  nature  going  on  so  publicly  in  her  Ladyship’s  house;  if  I  find  it  so  at 
my  return,  I  think  to  tell  her  my  mind.  I  pity  Miss  Anderson,  yet  hope  she  will 
continue  there,  because,  if  by  any  good  fortune  the  other  can  be  got  rid  of,  she  may 
supply  the  place.  I  shall  obey  your  commands  and  attend  Mr.  Mossop,  and  glad  to 
show  countenance  to  any  body  that  you  wish  well  to, 

I  am,  with  great  truth, 

Dear  Sir, 

Most  sincerely  your’s 

Hartington. 

I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Airs.  Garrick.  My  sister  told  me  that  she  had  seen  you 
both,  and  that  you  were  well,  which  I  was  glad  to  hear.  When  you  have  leisure,  let 
me  hear  from  you. 


THE  REV.  WILLIAM  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[This  is  the  first  letter  of  a  pretty  considerable  series  from  the  Rev.  William  Warburton,  Author  of  the 
“  Divine  Legation  of  Moses” — the  friend  and  commentator  of  Pope,  and  who  subsequently  illustrated  the 
See  of  Gloucester  by  ranking  among  its  bishops.  Time,  it  is  true,  has  spared  no  one  of  his  paradoxes,  nor 
yet  equalled  the  gigantic  powers  of  his  mind.  This  is  the  charm  that  still  attracts  reading  men  to  his 
works  :  the  certainty  of  finding  original  thought  and  unparalleled  ingenuity,  with  a  fullness  of  knowledge 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


63 


that  excites  astonishment,  and  a  mastery  of  all  the  arts  of  controversy,  exhibited  in  careless,  strong,  native 
expression  for  the  most  part ;  but  sullied  by  occasional  sins  against  grammar,  and  a  tasteless  attempt  to 
naturalize  a  host  of  French  words,  utterly  dissonant  in  English  construction.  I  cannot  perceive,  in  any 
of  Warburton’s  letters,  that  he  attended  his  friend  Garrick’s  theatre.  Even  to  Hurd  he  abstains  from  all 
mention  of  his  acting,  and,  at  times,  evinces  a  rather  savage  contempt  for  the  stage.  He  thought,  very 
obviously,  that  both  Drs.  Young  and  Brown,  as  clergymen,  dishonoured  themselves,  by  becoming  dry-nurses 
to  the  theatre. — Ed.] 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  March  2,  1756. 

I  am  favoured  with  yours  of  the  25th,  but  deferred  making  my  acknowledge¬ 
ments  till  I  could  give  you  the  best  information  that  could  be  got.  I  have  kept 
your  name  a  secret,  as  you  desired :  and  it  cannot  be  guessed  at  by  my  inquiries, 
since,  as  I  understand,  the  estate  has  been  two  or  three  years  upon  sale ;  and  the 
too  high  price  is  here  supposed  to  be  the  reason  of  its  having  not,  in  all  that  time, 
met  with  a  purchaser. 

We  have  the  village  every  moment  in  our  view,  and  it  is,  as  you  are  rightly 
informed,  about  a  measured  mile  from  Bath,  on  an  easy  ascent. 

Bath  lies  in  a  bottom,  through  which  the  river  Avon  runs  east  and  west ;  and 
so  forms  a  long  winding  valley  in  that  direction,  the  Bristol  road  going  west,  and 
the  London  road  east.  On  the  north  and  south  it  is  shut  up  by  two  mountains  ;  on 
the  side  of  the  northern,  fronting  the  south,  stands  the  village  of  Weston  ;  and  on 
the  southern,  fronting  the  north,  is  this  place  of  ours  ;  Bath  lying  in  the  bottom 
between  us. 

The  lands  of  the  estate  of  Weston  run  down  to  the  banks  of  the  Avon.  There 
is  a  manor-house  on  the  west  side  the  village,  and  higher  than  it ;  it  is  old  and  large, 
but  neither  very  good  nor  commodious.  It  has  been  sometimes  let,  and  for  forty 
or  fifty  pounds  a  year ;  and  though  on  an  eminence,  not  well  situate  for  the  pros¬ 
pect  ;  but  amends  might  be  made  for  that,  by  a  pleasure-building  at  a  very  little 
distance. 

The  village  is  pretty,  and  has  a  clear  brook  running  quite  through  the  middle  of 
it.  It  is,  as  you  observe,  a  manor,  or  royalty  :  but  the  advowson  of  the  church  is 
in  the  Chancellor  of  England.  The  estate  is  bare  of  wood  ;  so  that  you  would  have 
amusement  enough,  like  Mr.  Allen,  (and  a  very  delightful  and  profitable  one  it  is,) 
in  planting.  There  is  excellent  riding  on  the  down,  or  top  of  the  mountain,  which 
hangs  over  it,  called  Lansdown  :  and  below,  for  the  length  of  six  or  eight  miles 
towards  Bristol,  you  may  have  as  agreeable  excursions  by  water,  as  the  finest  wooded 
vale  and  a  clear  winding  river  can  afford the  fashionable  summer  diversion  of  the 
dissipated  guests  of  Bath.* 

But  Mr.  Allen,  who  goes  always  to  the  solid,  was  for  better  information  than  1 
could  pick  up.  So  he  sent  to  his  Steward,  or  Attorney,  for  a  circumstantial  account, 

*  In  speaking  of  Warburton’s  intellect,  it  should  be  observed  that  he  can  do  even  slight  things  with 
unexpected  ease  and  gracefulness.  Who  ever  described  “  a  patch  of  land”  better,  than  it  is  done  iu  the 
present  letter? — Ed. 


64 


private  correspondence  of 


who  transmitted  the  inclosed.  And  these  lie  bid  me  tell  you  are  his  reflections  upon 
it.  He  says  it  appears  from  the  rent-roll  that  it  is  well  tenanted,  (and  his  agent, 
you  see,  tells  him  he  is  informed  the  estate  may  be  improved.)  But  the  terms 
here  mentioned  he  thinks  not  only  too  high,  but  altogether  inconvenient.  He  sees 
little  difference  between  Lady  Parker’s  demand  of  an  annuity,  and  her  refusal  to 
sell  her  life  [interest]  : — the  purchaser  of  the  reversion  (at  too  high  a  price)  being 
not  so  good  as  her  rent-gatherer ;  for  he  will  pay  more  than  he  receives,  and  bear 
all  her  contingent  losses  and  damages. 

These  are  his  sentiments  of  the  terms  hitherto  demanded,  but  be  thinks  it  very 
possible  you  may  have  better.  He  would  be  glad  of  getting  a  person,  whose 
character  he  much  esteems,  into  his  neighbourhood  upon  good  terms ;  but  Mrs. 
Allen  and  my  wife,  who  desire  their  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  would  be 
glad  to  get  her  for  a  neighbour  upon  any  terms.  And  this  I  dare  say,  from  what 
I  have  seen,  is  the  common  sentiment  of  all  who  know  or  have  heard  of  Mrs. 
Garrick.  I  beg  my  best  respects  to  her,  and  that  you  would  believe  me  to  be, 

Dear  Sir,  with  true  esteem, 

Your  very  affectionate, 

And  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Wauburton. 

P.  S.  I  should  tell  you,  that  in  estates  of  this  value  it  is  not  usual  to  reckon 
such  sort  of  houses  at  any  thing.  Yet  here  are  two,  one  called  40/.  a  year,  the 
other  14/. 


THE  REV.  W.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  May  4th,  1756. 

I  have  the  favour  of  yours  of  the  1st  inst. ;  we  are  all  heartily  concerned  at 
Mrs.  Garrick  s  ill  state  of  health,  and  return  you  our  best  thanks  for  your  kind 
congratulations.  * 

The  accommodating  you  with  the  plays  you  want  of  Shakspear,  besides  the 
trifle,  is  but  justice  to  one  who  can  make  so  good  an  use  of  them,  and  has  enter¬ 
tained  so  proper  and  curious  a  design  as  the  writing  the  history  of  our  stage ; 
which  I  wish  you  would  pursue  in  good  earnest. 

I  suppose  the  Plays  you  want  are  in  two  4to.  vols.,  which  Mr.  Blackbourne 
borrowed  of  me  for  one  Mr.  Capel,  •f'  I  think  his  name  is.  Pray  take  them  of  him. 
and  cut  out  what  you  want.  I  have  two  more  4to.  vols.  in  London,  of  Shakspear’s 
Plays  ;  and  if  there  be  any  in  those  which  you  have  not,  you  are  very  welcome  to 

*  On  the  birth  of  his  only  son. 

t  Mr.  Edward  Capell,  a  rival  Editor  of  Shakspeare,  published  in  ten  very  accurate  volumes,  small  Svo. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


65 


add  them  to  your  own  collection.  I  have  the  First  Edition  of  Jonson’s  “  Evers 
Man  in  his  Humour,”  (if  it  be  not  lost,)  where  the  names  and  scene  are  Italian  : 
this  is  much  at  your  service,  if  you  have  it  not.  And,  I  think,  his  Catiline,  with  all 
the  imitations  from  the  Classics  quoted  in  the  margin. 

It  is  true,  as  you  say,  that  the  only  person  I  took  the  liberty  to  recommend 
to  you  was  our  friend:*  and  it  is  as  true  that  he  was  offended  at  it:  a  kind  of 
temporary  I  cannot  tell  what,  had  seized  him  at  that  time,  after  having  long  brooded 
oArer  a  suspicion,  that  I  and  some  of  his  best  friends  held  his  “  Barbarossa”  too  cheap. 
I  will  say  no  more  at  present;  and  this  is  in  your  ear.  But  I  dare  say, when  I  tell 
you  the  particulars,  you  will  be  as  much  surprised  at  the  relation,  as  I  was  at  the 
adventure.  In  the  mean  time  I  ought  in  justice  to  say,  that  you  was  entirely  out 
of  the  question :  that  his  account  of  you  from  your  first  transactions  together  has 
been  invariably  the  same,  and  full  of  the  greatest  honour,  confidence  and  esteem. 

I  am,  Hear  Sir,  with  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 

Your  very  faithful,  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 

P.  S.  My  only  motive  for  hinting  this  affair  to  you  was,  that  you  should  not 
remain  at  a  loss,  if  haply  you  had  observed  any  coldness  in  me  towards  him  when 
we  were  in  town  together.  I  hope  to  be  in  town  before  Easter  term  be  over. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[This  is  the  first  letter  in  the  collection  from  the  celebrated  Arthur  Murphy,  Esq.  whose  dramatic  talent, 
if  not  of  the  first  rate,  was  best  suited  to  the  existing  state  of  society,  and,  in  truth,  of  infinite  value  to  the 
London  stage.  Mr.  Garrick  preserved  his  letters,  I  imagine,  from  its  being  obvious  that  a  connection  could 
not  exist  with  Murphy  without  very  troublesome  disputes  :  indeed,  they  are  composed  of  alternate  acknow¬ 
ledgement  and  remonstrance,  confessions  of  the  deepest  sense  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  honour  and  justice,  followed 
by  demands  of  reference  as  to  the  matter  in  dispute  ;  by  which,  in  fact,  he  was  for  revising  the  management 
of  a  theatre,  by  a  committee  of  authors. 

While  under  the  immediate  influence  of  Garrick’s  presence,  Murphy  appears  contented  and  happy, 
relying  entirely  upon  his  judgment  and  his  friendship  ;  but  the  moment  he  joins  his  friends,  or  countrymen, 
(for  the  terms  are  not  synonymous,)  he  rises  in  self-importance,  and  comes  to  the  false  conclusion  that  he  is 
injured ,  if  his  services  benefit  more  than  himself ;  he  then  falls  into  the  common  cant,  “  That  he  has  all  his 
life  been  working  for  other  people,  who  exist  upon  his  brains,”  and  seriously  announces  “  his  intention,  in 
future,  to  employ  them  for  the  benefit  of  their  owner.” — Ed.] 

Bedford  Coffee-house,  27th  Feb.  1 751. 

Having  determined  to  relinquish  the  Gray’s  Inn  Journal  in  a  very  short  time, 
I  cannot  think  of  doing  it  without  acquitting  myself  to  every  one  who  has  been  in 

*  The  Rev.  J.  Brown,  who  wrote,  under  Warburton’s  eye,  an  Essay  on  the  Characteristics,  and,  against 
his  opinion,  a  tragedy  called  “  Barbarossa.”  But  the  reader  will  soon  see  more  of  him,  as  Mr.  Garrick’s  fre¬ 
quent  correspondent. — Ed. 

VOL.  I. 


K 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


66 

any  way  serviceable  to  me  in  the  prosecution  of  that  whimsical  undertaking. 
Among  the  few  of  this  class,  I  must  acknowledge  myself  indebted  to  you,  and  I 
therefore  take  this  opportunity  to  return  my  best  thanks  for  the  inclosed  ticket, 
which  Hanger  has  found  very  useful  in  his  Saturday  compositions.  As  1  do  not 
foresee  any  farther  occasion  for  this  obliging  passport,  1  am  not  willing  to  trespass 
too  long  upon  your  civility. 

There  is  one  point  more  to  which  I  must  beg  leave  to  speak  a  few  words.  With 
regard  to  the  trifling  piece  which  was  in  your  hands,  I  must  avow,  that  when  1  was 
first  applied  to  about  it,  I  firmly  believed  it  was  intended  for  this  season,  otherwise  I 
never  should  have  hurried  it  so  much,  nor  should  I  have  exposed  the  nakedness  of 
my  muse.  I  must  add,  that  it  has  hurt  my  vanity  to  think  that  any  one  should  know 
I  had  given  the  manager  a  piece  which  he  did  not  think  proper  to  produce.  I  always 
imagined  it  would  be  a  gratification  to  my  enemies,  (for  my  insignificance  does  not 
hinder  me  from  having  some,)  and  I  was  apprehensive  that  it  might  be  insinuated  to 
my  disadvantage,  that  I  had  met  with  a  repulse  in  my  first  theatrical  attempt. 
To  this  effect,  I  remember,  I  once  spoke  to  you,  and  had  I  then  been  told  that  your 
connections  would  not  admit  it  this  season,  I  should  have  made  my  mind  easy,  and 
have  told  my  friends  the  reason  of  the  delay.  As  matters  now  stand,  it  is  not  agree¬ 
able  to  a  precipitance  which  I  am  sorry  to  find  in  my  temper,  to  wait  upon  any 
body  for  a  whole  year,  for  so  trivial  a  matter,  nor  do  I  conceive  a  farce  of  conse¬ 
quence  enough  to  occasion  any  dispute  between  Mr.  Garrick  and  his 

Most  obedient,  &c. 

A.  Murphy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


SIR,  17-54. 

You  were  most  extremely  welcome  to  the  tickets,  or  any  other  assistance  in  my 
power,  in  all  your  undertakings,  whether  serious  or  whimsical.  If  you  choose  to 
relinquish  your  right  to  the  freedom  of  Drury-lane  Playhouse,  you  certainly  will  do 
as  you  please — but  without  the  ticket,  I  imagine,  Mr.  Murphy  will  find  the  doors 
open  to  him  as  usual ;  and  be  it  farther  known  to  you,  Sir,  that  as  I  thought  vou 
were  above  an  undue  influence,  I  never  meant  the  ticket  as  the  least  tie*  upon  the 
liberty  of  your  pen  or  conversation. 

*  Murphy  was  excessively  petulant.  He  here  throws  up  his  card  of  free  admission,  we  see  ;  a  com¬ 
pliment  at  all  times  to  dramatic  authors  of  any  value  ;  and  he  does  so  lest  it  should  fetter  him  in  the  liberty 
of  opposing  the  management  of  Drury-lane.  Garrick  treats  all  this  impotent  flutter  of  importance  with  great 
temper,  and  a  really  kind  forbearance.  He  knew  the  actual  merit  of  Murphy,  who  possessed  the  tact  of 
dramatic  writing  beyond  all  his  contemporaries.  He  was  a  dexterous  artist  even  in  tragedy,  and  in  comedy 
always  writes  with  point  and  elegance.  In  all  our  dealings  with  thg  French  theatre,  Murphy  has  been 
the  best  adapter  of  their  plays  to  the  English  stage. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


67 

The  mistake  between  us  about  the  “Young  Apprentice”  is,  indeed,  most 
mysterious  and  surprising;  and  as  it  was  impossible  to  give  you  any  promise  for  this 
season,  on  account  of  my  other  engagements  with  Mr.  Foote,  &c.  so  I  most  solemnly 
declare,  that,  however  you  may  have  mistaken  me,  I  never  hinted,  or  thought  of 
performing  it  this  Winter.  Nay,  I  imagined  you  were  quite  satisfied  with  its 
appearing  next  year,  at  the  beginning  of  the  season  ;  that  you  approved  of  its  being- 
left  with  me  for  alterations,  if  necessary ;  and  that,  at  the  same  time,  I  told  you  in 
what  manner  I  would  endeavour  to  strengthen  the  author’s  night.  But  supposing 
this  mistake  between  us  about  the  time  of  its  appearing,  how  could  it  be  insinuated 
to  your  disadvantage,  that  I  refused  your  piece  ?  So  far  from  that, — have  I  not 
said  everywhere,  and  to  every  body  who  knew  us  both,  that  the  subject  was  well 
imagined,  and  that  I  would  act  and  do  every  thing  in  my  power  to  make  it  suc¬ 
ceed? — I  assure  you,  that  I  desire  no  gentleman  to  wait  upon  me  unnecessarily.  1 
hope  that  I  give  myself  no  unreasonable  airs  to  any  author,  and  however  1  may  have 
been  misrepresented,  I  flatter  myself  that  no  gentleman  who  has  had  dealings  with 
me,  will  do  me  the  injustice  to  charge  me  with  breach  of  promise,  false  parade,  or 
the  want  of  warmth  to  support  their  performances,  in  my  double  capacity  of 
manager  and  actor. 

I  am.  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  was  obliged  to  go  from  home  yesterday  the  moment  I  had  dressed 
myself,  or  I  should  have  sent  you  an  answer  before. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Tavistock-row,  Tuesday  night  past  ten  o’clock,  13th  June,  1756. 

After  your  departure  from  Richmond  this  day,  I  spoke  my  mind  very 
explicitly  to  Mr.  Lacy  and  Mr.  Clutterbuck,  since  which  I  returned  to  London  full, 
as  you  may  believe,  of  reflections  on  the  meeting  we  had  this  day.  I  must  say 
ingenuously,  it  appears  to  me  mysterious  and  unintelligible,  because,  as  it  stood 
appointed  by  yourself  for  twelve  days  past,  I  did  imagine  the  Managers  of  Drury- 
lane  would  have  made  an  estimate  of  what  degree  of  utility  they  might  expect  to 
derive  from  my  slender  abilities,  and  that  they  would  have  proportioned  their  offers 
to  that  estimate.  Had  this  been  done,  I  came  prepared  to  make  a  peremptory 
answer,  and  by  those  means  both  sides  would  know  at  once  what  they  might  depend 
upon.  Had  I  an  inclination  to  indulge  myself  in  conjectures,  I  should  apprehend 
Mr.  Garrick  has  no  intention  to  contract  with  me,  or  surely  he  would  not  seek  to 
drive  me  into  a  toil.  I  profess  myself  unskilled  in  all  manner  of  theatrical  politics, 
and  therefore  repeat  what  I  said,  that  I  had  rather  be  with  Mr.  Garrick  than  any 
other  Manager,  provided  I  can  see  how  it  can  be  with  satisfaction  and  credit  to 

k  2 


(38 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


myself,  which,  1  must  avow,  1  cannot  perceive  as  your  Company  stands.  Were  I 
to  think  till  doomsday  of  a  list  of  parts,  I  dare  say  the  result  would  be,  that  I  should 
clash  continually  with  other  people,  as  you  saw  by  the  specimen  I  gave  this  day  at 
Mr.  Clutterbuck’s.  What  I  therefore  would  desire  is,  that  Mr.  Garrick  would  be 
explicit  with  me  on  this  head.  I  do  not  pretend  to  be  entitled  to  any  favour  from 
him,  but  I  Hatter  myself  that  I  have  some  pretensions  to  the  small  and  only  boon  I 
ask,  which  is,  that  you  would  at  once  let  me  know  your  mind,  and  in  return,  1  shall 
deal  as  candidly  with  you  ;  for  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  our  time  was  spent  at 
Mr.  Clutterbuck’s  to  no  other  purpose  but  to  enter  into  needless  expostulations,  and 
to  give  him  (Mr.  Clutterbuck)  an  opportunity  of  abusing  me — body,  soul,  lungs, 
and  what  not  ?  This  last  I  only  mention  by  way  of  a  joke,  and  you  will  call  it  a 
very  dull  joke  ;  be  that  as  it  may,  Mr.  Clutterbuck  or  any  body  is  welcome  to  give 
his  opinion  of  my  poor  abilities  ;  but  valeant  quantum  valere  possunt ;  I  beg  to  know 
what  encouragement  Mr.  Garrick  and  Mr.  Lacy  choose  to  give  me  to  enter  into 
another  article  with  them.  If  it  should  appear  to  me  that  I  am  underrated,  I  shall 
tell  you  so  without  any  heat  or  any  kind  of  animosity,  for  I  do  not  see  why  we  may 
not  differ  as  to  terms,  without  festering  any  of  our  minds  with  disagreeable  expos¬ 
tulations.  Tanti  quantum  habeas,  sis,  is  a  rule  as  old  as  Horace  ;  and  accordingly  let 
me  know  what  terms  you  afford  any  actor,  and  I  believe  I  can,  without  pretending 
to  prophecy,  foretell  what  use  will  be  made  of  him.  In  like  manner,  as  you  know 
what  you  want  of  me,  make  me  acquaipted  with  your  terms,  and  I  shall  very  easily 
see  whether  it  will  be  consistent  with  that  little  importance  I  may  be  of  to  myself 
to  agree  with  you.  Should  it  prove  worth  my  while,  the  affair  of  parts  must  easily 
be  decided.  I  have  run  over  the  course  at  a  strange  rate,  for  I  own  my  thoughts  are 
in  some  fluctuation,  and  will  continue  so  while  I  am  in  a  state  of  incertitude,  which 
is  neither  agreeable  to  my  mind  nor  my  circumstances,  for  as  I  am  not  a  man  of 
fortune,  I  must  cast  about  me,  should  I  not  settle  with  you,  and  I  have  no  time  to 
lose.  I  therefore  make  my  request  to  Mr.  Garrick  that  he  will  be  explicit  with  me, 
and  whether  we  agree  or  not,  I  subscribe  myself,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and 

Very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Your  answer  to  this  as  soon  as  possible,  shall  be  ranked  among  the  other  civilities 
I  have  received  from  you. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIK,  Tavistock-row,  21st  June,  1756. 

To  avoid  suspicions,  suggestions,  and  alterations,  I  wanted  to  bring  matters  to  a 
conclusion  last  Tuesday,  but  you  did  not  choose  to  come  to  any  thing  decisive  then  ; 
and  if  I  have  since  filled  a  sheet  of  paper,  it  is  what  the  style  of  yours  extorted  from 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


69 


me,  and  I  am  not  conscious  of  a  single  mistake  through  the  whole.  I  do  assure  you 
Sir,  that  my  situation  last  season  has  given  me  many  serious  moments  of  reflection 
for  eight  months  past ;  and  I  was  not  trifling  with  you  when  I  told  you  at  Rich¬ 
mond,  and  in  both  my  letters,  that  I  could  say  nothing  until  I  first  heard  from  the 
Managers,  as  I  did  the  first  year  with  Mr.  Rich,  and  the  last  year  with  you.  I  think 
myself  the  more  especially  entitled  to  this  at  present,  as  I  am  persuaded  that  my 
conduct  has  been  in  every  respect  unexceptionable  ;  as  the  meeting  was  of  your  own 
desire,  and  as  the  Managers  are  the  best  and  only  judges  of  what,  in  the  present 
disposition  of  their  affairs,  they  want  of  me,  and  what  they  can,  or  choose  to  afford 
for  it.  If  they  are  willing  to  explain  themselves  on  this  head,  they  will  find  me 
very  ingenuous  in  my  answer ;  but  if  they  really  hold  me  so  cheap,  as  not  to  think 
this  worth  their  while,  though  I  have  given  them  ample  proofs  of  my  tractability 
and  compliance  all  the  winter,  I  must  repeat  now,  what  I  said  in  my  last,  that  I 
cannot  suffer  an  indignity  which  I  have  not  deserved,  and  I  must,  however  reluct¬ 
antly,  bid  adieu  to  Drury-lane. 

Should  this  be  the  case,  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you  that  I  seek  no  future  dispute ; 
we  may,  I  imagine,  come  together  like  gentlemen,  or,  if  it  must  be  so,  we  may  part 
like  gentlemen.  Let  which  will  be  the  case,  1  very  sincerely  wish  Mr.  Garrick  all 
the  success  his  genius  deserves,  and  am,  with  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Lacy, 

Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Mr.  Cross*  bid  me  mention  that  he  is  in  distress  for  the  play  of  “  King  and  no 
King,”  which  I  believe  you  will  find  at  Hampton. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY,  ESQ. 

SIR,  Jime  l756- 

Your  not  sending  an  answer  to  mine  last  Thursday  night,  has  obliged  us  to 
send  another  person  on  purpose  with  this  letter. — I  was,  indeed,  surprised  by  your 
first  letter,  but  with  this  much  more  so.  You  want,  you  say,  to  bring  matters 
between  us  to  a  conclusion,  and  complain  that  we  were  not  explicit  enough  with 
you  last  Tuesday.  Why  then  did  you  not  propose  to  us  your  terms,  which  I 
desired  in  my  last,  and  to  which  I  promised  you  that  we  would  send  an  immediate 
and  direct  answer  ?  instead  of  which  you  have  filled  a  sheet  of  paper  with  suspicious 
suggestions,  and  mistakes  and  alterations,  which  still  keep  us  farther  from  the  point. 
When  I  see  you,  for  I  have  not  time  to  write  a  long  letter,  I  think  1  can  prove  to 
you  how  unlike  yourself  you  have  judged  of  every  particular.  You  have  so  warmly 


*  Richard  Cross,  the  Prompter;  he  died  in  175'J. — Ed. 


70 


private  correspondence  of 


resented  our  not  determining  about  your  engagement,  (which  was  impossible  for  us 
to  do,)  and  hinted  your  dislike  of  going  to  Richmond  for  no  end  (which  we  could 
not  possibly  help),  that  wre  cannot  think  of  bringing  you  down  to  Mr.  Lacy’s 
without  a  previous  likelihood  of  our  agreeing.  We,  therefore,  once  more  desire 
you  to  propose  your  terms  (for  that  was  your  only  point  in  your  first  letter),  which, 
as  I  said  before,  we  will  either  approve  of,  or  make  you  another  offer. 

I  shall  meet  Mr.  Lacy  at  eleven  to-morrow  at  his  house,  from  whence,  if  you 
return  an  answer  by  the  bearer,  we  will  wrrite  to  you ;  or  if  you  please  to  direct  a 
letter  to  one  of  us,  at  Mr.  Clutterbuck’s,*  at  Richmond,  we  shall  meet  there  on 
Tuesday  next.  D.  G. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  PAUL  VAILLANT,  ESQ. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Saturday,  Oct.  4th. 

I  have  received  your  note.  I  endeavoured,  in  writing  the  Play,  not  to  overload 
Mr.  Garrick’s  part,  and  I  flattered  myself  I  had  succeeded  in  that  particular.  When 
a  part  is  copied,  I  know  that  the  many  half  lines  that  must  necessarily  be  in  it,  s\vell 
it  to  a  great  bulk  in  appearance,  when  in  fact  there  is  not  much  more,  sometimes, 
than  half  for  the  actor  to  speak.  I  never  had  any  objection  to  cutting,  but  I  cannot 
see  where  I  can  now  retrench  any  more  without  mangling  the  piece.  If  any  man 
can  show  me  how  to  do  that,  I  shall  be  ready  to  do  it.  As  to  the  Sleeping  Scene, 
I  know  people  will  remark,  if  left  out,  that  no  new  scene  for  Mr.  Garrick  is  added : 
however,  I  never  desire  to  force  words  into  any  body’s  mouth  ;  all  I  can  do  is,  to 
print  what  I  like. 

I  am  very  clear  that  neither  of  the  additional  acts  wflll  amount  to  three  pages 
more  than  the  “  Suspicious  Husband,”  when  printed. 

I  shall  wish  the  play  success,  if  acted ;  if  not,  I  hope  it  wrill  not  be  contemptible 
in  the  closet. 

I  am,  Dear  Sir,  Yours,  &c. 

A.  Murphy. 

*  A  much-valued  friend  of  Mr.  Garrick’s,  a  man  of  business  of  considerable  fortune.  He  kept  a  shop, 
the  sign  of  the  Three  Angels  in  the  Strand,  aud  had  a  country-house  at  Richmond.  As  a  referee  he  some¬ 
times  rather  warmly  advocated  the  cause  of  his  neighbour,  the  patentee  of  Drury. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


71 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Thursday  Evening,  1756. 

Mr.  Murphy’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick ;  he  is  engaged  this  evening,  and 
can’t  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him,  otherwise  he  would  not  give  him  the  trouble 
of  this  note.  He  met  Mrs.  Cibber  once  before,  and  every  thing  then  was  thrown 
back  instead  of  being  put  forward :  the  same  thing  happened  again  to-day.  He 
imagined  when  a  piece  is  carried  into  the  Green  Room,  it  is  to  put  it  into  rehearsal, 
and  not  to  treat  the  author  as  if  he  was  going  to  school.  This  really  gives  so  much 
uneasiness  and  perplexity,  that  Mr.  Murphy  had  rather  bring  out  no  play  at  all, 
than  go  through  it ;  nor  can  he  afford  to  spend  his  time  upon  every  unnecessary 
refinement.  He  could  wish  to  please  every  performer,  but  that  is  often  incon¬ 
sistent  with  the  plan  of  the  whole,  and  is  the  case  at  present.  He  undertakes  to 
write  from  his  own  feelings,  and  cannot  possibly  do  it  from  other  people’s.  He 
would  have  mentioned  all  this  to-day,  but  his  complaisance  to  a  lady  restrained 
him.  Mr.  Murphy  hopes  to-morrow  morning  is  to  be  a  morning  of  business,  such 
as  to  retrench  for  the  ease  of  the  performers,  for  he  thinks  nothing  else  wanting, 
and  he  will  attend  with  pleasure  for  that  purpose,  but  he  has  an  aversion  to  Lec¬ 
tures,  and  never  heard  Sheridan’s  for  that  reason. 


SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  Night. 

As  we  have  deferred  our  jaunt  to  Richmond,  I  am  obliged  to  direct  this  note  to 
the  Adelphi. 

I  have  seen  Mr.  Murphy,  who  very  thankfully  received  your  very  polite  and 
friendly  offer.  He  expressed  himself  in  the  strongest  terms,  and  will  wait  on  you 
with  the  Comedy  as  soon  as  he  has  looked  it  over,  and  corrected  it  a  little. 

I  am,  very  respectfully, 

Your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 


Were  the  Author  to  cast  the  parts,  lie  would  do  it  as  follows : — 


Zamti  . 
Zaphimri 

Hamet 


Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  Mossop 
j  Mr.  Holland,  or 
(  Mr.  Fleetwood 
Mr.  Havard 


Morat  .  . 

Mirvan 
Octar  .  . 

Conspirators 
Mandane  . 


Mr.  Davies 
Mr.  Blakes 
Mr.  Bransby 


Timurkan 


Mrs.  Cibber. 


72 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  Author  is  sensible  that  Zamti  is  long ;  so  is  Tancred :  the  latter  was  cut 
for  the  stage ;  Zamti  may  likewise,  though  the  author  would  choose  to  print  it  as  it 
stands.  He  is  sufficiently  acquainted  with  theatrical  retrenchments,  and  knows 
they  are  often  necessary.  If  Mr.  Garrick  is  of  opinion  that  his  declining  the 
capital  part,  (a  very  uncommon  thing  with  him  in  a  new  play,)  will  not  appear  to  be 
designed  to  hurt  the  piece,  he  is  certainly  master  to  do  as  he  pleases,  and  the 
author  must  consent,  even  though  he  cannot  approve.  Mr.  Murphy  thinks  Mr. 
Mossop  will  do  Zamti  very  well,  but  it  is  surely  the  interest  of  the  managers,  of  the 
author,  and  the  bookseller,  whoever  buys  it,  that  the  principal  part  should  be  acted 
by  Mr.  Garrick  :  and  when  the  play  was  referred  to  Mr.  Whitehead,  he  imagined 
that  was  tacitly  understood.  However,  he  resigns  the  play  entirely  to  the  direction 
of  the  manager. 

Will  Mrs.  Cibber  like  appearing  in  the  character  of  Mandane,*  if  Mr.  Garrick 
will  not  appear  in  the  same  scenes  with  her  ? 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sjr5  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Wednesday  morning. 

I  troubled  you  with  a  letter  last  night,  written,  I  believe,  warmly,  for  I  never 
was  more  affected  in  my  life,  but  I  hope  not  rudely,  for  I  did  not  mean  it. 

I  will  not  now  enter  into  the  question  of  right :  thus  much  I  will  say,  that  men 
often  have  a  legal  right  to  do  an  act,  where  they  have  not  a  moral  right,  and  where 
in  point  of  honour  they  are  not  warranted. 

I  am  desirous  to  save  you  the  trouble  of  even  discussing  the  question,  and 
indeed  of  answering  the  letter;  for  I  am  willing  to  meet  you,  Mr.  Lacy,  the 
author,  or  authors  of  the  piece  you  have  put  into  rehearsal ;  and  if  reason  is  to  be 
hearkened  to,  I  am  sure  I  can  now,  having  considered  the  matter,  make  three 
or  four  different  propositions,  any  one  of  which  embraced  will  at  least  prevent 
dispute. 

I  want  exceedingly  to  avoid  disputes,  and  if  you  and  your  friends  have  the  same 
disposition,  half  an  hour  will  make  an  end  of  this  matter.  I  will  attend  you  any 
where,  and  am,  Sir, 

Yours,  &c.  Arthur  Murphy. 

P.  S.  I  flatter  myself  that  the  public  will  not  require  as  evidence  of  the  truth  of 
these  facts,  the  publication  of  the  letters  that  have  passed  between  us,  because 
nothing  but  the  last  necessity  can  justify  the  disclosing  what  was  communicated  in 
the  confidence  of  friendship,  even  after  that  friendship  is  at  end. 

*  Mr.  Garrick  did,  after  all,  perform  the  character  of  Zamti ;  but  Mandane  was  happily  the  occasion  of 
producing  the  unsuspected  excellence  of  Mrs.  Yates  ;  who,  from  the  appearance  of  the  “  Orphan  of  China,” 
sustained  the  first-rate  characters  in  the  drama  till  she  quitted  the  stage.  There  was  a  music  in  her  decla¬ 
mation  that  enchanted  the  hearer,  and  her  deportment  was  the  beau  ideal  of  a  Queen — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


73 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Tavistock- row,  26th  Nov.  1756. 

Mr.  Berenger  did  me  the  honour  to  call  on  me  yesterday,  and  convinced  me  that 
I  have  been  mistaken  in  regard  to  the  “  Orphan  of  China.”  All  I  can  say  in 
extenuation  of  myself  is,  that  as  I  am  sometimes  quick  to  err,  (I  believe  Aaron 
Hill  would  express  it  in  that  manner,)  I  am  also  quick  to  see  that  error.  I  think 
nothing  of  this  nature  can  happen  again  between  you  and  me,  because  I  have  some 
thoughts  of  making  my  bow  to  the  Muses,  and  leaving  them,  as  Addison  has  it, 
to  those  who  practise  them  with  more  success  :  and  if  I  can  make  my  way  in  a  new 
sphere  of  life,  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Garrick  will  not  only  be  a  pleasure,  but  a 
credit  to  me.  I  therefore  beg  that  no  jealousy  may  subsist  on  account  of  the 
“  Orphan  as  it  is  wrote,  if  you  will  act  it  at  your  own  time,  with  such  alterations 
as  shall  be  agreed  upon,  I  think  a  successful  play,  besides  the  emolument  of  it,  will 
give  me  an  opportunity  of  retiring  from  the  stage  with  some  degree  of  credit. 

In  this  matter  you  will  act  as  you  please ;  and  if  you  do  not  choose  to  have  any 
thing  to  do  with  the  “  Foundling,”  I  declare  I  shall  not,  after  what  has  past,  think 
I  have  any  right  to  take  umbrage  at  the  refusal,  and  shall  be  glad  at  all  times  to  be 
Mr.  Garrick’s  real  admirer  in  his  profession,  and 

His  most  obedient, 

Very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy.* 

To  save  you  the  trouble  of  answering  this  scroll,  I  will  wait  on  you  behind  the 
scenes  the  first  night  you  act. 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  Dec.  13th,  1756. 

I  shall  keep  your  counsel,  or  rather  my  own,  for  I  know  who  only  at  this 
time  of  day  could  write  so  instructive  and  witty  a  satire.  The  letter  to  the  book¬ 
seller  is  full  of  humour.  You  have  an  original  felicity  in  your  prologues.  This 
is  the  first  time  that  the  modo  point  Atlienis  has  been  touched  upon  in  a  prologue, 
though  the  happiest  subject  for  one ;  and  it  is  here  turned  so  masterly,  and  on  so 
proper  an  occasion,  that  it  is  one  great  ornament  of  the  piece,  which  is  indeed  a 
very  seasonable  and  a  very  just  satire  on  the  unmanly  degeneracies  of  the  great. 
It  has  all  the  legeretc  so  much  prized  in  the  best  compositions  of  this  species  of  the 

•  Mr.  Berenger  appears  to  have  fully  executed  his  commission.  Murphy  is  now  all  acquiescence.  He 
alludes  to  his  coming  to  the  bar. 


VOL.  I. 


L 


74 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


drama  amongst  the  French,  joined  to  what  they  want,  the  solidity  and  good  sense 
of  the  English.  In  short,  I  have  read  it  with  infinite  pleasure,  both  on  account 
of  its  own  excellence,  and  because  a  friend  I  so  much  value,  has  the  honour  of 
producing  it.  The  only  thing  I  had  to  blame  in  this  very  acceptable  present  was, 
that  it  is  cruelly  mangled  to  the  quick,  and  made  not  so  fit  to  bind  with  those 
little  delicice  which  I  value  most:  for  one  of  our  post  privileges  here  is  to  be 
unrestrained  by  weight  or  measure. 

My  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  attachment, 

Your  most  affectionate 

And  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[After  a  week’s  enjoyment  of  Garrick’s  trifle,  Warburton,  as  was  his  manner,  resolved  to  rencherir  upon 
his  letter  of  the  13th  ;  and  he  accordingly  now  displays  himself  in  one  of  his  disquisitions  upon  every  person 
and  thing  in  his  way.  The  stage  doctors  he  also  amuses  Hurd  with. — Ed.] 

DEAR  SIR,  *  Prior  Park,  Dec.  19,  1756. 

The  petite  piece ,  as  the  French  call  it,  which  Moliere  invented,  and  you  and 
Marivaux  have  much  improved,  by  turning  the  satire  from  the  singularities  of  the 
time  to  the  vices  of  our  Nature,  is,  in  my  opinion,  one  of  the  most  useful  species  of 
the  drama. 

The  Greeks  lamented  that  the  licentious  abuse  of  the  old  comedy  had  deprived 
them  of  that  manly  species,  and  substituted,  instead  of  an  useful  satire  on  public 
manners,  the  low  amusement  of  an  intriguing  servant  between  an  amorous  son  and 
an  avaricious  father,  which  was  the  constant  subject  of  the  new  ;  and  which  modern 
manners  have  changed  into  a  gallant  a  bonnes  fortunes ,  between  a  young  wife  and 
an  old  husband.  Those  critics  would  have  been  pleased  with  an  inventor  like 
Moliere  to  have  given  them,  in  th e  petite  piece,  the  vigour  of  the  old  comedy  joined 
to  the  politeness  of  the  new.  You  have  acted  a  very  friendly  part  in  your  remon¬ 
strance  to  our  Essex  Divine.  But  what  is  to  be  expected  when  men  mistake  propen¬ 
sity  for  genius  ;  and  miscall  the  benefit  of  success,  the  love  of  fame  ?* 

Your  intended  politeness  to  Mr.  Allen  and  me,  you  may  be  sure,  will  be  very 
acceptable  from  a  person  we  so  much  esteem.  We  wished  you  for  our  neighbour, 
but  we  shall  be  always  glad  to  have  of  you  what  we  can. 

You  say ,  poor  Tonson!  and  I  say,  poor  Shahspeare !  Yet  we  are  all  the  while 
anxious  for  the  interests  of  two  men  who  can  afford  to  be  plundered  of  a 

*  A  beautiful  turn  of  thought. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


75 


great  deal  of  money  and  sense,  and,  when  hungry  or  angry  critics  have  done 
their  worst,  still  remain  richer  than  all  their  neighbours.  In  charity,  therefore, 
reconcile  these  two  editors  ;*  if  not  for  the  love  of  Shakspeare,  yet  for  the  love  of 
laughter.  In  a  hunting-match,  would  it  not  be  pleasant  to  see  a  race-horse  and  a 
lobster  coupled  together  on  the  scent  ?  when,  singly,  the  one  would  never  reach  his 

game,  and  the  other  would  always  out-run  it.  Seriously,  as  Mr.  J - s  end  is  solid, 

and  he  is  likely  to  gain  it ;  and  Mr.  C - ’s  is  fantastical,  and  what  he  had  better 

be  without,  unless  he  mistakes  various  reading  for  much  reading  ;  I  could  wish  the 
first  might  meet  with  no  interruption. 

I  really  think,  theatrically  speaking,  you  could  not  have  projected  better  than 
to  revive  “Amphitryon.”  Dr.  Hawkesworth  is  a  very  ingenious  man  ;  and  it  is  pity 
he  should  have  suffered  his  “  Adventurer”  to  be  debased  by  the  silly  criticisms  of 
Warton.  But  has  he  that  easy  elegance  that  comic  dialogue  requires,  especially  in 
a  travestied  Mercury  ?  I  remember  he  was  generally  on  the  stretch  in  the  Adven¬ 
turer:!  but  perhaps  his  subject,  or  his  readers  required  it.  Apropos'.  It  is  my 
custom  when  I  have  read  a  book,  to  give  a  character  of  it,  while  the  thing  is  fresh 
in  my  mind,  in  the  blank  leaf,  that  I  may  not  be  betrayed  by  an  ill  memory  to  read 
a  bad  book  twice.  And  I  do  it,  because  it  is  generally  shorter,  and  always  better 
done,  in  the  words  of  some  classic.  So  my  character  has  the  advantage  of  becoming 
a  motto ;  which  Addison,  I  think,  called  a  charm  against  critics  ;  but  I  use  it  to 
guard  me  against  bad  writers.  I  remember  when  I  read  Dr.  Young’s  “  Centaur,” 
(you  know  the  genius  of  the  man,)  I  gave  my  sentiments  of  the  book  and  the  author 
in  the  following  words  of  Cicero.  “  Qui  nihil  potest  tranquille,  nihil  leniter,  nihil 
partite,  definite,  distinct^,  facete,  dicere,  is  furere  apud  sanos,  et  quasi  inter  sobrios 
bacchari  vinolentus  videtur.”! 

But  hark  you,  my  good  friend !  Can  none  but  doctors  serve  you  to  decorate  the 
scene  at  Drury-lane?  You  had  one  commenced  at  Cambridge  in  order  to  bring  on 
his  “  Barbarossa and  now  another  at  Lambeth  to  usher  in  “  Amphitryon.”  If  you 
will  at  last  take  pity  of  Dodsley’s  “  Hero,”  oblige  that  great  poet  previously  to  gra¬ 
duate  himself  in  physic  at  Edinburgh  at  least.  His  patron,  the  Irish  Apollo, §  is  full 
as  much  famed  for  medicine  as  for  poetry.  That  great  theatre,  the  Court  of  Com¬ 
mon  Pleas,  which  has,  before  now,  been  made  as  amusing  as  a  play-house,  suffers 
none  but  Sergeants-at-Law  to  entertain  the  public.  You,  who  nobly  aim  at  making 
your  play-house  a  Court  of  Justice,  by  giving  vice  and  virtue  their  due  rewards,  will 

*  The  tiL'o  editors. — Samuel  Johnson  and  Edward  Capell ;  inclining  strongly  to  Johnson,  till  his  work  came 
out :  then  we  find  that  he  resented  very  modest  occasional  dissent,  mixed  up  too  with  hyperbolical  praise, 
as  unpardonable  insolent  malignity.  See  the  letters  to  Hurd. — Ed. 

f  He  alludes  to  Dr.  Hawkesworth’s  eastern  grandeur  of  style.  Warburton  had  no  taste  for  the  tumid 
sonorous  balanced  English  of  the  Johnsonian  school,  and  was  always  ready  with  the  Queen  in  Hamlet  to 
exclaim — 

“  More  matter  with  less  art.” — Ed. 

I  From  the  treatise  styled  “  Orator,”  addressed  to  Marcus  Brutus. 

§  Dr.  John  Hill,  no  doubt. 

L  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


76 

admit  none  but  doctors  of  the  learned  faculties  to  plead  the  cause  of  truth.  Made 
nova  virtute,  Amice  mi* 

Is  it  not  time  my  paper  should  admonish  me  ?  Only  one  word  to  your  last  obliging 
question.  I  see  no  kind  of  necessity  for  binding  up  the  plays  you  do  not  want. 
But  if  you  will  do  so,  the  same  sort  of  covers  will  be  the  properest :  for  the  other 
volumes  I  have  are  bound  in  that  manner.  All  here  present  their  best  respects  to 
Mrs.  Garrick  and  yourself.  And  I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  esteem, 

Your  very  affectionate  and  faithful 
Humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  Jan.  25,  1757. 

The  beginning  of  your  letter,  concerning  your  health,  brought  me  ill  news ; 
which,  the  end  of  it,  concerning  Byng’s  condemnation,  did  by  no  means  compen¬ 
sate  ;  for  I  feel  with  the  humanity  of  our  laws,  that  it  is  better  twenty  rogues  should 
escape,  than  one  honest  man  suffer.  And  this  maxim  I  transfer  from  man’s  govern¬ 
ment,  to  God's  ;  where,  I  believe,  it  is  much  better  observed. 

In  the  diversity  of  doctors’  opinions,  there  is  a  safe  rule  to  go  by  ;  and  I  think  it 
very  unsafe  to  neglect  it :  and  that  is,  to  take  no  physic  of  them  as  proper  for  the 
distemper  they  have  decreed  you,  which  they  do  not  satisfy  you  is  harmless  in  any 
other,  from  whence  they  allow  it  possible  that  your  complaints  may  proceed. 

It  is  not  the  ignorance  of  physicians  I  complain  of,  but  their  presumption  ; 
that  when  God  has  put  a  ne  plus  ultra  to  the  little  knowledge  to  be  gained  in 

the  art  of  healing,  from  experience,  (which  was  soon  learnt,  and  to  which  no  addi¬ 

tions  have  been  made,  though  many  to  anatomy,  these  two  thousand  years,)  they 
should  act  as  if  they  knew  nothing  of  this  truth :  for  not  to  acknowledge  it  might 
be  excusable.  As  there  is  no  physical,  but  only  a  moral  impossibility,  of  finding  the 
philosopher’s  stone,  so  it  seems  to  be  in  the  art  of  healing :  which  makes  me  think 
the  only  way  of  bringing  it  to  perfection  is  to  improve  the  solar  microscope  to 
such  a  degree,  that  the  human  body  may  be  placed  within  it,  and  made  pellucid, 
that  the  doctors  may  see  quite  through  it,  as  at  present  they  do  through  that 
faithful  companion  of  its  miseries,  a  louse.  Till  then,  if  doctors  differ,  they  are 
verv  excusable,  as  they  can  only  guess.  So  that  the  best  guesser  is  the  best 

physician;  nay,  an  old  Greek  proverb  says,  he  is  the  best  prophet.  You  see  at  last, 

*  Dr,  Warburton  frequently  addresses  his  friends  with  this  classical  encouragement  from  Virgil’s  Ninth 
-Eneid. 

“  Macte  nova  virtute,  puer,  sic  itur  ad  astra, 

Dis  genite,  et  geniture  Deos.” — v.  640. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


77 


if  I  defalk*  from  their  human  science,  I  repay  them  largely  in  divine.  The  best 
guesser  I  know,  whom  you  have  the  good  fortune  to  have  for  your  physician,  has 
piety  enough,  I  am  sure,  to  make  him  satisfied  with  this  equivalent.  lapis,  I  dare 
say,  took  greater  glory  to  himself  for  the  cure  of  Eneas,  after  he  understood  the  god¬ 
dess  of  beauty  was  his  coadjutrix,  than  he  felt  before. 

I  now  begin  to  envy  Brown, — not  for  his  “  Barbarossa,’’  nor  yet  for  his  “  Estimate 
of  Manners,” — but  for  his  being,  before  me,  the  host  of  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you.  I  con¬ 
gratulate  you  for  your  respite :  but  I  congratulate  my  country  more  for  having  the 
honour  of  being  preferred  before  you,  and  in  the  article  of  danger  too ;  for  by  the 
character  he  gives  me  of  his  work,  it  will  be  a  kind  of  theological  Lilliput,  where 
the  great  will  be  told  their  own.  But  the  pulpit,  I  hope,  is  privileged  above  the 
stage.  The  mischief  is,  that  this  will  be  neither  in  the  pulpit  nor  on  the  stage,  but 
someAvhere  between  both.  There  is  indeed  another  privileged  place  that  would  do 
him  more  service  than  either,  and  that  is,  the  verge  of  the  court ;  but  here,  as  I 
understand,  his  artillery  is  to  be  levelled.  In  short,  he  has  too  much  honesty  for  a 
successful  court  chaplain,  and  too  much  sense  and  sobriety  for  a  city  preacher  :  take 
him  then  once  more  to  yourself ;  consider  him  as  addressing  you  in  the  words  a 
celebrated  French  poet  addressed  the  Goddess  of  Fame, — 

“  O  Renomraee  !  O  puissante  Deesse ! 

Qui  sfavez  tout  et  qui  parlez  sans  cesse, 

Par  charite,  parlez  un  pen  de  nous." 

But  seriously,  do  not  misconstrue  this  levity,  this  tete  a-tete  entre  nous.  I  love 
and  esteem  Dr.  Brown  :  he  vexed  me ;  but  I  find  he  must  be  treated  like  a  mistress 
as  well  as  friend. 

“  Be  to  his  faults  a  little  blind,” 

and  I  make  no  doubt  of  his  always  approving  himself  a  man  of  honour  and 
virtue,  and  a  warm  and  grateful  friend. 

As  to  Bower,  I  will  assure  you,  had  Douglas’s  detection  left  any  doubts  with  me 
concerning  the  force  of  his  evidence,  this  apology  would  have  removed  them.  I 
have  a  thousand  things  to  say  of  the  ill-faith  and  tergiversation  that  run  through 
every  page  of  it,  therefore  I  shall  say  nothing  save  this,  which  is  in  my  own 
province :  that  where  he  speaks  occasionally  of  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the 
Church  of  Rome,  in  the  articles  of  the  supremacy,  expulsion  from  monastical 
society,  and  what  is  deemed  incest,  and  of  the  resort  of  the  inquisitorial  tribunal,  by 
the  canon  law,  his  ignorance  or  impudence  is  most  astonishing  and  prodigious. 

I  think  you  very  insolently  treated  by  Hume,  the  Essay  writer ;  nor  do  I  see 
how  Millar  can  be  excused  from  impertinence  in  showing  you  the  puppy’s  letter, 
whose  boasted  generosity  and  charity  appears  to  me  to  be  only  the  vanity  of  a  mock 

t  Defalk.~\  The  real  verb  is  defalcate — but  this  may  live  and  not  generate,  on  the  authority  of  • 
Warburton. — Ed. 


78 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


patronage.  I  think  you  will  honour  him  too  much  in  returning  any  answer  to  it ; 
but  if  any  circumstances  attending  the  case  require  you  should  do  so,  I  think  your 
answer  extremely  proper,  and  the  only  one  should  be  made. 

But,  hark  you,  my  friend !  do  not  your  frequent  indispositions  say,  (whatever 
your  doctors  may  think  fit  to  do,) — Lusisti  satis  ? 

Is  it  tanti  to  kill  yourself,  in  order  to  leave  a  vast  deal  of  money  to  your 
heirs  ?  There  is  not  one  man  in  a  hundred  with  health  impaired  by  a  fatiguing 
business,  whom  I  should  advise  to  retire,  though  all  the  common  circumstances 
concurred  to  make  it  eligible ;  because  not  one  in  a  hundred,  who  have  been  long  in 
business,  know  how  (I  will  not  say  to  enjoy,  but  even)  to  bear  retirement.  But  I 
do  not  take  this  to  be  your  case.  'When  you  have  left  the  stage,  if  you  leave  it  with 
health  enough  to  make  life  worth  having,  the  happiest  portion  of  your  days  will  be 
to  come ;  because  you  can  then  diversify  life  more,  and  will  have  reasonable  occu¬ 
pations  enough,  with  a  taste  like  yours,  to  give  a  relish  to  every  diversity. 

I  and  my  family  propose  coming  to  town  the  beginning  of  next  month  ;  Mr. 
Allen  and  his,  the  beginning  of  March. 

I  heartily  wish  you  a  perfect  re-establishment  of  your  health  :  but  you  do  not  act 
by  it  with  a  conscience.  When  you  enter  into  those  passions  which  most  tear  and 
shatter  the  human  frame,  you  forget  you  have  a  body  ;  your  soul  comes  out,  and  it 
is  always  dagger  out  of  slieatli  with  you.  I  think  I  use  the  proverb  better  than  it 
is  commonly  applied. 

The  women  here  desire  their  best  respects  and  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  esteem, 

Your  most  affectionate 

And  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 

P.  S.  I  forgot  to  thank  you  for  the  entertainment  “  Amphitryon”  afforded  us.  I 
think  Dr.  Hawkesworth  has  added,  altered,  and  retrenched  with  judgment.  The 
prologue  is  manly,  lively,  and  worthy  to  usher  in  the  honest  purpose  of  washing  the 
wit  of  the  last  age  from  its  impurities.  I  think  I  know  the  writer  by  many  marks, 
but  especially  by  the  happy  application  of  the  line  from  Shakspeare. 

I  hinted  to  Mr.  HA  about  your  not  seeing  him  when  he  was  last  in  town.  He 
owns  you  had  reason  to  think  it  unkind,  as  you  did  not  know  the  only  reason 
respected  not  you,  but  Dr.  B.f  to  keep  clear  of  “  Athelstan.”  I  thought  it  proper 
that  the  behaviour  of  so  excellent  a  person  should  be  cleared  up,  the  most  accom¬ 
plished  clergyman  I  know  living. \ 


*  Mr.  Hurd.  -)■  Dr.  Brown. 

+  I  should  have  little  difficulty  in  pronouncing  this,  and  the  preceding  one,  from  the  same  great  man, 
the  two  finest  letters  which  even  Garrick  ever  was  honoured  with. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


79 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wednesday  evening,  Aug.  17th,  1757. 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire’s  compliments  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  desires  to 
know  how  they  both  do,  thinks  them  strange  rambling  people,  that  when  he  was 
in  town  for  ten  days  could  not  see  either  of  them  :  he  wants  much  to  consult  them 
upon  a  very  important  point,  namely,  a  birth-day  suit.  He  dines  at  Chiswick  to¬ 
morrow,  and  should  be  glad  to  meet  Madam  there :  if  that  is  not  convenient,  he 
may  very  possibly  be  there  on  Friday,  and  will  return  to  Derbyshire  early  on 
Saturday. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  R.  DODSLEY. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sunday  Morning,  1757. 

I  most  sincerely  congratulate  you  upon  your  success  last  night.  I  heard  with 
much  concern,  that  some  of  your  friends,  particularly  Mr.  Melmoth,  were  angry  with 
me  for  playing  the  “  Busybody”  against  your  Tragedy  :  this,  I  think,  is  very  hard 
upon  me,  for  I  am  certain  that  your  house  was  far  from  receiving  any  injury  from 
ours — however,  if  you  will  call  upon  me,  and  let  me  know  how  I  can  support  your 
interest  without  absolutely  giving  up  my  own,  I  will  do  it ;  for  whatever  you  or 
your  friends  may  think,  I  am,  most  sincerely. 

Your  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

Endorsed  “  My  first  Letter  to  Dodsley.” 


MR.  R.  DODSLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Dec.  5th,  1757. 

I  thank  you  for  your  compliments  on  the  success  of  “  Cleone,”  and  could  have 
wished  you  had  thought  proper  to  have  put  it  in  my  power  to  have  thanked  you 
for  contributing  towards  it ;  but  I  think  it  is  not  now  in  your  own  to  redress  the 
injury  you  have  done  me.  You  know  full  well,  that  profit  was  but  my  second 
motive  for  bringing  this  piece  on  the  stage,  and  you  have  taken  effectual  care  to  nip 
its  reputation  in  the  bud,  by  preventing  the  town,  as  far  as  lay  in  your  power,  from 
attending  to  it.  As  to  my  proposing  any  means  in  which  you  can  now  be  of  service 
to  me,  I  hope  you  do  not  think,  that  after  what  has  passed,  I  can  possibly  bring 
myself  to  ask  a  favour  of  you.  In  short,  if  your  behaviour  to  me  has  been  right, 


80 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  see  no  cause  you  have  to  be  concerned  about  it;  if  wrong,  why  was  it  so?  I  am 
certain  I  gave  you  no  provocation  for  it.  I  therefore  leave  it  on  yourself  to  pursue 
what  measures  you  may  think  most  consistent  with  your  own  reputation;  as  to 
mine,  you  have  certainly  in  this  instance  done  all  you  could  to  lessen  it.  However. 
I  beg  you  will  believe  it  is  with  some  regret  I  feel  I  cannot  at  present  subscribe 
myself  with  thar  cordiality  I  have  always  wished  to  be, 

Sir,  your  friend  and  sen  ant, 

R.  Dodsley. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  R.  DODSLEY. 

MASTER  ROBERT  DODSLEY, 

When  I  first  read  your  peevish  answer  to  my  well-meant  proposal  to  you,  I 
was  much  disturbed  at  it — but  when  I  considered,  that  some  minds  cannot  bear  the 
smallest  portion  of  success,  I  most  sincerely  pitied  you ;  and  when  I  found  in  the 
same  letter,  that  you  were  graciously  pleased  to  dismiss  me  from  your  acquaintance, 
I  could  not  but  confess  so  apparent  an  obligation,  and  am  with  due  acknowledg¬ 
ments,  Master  Robert  Dodsley, 

Your  most  obliged, 

David  Garrick. 

Endorsed  “  My  answer 
to  Master  Robert  Dodslev.’’ 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Pnor  Park,  Dec.  21st,  1757. 

I  have  the  favour  of  your  obliging  letter  of  the  17th. 

I  have  not  received  the  plays  you  so  kindly  intended ;  but  I  saw  a  scene  in  one 
of  them  in  the  Chronicle  that  pleased  me  extremely.  I  am  pleased  to  understand 
you  have  altered  the  “  Gamester”  of  Shirley.  I  am  sure  you  will  make  something 
good  of  it. 

I  honour  you  for  your  repeated  endeavours  in  stemming  the  torrent  of  vice  and 
folly.  You  do  it  in  a  station  where  most  men,  I  suppose,  would  think  you  might 
fairly  be  dispensed  with  from  bearing  your  part  in  the  duty  of  good  citizens  on 
such  a  necessary  occasion ;  but  it  is  for  this  very  thing  I  chiefly  honour  you. 

Nobody  but  1*01',  and  Mr.  Pope,  ever  knew  how  to  preserve  the  digjiity  of  your 
respective  employments.* 

*  A  fine  discernment  of  life.  This  was  exactlv  the  fact ;  but  meditation  on  the  reader's  part  must 
unfold  all  the  importance  of  it. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


81 


You  have  given  me  fresh  occasion  to  commend  and  esteem  you.  I  have  been 
told  you  have  carefully  avoided  the  occasions  of  having  the  Poet  Laureate’s  place 
offered  to  you.  I  will  tell  you  my  mind  frankly :  I  think  it  as  much  below  you, 
as  some  others,  who  have  declined  it,  think  it  below  them.  The  place,  as  Pope 
expressed  it,  has  suffered  an  attainder  and  an  interruption  in  the  succession.  And 
though  civil  places,  of  indispensable  use  in  society,  suffer  nothing  by  unworthy 
possessors,  and  contract  no  stain  thereby ;  yet  1  think  it  otherwise,  in  places  only  of 
ornament  to  society. 

All  here  desire  their  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  yourself.  They  are 
delighted  to  understand  that  her  health  is  grown  better  than  usual. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  all  affection, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 

A  Play  will  come  very  well  in  a  cover  to  Mr.  Allen. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


SIR,  l757- 

I  should  not  have  troubled  you  with  this,  my  last  letter,  had  it  not  been  to  have 
answered  that  part  of  your  letter  relative  to  my  friend  Mr.  Berenger.  He  might, 
indeed,  say  he  knew  of  my  good  intentions  towards  you,  but  he  could  scarce  tell 
you  that  I  had  intentions  to  serve  you  in  the  “  Orphan  of  China,”  as  he  knew  from 
the  nature  of  the  affair  that  it  was  impossible.  Your  warmth  or  quickness  to  err, 
(as  you  are  pleased  to  call  it,)  has  hurried  you  a  little  too  far  in  that  part  of  your 
letter,  where  you  talk  of  equitable  treatment ;  so  I  shall  leave  that  part  to  be  an¬ 
swered  by  your  own  feelings,  when  the  quickness  of  seeing  your  error  returns.  I 
have  always  declared  that  my  private  resentments  shall  never  interfere  with  the 
public  entertainments ;  so  Mr.  Murphy  may  be  assured,  though  he  should  publish 
twenty  volumes  of  abuse  upon  me,  that  whenever  he  sends  me  a  dramatic  perform¬ 
ance  that  I  think  will  succeed  upon  the  stage,  I  shall  certainly  perform  it  in  the  best 
manner  I  am  able ;  nor  will  I,  on  the  other  hand,  receive  one,  whose  only  merit 
should  be  that  its  author  has  published  the  same  quantity  of  panegyric  upon  me. 

The  new  acquisition  of  Mr.  Derrick,  which  you  are  pleased  to  honour  me  with, 
is  not  the  only  mistake  in  your  letter;  but  that  of  the  mention  of  Mr.  Hawkeswortln 
Shakspeare,  Voltaire,  are  visible  proofs  of  your  anger,  but  surely  not  of  your  wit, 
your  judgment,  or  your  justice. 

I  cannot  say  that  I  am  in  the  least  surprised  at  your  behaviour,  or  that  your 
letter  of  this  evening  should  be  so  totally  inconsistent  with  your  other  that  1 
received  yesterday.  My  acquaintance,  which  you  so  warmly  desired  in  that,  and 
VOL.  i. 


M 


82 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


which  l  so  freely  and  as  warmly  gave  to  you  in  my  answer,  I  now  as  willingly  take 
again,  and  assure  you,  that  it  shall  not  ever  incommode  you  for  the  future. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick.* 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  Jan.  21st,  1758. 

I  have  the  favour  of  yours  with  the  enclosed. 

We  have  been  all  here  labouring  under  the  same  indisposition  with  Mrs.  Garrick, 
and  so  know  how  to  pity  her.  The  disorder  in  your  breast  shows  how  you  over¬ 
strain  the  muscles  of  it ;  and  to  set  this  right,  you  need  no  learned  consultation, 
whereby  you  may  incur  the  danger  of  committing  any  man's  dignity  by  an  unsuitable 
association. 

We  have  read  over  the  altered  Playf  with  much  pleasure.  The  occasional  strokes 
up  and  down,  of  the  nature  of  those  in  the  excellent  prologue,  make  us  honour  you 
greatly.  If  you  did  not  give  offence,  you  would  not  deserve  applause. 

The  miscarriage  of  the  first  nights,  from  the  cause  you  mention,  was  very 
natural.  It  was  not  the  virtue  of  tl^e  audience  Avhich  took  offence  at  a  supposed 
adultery  ;  it  was  not  their  vice  which  was  disappointed  when  they  saw  none  com¬ 
mitted  ;  it  was  their  vanity  which  was  shocked,  in  finding  themselves  outwitted  by 
the  poet.  They  had  sat  long  enough  in  their  suspense  to  be  secure  in  their  sagacity, 
that  Wilding  had  been  really  cuckolded  ;  and  to  find  themselves  mistaken  at  last, 
was  enough  to  put  them  out  of  humour. 

I  cannot  but  smile  at  your  intelligence  from  Millar.  If  his  author  were  as  able 
as  he  pretends,  he  would  know  that  the  most  effectual  way  of  discrediting  our 
friend’s  book  (and  who  now  answers  but  to  discredit  ?)  would  be  to  show,  not  that 
it  is  full  of  falsehoods,  but,  on  the  contrary,  full  of  such  obvious  truths,  that  it  was 
hardly  worth  the  pains  of  bringing  them  together  in  any  formal  manner  that  had 
the  air  of  a  discovery.  But  this  inter  nos. 

I  hope  and  make  no  question,  but  that  “  Agis,”  under  your  direction,  will  better 
deserve  the  applause  of  the  public  than  “  Douglas.”  But  dramatic  writers  are  often 
used  like  ladies  of  pleasure :  they  are  received  with  rapture  and  enthusiasm  by  the 
public  on  their  first  appearance,  but  on  farther  acquaintance  are  received  very 
coolly,  though  they  have  indeed  by  this  time  greatly  improved  themselves  in  the 
art  of  pleasing. 

I  cannot  but  regard  it  as  an  instance  of  your  partiality  to  me,  to  give  credit  to 
any  loose  reports  in  my  favour.^  But  if  honour  comes,  as  your  old  friend  Falstaff 

*  Very  neat,  spirited  and  proper. — Ed.  +  The  “  Gamester”  of  Shirley,  altered  by  Mr.  Garrick. — Ed. 

J  As  to  his  becoming  a  Bishop. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


83 


says,  it  comes  unsought  and  unexpected.  Whatever  I  am,  I  shall  never  please  my¬ 
self  in  any  title  more  than  that  of  being, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  truly  affectionate  friend, 

And  faithful  humble  servant, 

7  t 

W.  Warburton. 

P.  S.  Next  week  my  wife  and  I  shall  bring  to  town  the  best  compliments  of  the 
family  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  23d  Feb.  1758. 

I  have  been  this  morning  with  Mr.  Woodward  about  the  “  Upholsterer,”  and 
after  a  perusal,  he  is  to  determine  whether  he  will  act  the  part.  I  did  hope  that  our 
last  night’s  interview  would  have  settled  this  matter,  but,  after  many  meetings,  it 
remains  as  much  in  suspense  as  ever. 

I  do  assure  you,  that  if  I  could  have  foreseen  so  much  trouble  on  all  sides,  I 
should  never  have  offered  it.  I  am  sorry  it  came  so  unseasonably  as  to  embarrass 
you  ;  and  the  moment  I  heard  you  had  another  farce  called  the  “  Politician,”  I 
proposed  to  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Fitzpatrick  to  embrace  an  overture  made  me  from 
the  other  House,  which  would  have  effectually  answered  any  purpose  of  mine, 
without  doing  any  hurt  to  Drury-lane.  This  I  proposed,  to  evade  any  mutual 
trouble  or  difficulty  which  I  foresaw  might  arise ;  but  they  were  both  against  it, 
and  indeed,  after  being  reconciled  to  Mr.  Garrick,  I  thought  I  owed  him  the  pre¬ 
ference.  I  am  sorry  to  find  this  intention  has  embarrassed  us  both.  Indeed,  I 
cannot  help  being  uneasy  at  present,  because  I  plainly  foresee  the  piece  is  likely  to 
suffer  in  the  representation  ;  and  every  friend  of  mine  who  has  seen  it,  Jack  Bourke, 
Fitzpatrick,  Colman,  &c.  are  of  opinion  it  is  superior  to  what  I  have  done  before 
in  this  way,  and  they  assure  me  if  Mr.  Garrick  cordially  recommends  it  to  the 
company,  that  they  think  it  cannot  fail.  For  God’s  sake,  Sir,  if  it  cannot  be  done 
properly,  don’t  let  it  be  done  at  all ;  for  if  the  actors  were  to  slur  it  over,  I  should 
be  tempted  to  print  it  without  their  names,  and  give  the  public  the  reason  of  it. 
Besides,  I  should  choose  to  give  Foote,  Macklin,  and  the  reviewers,  as  little  room  as 
possible  to  traduce  me.  I  beg  pardon  for  all  this  trouble,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir,  yours  with  great  sincerity, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Mr.  Woodward  seems  to  take  it  ill  that  the  Farce  was  not  offered  to  him  :  I  am 
sure  if  you  had  so  settled  it,  I  should  have  had  no  objection.  Mr.  Fitzpatrick  has 
called  upon  me  this  moment,  and  tells  me  he  imagined  you  said,  if  Mr.  Mossop 
would  change  his  day,  there  could  be  no  excuse  for  not  playing  the  Farce  with  the 

M  2 


84 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


strength  of  the  company.  1  plainly  see  the  danger  of  doing  it  otherwise ;  and  in 
my  situation  it  would  be  foolish  to  run  a  risque,  unless  it  is  as  well  taken  care  of 
as  every  other  thing  at  Drury-lane. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  24th  Feb.  1758. 

Pray  do  not  imagine  that  we  are  born  to  misunderstand  one  another.  1  have 
no  kind  of  reason  to  doubt  Mr.  Garrick’s  warmth  or  sincerity ;  on  the  contrary,  I 
have  reason  to  confide  in  his  friendship,  and  some  of  my  friends  know  this,  because 
I  have,  and  ever  shall,  profess  a  grateful  sense  of  your  civility.  But,  my  dear  Sir,  if 
I  doubt  your  company,  on  account  of  their  piques  to  Mr.  Mossop,  have  I  not  some 
reason  to  be  apprehensive?  I  can  assure  you  that  Mr.  Mossop’s  friends  are  uneasy, 
and  haA^e  made  me  so.  To  whom  then  shall  I  apply  but  to  Mr.  Garrick?  who  can, 
and  I  persuade  myself  will,  suggest  to  them,  that  it  would  be  hard  to  wound  the 
author  on  account  of  the  actor.  Rather  than  you  should  have  any  trouble,  I  could 
wish  the  Farce  never  had  been  written,  or  that  it  were  committed  to  the  flames.  I 
am  well  aware  of  the  fatigues,  both  of  body  and  mind,  that  your  talents  have  made 
you  liable  to,  and  I  assure  you  that  I  would  be  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  add  to 
your  burthen.  Cum  tot  sustineas  et  tanta  negotia  solus,  it  would  be  a  want  of  feeling 
to  disturb  you.  You  ask  me  if  I  think  you  lukewarm?  I  aver  that  I  do  not,  and  I 
beg  you  will  believe  me  when  I  assure  you  that  I  am  not  lukewarm  in  the  real 
esteem  I  bear  towards  Mr.  Garrick.  If  I  am  a  little  jealous  of  the  company,  surely 
you  will  give  me  leave  to  explain  that  to  you,  without  thinking  me  mysterious.  I 
do  assure  you  there  is  no  hidden  meaning  in  my  letter ;  the  tenor  of  it  I  imagined 
was  plain — that  I  am  afraid  the  actors  may  slight  the  Farce,  because  Mossop  is  not 
altogether  acceptable  to  them  ;  and  this,  you  will  allow,  would  be  an  ugly  scrape  for 
me.  This  is  all  that  ever  passed  between  me  and  any  friend  of  mine  ;  and  Mr.  Fitz¬ 
patrick,  particularly,  knows  I  have  no  reason  to  mistrust  Mr.  Garrick,  nor  does  he  en¬ 
tertain  the  least  doubt  of  your  good  wishes  for  me,  because,  I  think,  he  has  the  evi¬ 
dence  of  facts  to  convince  him.  I  hope  this  letter  will  satisfy  Mr.  Garrick,  and  that 
he  will  believe  me  his  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  J.  BEARD  TO  MR.  T.  NEVILLE. 

London,  May  8th,  1758. 

As  you  have  vouchsafed  to  mention  me  in  your  late  Imitation  of  Horace,  you 
will  excuse,  I  hope,  my  addressing  you  in  this  manner  with  ceremony.  In  what¬ 
soever  disagreeable  light  you  are  pleased  to  place  me,  and  my  profession,  yet  as 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


85 


every  man,  however  insignificant,  is  of  some  small  consequence  to  himself,  you  will 
not  think  me  too  presuming  for  rescuing  the  very  little  merit  I  have  from  the 
severe  and  unprovoked  lashes  of  your  satire.  I  am  humble  enough  not  to  accuse 
you  of  injustice  for  sinking  me  into  the  lowest  class  of  my  profession;  you  have 
an  undoubted  right  to  judge  of  me,  and  to  speak  your  judgment,  however  severe, 
of  my  public  performances.  I  can  therefore,  in  that  particular,  think  you  cruel  only 
towards  a  man  who  has  never  in  the  least  offended  you,  and  who  has  always  endea¬ 
voured  to  make  those  indifferent  talents  he  has,  as  useful  and  beneficial  to  society 
as  he  possibly  could.  If  I  have  no  merit,  I  have  no  vanity,  and  therefore  your 
good-nature  might  have  passed  me  by,  had  not  my  unlucky  name  been  too  tempt¬ 
ing  a  bait — for  your  rhyme.  In  this  point  I  can  only  tax  you  with  ill-nature,  but 
when  you  tell  the  world,  speaking  of  Farinelli  and  Beard, 

“  Press  them,  you’d  think  they  never  wou ’d  sing  more; 

Unask’d,  no  hints  can  teach  them  to  give  o’er — 

This  I  say,  with  regard  to  me,  Sir,  is  a  gross  calumny.*  I  flatter  myself,  if  you  had 
enquired  after  my  private  character,  you  would  have  found  that  as  I  have  not  the 
talents  of  the  great  singers,  so  neither  have  I  the  affectation  or  ill-behaviour  which 
you  satirize.  If  this  should  be  the  case,  you  cannot  think  it  surely  too  scrupulous 
a  delicacy ,  or  too  suspicious  a  sensibility  in  me  to  expect  some  vindication  of  your 
honest  satire  (as  you  call  it),  which  has  not  only  fixed  me  the  lowest  singer,  but  has 
likewise  injuriously  made  me  the  most  impertinent  of  men. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  a  due  sense  of  your  favours, 

Your  humble  servant, 
John  Beard. 

“  Beard’s  letter  to  the  Imitator  of  Horace  at  Cambridge,  with  the  answer.” 


MR.  T.  NEVILLE  TO  MR.  BEARD. 

Jesus  College,  May  12th,  175S. 

I  had  the  favour  of  your  letter,  which,  though  written  with  all  the  modesty 
and  politeness  the  occasion  would  admit,  has  given  me  real  pain.  Had  I  been  aware 

*  Beard  did  not  understand  the  licentia  poetica ;  and  I  will  answer  for  it,  that  Mr.  Thomas  Neville,  ot 
Jesus  College,  knew  nothing  of  Beard  but  that  he  was  a  singer.  He  couples  him  with  the  accomplished 
Farinelli  ;  for  which  Beard  ought  to  have  sung  for  him  at  the  Commemoration  whenever  called  upon.  But 
the  real  truth  is  that  Pope  had  made  the  imitation  of  Horace  popular,  and  the  third  satire  of  the  illustrious 
Roman  began  thus — 

“  Omnibus  hoc  vitinm  est  cantoribus,  inter  arnicos 
Ut  nunquam  inducant  animum  cantare  rogati ; 

Injussi  nunquam  desistant.” 

And  he  instances  Tigellius,  a  singer  of  Sardinia,  as  having  this  fault  in  the  most  extravagant  degree.  Our 
gownsman  translated  him  into  Beard,  who  very  probably  never  resisted  a  call  in  his  life. — Ed. 


86 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


of  your  extreme  sensibility,  I  should  certainly  have  afforded  you  no  pretence  for 
conceiving  the  least  displeasure  against  me ;  as  the  ease  now  stands,  I  have  nothing 
left  but  to  assure  you  that  I  shall  be  ready  to  remove  the  cause  of  your  complaint 
the  very  first  opportunity. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Neville.* 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  May  19th,  1758. 

1  HAVE  the  favour  of  your  obliging  letter  of  the  16th.  I  understand  by  our 
common  friends  your  loss  of  a  very  valuable  relation,  and  I  bear  a  share  with  you 
in  this  domestic  loss.  I  hope  in  all  other  respects  that  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  enjoy 
your  retirement,  and  all  other  blessings  that  your  virtues  entitle  you  to.  The 
women  here  desire  their  best  respects  to  her. 

I  will  with  equal  freedom  open  my  mind  to  you  concerning  our  friend  Dr. 
Brown,  who  has  many  good  qualities,  but  is  of  ungovernable  resentments.  To 
say  the  truth,  I  perceived  (and  I  think  I  have  told  you  so  before  in  confidence), 
that  the  success  of  his  “  Estimate”  had  turned  his  head.f  I  from  time  to  time,  and 
by  degrees,  insinuated  to  him  that  this  success  was  partly  owing  to  the  critical  junc¬ 
ture,  partly  to  his  clear  and  popular  way  of  writing,  and  partly  to  the  chance  that 
attends  these  sort  of  things  :  that,  as  to  the  rest,  he  had  told  the  world  no  news,  nor 
indeed  any  thing  else  but  what  had  been  retailed  to  them  for  this  last  twenty  years 
in  newspapers.  All  these  hints  he  bore  with  the  utmost  impatience,  and  once,  par¬ 
ticularly,  left  me  in  great  resentment,  and  I  dare  say  considered  me  as  one  of  the 
enemies  of  his  glory.  When  I  was  last  in  town,  he  communicated  to  me  his  design 
of  writing  again  on  the  subject.  The  very  -women  dissuaded  him  from  it,  as  what 
would  be  carrying  the  jest  too  far.  I  asked  him  whether  he  proposed  to  continue 
the  subject,  and  reveal  those  mysteries  he  had  promised  in  the  first  volume.  He  said. 
No,  he  was  not  master  of  that  matter ;  this  was  to  be  a  comment  on  what  he  had 
already  done.  I  told  him,  if  he  expected  the  same  success,  he  would  be  deceived. 
Yet  he  expected  it  so  much,  that  he  printed  4000  copies.  I  had  determined  long 
before  this  time  to  decline,  for  the  future,  the  supervisal  of  what  lie  wrote.  I  had 
found  him  very  untractable  even  in  the  “  Characteristics.”  You  know  what  I  did  for 
the  first  volume  of  the  “  Estimate,”  when  he  was  for  extirpating  our  trade.  As  to 
this  volume,  I  gave  him  no  advice  about  a  single  letter,  nor  indeed  could  I,  for  I 
onty  took  half  an  hour  to  skim  it  over,  where  I  found  here  and  there  a  reflection  of 
a  better  taste  and  less  trite  than  in  the  other. 

*  See  the  close  of  Dr.  Warburton’s  excellent  letter  which  follows. 

t  Nothing  could  be  clearer  than  Warburton’s  discernment  in  this  case.  Dr.  Brown  really  died  insane, 
because  his  health  did  not  permit  him  to  accept  an  invitation  of  the  Empress  Catharine’s,  to  construct 
an  Utopia  in  Russia. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


87 


The  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  now  at  Bath,  told  me  something  that  had  passed  between 
Williams,  the  Major,  his  Cousin,  and  himself.  On  which  I  wrote  to  him  to  this 
effect, — “  that  the  Major’s  part,  as  it  was  represented  to  me,  was  generous  and 
brave  ;  extremely  so,  if  done  without  his  knowledge.  If  otherwise,  I  could  not  see 
how  his  (the  Doctor’s)  could  be  justified.  Why  did  he  not  fight  himself,  if  fighting 
a  duel  was  lawful  ?  for  I  know  of  no  lawful  action  the  clergy  is  debarred  from.  If 
duelling  was  unlawful,  he  ought  to  have  no  hand  in  encouraging  another  to  it. 
What  he  could  not  do  in  person,  it  is  certain  he  could  not  do  by  proxy,” — And  this 
was  his  second  fault  in  this  affair ;  the  first  was  iti  resenting  the  conduct  of  a  man 
disordered  in  his  understanding.  As  to  his  squabble  with  Dodsley,  this  is  the  first 
word  1  heard  of  it.  I  am  an  utter  stranger  to  all  the  rest  of  the  trash  you  mention, 
except  Hill’s  pamphlet,  which  was  sent  to  Mr.  Allen.  As  to  Hill  himself,  as  his 
abuse  was  unlooked  for,  so  it  was  more  acceptable  than  from  any  other  hand  in 
England.  To  be  more  moved  by  such  abuse  than  by  the  annoyance  of  any  other 
vermin  whatsoever,  would  betray  a  strange  impotency  of  mind ;  yet  there  are 
seasons,  as  when  a  man  is  much  fatigued  with  his  journey,  when  the  howling  of  a 
village  cur  is  troublesome  enough. 

Mr.  Neville  is  a  man  of  worth  and  family.  I  am,  therefore,  much  concerned  he 
has  given  any  just  cause  of  complaint  to  Mr.  Beard,  whom  I  have  never  heard  any 
one  speak  of  but  with  regard.  Nay,  I  have  heard  him  spoken  of  much  to  his  honour 
on  the  marriage  of  his  lady’s  daughter,  when  a  mean,  a  paltry  proposal  was  made  to 
him.  I  did  not  recollect  that  Mr.  Neville  had  said  any  thing  offensive.  But  on  this 
occasion,  looking  into  the  book,  I  found  the  line,  (the  2d  in  the  3d  Satire,)  which  I 
suppose  Air.  Beard  objects  to — and  with  reason  enough,  if  it  be  understood,  as  I  sup¬ 
pose  he  takes  it,  to  insinuate  a  distance  between  the  merits  of  himself  and  Farinelli  ; 
but  it  may  mean  only  the  distance  in  time,  from  Farinelli’s  performance  here  to  this 
day  ;  or  the  distance  in  place ,  in  all  countries  from  Italy  to  England.  I  would  fain 
suppose  Mr.  Neville  (who  has  lived  all  his  life  in  a  college)  meant  one  of  the  latter  ; 
for  he  is  a  very  inoffensive,  as  well  as  a  very  ingenious  man. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  esteem. 

Your  most  affectionate  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  War  burton. 

P.  S.  I  come  to  town  for  the  term,  and  propose  to  be  in  London  next  week. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sjj^  Lincoln’s  Inn,  27th  May,  1758. 

I  am  most  extremely  sorry  that  you  did  not  think  proper  to  explain  yourself  to 
me  about  the  unfortunate  “  Orphan  of  China,”  as  soon  as  you  heard  my  sense  of  what 
passed  between  us.  It  woidd  have  prevented  all  possibility  of  any  future  cxpostula- 


88 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


tion ;  and  since  there  was  occasion  to  discuss  a  very  disagreeable  question,  I  could 
rather  wish  that  you  had  thought  proper  to  do  it  at  a  personal  interview,  rather  than 
by  the  intervention  of  others,  because  1  am  of  opinion  that  people  always  do  their 
own  business  best. 

I  look  upon  the  question  between  us  to  be  highly  unlucky,  nice,  and  delicate  in 
its  nature  on  both  sides,  and  only  likely,  if  agitated  any  more,  to  furnish  matter  to 
the  talking  world.  It  must  then  be  reduced  to  this  :  that  Mr.  Garrick  not  having 
been  quite  explicit  and  peremptory  as  to  time,  Mr.  Murphy’s  hopes  were  over-san¬ 
guine,  and  formed  too  hasty  a  conclusion.  This  is  all,  I  think,  that  can  be  said  to 
account  for  so  direct  an  opposition  of  opinions  between  us.  I  do  assure  you,  that  to 
the  best  of  my  knowledge ,  remembrance,  and  belief,  I  related  our  conversation  ;  but  as 
there  is  a  point  incontestable,  that  you  must  be  the  best  judge  of  your  own  meaning, 
I  think  it  may  fairly  be  allowed  that  you  must  be  the  interpreter  yourself. 

To  put  an  end,  therefore,  to  any  further  enquiries  about  the  matter,  and  that  it 
may  be  entirely  settled,  beyond  a  possibility  of  a  dispute  about  the  past,  or  any  misun¬ 
derstanding  for  the  future,  I  think  the  best  way  will  be  to  let  the  “  Orphan  of  China  ” 
stand  the  third  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  be  produced  next  after  Mr.  Mallet’s  Tragedy  and 
the  neAv  Comedy,  either  next  season  or  the  season  following,  as  shall  be  most  agree¬ 
able  to  Mr.  Garrick  ;  and  if  either  of  the  two  first  is  withdrawn,  then  to  stand 
second. 

This,  Sir,  I  hope  will  prevent  a  disagreeable  retrospect ;  for  the  peace  of  my  own 
mind,  which  has  been  a  good  deal  disturbed,  and  to  pursue  my  studies  without  any 
kind  of  wrangling,  I  have  judged  this  to  be  the  best  expedient,  and  I  choose  to  send 
it  in  writing  rather  than  by  another  method,  and  I  remain. 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


Endorsed,  By  Mr.  Garrick, 

“A  complaining  letter  about  the  *  Orphan  of  China.’  ” 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK.  • 

DEAR  SIR,  June  12th>  1758- 

As  you  know  me  to  be  less  an  idolizer  of  Shakspeare  than  yourself,  you  will  less 
suspect  me  of  compliment  when  I  tell  you,  that  besides  your  giving  an  elegant  form 
to  a  monstrous  composition,  you  have  in  your  own  additions  written  up  to  the  best 
scenes  in  this  play,  so  that  you  will  easily  imagine  I  read  the  “  Reformed  Winter’s 
Tale”  with  great  pleasure.  You  have  greatly  improved  a  fine  prologue,  and  have 
done  what  we  preachers  are  so  commonly  thought  unable  to  do — mend  ourselves  while 
we  mend  others. 

I  should  want  no  other  business  at  Hampton  than  paying  my  respects  to  Mrs. 
Garrick  and  you,  would  my  time  have  given  me  leave  to  do  myself  that  pleasure ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


89 


but  I  must  set  forward  for  the  North  in  two  or  three  days,  and  besides  aliena 
negotia  centum ,  my  laziness  always  makes  me  defer  my  own  little  affairs  to  the  last 
hour.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

With  the  truest  esteem  and  regard, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Chatsworth,  Sept.  10th,  1758. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  your  letter  last  post.  You  must  have  been  in  some  mistake 
about  my  coming  to  town,  for  I  have  not  been  there  since  I  saw  you  at  Hampton, 
nor  do  not,  unless  some  unforeseen  accident  should  call  me,  intend  being  there  till 
after  the  Newmarket  meeting.  I  am,  however,  much  obliged  to  you  for  calling. 
I  shall  be  glad  to  have  the  patterns  here.  I  do  not  much  relish  either  trimming  or 
embroidery,  and  should  rather  like  velvet,  either  with  lace  or  brocade  waistcoat,  &c. 
I  have  enclosed  sent  you  a  note  on  Mr.  Snow  for  500 1. :  if  you  wanted  as  much  more, 
it  is  at  your  service,  and  am  very  glad  it  is  in  my  power  to  be  of  any  convenience 
to  you.  My  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Yours  ever, 

I  will  have  no  security.  Devonshire* 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s  Inn,  Oct.  13th,  1758. 

According  to  your  desire,  signified  to  me  by  Mr.  Yaillant,  I  send  you  the 
Orphan  of  China.”  Two  or  three  friends,  who  have  lately  had  it  in  their  hands, 
have  favoured  me  with  their  criticisms.  But  as  they  relate  chiefly  to  single  words, 
sometimes  to  phrases,  and  but  rarely  extend  to  an  entire  line,  I  defer  the  lima 
labor,  until  I  am  favoured  with  Mr.  Garrick’s  opinion  of  the  piece.  I  flatter 
myself  the  fable  will  be  found  free  from  improbability,  or  obscurity  ;  and  I  hope 
the  incidents  will  be  deemed  to  grow  naturally  out  of  the  subject.  Whether  they  are 
such  as  will  alarm  the  passions  of  an  audience,  and  whether  the  whole  is  worked  up 
with  any  degree  of  poetic  spirit,  must  be  left  to  your  determination.  I  am  (what¬ 
ever  you  may  be  whispered  to  the  contrary,)  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Whatever  you  may  have  to  say  on  this  head,  I  beg  to  hear  it  through  any  chan¬ 
nel  but  that  of  a  little,  mean,  paltry  Irish  tale-hearer. 

*  Mr.  Garrick  honoured  both  himself  and  the  Duke,  by  preserving  the  record  ot  a  friendship  so  per- 
ectly  noble. — Ed. 


VOL.  I. 


N 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


90 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s  Inn,  23d  Oct.  1758. 

Upon  my  return  to  town  this  day  from  Richmond,  I  called  at  Mr.  Yaillant’s, 
where  I  received  the  “  Orphan  of  China:”  I  afterwards  saw  Mr.  Colman  at  his  cham¬ 
bers,  who  told  me  that  you  have  offered  me  either  a  meeting,  or  your  judgment  in 
writing,  upon  the  piece.  As  my  opinion  of  it  is  backed  by  the  criticisms  of  some 
persons  whose  understandings  are  not  thought  inconsiderable,  it  were  to  be  very  in¬ 
curious  not  to  desire  to  know  the  reasons  that  have  weighed  with  Mr.  Garrick.  Of 
the  two  alternatives  offered  above,  I  must  beg  leave  to  choose  the  latter ;  namely, 
your  opinion  in  writing ;  because  I  am  apprehensive  that  a  reading  will  produce 
nothing  but  conversation-wit,  whereas,  in  the  other  way,  I  shall  be  more  at  leisure  to 
attend  to  your  reasonings,  which  I  make  no  doubt  will  be  satisfactory. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  THE  MANAGERS  OF  DRURY  LANE. 

GENTLEMEN,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  29th  Nov.  1758. 

Though  Mr.  Garrick  has  been  pleased  to  declare  that  he  will  not  act  any  thing 
of  Mr.  Murphy’s,  yet  you  both  seem  very  willing  to  avail  yourselves  of  any  little 
project  of  mine,  provided  you  can  get  it  executed  by  a  person  of  honour,  and  whether 
that  person  be  Doctor  Hill,  Mr.  Foote,  or  Mr.  *  *  *,  seems  matter  of  indifference 
to  you. 

In  justice  to  myself,  I  must  inform  you,  that  I  will  not  silently  sink  under  acts 
of  oppression ;  and  though  I  never  propose  to  reap  the  smallest  profit  by  any  the¬ 
atrical  composition,  (for  indeed  the  treatment  is  enough  to  deter  any  man  of  feeling 
from  turning  his  thoughts  that  way,)  yet  I  own  myself  most  tenderly  sensible  to  all 
attempts  to  injure  me,  to  play  upon  me,  or  to  fret  me.  And  with  what  other  view 
can  you  resolve  to  bring  pieces  on  the  stage  for  literary  pirates,  which  you  would  not 
exhibit  for  the  original  proprietor  ?  I  think  I  have  a  right  to  expect  of  the  Mana¬ 
gers  of  Drury -lane,  that,  if  they  will  do  me  no  good,  they  will  at  least  refrain  from 
doing  me  any  harm.  This  is  surely  an  act  of  justice,  which  cannot  decently  be 
refused. 

The  pieces  which,  in  my  unguarded  hours,  I  mentioned  to  Mr.  Garrick  and 
others,  are, 

1st,  “  The  Tender  Wife,”  designed  for  a  comedy. 

2d,  “  The  Comical  Fellow.”  About  this  piece  Mr.  Garrick  has  told  Dr.  Hill 
that  he  has  a  tale  to  unfold.  I  am  afraid  of  no  tale. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


91 


3d,  “  The  Graces.”  The  hint  from  the  French. 

4th,  “  The  Rout ;  or,  Travelled  Lady.”  This  piece  is  to  be  forestalled  by  a  per¬ 
son  of  honour,  and  a  character  in  it,  namely,  an  Irishman,  is  to  be  pre-occupied  by 
Mr.  Foote. 

5tli,  “  The  Discreet  Man.” 

6th,  “  The  Orphan  of  China.” 

The  fate  of  the  last,  I  suppose,  will  be  soon  decided ;  and  for  the  others,  I  only 
solicit  that  they  may  be  suffered  to  lie  dormant  in  my  bookcase.  If  you  will  not 
molest  them  in  their  obscurity,  I  will  promise  you  that  they  shall  never  obtrude 
themselves  upon  your  time,  which,  no  doubt,  you  can  lay  out  in  a  manner  more  pro¬ 
fitable  to  yourselves,  and  more  agreeable  to  the  public. 

I  have  only  to  mention,  that  I  hope  to  hear,  as  soon  as  possible,  that  you  will 
graciously  be  pleased  to  grant  me  the  favour,  that  I  may  not  have  the  trouble  of  ap¬ 
pearing  elsewhere. 

I  am,  Gentlemen,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

Dec.  9th,  1 758. 

I  did  not  receive  your  letter  till  Sunday,  and  I  waited  yesterday  in  hopes  of 
seeing  Mr.  Lacy  ;  but  as  he  is  not  yet  come  to  town,  and  as  the  chief  part  of  your 
letter  relates  only  to  me,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  answering  it.  I  never  made  any 
declaration  that  I  would  not  act  any  thing  of  Mr.  Murphy’s,  nor  had  I  ever  such  in¬ 
tention,  for  I  have  declared  to  many,  and  to  Mr.  Murphy  in  particular,  that  I  would 
receive  a  good  performance  from  my  most  inveterate  enemy.  Whoever,  therefore, 
said  the  contrary,  told  an  untruth.  If  an  unkind  return  for  the  best  wishes  and  the 
best  offices  in  my  power  might  be  accounted  a  reason  sufficient  for  such  a  declaration, 
Mr.  Murphy  might  indeed  suspect  me ;  but  I  have  often  said,  and  do  now  again  re¬ 
peat  it,  that  private  pique  should  never  interfere  with  the  public  entertainments, 
while  I  had  any  concern  in  the  management.  But  pray  what  performances  have  we 
exhibited  for  literary  pirates,  which  we  have  rejected  from  the  original  proprietors  ? — 
We  have  exhibited  every  performance  which  you  have  offered  to  us,  the  “  Orphan  of 
China”  excepted,  which  is  now  under  consideration  ;  and  when  the  real  circumstances 
of  that  play  shall  be  known,  from  your  first  speaking  to  Mr.  Berenger  about  it,  to 
this  day,  I  believe  your  most  sanguine  friends  will  think  that  authors  may  have  their 
failings  as  well  as  managers.  But  whence  proceed  all  your  violent  resentments  against 
me,  and  which  have  occasioned  the  particular  favour  of  your  last  letter  ?  Why  truly, 
Mr.  Garrick  has  made  objections  to  your  tragedy,  which  objections  he  has  submitted 
to  the  judgment  of  a  third  person,  of  Mr.  Murphy’s  choosing.  And  if  that  third 
person  shall  say  that  the  “  Orphan  of  China”  is  fit  for  representation  in  its  present 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


go 

»7-V 

state,  I  will  then  convince  you  that  the  person,  or  persons,  who  told  you  I  never 
intended  to  perform  any  thing  of  your  s  are  slanderers.  I  am  surprised  that  you 
should  mention  Mr.  Foote’s  forestalling  your  character,  when  you  are  at  present  in 
such  intimacy  with  him,  and,  I  hear,  have  willingly  given  your  consent  that  he 
should  make  use  of  the  character  in  question.  As  to  the  farce  of  the  “  Rout,’’  1 
am  as  ignorant  of  its  being  a  piracy  from  you,  as  I  am  surprised  that  you  should 
imagine  that  I  would  be  either  base  enough  to  steal  it  from  you,  or  malevolent 
enough  to  give  the  hint  of  it  to  any  body  else.  I  never  heard  or  knew  the  least  cir¬ 
cumstance  of  the  farce  till  it  was  put  into  my  hands  to  be  acted  for  the  Charity  ;  and 
this  I  will  publicly  attest  when  called  upon.  As  to  Dr.  Hill,  (whom  you  likewise 
suppose  to  be  the  author,)  I  have  not  had  the  least  intimacy  with  him  for  some  years. 
But  is  it  not  somewhat  extraordinary  that  you  should  send  us  such  a  letter,  when 
you  gave  your  honour  to  Dr.  Macdonough,  (as  he  told  me,)  that  you  should  suspend 
your  opinion  till  the  farce  was  acted,  and  that  you  have  since  assured  a  gentleman, 
one  of  the  Governors  of  the  Charity,  that  you  were  quite  satisfied  about  it  ?  If  these 
things  are  so,  pray.  Sir,  who  is  the  person  most  injured,  most  fretted,  and  most 
played  upon  ? 

The  Managers  can  receive  no  advantage  from  the  farce ;  it  was  sent  to  them  from 
the  Hospital ;  we  have  promised  to  perform  it  for  the  benefit  of  the  Charity,  and 
must  do  it,  unless  it  is  recalled  by  the  Governors  ;  to  them,  therefore,  you  should 
apply,  for  our  word  has  been  given,  and  cannot,  on  any  account,  be  retracted. 

As  I  have  really  no  time,  health,  or  inclination,  to  continue  these  illiberal  wrang- 
lings,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  me  if  I  am  silent  henceforth  :  I  can  do  no  more.  I 
should  be  very  sorry  to  be  forced  into  any  future  altercation  ;  but  if  I  am  called 
upon  so  loudly  that  I  must  answer,  I  shall  give  a  plain  and  just  account  of  our  trans¬ 
actions,  supported  only  by  undeniable  testimonies ;  among  these,  I  flatter  myself, 
that  Mr.  Murphy  will  appear  in  the  defence  of. 

Sir,  your  obedient  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

P.  S.  You  should  have  received  this  yesterday,  had  I  not  played  last  night,  and 
been  too  much  tired  to  finish  it  after  the  play. 

Endorsed  :  “  An  answer  of  mine  to  a  wrangling  letter.” 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  Jan.  3d,  1759. 

I  have  the  favour  of  your  obliging  letter  of  the  30th  past,  with  the  play  ;  for 
which  I  return  you  our  best  thanks.  The  play  is  extremely  prettily  printed  :*  and 

*  The  plav  here  noticed,  was  “  Anthony  and  Cleopatra,  lilted  for  the  stage  by  abridging  only.”  This 
alteration  was  made  at  Garrick’s  desire  by  Edward  Capell,  and  printed  in  a  style  which  is  now  generally 
adopted  in  reprinting  old  English  authors.  The  “  mysterious  marks,”  which  the  Doctor  laughs  at,  were 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


93 


without  doubt  the  mysterious  marks  you  speak  of,  mean  somethin  o’ ;  but  I  think 
it  would  be  an  impertinent  curiosity  in  the  public  to  ask  what?  When  every 
religion,  and  even  every  trade  has  its  mysteries,  it  would  be  hard  to  deny  it  to  the 
Worshipful  Company  of  Editors.  Besides,  these  dealers  in  other  men’s  sense  should 
give  a  sign,  at  least,  that  they  have  some  of  their  own  :  like  your  haberdashers  of 
small  wares,  who  have  always  a  back-warehouse  of  their  own  manufactories.  How¬ 
ever,  whatsoever  wisdom  there  may  be  in  this  (which  I  was  absurdly  enough  going 
to  call)  word  to  the  wise ;  whatsoever  spirit  there  may  be  under  this  dead  letter, 
(and  that  name,  by  the  good  leave  of  the  critics,  I  will  venture  to  give  it,  for  they 
cannot  deny  but  the  Christ-cross  in  the  horn-book  has  been  ever  esteemed  by  the 
ablest  of  them  an  inseparable  part  of  the  alphabet) ;  whatsoever  advantage,  I  say, 
Shakspeare  may  receive  from  the  whims  of  his  dead  editors,  he  will  this  night  receive 
a  lustre  from  a  living  one,  which  I  make  no  doubt  was  in  his  own  idea  when  he 
wrote  the  play,  but  despaired  to  give,  applying  the  words  of  the  poet  to  his  case 
with  more  propriety  than  they  were  first  spoken, 

“  Monstrare  nequeo,  et  sentio  tantum.” 

We  are  all  here  rejoiced  to  understand  that  you  and  good  Mrs.  Garrick  are  in 
health.  Our  best  regard  and  esteem  attend  you  both.  And  know  me,  dear  Sir, 
to  be  your  most  faithful 

And  affectionate  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 

P.  S.  I  beg  my  best  respects  and  the  compliments  of  the  season  to  Mr.  Berenger, 
when  you  see  him. 

I  chanced  to  turn  to  the  end  of  the  play,  at  the  page  called  Conjectural  Readings, 
and  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  a  man  who  had  sense  enough  to  see  that  some 
are  reasonable,  should  neither  have  English  nor  grammar  enough  to  see  that  others 
of  them  are  absurd.  When  I  wrote  notes  on  Shakspeare,  I  could  not  imagine  that 
men  who  coidd  but  just  read,  would  pretend  to  judge  of  a  part  of  learning,  which, 
if  Longinus  may  be  believed,  is  the  consummate  fruits  of  long  study.  1  his  I  will 
assure  you,  that  of  all  parts  of  learning,  I  have  met  with  the  fewest  who  are  capable 
of  judging  of  this.  And  if  there  are  few  who  can  judge  in  this  part  of  learning, 
there  are  still  fewer  who  excel.  The  only  man  who  in  this  age  did  so,  was 
Bentley.  You  will  easily  believe  I  confine  my  encomium  to  his  performances  on 
Greek  and  Latin  writers.  In  a  word,  I  have  always  found  that  proposing  an 
emendation  to  the  generality  of  those  they  call  scholars,  was  desiring  a  blind  man 
to  judge  of  colours.  Yet  there  is  not  a  fruitfuller  source  of  the  buffoonery  of 
coxcombs  and  witlings  than  these  studies.  I  remember  not  long  since  to  have  read 

explained  in  the  year  following,  in  a  volume  called  “  Prolusions.  Rut  hss  Shakspeare,  whic  h  was  published 
in  1768,  did  not  receive  the  commentary  of  its  editor,  until  time  and  fashion  had  consigned  both  text  and 
commentary  to  other  hands  than  Capell’s. — En. 


94 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


a  philosophic*  discourse  of  the  best  writer  the  French  nation  at  present  has, — Con¬ 
dillac  :  it  was  on  the  senses ;  and  a  view  of  several  imaginary  people  were  given,  who 
wanted  this  or  the  other  sense  ;  amongst  the  rest,  a  knot  of  blind  philosophers  were 
brought  into  the  scene,  who  had  overheard  what  they  called  the  jargon  of  another 
people  who  had  their  eyesight.  And  their  discourse  turned,  with  much  critical 
acumen  and  pleasantry,  on  the  nonsense  and  unaccountable  ideas  of  their  neighbours.* 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Parle,  Jan.  7th,  1759. 

We  are  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  curious  paper  enclosed  in  your  last  favour 
to  me. 

Who  the  Bishop  is,  who  has  afforded  us  this  entertainment,  I  cannot  so  much 
as  guess ;  but  he  surely  would  have  done  himself  more  honour  to  have  confuted 
Dr.  Middleton’s  public  sentiments  in  his  lifetime,  than  to  expose  his  private  ones 
entrusted  to  the  bosom  of  a  friend,  after  his  death,  f  Dr.  Middleton  indeed  was,  in 
my  opinion,  a  very  bad  man  ;  not  for  being  an  infidel,  if  he  was  such  on  conviction ; 
but  for  pretending  to  believe  less  than  he  did,  in  flattery  to  the  most  corrupt 
courtier  upon  earth, %  and  professing,  to  believe  more  than  he  did,  to  keep  well 
with  those  whose  esteem  he  did  not  care  to  lose. 

The  widow’s  intended  revenge  is  natural ;  and  could  she  set  his  reputation 
clear  by  the  publication  of  his  letters,  I  should  applaud  her  piety.  As  it  is,  this 
will  only  be  a  sacrifice  to  his  temper,  which  was  ever  vindictive,  and  not  to  his  fame, 
which  was  always  equivocal. 

But  observe  how  well  the  parties  are  matched.  The  Herveys  and  she  agreed  to 
an  exchange  of  letters.  They  dishonourably  took  copies  of  the  Doctor’s ;  and  she, 
who  seemed  to  know  them  better  than  her  husband  did,  had  the  discretion  to  tran¬ 
scribe  theirs.  The  idle  public,  which  always  wants  amusement,  has  reason  to  thank 
them  both  for  their  pains. 

You  may  be  sure  I  have  the  curiosity  to  see  the  correspondence  you  speak  of,  if 
it  were  only  to  keep  me  in  countenance  for  having,  as  you  know,  myself  set  my  wit 
against  that  blockhead.  I  readily  believe  he  has  behaved  very  ill  to  you.  I  know 

*  Exquisitely  put ;  but  alas  !  conjecture  as  to  Shakspeare  was  for  the  most  part  unnecessary.  His  first 
editors  supposed  every  thing  to  be  corrupt  which  they  could  not  understand  ;  a  larger  library  of  old  English 
than  had  in  Warburto.i’s  time  been  collected,  showed  to  men  of  moderate  attainments,  that  the  more  they 
read,  the  less  they  would  suspect  ;  and  at  last,  that  the  only  safe  plan  would  be  to  correct  the  palpable 
misprints,  and  leave  what  they  were  themselves  still  unable  to  explain,  to  the  chance  of  future  illustration. 
Pistol’s  “  Callin  o  custure  me,”  which  had  been  conjectured  to  mean,  “  calmly,  construe  to  me  was  at 
last  found  to  be  tho  burden  of  an  Irish  song,  “  Callino  costora  me.” — Ed. 

f  Warburton  was  himself  greatly  superior  to  this  unholy  rancour.  I  Lord  Hervey,  Pope’s  antagonist. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


95 


you  are  incapable  of  injuring  him.  I  suffered  my  resentment  to  subside;  and  last 
summer,  at  Durham,  I  gave  his  friend  Spence  expectation  that  I  would  let  him  have 
a  share  of  Mr.  Pope’s  Works,  which  he  has  been  so  desirous  of.  But  I  will  assure 
you,  the  man  who  injures  you  shall  receive  no  favour  from  me  :  I  think  him  no 
longer  entitled  to  it.  I  am,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 


REV.  DR.  ROBERTSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Edinburgh,  Jan.  9,  1759. 

I  have  often  regretted  that  it  was  so  near  the  time  of  my  leaving  London, 
before  I  had  the  pleasure  of  being  made  known  to  you.  I  was  extremely  desirous  to 
have  put  into  your  hands  some  part  of  a  History  of  Scotland,  which  is  now  ready  to 
be  published.  I  would  have  wished  to  have  consulted  you  concerning  any  work  of 
taste,  and  I  know  what  advantages  I  must  have  reaped  from  your  animadversions  ; 
but  the  story  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  is  so  completely  tragical,  that  I  am  sensible  of 
the  greatest  impropriety  in  publishing  it  before  I  submitted  it  to  your  censure,  or 
received  your  approbation.  Since  the  lateness  of  our  acquaintance  rendered  that 
impossible,  permit  me  to  present  you  a  copy  of  the  book,  which  I  beg  you  would 
accept,  as  the  only  testimony  I  can  give  of  my  esteem  and  respect.  If,  amidst  your 
present  hurry  and  fatigue,  you  have  leisure  to  peruse  it,  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  very 
great  obligation,  if  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  point  out  to  me  any  defects  in  taste  or 
composition  you  discover  in  the  work. 

I  beg  leave  to  offer  my  most  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,*  with 
whom,  as  I  am  a  parson,  and  a  married  man,  and  at  four  hundred  miles  distance,  I 
may  acknowledge,  even  to  you,  that  I  am  much  in  love.  I  am,  nevertheless,  with 
great  respect  and  esteem,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

William  Robertson. 

If  you  are  so  good,  at  any  time,  as  to  honour  me  with  your  commands,  my 
address  is — One  of  the  Ministers  of  Edinburgh. 

*  Mrs.  Garrick  seems  to  have  always  received  her  full  share  of  the  affection  and  respect  testified  to  her 
husband  by  the  most  illustrious  persons  of  the  age.  They  were  inseparable  through  life,  and  she  loved  the 
memory  of  her  “  dear  David,”  as  she  called  him,  passionately ,  to  the  latest  moment  of  her  prolonged  exist¬ 
ence. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


9(5 


REV.  DR.  WAIIBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  Jan.  18,  1759. 

Dodsley  is  a  wretched  fellow,  and  no  man  ever  met  with  a  worse  return  than 
you  have  done,  for  your  endeavours  to  serve  him. 

I  deny  your  position,  that  scholars  and  men  of  ability  applaud  his  trumpery  ;  for, 
take  my  word  for  it,  a  learned  blockhead  is  a  blockhead  still.  I  think  the  applause 
given  to  it  by  Spence,  Lowth,  and  Melmoth,  was  very  sincere ;  and  though  I  hardly 
think  the  same  of  Sir  George’s,*  who  is  certainly  as  great  a  critic  as  politician,  yet  I 
excuse  him,  for  he  is  like  Enobarbus  in  the  play,  “  he  will  speak  well  of  any  body 
who  will  speak  well  of  him.” 

As  to  Master  Robert  Dodsley,  I  rate  him  at  his  worth ;  and  he  being  worth 
nothing,  we  shall  hardly  come  to  a  bargain.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  great  truth, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Ware ur ton. 


Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Warburton,  about  Dodsley.” 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  1759. 

I  cannot  help  making  an  immediate  answer  to  yours.  Whether  you  are  willing 
to  receive  a  good  performance,  (by  which  you  must  mean  a  performance  likely  to 
be  received  by  the  public,)  the  world  may  perhaps  one  day  judge.  What  can  you 
mean  by  its  present  state  f  Do  you  mean  without  the  alteration  of  a  line,  or  the 
insertion  of  a  line,  or  any  slight  alteration  that  can  be  expeditiously  made,  allowing 
such  alteration  should  be  deemed  reasonable  ?  Things  of  this  sort  I  am,  and  ever 
was,  willing  to  do ;  and  I  have  only  contended  that  your  friend’s  marginal  notes 
are  wholly  mistaken  ;  or,  allowing  even  that  they  are  true,  that  they  do  not  amount 
to  a  fundamental  objection  ;  and  I  am  surprised  that  you,  who  rung  a  bell  among 
the  Turks,  should  hesitate  about  such  trivial  matters.  I  believe  I  shall  be  the  first 
to  give  the  world  a  plain  and  just  account  of  this  whole  transaction ;  but  the 
“  Orphan  of  China”  was  out  of  the  question  in  my  letter  to  you.  Yow  to  the  point — 
I  did  tell  Dr.  Macdonough  that  I  would  suspend  any  publication  till  the  farce  was 
acted  for  the  Charity  ;  and  that  promise  was  founded  upon  his  assurance  to  me 
that  there  was  no  rout-scene  in  the  piece  now  advertised.  When  I  found  that 
there  is  hardly  any  thing  else  in  it,  he  says  he  meant  no  card- playing  :  the  Doctor 
should  have  dealt  ingenuously  with  me,  for  mental  reservation  is  not  entitled  to  be 
treated  with  a  scrupulousness  from  which  it  has  itself  made  a  departure.  I  have 
the  honour  of  knowing  a  very  respectable  Governor  of  the  Charity,  and  I  often 
told  him  that  I  set  no  value  on  a  farce,  but  never  said  I  was  satisfied  about  it, 


*  Saville,  I  suppose. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


97 


unless  it  was  when  I  said  I  was  satisfied  about  the  ground  I  had  for  suspicion,  which 
was  certainly  strengthened,  when  I  heard  that  the  Managers  were  willing,  in  a  very 
unprecedented  manner,  to  play  for  a  person  of  honour ,  {who  is  to  have  a  benefit ,)  at 
a  great  advance  of  charges  to  an  actor  of  reputation  for  pleasantry  and  humour. 

The  intention  of  my  letter  was  not  to  dispute  about  that  farce  with  the 
Governors  of  a  Charity — I  would  sooner  make  them  a  present  of  a  farce  ; — I  meant 
to  have  an  answer  about  the  others  1  mentioned — that  seems  evaded  in  yours. 
Surely  when  an  author  tells  a  manager  of  hints  he  intends  to  execute,  if  the  said 
manager  is  inclined  to  give  such  subjects  to  the  public,  let  who  will  be  the  man  of 
honour  that  comes  with  it,  the  original  proprietor  is  entitled  to  the  preference. — If 
this  were  not  so,  what  security  can  a  writer  have  ? 

As  you  will  perceive  that  you  have  not  answered  this  point,  you  will  excuse 
me  if  I  consider  the  thing  upon  the  same  footing  it  was,  until  the  request  at  the 
close  of  mine  is  answered,  as  in  poetical,  and  indeed  moral  justice,  it  ought. 

Whenever  you  are  called  upon,  I  am  sorry  that  Mr.  Murphy  cannot  appear  in 
your  defence  :  truth,  and  his  own  feelings,  from  very  indelicate  treatment,  have,  I 
am  afraid,  retained  him  on  the  other  side ;  and  he  never  will  be  afraid  of  a  reply, 
because  he  will  say  nothing  but  what  he  can  warrant. 

In  the  mean  time  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

My  letter  was  dated  last  Wednesday ;  it  was  sent  from  the  Bedford  Coffee¬ 
house,  though,  I  believe,  dated  from  Lincoln’s  Inn — the  moment  it  was  wrote; 
the  man  of  the  house  sent  it  to  Mr.  Varney,  and  it  was  not  till  that  evening  that 
Mr.  Foote  explained  himself  to  me,  about  ten  o’clock,  and  then  I  did  say  he  was 
welcome  to  any  character  I  could  write  or  suggest  to  him. 

Mr.  Whitehead  was  of  your  choosing,  and  I  willingly  consented  to  it. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sfjq  Tom’s  Coffee-house,  Feb.  3,  1759. 

Your  intention  of  declining  the  capital  part*  in  the  tragedy,  in  so  unprecedented 
a  manner,  cannot  but  appear  to  me  in  a  very  extraordinary  light.  As  you  have  com¬ 
pelled  me  to  the  painful  solicitude  of  one  reference  already,  I  must  now  beg  that  you 
will  give  me  another,  and  I  will  leave  it  to  any  man  of  honour,  whether  you  are  now 
performing  your  agreement  with  me.  The  part  I  am  willing  to  reduce  to  the  usual 
length ;  you  have  had  the  play  to  your  own  time,  and  I  cannot  think  that  I  am 
well  treated  at  present.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

I  shall  expect  your  answer  any  time  to-morrow. 

*  Zamti,  in  the  “  Orphan  of  China.” 


VOL.  I. 


O 


98 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

gIR>  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Feb.  4,  1759. 

I  meant  by  the  note  of  last  night  to  make  an  appeal  to  your  own  feelings,  whe¬ 
ther  it  is  the  letter  or  the  spirit  of  the  agreement  that  should  be  carried  into  execu¬ 
tion.  I  believe  there  is  not  a  man  in  England  but  will  say  you  choose  the  former  on 
this  occasion  ;  and  I  must  be  frank  enough  to  declare  that  every  body  with  whom  I 
have  consulted  about  this  affair,  nay,  and  some  that  have  sided  with  you  before, 
without  a  single  exception,  think  the  step  you  are  taking  injurious  to  me.  I  hope  it 
will  not  turn  out  so  ;  but  if  it  should,  I  choose,  at  least,  the  merit  of  endeavouring  to 
prevent  it.  If  I  cannot  alter  your  resolutions,  I  must,  as  I  said  before,  acquiesce  ;  and 
therefore  I  must  beg  that  you  settle  the  parts  one  way  or  other :  when  it  is  done,  I 
must  study  to  reconcile  myself  to  it. 

I  do  not  see  what  can  be  the  tendency  of  meeting  at  Mr.  Whitehead’s  :  I  am  sure 
I  have  no  objection  ;  at  any  time  I  am  ready.  Something  of  this  sort  would  have 
been  of  great  use  a  long  time  ago,  but  now  it  cannot  recall  the  past,  and,  by  what  I 
can  judge,  will  not  hinder  your  determinations  for  the  future.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
there  is  no  time  to  be  lost  in  regard  to  the  play,  and  I  am  sorry  you  are  now  deter¬ 
mined,  since  it  must  be  done,  to  do  it  in  what  you  yourself  must  allow  the  worst 
way.  It  is,  however,  better  than  none*  at  all.  You  had  an  opportunity,  by  acting 
genteelly  on  this  occasion,  of  making  me  blush  for  some  things  that  have  hap¬ 
pened,  and  I  thought  you  seemed  to  threaten  this  in  a  paragraph  of  a  very  long 
letter  you  wrote  me.  It  would  have  been  a  generous  way  of  triumphing  over  me : 
but  revenge,  perhaps,  is  more  agreeable.  If  so,  I  must  submit,  and  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Feb.  18th,  1759. 

I  could  wish  to  see  the  play  acted  as  near  as  possible  to  the  copy  which  Mr. 
Whitehead  approved.  Since  the  reading  in  the  green-room,  I  have  been  in  the  case 
of  the  painter  who  put  his  piece  in  the  window,  to  hear  the  opinions  of  the  people, 
and  continued  retouching  till  not  a  feature  remained.  I  have  now  recurred  to  my 
first  intention,  of  not  explaining  too  much  in  the  first  act.  I  am  sure  the  other  way 
would  be  attended  with  many  inconsistencies,  and  I  suspect  that  it  is  inartificial.  Mr. 
Cross  tells  me  Mrs.  Cibber  will  not  be  able  to  perform  :  if  so,  with  the  consent  of  the 
managers,  I  would  wait  on  Airs.  Pritchard,  who  is  a  very  acceptable  actress  to  the 
public.  If  Airs.  Cibber  is  not  so  ill  as  to  resign  her  part,  I  think,  for  fear  of 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


99 


accidents,  you  should  order  the  part  to  be  under-studied,  by  Mrs.  Yates,  as  has  been 
the  general  practice.  This  I  mention,  as  I  find  it  is  not  done,  and  there  is  little  time 
to  lose.  I  will  attend  you  at  the  House  whenever  you  please,  and  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


REV.  MR.  MASON  TO  REV.  DR.  WARBURTON. 

REVEREND  SIR,  London,  May  29,  1759. 

Mr.  Knapton  has  my  orders  to  send  a  copy  of  “  Caractacus”  to  you  in  the  Bath 
bookseller’s  parcel.  I  resolved  for  many  reasons  not  to  make  any  presents  of  this 
poem,  but  I  have  more  reasons  with  regard  to  Dr.  Warburton,  to  induce  me  to 
break  through  my  general  rule. 

I  this  moment  receive  yours  of  the  27th,  and  in  an  answer  to  it  have  only  just 
time  to  assure  you  that  I  am  as  ready  as  Mr.  Garrick  can  be  to  make  up  the  trivial 
breach  between  us.  I  go  to-morrow  to  Hampshire  for  a  few  days,  to  visit  Mr.  Gar- 
nier,  a  very  valuable  man,  to  whom  I  have  the  greatest  obligations ;  and  on  my 
return  will  make  it  my  first  business  to  wait  upon  Mr.  Garrick,  when  you  may 
depend  upon  it  that  it  shall  not  be  my  fault  if  our  meeting  be  not  such  as  you  say 
it  should  be,  “that  of  friends  who  never  had  any  difference.”  I  beg  my  best 
respects  to  Mrs.  Warburton,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Allen  ;  and  am,  dear  Sir,  in  great 
haste, 

Your  most  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

W.  Mason.* 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  Mr.  Mason  to  Dr.  Warburton, 
about  our  misunderstanding.” 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  May  31,  1759. 

As  I  went  out  of  town  unexpectedly,  and  before  I  could  see  Mr.  Mason,  when 
I  got  hither  I  wrote  him  a  very  friendly  and  expostulatory  letter,  on  the  subject  of 
what  passed  between  you  and  me  the  last  time  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you, 
and  with  that  caution  with  regard  to  your  honour,  which  you  had  entrusted  to 
my  hands,  which  I  am  sure  you  would  approve  of.  To  which  I  received  the  en¬ 
closed,  which  pleases  me  extremely,  as  it  discovers  a  temper  which  I  should  grieve 
to  find  wanting  in  any  of  my  friends ;  so  that  I  now  look  upon  all  strangeness 

*  Every  reader  of  this  correspondence  will  regret  that  Murphy  had  no  friend,  such  as  Warburton  proved  to 
Mason,  to  restrain  his  impetuosity,  and  by  commanding  wisdom  subdue  his  troublesome  self-love. — Ed. 

o  2 


100 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


between  you  as  entirely  vanished,  and  that  you  will  meet  upon  the  old  terms  of 
cordial  friendship.  I  set  forward  for  Durham  the  8th  or  9th  of  June.  All  here 
join  with  me  in  our  affectionate  regard  and  remembrance  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

W.  Warbuiiton. 

P.S.  Keep  the  enclosed,  nor  think  of  returning  it. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  JulY  12>  1759- 

I  am  to  set  out  to-morrow  morning  with  Mr.  Domville  for  Southampton.  I 
hoped  before  this  journey  to  have  been  able  to  send  you  the  two  pieces  I  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Spring ;  but  you  know,  in  the  series  of  such  works,  how  hag-ridden  poor 
poets  are  by  their  own  fancy,  and  how  many  caprices  and  changes  they  are  liable 
to.  Such  has  been  my  fate ;  but  at  last,  I  think,  I  have  finally  agreed  with  myself 
about  both,  and,  if  I  am  not  greatly  deceived,  believe  1  shall  put  into  your  hands 
two  agreeable  and  genteel  fables.  If,  therefore,  you  hold  your  resolution  of  bring¬ 
ing  them  out,  in  case  you  like  them,  in  any  part  of  the  winter,  I  have  a  call  to 
London  for  about  a  week,  and  will  contrive  to  make  my  time  coincide  with  yours, 
if  you  will  be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  know  by  a  line,  when  it  will  suit  you  to  be  in 
or  about  London.  Perhaps  the  sea-side  may  suggest  some  new  ideas  ;  if  that  does 
not  happen,  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  copy  out ;  and  I  reckon  a  fortnight  or 
three  weeks  at  most,  without  hurrying  myself,  will  complete  that  business.  I  beg 
to  observe,  that  I  do  not  want  to  encumber  you  with  these  pieces,  if  you  are  better 
engaged :  if  they  are  agreeable  to  you  upon  perusal,  I  can  promise  that  they  will 
give  you  very  little  fatigue  in  the  performance,  should  you  play  in  both,  which  I 
have  endeavoured  to  tempt  you  to  do. 

Will  you  be  so  good,  in  case  your  business  admits  the  reception  of  these  things, 
to  think  now  and  then  of  the  epilogue  you  mentioned  you  would  write?  The 
opportunity  will  be  a  fair  one  for  your  talent  in  that  way. 

I  beg  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Lacy,  when  you  see  him ;  and  I  remain  (excuse 
haste)  Yours  very  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Your  letter,  directed  for  me  at  the  Post-office,  Southampton,  or  left  at  Mr. 
Vaillant’s,  will  reach  me. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Southampton,  22nd  July,  1759. 

I  received  your  very  obliging  letter  on  Friday  evening  last,  and  take  this  first 
opportunity  of  returning  you  my  earliest  thanks  for  the  same.  Indeed,  I  cannot 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


101 


give  an  answer  in  form,  as  I  could  wish :  you  will  please  to  accept  of  this  as  a 
receipt  acknowledging  that  I  am  in  your  debt ;  for  really  I  have  not  time  to  do 
more  at  present,  for  it  is  Sunday  morning,  and  I  am  in  a  hurry  to  go  and  hear 
Mr.  Chancellor  Hoadly  preach :  I  intend,  after  the  sermon,  to  take  an  opportunity 
of  waiting  on  him  to  pay  him  my  compliments. 

If  you  come  soon  into  Hampshire,  and  will  let  me  know  it  by  a  line,  I  will  ride 
over  to  Portsmouth,  or  any  intermediate  place,  to  have  the  pleasure  of  meeting  you. 
Much  about  the  time  that  you  mention,  namely  the  1st  of  August,  I  shall  in  all 
probability  be  in  town,  but  I  would  not  peremptorily  fix  upon  that  day,  for  fear 
some  little  unexpected  contingence  may  intervene ;  for  when  people  are  in  pursuit 
of  pleasure,  you  know,  every  trifle  contributes  amusement,  and  therefore  I  am  afraid 
I  cannot  be  punctual  should  I  promise  to  meet  you  at  the  Sheriff’s  at  the  time  you 
appoint.  In  the  interim  I  shall  do  my  utmost,  and  hope  to  bring  in  poor  Pegasus 
with  sound  wind  and  limb:  however,  I,  perhaps,  am  a  kind  of  Yorkshire  jockey, 
promising  two  [fine]  colts,  or  three  year  olds,  (I  don’t  know  the  language),  but 
yours  is  Beaver's  Repository,  and  there  you  must  judge  whether  they  are  marlcet- 
able,  or  likely  to  tire  before  they  come  to  the  winning-post.  *Peccet  ad  extremum 
ridendus  et  Ilia  ducat,  is  the  shameful  state  a  horse  is  often  reduced  to  ;  and  many  a 
poor  jade  of  a  muse  meets  the  same  fate.  But,  as  Pritchard  said  of  his  pretty 
daughter,  so  I  say  of  my  poetical  offspring,  if  you  don’t  like  it — “  I’ll  throw  my 
girl  into  the  warehouse.”  And  now  that  I  have  mentioned  children,  is  it  not  a 
sort  of  a  bull,  that  an  Irishman  should  attempt  to  get  children  with  his  head  ?  I 
really  have  inverted  the  order  of  things,  but  I  am  in  hopes  the  salt  water  will  correct 
the  error,  and  make  me  have  recourse  for  the  future  to  the  talents  Nature  originally 
meant  I  should  exercise.  This  country  is  the  most  delightful  I  have  ever  seen  ; 
wood,  land,  water,  and  fertile  plains,  all  mixed  together  in  the  most  agreeable  variety. 
I  hope,  like  Jones,  to  catch  a  cod  here. — I  am  going  to  take  a  liberty  with  you  :  being 
a  modest  man,  I  shall,  to  introduce  myself  in  the  most  acceptable  manner,  salute 
Mr.  Hoadly  in  your  name.  The  clock  strikes  ten,  and  I  must  dress  for  church. 
Adieu,  dear  Sir,  and  believe  me,  with  great  compunction  for  all  fracas. 

Yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Mr.  Domville,  who  is  a  great  admirer  of  you  and  your  talents,  is  just  come  into 
the  room,  and  desires  his  compliments,  though  unknown.  He  is  in  hopes  you  will 
drop  in  here,  that  he  may  have  an  opportunity  of  commencing  an  acquaintance 
with  you. 

I  saw  Mr.  Wartonf  at  Winchester,  and  breakfasted  with  him :  I  told  him  you 
insisted  I  should  not  pass  through  the  town  without  saluting  him  in  your  name : 
he  enquired  with  great  affection  after  you.  I  fancy  I  shall  see  him  next  Wed¬ 
nesday,  as  I  propose  riding  thither  to  the  Assizes.  He  was  entertained  with  the 
story  of  me  and  Franklin. 

*  Horace  Epist.  I.  ad  Maecenatem,  v.  9.  f  The  Rev.  Joseph  Warton. 


102 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  August  3rd,  1759. 

I  received  your  last  letter  in  Hampshire,  the  evening  before  I  left  Portsmouth, 
or  I  should  most  certainly  have  appointed  a  day  for  the  pleasure  of  meeting  you  at 
Winchester. 

The  liberty  you  took  with  me,  I  esteem  a  favour,  and  I  am  sorry  that  I  had  it 
not  in  my  power  to  see  you  and  my  friend  and  Dr.  Hoadly  together. 

I  shall  Avait  with  pleasure  your  own,  or  rather  your  Muse’s  time,  for  favouring 
me  with  a  sight  of  the  “  Desert  Island,”  and  the  “  Way  to  Keep  Him  — follow 
your  amusements,  and  correct  at  your  leisure,  and,  my  life  for  it,  we  shall  neither 
of  us  repent  the  consequences.  I  think  myself  much  honoured  by  Mr.  Domville’s 
favourable  opinion  of  me,  and  I  beg  that  you  will  pay  my  respects  to  him. 

If  you  think  that  the  salt  water  will  abate  your  dramatic  inclinations,  I  must 
absolutely  prohibit  your  drinking  it :  1  most  willingly  consent  to  your  catching  as 
many  cods  as  you  please,  but  I  prescribe  no  other  use  of  the  sea-water  to  you ; — were 
it  really  a  remedy  for  every  kind  of  cacoethes,  I  could  send  you  a  waggon-load  of 
writers  (scurvy  ones)  to  be  ducked  and  drenched  for  their  own  and  the  public 
benefit.  The  public  has  done  you  justice,  and  you  cannot  possibly  make  a  more 
grateful  return,  (next  to  writing  yourself,)  than  by  doing  your  best  endeavour  to 
cure  these  gentlemen. 

The  fracas  you  mention  was  a  matter  of  much  concern  to  me.  I  despise  the 
attacks  and  misrepresentations  of  blockheads,  but  shall  be  ever  truly  sorry  when  I  am 
misunderstood  by  a  man  of  genius. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

1  was  in  London  the  1st  of  August,  but  did  not  flatter  myself  that  I  should  see 
you.  When  you  return  to  London,  pray  let  me  have  a  line  from  you.  Any  parcel 
sent  to  my  house  will  be  with  me  here  the  next  day. 

To  Arthur  Murphy,  Esq.  to  be  left 
with  Paul  Vaillant,  Esq.  iD  the 
Strand,  London. 


FRANCIS  GENTLEMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Edinburgh,  Sept.  11,  1759. 

Having  since  my  arrival  here  been  unfortunately  concerned  in  the  greatest 
scene  of  sharping  and  confusion  that  can  possibly  be  imagined,  my  eager  hopes  of 
being  able  to  return  the  sum  you  generously  favoured  me  with  have  been  frustrated  ; 
and,  indeed,  had  I  not  prevented,  by  reading  lectures  which  have  been  very  well 
received,  the  ill  consequences  of  the  fraudulent  treatment  I  have  met,  my  situation 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


103 


might  have  been  very  uncomfortable  :  however,  I  have  maintained  the  character  you 
were  kind  enough  to  give  me ;  and  now,  seeing  that  next  season  will  evidently  pro¬ 
duce,  if  possible,  something  worse  in  the  theatrical  way,  I  entertain  thoughts  of 
removing  into  a  more  favourable  climate,  and  must  confess  that  my  wishes  bend 
particularly  towards  your  influence,  admitting  that  any  changes  in  your  company 
afford  room.  I  would  by  no  means  desire  to  tax  good-nature,  but  cannot  avoid 
believing,  from  approbation  1  have  met,  that  the  abilities  I  may  possess,  disposed  of 
by  Mr.  Garrick’s  judgment,  might  be  rendered  useful.  Hitherto  I  have  been  so 
circumstanced  as  to  be  like  Penelope  and  her  web ;  what  favour  1  have  gained 
when  in  my  way  has  been  undone  the  next  night  by  being  obliged  to  labour  under 
great  disadvantages.  On  coming  here,  I  expected  to  find  a  capital  man,  but  was 
necessitated  to  do  every  thing  myself ;  and  after  all,  the  audience  always  received  me 
very  favourably,  and  the  receipts  of  the  season,  with  an  ill-conducted  company,  were 
very  little  short  of  what  used  to  be  taken. 

To  be  thus  particular  is,  perhaps,  intruding  too  much  on  your  leisure,  but  I  esteem 
it  a  duty  to  render  you  an  account,  and  should  heartily  rejoice  to  have,  in  whatever 
light  you  please,  and  upon  whatever  terms,  an  opportunity  to  repay  what  I  stand 
indebted,  as  well  as  to  convince  you,  by  every  endeavour,  with  what  a  grateful  sense 
of  favour  received, 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  humble  servant, 

Francis  Gentleman.* 

If  you  choose  to  favour  me  with  any  reply,  I  will  regulate  my  conduct  accord¬ 
ingly.  Please  address  me  under  cover  to  Mr.  James  Atkin,  at  the  Annexed  Estate 
Office,  Edinburgh. 

Not  having  ever  heard  from  Mr.  Derrick  since  I  wrote  to  him  to  put  the  manu¬ 
script  of  “  Osman”!  into  your  hands,  at  which  time  I  enclosed  an  address  to  you,  I 
know  not  what  to  think,  but  have  been  very  uneasy. 

*  The  author  of  a  work  called  the  “  Dramatic  Censor,”  and,  as  the  reader  sees,  one  ot  the  many  hun¬ 
dreds  under  pecuniary  obligations  to  the  'penurious  Garrick  !  In  fact,  Johnson  spoke  truth — Garrick  was  one 
of  the  most  liberal  men  of  his  time. — Ed. 

f  The  tragedy  of  “  Osman”  was  never  printed.  I  am,  therefore,  unable  to  express  any  opinion  ot  its 
merits.  The  author  led  a  wretched  life  of  expedients ;  one  of  which  was  both  to  act  and  print  the  present 
play  ;  giving  the  means  of  reading  to  any  persons  who  would  pay  for  seeing  it  at  the  Haymarket.  Gentleman 
could  procure  neither  spectators  nor  readers.  In  1774,  Bell  published  Shakspeare,  as  acted  at  the  Theatres 
Royal;  and  of  this  stage  companion,  Gentleman  was  the  editor.  Any  thing  of  this  sort  was  supposed  to  be 
in  the  way  of  Steevens,  who  had  now  a  monopoly  of  the  great  poet’s  writings.  It.  was,  therefore,  characterised 
by  him  and  Reed,  as  “the  worst  edition  that  ever  appeared  of  any  English  author.”  But  it  was  never  in¬ 
tended  for  a  genuine  Shakspeare,  and  really  did  all  that  it  promised  to  do, — exhibited  the  plays  as  they  were 
performed  in  London. — Ed. 


104 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Friday  Morning,  12th  Oct.  1759. 

Mr.  Murphy’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick.  He  has  seen  Mr.  Mossop  this 
morning,  and  finds  lie  goes  for  Ireland  to-morrow ;  and  as  Mr.  Murphy  has  some 
business  to  settle  with  him  before  he  sets  out,  he  begs  to  see  the  Managers  of  Drury- 
lane  for  ten  minutes  after  the  play  this  night.  The  business  he  has  to  talk  of  is 
this  : — Mr.  Murphy  offered  the  “  Desert  Island,”  and  the  “  Way  to  Keep  Him,”  to 
the  Managers,  when  he  thought  there  would  be  an  opposition  to  them  from  the  other 
house,  and  this  as  much  to  serve  them  as  himself.  Now  it  will  not  disserve  Mr. 
Murphy,  if  they  are  not  done*  at  Drury-lane,  because  he  has  very  strong  invita¬ 
tions  from  Dublin,  and,  from  the  present  state  of  their  company,  he  thinks  the  two 
pieces  can  be  done  there  more  to  his  satisfaction  than  here,  in  the  present  circum¬ 
stances  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  company,  unless  he  can  play  in  both  pieces  himself.  There 
is  nobody,  as  it  appears  to  Mr.  Murphy,  to  play  either  with  Mrs.  Cibber  or  Mrs. 
Pritchard  but  Mr.  Garrick,  who  will  be  the  best  judge  whether  he  will  choose  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  both  or  not.  Mr.  Murphy  will  call  after  the  play  to  see  Mr.  Garrick  and 
Mr.  Lacy  for  a  conclusion  of  this  matter,  that  he  may  determine  with  Mr.  Mossop 
this  night. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Murphy.  He  owns  himself  much  surprised 
at  the  note  that  he  has  received  from  him.  He  was  in  hopes  that  Mr.  Murphy 
would  never  again  have  cause  to  suspect  his  willingness  to  promote  the  interest  of 
him  or  his  works. 

It  is  impossible  for  Mr.  Garrick  to  undertake  the  two  characters  in  the  two 
pieces  :  could  he  have  acted  in  both,  he  should  have  been  as  ready  to  offer  his  ser¬ 
vices  as  Mr.  Murphy  to  ask  them. 

If  Mr.  Murphy  thinks  that  the  company  in  Ireland  will  perform  them  better, 
Mr.  Garrick  will  not  dispute  it ;  this  only  he  will  venture  to  say,  that  there  is  no 
person  in  Ireland  has  a  greater  opinion  of  Mr.  Murphy’s  abilities,  or  will  more  endea¬ 
vour  to  serve  him,  when  called  upon. 

Mr.  Garrick  will  be  glad  to  see  him  after  the  play.  Mr.  Lacy  is  gone  to  Isle- 
worth. 

*  This  is,  surely,  most  irritating  and  selfish  conduct.  We  have  just  seen  his  expressions  of  satisfaction  in 
the  prospect  before  him  ;  and  his  regret  at  former  fracas.  Garrick  had  replied  to  him  in  a  manner  highly 
complimentary,  and  really  friendly.  Mossop,  however,  had  got  hold  of  him,  and  Ireland  even  became  his 
“  Land  of  Promise,”  when  the  author  turned  Jew. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


105 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR, 

Mr.  King’s  accident,  and  Mrs.  Yates’s  indisposition ,  have  distressed  our  affairs  so 
much,  that  we  shall  really  want  matter  to  go  on  with  the  business  of  the  Theatre,  if 
we  do  not  bring  out  what  we  have  in  rehearsal  without  them  :  besides,  if  we  defer  the 
alteration  of  the  “Country  Wife,”  we  shall  not  be  able  to  fulfil  our  engagements  with 
other  authors.  The  parts  of  our  play  were  delivered  out  as  fast  as  they  were  written, 
and  Mr.  Dodd  and  Miss  Pope,  who  have  long  characters,  particularly  Dodd,  had  not 
theirs  till  the  time  you  favoured  me  with  your  first  letter ;  so  I  cannot  imagine 
where  the  gentlemen  of  the  other  house  got  their  intelligence.  1  am  very  glad  that 
you  have  not  the  least  care  about  it ;  but  the  wliip-hcind  must  be  your’s,  from  the 
novelty  and  variety.  I  cannot  say  that  I  agree  with  you  in  not  caring  whether  they 
are  damned  or  not ;  I  wish  them  both  success,  and  do  not  doubt  but  they  will  have  it. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


REV.  DR.  WARBURTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Grosvenor  Square,  Nov.  9,  1759. 

I  am  to  thank  you  for  myself,  and  your  friends  at  Prior  Park,  for  two  copies  of 
the  new  piece  of  “  High  Life  below  Stairs.”  I  have  read  it  with  extreme  pleasure  and 
satisfaction.  1  add  the  last,  because  satisfaction,  in  works  of  wit,  does  not  always  go 
along  with  our  pleasure.  I  will  not  venture  to  tell  you  whose  I  think*  it  is,  be¬ 
cause  the  author  would  be  unknown  :  yet  I  believe  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  hand. 
I  saw  it  in  the  very  title  and  motto,  and  quite  through,  to  the  last  of  the  concluding 
page. 

I  laughed  heartily  at  a  stroke  in  the  thirty-sixth  page,  and  thought  of  our  friend 
Browne,  who  seems  at  present  in  a  humour  to  quarrel  with  his  friends.  How  dares 
the  author,  if  he  has  any  tenderness  for  our  honest  friend,  joke  upon  modern  tragedy  ? 

We  have  a  few  instances  where  the  greatest  ambition  does  not  mislead.  I  find 
you  will  not  be  content  with  being  the  greatest  performer  that  ever  trod  the  stage, 
which  is  no  mean  fame,  but  you  will  be  the  reformer  of  it  too.  This  was  only 
wanting  to  give  a  lasting  lustre  to  your  incomparable  talents  ;  and  therefore  I  say, 
macte  nova  virtute  tua.  I  call  it  new,  because  the  greatest  of  your  predecessors  con¬ 
tented  themselves  with  being  what  the  French  call  honest  men.  You  think,  and 
justly,  that,  as  a  good  citizen,  more  is  required  from  the  advantages  of  your  talents 

*  “  High  Life  below  Stairs”  was  long  attributed  to  Garrick,  and  VVarburton’s  compliment  was  probably  not 
rejected  :  the  farce,  however,  it  is  now  believed,  was  really  written  by  the  Rev.  James  Townley,  High  Master 
of  Merchant  Tailors’  School. — Ed. 


VOL.  I. 


P 


IOC 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  situation, — the  reform  of  those  follies  which  the  laws  cannot  punish  :  for  which » 
what  the  poet  would  have  done,  posterity  will  do, — place  you  amongst  those, 

“  Who,  from  the  task  obscene,  reclaim  our  youth, 

And  set  the  passions  on  the  side  of  truth.” 

Dear  Sir,  believe  me  to  be,  with  the  truest  esteem, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Warburton. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

DEAR  SIR, 

I  should  not  have  troubled  you  with  a  letter,  had  I  not  thought  it  necessary 
to  acquaint  you  that  I  have  received  your  additions  to  the  “  Way  to  Keep  Him,” 
and  shall  follow  your  directions.  I  am  sorry  that  you  gave  yourself  so  much  trouble 
to  convince  me  of  the  insufficiency  of  my  remarks.  My  advice  and  fears  were 
submitted  to  you  with  great  good-will  and  sincerity ;  but  with  no  design  of  directing 
your  better  judgment,  or  that  of  your  friends.  I  am  very  well  satisfied.  As  to  the 
other  parts  of  your  letter,  which  relate  to  the  four  acts  for  a  hundred  pounds,  your 
state  of  suspense,  your  now  most  extreme  willingness  to  recede  from  any  bargain 
about  your  intended  new  comedy, — they  are  so  much  the  reverse  of  our  late  and 
last  conversations,  that  I  cannot  in  the  least  account  for  the  sudden  change.  With¬ 
out  entering  into  any  farther  discussion  of  this  matter,  1  beg  that  you  will  follow 
your  own  interest  and  inclination ;  for  I  most  readily  agree  with  you,  that  no 
attention  to  the  theatre  should  obstruct  your  pursuits  of  greater  moment. 

I  am,  &c.  D.  G. 

Endorsed  “  D.  G.  to  A.  M. 

An  answer  of  mine.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR, 

In  your  former  letters,  you  say  that  you  wish  not  to  quarrel ,  and  do  not  mean 
to  he  rude,  but  I  can  scarce  reconcile  that  declaration  with  your  last  favour.  Why 
would  you  challenge  me  to  a  reference,  when  you  know  that  I  first  proposed  one  ? 
Mr.  Johnson  is  now  in  town,  and  I  will  meet  him  to-morrow,  at  your  own  time  and 
place.  You  are  mistaken  ;  I  did  not  tell  you,  that  I  will  declare  loudly ;  there  is  no 
such  expression  in  my  letters  :  this  with  some  other  parts  of  your  letter,  will  convince 
you  that  we  should  never  write  in  anger  upon  any  subject. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

I  am  this  moment  come  from  Hampton,  or  I  should  have  answered  your’s  sooner. 
I  am  obliged  to  return  thither  on  Saturday. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


107 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR, 

When  I  heard  from  some  of  our  acquaintance  that  an  explanation  was  neces¬ 
sary,  I  desired  them  to  tell  you  what  I  thought  and  said  :  they  did  so,  and  then, 
surely,  the  farther  explanation  rested  with  you. 

The  “  Orphan  of  China,”  as  you  mention,  stands  the  third  on  our  list,  to  be 
performed  after  Mr.  Mallet’s  play  and  the  new  comedy ;  if  either  of  them  should  be 
withdrawn,  then  to  stand  the  second ;  always  reserving  to  myself,  which  you  have 
not  mentioned,  the  right  of  judging  of  its  fitness  for  appearing  upon  the  stage. 

People  in  general  do  their  own  business  best ;  but  as  we  have  been  somewhat 
unfortunate,  I  must  desire  that  our  theatrical  concerns  for  the  future  may  be  ad¬ 
justed  by  letter,  or  by  the  mediation  of  a  common  friend. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


SIR,  1759- 

However  painful  the  solicitude  of  the  reference  to  Mr.  Whitehead  might 
have  been  to  you,  your  tragedy,  I  am  sure,  is  much  the  better  for  it,  and  so  far  you 
are  obliged  to  the  reference. 

Would  you  have  me  refer  also  to  Mr.  Whitehead,  whether  I  should  undertake 
what  I  have  most  solemnly  assured  you  again  and  again  I  am  not  able  to  perform  ? 

You  cannot  surely  mean  that ;  but  if  you  mean  that  he  shall  judge  whether  I 
have  not  behaved  to  you  in  this,  as  well  as  in  every  other  transaction,  with  the 
greatest  justice  and  honour,  I  most  readily  and  willingly  agree  to  it,  and  whatever 
opinion  he  shall  give,  I  will  stand  to  it,  be  it  what  it  will ;  but  if  you,  Mr.  Murphy, 
should  chance  to  be  found  wanting  towards  me,  will  you  likewise  subject  yourself 
to  the  same  determination  ?  I  am,  and  ever  was,  and  ever  shall  be  ready  to  come  to 
a  discussion  of  these  matters  ;  but  I  little  thought,  after  your  note  yesterday  to  Mr. 
Mossop,  in  answer  to  a  civil  message  I  sent  by  him  and  my  brother,  which  you 
would  not  deign  to  receive,  that  we  should  have  any  more  delays  to  the  subject  of 
our  debate.  I  think  that  the  shortening  the  character  of  Zamti  in  some  places  will 
serve  it,  but  I  cannot  agree  that  you  should  mangle  it  so  much  to  bring  it  within  my 
reach  ;  you  and  your  friends  might  then  with  justice  condemn  me.  The  character 
of  Zamti  is  a  capital  one,  and  I  will  endeavour  to  make  it  so  ;  but  with  all  my  appli¬ 
cation,  I  can  but  be  barely  ready  in  it  by  next  Saturday  three  weeks.  Mr.  Mossop 
says,  that  he  could  not  have  undertaken  Zaphimri,  had  he  any  other  character  in 
hand.  I  believe  you  are  the  first  author  that  has  objected  to  my  taking  my  choice 
of  the  parts,  or  that  has  not  been  obliged  at  my  offer  to  play  the  one  you  would 


108 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


choose  for  me,  provided  I  had  time  for  it.  If  these  tilings  are  so,  why  are  these 
altercations  continued  in  neglect  of  the  grand  point,  and  in  contradiction  to  reason, 
justice,  and,  1  had  almost  said,  common  civility  ? 

I  am,  Sir,  &o. 

David  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  D.  G.  to  A.  M.  my  answer  about  the 
Orphan  of  China.” 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  [No  date.] 

I  have  this  instant  received  your  excessively  obliging  letter,  which  has  covered 
me  with  confusion.  I  really  did  not  want  any  proof  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  inclination  to 
serve  me,  but  this  is  one  to  which  I  cannot  in  any  shape  consider  myself  entitled, 
and  therefore  the  more  gratefully  I  feel  the  offer,  but  am  entirely  at  a  loss  what  to 
say.  I  am,  I  thank  God,  under  no  disability  of  prosecuting  my  studies,  but  the 
reason  of  my  appearing  hurried  about  the  farce  really  was,  that  my  brother  going 
to  Jamaica,  and  another  person,  dearer  to  me  than  he  is,  have  been  an  incumbrance 
on  me ;  but  that  is  no  reason  I  should  be  troublesome  to  Mr.  Garrick.  I  meant  the 
farce  as  a  convenient  expedient  to  prevent  the  necessity  of  asking  my  friend  Mr. 
Taylor,  or  any  body.  I  must  once  more  say,  I  am  in  such  confusion,  I  do  not  know 
what  I  am  writing,  except  when  I  say, 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Mr.  Colman  is  just  come  in,  and  I  hope  you  will  excuse  this  hasty  scrawl. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Saturday  Noon. 

I  fully  intended  waiting  on  you  last  night  behind  the  scenes,  but  was  unex¬ 
pectedly  detained  where  I  dined.  You  are  determined  to  overwhelm  me  with 
civility  and  friendship.  I  do  assure  you  I  never  meant  to  be  so  troublesome  to  Mr. 
Garrick  when  the  farce  was  put  into  his  hands,  and  am  sorry  that  the  renewal  of  our 
acquaintance  should  set  out  with  so  much  inconvenience  to  you.  Mr.  Garrick's 
head  and  heart  would  he  of  use  to  anij  man  in  England,  and  to  me  the  offer  is  an 
honour * 

*  This  pleasing  tribute  to  Mr.  Garrick  burst  from  Murphy  at  a  moment  when  he  was  too  grateful  to  be 
either  suspicious  or  vain — Roscius,  for  the  time,  had  subdued  him. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


109 


I  am  sorry  you  have  so  vexatious  a  cold,  and,  as  soon  as  I  can  get  on  my  things, 
I  will  do  myself  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir,  yours  with  the  greatest  sincerity, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIRj  Friday  evening,  Six  o’clock,  March  13.  [Year  uncertain.] 

I  take  the  liberty  to  send  you  a  few  remarks  upon  your  manner  of  playing, 
which,  excellent  as  it  is,  may  receive,  perhaps,  some  improvement  from  what  I  am 
now  going  to  mention.  I  have  the  less  reason  to  be  thought  intruding,  as  I  am  told 
you  are  always  open  to  receive  information ;  and  as  I  believe  that  you  will  not  over¬ 
look  advice,  though  the  friend  who  gives  it  is  concealed.  The  particulars  I  shall 
point  out,  have  frequently  offended  myself,  and  many  others  of  your  very  numerous 
admirers.  If  you  reform  in  these,  you  will  be  deficient  in  nothing  that  is  requisite 
to  finish  the  most  perfect  actor.  Your  chief  mistake  is  a  want  of  attention  to  the 
proper  stops  and  pauses  :  which,  however  inconsiderable  it  may  seem,  is  a  gross 
neglect,  and  would  hardly  be  excused  in  a  reader  of  ordinary  judgment.  You 
seem  to  have  contracted  this  by  a  regard  to  the  measure  of  the  verse,  more  than  to 
the  sense  of  it.  Accordingly,  you  are  apt  to  rest,  and  to  sink  your  voice  at  the 
conclusion  of  a  line,  when  the  sense  of  the  following  is  immediately  connected  with 
it,  and  consequently  requires  the  voice  to  be  still  raised,  and  will  admit  of  no  longer 
a  pause  than  is  just  necessary  to  recover  the  breath.  1  shall  give  you  several  exam¬ 
ples,  to  make  the  observation  as  clear  as  this  method  of  instruction  will  permit. 
For  instance,  in  these  lines  of  Hamlet, — 

*  *  *  *  Then  she  would  hang  upon  him 

As  if  increase  of  appetite  had  grown 
By  what  it  fed  on — ” 

The  justness  of  pronunciation  requires  that  there  should  be  only  a  very  short  stop  at 
appetite,  and  that  the  following  words  should  all  be  delivered  in  the  same  breath ; 
but  you,  Sir,  I  observed,  forgetful  of  this,  spoke  the  whole  verse  together,  pausing 
considerably  after  the  word  grown :  by  which  means  the  rest  of  the  period  came 
limping  after,  and  the  distinct  members  were  unnaturally  separated  from  each 
other.  So,  likewise,  in  the  famous  soliloquy  of  the  same  play, — 

“  Whether  ’tis  nobler  in  the  mind  to  suffer 
The  slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune, 

Or  to  take  arms,  &c.” 

you  incorrectly  lowered  your  accent  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  first  verse,  and 
made  a  long  rest ;  whereas  the  whole  line  should  be  pronounced  in  very  nearly 


110 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  same  key  of  elocution,  and  imperceptibly  carried  on  into  the  following  verse. 
The  only  pause  that  can  possibly  be  admitted,  should  be  made  at  mind ,  and  the 
remaining  part  should  be  spoke  as  one  entire  sentence.  Thus  again,  in  the  prologue 
to  Henry  the  Fifth, — 

“  Oh,  for  a  Muse  of  fire,  that  would  ascend 
The  brightest  Heaven  of  invention.” 

As  you  removed  the  stop  at  fire  to  the  conclusion  of  the  verse,  you  could  not,  of 
course,  connect  ascend  with  the  subsequent  line,  to  which  it  is  related.  But  you 
was  more  remarkably  incorrect  in  “  Venice  Preserved,”  and  made  more  slips  of 
this  kind,  than  in  any  other  part  which  I  had  seen  before ;  and  this  appeared  the 
more  singular,  because  the  verses  of  that  tragedy  are,  in  general,  far  from  being 
musical  and  flowing  ;  at  least,  they  are  not  so  harmonious,  as  to  deserve  the  being 
preserved  entire,  at  the  expense  of  the  meaning.  Take  this  example  from  among 
many  others, — 

“  When  in  your  brigantine  you  sail’d  to  see 
The  Adriatic  wedded  by  our  Duke,  &c.” 

you  went  through  the  first  line  without  any  intermission,  and  stopt  short  at  the 
end,  which  necessarily  broke  in  upon  the  sense,  and  occasioned  an  ambiguity  in  the 
expression  ;  for  it  did  not  readily  appear,  (as  the  ear  could  not  distinguish,)  whether 
the  poet  had  not  wrote,  you  sail'd  to  sea :  whereas,  had  you  made  only  a  brief  pause 
after  sail'd,  and  joined  to  see  with  the  next  verse,  you  would  both  have  spoke  with 
propriety,  and  removed  all  possibility  of  an  equivoque : — and  this  error  you  was 
frequently  guilty  of,  throughout  the  whole  performance,  though,  as  I  have  not 
the  play  by  me,  I  am  unable  to  point  out  the  rest.  To  prevent  it,  however,  for 
the  future,  you  may  be  pleased  to  observe  the  following  rule,  which,  you  will 
remark,  is  seldom  liable  to  any  exception, — Never  disjoin  the  verb  from  the  accusative 
case,  or  from  the  concluding  members  of  the  sentence  which  it  governs. 

The  next  omission  you  are  betrayed  into,  is  hurrying  on  the  close  of  a  period  in¬ 
distinctly,  and  dropping  the  accent  so  suddenly  that  we  lose  the  sense.  Again,  I  have 
observed  that  when  several  substantives  come  together,  as  truth,  justice,  honour, 
or  the  like,  you  are  apt  to  deliver  them  with  such  rapidity  of  utterance,  that  you 
neglect  to  make  the  necessary  rest,  which  ought  to  have  a  place  between  each  :  while, 
on  the  contrary,  in  pronouncing  polysyllables,  or  compound  epithets,  you  divide 
them  in  such  a  manner,  as  if  they  were  really  so  many  separate  words  :  thus,  I  have 
observed  you  speak, — 

“  Ye  hurri-canoes,  spout !” — Lear. 

And  “  Base-minded,  dull.”  —  Venice  Preserved. 

The  last  remark  I  shall  trouble  you  with  at  present,  relates  to  the  manner  of  pro¬ 
nouncing  those  verses  wherein  the  sense  also  closes  at  the  end :  and  here  I  have 
taken  notice,  that  for  several  lines  together  you  constantly  paused  in  the  middle,  and 
that,  too,  when  the  emphasis  as  often  required  the  contrary.  This  fault  in  speaking, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


Ill 


is  very  near  akin  to  the  practice  of  some  poets,  who  perpetually  place  the  caesura 
upon  the  same  syllable  for  a  score  of  verses  successively.  Such  a  uniformity  of 
voice,  always  in  the  same  tenor,  is  not  only  very  tedious  to  the  ear,  but  occasions 
you  to  sink  into  a  tone  which  almost  degenerates  to  whining. 

These  imperfections.  Sir,  as  they  are  very  glaring,  may  likewise  be  easily  cor¬ 
rected  by  a  very  little  attention  ;  and  you  will  think,  I  believe,  correctness  of 
speaking  of  such  importance,  that  no  force  or  propriety  of  gesture,  no  expression 
of  the  countenance,  how  exquisite  soever,  can  compensate  for  the  want  of  it.  If  you 
think  it  worth  your  while  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  ot  this,  your  answer,  directed 
to  Mr.  Watson,  to  be  left  at  the  Rainbow  Coffee-house  in  Cornhill,  will  be  de¬ 
livered  to  Your  very  humble  servant.* 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Thursday  evening. 

I  have  considered  of  the  appointed  meeting  at  Mr.  Lacy’s,  and  it  appears  to 
me  to  be  no  other  than  falling  into  the  very  thing  I  want  to  avoid,  namely,  wrang¬ 
ling  to  no  purpose ;  which  is  the  circumstance  that  makes  me  sick  of  the  theatre, 
as  I  never  yet  had  any  thing  done  without  a  great  deal  of  disagreeable  altercation. 
In  consequence  of  this,  it  is  now  my  final  resolution,  and  the  advice  of  my  friends, 
to  detach  myself  entirely  from  those  pursuits.  It  will,  therefore,  answer  no  end 
to  go  down  to  Mr.  Lacy’s,  when  I  can  come  to  no  other  point  than  that  of  with¬ 
drawing  the  “  Way  to  Keep  Him”  entirely,  or  carrying  it  into  immediate  execution  ; 
for  the  truth  is,  I  long  to  have  done.  The  very  proposal  of  doing  another  comedy 
first,  carries  at  its  first  blush  no  good-will  to  me ;  and  as  to  Mr.  Yates’s  part  being 
long,  I  foresaw  that  long  ago,  and  for  that  reason,  recommended  that  he  might  have 
his  part  in  the  Summer,  but  no  such  thing  was  done.  The  fairest  thing  I  can 
now  say  is,  that  I  am  willing  to  take  it  back,  and  even  refund  the  money  for  it ; 
for  I  dread  rehearsals,  or  rather  readings  in  the  green-room,  where  nothing  seems  to 
me  to  be  in  earnest,  and  where  the  other  day  I  was  induced  to  strike  out  a  scene, 
which  in  the  printing  I  must  restore  instead  of  what  is  substituted,  as  it  is  plain,  for 
many  reasons,  that  the  whole  is  hurt  by  the  alteration. 

I  have  here  written  the  ultimate  result  of  my  thoughts,  and  from  this  I  will 
not  be  so  frivolous  as  to  recede. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

If  the  trifle  I  lately  scribbled,  merely  to  serve  your  Theatre,  cannot  be  done 
otherwise  than  as  a  serenata,  I  must  beg  leave  to  retract  it ;  for  I  sincerely  think  it 

*  There  is  no  clue  to  the  date  of  this  really  anonymous  criticism,  which  is  of  the  soundest  kind.  What 
difficulty  I  have,  is  to  believe  that  Garrick  could  truly  be  so  open  to  censure.  The  very  reform  introduced 
by  him  was  the  destruction  of  that  eternal  chaunt,  which  was  the  vice  of  the  old  school.  The  reader  will 
admire,  however,  the  humility  of  so  great  a  genius,  in  preserving  the  lecture  among  his  papers. — Ed. 


1 12 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


is  already  maimed  enough,  without  farther  disadvantages.  I  am  sorry  to  be  obliged 
to  trouble  you  with  this  letter ;  but  the  truth  is,  I  long  to  have  done  with  the  stage, 
to  convince  the  world  it  shall  be  my  future  trade.* 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR, 

However  you  may  mistake  my  words  and  actions,  (for  many  mistakes  have 
arisen  between  us  since  our  first  acquaintance,)  I  have  ever  had  Mr.  Murphy’s  interest 
at  heart.  I  cannot  say  whether  I  was  more  surprised  or  concerned  that  my  beha¬ 
viour  and  advice  to  you,  in  our  last  transaction,  were  so  totally  misrepresented  and 
misunderstood. 

I  shall  ever  with  great  pleasure  be  ready  to  serve  you,  either  publicly  or  privately, 
provided  that  no  imputation  of  folly  or  meanness  should  cast  a  damp  upon  my 
endeavours ;  and  in  that  case,  I  flatter  myself  that  Mr.  Murphy  himself  would  not 
wish  me  to  exert  my  good  offices :  this  brings  us  to  the  point.  Had  Mr.  Rich,  or 
Mr.  Barry,  seen  your  tragedy  and  refused  it,  before  I  had  been  concerned  about  it, 
I  should  not  have  had  the  least  objection  to  take  my  turn  at  it,  and  upon  reading  and 
approving  it,  to  have  shown  you  my  zeal  for  your  welfare ;  but  on  the  other  hand, 
how  is  it  possible,  with  the  least  shadow  of  reason,  or  without  the  greatest  incon¬ 
veniences  to  me,  both  as  a  man  and  a  manager,  to  receive  a  performance  that  was 
taken  so  abruptly  out  of  my  hands,  and  so  unaccountably  put  into  those  of  other 
people  ?  1  would  desire  you  to  reflect  a  little  upon  my  situation,  and  be  convinced 

that  it  is  with  sincere  concern  that  1  am  obliged  to  refuse  you  the  request  in  your 
letter,  and  that  most  disagreeable  consequences  would  attend  (as  I  have  so  much  to 
do  with  other  gentlemen  who  write  for  the  stage)  my  making  a  precedent  of  this 
sort.  If  you  think  I  can  be  of  the  least  service  to  you  in  any  other  theatrical  matter, 
or  in  any  thing  else,  I  will  convince  you  that  I  retain  not  the  least  resentment  about 
our  late  transaction,  but  that  my  desire  to  be  excused  from  seeing  your  tragedy 
again,  proceeds  merely  from  the  nature  and  necessity  of  my  situation  and  con¬ 
nections. 

I  would  likewise  urge  another  objection,  were  not  the  former  an  indisputable 
one.  When  I  was  convinced  Mr.  Barry  had  your  tragedy,  I  thought  it  my  duty 
to  let  Mr.  Hawkesworth  (who  had  behaved  so  well  to  us)  know,  that  he  might 
proceed  again  upon  his  scheme  upon  Voltaire,  and  that  if  I  approved  it,  I  was  at 
liberty  to  perform  it.  What  his  intentions  are  I  cannot  say,  he  having  lately  had 
business  of  another  nature  to  employ  him.  I  am  greatly  flattered  by  your  saying 
my  acquaintance  will  give  you  pleasure.  You  are  most  heartily  welcome  to  it, 

*  Perhaps  Murphy’s  meaning  may  be  this.  I  long  to  have  done  with  the  mimic  world,  to  convince  the 
real,  that  it  shall  be  in  future  my  only  trade. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


113 


and  I  shall  be  proud  of  any  opportunity  to  convince  you  that  I  have  a  most  dis¬ 
interested  regard  for  your  talents  and  abilities. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant  and  well-wisher, 

David  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  should  have  sent  you  this  letter  sooner,  but  have  been  interrupted  by 
company  all  the  morning. 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick — 

“  Answer  of  mine  to  Murphy 
about  some  play.” 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Mr.  Murphy’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  as  the  copy  of  “Love  Ala¬ 
mode”  is  deemed  by  the  Managers  to  be  their  property,  he  begs  the  favour  of  him 
to  let  him  have  the  use  of  the  book  for  Mr.  Charles  Stanhope,  and  he  promises  him 
it  shall  be  kept  sacred  from  every  other  eye,  and  shall  be  returned  to  Mr.  Cross  to¬ 
morrow. 

You  may  consider  the  above  as  a  lawyer’s  opinion ,  that  the  farce  belongs  to  you, 
your  heirs,  executors,  &c. — for  ever  ; — and  pray  mind  that  I  make  use  of  the  words 
Ses  heirs,  which  are  very  material — you  have  the  opinion  also  for  nothing,  which 
is  no  bad  thing. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Friday. 

Mr.  Murphy’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  takes  this  method  to  let  him 
know,  that  the  affair  of  the  two  pieces  is  now  decided.  Had  Mr.  Garrick  men¬ 
tioned  in  his  letter,  which  Mr.  Murphy  received  in  Hampshire,  that  he  could  not 
act  in  two  pieces,  the  matter  had  been  settled  long  ago ;  for  he  never  will  write  a 
piece  for  the  rubbish  of  any  company.  He  is  now  determined  to  fix  the  affair 
finally  for  Dublin,  for  which  purpose  he  is  to  meet  Mr.  Mossop  this  night,  and  in 
about  a  month’s  time  he  will  set  out  for  that  city  himself.  The  two  parts  together 
would  not  have  been  above  twelve  lengths ;  but  it  is  to  no  purpose  to  mention  that : 
he  wishes  Mr.  Garrick  all  success. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Friday,  four  o’clock,  [about  1758.] 

A  few  days  since  I  drew  on  Mr.  Pritchard  in  favour  of  Mr.  Clutterbuck, 
assignee  to  one  Murray  a  Taylor,  for  3 3/.  17 s.  in  order  to  discharge  a  debt  of  a  small 
matter  due  by  me,  and  fifteen  guineas  from  my  brother.  Mr.  Clutterbuck  then 
told  me  he  would  not  require  the  money  until  due  in  regular  course ;  but  as  1 
VOL.  I.  Q 


114 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


apprehend  it  can  make  no  manner  of  difference  to  the  Managers  of  Drury-lane  to 
advance  me  the  rest  of  my  salary,  though  perhaps  it  may  be  out  of  the  common 
road  of  business,  1  should  take  it  as  a  great  favour — I  mean  the  remainder,  after 
reserving  Mr.  Clutterbuck’s  money.  Should  Mr.  Garrick  and  Mr.  Lacy  have  no 
objection  to  this,  it  will  make  me  very  easy  in  my  mind,  in  my  present  indisposition, 
as  I  have  this  day  had  two  or  three  small  bills  sent  in  to  me,  and  on  not  paying 
them,  (though  visibly  ill,)  the  bearers  were  unmanly  enough  to  speak  to  me  in  a 
manner  which  hurt  my  spirits  very  much  ever  since.  I  should,  therefore,  be  highly 
obliged  to  Mr.  Garrick  if  he  would  enable  me  to  prevent  any  farther  uneasiness  on 
this  score ;  for  though  I  got  very  handsomely  by  my  farce,  the  profits  were  soon 
disposed  of  in  payment  of  what  debts  I  contracted  before  I  went  on  the  stage,  and 
in  supplying  my  mother,  who  is  not  regularly  paid  the  annuity  left  her  by  my  late 
uncle.  1  beg  pardon  for  all  this  trouble,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

DEAR  SIR, 

The  enclosed  is  all  that  I  have  at  present  by  me.  Mrs.  Garrick  is  gone  to 
Hampton,  and  taken  the  keys  with  her ;  what  more  will  be  necessary  to  lighten  that 
incumbrance,  you  shall  be  most  sincerely  welcome  to  ;  all  I  desire  in  return  is,  that 
you  will  not  make  any  speeches  on  the  occasion.  Your  letter  has  said  too  much — 
and  all  that  I  shall  say  is,  that  I  am  happy  it  is  in  my  power  to  convince  you  how 
much  I  am  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s  Inn,  Friday. 

Mr.  Murphy’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick  :  he  is  unexpectedly  called  into  the 
city,  and  cannot  keep  his  engagement  at  eleven.  Mr.  Yates’s  scene  with  Lady  Con¬ 
stant  is  gone  to  the  press,  and  therefore  he  would  be  glad  to  let  it  stand  as  it  is  :  he 
hopes  it  will  not  appear  too  long.  In  general  he  could  wish  that  the  whole  may 
take  its  chance  as  it  is.  Horace  furnishes  me  with  a  prayer,  which  I  shall  offer  up 
to  you.* 

“  Sit  jus  liceatque  perire  Poetis! — ” 
and  he  gives  the  reason  for  this  a  little  after  : 

“  Invitum  qui  servat,  idem  facit  occidenti.” 

Written  in  very  good  humour,  so  don’t  be  angry. 

*  De  Arte  Poetica,  1.  460.  i.  The  prayer  of  such  a  petition  might  readily  be  granted,  as  far  as  the  poet 
is  concerned  ;  nor  might  the  manager  take  the  unthankful  labour  “  to  save  a  man  against  his  will,”  but 
that  the  interests  of  the  theatre  sometimes  rouse  the  reluctant  criticism  into  action. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK 


115 


SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  GEORGE  GARRICK,  ESQ. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  Night. 

Mr.  Murphy  will  not  have  the  play  read  to-morrow,  but  will  come  to  town 
and  call  on  me.  Present  my  compliments  to  your  brother,  and  let  him  know  that 
I  will  write  to  him,  or  wait  on  him,  the  moment  after  I  have  seen  him. 

I  am  most  sincerely  yours, 

Stranger  Barry. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Grosvenor-square,  Jan.  28,  1760. 

Nothing  at  this  time  could  give  me  greater  pleasure  than  that  my  friend  Mr. 
Garrick  had  not  given  me  up  as  unworthy  of  him.  Yet  I  am  not  without  some 
small  resentment  at  appearances  ;  and  since  you  are  so  nice,  I  intend  to  punish  you 
with  calling  on  you  in  my  episcopal  equipage,  (for  such  the  besprinkling  with 
mitres  now  makes  it,)  at  your  house  in  Southampton-street  one  of  these  days. 

To  be  serious,  I  began  to  suspect  you  might  take  it  a  little  amiss,  as  supposing 
I  made  a  mystery  of  it,  when  you  was  last  so  kind  to  call,  and  on  your  asking  me 
whether  there  was  any  truth  in  the  talk  of  my  promotion  to  the  vacant  bishoprick, 
I  said  I  knew  nothing  of  it.  This  was  the  unaffected  truth  :  I  knew  no  more  of  it 
than  your  footman,  till  some  time  after  in  the  West. 

My  best  respects  to  good  Mrs.  Garrick.  Assure  yourself,  dear  Sir,  there  is  no 
one  more  unalterably  yours  than 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Grosvenor-square,  March  7,  1760. 

You  told  me  no  news  when  you  mentioned  a  circumstance  of  zeal  for  your 
friends  ;  but  you  gave  me  much  pleasure  by  it  and  the  inclosed,  to  have  an  imperti¬ 
nent  story  confuted  the  first  moment  I  heard  of  it ;  for  I  cannot  but  be  pleased  to 
find  I  have  no  reason  to  change  my  opinion  of  so  agreeable  and  so  original  a  writer 
as  Mr.  Sterne ;  I  mean  my  opinion  of  his  moral  character,  of  which  I  had  received  from 
several  of  my  acquaintance  so  very  advantageous  an  account.*  And  I  cannot  see  how 

*  It  is  melancholy  to  find  the  good  Bishop  subsequently  compelled  to  change  this  opinion.  Sterne  had 
distinguished  the  Divine  Legation  in  his  “  Shandy,”  and  Warburton  was  amused  by  his  pleasantry,  originality, 
and  power  of  embodying  character  ;  but  he  at  length  opened  his  eyes  to  the  indecency  of  Sterne’s  Life,  and 
in  a  letter  to  Hurd,  dated  Dec.  27,  1761,  writes  thus: — “  Sterne  has  published  his  fifth  and  sixth  volumes  of 
Tristram;  whether  they  will  restore  his  reputation  with  the  public  is  a  questiou.  The  fellow  himself  is  an 
irrecoverable  scoundrel.” — Ed. 


116 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


1  could  have  held  it,  had  the  lying  tale  been  true,  that  he  intended  to  injure  one  per¬ 
sonally  and  entirely  unknown  to  him.  I  own  it  would  have  grieved  me,  (and  so,  I 
believe,  it  would  him  too,  when  he  had  known  me  and  my  enemies  a  little  better,) 
to  have  found  himself  in  company  with  a  crew  of  the  most  egregious  blockheads  that 
ever  abused  the  blessing  of  pen  and  ink. 

However,  I  pride  myself  in  having  warmly  recommended  “  Tristram  Shandy”  to 
all  the  best  company  in  town,  except  that  at  Arthur’s.  I  was  charged  in  a  very 
grave  assembly,  as  Dr.  Newton  can  tell  him,  for  a  particular  patronizer  of  the  work ; 
and  how  I  acquitted  myself  of  the  imputation,  the  said  Doctor  can  tell  him.  I  say 
all  this  to  show  how  ready  I  was  to  do  justice  to  a  stranger.  This  is  all  I  expect  from 
a  stranger.  From  my  friends,  indeed,  I  expect,  because  I  stand  in  need  of,  much  in¬ 
dulgence.  To  them,  (being  without  reserve,)  I  show  my  weaknesses.  To  strangers 
1  have  the  discretion  not  to  show  them  ;  at  least,  those  writing  strangers,  I  mentioned 
before,  have  not  yet  had  the  wit  to  find  them  out. 

If  Mr.  Sterne  will  take  me  with  all  my  infirmities,  I  shall  be  glad  of  the  honour 
of  being  better  known  to  him ;  and  he  has  the  additional  recommendation  of  being 
your  friend.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  13th  May,  1760. 

I  am  much  delighted  that  you  are  pleased  with  the  design  I  opened  to  you  in  re¬ 
gard  to  Sir  John  Restless  :*  I  have  conversed  much  with  him  since  I  saw'  you,  and  I 
dare  think  you  will  like  him,  and  likewise  the  people  about  him.  A  newr  idea  has 
occurred  to  me  in  my  speculations  on  this  affair,  of  which  I  will  take  your  opinion 
when  you  come  to  town ;  or,  upon  second  thoughts,  if  I  hint  it  now,  you  will  per¬ 
haps  be  better  enabled  to  speak  when  I  see  you.  What  think  you  of  an  additional 
character  of  a  vain  young  man,  who  fancies  every  woman  in  love  with  him,  and 
wdiile  the  jealous  people  are  interpreting  all  appearances  to  their  own  disadvantage, 
construes  every  thing  in  his  own  favour,  and  is  as  much  in  the  wrong  as  they  ?  Of 
this,  more  hereafter.  You  stand  engaged  to  Mr.  Thrale  for  Wednesday  se’ennight. 
You  need  not  apprehend  drinking  ;  it  is  a  very  easy  house,  and  the  scheme  of  going 
to  Ranelagli  will  be  agreeable  to  him.  I  am  to  dine  with  him  to-morrow,  in  order  to 
adjourn  in  the  evening  to  Ranelagli,  so  fond  is  he  of  that  place. 

1  have  not  seen  the  comical  fellow,  Mr.  Foote;  indeed,  I  do  not  go  much  to  the 
Bedford,  but  am  tempted  to  drop  in  there,  to  hear  him  dash  awray  at  every  body,  and 
every  thing.  “  Have  you  had  good  success  in  Dublin,  Mr.  Foote?'5  “  Poh  !  damn 
’em.  There  wras  not  a  shilling  in  the  country,  except  what  the  Duke  of  Bedford, 
and  I,  and  Mr.  Rigby  have  brought  away.  Woodw'ard  is  caterwauling  among  ’em ; 

*  A  character  in  the  comedy  of  “  All  in  the  Wrong.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


117 


and  Barry  like  a  wounded  snake ;  and  Mossop  sprawling  about  his  broken  arms  with 
the  rising  of  the  lights,”  &c.* 

I  have  enquired  for  the  books  you  mention,  and  Mr.  Sheriff  can  supply  me.  He 
has  them  all  in  sheets,  and  will  order  them  to  be  bound  in  a  day  or  two,  so  that  I 
will  not  put  you  to  the  trouble  of  bringing  them  up.  I  shall  be  in  great  forwardness 
very  soon. 

When  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  I  shall  mention  some  more  of  my  ideas 
of  this  matter,  which,  I  own,  I  grow  more  attached  to  in  proportion  as  I  cultivate 
the  subject.  It  will  be  a  play  of  intricacy  and  business,  and  also,  as  far  as  I  can  exe¬ 
cute,  of  natural  dialogue,  as  much  as  possible  in  the  way  of  Moliere,  rather  than 
Congreve. 

I  have  only  room  to  say,  that,  with  a  true  sense  of  all  your  civilities, 

I  remain,  dear  Sir,  your  very  obliged  and  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  June  16,  1760. 

I  must  not  forget  to  thank  you  for  the  hints  I  received  from  you  by  Mr. 
Berenger,  concerning  our  heteroclite  Parson.f  I  heard  enough  of  his  conduct  in 
town  since  I  left  it,  to  make  me  think  he  would  soon  lose  the  fruits  of  all  the 
advantage  he  had  gained  by  a  successful  effort,  and  would  disable  me  from  appearing 
as  his  friend  or  well-wisher. 

Since  he  got  back  to  York,  I  had  the  inclosed  letter  from  him,  which  afforded 
me  an  opportunity  I  was  not  sorry  for,  to  tell  him  my  mind  with  all  frankness,  as 
you  will  see  by  the  copy  of  what  I  wrote  to  him.  If  it  have  the  effect  I  wish,  it 
will  be  well  for  him  ;  if  it  have  not,  it  will  be  at  least  well  for  me,  in  the  satisfaction 
I  shall  receive  by  the  attempt  to  do  him  service.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  affectionate  friend  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  June  26,  1760. 

I  have  your  kind  favour  of  the  20th.  I  trouble  you  with  the  inclosed,  because 
1  was  willing  you  should  see  the  whole  of  our  correspondence. 

I  have  done  my  best  to  prevent  his  playing  the  fool  in  a  worse  sense  than,  I  have 
the  charity  to  think,  he  intends.  I  have  discharged  my  part  to  him.  I  esteemed 

*  These  are  valuable  hints  of  Foote’s  manner,  perhaps  actual  reports  of  what  he  said  — Ed. 

t  Sterne. 


118 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


him  as  a  man  of  genius,  and  am  desirous  he  would  enable  me  to  esteem  him  as  a 
clergyman. 

But  this  was  not  the  principal  purpose  of  my  letter  to  you.  1  am  setting  out  for 
the  North,  and  shall  he  at  Durham  from  the  20th  .July  to  the  20th  August,  and  then 
set  out  directly  for  home  to  this  place.  I  have  some  imperfect  notion  that  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick  intend  to  he  at  Litchfield  about  that  time.  If  you  be,  I  would  return 
that  way,  and  spend  one  day  with  you  there.  A  line  to  Durham  will  inform  me. 
All  here  are  much  your’s  and  good  Mrs.  Garrick’s.  No  one  more  than,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 

P.  S.  Somebody  or  other  told  me,  that  in  the  thing  called  “  Bibliogr,”  or  “  Bio¬ 
graph.  Brit.”  there  is  a  Life  of  Pope,  in  which  Mr.  Allen  is  spoken  of  as  a  rich 
Quaker.  Is  it  possible  there  can  be  such  creatures  in  the  world  ?  or  is  this  scribbler 
an  aboriginal  Grubbeian,  who  was  not  only  born  in  a  garret,  but  had  never  in  his 
whole  life  descended  it,  and  come  down  amongst  men  ? 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thurcaston,  July  3,  1760. 

I  have  an  unexpected  favour  from  you  this  morning  from  Leicester,  by  which  I 
find  I  shall  not  have  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you  at  Litchfield  in  my  return. 

I  shall  always  be  glad  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  pleasure  any  of  your  friends  in 
more  essential  matters  than  in  the  trifle  you  mention.  Be  so  good  to  subscribe  for 
me  and  Mr.  Allen  to  Mr.  Thomson’s  book,  and  I  shall  thankfully  repay  you  when  I 
see  you.*  1  am  glad  to  understand  that  Mrs.  Garrick  (to  whom  I  beg  my  best 
respects)  is  with  you  in  this  excursion ;  I  hope  the  exercise  will  contribute  to  the 
firm  establishment  of  her  health. 

I  had  the  pleasure  this  spring  of  taking  a  few  turns  in  the  park  with  a  gentle¬ 
man,  whom,  I  think,  Mr.  Berenger  called  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  and  he  bore  the  plain 
marks  of  being  all  you  say  of  him.  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  affection, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 

Mr.  Hurd  desires  to  be  remembered  to  you  in  the  kindest  manner,  and  bid  me 
say  what  pleasure  he  should  have  received  in  a  call. 

The  enclosed  paper  was  shuffled  into  your  packet  by  mistake,  so  I  send  it  back : 
but  be  assured,  had  the  whole  song  been  written  out,  which  promises  so  well,  I 
should  have  intercepted  it. 


*  The  quarto  edition  of  “  His  Works,”  published  by  subscription. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


119 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  August  2,  1760. 

I  am  to  set  out  to-morrow  morning  for  Hampshire,  and  before  I  go  I  think  pro¬ 
per  to  send  you  once  more  the  “  Way  to  Keep  Him,”  in  five  acts.  I  have  reviewed 
it,  and  have  called  in  to  my  assistance  as  many  judgments  as  I  conveniently  could. 
I  cannot,  with  all  my  industry,  find  out  any  essential  reasons  against  offering  the 
piece  to  the  public. 

The  arguments  you  have  urged  yourself,  I  think,  should  have  been  considered 
when  I  first  acquainted  you  with  the  materials  of  the  scenes  I  intended  to  add ;  and 
even  then  they  would  have  been  no  more  than  what  may  be  urged  against  every  new 
attempt,  namely,  the  general  danger  of  a  failure,  which  there  always  is  in  every  case, 
because  nobody  can  determine  in  what  light  the  multitude  will  be  struck  with 
characters  offered  to  their  judgment  or  caprice,  more  particularly  if  the  characters 
be  new.  For  my  part,  in  every  attempt  of  mine,  I  endeavour  to  be  as  right  as  l 
can,  and  then  I  divest  myself  as  much  as  possible  of  all  ideas  of  danger.  Had  you 
argued  with  me  from  any  other  sources  of  criticism  than  what  I  have  mentioned,  I 
should  very  probably  have  thought  there  was  more  weight  in  your  observations  : 
but  as  you  told  me  that,  were  the  additional  character  in  any  other  play  or  farce,  you 
would  play  it  yourself,  I  am  the  more  encouraged  from  thence  to  think  what  I  have 
added  is  dramatic,  and  fit  for  the  stage.  I  must  therefore  take  the  disadvantage  of 
an  inferior  actor  for  that  character,  and  I  flatter  mvself  that  Lovemore  will  no  more 
suffer  in  his  scenes  with  Sir  Bashful,  than  Archer  does  in  the  tankard  scene  with 
Scrub,  or  than  Ranger  does  because  there  is  a  suspicious  husband  in  the  same  play. — 
I  must  therefore  beg  to  offer  these  scenes  once  more  to  your  reception,  with  this 
additional  remark,  that  writing  a  farce  instead  of  what  I  now  send,  would  be 
writing  four  acts  for  a  hundred  pounds, — and  I  must  pay  myself  the  compliment  to 
value  my  time  a  little  higher  than  that.  Besides,  I  think  I  have  here  a  new  cha¬ 
racter,  which,  after  casting  about  in  my  mind,  I  cannot  perceive  how  I  could  employ 
in  any  other  play  so  well. 

I  shall  say  no  more  on  this  head,  but  that  I  hope,  on  a  review  of  the  matter, 
you  will  allow  that  I  send  you  an  equivalent  for  the  money  :  and  I  hope  also  you 
will  allow  that  I  put  it  into  your  hands  in  a  seasonable  time  to  be  performed,  as  was 
mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  the  season. 

With  regard  to  The  man  does  not  know  his  own  mind,  as  you  seem  to  me  to  be 
full  of  business,  l  am  most  extremely  willing  to  recede  from  that  bargain,  it  it  suits 
your  conveniency  ;  for  to  tell  the  truth,  my  time  of  going  to  the  Bar  draws  near,  and 
I  begin  to  be  very  indifferent  about  theatrical  performances,  particularly  if  I  cannot 
be  at  a  certainty,  for  a  state  of  suspense  ruins  my  application  to  all  other  objects. 

I  have  the  vice  of  writing  long  letters.  I  shall  be  in  town  in  the  beginning  of 
September,  if  not  sooner,  and  will  then  talk  this  over  with  you,  and  yourself  shall 


120 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


determine.  In  the  mean  time,  should  you  have  any  thing  to  say,  a  letter  di¬ 
rected  for  me  at  Southampton  will  find  me  there. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours,  &c., 

Arthur  Murphy. 

There  are  two  circumstances,  very  minute  in  themselves,  not  entirely  prepared, 
as  the  play  (I  mean  the  “  Way  to  Keep  Him’’)  stands.  They  will  not  interfere 
with  Sir  Bashful,  which  I  suppose  must  be  done  by  Mr.  Yates; — and  I  have  dif¬ 
ferent  ideas  about  these  trifling  deficiencies.  I  shall  put  them  to  rights  early  in  Sep¬ 
tember. 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Chatsworth,  Oct.  25th,  1760. 

I  had  a  long  conversation  with  his  Grace,*  who  would  have  authorized  me  to 
have  used  his  name  to  stop  “  The  Minor,”  but  I  got  off  from  it,  and  concluded  with 
sending  a  recommendation  by  Mr.  Pelham  to  the  author,  to  alter  those  passages  that 
are  liable  to  objection  :  his  Grace  would  not  point  them  out,f  so  I  think  very  little 
alteration  may  do.  This  to  yourself ;  let  me  hear  what  has  passed.  My  respects 
to  Madam. 

Yours  sincerely, 

Devonshire. 


JOSEPH  REED  TO  MRS.  DANCER. 

MADAM,  Friday  Evening,  1761. 

As  my  tragedy  of  “  Dido  ”  is  intended  to  be  got  up  immediately, \  I  think  it  my 
duty  to  the  public  to  solicit  your  performance  of  the  part  of  my  heroine.  It  is 
about  ten  lengths, §  and,  if  you  will  obligingly  take  the  trouble  of  studying  it,  I 
flatter  myself  that  your  appearance  in  the  character  would  be  some  little  addition  to 
your  theatrical  reputation.  The  part  is  mostly  of  the  pathetic  cast,  a  department 
in  which  you  are  so  peculiarly  happy,  and  so  inimitably  excellent. 

*  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  ;  for  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  as  Lord  Chamberlain,  might  have  surely 
done  what  he  thought  proper  with  Foote’s  farce,  and  its  objectionable  passages.  The  truth  is,  they  were 
all  of  them  afraid  of  Foote’s  wit  and  power  of  exhibiting  ludicrous  character,  or  rendering  most  characters 
ludicrous.—  Ed. 

t  His  Grace  said,  were  he  to  do  so,  Foote  would  publish  it  as  “  corrected  and  prepared  for  the  press  by 
His  Grace  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.”  And  he  did  not  over-estimate  the  writer’s  audacity.  This  he 
would  have  considered  a  high  treat  for  the  profligate  levity  of  the  age.— Ed. 

I  It  was  not  acted  till  the  year  1767,  when  Mrs.  Yates  was  the  Dido,  and  Powell  her  not  very  pious 
JEneas. — Ed. 

§  A  length  is  purely  technical.  Take  half  a  sheet  of  foolscap  paper  and  divide  it,  the  two  sides  are 
called  a  length  by  the  players  ;  and  in  this  form  their  parts  are  always  written  out  by  the  Prompter  or  his 
clerk. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


12] 


I  was  in  hopes  of  seeing  Mr.  Barry  in  the  character  of  my  hero,  but  Mr. 
Garrick  informs  me  that  gentleman’s  study  is  attended  with  such  difficulties,  that 
I  begin  to  fear  the  town  will  be  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him  in  iEneas, 
a  character  which  he  would  have  played  with  great  dignity  and  great  ease. 

If,  therefore,  Mrs.  Dancer  will  kindly  vouchsafe  to  study  the  part,  she  will 
confer  a  singular  favour  on  one,  who  will  endeavour  to  requite  the  obligation. 

I  shall  wait  upon  you  to-morrow  noon,  in  expectation  of  your  favourable  com¬ 
pliance  with  the  request  of, 

Madam,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Joseph  Reed. 


SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  1761. 

Mrs.  Dancer  is  at  a  loss  to  know  what  answer  to  give  to  the  enclosed.  She 
is  much  afraid  that  the  part  mentioned  in  the  enclosed  letter  will  interfere  with  the 
new  comedy, — with  Zara  (which  she  has  not  played  for  many  years),  and  with  many 
other  parts  that  you  may  possibly  want  immediately.  She  therefore  would  be 
obliged  to  you,  if  it  can  be  contrived  that  she  can  be  excused,  lest  it  should  pre¬ 
vent  her  preparing  parts  of  more  consequence  to  you.  I  am  just  going  to  set  off, 
and  must  again  return  you  a  thousand  thanks  for  your  excessive  goodness  to  me, 

I  am,  most  respectfully  and  affectionately  yours, 

Spranger  Barry. 

Endorsed  “  Letter  from  Barry 
about  Reed’s  Dido.” 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Wednesday  night,  11th  Feb.  1761. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  late  kind  enquiries  after  me  in  my  distress. 
After  maturely  reflecting  upon  the  late  severe  blow  I  felt,  I  think  it  would  be 
highly  indecent  in  me  to  embark  so  immediately  in  any  new  adventures  ;  and  even 
waving  that  point  of  delicacy,  my  spirits  are  so  impaired,  that  I  am  not  able  to  attend 
properly  to  dramatic  business,  and  without  that  due  attention,  the  piece  would  be 
brought  on  without  some  little  necessary  corrections  that  I  have  had  in  my  mind. 
I  therefore  must  beg  you  will  excuse  me  if  I  withdraw  “  The  Citizen”  for  the  pre¬ 
sent  ;  and  in  doing  this,  I  hope  it  will  be  rather  a  convenience  than  otherwise  to  you 
in  this  advanced  state  of  the  season,  when  you  have  so  much  business  still  upon 
your  hands. 


VOL.  i. 


R 


122 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  must  beg  likewise  that  you  will  take  the  trouble  to  make  my  apology  to  the 
gentlemen  and  ladies  who  have  had  the  trouble  of  attending  hitherto;  and  when 
they  consider  my  situation,  1  am  sure  they  will  accept  my  apology. 

I  shall  readily  pay  the  copier  for  his  trouble,  and  I  remain, 

Dear  Sir,  yours  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  17,  1761. 

Before  I  left  town,  I  talked  very  seriously  with  Millar  concerning  that  scoun¬ 
drel  poem,  and  more  scoundrel  subject  of  it.  He  appeared  truly  concerned  ;  and,  as 
he  told  me,  spoke  to  Wilks  with  great  resentment  of  the  injury  done  him,  by  incur¬ 
ring  your  displeasure,  through  his  perfidy. 

But  do  such  wretches  as  the  writer  of  the  poem  and  the  hero  of  it  deserve  a 
serious  thought  from  you  ?  I  think  you  and  I  have  all  the  standard-dunces  of  the 
kingdom  on  our  hands:  you  the  rhyming,  and  I  the  prosaic  dunces.  Yours  have 
most  of  the  nature  of  that  sort  of  vermin  Dryden  speaks  of — 

» 

- “  So  little  and  so  light, 

One  could  not  know  they  live,  but  that  they  bite.” 

Mine,  most  like  that  which  Sir  Hugh,  in  the  play,  calls  “  a  familiar  beast  to  man,  and 
signifies  love.” 

On  this  account  I  must  tell  you  a  story.  Two  English  soldiers,  travelling  through 
the  Highlands,  were  one  night  in  particular  most  miserably  lodged,  and,  before 
morning,  half  eaten  up  with  these  two  sorts  of  vermin.  As  day-light  approached, 
they  resolved  to  make  an  ample  sacrifice  for  the  violated  rights  of  Jupiter  hospitalis  ; 
but  the  first  attack  was  so  ill-planned,  that  a  great  part  of  the  enemy  had  escaped, 
had  not  one  of  these  commanders,  observing  the  absurd  manoeuvres  of  his  fellow, 
called  out,  “  What  the  devil,  comrade,  are  you  about  ?  Let  us  first  secure  the  light- 
horse  ;  the  heavy-armed  foot  lie  at  our  mercy.” 

And  now,  should  you  and  I,  think  you,  be  better  employed  than  these  two  brave 
sufferers,  did  we  seriously  set  about  revenging  ourselves  on  the  worthless  vermin 
that  molested  us  ?  I  was  pleased  to  see  you  in  sentiments  more  characteristic  of 
you,  the  last  time  we  were  together,  when  you  hinted  to  Mr.  Berenger  and  me  your 
inclination  of  being  the  means  of  diverting  some  rays  of  the  King’s  favour,  to  shine 
on  the  other  house.  I  said  nothing  to  you  then,  but  you  will  pardon  me  for  giving 
you  my  thoughts  now.  Were  the  King’s  using  your  house  intended  as  matter  of 
mere  favour  to  you,  your  modesty  and  generosity  would  be  well  employed  to  serve 
your  neighbour.  But  since  the  King,  in  this,  consults  only  the  gratification  of  his 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


123 


own  amusement,  which  your  acting  is  necessary  to,  modesty  and  generosity  would 
seem  to  be  misplaced  in  hinting  any  thing  in  behalf  of  the  other  house.* 

My  best  respects  to  good  Mrs.  Garrick,  along  with  those  of  all  here :  conclude  me, 

My  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


Feb.  20,  1761. 


I  hereby  declare  that  a  piece  called  “  The  Citizen,”  in  three  acts,  another  called 
“  The  Embarrassment,”  in  two  acts,  and  another  piece  called  “  The  Humorist,”  now  in 
my  drawers  at  home,  are  to  be  deposited  in  the  hands  of  Messrs.  Lacy  and  Garrick, 
to  answer  to  them  the  sum  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  pounds  borrowed  of  them. 
As  witness  my  hand,  London,  Feb.  20,  1761. f 

Arthur  Murphy. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Murphy’s  note  for  120.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  LYTTELTON. 

MY  LORD,  April  30th,  1761. 

I  think  myself  greatly  obliged  and  honoured  by  the  message  you  was  pleased 
to  send  to  me  by  my  friend  Mr.  Berenger.  I  have  since  that  had  it  in  my  power 
to  do  your  Lordship  justice,  and  publicly  to  contradict  an  assertion,  that  Mr.  Bower 
had  still  the  consolation  amidst  all  his  afflictions,  to  be  protected  and  encouraged  by 
Lord  Lyttelton.  With  regard  to  the  honour  which  he  has  conferred  upon  me,  and 
Mrs.  Garrick,  (for  I  most  sincerely  think  it  one,  to  be  abused  in  such  company,  and 
by  such  a  man,)  I  have  made  it  my  business  to  proclaim  his  favours  to  every  person 
of  consequence  I  am  known  to ;  and  in  this  I  have  served  him  ;  for  his  own  discredit 
had  so  much  sunk  the  reputation  of  his  book,  that  nothing  but  his  unparalleled 
abuse  of  some  good  characters,  could  excite  the  least  curiosity  to  look  into  it. 

“  When  shame  is  gone — to  take  the  rabble, 

Through  thick  and  thin,  abuse  and  squabble; 

When  reason,  proofs,  and  wit  are  wanting, 

Then  fly  to  cursing,  or  to  canting.” — Butler. 

I  am  certain  that  it  must  have  shocked  your  Lordship’s  delicacy  to  have  seen  tne 
illiberal  manner  in  which  he  has  mentioned  Mrs.  Garrick.  She  very  innocently  told 
the  conversation  which  passed  between  her  and  Bower,  without  the  least  intention 


*  An  admirable  decision,  for  one  reason  more  than  the  Bishop  chose  to  assign. — Ed. 
t  Murphy  and  Foote  took  Drury-lane  Theatre  this  year  for  the  summer,  and  “  The  Citizen”  was  then 
brought  out  as  a  comedy  in  three  acts.  It  is  a  pure,  or  rather  not  very  pure,  farce. — Ed. 


124 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


of  having-  it  published,  or  of  adding  to  his  shame.  Nor  would  she,  though  a  Papist, 
(as  he  calls  her,)  vary  a  tittle  from  that  or  any  other  truth,  though  commanded  by 
the  Pope  and  his  conclave  of  Cardinals.  I  was  myself  a  witness  to  the  contradic¬ 
tions,  prevarications,  and  falsehoods,  which  he  endeavoured  to  impose  upon  her ;  and 
I  shall  readily  take  my  oath  to  that,  and  other  circumstances,  which  he  seems  to 
have  forgot.  He  calls  out  for  Protestant  testimony,  and  he  shall  have  it ;  and  I  flatter 
myself  that  it  will  have  its  weight,  though  it  comes  from  a  player.  The  Avorld 
must  determine  which  is  most  to  be  credited  ;  he  who,  though  upon  the  stage,  has 
retained  a  sense  of  honour,  veracity  and  religion ;  or  he  who,  though  bred  to  one 
Church,  and  converted  to  another,  seems  to  have  lost  them  all  in  his  passage  between 
both.  To  be  less  serious,  I  am  truly  obliged  to  Mr.  Bower  for  his  late  attack.  I 
always  thought  him  a  richer  character  for  the  stage  than  even  the  Tartuffe  of  Moliere. 
And  though  I  had  warmly  conceived  the  use  I  could  make  of  him,  and  had  formed 
situations  to  produce  him  with  some  entertainment,  yet  as  I  understood  that  your 
Lordship  had  not  yet  given  him  up,  I  could  not  on  that  consideration  alone  meddle 
with  him ;  but  since  he  has  been  pleased  to  try  his  wit  upon  me,  I  am  sure  that  your 
Lordship  will  think  it  equitable  to  give  him  the  retort  pleasant,  as  Shakspeare  calls  it. 
And  indeed  by  all  the  laws  of  justice  and  the  drama,  since  he  has  had  a  public 
trial,  and  has  been  fairly  judged  and  condemned,  he  as  naturally  falls  into  my 
hands  for  dissection,  as  other  criminals  do  into  those  of  the  gentlemen  of 
Surgeons’-hall. 

I  am,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most  obliged 

And  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  1  shall  do  myself  the  honour  of  waiting  upon  you  very  soon  in  Hill-street. 


CHARLES  HOLLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

June  7,  1761. 

I  cannot  leave  London  without  some  explanation  with  Mr.  Garrick,  as  I  am  not 
conscious  of  having  ever  deserved  otherwise  than  well  at  his  hands.  I  must  confess 
his  treatment  the  last  time  I  saw  him  has  a  good  deal  hurt  me :  whatever  misappre¬ 
hension  (which  seemed  to  be  the  cause  of  his  treatment)  he  might  have  in  regard  to 
my  first  speaking  to  him,  I  neither  designed  indecency  nor  indelicacy,  nor,  I  think, 
was  there  any  tiling  in  my  words  or  manner  that  showed  either.  It  is  a  little  un¬ 
likely  there  should,  when  I  was  going  to  ask  a  favour.  Nor  did  Mr.  Garrick  at  that 
time  seem  to  understand  it  so  ;  for  he,  the  same  evening,  behind  the  scenes,  told  me 
he  knew  what  I  wanted,  and  said  it  in  such  a  way  that  it  flattered  me  with  the 
hopes  of  succeeding  in  my  solicitation  ;  for  such  only  I  designed.  I  knew  I  had  no 
right  to  demand,  and,  consequently,  Mr.  Garrick  might  have  given  his  negative  to 
my  request  with  less  harshness. — He  certainly  knows  every  performer’s  merit.  I  hope 
mine  is  not  seen  through  the  wrong  end  of  the  perspective.  Comparative  merit  was 


I 


DAVID  GARRICK.  125 

what  I  wished  to  be  judged  by,  and  it  gives  me  great  concern  to  find  myself  so  low  in 
your  judgment.  Besides,  could  I  behave  even  ungenteelly  to  one,  to  whom  I  have 
been,  within  these  two  months,  under  so  particular  an  obligation, — and  without  cause 
too  ?  Of  what  moment  to  my  request  was  your  going  into  the  country  ?  I  knew  I 
must  see  you  again  soon,  and,  if  I  recollect,  you  then  said  it  was  but  for  a  day  or 
two :  indeed,  Sir,  there  could  from  thence  be  no  cause  for  your  warmth  and  con¬ 
tempt.  I  know  of  what  small  consequence  I  am  to  Drury -lane  Theatre  ;  but  let 
me  ask  what  performer,  under  forty,  is  of  more  ?  Mr.  Garrick  has  proved  he  could 
bear  much  greater  losses  than  any  he  has  now  to  [suffer]  ;  and  though  you  said, 
among  other  things,  let  what  would  be  the  consequence,  you  would  not  comply,  I 
am  sure  I  had  no  consequence  in  my  thoughts.  I  would  wish  to  act  a  great  deal ; 
and  as  I  have  proved  I  can  do  as  much  (I  hope  as  well  too)  as  others,  my  ambition 
(interest  out  of  the  question)  told  me  I  had  a  sort  of  right  to  desire  to  be  ranked 
with  them.  I  write  what,  if  I  had  been  permitted  to  speak,  I  should  have  said,  and 
to  assure  you  I  did  not  design  at  the  above  time  to  look  or  say  any  thing  to  Mr. 
Garrick  unbecoming  him  to  see  or  hear.  I  am  this  instant  setting  off.  I  wish  you 
your  health  and  much  happiness  this  summer,  and  am 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Charles  Holland. 


DR.  JOHN  DELAP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  MOST  WORTHY  FRIEND,  Lee>  near  Canterbury,  August  7,  1761. 

For  I  now  claim  that  title  which  I  always  aspired  to,  and  it  must  be  something 
not  common  that  is  able  to  wrest  it  from  me.  I  thank  you,  once  for  all,  for  your 
noble  professions  of  esteem,  and  rest  myself  content  and  fully  satisfied  in  them — 

“  Safe  in  the  hand  of  one  disposing  power.” 

Do  with  “Hecuba”  just  what  you  please.*  You  are  able,  and  I  know  you  are 
willing,  to  do  better  for  her  and  for  me  than  I  could  for  myself.  I  will  endeavour 
to  make  it  not  unworthy  of  your  regard ;  and  if  I  should  ever  be  happy  enough  to 
think  of  a  subject,  in  which  the  principal  part  should  be  worth  your  attention,  it  shall 
be  my  pleasure,  and  my  supreme  pride,  to  finish  it  for  Mr.  Garrick.  You  may  have 
other  friends  who  can  write  to  you  in  a  more  florid  style ;  but  no  one  can  tell  you 
with  greater  sincerity  of  soul,  that  he  is  yours,  than,  my  most  worthy  Sir, 

Your  obedient  and  faithful  servant, 

John  Delap. 


*  He  brought  it  out  the  year  following,  but  the  audience  were  of  Hamlet’s  mind — 

“  What’s  Hecuba  to  him,  or  he  to  Hecuba, 

That  he  should  weep  for  her  ?” 

Delap  wanted  passion,  the  soul  of  tragedy,  without  which  it  is  “  a  quintain,  a  mere  lifeless  block." — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


1*2() 


DR.  J.  DELAP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Lewes,  Dec.  17. 

I  was  in  hopes,  after  the  alterations,  that  you  would  have  thought  better  of 
“  Panthea”  than  you  seem  to  do.  I  am  persuaded,  however,  that  you  speak  your 
real  thoughts,  and  that  you  would  bring  it  upon  the  stage,  if  it  could  be  made  proper 
for  it.  1  have,  therefore,  no  objection  to  Dr.  Hawkesworth’s  seeing  it,  provided  my 
name  be  concealed.  I  will,  in  a  post  or  two,  desire  your  opinion  of  a  plan  on  a  story 
entirely  new.  Mr.  Whitehead’s  opinion  of  it  is,  that,  supposing  the  story  not  to  be 
too  romantic,  it  is  told  in  a  very  masterly  manner ;  and  he  desires  that  I  would  send 
it  to  you. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  faithful  humble  servant, 

J.  Delap. 

Endorsed,  “  Dr.  Delap,  about 
‘  Panthea,’  a  tragedy.” 


JOSEPH  REED  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

King  David’s  Fort,  Aug.  12,  1761. 

Lest  the  partiality  of  the  author,'  the  flattery  of  friends,  or  my  own  mistaken 
feelings,  should  have  betrayed  me  into  too  favourable  an  opinion  of  “  Dido,”  I  have 
had,  since  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  the  piece  perused  by  no  less  than  five  gentlemen 
of  acknowledged  discernment  in  literature.  And  what  is  their  opinion  of  the  per¬ 
formance?  Why,  truly,  so  diametrically  opposite  to  yours,  that  I  should  incur  the  cen¬ 
sure  of  vanity,  by  committing  to  paper  even  one-half  of  the  praises  they  have  bestowed 
on  the  piece.  It  is  surely  somewhat  strange,  out  of  thirteen  persons,  (all  esteemed 
judges  of  dramatic  matters,)  who  have  read  the  play,  that  none  but  you  and  Mr. 
Johnson  should  give  the  least  unfavourable  opinion  of  it.  Mr.  Johnson,  indeed, 
scarce  objected  to  any  thing  but  the  Shakspearian  style ;  but  you  have  improved  your 
objections  to  such  a  height,  that  you  totally  exclude  from  the  piece  all  appearance  of 
merit.  In  short,  Sir,  I  cannot  help  thinking — but  I  shall  do  a  little  violence  to  ttie 
bluntness  and  honesty  of  my  nature,  by  suppressing  that  freedom  of  sentiment  which 
might  be  probably  offensive  to  one  who  is  used  to  addresses  of  a  more  courtly  and 
pliant  kind.  But  to  proceed.  You  have  given  a  most  severe  sentence  against 
“  Dido;”  eleven  others  have  commended  it — some  with  a  kind  of  enthusiasm,  some 
with  more  moderation.  To  which  opinion  am  I  to  incline  ?  I  am  anxious  for  the 
exhibition  of  my  piece,  but  would  by  no  means  have  it  played,  unless  I  had  pretty 
strong  expectations  of  its  favourable  reception  with  the  public.  A  lukewarm  recep¬ 
tion  would  not  do  ;  I  am  not  prostitute  enough  in  scribbling,  to  sacrifice  reputation 
to  profit. 

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  the  fallibility  of  human  opinions.  Is  it  not  then 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


127 


possible,  that  even  Mr.  Garrick  may  be  deceived  in  his  judgment  of  “  Dido  ?”  Will 
Mr.  Garrick  so  far  give  up  his  judgment  and  his  power,  as  to  refer  the  merits  of 
“  Dido”  to  the  decision  of  Mr.  Capel,  Mr.  Mason,  and  Mr.  Paul  Whitehead?  or  to 
Mr.  Whitehead  only  ?  They  are  gentlemen  with  whom  I  have  not  a  twentieth  part 
of  your  intimacy,  and  not  one  of  them  hath  seen  a  line  of  the  piece.  This  would 
sufficiently  convince  me  that  your  objections  to  “  Dido”  are  founded  on  prin¬ 
ciple  only. 

You  may  prudently  reply,  that,  as  manager,  you  may  run  a  risk  which  you 
ought  not  to  hazard  on  other  people’s  judgment.  True ;  but  that  risk  may  be 
guarded  against ;  this  alternative  will  prevent  it :  produce  the  receipts  of  the  mana¬ 
gers’  six  nights  for  any  new  tragedy  you  have  played  these  seven  years,  and  I  shall 
give  you  sufficient  security  to  make  up  the  sum.  If  the  play  should  be  damned 
on  the  first  night,  I  will  engage  to  pay  half  the  expense  of  dressing  it.  I  hope  you 
will  excuse  the  freedom  of  this  address,  and  vouchsafe  me  an  answer. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Joseph  Reed. 


JOSEPH  REED  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Grigsby’s  Coffee-house,  August  20,  1761. 

I  am  not  a  little  surprised  that  my  late  letter  should  raise  your  resentment  to 
such  a  height.  I  will  not  deny  that  I  have  doubted  your  integrity  relative  to  your 
sentence  on  “  Dido  yet,  as  such  doubt  was  rather  implied  than  expressed,  I  cannot 
think  that  you  have  any  just  reason  to  be  so  highly  offended.  If  a  man  will  quarrel 
writh  every  one  that  has  the  least  doubt  of  his  integrity,  he  may  be  at  variance  with 
half  the  world*  Are  not  even  the  best  characters  liable  to  suspicion  in  some  parti¬ 
cular  cases  ?  And  can  human  invention  find  out  any  situation  wherein  some  suspi¬ 
cion  could  be  more  excusable  than  in  mine  ?  Am  I  the  first  person  that  hath  dared 
to  suspect  your  sincerity  in  theatrical  concerns  ?  I  am  afraid  not ;  for  I  have  been 
more  than  once  the  unfashionable  fool,  to  attempt  your  defence  against  the  virulent 
attacks  of  those,  who  were  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression)  indebted  to  you  for 
their  daily  bread. 

I  confess  I  have  had  my  prepossessions  against  you  ;  but  if  you  were  acquainted 
with  all  the  circumstances  (reported)  of  your  disingenuous  conduct  to  dramatic 
authors,  which  were  told,  and  solemnly  affirmed  to  me  by  persons  who  had  pretty 
strong  connexions  with  you,  I  am  convinced  you  would  not  be  at  all  surprised  that 
I  should  incline  to  a  suspicion  of  your  integrity.  I  was  so  prepossessed  in  the 
beginning  of  the  last  winter,  that  on  being  assured  (upon  oath)  of  your  intention  of 
quitting  the  stage  at  the  end  of  the  season,  I  declared,  in  a  kind  of  rapture,  I  should 

*  Did  half  the  world  ever  doubt  the  integrity  of  a  good  man  ?  What  does  Mr.  Reed  think  of  the 
character  who  would  not  be  offended  with  even  an  implied  doubt  of  his  integrity  ? — Ed. 


128 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


not  grudge  to  make  a  bonfire  as  high  as  the  cupola  of  St.  Paul’s  when  such  happy 
day  arrived ;  but  though  at  that  time  a  male-content,  I  was  not  so  factious  and  fiery 
a  zealot,  as  wantonly  or  maliciously  to  attack  your  public  character.  As  it  is  con¬ 
trary  to  my  nature  to  entertain  the  least  doubt  of  any  man’s  integrity,  without  a  real 
or  supposed  cause,  I  will  honestly  tell  you  the  reason  of  my  suspecting  yours. 
During  the  exhibition  of  “  The  Register,”  (not  to  mention  any  thing  prior  to  that,)  1 
could  not  help  remarking  the  coldness  and  disregard  with  which  you  treated  me.  1 
was  not  singular  in  such  remark ;  for  your  friend  Mr.  Johnson  took  notice  of  your 
behaviour :  nay,  many  of  your  people  observed  it,  which,  I  am  persuaded,  contri¬ 
buted  not  a  little  to  lessen  my  dramatic  character.  In  short,  I  looked  upon  myself 
as  a  sacrifice  to  a  man  who  had  infamously  robbed  me  of  the  character  of  the  bawd. 
These  suspicions  were  strengthened  by  your  sentence  on  “  Dido.”  As  you  did  not 
soften  such  sentence,  by  proposing  any  alterations,  or  even  by  intimating  the  least 
desire  of  seeing  any  other  of  my  pieces,  I  began  to  conclude  you  had  determined  to 
discountenance  my  dramatic  appearance  on  the  stage. 

If  you  will  so  far  abstract  the  man  from  the  manager,  as  to  put  yourself  into  my 
place,  I  am  convinced  you  will  not,  cannot,  blame  me  for  doubting  your  integrity. 
If  my  suspicions  be  wrong,  they  recoil  on  myself,  and  wound  not  you  ;  then  why 
should  you  be  so  irreconcileably  enraged  against  me  ?  To  err  is  human  ;  the  wisest 
head,  the  most  honest  heart  may  be  misled :  the  delinquent  that  falls  by  mistaken 
principles,  hath  some  pretence  to  the  pity  of  his  fellow- creatures.  Much  more  might 
be  said  on  this  occasion ;  but  your  own  reason  will  suggest  to  you  that  my  doubts  of 
your  integrity,  however  misplaced,  are  not  altogether  unpardonable. 

But  once  more  to  the  disagreeable  business  of  solicitation.  The  offer  I  made  you 
concerning  Dido  was  such  as  I  thought  you  could  have  no  great  objection  to :  if  a 
more  reasonable  scheme  can  be  devised,  for  securing  your  interests  as  manager,  I  am 
willing  to  come  into  it.  If  I  had  not  an  uncommon  esteem  of  your  theatrical  abilities, 
the  rebuffs  I  have  met  with  from  you  would  have  prevented  this  present  application. 

I  hope  you  will  coolly  consider  the  merit  of  my  dramatic  pretensions,  and  not 
devote  me  a  sacrifice  to  splenetic  resentment.  I  could  wish  to  know  your  final  reso¬ 
lution  of  rejecting  or  yielding  to  the  proposals  mentioned  in  my  last.* 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Joseph  Reed. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  1 6th  Sept.  1761. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  find  from  two  or  three  different  quarters,  that  it  is  now 
circulating  about  town,  that  I  have  departed  from  my  engagements  and  broke  my 

*  This  endeavour  to  render  a  manager  subservient  to  a  committee,  reminds  one  of  other  critical  boards  in 
our  own  times.  They  are  always  mischievous. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


129 


word  with  you.  I  cannot  help  being  touched  at  this,  as  I  never  yet  broke  my  word 
with  any  man.  It  is  true  that  Mr.  Lacy  proposed  to  me  that  you  would  plav 
Yates’s  part,  and  that  I  should  take  two  nights  in  lieu  of  all  deficiencies  of  the 
profits  settled  between  us ;  it  is  also  true  that  I  then  approved  this,  and  added  that 
perhaps  I  might  that  way  get  more  money  than  on  the  terms  of  the  written  agree¬ 
ment.  Upon  considering  of  this  afterwards,  it  appeared  to  me  that  my  interest 
would  be  better  served  in  the  other  way,  and  accordingly  I  explained  myself  to  your 
brother.  Now,  Sir,  I  appeal  to  yourself  whether  this  could  be  an  absolute  engage¬ 
ment,  when  it  remained  still  in  your  power  to  put  a  negative  upon  it. 

I  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  let  me  know  how  you  understand 
this  matter,  for  I  cannot  help  being  delicate  when  I  find  myself  charged  with  a 
breach  of  my  word, — a  thing  I  do  not  recollect  I  ever  did  yet. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


SIR,  17th  Sept.  1761. 

I  received  your  letter  as  I  was  stepping  into  the  chariot  to  go  to  Hampton.  1 
desired  my  brother  to  call  upon  you,  but  you  was  in  the  country.  I  really  cannot 
answer  for  any  idle  stories  that  may  circulate  about  this  town.  It  has  been  asked  me 
several  times,  whether  we  were  to  have  your  pieces,  and  my  constant  answer  has 
been  that  I  imagined  we  were,  for  Mr.  Lacy  told  me  that  he  had  settled  with  you 
upon  the  terms  that  we  two  had  previously  talked  of,  and  agreed  to,  in  Bushy 
Park  ;  and  he  farther  assured  me  that  you  were  well  pleased  with  them.  I  am  much 
surprised  at  his  proposal  of  my  playing  Yates’s  character,  for  he  knew  my  sentiments 
upon  that  matter.  So  it  stood  between  me  and  Mr.  Lacy  ;  and  I  appeal  to  you,  Sir, 
whether  it  was  not  very  natural  for  me  to  think  that  we  had  bargained  for  your 
two  pieces :  nay,  to  convince  you  that  I  thought  so,  and  that  you  knew  it,  I  ordered 
Johnstone  to  write  out  some  of  the  parts,  and  you  forbid  him  for  some  reason  or 
another.  You  likewise  told  me,  that  you  were  preparing  a  comedy  for  us,  “  The 
Man  does  not  know  his  own  Mind,”  and  that  it  should  be  delivered  to  me  before  the 
opening  of  the  house ;  and  you  told  my  brother  that  you  would  write  to  me  about 
it :  but  I  have  neither  seen  you,  nor  heard  from  you,  till  the  receipt  of  your  letter, 
but  have  heard  from  others  you  are  in  another  interest,  which  indeed  I  could  not, 
nor  can  I  now  account  for. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

David  Garrick. 


vol.  i. 


s 


130 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


THE  DUKE  OF  NEWCASTLE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Claremont,  Sept.  18th,  17G1. 

Accept,  dear  Sir,  my  sincere  thanks  for  one  of  the  most  valuable  presents 
which  an  old  man  can  receive,  or  a  good  friend  can  make, —  of  a  delightful  horse, 
to  supply  the  defects  of  old  age  and  infirmity. 

To  have  such  a  present  from  one  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  character,  who  is  so  justly 
esteemed  all  over  Europe,  in  knowing  and  representing  human  nature  better  than 
any  one  even  in  ancient  times  ever  did,  adds  much  to  the  value  of  it. 

As  to  myself,  and  the  public  sphere  in  which  I  acted  so  many  years,  I  have 
my  donatum  rude,  and  am  fully  satisfied  in  having  discharged  my  duty  to  the  best 
of  my  understanding,  and  the  dictates  of  my  own  conscience. 

You,  Sir,  I  hope,  will  continue,  as  far  as  may  be  agreeable  to  you,  to  give 
(sometimes,  at  least,)  the  public  such  representations  of  human  nature,  as  must 
encourage  and  promote  the  love  of  virtue  and  virtuous  actions. 

Pardon  the  freedom  I  now  take.  It  comes  from  one  who  has  the  highest  value 
for  your  superior  merit,  and  for  all  men  who,  like  yourself,  love  to  do  good,  and 
to  give  pleasure  to  others. 

As  Claremont  is  so  near,  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  would  come  over  and  see  my 
place  of  retirement  here. 

I  am  with  great  truth,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

Holles  Newcastle* 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  23d  Sept.  1761. 

Since  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  this  is  the  first  leisure  moment  I  have  had,  or 
I  should  have  sent  a  more  speedy  answer,  especially  as  yours,  in  some  parts,  seems  to 
require  it.  You  appeal  to  me  whether  you  had  not  reason  to  tell  those  who  asked 
you,  that  you  were  to  have  the  Summer  recess  ?  Surely,  if  Mr.  Lacy  told  you  what 
passed  between  him  and  me,  you  had  none ;  for  he  expressly  told  me,  as  nearly  as 
a  memory  not  very  deficient  can  recollect,  that  he  had  been  thinking  of  the  articles 
subsisting  between  us;  he  was  afraid,  on  account  of  Air.  Foote’s  having  half  the 
profits,  that  difficulties  would  arise ;  he  liked  “  The  Old  Maid,”  and  “  All  in  the 
Wrong:”  to  make  matters  easy,  he  recommended  to  me  to  take  two  nights,  and  the 
comedy  should  be  got  up  with  the  strength  of  the  company,  and  Mr.  Garrick  would 
play  Yates’s  part,  which  would  give  great  strength  to  the  play.  He  had  not  con- 

*  The  Duke  as  a  politician  and  minister,  belongs  to  history ;  but  Garrick  seems  to  have  been  the  point 
of  union  for  men  of  all  parties  and  all  opinions.  They  admired  the  actor,  and  they  loved  the  man. — Ed, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


131 


suited  with  his  partner,  but  if  I  liked  his  proposal,  he  would  speak  to  him  and  let 
me  know  what  he  thought,  the  Thursday  following.  To  this  I  replied,  that  I  might 
possibly  in  that  manner  get  more  money  than  by  the  terms  of  the  written  agree¬ 
ment,  and  that  I  never  had  any  difference  about  money.  This  is  almost  word  for 
word  what  passed  between  us.  I  afterwards  told  your  brother  George,  that  some 
reasons  had  arisen  which  made  it  impossible  for  me  to  accept  of  the  alternative 
proposed  by  Mr.  Lacy  ;  and  this  was  before  the  Summer  season  was  closed,  since 
which  I  never  heard  one  word  from  the  managers. 

Now,  Sir,  I  am  as  much  surprised  as  you,  that  Mr.  Lacy  should  propose  your 
playing  Sir  John  Restless  if  he  knew  you  did  not  intend  it,  and  if  he  had  previously 
conferred  with  you  in  Bushy  Park  ;  I  am  still  more  surprised  he  should  tell  me  what 
he  said  on  the  occasion  was  the  suggestion  of  his  own  judgment,  and  that  he  had 
not  compared  notes  with  you :  it  is  also  surprising  that  he  has  not  told  you  since 
the  real  conversation  between  us ;  and  if  he  has  told  you,  it  is  surprising  that  your 
letter  still  sets  up  a  seeming  claim  to  an  agreement  made  by  me,  as  it  is  evident  that 
I  ought  not  in  reason  to  be  bound,  wrhen,  as  I  already  observed,  it  was  in  your  power 
to  give  your  negative  to  the  whole  or  part,  and  when,  in  fact,  you  now  do  reject  a 
part  of  Mr.  Lacy’s  negotiation. 

I  am  sorry  I  have  been  obliged  to  be  thus  long  on  this  head.  With  regard  to  my 
being  in  another  interest  now ,  I  will  account  for  it.  I  am  in  my  own  interest ,  and 
will  endeavour  to  dispose  of  what  pieces  I  write  to  the  best  advantage,  or  lock  them 
up  for  ever;  for  I  really  am  tired  of  being  a  day-labourer  to  add  to  other  people’s 
fortunes,  which  in  all  my  other  bargains  with  the  managers  of  Drury- lane  I  have 
actually  done,  it  being  demonstrable  that  they  have  got  at  least  about  400/.  by  my 
pieces,  which,  had  I  transacted  my  business  with  due  attention  to  myself,  ought  to 
have  come  into  my  pocket.  I  shall,  however,  learn  for  the  future  to  regard  myself  a 
little,  and  not  be  more  generous  than  richer  people ;  and  it  is  upon  this  principle  that 
I  cannot  think  of  offering  the  comedy,  called  “  The  Man  does  not  know  his  own 
Mind,”  to  the  stage,  till  I  can  meet  with  managers  who  will  be  willing  to  let  an 
author  reap  the  profits  of  his  industry. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


DR.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  MR.  GARRICK,  Newcastle,  Oct.  9,  1 761 . 

I  have  received  yours  ;  and  having  seen  our  friend,  he  says  lie  is  only  displeased 
at  your  making  so  many  apologies,  and  bids  me  tell  you,  that  there  is  no  man  better 
endures  the  critical  rod  than  he,  when  it  is  fairly  and  rationally  administered.  lie 
says,  he  was  disposed  to  try  an  experiment,  on  the  old  principle  of 

“  Tragicus  plerum<iue  dolct  sermone  pedestri.” — II or.  Dc  Arte  rod.  v.  95. 


132 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


But  as  it  seems  he  has  not  hit  the  true  medium,  he  gives  over  the  pursuit ;  and  at  a 
proper  time  will  go  to  work  in  Metre.  lie  thinks  it  impossible  to  go  through  a 
work  of  this  kind  during  this  season  ;  and  therefore  refers  it  to  the  next,  against 
which  (as  the  plan  appears  to  be  right)  he  is  pretty  sure  he  can  easily  accomplish  it. 

As  to  myself,  1  am  now  putting  the  last  hand  to  “  The  Cure  of  Saul  which  I 
think  of  publishing  this  winter :  and  have  made  a  considerable  progress  in  a  disser¬ 
tation  to  be  annexed  to  it,  “  On  the  Rise,  Union,  Progress,  Perfection,  and  Corrup¬ 
tion  of  Poetry  and  Music.”  This  subject  has  enlarged  upon  my  hands  very  unex¬ 
pectedly  :  and  I  now  expect  that  it  will  prove  a  kind  of  prelude  to  my  large  work ; 
and  is  very  proper  to  be  thrown  out  before  it,  because  it  is  prosecuted  in  the  same 
manner,  that  is,  by  deducing  things  from  their  state  in  savage  life,  through  the 
several  stages  of  civilized  society.  I  have  got  into  a  vast  field,  altogether  new  and 
untrodden  :  1  was  for  a  while  bewildered  in  its  immensity  and  variety ;  but  I  begin 
now  to  be  familiarized  to  it ;  and  meet  with  novelties  without  end.  What  I  now 
intend  to  publish  on  music,  is  but  a  corner  of  this  vast  scene.  I  must  expect  oppo¬ 
sition  and  enemies — no  matter  for  that,  you  know  I  can  despise  them.  I  shall  anger 
some  fahe  friends  in  this  first  dissertation  :  but  I  think  I  have  as  good  a  right  to  say 
what  is  true,  as  they  have  to  say  what  is  not.  I  wish  you  a  good  season ;  shall  be  glad 
to  hear  that  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  are  well ;  and  am  always. 

Dear  Sir,  most  truly  and  affectionately  yours, 

John  Brown. 


H.  H.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIB.  January  22,  1762. 

Last  Saturday  was  sennight,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  tragedy  of  “  Mac¬ 
beth,”  a  play  in  which  the  various  and  unlimited  genius  of  Mr.  Garrick  seems  to 
have  found  scope  for  entire  exertion.  It  cannot  certainly  savour  of  flattery  to  echo 
the  public  voice,  in  acknowledging,  that  the  powers  of  the  histrionic  art  are  not  ca¬ 
pable  of  attaining  a  higher  degree  of  excellence  than  you  displayed  this  evening  to 
the  audience,  in  the  scene  introductory  to  the  murder,  the  dagger  scene,  and  that  in 
which  the  murder  is  discovered.  But  you  will  give  me  leave  to  point  out  to  you 
some  passages  in  this  very  long  and  intricate  character  which  are  liable  to  exception, 
at  least  they  appear  so  to  me ;  and  I  shall  take  the  liberty  to  communicate  them 
with  great  candour,  not  intending  by  any  means  to  set  up  my  sentiments  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  your  judgment,  but  meaning  only  to  suggest  such  hints,  which  you  will 
reject  or  attend  to  as  they  may  merit.  One  thing  you  may  rely  upon,  that  they  are 
not  dictated  by  a  spirit  of  envy  or  malevolence,  nor  do  they  proceed  from  any 

*  A  sacred  ode,  adapted  first  to  music  of  Handel  by  the  author,  and  afterwards  new  set  by  Dr.  Arnold. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


133 


impertinent  affectation  of  criticism.  They  take  their  rise  from  a  disposition  of  great 
good  Avill  toward  Mr.  Garrick’s  person,  and  the  highest  admiration  of  his  astonishing 
abilities  in  the  profession  of  a  player. 

Early  in  the  play,  speaking  the  following  lines, 

“  My  thought,  whose  murder  yet  is  but  fantastical. 

Shakes  so  my  single  state  of  man,  &c.” 

you  stop  at  the  adjective  single,  which  has  a  very  bad  effect,  as  the  phrase  of 
“  single  state  of  man,”  which  is  a  very  quaint,  forced  one,  can  be  only  under¬ 
stood  by  collecting  the  whole  passage  closely  together  in  speaking.  I  am  sure 
your  good  sense  will  readily  subscribe  to  the  propriety  of  this  observation. 

In  the  soliloquy,  beginning,  “  If  it  were  done,  when  ’tis  done,  &c.”  I  shall 
submit  to  your  consideration  two  instances,  which  1  apprehend  you  will  think 
proper  to  alter,  when  you  next  oblige  the  town  with  this  excellent  performance. 

“  Besides,  this  Duncan 
Hath  borne  his  faculties  so  meek,  hath  been 
So  clear  in  his  great  office,  that  his  virtues 
Will  plead  like  angels  trumpet-tongu’d  against 
The  deep  damnation  of  his  taking  off  ; 

And  pity  like  a  naked  new-born  babe 
Striding  the  blast,  or  Heaven’s  cherubim  hors’d 
Upon  the  sightless  coursers  of  the  air,  &c.” 

In  speaking  the  passage,  viz. 

“  That  his  virtues 

Will  plead  like  angels  trumpet-tongu’d  against,  &c.  ’ 

you  make  a  stop  at  angels,  which  I  suppose  wrong,  as  you  by  this  manner  transfer 
the  epithet  tru mpet- tongu'd  from  angels  to  virtues,  which,  with  great  deference  to 
your  opinion,  I  do  not  take  to  be  the  idea  of  Shakspeare,  who  meant  to  describe 
angels  under  the  usual  representation  of  them,  which  is  generally  with  trumpets. 

In  the  lines, 

“  And  pity,  like  a  naked  new-born  babe, 

Striding  the  blast,  or  Heaven’s  cherubim  hors’d,” 

you  make  a  full  stop  at  hors'd.  Don’t  you  think  that,  if  you  had  just  paused  suf¬ 
ficiently  at  cherubim  to  recover  breath,  and  continued  without  iuteruption,  “  hors’d 
upon  the  sightless  coursers  of  the  air,”  the  whole  passage  would  be  more  forcible 
and  picturesque  ?  Pray  reflect  upon  this. 

In  the  air-drawn  dagger  scene,  you  lay  a  prodigious  strong  emphasis  on  was, 
in  this  line, 

“  And  such  an  instrument  I  was  to  use,” 

which  I  do  not  see  the  reason  of,  and  rather  think  that  use  is  the  word  to  be 
marked. 


134 


private  correspondence  of 


I  took  notice  of  a  circumstance  that  appeared  to  me  exceptionable,  upon  the 
second  appearance  of  the  Ghost  of  Banquo,  when  you  utter  the  following  lines,  viz., 

“  Be  alive  again, 

And  dare  me  to  the  desert  with  thy  sword,  &c.” 

You  recollect  a  degree  of  resolution,  and  advancing  on  the  Ghost,  pronounce  the  pas¬ 
sage  in  a  firm  tone  of  voice.  I  apprehend  the  whole  situation  supposes  a  fixed  im¬ 
movable  attitude  of  horror  and  amazement ;  and  I  have  always  thought  that  Shak- 
speare  intended  to  give  the  liveliest  idea  of  Macbeth  being  totally  overpowered  by 
this  supernatural  appearance  of  Banquo  in  the  passage  which  I  have  just  quoted. 
Let  us  examine  the  force  of  it.  He  says,  “  Assume  your  mortal  state  again,  and 
dare  me  to  single  combat  with  your  sword ;  if  I  then  betray  any  symptoms  of  fear, 
and  decline  the  encounter,  treat  me  with  the  last  indignity.” 

Does  not  this  imply  that,  during  the  presence  of  the  Ghost,  Macbeth’s  faculties 
were  all  absorbed  ?  If  this  meaning  could  be  disputed,  surely  what  follows  puts 
the  point  beyond  farther  controversy — 

“  Why  so  —  being  gone  —  I  am  a  man  again.” 

When  Banquo  vanishes,  he  recovers  his  powers,  of  which  he  was  bereft  while 
the  spectre  was  present  to  his  senses.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  fully  explained 
myself  upon  this  matter,  but  I  imagine  that  I  possibly  may  throw  your  mind  into  a 
new  train  of  ideas  upon  this  passage,  and  vour  quick  penetration  will  readily  deter¬ 
mine  how  far  the  foregoing  remarks  mav  be  just. 

I  shall  trouble  you  with  only  one  observation  more,  which  regards  a  line  in  the 
famous  speech,  “  To-morrow,  and  to-morrow,  &c.” 

When  you  come  to  the  “  Out,  out,  brief  candle!”  you  give  two  starts,  and  accom¬ 
pany  each  with  a  strong  action  of  both  hands  :  is  not  this  wrong  ?  I  should  suspect 
it  is :  for  the  whole  train  of  Macbeth’s  reasoning  tends  to  enforce  the  insignificance 
of  life,  which  he  slights  as  of  little  value,  and  not  worth  preserving,  under  the  figure 
of  a  candle,  which  is  easily  extinguished,  and  whose  existence  cannot,  in  the  nature 
of  things,  be  very  permanent,  as  it  is  incessantly  consuming. 

If  my  conception  of  this  speech  be  justifiable,  I  think  it  must  follow  that  “  Out, 
out,  brief  candle !”  should  be  spoken  without  anv  other  emotion  than  a  philosophical 
contempt.  You  will  have  opportunities  of  consulting  much  better  judges  than  I 
pretend  to  be  upon  this  question,  and  so  far  as  their  sense  of  this  passage  coincides 
with  the  suggestions  I  have  presumed  to  trouble  you  with,  you  will  be  pleased  to 
regard  them,  and  no  farther. 

Little  slips,  which  it  would  be  deemed  trifling  to  take  notice  of  in  another 
player,  become  glaring  in  Mr.  Garrick,  from  a  contrast  to  the  great  excellencies  that 
surround  them  ;  as  a  want  of  proportion  in  a  building  of  Inigo  Jones,  or  a  defect  in 
point  of  attitude  or  expression  in  a  painting  of  Michael  Angelo,  would  immediately 
catch  an  attentive  observer,  who  perhaps  might  overlook  much  greater  faults  in  the 
productions  of  inferior  artists. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


135 


If  any  thing  throughout  this  letter  should  be  thought  worthy  of  your  notice, 
I  shall  need  no  apology  ;  hut  should  it  be  deemed  otherwise,  ascribe  my  officiousness 
to  the  most  favourable  motive,  nor  let  a  severer  censure  fall  upon  me  than  that  I 
have  amused  myself  like  a  certain  whimsical  philosopher,  with  finding  out  spots 
in  the  sun. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  unknown  humble  servant, 

H.  H.* 

P.  S.  If  you  think  proper  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  please  to 
direct  to  H.  H.  at  the  Hungerford  Coffee-house  in  the  Strand. 

N.  B.  I  should  have  communicated  my  sentiments  early  in  the  last  week,  but  a 
family  connection  unexpectedly  summoned  me  into  the  country. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  H.  H. 

SIR,  Hampton,  Sunday  evening,  Jan.  24th,  1762. 

Though  I  seldom  answer  anonymous  letters,  for  many  reasons  which  I  need  not 
trouble  you  with,  yet  I  cannot  forbear  returning  you  my  best  acknowledgments 
for  your  kind,  friendly,  and  let  me  add,  very  flattering  letter.  I  should  have 
answered  your’s  the  moment  I  received  it ;  but  indeed  I  am  so  hurried  in  town  with 
my  theatrical  concerns,  that  I  have  not  a  moment  to  myself  till  I  can  retire  to  this 
place.  You  need  not  have  assured  me,  that  your  hints  are  not  dictated  by  a  spirit 
of  malevolence,  nor  by  an  impertinent  affectation  of  criticism.  The  whole  tenor  of 
your  letter  would  contradict  the  least  surmise  of  that  kind,  and  I  must  declare  in 
my  own  favour,  that  I  am  always  open  to  conviction  when  given  palatably,  and  I 
can  truly  say  with  Pope, 

“  Did  some  more  sober  critic  come  abroad  ; 

If  wrong,  I  smil’d — if  right,  I  kiss’d  the  rod.” 

To  show  you,  Sir,  that  I  will  do  as  I  say,  without  farther  preface  I  shall  enter  upon 
your  remarks,  and  hope  you  will  think  me  not  unworthy  of  your  future  favours. 
“  Shakes  so  my  single — ”  If  I  stop  at  the  last  word,  it  is  a  glaring  fault,  for  the 
sense  is  imperfect ;  but  my  idea  of  that  passage  is  this  :  Macbeth  is  absorbed  in 
thought,  and  struck  with  the  horror  of  the  murder,  though  but  in  idea,  (fantastical,) 
and  it  naturally  gives  him  a  slow  tremulous  under-tone  of  voice;  and  though  it 
might  appear  that  I  stopped  at  every  word  in  the  line  more  than  usual,  yet  my 
intention  was  far  from  dividing  the  substantive  from  its  adjective,  but  to  paint  the 
horror  of  Macbeth’s  mind,  and  keep  the  voice  suspended  a  little,  which  it  will  natu¬ 
rally  be  in  such  a  situation.  And  here.  Sir,  you  must  give  me  leave  to  explain  a  little 

*  The  reader  who  has  attentively  perused  the  above  letter,  may  feel  some  little  surprise  at  the  remarks 
of  the  writer;  but  he  will  not  at  all  wonder  that  Mr.  Garrick  should  reply  to  his  ingenious  though 
anonymous  correspondent. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


136 

what  I  mean  by  suspending  the  voice,  which  in  many  cases  I  reckon  a  beauty  in  the 
speaker,  when  a  stop  would  be  a  great  fault. 

I  have  been  frequently  abused  by  the  gentlemen  of  the  pen  for  false  stops ;  and 
one  in  particular  wrote  against  me  for  stopping  injudiciously  at  this  line  in  Hamlet : 

“  I  think  it  was  to  see— my  mother’s  wedding.” 

I  certainly  never  stop  there,  (that  is  close  the  sense,)  but  I  as  certainly  suspend  my 
voice,  by  which  your  ear  must  know  that  the  sense  is  suspended  too  ;  for  Hamlet’s 
grief  causes  the  break,  and  with  a  sigh,  he  finishes  the  sentence — “  my  mother’s 
wedding.”  I  really  could  not  from  my  feelings  act  it  otherwise ;  and  were  I  to  have 
the  pleasure  of  talking  this  matter  over  with  you,  I  flatter  myself  that  I  could  make 
you  by  various  examples  feel  the  truth  of  my  position.  But  to  return  :  I  am  sorry 
to  differ  with  you  about  the  joining  “  angels”  and  “  trumpet-tongued”  together.  I 
really  think  the  force  of  those  exquisite  four  lines  and  a  half  would  be  shortly  lost 
for  want  of  a  small  aspiration  at  angels — the  epithet  may  agree  with  either  of  the 
substantives,  but  I  think  it  more  elegant  to  give  it  to  the  virtues,  and  the  sense  is 
the  same ;  for  if  his  virtues  are  like  angels,  they  are  trumpet-tong u'd,  and  may  be 
spoke  justly  either  way.  “  Heaven’s  cherubim  hors’d”  with  a  stop,  is  certainly 
wrong,  and  was  not  so  intended  to  be  spoken ;  but  when  the  mind  is  agitated,  it  is 
impossible  to  guard  against  these  slips  : 

- “  Quas  incuria  fudit,”  &c. 

“  And  such  an  instrument  I  was  to  use.” 

I  think,  Sir,  that  both  the  words  teas  and  use  should  be  equally,  though  slightly 
impressed  as  I  have  marked  them  ;  and  if  you  please  to  consider  the  passage,  you  will 
find  they  are  both  emphatical.  The  vision  represents  what  was  to  be  done,  not 
what  is  doing,  or  what  had  been  done  ;  but  in  many  passages  like  this,  the  pro¬ 
priety  will  depend  wholly  upon  the  manner  of  the  actor. 

My  notions,  as  well  as  execution  of  the  lines  in  the  second  appearance  of  Banquo, 
are,  I  fear,  opposite  to  your  opinion.  Should  Macbeth  sink  into  pusillanimity,  I 
imagine  that  it  would  hurt  the  character,  and  be  contrary  to  the  intentions  of  Sliak- 
speare — the  first  appearance  of  the  Spirit  overpowers  him  more  than  the  second ;  but 
even  before  it  vanishes  at  first,  Macbeth  gains  strength  :  “If  thou  canst  nod,  speak 
too” — must  be  spoke  with  horror,  but  with  a  recovering  mind  :  and  in  the  next 
speech  with  him,  he  cannot  pronounce  “  Avaunt  and  quit  my  sight  !”  without  a 
stronger  exertion  of  his  powers,  under  the  circumstance  of  horror  :  the — “  Why  so 
— being  gone,'’  &c.  means,  in  my  opinion — I  am  a  man  again,  or  returning  to  my 
senses,  which  were  before  mad  and  inflamed  with  what  I  had  seen.  I  make  a  great 
difference  between  a  mind  sunk  by  guilt  into  cowardice,  and  one  rising  with  horror 
to  acts  of  madness  and  desperation,  which  last  I  take  to  be  the  case  of  Macbeth. 
I  certainly  (as  you  say)  recollect  a  degree  of  resolution,  but  I  never  advance  an 
inch,  for,  notwithstanding  my  agitation,  my  feet  are  immovable.  I  quite  agree  with 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


137 


you  about — “  Out,  out,  brief  candle” — but  surely  I  must  have  spoke  those  words 
quite  the  reverse  of  my  own  ideas,  if  I  did  not  express  with  them  the  most  con¬ 
temptuous  indifference  of  life.  I  have  now  gone  through  your  remarks,  and  I  wish 
that  you  had  favoured  me  with  as  many  as  I  am  sure  I  gave  you  occasions  to  make. 
There  is  such  a  partial  regard  for  me  through  your  letter,  that  1  have,  without 
knowing  you,  wrote  to  you  without  reserve,  and  have  poured  forth  my  feelings 
through  my  pen,  with  great  hurry  and  inaccuracy,  but  with  the  greatest  integrity,  and 
thorough  confidence  in  you.  I  am,  by  my  own  nature  and  multiplicity  of  business 
too  apt  to  write,  as  well  as  talk,  hastily ;  of  part  of  this  truth  you  are  before  this 
well  satisfied,  and  therefore  I  am  sure  will  excuse  the  many  errors  of  this  letter, 
which  should  not  have  been  sent  but  to  one,  who  has  acted  in  so  kind,  friendly,  and 
candid  a  manner  to, 

Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  must  beg  of  you  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  this  immediately,  and  to 
throw  it  into  the  fire.* 


H.  H.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Jsd.  29,  1/62. 

Some  unavoidable  avocations  have  prevented  me  from  sooner  acknowledging  the 
answer  which  you  have  been  pleased  to  return  to  the  letter  I  took  the  liberty  of 
sending  you.  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you,  that  it  was  not  my  intention,  in  communi¬ 
cating  to  you  such  observations  as  the  performance  of  Macbeth  gave  occasion  to, 
that  I  should  subject  you  to  the  defending  these  passages,  in  which  your  sentiments 
disagreed  from  mine.  On  the  contrary,  I  meant  only  to  suggest  a  few  doubts,  which 
might  give  occasion  to  the  consideration  of  the  character  in  question.  The  very  par¬ 
ticular  discussion  of  the  points  objected  to,  which  you  have  condescended  to  enter  into, 
at  the  same  time  that  it  shows  your  thorough  insight  into  the  beauties  and  critical 
knowledge  of  Shakspeare,  manifestly  evinces  the  candour  and  ingenuous  openness  to 
conviction  which  ever  accompany  true  genius. 

I  am  not  ignorant  that  you  were  persecuted  all  last  winter  by  a  cabal  of  malig¬ 
nant  critics,  who,  insensible  to  those  delicate  touches  in  which  the  excellence  of 
acting  consists,  confined  their  attention  to  one  point,  and  by  that  means  collected 
many  apparent  improprieties,  which  a  man  of  real  taste  would  not,  and  indeed  could 
not,  stop  to  regard.  For  what  Mr.  Spence  applies  to  Mr.  Pope,  may,  with  equal 
justice,  be  used  on  this  occasion.  “  His  faults  are  the  faults  of  a  man,  but  his 
beauties  are  the  beauties  of  an  angel.”  And  notwithstanding  those  pests  of  litera¬ 
ture  have  desisted  from  any  farther  public  attack  on  your  reputation,  yet  their 

*  Happily  it  is  preserved,  and  to  us  of  the  present  day  exhibits  the  mind  of  the  great  actor  to  be  equal 
to  his  fame. —  Ed. 


VOL.  I. 


T 


138 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


malice,  like  the  brutal  passion  of  Messalina,  seems  rather  fatigued  than  satiated. 
This  I  collect  from  the  many  ill-natured  conversations  I  hear  at  various  Coffee¬ 
houses,  and  the  numberless  pretenders  to  criticism  which  the  insidious  writings  of 
those  gentry  have  created.  In  order,  therefore,  to  obviate  the  designs  of  people 
who  lay  hold  on  the  only  circumstance  in  your  acting  which  malevolence,  on  the 
most  shameful  perversion  of  talents,  can  represent  as  exceptionable,  I  would  advise, 
(pardon  my  presumption,)  a  more  than  common  care  in  the  article  of  speaking.  I 
am  myself  of  a  profession  which  has  made  it  necessary  for  me  to  study  oratory ; 
but  indeed  that  species  of  it  which  being  rather  inanimate,  attended  with  but  little 
action,  and  scarce  requiring  more  than  bare  propriety  of  elocution,  may  mislead  in 
judging  of  stage  declamation,  which  being  impassioned,  frequently  to  a  degree  of 
enthusiasm,  does  not  admit  of  rigid  correctness.  I  shall,  however,  if  you  signify  to 
me,  by  a  note  directed  as  before,  that  it  ivill  be  agreeable,  occasionally  furnish  you 
with  my  thoughts  on  this  point,  from  a  sincere  regard  to  merit,  and  an  honest 
pleasure  which  I  shall  enjoy  in  thinking  that  I  may  in  some  degree  contribute  to 
defeat  the  united  efforts  of  malice  and  envy.  I  am  perfectly  sensible  that  every 
moment  of  your  time  is  precious,  and 

“In  publica  commoda  peccem, 

Si  longo  sermone  morer  tua  tempora  * 

and  will  therefore  wave  some  general  observations,  which  your  distinction  between 
suspending  the  sense  and  stopping  has  given  rise  to,  until  I  shall  have  an  opportunitv 
of  applying  them  to  Hamlet ,  or  some  other  principal  character  of  Shakspeare.  In 
the  mean  time,  rest  assured  of  my  good  will,  and  pardon  my  vanity,  when  I  pay 
myself  the  compliment  of  saying,  that  no  one  has  a  more  lively  sense  of  Mr.  Garrick’s 
merit,  than 

Your  unknown  humble  servant, 

H.  H. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  G.  S.  Feb.  17,  1762. 

I  give  you  many  thanks  for  the  favour  of  your  packet. 

I  had  not  seen  “The  Fribbleriad.”  It  is  excellent  both  in  the  fable,  the  senti¬ 
ment,  and  the  wit.  Pope,  in  speaking  of  the  coch  fribble  of  his  time,  compares  him 
to  a  gilded-bug.  I  remember  Middleton  used  to  say  to  me,  the  description  was  very 
faulty,  because  there  was  no  such  thing  in  Nature  as  a  gilded-bug.  I  replied,  it 
suited  the  purpose  the  better,  for  a  fribble  was  as  much  out  of  Nature. 

I  have  my  fribbles  as  well  as  you.  In  the  “  Anecdotes  of  Painting,”  just  pub¬ 
lished,  the  author,  by  the  most  unprovoked  malice,  has  a  fling  at  your  friend 

*  Epist.  ad  Augustuni,  L.  3. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


139 


obliquely,  and  puts  him  in  company  where  you  would  not  expect  to  find  him,  (it  is 
vol.  i.  p.  106,  107,)  with  Tom  Hearne  and  Browne  Willis.  It  is  about  Gothic 
edifices,  for  which  I  shall  be  about  his  pots,  as  Bentley  said  to  Lord  Halifax  of 
Rowe.  But  I  say  it  better  ;  I  mean  the  gaily -pots  and  washes  of  his  toilet.  I  kno\t 
he  has  a  fribble  tutor  at  his  elbow,  as  sicklied  over  with  affectation  as  himself.  But 
these  half  men  are  half  wits,  of  whom  Dryden  says, — 

- “They  are  so  little  and  so  light, 

One  should  not  know  they  liv’d  but  that  they  bite.” 

I  have  seen  the  first  edition  of  the  poem  you  mention,  “  The  Rosciad,”  and  I  was 
surprised  at  the  excellent  things  I  found  in  it ;  but  took  Churchill  to  be  a  feigned 
name,  so  little  do  I  know  of  what  is  going  forward. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  esteem, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  PALMER. 

“  E’en  Sunday  shines  no  Sabbath  day  to  me.” 

MADAM,  Saturday,  March  13th,  1762. 

I  flattered  myself  that  I  should  yesterday  have  been  freed  from  any  business 
of  the  Theatre  on  account  of  the  solemnity  of  the  day,  and  I  little  expected  that 
Mrs.  Palmer  would  have  broken  in  upon  it  with  a  letter  of  altercation. 

I  must  desire  every  lady,  for  the  future,  who  shall  be  pleased  to  give  her  senti¬ 
ments  upon  stage  affairs,  to  address  them  to  Mr.  Lacy  as  well  as  myself,  otherwise  I 
cannot,  in  justice  to  him,  take  any  notice  of  them. 

However,  I  shall  go  out  of  the  common  road  of  business  to  pay  my  respects  to 
you,  as  you  seem  to  have  done  the  same  in  favour  for  me.  I  have  done  myself  the 
pleasure  of  reading  over  your  letter  several  times,  and  have  considered  every  marked 
word  with  that  attention  which  such  stamp  of  weight  ought  to  excite  in  the  curious 
reader.  Though  your  letter  is  so  long,  the  matter  of  it,  stripped  of  ornaments,  may 
be  contracted  to  two  simple  questions.  Why  did  I  not  bring  out  the  new  play 
sooner?  And  why  is  your  benefit  two  days  later  now  than  before?  Heavy 
charges  !  But  I  trust  in  my  innocence ! 

I  would  not  wound  your  delicacy  to  ask  another  question  in  answer  to  the 
first  demand,  or  else  I  might  gently  surmise  that  the  most  capital  lady  has  not 
the  least  shadow  of  right  to  ask  the  managers  such  a  question  ;  but  I  will  indulge 
you,  and  drop  my  right  of  office,  to  satisfy  your  curiosity. — Mr.  Whitehead  particu¬ 
larly  desired  it ;  but  if  he  had  not,  I  should  not  have  thought  of  acting  it  sooner. 
But  do  not  imagine  that  I  mean  this  as  an  excuse  for  your  not  playing  the  part  of 
Celia  ;*  I  never  intended  that  you  should,  and  for  one  reason  among  many,  that  it 

*  Celia,— acted,  though  a  girl  of  sixteen,  by  Mrs.  Cibber,  in  her  54th  year.— Ed. 

T  2 


140 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


would  have  shown  too  strongly  the  similitude  between  “  The  Guardian”  and  “  The 
School  for  Lovers.” 

This  is  the  first  time  that  I  have  been  called  upon  by  a  performer  to  account  for  my 
management,  and  I  hope  it  will  be  the  last.  But  I  will  go  farther.  Had  I  intended 
the  part  for  you,  it  would  have  been  as  improper  in  us  to  have  given  it  to  you,  in 
your  condition,  as  in  you  to  accept  it ;  and  I  think  ladies  should  rather  be  thankful 
to  the  managers  for  their  attention  and  humanity  to  them,  than  be  calling  them  to 
an  account  for  not  giving  parts  to  those  who  are  not  in  a  condition  to  play  them. 
If  Mr.  Palmer  thinks  it  worth  while  to  ask  me  why  your  benefit  is  settled  as  it  is,  I 
will  give  him  a  very  full  answer  to  that  and  every  other  proper  cpiestion :  I  must  be 
excused  sending  it  to  you,  as  I  shall  be  obliged  to  open  my  mind,  and  to  endeavour 
to  convince  him  that,  if  any  partiality  is  shown,  it  is  in  your  favour.  Now  I  come  to 
a  more  serious  part  of  your  letter,  which  concerns  me  only.  You  tax  me  with  level¬ 
ling  my  anger  against  you  ;  yet  in  your  next  sentence  you  say,  that  last  year  I  pro¬ 
fessed  an  esteem  for  you,  and  showed  it.  Yes,  Madam,  I  think  I  did,  and  upon  an 
occasion  when  your  filial  tenderness  got  the  better  of  my  resentments  for  a  behaviour 
in  your  father  which  few  managers  could  have  forgiven.  I  had  drawn  a  veil  over 
that  transaction,  and  am  sorry  that  you  have  obliged  me  to  draw  it  aside.  Imme¬ 
diately  after  I  continued  that  regard,  let  me  say  partiality,  and  gave  you  and  yours 
(contrary  to  the  custom  of  theatres,)  a  most  successful  new  play  for  your  benefit — I 
do  not  include  Mrs.  Pritchard  in  this,  for  she  deserves  every  thing  we  can  do  for  her. 
But  surely,  Mrs.  Palmer  had  no  right  to  complain  in  the  green-room  of  the  settling 
of  benefits,  and  upon  her  first  coming  abroad  ;  when  I  had  given  her  husband  a 
play  I  had  refused  to  one  before  him,  and  which  I  look  upon  as  a  favour  in  my 
present  state  of  health.  But  this  is  nothing  ;  I  must  and  will  follow  the  dictates  of 
my  own  judgment  and  justice,  and  I  flatter  myself  that  I  shall  be  much  less  likely 
to  err,  than  those  individuals,  to  use  your  own  words,  whose  partiality  to  themselves 
makes  them  think  they  have  a  right  to  expect — what  is  not  in  the  power  of  an  honest 
manager  to  grant. 

I  am,  Madam, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick.* 

P.  S.  I  am  ready  to  see  and  talk  with  Mr.  Palmer  whenever  he  pleases. 

*  This  letter  shows  us  the  sort  of  intercourse  which  even  the  management  of  Garrick  was  exposed  to, 
but  he  is  lively  in  his  displeasure. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


141 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Prior  Park,  April  22nd,  1 762. 

I  have  mine  and  Mr.  Allen’s  best  thanks  to  make  you,  for  your  admirable  inter¬ 
lude.*  It  will  be  read  with  as  much  pleasure  as  it  was  represented :  with  more  by 
your  friends,  since  it  establishes  your  reputation  as  a  writer  amongst  men  of  sense, 
as  firmly  as  your  reputation  of  an  actor  is  amongst  all  men  of  sight.  But  never 
increase  the  envy  it  will  occasion  by  letting  it  be  known  in  how  short  a  time  it  was 
written. 

It  was  most  kindly  done  of  you  to  represent  my  complaint  to  Mr.  Walpole.  If 
an  abuse  had  been  intended,  it  was  altogether  unprovoked.  His  denying  any  such 
intention  on  his  honour,  gives  me  full  satisfaction :  though  neither  I  nor  my  friends 
know  what  the  passage  aims  at,  if  it  had  not  that  intention.  It  is  p.  106 — 7.  And 
to  confess  to  you,  inter  nos,  when  the  new  antiquarian  Bishop  of  Carlisle  mentioned 
this  affair  to  me,  impertinently  enough,  for  I  never  had  that  familiarity  of  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  him  to  expect  he  should  busy  himself  in  my  concerns,  I  gave  him  to 
understand,  that  Mr.  Walpole  must  give  me  farther  satisfaction  than  what  he 
brought,  which  was  that  gentleman’s  declaring  on  his  honour  he  had  not  me  in  his 
thoughts.  And  my  reason  was  this  :  I  knew  Mr.  W.  to  be  a  wag,  and  such  are 
never  better  pleased  than  when  they  have  an  opportunity  of  laughing  at  an  anti¬ 
quarian.  And  Mr.  W.  had  given  ample  proof  of  this  disposition  in  the  book  in 
question,  which  is  one  thorough  pillage,  and  one  thorough  ridicule  of  that  most 
serious  and  solemn  branch  of  literature.  You  will  smile  when  I  tell  you  one  of  the 
arguments  this  good  old  Bishop  Wormius  employed  to  acquit  his  friend  ;  it  was 
this,  that  he,  Wormius  himself,  and  not  I,  was  the  first  that  found  out,  or  made, 
the  distinction  between  Saxon  and  Gothic  architecture.  But  enough  of  these  anti¬ 
quarians,  whether  they  be  such  who  are  so  in  jest  or  in  earnest.  But  I  am  right 
enough  served  for  being  found  in  their  atmosphere.  Yet  I  might  have  been  spared 
(for  I  think  none  but  pikes  and  poets  prey  upon  their  kind)  for  the  sake  of  family 
relation,  the  dulness  of  antiquarians  and  commentators  being  congenial.  However, 
I  shall  never  esteem  that  a  misadventure  which  has  offered  me  the  pleasure  of  finding 
fresh  instances  of  your  friendship  for  me. 

All  here  desire  their  best  respects  to  good  Mrs.  Garrick  and  to  you. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  affection, 

Your  most  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

AY.  Gloucester. 

*  “  The  Farmer’s  Return  from  London,”  originally  given,  by  this  father  of  his  dramatic  company,  to  Mrs. 
Pritchard  for  her  benefit.  It  had  a  design  by  Hogarth  for  its  frontispiece  when  published. — Ed. 


142 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


CHARLES  HOLLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Liverpool,  June  18th,  1  762. 

Before  I  mention  business,  I  beg  you  will  accept  my  most  grateful  acknow¬ 
ledgments  for  all  the  favours  you  conferred  on  me  last  season,  of  which  I  am  so 
truly  sensible,  that  I  hope  the  remembrance  will  warm  me  ever  to  endeavour  to 
deserve  your  friendship  and  kindness. 

As  in  all  probability  there  will  be  some  alterations  in  the  Drury-lane  Com¬ 
pany  next  season,  it  may  not  be  very  inconvenient  to  remove  me  out  of  two  or 
three  plays  in  which  I  have  parts  beneath  those  you  generally  employ  me  in.  I 
should  be  very  happy  if  you  could  relieve  me  from  Ferdinand  in  the  “  Tempest,” 
Y.  Knowell,  and  Col.  Manly.  I  would  not  wish  to  do  less  business,  I  cannot  do  too 
much;  but  hope  to  be  employed  more  to  the  purpose.  You  mentioned  King  John 
to  me,  in  which  I  shall  be  at  your  service  whatever  part  of  the  season  you  please. 
Perhaps,  also,  Mr.  Havard  would  have  no  objection  to  parting  with  Shore,  as  I 
suppose  he  will  have  an  increase  of  business  from  the  resignation  of  Mr.  Davies.  If 
you  will  honour  me  with  any  other  commands,  I  will  do  my  best  to  fulfil  them,  as 
my  business  here  shall  be  but  a  second  consideration  when  opposed  to  your  conve¬ 
nience.  King  has,  no  doubt,  given  you  an  account  of  the  wretched  state  of  affairs 
in  Ireland.  Nothing  in  the  theatrical  world  can  succeed  that  you  have  not  a  hand 
in  :  but  fortune  is  not  blind  when  she  goes  hand  in  hand  with  you.  What  a  for¬ 
tunate  escape  I  had  in  not  going  to  Ireland  !  I  look  upon  it  as  the  happiest  circum¬ 
stance  in  my  whole  theatrical  life.  I  spoke  to  a  person  to-day  who  left  Dublin  on 
Tuesday.  I  learn  from  him  that  Mrs.  Pritchard  made  her  appearance  in  Lady  Mac¬ 
beth  on  Monday,  and,  notwithstanding  much  interest  was  made  to  fill  the  boxes, 
this  gentleman  asserts  there  was  not  50/.  in  the  house.  We  are  going  on  prodi¬ 
giously  well  here  ;  the  receipts  this  year  to  our  first  six  plays  exceed  by  nearly  one 
half  those  to  the  same  number  the  last  season.  Miss  Pope  will  be  a  favourite,  and 
so  is  King,  and  I  make  no  doubt  the  excursion  will  answer  well  to  every  body  in 
the  company.  If  I  did  not  know  every  minute  of  your  time  was  employed,  I  would 
ask  for  a  line,  but  as  that  is  the  case,  I  will  not  flatter  myself  with  the  hope,  unless 
you  have  business  to  communicate  to. 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  sincere  and  devoted, 

Charles  Holland. 

My  best  compliments  attend  your  brother. 


JAMES  LOVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Edinburgh,  July  5th,  1762. 

1  had  the  favour  of  your’s  on  Saturday  evening ;  but  the  post  came  so  late,  I 
had  not  time  to  reply.  It  would  take  up  too  much  of  your  time  to  enumerate  the 
many  particulars  that  caused  me  in  my  letter  to  Mr.  Jackson  to  seem  impatient ;  but 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


143 


the  chief  were  to  put  it  out  of  my  own  power  to  waver  in  the  determination  I  had 
made,  if  you  approved  my  proposal.  The  proprietors  here,  men  of  the  first  conse¬ 
quence,  who  have  been  applied  to  for  justice  in  my  case,  have  to  a  man  declared  in 
my  favour  privately  ;  but,  as  the  sessions  is  just  now  extremely  busy,  and  they  are 
mostly  of  the  law,  three  of  them,  indeed,  upon  the  bench  of  judges,  they  have  not 
had  a  general  meeting  to  determine  the  affair  finally  ;  but  as  my  chief  demand  rests 
upon  a  retribution  for  sums  advanced,  they  proposed  among  themselves,  as  I  have 
been  well  informed,  to  make  it  a  preliminary  article,  that  I  should  remain  here  at  all 
events  as  an  actor,  and  they  would  settle  my  salary,  &c.  to  my  utmost  desire.  Now, 
Sir,  if  they  had  not,  before  I  had  been  fully  acquainted  with  your  pleasure,  the 
matter  could  not  so  easily  have  been  reconciled,  as  I  should,  in  prudence,  have  been 
afraid  to  determine.  Perhaps,  on  my  refusal,  they  will  be  negligent  of  my  claim, 
and  leave  me  to  have  justice  from  the  law.  But,  be  it  as  it  will,  I  should  think  my¬ 
self  the  most  impertinent  and  most  ungrateful  of  all  mortals,  if  I  hesitated  a  moment 
when  you  have  done  me  the  honour  of  declaring  yourself  willing  to  receive  me.  I 
engage,  with  a  heart  determined  to  serve  you  and  Mr.  Lacy,  (to  whom,  as  I  have  not 
the  pleasure  of  being  known,  I  hope  you  will  be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments,) 
to  the  utmost  stretch  of  my  power  with  the  most  eager  sincerity.  I  would  choose,  if 
you  please,  to  have  an  article  like  that  formerly  sent  me,  with  the  time,  as  well  as 
salary,  mentioned  ;  to  wit,  as  I  said  in  Mr.  Jackson’s  letter,  three  years.  I  hope  you 
have  no  objection  to  my  retaining  the  name  I  have  assumed,  as  for  very  capital 
reasons  I  am  desirous  evermore  to  be  called  by  it.*  I  have  wrote  to  my  relations  to 
inform  them  of  my  design,  and  doubt  not  but  they  will  approve  it  much,  as  they 
have  often  lately  solicited  my  return.  In  speaking  of  the  circumstance  in  relation  to 
a  benefit,  you  say  I  must  leave  something  to  contingencies.  Sir,  I  should  be  ashamed 
to  presume  a  syllable  more  after  you  mention  that  you  never  engage  to  act  for  bene¬ 
fits  at  all ;  I  was  led  into  an  error,  having  been  informed  you  played  for  every  one  of 
such  a  salary.  I  am  sufficiently  contented,  when  you  give  me  leave  to  hope  that 
assiduity  and  attachment  to  your  interest  may  look  towards  that  honour  with  some 
degree  of  expectation.  If  merit  alone,  which  you  mention  also,  had  been  the  price 
of  your  performance,  I  should  at  least  have  trembled  for  fear.  Depend  upon  this, 
Sir,  I  have  experience,  and  I  do  not  come  to  you  without  looking  forward  upon  all 
probable  events.  Nor  am  I,  like  a  child,  fond  of  a  change  because  the  prospect  is  new. 

I  have  long  considered  the  chance  of  coming  to  Drury-lane  :  I  have  carefully  examined 
the  succession  of  actors  here,  whether  friends  or  foes,  in  regard  to  their  opinion  of  my 
abilities  ;  and  though  I  have  met  with  constant  encouragement,  still  have  I  paused 
upon  the  danger.  Had  you  ever  seen  me  play,  all  this  would  have  been  at  an  end,  for 
though  your  good-nature  ever  leads  you  to  the  kind  side  of  the  question,  I  am  certain 
you  discover  the  least  degree  of  merit  at  once,  and,  rich  beyond  all  count  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  it  yourself,  are  always  ready  to  acknowledge  your  poorest  relation.  Thus 
convinced  of  your  supremacy  (forgive  me  if  I  dwell  too  much  on  my  favourite  sub- 


His  real  name  was  Dance. — Ed. 


144 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ject,)  I  come  to  you  with  no  will  of  my  own,  but  always  to  be  guided  by  yours. 

I  am  sure  you  will  do  me  justice;  and  1  am  prepared  to  strain  every  nerve  for  your 
service,  and  to  keep  an  eternal  eye  to  your  interest.  I  have  obtained  no  end  in 
getting  a  decent  salary  from  you,  if  1  deceive  your  expectations ;  but  if,  as  I  am 
bold  enough  to  hope,  my  Falstaff  should  fill  some  houses,  and,  what  is  much  more, 
obtain  your  approbation,  think  not  it  is  possible  I  should  presume  one  atom  from 
thence,  and  think  myself  under-paid,  as  I  dare  say  many  a  weak  man  has  done. 
No,  Sir,  my  chief,  my  first,  my  ardent  desire  is  to  rise  in  your  opinion,  and  to 
that  goal  my  course  will  ever  be  directed.  You  mention  my  assistance  in  panto¬ 
mimes  ;  I  am  glad  you  think  I  can  assist ;  in  that,  as  in  every  tiling  else  you  com¬ 
mand  me  :  I  shall  have  no  kind  of  avocation  from  my  business,  and  my  whole  time 
will  be  yours.  I  am  afraid  I  shall  not  be  able  to  reach  you  these  six  weeks ;  about 
that  time,  I  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  I  have  long,  long,  and  ardently  wished  for, 
of  kissing  your  hands.  However,  I  will  not  lose  a  day  in  forwarding  my  prospect, 
for  much  I  desire  the  interview.  If  there  is  any  thing,  in  the  mean  time,  you  can 
think  of,  in  which  I  may  prepare  to  serve  your  pleasure,  command  and  be  obeyed. 

Till  I  had  your  last  favour,  I  was  something  concerned  to  hear  you  had  engaged 
Mr.  Parsons  ;  for  I  had  lost  my  most  useful  hand ;  but  permit  me,  Sir,  to  assure  you 
that  you  will  in  him  be  pleased.  He  is  a  most  regular,  sober,  industrious  lad,  and 
will  never  neglect  to  watch  your  interest  and  inclination.  Under  you  he  must 
thrive,  for  he  has  much  ability  and  great  variety  of  natural  talent.  I  doubt  if  ever 
you  saw  your  Taylor  in  “  Lethe”  so  well  performed.  His  feeble  old  men,  which 
he  has  only  tried  one  season,  will  increase  your  hopes.  He  sings  very  prettily,  has 
an  immensely  quick  study,  and  great  attention.  He  is  excellent  in  harlequin  for 
his  time,4  and  will  soon,  I  will  answer,  rival  the  greatest  masters  in  that  sublime  and 
glorious  profession — cum  multis  aliis,  &c.  I  think  what  I  have  said,  due  to  him  for 
the  faithful  services  he  did  me,  especially  as  I  am  sure  I  have  only  said  what  he  is 
amply  able  to  make  good. 

And  now.  Sir,  (no  more  a  manager,  for  that  employment  I  decently  interred  on 
Saturday  evening,  the  moment  I  received  your  epistle,)  give  me  leave  to  amuse  you, 
as  a  poor  appendix  of  yours,  with  some  Scotch  theatrical  history.  Mr.  Digges,  by 
some  accident  or  other,  has  got  a  hint  that  I  intended  to  quit  this  place  and  devote  my 
future  service  to  you.  On  this,  after  my  having  avoided  any  connection  with  him  for 
some  time,  he  has  attacked  me  lately  till  common  civility  could  no  longer  withstand 
it,  to  visit  and  be  gracious,  and  all  that.  I  own  to  you,  Mrs.  Bellamy  Avas  my 
greatest  incitement,  with  whom  I  wished  some  conversation.  AYe  are  pretty  com¬ 
pany  now,  and  see  one  another :  and  the  main  argument  is  this, — “  that  when  the 

*  Parsons.  This  long  letter  from  Love  is  very  amusing.  He  is  like  Kent  in  “  King  Lear,”  on  his  own 
word  “  the  best  of  him  is  diligence.”  He  was  a  very  useful  actor  in  both  tragedy  and  comedy.  Those  who 
distinctly  remember  the  perfections  of  Parsons,  and  his  peculiar  figure,  must  smile  to  hear  of  his  excellence 
in  harlequin ;  but  they  may  not  much  regret  that  he  was  induced  by  Mr.  Garrick  to  leave  Rich  and  Wood¬ 
ward  unrivalled. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


145 


price  of  my  submission  is  settled,  as  I  am  willing  to  resign  my  office,  I  may  get  more 
here  than  at  London,  and  Mr.  Digges  and  his  lady  will  do  every  thing,  &rc.  &e.” 
But  they  are  deceived,  and  go  upon  wrong  principles  ;  for  the  truth  is  this — I  entered 
deliberately  upon  the  Edinburgh  scheme,  and  have  laboured  diligently  three  years 
in  its  cultivation,  but  find  by  experience,  it  is  a  more  barren  spot  than  it  appeared 
at  first  view.  But  I  should  never  have  shrunk  till  I  had  waded  through,  had  not 
my  partner  played  me  false.  When  he  gave  me  an  opportunity  by  such  behaviour, 
1  was  the  first  to  declare  myself  willing  to  retreat ;  for  the  settlement  of  the  pro¬ 
perty  was  all  1  aimed  at  ;  I  can  safely  say  I  esteemed  but  little  the  governing. 
However,  I  have  the  comfort  to  find  that  the  company,  to  a  man,  do  me  the  honour 
to  praise  my  administration  and  lament  my  retreat,  and  the  very  considerable  voice 
of  the  town,  more  raised  than  could  well  be  imagined  on  such  a  petty  occasion,  for 
my  continuance  here,  inspires  me  with  gratitude  for  their  regard,  and  at  the  same  time 
makes  me  hope  that  I  may  also  thrive  in  your  soil,  and  merit  your  favour  and  indul¬ 
gence.  I  am  ashamed  when  I  look  back  on  the  length  of  this  scroll,  lest  I  too  much 
tire  your  patience ;  and  hasten  to  conclude  that  I  ever  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  greatest 
respect,  Your  most  sincerely  obedient  humble  servant, 

James  Love. 

I  beg,  if  you  please,  you  would  order  the  memorandum  to  be  sent  as  before, 
which  I  will  sign  immediately,  and  get  witnessed  as  you  shall  direct. 


THE  MULBERRY-TREE  AT  STRATFORD. 


[This  receipt  is  valuable  for  one  word  especially  which  it  contains :  it  informs  us  that,  at  the  date  of  it, 
the  Mulberry-tree  planted  by  Shakspeare  had  been  lately  cut  down  by  order  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gastrell.  Mr. 
Garrick,  we  see,  had  commissioned  a  military  friend  to  purchase  four  pieces  of  this  desecrated  wood  for  him, 
and  we  find  them  delivered  formally  and  duly  authenticated.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  these  relics 
suggested  the  commemoration  of  the  Mulberry-tree,  and  the  Stratford  Jubilee,  which  took  place  nine  years 
after.  The  approaching  anniversary  of  the  Poet’s  birth,  23rd  April,  1764,  which  completed  two  centuries 
from  that  event,  might  have  seemed  of  all  days  to  stand  paramount  in  the  claim  for  such  a  celebration  but 
a  more  extensive  preparation  might  be  judged  advisable  ;  and  Mr.  Garrick’s  health  in  the  year  1763,  made 
him  determine  upon  a  visit  to  the  Continent,  in  which  his  active  mind  necessarily  found  much  that  even 
profitably  engaged  his  attention.  Wisdom,  too,  admonished  him  to  quit  fora  time  a  metropolis  over  which 
the  sway  of  “  Pantomime  and  Song”  was  now  confirmed  : — indeed  Miss  Brent,  with  “  The  Beggars’  Opera” 
and  “  Artaxerxes,”  had,  like  another  Goneril,  abated  “  King  Lear”  once  again  of  half  liis  followers. — Ed.] 


9th  July,  1762. 


Received  of  David  Garrick,  Esq.  by  the  hands  of  Lieutenant  Eusebius  Sil¬ 
vester,  two  guineas  in  full,  for  four  pieces  of  Mulberry-tree,  which,  with  two  other 
pieces  of  the  same  tree,  I  lately  delivered  to  the  said  Mr.  Silvester  for  the  use  of  the 
said  Mr.  Garrick,  I  do  hereby  warrant  to  be  part  of  the  Mulberrv-tree  commonly 
called  Shakspeare’s  tree,  and  said  to  be  planted  by  him,  and  lately  cut  down  in  the 
Revd.  Mr.  Gastrell’s,  late  Sir  Hugh  Clopton’s  garden,  in  Stratford  upon  Avon. 
Witness  my  hand,  Geo.  Willes. 


Witness  hereto, 


William  Hunt,  Attorney,  in  Stratford. 

John  Payton,  Master  of  the  White  Lion  Inn  there. 


VOL.  i. 


u 


14(> 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Aug.  10,  1762. 

It  gave  me  a  very  sensible  concern  to  hear  of  the  late  return  of  your  illness ;  but 
I  hope  your  horse  mounted  weekly  between  London  and  Hampton,  will  confirm 
your  health. 

The  papers  tell  me  that  you  intend  to  gratify  the  public  by  appearing  on  the 
stage  this  winter.  Is  it  so?  Or  do  you  keep  to  the  resolution  you  had  formed  when 
I  saw  you  in  London  ? 

I  cannot  disguise  to  you,  that  1  was  much  surprised  to  find  you  hesitate  about 
bringing  on  “  Armida”  this  season ;  indeed,  I  understood  it  as  a  clear  determination 
that  it  should  [appear]  ;  and  in  consequence  of  that,  I  have  really  entered  upon  a 
measure  of  such  a  nature,  as  would  put  me  to  some  disagreeable  inconveniences,  if  it 
should  be  postponed.  As  to  the  musical  part,  1  have  fixed  most  of  the  capital  songs  ; 
and  the  poetical  part  will  not  exceed  (at  most)  three  acts  of  a  tragedy  in  length.  I 
cannot  pretend  to  prescribe  any  time  to  your  getting  ready  the  decorations ;  but  if 
they  require  such  a  length  of  time,  1  cannot  but  wish  that  circumstance  had  been 
sooner  mentioned. 

As  to  the  comedy,  my  good  friend,  I  must  brush  up  your  memory  a  little.  It 
was  your  own  proposal  (in  your  garden  at  Hampton,)  that  I  should  try  my  hand  at 
it.  Its  comic  merit,  in  point  of  character,  is  universally  allowed  to  be  of  the  first 
degree.*  In  point  of  plan,  it  goes  on  well  upon  the  whole,  till  the  third  or  fourth 
act,  and  then  falls  into  nonsense  and  absurdity.  This,  I  really  think,  I  have  removed  ; 
retaining,  at  the  same  time,  every  the  least  scrap  of  what  is  thinly  scattered  through 
the  bad  parts  of  it,  such  as  might  be  worth  preserving.  This  is  all  I  pretend  to  :  and 
as  to  the  excellence  of  the  other  parts,  it  is  generally  allowed  to  be  supreme.  The 
Pig-woman  certainly  cannot  be  removed  without  spoiling  the  whole;  for  on  her 
depend  all  the  fine  comic  scenes  between  Busy,  John  Littlewit,  and  Justice  Overdo; 
as  well  as  some  of  Coke’s  and  Wasp.  In  short,  she  is  the  great  connecting  circum¬ 
stance  that  hinds  the  whole  together.  If  the  scene  of  her  scolding  be  thought  rather 
too  coarse,  it  may  easily  be  softened.  But  as  to  all  these  matters,  I  can  only  give  my 
reasons:  you  are  to  judge  of  them.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  you  will  oblige  me 
much  if  you  can  bring  on  either  of  these  pieces  this  season.  If  you  declare  this 
impossible,  I  cannot  for  the  present  say  any  thing  farther  on  this  matter  ;  but  that  I 
shall  always  remain,  dear  Sir, 

Most  truly  and  sincerely  yours, 

J.  Brown. 

*  He  speaks  here  of  his  alteration  of  Beu  Jonson’s  “  Bartholomew  Fair.”  The  sterling  power  of  the  old 
bard’s  characters  leads  me  to  regret  that  Dr.  Brown’s  attempt  to  keep  up  the  humours  of  the  Fair  was  not 
cordially  received  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  stage — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


147 


DR.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Aug.  17,  1762. 

I  received  yours,  and  am  altogether  of  your  opinion,  that  much  will  depend 
upon  the  music,  and  that  the  airs  in  general  ought  to  be  as  light  as  possible.  You 
may  depend  upon  it  I  shall  select  them  of  this  kind  from  Handel,  as  far  as  they 
are  to  be  found  there  ;  but  the  present  taste  has  got  down  so  far  towards  the 
ballad  style,  that  I  question  whether  the  lightest  of  Handel’s  airs  will  quite  hit  the 
humour  of  the  town.  To  an  audience  of  taste,  I  could  go  through  this  with  pleasure 
and  security  of  success  ;  to  such  an  audience  as  we  have  to  deal  with,  I  cannot  pretend 
to  any  certainty  as  to  this  matter.  I  have  already  selected  twice  as  many  songs  from 
his  operas  as  will  be  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  and  these  of  great  variety  and  spirit ; 
but  still  they  are  of  a  higher  form  than  many  in  Artaxerxes.  I  apprise  you  of  this 
beforehand,  that  I  may  not  seem  to  mislead  you ;  and  therefore,  if  you  think  that 
any  of  the  composers  in  London  can  go  through  the  thing  in  a  more  popular  manner, 
I  shall  be  glad  to  resign  it  to  them,  and  to  pay  them  the  usual  price  for  such  perfor¬ 
mances.  If  Boyce  would  undertake  it,  he  (next  to  Arne)  I  think  most  capable  of  it. 
It  would  accelerate  the  completion  of  the  opera ;  because,  as  soon  as  one  act  was 
finished,  I  could  send  it,  and  thus  the  poetry  and  music  would  be  advancing 
together;  whereas,  if  I  do  both,  the  one  must  precede  the  other.  You  will  think  of 
this,  and  let  me  know  your  sentiments. 

There  will  be  a  resemblance  between  this  and  “  Arthur”  in  one  sense,  that  is,  so  far 
as  machinery  is  concerned  in  both ;  but  as  to  the  main  subject,  I  recollect  but  little ; 
and  the  conduct  of  the  machinery  is  so  different,  that  no  striking  resemblance  can 
arise.  By  your  asking  me  this  question,  I  suppose  you  have  some  thoughts  of 
presenting  “  Arthur.”  I  wish  I  had  heard  the  music  when  I  was  in  town,  but  I 
cannot  help  suspecting  the  success  of  it.  My  first  doubt  is,  whether  there  be  any  thing 
pathetic  in  the  plan ;  my  second  is,  with  respect  to  the  popularity  of  the  music. 
Purcel  is  admirable  here  and  there ;  but  as  to  any  whole  of  his  composition,  I  cannot 
help  questioning  the  success  of  it  at  this  time  of  day,  unless  it  was  purged  and  done 
up  anew.  Within  two  or  three  days  after  this  comes  to  hand,  you  will  receive  two 
packets  from  Colchester ;  this  is  owing  to  my  having  dealings  with  a  wit,  who,  of 
course,  has  no  memory.  I  desired  you,  in  my  last,  to  tell  me  of  some  Member  of 
Parliament  to  whom  I  might  inclose  any  thing  I  had  to  send  you.  This  you  totally 
forgot;  (pray,  good  Sir,  if  you  please,  to  remember  this  the  next  time  you  write.) 
For  want  of  this  I  have  been  forced  to  send  to  Mr.  Gray,  of  Colchester,  two  packets 
which  contain  a  new  edition  of  “  Bartholomew  Fair.”  I  pique  myself  more  on  recti¬ 
fying  this  plan,  than  on  any  plan  I  ever  struck  out  in  my  life.  It  is  amazing  to  think 
how  any  writer  could  do  so  well,  and  so  ill,  at  the  same  time,  as  Ben  Jonson  did  in 
this  comedy.  However,  so  far  as  I  am  a  judge,  there  are  admirable  materials  left, 
enough  to  make  out  a  first-rate  comedy  after  the  trash  is  thrown  out.  But  1  will  not 
anticipate.  As  to  the  little  connecting  scenes  which  I  have  added,  I  have  made  them 

U  2 


148 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


as  short  as  possible,  because  I  know  that  my  comic  composition  is  nothing.  As  soon 
as  you  have  well  considered  it,  let  me  have  your  thoughts.  I  can  furnish  you  with 
some  songs  that  will  be  proper  for  the  purpose :  that  which  is  inserted  is  the  finest 
that  ever  Purcel  composed  ;  and  if  Miss  Wright  can  act  it  as  well  as  she  can  sing  it 
(for  both  will  be  necessary),  that  very  song  will  draw  an  audience.  You  will  see 
that  I  have  struck  out  four  of  the  dramatis  persona. 

I  was  much  diverted  with  your  story  of  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and  Quin.  I 
see  you  are  going  on  triumphantly  in  politics,  and  we  of  the  minority  have  nothing 
to  do,  but  hide  our  heads.  For  my  part,  I  am  glad  to  find  that  the  late  minority 
have  laid  aside  their  factious  dispositions,  and  are  become  willing  to  serve  their  king 
and  country  ;  and  I  think  I  have  a  fair  title  to  a  deanery  at  least,  for  having  advised 
them  to  this  conduct.  At  least,  after  having  taken  my  advice ,  I  think  they  ought 
not  to  be  angry  at  me  for  having  given  it.  But  1  am  like  honest  Justice  Overdo, 
when  he  was  set  in  the  stocks,  and  defy  Dame  Fortune  to  hurt  my  mind,  come 
what  will. 

Yours,  yours,  in  good  spirits, 

J.  Brown. 

If  you  see  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  pray  tell  him  I  sincerely  rejoice  in  his  late  promotion. 

Do  not  forget  my  respects  to  Airs.  Garrick,  who,  I  know,  is  above  all  party,  as 
I  believe  you  are  at  the  bottom,  though  now  and  then  forced  to  put  on  appearances. 


DR.  T.  A.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Nov.  10th,  1762. 

The  occasion  of  my  troubling  you  with  this  arises  from  a  wicked  report  made  by 
some  busy  Argus,  who  having  an  hundred  eyes,  and  but  one  of  them  honest,  had 
ninety-nine  too  many. 

Mrs.  Cibber  not  a  little  amazed  me,  when  she  told  me  I  was  charged  by  you 
with  hissing  Master  Norris,  or,  at  least,  with  holding  my  head  down,  in  an  odd  posi¬ 
tion,  whenever  he  was  hissed. 

Sir,  I  cannot  remember  whether  my  head  was  up  or  down,  or  inclining  to  one 
side  or  the  other,  but  take  upon  me  positively  to  swear,  that  I  never  was  so  mean  a 
rascal  as  to  hiss  the  greatest  enemy  I  ever  had  in  the  world,  much  less  a  young  lad 
who  never  offended  me ;  who,  I  then  thought,  as  I  now  think,  deserved  the  kindest 
treatment  imaginable ;  being  surprised,  as  well  as  shocked,  to  hear  and  see  the  best 
singer  in  your  company  (except  Mr.  Vernon)  though  with  some  material  defects, 
treated  in  so  base  and  undeserved  a  manner. 

I  was  so  far  from  inclining  to  any  such  unbecoming  behaviour  that  I  was  the 
only  advocate  he  had,  and  kept  all  quiet  about  me,  except  a  young  boy  of  an  officer, 
who  said  he  did  not  care  for  the  lad’s  understanding  music — that  he  squalled,  and 
(by  God  !)  he  would  hiss  him. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


149 


I  would  not  have  gone  to  the  performance,  for  fear  of  some  scandal  from  these 
observing  Pickthanks,  had  I  not  a  friendship  for  Mr.  Stevens,  the  lawyer,  and  an  in¬ 
tention  to  serve  the  lad  ;  and  was  so  unhappy,  when  I  came  home,  that  I  could  not 
eat  my  supper  on  his  account. 

Whoever  told  you  that  1  showed  any  signs  of  disapprobation  is  a  busy  lying 
scoundrel,  which  I  am  ready  to  assert  to  his  face,  and  answer  the  consequence. 

Yet,  though  neither  1,  nor  my  small  abilities  in  my  profession,  nor  those  of 
any  person  belonging  to  me,  or  in  my  interest,  have  ever  received  the  smile  of  your 
favour,  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  been  greatly  overlooked  and  discouraged  upon 
my  account,  I  have  never  failed  in  my  respect  to  you,  and  still  continue  (in  spite  of 
ill  treatment)  an  admirer  of  your  extraordinary  talents,  and, 

Sir,  your  real  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Augustine  Arne.* 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  ARNE. 


SIR,  Nov.  10th,  1762. 

There  are  many  mistakes  in  your  letter  :  and  first,  I  did  not  charge  you  with 
hissing  Master  Norris  ;  but  when  Mrs.  Cibber  spoke  to  me  about  that  affair,  I  told 
her  the  truth,  that  you  was  charged  with  being  in  the  company  of  hissers,  and  though 
you  might  not  hiss,  the  person  averred  that  you  were  pleased,  and  laughed  at  the 
malcontents  about  you.  I  thought  this  affair  of  so  little  consequence,  and  so  little 
willing  am  I  to  hear  Pickthanks,  as  you  politely  call  them,  that  I  never  spoke  to  the 
person  who  accused  you.  Mr.  Lacy  did,  and  will  inform  you  of  the  whole.  When 
you  know  and  see  the  person  in  question,  you  may  deliver  your  own  messages,  for  I 
have  too  much  to  do  to  trouble  myself  about  these  matters.  Your  assertion,  that 
neither  you  nor  your  abilities,  Nc.  have  had  a  smile  of  favour  from  me,  has  no  founda¬ 
tion  ;  for  every  body  who  knows  me,  knows  that  I  have  always  given  you  your  due, 
as  a  man  of  genius,  but  at  the  same  time  I  had  no  great  reason  to  applaud  your  be¬ 
haviour  to  me.  I  never  ill-treated  a  man  of  genius  in  my  life,  and  I  was  so  far  from 
returning  ill-will  towards  you,  that  I  agreed,  contrary  to  my  judgment,  and  against 
all  rules  of  reason  and  policy,  that  you  should  make  new  prices  at  our  theatre  for 
your  oratorios.  Therefore  you  will  be  much  at  a  loss  to  particularise  the  ill-treatment 
you  mentioned;  nor  know  I  of  any  transactions  between  us,  but  your  indulging 
us  with  an  engagement  with  Mr.  Fawcett,  when  you  entered  into  articles  with  the 
other  house  for  Miss  Brent. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

1).  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  am  in  such  a  hurry  that  you  must  excuse  this  scrawl. 

*  A  variety  of  these  imputations  have  been  levelled  from  time  to  time  at  the  possessors  of  great  talent, 
but  few  of  them  so  silly  as  this  which  annoyed  that  fine  genius,  Dr.  Arne. — Ed. 


1.30 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


T.  B.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sir,  Nov.  25th,  1 762. 

The  many  proofs  you  have  given  the  town  of  your  desire  to  oblige  them, 
encourage  me  to  propose  to  you  a  scheme  no  less  advantageous  than  useful  to  the 
public,  especially  the  polite  part  of  it.  The  alterations  lately  made  in  your  theatre 
for  the  convenience  of  the  spectators,  naturally  suggested  to  me  an  inconvenience 
arising  from  the  servants  who  are  sent  to  keep  places.  I  have,  with  concern,  seen  a 
lady  finely  dressed  forced  to  sit  down  by  a  servant  whose  clothes  and  feet  have  been 
very  dirty,  and  behaviour  extremely  offensive ;  it  has  happened,  to  my  knowledge, 
that  some  servants,  in  order  to  follow  their  own  pleasures,  have  hired  common  porters 
of  the  street  to  keep  their  places,  whose  company  better  suited  a  prison  than  a  place 
of  polite  entertainment. 

I  have,  enclosed,  offered  to  your  consideration  a  plan  as  a  remedy  for  this  great 
inconvenience,  by  approving  of  which,  or  altering  it  suitably  to  the  occasion,  you  will 
add  another  pleasure  to  the  admirers  of  your  excellent  performance,  and  especially 
to,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

T.  B. 

The  plan  may  be  formed  by  having  a  copper  ticket  marked  with  the  letter  of  the 
box  and  number  of  the  row,  which  tickets  should  be  paid  for  upon  the  delivery  of 
them  to  the  servant  who  comes  for  places,  and  then  the  gentlemen  and  ladies  are  to 
carry  that  ticket  with  them  as  a  proof  of  their  being  entitled  to  such  a  place  as  the 
number  specified  upon  the  ticket  in  box  A,  or  B,  &c.  which  will  not  only  prevent 
the  very  great  inconveniences  of  the  within-mentioned  letter,  but  will  also  be  a 
means  to  put  a  stop  to  that  partiality  from  the  box  and  book-keepers  of  which  you 
possibly  may  be  ignorant,  and  the  method  of  these  tickets  will  prevent  many  frauds 
on  your  part. 

I  should  be  very  glad  to  know  how  far  you  approve  of  this  scheme,  by  the 
favour  of  an  answer  directed  to  T.  B.  at  Tom’s  Coffee-house,  in  Devereux  Court, 
near  Temple  Bar. 


DR.  DELAP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

Since  my  last  letter,  I  have  been  making  a  general  rout  and  reform  in  the 
management  of  my  play  ;  which,  though  it  will  cost  me  some  pains,  will  be  attended, 
in  my  opinion,  with  much  profit.  It  appeared  to  me  that  the  Oracle  might  pos¬ 
sibly  be  a  stumbling-block  to  an  English  audience,  and  I  have  hit  upon  an  expedient 
which  will  rid  me  of  that,  and,  at  the  same  time,  furnish  new  matter  for  a  large  part 
of  the  second  act,  as  well  as  an  additional  scene  that  will  enliven  the  third,  and  give 
me  an  opportunity  of  leaving  out  all  the  flat  parts  of  it.  Besides  all  this,  the  fourth 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


151 


will  be  more  passionate,  and  the  catastrophe  in  the  fifth  entirely  altered.  But  I  will 
lead  you  regularly  through. — In  the  first  act,  all  the  flimsy  parts  of  every  scene  will 
be  left  out,  to  make  room  for  the  appearance  of  Macaria,  which  scene  also  shall  be 
improved.  And  now  begins  the  alteration. — After  the  King  and  his  brother  have 
promised  their  assistance  to  the  Queen  and  Macaria,  I  suppose  that  Demophon’s  son, 
in  his  return  home  with  some  troops,  has  been  taken  prisoner  by  Eurystheus,  whose 
herald  has  informed  Demophon,  that  if  he  does  not  immediately  sacrifice  Macaria 
(against  whom  he  has  a  particular  malice,  which  shall  be  mentioned,)  Eurystheus  will 
before  the  morning  sacrifice  his  son.  The  second  act  begins  with  a  messenger 
informing  Acamas  that  the  King,  who  is  much  troubled  at  an  advice  he  has  lately 
received,  is  coming  to  communicate  it  to  him.  Demophon  then  tells  Acamas  the 
story,  and  says,  that  as  his  religion  and  his  priests  forbid  him  to  force  Macaria  from 
the  altar,  he  must  do  it  by  stratagem  :  this  is  warmly  opposed  by  Acamas,  who 
answers  the  King  with  so  much  severity  as  occasions  a  quarrel,  and  confirms  Demo¬ 
phon  the  more  in  his  intention,  who,  upon  the  appearance  of  Macaria,  commands 
Acamas  to  retire.  Macaria,  having  heard  them  conversing,  comes  from  the  temple  to 
return  them  her  mother’s  thanks  for  their  great  friendship  to  them  both.  She  tells 
the  King  that  it  has  drawn  her  mother  from  the  very  depth  of  despair,  and  saved 
her  life.  This  conversation  affects  the  King  so  much,  as  to  make  it  visible  to 
Macaria  that  something  has  happened  amiss,  and  she  speaks  her  apprehensions  :  the 
King  then  tells  her  that  he  is  the  most  unhappy  of  fathers, — that  an  accident  has 
happened  which  obliges  him  to  withdraw  his  assistance  from  her — that  in  the  first 
hurry  of  distress,  he  had  intended  to  deceive  her,  but  that  her  behaviour  forced  him  to 
discover  the  whole  truth.  He  then  tells  her  the  story,  and  says  that  his  kingdom,  as 
well  as  the  life  of  his  son,  is  at  stake,  for  that  in  his  present  situation  he  dares  not 
oppose  Eurystheus;  he  also  insinuates  that  the  altar  and  temple  of  Jupiter,  though 
reverenced  bv  him,  would  be  no  sanctuary  to  her  from  Eurystheus ;  and  that  Eurvs- 
theus  had  solemnly  engaged  never  more  to  persecute  the  Queen,  and  that  he  would 
himself  undertake  to  restore  her  to  her  kingdom.  This  throws  Macaria  into  great 
confusion  and  irresolution,  which  so  much  affect  the  King,  that  he  begs  her  to 
consult  with  Iolaus  and  the  Queen,  but  not  to  mention  what  has  passed  to  any  other 
person,  and  that  he  will  wait  for  her  reply.  Acamas  returns  to  Macaria,  and  finding 
her  in  tears,  suspects  his  brother,  whom  she  exculpates,  and  thanking  him  for  his 
friendly  concern,  desires  him  to  retire.  He  then  goes  out  determined  to  assist  her  to 
the  utmost  of  his  power.  Iolaus,  who  had  been  dispatching  Hyllus,  returns,  and 
Macaria  at  length  determines  to  sacrifice  herself  for  the  safety  of  her  mother  and 
friends. 

The  third  act  begins  with  Macaria's  address  to  Jove,  while  Iolaus  is  gone  to  the 
King :  her  mother,  hearing  her,  comes  from  the  temple,  rejoiced  at  the  friendship 
of  the  King,  and  the  consequent  happiness  which  will  attend  Macaria,  whom  she 
is  surprised  to  find  dispirited.  (This  scene  will  be  an  imitation  of  that  fine  one 
between  Agamemnon  and  Iphigenia,  where  he  is  unable  to  mention  the  sacrifice. 


152 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  officer  from  the  King  then  comes  for  Macaria,  whom  her  mother  is  at  last 
prevailed  upon  to  part  with ;  and  while  she  is  bemoaning  her  absence  and  that  of 
Hyllus,  her  son  comes  privately  to  see  her,  and  enquire  what  state  she  is  in  :  lie  tells 
her  that  Melanthus,  who  shares  the  command  with  him,  is  leading  on  a  large  body 
of  troops,  and  then  offers  to  go  to  thank  the  King  for  his  friendship,  but  is  pre¬ 
vented  by  Iolaus,  who,  after  some  emotion,  prevents  his  going  to  the  King,  and  desires 
him  for  good  reason,  which  he  cannot  then  mention,  to  retire  instantly  to  his  troops, 
and  then  goes  out  with  him.  Immediately  Acamas  enters,  enquiring  for  Macaria. 
The  Queen  tells  him  that  she  is  most  happy  and  secure  with  Demophon,  who  has  sent 
for  her  to  the  palace,  and  to  be  present  at  a  solemn  sacrifice.  Acamas  tells  her  that 
the  King  has  deceived  her,  and  that  Macaria  herself  will  be  the  sacrifice,  which  he 
came  on  purpose  to  prevent :  the  consternation  of  the  Queen  at  last  makes  her  faint 
away,  and  Acamas  goes  hastily  out.  The  fourth  act  begins  with  the  Queen's  violent 
grief.  Iolaus  then  entering,  confesses  himself  to  have  been  privy ;  this  calls  forth 
all  her  resentment  upon  him.  Hamon  then  tells  them,  that  as  the  priests  were 
preparing  to  sacrifice  the  victim,  every  thing  was  suddenly  thrown  into  confusion, 
and  there  was  a  general  uproar  of  the  people.  Demophon  then  enters  enraged,  but 
Dejanira,  before  he  can  speak,  breaks  passionately  out  against  him,  demanding  her 
daughter,  and  accusing  him  of  perfidy  ;  he  then  tells  her  it  was  her  daughter’s  own 
consent,  and  that  she  was  herself  to  blame,  who  had  impiously  prevailed  upon  Acamas 
to  force  her  daughter  from  the  altar — that  now  his  kingdom  and  his  son’s  life  were 
in  danger.  She  tells  him  it  is  a  proper  punishment  for  his  cruelty,  &c.  and  upbraids 
him  still  more ;  when  a  messenger  informs  him  that  Acamas  and  Macaria  are 
surrounded,  and  they  want  to  know  how  to  proceed :  the  Queen  then  falls  to  sup¬ 
plications,  tears,  &c.  and  the  King  goes  out  determined  to  sacrifice  her.  In  the  fifth 
act,  the  Queen’s  rage  changes  into  a  fixed  despair  and  melancholy  ;  upon  hearing  a 
tumult  of  the  people,  she  rushes  out  to  offer  herself  to  their  rage,  and  is  met  by 
Acamas  and  Macaria.  Demophon  soon  follows :  the  brothers  fight,  and  Demophon 
prevails,  and  is  going  to  take  Macaria,  when  Hyllus,  who  has  killed  Eurystheus  in 
single  combat,  and  rescued  Demophon’s  son,  comes  in,  and  is  upon  the  point  of 
killing  Demophon,  till  the  matter  is  explained :  the  sudden  violent  transitions  from 
grief  to  joy  overpower  Dejanira,  who  with  her  death  concludes  the  play.* 


R.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Newcastle,  Nov.  26th,  1762. 

I  know  that  your  affairs  require  all  your  attention  in  the  winter ;  and  therefore 
1  would  not  teaze  you  with  any  more  letters  on  the  subject  of  my  last,  till  I  knew 

*  Not  acted  until  the  year  1781,  when  it  was  called  “The  Royal  Suppliants.’-  The  scenes  here 
described,  between  the  mother  and  daughter,  made  so  strong  an  impression  on  the  town,  that  the  play  lived 
the  nine  nights,  which  the  bills  of  mortality  assign  as  the  mature  age  of  modern  tragedy. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


153 


certainly  how  the  affair  would  be  determined.  I  have  at  length  settled  it  amicably 
with  Mr.  Smith,  and  the  Oratorio  is  to  be  performed  in  Lent. 

You  may  remember,  perhaps,  some  hints  that  I  dropped  to  you  in  London  ;  from 
whence  you  might  reasonably  conclude,  that  I  should  not  be  much  surprised  if  I 
was  improperly  treated  from  that  quarter.  The  late  occurrences  have  confirmed  me 
in  my  opinion :  and  what  you  say  of  his  behaviour  to  you,  is  a  farther  confirmation 
of  it.  However,  we  must  take  things  as  they  fall  out ;  but  there  never  was  a  greater 
untruth  uttered  since  the  creation,  than  what  he  charged  upon  me  with  respect  to 
the  time  of  sending  up  the  music:  but  let  it  pass.  He  complains  of  the  determined 
style  of  my  letter  to  him ;  yet  I  know  that  it  was  that  determined  style  that  in¬ 
duced  him  to  change  his  resolution. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  of  the  dismission  of  your  friend  the  Duke  of  D.  *  Though 
as  to  myself,  you  know,  if  I  was  disposed  to  triumph  on  the  defeat  of  an  enemy, 
I  might  say  something  on  that  head.  But  though  1  never  thought  highly  of  his 
political  system  and  conduct,  yet  I  believe  him  an  honest  man  ;  more  honest,  perhaps, 
than  some  of  whom  I  once  thought  more  highly :  and  therefore,  I  wish  he  had  still 
been  about  the  King  : — but  inveni  portum  is  my  motto,  so  let  the  seas  roar ;  I  cannot 
help  it,  nor  does  the  storm  reach  me  in  my  retreat.  I  do  not  like  your  friend 
Churchill’s  third  book  of  the  Ghost.  To  talk  in  the  grand  epic  style,  it  has  neither 
beginning,  nor  middle,  nor  end :  it  is  crammed  with  personal  abuse,  and  that,  thrown 
on  people  who  did  not  deserve  it,  for  aught  that  appears.  It  is  obscure :  here  and 
there  a  good  line  ;  but  many  of  the  mediocre  rank,  in  my  opinion.  In  short,  he  will 
scribble  himself  down  in  spite  of  genius. 

The  press  is  groaning  and  in.  labour  with  my  Dissertation.  You  saw  a  rude 
draught  of  it ;  but  I  have  been  able  to  improve  it  in  almost  every  part :  and  I  dare 
almost  prophesy,  that  it  will  please  you.  The  Ode  is  printed. 

What,  in  the  name  of  wonder,  is  this  huge  work*  of  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester 
upon  Grace?  I  cannot  conceive  how  any  man  could  spin  the  subject  to  such  an 
immoderate  length.  What  mortifies  me  most  is,  that  I  do  not  hear  of  any  body  that 
is  abusing  it  in  print.  My  respects  attend  the  good  lady  of  the  house.  Let  me 
hear  a  political  anecdote  when  you  can  :  and  believe  me  always, 

Dear  Sir,  most  sincerely  and  truly  yours, 

John  Brown. 


*  Devonshire. 

+  This  “  huge"  work  composes  one  rather  small  volume  in  twelves.  It  contains  the  famous  attack  upon 
Wesley;  whose  mission,  on  his  own  authority,  appeared  to  be  graced  with  some  miraculous  powers.  But 
the  finest  thing  in  Warburton’s  writings  is  to  be  found  in  this  book;  I  mean  the  examination,  how  far 
inspired  speakers,  or  writers,  may  be  reasonably  expected  to  possess  the  scholastic  graces  of  the  language 
inspired  ? — Ed. 


VOL.  I. 


X 


154 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  London,  Saturday  night,  26th  Dec.  1 762 

Why  did  you  not  tell  me  that  you  Avas  to  go  out  of  town  to-night?  1  would 
have  seen  you  in  spite  of  all  obstacles.  As  it  is  otherwise,  I  cannot  omit  this  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  thanking  you  for  your  friendly  letter.  Your  caution  is  Avell  founded,  on 
what  you  (and  I  too)  know  of  the  impetuosity  of  my  temper;  and  it  will  certainly 
put  me  more  on  my  guard,  than  I  should  have  been  without  it.  However,  to  let 
you  see  that,  in  theory  at  least,  I  am  tolerably  prudent  on  this  occasion,  I  will  tran¬ 
scribe  the  concluding  paragraph  of  my  letter,  which  I  writ  to  the  Prime  Minister 
of  the  Russian  Empire.  “  I  will  take  the  liberty  of  observing  to  your  Excellency, 
that  I  think  my  purpose  in  coming  to  Petersburgh  cannot  be  too  little  talked  of, 
either  before  my  arrival,  or  when  I  am  there.  It  will  be  best  for  a  foreigner  silently 
to  make  his  observations  on  the  state  of  the  empire;  and  in  the  time  and  manner 
which  prudence  may  dictate,  convert  them  to  their  proper  use.  This  will  prevent 
jealousies,  and  tend  gradually  to  carry  forward  those  salutary  designs  which  will  be 
most  surely  established  by  being  insensibly  begun.” — Prudence  herself!  in  theory. — 
Yet  I  know  by  experience,  that  I  have  an  unconquerable  tendency  to  bolt  out 
truths,  independent  of  the  consequences  they  may  produce.  Therefore,  again  I  say, 
thank  you  for  your  good  ad\dce.  I  will  endeavour  to  folloAv  it.  As  to  the  point 
you  speak  of ;  it  Avould  certainly  be  dangerous  to  carry  it  so  far,  as  to  think  of 
removing  the  seat  of  empire.  That  is  certainly  too  much  to  think  of :  but  to  re-in- 
state  the  City  of  Moscoav  in  some  degree  of  splendour,  and  to  make  it  one  of  the 
tAvo  seats  of  art  and  science,  I  think  is  not  so  dangerous  a  proposal.  However, 
nothing  of  this  kind  will  I  say  to  any  soul  living  but  the  Empress  herself,  and  that 
with  great  caution.  But  let  me  be  fairly  at  home  again,  and  then  if  I  do  not  tell 
them  my  mind  at  large,  in  a  general  and  connected  plan  of  legislation,  may  I  be 
knouted  to  death  by  the  Metropolitan  of  Novogorod  or  Moscow  !  I  do  not  think 
it  certain  that  I  shall  be  able  to  move  before  Monday  se’nnight :  if  so,  I  will  hope  to 
see  you  yet :  whenever  you  come  to  town,  do  not  pass  my  lodgings  without  a  call. 
My  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  You  may  keep  the  other  things  till  I  return. 
Believe  me, 

Hear  Sir,  always  most  truly,  yours, 

John  Brown. 


DR.  BROAVN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

The  plan  goes  Avell  on  till  the  end  of  the  third  act ;  Bevern’s  giving  way  in  the 
fourth,  is  such  a  violation  of  character  as  sinks  the  merit  of  the  plan,  and  would 
greatly  Aveaken  its  effect  in  the  representation.  The  tragedy  should  have  ended  here; 
Avhat  follows  seems  designed  only  to  lengthen  it. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


155 

As  to  the  characters,  that  of  Osbert  is  not,  perhaps,  quite  kept  up  with  proba¬ 
bility  ;  considering  the  great  qualities  with  which  he  is  represented,  it  seems  unnatural 
that  he  should  be  wound  up  to  base  designs  and  actions  by  such  slight  persuasions  as 
Edric  lays  before  him.  Bevern’s  character  is,  perhaps,  liable  to  a  like  objection  ;  a 
mind  so  great,  after  the  violation  of  his  wife,  could  not  have  stooped  to  such  means  to 
save  her.  Emma’s  character  is  kept  more  consistent,  except  in  the  fourth  act,  where 
she  listens  a  long  time  to  her  husband’s  dishonourable  parley  without  speaking  a 
word  ;  and  at  last  does  it  faintly,  instead  of  snatching  the  dagger  which  was  held  over 
her,  and  ending  Bevern’s  distress  by  her  own  death  :  all  which  her  character  required. 
With  respect  to  the  style,  or  composition,  it  is  in  general  clear  and  easy ;  here  and 
there,  though  not  often,  too  florid ;  but  often  weak,  and  wanting  that  energy,  and 
sometimes  that  pathetic  amplification,  which  the  situations  (which  are  often  good) 
might  seem  naturally  to  have  produced.  Hence,  though  there  be  capital  situations, 
there  are  hardly  any  scenes  which  can  be  called  capital  or  great. 

Endorsed. 

“  Dr.  Brown’s  Critique  upon  a  Mr.  Johnston’s 
Play  I  desired  him  to  read.” 


HENRY  MOSSOP  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR.  SIR,  Dublin,  March  17th,  1763. 

I  received  your  letter,  and  I  should  have  acknowledged  the  favour  sooner,  but 
that  I  waited  with  the  hopes  of  being  enabled  to  return  a  full  and  satisfactory  answer 
to  it.  I  am  extremely  concerned  that  it  is  not  yet  in  my  power  to  do  so  ;  however, 
lest  I  might  appear  negligent,  in  a  matter  of  business,  I  cannot  think  of  deferring 
longer  my  writing  to  you. 

I  had,  as  I  mentioned  in  my  first  letter  to  your  brother,  begun  to  settle  my  affairs 
here,  so  as  to  be  enabled  to  be  at  his  service  for  the  next  season  ;  I  have  made  a  con¬ 
siderable  progress  in  this  business :  but  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  that  sincerity 
and  frankness,  which  I  hope  I  shall  always  preserve  in  my  dealings,  (and  which  I 
know  will  be  approved  of  by  you  and  your  brother,)  not  to  acquaint  you  that  some 
embarrassing  difficulties  yet  remain  which  prevent  me  from  being,  as  yet,  entirely  at 
liberty.  They  are  matters  of  an  interesting  nature,  inasmuch  as  my  honesty  and 
my  honour  are  concerned  in  them.  From  this,  your  brother  will  see  that  I  must 
not  think  of  leaving  this  kingdom  while  these  objections  remain ;  and  I  am  certain 
that  he  will  immediately  acquiesce  in  the  propriety  of  this  conduct,  from  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  that  honour  which  exists  in  his  own  mind,  and  which  is  apparent  in  all 
his  dealings. 

However,  1  must  likewise  acquaint  you,  that  I  have  no  doubt  of  being  enabled 
to  remove  these  difficulties  in  a  little  time,  though  1  think  it  mv  duty  to  inform 
your  brother  of  them ;  and  I  am  certain  it  would  be  improper  conduct  towards  him, 
to  come  to  a  conclusion  while  a  possibility  remained  of  any  difficulty  which  might 

x  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


156 

put  it  out  of  my  power  to  be  at  his  service  consistent  with  honour.  The  moment  I 
have  settled  these  matters,  which  I  flatter  myself  will  be  in  a  short  time,  you  mav 
depend  upon  hearing  from  me ;  in  the  mean  time  I  must  request  that  which  has 
passed  between  your  brother  and  me  upon  this  subject,  may  be  kept  an  entire  secret. 

With  respect  to  the  money  which  I  am  indebted  to  your  brother,  1  am  under 
great  concern  that  it  is  not  yet  in  my  power  to  remit  it  to  him :  as  soon  as  ever  it  is 
in  my  power,  I  shall  certainly  send  it  to  him,  which  I  fear,  however,  cannot  be 
before  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Holland.  If  I  cannot  pay  it  before,  you  may  be  assured 
that  the  first  money  which  comes  into  the  house  on  the  performance  of  that  gentle¬ 
man,  shall  be  appropriated  towards  discharging  my  debt  to  your  brother. 

I  beg  you  will  present  my  best  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  believe  me  to  be 

Your  most  obedient  and  very  sincere  humble  servant, 

Henry  Mossop. 

P.  S.  1  must  trouble  you  to  give  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Holland,  and  please  to 
acquaint  him  that  I  have  received  the  favour  of  his  letter,  and  that  I  shall  answer  it 
at  large  by  the  next  post. 


MR.  MOSSOP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  , 

I  should  have  written  to  you  much  sooner  in  relation  to  the  promissory  note 
which  you  sent  hither  by  Mr.  Holland,  but  that  I  really  was  at  a  loss  in  what  manner 
to  address  you,  not  having  it  in  my  power  to  write  to  you  as  I  ought  upon  that 
subject.  I  am  extremely  concerned  that  I  am  under  a  necessity  of  still  trespassing  on 
your  goodness,  and  delaying  the  payment  for  a  few  months  longer :  the  truth  is,  the 
theatrical  business,  for  the  latter  part  of  the  season,  has  been  extremely  indifferent, 
and  has  turned  out  much  inferior  to  what  I  expected  from  the  novelty  of  the  per¬ 
formers  from  England,  insomuch  that,  in  fact,  the  plays  hardly  answered  the  expenses; 
however,  Sir,  I  consider  myself  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  civility  in  permitting 
your  performers  to  come  to  me  before  the  expiration  of  their  articles  with  you,  and  I 
beg  you  will  accept  my  thanks  for  that  favour.  I  thought  it  incumbent  on  me,  through 
respect  to  you,  to  do  every  thing  in  my  power  to  make  their  situation  agreeable ;  and 
I  believe  the  gentlemen  have  nothing  to  complain  of.  The  failure  of  our  business 
has  been  principally  occasioned  by  Mr.  Shuter’s  breach  of  his  agreement,  who, 
notwithstanding  his  strange  and  unaccountable  conduct,  has  fifty  pounds  of  my 
money  in  his  possession  at  this  instant.  The  damages  I  have  sustained  are  very 
considerable ;  I  have  been  obliged  to  commence  a  suit  at  law  against  him,  from 
whence  I  am  assured  that  I  cannot  fail  of  receiving  ample  redress. 

I  wrote  a  letter  to  your  brother  a  considerable  time  ago,  and  was  very  unhappy  in 
being  unable  to  be  at  your  service  for  the  ensuing  season,  which,  I  assure  you,  was 
my  most  sincere  desire  ;  the  reasons  I  intimated  to  him,  I  am  certain,  must  be  satis- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


157 


factory  to  you,  as  they  were  such  as  bound  me  by  very  strong  ties  of  honour ;  and  I 
flatter  myself  I  know  your  mind  so  well  that  I  may  be  assured  that  you  have  approved 
of  my  conduct.  It  would  be  impossible  to  explain  this  matter  to  you  by  letter :  when 
I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  in  London,  which  I  hope  will  be  about  the  15th  of 
August,  I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity  of  laying  the  particulars  before  you.  I 
cannot  omit  in  this  place  returning  my  thanks  to  you  for  that  strict  secrecy  which 
you  have  been  pleased  to  preserve  in  this  affair;  and  I  must  entreat,  Sir,  that  you  will 
be  so  obliging  as  to  continue  it.  I  give  you  so  much  trouble  and  make  so  many 
requests  to  you,  that  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  mention  the  principal  circumstance  for 
which  this  letter  was  intended,  particularly,  Sir,  as  it  tends  in  some  degree  towards 
giving  you  fresh  trouble :  however,  I  flatter  myself  that  your  usual  goodness  will 
excuse  it.  I  must  first  premise,  that  Mrs.  Fitzhenry’s  salary  is  so  extremely  exor¬ 
bitant,  her  characters  so  few,  and  those  having  very  little  power  of  attracting  the 
public,  that  it  is  impossible  for  me,  consistent  with  reason  and  common  sense,  to  think 
of  engaging  her  for  the  next  season.  In  this  situation  Mrs.  Yates  would  be  of  the 
utmost  consequence  to  me,  and  if  you  can  spare  her  you  will  do  me  service  beyond 
expression. 

Mr.  Yates  can  likewise  be  of  great  consequence  in  his  characters.  My  intimating 
this  is  upon  a  supposition  that  they  may  possibly  not  be  essentially  necessary  in  your 
business  in  the  ensuing  season,  and,  in  that  case,  I  flatter  myself  you  do  not  want  in¬ 
clination  to  oblige  me.  If  you  should  be  so  kind  as  to  bring  a  treaty  on  foot,  I  shall 
be  perfectly  satisfied  to  be  determined  by  whatever  conditions  you  should  think 
reasonable,  and  shall  with  pleasure  confirm  any  agreement  that  you  shall  think  proper 
to  propose.  I  mention  this  upon  a  supposition  that  you  may  be  so  obliging  as  to  be 
at  the  trouble  of  interfering  in  this  business  as  a  mediator. 

I  shall  only  add,  that  your  showing  your  friendship  on  this  occasion  will  do  me 
inexpressible  service ;  and  let  me  assure  you  on  my  part,  that  I  shall  have  a  parti¬ 
cular  pleasure  in  embracing  every  opportunity  that  may  hereafter  occur,  in  order  to 
make  every  possible  return  within  my  power  for  your  friendship  and  civility,  and 
to  testify  how  much  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  sincere  and  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Henry  Mossop. 

P.  S.  This  being  a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance  to  me,  I  must  entreat  the 
favour  of  a  line  from  you  upon  this  subject,  as  soon  as  possible. 

Please  to  present  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


DR.  FORDYCE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

May  13th,  1763. 

Dr.  Fordyce  presents  his  best  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  begs  to  be 
indulged  in  the  pleasure  of  telling  that  gentleman  some  part  of  what  he  felt  the 
other  night  at  Drury-lane.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  him  all. 


358 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


He  lias  seen  Mr.  Garrick  in  his  other  characters  with  delight  always,  and  with 
admiration  as  often  as  the  author  will  let  him.  But  in  King  Lear  he  saw  him  with 
rapture  and  astonishment.  lie  could  wish,  he  could  imagine,  nothing  higher.  It 
was  Nature  herself,  wrought  into  a  vast  variety  of  the  strongest,  the  tenderest, 
and  the  most  terrible  emotions,  that  ever  agitated  the  breast  of  a  father  and  of  a 
monarch. 

In  my  opinion,  Sir,  those  who  have  not  seen  you  in  that  wonderful  part,  are  still 
strangers  to  the  extent  of  your  powers.  They  have  not  yet  seen  Mr.  Garrick.  It 
seems  to  me  the  character,  of  all  others,  that  gives  the  noblest  scope  to  the  career  and 
the  diversity  of  his  genius.  And  I  am  much  mistaken  if,  in  the  representation,  he 
does  not  feel  his  soul  expand  with  a  freedom  and  fulness  of  satisfaction,  beyond  what 
he  experiences  in  any  other  part. 

Such  violent  starts  of  amazement,  of  horror,  of  indignation,  of  paternal  rage, 
excited  by  filial  ingratitude  the  most  prodigious  ;  such  a  perceptible,  yet  rapid  gra¬ 
dation,  from  these  dreadful  feelings  to  the  deepest  frenzy  ;  such  a  striking  corre¬ 
spondence  between  the  tempest  in  his  mind,  and  that  of  the  surrounding  elements. 
In  the  very  whirlwind  of  passion  and  of  madness,  such  an  exact  attention  to  propriety, 
that  it  is  still  the  passion  and  the  madness  of  a  king.  Those  exquisite  touches  of 
self-reproach  for  a  most  foolish  and  ill-requited  fondness  to  two  worthless  daughters, 
and  for  the  greatest  injustice  and  cruelty  to  one  transcendently  excellent.  Those 
resistless  complaints  of  aged  and  royal  .wretchedness,  with  all  the  mingled  work¬ 
ings  of  a  warm  and  hasty,  but  well-meaning  and  generous  soul,  just  recovering 
from  the  convulsion  of  its  faculties,  through  the  pious  care  of  a  worthy,  but  injured 
child  and  follower ;  till  at  length  the  parent,  the  sovereign,  and  the  friend,  shine  out 
in  the  mildest  majesty  of  fervent  virtue,  like  the  sun  after  a  fearful  storm,  breaking 
forth  delightfully  in  all  the  soft  splendour  of  a  summer  evening.  These,  Sir,  are 
some  of  the  great  circumstances  which  so  eminently  distinguished  your  action  two 
nights  ago.  They  possessed  by  turns  all  your  frame,  and  appeared  successively  in 
every  word,  and  yet  more  in  every  gesture,  but  most  of  all  in  every  look  and  fea¬ 
ture  ;  presenting,  I  verily  think,  such  a  picture  as  the  world  never  saw  anywhere 
else ;  yet  such  a  one  as  all  the  world  must  acknowledge  perfectly  true,  interesting, 
and  unaffected.  A  very  crowded  audience  gave  the  plainest  proofs  that  they  found 
it  so.  Even  a  French  lady,  if  I  mistook  not  the  person,  who  has  been  used  to  all 
the  polite  frigidity  of  the  French  drama,  was  moved  and  melted  in  the  most  sensible 
manner.  As  to  myself,  I  suppose  that  I  was  affected  in  the  same  way  with  every 
body  else.  But  what  struck  me  most,  and  will  ever  strike  me  on  reflection,  was 
the  sustaining  with  full  power,  to  the  last,  a  character  marked  with  the  most  di¬ 
versified  and  vehement  sensations,  without  ever  departing  once,  so  far  as  I  could 
perceive,  even  in  the  quickest  transitions  and  the  fiercest  paroxysms,  from  the 
simplicity  of  nature,  the  grace  of  attitude,  or  the  beauty  of  expression.  What  I 
alone  regretted,  was  the  blending  of  modern  tragedy  with  the  inimitable  composition 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


159 


of  your  immortal  Shakspeare.  It  was  some  comfort,  however,  that  you  had  no 
share  in  the  whining  scene.* 

I  hope,  Sir,  you  will  forgive  this  freedom  of  praise,  prompted  as  it  is  by  pure 
esteem  for  the  man  whom  forming  Nature,  without  the  least  assistance  from  ex¬ 
ample,  has  placed  so  high  in  his  profession.  I  have  said  so  much,  not  because  I 
imagine  that  my  single  approbation  can  be  of  any  consequence  to  Mr.  Garrick, 
amidst  the  approbation  of  the  public ;  but  merely  to  relieve  myself  in  some  mea¬ 
sure  from  a  load  of  sensibility  with  which  King  Lear  has  quite  overwhelmed  me. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

J.  FoRDYCE.f 


MR.  HALL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

John-street,  Berkley-square,  May  29,  1763. 

Mr.  Hall  presents  his  compliments  to  Ml  Garrick,  and  is  desired  by  his 
friend  Mr.  Gilbert,^  to  inform  Mr.  Garrick,  that  he  has  made  some  alterations  in 
his  play  of  “  Jugurtha,”  which  he  hopes  are  sufficient  to  recommend  it  to  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick’s  favour ;  but  if  he  should  be  so  unfortunate  as  not  to  meet  with  his  appro¬ 
bation,  Mr.  Gilbert  is  so  well  convinced  of  the  merit  of  his  piece,  that  he  will 
try  every  justifiable  method  to  get  it  upon  the  stage.  Mr.  Hall  has  this  play  in 
his  possession,  and  begs  Mr.  Garrick  will  favour  him  with  such  an  answer  as  he 
can  show  to  Mr.  Gilbert  without  any  risque  of  creating  a  misunderstanding  be¬ 
tween  persons  for  whom  he  has  the  greatest  respect  and  regard. 


DAVID  GARRICK  TO  MR.  HALL. 

Hampton,  May  30,  1763. 

I  think  with  Mr.  Gilbert  that  an  author  has  a  right  to  try  every  justifiable 
method  to  get  his  play  upon  the  stage ;  and  I  think,  too,  that  a  manager  is  equally 
justifiable  in  refusing  a  play  which  he  thinks  will  fail  of  success  in  the  representation: 

*  Written  by  Nahum  Tate. 

f  Dr.  Fordvce  was  highly  accomplished  by  his  studies  for  stage  criticism,  and  he  has  here  enumerated 
the  astonishing  efforts  of  Garrick  in  Lear;  which  Shakspeare  himself  suggested,  but  never  could  have  the 
happiness,  in  his  time,  even  to  expect  from  the  stage.  When  I  say  this,  I  mean  no  disparagement  to  such 
men  as  Burbage  or  Alleyn  ;  but  what  could  even  Garrick  himself  have  achieved,  if  moving  between  a 
lane  of  lounging  Bobadils,  seated  upon  the  stage,  with  boys  in  waiting  for  their  pipes,  and  displaying 
themselves  upon  the  heath  in  troops,  along  with  the  deserted  King,  calmly  smoking  through  the  “  pelting  of 
the  pitiless  storm  ?” — Ed. 

t  I  rather  incline  to  think  that  the  name  of  Gilbert  is  assumed  here.  Jugurtha  was  really  writtenby 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Gloster  Ridley,  whose  eldest  son  wrote  the  Tales  of  the  Genii. 


160 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


this  is  a  right  which  I  will  always  exert,  as  long  as  I  shall  be  a  manager  of  a  theatre. 
I  should  with  great  pleasure  re-consider  the  tragedy  of  “  Jugurtha,”  (as  you  tell  me 
there  have  been  some  alterations  made  in  it,)  were  I  not  so  particularly  circumstanced 
that  I  cannot  with  propriety  read  it  at  present,  nor  tell  you  my  reasons  till  1  have 
settled  an  affair  of  some  consequence  to  me. 

The  moment  I  am  at  liberty  to  explain  myself,  I  most  certainly  will ;  and  in  the 
mean  time  1  must  beg  of  you  to  let  even  this  riddle  be  a  secret  till  I  shall  expound 
it  to  you.  I  think  myself  honoured  with  your  regard,  and  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  should  have  answered  your  note  sooner,  but  1  did  not  receive  it  till  last 
night  at  this  place. 


DAVID  GARRICK  TO  MR.  QUIN. 


DEAR  SIR,  June  20,  17t>3. 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  rejoiced  me  much  at  Ascot  races  with  the  hopes  of 
meeting  you  at  Chatsworth,  and  we  have  since  had  those  hopes  confirmed  to  us  by 
your  letter  to  Hubert.  I  should  have  had  ten  times  the  satisfaction  in  this  news,  had 
not  my  wife  taken  more  pleasure  in  hearing  of  it  than  is  quite  agreeable  to  the  temper 
of  a  prudent  husband  :  the  news,  indeed*  was  told  her  a  little  abruptly,  and  she  broke 
out  into  a  kind  of  transport,  that  even  her  friend  Hubert  thought  was  indiscreet ; 
but  whether  he  felt  for  me,  or  himself,  I  cannot  determine,  for  he  is  at  present  chief 
favourite  and  first  gallant  at  Hampton.  But,  my  good  friend,  as  you  are  stout,  be 
merciful ;  I  have  been  very  ailing  of  late,  and  am  ordered  by  the  faculty  to  keep  my 
mind  quiet  and  my  body  cool ;  therefore,  spare  me  and  mine,  I  beseech  you. 

I  must  say  a  word  or  two  to  you  upon  the  behaviour,  the  most  unaccountable 
behaviour,  of  your  friend  Hudson  :  you  remember  our  bargain,  and  though  partly 
made  in  the  warmth  of  our  cups  last  summer,  yet  it  was  as  sacred  to  me  as  if  it  had 
been  struck  and  ratified  over  our  tea,  and  toast  and  butter.  I  sent  to  him,  as  we 
agreed,  to  let  him  know  when  I  should  be  ready  to  sit  to  him :  he  was  not  at  that 
time  disengaged.  I  then  wrote  to  him,  that  I  would  attend  his  friendly  summons 
(those  were  my  words)  any  morning  at  his  own  hour,  by  giving  me  notice  over  night, 
— no  answer  to  this.  I  then  met  him  in  Maiden-lane,  he  begged  my  pardon,  seemed 
in  great  good-liumour,  and  promised  to  send  to  me :  from  that  time  to  this  I  have 
not  had  the  least  excuse  or  message  from  him ;  and,  indeed,  I  am  so  out  of  patience 
with  him,  that  I  shall  tell  him  my  mind  when  I  see  him.  I  have  considered  again  and 
again  whether  I  might  inadvertently  have  given  him  any  slight  cause  of  suspicion, — for 
he  is,  you  know,  a  sensitive  (and  not  a  sensible )  plant,  as  a  lady  called  it  in  our  garden — 
and,  upon  my  honour,  I  have  behaved  with  the  most  delicate  attention  to  him.  It 
was  hinted  to  me,  that  the  much  and  deservedly  admired  picture  of  you  by  Gainsbo¬ 
rough  has  piqued  him  a  little,  and  hinc  illce  lachrymre!  If  it  is  so,  I  sincerely  pity  him ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


161 


for,  indeed,  there  is  merit  sufficient  in  that  portrait  to  warm  the  most  stoical  painter, 
and  what  must  it  do  when  it  works  among  the  combustibles  of  our  friend  Hudson? 

I  have  thought  proper  to  say  thus  much  to  you,  that  you  might  not  imagine  that 
I  had  been  either  tardy  or  negligent.  I  should  be  proud  of  this  interchange  of  tokens 
of  good-will  between  us,  and  will  be  most  ready  at  any  time  to  accomplish  my  part. 
If  we  have  but  a  tithe  of  the  pleasure  at  our  next  meeting  we  had  at  our  last,  our 
meeting  will  be  well  made.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

My  wife  sends  her  best  to  you.  David  Garrick. 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  June  1763. 

I  received  your  letter  this  morning,  and  propose  great  pleasure  in  seeing  you 
at  Chatsworth  the  5th :  remember  to  come  by  Derby  and  Matlock ;  it  is  much  the 
best  way.  If  you  lie  at  Derby,  you  may  with  great  ease  be  with  me  by  dinner;  it  is 
but  twenty-six  miles,  and  all  good  road ;  remember  to  come  over  Rowesley  Bridge, 
three  miles  from  Chatsworth,  and  so  through  my  grounds,  which  shall  be  open.  Mr. 
Quin  will,  I  believe,  be  there  the  same  time ;  he  drives  out  almost  every  day  in  his 
one-horse  chaise  to  get  his  nag  in  wind. 

I  hear  Mr.  Hubert  has  furnished  him  with  an  umbrella  which  is  to  defend  him 
both  against  sun  and  rain.  I  send  you  a  note  on  Mr.  Snow.  My  best  compliments 
to  Madame.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Devonshire. 

I  expect  a  line  from  you  the  post  before  you  leave  London. 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Chatsworth,  Aug.  1,  1763. 

I  received  both  your  letters,  and  am  very  glad  to  find  by  your  last,  that  Mrs. 
Garrick  is  growing  better :  I  hope  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  little  over-fatigue  of  the 
journey,  and  I  flatter  myself  that  I  shall  soon  hear  she  is  quite  well  again.  I  am 
sorry  for  your  brother’s  accident ;  it  was,  however,  lucky  that  it  was  no  worse,  and  as 
wrell  that  you  knew  nothing  of  it  till  such  time  as  you  heard  he  was  better. 

John  communicated  the  Ode  to  me  ;  I  approved  much,  especially  that  part  w  here 
the  strawberries  were  introduced.  The  Duke*  left  me  this  morning ;  the  w'hole 
family  are  gone  with  him  to  Lord  Rockingham’s,  and  I  shall  follow  to-morrow\  Mrs. 
Dal,  who  is  this  instant  returned  from  Lord  Strafford's,  desires  her  best  compliments, 
and  is  very  sorry  to  hear  Mrs.  Garrick  has  not  been  well.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Yours,  &c. 

Devonshire. 


*  Bedford,  probably. 


VOL.  1. 


Y 


1 62 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  DAVIES  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Saturday,  August  6th,  1763. 

What  your  brother  said  to  Mr.  Colman  yesterday,  I  confess  has  touched  me 
very  much  ;  he  had  desired  that  gentleman,  it  seems,  to  take  up  what  was  due  to  him 
from  “  The  St.  James’s  Chronicle,”  at  the  same  time  that  he  knew  his  share  in  that 
paper  was  held  by  me,  in  trust  for  him.  What  is  this  but  to  brand  me  as  a  fellow 
not  fit  to  be  trusted  with  the  receipt  of  his  money  ?  He  did  indeed  some  time  since 
insinuate  there  was  some  mistake  in  my  account.  Why  then  does  he  not  point  it 
out?  I  am  ready  to  show  my  books  and  to  settle  with  him  whenever  he  pleases. 
So  help  me  God !  I  know  of  no  mistake  but  what  I  long  since  mentioned  to  him  of 
five  pounds  which  my  servant  I  imagined  had  overcharged  to  him,  and  which  I  told 
him  then  should  be  allowed. 

If  he  is  tired  of  his  kindness,  in  God’s  name  let  him  withdraw  it !  but  let  him 
not  endeavour  to  deprive  me  of  that,  by  which  alone  I  must  get  my  bread — I  mean 
the  character  of  an  honest  man.  This  I  write  that  you  may  show  to  Mr.  Garrick. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Davies. 


t 

MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  DAVIES. 

SIR,  August,  1763. 

My  brother,  according  to  your  desire,  has  shown  me  your  most  extraordinary 
letter.  I  shall  not  put  myself  to  the  unnecessary  trouble  of  convincing  you  of  your 
unprovoked  ill-treatment  of  me;  I  shall  leave  that  to  your  own  reflections  when  they 
are  uninfluenced  by  suspicion  and  self-sufficiency.  I  shall  only  say  that,  upon  my 
honour,  I  never  once  suspected  your  integrity,  and  till  I  heard  of  your  last  con¬ 
versation  with  my  brother,  I  had  not  the  least  doubts  of  your  veracity.  I  shall  most 
certainly  withdraw  myself,  as  you  are  pleased  to  command  me,  and  I  am  as  willing 
and  ready  as  yourself  to  settle  the  account  between  us. 

1  am,  Sir,  yours,  tkc. 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  DAVIES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

5Ig)  August  10th,  1763. 

By  desiring  the  account  between  us  might  be  settled,  I  did  not  mean  (which  you 
seem  to  intend  I  should)  to  pay  the  balance  immediately.  I  only  thought  that  it 
would  be  the  best  way  to  rectify  any  past  or  prevent  any  future  mistakes.  How¬ 
ever,  that  will  not  so  much  distress  me,  if  Mr.  Garrick  will  please  to  stay  till  my 
auction  is  over,  which  will  be  in  about  three  weeks ;  then  I  shall  be  able  to  pay  what 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


163 


is  due  with  ease.  I  should  likewise  be  obliged  to  him,  if  the  Museum  Florentinum 
(as  promised)  would  be  accepted  in  part  of  payment. 

I  find  it  was  wrong  in  me  to  complain,  though  I  thought  I  had  sufficient  reason 
to  apprehend  my  honesty  was  doubted.  I  very  sincerely  thank  you  that  you  have 
condescended  to  clear  that  point,  and  shall  only  say  that  I  too  hastily  judged  from 
appearances.  I  will  be  bold  to  say  that  I  detest  falsehood  and  dissimulation  as  much 
as  any  man  living.  But  if  you  mean  by  any  doubt  of  my  veracity,  that  I  assigned 
a  very  different  reason  to  Mr.  George  Garrick  for  leaving  the  stage  from  what  I  had 
given  to  yourself  and  others,  you  are  certainly  in  the  right.  Mr.  Johnson  can 
remember  that  I  declared  to  him  above  twelve  months  since,  that  I  should  not  have 
quitted  the  theatre  when  I  did,  if  your  warmth  of  temper  had  not  provoked  me 
to  it.  At  the  same  time  I  own  I  told  my  friends,  that  my  motive  for  so  doing,  was 
the  being  unable  to  attend  my  shop  and  the  business  of  the  stage  together.  And 
this  instance  of  want  of  veracity  I  readily  confess. 

I  could  not  be  so  impertinent  as  to  desire,  much  less  to  command  you  to  withdraw 
your  favours  from  me.  I  did  only  mean  that  I  had  much  rather  lose  yours  or  any 
man’s  favour  than  have  my  honesty  suspected. 

However  you  may  behave  to  me  for  the  future,  I  shall  always  think  myself 
obliged  for  past  favours. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Davis. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  DAVIES. 

Hampton,  Aug.  10,  176;!. 

They  who  have  too  much  the  weakness  of  sensibility  about  them,  confess  their 
mistakes  with  a  degree  of  contrition,  whilst  you,  Sir,  can  find  yourself  wrong  with 
that  superior  indifference,  and  self-approbation,  so  well  known  to  all  who  have  the 
pleasure  of  your  acquaintance.  I  hope,  for  my  own  sake,  that  you  will  still  continue 
to  keep  one  of  the  real  reasons  of  your  quitting  the  stage  a  secret  from  the  w’orld,  as 
I  would  not  choose  that  the  public  should  upbraid  my  warmth  of  temper  for  depriving 
them  of  your  theatrical  talents.  It  has  indeed  been  said,  that  the  stage  became 
disagreeable  to  you  from  the  first  publication  of  “  The  Rosciad,”  and  that  you  were 
resolved  to  quit  it,  as  you  were  always  confused  and  unhappy  whenever  you  saw  Mr. 
Churchill  before  you  :  should  this  be  truth,  how  will  you  reconcile  your  three  differ¬ 
ent  reasons  for  the  same  thing  with  your  detestation  of  falsehood  and  dissimulation  ? 
If  you  mean  by  the  warmth  of  temper  you  have  accused  me  of  to  Mr.  Johnson,  a 
certain  anxiety  for  the  business  of  the  stage,  your  accusation  was  well  founded  ;  for 
I  must  confess,  1  have  been  often  too  much  agitated  by  your  want  of  that  care  and 

Y  2 


164 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


readiness  in  your  parts,  which  1  thought  I  had  a  right  to  resent,  and  which  made 
your  leaving  us  of  such  little  consequence :  this  warmth  of  temper  is  certainly  my 
weakness,  but  1  could  never  find  that  any  actors  have  left  us  upon  that  account,  nor 
do  I  remember  that  1  ever  drove  a  single  performer  from  the  stage,  always  excepting 
him  whose  over-exquisite  feelings  have  made  my  connection  with  him  of  small 
duration. 

But  why  would  you  expose  my  infirmities  (the  real  reasons  for  your  quitting  the 
stage)  at  a  time  that  you  was  asking  and  receiving  favours  from  me,  and  when  I  was 
exerting  all  the  little  interest  I  had  in  your  service? — But  to  go  farther — did  not  you 
tell  my  brother  that  1  refused  you  the  fifty  pounds,  which  I  gave  you  as  a  deposit 
for  the  purchase  of  your  house  ?  If  I  had  refused  you,  could  you  possibly  have  the 
least  pretence  for  thinking  me  unkind  ?  certainly  not.  But  you  wrong  me  :  I  told 
you  I  would  lend  it  to  you,  though  I  could  not  conveniently  at  the  time  you  asked 
it,  and  I  told  you  why  I  could  not.  I  am  ashamed  to  mention  these  things,  but  I 
repeat  them  to  you  as  the  last  words  of  a  dead  acquaintance,  that  you  may  hereafter 
be  a  little  more  cautious  in  the  treatment  of  your  friends  and  well-wishers. 

I  am  very  ready  to  perform  the  conditional  promise  I  have  made  you  about  the 
. Museum  Florentinum ,  though  from  your  behaviour  you  have  no  claim  to  it :  and  I 
congratulate  your  prudence,  which  does  not  forget  your  interest  in  the  midst  of  your 
passion.  I  must  confess,  that  it  appears  particular  to  me  that  the  same  letter  which 
acknowledges  a  wrong,  without  even  the  smallest  concession,  should  ask  an  additional 
favour — at  parting.  I  am,  Sir, 

Yours,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  DAVIES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

London,  Aug.  13th,  1763. 

If  I  thought  you  had  good-nature  enough  to  be  sorry  for  an  ill-natured  action, 
I  should  have  enclosed  your  letter,  and  begged  your  re-perusal  of  it ;  and  should 
have  imagined  I  had  paid  you  by  that  behaviour  the  greatest  compliment  in  my 
power :  but  as  I  am  sure  any  concession  from  me  at  this  time  would  be  construed 
into  an  act  of  meanness,  I  am  determined  to  answer  every  thing  material  in  your  s 
with  equal  truth  and  coolness ;  nor  shall  I  endeavour  at  those  keen  strokes  of  spleen 
and  resentment  with  which  yours  is  so  plentifully  adorned. 

I  really  thought  that  a  man’s  acknowledging  he  was  in  the  wrong,  his  returning 
his  sincere  thanks  to  the  party  offended  for  his  condescension  in  clearing  up  the 
point  in  question,  his  confessing  that  he  had  trusted  too  much  to  appearances,  and 
his  owning  all  obligations  for  past  favours,  &c.  would  have  been  deemed  a  sufficient 
acknowledgment  from  one  man  to  another,  except  where  there  was  the  vast  distance 
of  subject  and  sovereign,  lord  and  vassal,  or  child  and  parent.  But  Mr.  Garrick  will 
not  be  satisfied  with  contrition,  which,  if  I  understand  it  right,  is  sorrow  for  sins  past 
from  the  love  we  owe  our  Maker,  and  the  sincere  desire  to  please  him. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


165 


As  I  have  not  the  most  distant  wish  to  return  to  the  stage,  your  ridicule  from 
thence  is  pointless. 

I  remember,  that,  during  the  run  of  Cymbeline,”  I  had  the  misfortune  to 
disconcert  you  in  one  scene  of  that  play,  for  which  I  did  immediately  beg  your 
pardon,  and  did  attribute  it  to  my  accidentally  seeing  Mr.  Churchill  in  the  pit,  with 
great  truth  ;  and  that  was  the  only  time  I  can  recollect  of  my  being  confused,  or 
unmindful  of  my  business,  when  that  gentleman  was  before  me.  I  had  even  then 
a  more  moderate  opinion  of  my  abilities  than  your  candour  would  allow  me,  and 
have  always  acknowledged  that  gentleman’s  picture  of  me  was  fair  ;  nor  had  I  a  right 
to  be  out  of  humour  with  him  when  better  performers  were  not  spared.  Mr.  John¬ 
son  is  a  common  friend  to  both  ;  surely  the  entrusting  to  him,  and  that  in  confidence, 
the  real  cause  of  my  leaving  the  stage,  which  was  as  much  a  proof  of  my  too  great 
sensibility,  as  your  warmth  of  temper,  cannot  be  deemed  a  very  great  fault. 

It  seems  I  am  the  only  person  whose  exquisite  feelings,  and  not  the  warmth  of 
your  temper,  have  driven  from  the  stage.  Is  it  really  so  ?  or  must  I  be  obliged  to 
name  the  living  and  the  dead  to  prove  the  contrary  ?  This  I  can  do  and  will  when 
called  upon ;  but  till  then  shall  be  silent,  and  leave  it  to  your  own  recollection  to 
supply  this  part  of  my  letter.  I  do  not  mean  that  any  other  but  myself  has  entirely 
quitted  the  stage  on  that  account ;  but  if  your  warmth  of  temper  obliged  them  to 
retire  to  another  stage,  my  assertion  stands  firm  and  unrefuted. 

Be  pleased,  Sir,  to  hear  a  short  history  of  your  own  conduct  to  me,  which  brought 
on  those  exquisite  feelings  you  are  so  merry  with.  You  will  please  to  call  to  mind 
that  by  a  mistake  of  your  own,  Mrs.  Davies  was  first  led  to  commit  an  offence  against 
you  about  walking  in  “  The  Coronation  you  will  likewise  please  to  call  to  mind 
the  submissions  of  husband  and  wife  on  this  occasion,  asking  your  pardon  in  the  most 
humiliating  terms  ;  owning  and  thanking  you  for  all  past  favours,  professing  the 
greatest  esteem  and  regard,  with  most  earnest  supplications  that  you  woidd  please  to 
remit  this  one  fault,  declaring  at  the  same  time  that  the  withholding  your  favour 
made  us  extremely  unhappy.  All  this  I  thought  due  to  one  who  had  perhaps  some 
just  cause  of  offence,  and  who  had,  as  I  imagined,  taken  a  pleasure  in  doing  us  acts  of 
kindness.  No  submission  availed,  neither  attrition  nor  contrition  would  do.  If  I  met 
Mr.  Garrick  behind  the  scenes,  or  in  the  street,  or  elsewhere,  he  woidd  not  speak, 
scarce  return  his  hat  when  bowed  to.  At  rehearsals  he  took  all  imaginable  pains  to 
make  me  unhappy — some  jest  or  galling  speech,  which  he  seems  to  be  excessively 
ready  at,  was  sure  to  be  at  my  service ;  the  gentlest  expression  of  his  resentment  was 
a  laugh,  not  indeed  of  the  most  good-natured  kind.  He  would  not  condescend  to 
settle  the  business  of  a  scene  without  some  mark  of  cool  disgust  and  displeasure. 
This  behaviour  my  exquisite  feelings  submitted  to  bear  for  above  two  months.  At 
last,  seeing  no  end  of  it,  I  told  your  brother  that  I  perceived  1  was  become  extremely 
disagreeable  to  you,  that  all  my  submissions  were  to  no  purpose,  and  that  such  a  life 
was  extremely  irksome  to  me,  and  that  I  would  much  rather  quit  any  man’s  roof, 
than  live  under  it  with  his  continual  frown,  &c.  This  conversation  I  have  reason  to 


> 


loo 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


think,  he  mentioned  to  you  ;  for  the  very  next  time  I  saw  you,  you  spoke  to  me  with 
that  good-humour  that  is  always  sure  to  please.  However,  I  found  this  sunshine 
was  of  short  duration,  and  was  determined  at  all  events  to  ask  my  dismission  :  you 
confirmed  me  in  my  resolution  by  something  that  is  as  well  forgot  as  remembered. 

I  really  cannot  call  to  mind  what  favour  1  asked  of  you  when  I  quitted  the  stage, 
and  should  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  refresh  my  memory.  If  I  remember 
right,  1  had  not  the  pleasure  of  your  conversation  for  a  long  time.  Please,  Sir,  to  call 
to  mind,  that  unsolicited  you  offered  your  service  to  purchase  my  house,  when  I  told 
you  that  my  friend  Mr.  Lane,  the  attorney,  had  promised  to  supply  me  with  money, 
and  that  I  then  paid  you  the  compliment  of  wishing  rather  to  be  obliged  to  you  than 
anybody  else.  The  lease  was  sent,  and  a  day  begged  of  you  to  meet  and  confer  on 
what  was  proper  to  be  done.  You  was  pleased  to  see  me  at  twelve  o’clock  the  very 
day  of  the  sale,  when  you  declared  that  the  freehold  was  not  worth  above  800/.  How¬ 
ever,  Mr.  Grignion’s,  which  is  not  one  penny  better  than  mine,  sold  for  (I  think)  about 
1200/.  and  mine  near  1100/.  I  did  then  return  you  thanks,  and  have  never  been 
forgetful  of  the  smallest  kindness,  but  have  declared  it  to  all  the  world.  It  is  true,  1 
asked  you  to  lend  me  the  50/.  draught,  which  you  had  given  me  for  a  deposit  in  case 
the  house  had  been  bought.  You  denied  me,  because  you  had  a  particular  occasion 
for  it.  I  could  not  have  the  least  pretence  for  anger  on  your  refusal.  The  anger  of 
a  man  who  is  refused  a  sum  he  wants  to  borrow,  is,  in  my  opinion,  like  the  anger  of 
a  highwayman  who  is  disappointed  of  his  booty.  I  own  I  was  displeased  at  an  ex¬ 
pression  you  then  dropped — you  was  really  surprised,  after  all,  that  I  should  want 
money  !  A  very  strange  thing  indeed,  that  a  tradesman  not  well  established  in  busi¬ 
ness  should  want  cash  ! — You  was  exerting  all  the  little  interest  you  had  for  my  ser¬ 
vice  :  I  am  sure  I  never  denied  any  service  you  did  me.  If  by  my  pride,  and  inso¬ 
lence,  and  ingratitude  together,  I  have  lost  the  third  share  of  a  work  which  was 
worth  100/.  as  you  told  me,  which  you  had  got  for  nothing,  or  a  trifle,  I  am,  as  I 
always  have  been,  the  undoer  of  my  own  fortunes. 

I  thank  you  for  the  intended  favour  of  the  Museum  Florentinum ,  but  cannot  now 
accept  of  it,  after  such  upbraiding  terms.  Two  or  three  pounds  more  or  less  will  not 
ruin  me.  However,  you  say  you  are  pleased  I  can  join  passion  and  interest  together : 
there  is  a  small  mistake  in  this,  for  you  will  find  the  passion  of  your  side  of  the 
question.  After  you  had  cleared  up  the  point  I  was  so  unhappy  as  to  think  I  had 
reason  to  be  angry  about,  I  must  have  been  a  madman  to  continue  it  longer.  All  I 
request  is  your  staying  till  my  auction  is  over.  If  you  should  put  your  bond  in  ex¬ 
ecution,  which  I  do  not  think  you  will,  I  am  not  so  ill  beloved  but  I  shall  be  able  to 
find  bail  till  I  can  raise  the  sum.  I  have  lost  no  friend  worth  having,  except  yourself. 

I  take  my  leave  of  my  dead  acquaintance,  by  telling  him  that  I  am  sure  I  have 
made  him  extremely  happy,  for  he  will  certainly  think  he  has  now  a  right  to  call  me 
the  most  ungrateful  scoundrel  upon  earth  ! 

I  am,  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Thoiuas  Davies. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


167 


DR.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  AND  GOOD  FRIEND,  St-  Mary’s,  Sept.  1st,  1763. 

I  am  most  heartily  sorry  for  the  occasion  that  deprives  the  greatest  city  of  the 
greatest  genius  in  the  world  in  his  art,  for  one  winter,  (I  hope  for  no  more,)  and  the 
most  sensible  people  in  it  of  the  highest  entertainment — perhaps  you  think  I  mean 
you  again  ;  no,  Sir,  I  mean  Cromwell ,  Earl  of  Essex,  upon  the  exhibition  of  which  I 
depended,  along  with  that  of  your  old  friend  Ben’s  piece,  the  next  winter.  Upon  this 
foundation,  I  have  battled  it  against  all  assertors  of  your  intended  journey,  persuading 
myself  that  you  would  certainly  give  me  the  first  notice  of  the  very  dawning  of  such 
an  intention.  I  have  made  use  of  almost  every  vacant  opportunity  from  the  neces¬ 
sary  avocations  of  my  duty,  and  the  unnecessary  ones  of  this  very  public  place,  to 
abridge,  reform,  new  plan,  &c.  and  then  re-copy  the  whole,  after  my  good  friends  and 
critics  had  convinced  me  how  much  I  had  to  do :  but  the  call  of  health  must  be 
obeyed ;  and  I  shall  not  grudge  my  premature  labour,  as  I  have  reason  to  hope  it 
will  grow  more  and  more  perfect,  and  appear,  like  yourself,  with  greater  strength  and 
eclat  at  your  return — if  it  please  God  to  spare  our  lives.  If  you  do  not  think  proper 
to  wait  upon,  or  write  to,  the  widow  Hoadly,  I  will  let  her  know  your  design,  as  her 
disappointment  (of  the  money,  I  mean)  will  be  great ;  though  not  so  great  as  mine, 
which  is  of  a  very  different  nature.  Ad-i-e-u,  au  revoir.  If  you  have  an  easy  oppor¬ 
tunity,  I  should  be  glad  if  you  would  give  my  respects  and  good  wishes  to  a  very  old 
acquaintance,  in  our  very  young  days,  at  the  university,  Isaac  Jamineau,  Esq.  Consul 
now  at  Naples,  formerly  a  sprightly,  ingenious  fellow,  and  a  lover  of  our  joint 
muses,  of  writing  and  acting.  What  he  is  now  I  know  not,  except  that  his  fortune 
was  somewhat  broken  (handsome  as  it  was  for  a  younger  brother,)  by  his  impru¬ 
dences,  before  his  appointment  to  this  place ;  in  which,  I  hear,  he  is  not  upon  a  very 
good  footing  with  our  greater  man,  Sir  James  Grey.  Again  adieu  !  with  the  good 
wishes  of  my  good  woman  to  you  and  yours,  jointly  with  those  of,  dear  David, 

Your  and  her  very  affectionate, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Woodhay,  Thursday,  Sept.  8th,  1763. 

I  was  last  night  favoured  with  yours,  and  greatly  surprised  with  the  news  in  it, 
for  though  I  had  read  a  paragraph  in  the  papers  that  you  intended  going  abroad,  l 
gave  no  credit  to  it.  However  sorry  I  am  for  my  own  sake,  I  think  you  do  right, 
and  wish  to  God  1  coidd  do  the  same  :  my  best  wishes  and  compliments  wait  on  you 
and  Mrs.  Garrick.  Mr.  Sloper  and  my  daughter  join  in  the  same.  I  shall  take  it  as  a 
particular  favour,  if  you  will  let  me  have  a  line  from  you  in  your  travels,  and  should 


168 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


you  or  Mrs.  Garrick  have  any  commands  in  England  that  I  am  capable  of  executing, 
I  shall  have  great  pleasure  in  obeying  them.  Health  and  pleasure  attend  you  both  ' 

1  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

To  save  you  threepence,  I  will  not  enclose  this,  having  no  frank. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday,  Sept.  I4th,  1763. 

Since  last  Sunday  night,  I  have  been  confined  at  home,  and  am  still  so  much 
out  of  order,  it  will  not,  I  apprehend,  be  in  my  power,  but  in  this  manner,  to  bid  you 
farewell  before  you  leave  London ;  I  must  therefore  assure  you,  that  as  few  persons 
can  have  more  reason  to  wish  you  the  enjoyment  of  every  thing  which  may  contri¬ 
bute  to  your  happiness,  so  no  one  does  it  more  sincerely  than  myself.  The  obligations 
you  have  conferred  on  me  are  of  too  substantial  a  nature  to  be  ever  erased  from  my 
memory ;  but  as  a  grateful  sense  of  them  is  all  at  present  in  my  power,  I  must  hope 
for  some  future  opportunity  of  convincing  you  I  am  not  undeserving  of  the  con¬ 
fidence  you  have  reposed  in  me,  and  I  am  with  great  regard,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

I  beg  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[This  letter  appears  to  have  been  written  while  the  Duke  was  Lord  Chamberlain ;  if  so,  it  must  have 
borne  date  before  Nov.  22,  1762,  when  his  Grace  was  succeeded  by  the  Duke  of  Marlborough. — Ed.] 

The  King  has  returned  me  the  play,*  and  in  case  it  is  soon  to  be  printed,  will 
wait ;  if  not,  I  am  to  get  it  copied  out  fair,  in  a  large  hand,  and  with  (black)  ink ; 
would  your  people  choose  to  do  it,  or  shall  I  employ  somebody  ? 

Yours,  &c. 

Devonshire. 

*  Mr.  Garrick’s  alteration  of  “The  Midsummer  Night’s  Dream,”  printed  in  1763.  He  left  this  to  his 
friend  Colman’s  care,  on  his  going  abroad  ;  it  was  brought  out,  and  the  audience,  like  the  characters,  at  one 
time  were  all  asleep.  The  judgment  of  Colman  recommended  the  cutting  it  down  to  a  fairy  tale;  but  fairy 
beings  must  be  left  to  the  imagination  for  one  especial  reason, — they  are  too  small  to  be  acted  by  men  and 
women  ;  and  children  want  the  requisite  maturity,  poxcer,  and  voice,  to  do  them  justice. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


169 


MR.  POWELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  London,  March  30,  1764. 

Since  your  departure  I  have  not  presumed  to  trouble  you  with  a  letter,  supposing 
you  had  all  the  advices  and  intelligences  you  could  desire  from  your  brother  and  Mr. 
Colman,  &c.  &c.  and  that  any  thing  farther  would  only  be  an  interruption  of  those 
pleasures  you  were  in  pursuit  of,  and  which  I  hope  you  have  enjoyed  to  your  utmost 
satisfaction.  I  have  long  had  an  inclination  to  write  to  you,  and  now,  on  your 
return,  I  hope  it  will  not  be  thought  impertinent,  for  my  heart  wishes  to  unburthen 
itself  of  some  of  the  many  acknowledgments  it  owes  to  you,  my  best  of  friends. 
1  need  not  inform  you  that  the  theatre  has  gone  on  in  a  most  flourishing  manner  ; 
and  in  regard  to  myself,  my  success  has  indeed  been  beyond  my  most  sanguine 
expectations,  or  even  my  warmest  hopes.  I  have  many  obligations  to  the  public  for 
their  readiness  in  discerning  my  little  share  of  merit,  and  their  generosity  in  excusing 
my  numberless  errors.  I  am  confident  I  can  never  cease  to  think  that  all  the  grati¬ 
tude  which  can  possess  the  heart  of  man,  is  due  to  you  from  me ;  for  you,  Sir,  laid 
the  foundation  of  all,  by  your  kind  care  of  me  during  the  course  of  last  summer, 
and  have  put  within  my  view  the  prospect  of  future  happiness,  for  me,  my  wife,  and 
little  infants,  who  are  daily  taught  to  bless  your  name  as  their  very  best  of  friends. 
During  my  poor  but  best  endeavours  in  the  duty  of  my  new  profession,  I  am  in¬ 
debted  to  Mr.  Colman  for  every  assistance  :  his  friendship  can  be  equalled  by  none 
but  that  which  I  have  experienced  from  you,  and  for  which  I  am  sure  I  shall  be 
taught  by  you  to  bear  a  most  grateful  remembrance.  He  is  so  kind  to  say  he  will 
direct  this  letter  to  you.  I  have  all  obligations  to  your  brother  for  his  abundance  of 
good-nature  and  friendship.  And  I  hope  I  have  at  last  by  unwearied  diligence  pre¬ 
vailed  on  Mr.  Lacy  to  be  in  earnest  my  friend ;  indeed  I  can  boast  of  no  more 
friendship  (scarcely  common  civility)  behind  the  curtain.  But  of  these  matters  I 
may  speak  more  at  large,  when  I  am  blest  with  the  happiness  to  see  you. 

I  have  engaged  to  go  to  Bristol  in  the  summer,  but  wish  to  have  the  satisfaction 
to  see  you  before  I  leave  London.  I  hope  I  shall  gain  credit  when  I  tell  you,  that, 
amidst  all  my  success,  vanity  has  no  immoderate  possession  of  me ;  nor  has  it  raised 
a  pride  beyond  that  of  an  honest  emulation  (with  your  future  kind  assistance)  to  go 
on  assiduously  and  still  to  prosper ;  and  that  the  greatest  ambition  my  mind  pos¬ 
sesses  is,  to  study  to  merit  your  favour  and  protection,  and  that  the  public  may  see, 
whatever  other  deficiency  I  may  labour  under,  at  least  I  do  not  want  gratitude  to 
you,  the  founder  of  all  my  happiness  and  success.  I  hope  this  will  find  both  you 
and  Mrs.  Garrick  in  perfect  health.  I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  she  has  been  at  all 
indisposed,  and  beg  you  will  do  me  the  honour  to  present  her  my  most  humble 
respects,  with  which  I  remain, 

Your  very  obedient,  and  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

William  Powell* 

*  Every  reader,  I  think,  will  be  pleased  with  the  modest  gratitude  of  this  excellent  actor.  But  his  feli- 
VOL.  1. 


Z 


170 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  MR.  GARRICK,  London,  April  1 7,  1  764. 

You  will  think  me  a  strange  beast  not  to  have  returned  you  my  thanks  for 
your  former  letter  sooner.  I  am  indeed  ashamed  of  myself :  do  not  impute  it  to 
any  want  of  regard  for  you,  for  that  is  impossible.  I  received  your  last  of  the 
24th  of  March,  yesterday,  and  though  it  gave  me  great  pleasure,  yet  the  account 
of  Mrs.  Garrick’s  indisposition  was  a  great  allay  to  the  satisfaction  I  had  from  it. 
I  should  hope  summer  and  the  warm  climate  of  Italy  will  soon  perfectly  re-estab¬ 
lish  her.  I  take  for  granted  your  numerous  correspondents  inform  you  of  the 
daily  occurrences,  and  as  I  am  not  in  the  secret  of  affairs,  I  know  very  little 
more  than  the  common  newspapers  tell  us ;  for  as  to  the  secrets  of  the  minority, 
God  knows  they  are  very  few,  or  rather  none  at  all.  We  made  a  figure  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  but  what  with  accidents,  that  were  in  themselves  unavoidable, 
and  mismanagement,  we  contrived  to  reap  no  benefit  from  our  numbers,  which  were 
very  considerable  ;  whereas,  had  we  known  how  to  make  a  proper  use  of  our  forces, 
or  rather,  had  we  all  properly  concurred  in  so  doing,  I  believe  we  should  at  least 
have  brought  the  enemy  to  terms  of  capitulation  before  this  time ;  whereas  now  we 
have  left  them  in  possession  of  the  field  till  next  session.  The  chapter  of  accidents 
may  possibly  decide  the  fate  of  the  next  campaign,  and  unless  something  extra¬ 
ordinary  happens,  I  should  think  our  adversaries  will  scarce  be  able  to  maintain 
themselves. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  that  your  administration  has  gone  on  so  well  in  your  absence. 
I  have  now  and  then  made  some  inquiries,  and  have  heard  it  doubted  whether  there 
would  not  be  a  considerable  difference  :  a  moderate  one,  perhaps,  might  not  be 
disagreeable,  as  it  would  be  flattering  :  however,  I  heard  two  days  ago  that  you 
must  come  over,  as  some  of  your  chief  performers  have  left  you.  What  a  silly 
thing  has  Lady  Susan  Strangwavs  done  :*  Lord  Ilchester  thought  he  had  reasoned 
her  out  of  it,  and  she  had  desired  him  to  take  her  into  the  country  :  he  is  by  all 
accounts  most  terribly  affected  by  it,  and  poor  Lady  Sarah  Bunbury  as  much. 


city  in  having  such  instructors  as  Garrick  and  Colman,  contributed  in  great  measure  to  regulate  the 
passion  which  distinguished  his  tragedy.  Nothing  but  a  sound  judgment  can  save  the  tragedian  from  the 
rival  absurdities  of  rant  and  whine.  Mr.  Powell  died  in  the  year  1769,  in  the  33d  year  of  his  age. 

*  Lady  Susan  Sarah  Louisa  Strangways,  eldest  daughter  of  Stephen  Fox,  the  first  Earl  of  Ilchester,  mar¬ 
ried  William  O'Brien,  the  actor.  He  quitted  the  stage  on  his  marriage,  in  compliment  to  the  prejudices  of 
the  noble  family  to  which  he  was  then  allied  ;  and  became,  by  their  influence,  Receiver  General  of  the 
County  of  Dorset,  in  which  important  station  he  lived  to  a  very  advanced  age,  highly  respected.  The  late 
William  Lewis  told  me,  that  “  he  was  the  only  actor,  who  seemed  perfectly  genteel  upon  the  stage.”  How 
able  he  was  to  judge  at  the  time,  or  how  much  he  could  have  seen  of  him,  the  reader  may  estimate  for  him¬ 
self  ;  for  O’Brien  had  quitted  the  stage,  when  Lewis  barely  reckoned  sixteen  years  :  however,  he  knew  him  in 
his  retirement,  and  his  judgment  might  be  one  of  inference,  what  O’Brien  must  have  been,  from  what  he 
saw  him  to  be. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


171 


As  you  have  lost  your  relish  for  the  stage,  and  virtu  has  taken  its  place,  we  shall 
have  you  come  over  a  perfect  Dilettante,  and  I  trust  we  shall  have  some  battles  upon 
the  subject. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  offer  of  purchasing  pictures  and  statues,  but 
I  have  no  money.  I  should,  however,  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  get  me  all 
the  prints  that  Bartolozzi  has  engraved :  as  you  are  such  a  connoisseur,  you  must 
know  him.  I  believe  he  lives  at  Rome ;  I  know  they  are  sold  there.  If  you  meet 
with  Lord  and  Lady  Spencer  again  in  your  travels,  I  beg  you  will  make  my  com¬ 
pliments,  and  assure  them  of  my  great  regard  and  esteem  for  both,  and  shall  be 
very  glad  to  see  them  return  in  perfect  health.  I  shall  be  impatient  till  I  hear 
Mrs.  Garrick  is  quite  well :  pray  assure  her  of  my  best  respects,  and  believe  me  to  be 
very  sincerely. 

Your  faithful  humble  servant, 

Devonshire. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LADY  SPENCER. 


MADAM,  1st,  1761. 

The  old  saying,  that  no  man  can  master  his  own  mind,  was  never  so  truly  veri¬ 
fied  as  in  your  humble  servant.  If  ever  I  was  bent  upon  one  thing  more  than  another, 
it  was  to  obey  Lady  Spencer’s  and  the  Marquise  of  Ligneville’s  commands ;  and  yet, 
though  I  have  seen  your  Ladyship’s  frowns,  and  have  felt  the  reproaches  of  my  own 
conscience  for  some  time  past,  though  no  man  ever  took  more  shame  to  himself  than 
I  have  done,  and  though  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  keep  my  word,  I  flatter  myself 
there  is  something  to  be  offered  in  my  vindication.  The  poem  of  which  I  had  written 
a  part,  and  in  which  I  had  introduced  the  character  of  Count  Firmian,  had  possessed 
me  so  much  when  I  had  the  honour  of  conversing  with  the  Marquise  of  Ligneville, 
that  I  could  not  doubt  of  being  able  to  finish  the  picture  I  had  begun  in  a  few  days ; 
but  whether  the  subject  was  too  much  for  me,  or  my  fears  of  not  answering  the  Mar¬ 
quise’s  expectations  had  taken  too  strong  hold  upon  me,  I  cannot  tell,  but  I  have  not 
yet  been  able,  with  all  the  struggles  I  have  had  with  my  froward  mind,  to  perform 
my  promise :  all  1  have  to  plead  in  my  own  defence  is,  that  my  heart  was  too  warm 
in  a  service  which  my  peevish  Muse,  out  of  a  little  spite  and  contradiction,  would 
not  agree  to ;  and  what  is  still  more  provoking,  all  the  trifles  I  have  hitherto  pro¬ 
duced,  have  been  as  quickly  executed,  as  they  have  been  lightly  written,  so  I  can 
only  say  with  poor  Captain  Bobadil  in  the  play,  (who  was  a  braggadocio  of  another 
kind,)  that  I  am  planet-struck.  If  your  Ladyship  will  step  between  me  and  the 
Marquise’s  displeasure,  you  will  do  me  a  most  signal  service,  and  if  I  can  outlive  my 
shame,  I  will  not  rest  till  I  have  laid  myself  and  my  muse  at  her  feet,  as  very  proper 
subjects  to  exert  her  mercy  upon  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  1  beg  leave  to  produce 

7  2 

/j 


172 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Montaigne  in  mitigation  of  her  anger,  who  says,  that  every  promise  breaker  should  be 
hanged,  except  he  be  a  poet  or  a  madman. 

I  am  your  Ladyship’s  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


SIGNOR  JOSEPH  BARETTI  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Venice,  July  10th,  1764 

Countess  Bujovich,  the  lady  who  told  me  of  her  miraculous  remedy  against 
the  sciatica,  has  been  out  of  town  these  three  weeks,  and  I  know  not  when  she  will 
be  back  again.  But  if  I  recollect  well,  the  plaister  is  made  with  some  Venetian  soap 
and  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  well  mixed  together,  applied  to  the  painful  part  on  a  bit  of 
blue  paper.  Have  you  forgot  the  black  hen  ?  Do  not  neglect  that  particularity, 
and  abstain  from  laughing,  you  incredulous  mortal.  To  be  serious,  I  heartily  wish 
Mrs.  Garrick  a  perfect  recovery  of  her  health,  and  should  be  very  glad  to  hear  her 
bettered  by  this  simple  remedy.  I  was  much  pleased  to  hear  from  more  than  one 
friend,  that  she  is  much  better  now  than  she  was  when  she  left  Venice,  and  that  she 
has  dismissed  her  stick,  and  walks  bravely  about.  Could  I  absent  myself  from  here, 

I  would  certainly  come  to  Albano,  and  wait  daily  on  her  in  our  Italian  character  of 
Cavalier  Serviente,  although  she  wants  a  stick  no  more.  My  best  wishes  and  com¬ 
pliments  wait  on  her  instead  of  me. 

Now,  friend  Garrick,  give  me  leave  to  be  a  little  peevish  with  you.  How  could 
you  be  such  a  witless  man,  as  to  think  that  you  could  find  Italian  literature  existing 
to  the  sum  of  thirty  sequins?  I  scarcely  think  you  would  find  literature  in  the 
whole  world  worth  such  a  sum.  I  reckon  that  you  have  about  twenty  sequins’ 
worth  in  England,  three  sequins’  in  France,  a  couple  of  sequins’  in  Germany,  and 
another  couple  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  which  sums,  put  together,  do  not  fully  come 
up  to  what  you  laid  out  in  that  of  Italy  only.  Yet,  though  literature  worth  money 
be  so  very  scarce,  in  my  opinion,  everywhere,  I  am  not  quite  of  your  mind  as  to  the 
books  you  bought,  considered  as  books.  Some  of  them,  (for  I  saw  a  list  of  them  in 
Mr.  Beauclerk’s  hands,)  some  of  them  are  valuable  for  their  printer’s  sake,  some  for 
this,  and  some  for  that  other  foolish  reason  ;  and  whenever  you  think  of  selling  them 
again,  I  firmly  believe  that  it  will  not  be  any  hard  matter  to  get  you  your  money 
again.  Mr.  Beauclerk,  meanwhile,  offers  you  twenty  sequins,  if  you  are  fully  per¬ 
suaded  of  having  made  a  very  bad  bargain.  So  you  see  you  will  but  lose  ten 
sequins  instead  of  twenty.  I  wish  I  had  seen  the  books  themselves,  I  could  be 
more  positive,  in  all  probability,  as  to  your  having  done  yourself  no  harm ;  for  I 
firmly  think  that  you  have  done  by  chance  what  many  more  people  in  Venice  would 
likewise  do  deliberately.  Be  comforted,  then,  and  do  not  consider  yourself  as  a  great 
sufferer  for  a  trifling  loss  that  you  may  make  at  the  very  worst.  The  great  sufferer 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


173 


is  your  lady,  who  is  obliged  to  stop  in  a  sorry  place,  physicking,  instead  of  rambling 
about  merrily  in  cheerful  places.  You  will,  I  hope,  excuse  this  long  nonsense,  and 
be  persuaded  that  I  am,  and  will  always  be,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  friend  and  servant, 

Joseph  Baretti. 


SIGNOR  JOSEPH  BARETTI  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Venice,  July  14th,  1764. 

Your  defence  is  so  eloquent  and  nervous,  that  had  you  betaken  yourself  to  the 
bar  as  you  did  to  the  stage,  I  am  positive  you  had  been  as  formidable  in  West- 
minster-hall,  as  you  are  in  Drury’s  play-house.  I  never  saw  any  thing  more  advocate¬ 
like  than  this  defence ;  and  though  the  gallant  Beauclerk  be  against  the  quoted 
sentiment  of  Hotspur,  yet  I  am  for  it,  as  I  do  not  pique  myself  to  be  any  thing 
more  than  a  mortal  man,  and  never  dared  to  run  counter  to  the  general  opinions. 

As  to  the  soap-plaister,  I  find  Mr.  Turton  is  not  against  it,  and  Mr.  Righellini 
approved  of  it  too.  Nay,  Turton  says,  that  soap  in  sciatical  complaints  is  set  down 
as  a  good  remedy  in  an  English  Dispensary.  I  wish  with  all  my  heart  it  may  pro¬ 
duce  good  effect,  as  I  had  really  a  great  value,  and  even  affection,  for  your  lady  ever 
since  she  poured  me  a  dish  of  tea  the  first  time  I  saw  her  in  London.  I  never  shall 
forget  that  adventure,  though  she  may.  She  did  it  in  so  graceful  a  manner,  I  could 
still  paint  her  in  that  pretty  attitude,  had  I  Reynolds’s  or  Guido’s  powers.  Do  not 
interpret  this  as  a  bold  declaration  of  love  to  your  best  half ;  for  was  my  love  to  her 
of  the  wicked  kind,  faith  !  husband,  a  cunning  Italian  would  know  better  than  to  let 
thee  in  the  secret.  You  see,  Sir,  the  effect  of  what  you  tell  me,  that  the  professors 
at  Padua  declare  me  the  best  writer  of  Italy.  Such  flattery  will  always  put  a  man 
in  good-humour.  However,  I  love  still  my  country  so  much,  that  I  should  be  sorry 
to  be  convinced  they  are  in  the  right.  Poor  Italy,  if  they  were  ! 

Signor  Sacchi  is  still  in  Milan  along  with  Tartaglia;  and  inclosed  you  have  a 
letter  that  will  do  for  both.  But  I  have  a  notion  you  go  another  way ;  and  it  is 
great  pity,  as  you  will  lose  an  opportunity  of  seeing  two  actors  not  easily  to  be 
matched,  if  I  am  allowed  to  judge,  after  having  seen  you  for  ten  seasons  running. 

Every  Englishman  here  tells  me,  that  you  do  not  come  back  to  Venice  as  they 
all  did,  the  Duke  not  excepted.  I  am  sorry  for  it :  but  the  devil  is  in  it  if  I  do  not 
go  to  see  you  in  England  again,  since  you  will  not  be  seen  again  in  Venice. 

Father  Finetti  presented  me  with  some  copies  of  his  book  after  he  had  seen  my 
opinion  of  it  in  my  paper;  therefore  give  me  leave  to  divide  those  copies  amongst 
my  friends,  and  accept  of  one  along  with  the  two  last  sheets  of  that  paper.  I  will 
take  care  you  have  the  remainder  when  it  be  time. 

I  wish  you  and  your  lady  as  good  a  journey  home  as  you  can  desire;  and  be 


174 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


assured  I  will  be  glad  of  any  opportunity  to  show  you  both  that  I  am  with  the 
utmost  affection  and  respect, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Joseph  Baretti. 

My  direction  is,  Alla  Bottega  (lei  Signor  Saviola  Librajo ,  in  Merceria. 


MR.  J.  MINI  FIE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Milan,  July  16th,  1764. 

I  received  your  two  letters  together:  the  first  requires  no  particular  answer. 
I  am  sorry  to  find  that  you  have  been  so  indecently  treated  by  a  man  who  had  so 
many  obligations  to  behave  otherwise.  I  believe  with  you  that  he  will  meet  with 
much  difficulty  to  get  into  an  English  service.  He  left  Mr.  Newton  here,  and  set 
out  immediately  for  Genoa,  and  said  that  he  had  travelled  with  him  as  a  companion, 
not  in  quality  of  a  servant.  Your  second  letter  has  given  me  a  very  great  pleasure  : 
I  accept  most  willingly  your  proposal  of  a  mutual  correspondence,  of  mutual  ser¬ 
vices,  and  promise  you  the  utmost  exactitude  and  punctuality  on  my  side.  If  you 
will  send  me  your  pattern  and  orders,  I  will  get  you  what  embroidery  you  think 
proper,  and  send  it  to  my  friend  Mr.  Holford,  to  be  sent  to  you  by  the  first  opportu¬ 
nity.  I  will  make  the  utmost  inquiry,  after  the  editions  of  Italian  authors  of  the 
15th  and  16th  century,  and  beg  you  will  let  me  know  the  names  of  those  you  have 
picked  up,  that  I  might  not  send  you  the  same  that  you  already  have.  I  have 
amongst  my  books  the  first  and  most  curious  edition  of  Machiavel's  Works,  entire,  of 
1500,  and  Davilla,  of  the  Civil  Wars  of  France,  an  excellent  author,  very  much  at 
your  service,  and  the  more  so  as  they  are  very  rare.  I  shall  not  fail  of  making  your 
compliments  to  Count  Firmian  :  I  am  sure  that  they  will  be  extremely  acceptable  to 
him  ;  for  he  esteems  you  as  much  as  the  most  partial  of  your  countrymen  can  possibly 
do.  I  wish  you  would  be  so  good  as  to  add  to  the  commission  I  have  already  troubled 
you  with  on  Count  Firmian’s  account,  the  Dialogues  of  Lord  Lyttelton ,  and  get  them 
to  be  sent  off  as  soon  as  possible,  directed  to  Mr.  Holford  for  me.  Be  so  good  as  to  get 
put  into  the  packet,  three  of  your  prints,  one  for  C.  Firmian,  one  for  Holford,  and 
one  for  me ;  and  two  prints  of  Mr.  Pitt,  if  there  are  any  like  him.  I  will  take  the 
liberty  of  troubling  you  for  some  English  books  on  my  own  account  as  soon  as  I 
have  made  some  progress  in  your  commission  for  the  Italian  ones,  which  I  shall  set 
about  without  delay.  I  shall  direct  this  letter  to  Augsburgh,  because  I  fear  that  I 
shall  be  too  late  for  Padua.  I  shall  be  extremely  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  safely 
arrived  in  Germany,  and  that  Mrs.  Garrick  has  got  rid  of  her  pains.  My  wife  begs 
you  will  not  forget  the  fans  in  the  small  commission  of  books  for  C.  Firmian.  I  am 
with  the  highest  esteem,  and  sincerest  attachment, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  most  humble  servant, 

J.  Mixifie. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


175 


SIGNOR  JOSEPH  BARETTI  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Venice,  Sept.  2,  1764. 

Make  me  not  ashamed  with  your  too  many  thanks  for  inconsiderable  trifles  that 
are  not  worth  two-pence.  Was  I  a  man  of  fortune,  it  is  probable  that  I  would 
endeavour  to  deserve  your  cordial  expressions,  as  well  as  those  of  other  Englishmen 
travelling  this  way ;  but  as  that  is  not  the  case  (ten  thousand  pities  it  is  not),  you  do 
me  a  favour  to  accept  of  my  good-will ;  but  as  to  your  warm  thanks,  you  may  spare 
them  for  proper  occasions,  without  putting  me  to  a  needless  blush. 

I  am  really  overjoyed  to  hear  that  your  lady  is  in  a  much  better  way  than  she  was 
here;  I  wish  her  as  much  health  and  happiness  as  she  can  wish,  and  if  you  will  give 
me  one  great  pleasure  you  must  tell  me  that  she  has  reached  home  perfectly  recovered. 

Inclosed  you  have  the  “  Life  of  Aretino,”  which  is  very  good,  and  would  still  be 
better,  was  it  not  over-filled  with  unimportant  notes :  yet  in  my  periodical  sheets  I 
thought  proper  not  to  blame  the  author  for  his  too  many  minutiae,  as  the  good  that  is 
in  it  preponderates  the  bad,  or,  to  say  better,  the  superfluous.  With  it  you  have 
likewise  two  numbers  more  of  the  “Frustra,”*  published  since  your  departure  ;  and 
I  will  find  means  to  send  you  the  three  remaining  when  printed. 

Continue  me  the  honour  of  your  friendship,  and  believe  me,  with  great  respect 
and  affection, 

Your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

Joseph  Baretti. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  ARDEN. 


DEAR  SIR,  Munich,  Sept.  15,  1764. 

Y ou  have  read  “  Letters  from  the  Dead  to  the  Living,”  and  from  the  living  to  the 
dead,  but,  I  believe,  never  received  one  before  from  the  half-dead  to  the  living — such 
is  the  case  at  present ;  I  am  but  the  shadow  of  myself,  that  self  which  at  Naples  and 
at  Venice  made  no  contemptible  figure  even  at  your  side,  and  which  was  always 
ready  and  willing  to  second  you  in  every  article  of  the  fat  and  fine ;  but,  alas !  my 
good  friend,  all  the  combustibles  I  had  been  long  storing  up  there  and  elsewhere  took 
fire  at  this  place,  and  I  have  been  confined  more  than  a  month  to  my  bed,  by  the 
most  dangerous  bilious  fever  that  ever  poor  sinner  suffered,  for  the  small  fault  of  a 
little  innocent  society.  By  the  greatest  good  luck  Turton  was  our  fellow-traveller  to 
this  place,  and  would  not  stir  from  me  till  his  great  care  had  made  me  able  to  pursue 
my  journey  to  Augsburgh,  which  we  intend  to  do  to-morrow,  when  he  will  turn  off* 
for  ltatisbon  and  to  Vienna. 


*  Anglice,  “  Scourge.” — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


176 

As  you  have  been  troubled  with  part  of  my  misfortunes,  you  must  have  the 
sequel.  When  I  had  got  quit  of  my  fever,  and  was  so  well  as  to  ride  out  twice  a  day, 
I  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  the  gravel,  or  stone,  collected  by  my  lying  in  bed  so  long, 
which  threw  me  back  another  week ;  so  that  though  I  cannot  “  creep  through  an 
alderman’s  thumb-ring,”  yet  I  can  thread  the  smallest  tumbler’s-hoop,  and  1  think  at 
my  return  to  England  of  entering  myself  at  Sadler’s  AVells,  as  much  fitter  for  that 
place  than  for  the  sock  or  buskin  at  Drury-lane. 

I  am  told  that  Spa  would  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  me,  but  I  fear  we  are 
too  late ;  we  shall  depend  upon  the  intelligence  we  get  at  Augsburgh  and  Stutgard, 
and  either  push  for  Spa  or  make  the  best  of  our  way  to  some  other  waters  in 
France. 

I  am  most  truly  the  Knight  of  the  Woeful  Countenance,  and  have  lost  legs,  arms, 
belly,  cheeks,  &c.  and  have  scarce  any  thing  left  but  bones  and  a  pair  of  dark,  lack¬ 
lustre  eyes,  that  are  retired  an  inch  or  two  more  in  their  sockets,  and  wonderfully  set 
off  the  parchment  that  covers  the  cheek-bones.  Thus  I  really  am,  but  out  of  all 
danger,  for  I  recover  daily,  have  no  cough,  and  am  in  tolerable  spirits  :  you  desired 
me  to  write,  and  invalids  will  prate  of  their  ailments.  What  is  become  of  the  rest  of 
our  English  friends,  we  know  not ;  Mr.  Beauclerk  and  Lord  Ossory  were  left  at 
Venice  in  the  hand  of  Marquis  Prie  and  Don  Pepy  the  Neapolitan  gamester, — the 
first  has  lost  about  4000  sequins,  and  Mr.  B.  20,000  sequins, — ten  thousand  good 
pounds,  Master  Arden,  and  all  this  in  one  night ! — You  may  depend  upon  the  fact,  and 
I  depend  upon  you  that  my  name  is  not  mentioned  as  giving  you  this  information  ;  I 
could  not  withhold  it  from  you,  though,  perhaps,  you  know  it  already,  for  it  is  too 
Avell  known  in  Italy,  and  has  spread  to  Vienna. 

“  On  eagle’s  wings  immortal  scandals  fly, 

Whilst  virtuous  actions  are  but  born  and  die.” 


MR.  ROBERT  BROMPTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Rome,  Oct.  9,  1764. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  writing  to  you  some  time  since,  but  never  have  had  the 
favour  of  an  answer,  which  the  circumstances  mentioned  in  my  letter  made  me  hope 
for :  not  having  arrived,  I  must  suppose  the  reason,  as  I  flatter  myself  you  would  have 
favoured  me  as  soon  as  convenient.  I  therefore  have  taken  the  liberty  to  draw  for 
the  60/.  which  I  desired  you  would  be  so  obliging  as  to  give  an  order  for ;  I  hope  you 
will  excuse  it,  as  the  reasons  I  gave  in  my  last  obliged  me  to  do  it.  Inclosed  I  send 
a  duplicate  of  a  receipt  which  I  sent  to  Air.  George  Garrick  with  the  bill,  lest  you 
should  not  be  in  London ;  and  this  I  direct  to  Paris,  that  if  you  should  be  there,  it 
may  be  a  preparation  for  the  bill,  or  if  not,  will  be  in  London  soon  after  the  other. 
As  to  the  pictures  at  Venice,  the  person  would  not  take  less  than  130  sequins,  which 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


177 


I  think  too  much,  but,  if  you  have  any  inclination  to  have  them,  you  are  always  in 
time;  and  I  have  also,  in  a  house  at  Padoua,  found  another  Old  Woman  by  Jelotti, 
the  same  size,  and  painted  by  the  same  person  as  that  in  the  number  fixed  upon,  and 
am  certain  it  might  be  had  for  ten  or  twelve  sequins :  when  you  have  determined 
about  it,  be  so  good  as  to  direct  me,  and  I  shall  act  accordingly. 

Your  copy  of  Lord  Ossory  is  finished, — when  any  opportunity  presents  itself  1 
will  send  it;  at  present  I  am  employed  upon  the  copies  of  the  Duke  of  York’s 
picture :  when  I  have  finished  three  of  them  I  shall  probably  come  to  England  to  do 
the  others,  except  something  very  extraordinary  should  prevent  it,  which  may 
happen  at  Parma,  where  I  have  been  told  by  the  people  that  I  shall  be  stopped  to 
paint  the  royal  family. 

I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am,  with  the  greatest  regard,  dear  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Robert  Brompton. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  POWELL. 

[Davies  tells  us  that  he  had  once  seen  this  correspondence  between  the  master  and  scholar — indeed  he  is 
pretty  accurate  as  to  the  chief  points  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  advice.— Ed.] 

DEAR  SIR,  Paris,  Dec.  12th,  1764. 

Though  I  have  neglected  to  answer  your  obliging  letter,  I  am  sure  your  good¬ 
nature  readily  excused  me,  when  you  heard  how  unfit  I  have  lately  been  to  pay  my 
debt  of  friendship  in  that  way :  the  writing  a  letter  has,  till  within  this  fortnight, 
been  a  labour  to  me,  and  which  I  should  have  undergone  with  pleasure,  could  1  have 
been  of  the  least  service  to  you.  The  news  of  your  great  success  gave  me  a  most 
sensible  pleasure, —the  continuance  of  that  success  will  be  in  your  own  power;  and 
if  you  will  give  an  older  soldier  leave  to  hint  a  little  advice  to  you,  I  will  answer 
for  its  being  sincere  at  least,  which,  from  a  brother  actor,  is  no  small  merit.  The 
gratitude  you  have  expressed  for  what  little  service  I  did  you  the  summer  before 
your  appearance  upon  the  stage,  has  attached  me  to  you,  as  a  man  who  shall  always 
have  my  best  wishes  for  his  welfare,  and  my  best  endeavours  to  promote  it.  I  have 
not  always  met  with  gratitude  in  a  playhouse.  You  have  acted  a  greater  variety 
of  characters  than  I  could  expect  in  the  first  winter,  and  I  have  some  fears  that 
your  good-nature  to  your  brother  actors  (which  is  commendable  when  it  is  not 
injurious)  drove  you  into  parts  too  precipitately ;  however,  you  succeeded,  and  it  is 
happy  that  you  had  the  whole  summer  to  correct  the  errors  of  haste,  which  the 
public  will  ever  excuse  in  a  young  performer,  on  account  of  his  beauties  ;  but  now 
is  the  time  to  make  sure  of  your  ground  in  every  step  you  take.  You  must,  there¬ 
fore,  give  to  study,  and  an  accurate  consideration  of  your  characters,  those  hours 
which  young  men  too  generally  give  to  their  friends  and  flatterers.  The  common 
excuse  is,  “  they  frequent  clubs  for  the  sake  of  their  benefit ;”  but  nothing  can  be 
more  absurd  or  contemptible, — your  benefits  will  only  increase  with  your  fame,  and 

2  A 


VOL.  i. 


178 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


should  that  ever  sink  by  your  idleness,  those  friends  who  have  made  you  idle,  will 
be  the  first  to  forsake  you.  When  the  public  has  marked  you  for  a  favourite,  (and 
their  favour  must  be  purchased  with  sweat  and  labour,)  you  may  choose  what 
company  you  please,  and  none  but  the  best  can  be  of  service  to  you. 

The  famous  Baron  of  France  used  to  say,  that  an  actor  should  be  “  nursed  in  the 
lap  of  Queens  by  which  he  meant  that  the  best  accomplishments  were  necessary 
to  form  a  great  actor.  Study  hard,  my  friend,  for  seven  years,  and  you  may  play 
the  rest  of  your  life.  I  would  advise  you  to  read  at  your  leisure  other  books  besides 
plays  in  which  you  are  concerned.  Our  friend  Colman  will  direct  you  in  these 
matters,  and  as  he  loves,  and  is  a  good  judge  of  acting,  consult  him  as  often  as  you 
can  upon  your  theatrical  affairs.  But  above  all,  never  let  your  Shakspeare  be  out 
of  your  hands,  or  your  pocket ;  keep  him  about  you  as  a  charm  ;  the  more  you  read 
him  the  more  you  will  like  him,  and  the  better  you  will  act  him.  One  thing  more, 
and  then  I  will  finish  my  preaching  :  guard  against  the  splitting  the  ears  of  the 
groundlings,  who  are  capable  of  nothing  but  dumb  show  and  noise — do  not  sacrifice 
your  taste  and  feelings  to  the  applause  of  the  multitude ;  a  true  genius  will  convert 
an  audience  to  his  manner,  rather  than  be  converted  by  them  to  what  is  false  and 
unnatural : — be  not  too  tame  neither.  I  shall  leave  the  rest  to  the  friendship  of  Colman 
and  your  own  genius. 

I  expect  to  receive  great  pleasure  when  I  see  you,  which  if  my  health  will  permit 
me,  I  expect  to  be  before  you  retire  into  the  country. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  sincere  friend  and  well-wisher, 

D.  Garrick.* 

P.  S.  I  have  by  mistake  written  upon  half  a  sheet  of  paper  ;  I  could  not  write  it 
over  again,  so  you  will  excuse  me. 


DR.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  1765- 

I  wrote  to  you  some  weeks  ago,  and,  I  suppose,  should  have  heard  from  you 
before  this,  had  not  your  theatrical  affairs  come  on  and  demanded  all  your  attention. 
I  should  not  have  interrupted  you  by  this,  had  not  an  affair  of  consequence  unex¬ 
pectedly  intervened,  which  the  enclosed  letter  will  explain  to  you. 

You  will  see  by  this,  that  Mr.  Smith  has  an  intention  of  putting  off  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  “  The  Cure  of  Saul”  till  another  season  ;  but  as  this  is  a  design  which  I 
cannot  submit  to,  upon  many  accounts  ;  so  I  have  desired,  (in  a  letter  which  I  wrote 
to  him  yesterday,)  that  in  case  he  persists  in  this  resolution,  the  copy  of  my  Oratorio 
(now  in  his  hands)  may  be  carefully  delivered  to  you.  If  he  should  do  this,  and 

*  I  could  wish  a  copy  of  this  letter  to  be  worn  as  an  amulet  by  every  young  actor  of  genius,  “  nearest 
his  heart those  are  the  very  words. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


179 


should  say  any  thing  to  you  upon  the  subject,  I  desire  that  my  letter  to  him  may  be 
shown  to  you,  in  which  you  will  see  the  reasons  at  large  why  I  cannot  consent  to  his 
proposal. 

In  case,  therefore,  this  should  be  the  issue  of  the  affair,  as  I  am  at  so  great  a 
distance,  and  an  immediate  journey  to  London  would  be  very  inconvenient  on  many 
accounts,  I  rely  on  your  friendship  for  your  assistance  in  this  critical  juncture:  for 
as  the  season  is  approaching,  no  time  is  to  be  lost.  The  first  thing  I  should  be  glad 
to  know  is,  whether  Dr.  Arne,  or  any  other  person,  has  engaged,  or  intends  to  engage, 
your  house  during  Lent.  2dly.  Whether  you  think  it  a  practicable  thing  for  me  to 
employ  Arne,  or  Boyce,  to  manage  the  whole  affair,  and  lead  the  Oratorio,  and  to 
get  a  sufficient  band,  during  the  vacant  nights  in  Lent.  3dly.  In  case  this  be  not 
practicable,  would  you  venture  to  embark  with  me  in  this  affair  during  any  of  the 
other  nights  in  Lent,  when  the  best  band  in  town  may  be  procured,  you  furnishing 
your  house  and  musical  band,  (as  a  part  of  the  whole,)  and  we  two  dividing  the  profits, 
or  the  loss  between  us  ?  Lastly,  in  case  this  would  not  be  eligible,  what  must  be 
the  least  that  I  must  give  for  the  use  of  your  house,  (on  an  acting  night,)  having  the 
use  of  your  band  of  music  ?  In  some  or  other  of  these  ways,  I  think  the  thing  may 
be  very  practicable. — JV.  B.  Giardini  does  not  perform  at  Covent  Garden  this  year ; 
he  was  here  lately,  and  I  talked  with  him  on  the  subject.  But  from  what  he  said,  I 
am  sure  I  could  procure  him,  provided  he  was  to  have  the  direction  of  the  whole. 
For  the  subjection  to  other  people’s  humours  was  what  he  complained  of. 

Mr.  Smith  says,  I  did  not  send  up  the  Oratorio  in  the  time  I  proposed :  I  sent 
it  from  hence  at  the  time  proposed ;  and  all  the  time  that  was  lost,  was  only  in  the 
slow  carriage  up  to  London,  which  was  about  a  fortnight.  The  particular  reason 
which  he  assigns  for  putting  it  off,  is,  that  they  have  only  two  music-writers.  Is  not 
this  strange,  that  only  two  music-writers  can  be  found  in  the  whole  City  of  London  ? 
As  to  the  Oratorio,  he  confesses  it  as  good  as  any  that  has  ever  appeared.  With 
respect  to  the  poetry ,  and  the  application  of  the  music,  I  can  say  nothing,  because 
these  are  my  own  doings :  but  as  to  the  music  itself,  I  dare  assert  that  it  is  far 
better  than  any  that  ever  appeared  in  any  one,  or  in  any  four  Oratorios  put  together. 
The  last  thing  I  have  to  request  of  you  is,  that  you  will  not  descend  to  intreat  the 
performance  of  it  this  winter.  This,  I  know,  your  friendship  might  prompt  you  to ; 
but  this  is  the  only  step  you  are  capable  of  taking,  in  which  you  can  displease  me  : 
therefore,  no  more  of  that.  I  have  treated  them  with  all  possible  respect,  in  the  pro¬ 
gress  of  this  affair  ;  but  if  they  think  I  am  afraid,  I  will  convince  them  that  they  are 
mistaken.  It  is  true,  I  shall  put  something  to  the  hazard  by  having  it  performed  at 
your  house ;  but  the  chances  on  the  other  side  are  equal  if  the  thing  succeeds.  If 
they  do  persist,  I  have  other  plans  which  I  will  certainly  put  in  execution ;  and  I 
think  I  am  pretty  sure  they  will  repent  their  ill-treatment  of  me.  They  may  flatter 
themselves  as  they  please,  but  I  well  know  that  they  have  only  three  Oratorios  that 
will  ever  bring  them  houses ;  and  these  three  are  losing  their  force  every  season. 

I  beg  your  pardon  for  troubling  you  with  the  contents  of  this  long  letter ;  and 

2  a  2 


180 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


nothing  but  the  sense  I  have  of  your  truly  friendly  disposition  could  have  induced 
me  to  give  you  this  trouble.  I  will  be  particularly  obliged  to  you  for  the  most 
speedy  intelligence  in  this  affair  ;  because  no  time  is  to  be  lost.  But  before  you  do 
any  thing  in  it,  you  must  certainly  know  Mr.  Smith’s  final  resolution.  If  he  brings, 
or  sends  you  the  Oratorio,  you  may  look  on  that  as  a  final  answer. 

1  hope  to  hear  that  your  health  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s  continues  good :  for  myself, 
1  never  was  better.  I  have  now  got  into  my  own  house,  which,  people  say,  is  one 
of  the  sweetest  rural  retreats  that  ever  was  seen  in  a  great  town.  My  love  and 
respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  I  am  truly,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  faithful  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

J.  Brown. 


COUNT  MARSILT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Padua,  April  10,  1765. 

Though  I  have  not  heard  from  you  since  you  left  Germany,  I  hope  you  are  safe 
and  easy  by  this  time  in  your  own  country,  with  your  lovely  half,  and  your  worthy 
friend  Mr.  Young,  after  your  long  peregrination,  and  several  encroachments  which  I 
have  heard  of  in  your  health.  1  hope,  too,  you  have  not  forgotten  your  affectionate 
friend  Marsili,  who  is  and  will  ever  be  proud  of  your  acquaintance,  and  more  so, 
should  you  often  give  him  the  pleasure  of  employing  himself  in  your  service. 

I  have  likewise  given  myself  the  treat  of  a  short  trip  into  Tuscany,  where  I  had 
frequent  opportunities  of  mentioning  you  with  Sir  Horace  Mann,  my  good,  though 
very  fantastical  friend,  Mr.  Cocehi,  and  several  more,  your  countrymen  and  friends  ; 
and  that  you  may  have  an  evidence  of  my  forwardness  for  whatever  concerns  you, 
as  you  left  me  a  commission  of  getting  you  some  of  our  ancient  and  valuable  Italian 
books,  I  seized  the  opportunity  of  choosing  and  buying  some  out  of  the  library  which 
is  selling  of  the  last ;  the  titles  of  them  shall  be  at  the  end  of  this  of  mine,  and  by 
the  first  opportunity  you  shall  have  them,  in  return  for  those  which  you  were  so 
kind  as  to  promise  me  from  England.  If  you  have  not  yet  made  the  purchase  of 
them,  I  wish,  instead  of  Morison’s  work,  which  I  then  wanted,  and  bought  after¬ 
wards  at  Florence,  you  would  purchase  me  Plukner’s  Botanic  works,  and  add  to 
them  the  Odyssea  of  Homer,  of  the  two  Greek  editions  lately  published  at  Glasgow. 
I  have  the  Iliad  of  both,  one  in  folio  lai'ge  paper,  and  the  other  in  two  volumes  oc¬ 
tavo,  common  size,  and  should  be  very  very  glad  of  getting  the  Odysseas  too  of  the 
same  editions,  for  the  suite  and  completion  of  the  work.  Mr.  Treves  is  already 
forewarned  for  the  expedition  of  whatever  should  come  from  you.  You  will  let  me 
know  the  cost  of  each  separately,  and  I  shall  not  permit  you  to  be  the  loser  in 
the  bargain. 

One  Mr.  Rigal,  a  Palatine  gentleman,  who  is  travelling  about  Europe,  by  the 
Elector  his  master’s  order,  in  quest  of  learning  and  taste  in  the  arts,  wanting  to  be 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


181 


acquainted  with  you,  will  present  you  a  letter  of  mine.  I  have  known  him  first  at 
Florence,  and  afterwards  at  Venice,  and  here,  and  found  him  a  very  honest  and 
clever  fellow,  worth  my  friendship  and  your  civilities,  so  that  whatever  you  should 
do  for  his  sake,  1  should  reckon  it  as  done  to  myself. 

Be  so  good  as  to  present  my  humble  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  with  my  best 
wishes  for  her  health ;  and  to  offer  my  service  to  Mr.  Young,  Avhether  in  Lombardy, 
or  not  in  Lombardy.  Mr.  Stratico,  and  Count  Seccho  send  you  a  million  of  compli¬ 
ments;  and  Marchetto  the  Jew,  with  the  bookseller  Scappino,  kiss  your  hand,  and 
recommend  themselves  to  your  protection.  My  dear  Mr.  Garrick,  let  me  soon  have 
some  news  about  your  welfare,  and  spare  me  not,  whenever  you  may  have  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  employing  me,  who  am,  with  the  most  cordial  attachment, 

Your  most  affectionate, 

Most  obliged  and  sincere  friend  and  servant, 

Marsili. 

P.  S.  Remember  you  promised  me  some  seeds  from  England,  namely,  of  the 
pepper-mint.  The  time  of  sowing  being  over,  I  shall  wait  for  them  till  the  next 
winter. 

P.  S.  The  above-named  Marchetto  begs  you  the  favour  of  delivering  the  inclosed 
letter  of  his  great  concern  to  the  said  Mr.  Treves,  who  lives  and  is  a  well-known 
Jew  merchant  in  the  city.  Scappino,  the  bookseller  too,  sends  you,  as  you  ordered 
him,  a  small  list  of  books,  to  look  it  over  and  choose,  if  there  should  be  any  thing 
worth  your  while. 

Palladio  Architettura.  Yen.  1561.  fogl.  per  il  Carampello. 

Enalbenigni  novelle.  Firenze,  1572.  4to.  Giunti. 

Massuccio  Salernitano,  il  novellino.  Yen.  1522.  4to.  rarissimo. 

Epistole  di  Luca  Pulci,  in  versi.  Fir.  1481.  4to. 

Prose  Antiche  di  Dante,  e  Boccacio.  Fir.  1547.  4to. 

Sonetti  e  canzone  antiche  di  diversi.  Fir.  1527.  8vo.  rarissimo. 

Giambullari  della  lingua  di  Firenze.  Fir.  1557.  8vo. 

Giraldi  gli  Ecatomiti  Montereale.  1565.  vol.  2.  8vo.  rarissimo. 

Vita  nuova  di  Dante,  e  vita  di  Dante  scritta  dal  Boccaccio.  Eir.  1576.  8vo. 

I  Sonetti,  del  Bunhiello.  Fir.  1552.  8vo.  Giunti. 

Firenzuola,  Prose.  Fir.  1562.  8vo.  Giunti. 

Picolomini  Niolozo  della  bella  creanza  delle  Nonne.  Yen.  1540.  8vo.  rarissimo. 

Evandro  Orazio,  del  Bracciolini.  Fir.  1612.  8vo.  Giunti. 

L’lncendio,  Coined,  del  Goredano.  Yen.  1597.  8vo. 

Poliziano  le  Stanze  e  l’Orfeo.  8vo.  raro. 

Lasca  la  Gelosia  Corned.  Fir.  1551.  8vo.  Giunti. 

Aristippia,  Corned.  1544.  8vo. 

Pescatore  Xina,  Coined.  Yen.  1558.  8vo. 

L’lngratitudine,  Coined.  Fir.  1559.  8vo.  Giunti. 

And  several  other  comedies  of  less  value. 


182 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OP 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAll  SIR,  London,  May  8th,  1765. 

As  it  is  uncertain  when,  or  if  at  any  time  I  may  have  an  opportunity  of  convers¬ 
ing  with  you  on  a  subject  in  which  I  am  greatly  interested,  I  beg  you  will  excuse 
my  taking  the  liberty  of  mentioning  it  to  you  in  this  manner. 

Since  your  leaving  England,  I  have  often  considered  many  circumstances  of  the 
transaction  between  us  which  a  little  preceded  that  time,  and  could  not  forbear  cen¬ 
suring  myself  very  severely,  for  every  thing  in  my  conduct  which  carried  the  most 
distant  appearance  of  mistrust  in  your  friendship,  at  a  time  when  I  had  so  little 
reason  to  doubt  of  it,  from  a  voluntary  instance,  on  your  part,  of  uncommon  gene¬ 
rosity  and  confidence. 

Many  things  at  that  time  deceived  me,  which  I  cannot  now  explain  ;  but  chiefly 
the  consciousness  of  my  own  inability  to  discharge  so  considerable  a  debt,  if  the 
power  of  demanding  it  fell  into  any  hands  but  your  own,  made  me,  for  the  first  time, 
listen  to  a  caution  which  has  been  in  its  consequences  as  disagreeable  to  me  as  any 
surmise  at  what  occasioned  it  may  have  been  to  you.  The  uneasiness  I  have  felt 
from  my  own  reflections  on  this  subject  has  determined  me  to  do  all  that  now 
remains  for  your  satisfaction  and  my  own — to  acknowledge  myself  under  the  greatest 
obligations  to  you,  and  to  assure  you,  that  if  you  please  now  to  accept  of  what  you 
had  always  a  right  to  require,  my  bond,  or  any  other  instrument,  for  the  money  I  am 
indebted  to  you,  it  will  by  no  means  lessen  the  sense  I  have  always  entertained,  and 
shall  for  ever  express,  of  the  great  service  your  kindness  has  done  me,  though  my 
own  principles  would  prompt  me,  whenever  it  was  in  my  power,  to  repay  it  with 
the  utmost  thankfulness. 

Many  reasons  induce  me  to  wish  myself  re-established  in  the  favourable  opinion  you 
formerly  entertained  of  me ;  I  have  always  received  the  greatest  pleasure  and  advan¬ 
tage  from  your  conversation  and  friendship,  and  there  is  nothing  a  temper  less  liberal 
than  yours  could  require,  which  I  would  not  acquiesce  in  for  that  purpose ;  if  my 
own  imagination  could  suggest  any  thing  more  likely  to  accomplish  it  than  what  I 
have  now  done,  you  may  depend  on  it,  it  should  not  be  left  untried ;  and  I  can  only 
depend  on  the  credit  you  will  give  to  my  assuring  you,  that  as  my  circumstances  in 
life  have  been  such  as  oftener  subjected  me  to  receive,  than  enabled  me  to  confer 
benefits,  I  have  never  till  this  unaccountable  period,  incurred  the  slightest  suspicion 
of  having  been  an  unworthy  object  of  them. 

I  hear  with  great  pleasure  that  your  health  is  perfectly  re-established,  and  I  beg 
you  to  believe  no  one  can  more  seriously  rejoice  at  that  and  every  event  which  con¬ 
tributes  to  your  happiness,  than,  deal-  Sir, 

Your  ever  obliged  and  affectionate  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


183 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  R.  JEPHSON. 


DEAR  SIR,  May  8th,  1765. 

I  thought  I  should  have  seen  you  last  week,  as  I  told  you  I  should  then  dispose 
of  my  papers ;  I  thought  too,  that  you  fixed  about  that  time  to  be  with  me.  I 
waited  till  yesterday  for  you.  I  have  done  what  I  promised  in  regard  to  the  men¬ 
tioning  our  transaction  in  my  will.*  The  more  I  think  of  this  matter  between  us, 
the  less  I  am  able  to  account  for  your  particular  diffidence.  I  wish  your  next  friend 
may  be  as  much  more  able  to  serve  you,  as  more  deserving  of  your  confidence :  and 
I  wish  that  I  could  not  remember  that  you  have  withheld  the  only  proof  you  could 
give  me  that  our  confidence  was  mutual. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


DR.  JOHNSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  May  18th,  1765. 

I  know  that  great  regard  will  be  had  to  your  opinion  of  an  edition  of  Shakspeare. 
I  desire  therefore  to  secure  an  honest  prejudice  in  my  favour  by  securing  your 
suffrage ;  and  that  this  prejudice  may  really  be  honest,  I  wish  you  would  name  such 
plays  as  you  would  see,  and  they  shall  be  sent  you  by,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson.'!' 

See  Mr.  Garrick’s  answer,  dated  3 1st  May,  1765. 


DR.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  St.  Cross,  near  Winchester,  May  23d,  1 765. 

I  was  prevented  from  making  observations  on  the  Dodd  in  “  1  he  Suspicious 
Husband,”  (which  I  much  longed  for),  by  an  ugly  cold,  which  confined  me  at  home; 
but  T  employed  a  judicious  friend  to  go  and  make  me  his  report.  Of  what  I  saw  in 
“  The  Wife’s  Resentment,”  “  Love  in  a  Village,”  “  Double  Gallant,”  and  “  Jealous 
Wife,”  I  will  give  you  my  own  opinion. 


*  There  is  no  mention  of  Mr.  Jephson  in  the  will. 

t  This  letter  from  Dr.  Johnson,  and  one  from  Garrick  in  return,  beginning  alike  with  a  term  of  endear¬ 
ment,  and  closing  alike  without  the  use  of  it,  express  to  one  who  venerates  them  both,  the  melancholy  truth 
that  there  was  little  true  cordiality  between  them.  Burke,  however,  seems  to  luxuriate  in  the  friendship  of 
Garrick,  and  give  free  play  to  his  whim  when  he  writes  to  him  ;  is  never  formal  in  the  least,  and  appears  to 
forget  his  own  high  merits  in  those  of  his  friend.  — Ed. 


184 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


My  friend’s  report  was,  that,  in  Hunger,  he  could  not  quite  enough  cast  off  the 
coxcombly  character  that  sticks  so  close  to  him  :  and  when  lie  was  to  express  joy  and 
rapture,  he  only  exalted  his  voice  into  a  very  disagreeable  untuneful  noise  ;  but  in 
the  main,  that  the  part  was  done  with  spirit  and  propriety  enough.  His  wife  did 
not  play  in  it,  it  being  for  Mrs.  Lea’s  benefit,  who  got  out  of  a  sick  bed  to  play 
Clarinda. 

My  own  opinion  of  him  in  general  is,  that  his  person  is  good  enough,  but  his 
motion  is  too  much  under  restraint  and  form  ;  more  the  stalk  and  menage  of  a 
dancing-master,  than  the  ease  of  a  gentleman.  I  speak  of  his  legs ;  his  action  seems 
easy  enough  and  unstudied.  He  has  a  white  calf-like  stupid  face,  that  disgusted  me 
much  till  I  heard  him  speak  and  throw  some  sensibility  into  it.  His  voice  is  good, 
and  well  heard  everywhere  ;  and  he  seems  sensible,  alive,  and  attentive  to  what  is 
going  on,  and  properly  so.  I  fear  there  must  be  a  dash  of  the  coxcomb*  in  every 
part  in  which  you  would  see  him  in  perfection  ;  and  in  that  cast  he  will  be  an 
excellent  successor  to  O’Brien :  in  the  easy  gentleman  I  much  doubt,  though  there 
were  some  strokes  in  Atall  that  promised  well.  He  sings  agreeably,  and  with  more 
feeling  than  he  acts  with  ;  though  there  is  a  formal  kind  of  parade  kept  up  by  the 
singing  gentry,  (not  easily  to  be  avoided  in  the  strange  unnatural  circumstances  and 
attitudes  that  the  songs  and  their  symphonies,  &c.  place  them  in,  in  the  front  of  the 
stage,)  that  hides  and  disguises  nature,  but  which  he  reconciles  better  than  I  re¬ 
member  any  body.  In  singing,  his  voice  seemed  to  me  remarkably  low,  but  that 
might  only  be  by  comparing  it  with  his  speaking  voice,  which  is  very  distinct.  One 
excellence  I  observed  in  him,  that  he  is  not  in  a  hurry,  and  his  pauses  are  sensible, 
and  filled  with  proper  action  and  looks.  My  general  idea  of  Mrs.  Dodd  is  that  of 
a  very  genteel,  sensible  woman,  fit  to  fill  any  part  of  high  life,  especially  if  written 
with  any  sensibility  and  tenderness.  Lady  Townley,  and  Mrs.  Conquest,  (of  the 
last,)  pleased  me  much.  Her  raillery  in  Mrs.  C.  rather  wanted  spirit.  The  affected 
drawl  of  Lady  Dainty  became  her  much ;  and  in  Mrs.  Oakley,  I  could  not  see  a 
fault.  She  was  not  a  moment  out  of  the  character,  and  amazingly  proper  and  ready 
in  the  repartee,  and  taking  up  the  half  sentences  before  they  fell  to  nothing ;  which 
abound  in  that  natural  comedy,  as  in  all  easy  discourse.  After  all,  I  wish  that  these 
excellencies  may  not  be  almost  totally  lost,  for  want  of  that  force  of  voice  requisite 
to  pierce  all  parts  of  a  large  and  crowded  theatre.  In  many  places  she  put  me  in  mind 
of  Mrs.  Heron,  who  succeeded  Mrs.  Oldfield — longo  intervallo !  but  has  a  much  gen- 
teeler  person,  though  a  face  not  unlike  her  ;  not  handsome,  but  I  think  better  for  a 
stage.  How  I  wished  that  our  little  poet  had  thrown  into  Mrs.  Oakley’s  character, 
or  made  visible  by  a  few  circumstances,  a  tenderness  and  sensibility  towards  Mr.  O. 
by  which  the  audience  should  have  been  soon  convinced  that  she  really  loved  him, 
and  had  more  of  the  jealous  wife  than  the  mere  termagant.  That  alone  would  have 
given  a  dignity  to  his  character,  which  it  now  wants  ;  and,  through  that  want,  is  more 


*  Dr.  Hoadly’s  account  of  Dodd  is  perfect.  He  saw  through  him  at  a  glance. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


185 


of  the  sneaking  hen-peck,  than  of  the  tender  enamoured  husband.  Mrs.  Oakley’s 
character  (without  this)  has  not  foundation  enough  to  support  that  sudden  recon¬ 
ciliation  at  the  end ;  with  it,  it  would  make  the  comedy  very  complete :  besides,  it 
would  ease  the  character  of  Mr.  O.  of  a  load,  which  even  your  own  great  acting 
cannot  thoroughly  support.  Could  not  he  be  prevailed  upon  to  try  this  only  in  the 
acting  ?  for  all  sensible  hearers  perceive  the  want  of  it.  This  by  the  bye.* 

To  resume  what  I  proposed,  I  thought  that  Dodd  was  deficient  even  in  coxcomb- 
liness  in  the  part  of  Lord  George  Brilliant,  and  sometimes  forgot  all  his  affectation. 
On  second  thought,  I  do  not  know  whether  that  was  not  judicious,  when  his  whole 
soul  is  intent  on  his  pursuit  of  Lady  Gentle,  in  the  great  scene  between  them, — or  is 
that  refining  in  me  ?  Mrs.  Dodd  did  Mrs.  Conquest  well,  but  not  with  brilliancy. 
She  is  tall,  and  made  no  bad  figure  in  breeches.  I  will  mention  another  part,  that  of 
Miss  Notable  by  Miss  Reynolds  ;  because  I  heard  that  she  also  was  to  come  to  your 
theatre  next  winter.  She  is  a  showy  figure,  and  has  life  and  vivacity ;  but  I  cannot 
think  her  any  genius.  When  she  is  left  alone,  she  seems  utterly  at  a  loss,  and  a 
soliloquy  is  the  death  of  the  actress.  I  never  knew  any  one  show  such  a  conscious¬ 
ness  of  defect,  except  Shuter  in  the  soliloquies  of  Falstaff,  whom  I  once  saw.  She 
seems  to  me  to  be  wanting  in  her  scholar clsliip.  However,  I  will  not  be  too  peremp¬ 
tory,  as  many  judge  like  her,  especially  in  breeches.  She  did  the  country  girl  in 
“  Love  in  a  Village”  tolerably,  and  one  of  the  ladies  in  “  The  Double  Gallant,”  and 
Miss  Notable  better  than  either. 

Dodd  is  reckoned  charming  in  the  gardener  in  “  Love  in  a  Village;”  and  indeed 
I  think  he  makes  the  most  of  such  precious  stuff.  They  say  his  Macheath  is  excel¬ 
lent.  I  suppose  his  wife  must  sing  tolerably,  at  least ;  for  she  played  Polly  with  him. 

He  played  Atall  well  in  the  main,  particularly  as  Col.  Standfast;  and  his 
formality  of  motion  became  him  in  the  grave  Mr.  Freeman.  In  the  character  of 
Atall  himself,  he  seemed  not  to  know  precisely  what  character  to  assume. 

In  Lord  Trinket,  in  “  The  Jealous  Wife,”  I  thought  him  admirable.  He  was 
every  inch  the  coxcomb  and  unfeeling  man  of  quality.  That  whole  play  was 
acted  well  enough  to  be  a  rational  entertainment  to  the  best  judges,  except  poor 
Charles,  by  Mr.  Sheriffe,  whose  contemptible  figure  and  snuffling  nose  never  became 
him  so  well  as  when  he  was  drunk.  But  his  wife  made  amends  in  Lady  Freelove, 
which  she  played  as  well  as  it  could  be  done  with  her  bad  figure  and  voice.  She  is 
a  judicious  player,  and  made  as  good  an  old  maid  afterwards  as  ever  went  to  six 
o’clock  prayers  at  Covent  Garden  Church. 

I  am  now  pretty  well  arrived  at  the  end  of  my  tether,  and  hope  my  characters 
are  pretty  true,  notwithstanding  the  deception  of  comparison,  which  I  know  to  be 
very  great. 

I  have  more  reason  than  ever  to  determine  me  to  produce  “  Cromwell”!  on  the 

*  I  am  not  clear  that  Garrick  ever  showed  this  letter  to  his  friend  Colman.  The  objection  is  at  least 
well  put. — Ed. 

+  A  tragedy  on  the  subject  of  Thomas  Lord  Cromwell  had  beeu  long  attributed  erroneously  to  Shak- 

VOL.  I.  2  15 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


186 


stage;  but  of  that,  more  another  time.  Madam  joins  in  compliments  and  good 
wishes  to  you  and  yours  with,  dear  David, 

Your  obliged  and  affectionate 

J.  Hoadly.* 

P.  S.  Tragedy  is  quite  out  of  date  at  Bath,  not  one  having  been  acted  while  I 
was  there  for  five  weeks,  and  I  never  heard  how  either  Dodd  or  his  wife  performed 
in  that  style. 

2d.  P.  S.  Mr.  Dance,  it  seems,  took  your  likeness  in  Italy,  and  by  the  account 
of  the  family  (with  part  of  which  I  have  a  great  intimacy)  much  to  your  approba¬ 
tion.  I  beg  to  know  your  real  opinion  of  him  as  an  artist  and  a  man ;  for  family 
opinions  are  seldom  formed  without  prejudice.  I  think  he  is  expected  over  soon. 

“  To  David  Garrick,  Esq. 

in  Southampton-street,  Covent  Garden, 

London.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  JOHNSON. 

DEAR  SIR,  May  31st,  1765. 

My  brother  greatly  astonished  me  this  morning  by  asking  me,  “  if  I  was  a  sub¬ 
scriber  to  your  Shakspeare?”  I  told  him  yes,  that  I  was  one  of  the  first,  and  as  soon 
as  I  had  heard  of  your  intention ;  and  that  I  gave  you,  at  the  same  time,  some  other 
names,  among  which  were  the  Duke  df  Devonshire,  Mr.  Beighton,  &c.  I  cannot 
immediately  have  recourse  to  my  memorandum,  though  I  remember  to  have  seen 
it  just  before  I  left  England.  I  hope  that  you  will  recollect  it,  and  not  think  me 
capable  of  neglecting  to  make  you  so  trifling  a  compliment,  which  was  doubly  due 
from  me,  not  only  on  account  of  the  respect  I  have  always  had  for  your  abilities, 
but  from  the  sincere  regard  I  shall  ever  pay  to  your  friendship. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 


EXTRACT  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  AN  ENGLISH  GENTLEMAN  AT  PARIS 

TO  HIS  FRIEND  IN  LONDON. 

[I  am  half  disposed  to  think  this  character  of  Freville  really  written  by  Garrick  after  his  return  to  London 
from  the  Continent,  and  the  form  of  “  A  Letter  from  a  Gentleman”  in  Paris  given  to  it,  and  a  later  date, 
the  better  to  disguise  it.  Garrick  wrote  much  in  the  public  prints  unavowed  ;  and  this  returns  to  the  right 
author  only  by  being  found  among  his  papers.  It  is  a  valuable  sketch. — Ed.] 

Paris,  June  5th,  1765. 

When  I  return  to  England,  I  shall  publish  my  thoughts  upon  the  French  stage 
and  the  performers,  most  of  which  you  saw  when  you  were  here  thirteen  years  ago : 

speare.  How  far  Dr.  Hoadly’s  muse  might  confer  dramatic  honours  upon  him,  we  know  not,  for  he  could 
not  prevail  on  his  friend  Garrick  to  embark  in  the  design. — Ed. 

*  Benjamin  and  John  Hoadly  were  sons  of  a  Bishop  of  Winchester  of  that  name,  but  by  some  unaccount¬ 
able  turn,  from  sacred  to  profane,  both  of  them  delighted  in  the  drama ;  and  the  younger  brother  gave 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


187 


of  these  I  shall  at  present  say  nothing,  but  only  send  you  an  imperfect  sketch  of 
the  character  of  Preville,  whom  you  have  not  yet  seen,  and  with  whose  comic  talents 
you  have  so  earnest  a  desire  to  be  acquainted. 

He  is  rather  a  little  man,  but  well  made ;  of  a  fair  complexion,  and  looks  remark¬ 
ably  neat  upon  the  stage — this  is  of  small  consequence,  but  I  choose  to  be  particular. 
His  face  is  very  round,  and  his  features  when  unanimated  by  his  vis  comica ,  have  no 
marks  of  drollery.  He  is,  though  one  of  the  most  spirited  comedians  I  ever  saw, 
by  nature  of  a  grave  cast  of  mind ;  and,  if  you  will  take  Garrick’s  word  for  it,  he  is 
a  man  of  parts  independent  of  the  stage,  and  understands  his  profession  thoroughly. 
His  eyes  are  rather  of  the  sleepy  kind,  and  very  happily  express,  with  the  raising  of 
his  brow,  and  opening  of  his  mouth,  folly,  confusion,  and  amazement :  when  he  is 
to  be  angry,  he  can  throw  such  a  ridiculous  vivacity  into  his  eyes,  that  you  see 
a  weak,  cowardly  mind,  bustling  up  to  a  resolution  which  he  can  never  attain ;  and 
his  anger  subsides  as  ridiculously  as  it  was  raised :  add  to  this,  that  when  his  part 
requires  a  contrary  expression,  he  can  throw  such  an  archness,  spirit  and  intrigue 
into  Iris  countenance,  that  he  appears  the  very  Davus  of  Terence.  He  performs  no 
less  than  five  different  parts  in  a  comedy  (not  a  good  one)  called  the  “  Mercure 
Gallant.”  In  the  first,  he  is  a  miserable,  half-starved,  sneaking  compound  of  flattery 
and  absurdity ;  in  the  second,  he  represents  a  shrewd,  sly,  suspicious,  obstinate  cam- 
pagnard ;  both  which,  though  whimsical,  are  made  natural  by  his  manner  of  playing 
them :  in  the  third  he  is  a  Swiss  soldier,  most  importantly  drunk  without  grimace  : 
in  the  fourth,  he  swells  his  figure  and  features  into  the  full-blown  pride,  pomp  and 
passionate  arrogance  of  a  serjeant-at-law,  and  then  in  a  moment  changes  himself 
totally,  and  enters  with  all  the  soft,  smirking,  self-conceited,  familiar  insignificance 
of  a  scribbling  Abb6.  His  performance  of  this  last  character,  perhaps,  equals  any 
thing  that  was  ever  seen  upon  any  stage ;  no  humour,  or  comic  passion  escapes 
him  :  nor  is  he  only  excellent  in  the  low  parts  of  comedy  ;  in  the petites pieces  of  Mari¬ 
vaux,  you  will  see  him  act  with  as  much  finesse  as  nature.  You  tell  me  that  in  the 
part  of  the  Physician,  in  the  petite  piece  of  the  Cercle,  you  see  little  or  nothing  to 
be  admired.  This  proves  the  actor’s  great  merit,  who  can  give  a  high  colouring  and 
a  finished  strength  to  the  slightest  outline.  You  will  ask  me  if  I  like  him  equally 
well  in  all  parts  ?  to  which  I  answer — No  he  is  obliged  by  the  customs  of  the 
French  stage  sometimes  to  play  what  they  call  les  roles  de  charge ;  but  I  am  as  sorry, 
as  he  seems  ashamed,  when  he  is  obliged  to  perform  them :  it  is  no  small  honour  to 
Preville  to  say,  that  he  is  always  out  of  his  sphere  when  he  is  out  of  nature.  How¬ 
ever,  play  what  he  will,  he  has  such  a  peculiar  pleasantry,  that  it  must  be  agreeable 
to  the  generality  of  spectators.  No  comedian  ever  had  a  more  happy  manner  in 
saying  little  things,  but  made  capital  by  his  comic  power  and  excellence  in  panto¬ 
mime — his  genius  never  appears  more  to  advantage,  than  when  the  author  leaves 
him  to  shift  for  himself ;  it  is  then  Preville  supplies  the  poet’s  deficiencies,  and  will 

himself  up  willingly  to  private  theatricals,  when  his  guests  at  St.  Cross  were  as  merrily  disposed  as  himselt 
a  thing  he  could  pretty  generally  secure — Er». 

2  Ii  2 


188 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


throw  a  truth  and  brilliancy  into  his  character,  which  the  author  never  imagined. 
In  short,  he  is  not  what  may  be  called  a  mere  local  actor,  whose  talents  can  only  give 
pleasure  at  Paris;  his  comic  powers  are  equally  felt  by  Frenchmen  and  strangers: 
and  as  there  are  particular  virtues  which  constitute  a  man  a  citizen  of  the  world,  so 
there  are  comic  talents,  such  as  those  of  Preville,  which  make  him  a  comedian  of 
the  world. 


EDMUND  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  DAVID,  Gregory’s,  Monday,  June  1 3th,  1765. 

We  have  now  got  a  little  settled  in  our  new  habitation.  When  will  you  and  Mrs. 
Garrick  come  and  make  it  comfortable  to  us  by  your  company  for  a  day  or  two  ? 
You  have  promised  us,  and  we  are  a  sort  of  persevering  folks,  and  will  not  easily  let 
you  off.  You  shall  have  fowls  from  our  own  poultry -yard,  and  such  beef  and 
mutton  as  our  next  market-town  yields ;  and  to  make  it  complete,  we  will  assure 
you  it  is  our  own  feeding,  and  then  you  will  find  it  very  good.  In  all  sadness  we 
wish,  Madam  Burke,  all  with  us,  and  myself,  most  hugeously  to  see  you,  and 
will  take  it  ill,  if  you  go  and  see  the  new  Paymaster  before  us  starving  proscribed 
folks.  You  know  the  unfortunate  are  always  proud  and  touchy.  We  only  wish 
you  would  give  us  a  day’s  notice  that  we  may  not  ramble. 

Adieu,  my  dear  Garrick,  and  believe  me  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Edmund  Burke. 

Mrs.  Burke  desires  her  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  If  you  bring  your  neigh¬ 
bour,  the  Thames,  with  you,  it  will  be  quite  agreeable. 


MR.  G.  GRAHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SXJi  Eton,  Juno  21st,  l<  6o. 

As  I  am  uncertain  whether  you  expected  my  tragedy  *  without  farther  notice,  or 
not,  I  take  the  liberty  of  sending  it  to  you,  as  I  presume  it  cannot  be  of  the  least  in¬ 
convenience  to  you  barely  to  have  it  in  your  possession.  You  can  read  it  at  your 
own  time.  I  am  in  no  hurry  for  an  answer ;  for  though  I  think  the  event  of  great 
consequence  to  me,  yet  it  is  of  very  little  to  know  whether  my  hopes  are  to  be  disap¬ 
pointed  or  not  six  weeks  sooner  or  later.  Only,  in  case  you  have  any  alterations  to 
propose,  I  should  be  glad  to  have  that  point  settled  before  our  leisure-time,  which  is 
the  month  of  August.  That  I  shall  spend  at  Bristol  with  the  Dean,  who,  I  believe,  is 
pretty  well  known  to  you.  Before  I  leave  Eton,  therefore,  I  hope  to  hear  from,  or 


*  “  The  Duke  of  Milan.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


189 


meet  you,  which  I  shall  be  always  ready  to  do  at  your  appointment.  Your  nephews 
are  very  well,  and  very  good  boys. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant 

George  Graham. 


EDMUND  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Queen  Anne-street,  July  16th,  1 765. 

You  have  made  me  perfectly  happy  by  the  friendly  and  obliging  satisfaction  you 
are  so  good  to  express  on  this  little  gleam  of  prosperity,*  which  has  at  length  fallen 
on  my  fortune.  My  situation  is  for  the  present  very  agreeable ;  and  I  do  not 
at  all  despair  of  its  becoming  in  time  solidly  advantageous.  So  far,  at  least,  I  thank 
God  !  the  designs  of  my  enemies,  who  not  long  since  made  a  desperate  stroke  at  my 
fortune,  my  liberty,  and  my  reputation,  (all!  Hell-kite !  all  at  a  snoop,)  have  failed 
of  their  effect ;  and  their  implacable  and  unprovoked  malice  has  been  disappointed. 

Your  attention  to  my  brother’s  affair  is  in  the  strain  of  your  usual  good-nature. 
There,  too,  the  impotence  of  the  attack  was  equal  to  the  baseness  of  it.  The  Com¬ 
missioners  of  the  Customs,  who  will  not  readily  believe  him  to  be  a  guilty,  because 
they  know  him  to  be  a  very  meritorious  officer,  have  written  some  days  ago  in  the 
strongest  terms,  assuring  him  of  their  perfect  satisfaction  in  his  conduct,  and  pro¬ 
mising  him  a  most  effectual  support  in  the  continuance  of  it.  So  that  if  the  wicked¬ 
ness  of  those  rascals  has  not  made  too  deep  an  impression  on  a  mind  whose  only  fault 
is  its  over-sensibility,  he  has  nothing  to  fear  from  them,  whatever  some  of  them  may 
have  to  apprehend  from  the  natural  consequences  of  their  own  villainy :  and  he  will 
have  hereafter  no  occasion,  I  hope,  for  the  interposition  of  good  offices  from  either  of 
us  ;  though  with  yours  he  shall  certainly  be  made  acquainted  ;  and  I  am  convinced 
he  will  have  a  proper  sense  of  them,  for  I  assure  you,  (I  will  speak  though  he  is  my 
brother,)  that  he  is  a  very  honest  young  man,  and  a  person  every  way  worthy  of  your 
friendship. 

Will.  Burke  is  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  good  opinion  of  his  readiness  to 
serve  you  on  every  occasion.  He  tells  me  that  the  best  book  he  ever  met  with  on 
the  subject  of  the  English  Islands,  and,  indeed,  in  general  on  the  trade  of  our  Planta¬ 
tions,  is  a  little  French  work,  called  “  ETIistoire  des  Antilles  Angloises.”  With  re¬ 
gard  to  the  queries,  we  might,  so  far  as  it  is  prudent  for  you  or  us  to  go,  satisfy  you 
much  better,  if  we  had  the  pleasure  of  a  little  previous  discourse  together.  AVhat 
day  will  you  eat  a  morsel  with  us  in  town,  or  spend  together  a  few  cheerful  hours  in 
an  evening?  Pray  tell  us,  for  we  long  for  it,  I  assure  you.  You  have  heard  of 
Will’s  promotion,  and  I  make  no  doubt  you  are  glad  of  it.  He  is  sincerely  desirous 
of  your  good  opinion.  You  little  Horace,  you  Lepidissime  Homuncio ,  when  will  you 

*  A  gleam,  indeed  !  the  Rockingham  administration  for  a  month  — Ed. 


190 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


call  to  see  your  “  Mfucenas  atavis,”  and  praise  this  administration  of  Cavendishes 
and  Rockinghams  in  ode,  and  abuse  their  enemies  in  epigram  ?  Though  your  per¬ 
formances  may  be  short,  surely  they  will  not  make  your  salary  so. 

I  should  grieve  to  send  our  excellent  Fitzherbert  to  the  ape  and  monkey  climes 
upon  any  terms.  You  know  and  love  him  ;  but  I  assure  you,  until  we  can  talk 
some  late  matters  over,  you,  even  you,  can  have  no  adequate  idea  of  the  worth  of 
that  man.  It  is  no  small  satisfaction  to  find  that,  if  some  men  are  capable  of  making 
the  basest  return  to  affectionate,  faithful,  and  long,  long  service,  and  if  they  endea¬ 
vour  to  asperse  you,  whose  conscience  bears  the  most  faithful  witness  to  your  in¬ 
tegrity,  yet  that  there  are  others  who,  without  any  previous  services  whatsoever, 
generously,  disinterestedly,  and  nobly,  forward  and  aid  their  friends  upon  every  occa¬ 
sion.  When  we  meet,  you  shall  hear  more  of  what  you  have  an  heart  that  can  relish. 

Adieu  !  my  dear  Garrick,  and  believe  me  ever 

Your  most  affectionate  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

E.  Burke. 

I  did  not  get  your  letter  until  one  o’clock  this  morning.  Mrs.  Burke  and  I  join 
in  our  affectionate  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  GENERAL  FITZWILLIAMS. 

SIR,  July  19>  1765. 

Before  I  enter  into  the  subject  of  this  letter,  let  me  assure  you  that  the 
writing  it  does  not  proceed  from  any  impertinent  presumption  in  me,  but  from  my 
very  great  opinion  of  you.  I  have  been  honoured  at  times  with  your  conversation, 
and  if  I  have  been  mistaken  when  I  flattered  myself  that  I  have  seen  some  kind  of 
partiality  for  me,  yet  let  the  good  cause  I  mean  to  plead,  and  the  worthy  parson  I 
mean  to  serve,  be  my  excuse.  The  honest  Yicar  of  Egliam,  (whom  I  am  sure  you 
regard,  and  whom  I  sincerely  love  from  the  best  conviction  of  his  worth,  a  long  and 
intimate  acquaintance  with  him,)  might  be  made  the  happiest  man  upon  earth  with 
a  small  addition  to  his  present  income,  and  without  which  I  fear  that  he  will  be  in 
an  uncomfortable  situation  :  he  is  obliged  to  undergo  more  labour  and  fatigue  than 
he  can  possibly  support  another  winter ;  he  has  not  only  the  severe  duty  of  Egham 
upon  him,  but,  besides  that,  he  is  obliged  to  ride  five  or  six  miles  through  much 
water,  and  often  to  swim  his  horse,  for  the  sake  of  about  thirty  pounds  a  year — this 
to  a  gouty  man,  and  turned  of  sixty,  is  a  terrible  consideration.  I  entered  lately  into 
a  very  serious  conversation  with  him  about  his  affairs,  and  he  confessed  to  me  that 
he  found  a  curate  was  necessary  for  him  ;  I  made  him  an  offer  of  money  for  that 
purpose,  till  something  might  happen,  but  he  absolutely  refused  me.  I  am  persuaded 
that  any  small  preferment,  with  what  he  has,  would  make  him  look  down  with  pity 
on  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  “  My  good  friend  Mr.  Garrick,  said  he,  taking 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


191 


me  by  the  hand,  and  giving  his  head  the  usual  jerk  of  affection,  “  could  I  have  fifty 
pounds  for  a  curate  and  fifty  to  keep  up  my  little  garden,  I  feel  no  ambition  or  hap¬ 
piness  beyond  it.” — “  And  thirty,”  said  I,  “  Beighton,  to  keep  Hannah  your  house¬ 
keeper.” — “  Pooh  !  pooh  !”  jerking  his  head  again,  “  you  turn  every  thing  into  a  joke  ; 
let  me  show  you  the  finest  arbor  vitce  in  the  country  :” — so  away  he  trotted  and 
forgot  his  wants  in  a  moment.  This  is  the  plain,  simple,  and  affecting  truth  ;  and  I 
am  certain,  that  if  it  were  stated  by  General  Fitzwilliams  to  the  most  princely 
disposition  in  the  world,  a  truly  worthy  man  would  be  made  happy,  whose  life  is 
ever  active  in  the  service  of  his  friends. 

That  no  imprudent  step  of  mine  may  be  charged  upon  Mr.  Beighton,  I  must 
assure  you,  upon  my  word  and  honour,  that  this  is  taken  without  his  knowledge  or 
concurrence :  I  have  long  felt  for  him,  and  wished  for  an  occasion  (as  you  have  flat¬ 
tered  me  that  I  have  sometimes  had  the  power)  to  raise  your  feelings  too  for  the  honest 
vicar.  My  friend  is  a  great  dabbler  in  curiosities,  and  he  has  collected  some  few  in 
his  little  library  and  garden ;  but  I  defy  him  to  show  me  a  greater  rarity  than 
himself,  for  he  is  a  generous,  modest,  ingenious,  and  disinterested  clergyman.  This 
is  the  man  for  whom,  as  our  Shakspeare  says,  I  have  at  last  “  screw’d  my  courage  to 
the  sticking-place ;”  but  if  I  have  exerted  it  now  improperly,  at  the  expense  of  my 
modesty  and  your  good  opinion,  I  shall  be  very  unhappy. 

I  am,  Sir, 


D.  G. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  letter  to  General  Fitzwilliams, 
for  Beighton.” 


DR.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Maries,  July  21,  1765. 

I  congratulate  you  on  coming  to  a  resolution,  and,  however  the  public  may 
suffer,  hope  you  will  continue  to  enjoy  the  sweets  of  retirement  with  your  sweet 
woman,  which  your  humane  and  social  disposition  render  you  equally  capable  of.  I 
thank  you  for  your  friendly  offer  and  advice  with  regard  to  “  Cromwell,”  and  shall 
never  forget  the  obligation  ;  but — you  are  indeed  the  sine  qua  non.  Nothing  but  my 
entire  friendship  for  you,  and  your  conduct  of  the  thing,  and  your  inimitable  perfor¬ 
mance,  could  induce  me  to  break  through  the  prudery  of  my  profession,  and  the 
fantastical  decency  of  my  (too)  exalted  station  in  it,  and  bring  the  name  of  Hoadly 
again  upon  the  public  stage.  I  shall  never  forget  your  friendly  advice  at  Hampton 
against  mv  exhibiting  it;  and  you  cannot  blame  now  my  closing  with  that  advice, 
when  the  main  inducement  to  my  rash  resolution  is  vanished.  I  shall,  nevertheless, 
beg  your  full  effort  of  criticism,  that  1  may  leave  that  (and  one  or  two  other  things) 
behind  me  in  as  perfect  a  state  as  the  nature  of  them  will  admit  of,  whatever  I  may 
resolve  concerning  them  hereafter.  —  {Exit  Cromwell.) 


192 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  shall  write  my  resolution  the  first  opportunity  to  my  sister,  who  will  not  be 
willing,  as  I  suppose,  to  trust  the  poor  Doctor’s  performance  without  its  designed 
companion :  if  you  think  it  worth  having,  and  she  worth  money,  you  may  depend 
upon  any  assistance  of  mine  that  I  can  possibly  give  it. 

The  criticism  of  “  The  Suspicious  Husband”  was  in  a  volume  of  comedies,  or 
rather  farces,  written  by  your  sweet  self,  and  bound  together  with  “  Old  Suspicions,” 
and  the  pamphlet  of  Foote.  It  was  a  marble-paper  binding,  with  a  white-leather 
back,  lettered  (I  think)  “  Comedies,  vol.  7.”  I  hope  it  is  not  entirely  lost,  as  it  broke 
my  set — but  you  wanted  it,  and  that  was  enough :  you  never  returned  it,  nor  did  I 
expect  it,  as  you  proposed  cutting  that  pamphlet  of  yours  out  of  the  volume.  I 
have  rummaged  all  my  drawers  of  this  place,  and  find  nothing  of  yours ;  all  I  have 
is  at  Alresford,  which  we  shall  visit  in  a  week  or  so,  and  then  I  will  look  for  every 
scrap  of  that  great  author’s  pen. 

The  resolution  above  is  formed  in  conjunction  with  a  wise  and  good  woman, 
who  has  my  interest,  and  reputation,  and  happiness  almost  as  much  at  heart  as  Mrs. 
Garrick  has  yours,  and  who  sincerely  joins  in  respects  and  all  good  wishes  to  her 
and  you  with,  dear  David, 

Your  most  affectionate, 

J.  Hoadly. 


» 

GENERAL  FITZWILLIAMS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Richmond,  July  22d,  1765. 

For  such  you  have  been  to  me,  ever  since  I  saw  you  in  the  character  of  Pierre 
at  Goodman’s-fields,  and,  what  is  as  true,  you  have  preserved  that  title  in  my  heart 
upon  twenty  other  occasions,  when  I  have  been  to  hear  and  to  admire  you.  I 
therefore  beg  leave  to  say  again,  dear  Sir  ;  and  to  declare  I  should  but  ill  deserve  the 
favourable  opinion  you  are  pleased  to  have  of  me,  were  I  to  make  a  merit  of  apply¬ 
ing  to  the  Duke  to  take  care  of  Beighton  upon  your  kind  application  to  me  in  his 
favour,  as  it  is  a  year  and  more  since  I  had  a  favourable  opportunity  of  mentioning 
the  poor  man’s  wish  to  his  Royal  Highness,  who  told  me,  he  should  be  the  chaplain, 
with  a  certain  salary,  the  moment  Mr.  Sandby  had  put  a  desk  into  the  chapel  fit  for 
such  a  clergyman  to  loll  on  and  read  from. 

This  he  knows,  and  for  this  I  am  constantly  soliciting  Sandby  to  hasten  on  the 
work  :  who  promises  stoutly,  and  as  stoutly  is  carrying  it  on. 

I  hope  Mrs.  Hale  is  in  spirits,  for  I  hear  she  is  at  Hampton  ;  and  cannot  but 
envy  your  good  fortune  in  having  one  under  your  roof,  for  whom,  as  your  Shak- 
speare  says,  I  have  often  wished  to  “  screw  my  courage  to  the  sticking-place.”  But  I 
fear  I  shall  never  be  suffered  to  exert  it,  as  Mr.  Hale’s  parts  and  abilities  are  so  much 
younger,  and  so  much  superior  to  those  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  obedient  humble  servant, 

John  Fitzwilliams. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


193 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GRAHAM. 


sir,  Hampton,  July  24,  1765. 

I  was  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  giving  me  so  much  time  to  consider  the  tragedy 
you  put  into  my  hands.  I  read  it  carefully  before  I  went  my  journey  into  Essex, 
and  since  my  return  I  have  considered  it  a  second  time  ;  the  result  of  which,  though 
it  may  not  raise  me  in  your  opinion  as  a  good  critic,  will  not,  I  hope,  lower  me  as  a 
man  of  sincerity.  My  judgment  of  “  The  Duke  of  Milan”  is,  that,  notwithstanding 
there  are  many  striking  passages  in  it,  there  will  be  certain  danger  in  representing  it. 
The  characters  and  construction  of  the  fable  are  greatly  deficient;  the  language, 
though  often  poetical,  is  seldom  dramatic ;  and  the  catastrophe  will  want  the  effect 
which  it  ought  to  have  upon  an  audience.  This  is  my  opinion  in  general ;  if  you  can 
meet  me  next  Saturday  morning,  about  ten  o’clock,  at  Mr.  Brighton’s,  I  will  give 
you  my  objections  more  at  large ;  if  your  affairs  will  not  permit  you  to  be  there,  I 
will  leave  the  tragedy  with  him,  and  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  another 
time.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 


MR.  G.  GRAHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sjr5  Bristol,  College  Green,  1765. 

You  will  hardly  imagine  that  the  line  I  had  the  honour  to  send  you  in  answer  to 
your  last,  written  in  so  much  haste,  and  at  a  time  when  I  should  have  been  pecu¬ 
liarly  unwilling  to  trust  to  my  first  thoughts  upon  receiving  a  piece  of  informa¬ 
tion  so  vexatious  to  me,  should  be  considered  by  me  as  a  sufficient  answer  on  a  point 
of  so  much  importance  to  me,  and  that  had  been  so  long  the  object  of  hopes  raised 
and  encouraged  by  yourself,  as  I  shall  clearly  prove  to  you.  You  proposed  to  me  a 
meeting  at  a  time  when  the  nature  of  my  business,  which  is  well  known  to  you, 
made  it  impracticable.  You  gave  me  no  alternative.  The  meeting,  indeed,  I  think, 
could  have  been  of  no  service  to  my  cause,  as  I  have  the  most  rooted  aversion  to 
disputing  on  my  own  compositions,  and  despair  of  any  good  from  it.  I  therefore 
address  myself  to  you  as  a  gentleman,  and  a  man  of  honour ;  and  hope  you  will  not 
think  much  of  giving  attention  to  this  letter,  when  you  consider  how  much  trouble 
I  have  given  myself  upon  your  advice. 

1  beg,  therefore,  you  will  consider  seriously,  with  how  much  hardship  you  will 
treat  me,  should  your  opinion  that  my  play  cannot  be  safely  represented,  be  ill- 
founded,  (upon  that  point  I  shall  speak  in  its  place.)  If  that  be  just,  you  certainly 
do  me  no  wrong.  If  it  be  not,  my  peculiar  hardships  are  founded  in  the  encourage¬ 
ment,  advice,  and  praises  I  received  from  you  before  you  went  abroad.  You  must 
give  me  leave  to  recall  them  to  your  memory. 
vol.  i.  2  c 


194 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


When  first  I  mentioned  to  you  my  design  of  writing  a  tragedy  for  the  stage, 
you  highly  encouraged  me  as  a  person  you  supposed  capable  of  it.  You  made  no 
promises  of  bringing  it  on,  nor  were  desired  by  me  to  do  so.  I  told  you  my  whole 
view  was  to  let  you  know  I  had  such  an  intention,  and  to  entitle  myself  to  any 
preference  it  was  in  your  power  to  give  an  acquaintance  on  that  account.  This  you 
did  promise  :  you  entered  most  warmly  into  the  thing  ;  you  desired  me  to  commu¬ 
nicate  my  plan,  fable,  &c.  which  on  the  whole,  so  far  as  1  had  then  formed  it,  you 
approved ;  giving  me  at  the  same  time,  as  we  rode,  several  hints,  which,  as  my  own 
plan  was  not  fully  formed,  and  you  had  never  heard  of  it  before,  it  was  highly  impro¬ 
bable  should  be  compatible  with  my  intentions.  All  this  I  call  entering  warmly  into 
my  views ;  but  to  take  away  all  doubt  about  it,  I  beg  leave  to  transcribe  a  letter  I 
had  the  honour  to  receive  from  you.  You  desired  as  a  favour  that  I  would  send 
you  what  I  had  then  done ;  I  consented :  you  assured  me  you  would  not  spare  me 
in  your  criticisms  ;  I  desired  you  would  not.  In  a  few  days  you  returned  it  with 
the  following  letter,  which  I  transcribe  verbatim  from  your  own  hand. 

“  Dear  Sir, — I  shall  be  very  short,  but  sweet  with  you.  I  like  what,  you  have 
sent  me  extremely  well,  and  if  you  keep  it  up  to  the  end  with  an  interesting  fable, 
will  ensure  you  success.  I  am,  &c.  &c.  &c.” 

At  Egham  afterwards  you  heard  me  read  the  second  act.  You  greatly  com¬ 
mended  the  characters  of  Julio  and  the  Duke,  though  you  made  some  exceptions  to 
other  parts,  which  I  did  not  think  incompatible  with  my  wishes,  because  I  always 
intended  to  pay  due  attention  to  them. 

When  I  dined  with  you  afterwards  at  Hampton,  you  encouraged  me  to  proceed. 
You  referred  me  to  your  brother  in  your  absence,  who  told  me  that  night  you  had 
spoken  to  him  of  my  performance  in  very  high  terms.  Though,  I  remember,  you 
said  yourself,  I  was  in  one  respect  on  ticklish  ground,  and  advised  me  to  be  cautious : 
I  told  you  I  would.  You  advised  me  also  to  consult  with  what  ingenious  men 
I  was  acquainted :  I  have  done  so. 

All  this,  I  think,  gave  me  much  reason  to  expect  a  favourable  determination 
from  you.  But  how  astonishingly  inconsistent  is  your  present  judgment  with  the 
expectation  you  were  pleased  to  form  of  me  !  If  it  be  true,  that,  notwithstanding 
your  opinion  of  the  two  first  acts,  the  characters,  fable,  language,  and  catastrophe 
are  all  deficient,  I  must  indeed  quit  all  hopes  of  succeeding ;  but  I  hope  you  will 
take  it  into  farther  consideration,  and  I  now  proceed  to  that  point. 

I  told  you  I  could  not  bear  to  defend  my  own  writing,  and  that  I  thought  my 
opinion  of  my  own  work  of  no  weight  to  one  who  disagreed  with  me.  What,  then, 
can  I  do  but  have  recourse  to  the  opinions  of  those  who  have  seen  it  ?  who,  on  the 
whole,  greatly  differed  from  your  judgment,  and  thought  it  entirely  calculated  for 
representation  ;  though  various  readers,  be  the  writer  whom  he  will,  will  form  various 
objections.  In  which  particulars,  did  you  think  well  of  it  on  the  whole,  you,  per¬ 
haps,  would  not  agree  with  them.  But  with  respect  to  the  language,  most,  if  not 
all,  have  expressed  high  approbation  of  it,  in  the  very  particular  you  condemn  in  it. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


195 


You  will  say,  perhaps,  they  flattered  me.  I  could  refer  you  to  one,  whom  you  do 
not  think  a  flatterer,  who  has  said  to  me  that  the  language  is  eminently  dramatic, 
in  opposition  to  poetic  :  I  would  willingly  risk  the  whole  on  his  saying  it  behind 
my  back. 

In  short.  Sir,  I  hope  you  will  take  the  matter  into  farther  consideration.  I  will 
be  ready  to  meet  you  if  required,  though  ill  inclined  to  dispute  on  my  own  per¬ 
formance.  But  what  I  would  wish  and  beg  is,  that  you  would  canvass  the  matter 
with  some  common  friend,  of  whose  judgment  and  impartiality  Ave  both  think  well. 
From  such  a  one  a  defence  of  my  piece  would  come  with  more  force  and  propriety 
than  myself;  and  if  he  cannot  obviate  your  objections,  whatever  you  two  shall 
agree  upon,  1  shall  acquiesce  in. 

To  conclude,  as  I  have  long  thought  you  incapable  of  using  me  with  hardship 
and  injustice,  I  beg  you  will  give  the  matter,  as  I  have  stated  it,  farther  consideration. 
I  hope  still  to  owe  you  thanks  in  this  affair ;  but  if  not,  have  former  cause,  which  I 
shall  never  forget,  to  write  myself, 

Sir,  your  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

George  Graham* 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GRAHAM. 

SIR,  Aug.  15>  j765. 

I  avas  prepared,  when  I  desired  to  meet  you  at  Mr.  Beighton’s,  to  talk  over  the 
tragedy  with  you.  You  thought  proper  not  to  come,  or  even  to  send  me  an  excuse. 
A  day  or  tAvo  after,  you  wrote  me  a  letter,  very  short,  and  signifying  that  you  chose 
not  to  see  me.  But,  upon  consideration,  you  have  honoured  me  Avith  a  long  epistle ; 
the  purport  of  which  is  (if  I  am  not  mistaken)  to  prove  that  I  gave  you  encourage¬ 
ment  to  write  a  tragedy,  with  the  hopes  of  having  it  represented  upon  our  theatre. 
The  matter  is  this  :  you  acquainted  me  Avith  your  design  of  Avriting  a  tragedy,  and 
told  me  the  subject  of  it;  I  promised  you  every  assistance  in  my  poAver,  and  likeAvise 
to  perform  it,  if  I  thought  it  Avould  meet  Avith  success. 

I  gaA^e  you  the  best  advice  I  Avas  able  from  the  little  part  of  it  I  saAv.  I  ha\re 
since  seen  the  Avhole,  and  gave  you  my  opinion  in  general,  and  Avould  have  been 
more  particular  had  you  not  declined  meeting  me.  Whatever  you  may  clearly  prove , 
or  Avhatever  you  may  think  of  my  justice  and  humanity,  I  shall  still  entertain  a  very 
good  opinion  of  them ;  and  if  you  can  only  think  Avell  of  them  by  my  acting  the 
tragedy,  I  must  be  unhappy  enough  to  lie  under  your  censure,  though  not  to  deserve 
it.  I  am,  Sir,  your  Arery  humble  servant, 

I).  Garrick. 

*  Mr.  Graham  was  one  of  the  Masters  of  Eton  College.  He  appears  to  have  acquiesced  in  the  unfa¬ 
vourable  sentence  of  Mr.  Garrick,  for  he  never  printed  his  tragedy.  Shall  I  say  that  even  in  his  letter  I 
discern  enough  to  make  me  sure,  that  he  was  unequal  to  the  production  at  least  of  a  tragedy  in  English  ? — Ed. 

2  C  2 


196 


private  correspondence  of 


MR.  SAMUEL  SHARP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Geneva,  Aug.  18th,  1765. 

I  am  just  come  from  Mons.  Voltaire’s,  and  can  give  you  the  fullest  assurance 
that  neither  your  letter  nor  any  other  part  of  your  conduct  has  given  him  the  least 
umbrage.  There  was  no  company  at  dinner  but  myself :  his  nieces  and  nephews 
talked  more  and  louder  than  other  men  and  women  usually  do  in  France ;  however, 

I  every  now  and  then,  as  I  sat  next  to  him.  got  hold  of  his  ears,  and  our  chief  topic 
was  our  English  actor.  When  I  signified  to  him  that  I  should  write  this  evening  to 
Mr.  Garrick,  and  that  it  would  be  the  greatest  pleasure  I  could  do  you,  to  say  he  was 
in  good  health  ;  Xo,  Sir,”  said  he,  “  do  not  write  an  untruth,  but  tell  him,  Je  suis 
plein  d'estime  pour  1 ui .”  When  I  represented  how  mortified  you  was  in  having  lost 
the  opportunity  of  paying  him  your  respects,  his  answer  was  such,  that  I  am  per¬ 
suaded  vou  never  offended.  All  the  conversation  turned  on  a  tragedy,*  represented 
at  his  own  theatre  last  Friday  evening  :  unfortunately  for  us,  the  night  of  our  arrival. 

Mademoiselle  Clairon,  the  subject  of  their  applause,  left  him  this  morning  to  visit 
some  friends,  so  that  I  shall  not  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  her  :  in  about  six  days 
she  sets  out  for  Provence;  Antonio,  however,  waited  on  her  yesterday,  and  made 
some  proper  apology,  in  answer  to  her  complaints  against  you  for  not  writing.  I 
confess  to  you,  though  I  am  conscious  of  her  merit,  I  never  was  so  fatigued  with 
panegvric  ;  the  women  screamed,  and  acted,  and  stared  so  violently  in  repeating  the 
fine  passages  :  Voltaire  sat  placid,  every  now  and  then  either  nodding  or  speaking 
his  approbation.  At  length  one  of  the  ladies  asserted,  in  contradiction  to  the  other, 
that  it  happened  in  the  course  of  five  acts,  that  Madem.  Clairon  was  not  equally 
excellent,  and  an  appeal  was  made  to  their  uncle  ;  he  turned  to  me,  and  said,  his 
answer  should  be  the  same  that  Madame  Dacier  gave  to  a  critic  who  pointed  out  to 
her  a  real  sottise  in  Homer :  “  Ah,  Monsieur,  dit-elle,  ce  n’est  que  divin.”  The  store 
is  not  the  best  Voltaire  ever  told,  but  I  will  tell  you  one :  he  wept  in  recollecting  and 
repeating  Clairon’s  manner  of  asking,  “  Ou  est  ma  mere  ?”  To  conclude,  he  had 
been  all  the  morning  busy  in  composing  an  epitre  to  Madem.  Clairon,  which  he  read 
in  the  rough  draught  with  wonderful  vigour  and  emphasis,  but  at  the  same  time 
with  a  tone  and  accent  so  different  from  those  of  the  English,  that  I  have  no  doubt 
that  was  you  to  repeat  any  passage  of  Shakspeare  before  the  same  assemblv,  thev 
would  feel  but  little  pleasure  from  your  recital.  Sick  as  I  was  of  all  the  praise  I 
heard  this  afternoon,  it  revived  my  spirits  to  be  told  by  Voltaire,  that  when  Madem. 
Clairon  was  sent  to  prison,  you  made  her  an  offer  of  five  hundred  louis  ;  and  I  was 
not  a  little  flattered  to  see  him  turn  round  to  the  company  and  ask  them  if  there  was 
a  Duke  or  a  Mareschal  in  France,  generous  and  honourable  enough  to  do  such 
an  action. 

Wilkes  is  here,  very  busy,  writing  and  printing  some  things,  which  I  hope  his 
*  “  Orestes,”  the  play ;  Electra  the  role  of  Madem.  Clairon. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


197 


friends  will  prevent  him  from  publishing.  I  am  his  well-wisher,  and  could  wish  he 
was  not  quite  so  zealous ;  such  zeal  may  tend  to  the  good  of  mankind,  as  martyrdom 
advances  religion  ;  hut  1  should  be  sorry  that  my  brother  or  David  Garrick  were  the 
instruments  in  either  case.  Antonio  continues  to  be  an  honest,  worthy,  and  sensible 
conductor  to  my  daughters  and  me.  He  flatters  us  you  may  possibly  give  us  a 
rendezvous  at  Paris  next  May.  I  will  not  attempt  to  tell  you  how  much  such 
an  event  would  delight  us.  Should  the  scheme  take  place,  we  will  endeavour  to  ac¬ 
commodate  our  return  to  your  arrival  at  Paris.  I  happened  at  dinner  to  assign  as 
one  reason  why  you  would  act  no  more,  that  our  theatre  was  overrun  with  sing-song. 
His  eyes  sparkled  at  the  indignation  I  expressed,  and  I  found  afterwards  it  was  from 
the  similarity  of  the  two  nations  ;  for  this  charge  makes  the  subject  of  some  lines  in 
his  epitre  to  Madem.  Clairon.  Voltaire  thought  his  theatre  would  hold  but  50 
persons,  and  they  crowded  in  120  ;  he  is  going  to  enlarge  it  so  much,  as  to  admit  an 
audience  of  200  or  250.  My  daughters  present  their  respects  and  compliments  to 
Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

Samuel  Sharp. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Woodhay,  Aug.  20th,  1765. 

You  cannot  imagine  how  vexed  I  am  to  find  you  expected  to  hear  from  me; 
either  you  or  I  quite  misunderstood  one  another  at  our  taking  leave,  for  I  verily 
thought  when  you  were  so  obliging  to  desire  to  hear  from  me,  that  I  said  to  you  I 
would  certainly  write,  and  you  called  after  me  and  said.  No,  no,  I  will  write  to  you  ; 
which  made  me  think  you  were  uncertain  how  you  would  dispose  of  yourself,  and 
would  send  me  word,  when  you  wrote,  where  to  direct  to  you.  This,  I  assure  you, 
Sir,  is  the  real  reason  why  you  have  not  had  a  letter  from  me ;  for  I  most  sincerely 
longed  to  know  how  you  did,  and  have  never  failed  to  abuse  you  every  post-day. 
The  shortness  of  your  letter  has  made  me  very  little  amends  for  my  many  disappoint¬ 
ments,  for  I  have  friendship  enough  for  you  to  wish  to  know  particulars  with  regard 
to  your  health,  which  you  were  lazy  enough  never  to  mention,  yet  could  cruelly 
knock  me  down  with  hinting  all  our  amours  were  at  an  end,  and  if  I  had  any 
thought  of  playing  the  fool  again,  it  should  be  by  myself.  This  is  so  unpleasing  a 
situation  to  think  of,  that,  I  believe,  like  yourself,  I  shall  take  care  of  number  one, 
and  leave  them  a  clear  stage,  and  all  the  favour  they  can  get ;  for  my  health  is  at  pre¬ 
sent  so  indifferent,  and  my  inducements  to  join  them  so  demolished  with  your 
barbarous  resolution,  that  I  must  wait  for  a  fresh  recruit  of  strength  and  spirits  before 
I  can  venture  upon  so  formidable  an  undertaking,  as  attempting  to  prop  others, 
when  I  am  in  danger  of  tumbling  down  myself.  In  short,  I  am  not  well  enough  to 


198 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


open  with  the  hounds.  But  when  the  weather  is  cooler,  and  there  is  a  stronger 
scent,  (in  case  I  am  in  running  order,)  I  will  certainly  hark  to  Garrick. 

And  now  let  me  tell  you  (for  I  am  in  a  very  ill  humour)  that  you  have  much 
disappointed  us  all  with  your  flattering  promises  of  seeing  us  at  Woodhay :  what  is 
become  of  all  that  fire  of  friendship  and  seeming  heartiness  with  which  you  almost 
said  you  would  certainly  come  ?  Perhaps  you  think  such  insinuations  of  no  conse¬ 
quence  ;  but  if  you  could  be  sensible  of  our  impatient  longings,  and  eternal  inquiries 
after  you,  of  every  body  who  is  in  London  or  has  gone  to  London,  you  would  be  of 
another  mind.  Besides,  you  have  actually  starved  us,  and  prevented  our  having  a 
morsel  of  venison  the  whole  summer !  for  Mr.  Sloper  has  positively  declared  he  will 
not  write  for  a  buck,  unless  you,  and  sweet  Mrs.  Garrick,  compensate  him  by  your 
company  for  the  infinite  fatigue  he  must  be  at  in  writing  a  note  to  his  Royal  High¬ 
ness’s  keeper.  If  you  have  any  bowels,  you  will  consider  all  this,  and  generously  send 
us  word  to  air  our  beds  and  stock  our  larder  :  if  you  do  not,  I  thank  my  stars,  I  have 
it  in  my  power  to  be  even  with  you  ;  for  not  a  dimple  (I  do  not  mean  wrinkle)  in 
my  face  shall  you  see  till  towards  next  Christmas.  As  we  have  not  succeeded  with 
trying  every  soothing  means  to  induce  you  to  make  us  happy,  I  would  have  you 
reflect  upon  the  consequence  of  provoking  us,  and  look  upon  this  letter  as  the  prelude 
to  many  things  much  more  terrible. 

As  we  are  not  in  the  least  angry  with  good  Mrs.  Garrick,  (who,  I  am  sure, 
always  does  what  you  would  have  her,)  we  beg  our  best  respects  and  compliments  to 
her;  as  for  you,  though  you  do  not  deserve  it,  I  think,  before  I  conclude,  I  shall  just 
give  you  a  hint,  that  upon  ordering  your  horses  immediately,  and  appearing  before 
me  here,  with  all  due  submission,  it  is  possible  I  may  be  prevailed  upon  to  make  it 
up  with  you  ;  for  I  feel  myself  very  much  disposed  to  be,  (though  I  am  really 
ashamed  to  own  it,)  most  sincerely, 

Your  truly  affectionate  friend, 

And  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

“  Mrs.  Cibber’s  letter  to  me 
this  Summer,  1765.” 


DR.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  4,  1765. 

I  have  been  for  some  time  expecting  an  answer  to  my  last,  in  which  I  told 
you  that  I  had  forwarded  twro  packets  for  you  by  the  way  of  Colchester.  As  I 
imagine  you  are  considering  that  point,  as  well  as  what  I  said  with  respect  to  the 
music  of  “  Armida,”  I  have  in  the  mean  time  made  some  progress  in  the  last-named 
work,  both  as  to  the  poetry  and  music  ;  and  that  no  time  may  be  lost,  I  send  a 
small  box  by  to-morrow’s  London  Fly,  directed  to  you  in  Southampton-street, 
which  contains  the  first  act,  (supposing  it  divided  into  five,)  both  poem  and  music, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


199 


consisting  of  five  songs.  I  do  this  that  you  may  make  trial  of  them,  and  bv  that 
means  judge  the  better,  how  far  the  songs  of  Handel,  or  other  eminent  composers 
(the  songs  not  being  hacknied  ones,)  may  be  likely  to  have  popularity  and  success. 

I  make  no  doubt  of  going  through  the  whole  in  the  same  manner ;  and  as  to  the 
real  excellence  and  propriety  of  the  music,  make  no  scruple  to  say,  that  I  believe  no 
modern  composer  can  come  near  it.  But  this  not  being  the  only  point  aimed  at, 
I  am  desirous  of  giving  you  this  means  of  judging  how  far  this  music,  or  such 
as  modern  composers  can  produce,  may  most  likely  be  attended  with  success. 
The  little  box  will  be  in  town  on  Saturday  evening,  and  will  be  left  at  your 
house.  The  post  is  just  going  out.  I  am  going  upon  a  party  of  pleasure  to 
Keswick  for  a  fortnight.  By  that  time,  I  hope  I  shall  have  your  opinion  in  these 
points,  and  shall  know  what  method  you  think  most  advisable.  Pray  be  as 
explicit  as  you  can. 

Always  yours, 

J.  Brown. 


DR.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK 

EXCELLENT  FRIEND,  St.  Maries,  Sept.  24th,  1765. 

So  we  all  think  you,  and  do  sufficient  justice  to  your  sincerity  when  we  give  up 
our  husbands,  our  brothers,  and  our  own  work,  to  our  opinion  of  your  judgment. 
Take  the  widow’s  words,  which  are  very  proper  on  the  occasion. 

“  To  say  I  am  not  greatly  disappointed,  would  not  be  telling  you  the  truth  ;  but 
since  it  is  so,  and  that  our  friend  is  of  opinion  it  would  not  be  to  the  credit  of  the 
memory  of  him,  whom  I  shall  for  ever  hold  in  the  highest  estimation,  to  let  it  be 
performed,  far  be  it  from  me  to  desire  it ;  and  therefore  I  hope  you  will  accept  of 
my  most  grateful  thanks  for  the  kind  assistance  which  you  had  designed  favouring 
me  with,  and  believe  I  think  myself  highly  obliged  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  in 
speaking  so  plainly  to  me,  as  it  will  have  saved  me  the  infinite  mortification  I  must 
have  met  with,  in  finding  it  not  approved.  Pray,  when  you  write  to  him,  be  so  kind 
as  to  make  my  best  compliments,  with  a  thousand  thanks  for  his  friendship  ;  and 
when  I  come  to  town,  I  should  be  very  glad  to  be  favoured  with  the  sight  of  the 
‘  Widow  of  the  Mill,’  as  she  was  to  have  appeared;  and  will  take  care  to  return 
it  safe,”  &c. 

She  does  not  stay  long  at  Tunbridge,  and  when  she  has  done  with  it,  she  may  find 
an  opportunity  easily  of  returning  it  to  me,  or  may  keep  it  till  I  come  to  town  in  the 
winter,  which  I  have  thoughts  of  doing,  as  usual,  about  the  middle  of  January  or 
perhaps  before. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  sending  you  a  little  article  for  the  “  Biographia  llri- 
tannica,”  which  a  sorry  fellow’s  behaviour  forced  me  to  put  together  in  my  own 
defence,  and  that  of  the  great  and  amiable  name  that  is  the  subject.  One  Ph. 


200 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Nichols  (who  would  have  been  transported  for  stealing  of  books,  had  he  not  in  good 
time  transported  himself,)  is  employed  by  the  booksellers,  and  has  a  property  in  a  new 
designed  supplement  to  the  “  Biographia  Britannica.”  This  man  applying  to  me,  and 
sending  down  only  a  week  after,  an  article  Hoadly,  ready  printed  off',  with  neither 
sense,  grammar,  nor  decency  in  it,  obliged  me  to  rescue  old  Ben  out  of  his  dirty  paws, 
and  give  a  plain  account  of  him  and  his  works — in  how  simple  a  manner  you  will 
see;  but  a  son  would  have  been  thought  prejudiced  had  he  said  more.  I  had  a  few 
copies  allowed  me,  which  I  have  given  away  to  friends  all  but  this,  which  I  reserved 
for  your  worship  ;  who,  being  mentioned  in  the  work ,  have  a  kind  of  right  to  it. 

When  you  have  an  opportunity,  I  shall  be  as  glad  as  willing  to  give  you  my 
opinion  on  certain  verses;  and,  I  trust, with  as  true  a  sincerity  as  your  own.  Your 
epigram  on  Duke  H.’s  Pickle  was  good,  and  almost  spake  itself.  I  am  pleased  to 
hear  that  Mr.  Colman’s  comedy  (two  acts  of  which  you  showed  me  at  Hampton  some 
years  ago)  is  in  such  forwardness  ;  as  I  found  by  his  talk  at  his  own  house  last  winter, 
he  had  not  worked  any  farther  upon  it.  I  did  not  let  him  know  I  had  seen  any  of 
it,  or  was  privy  to  the  scheme,  which  surely  is  a  good  one. 

God  bless  you  both  !  After  going  a  visitation  of  the  clergy  along  with  our  Bishop 
all  round  the  country,  you  will  think  I  have  caught  his  phrase.  I  am,  with  madam’s 
best  wishes  to  you  and  yours,  joined  with  mine, 

Dear  David,  yours  affectionately, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Woodhay,  Oct.  3,  1765. 

If  I  had  followed  my  inclinations,  I  should  have  immediately  returned  you 
thanks  for  your  most  agreeable  and  kind  letter,  as  I  was  then  overflowing  with 
gratitude  for  the  most  flattering  commendations  I  ever  had  in  my  life ;  but  as  they 
unfortunately  had  the  usual  effect  of  all  undeserved  praises,  (that  is,  as  they  made 
me  for  some  time  as  conceited  as  the  d — 1,)  I  thought  it  best  to  reserve  my 
acknowledgments  till  I  was  able  to  express  myself  like  a  reasonable  creature. 

You  cannot  imagine  how  much  we  are  obliged  to  you,  and  sweet  Mrs.  Garrick, 
for  your  kind  intentions  of  looking  upon  us  at  Woodhay.  To  be  sure,  this  is  not 
the  right  season  of  the  year  to  show  the  lions.  But  let  things  make  what  appear¬ 
ance  they  will  without  doors,  I  believe  I  may  say  without  vanity,  true  wit  and 
humour  reign  within  ;  and  what  is  very  extraordinary,  (though  there  are  three  of  us) 
it  will  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  decide  who  is  the  most  agreeable.  Our  common 
way  of  passing  our  time  is  in  lively  jokes,  smart  repartees,  &c.  :  we  have  it  at  our 
fingers  ends,  and  are  not  only  witty  ourselves,  but  as  Falstaff  says,  are  the  cause  of 
wit  in  others.  My  very  parrot  is  the  wonder  of  the  time !  equally  excellent  in  the 
sock  or  buskin,  and  when  you  come,  shall  cut  a  joke,  and  tip  you  a  tragedy  stiffle 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


201 


that  will  make  your  very  foretop  stand  on  end.  As  I  hope  to  be  saved !  I  have 
taught  him  to  speak  tragedy.  We  have  many  other  agreeable  entertainments  here, 
too  tedious  to  mention,  but  they  are  all  at  your  service. 

And  now,  Sir,  let  me  tell  you,  I  should  be  excessively  shocked  at  your  intention 
of  quitting  the  stage,  if  I  did  not  hope  that  the  judgment,  taste,  and  authority  of 
that  great  personage  you  hint  at,  would  put  it  out  of  your  power  to  keep  such  a 
barbarous  resolution  !  You  may  resolve  to  be  as  ill-natured  as  you  please,  but  depend 
upon  it,  there  are  those  who  will  never  suffer  such  talent  as  yours  to  be  long  hid  under 
a  bushel,  and  my  comfort  is,  they  will  force  you  to  shine  (at  least  sometimes),  wdiether 
you  like  it  or  not.  However,  I  highly  approve  of  your  taking  all  imaginable  care 
of  your  health,  and  most  heartily  wish  you  a  long  and  happy  enjoyment  of  the 
fruits  of  your  labours,  and  the  just  reward  of  your  great  merit. 

You  must  have  more  complaisance,  and  be  disposed  to  believe  every  thing  I  say 
to  you,  before  I  shall  give  you  any  account  of  myself.  What  an  infidel  you  are ! 
But  no  matter — you  must  be  convinced  all  is  not  right  by  my  not  coming  to  town  ; 
but  as  soon  as  ever  I  find  an  alteration  for  the  better  (to  be  depended  upon),  you 
shall  certainly  hear  from  me.  Pray  let  me  know  what  notice  you  would  wish  me 
to  give  you,  and  I  will  be  sure  to  write  in  time.  I  sometimes  fear  I  shall  not  be 
able  to  venture  on  the  fatigue  of  the  stage  till  towards  Christmas,  but  I  am  a  queer 
uncertain  animal,  and  a  week  or  ten  days  often  make  an  amazing  alteration  in  me ; 
in  such  a  case  you  will  see  me  much  sooner. 

Do  not  imagine  I  am  impertinent  enough  to  expect  you  to  acknowledge  this,  or 
any  other  letter  that  does  not  relate  to  business.  I  am  very  sensible  how  much 
better  you  can  employ  your  time,  than  in  reading  and  answering  my  nonsense.  But 
when  you  are  kicking  your  heels  at  the  fire,  and  have  really  nothing  else  to  do,  a 
hint  to  remember  your  friends  is  not  ill-timed,  amongst  whom  no  one  is  more 
warmly  and  sincerely  so,  than, 

Dear  Sir,  your  ever  affectionate  and  obedient  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 

Mr.  Sloper  and  my  daughter’s  best  compliments  wait  on  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  you. 

P.  S.  I  hope  you  remember  that  I  have  lost  poor  little  swivel-eye,  that  was  blind, 
and  also  that  you  promised  me  a  dog  that  could  see.  If  Biddzy  has  any  children,  I 
should  be  infinitely  obliged  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you  if  you  would  be  so  good  to 
spare  me  one. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  CIBBER. 


DEAR  MADAM, 


Oct.  3,  1765. 


I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  you  are  so  thin,  but  congratulate  you  at  the  same  time 
with  a  return  of  your  spirits,  for  be  assured  that  your  flesh  will  not  be  long  after 


them- 


-laugh  and  be  fat  all  the  world  over. 


2  D 


VOL.  i. 


202 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


You  have  seen  in  the  newspapers  an  account  of  my  intended  expedition  into 
Italy :  I  had  no  right  to  avow  it,  till  I  had  met  with  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  appro¬ 
bation  ;  I  have  had  it,  and  now  I  proclaim  the  certainty  of  it  to  my  friends.  I  have 
been  advised  by  several  physical  friends  and  physicians,  at  the  head  of  which  l 
reckon  Ur.  Barry,  to  give  myself  a  winter’s  respite ;  I  have  dearly  earned  it,  and  shall 
take  it,  in  hopes  of  being  better  able  to  undergo  my  great  fatigues  of  acting  and 
management.  If  your  daughter  or  Mr.  Sloper  have  any  commands  to  France  or 
Italy,  I  shall  obey  them  with  pleasure.  Mrs.  Garrick  desires  her  best  compliments 
to  all  about  you,  and 

I  am,  Dear  Madam,  your  most,  &c. 

David  Garrick. 


ROBERT  BRISTOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Seven  o’clock,  Friday  night,  Oct.  7,  1765. 

I  beg  pardon  for  troubling  you  with  this,  but  it  is  with  concern  that  I  acquaint 
you  the  Report  was  this  day  made  by  the  Recorder  to  his  Majesty,  in  consequence 
of  which  the  dead  warrant  was  brought  this  afternoon  to  prepare  (among  the  rest) 
the  unhappy  Robert  Turbott*  for  execution  next  Wednesday. 

I  hope,  if  not  too  late,  your  goodness  will  interest  itself  in  behalf  of  the  life  of 
that  unfortunate  youth,  as  a  petition  signed  by  a  nobleman  only  can  save  him, 

From,  Sir,  your  devoted  and  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

Robert  Bristow,  for  W.  Bristow,  being  absent. 


ROBERT  TURBUTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MOST  EVER  GOOD  AND  GRACIOUS  SIR,  Newgate  Cells,  Oct.  7,  1765. 

Since  I  find  it  is  the  will  of  Almighty  God  that  I  must  die,  I  here  take  this  last 
opportunity  to  return  you,  good  Sir,  my  ever-sincere  and  last  thanks  for  your  kind 
endeavours  and  good  intention.  I  own  I  flattered  myself  too  much  with  hopes  of 
my  life  being  saved  by  the  news  my  poor  unhappy  wife  brought  me  last.  Tuesday  ; 
but  when  the  dreadful  summons  came  to  me  last  night  to  prepare  to  die  on  Wednes¬ 
day  next,  the  shock  at  first  overpowered  me ;  but,  thanks  be  to  God  !  I  am  something 
easier  in  my  mind,  which  as  I  fear  there  is  no  possibility  now  of  saving  my  life, 
and  no  mercy  to  be  found  in  this  -world,  I  hope  God  will  have  mercy  upon  my 

*  Robert  Turbott,  a  young  man,  son  of  the  Comedian,  was  tried  at  the  Old  Bailey  i'or  stealing  a  silver 
cup  from  a  public-house,  and  found  guilty.  He  received  sentence  of  death,  Sept.  24,  1765,  and  from  the 
Report  made  to  the  King,  Oct.  5,  he  was  ordered  for  execution,  but,  owing  to  the  intercession  of  powerful 
friends,  he  was  afterwards  respited. — Gentlemans  Magazine ,  1765. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


203 


poor  soul  in  the  next.  But  then  here  comes  another  heavy  blow,  which  is  my 
poor  wife,  but  God  and  all  good  friends  I  hope  will  be  her  comfort.  Oh  !  I  could  say 
a  great  deal  on  this  head,  but  that  my  heart  is  too  full ;  and  for  fear  I  be  too  trouble¬ 
some,  I  here  return  you  my  last  thanks  for  all  your  goodness  to  me  in  this  world, 
And  am,  with  due  respect,  your  dying  and  ever  obliged  humble  servant, 

Robert  Turbutt. 

P.  S.  Pardon  me,  good  Sir,  but  here  I  hope  God  in  Heaven  will  bless  you  and  all 
your  good  family. 


C.  CLIVE*  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  October  14,  1765. 

I  beg  you  would  do  me  the  favour  to  let  me  know  if  it  was  by  your  order  that 
my  money  was  stopped  last  Saturday  :  you  was  so  good,  indeed,  last  week  to  bid 
me  take  care  or  I  should  be  catched, — I  thought  you  was  laughing,  and  did  not  know 
it  was  a  determined  thing. 

It  was  never  before  expected  of  a  performer  to  be  in  waiting  when  then’  names 
are  not  in  the  papers  or  bills ;  the  public  are  witness  for  me  whether  I  have  ever 
neglected  my  business.  You  may  (if  you  please  to  recollect)  remember  I  have  never 
disappointed  you  four  times  since  you  have  been  a  manager;  I  always  have  had  good 
health,  and  have  ever  been  above  subterfuge.  I  hope  this  stopping  of  money  is  not  a 
French  fashion  ;  I  believe  you  will  not  find  any  part  of  the  English  laws  that  will 
support  this  sort  of  treatment  of  an  actress,  who  has  a  right,  from  her  character  and 
service  on  the  stage,  to  expect  some  kind  of  respect. 

I  have  never  received  any  favours  from  you  or  Mr.  Lacy,  nor  shall  ever  ask  any 
of  you,  therefore  hope  you  will  be  so  good  to  excuse  me  for  endeavouring  to  defend 
myself  from  what  I  think  an  injury  ;  it  has  been  too  often  repeated  to  submit  to  it 
any  longer.  You  stopped  four  days’  salary  when  I  went  to  Dublin,  though  you  gave 
me  leave  to  go  before  the  house  shut  up,  and  said  you  would  do  without  me.  If  I 
had  known  your  intention,  I  would  not  have  lost  any  of  my  salary,  as  my  agreement 
with  Mr.  Barry  did  not  begin  till  our  house  had  shut  up.  I  had  my  money  last  year 
stopped  at  the  beginning  of  the  season  for  not  coming  to  rehearse  two  parts  that  1 
could  repeat  in  my  sleep,  and  which  must  have  cost  me  two  guineas,  besides  the 
pleasure  of  coming  to  town. 

I  am  sure  I  have  always  done  every  thing  in  my  power  to  serve  and  oblige  you  : 
the  first  I  have  most  undoubtedly  succeeded  in  ;  the  latter  I  have  always  been  un- 

*  As  this  delightful  actress,  Mr.  Garrick’s  Pixy,  lived  with  him  afterwards  on  the  happiest  terms,  I 
would  not  perpetuate  her  bad  spelling,  at  a  time  when  hardly  any  body  could  spell  decently.  She  was  by 
no  means  ignorant ;  on  the  contrary,  her  comic  power  in  private  society  was  transcendant,  and  on  the  stage 
she  was  unequalled.  —Ed. 


2  D  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


204 

fortunately  unsuccessful  in,  though  I  have  taken  infinite  pains.  Your  dislike  to  me 
is  as  extraordinary  as  the  reason  you  gave  Mr.  Sterne  for  it. 

The  year  Mrs.  Vincent  came  on  the  stage,  it  cost  me  above  five  pounds  to  go  to 
and  from  London  to  rehearse  with  her,  and  teach  her  the  part  of  Polly  ;  I  could  not 
be  called  on  to  do  it,  as  it  was  long  before  the  house  opened, — it  was  to  oblige  Mr. 
Garrick.  I  have  never  envied  you  your  equipages  nor  grandeur,  the  fine  fortune  you 
have  already  and  must  still  be  increasing.  I  have  had  but  a  very  small  share  of  the 
public  money:  you  gave  Mrs.  Cibber  600/.  for  playing  sixty  nights,  and  300/.  to 
me  for  playing  a  hundred  and  eighty,  out  of  which  I  can  make  it  appear  it  cost 
me  100/.  in  necessaries  for  the  stage;  sure  you  need  not  want  to  take  any  thing 
from  it. 

1  have  great  regret  in  being  obliged  to  say  any  thing  that  looks  like  contention. 
I  wish  to  be  quiet  myself,  and  I  am  sure  I  never  laid  any  schemes  in  my  life  to  make 
any  one  uneasy  or  unhappy.  In  regard  to  the  affair  of  “  The  Devil  to  Pay,”  I  sent 
my  compliments  to  the  managers  by  the  prompter,  at  the  beginning  of  the  season,  to 
beg  that  it  might  not  be  done  till  the  weather  was  cool,  as  the  quickness  of  the  shift 
puts  me  into  a  flurry,  which  gives  me  a  violent  swimming  in  my  head.  When  I  was 
sent  to,  I  recollected  I  had  given  my  servant  leave  to  go  out,  as  I  did  not  want  her, 
who  had  the  keys  of  all  my  things ;  neither  had  I  the  necessary  things  ready  if  she 
had  been  at  home.  I  had  a  friend’s  equipage  come  for  me  from  Greenwich  to  dine 
with  them,  and  take  my  leave,  as  they  are  going  to  Bath  for  the  recovery  of  her 
health.  I  was  very  unhappy  after  I  was  there,  and  the  gentleman  was  so  obliging 
to  send  one  of  his  grooms,  at  half  an  hour  after  four,  to  let  you  know  I  would  come 
if  you  could  not  do  without  me.  I  had  a  carriage  ready  with  the  horses  put  to 
when  he  came  back,  it  wanted  then  some  minutes  of  six. 

It  is  very  happy  for  me  that  they  happen  to  be  people  of  consequence,  who  know 
the  truth  of  what  I  say,  and  who  will  be  very  much  surprised  to  hear  how  I  have 
been  treated.  I  have  nothing  more  to  add,  but  that  I  am, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

C.  Clive. 


DR.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Newcastle,  Oct.  27th,  1765. 

Visits  and  engagements  have  prevented  me  from  sooner  answering  yours.  I  am 
glad  to  hear  of  your  recovery  from  your  illness,  and  hope  you  will  have  no  occasion 
for  your  epitaph  these  fifty  years,  except  to  give  your  friends  the  pleasure  of  reading 
it,  which  I  desire  you  will  do  the  next  time  you  write  to  me.  I  think  you  were  a 
little  quick  two  or  three  times  in  your  last  letter,  which  I  do  not  much  dislike  in  a 
friend,  by-the-by,  especially  when  there  is  not  much  reason  for  it,  as  I  look  upon  it 
as  a  proof  of  his  regard — at  least  it  is  so  with  me.  I  have  now  and  then  a  little 
anger  in  reserve  for  my  friends :  I  have  always  contempt  in  abundance  for  my  ene- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


205 


mies,  whether  they  be  mock  patriots  at  Stowe,  or  ballad-makers  in  Grub-street.  I  had 
seen  the  ballad  long  before  in  a  newspaper,  and  looked  upon  it  as  one  of  those  many 
honours  of  late  conferred  on  me  by  the  scribblers  of  the  times.  On  some  future  oc¬ 
casion,  I  will  write  to  you  more  particularly  about  the  affair  of  Stowe,  and  will  de¬ 
sire  you  to  lay  by  the  letter,  to  be  put  into  a  collection  which  will  hereafter  appear 
in  print.  I  think  you  acted  a  truly  humane  and  charitable  part  in  getting  the 
reprieve  for  poor  Turbott ;  and  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  Lord  R.  is  so  considerable  a 
man :  1  am  sure  I  shall  not  endeavour  to  make  him  appear  less  so. 

As  to  “  Bartholomew  Fair,”  my  sentiment,  in  a  word,  is  this  :  the  comedy  was, 
in  its  essentials,  excellent,  and  that  it  wanted  nothing  but  a  plan.  This  I  have  at¬ 
tempted  to  give  it ;  and  I  wait  for  your  decision  in  this  point,  as  well  as  your  judg¬ 
ment  of  the  music  and  poetry  of  “  Armida.” 

I  have  seen  some  extracts  from  Johnson’s  Preface  to  his  “  Shakspeare.”  In  my 
humble  opinion,  he  is  as  improper  a  critic  for  that  great  poet  as  any  that  have  yet  ap¬ 
peared.  No  feeling  nor  pathos  about  him  !  Altogether  upon  the  high  horse,  and 
blustering  about  Imperial  Tragedy  !  How  is  this  work  relished  by  the  public  ? 

I  am  going  upon  a  visit  to  Lord  Ttavensworth  for  about  ten  days,  where  the 
Duchess  of  Grafton  is  at  present.  So,  you  see,  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  take  ano¬ 
ther  turn  (according  to  the  blessed  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  whom  God  long  preserve !) 
to  become  a  courtier  on  the  right  side  again.  Take  my  word  for  it,  my  good  friend, 
nobody  is  so  apt  to  accuse  innocent  people  as  thorough  scoundrels.  So,  with  my 
compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  I  remain, 

Dear  Sir,  always  most  truly  yours, 

J.  Brown. 


MR.  CLUTTERBUCK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Lucknam  House,  Nov.  9th,  1765. 

Your  pretty  rebuke  for  my  omitting  to  put  up  a  line  along  with  the  returned 
books,  I  esteem  a  better  testimony  of  your  affection  than  a  page  of  complimentary 
professions  ;  but  I  knew  your  engagements  better,  than  to  think  of  resenting  any 
temporary  neglect,  (if  any  there  had  been,)  and  had  even  desired  Gastrell  in  my 
name  to  entreat  you  not  to  break  into  any  of  your  important  matters,  but  deal  at 
all  times  by  me  as  a  real  friend,  who,  being  secure  of  your  heart,  wants  no  fresh 
declarations  or  deeds  by  way  of  strengthening  my  title  .  I  hope  our  sentiments  on 
this  subject  are  reciprocal,  and  therefore  shall  not  trouble  you  with  excuses  for 
having  occasioned  your  reprimand. 

The  purchase  negotiated  by  Lacy  with  Fleetwood  amounted  to  13,750/.  for  the 
unexpired  seven  years  and  one  half  of  the  patent  granted  to  Wilks,  Booth,  and 
Cibber,  at  which  rate,  the  expired  thirteen  years  and  one  half  would  have  been  worth 
24,750/.  and  the  whole  term  of  twenty-one  years  thirty-eight  thousand  five  hundred 
pounds.  By  a  proportionate  calculation,  (supposing  there  were  nine  years  to  come 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


206 

of  the  present  patent  granted  to  Mr.  Lacy  and  yourself,  which,  you  know,  there  is  not 
quite,)  then  the  reversionary  patent  for  twenty-one  years,  which  takes  place  after¬ 
wards,  makes  the  whole  term  thirty  years,  which  amounts  to  fifty-five  thousand 
pounds.  The  half  whereof,  namely,  27,500/.  you  would  be  entitled  to  ;  but  that  is  a 
price  which,  although  you  would  be  the  gainer,  I  owe  to  no  man  living  so  ill  a  turn 
as  to  wish  him  to  give.  Your  peculiar  infelicity  is,  that  unless  you  sell  yourself  too, 
the  moiety  is  not  worth  so  much  as  your  partner’s  in  any  market  whatever :  by  how 
much  is  not  my  present  business  to  compute,  but  the  person  most  interested  in  the 
calculation  knows  it,  (though  not  to  a  precise  degree,)  and  therefore  he  will  not  sell  at 
an  equitable  price.  However,  what  I  have  said,  will  enable  you  to  make  a  demand, 
if  he  can  be  brought  seriously  to  treat ;  but  I  despair  of  that,  and  think  you  have  no 
chance  of  being  disentangled  from  him  by  any  other  means  than  finding  out  a  pur¬ 
chaser  that  will  offer  a  proper  sum  for  your  share.  In  that  case,  Mr.  L.  must  either 
take  to  it  himself,  or  submit  to  a  change  of  partners.  Pray,  why  may  not  Woodward 
be  sounded  ?  it  is  no  matter  to  you  who  the  man  is.  Your  only  concern  should  be 
to  have  a  proper  security ;  and  the  nature  of  the  estate  furnishes  means,  even  to  such 
a  one,  to  make  you  perfectly  safe.  It  will  be  time  enough  to  touch  upon  the  topic 
of  an  annual  sum  to  be  paid  you  out  of  the  profits,  in  consideration  of  a  mortgage  from 
him,  when  he  hath  consented  to  such  a  measure,  and  you  have  adopted  it.  But  your 
security  in  such  a  view  would  be  far  from  undeniable  in  my  opinion  ;  because  I  am 
convinced,  past  all  doubt,  that  were  he  to  be  the  sole  manager  for  a  very  few  years, 
the  profits  might  be  contained  in  a  small  box,  perhaps  in  a  nut-shell.  Avoid  disputes 
with  him  as  much  as  possible,  for  your  health’s  sake ;  be  cool  and  firm.  Nothing  is 
more  certain  than  that  “  it  was  his  agreement  not  to  meddle  in  the  management 
and  that  agreement  was  contended  for  by  poor  Draper  to  be  inserted  in  the  articles, 
but  was  omitted  by  your  delicacy  in  favour  of  the  gentleman’s  vanity.  With  regard 
to  his  ridiculous  charge  against  me,  and  his  subsequent  behaviour,  banish  the  whole 
from  your  thoughts,  and  owe  him  no  resentment  on  that  score ;  he  measures  other 
people’s  minds  by  his  own,  the  crookedness  of  which  makes  it  his  inclination  and 
interest  to  suppose  every  body’s  else  is  so  too,  and  therefore  I  look  upon  him  with 
an  eye  of  pity  instead  of  indignation,  and  pray  for  his  cure.  Your  brother  George, 
who  can  have  recourse  to  the  mortgage  deed,  must  draw  up  a  proper  notice  for  me 
to  sign  ;  I  am  unable  to  do  it  for  want  of  dates  and  other  matters.  Gastrell  will 
forward  the  draught  to  me,  and  I  will  return  it  duly  authenticated  without  delay. 
In  my  scrawl  from  Bath  last  Thursday,  I  advised  you  to  vest  your  superfluous  money 
in  India  bonds  for  the  present.  I  do  not  forget  the  farm  of  seventy  pounds  a  year 
at  Hendon,  that  I  said  you  should  have ;  but  until  the  business  of  the  land-tax  there 
be  brought  to  a  conclusion,  I  should  not  divest  myself  of  it;  because  then  I  shall 
not  have  estate  enough  in  Middlesex  to  qualify  me  to  act  as  a  commissioner  in  that 
county,  which  for  your  sake,  at  some  future  appeal  day,  I  purpose  doing,  if  the  same 
shall  be  thought  necessary,  and  my  health  will  permit  me  :  however,  I  have  in  my 
will  guarded  against  contingencies  in  relation  to  that  article.  Colman  and  you  are 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


207 


men  of  most  quick  sensations,  and  are  apt  sometimes  to  catch  at  words  instead  of 
things,  and  those  very  words  may  probably  receive  great  alterations  by  the  medium 
through  which  they  pass.  I  know  you  love  one  another,  and  a  third  person  might 
call  up  such  explanations  as  would  satisfy  ye  both  ;  I  myself  should  not  doubt  being 
able  to  do  it  were  we  assembled  together.  He  had  communicated  his  griefs  (but  no 
acrimony,  I  assure  you)  before  your  letters  came,  and  I  commiserate  his  disappoint¬ 
ment.  Had  I  not  been  in  the  secret  of  the  joint  enterprize,  I  suppose  he  would  not 
have  opened  his  mouth  to  me  ;  but  being  so,  the  comedy  was  read  to  my  Molly  and 
me  last  Wednesday  night,  and  our  concern,  for  that  it  is  not  likely  to  be  finished  and 
represented,  equalled  the  delight  we  had  in  hearing  the  piece  :  I  cannot  help  think¬ 
ing  there  is  but  one  person  in  the  world  capable  of  playing  Lord  Ogleby,  et  hinc  dice 
lachrymce !  but  who  can  help  it?  The  blasphemer  Johnson*  shall  never  more  be 
officer  of  mine ;  it  was  like  yourself  to  send  me  his  preface,  for  I  had  rather  make 
ducks  and  drakes  with  my  money,  than  buy  his  book.  My  dearest  Molly  holds 
herself  infinitely  obliged  to  you  for  the  attention  you  pay  to  the  increase  of  her 
library,  and  sends  her  most  grateful  thanks.  But  she  will  not  serve  God  and  Mam¬ 
mon  too ;  and  having  a  taste  to  read  and  admire  your  writings,  she  wonders  how  you 
could  think  her  capable  to  prey  on  garbage,  or  swallow  the  Cry,  and  such  miserable 
trash.  Her  relish,  you  must  know,  is  for  the  marvellous  and  the  pathetic,  but  loaths 
musty  mediocrity  ;  of  late,  her  hours  have  been  sadly  clouded  by  violent  pains  in  her 
stomach  and  teeth,  but,  Heaven  be  praised,  no  asthma !  My  own  health  at  this 
present  writing  is  full  as  good  as  I  have  a  right  to  expect  it.  The  dregs  of  life  are 
seldom  palatable;  but  my  spirits,  and  the  kindness  of  those  few  friends  that  Providence 
hath  spared  me,  take  off  the  bitterness,  and  make  the  draught  less  nauseous  to  my 
dear,  dear  Garrick’s  ever  affectionate  and  faithful  friend, 

James  Clutterbuck. 

I  must  forget  to  be,  before  I  can  forget  unfeigned  love  to  dear  Mrs.  Garrick;  pray 
present  to  her  mine  and  my  better  half’s,  and  know  that  both  of  us  cannot  esteem 
ye  more  than  we  do  for  the  souls  of  us. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Woodhay,  Nov.  15th,  1765. 

1  had  yesterday  the  favour  of  yours,  and  I  assure  you  that  you  were  the  subject 
of  my  thoughts  and  discourse  the  whole  day,  and  at  six  at  night  I  obeyed  your  com¬ 
mands,  and  had  for  you  all  the  feelings  of  a  sincere  friend. 

As  your  imaginary  apprehensions  are  now  all  over,  give  me  leave  to  congratulate 
you  upon  the  infinite  pleasure  you  have  given  and  received,  for  there  is  not  the  least 

*  Here  is  another  who  thinks  with  Dr.  Brown  on  the  subject  of  Johnson’s  censure  of  Shakspeare. 
Having  written  “  Irene”  in  the  strain  of  “  Imperial  Tragedy,”  I  think  the  true  feeling  was  hardly  to  be 
expected  from  the  Critic. — Ed. 


208 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


doubt  of  these  being  the  assured  consequence  of  your  appearance  again  in  public. 
I  always  highly  honoured  and  loved  his  Majesty,  for  his  sweet  disposition  and 
many  amiable  qualities,  but  am  now  charmed  to  find  he  has  added  so  noble  a  one 
to  those  he  already  possessed,  as  openly  to  profess  himself  the  admirer  and  patron 
of  merit. 

I  most  heartily  partake  of  the  pleasure  you  must  have  received  from  this  so  much 
deserved  and  distinguished  honour,  and  sincerely  wish  you  may  enjoy  a  long  and 
uninterrupted  state  of  health  and  spirits  to  enable  you  to  express  your  gratitude. 

I  still  hold  my  resolution  of  being  in  town  on  the  30th,  though  my  nerves  are 
plaguy  ones  as  well  as  yours !  I  have  been  ill  these  two  or  three  days  past,  but  I 
hope  I  am  getting  better.  This  cold  damp  weather  plays  the  vengeance  with  my 
delicacy  ;  and  if  it  was  not  for  the  stage,  I  should  wish,  with  Lady  Townshend,  that 
my  nerves  were  made  of  cart-ropes. 

I  have  sent  your  little - -  some  guttle,  which  I  hope  you  have  received.  The 

servant  happened  to  return  the  very  day  after  I  wrote  to  you. 

I  long  to  hear  your  prologue,  and  have  no  doubt  of  its  being  a  happy  one  ;  1  have 
taken  it  into  my  head  that  you  have  planned  it  upon  Horace’s  First  Epistle  to 
Maecenas,  as  it  is  so  strikingly  applicable  and  fine  for  your  purpose. 

Pray  please  me  with  two  or  three  lines,  when  you  have  recovered  your  fatigue, 
and  have  half-an-hour’s  leisure,  that  I  may  know  how  it  was,  and  every  thing 
about  it. 

Adieu,  dear  Sir;  our  best  compliments  and  congratulations  attend  good  Mrs. 
Garrick. 

I  am  ever, 

Your  affectionate  and  most  obedient  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 


EDMUND  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Gregories,  Friday. 

Well,  since  we  are  to  see  you,  I  am  satisfied.  I  think,  on  the  whole,  you  have 
disposed  your  matters  with  judgment.  You  first  sate  yourself  with  wit,  jollity,  and 
luxury,  and  afterwards  retire  hither  to  repose  your  person  and  understanding  on  early 
hours,  boiled  mutton,  drowsy  conversation,  and  a  little  clabber  milk.  As  to  my 
journey  to  Yorkshire,  if  I  should  go  at  all  thither  this  summer,  it  will  not  be  until 
late :  I  say  if  I  go  at  all,  because  if  I  get  the  farm  1  propose  into  my  hands,  it  will,  I 
believe,  keep  me  pretty  well  employed.  The  neighbour,  whose  name  you  could  not 
read,  is  no  other  than  your  silver  Thames,  whose  company  would  vastly  improve  this 
place.  Richard  is  gone  pleasuring  to  Oxford  and  Blenheim,  but  will  meet  you.  Will  is 
here,  and  continues.  So  we  shall  make  tilings  as  agreeable  to  you  as  we  can.  Madam 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


209 


Burke  is  very  happy  to  hear  she  is  to  see  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  in  some  reasonable 
time ;  about  when  may  it  be  ? 

Adieu,  dear  Garrick,  and  believe  me  most  affectionately  yours, 

Edmund  Burke. 

Be  so  good  to  give  my  service  and  congratulation  to  the  Paymaster. 


MRS.  CIBBER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Woodhay,  Nov.  24th,  1765. 

I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  informing  me  of  the  result  of  your  appearance 
again  in  public.  I  was  very  certain  it  would  turn  out  just  as  it  has  done ;  but  there 
is  always  a  great  satisfaction  in  hearing  of  the  due  encomiums  and  attention  paid  to 
one’s  friends.  That  pleasure  your  delicacy  would  not  suffer  you  to  give  me  com¬ 
plete,  but  my  imagination  has  fully  painted  to  me  what  your  good  sense  and  modesty 
would  not  relate. 

Your  prologue  is  delightful,  and  speaks  the  author  in  every  line;  I  can  easily  be¬ 
lieve  the  house  was  ready  to  come  down  with  the  conclusion.  I  think  myself  most 
infinitely  obliged  by  the  copy,  which  you  may  depend  on  my  keeping  sacred. 

“  Witty  folks,  you  know,  have  sometimes  cramp  ways  of  expressing  themselves.” 
I  find  I  was  so  very  witty,  it  was  impossible  to  comprehend  me ;  and  as  I  am  sure 
the  fault  must  he  at  my  door,  I  am  very  ready  to  humble  myself,  and  explain  a 
part  in  my  last.  I  said  I  would  enter  my  favourite  mare,  Belvidera,  into  your 
theatrical  stud,  in  about  a  week  or  ten  days  after  my  arrival  in  town,  by  which  I 
meant  to  inform  you  that  I  would  perform  that  character  about  that  time.  This 
explanation  will,  I  presume,  answer  the  demand  in  your  last. 

I  shall  set  out  from  hence  on  Friday  next,  lie  at  B,eading  that  night,  and  hope 
to  arrive  safe  in  Scotland-yard  the  next  day  by  dinner.  As  I  intend  myself  the  plea¬ 
sure  of  seeing  you  so  soon,  I  will  detain  you  no  longer  now,  than  just  to  deliver  Mr. 
Sloper’s  and  my  daughter’s  best  compliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  whom  I 
beg  mine. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  and  very  humble  servant, 

S.  Cibber. 


G.  COLMAN  ESQ.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Great  Queen-street,  Dec.  4,  1765. 

•  Since  my  return  from  Bath  I  have  been  told,  but  I  can  hardly  believe  it,  that, 
in  speaking  of  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage,”  you  have  gone  so  far  as  to  say,  “  Colman 
lays  a  great  stress  on  his  having  written  this  character  on  purpose  for  me,  suppose  it 
should  come  out  that  I  wrote  it!”  That  the  truth  should  come  out  is  my  earnest 
VOL.  i.  2  E 


210 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


desire ;  but  I  should  be  extremely  sorry,  for  your  sake,  that  it  should  come  out  by 
such  a  declaration  from  you.  Of  all  men  in  the  world,  I  believe  I  may  venture  to 
say  that  I  should  be  one  of  the  last  to  take  any  thing  to  myself  of  which  1  was  not 
the  author  ;  and  I  should  hope  you  could  never  so  much  forget  yourself,  and  what  is 
due  to  an  old  faithful  friend,  as  to  endeavour  to  fasten  such  an  imputation  on  me. 
In  the  present  case  you  must  be  sensible  that  such  an  insinuation  from  you  must 
place  me  in  that  ridiculous  light :  but  you  know  that  it  was  not  I,  but  yourself,  who 
desired  secrecy  in  relation  to  our  partnership,  and  you  may  remember  the  reasons  you 
gave  for  it.  You  know,  too,  that  on  the  publication  of  the  play  the  whole  affair  was 
to  come  out,  and  that  both  our  names  were  to  appear  together  in  the  title-page. 

Though  I  cannot  believe,  till  I  have  the  most  indisputable  proof  of  it,  that  you 

have  thus  suffered  your  anger  to  betray  yourself  and  me,  yet  it  puzzles  me  to  account 

for  an  indifferent  person’s  knowing  so  much  of  the  matter;  and  I  must  own,  that  I 

am  not  only  hurt  by  what  I  hear  you  have  said,  but  by  what  I  know  you  have 

written.  In  your  letter  to  Clutterbuck,  which  is  a  kind  of  memorial  against  your  old 

friend,  you  tell  him,  “  that  you  had  formed  a  plan  of  a  comedy  called  The  Sisters ;  that  I 

brought  some  city  characters  into  it;  and,  moreover,  that  if  the  piece  did  not  succeed,  you 

had  promised  to  take  your  part,  with  the  shame  that  might  belong  to  it,  to  yourself.” 

I  cannot  quote  the  words  of  your  letter,  but  I  am  sure  I  have  not  misrepresented  the 

purport  of  it,  though  the  whole  is  diametrically  opposite  to  my  notion  of  the  state  of 

the  partnership  subsisting  between  us.  You  have  the  plan  of  “  The  Sisters”  by  you  ; 

» 

read  it,  and  see  if  there  are  in  it  any  traces  of  the  story  of  “  The  Clandestine  Mar¬ 
riage.”  You  returned  me  the  rough  draught  which  I  drew  out  of  that  story,  and, 
thinking  it  might  be  of  use  in  conducting  the  plot,  I  happened  to  preserve  it :  let 
them  be  compared,  and  see  what  is  the  resemblance  between  them.  The  first  plate 
of  Hogarth’s  “  Marriage  a  la  Mode”  was  the  ground  I  went  upon  :  I  had  long  wished 
to  see  those  characters  on  the  stage,  and  mentioned  them  as  proper  objects  of  comedy, 
before  I  had  the  pleasure  of  your  acquaintance,  in  a  letter  written  expressly  in  your 
defence  against  the  attacks  of  your  old  arch-enemy  Shirley. 

Again ;  wTas  there  any  promise  of  your  taking  your  part  to  yourself,  out  of  ten¬ 
derness  to  my  reputation  ?  I  do  not  remember  it.  I  understood  it  was  to  be  a  joint 
work,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word ;  and  never  imagined  that  either  of  us  was  to 
lay  his  finger  on  a  particular  scene,  and  cry,  “  This  is  mine !”  It  is  true,  indeed,  that 
by  your  suggestion,  Hogarth’s  proud  lord  was  converted  into  Lord  Ogleby,  and  that, 
as  the  play  now  stands,  the  levee-scene,  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  act,  and  the 
whole  of  the  fifth  act,  are  yours ;  but  in  the  conduct  as  well  as  dialogue  of  the  fourth 
act,  I  think  your  favourite,  Lord  Ogleby,  has  some  obligations  to  me.  However,  if 
that  be  the  part  of  the  play  which  you  are  desirous  to  rest  your  fame  upon,  I  would 
not  have  differed  with  you  about  the  glory  of  it ;  but  cannot  help  being  hurt  at  your 
betraying  so  earnest  a  desire  to  winnow  your  wheat  from  my  chaff,  at  the  very  time 
that  I  was  eager  to  bestow  the  highest  polish  on  every  part  of  the  work,  only  in  the 
hopes  of  perpetuating  the  memory  of  our  joint  labours,  by  raising  a  monument  of  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


211 


friendship  between  me  and  Mr.  Garrick.  If  I  could  have  awakened  the  genius  of 
Shakspeare,  I  would  have  done  it ;  not  for  the  sake  of  adding  to  my  own  reputation, 
but  that  it  might  reflect  an  honour  on  us  both.  I  do  most  solemnly  protest,  that  I 
felt  myself  more  interested  as  a  friend  than  as  an  author,  in  “  The  Clandestine  Mar¬ 
riage  and  there  was  nothing  in  my  power  which  I  would  not  have  undertaken  in 
order  to  add  to  the  brilliancy  of  its  success.  Judge,  then,  of  my  disappointment  to 
find  you  so  cold  and  dead  to  all  these  feelings!  Was  it  behaving  towards  me  with 
your  usual  openness  and  ingenuousness  of  temper,  to  reserve  from  me  the  communi¬ 
cation  of  your  intentions  on  a  point,  wherein  our  interest  was  mutual,  till  after  the 
commencement  of  the  season  ?  In  all  our  conversations  concerning  your  return  to 
the  stage,  for  you  always  allowed  a  possibility,  did  you  ever  tell  me,  that  if  you  did 
return,  you  would  never  play  in  a  new  piece  ?  never  play  in  “  The  Clandestine  Mar¬ 
riage?”  Did  you  not  often  regret  the  want  of  a  performer  for  this  character?  and 
did  not  I  often  express  my  hopes  that  you  might  still  perform  it  ?  Did  you  throw 
cold  water  on  those  hopes  by  any  other  manner  than  saying,  you  did  not  believe  you 
should  ever  play  at  all  ?  Nay,  when  your  return  to  the  stage  was  mentioned  among 
your  friends,  and  I  joined  in  dissuading  you  from  it,  did  not  you  openly  applaud  my 
disinterestedness,  saying  that  your  absence  would  be  of  more  consequence  to  me  than 
to  any  other  person  ?  Had  I  then  the  least  reason  to  imagine  that  if  you  did  return 
you  would  have  any  objection  to  do  the  business  you  had  carved  out  for  yourself? 
So  far  was  I  from  the  slightest  suspicion  of  it,  that  some  days  after  opening  the 
theatre,  when  you  first  mentioned  this  matter  to  me  at  Richmond,  although  you  then 
made  no  positive  declaration,  I  was  thunderstruck.  Happening  to  come  up  to  town 
the  next  morning,  I  heard,  to  my  farther  surprize,  that  you  had  declared  your  inten¬ 
tions  in  the  most  open  as  well  as  positive  manner  behind  the  scenes  :  the  whole 
theatre  was  acquainted  with  a  circumstance  which  was  the  most  profound  secret  to 
me  not  twenty -four  hours  before.  Ten  days  or  a  fortnight  after  came  our  conference 
before  your  brother  in  Johnston’s  parlour ;  but  your  behaviour  to  me  in  the  interme¬ 
diate  time,  as  well  as  then,  showed  that  you  had  imagined  I  had  been  sensibly  affected 
by  your  most  unexpected  conversation  at  Richmond.  For  how  did  you  treat  me  ? 
— like  a  friend,  who  had  written  in  concert  with  you  ?  or  even  like  an  author,  with 
whom  you  were  upon  tolerable  terms? — You  formally  demanded  to  know  my  posi¬ 
tive  resolutions  ;  you  told  me  you  would  now  consider  the  work  as  solely  mine ;  that 
you  must  settle  your  business  ;  that  you  had  offers  of  other  plays,  &c.  Sec.  This  was 
strange  manager-like  language  to  your  friend  and  fellow-scribbler;  so  straime,  that 
from  that  hour  I  concluded  I  had  lost  all  your  confidence,  and  did  not  wonder  that 
you  were  unwilling  to  exert  your  endeavours  to  establish  the  credit  of  a  work,  which 
was  to  degrade  your  name  by  joining  it  to  mine. 

A  -word  or  two  more,  and  I  have  done.  You  tell  Clutterbuck,  that  if  I  will  not 
consent  to  the  play’s  being  done  this  season,  you  will  put  a  negative  on  its  being- 
played  at  all.  Is  it  possible  you  could  know  me  so  little,  as  to  suppose  that  I  ever 
dreamed  ot  it  ?  If  what  was#  undertaken  on  my  part,  chiefly  with  a  desire  of  perpe- 

2  e  2 


212 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


tuating  and  strengthening  the  connection  between  us,  was  only  to  serve  as  the  sera. 
of  its  dissolution,  the  object  for  which  I  laboured  vanished,  and  the  appearance  of 
our  joint  work  would  rather  give  me  pain  than  pleasure.  You  complain  also  of 
what  I  have  said  on  this  occasion  to  other  people.  I  will  not  recriminate  upon  you, 
nor  will  I  attempt  to  excuse  my  own  peevishness.  I  will  only  say,  that  I  had  a  right 
to  tell  my  friends  that  I  had  withdrawn  the  piece,  as  well  as  to  assign  your  refusing 
to  play  as  the  reason  for  it.  Indeed,  I  do  not  see  how  I  could  well  do  otherwise. 
As  to  the  words  you  charge  me  with,  I  never  uttered  them  :  and  on  the  whole  I 
flatter  myself  you  never  had  a  difference  with  any  friend,  who  behaved  with  more 
moderation. 

For  both  our  sakes,  the  secret  of  our  partnership,  I  think,  ought  to  be  made 
known.  On  your  part,  the  world  would  see  that  you  have  acted  with  no  more  rigour 
towards  me,  than  you  have  exercised  on  yourself ;  and  I  shall  be  delivered  from  the 
suspicion  of  the  meanness  of  fathering  a  work  of  which  I  am  not  the  author.  Here¬ 
after,  therefore,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  mentioning  the  true  state  of  the  case, 
unless  you  let  me  know,  within  a  few  days,  that  you  have  an  objection  to  it. 

I  could  not  bring  myself  to  the  formality  of  addressing  you  with  a  Sir,  at  open¬ 
ing  my  letter,  though  you  have  Mistered  mein  yours  to  Clutterbuck  and  Schomberg, 
and  I  hope  you  will  excuse  my  subscribing  myself 

Your  old  friend, 

George  Colman. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  GEORGE  COLMAN,  ESQ. 

Southampton-street,  Dec.  5th,  1765. 

Though  I  am  to  obey  his  Majesty’s  commands  this  evening,  and  my  head  is  full 
of  the  character  I  am  to  play,  yet  I  will  answer  your  long  letter,  however  hastily  or 
inaccurately. 

You  should  not  accuse  me  of  any  thing  in  our  present  circumstances  without 
mentioning  your  author  ;  let  me  know  what  indifferent  person  told  you,  and  I  will 
answer  both  him  and  you.  I  hope  I  shall  always  know  what  is  due  to  myself  and 
an  old  friend  ;  and  by  having  that  best  of  feelings,  I  was  astonished  and  unhappy  to 
hear  that  you  had  complained  of  me  (peevishly  indeed)  for  not  acting  the  character 
you  had  written  on  purpose  for  me ;  and  if  you  did  not  add  that  there  was  an  end  of 
our  friendship,  I  was  misinformed :  the  former  part  was  told  me  by  several  not 
indifferent  persons,  viz.  Mr.  Kent,  Mr.  Baldwin,  Mr.  Strahan,  &c.  & c.  Your  sus¬ 
picions  of  my  behaving  in  a  manager-like  manner,  before  you  went  to  Bath,  are  very 
unworthy  of  you  ;  I  never  assumed  the  consequence  of  a  manager  to  any  body,  (for 
I  know  that  fools  may  be,  and  that  many  fools  have  been  managers,)  much  less  to 
one  whom — I  leave  your  own  heart  to  supply  the  rest.  I  was  hurt  to  see  you  per¬ 
severe  in  a  point  which  in  the  end  would  be  of  so  little  consequence  to  you,  and  of 
so  much  to  me.  If  any  of  our  friends,  (to  whom  I  dare  refer  this  affair,)  will  pro- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


213 


nounce  that  you  were  either  friendly  or  kind  in  insisting  upon  my  return  to  the 
stage  in  the  manner  I  should  have  done  by  acting  in  a  new  play,  I  will  own  that  I 
am  unfit  for  society,  and  unworthy  of  the  name  of  friend  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  if 
they  should  declare  that  my  plan  of  happiness  was  not  to  be  broken  in  upon  by  any 
peculiar  notions  of  yours,  it  will  appear  that  your  peevishness,  as  you  are  pleased  to 
call  it,  (before  you  went  to  Bath,)  gave  the  first  stab  to  our  friendship.  Though  I 
think  your  account  of  the  comedy  somewhat  erroneous,  yet  I  shall  not  enter  into 
that  lesser  consideration  of  who  did  this,  or  who  did  that,  but  return  to  matters  of 
more  consequence :  I  will  adjust  that  business  very  easily  when  I  am  called  upon. 
I  am  sorry  that  you  have  given  a  kind  of  hint  at  obligations  by  your  mention  of  Mr. 
Shirley :  I  may  be  mistaken,  but  when  I  recollect  my  being  taxed  by  a  lady  before 
company  of  not  doing  so  much  for  you  as  you  have  done  for  me,  or  words  of  the  same 
import,  and  having  heard  since  of  her  great  warmth  in  our  affair,  I  own  myself 
surprised,  and  could  wish,  for  both  our  sakes,  that  no  account  courant,  (as  there 
ought  to  be  none  in  friendship,)  may  be  produced  on  either  side.  You  say  that  you 
never  knew  of  my  resolution  not  to  act  in  a  new  piece  till  after  the  season  had  com¬ 
menced  :  I  am  greatly  deceived,  if  I  cannot  mention  some  persons,  among  which  is 
one  of  your  own  friends,  who  can  attest  the  contrary.  Another  part  of  your  letter 
mentions  my  desire  to  “  winnow  my  wheat  from  your  chaff,” — what  can  you  pos¬ 
sibly  mean  by  that  ?  and  do  you  really  think  I  have  so  much  vanity  of  the  author  ? 
I  am  sure  you  cannot.  I  suspected,  indeed,  from  your  unfriendly  demand  upon  me, 
and  from  words  you  dropped,  of  not  being  able  to  read  the  part  of  Lord  Ogleby,  and 
which  is  now  confirmed  by  your  tauntingly  giving  the  glory  of  the  fourth  act  to  me 
that  you  thought  my  portion  of  the  play  could  only  be  supported  by  my  own 
acting  ;  and  that  you  rather  chose  to  ask  what  could  not  be  granted,  than  tell  me  your 
doubts  of  my  part  of  the  work.  This  I  mentioned  very  sincerely  to  Clutterbuck ; 
but  whatsoever  are  our  opinions  upon  this  head,  is  now  of  very  little  consequence, 
and  if  I  guess  right,  the  chief  matter  to  be  answered  in  your  letter  is,  whether  the 
secret  shall  be  told  or  not.  As  I  have  not  been  allowed  to  have  any  deter¬ 
mination  in  the  disposal  of  this  unhappy  comedy,  I  beg  that  you  will  act  from 
your  own  discretion  and  feeling,  and  do  whatever  you  please  in  the  affair,  only 
permitting  me  to  subscribe  myself 

Your  old  friend, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  In  my  hurry  I  have  overlooked  something  that  you  lay  a  great  stress  upon. 
You  speak  of  my  treatment  of  you  at  Richmond.  Are  you  really  in  earnest  to 
upbraid  me  with  saying  that  1  should  consider  the  work  as  solely  yours :  did  I,  or 
could  I  mean  any  thing,  but  that  you  should  dispose  of  it  as  you  pleased  ?  Were  we 
not  then  the  best  friends,  and  till  very  near  the  time  of  your  going  to  Bath,  when 
I  saw  with  the  greatest  concern  a  change  in  your  look  and  behaviour?  And  could 
there  be  any  managcr-lilce  language  in  telling  you  I  must  fix  the  business  of  the 
season,  and  if  you  would  not  suffer  our  play  to  be  acted,  I  must  accept  of  other 


214 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


offers  to  supply  its  place?  Can  any  thing  be  more  reasonable,  or  less  unfriendly  ?  and 
should  not  I  rather  accuse  you  of  using  me  in  a  strange  manner  by  withdrawing  the 
piece,  when  1  had  a  share  in  it,  and  reckoned  upon  its  appearance  ?  I  have  ever 
thought  you  and  loved  you  as  a  faithful  and  affectionate  friend  ;  but  surely  your 
leaving  London  so  abruptly,  and  leaving  complaints  of  me  behind  you,  was  not 
among  the  many  instances  of  your  kindness  and  moderation  to  me ;  and  if  I  be¬ 
trayed  any  warmth  in  consequence  of  your  conduct,  such  warmth  was  at  least  more 
natural  and  excusable  than  your  own. 


MR.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Dec.  6,  1765. 

I  am  sorry  you  gave  yourself  the  trouble  of  answering  my  letter  at  a  time  when 
you  might  have  been  so  much  better  employed;  however,  if  1  may  judge  by  your 
performance  last  night,  it  did  you  no  more  hurt  than  I  think  your  playing  Lord 
Ogleby  would  do  you.  As  a  correspondence  of  this  nature,  so  different  from  what  I 
expected  ever  to  open  with  you,  must,  I  suppose,  be  as  irksome  to  you  as  to  myself, 
I  will  be  as  brief  as  possible.  I  will  speak  to  no  points  but  what  are  directly  in 
answer  to  your  last ;  and  if,  contrary  to  my  intentions,  my  letter  should  be  drawn  out 
to  any  length,  I  hope  you  will  the  more  readily  excuse  it  when  I  promise  you  that 
it  is  the  last  I  will  send  you  on  this  very  disagreeable  subject. 

If  you  ever  spoke  those  memorable  words  mentioned  in  my  last,  you  must  easily 
recollect  to  whom  they  were  spoken.  It  was  needless  therefore  for  me  to  point  out 
the  particular  person,  especially  as  it  was  not  by  him  they  were  reported  to  me.  I 
told  you  I  could  hardly  believe  you  capable  of  having  uttered  them,  and  hoped  that, 
if  you  favoured  me  with  an  answer,  you  could  and  would  have  assured  me  that  you 
never  did.  If  you  did,  I  must  say  (as  you  do  of  my  suspicions),  they  were  unworthy 
of  you :  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  1  should  desire  the  true  state  of  the  case  to  be  made 
known,  rather  than  be  under  the  imputation  which  they  carried  with  them. 

My  mention  of  Shirley  was  purely  accidental,  and  never  meant  to  convey  the 
sense  which  you  have  extracted :  but  if  my  expressions,  with  their  gloss  upon  them, 
can  be  interpreted  as  glancing  in  the  least  towards  debtor  and  creditor,  I  take  shame 
to  myself  for  having  made  use  of  them.  However,  you  have  been  more  than  even 
with  me  by  what  you  say  of  a  certain  person.  I  am  quite  of  Lockit’s  opinion,  that, 
among  good  friends,  whatever  they  say  or  do  goes  for  nothing.  That  person,  I  am 
sure,  has  always  had  the  greatest  respect  for  you ;  and  if  there  were  any  offensive 
words  carried  to  you,  they  were  occasioned  by  some  irritating  expressions  brought 
from  you.  Spaniels,  who  will  fetch  and  carry,  may  be  useful ;  but  whenever  they 
lay  hold  of  any  thing,  they  do  so  tumble  and  disfigure  it,  that  when  it  comes  out  of 
their  mouths,  one  can  scarce  discover  it  to  be  the  same.  The  words  thrown  out 
before  company,  I  do  not  remember ;  but  I  think  it  very  possible  for  you  to  have 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


215 


misconceived  them,  as  I  see  you  did  what  I  said  of  my  not  being  able  to  read  the 
part  of  Lord  Ogleby.  I  might  intend  it  as  a  sincere  compliment  to  your  talent  as 
an  actor,  but  most  certainly  never  meant  a  reflection  on  your  abilities  as  an  author- 
There  are  characters,  where  the  writer  must  necessarily  leave  a  great  deal  to  the 
player :  Lord  Ogleby  is  one  of  them ;  and  I  know  no  player  that  can  so  well  fill 
up  such  passages  as  yourself.  I  am  sorry  to  find,  after  having  for  some  years  past 
opened  my  heart  to  you  so  very  freely,  that  you  should  suppose  that  I  would  rather 
choose  to  ask  what  could  not  be  granted,  than  to  tell  you  my  doubts  of  your  por¬ 
tion  of  the  work.  Did  I  ever  deal  that  way  with  you  in  any  other  matter  ?  I  hate 
all  crooked  politics.  I  have  written  in  concert  before,  and  have  seen  more  manu¬ 
scripts  than  I  ever  desire  to  see  again ;  but  I  cannot  tax  myself  with  having  in  one 
instance  dissembled  my  real  sentiments.  Why  then  should  you,  my  particular 
friend,  suspect  me  of  trifling  with  you  ?  Why  might  not  I  reprehend  what  I  dis¬ 
liked,  without  your  immediately  crying,  I  am  always  very  ready  to  give  up  what  I 
write,  as  if  it  was  a  quality  peculiar  to  yourself  ?  And  why  might  not  1  confess 
what  I  approved,  without  suspicion  of  flattery  or  dissimulation  ? 

You  tell  me  that  you  are  greatly  deceived,  if  you  cannot  produce  some  persons, 
among  which  is  one  of  my  own  friends,  who  can  attest  that  I  knew  of  your  resolu¬ 
tion  not  to  act  in  a  new  piece  before  the  season  commenced.  You  are  very  greatly 
deceived  indeed.  May  I  never  be  believed  to  speak  one  word  of  truth,  and  I  know 
no  greater  curse,  if  I  had  the  least  conception  of  it  till  the  time  mentioned  at  large 
in  my  last  letter !  Nay,  in  some  fond  moments  I  had  flattered  myself,  that  though 
you  should  never  regularly  list  yourself  again  in  the  service  of  the  public,  you  might 
perhaps  be  tempted  to  act  as  a  volunteer  in  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage.”  I  was 
even  weak  enough  to  communicate  these  hopes  to  a  particular  friend,  who  was  of 
our  counsel.  You  see  from  what  a  mountain  of  hope  I  have  fallen,  and  cannot 
wonder  if  I  have  received  some  little  shock.  On  the  whole,  it  was  not  my  un¬ 
friendly  and  unreasonable  demand,  but  your  long  reserve  and  most  unexpected 
denial  of  what  I  thought  would  never  have  been  questioned,  that  has  occasioned  our 
difference. 

I  cannot  reconcile  your  desiring  the  play  to  be  considered  as  solely  mine,  with 
your  complaints  of  not  having  been  allowed  to  have  any  determination  in  the  dis¬ 
posal  of  the  comedy,  when  you  had  a  share  in  it ;  but  if  you  now  claim  the  right  of 
your  affirmative  voice,  as  in  your  letter  to  Clutterbuck  you  laid  your  claim  to  a 
negative  one,  you  are  welcome,  if  you  please,  to  put  the  play  into  rehearsal ;  but  as 
it  is  against  my  opinion,  I  hope  you  will  not  be  farther  offended,  that  I  give  myself 
no  concern  about  it. 

I  have  sent  you  the  fifth  act  as  you  desired,  but  have  had  neither  leisure  nor  incli¬ 
nation  to  compare  it  with  that  left  by  your  brother  yesterday.  You  know  it  was  my 
opinion,  that  it  wanted  retrenching  ;  but  for  near  two  months  past  I  have  been  totally 
incapable  of  that  task,  as  I  could  never  without  pain  turn  my  eyes  or  thoughts  on 
“  The  Clandestine  Marriage,” — this  unhappy  comedy,  as  you  very  properly  call  it. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


216 

You  take  great  advantage  of  my  acknowledgement  of  my  own  peevishness,  and 
in  one  part  of  your  letter  seem  to  imply  that  it  deserves  a  harder  name.  You  are 
pleased  also  to  bandy  about  the  words  unfriendly  and  unreasonable  very  liberally, 
both  in  your  letter  to  me  and  that  to  Clutterbuck.  The  fact  must  speak  for  itself, 
and  declare  on  which  side  friendship  and  reason  have  been  most  violated ;  wherefore 
all  the  notice  I  shall  take  of  those  marks  of  your  ill-humour  is  to  wish  that  you  may 
find  all  your  other  acquaintance  less  peevish,  and  more  friendly,  and  more  reasonable, 
and  more  faithful  than 

Your  old  friend, 

George  Colman.* 


MR.  GEORGE  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  London,  Dec.  27,  1765. 

I  hope  you  will  oblige  me  so  far  as  to  accept  of  a  work  which  1  could  never 
have  carried  into  execution  but  for  the  assistance  you  lent  me,  which  was  made 
more  valuable  by  the  ready  manner  in  which  you  granted  the  favour  I  came  to 
solicit.  I  am  sorry  that  I  could  not  procure  a  greater  number  of  the  old  copies, 
that  my  collection  might  have  been  complete ;  but  them  scarcity  is  such  as  not  to 
admit  of  their  being  easily  found  or  purchased,  nor  would  my  own  pride  allow  me 
to  borrow  what  I  had  reason  to  suppose  were  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Capell.  He  would 
probably  have  thought  he  had  conferred  a  greater  obligation  on  me  than  the  utmost 
endeavours  of  my  future  life  could  have  returned,  if  he  had  been  inclined  to  assist 
me ;  though  it  is  more  likely  he  would  have  treated  me  and  my  undertaking  with 
the  same  contempt  he  does  the  rest  of  a  world,  which,  I  believe,  in  that  respect,  is 

*  These  letters  are  among  the  innumerable  proofs  afforded  by  all  ages  that  literary  jealousy  is  the 
strongest  of  all  feelings.  It  would  be  very  impertinent,  on  these  documents  alone,  to  pronounce  a  sentence 
upon  the  disputants.  But  there  is  no  sort  of  difficulty  in  confessing  the  regret  excited  by  the  silly  practice 
of  venting  every  doubt  or  momentary  displeasure  conceived  between  friends;  because  the  reporters  are  seldom 
accurate  in  their  intelligence,  and  commonly  colour  the  matter  with  their  own  malevolence  in  the  garb  of 
friendly  interest.  There  is  one  point  only  of  this  dispute,  on  which  I  think  it  allowable  to  give  an  opinion — 
it  is  Garrick’s  resigning  the  part  of  Lord  Ogleby.  I  feel  confident  myself,  from  a  recent  perusal  of  his 
“  Lethe,”  that  it  was  to  avoid  the  positive  identity  of  manner  with  his  Lord  Chalkstone  in  that  farce.  For  in 
whatever  variety  of  business  Lord  Ogleby  may  be  engaged,  he  is  absolutely  Chalkstone,  with  his  Bowman, 
even  to  the  eternal  calls  upon  either  Canton  or  Lovewell  to  confirm  or  admire  what  he  says !  Accordingly, 
had  the  comedy  appeared  as  Mr.  Colman’s  only,  he  would  have  been  accused  of  stealing  that  character  from 
his  friend’s  farce,  and  Mr.  Garrick’s  own  performance  of  Lord  Ogleby  would  have  still  more  strongly  pro¬ 
claimed  the  sameness  of  the  parts.  The  determination  therefore  to  try  Tom  King  in  it,  as  it  made  the  great 
reputation  of  that  actor,  was  of  real  service  to  the  play — indeed  his  conception  and  execution  were  alike  mas¬ 
terly  ;  and  they  are  perpetuated,  as  far  as  tradition  can  convey  them,  to  the  present  hour,  except  some  enthu¬ 
siastic  raptures,  which  King  alone  warmed  into  occasionally,  when  in  the  utmost  harmony  of  his  Lordship’s 
spirits. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


217 


not  behind-hand  with  him.  I  hope  I  have  executed  my  part  of  the  work  with 
tolerable  care,  though  I  do  not  pretend  to  the  exactness  of  the  gentleman  I  have 
just  mentioned,  for  should  a  flea  break  his  chain  I  declare  myself  utterly  incapable  of 
mending  it.  I  have  taken  no  notice  of  the  variations  of  the  stops  in  the  different 
editions  I  have  collected,  as  I  look  on  them  as  merely  fortuitous,  and  that  punctuation 
which  chance  has  directed  for  the  better  in  some  than  in  others,  may  as  well  be 
supplied  by  the  skill  of  future  editors,  for  whose  use  these  volumes  are  principally 
designed,  as  adopted  from  old  copies.  I  make  no  doubt  but  when  the  other  ex¬ 
pected  edition  makes  its  appearance,  we  shall  find  them  all  faithfully  recorded  there, 
and  receptacles  erected  in  every  page  like  parish  pounds,  for  stray  commas  and 
semicolons  that  have  committed  a  trespass.  To  the  jurisdiction  of  this  editor  I 
leave  them,  nor  should  laugh  at  exactness,  unless  carried  to  a  length  that  made  it 
ridiculous.  I  am  contented  with  the  spirit  of  the  author  you  first  taught  me  to 
admire,  and  when  I  found  you  could  do  so  much  for  him,  I  was  naturally  curious 
to  know  the  value  of  the  materials  he  had  supplied  you  with  ;  and  often  when 
I  have  taken  the  pen  in  my  hand  to  try  to  illustrate  a  passage,  I  have  thrown  it 
down  again  with  discontent  when  I  remembered  how  able  you  were  to  clear  that 
difficulty  by  a  single  look,  or  particular  modulation  of  voice,  which  a  long  and 
laboured  paraphrase  was  insufficient  to  explain  half  so  well.  In  respect  to  the 
present  performance,  I  must  be  satisfied  with  having  done  a  little  where  I  should 
have  been  glad  to  have  done  more,  and  be  as  happy  in  the  recollection  of  my  obli¬ 
gations  to  you,  as  I  am  that  I  wTas  not  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  being  obliged 
to  Mr.  Capeil. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  great  sincerity,  your  much  obliged, 

George  Steevens.* 

I  am  sorry  the  volumes  are  so  clumsy,  but  I  desired  a  few  might  be  worked  off 
on  large  paper,  instead  of  which  they  have  printed  them  on  thicker,  and  the  printers 
being  paid  by  the  sheet,  have  made  the  entries  and  exits,  &c.  so  considerable,  that 
the  books  are  swelled  to  a  size  I  never  dreamt  of.  If  you  have  a  friend  you  would 
oblige  with  a  set  or  two,  or  more,  I  am  bound  (as  Lady  Macbeth  says),  still  to  return 
your  own. 

*  This  letter  acknowledges  the  liberal  use  of  several  scarce  quarto  plays,  which  Mr.  Steevens  borrowed 
for  his  reprint  of  “  Twenty  of  the  plays  of  Shakspeare,”  published  during  the  poet’s  life-time,  or  previous  at 
least  to  the  appearance  of  the  folio  edition  printed  in  1623.  He  here  begins  that  unsparing  ridicule  of  Ed¬ 
ward  Capeil,  which  he  continued  through  life ;  but  surely,  in  an  edition  of  such  a  poet  as  Shakspeare,  there 
is  no  point  at  which  critical  care  ceases  to  be  a  virtue. — Ed. 


2  F 


VOL.  I. 


218 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR  Newcastle,  Jan.  3,  1766. 

You  will  shortly  receive,  as  usual,  a  printed  letter  of  mine,  addressed  to  Dr. 
Lowth :  and  I  write  to  you,  as  well  as  some  other  friends,  on  this  occasion,  upon 

account  of  a  letter  I  formerly  showed  you,  written  to  Dr.  15 - y*  It  is  inserted  : 

and  he  desires  that  his  name  may  not  be  publicly  mentioned  on  this  occasion  ;  and 
therefore  I  desire  the  favour  of  you  and  my  other  friends  to  whom  I  communicated 
it,  that  you  would  not  name  the  person  to  whom  it  was  written.  When  you  see  the 
letter,  you  will  remember  it. 

If  you  are  deliberating  in  what  manner  to  answer  my  last,  I  think  you  are  doing 
better  than  to  answer  it  in  the  hasty  style  in  which  it  was  written.  Of  the  letter 
which  occasioned  it  I  say  nothing ;  except  that  I  certainly  owe  you  my  thanks  for 
suppressing  the  dirty  ballad.  You  and  I  are  like  a  pair  of  good  friends,  walking 
side  by  side,  with  their  hands  upon  their  sword-hilts,  and  ready  to  draw  them  sud¬ 
denly.  Yours  was  half-drawn  ;  and  mine  was  out  in  an  instant :  but  by  calmly 
replacing  yours,  I  really  think  you  have  fairly  got  the  better  of  me.  Pray  make  my 
best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  ;  and  believe  me  to  be  always,  dear  Sir, 

Very  sincerely  and  faithfully  yours, 

J.  Brown. 


DR.  FRANKLIN  TO  THE  PRINTER  OF  THE  ST.  JAMES’S  CHRONICLE. 

SIR,  -Tan.  13th,  I  766. 

In  the  last  Critical  Review  for  December,  in  the  observations  on  the  new  tragedv 
of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  we  meet  with  the  following  stricture. 

De  la  Harpe  (says  the  critic)  author  of  the  French  play  on  this  subject,  seems  to 
have  deviated  from  history,  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  rendering  his  fable  truly 
dramatic,  as  in  order  to  accommodate  it  to  the  manners  of  the  people  to  whom  he 
wrote.  King  Edward,  according  to  the  genius  of  their  government,  is  treated  en 
Prince,  and  Warwick  is  inspired  with  a  reverence  for  the  regal  authority  diametrically 
opposite  to  his  known  character,  and  smelling  too  strongly  of  the  principles  of  pre¬ 
rogative  and  arbitrary  power :  this,  continues  the  critic,  is  equally  applicable  to  De 
la  Harpe  and  his  imitator. 

The  latter  part  of  this  observation  is,  in  my  opinion,  very  false  and  injurious  to 
the  ingenious  author  of  the  English  tragedy,  who  has,  I  think,  carefully  avoided  the 
error  attributed  to  Mr.  De  la  Harpe,  of  falsifying  the  character  of  Warwick.  I  have 
read  the  play  over  very  carefully,  and  cannot  find  that,  according  to  this  critic,  the 

*  Doctor  Balguy,  I  presume, — the  common  friend  of  Warburton,  Brown,  and  their  clerical  connections  ; 
a  divine  of  very  profound  learning,  unambitious,  and  shunning  all  controversy ;  one  to  whom  the  wisest 
deferred,  and  of  whom  the  most  litigious  never  spoke  ill. —  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


219 


English  Earl  of  Warwick  shows  any  reverence  for  the  legal  authority,  or  smells  at  all 
of  the  principles  of  prerogative  and  arbitrary  power,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  through¬ 
out  the  whole  piece  shows  a  spirit  of  liberty  and  independence,  agreeable  to  his  real 
character  in  the  English  history. 

The  author  of  the  critique  has  not,  indeed,  by  any  means  done  justice  to  the 
merits  of  this  piece,  which,  though  not  without  faults,  is  generally  allowed  to  be  the 
best  written  tragedy  which  has  appeared  for  some  years.  I  have  already  seen  it 
twice  with  great  pleasure,  and  when  it  is  acted  next,  shall  certainly  again  pay  my 
respects  to  the  inimitable  Mrs.  Yates,  who  is,  without  doubt,  and  above  all  in 
Margaret  of  Anjou,  the  finest  actress  now  in  Europe.  I  am,  Sir, 

Yours,  &c. 

Candidus.  (Dr.  Franklin.) 

“  For  the  Author  of  the  St.  James’s  Chronicle, 
to  be  left  at  Mr.  H.  Baldwin’s,  printer,  in 
White-friars,  Fleet-street.” 

Endorsed,  by  the  Editor,  “  Passed.” 


DR.  J.  BROWN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Newcastle,  Jan.  19th,  1  766. 

I  must  first  wish  you  joy  of  your  new  acquaintance,  the  gout.  If  he  comes  as  a 
friend,  he  is  a  very  honest  fellow,  and  often  drives  away  all  enemies  ;  but  take  care 
how  you  provoke  him  ;  for  in  that  case  he  is,  I  believe,  one  of  the  worst  of  enemies. 
I  have  had  a  slight  visit  from  him,  (about  four  years  ago,)  in  the  friendly  mood ; 
since  which  time,  by  temperance,  ease  of  mind,  and  exercise,  I  have  enjoyed  a  firmer 
state  of  health  than  ever  I  had  before.  With  proper  care,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the 
same  agreeable  consequence  may  arise  to  you. 

By  the  half  drawn  sword  I  meant  the  old  political  one,  which  really  seemed  to  me 
to  be  coming  out  of  the  scabbard.  But  I  have  forgot  all  the  particulars  of  that 
affair ;  which,  however  it  was,  is  now  only  to  be  laughed  at.  Yet  I  will  have  a 
lunge  with  you,  with  all  my  heart,  when  I  come  to  London  ;  but  it  shall  be  with 
foils,  and  not  with  mortal  weapons. 

I  should  wonder  not  a  little,  if  any  of  Dr.  Lowth’s  impartial  friends  should  think 
I  had  not  reason  enough  for  my  late  publication.  Had  no  false  imputations  been 
cast  upon  me  before,  the  necessity  would  have  been  less  pressing;  but  you  know 
that  all  the  scribblers  of  Grub-street  have  joined  in  this  cry,  ever  since  the  publica¬ 
tion  of  the  “  Estimate,”  and  some  of  them  before  it.  Dr.  L.,  joining  this  cry,  made 
the  consequence  inevitable.  I  believe,  he  meant  it  not  in  malice  to  me ;  but  if  he 
rashly  wounded  me  through  another  man's  side,  I  surely  had  a  right  to  defend  my¬ 
self.  I  think  I  have  struck  Calumny  dumb  on  this  article ;  yet  I  have  no  doubt  but 
she  will  attack  me  on  some  other.  You  know,  as  well  as  I.  that  she  will  always 
either  find  a  pretence  or  make  one. 

2  v  2 


220 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  sent  a  copy  of  my  printed  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester  before  publication  ; 
along  with  it  I  enclosed  a  letter  to  himself,  in  which  is  the  following  paragraph  : — 

“  In  the  first  of  my  letters  inserted  in  that  to  Dr.  L.,  I  have  omitted  several  para¬ 
graphs  which  glanced  strongly  at  an  author  or  two,  to  whom  though  your  Lordship 
may  think  you  have  many  obligations,  yet  I  am  pretty  sure  I  have  none.  What  I  have 
omitted,  I  am  sure  the  public  would  have  strongly  approved,  and  therefore  I  hope  your 
Lordship  will  at  least  allow  me  the  praise  of  some  forbearance,  in  thus  sacrificing  re¬ 
sentments,  which  I  think  just,  to  that  reverence  which  I  have  even  for  the  shattered 
remains  of  a  ruined  pile  of  friendship.”  No  answer  is  returned  either  to  this  or  the 
printed  letter  ;  from  whence  I  conclude,  that  all  friendship  and  correspondence  are 
at  an  end.  Indeed  you  know,  that  in  reality  all  friendship  was  at  an  end,  on  his  side, 
long  ago.  I  see  a  pamphlet  advertised  against  me,  which  by  the  Greek  and  Latin 
mottoes,  I  guess  to  come  from  the  Warburtonian  quarter.  I  see  the  scribblers  are  at 
me  pele-mcle.  This  is  as  it  should  be. 

If  you  can  get  well  rid  of  your  theatrical  property,  you  are  certainly  right  in 
doing  it.  If  your  partner  would  sell  his  at  the  same  time,  I  suppose  you  might  sell 
to  good  advantage.  But  (though  I  know  nothing  of  particulars)  I  think  I  see,  that 
his  being  possessed  of  one-half  must  be  a  heavy  clog  upon  the  sale  of  the  other. 
"With  respect  to  the  music,  &c.  of  “  Armida,”  I  own  I  had  some  suspicion  of  what 
you  say  :  you  will  consider  of  that  matter  at  your  leisure ;  but  it  cannot  be  done  in 
a  lighter  style.  Neither  the  subject,  nor  the  sources  from  whence  the  music  is  drawn, 
will  admit  of  it. 

Till  this  foolish  affair  of  Lowth’s  letter,  (in  which,  by  the  way,  I  think,  in  attack¬ 
ing  the  Bishop’s  character  he  has  sunk  his  own,)  I  have  for  about  three  months  been 
engaged  in  one  of  my  grand  pursuits.  I  have  not  only  completed  the  plan  of  my 
projected  Epic  Poem,  but  have  thrown  off  a  rough  draught  of  nearly  the  two  first 
books ;  and  should  by  this  time  have  completed  the  second,  had  not  that  interruption 
come  in  the  way. 

Another,  and  still  more  serious  circumstance,  I  must  inform  you  of — that  I  have 
lately  been  invited  to  assist  in  the  civilization  of  a  great  empire.  I  have  had  letters 
from  Russia,  which  do  me  more  honour  than  I  can  pretend  to  deserve ;  but  which  I 
have  answered  in  such  a  manner,  as  may  probably  cany  me  to  Petersburgh  in  a 
summer  or  two.  The  Empress  is  aiming  at  great  things,  but  seems  to  me  to  be 
wandering  in  the  dark.  I  have  sent  a  general  sketch  of  a  plan,  which  by  this  time  is 
laid  before  her  Imperial  Majesty.  Whether  the  whole,  or  any  part  of  it,  may  be 
adopted,  I  cannot  yet  say  ;  if  it  should,  you  will  probably  some  time  or  other  see  “  A 
System  of  Legislation  for  the  Russian  Empire.”  At  a  leisure  hour,  pray  give  me  a 
little  of  the  town  talk  on  our  present  foolish  debate.  Compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Affectionately  yours, 

J.  Brown.* 

*  This  is  a  very  extraordinary  and  valuable  letter.  Warburton  had  long  observed  his  progress  without 
much  wonder,  as  a  man  who,  in  the  midst  of  the  most  glaring  inconsistencies,  could  always  “  satisfy  himself.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


221 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOOTE. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  13th,  1766. 

I  had  resolved,  before  I  spoke  to  Mr.  Bromfield,  to  send  you  my  sincere  condole- 
ment  in  a  letter  upon  your  late  accident  ;*  but  I  was  afraid  lest  you  should  put  your¬ 
self  to  the  trouble  of  answering  me.  It  gives  me  infinite  pleasure  to  hear  by  Mr. 
Bromfield,  that  you  have  passed  all  danger,  are  in  the  best  way,  and  in  the  highest 
spirits. 

Notwithstanding  the  severity  of  your  misfortune,  yet  it  must  be  the  greatest 
consolation  to  you,  to  hear  how  many  have  most  cordially  felt  and  lamented  it. 
Among  which  number,  my  friend  Colman  has  particularly  shown  his  regard  to  you  ; 
and  if  I  could  convince  you  of  mine  by  any  other  proof  than  that  of  mere  words,  I 
should  be  proud  and  happy  to  show  it  upon  this  occasion.  All  I  shall  say  at  present 
is,  that  should  you  be  prevented  from  pursuing  any  plan  for  the  theatre,  I  am  wholly 
at  your  service,  and  will  labour  in  your  vineyard  for  you,  in  any  capacity,  till  you  are 
able  to  do  it  so  much  better  for  yourself.  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  with  my  best  thanks 
for  your  kind  wishes,  and  my  warmest  wishes  for  your  recovery, 

Your  most  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  have  sent  a  paragraph  to  the  papers  to  contradict  the  false  reports 
about  you. 

I  have  this  moment  seen  Holland ;  he  speaks  of  you  with  the  greatest  regard  and 
affection. 

Mrs.  Garrick  presents  her  compliments  and  best  wishes  to  you. 


MR.  FOOTE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Cannon  Park,  Feb.  26th,  1766. 

I  should  have  answered,  my  dear  Sir,  your  kind  and  friendly  letter  long  before 
this,  but  Mr.  Bromfield’s  substitutes  supposing  that  I  had  rather  made  too  free  a  use 

The  ruined  pile  of  their  friendship  had,  however,  been  too  severely  shattered  for  any  earthly  repairs  to  reach. 
Warburton  dropped  him  as  one  whose  vanity  had  become  gigantic.  He  was,  indeed,  tried  in  a  way  that 
would  have  turned  a  sounder  head  than  Brown  ever  could  boast.  Her  Imperial  Majesty  the  Empress  of  all 
the  Russias  invited,  as  we  see,  the  Estimator  of  the  Times  to  frame  a  system  of  civilization  for  her  barbarous 
empire.  Thus  elevated  to  the  highest  heaven  of  imagination,  and  being  disappointed  in  prescribing  the 
future  destinies  of  Russia,  a  morbid  tendency  in  his  habit  burst  out  with  various  alarming  symptoms  of 
insanity  ;  and  in  the  month  of  September  of  the  present  year,  he  destroyed  himself ;  but  his  violent  death 
redeemed  his  moral  character  to  his  friends,  which  had  been  reproached  with  acts  like  positive  ingratitude 
and  breach  of  engagement. — Ed. 

*  He  was  at  Lord  Mexborough’s,  with  the  Duke  of  York,  when  this  accident  occurred.  Foote  fell  from 


9‘>2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


of  my  pen,  deprived  me  of  it  entirely.  Nothing  can  be  more  generous  and  obliging, 
nor,  1  am  sure,  at  the  same  time  would  be  more  beneficial  for  me,  than  your  offers  of 
assistance  for  my  hovel  in  the  Haymarket ;  but  the  stage  to  me  at  present  is  a  very 
distant  object,  for,  notwithstanding  all  the  flattery  of  appearances,  I  look  upon  my 
hold  in  life  to  depend  on  a  very  slender  tenure  ;  and  besides,  admitting  the  best  that 
can  happen,*  is  a  mutilated  man,  a  miserable  instance  of  the  weakness  and  frailty  of 
human  nature,  a  proper  object  to  excite  those  emotions  which  can  only  be  produced 
from  vacant  minds,  discharged  of  every  melancholy  or  pensive  taint  ? 

I  am  greatly  obliged  to  Mr.  Colman  for  his  friendly  feelings  on  my  late  me¬ 
lancholy  accident.  I  am  no  stranger  to  his  philanthropy,  nor  how  eagerly  he  has 
adopted  one  of  the  finest  sentiments  in  his  favourite  author.  Homo  sum,  et  humani 
nihil  a  me  alienum  puto.  I  rejoice  with  him  and  the  public  on  the  success  of  his 
“  Clandestine  Marriage Lady  Stanhope  came  here  last  night,  gave  me  a  very  good 
account  of  it,  and  is  vastly  pleased.  It  has  been  my  misfortune  not  to  know  Mrs. 
Garrick  much  ;  but  from  what  I  have  seen,  and  all  that  I  have  heard,  you  will  have 
more  to  regret  when  either  she  or  you  die  than  any  man  in  the  kingdom.  I  beg  my 
most  grateful  compliments  may  be  made  her  for  the  share  she  has  generously  taken 
in  my  calamity.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  expression  be  clear  in  the  last  period 
but  one ;  but  I  mean  your  separation,  whichever  occasions  it.  As  to  my  present 
condition,  for  which  I  am  sure  your  friendship  will  make  you  anxious,  I  wish  I  could 
meet  you  with  a  more  favourable  account ;  but  I  am,  in  truth,  very  weak,  in  pain, 
and  can  procure  no  sleep  but  by  the  aid  of  opiates.  Oh  !  Sir,  it  is  incredible  all  that 
I  have  suffered !  and  you  will  believe  me  when  I  assure  you,  that  the  amputation 
was  the  least  painful  part  of  the  whole.  They  flatter  me  with  the  thoughts  of  being- 
able  to  get  to  town  in  three  weeks :  change  of  place  to  a  man  in  my  way  is  but  of 
little  importance,  but  for  one  reason  I  wish  it,  as  it  will  give  me  an  opportunity  in 
person  of  expressing  some  part  of  my  gratitude  to  dear  Mr.  Garrick  for  all  his  atten¬ 
tion  and  goodness  to  me,  and  of  assuring  him  that  no  man  can  be  more  sincerely 

His  most  obliged  and  devoted  servant, 

Saml.  Foote. 

I  fancy  my  man  has  made  a  horrid  blunder,  by  inclosing  to  you  a  letter  for 
Mr.  Holland. 

his  horse,  and  fractured  his  leg  in  so  dreadful  a  way,  that  the  amputation  of  the  limb  could  alone  save  the 
life  of  the  sufferer. — Ed. 

*  There  is  a  melancholy  truth  in  this  question,  which  goes  to  the  heart.  The  whole  letter  indeed  is 
peculiarly  amiable. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


223 


MR.  PATERSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR.  New  Burlington-street,  March  4,  1766. 

Mr.  Lacy  is  just  gone  from  me ;  he  brought  me  back  the  memorandum  I  had 
drawn,  and  absolutely  refuses  to  subscribe  to  it.  He  particularly  objects  to  the 
mode  I  had  pointed  out  for  the  disposal  of  the  property  in  case  of  death  or  separa¬ 
tion.  He  declares  the  most  sincere  desire  of  continuing  with  you  in  partnership,  as 
well  as  friendship,  and  says  that,  in  the  eighteen  years  you  have  been  together,  he 
does  not  recollect  his  having  interrupted  you  in  the  management  of  the  stage  more 
than  twice,  and,  as  to  the  last  time,  seems  to  think  himself  to  blame  for  the  manner 
of  doing  it,  and  I  really  believe  is  sorry  for  it.  He  says,  he  desires  you  may  go  on 
upon  the  old  footing,  and  has  given  me  his  word  of  honour  that  in  such  case  he  will 
never  object  to  your  management  but  in  a  private  and  friendly  manner.  And  in 
case  you  two  cannot  agree,  he  will  leave  it  to  my  determination  as  the  common 
friend  of  both,  though  originally  yours. 

Now  taking  it  for  granted  that  Mr.  Lacy  is  in  earnest,  I  think  his  proposal  fair 
and  reasonable,  and  such  as  you  should  agree  to.  I  have  heard  you  express  your 
inclination  to  continue  with  him,  in  which  I  thought  you  sincere  ;  give  me  leave  to 
say  that  I  think  Mr.  Lacy  equally  so,  and  will  undertake  for  his  punctually  perform¬ 
ing  what  he  promises.  I  have  not  told  him  my  sentiments  of  his  proposal,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  have  appointed  to  meet  Mr.  Fitzgerald  next  Saturday.  But  my  sincere 
wish  is,  that  you  would  both  agree  ;  disappoint  the  little  arts  of  those  who  endea¬ 
vour  to  make  a  total  breach  between  you  ;  and  give  me  the  satisfaction  of  being  the 
happy  instrument  of  restoring  your  ancient  harmony  and  friendship.  Pray  send  me 
an  answer  as  soon  as  possible,  that  I  may  let  Mr.  Lacy  know  your  determination,  and 
believe  me  ever 

Your  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

John  Paterson* 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  PATERSON. 


MY  DEAR  SIR, 


March  5,  1766. 


As  I  am  most  willing  to  put  an  end  to  your  trouble  and  my  own  anxiety,  1  shall 
certainly  submit  to  your  opinion.  If  Mr.  Lacy,  as  you  have  told  me,  is  sorry  for  our 
late  quarrel,  and  sincere  in  his  desire  of  continuing  in  partnership  with  me,  I  shall  at 
once  come  into  your  determination.  I  should  have  quitted  Drury-lane  Theatre  with 
reluctance,  and  nothing  but  being  convinced  that  Mr.  Lacy  had  chose  to  part  with 
me  should  have  drove  me  to  the  step  that  I  was  obliged  to  take— therefore  I  fully 


*  This  gentleman  was  one  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  executors  ;  and,  as  this  letter  proves  him  to  be,  a  person  ot 
sound  judgment  and  perfect  impartiality. — Ed. 


224 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


subscribe  to  your  proposals  in  your  letter,  and  am  ready  to  meet  Mr.  Lacy  as  my 
partner  and  friend  without  having  the  least  remembrance  that  we  ever  disagreed.  I 
most  sincerely  thank  you  for  the  pains  you  have  taken,  and  the  true  friendship  you 
have  shown  to  both  of  us. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  would  have  answered  your  letter  last  night,  but  it  was  very  late  when  I 
received  it.  I  will  call  upon  you  before  twelve  to-morrow. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR,  May  24,  1766. 

!•  never  heard  that  you  did  me  the  favour  of  calling  in  Southampton-street.  I 
have  not  yet  examined  our  theatrical  stores  for  next  season.  We  have  many  things 
to  make  their  appearance.  You  did  not  mention  what  performance  you  intended 
for  us,  whether  tragedy,  comedy,  or  farce.  Whatever  it  is,  if  you  will  please  to 
put  it  into  my  hands,  I  will  take  care  to  perform  it  as  soon  as  I  possibly  can. 
The  managers  reserving  to  themselves  the  right  of  refusing  it  if  they  shall  (upon 
consideration)  thmk  it  not  for  your  and  then-  advantage  to  receive  it.  I  may  ven¬ 
ture  to  say  that  you  can  run  no  risk  of  this  last  condition. 

You  will  oblige  me  by  putting  me  in  the  list  of  your  subscribers.  Mr.  Lacy, 
Mr.  Holland,  and  Mr.  Powell,  desire  to  have  their  names  also  among  your  subscribers. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  know  by  a  line  in  Southampton-street,  Tuesday  or  "Wednesday 
next,  what  kind  of  performance  you  intend  for  our  theatre,  that  I  may  give  you  my 
answer  as  soon  as  possible. 


MR.  LOVE  TO  MR.  HOPKINS. 


DEAR  HOPKINS,*  Richmond,  May  28,  1766. 

If  you  remember,  you  told  me  that  Mr.  Garrick  would  not  be  in  town  till  Tues¬ 
day  evening.  When  I  went  over  to  Hampton  yesterday  he  was  just  gone,  and  I 
missed  the  opportunity  of  seeing  of  him  by  being  too  late ;  I  must  therefore  wait  till 
I  can  have  that  pleasure,  in  order  to  clear  up  the  matter  you  said  he  seemed  displeased 
about. 

But  I  am  unhappy  enough,  you  tell  me,  to  be  blamed  on  a  fresh  account.  I 
should  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  candidly  tell  Mr.  Garrick  what  you 

*  The  prompter  of  Drury-lane  theatre,  and  the  father  of  Mrs.  John  Kemble. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


225 


know  of  our  situation  ;  and  then,  I  think,  you  will  accord  with  me,  that  I  cannot  ven¬ 
ture  a  tragedy  on  a  Saturday  night  without  the  certainty  of  losing  more  than  I  can 
possibly  afford.  I  always  apprehended  that  Mr.  Garrick  proposed  my  taking  Mr. 
Cautherly  for  an  opportunity  of  practising  a  little  under  his  eye,  and  therefore  only 
to  play  when  we  found  it  convenient  to  perform  the  pieces  in  which  he  was  studied: 
Mr.  Garrick,  to  whom  nothing  theatrical  can  be  unknown,  must  be  sensible  that 
otherwise  Mr.  Cautherly,  instead  of  being  of  service,  would  greatly  injure  the  whole 
undertaking ;  for  as  it  is  impossible  he  should  bring  us  any  thing  by  his  single  merit, 
we  cannot  afford  to  risk  plays  on  his  account  that  no  one  will  come  to  see.  I  hope 
Mr.  Garrick  will  be  so  kind  as  to  consider,  that  if  Mr.  Cautherly  was  not  with  us  at 
all,  we  should  not  want  one  person  more  to  supply  what  he  can  at  present  fill  up : 
but  as  there  is  not  the  thing  in  the  world  I  would  not  do  to  pleasure  Mr.  Garrick,  as 
far  as  I  am  able,  if  he  thinks  it  of  consequence  to  wait  a  particular  day,  I  do  not 
desire  Mr.  Cautherly  to  appear  till  we  can  do  a  comedy  he  is  in,  and  then  he  may 
play  first  on  a  Saturday ;  as  to  a  tragedy,  1  neither  dare  nor  can,  consistent  with  my 
duty,  attempt  it  on  any  Saturday  in  the  season.  Dear  Sir,  give  my  sincere  and  most 
respectful  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  beg  him  to  consider  the  truth  of  these 
particulars ;  and,  as  1  know  you  to  be  the  faithful  friend  to  both,  endeavour  to  set 
this  matter  in  a  right  light.  I  am,  of  late,  very  unhappy  to  find  upon  what  slight 
occasions  Mr.  Garrick  suffers  me  to  sink  in  his  esteem :  I  trust  you  think  I  do  not 
deserve  it ;  1  am  sure  I  do  not.  I  wish  you  and  family  a  safe  and  pleasant  journey 
hither,  and  am, 

Yours,  most  sincerely, 

James  Love.* 

P.  S.  If  the  play  must  be  changed,  please  to  put  “  Love  in  a  Village”  for  Wed¬ 
nesday. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LOVE. 


Hampton,  June  3. 

That  Mr.  Garrick  may  too  hastily ,  and  Mr.  Love  too  slowly,  feel  the  delicacy  of 
friendship,  I  am  very  ready  to  acknowledge ;  but  I  could  wish  that  Mr.  Love  would 
make  some  small  distinction  between  slights  and  slight  occasions:  the  last  are  the 
words  made  use  of  in  your  letter  to  Mr.  Hopkins.  As  for  Cautherly,  it  was  never 
intended  that  he  should  be  a  burden  to  you,  and  he  never  shall :  he  is  otherwise 
disposed  of.  Hopkins  is  my  witness  that  I  read  your  extraordinary  letter  to  him, 

*  Love  was  an  indolent  man,  but  a  respectable  and  judicious  actor.  One  wonders,  if  he  really  prized  Mr. 
Garrick’s  favour  so  highly,  that  he  did  not  at  once  concede  the  point  as  to  Cautherly.  If  the  great  actor 
felt  any  particular  interest  in  this  young  man’s  welfare,  he  had  surely  the  means  of  gratifying  any  country 
manager,  like  Love,  who  aided  him  in  his  object.  His  real  name  was  Dance,  and  his  father  was  the  architect 
of  the  Mansion-house. — Ed. 

2  G 


VOL.  I. 


226 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


with  astonishment,  indeed,  but  no  anger.  I  beg  with  you  that  the  whole  matter 
may  be  drowned  in  oblivion :  we  have  both  been  mistaken. 

“ - nos  debemus  amici, 

Si  quod  sit  vitium,  non  fastidire.” 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick.* 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Mr.  Helsa’s,  Great  Rider-street,  St.  James’s,  May  31st,  1  766. 

The  favourable  reception  that  the  town  gave  to  “  The  Double  Mistake,”  has  en¬ 
couraged  me  to  essay  their  indulgence  again,  by  writing  another  comedy.  Notwith¬ 
standing  your  severe  censure  upon  my  last,  I  most  earnestly  wish  to  present  my 
instant  performance  to  the  public  through  your  hands.  If,  therefore,  Sir,  it  may  be 
agreeable  to  you  to  receive  the  comedy  I  mention,  it  shall  be  sent  to  you  imme¬ 
diately,  upon  this  condition,  that  if  you  should  reject  it,  you  will  never  mention  your 
having  seen  it  to  any  person.  If  I  should  be  happy  enough  to  have  my  comedy  re¬ 
ceived  and  approved  by  you,  I  shall  be  truly  thankful  to  you  for  any  observations  or 
alterations  you  may  think  proper  to  make. 

As  I  have  not  the  pleasure  of  being  personally  known  to  you,  I  prefer  this  me¬ 
thod  of  addressing  you,  to  troubling  any  of  my  friends  who  may  have  the  happiness 
of  your  acquaintance. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith.! 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  June,  1766. 

I  have  been  ill  these  ten  days,  and  I  really  think  it  is  you  have  made  me  so, 
by  unkindly  refusing  me  an  indulgence  which  I  have  set  my  heart  upon — that  of 
dedicating  my  play  to  you  ;  but  I  am  not  so  easily  said  nay  to  as  you  may  imagine. 
You  have  a  right  to  waive  a  compliment  which  you  do  not  choose  to  accept,  but 
none  to  prevent  me  from  expressing  the  honest  feelings  of  my  heart  towards  you,  or 
any  other  person. 


*  One  of  Garrick’s  neat  and  gentlemanly  closes  of  altercation.  The  reader  sees,  with  Dr.  Warburton,  how 
well  he  could  preserve  his  dignity  in  the  profession  he  illustrated. — Ed. 

t  Mrs.  Griffith  has  left  no  comedy  of  striking  excellence ;  and  as  an  author  is  most  advantageously  re¬ 
membered  for  her  share  of  the  Letters  between  Henry  and  Frances  j  and  her  very  clear  display  of  the  ethical 
strength  of  our  great  dramatic  poet.  Her  “Illustrations”  afford  a  code  of  morals  suited  to  all  the  exigen¬ 
cies  of  human  life. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


227 


Women,  you  know,  do  not  easily  give  up  a  favourite  point,  and  I  declare  I  shall 
be  extremely  mortified  if  you  persist  in  refusing  to  let  the  enclosed  be  published 
along  with  my  play.  If  you  take  the  trouble  of  reading  it,  you  will  find  how  much 
I  am  interested  in  this  request. 

Mr.  Griffith  tells  me  you  do  not  approve  of  the  title  he  gave  my  play  ;  call  it 
what  name  you  will,  provided  you  let  yours  appear  in  the  Dedication. 

I  should  be  glad  to  know  if  Mr.  Barry  will  play  Sir  William,  and  Mrs.  Barry, 
Harriet  ?  Do  be  so  good  to  tell  me  something  about  it.  I  do  not  wish  to  plague 
you,  but  I  cannot  avoid  being  anxious.  My  compliments  wait  upon  Mrs.  Garrick, 

And  I  am  very  sincerely, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH. 


MADAM, 

I  should  have  answered  your  letter  immediately,  had  I  not  been  in  the  country. 
The  opinion  I  gave  of  “  The  Double  Mistake”  was  to  a  friend,  to  whom  I  never  dis¬ 
guise  my  thoughts :  had  I  known  that  a  lady  was  the  author,  and  that  my  letter 
would  have  been  sent  to  her,  I  should  certainly  have  been  more  wary  in  my  expres¬ 
sions  ;  however,  1  most  sincerely  congratulate  you  that  the  success  of  the  comedy 
did  not  correspond  with  my  opinion. 

We  have  six  new  performances  in  our  hands,  three  of  which  are  only  farces  ;  I 
am  likewise  to  read  a  new  comedy  to-morrow,  and  expect,  from  its  author,  sufficient 
merit  to  receive  it.  Exclusive  of  this  last  piece,  it  will  be  impossible  to  perform 
yours  this  next  winter;  it  shall  come  in  its  turn,  and  if  it  is  received,  you  shall 
be  acquainted  with  its  situation  upon  our  book,  and  with  the  names  of  those  per¬ 
formances  which,  in  justice,  and  by  the  custom  of  theatres,  must  precede  it. 

I  am,  Madam,  yours,  &c.  D.  G. 

Whenever  you  please  to  entrust  me  with  a  performance,  you  may  depend  upon 
my  not  abusing  your  confidence.  If  I  think  I  cannot  serve,  I  take  care  not  to  injure, 
an  author. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  June  4th,  1  766 

I  am  very  sorry  to  find  by  your  letter  that  my  comedy  cannot  be  performed 
at  Drury -lane  next  winter,  as  it  ‘will  by  no  means  suit  my  convenience  to  postpone  it 
farther. 


2  g  2 


‘228 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  earnest  desire  I  had  to  obtain  your  approbation  had  flattered  me  into  a  belief 
that  my  present  performance  might  in  some  measure  have  deserved  it.  I  very  sin¬ 
cerely  wish  success  to  every  work  and  person  of  merit,  and  am,  therefore,  Sir,  with 
great  regard, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


SHERIDAN  DAVENPORT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Bath,  June  9,  1766. 

I  knew  nothing  of  your  intended  engagement  with  Mr.  Arthur  or  Miss  Rey¬ 
nolds,!  or  I  should  never  have  interfered  in  a  matter  that  no  way  concerned  me. 
She  commissions  me  to  say,  that  she  has  no  doubt,  from  what  Mr.  Palmer  has  said  to 
her,  that  she  would  have  the  salary  here  that  you  had  put  her  down  for,  rather  than 
part  with  her.  Here  she  is  secure  of  very  good  benefits  from  our  interest ;  in  Lon¬ 
don  she  runs  a  great  risk  of  being  out  of  pocket:  and  the  difference  of  living  here  and 
there,  chair-hire  from  the  plays,  & c.  makes  a  material  circumstance  in  her  life.  She 
says  that  fifty  shillings  the  first  year,  with  half  a  benefit,  and  three  pounds  the  second, 
if  she  is  approved  of,  she  is  willing  to  venture  on  ;  not  that  that  would  be  an  induce¬ 
ment  to  her,  unless  she  could  flatter  herself  with  your  patronage  and  care  of  her 
interest,  as  she  hopes  by  her  good  behaviour,  diligence,  and  talent,  to  merit  it. 
Placing  things  in  the  worst  light,  the  loss  of  ten  shillings  in  one  year,  can  be  of  no 
moment  to  you  or  Mr.  Lacy. 

She  has  desired  me  to  subjoin  the  catalogue  you  desired.  Arthur,  I  think,  never 
intended  serving  you  ;  if  he  did,  he  had  spun  his  web  so  fine  as  to  conceal  itself,  for  he 
has  held  up  such  a  terrible  picture  of  ruin,  desertion,  and  street-walking  to  the  lady, 
that  I  had  some  difficulty  to  smooth  the  rough  impression  he  had  worked  on  her  fancy. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Sheridan  Davenport. 


Cordelia  .  . 

Juliet  .  .  . 

•Audrey,  or  Celia 
Flora  .  .  . 

Fidelia  .  .  . 

Harriet  .  .  . 

•Foible 

Charlotte  .  . 

•Miss  Notable  . 
•Flarret  . 

Angelica  .  . 

•Phillis,  or  Lucinda 
Ann  Lovely 
Muletta  .  .  . 


CATALOGUE. 


King  Lear. 

Romeo. 

As  You  Like  It. 

Kind  Impostor. 
Foundling. 

Jealous  Wife. 

Way  of  the  World. 
Funeral. 

Lady’s  Last  Stake. 
Love’s  Last  Shift. 
Constant  Couple. 
Conscious  Lovers. 

Bold  Stroke  for  a  Wife 
Pilgrim. 


Clarinda,  or  Silvia  .  .  Double  Gallant. 

•Jacintha,  or  Mrs.  Strickland, 

or  Julietta  ....  Suspicious  Husband. 
Miss  Jenny,  or  Lady  Grace  Provoked  Husband. 

•Fanny . Maid  of  the  Mill. 

•Margery . Love  in  a  Village. 

Aura . Country  Lasses. 

Oriana . Inconstant. 

•Lucy . Beggar’s  Opera. 

•Dorcas . Thomas  and  Sally. 

♦Pastora . Chaplet. 

•Maria  . Citizen. 

Nell . Devil  to  Pay. 


t  Miss  Reynolds  was  received  by  Mr.  Garrick,  and  made  her  first  appearance  at  Drury-lane,  in  the  pre¬ 
sent  year,  as  Peggy,  in  the  “  Country  Girl.”— Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


229 


The  chambermaids  and  all  the  girls,  likewise  a  number  more  that  she  is  studied 
in,  which  she  thinks  would  be  troubling  Mr.  Garrick  to  read. 


MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LOVE. 


DEAR  SIR,  June  13,  1766. 

The  managers  of  Drury-lane,  having  considered  the  contents  of  your  last  letter, 
have  desired  me  to  inform  you  that  they  cannot  possibly  raise  your’s  or  Mrs.  Love’s 
salary ;  and  from  the  little  use  they  have  made  or  can  possibly  make  of  the  lady,  they 
think  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  it.  Besides,  they  think  that  you  are  fully  rewarded 
according  to  the  rate  of  other  actors.  If,  therefore,  you  are  willing  to  enter  into  an 
article  with  them  for  three  years,  (and  which  you  so  ardently  sought  for  last  year,) 
please  to  let  me  know  in  two  or  three  days,  otherwise  the  managers  will  look  upon 
your  silence  as  a  taking  leave  of  them  and  Drury-lane  Theatre. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

George  Garrick. 


MR.  LOVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Richmond,  Tuesday,  Noon. 

I  can  truly  say  (and  I  believe  I  have  many  witnesses)  that  I  have  never  enjoyed 
ease  since  the  unhappy  accident  of  incurring  your  displeasure ;  and  to  secure  my  mis¬ 
fortune,  I  am  continually  receiving  fresh  intelligence  that  there  is  a  breach  between  me 
and  Mr.  Garrick.  I  take  God  to  witness  that  I  never  intentionally  offended  you  ;  and 
beg  that  you  will  consider  that  my  letter  to  Mr.  Hopkins  was  wrote  unguardedly, 
and  little  dreaming  to  be  so  severely  commented  on.  Pray,  Sir,  be  satisfied,  and  burn 
the  cursed  cause  of  my  present  unhappiness ;  depend  upon  it,  you  have  punished  me 
enough.  I  am  willing  to  make  every  submission  that  may  become  a  man,  every  ac¬ 
knowledgment  you  can  possibly  desire.  If  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  permit  me 
to  pay  you  a  visit,  I  hope  to  prevail  upon  your  good-nature  to  send  me  away  happy ; 
pray  inform  the  bearer  of  a  leisure  hour,  that  I  may  not  break  in  upon  you  abruptly. 
(To-morrow  is  play  day,  but  I  can  come  over  in  the  morning,  or  if  you  want  Mr. 
Hopkins,  I  can  bring  him  with  me  after  rehearsal  on  Thursday  or  F riday.)  Once 
more,  let  me  intreat  you  to  restore  me  to  your  friendship.  I  am  ready  to  article 
when  and  on  what  terms  you  please,  who  am  ever  (let  what  will  happen) 

Your  most  sincere  friend, 

And  obedient  humble  servant, 

James  Love. 

P.  S.  Excuse  my  scrawl.  I  am  not  easy  enough  to  write  with  any  care. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LOVE. 


Hampton,  June  18,  1766. 

Though  Mr.  Garrick  may  have  been  too  sensibly  touched  with  the  slights  he 
has  received  from  a  quarter  where  he  imagined  that  he  had  some  reason  to  expect  a 
contrary  behaviour,  yet  his  heart  is  a  stranger  to  such  an  obstinacy,  that  would  pre¬ 
judice  rather  than  justify  his  sensibility  in  the  first  case.  Mr.  Garrick  will  be  glad  to 
see  Mr.  Love  to  breakfast  either  to-morrow  or  Friday  morning.  All  he  requests  of 
Mr.  Love  in  return  is,  that  for  both  their  sakes,  he  will  not  say  a  word  more  of  what 
has  passed.  As  to  his  engagement  with  the  managers  of  Drury-lane  Theatre,  he 
begs  it  may  be  no  consequence  of  their  meeting.  Mr.  Garrick  scorns  that  the  recon¬ 
ciliation  should  have  any  effect  upon  Mr.  Love’s  interest;  the  latter  must  send  his 
determination  to  Mr.  Garrick’s  brother,  and  accept  or  refuse  the  proposals  as  he 
thinks  will  best  suit  his  circumstances.* 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  July  17th,  1766. 

With  infinite  pleasure  I  commend  the  comedy  that  goes  with  this,  into  your 
hands,  though  not  without  the  same  kind  of  apprehension  that  a  flattered  client  feels, 
when  his  cause  is  to  appear  before  Lord  Camden,  for  should  he  or  you  condemn,  we 
may  lament,  but  not  accuse  our  judge  either  of  partiality  or  ignorance.f 

I  confess  I  had  vanity  enough  to  hope,  that  a  comedy  of  mine  might  be  received 
by  you,  and  therefore  wrote  the  one  I  send,  with  the  performers  of  Drury-lane  in 
my  view,  and  designed  it  more  for  the  stage  than  the  closet.  The  greatest  merit  it 
can  pretend  to  is  its  originality,  as  neither  the  plot,  nor  characters,  are  taken  from 
any  other.  I  shall  not  say  any  thing  more,  either  of  its  faults,  or  merits,  as  I  am 
certain  they  will  be  sufficiently  conspicuous  to  you ;  but  only  beg  leave  to  hint,  that 
the  first  may  be  mended,  and  the  latter  heightened,  by  any  friendly  hint  from  you, 
which  shall  ever  be  gratefully  acknowledged  by 

Sir,  your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 

I  shall  leave  town  the  beginning  of  next  week,  but  request  the  favour  of  your 
answer,  directed  for  me  at  Airs.  Gore’s,  St.  James’s  Street.  I  beg  you  will  keep  the 
comedy  till  I  return. 

*  The  reader  sees  by  the  measured  language,  and  studied  delicacy,  that  James  Love  had  various  claims 
beyond  those  of  the  mere  actor.  He  was  a  scholar,  and  a  satirist,  and  had  written  and  altered  several 
pieces  for  the  stage. — Ed. 

t  She  had  just  had  a  comedy  brought  out  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  the  manager  of  which,  in  point  of 
judgment,  had  never  been  compared  with  Lord  Camden,  by  successful  or  unsuccessful  authors. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


231 


MR.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Paris,  July  21st,  1766. 

1  have  had  both  yours,  and  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  kind 
attention  to  my  little  boy  ;*  but  I  hope  you  will  not  let  him  be  troublesome  to  you. 
I  know  he  is  very  well  taken  care  of ;  and  yet  I  would  give  50/.  to  be  with  him  at 
present  writing,  though  perhaps  in  that  matter  I  consult  my  own  happiness  more 
than  his.  I  have  not  been  well  since  I  left  you,  and  yesterday  se’nnight  had  so 
serious  an  attack  of  a  very  bad  sort  of  fever,  that  Dr.  Genn’s  melancholy  face  looked 
ten  times  more  melancholy  than  usual.  The  fever  is  off;  but  the  devil  has  got  into 
my  bowels,  as  well  as  poor  Thomas’s,  and  makes  a  little  hell  of  my  inside.  Add  to 
all  this,  I  have  had  another  boil,  which  falling  on  my  thigh  was  inflamed  by  my 
breeches,  and  has  brought  me  under  the  hands  of  a  surgeon.  Such  is  the  present 
state  of  your  friend.  My  complaints  however  are,  I  think,  all  on  the  mending  side, 
and  I  hope  soon  to  find  myself  on  my  legs  again :  and  the  first  use  I  shall  make  of 
them  will  be  to  run  to  England  again ;  for  all  these  accidents  have  thrown  such  a 
cloud  over  our  expedition,  that  though  I  am  very  well  disposed  both  to  the  place 
and  the  people,  I  see  every  thing  through  the  jaundiced  medium  of  my  ill  health. 
To  obtain  money,  ready  money,  of  the  Chevalier  was  absolutely  impossible,  for  he 
had  none,  and  nobody  will  lend  him.  After  a  good  deal  of  rough  riding,  I  have  got 
him  to  accept  bills  of  exchange  payable  in  two  and  four  months,  at  the  end  of  which 
periods  he  must  either  fly  the  place,  pay,  or  go  to  gaol.  I  took  advice,  and  was  told 
by  every  body  that  this  was  the  best  thing  I  could  do.  You  know  he  evaded  ac¬ 
cepting  the  draughts  sent  over  to  you.  I  have  told  him  of  them  often  enough.  I 
have  had  a  letter  from  England  from  a  gentleman  of  some  fashion,  whom  I  never 
saw  in  my  life.  I  long  to  tell  you  the  contents,  but  after  the  confidence  he  has 
reposed  in  me,  I  dare  not.  However,  I  believe  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  when  we 
meet.  Riddle-me,  riddle-me-ree  ! — I  am  so  low,  I  have  no  stomach  to  “  The  Country 
Wife.”  I  am  sorry  you  have  lost  Miss  Wright.  When  you  were  ill  abroad,  were 
you  so  uneasy  as  I  ?  I  believe  not.  You  are  in  port.  My  little  bark  is  yet  at  sea, 
and  if  I  am  thrown  from  the  helm,  God  knows  what  will  become  of  the  poor  souls 
left  on  board  the  vessel ! 

“  Oh,  I  have  ta’en  too  little  care  of  this !” — but  I  will  take  more  and  more,  if  I 
live.  I  have  very  little  ambition.  All  I  have  ever  desired  has  been  a  few  of  the 
common  comforts  of  life;  and  all  I  wish  is  to  leave  those  behind  me  not  destitute 
of  them.  But  this  is  melancholy  and  low-spirited.  My  little  woman  sends  you  her 
best  love  and  thanks.  Pray  give  mine  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe  me  most  cor¬ 
dially  and  affectionately, 

My  dear  Garrick,  yours  ever, 

George  Col  man. 

*  The  great  ornament  of  the  modern  stage,  George  Colman,  the  younger. — Ei>. 


232 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Paris,  July  27,  17G6. 

As  I  sent  you  but  a  poor  account  of  myself  the  other  day,  I  cannot  help  seizing 
the  opportunity  of  another  private  hand  to  tell  you  that  I  seem  to  be  growing  better 
every  day.  My  lank  jaws  begin  to  recover  flesh  and  colour,  and  though  I  am  con¬ 
siderably  fallen  away,  I  hope  to  be  visible  without  the  help  of  a  microscope  by  that 
time  I  reach  England.  We  had  proposed  setting  out  next  Thursday,  but  have  since 
deferred  it  for  a  week,  so  that  our  departure  is  now  fixed  for  the  seventh  of  August. 
Monnet,  who  has  been  extremely  kind,  met  Genn  two  or  three  days  ago,  and  said, 
“  Mais  qu’est-ce  qu’il  a  eu,  ce  pauvre  petit  Colman  ?  Je  l’ai  vu  hier :  il  me  sembloit 
presque  mort.”  There  hang  out  here  in  every  street  pirated  prints  from  Reynolds’s 
picture  of  you,  which  are  underwritten  Uhomme  entre  le  Vice  et  la  Vertu  *  I  was  last 
night  at  the  Italians,  to  see  a  new  little  piece  called  “  La  Clochette,”  and  the  debut 
of  an  Italian  dancer,  (Guidetti  his  name  is,)  whom  I  think  Monnet  talked  of  sending 
you  ;  but  I  suppose  by  this  time  he  has  dropped  all  thoughts  of  it,  for  he  is  one  of 
the  worst  I  ever  saw.  A  little  grotesque  pantomime  at  first,  but  no  execution  as  a 
dancer,  and  so  damned  thick-winded,  that  he  is  only  fit  for  Lacy’s  infirmary. 
Slingsby  is  here  at  the  Opera,  but  did  not  dance  when  I  was  there.  I  met  him  one 
day  in  the  street :  he  fixed  his  eyes  upon  me,  and  knew  me,  I  am  sure ;  but  as  he  did 
not  claim  my  acquaintance,  I  was  not  ambitious  to  solicit  his,  and  so  we  passed  with¬ 
out  a  word.  “  La  Clochette”  is  a  mere  trifle,  not  wholly  despicable,  written  by  the 
prompter.  La  Ruette  (the  man  I  mean)  plays  well  in  it,  and  Clairval  very  ill. 
Cailland,  to  my  great  mortification,  is  gone  into  the  country  to  some  Duke’s.  I  saw 
him  play  Western  in  “  Tom  Jones,”  the  night  before  he  went,  admirably.  His  dress 
is  not  altered,  but  all  the  rest  are.  Do  you  know  any  thing  of  the  quarrel  between 
David  Hume  and  Rousseau  ?  It  makes  a  great  noise  here.  Baron  d’Holbach  has  had 
three  letters  from  Hume  about  it,  who,  it  seems,  is  to  publish  a  pamphlet  containing 
the  whole  story.  Suard  seems  vastly  hurt  at  Smollet’s  letters,  and  I  suppose  will 
give  a  suitable  account  of  them  in  the  Gazette  Literaire.  Monnet  brought  me 
Favart  the  other  morning,  and  seemed  vastly  happy  at  seeing  two  little  authors 
together.  In  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  he  had  told  Favart  that  I  had  given  a  very 
fine  translation  of  “  Telemachus.”  Gravelot,  it  seems,  had  spoken  handsomely  to 
him  of  my  Terence,  and  this  was  what  he  meant.  I  have  agreed  with  Gravelot  for 
the  plates.  The  engravings  will  come  to  thirty  guineas,  which  is  to  be  paid  by 
Becket  and  Co. ;  and  the  designs,  which  will  come  to  twelve  more,  I  make  them  a 
present  of.  When  the  plates  are  taken  from  them,  I  shall  frame  them  and  hang 
them  round  my  room,  and  expect  they  will  be  mighty  pretty  furniture.  Diderot 
told  an  English  gentleman,  he  had  dined  with  me  at  the  Baron’s,  and  that  he  wanted 

*  Garrick  between  Tragedy  and  Comedy.  Among  a  mercurial  people  like  the  French,  I  suppose  Virtue 
would  be  drest  in  smiles. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


233 


to  see  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage.”  I  happened  to  have  one  here,  and  sent  it  him  by 
the  gentleman,  as  a  donum  ex  authoribus.  I  could  make  myself  very  happy  here  for 
a  month  or  six  weeks  more  at  least ;  but  to  be  locked  up  in  a  stinking  metropolis  all 
the  summer,  will  not  do  for  an  invalid.  The  weather  has  been  miserable,  and  so,  1 
hear,  it  has  been  with  you.  I  hope  you  got  Georgy -go-ging  a  good  raspberry  tart, 
and  that  he  has  been  very  saucy  during  his  visit  at  Hampton.  Madam  sends  her 
love  to  you ;  and  moreover  she  will  bring  over  a  petticoat  for  Mrs.  Garrick.  We 
did  intend  returning  by  Dieppe  and  Briglithelmstone,  but  we  have  at  last  settled  for 
Calais  and  Dover.  I  long  to  be  with  you.  I  have  made  your  compliments  to 
every  body  here.  Changuion  has  been  a  very  constant  visitor  during  my  illness,  and 
we  have  had  the  pleasure  of  joining  in  abusing  you  more  than  once.  I  like  him 
much.  He  seems  a  very  honest  man,  and  his  spleen  against  the  Chevalier  is  quite 
entertaining.  Miss  Ford  sends  her  baisemains  to  you,  and  most  humble  respects  to 
Mrs.  Garrick.  My  best  love  to  her,  and  believe  me  here  and  everywhere,  now  and 
ever,  dear  Garrick, 

Most  affectionately  yours, 

G.  Colman. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH. 


MADAM,  Aug.  ...,  1766. 

I  find  by  your  letter  that  Mr.  Griffith  sent  the  play  sooner  than  I  desired  him. 
I  have  made  a  longer  visit  than  I  at  first  intended,  and  had  not  an  opportun  ty  of 
considering  the  comedy  as  I  ought  till  the  week  before  last.  I  have  read  it  twice 
over  very  carefully  at  the  distance  of  a  week.  Let  me  assure  you  that  it  would  have 
given  me  the  greatest  pleasure  to  have  received  a  performance  of  yours,  and  shown 
you  what  a  sense  I  had  of  your  politeness  by  my  care  of  it ;  but  indeed  I  should  deal 
very  insincerely  with  you,  if  I  did  not  tell  you  my  opinion  of  the  comedy  with  that 
plainness  which  I  have  always  professed. 

To  begin  with  the  characters.  I  think  Dalton  a  most  dangerous  one :  his 
adventures  in  the  garden  with  the  Colonel,  and  the  mistakes  which  thence  arise, 
are  improbable,  and  I  am  afraid  not  entertaining :  his  putting  on  women’s  clothes 
is  surely  too  like  the  circumstance  of  Alderman  Smuggler,  and  if  it  were  not,  it 
appears  to  me  to  be  too  farcical  and  uninteresting  for  comedy.  I  cannot  quite  ap¬ 
prove  of  Col.  Weston ;  and  his  Captain  seems  to  me  to  be  no  more  than  a  sort  of 
upper  servant  to  him.  Sir  William’s  bullying  and  tricking  poor  Dalton  into  a  con¬ 
sent,  is  surely  ungentlemanlike  and  dishonest.  Though  there  have  been  many 
circumstances  in  other  plays  like  the  passing  Lucinda  upon  Lord  Frank  for  Lord 
Samuel,  yet  I  fear  that  this  part  of  the  fable,  which  is  the  basis  of  the  whole,  would 

be  very  exceptionable :  the  precipitate  manner  in  which  Lord  F - swallows  the 

VOL.  i.  2  H 


234 


PH  I V  ATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


hook,  and  her  unaccountable  calm  behaviour  upon  the  discovery  of  the  imposition, 
appear  to  me  neither  comic  nor  natural.  The  amiable  character  of  Harriet  suffers 
much  by  her  joining  in  the  conspiracy  against  her  mother.  Civil  is  too  like  many 
chambermaids  of  late  who  mistake  words,  and  I  think  that  humour  very  near 
exhausted :  however  that  part  of  the  play,  if  it  is  really  an  objection,  might  be  easily 
altered,  were  there  not  other  difficulties  which  cannot  possibly  be  removed  without 
taking  away  the  very  foundation  of  the  play.  In  short,  it  is  my  opinion  that,  not¬ 
withstanding  there  are  many  good  things  said,  the  whole  together  would  not  answer 
your,  or  our  wishes,  nor  answer  the  expectations  which  the  public  may  have  con¬ 
ceived  of  its  author.  I  am,  Madam, 

Your  obedient,  &c. 

D.  G. 

I  shall  keep  the  copy  of  the  play  till  I  have  received  your  commands,  which  I 
will  immediately  obey. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Weymouth,  August  17th,  1766. 

I  this  day  received  your  favour,  and  very  sincerely  thank  you  for  the  attention 
you  have  shown  in  the  condemnation  6f  my  comedy,  for,  I  again  assure  you,  I  shall 
not  appeal  from  your  sentence.  It  would  have  gratified  my  utmost  wishes  as  a 
dramatic  writer,  to  have  had  a  performance  of  mine  approved  by  you,  and  I  will 
not  yet  despair  but  that  pleasing  event  may  happen. 

Now,  Sir,  you  must  allow  the  author  (a  female  one)  to  step  forward  a  little  in 
defence  of  her  work.  And  first  give  me  leave  to  observe,  that  there  is  scarce  such  a 
tiling  as  a  modern  comedy  where  there  may  not  be  a  likeness  traced,  either  in  the 
characters  or  incident,  to  some  other  play  ;  and  indeed  it  must  necessarily  be  so  if  we 
stick  to  nature,  which  is  nearly  the  same  in  all  ages — at  least  the  present  one  affords 
no  great  variety  of  humour ;  and,  as  Swift  says,  “  Those  anticipators,  the  ancients, 
have  done  infinite  prejudice  to  the  writers  of  the  present  times.”  Notwithstanding 
this  acknowledged  dearth,  I  flattered  myself  that  Col.  Weston,  Dalton,  and  Lu¬ 
cinda  were  tout  a  fait  nouveau ;  for  I  cannot  agree  to  the  likeness  between  Dalton  and 
Smuggler,  there  being  in  my  mind  nothing  similar  but  their  metamorphose.  The 
contracted  time  of  representation  precipitates  all  our  dramatic  action  too  much,  and 
almost  every  play  which  I  have  ever  seen  or  read  exceeds  the  bounds  of  probability 
in  that  particular.  I  cannot  look  on  the  calmness  of  Lady  F.’s  behaviour  on  the 
discovery  of  the  imposition  as  unnatural,  as  she  stands  self-convicted  of  the  most 
ridiculous  vanity ;  but  that  objection  might  be  easily  removed  by  heightening  her 
resentment. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


235 


I  am  now  to  apologize  for  taking  up  so  much  of  your  time  by  my  weak  defence 
against  your  powerful  decree ;  but  let  me  at  least  stand  justified  in  attempting  to 
wear  the  sock,  though  I  may  fail  to  make  it  fit  me :  it  was  not  vanity  led  me  to  the 
trial,  but  a  young  family  and  a  small  fortune  called  for  the  assistance  of  a  fond 
mother,  who  would  hazard  much  more  than  her  fame — her  life  for  their  service :  the 
cause  is  certainly  good,  be  the  effect  what  it  may. 

I  shall  return  to  London  in  about  three  weeks,  till  which  time  I  request  you  will 
be  so  good  as  to  keep  my  copy  for  me,  and  that  you  will  believe  me,  with  sincere  regard. 

Sir,  your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH. 


MADAM,  Sunday,  Aug.  23rd,  1766. 

I  should  have  immediately  thanked  you  for  your  very  polite,  generous,  and  very 
affecting  letter,  if  I  had  not  been  from  home  when  your  letter  was  received ;  let  me 
assure  you  that  I  shall  think  myself  .happy  whenever  it  is  in  my  power  to  serve  you. 
Give  me  leave  at  present  to  take  notice  that  you  mistook  me  quite,  if  you  thought 
that  I  mentioned  the  character  of  Dalton  to  be  like  that  of  Smuggler ;  there  is  cer¬ 
tainly  not  the  least  similitude  between  them  ;  it  was  the  circumstance  alone  of  their 
both  going  into  petticoats  that  I  thought  so  much  alike,  and  too  farcical  to  be  ad¬ 
mitted  into  comedy.  I  am  quite  of  your  opinion,  that  there  can  be  no  objection  to 
the  introducing  circumstances,  incidents,  characters,  and  even  scenes,  that  may  bear 
some  resemblance  to  other  plays  ;  authors  should  only  take  care  that  such  incidents, 
characters,  and  scenes,  are  not  too  nearly  imitated  or  ill-chosen. 

I  am,  Madam,  most  truly  your  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garr  ick. 

I  shall  keep  the  play  till  I  receive  your  commands. 


MR.  B.  VICTOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


London,  Aug.  25,  1766. 

This  tragedy.  Sir,  lays  more  than  ordinary  claim  to  your  attention,  for  the 
following  reasons. 

In  its  first  weak  state,  as  I  produced  it  about  the  year  1728,  it  had  merit  enough 
to  claim  the  attention  of  Mr.  Booth,  and  to  excite  him  to  request  the  late  Mr.  Hill  to 

2  h  2 


236 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


new-write  the  character  of  Gonsalvo.  I  had  drawn  him  a  young  man  of  merit  and 
virtue,  which  they  said  was  doing  some  injury  to  Altamira,  and  not  contrasting  the 
characters  of  her  lovers.  Mr.  Booth’s  letter,  which  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Hill  on  that 
occasion,  is  published  in  a  volume  of  “  Hill’s  Letters,”  in  which  they  have  only 
printed  the  initials  of  my  name.  Mr.  Hill  complied  with  Mr.  Booth’s  request ;  and 
though  the  play,  as  it  came  from  Mr.  Hill’s  hands,  (besides  the  rape  and  incest)  was 
full  of  great  faults,  yet  it  was  ordered  into  rehearsal  and  cast  thus  : — Old  Mills,  Bel¬ 
fort ;  Milward,  Bellario ;  Mrs.  Horton,  Altamira  -,  and  Mrs.  Booth,  Lucidora.  In 
the  six  letters  of  Mr.  Hill’s,  which  I  printed  at  the  end  of  my  second  volume  of  the 
Theatres,  you  will  see  he  speaks  of  the  rehearsals  of  “Altamira,”  and  advice  to  Mrs. 
Horton,  with  his  severity  against  Mills  in  Belfort,  where  he  says,  “  He  could  enter 
no  farther  into  a  passion  than  a  snail  into  a  pavement.”  After,  I  think,  six  public 
rehearsals,  the  whole  company  revolted  to  the  little  theatre  in  the  Haymarket.  Thus 
it  has  lain  for  these  thirty  years.  The  revival  of  it  this  summer  at  Horton  (carried 
thither  by  your  kind  advice)  has  given  it  new  life.  The  noble  Lord  was  attached  by 
the  three  first  acts  (as  Captain  Falkner  can  tell  you)  to  an  amazing  degree,  so  as  to 
employ  his  thoughts,  with  the  utmost  solicitude,  to  remove  the  grand  objections  (the 
rape  and  incest)  which  threw  an  odium  on  almost  all  the  characters,  and  brought  the 
whole  into  danger.  But  to  the  point. 

The  reasons  you  gave  for  its  performance  in  the  neighbouring  theatre  were 
powerful,  and  could  it  be  done,  I  should  think  myself  happy  ;  but  you  then  admitted 
the  absolute  necessity  of  concealing  the  author.  If  Hull  is  not  let  into  the  secret  by 
Captain  Falkner  (which  will  be  dangerous),  he  will  undoubtedly  mention  the  play 
and  subject  to  the  Griffiths  (whom  he  frequently  visits)  who  read  it  in  Dublin : 
besides,  Paul  Whitehead  may — nay,  I  think,  must  recover  the  knowledge  when  he 
reads  it ;  and  if  known  to  be  mine,  many  objections  will  start,  of  course,  even  if  they 
had  none  to  the  play  before;  and  to  be  rejected  there,  would  be  attended  with  bad 
consequences  indeed. 

Therefore,  Sir,  though  the  most  obliged  man  has  not  the  least  claim  to  ask  favours, 
yet  let  me  beg  you  to  extend  your  friendship  to  me  thus  far,  as  to  give  “  The  Fatal 
Error”*  one  serious  reading  (which,  perhaps,  you  never  did)  now  it  stands  corrected ; 
and  if  you  should  alter  your  opinion  as  to  the  danger,  (which  I  very  much  hope  you 
will,  now  the  dangerous  passages  are  removed,)  if  no  room  can  be  made  for  it  either 
before  or  after  Christmas,  I  am  sure  it  will  be  worth  my  while  to  let  it  lie  over  to  the 
next,  because  tolerable  success  (which  I  should  not  fear  where  it  can  be  so  well  acted) 
would  make  my  little  fortune  for  ever  in  this  world ;  and  that  I  am  sure  (by  way  of 
completing  the  many  great  and  friendly  offices  you  have  done  me)  would  give  you 
real  pleasure :  therefore,  let  me  beg  you  to  pause  a  little  on  a  subject  of  so  much 

*  It  is  merely  an  alteration  from  Heywood’s  “  Woman  Killed  with  Kindness,”  and  has  never  been  acted 
in  London.  One  scene  of  the  original  play  is  beautifully  written. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


237 


importance  to  your  poor  friend,  and  after  that  I  shall  cheerfully  submit  to  your 
determination.  Captain  Falkner,  who  gives  you  this  (and  who,  I  know,  is  so  good 
as  to  be  under  the  greatest  anxiety  for  my  success),  will  proceed  as  you  shall  be 
pleased  to  advise  him,  with  all  the  fidelity  of  a  true  friend  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  faithful  servant, 

B.  Victor. 


THE  REV.  T.  KENNEDY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Munich,  Aug.  26,  1766. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  your  kind  letter  of  the  12th  of  January  upon  the  27th  of 
March  last.  I  certainly  had  answered  you  long  ago,  had  I  not  been  expecting  from 
day  to  day  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Greville’s  vessel,  wherein  the  present  you  was  pleased  to 
honour  me  with  was  packed.  Some  days  ago  the  ambassador  sent  me  the  books  in 
perfect  good  order.  I  was  not  a  little  overjoyed  to  see  myself  in  possession  of  an 
author  I  longed  for  many  years  ago,  viz.  Dry  den  : — Dennis’s  “  Fables”  are  likewise 
very  acceptable,  as  are  all  such  works  of  our  language,  which,  at  this  distance,  I 
cannot  purchase  even  for  money.  But  without  making  a  compliment,  I  assure  you 
the  most  agreeable  of  all  was  to  see  thereby  you  have  not  forgotten  your  old  friend  •' 
for  I  look  upon  friendship  not  only  as  the  greatest  tie,  but  as  the  greatest  happiness 
amongst  us  mortals.  That  posterity  may  know  that  Mr.  Garrick  and  T.  Kennedy 
were  friends,  I  have  wrote  it  on  the  front  of  the  books,  which,  probably,  may  be  seen 
in  the  library  of  our  house  several  ages  after  we  are  both  dead  and  gone. 

I  am  very  glad  you  have  got  the  better  of  your  indisposition :  take  more  care 
of  your  precious  health  for  the  future,  as  the  greatest  treasure  on  this  side  of  time, 
and  preserve  a  person  of  so  many  good  qualities  and  extraordinary  talents  for  your 
friends,  your  native  country,  and  the  whole  learned  world,  for  many  years  to  come. 

Since  you  left  Munich,  I  have,  God  be  thanked !  kept  my  health  tolerably 
well.  I  am  still  going  on  my  philosophical  way,  shunning  the  great  as  much  as  I 
can,  and  wrestling  with  a  thousand  difficulties,  to  draw  a  nation  out  of  ignorance  and 
pedantry, — to  what  purpose  time  must  teach. 

Mr.  Greville,  who  is  very  well,  has  his  kind  compliments  to  you ;  he  is  exceeding- 
gracious  towards  me,  and,  as  he  deserves,  much  beloved  and  esteemed  here.  In  his 
present  station,  as  he  is  an  honour,  so  he,  no  doubt,  will  be  of  profit  to  his  king  and 
country. 

I  beg  you  make  my  acknowledgments  and  humble  respects  acceptable  to  Mr. 
Pitt.  I  trust  not  myself  to  write  to  him  in  the  present  exaltation  of  his  family,  on 
which  I  congratulate  him  from  my  whole  heart,  for  fear  lie  chooses  not  to  correspond 
with  a  Popish  priest.  You  may  assure  him  I  am  no  dangerous  one  either  for  church 
or  state. 


238 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  have  heard  nothing  from  our  good  friend  Mr.  Turton,  since  he  left  us  ;  I  am 
afraid  he  will  have  much  ado  to  bring  his  bones  back  to  England,  his  constitution 
being  so  broke.  I  am  really  sorry  for  it,  for  1  love  him,  and  he  deserves  to  be  beloved 
as  a  learned  and  worthy  gentleman ;  the  only  fault  I  find  in  him  is,  that  he  hath  too 
much  faith  in  physic,  and  thereby  I  am  afraid  he  will  ruin  the  remainder  of  his  health 
by  making  too  much  use  of  it.  The  more  I  see  and  experience  in  this  world,  the 
more  I  am  confirmed  that  medicine  can  do  a  great  deal  of  hurt,  but  little  good,  except 
accidentally ;  and  that  is  the  reason  I  make  no  use  of  it,  and  choose  rather  to  die  a 
natural  death,  than  be  killed  by  art. 

I  suppose  our  old  punning  friend  Young  is  by  this  time  a  perfect  French  petit- 
maitre.  I  have  often  reflected  upon,  and  envied  his  easy  and  happy  temper ;  who, 
going  on  his  way,  laughs  at  the  whole  world,  keeps  his  health  and  humour,  and  is 
still  the  same. 

Pray  make  offer  of  my  most  cordial  and  humble  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  who  I 
hope  is  in  good  health.  Make  me  so  happy  as  to  see  now  and  then  aline  from  your 
hand,  and  believe  that  I  am  till  death,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  most  obliged,  and  most  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Kennedy* 


MR.  GARRICK’S  NOTE  AS  TO  VICTOR’S  TRAGEDY. 

Sept.  1st,  1766. 

I  take  it  very  ill  of  Mr.  Victor  that  he  should  force  me  into  a  correspondence 
with  him  about  the  play,  which  might  have  been  more  fully  debated,  and  determined 
upon,  in  some  of  our  late  conversations  : — though  lie  loves  writing,  he  knows  very 
well  that  I  hate  it ;  and  besides  that,  I  have  scarce  time  for  my  theatrical  matters. 
Mr.  Victor  has  acted  contrary  to  my  directions  and  express  desire,  in  every  move¬ 
ment  he  has  made  lately  in  the  business  of  his  tragedy. 

I  gave  my  advice  like  a  friend,  and  I  pointed  out  the  only  method  by  which 
Mr.  Victor  could  have  any  chance  to  reap  advantage  from  the  performance  ;  but,  it 
seems,  I  must  be  pressed  into  the  service  and  solicited  to  contradict  myself.  Pre¬ 
vious  to  Mr.  Falkner’s  seeing  the  play,  I  gave  my  sincere  sentiments  upon  it, 
and  which  I  still  maintain,  viz. — that  “  Altamira”  will  have  a  better  chance  of  suc¬ 
ceeding  at  CoArent  Garden  than  with  us,  and  that  I  am  certain  that  “  Cleone,” 
“  Virginius,”  “  The  Double  Mistake,”  and  many  others,  would  not  have  been  well 

*  This  gentleman  was,  it  appears,  a  Catholic  priest,  highly  esteemed  by  Mr.  Garrick,  and  who  enjoyed 
the  protection  of  Mr.  Greville,  our  resident  at  Munich.  I  sincerely  believe  he  was  no  rara  axis  in  his  order  ; 
though  he  describes  himself  as  keeping  the  even  tenour  of  his  philosophical  way,  “  and  wrestling  with  a 
thousand  difficulties,  to  draw  a  nation  out  of  ignorance  and  pedantry.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


239 


received  at  Drury-lane.*  T  hope  Mr.  Victor  is  sensible  that  I  have  been  his  friend 
without  any  other  motive  but  the  mere  desire  of  serving  him  :  therefore  I  have 
a  right  to  demand  of  him,  when  I  give  my  judgment  upon  any  thing  relative  to 
him,  that  he  will  believe  that  I  give  it  with  great  truth  and  sincerity,  and  to  the 
best  of  my  abilities.  I  am  sorry  that  so  much  time  has  been  lost  in  proceeding 
contrary  to  my  advice,  which  was  the  best  and  most  friendly  I  could  give,  and 
consequently  I  cannot  change  it  for  the  better.  I  am, 

Mr.  Victor’s  most  obedient, 

D.  G. 


MR.  B.  VICTOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Gosport,  Sept.  8th,  1766. 

Captain  Falkner  (who  did  not  follow  my  directions)  has  enclosed  me  your 
severe  paper ;  which  has,  of  course,  made  me  very  unhappy  at  the  misfortune  I 
labour  under  of  disobliging  where  it  is  my  utmost  wish  and  endeavour  to  oblige. 

Every  step,  as  directed  by  you,  was  carefully  taken  by  me  to  the  utmost  of  my 
power.  I  can  think  of  no  variation  in  any  degree  or  shape,  except  in  your  expecta¬ 
tion  of  having  the  lady  engaged  to  use  her  interest  with  Mr.  H — 11  while  we  were 
together  at  Horton.  But  that,  the  Captain  and  I  both  agreed  when  there  to  defer 
for  this  reason : — Compliments  had  passed  between  you  and  the  Captain  about  an 
interview  before  we  went  down  ;  which  was  mentioned  at  the  table  at  Horton  :  and 
as  the  noble  lord  was  reading  the  play,  and  expressed  himself  with  so  much  warmth 
on  reading  the  two  acts,  and  even  when  he  came  to  the  third  and  fourth,  only  marked 
dangerous  passages  which  he  thought  might  be  easily  removed,  and  never  quitted 
the  subject  till  he  proposed  the  means  :  was  it  then  to  say  Mr.  Garrick  has  objections, 
and  fears  danger  from  what  was  then  supposed  to  be  altered  and  removed  ?  No, 
surely — the  Captain  was  to  bring  the  copy  with  him  to  Hampton,  and  after  the  in¬ 
terview  with  Mr.  Garrick,  then  the  expected  consequence  was  to  be  sent  by  the  Cap¬ 
tain  down  to  Horton,  (viz.)  that  on  a  serious  reading,  though  the  tragedy  was  much 
better  for  the  alterations,  yet  there  was  something  dangerous  in  the  fable  that  would 
not  escape  an  audience  inclined  to  severity,  and  such  are  the  audiences  at  Drurv- 
lane ;  therefore  the  only  chance  for  lenity  was  at  Covent  Garden,  where  pieces  of 
little  merit  have  been  received  with  favour.  To  this  opinion  I  should  have  sub- 

*  A  manager  is  the  happiest  of  all  critics.  The  most  brilliant  success  does  not  refute  his  unfavourable 
sentence.  When,  as  in  the  case  of  Dodsley’s  “  Cleone,”  Miss  Bellamy  had  raised  the  tragedy  to  the  most 
enviable  popularity,  there  was  still  a  retreat  for  Garrick  from  which  he  could  never  be  forced,  because  the 
trial  could  never  be  made. — “  The  play  would  not  have  been  well  received  at  Drury-lane.”  It  is,  however, 
probable,  that  had  “  Cleone”  contained  a  hero  that  could  at  all  have  stood  his  ground  against  the  heroine, 
the  trial  would  have  been  made,  and  Dodsley  been  endured  though  he  had  worn  a  livery. — Ed. 


240 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


scribed,  and  solicited  the  interest  accordingly,  which  would  have  determined  the 
affair  at  Horton. 

You  will  now,  Sir,  be  pleased  to  observe  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise  with  the 
least  degree  of  propriety.  How  unfortunate  was  it  that  the  Peer,  at  parting  with  the 
Captain,  should  desire  him  to  leave  the  copy  behind  him,  to  give  it  another  read¬ 
ing  :  which  I  could  not  recover,  though  I  wrote  two  letters  to  his  Lordship,  till 
Saturday  the  24tli  of  August,  and  on  Monday  following  (the  26th)  I  was  engaged 
to  go  into  Hampshire.  Was  I  not  then  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  writing  to  you 
and  the  Captain  both  at  Hampton  ?  Could  any  thing  of  this  be  debated  at  pre¬ 
ceding  conversations  ? 

The  noble  Lord’s  letter  that  attended  the  copy  was  very  polite  and  obliging,  and 
paid  great  deference  to  the  manager’s  judgment,  on  which  all  was  to  depend',  evidently 
proving  that  no  clandestine  measures  had  been  taken  with  his  Lordship  to  press  Mr. 
Garrick  into  the  service.  Whatever  favours  his  Lordship  is  pleased  to  honour  me 
with,  will  at  all  times  be  acceptable,  but  I  have  certainly  no  claim  to  entitle  me  to 
ask  any  ;  and  surely  I  must  be  a  stranger  indeed  to  theatrical  affairs,  if  I  thought  the 
interest  of  a  monarch  could  secure  a  damned  play  from  its  just  fate  from  a  British 
audience ! 

Rest  assured,  therefore,  dear  Sir,  that  my  noble,  as  well  as  gentle  friends,  will 
religiously  submit  to  your  better  judgment,  and  conclude  that  every  opinion  of  yours 
in  theatrical  affairs  has  almost  infallibility  to  support  it. 

F or  my  own  part,  I  have  received  so  many  instances  of  the  friendship  and  good 
’wishes  of  Mr.  Garrick,  by  so  many  signal  services,  that  nothing  he  can  say  or  do  shall 
lessen  the  esteem  of  his  much  obliged 

And  faithful  servant, 

B.  Victor. 

P.  S.  By  a  letter  received  this  morning  from  my  poor  wife,  I  find  she  is  dying 
with  fear  ;  some  ill  news  having  been  brought  her  from  Hampton  Court  Green.  I 
know  you  have  good  nature  when  your  rage  is  over — comfort  her* 

I  am  making  myself  young  again  by  the  use  of  sea  water. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hyde-street,  Sept.  11th,  1766. 

I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  the  kindness  and  attention  you  have  shown 
me,  and  I  should  be  both  weak  and  ungrateful  if  I  did  not  entirely  rely  upon  your 
judgment  and  friendship.  I  flatter  myself  I  have  sense  and  virtue  sufficient  to  value 
them  as  they  deserve. 

*  This  poor  treasurer  is  really  too  abject  for  endurance.  He  was  a  tiresome  minute  scribbler  of  theatrical 
matters,  which  he  invested  with  ludicrous  importance.  His  manner  was  well  anticipated  by  Shakspeare’s 
Gratiano. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


241 


Indeed,  Sir,  I  cannot,  as  I  would,  express  the  sentiments  I  feel  for  your  un¬ 
merited  goodness  to  me ;  and  though  the  disagreeable  situation  of  my  circumstances 
might  perhaps  tempt  me  to  be  too  precipitate,  I  shall  perfectly  acquiesce  in  whatever 
you  think  best  to  do  with  the  “  Pere  de  Famille,”  or  any  other  of  my  theatrical 
productions. 

I  shall  set  about  finishing  the  comedy  upon  Diderot's  plan,  as  soon  as  my  eyes 
will  give  me  leave,  but  they  are  at  present  so  bad,  that  Mr.  Hawkins  has  forbid  me 
the  use  of  pen  and  ink.  But  not  even  his  command  could  prevent  me  from  returning 
you  my  sincere  thanks,  and  assuring  you  that  I  am,  with  real  gratitude  and  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  C.  YORKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Wednesday,  Nov.  12th,  1766. 

Give  me  leave  to  ask  the  favour  of  a  side  box  for  Mrs.  Yorke  the  next  time  you 
act  Hamlet.  I  think  that  you  made  me  such  a  promise  four  years  ago,  and  let  me 
now  claim  the  performance  of  it.  Mrs.  Y.  sent  last  week  to  make  interest  with  the 
box-keeper,  but  without  success, — (I  suppose,)  by  some  mistake  between  him  and  the 
servant.  I  hear  sometimes  with  great  pleasure  of  your  health  from  Mr.  Cambridge 
and  Mr.  Wray,  and  on  that  account  hold  you  wise  in  being  frugal  of  your  dramatic 
labours,  though  the  public  is  a  loser  in  the  consequence.  I  am,  Sir,  with  great 
esteem  and  regard, 

Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

C.  Yorke. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Tuesday  night,  Sept,  30th,  1766. 

1  was  really  in  hopes  I  never  should  have  occasion  to  trouble  you  with  a  letter 
about  any  theatrical  affairs  again  while  I  lived ;  and  I  was  farther  in  hopes  that  you, 
Sir,  would  rest  contented  with  the  injuries  you  had  upon  many  occasions  done  me. 
But,  Sir,  I  find  I  am  still  to  be  persecuted  by  you,  and  even  those  I  wish  well  to. 
To  come  to  the  point — 

It  has  been  these  three  years  (near  four  years)  that  I  had  written  for  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  Miss  Elliot  a  new  play,  upon  the  subject  of  “  The  Country  Wife.”  Mr. 
Yates,  of  your  playhouse,  and  Mrs.  Yates,  Mr.  O’Brien,  Mr.  Woodward,  all  saw  it 
three  years  ago.  I  have  often  mentioned  it  to  Mr.  Holland,  though  never  shown  it 
to  him.  It  has  been  lately  given  up  to  Miss  Elliot  entirely,  and  this  is  known 
to  people  of  the  first  fashion  in  England. 

VOL.  i.  2  i 


242 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Sir,  though  subjects  lie  in  common,  yet  when  a  man  has  declared  himself,  I  appre¬ 
hend,  in  point  of  honour,  Mr.  Garrick  should  not  attempt  to  forestall  it ;  yet  the  same 
design  is  this  day  put  in  rehearsal  at  your  playhouse.  Luckily,  you  cannot  wound 
me;  but  I  leave  it  to  yourself  to  judge  whether  it  becomes  Mr.  Garrick  to  contend 
with  a  girl  !  When  the  fact  is  known  to  the  first  people  in  England  that  I  have  given 
it  to  her,  l  leave  it  to  your  own  feelings  to  judge  whether  you  ought  to  anticipate 
her !  If  you  are  afraid  that  she  will  do  your  house  any  mischief,  why  do  not  you 
give  her  a  trial  winter  on  your  own  stage  ?  She  and  her  play  are  at  your  service 
upon  any  terms  !  And  this  I  say,  though  it  depends  upon  herself  to  be  engaged  at 
Covent  Garden. 

I  vow  to  God  I  have  no  interest  in  this  piece,  and  if  it  was  not  for  her  I  would 
burn  it.  It  consists  of  three  plays  of  Moliere  moulded  into  one.  I  want  neither 
profit  nor  reputation  from  it.  But  I  own  I  am  stung  to  the  very  heart  at  this 
attempt  to  hurt  her,  and  you  must  excuse  me  for  explaining  myself  on  the  instant  I 
heard  of  your  intentions ! 

I  beg.  Sir,  (for  I  want  no  quarrels)  that  you  will  consider  of  this  measure. 

I  do  not  meddle  with  your  designs.  Why  will  you  meddle  with  mine  ? 

I  will  say  no  more ;  for  I  feel  myself  much  hurried  by  my  feelings  upon  this 
business.  The  more  so  as  it  is  the  affair  of  a  young  girl  to  whom  I  am  not  ashamed 
to  be  a  well-wisher. 

I  hope.  Sir,  you,  that  have  made  your  fortune,  will  not  desire  to  clash  with  a  poor 
girl.  I  say  once  more  the  play  is  known  by  the  first  people  in  England,  and  Air. 
Beard  has  expected  it  any  time  these  four  years ;  but  the  want  of  Miss  Elliot,  for 
whom  it  was  written,  was  the  obstacle.  Now,  wherever  she  engages,  the  play  must 
go.  I  hope  once  more  you  will  consider  of  it. 

I  remain,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

I  write  this  from  the  Bedford  Coffee-house,  where  I  have  not  been  these  three 
years  before. 

But  as  it  is  now  near  twelve,  I  desire  it  may  not  be  sent  to  your  house  till  to¬ 
morrow  morning. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


Oct.  1st,  1/66. 

You  begin  your  very  surprising  letter  with  saying  that  you  have  received  many 
injuries  from  me,  and  yet  in  other  parts  of  the  letter  you  desire  no  quarrels—  do  you 
imagine  that  I  will  not  contradict  your  assertion,  and  boldly,  and  honestly  aver,  that 
what  you  have  said,  has  not  the  least  foundation,  but  in  your  own  warm  imagi¬ 
nation  ? 

I  have  indeed  often  thought  myself  injured  by  you,  both  publicly  and  privately  ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


243 


but  we  are  not  to  be  judges  in  our  own  cause.  As  to  the  subject  of  your  letter,  I 
give  you  my  word,  and  will  my  oath,  that  I  never  heard  of  your  performance  till 
lately,  and  long  after  I  was  in  possession  of  the  alteration  of  Wycherley,  now  in 
rehearsal.  I  have  had  a  comedy  many  years  ago  in  my  hands  upon  the  subject  of 
Moliere's  Ecole  des  femmes  and  Ecole  des  mar  is,  and  which  several  gentlemen  have 
seen.  I  saw  it  likewise  again  when  I  was  at  Bath,  but  I  thought  it  unfit  for  repre¬ 
sentation.  I  therefore  got  an  alteration  of  “The  Country  Wife,”  (which  had  been 
altered  and  acted  as  a  farce  at  our  theatre  the  season  before,)  to  introduce  Miss  Rey¬ 
nolds.  I  pray  what  injury  is  done  to  your  performance,  that  has  not  been  done 
before?  for  unless  you  imagine  that  the  additional  part  of  the  present  alteration  is 
stolen  from  you,  how  can  you  have  the  least  reason  for  complaint  against  me?  Your 
saying  that  I  would  clash,  or  injure  a  poor  girl,  deserves  no  answer.  I  have  an  un¬ 
doubted  right  to  exhibit  this  alteration  of  Wycherley :  .  but  to  convince  you  that  I 
am  as  free  from  meaning  an  injury  to  any  body  as  wishing  to  quarrel  with  you,  I  will 
leave  the  matter  in  dispute  to  your  friend  Mr.  Johnson,  whose  knowledge  and  justice 
I  will  appeal  to,  and  be  determined  by.  Once  more,  Sir,  I  repeat  it  again  and  again, 
that  you  never  have  received  an  injury,  or  the  least  shadow  of  one,  from  your  humble 
servant, 

David  Garrick. 

P.  S.  You  have  mentioned  another  person  in  your  letter,  I  suppose  you  mean  my 
friend  Colman  ;  therefore  to  clear  him  from  this  disagreeable  altercation,  I  must  assure 
vou  that  he  never  saw  the  alteration  of  “  The  Country  Wife”  till  two  days  ago, 
though  he  has  known  of  it  for  some  time. 

o 

[Examined  the  above  with  Hopkins  with  the  original,  which  I  delivered  to  Mr. 
Murphy,  and  he  declined  the  reference  to  Mr.  Johnson,  saying  he  was  out  of  town, 
and  that  there  was  nothing  to  refer  to  him ;  but  made  a  proposal  to  bring  the  two 
pieces  out  at  each  theatre  on  the  same  night,  and  that  would  satisfy  him.] 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

Oct.  1st,  1766. 

Since  you  have  declined  a  reference  to  Mr.  Johnson,  I  have  no  more  to  say  upon 
the  occasion.  I  made  that  proposal  merely  to  satisfy  your  own  mind,  and  to  con¬ 
vince  you  that  you  had  not  the  least  matter  of  complaint.  I  must  beg  leave  there¬ 
fore  to  pursue  my  own  business,  without  considering  that  of  another  theatre. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

[Mem.  I  delivered  an  exact  copy  of  the  within  to  Mr.  Murphy’s  servant,  at  his 
lodgings  in  Lincoln’s  Inn,  at  twelve  o'clock,  per  the  Inn  Church  dial. 

John  Johnson.] 


2  i  2 


244 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  two  o'clock,  Wednesday,  1st  Oct.  1 76C. 

It  is  not  true  that  I  declined  a  reference  to  Mr.  Johnson  ;  but  I  observed,  Sir, 
that  he  is  out  of  town,  and  to-morrow  it  is  necessary  to  read  “  The  School  for 
Guardians”  to  the  managers  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre. 

Miss  Elliot’s  business  must,  and  if  I  can,  shall  go  on,  whatever  you  do.  1  chal¬ 
lenge  a  meeting  with  Mr.  Johnson,  or  any  body  else  of  his  judgment  and  morals  ; 
and  then,  Sir,  I  will  make  it  plain  (for  more  is  known  to  me  than  you  are  aware  of) 
that  you  do  not  pursue  your  own  business,  without  considering  that  of  another 
theatre,  and  even,  as  1  said  before,  a  poor  girl’s  business ! 

You  may  remember,  Sir,  that  you  assured  a  gentleman  of  the  city,  upon  my 
remonstrance  relative  to  a  scene  in  “  The  Male  Coquette,”  that  you  was  not  the 
author  of  that  piece  !  and  you  know  whose  name,  as  author,  has  been  since  publicly 
annexed  to  it. 

You  tell  me,  you  will  declare  loudly,  & c. ;  but  I  never  yet  valued  any  man’s 
loudness.  When  I  choose  it,  I  will  be  as  loud  as  you ;  but  it  is  most  probable  I 
shall  despise  the  whole  affair. 

I  will  only  take  care  that  you  shall  not  be  a  forestaller  of  markets,  since  you  have 
not  accepted  the  reasonable  offer  I  made,  namely,  that  both  pieces  should  start  on 

t 

the  same  flight. 

Unless  we  have  a  meeting,  I  beg  we  may  not  altercate  this  matter  any  more  by 
letter. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  3rd  Oct.  1766. 

I  am  this  moment  favoured  with  your  letter,  which  was  left  for  me  at  the  Coffee¬ 
house  last  night.  I  was  sincere  when  I  said  I  wanted  to  avoid  quarrels,  and  I  hope 
I  always  shall  endeavour  to  avoid  them.  I  should  be  sorry  to  say  or  do  the  thing 
that  Mr.  Johnson  should  disapprove.  I  am  ready  to  attend  you,  and  him,  at  any 
time  or  place  this  day,  though  there  is  little  to  refer  to  him  at  present ;  for  Miss 
Elliot  being  settled  at  the  other  house,  and  her  play  read  yesterday  at  Mr.  Rich’s, 
my  commission  is  at  an  end,  and  please  God !  it  shall  be  the  last  of  the  sort.  How¬ 
ever,  it  may  be  right,  notwithstanding  what  I  have  said,  to  see  Mr.  Johnson.  You 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


24  5 


will  please,  therefore,  to  choose  any  time  and  place  this  day  or  next  week,  to  meet 
Mr.  Johnson,  and  1  will  attend  you  and  him. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Lincoln’s-inn,  Oct.  7,  176C. 

I  acquainted  Miss  Elliot  with  your  proposal  to  defer  playing  the  alteration  of 
“  The  Country  Wife”  till  next  Saturday  fortnight,  which  will  be  the  25th  of  October, 
and  I  this  moment  have  her  answer,  which  is,  that  she  has  consulted  Mr.  Woodward 
and  other  principal  performers,  who  cannot  undertake  to  be  ready  by  the  time  you 
have  limited.  Mr.  Woodward  and  Mr.  Shuter,  in  particular,  have  such  long  parts, 
that  I  am  convinced  it  will  be  impossible  for  them,  consistently  with  what  they  owe 
themselves,  to  hazard  a  performance  at  so  short  a  warning,  and  this  the  more  especi¬ 
ally  as  they  understand  the  parts  at  Drury -lane  have  been  given  out  for  some  time. 

By  Saturday  the  1st  of  November,  which  is  next  Saturday  three  weeks,  the  per¬ 
formers  undertake  to  be  ready,  but  cannot  run  any  risk  before  that  time. 

For  my  part,  I  have  no  farther  concern  in  this  affair;  both  plays  may  succeed,  or 
both  be  damned  with  my  full  consent ;  and  whether  you  have  the  whip-hand  of  them 
or  not,  shall  never  give  a  moment’s  thought  to,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


DR.  JOHNSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Oct.  10,  1766. 

I  return  you  thanks  for  the  present  of  the  Dictionary,  and  will  take  care  to 
return  you  other  books. 

I  have  had  it  long  in  my  mind  to  tell  you  that  there  is  a  hundred  pounds  of 
yours  in  Air.  Jonson’s*  hands,  if  you  have  not  received  it.  I  know  not  whether  any 
other  paper  than  what  I  gave  you  be  necessary.  If  there  is  any  thing  more  to  be 
done,  I  am  ready  to  do  it. 

Please  to  make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  obliged,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson. 

*  I  suppose  Tonson.  But  indeed  this  letter  is  in  its  character  so  curt,  so  blunt,  so  obscure,  and  so  ungra¬ 
cious,  that  few  persons  would  write  so  uncivilly  even  to  an  attorney  who  had  been  instructed  to  sue. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


24() 


MR.  J.  SHEBBEARE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Meard’s-buildings,  Dean-street,  Soho,  Nov.  10,  1766. 

The  tragedy  which  accompanies  this  letter  was  put  into  your  hands  either  by 
Dr.  Hoadly  or  Mr.  Dodsley  not  much  less  than  twenty  years  since,  and  before  I 
had  the  pleasure  of  being  known  to  you.  The  person  to  whom  you  delivered  it, 
when  it  was  returned,  told  me  it  was  your  opinion  that  it  must  receive  some  altera¬ 
tion  before  it  could  be  proper  for  the  stage.  My  going  to  Paris  prevented  my 
waiting  upon  you  at  that  time ;  since  which  it  has  received  many  alterations,  and,  I 
doubt  not,  is  capable  of  receiving  many  more  from  your  knowledge  in  theatrical 
compositions. 

Many  of  the  lines,  I  am  sensible,  want  measure;  but,  as  there  may  be  more 
essential  faults,  I  have  not  taken  the  trouble  of  correcting  the  former  till  I  am 
informed  by  you  whether  the  whole  is  capable  of  being  made  acceptable. 

In  the  advertisement  prefixed  to  your  comedy  of  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage,” 
you  have  acknowledged  some  little  obligation  to  one  of  my  novels  :  be  kind  enough 
to  permit  me  to  receive  a  great  one  from  your  hands,  and  to  consider  this  tragedy  so 
that  I  may  have  it  returned  before  Christmas,  unless  you  should  not  have  leisure  for 
it  in  that  time.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

J.  Shebbeare. 


MR.  C.  YORKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Saturday  Morning,  Nov.  15,  1766. 

Mrs.  Yorke  and  I  give  you  many  thanks  for  your  kind  note.  She  will  not  see 
you  in  Lothario,  wishing  for  more  of  your  natural  character  even  in  the  parts  you 
act.  Be  so  obliging  only  as  to  give  us  a  few  days’  notice  of  Hamlet,  whenever  you 
play  it  either  on  a  Thursday  or  a  Saturday,  and  secure  a  box  for  us. 

Always  with  great  esteem, 

Your  faithful  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

C.  Yorke.* 

*  The  sudden  and  premature  death  of  this  great  and  good  man,  affected  a  very  extensive  circle  of  all 
ranks.  In  less  than  four  years  from  the  date  of  the  present  letter  he  abruptly  finished  his  career.  The 
Christmas  holidays  of  1766  he  passed  at  Prior  Park — a  visit  thus  commemorated  by  Bishop  Warburton  : 
“  Mr.  Yorke,  who  has  spent  the  holidays  with  me,  has  just  now  left  me,  to  return  to  the  Bar ;  when  nature, 
virtue,  and  superior  science,  in  any  age  but  this,  would  have  conducted  their  favourite  pupil  to  the  Bench." 
—Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK 


247 


MR.  POTTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Vauxhall,  Nov.  25,  1766. 

I  understand  from  Mr.  Tyers  and  Mr.  Vernon,  that  you  say  I  am  the  author 
of  “  The  Rosciad,”  and  that  you  can  prove  it. 

You  have  also  sent  to  Mr.  Tyers  to  inform  him,  that  I  am  a  bad  man,  and  that 
in  your  opinion  I  am  a  dangerous  person  for  him  to  employ.  I  should  have  waited 
upon  you,  but  Mr.  Vernon  told  me  you  would  not  see  me.  I  think  this  an  unjust 
proceeding,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  expressions,  and  the  manner  of  conducting  it, 
an  attack  upon  my  interest  with  Mr.  Tyers,  and  in  short,  a  manifest  attempt  to  de¬ 
prive  me  of  my  livelihood.  I  can  see  it  in  no  other  light,  and  therefore  think  myself 
grossly  injured. 

What !  upon  conjecture  and  suspicion  (for  proof  you  can  have  none)  rashly  proceed 
in  such  violent  persecuting  measures  !  It  concerns  me  in  the  tenderest  point,  and 
therefore  I  am  obliged  to  vindicate  and  redress  myself  of  the  injury. 

I  have  a  right  to  examine  into  this  affair,  and  I  do  expect  to  receive  an  answer  to 
this  letter  in  a  day  or  two  at  farthest.  As  to  your  taking  the  liberty  of  the  house 
which  you  gave  me,  I  do  not  blame  you,  if  you  have  any  reason  to  suppose  me  the 
author  of  “  The  Rosciad.”  I  am  also  told,  you  say  you  will  let  me  know  I  am 
the  author.  This  I  understand.  I  am  indebted  to  the  house,  which  should  not  have 
remained  so  long  unsettled,  but  I  expected  some  things  I  have  offered,  and  have  to 
offer,  would  have  suited  your  purpose.  However,  please  to  let  me  know  when, 
and  to  whom  I  shall  pay  the  money,  and  it  shall  be  done  as  soon  as  I  receive  your 
answer. 

The  violence  of  your  proceedings,  and  the  underhanded  manner  of  doing  it,  has 
injured  me  and  made  a  disturbance  ;  I  have  therefore,  by  proper  advice,  drawn  up  a 
state  of  the  case,  with  such  attestations  as  are  necessary,  and  shall  offer  it  to  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  public.  Had  you  sent  to  me,  and  treated  me  with  that  civility  due 
from  one  man  to  another,  I  would  have  given  you  any  information  you  should  have 
desired.  To  injure  me,  and  aim  at  my  ruin,  upon  suspicion,  is  what  the  laws  of 
England  will  not  suffer,  nor  do  I  think  they  would  were  I  absolutely  the  author  of 
“  The  Rosciad.” 

I  am.  Sir,  your  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  JOHN  POTTER. 

“  An  impudent  letter  of  Potter’s,  and  my  answer.” 


248 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  POTTER. 


SIR.  Nov.  27,  1 76C. 

I  most  sincerely  believe,  that  you  are  the  author  of  the  Theatrical  Register,  and 
if  you  will  call  upon  me,  (for  I  will  see  you,)  I  will  give  you  my  reasons.*  But 
whether  you  are  or  are  not,  I  care  not.  I  had  a  regard  for  you,  and  always  showed 
it  when  in  my  power :  you  best  know  if  you  have  returned  it  in  a  proper  manner. 
That  I  have  sent  any  message  about  you  to  Mr.  Tyers,  is  false;  that  I  have  in  the 
least  endeavoured  to  ruin  you  with  him  or  any  body  else,  is  false ;  that  I  ever  pro¬ 
ceeded  with  you  or  any  body  else  in  an  underhand  manner,  is  false ;  that  I  knew  till 
three  days  ago  that  you  were  engaged  (by)  or  dependant  upon  Mr.  Tyers,  is  false ; 
that  I  insinuated,  or  even  knew  you  to  be  indebted  to  the  managers  of  Drury-lane 
Theatre,  is  false  ;  that  I  have  taken  away  your  liberty  of  our  house,  is  false.  If  you 
can  clear  yourself  of  acting  falsely  by  me,  you  will  be  certainly  right.  As  for  the 
statement  of  your  case,  I  disregard  it,  as  I  do  every  thing  that  “  The  Rosciad,”  or 
“  Theatrical  Register,”  can  say  of  me  as  a  manager,  an  actor,  or  a  man. 

D.  Garrick. 

Upon  looking  over  your  letter,  I  find  there  is  another  accusation,  that  1  have 

sent  word  to  Mr.  Tyers,  that  you  are  a  had  and  dangerous  man  :  this  is  likewise  a 

rank  falsehood,  and  I  appeal  to  Mi.  Tyers  whether  it  is  or  not. 

» 

(Wrote  in  the  cover.) 

Mr.  Garrick  has  sent  the  letter  open,  as  it  in  some  measure  concerns  Mr.  Tyers 
and  Mr.  Vernon. 


DR.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  Old  Alresford,  Dec'  4th,  1766. 

Hadst  thou  written  to  me  directly,  I  could  have  written  to  thee  directly,  as  thou 
desirest ;  but  as  thy  epistle  travelled  to  St.  Maries,  (where  I  have  not  resided  ever 
since  I  could  walk  the  parade  with  thee  at  Bath,)  I  could  not  give  thee  an  answer 
before  I  received  thy  question.  It  came  regularly  back  again  last  night.  As  to  its 
contents,  I  am  doubtful;  but  rather  think,  as  it  will  be  a  hard  matter  to  avoid 
suspicion  in  Bowyer,  and  not  the  genteelest  way  of  considering  the  very  genteel 
obligations  I  have  to  him,  and  he  is  not  in  want  of  such  a  return,  my  best  way  will 
be  to  drop  the  whole  design,  and  make  my  acknowledgments  to  you  for  this  in- 

*  Potter  was  a  scholar,  and  had  a  degree  in  music.  He  read  the  Gresham  Lecture,  and  assisted  Tvers  in 
the  musical  preparations  of  Vauxhall.  Whether  he  wrote  Theatrical  Registers  in  1766,  I  cannot  say;  but 
in  1768  he  wrote  and  published  the  Theatrical  Review,  a  series  of  papers,  which  were  collected,  and  still 
wander  through  the  stalls  in  two  octavo  volumes _ Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


249 


stance,  amongst  others  of  infinitely  more  consequence,  of  your  true  regard  and  friend¬ 
ship  for  me.  There  let  it  rest  therefore,  and  put  thy  paper  into  thy  pocket  again  : 
Tantum. 

The  French  have  a  rascality  of  their  own  ;  and  I  told  you  when  you  changed 
the  scene  to  England,  that  there  was  a  spirit  in  the  thing  that  might  keep  it  alive ; 
but  the  heroes  were  not  English  valets,  nor  English  villains.  I  never  expected  much 
success,  though  your  actors,  you  told  me,  were  so  fond  of  it  last  year. 

Talking  over  theatrical  affairs  with  Iveate,  I  found  your  scheme  of  “  Cymon”  was 
resolved  to  be  extended  to  the  length  of  five  acts — “  I’ll  speak  a  prophecy,  or  ere 
I  go.”*  The  character  and  the  scenery,  &c.  of  the  rest,  may  support  it  through  two 
or  three  acts  at  most ;  but  surely  nothing  full  of  Urgandas  and  Merlins  can  be 
drawn  out  longer,  to  keep  a  sensible  audience  pleased.  Cymon,  the  natural  Cymon, 
will  be  the  hero,  add  what  you  please ;  and  I  could  wish  that  he  had  none  but 
natural  things  and  objects  about  him  ;  but  as  they  are,  take  heed  of  bending  the  bow 
till  it  loses  its  elasticity.  You  are  not  apt  to  do  that  neither,  but  this  struck  me 
so  strongly,  that  I  could  not  help  crying  out. 

You  have  done  the  stage  great  service  by  restoring  Wycherley  to  it.  I  never 
read  the  plays  till  now.  They  will  certainly  be  both  stock  plays  :  “  The  Plain- 
Dealer”  excellent,  “  The  Reformer”  could  go  no  farther ;  there  was  no  castrating  of 
Manley. 

Another  hint.  Would  not  the  story  of  “  Amphitryon”  in  good  burlesque,  in  the 
manner  of  “  Midas,”  be  a  fine  subject  for  a  burletta?  Amphitryon,  a  sergeant  of 
grenadiers,  stealing  away  after  the  battle,  along  with  the  suttler’s  boy  to  attend  on 
him,  to  his  trull  or  wife,  in  a  night  cellar,  or  something  in  that  style.  I  have  laughed 
more  than  once  upon  my  pillow  at  the  whim  of  it.  You  will  send  me  down  one  of 
the  farces  in  a  cover  or  two  :  more  may  breed  suspicion  of  my  having  to  do  in  it. 
You  will  also  return  my  wife’s  compliments  and  my  love  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  your¬ 
self,  and  you  will,  I  trust,  believe  me, 

Dear  Sir,  your’s  most  affectionately, 

J.  Hoadly. 

P.  S.  My  love  to  Iveate ;  who  will  tell  you  what  a  poor  summer  I  have  passed. 
Not  once  have  I  walked  round  my  own  garden  ;  but  I  am  well  in  health,  and  heart 
whole,  boy. 


JOHN  WILKES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  Rue  des  Saints  Peres,  Jan.  17ih,  1767. 

Mr.  Turton’s  return  to  England  gives  me  an  opportunity,  my  dear  Sir,  of  assur¬ 
ing  you  of  the  most  sincere  regard,  and  at  the  same  time  of  transmitting  to  you  a 


VOL.  i. 


*  The  fool  in  “  King  Lear.” 
2  K 


250 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


pacquct  from  our  most  amiable  friend  Helvetius.  He  desires  me  in  the  wannest 
terms  to  recommend  to  you  a  tragedy  of  one  of  his  friends,  an  Irishman,  who  is  here. 
1  have  no  acquaintance  with  the  play-wright,  but  Helvetius  has  dragged  me  through 
the  piece,  and  insists  on  my  saying  the  handsomest  things  of  it  to  you.  His  reason 
for  all  this  you  will  find  in  the  four  pages  prefixed  to  the  play.  I  have  great  power 
of  face,  and  therefore  only  found  the  tragedy  too  didactic,  and  lamented  the  author’s 
not  sufficiently  knowing  the  English  stage.  I  admired  the  sentiments,  and  recom¬ 
mended  the  form  of  a  philosophical  epistle  to  Helvetius,  rather  than  this  of  a  tra¬ 
gedy.  In  vain  ;  I  must  send  it  to  you :  I  obey,  and  wish  you  a  good  deliverance 
from  this  new  Irish  attack  on  our  stage. 

As  I  could  not  save  you,  you  will  save  yourself  by  a  letter  to  Helvetius,  and  he 
will  subscribe,  I  am  sure,  to  the  opinion  of  the  best  judge  of  literature,  as  well  as  one 
of  our  best  authors.  We  regret  your  absence  greatly  at  Pelletier’s,  and  send  many 
warm  wishes  after  you.  We  have  made  an  agreeable  acquisition  in  Monsieur  de 
Bussy,  who  is  always  amiable  and  good-humoured  here,  though  I  believe  he  was 
peevish  enough  among  our  countrymen.  I  love  a  Frenchman  d'un  certain  age , 
when  he  is  retired  from  business  with  a  good  pension  and  a  good  cook.  Helvetius 
is  now  often  of  that  set.  Did  you  know  his  own  mother,  whom  he  loved  tenderly, 
and  was  a  woman  of  superior  merit?  She  is  just  dead,  and  he  is  this  morning  in 
great  affliction.  Yesterday  I  had  a  letter  from  him,  the  beginning  of  whkh  will 
please  you,  Mon  cher  precepteur  des  Hois ,  vous  qui  avez  de  si  mauvais  eudiers,  qui 
etes  exile  dans  ce  monde,  qui  serez  damne  dans  V autre,  et  a  qui  la  posterite  doit  une 
statue ,  8$c. 

I  keep  a  steady  and  a  longing  eye  on  dear  England,  but  I  do  not  know  when  I 
am  likely  to  see  its  white  cliffs  again.  Perhaps  I  may  be  doomed,  like  all  my  pre¬ 
decessors  in  Plutarch,  to  pass  the  rest  of  my  life  in  exile  :  so  dangerous  is  it  to  do 
great  services  to  any  country.  If  that  should  be  the  case,  I  will  alleviate  the  evil  by 
philosophy,  by  the  amiable  philosophers  you  know  this  country  produces,  by  a  good 
conscience,  and  the  superbiam.  I  believe  you  will  let  me  say  qucesitam  mentis.  My 
place  of  banishment,  at  least,  is  left  me,  and  the  pursuit  of  those  studies,  which  in 
every  place  and  every  age  are  the  duty  and  ornament  of  life. 

I  am  less  dissipated  than  ever  here,  and  my  history,  &c.  advance  very  fast.  If 
I  had  an  amanuensis,  I  should  send  you  some  parts,  but  that  is  almost  the  only  con¬ 
venience  1  cannot  have  here.  I  enclose  you  a  few  trifles.  The  others  of  that  kind 
I  dare  not  venture,  and  they  are  too  numerous. 

I  hear  that  you  are  collecting  your  works  for  publication.  I  rejoice  at  it.  Do 
not  be  content  with  charming  the  present  age,  but  command  posterity  to  admire  you, 
and  give  me  the  happiness  of  reading,  when  I  cannot  have  that  of  seeing  you. 

Let  me  beg  you  to  remember  Miss  Wilkes  and  me  very  affectionately  to  Mrs. 
Garrick ;  she  has  two  great  admirers  in  us. 

I  will  come  to  my  native  London  as  soon  as  ever  I  have  leave,  and  to  you.  If  I 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


251 


have  not  leave,  I  hope  we  shall  meet  here,  and  early  in  the  spring :  in  the  mean  time, 
you  will  oblige  me  greatly  by  writing  to  me,  and  commanding  me  in  every  particular 
which  can  be  useful  or  agreeable  to  you  or  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  great  truth  and  regard. 

Your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

John  Wilkes. 

Monsieur  et  Madame  d’Holbach  vous  font  mille  complimens,  item  Monsieur  et 
Madame  Suard,  Beaumont,  <$cc.  My  best  services  to  Fitzherbert,  Colman,  Clut- 
terbuck,  kc. 


THE  RIGHT  HON.  CHARLES  TOWNSHEND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

D owning-street,  Jan.  31st,  1767. 

Mr.  Townshend*  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick  :  he  is  very  much 
obliged  to  him  for  his  information  of  “  The  Earl  of  Warwick’s”  being  to  be  played 
this  evening ;  but  Mr.  Johnston  not  having  left  the  notice  till  late  yesterday,  and  a 
cabinet  being  since  appointed  for  this  evening,  Mr.  Townshend  is  prevented  the  plea¬ 
sure  of  being  at  the  play. 

Lady  Edgecombe  presses  Mr.  Townshend  to  solicit  Mr.  Garrick  that  “  The  Earl 
of  Warwick”  may  be  fixed  for  Friday  next;  and  if  this  can  be  done,  Mr.  Townshend 
solemnly  swears,  for  their  mutual  convenience,  never  again  to  trouble  Mr.  Garrick 
upon  a  matter  of  this  sort. 

Mr.  Townshend  hopes  Mr.  Garrick  has  heard  from  Capt.  Schomberg,  that  he  yes¬ 
terday  stretched  his  conscience  a  little  to  oblige  him,  and  he  rather  forgets  the 
original  promise,  nor  means  the  favour  of  yesterday  in  discharge  of  it. 


MR.  J.  REED  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Grigsby’s  Coffee-house,  half-past  three,  Feb.  11th,  1767. 

As  I  arfi  of  opinion  that  “  Zenobia”  has  been  the  cause  of  “  Dido’s”  non-appear¬ 
ance  this  season,  you  will  oblige  me  by  giving  necessary  orders  that  my  farce  shall 
not  be  played  with  it :  I  would  be  understood  with  this  restriction — that  the  part  of 
Mrs.  Doggerel  may  not  he  played .f  The  new  character,  I  apprehend,  is  (as  yet)  my 
own  property  ;  you  may,  therefore,  easily  imagine  how  disagreeable  it  must  be  to  me, 

The  great  Charles  Townshend,  whom  Burke  characterised  as  the  delight  of  the  British  House  of  Com¬ 
mons,  at  a  time  when  it  could  boast  of  powers  of  entertainment  !  Written  1828. — Ed. 
t  Acted  by  Miss  Pope. 


2  K  2 


252 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


to  have  that  character  played  in  support  of  a  piece  brought  upon  the  stage  at  the 
expense  of  my  reputation. 

I  hope,  therefore,  Mr.  Garrick  will  oblige  me  in  this  request,  as  an  exhibition  of 
the  new  character  will  be  esteemed  an  insult  offered  to  his 

Very  humble  servant, 

Joseph  Reed. 

P.  S.  I  cannot  possibly  be  at  the  West  End  of  the  Town  this  evening,  or  I  would 
have  waited  on  you  on  this  occasion. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GEORGE,  Sunday,  April  5th,  1767. 

In  the  first  place,  I  am  grown  as  fat  as  a  hog,  and  you  may  measure  with  me  at 
my  return  without  tucking  in  your  guts  till  your  face  is  as  read  as  bull-beef. 

I  have  had  a  letter  from  Noverre,  who  is  at  Paris,  and  offers  us  his  service  in 
preference  to  the  Opera,  Vienna,  and  other  engagements  he  may  have.  If  Mr. 
Lacy  has  altered  his  mind,  I  will  write  to  know  his  proposals  ;  if  Mr.  Lacy  thinks  it 
not  right  to  have  him,  I  will  let  him  know  we  are  engaged.  Send  me  a  line  about 
that  on  Tuesday’s  post,  or  Wednesday’s  at  farthest,  for  I  will  send  you  a  French  letter 
to  be  put  into  the  post  on  Tuesday  afterwards. 

Colman  and  Changuion  are  arrived ;  we  pulled  off  our  hats,  but  did  not  smile. 
Our  friends  here  will  stir  heaven  and  earth  to  bring  us  together :  make  the  best  of 
it,  it  will  be  but  a  darn.  And  does  “  Dido”  please  ?  Good  God  ! — and  will  they  come 
twice  to  see  it  ?  Good  God ! — it  is  time  to  leave  the  stage,  if  such  a  performance  can 
stand  upon  its  legs.  Good  God!*  I  have  seen  a  paragraph  for  “  Cautherly,”  but 
not  an  advertisement.  I  hope  the  lad  will  get  something.  I  expect  a  full  account 
(and  hope  for  a  full  house  at  King’s  benefit)  of  the  new  hodge-podge  of  Linco. 
Pray  let  me  know  it  by  the  first  post :  that  will  be  on  Tuesday,  the  day  you  receive 
this.  Have  you  seen  Kelly  yet  ?  do  you  know  any  thing  of  his  play  ?  Is  John¬ 
ston  yet  arrived  from  Ireland  ?  I  believe  Arthur  would  gladly  receive  Miss  Rey¬ 
nolds  ?  I  have  told  him  that  I  would  give  up  her  articles  to  her  advantage :  he 
knows  what  she  has,  and  has  dined  with  Mr.  Davenport,  so  that  perhaps  she  would 

*  “  Dido.”  Notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Garrick,  Reed,  by  giving  his  “  Dido”  to  Holland  for  his 
benefit,  procured  an  admission  for  the  “  Queen  of  Carthage”  to  Drury-lane  Theatre.  After  it  had  been 
acted  with  applause  on  the  28th  of  March,  the  management  repeated  it  twice  for  the  house  ;  by  the  usage, 
that  what  appears  for  a  benefit  is  at  the  option  of  the  concern.  La  Clairon,  as  it  appears,  wanted  something 
of  the Jfgure  demanded  by  the  heroine;  but  when  I  think  of  that  finest  portrait  by  Virgil,  Mrs.  \ates  best 
realizes  the  picture  sense  of  my  fancy.  She,  in  fact,  could  have  charmed  by  merely  walking  through  the 
fable. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


253 


be  as  willing  to  part  with  us  as  we  with  her.  Suppose  you  were  to  feel  her  pulse 
on  this  matter:  I  have  kept  up  her  importance  with  Arthur.  They  ask  for  her 
here  much  ;  and  indeed  she  would  be  right  to  desire  her  conge  of  us.  I  see  adver¬ 
tised  “  The  Theatrical  Campaign,”  price  one  shilling  and  sixpence, — have  you  heard 
of  it?  Pray  let  me  know  what  the  subject  is,  and  what  they  say  of  it?  Love  to 
your  dear  little  ones. 

Ever  and  most  affectionately  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

Poor  Jacob  Tonson  ! 

I  have  not  put  the  name  of  the  Inn  on  Dr.  IJawkesworth’s  letter,  for  I  do  not 
[know]  whether  it  is  Lyon’s  or  Clement’s  ;  I  believe  it  is  the  last.  If  Johnston  is 
returned  from  Ireland,  he  will  tell  you  and  carry  it,  for  he  has  done  so  by  many 
before. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GEORGE,  Good  Friday,  1767. 

I  suppose  by  this  time  you  are  near  to  London.  I  did  not  understand  that 
Noverre  talked  of  coming  to  our  Opera,  but  had  offers  to  be  engaged  at  the  Opera 
in  Paris  ;  however,  we  will  wait  for  his  answer.  I  am  glad  Cautherly  goes  on  so 
well :  Philips  was  a  fool  to  refuse  taking  his  tickets  when  I  settled  it ;  he  will  be  no 
gainer  by  it.  Pray  put  a  puff  about  Linco’s  Travels  into  the  paper;  King  and  you 
will  settle  it.  I  wish  you  would  tell  me  if  I  should  play  on  the  second  Thursday 
after  Easter  week  or  not.  I  shall  be  in  town  (if  I  must)  on  the  Tuesday  before,  and 
will  settle  the  part  before  I  leave  Bath.  What  is  to  become  of  “  Dido?”  Now  I 
talk  of  “  Dido,”  I  have  heard  a  bird  sing  that  there  were  some  scoundrel  suspicions 
that  I  wrote  a  long  copy  of  verses  against  “  Dido”  in  the  St.  James’s  Chronicle.  I 
shall  be  very  angry  if  I  hear  the  least  hint  of  it  from  my  partner.  It  is  well  known 
that  they  are  Kenrick’s,  and  I  shall  speak  to  Reed  about  them  as  soon  as  I  see  him. 
Do  you  know  any  thing  about  this  ?  Do  not  mention  Kenrick’s  name,  for  Becket 
told  me  in  secrecy.  I  shall  see  Powell  and  Holland  to-morrow,  and  give  them  a 
breakfast.  1  received  a  letter  last  week  from  Sir  Edward  Lyttelton,  desiring  me  to 
help  him  to  discover  the  author  of  some  letters  which  have  been  written  to  him,  or 
his  friends,  of  a  very  scandalous  nature,  and  which  he  hears,  by  tracing  them,  were 
written  by  our  Hurst.  I  have  promised  him  my  assistance.  If  you  will  call  upon 
him  in  Pall  Mall,  (Johnston’s  housekeeper  knows  where,  for  I  sent  my  answer  to 
Sir  Edward  by  him,)  you  may  tell  Sir  Edward  that  I  sent  you  to  know  how  you 
might  serve  him  in  the  affair  he  mentioned  to  me; — say  nothing  to  Hurst  till  you 
have  consulted  with  Sir  Edward.  I  believe  Hurst  is  a  tartar.  AVe  are  very  well, 
and  I  am  very  fat.  I  am  made  too  much  of,  and  eat  and  drink  too  freely  :  it  won’t 


254 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


do,  and  I  cannot  undertake  Macbeth  this  season.  When  you  see  Mr.  llamus,  give 
my  love  to  him,  and  hint  as  much.  I  see  Colman  often,  and  we  talk  as  usual. 
Clutterbuck  and  Schomberg  would  see  us  upon  good  terms.  We  all  dined  with  the 
former  last  Monday,  and  were  merry.  Pray  puff  Linco’s  Travels  for  Tom.* 

Yours  most  affectionately, 

D.  G. 

Madam  sends  her  love  with  mine  to  our  nieces.  Are  you  better  for  your  journey  ? 
Will  the  boy  be  better  for  Mrs.  Lessingham  ?  Do  her  friends  come  for  tickets  ? 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  GEORGE,  1767- 

I  have  found  the  letter  C - sent  to  me,  in  which  the  affair  is  hinted  at.  The 

first  paragraph  relates  to  a  letter  which  he  received  from  General  Poultney,  in 
answer  to  one  of  his,  which  I  saw  and  advised  him  about.  I  suppose  I  shall  hear 
the  -whole  matter  to-morrow,  for  we  have  agreed  to  ride  out  together. 

Once  again.  Adieu. 

Yet  I  do  not  understand  it !  take  care  of  C - ’s  letter. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GEORGE,  Tuesday  Night,  1767. 

I  SEND  this  by  my  friend  Changuion.  I  have  enclosed  two  franks,  one  for  the 
letters,  and  one  for  “  The  St.  James’s  Chronicle”  and  “  The  Public  Advertiser,” 
which  I  beg  you  will  send  on  Saturday  next— both  the  papers  of  that  day.  Sir 
Edward  Lyttelton’s  affair  shocks  me  :  1  long  to  know  the  event.  Hurst  must  be  dis¬ 
charged — what  a  villain !  Pray  let  me  know  the  -whole  in  your  next. 

Now  to  the  grand  affair.  Pray  return  my  best  respects  to  my  partner,  and  tell 
him,  if  you  think  proper,  that  the  news  of  the  sale  of  the  other  house  gives  me  not 

the  least  uneasiness.  It  is  impossible  that  it  should  hurt  us ;  and  if  P _ .  is  to  be  a 

director,  we  have  reason  to  rejoice,  for  he  is  finely  calculated  for  management.  What 
a  strange  affair !  We  shall  know  all  in  time.  I  am  satisfied,  be  the  news  true  or  false. 
I  shall  most  certainly  keep  the  secret.  I  think  Forest  would  not  deceive  you.  Not¬ 
withstanding  Cautherly  has  many  tickets  out,  I  tremble  for  his  benefit.  I  hope  he 

*  Toni,  i.  e.  Tom  King,  to  whom  Garrick  had  given  it  for  his  benefit _ Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


9 


50 


will  not  lose  by  it.  You  will  take  care  to  put  “  The  Public  Advertiser”  and  “  Chro¬ 
nicle”  of  Saturday  into  that  frank  which  I  have  directed  myself,  and  the  letters  into 
the  other, — very  cautious,  you  will  say, — but,  my  dear  George,  a  mistake  might  be 
made,  so  do  not  think  me  overwise  in  wishing  to  be  sure  of  my  newspapers,  when  I 
come  into  my  Inn  at  Reading.  God  bless  you  and  yours  !  I  and  mine  send  our  loves 
to  you. 

David  Garrick. 

I  wish  you  joy  of  Clive’s  familiar  epistle  to  the  public. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  GEORGE,  Thursday,  1767. 

In  the  first  place  give  my  best  washes  and  services  to  my  partner,  and  tell  him 
that  I  believe  his  suspicions  are  well  founded.  He  may  be  well  assured  that  I  would 

not  suggest  the  smallest  hint  of  what  I  know  to  C - .  Do  not  imagine,  Mr. 

George,  that  I  am  such  a  booby.  Colman  has  told  me  that  he  has  an  affair  to  open  to 
me,  but  we  have  always  been  interrupted  by  somebody  or  other,  so  I  have  not  yet 
had  the  whole,  and  which  he  has  some  qualms  in  bringing  out.  However,  I  am  pre¬ 
pared,  and  he  will  be  surprised  at  my  little  concern  and  ease  upon  the  occasion.*  I 
am  sure  there  is  something  in  it ;  and  yet,  the  more  I  think  of  it,  the  more  I  am  puz¬ 
zled.  Who  finds  money?  What  is  the  plan?  Who  are  the  directors  ?  D — n  me 
if  I  comprehend  it,  but  I  shall  know  more.  Suppose  you  and  Mr.  Lacy  meet  me  at 
his  house  at  Isleworth  next  Wednesday  morning.  I  will  come  from  Hampton,  and 
be  with  you  at  his  owrn  time,  and  he  may  return  to  town  again.  You  may  send 
me  a  note  by  the  Hampton  stage  Tuesday  next,  which  I  shall  receive  at  the  time 
I  arrive  there ;  and  pray  send  the  twro  Reviews  from  Becket,  or  what  other  things 
you  may  have  for  me — pray  mind  that.  I  think  we  should  meet  directly.  I  am 
glad  Yernon  has  signed,  and  I  think  we  should  close  with  Arne,  but  let  Mr. 
Lacy  determine. 

My  wife  desires  you  to  vrrite  a  note  the  night  you  receive  this  (Saturday)  to  our 
maid  at  Hampton,  Nancy  Hetherington,  to  prepare  some  mutton,  and  a  pudding, 
with  some  asparagus,  for  our  dinner  on  Tuesday,  about  five  o’clock  or  rather  six. 
Pray  get  me  all  the  news  to  send  on  Tuesday  by  the  coach.  What!  has  Holland 
no  hand  in  this  ? — is  he  hummed  ?  I  have  not  the  least  idea  of  the  matter,  nor 
have  I  the  least  notion  of  their  doing  any  thing  to  give  us  one  moment  of  uneasi- 


*  The  letting  Powell  into  the  Covent  Garden  property,  and  the  purchase  of  the  theatre  from  the  heirs 
of  Rich  by  Colman,  Harris,  Powell,  and  Rutherford.  Garrick  judged  rightly,  that  Colman  would  not  be 
happy  in  the  concern. — Ed. 


256 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ness.  I  hope  Mr.  Lacy  thinks  so  too.  God  bless  you  and  yours.  My  wife  sends 
her  love  to  you  all. 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Remember  the  newspapers  for  Reading,  and  a  slice  of  news.  I  shall 
let  you  know  what  C - says. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GEORGE,  Reading,  Monday  Night,  1767. 

We  are  here  safe,  and  sound,  and  merry.  Clutterbuck  brings  you  this.  I  should  be 
glad,  if  you  send  me  the  Monthly  Review  by  the  coach,  that  you  would  bid  Becket 
let  me  have  a  Gentleman’s  Magazine  too ;  and  pray  let  me  know  by  a  note  how  I 
am  to  behave  to  Lacy.  I  have  told  Colman  that  I  cannot  forgive  Powell’s  beha¬ 
viour  to  me,  and  breach  of  articles.  He  is  silent  upon  that  head ;  but  I  cannot  think 

Colman’s  joining  P - ,  when  he  and  I  were  at  variance,  and  from  an  offer  of  P - 

and  his  confederates,  blameable :  however,  C - will  act  under  my  wing  if  I  would 

have  him,  and  so  do  not  inflame  matters,  dear  George,  for  I  have  acted  to  a  tittle  by 

your’s  and  Mr.  Lacy’s  desire.  As  for  Powell,  he  is  a  sc - and  C - will  repent  his 

conjunction  in  every  vein ;  nay,  he  does  repent  it,  and  wishes  the  affair  was  broke  up; — 
but  I  believe  it  is  gone  too  far.  I  hope  to  God  that  my  partner  has  not  talked  with 

P- - of  an  agreement,  or  a  friendly  intercourse,  between  the  houses — that  would  be 

ruin  indeed!  I  cannot  forgive  P - .  You  surprise  me  about  Holland;  I  should 

think  the  contrary.  Just  give  me  a  clue  to  walk  into  the  labyrinth  of  Lacy’s  brain, 
that  I  may  be  upon  my  guard. 

For  Heaven’s  sake  !  say  not  one  word  about  Hurst’s  affair. 

Our  maids  will  [be]  in  Southampton-street  to-morrow  night,  and  I  shall  be  there 
the  end  of  the  week. 

Yours  most  affectionately, 

D.  Garrick. 

Our  loves. 

My  wife  desires  you  to  bring  in  your  pocket  to  Lacy’s  some  dried  rosemary 
flowers  for  tea ;  half  an  ounce  will  do,  and  you  may  have  them  at  the  herb-shops  in 
Co  vent  Garden. 

Pray  see  Clutterbuck. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


257 


DR.  SHEBBEARE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


1767. 

Dn.  Shebbeare  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  desires  his  accept¬ 
ance  of  the  enclosed  pamphlet :  at  the  same  time,  he  takes  this  opportunity  of  de¬ 
claring  that  Mr.  Garrick  has  at  all  times  treated  him  with  politeness,  that  he  has  kept 
his  tragedy  at  the  Doctor’s  request,  and  may  still  detain  it  as  long  as  he  pleases :  he 
thinks  it  right  to  say  this  in  writing  on  this  occasion,  that  it  may  not  be  imagined  he 
is  capable  of  using  any  man  ill  who  has  treated  him  with  good  manners. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  SHEBBEARE. 

SIR,  May  9,  1767. 

In  the  first  place  let  me  thank  you  for  waiting  so  obligingly  till  my  return  from 
Bath,  for  my  opinion  of  “  Dion.” 

I  have  read  and  considered  the  tragedy  with  great  care,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that 
I  think  it  not  calculated  for  representation,  and  for  the  following  reasons.  The  chief 
defect  appears  to  be  in  the  fable  :  there  is  certainly  what  is  vulgarly  called  business 
in  it,  no  less,  I  believe,  than  three  revolutions  in  five  acts ;  but  I  fear  these  changes 
are  without  that  interest,  and  those  striking  situations,  from  which  must  arise  an  effect 
that  gives  success  to  dramatic  performances. 

The  character  of  Heraclides  seems  rather  out  of  nature ;  and  the  scene  in  which  he 
Avorks  up  the  people  against  Dion,  though  an  imitation  of  Shakspear,  in  my  opinion 
\\rants  art  and  probability  ;  and  surely  Dion’s  horrors  and  death,  on  account  of  this 
man,  aaTio  behaved  so  treacherously  in  the  former  part  of  the  play,  are  very  ex¬ 
ceptionable. 

The  circumstance  of  Aretes  being  forced  to  another  marriage  answers  no  end, 
as  it  does  not  bring  about  any  tragic  event,  and  will  only  raise  expectation  without 
gratifying  it. 

The  scene  with  her  dead  child  I  fear  bears  too  great  a  similitude  to  one  in 
“  Cleone the  unexpected  change  in  the  character  of  Callippus  AA’ould  not  haAre  any 
effect,  for  \\rant  of  a  proper  preparation  ;  it  appears  too  sudden,  and  will  hurt  rather 
than  please  an  audience. 

In  short,  Sir,  for  I  have  not  room  to  give  my  opinion  more  at  large,  though  there 
are  many  speeches  which  please  me,  and  convince  me  that  with  a  good  story,  you 
might  produce  a  successful  tragedy ;  yet  to  speak  my  feelings,  I  think  “  Dion” 
wants  that  dramatic  force,  that  raising  of  the  passions,  by  which  alone  a  Tragedy  can 
be  supported  on  the  stage. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


vol.  i. 


2  L 


258 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OE 


MR.  C.  DINGLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK 


DEAR  SIR,  May  26,  1767. 

You  have  had  my  confession  that  I  was  eager  to  purchase  of  you,  Hendon  Manor, 
on  a  presumption  that,  being  accustomed  to  divest  yourself  of  pomp  and  grandeur, 
and  you  having  made  the  overture  by  mentioning  you  would  sell,  it  could  not  dis¬ 
please  for  both  to  be  gainers,  you  by  sale,  myself  by  purchase,  as  most  certainly  my 
situation,  living  on  the  manor,  industry,  &e.  are  circumstances  for  my  having  it.  But 
the  sum  you  have  mentioned  has  quite  dismayed  me  from  all  thoughts  or  expecta¬ 
tions  :  and  if  I  mistake  not,  we  agreed  to  be  cautious  that  Mr.  Wylde  should  not 
know  our  inclination.  If  S.  and  you  are  really  in  earnest  to  sell  at  a  price  that  you 
would  buy  were  you  C.  D.,  the  best  means  to  bring  this  business  to  a  speedy  and 
candid  conclusion  is  to  inform  me  of  facts:  what  has  the  Manor  produced  you  since 
your  purchase  ?  what  expectation  or  plan  have  you  to  make  it  more  beneficial  by  en¬ 
franchising?  And  though  Lord  Pom  fret,  or  those  under  him,  may  have  deceived  you, 
I  have  faith  you  would  not  do  so  to  me :  and  if  we  cannot  hit  it  off  as  to  sale  and 
purchase,  I  may  be  of  service,  and  you  may  rely  I  will  be  a  trusty  vassal  to  you  and 
do  all  the  suit  and  good  I  can,  by  a  frank  advice,  speech,  &c.  and  if  you  command  me 
to  attend  the  Lordship  any  hour  I  shall  obey,  or  if  you  will  call  at  my  cot  it  may 
save  trouble  to  us  both.  My  Essex  and  Wiltshire  estates  may  be  called  200/.  and 
400/.  per  annum,  and  I  should  sell  for  16,000/.  and  I  was  in  hopes  to  have  received 
some  rhino  to  reimburse  me  what  I  am  laying  out  for  a  manor-house;  and  purchased 
the  tythes  for  less  than  sold  at  public  sale,  and  by  trouble  and  management  I  hope  to 
make  them  more  valuable  than  they  have  been,  and  will  sell  you  them  at  a  price 
worth  your  buying,  to  be  connected  with  the  Manor.  I  had  heard  you  had  given  too 
much  for  the  Manor,  and  that  you  had  as  much  if  not  more  reason  to  repent  your 
purchase,  as  those  who  bought  the  tythes ;  and  if  so,  I  had  reason  to  suppose  you 
might  be  willing  to  sell  at  or  near  the  price  you  purchased,  and  if  I  paid  1000/.  as  a 
vain  man  to  be  the  Lord  of  Hendon  Manor,  14,000/.  in  exchange  would  be  about  the 
mark ;  but,  as  I  am  quite  in  the  dark,  it  is  from  ignorance  if  I  offend  in  my  conjec¬ 
tures  of  the  value,  and  be  assured  I  am,  truly  and  sincerely,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  trusty  friend  and  humble  servant, 

C.  Dingley. 

P.  S.  My  daughter  expects  performance  of  having  the  honour  of  seeing  Mr. 
Garrick  on  Golder’s  Hill.  We  enjoyed  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  on  Saturday;  and 
the  party  of  three  thank  you. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


MR.  C.  DINGLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Golder’s  Hill,  May  30,  1767. 

I  make  use  of  one  of  my  secretaries,  being  so  ill  as  to  be  in  bed.  I  have  received 
your  favour,  and  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  you  say  you  have  by  enfranchising  acquired 
for  your  estate  the  sum  [at  which]  you  offered  it  to  me.  I  repeat,  I  am  at  your  service 
as  a  decoy,  or  as  the  first  to  begin  ;  but  it  is  my  opinion  you  will  be  disappointed,  and 
not  find  that  spirit  which  you  expect ;  as  I  have  been  in  my  offers  to  sell  any  parcel  of 
the  tythes  to  the  owners  of  land.  I  thought  that  you,  as  well  as  myself,  would  rather 
decline  speaking  to  Mr.  Wylde :  and  surely,  my  good  friend,  there  could  be  no 
inconveniency  to  you  to  give  me  the  plan,  or  upon  what  basis  you  ground  your 
expectation  of  making  20,000/.  or  more  for  yonr  estate.  I  am  still  in  the  dark,  and 
shall  be  so,  unless  you  are  pleased  to  give  me  daylight  by  information.  I  am  sure  you 
would  not  deceive  me,  though  you  or  Mr.  Clutterbuck  may  have  been  deceived;  and 
I  have  been  by  many  told  that  it  was  a  dear  purchase.  I  told  you,  ambition,  vanity, 
and  a  presumption  that  I  can  make  more  of  it  than  you  or,  perhaps,  any  one  can,  by 
reason  of  certain  circumstances,  made  me  incline  to  buy  it.  The  two  estates  which 
I  have  mentioned  in  exchange,  which  I  estimate  at  16,000/.  I  suppose  more  than  an 
equivalent  to  be  the  Lord  of  the  Manor:  I  may  stretch  1000/.  more.  I  have  only  to 
add  that  I  am  upon  all  occasions,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

C.  Dingeey. 

P.  S.  My  daughter  and  secretary  joins  in  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MR.  JAMES  LOVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Richmond,  June  2,  1 767. 

For  God’s  sake,  do  not  misunderstand  me:  I  have  the  highest  and  most  disin¬ 
terested  respect  for  you,  and,  consequently,  cannot  resign  a  grain  of  your  friendship 
with  any  sort  of  ease  or  patience.  If  I  could  have  possibly  found  time  to  wait  upon 
you,  I  would  have  ventured  to  convince  you  that  though,  perhaps,  my  judgment 
might  err,  I  never  conceived  a  thought  of  offending  you,  or  acting  ungenerously  in 
regard  to  any  one  you  are  pleased  to  favour.  I  beg  you,  drown  in  oblivion  the  anger 
you  have  hastily  conceived :  let  Mr.  Hopkins  tell  you  the  state  of  our  affairs,  and 
settle  Mr.  Cautherly  to  play  when  and  what  you  please.  I  will  do  every  thing  in 
my  power  to  render  his  appearance  agreeable  to  you,  who  am  ever  immutably  (permit 
me  to  say  it,) 

Your  most  faithful  and  sincere  friend, 

And  obedient  humble  servant, 

James  Love. 


2  l  2 


200 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  GRIFFITHS. 


MADAM,  June  16,  1767. 

It  is  with  the  greatest  uneasiness,  but  with  the  greatest  sincerity,  that  I  am 
obliged  to  tell  you  my  sentiments  of  the  three  acts  you  put  into  my  hands.  I  am 
greatly  disappointed  in  the  fable  and  the  characters.  Maria  is  so  unnatural  a  charac¬ 
ter,  that  an  audience  (I  speak  my  own  opinion),  I  fear,  would  not  suffer  her  :  I  had 
always  my  fears  about  her,  and  I  am  now  convinced  of  the  danger  of  introducing 
such  a  person  in  such  circumstances.  You  will  say,  that  the  transaction  in  which 
she  is  concerned  has  happened  in  life, — may  be  so, — nevertheless  it  will  appear  very 
unfit  for  a  serious  play,  as  Maria  does  not  appear  to  be  abandoned,  though  she  has 
been  deluded.  To  have  fixed  the  propriety  of  her  character  (which  I  think  next  to 
impossible),  it  should  be  shown  by  what  arts  Sir  William  had  worked  upon  her  to 
join  with  him  in  a  scheme,  which  will  render  her  odious  to  the  spectators,  and  wound 
herself  in  the  most  sensible  and  delicate  point.  Lady  Somerville  appears  by  Thomas’s 
soliloquy  to  be  ruined  at  the  opening  of  the  play,  and  enters  directly  into  all  the 
horrors  of  repentance,  that  nothing  can  add  to  her  distress  but  the  entrance  of  Lord 
Somerville.  When  he  appears,  which  will  raise  expectation  to  the  highest  pitch, 
what  passes  between  them  ?  She  complains  of  a  disorder  “  which  corrosives  alone 
can  cure,”  <Scc.  which  he  does  not  endeavour  to  find  out,  but  thinks  she  is  mad ;  she 

t 

leaves  him,  and  he  prays  for  the  return  of  her  reason  :  this  scene,  in  my  opinion,  is 
not  worked  up  to  that  point  of  terror  and  pathos  which  will  be  naturally  expected 
from  so  great  a  situation.  In  short,  Madam,  the  capital  mistake,  in  my  opinion,  lies 
in  the  construction  of  the  fable ;  and  I  fear,  if  you  proceed  upon  this  plan,  you  will 
lose  that  time  which  might  be  more  preciously  employed  both  for  yourself  and  the 
public.  I  beg  leaAre  to  return  you  my  thanks  for  the  two  volumes,  which  I  shall 
carry  into  the  country  with  me.  1  shall  return  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  next 
week,  and  will  do  myself  the  pleasure  of  waiting  upon  you  before  I  go  into  Stafford¬ 
shire.  I  am,  Madam, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  beg  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Griffiths.  I  always  write  in  a  hurry,  and  mean 
only  to  give  you  my  feelings,  not  a  regular  critique. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  JAMES  LOVE. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  June  30th,  ]  767. 

As  it  was  neither  so  late  in  the  day  when  we  last  met,  that  we  could  be  supposed 
to  be  drunk,  nor  so  early  in  the  morning  to  be  half  asleep,  I  cannot  for  my  life  account 


D A V7 1 D  GARRICK. 


261 


for  this  very  strange  mistake  between  us.  It  is  most  certain  that  I  have  very  much 
misunderstood  you ;  but  that  I  may  have  no  more  trouble,  as  you  say,  with  this  or 
any  other  disagreeable  business  that  does  not  belong  to  me,  I  must  desire  you  never 
more  to  let  me  hear  of  it  in  any  shape  whatsoever. 

I  am  your  most  obedient  servant, 

1).  Garrick. 

1  believe  that  there  are  other  people  who  have  misunderstood  you  about  this 
matter,  as  well  as  your  humble  servant. 


MR.  J.  REED  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sun-Tavern  fields,  June  16th,  1767. 

I  have  advised  with  some  friends  concerning  the  enclosed  letters,  and  they  are 
unanimously  of  opinion  that  it  would  be  proper  to  lay  them  before  Mr.  Garrick.  I 
therefore  hope  Mr.  Garrick  will  excuse  the  freedom  of  the  present  address.  Though 
anonymous  letters  seldom  deserve  any  notice,  yet,  as  a  strain  of  sincerity  seems  to 
run  through  the  enclosed,  I  have  thought  fit  to  answer  them.  I  should  hardly  have 
answered  the  first,  (as  it  has  a  greater  appearance  of  curiosity  to  learn  if  I  would  dis¬ 
pose  of  my  opera,  than  of  any  real  design  of  purchasing  it,)  if  the  reference  to  the 
clergyman  had  not  drawn  me  into  a  kind  of  belief  that  the  writer  was  sincere.  The 
second  letter,  indeed,  comes  so  much  to  the  point,  that  one  can  hardly  doubt  the 
writer’s  being  in  earnest. 

I  could  therefore  wish,  my  good  Sir,  you  would  favour  me  with  your  advice.  As 
I  have  already  suffered  by  theatrical  anticipation,  I  am  not  in  the  present  case  with¬ 
out  my  fears.  A  burnt  child  will  naturally  dread  the  fire.  Could  I  entirely  divest 
myself  of  the  suspicions  of  jockeyship,  I  should  not  have  troubled  you  with  this  ap¬ 
plication  ;  but  as  an  opera  may  be  easily  cooked  up  on  the  same  subject,  I  hope  you 
will  excuse  the  freedom  of  laying  my  case  before  you. 

Be  not,  therefore,  my  dear  Sir,  offended,  if  I  should  entreat  you  to  produce  my 
opera  at  your  house  the  next  winter.  The  only  certainty  of  preventing  all  anticipa¬ 
tion  will  be  a  timely  exhibition  of  the  piece.  This  would  remove  every  fear,  and 
secure  to  me  the  fruits  of  my  dramatic  labours.  To  a  person  of  my  finances,  the  loss 
of  such  a  sum  as  might  be  gained  by  a  successful  comic  opera,  is  a  very  serious  affair. 

I  hope,  therefore,  my  good  friend  Mr  Garrick  will  not  take  amiss  my  earnest  re¬ 
quest  for  the  representation  of  “  Tom  Jones”*  the  next  season  ;  which  favour  1 
would  by  no  means  solicit  of  you,  were  it  not  for  the  reasons  hinted  at  in  the  en¬ 
closed  letters. 

If,  Sir,  you  will  obligingly  favour  me  in  this  particular,  I  should  be  glad  to  con- 


*  “  Tom  Jones.”  It  was  acted  at  the  other  theatre  in  the  year  1769. —  Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


2(>2 

suit  with  you  on  a  proper  person  for  compiling  the  music.  At  the  recommendation 
of  my  friend  Dr.  Sharp,  I  applied  above  a  fortnight  ago  to  his  musical  acquaintance 
Mr.  Simpson,  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  for  that  purpose.  Mr.  Simpson  gave  me 
some  hopes  of  undertaking  it ;  but  I  find  Mr.  Beard  hath  advised  him  not  to  meddle 
with  it,  for  fear  of  giving  offence  to  the  new  managers ;  wherefore  I  cannot  prevail 
on  him  to  engage  in  the  affair,  unless  I  will  give  him  my  promise  of  offering  the 
piece  to  the  new  house,  which  1  have  told  him  I  could  not  agree  to,  as  I  was  in  hopes 
of  your  playing  it  the  season  after  the  next.  He  has,  however,  very  warmly  recom¬ 
mended  his  friend  Mr.  Toms,  (the  compiler  of  the  music  for  “  Love  in  a  Village,”) 
with  whom  I  had  an  interview  last  week  at  Vauxhall.  After  some  talk  on  the  opera, 
1  told  Mr.  Toms  I  was  determined  not  to  take  any  step  in  the  affair  without  pre¬ 
viously  consulting  you.  In  the  course  of  our  conversation,  Mr.  Toms  informed  me, 
(which  I  had  no  conception  of,)  that  it  woidd  be  necessary  to  cast  the  characters  be¬ 
fore  the  songs  are  adapted  to  music,  as  some  airs  would  suit  one  performer  much 
better  than  they  would  suit  another  in  the  same  character.  If  I  knew  when  you 
would  be  in  town,  I  should  do  myself  the  honour  of  waiting  on  you.  In  the  mean 
time,  if  you  will  kindly  vouchsafe  me  a  line,  I  shall  esteem  it  an  addition  to  the 
favours  already  done  to, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Joseph  Reed. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LADY  CAMDEN. 

MADAM,  Ju«e  17th,  1767. 

I  find  I  was  mistaken  in  a  few  circumstances  relating  to  Mr.  Beighton.  I  sent 
him  a  copy  of  what  I  had  said  about  him  to  your  Ladyship,  and  the  good  man  has 
sent  me  the  inclosed  answer.  I  wish  it  had  not  been  so  long,  but  age  is  talkative, 
and  he  is  willing  I  should  be  acquainted  with  every  circumstance  of  his  story,  for  he 
would  not  be  guilty  of  a  falsehood  for  a  bishoprick.  I  should  not  have  been  imper¬ 
tinent  a  second  time,  had  not  I  made  the  mistakes  I  mentioned.  I  hope  your  Lady¬ 
ship  will  excuse  me  once  more.  I  should  not  indeed  have  been  so  importunate,  had 
not  my  friend  been  so  distressed. 

Mrs.  Garrick  presents  her  respects  to  your  Ladyship. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most,  &c.  &c. 

D.  G. 

I  have  promised  to  take  Mr.  Beighton  to  the  Duchess  of  Portland  next  Monday 
at  Bulstrode  ;  she  is  his  friend,  but - 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


263 


LADY  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s- inn-fields,  June  22,  1767. 

I  communicated  to  my  Lord  the  contents  of  yours  and  Mr.  Beighton’s  letter, 
and  he  begs  I  would  inform  you  that  it  would  give  him  infinite  pleasure  to  have 
it  in  his  power  to  give  any  addition  to  Mr.  Beighton’s  happiness.  Though  unknown 
to  him,  your  recommendation  would  have  great  weight  without  the  knowledge  of 
the  hard  fortune  Mr.  Beighton  has  met  with :  he  only  wishes  for  a  quick  opportu¬ 
nity,  which  must  depend  on  chance ;  for  he  concludes  that  it  would  be  a  mortifying 
thing  to  Mr.  Beighton  not  to  have  a  living  within  [a  short]  distance  of  his  present 
habitation.  I  never  read  a  letter  better  wrote  than  Mr.  Beighton’s,  and  we  are  all 
quite  anxious  for  the  good  old  man.  I  hope  it  is  no  sin  to  wish  an  unknown  person 
removed  to  a  better  place  near  Egham,  for  I  cannot  help  it  for  my  life.  I  beg  my 
best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  should  have  answered  your  letter  sooner,  but 
had  not  any  opportunity  till  yesterday  of  showing  it  to  my  Lord,  he  having  this 
last  week  been  so  much  involved  in  business  that  I  have  scarce  seen  him.  I  beg 
you  would  believe  me  to  be 

Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

E.  Camden. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LADY  CAMDEN. 

madam,  June  27th,  1767. 

Mr.  Beighton  and  I  must  once  more  beg  leave  to  return  your  Ladyship  our 
most  grateful  acknowledgments  for  your  humane  and  gracious  offices  with  my  Lord 
Chancellor. 

The  good  man  happened  to  dine  with  me  at  Hampton  when  I  had  the  honour 
of  receiving  your  Ladyship’s  letter.  He  coidd  not  refrain  from  tears  of  joy,  and 
desired  me  to  assure  your  Ladyship  that  whatever  might  be  his  future  fortune,  he 
shall  never  forget  the  obligations  which  he  is  under  to  your  kindness.  Mrs.  Garrick 
presents  her  respects  with  mine  to  your  Ladyship,  my  Lord,  and  the  young  ladies. 


MR.  G.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  BROTHER,  July  5th,  1767. 

It  is  with  the  greatest  reluctance  that  1  make  this  application  to  you,  for  nothing- 
gives  me  so  much  uneasiness  as  to  think  that  I  am  the  least  troublesome.  My  allow¬ 
ance  from  the  theatre  is  200/.  out  of  which  I  pay  for  stamps,  engrossments,  &c.  up¬ 
wards  of  50/.  So  that  there  remains  clear  150/.  which  with  your  kind  allowance 
makes  250/.  My  boys’  bare  schooling  costs  me  upwards  of  120/.  So  that  there 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


2(>4 


remains  130/.  clear,  out  of  which  1  pay  for  the  boys  more  than  40/.  for  clothes,  shirts, 
&c.  &c.  which  reduces  the  above  to  90/.  This  is  what  remains  to  maintain  myself 
and  the  rest  of  my  family,  and  to  find  us  in  clothes  and  every  other  necessary.  I 
mention  these  particulars  by  way  of  apology,  and  that  you  may  in  some  measure 
account  for  this  application,  and  at  a  time  when  every  thing  is  so  very  dear  with 
regard  to  housekeeping.  If  you  will  therefore  be  so  good  as  to  lend  me  two  hundred 
pounds,  I  will  give  you  an  order  upon  Mr.  Pritchard  to  receive  my  salary  at  the 
house  in  the  winter,  and  1  hope  before  next  winter  to  be  in  such  a  situation  as  to 
repay  without  any  inconvenience ;  for  I  am  obliged,  you  see,  to  think  of  altering 
my  state,  for  indeed  I  cannot  subsist  in  the  situation  I  am  in.  You  will,  I  hope, 
forgive  my  troubling  you  on  this  subject,  and  believe  me, 

Yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

George  Garrick. 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  June  27,  1767. 

I  have  at  length  got  a  comedy  ready  for  your  perusal,  which  has  at  least  the 
negative  merit  of  being  entirely  inoffensive ;  as  to  its  value  in  other  respects,  I  can 
only  say  that  you  will  be  the  best  judge,  and  that  whatever  alterations  you  may  think 
proper  to  advise,  I  have  too  just  a  deference  for  your  knowledge  of  literature  and 
life,  not  to  make  them  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness.  Do  not  therefore  consider  me, 
Sir,  as  one  of  those  writers  that  agonize  at  every  pore,  when  they  are  told  that  an 
amendment  is  absolutely  necessary  in  their  productions.  On  the  contrary,  I  beg  you 
will  think  me  one  of  those  who  have  sense  enough  to  know  that  their  betters  by 
much  are  not  without  a  number  of  faults,  and  that  it  would  be  highly  to  their  credit 
if  they  were  more  willing  to  correct  them. 

I  was  just  sending  the  comedy  off  to  you,  Sir,  when  an  alteration  occurred  to  me 
that  shortened  the  first  act  no  less  than  ten  whole  sides,  and  occasioned  the  pastings 
which  you  will  find  in  one  or  two  places  of  that  act ;  they  are,  however,  legible,  and 
there  is  no  necessity  to  alter  the  number  of  the  pages  after  I  have  told  you  of  the 
amputation.  As  to  title,  there  is  time  enough  for  that,  should  you  think  the 
piece  any  Avay  calculated  to  succeed.  I  have  indeed  thought  of  a  title,  but  the  few 
friends  with  whom  I  consulted,  condemned  it  unanimously.  What  I  thought  of 
was,  “  Fortune  with  Eyes.”* 

I  have  nothing  to  add.  Sir,  unless  to  request  that  you  will  tell  me  as  soon  as  you 
can,  whether  I  am,  or  am  not,  an  incorrigible  blockhead  in  dramatic  literature.  Till  I 
have  your  answer,  you  will  easily  imagine  I  shall  experience  a  very  anxious  interval ; 

*  It  assumed  the  clearer  title  of  “  False  Delicacy,”  and  was  acted  the  year  following  at  Drury-lane 
Theatre.  It  was  translated  into  German,  French,  and  Portuguese,  and  had  the  most  brilliant  success.  A 
punster  during  the  run  of  it  said  that  it  was,  like  its  author,  “  as/a^-maker.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


265 


but  it  would  give  me  a  still  greater  degree  of  anxiety,  if  I  thought  you  put  yourself 
to  any  difficulty  to  gratify  the  impatience  of, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

H.  Kelly. 


THOMAS  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR.  SIR,  Liverpool,  July  24,  1767. 

I  have  seen  Mr.  Gibson  since  1  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  your  last  letter, 
the  necessary  parts  of  which  I  communicated  to  him.  His  answer  was,  that  he  was 
much  obliged  to  you  for  the  civility  used  on  the  occasion,  but  could  not  give  up  his 
opinion  as  to  your  intentions,  or  his  resolution  in  regard  to  Mrs.  Bennet.* 

As  to  the  “  Invasion,’’  I  think  that  it  would  be  proper  that  I  should  keep  my 
part,  and  Parsons  be  put  into  Snip.  Should  Yates  think  better  of  it,  and  take  the 
Covenant,  you  will  undoubtedly  choose  to  have  him  reinstated.  Parsons  has  played 
the  Harlequin  one  night  for  me  :  now  by  this  means,  should  sickness  or  any  acci¬ 
dent  befall  Yates  or  me,  you  will  be  at  a  certainty  ;  the  entertainment  need  not 
be  stopped,  as  he  will  be  then  ready  to  supply  the  place  of  either  of  us.  Am  I 
right  ? 

We  have  hitherto  gone  on  very  well  here.  Mattocks  and  wife  are  in  great  re¬ 
pute,  and  we  shall  make  a  good  season  of  it,  if  electioneering  does  not  put  a  disagree¬ 
able  spoke  in  the  wheel.  Here  is  like  to  be  a  strong  opposition,  and  most  of  the 
inhabitants  seem  at  present  on  the  verge  of  lunacy.  I  have  been  so  long  this  after¬ 
noon  obliged  to  attend  to  every  argument  pro  and  con,  that  I  have  hardly  time 
enough  before  the  curtain  goes  up  to  assure  you  that  I  am, 

Your  most  affectionate,  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thomas  King. 

I  beg,  Sir,  you  will  present  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


REV.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  London,  July,  1767. 

I  have  been  informed  by  some  persons  who  are,  or  pretend  to  be,  well  acquainted 
with  the  gentleman  you  are  now  with,  that  he  has,  by  the  most  uncommon  chance, 
so  contrived  as  to  unite  certain  qualities  that  seldom  meet  together,  and  to  join  great 
parts,  wit,  and  understanding,  to  an  equal  fund  of  generosity  and  benevolence  :  if  it 
be  really  so,  and  from  your  intimacy  with  him  I  am  inclined  to  believe  it,  he  is 


VOL.  I. 


* 


Mrs.  Bennet,  an  actress,  who  died  in  the  year  1791. 
2  A1 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


266 


certainly  a  very  extraordinary  character.  Now  as  I  love  to  make  every  body  happy 
as  far  as  lies  in  my  power,  I  have  just  now  thought  on  a  method,  and  l  expect  you 
will  thank  me  for  it,  of  promoting  your  friend’s  felicity  by  giving  him  an  opportunity 
of  doing  a  good-natured  action,  in  providing  for  a  poor  person  of  your  acquaintance 
with  a  wife  and  almost  five  children,  now  grazing  on  a  pitiful  college  living  at 
Thundridge. 

It  is  pretty  certain,  which  I  hope  you  will  not  deny,  that  “  The  E.  of  W.” *  is  an 
excellent  tragedy :  there  are,  however,  two  things  which  I  am  much  more  certain  of, 
even  than  this,  as  I  have  it  from  the  best  authority,  viz.  first,  that  his  Grace  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  will  not  refuse  Mr.  Rigby  any  thing  which  he  may  ask  of  him  ; 
and  secondly,  that  Mr.  Rigby  will  not  refuse  any  thing  which  Mr.  Garrick  shall 
think  proper  to  ask  of  him ;  the  only  doubt,  therefore,  remaining  is,  whether  Mr.  G. 
will  ask  Mr.  Rigby  to  serve  Mr.  F.  and  whether  in  that  case  Mr.  Rigby  will  ask 
the  D.  of  B.  the  same  question :  to  these  two  important  queries  you  will  be  so  kind 
as  to  send  me  an  answer  the  first  opportunity. 

I  have  not  the  honour  of  any  personal  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Rigby  ;  but  re¬ 
member,  which  I  believe  I  mentioned  to  you,  that  some  time  ago  he  was  casually  a 
hearer,  and  condescended  to  profess  himself  an  admirer  of  mine  in  the  pulpit,  (where, 
by  the  by,  admiration  was  all  I  ever  got  yet,)  so  that  I  have  no  right  to  apply  to 
him,  but  shall  rely  on  a  much  better  advocate  than  myself,  having  flattered  myself 
that  you  will  plead  my  cause  with  him. 

I  need  not  add  how  good  a  tragedy  you  may  then  expect  from  me, — such  a  one, 
I  assure  you,  as  shall  beat  “  W.”j~  as  the  jockeys  say,  all  hollow  ;  but  of  this  when  we 
meet :  in  the  mean  time,  wishing  you  and  Mrs.  G.  all  health  and  pleasure  in  the 
remainder  of  your  summer  tour, 

I  am.  Sir, 

Your  obliged  friend  and  humble  servant, 

Tho.  Francklin. 

P.  S.  His  Grace  of  B.  knows  me  well  by  name,  and  is,  I  believe,  inclined  to 
serve  me,  so  that  a  word  from  your  friend  in  due  season  might  be  of  infinite  service 
to  me :  I  shall  expect  the  favour  of  a  line  from  you  on  this  head  as  soon  as  is 
convenient. 


MR.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Battersea,  July  27th,  1 767. 

I  HAVE  put  into  your  brother’s  hand  with  this  letter  the  alteration  of  “  The 
Nonjuror,”  and  I  flatter  myself  it  is  not  ill  done,  because  I  have  adhered  as  strictlv 
as  possible  to  your  idea  of  what  it  should  be ;  and  with  the  assistance  of  Moliere,  I 


*  “  Earl  of  Warwick.” 


f  Whitehead,  the  author  of  “  The  Roman  Father.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


267 


think  I  have  made  it  a  clean,  laughable,  and  (what  in  my  opinion  is  no  small  excel¬ 
lence  in  one)  not  too  long  a  comedy  ;  though  I  must  observe  to  you,  that  you  will 
find  many  faults  from  my  amanuensis,  but  I  chose  to  let  them  remain  rather  than 
deface  the  copy. 

I  was  very  much  hurt  by  a  report  which  your  brother  mentioned  to  me,  that  Mr. 
Colman  offered  me  my  articles,  and  that  I  refused  to  accept  them  ;  I  assure  you,  it  is 
diametrically  opposite  to  truth.  When  we  met,  he  talked  to  me  as  supposing  them 
valid  and  in  full  force,  and  in  consequence  of  it,  desired  to  know  what  I  would  give 
them  next  winter.  I  told  him  that  I  had  been  with  you,  having  determined  with 
myself  to  get  rid  of  the  articles,  but  that  you  had  absolutely  refused  to  hear  of  any 
thing  of  mine,  or  the  music  of  a  piece  which  I  had  ready  and  desired  your  opinion 
of,  while  I  was  under  contract  with  them  ;  and  that  at  the  same  time  you  told  me 
you  did  not  think  it  would  be  just  or  honourable  in  me  to  break  my  articles  with 
them,  though  they  might  not  be  strictly  binding.  I  said  this,  because  I  found  Mr. 
Colman  entertained  some  little  jealousies  of  you,  which  I  know  to  be  totally  ground¬ 
less,  if  1  may  judge  by  the  manner  in  which  I  have  always  heard  you  talk  of  him  ; 
but  I  dare  swear  you  will  be  able  to  judge  of  this  matter  yourself.  I  dare  say  I 
shall  be  able  to  give  you  “  Inkle  and  Yarico,”  if  you  think  proper  to  accept  it,  and 
“  The  Hypocrite”  out  of  dispute,  if  I  have  done  it  to  your  mind.  I  shall  not 
hesitate  to  give  it  under  my  hand,  that  of  all  mankind,  my  inclination  leads  me  to 
be  employed  by  Mr.  Garrick,  while  any  trifles  of  mine  can  merit  his  attention ;  and 
I  shall  always  think  of  him  with  that  respect  and  affection,  which,  in  my  opinion, 
his  talents  and  his  goodness  entitle  him  to  from  all  the  world,  and  from  none  more 
than  Dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  grateful  servant, 

Is.  Bickerstaff. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  COLMAN. 


DEAR  COLMAN,  August  17,  1767. 

Mrs.  Lessingham  did  not  attend  Mr.  Lacy’s  summons  at  our  meeting  last 
week  ;  she  sent  an  excuse  that  her  business  at  Richmond  prevented  her.  I  do  not 
believe  that  he  has  made  her  an  offer  of  four  pounds  a  week ;  she  has  demanded  that 
sum,  though  she  was  engaged  to  us  for  less.  I  am  resolved  not  to  agree  to  her  pro¬ 
posals  ;  the  matter  is  left  to  Chamberlain,  who  is  now  in  Oxfordshire,  and  is  much 
her  friend.  I  am  quite  tired  of  this  trouble  about  nothing. 

I  must  desire  to  see  you  as  soon  as  you  come  to  town,  upon  a  matter  that  has 
given  me  some  uneasiness,  but  you  can  set  all  right  again. 

I  am,  dear  Colman,  most  truly  your  friend  and  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


9  vi  § 

ill  >w 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


2()8 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Middle  Temple,  Sept.  1,  1767. 

My  worthy  friend  BickerstafF  having  informed  me  on  Saturday,  that  you  thought 
I  had  agreed  to  let  you  see  the  plan  of  my  thing  before  I  got  it  transcribed,  I 
sat  down  immediately  to  write  it,  which  indeed  I  would  have  done  long  before  this, 
but  that  I  was  fearful  of  teazing  you  with  the  concerns  of  a  stranger,  at  a  time 
when  I  knew  you  found  it  difficult  enough  to  mind  the  interest  of  your  friends. 
Your  own  generosity  has  drawn  this  trouble  on  you,  and  your  own  good  sense  will 
lead  you  to  be  as  kindly  candid  with  the  present  sketch,  as  you  were  formerly  with 
the  despicable  stuff  which  you  took  so  much  trouble  to  inspect.  I  have  in  this 
plan  begun  at  the  second  act,  supposing  that  by  this  time  you  may  have  cast  your  eyes 
over  the  first.  Submitting  it  entirely  to  your  opinion,  which  I  know  to  be  the  best 
in  England,  and  resolving  to  be  guided  by  that  opinion  implicitly,  I  now  take  the 
liberty  of  thanking  you  most  heartily  for  the  politeness  and  good  nature  which  I 
have  received  at  your  hands;  and  let  the  fate  of  this  production  be  what  it  may, 
whether  you  totally  reject,  or  warmly  encourage  it,  the  author  will  always  with 
the  utmost  sincerity  and  gratitude  acknowledge  that  he  is, 

Dear  Sir,  your  very  great  admirer,  and  very  humble  servant, 

Hugh  Kelly. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Hyde-street,  Sept.  7th,  1767. 

I  received  y oar  favour  at  Hartingfordbury  on  Friday  last,  and  am  sorry  to 
tell  you,  that  a  hint  contained  in  it  soon  rendered  me  a  very  unfit  companion  for 
my  lively  and  agreeable  hostess. 

I  really,  Sir,  cannot  express  the  concern  I  felt  at  your  seeming  intention  of 
postponing  the  “Pere  de  Famille”  till  another  season.  I  am  perfectly  convinced 
of  the  great  advantages  it  would  receive  from  the  masterly  strokes  of  your  judi¬ 
cious  hand  :  but  alas,  Sir  !  my  situation  will  not  admit  of  delay.  Adversity  does 
still  neglect  that  caution  to  which  prosperity  is  bound  ;  we  are  not  ourselves  when 
pressed  by  deep  distress — both  mind  and  body  suffer.  This  may  be  a  bad  parody,* 
but  it  is  too  certainly  matter  of  fact.  I  must  therefore  entreat  you,  by  the  regard 

*  The  reader  shall  at  least  be  in  a  state  to  judge — a  passage  of  Shakspeare’s  finest  tragedy  can  never 
burthen  any  page. — 

“  Infirmity  doth  still  neglect  all  office, 

Whereto  our  health  is  bound  ;  we’re  not  ourselves, 

When  Nature,  being  oppress’d,  commands  the  mind 
To  suffer  with  the  body.” — King  Lear. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


269 


you  have  been  so  good  as  to  profess  for  me,  that  you  will  consent  to  bring  out  the 
‘  Pere  de  Famille”  this  next  winter. 

What  I  said  to  you  in  my  letter  to  Litchfield  was,  that  “  if  Ave  could  not  fix  upon 
some  plan,  I  must  give  up  all  thoughts  of  the  comic  muse  for  this  year,  and  return  to 
Madame  Melpomene,”  by  which  I  meant  that  I  should  set  about  finishing  my  tra¬ 
gedy  :  this,  Sir,  I  haAye  neglected,  and  in  short  every  thing  else,  and  am  in  truth  most 
unhappily  circumstanced,  if  that  extreme  good  nature,  Avhicli  I  lmTe  already  expe¬ 
rienced,  does  not  incline  you  to  comply  with  my  request. 

An  accidental  complaint  in  my  left  eye  has  prevented  my  writing  Avliile  I  was  in 
the  country,  but  neither  that  nor  any  thing  else  shall  interfere  Avith  my  finishing  the 
comedy,  if  you  are  so  good  as  to  indulge  my  suit. 

Mrs.  Cholmondely  by  me  presents  her  compliments,  and  Avould  have  joined  in  my 
request,  but  her  thorough  knoAvledge  of  your  heart  made  her  think  her  application 
unnecessary.  I  most  earnestly  entreat  the  favour  of  a  line  from  you  as  soon  as  pos¬ 
sible,  and  that  you  Avill  believe  me,  with  the  sincerest  esteem, 

Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  GRIFFITH. 


MADAM,  London,  Sept.  10th,  1767. 

Your  letter  found  me  at  Hampton,  and  indeed  has  a  little  surprised  me.  I  am 
truly  sorry  that  what  I  meant  most  kindly  should  make  you  unfit  to  enjoy  any 
pleasure  in  your  poAver. 

I  am  sure  Mrs.  Griffith  would  not  wish,  for  her  own  sake  as  Avell  as  mine,  to 
produce  a  performance  too  hastily  upon  Drury-lane  Theatre.  I  will  beg  leave  to  say, 
that  Mrs.  Griffith  is  bound  to  be  careful,  and  \Tery  careful,  of  her  next  theatrical 
production.  It  may  be  coiwenient  in  one  sense  to  hurry  on  a  play,  but  I  am  sure  it 
will  be  most  imprudent  to  think  of  giving  the  “  P£re  de  Famille”  without  the 
greatest  assurance  of  success  ;  and  if  you  Avill  please  to  finish  the  play  in  question  as 
soon  as  you  can,  I  \v ill  bring  it  out  the  moment  it  is  in  my  poAver,  Avith  credit  to  the 
author  and  the  managers.  I  cannot  say  more ;  I  would  not,  for  her  sake,  promise 
more.  You  may  depend  upon  its  being  acted  in  this  season  or  the  next,  and  you 
may  also  depend  upon  selling  the  copy  of  it  directly,  upon  my  assuring  the  hook- 
seller  that  I  had  received  it ;  nay,  I  will  find  the  bookseller  if  necessary.  Indeed, 
Madam,  this  is  the  utmost  in  my  power,  and  you  would  not  consider  your  oavu 
interest  to  Avish  to  exact  more  from  me.  I  hope  you  will  Aery  seriously  consider 
this,  and  not  imagine  that  I  have  any  vanity  in  thinking  that  the  strokes  of  my 
hand  are  of  much  consequence ;  but  1  flatter  myself  that  my  long  experience  in 


270 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


these  matters,  may,  in  a  friendly  manner,  be  of  some  little  service  to  your  interest 
and  reputation. 

I  am,  most  truly,  Madam, 

Your  sincere  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 

Pray  present  my  respects  to  the  lady  and  gentleman  of  the  house. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  DAVID,  Oct.  27,  1767. 

I  begin  not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  dribblets  of  thin  potations  that  Keate  affords 
me  now  and  then  of  your  health  and  Madam’s.  There  is  more  comfort  in  honest 
Richard  \Yarner,  than  in  him  ;  who  sawr  you  last  the  last  year,  and  first  this 
season  with  the  true  original  spirit  of  Ranger  upon  you.  It  will  comfort  the  old 
Stage-monger  to  have  a  line  from  your  original  self  upon  you  and  your  doings, 
and  your  future  doings.  An  old  hunter  commodities  up  his  ears,  (as  the  old  spinster 
w'orded  it,)  if  he  but  bears  a  single  hound  lifting  up  his  throat ;  and  enjoys  the  old 
stuff,  though  lie  has  never  a  leg  to  his  body. 

“  Old  John  again  halloos  the  hare, 

And  turns  her  in  his  wicker  chair.” 

Now  you  talk  of  a  leg,  I  have  two  -wooden  ones,  as  long  almost  as  my  body, 
which  I  clap  on  occasionally  to  my  shoulders,  and  feague  it  away ,  i  faith  !  You 
would  tremble,  if  you  saw  me,  at  the  thoughts  of  what  might  have  happened  when 
I  peppered  your  peeper  at  Bath.  I  think  I  am  improved  in  my  style,  since  we  met 
last. 

To  return  therefore — I  have  gotten  a  nomination  of  our  poor  widow’s  son  into 
Christ  Church  Hospital  next  Easter,  from  no  less  a  man  than  his  Grace  of  Bedford 
—supposing  she  tells  me  truly,  (which  I  still  scarce  believe,)  that  Clergy-orphans 
are  actually  preferred  to  freemen’s  sons  of  the  city.  If  so,  the  hospital  -would  be 
filled  with  none  else  by  this  time.  I  forget  whether  I  told  you  the  fate  of  all  your 
letters  to  her  father.  I  mentioned  gently  your  deske,  that  proper  care  might  be 
taken  that  they  might  not  get  into  other  hands,  and  a  bad  use  be  made  of  them  : 
and  the  next  time  I  saw  her,  she  told  me  she  had  burned  them  all — a  fate  they 
did  not  deserve,  as  she  added — a  foolish  woman  ! — Now  a  qu.  arises  wdiether  your 
mind  is  more  distressed,  or  more  at  ease?  Be  comforted:  though  they  -were  vour 
own  children,  they  had  better  be  dead  than  a  disgrace  to  you.  Rest  their  souls ! 
The  lady  is  gone  to  live  at  Salisbury,  where,  it  seems,  lodging  is  more  reasonable, 
i.  e.  wnere  she  has  yet  no  duns. 

Talk  to  me  of  plays,  and  players,  and  theatres  and  things.  What  say  you  of 
Mrs.  Dancer?  A  gemman ,  who  is  (I  think)  no  great  judge,  a  correspondent,  the 
first  letter  of  whose  name  is  Warner ,  says  she  is  nulli  secunda  in  Mrs.  Sigismunda. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


271 


Doctors  differ,  and  in  nothing  so  much  as  acting.  Iveate  says  nay.  New  plays  you 
have :  now  I,  who  was  ever  the  support  of  your  stage,  will  recommend  some  old 
ones — first,  the  droppings  of  Shakspeare’s  tap.  What  is  become  of  “  Timothy  At¬ 
kins  or  the  Man  Eater  ?”*  A  good  drip,  master  Gar.  “  Julius  Caesar” — Barry  a 
tolerable  Cassius  ;f  Holland  a  good  haranguing  Anthony  ;  Love  an  excellent  Casca, 
(but  not  spliced  with  Titinius,  as  it  used  to  be  acted) ;  and  the  philosophical  Brutus, 
the  Garrick — but  you  must  pare  your  nails  on  a  Monday  morning  fasting,  without 
thinking  upon  a  white  fox’s  tail,  i.  e.  you  must  never  turn  a  thought  upon  Ra- 
gandjaw,  in  “  The  Parson’s  Theatrical  Garret.”  What  think  you  of  playing  Iago, 
to  Barry’s  Othello?  where,  though  you  may  see  faults,  he  is  generally  admired. 
The  town  has  for  years  sighed  to  see  Volpone  at  Drury-lane.  “  The  Voluptuary 
Magnifico”  would  afford  good  acting,  and  in  a  style  you  have  not  been  seen  in,  espe¬ 
cially  varied  with  “  The  Mountebank,”  for  in  Mosca  you  do  not  like  the  business, 
any  more  than  in  Truewit,  as  I  have  heard  you  say.  “  Bessus”  I  cannot  say  I  have 
much  hopes  of,  though  you  once  resolved  to  revive  it,  the  other  parts  are  so  outree. 
Dixi. 

Now  you  must  know,  that  we  and  our  royal  court  move  next  week  to  St.  Cross, 
near  Winchester,  for  the  winter.  And  now  pray,  Sir,  and  Madam,  how  came  you 
not  to  come  near  my  pudclen  at  Southampton  as  you  promised  ?  I  hope  your  rib  is 
in  better  plight  than  mine,  whose  soul  and  spirit,  that  used  to  aspire  to  the  regions 
of  mirth  and  joy,  are  now  even  in  her  shoes.  Where  must  my  heart  be  then  ? 

Her  good  wishes  attend  her  and  you,  with  those  of,  dear  David, 

Your  affectionate  Fubzy, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  W.  WHITEHEAD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Middleton  Park,  Nov.  1st,  1767. 

I  confess  that  I  have  behaved  abominably,  but  I  have  had  a  thousand  interrup¬ 
tions  during  the  summer,  besides  my  general  disinclination  to  do  any  thing  in  the 
poetical  way.  The  farce,  however,  such  as  it  is,  is  finished,  and  I  will  let  you  have 
it  as  soon  as  I  can  write  it  over ;  but,  if  you  make  use  of  it,  it  must  not  be  declared 
as  mine.  An  hour  or  two  will  complete  my  alterations  of  “  The  Roman  Father,” 
and  those  two  you  shall  have.  But  I  beg  nothing  of  mine  may  at  all  interrupt  your 
other  schemes  for  the  public.  The  first  four  acts  of  “  The  R.  F.”  will  stand  as  they 
did,  with  only  the  change  of  a  few  lines  or  words  in  particular  places.  The  lady  will 
be  entirely  left  out  of  the  fifth  act,  any  more  than  as  a  handsome  corpse. 

I  know  of  no  alterations  in  your  part  in  the  first  four  acts,  but  the  trifling  one 

*  Slang  for  Timon  of  Athens  the  Mun-hater. 

t  Surely  he  could  not  be  serious  in  proposing  the  towering  Barry  for  Cassius — the  philosophy  of  Brutus 
himself  could  not  have  made  Garrick  endure  such  a  contrast.  I  should  have  assigned  Antony  to  the 
pathetic  Barry. — Ed. 


272 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


of  changing  woes  to  sorrows,  in  the  last  line  of  the  second  act,  to  avoid  the  rhime;  and 
I  should  be  glad  to  have  your  concluding  speech  of  the  third  act  run  thus : 

- “  Tell  not  me, 

What’s  Rome  to  me?  Rome  may  excuse  her  traitor; — 

But  I,  the  guardian  of  my  house’s  honour, 

Will  judge,  will  punish.  Pray  you  lead  me  forth; 

I  would  have  air — But  grant  me  strength,  kind  Gods, 

To  do  this  act  of  justice,  and  I  ’ll  own, 

Whate’er  ’gainst  Rome  your  awful  wills  determine, 

To  me  ye  still  are  just — are  merciful !” 

It  will  probably  not  be  a  great  while  now  before  I  am  in  town.  I  beg  my  best  com¬ 
pliments  may  be  made  acceptable  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Whitehead. 

P.  S.  A  line  sent  to  Lord  Jersey’s,  in  Grosvenor  Square,  will  always  find  me. 


LORD  POMFRET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Sjr?  Sunbury,  Nov.  8th,  1767. 

Your  letter  informs  me  that  you  have  been  many  times  at  Sunbury,  amongst 
which  I  should  have  been  glad  to  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  have  seen  you  at  my 
house.  I  once  called  at  yours,  in  return  to  a  visit  you  made  me,  because  I  wished  to 
know  if  any  part  of  the  estate  would  have  been  agreeable  to  you,  as  your  brother, 
when  he  delivered  me  Lord  Monson’s  writings,  never  mentioned  a  word  about  it, 
and  I  would  not  grant  a  lease  of  it  to  Blanchard  till  I  heard  you  were  gone  abroad, 
in  expectation  of  your  desires.  This  estate  has  proved  a  very  dear  bargain  to  me ; 
however  (a  very  few  acres  excepted  which  border  my  land  at  Hampton),  I  shall  have 
a  great  pleasure  in  accommodating  you,  and  if  your  intention  is  to  extend  your 
property  in  that  parish,  I  have  more  land  there,  of  which  you  shall  have  the  first 
refusal.  I  shall  come  soon  to  town,  and  whenever  it  suits  your  conveniency,  shall  be 
glad  to  show  you  with  how  much  sincerity  I  subscribe  myself, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Pomfret. 


MR.  WILKES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Le  Samedi,  9  Novembre,  1767. 

J  ai  connu  a  Paris  l’aimable,  le  charmant  Garrick,  j'ai  vu  a  Londres  le  grand,  le 
sublime  Garrick.  Je  remercie  Mr.  Ivitely  de  me  l’avoir  fait  connaitre.  Si  My  lord 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


273 


Maire  ne  s’emparoit  pas  de  nous  pour  toute  la  journee,  si  nous  n’allions  pas  diner  et 
danser  a  Guildhall,  j’aurai  vole  dans  les  bras  de  Mr.  Kitely,  et  je  lui  aurois  demande 
des  nouvelles  de  sa  nuit,  et  comment  il  se  trouve  de  son  raccommodement  avec  sa 
femme.  Je  n’oublierai  jamais  cette  journee  qui  m’a  appris  que  1’art  le  plus  profond, 
la  metaphysique  la  plus  subtile,  peut  s’allier  avec  le  naturel  le  plus  sublime.* 


DR.  WARNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Barnet,  Nov.  11th,  1767. 

I  take  the  liberty  to  send  you  the  enclosed  papers,  and  to  inform  you  that  I  was 
happy  enough,  after  great  pains  and  application,  to  establish  a  Society"  for  the  purpose 
intended  by  the  letter,  on  the  plan  with  which  it  is  accompanied.  Because,  to  oblige 
some  of  the  great  Dons,  the  majority,  though  six  to  one,  admitted  a  charitable  fund 
also,  in  hopes  to  bring  them  in.  But  as  they  could  not  carry  the  whole  scheme  in 
their  own  way,  they  have  been  so  far  from  concurring  in  the  great  design,  that,  one 
of  them  only  excepted,  they  have  never  contributed  a  shilling  to  the  support  of  the 
fund  they  had  contended  for.  As  I  had  the  honour  to  be  the  founder  of  this  Society", 
you  will  not  wonder  that  I  am  particularly  solicitous  for  its  success  ;  and  as  I  am 
much  too  lame  to  go  to  town  to  wait  on  you,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  this  application 
for  your  assistance  in  its  infancy,  by  giving  the  Society  a  benefit  play  some  time  be¬ 
fore  Christmas,  in  which  you  will  act  yourself.  I  shall  not  assume  the  preacher  to 
Mr.  Garrick  to  induce  him  to  an  act  of  charity,  nor  shall  I  take  the  part  of  a  man  of 
the  world,  in  reminding  him  of  the  good  policy"  of  this  particular  piece  of  respect  to 
such  a  body  of  men  as  the  clergy  of  the  metropolis.  You  know  every  thing  that  I 
can  suggest  as  well  as  I  do ;  and  as  I  have  no  sort  of  claim  to  any  favour  from  you, 
it  would  be  impertinent  in  me  to  add — though  it  is  very"  true— that  your  compliance 
with  this  application  would  greatly  oblige, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Feud.  Warner. 


MR.  J.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Somerset-yard,  Nov.  1 1th,  1 767. 

I  did  myself  the  pleasure  to  wait  upon  you  three  times  within  these  few  days, 
but  could  not  be  so  happy  as  to  see  you.  You  remember  that  you  and  I  had  some 
discourse,  about  a  fortnight  ago,  concerning  Mr.  Murphy;  and  there  was  so  much  of 
that  worth  and  good-nature,  which  to  me  has  ever  marked  your  character,  in  what 
you  then  said  of  that  gentleman,  that  I  cannot  help  letting  you  know  that  he  thinks 

*  This  card  was  from  Wilkes,  who  had  come  over  to  embarrass  the  Government.  He  had  seen  Garrick 
in  Kitely,  in  Ben  Jonson’s  delightful  comedy  of  “  Every  Man  in  his  Humour.” — Ed. 

2  N 


VOL.  I. 


274 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  talks  with  the  same  kindness  of  you  ;  and  that  I  am  authorized  by  himself  to 
say,  that  he  wishes  for  a  handsome  opportunity  to  put  an  end  to  all  little  quarrels 
that  may  have  happened  between  you. 

I  should  be  extremely  glad  to  be  an  humble  instrument  in  bringing  two  such 
men  again  together ;  and  as  you  have  promised  to  honour  my  hovel  one  night  or  other 
after  play,  I  should  be  very  glad  to  have  you,  Mr.  Murphy,  and  Mr.  Johnson  there 
together,  some  night  next  week,  by  which  time  I  shall  have  his  bust  set  up  in  my 
room,  who,  like  Shakspeare  to  you,  is  the  God  of  my  idolatry.  A  line  in  answer  will 
much  oblige, 

My  dear  Sir,  your  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

J.  lllCKERSTAFF. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  B1CKERSTAFF. 

DEAR  BICKERSTAFF,  Nov.  1 1,  1767. 

You  are  a  good  Christian — I  shall  with  the  greatest  pleasure  meet  the  company 
you  mention  at  your  house.  As  I  am  almost  upon  my  theatrical  death-bed,  I  wish 
to  die  in  charity  and  good-will  with  all  men  of  merit,  and  with  none  more  so  (as  he 
wishes  it  too)  than  with  Air.  Murphy.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Most  truly  yours, 

*  D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Pray  let  us  meet  as  if  we  had  never  thought  unkindly  of  each  other. 


REV.  T.  FRANC  KLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Russel-street,  Covent-garden,  Saturday,  Nov.  13,  1767. 

Rev.  Mr.  Francklin’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick.  Mr.  Derrick  having 
informed  Mr.  Francklin  that  Mr.  Garrick  had  made  mention  of  him  as  the  supposed 
author  of  an  article  in  “The  Critical  Review”  for  April  last,  containing  “Remarks 
on  an  Essay  on  the  Writings  of  Pope,”  Mr.  Francklin  begs  leave  to  inform  Air. 
Garrick  that  he  is  not  the  author  of  that  article  in  the  Review.  Mr.  F.  had  already 
desired  Mr.  D.  to  acquaint  Mr.  G.  with  this  particular,  but  thought  proper  to  signify 
it  under  his  own  hand,  to  prevent  mistake  and  misrepresentation,  to  which  alone  Mr. 
F.  can  attribute  Mr.  G.’s  late  conduct  and  behaviour  to  him ;  as  he  is  satisfied  that  if 
Mr.  G.'s  ears  had  not  been  open  to  the  suggestions  of  malice  and  the  whispers  of 
ill-nature,  Mr.  F.  would  rather  have  been  esteemed  by  him  as  a  real  friend,  than 
suspected  as  a  concealed  enemy  ;  which,  whenever  Mr.  G.  shall  condescend  to  an 
explanatory  interview,  lie  may  be  fully  convinced  of :  in  the  mean  time  Mr.  F. 
desires  that  Mr.  G.  will  do  him  the  justice  to  suppose  him  incapable  of  uttering  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


275 


falsehood,  or  giving  a  secret  wound  to  the  character  and  reputation  of  any  man,  and 
hopes  that  he  may  expect  from  Mr.  G.  the  same  honour  and  the  same  sincerity. 
Mr.  F.  takes  this  opportunity  of  lamenting  the  loss  of  Mr.  G.’s  friendship,  as  he 
should  always  have  been  glad  of  connexion  with  men  of  distinguished  abilities ; 
and  as  he  is  not  conscious  to  himself  of  any  injury  done  or  affront  given  to  Mr.  G. 
except  by  a  few  unguarded  words  dropped  long  since  in  regard  to  “  Barbarossa,”  and 
which  he  had  hoped  were  long  since  forgotten,  he  cannot  but  acknowledge  himself 
both  sorry  and  surprised  at  the  continuance  of  Mr.  G.’s  ill-placed  and  ill-deserved 
resentment. 


MR.  J.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Somerset- yard,  Nov.  13,  1767. 

It  is  just  as  I  supposed  it  would  be  ; — but  you  know  mankind,  and  I  dare  swear 
you  think  with  me,  that  at  this  moment  the  writer  of  the  enclosed  letter  would  say 
as  much  in  your  praise,  as  his  indiscretion  made  him  ever  say  the  contrary.  I  wish 
I  could  say  that  he  receives  your  forgiveness  with  as  good  a  grace  as  you  let  him 
have  it.  Did  1  want  any  thing  to  make  me  think  better  of  you,  or  love  you  better, 
your  charming  behaviour  in  this  affair  would  make  me  do  it.  I  will  do  myself  the 
honour  to  drink  tea  with  you,  if  you  think  proper,  this  evening,  or  come  to  you  any 
time  after  dinner,  and  am,  till  then,  and  ever  after, 

Your  most  obliged  and  grateful  servant, 

J.  Bickerstaff. 


LORD  POMFRET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Sonbury,  Nov.  15,  1767. 

Y esterday  I  looked  over  my  land  in  Hampton,  and  desire  to  retain  for  myself 
only  eight  acres,  which  stand  upon  the  extremity  of  the  shot  called,  as  I  am 
informed,  Up  and  Down,  close  adjoining  to  Ivempton  Manor  and  Kempton  Park, 
and  one  acre  and  one  yard  land,  the  former  late  Monson’s,  the  latter  late  Osborn’s, 
they  being  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  me  as  brick  earth,  as  I  am  going  to  add 
much  building  to  my  house  and  premises.  The  remaining  land  belonging  to  me 
amounts  to  five-and-twenty  acres,  more  or  less,  and  are  at  your  service,  lying  in  the 
meadow,  and  the  best  shots  of  the  field. 

I  shall  not  detain  you  with  a  tedious  account  of  the  exorbitant  prices  I  have  been 
made  to  pay  for  them  :  a  man  of  judgment  informs  me  the  acres,  throughout  the 
whole  field,  are  twice  as  large  as  those  in  Kempton  and  Sunbury;  that  they  are  worth 
a  pound  an  acre,  and  thirty  years’  purchase.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Pomfret. 


2  n  2 


private  correspondence  of 


276 


DR.  WARNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Sir,  Barnet,  Nov.  19th,  1767. 

I  could  not  acknowledge  the  favour  of  your  letter  sooner  ;  because,  as  it  was  not 
directed  to  Dr.  Warner,  but  to  Mr.  Warner,  which  describes  my  son,  who  com¬ 
monly  lives  with  me,  and  he  not  returning  home  till  last  night,  the  mistake  was  not 
found  out  before. 

I  did  not  know  that  you  had  left  off  performing  for  any  benefit,  or  I  should  not 
have  made  such  a  request.  The  Charity,  of  which  I  sent  you  the  account,  has  not 
yet  had  a  benefit  at  Drury -lane  ;  neither  did  I  mean  to  ask  for  more  than  one,  to 
assist  it  whilst  it  was  in  its  infancy.  I  should  hope  that  the  nature  of  it  would 
recommend  it  to  the  managers  as  a  charity ;  and  1  imagine  that  such  a  piece  of 
respect  to  the  clergy  of  the  metropolis,  without  any  other  application  than  what  I, 
who  was  the  founder  of  the  society,  make  to  Mr.  Garrick,  would  not  be  thrown  away, 
considered  in  another  view.  1  mentioned  before  Christmas,  because  that  is  our 
annual  audit ;  but  benefactions  may  be  made  to  it  at  any  time  ;  and  if  you  will  be 
so  good  as  to  communicate  this  application  to  the  other  managers,  and  you  will  grant 
us  a  benefit,  we  will  thankfully  accept  it  at  your  own  time,  and  shall  think  ourselves 
much  obliged  to  you. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you,  that  I  am  with  great  respect, 

Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 
Ferd.  Warner. 


MR.  G.  S.  CAREY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Nov.  20th,  1767. 

I  should  not  have  troubled  you  with  this,  but  I  think  it  a  duty  incumbent  on 
me  to  prevent  your  having  a  worse  opinion  of  me  than  I  really  deserve.  I  have 
been  more  than  once  accused  of  being'  the  author  of  the  “  Theatrical  Monitor,”  and 
I  have  reason  to  think  that  the  report  is  believed  by  many.  I  have  taken  this  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  assure  you,  Sir,  that  I  neither  am,  nor  do  I  know,  the  author ;  but  have  as 
great  a  contempt  for  him,  be  he  who  he  will,  as  you  can  have ;  and  had  rather  they 
had  laid  the  history  of  Tom  Hickathrift  to  my  charge,  than  to  say  I  was  the  author 
of  “  The  Theatrical  Monitor for  in  my  opinion,  there  was  never  published  any 
thing  more  puerile,  invidious,  and  exceptionable  :  nor  did  I  ever  write  any  thing  in 
my  life  against  any  performer  or  theatre,  but  that  of  the  Haymarket.  1  would  not 
have  you  think,  Sir,  I  want  to  ask  any  favours  by  this  declaration,  for  1  am  not  so 
much  in  need  of  them  as  I  have  been ;  but  give  me  leave  to  make  this  one  acknow- 
lodgment,  that  I  never  repented  me  of  any  thing  so  much  as  losing  your  regard  and 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


277 


friendship ;  and  must  confess  I  stand  convicted  of  the  greatest  piece  of  ingratitude, 
when  I  remember  the  voluntary  present  that  you  made  me  about  two  years  ago.  1 
have  nothing  to  say  in  my  own  behalf  but  my  being  rashly  urged  to  it  by  a  series 
of  disappointments  ;  and  to  soften  the  charge  of  ingratitude,  I  am  not  ashamed  to 
beg  your  pardon,  and  believe  me,  so  far  am  I  from  being  inclined  to  abuse  you,  Sir, 
that  I  shall  think  it  my  duty  to  employ  my  poor  pen  as  an  advocate  whenever  I  see 
your  character  attacked. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  humble  servant, 

Geo.  Saville  Carey.* 

P.  S.  Sir,  as  you  are  going  to  decline  your  theatrical  connections,  you  cannot 
think  this  acknowledgment  precedes  some  other  application,  as  I  shall  never  more 
think  myself  entitled  to  your  future  favour  or  regard. 

J  J  O 


MR.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK 

DEAR  SIR,  Somerset  Yard,  20t’n  Nov.  1767. 

Mr.  Murphy  left  this  tragedy  with  me  last  night,  with  a  desire  that  it  should  be 
laid  before  you.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  be  able  to  convey  to  you  the  strength 
of  his  expressions,  but  I  will  endeavour  to  set  down  his  own  words.  This  play  was 
proposed  to  be  read  by  the  managers  of  Covent  Garden,  but  he  rejected  it :  he  has 
long  and  ardently  wished  for  a  reconciliation  with  you,  and  your  consenting  to  it, 
has  given  him  as  good  an  opinion  of  your  heart  as  he  always  had  of  your  judgment, 
which  in  theatrical  matters  he  thinks  infallible  ;  therefore  he  gladly  submits  his 
tragedy  to  your  perusal,  to  be  acted  or  rejected,  as  you  shall  think  it  deserves. 

He  is  far  from  wishing  to  impose  on  your  good-nature  a  mere  nine-night  play  ; 
and  should  you  not  like  this,  he  has  another  tragedy,  which  he  will  submit  to  your 
perusal  on  the  same  terms  ;  but  he  thinks  from  the  novelty  of  this  play,  which  he 
intends  to  call  “  The  Conquest  of  Peru,” — J  mean  the  novelty  of  the  personages — it 
will  be  more  likely  to  strike  than  “  Rhadamistus  and  Zenobia and,  in  my 
opinion,  there  are  three  good  characters  in  it  for  Mr.  Holland,  Mrs.  Dancer,  and  Mrs. 
Pritchard.  I  was  very  much  disappointed  at  not  seeing  your  name  in  the  papers 
this  day,  but  I  hope  in  God  you  are  better.  I  would  come  to  you,  but  am  afraid  of 
being  troublesome  ;  but  if  you  will  let  me  know,  should  you  be  confined,  when  you 
would  at  any  time  have  me  sit  an  hour  with  you,  you  will  always  find  at  your 
command, 

Dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

J.  Bickerstaff. 

*  Carey  took  the  lead  among  the  mimics,  from  his  being  able  to  give  no  faint  idea  of  even  female 
singers,  along  with  very  powerful  sketches  of  our  great  actors  He  lived  the  usual  life  of  such  humble 
retainers  of  the  theatre — getting  up  his  hopes  and  his  lectures  together  occasionally  ;  but  having  no  treasury 
to  resort  to  on  the  Saturday  like  his  originals,  he  existed  scurvily,  and  died  in  debt. — Ed. 


278 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sin,  Monday  evening,  Nov.  24th,  1767.  No.  2,  Middle-Temple  Lane. 

You  will,  I  flatter  myself,  excuse  the  freedom  of  this  address,  when  I  assure  you 
that  it  is  made  to  prevent  you  from  suffering  a  greater  share  of  trouble  on  some 
future  occasion.  Many  friends  of  mine,  who  think  much  better  of  me  than  I  can 
possibly  deserve,  have  for  some  time  advised  me  to  attempt  a  theatrical  piece,  and 
have  so  worked  upon  my  vanity,  that  I  should  immediately  enter  upon  such  an  un¬ 
dertaking,  if  I  had  any  tolerable  hope  of  getting  it  exhibited  when  done.  But  the 
uncertainty  of  this  circumstance  prevents  me  from  proceeding,  as  the  affair  must  be  a 
Avork  of  time,  and  as  I  have  a  provision,  besides,  to  make  for  my  family,  Avhich  can¬ 
not  be  trusted  to  eventual  contingencies. 

I  have,  therefore,  Sir,  from  a  just  opinion  both  of  your  good  sense  and  your  good¬ 
nature,  presumed  to  trouble  you  with  this  question  :  whether  it  will  be  convenient 
for  you  to  give  a  piece  of  mine  a  trial  next  season,  if  it  should  be  ready  in  proper 
time  ?  But  though  you  may  naturally  think  an  answer  to  this  question  in  the  affir¬ 
mative  would  afford  me  much  satisfaction,  yet  I  beg  you  will  believe  that  I  should 
be  filled  Avith  the  truest  concern  if  your  politeness  Avas  to  lead  you  into  any  promise 
repugnant  in  the  least  to  your  interest,  or  opposite  to  your  inclination.  Do  not, 
therefore,  Sir,  through  a  principle  of  delicacy,  to  Avhich  generous  minds  are  subject, 
expose  yourself  to  the  minutest  difficulty  on  a  stranger’s  account.  I  knoAv  Iioav  you 
must  be  teazed  with  solicitations  of  this  nature,  and  I  can  easily  guess  Iioav  it  must 
affect  your  sensibility  to  be  under  so  frequent  a  necessity  of  rejecting  them ;  consider 
this  letter,  then,  as  a  mere  matter  of  business,  and  be  assured  that  the  man  Avho  noAv 
applies  will  feel  no  abatement  in  his  high  esteem  either  for  your  public  or  private 
character,  because  you  Avisely  prefer  your  own  emolument  to  his,  and  decline,  in  the 
regular  way  of  trade,  to  make  a  purchase  of  his  commodity. 

I  am,  Sir,  Avith  great  truth  and  regard,  your  very  humble  servant, 

H.  Kelly. 


MR.  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Saturday,  Dec.  5th,  1 767. 

I  have  been  perplexed  and  hurried  almost  out  of  my  life,  but  shall  not  iioav 
trouble  you  with  the  particulars  of  our  damned  journey — tAventy-eight  davs  on  our 
Avay.  I  have  been  here  since  Monday  night  last,  and  I  shall  haA^e  entirely  finished  my 
business  on  Tuesday  next,  on  which  day  I  shall  set  off  in  the  packet. 

I  knoAv  not  Avhat  to  say  for  myself,  but  beg  leaA^e  to  assure  you  it  has  been  my 
misfortune,  not  my  fault ;  Avhat  I  did  Avas  for  the  best,  and  being  too  anxious  to  be 
certain  of  returning  soon  has  been  the  cause  of  my  long  delay.  I  am  fretted 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


279 


almost  to  death,  not  on  account  of  my  business,  which  has  been  very  well  settled,  but 
I  hear  you  are  displeased  with  me,  which  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you  I  shall  feel  much 
more  than  all  the  distresses  and  disappointments  that  have  happened  to  me.  I  return 
you  ten  thousand  thanks  for  your  goodness  to  Mrs.  Dancer,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect. 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 

The  ship  that  carries  the  curtain  for  “  King  Arthur,”  I  hope  will  sail  to-morrow. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  POMFRET. 


MY  LORD,  London,  Dec.  7th,  1767. 

I  have  been  detained  in  town  by  business  and  illness,  or  I  should  have  paid  my 
respects  to  you  long  before  this  time.  I  really  understood  from  your  Lordship’s  con¬ 
versation  with  my  brother,  when  I  gave  up  with  great  readiness  and  pleasure  the 
purchase  of  the  Monson  land,  that  I  was  to  have  all  that  part  of  it  which  lay  in 
Hampton  parish.  I  did  not  care  to  trouble  your  Lordship  with  too  many  visits  upon 
the  occasion,  not  doubting  but  that,  the  moment  it  was  agreeable  to  your  Lordship, 
I  should  have  had  the  honour  of  waiting  upon  you.  I  went  to  pay  my  respects 
at  Sunbury  several  times,  but  was  afraid  of  being  importunate,  or  appearing  imperti¬ 
nently  solicitous  in  the  affair.  I  believe  your  Lordship  will  find,  upon  further 
inquiry,  that  the  price  you  have  asked  for  the  shots  in  the  common  field  or  meadow 
cannot  be  given.  I  am  willing,  if  your  Lordship  pleases,  to  take  the  land  upon  a  fair 
valuation,  and  upon  the  judgment  of  two  of  our  well-informed  neighbours. 

I  am,  my  Lord,  &c. 

I  will  do  myself  the  honour  to  wait  upon  your  Lordship  the  next  time  I  come  to 
Hampton. 


MR.  CHARLES  YORKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Saturday,  Dec.  12th,  1767. 

You  flatter  me  very  much  by  treating  me  as  a  friend,  and  not  only  in  asking  my 
advice,  but  en  badinant.  I  had  your  letter  two  nights  ago,  and  have  read  your  papers. 
The  answer  is  in  three  words :  neither  Lacy  is  bound  nor  you ;  not  Holland ,  &c.  to 
Lacy ,  nor  Lacy  to  them ;  nor  you  to  Lacy ,  nor  I^acy  to  you.  You  will,  from  this 
answer,  suspect  me  of  mixing  the  schoolman  and  theologue  with  the  lawyer ;  because 
the  answer  will  read  as  quaint  as  some  ancient  creeds  in  the  church,  which  we  repeat 
too  often  every  time  we  read  them.  To  return  to  my  profession  ;  the  whole  rested  on 
talk  and  treaty,  and  you  may  deal  with  it,  in  my  opinion,  as  you  please.  Do  not  sell 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


280 

in  a  hurry,  whilst  you  arc  at  the  best,  both  as  an  actor  and  manager ;  and  if  you  do  it 
for  health,  tedium ,  or  any  other  reason,  why,  see  your  purchase-money  well  secured 
and  paid  with  certainty. 

Mrs.  V.  joins  with  me  in  many  compliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  whom  she 
wishes  to  know  better.  You  are  very  kind  in  your  notices  of  her  by  your  box- 
keeper  ;  and  as  she  profits  always  when  her  health  allows,  1  hope  to  profit  sometimes 
when  my  leisure  admits.  But  for  some  of  your  parts  so  performed  as  I  have  seen 
them  lately,  I  will  force  leisure. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you  in  the  beginning  of  the  week  before  Christmas-day,  and 
will  then  send  to  you  again,  or  call  upon  you.  At  present,  my  time  is  uncertain ,  but 
my  regards  uniform,  and  always. 

Dear  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Charles  Yorke. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s-inn,  Dec.  30,  1767. 

As  1  imagine  your  brother  is  out  of  town,  you  will  give  me  leave  to  open  myself 
to  you :  what  I  have  to  observe  shall  be  said  with  the  utmost  frankness,  as  I  take 
that  to  be  the  surest  ivay  to  prevent  every  possibility  of  future  misunderstandings. 

You  will,  perhaps,  think  it  odd  (but  so  the  fact  is,)  that  I  have  been  much  dissa¬ 
tisfied  with  myself  ever  since  I  took  up  the  100/.  upon  my  accountable  receipt.  To 
that  mode  of  dealing  there  was,  it  is  true,  no  objection  formerly ;  but  at  present  it  is 
not  only  disagreeable,  but  inconsistent  with  the  plan  of  life  I  am  pursuing.  This 
circumstance  has  thrown  the  theatrical  matter,  in  agitation  between  your  brother  and 
me,  into  a  channel  I  never  intended.  It  seemed  to  me  sufficiently  understood  that 
the  pieces  I  had  by  me  (such  as  they  are)  were  put  up  to  sale  by  an  author  leaving 
off  trade.  It  wras  proposed  that  Mr.  Lacy  should  be  consulted,  and  I  imagined  I 
should  soon  knowr  the  determination  of  the  managers.  But  so  it  has  happened,  I  am 
now  in  the  light  of  pawning  the  plays,  and  borrowing  money  upon  them,  which  is  to 
work  itself  clear  the  Lord  knows  when.  This  is  the  old  tract  of  business,  and  I  much 
wish  to  avoid  it :  I  must,  therefore,  beg  to  pay  back  the  money,  and  then  to  hope  that 
the  affair  may  be  brought,  as  soon  as  convenient,  to  a  final  conclusion. 

It  is  the  infirmity  of  my  temper  to  hate  a  state  of  suspense,  and  your  extricating 
me  out  of  it  will  oblige,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


281 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dec.  30,  1767. 

My  brother  showed  me  a  letter  from  you  which  not  a  little  surprised  me.  You 
have  desired  him  to  get  your  note  from  me,  (by  the  by,  he  knew  nothing  of  the 
business,)  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  you  seem  to  make  my  sending  back  the  play  partly 
the  reason  for  desiring  your  note.  What  can  be  the  meaning  that  your  natural 
good-humour  and  good  sense  will  now  and  then  fail  you  when  you  are  to  judge  of 
me  ?  The  plain  matter  is  this  :  after  we  had  settled  at  Hatfield  that  “  Alzuma”  had 
better  not  appear  this  season,  I  thought  (sorry  I  am  I  did  not  think  with  you)  that  it 
would  be  indelicate  to  lock  up  the  play  from  you  till  it  was  acted ;  — you  might 
choose  to  read  it  over  yourself,  or  lend  it  to  a  friend,  or  make  some  alterations,  &c. — 
but  if  you  could  imagine  that  I  sent  it  to  you  by  way  of  an  unfriendly  hint  to  you, 
you  have,  indeed,  much  wronged  me;  I  meant  it  just  the  reverse.  I  think  it  a  very 
small  favour  to  lend  money  to  a  friend ;  but  to  lend  it  with  his  silver  spoons  in  my 
drawer,  seems  to  me  the  very  spirit  of  pawn-broking  without  the  three  blue  balls. 
You  are  acquainted  with  no  man  who  would  have  more  pleasure  in  serving  you  in 
every  manner  he  could  than  myself.  That  you  are  able  to  pay  money  or  lend  money 
I  have  no  doubt  of,  because  what  we  very  warmly  wish  we  can  readily  believe  :  but 
if  you  send  for  my  note  merely  upon  suspicions  which  your  own  sensibility  has 
created,  you  do  me  and  yourself  great  injustice. 

I  am  most  truly  yours,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 

You  mention  in  a  second  letter  the  affair  of  a  former  note;  it  is  all  settled,  as  you 
may  see  in  the  last  account,  and  given  up. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln  s-inn,  Jan,  25,  1/68. 

I  am  by  no  means  a  competent  judge  in  this  matter.  It  is  above  six  years  since 
I  wrote  a  single  line  on  my  own  account,  and  of  the  state  of  the  houses  since  that 
time  I  am  almost  totally  ignorant. 

The  managers  know  what  new  plays  in  general  do,  and  they  can  form  their  con¬ 
jecture  what  “  Zenobia”  is  likely  to  do.  In  my  opinion  they  are  the  proper  persons 
to  set  the  value  ;  and  as  to  myself,  I  can  only  say  that  I  should  be  very  sorry  to 
take  a  shilling  more  than  I  ought. 

If  we  are  to  be  delicate  on  both  sides,  I  will  leave  it  to  the  decision  of  any  third 
person  acquainted  with  playhouses.  A  general  question  may  be  put,  without  re¬ 
ferring  to  any  play  in  particular. 

2  o 


VOL.  i. 


2b2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


1  am  very  much  obliged  to  your  brother,  if  he  lias  conceived  it  would  be  in  any 
degree  agreeable  to  me  to  produce  one  of  the  pieces  this  season  ;  but  1  do  assure  you 
I  always  spoke  my  real  sentiments  when  I  said  it  would  be  totally  a  matter  of  indif¬ 
ference  to  me.  In  fact,  my  passion  for  the  stage  is  in  a  great  measure  over,  and  I 
have  only  now  to  wish  to  get  rid  of  what  I  wrote  or  planned  when  my  thoughts  were 
turned  very  much  that  way. 

An  expedient  this  moment  occurs  to  me  :  to  remove  the  difficulty  that  both 
sides  seem  to  labour  under,  let  there  be  a  “  We  hear  that  the  managers  of  Drury- 
lane  have  purchased  the  tragedy  of  ‘  Zenobia’  at  a  considerable  price,  &c.”  and  let 
that  secret  be  kept  from  every  person  whatever,  and  I  shall  be  very  well  content. 
Any  thing  rather  than  set  any  sort  of  value  upon  the  play  myself.  This  is  no  affected 
modesty. 

I  wish  there  was  no  such  thing  in  the  world  as  money,  or  that  I  had  enough  of  it, 
without  ever  making  a  bargain  for  it.  1  could  sell  a  house  if  I  had  one,  and  ask  the 
price,  for  that  would  be  the  work  of  the  builder.  I  could  demand  a  price  for  a  horse, 
for  that  would  be  one  of  my  fellow-creatures ;  but  for  my  own  performance,  I  may 
think  well  of  it,  but  nobody  shall  know  how  well.  This  is  perhaps  but  an  external 
modesty,  but  if  it  is  a  veil  for  the  want  of  it  inwardly ,  there  is  at  least  some  prudence 
in  wearing  the  veil. 

“  Nothing  in  nature  is  so  lewd  as  Peg, 

Yet,  for  the  world,  she  would  not  show  her  leg." 

» 

This  is  the  state  of  my  mind.  I  have  laid  myself  very  open  ;  I  am  not  so  much 
a  man  of  business  yet,  as  to  have  surmounted  all  my  feelings.  When  an  attorney 
comes  to  me  with  a  brief,  I  am  heartily  glad  to  see  the  brief ;  and  though,  if  his 
fee  be  a  good  one,  I  have  no  objection  to  it,  yet  I  hate  the  moment  when  he 
puts  his  hand  in  his  pocket,  draws  on  his  wise  face,  and  considers  what  he  shall 
give  me.  False  delicacy  all  this!  but  so  it  is,  and  I  cannot  help  it.  When  your 
brother  sees  the  comedy,  I  shall,  if  he  likes  it,  have  the  same  work  over  again. 
I  wish  I  was  half  as  rich  as  he,  and  damn  me  if  I  would  not  part  with  it  for  nothing. 

You  see  how  much  of  a  man  of  business  I  am,  who  now  write  for  nothing,  what 
no  lawyer  in  Lincoln’s-inn  would  do  for  less  than  two  guineas. 

I  will  release  you,  with  adding,  that  I  have  thrown  myself  entirely  open,  and, 
for  God’s  sake !  now  please  yourselves. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your's  very  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


283 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Jan.  25th,  1768. 

I  was  lying  down  when  your  letter  was  sent,  having  been  much  indisposed  with 
a  sore  throat.  I  am  not  able  to  go  to  Westminster,  nor  is  it  possible  for  me  to  go  to 
the  playhouse.  I  must  add  that  it  seems  to  be  rather  premature  to  put  the  play 
into  rehearsal,  as  nothing  is  as  yet  agreed  upon  between  the  managers  and  me.  It 
was  from  the  beginning,  and  is  still,  my  fixed  resolution,  never  to  bring  out  any  thing 
upon  the  usual  terms  of  taking  authors’  nights. 

I  have  considered  the  matter,  but  it  is  perhaps  a  false  delicacy  that  hinders  me 
from  setting  the  value  upon  my  own  works. 

If  the  play  is  read  this  morning,  I  beg  my  compliments  to  all  the  gentlemen  and 
ladies  concerned,  and  I  hope  they  will  impute  to  illness  the  non-attendance  of. 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

DEAR  SIR,  Jan<  ~5th>  1768- 

I  was  very  sorry  to  hear  of  your  illness,  and  on  that  account,  as  well  as  of  your 
letter,  shall  put  off  the  reading  of  your  play.  Though  you  must  be  very  sensible 
that  we  have  no  time  to  lose,  and  indeed  we  have  laboured  hard  to  bring  it  out  at  all 
this  season,  and  my  brother  made  a  point  of  it,  as  it  seemed  to  be  very  agreeable  to 
you.  When  I  came  to  consult  with  you  with  regard  to  the  gentlemen  and  ladies 
that  were  to  perform  in  your  play,  you  did  not  then  hint  that  it  was  in  the  least 
premature ;  but  when  I  asked  you  whether  you  had  thought  of  a  mode  of  purchase 
for  the  managers,  you  replied  that  it  was  time  enough.  For  God’s  sake,  as  you  are 
a  man  of  business,  let  us  come  to  business ;  and  for  once  lay  aside  your  false  delicacy. 
And  as  you  say  you  have  considered  of  the  matter,  be  so  good  as  to  let  me  know 
your  sentiments,  which  I  will  immediately  communicate  to  the  managers,  that  we  may 
know  what  we  have  to  do.  It  may  be  a  false  delicacy  in  you  not  to  fix  a  value  upon 
your  own  works,  but  it  is  a  real  delicacy  in  the  managers  which  hinders  them  from 
doing  it. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

George  Garrick* 

P.  S.  My  brother  is  very  ill  in  bed,  and  every  thing  is  stopped  till  I  hear  from 
you. 

*  I  more  than  suspect  this  letter  to  have  been  dictated  from  the  pillow  by  brother  David.  It  has  his 
point  and  turn  so  exactly  : — besides,  Murphy  was  a  card  that  he  loved  to  play — a  difficult  one  at  times. — Ed. 

2  O  2 


284 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  RICHARD  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Queen  Anne  Street,  Cavendish  Square,  Jan.  26th ,  17C8. 

1  beg  leave  to  enclose  an  altered  copy  of  Sliakspeare’s  “  Timon,”  with  the  addi¬ 
tion  of  a  new  character,  which  I  dare  say  you  will  be  polite  enough  to  read.  This 
act  of  civility  1  am  confident  you  will  not  refuse ;  though  I  must  inform  you  that 
the  copy  has  been  a  long  time  in  Mr.  Colman’s  hands,  who,  after  having  flattered  it 
more  than  it  deserves,  and,  as  I  was  told,  cast  the  parts,  has  at  length  rejected  it.  I 
have  little  doubt  but  that  your  opinion  will  agree  with  Mr.  Colman’s ;  however,  as  I 
am  totally  disinterested  with  respect  to  profit  in  the  offer,  and  as  I  hope  the  perusal 
will  not  involve  you  in  any  extraordinary  trouble,  I  take  the  liberty  of  submitting 
it  to  your  judgment,  and  am, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 

You  will  be  good  enough  to  return  it  to  me  according  to  the  above  direction. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  RICHARD  CUMBERLAND. 

SIR,  Feb-  5th,  1768. 

I  have  read  “  Timon”  over  very  carefully,  and  think  that  the  alterations  have 
great  merit  in  the  writing  part,  but  as  they  do  not  add  greatly  to  the  pathos  of  the 
play,  and  break  into  its  simplicity,  1  really  believe  that  the  lovers  of  Shakspeare 
would  condemn  us  for  not  giving  them  “  Timon”  as  it  stands  in  the  original.  I 
think  that  excellent  rule  for  writing  as  it  is  laid  down  by  Horace,  simplex  et  unum, 
was  never  more  verified  than  in  Shakspeare’s  “  Timon.”  I  could  have  wished  that 
the  same  hand  which  has  altered  “Timon”  had  been  employed  upon  a  less  merito¬ 
rious  play. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 


MR.  RICHARD  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

sir,  Queen  Anne  Street,  Feb.  7th,  1768. 

I  give  you  many  thanks  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken  in  the  perusal  of 
“  Timon,”  and  your  speedy  return  of  it :  had  it  met  with  your  approbation,  it  would 
have  been  entirely  at  your  service  without  any  reserve.  It  was  the  unreasonable 
time  Mr.  Colman  detained  it,  not  his  refusal,  gave  me  offence.  In  the  latter  par¬ 
ticular  he  did  justice  to  himself,  in  the  former  he  neglected  what  I  thought  was 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


285 


justly  due  to  me,  and  to  every  one  who  makes  a  disinterested  offer  of  his  perform¬ 
ance.  Your  conduct,  Sir,  has  indeed  confirmed  my  opinion  of  Mr.  Colman’s  judg¬ 
ment,  but  convinced  me  that  it  would  have  been  no  impeachment  to  his  management 
if  he  had  had  a  little  more  politeness. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  see  the  time  when  simplicity  is  a  recommendation  to  any  dra¬ 
matic  piece.*  It  was  in  conformity  to  the  depravity  of  modern  taste  that  I  altered 
Shakspeare ;  and  conceived  that,  when  I  robbed  him  of  the  beauties  of  his  native 
simplicity,  I  made  him  less  venerable  indeed,  but  more  suitably  equipped  for  the 
company  he  was  to  keep. 

I  hope  your  ideas  are  better  founded  than  mine. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  26th,  176S. 

Mrs.  Barry  desires  me  to  assure  you  that  she  fears,  if  she  undertakes  what  you 
desire,  it  probably  will  make  her  incapable  of  going  through  the  business  of  the 
season.  She  is  really  ill,  and  fatigued  to  death  with  this  and  last  night’s  perform¬ 
ance. 

It  is  very  disagreeable  to  her  to  refuse  to  do  any  thing  you  think  proper  to  de¬ 
sire  ;  but  the  truth  is,  her  spirits  are  weak,  and  I  have  often  experienced  that  when 
she  has  been  sunk  with  too  much  fatigue,  she  has  been  a  long  time  after  quite  inca¬ 
pable  of  her  business. 

I  have  not  played  Hamlet  for  some  years,  but  shall  be  ready  in  it  any  day  you 
please  in  the  next  week. 

If  you  are  of  opinion  any  part  of  mine  can  be  done  with  propriety  without  Mrs. 
Barry  on  Saturday,  I  shall  be  ready  to  do  it. 

As  to  our  credit,  I  cannot  be  anxious  about  it  at  the  expense  of  Mrs.  Barry’s 
constitution. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  very  sincerely  your  obedient  humble  servant, 

Spraxger  Barry. 


LORD  PEMBROKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  March  1,  1768. 

I  was  in  hopes,  my  dear  Sir,  to  have  been  able  to  have  sent  you  a  new  edition, 
with  alterations  and  additions,  of  the  “  Honnete  Criminel”  with  this,  but  it  is  not  yet 

*  Fairly  retorted  upon  a  man,  who,  rejecting  the  female  interest  worked  into  “  Timon"  by  Cumberland, 
yet  continued  the  drivel  of  Tate  whenever  he  acted  Lear. — Ed. 


286 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


come  out,  though  Madem.  Clairon  assured  me  it  would  be  so  some  days  ago.  Mons. 
Fenouillot  de  Falbaire  is  much  flattered  with  what  you  say.  1  cannot  help  thinking, 
however,  that  the  noise  his  piece  has  made  is  full  as  much  owing  to  the  subject  as 
the  manner  of  treating  it.*  Religion,  and  a  thousand  other  prejuges,  have  certainly 
cramped  the  genius  of  the  author  very  much.  In  England  a  writer  might  fully  let 
himself  loose,  and  I  should  hope  that  such  a  man  as  Andre,  of  any  country,  would  do 
on  an  English  stage.  I  wish  you  may  think  so,  and  show  us  Andrew  at  Drury-lane. 
By  the  time  you  receive  this,  I  shall  probably  be  setting  out  for  London,  where  I 
hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  finding  you  quite  recovered.  I  cannot  say  I  have  the 
least  business  in  England  just  now,  but  my  uncle  Mr.  Robert  Herbert  has  taken  it 
into  his  head  that  I  have,  and  I  shall  set  out  accordingly,  though  to  stay  but  a  very 
short  time ;  as  Lady  Pembroke,  who,  with  me,  desires  our  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Garrick  and  you,  waits  for  me  here  to  take  her  to  Spain,  where  she  wishes  to  pass 
two  months  before  the  great  heats  set  in.  I  hope  “  False  Delicacy”  will  not  be  over 
before  I  get  to  town.  What  you  say  of  it  makes  me  wish  very  much  to  see  it, 
though  I  cannot  say  the  name  of  Kelly,  especially  if  it  has  an  O  before  it,  raises  my 
expectations  very  high.  Lord  and  Lady  Rochford  are  both  very  well,  and  desire 
their  compliments  ;  the  latter,  has  so  papered  up  every  air-hole  in  her  house,  that  she 
lives  absolutely  like  a  dormouse  in  cotton.  They  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
you  here,  when  you  are  driven  out  of  London  by  emptiness  and  dust. 

1  am,  dear  Sir, 

With  great  truth  and  regard,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Pembroke. 


REV.  T.  BEIGHTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAREST  MR.  GARRICK,  Egham,  March  7th,  1768. 

Every  one  is  proud  and  glad  of  any  opportunity  to  show  their  great  esteem  and 
regard  for  you.  I  have  more  reason  than  any  person  to  do  it,  and,  therefore,  was 
oveijoyed  to  receive  the  favour  of  your  commands.  Though  I  had  not  been  abroad 
of  a  great  while,  confined  to  my  bed  by  the  gout,  I  went  immediately  to  Sunbury, 
hoping,  as  it  was  Saturday,  I  might  meet  Sir  Edward  Ilawke  at  his  country-house ; 
but  he  was  in  town,  and  I  not  being  able  to  go  thither,  sent  what  you  receive  a  copy 
of.  If  it  meet  with  a  favourable  reception,  attended  with  success,  it  will  give  the 
greatest  pleasure  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

O 

Thomas  Beighton. 

If  I  might  have  had  the  whole  world,  and  had  I  it,  1  would  frankly  give  it  to 
serve  you.  It  was  not  possible  for  me  to  write  yesterday.  The  whole  morning  taken 

*  The  piece  had  one  good  effect :  it  obtained  for  the  hero  of  it,  the  younger  Table ,  a  restoration  to  his 
rights  as  a  citizen,  of  which  his  Jilial  piety  had  deprived  him. —  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


287 


up  in  the  duty  of  Egham ;  immediately  from  thence  went  to  Wraysbury,  where  I 
was  detained  by  an  unlooked-for  funeral  till  seven  o’clock  ;  on  my  return  home 
another  burial,  besides  the  great  weakness  and  slowness  of  my  hand :  no  pen  like  you 
of  a  ready  writer.  Pray  let  me  know  when  you  will  be  at  Hampton — I  want  to 
talk  with  Mrs.  Garrick  about  planting  some  choice,  not  very  large,  evergreens,  here 
and  there  one,  upon  the  grass  before  your  grand  portico,  which  will  have  a  good 
effect.  The  beginning  of  next  month  is  the  time 


REV.  T.  BEIGHTON  TO  SIR  EDWARD  HAWKE. 

MOST  HONOURED  AND  GOOD  SIR,  Egham,  March  7,  1768. 

I  must  make  a  great  apology  for  the  freedom  of  this  epistle ;  or,  otherwise,  you 
will  be  apt  to  think  there  will  be  no  end  of  my  application :  pardon  me  but  this 
once,  and  I  promise  on  my  word  and  honour  never  to  teaze  you  any  more.  I  write 
at  the  solicitation  of  the  best  friend  I  have  in  all  the  world,  and  that  dear  friend  is 
Mr.  Garrick,  at  whose  request  my  Lord  Chancellor  has  lately  given  me  a  very  pretty 
living  in  our  neighbourhood,  which  has  made  me  extremely  happy,  and  without  it 
I  must  have  been  most  miserable,  as  the  help,  on  account  of  my  frequent  infirmities 
1  am  obliged  to  have,  would  run  away  with  most  of  my  former  income.  How 
happy  shall  I  be  should  I  succeed  in  my  negociation,  as  it  will  give  me  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  showing  my  gratitude  to  my  patron  and  benefactor  for  the  vast  debt  I  owe 
him  !  and,  at  the  same  time,  I  shall  have  the  most  grateful  sense  of  your  great  favour 
and  kindness.  This  letter  I  trouble  you  with,  is  in  behalf  of  Lieutenant  Edward 
Thompson,  Commander  of  the  Tartuffe,  now  at  Stranrhaer,  in  North  Britain.  He  is 
the  first  E.  T.  upon  the  naval  list,  there  being  two  of  the  same  name.  By  my  dear 
friend’s  recommendation,  he  is  a  good  and  a  brave  officer  ;  and  he  hopes,  from  his  long 
service,  deserving’  the  rank  he  is  petitioning  for ;  which  is  to  be  raised  to  Master 
and  Commander,  either  to  be  upon  half-pay,  or  preferred  to  a  sloop  of  war.  If,  upon 
inquiry,  he  answers  that  character,  no  more  I  need  to  say  to  you,  with  whom  merit 
is  all  in  all ;  only  be  pleased  to  excuse  me  that  I  add,  you  will  make  me  the  happiest 
person  that  can  be  by  granting  me  this  request.  He  flatters  himself  he  may  meet 
with  a  Lord  or  two  in  the  Admiralty  desirous  of  his  promotion.  I  humbly  ask  your 
pardon  for  the  length  of  this  letter.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  hear  of  Mr.  Hawke’s 
health  ;  I  make  no  manner  of  doubt  of  his  great  improvement ;  if  I  could  tell  where 
to  address  him,  I  would  write.  My  compliments,  if  you  please,  to  Miss  Hawke  and 
Mrs.  Birt,  and  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  very  humble  servant, 

Tiiomas  Brighton. 


288 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  March  14th,  1768. 

I  hope  you  will  not  think  me  either  impatient  or  unreasonable,  for  taking  the 
liberty  to  remind  you,  that  twelve  months  are  now  past  since  you  were  so  kind  to 
assure  me  of  your  friendship,  and  to  promise  me  your  assistance  in  bringing  on  some 
performance  of  mine,  upon  the  theatre.  The  thorough  acquiescence  I  had  both  in 
your  power  and  inclination  to  serve  me,  made  the  last  summer  pass  quietly  away  in 
undetermined  and  vague  experiments,  which  have  none  of  them  answered  either 
your  expectations  or  mine ;  and  the  complicated  duties  of  your  station  during  the 
winter,  made  me  think  it  improper  and  even  cruel  to  attempt  distressing  you  with 
my  affairs.  But  as  I  find  myself  now  at  as  great  a  distance  from  any  reasonable 
expectation  of  success  as  I  was  a  year  ago,  I  cannot  help  telling  you,  that  I  begin  to 
feel  “  that  sickness  of  the  heart,  which  arises  from  hope  deferred.” 

The  two  French  plays  which  you  were  so  obliging  to  send  me,  can  neither  of 
them,  in  my  opinion,  be  rendered  fit  for  the  English  stage ;  nor  do  I  think  the 
“  Pere  de  Famille,”  without  much  alteration,  will  answer  your  purpose  or  mine  :  there 
is,  however,  a  much  better  foundation  to  go  on  upon  in  that,  than  any  of  those  I 
have  yet  seen  ;  and  I  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you,  if  you  will  look  over  my  transla¬ 
tion,  and  point  out  the  deficiencies  that  occur  to  you,  and  the  improvements  that 
may  be  made.  This,  Sir,  I  know  will,  require  some  leisure,  which  you  may  not  at 
present  be  able  to  spare  ;  I  will  therefore  wait  your  time  with  pleasure,  and  receive 
whatever  hints  you  are  so  good  to  give  me,  upon  that,  or  any  other  subject,  as  a  real 
obligation. 

I  have  not  seen  “  Eugenie”  yet :  if  it  is  in  your  possession,  I  shall  be  obliged  to 
you  for  it.*  I  also  request  you  to  lend  me  Massinger’s  works,  which  I  will  take  the 
utmost  care  of. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  sincere  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  March  17th,  1768. 

I  certainly  did  not  mean  to  accuse  you  of  remissness,  or  of  any  other  fault 
towards  me,  though  I  wished  gently  to  remind  you,  that  there  was  such  a  person  in 
the  world,  which  the  multiplicity  of  your  affairs  might  very  possibly  make  you 

*  “  Eugenie”  was  a  piece  of  Beaumarchais’.  She  drew  from  it  her  comedy  called  “  A  School  for  Rakes,  ’ 
acted  in  1769. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


289 


forget.  Believe  me,  Sir,  I  have  the  highest  sense  of  your  kindness  to  me,  and  I  dare 
flatter  myself  that  I  shall  never  forfeit  it  by  the  meanest  of  all  vices,  ingratitude.  I 
have  not  read  over  the  “  Pere  de  Famille,”  nor  do  I  think  it  necessary  that  I  should, 
as  I  am  determined  to  be  entirely  guided  by  your  opinion  with  regard  to  it. 

I  know  this  letter  is  no  farther  necessary  than  to  relieve  my  own  mind,  which 
must  be  hurt  by  your  entertaining  any  suspicion  of  my  entire  reliance  upon  your 
friendship  ;  I  will  not  therefore  trespass  farther  on  your  leisure,  than  while  1  sub¬ 
scribe  myself  with  unfeigned  regard, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  WALKER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Dublin,  March,  1768. 

Though  your  letter  requires  no  answer,  and  I  am  too  sensible  howr  troublesome 
I  have  already  been,  yet  I  cannot  persuade  myself  from  thinking  that  I  am  under  a 
sort  of  an  obligation  not  to  let  a  letter  of  yours  pass  without  an  acknowledgment,  if 
it  is  only  to  let  you  knovr  I  have  received  it,  and  how  much  I  think  myself  obliged 
for  this  last,  as  well  as  all  former  favours. 

I  wish  other  managers  wrould  copy  your  steady,  generous  manner  in  your  dealings, 
as  much  as  they  affect  to  copy  another  part  of  your  theatrical  conduct.  Your  par¬ 
tiality,  if  it  may  be  called  so,  to  those  who  have  long  served  you,  must  endear  you 
even  to  those  who  are  disappointed  by  it :  for  my  part,  I  shall  always  admire,  though 
I  cannot  help  regretting,  the  occasion  that  forbids  so  desirable  a  situation  as  an 
engagement  in  a  theatre  under  your  direction  ;  however,  if  1  am  still  so  happy  as  to 
preserve  your  good  opinion,  or  can  return  the  obligations  I  am  under  by  any  trifling 
services  within  my  narrow  sphere,  it  will  indulge  the  desire  I  feel  to  be  grateful,  and 
cherish  the  vanity  I  have  in  being  thought  not  unworthy  your  notice— a  vanity 
that  has  given  me  the  most  solid  pleasure,  from  the  first  moment  I  entertained  it 
Our  affairs  here  wrear  a  much  better  face  than  they  did  some  time  ago,  and  I  make 
no  doubt  but  our  chaos  will  in  a  little  time  jumble  into  form.  We  want  nothing  but 
a  principal  comedian  to  make  our  receipts  double  what  they  are.  We  have  given 
the  town  no  variety — nothing  but  the  same  dull  tragedies  they  have  seen  a  hundred 
times  over.  “  The  English  Merchant”  is  the  only  newT  thing  wre  have  done  ;  it  w'as 
done  twice  to  about  sixty  or  seventy  pound  houses.  We  are  getting  up  “  False 
Delicacy,”  in  which  Mr.  Mossop  is  to  do  Cecil,  and  Mrs.  Fitz-Henry,  Lady  Betty 
Lambton.  We  have  a  Parson  to  appear  in  Scrub,  with  Mr.  Mossop’s  Archer  :  such 
an  extraordinary  metamorphosis  will  no  doubt  excite  curiosity.  The  town  cannot 
now  complain  that  they  have  had  no  novelty  ;  this  is  perhaps  the  greatest  the 
stage  ever  knew — though  it  is  thought  the  canonical  gentlemen  will  be  so  scandalized 
as  to  influence  a  party  against  him  ;  but,  hoAvever  it  happens,  it  w  ill  bring  one  great 
vol.  I.  2  l* 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


290 

house  at  least,  perhaps  several ;  and  if  we  can  but  escape  civil,  we  do  not  much  mind 
ecclesiastical  censure.  Excommunication  is  not  half  so  terrible  to  our  state  as  an 
execution. 

Our  manager  seems  determined  to  keep  possession  of  Crow-street  now  he  has  got 
it,  for  I  bear  he  has  already  paid  960/.  to  Mr.  Barry’s  agent  here,  though  bv  the  best 
enquiry  I  can  make  I  find  we  have  not  taken  4000/.  by  a  good  many  pounds.  The 
Lord  Lieutenant  s  not  coming  once  a  week,  as  was  the  custom,  has  been  a  drawback 
of  near  a  thousand  pounds  on  the  takings. 

As  I  am  much  employed,  and  it  is  a  difficult  matter  to  see  the  London  papers  in 
Dublin,  I  am  vastly  at  a  loss  about  the  transactions  of  the  theatre.  I  hear  every  body 
loud  in  the  praises  of  your  epilogue  to  “  Zenobia,”  but  have  not  yet  had  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  reading  it  myself:  I  believe  I  may  justly  adopt  a  common  saying  on  the 
occasion,  and  be  pretty  sure  that  I  have  a  great  pleasure  to  come.  Mrs.  Pritchard,  I 
bear,  is  taken  notice  of  in  it  much  to  her  advantage.  The  public,  no  doubt,  suffer  a 
great  loss  in  such  an  actress  leaving  the  stage ;  but,  I  fear,  the  loss  of  her  is  but  a 
prologue  to  a  much  greater  loss — a  loss  that  will  be  irreparable :  and  when  that  hap¬ 
pens,  we  may,  without  the  imputation  of  pedantry,  pronounce  it  the  grand  climacteric 
of  the  stage. 

I  regret  my  absence  from  London  more  particularly  at  this  time,  as  I  may  never 
have  another  opportunity  of  seeing  Hamlet,  Macbeth,  and  a  long  &c.  of  heroes,  and 
cannot  help  crying  out  with  Cibber,  in  his  “  Apology,” — “  Oh,  what  a  pity  it  is  that 
the  strong  and  beautiful  strokes  of  a  great  actor  should  not  be  as  lasting  as  the  strokes 
of  the  pencil  or  chisel  of  inferior  artists  !”  But  I  am  so  lost  in  my  subject  as  to  forget 
I  have  already  made  too  great  a  trial  of  your  patience,  so  will  take  up  no  more  of 
your  time  than  just  to  conclude  with  begging  many  pardons  for  my  impertinence, 
and  taking  the  liberty  to  assure  you  I  shall  ever  remain,  with  the  greatest  gratitude 
and  profound  respect,  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  Walker. 

P.  S.  My  best  respects  and  wishes  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  By  a  mistake  of  the 
postman,  your  letter  did  not  reach  me  so  soon  as  it  ought  to  have  done,  or  I  should 
have  troubled  you  with  this  sooner. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Northampton,  March  14,  17C8. 

I  have  been  in  town  about  business  for  two  days,  and  on  my  return  to  North¬ 
ampton  found  your  obliging  letter.  “  Zenobia,”  I  find,  was  at  that  time  going  on 
tolerably  well :  what  is  to  become  of  her  now  ?  I  think  I  am  well  rewarded  by  Mrs. 
Dancer :  if  any  body  had  offered  me  a  bet  that  she  would  treat  the  play  in  the 
manner  she  has  done,  I  should  have  laid  considerable  odds  that  no  such  thing  would 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


291 


happen.  Had  the  bills  said  that  the  play  was  deferred  on  account  of  her  indis¬ 
position,  and  she  had  not  appeared,  I  should  have  concluded  that  the  excuse  was 
founded  in  truth,  from  a  persuasion  that,  after  I  had  endeavoured  to  serve  her  fame, 
she  would  not  lightly  run  the  risk  of  overturning  mine.  I  always  thought  that 
performers  held  themselves  bound  in  honour  not  to  stop  the  run  of  a  new  play,  but 
in  cases  of  the  utmost  necessity ;  and  I  should  farther  have  been  convinced  that  hers 
was  a  case  that  made  it  impossible  for  her  to  play,  if  she  had  not  herself  taken  care  to 
convince  me  of  the  contrary  by  appearing  on  the  very  night.  In  what  light  must 
this  appear  to  the  world  ?  A  new  tragedy  is  stopped  all  of  a  sudden,  the  reason  for 
it  is  Mrs.  Dancer’s  indisposition ;  and  then  the  public  sees  her  performing  in  another 
new  piece  which  has  succeeded.  Is  it  not  reasonable  to  conclude  that  “  Zenobia”  did 
not  answer,  and  that  a  genteel  way  was  taken  to  let  it  down  as  easily  as  possible  ? 
How  Mrs.  Dancer  could  be  inattentive  to  all  this,  I  cannot  conceive;  and  it  is  equally 
odd  how  it  could  escape  a  person  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  experience  in  theatrical  matters 
Had  I  been  the  manager,  I  am  very  sure  that,  when  she  sent  word  that  she  was  willing 
to  appear,  I  should  have  sent  her  notice,  that  I  then  perceived  she  could  perform,  and 
therefore  should  insert  her  name  in  the  bills,  leaving  to  her  to  answer  to  the  public  if, 
after  such  a  message,  she  absented  herself  from  the  business.  This,  I  am  clear,  I 
should  have  done ;  or  at  least,  if  I  believed  her  excuse,  I  would  have  taken  care  that 
the  town  should  have  no  reason  to  disbelieve  it  from  the  circumstance  of  her  appear¬ 
ing  in  another  play.  As  the  matter  now  stands,  “  Zenobia”  is,  in  my  opinion,  fallen 

to  the  ground.  Adieu  to  her  with  all  my  heart !  I  thank  God,  I  have  not  leisure,  if 

I  had  inclination,  to  fret  about  the  matter.  I  am  very  much  tempted  to  write  to 
town  to  cancel  the  dedication  :*  how  1  can  let  it  go  abroad  after  such  treatment  I  do 
not  see ;  but  I  shall  do  nothing  rashly.  When  this  election  is  over,  I  shall  be  in 

town,  and  then  will  take  my  measures  as  silently  and  as  coolly  as  possible.  I  can  at 

present  form  no  resolutions,  but  I  think  I  can  venture  to  say  that  I  shall  never  put 
myself  in  that  lady’s  power  again. 

Mr.  Barry  called  upon  me  in  Lincoln’s  Inn  last  Saturday :  I  was  then  determined 
to  expostulate  as  little  as  possible,  but  I  could  not  help  telling  him  that  Mrs.  Yates 
would  have  died  on  the  boards  sooner  than  have  served  me  in  that  manner.  I  told 
him,  the  only  fault  was  that  her  name  was  in  the  bills.  The  ill-treatment  would  not 
have  been  so  glaring,  had  she  not  appeared,  and  then  the  excuse  of  indisposition 
might  have  been  believed.  I  think  I  may  say  that  I  behaved  as  genteelly  as  an  author 
could  well  do  to  Mrs.  Dancer ;  but  it  is  a  fatality  in  all  my  theatrical  dealings,  that 
I  never  attempted  to  show  my  friendship  to  any  body  but  I  was  ill-requited  for  it. 

I  have  tired  your  patience  upon  this  disagreeable  subject.  I  thank  you  for  sending 
to  Griffin  about  the  word  “  mettle  it  was  written  metal.  But  as  my  ill-luck  would 
have  it,  I  corrected  the  sheet  in  the  bookseller’s  shop,  and  there  consulted  “  Warbur- 

*  Which  was  to  Mrs.  Dancer — 

“  Which  prais’d  her  for  imputed  charms, 

And  feign'd,  or  felt  a  flame.” — Ed. 


292 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ton,”  who  writes  “  mettle,”  a  word  which  I  do  not  understand,  but  had  a  mind  that 
he  should  think  me  orthodox ,  and  so  gave  up  my  reason  to  my  faith. 

1  believe  you  are  right  about  Tiberius,  but  I  own  I  do  not  remember  it.  Rome 
will  fit  the  niche  as  well  as  Greece,  and  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  care  Care, 
however,  is  superfluous,  nay  it  is  posthumous  at  present,  for  the  burial  is  gone  by. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

The  election  is  fixed  for  next  Thursday ;  Lord  Spencer  offers  fifty  and  sixtv 
pounds  a  vote.  At  present  the  two  other  lords  have  the  majority,  but  how  matters 
may  fluctuate  between  this  and  the  poll  it  is  impossible  to  say.  I  wish  my  Lord 
Spencer  does  not  entertain  us  with  a  riot. 

I  shall  go  to  town  as  soon  as  it  is  over,  but  I  believe  the  poll  will  last  two  or  three 
days.  Adieu  once  more  !  I  am  in  as  much  good-humour  as  it  is  possible  for  a  de¬ 
feated  general  to  possess. 


MR.  JOSEPH  BARETTI  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Anne-street,  Portland  Chapel,  Saturday,  March  15th,  1768. 

I  want  fifty  pounds,  and  I  promised  to  apply  to  you  whenever  that  should  be  the 
case.  Please,  therefore,  to  send  them  me  at  Mr.  Wilson’s,  who  lives  opposite  to  me, 
and  the  letter  with  the  bill  enclosed  will  be  forwarded  to  me  by  his  people  to 
Snaresborough,  where  I  intend  to  go  for  a  few  days  this  afternoon,  that  I  may 
end  a  little  bit  of  a  work  at  a  distance  from  the  temptations  of  this  town. 

I  am  yours, 

Joseph  Baretti. 


MR.  JOSEPH  BARETTI  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Queen  Anne-street,  Portland  Chapel,  March  16th,  176S. 

I  begged  your  lady’s  acceptance  of  my  book,  and  not  yours ;  so  you  had  no 
reason  to  thank  me  for  it,  my  good  master.  As  to  your  criticism,  I  say  that  it  is 
noble  to  compassionate  those  who  praise  us,  and  every  thing  round  us.  But  the  man 
whom  you  look  upon  as  an  old  friend, #  I  look  upon  as  a  calumniator  ;  and  whatever 
mercy  he  might  expect  from  an  Englishman,  he  was  to  wait  for  nothing  but  justice 
from  an  Italian.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Joseph  Baretti. 

*  Samuel  Sharp,  the  very  ingenious  author  of  “  Letters  upon  Italy."  But  see  his  satisfactory  notice  of 
the  wasp  Baretti,  from  Bath,  1st  April,  1768.;ws£. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


293 


MR.  RICHARD  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Queen  Anne-street,  March  21st,  1768. 

I  have  a  comedy  in  my  possession  which  has  never  been  in  any  hands  but  my 
own,  and  is,  both  in  plot  and  execution,  entirely  new  and  original.  If  your  engage¬ 
ments  for  the  ensuing  season  admit,  and  the  offer  of  this  piece  will  be  agreeable  to 
you,  it  shall  be  submitted  to  your  refusal,  upon  presumption  that,  in  case  of  accept¬ 
ance,  it  will  be  brought  out  between  the  periods  of  Christmas  and  Lent  next.  The 
characters  are  numerous,  and  some  new  decorations  will  be  necessary. 

If  these  proposals  are  acceptable,  it  shall  be  got  ready  for  your  perusal  as  soon  as 
a  correct  copy  can  be  made  out ;  but  as  this  must  fall  singly  upon  myself,  it  will  be 
some  little  time  before  I  can  send  it  to  you  ;  in  the  mean  while  you  will  favour 
me  with  your  answer. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 

LORD  PEMBROKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wilton-house,  Thursday,  March  24,  1768. 

I  must  be  troublesome,  and  rely  on  you  for  myself  and  friends  for  the  25th  of 
next  month,  or  I  shall  lose  all  my  credit  of  being  well  with  you.  They  left  this  yes¬ 
terday  morning,  and  are  to  meet  me  next  Sunday  at  Bath,  from  whence  I  shall  carry 
them  to  Blenheim,  Windsor,  &c.  in  the  road  to  town.  They  seem  charmed  at  the 
Brown-Yike  gardens  of  England  ;  notwithstanding  which  I  plainly  see  that  a  cascade, 
a  fountain,  or  an  cillined  walk  charms  them  more  than  la  belle  nature  peignee.  They 
are  up  at  five,  and  are  indefatigable  ;  so  much  so,  that  I  do  not  doubt  of  their  exe¬ 
cuting,  between  yesterday  morning  and  Sunday,  their  plan  of  seeing  Messrs. 
Beckford’s,  Hoare’s,  Lord  Weymouth’s,  Messrs.  Morris’s,  near  Chepstow,  Mr.  South- 
well,  and  Bristol.  Pray  put  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  Dr.  Hawkesworth’s 
“  Telemachus,”  and  be  so  good  as  to  pay  the  guinea  for  me,  providing  you  will  ask 
me  for  it  when  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  for  mine  is  a  miserable  forgetful 
noddle.  My  compliments,  if  you  please,  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  great 
truth  and  regard, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Pembroke. 

MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  MANSFIELD. 

MY  LORD,  March  21,  1  768. 

1  do  not  mean  to  trouble  your  Lordship  with  any  impertinent  solicitation  in 
favour  of  my  brother,  but  to  make  my  grateful  acknowledgments  for  the  kind 
reception  which  your  Lordship  lately  gave  him.  This  was  much  more  than  he  had 


294 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  least  right  to  expect;  and  indeed,  though  lie  was  urged  by  some  of  his  friends  to 
apply  to  your  Lordship’s  goodness  in  case  of  Mr.  Ashton’s  death,  yet  1  was  so  con¬ 
scious  that  he  had  not  the  smallest  claim  to  your  bounty,  and  I  was  so  much  afraid 
that  your  Lordship  would  think  it  presumption  in  him,  and  folly  in  me  to  suffer  it, 
that  I  have  been  very  unhappy  with  the  consciousness  of  our  being  guilty  of  both. 
I  should  have  done  myself  the  honour  of  paying  my  respects  again  to  Lord  Mans¬ 
field,  had  not  too  great  a  sensibility  hindered  me  from  making  use  of  the  permission 
that  was  given  me. 

I  will  not  presume  to  detain  your  Lordship  any  longer  upon  this  subject,  and  I 
am  confident  as  you  have  so  generously  pardoned  my  brother’s  address  to  you,  that 
you  will  give  me  leave  to  assure  your  Lordship,  that  if,  as  our  Shakspeare  says,  a 
brother  may  commend  a  brother,  I  do  not  know  a  man  of  more  probity  and  hu¬ 
manity,  nor  (except  in  his  late  application)  of  more  modesty. 

I  am,  my  Lord,  &c.  &c. 


LORD  MANSFIELD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[In  the  clear  and  masterly  preface  with  which  Mr.  Pope  graced  the  works  of  Shakspeare,  there  is  the 
following  notandum.  “  Some  of  the  most  shining  passages  are  distinguished  by  commas  in  the  margin  ;  and 
where  the  beauty  lay  not  in  particulars,  but  the  whole,  a  star  is  prefixed.”  In  relation  to  the  following  letter 
of  the  great  Lord  Mansfield,  I  doubted  the  course  to  be  pursued ;  for  the  beauty,  whether  of  principle  or 
expression,  alike  distinguishes  both,  and  the  whole  is  only  the  more  valuable  because  it  is  the  total  of  the 
particulars.  The  reader  will  be  pleased  therefore  ,to  take  this  preliminary  as  the  star  that  points  to  the  beauty 
of  the  whole,  and  insert  the  commas  in  the  margin  at  his  pleasure,  where  he  is  most  impressed  by  either  the 
-wisdom,  the  purity,  or  the  fine  taste  of  the  noble  and  learned  writer. — Ed.] 

March  23,  1768. 

I  have  just  received  the  favour  of  your  letter.  I  very  well  know  that  your  bro¬ 
ther,  from  his  universal  character,  is  worthy  of  the  relation  he  bears  to  you.  The 
office  of  Marshal  I  believe  to  be  lucrative,  but  the  conditions  are  irksome  to  a  liberal 
mind,  and  dangerous.  He  must  live  in  the  prison,  or  within  the  Rules.  He  must 
execute  it  by  himself,  and  he  is  liable  for  all  escapes,  so  that  he  must  live  in  the 
worst  company,  and  often  risk  his  fortune  upon  the  trust  he  is  obliged  to  put  in  bad 
men .  I  found  your  brother’s  course  of  business  had  not  led  him  to  any  connection 
with,  or  experience  in,  the  work  of  that  office. 

There  are  some  in  near  relation  of  service  to  me,  of  whom  1  have  a  very  good 
opinion,  and  to  whom  I  wish  well,  and  yet  for  that  very  reason  have  thought  them 
not  made  to  be  happy  in  such  an  office,  and  to  discharge  it  as  they  ought.  I  would 
not  throw  the  temptation  of  gain  in  their  way  to  put  them  out  of  their  element. 
No  objection  could  lie  to  your  brother  but  of  this  kind,  which  I  mean  to  his  honour. 
I  thought  very  seriously  whom  I  should  recommend,  and  I  destined  for  some  time 
in  my  own  mind,  in  case  he  would  accept  it,  a  man  whom  I  continued  in  an  office 
which  he  held  under  two  of  my  predecessors.  It  has  given  him  great  insight  into 
the  business  of  the  Marshal's  office.  He  has  behaved  very  well,  is  diligent,  know- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


295 


ing,  and  a  man  of  substance,  and  his  course  of  life  and  genius  do  not  put  him  in  a 
light,  or  give  him  a  turn  of  mind,  above  the  drudgery  of  the  charge.  I  thought  he 
had  a  preferable  claim  from  the  relation  of  service  in  which  he  stood.  I  wished  too 
to  be  able  to  say  I  personally  knew  the  man  I  recommended.  The  Marshal  died 
yesterday:  I  mentioned  it  to  this  man,  who  was  ready  to  accept.  I  spoke  to  the 
King  to-day,  who  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  grant  it  upon  my  recommendation. 
Though  I  had  many  applications,  I  do  assure  you,  if  I  had  been  under  the  necessity 
of  giving  it  upon  application,  and  not  upon  my  own  knowledge,  none  would  have 
had  so  much  weight  with  me  as  your  brother’s.  I  shall  always  be  extremely  glad  of 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  :  our  friend  Dr.  Turton  has  promised  me  to  prevail  upon 
you  to  do  me  the  favour  to  dine  with  me,  when  you  have  a  little  leisure.  I  am  with 
much  esteem, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Mansfield. 


TO  CAPTAIN  THOMAS  RIDDELL,  OF  POCOCK. 

SIR;  Calcutta,  26th  March,  1768. 

The  theatre  of  Calcutta  being  in  want  of  scenery,  we  shall  esteem  ourselves 

obliged  to  you,  if  upon  your  arrival  in  England  you  will  request,  on  our  behalf,  one 

of  the  Captains  bound  to  this  port,  to  get  a  set  of  new  scenes  of  the  following  dimen¬ 
sions  painted  upon  canvass,  and  bring  them  out  in  his  privilege,  we  agreeing  to  allow 
him  fifty  per  cent  on  the  prime  cost,  viz. 

2  Scenes  29  feet  broad,  16  feet  high. 

3  do.  26  do.  do.  16  do.  do. 

2  do.  24  do.  do.  16  do.  do. 

As  also  five  copies  of  all  the  acting  plays  and  farces  half-bound,  with  the  words 
“  Calcutta  Theatre”  stamped  on  the  back  of  each,  together  with  a  book  of  copper¬ 
plates  representing  the  different  habits  of  the  theatre,  if  such  a  work  is  to  be  had. 

We  desire  that  one  of  the  scenes  twenty-nine  feet  broad,  may  represent  a  street, 
and  the  other  a  bed-chamber ;  one  of  the  scenes  of  twenty-six  feet  a  street,  another  a 
parlour,  and  the  third  a  hall ;  one  of  the  scenes  of  twenty -four  feet  a  park  with  trees, 
and  the  other  a  garden. 

If  the  time  will  permit  for  painting  the  full-length  figures  of  Tragedy  and 
Comedy,  we  request  they  may  be  added  to  the  above  commissions. 

We  heartily  wish  you  a  good  voyage,  and  are  with  great  regard.  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servants, 

(Signed)  T.  Motte, 

Thos.  Pearson, 
Edw.  Baber, 

Jas.  Ellis. 

(A  true  Copy.) 


296 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


CALCUTTA  ACCOUNT. 


BOUGHT  FOR  THE  CALCUTTA  COMPANY, 


London,  3rd  of  December,  1768. 


£ 

S. 

fl. 

1. 

Mr.  Griffin,  bookseller  and  stationer’s  bill 

60 

17 

0 

2. 

Mr.  Johnston’s  bill  for  music 

4 

4 

0 

3. 

Boxes  and  cords  . 

0 

16 

0 

Porterage,  &c.  . 

0 

3 

0 

66 

0 

0 

3. 

Mr.  French’s  bill  for  painting  scenes 

.  138 

12 

0 

4. 

Mr.  Sanderson’s  bill  for  carpenter’s  work  . 

.  44 

0 

0 

00 

** 

12 

0 

To  the  Prompter,  Mr.  Hopkins,  of  Drury -lane) 

12 

12 

0 

Theatre,  for  his  cutting  and  care  of  books  j 

To  2  vols.  of  dresses 

4 

4 

0 

Total 

265 

8 

0 

Given  to  Hopkips  three  guineas  more 

3 

3 

0 

Total 

£268 

11 

0 

MR.  SHARP  RELATIVE  TO  BARETTI. 


Sin,  Bath,  April  1st,  1768. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  yours  by  yesterday’s  post ;  and  though  I  find  you  have 
been  greatly  provoked  by  Sig.  B.  yet  my  advice  is,  that  you  should  not  take  notice 
of  it  in  print ;  for  as  you  must  write  in  English,  in  order  to  be  read  in  this  country, 
the  disadvantages  you  will  lie  under  in  that  particular  are  unspeakable.  Mr. 
Baretti’s  proficiency  in  our  tongue  is  astonishing  ;  and  were  he  as  capable  of  speak¬ 
ing  truth,  and  making  sensible  observations,  as  he  is  of  the  language,  his  book  would 
have  been  a  most  agreeable  entertainment.  But  he  does  not  appear  to  have  made 
one  quotation  from  the  letters  without  misrepresenting  it,  and  the  direct  lie  he  gives 
to  the  author  of  them,  in  a  great  number  of  pages,  upon  mere  matters  of  fact,  renders 
the  performance  so  despicable,  that  it  certainly  does  not  deserve  any  answer. 
Besides,  Mr.  Baretti  says  you  are  a  clever  fellow;  and  the  only  falsehood  he 
reports  of  you  is  (if  I  remember  rightly)  that  you  wrote  the  letters,  and  boasted  of 
it  to  your  friends  ;  whereas  he  charges  me  with  a  thousand,  and  instead  of  com- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


297 


plimenting  me  with  the  epithet  clever,  says,  I  am  ignorant,  drunk,  stupid,  imper¬ 
tinent,  &c.  be.  Now  if  I  can  laugh,  why  should  not  you  laugh  also  ? 

I  do  not  believe  that  he  contradicts  fairly  more  than  three  assertions  in  the 
letters,  which  are,  that  the  State  of  Venice  receives  informations  privately  by  the 
lions’  mouths ;  that  young  ladies  of  family  are  educated  in  convents  ;  and  that 
Cicisbeos  in  general  are  not  supposed  to  live  innocently  with  the  ladies  they  gallant. 
These  three  suppositions,  he  says,  are  false ;  but  I  do  not  meet  with  any  gentle¬ 
man,  who  has  lived  many  years  in  Italy,  who  does  not  grant  that  they  are  no¬ 
toriously  true. 

He  is  much  ruder  to  me  than  he  is  to  you,  when  he  charges  me  with  only  the 
pretension  of  being  intimate  with  the  Resident  at  Venice,  whom  he  is  sure  I  did  not 
visit  often;  when  he  affirms  I  never  was  in  the  company  of  fashionable  people  at 
Naples,  though  I  declare  we  spent  so  many  evenings  at  Mr.  Hamilton’s,  where  there 
was  a  great  resort  of  the  nobility  ,  that  I  did  not  travel  post  on  the  Loretto  road, 
though  I  declare  I  did ;  and  a  thousand  other  such  like  affronts.  I  fancy,  by  the  by, 
that  he  never  travelled  through  Savoy,  and  he  owns  he  never  went  to  Naples  ;  for  he 
does  not  seem  to  know  that  people  of  the  first  rank  use  voiturins  on  these  roads,  and 
mentions  it  as  a  reflection  on  my  method  of  travelling.  He  has  been  ill-informed 
that  I  kept  my  bed  two  months ;  for  you  may  remember  I  dined  with  the  Consul  on 
Christmas-day,  and  saw  two  of  the  Cocagna’s  in  January.  Somebody  told  him  we 
knew  no  lady  at  Rome  but  the  Marchioness  of  Ceva,  and  I  think  I  never  saw  her  in 
my  life,  so  that  his  instructor  has  misled  him  in  every  article.  But  what  I  have  most 
reason  to  resent,  is  the  character  he  represents  me  to  have  drawn  of  the  Italian  nobility, 
whom  I  have  often  praised,  but  never  once  spoken  ill  of,  except  upon  the  subject  of 
Cicisbeos  :  and  amongst  other  things  he  makes  me  affirm  that  Italy  is  an  unpeopled, 
uncultivated  country  ;  whereas  I  say  that  the  towns  swarm  with  inhabitants,  and 
excepting  the  barren  mountains,  it  is  the  most  fertile  kingdom  in  the  world.  I  have 
laid  before  you  these  instances,  to  show  you  that  I  have  perused  his  account,  though  I 
do  not  think  it  worth  animadversion,  and  I  hope  this  letter  will  convince  you,  that  he  is 
as  much  below  your  attention  as  mine.  Dr.  Smollett  is  too  ill,  and  too  much  engaged, 
to  revise  your  pamphlet ;  and  besides,  he  would  have  answered  him  himself,  had  Ba- 
retti  been  worthy  of  his  pen.  Mr.  Clutterbuck,  I  dare  say,  is  too  much  engaged  to 
undertake  it ;  however,  I  shall  send  him  your  letter.  If  you  wish  to  expose  Baretti 
to  your  Italian  friends,  borrow  of  Mr.  Garrick  his  Frusta  Letteraria,  where  he  has 
treated  his  countrymen  and  countrywomen  with  such  outrageous  satire  and  insolence, 
as  is  not  to  be  paralleled  in  any  other  book.  Vide  pp.  191,  253,  290,  329,  381,  168, 
377,  255,  342,  343,  344,  134,  311,  9,  374.  Vol.  II.  9.  Vol.  I.  154,  316,  354. 

I  am,  your  most  obedient, 

And  most  humble  servant, 

Samuel  Sharp. 


2  Q 


VOL.  I. 


298 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  M.  FRAMPTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  April  7th,  1768. 

I  have  just  received  your  present  from  the  hands  of  Mr.  Clutterbuck.  A  mark 
of  your  obliging  remembrance  is  much  too  flattering  to  my  ambition  to  merit  it,  not 
to  claim  my  instant  acknowledgment.  But  1  have  not  heard  your  name  mentioned 
of  late  without  an  almost  equal  mixture  of  mortification  and  pleasure.  The  first  has 
arisen  from  my  disappointment  hitherto  of  seeing  you  here.  The  second,  from  the 
reports  which  I  have  heard  so  repeatedly  echoed  of  your  continuing  so  totally  your 
very  self  in  the  honour  which  you  do  the  age,  and  the  delight  which  you  give  the 
town.  Believe  me,  no  one  of  the  vast  numbers  who  have  longer  enjoyed,  and  more 
deserved  your  acquaintance,  is  more  sincerely  interested  in  the  permanence  of  your 
health,  and  that  happy  proof  of  it,  your  public  exertion. 

The  great  Wilkes,  you  know,  is  here  ;  but  how  changed  the  scene  !  No  Io!s  re¬ 
sound  !  No  glaziers,  no  tallow-chandlers  rejoice.  He  is  not  now  “  thundering  on 
the  hustings,  with  all  the  mouths  of  Middlesex  to  second  him.”  All,  or  very,  very 
near  all,  is  silence,  shyness,  and  a  strong  stare.  Sir  John  Sebright  gave  yesterday 
(as  Member)  a  great  entertainment  and  ball  to  both  sexes,  at  the  Town-hall.  Every 
body  of  fashion  (I  believe)  was  invited  ;  but  the  hero  was  not.  You  know  the  en¬ 
trances  and  the  exits  of  heroism,  the  vicissitudes  and  the  catastrophes. 

I  am  not  too  impertinent  (am  I  ?)  'in  asking  you  when  the  recollection  pops  upon 
you,  apropos,  to  mention  my  most  affectionately  respectful  compliments  to  Mr.  Burke. 
If  I  could  tell  how,  I  would  add  them  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am  with  strong  sentiments  of  true  esteem  and  attachment, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient, 

And  most  faithful  servant, 

INI.  Frampton. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CHARLES  YORKE. 

SIR,  April  8th,  1768. 

Give  me  leave  to  return  you  my  warmest  respects  for  your  kind  readiness  in  re¬ 
lieving  my  partner  Mr.  Lacy,  and  myself,  from  a  disagreeable  suspense.  I  was  in  the 
country  when  my  brother  took  the  liberty  of  returning  a  very  small  tribute  for  the 
best  advice  in  England.  I  rely  upon  your  usual  goodness  to  me,  to  excuse  my 
brother.  He  meant  well  to  the  managers,  and  was  willing  not  to  deprive  them  of 
the  benefit  of  having  recourse  to  Mr.  Yorke,  whenever  they  might  want  him  ;  which 
they  could  not  dare  to  do,  were  they  not  put  upon  a  footing  with  other  clients :  besides, 
my  brother  well  knew  the  great  pride  and  pleasure  I  had  in  your  very  generous  and 
friendly  behaviour  in  my  particular  concerns,  and  was  desirous  that  I  should  have 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


299 


that  honour  alone  ;  and,  indeed,  however  he  might  be  wrong  in  his  manner,  he  spoke 
the  feelings  of  my  heart. 

I  may  be  selfish  in  the  declaration,  but  I  must  confess  my  weakness  that  I  wish 
not  to  have  a  partner  in  your  favour.* 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 


MR.  W.  MASON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  April  29th,  1768. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  you  have  so  serious  an  impediment  from  visiting  your 
friends ;  but  1  am  sure,  on  my  part,  that  I  ought  to  excuse  you  without  any  apo¬ 
logy  ;  and  I  am  certain  that  Mr.  Stonehewer  (if  he  was  at  home)  would  join  in  saying 
the  same  thing,  though  for  a  different  reason,  for  his  business  abroad  makes  him  very 
difficult  to  be  found  at  his  own  house,  and  my  want  of  business  ought  to  prompt  me 
to  call  at  the  doors  of  such  of  my  friends  as  cannot  call  at  mine,  without  expecting  a 
return.  I  shall,  therefore,  certainly  pay  my  respects  to  you  in  Southampton-street  the 
first  opportunity. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  obedient  servant. 

W.  Mason.| 

I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  May  14th,  1768. 

Though  I  have  given  up  my  whole  thoughts  and  attention  to  “  Eugenie,”;};  ever 
since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  I  cannot  yet  make  out  a  plan  adequate  to  my 
own  ideas  of  the  alteration  I  wish  to  make,  or  render  them  sufficiently  clear  to  you. 
I  must  therefore  entreat  that  you  will  permit  me  to  proceed  in  this  work,  without 
calling  upon  me  to  explain  my  intention  till  I  have  executed  my  own  scheme,  which 
shall  then,  with  the  greatest  humility  and  gratitude,  be  submitted  to  your  superior 
judgment.  1  flatter  myself  you  are  convinced  that  no  person  breathing  can  have  a 
higher  opinion  of  your  abilities  than  I  have ;  and  I  hope  you  also  know,  that  though 
a  woman,  and  an  author,  I  am  neither  self-conceited  nor  obstinate.  I  write  rapidly, 
perhaps  too  rapidly  ;  be  that  as  it  may,  I  will  promise  to  put  my  “  Eugenie”  into 


*  Very  neatly  put ;  that  Lacy,  by  Mr.  Yorke’s  refusing  the  fee  for  the  opinion,  had  become  a  partner  with 
Garrick  in  the  favour  done  him. — Ed. 

t  Mason  the  poet,  author  of  “  Elfrida  and  Caractacus.” 

j  A  comedy  by  Beaumarchais,  which  was  worked  up  into  her  “  School  for  Rakes,”  and  acted  at  Drury- 
lane  Theatre  the  year  following  with  considerable  effect. — Ed. 

2  Q  2 


300 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


your  hands  by  the  beginning  of  .inly  ;  there  will  certainly  be  time  enough  to  make 
any  alterations  which  you  may  think  necessary,  after  that  era. 

In  a  few  days  I  purpose  going  to  Windsor  for  a  month  or  six  weeks ;  I  shall 
there  have  leisure,  and  1  hope,  health  and  spirits,  all  of  which  I  mean  to  devote 
to  “  Eugenie.”  It  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  proceed  without  the  original ;  I  will 
take  the  utmost  care  of  it,  and  promise  to  restore  it  perfectly  safe  to  you.  Notwith¬ 
standing  my  desire  to  cover  my  skeleton,  before  I  venture  to  produce  it  to  you,  I 
shall  very  readily  do  myself  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you  to  receive  any  instruction 
or  commands  you  may  think  proper  to  give,  if  you  desire  it. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  sincerest  regard, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  KEAN  O’HARA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Molesworth-street,  Dublin,  May  28th,  1768. 

It  is  not  solely  the  partiality  of  an  author  towards  his  own  productions  that  ob¬ 
trudes  upon  you  the  trouble  of  perusing  the  enclosed  sheets,*  but,  in  truth,  many  of 
my  friends  here,  who  boast  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance,  and  are  allowed  to  be 
more  than  commonly  versed  in  theatrical  affairs,  urge  me  incessantly  to  offer  them  to 
the  public  under  your  patronage. 

Though  entirely  sensible  of  the  just  and  extensive  influence  of  that  valuable 
patronage,  I  dare  not  indulge  any  sanguine  hopes  of  being  favoured  with  it,  know¬ 
ing  that  it  never  is,  and  indeed  never  ought  to  be,  granted,  except  to  intrinsic  merit ; 
which  no  vanity  can  mislead  me  to  think  any  work  of  mine  possessed  of.  Yet  I 
yield  to  the  importunities  of  these  Savii,  and  humbly  take  the  liberty  (which  I 
request  your  benevolence  to  pardon)  of  addressing  this  trifle  to  your  protection. 

It  was  originally  written  and  partly  set  to  excellent  music  by  Signore  Giordani 
for  the  entertainment  and  performance  of  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  our  musical 
academy ;  but  the  sudden  dissolution  of  that  elegant  society  prevented  the  exhibition 
of  it,  and  doomed  it,  as  I  thought,  and  as  you  perhaps  will  judge  it  deserves,  to  per¬ 
petual  oblivion. 

But  its  fate  is  now  implicitly  submitted  to  your  candid  decision :  if  it  cannot 
plead  for  itself  at  your  tribunal,  I  shall  not  impertinently  presume  to  solicit  you, 
against  yourself,  on  its  behalf.  I  only  offer  it  to  fill  upon  occasion,  as  my  “  Midas’ 
sometimes  does,  the  place  of  a  farce.  As  the  subject  of  my  drama  was  new  here,  the 
long  previous  tale  became  in  some  sort  necessary ;  but  of  this  you  are  absolute 
master  to  reject  or  retain  so  much  only  as  to  your  consummate  judgment  seems 

*  I  should  think  this  “  The  Golden  Pippin,”  which  was  not  brought  out  till  1773.  O’Hara,  like  O’Keeffe, 
was  blind  in  his  latter  days. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


301 


proper :  and  to  deal  in  the  same  manner  with  the  prologues  and  epilogue  which  ac¬ 
company  it ;  in  short,  if  you  condescend  to  accept  me,  “  Me  tibi  totum  dedo.” 

Upon  any  encouragement  from  you,  the  music  score  shall  be  completed,  and  sent 
over  before  the  10th  of  next  August :  but  if  you  find  the  piece,  as  I  fear,  not  worthy 
of  your  attention,  or  of  the  scenes,  habits,  and  machinery,  that  its  appearing  with  de¬ 
cency  on  so  accurate  a  stage  as  yours  may  require,  you  will  be  pleased  to  return  it, 
and  humanely  to  grant  the  luckless  author  your  forgiveness  of  this  bold  intrusion. 

I  am,  with  unfeigned  respect  and  esteem, 

Sir,  your  very  obedient  humble  servant, 

Kean  O’Hara. 


LORD  AND  LADY  MANSFIELD  TO  DOCTOR  TURTON. 

Thursday,  May  19th,  1768. 

Lord  and  Lady  Mansfield  send  their  compliments  to  Doctor  Turton,  and  desire 
that  he  would  engage  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  to  name  some  day  next  week  to  do  them 
the  favour  to  dine  with  them  at  Kenwood ;  Lady  Mansfield  would  have  called  upon 
Mrs.  Garrick  to  have  asked  her  herself,  but  not  being  sure  of  finding  her,  thought 
this  the  more  certain  way. 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


About  May,  176S. 

I  am  extremely  sorry  your  business  is  again  interrupted  by  a  heavy  misfortune 
fallen  upon  me,  the  death  of  my  son,  of  which  I  received  no  information  till  yester¬ 
day  in  the  evening.  Though  he  had  been  dangerously  ill  for  some  time,  yet  I  had 
last  week  very  favourable  accounts  of  him,  his  physicians  thinking  him  in  a  very  fair 
way  of  doing  well ;  judge  then  how  great  my  distress  upon  receiving  so  unexpectedly 
the  account  of  his  death. 

Circumstanced  as  I  am,  and  incapable  of  determining  for  myself,  I  would  request 
the  favour  of  your  advice,  whether  I  shall  defer  my  benefit  to  some  future  night  that 
you  can  spare,  or  take  another  play  on  Wednesday,  as  I  am  really  incapable  of  per¬ 
forming,  even  if  decency  did  not  prevent  my  appearing. 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 


302 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s-inn,  June  2,  1 768. 

You  will  now  allow  that  I  have  waited  with  great  calmness  to  see  whether  it  was 
possible  to  play  “  Zenobia”  eight  times  in  the  course  of  three  months.  It  was  acted 
on  the  27th  of  February  for  the  first  time,  and  from  that  night  to  the  end  of  May,  all 
that  could  be  done  was  to  perform  the  piece  six  times,  in  all  amounting  to  the  mighty 
number  of  seven  nights !* 

By  what  fatality  this  has  so  fallen  out,  I  have  never  paused  one  moment  to 
enquire ;  but  I  know  it  is  without  a  precedent  in  the  annals  of  the  theatre.  I  am 
afraid,  that  while  the  government  of  the  state  has  been  relaxed,  that  of  the  theatre 
has  grown  languid  also ;  otherwise  the  flints  or  the  dungs,  which  to  call  them  I  do 
not  know,  must  before  now  have  been  forced  to  work  for  their  wages.  To  speak 
plain,  Mr.  Barry  and  Mrs.  Dancer  have  behaved  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would  be 
the  extreme  of  folly  in  me  ever  to  trust  either  of  them  again.  What,  therefore, 
must  be  done  with  “  Alzuma?”  I  valuef  that  play  much  more  than  “  Zenobia,”  and 
I  am  heartily  glad  it  has  not  been  strangled  in  its  birth,  as  I  suppose  would  have 
been  the  case  if  it  had  not  been  postponed  to  “  Zenobia.”  The  discouragement  I 
have  met  with  on  this  occasion  has  made  me  now  desirous  to  withdraw  it.  It  is  an 
ill  wind  that  blows  nobody  good.  By  this  step  you  will  be  freed  from  the  burthen 
of  another  play,  and  I  shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  being  independent  of  people  who, 
to  say  no  more,  have  used  me  very  ill.  I  am  sorry  this  transaction  has  proved  so 
unlucky  and  disagreeable. 

All  the  pride  and  feelings  of  an  author  I  have  suppressed,  those  of  a  man  I  cannot 
forget :  “  Alzuma”  must,  therefore,  return  to  his  prison-house.  I  think  Mr.  Hop¬ 
kins  mentioned  to  me  that  he  was  making  a  copy  of  it ;  if  he  has,  I  must  beg  that  you 
will  direct  him  to  send  it  to  me  with  the  original.  Valeat  res  ludicra. 

It  is  fit,  before  I  conclude,  that  I  should  say  what  I  really  think,  namely,  that  the 
managers  would,  in  my  opinion,  have  done  me  all  due  justice  if  it  had  been  practicable. 
In  that  conviction  I  remain,  dear  Sir, 

Yours,  with  every  good  wish, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

*  Such  was  the  great  and  deserved  success  of  a  tragedy  which  originated  with  Tacitus,  was  given  by  Cre- 
billon  to  the  French  stage,  and  adapted  to  the  English  taste  by  the  dramatic  skill  of  Murphy.  It  was  ludi¬ 
crous  enough,  to  be  sure,  that  a  dedication  to  the  actress  should  have  delivered  the  author  up  as  a  helpless 
victim  to  her  caprice.  He  could  not  retract  the  obligations  which  he  had  deliberately  written. — Ed. 

f  If  this  was  the  author’s  real  opinion,  he  had  it  to  himself; — it  was  really  unworthy  of  his  talents. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


303 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  June  3,  1768. 

1  was  considering  your  tragedy  when  I  received  your  letter  to  take  it  home.  I 
have  obeyed  your  commands  very  unwillingly  :  my  brother  will  take  care  to  send 
both  the  copies  to  you  ;  by  mistake  they  were  sent  here  yesterday.  Indeed,  you  will 
do  me  but  justice  if  you  think  that  I  have  done  every  thing  in  my  power  to  show 
my  sentiments  of  the  performance,  and  my  great  regard  for  the  author.  I  have  been 
most  sincerely  vexed  that  a  play,  so  justly  applauded,  could  not  have  been  oftener 
performed,  for  your  credit  and  our  certain  profit :  Mr.  Barry  has  certainly  been  ill,  and 
we  have  all  suffered  for  it.  I  hope  that  I  shall  yet  prevail  with  you  to  change  your 
mind;  be  assured,  whatever  may  be  your  determination,  that  I  shall  always  be  ready 
to  obey  your  commands  as  a  manager,  and  convince  you  of  my  regard  for  you  as  a 
man.  If  it  is  in  my  power,  or  ever  should  be  in  my  power,  I  shall  be  happy  to  know 
it,  and  proud  to  serve  you  on  any  occasion,  for  I  am,  most  truly, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Broad  Street,  June  3,  1768. 

The  treasurer  has  charged  me  with  48/.  for  the  death  of  the  Princess  Louisa, 
which  I  apprehend  ought  not  to  affect  my  agreement,  as  my  time  ended  the  15th  of 
May,  and  as  from  the  Princess’s  death,  which  was  only  two  days  before,  to  that  time, 
benefits  were  appointed  in  which  I  had  no  concern  (and  which  has  been  since  per¬ 
formed).  I  hope,  therefore,  and  believe,  this  deduction  is  made  in  my  account  with¬ 
out  the  order  or  privity  of  the  managers,  who  would  not,  I  am  convinced,  (if  the  case 
were  otherwise)  attempt  to  affect  me  so  severely  by  an  event  which  has  not  in  any 
degree  lessened  the  income  of  any  other  performer,  if  (as  I  apprehend)  the  houses 
have  not  on  this  occasion  played  one  night  less  than  they  would  otherwise  have  done. 

I  am  very  sorry,  Sir,  to  perceive  that  I  am  distinguished  from  every  other  per¬ 
former  by  a  N.  B.  at  the  foot  of  my  account,  signifying,  that  since  the  close  of  it 
“  the  prompter  has  made  a  return  to  the  office  of  four  nights  that  Mr.  Barry  was  not 
able  to  perform,  amounting  to  12/.  4«y.”  not  to  mention  that  these  four  days  of  Mr. 
Barry’s  illness  were  during  the  run  of  the  new  comedy,  when,  if  he  could  have 
played,  it  would  have  been  rather  a  detriment  than  an  advantage  to  the  managers. 

I  must  beg  leave  just  to  observe  to  you,  that  what  with  the  expense  of  500/.  for 
clothes,  and  the  deductions  of  near  200/.,  we  have  served  the  managers  this  season  for 
a  very  moderate  consideration,  our  real  salary  amounting  to  no  more  than  350/.  each, 
though  we  figure  it  so  much  nominally. 


;304 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  go  out  of  town  this  day,  and  therefore  beg  leave  to  know  what  hour  I  may 
have  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you  this  morning. 

1  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY. 

Hampton,  June  3rd,  1768. 

If  there  has  been  any  mistake  in  your  account,  you  may  depend  upon  its  being 
rectified.  I  have  sent  to  my  brother,  that  it  may  be  done  directly.  The  four  days 
you  mention  are  such  a  trifle,  that  I  am  sure  the  managers  will  agree  to  take  it  off. 
I  must  own  that  I  did  not  understand  that  the  season  with  you  ended  the  loth  of 
May.  The  managers  had  no  objection  to  your  going  to  Ireland  on  that  day,  as  you 
thought  it  would  be  of  so  much  consequence  to  you :  but  surely  they  ought  not  to 
lose  the  small  deduction  which  is  allowed  them  by  your  articles,  when  they  are 
obliged  to  give  up  the  great  advantage  of  your  playing  for  them  ;  besides,  I  thought, 
when  you  sent  to  us,  that  you  gave  up  all  thought  of  Ireland,  and  were  ready  to  act 
for  the  remainder  of  the  season  ;  that  you  understood  the  agreement  as  1  did.  But 
these  matters  are  very  easily  settled,  as  I  am  sure  all  parties  mean  fairly  and  justly, 
and  I  hope  amicably  to  each  other. 

I  must  own  that  I  am  a  very  negligent  attender  to  the  accounts  of  the  theatre, 
and  depend  upon  the  accuracy  and  justice  of  other  people  to  do  that  business  for  me: 
I  must,  therefore,  repeat  what  I  said  before,  that  the  managers  will  immediately  set 
to  rights  any  articles  of  your  account  that  may  be  wrong,  and  my  brother  will  be 
ready  to  meet  any  body  for  that  purpose,  whenever  you  please  to  appoint  him. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  beg  my  best  compliments  to  the  lady. 


MR.  RICHARD  RIGBY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Monday,  June  13th,  1768. 

Do  you  imagine,  my  David,  that  any  paltry  consideration  of  office  or  business 
shall  deprive  me  of  the  pleasure  of  our  Mistley  party  ? — I  should  be  worth  but  half* 
the  Pay-office  indeed,  if  I  could  sacrifice  the  rites  of  Mistley  to  any  earthly  consi¬ 
deration  :  no,  they  begin  the  25th  at  dinner — and  you  and  your  Cara  Sposa  are  ex¬ 
pected  by, 

Her  and  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

Richard  Rigby. 

*  The  paymastership  of  the  forces  is  a  pure  sinecure,  yet  so  considerable  as  to  afford  provision  to 
tun  dependents  upon  the  State  ;  though  this  heavy  burthen  is  sometimes  cheerfully  borne  by  one  pair  of 
shoulders. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


305 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR,  Hampton,  June  15th,  Wednesday. 

I  should  have  answered  your  somewhat  extraordinary  letter  immediately,  had 
not  the  subject  of  it  obliged  me  to  see  Mr.  Lacy  first :  had  you  been  at  your  lodgings 
in  London  when  we  sent  my  brother  to  you,  (which  by  the  by  is  not  so  long  as  you 
say,)  your  affair  had  been  fixed  before  this,  or  at  least  we  had  been  better  prepared 
for  our  determination  on  both  sides  last  Tuesday, — so  that  your  putting  the  delay 
upon  us  is  unjust. 

Though  you  are  ingenuously  pleased  to  say  that  we  were  mysterious  at  our  meet¬ 
ing,  I  must  tell  you,  as  ingenuously,  that  our  darkness  proceeded  from  your  want  of 
light ;  for  if  you  had  been  more  explicit  and  intelligible,  we  should  have  been  as  plain 
and  determinate ;  but  perhaps  you  did  not  find  me  so  open,  as  you  did  at  our  first 
engagement  ?  Indeed  I  was  not,  and  I  am  very  sorry  that  you  yourself  have  been 
the  occasion  of  it :  the  complaints  you  made  at  different  times  to  different  persons,  of 
your  doing  this  part  and  not  doing  that,  with  other  disagreeable  givings  out,  at  a 
time  when  I  thought  that  I  was  not  only  acting  towards  you  with  justice  but  with 
friendship — this,  I  say,  determined  me  to  behave  more  cautiously  for  the  future,  and 
to  resolve  that  the  basis  of  any  subsequent  engagement  should  come  from  yourself, 
and  that  what  you  was  to  do  should  be  settled  and  agreed  upon  before  common 
friends,  that  no  more  mistakes  may  be  made  for  the  future.  But  what  do  you  mean 
by  stage  politics,  and  driving  you  into  a  toil  ?  These,  sure,  are  strange  words  to  one 
who  has  served  you  last  season  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  and  who  is  now  well  inclined 
to  serve  you  as  much  as  is  in  his  power. 

I  cannot  answer  your  paragraph  about  Mr.  Clutterbuck,  because  you  say  that  you 
are  in  joke  ;  but  whatever  you  may  feel,  I  must  assure  you,  that  he  is  most  sincerely 
your  well-wisher.  But  to  the  point : — you  seem  to  be  sensible  as  well  as  ourselves,  of 
the  necessity  of  having  Mr.  Mossop,  and  said,  were  you  in  our  places,  that  you  would 
engage  him.  We  intend  to  join  him  to  our  company  if  we  can,  for  notwithstanding 
the  whispers  of  Mr.  Davies,  or  the  reports  of  this  or  that  person,  the  managers  of 
Drury -lane  have  not  had  the  least  correspondence  with  him  about  engaging  till  lately  ; 
and  could  you  have  supplied  the  characters  which  he  is  fit  for  with  credit  to  yourself 
and  us,  we  had  fully  intended  to  look  no  farther.  If  therefore  you  think  it  not 
incompatible  with  your  ease  and  reputation  to  be  in  our  company,  (which  from  your 
conversation  we  had  reason  to  suspect,)  and  will  be  contented  with  a  cast  of  characters 
(of  the  kind  which  I  mentioned  to  you),  Mr.  Lacy  and  I  are  well  inclined  to  enter 
into  another  engagement  with  you. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Bray  send  me  a  line  the  first  opportunity,  and  be  as  plain  as  I  am. 

VOL.  i.  2  K 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


.‘306 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


[fragment.] 


18th  June,  I7G8. 


_ But  you  are  to  say  what  terms  you  desire  and  expect  for  the  next  season, 

which  we  will  either  approve  or  offer  you  others  :  this  is  the  common  and  natural 
way  of  doing  business  between  managers  and  actors,  and  the  only  one  to  bring  this 
affair  to  a  speedy  conclusion. 

P.  S.  If  there  is  not  a  great  difference  in  our  ways  of  thinking,  I  imagine  some 
engagement  might  be  made  with  you  both  as  actor  and  dramatic  author,  that  might 
be  creditable  and  profitable  to  you  and  serviceable  to  us. 


MR.  A.  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  July  16,  1768. 

I  think  it  very  unnecessary  to  submit  the  tragedy  to  any  man’s  judgment  but 
yours.*  Take  it  with  you  to  the  country ;  make  your  objections  :  if  they  can  with 
facility  be  removed,  I  shall  request  the  favour  of  you  to  bring  it  on ;  if  not,  it  is  far 
from  being  my  intention  to  urge  the  point  any  farther.  As  I  intend  to  leave  town 
in  a  few  days,  I  wish  to  have  your  answer  as  soon  as  convenient.  I  know  not  in 
what  manner  Dr.  Goldsmith  came  to  a  knowledge  of  this  transaction,  but  it  is  certain 
that  he  mentioned  it  publicly  last  night  at  Ranelagh  to  a  gentleman,  who  asked  me 
in  a  jeering  manner,  “  What  sentence  the  committee  of  critics  had  passed  on  my 
play  ?”  In  this  situation  of  affairs  I  am  reduced  to  a  disagreeable  dilemma,  as  I  risk 
as  much  from  your  rejection  as  from  the  judgment  of  the  public  :  had  not  this  been 
the  case,  I  intended  never  to  have  troubled  you  upon  this  head.  Your  opinion  of  the 
piece  being,  at  the  same  time,  known  to  be  unfavourable,  will  subject  it  to  many  dis¬ 
advantages,  and  creates  a  risk  in  the  representation,  of  which  I  had  no  idea  before. 
You  may  be  assured  it  is  with  reluctance  that  I  have  given  you  so  much  trouble  in 
this  affair,  and  now  wish  it  had  never  been  agitated.  I  wrote  from  no  view  but 
amusement :  if  I  had  any  reputation  in  letters  to  lose,  I  was  willing  to  have  risked  it 
upon  the  opinion  of  my  friends  ;  and  as  I  have  always  considered  you  in  that  number, 
I  thought  myself  no  less  obliged  to  you  for  your  objections  than  to  them  for  their 
approbation :  but  in  a  matter  of  such  delicacy,  I  hoped  it  would  have  been  confined 
to  ourselves.  In  this  case,  my  resolution  would  not  have  been  difficult  to  take ;  but 
as  I  am  unwilling  to  subject  myself  to  invidious  surmises,  I  think  it  now  in  some 
measure  necessary  to  bestow  some  attention  upon  it,  should  I  find  your  objections  can 
easily  be  removed.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Alex.  Dow. 

*  This  was  the  tragedy  of  “  Zingis,”  performed  the  year  following. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


307 


THE  EARL  OF  BUTE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Wednesday. 

Lord  Bute's  compliments  attend  Mr.  Garrick :  he  receives  with  great  pleasure 
the  present  sent  him,  and  he  assures  him  that  it  is  much  more  agreeable  by  being  the 
produce  of  his  own  pen ;  and  yet  he  is  too  jealous  for  his  country’s  honour  not  to 
wish  in  silence  that  it  had  been  the  first  composition,  as  well  as  the  writing  of  Mr. 
Garrick,  whose  talents  are  not  only  equal  but  much  superior  to  such  a  work.  Lord 
Bute  desires  Mr.  Garrick  would  excuse  his  freedom  as  to  the  purport  of  his  letter ; 
he  is  persuaded  his  silence  can  never  be  taken  ill :  were  it  possible,  he  would  take  care 
to  prevent  it.* 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Windsor  Castle,  July  18,  1768. 

I  have  just  finished,  would  I  could  say  accomplished,  the  translation  of 
“  Eugenie  nothing  but  my  reliance  upon  your  good-nature,  and  the  generous  pro¬ 
mise  of  your  assistance,  could  make  me  venture  to  lay  it  before  you  in  its  present 
weak  state ;  but  we  must  not  conceal  our  maladies  from  our  physician,  if  we  wish  to 
be  cured.  To  your  humane  and  powerful  protection  I  now  commit  it,  without 
descanting  either  on  the  merits  or  defects  of  the  original  or  copy,  and  submit  the 
latter  to  be  moulded  by  your  masterly  hand  into  whatever  form  you  please.  An  ill 
state  of  health,  and  a  very  dissipated  situation,  have,  perhaps,  prevented  my  attending 
to  the  minute  faults  of  a  first  copy  ;  but  you  are  too  good  a  critic  to  lay  any  stress 
upon  them.  You  will  find  that  I  have  not  deviated  from  the  original  story,  which  I 
am  happy  to  know  that  you  approve,  and  those  characters  which  I  have  introduced  to 
lengthen,  will,  I  hope,  also  strengthen  the  performance ;  but  it  is  solely  on  the  pleas- 


* 

*  The  letters  of  great  statesmen  are  apt  to  partake  of  a  certain  cabinet  air,  by  which  they  are  rendered 
mysterious  and  unintelligible.  It  would,  I  imagine,  be  very  difficult,  as  an  exercise,  to  write  to  your  friend  a 
card  so  completely  obscure,  as  this  is,  to  every  other  being.  I  can  only  conjecture  the  subject  of  the  note. 

Perhaps  the  present  to  his  Lordship  might  be  Mr.  Garrick’s  farce  newly  printed,  called  “  A  Peep  behind 
the  Curtain,  or  the  New  Rehearsal.”  This  was  the  “  produce  of  his  own  pen,”  but  not  his  as  to  the  “Jirst 
composition ”  of  such  a  piece,  that  merit  belonging  to  the  author  of  the  original  “  Rehearsal to  the  production 
of  which  original  his  Lordship  thought  Mr.  Garrick’s  talents  fully  competent,  and  even  to  greater  matters  still. 
One  is  not  surprised  that  silence  should  continue  the  obscurity  in  his  Lordship’s  note  to  the  very  close  of  it. 

The  “  Peep  behind  the  Curtain”  may  discover  a  little  more,  namely,  that  its  success  was  unbounded, 
being  acted  a  hundred  and  eight  times  in  one  year ;  and  that  when  Garrick  settled  with  Barthelemon  for  the 
music  of  the  burletta  of  “  Orpheus,”  in  the  second  act,  he  struck  off  ten  guineas  from  the  fifty,  which  he  had 
promised,  saying,  that  “  the  dancing  cons  had  cost  him  so  much  money  he  could  not  really  afford  to  give  the 
composer  more.” — Ed. 


l2  R  2 


308 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ing  dependence  of  your  inclinations  to  serve  me  that  I  rest  my  hopes  of  its  success : 
and  with  the  sincerest  gratitude  for  them,  I  am.  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 

I  shall  return  to  London  next  week,  and  remain  there  till  I  receive  your  com¬ 
mands:  as  soon  as  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  or  hearing  from  you  I  shall  go  into 
Hertfordshire. 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Windsor  Castle,  July  20,  1768. 

I  am  extremely  sorry  that  the  diffidence  I  expressed,  in  regard  to  the  work  I  sent 
you  by  my  son,  should  alarm  or  prepossess  you  against  it.  There  are  few  people  in  the 
world  who  have  a  humbler  opinion  of  themselves  or  their  writings  than  I,  but  I  must 
be  vain  indeed,  if  I  did  not  suppose  that  any  dramatic  performance  might  receive  the 
highest  improvement  from  your  hand :  and  as  you  have  been  so  good  to  promise  me 
your  assistance,  I  did  not  even  wait  to  give  the  work  in  question  the  little  advantages 
of  correcting  or  finishing  which  it  may  yet  receive  from  me,  but  submitted  it  in  the 
weak  state  of  a  first  copy,  or  rough  draft,  to  your  inspection.  I  flatter  myself,  how¬ 
ever,  that  you  will  find  it  not  unworthy  your  attention,  as  the  few  persons  I  have 
shown  it  to  pronounce  it  to  be  more  interesting  than  any  thing  they  have  seen  for  a 
long  time.  From  the  circumstances  6f  the  story,  the  last  act  does  not  abound  with 
incident  as  much  as  the  preceding  ones  ;  I  have  therefore  made  it  short,  as  all  conver¬ 
sations  which  follow  the  denouement  are  generally  tiresome  to  the  audience.  There  is 
no  part  of  the  performance  that  I  am  not  ready  to  alter  at  your  desire,  and  I  intreat 
you  to  consider  it  as  the  work  of  one  whose  highest  ambition  will  be  satisfied  by  your 
approbation,  and  whose  sincerest  gratitude  will  ever  follow  your  kind  attention  to 
her,  and  who  is,  with  unfeigned  regard, 

Your  much  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 

My  son  forgot  “Eugenie”  when  he  went  to  wait  upon  you;  it  shall  be  sent  to 
your  house  in  London  by  the  first  opportunity.  He  begs  leave  to  present  his  best 
respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you. 


THOMAS  GAINSBOROUGH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  July  27,  1768. 

I,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  world,  acknowledge  your  riches,  and  know  your 
princely  spirit ;  but  all  will  not  do,  for,  as  I  told  you  before,  I  am  already  overpaid  for 
that  shabby  performance  ;  and  if  you  have  a  mind  to  make  me  happier  than  all  the 
presents  London  can  afford,  you  must  do  it  by  never  thinking  yourself  at  all  in  my 
debt.  I  wished  many  years  for  the  happiness  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  acquaintance,  and  pray, 
deal-  Sir,  let  me  now  enjoy  it  quietly ;  for  sincerely  and  truly,  I  shall  not  be  easy  if 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


309 


you  give  way  to  any  of  your  romantic  whimsies :  besides,  d — n  it,  I  thought  you 
knew  me  too  well,  you  who  can  read  hearts  and  faces  both  at  a  view,  and  that  at  first 
sight  too.  Come,  if  you  will  not  plague  me  any  more  upon  this  frightful  subject,  I 
will  tell  you  a  story  about  first  sight.  You  must  know,  Sir,  whilst  I  lived  at  Ips¬ 
wich,  there  was  a  benefit  concert  in  which  a  new  song  was  to  be  introduced,  and  I 
being  steward,  went  to  the  honest  cabinet-maker  who  was  our  singer  instead  of  a 
better,  and  asked  him  if  he  could  sing  at  sight,  for  that  I  had  a  new  song  with  all  the 
parts  wrote  out.  “  Yes,  Sir,”  said  he,  “  I  can.”  Upon  which  I  ordered  Mr.  Giardini 
of  Ipswich  to  begin  the  symphony,  and  gave  my  signal  for  the  attention  of  the  com¬ 
pany  ;  but  behold,  a  dead  silence  followed  the  symphony  instead  of  the  song  ;  upon 
which  I  jumped  up  to  the  fellow  :  “  D — n  you,  why  don’t  you  sing?  did  not  you 
tell  me  you  could  sing  at  sight?”  “  Yres,  please  your  honour,  I  did  say  I  could  sing 
at  sight,  but  not  first  sight.” 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Gainsborough.* 

P.  S.  I  beg,  Sir,  you  will  leave  the  affair  of  Gossett  to  me.  I  shall  give  him  a  bill 
payable  at  first  sight,  I  assure  you. 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Windsor  Castle,  Friday  Morning. 

With  this  you  will  receive  my  first  act,  which  is  all  I  have  been  able  to  get 
through  since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you.  I  hope  you  will  find  it  much  im¬ 
proved,  and  your  objections  entirely  removed. 

My  dear  Sir,  how  shall  I  tell  you?  You  will  hang  me  !  And  I  confess  1  deserve 
to  be  hanged ;  but  the  truth  must  out.  I  have  by  some  unfortunate  accident  lost  the 
paper  of  memorandums,  which  I  made  in  consequence  of  our  last  conversation :  this 
has  fretted  me  considerably,  and  almost  addled  my  poor  brains.  I  am  afraid  to  pro¬ 
ceed,  and  yet  unwilling  to  stop.  I  remember  your  plan  for  the  fourth  and  fifth  acts, 
but  the  second  and  third  have  quite  escaped  me.  May  I  hope  you  will  be  so  good  as 
to  recollect  your  own  observations,  and  enclose  them  to  me  as  soon  as  it  is  conve¬ 
nient  ?  Indeed,  Sir,  I  blush  while  I  make  this  request,  though  I  have  no  reason  to 
doubt  your  goodness  to  me. 

I  am  to  thank  you  for  your  letter  from  Gregorie’s,  and  most  sincerely  wish  I  may 
be  able  to  answer  your  expectations,  as  my  highest  ambition  would  be  gratified  by 
your  approbation.  I  beg  you,  Sir,  to  present  my  respects  to  Mr.  Beighton,  and  to 
believe  me  with  the  truest  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged,  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 

I  send  the  former  first  act  as  far  as  relates  to  the  latter :  the  second  act  is  to  open 
with  the  interview  between  Harriet  and  Lord  Eustace. 

*  The  great  painter,  who  excelled  in  portrait  as  well  as  landscape.  The  best  estimate  of  his  talents  is  in 
the  lecture  which  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  devoted  to  him. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


310 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Windsor  Castle,  August  19th,  1768. 

As  your  hurry  is  over,  I  hope  your  auger  is  so  too,  and  that  I  may  now  venture 
to  tell  you  that  your  letter  gave  me  very  great  concern  :  it  would  have  vexed  me  still 
more,  if  I  had  been  conscious  of  deserving  your  resentment ;  hut  let  that  matter  rest. 

I  should  be  very  glad  to  know  your  opinion  of  the  first  act,  which  1  sent  you ; 
and  by  what  means  I  can  best  convey  the  second  act  to  you  ? 

I  perfectly  agree  with  you,  that  our  present  plan  is  a  very  good  one,  and  I  must 
beg  leave  to  assure  you  that  I  was  never  more  seriously  engaged  in  any  pursuit  than 
in  endeavouring  to  execute  it  to  your  satisfaction.  There  is  a  difficulty  which  has 
arisen  with  regard  to  the  unity  of  time,  by  changing  the  first  interview  between  Lord 
Eustace  and  Harriet  into  the  second  act ;  but  this  may  be  easily  settled  when  we  meet. 
I  flatter  myself  that  the  characters  are  much  strengthened  by  the  re-writing,  and  that 
the  improbabilities  are  removed,  as  far  as  the  original  plan  will  admit  ;  but  I  most 
willingly  submit  my  opinion  to  your’s  :  as  I  have  the  strongest  dependence  both  on 
your  judgment  and  good-nature,  I  shall  always  be  grateful  for  your  kind  exertion  of 
them  in  my  favour,  and  ever  acknowledge  myself, 

Your  sincerely  obliged,  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  PATERSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  New  Burlington-street,  20th  August,  1768. 

Calling  at  the  house  for  places  the  other  day,  I  inquired  after  your  health  of 
your  brother  George,  Avhen,  from  some  oracular  answers  to  some  of  my  inquiries,  I 
had  reason  to  suspect  that  all  is  not  well  in  Denmark.  Some  dark  hints  of  your 
being  disgusted,  and  resolved  to  quit  the  stage,  have  alarmed  me.  It  was  an 
additional  mortification  to  me  to  find  that  I  am  no  longer  in  your  confidence  ;  since 
you  decline  imparting  your  complaints  to  me,  who  so  heartily  (and  I  may  say  suc¬ 
cessfully)  laboured  to  remove  them  two  years  ago.  If  this  is  so,  you  will  think  me 
impertinent  in  wishing  to  know  what  you  do  not  care  to  tell  me.  If,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  I  still  retain  your  good  opinion,  you  will  at  once  open  your  mind  to 

Your  sincere  friend  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

John  Paterson. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


311 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  PATERSON. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Sunday  21st,  1768. 

I  was  very  glad  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  procure  you  sucli  good  places.  I  have 
been  well  in  my  health,  and  will  endeavour  to  continue  so,  in  spite  of  some  disagree¬ 
able  circumstances  which  have  lately  happened  between  my  partner  and  me.  And 
that  they  may  have  no  effect  upon  my  spirits,  I  am  resolved  to  close  our  theatrical 
connection  as  soon  as  possible.  I  have  (and  T  believe  you  know  it)  withstood  very 
great  temptations  to  be  easy  at  Drury-lane,  and  to  end  my  theatrical  life  there ;  but 
fate,  and  Mr.  Lacy,  who  seems  to  be  alone  insensible  of  my  merit  and  services,  will 
drive  me  away,  and  they  shall  have  their  ends,  I  would  not  trouble  you  any  more, 
because  I  know  it  is  in  vain  to  settle  us  as  we  ought  to  be.  Mr.  Lacy  thinks  and 
speaks  very  injuriously  and  unjustly  of  my  brother,  and  has  lately  done  some  things 
which  I  think  shows  a  spirit  contrary  to  that  of  our  articles,  and  the  terms  of  our 
reconciliation  settled  before  you  ;  therefore  I  will  immediately  prepare  for  my 
brother’s  retreat,  and  will  most  assuredly  follow  him.  I  will  have  no  more  alter¬ 
cations  with  Mr.  Lacy ;  I  now  see  the  depth  of  his  good-will  to  me  and  mine,  and 
shall  act  accordingly. 

When  you  and  Mrs.  Paterson  will  make  us  happy  at  Hampton,  you  shall  know 
more.  Mrs.  Garrick  begs  that  you  will  fix  some  day  in  the  next  week,  Sunday, 
Monday,  or  Tuesday. 

I  am  ever,  and  most  truly  your  affectionate 

D.  Garrick. 

Do  not  imagine  that  I  have  slighted  your  advice  by  not  communicating  my 
sentiments.  I  have  really  avoided  it  from  mere  regard  to  you. 


T.  G.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  22nd  Aug.  1768. 

I  doubt  I  stand  accused  (if  not  accursed)  all  this  time  for  my  neglect  of  not  going 
to  Stratford,  and  giving  you  a  line  from  thence  as  I  promised ;  but,  Lord !  what  can 
one  do  such  weather  as  this — continual  rains  ?  My  genius  is  so  damped  by  it,  that  I 
can  do  nothing  to  please  me.  I  have  been  several  days  rubbing  in  and  rubbing  out 
my  design  for  Shakspeare,*  and  d — n  me  if  I  think  I  shall  let  it  go  or  let  you  see  it 
at  last.  I  was  willing,  like  an  ass  as  I  am,  to  expose  myself  a  little  out  of  the  simple 

*  It  is  a  pity  that  such  a  genius  as  Gainsborough  should  have  dishonoured  himself,  and  sullied  pure 
white  paper  by  such  profane  filth  !  I  would  have  letters  written  colloquially,  and  conversation  be  guardedly 
innocent  and  decent.  IIow  could  Pope’s  immortal  couplet  be  lost  upon  such  men  as  were  Hoadly  and 
Gainsborough  ? — Ed. 


312 


PRIVATF.  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


portrait  way,  and  had  a  notion  of  showing  where  that  inimitable  poet  had  his  ideas 
from,  by  an  immediate  ray  darting  down  upon  his  eye  turned  up  for  the  purpose; 
but  G— d  d— n  it,  I  can  make  nothing  of  my  ideas,  there  has  been  such  a  fall  of  rain 
from  the  same  quarter.  You  shall  not  see  it,  for  I  will  cut  it  before  you  can  come. 
Tell  me,  dear  Sir,  when  you  purpose  coming  to  Bath,  that  I  may  be  quick  enough  in 
my  motions.  Shakspeare’s  bust  is  a  silly  smiling  thing,*  and  1  have  not  sense 
enough  to  make  him  more  sensible  in  the  picture,  and  so  I  tell  ye,  you  shall  not 
see  it. 

I  must  make  a  plain  picture  of  him  standing  erect,  and  give  it  an  old  look,  as  if 
it  had  been  painted  at  the  time  he  lived  ;  and  there  we  shall  fling  ’em,  dam’  me. 

Poor  Mrs.  Pritchard  died  here  on  Saturday  night  at  eleven  o’clock  ;  so  now  her 
performances  being  no  longer  present  to  those  who  must  see  and  hear  before  they  can 
believe,  will,  you  know,  my  dear  Sir, — But  I  beg  pardon,  I  forgot — Time  puts  all 
into  his  fob,  as  I  do  my  time-keeper — watch  that,  my  dear. 

Who  am  I  but  the  same,  think  you  ? 

T.  G. 

“  Impudent  scoundrel !”  says  Mr.  G - k.  “  Blackguard!” 


MR.  PATERSON  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

t 

DEAR  GEORGE,  New  Burlington-street,  Aug.  24,  1768. 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  alter  your  brother’s  letter  to  me  by  marking  the  part 
I  would  have  left  out,  as  a  complaint  which  in  my  opinion  cannot  be  supported. 
And  yet  upon  reflection  I  think  it  may  perhaps  be  good  policy  to  let  it  stand, f  that, 
by  deciding  it  against  him,  I  may  have  more  weight  in  my  determination  of  those 
points  in  which  Lacy  is  undoubtedly  wrong.  When  fair  argument,  or  the  justice  of 
the  case,  are  not  likely  to  prevail,  through  the  adversary’s  prejudices  or  stupidity,  I 

*  Shakspeare' s  bust  is  a  silly  smiling  thing. — Of  this,  Mr.  Gainsborough  was  a  perfect  judge,  and  he  speaks 
the  exact  truth  of  it.  Of  late,  we  have  had  a  rage  for  what  has  been  termed  the  genuine  Shakspeare,  and  an 
attempt  was  made  by  some  unthinking  people,  to  substitute  the  Stratford  fatuity  for  the  at  least  sensible 
representation  in  Poet’s  Corner.  The  statue  there  seems  to  be  an  improvement  of  the  Chandos  picture, 
which  was  painted  evidently  by  a  very  poor  artist.  What  was  said  of  the  heroes  before  Agamemnon — “  they 
had  no  poet,  and  they  died,”  is  applicable  to  the  features  of  the  Poet  himself ; 

“  They  had  no  painter,  and  they  died.” 

It  is  undoubtedly  true,  that  a  rude  likeness  may  be  drawn  by  a  dauber ;  and  we  can  rely  so  far  upon  the 
dismal  resemblance  ;  but  what  can  be  done  with  it  in  a  period  where  art  is  required,  to  render  pictures 
endurable  ?  If  we  correct  the  drawing,  we  perhaps  expunge  some  absolute  peculiarity  in  the  feature  ;  if  we 
allow  imagination  to  infer  the  Poet’s  personal  character  from  his  mental  power,  we  are  calling  upon  fancy  to 
regulate  fact,  and  every  man  will  draw  a  Shakspeare  for  himself.  Who  that  ever  looked  at  the  head  of  Sir 
Walter  Scott  of  our  own  day,  could  believe  him  to  be  the  Genius  of  Romance  ? — Ed. 

f  Admirable,  judicious,  excellent  Paterson  ! — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


313 


think  it  justifiable  to  employ  a  little  art  for  obtaining  what  ought  not  to  be  refused. 
King  William  had  occasion  for  a  million  in  the  war  he  was  engaged  in.  The  Tories 
violently  opposed  every  measure  of  Government.  One  of  them,  however,  saw  the 
justice  and  necessity  of  the  demand,  and  therefore  advised  the  Minister  to  ask  for 
two  millions,  that  by  restraining  the  grant  to  one,  he  might  appear  to  thwart  the 
Minister  and  yet  supply  the  exigencies  of  the  State.  I  am  glad  your  brother  has 
deferred  our  meeting  at  Hampton.  Mrs.  Jones  is  so  ill,  and  my  wife  so  good  a 
daughter,  that  I  fear  we  shall  not  be  in  a  condition  to  think  of  pleasure  for  some 
time.  We  neither  of  us  could  have  a  greater  than  to  enjoy  the  company  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Garrick.  Pray  assure  them  both  of  our  affection  and  esteem,  and  believe  me 
ever 

Your  faithful  friend, 

John  Paterson. 


REV.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thundridge,  Sept.  27,  1768. 

I  but  this  moment  received  yours,  which  was  sent  me  with  other  letters  from 
London,  and  have  taken  this  first  opportunity  of  answering  it.  The  state  of  my  mind, 
which  you  desire  to  know,  is  this :  after  the  many  and  great  obligations  which  I  have 
to  Mr.  Garrick,  I  should  think  it  highly  ungrateful  not  to  prefer  his  advantage  and 
convenience  to  my  own ;  and  have,  besides,  such  an  opinion  of  his  judgment  as  will 
incline  me,  in  most  cases,  to  submit  implicitly  to  it.  I  desire  therefore  you  would 
act  in  the  point  you  mention,  as  may  be  most  agreeable  to  your  interest  and  inclina¬ 
tion.  I  should  be  very  sorry  to  prevent  the  appearance  of  any  performance  of  merit, 
as  such  are  not  to  be  met  with  every  day,  and  therefore  beg  it  may  be  produced 
immediately. 

With  regard  to  my  own  tragedy,  the  state  of  it  (which  you  will  perhaps  think 
but  an  indifferent  one)  is  fairly,  candidly,  and  exactly  as  follows.  The  two  first  acts 
in  a  very  imperfect  condition,  and  not  such  as  please  me  at  present — the  principal 
scene  of  the  third  (and  that  only)  well  and  carefully  written.  The  two  last  acts  com¬ 
pletely,  and,  I  think,  highly  finished :  the  part  of  the  Duke  (turn  to  Voltaire  and 
look  at  it)  is  amazingly  improved,*  and  such  a  one  as  would  almost  deserve  a  Gar¬ 
rick  to  support  it,  and  which,  if  you  were  as  willing  as  you  are  able  to  perform, 
would  be  no  disgrace  to  you.  The  whole,  however,  cannot  be  perfectly  fit  for  your 
inspection  till  near  Christmas,  at  which  time  (and  not  before)  it  will  and  shall,  if  I 
have  health,  be  ready. 

“  Hoc  si  quid  promittere  de  me 
Possum,  promitto.”f 

*  I  fancy  he  means  the  Duke  de  Foix. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  2  S 


t  IIou.  Sat.  4.  Book  i. 


314 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


You  may  then,  if  any  of  your  engines  chance  to  fail,  make  use  of  mine,  or  defer  it 
till  the  next  season,  which  will  be  equally  agreeable  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  obedient  serv  ant, 

T.  Francklin. 

P.  S.  Whenever  I  appear  on  the  stage,  1  propose  for  many  reasons  to  be  incog. : 
I  beg  therefore  that  this  letter  and  the  subject  of  it  may  be  so  likewise. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Windsor  Castle,  Aug.  24th,  1768. 

Ten*  thousand  thanks  to  you  for  your  delightful  letter  :  I  wish  you  were  to  scold 
me  even*  day,  provided  you  were  obliged  to  make  me  such  amends.  You  say  I  am 
not  to  expect  “  milk  and  honey  from  you  ay,  but  I  do,  and  corn,  wine,  and  oil 
also — for  indeed,  my  dear  Sir,  if  “  Eugenie”  should  ever  produce  any  of  them  for  me, 
I  shall  consider  mvself  indebted  to  vou  for  them. 

J  J 

I  hope  you  will  not  think  I  have  been  idle,  as  I  now  send  you  the  second  and 
third  acts.  I  have,  as  you  desired,  just  sketched  out  the  scene  between  Wilson  and 
Sir  Wm.  Evans :  vou  will  see  how  much  it  wants  your  aid,  and  I  doubt  not  but  vou 
will  give  it.  The  character  of  Wilson  has,  I  think,  been  of  great  use  to  this  drama  ; 
but  he  may,  if  you  please,  become  an  ornament  to  it  also.  I  have  not  time  to  look 
over  the  third  act,  which  I  have  this  moment  finished,  as  I  take  the  opportunity  of 
sending  it  by  a  young  gentleman  who  waits  till  I  have  finished  this,  with  the  utmost 
impatience. 

I  know  not  whether  I  am  to  rejoice  or  grieve  that  you  are  to  play  Macbeth 
before  the  King  of  Denmark.  Do,  my  dear  Sir,  have  pity  on  me  ;  remember  I  have 
never  seen  you  play  it,  and  that  I  would  give — I  will  not  say  how  much,  because  1 
should  still  think  it  too  little — indeed  you  will  extremely  oblige  me,  if  you  will  make 
Johnson  keep  me  a  couple  of  places  anywhere  that  I  can  see  you. 

I  beg  you  will  present  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick :  I  hope  I  shall  some 
time  or  other  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  her  tell  me,  what  I  am  very  ready  to 
believe,  that  it  is  rather  your  good  than  ill-nature  that  prompts  you  at  some  times 
to  seem  angry.  I  shall  be  but  too  happy,  if  what  I  now  send  you,  should  have  the 
good  fortune  to  please ;  or  if  you  should  think  that  it  wants  but  little  mending,  I 
shall  be  ready  to  set  about  any  species  of  alteration  that  you  think  necessary. 

I  have  not  left  mvself  room  on  the  other  side,  and  must  therefore  subscribe  mv- 

•i  *  J 

self  on  this,  your  truly  obliged  friend, 

And  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


315 


MR.  ALEXANDER  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lisle-street,  Sept.  1st,  1768. 

Having  now  finished  the  alterations  you  were  pleased  to  recommend  in  the  tra¬ 
gedy  of  “  Zingis,”*  I  herewith  send  the  fourth  and  fifth  act  for  your  perusal,  that 
you  may  be  the  better  able  to  judge  of  the  performance  by  having  it  all  at  once  be¬ 
fore  you.  The  alterations  I  have  made  in  consequence  of  your  very  judicious  obser¬ 
vations,  have  amounted  to  little  less  than  five  hundred  lines,  and  I  flatter  myself  that 
the  piece  is  become  much  less  exceptionable  than  it  was  before.  I  hope  you  will  now 
find  the  character  of  Ovisa  is  supported  throughout,  and  even  rising  in  every  scene  to 
the  last.  Should  you  think  it  necessary,  I  shall  lengthen  the  scene  of  Aunac  in  the 
third  act ;  for,  since  the  day  I  had  the  honour  of  conversing  with  you  upon  that  sub¬ 
ject,  a  thought  has  arisen  to  me  that  will,  I  think,  mend  it.  I  hope  you  will  do  me 
the  favour  to  excuse  the  trouble  I  have  given  you,  and  that  you  will  convey  to  me 
your  opinion  as  soon  as  it  shall  be  convenient. 

I  am,  with  great  esteem,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Alex.  Dow. 


MR.  ALEXANDER  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lisle  street,  Sept.  8th,  1768. 

I  have  with  great  attention  made  those  alterations  in  the  fourth  act  which  you 
were  so  obliging  as  to  point  out.  I  have  thrown  the  scene  of  Zingis  out,  lengthened 
the  scene  of  Ovisa  and  Timur,  and  made  the  latter  embark  in  the  conspiracy  in  the 
way  which  I  conceived  you  desired  ;  at  any  rate,  it  is  the  only  way  which  will  suit 
the  general  plan  of  the  other  acts.  The  fifth  act  remains  as  it  was,  as  it  naturally 
rises  from  the  preparations  made  in  the  preceding  one.  I  have  lengthened  the  scene 
of  Aunac  in  the  third  act,  and  inserted  a  speech  in  the  part  of  Zingis,  which  displays 
the  political  qualities  of  that  hero.  I  have  also  altered  the  form  of  the  first  scene  of 
the  first  act,  and,  I  think,  made  the  story  more  clear,  though  I  have  reduced  near 
forty  lines.  Upon  the  whole,  after  the  most  critical  perusal  of  the  play,  I  do  not 
think  any  more  alterations  in  the  scenes  can  be  made,  consistent  with  the  general 
plan :  as  to  lines,  expressions,  or  a  few  sentiments,  these  may  be  changed  without 

*  I  have  never  been  able  to  ascertain  why  the  very  moderate  fame  of  this  author  has  been  disputed  with 
him.  He  was  born  in  Scotland,  and  resided  long  in  India.  His  play  exhibits  the  barbarous  names  of  Hin- 
dostan,  and  the  false  sublime  of  Ossian  ;  all  this  was  to  be  expected  from  himself : — that  he  had  many  friends 
and  countrymen  who  were  clamorous  for  his  success,  was  to  be  expected  from  them ;  he  had  obtained  mili¬ 
tary  rank,  and  could  return  such  favours  in  kind. —  Ed. 

2  S  2 


316 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


much  trouble,  if  it  is  necessary.  I  have  to  ask  your  pardon  for  the  trouble  I  have 
given  you  on  this  occasion,  and  to  beg  that  you  will  accept  my  thanks  for  the  atten¬ 
tion  you  have  paid  to  the  amendment  of  the  performance. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Alex.  Dow. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Windsor  Castle,  Sept.  2d,  17G8. 

I  am  extremely  happy  to  hear  that  you  approve  of  the  three  acts  I  have  sent 
you  ;  the  fourth  goes  with  this ;  I  hope  it  will  be  equally  agreeable  to  you.  There  are 
some  inconsistencies  in  it,  which  I  could  not  avoid,  but  which  may  be  very  easily 
remedied  by  trifling  insertions  in  the  foregoing  acts.  The  fifth  act  will,  I  fear, 
be  very  difficult.  I  think  Lord  Eustace’s  intention  of  not  firing  upon  Sir  William 
Evans  should  be  known  to  the  audience  before  the  duel  is  prevented.  Would 
you  have  him  then  offer  his  hand  to  Harriet,  or  as  it  was  before,  go  to  his  father  and 
return,  after  acquainting  him  with  his  situation  ?  Of  what  use  can  Frampton  be  in 
the  last  act  ?  I  should  be  very  glad  to  have  your  opinion  upon  these  matters  before 
I  proceed,  though  I  am  extremely  impatient  to  get  the  play  finished,  as  I  have  busi¬ 
ness  that  calls  me  to  London,  and  only  wait  at  Windsor  to  receive  your  commands. 
The  time  of  this  piece  is  totally  unsettled,  and  will  require  some  attention.  There 
are  several  other  things  that  I  have  made  memorandums  of,  in  order  to  mention 
to  you  when  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you.  I  mean  to  cut  out  that  part  where 
the  Colonel  offers  himself  for  Lord  Eustace’s  second,  as  it  must  lessen  the  surprise  of 
bis  being  so  ;  but  I  submit  the  whole  to  your  direction,  Sir,  and  only  plead  the  merit 
of  being  ready  to  obey. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  sincerest  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  ALEXANDER  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  London,  Sept.  13th,  1768. 

I  have  the  honour  of  your  letter,  together  with  the  tragedy  of  “  Zingis.”  I  am 
sorry  that  the  manner  I  expressed  myself  seems  to  have  been  understood  to  preclude 
any  farther  criticisms  you  might  be  pleased  to  make.  I  am  very  sensible  of  the 
favour  you  did  me  in  your  former  strictures,  and  my  attention  to  them  had  much 
mended  the  performance  ;  and  I  candidly  confess  it  was  then  my  opinion  that  if  these 
alterations  had  not  rendered  the  play  fit  for  the  stage,  I  thought  myself  unequal  to 
the  task.  You  must  by  this  time  be  in  some  measure  a  judge  of  what  I  can  do ;  and 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


317 


if  the  plan  is  not  fundamentally  wrong,  I  will  alter  any  small  part  that  you  may 
think  capable  of  improvement.  But  I  have  no  great  spirit  to  proceed  farther  without 
some  prospect  of  rendering  it,  with  these  amendments,  worthy  of  your  acceptance. 
I  have  all  along  professed  an  uncommon  respect  for  Mr.  Garrick’s  judgment  in 
matters  of  this  kind,  and  I  shall  implicitly  follow  his  directions. 

I  am,  with  respect,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Alex.  Dow. 


MR.  ALEXANDER  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Saturday  Night. 

According  to  your  proposal,  I  shall  be  glad  to  be  honoured  with  your  company 
at  a  petit  dinner  on  Monday,  and  shall  endeavour  to  get  our  friends  to  convene  at 
two  o’clock.  Mr.  McPherson  went  out  of  town  this  morning,  and  I  have  not  yet 
seen  Mr.  Cumberland  ;  but  I  make  no  doubt  but  we  shall  be  able  to  get  them  toge¬ 
ther,  and  should  it  happen  otherwise,  we  must  settle  the  matter  between  ourselves. 
I  hope  nothing  but  friendship  will  have  place  amongst  us ;  for  upon  full  conviction 
that  no  private  views  exist,  we  ought  certainly  to  hear  every  objection  with  candour, 
since  it  is  well  known  the  opinions  of  the  first  men  in  every  walk  of  life  seldom 
coincide  in  every  particular.  I  had  written  three  sheets  about  your  objections  and 
explanations  of  particular  passages  where  I  think  you  have  misunderstood  me,  which 
must  certainly  be  my  fault,  as  you  have  read  the  play  so  often  ;  but  upon  reflection 
I  found  that  an  hour’s  conversation  would  do  more  than  a  whole  day  could  produce 
upon  paper.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  offer  of  representing  Sethona 
with  care  and  spirit,  but  rest  assured  that,  without  you  are  convinced  that  it  is 
worthy  of  representation,  I  will  by  no  means  impose  such  a  tax  upon  your 
friendship. 

I  am,  with  esteem,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Alex.  Dow. 


ANTONIO  CARRARA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SjR  Florence,  Oct.  16th,  1768. 

Your  commission  at  Milan  was  executed  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  as  1  have  not  had 
any  opportunity  of  seeing  Capt.  Minifie,  who  was  in  the  country  along  with  the 
Count  Firmian,  who  has  been  visited  by  Sir  Watkin  and  his  company  twice,  and 
besides  that,  has  been  to  a  party  of  pleasure  over  il  Logo  di  Como  along  with  them. 
Mr.  Hamilton  told  me,  that  Capt.  Minifie  was  very  well  satisfied  with  regard  to  you. 


318 


private  correspondence  of 


and  that  Count  Firmian  showed  to  have  very  great  ‘regard  for  you,  and  was  highly 
pleased  with  the  present  you  had  sent  him.  Sir  Watkin’s  intention  is  not  altered  in 
the  least,  as  we  are  to  be  in  England  by  the  latter  end  of  February  the  farthest :  be 
pleased  then.  Sir,  to  prepare  yourself  to  think  what  commands  you  will  have  for  me 
at  Paris,  as  we  shall  be  there  in  February  for  a  day  or  two.  I  am  sorry  to  acquaint 
you,  that  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  cuts  but  a  poor  figure  abroad,  and  is  reckoned  dull, 
if  not  stupid  ;  he  sees  but  little  company,  and  does  not  show  enough,  considering  his 
rank  and  his  fortune.  Sir  Watkin,  on  the  contrary,  has  a  noble  spirit,  and  does  every 
thing  very  genteel,  and  generously  ;  he  is  very  much  liked,  and  behaves  extremely 
well  with  regard  to  every  thing.  He  is  to  give  one  of  these  days  a  great  dinner  to 
above  fifty  people  ;  after  dinner  there  is  to  be  a  great  concert.  Manzoli  and  Guar- 
ducci  are  to  sing  ;  and  in  the  night  he  gives  a  noble  ball :  we  are  in  hopes  to  have 
the  great  Duke  and  Duchess  at  it  :  this  is  to  be  at  Hadfield’s  country  house.  Flo¬ 
rence  has  never  seen  so  many  English  together :  there  is,  besides  the  Duke  and  his 
family.  Lord  Exeter  with  six  gentlemen,  one  of  the  Duke  of  Northumberland’s 
sons.  Lord  Fortrose,  Lord  Tilney,  Lord  Cupper,  Sir  John  Dick  and  his  Lady,  Sir 
Thomas  Tancred,  Sir  Gregory  Turner,  besides  our  family,*  and  twenty  other  gentle¬ 
men.  Sir  Horace  Mann  is  to  have  the  order  of  the  Knights  of  Bath  very  soon  ;  Sir 
John  Dick  brought  it  from  London ;  and  there  is  to  be  a  great  feast  upon  this 
occasion.  I  hope  that  you  will  receive  thanks  from  Sir  Watkin  for  having  recom¬ 
mended  me  to  him ;  he  repeated  that  several  times  to  me,  and  I  am  sensible  he  is 
very  glad  that  I  am  with  him.  Nothing  almost  is  done  without  asking  my  advice, 
and  my  situation  is  very  agreeable  to  me,  as  I  know  that  the  gentlemen  like  me 
and  my  way  of  behaving.  I  expect  with  great  anxiety  a  letter  from  you  :  add  this 
favour  to  all  the  rest,  I  beseech  you  ;  if  I  wish  for  any  thing,  it  is  certainly  to  hear 
from  you.  I  hope  Mrs.  Garrick  is  well,  and  I  hope  the  same  of  you  ;  I  have  seen  in 
the  papers  that  you  acted  lately.  If  you  had  given  me  a  commission  for  dan¬ 
cers,  I  could  have  procured  you  some  very  clever,  either  men  or  women.  I  have 
seen  several  very  good  in  different  characters.  I  left  Adriani  and  his  wife  at  Milan, 
who  desired  I  would  mention  to  you  that  he  should  be  very  glad  to  be  at  your  thea¬ 
tre  next  year  ;  but  I  have  seen  some  superior  to  him.  Mr.  Hamilton  agrees  with  me 
about  this  article.  In  about  a  week  we  will  set  off  for  Rome,  where  we  intend  to 
stay  till  the  first  of  December  ;  then  we  will  proceed  on  our  journey  towards  Naples, 
and  coming  back  we  will  take  Loretto  in  our  way  to  Venice,  from  whence  we  will 
come  by  Germany,  as  you  did,  to  England.  If  you  intend  to  honour  me  with  your 
letters,  be  so  obliging  as  to  direct  them  to  Marquis  Belloni  at  Rome,  who  will  for¬ 
ward  them  to  Naples,  in  case  we  should  be  there.  As  you  have  not  given  me  a  posi¬ 
tive  order  about  paying  Mr.  Hadfield  for  the  wine  he  had  sent  to  you,  I  have  not 
done  it ;  but  if  you  will  be  pleased  to  order  me  to  do  it,  I  can  do  it  from  Rome.  I 
shall  expect  your  answer  about  this  particular.  He  says  that  the  wine  comes  to  five 


*  Sir  Watkin  Williams  Wvnn's. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


319 


pounds  and  sixteen  shillings.  Excuse  me  for  the  liberty  I  take  in  begging  from  you 
to  give  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Hart.  I  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

A.  Carara* 


MRS.  LENNOX  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Somerset-house,  Oct.  25th,  1768. 

The  success  which  has  lately  attended  writers  for  the  stage,  and  some  of  them 
too  of  my  own  sex,  has  encouraged  me  to  write  a  comedy, f  which  I  beg  you  will 
read  with  your  usual  candour,  and  that  indulgence  you  have  always  shown  for  my 
writings.  You  will  find  that  I  have  pursued  a  hint  you  gave  me  some  years  ago, 
which  has  furnished  me  with  one  of  the  most  interesting  incidents  in  the  whole 
piece.  You  may  depend  upon  it  that  every  alteration  and  amendment  which  you 
judge  necessary,  will  be  readily,  and  thankfully  admitted.  I  am  so  fully  persuaded 
of  your  justice  and  benevolence,  that  I  do  not  think  you  will  reject  my  play  unless 
you  find  it  wholly  destitute  of  merit,  and  by  accepting  it  you  will  confer  a  great  ob¬ 
ligation  upon  me,  and  put  it  in  the  power  of  my  friends  to  serve  me,  in  a  way  in 
which  they  have  often  wished  to  serve  me,  and  often  recommended  to  me.  But 
whatever  be  your  determination,  Sir,  I  earnestly  entreat  you  to  acquaint  me  with  it 
soon ;  suspense  is  a  most  uneasy  state  of  mind,  and  on  this  occasion  delay  will  be 
productive  of  great  inconveniences. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obliged  humble  servant, 

Charlotte  Lennox. 

I  have  not  yet  written  the  concluding  lines,  but  that  can  be  done  when  the  piece 
has  received  your  corrections. 

*  This  ingenious  man  is  one  of  a  class  of  useful  beings,  natives  of  several  European  States,  but  never 
of  our  own.  They  are  a  compound  of  valet  de  place,  major  domo,  courier,  compagnon  du  voyage,  humble 
friend,  and  connoisseur.  They  are  acquainted  with  the  route,  they  speak  the  languages,  they  measure 
accurately  the  expectations  of  the  traveller  and  the  people  whom  he  visits  ;  they  weigh  in  the  nicest  scales  the 
relative  weight  of  individuals  of  the  same  nation,  and  take  care  of  their  master’s  consequence  for  their  own. 
That  they  invariably  govern  is  to  be  expected — their’s  is  the  really  useful  talent ;  and  by  the  time  the  stran¬ 
ger  is  able  abroad  to  manage  for  himself,  the  place  has  lost  its  charm,  or  the  visitor  becomes  too  indolent  to 
move ;  perhaps  the  prey  moreover  of  some  faithless  and  mercenary  woman ;  and  is  for  years  an  uncomfort¬ 
able  exile  from  his  native  country  and  his  friends,  without  the  compulsory  sentence  of  a  court  of  justice. — Ed. 

f  “  The  Sister,”  her  own  novel  of  Henrietta  dramatized.  It  was  acted  one  night  only  at  Covent  Garden 
Theatre,  the  year  following. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


320 


MR.  CHARLES  YORKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sunday  Night,  Nov.  27th,  1768. 

I  thank  you  very  much  for  your  kind  note,  and  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you, 
if  you  can  spare  time  from  the  important  concerns  of  the  theatre,  to  vote  at  Brent¬ 
ford,  as  a  Middlesex  freeholder,  for  Sir  William  Beauchamp. 

The  appearance  of  all  our  friends  is  desired  earnestly.  Your  interest,  I  know,  is 
great,  where  you  have  exerted  it ;  and  if  it  were  as  great  in  Wapping,  as  it  is  else¬ 
where,  there  could  not  be  the  least  doubt  of  success ;  but  I  fear  that  your  friend 
Langstaffe  (who  once  offered  me  a  share  in  three  privateers,  meeting  me  upon  a  full 
trot)  would  beat  you  there,  as  a  canvasser.  However,  it  will  be  enough  for  you  to 
have  the  better  end  of  the  staff  in  chancery,  as  I  think  you  have. 

Mrs.  Y.  presents  her  compliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  is  very  sorry 
that  she  was  not  at  home  when  Mrs.  G.  called  upon  her ;  but  she  was  gone  with 
her  children  to  see  the  King  go  in  state  to  the  House  of  Lords.  She  begs  a  favour 
for  Lady  Grey,  Lord  Hardwick,  and  herself,  that,  when  “  Zenobia”  is  next  acted 
(for  which  night  they  have  taken  boxes),  “  The  Padlock”  may  be  added  to  it  (if  it 
consists  with  convenience,  rules  of  the  house,  &c.  &c.) ;  of  these  things  they  know 
nothing,  and  a  word  from  you  will  put  it  out  of  their  heads,  in  case  it  is  improper. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  true  esteem, 

,  Your  faithful  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

C.  Yorke. 


MRS.  CATHERINE  CLIVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Nov.  27th,  1768. 

I  am  most  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  polite  letter  :  how  charming 
you  can  be  when  you  are  good  ;  I  believe  there  is  only  one  person  in  the  world  who 
has  never  known  the  difference.* 

1  shall  certainly  make  use  of  the  favour  you  offer  me  ;  it  gives  me  a  double  plea¬ 
sure — the  entertainment  my  friends  will  receive  from  your  performance,  and  the 
being  convinced  that  you  have  a  sort  of  a  sneaking  kindness  for  your  Pivy.  I  suppose 
I  shall  have  you  tapping  me  on  the  shoulder,  (as  you  do  to  Violante,)  when  I  bid  you 
farewell,  and  desiring  one  tender  look  before  we  part,  though  perhaps  you  may  recol¬ 
lect  and  toss  the  pancake  into  the  cinders.  You  see  I  never  forget  any  of  your  good 

*  On  this  very  pleasing  letter  Mr.  Garrick  wrote  with  his  own  hand  — 

“  A  love-letter — the  first  I  ever  had 
from  that  truly  great  comedian,  Mrs.  Clive.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


321 


things.  Pray  make  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe  I  shall  always 
have  sincere  pleasure  when  I  can  assure  you  I  am 

Your  obliged  and  humble  servant, 

C.  Clive. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Friday,  Dec.  2d,  1768. 

As  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry  have  now  given  their  absolute  refusal,  I  beg  to  know  how 
you  intend  to  proceed  without  them.  Holland  may,  if  he  pleases,  do  very  well  in 
Sir  William,  and  Jefferson  in  Frampton.  Mrs.  Barry  will  be  a  loss  to  us  ;  I  know 
not  how  to  supply  her  place,  unless  you  put  one  of  the  new  actresses  into  the  part  of 
Harriet ;  but  I  submit  all  these  matters  to  you,  only  entreating  you  to  let  me  know 
your  determination.  I  will  wait  on  you  whenever  you  please,  as  I  cannot  avoid  being 
a  little  anxious  about  my  poor  nameless  brat. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  sincerely, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH. 


MADAM,  Dec-  6th>  1768- 

You  may  depend  upon  my  settling  the  parts  to  the  best  of  my  judgment,  for 
your  sake  as  well  as  my  own.  I  hope  and  expect  that  Mrs.  Clive  is  preparing  herself 
in  the  Welsh  aunt,  for  she  must  have  time  for  it.  I  shall  read  the  play  to  them  be¬ 
fore  the  holidays.  I  think  Miss  Younge  or  Mrs.  Baddeley  should  do  Harriet;  the 
figure  and  beauty  of  the  last  would  suit  it  well,  and  she  would  act  it  agreeably  ;  but 
that  I  shall  not  determine  upon  immediately. 

You  have,  Madam,  in  most  of  your  letters  to  me  acknowledged  your  obligations 
to  me  in  furnishing  you  with  a  subject  for  your  play,  and  often  repeating  what  ad¬ 
vantages  it  has  received  by  my  advice,  alterations,  additions,  &c.  in  the  plot,  scenes, 
language,  &c.  As  I  have  never  in  the  least  doubted  your  sincerity,  I  have  pursued 
what  I  thought  my  good  offices,  with  the  greatest  alacrity,  and  let  me  add,  kindness. 
Now,  Madam,  all  I  desire  in  return  for  this  is  to  have  under  your  and  Mr.  Griffith’s 
hand,  that  you  really  believe  that  what  I  have  done  to  the  play  has  been  to  its 
advantage  ;  or,  if  you  do  not  think  so,  that  you  or  he  will  be  so  good  to  let  me  know 
what  I  may  have  altered  for  the  worse,  (which  you  may  have  submitted  to,  that  you 
might  not  offend  the  manager,)  that  it  may  be  restored  directly.  I  must  beg  this 
favour  from  you  as  soon  as  possible,  and  you  shall  know  some  time  or  other  the  reason 
for  this  my  very  particular  request. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most  sincere  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


2  T 


VOL.  i. 


322 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  1768. 

Though  in  the  midst  of  company,  I  cannot  delay  giving  you  the  proof  you  de¬ 
sire  of  my  sincerity,  by  declaring,  as  I  have  ever  done,  that  I  think  myself  extremely 
obliged  to  you  for  your  kindness  to  me  in  the  trouble  you  have  taken  with  my  play, 
and  that  I  am  thoroughly  convinced  the  alterations  you  have  made  in  it  have  con¬ 
siderably  improved  it. 

This  declaration  I  owe  to  justice  and  myself,  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  indebted  to 
you  for  informing  me  who  could  be  base  enough  to  insinuate  any  thing  to  the 
contrary,  as  I  am,  with  all  the  sincerity  you  are  kind  enough  to  give  me  credit  for, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


I  most  sincerely  subscribe  to  the  truth  of  the  above  expressions,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 


Richard  Griffith. 


MR.  WHELER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

i 

SIR,  Brick  Court,  No.  1,  Middle  Temple,  Dec.  6th,  1768. 

The  old  Town-hall  of  Stratford  on  Avon,  where*  you  very  well  know  Shak- 
speare  was  born  and  lies  buried,  hath  this  present  year  been  rebuilt  by  the  Corporation, 
assisted  by  a  liberal  contribution  from  the  nobility  and  gentry  in  the  neighbourhood. 
The  lower  part  of  the  building  is  used  as  a  market-place,  and  is  of  great  benefit  to 
the  poorer  sort  of  people  ;  over  it  is  a  handsome  assembly  room.  It  would  be  a 
reflection  on  the  town  of  Stratford  to  have  any  public  building  erected  there  with¬ 
out  some  ornamental  memorial  of  their  immortal  townsman ;  and  the  Corporation 
would  be  happy  in  receiving  from  your  hands  some  statue,  bust,  or  picture  of  him, 
to  be  placed  within  this  building.  They  would  be  equally  pleased  to  have  some 
picture  of  yourself ;  that  the  memory  of  both  may  be  perpetuated  together  in  that 
place  which  gave  him  birth,  and  where  he  still  lives  in  the  mind  of  every  inhabitant. 

The  Corporation  of  Stratford,  ever  desirous  of  expressing  their  gratitude  to  all 
who  do  honour  and  justice  to  the  memory  of  Shakspeare,  and  highly  sensible  that  no 
person  in  any  age  hath  excelled  you  therein,  would  think  themselves  much  ho¬ 
noured  if  you  would  become  one  of  their  body.  Though  this  borough  doth  not 
now  send  members  to  parliament,  perhaps  the  inhabitants  may  not  be  the  less  vir¬ 
tuous  ;  and  to  render  the  freedom  of  such  a  place  the  more  agreeable  to  you,  the 

*  Carelessly  expressed ;  “  in  which  town,”  instead  of  -where,  would  relieve  the  town -hall  from  the  nativity 
and  interment  of  the  Poet. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


323 


Corporation  propose  to  send  it  in  a  box  made  of  that  very  mulberry-tree  planted  by 
Shakspeare’s  own  hand.  The  story  of  that  valuable  relic  is  too  long  to  be  here 
inserted ;  but  Mr.  Keah,  who  is  so  obliging  as  to  convey  this  to  you,  will  acquaint 
you  therewith,  and  the  writer  hereof  flatters  himself  it  will  afford  you  some  enter¬ 
tainment,  and  at  the  same  time  convince  you  that  the  inhabitants  of  Stratford  are 
worthy  of  your  notice. 

I  am  your  obedient  humble  servant. 

Franc  Wheler. 


A  COPY  OF  THE  FREEDOM  OF  A  BURGESS  GIVEN  TO  DAVID  GARRICK. 


Stratford  upon  Avon  Borough.  At  a  Common  Council  held  this  11th  day  of 
October  1768,  present 

Samuel  Jarvis,  Mayor. 

ALDERMEN. 


William  Lees, 
John  Halford, 
Nathaniel  Cooks, 
Richard  Allen, 
William  Evetts, 


William  Bolton, 
Richard  Lord, 
John  Baylis, 

John  Hitchcocks, 
John  Meachum. 


BURGESSES. 

William  Eaves,  Isaac  Gardner, 

Thomas  Nut,  Charles  Ingram. 

Richard  Stevens, 

David  Garrick,  Esq.  the  great  theatrical  genius  of  the  age,  and  who  has  done  the 
highest  honours  to  the  memory  of  the  immortal  Shalcspeare  (a  native  of  this  place), 
was  unanimously  elected  an  honorary  burgess  of  this  Corporation,  and  his  freedom 
was  directed  to  be  presented  to  him  in  a  box  to  be  made  of  the  Mulberry-tree  planted 
by  Shakspeare’s  own  hands. 

Given  under  the  common  seal  of  said  borough  the  day  and  year  above  mentioned. 


UMBRA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR?  10th  Dec.  1768. 

At  the  time  that  I  entertain  the  highest  opinion  of  your  judgment,  I  have  no 
less  a  one  of  your  good-nature,  and  should  therefore  be  equally  easy  in  trusting  to 
your  view  not  only  my  wisdoms  but  my  follies ;  satisfied  that  where  you  could  not 
approve,  you  would  be  gentle  in  censure. 

In  this  persuasion  I  should  be  inclined  to  entreat  the  favour  of  your  perusal  of  a 

2  t  2 


324 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


play  which  I  have  had  lying  neglected  in  my  study  now  some  years.  It  was  begun 
as  an  amusement  in  the  country  ;  continued  because  what  was  begun  pleased  me  ; 
and  now  submitted  to  you,  partly  out  of  a  foolish  sort  of  vanity,  and  partly  because 
I  think  it  may  entertain  his  It.  H.  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  wrill  probably  be  often 
your  visitor.  I  have  only  to  insist  on  your  granting  me  two  demands  :  first,  that  as 
I  seek  no  emolument,  I  be  not  put  upon  a  common  footing ;  but  that  you  will  read 
me  a  tete  posee  patiently,  and  if  you  can,  twice.  Secondly,  that  you  make  no  en¬ 
quiry  who  I  am,  but  be  content  to  converse  with  a  voice ;  or  be  it  a  shadow,  it  will 
be  the  more  romantic. 

I  enclose  you  the  argument  and  a  few  specimens ;  if  you  approve  of  them,  your 
signification  thereof  directed  to  A.  B.  in  a  cover  to  Mr.  Powell,  at  Chace-side,  Enfield, 
will  determine  me  to  send  you  the  manuscript. 

Whatever  be  your  decision,  I  shall  ever  honour  the  man  whom  the  world  present 
honours,  and  whom  the  future  must  hear  of  with  admiration. 

I  am  with  the  greatest  esteem  and  respect,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Umbra 


Endorsed. 

“  Letter  about  a  play,  the  author  of  which 
could  not  he  found  from  his  own  direction.'’ 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Russell-street,  Dec.  19,  1768. 

I  hope,  my  dear  Sir,  to  be  believed  when  I  declare  to  you,  that  circumstanced  as 
I  now  am,  the  whole  receipts  of  Covent-garden  or  any  other  theatre,  could  not  tempt 
me  to  leave  the  patentees  of  Drury-lane  : — so  much  for  the  present. 

You  desire  to  know  if  it  wall  be  agreeable  to  me  to  enter  into  a  future  article ;  I 
cheerfully  answer  yes.  The  time  and  salary  I*  rather  wish  should  be  proposed  by 
the  managers  than  myself :  I  hate  to  have  many  words  about  money  matters,  parti¬ 
cularly  when  I  think  I  am  dealing  with  friends ;  therefore,  that  your  offer  may  as 
near  as  possible  accord  at  once  with  my  expectations,  I  shall  open  myself  with  great 
frankness.  My  present  income  is  a  very  genteel  one ;  but  it  is  natural  for  the  man 
on  foot  to  look  up  at  the  man  on  horseback,  and  for  the  man  on  horseback  to  envy 
the  lazy  fellow  lolling  in  his  chariot ; — so  it  is  with  me.  The  favour  of  the  managers, 
and  the  partiality  of  the  public,  forwarded  not  a  little  by  my  own  industry,  have  put 
me  a  cock-horse,  but  I  want  to  be  in  the  theatrical  carriage ;  not  for  the  sake  of  ease 
(for  you  know  I  can  bear  a  tolerable  deal  of  dramatic  jolting),  but  for  my  profit. 
When  I  look  round  both  theatres,  I  see  several  performers  whose  stipends  are  much 
larger  than  mine, — vanity  whispers,  “Thus  it  ought  not  to  be:”  of  this,  however, 
paymasters  must  be,  nay,  ought  to  be  the  judges. 

*  Bad  regimen. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


325 


I  now  consider  that  my  fortune  in  the  theatre  is  to  be  made  or  marred  in  the 
ensuing  ten  years ;  and  as  I  may  not  always  have  a  Mr.  Garrick  or  a  Mr.  Lacy  to 
treat  with,  I  must  proceed  with  a  caution  which  I  am  sure  you  will  rather  approve 
than  condemn. 

The  grand  affair  is  this.  My  word  is  a  bond  which  I  will  not  break ;  Mr.  Lacy  and 
you,  Sir,  may  choose  to  have  what  you  may  think  better  security,  an  article : — with 
all  my  heart,  provided  you  will  endorse  on  the  back  of  the  article  a  memorandum 
empowering  me,  if  the  patent  should  be  transferred  into  other  hands,  to  demand  and 
receive  my  liberty,  giving  two  months’  notice.  My  attachment,  which,  on  my  word, 
is  a  hearty  one,  is  not  to  the  patent,  but  the  owners  of  it :  therefore,  should  they  part 
with  it,  I  should  not  be  willing  to  be  turned  over  as  a  part  of  the  stock  of  live  cattle 
grazing  on  the  farm  of  old  Drury.  In  short,  I  am  desirous  of  spending  the  whole 
of  my  theatrical  life  with  my  present  employers ;  but  they,  some  time  hence,  may 
choose  to  retire,  and  I,  in  such  a  case,  stand  a  chance  of  being  involved  in  a  lasting 
contention  with  some  blockhead,  whose  sole  merit  may  be  a  power  of  purchasing  a 
precedence. 

Your  polite  behaviour  to  me  while  you  were  treating  with  Mr.  Macklin,  deserved 
and  had  my  warmest  thanks :  what  you  said  to  me  on  the  occasion  I  can  never  forget. 
I  flatter  myself  you  think  (and  if  you  think  it,  I  am  sure  you  have  generosity  enough 
to  say  it)  no  one  comedian  now  on  either  of  the  stages  can  have  a  right,  unless  you 
please  to  compliment  him  with  it,  to  precede  me  in  any  one  particular  at  Drury -lane. 
The  rank  I  at  present  possess,  I  have  fought  long  and  hardly  for,  and  hope  I  shall 
never  have  the  mortification  to  find  that  the  commanders  under  whom  I  have  served, 
incline  to  put  any  one  over  my  head.  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  situation  of  the 
theatres  and  their  interests,  and  it  is  my  honesty  that  now  assures  you,  Sir,  that  while 
I  am,  by  Mr.  Lacy  and  yourself,  treated  as  a  person  you  like  and  dare  trust,  my 
inclination  ties  me  most  firmly  to  you,  and  you  might,  on  that  security  only,  be  cer¬ 
tain  of  my  doing  my  utmost  to  oblige.  But  the  moment  any  part  of  that  counte¬ 
nance  and  confidence  is  withdrawn,  an  article  of  adamant  will  not  be  strong  enough 
to  hold  me.  About  money,  I  hope  we  shall  have  very  few  words.  As  to  the  number 
of  years,  let  Mr.  Lacy  and  you,  Sir,  please  yourselves.  When  this  matter  is  concluded, 
I  dare  say  you  will  still  kindly  endeavour  rather  to  increase  than  diminish  my  conse¬ 
quence  in  the  theatre ;  and  I,  in  return,  will  devote  to  the  use  of  the  managers  that 
consequence  and  every  effort  in  the  power  of 

Your  much  obliged  friend  and  very  humble  servant, 

Thomas  King. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


326 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Russell-street,  December  19th,  1768. 

To  the  person  by  far  the  most  dear  to  me  in  the  small  circle  of  my  friends, 
let  me  declare  there  is  not  any  thing  so  disagreeable  to  me  as  bargain-making, 
even  with  a  stranger.  How  then  am  I  now  embarrassed !  I  "was  much  pleased 
on  your  saying  in  your  letter,  you  desired  to  have  the  settling  my  articles  ;  for 
I  thought  I  should  by  that  be  relieved  from  every  part  of  so  displeasing  a  trans¬ 
action  ;  but  you  afterwards  request  me  to  mention  time  and  terms.  I  have  not 
in  the  enclosed  been  very  particular  about  them,  but  have  dwelt  on  something 
more  essential  to  me  than  either,  or  both. 

Was  the  whole  of  the  theatre  and  its  appurtenances  in  your  hand,  I  would  not, 
on  any  account,  take  five  minutes  to  make  an  agreement.  I  have  too  great  a 
reliance  on  you  to  think  it  necessary  ;  but  you  may  not  always  be  inclined  to 
keep  the  power  you  now  have,  therefore  I  am  obliged,  for  the  sake  of  future 
quiet,  to  be  very  explicit.  To  the  manager,  I  say,  I  do  not  care  how  short  a  time 
I  contract  for.  That  declaration  is  made  from  pride.  To  my  dear  friend  Mr. 
Garrick,  I  say  I  don’t  care  how  long  I  bind  myself ;  by  so  doing  I  shall  avoid 
a  repetition  of  this  kind  of  business,  so  disagreeable  to  both  of  us.  I  sincerely 
hope  you  will  find  it  convenient  to  preside  at  the  theatre  while  I  am  obliged  to 
continue  on  it.  If  you  should  not,  I  am  determined  to  have  it  in  my  power  either 
to  retire  from  the  field,  or  fight  my  way  through  it,  as  I  shall  find  most  agreeable. 
Mr.  Lacy  has  ever  to  me  (one  particular  excepted)  behaved  uniformly  well ;  that  and 
his  situation,  entitle  him  to  respect ;  but  should  I  say  I  am  attached  to  him  and  his 
interest  as  I  am  to  you  and  your’s,  my  heart  would  immediately  give  me  the 
lie.  This,  I  hope,  will  not  appear  like  flattery — should  it  do  so,  I  shall  be  much 
misunderstood.  I  am  vain  enough  to  suppose  my  abilities  as  an  actor  will  be 
a  sufficient  passport  to  the  favour  of  the  manager  ;  but  I  would  wish  to  have 
something  more  intrinsic  to  secure  to  me  the  opinion  and  good  wishes  of  my 
friend.  That  I  may,  as  far  as  I  am  able,  separate  the  titles,  I  trouble  you  with 
two  letters,  that  you  may,  if  necessary,  produce  the  enclosed  to  Mr.  Lacy,  when¬ 
ever  you  choose  to  bring  the  business  on  the  carpet.  My  conduct  in  this  affair 
will,  I  hope,  have  your  approbation.  Should  it  not,  I  know  your  good-nature  will 
make  proper  allowances,  and  oblige  me  with  hints  for  amendment. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  utmost  respect, 

Your  warmest  well  wisher,  and  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thomas  King. 

Pray,  Sir,  be  kind  enough  to  present  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


327 


CHARLES  MACKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  December  24,  1768. 

By  the  Monitor  which  is  enclosed  in  this  note,  you  may  see  what  strange  and 
malignant  falsehoods  are  published  by  theatrical  mercenaries  in  defiance  of  all  de¬ 
cency,  and  without  even  the  shadow  of  probability  or  common  sense  to  give  a 
colour  to  the  malevolence.  For  my  own  part,  I  think  it  my  duty  as  a  parent  to 
use  my  endeavours  to  prove  the  innocence  of  Miss  Macklin,  and  the  propriety  of 
her  conduct  respecting  the  managers  of  Covent-garden,  and  of  Mr.  Hoole  and  his 
tragedy,  and,  if  I  can,  to  trace  out  the  authors,  or  at  least  the  notorious  fomenters 
and  abettors  of  the  slander;  and  as  a  circumstance  towards  this  end,  I  shall  esteem 
it  as  a  favour,  and  an  act  of  justice,  if  you  will  answer  me  the  following  questions. 
Whether  or  no  you  sent  for  Miss  Macklin  to  your  house  on  the  Wednesday  morning 
after  she  had  read  the  part  of  Aspasia  in  Mr.  Hoole’s  tragedy  of  “  Cyrus,”  which 
was  the  7th  instant;  or  whether  she  was  at  your  house  at  all  on  that  or  any  other  day 
since  “  Cyrus”  has  been  acted  ?  Whether  she  has  been  in  treaty,  or  is  engaged  at 
your  theatre  for  next  year  ?  And  if  it  be  not  a  breach  of  private  conversation,  what 
passed  between  you  and  Mr.  Hoole  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  6th  instant,  when  he 
waited  on  you  to  inform  you  of  his  not  having  any  person  to  act  Aspasia  that  night, 
and  to  ask  you  for  your  advice  ? 

I  am  sure  your  good  sense  and  humanity  will  excuse  this  liberty,  as  it  is  in  the 
cause  of  innocence  and  truth.  You  know  Miss  Macklin  well,  nobody  better  :  she  is  of 
a  peaceable  timid  nature,  unused  to  the  shafts  of  slander,  and  with  grief  I  tell  it  you, 
she  is  severely  hurt  by  this  treatment ;  nor  is  it  strange  that  she  should,  for  this  is  the 
first  dart  she  ever  felt  of  reproach  or  accusation.  And  you,  Sir,  who  are  so  intimate 
with  the  feelings  of  human  nature,  must  know  that  the  novelty  of  accusation  gives 
a  degree  of  sharpness  to  the  first  wound  of  innocence  more  intense  than  a  charge  of 
the  blackest  crime  can  give  to  the  guilty,  or  perhaps  than  innocence  can  ever  expe¬ 
rience  after. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Charles  Macklin. 

P.  S.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  return  the  Monitor,  as  I  have  a 
farther  use  for  it,  and  cannot  get  another. 


DR.  J.  DELAP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Charles-street,  St.  James’s,  176S. 

I  am  very  far  from  being  offended  at  your  free  and  open  behaviour ;  I  must  ever 
esteem  those  most  who  have  most  of  it :  and  to  convince  you  that  I  am  in  earnest,  I 
will  deal  as  freely  and  as  openly  with  you.  I  will  tell  you,  that  however  civilly  you 


328 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


may  have  offered  me  your  services  in  the  concluding  part  of  your  letter,  yet  I  cannot 
bring  myself  to  accept  them  after  what  went  before.  I  am  sensible  that  I  could  not 
now  write  for  you  with  a  proper  spirit ;  1  could  not  help  feeling,  throughout  the 
work,  that  every  scene  must  be  in  a  manner  prejudged :  with  your  leave,  therefore, 
I  will  not  give  you  any  farther  trouble,  or  send  you  the  plan  that  I  have  just  sketched 
out.  My  present  intention  is  to  offer  it  to  Mr.  Colman,  and,  if  he  should  have  more 
confidence  in  me,  to  write  for  him  to  the  best  of  my  abilities :  but  let  me  entreat  you 
not  to  imagine  that  I  speak  this  in  a  splenetic  humour ;  nothing,  I  assure  you,  is  far¬ 
ther  from  my  heart.  I  must  always  think  of  Mr.  Garrick  as  highly  as  he  deserves; 
and  shall  hope  this  will  not  prove  the  least  interruption  to  an  acquaintance  that  I 
must  ever  esteem,  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  a  very  particular  pleasure  as  well  as 
honour.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  Delap.* 


MR.  GAINSBOROUGH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  1768. 

I  take  particular  notice  of  your  friendly  anxiety  for  my  recovery,  I  do  assure 
you,  and  thank  you  most  kindly  for  your  sharp  thought ;  but  having  had  twelve 
ounces  of  blood  taken  immediately  away,  am  perfectly  recovered,  strong  in  the  back, 
and  able — so  make  your  sublime  self  easy.  I  suppose  your  letter  to  Mr.  Sharp  was 
upon  no  other  business,  so  have  enclosed  it :  but,  observe,  I  thank  you  sincerely. 

Shakspeare  shall  come  forth  forthwith,  as  the  lawyer  says.  Damn  the  original 
picture  of  him,  with  your  leave ;  for  I  think  a  stupider  face  I  never  beheld  except 
D — k’s. 

I  intend,  with  your  approbation,  my  dear  friend,  to  take  the  form  from  his  pic¬ 
tures  and  statues,  just  enough  to  preserve  his  likeness  past  the  doubt  of  all  blockheads 
at  first  sight,  and  supply  a  soul  from  his  works :  it  is  impossible  that  such  a  mind  and 
ray  of  heaven  could  shine  with  such  a  face  and  pair  of  eyes  as  that  picture  has :  so, 
as  I  said  before,  damn  that. 

I  am  going  to  dinner,  and  after  I  will  try  a  sketch.  I  shall  leave  th e  price  to  you; 
I  do  not  care  whether  I  have  a  farthing  if  you  will  but  let  me  do  it :  to  be  sure,  I 
should  never  ask  more  than  my  portrait  price  (which  is  sixty  guineas),  but  perhaps 
ought  to  ask  less,  as  there  is  no  confinement  of  painting  from  life ;  but,  I  say,  I  leave 
it  to  you,  promising  to  be  contented  upon  honour.  I  could  wish  you  to  call,  upon  any 
pretence ,  any  day  after  next  Wednesday  at  the  Duke  of  Montagu’s,  because  you 

*  Dr.  John  Delap  did  not  succeed  in  his  applications  to  the  rival  manager.  Thirteen  years  elapsed  before 
his  second  effort  made  its  appearance.  Managers  seldom  recover  the  effect  of  a  play  that  is  acted  a  third 
time  only  for  the  benefit  of  the  author. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


329 


would  see  the  Duke  and  Duchess  in  my  last  manner ;  but  not  as  if  you  thought  any 
thing  of  mine  worth  that  trouble,  only  to  see  his  Grace’s  landscape  of  Rubens,  and 
the  four  Vandykes,  whole-length,  in  his  Grace’s  dressing-room. 

Endorsed. 

“  Letter  from  Gainsborough  about 
Shakspeare’s  and  my  picture,  1768.” 


ANTONIO  CARARA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Dec-  16. 

Your  faithful  Antonio  is  at  last  in  his  native  country,  and  entirely  recovered 
from  his  late  complaint.  What  I  have  suffered  during  my  journey,  and  while  at 
Spa,  is  out  of  purpose,  having  nothing  in  view  but  to  assure  you  of  my  attachment 
to  you,  which  proceeds  from  a  grateful  knowledge  of  what  you  have  done  for  me. 

I  hope  that  by  this  time  you  are  entirely  satisfied  of  Mademoiselle  Hidoux’s  beha¬ 
viour  and  abilities.  Should  you  think  proper  to  have  any  good  dancers,  either  men  or 
women,  from  Venice,  there  are  two  couples  here,  which  I  think  far  superior  to  any 
one  you  ever  had  in  England,  with  respect  to  their  kind  of  dancing,  which  is  the 
mezzo  carattere.  Though  I  never  spoke  to  any  of  them,  I  am  certain  you  could  have 
them  a  great  deal  cheaper  than  Mademoiselle  Hidoux,  or  Mr.  Slingsby  ;  but  remember, 
that  in  case  you  would  trust  to  my  taste  for  them,  you  must  be  punctual  with  your 
answer,  as,  when  the  Carnival  is  over,  they  quit  Venice  immediately.  Should  you 
likewise  want  any  thing  of  what  kind  soever  from  hence,  you  may  entirely  dispose  of 
me,  as  you  will  find  me  always  the  same.  The  articles  which  we  have  here  that  are 
wanted  in  your  country  are,  Cyprus  Wine ,  Maraschino,  Bosolio,  and  masks.  Mrs. 
Carara  begs  her  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  whom  I  wish  likewise  you  would 
present  mine,  while  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Antonio  Carara. 

P.  S.  Please  to  direct  to  me,  “  chez  Conrade  Martens,  Banquier,  Venice.” 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  J.  BICKERSTAFF,  ESQ. 

DEAR  BICKERSTAFF,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Thursday  Morning. 

I  am  going  directly  to  Westminster,  and,  as  I  cannot  think  of  rousing  you  out  of 
your  bed  at  nine  in  the  morning,  1  take  the  first  opportunity  to  tell  you  how  much 
I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  gentlemanlike  manner  of  interposing  between 
Mr.  Garrick  and  me.  The  fact  is,  I  am  very  unfit  to  act  the  character  of  the 
VOL.  I.  2  u 


\ 


330 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  O F 


Angry  Boy,*  and  I  only  regret  that  nobody  but  yourself  has  had  the  Christian  bene¬ 
volence  to  attempt  what  you  have  so  handsomely  accomplished.  I  feel  as  if  a  moun¬ 
tain  was  taken  off;  for  I  must  do  myself  the  justice  to  say  that  to  live  in  cheerfulness 
and  good  humour  is  the  predominant  habit  of  my  temper.  Forced  resentment  is  of 
a  corrosive  quality,  and  docs  not  agree  with  my  constitution.  In  short,  I  am  more 
pleased  than  1  can  tell  you.  I  can  now  laugh,  and  can  with  satisfaction  say  there  is 
not  a  man  in  the  world  to  whom  I  have  even  a  pretended  ill-will. 


“  Hcec  est  vita  solutorum  misera  ambitione  gravique.”f 


I  beg  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick.  I  thank  him  and  you  for  the  graceful 
ease  with  which  every  thing  is  adjusted.  I  shall  be  at  your  service  any  night  what¬ 
ever,  and  shall  long  for  the  time.  I  do  not  know  how  J.  J.  Rousseau  would  feel  if  a 
period  were  to  be  put  to  all  his  jealousies.  To  the  devil  I  pitch  mine,  as  we  say  in 
Dublin. 

I  not  only  think  it  right  that  we  should  meet  as  if  we  had  never  thought  unkindly 
of  each  other,  but  I  am  sure  it  will  be  so. 

I  will  take  my  chance  at  your  house  as  1  return  from  Westminster,  and  am  with 
a  thorough  sense  of  your  kind  offices. 

Dear  Sir,  ever  yours, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


Endorsed, 

“  Letters  from  Mr.  Bickerstaff  and  Mr.  Murphy,  with  my 
answer  about  a  reconciliation  with  Mr,  Murphy.” 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Feb-  •  •  •  l769- 

Your  letter  has  made  me  easy ;  it  is  a  very  friendly  one,  and  I  thank  you  for  it. 
Now  therefore  to  my  dramatic  intentions,  which  you  desire  me  to  be  explicit  about. 
1  have  a  tragedy  by  me  unfinished,  which  has  lain  at  the  bottom  of  my  drawers 
unregarded  for  these  three  months,  almost  drowned  by  the  quantity  of  cold  water 
which  you  threw  upon  it  last  autumn :  I  will  take  it  out  next  week,  and  try  if  a 
little  genial  warmth  from  the  sun  of  your  favour  will  not  bring  it  to  life  again ;  it  is 
at  present  but  a  skeleton,  I  will  put  some  flesh  upon  the  bones,  and  as  soon  as  it  is  fit 
to  appear  in  company,  wait  upon  you  with  it.  With  regard  to  your  having  nobody 

*  I  see  that  Murphy  had  preceded  Sheridan  in  this  reference  to  old  Ben’s  “  Angry  Boy.”  It  did  not 
suit  Sheridan  the  less;  and  I  remember  well  the  long-continued  echo  of  the  term  by  the  fry  of  small  poli¬ 
ticians,  who,  like  most  of  their  leaders,  had  never  read  the  play.  The  “  Angry  Boy”  was  deemed,  like  Poins’s 
robbery  at  Gad’s-hill,  “  argument  for  a  week,  laughter  for  a  month,  and  a  good  jest  for  ever.”  Even  Mr. 
Pitt’s  friends  joined  in  the  laugh  which  it  excited  in  the  house. — Ed. 
t  Hor.  Satira  vi.  1.  128. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


331 


to  act  in  it,  you  will  please  to  observe  I  only  alluded  to  your  scald-miserable  com 
pany  of  tragedians  who  exhibited  “  Zingis but,  as  that  was  a  work  of  genius 
(, secundum  doctissimum  Garrickium)  it  might  be  able  to  support  itself.  I  make  no 
such  pretensions,  and  shall  be  very  happy  if  my  performance  can  make  its  way  with 
the  help  of  all  the  strength  which  your  best  actors  can  afford.  I  am  sure  you  have 
too  much  friendship  for  me  to  permit  my  poor  play  to  be  Zingis  cl  for  fear  of  bad 
consequences.  I  hope  therefore  (for  I  will  take  this  opportunity  to  tell  you  my 
whole  mind  upon  the  subject)  that  Barry  and  his  wife  will  be  with  you  next  winter ; 
that  my  name  may  be  concealed  if  possible,  till  the  trial  at  least  is  over,  and  that  you 
will  take  the  trouble  to  attend  the  rehearsals  of  it :  if  I  were  to  add  another  wish,  it 
should  be  that  it  might  not  make  its  appearance  till  after  Christmas,  as  poor  Warwick 
suffered  greatly  on  that  account,  and  scarce  ever  showed  himself  before  a  full  and 
polite  audience. 

As  you  are  in  earnest,  I  shall  be  so  too,  and  set  about  it  immediately,  that  it  may 
be  finished  with  all  expedition :  but  I  must  not  be  hurried,  as  in  that  case  my 
Pegasus  is  apt  to  fling  me,  though  at  the  same  time  (which  I  beseech  you  to 
remember)  a  little  spur  now  and  then  is  of  service. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  sincerely, 

T.  Francklin. 


MR.  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAREST  GARRICK,  St.  Stephen’s,  Tuesday,  1 769. 

The  once  patentee  is  worth  all  the  existing  patentees  in  the  world.  The  Duke 
of  Ormond  said,  that  he  would  not  change  his  dead  son  for  the  living  sons  of  half 
the  peerage.  Be  assured  that  your  former  request  had  all  its  weight  with  me ;  and 
what  is  strange,  outweighed  a  very  powerful  recommendation  of  some  of  my  own 
constituents.  They  have  been  since  so  attacked  by  applications  from  their  con¬ 
nexions  in  Birmingham,  that  I  have  again  had  such  instructions,  as  in  wisdom,  and 
indeed  in  common  decency,  I  cannot  wholly  resist.  You  know  that  I  cannot  set  my 
face  against  those  to  whom  I  owe  my  seat,  unless  the  cause  they  espouse  is  indeed  a 
bad  one ;  nor  would  you  in  that  case  advise  me  to  it.  I  hope  to  call  on  you  and 
explain  this  matter  to  you  very  fully.  Poor  Hercules  is  fit  only  for  spinning ;  and 
his  club  is  not  more  powerful  than  Harlequin’s  sword.  But  I  believe,  as  far  as  I  can 
see,  Yates  is  in  no  great  danger.  The  house  seems  to  be  with  him  ;  and  assuredly  I 
do  not  mean  to  be  a  very  mischievous  enemy  to  him.  With  all  cordiality  and  affec¬ 
tion,  ever  yours, 

E.  Burke. 


2  u  2 


332 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


TO  DAVID  GARRICK,  ESQ.,  WITH  A  WAX  REEL. 

As  Garrick  wrote  a  billet-doux, 

(“  Bless  me!  I  can’t  believe  that  true.” 

You  may  believe  as  you  think  meet, 

But  I  think  all  his  lines  are  sweet,) 

I  enter’d  at  his  study  door, 

And  softly  tripp’d  along  the  floor. 

“  Madam,”  says  he,  “  your  most  obedient, 

Just  seal  this  letter, — what  expedient? 

I  have  it, — here’s  a  bit  of  paper 
Will  do  as  well  as  any  taper.” 

With  pain  I  saw  him  twist  and  light 
The  fragment,  which  now  blazed  so  bright. 

The  melting  wax  before  it  run, 

Like  snow  dissolving  in  the  sun. 

But  for  his  fingers  as  I  trembled, 

Though  I  my  fright  full  well  dissembled, 

I  then  resolved  that  if  third  night 
Made  my  purse  heavy,  my  heart  light, 

This  little  implement  should  stand 
For  ever  ready  at  his  hand, 

That  I  might  boast  it  to  my  betters, 

I  had  some  share  in  Garrick’s  letters, 

And  like  the  sexton,  slily  tell, 

That  when  he  preach’d,  1  rang  the  bell.* 


MR.  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK, 

I  send  you  a  rosa  sera,  a  late  turtle,  an  entertainment  at  least  as  good  for  the 
palate,  as  the  other  for  the  nose.  Your  true  epicureans  are  of  opinion,  you  know, 
that  it  contains  in  itself  all  kinds  of  flesh,  fish,  and  fowl.  It  is  therefore  a  dish  fit 
for  one  who  can  represent  all  the  solidity  of  flesh,  the  volatility  of  fowl,  and  the  oddity 
of  fish. 

As  this  entertainment  can  be  found  no  longer  anywhere  but  at  your  table,  or  at 
those  tables  to  which  you  give  conviviality  and  cheerfulness,  let  the  type  and  shadow 
of  the  master  grace  his  board;  a  little  pepper  he  can  add  himself ;  the  wine  likewise 
he  will  supply :  I  do  not  know  whether  he  still  retains  any  friend  who  can  finish 
the  dressing  of  his  turtle  by  a  gentle  squeeze  of  the  lemon.  Our  best  regards  to 
Madam, 

Ever,  dear  Garrick,  most  faithfully,  your  obedient 

E.  BURKE.f 

*  No  doubt  from  Mrs.  Griffith,  the  dramatic  writer. — Ed. 

t  Perhaps  Burke,  by  this  pleasantry  to  his  friend  Garrick,  suggested  a  comparison  to  Goldsmith  in  the 
poem  of  “  Retaliation,"  the  last  effusion  of  the  Doctor’s  muse.  Burke  had  gaiety  of  the  most  sportive  kind  ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


Westminster,  Tuesday,  one  day  before  the  meeting  of  the  session  that  gives  the 
finishing  stroke. 


MR.  J.  SHARP  TO  MR  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  C-  C-  C-  Feb.  ...  1769. 

Though  I  am  keeping  Lent  like  one  of  the  old  monks  of  this  old  house  in  days 
of  yore,  I  cannot  help  reflecting  sometimes  on  the  carnival  I  passed  in  town  lately, 
and  the  pleasure  I  received  from  seeing  Mr.  Garrick  in  public  and  private.  Nor  do 
I  forget  the  promise  I  made  him  of  transmitting  to  him,  one  time  or  other,  the  altera¬ 
tions  I  have  ventured  to  make  in  the  first  tragedy  of  Beaumont  and  Fletcher.  But 
when  or  where?  Our  stage  was  made  for  “  Csesar,”  and  “  Cato”  has  no  business  on 
it.  In  serious  truth,  I  could  not  do  greater  penance  than  to  submit  my  crudities  to 
the  just  examination  of  the  most  extensive  judge  of  the  drama,  and  the  best  com¬ 
mentator  on  Shakspeare !  Nevertheless,  in  the  long  vacation,  and  in  some  idle  hour 
of  the  summer,  “  The  Maid’s  Tragedy”  may  make  you  laugh  at  Hampton  as  well  as 
any  thing  else.  I  could  wish  indeed  you  would  set  me  a  better  task  for  my  leisure, 
for,  after  all,  king- killing  plays  are  not  the  thing. 

The  arts  and  sciences,  I  find,  are  at  variance,  as  we  prophesied  they  soon  would  be. 
The  President  Reynolds,  I  am  told,  has  desired  to  resign  ;  that  the  King  sent  to  him 
and  insisted  on  his  continuing  ;  Reynolds  returned  that  he  owed  his  Majesty  the  duty 
of  a  subject,  but  no  more ;  and  that  as  his  Majesty  had  never  sat  to  him,  as  he  had 
to  many  others,  he  desired  to  adhere  to  his  resolution.  The  King  then  said  he  would 
sit  to  him :  since  that,  another  of  the  artists  has  applied  for  the  like  honour. 

Our  poor  friend  Arden’s  fate  I  begin  to  think  was  owing  to  his  marrying  a 
woman  whom  he  did  not  love,  and  losing  one  whom  he  did  love,  and  might  (when 
too  late)  have  had  by  the  death  of  her  husband,  Major  Barton ;  she  was  formerly 
Miss  Ekins.  In  a  letter  written  a  little  before  he  married,  Arden  said,  “  He  was 
not  romantically  in  love ;  that  the  lady  was  rather  too  young  for  him,  she  being 
twenty -three  and  he  thirty -seven  ;  that  she  was  little  and  short,  and  had  a  cast  with 
one  eye,  but  was  not  ugly !”  This,  from  a  lover  on  the  brink,  did  not  promise  much. 
I  forgot  to  tell  you  before,  that  John  Fletcher  the  poet  was  educated  in  this  old 
house,  as  was  his  father  the  Bishop  :  and  that  Dr.  Hoadly,  son  of  the  late  Bishop  of 
Winchester,  and  the  reputed  author,  you  will  give  me  leave  to  call  him,  of  “  The 
Suspicious  Husband,”  was  admitted  here  in  1730,  as  was  his  brother,  the  present 
Chancellor  of  Winchester. 

I  am  told  that  Mr.  Kenrick  is  one  of  the  principal  conductors  of  the  critical 
memoirs  of  the  times.  He  is  like  enough,  I  think,  to  have  wrote  the  splenetic  ac¬ 
count  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre  in  the  last  number. 

and  it  will  be  remembered  that  he  now  trod  in  air.  Junius  also  at  this  time  saw  the  premier  tottering  from 
the  steps  of  the  throne,  and  the  Whigs  secure  of  power  and  place  and  patronage.  The  session  passed  away 
without  the  anticipated  coup  de  grace. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  beg  your  pardon.  Sir,  for  taking  up  so  much  of  your  time  on  these  trifling 
subjects ;  and  have  only  to  add  at  present,  that  if  your  inclination  shall  lead  you  this 
way,  when  our  new  Chancellor  is  installed,  or  at  any  other  season,  I  shall  be  extremely 
glad  to  see  you,  and  any  of  our  friends  with  you  at  this  old  house.  Some  of  our 
dusty  libraries  may  have  some  curiosities  that  have  escaped  you  before  :  we  have  here 
a  curious  manuscript  of  Chaucer,  with  a  painted  frontispiece,  or  rather  coloured 
group  of  figures,  in  which  the  author  is  included.  The  manuscripts  of  Milton,  I 
suppose  you  may  have  seen  at  Trinity.  Mr.  Gray  and  Mr.  Mason  are  both  here  at 
present :  the  former  favoured  me  with  his  company  some  time  ago,  to  see  the 
Chaucer  I  have  mentioned.  Mrs.  Newling,  old  Colson’s  niece,  will  always  have  a 
bed  at  your  service ;  and  you  may  be  able  to  recollect  the  little  girl  that  used  to  run 
about  the  house  and  make  such  a  noise,  that  you  in  vain  used  to  bid  her  be  quiet. 
I  shall  at  all  times  be  proud  of  the  honour  of  your  commands,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

With  great  respect  and  esteem,  yours,  &c. 

J.  Sharp. 


MR.  J.  SHARP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Inner  Temple,  Thursday  noon,  1  769. 

Since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  at  Court,  I  received  the  enclosed  from 
my  friend  Alderman  Newling,  at  Cambridge  :  he  thus  apologizes  to  me  for  the 
liberty  he  took  in  printing  them  (the  letters.)  “  It  -was  the  universal  esteem  he  had 
gained,  induced  me  to  it ;  seeing  how  greedily  the  people  sucked  in  every  anecdote 
concerning  him,  I  was  fully  persuaded  that  such  a  charming  character  of  him  when 
a  youth,  which  these  letters  contain,  would  be  highly  acceptable  to  the  public  ;  and 
while  I  published  his  merit,  I  wras  ambitious  the  -world  should  know,  that  the  pre¬ 
ceptor  to  this  deservedly  great  man  was  my  worthy  friend  Mr.  Colson.” 

“  Mrs.  Newling  presents  her  most  respectful  compliments  to  him  with  these 
letters,  and  reflects  often  with  great  pleasure  upon  the  happy  minutes  his  vivacity 
caused,  during  his  abode  in  Mr.  Colson’s  family.” 

So  much  for  the  worthy  Alderman  and  his  wife  :  I  can  add  nothing  to  it,  but 
my  wish  that  when  Mr.  Garrick  bequeaths  his  collection  of  plays  to  the  Museum, 
these  letters  may  go  along  with  them.  I  can  anticipate  every  fine  feeling  which  a 
man  of  your  genius  must  be  susceptible  of  at  the  sight  of  those  old  MSS.  and  such 
as  are  inseparable  from  true  conscious  merit.  If  I  had  called,  as  I  sometimes  do,  on 
Dr.  Johnson,  and  shoAved  him  one  of  them  -where  he  is  mentioned  as  one  Johnson,  I 
should  have  risked  perhaps  the  sneer  of  one  of  his  ghastly  smiles  :  Mr.  Garrick  may 
do  it  with  better  success.  If,  Sir,  you  have  one  quarter  of  an  hour’s  leisure  within 
six  days  to  come,  1  should  be  very  glad  to  drink  a  dish  of  chocolate  with  you  at  my 
chambers,  or  at  your  house,  as  I  have  a  subject  to  mention  to  you  beyond  the  length 
of  a  letter,  and  I  would  not  wish  to  engage  your  attention  this  day  from  any  thing 
but  Majesty.  I  should  be  happier  to  see  King  Richard  than  King  George,  but  can- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


not  mob  it,  though  I  am  so  near  as  to  dine  in  York-street,  Covent  Garden,  where  at 
Mr.  Hewson’s,  No.  8,  a  line  will  find  me  any  day  more  certainly  than  at  chambers,  as 
I  am  much  abroad. 

I  saw  “  Agnes”  the  other  night ;  I  have  nothing  to  say  of  the  play,  or  of  any 
other  modern  tragedy ;  but  you  will  excuse  me  when  I  tell  you  that  I  thought  Mrs. 
Yates,  Mr.  Garrick  in  petticoats,  without  a  compliment,  for  I  sought  in  vain  the 
maternal  tenderness  of  Mrs.  Cibber,  and  the  fine,  open,  mellow  variety  of  Mrs. 
Pritchard.  As  to  the  rest,  I  must  tell  you  again,  that  I  think  you  have  spoiled  as 
many  actors  as  Mr.  Pope  did  poets,  who  studied  the  jingle  of  his  versification  and 
got  that  only. 

“  O  imitatores  servom  pecus,  ut  mihi  seepe 

Bilem,  saepe  jocum  vestri  mov&re  tumultus  !”  Hor. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

With  the  greatest  respect  and  esteem,  your’s,  &c. 

J.  Sharp. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Feb.  25th,  1769. 

As  we  have  explained  ourselves  to  our  mutual  content,  and  as  you  dislike  flat¬ 
tery,  and  love  plain  dealing  as  well  as  myself,  I  will  give  you  a  specimen  in  this 
letter  of  what  you  like  and  practise.  What  can  you  possibly  mean  by  my  throwing 
cold  water  upon  your  tragedy  last  autumn  ?  I  thought  by  our  seemingly  being  of 
one  mind,  that  you  were  rather  animated  to  go  on,  than  damped  in  your  intentions ; 
and  why  you  did  not  proceed  in  your  dramatic  business,  and  finish  by  this  time, 
is  more  to  be  attributed,  I  fear,  to  your  idleness,  than  your  judgment,  or  your 
prudence.  I  wish  you  may  never  have  a  play  worse  acted  than  that  by  the  scald- 
miserable  tragedians,  as  you  are  pleased  to  call  them  ;  the  principal  character  was  per¬ 
formed  excellently,*  and  all  of  them  were  decent.  But  to  come  a  little  nearer  to  the 
point,  for  you  have  made  so  many  conditions  with  me  that  I  must  speak  my  mind 
fairly  to  you  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry  are  not  yet  engaged  with  us  for  another  season, 
and  by  their  last  answer  I  rather  think  they  will  not.  How  can  I,  therefore,  promise 
that  they  shall  perform  in  your  play  ?  nay,  if  they  were  engaged,  how  can  I  say  whe¬ 
ther  they  will  approve  of  the  parts  you  would  wish  them  to  act  ?  They  did  not  like 
those  in  “  Zingis,”  or  “  The  School  for  Rakes,”  and  you  know  that  it  is  not  in  the 
power  of  a  manager  to  force  such  performers  against  their  will.  And  now,  dear  Sir, 
let  my  friendship  get  the  better  of  my  interest,  and  advise  (which  I  do  most 


*  “  The  principal  character,”  fyc.  This  was  Ovisa,  acted  by  Miss  Younge,  afterwards  Mrs.  Pope.  But 
she  was  ever  young  ;  for,  five  and  twenty  years  after  this  date,  she  performed  the  youthful  heroine  in  a  play  by 
the  writer  of  the  present  note  ;  who  is  happy  in  the  opportunity  of  expressing  his  utter  scorn  for  the  taste  of 
the  present  audiences  or  the  present  managers;  who  seem  to  think  corresponding  age  the  only  alliance 
between  the  actress  and  the  character. — Eo. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


336 


sincerely)  to  make  sure  of  Mrs.  Yates  for  your  principal  character ;  she  is  obliged  to 
you,  and  will  do  you  all  the  service  in  her  power.  The  manager  of  Covent  Garden 
will  most  gladly  receive  your  play  if  you  offer  it  in  time,  and  that  of  Drury-lane 
will  be  well  pleased  if  you  are  served  in  any  way. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  ever  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Think  seriously  of  the  above,  and  write  or  talk  to  me  about  it  soon,  for  soon 
you  must  determine. 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  Feb.  26th,  1769. 

How  strangely  the  wind  veers  about  in  this  inconstant  climate  of  ours !  but 
two  or  three  days  ago  it  was  “ dear  Ranger,  and  dear  boy”  and  now  my  throat  is  to 
be  cut,  and  my  play  packed  off  to  the  other  house,  only  because  I  called  in  question 
the  tragic  powers  and  jested  with  the  sacred  and  respectable  characters  of  Messrs. 
Aicken,  Jefferson,  &c.  I  pretend  to  no  extraordinary  knowledge  in  theatrical  affairs, 
but  whilst  I  have  eyes,  and  ears,  and  common  understanding,  can  never  persuade 
myself  that  “  Zingis”  was  finely  acted,  and  I  am  sure  nineteen  in  twenty  are  of 
my  opinion.  But  this  is  a  point  of  little  consequence  to  either  of  us  ;  I  shall  there¬ 
fore  proceed  to  something  more  material.  You  say  in  )~our  last,  how  can  I 
promise  that  B.  or  his  wife  will  perform  in  your  play  ?  I  did  not,  my  dear  Sir,  de¬ 
sire  you  to  promise  any  such  thing ;  I  only  hoped  (that  was  my  expression)  that  they 
might  be  with  you,  and  surely  a  man  may  hope  for  good  actors  in  his  piece  without 
offence.  And  now  for  the  immediate  determination  which  you  desire  :  I  have  deter¬ 
mined  long  since,  and  shall  abide  by  the  resolution — to  bring  the  play  to  you  as  soon 
as  finished,  and  if  you  approve,  to  submit  the  representation  of  it  entirely  to  yourself, 
relying  upon  your  friendship  and  judgment  with  regard  to  the  execution  of  it  :  with 
this  I  shall  rest  perfectly  satisfied,  and  leave  the  rest  to  fortune ;  nor,  unless  it  is  abso¬ 
lutely  refused  and  rejected  by  you,  should  I  ever  think  of  offering  it  to  Covent  Garden. 
Mrs.  Yates  is  in  many  parts  a  good  actress ;  perhaps  the  most  popular  one  now  on 
the  stage — on  that  account  I  could  wish  her  with  you,  but  of  the  propriety  of 
that  you  are  the  best  judge.  You  think  she  is  obliged  to  me  :  whether  she  thinks  so 
herself  is  another  question  ;  but  be  that  as  it  may,  she  could  be  of  no  service  to  me 
in  the  piece  I  am  now  writing  ;  nor  had  I  ever  the  least  view  towards  her,  as 
there  is  no  character  in  it  that  would  suit  her.  I  am  not,  however,  the  less  obliged  to 
you  for  your  generous  and  disinterested  proposal  with  regard  to  her,  which  I  flatter 
myself  is  sincere,  and  agreeable  to  the  kind  regard  which  you  have  already  shown  to 

Your  obliged  friend,  <$cc. 

T.  Francklix. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


337 


MR.  J.  SHARP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Easter  Tuesday,  March  28,  1769. 

I  hope  you  are  enjoying  this  holiday  this  very  fine  day,  as  happy  on  Claverton 
Downs  as  any  horseman  now  at  Newmarket,  or  finding  the  Circus  a  pleasanter  place 
than  I  should  think  the  round  courses  to  which  all  our  youth  are  hastening.  I  did 
intend  to  have  sent  you  an  Horatian  epistle  upon  your  going  down  to  Bath,  but  the 
subject  was  too  serious,  and  I  really  felt  too  much  for  you. 

“  Did  ever  mourner  feel  poetic  fires  ? 

Slow  comes  the  verse  that  real  woe  inspires.” 


Take  Tickell’s  authority,  which  is  as  good  as  a  Latin  or  Greek  one  on  such  an 
occasion.  Let  me  tell  you,  Sir,  that  I  gladly  seized  the  interval  between  the  services 
on  Good  Friday  to  take  a  ride  to  my  friend  Anstey’s.  I  found  him  sowing  and 
planting,  and  his  wife  in  the  straw ;  and  when  I  charged  him  with  having  had  an 
intrigue  with  the  Muses,  he  assured  me  he  knew  no  other  than  his  wife  and  eight 
children :  however,  he  soon  recollected  his  Hertfordshire  holidays,  and  before  Mrs. 
Anstey  and  Miss  Calvert  read  over  your  prose  and  poetical  correspondence.  I  will 
be  bold  to  say,  that  his  poetical  thoughts  were  my  prose  ones,  and  the  occasion  was 
very  similar,  though  he  has  turned  and  closed  them  very  epigrammatically.  As  to 
yours,  I  will  say  as  we  now  say  of  Mr.  Gray, — no  man  can  write  so  well  when  he  is 
bid :  he  cannot  make  the  Installation  Ode  for  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  his  friend  and 
patron  ;  Mason  must  preach  one  on  the  occasion,  for  he  is 

“  Ordain’d,  you  know,  and  made  divine.” 

I  was  sorry  I  could  not  stay  to  dine  and  drink  your  health,  but  intend  to  take  the 
first  leisure  day,  when  we  will  all  toast  it  in  a  bumper.  When  I  came  home  I 
turned  to  some  of  my  rhymes  to  Anstey  about  three  years  ago,  and  found  them  in 
“  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine”  for  June  1766,  p.  285,  and  was  not  a  little  tickled  at 
finding  you  and  myself  cheek  by  jowl  in  the  same  page.  The  verses  on  Mr.  P— ces 
Lilliput  at  Bath,  which  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  which  really  delighted  me,  stand 
with  mine  “  To  the  ingenious  Author  of  the  New  Bath  Guide.”  They  are  not  worth 
transcribing,  only  Anstey  wrote  two  of  them,  and  corrected  the  rest  before  they 
appeared  in  the  Cambridge  newspaper.  I  never  admired  Buckhorse,  and  when  he 
sent  it  me  was  sorry  I  could  pay  him  no  compliment  but  thanks  :  nevertheless,  it  has 
its  admirers,  but  is  a  species  of  composition  and  a  subject  I  think  much  below  the 
author  of  the  Bath  Guide. 

I  take  for  granted  you  amuse  yourself  often  at  Leake’s  shop,  then  at  Arthur’s. 
Have  you  read  Ruffhead’s  new  “  Life  of  Pope  ?”  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  differ 
from  him  in  some  remarks  not  worth  your  looking  for,  in  the  last  page  of  the  Public 
Advertiser  of  Saturday  last.  I  will  not  allow  him  or  you  to  characterize  Pope  or 

VOL.  I.  2  X 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


338 

Anstey  by  the  name  of  “the  Nightingale.”  There  is  one  that  deserves  the  appella¬ 
tion  beyond  them  both,  and  l  trust  will  sing  again ;  though  I  never  desire  to  hear 
him  again  straining  his  throat  to  King  Lear  or  King  Richard.  God  forbid  that  I 
ever  should  see  him  coming  up  once  a  year  from  Bath,  like  Falstaff,*  to  whistle  a 
favourite  song,  for  the  benefit  of  some  favourite  actor.  My  ardent  desires  are  to  see 
him  in  re-established  health,  enjoying  himself  and  his  friends,  his  well-earned  fame 
and  his  books,  in  his  charming  retreat  at  Hampton,  where  I  shall  respect  him  more 
than  Pope  at  Twickenham,  or  Bolingbroke  at  Battersea.  May  his  last  scenes  crown 
all  the  rest,  while  as  old  and  as  gay  as  Voltaire,  he  plays  with  the  management  of  a 
theatre.  This  is  from  the  heart  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  sincere  friend, 

J.  Sharp. 

C.  C.  C.  C.  not  C.  C.  at  Cambridge ;  this  is  Corpus  Christi  College,  or  Bene’t ;  the 
other  Christ’s  College. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Tom’s  Coffee-house,  March  25,  1769. 

I  am  just  returned  from  the  circuit :  before  I  went,  I  called  at  your  house,  and 
was  in  hopes  all  your  danger  was  over,  for  your  servant  told  me  at  the  door,  “  I 
think  my  master  is  a  good  deal  perter  to-day  !”  I  walked  away  contented  with  this 
reply,  with  some  idea  of  congratulating,  you  in  the  manner  I  remember  you  formerly 
did  Mrs.  Clive — “  I  am  very  glad  you  are  come  to  your  usual  spirits,”  after  she  writ, 
as  the  first  essay  of  her  health,  a  violent  scolding  letter.  On  the  circuit  we  were 
alarmed,  but  the  report  I  soon  perceived  took  its  rise  from  a  paragraph  in  the  papers 
that  ushered  Mr.  Derrick  to  Pluto’s  Assembly  Room.  While  you  die  by  proxy, 
and  appoint  such  a  deputy,  you  shall  have  my  full  consent.  The  Norfolk  Circuit 
showed  their  taste;  they  were  all  ready  to  go  into  mourning,  with  Seijeant  Whitaker 
at  the  head  of  them.  How  well  he  played  this,  that,  the  other,  every  thing  !  Shak- 
speare  would  never  have  been  understood,  certainly  never  felt,  but  for  him  !  They 
built  you  a  monument  in  Westminster  Abbey  in  a  moment ;  so  that  you  see  what¬ 
ever  envy  and  malice  may  say,  Extinctus  amabitur  idem.  I  will  not  say  how  much 
I  rejoice  that  you  are  still  among  us,  though  I  owe  you,  besides  200/.  upon  my  note, 
100/.  more,  for  which  you  have  no  voucher.  As  you  are  now  out  of  danger,  I  may  as 
well  own  the  fact.  I  offered  your  brother  my  note  for  the  money,  that  it  may  appear 
how  the  account  stands  between  us,  namely,  a  sum  of  300/.  due  to  you.  Your 
brother,  who  is  now  writing  to  you,  at  the  other  side  of  the  room,  says  he  knows 
nothing  of  the  matter,  will  take  no  note,  and  tells  me,  “  I  have  no  money  to  pay  you  !” 


*  An  allusion  to  Quin,  who  had  a  benevolent  habit  of  this  kind.  As  far  as  the  kindness  goes,  it  is  praise¬ 
worthy.  But  an  actor  owes  something  to  his  own  fame.  To  be  out  of  practice  is  to  be  inferior  to  yourself. 
To  return  occasionally  is  to  invade  other  possessors  of  the  town,  and  perhaps  to  meet  with  a  taste  altered,  if 
not  depraved. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


339 


Clutterbuck  used  to  say  you  did  not  mind  money  ;  I  thought  he  dealt  in  paradoxes, 
but  I  now  believe  him  ;  and  pray  tell  him  so.  Mr.  Clutterbuck  may  also  add,  “  I 
remember  when  Murphy  would  not  require  much  pressing  to  accept  of  money;  how 
comes  he  not  to  catch  at  it  now  ?”  Explain  this  phenomenon,  and  tell  him,  times 
are  a  little  altered  with  me.  Not  as  to  talking  or  scribbling,  you  will  say : — the 
charge  is  true,  and  it  is  unfair  to  write  so  much  till  you  are  quite  established.  Vive 
vcileque. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  ever  yours, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

I  beg  you  will  make  my  compliments  acceptable  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s-inu,  April  10,  1769. 

I  am  almost  tempted  to  begin  with  a  moral  reflection  upon  procrastination,  as 
Congreve  says  of  business,  “  it  is  the  rub  of  life  perverts  our  aim,  and  quite  casts  off 
our  bias.”  I  could  say  much  more  against  this  foolish  impotence  of  the  mind,  which 
is  always  deferring  what  it  ought  to  do,  resolving  and  yet  never  coming  to  action. 
This  has  been  my  case  ever  since  your  two  favours  reached  me.  1  certainly  will 
write  to-morrow  ;  and  so  to-morrow,  and  to-morrow,  to  this  last  syllable,  has  crept  on, 
and  yet  no  letter  has  been  written.  I  have,  however,  been  too  hard  upon  poor  pro¬ 
crastination  !  It  is  a  beast  of  burden,  to  be  sure,  but  ought  not  to  be  overloaded. 
It  has  been  much  to  blame,  no  doubt ;  but  yet  the  whole  fault  should  not  be  laid  at 
that  door.  Sometimes  an  attorney,  with  overwhelming  brow,  has  broke  in  between 
us,  and  has  left  me  in  a  brown  study  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  With  spirits  jaded, 
exhausted  with  law,  which  you  know  is  a  damnable  dry  study,  how  could  I  take  a 
pen  in  hand  to  address  myself  to  you,  who  are  boiled  in  Medea's  kettle,  and  grown 
as  young  as  ever  you  were  !  I  hear  of  nothing  from  Bath  but  the  wonderful  pro¬ 
gress  you  have  made  in  the  recovery  of  your  health.  The  saffron  tinge  is  quite 
gone,  and  every  body  talks  of  your  roses  and  lilies.  Poor  Derrick,  I  find,  could 
not  fight  such  a  battle  as  you  have  done.  He  has  left,  as  I  understand,  a  number 
of  competitors,  and  Bath  is  now  involved  in  as  violent  a  contest  as  the  county  of 
Middlesex.  Next  Thursday,  it  is  expected,  will  be  a  busy  day.  Large  sums  are 
actually  insured  upon  Lutterell’s  life  ;  but  he  is  game,  and  will  face  the  danger 
boldly. 

Tiger  Roach*  (who  used  to  bully  at  the  Bedford  Coffee-house,  because  his  name 
was  Roach)  is  set  up  by  Wilkes’s  friends  to  burlesque  Lutterell  and  his  pretensions. 
I  own  I  do  not  know  a  more  ridiculous  circumstance  than  to  be  a  joint  candidate 


*  Tiger  Roach — A  very  interesting  sketch  of  the  Coffee-house  bully,  so  named — who  seemed  lineally 
descended  from  the  Mohocks  of  Addison’s  day. — Ed. 

2x2 


340 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


with  the  Tiger.  O’Brien  used  to  take  him  off  very  pleasantly,  and  perhaps  you 
may,  from  his  representation,  have  some  idea  of  this  important  wight.  lie  used  to 
sit  at  a  table  all  alone,  with  a  half-starved  look,  a  black  patch  upon  his  cheek,  pale 
with  the  idea  of  murder,  or  with  rank  cowardice,  a  quivering  lip,  and  a  downcast 
eye,  which,  if  it  was  ever  raised,  was  raised  only  like  poor  Dido’s  (I  do  not  mean 
Reed’s  Dido,  but  Virgil’s) — 

“  Quaesivit  coelo  lucem,  ingemuitque  reperti.” 

So  far  for  the  description  of  my  hero.  In  that  manner  he  used  to  sit  alone,  and  his 
soliloquy,  interrupted  now  and  then  with  faint  attempts  to  throw  off  a  little  saliva, 
was  to  the  following  effect:  “Hut!  hut! — a  mercer’s  prentice  with  a  bag-wig — 
d — n  my  s — 1,  if  I  would  not  skiver  a  dozen  of  them  like  larks  ! — Hut !  hut !  I  don’t 
understand  such  airs  !— I’d  cudgel  him  back,  breast,  and  belly  for  three  skips  of  a 
louse ! — How  do  you,  Pat  ?  Hut !  hut !  God’s  blood — Larry,  I’m  glad  to  see  you — 
Prentices  ! — a  fine  thing  indeed  ! — hut!  hut !  How  do  you  do,  Dominick? — D — n 
my  s — 1,  what’s  here  to  do  ?”  These  were  the  meditations  of  this  agreeable  youth. 
From  one  of  these  reveries  he  started  up  one  night,  when  I  was  there,  called  a  Mr. 
Bagnell  out  of  the  room,  and  most  heroically  stabbed  him  in  the  dark,  the  other 
having  no  weapon  to  defend  himself  with.  In  this  career  the  Tiger  persisted,  till  at 
length  a  Mr.  Lennard  brandished  a  whip  over  his  head,  and  stood  in  a  menacing 
attitude  commanding  him  to  ask  pardon  directly.  The  Tiger  shrank  from  the 
danger,  and  with  a  faint  voice  pronounced,  “  Hut !  what  signifies  it  between  you  and 
me  ? — well !  well !  I  ask  your  pardon  !”  “  Speak  louder,  Sir  ;  I  don’t  hear  a  word  vou 
say.”  And  indeed  he  was  so  very  tall,  that  it  seemed  as  if  the  sound  sent  feebly  from 
below  could  not  ascend  to  such  a  height. 

This  is  the  hero  who  is  to  figure  at  Brentford.  Some  dreadful  consequences,  I 
fear,  will  happen  there.  I  this  moment  see  an  advertisement  in  the  papers  request¬ 
ing  votes  for  my  friend  the  Serjeant ;  being  a  person  every  way  qualified  to  make 
the  Bill  of  Rights  perfectly  easy,  and  let  it  sleep  in  its  bed,  as  it  has  done  ever  since 
the  Revolution.  I  do  not  mean  that  these  are  the  exact  words  of  the  advertisement. 
I  have  not  seen  him,  but  if  he  is  in  earnest,  I  most  heartily  join  with  you  in 
wishing  him  success.  Your  letter  to  the  Reverend  Elector  of  Middlesex  went  by 
the  post  the  very  day  I  received  it. 

Shall  I  tell  you  a  piece  of  bad  news  ?  I  was  counsel  last  Saturday  at  the  Old 
Bailey  against  a  man  who  stood  indicted  for  publishing  a  libel,  in  which  it  was  most 

virulently  said  that  Lord  M - d  had  long  disgraced  the  public  justice  of  this 

kingdom.  The  law  and  the  fact  were  clear,  and  yet  in  three  minutes  a  London 
Jury  came  into  court,  and  most  deliberately  brought  in  a  verdict,  Not  Guilty. 
Baron  Smith,  who  tried  the  fellow,  was  amazed.  “  Pray,  gentlemen,  do  you  collect 
from  the  evidence  that  he  did  not  publish  the  pamphlet  ?”  “  My  Lord,”  says  the 

Foreman,  “  we  have  considered  the  whole,  and  that  is  our  verdict.”  Pleasant  times 
these  are !  the  brightest  talents  are  no  security  against  calumny  and  malice.  My 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


341 


ambition  droops  at  the  thought.  I  am  almost  resolved  never  to  be  Chief  Justice  ! 
I  shall  seize  the  first  plank,  and  swim  safe  to  shore,  if  I  can.  Sink  or  swim,  I  am 
with  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 

Dear  Sir,  ever  your’s, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Revised  and  corrected,*  with  best  compliments, 

John  Ranby. 


MRS.  CLIVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  London,  April  14th,  1769. 

I  could  not  stay  till  the  24th  to  thank  you  for  your  very  kind  letter.  I  am 
extremely  glad  to  hear  you  continue  to  be  so  well.  I  have  often  enquired  after  you 
of  your  brother  George : — now  do  not  say  to  yourself,  ay,  for  your  own  sake  ;  for 
when  I  heard  you  was  in  such  great  pain,  1  was  most  sincerely  sorry.  In  the  next 
place,  to  be  sure,  I  am  glad  you  are  well  for  the  sake  of  my  audience,  who  will  have 
the  pleasure  to  see  their  own  Don  Felix.  What  signifies  fifty-two?  they  had  rather 
see  the  Garrick  and  the  Clive  at  a  hundred  and  four,  than  any  of  the  moderns  ; — the 
ancients,  you  know,  have  always  been  admired.  I  do  assure  you,  I  am  at  present  in 
such  health  and  such  spirits,  that  when  I  recollect  I  am  an  old  woman,  I  am  aston¬ 
ished.  My  dear  town  are  giving  me  such  applause  every  time  they  see  me,  that  I 
am  in  great  fear  for  myself  on  my  benefit  night  ;  I  shall  be  overcome  with  kindness. 
Indeed,  I  have  every  day  fresh  instances  of  the  public  affection  for  me.  Lord  Clive 
has  behaved  in  a  noble  manner ;  he  sent  me  the  most  polite  note,  and  fifty  pounds 
for  his  box.  I  am  greatly  obliged  to  Sir  William  Stanhope  :  if  he  should  be  at  Bath 
when  you  receive  this,  I  beg  you  would  do  me  the  favour  to  return  my  thanks  to 
him  ;  I  hope  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  doing  it  at  Twickenham. 

You  are  very  much  mistaken  if  you  imagine  I  shall  be  sorry  to  hear  Mr.  Clive  is 
well ;  I  thank  God  I  have  no  malice  or  hatred  to  any  body  :  besides,  it  is  so  long  ago 
since  I  thought  he  used  me  ill,  that  I  have  quite  forgot  it.  I  am  very  glad  he  is  well 
and  happy  :  I  can  say  no  more,  for  Mr.  Jefferson  is  just  gone;  he  came  to  let  me 
know  that  Mr.  Barry  has  sent  word  he  cannot  play,  and  unless  I  will,  he  can  have  no 
benefit. 

Pray  make  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  who  I  hope  is  so  well  as  not  to 
want  the  waters. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

C.  Clive. 

*  How  much  the  letter  may  owe  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Ranby,  I  cannot  say ;  but  it  is  the  best  ever  written 
by  Murphy,  and  highly  entertaining. — Ed. 


34  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  SCROPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Kingston,  April  19th,  1769. 

I  take  the  liberty  of  writing  to  you  upon  a  particular  subject.  The  gentlemen 
of  Oxford  are  going  to  print  a  second  edition  of  their  Shakspear,  the  care  of  which, 
1  mean  with  regard  to  the  first,  was  formerly  committed  to  me.  At  the  end  of  this 
second  edition,  is  to  be  a  collection  of  various  readings.  Many  years  ago,  1  had  the 
great  pleasure  of  seeing  you  perform  Macbeth,  when  your  strong  and  clear  pro¬ 
nunciation  conveyed  to  my  ear  as  happy  a  restoration  of  a  passage  as  any  one  in  the 
many  late  editions  of  the  poet.  It  was  towards  the  end  of  the  tragedy,  and  to  the 
best  of  my  remembrance,  the  speech  begins, 

“  I  have  lived  long  enough — my  May  of  life 
Is  worn  into  the  sear,  the  yellow  leaf.”* 

Your  judicious  emphasis  on  the  word  May  struck  me,  and  upon  reflection  I  was 
convinced  this  must  be  the  right  reading.  It  is  Sliakspeare’s  way  of  saying,  my 
Spring  is  declined  to  Autumn  ;  and  it  is  confirmed  beyond  dispute  by  another 
passage  of  the  same  author.  For  in  “  Much  ado  about  Nothing,”  one  of  the  old 
men  tells  Claudio  he  is  resolved  to  be  revenged  on  him,  notwithstanding  his 
“  May  of  youth  and  bloom  of  lustihood.”  Theobald  and  his  critical  assistant  pre¬ 
tend  to  illustrate  the  common  reading,  way  of  life,  by  quoting  the  same  expression 
from  “  Sophocles”  or  “  Euripides.”  For  you  know,  Sir,  when  it  will  serve  one  turn, 
Shakspeare  must  be  represented  as  utterly  destitute  of  learning  ;  and  when  it  will 
serve  another,  that  is,  show  the  critic’s  own  learning,  he  must  be  represented  as  deep 
in  the  Greek  tragedians.  But  assuredly  the  best  way  of  interpreting  any  author  is 
from  himself : 

“  Still  with  itself  compared  his  text  peruse.” 

I  beg  pardon,  as  I  am  unknown  to  you,  for  taking  up  so  much  of  your  valuable  time 
at  this  rate ;  but  I  must  own  I  am  not  sorry  for  this  opportunity  of  writing  to  a 
gentleman,  who  has  reformed  the  taste  of  the  town,  and  the  exhibitions  of  the 
theatre,  to  such  a  degree,  that  a  person  of  the  greatest  modesty,  or  of  a  profession 
that  must  some  time  ago  have  excluded  him  from  thence,  may  now  attend  without 
blushing  or  being  offended.  I  hope,  Sir,  on  the  recovery  of  your  health,  the  public 
will  still  enjoy  the  advantage  of  your  management  of  its  most  rational  entertainment. 

*  May  of  life. — One  is  really  ashamed  to  read  the  impotent  trash  of  learned  men  upon  Shakspeare’s  use 
of  his  mother  tongue.  Dr.  Scrope,  who  was  an  editor  of  the  Poet’s  works,  knew  nothing  of  his  text: — the  pas¬ 
sage  really  is — 

“  I  have  liv’d  long  enough — my  way  of  life 
Is  fall’n  into  the  sear,  the  yellow  leaf,” — 

The  course,  the  progress  of  existence  has  at  length  fallen  into  the  autumnal  season — And,  in  the  name  of 
good  sense,  where  is  the  difficulty? — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


343 


I  am  acquainted  with  your  friend  Mr.  Clutterbuck,  and  we  never  meet  but  we 
do  ourselves  the  pleasure  of  talking  of  you. 

But  I  must  not  forget  that  one  end,  the  very  pretence  indeed  that  I  laid  hold  of, 
in  writing  to  you,  was  to  desire  that  the  above  emendation  may  be  inserted  among 
the  various  readings  ;  for  not  having  met  with  it  in  print,  (though  indeed  I  have 
not  seen  Johnson’s  edition)  I  look  upon  it  as  your  private  property.  I  am,  Sir,  with 
the  greatest  respect, 

Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  Scrope. 

P.  S.  Please  to  direct  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Scrope,  at  Kingston,  near  Chippenham, 
Wilts. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  KING. 

Saturday,  April  29th,  1769. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  compliments  to  Mr.  King :  though  he  is  seldom  surprised  at 
what  may  happen  in  a  theatre,  yet  he  should  be  obliged  to  Mr.  King,  if  he  would 
let  him  know  by  a  note  what  he  was  pleased  to  say  about  him,  and  the  farce  of 
“  The  Invasion,”  to  Mr.  Hopkins.  Mr.  Garrick  assures  Mr.  King  that  he  will  not 
send  his  answer  to  the  prompter,  but  to  himself.* 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Russell-street,  April  30th,  1769. 

As  to  what  passed  between  Mr.  Hopkins  and  me  concerning  “  The  Invasion,” 
as  I  have  a  better  opinion  of  his  integrity  than  my  own  memory,  I  should  have 
referred  you  to  him  for  the  account,  had  you  not  desired  to  have  it  under  my  hand. 
I  have  committed  it  to  paper,  I  hope  with  a  proper  regard  to  truth,  and  as  minutely 
as  I  am  able. 

You  are,  I  find,  displeased  with  my  conduct:  no  one  thing  on  earth  can  make 
me  more  unhappy.  I  have  offended  by  giving  my  sentiments  to,  and  sending  a  mes¬ 
sage  by  the  prompter.  Let  me,  if  I  can,  justify  myself.  When  Mr.  Lacy  and  you 
are  on  the  spot,  if  I  have  any  thing  that  I  think  necessary  to  communicate  to  both, 
I  always  trouble  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  who  kindly  in  such  cases  becomes  a  middle  man, 
and  acts  for  all  parties.  When  you  retire  for  a  time,  I  look  on  Mr.  G.  Garrick  as 

*  I  suppose  the  farce  of  that  title,  printed  in  1759,  but  never  acted.  Garrick,  it  will  be  remembered, 
wrote  the  dialogue  of  “  Harlequin’s  Invasion,”  originally  for  Bartholomew  Fair;  from  one  or  both  ot  these 
Invasions  some  mischief  had  been  contrived,  and  was  industriously  reported. — Ed. 


.344 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


your  representative;  if  I  have  any  thing  in  the  way  of  business  to  settle  with  the 
managers ,  I  think  it  necessary  to  search  for  some  other  person  to  act  for  me.  Who 
so  likely  to  find  the  managers  together  as  the  prompter?  Nay,  I  believe  in  every 
theatre  where  they  are  not  happy  enough  to  have  a  person  of  so  useful  and  friendly 
a  turn  as  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  messages  relative  to  the  business  of  the  stage  are  sent  or 
given  to  the  prompter,  and  I  have  ever  thought  it  a  part  of  his  office  to  receive  and 
deliver  them.  You  desire  I  would  let  you  know  what  I  was  pleased  to  say  about 
you  and  the  farce.  1  declare  on  my  honour,  I  do  not  recollect  that  your  name  was 
mentioned,  nor  do  I  remember  that  there  was  any  thing  particular  said  about  the 
farce  ;  but  as  I  said  before,  I  must  refer  you  to  Mr.  Hopkins  ;  some  part  of  the  con¬ 
versation  may  have  slipped  my  memory,  and  I  have  not  the  least  apprehension  of  his 
doing  me  injustice.  I  shall  only  say,  that  it  was  out  of  my  power,  either  on  this  or 
any  other  occasion,  whenever  your  name  could  be  mentioned,  to  treat  it  otherwise 
than  with  a  warmth  of  respect,  little  short  of  enthusiasm ;  and  I  defy  the  world, 
replete  as  it  is  with  rascals,  to  produce  one  base  enough  to  contradict  me. 

I  have,  since  your  departure  for  Bath,  been  most  indelicately  treated  in  many 
particulars,  which  I  now  shall  never  trouble  you  with  a  mention  of.  I  flattered  my¬ 
self  for  some  days  past,  that  on  your  return  to  town  I  should  again  have  the  pleasure 
of  taking  you  by  the  hand,  and,  as  usual,  trusted  you  with  every  thing  that  had  made 
or  could  make  me  happy ;  on  the  contrary,  your  desiring  an  explanation  in  a  note, 
seemed  to  forbid  my  waiting  on  you.  Depend  upon  it,  dear  Sir,  I  shall  not  become 
a  trespasser.  I  know — I  feel  myself  unworthily  treated.  I  must  and  will  assert, 
though  that  assertion  shall  never  be  made  but  to  yourself,  that  your  suspecting  any 
part  of  the  warmth  of  my  attachment  to  you  is  uncandid,  and  your  severity  (for  I 
shall  never  call  coolness  from  you  by  any  other  name)  unwarrantable.  I  have  for 
some  time  rejoiced  in  supposing  myself  an  object  of  your  esteem.  While  you 
seemed  to  think  me  deserving  of  it,  I  could  have  died  to  convince  you  it  was  not 
improperly  placed ;  but  you  have  suspected  me,  and  I  shall  say  but  little  more. 
Had  I  been  a  prince,  I  should  have  prided  myself  in  having  Mr.  Garrick  for  my 
friend ;  but  were  I  this  moment  shirtless,  I  would  not  wholly  give  up  the  duty  I 
owe  myself,  merely  because  he  is  my  employer. 

I  am,  and  ever  shall  be,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  ardent  well-wisher,  and  very  humble  servant, 

Thomas  King. 

You  were  some  time  ago  anxious  lest  some  of  your  letters  should  fall  into  im¬ 
proper  hands  ;  I  take  the  liberty  to  enclose  your  last  for  your  re-perusal,  and  beg  you 
will  indulge  me  by  burning  it.  Such  a  note  found  after  my  decease,  would  go  near 
to  convince  some  friends  whose  good  opinion  I  covet,  that  I  had  most  basely  forfeited 
the  favour  of  a  man,  whose  friendly  attachment  to  me  was  for  some  time  my  greatest, 
nay  almost  my  only  boast. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


345 


THE  MAYOR,  ALDERMEN,  AND  BURGESSES  OF  THE  TOWN  OF  STRATFORD-UPON-AVON 

TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Stratford-upon-Avon,  May  3, 1769. 

The  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Burgesses  of  the  ancient  Borough  of  Stratford-upon- 
Avon — a  town  that  glories  in  giving  birth  to  the  immortal  Shakspeare,  whose 
memory  you  have  so  highly  honoured,  and  whose  conceptions  you  have  ever  so  hap¬ 
pily  expressed — rejoice  in  an  opportunity  of  adding  their  mite  to  that  universal 
applause  your  inimitable  powers  have  most  justly  merited ;  and  as  a  mark  of  their 
esteem  and  gratitude  have  respectfully  transmitted  to  you  the  Freedom  of  their 
Borough  in  a  box  made  from  a  mulberry-tree  undoubtedly  planted  by  Shakspeare’s 
own  hand,  which  they  hope  you  will  do  them  the  honour  of  accepting. 

By  order  of  the  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Burgesses  in  Common  Council, 

(Signed  by)  Wm.  Hunt,  Town  Clerk. 

“  Stratford,  a  Copy  of 
The  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Burgesses, 

Letter  to  David  Garrick  with  his  Freedom.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  MAYOR,  ALDERMEN,  AND  BURGESSES  OF  THE  TOWN  OF 

STRATFORD-UPON-AVON. 


GENTLEMEN,  London,  Southampton-street,  May  8,  1769. 

I  cannot  sufficiently  express  my  acknowledgments  for  the  honour  you  have 
done  me  in  electing  me  a  Burgess  of  Stratford-upon-Avon ;  a  town  which  will  be 
ever  distinguished  and  reverenced  as  the  birth-place  of  Shakspeare. 

There  are  many  circumstances  which  have  greatly  added  to  the  obligation  you 
have  conferred  upon  me.  The  freedom  of  your  town  given  to  me  unanimously,  sent 
to  me  in  such  an  elegant,  and  inestimable  box,  and  delivered  to  me  in  so  flattering  a 
manner,  merit  my  warmest  gratitude.  It  will  be  impossible  for  me  ever  to  forget 
those  who  have  honoured  me  so  much  as  to  mention  my  unworthy  name  with  that 
of  their  immortal  townsman. 


I  am.  Gentlemen, 

Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick 


“  A  copy  of  my  letter  to 
The  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Burgesses 
Of  the  Town  of  Stratford  upon  Avon,  May  8th,  1769.” 


VOL.  I. 


2  Y 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  STURTZ  TO  MR.  GARRICK.. 

MY  DEAREST  FRIEND,  Copenhagen,  May  5th,  1 769 . 

Mr.  Ce  ement,  the  hearer  of  this,  is  a  good-natured  young  gentleman,  who  is 
over  fond  of  England,  not  uninformed  of  your  literature  and  your  language,  and 
who,  in  his  trip  to  the  fortunate  island,  longs  for  nothing  more  than  to  see  Mr. 
Garrick  face  to  face.  I  do  not  presume  to  cause  you  any  trouble  on  his  account 
whatever,  only  some  indulgent  audiences  and  some  friendly  diversions  is  all  that  I 
entreat  you  to  grant  him. 

Receive  my  warmest  thanks  for  your  spirited,  never  enough  to  be  praised,  epistle. 
I  peruse  it  over  and  over  with  a  new  satisfaction  ;  there  is  wit,  humour,  and  heart 
to  be  found  in  every  line,  and  more  true,  more  masterly  remarks  on  your  art  than  in 

all  the - and  the - Some  touches  are  poignant  with  new  and  uncommon 

truth.  I  reserve  for  some  other  letter  several  interesting  queries  which  you  will  not 
deny  me  to  answer,  and  meanwhile  I  apply  closely  to  the  task  I  am  bold  enough  to 
take  upon  me.  I,  the  moderator  of  Mr.  Garrick  ?  What  a  figure  I  shall  make 
in  the  annals  of  Thalia !  You  shall  have  the  account  I  give  to  myself  and  to  my 
country  of  the  many  pleasures  you  have  procured  me.  I  relate  rather  my  feelings  :  I 
follow  the  play  in  every  situation  of  the  different  characters,  and  pointing  out  what 
Nature  required,  I  tell  what  Mr.  Garrick  did,  even  when  there  was  no  original  in 
Nature,  (as  certainly,  for  the  honour  6f  humanity,  there  is  no  such  tyrant  as  Richard  ;) 
how  like  a  new  Prometheus  he  fetched  fire  from  heaven  when  it  was  not  to  be  found 
upon  earth.  Now  that  I  am  going  to  the  country,  I  shall  retire  sometimes  to  the 
pleasant  shade  of  a  neighbouring  grove,  and  there  I  shall  recall  to  my  memory  every 
scene  of  what  I  saw  and  admired :  then  I  may  often  shudder  at  the  ghastly  appear¬ 
ance  of  unhappy  Macbeth,  and  feel  horror  at  the  sight  of  him  I  long  so  much  to 
embrace. 

Pray  let  me  have  that  W onder  wherein  you  performed  the  young  lover !  I  do 
not  doubt  of  your  excellence  in  it.  Nature  would  be  at  a  loss  to  form  a  character 
beyond  your  reach. 

When,  my  dear  friend,  may  I  hope  for  the  publication  of  your  work  ?  I  would 
be  very  glad  also  to  get  every  print  which  represents  you  ;  and  if  you  could  pro¬ 
cure  me  them,  I  would  gladly  and  gratefully  refund  the  expense.  Tell  me  some¬ 
thing,  I  beseech  you,  of  Dow’s  tragedy  of  “  Zingis.”  1  have  seen  some  extracts, 
which,  I  think,  declare  the  author  a  poet ;  but  I  wanted  to  find  therein  some  true 
Oriental  beauties,  so  much  the  more  as  Mr.  Dow  is  acquainted  with  that  country  and 
its  writers  :  I  was  somewhat  disappointed  in  meeting  rather  with  imitations  of 
Ossian.  My  best  respects  and  acknowledgments  to  Mistress  Garrick  ;  any  commands 
of  hers  would  be  very  welcome  to  me  in  return  for  her  procuring  me  the  hats  ;  but  I 
doubt  whether,  in  this  Septentrional  country,  the  English  ladies  might  find  any  thing 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


347 


for  the  toilette,  unless  it  were  whalebones.  I  hope  Baron  Diede  has  paid  for 
the  hats. 

Count  Hoik  is  exceedingly  rejoiced  at  your  remembrance,  and  bids  you  be  assured 
of  his  :  he  had  a  mind  to  write  some  lines  in  this  letter,  but  he  went  this  morning  out 
with  the  King  to  some  neighbouring  place  in  the  country  :  he  is  on  the  eve  of  being- 
married  to  a  young  lady  of  the  first  quality,  thirteen  years  old,  and  a  great  fortune. 

Your  love  stories,  your - ,  as  well  as  the  faits  et  gestes  of  your  supporters  and 

addressers,  have  reached  us  :  what  will  this  animosity  end  in?  Was  I  to  form  from 
these  offsprings  of  licence  an  idea  of  the  blessings  of  your  freedom,  I  should  be  some¬ 
what  puzzled  at  the  choice  ;  but  happily  you  have  radiant  and  glorious  days  of  liberty 
undarkened  by  these  gloomy  clouds  of  faction. 

I  embrace  you,  my  best  friend, 

Sturtz. 


AN 

ACCOUNT  OF  “  ZENOBIA.” 

1768. 

£>  s»  d» 

£ 

s. 

d. 

March  3. 

Author’s  first  night 

240  18  6 

Charges 

. 

73 

10 

0 

10. 

- second  ditto 

241  18  6 

Ditto 

• 

73 

10 

0 

6. 

186  16  0 

12. 

223  3  0 

£409  19  0 

The  half  of  the  above  ninth  and  tenth 

nights  for  the  Author’s  third  night 

204  19  6 

Ditto 

• 

73 

10 

0 

1764.  March  4 

. 

100 

0 

0 

1767.  Dec.  16 

. 

100 

0 

0 

1768.  March  3 

Draft  for  . 

50 

0 

0 

Balance  . 

217 

6 

6 

£687  16  6 

£687 

16 

6 

London,  May  18,  1769. 

Received  the  above  balance  of  two  hundred  and  seventeen  pounds,  six  shillings, 
and  sixpence  for  the  tragedy  of  “  Zenobia,”  and  in  full  of  all  demands  ;  I  say  received 
of  David  Garrick,  Esq. 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Hyde-street,  May  19,  1769. 

Shall  I  flatter  myself,  my  dear  Sir,  that  in  the  multiplicity  of  affairs  in  which  you 
are  necessarily  engaged,  you  have  at  some  time  or  other  bestowed  a  single  thought 

2  y  2 


348 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


on  me  ? — Say  yes,  and  that  will  repay  me  for  the  real  anxiety  I  suffered  for  your  illness. 
You  are  now,  thank  God,  restored  to  health  ;  may  it  be  as  permanent  as  my  good 
wishes  for  you,  and  it  will  then  last  at  least  my  life. 

As  I  hope  and  believe  that  the  hurry  and  fatigue  of  your  winter  campaign  are 
pretty  near  over,  I  take  the  liberty  of  reminding  you  of  a  promise  you  were  so  good 
to  make  me  last  summer  of  looking  over  the  “  Pere  de  Famille,”  and  some  other 
attempts  of  mine  in  the  dramatic  way :  your  taking  this  trouble  I  shall  certainly 
esteem  as  a  favour,  but  I  shall  be  infinitely  more  obliged  if  you  will  point  out  any 
other  plan  you  may  think  more  likely  to  succeed.  You  have  not,  perhaps,  forgotten, 
and  indeed  I  never  shall  forget,  the  great  pains  which  “  The  School  for  Rakes”  cost 
you ;  but  do  not,  my  dear  Sir,  let  that  deter  you  from  a  second  trial :  you  have 
allowed  that  I  am  pliable  and  docile,  and  I  will  boast  that  I  am  grateful  also.  I 
know  that  without  your  aid  I  can  do  nothing,  and  with  it  I  may  hope  for  every 
thing :  will  you  then  withdraw  your  assistance  from  one  who  has  frankness  enough 
to  avow  her  total  dependence  on  you  ?  I  hope  you  will  not.  If  you  have  got  an 
old  play  of  Thomas  Hey  wood’s,  called  “  The  Travellers,”*  1  shall  be  obliged  to  you 
if  you  will  lend  it  me ;  and  if  you  can  find  the  four  acts  of  my  first  play,  on  the  plan 
of  “Eugenie,”  I  shall  be  glad  to  have  them. 

I  have  made  many  efforts  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you, 
but  have  been  so  unfortunate  to  miss  you  both :  my  best  compliments  wait  upon  her, 
and  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  J.  SHARP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  c-  C-  C-  C-  May  26>  1769- 

Since  my  return  to  this  place  I  have  looked  in  vain  for  your  verses  to  the  late  Duke 
of  Devonshire  in  the  Collections  for  1752  and  1753  :  you  must  give  me  a  farther  clue. 
I  am  more  fortunate  in  searching  my  Martial  than  yours.  The  epigram  I  recom¬ 
mended  to  you  is  in  book  iii.  [vii.]  and  begins,  “  Doctorum  Licini,”  Sec.  The  fol¬ 
lowing  lines  in  it  might  be  well  turned  to  you  : — 

.  “  Redderis,  heu  quanto  fatorum  munere  nobis, 

Gustata  Lethes  pene  remissus  aqua ! 

Vive  velut  rapto,  fugitivaque  gaudia  carpe  : 

Perdiderit  nullum  vita  reversa  diem.” — Lib.  vii  ep.  46. 


*  1  conclude  her  to  mean  Heywood’s  tragi-comedy  called  “  The  English  Traveller,  which  was  acted  at 
the  Cock-pit,  in  Drury-lane,  and  was  printed  in  1633.  It  was  in  the  preface  to  this  piece  that  he  told  the 
world  the  astonishing  fact,  that  he  was  concerned,  either  alone  or  in  company,  in  the  production  of  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  twenty  plays;  nor  were  these  his  only  writings.  And  to  swell  the  wonder  to  an  extravagance  of 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


349 


EPITAPHIUM  LATINI. 

“  Dulce  decus  scenas,  ludorum  fama,  Latiaus 
Ille  ego  sura,  plausus,  deliciasque  tuae  : 

Qui  spectatorem  potui  fecisse  Catonem, 

Solvere  qui  Curios,  Fabriciosque  graves,”  &c. — Lib.  ix.  ep.  29. 

It  is  well  for  you  that  you  have  not  yet  to  adopt  this.  Give  me  leave  to  apply 
to  you  what  Cicero  (our  Mansfield)  says  of  your  namesake  Roscius,  now  I  am  upon 
Latin  quotations.  “  Quis  nostrum  tarn  animo  agresti  ac  duro  fuit,  ut  Roscii  morte 
non  commoveretur  ?  Qui  cum  esset  senex  mortuus,  tamen  propter  excellentem  artem 
ac  venustatem,  videtur  onmino  mori  non  debuisse!”*  I  could  epigrammatise  this, 
but,  happily,  there  is  no  occasion  but  for  you  to  pay  such  honours  yourself  to  Quin 
and  Shakspeare.  I  hope  you  will  furnish  something  better  to  the  memory  of  the 
latter  at  his  jubilee,  than  Mr.  Marty n’s  and  Mr.  Noel’s  prologue  and  epilogue  at  his 
benefit  in  the  year  1738,  for  the  erecting  his  monument  in  Westminster  Abbey.  I 
hope  to  be  at  Stratford,  and  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  to  know  the  exact  time  of 
the  celebration,  that  I  may  provide  a  deputy  here.  I  could  wish  to  see  you  first  at 
our  Encaenia,  the  installation  of  our  Chancellor,  on  the  first  of  July.  I  can  tell  you 
that  Mr.  Gray  makes  the  Ode  at  last,  and  our  professor  has  already  got  a  part  of  it  to 
set  to  music.  I  met  Mr.  G.  here  at  dinner  last  Sunday  ;  he  spoke  handsomely  of 
your  happy  knack  at  epilogues,  a  gentleman  in  company  giving  an  account  of  the 
additional  lines  to  that  at  the  actor’s  benefit:  but  he  calls  the  Stratford  Jubilee,  Vanity 
Fair.  I  hope  to  see  such  doings  there  that  the  soul  of  Shakspeare  might  exult  and 
say,  as  he  did  formerly, 

“  This  is  a  most  majestic  vision  and  harmonious  charming  lays.”f — Masque  in  Tempest. 

We  have  just  set  out  our  seal  to  an  instrument,  finely  illuminated  by  Mr. 
Charles  Rickaby,  to  be  delivered  to  the  Danish  minister  and  sent  to  Copenhagen. 
It  is  the  diploma  or  grace  of  the  Senate,  presenting  the  degree  of  LL.D.  to  the 
King  of  Denmark,  as  done  in  October  last.  It  is  drawn  on  vellum  with  curious 
emblematic  paintings,  in  water  colours,  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences.  The  whole  is 
enclosed  in  a  gold  frame,  at  the  top  of  which  is  a  regal  crown  of  his  present  Majesty, 
and  at  the  bottom  is  the  University  seal  under  a  double  crystal.  This  will  be  a 
handsome  ornament  for  the  King’s  Museum,  whereas  the  diploma  of  the  University 
of  Oxford,  being  on  parchment  and  in  a  gold  box,  must  be  deposited  in  a  drawer. 
You  will  probably  see  a  fuller  account  of  it  in  the  public  papers.  These  intelli¬ 
gencers  tell  us  you  are  going  to  Germany,  with  what  truth  I  shall  hope  to  be  in¬ 
labour,  Heywood  was  at  the  same  time  an  actor,  with  the  studies  of  other  plays  to  encumber  his  mind,  and 
the  daily  devotion  of  many  hours  to  the  stage,  which  must  have  detained  him  from  composition. — En. 

*  Oratio  pro  Archia  Poeta. 

t  This  sophisticated  trash  the  reader  will  now  reject  for  the  poet’s  own  expression,  “  harmonious  charm¬ 
ingly or,  if  his  verse  had  allowed  him  so  to  place  the  two  words,  charmingly  harmonious. — Ed. 


350 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


formed  soon.  I  shall  stay  here  till  after  the  installation,  and  then  make  a  little 
voyage  from  London  into  Kent,  But  the  knowledge  of  the  exact  time  of  Shaks- 
peare’s  jubilee  will  determine  many  of  my  motions.  I  am  wdtli  best  wishes  for  your 
health  and  enjoyment  of  a  pleasant  summer, 

Dear  Sir,  your  faithful  servant, 

J.  Sharp. 


MR.  WEST  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Alcot,  May  27th,  1769. 

Mr.  West  presents  his  best  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  returns  him  thanks  for 
his  generous  invitation  of  the  public  to  Stratford  jubilee  in  so  obliging  a  manner, 
which  is  most  gratefully  applauded  by  this  county.  Mr.  West  showed  them  to 
Mr.  Hunt,  and  they  have  since  been  universally  approved  on  appearing  in  the  papers. 
Mr.  Wilson  tells  Mr.  West,  Mr.  Garrick  proposes  us  the  honour  of  a  visit  soon, 
which  Mr.  West  begs  he  may  know  the  time  of,  that  nothing  may  call  him  from 
home,  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  West  will  thankfully  acknovdedge  the  very  great  honour 
done  them. 


MR.  T.  DAVIES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

t 

Birmingham,  July  30th,  1769. 

On  the  16th  of  this  month  I  did  myself  the  honour  of  sending  you  the  sketch  of 
the  medal  and  the  gold  work  ;  on  the  19th  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  G.  Garrick, 
which  mentioned  your  getting  the  gold  done  in  London,  and  I  imagine  your  inten¬ 
tion  is  to  put  a  glass  before  it.  In  Birmingham  vre  have  a  varnish  that  has  all  the 
qualities  of  it;  it  is  transparent  and  colourless,  and  will  keep  the  medal  from  less 
injuries,  and  if  you  approve  of  it,  a  line  from  you  of  your  approbation,  shall  be  im¬ 
mediately  put  into  execution  by, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

T.  Davies. 

I  imagine,  if  I  send  by  the  coach  directed  for  you,  it  will  come  safe ;  if  you  think 
otherwise,  I  shall  be  greatly  honoured  with  your  advice. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  DAVID,  O-  Alresford,  May  28th,  1769. 

I  am  such  a  self-flatterer  as  to  think  that  an  account  of  my  safe  arrival  in  these 
parts  will  not  be  indifferent.  If  so,  you  have  thrown  awray  a  vast  deal  of  civility. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


351 


you  and  your  wife,  to  no  manner  of  purpose.  With  a  great  nosegay  of  Stephen’s 
provision  I  set  out,  j  ust  as  if  I  was  going  to  be  hanged ;  after  having  taken  good 
care  of  one,  and  that  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  offend  my  good  landlady.  I  did 
not  know  but  she  might  have  a  liking  and  a  prejudice  to  one  canister,  and  so  I  drank 
twist,  made  of  both — and  ate  brown  and  white  bread  and  butter  in  abundance — all 
for  fear  of  giving  offence. 

I  spent  the  evening  with  Dr.  Butler,  who  was  then  going  to  take  the  fourth 
dose  of  his  medicine.  I  examined  him  pretty  closely,  and  all  I  could  find  was,  that 
he  was  easier  after  great  pain,  but  I  could  not  understand  that  he  was  certain  of  the 
effect  of  the  medicine.  He  certainly  is  better,  and  can  walk  more  and  more  without 
making  bloody  water.  I  shall  have  farther  account  of  his  state  of  health  from  time 
to  time,  and  I  will  certainly  let  you  know  what  is  his  opinion  of  his  medicine  after 
more  experience.  He  was  very  easy  and  cheerful  on  Friday  evening,  and  great 
hopes  he  had  of  continuing  so. 

You  may  be  surprised  to  see  this  dated  at  Alresford,  but  we  found  ourselves  so 
happy  here  in  cleanliness  and  beauty,  that  in  hopes  of  a  dry  day  for  Madam  to  stroll 
about  the  garden,  and  not  ambitious  of  honour  or  coveting  riches,  but  having  a 

tolerable  constitution,  a  competency,  and  a  S -  and  W - s  by  me,  I  took  my 

stand  here,  and  resolved  to  go  no  farther  a-field. 

Madam  is  downright  thankful  for  the  care  you  and  your  Eve  have  taken  of  me> 
and  will  give  it  under  her  hand,  if  required,  that  she  received  me  safe  and  sound. 
It  is  doing  as  you  would  be  done  by,  and  shows  you  may  be  trusted  upon  another  oc¬ 
casion.  Our  reports  here  are,  that  you  will  not  have  above  four  hundred  people  at 
your  masquerade ;  that  there  is  some  folly,  but  no  politics  in  it,  as  your  friend  Cox 
chose  to  insinuate.  Our  loves  wait  upon  you  and  your’s  with  all  good  wishes  ;  and 

I  am,  &c. 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  W.  HAVARD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Tavistock- street,  May  30th,  1769. 

Though  I  had  the  pleasure  of  personally  thanking  you  the  night  of  my  epilogue 
for  your  many  favours  and  indulgences  (particularly  your  last  of  friendship)  during 
your  direction  of  Drury-lane  Theatre,  yet  now  the  season  is  quite  finished,  I  cannot 
help  putting  something  more  upon  paper,  as  I  am  sure  what  I  then  said  was  inade¬ 
quate  to  my  feelings  upon  that  occasion. 

Believe  me,  Sir,  they  are  wrote  upon  my  heart,  and  must  continue  as  long  as  the 
frail  tenement  that  contains  it. 

I  know,  grateful  acknowledgments  are  supposed  to  carry  with  themselves  a  receipt 
for  past  obligations,  yet  1  can  by  no  means  think  of  getting  out  of  debt  in  that  man¬ 
ner  ;  nor  can  an  act  of  grace  from  his  Majesty  (or  even  from  you,  who  are  most  con¬ 
cerned)  make  me  believe  that  I  can  be  released,  at  least  in  J'oro  conscientice. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


352 

May  your  health  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s  continue  perfect,  at  least  with  so  small  a  dif¬ 
ference  that  it  may  only  add  a  relish  to  the  future  enjoyment  of  it;  as  the  absence  of 
friends  the  more  endears  their  next  meeting.  May  every  circumstance  of  your  lives 
be  easy,  and  every  wish  completed.  And  now  my  heart  is  somewhat  lighter. 

I  give  you  joy,  Sir,  of  your  approaching  Shakspearian  Jubilee.  The  people  of 
Stratford  could  not  err  in  their  choice  of  a  President. — They  had,  properly,  no  other. 

May  I  not  be  permitted,  Sir,  to  be  a  walker  in  the  cavalcade,  and  hold  up  the 
train  of  part  of  the  ceremony  ?  I  have  already  written  an  Ode  in  honour  of  our 
great  master,  which  you  have  formerly  thought  well  of.  Dr.  Boyce  has  set  it  excel¬ 
lently  to  music  ;  and  voices,  I  should  think,  will  not  be  wanting  upon  this  occasion  ; 
but  you  will  determine  all  this  yourself.  You  see  the  ruling  passion— the  love  of 
fame  will  pant,  while  the  heart  beats. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  obliged, 

Grateful  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

William  Havard.* 

P.  S.  As  I  purpose  going  out  of  town  |  next  week,  if  you  can  spare  the  horse  you 
kindly  offered  to  me,  I  shall  be  obliged  by  an  order  for  his  delivery  to  me. 

Endorsed, 

“  Havard’s  letter  of  thanks  to  me.” 


MR.  J.  WARD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Leominster,  May,  31st,  1 769. 

On  reading  the  newspapers,  I  find  you  are  preparing  a  grand  Jubilee,  to  be  kept 
at  Stratford  upon  Avon,  to  the  memory  of  the  Immortal  Shakspeare.  I  have  sent  you 
a  pair  of  gloves  which  have  often  covered  his  hands  :  they  were  made  me  a  present 
by  a  descendant  of  the  family,  when  myself  and  company  went  over  there  from  War- 

*  One  of  the  race  once  noticeable  in  theatres,  and  respected  from  habit  as  much  as  merit.  Men  of  no 
great  ambition,  but  of  infinite  steadiness  and  attachment.  They  did  not  desire  to  quit  their  humble  stations, 
and  were  never  discharged  by  the  manager.  Mr.  Havard  had  powers  as  a  writer  greatly  beyond  mediocrity, 
and  his  “  Charles  the  First”  would  have  secured  to  any  man  but  an  actor  both  permanent  popularity  and 
emolument.  He  could  not  keep  his  own  secret,  and  his  audiences  once  apprised  that  an  actor  had  presumed 
to  interest  them  by  language  of  his  own,  withdrew  from  the  theatre,  as  though  ashamed  of  having  been  so 
easily  pleased.  Packer  seems  to  have  succeeded  to  his  vacant  cast  of  the  tyrant  and  the  friend  of  the  stage, 
and  perhaps  even  more  than  Havard  reconciled  these  opposite  extremes,  by  the  native  softness  of  his  personal 
character.  I  have  seen  Packer  in  the  King  of  Denmark,  and  totally  overlooked  the  murderer  and  usurper. 
Indeed,  only  the  hired  assassin  of  the  stage  ever  exhibits  any  external  signs  of  ferocity. — Ed. 

t  Havard  “  was  not  of  the  fashion  of  these  times”  (1829).  He  tried  to  retire  as  far  as  Islington,  but 
made  sad  work  of  it;  so,  to  be  nearer  his  friends,  he  returned  to  his  old  lodgings  in  Tavistock-street,  where 
he  died,  the  20th  of  February,  1778  ;  and  both  his  old  master  and  Whitehead  wrote  epitaphs  for  his  tomb, 
as  innocent  at  least  as  his  life. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


353 


wick,  in  the  year  1746,  to  perform  the  play  of  “  Othello,”  as  a  benefit,  for  repairing 
his  monument  in  the  great  church,  which  wre  did  gratis,  the  whole  of  the  receipts 
being  expended  upon  that  alone. 

The  person  who  gave  them  to  me,  William  Shakspeare  by  name,  assured  me  his 
father  had  often  declared  to  him,  they  vrere  the  identical  gloves  of  our  great  poet ; 
and  when  he  delivered  them  to  me,  said,  “  Sir,  these  are  the  only  property  that  re¬ 
mains  of  our  famous  relation  ;  my  father  possessed,  and  sold  the  estate  he  left  behind 
him,  and  these  are  all  the  recompense  I  can  make  you  for  this  night's  performance." 

The  donor  w'as  a  glazier  by  trade,  very  old,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  memory,  lived 
in  the  street  leading  from  the  Town-hall  down  to  the  river.  On  my  coming  to  play 
in  Stratford  about  three  years  after,  he  wras  dead.  The  father  of  him  and  our  poet  were 
brother’s  children. 

The  veneration  I  bear  to  the  memory  of  our  great  author  and  player,  makes  me 
wish  to  have  these  relics  preserved  to  his  immortal  memory ;  and  I  am  led  to  think  I 
cannot  deposit  them,  for  that  purpose,  in  the  hands  of  any  person  so  proper  as  our 
modern  Roscius. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

John  Ward* 

P.  S.  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  you  receive  them  safe,  by  a  line  directed  for  me  in 
the  Bargate,  Leominster,  Herefordshire. 


MR.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday  morning,  1769. 

Though  I  am  aware  that  an  offer  of  my  services  may  now  seem  to  come  with  an 
ill  grace,  yet  I  beg  leave  to  say,  if  I  can  be  of  any  use  in  the  Jubilee,  you  may 
command,  Sir, 

Your  sincere  servant, 


Endorsed, 

“  Smith  offers  himself  for  the  Jubilee.” 


W.  Smith. 


MR.  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Charles-street,  June  15th,  1769. 

I  make  no  apology  for  asking  a  favour  from  you,  because  you  need  make  none 
to  me  for  refusing  it.  I  wish  then,  that  you  could  let  me  have  a  thousand  pounds 

*  Mrs.  Siddons's  maternal  grandfather.  For  the  gloves  and  the  story,  I  leave  them  upon  the  conscience  of 
the  glazier ;  hereby  declaring  myself  ready  to  prove  the  utter  falsehood  of  the  whole  narrative. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  2  Z 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


354 

upon  my  bond  until  this  time  twelvemonth.  I  shall  at  that  time,  possibly  before, 
be  able  to  discharge  it,  and  will  not  fail  to  do  so. 

I  am  with  great  truth  and  affection,  dear  Garrick, 

Most  sincerely  yours, 

Edm.  Burke.* 


‘  MRS.  CELESIA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Genoa,  June  4th,  1709. 

The  acquaintance  and  friendship  that  subsisted  between  my  father  and  you,  and 
the  knowledge  I  have  of  your  personal  character,  are  the  motives  which  encourage 
me  to  address  myself  to  you  on  the  present  occasion. 

I  employed  great  part  of  last  summer,  chiefly  in  order  to  pass  less  heavily  my 
leisure  hours,  in  translating  Voltaire’s  “  Tancred.”f  People  who  write,  are  apt,  like 
Pyg  malion,  to  grow  in  love  with  their  own  works,  and  hardly  ever  finish  without 
wishing,  as  he  did,  to  obtain  for  their  favourite  productions  life  and  immortality. 

1  know  so  well  how  difficult  it  is  to  judge  rightly  of  whatever  is  our  own,  that 
I  will  not  venture  to  form  any  opinion  of  my  translation.  I  submit  it  entirely  to 
your  decision,  and  though  I  may  be  mistaken  in  my  notions  about  it,  I  am  certainly 
right  in  my  choice  of  the  judge  before  whom  I  lay  it ;  no  literary  heretic  being,  I 
believe,  bold  enough  to  appeal  from  an  authority  so  well-founded  and  so  universally 
acknowledged  as  yours  is,  with  regard  to  performances  of  this  nature. 

“  Tancred”  is  far  from  being  one  of  Voltaire’s  best  pieces  with  respect  to  the 
versification :  in  those  places  where  the  expression  was  the  weakest,  I  have  endea¬ 
voured  to  strengthen  it  as  well  as  I  was  able.  I  was  led  to  translate  this  play  rather 
than  any  other,  because  I  remember  it  struck  me  strongly  at  the  representation.  I 
saw  it  here  some  years  ago,  by  very  indifferent  French  actors,  yet  I  think  there  was 
not  a  dry  eye  in  the  whole  house  during  the  last  scene.  If  it  should  be  fortunate 
enough  to  deserve  your  approbation,  I  should  think  it  a  very  great  favour,  if  you 
would  introduce  it  to  the  public  at  the  time,  and  in  the  manner,  you  think  most  fit. 
It  may  from  your  protection  hope  that  success  I  am  conscious  it  has  no  title  to  from 
its  own  merit ;  and  let  what  will  be  the  event  of  this  letter,  there  is  one  agreeable 
circumstance  certainly  attending  it, — I  mean  the  opportunity  it  gives  me  of  assuring 
you,  Sir,  that  I  am  with  the  highest  esteem  and  regard. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Dorothea  Celesia. 

P.  S.  My  best  compliments  attend  your  lady. 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick, 

“  Mrs.  Ce.  daughter  of  Mallet.” 

*  Mr.  Garrick  seems  to  have  kept  no  copy  of  his  reply  to  this  application _ Ed. 

•f  In  1771,  a  modification  of  this  play,  under  the  title  of  “  Aim ida,”  was  brought  out  at  Druiy-lane 
theatre,  and  the  powerful  talent  of  Mrs.  Barry  rendered  it  successful  beyond  the  career  of  modern  tragedy. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


3  55 


MR.  WARTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Trinity  College,  Oxford,  June  23,  1769. 

I  wish  I  could  have  had  the  pleasure  of  a  longer  conversation  with  you  at  Ox¬ 
ford.  I  wanted  to  talk  with  you  about  a  work  which  I  have  now  in  hand.  I  am 
writing  the  History  of  English  Poetry,  upon  a  plan  which  I  once  mentioned  to  you  ; 
and  you  were  so  kind  as  to  encourage  me  to  proceed.  Among  your  old  plays  yon 
have  some  metrical  romances,  viz.  in  vol.  k.  10,  and  vol.  k.  9-  Will  you  be  so  good 
as  to  send  them  to  me  at  Trinity  College,  Oxford,  as  soon  as  convenient?  I  see  you 
have  these  by  Percy’s  references.  If  you  have  any  other  pieces  of  that  sort,  you  will 
much  oblige  me  by  adding  them  to  the  packet.  The  utmost  care  shall  be  taken  of 
them.  I  have  large  materials  by  me  for  this  design,  and  I  hope  to  finish  soon.  Gray 
had  once  an  intention  of  this  sort,*  but  he  dropped  it ;  as  you  may  see  by  an  adver¬ 
tisement  to  his  Norway  Odes.  I  beg  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 

And  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  sincere  friend  and  servant, 

Thomas  Warton. 

IN  MR.  GARRICK’S  HANDAVRITING. 

N.  B.  I  sent  the  books  which  Mr.  Warton  of  Oxford  desired  on  the  other  side, 
viz.  k.  9  and  10,  which  contain  metrical  romances, — to  wit : — 

9.  Sr.  Guy,  imperfect. 

Sr.  Be  vis  of  Hampton. 

Sr.  Degore. 

The  Squire  of  low  degree. 

10.  Sr.  Eglamore  of  Artois. 

Sr.  Triamere. 

A  Merry  Jest  of  P.  Hood. 

x\.dam  Bell,  Clim  of  the  Clowgh,  William  of  Cloudesley,  Howleglass. 

The  Knight  of  the  Swan. 

Vergilius,  imperfect. 

Yet  am  I  far  from  ascribing  the  whole  of  that  success,  ungratefully,  to  the  actress.  In  spite  ot  the  decided 
difference  between  French  and  English  tragedy,  I  willingly  admit  the  taste  and  skill  of  Voltaire  ;  and  there 
is  enough  of  both  in  his  “  Tancrede,”  to  secure  any  decent  transfusion  of  his  materials  from  contempt,  upon 
the  stage  of  any  civilized  people.  At  the  dreadful  period  of  the  French  Revolution  [1790,]  I  knew  a  prcux 
c/ieialier,  who  could  repeat  that  tragedy,  and  that  alone. — Ed. 

*  He  had,  in  conjunction  with  his  friend  the  poet  Mason  ;  and  without  meaning  to  undervalue  the  mass 
of  information  brought  together  by  Warton,  I  regret  exceedingly  that  they  did  not  execute  their  design. 
Gray  had  that  accuracy  which  Warton  so  obviously  wanted,  with  an  equal  love  and  veneration  for  antiquity. 
Their  work  would  have  been  popular,  because  of  general  entertainment;  this  is  apparent  from  the  noble  and 
beautiful  imitations  executed  for  this  work  by  Mr.  Gray.  They  would  have  delighted,  by  clothing  the  spirit 
of  the  ancient  writers  in  language  perfectly  intelligible  to  every  reader ;  instead  of  heaping  together  sheets 
of  barbarous  and  obsolete  composition,  suited  only  to  the  digestion  of  the  philologist. — Ed. 

2  z  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


356 


MR.  STURTZ  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAREST  FRIEND,  Copenhagen,  1 7G9. 

I  hope  l)r.  Verdon  lias  delivered  my  letter,  and  made  a  proper  apology  for  my 
long  silence.  There  was  indeed  no  possibility  to  write  ;  pushed  and  hurried  through  a 
numberless  variety  of  things,  I  could  scarce  throw  a  glance  on  some :  these  appear¬ 
ances  are  over,  and  all  is  a  dream,  a  coloured  shadow,  as  the  French  invasion  in  your 
pantomime  :  now  at  the  altar  of  the  Dii  penates  I  devote  you  anew  my  most  sincere 
affection  for  ever. 

Well,  my  dear  friend,  France  should  not  keep  me  for  life  :  a  couple  of  months 
run  very  pleasantly  away  among  these  giddy,  over-varnished  beings  ;  but,  as  by  and 
by  the  plastering  would  crack,  I  should  not  care  for  the  natural  complexion. 

PoIites.se  without  cordiality  cannot  affect  a  sensible  mind,  and  phrase  without 
meaning  may  keep  up  the  bon  ton  for  a  while,  but  at  the  last  it  grows  tedious  and 
fades.  And  then  those  manners  all  alike,  those  faces  all  alike,  those  wigs  and  those 
characters  all  curled  and  dressed  alike, — is,  as  our  friend  Wilson  would  exclaim,  but 
a  poor  show  for  a  philosopher  !  In  such  a  representing  nation,  I  had  a  great  opinion 
of  their  stage,  and  yet  I  was  disappointed.  It  seems,  the  quality  has  forestalled  the 
best  parts  for  them  alone,  for  I  saw  but  an  indifferent  medley  of  players. 

There  is  indeed  Madame  Clairon,  standing  alone,  as  it  were,  amidst  the  ruins  of  the 
Republic,  shooting  forth  the  last  rays  ,of  a  departing  star.  I  have  gazed  on  her  when 
she  trod  the  stage  as  Queen  of  Carthage,  worthy  that  rank,  and  above  the  mob  of 
queens ;  she  inspired  every  sentiment,  she  displays  every  passion,  and,  I  dare  say,  she 
felt  none  ;  all  the  storm  was  on  the  surface,  waves  ran  high,  and  the  bottom  was 
calm  ;  her  despair  and  her  grief  rose  and  died  at  the  end  of  her  tongue. 

You  know  that  tragedy  Dido,  that  frame  of  Pompignan  stuff ;  it  is  rather  below 
her  abilities.  Eternally  cries  the  poor  maid  “  My  swain,  would’st  thou  leave  me  ?” 
and  alas  !  away  he  goes  : — the  whole  will  not  move  forward ;  there  is  neither  plot 
nor  action.  In  Virgil,  iEneas  cuts  a  mean  figure  ;  here  it  is  uncertain  whether  he 
deserves  more  to  be  hated  or  despised ; — high-soaring,  frothy  declamation  instead  of 
Nature. 

JDes  vers  a  Taune  et  cles  sentimens  a  la  queue,  of  those  rough  unyielding  treache¬ 
rous  verses,  which  in  the  way  of  even  the  best  actors  are  foot-traps,  so  that  he  cannot 
get  over  without  being  maimed.  Every  body  curses  that  cold  pedantic  chief ;  and  it 
is  but  a  poor  expedient  to  gather  on  a  sudden  a  foreign  array,  in  order  to  make  him 
win  a  battle ;  sic  fata  voluere.  iEneas  must  be  the  ioW-fool  to  make  “  Dido”  shine 
the  more. 

Indeed  her  part  fills  up  two  thirds  of  the  whole  ;  she  goes  through  a  number  of 
opposite  feelings,  soft  melancholy,  despair,  languid  tenderness,  raving  fury,  scorn  and 
melting  love  ;  there  is  not  one  passion  absent.  She  is  wonderful  in  those  transitions, 
when  an  inferior  actress,  from  an  intense  grief,  would,  at  some  lucky  event,  jump  on 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


357 


a  sudden  to  a  giddy  wanton  joy.  Madame  Clairon,  though  exulting  at  her  new-born 
hopes  Tineas  might  stay,  keeps  always  the  dark  colour  of  sorrow  ;  when  her  eye 
brightens  through  her  tears,  she  looks  as  Ossian  expresses  it,  “  like  the  moon 
through  a  watery  cloud.”  Her  characteristical  perfection  is  the  scornful,  the  com¬ 
manding  part ;  then  is  nobility  spread  about  her  as  a  glory  around  the  head  of  a 
saint ;  and  yet  she  never  puts  off  the  woman  ;  in  the  midst  of  violent  rage  she  is 
always  the  tender  female,  and  a  nuance  of  love  softens  the  harsh  colours  into 
harmony. 

Mistress  Yates  should  have  attempted  this  part  of  her  acting,  rather  than  to 
throw  her  arms  akimbo ; — she  who  indeed  was  designed  for  a  great  actress,  who  is 
noble,  decent,  and  when  in  distress  affecting;  but  has  too  much  of  the  virago,  is 
never  tender,  never  in  love,  sometimes  of  no  sex,  and  if  any,  not  of  the  fair  one. 
Nature  has  done  a  great  deal  in  favour  of  Madame  Clairon ;  her  voice  is  melody,  of  a 
vast  extent,  and  capable  of  numberless  inflexions ;  however,  I  was  sometimes  unwill¬ 
ingly  disturbed  by  a  disagreeable  shrill  cry,  rather  expressing  physical  pain.  As 
to  her  figure,  it  is  not  a  very  elegant  one,  her  head  being  rather  too  big,  and  her 
whole  person  too  little  ;  and  yet  she  is  great,  towering  amongst  the  crowd  in  the 
height  of  action  :  so  as  you  see  by  the  enchantment  of  art  a  colossal  head  of  Ju¬ 
piter  in  a  cameo  not  exceeding  the  size  of  sixpence.  Were  I  in  a  temper  to  find 
fault  with  her,  I  might  mention  her  too  articulate  declamation,  the  cadence  of  every 
motion ;  but  then  I  might  as  well  charge  Raphael  with  having  too  carefully  marked 
his  contours,  which  are  the  admiration  and  the  models  of  every  age.  True  it  is,  that 
compound  of  excellence  is  a  mere  compound  of  art ;  were  it  possible  to  note  action,  as 
music,  then  she  would  show  you  a  fortnight  before,  every  mien,  the  measure  of  every 
tone,  the  tension  of  every  march  on  paper.  She  is  else  quite  free  from  that  disagree¬ 
able  tragical  hiccup  so  epidemical  in  France,  and  so  awkwardly  returning  at  the  end  of 
every  verse :  she  never  shakes  so  affectedly  her  head  as  some  others,  in  what  you  call 
the  graceful  style  forsooth  ;  and  she  alone  may  venture  some  bold  strokes  which  would 
never  do  else  with  so  well  bred,  so  elegant  an  audience. 

So  when  she  heard  that  all  was  lost,  that  Tineas  was  gone,  then  in  the  rage 
of  despair,  with  her  two  hands  across,  she  beat  her  forehead  with  such  a  gloomy 
death-threatening  look,  that  we  stood  all  aghast,  and  her  cry  raised  horror  in  every 
breast.*  I  cannot  say  she  killed  herself  well  though,  but  she  died  well ;  her  weaken¬ 
ing  voice  was  not  a  childish  whining  tone,  but  imminent  dissolution  altered  it,  con¬ 
vulsion  raised  it,  broke  it,  and  so  it  vanished  into  the  air  as  a  vapour.  There,  then,  I 

*  I  suppose  every  reader  of  this  fine  description,  which  is  a  little  injured  by  the  writer’s  being  a  foreigner, 
will  be  of  opinion  that  M.  Sturtz  could  judge  very  accurately  upon  the  subject.  For  my  ow  n  part,  he  con¬ 
vinces  me,  that  the  Clairon  was  the  most  perfect  artist  that  imperial  tragedy,  as  Dr.  Johnson  styles  it,  has 
ever  known.  He  sketches  the  agony  of  Dido  in  a  very  masterly  manner  ;  and  as  to  the  inflexions  of  her  voice, 
when  dying,  has  left  us  both  a  record  and  a  lesson.  Perhaps  all  English  actresses  are  more  intent,  in  stage 
deaths,  to  give  a  graceful  termination  to  their  dramatic  sorrows,  than  exhibit  the  changes  of  expiring 
nature. — Ed. 


358 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


have  brought  her  to  the  highest  pitch  of  glory  of  your  tribe,  .self-murder ;  may  she 
now  quietly  repose. 

I  am  sure  you  will  smile  at  my  grave  and  solemn  criticisms  ;  but  what  would 
you  say  if  1  told  you  that  I  have  wrote  a  great  deal  more  on  the  action  of  Mr.  Garrick, 
that  I  have  even  a  mind  to  publish  it,  happily  not  in  English,  and  so  I  may  be  safe. 

I  do  not  tell  you  any  thing  about  Mr.  Lekain  :  he  is  truly  a  great  actor  in  the 
sense  of  Mr.  Partridge  ;  the  very  man  who  has  a  mind  to  look  like  an  Emperor,  but 
never  any  Emperor  attempted  to  look  as  he  does.  Preville  is  excellent,  but  do  not 
you  think  lie  wants  rather  internal  gaiety?  1  am  nice  in  that  point,  since  I  have 
seen  Ranger.  Caillot  did  astonish  me  in  Tom  Jones  ;  why,  I  never  saw  a  more 
Squire-like  Frenchman  :  wherever  did  he  fetch  that  ? 

Little  Madam  Aroued  is  enchanting;  a  figure  of  Boucher’s, — a  graceful,  innocent, 
and  a  soft  sentimental  voice. 

Now  I  think  I  have  chattered  a  great  deal :  pray  enlarge  a  little,  my  very  good 
friend,  on  these  matters ;  the  very  hints  you  drop  about  your  art  are  precious  to  this 
and  the  coming  age :  tell  me  something  about  your  new  performances ;  there 
have  been  tragedies  and  comedies,  I  find.  Is  there  some  hopeful  actor  or  actress 
rising?  How  does  Mr.  Murphy  and  Mr.  BickerstafF?  My  best  compliments  to 
them  ;  I  will  write  to  them  as  soon  as  I  get  at  a  quiet  moment  again,  when  my  head 
is  clear  of  politics,  and  all  those  tricks  in  icks.  Count  Hoik  remembers  you  every 
day,  and  kindly;  he  bids  me  to  present  you  his  compliments,  and  he  'will  even  write. 
Since  our  return  the  English  language — the  English  fashions,  have  a  great  run. 

Now  I  will  leave  you  and  speak  one  word  more  to  Mrs.  Garrick  ;  do  not  be  too 
curious,  you  have  seen  in  your  life  love  letters  enough.  Answer  me  as  soon  as  pos¬ 
sible,  my  dear  friend,  and  believe  me  for  ever, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

And  most  affectionate  friend, 

Sturtz. 

Give  your  letter  to  Baron  Diede,  and  embrace  Mr.  Erust  and  Mrs.  Wilson  in 
my  name. 

Endorsed, 

“  An  ingenious  letter  from  my  friend  Sturtz  at  Copenhagen  : 
with  a  part  of  my  answer  about  the  Clairon.” 


MR.  GARRICK,  AS  TO  MADAME  CLAIRON. 

August,  (probably.) 

Your  idea  of  France  exactly  agrees  with  mine  :  their  politesse  has  reduced  their 
character  to  such  a  sameness,  and  their  humours  and  passions  are  so  curbed  by  habit, 
that,  when  you  have  seen  half  a  dozen  French  men  and  women,  you  have  seen  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


359 


whole.  In  England  (and  I  suppose  in  Denmark)  every  man  is  a  distinct  being,  and 
requires  a  distinct  study  to  investigate  him ;  it  is  from  this  great  variety,  that  our 
comedies  are  less  uniform  than  the  French,  and  our  characters  more  strong  and 

o 

dramatic. 

What  shall  I  say  to  you,  my  dear  friend,  about  the  “  Clairon?”  Your  dissection 
of  her  is  as  accurate  as  if  you  had  opened  her  alive ;  she  has  every  thing  that  art  and 
a  good  understanding,  with  great  natural  spirit,  can  give  her.  But  then  I  fear  (and 
I  only  tell  you  my  fears,  and  open  my  soul  to  you)  the  heart  has  none  of  those  in¬ 
stantaneous  feelings,  that  life-blood,  that  keen  sensibility,  that  bursts  at  once  from 
genius,  and,  like  electrical  fire,  shoots  through  the  veins,  marrow,  bones  and  all,  of 
every  spectator.  Madame  Clairon  is  so  conscious  and  certain  of  what  she  can  do, 
that  she  never,  I  believe,  had  the  feelings  of  the  instant  come  upon  her  unexpect¬ 
edly  :  but  I  pronounce  that  the  greatest  strokes  of  genius  have  been  unknown  to 
the  actor  himself,  till  circumstances,  and  the  warmth  of  the  scene  has  sprung  the 
mine  as  it  were,  as  much  to  his  own  surprise,  as  that  of  the  audience.  Thus  I  make 
a  great  difference  between  a  great  genius  and  a  good  actor.  The  first  will  always 
realize  the  feelings  of  his  character,  and  be  transported  beyond  himself ;  while  the 
other,  with  great  powers,  and  good  sense,  will  give  great  pleasure  to  an  audience, 
but  never 

- “  Pectus  inaniter  angit, 

Irritat,  mulcet,  falsis  terroribus  implet, 

Ut  magus.” 

1  have  with  great  freedom  communicated  my  ideas  of  acting,  but  you  must  not 
betray  me,  my  good  friend ;  the  Clairon  would  never  forgive  me,  though  I  called  her 
an  excellent  actress,  if  I  did  not  swear  by  all  the  Gods  that  she  was  the  greatest 
genius  too.  I  never  liked  “  Dido,”  though  it  bears  a  good  character  upon  the  French 
stage :  there  are  good  lines,  and  some  little  pathos  ;  but  what  is  that  ?— I  am  spoiled 
by  Shakspeare,  and  I  hope  you  are  very  near  spoiled  too.  I  am  wonderfully  curious 
(and  you  must  indulge  my  curiosity)  to  see  your  account  of  me  and  my  performance; 
and  yet  you  are  so  strictly  just  in  your  observations,  so  very  accurate  in  your  disqui¬ 
sitions  of  the  several  parts  of  “  Dido,”  that  I  am  almost  afraid  of  you  : — but  let  me 
conjure  you,  by  the  love  you  bear  to  England,  and  to  me  in  particular,  that  you  will 
send  me  the  account  you  have  written  of  my  action,  &c. ;  it  will  give  me  infinite 
pleasure,  I  assure  you  ;  and  I  promise  you  I  will  kiss  the  rod  with  an  unruffled  mind 
and  great  humility.  Bray  let  me  have  it,  I  beseech  you. 


MR.  H.  STURTZ  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Copenhagen,  August  5,  1769. 

As  I  hope  that  at  Sliakspeare’s  Jubilee,  you  will  grant  some  indulgences  in  his 
name,  1  would  even  go  on  pilgrimage  to  obtain  a  free  pardon  for  my  long  silence, 


360 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


were  it  in  my  power ;  but  as  I  cannot  get  rid  of  my  fetters,  I  must  entreat  you  to 
send  the  holy  licence  over. 

Pray  give  me  some  account  of  that  grateful  and  highly  becoming  measure  in  a 
nation  ever  sensible  of  real  merit.  AVere  I  to  give  my  advice,  I  would  have  on  that 
place  near  the  river,  where  the  trees  are  removed,  a  temple  erected  to  Fame:  an  awful 
majesty  should  grace  the  building,  and  therein  should  be  seen  the  statues  of  Shak- 
speare  and  Garrick  ;  Fame  spreading  her  wide  wings  over  their  heads  with  a  magic- 
laurel  crown  in  her  hand,  uncertain  to  which  of  them  both  it  might  be  just  to  be¬ 
stow  it.  AVere  I  to  join  another  figure,  it  should  be  that  of  Nature,  whispering  con- 
fidentlv  her  secrets  in  their  ears.  Indeed,  if  that  genius  has,  as  you  so  properly  ex¬ 
press  it,  sprung  the  mine  as  it  were,  he  is  not  less  indebted  for  his  glory  to  your  unpa¬ 
ralleled  talents.  He  was  almost  forgotten  in  a  period  when  false  wit  began  to  pre¬ 
vail  ;  his  language  was  offensive  to  an  audience  entertained  by  Durfey,  or  accustomed 
to  the  weak  and  shallow  style  of  French  conversation  ;  the  animating  obelisk  lay  buried 
in  the  sand  :  you  have  raised  him.  Now  there  he  stands,  towering  his  head  to  the 
skies,  a  striking  wonder  for  ages  to  come  :  let  the  fairest  nymphs  of  the  Avon  adorn 
him  with  ever  fragrant  garlands  ! 

I  beg  you,  dear  Sir,  not  to  imagine  I  have  quite  laid  aside  my  intention  of  giving 
an  imperfect  account  of  your  acting  ;  business  has  been  this  summer  so  heavy  upon 
me  that  I  had  neither  time,  nor  that  quiet  undisturbed  temper  I  want  for  such  an 
undertaking: — for  I  would  not  confine  myself  to  barren  exclamations,  nor  to  common¬ 
place  criticism  ;  I  intend  to  follow  yop  through  every  situation,  through  every  stroke 
of  the  manifold  characters  I  saw  you  in.  I  would  rather  relate  my  feelings,  and  tell 
plainly  wjiat  you  did  to  raise  them,  than  call  in  to  my  aid  the  cold  rules  of  art,  which 
are  not  made  for  you.  It  would  not  be  a  witty,  but  it  might  be  a  sentimental  dis¬ 
quisition  ;  the  heart  alone  is  the  judge  of  Shakspeare  and  of  you. 

We  have  seen  your  Duke  of  Gloucester  with  an  unspeakable  pleasure,  for  there 
is  a  number  of  good  Englishmen  here  :  tell  me  if  you  hear  how  he  likes  this 
country.  Your  Princes  and  great  men  are  very  far  from  being  able  to  enjoy  the 
pleasure  of  such  a  journey  ;  solemnity  and  deference  is  always  in  their  way ;  the 
hardship  of  what  you  call  Jestins  is  everywhere  about  them  ;  they  see  whole  na¬ 
tions  in  their  holiday  dresses,  and  every  thing  painted,  plastered,  and  by  candle¬ 
light.  Let  them  ever  so  much  struggle  against  it,  and  strive  to  approach  the  na¬ 
tural  way,  tiring,  their  rank  haunts  them  as  a  ghost,  and  puts  cordiality  and  hu¬ 
mour  to  flight  before  them.  The  Duke  has  else  been  infinitely  applauded ;  he  is 
condescending,  sensible,  and  natural,  and  by  his  uncommon  application  to  military 
knowledge,  appears  to  become  a  worthy  defender  of  his  country,  if  any  future  oc¬ 
casion  should  require  it. 

I  have  spent  an  agreeable  evening  in  a  thorough  English  company,  with  some 
gentlemen  of  his  retinue,  Mr.  AAYst,  Mr.  Rainsford,  and  Mr.  Cox ;  we  supped  to¬ 
gether  at  the  Count  - ,  the  chief  of  our  fleet,  who  is  at  the  eve  of  being  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


361 


father-in-law  to  Count  Hoik.  The  Count  is  very  near  being  married  with  a  young 
lady  of  fourteen  :  he  remembers  you,  dear  Sir,  with  sincerity  and  friendship,  and 
often  bids  me  to  tell  you  so. 

There  has  been  of  late,  I  find,  a  strange  mortality  on  the  stage ;  mighty  Kings 
are  fallen,  and  traitors  and  conspirators  have  been  swept  away.  Poor  Powell !  I  pity 
him ;  he  had  feelings,  and  might,  had  he  lived,  have  arrived  to  more  variety  in  his 
expression.  I  am  afraid  he  has  left  his  widow  with  little  more  than  nothing.  I  have 
been  truly  concerned  at  the  death  of  poor  little  Mrs.  Arne  ;*  this  composer’s  wife  was 
so  young  and  so  blooming.  Have  you  got  some  new  reinforcements,  some  promising 
offspring  ?  All  that  has  some  relation  to  you  is  equally  interesting  to  me. 

Mrs.  Ricoboni  continues  to  show  me  particular  kindness.  She  tells  me,  to  my 
greatest  satisfaction,  you  mention  me  sometimes  in  your  letters  to  her.  Goes  her 
translation  of  English  plays  on,  and  are  you  satisfied  with  it  ?  1  am  afraid  there  is 

yet  something  not  to  be  combined,  and,  though  she  is  sensible  of  the  trifling  taste  of 
the  nation,  she  cannot  altogether  avoid  to  follow  the  torrent,  and  to  graft  French  wit 
on  English  humour. 

I  have  begun  your  drawing  long  since,  but  could  not  find  the  time  to  finish  it 
before  this  reaches  England.  I  will  not  make  any  indiscreet  pretensions,  but  then,  dear 
Sir,  I  must  insist  upon  having  your  works  as  soon  as  they  are  published,  and  your  own 
hand-writing  in  it.  There  had  been  spread  a  report  of  late,  that  you  had  a  mind  to 
come  over  and  pay  a  visit  to  your  Danish  friends ;  the  joy  was  great  on  the  account, 
and  though  I  had  strong  reasons  not  to  believe  it,  I  indulged  the  pleasing  illusion  as 
long  as  it  could  possibly  last.  Indeed,  my  dear  friend,  such  a  trip  would  be  a  very 
meritorious  thing ;  Kings  and  Queens  would  delight  at  it,  the  halls  of  the  northern 
worthies  would  resound  with  your  name,  and  you  would  for  ever  be  remembered  by 
the  bards  at  the  feast  of  the  Shells. 

My  best  respects  wait  on  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  I  am  with  the  truest  friendship  and 
tenderness  for  ever, 

My  dear  friend,  entirely  yours, 

H.  Sturtz. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CHARLES  MACKLIN. 


SIR, 

I  have  this  moment  received  your  long  letter,  and  the  post  going  away  in  half 
an  hour,  I  woidd  not  omit  writing  to  you  directly,  though  I  can  answer  yours  only 

*  She  was  the  wife  of  Dr.  Arne,  and,  when  Miss  Cecilia  Young,  had  the  honour  of  being  a  pupil  to  Ge- 
miniani.  She  was  a  most  interesting  singer. 

VOL.  I.  3  A 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


362 


in  part: — I  mean  those  passages  that  regard  myself  only.  As  to  the  matter  of  Miss 
Macklin’s  agreement,  it  must  be  discussed  and  talked  over  by  yourself,  Mr.  Lacy, 
and  me;  for  which  purpose  I  will  be  in  town  next  week,  at  a  time  I  hope  that  will 
not  be  inconvenient  to  you. 

Your  paragraph  relative  to  Mrs.  Macklin  is  a  mistake  throughout.  I  had  ever 
a  great  regard  for  her,  both  as  a  woman  and  as  an  actress :  this  I  believe  she  knew  and 
felt ;  but  when  by  an  ill-state  of  health  she  was  incapable  of  appearing  upon  the 
stage,  the  managers  were  satisfied  with  what  she  could  do  for  them,  without  ever 
once  making;  use  of  such  a  disagreeable  term  as  incumbrance.  If  Miss  Macklin  was 
ever  shocked  to  bursting  into  tears  at  what  I  may  have  said  to  her  upon  this  head, 
I  shall  most  frankly  own  that  I  neither  know  her  nor  myself,  and  I  am  very  sorry 
that  I  should  so  ill  execute  my  own  intentions  as  to  produce  a  contrary  effect.  The 
other  passage  in  your  letter,  concerning  a  conversation  with  Miss  Macklin  about 
salary,  &c.  & c.  I  shall  leave  to  herself  to  answer ;  and  beg  to  know  if  the  name  of 
Mrs.  Cibber  was  not  most  particularly  and  essentially  mentioned,  which  name  is 
omitted  in  your  letter,  and  is,  I  think,  a  full  answer  to  that  part  of  it.  I  shall  now 
come  to  the  last  charge  against  me:  it  was  reported  that  you  had  joined  with  Mr. 
Foote,  signed  and  sealed  with  him,  but  I  did  not  believe  it ;  to  the  truth  of  which  I 
can  call  some  gentlemen  of  your  acquaintance ;  therefore  I  now  declare  that  my 
reporting  or  sending  word  to  Mr.  Foote,  with  whom  1  have  not  had  the  least  corre¬ 
spondence,  that  I  would  remonstrate  to  the  Lord  C - upon  that  account,  is  a  false¬ 

hood,  and  therefore  Mr.  Macklin  should  surely  have  had  a  better  authority  for  his 
aspersion  before  he  had  given  it  under  his  hand.  My  real  intentions  are  to  sign  and 
seal  our  agreements,  which  were  settled  between  us,  I  thought  fully  and  amicably, 
at  our  last  meeting ;  and  though  my  brother  may  have  delayed  the  execution,  yet 
you  cannot  imagine  that  the  managers  would  deviate  one  tittle  from  what  was  then 
settled.  I  likewise  wish  and  hope,  that  Miss  Macklin  will  be  settled  with  us  for  a 
term  of  years,  the  longer  the  better,  and  that  all  agreements  between  us  may  be  so 
full  and  explicit  that  mean  unmanly  disputes  may  be  prevented  for  the  future, 

I  am  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  was  told  that  you  asked  for  the  [abstract]  of  the  [agreement;]  it  is,  for 
better  security,  in  my  possession,  but  you  may  demand  it  whenever  you  please. 

Whatever  part  of  your  letter  I  have  omitted  to  answer,  you  must  attribute  to 
my  great  haste ;  however,  I  shall  not  let  a  single  circumstance  pass  unanswered  when 
I  see  you. 


MR.  SHARP  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bene’t  College,  Cambridge,  Aug.  18th,  1769. 

I  am  detained  on  the  willowy  Camus,  where  I  cannot  say  I  linger  with  much 
delight  at  this  season,  from  visiting  the  banks  of  the  Thames,  and  joining  in  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


363 


choruses  at  Avon.  I  must  be  content  with  the  echoes  of  Shakspeare’s  and  your 
fame  from  thence,  which  I  hope  will  make  amends  for  the  silly  pageants  of  the  day , 
which  the  newspapers  at  present  exhibit  to  us,  and  for  which  I  think  the  authors 
should  be  condemned  to  sing  their  ballads  in  the  streets  of  Stratford  at  the  Jubilee 
season.  I  saw  a  gentleman  from  thence  to-day,  who  compares  the  new  building  to 
Ranelagh,  and  is  loud  in  the  praises  of  the  new  Hall,  and  the  preparations  for  the 
approaching  celebration.  If  I  had  been  to  have  sought  a  scriptural  quotation,  I  had 
been  more  lucky  by  the  help  of  my  Concordance,  than  in  searching  a  motto  for  the 
new  statue  of  Shakspeare  from  his  own  works.  But  I  doubt  not  you  have  been 
happy  enough  in  selecting  something  for  the  purpose,  that  will  hit  better  than  the 
eulogium  of  music  which  he  makes  in  those  noble  lines  of  the  man  “  that  has  not 
music  in  his  ear,”  &c.  which  might  be  aptly  quoted  at  a  musical  exhibition,  with 

“  Such  harmony  is  in  immortal  souls,” — 

or, 

“  The  poet’s  eye  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling,” — 

or  if  it  be  not  too  obvious  and  too  blown  upon, 

“  His  life  was  gentle,  and  the  elements 
So  mixt  in  him,  that  Nature  might  stand  up 
And  say  to  all  the  world,  This  was  a  man  I” 

But  “  what  you  do  yourself  on  this  occasion,  still  betters  what  is  done,”  in  the 
improvement  of  every  hint  that  can  be  given,  and  therefore  I  need  not  search 
farther:  unless  it  be  that  I  remind  you  of  what  Ben  Jonson  says,  “  I  lov’d  Shak¬ 
speare,  and  do  honour  his  memory  on  this  side  idolatry,  as  much  as  any.”  I  submit 
whether  “  the  God  of  your  idolatry”  is  not  honoured  a  little  more.  But  I  think, 
dear  Sir,  you  may  bid  defiance  to  all  the  little  critics  that  shall  carp  at  this  truly  taste¬ 
ful  and  classical  entertainment  of  your  making,  to  the  honour  of  our  immortal  bard. 
“  The  motions  of  such  spirits  are  dull  as  night,  and  their  affections  dark  as  Erebus. 
Let  no  such  men  be  trusted.  Mark  we  the  music.” 

I  think  to  be  in  town  about  the  twentieth  of  September,  and  will  do  myself  the 
pleasure  of  calling  on  you  in  town,  or  at  Hampton,  about  that  time.  Meanwhile  with 
most  auspicious  omens  for  all  the  Ides  of  September, 

I  remain  yours  most  sincerely, 

J.  Sharp. 


MR.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


HEAR  SIR,  Yabley,  Aug.  16th,  1769. 

Your  politeness  has  entirely  removed  my  awkwardness,  and  I  am  totally  at  your 
disposal.  The  post  and  dress  you  allot  for  me  will  be  most  agreeable  to  me,  and  all 
scruples  are  removed.  If  I  recollect  right,  the  hat  I  wear  in  Richard  is  very  shabby  ; 

3  a  2 


304 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  the  little  ornaments  1  wore  in  it  are  locked  up  in  town  under  a  key  I  have  with 
me.  The  hat  Mr.  Powell  used  in  King  John  is  a  good  one,  and  I  should  suppose 
might  be  had  with  the  ornaments  on  it ;  if  not,  I  should  be  glad  of  yours.  You  will 
excuse  me  mentioning  these  particulars,  as  the  motive  is  that  I  may  appear  to  the 
best  advantage  in  your  train.  We  are  much  disappointed  at  Mrs.  Make’s  declining 
the  Jubilee :  it  obliges  my  wife  to  do  the  same.  I  hope  your  fears  of  ill-con¬ 
sequences  from  the  fatigues,  which  must  be  great,  will  prove  groundless. 

“  Luct^re,  multi  proruet  integrum 
Cum  laude  victorem  geretque 
Praelia,  &c.  &c.” — Hor.  Ode  4,  Book  4. 

Will  your  hurry  allow  you  time  to  tell  me  where  I  am  to  go  to  at  Stratford  ? 
and  whether  you  mean  to  apply  to  our  managers  for  Richard’s  dress,  or  would  have 
me  do  it  ?  I  think  they  will  make  less  difficulty  with  you  than  me.  On  what  day 
ought  I  to  be  at  Stratford  ?  I  shall  take  up  no  more  of  your  time  than  to  assure 
you,  I  am  with  the  greatest  truth  and  respect, 

Your  most  sincere  and  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

We  set  out  for  York  Races  to-morrow. 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  11,  1769. 

Returned  as  you  now  are  from  giving  and  receiving  honour  due  to  the  first  of 
dramatic  poets,  and  his  best  commentator,  will  you  kindly  condescend  to  listen  to  the 
last,  and  I  may  say  the  least  of  the  dramatic  tribe  ?  I  have  in  vain  wished  for  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  you  the  whole  summer;  you  have  been  much,  and  better  employed  ; 
but  I  now  hope  that  you  will  afford  me  so  much  leisure,  as  to  look  over  a  comedy 
which  I  have  just  written — I  will  not  say  finished,  till  it  receives  the  stamp  of  your 
approbation.  The  characters  are  new,  and  the  situations  interesting;  at  least,  this  is 
the  opinion  of  the  few  that  have  seen  it. 

As  I  flatter  myself  that  I  have  the  good  fortune  to  stand  in  a  favourable  light 
with  the  public  at  present,  for  which  I  will  ever  confess  myself  much  indebted  to 
you,  I  wish  to  improve  their  indulgence  to  my  advantage,  and  I  should  think  that  a 
comedy  of  mine,  performed  under  your  auspices,  might  meet  with  success. 

Whatever  objections  you  may  think  proper  to  make,  shall  be  received,  as  they 
have  ever  been,  as  a  mark  of  your  friendship,  which  I  have  never  deservedly  for¬ 
feited,  however  I  may  have  been  misrepresented  to  you. 

I  need  not  tell  you,  Sir,  that  the  comedy  I  send  is  in  its  first  dress,  or  rather  un- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


365 


dress,  in  which  I  see  many  errors  that  may  be  mended ;  but  if  the  stuff  be  good,  it  is 
extremely  easy  to  add  flounces  and  furbelows. 

As  it  is  impossible  that  I  should  doubt  of  your  candour  to  the  piece,  or  your 
kindness  to  its  author,  I  shall  wait  for  your  opinion  rather  in  hope,  than  fear,  and 
shall  on  this,  and  every  other  occasion,  be  pleased  to  subscribe  myself, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  grateful  humble  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 

My  best  compliments  wait  on  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CLUTTERBUCK. 

Three  Angels,  Strand,  Sept.  14,  1768. 

Pray  pay  to  Dr.  Arne  or  order  the  sum  of  sixty-three  pounds,  for  the  sole  pro¬ 
perty  in  his  music  of  the  Ode  which  I  wrote  upon  dedicating  a  Building  to  Shak- 
speare,  and  place  it  to  the  account  of,  Sir,  Your  humble  servant, 

£63  0^.  0 cl.  D.  Garrick. 


W.  FINCH  TO  MESSRS.  SNOW,  DENNE,  AND  SANDBY. 


GENTLEMEN, 

Please  to  pay  the  above  draft  for  Mr.  Clutterbuck. 


Endorsed, 

“  Vouchers  for  money  paid  by  Mr.  Clutterbuck 
for  me,  for  the  years  1769  and  1770.” 


W.  Finch. 


Received,  September  14,  1769,  of  David  Garrick,  Esq.  the  sum  of  sixty  gui¬ 
neas  for  the  sole  property  of  the  music  composed  by  me  to  the  Commemoration  Ode 
on  Shakspeare,  the  words  by  him.  I  say  received  by  me, 

Thomas  Augustine  xVrne. 


Endorsed, 


“  Dr.  Arne’s  letter  and  receipt, 
about  the  music  for  my  Ode.” 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hyde-street,  Sept.  15,  1769. 

At  my  arrival  in  town  last  night  I  met  Mr.  Victor,  who  said  he  came  from  you 
to  desire  my  opinion  about  postponing  the  performance  of  “  Eugenia”  to  another 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


3(i6 

year.  1  confess  myself  to  be  extremely  shocked  and  surprised  at  this  proposal,  as  you 
did  not  seem  to  have  any  thoughts  of  deferring  it  when  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
you  at  Hampton,  and  as  I  flattered  myself  that  your  kind  attention  to  it  and  me  had 
rendered  it  not  unworthy  of  your  own  approbation.  Oh  !  my  dear  Sir,  think  what  a 
mortifying  disappointment  it  must  be  to  me  to  have  it  now  delayed.  But  were 
only  my  pride  at  stake,  1  would  readily  sacrifice  it  to  your  inclination  ;  but,  indeed, 
Sir,  I  have  better  and  stronger  motives  for  entreating  you  to  bring  it  out  this  year  : 
and  though  1  think  myself  tolerably  free  from  the  vanity  of  an  author,  if  you  will 
but  continue  your  generous  assistance  to  me,  I  will  venture  to  flatter  myself  with 
hope  of  its  success. 

I  have  now  expressed  my  sentiments  upon  this  subject  as  clearly  as  I  am  capable, 
and  shall  leave  the  decision  entirely  to  your  goodness  and  friendship  for  me,  which  I 
shall  ever  acknowledge  to  have  been  infinitely  superior  either  to  my  deserts  or  expec¬ 
tation. 

I  now  send  you  the  fourth  act  altered,  as  I  hope,  to  your  satisfaction.  I  find  I 
have  not  resolution  sufficient  to  wait  upon  you  this  evening,  unless  you  desire  it,  as 
the  apprehension  of  trespassing  upon  your  leisure  would  give  me  real  uneasiness ; 
but  if  you  are  so  good  as  to  comply  with  my  request,  I  beg  you  will  allow  me  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  you  before  you  leave  town,  as  the  business  of  the  fifth  act  remains 
unsettled. 

I  am  utterly  incapable  of  expressing  either  my  gratitude  for  your  past  kindness 
to  me,  or  my  earnest  wishes  for  the  continuance  of  your  friendship  ;  “  but  though 
my  mouth  be  dumb,  my  heart  shall  thank  you,”  &c. 

I  beg  leave  to  present  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  that  you  will  believe 
me,  with  the  sincerest  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  GRIFFITH. 

Friday,  Sept.  15,  1769. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  compliments  to  Mrs.  Griffith:  his  servant  in  town 
sent  her  first  note  without  the  play,  which  he  received  when  he  was  in  London  yes¬ 
terday.  He  was  so  much  out  of  order  that  he  was  not  able  to  attend  the  theatre,  but 
obliged  to  return  directly  into  the  country,  where  he  continues  very  unfit  for  any 
kind  of  business.  However,  had  not  Mrs.  Griffith  sent  her  last  note,  he  should,  as 
soon  as  he  was  able  (and  he  cannot  think  Mrs.  G.  would  desire  it  before)  have  read 
her  play,  as  she  seems  so  anxious  about  it :  yet  lest  she  should  have  an  opportunity 
of  bringing  it  upon  the  stage  this  season,  he  has  obeyed  her  commands  and  sent  it  by 
Mr.  Becket.  If  that  should  not  be  the  case,  and  Mrs.  Griffith  will  return  it,  Mr.  G. 
will  consider  the  play  as  soon  as  he  possibly  can,  to  do  justice  to  the  author  and 
himself. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


367 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Tuesday  morning,  Oct.  3rd,  1769. 

I  find  it  will  be  absolutely  impossible  to  finish  “  The  Grecian  Daughter”  this 
year.  I  am  now  on  the  point  of  setting  out  for  the  country  on  very  sudden  busi¬ 
ness,  and  at  the  end  of  this  week  I  am  called  away  again  for  a  fortnight.  By  that 
time  the  term  will  be  at  hand,  and  then  judge  whether  the  conversation  of  attorneys 
will  dispose  the  mind  to  any  degree  of  poetry  or  pathos?  I  must  give  up  all  thoughts 
of  that  play  for  the  present ;  and  indeed  I  am  not  sorry,  as  I  am  sure  I  can  at  more 
leisure  make  it  very  superior  to  what  it  is  at  present.  If  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry  will 
read  “  Alzuma,”  and  be  of  opinion  that  they  can  bear  the  fatigue  of  two  such  long 
characters,  I  shall  have  no  objection  to  its  being  performed :  in  fact,  if  they  are  to 
play  it  at  all,  they  never  can  do  it  younger  than  now. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


REV.  R.  JAGO  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

Snitterfield,  Oct.  6th,  1769. 

Though  I  do  not  expect  to  pacify  your  resentment  on  account  of  the  charge 
which  you  alleged  against  me  yesterday,  relating  to  your  brother,  yet  you  must 
allow  me  to  do  myself  justice  in  stating  the  grounds  of  that  charge  more  truly  than 
has  yet  been  done.  I  must  therefore,  in  the  first  place,  absolutely  deny  that  I  have 
been  in  any  sense  the  author  of  a  report  that  your  brother  was  the  writer  of  those 
verses  commonly  ascribed  to  him,  reflecting  on  L.  W.,  or  the  propagator  of  that 
report  any  otherwise  than  in  common  with  every  gentleman  in  the  county  by  whom 
I  have  heard  them  mentioned.  And  more  particularly  with  regard  to  any  informa¬ 
tion  which  you  might  receive  from  that  gentleman  who  was  pleased  to  report  what 
passed  at  my  house,  I  must  inform  you  that  this  subject  made  no  part  of  that  con¬ 
versation,  and  that  his  friend  then  present,  and  from  whom  I  thought  it  probable  he 
might  learn  somewhat  that  did  pass  between  him  and  myself  at  a  different  time, 
assures  me,  in  a  letter  written  to-day,  in  answer  to  one  from  me,  that  he  never  men¬ 
tioned  my  name  in  connexion  with  those  verses ;  and  indeed  it  would  have  been 
very  strange  if  he  had,  in  the  sense  you  intend,  considering  that  he  had  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  knowing  his  friend  Mr.  Andrew’s  sentiments  on  the  subject  at  his  own  house, 
at  the  very  time  that  it  was  fresh  and  warm  upon  his  mind.  It  would,  therefore, 
perhaps  be  better  for  you  not  to  be  quite  so  liberal  of  those  scurrilous  names  which 
you  make  use  of  upon  this  occasion,  for  more  reasons  than  those  which  I  mentioned 
to  you  at  Stratford.  But,  Sir,  I  look  upon  this  as  only  a  pretence  for  your  anger, 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


368 

and  that  the  true  ground  of  it  was  the  report  which  the  above  gentleman  made  of 
my  reflections  on  your  brother’s  recital,*  and  other  particulars  at  the  Jubilee.  And 
this,  1  own,  was  of  itself  a  sufficient  foundation  for  your  indignation.  But,  not  to 
enquire  whether  this  account  was  exaggerated,  as  it  is  very  probable  it  might  be,  you 
may  be  pleased  to  consider  that  its  being  in  any  degree  public  was  owing  more  to 
this  gentleman’s  ofliciousness,  than  to  any  design  in  me.  But,  Sir,  whether  you  will 
allow  this  to  be  any  justification  or  not,  reserving  to  myself  the  liberty  of  speaking 
my  own  sentiments  in  private,  I  expect  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  believe,  that 
neither  before,  nor  since  the  Jubilee,  have  I  written  a  syllable  on  the  subject,  nor  in¬ 
tend  doing  it,  unless  any  public  provocation  should  oblige  me  to  alter  my  resolution. 
Indeed,  previous  to  the  Jubilee,  I  took  every  occasion  to  condemn  the  many  severe 
and  ungenerous  things  that  were  said  against  it ;  and  what  I  have  really  said  since 
would  admit  of  some  mitigation,  if  it  were  worth  while  to  enlarge.  But  I  say  no 
more  at  this  time.  If  you  think  proper  to  call  upon  me  for  an  explanation  of  any 
thing  in  the  preceding  pages,  you  shall  receive  farther  satisfaction  from 

Your  humble  servant, 

Richard  Jago. 


REV.  DR.  WARTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Oct.  8,  1769. 

I  ought  not  to  have  delayed  a  'moment  to  thank  you  for  the  very  agreeable 
present  of  your  Ode,  which  I  greatly  like,  as  admirably  adapted  to  the  subject  and 
occasion,  and  as  containing  a  great  many  strokes  of  poetry.  I  hear  from  various 
quarters,  that  in  the  speaking  it  you  were  never  more  forcibly  felt  by  an  audience : 
and  your  idea  of  substituting  the  speaking  some  parts  instead  of  recitative,  is,  I  really 
think,  excellent. 

I  leave  my  brother  to  express  to  you  his  thanks  also  as  he  thinks  proper.  He  has 
shut  up  himself  this  vacation,  and  stuck  so  closely  to  his  favourite  work,  “  The  His¬ 
tory  of  English  Poetry,”  that  he  has  made  a  very  considerable  progress,  which  he  was 
farther  enabled  to  do  by  having  been  a  long  while  collecting  materials. 

I  hope  to  get  an  evening  with  you  at  Christmas,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  and  obedient  servant, 

Joseph  Wartox. 

My  wife  joins  in  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

*  Let  never  man  in  future  endeavour  to  honour  either  prophet  or  poet  in  the  place  of  his  nativity.  The 
Stratford  Jubilee  was  considered  as  sacrilege  by  the  ignorant  clowns  about  the  Avon,  and  the  rain  from 
heaven  as  a  testimony  of  its  displeasure  rather  than  its  bounty.  Mr.  Steevens  in  every  form  of  sarcasm 
attacked  the  design,  and  all  engaged  in  it;  and  Shenstone’s  friend  Jago,  as  we  find,  amused  himself  with 
“  reflections  on  Mr.  Garrick’s  recitation.”  Yet  surely  there  was  an  obvious  propriety  in  the  great  actor’s 
taking  the  lead  in  such  a  celebration  ;  and  it  would  be  a  curious  scepticism  that  should  question  such  a 
man’s  abilitv  to  give  effect  to  what  he  had  written  himself. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


369 


MR.  THOMAS  WARTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Winton,  Oct.  10,  1769. 

You  have  my  most  hearty  thanks  for  the  very  kind  present  of  your  Ode;  I  have 
read  it  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  for  it  contains  many  strokes  of  true  poetry.  I 
lament  much  that  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  be  present  at  the  Jubilee.  To  tell  the 
real  truth,  I  am  deep  in  “  The  History  of  English  Poetry but  yesterday  I  could 
not  forbear  making  an  elopement  to  Spithead,  when  I  went  on  board  one  of  the 
Russian  ships,  and  had  the  pleasure  of  being  surrounded  with  a  thousand  whiskered 
sailors  and  soldiers  fresh  from  Archangel.  I  take  great  care  of  your  books,  which 
are  of  much  service. 

I  beg  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Warton. 


MR.  HOPKINS  TO  MR.  BARRY. 


SIR, 


Friday,  Oct.  27,  1769. 


I  am  ordered  by  the  managers  to  express  their  surprise  at  your  note  to  me,  and 
to  tell  you  they  are  at  a  loss  what  you  mean  by  threats ;  they  have  sent  no  messages 
but  by  me,  and  they  are  equally  ignorant  with  me  of  the  ground  of  your  unpolite 
behaviour :  however,  they  bid  me  to  assure  you  that  they  disregard  threats  of  any 
kind  as  much  as  you  possibly  can  do,  but  that  they  must,  and  will,  on  all  occasions, 
do  justice  to  themselves  and  their  company.  They  imagined  from  their  behaviour 
to  Mr.  Barry  last  year  that  they  should  have  had  civility  from  him  at  least,  and  they 
should  think  themselves  deserving  of  any  treatment  if  they  could  bear  to  be  injured 
and  insulted  at  the  same  time.  They  farther  add,  that  they  are  never  so  unreason¬ 
able  as  to  call  on  any  person  to  do  more  than  their  duty :  and  if  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry 
say  that  they  have  done  their  duty,  they  deserve  no  answer.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

William  Horinxs. 


Endorsed, 

“  Copy  of  a  letter  sent  to  Mr.  Barry  on 
Friday,  Oct.  27,  1769,  delivered  to 
his  man  by  James.” 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

GENTLEMEN,  Oct.  27,  1769. 

The  many  misunderstandings  that  have  happened  in  consequence  of  messages 
that  have  passed  between  us,  have  determined  me  to  take  the  liberty  of  giving  you 
this  trouble  rather  than  send  an  answer  to  Mr.  Hopkins. 

VOL.  I.  3  B 


370 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


What  I  meant  with  regard  to  threats,  was  the  message  brought  from  the 
managers  by  Mr.  Hopkins  to  Mrs.  Barry,  which  was,  that  they  expected  she  would 
continue  to  go  on  in  the  pageant  as  long  as  she  was  able ;  though  they  were  at  the 
same  time  informed  by  Mr.  Hopkins  that  she  was  not  able,  having  got  a  dangerous 
cold  by  her  attending  the  procession ;  and  that  she  could  not  venture  to  continue  it 
any  longer  without  hazard  of  her  life.  Mr.  Garrick  also  desired  Mr.  Hopkins  to  tell 
Mrs.  Barry  that  he  would  never  ask  her  to  do  any  thing  on  his  account  as  long  as  he 
lived;  which  was  a  very  disagreeable  circumstance,  as  it  might  be  understood  to 
affect  her  very  much  in  her  business,  and  she  has  now  the  mortification  to  observe 
that  one  of  her  parts  in  comedy,  though  appointed  for  her  last  March,  is  given  to 
another  person.  However,  Gentlemen,  give  me  leave  to  assure  you  that  I  say  this  in 
apology  and  not  in  justification  of  the  too  warm  and  unguarded  expressions  in  my 
note  to  Hopkins,  and  which  I  should  not  have  been  betrayed  into  but  for  certain 
information  which  I  received  just  before  I  wrote  the  note,  and  which  1  am  not  at 
liberty  to  mention.  This  vexed  me  not  a  little,  though  I  believe  it  was  intended 
well,  and  to  answer  a  different  purpose. 

I  have  not  forgot  the  obligations  I  am  under  to  the  managers,  but  shall  always 
retain  a  very  grateful  sense  of  them ;  and  as  I  think  no  man  should  be  ashamed  of 
acknowledging  an  error  as  soon  as  he  is  conscious  he  has  fallen  into  one,  I  must 
therefore  beg  pardon  for  any  uncivil  or  unpolite  expression  in  my  letter,  and  am, 
Gentlemen, 

•  Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY. 


SIR,  Oct.  28,  1769. 

As  there  is  one  paragraph  in  your  last  letter  which  relates  to  me  alone,  I  must 
beg  leave  to  answer  it.  I  most  certainly  did  send  word  by  Mr.  Hopkins  that  I 
would  never  ask  Airs.  Barry  to  do  any  thing  on  my  account  only ,  by  which  you  could 
not  but  know  that  I  meant  to  play  on  any  night  which  I  might  have  as  an  author, 
unconnected  with  the  manager. 

Mrs.  Barry  was  pleased  to  refuse  playing  the  part  of  Almeria  for  me,  on  Monday 
last,  though  she  knew  (for  she  was  told  it)  that  it  was  the  author’s  night  for  the 
Jubilee.  Mrs.  Barry  had  the  choice  of  two  parts :  she  first  chose  Lady  Townley, 
then  Almeria,  and  would  do  neither.  I  know  that  after  I  was  gone  to  Hampton 
she  sent  to  know  what  play  was  given  out,  but  I  had  left  orders  that  the  play  I  had 
fixed  upon  should  not  be  altered. 

I  believe  no  person  in  my  situation  ever  met  with  such  a  refusal ;  and  as  no  favour 
could  be  granted  by  the  compliance,  the  refusal  appeared  the  more  extraordinary.  I 
can  lay  my  hand  upon  my  heart  and  say,  when  I  acted  in  common  1  never  refused  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


371 


favour  in  all  my  life ;  and,  indeed,  this  is  the  first  time,  and  shall  be  the  last,  that 
ever  I  will  run  the  risk  of  having  it  refused  to  me.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

The  terms  which  Mrs.  Barry  sent  me  of  her  playing  on  Monday  were,  that  she 
toould  not,  or  could  not  appear  in  the  pageant  on  Saturday.  I  shall  say  no  more. 
Endorsed,  “  Not  sent.”* 


MR.  N.  RAMUS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Richmond  Lodge,  Thursday,  Nov.  2,  1769. 

In  obedience  to  his  Majesty’s  commands,  I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  he  Avill  not  go 
to  the  play  next  Thursday,  but  on  the  Thursday  after.  Their  Majesties  intend  to 
honour  you  with  their  commands;  therefore  his  Majesty  would  be  glad  to  know 
what  you  can  perform  yourself ;  either  a  tragedy  or  a  comedy,  which  will  be  the 
most  easy  to  yourself,  will  be  agreeable.  I  am.  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

Nl.  Ramus. 


MR.  J.  REED  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Mr.  Garrick  is  desired  to  read  the  following  letter  in  private. 

SIR,  Nov.  15,  1769. 

As  mv  connections  with  the  theatre  at  Covent  Garden  have  not,  since  the  death 
of  Mr.  Powell,  been  altogether  agreeable,  if  a  reconciliation  with  Mr.  Garrick  could 
be  effected,  I  have  a  desire  of  returning  to  my  late  master,  to  fight  my  dramatic 
battles  under  the  banner  of  David,  King  of  Drury,  a  man  after  the  public’s  own 
heart. 

I  should,  many  months  ago,  have  endeavoured  to  make  my  peace  with  you  if 
several  oblique  hints  had  not  been  given  me,  that  there  would  be  no  possibility  of  a 
reconciliation,  as  you  were  so  inveterately  prepossessed  against  me.  After  the  ma- 
turest  consideration,  I  have  a  better  opinion  of  your  disposition  and  good  sense,  than 
to  entertain  any  longer  such  uncharitable  thought.  The  greatest  mind  may  for 
a  while  resent ;  but  for  ever  to  continue  an  inflexible  resentment  is  the  infallible  sign 
of  a  rancorous  heart.  But  I  am  well  assured  that  a  person  of  your  delicate  feelings 
cannot  be  without  a  very  considerable  share  of  humanity  and  good  nature. 

I  shall  not  make  any  servile  professions  of  sorrow  for  what  has  passed ;  you 

*  Although  Mr.  Garrick  withheld  this  letter  from  Barry,  I  shall  not  do  so  from  the  reader :  because  it 
preserves  some  of  the  features  of  scenes  seldom  exhibited  to  the  audience,  who  little  suspect  the  trouble  and 
difficulty  found  by  managers  to  prevail  upon  the  public  servants  to  appear  before  them. — Ed. 

3  R  2 


372 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


would  either  despise  me  for  so  mean  a  submission,  or  suspect  my  sincerity.  I  can, 
however,  very  honestly  assure  you,  that  no  incident  in  my  life  could  give  me  greater 
pleasure,  than  to  be  on  a  friendly  footing  with  you.  This  acknowledgment  is  all 
the  submission  I  can  make,  or  an  ingenuous  mind  can  require.  If  a  total  oblivion  of 
past  animosities  between  us  should  take  place,  you  will  render  me  the  happiest  being 
in  the  world.  But  more  immediately  to  the  purpose.  I  have  lately  finished  a 
comedy,  which  can  be  more  happily  cast  at  your  house,  than  at  any  other  theatre ; 
as,  in  writing  it,  I  had  my  eye  on  several  of  your  performers.  There  is  a  character 
in  which  Mr.  King  would  probably  acquire  not  less  reputation  than  he  did  (no 
offence  to  Messrs.  Garrick  and  Cohnan)  in  Lord  Ogleby.  Mrs.  Abington  would 
likewise  have  an  opportunity  of  displaying  her  great  vivacity,  in  the  part  of  a  volatile 
young  lady.  There  are  other  characters  in  the  piece,  that  will  be  no  disgrace  to  the 
comic  performers  at  Drury -lane.  If  therefore  you  will  play  it  this  season — now  do 
not  throw  my  letter  into  the  fire — the  comedy  is  at  your  service. 

I  have  laid  down  my  pen  to  indulge  a  short  reverie. — Methinks  I  see  you  in  one 
of  your  soliloquizing  attitudes,  with  which  you  have  so  often  delighted  the  town, 
crying  out,  “  What  the  devil  does  this  impudent  fellow  mean  ? — write  to  me  with 
this  freedom  after  such  usage  as  I  have  met  with  from  him  !  threaten  to  publish  his 
case ! — file  a  bill  in  Chancery  against  me ! — make  the  devil  and  all  of  a  hubbub 
about  me ! — and  yet  after  this,  without  asking  my  pardon,  desire  me  to  play  him  a 
comedy  ! — a  very  modest  request  indeed! — d — n  his  comedy  !  why  does  the  block¬ 
head  teaze  me  about  it ! — why  does  pot  he  get  it  played  at  the  other  house  ? — I  will 
lay  fifty  guineas  that  he  and  Colman  have  quarrelled !” — Upon  my  honour,  you  are 
mistaken.  I  have  had  no  quarrel  with  Mr.  Colman  ;  but  as  my  piece  can  be  better 
played  at  Drury-lane,  and  as  I  must  be  connected  with  a  manager,  while  my  cacoethes 
scribendi  continues,  my  fame  (not  to  mention  my  pride  and  interest)  naturally 
prompt  me  to  wish  such  connexion  to  be  with  the  ablest  manager  that  ever  presided 
over  a  theatre. 

You  have  it  now  in  your  power  to  secure  my  friendship,  if  you  think  the  friend¬ 
ship  of  one  who  prides  himself  in  the  character  of  an  honest  man,  worthy  your 
regard.  I  could  give  you  particular  reasons  for  my  desire  to  be  re-connected  with 
you;  but  as  such  premature  explanation  might  be  of  disservice  to  me  elsewhere ; 
prudence  requires  my  silence  on  that  occasion.  If  you  are  inclinable  to  read  the 
comedy,  I  will  send  you,  by  way  of  sample,  the  first  four  acts :  these  will  sufficiently 
enable  you  to  judge  of  the  merits  of  the  piece.  If  these  should  meet  your  approba¬ 
tion,  (as  I  have  scarce  a  doubt  but  they  will,)  I  shall  immediately  send  you  the  fifth. 
My  reason  for  withholding  the  last  act  is,  that  I  may  be  able  ( not  unjustly )*  to  declare 
the  comedy  has  not  been  read  by  you,  in  case  I  should  be  hereafter  interrogated  on 
that  head. 

I  have  now  only  to  desire  that  no  mention  may  be  made  of  this  application,  and 

*  The  hand  also  has  Jixe  fingers ;  if  Mr.  Reed  withheld  the  last  of  them  when  he  saluted  a  friend,  would 
he  think  himself  justified  in  saying  that  “  he  never  shook  hands  with  him?” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


373 


rely  on  your  generosity  for  keeping  the  secret.  Should  the  affair  get  wind,  it  may 
be  of  great  prejudice  to  me ;  and  I  am  sure  that  Mr.  Garrick  is  a  gentleman  of  more 
honour  than  to  do  any  thing  that  would  be  of  injury  to  one  who  reposes  such 
confidence  in  him. 

If  you  cannot,  or  will  not  serve  me  in  this  point,  I  desire  you  will  return  me  this 
letter.  Whatever  you  think  fit  to  say  by  wTay  of  answer,  shall  likewise  be  returned. 

Before  I  conclude,  let  me  enter  the  following  caveat. — You  may  possibly  imagine 
the  letter  1  wrote  you  about  two  months  ago,  wras  intended  as  a  preparative  to  this 
application  ;  I  solemnly  declare  I  did  not  send  you  that  intelligence  on  such  interested 
intent.  I  had  no  farther  view  in  writing  than  to  render  you  service. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Jos.  Reed. 


MR.  A.  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Bombay,  Dec.  3rd,  1769. 

As  every  man  who  has  been  honoured  with  your  friendship,  must  be  desirous  of 
preserving  it,  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  addressing  you  from  this  distant  part  of 
the  world,  that  I  may  live  in  your  remembrance,  though  I  should  be  dead  to  the 
rest  of  mankind. 

After  a  voyage  of  five  months,  which  time  I  employed  on  a  continuation  of 
the  History  of  Hindostan,  I  was  safely  landed  on  this  barren  rock.  Since  that  time, 
my  ears  have  been  rent  with  the  noise  of  drums  and  trumpets,  whilst  the  air  of 
this  place,  so  remarkable  for  blunting  the  intellect,  has  rendered  me  unfit  for  any 
thing,  unless  the  Directors,  in  pity  of  my  misfortune,  should  make  me  a  counsellor 
at  Bombay.  Instead  of  invoking  the  Tragic  Muse,  and  calling  the  heroes  of  ancient 
times  from  the  dust,  I  am  employed  in  teaching  puppets  to  dance,  (sad  falling 
off!)  to  the  tune  of  Nancij  Dawson.  Why  should  I  disgrace  the  revered  names  of 
antiquity  ?  Catos  and  Csesars  may  be  painted,  but  they  can  only  be  animated 
by  you. 

Does  “  Zingis”  live,  or  like  a  Christian  visitor,  did  he  take  leave  on  the  twelfth 
night  ?  Does  Mrs.  Barry  breathe  the  spirit  of  Ovisa,  and  display  more  than  her 
beauties  to  the  town  ?  If  you  answer  in  the  affirmative,  perhaps  I  may  be  your 
humble  petitioner  to  accept  of  another  play.  If  not,  the  world  has  seen  enough  of 
my  folly,  silence  will  be  the  best  cloak  for  it,  and  I  may  pass  through  life  in  a 
crowd. 

As  all  but  madmen  give  over  writing  when  once  they  have  got  rich,  the  Di¬ 
rectors,  too  partial  to  my  genius,  have  determined  to  keep  me  poor.  I  have  indeed 
the  command  of  four  thousand  men,  but  so  circumscribed  in  every  thing,  that  in¬ 
stead  of  acquiring  a  fortune,  I  am  spending  the  little  I  have  got.  I  have  solicited 
a  removal  to  Bengal ;  but  as  I  never  had  any  friends  but  such  as  the  little  merit  I 
had  procured  me,  I  am  very  doubtful  about  success.  Few  men  can  be  generous 


374 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


without  motives  of  interest ;  and  however  capable  I  may  be  of  serving  the  public,  I 
have  few  voices  in  the  India  Courts.  Disappointment  shall  not,  however,  damp  me; 
in  the  world  there  is  much  room  for  hope. 

When  1  can  procure  any  thing  worthy  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  acceptance,  I  shall  take 
the  liberty  of  insinuating  the  greatness  of  my  respect  and  esteem  :  in  the  mean  time 
1  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Alex.  Dow. 


FRANK  AICKIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  December  6th,  1769. 

I  am  in  great  hopes  this  letter  will  reach  your  hand  at  a  time  when  a  leisure  mo¬ 
ment  will  permit  you  to  favour  it  with  a  reading ;  the  extensive  business  of  the  thea¬ 
tre  immediately  under  your  direction,  as  well  as  an  apparent  coolness  in  your  de¬ 
portment,  have  prevented  me  from  making  this  a  personal  address.  I  have  observed 
with  the  greatest  concern  that  latterly  I  have  fallen  in  your  esteem,  and  that  you 
now  seem  to  have  almost  totally  withdrawn  that  protection  I  was  once  honoured 
with.  Was  I  conscious  that  I  had  ever  intentionally  acted  any  part  that  deserved  so 
severe  a  reprimand,  I  should  despise  myself  for  the  most  ungrateful  and  unthinking 
of  m  ankind  :  to  offer  the  least  mark  of  disrespect  to  a  gentleman  from  whose  hand 
I  received  the  most  magnificent  acts  of  friendship,  would  picture  a  character  I  would 
not  wish  to  exist  with ;  and  viewing  it  with  an  interested  eye,  it  would  be  the  most 
unpardonable  act  of  folly. 

If  the  circumstance  of  my  omitting  the  rehearsal,  for  which  I  was  lately  forfeited, 
occasioned  this  change  of  deportment,  receive  this  as  my  most  sincere  assurance, — it 
arose  from  accident ;  but  if  from  the  whispers  of  any  latent  enemy,  honoured  for  a 
moment  with  your  private  ear,  Mr.  Garrick  will  surely,  on  every  principle  of  jus¬ 
tice,  give  me  an  opportunity  to  acquit  myself,  like  a  man  of  feeling,  as  he  ought,  from 
such  a  treatment.  I  dwell  on  the  feeling  of  a  grateful  heart :  be  assured  the  recol¬ 
lection  of  your  disinterested  behaviour,  when  obliged  to  call  upon  your  assistance, 
weighs  more  in  my  breast  than  the  certainty  of  rising  in  my  profession,  if  favoured 
with  your  instruction  and  protection.  Give  me  leave,  therefore,  my  dear  Sir,  to 
request  a  continuation  of  your  former  countenance,  without  which  a  man  appears 
but  in  an  awkward  point  of  view,  among  the  crowd  every  moment  traversing  the 
windings  of  artifice  to  recommend  themselves  to  your  attention  :  as  much  as  I  revere 
the  character  I  now  address,  on  that  foundation  I  shall  never  wish  to  rise  in  his 
estimation  ;  by  every  open,  honest  means,  I  wish  to  recommend  myself  to  him, 
and,  of  course,  to  the  public  ;  when  I  lose  sight  of  these  principles,  then  let  Mr. 
Garrick  forget  he  ever  had  in  his  service  a 


a 


Endorsed, 

A  penitential  letter.” 


Frank  Aickin. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


375 


MR.  STURTZ  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Copenhagen,  Dec.  23,  1769. 

No,  you  have  not  forgot  me,  my  very  worthy  friend,  but  the  bustle  of  the  Jubilee, 
and  your  public  life,  which  of  late  has  been  very  busy,  I  hear,  have  taken  up  your 
time  much  better  than  you  would  have  employed  it  in  writing  letters  to  me :  how¬ 
ever,  now,  I  long  for  some  lines  of  yours,  were  it  only  to  become  assured  of  your 
being  well  and  happy,  and  still  my  friend.  I  have  read  a  vast  deal  of  nonsense  about 
the  J ubilee,  and  a  great  many  pretty  things  also  ;  pray  be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  have 
some  authentical  account  of  that  national  solemnity  :  there  being  a  collection  of  pam¬ 
phlets  published  on  that  subject,  I  should  be  very  glad  to  peruse  it.  When,  my  dear 
friend,  may  we  hope  for  your  works  ?  it  were  a  pity  if  you  would  not  collect  as  soon 
as  possible  the  disjecti  membra  poetce,  the  many  humorous  entertaining  little  epi¬ 
grams,  prologues,  &c.  which  might  be  lost  by  and  by,  if  proper  care  is  not  taken  ;  and 
a  loss  indeed  it  would  be : — for  your  plays  and  larger  pieces,  they  are  preserved,  and 
consecrated  to  eternity.* 

We  are  here  entirely  engrossed  by  French  players  ;  but  if  out  of  necessity  we 
frequent  them,  we  have  seen  too  much  of  your  performance  not  to  be  disgusted  with 
every  other  sort  of  theatrical  entertainment.  There  is  some  of  our  retinue  who,  not  un¬ 
derstanding  a  word  of  your  language,  mimic  your  gesture  and  your  action  :  so  great 
an  impression  did  it  make  upon  their  minds,  the  scene  of  daggers  has  been  repeated  in 
dumb  show  a  hundred  times,  and  those  most  ignorant  of  the  English  idiom  can  cry 
out  with  rapture,  “A  horse,  a  horse,  my  kingdom  for  a  horse !”  I  am  the  most  happy 
of  them  all ;  for  in  silent  contemplation,  and  my  Shakspeare  in  hand,  I  follow  you 
close  through  every  masterly  stroke  of  your  action,  and  feel  its  magic  powers  a  hun¬ 
dred  times  again.  I  must  absolutely  see  you  and  Old  England  again  ;  and  if  ever, 
in  the  school  of  politics,  I  have  been  able  to  find  out  ways  and  means,  I  must  bring 
it  about. 

Has  Master  Capell  fulfilled  his  promise  in  giving  the  additional  volumes  to  his 
Shakspeare,  wherein  he  intended  to  treat  the  historical  part  of  his  plays  ?f  Has  there 
any  dramatical  piece  of  - made  its  appearance  since  I  left  England  ? 

Pray  be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  know  some  of  your  literary  events,  for  I  do  not  care  for 
your  political  ones,  your  petitions,  your  North  Britons,  &c.  One  would  not  judge  you 
to  be  so  happy  a  nation  by  the  writings  of  your  Juniuses,  your  Vindexes,  and  so  forth. 

*  Something  may  fairly  be  allowed  to  Mr.  Sturtz  on  the  head  of  the  fulsome  style  which  usually  dis¬ 
tinguished  foreign  praise,  particularly  friendly  praise ;  and  it  will  also  be  remembered,  that  though  he  was 
amazingly  well  acquainted  with  the  words  of  our  language,  his  selection  of  the  terms, is  not  always  idiomatical, 
and  frequently  his  phrase  is  too  sounding  for  his  matter.  “  Consecrated  to  eternity”  truly !  Eternity  for 
trifles  like  altered  plays  (for  Garrick  is  the  author  of  no  entire  comedy),  even  our  love  for  his  memory  must 
remark  to  be  too  bold  an  assignment  for  his  literary  merits. — Ed. 

t  They  were  published  after  Garrick’s  death  and  his  own. 


37  G 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  present  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am,  with  undaunted  sincerity, 
most  devoutly,  entirely 

Y  ours, 

N.  B.  He  was  here  and  a  favourite  of -  Sturtz. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  [No  date.] 

Of  a  thousand  supplicants  for  a  box  to-morrow  night  you  will  be  happy  to  be  rid 
of  one  ;  but,  as  all  happiness  in  this  world  is  of  short  duration,  the  next  time  “  Lear” 
appears,  low  on  my  bended  knee  I  shall  beg  some  corner.  By  a  strange  etourderie , 
I  neglected  an  invitation  from  my  old  friend  Lady  Sandy s,  neither  went  to  her  nor 
sent  excuse:  she  was  very  good  and  did  not  pout,  but  sent  me  another  for  to-morrow 
night,  to  which  I  consider  myself  as  inviolably  bound;  and  indeed  I  have  not  spirits  for 
such  an  assault  as  you  make  on  the  heart.  Real  woe  has  visited  those  I  tenderly  love. 
My  poor  Dolly  Gregory  has  lost  the  best  of  fathers,  and  the  best  of  men.  On  Tuesday 
night  he  went  to  bed  in  perfect  health  and  spirits,  as  usual  rejoicing  in  the  gay  circle 
of  his  fine  children  ;  on  Wednesday  morn  she  called  him  to  come  to  breakfast,  but, 
alas  !  his  feast  of  life  was  done.  Physicians,  &c.  were  assembled,  but  some  great 
vital  principle  had  failed  at  once,  it  is  supposed  ;  he  died  without  a  pang.  He  was 
the  most  amiable  philosopher  I  ever  knew  ;  and  though  skilled  in  all  worldly  wisdom, 
rejected  not  Him  who  only  has  the  words  of  eternal  life :  he,  therefore,  is  happy  ; 
but  his  family  are  greatly  afflicted,  and  mankind  has  lost  a  friend,  the  poor  a  gene¬ 
rous  and  tender  benefactor.  Best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am  going  to  see 
my  father,  who  is  indisposed.  I  have  not  had  Mrs.  Garrick’s  answer,  but  hope  it  will 
be  gracious. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  always  yours, 

E.  Montagu. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  Morning. 

I  SHALL  be  very  happy  to  have  the  honour  and  pleasure,  or  more  properly 
speaking,  th e  felicity  of  your’s  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s  company  on  Sunday  evening  if  you 
can  bestow  it  on  me  :  you  will  find  here  some  friends,  and  all  you  meet  must  be  your 
admirers,  for  I  never  invite  idiots  to  my  house.  I  shall  certainly  be  at  your’s  and 
Mrs.  Capel’s  commands,  and  if  you  wish  me  to  subscribe  for  more  than  one  set,  please 
to  put  my  name  down  accordingly.  Take  care  of  your  health  this  sickly  season,  or 
rather  let  Mrs.  Garrick  take  care  of  your  health  ;  she  has  the  attributes  of  Hebe 
and  one  more,  she  is  happiness  as  well  as  health  and  youth : — but  to  get  out  of  my 
heathenish  phrase,  God  bless  you  both,  and  believe  me, 

Your  most  grateful,  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


377 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

The  testimonies  of  wise  and  judicious  men  have  been  received  in  every  age  of 
polite  learning  with  pleasure  and  respect.  It  is  an  incense  due  to  merit ;  a  sacrifice 
in  which  even  modesty  may  delight  without  censure.  Antiquity  has  left  us  many 
noble  monuments  of  praise ;  and  it  is  not  more  to  the  credit  of  the  times  in  which 
they  lived,  that  they  produced  a  Homer,  a  Cicero,  or  a  Virgil,  than  that  there  were 
contemporary,  as  well  as  succeeding  writers,  who  did  justice  to  their  great  accomplish¬ 
ments,  and  who  recommended  their  golden  labours  without  any  fear  of  lessening  the 
value  of  their  own.  To  compare  the  present  state  of  literature  with  the  past,  is  to 
take  a  melancholy  view  indeed.  Criticism,  ancient,  candid  criticism,  hath  at  length 
“  closed  its  long  glories  with  a  sigh.”  The  dark  shades  of  prejudice  extend  daily, 
and  the  pains  which  the  philosopher  bestowed  in  finding  an  honest  man,  would  be 
now  as  fruitlessly  employed  in  searching  for  a  generous  and  impartial  author. 

“  Mov’d  by  some  hidden  spring  in  wond’rous  fate, 

Sound,  living  worth,  they  stamp  with  endless  hate ; 

Shake  from  the  tree  of  Fame,  while  at  its  root 
The  reptile  Envy  lurks,  her  infant  fruit, 

And  think,  that  when  another’s  faults  are  shown, 

It  gives  a  kind  of  sanction  to  their  own.” 

Ever  at  variance  amongst  themselves,  I  know  but  one  opinion  in  which  they 
seem  all  of  them  to  have  united  with  a  mutual  good-will  and  cheerfulness,  and  to 
which  you  must  attribute,  perhaps,  the  tedious  perusal  of  this  epistle  ;  for  if  we 
look  into  the  best  modem  productions,  whether  they  are  intended  either  for  the  im¬ 
provement  of  our  taste,  for  the  information  of  our  knowledge,  or  for  the  easy  relax¬ 
ation  of  our  softer  and  more  domestic  endearments,  we  shall  perceive  that  no  graceful 
opportunity  of  mentioning  your  name  with  honour  has  been  omitted  by  any  writer  of 
any  sect,  class,  or  party  whatever  :  and  whether  they  speak  of  nature,  or  nature’s 
laws,  of  powers  inconceivable,  of  eloquence  irresistible,  of  action  inimitable,  that  they 
shelter,  and  that  they  justify  their  opinion,  under  the  example  of  your  great  and  mas¬ 
terly  abilities.  But  as  the  reading  of  many  books  does  not  quite  fall  in  with  the 
manners  of  the  present  age,  and  as  it  would  be  presumption  to  answer  for  posterity, 
I  could  wish  that  such  extracts  were  made,  properly  to  be  published,  as  should  remain 
a  lasting  and  a  beauteous  pillar  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  merit,  and  of  his  country’s  gratitude 
and  discernment.  Macbeth’s  comparison  of  life  to 

- “  A  poor  player, 

That  struts  and  frets  his  hour  upon  the  stage, 

And  then  is  heard  no  more,” 

pronounced  by  the  softest  voice  that  ever  drew  pity  from  the  heart  of  man,  1  well 
remember  to  have  affected  me  beyond  expression.  Busy  fancy  represented  the 

3  c 


VOL.  i. 


378 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


pathetic  speaker  as  retired  to  the  divine  poet,  with  whom  lie  had  been  so  long  cul¬ 
tivating  an  acquaintance ;  and  I  wept  at  the  unequal  dispensation  of  human  glory  : 
that  you  who  could  bestow  immortality  on  others,  and  whose  passions,  the  only  good 
comment  on  Shakspeare’s  meaning,  did  first  favourably  introduce  him  to  public  notice 
(for  till  then,  his  virgin  blossoms  once  faded,  he  was  but  little  sought  after, — “  ’twas 
caviare  to  the  general,”)  might  yourself  perhaps  in  a  few  years  be  totally  forgotten. 
To  prevent  this  misfortune,  and  to  tempt  with  these  rude  outlines  some  abler  hand 
to  complete  the  picture,  is  the  sole  motive  of  subscribing  myself,  what  I  truly  am. 

Dear  Sir,  your  unknown,  but  very  cordial  admirer, 

A  Gentleman. 


Endorsed, 

“  Letter  of  compliment  from  a  clergyman, 
whose  name  is  Nott.”* 


MR.  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Tuesday  Morning. 

I  give  you  my  most  cordial  thanks  for  the  delight  I  received  last  night ;  and 
Lord  North  commands  me  to  express  his  obligation  to  you  in  the  strongest  manner. 
I  cannot  go  in  comfort  to  my  wife  and  children  at  Windsor,  till  I  am  assured  that 
you  have  not  suffered  for  this  inimitable  exertion  of  your  powers.  I  never  remember 
to  have  seen  or  heard  you  greater,  taw  in  concitatis  quam  in  remissis  affectibus,  which 
Quintilian  says  of  Cicero  in  one  of  his  finest  orations.  I  beg  my  best  compliments 
to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  saw  her  stooping  from  her  cloud  and  gazing  at  you  ;  I  thought 
the  spirit  of  Shakspeare  was  probably  doing  the  same,  and  with  equal  pleasure.  By 
the  by,  why  should  not  those  fine  lines  in  the  Essay  on  Man  be  applied  to  your 
demigod  as  well  as  Newton  ? 

“  Superior  beings  when  of  late  they  saw 
A  mortal  man  unfold  all  Nature’s  law,”  &c. 


4  4 


I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  very  affectionately  yours. 

Grey  Cooper. 


Endorsed, 

Mr.  Grey  Cooper,  upon  my  acting.” 


REV.  C.  JENNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Jan.  11th,  1770. 

After  the  fruitless  trouble  I  have  before  given  you  with  two  attempts  in  the 
dramatic  way,  I  am  afraid  you  will  think  me  impertinent  in  taking  the  liberty  once 
more  to  beg  leave  to  offer  you  a  piece.  But  as  I  am  greatly  encouraged  by  such  of 
my  literary  friends  as  have  perused  a  comedy  I  have  lately  finished  with  much 

*  He  was  the  translator  of  Secundus’s  “  Basia.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


379 


care  and  pains,  to  hope  for  its  proving  worthy  of  your  notice,  I  could  not  resist  the 
temptation  of  begging  your  indulgence  so  far  as  to  give  me  leave  to  submit  it  to 
your  perusal.  It  will  be  unnecessary  for  me  to  apprize  a  person  so  well  acquainted 
with  the  dramatic  writers  of  all  nations  as  you  are,  of  the  hints  I  have  borrowed  from 
Diderot,  the  most  eminent  amongst  the  modern  French  writers,  from  whose  “  P&re 
de  Famille”  I  have  taken  the  original  idea  of  the  fable,  though  I  have  found  it 
necessary  to  make  very  considerable  deviations  from  it,  and  by  throwing  the  foible 
of  family  pride  into  the  leading  character,  I  have  endeavoured  to  enliven  it  a  little, 
without  taking  off  from  the  intrinsic  merit  of  it :  from  which  idea  I  have  taken  the 
title  of  “  The  Man  of  Family,”  and  have  endeavoured,  by  softening  the  extreme 
seriousness  of  the  original,  to  render  the  piece  rather  more  conformable  to  the  En¬ 
glish  notions  of  comedy.  I  have  desired  a  friend  of  mine  to  leave  the  copy  at  your 
house ;  and  if  it  should  prove  worthy  of  your  notice,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  my 
taking  the  liberty  to  beg  the  favour  of  you  to  introduce  it  to  the  public.  I  am  aware 
that  I  have  not  the  least  claim  to  your  favour  ;  but  I  rely  upon  the  satisfaction  which 
men  of  genius  and  established  reputation  in  the  world  of  letters  must  find  in  affording 
protection  to  those  who  labour  in  the  same  department. 

The  favour  of  a  line  directed  to  me  at  Claybrook,  near  Lutterworth,  Leicester¬ 
shire,  will  very  greatly  oblige,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Charles  Jenner.* 


MRS.  CELESIA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Genoa,  Jan.  21, 1770. 

Your  obliging  letter  of  the  12th  of  December  gives  me  the  utmost  satisfaction 
nor  do  I  know  how  sufficiently  to  express  the  sense  I  have  of  the  indulgence  you 
have  shown  to  “  Tancred.”  Nothing,  I  own,  could  give  me  equal  pleasure  with  your 
approbation.  As,  I  must  confess,  I  have  the  success  of  this  affair  greatly  at  heart,  I 
must  beg  you  to  continue  your  friendly  intentions  towards  me ;  and  I  absolutely 
leave  you  at  liberty  to  make  whatever  alterations  or  retrenchments  you  think  proper. 

I  observed  and  felt  while  I  was  translating  “Tancred,”  that  several  of  the 
speeches  were  too  long  for  our  stage  ;  but  as  I  had  nobody  to  consult  with,  I  was  at 
an  uncertainty  about  what  to  omit :  you  may  therefore  strike  out  what  you  please, 
and  I  leave  it  to  you,  whether  it  may  be  right  to  replace  those  lines  when  the  play  is 
printed. 

I  am  also  of  your  opinion  about  the  title ;  and  to  tell  you  the  truth.  I  am  not 
thoroughly  satisfied  with  the  name  of  Ahnida ;  but  a  ten  years’  absence  begins  to 
wear  out  many  native  sounds  and  ideas  from  my  mind.  I  think  I  should  like  better 

*  The  Rev.  Charles  Jenner. — He  was  of  Pembroke  Hall,  Cambridge,  and  distinguished  as  a  scholar. 
He  enjoyed  some  valuable  livings  in  the  Church,  and  died  greatly  beloved  in  1774.  Everybody  that  could 
aim  at  the  stage  had  been  incited  to  naturalize  the  “  Pure  de  Famille”  of  Diderot.  Jeuner’s  attempt  has 
been  twice  printed. — Ed. 


3  C  2 


380 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Athcnais,  or  Etheliiula,  as  names  more  in  character — but  how  do  they  strike  your 
ear?  I  beg  you  will  do  me  the  favour  to  decide  for  me. 

Your  idea  about  the  prologue  agrees  exactly  with  mine :  but  what  will  seem  odd, 
though  it  is  true,  is,  that  I  do  not  feel  myself  at  present  in  a  disposition  to  do  any 
thing  worth  a  pin.  Perhaps  something  may  arise  to  my  fancy  before  the  year  is  out : 
if  it  does,  I  will  send  it  to  you;  else  I  must  entreat  you,  Sir,  to  complete  my  obli¬ 
gations  to  you,  by  employing  your  own  elegant  pen  in  my  favour. 

I  write  by  the  same  post  to  Mr.  Scot  to  thank  him,  and  to  beg  him  to  take  with 
you  any  measures  that  you  may  think  fit  with  regard  to  my  play. 

Mr.  Celesia,  to  whom  I  showed  your  letter,  desires  you  will  accept  his  best 
wishes,  and  begs  you  will  be  assured  that  he  thinks  himself  highly  obliged  by  your 
kind  remembrance  of  him,  and  your  friendly  behaviour  to  me.  Both  our  compli¬ 
ments  wait  upon  your  lady,  and  I  am,  with  the  truest  esteem, 

Sir,  your  obliged  and  sincere  humble  servant, 

Dorothea  Celesia. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Jan.  25,  1770. 

I  am  as  ready  to  adopt  unfavourable  sentiments  of  my  own  performances  as  any 
man  living,  and  therefore  do  not  allow  that  we  differ  in  opinion  about  “  Salome.”  I 
gave  it  to  you  (as  I  have  done  every  other  performance  of  mine)  as  the  best  I  could 
write,  but  I  did  not  insist  upon  it  that  you  was  to  approve  of  it.  I  fear  now  it  is  not 
within  the  bounds  of  my  genius  to  give  you  satisfaction.  However,  as  these  points 
are  soon  settled  in  conversation,  and  read  very  ill  upon  paper,  I  hope  you  will  not 
think  it  much  trouble  to  indulge  me  with  a  few  minutes’  conversation  to-morrow 
morning ;  and  that  I  may  not  interrupt  better  business,  I  will  call  between  ten  and 
eleven. 

The  motives  of  “Salome,*”  if  I  mistake  not,  are  revenge,  ambition,  and  disap¬ 
pointment.  These  are  strong  principles  for  guilty  action :  perhaps  they  are  not  so 
forcibly  marked  in  her  character  as  they  might  be,  but  a  very  few  touches  might 
finish  that  part  of  the  piece  as  highly  as  you  please.  Her  life  twice  attempted  by 
Mariamne,  her  ambition  defeated  by  Antipater,  and  her  revenge  frustrated  by  Alex¬ 
ander  :  I  know  no  other  principle  but  love  that  could  add  to  the  motives  that  she 
has  for  what  she  commits.  You  see  I  have  still  a  little  partiality  left,  a  small  feeling 
for  a  performance  which  has  been  many  years  under  my  pen,  and  which  hitherto  no 
friend  (not  even  Mr.  Colman  himself)  has  assisted  with  an  objection. 

With  your  leave,  I  will  wait  upon  you,  and  I  dare  say  I  shall  submit  my  preju¬ 
dices  to  your  better  judgment.  I  can  by  no  means  wish  to  have  any  piece  put  into  a 

*  I  have  no  means  of  tracing  what  became  of  poor  “  Salome.”  The  materials  were,  probably,  worked 
up  into  some  future  plays.  The  letter  is  very  characteristic  of  the  author. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


381 


performer’s  hand  which  a  manager  disapproves,  and  therefore  beg  it  may  not  be 
shown  to  Mrs.  Barry,  unless  it  was  honoured  with  your  recommendation. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  14th,  1770. 

I  have  made  so  many  unsuccessful  attempts,  that  I  almost  begin  to  despair  of 
ever  having  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you ;  yet  there  are  a  thousand  little  matters  that 
I  have  wished  to  communicate  to  you — first,  my  thanks  for  your  letter  to  Mr.  Van- 
sittart,  and  a  number  of  kind  remembrances  from  Mrs.  Cholmondely,  which  she 
charged  me  to  deliver  to  you.  She  has  sent  me  a  petite  piece  of  Marivaux,  which  I 
should  be  glad  you  would  look  over  when  your  leisure  will  permit ;  there  is  some¬ 
thing  peculiar  in  the  idea  of  the  plan,  which  I  well  know,  with  your  assistance,  might 
be  improved  into  a  comedy,  and  I  as  well  know  that  without  that  I  can  do  nothing. 

I  will  hope  that  the  great  and  unavoidable  expense  I  have  been  at  in  fitting  out 
my  young  adventurer  may  not  only  appear  to  you  a  sufficient  reason  for  my  wishing 
to  do  something,  but  may  also  influence  your  friendly  and  humane  heart  to  render 
that  something  successful. 

I  have  not  a  wish  to  engage  one  moment  of  your  attention  at  present ;  but  the 
time  will  come  when  you  will  be  more  at  ease,  and  then  I  hope  you  will  re¬ 
member  me.  Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  March  17th,  1770. 

I  send  you  my  tragedy  in  obedience  to  your  desires.  I  scarce  expected  you 
could  find  time  to  give  it  a  hearing,  but  I  was  not  guided  in  that  proposal  by 
any  other  motives  than  extreme  solicitude  for  your  judgment,  and  I  am  apt  to  think 
that  many  minute  observations  strike  upon  a  reading  which  the  memory  loses  when 
they  are  to  be  related. 

I  am  exceedingly  anxious  to  produce  such  a  piece  under  your  protection  as  shall 
serve  our  mutual  fame  ;  no  labour,  therefore,  will  deter  me  from  <>ivin«-  this  everv 
finishing  that  my  pen  can  give  it :  I  therefore  present  it  to  you  not  as  perfect  and 
complete,  but  as  much  improved.  Your  objections  bring  so  much  amendment 
with  them,  that  if  you  are  not  tired  with  making  them,  I  can  never  be  weary  of  re¬ 
ceiving  them.  In  the  present  copy,  the  character  of  Doris  is  not  softened  in  point  of 
terror,  rather  heightened  ;  her  tone  and  language  is  much  raised,  but  her  wickedness 
is  much  abated  by  the  strengthening  that  is  given  to  her  motives  ;  the  real  injuries 


382 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


she  has  received,  the  connexion  between  her  and  Antipater,  and  the  non-perpetration 
of  the  murder,  meliorate  her  character  exceedingly.  If  yet  the  catastrophe  is  too 
shocking,  by  the  danger  in  which  Glaphyra  is  kept,  1  have  a  plan  for  softening  that, 
though  1  am  humbly  of  opinion  it  has  a  very  great  effect  as  it  is. 

The  character  of  Antipater  I  now  venture  to  deliver  to  you  as  complete  in  all  parts 
and  principles. 

Glaphyra  is  introduced  with  much  more  eclat,  and  is  made  altogether  more  rea¬ 
sonable  and  important. 

I  flatter  myself  you  will  approve  the  turn  I  have  given  to  that  of  Bethanor,  the 
use  I  have  put  him  to,  and  the  great  accession  he  is  to  the  piece.  The  softenings  that 
his  character  gives  to  the  play  will,  I  think,  be  a  great  relief  to  the  general  cast  of  terror 
that  prevails  throughout. 

I  write  this  to  you,  Sir,  not  to  puff  my  performance,  but  to  explain  my  meaning. 
Pray  keep  it,  without  troubling  yourself  about  an  answer,  as  long  as  ever  you  please, 
and  till  you  have  full  leisure ;  for  I  should  earnestly  wish  that  you  did  not  take  it 
up  till  you  could  read  it  fairly  through  at  one  sitting. 

I  cannot  conclude  without  telling  you  that  my  friend  in  “  The  Morning  Chro¬ 
nicle”  has  not  forgot  me :  I  casually  took  it  up  some  time  ago  and  found  my  name 
at  full  length,  with  an  assertion  directly  false  as  to  the  department  in  which  I  am  con¬ 
cerned,  and  motives  ascribed  to  me  for  my  dedication  to  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  which 
I  utterly  disavow.  As  you  saw  the  letter  I  wrote  on  a  certain  occasion,  I  mention 
this  to  you  as  being  the  only  return  which  I  have  ever  received  to  it.  I  am  with 
great  truth,  Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  faithful  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 

If  Mr.  B.*  is  not  compiler  of  “  The  Morning  Chronicle,”  he  is  no  ways  respon¬ 
sible  for  what  I  refer  to ;  but  this  is  by  no  means  worth  your  mentioning. 


REV.  C.  JENNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Claybrook,  near  Lutterworth,  Jan.  23rd,  1770. 

I  return  you  many  thanks  for  the  favour  of  yours,  which,  on  account  of  my 
being  from  home,  did  not  reach  me  till  yesterday.  Before  I  received  it,  I  had  de¬ 
sired  a  friend  to  leave  the  copy  of  my  comedy  at  your  house,  otherwise  I  would  not 
have  troubled  you  with  it  before  the  time  you  mention  ;  but  I  beg  you  would  not 
hurry  yourself  in  regard  to  it,  as  I  would  wish  to  attend  your  leisure  and  conve¬ 
nience.  If  I  should  be  so  fortunate  as  to  find  that  it  in  any  degree  meets  with  your 
approbation,  I  shall  with  the  greatest  pleasure  wait  till  another  season  for  its  appear¬ 
ance.  I  hope  this  will  find  you  entirely  recovered  from  your  late  indisposition,  as  it 
is  hardly  a  compliment  to  say  that  your  confinement  is  a  general  loss.  I  hope  you 

*  Mr.  Burke,  it  appears,  was  the  person  here  alluded  to  by  Cumberland. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARIUCK. 


383 


will  excuse  a  liberty  I  have  taken  in  ordering  my  bookseller  to  send  you  a  couple  of 
volumes  I  have  lately  published,  which,  as  they  have  some  affinity  with  the  drama,  I 
hope  you  will  not  think  absolutely  beneath  your  notice.  If  they  should  afford  you 
an  hour’s  amusement  during  your  retreat  from  the  hurry  of  business,  it  will  be  the 
highest  honour  to,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

Charles  Jenner. 


REV.  C.  JENNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Claybrook,  April  20th,  1770. 

I  received  the  favour  of  yours  yesterday,  and  am  not  a  little  flattered  in  finding 
that  my  play  so  far  meets  with  your  approbation  as  to  merit  a  farther  consideration. 
With  regard  to  any  alterations  that  you  may  think  necessary  in  order  to  its  better 
success  on  the  stage,  I  am  very  far  from  being  so  partial  to  my  own  judgment,  as  to 
be  averse  to  making  them.  I  am  well  aware  that  as  I  write  merely  from  reason,  and 
from  such  helps  as  reading  and  a  common  intercourse  with  mankind  afford,  I  must 
very  probably  be  deficient  in  that  kind  of  experience  which  teaches  how  to  adapt 
performances  of  this  kind  to  the  humour  of  a  very  capricious  audience ;  and  though 
I  should  be  loth  to  sacrifice  too  much  to  a  taste  which  is  not  always  regulated  by 
good  sense,  yet  I  am  confident  I  can  run  no  risk  in  submitting  entirely  to  your 
judgment,  whose  taste  as  well  as  experience  are  so  well  known.  I  am  extremely  sorry 
that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  pay  my  respects  to  you  just  at  this  time,  but  a  melan¬ 
choly  attendance  on  a  poor  wife,  almost  I  fear  in  the  last  stage  of  a  consumption,  pre¬ 
vents  my  coming  to  town.  I  hope,  however,  to  be  able  to  come  up  some  time  in  next 
month,  when  I  will  not  fail  to  do  myself  the  honour  of  waiting  on  you,  either  in 
town  or  wherever  you  may  happen  to  be.  In  the  mean  time,  if  it  would  not  be 
giving  you  too  much  trouble,  as  I  have  no  friend  in  town  proper  to  be  employed  on 
this  occasion  at  present,  I  should  be  greatly  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  give  me  by 
letter  any  hints  with  regard  to  the  alterations  you  would  propose  ;  as  1  have  a  copy 
by  me,  any  references  to  particular  scenes  would  be  very  easily  understood ;  and  I 
make  no  doubt  but  I  shall  esteem  those  parts  you  shall  please  to  correct,  the  most 
valuable  part  of  the  work,  from  having  had  the  advantage  of  your  assistance.  With 
regard  to  the  case  of  conscience  you  mention,  1  can  only  say,  if  it  respects  any  prior 
engagement,  or  any  thing  of  that  kind,  that  I  have  not  the  least  pretensions  to  hope 
that  you  will  put  yourself  to  the  least  difficulty  on  my  account ;  but  whatever 
favour  it  is  in  your  power,  consistently  with  your  own  convenience,  to  show  me,  I 
shall  ever  be  ready  to  acknowledge. 

I  hope  this  will  find  your  health  established,  and  am  with  great  respect, 

Sir,  your  obliged  and  very  humble  servant, 

Charles  Jennf.r. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


REV.  C.  JENNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Claybrook,  May  5,  1770. 

I  return  you  many  thanks  for  your  two  last  favours,  and  am  very  happy  to  find 
that  the  little  affair  I  did  myself  the  honour  to  send  you  afforded  you  any  amuse¬ 
ment.  I  think  myself  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  remarks  upon  it,  and  only 
wish  I  could  have  been  favoured  with  them  time  enough  to  have  profited  by  them. 
With  regard  to  the  title,  I  am  of  your  opinion,  that,  according  to  the  general  accepta¬ 
tion  of  the  word  placid,  it  does  not  suit  the  character ;  but  my  idea  of  it  was  merely 
a  cool,  collected,  easily  pleased  man,  full  of  the  milk  of  human  kindness,  and  ever  dis¬ 
posed  to  take  every  thing  by  the  right  handle  :  I  fear  the  common  idea  throws  a  degree 
of  weakness  and  insensibility  into  the  character  that  I  never  meant.  With  regard  to 
fictitious  names,  you  are  most  certainly  right,  and  though  I  never  considered  the 
matter  before,  I  am  so  thoroughly  of  your  opinion,  that  I  shall  learn  better  than  to  use 
them  again  ;  though,  if  ever  they  are  excusable,  it  must  be  in  the  burlesque  characters 
just  touched  upon  en  passant,  as  in  the  single  instance  of  Poundern;  where  they  are 
to  be  long  dwelt  upon  (as  in  llupee),  they  are  detestable,  I  acknowledge.  I  am  sorry 
you  are  pleased  to  think  an  apology  necessary,  for  remarks  which  do  both  me  and 
my  work  honour;  the  commendations  of  a  man  of  genius  are  the  pleasure,  and  his 
criticisms  th q  profit,  that  one  derives  from  his  acquaintance.  I  hardly  know  what  to 
say  with  regard  to  “  The  Man  of  Family.”  With  regard  to  the  want  of  variety  of 
situation  you  complain  of  in  the  characters  of  the  brothers  and  the  wife,  I  would 
only  observe  that  I  meant  the  characters  should  be  rather  contrasted  to  each  other, 
than  to  themselves,  and  I  introduced  nothing  that  did  not  immediately  relate  to  the 
carrying  on  the  main  action  ;  and  though  I  was  aware  the  plot  was  rather  too  thin, 
without  great  assistance  from  the  dialogue,  yet  I  was  willing  to  do  any  thing  rather 
than  substitute  an  underplot,  to  which  I  have  many  objections.  With  regard  to  the 
genre,  I  am  of  opinion  that  an  English  audience  will  not  relish  it  so  well  as  a  more 
characteristic  kind  of  comedy  ;  possibly  too,  as  you  observe,  the  stage  may  be  getting 
too  much  into  the  handkerchief  strain  ;  but  I  am  a  little  too  much  inclined  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  enthusiasm  for  nature  in  her  pathetic  vein,  and  now  and  then  forget  that  the 
closet  and  the  stage  are  very  different  situations.  I  had  once  thought  of  introducing 
Trimmer,  Mr.  Solomon’s  clerk,  upon  the  stage,  to  make  love  to  Maria  ;  a  pert  witling, 
with  a  Jemmy  scratch  wig,  and  a  mouth  full  of  vile  puns,  like  Proctor  John  Little- 
wit  ;  but  I  had  too  much  the  fear  of  Diderot  before  my  eyes,  in  all  his  sentimental 
austerity.  I  do  not  mean,  Sir,  to  justify  any  of  my  errors  in  judgment :  when  I  have 
the  pleasure  of  paying  my  respects  to  you  in  town,  I  shall  be  extremely  glad  to  alter, 
or  add,  or  blot  out,  just  as  you  will  advise  me,  and  shall  be  not  a  little  happy  if  I  can 
at  length  produce  any  thing  worthy  your  notice.  I  yesterday  returned  from  passing 
a  day  or  two  with  my  friend  and  neighbour  Mr.  Cradock,  who  desires  me  to  present 
his  best  compliments  to  you. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obliged,  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

Charles  .Tenner. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


385 


MR.  W.  ELSDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIKj  Lisbon,  May  30th,  1770. 

I  do  not  know  how  to  begin  so  as  to  prepossess  you  in  favour  of  what  I  am 
going  to  say  ;  and  if  I  did,  perhaps  it  would  not  be  the  best  way,  as  the  matter  here 
to  be  treated  of  must  stand  or  fall  by  its  own  qualities.  To  be  brief,  I  have 
attempted  a  dramatic  piece,  from  the  Spanish  of  Don  Quixote.  It  contains  three 
acts,  and  begins  where  the  curate  and  barber  fail  in  with  Sancho,  near  the  Brown 
Mountain,  or  the  Sierra  Morena :  it  contains  three  acts,  wherein  are  unfolded  the 
stories  and  discoveries  of  Cardenio,  Dorothea,  Don  Fernando  and  Lucinda,  of  the 
Judge  and  his  brother  the  captive,  and  Don  Louis’s  love  for  Donna  Clara.  The 
time  about  ten  hours.  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  some  pieces  of  vocal  music,  as 
well  as  two  dances,  necessary  parts  of  the  whole  piece.  I  flatter  myself  with  good 
reason,  if  this  little  attempt  should  be  thought  worthy  a  few  of  your  masterly  touches, 
it  might  please :  and  could  I  persuade  myself  that  you  would  not  think  me  trouble¬ 
some,  I  would  send  it  to  you  through  the  hands  of  my  friend  Arthur  Hart,  Esq.  of 
London.  If  it  should  be  approved,  I  should  like  to  have  my  name  concealed  (at 
least  for  the  present) ;  and  if  you  find  it  not  worth  preserving,  as  I  suspect  may  be  the 
case,  to  have  it  burned*  by  your  order  would  give  me  more  real  satisfaction,  than 
the  greatest  applause  that  could  be  given  it  where  your’s  could  not  enter. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Your  obedient  and  obliged  servant, 

William  Elsden. 

P.  S.  If  you  should  think  fit  to  honour  me  with  a  line,  direct  to  William  Elsden 
Esq.  Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Quarter-master-general  of  his  most  faithful  Majesty’s 
armies.  Fonte  Santa,  Lisbon. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Hill-street,  May  31st,  1770. 

Mrs.  Montagu  presents  her  best  compliments  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and 
has  taken  the  liberty  to  send  them  a  book,  no  otherwise  worthy  of  their  acceptance 
than  as  it  is  written  by  one  who  is  proud  of  being  known  as  their  admirer  and  their 
friend.  Mrs.  Montagu  is  a  little  jealous  for  poor  Shakspeare ;  for  if  Mr.  Garrick 
often  acts  Kitely,  Ben  Jonson  will  eclipse  his  fame.  All  the  labours  of  the  critics 

*  \V  hether  this  work  of  his  most  faithful  Majesty’s  Quarter-Master-General  was,  in  consequence  of  his 
permission,  consigned  by  Garrick  to  the  flames,  does  not  appear.  This  conversion  of  the  immense  fer¬ 
tility  of  Cervantes  into  a  play ,  only  shows  how  little  the  gallant  engineer  understood  his  new  service.  To 
compress  such  splendid  inventions  is  to  smother  them. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  3D 


386 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


can  do  nothing  by  the  dead  letter  of  criticism  against  the  living  force  of  Mr.  Garrick’s 
representation.  King  Lear  in  his  madness,  or  Macbeth  led  by  air-drawn  daggers, 
cannot  kill  what  Mr.  Garrick  has  rendered  immortal.  Kitely  will  never  sink  into 
oblivion.  Fie  upon  Mr.  Garrick  !  he  alone  could  raise  a  rival  to  Shakspeare.* 

The  epilogue  was  incomparable,  and  Mrs.  M.  tasted  it  with  unmixed  delight.  She 
has  heard  from  Lord  and  Lady  Chatham  lately,  and  they  are  still  regretting 
that  they  were  deprived  of  the  great  pleasure  they  had  promised  themselves  from 
the  incomparable  Kitely. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Montagu’s  letter,  with  her 
book  upon  Shakspeare.” 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  June  15th,  177°* 

The  many  obliging  and  good-natured  things  you  have  been  pleased  to  say  of 
me  to  some  of  our  mutual  friends  deserve  my  warmest  gratitude  ;  for  though  I  will 
venture  to  say  that  I  am  as  free  from  vanity  as  any  of  my  scribbling  sisters,  I  am  not 
insensible  to  the  honour  conferred  by  any  portion  of  your  regard  or  esteem.  Accept 
my  thanks,  then,  my  worthy,  my  humane  friend  !  for  having  given  pleasure  to 
my  heart. 

Our  good  and  amiable  Mrs.  Wilmot  told  me  that  you  were  involved  in  so  many 
engagements  to  authors,  that  you  regretted  it  was  not  in  your  power  to  receive  any 
piece  from  me.  Now,  my  dear  Sir,  the  only  favour  that  I  would  presume  to  ask  of 
you  is  a  preference  to  persons  who  must  be  totally  indifferent,  as  they  are  un¬ 
known,  to  you. 

You  must  take  trouble  with  every  piece  before  they  can  be  brought  upon  the 
stage,  and  why  not  bestow  some  of  your  pains  on  one  that  will  bless  you  for 
your  kindness  ? 

When  I  had  first  the  honour  of  corresponding  with  you,  I  frankly  informed  you 
of  my  motives  for  writing :  your  humanity  was  affected,  and  you  became  my  friend ! 
Alas !  those  motives  still  subsist, — a  narrow  income,  an  aged  mother,  a  family  to  sup¬ 
port  who  have  ever  lived  decently,  and  debts  contracted  by  providing  for  a  beloved 
and  deserving  son  !  From  these  painful  circumstances  it  is  in  your  power  to  relieve 
me,  by  saying  that  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  assist  me  in  bringing  on  a  play,  either 
the  next  season  or  the  following  one.  I  am  content  to  struggle  through  a  thousand 
difficulties,  rather  than  lay  you  under  any.  I  will  also  pawn  my  word  that  I  will 
never  solicit  you  for  more  than  what  I  have  now  asked.  I  most  earnestly  entreat 

*  I  am  sure  that  I  do  not  want  enthusiasm  for  Shakspeare  ;  but  why  must  every  other  merit  he  slighted 
for  his  honour  ?  That  Kitely  was  finely  acted  by  Mr.  Garrick  every  body  knows  ;  but  why  should  Mrs. 
Montagu  wish  them  not  to  be  told  that  it  was  finely  written  by  Ben  Jonson  ?  Why,  her  own  Shakspeare 
himself  acted  in  the  very  play,  and  as  far  as  comparison  will  lie  between  comedy  and  tragedy,  the  scene  of 
Kitely  and  Cash  is  upon  a  par  with  that  of  King  John  and  Hubert. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


387 


you  to  consider  my  situation,  and  I  will  not,  cannot  doubt  of  your  wishing  to  render 
it  less  wretched. 

May  health  and  every  happiness  attend  you !  is  the  sincere  wish  of  your  ever 
grateful  and  affectionate  friend, 

E.  Griffith. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Anne-street,  July  2d,  1770. 

I  do  indeed  receive  your  letter  and  the  one  enclosed  with  singular  pleasure.  I  am 
very  glad  so  unfavourable  an  impression  is  effaced  from  Mr.  Burke’s  mind ;  I  am 
doubly  anxious  it  should  be  cleared  to  Lord  Rockingham ;  and  I  am  happy  to  owe 
these  kind  offices  to  your  friendship. 

I  have  twice  the  pleasure  in  following  your  corrections  that  I  had  in  composing 
the  piece  ;*  and  if  your  patience  does  not  give  out,  mine  never  will.  I  entirely  adopt 
your  observation  on  the  first  scene,  and  have  already  executed  it  in  a  manner  that  1 
hope  embraces  your  ideas.  I  wished  to  have  sent  you  the  new  scenes  I  have  put  in 
the  place  of  those  where  F ulmer  is  caned  and  the  constable  is  brought  in ;  it  is  the 
greatest  amendment  that  could  be  made ;  but  they  were  too  long  for  my  time  to 
transcribe.  I  will  get  a  proper  copy  of  the  whole  made  in  Ireland,  and  transmit  it  to 
you.  Perhaps  I  shall  be  able  to  recruit  the  character  of  O’Flaherty  with  some  natural 
touches  from  the  county  of  Galway :  I  have  heightened  it  very  much  in  the  new 
scenes,  and  tied  him  in  closer  to  the  plot,  as  you  advised.  The  money  is  given  to 
Dudley  in  a  way  that  satisfies  all  scruples,  and  casts  a  strong  light  on  Belcour’s 
character. 

Mrs.  Cumberland  desires  her  compliments  and  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  your¬ 
self  :  she  joins  me  in  thanking  her  and  you  for  a  most  delightful  day  on  Tuesday, 
and  hopes  Mrs.  Garrick  will  allow  her  to  renew  her  acquaintance  on  her  return  from 
Ireland.  You  see,  Sir,  you  not  only  protect  my  fame,  as  manager,  but  add  to  my 
happiness  as  a  friend. 

I  could  very  much  wish  that,  if  this  comedy  comes  out  next  season  at  your  thea¬ 
tre,!  ^  might  steal  quietly  and  silently  into  the  world :  there  are  but  two  men,  your¬ 
self  excepted,  that  ever  heard  a  word  of  it,  and  they  only  in  part.  I  do  not  know 
whether  you  will  think  me  ridiculous  in  wishing  to  conceal  the  title  of  it, — “  The 
West  Indian,”  but  I  think  it  robs  it  of  its  novelty  in  some  degree  by  announcing  it 
under  that  character.  Farewell,  and  believe  me. 

Your  most  faithful  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 

*  “  The  West  Indian,”  by  which  Cumberland  keeps  his  place  upon  the  British  stage. — Ed. 
f  As  it  did  with  the  greatest  possible  success. — Ed. 

3  D  2 


388 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


AN  ANONYMOUS  ADVISER. 

SIR,  July  2.  1770. 

The  pleasure  of  your  acquaintance  I  am  a  stranger  to,  but  have  for  a  long  course 
of  years  admired  your  excellencies  as  an  actor  and  author. 

In  the  last  of  these  capacities  I  now  address  you  ;  and  take  the  liberty  to  ask,  whe¬ 
ther  a  genius  fertile  and  lively  as  yours,  could  not  form  a  comedy  of  three  acts  at 
least,  upon  the  story  of  Joseph  Andrews,  that  would  afford  high  entertainment  to 
the  public,  and  advantage  to  yourself?  The  piece  might  commence  at  the  time  Lady 
Booby  makes  her  grand  attack  upon  Joseph  ;  Parson  Adams  might  be  changed  into 
a  schoolmaster,  and  tutor  to  Lady  Booby’s  sons  ;  and  surely  the  variety  of  passions  in 
her  character,  with  the  ridiculous  adventures  of  Joseph  and  Adams  in  consequence 
of  them,  would  receive  such  heightenings  in  the  representation  from  your  masterly 
hand,  as  poet  and  manager,  that  it  could  not  fail  of  crowning  your  labours  with  suc¬ 
cess.  You  have  also,  in  the  present  dearth  of  good  performers,  a  set  that  would  fill 
the  characters  in  the  piece  proposed  with  propriety :  Mr.  Cautherley  looks  Joseph 
himself ;  Mr.  Love  would  make  a  good  Adams ;  and  his  wife,  if  she  did  not  speak  so 
fast,  a  good  Slip-slop  ;  Mrs.  Hopkins,  Lady  Booby;  Parsons,  Lawyer  Scout ;  Mrs.  W. 
Barry,  Fanny ;  and  the  towering  awkwardness  of  Miss  Young  would  suit  the  upstart 
pride  of  Pamela.  Thus  have  I  presumed  to  dictate  to  you,  as  author  and  manager ; 
but  from  no  other  motive,  than  a  strong  desire  to  see  a  story  replete  with  humour, 
brought  upon  the  stage  by  him  who  tjone  is  qualified  to  introduce  it. 

Should  you  never  pay  any  attention  to  these  hints,  I  shall  be  very  sorry,  but 

always  remain,  Sir,  Your  well  wisher  and  very  humble  servant,! 

#  * 

There  are  some  admirable  strokes  upon  tuition  in  the  “  Bachelor  of  Salamanca.  ’ 
Endorsed, 

"  Letter  of  recommendation  of  Joseph  Andrews,  &c. 
for  a  play  to  me.” 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[Tliis  is  one  of  the  most  elegant  letters  in  the  collection  ;  and  if  the  pedant  should  feel  disposed  to 
insinuate  any  male  help  in  the  composition  of  her  convincing  “  Essay  upon  Shakspeare,”  the  polite  circles 
who,  with  Mr.  Garrick,  esteemed  Mrs.  Montagu  the  first  of  women,  may  here  ascertain,  that  she  needed  no 
friendly  assistance  in  literary  composition  : — there  is  a  dignity  of  thought ,  and  a  gracefulness  of  expression  in 
the  present  letter,  which  fully  sustain,  though  they  cannot  heighten  her  character. — Ed.] 

DEAR  SIR,  Denton,  July  24,  1770. 

The  liberty  I  am  going  to  take  seems  to  require  many  apologies  ;  at  the  same 
time,  I  am  but  too  sensible  that  excuses  are  but  poor  alleviations  of  a  fault.  There 

t  This  invitation  might  have  been  written  by  Pratt ;  who  certainly  tried  the  subject  afterwards  himself. 
He  made  a  farce  of  it  for  Bensley.  The  “  towering  awkwardness”  of  Miss  Young,  I  remember  so  well,  with 
a  very  different  feeling,  that  I  most  sincerely  wish  we  had  any  thing  at  present  that  but  reminded  me  of  her 
dignity,  her  grace,  her  elegant  vivacity  and  sensible  pathos. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


389 


is  a  certain  quality  called  by  the  Gods  simplicity,  by  men  foolishness,  which  some¬ 
times  betrays  the  owner  into  transgressions  for  which  good-nature  finds  an  excuse 
when  the  invention  of  the  offender  cannot  frame  one.  Let  my  folly  therefore  find 
access  to  your  good-nature,  and  thus  gently  introduce  my  story. 

A  friend  of  mine,  who  has  not  a  foot  of  land  anywhere  but  in  Parnassus,  and 
there  pretends  not  to  more  than  a  copyhold,  shotved  me  a  comedy  of  his  writing, 
which  I  thought  might  at  least  vie  with  most  of  the  late  productions  in  that  way ; 
but  I  am  a  very  incompetent  judge  of  this  matter.  All  I  would  beg  is,  that  you 
would  cast  your  eye  over  the  piece.  If  you  do  not  approve  it,  no  angry  female 
muse,  (such  as  once  assailed  you)  armed  with  terrors  which  belong  rather  to  Tisiphone 
than  Melpomene,  will  rage  and  foam.  My  friend  is  an  honest  peaceable  man  :  if  his 
play  deserves  your  approbation,  it  will  be  a  great  piece  of  good  fortune  to  him  to  have 
it  under  your  protection,  and  will  at  once  realize  every  good  wish  I  can  form  for 
him.  Whatever  you  decide  upon  the  subject,  I  shall  know  is  right  and  just.  I  am 
not  perhaps  a  judge  what  should  please  in  comedy,  and  have  not  the  least  guess  what 
will  please.  The  dialogue  of  this  play  seemed  to  me  easy  and  lively,  and  I  thought 
the  poet  touched  with  good-humoured  raillery  the  fashionable  follies  of  the  times, 
which  in  themselves,  though  perhaps  not  in  their  consequences,  appear  too  frivolous 
for  severe  satire.  Great  physicians  have  transmitted  to  posterity  remedies  for  those 
disorders  to  which  human  nature  is  addicted  in  all  ages  and  climates  of  the  world ; 
but  though  an  Hippocrates  and  a  Galen  may  have  assumed  a  perpetual  authority  in 
cases  of  consumption,  dropsy,  and  malignant  fevers,  the  humble  under-graduate  doc¬ 
tor  considers  some  new  epidemical  cold  as  his  province ;  and  hastens  to  publish  his 
cure  for  the  Influenza,  or  to  offer  an  antidote  to  Hyson  tea ;  advertises  his  balsam  of 
honey  when  the  fogs  of  November  affect  the  lungs  ;  and  as  the  Spring  advances,  brings 
out  his  tincture  of  sage,  to  purify  those  humours  that  warm  weather  causes  to  ferment. 

To  a  Plautus,  a  Terence,  or  a  Moliere,  it  belongs  to  attack  the  dropsy  of  pride, 
the  feverish  thirst  of  avarice,  or  the  melancholy  madness  of  misanthropy.  The  minor 
poet  aims  no  higher  than  to  remove  some  incidental  malady,  some  new  disorder  with 
which  the  town  is  infected.  Even  if  he  can  take  off  those  freckles  which  pollute 
the  pure  roses  and  lilies  of  youthful  beauty,  or  can  soften  the  wrinkles  on  the  brow 
of  old  age,  he  has  his  merit,  and  deserves  encouragement.  I  wish  you  may  have 
reason  to  think  my  friend  deserves  a  place  in  some  of  these  humble  classes.  It  is 
improper,  on  some  accounts,  that  his  name  should  be  known,  and  therefore  he  desired 
me  to  send  his  piece  with  my  petition  to  you  to  read  it.  As  I  endeavoured  to 
smuggle  a  certain  Essay*  through  the  world,  you  may  perhaps  suspect  me  of  having  a 
hand  in  this  comedy ;  but  I  do  assure  you,  by  all  that  is  most  serious,  I  have  not 
therein  either  art  or  part ;  I  have  not  either  invented  or  corrected,  nor  knew  any 
thing  of  it  till  it  was  almost  finished.  The  author  was  to  finish  it  after  I  came  out 
of  town,  and  I  promised  to  send  him  a  letter  to  you  to  send  with  it,  which  I  did  the 
more  readily  as  he  will  remain  to  you  mute  and  invisible;  and  therefore  you  will  have 

*  On  the  Writings  and  Genius  of  Shakspeare. — F.d. 


390 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


merely  the  trouble  of  casting  your  eye  over  the  play,  and  when  you  have  done  so,  if 
you  will  please  to  send  the  play  with  your  opinion  of  it  to  my  house  in  Hill-street,  I 
shall  be  more  obliged  to  you  than  I  can  express.  Any  alterations  you  should  desire 
will  certainly  be  made.  Upon  recollection,  I  will  beg  of  you  not  to  send  your  letter 
in  the  packet  with  the  play,  but  indeed  to  put  the  letter  in  the  post  directed  to  me 
at  Denton,  near  Newcastle-upon-Tyne;  for  the  person  may  otherwise  delay  my 
having  your  letter,  if  he  should  not  call  at  my  house  for  his  play.  I  should  have 
wrote  to  you  sooner,  but  I  have  been  very  much  indisposed.  I  shall  be  in  great 
anxiety  till  I  hear  you  forgive  me  the  liberty  I  have  taken.  I  was  under  very 
uncommon  obligations  to  exert  my  endeavours  to  serve  the  author  of  this  play :  I 
promise  you  I  will  never  again  presume  so  far.  I  should  be  very  unhappy  if  I 
thought  my  taking  this  liberty  would  lessen  that  friendship  which  I  flatter  myself  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Garrick  have  for  one  who  has  the  highest  esteem  for  them.  I  beg  my  best 
respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  live  over  again  in  imagination  the  charming  day  I  passed 
at  Hampton.  May  the  muses,  les  jeux,  and  les  ris,  as  usual,  keep  their  court  there, 
and  health  and  pleasure  never  be  absent  even  for  an  hour.  With  most  perfect 
regard,  1  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 


DR.  HIFFERNAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

t 

SIR,  July  23,  1770. 

Thus  stands  the  account  between  Mr.  Foote  and  Dr.  Hiffernan  :*  For  a  number 
of  years  the  latter  had,  by  every  means  in  his  power,  made  constant  efforts  to  serve 
the  former’s  undertaking  and  particular  claim  to  representative  exhibition,  which 
sometimes  were  wanting,  and  produced  the  desired  effect,  even  by  his  own  confession. 
Occasionally  some  economical  acknowledgments  have  been  made,  always  accompa¬ 
nied  with  most  bountiful  promises  of  an  essential  service  to  ensue  from  his  theatrical 
department ;  but  the  hour  of  accomplishment  never  came,  and  every  method  pointed 
at  was  unrelentingly  slighted. 

Upon  seeing  that  all  expectation  was  to  be  groundless,  Hiffernan  delivered  to  his 
friends  proposals,  dated  September  1769,  for  a  work  to  be  published.  To  Mr.  Foote 
among  the  first  were  some  sent,  with  an  implied  belief  of  his  being  serviceable  on  the 
occasion;  but  so  far  from  answering  such  expectation,  Mr.  Foote  made  both  a  jest 
and  a  ridicule  of  the  author  and  his  proposals,  wantonly  depreciating  his  talents  and 
literature,  in  a  most  cruel,  wicked,  and  oppressive  manner ;  of  which,  Sir,  you  may 
remember  I  gave  you  some  hints  a  little  after  Christmas  (as  wre  met  in  Long-acre),  to 
your  very  great  astonishment. 

*  The  Doctor’s  explanation  of  the  subject,  which  produced  the  two  succeeding  letters.  Paul  Hiffernan 
was  from  the  sister  kingdom,  and  certainly  one  of  the  most  scurrilous  of  her  literary  adventurers.  Again,  it 
is  amusing  to  observe  Foote’s  sensibility  under  attack. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


391 


Upon  certain  information  of  the  same  reiterated  abuse,  and  quite  unprovoked,  I 
sent,  by  way  of  sounding  him,  (having  for  some  time  declined  paying  visits,)  a  second 
letter,  with  proposals,  desiring  to  know  for  what  number  of  his  friends  I  should  order 
copies ;  but  that  application,  like  the  former,  was  disregarded,  and  no  answer  sent ; 
but  the  illiberal  detraction  of  author  and  proposal  was  still  continued.  That  he 
might  have  no  room  for  pleading  a  remissness  on  my  side,  and  a  multitude  of  busi¬ 
ness  on  his,  for  the  neglect  of  serving  me,  I  sent  a  third  letter  notifying  the  book’s 
being  printed :  the  same  uncomplimentary  silence  was  observed. 

About  a  fortnight  or  so  after  the  opening  of  his  theatre,  I  had  two  short  inter¬ 
views  with  him  in  his  dressing-room,  where,  from  the  cold  confused  reception  of  a 
visibly  unwelcome  guest,  no  room  was  left  for  a  doubt  of  his  having  conceived  a 
determined  enmity  against  me.  Not  a  word  was  mentioned  by  either  of  the  work  or 
proposals,  and  a  cold  adieu  was  bid  on  both  sides  at  parting. 

A  criticism  on  his  prologue  appeared,  which,  from  a  quick  sense  of  his  foregone 
maltreatment  of  me,  he  thought  he  was  entitled  to  from  no  hand  so  much  as 
from  mine. 

This  terrible  menace  was  immediately  promulgated — “  he  would  write  my  life.” 
The  humble  answer  thereto  was,  “  I  would  write  his,”  and  in  order  not  to  prove  un¬ 
grateful,  I  should  embrace  every  opportunity  of  inducing  him  to  set  a  higher  value 
on  my  talents  and  literature  than  he  had  lately  done ;  since  what  ought  to  mortify 
a  writer  more  than  to  be  low  in  Air.  Foote’s  estimation  ? 

The  last  sentence  denounced  was,  that  “  the  door-keepers  were  to  refuse  me  ad¬ 
mission  I  replied,  so  they  may,  when  I  present  myself  a  gratis  object ;  but  my  inten¬ 
tion  is  to  pay,  and  if  I  go  at  the  latter  account  time,  shall  certainly  give  but  estab¬ 
lished  prices  at  Drury -lane  and  Covent-garden :  which  resolution  may  in  all  proba¬ 
bility  have  given  rise  to  a  letter,  about  which  it  seems  a  great  noise  has  been  made. 
The  best  way  to  come  to  a  certainty  of  the  author  would  be  to  publish  it.  He  will 
be  soon  known  by  the  purport  and  style.  Hand-writing  may  be  counterfeited,  and 
there  is  a  veteran  adept  in  that  practice  frequents  Mr.  Foote. 

This  is  all  I  have  to  say  concerning  a  subject  about  which  I  am  sorry  any  gentle¬ 
man  has  been  troubled,  nor  can  I  see  upon  what  foundation,  or  with  what  propriety. 

I  am  with  respect,  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

P.  Hiffernax. 


MR.  FOOTE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  July,  1770. 

Last  night  a  letter  written  by  Doctor  Hiffernan  was  brought  me  by  a  director 
of  one  of  the  newspapers,  containing  in  express  words,  an  invitation  to  the  public  to 
come  and  pull  down  my  playhouse  for  not  taking  after-money.  Whilst  the  Doctor 
confined  himself  to  mere  personal  abuse,  I  thought  myself  (upon  the  old  principle  of 


392 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ah  illis  non  lauilari  maxima  laus  est*  )  rather  obliged  to  his  pen  than  not ;  hut  this 
attempt  is  of  so  black,  so  malignant,  so  criminal  a  nature,  that  I  could  not  help  com¬ 
municating  it  to  you  as  a  sort  of  lesson  what  you  must  expect  when  your  subscrip¬ 
tions  fall  off,  or  you  find  yourself  obliged  to  reject  some  unreasonable  request  of  the 
Doctor’s.  It  will,  Sir,  be  difficult  for  you  to  be  more  kind  to  this  writer  of  in¬ 
cendiary  letters  than  I  have  been.  Last  season,  indeed,  I  found  myself  obliged,  as  a 
servant  of  the  crown,  to  resent  Iliffernan’s  vomiting  out  a  volume  of  treason  behind 
the  scenes  before  the  whole  company,  for  which  he  might  and  ought  to  have  been 
hanged,  in  consequence  of  a  supposed  slight  shown  him  by  the  Duke  of  Cumber¬ 
land.  Upon  the  whole,  it  is,  I  think,  worthy  of  consideration  whether  there  is  not 
something  immoral,  as  well  as  impolitic,  in  encouraging  a  fellow,  who,  without  parts, 
principles,  property,  or  profession,  has  subsisted  for  these  twenty  years  by  raising 
contributions  under  false  pretences,  and  finding  how  necessary  the  public  good 
opinion  is  to  every  subject  of  the  stage,  has,  with  all  the  qualities  of  a  footpad  but 
the  courage,  extorted  money  from  every  individual  by  presenting,  instead  of  a  pistol, 
a  pen  to  his  breast.  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

My  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Samuel  Foote. 

Sowden,  Macklin,  &c.  & c.  have  seen  the  letter,  and  can  swear  to  the  Doctor’s 
hand-writing. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOOTE. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  July,  1770. 

You  do  me  great  justice  in  supposing  that  I  should  think  of  the  attack  you 
mention  in  your  letter  as  your  friend  and  well-wisher ;  it  is,  indeed,  a  most  wicked 
and  alarming  one,  and  should  be  put  an  end  to  directly.  I  have  written  to  Dr. 
Morris,  for  whom  I  have  a  very  great  regard,  and  who  knows  the  culprit,  and  I 
doubt  not  but  it  will  have  a  proper  effect.  I  have  done  some  service  to  Dr.  Hiffer- 
nan  from  a  representation  of  his  circumstances  by  our  friend  Hamilton,  who  showed 
me  a  particular  letter  from  him  at  the  same  time.  I  hope  to  see  you  soon  at  Hamp¬ 
ton  with  the  family  of  your  friends  at  Greenwich,  when  we  will  talk  over  the  matter 
at  large. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  sincerely  your  friend  and  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 


Foote  seems  to  confuse  two  distinct  quotations  in  his  anger  or  alarm, 

“  Principibus  placuisse  viris,  non  ultima  laus  est.”  And 
“  Laudatur  ab  his,  culpatur  ab  illis.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


393 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Worcester,  August  1st,  1770. 

Your  very  obliging  letter  of  the  26tli  of  last  month  lias  found  me  just  setting 
out  from  this  place  for  Ludlow.  It  will  take  me  up  about  three  weeks  to  run  over 
my  estates  there,  and  in  Staffordshire,  with  that  caution  which  a  man  must  use  who 
stares  but  one  peep  at  his  honest  tenants  in  a  year.  I  shall  then  return  to  Kew  ; 
and  will  honour  myself,  without  fail,  by  calling  on  you  as  soon  as  possible. 

Cordelia  still  wears  no  charms  for  me  in  the  3d  act  scene;  but  you  have  started  an 
objection  that  I  was  not  aware  of,  and  a  material  one  it  is,  I  can  assure  you.  For 
having  watched  my  favourite  Mrs.  B.  with  some  attention,  I  can  pronounce  that  I 
never  saw  the  lady  whose  merit  in  her  character  did  so  much  and  so  apparently  de¬ 
pend  on  the  humour  in  which  she  plays.  But  I  will  defer  what  I  have  to  add 
to  this  subject  till  we  meet ;  in  the  mean  while,  reckon  largely  upon  my  grateful 
esteem,  and  enjoy  as  much  health,  and  as  much  happiness  as  you  deserve — more 
cannot  be  wished  you  by 

Your  very  faithful  servant, 

Sam.  Nott. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GEORGE,  August  30th,  1770. 

I  have  told  my  wife  you  cannot  meet  us  on  Saturday ;  and  she  says  very  well. 

Did  not  you  tell  Mrs.  B - y*  of  the  Case  her  sweet  husband  is  preparing  ?  AVill 

she  testify  the  truth  against  his  falsehoods,  and  will  Snew  do  the  same  ?  I  could 
wish  to  know  what  he  wants  with  Mrs.  Gillio  :  her  testimony  may  be  of  consequence ; 
for  we  must  show  him  in  his  proper  colours  if  necessary.  I  cannot  believe  that  Mr. 
St.  John  has  any  more  concerns  with  him ;  for  he  told  me  at  the  Opera,  he  would 
have  no  more  to  say  to  Leavey,  and  that  he  told  him  so.  I  am  obliged  to  Admiral 
Hawke,  but  will  take  no  powders  till  I  am  well  satisfied  of  their  goodness. 

We  cannot  engage  Armoir ,  so  pray  tell  them  so  :  they  were  dancing  pigmies, 
particularly  the  girl.  I  have  received  a  letter  from  Lambert  at  Paris — absurdity  and 
madness !  I  shall  send  over  bis  papers  to  Mr.  Kennedy,  who  recommended  him. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  that  Barry  will  do  his  best  in  my  absence ;  I  hope  he  will  be 
as  good  as  his  word. 

The  children,  with  the  great  child  (my  wife)  at  their  head,  are  all  dancing  and 
making  such  a  noise,  I  can  no  more. 

Yours  ever  and  affectionately, 


VOL.  I. 


*  Mrs.  Baddeley  the  actress. 
3  E 


I).  Garrick. 


394 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  could  wish  you  would  see  Murphy,  and  hear  what  he  says  to  the  Case. 

Have  you  spoke  to  Realinds  about  Adcock  the  trumpet,  who  begs  to  be 
restored  ? 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Denton,  Aug.  31  st,  1770. 

If  I  had  known  how  to  have  directed  my  thanks  for  your  first  letter,  I  should 
not  have  waited  for  the  double  obligation  of  your  second,  before  I  returned  my  sin¬ 
cere  acknowledgments.  You  told  me  you  were  going  to  take  wing,  but  did  not  say 
at  what  place  you  should  alight.  I  could  not  overtake  your  flight,  for  Venus’s 
pigeon  letter-carriers  deign  only  to  speed  the  soft  intercourse  from  lover  to  lover ; 
letters  of  gratitude,  esteem,  and  friendship,  they  do  not  consider  as  any  part  of  their 
mistress’s  business.  Had  I,  like  my  ingenious  predecessor  in  criticism,  the  great 
Warburton,*  substituted  a  widgeon]  or  silly  fellow  in  their  room,  he  would  have  re¬ 
quired  to  be  informed  at  what  place  you  intended  to  stop,  and  of  that  I  was  totallv 
ignorant.  My  grateful  thoughts,  more  rapid  than  pigeon  or  widgeon,  however,  fol¬ 
lowed  you  constantly.  Three  days  ago,  1  had  the  favour  of  your  second  letter.  I 
acquiesce  in  your  sentiments  of  the  comedy,  as  they  are  just,  and  I  glory  in  your 
sentiments  of  me,  because  they  are  partial ;  and,  as  long  as  you  neither  insist  on  a 
marked  character,  the  vis-comica ,  or -any  thing  very  interesting  in  your  humble  ser¬ 
vant,  depend  upon  it  I  will  not  pout  that  you  require  them  in  a  play.  I  am  not  a 
little  delighted  to  find  the  great  desire  you  had  to  serve  my  friend  for  my  sake ;  and 
as  you  have  as  good  an  interest  in  all  the  Muses,  as  I,  or  any  one  can  have  in  you,  or 
any  mortal  friend,  I  desire  of  you  to  order  the  Comic  Muse  to  attend  my  poor 
author  the  next  time  he  sits  down  to  write.  I  assure  you,  the  play  I  offered  to  you 
did  not  answer  my  ideas  of  a  comedy ;  but  I  thought  it  approached  nearer  to  them 
than  some  I  have  seen  on  the  stage ; — but  I  knew  you  would  be  a  judge,  whether  it 
was  such  as  would  be  relished  by  the  town,  and  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  not 

*  See  Warburton’s  notes  on  the  “  Jew  [Merchant]  of  Venice." 

t  A  widgeon — This  is  so  very  absurd,  that  it  should  at  least  be  attended  with  all  the  reason  Warburton 
assigned  for  such  an  invasion  upon  the  established  letter-carriers  of  Venus.  “  The  joke,’’  he  tells  us, 
“  consists  in  the  ambiguity  of  the  signification:  and  to  call  the  votaries  of  love  Venus's  widgeons,  has,  1 
think,  something  very  pretty.  Butler  has  made  the  same  joke  upon  the  Presbyterians.  Canto  1st, 
part  1 ,  v.  231  — 

“  Th’apostles  of  this  fierce  religion, 

Like  Mahomet's,  were  ass  and  widgeon.” 

And  now,  I  suppose,  every  reader  will  hurry  to  his  Shakspeare,  and  correct  the  speech  of  Salanio  waiting  for 
Lorenzo  in  the  second  act, 

“  O,  ten  times  faster  Venus’  pigeons  fly 
To  seal  love’s  bonds  new  made.” 

For  pigeons  read  widgeons ! ! ! — See  Theob.  Shakspeare,  vol.  ii,  p.  30.  ed.  1733. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


395 


encouraging  my  friend  to  an  attempt  which  would  have  ended  in  his  great  morti¬ 
fication.  A  poet  must  be  in  terrible  purgatory  while  his  play  is  d - g.  I  dare  say 

my  friend  has  sense  enough  to  think  himself  as  much  obliged  to  you  as  possible  for 
saving  him  from  such  an  humiliating  event.  For  my  own  part,  I  really  have  not 
words  to  express  how  sensible  I  am  to  the  kindness  of  your  whole  behaviour  upon 
this  and  every  occasion ;  and  beg  you  will  be  assured,  that  every  mark  of  Mr. 
Garrick’s  esteem  is  matter  of  great  joy  and  pride  to  me.  I  wish  I  had  powers  for 
writing  a  comedy,  because  I  know  it  would  produce  an  excellent  prologue. 

I  was  so  engaged  with  business  and  company,  that  I  was  obliged  to  let  three 
days  elapse  before  I  answered  your  letters.  I  have  been  in  a  very  delicate  state  of 
health  of  late,  but  to-morrow  I  shall  undertake  a  journey  to  Edinburgh.  Dr.  Gre¬ 
gory,  a  very  ingenious  physician,  and  a  friend  of  mine,  is  come  to  conduct  me  thither, 
and  will  see  me  safe  home  again.  I  hope  this  little  journey  will  be  of  service.  I 
shall  stay  only  a  week  in  Scotland,  and  then  return  hither.  I  shall  endeavour  to 
send  you  a  grouse  pie,  which  in  Northumberland  is  reckoned  a  good  dish  :  on  the 
more  elegant  banks  of  the  Thames,  it  may  not  perhaps  be  so  much  approved ;  how¬ 
ever,  if  a  sufficient  number  of  grouse  can  be  got,  I  will  hazard  my  pie ;  it  will  give 
me  the  air  of  a  good  housewife  ;  and  if  you  should  be  asked  if  I  can  make  a  good 
pudding,  you  will  at  least  bear  testimony  that  I  can  make  a  good  pie,  which  is  the 
next  merit  for  a  woman.  My  best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am  with  perfect 
regard,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s  Inn,  3rd  Sept.  1770. 

Mr.  Murphy  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  who,  he  finds,  has 
called  two  or  three  times  at  chambers,  when  Mr.  M.  was  at  Chelsea.  He  wishes  he 
had  been  in  the  way,  as  he  had  a  favour  to  beg  of  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  namely,  that  he 
would  be  so  kind  as  to  get  Mr.  Murphy’s  note  to  his  brother  into  his  care,  to  the  end 
that  it  may  be  immediately  discharged.  While  the  tragedy  of  “  Alzuma”  was  in 
Mr.  Garrick’s  hands,  it  was  considered  as  a  tolerable  security  for  the  money  due  on 
the  note,  which,  indeed,  was  taken  up  with  a  view  to  that  play.  But  since  it  is 
now  returned,  and  the  transaction  seems  to  be  at  an  end,  Mr.  Murphy  wishes  to 
repay  the  money. 

He  will  be  much  obliged  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  if  he  will  take  this  trouble;  and  pro¬ 
poses  to  call  upon  him  the  first  time  he  comes  to  town  (whicli  will  be  about  the  end 
of  this  week,  or  the  beginning  of  next)  in  order  to  do  the  needful. 


3  £  2 


396 


private  correspondence  of 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Chelsea,  5th  Sept.  1770. 

Having  occasion  to  send  to  town,  I  take  the  opportunity  of  troubling  you  with 
a  line.  In  our  conversation  last  night  at  the  College-gate,  I  must  either  have  mis¬ 
understood  you,  or  you  were  under  a  mistake. 

You  seemed  (as  I  conceived)  to  think  my  billet  to  you  the  other  day  related  to  a 
note  for  100/.  given  by  me  some  time  since  to  Mr.  Lacy.  That  note  was  discharged 
in  the  account  of  “  Zenobia,”  which  was  settled  between  your  brother  and  me  in 
Southampton-street,  as  you  will  see  by  my  receipt  at  the  foot  of  it.  He  had  not 
the  note  in  his  possession,  but  said  you  had,  or  would  take  it  out  of  the  office  in  order 
to  give  it  up.  Forgetfulness  on  my  part  hindered  me  from  applying  to  you  for 
that  purpose. 

What  I  entreated  you  to  get  for  me  is  my  note  to  your  brother,  which  it  is 
convenient  to  me  to  take  up.  Pray  be  so  good  as  to  give  Mr.  Garrick  my  com¬ 
pliments,  and  tell  him  I  shall  take  it  as  a  favour  if  he  will  put  the  note  in  your  hands, 
that  I  may  call  some  morning  to  put  myself  in  the  agreeable  situation  of  being  out 
of  debt, — a  point  I  have  much  at  heart,  and  have  laboured  hard  for. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 
.  Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GEORGE,  7th>  l770' 

I  am  told  that  Baddeley  makes  great  noise  that  he  does  not  know  what  was 
agreed  upon  by  Mr.  St.  John  and  Mr.  Murphy  at  their  meeting  before  our  good 
friend  Mr.  Wallace.  As  Mr.  Murphy  may  be  thought  too  partial  to  us,  if  you  think 
it  would  not  be  troubling  Mr.  Wallace  too  much  with  our  nonsensical  affairs,  I  could 
wish  that  you  knew  from  him,  if  he  can  recollect  it,  what  was  the  result  of  our 
meeting,  and  what  we  on  our  parts,  and  Baddeley  on  his,  were  enjoined  to  do.  When 
you  see  him,  if  you  think  it  right  so  to  do  upon  this  business,  pray  present  my  best 
respects  to  him,  and  let  him  know  I  was  flattered  that  he  and  his  lady  would  like  to 
see  Hampton.  I  shall  be  always  proud  to  wait  upon  him  and  his  lady  whenever 
they  will  make  me  happy  by  their  commands. 


Yours  in  great  haste. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


397 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hill-street,  Sept.  17,  1770. 

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Beattie  brought  me  the  kind  and  agreeable  favour  of  your 
letter,  but  would  hardly  give  me  time  to  read  it  without  interruption,  from  the 
grateful  overflowings  of  their  hearts  for  the  delightful  morning  they  had  passed  at 
Hampton.  Mrs.  Beattie  appeared  not  less  sensible  of  the  charms  of  yours  and  Mrs* 
Garrick’s  conversation  than  the  bard ;  by  which  I  guess  sweet  minstrelsy  has  im¬ 
proved  her  ear.  I  am  much  pleased  with  the  little  Scotchwoman  ;  she  seems  to  have 
great  sensibility,  and  I  would  have  you  and  your  proud  sex  to  know,  that  as  Provi¬ 
dence  designed  us  only  for  spectators  and  auditors,  when  we  see  and  hear  with  judg¬ 
ment  we  deserve  that  respect  from  you  all,  which  the  ingenious  artist  gives  to  the 
judicious  connoisseur.  To  be  a  judge  of  merit,  to  love  and  esteem  it,  is  female  per¬ 
fection.  I  am  always  out  of  patience  when  1  see  a  woman  who  is  married  to  a  man 
of  distinguished  merit,  insensible  to  his  singular  perfections,  and  thinking  she  has 
acquitted  herself  well  if  she  has  not  failed  in  any  of  the  ordinary  domestic  duties,  and 
has  lived  with  him  as  enjoined  by  the  holy  church.  Mrs.  Beattie  seems  to  have  a 
proper  enthusiasm  for  the  Doctor;  he  is  to  her,  Apollo  and  the  nine  Muses.  You 
are  very  good  in  your  kind  wishes  towards  my  nephews  :  as  it  has  pleased  Heaven  to 
give  me  nephews,  I  ought  to  love  them ;  but  I  do  not  know  whether  they  will  not 
cause  me  many  palpitations  of  the  heart,  for  they  seem  as  if  they  would  bring  a  great 
deal  of  vivacity  with  them  into  an  age  of  levity  and  dissipation  ;  so  that  perhaps  my 
slumbers  in  the  easy  chair  or  cradle  of  old  age  would  have  been  more  quiet  if  I  had 
not  had  any.  Mr.  Montagu  assures  me  the  little  man  is  well  again.  I  have  returned 
Mrs.  Garrick’s  smelling-bottle  at  last,  and  ask  pardon  for  not  having  done  it  sooner, 
but  I  forgot  it :  I  will  own  that  if  it  had  in  other  hands  conveyed  the  vivifying  spirit 
I  found  in  it  when  applied  by  hers,  I  believe  I  should  not  have  restored  it :  my  best 
respects  attend  her.  Lord  Lyttelton  makes  great  lamentation  about  your  illness,  and 
says  his  anxiety  will  not  be  at  an  end  till  he  hears  you  are  quite  well.  1  propose  to 
return  to  Sundleford  on  Saturday.  I  long  to  catch  the  last  gale  of  summer  playing 
among  the  falling  leaves  of  the  grove.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  most  sincere  regard, 
attachment,  and  esteem, 

Your  affectionate,  faithful,  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

Eliz.  Montagu. 

I  had  so  bad  a  fit  of  the  head-ache  yesterday  I  could  not  write  a  word.  The 
Minstrel  and  his  consort  are  to  come  to  Sundleford  on  Tuesday  next. 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick, 

“  Mrs.  Montagu,  first  of  women.” 


398 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday  Morn. 

I  have  set  all  things  right  with  the  Yeseys,  first,  because  you  ordered,  secondly, 
because  I  am  determined  no  one  shall  be  angry  with  you  but  myself.  Are  you 
not  a  sad  deceiver,  to  give  out  a  comedy  and  then  put  on  Melpomene’s  best  buskins, 
instead  of  sending  forth  the  Muse  in  vulgar  pattens,  singing  ballads  ?  Deceived  by 
your  treachery,  I  asked  a  gentleman  who  lives  at  Newington  to  dine  with  me  to-day, 
and  he  desired  me  to  ask  Mr.  Earles.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  hearing  good  and  wise  folks 
were  to  be  here,  desired  to  be  of  the  party ;  and  so  I  am  fixed  down  to  Hill-street, 
and  shall  wish  myself  in  Denmark.  If  you  design  to  appear  on  the  stage  next 
Friday  se’nnight,  the  19th,  pray  give  me  a  hint,  for  if  you  do  not  forbid  the  banns,  I 
shall  ask  some  great  personages  to  dine  here  whom  I  cannot  put  off ;  and  if  I  lose 
seeing  you  again,  I  shall  be  in  rage  and  despair,  and  as  soon  as  Lord  Bellamont’s 
bullet  is  extracted  I  will  get  it  to  shoot  you.  Best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I 
am  at  once  your  very  angry  and  very  affectionate,  poor  deluded, 

But  faithful  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s-inu,  Sept.  20,  1770. 

I  have  postponed  answering  your  very  polite  letter,  in  order  to  balance  -with 
myself  whether  there  was  any  thing  in  either  of  my  notes  to  your  brother  that  could 
justly  give  you  any  surprise.  After  watching  every  motion  of  my  mind,  I  can  most 
truly  say,  that  I  have  not  departed  in  the  least  from  that  natural  good-humour  which 
you  ascribe  to  me,  and  which,  I  thank  God,  I  feel  within  myself. 

When  I  addressed  myself  to  your  brother,  I  did  not  consider  the  play’s  being 
returned  as  a  hint  with  regard  to  the  account  between  us,  nor  did  any  sensibility  on 
my  part  create  the  smallest  suspicion  of  that  sort.  I  am  convinced  that  you  look 
upon  the  loan  of  two  or  three  hundred  pounds  to  a  friend  as  a  small  favour,  and  I  am 
farther  persuaded  that  I  am  welcome  to  be  in  your  debt  as  long  as  I  please.  Having 
said  thus  much,  and  said  it  from  conviction,  I  hope  I  may  without  offence  explain 
the  motives  upon  which  I  acted. 

I  did  once  flatter  myself  that  the  play  of  “  Alzuma”  would  some  time  or  other 
create  the  fund  out  of  which  I  should  repay  the  sum  I  owe  to  Mr.  Garrick.  At 
Hatfield  I  was  of  opinion,  as  I  am  now,  that,  in  this  present  temper  of  the  times,  it 
would  not  be  right  to  put  myself  in  the  way  of  that  unaccountable  malevolence, 
which  seems  always  ready  to  discharge  itself  on  me.  I  call  it  unaccountable,  because 
since  the  year  l?6d  1  have  not  written  one  syllable  of  politics,  nor  was  I  ever  in  my 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


399 


life  the  author  of  one  clandestine  letter,  advertisement,  or  paragraph  in  any  newspaper 
whatever  ;  and  yet  there  is  no  man  who  has  more  enemies.  Perhaps  I  made  myself 
of  too  much  consequence,  when  I  thought  at  Hatfield  that  the  Bill  of  Rights*  would 
oppose  any  play  of  mine ;  but,  thinking  as  I  did,  I  judged  it  prudent  not  to  run  the 
hazard  of  involving  either  your  theatre  or  myself  in  a  dispute  of  that  kind.  Thus 
far  we  both  agreed.  In  three  weeks  after,  I  find  the  play  at  my  chambers  without  a 
line  of  any  sort  to  accompany  it.  1  fell  into  reflection  : — “  Alzuma  is  now  upon  my 
hands,  and  what  prospect  is  there  that  it  will  ever  be  disposed  of  to  advantage? 
None.  What  is  to  be  done?  By  good  luck  I  have  saved  money  in  my  profession  : 
had  I  not  better  put  myself  out  of  debt  at  once?” — To  this  end  I  writ  to  your  brother, 
and  told  him  that  the  transaction  seemed  to  be  at  an  end.  Having  the  prompter’s 
copy  in  my  drawer  for  above  two  years  past  (a  copy  sent  by  Mr.  Garrick),  I  could  not 
suppose  that  the  play  was  returned,  either  that  I  might  read  it  myself,  or  lend  it  to  a 
friend,  or  make  alterations.  I  felt  some  pleasure  in  the  thought  of  being  at  last 
safe  ashore ;  and  I  believe  I  shall  not  easily  be  tempted  to  venture  out  to  sea  again. 
Suave  mari  magno,  &c.  will,  I  fancy,  be  my  motto  for  the  future. 

I  have  opened  myself  without  reserve  ;  and  now  may  I  not,  without  being  thought 
hasty,  suspicious,  or  ill-humoured,  beg  to  discharge  my  debts  at  a  time  when  it  is 
most  thoroughly  convenient,  and  when  I  do  it  with  the  most  perfect  serenity  ?  I  am 
going  upon  a  visit  for  eight  or  ten  days,  and  have  only  to  entreat  that  you  will  give 
me  leave  at  my  return  to  finish  the  business  with  your  brother  George,  and  that  you 
will  believe  me  in  the  most  perfect  good-humour, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MRS.  CELESIA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Genoa,  Sept.  29th,  1770. 

I  have  desired  my  friend  Mr.  Scott  to  read,  or  to  send  you  that  part  of  my 
letter  to  him  which  regards  the  prologue  to  my  play.  I  once  or  twice  attempted 
something,  but  I  could  by  no  means  please  myself.  The  kindness  you  have  shown 
me  on  this  occasion  has  been  so  great,  that  I  flatter  myself  you  will  put  the  finishing 
stroke  to  it,  and  write  it  for  me.  You  know  so  well  what  will  please  the  public,  and 
are  so  excellent  a  judge  of  the  fitness  of  every  thing  of  this  nature,  that  if  you  would 
be  at  this  trouble,  it  will  be  of  great  advantage  to  “  Tancred,”  for  a  prologue  wrote 
by  you  is  a  passport  to  success. 

Mr.  Baretti,  who  arrived  here  a  fortnight  ago,  gave  me  great  satisfaction  by 
assuring  me  that  both  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  ’were  in  perfect  health.  He  confirmed 
to  me  in  the  most  obliging  manner  your  friendly  intention  towards  my  play,  and 

*  The  political  society  assembled  under  that  title,  embalmed  in  the  letters  of  Junius — such  is  the  magic 
of  style. — Ed. 


400 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


your  kind  mention  of  Mr.  Celesia.  I  assure  you,  Sir,  it  is  not  possible  to  have 
a  livelier  sense  of  your  kindness  than  I  have.  No  one  can  feel  better  than  your¬ 
self,  that  the  manner  of  doing  a  favour  is  what  gives  it  its  value ;  and  the  pleasure 
I  should  receive  from  the  success  of  my  play,  was  it  even  to  surpass  my  greatest 
hopes,  would  be  less  than  that  you  have  given  me,  by  so  cordially  taking  it  into  your 
protection. 

Mr.  Celesia  is  very  sensible  to  your  kind  remembrance  of  him.  You  have  not 
a  sincerer  admirer  in  the  world  than  he  is.  There  is  a  kind  of  magnet  attraction, 
that  draws  and  assimilates  the  minds  of  men  of  genius  and  virtue.  They  taste 
and  love  each  other  as  soon  as  this  attraction  is  felt;  the  narrow  boundaries  of 
countries  or  interests  vanish  before  it  ;  they  are  all  of  one  nation,  or  rather  of 
one  species,  and  form  a  chain  of  beings  superior  to  the  vulgar  of  their  respective 
climates. 

I  think  I  told  you  in  a  former  letter,  that  I  was  quite  of  your  opinion  as  to 
changing  the  title  of  my  tragedy.  I  am  not  at  all  satisfied  with  the  name  of 
“  Almida,’’  yet  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  put  in  its  room.  Methinks  some  of  these  would 
be  more  in  character — Ethelinda,  Eumenida,  Euthalia,  Athenais,  Ahelia,  &c. ;  but  I 
beg  you  will  decide  for  me. 

Mr.  Baretti  desires  I  will  let  him  add  a  few  lines.  So  I  beg  you  will  accept  the 
kindest  wishes  from  my  husband  and  self,  and  believe  me  with  the  utmost  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

,  Dorothea  Celesia. 

My  best  Garrick,  by  the  above  you  may  see  that  I  have  not  forgot  the  long  and 
friendly  discourse  you  made  me  in  your  delightful  garden  relative  to  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Celesia.  You  and  your  lady  have  already  been  the  favourite  topic  of  our  frequent 
cliatterations,  and  we  have  not  yet  exhausted  both  subjects.  I  have  been  here  near  a 
fortnight,  and  am  not  yet  resolved  to  quit  the  friends  I  have  here,  especially  as  I 
have  a  notion  that  it  will  be  long  before  I  visit  them  again,  if  I  get  once  more 
amongst  my  English  folks.  My  constant  love  waits  on  Mrs.  Garrick,  Johnson,  the 
Burkes,  the  Reynoldses,  et  cetera ,  et  cetera. 

Fare  you  well  a  million  of  times  !  For  ever  yours, 

J.  Baretti. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GEORGE,  Thursday,  Oct.  2nd,  1 770. 

W e  shall  be  at  home  in  Southampton-street  this  evening,  and  bring  the  children 
with  us:  and  they  may  go  the  next  day,  Friday,  in  our  coach  to  Acton,  so  pray  let 
Mr.  Covington  know  if  you  can.  I  wish  you  would  look  for  that  memorandum  of 
Murphy’s,  when  we  lent  him  the  money,  and  only  let  me  know  what  are  the  contents 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


401 


of  it :  if  you  can  find,  too,  the  list  of  liis  subjects  for  plays,  that  nobody  else  was  to 
make  use  of — I  think  it  is  in  the  office. 

Yours  ever  and  truly, 

David  Garrick. 


MR.  R.  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Grenada,  October  3rd,  1770. 

Do  not  start ;  a  letter  from  another  world  may  be,  and  yet  not  be,  a  letter  from 
the  dead.  From  this  world,  then,  I  send,  my  dear  Sir,  a  letter,  and  what  ought  to  be 
more  acceptable  to  you,  a  turtle.  The  devil  is  in  it  if  after  this  you  cannot  guess  that 
you  have  a  West  Indian  correspondent.  Do  not  now  fall  into  the  vulgar  mode,  and 
consider  all  America  as  the  West  Indies ;  if  you  should,  a  correspondence  from  thence 
with  you  would  be  by  no  means  wonderful,  a  tolerable  number  of  your  acquaintance 
having  been  from  time  to  time  transported.  You  may  add,  if  you  please,  that  I  was 
the  last,  but  remember  that  it  was,  though  a  forced,  yet  not  a  transportation  to  avoid 
the  gallows  ;  that  was  the  condition  of  the  obligation  with  most  of  your  friends  ;  and 
were  I  now  in  America,  it  is  not  a  turtle,  but  a  turbot  that  I  should  send  you.  May 
what  I  do  send  you  go  safe ;  and  yet  I  despair  of  it,  when  I  consider  the  rigour  of 
your  rascally  climate,  and  the  mildness  of  that  in  which  this  poor  creature  was  born 
and  bred.  Well,  if  he  dies,  you  may  write  an  epitaph  on  him  ;  if  he  lives,  an  epi¬ 
gram, — or  indeed,  even  so,  an  epitaph,  and  I  would  recommend  you  to  lay  your  hand 
on  your  stomach  after  you  have  had  him  for  dinner,  and  begin  hie  jacet,  if  they 
should  charge  you  with  stealing  the  thought  from  Pope  or  Gay.*  Now,  Mr. 
David,  do  you  know  that  you  are,  or  at  least  ought  to  be,  very  much  obliged  to 
me  for  writing  to  you  ?  and  why  ?  Thus  it  is.  If  I  do  not  write  now,  I  fear  I 
cannot  write  by  this  ship;  she  sails  early  to-morrow  morning,  and  it  is  now  very 
late  at  night,  that  is,  ten  o’clock,  which,  believe  me,  is  very  late,  and  an  hour  at 
which  I  am  oftener  in  than  out  of  bed ;  besides,  I  am  horribly  fatigued,  and  in  spite 
of  all  doors  and  windows  open,  and  being  in  my  waistcoat,  I  am  sweating  most  abo¬ 
minably,  (I  bar  consequences,)  and  that  not  without  suspicion  of  the  cause.  You  shall 
be  more  obliged  to  me;  I  will  lay  the  foundation  for  another  epigram.  The  ship 
which  carried  me  from  you,  carries  the  turtle  to  you.  If  you  cannot  make  any  thing 
of  this,  you  are  as  dull  as  myself,  and  upon  my  soul  you  need  not  be  duller  to  please 
the  Magazine  critics,  or  your  own  flatterers,  for  I  am  two-thirds  asleep  ;  no  wonder,  I 
have  been  writing  a  long  letter  about  jack-asses.  Would  it  not  be  witty  to  say  that 
from  writing  about  them,  it  was  a  natural  transition  to  write  to  you  ?  Suppose  it 
said,  and  let  Goldsmith,  when  he  comes  from  France,  be  the  judge.  I  hope  that  he 
will  not  leave  his  poetry  there:  let  him  bring  home  as  many  French  airs  as  he  pleases, 


VOL.  i. 


*  “  Striking  their  pensive  bosoms — here  lies  Gay.” — Ed. 

3  F 


402 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  would  have  his  song  continue  to  be  plain  English.  His  poetry  is  all  I  can  now 
have  a  concern  in ;  half  the  convex  world  intrudes  between  me  and  his  old  or  new 
acquired  accomplishments  of  any  other  kind.  1  wish  that  1  was  not  asleep,  and  I 
wish  this  was  the  last  letter  I  had  to  write  to-night ;  but  I  have  as  yet  hardly  wrote 
a  word  to  Fludyer-street,  and  the  folks  there  will  not  take  it  kindly  if  I  do  not  say 
“  How  do  ye?”  to  them.  What  shall  I  send  besides  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick? 
Very  seriously,  I  wish  that  I  knew  which  of  our  curiosities  would  be  agreeable  to 
her.  I  can  send  her  parrots  or  monkeys,  and  hang  me  if  I  know  of  any  thing  else 
that  could  be  pleasing  to  her  from  hence.  Let  her  command  me  in  either  of  these 
articles.  Pray,  however,  make  (en  attendant,  I  speak  French)  my  very  best  compli¬ 
ments  to  her.  Do  not  forget  to  remember  me  to  my  very  excellent  friend  George, 
who  has  got  rid,  without  losing  his  own,  of  one  petitioner  for  places  :  more  than  any 
minister  can  say.  Farewell,  my  dear  Sir;  I  am  now  wholly  asleep,  but  I  can  still  say 
the  only  thing  worth  saying  were  I  awake,  that 

I  am  indeed,  very  much,  and  very  truly  yours, 

Richard  Burke. 

Ship’s  name,  Redhead  Galley,  Captain  Neale ;  he  will  send  the  turtle  if  it  survives 
the  passage. 


SIR  E.  HAWKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Bloomsbury-square,  October  10th,  1770. 

I  received  your  letter  in  favour  of  Captain  Thompson,  and  shall  be  very  glad  to 
oblige  you,  when  it  shall  be  in  my  power. 

I  cannot  take  upon  me  to  make  a  promotion  of  officers  myself ;  but  when  his 
Majesty  shall  please  to  order  a  promotion  to  be  made,  you  may  be  assured  that 
I  shall  not  be  unmindful  of  your  friend. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Edward  Hawke. 

P.  S.  My  Amanuensis — should  have  said  Lieutenant  Thompson,  whom  you  may 
be  assured  I  will  not  forget,  when  I  shall  have  it  in  my  power  to  serve  him. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  E.  HAWKE. 

October  loth,  1770. 

Old  Montaigne  asserts,  that  “  generous  minds  will  forgive  extravagances  in  warm 
friends  and  lovers.”  If  that  author  is  not  mistaken,  I  may  hope  that  Sir  Edward 
Eawke  will  pardon  my  late  almost  inexcusable  impertinence :  let  me  assure  lmn  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


403 


I  shall  never  dare  to  trouble  again  the  very  great  goodness  and  indulgence  which  I 
have  experienced.  All  I  can  say  is,  that  I  shall  be  as  proud  and  happy  to  receive  his 
commands,  as  I  am  in  gratitude  bound  to  obey  them. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


DR.  BURNEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Naples,  Oct.  1 7th,  1770. 

“  Thus  far  into  the  bowels  of  the  land  have  we  marched  on  without  impedi¬ 
ment,”  except  such  as  every  traveller  must  encounter  who  has  to  deal  with  Italian 
innkeepers,  Camerieri,  Vetorini,  Postiglioni,  &c.  &c. ;  but  for  the  honour  of  Italy,  as 
well  as  for  my  own  honours,  I  must  say  that  my  reception  and  treatment  among 
these  men  of  learning  and  genius  throughout  my  journey  have  been  to  the  last  degree 
flattering.  After  the  accounts  I  had  read  and  heard  of  this  country,  I  expected  to 
meet  with  a  people  shy  of  strangers  and  difficult  of  access  ;  but  au  contraire,  in  every 
great  town  where  I  have  stopped,  I  have  not  only  met  with  politeness  and  civility, 
but  even  with  kindness  and  friendship.  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  tell  you  how  many 
men  of  eminence,  both  in  the  literary  and  musical  world,  have  interested  themselves 
in  my  enterprise ;  but  as  you,  who  rank  so  high  among  the  former  class  in  our  own 
country,  have  kindly  manifested  your  good  wishes  in  an  effectual  manner  by  your 
hearty  recommendations  to  your  friends  at  Paris,  I  shall  continue  to  tell  you,  without 
fear  of  incurring  the  character  of  a  puffer,  what  reason  I  have  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
success  of  my  journey. 

When  I  left  England,  I  had  two  objects  in  view :  the  one  was  to  get,  from  the 
libraries  to  the  viva  voce  conversation  of  the  learned,  what  information  I  could  relative 
to  the  music  of  the  ancients;  and  the  other  was  to  judge  with  my  own  eyes  of  the 
'present  state  of  modern  music  in  the  places  through  which  I  should  pass,  from  the 
performance  and  conversation  of  the  first  musicians  in  Italy.  I  shall  here  only  men¬ 
tion  the  most  remarkable  of  both  sorts.  As  my  general  history  must  be  a  work  of 
time,  I  intend  publishing,  as  soon  as  I  get  home,  in  a  pamphlet,  or  small  volume,  an 
account  of  the  present  state  of  music  in  France  and  Italy,  in  which  I  shall  describe, 
according  to  my  judgment  and  feelings,  the  merits  of  the  several  compositions  and 
performers  I  have  heard  in  travelling  through  those  countries.  At  Turin  I  often 
saw  and  conversed  with  the  famous  Padre  Beccaria ;  and  the  two  Bezozzis  not  only 
performed  to  me  for  two  hours,  but  were  friendly  all  the  time  I  was  there.  I  found 
some  things  I  wanted,  too,  in  the  King’s  Library.  At  Milan,  Padre  Boscovidi, 
Padre  Frision,  Signor  Oltrochi,  Ambrosian  librarian,  D.  Triulzi,  the  Abate  Bonitti, 
Padre  Sacchi,  Conte  Po,  &c. ;  and  on  the  side  of  practical  music,  the  famous  San 
Martini,  Lampugnani,  il  Padre  Maestro  Florione,  of  the  Duoino,  he.  At  Brescia  I 

3  F  2 


404 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


stopped  but  two  days,  and  only  one  at  Verona  and  Vicenza  ;  but  at  Padua  I  was  six 
or  eight  days,  and  there  I  found  your  friend  Dr.  Marsiti,  Cav.  Valeinicis,  Padre 
Colombo,  Padre  Vallotti,  Maestro  di  Capella  at  Santo,  one  of  the  greatest  composers 
for  the  church  now  alive;  and  on  the  side  of  practice,  Signor  Guglietti,  poor  Tartini’s 
scholar  and  successor  at  St.  Anthony’s  Church,  from  whom  I  got  the  last  drop  of  his 
pen,  or,  in  other  words,  the  last  solo  he  composed.  At  Venice,  I  had  high  entertain¬ 
ment  of  all  sorts  for  learning  aiid  theory.  I  conversed  with  Dr.  lleghellini,  the  Abate 
Martini,  the  librarian  of  St.  Marc’s,  il  Conte  Tassis  ;  and  for  modern  music  with  the 
famous  Galuppi,  Latilla,  and  Sacchini.  At  Bologna  1  almost  lived  in  the  houses  of 
the  celebrated  theorist  and  historian.  Padre  Martini,  whose  library  of  books  relative  to 
music  amounts  to  16,000  or  17,000  volumes  ;  he  was  very  communicative,  and  we 
compared  notes,  and  have  already  opened  a  correspondence.  I  had  great  civilities  from 
Farinelli,  with  whom  I  spent  two  whole  days.  I  visited  here  the  famous  Dottoressa 
Laura  Bassa,  upon  the  merits  of  a  recommendation  from  her  friend  Padre  Beccaria. 
At  Florence,  il  Prefetto  Fossi,  Dr.  Guadagni,  Signor  Bandini,  the  Grand  Duke’s 
librarian,  il  Canonico  Dominico  Cavaluc,  and  Dr.  Perelli,  were  all  open  and  friendly. 
I  was  almost  every  night  at  an  academia.  The  first-rate  practical  musicians  I  found 
here,  were  Mansoli,  Nardini,  Campioni,  Detel  Figlio,  &c.  By  the  time  I  got  to 
Rome  my  Italian  acquaintance  and  letters  -were  much  accumulated ;  I  stayed  there 
near  a  month.  Several  friends  and  first-rate  artists  are  on  the  hunt  for  me,  and  on 
making  original  drawings  of  musical  instruments  from  bassi  rilievi,  and  ancient  sculp¬ 
ture  of  the  first  class.  As  to  the  music  of  the  Pope’s  Chapel,  I  shall  be  enabled 
to  speak  of  it  from  the  best  authority  my  own  eyes  and  ears  can  afford.  Signor  San- 
tarelli,  the  Pope’s  Maestro  di  Capella,  who  has  loaded  me  with  civility  and  friendly 
offices,  is  now  getting  made  out  for  me  copies  of  the  best  compositions  that  are  in 
constant  use  in  the  Pope’s  Chapel.  I  have  found  out  the  music  of  the  first  opera  and 
first  oratorio  that  -were  set  to  music.  The  Duke  of  Dorset  had  a  very  good  concert 
every  night,  and  took  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  get  curious  and  clever  performers  toge¬ 
ther  often  on  my  account.  I  was  presented  to  Cardinal  Alissandro  Albani,  the  prin¬ 
cipal  librarian  at  the  Vatican,  who  gave  me  permission  to  go  into  it,  and  to  have 
whatever  would  be  of  use  to  my  work  copied.  I  spent  most  of  my  mornings  in  this 
library,  and  the  Abate  Elie,  one  of  the  Custode,  -was  very  obliging  and  serviceable  to 
me  in  my  researches  after  Canto  Fermo,  Contra  Panto,  Provincial  songs,  &c.  and  I  have 
been  pretty  fortunate.  The  Cardinal  Albani  is  likewise  prefetto  of  the  Pope's  Chapel, 
and  gave  me  leave  to  ransack  the  archives  there.  But  though  this  is  sport  and  special 
fun  to  me,  I  forget  that  by  the  time  this  arrives  both  your  hands  and  your  head  will 
be  too  full  to  admit  flutes  and  fiddles.  However,  this  I  am  sure  of,  that  you  have  a 
heart  which  glows  with  friendship,  and  will  excuse  my  breaking  in  upon  you  at  an 
unseasonable  time,  when  it  is  to  pay  an  old  debt  from  hence  of  several  years  standing. 
1  remember  you  sent  me  an  excellent  letter  from  Naples,  which  was  never  answered, 
and  this  is  more  an  acknowledgment  of  the  debt  than  a  payment  of  it.  But  d — n 
your  speeches,  you  will  say ;  and  so  I  have  done,  first  begging  my  best  respects  to 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


405 


Mrs.  Garrick.  I  shall  stay  here  till  after  the  4th  of  November,  St.  Charles’s  Day, 
which  you  know  is  that  on  which  the  serious  opera  begins,  when  the  great  theatre  is 
doubly  illuminated.  I  would  not  take  100/.  not  to  be  here  then  ;  indeed,  it  will  cost 
me  more,  but  Jomelli  is  here,  and  is  the  composer ;  Deamicis  and  Apribeau,  princi¬ 
pals.  The  Gabriele  is  still  in  banishment  at  Palermo.  I  was  with  Piccini  all  the 
morning  ;  there  is  a  pretty  comic  opera  of  his  now  in  run,  as  to  music,  but  the  libretto 
is  terrible  stuff.  I  have  been  here  but  three  days.  Air.  Hamilton  is  at  his  villeggia- 
tura.  I  dine  with  our  little  Consul  to-morrow,  and  with  Mr.  Hamilton  in  the 
country  on  Sunday.  Vesuvius  begins  to  throw  up  fire  finely,  and  an  eruption  is 
hourly  expected.  Adieu,  my  dear  Sir.  Believe  me  yours  most  affectionately, 

Charles  Burney.* 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln's  Inn,  Nov.  14,  1770. 

I  wrote  to  you  on  Monday  morning  last  upon  the  subject  of  Mr.  Newton’s 
letter ;  but  I  afterwards  recalled  my  packet,  as  the  contents  were  only  to  inform  you 
that  I  never  was  concerned  in  any  affair  relative  to  Mr.  Newton.  I  had  a  mind  to 
make  some  enquiry  how  my  name  came  to  be  made  use  of,  and  I  have  attained  my 
point.  There  is  a  gentleman  of  the  same  name  in  the  Temple.  He  has  been  a 
chamber-counsel  upwards  of  thirty  years,  and  is  well  known  in  the  world.  1  find  he 
knows  a  great  deal  relating  to  Mr.  Newton  and  a  Miss  Solfigure  (I  believe  I  do  not 
spell  her  name  right).  Mr.  Murphy  of  the  Temple  was  a  kind  of  guardian  to  that 
lady  :  he  knows  her  and  all  her  family  affairs.  I  find  he  also  knows  something  about 
Mr.  Newton’s  intended  marriage  in  Ireland,  and  how  it  happened  to  break  off. 

He  is  the  person  to  whom  Mr.  Newton  must  address  himself ;  and  by  what  I  un¬ 
derstand,  Mr.  Murphy,  who  lives  in  Pump-court,  will  be  very  open  as  to  all  he 
knows  and  thinks  upon  the  subject. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  sincerely, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  about  my  friend  Mr.  Newton.” 


A.  B.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

sir,  Turk’s  Head,  Dec.  7th,  1770. 

I  received  your  letter  too  late  to  wait  upon  you  at  the  time  you  appointed.  I 
concluded,  when  I  saw  by  the  bills  you  were  engaged  at  the  theatre,  that  you  would 
not  think  any  other  notice  necessary ;  indeed  I  did  not  expect  it,  but  think  myself 
much  obliged  to  you  for  it.  Many  acknowledgments,  Sir,  are  due  to  you  for  the 

*  Dr.  Charles  Burney,  the  celebrated  author  of  the  “  History  of  Music.  ’ 


40G 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


trouble  you  have  already  had  on  my  account ;  and  if  my  wishes  cannot  be  answered,  I 
shall  still  retain  a  grateful  sense  of  your  behaviour  to  me.  From  what  you  have  said 
tome,  I  fear  I  must  not  indulge  the  thoughts  of  appearing  this  season  ;  and  however 
desirous  I  may  he  to  have  it  accomplished,  1  should  be  very  unwilling  to  put  you  to 
inconvenience ;  indeed,  I  have  no  right  either  to  expect  or  desire  it. 

As  you  suppressed  all  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  my  present  situation,  I  never 
thought  it  materially  necessary  to  inform  you  of  it.  That  it  is,  and  has  long  been, 
very  disagreeable  to  me,  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  my  desiring  to  change  it. 

The  stage,  however  unqualified  I  may  be  for  acting  in  that  sphere  of  life,  has  for 
many  years  been  the  object  of  my  admiration.  The  opinions  of  friends,  which  might 
perhaps  be  injudiciously  given,  and  that  self-opinion,  which  often  leads  a  man  astray, 
but  is  generally  inseparable  with  the  intent  for  an  undertaking  of  this  nature,  were 
the  motives  that  have  induced  me.  To  mention  what  have  been  my  hopes  and  fears 
since  I  was  first  introduced  to  you,  or  to  say  bow  my  mind  has  since  been  agitated, 
will  answer  little  or  no  purpose  now,  and  would  only  be  an  intrusion  upon  your  time, 
which  I  have  great  reason  to  believe  is  seldom  a  moment  unemployed.  I  will,  how- 
ever,  beg  leave  to  say  a  word  or  twro,  in  answer  to  your  observations  on  the  resolution 
I  have  taken,  and  the  difficulties  which  you  tell  me  I  shall  have  to  encounter,  and 
must  consequently  be  the  effects  of  it.  As  to  my  resolution,  it  is,  and  has  been  for 
some  time  fixed  ;  a  pressing  inclination,  and  a  disagreeable  situation  drove  me  to  it ; 
and  as  to  the  difficulties  which  are  likely  to  attend  it,  I  have  fully  considered,  and  am 
aware  of  them.  Difficulties  must  be  expected  in  whatever  state  I  hereafter  engage 
in,  and  prudence  suggests  to  me,  that  I  should  endeavour  to  avoid  those  which  are 
likely  to  be  the  greatest ;  but  how  much  more  easy,  Sir,  are  they  to  be  surmounted 
in  a  pursuit  that  is  agreeable  to  one’s  inclinations,  for  as  the  bard  of  all  bards  says — 

“  The  labour  we  delight  in  physics  pain.” 

Your  theatre,  I  allow,  is  crowded,  and  it  might  be  difficult  to  find  a  place  for  me; 
happy  are  they  who  have  your  countenance :  but  pray  give  me  your  pardon,  Sir,  if  I 
appear  too  presuming  in  supposing  that  my  own  abilities,  with  assiduity  and  culti¬ 
vation,  might  be  made  at  least  equal,  if  not  superior  to  some  wTho  now  fill  your  prin¬ 
cipal  parts.  My  pride,  however,  and  the  spirit  of  emulation,  I  am  sensible  would 
never  suffer  me  to  appear  in  a  contemptible  or  low  degree ;  but  you  are  certainly  the 
best  judge,  and  your  opinion,  if  contrary  to  my  own,  will  have  so  much  weight  with 
me  that  it  will  soon  efface  the  wrong  impression  I  may  have  received  in  my  own 
favour. 

Some  apology  1  think  is  necessary  for  taking  up  so  much  of  your  time ;  but 
before  I  conclude  I  must  tell  you,  that  my  friend  and  I  would  be  glad  to  have  some 
conversation  with  you  on  the  subject,  when  you  are  at  leisure.  By  some  means  or 
other,  the  secret,  or  what  I  intended  should  be  so,  has  transpired,  and  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  two  or  three  gentlemen  of  rank  and  fashion  to  whom  I  am  known, 
and  I  believe  wish  me  well.  I  shall  not  be  surprised  to  hear  you  have  been  waited 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


407 


upon  to  have  your  opinion  of  me ;  and  as  you  are  inclined,  so  will  they  encourage  or 
disapprove.  At  the  same  time,  let  me  beg  of  you,  Sir,  to  have  in  remembrance  the  dis¬ 
agreeable  circumstances  I  have  mentioned  to  you,  the  force  of  my  own  inclination, 
and  the  pressing  occasions  which  call  upon  me  to  change  my  situation  ;  that  without 
they  can  do  something  for  me  that  is  likely  to  be  more  advantageous,  much  more  so, 
there  is  no  other  employment  will  coincide  so  well  with  my  own  desires. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

A.  B.* 


LADY  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Dec.  30th,  1770. 

I  sincerely  wish  it  was  in  my  power  to  find  expressions  that  would  convince 
you  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt,  that  what  I  am  going  to  say  is  not  a  mere 
excuse,  but  a  reality  that  gives  both  Lord  Spencer  and  myself  pain,  as  it  prevents  his 
complying  with  a  request  of  yours.  It  is  very  true  that  there  is  a  strong  connexion, 
as  far  as  friendship  goes,  between  Lord  Spencer  and  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph  ;  but, 
from  an  idea  that  the  Bishop  owed  his  promotion  to  Lord  Spencer,  which  is  entirely 
without  foundation,  he  has  been  so  pressed  to  make  applications  to  him  for  small 
livings  and  prebends  in  his  gift,  that  he  cannot  with  any  degree  of  delicacy  request 
any  thing  farther  of  him. 

I  make  no  doubt  if  the  Bishop  was  acquainted  with  Mr.  Lloyd’s  character,  and 
had  no  pre- engagement,  he  would  be  glad  to  serve  him  ;  and  if  you  are  very  anxious 
about  him,  perhaps  you  might  convey  some  account  of  him  to  the  Bishop  through 
the  Wilmots,  who  live  in  great  intimacy  with  him,  and  whom  he  loves  and  honours 
as  they  deserve.  It  is  an  age  since  I  have  seen  you  or  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  hope  I  shall 
have  that  pleasure  when  I  come  to  town ;  and  remember  that  you  have  long  pro¬ 
mised  me  a  dinner,  and  a  Paoli  at  Hampton,  of  which  I  expect  you  should  acquit 
yourself  some  fine  day  next  summer.  Assure  Mrs.  Garrick  of  my  Lord’s  compli¬ 
ments  and  mine,  and  believe  me,  Sir,  with  great  regard, 

Your  faithful  humble  servant, 

G.  Spencer. 

As  I  am  in  an  old  house,  in  an  old  park,  in  the  country,  I  flatter  myself  it  is 
allowable  to  send  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  all  the  old-fashioned  good  wishes  of  the 
season  .f 

*  Who  this  candidate  was,  does  not  appear— few  who  have  been  driven  upon  the  stage,  have  not  also 
been  driven  off.  It  must  not  be  taken  as  a  pis  oiler,  when  other  trades  fail;  it  should  be  a  passion,  before 
which  poverty  and  contempt,  and  persecution  and  even  prejudice  are  as  nothing;  then,  yes  and  then,  one  in 
perhaps  one  hundred  candidates,  may  be  respectable  as  an  actor  and  respected  as  a  man. — Ed. 

t  This  letter  is  a  beautiful  specimen  of  the  charm  thai  attended  the  Countess  Spencer  in  every  relation 
of  life.  Like  Mr.  Garrick,  Gibbon  the  historian  used  to  preserve  such  letters  as  the  proudest  testimonials  to 
his  fame,  and  compensating  much  of  the  unavoidable  evils  of  existence. — Ed. 


408 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  •••••• 


DEAR  SIR, 

T  have  not  only  road,  but  considered  your  tragedy  with  a  particular  attention. 
You  must  therefore  excuse  me  for  not  returning  it  before,  as  I  did  not  choose  to  give 
you  my  opinion  of  it  too  lightly  or  too  hastily.  1  think  there  is  hut  one  capital  situa¬ 
tion  in  the  whole  play,  and  that  is  the  discovery  of  the  armed  men  to  Lavagna’sf 
guests ;  which  indeed  was  the  only  thing  that  struck  me  as  a  dramatic  circumstance, 
when  I  read  the  story  in  De  Retz :  the  rest  of  the  play  seems  to  me  to  be  too  like  all 
the  other  conspiracies  we  have  had  upon  the  stage,  with  fewer  situations  ;  indeed,  Sir, 
I  fear  there  is  a  languor  through  the  whole  that  will  ever  make  its  success  precarious. 
I  am  of  opinion,  too,  that  this  evil  is  not  to  he  remedied,  for  it  lies  in  the  story  itself, 
which  has  not  afforded  dramatic  circumstances  sufficient  to  give  that  particular  in¬ 
terest  without  which  no  play,  in  my  opinion,  can  be  supported  upon  the  stage. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

1  should  have  waited  upon  you,  but  I  am  obliged  to  go  to  town. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  !771- 

Your  brother,  whom  I  had  the  honour  of  seeing  this  morning  at  Camden-place, 
made  so  short  a  visit,  that  I  had  not  time  to  write,  and  did  not  care  to  detain  him 
longer,  because  his  business  required  him  to  return  immediately  to  London.  I  am 
very  much  affected  with  the  news  of  poor  Beighton’s  death,  who,  as  far  as  I  could 
judge,  was  one  of  the  best  men  that  ever  Christianity  produced,  whom  we  must  never 
hope  to  see  again,  unless  we  go  to  heaven.  My  Lady  is  extremely  grieved  at  his 
loss,  and  we  are  both  the  more  hurt,  because  the  blow  was  unexpected  ;  for  notwith¬ 
standing  his  age  and  infirmities,  we  thought  he  would  have  held  out  some  years 
longer.  I  am  very  much  flattered  by  his  kind  remembrance  of  me  in  his  will,  which 
is  much  more  than  my  poor  living  deserved ;  and  yet  I  believe  that,  besides  his  good 
will  to  me,  and  his  friendship  for  you,  he  had  another  view  in  making  us  two  of  his 
executors,  which  was  to  prevent  his  collection  of  books  from  being  dissipated  by  a 
sale.  I  remember  when  I  once  told  him,  his  dear  books  would  probably  come  under 

t  John  Louis  Fiesco,  Count  of  Lavagna.  See  the  History  of  this  conspiracy  at  the  end  of  the  Cardinal 
de  Retz’s  Memoirs,  referred  to  by  Mr.  Garrick.  It  will  be  seen  moreover  that  at  one  time  it  was  thought 
essential  to  the  manager  of  a  theatre  to  be  profoundly  conversant  with  history  and  poetry  ;  and  to  cultivate 
all  the  lighter  graces  of  composition,  from  a  personal  acquaintance  with  the  literature  and  literary  characters 
of  polished  Europe.  Such  a  person  at  least  was  David  Garrick;  such  a  man  too  was  George  Colman. —  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


409 


the  auctioneer’s  hands  after  his  death,  he  answered,  that  was  not  his  intention,  for 
he  would  take  care  to  make  such  a  provision,  as  should  prevent  their  being  broke  or 
separated  :  probably  you  may  have  heard  him  express  himself  to  the  like  effect.  If 
you  should  happen  to  think  with  me  upon  this  subject,  we  shall  contrive  between  us, 
if  it  is  possible,  to  carry  the  good  man’s  intention  towards  his  beloved  books  into 
execution.  Our  colleague,  the  bookseller,  will  probably  be  contented  with  the  value 
of  his  share  in  money,  and  Mr.  Willis,  (whom  I  do  not  know)  if  he  has  not  curiosity 
or  taste  that  way,  may  permit  us  to  be  the  purchasers  ;  or  if  he  has,  may  deserve  to 
retain  his  share  in  kind.  I  could  wish  to  have  the  name  of  the  collector,  and  the 
bequest,  printed  on  a  small  piece  of  paper,  and  pasted  in  the  cover  of  each  book,  to 
preserve  the  memory  of  the  man,  and  of  his  kindness  to  his  friends.  I  mentioned 
this  proposal  to  your  brother  this  morning ;  but  I  thought  proper  to  repeat  it  again, 
because,  the  more  I  think  upon  this  business,  the  more  I  am  convinced  that  this  was 
the  secret  wish  of  our  friend.  I  understand  you  have  given  the  proper  orders  for 
his  funeral,  and  ordered  Baker  to  take  the  catalogue.  You  will  be  so  good  to  get 
the  will  proved  in  Doctors’  Commons,  and  direct  his  debts  to  be  called  in.  As  your 
business  will  not  permit  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  to  come  to  us,  we  will  come  to  you ; 
and  propose  to  be  in  town  next  Thursday,  and  shall  wait  on  you,  or  see  you  at  Lin¬ 
coln’s  Inn-fields,  as  it  is  most  convenient  to  you. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  more  meaning  than  passes  with  the  usual  subscription  of  a 
letter, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

Camden. 

My  wife  desires  her  compliments  may  not  be  forgot  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  to 
whom  you  will  be  so  good  to  present  my  respects. 

We  hope  to  be  supplied  with  three  good  places  in  the  front  box,  to  see  the  “  In¬ 
stallation,”  Thursday  or  Friday  next. 

Endorsed, 

“  Lord  Camden  about  our 
Executorship  for  poor  Beigbton.” 

REV.  E.  A.  LOYD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  14th  Jan.  1771. 

This  same  dame  Preferment  (like  other  ladies  that  know  they  are  wooed  merely 
for  their  fortune )  gives  herself  many  unnecessary  airs,  short  turns  upon  the  heel,  the 
eclipse  of  the  fan,  the  negative  shrug  of  the  shoulder,  and  fifty  tricks  beside,  when¬ 
ever  I  make  my  advances.  Indeed,  I  almost  think  there  is  somewhat  too  much 
indifference  in  my  manner :  I  make  love  a  little  like  Harry  the  Fifth,  “  Dost  thou 
love  me,  Kate  ? — Can  any  one  of  thy  neighbours  tell,”  <Scc.  &c.  This  offends  Ma¬ 
dam's  delicacy,  so  off  she  goes  to  some  opulent  rival,  who,  though  he  does  not  want 
her,  will  keep  her  to  himself — which  is  more,  I  confess,  than  I  would  promise.  Egad, 
perhaps  it  is  written  in  my  face,  that  I  should  divide  her  favours  among  my  poorest 

vol.  I.  3  G 


410 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


neighbours,  and  suffer  myself  to  be  cuckolded  by  Charity  ;  and  what  care  I,  if  I 
were  such  a  contented  wittol  ?  This  I  can  venture  to  say,  that  if  nobody  was  to  be 
the  better  for  the  match  but  myself,  I  would  willingly  be  the  Benedick  of  the  first 
act  throughout  the  comedy  of  Life.  Well,  if  one  won't,  another  will,  they  say  ;  but 
there  are  no  maiden  churches  to  be  had  ;  however,  one  comfort  is,  there  is,  or  will  be, 
many  a  widowed  church,  genteel,  well  portioned,  well  dressed,  with  a  glittering  wea¬ 
thercock  for  a  pompoon,  which  may  be  willing  to  have  me,  ere  her  last  husband 
is  cold  in  the  grave ;  at  least,  I  am  sure  I  have  no  reason  to  despair,  since  I  have  been 
lucky  enough  to  find  an  advocate  in  Lady  Wilmot*  (the  Chief  Justice’s  Lady,  is  it 
not  ?)  By  all  that  is  grateful  in  the  human  heart,  I  can  scarce  refrain  from  an  apos¬ 
trophe  of  thanks  to  that  lady,  for  the  heartiness  and  warmth  with  which  she  patronized 
me.  I  must,  at  least,  beg  of  you  to  make  her  one  of  your  most  sentimental  bows  (and 
I  have  seen  you  make  very  good  ones)  for  me  when  you  see  her  next.  When  ano¬ 
ther  comfortable  vacancy  happens  in  the  diocese  of  St.  Asaph,  I  shall  beg  of  you  to 
trouble  her  ladyship  to  publish  the  bans  between  the  bell-rope  and  me,  to  the  Bishop, 
who  is  the  only  person  that  has  a  right  to  forbid  them.  I  am  extremely  obliged  to 
her  ladyship  for  the  offer  of  Monmouthshire  mutton ;  that  overture  is  far  beyond  the 
neutral  civilities  of  court  friendship  ;  but  Merionethshire  connexions  put  a  ceto  on 
it,  though  “  there  is  a  river  in  Monmouth,  and  a  river  in  Bala,  and  salmon  in  both." 
The  Bishop  was  very  obliging  in  expressing  any  approbation  of  the  trifling  letters  of 
mine  which  fell  into  his  hands.  If  I  had  thought  they  would  have  been  laid  before 
him,  probably  I  should  have  scratched  my  head,  bit  my  nails,  looked  wise,  blotted  out, 
began  again,  kc.  kc.  kc. ;  but  hang  it,  this  would  have  spoiled  the  matter,  and  pro¬ 
duced  a  piece  as  dull,  formal,  prim,  and  precise,  as  a  Quaker — one  of  Pope's  letters  for 
all  the  world  !  You  see  how  frankly  I  speak  my  opinion  of  great  authors.  An  easy 
flowing  dishabille  for  a  letter,  I  say  ;  a  night-gown  and  slippers  are  the  only  dress  to 
write  one  in.  I  believe  one  might  almost  guess  from  the  style  of  a  letter,  how  the  writer 
was  dressed,  though  I  think  it  would  require  very  uncommon  penetration  to  discover 
my  drapery  from  the  above  scribble,  for  you  must  know  that  at  present  I  am  a  jjer- 
fect  hospital  figure:  a  patch  over  my  right  eye,  which  is  violently  inflamed,  a  bandage 
over  the  orifice  of  a  venesection  in  my  right  arm,  a  blister  under  my  right  ear,  and 
another  on  my  back.  I  flatter  myself  this  letter  carries  with  it  no  such  exacerbation 
( Johnson ,  for  that)  of  style,  as  to  mark  out  my  present  habit  of  body  in  either  sense  of 
the  phrase  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  think  my  soul  contrives  to  keep  herself  at  ease,  (though 
her  case  is  at  present  out  of  repair  a  little,)  and  feels  comfortably  in  having  lately  re¬ 
ceived  an  additional  reason  for  subscribing  herself,  Air.  Garrick’s 

Obliged  humble  servant, 

Witness  her  Secretary,  E.  A.  Loyd. 

Compliments  to  Airs.  Garrick.  I  have  returned  your  letters — thanks  for  the 
perusal  of  them. 

*  Here  we  see  the  effect  of  Lady  Spencer’s  suggestion,  of  which  the  ever  kind  Garrick  had  availed  himself 
to  serve  his  pleasant  friend  Loyd. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


411 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. * 

DEAR  BROTHER,  Jan.  25th,  1771. 

I  sit  down  at  this  time  to  do  a  most  disagreeable  thing  to  me,  which  is  to  tax 
you  with  neglect,  unkindness,  and  I  will  not  add  injustice  to  me.  I  have  suffered 
much  of  late,  I  have  hid  my  uneasiness  as  well  as  I  could,  I  have  had  moments  of 
good  spirits,  but  my  mind  has  still  returned  to  you,  and  your  behaviour  to  me. 
Some  late  circumstances  have  brought  this  letter  somewhat  forwarder  than  I  intended 
it,  and  a  wreight  upon  my  thoughts  has  pressed  me  to  disclose  them  to  you.  I  shall 
not  accuse  you  of  being  always  uneasy  when  you  are  with  me,  and  your  excuse  of 
business  to  get  away  as  soon  as  possible  ;  I  think  that  would  be  weakness  in  me,  and 
the  only  way  not  to  remedy  it ;  but  as,  I  imagine,  such  seeming  unkindness  proceeds 
from  your  unwillingness  to  hear  my  complaints,  your  visits  of  hurry  are  not  unna¬ 
tural.  But  to  the  business, — Did  I  ever  keep  any  concern  of  any  kind  from  you  ?  Have 
I  not  always  opened  my  heart  and  designs  to  you  ?  Have  you  not  had  permission  to 
open  my  letters,  and  know  every  thing  about  me  and  my  affairs  ?  Have  you  returned 
this  kindness  ?  Have  you  not  been  possessed  some  time  of  a  country  house,  of  horses, 
chariot,  <kc.  without  so  much  as  in  the  least  hinting  it  to  me  ?  Had  you  been  pos¬ 
sessed  of  the  fortune  of  Lord  Clive,  such  a  brother  as  I  think  I  have  been  to  you, 
should  have  been  in  common  civility  at  least  acquainted  with  it.  I  have  never  heard 
of  it  but  from  your  neighbours,  to  whom  I  have  always  expressed  my  ignorance :  an 
old  clergyman  attacked  me  at  Court  on  the  Birth-day,  as  your  neighbour  in  the 
country.  What  is  this  mystery  ?  If  I  was  not  kindly  to  be  admitted  into  the  secret, 
surely  I  had  a  right  to  be  a  partaker  of  it : — but  let  that  be  passed  over ;  I  can  have 
my  separate  secrets,  if  I  please,  and  at  least  balance  that  account  with  you.  I  have 
likewise  no  right,  perhaps  I  have  not,  to  ask  how  your  circumstances  can  bear  this 
load  of  expense  ;  and  whether  it  is  not  strange,  with  your  family,  and  complaints  of 
hard  times,  hard  relations,  &c.  that  you  have  voluntarily  taken  a  load  upon  you, 
which,  I  fear,  you  are  not  able  to  bear.  If  it  is  said,  for  that  has  been  dropped,  (for  I 
hear  more  than  I  could  wish,)  that  Mr.  Cap — n  insisted  upon  your  having  it,  or  taking 
it ;  this  mends  not  the  matter  with  me — I  am  still  unkindly  treated.  I  must  tell  you 
too,  that  you  did  not  please  me  by  sending  the  receipt  to  Mr.  Hoare  to  get  the  money 

from  my  tenant  G - f.  How  could  you  know  in  what  manner  I  intended  to  act  by 

him  ?  And  your  not  telling  me  of  it,  till  I  had  exposed  myself,  wras  a  most  disagreeable 
circumstance :  I  must  for  the  future  insist  that  no  monies  of  mine,  upon  any  account. 


*  The  reader  has  seen  much  of  the  zeal,  intelligence,  and  affection  exhibited  by  Mr.  George  Garrick,  in  his 
brother’s  concerns.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  these  gentlemen  were  no  common  brothers.  The  following  letter, 
however,  shows  that  their  harmony  had  been  somewhat  interrupted.  Mr.  Garrick,  in  a  very  manly  and  delicate 
way,  presses  for  explanation  on  subjects,  that,  if  they  can  have  a  divided  interest,  threaten  his  brother’s  wel¬ 
fare  even  more  than  his  own.  I  am  sorry  that  the  reply  has  escaped  us;  but  its  nature  will  be  sufficiently 
unfolded  in  some  other  communications  from  Mr.  George  Garrick. — Ed. 

3  G  2 


412 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


are  taken  up  without  my  receipt,  from  any  one  person  whatsoever.  I  come  now  to 
my  request, — which  is,  that  you  make  me  acquainted  with  the  state  of  Fermingnac’s 
account.  You  know  that  I  had  resolved  not  to  pay  a  shilling  of  the  Jubilee  business, 
but  by  the  money  owing  to  me  then.  I  now  calmly  assure  you,  that  I  will  not.  I 
had  (I  think  generously)  determined  to  pay  the  debts  of  the  adventurers  of  the 
Jubilee.  I  told  you  I  would  pay  them  with  the  legacy  money  :  I  told  you  to  make 
a  partition  of  it,  and  that  I  was  ready  to  give  any  security  for  paying  my  portion  of 
any  after-debts,  if  they  should  come  in.  If  you  had  consulted  the  spirit  of  the  deed,  it 
should  not  have  been  dragged  on  to  this  time,  to  make,  what  would  have  been  a  piece 
of  generosity  quickly  done,  a  flat  tame  action  so  laggingly  performed.  I  must  en¬ 
treat  you  to  lay  the  account  before  me,  that  I  may  act  accordingly.  I  can  have  no 
pleasure  in  knowing  more  of  your  secrets  than  what  immediately  concern  me ;  but 
these  I  have  a  right  to,  and  my  affairs  demand  that  I  be  instructed  immediately. 
You  have  known  my  wishes,  my  uneasiness  upon  the  matter,  and  I  wish  you  had 
done  it  before  and  openly  from  yourself. 

I  am,  dear  brother,  in  expectation  of  your  compliance  with  my  request, 

Yours  sincerely, 

E).  Garrick. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Grosveuor-square,  Feb.  18th,  1771. 

* 

I  thank  you  for  the  favour  of  a  sight  of  the  enclosed  to  you.  The  writer  appears 
to  be  a  very  worthy  man.  I  have  enclosed  too  in  this  packet  a  pamphlet,  which  if  you 
have  not  seen,  (which  I  suppose  you  have  not,  as  you  was  out  of  England  when  it 
was  published)  will  afford  you  much  entertainment,  as  it  is  on  a  subject  you  so  well 
know  the  force  of,  namely,  eloquence.  You  will  not  be  at  a  loss  for  the  author,* 
there  being  so  few  who  are  capable  of  treating  it  in  so  masterly  a  manner.  You 
will  find  it  to  be  a  kind  of  subsidium  podagra,  whenever  you  are  attacked  by  that 
disorder. 

Speaking  of  eloquence,  I  am  naturally  put  in  mind  of  you  and  Shakspeare.  It 
may  be  a  question  who  is  most  dishonoured  ;  you  by  the  idle  boys  called  .pouters ;  or 
Shakspeare  by  the  idler  men  called  critics  and  editors?  Both  of  you  are  answerable 
for  them.  Your  several  excellencies  have  produced  them  ;  as  weeds  spring  up  and 
are  ready  to  choke  the  richest  gifts  of  Ceres.  Editions  on  editions  of  our  immortal 
favourite  are  daily  springing  up — I  was  ready,  very  improperly,  to  say,  and  showing 
their  heads.  But  of  all  these  idiots,  the  greatest  sure  is  one  Capell*  While  others 

*  It  was  a  pamphlet  by  Hurd. — Ed. 

+  The  greatest  is  one  Capell. — The  lofty  confidence  of  Warburton  was  astonished  at  the  presumption  that 
folloued  him  over  the  ground  of  Shakspeare.  But  when  he  has  laughed  at  the  simplicity  of  Capell,  who 
avoided  to  embalm  himself,  because  he  thought  only  of  preserving  the  genuine  Shakspeare,  and  sees  him 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


413 


have  procured  for  themselves  the  advantage  of  being  embalmed  alive  in  the  liquid 
amber  of  the  poet,  this  man  seems  to  have  been  only  able  to  gibbet  himself  above 
ground  over  his  grave. 

Dear  Sir,  believe  me  to  be  your  truly  affectionate  and  faithful  friend, 

And  obedient  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Grosvenor-square,  Feb.  25,  1771. 

I  have  your  favour  of  yesterday,  and  am  glad  to  understand  you  have  had  so 
kindly  a  fit  of  the  gout,  which  I  make  no  doubt  will  be  of  use  to  your  general  health. 
Never  let  an  unthinking  public,  that  is,  thinking  only  for  themselves,  induce  you  to 
hinder  the  free  course  of  this  natural  and  beneficial  discharge  of  what  is  critical. 

I  will,  as  you  desire,  attend  my  duty  in  the  House  to-morrow.  As  the  affair  of  the 
Liverpool  playhouse  is  circumstanced,  with  the  approbation  of  the  town  and  corpora¬ 
tion,  I  see  no  reasonable  objection  to  it.  I  fancy  the  petitioner  must  be  misinformed 
concerning  the  Archbishop’s  opposition ;  for,  I  think,  in  that  case  he  must  have  men¬ 
tioned  it  to  the  bench. 

I  think  the  petitioner  might  have  given  a  better  reason  for  the  approbation  of  the 
inhabitants.  The  youth  of  so  busy  and  populous  a  place  must  have  their  intervals  of 
relaxation  ;  and  the  only  question  is,  whether  these  shall  be  passed  in  an  innocent  and 
elegant  amusement,  or  in  those  turbulent  gratifications  that  unwary  youth  are  apt  to 
fall  into:  so  that  my  sentiments  perfectly  coincide  with  what  you  seem  to  wish.  I 
am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  most  perfect  esteem, 

Your  very  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dartmouth-street,  Feb.  23,  1771. 

1  received  the  favour  of  your  letter  yesterday  when  I  was  in  company,  and  I 
shall  certainly  be  glad  to  befriend  Mr.  Gibson  upon  your  recommendation,  if  I  go  to 
the  House  of  Lords ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  I  have  been  but  twice  there,  and  was 
forced  to  quit  it  after  an  hour,  as  my  head  turned  dizzy,  by  the  gout  in  my  stomach 
affecting  my  nerves,  ever  since  I  saw  you  at  St.  James’s.  I  am  sorry  that  you  are  so 

“  gibbeted  above  ground  over  his  grave,”  it  is  curious  that  he  should  forget  Mr.  Garrick’s  intimacy  with 
Capell,  and  the  present  of  the  “  Antony  and  Cleopatra."  This  modest  man’s  notes  will  be  mentioned 
hereafter. — Ed. 


414 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


afflicted  with  it;  I  can  pass  in  the  world  without  head  and  nerves,  but  it  is  more 
material  that  you  should  be  sound  and  stout. 

I  have  sent  you  the  receipt  for  the  ginger-cakes,  which  I  have  found  do  me  good 
in  a  morning  by  letting  a  piece  (as  big  as  sixpence)  melt  in  my  mouth ;  and  it  helps 
the  stomach  as  to  wind,  and  wateriness,  and  phlegm.  They  can  be  easily  made  at 
home.  I  am,  with  true  regard, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

R.  Ebor.* 


MR.  W.  EAVES  TO  MR.  WHELER. 


DEAR  SIR,  Stratford,  Feb.  26,  1771. 

As  we  have  sufficient  reason  to  think  you  have  at  heart  the  interest  and  reputation 
of  the  town  of  Stratford  as  much  as  any  of  the  gentlemen  here,  and  as  we  can  at 
present  think  of  no  method  so  likely  to  promote  both  as  (that  which  is,  indeed,  most 
suitable  to  our  inclination)  an  annual  Jubilee,  in  which  we  would  do  what  honour  we 
could  to  the  memory  of  our  townsman  Shakspeare,  and  at  the  same  time  show  our 
high  esteem  for  Mr.  Garrick  his  faithful  and  unequalled  representative ;  we  there¬ 
fore  take  this,  perhaps  the  only  favourable  opportunity  that  may  occur,  to  entreat 
you,  before  you  return  to  us,  to  prefer  in  your  own  and  our  names  our  joint  request 
to  David  Garrick,  Esq.  that  he  would  be  pleased  in  due  time  to  communicate  to  us 
some  scheme  for  our  next  as  well  as  each  succeeding  jubilean  anniversary.  We  are 
the  more  induced  to  ask  this  favour  at  his  hands,  as  we  are  fully  sensible  no  one  can 
form  a  plan  for  such  a  laudable  purpose  with  so  much  propriety,  or  give  so  great  a 
sanction  and  support  to  it  when  it  is  once  established.  "We  are  not  a  little  encou¬ 
raged  to  expect  this  favour  at  his  hands,  as  he  has  for  some  time  been  a  very  worthy 
member  of  our  community,  and,  when  with  us  last  (besides  the  generous  instances  of 
his  regard  already  shown),  thought  fit  to  express,  with  seeming  ardour,  an  undeviating 
esteem  for  Stratford  and  its  vicinity.  We  submit  the  above  hints  to  you,  and  leave 
them  to  your  own  judgment  (previous  to  your  application  to  Mr.  Garrick.)  for  altera¬ 
tion,  addition,  or  contraction. 

We  hope,  Sir,  you  will  not  fail  to  execute  this  commission  for  us  ;  much  will  be 
due  to  you  for  it,  besides  your  unquestionably  receiving  the  thanks  and  applause  of 
this  town  and  neighbourhood. 

With  my  best  compliments,  in  the  name  of,  and  jointly  with  our  other  gentlemen, 
I  have  the  pleasure  to  be,  Sir, 


Endorsed, 

“  About  an  annual  Stratford  Jubilee.” 


Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

William  Eaves. 


This  was  Dr.  Robert  Drummond,  translated  from  Salisbury  in  1761. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


415 


LORD  SUFFOLK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Duke-street,  Westminster,  Feb.  26,  1771. 

I  will  certainly  attend  the  Liverpool  Playhouse  Bill,  with  every  good  disposition 
towards  it  that  your  recommendation  and  patronage  of  the  measure  ought  to  inspire. 
My  Lords  the  Bishops,  I  understand,  are,  to  a  man,  in  different  sentiments. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  of  your  indisposition,  and  will  take  an  early  opportunity 
of  making  my  personal  inquiries  after  you  :  in  the  mean  time,  believe  me.  Sir,  with 
great  esteem, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Suffolk. 


LORD  SUFFOLK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Duke-street,  Westminster,  half-past  four,  Tuesday,  Feb.  26,  1771. 
Lord  Suffolk  has  the  pleasure  to  inform  Mr.  Garrick  that  the  Liverpool  Play¬ 
house  Bill  is  committed ;  it  stands  for  Tuesday  next,  when  Lord  Suffolk  hopes  there 
is  some  reason  to  think  it  will  not  be  farther  opposed. 


For  committing  the  Bill 


Against  committing  it 


,  , 

.  22 

Proxies 

5 

.  21 

Proxies 

2 

27 


23 


MRS.  CELESIA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


sir,  Genoa,  Feb.  28th,  1771. 

I  have  received  with  the  utmost  satisfaction,  from  Mr.  Scott  and  others,  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  favourable  reception  “  Almida”  has  met  with  from  the  public.  No  gra¬ 
titude  is  so  pleasing  as  that  we  owe  to  those  whom  we  esteem  ;  and  therefore  I  cannot 
forbear  writing  to  tell  you  how  much  you  are  entitled  to  mine,  upon  an  occasion  where 
you  have  acted  so  friendly  and  so  obliging  a  part  towards  me  ;  and  I  do  assure  you, 
I  shall  ever  retain  the  warmest  sense  of  your  kindness. 

As  I  wished  to  express  my  thanks  to  Mr.  Whitehead,  and  to  Mrs.  Barry,  whose 
performance  in  “  Almida,”  I  am  told,  was  inimitable,  I  have  wrote  a  line  to  them 
both,  which  I  take  the  liberty  to  enclose,  and  1  beg  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  forward 
them  to  their  directions. 


4 1  (j 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  encouragement  I  have  met  with  in  my  first  essay  may,  perhaps,  induce  me  in 
a  future  leisure  hour  to  attempt  something  again  in  the  same  way.  I  am  well  ap¬ 
prized  of  the  many  disadvantages  1  lie  under,  by  being  at  such  a  distance  from  those 
whose  assistance  and  advice  would  be  so  necessary,  in  an  undertaking  of  this  nature. 
Inaccuracy,  and  many  foreign  idioms,  must  inevitably  glide  into  my  style  and  lan¬ 
guage,  after  a  ten  years’  absence  from  my  native  country ;  yet  experience  teaches  me 
that  nothing  is  impossible  to  those  who  are  assisted  by  diligence,  and  befriended 
by  kindness. 

T  think  Voltaire’s  tragedy  of  “  Semiramis,”  if  it  was  well  translated,  would  suc¬ 
ceed  on  our  stage.  I  should  consider  it  as  an  additional  favour  to  those  I  already 
owe  you,  if  you  would  inform  me  by  a  line,  whether  it  has  been  already  attempted, 
and  whether  you  would  advise  me  to  undertake  it. 

Mr.  Baretti  desires  me  to  present  his  respects  to  you.  He  is  about  to  leave  us. 
He  intends  a  trip  to  Bologna  and  Florence,  and  then  to  return  to  England,  which  he 
considers,  and  with  reason,  as  his  mother  country. 

I  see  by  the  papers,  which  I  constantly  read,  how  high  the  stream  of  faction, 
under  the  name  of  patriotism,  has  run.  Foreigners  are  apt  to  imagine  that  it  must 
be  bad  living  in  such  a  turbulent  scene;  but  I  tell  them  the  contrary,  for  after  an 
Englishman’s  gall  has  run  from  his  heart  to  his  paper,  he  is  as  humane  and  sociable 
a  being  as  a  Frenchman  or  an  Italian  can  be. 

Mr.  Celesia  sends  his  kindest  compliments,  to  which  I  beg  leave  to  join  my  best 
wishes,  both  to  you  and  to  Mrs.  Garrick ;  and  I  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  esteem, 

Your  obliged  and  sincere  humble  servant, 

Dorothea  Celesia. 


LORD  PEMBROKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wilton  House,  Monday,  4th  March,  1771. 

I  was  getting  into  my  chaise,  my  dear  Sir,  to  come  hither,  when  I  received  your 
favour.  Though  business  here  will  prevent  my  attending  personally  for  Mr.  Gibson, 
I  have  desired  Lady  P.  to  beat  up  for  as  many  troops  for  him  as  she  can :  and,  as  it 
is  to  oppose  an  opinion  of  the  Church,  I  trust  she  will  get  a  good  many  to  majority 
the  bench,  who,  far  from  a  voice,  should  by  rights  have  no  seat  but  a  peiv  any 
where* 

If  you  have  not  better  weather  at  Hampton  than  I  find  here,  I  advise  you,  in 
spite  of  the  faculty,  to  return  to  London  immediately.  There,  or  at  Hampton,  I 

*  If  Lord  Pembroke  had  submitted  this  opinion  as  to  the  Church  to  his  friend  Burke,  the  orator  even 
then  might  have  told  him — “  We  have  not  relegated  religion,  like  something  we  were  ashamed  to  show,  to 
rustic  villages.  We  will  have  her  to  exalt  her  mitred  front  in  Courts  and  Parliaments.  We  will  have  her 
mixed  throughout  the  whole  mass  of  life,  and  blended  with  all  the  classes  of  society.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


417 


hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  soon  in  perfect  health  again.  My  best  com¬ 
pliments,  pray,  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Ever  yours,  my  dear  Sir,  most  obediently  and  sincerely, 

Pembroke. 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Parliament-street,  March  14th,  1771. 

I  will  not  fail  to  use  my  best  endeavours  to  obtain  what  you  request,  and  I  am 
well  assured  that  Lord  North  will  receive  the  application  with  a  favourable  impres¬ 
sion,  as  it  comes  from  you.  At  the  same  time  I  must  acquaint  you,  that  the  same 
indulgence  which  Mr.  R.  Burke  desires,  was  last  year  refused  to  Mr.  Haliday,  the 
Collector  of  Antigua,  on  the  ground  of  his  having  been  only  one  year  attending  his 
duty  since  his  former  leave  of  absence  expired.  This  is  the  very  case  of  Mr.  Richard 
Burke  ;  but  as  my  heart  always  inclines  me  to  go  beyond  the  severe  rules  of  my  duty 
in  soliciting  the  petitions  of  the  lowest  officers  of  the  Crown  when  they  apply  for 
leave  of  absence  on  account  of  their  health,  or  the  urgency  of  their  private  affairs, 
even  when  the  facts  do  not  come  so  well  vouched  as  they  ought  to  be  by  the  rules 
of  office,  I  cannot  refuse  my  assistance  to  the  recommendations  of  a  friend  whom 
upon  much  greater  occasions  I  should  be  happy  to  oblige.  Lord  North  is  the  best- 
natured  man  in  the  world,  and  I  know  he  will  as  readily  do  a  favour,  or  grant  a  rea¬ 
sonable  indulgence,  to  the  brother  of  Mr.  E.  Burke,  as  to  any  of  those  who  stand  in 
the  ranks  of  his  political  friends ;  nothing  but  public  consideration  and  the  tendency 
of  the  example  can  prevent  him  from  granting  what  is  requested. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  truest  regard,  your  very  faithful  servant, 

Grey  Cooper. 


Endorsed, 

“  Sir  Grey  Cooper,  March  17th,  1771. 
Richard  Burke.” 


I 


MR.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  March  1 6th,  1771. 

It  must  not  only  appear  a  strange  affectation  in  me,  but  an  instance  of  great 
folly,  was  I  to  endeavour  to  hide  from  you  any  literary  design  for  my  advantage ; 
but  at  the  same  time  give  me  leave  to  say,  the  scheme  for  publishing  my  Fables  is  of 
such  a  nature  as  might  sufficiently  justify  some  little  artifice,  or,  let  me  rather  call  it, 
decent  caution,  before  T  ventured  to  mention  it  to  you  in  a  manner  to  desire  your 
assistance:  I  have  troubled  you  so  often  with  paltry  suits,  that  I  really  do  it  now 
(though  in  some  sort  encouraged  to  it  by  yourself)  with  timidity  and  reluctance. 

I  have  been  my  own  dupe,  and  the  dupe  of  others  ;  what  I  have  erred  in  at  the 
instigation  of  my  own  folly,  I  have  corrected.  Some  little  success  in  subscribing 
VOL.  I.  3  II 


418 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


my  Fables  would  repair  all,  and  I  think  I  shall  err  no  more.  I  had  no  thought  farther 
than  Ireland,  hut  Mr.  Foote  offered  to  serve  me  unasked  :  I  knew  the  warmth  of  his 
disposition,  however,  and  made  allowances  for  it,  that  is,  built  nothing  upon  the 
foundation  ;  hut  he  has,  contrary  to  my  expectation,  served  me  in  the  most  ample 
manner,  and  I  am  well  assured,  done  it  in  a  way  to  deserve  my  thanks.  If  you  think 
proper  to  lend  me  the  Fables  you  mentioned,  I  shall  be  greatly  obliged  to  you. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  very  gratefully  yours, 

I.  Bickerstaff. 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Treasury  Chambers,  March  18th,  1771. 

I  have  the  pleasure  (because  I  know  it  will  give  you  pleasure)  to  acquaint  you 
that  I  have  obtained  Lord  North’s  permission  to  order  a  warrant  for  granting  leave 
of  absence  to  Mr.  Richard  Burke*  for  one  year. 

By  some  expressions  in  your  last  letter  you  seem  to  have  misunderstood  what  I 
wrote  to  you :  I  never  conceived  that  any  gentleman  should  be  refused  an  ordinary 
and  reasonable  indulgence  on  account  of  his  political  conduct,  much  less  that  of  his 
relations. 

I  can  answer  for  my  noble  and  excellent  friend  having  the  same  sentiments. 

Mrs.  Cooper  desires  me  to  convey,  her  compliments  with  my  own  to  Mrs.  Garrick 
and  you,  and, 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  ever  most  faithfully, 

Grey  Cooper. 

The  warrant  will,  I  hope,  be  signed  to  morrow. 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Worcester,  April  6th,  1771. 

Alone — and  in  a  post  chaise — it  is  natural,  if  a  man  has  but  one  grain  of  good- 
humour  in  his  composition,  to  think  of  those  things  which  will  afford  him  the 
highest  entertainment.  I  thought  of  you.  And  recollecting  that  part  of  our  last  con¬ 
versation,  which  informed  me  that  you  proposed  adding  some  farewell  verses  to 
your  inimitable  epilogue,  for  the  benefit  of  decayed  actors,  my  Muse  took  the 

*  To  Mr.  Richard  Burke,  one  writer  of  his  brother  Edmund’s  life,  I  mean  Dr.  Bisset,  attributed  the 
Letters  of  Junius — he  thought,  forsooth  !  that  they  exhibited  much  of  the  “  condensed  manner  of  that  writer. 
Alas  !  he  never  suspected  his  “  unthought  of  Junius”  to  be  broiling  in  Grenada  while  they  were  in  progress ; 
and  that  pungent  replies  within  a  week  were  not  to  be  obtained  from  the  West  Indies,  though  an  occasional 
turtle,  as  we  have  seen,  might  be  sent  to  enliven  the  circle  of  his  friends. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


419 


alarm ;  out  she  set ;  and  before  I  had  well  got  to  this  place,  she  presented  me  with 
a  few  straggling  lines  picked  up  amidst  the  humbler  shrubs  of  Parnassus.  I  hardly 
thanked  her  for  the  present.  I  had  no  garland  to  twine  them  into  of  my  own, 
and  I  knew  that  yours  was  all  too  rich  to  admit  of  them.  But  must  they  die?  says 
Pity.  Shall  so  many  dews  have  cherished,  shall  so  many  suns  have  ripened,  them 
in  vain  ?  My  heart  sunk  within  me,  I  called  for  pen  and  ink,  tied  them  up  together 
loosely  as  you  receive  them ;  and  here  they  are !  as  poor,  but  as  grateful  a  tribute, 
as  the  lip  of  friendship  ever  uttered,  or  the  hand  of  worth  received. 

Always  your  obliged  friend  and  servant, 

S.  Nott. 

VERSES  BY  THE  REV.  S.  NOTT. 

Thus  far  with  joy  my  annual  debt  I  pay  ! 

’Tis  sweet  to  help  a  brother  in  decay ; 

To  heal  his  wants ; — and,  be  the  truth  confest, 

In  blessing  others,  I ’ve  myself  been  blest ; 

Well  have  your  partial  smiles  the  labour  crown’d, 

Nor  knows  this  grateful  heart  an  ampler  bound. 

But  oh  !  their  cause  obtain’d,  oh,  who  shall  plead 
My  own  best  hope !  and  pleading  it,  succeed  ? 

Can  I  forget,  when  first  in  Shakspeare’s  bow’r 
You  found,  and  took  me  up,  a  little  flow’r! 

Warm’d  with  your  breath,  the  aspiring  trifle  grew; 

And  as  your  favour  shone,  I  blush’d  !  I  blew !  * 

To  you  I  offer’d  up  my  purest  rays ; 

My  spring’s  young  incense,  and  my  summer’s  blaze  ; 

And  o’er  my  leaves  when  sober  autumn  threw 
A  dimmer  shade,  I  offer’d  still  to  you ; 

But  now  stern  winter  calls — I  feel  the  blast — 

And  this,  perhaps,  this  offering,  is  my  last ! 

Not  but  some  colours  yet  remain  in  store; 

Not  but  I  wish  to  live  one  season  more ; 

One  season  more,  in  this  fair  garden  spent, 

Grant  me  one  season — and  I  die  content. 


*  I  am  afraid  that  blew  is  not  the  allowed  preterite  of  the  neutral  verb  blow  to  blossom,  which  regularly 
makes  blowed  in  the  past  tense.  In  the  neutral  windy  verb  to  blow,  we  have  “  it  blew”  impersonally,  and 
“  he  blew ”  strongly.  Perhaps  the  distinction  has  no  other  propriety  than  the  desire  of  discrimination.  The 
verses  are  extremely  sweet. — Ed. 


3h2 


420 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  TIIOMAS  WARTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Trinity  College,  Oxon,  April  26th,  1771. 

I  have  many  pardons  to  beg  for  the  frequent  troubles  I  give  you.  Mr.  Mickle 
has  shown  me  his  tragedy,*  almost  entirely  new  written,  and  the  disposition  greatly 
altered,  so  that  I  hope  you  will  think  it  tit  for  the  stage.  But  this  1  leave  to  your 
judgment.  I  own,  I  wish  we  could  contribute  to  keep  him  in  England,  and  in  the 
poetical  world.  Certainly  there  are  great  strokes  of  merit  in  the  play ;  and  I  shall 
be  glad  to  find  that  none  of  your  former  objections  remain.  I  am  with  best  compli¬ 
ments  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 

Dear  Sir,  yours  very  sincerely, 

Thomas  Warton. 


MR.  W.  MICKLE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Oxford,  April  27,  1771. 

Mr.  Warton  has  desired  to  keep  my  tragedy  a  week  longer.  As  soon  as  I 
receive  it  from  him,  and  get  it  transcribed  in  a  fair  hand,  I  will  send  it  to  you,  which 
will  be  in  two  or  three  weeks.  From  Mr.  Warton’s  opinion  of  it,  and  from  the  in¬ 
clination  to  be  of  service  to  me  which  you  was  pleased  to  express,  I  would  fain 
flatter  myself  with  the  hope  of  success.  Whatever  farther  alterations  you  may  judge 
necessary,  shall  be  willingly  made. 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Wm.  Mickle. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Cross,  April  28,  1771. 

We  move  in  a  week  or  ten  days  to  St.  Mary’s  for  the  summer ;  for  there  is 
none  here. 

1  am  sorry  to  have  it  confirmed,  that  you  are  slower  in  your  recovery  after  your 
late  attack,  than  your  former.  I  should  be  rejoiced  to  see  you  give  me  the  lie  under 
your  own  hand. 

You  prophesied  that  the  “  West  Indian”  would  make  my  mouth  water  to  read. 
I  suppose  you  meant  after  your  character  of  it :  you  might  have  added,  that  it 
would  make  my  eyes  water ,  which  it  did  twenty  times  in  the  reading.  It  has  been 
thoroughly  canvassed,  and  few  faults  of  consequence  have  been  found  in  it.  That  of 

*  This  was  “  The  Siege  of  Marseilles,”  never  acted,  the  work  of  a  descriptive  poet,  but  without  the  nerve 
of  tragedy.  Mr.  Garrick  was  every  way  interested  for  the  amiable  author,  who  at  length  made  a  fortune 
under  Governor  Johnstone,  married,  and  enjoyed  himself  in  elegant  virtuous  retirement. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


421 


a  young  lady  of  fashion  borrowing  money  on  her  jewels  of  a  great  merchant ,  might 
be  easily  acknowledged  by  her  afterward,  to  flow  from  her  ignorance  of  the  business 
of  the  world :  and  so  it  would  be  fully  obviated,  and  natural.  That  of  the  Irish 
captain’s  having  so  many  wives,  alive  and  merry,  may  be  (and  ought  to  be)  left  out 
in  the  acting,  and  in  print  in  the  next  edition.  It  knocks  the  whole  idea  of  the  cha¬ 
racter  on  the  head.  But  I  wonder  no  critic  has  taken  notice,  that  what  would  naturally 
be  the  principal  scene  in  the  whole  play,  for  fun,  humour,  sensibility  and  spirit,  is  art¬ 
fully  slurred  over  by  the  poet,  and  made  little  or  nothing  of.  I  mean  that  of  the 
West  Indian’s  addressing  the  virtuous  girl  as  a  kept  mistress.  The  reason  is  plain 
and  judicious ;  that  it  is  directly  the  subject  of  Farquhar’s  principal  scene  in  the 
“  Constant  Couple and  could  not  be  managed  so  as  to  appear  new,  and  not  an  imi¬ 
tation.  I  remember  the  only  true  objection  I  ever  heard  to  any  part  of  the  “  Sus¬ 
picious  Husband”  was,  that  Jacyn.  had  no  visible  reason  to  put  on  the  disguise  of 
men’s  clothes,  having  full  liberty  to  go  and  come  as  she  pleased,  and  being  in  the 
park  with  Clara,  &c. :  which  Ben  never  thought  worth  while  to  obviate — as  he  might 
easily  have  done,  by  only  adding  in  her  letter,  that  her  guardian’s  suspicions  had 
been  raised  to  such  a  pitch,  that  he  had  actually  threatened  to  confine  her.  This  by 
the  by.  My  good  sister  tells  me,  that  when  you  returned  her  a  former  packet,  (of  the 
“  Contrast,”  kc.  of  poor  Ben’s)  you  accidentally  retained  another  piece  of  two  acts : 
one  act,  as  I  believe,  in  the  Doctor’s  hand,  and  the  second  in  mine,  foolishly  supplied 
by  me.  The  “  Country  Burial”  it  was,  altered  by  Ben  ;  as  he  truly  thought  there 
would  be  some  real  true  fun  in  it,  if  the  taylor’s  sorrow  for  his  drunken  wife  were  made 
all  hypocritical,  and  not  real  as  in  the  original.  You  will  be  so  kind  as  to  look  over 
your  old  stores,  and  if  her  surmise  be  true,  to  return  it  to  her.  You  may  perhaps 
find  things  of  mine,  as  the  “  Beggar’s  Garland,”  all  in  songs,  which  you  took  from  me 
at  Bath  ;  and  the  story  of  the  Sea  Captain’s  discourse  with  the  Doctor  of  Divinity, 
about  giving  his  black  boy  Frank  Christian  burial,  in  a  letter ;  which  you  promised 
to  return  but  forgot  it  again.  Madam  Charles  Street  has  in  many  things  shown  her¬ 
self  so  mercenary,  that  I  cannot  help  thinking  she  would  be  glad  to  pocket  a  little 
money  by  any  of  the  Doctor’s  even  little  things,  after  I  shall  be  gone — to  Heaven. 
I  have  taken  good  care  that  nothing  of  mine  shall  ever  appear,  and  nothing  where  I 
have  been  concerned ;  but  she  seems  to  have  a  mind  to  claim  a  property  in  things  of 
that  sort,  as  the  “  Contrast,”  the  “  Widow  of  the  Mill,”  the  “  Country  Burial,” — and  I 
think  that  must  be  with  some  such  view. — Mum  !  Budget ! 

I  dare  say  you  will  continue  to  be,  as  you  have  truly  shown  yourself  already,  an 
honest  guardian  of  his  fame  as  long  as  you  live.  I  am  amazingly  well,  considering 
I  have  no  legs;  and  madam  much  better,  after  a  long  winter,  and  a  slow  fever, 
and  mortal  real  want  of  spirits.  We  sincerely  join  in  all  good  wishes  to  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick. 

Yours  ever, 

J.  Hoadly. 

P.  S.  Did  Keate  show  you  my  little  compliment  to  James  Harris,  sen.,  for  which 
1  received  his  thanks  from  London,  and  his  son’s  from  Madrid  ? 


422 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  CLUTTERBUCK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MV  DEAREST  GARRICK,  Luckman,  May  4,  1 771. 

It  is  fit  you  should  know  that,  the  first  of  this  month,  I  brought  in  my  chaise 
from  Gainsborough’s  house  in  the  Circus,  a  copy  of  his  exquisite  portrait  of  you  ;  and 
if  your  idea  of  gratitude  be  as  high  as  mine,  you  will  never  begrudge  the  friendship 
you  have  bestowed  upon  the  painter,  who,  because  he  owes  you  so  much,  thinks  it 
is  not  in  his  power  to  pay  you  enough  ;  whereby  he  proves  to  a  demonstration,  that  it 
is  impossible  for  you  to  lay  out  your  benevolence  to  such  great  advantage  as  in 
serving  of  him.  So  long  as  that  mother  of  all  the  virtues  will  be  held  in  estimation,  and 
that  will  be  as  long  as  one  honest  heart  is  left  among  us,  Gainsborough  will  possess 
as  much  superiority  and  esteem  as  a  man,  as  he  is  entitled  to  as  an  artist.  Thank  him 
and  you — thank  you  and  him,  for  the  most  valuable  present  it  is  worth  my  while 
(circumstanced  as  I  am)  to  accept  of,  and  which  affords  me  more  pleasure  than  the 
being  next  taker  to  Lord  Clive’s  possessions  could  possibly  do.  The  unbounded 
liberality  he  possesses  hath  inclined  him,  contrary  to  my  wish  and  expostulations,  to 
add  a  frame  (price  35s.)  to  his  picture.  I  can  have  no  merit  with  him  that  entitles 
me  to  this  additional  generosity,  neither  do  I  know  how  to  thank  him  properly.  Do 
you,  I  beseech  you,  be  so  friendly  as  to  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  doing  it,  as 
well  on  your  own  as  my  behalf ;  and  that  tvill  answer  my  purpose  with  him  better, 
far  better  than  any  thing  I  can  possibly  .do  or  say.  This  would  have  come  to  you  a 
post  sooner,  but  I  have  been  from  home  enacting  the  parts  of  a  Commissioner  of  the 
Land  Tax,  a  Commissioner  of  a  Turnpike  Act,  besides  my  ordinary  roll,  as  one  of  the 
quorum  in  the  county  of  Gloucester.  I  thank  God,  I  have  already  (in  my  own  odd 
way)  expressed  the  sense  I  have  of  Mrs.  Garrick’s  and  your  additional  ornament  for 
my  dining-room ;  but  for  want  of  new  painting,  neither  of  them  can  yet  be  put  in 
their  places  :  however,  they  are  so  disposed  till  that  can  be  done,  as  to  remind  us  con¬ 
stantly  what  obligations  they  have  laid  us  under.  I  have  got  a  touch  of  my  dejec¬ 
tion  of  spirits  again,  which  makes  my  writing  so  diminutive ;  but  I  hope  this  second 
fit  will  go  off  as  the  first  did.  .Mrs.  Clutterbuck’s  constitution  does  not  mend  by 
her  advance  in  years,  although  it  is  a  frequent  and  flattering  topic  with  Sharpe  and 
me,  that  we  outgrow  our  infirmities.  I  hope  the  observation  will  be  verified  in 
you  too,  and  that  every  fresh  year  will  produce  vigour  and  happiness.  Both  our  loves 
to  you.  Ever  and  ever  yours, 

James  Clutterbuck. 


MR.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

May  21,  1771. 

Still,  dear  Sir,  so  much  good-nature 
You  have  shown  to  me  your  creature. 

That  ’tis  now  a  thing  of  course, 

And  you  are  my  first  resource. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


423 


Fifty  times,  as  I  suppose, 

I  have  troubled  you  in  prose ; 

Let  me,  if  I  can,  a  while 
Strive  at  least  to  change  my  style  ; 
Change  of  style  is  all  my  aim, 

For  my  subject  is  the  sanle; 

And  in  prose  or  verse  a  craver, 

I  must  write  to  beg  a  favour. 

“  Well !”  cry  you  with  peevish  brow, 
“  What  the  plague’s  the  matter  now  ? 
Teas’d  and  worried  at  this  rate : 

What ’s  inclos’d  here — after  date  ? 
Promise  in  six  months  to  pay 
Griffin — Ay,  this  is  his  way  ; 

Every  now  and  then  to  send  me  : 

To  these  Irishmen  commend  me ! 

But  if  in  again  I ’m  drawn, 

Next  he’ll  send  his  brogues  to  pawn  ; 
And  expect  me  at  his  need : 

Fifty  pounds  ! — not  I  indeed. 

“  Hark’e,  George,  come  hither,  quick 
Give  this  paper  back  to  Bick ; 

Tell  him  that  I  gladly  wou’d 
Do  him  any  sort  of  good  ; 

But  demand  upon  demand 
Forces  me  to  stop  my  hand  ; 

And  in  short — (but  don’t  be  rough)— 
Say  I  can’t,  and  that’s  enough.” 

Thus,  dear  Sir,  however  I 
Your  good-nature  mean  to  try ; 

’Tis  not  but  I  know  in  fact 
How  your  judgment  ought  to  act ; 
And  whatever  my  success, 

I  am  not  obliged  the  less ; 

But  while  memory  endures 
Shall  remain  for  ever  yours. 


Endorsed, 

“  Bickerstaff’s  letter  in  verse 
for  501.,  lent  directly.” 


I.  Bickerstaff. 


MR.  T.  KYNASTON  TO  MR  GARRICK. 

Chandos-street,  Cavendish-square,  July  2nd,  1771. 

It  is  natural  for  men  eminent  in  any  profession  to  be  inquisitive  into  the  lives 
and  characters  of  persons  who  have  trod  the  same  path  of  honour  and  reputation.  I 
therefore  apply  to  you  with  great  probability  of  success,  and,  I  hope,  without  any 
breach  of  propriety,  in  a  matter  which  has  lately  very  much  raised  my  curiosity.  In 


424 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Mr.  Cibber’s  Apology  I  find  some  very  remarkable  anecdotes  of  a  gentleman  of  my 
name,  and  (as  I  have  reason  to  suppose)  of  my  family.  As  be  seems  to  have  appeared 
on  the  stage  with  no  small  degree  of  credit  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  your 
literary  researches  into  theatrical  history  have  probably  furnished  you  with  a  more 
particular  account  of  him  than  I  have  been  able  to  collect  from  the  imperfect  infor¬ 
mation  of  my  relations.  If  any  circumstances  of  his  birth,  Christian  name,  or  connex¬ 
ion  with  the  families  of  my  name  in  Shropshire,  have  at  any  time  come  to  your 
knowledge,  either  from  books  or  tradition,  I  should  think  myself  much  obliged  to 
you,  if  you  would  employ  a  leisure  hour  in  communicating  them  to  me.  The  proofs 
you  have  given  of  your  inclination  to  serve  me  (for  which  I  take  this  opportunity  to 
repeat  my  acknowledgment)  flatter  me  that  you  will  excuse  the  liberty  of  this 
application. 


<c 


I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  obliged  servant, 

Thomas  Kynaston. 


Endorsed, 

Letter  from  a  Mr.  Kynaston  about 
the  old  actor  Kynaston.” 


MR.  H.  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

HONOURED  SIR,  Stratford,  June  4th,  1771. 

By  your  leave,  I  have  made  bold  to  send,  to  your  honour,  by  this  man,  two  small 
heads  of  Shakespears,  which  I  have  carved  from  part  of  the  mulberry  tree,  Avhich 
Shakespear  planted,  which  I  hope  your  honour  will  do  me  the  favour  of  accepting 
them,  as  the  intent  of  them  are  to  be  set  in  two  rings,  under  the  stone  or  without,  jest 
as  your  honour  thinks  proper.  I  have  add  the  pleasure  of  carving  things  of  one  sort 
or  another  ever  since  the  Jubilee,  and  have  carv’d  Shakespears  statuer,  in  the  same 
postuer  which  he  now  represents  at  the  Town-hall,  here  in  Stratford,  for  one  Mr. 
Sharp  in  Stratford  that  keeps  a  toy-shop,  which  said  statuer  is  apon  sale,  and  his 
look’d  upon  by  all  judges  that  have  saw  it,  to  be  very  well  executed,  tho’  I  never 
saw  any  thing  carv’d  in  my  life,  for  I  am  by  trade  a  shoemaker,  and  a  native  of  Strat¬ 
ford,  tho'  have  not  follo’d  that  branch  for  several  years,  for  I  am  a  painter,  carver, 
and  engravenor,  and  in  short  Jack  of  all  Trades,  for  through  the  blessings  of  God,  I 
never  saw  nothing  yet  but  what  I  can  do.  This  your  honour  may  think  is  my  con¬ 
ceitedness;  but  I  have  done  that  which  all  the  great  mecannicks  at  Birmingham  could 
not  perform,  a  hook  for  a  ladies  watch,  the  twenty-four  letters  in  cyper  thorrougli’t 
in  steel,  that  a  shilling  covered  it.  That’s  not  all ;  but  I  am  sorry  to  be  so  trublesom 
to  your  honour,  concerning  the  seens  of  my  life,  as  I  shant  say  much  more,  tho’  I 
have  been  allmost  in  all  ceens  of  life,  but  never  could  shine  in  the  world  as  some  men 
do.  All  that  I  ever  gained  wras  applaws,  and  I  should  take  it  as  a  great  favour,  if  your 
honour  would  be  so  good  as  to  give  me  an  order  somewhat  in  the  carving  way,  and 
if  you  should  be  any  ways  dubeious  as  it’s  not  the  tree,  I  will  come  upon  oath  that  it 
his  of  the  real  tree. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


42  5 


P.  S.  Theis  heads  I  carv’d  with  my  naked  eye  without  the  use  of  a  glass,  altho’ 
I  am  at  the  age  of  forty-three ;  I  can  write  the  Lord’s  Prayer  without  the  use  of  any 
glass,  in  the  cumpas  of  a  silver  penney ;  and  thees  small  stones  which  I  have  sent  are 
to  be  found  on  a  hill  cald  Barnhill,  within  a  mild  of  Stratford,  the  road  that  Shake- 
spear  whent  when  he  wlient  to  see  his  Bidford  topers ;  thees  stones  will  swim  in  a 
delf-plate  amongst  viniger.  I  can  send  your  honour  a  thousand  of  them  if  you  will 
except  of  them,  of  vareious  sises  ;  the  are  natural.  I  have  a  very  hansom  remarkable 
spoted  coach-dog,  that  his  spoted  like  a  leper,  which  I  add  of  one  Mr.  Shakespear 
of  Coventry,  and  of  Shakespear’s  famuley,  and  for  that  acount  I  don’t  set  a  little  store 
by  my  dog,  for  I  could  have  parted  with  him  several  times,  but  I  ont  without  your 
honour  will  except  of  him,  he  shall  be  at  your  service.  I  hope  your  honour  will 
excuse  my  writing,  spelling,  and  inditing,  for  I  add  but  a  very  slender  education, 
what  learning  I  ever  have  add  was  at  the  said  school  where  Shakespear  went,  that  his, 
under  the  same  ruff,  and  what  learning  I  have,  I  have  tane  chefley  of  my  one  head. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant  at  command, 

Henry  Cooper.* 

I  hope  that  your  honour  will  favour  me  with  a  line  or  two  in  Swine-street, 
Stratford. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Kildare-street,  July  4,  1771 . 

One  of  the  first  offices  following  those  of  duty,  is  to  give  myself  the  importance 
with  you  of  acquainting  you  of  my  safe  arrival  in  this  place  on  the  night  of  the  30th 
instant,  after  a  calm  and  pleasant  passage  of  thirty-six  hours  in  a  Parkgate  ship,  which 
on  my  arrival  at  Chester  I  found  with  her  topsails  unbent,  and  ready  to  catch  the 
first  favourable  breeze.  My  dear  woman  and  the  little  boys,  who  had  been  charming 
companions  on  land  to  me,  did  not  lose  their  spirits  by  sea;  and  as  I  lashed  my  chariot 
on  deck,  we  sate  in  it  with  great  state  and  composure,  and  saved  the  nauseous  smell 
of  human  sickliness,  which  infests  the  lower  regions  of  a  ship  full  of  passengers.  We 
found  our  friends  here  almost  sinking  under  repeated  family  sorrows  and  losses,  and 
my  mother,  in  particular,  suffering  infinite  pain  and  illness  from  a  disorder  which  the 
faculty  have  in  vain  attempted  to  remove :  I  much  doubt  if  she  is  recoverable,  but  1 
hope  I  shall  give  comfort  if  not  cure. 

You  will  believe  1  lost  no  time  in  obeying  your  desires,  and  the  second  day  I 
delivered  your  letter  into  George  Falkener’s  hands.  As  you  had  anticipated  the  very 
words  he  saluted  me  with,  I  need  not  repeat  them ;  he  rehearsed  your  epistle  with 

*  One  move  of  those  singular  instances  in  which  the  mere  notion  of  learning  seems  to  have  kept  very 
clever  people  all  their  lives  in  total  ignorance  of  orthography ;  and  they  have  given  up  a  spelling-book  in 
despair,  at  a  time  when  the  really  difficult  things  of  the  world  were  but  as  pastime  to  their  genius  and  appli¬ 
cation. — Ed. 

3  i 


VOL.  1. 


42b 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


great  dignity  and  energy,  and  we  proceeded  forthwith  to  summon  parties  and  wit¬ 
nesses  relative  to  the  Jubilee  cause  before  the  Alderman,  Dean  Bayly,  and  the  author 
of  “The  West  Indian,”  assisted  by  a  jury  of  printers,  compilers,  devils,  hawkers,  and 
raps  of  all  sorts,  which  compose  the  train  of  George  the  Great.  I  have  long  known 
what  consequence  is  to  be  expected  from  trying  a  cause  in  Ireland  :  it  was  verified  on 
this  occasion ;  oaths,  depositions,  affidavits,  and  all  kinds  of  evidence,  were  attested  to 
clear  the  parties  suspected ;  and  as  these  proofs  had  been  transmitted  to  you  by  Mr. 
Wilks  (whom  also  I  have  seen),  I  hope  you  have  formed  your  opinion  on  the  matter. 
It  is  said  Mr.  Dawson  extracted  his  “Jubilee”  (for  it  is  not  yours)  from  magazines, 
song-books,  papers,  kc.  and  that  he  compiled  it  from  these  publications  as  well  as  he 
could,  the  Sparkes’s  being  entirely  innocent  of  the  plagiary :  it  seemed  probable  that 
they  had  no  hand  in  it. 

The  Barrys  are  here  acting  to  thin  theatres,  the  weather  being  hot  and  the  town 
empty :  she  has  played  with  reputation,  and  is  allowed  to  be  much  improved :  she  is 
at  this  moment  acting  Sir  Harry  Wildair  for  her  owm  benefit,  and  on  the  same  night 
that  Fischar  the  hautboy  has  his,  which  is  resented  in  general. 

I  am  wishing  that  Barry  would  get  up  the  part  of  O’Flaherty,  and  she  that  of 
Miss  Rusport ;  and  though  I  shall  not  signify  my  wish  to  them  after  what  has  passed 
from  Mr.  Barry  on  the  same  subject,  yet  as  Dr.  Leland,  in  particular,  and  many 
more  are  of  the  same  opinion,  and  they  seem  likely  to  ensure  several  full  houses  from 
the  experiment,  I  am  privately  told  they  will  probably  get  it  up :  if  they  do,  I  will 
let  you  know.  Mossop  is  silent.  Miss  Young  is  well  spoken  of,  and,  I  believe,  is  a 
good  comedian  in  upper  life.  In  general  I  believe  our  friend  Gibson  has  as  good  a 
set  at  Liverpool  as  Dublin  can  show  ;  wretched  indeed,  and  ill-attended.  They  are 
very  angry  with  Moody,  and  never  knew  his  story  till  I  gave  them  some  intima¬ 
tion  of  it ;  on  the  contrary,  George  and  others  believed  him  mad ;  and  indeed, 
between  us,  he  committed  some  wanton  frolics  under  the  name  of  O’Flaherty.  I 
have  bought  your  linen,  and  shall  send  it  over  this  Aveek. 

Adieu,  my  dear  friend,  yours, 

R.  Cumberland. 


July  6th,  1771. 

At  the  Court  of  Apollo,  it  was  resolved — 

That  a  pilgrimage  be  made  to  Hampton,  on  Monday  next,  by  Messrs.  \\  ilkes 
and  Loyd  to  pay  their  Devoirs  to  the  Prophet  Sliahspeare  and  his  Priest. 

N.  B.  Miss  Wilkes  will  pay  her  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  at  the  same  time. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


427 


MR.  RICHARD  RIGBY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  Mistley,  July  12th,  1771. 

If  Lord  Somers  was  in  London,  he,  and  he  only,  would  be  the  proper  person  to 
apply  to  for  to  get  a  Sheriff  to  one’s  mind  ;  but  he  is  at  Trentham,  and  does  not 
come  up  till  a  day  or  two  before  the  Installation. 

To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  I  have  seen  the  Monmouthshire  election  fixed 
for  the  22nd  of  this  month  ;  and  nothing  can  postpone  the  day,  if  it  is  fixed.  In  case 
of  the  death  of  a  sheriff,  I  apprehend,  there  is  no  longer  any  under-sheriff,  and  the 
coroner  will  become  the  returning  officer  for  the  county,  unless  a  new  sheriff  is  ap¬ 
pointed,  which  there  seems  hardly  time  to  have  done,  if  the  election  is  ten  days  hence. 
But,  my  dear  David,  your  good  friends  at  Tunbridge,  I  find,  do  not  know  so  well  as 
I  do,  that  the  Morgans,  who  are  two  brothers  in  parliament,  and  think  themselves 
sure  of  a  third  upon  this  vacancy,  are  staunch  friends  to  Government,  and  particu¬ 
larly  to  Lord  North,  to  whose  administration  they  have  constantly  given  all  their 
support,  which  effectually  prevents  my  being  at  liberty  to  stir  in  this  business.  I 
rejoice  at  our  royal  master’s  triumph  over  such  a  set  of  scoundrels. 

I  do  not  wonder  Jack  Cade*  wanted  a  dinner  at  Hampton ;  it  is  the  place  in  the 
world  for  true  taste,  good  living,  and  good  company.  My  best  compliments  to  the 
female  portion  of  it. 

I  am,  dear  David,  yours  sincerely, 

Richard  Rigby. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Kildare-street,  July  13th,  1771. 

It  is  well  that  snarlers  at  home  now  and  then  give  me  a  snap,  else  I  should  swell 
like  the  frog  in  the  fable,  not  only  with  Irish  hospitality,  but  with  Irish  flattery.  It 
is  not  only  individuals  of  the  first  rank  in  this  kingdom  that  have  caressed  your  un¬ 
deserving  friend,  but  the  University  of  Dublin  have,  of  their  own  mere  motion  and 
bounty,  conferred  upon  me  an  honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of  Civil  Law,  at  the  public 
commencement.  I  am  bound  to  report  all  these  flattering  circumstances  to  you,  who 
are  the  friend  and  father  of  my  fame,  and  to  whom  I  owe  an  account  of  every  thing 
relating  to  it.  It  has  been  a  spur  in  the  way  of  the  growing  comedy,  which  comes 
out  purified  by  your  fiery  trial,  and  less  drossy  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been  : 
it  will  be  ready  in  time  if  it  pleases  God  I  have  my  health,  and  I  flatter  myself 
“  Timon”  will  open  the  season  successfully  and  brilliantly.  I  wish  to  hear  that  you 
are  at  your  ease  about  the  Jubilee. 

There  is  a  young  man  here  of  the  name  of  Lewis,  who  played  Belcour :  I  have 
*  A  whimsical  reference  to  Jack  Wilkes’s  pilgrimage  to  Hampton,  ante. — Ed. 

3  I  2 


428 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


not  yet  seen  him,  as  Barry  is  for  ever  in  the  tragic  vein  :  lie  seems  to  promise  good 
matters;  he  has  person  and  spirit,  and  they  tell  me  is  quite  at  home  in  the  coxco- 
mical  and  gav  walk  of  comedy :  he  overacted  Belcour,  but  was  liked,  and  that  is  a 
good  fault,  if  any  fault  can  be  such.  I  shall  write  to  you  farther  particulars  when 
I  have  seen  him,  but  in  the  mean  time  tell  me  if  I  shall  sound  him  about  engage¬ 
ments,  or  hold  out  any  overture  to  him  on  your  behalf.  I  conceive  he  would  be  an 
accession  under  your  government,  as  he  is  very  young,  handsome,  and  volatile. 

Adieu,  my  dear  Sir ;  accept  mine  and  Mrs.  Cumberland’s  best  wishes,  and  pre¬ 
sent  them  to  your  amiable  wife. 

I  am  ever  most  faithfully  and  affectionately  yours, 

R.  Cumberland. 

Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Cumberland’s  first  letter 
since  his  taking  his  degree.” 


MR.  WILMOT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bloomsbury-square,  18th  July,  1771 . 

Your  plague  and  mine,  Mr.  Phillips,  has  been  with  me  this  morning,  telling  me 
a  most  damned  be,  viz.  That  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you  had  sent  him  to  me  to  be  paid, 
for  that  you  had  desired  me  to  settle  it  with  him  and  pay  him.  I  told  him  he  had 
omitted  the  most  material  part,  viz.  that  he  was  to  be  paid  if  I  thought  it  reasonable 
that  he  should  be  paid  any  thing ;  and  that  I  did  not  think  it  reasonable  that  he 
should  be  paid  one  farthing.  I  read  him  Lord  Halifax’s  letter,  and  the  other  letter  ; 
and  told  him  I  should  believe  those  and  not  him,  and  that  I  did  not  think  you  ought 
to  pay  him  two-pence.  Nothing  would  satisfy  him,  and  he  stayed  here  making  a 
great  noise  for  the  best  part  of  an  hour,  and  then  went  away,  he  said,  to  your  house. 
Since  that  he  has  returned  again,  says  your  servants  tell  him  that  you  are  come  here, 
and  he  wants  to  meet  you  face  to  face.  He  says  he  will  call  again  in  the  evening ; 
and  if  I  tell  him  that  you  will  not  pay  him,  he  will  arrest  you  as  you  go  through 
Kensington.  If  he  should,  you  may  send  to  me  to  bail  you  ;  though  I  think  I  had 
rather  you  should  go  to  gaol,  and  then  Mrs.  Garrick  (to  whom  I  beg  my  love)  may 
come  and  live  with  me,  who  am, 

My  dear  Sir,  ever  faithfully  and  affectionately  yours, 

Hen.  Wilmot.* 

My  wife  returns  from  Tunbridge  on  Tuesday.  We  shall  be  at  Farnborough  on 
Friday,  viz.  to-morrow  se’nnight.  Will  you  come  to  us  there  ?  or  when  do  you  go 
into  Devonshire,  or  to  Rome,  or  the  south  of  France  ? 


The  Chief  Justice. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


429 


MR.  R.  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Grenada,  26th  July,  1771 — a  day  of  great  hurry 
and  confusion  with  us. 

X 

No,  it  is  not  my  fault,  friend  Hotspur  ;  whose  it  is  I  know  not,  but  somewhere  or 
with  some  person  it  rests,  perhaps  with  your  bosom  friend  Captain  O’Neale,  that  1 
am  on  the  26th  July  answering  a  letter  from  you  dated  28th  March.  I  did  not  re¬ 
ceive  it  until  the  14th  of  this  month.  See  what  it  is  to  correspond  with  wits !  the 
credit  of  the  correspondence,  it  is  true,  is  something,  but  the  confusion  of  it  is  dread¬ 
ful.  Had  not  one  man  of  plain  sense  and  cool-headed  understanding  happily  mixed 
himself  with  the  geniuses  David,  Edmund,  and  William,  to  ivit,  my  excellent  friend 
George,  your  unsuspecting  friend  Richard  might  have  sweated  here  till  Doomsday, 
for  any  direct  information  which  he  received,  or  almost  I  may  say  hint  given  to  him, 
that  he  had  leave  of  absence.  The  packet  indeed,  which  arrived  here  last  Sunday,  put 
an  end  to  all  doubts,  by  bringing  to  me  a  letter  from  a  set  of  gentlemen  not  much 
noted  in  their  collective  capacity  for  wit — the  Commissioners  of  his  Majesty’s  Cus¬ 
toms,  who  in  the  plainest  and  most  intelligible  manner  inform  me,  that  the  Lords  of 
the  Treasury  command  me  to  quit  this  island,  and  to  be  absent  for  twelve  months. 
My  dear  Garrick,  ten  thousand  thanks,  and  then  ten  thousand  more :  never  was  any 
thing  so  opportune ;  I  had  almost  worked  myself  up  to  the  resolution  of  going  with¬ 
out  leave.  Such  are  still  my  hopes  in  the  Caraibe  lands,*  ‘  for,  though  oppressed  and 
fallen,  1  give  not  Caraiby  for  lost,’  in  the  violence  and  ignorance  of  their  modes  I 
hope  to  find  an  antidote  against  the  malice  and  injustice  of  their  actions.  But  no  more 
of  this  until  we  meet ;  then  perhaps,  if  you  continue  to  behave  well,  I  may  honour  your 
house  by  presenting  to  it  the  most  superb  pantomime  of  Harlequin  Caraibe,  inter¬ 
spersed  with  the  humours  of  a  West  Indian  Council  and  Assembly,  and  fine  ma¬ 
chinery  by  Major  Sturgeon,  who  has  also  set  the  piece  to  music. 

You  shall  speak  a  prologue,  which  I  give  you  leave  to  write;  but  as  to  the 
character  of  Harlequin  (though  I  have  a  just  sense  of  your  abilities)  I  will  positively 
do  justice  to  that  myself.  Curse  your  “West  Indian  !” —  however,  as  I  hope  the  run 
of  it  will  be  over  by  the  time  I  get  home,  and  the  house  just  opening,  I  beg  of  my 
very  good  friend  George  to  get  every  thing  ready  for  exhibiting  my  Caraibe,  who 
will  put  Mother  Shipton  to  flight,  and  save  you  the  censure  of  your  friend,  critic 
Jack.  But  rather  sham  illness  than  be  ill ;  let  me  find  you  well,  strong  and  in  spirits  ; 
as  to  fortune  and  reputation,  you  have  got  as  much  as  a  wise  man  would  wish  of  the 
first,  and  of  the  last  as  much  as  might  make  ten  wise  men  fools  or  madmen  :  may 
they  increase,  however,  until  1  cry  enough,  and  until  your  enemies  hang  themselves  ! 
On  the  1st  of  August,  and  in  the  good  ship  the  Friendship,  I  shall  embark;  and  about 

* - “  Though  opprest  and  fall’ll, 

I  give  not  Heaven  for  lost.” 


Var.  Lost,  B.  2.  1.  13. — Ed. 


430 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  middle  of  September  I  trust  to  shake  you  by  the  hand,  to  tell  you  how  much  I 
thank  you,  and  how  really  1  love  you.  I  will  not  desire  my  compliments  even  to 
Mrs.  Garrick,  or  my  thanks  to  George  ;  in  person  1  will  pay  them.  Adieu,  my  dear 
Sir ;  believe  me  most  truly  yours, 

Rich.  Burke. 

This  letter  goes  by  a  Friendship,  but  that  is  not  the  other  Friendship. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  friend  Dick  Burke’s  letter  to  me 
from  the  West  Indies.” 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK 


Dublin,  Aug.  5th,  1771. 

I  cannot  leave  Dublin,  my  dear  friend,  without  bidding  you  farewell ;  for  the 
solitude  I  am  going  into  naturally  disposes  my  mind  to  take  leave  of  those  friends 
which  the  world's  society  have  bestowed  upon  me  :  amongst  them  my  chief  accession 
lies  in  your  breast,  and  when  “  The  West  Indian”  gave  me  your  regard,  and  bestowed 
all  mine  upon  you,  it  did  more  for  me  than  the  best  production  ever  did  for  its 
author  before. 

I  am  eoinsc  with  a  resolution  not  to  stir  out  of  the  demesne  lands  of  Clonfert, 
but  to  court  the  Muse  naked  from  tlie  bog,  and  catch  a  glimpse  of  unsophisticated 
Nature.  I  would  fain  do  something  for  you  that  should  live  ;  I  write  with  double 
zeal,  because  I  think  I  am  in  some  degree  serving  your  fame  as  well  as  my  own ;  and 
I  proceed  with  confidence,  because  I  know  my  production,  if  it  can  pass  your  scrutiny* 
must  make  its  way  with  the  public.  Let  me  cast  one  dart  at  Prejudice  (national 
prejudice),  and  I  shall  call  it  victory,  if  it  pierces  no  farther  than  the  stroke  which 
Abdiel  gave  to  Satan. 

I  am  not  happy  about  this  Lewis ;  I  am  leaving  him  behind,  and  I  am  not  quite 
satisfied  in  so  doing :  the  fellow  avoided  an  interview  with  me,  as  I  believe,  con- 
trivedly  ;  for  I  understand  he  is  connected,  or  related  to  Dawson,  and  has  besides  so 
great  a  salary,  (viz.  eight  guineas  a  week)  that  if  his  ambition  to  be  made  an  actor 
did  not  operate  more  forcibly  than  his  avarice,  there  would  be  no  probability  of 
detaching  him  ;  for  I  suppose  you  would  hardly  give  him  more  than  a  moiety  of 
such  pay.  I  am  firmly  of  opinion,  the  lad  has  faculties  to  make  a  figure  in  Comedy  ; 
and  not  in  Mr.  King’s  or  Dodd’s  walk  only,  but  as  the  fine  gentleman  ;  as  that  higher 
kind  of  comedy  which  hardly  now  exists,  which  Smith  has  in  the  exterior,  to  which 
O’Brien  might  perhaps  have  attained,  if  he  had  not  meddled  with  real,  instead  of 
artificial,  upper  life.  He  has  a  strong  tone,  which  breaks  occasionally  into  the  hu¬ 
morous  with  great  success,  and  is  capable  of  variation  in  his  cadences  ;  his  eye  is 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


431 


quick,  and  his  modesty  does  not  stand  in  his  way.*  I  lost  the  opportunity  of  seeing 
him  in  Mercutio,  and  Dick  the  Apprentice,  for  Dawson’s  benefit,  because  Madam 
Barry  chose  to  be  ill-disposed,  and  so  the  benefit  was  laid  aside ;  I  believe  indeed 
it  would  not  have  lit  the  candles. 

I  have  written  my  foolish  sentiments  about  the  Barrys  with  the  sincerity  that  I 
shall  always  use  to  you.  As  far  as  my  poor  judgment  goes,  it  is  confirmed  by  re¬ 
flection  :  and  when  you  have  once  shown  them  and  the  world  you  can  do  as  well 
without  them  as  with  them,  they  will  no  longer  be  tyrants  and  coquettes.  Miss 
Younge  you  well  know  how  to  husband,  and  not  spend  what  powers  she  may  have 
with  the  profligate  waste  that  the  little  man  of  Covent  Garden  used  in  Mr.  Savigny’s 
instance.  I  hear  her  forte  is  genteel  comedy,  and  am  not  much  edified  by  the  account 
of  her  tragical  performances.  I  have  not  absolutely  lost  sight  of  Lewis,  if  you  choose 
to  give  me  any  instructions  peremptory  about  him ;  for  I  have  left  a  word  or  two  in 
a  friend’s  ear  which  may  work  upon  him,  but  have  not  committed  you  in  the  busi¬ 
ness.  After  all  I  have  said,  you  would  frighten  me  if  you  gave  me  full  contracting 
powers,  because  I  should  distrust  my  judgment  from  the  short  trial  I  have  had  of 
him.  I  need  not  entreat  my  friend  to  equip  my  offspring  “  Timon”  with  all  due 
splendour  and  magnificence ;  for  if  he  does  not  glitter  in  scenery  and  dress,  the  words 
will  come  unrecommended  to  the  ear. 

Adieu,  my  dear  Sir,  and  believe  me  ever  most  faithfully  and  truly  yours, 

R.  Cumberland. 


THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Gloucester,  Aug.  16th,  1771. 

Give  me  leave  to  return  my  thanks  for  the  delightful  opportunity  afforded  me 
just  to  take  my  aim  at  a  bevy  of  flying  travellers.  But  my  best  thanks  are  due  to 
Mrs.  Garrick  for  the  honour  she  did  me  in  accompanying  you  to  my  superb  palace. 
When  I  come  to  town,  and  can  get  into  your  house,  my  first  care  shall  be  to  make 
my  warmest  acknowledgments  to  her  for  this  favour. 

I  have  not  had  (or  rather  you  have  not  given  me)  an  opportunity  to  explain  my 
conduct  concerning  the  Liverpool  Theatre.  I  had  proposed,  according  to  my  pro¬ 
mise,  to  assist  the  patentee.  But  when  I  came  into  the  house,  I  found  the  whole 
Bench  had  agreed  to  oppose  it ;  and  as  my  dissenting  from  them  would  be  of  no  use, 
and  would  much  disgust  them,  some  of  them  desired  I  would  be  silent,  as  it  would 
not  hurt  the  claimants ;  for  it  was  soon  seen  how  the  thing  would  go. 

*  A  very  lively  picture  of  the  brilliant  success  of  our  favourite  William  Lewis,  when  a  youth.  Cumber¬ 
land  seems  to  have  been  a  remarkably  keen  observer,  and  sound  judge  of  his  materials. — Ed. 


432 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OP 


1  have  only,  at  present,  to  wish  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  a  safe  return  in  full  health 
to  Twitenham. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Gloucester. 


DR.  BEATTIE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Well’s  Street,  Oxford  Road,  Aug.  20th,  1  771. 

Be  pleased  to  accept  of  this  little  poem  as  a  small  tribute  of  respect  from  one 
who  loves  your  character  and  admires  your  talents.  Solicitous  as  I  have  been,  these 
many  years,  to  be  in  some  degree  known  to  you,  I  should  hardly  have  ventured  to 
take  this  liberty,  if  I  had  not  heard  from  Lord  Mansfield  that  you  have  been  pleased 
to  speak  favourably  of  “  The  Minstrel.”  The  approbation  of  such  a  person  yields 
me  a  pleasure  which  I  cannot  express  ;  but  which  you,  Sir,  who  are  so  perfectly 
acquainted  with  every  generous  emotion  of  the  human  heart,  will  be  at  no  loss  to 
conceive,  when  I  tell  you,  that  the  principal  object  of  my  ambition  is  to  deserve  the 
notice  of  men  of  genius  and  worth.  I  am,  with  every  sentiment  of  esteem  and 
respect,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

James  Beattie. 


LORD  LYTTELTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Hagley,  Aug.  29th,  1771. 

I  believe  you  have  passed  a  very  judicious  decree  concerning  the  turtle,  and 
only  regret  that  you  have  given  yourself  so  much  trouble  about  it. 

Your  borrowed  book  shall  be  sent  to  you  by  the  first  safe  hand.  Mrs.  Montagu 
has  it,  and  will  give  you  joint  security  that  it  shall  not  be  lost  here.  You  may  do 
what  you  please  with  mine,  which  is  only  a  broken  volume. 

The  Grenville  family  is  still  here;  Burzinsky  and  Paoli  have  just  left  us;  Bel- 
gioioso  and  the  Russians  are  to  come  next  week  ;  Mrs.  Montagu  has  been  indisposed, 
but  is  better :  we  are  preparing  for  another  expedition  to  Arley,  but  all  parties  of 
pleasure  without  Garrick  and  Pid-pad  appear  dull  and  insipid.  This  is  all  our  Hagley 
news.  Mrs.  Montagu  desires  me  to  say  fine  things  from  her  to  you,  but  I  will  leave 
her  to  say  her  fine  things  herself,  and  only  tell  you  a  plain  truth,  that  we  both  love 
you  dearly.  I  have  given  my  little  grandson  the  kisses  you  sent  him,  and  delivered 
your  compliments  to  Miss  Canning,  who  desires  hers  to  you  and  Pid-pad,  but  takes 
it  ill  that  you  sent  no  kisses  to  her.  Lord  and  Lady  Yalentia  are  much  your  servants. 
I  am  ever,  my  dear  Garrick,  and  my  dear  Pid-pad, 

Most  affectionately  and  faithfully  yours, 

Lyttelton. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


433 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  Sept.  1st,  1771. 

After  your  220  miles  twice  told,  I  trust  you  are  returned,  and  Madam  with 
you,  safe  and  sound,  to  Hampton,  and  dear  home — as  every  Miss  is  taught  to  say, 
when  she  has  been  with  Mamma  a  whole  summer  a-watering.  It  has  often  been 
in  my  head  to  wish  you  as  good  a  neighbour  as  you  had  in  Lord  Halifax,  whom 
I  have  heard  you  talk  of  -with  pleasure.  I  get  nothing  from  my  sister  by  my 
enquiries,  but  a  word  from  Tunbridge,  (where  she  is  instead  of  more  expensive  Spa, 
to  which  she  is  recommended,)  “  begging  her  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick  with  her 
great  concern  for  the  trouble  her  enquiries  have  given  him,  especially  at  such  a 
distance  of  time;  begging  him  to  forgive  and  forget,  and  let  this  Country  Burial  be 
buried  in  all  our  thoughts  for  ever,  and  all  circumstances  of  it.  It  was  not  on  any 
account  of  her  own  that  enquiries  were  made,  &c.  writing  not  agreeing  with  her 
head,  while  she  is  drinking  the  waters.  She  begs  it  may  never  be  thought  of  again.” 
Such  things,  good  Madam  Hoadly,  may  rise  again  when  we  are  gone,  or  when  we  do 
not  think  of  them,  to  our  great  uneasiness.  So  much  for  that.  This  old  Lady’s 
great  fortune  is  not  owing,  a  farthing  of  it,  to  the  Mathews’s ;  but  comes  from  a 
widow  sister,  and  that  excellent  thing,  the  admiration  of  misers,  called  accumula¬ 
tion.  She  has  returned  10,000/.  with  the  interest  thereof  to  them,  who,  as  I  hear, 
were  always  upon  the  high  ropes  with  her,  and  did  not  use  her  well.  How 
P.  has  used  her,  I  know  not;  but  she  is  a  very  worthy  woman,  and  sits  down 
in  a  very  worthy  fortune.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  We  are  too  gay 

here  by  half ;  the  maddest  of  us  are  tired  down.  A  full,  but  sad  masquerade — poor 
supper — sad  attendance — all  confusion,  and  the  great  Frere  blamed  on  all  hands. 
The  great  Dr.  Dodd  there,  in  jewels  of  silver,  merely,  I  suppose,  to  look  after  his  two 
youths,  who  are  here  under  his  care.  I  wish  somebody  had  played  two  or  three  of 
his  Magdalens  upon  him.  It  would  have  been  a  good  and  new  character.  Colman 
has  been  here,  but  I  have  not  had  a  sight  of  him.  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  of  your 
winter  operations.  Is  there  an  East  Indian,  or  is  it  only  a  bamm  of  the  news  ?  If 
Air.  C.  has  any  thing  on  the  anvil,  that  you  or  he  thinks  I  can  be  of  use  in,  I  am  at 
those  worthy  gentlemen’s  service.  Our  loves.  Adieu,  remember  me. 

J.  Hoadly. 

P.  S.  Send  me  the  two  copies  of  verses  by  Lord  Lyttelton  and  yourself,  before 
they  are  seen  and  old  (like  clothes  now-a-days)  or  worn  out  in  your  pocket.  This 
after  preaching  at  Old  Alresford.f  *  *  *  * 

We  return  to  St.  Maries  on  Tuesday,  and  meet  II.  Warner. 

t  I  have  omitted  a  few  passages  in  this  and  other  letters  of  Chancellor  Hoadly’s,  because  they  were  cal¬ 
culated  for  private  perusal  only.  Personal  infirmities,  and  the  contrivances  to  palliate  them,  are  but  sorry 
subjects  of  jocularity;  but  we  often  find  that,  when  they  are  endured  at  home  by  delicacy  and  duty,  the 
object  of  them  derives  confidence  from  indulgence,  and  makes  a  favourite  topic  of  what  should  be  a  profound 
secret. — Ed. 

3  K 


VOL.  I. 


434 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Clonfert,  Sept.  8th,  1771. 

I  have  been  watching  the  posts,  my  dear  Sir,  with  more  than  usual  impatience, 
for  some  time.  L  wrote  to  you  the  day  before  I  quitted  Dublin  the  sum  total  of 
my  thoughts;  and  I  went  out  of  my  province,  by  following  the  zeal  of  my  friendship, 
in  talking  about  matters  that  respected  the  internal  government  and  police  of  your 
theatre.  I  mean  with  regard  to  the  Barrys  :  I  own  I  wish  to  hear  from  you  on  that 
among  other  accounts.  My  little  Major  says  you  have  passed  your  time  agreeably 
amongst  the  great  ones  of  this  world  in  the  paradise  of  the  West,  Mount  Edge- 
cumbe.  I  rejoice  in  your  felicity,  and  I  envy  them  theirs  in  having  you.  I  have 
looked  for  you  amongst  our  bogs,  and  sometimes  in  a  brighter  moment  I  have  seen 
you.  It  is  then  I  have  pleased  myself ;  it  is  then  my  Muse  has  been  my  favourite; 
and  at  length  I  have  completed  my  work.  You  ask,  does  it  please  me  ?  I  tell  you, 
with  a  sincerity  that  does  not  fear  the  imputation  of  vanity,  that  it  does  please  me, 
and  very  highly.  I  have  an  internal  plaudit  that  sanctifies  my  effort,  and  I  am  satis¬ 
fied  I  shall  put  into  your  hands  a  work  more  worthy  your  protection  than  any  I  have 
yet  committed  to  the  public.  Mortimer  has  gained  upon  me  in  the  working  up  ; 
occasions  grew  upon  my  plan  that  I  did  not  foresee,  and  the  intervention  of  Aubrey 
the  father  comes  in  with  all  the  higher  powers  of  Comedy,  and  carries  Mortimer  and 
Macleod  up  along  with  it.  I  have  kept  these  two  pure  and  steady  to  their  character ; 
I  have  not  let  Mortimer  sink  into  m’ere  good  humour,  as  Dr.  Smollet  has  let  Mat¬ 
thew  Bramble  in  Humphrey  Clinker.  I  think,  with  the  assistance  of  Doctor  Druid, 
a  Welsh  (instead  of  Dutch)  antiquarian,  there  is  enough  of  Comedy  ;  and  the  other 
parts  go  much  deeper  to  the  heart  than  our  last  did.  By  putting  out  Lady  Caroline 
and  Fairfax,  as  you  advised,  I  have  had  elbow-room,  and  without  running  the  piece 
into  length,  have  been  nowhere  cramped  or  distressed.  Enough  is  said  to  satisfy 
morality  and  the  times ;  and  the  touches  are  light  and  pleasant,  though  they  cut  deep. 
To  combat  a  national  prejudice  of  a  pernicious  sort,  is  the  avowed  design  of  the  play 
and  is  the  closing  moral.  I  think  the  world  will  be  with  us  in  the  attempt.  Give 
me  pardon  for  this  long  digression  upon  the  subject  of  self ;  but  I  really  write  with 
your  approbation  ever  in  view,  and  as  I  now  flatter  myself  I  enter  into  your  sen¬ 
timents,  I  am  always  in  high  spirits  when  1  think  I  have  hit  your  taste.  I  write  in 
a  house  of  sickness,  for  my  mother  has  been,  and  still  is,  in  a  very  dangerous  state. 

I  am  looking  homewards  ;  but  if  accident  or  illness  either  to  self,  family  or  friends, 
clogs  my  chariot-wheels  in  my  return  towards  you,  father,  I  beseech  you,  favour 
my  lialf-begotten  brat,  called  “  Timon  give  him  a  good  coat  on  his  back,  and  send 
him  into  the  world  like  a  gentleman’s  son.  Cast  the  parts  entirely  to  your  own 
taste.  But  what  shall  I  say  about  correcting  the  press  ?  Surely  Becket  can  do  that 
— And  then  prologue  and  epilogue — You  know  my  wishes,  you  see  my  wants,  and 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


435 


your  friendship  will  provide  for  both.  It  shall  be  then  my  turn  to  propose  my  poor 
services  to  you  in  the  way  you  hinted  to  me,  as  an  office  Chancellor  Hoadly  was 
to  have  engaged  in  ;  and  if  you  think  me  capable  of  the  task,  I  will  hold  myself  vacant 
from  any  other  pursuits,  and  give  my  thoughts  entirely  to  the  undertaking  for  your 
sake.*  I  left  word  that  any  turtles,  that  might  come  in  my  absence,  should  be  sent  to 
you,  and  I  understand  one  has  been  at  your  door  ;  I  hope  you  found  it  on  your  return, 
and  that  it  was  a  good  one.  Adieu,  my  dear  friend.  I  am  going  to  “  The  West 
Indian,”  performed  by  a  party  of  Pagan  Irish  at  Eyre  Court.  Bessy  joins  in  good 
wishes  and  best  compliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Believe  me  ever  yours, 

R.  Cumberland. 


MR.  BOSWELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Edinburgh,  18th  Sept.  1771. 

It  gives  me  concern  to  find  you  complaining  of  sickness,  and  talking  of  putting 
into  port.  I  must  be  allowed  to  pay  you  the  compliment  that  my  father  did  to  a 
valetudinary  friend,  “  Long  may  you  complain  !”  You  have  had  more  than  once  the 
agreeable  experience  of  recovering  health  ;  and  I  hope  these  last  summer  months  have 
restored  you  again  to  your  usual  state.  You  are  at  least  happy  enough  to  enjoy  at  all 
times  the  best  of  Horace’s  two  requisites  ;  for  if  the  corpus  sanum  fails,  you  are 
never  without  the  mens  sana.  You  are  blessed  with  a  perennial  flow  of  good  spirits 
and  vivacity,  which  makes  the  soul  live  as  it  were  in  a  Southern  climate. 

Hie  ver  perpetuum,  et  alienis  mensibus  azstas. f  I  will  not  allow  you  to  think  of 
your  exit,  when  so  much  of  the  play  remains,  and  perhaps  some  of  the  best  parts  of 
it.  I  please  myself  with  the  prospect  of  attending  you  at  several  more  Jubilees  at 
Stratford  upon  Avon.  It  is  true,  we  must  all  look  forward  to  the  last  scene ;  and 
you  who  have  so  often  felt  and  made  others  feel  its  solemnity  must  fall,  just  like 
others.  This  puts  me  in  mind  of  three  Essays  which  I  wrote  on  the  profession  of  a 
player  last  year,  and  which  were  published  in  the  London  Magazine,  in  which  I  have 
some  concern.  Pray  have  you  read  them  ?  Since  I  am  upon  the  serious  subject  of 
death,  I  cannot  help  expressing  to  one  who  feels  as  you  do,  that  I  am  affected 
with  much  melancholy  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Gray.  His  Elegy  in  a  Country  Church¬ 
yard  has  been  long  like  a  part  of  myself ;  and  many  passages  in  his  other  poems 
glance  across  my  soul  with  a  most  enlivening  force.  I  never  saw  Mr.  Gray  ;  but  my 
old  and  most  intimate  friend,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Temple,  Rector  of  Mainhead  in  De¬ 
vonshire,  knew  him  well.  He  knew  his  foibles  ;  but  admired  his  genius  and  esteemed 

*  He  means  as  a  reader  of  new  pieces — a  cabinet  adviser  to  the  manager  ;  and  perhaps,  in  addition  to  his 
own  dramatic  inventions,  as  a  writer  to  be  called  on  for  any  temporary  exigence  of  the  theatre. — Ed. 

f  The  line  in  Virgil  is  somewhat  different : — 

“  Hie  ver  assiduum,  atque  alienis  mensibus  aestas.” — 2  Georg,  v.  119. — Ed. 

3  k  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


43(> 

his  virtues.  I  know  not  if  you  was  acquainted  with  Mr.  Gray.  He  was  so  abstracted 
and  singular  a  man,  that  I  can  suppose  you  and  him  never  having  met. 

Permit  me  now,  my  dear  Sir,  again  to  recommend  to  your  patronage  Mr. 
Mickle’s  tragedy,  which  I  rejoice  to  hear  has  now  passed  through  the  hands  of  both 
the  Wartons.  By  encouraging  Mickle,  you  will  cherish  a  very  worthy  man,  and  1 
think  a  true  poetical  genius.  Let  me  add,  that  your  goodness  to  him  will  be  an  ad¬ 
ditional  obligation  to  your  humble  servant,  who  will  venture  to  say  that  you  have 
never  had  a  warmer,  a  more  constant,  or  a  bolder  admirer  and  friend  at  all  times,  and 
in  all  places,  than  himself,  though  you  have  had  multitudes  of  greater  distinction 
and  abilities.  All  these  things  considered,  I  would  hope  that  Mr.  Mickle,  who  has 
waited  long  in  the  anti-chamber,  will  soon  be  introduced,  and  not  be  shoved  back  by 
others,  who  are  more  bustling  and  forward. 

I  have  just  been  enjoying  the  very  great  happiness  of  a  visit  from  my  illustrious 
friend  Pascal  Paoli.  He  was  two  nights  at  Auchinleck,  and  you  may  figure  the  joy  of 
my  worthy  father  and  me  at  seeing  the  Corsican  hero  in  our  romantic  groves.  Count 
Burgynski,  the  Polish  Ambassador,  accompanied  him.  You  know  the  Count  very 
well,  so  I  need  not  praise  him  to  you.  Why  have  you  not  called  on  General  Paoli, 
since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  presenting  you  to  him  in  your  morning  dress,  comme  un 
Roi  deguise,  and  he  paid  you  so  handsome  a  compliment,  which  I  dare  say  you  have 
added  to  your  cabinet  of  jewels  ?  He  will  be  very  glad  to  see  you.  I  had  lately  a 
kind  letter  from  our  friend  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson.  He  still  flatters  me  with  seeing 
him  among  the  rocks  of  Scotland.  I  intend  being  in  London  next  March,  and 
promise  myself  much  happiness  with  you  and  my  other  friends  there,  now  that  I 
am  just  as  you  all  would  wish  me  to  be,  as  far  as  I  can  be  while  living  in  Scotland. 
To  be  sure,  Parliament,  or  the  English  bar,  are  situations  devoutly  to  be  wished. 
We  must  look  about  us.  Pray  is  there  any  thing  in  the  little  note  of  old  plays 
belonging  to  a  Scotch  gentleman  which  I  left  with  you  ?  He  would  most  readily 
give  you  any  that  he  has.  When  you  have  half  an  hour,  I  beg  you  may  bestow  it 
upon  me,  and  be  assured  that  I  ever  am, 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

James  Boswell. 

I  find  I  must  transgress  the  ordinary  bounds  of  a  letter,  to  tell  you  that  Mr. 
Donaldson,  who  published  the  last  edition  of  Shakespeare,  is  a  prodigiously  happy 
man,  on  your  having  inscribed  him  among  the  freemen  of  Drury-lane  Theatre. 
He  is  in  the  humour  of  Horace — Quod  si  me  Lyricis  vatibus  inseres,  (Sec.  1  think 
I  may  take  a  little  crop  of  praise  for  my  dedication  of  the  edition,  since  it  has  had 
such  an  effect. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


437 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Oct.  2,  1771. 

Your  last  kind  letter  reached  me  on  the  very  day  Iliad  wrote  to  you,  and  though 
I  am  now  on  the  point  of  taking  my  departure  from  hence,  I  cannot  turn  my  back 
on  Dublin  without  thanking  you  in  the  most  affectionate  manner  for  it  and  all  your 
kindness.  I  am  glad  you  have  passed  your  time  so  agreeably,  and  with  such  excel¬ 
lent  company  ;  I  am  only  afraid  of  your  spirits  misleading  your  constitution  a  little, 
and  laying  in  for  a  gouty  winter.  Indeed  you  have  a  female  Mentor  at  your  elbow, 
but  you  have  a  great  deal  of  gaiety  at  your  heart.  Well,  you  are  now  come,  and  your 
campaign  commenced  ;  I  watch  your  operations  with  a  friendly  eye,  and  I  see  my  poor 
“  West  Indian”  receive  early  honours  from  your  choice,  and  as  I  had  rather  flatter 
my  heart  than  my  head,  I  tell  myself  that  your  friendship  to  the  author  leads  you  to 
the  preference  of  his  works.  I  now  recollect  that  I  never  thanked  you  for  the  para¬ 
graph  you  sent  me  from  the  Public  Advertiser,  relative  to  the  degree,  and  I  believe 
I  am  to  thank  you,  not  for  the  sending  it  only.  I  have  laboured  industriously  not 
to  defeat  your  expectations  in  the  comedy,  and  the  more  I  weigh  it  in  my  mind,  the 
more  I  am  inclined  to  stake  myself  upon  it :  I  think  in  my  conscience  that  it  is  greatly 
preferable  to  the  “  West  Indian.”  With  respect  to  “  Timon,”  you  make  me  very 
happy  to  receive  your  approbation  of  it,  and  I  hope  it  will  meet  your  expectations. 

I  think  you  will  not  want  me  in  the  getting  it  up,  in  case  you  shall  see  proper  to 
bring  it  on  before  I  can  get  to  you  :  should  that  be  so,  Mr.  Roberts,  a  clerk  in  the 
Plantation  Office,  has  a  copy  of  it ;  his  copy  probably  would  do  for  the  prompter, 
and  your  copy  might  be  given  to  Mr.  Becket.  Pray  tell  Mr.  Becket  that  my  lines 
are  to  be  printed  between  hooks  [thus]  and  the  original  left  plain  :  as  he  is  a  sensible 
man,  I  am  sure  he  can  superintend  the  correction  of  the  press  without  any  trouble  to 
you,  who  must  have  more  than  enough  to  do.  If  your  young  actor  succeeds  in 
Alcibiades,  it  will  greatly  strengthen  the  representation,  and  one  glance  of  your  eye 
at  rehearsal  will  decide  upon  that.  You  are  busily  employed  about  your  Installation, 
I  take  for  granted ;  may  you  be  as  superior  in  that  as  you  was  in  the  Jubilee.  I 
suppose,  however,  that  Covent-garden  will  put  forth  all  its  strength,  and  hang  out  all 
its  colours.  The  wits  will  abuse  you  both,  but  these  are  sacrifices  which  must  be 
made,  and  their  success  speaks  for  them.  I  cannot  forego  this  opportunity  of  re¬ 
turning  by  the  North  of  Ireland,  and  so  through  Scotland ;  I  mean  to  take  Glasgow 
and  Edinburgh  in  my  way,  and  I  look  to  reap  advantage  from  reading  my  “  High- 
lander”  to  Doctor  Robertson  and  the  coterie  of  wits  at  Edinburgh.  It  is  that  princi¬ 
pally  which  determines  me  to  this  long  journey.  On  Friday  next  I  purpose  to  set 
out  from  hence,  that  is  the  day  after  to-morrow,  and  probably  shall  kiss  your  hands 
the  last  week  in  this  month.  I  shall  write  to  you  on  the  road,  but  it  will  be  to  no 
purpose  for  you  to  be  at  the  trouble  of  an  answer.  I  have  done  a  great  deal  of 
family  business  since  my  coming,  and  have  at  length  closed  the  uneasy  transaction  of 
my  sister’s  marriage  much  to  my  satisfaction,  and  to  that  of  all  my  family. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


438 

A  vacancy  being  now  made  on  the  bench  by  the  Bishop  of  Limerick’s  death.  Dr. 
Averall.  my  father  puts  in  his  plea  for  a  remove :  the  general  report  of  the  town 
sends  him  to  Elphin  or  Kilmore,  both  which  would  be  agreeable  exchanges ;  but  I 
fear  this  matter  will  not  be  decided  before  I  leave  Dublin,  as  Lord  Townshend  gene¬ 
rally  keeps  those  destinations  a  long  time  secret.  Lord  Hillsborough  came  out  of 
the  North  with  his  Ladv  and  familv  last  night,  and  I  have  this  morning  settled  office 
matters  with  him  to  my  entire  satisfaction.  My  dear  woman  desires  to  be  affection- 
atelv  remembered  to  vou  and  Mrs.  Garrrick ;  she  savs  she  wishes  for  a  cheerful  dinner 

»  *  '  m' 

with  you,  and  the  more  so  as  her  spirits  are  greatly  struck  down  at  this  particular 
time,  and  she  seems  losing  the  good  effects  of  her  countrv  air  and  exercise  a  great 
pace.  I  trust  in  God  that  the  journev  will  bring  back  her  spirits  and  health,  as  it 
seldom  or  ever  fails  to  be  a  great  specific  in  her  case.  I  came  hither  only  the  day 
before  yesterday,  and  find  the  town  quite  empty.  I  dined  yesterday  with  the 
Bishop  of  Kildare,  who  met  you  at  mv  house,  and  drank  your  health  in  a  very 
cheerful  company  with  the  Primate  and  several  others.  Farewell,  my  dear  friend; 
continue  to  believe  me,  what  I  shall  ever  continue  to  be. 

Your  most  sincere  and  affectionate  friend, 

Bichaed  Cumberland. 


MR.  F.  GENTLEMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

S1K.  Downing-street,  Westminster,  1771. 

The  influence  of  a  friend,  which  it  would  be  ungrateful  and  unpolite  to  evade, 
intrudes  this  on  your  leisure.  Having  seen  by  the  papers  that  you  are  preparing  a 
masque  of  three  acts  ”  On  the  Institution  of  the  Garter,"  it  is  judged  necessary  that 
I  should  mention  a  piece  upon  that  very  subject  laid  before  you  ten  years  ago,  when 
I  was  at  Manchester.  I  mentioned  then  taking  mv  general  idea  from  Mr.  West's 
poem,  in  Dodsley's  Collection  :  I  sent  two  acts  complete,  and  my  plan  for  the  third: 
you  was  pleased  to  return  it  with  some  compliments  on  the  design  and  writing,  but 
urged  many  previous  engagements.  Pageantry  was  not  then  so  much  in  fashion  as 
at  present,  yet  I  thought  the  subject  of  importance,  and  that  show  might  be  united 
with  sense.  When  I  reflect  that  *•'  The  Fatal  Marriage’’  was  brought  out  at  Drurv- 
lane  after  I  had  laid  before  you  a  plan  of  alteration  :  that  “  Oronoko"  also  came  forth 
at  the  same  theatre  after  a  like  suggestion,  and  when  I  had  actually  printed  one  in 
Edinburgh :  I  am  induced  to  think  my  little  abilities  rather  oppressed — abilities, 
which  under  Mr.  Garrick's  patronage  and  protection,  I  am  taught  to  believe,  might 
stand  an  equal  chance  with  some  who  have  been  more  favourably  received.  I  have 
■with  persevering  patience  borne  the  chill  hand  of  neglect  without  entering  into  a 
paper  war.  One  favour  I  acknowledge,  which  I  have  wished  a  thousand  times  to 
return,  and  will  the  first  opportunity :  at  present  I  would  with  all  delicacy  submit  to 
your  consideration  the  circumstance  of  the  Masque  only;  and  am,  what  I  always  have 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


439 


been,  not  only  an  admirer  of  your  public 
success,  and,  Sir, 

Endorsed, 

“Mr.  Gentleman’s  extraordinary  letter  to 
me  about  the  Masque  of  ‘  The  Installation.’  ” 


merit,  but  also  a  warm  well-wisher  to  your 
Your  respectful  humble  servant, 

Francis  Gentleman. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  F.  GENTLEMAN. 

Oct.  9th,  1771. 

Since  I  have  been  a  manager,  I  never  received  a  letter  that  surprised  me  so  much 
as  yours.  You  are  pleased  to  compliment  me  as  an  actor,  and  wish  me  success  as  a 
manager,  but  at  the  same  time,  if  I  do  not  mistake  you,  attack  my  probity  as  a  man. 
Of  all  the  different  characters  of  authors  with  whom  I  have  had  such  various  dealings 
for  so  many  years,  you  are  the  first  who  have  insinuated  something ,  of  which  I  must 
desire  an  immediate  explanation.  I  have  not  the  least  idea  of  your  sending  me  the 
Masque  of  “  The  Garter  my  continual  hurry  of  business,  and  the  numbers  of  per¬ 
formances  I  have  read  since  that  time,  is  my  excuse  for  not  remembering  it.  The 
fact  is  granted  ;  but  what  do  you  infer  from  that  ?  Do  you  imagine  I  have  been  mean 
enough  to  steal  your  Masque,  or  the  plan  of  your  Masque  ?  or  do  you  think  that  my 
rejecting  yours  ten  years  ago  for  reasons  you  say  I  have  given  in  my  letter,  is  the 
least  objection  to  my  producing  another  upon  the  present  occasion  ?  The  circum¬ 
stances  of  “  Oronoko”  and.  “  The  Innocent  Adultery”  are  wholly  forgotten  by  me, 
which  never  could  have  happened  had  my  conscience  any  thing  to  upbraid  me  upon 
your  account ;  but  surely  your  long  silence  upon  the  occasion  (as  we  were  unac¬ 
quainted)  is  a  proof  that  you  thought  then  I  had  not  injured  you.  Will  it  not  seem 
very  particular  that  you  should  now,  when  you  know  the  piece  is  almost  at  the 
evening  of  representation,  write  me  so  unaccountable  a  letter  ?  Why  did  you  not  in 
the  summer,  when  the  occasion  offered,  and  you  knew  we  intended  to  introduce 
“The  Installation,” — why  did  you  not  then  speak  to  me  about  your  masque  ?  The  same 
objections  you  give  did  not  then  subsist ;  I  was  wholly  unprovided,  nor  did  I  till 
very  late  procure  a  vehicle  for  the  ceremonies  of  the  festival.  I  saw  you  twice  at 
Mr.  Foote’s,  and  thought  you  rather  chose  to  avoid  than  converse  with  me.  In  short, 
Sir,  if  you  think  a  paper  war  either  profitable  or  reputable,  I  shall  not  in  the  least 
dissuade  you  from  it.  All  I  can  say  is,  that  I  have  given  some,  but  never  stole  any 
hints  from  living  authors  ;  and  I  am  ready  to  convince  any  gentleman,  that  the  piece 
I  have  in  my  possession,  is  merely  written  and  compiled  upon  the  present  occasion, 
and  that  it  was  impossible  a  mere  alteration  of  Mr.  West’s  poem  coidd  answer  the 
purpose  of  our  theatre.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 

P.  S.  I  was  at  the  house  when  your  letter  was  received,  and  too  fatigued  to  write 
directly ;  I  am  now  scribbling  this  in  a  great  hurry,  and  attending  upon  their  Majesties. 


440 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


LORD  LYTTELTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Hagley,  Oct.  12th,  1771. 

I  heard  some  time  ago  from  our  friend  Mrs.  Montagu,  that  since  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  your  company  here,  you  had  been  much  indisposed  ;  and,  though  she 
told  me  you  were  recovered,  I  cannot  be  easy  about  you,  without  an  assurance  under 
your  own  hand  of  your  continuing  well. 

I  think  I  love  you  more  than  one  of  my  age  ought  to  do ;  for  at  a  certain  time 
of  life  the  heart  should  lose  something  of  its  sensibility  :  but  you  have  called  back  all 
mine,  and  I  feel  for  you  as  I  did  for  the  dearest  of  my  friends  in  the  first  warmth  of 
my  youth. 

Lord  Valentia  has  just  left  us  to  attend  the  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in 
Ireland,  concerning  his  Irish  honours,  which  it  is  presumed  will  be  soon  referred  to 
their  judgment.  My  daughter  stays  at  Arley  in  a  very  anxious  state.  I  can  tell 
you  nothing  about  my  son,  but  have  reason  to  fear  he  will  take  up  money  by  selling 
reversions  of  the  best  parts  of  my  estate  (if  not  of  the  whole)  on  the  contingency  of 
his  surviving  me,  rather  than  tie  himself  up  as  I  had  proposed.  Resignation  and 
patience  are  my  only  remedies  for  these  evils. 

I  have  heard  from  Mrs.  Vesey  since  she  got  into  Ireland.  With  a  good  account 
of  her  health,  she  writes  me  many  douceurs ,  in  which  you  have  a  great  share ;  so  I 
keep  the  letter  for  you,  and  another  which  she  sent  me  while  she  lay  at  Holyhead, 
full  of  passion  for  us  both.  Phi-pad  perhaps  may  be  jealous,  but  no  matter  for  that  ; 
for  Mrs.  Vesey  is  as  jealous  of  her  about  me,  and  I  must  own  with  good  reason. 
You  will  be  charmed  (as  I  am)  with  the  lively  colouring  and  fine  touches  in  the  epis¬ 
tolary  style  of  our  sylph,  joined  to  the  most  perfect  ease. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  letters  are  superior  to  her’s  in  nothing,  but  force  and  compass  of 
thought.  But  you  must  wait  for  this  pleasure  till  about  the  middle  of  November, 
my  affairs  in  this  country  and  some  necessary  visits,  not  permitting  me  to  be  in  town 
before  that  time. 

L  et  me  know  how  you  do,  and  believe  me  ever, 

Most  affectionately  and  faithfully  yours, 

Lyttelton. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  R.  W.  HAWKINS. 


London,  Oct.  16th,  1771. 

Though  I  have  been  very  ill,  and  in  the  greatest  theatrical  bustle  I  have  ever 
known,  I  shall  obey  your  commands  and  give  you  a  speedy  answer,  though  I  ought 
to  have  had  the  play  in  the  country,  to  have  well  considered  it.  You  must  excuse 
the  hurry  I  am  in  :  you  desired  my  confidence,  and  I  must  now  rely  upon  yours. 
“Alfred”  has  given  me  both  pleasure  and  pain ;  did  you  not  know  that  we  have  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


441 


masque  called  “  Alfred,”  which  is  preparing  to  be  revived  at  our  house  with  new 
music  ?  The  part  of  his  story  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  masque,  is  likewise  that 
of  the  tragedy ;  but  we  will  drop  this  consideration,  and  come  at  once  to  your  per¬ 
formance.  Your  imitation  of  Shakspeare’s  manner  of  writing  pleased  me  greatly,  and 
I  think  it  the  best  imitation  of  his  language  I  have  seen  ;  but  indeed  your  con¬ 
struction  of  the  fable  is  in  my  opinion  very  faulty,  and  wrould  endanger  the  success 
of  the  tragedy.  I  shall  not  make  objections  to  what  I  imagine  small  errors,  which 
are  soon  amended,  but  to  the  foundation  of  your  fable.  I  think  the  entrance  of 
Alfred  in  his  first  disguise  not  wrell  prepared,  and  the  good  situation  of  his  discovery 
to  Ethelred  unartfully  brought  about :  this  may  be  easily  mended  ;  but  their  going 
into  the  Danish  camp  as  philosophers,  soothsayers,  or  fortune-tellers,  without  reasons 
given,  to  appear  only  (particularly  Alfred)  amusing  themselves  with  the  tw«  Danish 
brothers  and  Emma,  is  surely  unnatural.  The  great  business  of  Alfred’s  mind  seems 
to  sleep,  at  least  as  it  appears  to  the  reader :  and  though  in  the  fourth  act  the  Danes 
make  an  attack,  and  Alfred  kills  Hubba,  yet  in  the  course  of  the  fable  there  is  no 
solicitude  or  interest  kept  up  about  the  delivery  of  Britain  from  her  enemies. 
Guthurns  so  readily  confessing  his  conversion  to  Christianity  to  Alfred,  whom  he 
supposes  of  another  religion,  is  very  improbable.  Hubba’s  desire  to  enjoy  his 
brother’s  wife,  knowing  her  to  be  such,  though  the  fact  might  be  supported  by  ex¬ 
amples  in  barbarous  times,  is  to  me  rather  too  savage,  and  would  disgust  a  modern 
audience.  Emma’s  feigned  madness  is  well  imagined;  but  surely  her  revealing  her 
scheme  to  Alfred  without  some  stronger  reason,  is  not  quite  in  nature.  Guthurns’s 
half-madness  I  think  very  unartful,  so  soon  after  the  feigned  one  of  his  wife.  The 
play  ends  with  the  fourth  act,  and  in  my  opinion  not  a  single  line  of  the  fifth  would 
be  attended  to.  In  the  first  place,  I  cannot  imagine  that  any  scheme  for  a  fifth  act 
would  succeed,  after  the  death  of  Hubba,  and  Alfred’s  recovering  his  country  from 
the  Danes.  But  what  is  the  employment  of  this  great  King  in  the  last  act  ?  Why, 
to  try  by  the  most  unjustifiable  means  the  strength  of  Emma’s  virtue,  which  he  had 
well  proved  before  in  a  very  good  scene  in  the  third  act :  there  is  something  not  only 
wantonly  cruel  in  it,  but  shocking  too ;  for  the  concealing  the  death  of  Hubba  from 
his  brother  and  Emma,  merely  from  an  idle  curiosity,  deserves  the  epithet.  Will  an 
audience  think  this  a  proper  employment  for  the  Great  Alfred,  at  the  time  he  has 
driven  the  Danes  from  his  kingdom  ?  Will  they  not  rather  think  that  the  poet 
wanted  matter,  and  pieced  out  the  fifth  act  without  proper  consideration  ?  I  should  be 
glad,  now,  that  you  would  appeal  to  our  friends  the  Wartons.  Could  I  see  you  or  any 
of  your  friends,  I  would  talk  this  business  over  more  fully ;  perhaps  you  think  I  have 
said  too  much  already :  what  I  have  said  is  certainly  meant  well,  and  however  I  may 
err  in  my  judgment,  and  differ  with  you  in  opinion,  I  must  desire  you  not  to  think 
severely  of  my  intentions,  though  you  may  condemn  my  criticisms. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Had  you  given  me  time  to  consider  the  tragedy  more  at  my  leisure,  1  should  have 
been  better  able  to  have  acquitted  myself  in  this  very  disagreeable  undertaking. 

vol.  i.  3  L 


442 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Parliament-street,  Nov.  8,  1 771 . 

I  have  received  your  letter  this  morning,  and  sent  it  Lady  North  :  she  and  my 
Lord  must  be  much  pleased  with  the  very  polite  offer  you  make  them  of  your 
charming  villa,  though  I  should  suppose  that  my  Lord’s  business  (which  grows  upon 
him  every  hour  we  get  nearer  to  Parliament)  will  not  suffer  him  to  avail  himself  of  it. 
I  attended  her  Ladyship  and  my  wife  last  night  to  the  play  :  how  I  was  mortified  that 
I  did  not  see  you,  and  how  grieved  for  the  cause  of  your  absence !  I  beg  to  know 
particularly  how  you  do :  I  would  have  waited  upon  you  if  I  had  not  been  still  very 
lame  by  a  sprained  ankle.  I  go  to  Richmond  to  dinner,  where  I  shall  lay  my  leg  up 
as  much  as  I  can.  Mr.  R.  Burke  has  called  on  me,  and  I  have  returned  his  visit. 
Junius  writes  again  to-day  both  in  the  shape  of  a  letter  and  a  card. 

With  regard  to  the  subject  of  your  former  letter,  my  constant  conduct  and  lan¬ 
guage  has  been,  that  though  in  reading  the  letters  I  was  often  led  to  conjecture  and 
to  believe  that  they  were  written  by  that  person,  I  as  often  felt  myself  restrained  and 
controlled  from  entertaining  such  suspicions  by  the  solemn  declarations,  and  the 
parole  of  the  honour  of  a  gentleman,  which  I  had  heard  from  you  he  had  given,  and 
which  every  gentleman  holds  more  sacred  than  his  life.* 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  ever  yours  most  truly, 

Grey  Cooper. 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Winchester,  Nov.  I  7,  1771. 

1  have  read  somewhere  or  other  (I  forget  where),  “  that  it  is  the  part  of  an  in¬ 
genuous  mind  to  wish  to  be  more  obliged  to  those  to  whom  we  are  already  much 
obliged."  Now  this  is  so  pretty  a  compliment  to  my  own  conduct,  in  the  variety  of 
intrusions  which  I  have  made  upon  your  good-nature,  that  I  am  not  at  all  disposed 
to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  assertion ;  at  the  same  time  that  I  feel  myself  a  little 
awkward,  when  I  venture  to  give  it  any  farther  countenance  or  support.  But  such 
is  your  merit,  and  such  my  attachment  to  it,  that  the  distance  of  many  miles  can 
neither  make  me  forget  your  intentions  of  obliging  the  town  sometime  this  winter 

*  This  is  a  most  remarkable  paragraph.  It  is  very  clear  that  Sir  Grey  Cooper,  the  friend  of  Lord  North, 
and  a  man  in  high  official  station,  had  the  utmost  difficulty  to  convince  himself  that  the  letters  of  Junius 
could  proceed  from  any  writer  but  Burke ;  that  he  at  last  yielded  only  to  solemn  declarations  upon  honour, 
that  he  was  not  the  author — the  “parole  of  honour”  which,  as  he  beautifully  expresses  it,  “  every  gentleman 
holds  more  sacred  than  his  life.”  It  appears  that  Garrick  himself  conveyed  these  assurances  on  the  part  of 
Burke  to  Sir  Grey  Cooper.  Does  any  man,  in  fact,  think  that  Burke,  who  loved  Garrick  affectionately,  could 
ever  have  addressed  him  in  the  words  “  Now  mark  me,  vagabond — keep  to  your  pantomimes,”  &c.  ?  When 
he  wanted  a  thousand  pounds,  we  see  him  apply  to  Garrick,  as  the  friend  of  all  others  to  whom  it  was  not 
painful  to  be  obliged.  Burke  always  expressed  the  highest  indignation  when  the  letters  were  imputed  to  him  : 
no  wonder ;  had  he  been  the  author,  in  his  circumstances,  he  would  have  disgraced  human  nature.  This 
opinion,  however,  must  be  understood  to  apply  only  to  Edmund  Burke. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


443 


with  two  admirable  characters,  nor  damp  the  ardour  with  which  I  always  burn  to  be 
present  at  such  wonderful  exertions  of  wit  and  laughter,  horror  and  ambition :  if, 
therefore,  you  can  tell  me  but  two  days  beforehand,  when  either  Bayes  or  Macbeth 
shall  adorn  the  stage,  I  am  not  afraid  to  whisper  in  your  ear  that  I  will  come  and  see 
you ;  at  the  same  time  that  I  would  conceal  from  my  grave  brethren  of  the  church 
this  perhaps  unpardonable  instance  of  being  in  love  with  nature  and  with  you.  I  am, 
with  my  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  faithful  servant  and  friend. 

Endorsed,  Sam.  NoTT. 

“  Rev.  Mr.  Nott  about  Macbeth,”  &c. 


JUNIUS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[This  man  could  even  flatter  upon  occasion,  but  he  did  not  condescend  to  do  so :  there  was  no  true  dignity 
in  his  mind.  Could  he  gratify  himself  by  calling  the  intimate  friend  of  Lord  Chatham,  Lord  Lyttleton,  the 
Duke  of  Devonshire,  Lord  Spencer,  Lord  Camden,  Edmund  Burke,  “  a  vagabond?”  The  point  of  this  mis¬ 
sive  was  blunted  by  the  delay  of  it.  The  stage  effect,  if  he  really  did  know  the  “  next  day”  that  Garrick 
had  written  about  him,  would  have  been  an  instant  notice  that  he  was  apprised  of  it,  to  have  met  the  Prince 
of  Denmark  as  he  quitted  the  scene,  and  excited  real  astonishment  not  inferior  to  that  which  he  had  just 
dissembled.  Ed.]  Nov.  10>  im 

I  am  very  exactly  informed  of  your  practices ,*  and  of  the  information  you  so 
busily  sent  to  Richmond,  and  with  what  triumph  and  exultation  it  was  received.  I 
knew  every  particular  of  it  the  next  day. — Now,  mark  me,  vagabond  ! — Keep  to 
your  pantomimes,  or  be  assured  you  shall  hear  of  it.  Meddle  no  more,  thou  busy 
informer ! — It  is  in  my  power  to  make  you  curse  the  hour  in  which  you  dared  to 
interfere  with 

Junius. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  WOODFALL. 

[Upon  the  subject  of  the  foregoing  letter. — Ed.] 

SIR,  Nov.  20th,  1771. 

I  am  obliged  to  address  this  letter  to  you,  and  to  appeal  to  your  probity — in  that, 
and  my  own,  lies  my  defence  against  a  most  unprovoked  and  illiberal  attack  made 
upon  me  by  your  celebrated  correspondent  Junius.  Had  you  not  convinced  me,  that 
the  letter  I  received  last  Monday  night  was  really  written  by  that  gentleman,  I  could 
not  have  imagined  that  such  talents  could  have  descended  to  such  scurrility.  How¬ 
ever  mighty  the  power  may  be  with  which  he  is  pleased  to  threaten  me,  I  trust,  with 
truth  on  my  side,  and  your  assistance,  to  be  able  to  parry  the  vigour  of  his  arm,  and 
oblige  him  to  drop  his  point,  not  for  want  of  force  to  overcome  so  feeble  an  adversary 

*  Practices. — In  the  original  letter  it  stood  impertinent  enquiries.  Changed  by  direction  of  the  writer  to 
Woodfall,  who  also  transcribed  the  paper,  for  Junius  would  not  have  Mr.  Garrick  see  his  hand-writing. 
Junius  remained  convinced  that  Mr.  Garrick  had  been  busy  in  his  affairs,  and  he  hints  that  he  knows  it 
through  the  indiscretion  of  the  Great  Personage  most  concerned,  who,  he  indecorously  adds,  “  makes  it 
a  rule  to  betray  every  body  that  confides  in  him.”  See  G.  W.’s  edition,  vol.  1,  p.  240. — Eu. 

3  L  2 


444 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


as  I  am,  but  from  the  shame  and  consciousness  of  a  very  bad  cause.  In  one  particular 
I  will  be  acknowledged  his  superior,  for,  however  easy  and  justifiable  such  a  return 
may  be,  I  will  make  use  of  no  foul  language  :  my  vindication  wants  neither  violence 
or  abuse  to  support  it ;  it  woidd  be  as  unmanly  to  give  injurious  names  to  one  who 
will  not,  as  to  him  who  cannot  resent  it.  Now  to  the  fact,  which  till  you  had  ex¬ 
plained  to  me,  had  made  no  impression  upon  my  mind.  I  am  told  in  most  out¬ 
rageous  terms,  and  near  a  month  after  the  supposed  crime  was  committed  (for. Junius 
was  exactly  informed  of  my  practices  the  day  after),  that  if  the  vagabond  does  not 
keep  to  his  pantomimes,  every  hour  of  his  life  shall  be  cursed  for  interfering  with 
Junius.  Is  not  this  rather  too  inquisitorial  for  the  great  champion  of  our  liberty? 
Now  let  us  examine  into  the  dreadful  cause  of  this  denunciation — Mr.  Woodfall, 
the  first  informer,  informs  me  in  a  letter  in  no  wise  relative  to  the  subject,  without 
any  previous  impertinent  enquiries  on  my  part,  or  the  least  desire  of  secrecy  on  his, 
that  Junius  would  write  no  more.  Two  or  three  days  after  the  receipt  of  yours, 
being  obliged  to  write  a  letter  upon  the  business  of  the  theatre  to  one  at  Richmond, 
and  after  making  my  excuses  for  not  being  able  to  obey  his  Majesty’s  commands,  I 
mentioned  to  him  that  Junius  would  write  no  more ;  but  the  triumphs  that  suc¬ 
ceeded  this  intelligence  never  reached  me,  till  I  received  Junius’s  letter;  and  so  far 
was  I  from  thinking  there  was  a  crime  in  communicating  what  was  sent  to  me  with¬ 
out  reserve,  that  I  will  freely  confess,  that  I  wrote  no  letter  to  any  of  my  friends 
without  the  mention  of  so  remarkable  an  event :  I  will  venture  to  go  farther,  and 
affirm,  that  it  would  have  been  insensible  and  unnatural  not  to  have  done  it.  I  beer 
you  will  assure  Junius  that  I  have  as  proper  an  abhorrence  of  an  informer  as  he  can 
have,  that  I  have  been  honoured  with  the  confidence  of  men  of  all  parties,  and  I  defy 
my  greatest  enemy  to  produce  a  single  instance  of  any  one  repenting  of  such  confi¬ 
dence.  I  have  always  declared  that,  were  I  by  any  accident  to  discover  Junius,  no 
consideration  should  prevail  upon  me  to  reveal  a  secret  productive  of  so  much  mis¬ 
chief  ;  nor  can  his  most  undeserved  treatment  of  me  make  me  alter  my  sentiments. 

One  thing  more  I  must  observe,  that  Junius  has  given  credit  to  an  informer  in 
prejudice  of  him  who  was  never  in  the  least  suspected  of  being  a  spy  before ;  had 
any  of  our  judges  condemned  the  lowest  culprit  upon  such  evidence,  without  hearing 
the  person  accused,  and  other  witnesses,  the  nation  would  have  rung  with  the  in¬ 
justice  !  I  shall  say  no  more,  but  I  beg  you  will  tell  all  you  know  of  this  matter, 
and  be  assured,  that  I  am  with  great  regard  for  Junius’s  talents,  but  without  the  least 
fear  of  his  threatenings,  Your  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

I  have  hurt  my  hand,  and  have  sent  you  a  letter  you  will  be  scarce  able  to  read. 


MR.  H.  S.  WOODFALL  TO  MR.  BECKET. 

DEAR  BECKET,  Nov.  23rd,  1771. 

I  have  just  received  a  general  letter  from  Junius  upon  private  subjects,  in  which 

he  has  returned  me  Mr.  G.’s  letter,  without  the  satisfactoiy  answer  I  had  wished  to 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


445 


have  received  with  it.  I  am  of  opinion  some  enemy  of  Mr.  G.’s  has  endeavoured  to 
excite  Junius’s  resentment  against  Mr.  G.,  and  that  it  does  not  proceed  merely  from 
this  little  communication,  which  Mr.  G.  vras  not  enjoined  to  keep  secret  by  me. 
The  following  passage  I  have  extracted  from  his  letter  relating  to  Mr.  G. — “  If  he 
attacks  me  again,  I  will  appeal  to  the  public  against  him.  If  not,  he  may  safely  set 
me  at  defiance.” — I  wish  a  more  favourable  construction  of  what  I  sent,  would  have 
permitted  me  to  have  written  to  Mr.  G.  so  as  to  have  given  him  the  fullest  satisfac¬ 
tion  ;  I  am  not  however  without  hopes  of  still  accomplishing  this  mattei  to  his  mind, 
and  am,  Sincerely  yours, 

H.  S.  Woodfall. 

P.  S.  My  presses  are  all  on  the  stand-still.  You  must  assist  me,  if  you  can,  in  a 
little  work,  and  the  sooner  the  better. — Qui  cito  dat,  bis  dat. 


MR.  BROOKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIRj  Norton,  Nov.  25th,  1771. 

I  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  answering  your  letter,  which  I  did  not  meet 
with  till  my  return  from  Bath  last  night. 

As  to  the  affair  you  mention,  all  I  know  of  it  is  this,  (and  I  hope  Miss  Younge  so 
understood  me,)  that  I  was  at  the  first  performance  of  the  new  masque ;  the  singu¬ 
larity  of  only  one  person  hissing,  who  sat  two  or  three  seats  above  me  in  the  front 
(center)  box,  led  me  to  ask  a  friend,  on  the  same  seat  with  me,  if  he  knew  the  man ; 
yes,  says  he,  I  am  pretty  sure  it  is  one  Younger,  belonging  to  the  other  house,  and 
added  he  must  be  a  very  impudent  fellow  to  treat  with  contempt  the  opinion  of  the 
whole  house :  however,  to  be  perfectly  clear  in  this  matter,  I  shall  by  to-night’s  post 
write  to  my  friend  and  hear  what  he  says. 

I  agree  with  you  in  saying  such  proceedings  are  infamous,  and  think  they  should 
not  be  suffered  with  impunity. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  P.  BROOKE. 

*“  Answer  to  a  letter  of  mine 
about  hissing  at  the  Installation.” 


MRS.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dec.  6th,  1771. 

I  send  you  my  translation  of  the  “  P6re  de  Famille.”  I  have,  as  you  desired, 
confined  myself  entirely  to  Diderot’s  plan,  except  with  regard  to  the  lettre  de  cachet, 
the  place  of  which  I  think  is  very  well  supplied  by  the  Governor’s  scheme  of  send¬ 
ing  Sophia  to  India.  I  have  not  copied  any  part  of  the  play,  except  the  second  act, 
as  I  am  certain  that  it  wrill  require  many  alterations,  and  additions.  If  your  leisure, 
Sir,  -would  but  permit  your  considering  this  work,  and  pointing  out  what  you  think 
necessary  to  its  improvement,  I  should  have  no  doubt  of  its  success ;  but  it  must  be 
from  your  judgment  with  regard  to  the  piece,  and  your  kindness  to  the  author,  that 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


446 

I  can  hope  for  it.  I  flatter  myself  that  I  have  done  justice  to  the  sentiment  and 
language  of  the  original :  the  story  lias  at  least  the  charm  of  novelty,  and  I  will  not 
doubt  of  its  meeting  a  favourable  reception  from  the  public,  under  your  auspices. 

I  have  been  in  a  very  languid  state  of  health  for  some  time,  which  with  a  little 
hurry,  occasioned  by  Mr.  Griffith’s  going  to  Ireland,  has  delayed  my  finishing  the 
“  Pdre  de  Famille”  longer  than  I  could  have  wished.  1  now  submit  it  entirely  to 
you,  Sir,  and  I  am,  with  the  sincerest  esteem, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed  with,  E.  GRIFFITH. 

“  I  see  your  tears,  and  hear  your  sighs. 

Which  ever  female  craft  supplies, 

To  move  a  hard  obdurate  block.” 


DR.  JOHNSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Streatham,  Dec.  12,  1771. 

I  have  thought  upon  your  epitaph,  but  without  much  effect :  an  epitaph  is  no 
easy  thing. 

Of  your  three  stanzas  the  third  is  utterly  unworthy  of  you ;  the  first  and  third 
together  give  no  discriminative  character ;  if  the  fifth  alone  were  to  stand,  Hogarth 
would  not  be  distinguished  from  any  other  man  of  intellectual  eminence.  Suppose 
you  settled  upon  something  like  this : 

“  The  hand  of  art  here  torpid  lies 

That  wav’d  th’  essential  form  of  grace  ; 

Here  death  has  clos’d  the  curious  eyes 
That  saw  the  manners  in  the  face. 

If  genius  warm  thee,  reader,  stay  ; 

If  merit  touch  thee,  shed  a  tear ; 

Be  vice  and  dulness  far  away  ! 

Great  Hogarth’s  honour’d  dust  is  here.” 

In  your  second  stanza  pictured  morals  is  a  beautiful  expression,  which  I  would 
wish  to  retain :  but  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  cannot  stand  for  rhymes ;  art  and  nature  have 
been  seen  together  too  often.  In  the  first  stanza  is  feeling ,  in  the  second  feel;  feeling 
for  tenderness,  or  sensibility,  is  a  word  merely  colloquial,  of  late  introduction,  not  yet 
sure  enough  of  its  own  existence  to  claim  a  place  upon  a  stone.  If  thou  hast  neither 
is  quite  prose,  and  prose  of  the  familiar  kind. 

Thus  easy  is  it  to  find  faults,  but  it  is  hard  to  make  an  epitaph.* 

When  you  have  reviewed  it,  let  me  see  it  again ;  you  are  welcome  to  any  help 
that  I  can  give  or  [borrow].  Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

1  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most,  & c. 

Sam.  Johnson. 


*  This  letter  is  a  fine  specimen  of  Johnson's  critical  acuteness ;  the  reader  loses  nothing  of  it  from  the 
wear  and  tear  of  time  but  two  bad  rhymes.  “  Discriminative  character”  the  first  line  now  exhibits  with 
admirable  felicity.  The  beautiful  expression,  “  pictured  morals,”  was  retained  by  Garrick  ;  “  art  and  uature 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


447 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Dec.  25,  1771. 

I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  the  favour  of  yours,  and  object  to  no  part  of 
the  epitaph  but  the  compliment  in  the  last  line,  as  not  being  a  sufficient  flattery  to 
my  vanity  for  want  of  the  author’s  name.  If  D.  Garrick  was  engraved  at  the  end  of 
the  verses,  posterity  would  think  me  to  have  been  somebody ;  and  a  discarded  Chan¬ 
cellor  requires  the  assistance  of  some  considerable  authority  to  recommend  him  : 
every  other  line  is  good  and  worthy  of  the  subject,  nor  dare  I  venture  to  change  a 
letter.  As  to  the  prose  introduction,  I  am  not  sure  whether  the  application  of  plain¬ 
ness  and  simplicity  in  the  monument  to  the  like  qualities  of  the  good  man,  in  name 
and  sound  is  not  rather  too  quaint  and  Ovidian  for  the  modesty  of  honest  prose. 
You  must  not  be  displeased  with  me  for  taking  this  freedom,  because  you  have  com¬ 
manded  it ;  and  the  remark,  such  as  it  is,  is  referred  back  to  your  own  judgment, 
which  you  ought  to  exercise  as  freely  as  I  have  done  on  my  part.  *  *  * 

To  the  other  part  of  your  letter,  I  am  not  surprised  at  the  bookseller’s  difficulties, 
which,  I  confess,  I  expected  from  the  beginning.  If  you  take  the  whole,  I  will  take 
care  you  shall  pay  to  the  utmost  farthing  and  more,  and  my  own  man  shall  be  well 
instructed  to  raise  the  value  as  high  as  possible.  If  you  propose  to  separate,  I  shall 
hardly  consent  to  that,  because  it  will  hurt  the  estate ;  i.  e.  my  share  will  not  produce 
so  much  that  way  as  I  can  screw  it  up  to  by  a  well-puffed  auction.  This  is  Mr. 
Becket’s  point,  but  I  shall  be  glad  to  know  Mr.  Willis’s  opinion :  if  he  should  agree 
with  us,  the  majority  ought  to  bear  rule.  I  have,  however,  no  intention  to  make  any 
disputes  in  the  conduct  of  this  executorship :  I  can  only  say  that,  if  it  might  be  per¬ 
mitted,  I  should  be  very  desirous  to  have  my  share  in  kind,  and  should  choose  to  have 
the  books  divided  rather  than  the  whole  sold.  If  that  cannot  be  complied  with, 
would  it  be  too  much  to  allow  me  to  take  some  part,  at  least  according  to  my  own 
choice  to  myself,  to  be  fairly  valued,  not  by  Mr.  BecJcefs  man  only  ?  let  me,  at  least, 
have  a  few.  I  should  think  it  bard  to  refuse  me  every  thing :  however,  as  I  have 
said,  I  will  have  no  disputes. 

had  been  seen  together  much  too  often,”  it  is  true,  but  it  was  impossible  to  speak  of  Hogarth  without  this 
appropriate  allusion  :  even  the  prosaic  “  if  thou  hast  neither”  has  been  lifted  from  the  ground  by  the  ingenious 
writer.  I  shall  here  exhibit  the  epitaph  as  it  stands  on  the  monument  in  the  church- yard  of  Chiswick. 
“  Easy  as  it  is  to  find  faults,”  and  “  hard  as  it  may  be  to  make  an  epitaph,”  I  consider  this  as  nearer  per¬ 
fection  than  any  one  of  Pope’s,  especially  that  for  Kneller,  another  great  painter. 

“  Farewell,  great  painter  of  mankind, 

Who  reach’d  the  noblest  point  of  art ; 

Whose  pictur’d  morals  charm  the  mind, 

And  through  the  eye  correct  the  heart. 

If  genius  fire  thee,  reader,  stay  ; 

If  nature  move  thee,  drop  a  tear; 

If  neither  touch  thee,  turn  away  : 

For  Hogarth’s  honour’d  dust  lies  here.” — Ed. 


448 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  am  happy  to  hear  you  are  so  well  recovered,  and  hope  you  are  returned  to  wine. 
These  waters  have  their  usual  good  effect  with  me,  and  would  have  done  you  as  good 
service  this  Christmas  as  Shakspeare’s  Hamlet.  Lady  Camden,  Fanny,  and  myself, 
beg  to  be  remembered  to  Mrs.  Garrick  as  well  as  to  yourself. 

Yours,  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


Endorsed, 

“  Lord  Camden  about  poor  Beighton’s  epitaph.” 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GAltRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Maries,  Dec.  29th,  1771. 

I  rejoice  to  hear  you  are  so  well  from  Mr.  Stanley,  who  tells  me  that  you  re¬ 
solve  to  play  your  great  parts  this  winter.  Hamlet,  I  hear,  was  as  good  as  ever  you 
played  ;  and  report  says  you  are  reviving  Bayes,  with  some  additional  scene  of  your 
own.  An  hardy  undertaking,  my  good  friend  !  The  fooleries  of  farce  in  the  Rehearsal 
are  now  long  established  by  custom  ;  and  any  thing  that  may  be  added,  to  be  of  a 
piece,  must  be  very  foolishly  farcical  indeed  ;  and  then  will  not  be  received  if  known, 
because  low — though  nothing  else  at  the  same  time  will  put  with  it.  This  is  only 
my  private  opinion ;  yours  has  been  so  constantly  applauded  by  the  public,  that  I 
shall  not  be  surprised  at  your  success.  I  am  sorry  that  Mr.  Cumberland’s  alteration 

t 

of  “  Timon”  has  not  succeeded  to  your  wish.  The  specimen  in  my  paper,  of  Lu¬ 
cius,  the  miserly  Senator,  is  in  my  mind  truly  Shakspearian :  what  he  does  with  the 
lady  I  am  not  a  judge  ;  but  Tate’s  (with  the  same  name,  I  think,  which  I  should 
have  avoided)  was  abominable,  making  the  character  of  a  mistress  honourable,  and 
that  of  a  wife  professedly  contemptible — too  much  the  maxims  of  those  times. 

I  have  lately  been  looking  over,  and  burning,  old  papers,  rhymes  and  reasons, 
poetry  and  prose  ;  and  lighted  upon  some  begun  forty  years  ago  and  left  unfinished, 
not  half  completed.  They  are  a  laudable  attempt  to  make  a  pantomime  a  little  more 
tolerably  reasonable.  It  is  partly  in  Hudibrastic  verse,  and  partly  in  loose  rhymes, 
like  Mrs.  Harris’s  petition  in  Swift,  and  so  more  natural  for  the  humour  of  country¬ 
folk.  The  story  is  that  of  Baucis  and  Philemon,  and  of  Jupiter  and  Mercury  de¬ 
scending  in  the  disguise  of  beggars  to  try  good  Christians’  hospitality.  They  find 
such  a  bad  reception  at  the  great  house,  from  the  fat  Justice  and  his  scolding  wife, 
that  Mercury  is  forced  to  use  his  Caduceus,  and  at  the  command  of  Jupiter  dumb¬ 
founds  them  all.  The  Gods  go  then  to  Philemon's  cottage  in  a  terrible  storm  of 
Jupiter’s  own  raising.  They  are  received  with  good -humour  and  hospitality,  and  the 
poor  people  rewarded  by  having  their  wish :  Jupiter,  to  show  his  power  to  fulfil  their 
wish,  turning  himself  into  Harlequin,  and  Mercury  into  his  man  Scaramouch  ;  and 
imposes  in  that  shape  upon  the  Justice’s  pretty  daughter  Columbine.  At  the  end  of 
the  pantomime  he  discovers  himself  to  be  Jupiter  ;  gives  Harlequin  to  Columbine ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


449 


brings  down  a  shower  of  gold  into  her  lap  ;  and  then,  and  not  till  then,  the  Justice 
and  his  shrew  give  them  their  blessing.  Baucis  and  Philemon  make  their  wish,  to  be 
the  curate  and  his  wife  ;  and  the  cottage  is  seen  by  degrees  expanding  and  changing 
into  a  country  church,  after  the  manner  of  Swift’s  description,  or  better.  This  will 
afford  comic  fun  enough  in  itself,  and  be  a  good  foundation  for  like  sport  in  the 
dumb  show.  This  is  so  old,  and  has  been  till  now  so  unfinished,  that  nobody  knows 
of  it,  and  if  you  think  that  any  good  use  may  be  made  of  it,  as  I  do  in  reality,  you 
are  welcome  to  it,  and  I  will  say  nothing  of  it  to  the  nearest  friend  I  have.  I  shall 
soon  send  a  parcel  to  Keate,  and  will  then  enclose  this  sealed  up  to  you — without  a 
word  of  the  pudding.  Your’s  and  good  Mrs.  G - s, 

J.  H 

You  have  a  scene  of  mine  of  a  Beggar  and  his  trull,  &c. — all  songs. 

EPIGRAM. 

“  Who  is  this  drab,  this  Goody  Hector, 

Who  makes  a  victim  of  poor  Victor  ? 

She  is  the  scold,  who  does  the  wrong  ; 

Ben  is  the  Victor, — holds  his  tongue. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  *****  * 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Southampton- street,  Dec.  31st,  1771. 

I  have  this  moment  seen  our  friend  Bickerstaff,  who  has  shown  me  two  very 
extraordinary  letters  ;  and  I  do  not  know  which  to  admire  most,  the  supreme  non¬ 
sense  of  the  printed  letter,  or  the  apparent  ignorant  design  of  the  manuscript.  I 
would  not,  for  twice  the  sum  you  paid  me  last  night,  believe  that  such  ribaldry  has  in 
the  least  affected  you.  By  my  word,  I  have  as  much  forgotten  the  poem  on  the 
theatres  as  if  it  had  never  existed;  and  upon  my  honour,  I  never  heard  of  a  word  you 
had  said  in  the  boxes  the  other  night,  but  what  expressed  your  great  partiality  and 
regard  to  me.  As  to  your  being  angry  with  one  of  the  company  who  has  been  sup¬ 
posed  the  author  of  the  poem,  you  ought  not  in  justice  to  wish  me  to  discharge  him  ; 
the  author  is  as  yet  unknown,  and  you  had  much  better  exert  your  humanity  towards 
a  hundred  undeserving  people  than  injure  one  innocent  man. 

I  am  most  truly,  &c. 

D.  G. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  1771- 

He  who  is  engaged  in  the  service  of  Shakspeare  is  engaged  in  yours,  and  there¬ 
fore  I  am  the  less  studious  to  apologise  for  my  neglect  in  answering  your  last  favour. 
The  truth  is,  I  have  spent  almost  three  weeks  in  a  strict  examination  of  the  books  of 
vol.  i.  3  M 


450 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


entries  at  Stationers’  Hall.  From  these  I  have  derived  much  knowledge  relative  to 
dates  and  first  editions  of  our  author’s  plays,  as  well  as  early  dramatic  pieces  on  the 
same  subjects  as  those  on  which  he  afterwards  undertook  to  write.  As  knowledge 
however  sometimes  brings  its  own  mortifications  with  it,  I  am  sorry  to  let  you  know 
that  very  many  tragedies  and  comedies  are  entered,  the  names  of  which  are  neither 
to  be  found  in  your  catalogue  nor  any  other.  I  have  likewise  amassed  much  colla¬ 
teral  information  relative  to  ancient  translations,  ballads,  &c.  from  the  same  volumes ; 
and  though  my  journey  through  this  confusion  of  records  has  been  little  less  dis¬ 
agreeable  than  that  of  Satan  through  the  war  of  atoms,  yet  I  must  confess  that  I  am 
very  amply  paid  for  my  labour. 

The  letter  which  accompanied  your  plays  contains  no  other  information,  but  that 
you  had  lent  Mr.  Capell  monies.  With  the  addition  of  a  few  more  plays  (which  I 
believe  I  shall  easily  find  for  you)  I  can  add  two  more  quarto  volumes  to  your  col¬ 
lection.  I  have  tied  up  the  bundle  again  with  your  name  on  it,  so  that  your  pro¬ 
perty  will  be  secure,  even  though  Dr.  Kenrick  should  break  my  heart  by  abusing 
me  at  Marybone,  or  pilloring  me  in  his  future  commentary,  which  I  am  told  he 
means  to  publish  by  subscription. 

Among  your  loose  plays  is  a  very  valuable  though  imperfect  copy  of  the  first 
part  of  King  Henry  IV.  From  this  I  have  retrieved  two  readings,  which  afford  a 
clear  sense  instead  of  that  very  obscure  one  with  which  we  had  been  so  long  contented. 

I  will  trespass  no  longer  on  your  time,  than  just  to  beg  your  pardon  for  not 
having  sent  for  my  boxes  before,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  remain 

Your  most  faithful  and  obedient, 

G.  Steevens. 


TO  MR.  STEEVENS. 

Tuesday,  1771. 

Mr.  Garrick,  with  his  compliments,  desires  to  have  that  volume  of  Voltaire 
which  has  the  critique  upon  Shakspeare  in  it.  Mr.  Garrick  takes  this  opportunity 
of  thanking  Mr.  Steevens  for  his  intended  expedition  and  operations  in  the  Temple 
of  Shakspeare :  whenever  he  pleases  to  think  of  putting  it  in  execution,  Mr.  Garrick 
will  take  care  that  the  windows  are  kept  open. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  London,  July  28th,  1771. 

Mr.  Warner  gives  me  leave  to  ask  you  for  his  copy  of  “  The  Midsummer 
Night's  Dream”  with  his  notes  on  it,  which,  when  you  are  at  leisure,  I  should  be 
obliged  to  you  to  look  out,  and  leave  it  at  your  house  in  Southampton-street,  and 
I  will  send  for  it.  I  would  not  have  troubled  you  with  this,  but  almost  despair  of 
the  pleasure  of  meeting  with  you  here,  as  some  business  in  the  country  will  not 
permit  me  to  remain  in  London  more  than  a  day  at  a  time. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


451 


I  hear  that  Dr.  Hoadly  has  received  such  news  from  you,  as  will  hereafter  incline 
me  to  prefer  reading  plays,  wherein  I  have  remembered  and  seen  you,  to  the  attending 
them  at  the  theatre ;  and  suffer  my  fancy  to  revive  your  action  and  manner  (as  far 
as  I  am  able)  to  accompany  those  scenes  which  I  must  never  expect  to  see  represented 
again.  I  cannot  but  remember  such  things  were — “  and  were  most  dear  to  me 
and  yet — he  hates  you, 

“  That  would  upon  the  rack  of  this  rough  world, 

Stretch  you  out  longer, — ” 

and  I  must  bid  King  Lear  farewell  with  the  same  hopes  as  old  Kent  did,  of  his 
being  happier ;  which  none  can  more  sincerely  wish  than 

Your  much  obliged 

G.  Steevens. 

I  have  quite  done  with  the  remaining  19  vols.  of  your  old  plays,  and  will  return 
them  whenever  you  please,  though  I  wait  to  have  the  pleasure  of  replacing  them 
on  your  shelves  with  my  own  hands. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Saturday  Evening,  1771. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  pointing  out  to  me  the  two  harsh  words,  which 
shall  be  dismissed  immediately.  They  were  not  admitted  through  choice,  but  forced 
on  me  to  avoid  repetitions.  You  have  not  very  clearly  explained  yourself  as  to  the 
remaining  defective  expression,  otherwise  it  should  have  met  with  the  same  treat¬ 
ment. 

I  expect  great  pleasure  from  the  perusal  of  your  altered  “  Hamlet.”  It  is  a  cir¬ 
cumstance  in  favour  of  the  poet  which  I  have  long  been  wishing  for.  Dr.  Johnson 
allots  to  this  tragedy  the  praise  of  variety ;  but  in  my  humble  opinion,  that  variety 
is  often  impertinent,  and  always  languishing  on  the  stage.  In  spite  of  all  he  has  said 
on  the  subject,  I  shall  never  be  thoroughly  reconciled  to  tragi-comedy  ;  for  if  the 
farce  of  theatrical  deceptions  is  but  short-lived  at  best,  their  slightest  success  ought 
not  to  be  interrupted.  This  play  of  Shakspeare,  in  particular,  resembles  a  looking- 
glass  exposed  for  sale,  which  reflects  alternately  the  funeral  and  the  puppet-show,  the 
venerable  beggar  soliciting  charity,  and  the  blackguard  rascal  picking  a  pocket. 

I  am  sure  when  you  personate  the  Danish  Prince,  you  wish  your  task  concluded 
with  the  third  act,  after  which  the  genius  of  Shakspeare  retires,  or  only  plays  bo- 
peep  through  the  rest  of  the  piece.  I  confess  I  am  talking  a  kind  of  poetical 
blasphemy;  but  I  am  become  less  afraid  of  you,  since  you  have  avowed  your  present 
design. * 

*  See,  however,  the  attack  upon  this  alteration  by  Garrick,  written  by  Isaac  Reed,  Steevens’s  “  follower,” 
in  the  Biographia  Dramatica, — Ed. 


3  M  2 


452 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  think  you  need  not  fear  that  the  better  half  of  your  audience,  (as  Othello  says,) 
should  yawn  at  alteration.  No  performer  whatever  would  be  able  to  recite  all  that 
Shakspeare  has  put  into  the  mouth  of  his  prince  with  equal  energy.  You  are  there¬ 
fore  furnished  with  a  plea  for  declaring,  that  performers  must  either  check  their 
powers,  or  shorten  the  drama  where  it  grows  to  an  unreasonable  length.  Every 
man  in  his  senses  must  think  you  had  done  right  in  making  the  latter  your  choice ; 
for  you  will  then  be  enabled  to  do  justice  to  all  you  retain,  and  to  retain  no  more 
than  deserves  that  justice.  I  cannot  answer  for  our  good  friends  in  the  gallery. 
You  had  better  throw  what  remains  of  the  piece  into  a  farce,  to  appear  immediately 
afterwards.  No  foreigner  who  should  happen  to  be  present  at  the  exhibition,  would 
ever  believe  it  was  formed  out  of  the  loppings  and  excrescences  of  the  tragedy  itself. 
You  may  entitle  it,  “  The  Grave-Diggers ;  with  the  pleasant  Humours  of  Osrick,  the 
Danish  Macaroni.” 

As  you  intend  to  stab  the  usurper,  I  beg,  for  your  own  sake,  you  will  take  care  that 
this  circumstance  is  not  on  his  part  awkwardly  represented.  Those  who  die  on  the 
stage  either  in  single  combat  or  by  suicide  generally  meet  with  applause ;  but  Henry 
the  Sixth,  standing  still  to  receive  the  dagger  of  Richard,  too  often  excites  merri¬ 
ment.  Poor  Gibson  was  sure  to  convulse  the  audience  with  laughter  whenever  he 
fell  in  that  character  :  and  yet  it  is  no  more  than  justice  to  his  memory  to  observe, 
that  all  who  knew  him  were  sincerely  sorry  when  he  died  a  natural  death.  A  stab 
given  to  an  unarmed  or  a  defenceless  man  has  seldom  a  very  happy  effect.  An  Eng¬ 
lishman  loves  a  spirited,  but  abhors  a  phlegmatic  exit. 

Excuse  this  liberty  I  have  taken  with  you  in  your  profession ;  but  the  idea  struck 
me  immediately  on  reading  your  intended  change  in  the  catastrophe  of  Hamlet,  which 
I  am  very  impatient  to  see. 

I  think  myself  much  obliged  to  you,  both  for  a  letter  which  is  highly  flattering 
to  my  vanity,  and  for  the  entertainment  I  expect  from  your  promised  communi¬ 
cation.  That  I  may  not  appear  totally  ungrateful,  I  will  cease  to  trespass  on  your 
patience  any  longer,  and  once  more  assure  you,  that 

I  am,  with  great  truth,  your  much  obliged 

G.  Steevens. 

I  had  sealed  my  letter  without  paying  a  proper  attention  to  a  part  of  yours.  I 
hope  Kenrick  will  appear  in  Falstaff.  Those  who  have  been  present  at  his  lectures, 
tell  me  that  he  hits  off  the  humour  of  the  fat  knight  very  successfully.  I  have  never 
dared  to  attend  him,  and  am,  therefore,  no  judge.  I  shall,  however,  expect  to  see 
a  paragraph  like  the  following  in  the  papers,  as  soon  as  the  theatres  open.  “  All 
enmity  between  men  of  acknowledged  talents  is  destructive  to  the  entertainments  of 
the  public.  We  are  happy  to  acquaint  the  admirers  of  Shakspeare,  that  a  reconci¬ 
liation  between  Mr.  G.  and  Dr.  K.  has  taken  place  ;  in  consequence  of  which  the 
former  will  soon  appear  in  the  character  of  Mr.  Ford,  and  the  latter  in  that  of  Sir  John 
Falstaff.  What  pleasure  is  not  to  be  expected  from  the  joint  efforts  of  two  such 
geniuses  in  so  capital  a  comedy  as  that  of  ‘  The  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  ?’  ”  I  need 
not  add,  that  I  shall  suspect  the  Doctor  only  of  having  written  it. 


DAVID  GARRICK 


453 


MR.  STEEVENS’S  REMARKS 
As  to  the  text  of  Shakspeare’s  play,  and  Mr.  Garrick’s  alteration  of 

HAMLET. 

As  a  proof  that  this  play  was  written  before  1597,  of  which  the  contrary  has  been 
asserted  by  Mr.  Holt,  in  Dr.  Johnson's  Appendix,  the  following  passage  from  Mr. 
Farmer’s  pamphlet  may  be  brought.  “  Shakspeare  is  said  to  have  been  no  extraor¬ 
dinary  actor,  and  that  the  top  of  his  performance  was  the  Ghost  in  his  own  “  Hamlet.” 
Yet  this  chef-d'oeuvre  did  not  please.  I  will  give  you  an  original  stroke  at  it.  Dr. 
Lodge  published  in  the  year  1596,  a  pamphlet  called  Wits  Miserie,  or  the  World's 
Madness,  discovering  the  incarnate  devils  of  the  age,  4to.  One  of  these  devils  is  Hate 
Virtue,  or  sorrow  for  another  man's  success,  who  (says  the  Doctor)  looks  as  pale  as  the 
vizard  of  the  Ghost,  which  cried  so  miserably  at  the  theatre,  Hamlet,  revenge  !” 

It  appears  from  a  MS.  note  of  Dr.  Gabriel  Harvey  (a  name  well  known  to  us 
who  rake  over  the  dunghill  of  antiquity)  that  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  play  of 
Hamlet,”  in  the  year  1598.  His  words  are  these  : — “  The  younger  sort  take  much 
delight  in  Shakspeare’s  Venus  and  Adonis ;  but  his  Lucrece,  and  his  tragedy  of 
Hamlet  Prince  of  Denmark,  have  it  in  them  to  please  the  wiser  sort.  1598.” 

This  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  “  Hamlet’’  had  been  performed  seven  years  at 
least  before  it  was  published,  as  the  first  known  edition  is  in  1605  ;  the  title-page  of 
which  declares  it  to  have  been  much  augmented  and  corrected  by  the  author.  I 
have  not  the  copy  by  me,  so  that  Air.  Garrick  will  do  well  to  consult  his  own  for  fear 
of  mistakes. 

Shakspeare  was  always  adding,  without  the  least  consideration  whether  his  addi¬ 
tions  were  consistently  made  or  not.  If  it  were  necessary  to  bring  proofs  of  this,  the 
task  would  be  easily  performed.  All  his  amplifications  &c.  were,  I  suppose,  commu¬ 
nicated  to  the  Hopkins  of  his  theatre,  who  not  having  the  judgment  or  the  caution 
of  our  friend  in  the  easy  chair,  published  them  indiscriminately  ;  nay,  what  the  poet 
had  rejected  as  well  as  what  he  had  added.  This  may  account  for  the  immoderate 
length  of  Hamlet ;  but  as  no  copy  of  it  in  its  first  state  is  preserved,  our  conjectures 
are  little  better  than  guess-work. 

EDITIONS  OF  HAMLET. 

Hamlet. — 1605.  J.  R.  for  N.  L. 

-  1611.  For  John  Swethwicke. 

■ - -  no  date.  W.  S.  for  do. 

-  1637.  R.  Young  for  do. 

-  1623.  In  the  first  folio. 

In  the  Persona  Dramatis  remember  to  leave  out  the  names  of  the  characters 
omitted  in  this  alteration  of  the  play. 

Page  130.  “  If  you  do  meet  Horatio,  and  Marcellus 

The  rivals  of  my  watch,” 


454 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  true  reading  is, 

“  If  you  do  meet  Horatio  and  Marcellus, 

The  rival  of  my  watch.” 

There  is  but  one  person  on  each  watch.  Bernardo  relieves  Francisco,  and  Francisco 
waits  to  be  relieved  by  Marcellus.  Horatio  watched  only  through  curiosity. 

Page  1 85.  “  Lord  Hamlet  is  a  prince  out  of  thy  sphere.” 

All  princes  alike  were  out  of  her  sphere.  The  passage  should  be  printed  thus:  — 

“  Lord  Hamlet  is  a  prince — out  of  thy  sphere.” 

197.  After  “  Comedy,  history,  pastoral,”  the  folio  reads,  “  Tragical-historical,  tra¬ 
gical-comical,  historical-pastoral.”  Why  should  these  distinctions  be  omitted  ?  Many 
of  the  plays  of  our  poet’s  age  answer  to  the  description. 

19S.  “  The  first  row  of  the  Rubrick.” 

These  two  words  were  added  by  Rowe,  because  he  did  not  understand  pont  chan¬ 
sons,  which  is  nonsense,  and  because  he  never  looked  into  the  4to.  1611,  where  pious 
chanson  the  true  reading  might  have  been  found. 

220.  Mr.  Garrick  speaks — “  Miching  Maliclio,”  and  yet  it  is  scratched  out  in 
the  copy. 

251.  “  Hide  fox  and  all  after.”  Should  not  this  be  omitted? 

256.  “  Rightly  to  be  great,’’  &c.  This  is  not  printed  as  Mr.  Garrick  spoke  it. 
He  delivered  it  with  a  variation  which  obviates  the  inconsistency  of  the  speech. 

Ibid.  Why  the  alteration  and  omission  of 

“  This  army  of  such  mass  and  charge, 

Led  by  a  delicate  and  tender  prince.”  ? 

268.  “  Oh  he  is  mad,  Laertes.” 

Why  not  the  old  speech?  [What  old  speech?*] 

227.  “  For  if  the  King  likes  not  the  comedy, 

Why  then  belike — he  likes  it  not  perdy.” 

Is  it  necessary  to  retain  these  lines  ? 

260.  “  Royal  Dane.”  [Q.  ?] 

269.  “  Thanks,  Gildenstern,”  &c.  [Q.  repetition  out?] 

193.  “  We  coted  them  on  the  way.” 

[Stabs  the  King.~\ 

“  Nay  and  you'll  mouth  it,  Sir, 

I’ll  rant  as  well  as  thou.” 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Steeveus  of  Hampstead, 
about  *  Hamlet,’  &c.” 


*  Perhaps  the  tender  alarm  of  the  Queen,  which  follows  this  in  the  old  copy,  before  the  rant  of  Hamlet. 
Queen. — For  the  love  of  God  forbear  him. .  [To  Laertes. 

I  presume  this  to  have  been  a  copy  of  the  play,  on  which  Mr.  Garrick  had  made  his  alteration  of  Hamlet, 
submitted  to  the  revision  of  Mr.  Steeveus  ;  who,  to  my  eternal  astonishment,  concurred  with  Mr.  Garrick  in 
this  desperate  mutilation. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


455 


MR.  J.  PALMER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Sunday  night,  1772. 

Mr.  Gainsborough  has  been  so  very  indifferent  from  his  attention  to  and 
confinement  with  his  daughter  in  her  illness,  and  I  have  been  so  much  engaged  with 
one  matter  or  other,  that  I  had  no  opportunity  of  delivering  your  message  to  him, 
until  the  other  night  at  the  new  rooms.  He  says  you  have  sent  him  wine  enough  to 
bribe  the  whole  Corporation  with.  I  had  called  at  his  house  once  or  twice  after  his 
return,  and  he  was  too  ill  to  see  any  one.  Miss  Gainsborough  is  now  as  well  as  eve 
she  was.  He  complains  very  much  of  Moysey’s  behaviour ;  who  paid  no  attention  to 
her,  declaring  it  was  a  family  complaint,  and  he  did  not  suppose  she  would  ever  re¬ 
cover  her  senses  again  ;  so  that  Gainsborough  was  obliged  to  call  in  Schombergh 
and  Charlton,  who  called  it  by  its  right  name,  a  delirious  fever,  and  soon  cured  her. — 
Gainsborough  sent  home  after  this  the  pictures  of  Moysey  and  his  family,  which  he 
had  painted  gratis  for  him,  and  the  old  doctor  offered  to  pay  for  the  frames.  Stand¬ 
ing  under  one  of  the  chandeliers  with  Gainsborough,  admiring  the  figures  which  the 
ingenious  Committee  had  drawn  by  Garoy,  the  landscape  painter,  we  narrowly  escaped 
having  our  crowns  cracked  by  a  branch  falling  out  of  one  of  the  chandeliers  :  it  was 
taken  little  notice  of  by  the  company  ;  but  the  Committee  met  upon  it  the  next 
morning,  and  that  the  public  might  not  be  alarmed  by  it,  and  to  make  them  easy, 
put  the  enclosed  curious  advertisement  in  the  paper,  which  had  so  good  an  effect, 
that  the  next  night  they  had  not  two  hundred  people  in  the  room.  Upon  this,  it 
seems,  they  have  met  again  and  sent  Pritchard  post  to  London,  to  bring  the  man  who 
made  the  chandeliers  down  to  Bath,  who  is  himself  to  re-examine  them,  and  make 
his  report  to  the  public,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  effectually  remove  all  fears  and 
apprehensions.  The  Committee  go  on  pretty  amicably,  considering  there  are  seven 
or  eight  of  them  ; — a  little  of  “  you  lie,”  and  “  you  lie;”  and  “  damme,  I’m  a  gentle¬ 
man  ;”  and  “  damme.  I’ll  tell  guineas  with  you  —  “  take  care  of  your  nose  ;”  “  don't 
come  within  reach  of  my  fist and  such  trifles  as  that ;  but  not  a  word  of  gunpowder 
since  their  first  meeting.  The  subscription  yesterday  was — to  the  Balls  220 — Concerts 
261 — for  walking  in  the  rooms,  290  ladies  at  os.  each,  and  237  gentleman  at  10s.  Gd. 
each ;  so  as  yet,  you  see,  they  go  on  well,  and  I  suppose  always  will  in  some  degree  ; 
though  after  their  novelty  is  over,  I  cannot  think  they  will  succeed  any  way  equal 
to  their  expectations.  They  have  made  an  odd  regulation,  for  every  person  to  pay 
sixpence  for  their  tea  at  the  door ;  which,  I  think,  must  appear  strange  and  mean  to 
a  man  of  fashion  at  his  entering  so  elegant  a  room.  Would  not  it  have  been  better, 
as  the  room,  music,  &c.  is  paid  out  of  the  subscription,  to  have  paid  for  the  tea  like¬ 
wise  out  of  it  ?  They  have,  however,  got  themselves  the  title  of  the  Sixpenny  Com¬ 
mittee  from  it,  and  I  suppose,  ere  the  season  is  over,  they  will  have  as  many  as  a 
German  prince,  each  of  them.  The  lower  rooms  have  only  70  to  the  balls,  but  about 
400  for  walking.  You  will  guess  by  this  impudent  letter  that  the  theatre  goes  on 


456 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


well ;  I  have  the  pleasure  to  tell  you,  better  than  ever  it  did,  and  I  am  in  hopes  it 
will  hold.  I  flatter  myself  you  will  be  more  pleased  with  this  than  any  other  news 
in  my  letter,  except  that  of  Gainsborough’s  family  being  well : — brother,  I  am  afraid, 
is  dropping ;  he  has  not  played  these  three  weeks ;  this  will  be  another  confirmation 
to  Squire  Flint  of  the  prudence  of  his  conduct.  I  hope  you  will  soon  be  amongst 
us.  With  Mrs.  Palmer’s  and  my  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  self, 

I  remain  your  obliged  to  command, 

J.  Palmer. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN. 


When  I  received  your  last  favour,  I  was  so  ill  as  to  be  denied  both  reading  and 
writing ;  now  I  am  better,  I  cannot  pass  your  last  extraordinary  epistle  without 
answering  it. 

Whenever  you  put  a  play  into  my  hands,  you  desire  my  remarks,  seem  to  express 
an  eagerness  for  them ;  but  I  always  found  that  my  criticism  was  a  very  ill  office. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  hear  that  you  intend  to  show  the  play  to  your 
friends  and  approved  judges,  and  let  me  request  you  as  the  greatest  favour  you  can 
confer  upon  me,  implicitly  to  follow  their  advice  ;  for  I  should  indeed  be  very  un¬ 
happy,  if  you  or  they  should  out  of  false  delicacy  regard  any  observations  which  I 
might  have  made.  I  may  venture  to  say  with  you,  whatever  you  may  think,  I  have 
no  vanity  about  me ;  I  therefore  repeat  it  again,  that  I  hope  the  catastrophe  which  I 
suggested  will  not  stand.  Sorry  I  am  to  hear  that  mere  money  is  your  Muse,  and 
that  you  would  never  write  again  for  the  stage  but  for  the  sake  of  lucre.  Pray  what 
mortifications  has  Dr.  Francklin  met  with  by  writing  for  the  stage?  I  will  without 
vanity  be  bold  to  say  that  he  had  every  advantage  with  us  that  an  author  could  have, 
or  his  merits  demand  ;  if  he  did  not  succeed  so  well  when  he  turned  from  the  Ca- 
pulets  to  the  Montagues,  what  can  he  blame  but  his  own  inconstancy? 

You  are  pleased  to  say,  that  I  must  remember  when  you  first  presented  “  War¬ 
wick,”  I  told  you  it  would  not  do  at  all: — did  I  not  add,  without  alterations ;  and  were 
not  those  alterations  made  ?  If  I  thought  about  it  as  you  say,  why  did  I  receive  it  ? 
or  suppose  it  otherwise,  have  not  I  a  greater  merit  with  you  for  performing  the 
play  which  I  thought  would  not  do  at  all?  Why  will  you,  Sir,  call  [up]  the  past 
transactions  ?  they  will  not  make  matters  better  between  us  :  let  me  assure  you,  that  I 
think  now  of  “  Warwick”  as  I  always  did.  Of  men  and  plays  (for  I  have  known  and 
tried  a  great  many)  my  guess  is  tolerably  good : — though  I  will  boast  to  have  as  little 
vanity  as  yourself,  yet  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  “  Warwick”  was  not  the  worse  for 
going  through  my  hands. 

Whether  you  think  of  retreating  or  not,  is  your  affair,  but  my  business  is  to  desire 
you  to  send  me  the  tragedy  completed  to  your  own  liking  in  two  months’  time,  or  I 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


457 


shall  imagine  that  you  have  again  changed  your  mind.  I  shall  take  care  to  give  you 
a  good  part  of  the  season,  and  exhibit  the  play  as  well  as  1  can  for  my  own  credit. 

I  am  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Maries,  Feb.  2,  1 772. 

I  cannot  help  congratulating  you  on  the  success  of  Mr.  Cumberland’s  Comedy. 
If  it  be  worthy  the  specimen  of  his  prologue  and  epilogue,  it  will  do  ;  for  we  think 
them  very  excellent.  One  thing  I  am  sorry  for, — I  am  told  he  has  in  this  play  fallen 
into  the  same  great  error  which  was  laid  to  his  charge  in  his  last ;  that  is,  that  Ills 
denouement  depends  on  overhearing  a  soliloquy.  The  great  secret  which  Varland  is 
bound  of  all  things  to  keep  to  himself,  he  discovers  even  to  an  Irish  understanding, 
by  talking  aloud  to  himself ;  which  none  but  a  madman  is  excused  doing ;  except  it 
be  characteristic,  or  that  the  poet  contrives  it  so  artfully  as  in  Maskwell,  whose  soli¬ 
loquy  is  designed  to  be  overheard.  You  must  know,  that  a  soliloquy  is  esteemed  on 
the  stage  only  as  thinking  aloud,  and  not  supposed  possible  to  be  overheard ;  and  I 
lament  you  have  no  more  influence  over  Mr.  Cumberland  than  to  let  such  a  fault 
pass  in  two  comedies.  You  have  forgot  the  fun  made  of  this  in  “  The  Contrast,”* 
where  a  dialogue  is  introduced  in  soliloquy  in  burlesque  of  one  of  Vanbrugh’s,  by 
one  servant’s  overhearing  another’s  soliloquy. 

If  we  thus  criticise  others,  we  must  learn  to  bear  criticism  ourselves.  You  and  I 
are  utterly  undone  by  these  theatrical  reviewers  ;  for  it  seems  “  The  Old  Suspicious 
Husband”  has  neither  plot,  sentiment,  nor  character,  nor  diction  :  it  is  an  harlequinery  ; 
it  should  really  be  called,  what  Cutler  laughingly  advised  us  to  call  it,  “  The  Hat  and 
Ladder.”  What  shall  we  do,  my  friend  ?  I  fancy  we  had  best  let  it  fill  houses  (even 
without  the  original  Ranger),  and  be  itself  the  confuter  of  this  hypercritic. 

Did  you  ever  think,  now  you  have  an  excellent  woman  (at  least,  as  she  is  gene¬ 
rally  thought)  to  succeed  Mrs.  Cibber,  of  reviving  “  The  Siege  of  Damascus,”  as  it  was 
originally  written  by  Hughes  in  his  vigour,  when  Phocyas,  in  his  distraction,  turns 
Mahometan,  the  only  thing  that  makes  that  charming  play  consistent  ? 

Have  you  ever  seen  any  thing  in  the  dramatical  way  by  the  two  novel-writers 
the  Miss  Minifies  ?  The  mother  and  they  are  come  to  live  at  Southampton  ;  and  the 
elder  brother,  though  he  has  a  tolerable  estate  and  a  large  family  livin<»-  in  Somerset¬ 
shire,  would  be  glad  of  a  curacy  in  this  county,  to  be  nearer  them  and  farther  off  from 

*  The  fun  made  in  this  burlesque  play,  written  by  the  Doctor  and  his  brother,  might  well  be  forgotten  by 
Mr.  Garrick.  It  was  doomed  to  oblivion  by  Bishop  Iloadly;  and  Rich,  the  manager,  called  in  all  the 
written  parts  of  which  the  performers  were  in  possession.  It  was  a  ridicule  upon  the  living  poets,  and  among 
them  a  bard  so  amiable  as  the  author  of  the  Seasons. 

The  wide-mouthed  progeny  of  buffoonery  never  die  ;  but  then,  to  any  desirable  fame  they  never  live.—  Ed. 

VOL.  I.  3  N 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


458 

a  damnable  wife  in  his  own  country.  I  have  read  two  of  them,  but  they  are  weak  and 
womanish  ;  a  good  spirit,  hut  nothing  artificial.  The  last  I  saw,  1  think,  might  have 
done,  with  a  little  alteration,  had  not  Murphy  professedly  drawn  the  character  of  an 
old  maid; — an  old  amorous  aunt,  on  whom  her  niece’s  fortune  and  marriage  depend, 
having  brought  her  to  Bath  away  from  her  lover ,  (whom  the  old  lady,  besides,  cannot 
persuade  to  love  her,)  to  show  her  the  world,  and  to  the  world ;  and  at  the  same  time 
locks  her  up  out  of  jealousy,  having  more  a  mind  to  dispose  of  herself,  and  woidd  fain 
make  her  niece's  lovers  her  own.  There  is  no  name  to  either  of  them,  but  I  would 
call  this  “  The  Aunt.”  I  doubt  it  is  hardly  worth  your  farther  inquiring  about, 
after  Murphy’s  farce. 

I  see  in  the  papers  they  would  not  hear  the  piece  of  “  An  Hour  before  Marriage,” 
at  Covent-garden  : — so  much  the  better  for  Drury.  I  doubt,  by  the  receipt  of  my 
packet,  and  saying  no  more,  there  is  a  coldness  at  least  between  you  and  Keate.  Is 
“  Semiramis”  at  the  bottom  a-burning  ?  We  are  much  yours  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s. 

Yours  ever, 

J.  Hoadly. 

P.S.  If  D.  G.  or  his  nymph  can  descend  from  the  gods,  and  help  their  neighbours 
in  distress,  we  should  be  obliged  to  them  if  they  could  recommend  a  good  upper 
servant,  or  butler  ;  or  if  they  would  inquire  after  one. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  CHATHAM.* 


MY  LORD,  Hampton,  Feb.  26,  1772. 

It  has  been  said  that  there  is  a  charm  in  particular  verses  to  cure  many  disorders. 
I  was  weak  and  slowly  recovering  from  a  fit  of  the  stone  when  Lord  Lyttleton 
sent  me  your  Lordship’s  favour  ;  I  am  now  well  and  in  the  highest  spirits  :  the  only 
fear  at  present  is,  lest,  from  the  peculiar  force  of  the  charm,  they  should  rise  be¬ 
yond  their  proper  pitch,  and  affect  me  another  way.  Indeed,  my  Lord,  you  have 
put  my  wits  to  a  very  severe  trial,  and  it  is  some  small  compliment  to  them  that  my 
vanity  has  not  overset  them.  The  only  excuse  I  can  possibly  make  for  not  sooner 
acknowledging  the  great  honour  conferred  upon  me,  is,  that  I  did  not  find  my  mind 
sufficiently  settled  to  appear  before  your  Lordship.  Though  I  am  thoroughly  hum¬ 
bled  as  a  poet,  and  not  a  little  as  an  actor  ;  more  inquiries  being  made  after  the  verses 

*  It  could  not  be  said  of  Garrick,  as  it  was  of  his  own  Macbeth,  by  Banquo, 

“  New  honours  come  upon  him. 

Like  our  strange  garments ;  cleave  not  to  their  mould. 

But  with  the  help  of  use.” 

He  is  thoroughly  accustomed  to  the  various  gradations  of  praise  ;  and  in  the  expression  of  his  sensibility  is 
only  more  careful  of  his  language,  as  the  person  who  celebrates  him  has  attained  a  higher  eminence  in  talent 
and  virtue. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


459 


addressed  to  me,  than  after  Lear  or  Macbeth  :  yet  still  I  think  myself  more  obliged 
and  honoured  than  I  have  words  to  express.  Even  you,  my  Lord,  cannot  exert  a 
greater  spirit  of  disinterestedness  and  benevolence  than  you  have  done  in  my  favour ; 
for  it  is  as  impossible  for  your  Lordship  to  receive  any  additional  fame  by  writing 
best  verses,  as  it  is  for  me  not  to  derive  from  them  every  honour  and  importance 
which  my  vanity  or  my  ambition  could  wish  for. 

I  am,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


LORD  CHATHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Burton-Pynsent,  April  3,  1772. 

Nothing  but  my  hand  is  guilty  in  leaving  your  very  obliging  letter  so  long 
unacknowledged.  I  now  make  the  earliest  use  of  its  returning  strength  to  express 
how  much  I  feel  your  flattering  sensibility,  upon  a  sincere  tribute  to  genius  and  uni¬ 
versal  talents. 

As  our  own  age  owes  more  to  them  for  improvement  as  well  as  delight  than  it 
is  able  to  pay,  I  might  have  it  upon  my  conscience  were  I  not  to  bring  my  mite  of 
praise  towards  discharging  this  favourite  branch  of  the  national  debt,  which,  however, 
must,  I  foresee,  remain  to  late  posterity.  Need  I  say  what  charms  the  verses  from 
Mount  Edgecumbe  have  for  all  here  ?  or,  that  the  sentiment  which  dictated  them 
makes  me  justly  vain  ?  You  have  kindly  settled  upon  me  a  lasting  species  of  pro¬ 
perty  I  never  dreamed  of  in  that  enchanting  place :  a  far  more  able  conveyancer  than 
any  in  Chancery-land  ;  for  instead  of  laboriously  perplexing  rights,  you,  by  a  few 
happy  lines,  at  once  both  create  the  title  and  fix  the  possession.  Accept,  my  dear 
Sir,  many  sincere  wishes  that  you  may  hear  no  more  of  that  cruel  kinsman  to  the 
gout,  by  which  you  have  been  so  lately  visited,  and  believe  me  with  all  esteem  and 


regard. 


Your  most  faithful  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

Chatham. 

TO  MR.  GARRICK, 

IN  ANSWER  TO  HIS  VERSES  FROM  MOUNT  EDGECUMBE. 

Leave,  Garrick,  the  rich  landscape,  proudly  gay, 

Docks,  forts,  and  navies,  bright’ning  all  the  bay  : 

To  my  plain  roof  repair,  primeval  seat! 

Yet  here  no  wonders  your  quick  eye  can  meet: 

Save,  should  you  deem  it  wonderful  to  find 
Ambition  cured,  and  an  un-passion’d  mind  : 

A  Statesman  without  pow’r,  and  without  gall, 

Hating  no  courtiers,  happier  than  them  all ; 

Bow’d  to  no  yoke,  nor  crouching  for  applause, 

Vot’ry  alone  to  freedom  and  the  laws. 

Herds,  flocks,  and  smiling  Ceres  deck  our  plain, 

And  interspersed,  an  heart-enliv’ning  train 

3  N  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


460 


Of  sporting  children  frolick  o’er  the  green  ; 

Meantime,  pure  Love  looks  on,  and  consecrates  the  scene. 
Come  then,  Immortal  Spirit  of  the  Stage, 

Great  Nature’s  proxy,  glass  of  every  age, 

Come,  taste  the  simple  life  of  patriarchs  old, 

Who,  rich  in  rural  peace,  ne’er  thought  of  pomp,  or  gold. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  March  ],  1772. 

Your  letter  found  me  with  a  pen  in  my  hand  upon  the  point  of  beginning  a 
letter  to  you.  Being  to  set  out  upon  the  circuit  to-morrow  morning,  I  could  not 
think  of  stirring  without  returning  you  my  sincerest  thanks  for  the  zeal  you  have 
shown  in  the  cause  of  “  The  Grecian  Daughter,”  and  the  very  kind  relief  you  gave  me 
from  the  fatigue  of  attending  rehearsals.  The  burthen,  I  know,  fell  very  heavy  upon 
you,  and  your  undertaking  it  served  me  doubly :  the  piece  was  most  correctly  got  up, 
and  I  was  as  constantly  in  my  business,  as  if  I  had  no  play  upon  the  anvil.  I  must 
add  to  this,  that  the  decorations  have  greatly  adorned  the  play.  I  cannot  say  that  I 
was  fobbed  off  with  a  touched-up  palm-tree.  1  have  seen  your  Epilogue  corrected  by 
your  own  hand,  and  I  perceive  that  you  do  not  suffer  me  to  thank  you  publicly  for 
writing  it,  when  I  was  in  distress  for  that  necessary  appendage  to  a  play.  I  regret 
but  one  thing  in  this  business,  and  that  is,  though  Mr.  Barry  acts  finely,  that  the 
play  was  not  in  readiness  while  you  appeared  in  new  characters.  In  that  case,  I 
know  what  Evander  would  have  been  ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  do  protest,  that  in  my 
judgment  Mrs.  Cibber  would  have  spoken  speeches  well,  but  the  announcing  a  cha¬ 
racter  in  the  first  act,  and  sustaining  it  to  the  last  line  was  not  the  talent  of  that  great 
actress,  and  it  is  Mrs.  Barry's  in  the  most  eminent  degree. 

My  connection  with  you,  Sir,  is  what  I  never  can  repent  of.  I  should  be  ashamed 
to  think  any  body  deserved  the  preference.  I  confess  indeed  to  have  often  had  my 
jealousies,  but  they  were  the  jealousies  of  a  lover.  But  after  what  you  have  done, 
think st  thou  I'll  lead  a  life  of  jealousy  ?  Xo !  I  have  demonstration  that  there 
is’-no  reason.  I  do  once  more  return  you  my  sincere  thanks,  and  I  go  most  cheer¬ 
fully  to  the  business  of  the  law,  because  I  leave  “  The  Grecian  Daughter”  in  your 
hands  and  in  Mrs.  Barry’s.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  ever  yours, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Mrs.  Garrick’s  congratulations  on  the  first  night  had  an  air  of  triumph,  for  which 
I  return  her  a  million  of  thanks. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


461 


DR.  BEATTIE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Aberdeen,  March  lGth,  1772. 

Y ou  know  the  heart  of  man  so  well,  that  I  am  sure  I  need  not  tell  you  what 
intense  pleasure  I  received  from  your  most  kind  letter.  You  were  born  to  give 
delight  wherever  you  are  seen,  or  heard,  or  heard  of ;  and  I  am  confident  that  in  the 
bowers  of  Hampton  many  plants  might  be  found  of  the  true  nepenthe*  of  Homer, 
after  which  the  critics  have  so  long  been  enquiring  in  vain.  Like  your  friend  and 
patron  Phoebus,  you  sometimes  cast  a  glance  even  to  these  northern  regions  :  and, 
though  we  must  ever  lament  our  distance  both  from  the  God,  and  from  his  favourite 
pupil  and  best  interpreter,  we  are,  I  trust,  not  ungrateful  for  their  temporary  smiles ; 
nay  peril aps  we  are  even  more  grateful  than  those  who  are  more  within  the  sphere  of 
the  enlivening  effulgence. 

It  is  with  the  utmost  pleasure  and  sincerity  that  I  congratulate  you,  and  the 
public,  and  myself,  on  the  good  health  you  have  enjoyed  this  winter.  Those  slight 
attacks  you  complain  of  are,  I  hope,  the  last  struggles  of  a  disorder  which  I  hear  is 
now  on  the  point  of  yielding  to  the  power  of  medicine.  What  a  blessing  is  this  to 
your  friends  !  what  matter  of  exultation  to  your  country  ! 

I  have  been  told,  that  a  very  great  temptation  has  been  sometimes  admitted  as  an 
apology  for  a  fault.  Julius  Caesar  used  to  say,  that  to  obtain  empire  one  might 
even  venture  upon  injustice.  I  wish  not  for  empire;  but  ardently  do  I  wish  for 
that  which  would  do  honour  to  any  emperor,  and  which  that  same  Caesar  would  have 
accounted  a  very  great  honour :  I  wish  to  secure  to  perpetuity  that  place  in  your 
esteem  to  which  your  goodness  has  granted  me  admittance :  and  if  I  could  effect  this 
by  a  petty  larceny  in  the  literary  way,  do  you  think  there  is  a  poetical  conscience  on 
earth  that  would  not  acquit  me  ?  But  I  fear  that  you,  who  have  been  be-rhymecl  so 
long,  would  not  set  such  value  on  any  verses  that  I  could  be  supposed  to  write.  I 
will  therefore  study  to  merit  the  continuance  of  your  kindness  by  other  methods  ; 
I  will  be  honest,  and  fairly  and  frankly  confess,  that  I  am  not  the  author  of  those 
verses  which  you  have  done  me  the  honour  to  suppose  mine.  I  wish  indeed  your 
supposition  had  been  a  true  one  ;  however,  I  thank  you  for  it.  It  makes  me  not  a 
little  vain ;  for  it  is  a  proof,  that  you  are  sometimes  kind  enough  to  remember  me. 

That  my  muse,  such  as  she  is,  has  not  long  ere  now  attempted  something  in  your 
praise,  is  indeed  not  her  fault,  but  the  fault  of  this  crazy  tabernacle  with  which  she 
has  frequent  occasion  to  grumble  that  she  is  so  closely  connected.  On  occasion  of 
seeing  your  temple  and  statue  of  Shakspeare  at  Hampton,  I  wrote  a  few  lines  and 

*  A  poet  like  Beattie  shall  have  such  illustration  to  his  figure  as  a  still  greater  poet  has  supplied. 

“  Not  that  Nepenthes,  which  the  wife  of  Thone 
In  Egypt  gave  to  Jove-born  Helena, 

Is  of  such  power  to  stir  up  joy  as  this, 

To  life  so  friendly,  or  so  cool  to  thirst.’* — Counts,  v.  675. — Ed. 


462 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


framed  a  little  sketch  of  a  poem  or  epistle,  which  I  intend  to  finish  as  soon  as  I  can 
obtain  a  short  respite  from  business  and  vertigo,  of  both  which  I  have  for  several 
months  past  had  more  than  a  sufficiency. 

The  kind  reception  my  Essay*  has  met  with  in  England  and  from  you,  my  dear 
Sir,  in  particular,  I  will  ever  consider  as  one  of  the  most  fortunate  incidents  of  my 
life.  It  was  worthy  of  your  generosity,  and  worthy  of  the  generosity  of  the  English 
nation,  to  encourage  and  patronize  a  poor  disheartened  valetudinary  stranger ;  who, 
for  no  other  crime  than  attempting  to  do  some  service  to  mankind,  had  drawn  upon 
himself,  in  his  own  country,  such  an  host  of  formidable  enemies,  and  such  a  weight 
of  literary  persecution. 

Those  enemies,  still  as  violent  as  ever,  though  not  quite  so  clamorous,  give  me 
now  no  manner  of  concern ;  thanks  to  the  good-nature  and  good  principles  of  my 
southern  friends.  I  hope  I  shall  yet  live  to  give  some  testimony  of  my  gratitude  to 
you,  Sir,  and  to  your  noble-minded  countrymen ;  and  to  approve  myself  not  alto¬ 
gether  unworthy  of  those  distinguished  honours  I  have  received  from  you. 

I  should  esteem  it  a  very  particular  favour  to  be  allowed  a  copy  of  the  verses 
addressed  to  you  by  Lord  Chatham.  Every  thing  that  great  man  does  must  have 
something  wonderful  in  it.  You  could  not  have  given  me  a  piece  of  more  agreeable 
intelligence  than  what  you  mention  of  Lord  Lyttleton.  God  grant  his  satisfactions 
may  be  permanent !  But  nothing  less  than  Heaven  can  ever  make  him  so  happy  as 
he  deserves  to  be.  To  him,  and  to  his  amiable  and  admirable  neighbour  in  Hill- 
street,!  I  am  so  much  obliged,  that  though  I  had  Shakspeare’s  or  even  your  talents, 
I  should  hardly  be  able  to  express  my  gratitude. 

I  lately  received  a  letter  from  one  who  subscribes  himself  E.  Darwin,  Physician 
in  Litchfield ,  containing  some  objections  to  an  argument  advanced  in  my  essay 
against  Mr.  Hume’s  doctrine  of  extended  ideas.  His  manner  seems  rather  captious ; 
however,  I  know  not  how  it  is,  my  heart  warms  to  the  man,  either  because  his  hand- 
writing  bears  some  resemblance  to  yours,  or  because  he  has  the  honour  to  live  in  the 
towm  where  you  and  Johnson  were  born ;  and  therefore  I  will  write  to  him  soon, 
and  I  hope  to  satisfy  all  his  doubts,  which  indeed  seem  to  arise  from  his  not  per¬ 
fectly  understanding  either  my  philosophy  or  that  which  he  himself  defends. 

Mrs.  Beattie  joins  me  in  warmest  wishes  and  most  respectful  compliments  to 
Mrs.  Garrick  and  you.  We  talk  of  you  every  day ;  your  name  is  quite  familiar  to 
our  little  boy,  who  is  something  more  than  three  years  old.  He  is  very  fond  of 
Hogarth’s  print  of  you  in  Richard  III.  ;  and  asked  me  yesterday,  whether  it  was 
you  vdio  made  “  Ye  medley  of  mortals  who  make  up  this  throng,”  a  song  which 
he  learned  lately  and  very  much  admires.  I  intend  soon  to  teach  him  “  The  War¬ 
wickshire  lad.”  But  I  encroach  too  much  on  your  patience. 

Believe  me  to  be  with  the  most  perfect  esteem  and  sincerity, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

J.  Beattie. 

*  On  the  Nature  and  Immutability  of  Truth. — Ed.  t  Mrs.  Montagu. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


463 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN. 

DEAR  SIR,  March  18,  1772. 

Your  letter,  which  surprised  me  much,  came  in  the  midst  of  my  hurry  in  remov¬ 
ing  to  the  Adelphi,*  and  as  my  brother  is  mentioned  too,  and  upon  a  matter  which  I 
was  ignorant  of,  I  thought  proper  to  see  him  before  I  sent  you  this  answer.  He  as¬ 
sures  me  that  he  had  no  message  from  you  about  a  play  ready  for  my  perusal,  nor 
did  he  say  to  me  any  thing  about  it.  My  brother  says,  he  told  you  I  was  at  home 
when  he  met  you  in  Southampton-street,  and  desired  you  to  call  upon  me,  and  that  I 
would  then  explain  the  question  in  my  letter  ;  this  you  declined.  But  pray,  Sir,  if 
the  tragedy  you  speak  of  has  lain  in  your  drawer  ready  for  my  calling  it  into  being, 
why  did  you  not  send  it  to  me,  instead  of  “  Minos  ?”  or  why  did  you  not  mention  it 
to  me,  when  you  talked  about  that  little  piece  ? — Give  me  leave  to  call  to  your  mind 
a  circumstance  or  two,  by  which  I  thought  myself  very  unkindly  and  unjustly 
treated. 

Some  years  ago  you  mentioned  to  me  your  design  of  altering  a  play  of  Voltaire’s, 
I  think,  the  “  Duke  de  Foix.”  I  told  you  I  should  be  ready  to  do  you  all  the  service 
in  my  power,  and  desired  only  to  have  a  long  notice  when  you  were  ready.  Once 
after  this  you  spoke  to  me  about  it,  rather  coolly,  that  you  had  not  pleased  your¬ 
self  ;  and  indeed  I  understood  that  you  had  changed  your  mind  about  it.  That  I 
was  not  changed,  my  great  zeal  in  your  affair  with  the  Duke  of  Bedford  and  Mr. 
Rigbv,  when  I  obtained  a  promise  in  your  favour,  may  convince  you  ;  and  that  I 
could  not  but  suppose  some  alteration  in  you,  and  that  you  had  made  some  new 
theatrical  connexion,  I  had  the  strongest  reason  to  believe.  It  was  likewise  last 
summer  reported,  that  you  had  an  epistolary  altercation  with  Mrs.  Yates  about  a 
tragedy  altered  from  Voltaire :  so  many  years  having  passed  since  our  first  conversing 
on  this  business,  and  hearing  nothing  since  from  you  but  about  “  Minos,”  and 
knowing  your  attachment  elsewhere,  what  could  I  possibly  imagine?  Do  not  think 
me  unreasonable  enough  to  wish  any  gentleman  confined  to  my  theatre  ;  I  only 
thought  that  I  had  a  friendly  right  to  have  the  business  cleared  to  me.  And  now  after 
all  this,  you  seem  to  turn  the  tables  upon  me.  And  as  if  you  were  waiting  for  my 
sending  to  you.  Can  you  be  serious  with  me  ?  I  can  scarcely  believe  it. 

When  Dr.  Francklin  pleases,  or  any  other  gentleman,  to  send  me  a  play,  I  shall 
read  it  with  great  care,  and  give  my  sincere  opinion  of  it.  I  am  at  this  moment 
engaged  to  four  Five  Act  Dramas,  and  three  little  pieces  ; — these  must  be  performed, 
unless  withdrawn  by  their  authors,  before  I  can  represent  any  others  received  from 
this  day.  Thus  situated,  I  am  ready  and  willing  to  consider  any  theatrical  perform- 

*  From  his  house  in  Southampton-street,  where  he  resided  during  the  most  brilliant  part  of  his  career. 
The  house  on  the  Adelphi-terrace  tempted  Mr.  Garrick  by  a  view  of  the  river,  and  a  little  external  display  of 
the  architect ;  but  from  sun-rise  to  sun-set  the  windows  were  indebted  to  blinds  for  being  approachable,  and 
the  back  rooms  were  gloomy  dungeons,  that  had  not  light  enough  to  show  his  pictures.  The  front  drawing¬ 
room  only  could  be  called  a  fine  room. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


4(U 


ance  you  shall  please  to  send  me,  but  with  these  engagements  it  is  impossible  to  say 
when  1  can  act  it ;  you  may  depend  upon  it,  if  received,  that  your  tragedy  shall 
have  all  the  justice  done  to  it  in  the  power  of,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  am  now  writing  in  the  midst  of  removing,  and  have  scarce  a  table  to  write 
upon,  or  pen  and  ink  to  finish  this  scrawl. 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  March  25,  1772. 

Your  answer  to  my  last  has  given  me  much  concern,  which  I  assure  you  arose 
not  from  your  contempt  of,  or  indifference  with  regard  to,  my  tragedy,  but  from  your 
appearing  to  think  me  guilty  of  the  worst  of  human  vices,  ingratitude.  If  you 
knew  me  better,  you  would  know,  that  once  essentially  obliged  I  never  forget ;  your 
recommendation  of  me  to  Mr.  Rigby  gave  me  such  an  opinion  of  your  benevolence, 
as  can  never  be  effaced  by  any  difference  of  opinion  concerning  theatrical  matters. 

With  regard  to  the  play,  we  may  perhaps  both  have  been  to  blame ;  perhaps  my¬ 
self  alone :  any  casual  meeting  last  year  would,  I  believe,  have  set  the  matter  right 
between  us. 

There  is  only  one  point  necessary  to  be  cleared  up.  You  seem  to  have  enter¬ 
tained  a  suspicion  that  I  meant  to  offer  that  tragedy  for  representation  at  Covent- 
Garden  last  year,  which  I  assure  yoit  I  never  had  the  least  thought  of ;  nor  did  I 
ever  make  any  proposal  of  the  kind,  as  it  was  promised  to  you ,  and  I  was  in  daily 
expectation  of  hearing  from  you  concerning  it. 

The  altercation  with  Mrs.  Yates,  which  I  will  explain  to  you  when  we  meet,  was 
on  another  subject. 

The  connexion  and  attachment,  which  you  hint  at,  took  its  rise  from  a  particular 
private  circumstance,  and  had  no  connexion  with  theatrical  affairs  :  it  lasted  but  a 
short  time,  and  ended  in  fumo. 

In  consequence  of  your  permission  given  in  the  latter  part  of  your  letter,  I  shall 
take  the  first  opportunity  to  revise  my  tragedy,  get  it  fairly  transcribed,  and  submit 
it  to  your  judgment ;  if  it  meets  with  your  approbation,  you  will  suit  your  own 
conveniency  in  bringing  it  on  the  stage,  though  the  sooner  you  can  find  a  vacancy  for 
it,  the  more  agreeable  it  will  certainly  be  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  Francklin. 


A  SURGEON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

GREAT  SIR,  Borough,  13th  April,  1772. 

Give  me  leave  to  express  my  mind :  to  see  you  act,  even  ennobles  me.  No  one 
living  can  please  a  judicious  person  like  you.  In  Don  Felix  how  great  art  thou  ! 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


465 


In  Hamlet,  O  Garrick  !  thou  raisest  the  human  mind  above  itself !  But  why 
should  I  mention  particulars  ?  for  thou  art  great  in  every  thing.  To  an  intelligent 
person,  it  must  be  the  most  agreeable  and  noble  entertainment  to  see  so  masterly  a 
performer.  O  Garrick !  you  please  the  mind  beyond  any  description  in  all  your 
actions.  That  you  may  have  health  and  long  life,  and  oblige  the  public  as  often  as 
you  can  upon  the  stage,  is  the  hearty  wish  of  numbers,  and  of  none  more  than  the 
writer  of  this. 


Endorsed, 

“  A  strange  letter  from  a  Surgeon,  1772.” 

I  add,  utterly  unworthy  of  dissection. — Ed. 


A  Surgeon. 


THE  MANAGERS  OF  THE  CALCUTTA  THEATRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Calcutta,  21st  April,  1772. 

The  gentlemen  of  the  old  Management  having,  by  an  unaccountable  omission, 
neglected  to  make  any  acknowledgment  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken  to  promote 
our  theatrical  attempts  in  this  distant  quarter,  we  now.  Sir,  take  the  liberty  to 
fulfil  their  intentions,  and  as  a  trifling  testimony  of  the  esteem  and  respect  we  bear 
you,  we  request  your  acceptance  of  the  two  pipes  of  Madeira  wine,  Captain  Morris 
has  in  charge  to  deliver  you. 

W  e  are,  Sir,  your  very  obedient  humble  servants, 

P.  M.  D acres,  Richd.  Barwell, 

J.  Shakspeare,  James  Clive, 

H.  Cottrell,  Wm.  Hosen. 

J.  Fortnony. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  St.  Mary’s,  May  21st,  1772. 

Before  you  quit  town  for  sweet  Hampton,  or  we  this  place  for  Alresford,  I  have 
just  got  hand  enough  to  ask  you,  in  the  name  of  Madam  and  Sir,  how  you  and 
yours  do? 

We  hope  you  have  had  a  tolerable  winter  in  all  senses, — in  health,  spirits,  and 
advantages;  and  a  good  prospect  for  the  next.  I  have  shed  tears  more  than  once  over 
Mr.  Cumberland’s  comedy — I  cannot  say  so  much  of  Mr.  Murphy’s  tragedy.  I  can 
more  easily  forgive  Colin’s  overhearing  Augusta  Aubery’s  complaints,  (which  he  may 
do  without  hearing  her  words)  and  making  the  whole  discovery  depend  upon  that, 
than  I  can  “  The  Grecian  Daughter’s”  being  dead  as  dish-water  after  the  first  act : 
the  usual  fault  of  Mons.  Murphy.— I  hope  the  nonsense  of  the  reviewers  will  not 

VOL.  i.  3  o 


466 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


make  Mr.  C.  be  silent ;  we  want  writers  who  think  and  act  like  gentlemen  for  the 
stage.  I  wish  some  pen,  as  good  as  his,  would  draw  his  old  fool  of  a  father*  with  his 

w - ,  and  a  family  and  wife  whom  he  lives  away  from,  and  who  are  indecent  enough 

to  admit  him  into  their  company,  and  sometimes  to  dinner. 

You  will  be  so  kind  as  to  send  me  “  The  Beggar’s  Garland,”  and  “  Baucis  and 
Philemon,”  if  you  make  no  use  of  it,  as  I  woidd  not  have  them  appear  in  my  hand 
after  my  or  your  death.  Have  you  ever  lighted  on  a  farce  of  mine,  from  Molierc’s 
“  Marriage  Force,”  called  “  The  Lady  her  own  Champion,”  which  I  once  read  to  you 
and  Peggy  AYoffington  at  breakfast  at  her  lodgings?  1  have  lost  it,  and  fear  it  is  in 
my  hand-writing. 

I  see  you  among  the  Stewards  of  the  Sons  of  the  Clergy ;  can  you  conveniently 
compliment  me  with  binding  out' a  hoy  or  a  girl? 

The  post  will  not  stay,  anymore  than  the  tide,  at  Southampton  ;  so  adieu,  dear  Sir 
and  Madam,  with  both  our  compliments.  Yours,  faithfully, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  CLELAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Friday,  May  22,  1772. 

There  has  been  hardly  any  thing  that  1  had  more  peremptorily  determined  with 
myself,  than  its  being  wrong  for  me  tQ  pester  you,  either  personally  or  by  writing. 
This  resolution  is  not,  however,  proof  against  my  sensation  on  reading  in  this  morn¬ 
ing’s  paper  your  indisposition. 

Then  it  was,  that,  balancing  between  a  visit  and  a  note,  I  at  length  preferred  this 
last: — And  why? — you  are  continually  beset  with  attendants  on  indispensable  busi¬ 
ness.  This  is  nothing  more  than  in  course.  But  you  are  besides  so  infested  with 
Lords,  Counts,  Marquises,  Dukes,  &c.  that  I  most  readily  acquiesce  in  my  no  title 
to  admission  among  them,  and  less  yet,  preferably  to  them.  There  was  a  time  when, 
never  less  than  upon  a  line  with  them,  I  saw  them  as  familiarly  as  you  noic  do.  That 
time  was  even,  though  but  on  that  account,  the  dullest  part  of  my  life.  The  return 
of  that  time  has  been  often  offered  to  me,  and  constantly  declined  by  me,  on  my  being 
well  assured  that  ignorance,  stupidity,  avarice,  and  meanness  are  actually  even  more 
rife  in  that  rank  than  ever.  Peace  be  with  them,  and  with  those  that  can  endure 
them ! 

My  ideas  being,  besides,  at  once  more  susceptible  of  order  and  clearness  upon 
paper  than  in  the  rcmtnm  scantum  of  conversation,  and  leaving  you  more  to  your  own 
greatest  leisure,  this  forms  another  reason  for  choosing  this  way  of  paying  you  my 
respects. 

I  am,  Mr.  Garrick,  but  too  sensible  that,  unhappily,  there  is  not  in  you  foundation 
enough  of  opinion  for  one  to  hope  from  you  the  attention  requisite  for  my  being  of 
*  Mr.  Cumberland’s  father-in-law.  See  Hoadly’s  letter  of  explanation  of  2Sth  May,  1772. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


467 


service  to  you  in  laying  my  sentiments  before  you,  especially  as  they  are  of  a  nature 
to  need  for  their  reception  the  preparation  of  that  so  rare  superiority  to  established 
prejudices.  It  was,  however,  in  a  very  sincere  spirit  of  grateful  regard  for  you,  that, 
well  aware  that  counsels  were,  like  ladies’  favours,  never  to  be  offered,  I  conquered 
my  repugnance  to  that  impertinence :  but  the  last  time  I  had  the  honour  of  seeing 
you  I  gave  up  every  vain  hope.  After  my  observing  to  you  the  danger,  or  rather 
certain  detriment,  of  those  deleterious  lixiviums  which  act  collaterally,  much  in  the 
nature  of  pearl-ashes  that  cleanse  the  cloth  but  damage  or  destroy  its  texture  :  after 
assuring  you  that  there  were  instances  of  persons  accelerating  their  death  by  the  use 
of  them  without  always  obtaining  the  end  proposed,  at  least,  of  mitigation  of  torture. 
your  conclusion  was  that  the  fact  was  against  me.  May  you  find  it  so !  I  have 
nothing  farther  to  say  than  to  submit,  and  leave  with  you  the  following  question  for 
your  own  solution  and  practical  inference. 

While  the  attainment  of  the  gentle,  gradual,  though  perhaps  slower  dissolution 
of  the  calculous  concretions  by  regimen  is,  on  the  strongest  grounds  of  reason,  pre¬ 
sumable,  without  any  the  least  danger,  must  it  not  be  a  method  of  cure  incom¬ 
parably  preferable  to  that  of  a  known  poisonous,  infernal  caustic,  of  which  the 
mischief,  at  the  long  run,  is  not  a  whit  the  less  certain  for  the  small  quantities  in 
which  it  may  be  given,  and  which  owes  its  proposed  efficacy  against  the  ill  it  is 
meant  to  remedy,  to  its  uncontrollable  power  of  collateral  damage  to  your  tenderest 
internals,  to  your  unguarded  vitals  ?  Or  have  you  any  such  horrors  to  dread  from 
warm  sippings,  parsley,  testaceous,  or  other  fish,  stock-fish  especially,  and  above  all 
from  the  ginseng? 

Treat,  however,  all  that  I  have  urged  to  you  on  this  occasion  with  what  slight  or 
contempt  you  please.  It  is  not  for  myself  that  I  shall  be  sorry.  You  will  never 
be  importuned  with  another  syllable  upon  the  subject.  Liheravi  animam  meam. 

But  while  I  am  writing  to  you,  a  thought  strikes  into  my  head,  which  is  of  a 
nature  not  to  be  suppressed.  It  is  this.  In  the  true  spirit  of  the  times,  you  have 
perhaps,  most  injuriously  to  me,  imagined  that  under  this  officiousness  there  lurks 
some  design,  some  by-view,  some  latent  hope  of  service  from  you  in  the  character  of  a 
manager.  If  so,  in  the  name  of  all  that  justice  and  honour  of  which  you  are  capable, 
disdain  so  false,  so  mean  a  refinement  of  suspicion.  By  every  thing  that  is  sacred,  I 
have  early  and  long  renounced  any  such  idea.  Nor  did  I  ever  once  entertain  a  spark 
of  resentment  against  you  for  your  rejection  of  that  luckless  play,*  in  which  I  had 
aimed  at  a  medium  between  the  frigidity  and  flightiness  of  the  sonorous  jargon  of  our 
modern  tragedies,  and  the  ridiculously  familiar  chit-chat  of  Fontenelle,  which  is 
almost  as  unnatural,  since  great  dramatic  situations  require  greatness  of  language. 
But  then  buskins  are  not  stilts.  Besides,  you  took  care  to  give  me  ample  revenge. 
You  brought  on  “  Boadicea,”  “  Barbarossa,”  and  how  many  more,  only  fit  to  make 
an  ice-house  of  a  summer  theatre,  if  there  was  such  a  thine:  as  taste  existing. 

There  was,  however,  in  the  tender  of  that  piece  of  mine  to  you,  a  proof  of  my 

*  His  tragedy  of  “  Titus  Vespasian.” — Ed. 

3  o  2 


4f>8 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


esteem,  which  it  is  not  well  possible  for  you  to  suspect  of  falsity,  even  though  that 
sentiment  in  me  should  be  as  indifferent  to  you,  as  I  believe  it.  If  you  remember, 
hardly  not  quite  a  stranger  to  you,  I  applied  in  the  character  of  a  gentleman  to  whose 
situation  your  favour  on  that  occasion  would  have  been  probably  serviceable.  Know¬ 
ing  your  genius,  I  presumed  in  you  the  heart  that  always  goes  with  genius.  It 
was  in  that  confidence  that  I  refused  recommendations  to  you,  which,  after  all, 
might  very  well  have  been  of  no  weight.  On  your  refusal,  I  did  you,  however, 
justice.  I  reflected  that  I  bad  not  precedently  enough  considered,  that  if  such  a  plea 
as  mine  Avas  receivable,  Hogarth's  admirable  idea  of  a  ruined  prodigal’s  offering  in 
vain  his  play  to  Rich,  as  a  resource,  would  have  been  less  a  jest  than  a  cruelty. 

I  flatter  myself,  then,  that  you  do  me  the  justice  to  belieAre  that  in  my  life  I 
never  (except  once  in  not  an  uncurious  unpublished  letter  to  Browne)  made  use  of 
an  expression  that  so  much  as  squinted  at  disrespect  towards  you.  Not  that  I  sup¬ 
pose  you  would  have  cared  a  pinch  of  snuff,  if  I  had  ;  in  which  you  Avould  have  been 
perfectly  right. 

There  Avas  another  idea  that  had  mixed  with  my  tender  of  poor  “  Vespasian”  to 
you,  which  I  hope  you  will  not  think  or  an  affected  one,  or  quite  out  of  character  for 
me.  Basely,  infamously  betrayed,  and  meanly  oppressed  by  the  people  of  power  and 
rank,  in  these  delectable  times,  I  imagined  to  myself  a  pleasure  in  my  oAving  to  un¬ 
titled  genius  an  ease  of  situation  which  I  Avould  have  reluctantly  OAved  to  them. 

“  Quod  non  dant  proceres,  dabit  Histrio,” — Juv. 

was  a  favourite  chimera  of  mine  till  I  Avaked  out  of  my  dream.  But  in  how  just, 
hoAv  noble,  Iioav  perfectly  Greek  a  light,  I  understood  the  word  Histrio,  may  be 
proved  to  you  by  the  enclosed,  which  at  your  leisure,  at  Hampton,  I  wish,  for  a 
particular  reason,  you  would  re-peruse ,  for  it  runs  in  my  head  that  I  have  flung  it  at 
yours  before. 

Now,  see  what  it  is  to  be  run  aAvay  Avith  over  a  field  of  white  paper  by  a  damned 
hobby-horse.  When  I  began  this  note,  believe  it  as  you  may,  1  had  no  more  thought 
of  this  infinite  scribble  than  of  writing  a  panegyric  upon  Bute.  But  the  truth  is, 
that  the  Quixotism  of  my  Avish  to  see  redressed  the  perpetual  wrongs  offered  to  one 
of  your  favourites,  the  Tragic  Muse,  and  my  fond  partiality  for  the  Dulcinea  of  my 
imagination,  always  play  me  this  villainous  trick.  Your  having,  however,  been  the 
death  of  my  vain  hopes,  gives  me,  at  least,  some  title  to  your  forgiveness  of  the  tre¬ 
mendous  length  of  this  address.  Think  of  the  feelings  of  a  writer  that  sees  his  be- 
loA'ed  production  doomed  to  death  and  oblivion,  after  being  refused  eA7en  the  com¬ 
fortable  chance  of  damnation.  Think  of  the  different  fate  of  Pygmalion,  when  on 
the  point  of  finishing  the  statue  of  Venus,  upon  his  plan  of  ideal  beauty,  and 
groAvn  enamoured  of  the  work  of  his  own  hands,  he  with  a  gaze  of  rapture,  giving 
it  the  last  stroke  of  the  chisel,  cried  out,  “  Live  !”  And  live  it  did,  for  so  had 
Love  and  Fate  ordained. 

My  best  respects  ever  attend  Mrs.  Garrick :  Adieu  ! 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


469 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CLELAND. 

SIR,  Sunday  Night,  May  24th,  1772. 

The  addition  of  a  cold,  to  my  natural  dislike  of  writing,  prevented  my  answering 
your  letter  immediately.  There  is  something  so  very  kind  and  unkind  in  it,  that  I 
cannot  let  it  pass  without  some  few  observations.  Let  me  say  once  for  all,  that  I 
think  myself  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  sensible  reasoning  upon  my  disorder  ; 
but  I  should  have  thought  that  I  paid  you  a  very  ill  compliment,  and  returned  your 
sincerity  ungratefully,  had  I  not  opened  my  heart  as  freely  to  you :  it  is  my  manner 
of  acting  with  every  body,  and  I  imagined  I  was  dealing  with  you  as  you  would 
wish,  by  arguing  the  matter  in  an  open  and  friendly  manner.  Your  observation 
upon  my  Marquises,  Counts,  &c.,  and  my  indispensable  business,  appears  to  carry  an 
edge  with  it ; — but  if  you  mean  that  I  pretended  business  when  I  had  it  not,  or  if 
you  suspect  me  of  being  fond  of  worthless  titles,  you  wrong  me  ;  I  would  no  more 
avoid  the  company  of  a  man  because  he  was  a  Marquis,  than  I  would  keep  him  com¬ 
pany  if  he  was  a  fool  or  a  scoundrel.  I  readily  believe  that  you  might  have  kept 
what  company  you  please,  and  in  return  I  expect  that  you  will  believe  me  as  little 
inclined  to  lose  my  time,  or  prostitute  my  understanding,  as  Mr.  Cleland* 

To  return  to  my  disorder.  Had  you  ever  felt  its  pangs,  you  would  not  be  surprised 
at  my  risking  any  thing  to  get  clear  of  them.  I  never  had  any  visible  effects  from 
any  thing  but  the  lixivium.  Are  not  you,  Sir,  guilty  of  an  ill-founded  suspicion  at 
the  same  time  that  you  desire  me  to  disdain  it  ?  I  call  upon  every  thing  sacred,  as 
you  do,  to  witness  for  me,  that  I  sincerely  believed  you  wished  to  be  of  service  to 
the  man,  without  the  least  regard  to  the  manager.  I  am  sorry  that  you  thought  any 
protestation  necessary,  as  it  implies  no  great  compliment  to  your  humble  servant. 

I  do  not  think  this  the  unkindest  part  of  your  letter :  why  would  you  again  bring 
to  my  mind  a  transaction  in  which  I  have  been  always  sorry  to  differ  from  you  ?  If 
you  think  that  I  refused  “  Vespasian”  from  any  mean  consideration,  you  wrong  me  and 
yourself;  for  your  contempt  of  me  would  have  been  as  j  ustifiable,  as  your  now  “holla¬ 
ing  Mortimer”  is  unkind.  If  you  believe  I  judged  of  “  Vespasian”  ignorantly,  with  all 
my  heart;  but  then  ignorance  is  no  crime,  and  once  being  called  fool  should  satisfy  a 
thinking  man  like  yourself.  I  never  heard  of  your  letter  to  Browne,  or  your  slight 
attack  upon  me;  you  had  a  right  to  justify  your  performance  against  my  sentence, 
which  I  desire  you  will  think  proceeded  from  an  error  of  the  head,  and  not  of  the 
heart.  May  I  be  permitted  to  ask  you,  if  you  mean  any  thing  more  by  the  mention 
of  that  unlucky  business  than  the  mere  reminding  me  of  my  offences  ?  If  you  do,  I 
could  wish,  and  must  desire  to  know  it.  Why  do  you  raise  the  ghosts  of  Boadicea 
and  Barbarossa  to  haunt  me?  If  I  had  not  performed  the  first,  I  should  have  been 
a  very  shallow  politician  ;  and  if  I  had  not  received  the  last,  I  should  have  suffered 

*  The  true  wisdom,  keenness,  and  manly  spirit  of  this  paragraph,  show  that  Garrick,  had  he  been  fond  of 
writing,  would,  as  a  correspondent,  have  had  few  equals,  and  no  superior. — Ed. 


470 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


as  a  manager,  for  no  tragedy  bad  more  success.  I  thank  you  for  the  prologue  and 
epilogue :  T  cannot  recollect  having  seen  them  before. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  have  hurt  my  thumb  and  cannot  write  legibly:  though  1  had  written  this  last 
night,  and  the  moment  the  defluxion  from  my  eyes  and  nose  would  suffer  me  to 
write,  yet  it  was  too  late  to  send  it. 


DU.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Mary’s,  May  28th,  1772. 

I  write  immediately,  that  I  may  put  an  end  to  your  good  and  amiable  concern 
for  your  friend  Cumberland  and  his  father.  You  are  not  acquainted  with  our  Hamp¬ 
shire  connexions,  or  you  would  immediately  have  known,  that  father  means  father-in- 

law,  and  that  old  George  Ridge  keeps  a  w - at  Waltham,  separates  from  his  wife  and 

family,  &c.  &c.  So  let  my  scandal  fall  upon  the  right  horse,  and  the  good  Cumberlands 
live  in  peace  and  reputation,  and  go  on  to  divert  and  improve  the  world.  It  is  so 
long  since  you  sent  me  your  epitaph  on  Hogarth,  that  I  had  forgotten  what  I  owed 
to  it  and  you.  I  have  given  it  a  niche  in  my  temple  of  immortality,  i.  e.  inserted  it 
in  vol.  14.  You  have  fully  revenged  yourself  upon  me  in  not  saying  a  word  of  two 
admirable  performances  which  you  returned  me.  You  might  at  least  have  said  as 
much  as  our  friend  Hogarth  makes  Rich  say  to  his  rake :  I  have  read  your  play,  and 
it  will  not  do.  I  hope,  after  this,  you  will  reverse  your  decree,  and  send  me  all  the 
nonsense  you  can  recollect.  After  what  Mr.  Murphy  has  said,  I  think  your  wings 
more  in  danger  of  being  singed  by  the  fire  of  your  vanity,  than  clipped  by  my  satire. 
Murphy,  I  suppose,  is  making  amends  for  former  times :  in  which  you  used  to  abuse 
one  another  very  handsomely ;  and  we  agreed,  there  was  not  a  more  sorry  fellow. 
I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  compliments  about  Baron,  (who  I  did  not  know  was  a 
writer,)  and  a  girl.  Is  there  a  necessity  of  its  being  a  girl,  if  you  can  help  me  to  bind 
out  any  honest  parson’s  child  ?  The  TVdrtons  are  the  men  you  love,  not  the  Waltons ; 
at  least,  you  could  love  none  that  I  ever  knew  of  the  name. 

Brother  1  om  of  Oxford  has  been  with  his  brother  ;  but  they  had  not  the  grace 
to  come  over  to  their  lame  friend  at  St.  Mary’s.  They  break  up  this  day,  and  you 
are  more  like  to  see  them  than  I ;  for  Joe  loves  holidays  as  well  as  any  of  his  boys. 
We  return  our  loves  sincerely,  and  take  for  granted  that  Madam  is  well,  as  you 
would  not  be  indifferent  if  she  were  so.  I  write  finely  with  a  worsted  glove  on  a 
swelled  hand :  more  another  opportunity.  ISTot  that  I  have  any  thing  particular  to 
say ;  but  I  am  unwilling  to  let  you  go,  now  I  am  shaking  you  by  the  hand.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  with  our  best  wishes,  Your  very  affectionate, 

J.  Hoadly. 

A  e  think  of  Old  Alresford  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  week  for  the  summer 

o  o 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


471 


MR.  W.  HILLAS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Dublin,  10th  June,  1772. 

A  letter  from  a  person  unknown  to  you  requires  some  apology ;  and  I  hope  it 
will  be  excused,  as  it  arises  from  a  desire  of  putting  a  weak  production  of  mine  under 
your  protection,  where  (if  it  is  found  to  have  merit)  I  well  know  justice  will  be  ren¬ 
dered  to  it.  A  very  early  attempt  cannot  be  expected  to  pass  the  strict  ordeal  of 
criticism ;  but  I  flatter  myself,  some  few  things  may  be  found,  in  the  piece  I  speak 
of,  to  render  the  perusal  at  least  supportable.  It  is  the  product  of  some  few  years 
ago,  which  in  truth  was  intended  to  have  remained  in  oblivion,  had  it  not  by  chance 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  literary  friend,  in  compliance  with  whose  advice  I  am  pre¬ 
vailed  upon  to  submit  it  for  representation  ;  but  whatever  my  wishes  may  now  be,  I 
cannot  attempt  to  give  you  any  trouble  without  your  previous  permission,  as  I  am 
well  convinced,  should  it  even  in  general  meet  your  approbation,  it  will  still  require 
your  judicious  hand  to  prune  the  superfluous  branches  of  a  young  imagination,  before 
it  can  have  any  prospect  of  coming  to  maturity  in  a  British  soil. 

I  have  been  solicited  to  bring  out  this  comedy  here  :  if  it  meets  your  appro¬ 
bation,  it  will  be  more  likely  to  succeed  under  a  perfect  representation,  which  is  not 
at  present  to  be  expected  on  the  Irish  stage  ;  if  you  disapprove  of  it,  I  have  too  good 
an  opinion  of  your  judgment,  and  too  poor  a  one  of  my  own  abilities,  to  suppose  it 
would  succeed  anywhere. 

While  the  Comic  Muse  has  ranged  almost  the  whole  extravagancies  of  character 
at  home,  and  boldly  winged  her  flight  even  to  the  extremities  of  the  empire,  I  doubt 
if  a  genuine  South  Briton  has  not  escaped  her  observation :  a  contrast  occurs  from 
this  idea,  and  a  comparison  from  a  century  ago  with  the  present  age,  presents  itself. 
This  island,  too,  has  furnished  some  characters,  which  have  been  lately  drawn  with 
spirit  and  abilities ;  but  it  appears  to  me  that  some  still  remain  untouched,  which, 
however  weakly  they  may  be  executed,  claim  that  great  advantage  of  being  original. 
These  subjects  judiciously  disposed,  and  elegantly  expressed  by  a  Cumberland,  would 
probably  afford  matter  sufficient  to  feed  our  utmost  avidity  in  a  comedy  ;  but  at¬ 
tempted  by  very  slender  abilities,  require  some  auxiliaries  to  support  them,  and  an 
attentive  research  for  other  objects,  that,  by  presenting  a  group,  the  figures  may  escape 
that  nice  observation  which  they  would  receive  if  singly  disposed.  Upon  these 
principles  I  have  proceeded,  and  hope  my  mentioning  so  much  of  the  scheme  will 
not  be  thought  unnecesary. 

Air.  Garrick  must  blame  himself  for  the  trouble  he  receives  on  these  occasions  ; 
the  assistance  he  has  so  liberally  afforded  to  native  attempts,  induces  even  the  remote 
to  have  recourse  to  him  :  if  you  therefore  allow  me,  the  piece  shall  be  very  speedily 
delivered  to  you,  and  if  it  shall  merit  your  attention,  1  hope  an  opportunity  in  some 
part  of  the  ensuing  season  will  be  found  for  it.  I  could  have  had  the  piece  presented 
to  you  by  some  gentlemen  who  have  the  pleasure  of  being  known  to  you,  but  I  pre- 


472 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


fer  this  method,  in  order  to  prevent  any  unnecessary  trouble  to  either  you  or  them  ; 
a  trouble  which  I  am  really  doubtful  whether  the  piece  has  merit  to  authorize. 
You  will  readily  conceive  my  reasons  for  hoping  for  the  favour  of  your  answer  as  soon 
as  is  convenient  to  you  ;  and  therefore  I  hope  you  will  excuse  the  request. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Wynne  Hill  as* 

Be  so  good  as  to  address  to  my  house  at  Broad-stone,  Dublin. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  Ireland,  about  a  comedy, 

Julv  3,  1772.”  Answered. 

*/  ' 


MR.  GAINSBOROUGH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  June  22,  1772. 

I  ask  pardon  for  having  kept  your  picture  so  long  from  Mrs.  Garrick.  It  has 
indeed  been  of  great  service  in  keeping  me  going ;  but  my  chief  reason  for  detaining 
it  so  long  was  the  hopes  of  getting  one  copy  like  to  hang  in  my  own  parlour,  not  as 
a  show  picture,  but  for  my  own  enjoyment,  to  look  when  I  please  at  a  great  man, 
who  has  thought  me  worthy  of  some  little  notice; — but  not  one  copy  can  I  make  which 
does  not  as  much  resemble  Mr.  Garrick’s  brother  as  himself ;  so  I  have  bestowed  a 
drop  of  excellent  varnish  to  keep  you  out,  instead  of  a  falling  tear  at  parting,  and 
have  only  to  beg  of  dear  Mrs.  Garrick  to  hang  it  in  the  best  light  she  can  find  out, 
and  to  continue  puffing  for  me  in  the  manner  Mr. - informs  me  she  does. 

That  you  may  long  continue  to  delight  and  surprise  the  world  with  your  original 
face,  whilst  I  hobble  after  with  my  copy,  is  the  sincere  wish  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  unaccountable  and  obedient  servant, 

Thomas  Gainsborough. 

P.  S.  The  picture  is  to  go  to  London  by  the  Wiltshire  fly-waggon  on  Wednes¬ 
day  next ;  and  I  believe  will  arrive  by  Saturday  morning.f 


ISAAC  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  St.  Malo,  Juin  24,  1772. 

Si  votre  cceur  a  conserve  jusqu’a  present  la  moindre  trace  de  cette  prevention  que 
vous  avez  autrefois  avoue  pour  un  homme  qui  est  aujourd’hui  le  plus  malheureux 

*  This  gentleman  was,  I  suppose,  properly  discouraged  by  Mr.  Garrick,  for  his  name  does  not  enlarge 
the  list  of  dramatic  writers. — Ed. 

t  This  portrait  is  a  front  view  of  Garrick  in  laced  clothes,  with  a  book  in  the  right  hand.  It  is  more 
genteel  than  Sir  Joshua’s — I  mean  than  that  great  painter’s  front  view  of  him.  Gainsborough’s,  though 
extremely  like,  gives  what  is  a  common  fault,  the  impression  of  a  larger  figure  than  that  of  the  sitter.  How 
either  painter  could  be  reconciled  to  the  abominable  nigs  of  the  time,  saddling  the  forehead  in  the  most 
expressive  part  of  it,  they  have  not  condescended  to  inform  us. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


473 


qui  soit  sur  la  terre  ;  je  vous  supplie  de  me  le  faire  connoitre  par  trois  ou  quatre 
mots  addresses  pour  M.  Burrows,  chez  M.  Vagries  fils,  Libraire,  au  cot6  du  Cathedral, 
a  Saint  Malo,  Bretagne,  France. 

Penetre  avec  un  chagrin  le  plus  amer  qui  peut  blesser  le  coeur,  soyez  persuade, 
Monsieur,  que  je  n’ai  rien  de  demander  de  votre  bonte  que  la  seule  licence  de  vous 
6crire  plus  au  longue  ;  si  vous  n’etes  pas  dans  le  sentiment  de  me  pennettre,  imaginez 
que  cette  lettre  vient  d’un  mort  au  vivant ;  jettez-la  dans  le  feu,  et  n’en  pensez  plus. 
Je  n’ai  pas  la  moindre  doute.  Monsieur,  que  mon  chagrin  me  portera  au  tombeau, 
mais  par  un  chemin  peut-etre  plus  long  que  je  ne  le  souhaiterai,  et  cette  pensee  est 
une  grande  augmentation  de  mes  peines.  Ayant  perdu  mes  amis,  mes  esperances, 
tombe,  exile,  et  livr6  au  desespoir  comme  je  suis,  la  vie  est  un  fardeau  presque  insup¬ 
portable  :  j’etois  loin  de  soup^onner,  que  la  derniere  fois  que  j’entrois  dans  votre 
libraire,  serait  la  derniere  fois  que  j’y  entrerais  de  ma  vie,  et  que  je  ne  reverrais  plus  le 
maitre !  Mais  celle-ci  est  une  reflexion  que  je  fais  le  moins  souvent  que  m’est 
possible. 

Je  vous  supplie,  Monsr.  de  ne  dire  a  personne,  que  je  vous  ai  ecrit,  et  sur  tout  de 
garder  silence  sur  la  place  de  ma  retraite,  qui  est  une  chose  pour  moi  de  la  plus  grande 
consequence.  Comme  je  vous  ai  dit  deja,  si  vous  ne  me  ferai  pas  la  consolation  d’une 
lettre,  brulez  celle-ci,  et  restez  comme  si  elle  n’avoit  jamais  tombee  entr6  vos  mains ; 
si,  au  contraire,  votre  compassion  pour  un  miserable  l’emporte,  personne  ne  saura  que 
vous  avez  eu  tant  de  bonte  pour  lui.  Dieu  vous  garde,  mon  tres  cher,  et  trcs  honors 
Monsieur,  et  comble  vous  et  le  votre  avec  toute  la  felicitd  du  monde,  s’il  y  vous 
restede  demander  encore.  Je  voudrais  dire  beaucoup  plus,  mais  je  ne  sais  pas  quoi ; 
je  crains  fort,  que  vous  aurez  de  peine  d’expliquer  mon  mauvais  Francois.* 

Endorsed, 

“  From  that  poor  wretch  Bickerstaff. 

I  could  not  answer  it.” 

*  I  persuade  myself  to  give  this  letter  for  several  reasons.  In  the  first  place  the  writer  had  a  name 
among  us,  which  he  lost,  and  1  fear  deserved  to  lose.  The  stage  is  indebted  to  him  for  a  series  of  very  pure 
and  pleasing  productions :  “  Love  in  a  Village,”  “  The  Maid  of  the  Mill,”  “  Lionel  and  Clarissa,”  “  The 
Padlock,”  &c. ;  and,  under  Mr.  Garrick’s  directions,  he  altered  several  plays  as  revivals,  and  was  of  real 
importance  to  the  stage.  The  reader  of  this  correspondence  will  find  Bickerstaff  entertaining  at  his  own  house, 
at  one  time,  Dr.  Johnson,  Arthur  Murphy,  Samuel  Foote,  David  Garrick,  and  others,  with  whom  he  was 
permitted  to  associate  upon  equal  terms,  admired  and  respected.  A  few  pages  only  are  turned  over,  and  we 
see  the  same  man  become  a  “  poor  wretch ,”  whose  miserable  letter  a  very  kind  heart  indeed  “  could  not ” 
bring  itself  to  “  answer ,”  and  giving  the  following  description  of  his  degradation.  “  I  have  not  the  smallest 
doubt  that  my  chagrin  will  conduct  me  to  my  grave  ;  but  by  a  road  of  greater  length  than  I  could  wish  it, 
and  this  thought  adds  to  my  afflictions.  Having  lost  my  friends,  my  hopes;  fallen,  banished,  devoted  to 
despair  as  I  am,  life  is  a  load  almost  insupportable  !  I  was  far  from  suspecting  that  the  last  time  I  entered 
your  library,  would  be  the  last  visit  I  should  ever  pay  it,  and  that  I  had  seen  its  master  also  for  the  last  time 
in  my  life.”  Surely,  surely,  such  reflections  cannot  be  too  widely  spread ;  and  in  our  abhorrence  of  the  of¬ 
fence  we  should  at  least  insist  strongly  upon  its  agonies,  if  they  can  at  all  contribute  to  its  prevention. — Ed. 


3  p 


voi..  i. 


474 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  JOHN  FIELDING. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  June  28th,  1772. 

If  I  were  sure  you  would  not  laugh,  I  should  be  very  angry  with  you.  What 
can  you  possibly  mean  by  telling  my  brother  that  you  are  surprised  at  my  counte¬ 
nancing  Torre  in  an  illegal  act  ?  Are  you  really  serious,  or,  what  I  like  much  better, 
joking  with  me?  You  cannot  sure  be  misled  by  newspaper  intelligence.  The  affair 
between  me  and  Torre  stands  thus : — A  friend  of  mine  at  Paris,  from  whom  I  had 
received  in  my  illness  there  many  favours,  recommended  Torre  to  me,  as  a  great 
genius  in  his  way,  one  greatly  oppressed,  and  as  worthy  as  he  was  ingenious.  His  story 
in  short  is  this : — he  had  obtained  a  patent  for  exhibiting  his  fire-works  upon  the 
Boulevards,  where  he  got  great  profit  and  reputation  :  another  patent  was  obtained 
by  some  favourite  of  the  favourite  of  one  of  the  French  Ministers,  to  open  a  place 
built  at  a  great  expense,  called  the  Colliseum ;  at  the  same  time  they  most  unjustly 
stopped  Torre,  in  hopes  that  he  would  exert  his  genius  to  support  the  Colliseum, 
which  without  his  assistance  must  fail.  The  man  was  so  hurt  at  this  act  of  oppres¬ 
sion,  that  he  was  resolved  not  to  submit  to  their  tyranny.  At  this  time,  the  friend 
before-mentioned  recommended  him  to  me,  and  I  to  the  managers  of  Ranelagh  :  they 
had  him  over,  but  could  not  agree  upon  terms ;  upon  which,  according  to  promise, 
they  paid  him  his  expenses  of  coming  over,  and  there  finished  my  commission. 

He  then  engaged  himself  with  Mr.  Arnold ;  but  before  he  signed,  I  was  desired 
to  attend,  to  see  if  they  well  understood  each  other :  this  I  did,  and  their  agreement 
was  made.  His  licence  from  the  Office  of  Ordnance,  which  I  am  told  is  never 
refused  to  licensed  places  of  entertainment,  and  was  obtained  for  the  same  place 
before,  I  got  for  him  : — this  is  the  plain  fact ;  and  how  they  can  accuse  me  of  coun¬ 
tenancing  Torre  in  an  illegal  act,  by  being  merely  civil  and  friendly  to  an  ingenious, 
worthy  stranger,  recommended  to  me  by  one  who  had  been  particularly  civil  and 
friendly  to  me,  I  shall  leave  to  your  own  judgment.  I  have  consulted  no  lawyer  for 
him,  nor  applied  to  any  magistrate,  nor  have  I  conversed  with  any  upon  the  subject 
but  yourself ;  so,  my  good  friend,  pray  explain  yourself  to  me.  I  wish  Torre  well, 
for  he  has  great  worth,  spirit  and  genius,  in  his  way.  But  I  would  not  countenance 
my  brother  in  an  illegal  act.  I  honour  the  laws  of  my  country,  and  no  man,  I  trust, 
less  offends  them  than,  Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

My  best  compliments  to  your  lady. 

This  scrawl  has  been  written  in  such  a  hurry,  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  teach 
Becket,  the  bearer,  to  read  it,  and  who  will  be  the  interpreter  between  us. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


475 


THE  DUKE  OF  RICHMOND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Goodwood,  July  8th,  1772. 

I  confess  I  am  by  no  means  satisfied  with  your  letter.  You  say  you  will  call 
here  in  your  return  from  the  Isle  of  Wight,  but  do  not  say  when  that  will  be  :  and 
you  talk  of  taking  your  chance  of  finding  us  here,  as  if  it  was  a  matter  of  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  us  whether  we  saw  you  or  not.  As  this  is  by  no  means  the  case,  I  must 
once  more  trouble  you  to  beg  you  will  say  about  what  time  it  will  be,  that  you  think 
you  shall  return  from  the  Isle  of  Wight. 

I  beg  you  would  present  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe 
me,  Sir,  Your  most  obedient  and  very  sincere  humble  servant, 

Richmond,  &c. 


LORD  HYDE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  The  Grove,*  July  11th,  1772. 

You  do  justice  to  my  esteem  by  transmitting  the  enclosed.  I  wish  by  my 
answer  I  could  give  as  much  satisfaction  as  I  receive  from  your  confidence;  but 
the  office  desired  is  mentally  engaged  to  one  who  has  previously  earned  it :  was 
not  that  the  case,  I  should  have  endeavoured  to  have  made  you  fetch  it ;  but  1  have 
now  no  bait  to  put  to  an  invitation  but  love  of  merit,  and  a  strong  desire  for  oppor¬ 
tunities  to  show  the  just  consideration  with  which  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Hyde. 


Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  from  Lord  Hyde  July  the  14th, 
and  answer  within  of  the  16th.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  COL.  DOW. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday,  July  15,  1772. 

A  hundred  people  are  come  in  upon  me,  and  prevent  my  going  out.  I  have 
read  and  considered  your  tragedy  twice  over  at  Hampton.  As  I  flatter  myself  that 
you  are  convinced  of  my  sincerity,  whatever  you  may  think  of  my  judgment,  I  shall 
freely  declare  that  I  differ  greatly  with  our  friends  about  “  Sethona.”  I  should  be 
glad  to  meet  Mr.  Macpherson  and  Mr.  Cumberland,  and  read  over  with  them  the 
third,  fourth,  and  fifth  acts,  that  they  may  convince  me  of  my  mistakes,  or  give  way 
to  my  objections. 

*  The  Grove,  near  Watford  in  Hertfordshire,  a  beautiful  seat  of  the  Earl  of  Clarendon. — Ed. 

3  p  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


47G 

As  I  think  wc  cannot  show  our  friendship  to  you  more  than  by  such  a  consulta¬ 
tion,  1  don’t  care  how  soon  and  what  pains  1  take  in  such  a  cause. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours,  most  truly, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  shall  keep  the  tragedy  till  I  know  your  determination. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  to  Col.  Dow,  July  15,  1772, 
about  a  tragedy.'’ 


COL.  DOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  duly  16,  1772. 

If  you  think  that  with  slight  alterations  “  Sethona”  may  be  brought  on,*  I  beg 
it  may  be  done,  as  the  business,  contrary  to  my  inclination,  has  taken  air :  if  you 
think  otherwise,  I  desire  it  may  be  returned  by  the  bearer.  I  would  not  have  pre¬ 
sented  it  to  you,  had  it  not  previously  obtained  the  favourable  opinion  of  two  gentle¬ 
men,  whose  judgment  in  literary  matters  ought  to  have  weight  with  the  world  as 
well  as  with,  dear  Sir,  Your  very  humble  serv  ant, 

Alex.  Dow. 


MR.  J.  MOODY  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sunday,  July  26,  1772. 

I  have  to  ask  your  pardon  that  I  did  not  answer  yours  yesterday  ;  but  I  was  at 
Bath,  it  being  a  vacant  day.  Mrs.  Hartley  is  a  good  figure,  with  a  handsome  small 
face,  and  very  much  freckled  ;  her  hair  red,  and  her  neck  and  shoulders  well-turned. 
There  is  not  the  least  harmony  in  her  voice  ;  but  when  forced  (which  she  never  fails 
to  do  on  every  occasion)  is  loud  and  strong,  but  such  an  inarticulate  gabble,  that  you 
must  be  well  acquainted  with  her  part  to  understand  her.  She  is  ignorant  and 
stubborn :  the  latter  might  be  got  the  better  of  at  Drury -lane,  and  the  former 
mended ;  but  I  despair  of  either  at  Covent-garden,  where  she  is  engaged :  notwith¬ 
standing,  there  is  a  superficial  glare  about  her  that  may  carry  her  through  a  few 
nights ;  but,  be  assured,  she  cannot  last  long.  She  has  a  husband,  a  precious  fool, 
that  she  heartily  despises.  She  talks  lusciously,  and  has  a  slovenly  good-nature  about 
her  that  renders  her  prodigiously  vulgar.  She  is  to  out- Jane-Shore  all  that  ever  went 
before  her :  in  that  they  intend  to  launch  her ;  but  all  the  last  act  is  a  perfect  model 
of  Mrs.  Kennedy’s  Mrs .  Honeycomb.  Let  me  add,  she  has  carefully  collected  all  Mrs. 

*  Two  years  after  this  Garrick  yielded  to  importunity  and  brought  out  “  Sethona”  against  his  own 
judgment.  The  author’s  countrymen,  agreeably  to  orders,  supported  him  warmly;  but  the  treasury  of  the 
theatre,  seeing  little  but  paper  currency  at  night,  soon  consigned  the  Oisia«-like  sublimity  of  its  scenes 
to  oblivion. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


477 


Yates’s  deformities.  This,  Sir,  is  my  real  opinion  of  her,  and  yet  I  wish  we  had  her; 
because  I  am  sure  she  would  do  that  for  Mr.  Garrick  that  no  other  man  in  the  world 
will  ever  get  her  to  think  of,  she  is  so  stubborn. 

Indeed,  Sir,  it  wounds  me  to  the  heart  to  think  that  that  execrable  fiend  K - * 

should  have  power  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  my  most  honoured  friend  ;  and  yet, 
when  I  think  of  the  horrid  attack,  1  cannot  blame  him.  I  hope  the  law  will  have 
sufficient  power  to  punish  him  as  he  really  deserves,  and  make  him  an  example  for 
the  tribe  of  scoundrels  of  his  stamp.  1  hope  to  God  he  does  not  suffer  this  injury  a 
place  in  his  mind,  but  lets  it  go  to  hell  from  whence  it  came.  May  God  Almighty 
give  him  health  and  peace  of  mind  !  Amen. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  thank  you  as  I  ought  for  your  kind  enquiries 
after  my  health.  I  am  very  well,  and  shall  be  proud  of  any  occasion  that  brings 
the  like  account  of  you  and  your  whole  family  ;  and  if  I  can  be  of  any  service  here, 
pray  lay  your  commands,  without  reserve,  on,  Sir, 

Your  humblest  servant, 

J.  MooDY.f 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  July  29,  1772. 

The  many  proofs  I  have  had  of  your  friendship  and  good  wishes  prevent  my 
making  an  apology  for  giving  you  some  account  of  my  present  situation,  and  for  re¬ 
questing  that  you  will  say  as  much  as  your  partiality  can  dictate  of  me  to  my  Lord 
Harcourt,  or  to  any  of  your  friends,  should  they  happen  to  be  in  his  Lordship's  con¬ 
fidence.  When  his  Lordship's  having  accepted  the  government  of  Ireland  was  made 
public,  I  requested  the  honour  of  my  Lord  Townshend’s  recommendation  to  have  me 
continued  Master  of  the  Horse,  but  delicacy  to  his  successor  prevented  his  Excellency 
from  doing  it ;  yet  I  have  the  satisfaction  to  think  he  wishes  me  well,  as  he  declined 
doing  me  this  favour  in  such  a  manner  as  left  me  no  room  to  be  discontented,  and  he 
is  so  good  to  intend  settling  a  seat  for  me  in  Parliament  before  he  leaves  the  Govern¬ 
ment.  To  some  absent  friends  I  have  applied  for  their  good  offices,  but  I  can  form 
no  conjecture  of  the  event  on  better  grounds  than  expectation,  which  is  always  falli¬ 
ble  :  thus  much,  however,  is  certain,  that  your  expressing  any  favourable  sentiments 
of  me,  should  it  not  contribute  to  my  success,  will  be  a  very  flattering  proof  of  my 
deserving  it,  and  a  salve  for  the  disappointment. 

*  Kenrick.  Alludes  to  an  infamous  poem  called  “  Lamentations  for  the  loss  of  his  Nyky;”  the  poor 
wretch  whose  letter  we  have  just  read. 

f  This  letter  was  from  that  admirable  actor  Mr.  John  Moody,  whose  first  appearance  at  Drury-lane 
theatre  was  in  the  beginning  of  1759,  and  who  died,  much  respected  and  full  of  years,  in  1813,  aged  eighty- 
five.  His  Irishmen  were  very  fine  performances  ;  they  had,  however,  a  solid  importance  in  their  blunders, 
almost  as  amusing  as  the  exhilarating  hurry  of  Johnstone. — Ed. 


478 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


It  gave  Mrs.  Jephson  and  me  great  concern  to  find  by  a  paragraph  in  one  of  the 
London  papers  that  you  were  obliged  to  resort  to  the  law  against  a  libeller.  I  sup¬ 
pose  there  was  some  very  infamous  provocation  ;  but  we  know  no  more  than  the 
title  of  the  paper  which  occasioned  the  prosecution ;  and  we  conjecture  from  that 
title  that  there  is  some  abominable  calumny  at  the  bottom  of  it. 

The  papers  which  I  enclose  from  our  Government  press  will,  I  hope,  serve  for 
half  an  hour’s  amusement,  when  you  have  leisure  to  peruse  them.  Except  the  abs¬ 
tract  of  Sir  E — d  N — in’s  sentiments  in  the  paper  on  the  Finlander’s  Herb,  and  the 
Imitation  of  Quern  Virurn,  (which  you  will  find  at  the  end  of  the  letters  signed  Mer¬ 
cator,)  they  are  all  the  production  of  Mr.  Courtney’s  fertile  imagination.  As  I  know 
your  caution  on  points  of  this  nature,  he  gives  me  leave  to  mention  his  name  to  you. 
He  is  the  same  gentleman  whom  I  mentioned  to  you  in  a  former  letter.  If  chance 
should  make  you  both  personally  acquainted,  I  am  certain  you  will  thank  me  for  any 
predisposition  you  may  conceive  in  his  favour,  from  my  very  high  opinion  of  him. 
He  has  genius,  learning,  and  honour— three  things  which,  if  they  do  not  make  a  man’s 
fortune,  must  make  him  respectable,  especially  to  one  who,  like  your  humble  servant, 
has  known  so  many  instances  of  his  possessing  them  all  in  a  very  uncommon  degree. 
Lord  Townshend  has  lately  given  him  an  office  of  about  300/.  a  year,  which  Ins  ser¬ 
vices  in  the  cause  of  Govennent  have  well  deserved ;  and  I  am  certain  that  a  person 
of  his  Excellency’s  discernment  must  think  with  regret  on  some  Court  favours  of 
greater  magnitude  which  political  necessity  has  obliged  him  to  confer  on  dunces. 
You  will  see  in  the  letters  signed  Mercator  a  very  satisfactory  account  of  the  late 
tumults  in  the  Northern  parts  of  Ireland. 

Your  constant  friend  the  P.  Serjeant*  has  gained  immortal  honours  by  the  exer¬ 
tion  of  his  great  talents  in  the  Yalencia  cause,f  which  was  determined  by  the  Lords 
here  contrary  to  the  judgment  of  the  Lords  of  England.  Next  to  yourself,  he  has 
the  greatest  dominion  over  the  passions  of  his  auditors  of  any  public  speaker  I  ever 
heard.  That  complicated  cause  was  w  rthy  of  his  great  powers,  and  the  best  judges 
agree  that  his  masterly  comprehension  of  the  subject,  and  the  solidity  of  his  legal 


*  John  Hely  Hutchinson. 

f  This  cause  the  reader  will  remember  as  one  of  the  most  singular,  on  many  accounts,  that  ever  occupied 
the  highest  tribunal  in  these  kingdoms.  Tt  was,  in  a  word,  whether  the  late  Lord  “Viscount  Valentia  in  Ire¬ 
land,  and  Earl  of  Anglesey  in  England,  was  married  to  Juliana  Donovan  on  the  15th  of  September,  1741  ? 
The  English  House  of  Peers,  on  some  suspicion  that  there  was  a  forgery  in  the  marriage  certificate,  disal¬ 
lowed  the  claim  of  the  present  Lord,  as  heir  of  that  marriage.  The  Irish  House,  after  a  patient  investigation 
of  one  and  twenty  successive  days,  pronounced  the  marriage  valid  and  the  claim  incontestable.  The  singulari¬ 
ties  were,  that  the  English  House  should  pronounce  against  parole  evidence  direct,  positive,  natural  and  usual  ; 
and  lean  to  mere  suspicion,  and  a  doubtful  testimony  as  to  the  hand-writing  of  subscribing  witnesses  this, 
too,  in  opposition  to  Lord  Mansfield’s  opinion  ;  and  that  Elizabeth  Elton,  alias  Smalley,  a  shoemaker  s 
wife,  should  swear  before  the  Lords  of  England,  that  she  knew  the  signatures  in  question,  and  in  Ireland  that 
she  did  not  know  them  ;  and,  to  maintain  her  credit  in  her  inconsistency,  swear  also,  that  the  certificate  shown 
to  her  in  the  two  kingdoms  was  not  the  same.  The  rival  tribunals  retained  their  respective  opinions.  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


479 


arguments,  were  equal  to  those  parts  of  his  pleading  for  the  excellence  of  which  the 
heart  only  is  appealed  to. 

My  wife  always  thinks  of  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  with  sincere  friendship  ;  she  is 
by  my  side,  and  desires  with  mine  her  kindest  compliments  to  you  both  :  her  health 
has  been  sometimes  indifferent,  but  her  worst  complaints,  a  cough  and  the  rheuma¬ 
tism,  are,  thank  God,  much  better.  As  to  myself,  I  have  had  fevers  without  num¬ 
ber,  but  her  kind  care,  and  the  skill  of  her  excellent  brother  Doctor  Barry,  have  set 
me  on  my  legs.  If  I  can  persevere  in  a  course  of  temperance,  I  do  not  despair  of 
possessing  the  greatest  blessing  in  this  life — mens  sana  in  corpore  sano.  I  wish  you 
all  happiness,  and  am  sincerely, 

My  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 


MR.  STANLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Paulton’s,  Aug.  6th,  1772. 

Mr.  Stanley  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick :  he  comes  over 
to  the  Isle  of  Wight  on  Saturday,  and  should  be  very  much  concerned  if  they  left  that 
country  without  his  having  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them  at  Steeple.  He  shall  be  much 
obliged  to  them  if  they  will  favour  him  with  their  company  at  dinner,  any  day  they 
choose  to  appoint ;  and  he  has  beds  at  their  service  if  they  will  pass  the  night  there. 
Mr.  Stanley  will  order  them  a  yacht,  if  it  is  agreeable  to  them,  to  make  any  excur¬ 
sions  upon  the  water. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Stanley,  Governor  of  the 
Isle  of  Wight.” 


MR.  J.  WALLIS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Norfolk-street,  Aug.  22nd,  1772. 

Having  communicated  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry  the  conversation  of  the  other 
morning  respecting  their  engagements,  and  of  your  offer  of  an  additional  100/.;  they 
desire  you  may  be  informed  of  their  great  obligation  to  you  for  so  genteel  a  proposal, 
the  more  so  as  it  is  contrary  to  Mr.  Lacy’s  absolute  determination. 

Mrs.  Barry  desires  me  to  assure  you,  that  nothing  is  so  disagreeable  to  her  as  the 
finding  her  own  clothes  for  the  stage,  and  nothing  more  certain  than,  by  doing  so,  her 
salary  is  200/.  less  than  Mrs.  Cibber's  was.  Yet  to  convince  you  how  unwilling  she 
is  to  change  her  situation,  and  for  the  sake  of  making  early  preparations  for  the  good 
of  the  ensuing  season,  she  agrees  to  your  proposal,  and  is  desirous  of  entering  upon 
business  immediately,  that  no  time  may  be  lost. 


480 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Mr.  Barry  assures  me,  that  (though  he  was  desired  by  Mr.  G.  G.  to  lose  no  op¬ 
portunity  of  engaging  elsewhere,  as  it  was  determined  to  make  no  alteration  in  the 
articles)  he  has  made  no  application  to  the  gentlemen  of  the  other  house,  directly  or 
indirectly,  knowing  it  would  be  to  no  purpose  till  Mrs.  Yates  was  engaged  at  Drury- 
lane,  which  he  had  heard  was  in  agitation.  Thus  much  he  thought  necessary,  in 
answer  to  what  I  told  him  had  been  mentioned  to  you. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

J.  Wallis. 

There  is  a  secret  article  to  be  settled  by  you  and  me. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  friend  Wallis  about  the  Barry s.” 


MR.  T.  FITZMAURICE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR.  SIR,  Isle  of  Wight,  Aug.  22nd,  1772. 

It  gave  us  great  pleasure  to  hear  of  your  safe  and  timely  arrival  among  your 
own  household  gods,  who  I  hope  will  protect  you,  without  the  aid  of  art,  from  all 
farther  attacks  of  that  shocking  fiend  who  plagued  you  and  us  here.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  my  having  mentioned  your  sufferings  in  a  letter  to  my  mother,  she  sent 
me  the  enclosed  recipe  for  you,  which  I  received  a  day  or  two  after  we  parted ;  you 
are  to  do  as  you  think  proper,  but  I  should  not  do  her  justice  were  I  to  omit  for¬ 
warding  it  to  you. 

Our  Queens  Health  was  our  first,  and  a  bumper  toast,  every  day  after  dinner, 
during  the  solitary  remainder  of  the  last  week  ;  nor  has  better  health  to  your  Majesty 
ever  been  forgotten.  Mr.  Barwell  insists  upon  it  that  Mr.  Hewson  in  the  prayers 
last  Sunday,  at  Shanklin,  when  he  came  to  “  Our  Gracious  Queen  Charlotte,”  laid  a 
strong  emphasis  upon  her  Majesty’s  name,  the  better  to  prevent  his  friends  making 
any  mistake  as  to  the  Queen  -whom  we  were  required  to  pray  for.  I  hope  the  band- 
box  has  arrived  safe  and  unscrutinised,  either  by  public  or  private  hands.  I  directed 
it  myself,  giving  very  particular  directions  concerning  it,  and  believe  it  to  have  set 
out  from  Portsmouth  last  Thursday  se’nnight. 

Mr.  Barwell  and  I  went  to  Shanklin  on  Friday,  where  we  stayed  till  Wed¬ 
nesday  ;  and  on  Thursday,  here  at  Knighton,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  giving  the  Ad¬ 
miral  and  his  commanding  officer,  Captain  Urry,  with  some  others,  a  turtle  for 
dinner,  when  we,  that  is  the  Admiral,  Secretary,  and  self,  were  as  jolly  as  our  re¬ 
flections  upon  the  loss  of  a  much  more  agreeable  party  would  suffer  us  to  be.  At 
Shanklin,  Mr.  Barwell  and  I  enjoyed  our  solitude  exceedingly,  though  he,  as  you  may 
believe,  was  now  and  then  inclined  to  temper  his  solitude  by  a  little  gallantry  in  the 
afternoon  with  the  young  ladies  belonging  to  the  farm ;  whilst  I,  more  savage  like, 
was  prowling  among  my  ancient  haunts  upon  the  beach.  He  read  and  walked  in  the 
mornings ;  I  wrote  letters,  and  bathed.  These  recreations  we  hope  again  to  resume 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


481 


for  l wo  or  three  days  more;  a  longer  time  we  shall  not  be  able  to  afford ;  for  by  con¬ 
sulting  the  almanack  I  find  our  decampment  must  be  on  Monday  fortnight,  the  seventh, 
from  hence  :  the  day  of  the  Mayor’s  election,  which  is  to  be  the  last,  if  possible,  of  my 
stay  at  Wycomb,  being  the  24th  September,  previous  to  which,  some  days  must  be 
allotted  to  my  duties  at  Twick’nam,  when  and  where  I  hope  to  have  some  laughing 

with  you  and  the  Countess  Dow - r.  I  told  her  that  you  and  Mrs.  G.  intended 

calling  upon  her;  but  now  you  will  think  yourself,  I  hope,  under  a  necessity  of 
going,  if  it  be  only  to  thank  her  for  this  prescription. 

Your  story  about  the  cook  at  Midhurst  entertained  us  very  much,  so  that  we 
shall  not  fail  to  ask  for  her  own  edition  of  it,  if  on  our  return  we  should  pass  that 
way.  The  Doctor  was  ingenious  and  positive  enough  to  lie  at  Guildford  instead  of 
Godalmino-,  where  I  have  the  satisfaction  to  find  he  met  with  the  exact  treatment  he 
deserved,  and  complains  of  it  almost  as  much  as  I  could  wish. 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  our  friend  the  Abbe,  who  astonishes  me  by  saying 
that  he  had  not  seen  you ;  however,  I  understand  he  means  to  be  at  Hampton  the 
beginning  of  September,  after  his  return  from  the  North,  whither  he  is  accompanying 
my  brother,  on  his  road  to  Ireland.  I  send  you  his  letter,  chiefly  for  Mrs.  Garrick’s 
perusal ;  that  if  you  and  she  on  consultation  should  think  it  requisite,  there  may  be 
no  time  lost  in  having  his  four  pendules  (separated  from  those  which  are  come  from 
Derby,  and  which  are  now  lying  in  Pall  Mall)  packed  up  and  forwarded  to  Linsley, 
his  bookseller  in  the  Strand.  All  the  troublesome  part  of  which  commission  I  should 
imagine  Beeket  might  best  execute,  if  Mrs.  Garrick  would  only  have  the  goodness  to 
see  the  separation  made,  and  to  give  directions  about  the  safe  passage  of  those  which 
are  to  go  to  France,  the  manner  of  doing  which  may  possibly  be  best  learned  from 
attending  to  that  in  which  Mr.  Whitehurst  has  forwarded  the  whole.  Will  her 
Majesty,  (for  such,  when  by  ourselves,  we  still  call  her)  have  the  goodness  to  excuse 
my  impertinence  in  troubling  her  with  the  execution  of  such  a  commission  ?  and  will 
you  pardon  my  prolixity  in  saying  how  it  is  to  be  executed  ?  It  was  at  my  tongue’s 
end  to  say,  that  1  do  all  this  with  the  less  scruple,  since  the  object  is  to  serve  the 
Abbe  more  than  myself— but  my  vanity  will  not  suffer  me. 

I  liked  the  appearance  of  the  housekeeper  we  saw  at  Hampstead  :  the  place  being 
to  be  let,  possibly  she  may  be  to  be  let  too.  I  think  of  writing  to  Smith  upon  the 
subject,  and  to  desire  him  to  procure  her  for  me.  Am  I  right? 

The  affair  which  I  mentioned  to  you  the  night  before  we  parted  is  to  take  place, 
at  the  desire  of  and  upon  the  handsomest  and  most  sensible  grounds  stated  by  the 
lady  herself.  So  the  settlement  of  it  will  be  put  into  the  channel,  which  you  thought 
along  with  me,  to  be  the  best,  and  which  I  am  very  happy  to  find  she  approves  of  too. 
I  hope  if  any  thing  occurs  to  you  upon  this  subject,  you  will  mention  it  to  me;  when 
we  meet,  I  will  talk  to  you  upon  it  more  fully. 

A  thousand  thanks  to  you  and  Mrs.  G.  for  the  compliments  you  pay  to  Knighton 
and  its  tenant  ;  had  you  and  he  had  fewer  complaints,  the  place  and  he  had  possibly 
better  deserved  them.  The  Admiral  and  Air.  Barwell  are  now  at  my  elbow,  and 

VOL.  I.  3  Q 


482 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


would  not  forgive  me  if  I  omitted  expressing  the  sense  they  entertain  of  your  kind 
remembrance  of  them,  begging  that  their  respectful  homage  may  be  made  to  the 
Queen,  and  their  acknowledgments  as  acceptable  as  possible  to  your  Majesty. 

Forgive  the  length  of  this  letter,  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  curtail,  though 
the  phaeton  has  been  waiting  this  hour  to  carry  us  to  make  some  morning  visits 
among  the  natives,  as  I  am  to  leave  them  so  soon. 

Together  with  the  compliments  which  you  are  to  pay  in  the  name  of  the  above 
gentlemen,  you  must  not  forget  to  add,  in  the  most  distinguished  manner,  those  of 

My  dear  Sir,  your  ever  faithful  and  affectionate 

Thos.  Fitzmaurice. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Camden  Place,  Sept.  2,  1772. 

I  understand  from  my  daughters  that  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  are  returned  from 
the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  have  not  forgot  your  promise  to  favour  us  with  a  day  at 
Camden  Place.  The  beds  are  aired  ;  the  family  are  in  good  health  and  excellent 
spirits,  and  long  most  impatiently  to  see  you  both.  Any  day  after  next  Sunday  will 
be  convenient  to  us,  and  a  line  sent  any  night  to  this  place  will  give  us  notice  by 
seven  o’clock  the  next  morning.  If  you  give  us  a  day  extraordinary,  you  will  have 
an  opportunity  of  bringing  me  and  Dr.  Hawkesworth  together.  My  lady  and  her 
children  desire  to  add  their  compliments  to  mine,  with  their  best  wishes  to  yourself 
and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

From  your  most  obedient  faithful  servant, 

Camden. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  1772. 

It  is  not  easy  to  express  how  much  we  are  mortified  and  disappointed  by  the 
receipt  of  your  letter  this  morning ;  and,  as  it  is  usual  to  inveigh  against  all  the  causes 
of  our  misfortunes,  you  may  be  sure  this  impertinent  Abbe  has  not  escaped  our  cen¬ 
sure  :  nay,  we  abused  all  the  French  nation,  and  wished  for  a  moment  that  you  your¬ 
self  had  been  a  little  more  churlish  ;  condemning  your  hospitality  at  the  very  time 
we  were  inviting  you  to  taste  ours.  The  guitar,  the  harpsichord,  and  the  viol  de 
gamba,  are  all  new  strung  and  tuned,  and  my  boy  was  prepared  to  greet  you  with 
ail  excellent  copy  of  humorous  verses,  which  you  shall  now  never  see.  The  girls 
will  break  their  instruments,  and  sing  nothing  but  psalms  for  the  next  month.  Will 
this  unseasonable  Frenchman  keep  you  confined  the  whole  week? 

Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  Thursday,  Friday,  does  he  hang  upon  you  all 
these  days  ?  I  am  the  more  anxious  to  see  you  now,  because  I  am  myself  engaged  to 
make  a  visit  or  two  next  Saturday,  and  you  threaten  to  lock  up  yourself  shortly  in 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


483 


the  theatre,  where  none  of  your  friends  can  see  you  gratis,  nor  even  for  money,  with¬ 
out  Johnson’s  leave. 

Mrs.  Garrick  is  more  generous,  and  therefore  I  must  apply  to  her  to  exert  a  little 
of  her  matrimonial  authority,  to  bring  you  here  bare-faced,  before  you  put  on  your 
winter’s  mask.  I  remain  however,  till  I  receive  your  answer, 

Yours  very  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden.* 

The  ladies,  angry  as  they  are,  desire  with  myself  to  send  their  compliments  to  you, 
but  more  particularly  to  your  lady. 

Our  post  comes  every  day. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  C&stle,  Sept.  3,  1772. 

I  think  myself  very  happy  in  the  favourable  sentiments  you  are  so  good  to 
express  of  me  in  your  last  letter,  and  hope  it  will  give  you  pleasure  to  hear  that 
I  am  to  continue  in  my  office  of  Master  of  Horse  to  the  successor  of  my  Lord 
Lieutenant. 

Some  misinformation  in  regard  to  my  circumstances  since  my  being  in  Ireland 
has,  1  imagine,  occasioned  your  expressing  a  disappointment  at  my  not  having 
taken  notice  of  your  demand  on  me  of  so  many  years’  standing.  My  principal 
reason  for  this  omission  was  my  never  having  been  better  enabled  to  cancel  it, 
than  at  the  time  you  so  generously  returned  my  offered  bond,  when  I  waited  on 
you  in  Southampton-street  on  that  subject :  yet  I  have  never  forgot  the  manner  in 
which  I  became  subject  to  it,  and  other  subsequent  particulars  redounding  so  much 
to  our  mutual  satisfaction,  and  to  your  credit ;  and  I  have  often  mentioned  the  whole 
of  your  conduct  and  my  own  in  this  affair,  to  persons  in  whose  opinion  I  imagined 
you  could  lose  no  esteem  by  your  disinterested  and  generous  friendship  to  me.  I 
will  not  trouble  you  with  all  the  particulars  of  my  situation  at  present,  but  hope  you 
will  pardon  me  for  assuring  you  that  my  income  is  not  better  than  at  my  coming  to 
Ireland  five  years  ago,  and  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  incur  many  new  and  heavy 
debts  by  my  station  at  the  Castle,  attended  as  it  has  been  with  unavoidable  expenses 
much  beyond  the  narrow  means  allowed  to  furnish  them. 

Whenever  I  am  able  to  cancel  this  great  obligation  to  you,  I  shall  have  a  pride 
and  pleasure  in  doing  it,  and  I  regret  sincerely  that  the  prospect  is  so  remote  and  un¬ 
certain,  as  I  wish  to  keep  alive  in  your  breast  the  same  kind  sentiments  which  I 
always  considered  as  a  most  flattering  mark  of  distinction. 

My  wife  desires  her  kindest  compliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  aud 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Robert  Jepiison. 

*  The  reader  who  remembers  Camden  in  the  contentious  scenes  of  party  politics,  will  be  gratified  in  these 
displays  of  his  private  character,  “  fertile  alike  in  every  great  and  amiable  quality.” — Ed. 

3  q  2 


484 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  BURKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Beconsfield,  Sept.  5th,  1772. 

As  l  know  with  what  particular  pleasure  you  receive  a  new  dramatic  perform¬ 
ance  of  merit,  I  send  you  two  of  them,  “  The  Female  Gamester,”  and  “  The  Siege  of 
Tam  or.' ”  You  are  no  stranger  to  the  abilities  and  reputation  of  the  author,  and  it 
will  be  an  abundant  recommendation  of  these  pieces  to  your  very  serious  attention 
to  inform  you,  that  they  were  written  by  Mr.  George  Howard,*  of  Dublin.  This 
gentleman,  after  having  practised  the  law  with  success  and  eminence  for  several 
years,  in  the  decline  of  his  life,  but  in  the  full  vigour  of  his  genius,  has  devoted  him¬ 
self  to  a  more  pleasing,  but  not  quite  so  lucrative  a  pursuit.  Indeed  to  him,  in  this 
instance,  it  is  likely  to  be  of  but  little  private  emolument ;  for  he  has  authorized  me 
to  tell  you,  that  he  consents  to  give  up  his  share  of  the  profits  to  be  disposed  to  any 
charity  you  think  proper.  I  would  thus  early  take  the  liberty  of  suggesting  to  you, 
that  although  Mr.  Howard  leaves  this  matter,  in  the  handsomest  way,  to  your  own 
discretion,  it  is  in  some  sort  equitable  to  let  Ireland  have  the  preference,  and  it  would 
be  handsome  upon  your  side  to  appropriate  the  benefits,  of  one  night  at  least,  to 
Swift’s  Hospital  in  Dublin ;  that  such  an  useful  charity,  hitherto  not  endowed  in  a 
manner  suitable  to  the  demands  upon  it,  may  owe  its  chief  support  to  the  successive 
liberality  of  men  of  genius ;  and  the  rather,  as  Mr.  Howard  is  a  great  admirer  of  Dr. 
Swift,  and  in  his  youth  had  the  pleasure  of  knowing  him  :  excuse  the  liberty  I  take  in 
giving  this  hint.  Your  own  good  sense,  coinciding  with  Mr.  Howard’s  generosity, 
will,  I  dare  say,  induce  you  to  make  the  best  use  of  the  powers  he  has  put  into  your 
hands.  Your  absence  on  your  Sussex  and  Hampshire  tour  have  prevented  me  from 
giving  you  the  pleasure  of  the  perusal  of  these  pieces,  of  equal  merit,  though  in  dif¬ 
ferent  styles,  some  days  sooner.  I  trust  I  shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the 
British  stage  decorated  from  Ireland  with  two  pieces  of  such  an  uncommon  spirit,  in 
the  approaching  winter.  It  will  be  some  gratification  to  my  pride  to  see  the  successful 
exhibition  of  the  performances  of  a  person  who  honours  me  with  his  friendship.  I 
am,  with  the  greatest  sincerity  and  regard,  with  mine  and  Mrs.  Burke’s  best  compli¬ 
ments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Edmund  Burke.' 


Endorsed, 

“  An  ironical  letter  of  Burke’s.” 


*  Mr.  Burke  was  mistaken.  His  friend’s  names  were  really  “  Georges  Edmond  Howard,”  special  pleader 
and  dramatic  poet,  author  of  profound  essays  on  the  law  and  chancery  courts,  a  man  of  amazing  industry 
and  eccentricity,  who,  though  his  floors  were  a  warehouse  to  his  unsold  books,  and  his  plays  the  sad  burthen 
of  a  merry  song,  contrived  in  spite  of  Burke’s  waggery  and  Garrick’s  obduracy,  to  leave  a  splendid  fortune 
behind  him,  from  which  I  hope  the  Dublin  charities  derived  more  available  help,  than  from  the  two  plays  here 
recommended.-  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


485 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  CAMDEN. 


MY  LORD,  September  7th,  1772. 

Robert  Turbot,  well  known  at  the  theatre  by  the  name  of  Bob  Turbot,  was 
a  great  glutton  ;  the  wits  of  the  green-room  would  entertain  themselves  with  giving 
a  most  luxurious  account  of  imaginary  dinners  they  had  eaten,  to  make  Robert  smack 
his  lips.  Why  am  I  tantalized  with  the  young  ladies’  harpsicord,  guitar,  viol  de 
gamba,  kc.  &c.  <kc.  ?  I  know  the  feast  to  be  real  and  exquisite,  and  Robert  Turbot 
had  not  half  my  longings.  I  am  in  a  French  prison  all  this  week,  but  when  your 
Lordship  is  desirous  to  rest  your  understanding,  the  theatre  shall  be  open.  We  will 
most  certainly  make  holiday,  and  repair  to  the  place  where  I  am  so  happy  and  so 
much  honoured.  I  am  your  Lordship’s  most  devoted, 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Garrick  begs  that  her  respects  may  be  presented  with  mine  to  Lady  Camden, 
your  Lordship,  and  the  Miss  Pratts. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  BARRY. 


DEAR  SIR,  September  8th,  1772. 

You  must  imagine  how  happy  Mrs.  Barry’s  and  your  opinion  upon  the  farce * 
made  the  author.  I  really  think  with  you  that  it  bids  fair  for  great  success,  espe¬ 
cially  as  the  heroine  of  all  heroines  has  taken  so  kindly  to  it :  but,  my  dear  Sir,  have 
you  well  considered  “  Sethona  ?”  I  hope  not,  and  that  you  will  change  your  opinion 
upon  a  second  perusal.  Sure  the  character  of  “  Sethona”  is  a  fine  one,  and  the  mad¬ 
ness  must  have  an  effect  upon  the  stage.  The  author  is  a  most  gallant,  worthy,  noble- 
minded  man,  and  I  understand  by  him  that  Dr.  Elliott  assured  him  you  would  per¬ 
form  in  it.  Pray  think  a  little  more  of  this  matter,  and  read  the  play  attentively, 
and  then  let  me  have  your  well-digested  opinion  in  writing,  or  otherwise,  that  I  may 
consult  with  the  author.  I  am  most  truly  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

Pray  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Barry.  Our  conversation  upon  the  tragedy  lias 
spoiled  my  night’s  rest. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  to  Barry  about  Dow’s  letter.” 

*  The  “  Irish  Widow,”  written  by  Garrick  to  show  off  the  comic  talents  of  that  astonishing  creature, 
Mrs.  Barry. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


48(J 


MR.  T.  FITZMAURICE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  VERY  DEAR  SIR,  High  Wycombe,  Sept.  23,  1773. 

At  the  very  moment  when  I  was  taking  my  pen  to  acquaint  you  with  our 
intended  motions,  I  am  honoured  with  your  obliging  packet,  the  correspondence  con¬ 
tinued  in  which  calls  for  my  heartiest  thanks,  and  lays  me  under  the  strongest  obliga¬ 
tions  to  your  better  part,  to  whom  be  pleased  to  present  the  enclosed  in  acknowledg¬ 
ment  of  her  goodness  and  in  full  answer  to  her  commands. 

The  Doctor  and  myself  are  both  (I  thank  God,  and  not  without  reason)  in  perfect 
health  and  in  good  natural  spirits,  notwithstanding  the  great  expense  we  are  at  of 
artificial  ones :  these  have  been  dispensed  every  afternoon  in  much  greater  profusion 
than  has  been  always  desirable.  The  worst  of  my  situation  has  been  the  being  tied  by 
the  leg  all  the  mornings,  which  agrees  but  ill  with  free-living  the  remainder  of  the  day. 
I  have  got  to  bed,  however,  hitherto  at  eleven,  which  makes  very  considerable  amends. 
In  the  riot  of  Monday,  when  all  the  Corporation  dined  here,  my  hat  was  bereaved 
clandestinely  of  its  proud  ornament,  the  golden  band :  that  band  which  has  so  often 
dazzled  your  invidious  eye,  may  by  this  time  possibly  be  reduced  to  an  insignificant 
atom  of  solid  drop,  commonly  called  gold.  The  circumstance  has  alarmed  our  friend 
the  Doctor  not  a  little,  who  trembles  every  moment  for  the  loss  of  his  new  button 
and  loop,  which  Avas  bought  in  express  compliment  to  the  Mayor’s  election.  Many 
have  been  the  Avays  thought  of  for  its  preservation  to-morroAV  amidst  the  confusion 
and  uproar  that  an  assembly  of  tAvo  or  three  hundred  people  at  dinner  in  the  toAvn- 
hall  occasion ;  but  no  one  seems  to  merit  approbation  so  much  as  that  of  the  Doctor’s 
sitting  with  it  between  his  legs. 

A  thousand,  thousand  thanks  to  you  for  your  very  kind  endeaAmurs  of  sending  us 
away  in  good  humour  by  performing  yourself  on  Saturday.  Do  not,  howeArer,  let 
my  impertinence  seduce  you  for  a  moment,  even  in  thought,  to  do  Avhat  may  carry 
with  it  the  least  degree  of  inconvenience,  or  the  least  appearance  of  impropriety. 
Were  my  pleasure  ever  so  much  at  stake,  be  assured  it  should  be  made  a  cheerful  sa¬ 
crifice  of  in  such  a  case :  hoAvever,  if  the  thing  should  be,  I  must  get  a  box  for  my 
mother,  if  I  am  obliged  to  go  doAvn  upon  my  knees  to  Johnson  for  it. 

On  Friday  AA'e  shall  make  our  escape  from  hence  and  shall  return  to  toAvn,  AA'liere 
my  good  Doctor  promises  to  stick  by  me  till  the  A7ery  last  moment.  I  shall  expect  to 
find  the  Admiral  on  my  arrival  in  Pall-mall,  Avhere  I  hope  to  get  by  four  o’clock, 
after  kissing  both  the  hand  and  lips  of  my  doAvager. 

The  Doctor  and  I  av ill  certainly  call  Avithout  loss  of  time  at  the  Adelphi,  there  to 
pay  our  homage  and  recehre  commands  upon  our  Avay  to  dinner,  which  seems  to  be 
fixed  at  the  London  Tavern. 

It  is  a  pleasure  to  me  now,  and  at  all  times,  to  subscribe  myself,  my  dear  Sir,  for 
ever  and  ever.  Most  affectionately  yours,  &c. 

Thomas  Fitzmaurice. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


487 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Camden-place,  Sept.  27,  1772. 

We  are  all  again  re-assembled  at  this  place,  and  I  take  the  first  opportunity  of 
reminding  you  of  your  promise  to  spend  a  day  here.  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
have  as  yet  been  long  enough  engaged  in  business  to  relish  a  holiday,  but  I  used  to 
be  sick  of  it  in  three  days. 

My  girls  go  into  Bedfordshire  upon  a  visit  the  7th  of  next  month,  and  therefore 
I  hope  you  will  find  a  day  before  that  time.  Change  the  scene  and  become  a  private 
man  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  we  will  return  the  visit  at  Drury -lane.  The  family 
here  join  with  me  in  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  yourself. 

From  your  most  obedient  faithful  servant, 

Camden. 


MR.  D.  W - S  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIRj  Oct.  2nd,  1772. 

The  following  letter  will  convince  you  of  my  friendship.  I  am  so  circumstanced 
that  I  cannot  appear,  though  it  is  in  this  case  to  do  good.  Among  the  many  attacks 
which  have  been  made  lately  on  your  character,  none  has  so  great  effects  as  a  letter 
to  you  printed  for  Bladon.  It  is  elegantly  wrote,  and  the  criticisms  are  plausible 
where  they  are  not  just.  It  is  well  spoken  of  by  most  people  who  read  it ;  and  to 
do  you  irreparable  mischief,  it  only  wants  to  be  generally  known.  I  believe  it  is 
wrote  by  a  young  man,  who  is  making  himself  known  as  a  first-rate  genius.  My 
suspicion  is  grounded  on  the  great  intimacy  between  such  a  person  and  Mossop ;  and 
his  declaring  lately,  where  I  was,  that  he  had  seen  you  in  all  your  characters,  but 
hoped  to  revise  you  in  the  winter ;  that  he  was  sorry  to  think  you  a  thorough  bad 
man,  and  that  he  thought  it  the  business  of  every  one  to  prevent  your  debauching 
the  public  taste  and  manners.  There  were  then  the  highest  compliments  paid  to 
him,  and  the  letter  to  G.  mentioned  with  the  highest  applause,  apparently  as  his. 
Since,  I  have  read  the  letter,  and  thrown  myself  in  the  gentleman’s  way ;  and  I  am 
more  and  more  convinced  that  he  is  the  author;  and  that  he  intends  to  pursue  his 
blow.  I  really  think  you  have  been  to  blame.  But  you  will  fall  into  unmerciful 
hands ;  and  I  who  know  your  merits  as  well  as  your  faults,  would  wish  you  would 
take  some  method  to  undeceive  this  young  man.  His  ears  are  always  filled  with 
accounts  of  your  villainy.  His  name  is  Williams ;  he  is  intimate  at  Captain  Bye’s. 
Goldsmith  knows  him,  and  I  have  seen  him  go  into  Johnson’s,  but  perhaps  it  was 
for  music.  Rice,  the  instructor. of  English,  was  with  him  last  night  in  the  front  box 
of  Drury -lane ;  and  they  seemed  very  intimate. 

You  may  think  I  have  some  interest  in  this  matter  besides  serving  you.  If  I 


488 


Pin  V  ATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


have,  it  is  from  a  regard  to  the  young  man.  He  might  be  better  employed,  and  his, 
humanity  better  directed.  I  am  persuaded  he  acts  from  the  best  principles,  and  1 
have  great  obligations  to  him.  If  you  show  this  letter,  you  will  repent  it.  If  you 
act  according  to  it,  you  will  do  wisely ;  and  prevent  a  great  deal  of  mischief  to  your¬ 
self,  as  well  as  vexation  to  your  Well-wisher  and  admirer, 

U.  W - s  * 


MR.  THOMAS  L1NI.EY  TO  MR  GARRICK. 


Sli{,  Bath,  Oct.  12th,  1772. 

I  should  have  answered  your  letter  sooner,  but  the  unsettled  state  of  my  mind 
in  regard  to  leaving  Bath  has  hindered  me: — this  winter  it  appears  impracticable ;  but 
as  I  have  engaged  with  Messrs.  Smith  and  Stanley  for  the  Oratorios  in  the  ensuing 
Lent,  if  there  is  any  thing  you  can  propose  to  me,  I  will  treat  with  you,  and  if  we 
can  agree,  when  I  come  to  London  we  may  sign  and  seal. 

I  must  beg  leave  to  observe,  that,  unless  I  can  be  settled  myself  in  London  so  as 
to  take  care  of  my  daughter,  or  that  you  yourself  may  think  proper  to  take  her 
under  your  immediate  protection,  I  cannot  consent  to  her  engaging. 

In  regard  to  other  matters  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  you  will  give  me  every 
encouragement  in  your  power,  and  I  hope  I  shall  never  give  you  reason  to  doubt 
the  sincerity  and  esteem  with  which  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thos.  LlNLEY.f 

My  wife  and  daughters  present  then’  respects,  and  are  much  obliged  by  your  kind 
remembrance  of  them. 

Endorsed, 

“  Linley  of  Bath.” 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  21st  Oct.  1772. 

I  will  give  you  my  sentiments  upon  Monsieur  de  Belloy’s  letter  as  well  as  I  am 
able  in  the  short  time  I  have  to  think  of  it. 

You  that  know  so  well  how  much  a  tragedy  depends  upon  the  general  power  of 
the  scenes  to  interest  and  affect  the  passions,  must  also  know  that  it  is  impossible, 

*  Garrick,  I  suppose,  did  not  condescend  to  notice  these  rascals.  If  a  management  of  the  first  theatre 
in  the  world  for  Jive  and  twenty  years  could  not  render  him  impervious  to  this  arrogant  boy’s  attack,  it  would 
not  be  worth  a  great  man’s  while  to  be  the  best  actor  and  the  ablest  conductor  of  a  theatre  that  the  world 
ever  saw. — Ed. 

t  The  daughter  here  spoken  of,  became  the  wife  of  Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan — a  proud  distinction,  but 
not  a  happy  one. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


489 


without  reading  the  piece,  to  give  a  definite  answer.  The  short  argument  which  the 
author  has  given  you,  is  not  enough  to  determine  the  question  whether  such  a  play 
will  do  on  the  English  stage ;  but  if  this  is  the  Monsr.  de  Belloy  who  wrote  “  Zel- 
mira,”  I  think  that  piece  shows  that  the  author  has  an  idea  of  theatrical  business  and 
of  incident :  without  those  two,  no  tragedy  is  likely  to  succeed  with  us.  It  seems  to 
me  that  you  may  well  make  answer,  that  you  shall  be  glad  to  read  his  piece,  and,  as 
he  proposes  to  revenge  himself  upon  his  countrymen  at  Paris  by  the  applause  of  an 
English  audience,  you  will  to  the  best  of  your  judgment  tell  him  whether  his  play  is 
likely  to  answer  that  end.  Should  his  piece  bid  fair  for  considerable  success,  if  you 
choose  to  undertake  the  translation,  and  will  accept  of  my  poor  assistance  to  lighten 
your  trouble,  you  may  command  me  ;  and  as  you  are  rich  enough,  if  I  understood  that 
you  intend  the  profits  for  the  French  author  ( to  make  their  nation  stare!)  I  should 
go  to  work  with  more  zeal.  Such  an  event  would  be  unparalleled  in  the  history  of 
the  drama !  I  suppose  you  will  tell  him  that  you  have  left  off  the  acting  of  new 
parts,  that  he  may  not  be  disappointed.  If  the  play  has  real  merit,  I  think  it  would 
be  to  your  honour  to  give  a  lift  to  his  reputation. 

I  have  been  busy,  amidst  a  thousand  dissipations,  in  making  some  necessary  alter¬ 
ations  in  the  comedy,  but  I  do  not  know  my  own  mind.  One  clay  I  am  charmed,  and 
the  next  I  am  tempted  to  burn  the  whole.  It  will  have  the  last  hand  in  a  very 
few  days.  I  am  yours,  &c. 

Arthur  Murphy. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  DAVID,  Old  Alresford,  Nov.  2nd,  1772. 

I  have  had  little  leisure  of  late,  from  my  own  complaints  and  those  of  my  good 
Madam,  (which  have  been  a  little  frightful)  and  my  attention  to  finishing  my  present 
great  affair,  of  the  Bishop’s  Works,  to  ask  you  particularly  how  you  do.  Your  appear¬ 
ance  so  early  in  the  season,  and  in  parts  of  such  consequence  as  Bayes  and  Kitely, 
gives  us  great  hopes  of  your  confirmed  state  of  health  :  and  no  news,  1  hope,  is  good 
news  with  respect  to  Madam. 

How  stand  the  affairs  of  the  banker  of  the  Society  of  the  Sons  of  the  Clergy  ? 
If  I  hit  upon  any  child  that  wants  your  help,  am  I  yet  at  liberty  to  draw  for  it  ?  and 
where  ? — or  is  it  desperate  ? 

I  hear  your  “  Irish  Widow”  was  at  first  too  Irish,  i.  e.  too  impudent ;  and  many 
defalcations  were  necessary.  I  see  it  goes  on  ;  but  whether  it  runs  or  limps,  I  cannot 
judge.  By  the  story  of  it  in  the  News,  the  principal  scene  must  be  from  the  “  Ma¬ 
nage  Forc£e”  of  Moliere ;  and  the  lady  being  her  own  champion,  must,  one  would 
imagine,  be  from  my  farce  of  that  name,  (the  hint  at  least)  which  you  remember  I 
once  read  to  you,  in  days  of  yore,  at  poor  Peg  Woffington’s  lodgings.  This  farce  has 
been  long  lost ;  and  if  it  has  been  found  among  the  rubbish  of  play-house  papers,  I 
claim  it  in  my  hand-writing,  that  I  may  have  the  keeping  or  the  burning  of  it  my- 

VOL.  i.  3  It 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


490 


self.  I  shall  be  glad  if  it  has  been  of  any  service.  1  last  week  burned  four  acts  of  a 
complete  comedy,  and  reserved  the  first,  to  be  a  memento  of  the  young  man’s  folly 
and  vanity,  who  could  bring  it  up  from  Cambridge  himself,  and  send  it  without  a 
name  to  John  Rich,  where  by  good  luck  brother  Ben  was,  and  read  it,  and  found 
out  the  ingenious  author,  and  put  a  stop  to  his  exposing  himself.  A  gentleman 
told  me  the  other  day,  that  you  had  said  you  never  saw  such  good  acting  as  Beck- 
ford’s  when  he  made  his  speech  to  the  King — at  which  you  was  present.  Is  it  true  ? 
I  have  a  reason  for  asking. 

1  am  glad  to  see  in  the  News  your  remembrance  of  an  old  acquaintance,  whom 
you  could  not  transplant  from  the  Tower  Hamlets  to  the  theatre.  I  retain  so  much 
love  for  dramatics,  that,  if  you  can  find  time,  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  what  you  are 
doing,  and  what  are  your  hopes  and  your  views  for  the  winter.  I  once  reduced 
“  The  Cheats  of  Scapin”  into  two  acts,  which  I  think  you  sometimes  act  at  Drury- 
lane.  As  it  never  was  printed,  I  should  like  to  have  a  copy  of  it.  Was  “  The  Win¬ 
ter’s  Tale,”  as  acted,  ever  printed?*  If  so,  send  me  one  of  them. 

We  think  in  a  week  or  two  of  removing  to  St.  Cross  for  the  winter.  Our  joint 
compliments  attend  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  affectionate 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

i 

DEAR  SIR,  Islington,  Nov.  f,  1772. 

Believe  me,  the  task  I  am  now  undertaking  is  a  most  disagreeable  one  :  com¬ 
plaining  is  very  irksome  to  me,  and  must  be  little  less  so  to  you  ;  but  as  we  seem  to 
misunderstand  each  other,  it  is  necessary,  for  our  future  mutual  ease,  that  I  should 
explain  myself.  Cause  of  complaint  I  think  I  have — you  perhaps  think  I  have  not ; 
but  I  shall  proceed,  and  if  my  vanity  should  induce  me  to  urge  any  thing  which  Mr. 
Garrick,  the  manager,  may  deem  an  impropriety,  I  must  beg  Mr.  Garrick,  my  friend, 
will  endeavour  to  excuse  it. 

A  certain  person,  on  Saturday  last,  told  me  I  was  in  your  opinion  firmly  engaged 
to  you,  as  I  had  promised  to  give  you  a  twelvemonth’s  notice  whenever  I  meant 
to  alter  my  situation.  If  you  really  think  so,  I  must,  dear  Sir,  inform  you,  you  have 
much  misunderstood  me. 

When  I  paid  my  respects  to  you,  and  acquainted  you  with  my  intention  of  taking 
Mrs.  King  from  the  stage,  you  politely  said,  you  hoped  I  did  not  mean  to  leave  it 
myself:  I  readily  told  you  I  did  not  intend  so  to  do  for  some  years  to  come.  You 
with  a  friendly  cheerfulness,  which  has  often  attended  your  discourse  with  me,  said, 
“  Tom,  I  hope  we  shan’t  part  while  you  do  continue  to  play  the  fool ;  and  when  you 
purpose  retiring,  I  doubt  not  you  will  give  us  proper  notice.”  My  answer  was,  that 

*  It  was  printed  in  1758  as  a  dramatic  pastoral  in  three  acts,  and  called  “  Florizel  and  Perdita;” — the 
mutilation  was  Mr.  Garrick’s. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


491 


I  was  greatly  attached  to  the  house  and  to  yourself ;  that  I  should  never  think  of- 
leaving  you  during  my  theatrical  life,  as  I  make  no  doubt  I  should  be  at  least  as  well 
treated  at  Drury -lane,  as  I  could  be  any  where  else.  I  must  confess  I  should  have 
proceeded  a  little  farther,  but  you  stopped  me  short  by  a  most  grateful  reply — “  Oh 
damn  it !  never  fear.  I’ll  take  care  of  you.”  Among  the  multiplicity  of  things  in 
which  you  engage,  you  may  not  perhaps  remember  these  particulars ;  but  they  dwell 
with  me,  and  I  believe  this  is  almost  a  literal  state  of  that  part  of  our  discourse 
which  related  to  business.  I  fancy,  dear  Sir,  you  cannot  think  that  by  this  declara¬ 
tion  I  was  bound  to  serve  you  on  your  own  terms.  Should  you  ask  what  right  I  had 
to  expect  better  than  I  then  enjoyed,  I  answer  thus — 

Mr.  George  Garrick,  between  three  and  four  years  ago,  applied  to  me  to  enter 
into  articles ;  after  a  message  or  two,  the  managers  agreed  to  give  me  the  money  I 
required,  provided  I  would  article  for  four  years.  I  refused  to  engage  for  more 
than  three ,  and  instruments  were  ordered  to  be  drawn  accordingly.  On  my  saying  to 
Mr.  G.  Garrick,  I  took  it  for  granted  Airs.  King  was  to  be  continued  at  her  usual 
salary,  he  hesitated,  and  returned  a  ijes,  but  of  such  a  kind  as  hurt  me  greatly.  My 
article  was  soon  prepared  and  executed,  without  mention  being  made  of  hers  ;  and  it 
was  at  the  distance  of  some  weeks,  if  I  remember  rightly,  and  after  repeated  applica¬ 
tions,  that  this  last-mentioned  piece  of  business  was  concluded.  In  short,  she  seemed 
to  be  considered  by  the  managers,  though  she  never  was  by  me,  or  I  believe  by  the 
town,  as  an  appendage  to  your  humble  servant.  In  her  private  capacity  I  allow  she 
received,  as  her  behaviour  always  merited,  marks  of  attention ;  but  in  her  public,  I 
think  she  was  in  the  latter  part  of  her  time,  very  indifferently  treated.  These  mo¬ 
tives  partly  (I  cannot  say  wholly)  induced  me  to  take  her  from  the  theatre,  before 
the  time  should  come  that  I  expected  to  treat  with  you  again,  that  she  might  not  be 
subjected  to  another  slight,  and  that  I  might  claim  an  addition  to  my  own  income, 
after  having  removed  what  seemed  to  be  looked  on  as  an  incumbrance  brought  on 
you  by  me. 

You  have  often,  with  a  great  frankness,  told  me,  there  was  not  a  performer  on 
the  stage  who  took  the  lead  of  me  in  the  opinion  of  the  public  ;  the  encouragement 
I  meet  with  from  that  public  confirms  it.  No  actor  is  better  received  than  I  am, 
yourself  excepted,  (whose  merits  I  hope  and  believe  will  never  be  brought  into  com¬ 
parison  with  any  other  performer’s  while  the  theatre  shall  be  remembered ;)  why  then 
am  I  not  to  be  as  well  paid  as  any  other  performer  ?  I,  without  a  murmur,  begin  at 
the  opening  of  the  theatre,  if  required,  and  never  repine  at  playing,  if  called  on, 
six  nights  in  the  week,  till  every  door-keeper  is  served  and  the  theatre  shut  up  ; 
while  those  who  are  better,  much  better,  allow  me  to  say  shamefully  better  paid, 
never  enter  the  lists  till  the  theatre  has  been  opened  some  time,  are  periodically  sick, 
or  impertinent  about  the  month  of  April,  and  in  the  very  heat  of  the  season  are  never 
expected  to  play  two  nights  running.  Some  evasion  is  also  found  out  by  them  when 
called  on  to  play  on  a  night  immediately  subsequent  to  your  performing,  their  Ma¬ 
jesties  coming  to  the  theatre,  or  in  short  any  thing  that  attracts  the  public  notice, 

3  it  2 


492 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


so  as  to  strengthen  one  night  and  weaken  another.  I  am,  on  most  occasions  of 
this  sort,  thrust  into  the  gap,  and  seldom  grumble,  though  conscious,  by  these 
means,  my  consequence  and  that  of  some  other  performers  must  be  diminished  in 
proportion  as  the  persons  alluded  to  are  aggrandized.  I  most  readily  allow  you  have 
a  right  to  direct  every  performance  and  performer;  to  that  right  I  have  ever  submit¬ 
ted  ;  but  suffer  me  to  say,  as  I  am  about  to  make,  perhaps,  my  last  theatrical  engage¬ 
ment,  I  cannot  submit  to  be  but  moderately  rewarded  for  a  constant  exertion  of  my 
abilities,  while  others  are  immoderately  paid  for  a  partial  or  temporary  use  of  theirs. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry,  perhaps  you  will  say,  are  members  of  the  Buskin,  and  ought,  as 
such,  to  have  the  preference  to  those  of  the  Sock.  I  own  I  can  see  no  reason  for  such 
a  distinction,  but  if  it  must  be  made,  let  us  turn  our  eyes  to  Covent-garden. 

Mr.  Woodward  has  500/.  per  annum.  If  you  say  Mr.  Woodward  is  a  Harlequin, 
I  reply,  he  never  appears  as  such  but  in  the  first  run  of  some  new  piece  of  his  own, 
or  if  otherwise,  I  could  (I  think)  find  in  my  favour  something  to  counterbalance  that 
matter.  Mr.  Smith  had  last  year  much  more  than  I  possessed.  Mr.  Yates,  the 
salary  allotted  me,  and  played  about  one  night  to  my  ten.  Mr.  Shuter,  at  my  salary 
nominally,  had  an  hundred  guineas  given  him  for  signing  the  article,  and  some 
hundreds  lent  him,  which  the  manager,  I  believe,  never  expects  to  be  repaid.  Suffer 
me  to  say,  I  never  have  disputed  your  authority,  never  have  feigned  illness,  or 
troubled  you  to  rescue  me  from  bailiffs  or  creditors.  To  this  let  me  add,  about  three 
days  after  I  had  made ,  and  before  I  had  signed ,  my  last  engagement  with  the  managers 
of  Drury-lane,  I  dined  in  company  with  Mr.  Colman  and  Mr.  Powell,  managers  of 
Covent-garden,  who  tempted  me  to  enlist  under  their  banner.  After  various  argu¬ 
ments,  I  was  offered  by  them  five  hundred  pounds  to  sign  the  same  sort  of  article 
with  them,  which  I  had  agreed  to  sign  with  the  managers  of  Drury-lane.  I  replied 
in  the  negative ;  but  I  am  sure  I  could  at  that  time  have  secured  the  money  then 
offered,  with  an  addition  of  forty  shillings  a  week  to  Mrs.  King’s  salary.  By  refusing 
this,  I  certainly  gave  up  Jive  hundred  pounds,  and,  as  I  most  firmly  believe,  above  seven. 
I  claim  no  merit  from  the  act,  for  my  heart  was  at  Drury-lane,  and  the  offer  of  ten 
thousand  pounds  would,  in  such  a  case,  have  had  no  more  force  than  one  of  ten 
pence.  I  repine  not  at  what  is  past,  but  I  must  look  to  myself  on  the  present  occa¬ 
sion.  Now  then  to  what  I  expect,  or  rather  to  what  I  require,  for  I  shall  not  be 
offended  or  surprised  at  a  refusal.  I  require  for  my  performance  5007.  per  season ; 
the  term  shall  be  as  short  or  as  long  as  you  please,  not  exceeding  five  3'ears  ;  nay,  you 
shall  have  a  liberty  of  cancelling  the  article  at  the  end  of  each  year,  on  giving  me 
proper  warning,  provided  I  may  challenge  my  liberty  if  the  Patent  should  fall  into 
any  hands  but  those  of  the  present  possessors.  If  this  is  not  agreeable,  I  will  an¬ 
nually  article  with  you,  promising  never  to  encrease  my  demand.  By  either  of  these 
methods,  you  will,  whenever  you  find  my  agreement  a  burthen,  be  able  to  get  rid  of 
it.  This  agreed  to,  I  shall  cease  to  think  about  good  nights,  or  bad  nights,  puffs,  para¬ 
graphs,  &c. ;  for,  trust  me,  the  wound  given  my  vanity  would  be  little  felt,  were  my 
property  secure.  Give  me  what  I  now  request,  I  shall  stand  very  quietly  on  my  own 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


493 


little  hillock,  without  envying  those  who  may  choose  to  put  themselves  on  a  pinnacle. 
If  there  are  any  parts  in  plays,  which  I  have  given  up,  that  you  wish  I  should  re¬ 
sume,  I  will  most  cheerfully  accept  them  (the  Hypocrite  excepted)  together  with  any 
new  ones  you  shall  choose  to  offer.  Are  there  any  you  wish  me  to  give  up  in  favour 
of  any  other  performer?  command  them.  There  is  no  one  thing  you  can  in  reason 
propose  that  I  will  not  come  into,  provided  you  will  give  me  the  money  I  now  ask. 
If  you  will  not,  (let  not  my  declaration  of  a  fixed  resolution  be  construed  bluntness 
or  ill-manners,)  I  will  never  enter  into  any  farther  contract  with  the  managers  of 
Drury -lane.  The  salary  set  down  for  me  in  the  playhouse  books  I  have  not  touched, 
nor  do  I  consider  myself,  at  present,  bound  by  any  tie  but  that  of  inclination.  You 
may,  however,  rely  on  an  unremitting  attention  on  my  part  through  the  present 
season  ;  during  which  time,  whatever  necessity  or  inclination  may  lead  you  to  intrust 
me  with,  I  shall  pursue  with  my  usual  warmth,  and  maintain  as  heretofore,  an 
inviolable  secrecy.  I  lav  my  intentions  thus  open  to  you,  that  you  may  not  so 
connect  me  in  the  ensuing  business  of  the  theatre,  as  to  feel  a  loss  at  my  depar¬ 
ture.  All  I  beg  in  return  for  my  frankness  on  the  occasion  is,  that  you  will  not 
ask  me  to  play  any  characters  that  may  be  thought  unfit  for  me ;  if  you  should,  I 
must  refuse  them ;  for  I  cannot  consent  to  appear  disadvantageously  in  the  eye  of 
that  public,  to  whom  I  shall,  I  doubt  not,  find  frequent  opportunities  of  presenting 
myself,  though  rejected  by  the  managers  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury -lane. 

I  cannot  quit  my  pen,  without  acknowledging  myself,  in  my  private  capacity, 
under  many  obligations  to  you  :  your  playing  for  Mrs.  King’s  benefit  was  kind ; 
but  I  do  not  place  that  in  the  foremost  rank.  You  have  often  served  me,  and  the 
manner  in  which  you  have  generally  so  done,  has  greatly  enhanced  the  value  of  the 
favour  conferred.  You  have  frequently  gratified  my  pride  by  reposing  a  confidence 
in  me ;  I  hope  you  will  not  think  I  make  an  improper  return  by  being  peremptory 
on  the  present  occasion.  If  my  proposal  should  be  accepted,  I  should  esteem  myself 
most  happy ;  it  will  put  an  end  for  my  life  to  the  most  disagreeable  business  of  it — 
bargain-making.  If  it  should  not,  let  me  not,  I  beseech  you,  while  we  are  destined 
to  be  together,  experience  a  coolness  from  you,  and  you  shall  see  nothing  but  cheer¬ 
fulness  in  me.  However  my  performance  may  be  in  future  devoted,  Mr.  Garrick 
will  always  have  the  admiration  and  warmest  good  wishes  of  his  much,  very  much 

Obliged  humble  servant, 

Thomas  King. 

Do  not  think,  my  dear  Sir,  I  wish  you  to  throw  away  your  time  in  writing  a 
formal  answer  to  this  stuff.  Two  lines  will  be  as  good  as  two  thousand.  Talk  to 
you  on  the  subject,  do  not  let  me  say  I  will  not ;  I  really  cannot.  My  reason  why, 
would  appear  fulsome,  I  therefore  shall  not  offer  it.  On  two  things,  my  dear  Sir, 
you  may  depend:  the  first  is,  that  my  resolution  in  this  matter  is  unalterable;  the 
second,  that  if  you  agree  to  my  terms,  the  utmost  secrecy  shall  be  observed  on  my 
part.  I  would  not  wish  to  be  the  means  of  any  other  performer  increasing  his  or 
her  demands,  by  publishing  the  nature  or  extent  of  mine. 


494 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


This  affair  will  naturally  come  before  Mr.  Lacy,  I  beg  you  will  present  him  my 
best  compliments.  1  hope  he  will  not  think  I  violate  the  respect  due  to  him,  by 
addressing  this  letter  to  you.  Mr.  George  Garrick  came  to  me  in  your  name  ;  to  you 
therefore  I  thought  fit  to  state  my  conduct,  and  make  known  my  expectations. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  KING. 


SIR,  Nov.  6,  1772. 

I  received  last  Wednesday  a  long  letter  from  you,  charged  with  much  matter ; 
had  you  fired  a  long  gun  at  me,  it  would  not  have  been  with  more  astonishment  on 
my  part,  and,  I  will  say,  Avith  less  justice  on  yours.  What  concerns  me  as  a  private 
man,  and  your  friend,  I  shall  noAv  only  ansAver,  and  leaAre  the  money  matter  to  be 
settled  by  the  managers.  You  have  been  for  years  my  chief,  and  shall  be  my  last, 
theatrical  connexion ;  I  am  sorry  so  little  pleasure,  profit,  and  credit  arose  from  it, 
that  you  haA^e  shown  so  little  regard  to  it.  But  to  particulars : — you  accuse  your 
friend  (for  so  you  say  I  lurve  been,  and  so,  indeed,  I  thought  you  to  be)  of  many 
misdemeanours — such  as  being  tardy  in  coming  into  your  former  proposals;  neglect¬ 
ing  Mrs.  King  in  her  agreement,  thinking  her  a  mere  appendage  to  you,  and  in  her 
business  of  late  much  neglecting  her — (this  accusation  Avas  the  last  I  should  have 
expected,  but  it  is  a  strange  world,  and  so  I  will  go  on): — you  accuse  me  of  not  taking 
proper  care  of  your  importance ;  of  making  you  the  hack  of  the  theatre ;  of  giving 
you  improper  parts  ;  of  raising  others  beyond  their  merits,  and  by  A’arious  methods 
lessening  yours.  These  are  the  allegations  of  my  friend  Mr.  King  in  the  midst  of  our 
friendship,  and  when  he  Avas  possessed  of  my  entire  confidence ; — however,  all  these 
hardships  do  not  seem  to  yourself  insufferable,  for,  Avith  only  an  exception  or  tAvo, 
you  are  willing  to  submit  to  them  if  the  managers  of  Drury-lane  will  give  you  your 
price.  If  I  have  been  guilty  in  thought,  Avord,  or  deed,  of  all  or  any  of  the  above 
sins  against  you  or  Mrs.  King,  I  will  most  Avillingly  declare  that  Dr.  Kenrick  is  no 
libeller.  Have  not  you,  Mr.  King,  been  conscious  of  some  breaches  of  friendship  to 
me,  and  are  [you  not]  producing  these  allegations  as  excuses  for  your  own  behaviour? 
Have  not  you,  instead  of  an  open,  manly  declaration  of  your  thoughts  to  your  friend, 
Avhispered  about,  in  hints  and  ambiguities,  your  uneasiness  ?  All  which  by  circulation 
haAr e  partly  crept  into  the  neAvspapers ; — and  though  you  have  disclaimed  being  privy 
to  their  circulation,  yet  you  have  certainly  been  the  first  cause  of  it ;  Avlnle  to  me, 
even  so  lately  as  a  fortnight  ago,  you  came  to  my  house  at  Hampton,  shoAved  no  signs 
of  displeasure,  but  rode  Avith  me  to  toAvn  with  all  the  cheerfulness  of  ease,  and  in 
the  warmest  spirit  of  confidence.  Was  your  friend  to  be  the  last  to  hear  of  your 
complaints,  or  to  suspect  them  ?  My  complaints  against  you,  not  only  as  my  friend, 
but  as  a  gentleman,  are  these, — that  you  should  keep  a  secret  from  me  you  have  told 
to  many ;  that  you  Avere  the  cause  of  having  our  names  mentioned  in  the  daily 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


495 


papers,  and  at  a  particular  time  when  my  other  friends  are  showing  their  attachment 
and  zeal  to  me.  Had  you  last  summer,  when  I  talked  of  the  business  of  the  house 
to  you,  mentioned  your  uneasiness ;  or,  if  you  could  not  have  spoken,  had  written 
your  thoughts  to  me,  before  so  much  of  the  season  had  passed,  I  should  then  have 
had  no  complaints,  had  you  asked  5000/. ;  but  without  a  hint  of  your  wishes  to  me, 
and  having  your  promise  to  give  me  a  season’s  notice  if  ever  you  quitted  the  stage, 
what  could  I  think  but  that  you  were  fully  satisfied  ?  And  I  should  have  thought  so 
to  this  moment  had  not  your  very  unjustifiable  behaviour  reached  my  ears  within 
these  few  days.  That  you  may  not  place  any  loss  to  the  account  of  my  friendship 
this  season,  I  will  most  readily  pay  out  of  my  own  pocket  what  addition  you  think 
you  ought  to  have.  For  the  time  to  come,  (I  mean  after  this  season,)  if  Mr.  Lacy  will 
agree  to  it,  I  shall  have  no  objection  to  the  money  part  of  your  letter. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

You  have  mentioned  a  most  iniquitous  offer  of  Mr.  Colman’s,  when  he  knew  you 
were  engaged — with  your  leave  I  will  speak  my  mind  to  him  upon  the  subject.  In 
return  I  could  tell  you  what  advantageous  offers  have  been  made  to  me  upon  my 
own  terms,  which  for  your  sake  I  have  declined :  my  attachment  to  Mr.  King  seems 
to  be  evident  to  every  body  but  himself.  To  finish  this  literary  correspondence,  my 
brother  shall  bring  you  Mr.  Lacy’s  determination  when  Ave  have  met  and  talked  the 
matter  over.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

David  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  KING. 


DEAR  SIR,  Nov-  lltb>  1772. 

Ill  as  I  am,  and  scarce  able  to  hold  up  my  head,  I  write  a  few  lines  in  answer  to 
your  bill  in  Chancery.  What,  still  upon  Mrs.  King’s  grievances !  I  will  not  enter 
into  the  particulars  so  long  passed,  and  which  you  so  precisely  remember,  but  answer 
in  a  few  words,  that  if  she  were  ill-treated ,  I  never  treated  any  body  well.  Did  she,  or 
you,  ever  make  any  complaint  that  I  did  not  relieve  if  in  my  power?  or  to  say  all  in 
a  few  words,  why  could  you  be  so  attached  to  me,  if  I  was  neglectful  or  unjust  to  you 
or  yours?  My  conscience  cannot  upbraid  me  with  one  single  act  of  injustice  or 
neglect  towards  you  or  your  wife :  to  be  be  sure,  I  did  mark  the  words  your  price,  that 
you  might  reflect  upon  sending  a  long  list  of  grievances  received  from  your  friend, 
but  to  which  you  are  willing  to  submit  for  an  additional  one  hundred  and  some 
pounds— was  not  this  too  particular  and  had  dropped  too  hastily  from  your  pen,  not 
to  be  marked  a  little  ?  Let  me  revert  to  your  former  letter,  where  you  except  against 
performing  the  Hypocrite,  and  other  parts  unfit  for  you.  Have  I  ever  insisted  upon 
your  acting  any  parts  (Lord  Ogleby  excepted)  that  you  have  objected  to?  Fray 
give  me  a  list  of  those  unfit  characters,  that  I  may  ease  you  from  them  as  fast  as  I 
can.  Now  to  the  point,  in  which  I  still  aver  I  have  been  used  by  you  in  an  un- 


49f> 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


friendly  manner.  Friendship,  according  to  Mr.  Addison’s  definition,  is  of  the  most 
delicate  nature.  He  will  not  allow  of  the  least  hint,  wink  or  nod,  against  a  friend  ; 
and  why  ?  The  silence  of  friendship  is  more  mischievous  than  the  loudest  vcnomed 
tongue  of  enmity  and  slander ;  nay,  should  you  be  convinced  your  friend  is  wrong, 
you  are  to  hide  that  conviction  from  every  body  but  the  friend.  Have  not  you  done 
the  contrary  ?  You  have  hinted  your  uneasiness  and  dissatisfaction  both  in  and  out 
of  the  green-room.  You  have  called  for  bills  of  other  plays  to  show  my  partiality  in 
that  of  “  The  Gamesters”  in  your  disfavour.  This  kind  of  peevishness  (as  you  call  it) 
is  point  blank  against  the  very  spirit  and  truth  of  friendship,  and  contrary  to  our 
original  compact  in  every  sense.  Had  1  been  first  acquainted  (as  I  ought  to  have  been) 
with  your  griefs,  they  should  have  been  removed,  or  your  complaints  would  have 
been  justified  ;  but  no  more  of  that.  I  could  have  had  Mr.  Woodward  upon  my  own 
terms,  when  he  brought  great  houses  to  Covent-garden  ;  I  was  often  applied  to  by 
Mr.  Stephens  of  Chancery -lane  ;  my  answer  always  was  the  same.  King  is  attached 
to  me ;  I  will  not  give  him  the  least  uneasiness.  I  could  say  more,  and  will,  when 
you  are  in  a  proper  mood  to  receive  it. 

As  to  Air.  Barry,  he  is  not  paid  if  he  does  not  play.  I  will  not  say  any  thing 
about  the  superior  salary  given  to  tragedy-actors,  nor  will  I  speak  my  mind,  unless 
you  request  it;  for  it  is  not  my  desire  to  widen  the  breach  between  us.  To  be  plain 
with  you,  I  really  think  you  have  demanded  too  much  from  the  managers.  Wood¬ 
ward,  your  senior,  (if  you  will  make  Covent-garden  your  standard,)  I  have  heard,  has 
no  certainty,  and  Smith  has  your  salary,  though  (I  mean  this  in  a  joke)  he  plays 
Kitely  better  than  I  do. 

Now  if  fifteen  pounds  a  week  will  not  content  you,  I  will  with  pleasure,  rather 
than  lose  you,  make  up  the  sum  you  require,  for  the  time  we  shall  be  together.  I 
cannot  say  more,  nor  show  more  my  inclination  to  you,  as  a  man,  an  actor,  and  the 
friend  of,  Dear  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

David  Garrick. 

An  aching  head,  sore  throat,  and  a  wretched  pen,  must  be  my  excuse  for  this 
scrawl. 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, — My  VERY  DEAR  Mr.  GaRRICK,  Nov.  13th,  1772. 

I  did  not  mean  to  urge  a-fresh  Mrs.  King’s  grievances ;  and  shall  say  with  you, 
they  are  particulars  long  past — you,  perhaps,  at  the  time,  never  thought  about  them ; 
I,  at  present,  do  not  wish  to  remember  them.  I  most  frankly  acknowledge,  that  I 
believe,  had  I  at  the  time  mentioned  our  uneasiness,  every  thing  would  have  been 
made  agreeable.  I  will  go  farther ;  1  cannot  recollect  that  I  ever  applied  to  you  in 
vain  for  any  thing.  I  have  been  under  many  obligations  to  you,  and  you  have  con- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


497 


tinued  to  behave  to  me  as  if  you  had  never  conferred  one.  So  far  from  being  above 
owning  the  past,  when  necessity  urges,  I  shall  not  shun  receiving  fresh  ones.  But  I 
have,  as  I  informed  you,  been  much  hurt  by  insinuations  from  a  certain  quarter,  that 
I  derived  my  large  salary  from  your  partiality ;  therefore  wished  to  have  my  demand 
come  on  in  the  common  way  of  business — but  that  is  past ;  and  your  offer  to  me 
seems  to  be  so  much  of  the  conciliating  kind,  that  I  am  bound  to  pay  particular  at¬ 
tention  to  it ;  and  also  to  set  you  right  in  a  mistake  or  two  you  have  made. 

You  say  I  charge  you  with  giving  me  parts  unfit  for  me,  and  kindly  offer  to 
relieve  me  of  them,  one  by  one,  if  I  will  give  you  a  list  of  them.  My  dear  Sir,  I 
want  no  such  relief,  nor  did  I  make  such  a  charge.  I  do  not  desire  to  relinquish  any 
part  I  now  have — I  wished  indeed,  that  in  case  we  were  likely  to  be  together  this 
winter  only,  you  would  prevent  my  being  employed  in  any  new  or  revived  piece, 
in  a  way  that  might  not  be  advantageous.  As  to  the  bill  of  “  The  Gamesters,”  let 
me  assure  you  I  never  accused  you  of  being  (or  thought  you  at  any  time  was)  par¬ 
tial  to  any  person  concerned  in  that  piece,  if  I  may  except  myself.  I  asked  for  a  bill 
of  “  The  Merchant  of  Venice for  I  thought  I  recollected,  that  character,  song,  and 
name  of  the  performer,  were  contained  in  one  line.  I  found  it  to  be  true.  I  should 
not  have  made  the  remark,  but  as  I  came  to  the  house,  the  first  name  that  struck  me 
was  that  of  Reddish,  which  took  up  to  itself  the  whole  line.  I  could  hardly  believe 
that  it  was  intended  to  be  first  in  the  bill.  On  examination,  I  found  it  was  not  the 
first ;  but  really,  to  make  room  for  the  lines  devoted  to  him,  my  character  and  name 
were  thrust  so  close  under  the  title  of  the  play,  that  it  required  some  attention  to 
find  them.  I  made  the  remark  to  the  prompter  (thinking  him  only  to  blame),  and 
added — “  These  things  have  ever  been,  in  my  opinion,  below  notice;  but  as  I  find 
other  performers  think  them  of  consequence,  I  shall  henceforth  endeavour  to  have 
my  right !  As  I  am  a  man,  I  meant  not  to  glance  at  you. 

I  do  not  recollect  that  I  have  at  improper  times  and  places  betrayed  uneasiness 
at  my  situation ;  nevertheless,  the  case  may  have  been  so, — nay,  if  it  will  in  this 
matter  give  you  any  triumph,  I  will  say  it  has  been  so.  In  short,  I  have  been  on 
the  rack  for  some  days,  and,  like  other  creatures  in  such  situations,  would  own 
almost  any  thing  rather  than  not  be  relieved.  I  will  give  you  leave  to  call  me,  if 
you  please,  vain,  wrong-headed,  absurd;  in  short,  any  thing,  so  you  shun  the  words 
unfriendly  and  ungrateful. 

I  am  very  sure,  from  what  you  say  in  both  your  letters  about  my  submitting  to 
undergo  what  I  complained  of  on  certain  conditions,  I  must  have  expressed  myself 
in  a  bungling  manner,  and  wide  of  my  meaning.  Perhaps  I  shall  not  be  more  clear 
in  my  present  attempt ;  a  certain  point  you  find  I  for  some  time  have  had  in  view. 
I  thought  that  a  frequent  appearance  in  characters  that  any  body  else  could  play  as 
well  as  myself,  and  some  other  little  things  mentioned,  lessened  me  and  threw  stum¬ 
bling-blocks  in  my  way :  but,  the  situation  I  wished  once  attained,  1  should  be  less 
delicate  in  my  choice. 

Most  sincerely  I  thank  you  for  your  offer,  and  your  manner  of  making  it ;  but 

vol.  I.  3  s 


498 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


should  I  accept  the  15/.  a  week  merely,  I  give  up  the  point  my  vanity  lias  con¬ 
tended  for :  and  as  to  having  the  money  made  up  by  you,  1  can  never  consent  to 
it.  Were  money  my  sole  object,  I  should  be  glad,  as  Lord  Foppington  says,  to  take 
it  any  way,  “  stap  my  vitals !”  but  my  wish  was  and  is,  to  be  paid  as  much  as  any 
comedian  on  the  stage,  yourself  excepted.  If  I  cannot  bring  this  about  in  my  present 
agreement,  I  never  can  expect  to  do  it ;  for  should  you  retire,  and  I  want  to  make  a 
fresh  one  and  enlarge  my  demand,  the  reply  would  naturally  be — “Why  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick,  who  was  a  competent  judge  of,  and,  as  you  have  allowed,  rather  partial  to  your 
abilities,  would  have  given  it  to  you  if  he  had  thought  you  deserved  it.”  I  do  not 
believe  the  persons  with  whom  I  should  then  be  in  treaty,  would  give  me  more  for 
my  plea  of  being  then  so  many  years  older.  You  know,  my  dear  Sir,  Woodward  is 
my  senior ;  so  are  Bransby  and  Barrington ;  yet  one  has  a  small  salary,  and  the  other 
is  discharged.  I  rely  you  will  not  mention  this  my  folly  and  impudence  to  any 
mortal.  I  do  not  mean  to  put  the  first  on  a  footing  with  either  of  the  last ;  but — you 
know  my  opinion,  I  would  not  wish  to  be  on  a  footing  with  him  in  any  thing  but 
salary. 

To  conclude, — for  indeed  it  is  time  to  do  so, — I  cannot  think  of  wholly  giving 
up  my  favourite  point :  indeed,  I  have  in  the  most  solemn  manner  sworn  I  would 
never  article  without  its  being  agreed  to ;  but  I  think  I  shall  stand  acquitted  by 
making  one  that  will  give  it  me  in  a  future  year.  Indeed  you  have  made  so  large  a 
stride  towards  gratifying  me,  that  I  wish  to  settle  immediately.  You  say  you  are 
not  for  widening  the  breach  ;  I  go  farther,  I  am  for  closing  it.  My  proposal  then 
is  this,  (for  God’s  sake,  my  dear  Sir,  come  into  it  and  let  us  have  done,)  I  will  article 
with  you  for  three  years;  that  is  to  say,  for  this  and  two  more.  For  the  two  first 
I  will  accept  the  15/.  per  week;  for  the  last,  I  will  have  the  favourite  agreement 
500/.  certain.  At  the  expiration  of  that  article  I  will,  if  it  shall  be  found  agreeable 
to  you,  make  another  for  two  years  at  the  last-mentioned  sum. 

Let  me  assure  you  that  Woodward  has  500/.  certain,  and  receives  at  the  rate  of 
16/.  lOs.  every  week  at  the  office;  and  that  he  paid  (while  he  belonged  to  it)  in  that 
proportion  to  the  fund. 

Smith  had  the  same  salary  I  used  to  have  till  the  beginning  of  last  season,  when 
he  demanded  one  equal  to  Mr.  Woodward :  this  was  refused,  but  they  added  to  his 
former  one, — how  much  I  cannot  positively  say.  I  do  not  contend  for  money  for  the 
sake  of  itself,  for  after  I  have  acquired  it,  I  would  most  willingly  part  with  it  in  any 
way  that  might  “  give  ease  to  you  and  grace  to  me.” 

I  have  said  my  say.  Trouble  not  yourself  in  writing :  let  me  take  for  granted 
what  I  have  urged  will  set  to  rights  what  has  been  misunderstood,  and  induce  you, 
where  you  think  I  have  been  wrong,  to  excuse  it.  You  must  indeed,  my  dear  Mr. 
Garrick,  give  in  to  my  proposals :  send  me  word  so  by  Mr.  George  Garrick:  say  you 
will  be  glad  to  see  me,  and  I  shall  be  again  in  my  own  element :  I  am,  at  present,  far 
from  happy.  Let  us  have  no  more  expostulations ;  receive  me  as  you  were  wont 
and  I  will  continually  give  proof  how  much  I  think  myself  beholden  to  you.  I  will 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


499 


henceforth  rather  come  to  you  with  twenty  farthing  complaints  a  week,  than  wear  a 
frown  at  the  playhouse.  In  short,  I  will  do  any  thing  that  can  prove  me 

Your  sincerest  well-wisher  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thos.  King.* 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  King’s  last  letter  to  me.” 


MR.  J.  WICKINS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Litchfield,  Nov.  14,  1772. 

I  beg  leave  to  present  you  with  a  small  pedestal  and  vase,  made  from  the  wood 
of  the  mulberry-tree  which  was  planted  by  the  hand  of  Shakspeare. 

An  attempt,  however  weak,  to  do  honour  to  the  memory  of  that  immortal  poet, 
when  addressed  to  you,  will  ever  be  supposed  to  carry  its  own  apology  along  with  it. 

I  honour  you  extremely,  Sir ;  and  if  you  will  forgive  me  this  liberty,  it  is  the 
only  favour  I  shall  ever  have  to  ask.  The  knowledge  of  me,  which  your  friends  at 
this  place  have  had  for  many  years  past,  will  set  me  above  any  suspicion  of  an 
attempt  to  deceive  you. 

The  gift  is  but  a  trifle  :  if  it  has  any  merit  it  must  be  that  of  becoming  a  tribute 
of  private  gratitude  to  your  public  virtues. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  greatest  deference  and  respect, 

Sir,  your  most  devoted,  and  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

James  Wickins. 

P.  S.  It  is  sent  by  a  carrier  this  week,  and  I  expect  will  be  delivered  at  your 
house  on  Tuesday  next. 

The  finishing  stroke  was  given  by  Air.  Peter  Garrick  with  his  varnish. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Nov.  30,  1772. 

I  am  unable  to  express  my  astonishment  at  the  absurdity  and  impertinence  of 
Mr.  Sheridan  senior’s  conduct  to  you.  He  was,  is,  and  always  will  be  the  most 
superlative  of  coxcombs  :  I  do  not  wonder  at  his  son’s  concern.  It  may  have  very 
serious  consequences  to  the  gentleman  himself  hereafter ;  and  in  the  mean  time  my 
play  and  the  public  will  suffer  if  you  continue  determined  not  to  interfere  about  it ; 
for  well  as  I  think  of  the  tragedy  itself,  my  expectations  were  greatly  raised  by  the 
kind  assistance  you  promised  me  to  enable  the  performers  to  do  it  justice.  I  still 

*  I  cannot  say  but  that  honest  Tom  King  appears  to  get  through  his  work  in  this  correspondence  with 
much  credit.  To  the  last  bit  of  him  he  honoured  and  loved  his  great  master,  to  whose  excellence  he  made 
a  nearer  approach  in  his  Ogleby  than  any  other  actor  in  comedy.  I  do  not  mean,  in  course,  that?  Garrick  ever 
played  that  part,  but  that  it  always  seemed  to  me  to  attain  the  point  of  highest  perfection. — Ed. 

3  s  2 


500 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


flatter  myself  you  will  not  suffer  the  absurdity  of  a  man  you  have  long  known  so 
well,  to  prevent  your  doing  me  a  most  essential  sendee ;  as  I  have  not  the  smallest 
doubt  how  sincerely  you  wish  the  “  Law  of  Lombardy”  the  most  brilliant  success, 
and  you  have  often  assured  me  how  much  you  approve  of  it. 

The  last  copy  you  received  by  Lord  Inchiquin  is  the  true  copy;  from  that  the 
play  must  be  acted  and  printed;  and  I  must  entreat  you  will  take  from  Mr.  Sheridan 
that  which  he  received  from  my  friend  Mr.  Courtney,  and  let  them  have  yours.  It 
is  in  several  respects  different  from  and  better  than  the  first.  A  good  deal  of  super¬ 
fluous  poetry  is  omitted  in  the  first  act,  and  there  are  improvements  in  all  the  subse¬ 
quent  acts.  Long  ago  I  was  offered  two  hundred  pounds  for  the  copy  of  this  play ; 
if  your  bookseller  thinks  it  worth  so  much,  he  shall  certainly  have  the  preference. 
Considering  the  great  profits  the  booksellers  made  by  the  sale  of  the  first,  “  Bra- 
ganza,”  and  that  the  expectation  of  the  public  is  a  good  deal  raised  about  the  “  Law 
of  Lombardy,”  I  think,  honestly,  whoever  purchases  it  at  that  price  will  be  a  gainer. 
I  beg  you  to  accept  my  most  sincere  thanks  for  your  promise  of  a  Prologue  or  Epi¬ 
logue,  or  both.  Though  I  am  certain  they  will  be  of  great  service,  I  am  less  pleased 
with  the  advantage,  than  with  the  cause  which  it  proceeds  from — your  better  state  of 
health,  the  uninterrupted  continuance  of  which  I  devoutly  wish  you.  I  send  you  a 
prologue  and  epilogue,  of  which  I  entertain  the  meanest  opinion.  As  they  are  of  my 
own  manufacture,  and  written  invita  Minerva,  you  need  not  apprehend  any  jealousy 
or  a  little  pishing,  though  you  condemn  them,  as  I  think  they  deserve,  to  the  flames, 
or  to  oblivion.  They  were  produced  -merely  from  despair  of  getting  better,  when 
you  declared  your  physician’s  prohibition ;  and  the  best  I  could  expect  from  such 
meagre  pieces  was  that  they  might  escape  without  notice. 

As  you  advised  me,  I  lately  wrote  to  Sheridan  senior  in  the  most  flattering  style 
to  which  I  could  shape  my  pen.  I  am  glad  I  did  not  know  of  his  behaviour  to  you 
till  that  necessary  piece  of  insincerity  was  performed ;  for  at  present,  I  can  hardly 
think  of  him  with  patience.  Our  friend  Tighe  will,  I  am  certain,  be  shocked  beyond 
measure  when  he  hears  of  his  monstrous  presumption.  It  is  unnecessary  to  beg  you 
will  not  disclose  my  opinion  of  his  vanity  and  folly,  at  least  till  our  affairs  are  en¬ 
tirely  out  of  his  hands.  A  thousand  thanks,  my  dear  Sir,  for  the  kind  trouble  you 
take  so  often  on  my  account.  My  wife  desires  me  to  say  every  thing  affectionate  to 
you  and  Mrs.  Garrick.  Believe  me  ever  your  most  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 


MR.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DE  VR  SIR  Hampstead,  Dec.  3rd,  1772. 

The  legitimacy  of  an  edition  of  Shakspeare  can  no  more  be  ascertained  to  satis¬ 
faction,  without  the  testimony  of  the  Poet’s  High  Priest,  than  that  of  a  prince  can  be 
lawfully  proved,  unless  the  archbishop  attends  in  person.  I  am  therefore  desirous  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


501 


you  should  glance  your  eye  over  the  enclosed  papers,  which  are  to  announce  the  birth, 
or  (not  to  speak  profanely)  the  regeneration  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  Edition  to  the  world.* 
I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  introduce  your  name,  because  I  have  found\  no  reason  to 
say  that  the  possessors  of  the  old  quartos  were  not  sufficiently  communicative.  You 
will  remember  the  circumstance  to  which  I  allude.  All  your  favour,  however,  will  not 
prevent  the  public  from  being  of  opinion  that  the  child  is  wrapped  up  in  too  many 
swaddling  clothes.  The  truth  is,  that  the  elder  of  his  nurses  was  rather  obstinate, 
and  determined  to  adhere  closely  to  certain  old  customs,  ( variorum  1  think  they  call 
them)  introduced  by  the  two  Burmans,  and  other  Dutch  midwives  of  oppressive 
memory.  The  method  of  treating  poets  should  perhaps  be  changed  in  conformity  to 
that  of  managing  people  in  the  small-pox.  Too  great  a  load  on  either  has  been  found 
insalutary ;  for  under  a  pretence  of  having  their  spirits  kept  from  evaporation,  both 
writers  and  patients  have  been  suffocated.  A  classical  editor  and  a  college  physician 
are  alike  bigoted  to  ancient  regulations,  and  there  are  but  small  hopes  of  reforming 
either.  The  next  persons  to  whose  care  our  distempered  bard  is  entrusted,  must  cut 
the  superfluous  bandages,  strip  off  the  unnecessary  blankets,  and  allow  him  the  free 
use  of  his  limbs  for  the  speedier  recovery  of  his  health — if  I  offend  not,  to  say  he  is  sick 
of  any  thing  but  his  commentators.  To  add  another  allusion  in  ridicule  of  ourselves, 
we  may  be  said  to  have  rid  poor  Shakspeare  like  the  night-mare ;  nor  till  he  has 
thrown  us,  (which  I  trust,  through  some  peppery  preparation  clapped  under  his  tail 
by  that  roguish  jockey  Air.  Kenrick,  he  will  not  fail  to  do)  you  will  hardly  think  his 
circulation  effectually  restored. 

Be  so  good  as  to  return  these  papers,  because  I  must  dismiss  them  to  the  press ; 
but  be  as  free  in  your  remarks  as  you  please. 

I  am  with  great  truth,  your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

G.  Steevens. 

I  shall  think  myself  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  seven  or  eight  places  when 
you  play  Hamlet,  or  any  principal  character  in  Shakspeare’s  tragedies.  I  do  not 
reckon  “  Henry  the  Fourth”  among  such;  for  though  a  theatrical  epicure  like  my¬ 
self  would  travel  many  miles  for  a  bellyful  of  stage  turtle,  yet  he  would  hardly  stir 
out  for  a  mere  spoonful,  which  would  serve  only  to  tantalize  not  satisfy  his  appetite. 


*  This  was  a  highly  improved  edition  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  Shakspeare,  published  the  year  following  in  ten 
volumes  octavo.  Mr.  Steevens  devoted  himself  steadily  to  the  illustration  of  this  great  poet ;  and  as  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  his  learning  had  been  decided  by  Dr.  Farmer  on  the  authority  of  the  books  he  had  read,  so  his  mean¬ 
ing  rested  upon  that  of  the  early  copies  of  his  writings,  and  the  confirmation  afforded  by  those  of  his  contem¬ 
poraries.  Of  these,  therefore,  collections  were  to  be  made  by  the  new  commentator,  or  at  any  rate  consulted. 
The  reader  of  Mr.  Steevens’s  letters,  even  here  assembled,  will  feel  some  surprise  that  such  fertility  of  fancy 
and  neatness  of  expression  should  be  contented  to  hang  like  “  fringe  upon  a  petticoat,”  or  often  “  like  burs” 
thrown  on  in  holiday  foolery.”  His  extent  of  reading  was  immense,  and  his  genius  equal  to  works  of  the 
highest  class.  Even  in  this  line  which  he  had  adopted  for  distinction,  he  was  soon  invaded  by  Malone,  who 
exceeded  him  in  diligence,  though  he  could  not  approach  him  in  wit. — Ed. 

f  Dr.  Johnson  did  not  meet  with  so  ready  a  communication.  The  secret,  I  believe,  was  his  known  care¬ 
lessness  as  to  the  condition  of  a  book. — Ed. 


502 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  hope  you  and  your  brother  manager  will  speedily  grant  a  benefit  to  the  Pro¬ 
prietors  of  East  India  stock. 

Endorsed,  “  Mr.  Steevens  of  Hampstead  to  me, 
about  his  preface  for  a  new  edition  of  Shakspeare.” 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

JIY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Dec.  27th,  1772. 

I  cannot  forgive  myself  for  having  sent  you  my  dull  prologue  or  epilogue,  as  I 
have  lost  by  them  a  good  one  from  your  hand.  They  are,  in  my  opinion,  so  very 
flat  and  insipid,  that,  as  they  are,  they  may  be  a  serious  weight  to  the  tragedy.  Such 
a  heavy  prologue  will  not  much  predispose  an  audience  to  hear  favourably  a  tragedy 
which  I  am  [afraid]  will  not  be  greatly  assisted  by  the  performers.  Your  kind  pro¬ 
mise  of  giving  me  an  epilogue  or  a  prologue,  perhaps  both,  raised  my  spirits,  and 
made  me  some  amends  for  other  disappointments ;  but  they  are  now  sunk  in  pro¬ 
portion.  I  feel  really  mortified,  to  find  myself  almost  the  only  person  for  so  many 
years  past,  who  has  not  had  influence  enough  with  you  to  prevail  for  a  composition 
which  you  never  fail  to  execute  with  peculiar  ease  and  felicity.  Your  name  is 
always  of  the  greatest  service,  and  any  thing  of  yours,  added  to  whatever  is  to  appear, 
is  a  mark  of  good-will  that  cannot  be  equivocal.  I  am  convinced  with  you  that 
the  play  is  not  cast  to  advantage,  and  Palmer’s  being  left  entirely  out,  surprises 
me  beyond  measure.  I  have  given  Mr.  Sheridan  senior  a  gentle  hint  that,  not 
knowing  Bensley,  and  knowing  Palmer,  I  should  have  wished  to  have  the  latter 
employed.  Henderson  never  occurred  to  me  for  the  King.  I  saw  him  attempt 
Lear  here,  and  it  did  not  much  raise  my  ideas  of  his  powers  in  the  pathetic.  I 
thought  Mrs.  Yrates  would  have  played  the  Princess  ;  she,  I  find,  is  gone  to  Covent- 
garden.  Mr.  Sheridan  tells  me  she  sent  to  offer  to  play  that  part,  but  it  was  too 
late,  and  Miss  Yrounge  in  possession.  I  never  saw  Miss„Younge,  but  suppose,  by 
what  I  hear,  she  will  do  very  well.  Palmer’s  being  left  out,  I  own,  vexes  me.  At 
such  a  time  of  the  stage  how  can  such  an  actor  be  spared  ?  F or  Heaven’s  sake,  have 
an  eye  to  what  they  are  doing !  The  town  has  such  a  prejudice  against  Sheridan,  and 
he  has  such  an  inordinate  partiality  for  himself,  that  I  receive  with  some  mistrust  all 
the  strong  assurances  he  sends  me.  I  am  convinced  he  believes  the  world  has  been 
in  a  mistake  above  thirty  years,  in  thinking  you  the  greatest  genius  the  stage  ever 
saw,  and  that  the  judicious  few  give  him  the  preference  in  their  private  opinion.  I 
suppose  the  fate  of  his  Esop  has  chagrined  him  ;  but  it  will  not  make  him  a  grain  less 
confident.  He  is  resolved,  I  hear,  to  have  done  with  the  management  after  the 
present  season.  The  stage  here  is  in  a  most  deplorable  condition.  The  manager, 
Ryder,  is  reduced  to  an  easy  confinement  in  his  own  house  communicating  with  the 
theatre.  Though  he  is  himself  ruined  pro  tempore,  he  first  contrived  to  drive  away 
the  Italian  Burletta,  the  only  entertainment  we  had  here  worth  a  farthing.  Y"our 
former  pupil,  Cautherly,  acts  lovers,  heroes,  and  fine  gentlemen,  to  empty  benches  ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


503 


and  he  is  a  Garrick  to  the  rest  of  the  company.  I  saw  Jupiter  lately  in  “  Midas,” 
without  the  gout  in  his  feet,  and  with  broken  shoes.  The  State  and  the  Stage  seem 
to  be  declining  rapidly,  and  every  thing  as  bad  as  possible,  except  the  weather, 
which  is  not  in  the  government  of  ministers  or  managers.  Mrs.  Jephson,  with  me, 
wishes  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  all  the  hearty  enjoyments  of  the  season.  The  air  here 
at  present  is  milder  than  spring-time  in  general.  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,  ever 

Your  affectionate  and  obliged  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

You  need  not,  when  you  are  so  good  to  write,  wait  for  covers  to  me ;  my  being 
in  Parliament  entitles  me  to  receive  letters  without  postage. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  January  23,  1772. 

Were  the  play  to  be  got  up  at  another  playhouse,  I  should  think  it  absolutely 
necessary  to  attend  the  rehearsals,  but  when  you  are  willing  to  undertake  that 
trouble,  the  anxiety  of  an  author  may  be  natural,  but  is  superfluous.* 

As  the  term  begins  this  day,  I  should  wish  to  be  dispensed  with  in  general,  but 
will  wait  upon  you,  if  you  think  proper  on  any  particular  occasion  to  call  me  into 
court.  On  my  way  to  Westminster  I  propose  calling  at  Mr.  Barry’s  to  talk  the 
matter  over  with  him.  In  the  fourth  act  of  the  play  a  speech  is  put  into  Mr.  Barry’s 
part,  in  which  you  will  see  that  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  a  dramatic  use  of 
the  description  given  by  Addison  of  Dionysius’s  Ear.  I  thought,  when  I  wrote  that 
passage  four  years  ago,  that  Tully  gave  the  same  description  in  one  of  the  orations 
against  Verres.  After  a  careful  search  I  cannot  find  that  he  gives  so  minute  an 
account  of  the  place  as  I  imagined.  In  the  fifth  oration  he  charges  Verres  with 
making  the  prison,  constructed  by  the  elder  Dionysius  at  Syracuse,  the  habitation  of 
the  Roman  citizens.  The  gaol  he  says  was  called  the  Latomicc.  If  you  have  the 
Delphin  edition  of  the  Orations,  you  will  find  the  passage  in  the  first  volume,  p.  462. 

In  the  first  conception  of  the  play,  my  design  was  to  form  the  character  of  Dio¬ 
nysius  upon  Tully’s  account  of  him  in  the  Tusculan  Questions,  together  with  what 
is  to  be  found  in  Plutarch.  Shall  I  tell  you  what  made  me  desist  ?  I  foresaw  the 
want  of  an  actor  who  would  take  as  much  pains  to  represent  the  character  as  it 
would  cost  me  to  write  it.  I  resolved  therefore  not  to  be  over  curious  in  touching 
particular  features,  and  contented  myself  with  taking  the  general  outline.  A  la¬ 
boured  portrait  of  Dionysius,  formed  upon  the  model  of  Tully,  would  require  such 
an  actor  as  yourself ;  and  though  the  Archbishop  of  Cambray  would  have  come  in  aid 
to  Tully,  yet  in  my  hands  it  would  have  wanted  force,  especially  as  that  damned 
fellow  Shakspeare  has  forestalled  all  my  good  thoughts  upon  the  subject.  I  have 
cunningly  evaded  the  trouble  of  minute  delineation.  The  law  says,  Dolus  versatur 

*  This  play  was  “  The  Grecian  Daughter,”  first  acted  on  the  26th  February,  1772,  which,  though  for 
the  most  part  poorly  written,  lives  and  must  continue  to  live  while  the  stage  possesses  an  actress  of  feeling 
and  dignity. — Ed. 


504 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


in  generalibus.  As  the  part  now  stands,  it  will  not  be  of  too  much  weight  for  the 
shoulders  that  are  to  carry  it.  Shall  I  tell  you  a  story  of  Foote  ?  A  gentleman  that 
went  to  Paris  with  him  last  summer,  told  me  yesterday,  that  he  was  at  breakfast  with 
Foote  at  Paris,  when  the  author  of  a  Monthly  Collection  waited  upon  our  Modern 
Aristophanes  for  a  list  of  all  his  pieces,  with  as  many  anecdotes  relative  to  them  as 
possible.  Foote  gave  a  list,  annexing  to  each  piece  the  number  of  nights  it  ran: 
eighty  nights  dc  suite  was  the  general  run,  as  the  lowest  was  thirty-five  nights 
de  suite. 

N.  B.  The  Sieur  F oote  is  remarkable  for  originality,  and  the  variety  of  his  inven¬ 
tion.  He  never  borrowed  a  hint  from  any  author  living  or  dead.  Yours, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  T.  GAINSBOROUGH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  1772. 

I  never  will  consent  that  any  body  makes  a  present  of  your  face  to  Clutter- 
buck  but  myself,  because  I  always  intended  a  copy  (by  my  own  hand)  for  him,  that 
he  may  one  day  tell  me  what  to  do  with  my  money,  the  only  thing  he  understands, 
except  jeering  of  folks. 

I  shall  look  upon  it  that  you  break  in  upon  my  line  of  happiness  in  this  world  if 
you  mention  it ;  and  for  the  original,  it  was  to  be  my  present  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  so 
it  shall  be  in  spite  of  your  blood. 

Now  for  the  chalk  scratch;  it  is  a  poor  affair,  not  much  like  the  young  ladies ;  but, 
however,  if  you  do  not  remember  what  I  said  in  my  last,  and  caution  your  brother  of 
the  same  roch,  may  you  sink  in  the  midst  of  your  glory  ! 

I  know  your  great  stomach,  and  that  you  hate  to  be  crammed,  but  by  G —  !  you 
shall  swallow  this  one  bait ;  and  when  you  speak  of  me  do  not  let  it  be  like  a  goose, 
but  remember  you  are  a  fat  turkey. 

God  bless  all  your  endeavours  to  delight  the  world,  and  may  you  sparkle  to 
the  last ! 

Thos.  Gainsborough. 

D — n  Underwood. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Beaufort-buildings,  Wednesday  night,  1773. 

The  great  distance  at  which  you  have  of  late  kept  me,  makes  me  doubtful  if  I 
am  not  now  taking  too  great  a  liberty  in  troubling  you  with  this ;  but  as  negotia¬ 
tions  in  business  are  (I  fear)  at  an  end  betwixt  us,  excuse  me  thinking  in  friendship 
hone  but  principals  are  to  be  treated  with. 

As  a  friend  I  now  address  you,  and  hope  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  acquit  me 
of  having  acted  disrespectfully  to  you,  or  inattentively  to  your  interest,  though  pur- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


505 


suing  my  own.  Your  hard  offers  I  cannot  accept  of ;  and  if  I  know  my  own  heart,  I 
am  sure,  in  a  change  of  situations,  I  could  not  have  made  such  to  you ;  and  sorry 
am  I  to  say,  I  never  was  so  much  convinced  that  there  is  no  friendship  in  trade. 
Notwithstanding  which,  I  flatter  myself  I  shall  not,  by  any  step  I  may  take  in  ano¬ 
ther  theatre,  forfeit  my  title  to  your  future  patronage,  though  you  cannot  afford  it  to 
me  at  present.  I  am.  Sir,  with  much  respect, 

Your  most  faithful  humble  servant  (may  I  say  friend?) 

VY.  Smith. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thursday,  four  o’clock,  1773. 

I  have  not  seen  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  but  conclude  it  is  determined  I  am  never  to 
have  the  advantage  of  your  auspices.  As  this  is  the  case,  I  could  have  wished  that 
even  Mr.  G.  Garrick  had  not  been  acquainted  with  our  negotiation,  but  hope  I  may 
depend  on  his  secrecy.  You  say  you  are  much  my  friend;  I  doubt  it  not,  and  am 
sure  I  am  very  much  yours.  What  pity  that  in  such  a  case  we  never  can  be  united 
in  the  same  interest :  however,  I  now  hope  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  acquit  me  of 
taking  any  unwarrantable  step  in  opposition  to  you  or  your  affairs.  I  have  been  too 
ill-treated  by  Mr.  Colman  ever  to  think  of  an  engagement  with  him  without  a  cer¬ 
tainty  of  better  usage  than  I  can  expect  from  so  illiberal  a  mind ;  and  have  now  no 
resource  but  with  the  Yateses,  with  whom,  as  the  licence  is  now  certain,  I  shall 
immediately  close,  and  hope  that  I  shall  not  by  this  step  forfeit  your  esteem  or 
any  good  offices  which  your  future  friendship  may  have  intended  for  me.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  with  real  and  disinterested  respect, 

Your  very  faithful  and  sincere  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith 


REV.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Gough-square,  Wednesday,  1773. 

I  have  just  been  with  Dr.  Johnson,  and  have  communicated  to  him  your  anxiety, 
and  your  intention  if  he  approved  it.  He  desired  me  to  send  you  his  compliments, 
and  his  warm  sense  of  your  very  friendly  care.  He  told  me  his  eyes  were  every  day 
perceptibly  better,  and  he  therefore  thought  he  should  not  need  the  ointment.  They 
seem  indeed  much  better,  nay,  almost  quite  well. 

I  hope  I  shall  see  you  on  Thursday ;  but  you  will  give  me  leave  to  wait  for  a 
message  from  you,  as  I  know  not  by  your  letter  what  will  be  the  proper  time  to  wait 
upon  you. 

1  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  farther  information  concerning  the  twenty 
guineas.  You  leave  me  as  much  obliged  to  you  as  before;  but  my  pride  will  always 
rather  be  flattered  than  mortified  by  my  being  obliged  to  Mr.  Garrick. 

vol.  i.  3  T 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


506 

I  have  thrown  out  my  feelings  for  the  dying  Negro  and  for  myself  in  a  hundred 
lines.  1  am  sincerely,  and  with  unaffected  timidity,  diffident  of  their  value :  they 
shall  not  appear  in  public  without  your  imprimatur. 

Best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  grateful  and  faithful  friend  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Percival  Stock  dale. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK.  * 

DEAR  SIR,  1773. 

I  neither  have,  nor  ever  had,  the  least  doubt  of  your  behaviour  to  any  man, 
from  King  Arthur  down  to  Arthur  Murphy,  whom  I  hated  to  see  in  your  company, 
and  wondered  you  admitted  over  your  threshold  after  his  former  behaviour  towards 
you.  Curiosity  desires  a  communication  of  your  answer  to  his  advertisement,  neither 
of  which  I  ever  heard  of.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  offer  of  your  next  year’s 
charity,  as  I  could  not  find  a  proper  object  for  the  present ;  and  I  will  take  care  to 
give  you  more  regular  notice  if  I  live.  Good  now,  why  does  not  Mr.  Home  say 
whence  he  takes  his  main  plot  of  “Alonso?”  for  surely  Massinger’s  play  of  “The 
Unnatural  Combat”  is  the  basis,  and  that  is  too  lately  printed  in  his  AVorks,  and  in 
Dodsley’s  Collection,  to  be  concealed.  I  think  it  worthy  of  Mr.  H - ■.  Squire  Mur¬ 

phy’s  far  otherwise,  though  on  a  stoiy  more  capable  of  being  worked  up  into  some¬ 
thing.  I  have  not  yet  had  a  sight  of  Dr.  G - ’s  five-act  farce,  (for  such  it  must  be 

from  the  specimen  in  the  papers,)  which  seemed  sadly  writ,  though  capable  of  some 
fun  in  the  action.*  AATiat  an  odd  fellow  he  must  be,  who  speaks  against  the  liberty 
of  the  press  while  he  pleads  for  it !  He  had  better  throw  what  inconsistent  humour 
he  has  into  a  novel ,  (as  in  “  The  ATicar  of  AA'akefield,”)  than  pretend  to  a  theatrical 
turn,  which  he  has  not.  In  his  first  play  the  town  would  not  bear  his  low  humour, 
and  justly,  as  it  degraded  his  “  Good-Natured  Man,”  whom  they  were  taught  to  pity 
and  have  a  sort  of  respect  for,  into  a  low  buffoon,  and  what  is  worse,  into  a  falsifier, 
a  character  unbecoming  a  gentleman.  You  seem  concerned  to  have  all  the  Bishop’s 
works.  You  have  indeed  more  than  his  works,  and  some  that  are  doubtful,  and 
some  even  against  his  own  words  and  desire  (viz.  papers  of  political  grave  humour, 
the  true  humour,  printed  in  1710,)  which  I  am  induced  to  print  from  the  impossibi¬ 
lity,  as  they  are  so  well  known,  of  keeping  them  from  the  public,  and  the  fear  of 
their  being  slovenly  done.  The  purchase  meets  with  some  delay,  as  they  com¬ 
monly  do,  on  my  insisting  that  the  premises  be  delivered  to  me  in  the  best  repair, 
which  I  may  certainly  expect,  as  I  give,  and  at  once,  so  enormous  a  price.  The 
value  is  offered  me,  but  I  have  refused  that,  as  I  and  Madam  will  not  have  the  trou¬ 
ble  nor  the  burthen  upon  our  minds.  I  am,  with  Mrs.  H - ’s  compliments,  and 

thanks  for  her  care  of  her  husband,  Your  affectionate, 

J.  Hoadly. 

*  This  was  the  comedy  of  “  She  Stoops  to  Conquer,”  acted  for  the  first  time  at  Covent-Garden  Theatre, 
on  the  loth  of  March,  1773. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


507 


Our  Dean  (Dr.  Ogle)  has  lately  taken  a  small  living  near  Winchester  (a  walk 
and  a  syllabub  for  bis  children,  and  cream  for  his  breakfast) ;  and  I  send  you  a  neigh¬ 
bour's  lamentation  on  the  occasion.  It  will  not  ruin  you  if  the  impertinent  papers 
are  not  to  be  credited. 

Thursday  morning. 

How  d'ye  do?  and  I  suppose  you  know  who  has  got  the  living  of  our  late  wor¬ 
thy  friend,  Dr.  Shipman. 

Some  pretend  to  say  that  a  very  deserving  but  unbeneficed  clergyman  preached 
before  the  Patron  on  2d  of  Corinth,  chap.  ix.  verse  9,*  in  hope  of  obtaining  it,  and  so 
pathetic  was  his  reasoning  and  address,  that  the  old  gentleman  felt  something  rising 
about  him  like  spirit,  but  he  blew  his  nose,  and  put  the  inspiration  into  his  pocket. 


But  when  the  Dean  the  rostrum  mounted, 

And  all  his  valorous  deeds  recounted, 

Yet  knowing  well  that  over  his  shop 
Would  ne’er  be  wrote  “  Here  sleeps  a  Bishop,” 
Proving  that  he  was  worse  than  Turk 
Who  would  not  for  such  children  work — 


from  1  Timothy,  chap.  v.  verse  8,'f  the  matter  was  soon  determined;  it  was 
“  argumentum  ad  hominem.  Paulus  Episcojows  ad  magnum  episco pum  was 
irresistible : — 


So,  ’twixt  pus  and  pum, 
The  tenants  look  glum ; 
For  cushion  at  Compton 
Will  never  be  thumpt  on 
By  this  Rector  Dean, 
Who  ’ll  never  be  seen, 
Save  once  in  the  year 
Their  coffers  to  clear, 


And  read  a  short  lecture 
On  George  the  Third’s  picture  ; 
Complain  of  the  times, 

And  tell  the  great  crimes 
The  farmers  commit, 

The  priest  to  out-wit : 

Then  pocket  the  purse, 

And  return  with  their  cu — se. 


I  might  have  quoted  the  texts  at  large,  but  let  Smith  fetch  the  Bible ;  it  will 
amuse  you,  and  he  may  get  a  good  dinner  by  the  doctrine. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  DAVID,  January  1st,  1773. 

I  have  been  at  Salisbury  for  a  few  days  enjoying  some  nodes  Atticas  with  my  old 
friend  of  the  Close,  Mr.  Harris,  and  Joe  Warton,  reviving  an  old  and  most  laudable 
custom  of  spending  a  Christmas  week  together,  which  his  being  a  transitory  great 
man  in  the  Treasury  had  for  a  few  years  interrupted.  This  lost  me  a  post  in  answer- 

*  As  it  is  written — “  He  hath  dispersed  abroad  ;  he  hath  given  to  the  poor  ;  his  righteousness  remaineth 
for  ever.” 

t  “  But  if  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  has  denied  the  faith, 
and  is  worse  than  an  infidel.” 

The  editor  has  here  performed  the  office  of  Smith,  for  the  reader’s  ease  and  pleasure. — Ed. 

2  T  2 


508 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ing  yours,  and  now  I  do  not  know  well  what  to  say.  Mr.  Bowycr  is  a  man  of  con¬ 
sequence  both  in  his  business  and  his  character  of  a  scholar,  in  which  he  is  excellent 
beyond  most  men  of  this  age.  The  Bishop  loved  him,  and  gave  many  morning 
hours  to  him,  having  made  an  acquaintance  with  him  late  in  life.  He  was  useful 
to  me  upon  my  father’s  death,  with  regard  to  books  which  he  catalogued  and  dis¬ 
posed  of  for  me  :  upon  this,  when  I  thought  you  sure  as  my  actor ,  upon  your  return 
from  abroad,  1  fairly  opened  the  case  to  him,  and  made  him  a  present  of  the  copy  of 
“  Cromwell”  when  it  should  be  acted.  This  man,  you  see,  does  not  so  much  want 
the  profit  as  the  compliment  from  me,  by  whom  he  has  met  with  some  disappoint¬ 
ment.  It  will  not  be  at  all  genteel  to  talk  to  him  about  halving  and  quartering  ; 
you  see,  he  must  have  the  whole  or  none,  without  a  word  spoken  but  a  charge  of 
secresy,  and  he  is  one  of  the  most  prudent,  as  well  as  sensible,  men  in  England.  A 
penny-post  letter  will  fetch  him  to  you  from  Whitefriars,  where  his  printing-office  is; 
and  if  you  are  pressed  in  time,  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  open  the  affair  to  him  your¬ 
self.  If  not,  give  me  your  final  resolution  ;  for  notwithstanding  all  this,  if  you  have 
any  particular  friend  to  serve,  &c.  as  I  said  at  first,  I  am  not  so  bent  upon  this  but 
that  I  am  very  ready  to  give  it  up  to  you  or  yours,  as  Mr.  Bowyer  as  yet  knows  no¬ 
thing  of  it.  Let  me  hear  your  resolution,  and  so  success  attend  as.  Q.  Do  you 
know  that  poor  Miller’s  poor  widow  (who,  by  the  by,  calls  herself  wife  in  her  Dedica¬ 
tion  of  Mahomet)  is  in  deplorable  circumstances?  You  are  known  to  be  so  ready 
to  do  good,  that  I  suppose  she  has  not  let  you  rest  at  this  juncture.  If  not,  a  little 
matter  from  the  managers,  on  this  second  flight  of  her  husband’s  muse,  -would  be  most 
seasonable  for  her,  and  not  disreputable  from  them,  as  she  has  always  behaved  more 
decently  than  ever  he  did.  Loves  and  compliments  from  both  to  both.  My  paper 
will  no  more.  Mayhap  I  may  call  upon  you  about  the  middle  of  the  month.  So 
adieu.  Miritos  etfelices. 


DR.  WILLIAM  ROBERTSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  College  of  Edinburgh,  Jan.  5th,  1773. 

This  letter  will  be  presented  to  you  by  Mr.  Mackenzie,  the  author  of  “  The 
Prince  of  Tunis,”*  which  you  was  so  good  as  to  read  on  my  recommendation.  I  beg 
leave  to  introduce  him  to  you  as  my  friend,  and  a  man  -whose  genius  as  tvell  as  good¬ 
ness  of  heart  render  him  not  unworthy  of  your  acquaintance.  I  mentioned  to  you 
Mr.  Mackenzie’s  situation  in  life.  He  does  not  depend  upon  the  emoluments  of 
authorship,  but  is  prompted  to  write  by  a  genius  for  poetry,  and  the  loAre  of  honest 
fame.  I  need  not  say  that  he  is  very  ambitious  of  being  kno-wn  to  you;  and  if  he  is  so 
fortunate  as  to  find  you  disengaged,  he  may  profit  much  by  this  introduction.  For 
he  was  so  much  convinced  by  your  remarks  that  his  former  tragedy  was  not  so  per- 

*  The  “Prince  of  Tunis,”  I  am  afraid,  is  forgotten — but  the  “  Man  of  Feeling”  has  kept  its  place  among 
the  Scottish  novels  ;  now  a  mighty  class  of  invention  indeed. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


509 


feet  as  he  would  wish  any  piece  to  be  that  appears  on  your  theatre,  that  he  has  begun 
to  work  upon  another  subject,  and  will  be  glad  to  submit  the  sketch  of  it  to  your 
judgment. 

I  am  happy  to  hear  that  you  intend  to  make  out  your  visit  to  Scotland  this 
summer,  with  the  hopes  of  which  you  have  been  long  flattering  your  friends  here.  I 
need  not  tell  you  how  agreeable  this  will  be  to  them,  and  I  am  almost  confident  it 
will  not  be  disagreeable  to  you.  May  I  beg  that  you  will  give  me  some  notice  of 
your  motions,  that  no  excursion  may  rob  me  of  the  pleasure  of  enjoying  you  during 
your  stay  in  this  place  ?  Offer  my  respectful  (may  I  say)  my  affectionate  compli¬ 
ments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe  me  to  be  ever. 

My  dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

William  Robertson. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  HENDERSON. 

Hampton,  Jan.  5th,  1773. 

It  is  with  the  greatest  pleasure  I  hear  of  your  success :  the  continuance  of  it  will 
in  great  measure  depend  upon  yourself.  As  the  older  soldier,  I  will  venture  to  point 
out  some  rocks,  which  former  young  men  of  merit  have  split  upon.  Too  much  intoxi¬ 
cated  with  the  applause  they  had  received,  and  more  inclined  to  be  flattered  by  their 
inferiors  than  pursue  the  means  to  increase  their  reputation,  they  have  generally  neg¬ 
lected  study,  to  keep  indifferent  company ;  by  which  behaviour  their  little  stock  of 
merit  has  been  soon  exhausted,  and  in  exchange  they  have  got  the  habit  of  idling  and 
drinking,  contenting  themselves  in  public  with  barely  getting  the  words  of  their 
parts  into  their  heads,  and  in  private  with  the  poor,  unedifying,  common-place  gabble 
of  every  ignorant  pretender  who  (to  the  disgrace  of  it)  belongs  to  a  theatre.  You 
must  not  imagine  that  I  would  have  a  young  man  always  at  his  book ;  far  from  it :  it 
is  part  of  his  business  to  know  the  world ;  and  conversation,  provided  it  is  creditable, 
will  be  of  the  utmost  service.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the  conversation  I  would  re¬ 
commend  is  not  to  be  found  among  the  dramatis  persona?.  Permit  me  to  go  a  little 
farther ;  you  have  given  me  a  sort  of  right,  by  saying  that  my  interest  at  Bath  has 
served  you.  I  would  have  you  endeavour  to  read  other  books  besides  those  of  the 
theatre.  Every  additional  knowledge  to  that  of  your  profession  will  give  you  im¬ 
portance  :  the  majority  of  actors  content  themselves  (like  parrots)  with  delivering 
words  they  get  from  others ;  repeat  them  again  and  again  without  the  least  altera¬ 
tion  ;  and  confine  their  notions,  talking  and  acquirements,  to  the  theatre  only,  as  the 
parrot  to  his  cage.  The  last  and  chief  matter  is  your  preservation  of  that  character 
which  you  set  out  with,  of  being  an  honest  man  :  let  no  inducements  prevail  upon  you 
to  break  your  engagements ;  steadiness  and  perseverance  will,  though  slowly,  bring 
you  surely  to  the  best  end  of  all  our  actions;  while  flights,  rambling,  and  what  some 
call  spirit,  will  mislead,  distract,  and  destroy  you. — So  much  for  preaching. 


510 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


What  I  have  said,  is  said  to  yourself,  and  meant  kindly :  if  my  future  advice  will 
be  of  the  least  service  to  you,  you  shall  command  it.  When  you  come  to  London, 
I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you  ;  half  an  hour’s  conversation  will  do  more  than  a  quire  of 
written  paper. 

D.  G* 

My  best  wishes  to  Mr.  Taylor  and  all  my  friends. 

I  have  a  little  gout  in  my  hand,  and  can  scarce  write  :  I  am  sure,  not  to  be  read 
easily. 

Endorsed, 

“  Copy  of  my  letter  to  Mr.  Henderson, 
of  the  Bath  Theatre.” 


REV.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Portsmouth,  Jan.  6th,  1773. 

I  have  been  extremely  ill  of  an  intermitting  fever  (which  I  had  upon  me  before 
I  left  town)  ever  since  I  arrived  here  ;  otherwise  I  should  have  taken  the  liberty  to 
have  sent  you  a  line  or  tAvo  ere  now.  I  iioav  write  to  you  out  of  gratitude  for  your 
past  benevolence  and  attention  to  me ;  and  I  still  flatter  myself  that  you  will  accept 
my  letter  not  Avithout  some  friendly  sentiments  Avith  regard  to  the  Avriter. 

The  travelling  all  night  in  a  stage-coach,  and  the  manner  of  traATelling,  eArery  Avay 
disagreeable,  hurt  me  much.  We  were  oA'erturned  at  Cobham  at  four  o’clock  in  the 
morning,  through  the  drunkenness  of  the  driver.  We  Avere  obliged  to  stand  an  hour 
at  that  time  in  the  open  air,  as  there  Avas  no  house  open  to  receive  us  :  this  hurt  me 
more.  My  pain  of  body  and  mind,  from  three  Aveeks  before  I  left  London  to  the 
present  moment,  have  been  horrible  ;  therefore  I  shall  not  dAvell  upon  them.  I  have 
had  the  advice  of  our  surgeon,  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  apply  to  a  physician.  My 
recovery  is  yet  very  sIoav,  or  rather  dubious. 

I  haAre  heard  nothing  of  Mr.  Fitzmaurice.  Surely  the  Ioav  invectives  of  a  news¬ 
paper  cannot  hurt  me  so  radically,  as  to  deprive  me  of  the  friendship  of  a  gentleman 
whom  I  so  highly  esteemed  and  honoured.  I  need  not  surely  request  him,  nor  any 
friend  whom  I  anxiously  wish  to  retain,  or  to  regain,  to  reflect,  that  eArery  fact  against 
me  Avas  most  atrociously  hyperbolized,  and  aggra\  ated  by  the  groundless  resentment 
and  scurrility  of  perhaps  the  Avorst  man  upon  earth  ;  and  that  many  falsehoods  Avere 
interspersed  Avith  those  facts. 

The  officers  of  our  ship  call  upon  me,  and  are  very  polite  to  me ;  and  the  Captain 

*  Mr.  Garrick  does  not  appear,  when  writing,  to  have  had  the  slightest  notion  of  Henderson’s  peculiar 
character.  Without  pedantry,  he  rvas  formed  for  study  ;  and  in  truth,  one  of  the  great  masters  of  his 
profession.  He  had  prudence  too,  equal  to  his  application.  What  he  wanted  was  that  piercing  sharpness  of 
voice,  which  would  have  relieved  his  declamation  from  occasional  heaviness,  and  a  face  that  would  have 
better  reflected  the  accurate  perceptions  of  his  mind.  From  nature  and  conviction  alike,  Henderson  acted 
religiously  upon  Garrick’s  advice,  through  the  whole  of  his  honourable  but  brief  career. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


511 


begs  that  I  would  keep  my  mind  easy  with  regard  to  my  duty,  and  take  all  the  in¬ 
dulgence  which  my  illness  requires. 

I  find  the  two  best  things  I  shall  be  able  to  effect  here,  will  be  to  finish  Becket’s 
translation,  when  I  recover,  with  all  expedition,  and  to  fix  my  mind  to  that  prudent 
and  circumspect  tone  of  conduct,  which  I  hope  will,  in  time,  reinstate  me  in  the  good 
opinion  of  all  those  whom  I  esteem  and  respect.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  most  faithful  obedient  servant, 

P.  Stockdale. 

P.  S.  I  beg  Mrs.  Garrick  to  accept  my  most  respectful  compliments.  Pray  ac¬ 
quaint  Mr.  Ayrey  that  the  best  and  most  grateful  feelings  of  my  heart  ardently  wish 
his  happiness. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  FRIEND  DAVID,  Jan.  6th,  1773. 

1  have  got  the  scene  of  the  Gods  fairly  written  out  by  a  trusty  hand,  and  shall 
take  the  first  opportunity  of  sending  it  to  you.  I  imagine  it  may  be  easily  altered, 
by  leaving  out  all  that  can  personally  be  applied  to  Rich  ;  and  by  introducing  Momus 
at  the  end  in  the  character  of  Harlequin.  The  encouragement  of  so  popular  and 
true  a  friend  among  the  Gods  will  be  enough  to  raise  the  ladies’  spirits,  without  any 
mention  of  Mr.  Shakspeare.  If  the  verses  be  spoken  (without  any  recitative),  it  will 
be  scarce  enough  for  an  entertainment  after  the  play ;  and  I  thought  a  fine  parody7 
of  the  whole  of  “  Alexander’s  Feast”  would  make  a  noble  addition  to  it,  if  well  set  to 
burlesque  music  ;  and  finish  with  an  eclat.  But  I  fear  yrou  will  think  Bon1.  Thorn¬ 
ton  has  been  beforehand  with  yrou  in  his  exhibition  of  humstrums  and  salt-boxes  at 
Ranelagh.  I  think  not ;  for  I  would  have  the  Ode  set  to  good  music,  but  hurlettick 
and  fantastical,  and  performed  with  great  gravity  and  oratorio-ich  importance.  I  have 
such  an  Ode,  to  be  performed  by  beggars  on  a  most  solemn  occasion,  the  anniversary  of 
the  birth-day,  and  the  real  marriage  at  coming  of  age,  of  the  grandson  of  the  beggar, 
author  of  the  Opera  so  called.  The  introduction  shall  introduce  him  very7  old,  as 
taking  this  opportunity  of  the  true  and  fine  taste  of  the  town,  introduced  by7  his  own 
opera  so  many7  y7ears  ago,  to  bring  these  pieces  into  public,  formerly7  played  with  such 
applause  in  a  large  cellar  at  St.  Giles’s,  for  the  honour  of  himself,  Tipltin  King  of  the 
Beggars.  This  introduction  may  admit  of  good  satire  and  wit ;  especially7  as  “  The 
Beggar’s  Opera”  lias  been  so  lately7  pecked  at  by  our  pseudo-reformers  ;  and  be  a 
proper  excuse  for  introducing  some  of  the  old  ballad-tunes. 

If  you  think  the  addition  of  the  Ode  in  parody  will  have  effect,  I  will  write  to 
the  author  for  his  leave — whom  I  have  not  seen  for  scores  of  yrears.  It  may7  be  called 
the  Burletta  Ode. 

I  have  just  room  for  a  true  story,  and  to  send  Madam’s  best  wishes,  always  sea¬ 
sonable,  to  you  and  yours,  along  with  those  of  your  devoted 


J.  IIOADLY. 


512 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


A  good  Lady  Bountiful  of  these  parts  prescribed  to  a  poor  man  for  a  dismal  cold 
in  his  limbs,  bidding  his  wife  give  him  plenty  of  halm-tea.  This  did  not  cure  him, 
and  she  questioned  the  poor  woman  when  she  saw  her.  “  To  be  shore,  your  La? ship, 
the  poor  crater  did  all  he  could  to  swallow  it,  but  he  snatter'd  and  jowVd  so,  1  had  not 
the  heart  how  to  giv’n  any  more  of  it.”  “  I  doubt,  good  woman,  you  did  not  get  it 
fresh.”  “  Yes,  your  La’ship,  I  had’n  of  my  next  neighbour,  and  she  had  brewed  but 
the  day  afore.” — Under  a  sign  at  Odiham,  A  Cur  for  a  Goose  under  God. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY. 

DEAR  BARRY,  Streatham,  Thursday,  Jan.  7th,  1773. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken,  but  I  think  you 
receive  conviction  upon  easy  terms.  The  more  I  think  of  the  whole  affair,  the  more 
ready  am  I  to  say,  “  They  fool  me  to  the  top  of  my  bent.”  I  am  sick  of  this 
whole  business ;  and  for  that  reason  I  have  avoided  even  a  syllable  about  it  to  Dr. 
Johnson,  who  is  now  in  the  house.  Every  mortal  whom  I  consulted  before  I  came 
to  this  place  yesterday,  is  clear  that  I  have  not  been  fairly  treated.  At  Hatfield,  in 
the  summer  1770,  an  alarm  concerning  the  Bill  of  llights  was  given  by  Mr.  Garrick: 
he  told  me  that  Mr.  Kelly  was  a  flea-bite  to  those  gentlemen,  but  they  -would  think 

me  an  object,  and  would  be  glad  to  lay  hold  of  me.  My  reply  to  Mr.  Garrick  was, 

» 

that  since  the  year  1763,  I  had  not  written  one  word  of  politics,  and  “  Zenobia”  had 
been  since  acted  without  any  manner  of  opposition.  I  told  Mr.  Garrick  that  I  was 
sure  Mr.  Wilkes  thought  with  more  generosity  of  me  than  to  suffer  forgotten  dis¬ 
putes  to  be  revived,  and  that  I  could  rely  upon  the  frankness  of  that  gentleman's 
temper,  and  the  many  polite  expressions  he  had  made  use  of  in  conversation  with 
me.  Mr.  Garrick  and  I  agreed  to  meet  in  toAvn,  in  order  to  talk  the  matter  over. 
When  1  returned  to  town  from  the  circuit,  I  met  Mr.  Wilkes  by  accident,  (at  the 
Old  Bailey,  I  think  it  was,)  and  he  assured  me  that  he  never  heard  of  a  design  against 
me ;  and  he  added  with  his  usual  politeness,  that  he  never  would  be  in  a  plot  against  a 
work  of  genius.  Armed  with  this  answer,  I  thought  myself  well  provided  for  a  meet¬ 
ing  with  Mr.  Garrick :  but  he  did  not  choose  to  come  more  closely  to  the  point. 
L"pon  going  home  one  day  to  Lincoln’s  Inn,  I  found  the  tragedy  of  “  Alzuma”  on 
my  table  without  a  letter  or  even  a  card.  This  was  about  the  end  of  September 
1770.  I  thought  myself  so  abruptly  treated,  that  I  repaid  him  300/.  and  acquiesced 
under  that  stratagem,  without  a  complaint,  except  now  and  then  a  murmur  that  broke 
out  of  my  chamber  to  some  of  his  intimates.  I  am  now  to  be  made  an  April  fool  with 
the  same  trick,  and  that  too  after  the  reception  of  “  The  Grecian  Daughter,”  and 
even  after  “  The  Irish  Widow,”  which  he  writ  himself,  and  contrived  to  pass  for 
mine.  In  the  name  of  common  sense,  why  was  so  formidable  a  story  told  me  by 
Mr.  Garrick  on  Saturday  the  26th  of  December?  Mrs.  Abington  had  made  an 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


513 


apology  for  her  behaviour  in  a  letter  of  the  16th  ;  and  yet  a  second  letter  from  her, 
dated  the  27th  December,  in  a  brisk,  smart  manner  renewed  the  dispute,  with  a 
manifest  intention  to  puzzle  and  embarrass.  Mr.  Garrick  wondered  on  Wednesday 
the  27th,  who  could  write  Mrs.  Abington’s  letters  ;  and  yet,  the  very  night  before, 
Mr.  Hugh  Kelly  was  the  man  who  went  to  Mr.  Garrick  on  a  very  particular  message 
from  Mrs.  Abington  in  regard  to  Mr.  Brereton !  These  are  but  very  few  of  the 
many  circumstances  that  attend  this  extraordinary  transaction. 

I  cannot  agree  that  the  play  shall  be  read  :*  the  very  cast  of  the  parts,  as  settled 
in  a  particular  or  two,  and  proposed  in  some  other  particulars,  would  sink  the  play, 
even  if  it  were  as  good  as  Congreve.  I  write  in  a  great  hurry,  and  will  detain  you 
only  to  say  that  they  have  made  me  like  a  horse  that  starts  at  a  post,  and  cannot  be 
brought  up  to  it  again.  No  business  of  mine  (“  The  Grecian  Daughter”  excepted)  was 
ever  done  in  a  candid  manner  :  my  peace  of  mind  upon  that  occasion  I  owe  to  you 
and  Airs.  Barry.  Upon  every  other  occasion  Mr.  Garrick  has  been  a  thorn  in  my 
side.  I  have  engaged  to  stay  here  till  Sunday  morning ;  but  will  endeavour  to  see 
you  sometime  to-morrow,  when  I  will  explain  myself  more  at  large.  If  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  this  crooked  dealing  was  not  to  thwart  Mrs.  Barry,  the  whole  pointed  at  me. 
The  attempt  to  hinder  me  from  writing  a  comic  character  for  her  is  new :  but  the 
public  universally  admire  her  genius,  and  I  beg  to  be  one  of  the  number,  f  I  am  with 
my  best  compliments  to  her,  Dear  Barry,  ever  yours, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Jan.  10th,  1773. 

I  wrote  to  you  on  Wednesday  evening  the  30th  of  December  last,  desiring  that 
the  play  and  all  the  parts  might  be  recalled.  At  my  chambers  the  next  morning, 
you  told  me  that  you  had  seen  Mrs.  Abington  upon  the  subject  of  her  endeavours 
to  disconcert  the  business  at  the  theatre,  and  that  she  appeared  extremely  uneasy, 
and  cried  and  laughed  alternately.  You  recommended  to  me  to  make  further 
enquiry  into  the  whole  affair,  and  intimated  a  wish,  that  I  should  wait  to  see  your 
brother,  who  was  then  at  Hampton.  I  waited  from  that  time  till  Wednesday,  the 
6th  instant,  but  I  never  heard  a  word  from  either  of  you.  On  Thursday  the  7th 
instant,  I  received  at  Streatham  a  letter  from  Mr.  Barry,  requesting  my  consent  that 

*  I  imagine  “  Know  your  own  mind,”  a  comedy  which  appeared  in  1777  at  Covent-Garden  Theatre. 
Dashwood  was  avowed  to  be  a  portrait  of  Foote,  and  it  is  finely  drawn  and  coloured.  If  Foote  could  really 
flow  on  in  a  stream  of  wit  and  fancy  at  all  upon  a  level  with  Murphy’s  sketch,  he  must  have  been  a  conversa¬ 
tional  prodigy,  such  as  the  world  has  rarely  enjoyed.  A  learned  friend  of  mine,  who  passed  some  time  with 
him,  described  himself  to  me  as  in  a  state  of  intellectual  rapture. — Ed. 

+  Murphy  totally  forgets  his  own  complaints  of  this  lady  as  to  his  “  Zenobia.” — “  The  present  eye 
praises  the  present  object.” — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  3  u 


514 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  unfortunate  comedy  should  be  read  the  next  morning  at  the  house.  I  wrote 
an  immediate  answer ;  and  as  I  do  not  mean  to  disguise  my  feelings  upon  the  oc¬ 
casion,  I  send  you  enclosed  a  copy  of  my  letter  to  Mr.  Barry.  By  the  sentiments  of 
that  letter  I  abide,  and  have  only  now  to  request  that  the  play,  together  with  all 
copies  that  have  been  made  of  it,  may  be  returned  as  soon  as  your  convenience  will 
permit.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


DR.  J.  FIOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Cross,  Jan.  10th,  1773. 

I  have  been  tweaked  by  the  conscience,  and  I  can  assure  you  that  is  worse  than 
the  thumb,  for  not  keeping  up  a  better  correspondence  of  late  with  my  old  friends. 
One  great  reason  was,  that  I  have  been  perplexed,  (besides  proceeding  too  slowly  in  the 
great  work  of  old  venerable  Ben  Hoadly’s  Works,)  by  the  foolish  loss  of  my  will.  I 
do  not  mean  the  government  over  my  wife,  but  last  will  and  testament,  of  which 
I  was  silly  enough  not  to  have  a  copy  deposited  with  some  friend.  My  memory 
and  hand  have  been  upon  the  stretch  this  last  week  or  two,  to  recover  the  substance 
of  one  immediately,  which  I  executed  directly,  for  fear  of  accidents,  as  I  found  by 
experience  by  poor  Dr.  Perkins,  at  Southampton,  that  parsons  had  apoplectic  fits,  as 
well  as  you  laity. 

I  had  gone  thus  far  when  I  found  my  old  one  where  I  little  expected  it,  and  where 
I  had  sworn  truth  out  of  England  it  was  not ;  so  I  am  ashamed  to  tell  my  wife,  for  I 
do  not  love  the  laugh  of  sensible  people.  Are  you  ashamed  to  tell  your  wife 
any  thing f  I  found  most  of  the  articles  of  this  wanted  as  much  tinkering  as 
thirty-nine  others  that  shall  be  nameless  ;  and  finding  myself  not  dead,  but  of 
tolerable  sound  mind,  I  have  been  hard  at  it  this  week  past,  and  have  writ  over  a 
tolerable  testament,  as  Madam  will  find.  This  is  the  plague  of  having  more  money 
than  we  want,  and  no  young  Buskins  to  inherit  it.  Ha !  David.  So  I  have 
been  possessed  rather  with  the  restless  spirit  of  writing  (as  we  both  have  been 
before  now),  than  with  the  sleepless  spirit  of  the  gout.  Tantum — to  you  perhaps 
not  Tanti. 

1  have  spoke  to  several  clergy  and  laity,  and  thought  I  had  got  a  lad  for  you  ;  but 
Sir  Simeon  Stuart,  who  has  been  very  good  on  these  occasions,  especially  to  a  large 
family  of  a  late  dead  curate,  rendered  it  not  necessary,  but  was  a  long  while  before 
he  told  me  so.  Two  others  where  I  applied,  were  not  quite  old  enough  ;  and  a  third, 
being  the  son  of  a  Welshman,  would  have  been  disinherited  of  an  estate  of  nine 
pounds  a-year,  if  he  had  been  so  poor  in  spirit  as  to  have  accepted  of  it.  jNt.  B.  This 
gentleman  has  eight  children,  and  no  more  visible  means  of  a  subsistence  for  any  one 
of  them,  except  one  at  Winchester  school,  at  an  expense  he  cannot  afford,  than  the 
minor  in  “  The  Recruiting  Officer.”  Poverty  and  pride  make  as  comfortable  a  match 


david  garrick. 


515 


as  the  virtues  of  some  of  our  late  quality.  I  thank  you,  nevertheless,  as  much  as  if  I 
wanted  it  myself ;  and  then  I  have  no  doubt  but  I  should  make  use  of  it,  let  my 
Welsh  relations  say  what  they  would.  If  you  will  tell  me  how  long  I  may  delay,  I 
will  try  again  ;  or  if  you  can  use  the  money  yourself,  do. — Th e  farce  has  been  so  long- 
lost,  that  I  am  now  unconcerned  about  it ;  only  that  one  circumstance  of  the  Lady 
being  her  own  Champion  (which  was  the  name  given  it,)  made  me  ask  you  a  few  ques¬ 
tions  about  it.  As  to  “  Hamlet,”  we  have  before  now  talked  of  the  possibility  of 
altering  it ;  and  as  it  was  resolved  at  last,  I  am  sorry  I  knew  nothing  of  the  matter. 
By  your  account,  and  twenty-five  lines  only  added,  I  fear  too  little  has  been  done.  The 
part  which  in  my  mind  wanted  most,  and  admitted  of  good  alterations,  was  Ham¬ 
let’s  and  Ophelia’s  behaviour  to  each  other.  There  is  a  poor  cause  assigned  for  all 
her  grief,  and  madness,  and  death, — solely  her  father’s  being  killed  accidentally  — a 
fellow  you  are  nothing  concerned  about,  who  talks  one  minute  like  a  Solomon,  and 
the  next  like  a  simpleton.  But  if  this  love  had  been  rankling  in  her  mind,  and  at 
last  had  overcome  her  reason,  and  been  shown  to  be  the  bottom  of  her  madness  more 
than  her  father’s  death — and  at  the  same  time  Hamlet  had  been  witness  to  this,  and 
shown  remorse  and  distress  at  having  been  the  imprudent  occasion  of  all,  how  would 
this  have  heightened  both  their  characters,  and  reconciled  her  catastrophe  until  some 
probability  !  Besides,  Hamlet's  character  wanted  it  more  than  hers  ;  and  his  behaviour 
to  her  in  his  assumed  madness  might  have  been  reconciled  to  prudence,  to  drive  all 
thoughts  out  of  her  mind  of  ever  marrying  a  Prince,  &c.  though  he  had  been  so  very 
imprudent  as  to  write  to  her  on  that  subject.  She  might  resolve,  and  naturally,  to 
go  into  a  nunnery  in  earnest ;  and  that  sort  of  melancholy  might  drive  her  the  more 
easily  into  madness.  I  can  say  no  more,  unless  I  were  to  have  the  alterations  by  me ; 
only  that  I  thought  the  death  of  the  Queen,  whatever  the  other  characters  were,  had 
ever  a  greater  effect,  being  by  a  natural  accident,  which  at  the  same  time  pleased  as  a 
piece  of  poetical  justice. 

I  have  run  you  to  the  expense  of  three  pennyworth  of  criticism  before  I  was 
aware  :  but  you  will  forgive  me,  as  you  have  so  good  a  bargain.  But  good  now, 
after  all,  how  did  the  galleries  behave  when  they  found  themselves  deprived  of  their 
grave-diggers  ? — or  did  not  they  miss  them?  That  would  be  the  greatest  applause 
to  your  alterations. 

Poor  Warton  (not  Walton)  had  been  to  Oxford  to  fix  another  good-for-nothing 
son  there  ;  and  was  just  returned  for  a  day  or  two  to  Winchester,  when  I  met  him 
on  the  road.  We  could  do  little  more  than  shake  hands.  He  had  not  resolution  to 
come  to  St.  Cross,  though  I  sent  a  note  to  him.  He  felt  that  we  loved  one  another 
too  Avell  to  be  indifferent  at  our  meeting,  and  so  avoided  it.  I  thank  him.  By 
this  time,  I  doubt  not  you  have  seen  him  at  London.  He  must  get,  at  any 
price  whatever,  a  sensible  good  distressed  gentlewoman  to  preside  with  some  au¬ 
thority,  as  well  as  cleverness,  in  his  vast  family,  and  keep  company  and  dine  and  sup 
with  him — and  even’  thing  but  lie  with  him — or  else  he  must  leave  off  his  boarders 
entirely.  Multos  et  felices  to  you  and  Madam  from  me  and  Madam.  She  is  gone  to 

3  u  2 


51 G 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


fleece  my  flock  at  St.  Mary’s  ;  and  gone  to  preside  over  a  mountain  of  beef,  and  an 
ocean  of  soup,  and  a  fortification  of  minced  pie,  in  which  she  is  intrenched,  and  I 
hang  out  the  broom  in  her  absence.  Yours  ever, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 

SIR,  Monday,  Jan.  11,  1773. 

Youn  letter,  with  the  copy  of  one  which  you  had  before  written  to  Mr.  Barry, 
surprised  me  much ;  and  I  was  not  a  little  concerned  at  the  contents  of  both,  notwith¬ 
standing  what  I  had  before  heard  from  you  by  Mr.  Barry,  as  I  am  most  truly 
sensible  that  all  your  suspicions  of  my  brother  are  wholly  groundless ;  for  I  do  aver 
that  he  has  been  always  more  anxious  for  the  success  and  reputation  of  your  play 
than  he  could  have  been  or  ever  was  for  any  thing  of  his  own. 

When  you  wrote  to  me  on  the  30th  of  December  to  inform  me  of  your  deter¬ 
mined  resolution  to  withdraw  the  comedy  on  account  of  Mrs.  Abington’s  conduct, 
and  desired  me  to  return  you  the  copy  and  such  parts  as  had  been  then  written  out, 
it  is  true  I  waited  on  you  the  next  morning,  and,  conscious  of  my  brother’s  wishes 
and  intentions  respecting  the  play,  was  desirous  of  course  to  persuade  you  to  retract 
a  resolution  which  I  conceived  to  be  injurious  to  yourself,  and  totally  unnecessary, 
and  desired  you  would  at  least  let  the  parts  be  finished  and  the  play  remain  till  my 
brother’s  return  to  town.  But  I  must  beg  leave  to  observe  that  neither  in  this  letter, 
nor  in  the  conversation  I  had  with  you  the  next  day,  did  you  make  any  complaint  or 
give  the  least  hint  of  any  suspicion  concerning  my  brother’s  conduct  in  this  business. 
As  to  your  not  seeing  him  in  consequence  of  my  proposal  or  advice,  he  never  was  in 
town  from  the  time  I  last  saw  you  till  the  Wednesday  following,  (the  day  you  left 
town,)  except  that  he  came  from  Hampton  on  Saturday  evening,  and,  being  very  ill, 
uras  advised  to  return  early  the  next  morning,  where  he  remained  till  the  Wednesday, 
though  he  came  to  town  on  purpose  to  be  present  at  the  reading  of  the  comedy 
which  you  had  put  off,  at  your  own  request,  from  the  Friday  to  the  Monday.  On 
Tuesday  last,  after  the  play,  Mr.  Barry  for  the  first  time  informed  me  of  your  suspi¬ 
cions.  I  then  endeavoured  to  convince  him  how  groundless  they  ivere,  as  vrell  in 
regard  to  Mrs.  Barry  as  to  yourself ;  and  it  vras  settled  that  Mr.  Barry  should  see  my 
brother  as  soon  as  he  came  to  town ;  which  he  accordingly  did  the  day  after :  and  the 
result  wras,  that  the  parts  should  be  delivered  out,  and  the  play  read  the  next  morning; 
Mr.  Barry  undertaking  to  vrrite  to  you  for  that  purpose,  and  that  lie  wrould  endea¬ 
vour  to  clear  up  every  thing  you  had  so  much  misconceived. 

I  have  sent  by  the  bearer  the  comedy  and  all  the  parts,  which  are  but  this 
moment  sent  to  me,  and  is  the  reason  of  your  not  receiving  this  answer  sooner. 
Enclosed  I  return  you  the  copy  of  your  letter  to  Mr.  Barry,  which  as  he  thought 
would  be  indelicate  in  him  to  show  to  my  brother,  I  think  would  be  more  indelicate 
in  me  to  do.  I  am,  Sir,  Your  most  obedient  servant, 

George  Garrick. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


517 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Jan.  11,1773. 

Being  determined  to  recall  the  comedy  which  was  in  your  hands,  I  was  also 
determined  to  let  you  know  the  motives  upon  which  I  proceeded.  To  that  end  I 
enclosed  to  your  brother  George  a  copy  of  my  letter  to  Mr.  Barry,  who  had  writ  to 
me  at  Streatham,  by  your  desire.  Your  brother  tells  me  now  that  he  has  not  shown 
you  the  copy,  and  I  perfectly  understand  the  nature  of  his  delicacy. 

As  the  letter  to  Mr.  Barry  contains  an  answer  to  what  he  writ  by  your  directions, 
I  think  it  would  be  indelicate  to  conceal  it  from  you  :  I  therefore  enclose  the  copy 
for  your  perusal,  that  the  blame  of  handing  it  to  you  may  not  fall  upon  your  brother, 
who  does  business  in  a  manner  somewhat  odd.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Jan.  12,  1773. 

The  bearer  of  this,  Mr.  Leland,  is  the  son  of  Dr.  Leland,  one  of  the  most  respect¬ 
able  men  in  this  country,  with  whom  I  have  the  honour  of  being  very  particularly 
connected  by  a  long  and  intimate  friendship ;  and  I  take  the  liberty  (to  which  your 
kindness  encourages  me)  of  recommending  the  young  gentleman  to  your  acquaintance 
and  protection.  His  present  business  in  London  is  to  enter  the  Temple,  and,  I  hope, 
bonis  ambus,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  knowledge  in  the  law  which  may  enable  him  in 
time  to  climb  to  the  top  of  his  profession.  When  you  become  acquainted  with  him, 
I  am  certain  he  will  want  no  other  recommendation  to  your  favour  than  his  own 
good  qualities;  but,  in  the  mean  time,  it  will  make  me  very  happy  should  you 
receive  him  more  cordially  as  a  person  for  whose  welfare  I  am  really  anxious. 

I  hear  from  some  friends  in  London,  that  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy”  is  to  be 
acted  next  winter  at  Drury-lane ;  but  though  in  conformity  to  your  desire  I  wrote  to 
Mr.  Richard  Sheridan  (I  think  above  two  months  ago),  he  has  not  yet  done  me  the 
honour  to  answer  my  letter.*  My  letter  was  as  civil  as  I  could  make  it;  his  talents,  I 
think,  are  very  extraordinary,  but  not  more  so  than  his  manners.  It  would  perhaps 
have  been  well  for  him  that  with  your  patent  you  could  also  have  transferred  to  him 
a  little  of  your  good-breeding ;  for  I  never  heard  that  genius  and  politeness  were  in¬ 
compatible  in  the  same  person, — at  least  I  am  certain  he  has  not  learned  that  maxim 
from  your  example. 

I  am  ever,  my  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  affectionate  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

*  Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan.  This  neglect,  in  a  very  amiable  man,  proceeded  from  the  hurry  into 
which  pure  indolence  forces  him  who  has  business  to  do.  A  man  of  policy  knows  that  not  to  answer  a  letter 
gives  his  correspondent  an  advantage  in  any  negociation  : — you  have  to  propitiate  before  you  treat,  or  apolo¬ 
gize  by  your  offer. — Ed. 


.018 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY. 

DEAR  SIR,  Jan-  12th»  177S* 

I  am  not  a  little  surprised  that  Mr.  Murphy,  after  having  so  lately  lectured  a 
young  author  for  having  suspicions  of  me,  should  again,  in  a  letter  to  you,  stretch  his 
ingenuity  to  make  out  another  quarrel  with  me,  and  withdraw  his  play.  I  was  in 
hopes,  after  eighteen  years’  acquaintance,  in  which  time  he  has  often  quarrelled,  often 
acknowledged  his  error,  and  desired  a  reconciliation  (as  his  letters  can  prove),  that  he 
should  at  last  have  finished  with  much  harmony,  and  good-will :  this  has  been  my 
warmest  wish,  backed  by  my  best  endeavours. 

I  cannot  believe  that  even  Mr.  Murphy’s  suspicions  could  tax  me  with  a  base 
neglect  of  his  interest ;  he  does  not,  he  cannot  believe  it.  I  am  afraid  that  he  has 
unwarily  got  into  some  misunderstanding  with  Mrs.  Abington,  and,  thinking  a 
quarrel  with  an  actress  about  a  part  would  be  too  trifling  a  reason  for  taking  away 
his  play,  he  has  chosen  rather  to  exhibit  a  complaint  against  me,  that  his  resolution 
may  appear  to  have  a  little  better  foundation.  But  I  defy  the  malice  of  my  most  in¬ 
veterate  enemies  to  prove  the  least  intentional  injury  from  me  to  him  since  our  first 
knowledge  of  each  other : — can  Mr.  INI.  do  the  same  ?  As  for  the  comedy,  I  volun¬ 
tarily  asked  for  it,  considered  it  with  my  best  judgment,  and  would  have  acted  it 
with  every  advantage  in  my  power — this  I  am  sure  ijou  believe,  though  I  would  not, 
from  your  intimacy  with  Mr.  Murphy,  put  any  disagreeable  question  to  you. 

I  am  very  much  hurt  to  hear  that  he  has  ripped  up  old  sores,  which  I  hoped  had 
been  long  healed.  When  we  came  before  to  a  reconciliation  at  his  request,  I  re¬ 
solved,  nay  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  forget,  what  I  thought  former  injuries : — has  he 
still  retained  them  in  his  mind  for  occasional  use  ?  I  do  not  envy  him  that  particular 
quality. 

To  finish  this  matter  at  once:  if  two  of  our  common  friends  be  convinced  of  my 
want  of  friendship  in  the  business  of  this  comedy,  I  will  forfeit  a  sum  of  money 
equal  to  the  profits  of  a  new  successful  play,  provided,  on  their  acquittal  of  me,  that 
Mr.  Murphy  shall  ask  my  pardon,  as  he  ought  to  do,  for  his  unjustifiable  unfriendly 
behaviour  and  unwarrantable  suspicions.  Let  him  agree  to  this,  I  am  ready  for  the 
trial.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  sen-ant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  will  refer  this  matter  to  any  of  his  friends  of  Lincoln’s  Inn — Mr.  Wallace, 
Mr.  Bearcroft,  Mr.  Ranby,  Mr.  Cowper,  and  Mr.  Tighe,  though  the  two  last  I 
believe  belong  to  the  Temple. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


519 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPHY. 


Adelphi,  Jan.  12th,  1773. 

I  am  too  much  indisposed  to  write  long  letters,  and  too  old,  and  too  happy  to 
love  altercation.  I  had  written  the  enclosed  to  Mr.  Barry  ;  I  really  have  no  more  to 
say  upon  the  occasion,  and  am  sorry  you  have  renewed  your  old  way  of  making  war, 
when  I  thought  we  had  concluded  a  lasting  peace, 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  did  not  desire  Mr.  Barry  to  write  to  you  at  Streatham. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s  Inn,  Jan.  13th,  1773. 

Your  letter  to  me  of  yesterday’s  date,  and  a  copy  of  another  to  Mr.  Barry,  are 
now  both  before  me.  The  contrivance  of  a  middle  man  between  us  is  nugatory. 
On  my  part,  it  grew  out  of  the  real  occurrence :  if  Mr.  Barry  did  not  write  to  me  by 
your  desire,  he  writ  with  your  privity,  and  your  brother  George  dispatched  the  mes¬ 
senger  on  horseback.  I  therefore  thought  it  fit  that  you  should  be  acquainted  with 
the  answer.  I  shall  now  consider  the  substance  of  both  your  letters  as  if  directed  to 
myself. 

I  am  so  parsimonious  of  my  time,  that  I  hate  to  lay  it  out  in  letters,  but  am  afraid 
I  shall  now  be  drawn  into  some  length.  Altercation  is  not  among  my  amusements. 
My  old  way  of  making  war,  I  grant,  adheres  to  me :  but  what  is  that  way  ?  If  I 
am  treated  with  candour,  the  man  who  does  it,  has  my  acknoAvledgments.  Is  he 
grossly  vilified  ?  I  abhor  the  calumny.  Can  I  be  of  any  use  to  him  ?  He  may 
command  me.  Does  the  same  person  do  me  an  ill  office  ?  I  am  ready  to  avow  my 
feelings.  During  an  acquaintance  of  eighteen  years,  I  have  hoarded  no  man’s  letters, 
and  I  have  written  none  that  I  am  ashamed  of.  If  in  that  period  I  have  quarrelled,  I 
never  quarrelled  without  reason.  If  a  reconciliation  followed,  I  never  made  improper 
advances  to  any  man.  Had  I  been  always  the  first  to  make  concessions  to  you, 
where  could  be  the  wonder,  to  a  man  armed  with  an  exclusive  patent  ?  I  was  at 
that  time  very  young,  and  little  aware  of  a  stroke  of  policy,  which  I  have  since  per¬ 
ceived  is  very  refined,  but,  I  think,  of  little  value— I  mean  the  policy  of  obtaining 
letters  from  an  author  in  the  hour  of  his  success,  or  the  warm  moments  of  a  manager’s 
professed  friendship,  in  order  afterwards  to  make  that  very  author  feel  a  theatrical 
tyranny,  and,  should  he  resent  the  usage,  to  present  his  own  letters  as  a  contradiction 
to  all  he  has  to  urge.  I  never  yet  heard  that  what  a  man  says,  when  he  has  reason 
to  be  pleased,  gives  the  he  to  contrary  sentiments  when  he  is  injured.  I  rely  much 


52  0 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


upon  my  memory,  and  will  now  hazard  a  trial  of  it.  Three  quarrels  have  been  made 
up  between  us.  In  Oct.  1756,  we  met  at  Mr.  Berenger’s  by  your  desire:  three  acts 
of  “  The  Orphan  of  China”  were  ready ;  and  upon  the  whole  it  was  my  idea,  that 
Mr.  Garrick’s  drift  was  to  crush  my  endeavours  in  the  bud.  Whatever  I  thought 
upon  the  subject,  I  threw  it  out  with  warmth,  perhaps  with  violence.  Mr. 
Berenger  did  me  the  honour  to  call  upon  me,  and  laboured  hard  to  infuse  a  con¬ 
trary  opinion.  I  believed  him,  and,  as  he  advised,  writ  to  Mr.  Garrick  in  the  most 
civil  terms.  There  that  quarrel  ended. 

In  a  few  days  after  I  was  told  by  a  gentleman  at  the  Bedford  Coffee-house,  that 
a  writer,  whom  I  suspect,  was  then  actually  employed,  under  the  auspices  of  Mr. 
Garrick,  in  a  translation  of  Voltaire’s  “  Orphelin  de  la  Chine.”  I  concluded  imme¬ 
diately  that  Mr.  Berenger  had  been  imposed  upon,  and  that  all  the  mischief  I 
had  before  apprehended  was  planned  against  me.  Upon  the  spot  I  wrote  to  Mr. 
Garrick,  and,  whatever  the  sentiments  of  that  letter  might  be,  the  expression  was 
intemperate  and  unworthy  of  me.  This  was  our  second  quarrel.  Mr.  Garrick  upon 
a  particular  occasion  showed  that  letter  to  his  Grace  the  late  Duke  of  Bedford,  and 
the  purpose  for  which  it  was  shown  was  fully  answered.  In  the  month  of  De¬ 
cember  following,  when  I  was  settled  in  Lincoln’s  Inn,  Mr.  Vaillant  interposed  his 
good  offices,  by  the  desire,  as  I  thought,  of  Mr.  Garrick,  and  certainly  without  any 
application  from  me.  He  repeated  many  handsome  declarations  made  by  Mr. 
Garrick,  and  finally  proposed  a  reconciliation.  To  try  the  sincerity  of  the  offer,  I 
made  it  a  preliminary  that  the  letter  wlpch  had  been  shown  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
should  be  given  up  to  me :  it  was  so.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Garrick  to  thank  him,  and  I 
condemned  the  style  and  language  of  that  letter.  Ill  humours,  as  you  well  know, 
broke  out  afterwards  concerning  “  The  Orphan  of  China,”  and  one  or  two  subsequent 
pieces  ;  but  they  were  acted,  and  my  point  was  carried. 

In  October  1761,  I  had  substantial  reasons  to  sound  a  retreat  from  Drury-lane 
Theatre.  In  the  month  of  May  following,  or  about  that  time,  I  went  to  the 
treasurer’s  office,  and  paid  120/.,  or  from  that  sum  to  150/.,  which  I  owed  Messrs.  Lacy 
and  Garrick,  together  with  about  3/.  15s.  6fd.  interest  due  thereon.  From  that 
time,  though  I  wrote  plays,  and  among  them  the  comedy  lately  in  question,  I 
offered  none  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  several  years.  A  quarrel  subsisted,  and  would  in 
my  opinion  have  subsisted  till  now,  had  not  Mr.  Bickerstaff  made  the  first  over¬ 
ture  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Garrick.  He  told  me  what  handsome  things  were  said  of 
me,  and,  as  I  was  understood  willing  to  dispose  of  three  plays  in  order  to  have  done, 
he  assured  me  that  Mr.  Garrick  was  ready  to  purchase  them.  I  believed  it,  for 
Colman  was  then  become  manager  of  Covent-Garden.  I  closed  with  the  offer  of 
Mr.  Garrick’s  friendship,  and  dined  with  him  and  Dr.  Johnson  at  Bickerstaff’s 
house.  After  dinner  the  plays  were  mentioned.  “  Prithee,”  says  Dr.  Johnson, 
“  don't  talk  of  plays;  if  you  do,  you  will  quarrel  again.”  He  was  a  true  prophet. 
Though  I  wished  it  much,  no  bargain  was  made  with  me.  “  Zenobia,”  however, 
was  acted  in  February  1768;  and  no  other  piece  of  mine  till  “  The  Grecian  Daughter,” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


521 


in  March  1772.  Mr.  Garrick,  in  the  mean  time,  was  pleased  to  show  me  that  he 
could  for  another  author  act  four  pieces  in  twelve  months.  So  much  for  the  history 
of  our  quarrels  in  the  gross,  not  in  the  detail.  During  all  this  time,  it  is  said,  Mr. 
Garrick  was  free  from  intentional  injury  to  me ;  and  a  question  is  put,  “  Can  Mr. 
Murphy  say  the  same  ?”  The  characters  of  the  two  men  might  be  left  to  decide  that 
point,  but  I  will  speak  out.  I  have  been  often  sore  from  Mr.  Garrick,  and  two  or 
three  times  retaliated  openly  :  I  scorned  a  clandestine  blow. 

We  come  now  to  our  fourth,  and,  I  hope,  our  last  quarrel.  A  misunderstanding 
with  Mrs.  Abington  would  have  been,  as  you  say,  too  trifling  a  reason  for  with¬ 
drawing  the  comedy,  if  the  conduct  of  the  manager  had  been  such  as  friendship, 
honour,  fair  dealing  and  justice  required.  I  have  weighed  every  circumstance  with 
deliberation,  and  I  remain  convinced  that  a  man  of  spirit  had  no  way  left  but  to  make 
his  bow  to  Drury -lane  stage  for  ever. 

If  Mr.  Garrick  considered  it  as  his  duty  to  forget  what  he  thought  former  injuries, 
how  did  it  happen  that  he  told  a  relation  of  Mr.  Murphy’s  at  Bath  two  years  ago, — 
“  Yes,  I  could  do  great  things  with  his  play,  but  you  know  he  has  written  against 
me?”  If  I,  Sir,  remember  former  injuries,  it  is  because  the  wounds  are  opened  by 
the  hand  that  gave  them.  To  store  up  resentments  for  occasional  use  was  the  black 
character  of  Tiberius.*  I  laugh  at  the  idea  of  imputing  to  me  the  qualities  of  that 
Emperor.  If  you  imagine  him  the  model  of  my  conduct,  I  am  sure  I  imitate  very 
ill,  and  cannot  flatter  myself  that  you  have  reason  to  envy  me. 

The  proposal  of  a  reference,  with  which  your  letter  closes,  cannot  be  accepted, 
because  the  terms  of  it  are  ludicrous,  and  Mr.  Garrick  kept  behind  the  curtain  till 
the  play  was  returned.  I  have  much  esteem  for  the  gentlemen  named,  but  must 
take  leave  to  think  myself  a  competent  judge  of  my  own  concerns. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  READ. 


DEAR  SIR,  Jan>  17th>  1773- 

I  have  had  a  touch  of  my  old  complaint,  and  have  not  been  at  the  house  in  an 
evening  but  once  since  the  holidays.  I  have  considered  your  two  pieces  with  the  most 
friendly  care  :  there  is  a  character  and  a  spirit  in  the  dialogue  ;  but,  be  assured,  the 
want,  the  total  want  of  plan,  would  prevent  their  success  upon  the  stage.  Had 
you  a  fable,  I  am  persuaded  you  could  write ;  to  show  you,  therefore,  that  I  do  not 
mean  to  discourage  without  showing  my  regard  for  you,  (for,  notwithstanding  your 
former  mistrusts,  I  am  convinced  you  have  some  liking  to  me,)  I  will  give  you  a 


*  Junius  and  Sir  William  Draper  had  made  this  reference  to  Tiberius  popular.  The  point  is  neatly  given 
at  last  by  Murphy. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  3  X 


522 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


little  plan  of  my  own,*  which  if  you  please  you  shall  execute  under  my  eye,  and 
we  will  settle  it  as  soon  as  you  please.  There  will  be  some  music  necessary,  which 
Dibdin  shall  execute;  and  if  you  will  go  to  work  directly,  it  may  be  prepared  for 
the  next  season.  Be  assured  I  am,  very  truly, 

Your  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

The  next  time  I  play  I  hope  to  see  you,  and  fix  a  time  for  a  conference. 

Endorsed 

“  Copy  of  a  letter  to  Mr.  Read.” 


MR.  T.  F1TZMAURICE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Pall-mall,  Jan.  19th,  1773. 

From  the  time  you  will  receive  this,  which  will  be  probably  about  ten,  till 
two  o’clock,  I  shall  be  sitting  at  Mr.  Dance’s,  where,  if  the  Queen  or  you  have  any 
goodness  in  you,  you  will  come,  to  prevent  this  performance  from  meeting  with  the 
fate  of  Sir  Joshua’s. 

You  are  a  wretch  for  not  letting  me  know  of  your  acting  this  night,  before  I 
had  engaged  company  to  dine  here,  Banks,  Solander,  &cc.  I  did  heartily  wish  almost 
that  all  the  actors,  but  yourself,  might  be  sick  and  not  able  to  perform. 

Please  to  let  me  know  when  you  sit  next  to  Sir  Joshua,  and  I  will  attend  you 
during  the  whole  operation  if  you  will  give  me  leave.  My  duty  to  the  Queen. 

Yours  most  affectionately,  &c. 

T.  Fitzmaurice. 


MR.  HENDERSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Jan.  21st,  1773. 

I  am  honoured  and  obliged  by  your  kind  letter  more  than  I  can  express.  You 
may  be  sure,  Sir,  your  advice  will  always  be  uppermost  in  my  thoughts,  and  influ¬ 
ence  my  conduct.  I  wish  I  could  promise  to  retain  and  improve  by  your  advice 
and  example  in  my  playing,  as  much  as  I  am  confident  my  morals  will  be  what 
your  friendship  would  wish  them.  He  has  some  right  to  assure  you  lie  will  be 
temperate,  for  whom  intemperance  has  no  temptation.  I  have  been  very  injuriously 
represented  to  you,  if  you  have  heard  that  “  idling  and  drinking”  are  amongst  my 
errors. 

“  Tout  le  monde,”  (says  Bruyere,)  “  parle  de  son  coeur,  personne  n’ose  parler  de 
son  esprit.”  You  will  suppose  me,  Sir,  under  this  predicament,  and  that  I  am  among 
the  objects  of  this  Frenchman’s  satire.  But  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  a  man 

*  Nothing  ever  came  of  this,  unless  it  passed  for  Garrick’s,  which  was  not  an  unusual  thing. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


523 


has  some  right  to  talk  of  his  morals,  over  which  he  ought  to  have  power,  when  he  may 
not  speak  of  his  talents,  which  are  not  in  his  choice  to  possess  or  not. 

I  am  glad  that  it  is  your  advice  I  should  read  other  books  than  those  which 
belong  to  my  profession ;  for  reading  is  my  greatest  pleasure,  and  my  reading  has 
been  least  of  all  in  the  drama.  Indeed,  I  was  afraid  I  must  have  relinquished  the 
delight  I  have  from  other  authors,  lest  they  should  have  disturbed  my  more  neces¬ 
sary  and  severer  studies.  Since  I  have  the  sanction  of  your  advice,  Sir,  I  shall  re¬ 
sume  them  without  hesitation. 

I  take  you  at  your  word,  Sir,  and  ask  the  advice  you  was  so  generous  to  offer 
me.  I  played  Hotspur  the  other  night,  and  am  not  at  all  satisfied  with  this  line  as 
it  stands. 

“  Nor  ever  could  the  noble  Mortimer 
Receive  so  many  and  all  willingly 

I  cannot  but  think  the  noble  Mortimer  would  have  received  them  all  willingly ; 
and  therefore  I  proposed  to  have  said,  Nor  ever  could  revolted  Mortimer  have  received 
them  willingly.  There  is  another  line  in  the  same  character  which  to  me  seems  to 
want  correction. 

- -  “  The  time  of  life  is  short, 

To  spend  that  shortness  basely  were  too  long.”t 

I  wish  it  might  be  read, 

“  To  spend  that  shortness  basely  ’twere  too  long.” 

If  I  had  ever  had  the  happiness  to  see  you  play  this  character,  these  questions 
would  have  been  unnecessary,  for,  if  you  choose  to  retain  the  old  text,  I  am  sure  you 
would  have  given  it  such  emphasis  and  accent  as  would  have  satisfied  the  most  criti¬ 
cal  judgment  ;  but  that  happiness  I  never  had,  and  therefore  I  hope  you  will  excuse 
the  freedom  with  which  I  ask  for  your  decision  upon  this  matter. 

There  is  a  report  which  I  wish  the  truth  of,  more  than  that  of  any  report  what¬ 
ever,  namely,  that  you  will  give  the  world  an  edition  of  Shakspearej; — till  yours 
appears,  I  never  expect  to  read  the  genuine  meaning  and  full  force  of  that  wonderful 


*  Henderson  here  shows  the  subtlety  of  his  mind  upon  a  passage  which,  like  another  in  the  same  speech, 
is  carelessly  reasoned.  But  neither  one  nor  the  other  requires  alteration.  The  reasoning  must  be  taken  from 
what  precedes,  as  well  as  these  two  lines  of  Hotspur, 

“  Never  did  base  and  rotten  policy 
Colour  her  working  with  such  deadly  wounds; 

Nor  ever  could  the  noble  Mortimer 
Receive  so  many  and  all  willingly.” 

No  man  colours  the  policy  of  treason  by  serious  wounds.  Mortimer  received  many ,  and  willingly  exposed 
himself  to  them  ;  he  cannot  therefore  be  suspected  of  disinclination  to  the  cause. — Ed. 

t  An  actor,  might,  on  the  stage,  take  this  slight  liberty. — Ed. 

I  Garrick  was  at  bottom  too  wise  to  think  of  such  a  thing.  His  admirers  were  not  critical  enough  to 
discover,  that  it  was  one  thing  in  action  to  show  a  meaning  ;  but  upon  paper  drily  and  grammatically  to 
ascertain  Shakspeare’s,  another  end  very  different  faculty.— Ed. 

3x2 


524 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


man.  There  is  no  one  but  yourself  from  whom  a  correct  edition  can  be  expected,  for 
Shakspeare  looked  not  deeper  into  the  human  heart  and  passions,  than  you  have  into 
Shakspeare. 

Pray,  Sir,  do  you  intend  to  publish  your  alteration  of  “  Hamlet  ?”  I  am  very 
ambitious  to  appear  in  it,  and  very  eager  to  show  the  world  what  can  be  produced  by 
two  of  the  greatest  geniuses  the  world  ever  saw,  Shakspeare  and  Garrick. 

I  must  once  more  recur  to  myself,  (as  great  an  instance  of  the  bathos  as  perhaps 
you  ever  had,)  and  assure  you  that  the  honesty  with  which  I  began  my  theatric  expe¬ 
dition,  shall  never  depart  from  me ;  if  you  will  not  be  ashamed  of  professing  a  friend¬ 
ship  for  one  of  so  moderate  talents  as  myself,  you  shall  never  be  disgraced  by  a  par¬ 
tiality  for  one  of  loose  morals  and  doubtful  integrity  in  me. 

Again,  I  thank  you,  Sir,  for  your  kindness  to  me  ;  and  again,  I  wish  you  every 
happiness  you  can  wish  yourself,  and  am, 

With  great  deference,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  Henderson. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  OLD  FRIEND,  St.  Cross,  Jan.  24th,  17 73. 

People  are  generally  more  explicit,  and  have  time  to  be  plainer  when  they  write, 
than  when  they  speak.  We  seem  to  resolve  to  mistake  one  another  :  I  told  you 
directly,  that  I  had  no  boy  to  name  to  you,  and  only  desired  to  know  the  time  I  must 
determine  in  ;  how  long  you  would  allow  me  to  make  farther  inquiries.  Or  had  not 
you  better  dispose  of  your  money  to  somebody  else,  who  may  have  a  better  oppor¬ 
tunity  at  present  to  make  use  of  it  ?  I  would  know  whether  I  am  to  look  out  any 
farther  for  a  boy  among  the  poor  clergy’s  families ;  and  what  time  you  will  allow  me 
for  my  answer,  or  whether  you  will  give  your  nomination  to  somebody  else  directly. 
I  cannot  recollect  any  thing  of  mine  that  will  suit  your  friend  King.  The  burlesque 
scene  which  you  formerly  had,  and  which  you  returned,  of  “  The  Beggar’s  Garland,” 
would  have  done,  but  I  fear  it  is  too  much  known.  The  very  beggar  grown  old, 
whom  Gay  has  introduced  with  the  player,  might  very  well  be  produced,  as  the 
author,  in  an  introduction  along  with  a  player  or  the  manager  ;  and  he  may  perceive 
the  taste  for  sing-song  to  be  increased  since  his  “  Beggar’s  Opera”  led  them  the  way, 
and  may  have  encouraged  him  to  set  skewer  to  paper  again.  There  may  be  some 
satire  against  the  bad  taste  of  the  town,  that  even  listen  after  Foote’s  intended  pup¬ 
pet-show,  and  the  other  more  costly  puppet-shows  of  both  the  managers. 

In  the  acting ,  they  may  admit  not  a  bad  burlesque  of  the  Italians,  or  at  least  of 
the  modern  manner  of  spoiling  good  old  ballads,  and  giving  Italian  airs  (in  a  double 
sense)  to  songs  and  characters  whose  excellence  is  their  vulgarity  :  (but  this  is  not  the 
spirit  of  the  piece.)  One  song  introducing  another,  without  any  recitative  or  prose 
speaking,  is  the  chief  novelty  of  it.  If  you  think  that  will  do,  I  may  venture  it  at  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


525 


distant  theatre.  I  think  he  goes  in  summer  to  Bristol.  Farther  than  this,  I  cannot 
possibly  go  now,  as  I  have  my  hands  full  of  real  business.  If  you  want  nonsense , 
read  the  following  severe  epigram,  which  disturbed  my  sleep  the  night  before  last, 
and  which  I  am  revenged  on  by  exposing  it  to  you — the  only  satirical  thing  I  ever 
vented  here  on  any  of  my  neighbours.  The  man  is  indeed  a  sad  dog,  and  has  married 
his  wli — .  Your  good-nature  will  think  that  punishment  enough. 

EPIGRAM. 

“  W - ,  with  strange  malignity  of  evil, 

Curses  himself  to  damn  his  wh —  : 

Adultery  sends  her  straighter  to  the  Devil, 

Than  her  high  road  of  life  before. 

Or  does  than  Socrates  this  better  man 
For  public  good  bear  private  strife  ? 

On  earth  the  great  rewards  of  both  began, 

The  public’s  wh —  is  W - ’s  wife.” 

Your’s  ever, 

J.  Hoadly. 

P.  S.  I  have  not  seen  Warton  since  his  return  yet. 

By  a  letter  last  post  from  Dr.  Balguy,  “  Mason’s  Elfrida  has  had  a  great  run  at 
C.  G.  yet  scarce  a  line  in  it  spoken  as  it  ought.  The  general  prepossession  in  favour 
of  the  play,  and  some  pretty  music  composed  by  Dr.  A.  for  the  choruses,  have  done  all. 
Mr.  G.  acquitted  himself  in  Ranger  last  week,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  audience ; 
but  this  will  not  prevent  him  from  being  exhibited  by  Foote  in  his  new  puppet-show.” 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  Feb.  8th,  17 73. 

I  lament  that  you  thought  it  expedient  (to  have)  quite  done  with  Ranger  ;  but 
like  C.  Johnson,  you  die  a  martyr  to  the  rotundity  of  your  parts.  You  bid  me  send 
you  a  list  of  parts,  to  revive  one.  I  am  a  man  much  prejudiced  in  favour  of  “The 
Suspicious  Husband.”  That  part  deserves  as  good  an  actor  as  he  that  plays  Kitely  ; 
and  has  never  been  attempted ,  I  may  say,  since  Bridgewater  felt  it.  I  have  heard  Ben 
say,  he  never  rehearsed  it  without  tears.  Wood  and  Wire  have  acted  it  ever  since. 
What  think  you  of  Falstaff,  if  you  dare,  with  a  prologue  about  your  growing^//  and 
facetious  ?  What  think  you  of  the  powers  of  Tragedy  and  Comedy  at  once  united 
in  that  face  of  yours,  when  exemplified  in  the  same  breath  in  Don  Manuel,  in  “  She 
Would,  and  She  Would  Not  ?”  or  the  piteous  plight  of  features  in  the  laughable 
Barnaby  Brittle ;  if  you  can  castrate  that  play  without  unmanning  it  ?  What  of 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


526 


A  olpone,  with  the  fun  you  would  make  of  the  mountebank  ?  In  short,  you  have 
exhausted  Nature  and  Fancy. 

“  Nature’s  powers  you  have  shown, 

Making  her’s  to  seem  your  own  ; 

Fancy's  fairy  ground  you  've  trod, 

And  command  her  magic  rod  ; 

Nought  remains  but — Caliban, 

Act  the  monster  if  you  can.” 

In  return  for  this,  I  expect  you  to  send  me  the  wit  between  Dr.  Cadogan  and 
you,  which  made  his  daughter  cry  at  Mr.  AVilmot’s.  We  are  much  better  than  we 
lately  had  reason  to  expect,  and  very  much  Mrs.  and  Mr.  Garrick’s,  so — 

J.  and  E.  Hoadly. 


MR.  R.  KELLY  TO  HUGH  KELLY,  ESQ. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Feb.  11th,  1773. 

Your  very  friendly  letter  I  received,  and  must  say  I  am  unhappy  in  having  no 
prospect  of  making  any  suitable  return  to  your  extreme  civility  and  politeness,  other 
than  my  sincere  thanks  and  wannest  wishes.  My  friend,  Mr.  Lewis,  I  am  confident, 
(at  least  if  I  can  judge  from  the  universal  applause  he  has  met  here,)  will  prove  a 
valuable  acquisition  to  Mr.  Garrick ;  he  feels,  as  I  am  certain  every  man  of  senti- 
ment  must,  the  force  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  judgment,  candour,  and  generosity ;  and  begs 
leave  to  decline  any  terms  of  agreement,  leaving  that  entirely  to  his  own  breast.  Mr. 
Garrick  has  ever  been  foremost  to  encourage  any  dawning  of  merit,  and  Mr.  Lewis 
will  with  great  pleasure  implicitly  submit  to  his  decision.  You  desire  I  may  not  mind 
your  blots  or  inaccuracies  ;  be  assured  your  blots  are  beauties  to  me,  your  judgment 
cannot  be  arraigned,  your  correctness  is  established,  and  if  any  little  negligence 
should  appear,  I  must  consider  it  as  a  compliment,  namely,  your  divesting  yourself 
of  form  and  restraint,  and  doing  me  the  honour  to  treat  me  with  the  frankness  and 
freedom  of  a  friend.  I  have  only  to  regret  I  cannot  see  more  of  them  ;  but  that  can 
hardly  be  expected  when  I  consider  the  obscurity  in  which  I  am  comparatively 
placed,  and  the  many  objects  of  more  consequence  which  must  necessarily  engage 
your  attention.  However,  as  an  early  admirer  and  an  invariable  friend  of  yours,  I 
am  persuaded  my  sincerity  needs  only  to  be  known,  to  obtain  (from  worth  like  yours) 
now  and  then  at  a  leisure-hour  the  favour  of  a  line.  I  have  read  a  long  account  in 
“  The  Ledger”  of  the  transaction  between  Dibdin,  author  of  the  piece  you  mention, 
in  conjunction  with  one  Aiekin  an  actor,  and  the  printer:  if  the  facts  be  as  they  are 
stated  there,  the  balance  seems  to  be  in  favour  of  the  printer ;  on  the  other  hand,  I 
think  it  illiberal  (though  Bickerstaff’s  character  be  odious)  to  suppress  the  produc¬ 
tion  if  it  has  merit,  and  still  worse  as  the  suspicion  was  wrongly  grounded,  which  it 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


527 


seems  was  the  case,  by  Dibdin  owning  himself  the  author ;  — but  the  public  is  a  many¬ 
headed  monster  and  hard  to  please.*  You  have  enclosed  a  list  of  the  principal  parts 
in  which  Mr.  Lewis  has  appeared  with  general  approbation ;  I  shall  avoid  entering 
into  farther  particulars,  lest  your  good-nature  should  consider  me  more  as  the  friend 
than  the  critic ;  indeed,  the  former  is  the  character  I  should  wish  most  to  appear  in ; 
partiality  in  this  case  may  be  pardoned,  but  can  little  avail  the  person  we  wish  to 
recommend,  so  I  shall  leave  him  to  plead  his  own  cause. 

Y  ras  I  here  to  say  half  how  well  I  think  of  you,  I  fear  I  should  incur  censure  as 
a  flatterer ;  and  be  assured  it  is  not  my  character.  I  heartily  wish  some  accident  (not 
to  your  prejudice)  would  blow  you  over  here  to  spend  one  month  ;  but  fearing  that 
unlikely,  must  content  myself  with  toasting  your  health  as  often  as  I  am  able  to 
purchase  a  bottle  of  wine,  or  until  I  have  resolution  to  make  a  trip  to  London,  which 
I  have  been  threatening  several  years.  I  remain, 

Dear  Sir,  with  great  sincerity,  respect,  and  esteem. 

Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

Richard  Kelly. 

Mr.  Lewis  waits  your  farther  instructions,  vdiich  he  will  punctually  observe,  as 
to  time,  place,  &c.  I  delivered  your  compliments  to  Mr.  Hoey,  who  returns  his,  and 
says  he  intends  shortly  to  write  to  you. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  about  Mr.  Lewis  the  actor  in 
Ireland,  to  Mr.  Kelly.” 


DR.  GOLDSMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  6th,  1773. 

I  ask  you  many  pardons  for  the  trouble  I  gave  you  of  yesterday.  Upon  more 
mature  deliberation,  and  the  advice  of  a  sensible  friend,  I  began  to  think  it  indelicate 
in  me  to  throw  upon  you  the  odium  of  confirming  Mr.  Colman’s  sentence.  I  there¬ 
fore  request  you  will  send  my  playt  by  my  servant  back;  for  having  been  assured 
of  having  it  acted  at  the  other  house,  though  I  confess  yours  in  every  respect  more 
to  my  wish,  yet  it  would  be  folly  in  me  to  forego  an  advantage  which  lies  in  my 
power  of  appealing  from  Mr.  Colman’s  opinion  to  the  judgment  of  the  town.  I 
entreat,  if  not  too  late,  you  will  keep  this  affair  a  secret  for  some  time, 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 
Endorsed,  OLIVER  GOLDSMITH. 

“  Dr.  Goldsmith  about  his  play.” 

*  This  refers  to  a  comic  opera  called  “  The  Wedding  Ring.”  The  report  of  BickerstafTs  having  written 
the  piece  produced  the  most  violent  tumult  in  the  play-house.  At  length  Charles  Dibdin,  the  composer  of 
the  music,  was  forced  to  appear,  and  from  the  stage  acknowledge  himself  the  author  of  both  dialogue  and 
airs,  which  restored  the  harmony  of  the  audience. — Ed. 

f  “  She  Stoops  to  Conquer.” — Ed. 


528 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  March  2nd,  1773. 

Every  part  of  your  last  obliging  letter,  except  that  which  mentions  the  gout  in 
your  fingers,  gave  me  the  greatest  pleasure.  I  heartily  wish  you  free  from  every 
complaint,  and  believe  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  King’s  dominions  who  does  not  join 
in  the  wish.  You  delight  me  much  by  the  good  accounts  you  give  me  of  my 
tragedy’s  reception,  with  so  many  emunct  noses.  It  had  your  warm  approbation 
long  ago ;  and  I  had  little  doubt  of  its  reception  with  the  gentlemen  you  mention, 
for  you  are  no  flatterer.  I  could  hardly  have  expected  Mr.  Fox  would  have  had 
leisure  in  these  bustling  times  not  only  to  read  but  to  command  my  favourite  piece. 
He  heard  it  poorly  read  by  the  author  at  Mr.  Conolly’s,  when  his  active  genius  was 
somewhat  subdued  under  the  influence  of  above  two  quarts  of  cold  claret,  after  a 
full  dinner,  and  a  pretty  warm  debate,  in  which  he  took  the  lead  with  his  usual 
energy.  May  I  request  you  will  make  my  acknowledgments  acceptable  to  him. 
If  I  had  any  weight  with  you,  I  should  also  request  you  would  take  into  your  grace 
and  favour  his  divine  aunt,  Lady  Louisa  Conolly ;  make  some  pleasant  parties  for  her, 
or  make  some  dull  parties  where  she  may  be  pleasant,  by  adding  yourself  to  the  com¬ 
pany.  If  there  is  the  smallest  flaw  in  her  heart,  manners,  or  temper,  her  Ladyship 
is  a  better  actress  than  Mrs.  Gardiner.  You  have  heard  much,  no  doubt,  about  our 
“  Macbeth.”  The  second  night  of  the  representation,  Mrs.  Gardiner  surprised  even 
me,  who  have  long  thought  of  her  with  the  affectionate  partiality  of  a  brother.  The 
language  of  Lady  Macbeth  is  so  peculiar,  that  I  think  it  no  easy  matter  to  convey 
the  mere  meaning  of  the  author :  she  seemed  to  me  to  give  the  full  sense  and  spirit 
of  every  passage ;  deportment,  countenance,  and  articulation  (notwithstanding  a 
natural  lisp)  excellently.  On  the  first  night,  there  was  such  a  hurricane  of  wind 
and  rain,  that  the  noise  seemed  at  times  to  confound  us  all.  She  spoke  an  epilogue, 
which  I  understand  you  have  seen,  admirably.  It  is  rather  longer  than  the  usual 
length,  but  her  manner  made  us  think  it  much  too  short.  AVhen  I  can  find  a  copy 
of  an  indifferent  prologue  hammered  out  by  me  in  a  short  time,  I  will  venture  to 
send  it  to  you ;  not  for  your  approbation,  but  your  comfort,  should  you  at  any  time 
think  of  the  worst  of  your  own  in  a  fit  of  the  spleen.  I  have  seen  with  a  kind  of 
invidious  regret  an  excellent  epilogue  of  yours  to  the  tragedy  of  “  Alfred as  to 
the  tragedy  itself,  it  is  so  contemptible,  that  I  should  not  have  thought  the  author  of 
“  Douglas”  would  have  tarnished  his  fame  by  suffering  it  to  appear  (a  few  passages 
excepted).  That  epilogue,  with  a  few  slight  alterations,  would  have  done  honour  to 
what  you  are  pleased  to  say  is  considered  as  my  master-piece,  “  The  Law  of  Lom¬ 
bardy.”  I  hope  you  will  give  it  as  bright  a  tail-piece  about  the  middle  of  next 
January.  Not  a  word  yet  from  Mr.  Rd.  By.  Sheridan.  I  request,  dear  Sir,  you 
will  make  my  acknowledgments  to  him  for  his  favourable  opinion  of  me,  and  beg 
he  may  not  trouble  himself  with  answering  my  letter,  or  with  reproaching  himself 
for  not  doing  it. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


529 


Since  you  are  so  good  to  desire  it,  I  will  certainly  take  the  liberty  of  sending  you 
some  alterations  which  seem  to  me  necessary,  and  when  Mr.  Sheridan  sees  them,  I 
am  persuaded  he  will  think  them  improvements.  In  part  of  the  first  act,  I  mean  to 
strike  out  some  superfluous  poetry ;  to  insert  a  speech  of  about  ten  lines  in  the  part  of 
Berino,  in  the  last  scene,  between  him  and  Paladore,  in  the  same  act ;  a  short  passage 
or  two  in  the  council  scene,  third  act,  a  little  to  enliven  the  first  senator’s  exposition 
of  the  law  ;  and  to  make  perhaps  some  retrenchments  in  the  fifth  act :  the  incident 
I  disapproved,  namely,  Berino’s  killing  Ascanio,  I  suppose  is  struck  out  already  by 
your  hand.  There  is  ample  time  for  more  alterations  between  this  and  the  season 
for  preparation,  should  more  occur  to  me,  or  be  suggested  by  friends. 

I  must  again  recall  you  to  the  subject  of  “  Macbeth for  upon  looking  over  my 
paper,  I  find  I  have  said  nothing  but  about  Mrs.  Gardiner.  As  to  myself,  I  played, 
in  my  own  judgment,  some  parts  very  poorly,  and  others  better  than  I  expected.  I 
had  little  possession  of  myself  (on  the  second  night  which  I  remember  best)  till  after 
the  murder  of  Duncan.  That  scene,  the  whole  banquet-scene,  and  the  fifth  act,  were 
my  best.  I  wanted  solemnity  of  voice  in  some  of  the  deep  moral  reflections  ;  and 
my  transitions  might  have  been  more  artful. 

The  reward  I  met  with  in  one  of  the  libellous  papers  here,  was  a  sharp  malignant 
letter,  addressed  to  the  Thane  of  Cawdor,  to  persuade  me  and  the  public  that  I  never 
could  appear  but  to  my  disgrace  in  any  but  a  fictitious  character.  I  felt  at  first  some 
little  resentment,  but  it  soon  subsided,  when  I  considered  that  I  had  formerly  dipped 
my  pen  in  the  mud  of  party  ;  and  when  I  knew  that  the  person  generally  supposed  to 
be  the  author  could  have  no  motive  for  such  an  attack  but  the  hope  of  assisting  a  bad 
cause  in  an  election  at  present  before  a  committee,  in  which  I  am  bound  to  take  an 
active  part  as  a  nominee  for  my  friend  Mr.  Hutchinson.  I  do  not  send  you  the  libel, 
because  it  might  probably  fall  into  hands  not  so  partial  as  yours  to  the  Thane  of  Caw¬ 
dor  ;  but  I  trouble  you  with  this  particular,  hoping  that  if  the  libel  should  appear  in 
the  English  papers,  or  be  talked  of  in  your  presence,  you  will  be  so  good  to  assign  the 
cause  I  have  mentioned ;  which  I  have  no  doubt  to  be  the  true  one.  Most  other 
characters  in  the  play  of  Macbeth  were  very  well  sustained — particularly  Hecate,  by 
Mr.  Swan  ;  Malcolm,  by  Mr.  Hutchinson  ;  and  Ross  by  a  very  amiable  young  gentle¬ 
man,  Mr.  Corry.  The  last  and  the  second  have  some  peculiar  advantages  in  grace, 
person,  and  countenance.  In  the  farce  of  “  The  Citizen,”  Miss  Gardiner,  in  Maria, 
had  very  uncommon  spirit,  archness,  and  humour ;  her  air,  countenance,  and  figure 
are  very  engaging.  A  young  brother  of  Mr.  Gardiner,  Mr.  Robert  Gardiner, 
played  old  Philpot  with  such  seemingly  unconscious  drollery,  that  I  think  if  you 
had  been  present  he  would  have  made  your  lungs  crow  like  chanticleer.  Mr.  Bushe, 
in  young  Philpot,  was  the  envy  of  every  genuine  blackguard  who  was  present.  He 
was  a  very  humorous  blackguard  ;  but  he  was  a  Dublin  one.  I  must  beg  you  to  read 
what  follows  seriously,  and  to  yourself. 

Though  my  health  is  at  present  better  than  I  could  expect,  considering  my  former 
abuse  of  constitution,  a  much  stronger  man  than  myself  may  not  five  to  see  the 
VOL.  i.  3  Y 


530 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


golden  fruit  which  is  not  to  ripen  in  loss  than  a  twelvemonth.  Should  it  therefore 
please  God  to  cut  me  off  before  that  time,  you  will  he  so  good  to  take  care  that  all 
the  profits  fairly  mine  from  the  “  Law  of  Lombardy”  be  at  the  disposal  of  my  wife, 
should  she  survive  me.  1  have  yet  many  unpaid  debts,  and  1  rely  so  entirely  upon 
her  honour  and  affection,  that  I  know  she  will,  to  the  best  of  her  power,  and  con¬ 
formably  to  my  desire,  discharge  them.  I  have  also  great  hopes  that  the  tragedy  of 
“  Vitellia”  may  make  its  appearance,  not  unprofitably  to  the  manager  of  some  thea¬ 
tre,  and  myself,  next  winter.  The  produce  of  that  piece,  also,  (should  there  be  any) 
I  wish,  in  case  of  my  death,  to  be  disposed  of  in  the  same  manner.  You  have  always 
been  her  friend,  and  I  am  certain  are  both  able  and  willing  to  assist  her  in  every  good 
office.  I  shall  have  by  me  an  account  of  such  debts  as  I  remember ;  and  in  case  of 
the  greatest  of  all  misfortunes,  her  death  before  me.  I  shall  find  a  friend  here  who 
will  communicate  with  you  upon  this  subject. 

Our  friend  Tighe  is  much  engaged  in  his  office  of  Private  Secretary  to  the  Lord 
Lieutenant,  but  is  getting  better  health  and  more  strength  every  day ;  he  is  much 
yours,  and  thinks  Davies  and  Henderson  have  been  imprudent,  and  does  not  counte¬ 
nance  either  the  one  or  the  other  in  what  relates  to  you  in  their  conduct.  As  to  my¬ 
self,  I  have  promised  Davies  the  whole  (if  he  can  pay  for  it)  of  the  copyright  in 
“  The  Law  of  Lombardy.”  He  offered  without  hesitation  to  pay  two  hundred 
pounds.  He  behaved  not  only  honestly,  but  I  think  gratefully  for  his  share  in  the 
profits  of  my  first  play,  “  Braganza  ;”  and  his  late,  or  present  circumstances,  make  me 
wish  to  cheer  him.  We  have  all  our  offences,  but  Davies  has  certainly  none  to  me. 
Pardon  me  for  this  long,  tedious  letter  ;  and  with  Mrs.  Jeplison’s  and  my  sincere  and 
affectionate  compliments  to  you  and  yours,  believe  me  ever, 

Your  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

Tighe  joins  with  me  in  wishing  your  name  may  appear  in  Mr.  Sheridan’s  list  of 
subscribers  to  his  Dictionary. 


MR.  T.  WILKES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dubliu,  March  4,  17^3. 

I  was  favoured  with  yours  this  day.  It  is  certain  that  Barry  has  wrote  to  his 
friends,  that  he  will  be  here  in  May  next,  in  order  to  perform  a  few  nights,  to  pay 
the  demands  on  his  theatre,  and  to  sell  or  let  it :  for  by  all  accounts  Dawson  owes 
him  800/.  The  very  bad  company  he  had  could  not  be  expected  to  meet  with  success  ; 
for  except  Macklin,  there  is  not  one  of  them  worth  forty  shillings  a  week ;  one 
Lewis,  a  very  indifferent  actor,  who  squints,  was  the  principal  performer.  Barr}',  in 
one  of  his  letters,  mentions  re-assuming  the  management  of  his  theatre ;  but  that  is 
only  in  case  his  acting  will  not  clear  off  the  debts.  The  theatre  will  require  a  large 
sum  to  repair  it.  The  town  had  uncommon  expectations  fron  a  young  gentleman 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


531 


from  England :  he  is  in  deacon’s  orders,  and  heir,  it  is  said,  to  a  good  estate  :  he  per¬ 
formed  Anthony  in  “Julius  Cassar”  last  week  with  great  applause:  he  is  a  good 
figure,  has  a  fine  voice,  and  good  action,  but  is  rather  awkward  in  the  rostrum :  he 
had  the  advantage  of  Sheridan,  who  performed  Brutus.  Last  Monday  the  “  Careless 
Husband Sir  Charles  and  Lady  Easy  by  Sheridan  and  Fitzhenry,  they  were  dis¬ 
mally  ridiculous  ;  Wilks  had  great  applause  in  Foppington.  The  “  South  Briton” 
has  been  acted  six  nights ;  I  have  inclosed  an  account  of  it.  It  is  said  you  have  en¬ 
gaged  Mossop  ;  he  did  not  get  above  thirty  pounds  by  his  benefit.  We  have  read 
“  The  Golden  Pippin,”  and  are  surprised  that  Mr.  Colman  would  suffer  such  stuff  to 
be  performed ;  it  would  not  do  here,  notwithstanding  that  the  author  is  an  Irishman. 
I  heard  a  letter  read  yesterday  at  the  College,  from  London,  which  mentions  your  being- 
in  a  good  state  of  health,  that  you  did  wonders  in  “  Lear,”  and  received  uncommon 
applause,  which  gave  me  great  pleasure;  the  same  letter  mentions  Foote’s  puppet- 
show  being  disliked,  and  that  Smith  and  Colman  had  quarrelled.  The  authors  of 
“  Barratariara,”  which  I  sent  you,  have  published  a  new  edition  of  that  work,  with 
very  considerable  additions,  and  a  most  curious  dedication  to  Lord  Townsend ;  this 
edition  was  sold  in  ten  days,  but  Mr.  Wilson,  who  desires  his  compliments  to  you, 
will  send  you  one  in  a  few  days.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  sincerely, 

Your  humble  and  obliged  servant, 

Thomas  Wilkes. 

My  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MR.  T.  WILKES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Saturday,  13th  March,  1773. 

On  Wednesday  night  I  received  the  tragedy  of  “  Alonzo,”  which  I  gave  to  Mr. 
Wilson,  for  which  he  returns  you  many  thanks.  All  the  town  have  it  that  Barry 
and  wife  will  be  here  in  May  ;  but  they  all  agree  that  Mrs.  Barry  has  such  a  dislike 
to  Dublin,  from  her  very  frequent  declarations,  that  she  will  never  be  a  winter  out 
of  London,  which  I  do  believe  :  for  notwithstanding  her  very  great  merit,  one  season 
here  would  most  certainly  let  down  her  consequence :  as  Barry,  by  all  accounts,  is  in 
such  an  uncertain  state  of  health,  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  perform  with  her 
above  once  a  week,  which  would  not  answer  here ;  therefore  she  must  be  obliged  to 

o 

act  with  a  wretched  set,  the  best  of  them  not  worth  forty  shillings  a  week.  Some 
people  talk  of  Ross,  Smith,  and  Lee  being  here ;  they  would  not  do,  therefore  I  am 
not  alone  in  my  opinion,  that  it  is  impossible  she  would  ever  stay  here.  As  to  Mack- 
lin,  he  says  he  is  engaged  at  Covent  Garden  for  next  season :  his  voice  is  very  much 
impaired,  and  he  finds  it  is  full  time  to  quit  us,  from  his  ill-success  this  season. 
Smock-Alley  theatre  does  not  stand  the  manager  in  a  third  of  what  is  paid  for  Crow- 
street.  The  tragedy  of  “  Alzuma”  was  not  believed  to  be  Murphy’s,  from  the 
accounts  of  it  by  the  letters  from  London,  until  it  arrived  here  with  his  name  to  it ; 

3  y  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


532 

however,  it  is  agreed  by  all  who  have  read  it,  that  it  is  much  inferior  to  his  other 
dramatic  pieces.  A  report  has  prevailed  here,  that  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  do  intend 
to  be  here  in  June  next,  and  are  to  reside  at  Mr.  Hutchinson’s.  I  have  had  many 
inquiries  relative  to  this  report ;  pray  is  there  any  truth  in  it  ?  This  is  the  only 
frank  I  have  left,  but  make  no  doubt  your  friend  Mr.  Fitzmaurice  will  supply  you 
with  a  few  to  inclose  to  me:  pray,  Sir,  my  compliments  to  him.  Mr.  Wilson  has 
sent  you  the  book  I  mentioned  to  you  in  my  last ;  also,  by  post,  a  poem  by  a  fellow 
of  our  College,  which  is  said  to  have  great  merit.  I  much  admire  the  epilogue  to 
“  Alonzo  1  think  the  performance  has  very  great  merit. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  sincerely,  your  humble  and  obliged  servant, 

Thos.  Wilkes. 

My  compliments  to  Airs.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  WOODFALL. 

DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Friday,  March  20th,  1773. 

From  what  dropped  from  our  friend  Becket  yesterday,  I  imagine  that  I  am  but 
a  poor  caput  mortuum  among  my  brethren  of  the  Public  Advertiser ;  and  what  is 
worse,  I  have  a  property  the  very  reverse  of  a  boy’s  top,  for  the  more  I  am  whipped, 
the  less  I  can  spin.  I  must  therefore  desire  you  to  dispose  of  my  share  to  any  gen¬ 
tleman  who  has  more  time  and  talents-  to  serve  the  paper  and  the  publisher,  though 
no  one  can  wish  better  to  both  than,  Dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  shall  have  no  objection  to  give  up  the  dividend  too,  which  I  have  received. 

Endorsed, 

“  Answer  to  Woodfall’s  murmuring 
to  Becket,  March  20tb,  1773.” 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  April  16th,  1773. 

I  have  been  so  hurried  lately  in  finishing  off  the  Bishop’s  great  work,  (which  you 
see  advertised,)  that  I  have  had  no  time  even  for  you,  whom  I  love  and  esteem,  both 
as  a  man  (you  and  Madam  make  one),  and  as  a  theatrical  man. 

After  two  more  attempts,  I  give  up  all  hopes  of  finding  parsons  and  their  wives 
without  pride.  You  are  at  free  liberty  to  enrich  the  Orphan  Charity,  as  you  in¬ 
tended  ;  and  I  am  not  the  less  obliged  for  your  intentional  charity  to  such  of  our 
clergy  as  I  might  recommend. 

You  have  never  said  a  word  in  answer  to  my  small  list  of  comic  characters,  nor 
(which  a  rhymer  will  not  easily  forgive)  to  my  small  epigrammatical  compliment, 
which  the  poet  thinks  not  the  worst,  though  you  may  take  the  least  notice  of  it. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


533 


You  might  have  told  me  what  wras  the  result.  I  am  told,  that  you  resolve  to  act 
Falstaff  for  one  night ;  which  I  think  I  dared  you  to  do,  but  did  not  expect  you 
would  accept  the  challenge.  I  think  it  not  true ;  but  let  me  hear  about  it  from  one 
who  is  not  only  a  fine  old  Grecian  but  a  bold  Briton. 

-En !  volvenda  dies  has  brought  about  what  I  had  some  apprehensions  would 
never  come  to  pass — a  visit  from  Dr.  Warton :  a  good  deal  shattered  both  by  the 
loss  of  his  wife,  and  a  long  confinement  with  a  miserable  strain.  I  ventured  to  say, 
in  the  too  openness  of  my  heart,  what  all  his  well-wishers  agreed  in,  that  they  hoped 
by  this  time  to  have  seen  a  person  of  some  consequence  (of  the  feminine  gender),  and 
authority,  at  the  head  of  his  large  ungovernable  family,  that  might  have  dined  with 
him,  and  been  looked  upon  as  governess  and  somebody.  I  found  this  was  not  taken 
well ;  neither  do  I  find  more  intended  than  an  additional  help  in  the  school,  with 
some  power  over  his  boys.  So  they  will  come  home  to  mothers  at  Whitsuntide — (who 
must  and  will  be  consulted)  with  ragged  linen  and  lousy  heads.  He  seemed  con¬ 
cerned  at  the  neglect  of  you  in  town ;  but  said  he  was  not  in  a  condition  to  see 
several  he  ought  to  have  visited,  and  Tom  must  answer  for  himself.  I  have  had 
his  leave  for  half-a-dozen  of  his  boys  to  dine  with  us,  but  have  not  seen  him  since. 

Have  you  and  your  dame  a  mind  to  quit  one  Hampton,  (now  you  have  done  all 
you  can  there,)  and  take  a  lease  of  a  sweet  nice  house  and  gardens  down  to  the  water  of 
another  Hampton  (South)  ;  for  such  have  I  purchased  there,  in  case  Madam  out¬ 
stretches  me,  at  no  less  a  price  than  4000/.  It  was  our  poor  friend’s  the  late  General 
Rufane’s,  who  had  built  the  back  part  of  it,  with  a  sweet  room  to  the  garden.  It  is 
indeed  rus  in  urbe,  for  it  opens  to  the  High-street,  as  well  as  to  garden  and  water. 
You  must  depend  upon  my  life,  and  yet  pay  160/.  per  ann.  That ’s  all.  Madam  joins 
in  all  respects  with,  dear  David,  Yours  affectionately, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Bath,  April  17th,  1773. 

Have  you  charity  enough  to  give  me  a  line  to  inform  me  whether  I  am  to  be 
undone  or  no?  You  may  safely.  I  never  mentioned  any  thing  of  consequence,  nor 
did  the  parties  concerned  know  a  syllable  of  my  going  to  Grosvenor-square,  nor  shall 
of  any  news  you  send  me.  I  hear  some  of  our  folks  talk  very  confidently  of  fifty 
nights  at  least  next  winter,  quod  Dii  prohibeant !  I  almost  wish  I  had  quite  washed 
my  hands  of  it :  it  is  not  pleasant  to  be  in  the  suds. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH. 

MADAM,  1773. 

A  fit  of  the  gravel  has  prevented  me  from  doing  any  thing,  or  you  should  have 
heard  again  from  me  before  this.  Let  me  assure  you  that  I  am  not  in  the  least  hurt 


,534 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


by  your  opposition  to  my  remarks,  or  surprised  that  your  friends  think  differ¬ 
ently  from  me ;  it  is  very  natural  for  an  author  to  be  partial,  and  very  common 
for  the  friends  of  the  author  to  be  mistaken  or  insincere :  at  the  same  time  I  most 
readily  subscribe  to  the  fallibility  of  managers.  I  have  indeed  hitherto  been  of  the 
same  opinion  with  the  public  in  your  affairs,  but  have  always  with  great  reluctance 
differed  with  you  and  your  friends.  Though  the  general  tenour  of  your  letter  is  most 
polite  and  flattering,  yet  there  is  one  expression  in  it  which  cancels  every  expression 
of  kindness  and  regard :  viz.  that  you  must  abide  by  my  sentence,  even  though  you 
had  reason  to  fear  that  sentence  was  predetermined.  If  I  was  predetermined  to  refuse 
your  play,  I  am  a  very  unjust  manager  and  a  very  dishonest  man,  nor  can  I  possibly 
conceive  how  I  have  deserved  this  hard  sentence  from  Mrs.  Griffith. 

Let  me  assure  you,  Madam,  that  the  very  reverse  was  the  truth  ;  and  had  I  thought 
that  any  hints  of  mine  could  have  altered  the  comedy  not  to  have  discredited  us,  by 
my  honour  I  should  have  given  them  with  the  greatest  satisfaction  :  but  notwith¬ 
standing  the  play  has  received  the  stamp  of  approbation  from  great  names,  I  must 
solemnly  declare  that  it  is  my  most  impartial  opinion,  that  there  is  no  groundwork 
in  the  sketch  you  were  pleased  to  put  into  my  hands  to  build  a  play  upon  for  a  suc¬ 
cessful  representation.  I  am,  dear  Madam,  your  most  obedient,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  May  3,  1773. 

As  every  expression  of  regard  in  my  letter  to  you  flowed  from  the  sincerity  of 
my  heart,  I  hasten  to  account  for  that  one,  which  you  say  has  cancelled  them  all. 

Incapable  of  deceit  myself,  I  am  above  suspicion  ;  nor,  indeed,  had  I  ever  reason, 

from  any  part  of  your  conduct  to  me,  or  mine  towards  you,  to  suspect  that  you  were 
my  enemy.  But  it  is  now  above  two  years  since  a  person,  then  in  intimacy  with  you, 
informed  me,  that  he  had  heard  you  declare,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  “  that  you 
would  never,  on  any  condition,  bring  out  any  piece  of  mine,”  with  many  expressions 
of  dislike  and  disregard.  This,  Sir,  has,  for  the  time  mentioned,  prevented  even  my 
paying  my  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you ;  as  I  would  rather  submit  to  the  self- 
denial  of  not  seeing  you,  than  obtrude  where  I  had  reason  to  fear  my  visits  might 
not  be  agreeable.  This,  upon  my  honour,  is  truth,  and  from  this  foundation  alone 

arose  the  expression  which  has  offended  you.  I  am  very  sorry  I  happened  to  make 

use  of  it ;  as  I  can,  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  subscribe  myself, 


E.  Griffith. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


535 


DR.  IIAWKESWORTH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  May  6th,  1773. 

I  am  extremely  sorry  to  hear  that  I  have  incurred  your  censure  by  the  sale  of  my 
work,  without  submitting  the  conditions  to  Becket.  I  shall  state  the  facts  to  you, 
and  I  am  confident  that  if  you  did  not  wish  me  to  sacrifice  my  interest  to  that  of 
Becket,  you  will  acquit  me.  Having  had  applications  from  half  the  booksellers  in 
London,  none  of  whom  offered  me  more  than  five  thousand  pounds,  without  allow¬ 
ing  me  a  single  copy,  Mr.  Strahan  offered  me  six  thousand,  and  to  furnish  me  with 
all  the  copies  that  I  had  engaged  to  give  away,  which  being  five-and-twenty, 
amounted  to  seventy-five  pounds.  I  was  not  then  unmindful  of  your  recommenda¬ 
tion  ;  but,  knowing  that  Becket  had  no  property — that  if  you  should  engage  on  his  be¬ 
half  to  pay  me  six  thousand  pounds,  on  the  contingency  of  his  being  enabled,  by  the 
sale  of  the  book,  to  repay  it,  it  would  reduce  you  to  a  disagreeable  dilemma,  I  thought 
it  a  friendly  part  to  prevent  your  coming  into  such  a  situation.  However,  supposing 
that  you  might  engage  for  one  thousand  five  hundred  pounds  without  an  incon¬ 
venience  that  you  would  much  wish  to  avoid,  I  told  Strahan  that  I  wished  to  give 
Becket  the  option  of  a  fourth.  To  this  he  instantly  replied,  that  with  Becket 
he  would  have  no  concern,  and  that  I  must  either  relinquish  his  offer  or  give  up 
Becket :  thus,  you  see,  my  interest  was  pitted  against  Becket’s  :  I  supposed  you 
would  not  wish  that  my  interest  should  be  sacrificed  to  Becket’s,  and  therefore  I 
closed  at  once  with  Strahan’s  proposal. 

When  Becket  came  to  me  yesterday  at  the  India-house,  and  told  me  he  hoped  to 
have  had  a  share  of  my  book,  I  asked  him  what  he  thought  the  whole  was  worth  ;  he 
said  two  thousand  pounds.  I  asked  him  if  he  would  be  willing  to  give  one  thousand 
for  a  fourth  part ;  he  said  he  could  not  answer  without  making  a  calculation.  I  then 
said  I  had  sold  the  whole  for  six  thousand,  and  that  I  dared  to  say  he  would 
not  think  it  eligible  to  give  one  thousand  five  hundred  pounds  for  a  fourth,  if  it  was 
to  be  had ;  to  which  he  signified  his  assent.  Now,  in  the  whole  of  this  affair,  I  think 
I  have  acted  under  the  sense  of  your  friendship,  and  with  the  best  return  I  could 
make  to  it,  consistent  with  the  regard  which  I  supposed  you  to  have  to  my  interest, 
which  I  never  could  imagine  you  meant  to  sacrifice  to  that  of  Becket  in  my  own 
affair : — if  you  think  otherwise,  I  am  ready  to  make  you  any  satisfaction  in  my  power ; 
no  pecuniary  advantage  being,  in  my  estimation,  equivalent  to  acquitting  the  obliga¬ 
tions  of  friendship,  or  approving  myself, 

Your  ever  faithful  and  affectionate, 

J.  Hawkesworth.* 

*  The  work  here  spoken  of  was  the  “  Voyages  to  the  South  Seas.”  Hawkesworth  literally  died  of  pros¬ 
perity,  six  months  after  writing  the  present  letter. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


536 


DR.  HAWKESWORTH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Great  Ormond-street,  May  6th,  1773. 

Supposing  that  you  was  no  farther  concerned  in  my  transaction  with  Strahan, 
than  as  it  affected  Becket,  I  wrote  my  last  letter  under  the  impression  of  that 
sentiment.  If  Becket  is  out  of  the  question,  I  hesitate  not  to  acknowledge  that  1 
failed  in  what  I  trust  you  will  look  upon  more  as  a  matter  of  form  than  as  an  instance 
of  want  of  affection  or  a  sense  of  your  friendship,  the  strength  of  which  is  such  as 
makes  me  digest,  though  with  difficulty,  the  terms  of  what  1  flatter  myself  was  a 
hasty  billet.  Recollect,  my  dear  Sir,  that  pressed  as  I  was  by  multifarious  business, 
and  by  the  most  important  transaction  of  my  life,  it  was  not  unnatural  for  me  to 
look  upon  that  as  but  a  small  trespass  upon  your  friendship,  the  tendency  of  which 
was  to  confirm  with  the  greater  speed  and  certainty,  what  your  conduct  in  the 
beginning  of  this  affair  showed  a  flattering  and  ardent  desire  of  procuring  for  me. 
When  I  readily  confess  that  the  attention  you  expected  should  have  been  paid  you, 
and  when  I  assure  you  that  it  was  my  situation,  and  not  my  will,  that  occasioned  the 
omission,  I  trust  it  will  not  be  disagreeable  to  you  to  see  that,  notwithstanding  the 
cold  expressions  of  your  note,  I  am  once  more  desirous  to  subscribe  myself,  with 
cordiality  and  friendship,  My  dear  Sir,  your  truly  affectionate, 

John  Hawkesworth. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  HAWKESWORTH. 


May  6th,  1773. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  compliments  to  Dr.  Hawkesworth,  and  as  he  has  the 
misfortune  to  differ  totally  with  him  in  opinion  upon  the  subject  of  his  letter,  he 
will  not  give  the  Doctor  the  trouble,  nor  himself  the  pain,  to  enter  into  any  farther 
discussion  of  this  very  disagreeable  business. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  of  Dr.  Hawkesworth.  My  answer 
to  his  about  his  breach  of  promise.” 


THE  REV.  MR.  MATY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Paris,  May  20th,  1773. 

Well  acquainted  as  I  am  with  your  disposition  to  receive  the  visits  you  have 
so  great  a  share  in  procuring  us,  I  should  not  have  ventured  of  myself  to  give  Mr. 
Budin,  who  is  a  man  of  letters,  an  introduction  to  you,  but  that  I  am  desired  to  take 
poor  Madam  Grinai’s  place,  who  would  most  gladly  have  filled  it  herself  if  she  had 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


537 


been  able,  but  she  is  almost  constantly  confined  to  her  bed,  and  though  her  friends 
still  hope  she  will  get  over  it,  suffers  cruelly  from  what  they  call  here  an  obstruction. 

If  I  had  only  consulted  the  wishes  she  forms  with  all  those  I  see,  or  indeed  fol¬ 
lowed  the  popular  language  of  the  country,  which  I  should  have  been  more  likely  to  do 
before  I  received  some  of  your  last  lessons,  I  should  say,  let  the  fund  go  to  the  Devil, 
and  come  and  see  Mademoiselle  Raucourt.  I  now  say,  play  for  the  fund,  finish  what¬ 
ever  is  begun  at  Hampton,  answer  as  many  authors  as  you  can,  and  then,  if  you  are 
very  well,  and  the  weather  very  mild,  and  Mrs.  Garrick  very  well  disposed  to  come 
with  you,  come  and  see  Mademoiselle  Raucourt.  I  have  seen  her  three  times,  as  you 
desired  I  would,  before  I  ventured  to  pronounce ;  in  “  Pulcherie,”  in  “  Heraclius,”  in 
“  Eriphile,”  in  “  Iphigenie,”  and  in  “  Dido.”  In  the  two  first  parts  I  found  her  on  the 
whole  but  little  above  mediocre ;  but  in  the  last  she  gave  me  real,  and  sometimes 
original  pleasure.  She  certainly  possesses  all  the  external  advantages  to  a  very  high 
degree ;  is  certainly  handsome,  has  an  expressive  countenance,  a  most  harmonious 
voice,  a  fine  figure,  and  walks  well.  To  this  she  adds  that  rare  flexibility  of  muscles 
which  enables  her  to  vary  her  countenance  at  pleasure,  extreme  attention  to  business 
when  she  is  not  speaking,  now  and  then  very  striking  and  proper  action,  and  rather 
oftener  very  happy  movements  of  passion.  With  all  this,  (besides  that  it  is  impossible 
to  determine  upon  such  short  acquaintance  how  far  she  may  have  been  taught  every 
thing  but  her  talent  for  expression,  which  is  certainly  her  own  ;)  she  has  faults  that 
prevent  my  feeling  that  pleasure  which  I  have  often  had  from  inferior  actresses.  The 
principle  of  these  are  a  great  monotony,  insufferable  slowness,  general,  though  not 
constant  want  of  the  pathetic,  and  above  all,  the  common  fault  of  young  actors,  but 
which  she  carries  farther  than  any  of  them,  the  wish  to  mark  every  word,  and  almost 
every  syllable  of  a  sentence.  You  will  judge  what  part  is  owing  to  inexperience, 
what  is  incurable,  what  will  grow  worse  in  the  vitiated  soil  she  is  planted  in :  it  is 
but  justice  to  own  her  fame  could  not  have  been  in  the  hands  of  a  cooler  panegyrist ; 
but  I  promised  you  an  account  of  my  feelings,  and  “  encore  un  coup,  ce  n’est  pas  ma 
faute  si  vous  m’avez  rendu  difficile.”  I  fear  to  say  too  little,  and  must  therefore  add, 
nothing  ever  equalled  the  crowds  of  all  ranks  that  flock  to  see  her ;  and  that  those 
whom  at  my  warmest  instants  of  self-love  I  shall  always  acknowledge  for  my  supe¬ 
riors  in  every  point  of  taste,  see  her  with  much  more  favourable  eyes  than  I  can  yet 
persuade  myself  to  do.  I  shall  make  it  my  business  to  follow  her  close,  and  really 
hope  to  give  you  a  better  account  when  we  meet. 

You  have  so  lately  seen  Suard,  who  I  hope  has  seen  you,  that  there  can  be  little 
news  from  hence  you  have  not  heard  already.  Grimm  is  gone  to  Russia  with  the 
Landgravine  of  Hesse  Darmstadt  and  her  daughters.  I  believe  there  was  some 
notion  that  Caillaud,  who  lias  quitted  the  Paris  stage,  and  only  plays  two  years 
longer  before  the  Court,  would  have  gone  with  or  followed  him,  but  I  don’t  hear  it 
has  taken  place.  The  state  of  letters  is,  as  usual,  a  state  of  war.  The  Voltairists  have 
at  length  raised  a  respectable  antagonist,  one  Clement,  who  in  a  series  of  letters  ad¬ 
dressed  to  Voltaire  himself,  proposes  first  to  examine  all  his  literary  judgments  of 

VOL.  i.  3  z 


538 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


others,  and  then  to  determine  his  own  claims  to  the  rank  lie  fills.  They  are  written 
with  taste,  as  impartially  as  can  be  expected  from  a  rival  author,  and  are  certainly 
very  necessary  to  awaken  those  who  have  a  long  time  seen  all  things  in  Voltaire. 
La  Harpe,  the  author  of  the  Mercure,  starts  on  his  side,  and  from  some  little  things 
I  have  lately  heard  him  read,  and  a  tragedy  which  even  his  enemies  (and  no  man 
either  has  or  deserves  more)  extol,  bids  fair  to  wear  some  of  his  literary  crowns 
after  his  death.  Thomas  has  just  published  all  his  works  in  four  volumes  ;  two  of 
them  consist  of  eloges  known  before,  and  the  other  two  are  taken  up  by  a  history  of 
that  species  of  oratory  from  the  ancient  Egyptians  to  the  present  times,  in  which 
there  are  some  sensible  remarks  and  pleasing  anecdotes.  As  to  the  state  of  the 
theatres,  the  French  Comedy  carries  all  before  it,  the  Opera  is  evidently  upon  its 
last  legs,  and  the  Italian  Comedy  totters.  This  is  as  it  should  be.  We  have  heard 
of  your  last  gala-coat,  and  of  the  pretty  new  trimming  you  put  to  it :  do  us  the 
justice  to  believe  we  all  regret  the  not  having  been  at  your  court  either  of  the  days 
you  wore  it.  You  must  make  us  amends  when  we  come  home,  and  as  you  are  one 
of  the  causes  for  which  we  love  our  country,  be  one  of  the  rewards  for  having  sup¬ 
ported  its  dignity.  Adieu,  my  dear  Sir ;  be  kind  to  Mr.  Budin,  because  he  is  one  of 
Madam  D'Epinai’s  particular  friends,  and  believe  me,  with  very  true  sentiments  of 
esteem,  Your  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

N.  Maty. 

Pray  make  my  compliments  agreeable  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  assure  her,  that 
though  too  awkward  by  nature  for  a  commissioner  myself,  I  shall  make  her  a  most 
zealous  broker,  and  take  care  any  orders  she  sends  me  shall  be  executed  in  the  best 
manner  possible,  without  exacting  any  thing  for  my  brokerage  but  the  honour  and 
pleasure  of  having  obliged  her. 

Mr.  Budin  does  not  come. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  Maty,  at  Paris,  about 
Mademoiselle  Raucourt,  the  new  french  actress. 

May  20th,  1773.  Answered  June  20th.” 


DR.  BEATTIE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Suffolk-street,  No.  27,  Haymarket,  Saturday,  May  22,  17/3. 

I  have  been  two  weeks  in  town,  and  have  often  called  at  the  Adelphi,  but  had 
the  mortification  not  to  find  you  at  home  ;  which  indeed  I  do  not  much  wonder  at, 
as  I  know  you  are  very  much  engaged  at  present.  Mrs.  Yesey  tells  me  you  in¬ 
tended  me  the  honour  of  a  visit  yesterday ;  which  1  suppose  something  has  pre¬ 
vented  ;  however,  I  flatter  myself  we  shall  meet  ere  long. 

I  haATe  two  favours  to  ask,  which  you  must  grant,  if  you  do  not  mean  to  break 
my  heart.  The  first  is,  that  as  soon  as  possible  you  will  give  me  an  opportunity  of 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


539 


paying  you  that  homage,  which  from  every  son  of  Apollo,  whether  bastard  or  legiti¬ 
mate,  you  are  entitled  to  receive ;  the  second,  that  you  would  exert  some  of  those 
magical  powers,  by  which  you  can  transport  us  to  Thebes,  to  Athens,  when  you  will 
and  where,  in  conveying  Mrs.  Beattie  and  me  to  some  snug  corner  in  Drury-lane 
theatre  on  the  26th  current.  Whether  I  can  outlive  the  distresses  of  Lear  when  per¬ 
sonated  by  you,  is  uncertain  ;  for  once  in  the  character  of  Macbeth  you  almost  mur¬ 
dered  me  as  well  as  Duncan  ; — but  I  wish  to  make  a  trial,  and  if  I  fall  a  martyr  to 
Garrick  and  Shakspeare,  1  shall  from  that  circumstance  have  some  chance  of  being 
remembered  as  a  person  who  had  the  feelings  of  a  man,  and  the  imagination  of  a 
poet. 

Airs.  Beattie  joins  me  in  most  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  more  than  I  can  express,  dear  Sir, 

Your  passionate  admirer  and  most  faithful  servant, 

J.  Beattie. 

Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Beattie  about  Lear,” 

May,  1773. 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Inner  Temple,  May  27th,  1773. 


“  Qu*  tibi  pro  tali 

Praemia  posse  rear  solvi  V 


Instead  of  laboured  thanks,  accept  a  simple  fact. 

Miss  Montgomerys  sat  just  before  us,  and  (in  spite  of  your  admirable  perform¬ 
ance)  it  was  impossible  not  to  watch  their  countenances. 

The  expression  of  the  eldest  was  wonderful,  and  such  as  the  mighty  master  would 
have  smiled  to  see.  She  gazed,  she  panted,  she  grew  pale,  then  again  the  blood  rose 
in  her  cheeks,  she  was  elevated,  she  almost  started  out  of  her  seat,  and  tears  began  to 
J/ow,  &c.  &c. 

Mr.  B.  is  infinitely  obliged  to  you  for  the  most  exquisite  entertainment  he  has 
received  these  eleven  years.  He  saw  “  Lear,”  Anno  1762. 

Your  sincere  and  obedient, 

G.  Tighe. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  May  28th,  1773. 

I  am  extremely  sorry  for  having  given  you  the  pain  or  trouble  of  reading  the 
sketch  of  my  comedy,  for  in  its  present  state  I  consider  it  as  such,  till  it  had  received 
the  stamp  of  approbation  from  greater  names  than  mine — which  it  has  been  fortunate 
enough  to  obtain,  since  I  received  it  back  ; — but  as  it  stands  rejected  by  you,  no  other 

3  z  2 


.340 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


person's  opinion  in  its  favour  can  be  of  any  consequence  to  its  author ;  for  I  shall 
always  hold  my  resolution  of  never  having  any  kind  of  dealing  with  Mr.  Colman. 
I  do  not  therefore  mean  to  make  a  merit  of  saying  that  I  must  abide  by  your  sen¬ 
tence,  even  though  I  had  reason  to  fear  that  sentence  was  predetermined. 

But  as  even  in  criminal  cases,  the  wretch  wrho  stands  condemned,  has  a  right  to 
plead  in  his  vindication,  your  candour  will,  I  hope,  excuse  my  taking  the  liberty  to 
reply  to  your  remarks,  though  rather  apprehensive  that  any  defence  which  I  can 
make  will  not  avail.  In  your  cross-examination,  you  ask  whether  Fret  well  has  not 
a  resemblance  to  Mr.  Colman’s  Mr.  Cross  ?  I  answer,  positively,  no — excepting  their 
both  being  men,  and  both  peevish  ;  and  I  will  venture  to  add,  that  there  are  but  few 
better  comic  situations  on  our  stage,  than  the  meeting  between  Fretwell  and  his  son. 

You  will  pardon  me  for  saying  you  have  mistaken  the  impetuosity  of  Fret  well’s 
passion  for  a  serious  resolution,  wrhere  he  talks  of  blowing  up  his  house  ;  but  if  the 
expression  appeared  too  strong,  it  might  very  easily  have  been  expunged.  Fretwell 
does  not  appear  to  be  really  persuaded  that  his  son  is  mad,  but  rather  wishes  to  per¬ 
suade  himself  and  others  that  he  is  so,  in  order  to  punish  him  for  his  absurd  behaviour  ; 
and  surely,  I  speak  not  from  my  own  opinion,  that  very  circumstance  is  comic.  I 
do  not  by  any  means  think  it  unnatural,  that  some  of  the  younger  part  of  Colonel 
AYoodlys  corps  should  go  in  pursuit  of  him  after  an  absence  of  two  days  ;  and  the 
unsociable  character  of  Fretwell,  joined  to  their  being  refused  entrance,  and  finding 
his  gate  locked,  might  very  probably  occasion  what  you  call  taking  the  house  by 
storm.  So  much  for  Sir  John  : — now  for  his  son,  whom  you  style  “  the  hackneyed 
fop  of  even'  play  and  farce.”  I  consider  the  fop  as  a  species  almost  distinct  from  the 
generality  of  men,  and  in  that  particular  species  there  must  undoubtedly  be  some 
degree  of  similarity  :  the  placing  them  in  different  situations  is  therefore  all  that  can 
be  done  to  mark  the  distinction  between  them ;  and  I  do  not  perceive  the  smallest 
affinity  in  circumstance  between  my  fop,  and  any  one  of  those  you  have  named. 
Besides,  my  dear  Sir,  if  similarity  of  character  was  to  preclude  the  exhibition  of 
dramatic  pieces,  we  should  never  have  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  in  Ranger  and 
Don  John  ;  nor  would  any  other  person  have  been  suffered  to  appear  in  the  part  of 
Mr.  Strictland,  after  having  seen  your  inimitable  Kitely.  I  have  drawn  my  instances 
of  similarity  but  from  one  play,  and  that  an  approved  one  :  but  I  think  I  might  pro¬ 
ceed  on  the  same  plan  with  almost  every  comedy  upon  the  stage ;  and  it  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  so,  for  Xature  is  uniform  in  all  her  works,  and,  if  we  copy  from  her,  there 
must  be  a  resemblance,  which  the  microscopic  eve  of  a  critic  may  possibly  discover. 

There  cannot  possibly  be  a  more  natural  mistake,  again  I  speak  from  authority 
higher  than  mv  own,  than  the  Doctor's  accosting  voung  Fretwell  for  Charlotte:  he 
had  reason  to  expect  her  in  that  very  spot,  accoutred  en  cavalier ;  he  was  therefore 
under  the  influence  of  prepossession  ;  and  supposing  Dodd  to  play  Fretwell,  the  figure 
could  not  possibly  undeceive  him,  allowing  darkness  sufficient  to  conceal  the  face. 

As  to  Charlotte  s  mistaking  Sir  Charles  for  the  Doctor,  she  was  also  prepossessed 
that  it  must  be  him,  and  the  deception  need  not  be  farther  carried  on,  than  while  she 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


541 


makes  her  excuse  for  not  going  off  with  him,  which  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  her  having 
intended  it,  and  Sir  Charles  might  then  discover  himself  without  affecting  to  deceive 
her.  Though,  even  as  it  now  stands,  I  must  say  that  it  is  a  more  probable  mistake 
than  many  which  have  been  suffered  to  pass  in  other  comedies,  where  persons  con¬ 
verse  for  whole  scenes  in  the  plainest  language,  and  yet  affect  to  misunderstand  each 
other.  Not  to  mention  the  last  favourite  comedy,  where  Mr.  Marlow  passes  some 
time  in  conversation  with  the  lady  he  was  going  to  marry,  and  don’t  know  her  again 
in  a  few  hours  after,  because  she  had  taken  off  her  ruffles. 

The  only  likeness  of  character  which  I  confess,  is  that  between  Lady  Dainty  and 
Lady  Languid.  I  am  sorry  for  having  introduced  her,  though  their  situations  and 
conduct  are  totally  distinct ;  hut  I  was  led  into  it  by  having  the  fainting  scene 
related  to  me  as  a  fact,  by  a  person  of  rank  and  undoubted  veracity,  who  strongly 
recommended  it  as  an  incident  proper  for  the  stage ;  so  that  I  may  at  least  urge  in 
my  defence,  that  the  picture  is  drawn  from  the  life. 

The  making  Colonel  Woodly  personate  a  Mate,  was  taken  from  a  hint  long  since 
given  me  by  her  Grace  of  Bedford,  whom  I  highly  honour,  and  should  have  been 
happy  to  have  obeyed ;  and  had  you,  my  dear  Sir,  thought  proper  to  have  adopted 
this  unfinished  piece  of  mine,  I  have  no  doubt  but  we  should  have  found  comic 
situations,  for  this  at  least  new  character  upon  our  stage.  I  am  not  now  to  learn, 
that,  without  your  aid,  few  are  the  comedies  that  could  succeed  ;  and  as  I  was  once  so 
happy  as  to  receive  your  friendly  assistance  in  that  way,  and  unconscious  of  ever 
having  even  in  thought  forfeited  my  claim  to  your  kindness,  I  feel  a  very  sensible 
mortification  from  your  withdrawing  it,  particularly  as  I  did  not  attempt  to  press 
you  in  time,  but  would  with  the  utmost  pleasure  have  waited  your  leisure  ;  perfectly 
content,  if  at  any  time  I  might  have  hoped  for  the  honour  and  happiness  of  your 
approbation. 

Long  as  my  letter  is,  I  cannot  conclude  without  expressing  my  joy  at  hearing 
that  you  mean  to  perform  at  least  another  year:  long,  very  long,  and  very  happy  do  I 
sincerely  wish  your  years  may  be,  though  I  were  never  to  have  the  happiness  of 
seeing  you ;  for  merit  like  yours  must  claim  the  regard  even  of  those  who  are  not 
fortunate  enough  to  possess  any  portion  of  yours. 

I  shall  make  my  son  happy  when  I  write,  by  mentioning  your  obliging  remem¬ 
brance.  Mr.  Griffith  joins  me  in  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you,  and  I 
am  with  unalterable  esteem,  your  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 


E.  Griffith. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Griffith’s  letters  about  a  play, 
and  my  answer.” 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


7>\2 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  June  3rd,  1773. 

I  have  received  another  letter  from  my  sister,  after  a  thorough  search  among  the 
Doctor’s  papers,  and  no  “  Country  Burial”  is  to  be  found.  She  therefore  begs  that  you 
would  give  yourself  the  same  trouble ;  and  blames  nobody  but  herself,  who  was  so 
careless  as  not  to  look  into  the  parcel  returned  by  you,  till  a  great  while  afterwards. 
What  you  mention  of  “  The  Contrast,”  I  cannot  help  thinking  an  impracticable 
scheme ;  especially  as  the  thing  was  originally  so  personal,  even  to  the  use  and  bur¬ 
lesque  of  the  expressions  and  words  of  the  authors.  These,  at  that  time  known  and 
in  people’s  mouths,  now  almost  unknown  and  obsolete.  The  principal  life,  spirit, 
and  vigour  of  the  piece,  (I  mean  the  contrast  between  the  two  opposite  bards  of 
tragedy  and  comedy,)  retailed  out  in  Fielding’s  “  Pasquin,”  and  that  too  well-known 
to  render  the  original  thought  (which  is  the  life  of  it)  either  a  novelty,  or  a  night’s 
entertainment.  The  stage,  by  your  means,  and  the  good  taste  you  have  introduced, 
is  not  so  much  the  subject  of  real  satire  and  burlesque,  as  you  found  it  thirty  years 
ago ;  though  galloping  down  hill  apace,  with  the  help  of  those  false  syrens  who 
should  assist  it.  Music,  Painting,  Mechanics,  &c.  It  is  a  thing  impossible  to  geld  the 
gentleman  of  his  personality,  as  he  would  be  a  mere  capon  without  it ;  but  then  that 
personality  would  not  now  raise  such  a  nest  of  hornets  as  it  did  originally.  If  you 
could  point  out  a  number  of  the  present, faults  of  playwrights,  and  give  them  a  true 
comic  turn  and  of  novelty,  something  might  be  done ;  but  I  despair  of  that.  Let  me 
have  your  real  thoughts  at  leisure. 

Mrs.  Charles  Street  does  not  want  money  so  much  as  she  did,  her  noble  sister 
having,  on  this  great  acquisition  of  fortune,  made  her  a  present  of  300/.  to  renew  her 
lease  under  the  Crown,  and  enabled  her  to  pay  me  that  money  which  I  had  lent  her, 
and  which  I  received  yesterday.  Xot  only  that,  but  Miss  Pris.  has  given  her  sister 
maiden  5000/.,  which  is  now  already  in  her  own  name  in  the  stocks,  entirely  in  her 
own  disposal.  The  very  Matthewses  can  hardly  grudge  her  this  great  fortune.  We 
hope  your  own  health  and  spirits  and  feelings  do  not  give  the  lie  to  your  encomiast 
in  the  papers,  when  you  harangued  the  gods  as  usual  in  Benedict.  For  myself,  I 
have  lately  had  an  attack  of  spasms,  &c.  which  threatened  to  lay  me  up  at  St.  Cross, 
and  did  delay  me  there  above  a  week,  but,  thank  God  !  is  gone  off,  leaving  only  my 
loins  a  little  affected.  Adieu  ! 

J.  H. 

I  and  mine  to  you  and  yours. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  HIS  EXCELLENCY  RICHARD  PENN,  ESQ. 

SIR,  Hampton,  June  10th,  1773. 

Though  I  received  your  letter  some  time  ago, and  had  prepared  to  answer  it  directly, 
yet  finding  that  the  subject  of  it  was  known  all  over  London,  and  that  you  had  taken 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


543 


a  more  certain  method  to  prove  my  age  than  by  my  own  testimony,  I  hope  I  shall  stand 
excused  for  not  obeying  your  Excellency’s  commands  sooner.  You  have  too  much 
good  sense  to  expect  that  I  should  be  sorry  for  the  loss  of  your  wager ;  indeed,  Sir,  I 
had  rather  that  you  had  lost  thousands  for  hundreds,  than  that  I  should  have  been, 
what  you  have  endeavoured  to  make  me,  four  years  older  than  I  am.  Your  Excel¬ 
lency  knows,  that  persons  upon  the  stage,  like  ladies  upon  the  town,  must  endeavour, 
by  dress,  paint,  and  candle-light,  to  set  themselves  off  for  wliat  they  are  not,  and  that  a 
publication  of  registers  would  ruin  the  practice  of  half  the  Antonys  and  Cleopatras  in 
London.  My  age  (thanks  to  your  Excellency’s  proclamation  of  it)  has  been  pub¬ 
lished  with  a  proper  certificate  in  all  the  papers,  so  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  resign 
all  the  love-making,  ravishing  heroes  and  gentlemen  in  the  dramatis  persona?. 

The  ladies,  who  are  very  quick  at  these  matters,  sit  now  very  quietly  in  the 
boxes,  and  think  that  Mrs.  Sullen  and  Mrs.  Strictland  are  in  no  great  danger  from 
Archer  and  Hanger,  and  that  Jane  Shore  may  easily  escape  from  a  Lord  Hastings  of 
fifty-six.  Our  friend  Captain  Wynn,  were  he  not  better  provided  for,  might 
now,  as  he  once  intended,  take  possession  of  the  Hamlets,  the  Rangers,  the  Lotha¬ 
rios,  as  he  was  pleased  to  call  them,  without  a  rival.  What  is  still  more  mortifying 
is,  that  you  could  not  possibly  have  laid  such  a  wager,  had  you  not  seen  in  my  looks, 
and  found  by  my  conversation,  that  I  was  grown  quite  an  old  man  ;  however,  you 
have  so  much  penetration,  that  your  opinion,  though  erroneous,  is  a  kind  of  warning 
to  me,  which  my  vanity  has  prevented  me  from  taking  before ;  and  as  you  have 
so  kindly  pulled  cff  my  mask,  it  is  time  for  me  to  make  my  exit,  artemque  reponere. 

I  am  your  Excellency’s  most  obedient  servant, 

U.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Notwithstanding  the  shame  you  have  brought  upon  me,  1  must  beg  leave 
to  congratulate  you  most  sincerely  upon  your  marriage,  and  to  present  my  respects 
to  your  lady. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  SMITH. 


Adelphi,  June  10th,  1773. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Smith  ;  in  all  the  transactions  he 
has  had  with  managers  and  actors,  he  never  was  more  surprised  than  at  the  late  one 
with  Mr.  Smith.  Some  particular  reasons  of  this  surprise  shall  remain  in  his  own 
breast.  All  matters  of  business  are  indeed  at  an  end  between  them.  Mr.  G.  wishes 
that  they  had  never  begun.  He  cannot  suffer  Mr.  Smith’s  hard  terms  in  his  letter  to 
pass  by  unnoticed ;  for  he  trusts,  that  could  every  circumstance  of  this  transaction  be 
known,  Mr.  Garrick  would  appear  to  have  shown  more  friendship  in  trade,  and  to 
Mr.  Smith,  than  he  seems  to  be  sensible  of,  or  than  can  be  every  day  produced,  either 
off  or  on  the  stage.  Mr.  Garrick  returns  Mr.  Smith  his  good  wishes. 


544 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


TO  MR.  GARRICK  MR.  CLELAND'S  RESPECTS. 

Thursday,  the  Ilth  June,  1773. 

You  cannot  conceive  the  pleasure  your  note  of  yesterday  gave  me.  It  would 
have  been  still  greater,  could  I  have  flattered  myself  that  you  would  join  to  the  Gin¬ 
seng  some  concomitancies  of  regimen  essential  to  the  security  of  its  success.  Whe¬ 
ther  you  are  in  earnest  or  not  to  afford  it  a  fair  trial,  suffer  me  to  annex  a  memoran¬ 
dum,  herewith  inclosed,  of  certain  additional  points. 

In  short,  I  would  wish  you  to  omit  nothing  that  may  in  competent  time  radi¬ 
cally  rid  you  of  that  infernal  torturous  inmate,  without  endangering  you  of  a  meta¬ 
ptosis,  or  transition  into  other  dreadful  disorders,  and  with  all,  enable  you  to  accom¬ 
plish  a  perfect  regeneration  of  your  whole  mass  of  solids  and  fluids,  without  any  pain 
but  that  of  a  few  negations,  to  which,  with  a  little  manly  resolution,  habit  will  soon 
reconcile  you,  and  even  make  a  pleasure  to  you.  Unfortunately,  while  doing  much 
towards  a  cure,  we  too  often  perish  by  the  little  we  neglect.  There  is  nothing  that 
is  not  of  great,  of  capital  importance,  in  matters  of  health.  Many,  or  rather  most 
human  creatures,  on  their  death-bed,  would  willingly  sacrifice  half,  ay,  the  whole  of 
their  fortune,  to  the  purchase,  though  it  were  but  of  a  month’s  reprieve,  from  the  last 
agony,  so  tenacious  of  life  has  nature  made  even  the  most  courageous ;  even  some 
who  have  been  known  to  brave  the  terrors  of  death  in  the  field  with  the  most  calm 
intrepidity.  And  with  all  this,  how  few  are  there,  that  by  their  own  indiscretion  and 
intemperances  do  not  accelerate  the  fatal  period  !  May  you,  however  be  an  happy 
exception,  nor  ever  Cooper  me  or  yourself ! 

As  to  that  sketch  of  an  historical  drama  which  you  needlessly  returned  me,  what 
you  are  pleased  to  say  of  it,  is  much  beyond  my  pretensions  in  it.  You  could  hardly 
not  see  that  I  framed  that  rough  draught  merely  to  give  you  an  embryo  idea,  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  every  addition  or  alteration  that  should  appear  requisite  to  give  it  a  full 
theatrical  effect. 

All  nauseous  mean  flattery  to  you  apart, — flattery  which  you  would  surely  see 
through  and  spurn, — I  would  wish  to  make  one  representation  to  you,  which  I  have 
before  offered  only  in  form  of  a  hint.  It  is  this  :  since  you  have  made,  even  as 
a  dramatic  writer,  so  good  a  figure  in  comedy,  it  would  give,  I  dare  swear,  great 
satisfaction  to  the  public,  to  see  you  in  the  character  of  an  author,  and  why  not  in 
tragedy  ?  You  have  one  of  the  greatest  principles  for  it  that  can  be  desired — your 
admiration  of  Shakspeare,  which  is  but  in  other  words  a  taste  for  nature  a  taste  to 
which,  for  your  having  suffered  yourself  to  be  occasionally  seduced  from  it  by  that 
damned  fashion  of  fustian,  which  has  so  long  infected  our  tragic  dramas,  you  owe 
the  honourable  reparation  of  doing  something  worthy  of  yourself — worthy  of  your 
genius,  (probably  as  equal  in  authorship,  as  it  has  been  proved  in  actorship,  to  both 
the  muses  of  the  theatre,)  in  the  manner  and  way  of  that  god  of  your  idolatry. 
Much  you  did  for  him  in  your  Jubilee,  but  you  would  still  do  more  for  him  in  re- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


545 


viving  his  spirit  and  taste.  You  owe  it  him,  if  but  in  point  of  gratitude  for  what  he 
has  done  for  you.  Only  figure  to  yourself  with  what  a  rapture  the  town  would 
receive  your  deliverance  of  it  from  the  frigidities  of  our  modern  tragedies,  by  the 
restoration  of  that  long-banished  nature  which  seems  to  have  been  born  and  died  with 
Shakspeare  *  Even  but  an  emulation  of  him  could  not  but  carry  the  stamp  of 
genius,  and  bid  fair  for  success  :  at  least,  it  has  not  yet  been  tried,  except,  perhaps, 
by  a  Theobald  or  his  equivalents. 

If,  then,  you  can  conceive  a  more  promising,  a  more  popular  subject,  than  what 
that  sketch  of  mine  affords,  in  its  outline,  in  the  name  of  your  own  acknowledged 
taste,  reject  it.  If  not,  might  it  not  be  a  pleasurable  amusement  to  you  this  summer 
to  try  your  pinions  at  it  ?  To  myself,  it  would  have  been  a  most  agreeable  task,  but 
for  reasons,  in  which  you  have  not  any  the  least  concern,  it  is  amongst  the  class 
of  impossibilities. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  DAVID,  St  Mary’s,  June  15th,  1773. 

The  ground-floor  at  my  service!  A  temptation  indeed!  Madam  and  you  will 
take  care  of  me !  A  flattering  consideration  !  I  fear  the  ground-floor  would  not 
contain  me,  for  I  should  be  o’  top  of  the  house.  And  Madam  to  take  care  of  me  !  I 
doubt  you  would  be  jealous  of  me,  you  cock-sparrow.  Another  doubt  is,  that  if  I 
should  think  myself  well  enough,  it  is  a  million  to  one,  whether  my  Madam  would. 
I  have  had  some  return  of  gout  since  I  came  hither,  and  but  this  last  week  have  lost 
a  good  quantity  of  blood  by  the  piles,  which  may  not  be  bad  in  the  end,  though 
a  little  alarming  at  the  time  ;  and  Madam  herself  has  lately  had  too  frequent  returns 
of  a  bilious  cholic,  though  better  at  present.  These  are  but  ugly  spokes  in  the  travel¬ 
ler’s  wheel,  if  ever  he  should  turn  his  face  towards  his  few  friends  remaining  on  this 
side  of  Temple-bar.  It  is  a  great  undertaking  ;  and  I  must  make  my  will,  as  country 
gentlemen  used  to  do  on  going  to  town,  before  the  turnpike-roads  joined  London 
and  Edinburgh.  Notwithstanding  this  despair,  I  should  be  glad  to  know  in  what 
part  of  the  summer  you  would  be  most  at  leisure,  and  freest  from  company  ?  whether 
you  know  any  thing  of  Lord  Hardwick’s  motions — at  Richmond  or  at  Wrest  ?  whe¬ 
ther  worthy  Daniel  Wray  lives  at  Mount  Ararat  at  a  rare  rate,  according  to  my  old 
pun,  so  worthy  to  be  remembered. 

I  have  lately  heard,  from  one  I  think  a  judge,  an  extraordinary  character  of  one 
Henderson,  now  on  the  Bath  stage,  formerly  under  the  name  of  Courtnay.  He  may 
be  worth  inquiring  after;  though,  I  hear.  Palmer  there  has  said  he  would  strain 
a  point  to  keep  him  at  almost  any  expense.  The  house  is  never  filled  but  when 
he  plays. 

•  Garrick,  at  all  events,  was  not  destined  in  tragedy  to  rival  Shakspeare.  His  own  few  additions  to 
“  Hamlet”  are  a  blot  upon  his  genius,  and  are  now  happily  both  rejected  and  forgotten. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  4  A 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


r,  4(> 

I  have  just  been  running  over,  for  read  it  fairly  I  could  not,  a  most  vile  comedy 
in  MS.  called  “  The  Methodist.”  I  think  there  is  one  tragedy,  by  the  same  author, 
(Mr.  Jefferies,  now  dead,  but  a  very  ingenious  man,  and  of  uncommon  learning — 
perhaps  not  dramatic  genius,)  that  deserves  your  eye  and  examination ;  and  which, 
with  a  little  alteration,  might  do — I  mean  “  Edwin.”  The  story  being  taken  from 
our  own  history,  is  something  in  its  favour;  and  the  language,  I  think,  more  dramatic 
than  common.  He  had  the  merit  of  first  bringing  “  Merope”  upon  the  stage;  and 
the  demerit  of  adding  under-parts  and  underplots,  that  spoiled  all  the  simplicity  of 

the  story,  else  Aaron  Hill’s  is  mine - to  it.  It  breaks  one’s  teeth  to  read  it.  As 

you  love  street  humour,  or  any  true  humour,  better  than  wTit,  I  will  tell  you  a  story, 
which  may  be  long  enough,  perhaps,  to  cost  you  threepence,  but  it  is  worth  all  the 
money.  Mr.  Ridding,  my  father’s  secretary,  overheard  a  Scotchman  persuading  his 
freen  into  an  ale-cellar,  in  St.  Martin’s-lane,  because  there  was  an  excellent  harper. 
“  Ken  ye  the  cheeld  of  Gud  that  danced  afore  the  ark  of  the  Loord  ?”  “  Wee’ll 

enuf,  ’twas  David.” — “  Oh !  my  sul,  he  was  mine - to  this  mon  for  a  Scotch  tune .” 

— I  have  room  for  all  loves  to  thee  and  thine  from  me  and  mine ;  and  you  have 
my  story  for  nothing. 

J.  Hoadly. 

P.  S.  I  have  some  observations  on  “  Edwin,”  by  Theobald,  if  you  shall  ever  have 
a  thought  about  it. 

Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Hoadly  about  money  matters, 

June  1 5th,  1773,  answered  20th  ditto.” 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  June  15tk>  1773. 

I  am  in  no  less  astonishment  at  the  receipt  of  your  note,*  than  you  express  at  the 
late  transactions  between  yourself  and  me. 

That  you  are  very  angry  with  me  is  too  evident ;  that  I  never  have  done 
any  thing  (intentionally)  to  deserve  your  anger,  is  not  less  true.  I  am  totally  at  a 
loss  to  guess  at  the  meaning  of  your  letter,  or  what  I  have  done  to  offend  you  so 
much.  Your  terms  were  not  only  thought  hard  by  me,  but  by  others  who  were  more 
your  friends  than  mine.  I  am  sorry  I  made  use  of  the  expression  in  my  last  applica¬ 
tion  to  you,  as  I  would  not  offend  you  for  the  world.  If  to  have  idolized  you  de¬ 
serves  your  resentment,  no  one  can  have  been  more  guilty  than, 

Your  very  sincere  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 


*  Of  the  10th  of  June,  ante. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


547 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  SMITH. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  June  19th,  1773. 

Our  Shakspeare  says,  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men,  which,  in  my  opinion, 
you  have  lost.  You  must  excuse  me,  if  I  never  write  a  word  more  about  this  dis¬ 
agreeable  matter  ;  you  have  desired  it  now,  or  I  should  not  have  done  it.  For  some 
years  past,  you  have  assured  me  that  all  your  wishes  centered  in  being  with  me  at 
Drury-lane  ;  that  you  would  come  upon  any  terms — my  own  terms,  and  used  many 
expressions  of  that  kind.  As  our  company  was  full,  and  I  thought  you  well  fixed  at 
Covent-Garden,  I  most  sincerely  advised  you  to  be  satisfied  with  your  situation  : 
upon  your  quarrelling  with  Mr.  Colman,  and  your  situation  becoming  a  disagreeable 
one,  I  resolved  to  show  my  regard,  and  extricate  you  from  it.  I  fear,  you  un¬ 
luckily  thought  that  it  was  policy  made  me  listen  to  a  treaty  with  you,  in  hopes  to 
break  your  present  connexion  ;  how  little  you  know  of  me,  or  of  what  I  know  !  I 
laughed  at  all  your  golden  dreams !  When  we  conversed  upon  the  subject,  and  you 
began  to  stand  upon  terms,  (which  surprised  me  much,)  I  stopped  our  conversation, 
and  turned  you  over  to  my  brother — he  settles  our  money  matters,  for  I  hate  to  make 
bargains,  and  was  sorry  that  you  had  any  to  make :  to  be  short,  you  were  offered 
what  you  had  at  Covent-Garden,  and  refused  it.  You  did  indeed  say,  that  if  I  in¬ 
sisted  upon  it,  you  would  take  it,  but  you  should  be  miserable — could  Mr.  Smith 
imagine  that  I  would  engage  him  upon  such  terms  as  these  ?  From  that  moment  I 
changed  my  mind,  as  you  had  yours,  and  was  glad  that  you  refused  the  hard  offer 
which  was  made  you  :  let  me  assure  you,  upon  my  honour,  now  it  is  over,  that  what 
I  did,  and  brought  about  with  much  trouble,  was  for  the  man,  and  not  the  actor ;  and 
that  if  I  had  been  Mr.  Smith,  I  would  have  agreed  with  Mr.  Garrick  upon  harder 
conditions,  especially  as  Mr.  G.  Garrick  hinted  (not  without  good  reasons)  the  great 
probability  of  your  situation  being  soon  mended.  You  were  mistaken  to  think  that 
I  agreed  to  your  proposals  when  I  talked  with  Mr.  Cooper,  and  it  was  not  in 
my  power — I  told  him  so,  and  he  acknowledges  it.  You  said,  in  a  former  letter,  that 
some  persons,  who  were  more  my  friends  than  yours,  thought  the  terms  which  were 
offered  you  hard  ones  ;  to  which  I  say,  and  I  beg  that  you  will  tell  them  so,  that  they 
can  be  no  friends  of  mine,  nor  can  they,  for  much  stronger  reasons,  be  any  friends  of 
yours.  Be  assured  that  I  am  not  angry  with  you  for  losing  an  opportunity  of  being 
at  Drury-lane,  and  I  desire  you  not  to  be  too  angry  with  yourself. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  sincere  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  wish  you  much  pleasure  on  your  present  expedition.  I  should  have  been  at 
the  Isle  of  Wight  too. 


4  a  2 


548 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday  Morning,  June  1 9th,  1773. 

Since  I  received  yours  yesterday  (for  I  did  not  get  it  before,  having  been  in 
the  country,)  I  have  been  so  uneasy  in  my  mind,  that  1  cannot  help  troubling 
you  again.  The  loss  of  your  friendship  is  more  to  me  than  that  of  any  engagement 
in  a  theatre  ;  and  could  I  have  been  admitted  to  your  presence  -when  in  treaty  with 
you,  I  am  satisfied  matters  would  have  been  adjusted  to  your  satisfaction.  You  may 
remember  you  told  me,  that  though  you  never  gave  guineas  as  a  salary,  you  would 
make  up  that  difference  to  me  out  of  your  own  pocket.  1  do  not  mention  this  by 
way  of  new  bargain,  but  to  justify  myself  for  refusing  twelve  pounds  ;  which,  if  Mr. 
G.  Garrick  rightly  informed  you,  and  I  doubt  it  not,  I  said  I  would  accept  if  you  in¬ 
sisted  on  it,  but  that  it  would  make  me  unhappy,  and  that  I  asked  from  your  friend¬ 
ship  and  generosity  thirteen  pounds  by  way  of  rank,  and  that,  if  you  would  consent, 
I  would  refund  the  difference  at  the  end  of  the  season.  This  is  now  nonsense,  but  I 
would  wish  to  stand  clear  in  your  opinion  of  any  imputation  of  having  slighted  any 
offer  from  you,  and  that  you  should  do  me  the  justice  to  think,  if  I  have  offended 
you,  that  it  has  been  from  an  error  of  the  head  and  not  the  heart.  I  am  sensible  of 
your  good  wishes  for  me,  which  I  will  hope  I  have  not  forfeited.  Do  not  let  for¬ 
giveness  be  the  only  virtue  you  are  without,  though,  in  truth,  I  know  not  how  I 
have  offended  you.  I  am  leaving  town  this  morning.  If  you  will  condescend  to 
favour  me  with  a  line,  directed  to  me  at  James  Mackenzie’s,  Escp  East  Cowes,  Isle 
of  Wight,  you  will  take  a  weight  from  my  spirits  which  oppresses  me  much.  Do 
not  think  me  interested  enough  to  be  now  soliciting  for  an  engagement  with  you  : 
I  am  not ;  yet  at  the  same  time  I  must  say,  should  you  ever  make  me  an  offer  again, 
it  cannot  be  refused.  Permit  me  to  assure  you,  I  am  with  the  greatest  truth, 

Your  very  sincere  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

W.  Smith. 


MR.  J.  CLUTTERBUCK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


June  21st,  1773. 

Every  body  tells  me  that  my  dear  Garrick  still  continues  to  exceed  even  his  own 
exceedings  upon  the  stage,  which  puzzles  my  philosophy,  because  I  cannot  conceive 
how  the  theatrical  powers  can  last  after  the  memory  is  gone  ;  or  how  you  can  re¬ 
member  your  parts,  and  forget  for  almost  a  year  together  that  I  am  in  the  land  of  the 
living.  Perhaps  you  think,  that  having  your  picture,  and  that  of  my  dearest  Mrs. 
Garrick,  is  sufficient  for  one  who  is  now  scarce  more  than  the  shadow  of  himself ;  and 
to  be  sure,  I  reap  some  comfort,  by  stepping  now  and  then  into  my  parlour,  and 
holding  a  dumb  conversation  with  you  both  ;  but  let  me  tell  you,  it  is  but  a  water- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


549 


gruel  diet,  and  barely  keeps  body  and  soul  together  :  however,  that  good  young  man, 
Hatsell,  hath  in  his  last  letter  lent  me  his  poker  to  stir  the  embers  of  affection,  and  I 
again  glow  with  that  warmth  which  cannot  quite  cool  until  my  vital  bellows  cease 
their  function. 

Enclosed  you  have  the  account  of  the  Theatrical  Fund  cash,  which  you  must  look 
at  the  doors  of  others,  and  not  at  mine,  to  trace  the  cause  why  it  hath  not  been  em¬ 
ployed  to  rather  greater  advantage  ;  and  when  your  hand  is  in,  inquire  why  the  un¬ 
claimed  money  which  Pritchard  lodged  in  my  hand  for  the  original  renters,  hath  re¬ 
mained  unprofitable,  at  least  ever  since  the  time  that  I  drew  up  a  form  and  gave  to 
my  worthy  friend  George  to  get  copied  and  signed  by  you  and  your  partner,  by  way 
of  authority  and  indemnification  to  me  for  carrying  to  the  above-mentioned  The¬ 
atrical  Fund.  I  assure  you,  the  being  entrusted  with  the  care  of  other  people’s  pro¬ 
perty,  hath  been  neither  profit  nor  pleasure  to  me ;  and  I  have  in  the  late  perilous 
times  been  apt  to  think  myself  a  fool  for  keeping  their  cash  in  a  banker’s  hand,  and 
standing  all  risks  as  a  middle  man,  without  other  emolument  or  motive  than  causa 
amicit'uc .  But  such  indiscretions  may  affect  the  takers  of  Broom-Field,  but  they 
shall  not  me  ;  as  I  am  firmly  of  opinion,  that  “  more  money  than  enough ”  is  the  most 
contemptible  of  all  objects.  If  it  (money)  would  buy  health  for  one’s  self  or  others,  I 
would  consent  to  grow  avaricious,  but  every  day’s  experience  convinces  me  that  it 
will  not  keep  one  from  wearing  out,  therefore  a  fig  for  redundance.  I  am  sorry  to 
tell  you  that  a  gloom  accompanies  me  whenever  I  go  to  Bath  at  the  house  where 
sport  and  fun  used  to  reign  : — our  valuable  friend  Sharpe  is  alarmed  almost  to  de¬ 
spondency  by  a  cataract  formed  upon  one  eye,  and  his  fears  that  the  other  will  share 
the  same  misfortune.  He  begs  me  to  come  as  often  as  I  can  to  him,  and  I  purpose 
dining  there  to-morrow,  in  hopes  of  strengthening  him  in  his  wise  resolution  of  laying 
in  as  many  additional  ideas  as  can  be  obtained  while  his  sight  lasts,  and  strive  to  imi¬ 
tate  the  feathered  songsters,  who  are  said  to  perform  best  when  their  eyes  are  out. 
My  brother  is  dying,  my  dear  wife  hath  had  of  late  hardly  a  day’s  health,  and  under 
all  this  I  bear  up,  and  am  to  you  and  my  dear,  dear  Mrs.  Garrick, 

Most  affectionately, 

James  Clutterbuck. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Clutterbuck's  letter  to  me, 
June  21,  1773.” 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Ylt  SIB  East  Cowes,  June  21st,  1/73. 

I  THANK  you  for  the  favour  of  yours,  though  every  word  stabs.  I  fear  you  are 
implacable,  as  you  are  determined  never  to  write  again  on  the  affair  betwixt  us.  If 
I  have  lost  the  tide ,  it  is  my  misfortune,  not  my  fault.  I  had  never  thought  of 
making  terms  with  you,  had  you  not  insisted  on  it.  My  wishes  have  ever  been  to  be 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


550 

with  you,  and  I  have  never  refused  the  terms  I  had  at  Covent-Garden,  nor  should  I, 
had  they  been  offered.  I  have  had  for  three  years  past  twelve  guineas,  and  Mr.  G. 
Garrick  never  proposed  more  than  twelve  pounds;  nor  did  lie  give  me  any  hint  of 
the  probability  of  my  situation  being  mended.  Mr.  Cooper  well  knows  that  I  told 
him  I  would  not  refuse  the  terms  I  had  at  Covent-Garden,  if  you  offered  them  to 
me.  By  this,  Sir,  I  hope  you  will  find  you  are  under  a  mistake,  and  that  you  will 
suffer  that  mistake  to  be  set  right  in  my  favour.  Do  not  be  quite  so  determined 
against  one  you  have  professed  a  regard  for,  and  who,  if  he  has  been  wrong,  is  desi¬ 
rous  of  making  every  atonement  in  his  power.  Heaven  has  but  our  sorrow  for  our 
sins,  and  then  delights  to  pardon  erring  man.  If  you  can  forgive  what  is  past,  and 
will  permit  Mr.  G.  Garrick  to  draw  up  an  article,  1  will  sign  it  without  looking  at  it. 
I  cannot  hope  for  another  line  from  you,  and  your  last  has  totally  overturned  all  my 
hopes  of  pleasure  on  my  present  scheme.  I  had  the  honour  of  seeing  your  friend, 
Fitzmaurice,  yesterday,  who  gave  me  an  invitation  to  Knighton,  where  1  hoped  I 
might  have  met  you,  but  I  find  you  will  not  come.  I  shall  be  in  town  in  ten  days, 
where,  (if  you  can  persuade  your  heart  to  take  me  once  again  under  your  protection,) 
I  will  hope  to  hear  from  Mr.  G.  Garrick.  If  not,  farewell,  and  may  you  be  happy, 
though  you  inflict  misery  on  your  most  faithful  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

Excuse  nonsense  and  mistakes,  for  I  really  am  so  agitated  that  I  know  not  what 
I  write. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Mary’s,  June  25,  1773. 

I  am  sorry  I  have  not  a  frank  for  your  double  letter,  but  all  our  members  are 
privy  counsellors,  and  gone  to  the  King’s  puppy- show,  more  dull  to  me  even  than 
Foote’s.  You  see  by  him  that  duller  sentimentals  will  never  truly  burlesque  senti- 
mentals,  any  more  than  excess  of  bawdy  can  be  truly  a  criticism  on  bawdy. 

I  remember  a  foolish  comical  instance  at  the  time  of  the  “  Contrast,”  which  followed 
the  “  Merope”  of  this  same  Mr.  Jefferies.  We  had  made  an  exceeding  high-seasoned 
exordium  of  an  epilogue;  applyingt/?r^  nights  to  authors  as  well  as  to  virgin  brides. 
This  we  soon  found  was  more  absurd  than  the  Lacedemonians  making  their  slaves 
drunk  to  deter  their  youth  from  that  vice ;  it  only  taught  it  them  in  higher  perfec¬ 
tion.  Merope  was  at  a  sad  loss  for  an  epilogue,  and  Ben  added  a  few  lines  about 
snarling  criticks  and  ill-humoured  husbands  ;  and  our  Satire  upon  bawdy  went  off, 
by  the  help  of  Mrs.  Buchanan,  with  high  applause,  as  the  tip  of  the  mode.  I  thank 
you  for  your  kind  invitation,  but  I  doubt  my  abilities — however,  I  will  not  despair 
of  the  month  of  August ;  ’twill  be  the  Augustan  age  with  me.  Know  my  Lord’s 
motions,  and  let  me  hear.  I  cannot  come  now,  having  a  bad  cold  and  cough,  and 
pain  in  my  side.  Your  bottomless  chairs  do  not  prevent  me,  as  I  have  a  remedy  for 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


551 


that ;  as  George  Sturt  told  my  wife,  who  was  commissioned  by  him  to  bid  for  such 
chairs  at  an  auction  here. — “  Never  mind  that,  my  friends  will  bring  bottoms’ ’ 

I  really  think  my  friend  a  judge  of  what  will  do  on  the  stage.  You  will  believe 
me  when  I  tell  you,  I  once  persuaded  him  to  try  his  vein  of  humour  on  the  stage ; 
but  he  is  too  lazy,  and  finds  too  much  employment  of  his  time  in  a  more  rational 
way,  with  too  much  idling  when  from  home,  and  too  much  diligence  at  home,  with  a 
German  flute  and  an  English  girl,  whom  he  keeps  in  this  county ;  but  I  am  neither 
bed  nor  bolster,  so  know  nothing  of  the  matter.  You  ask  me  for  the  play  of 
“  Edwin.”  I  thought  you  had  all  the  plays  in  the  language.  It  was  published 
when  acted,  and  since  in  a  quarto  volume  of  Jefferies’  W orks,  1754.  The  chief  of 
the  story,  I  fancy,  is  invention  ;  and  you  will  see  with  half  your  eye  whether  it  will 
be  for  your  purpose.  You  must  send  me  Theobald’s  Remarks  back  again,  for  they 
have  an  owner  whom  I  would  not  disoblige.  Theobald  once  made  the  “  Richard  II.’’ 
of  Shakspeare  actable,  if  I  remember,  not  much  amiss.  There  are  fine  drops  of  that 
immortal  man,  that  have  not  yet  appeared  under  your  auspices.  Julius  Ccesar  is  one 
more  ;  but  I  have  a  notion  Covent-Garden  is  beforehand  with  you.  The  procession 
to  the  Lupercal  Games  might  be  an  entertainment  for  a  King.  Might  not  any  new 
actor  appear  to  advantage  in  such  plays  as  have  not  been  acted  in  our  times  ?  Our 
respects  and  all  good  wishes  attend  on  you  and  Madam  Garrick,  and  believe  me, 

Dear  Sir,  sincerely  yours, 

J.  Hoadly. 

I  have  not  yet  got  the  key  of  my  house,  but  I  have  advertised  it  in  our  paper, 
and  in  two  London  papers. — Oh  !  repairs,  repairs  ! 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Queen  Ann’s-street,  June  27,  1773. 

Mr.  Cumberland  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  will  take  an  early 
opportunity  of  sending  him  the  piece  of  two  acts,  agreeable  to  his  promise,  as  soon  as 
he  has  completed  the  alteration  which  Mr.  Garrick  recommended.*  He  will  transmit 
it  from  Ireland  before  the  season  commences,  in  time  for  any  purpose  Mr.  Garrick 
may  have  for  it,  though  ever  so  early.  Mr.  Cumberland  leaves  town  in  very  few 
days. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Cumberland’s  letter  about  his 
farce,  and  my  answer.” 

*  The  very  entertaining  farce  of  the  “  Note  of  Hand,”  acted  at  Drury-lane,  in  the  year  1774. — Ed. 


552 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CUMBERLAND. 

Hampton,  June  27th,  1773. 

Mr.  Garrick  returns  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Cumberland,  and  will  give  a  very 
sincere  opinion  of  any  piece  which  he  is  pleased  to  put  into  his  hands. 

At  the  same  time,  he  must  confess  himself  as  much  surprised  after  so  long  a 
silence  to  receive  his  note  of  yesterday,  as  he  was  to  know  the  cause  of  it :  indeed,  he 
little  thought,  after  he  was  informed  of  his  new  scheme,  that  he  should  have  been 
honoured  again  with  his  commands. 


Mlt.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Ann-street,  June  30th,  1773. 

When  I  have  used  every  effort  to  preserve  your  friendship  and  to  render  myself 
understood  by  you,  I  shall  have  fulfilled  the  duty  I  owe  to  the  professions  that  have 
been  in  use  between  us,  and  shall  bring  myself  to  acquiesce  in  the  consequences  of 
my  miscarriage,  though  they  rob  me  of  your  society  for  ever. 

I  perceive  you  write  to  me  under  resentment,  and  it  is  plain  you  allude  to  the 
cause,  when  you  tell  me  of  the  new  scheme  I  have  been  engaged  in.  Weak  as  the 
foundations  are  on  which  you  build  your  anger,  I  am  yet  well  content  you  should 
have  some  plea  for  your  neglect  of  me ;  and  I  had  rather  that  excuse  should  spring 
from  passion  (though  self-interest  be  the  root  of  it)  than  be  found  to  proceed  from 
lassitude  in  friendship,  and  that  insensibility  of  nature  which  is  more  unconquerable 
than  aversion  itself. 

It  is  true,  Sir,  I  have  been  engaged  in  an  undertaking,  which  had  for  its  object 
the  promotion  of  genius.  I  have  been  tempted  to  subscribe  my  opinion  at  the 
instigation  of  friends  whose  judgment  I  hold  sacred,  and  amongst  them  by  some 
which  you  and  I  enjoy  in  common,  who,  like  myself,  did  not  apprehend  you  would 
have  resented  an  effort,  founded  in  public  spirit,  and  which  neither  aimed  nor 
aspired  to  affect  a  fortune  and  a  fame,  which  your  unequalled  merits  have  long  made 
secure,  and  promise  to  transmit  without  impeachment  to  posterity.  Why,  then,  do 
you  express  surprise  that  I  write  to  you  to  signify  my  readiness  to  fulfil  an  engage¬ 
ment,  entered  into  at  our  last  meeting,  and  which,  unless  it  is  your  wish  to  revoke, 
I  cannot  honourably  recede  from  ?  Indeed,  as  you  say,  our  silence  has  been  long ; 
so  long  as  almost  to  warrant  your  forgetfulness  of  the  trifling  production  which  has 
interrupted  it  and  all  that  relates  to  it ;  but  has  the  intercourse  dropped  in  my 
hands  ?  You  are  too  ingenuous  to  suppose  it.  I  am  sure  you  can  recollect  nothing 
of  me  for  the  last  eight  months  of  our  lives,  which  I  have  not  obtruded  upon  you  ; 
and  yet,  in  that  period,  I  have  had  more  claims  upon  the  sensibility  and  politeness  of 
my  friends,  than  in  all  my  life  before. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


55  3 


There  is  a  time,  Sir,  when  self-respect  will  tell  us  we  have  done  enough  :  the  last 
public  testimony  1  set  my  hand  to,  was  in  your  just  applause ;  the  last  private  en¬ 
comium  which  my  pen  ever  passed  on  aity  living  person,  was  dedicated  and  delivered 
to  you :  with  whom  rests  the  silence  then, — with  yourself  or  me  ? 

I  have  repeatedly  been  at  your  door  to  converse  with  you  on  this  very  scheme 
you  allude  to  ;  in  short,  I  am  conscious  of  having  neglected  no  occasion  of  deserving 
and  maintaining  your  friendship  upon  fair  and  equal  terms  ;  but  if  I  am  to  hold  your 
favour  upon  conditions  which  must  degrade  me  with  myself,  or  if  I  am  to  incur  your 
displeasure  whenever  I  chance  to  cross  your  interest  in  a  laudable  pursuit,  the  wider 
and  the  more  public  our  breach  is,  in  that  case,  the  better. 

I  have  troubled  you  with  a  very  long  letter,  because  I  would  be  loth  to  lose  any 
friend  for  want  of  a  little  seasonable  explanation ;  and  if  my  time  allowed,  I  would 
have  come  to  you  myself,  but  I  depart  to-morrow,  or  at  farthest  on  Friday ;  I  there¬ 
fore  send  my  servant  with  this  to  receive  your  answer,  which  the  post  would  not 
bring  me. 


I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Rich®.  Cumberland. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Cumberland’s  letter  of  June  30th,  1773.” 


DR.  BERKENHOUT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  July  19th,  1773. 

The  exuberance  of  a  wild  imagination  is  generally  like  the  gall-nut  of  the  oak, 
the  produce  of  a  maggot ;  but  in  this  they  differ — the  one  makes  ink,  the  other 
wastes  it.  This  being  an  entire  new  simile,  I  hope  you  will  not  neglect  to  store  it  in 
your  common-place  book,  among  the  few  originals  of  the  present  age :  and  if  you 
should  ever  write  a  criticism  on  Solomon,  you  may  produce  it  as  a  proof  that  he  was 
wrong  in  asserting  that  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun.  But  lest,  like  the  sun- 
fish  ,  my  epitre  should  seem  all  head,  I  will  proceed  to  my  tale.  Yet  upon  reflexion, 
lest  this  sun-fish  should  remain  under  a  cloud,  as  you  are  no  great  naturalist,  before 
I  proceed  to  business,  I  must  refer  you  for  a  description  of  that  animal,  to  Vol.  i. 
p.  65.  of  the  Outlines,  &e.  written  by  the  learned  and  ingenious  Dr.  B. 

Our  philosophers,  I  think,  are  generally  of  opinion,  that  kings  are  not  immortal ; 
consequently  they  are  subject  to  diseases,  and  consequently  want  physicians.  An 
ingenious  friend  of  mine  is  of  opinion  that  our  gracious  Sovereign  ought  to  have  at 
least  one  country  physician.  “  Now,”  says  he,  “  if  you  could  by  any  means  obtain 
the  feather  of  King’s  physician,  it  would  be  worth  all  the  feathers  in  your  cap.  You 
might  reside  at  Richmond,  retain  your  old  friends  at  Isleworth,  and  make  a  fortune 
in  a  very  few  solar  revolutions.”  My  friend  is  an  astronomer.  I  should  be  glad  of 

4  B 


VOL.  i. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


554 

your  opinion  of  this  matter.  Give  it,  if  you  please,  a  moment’s  consideration.  As  it 
is  a  mere  feather  we  ask,  is  there  not  some  probability  of  succeeding?  I  have  the 
honour  to  be, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  Berkenhout.* 

Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Eerkenhout’s  letter, 

King’s  Physician.” 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Mary’s,  July  21st,  1773. 

I  have  had  a  painful  toe  all  night  since  I  wrote  this,  and  hope  it  will  ease  my 
cough. 

I  think,  and  was  confirmed  by  the  tears  of  two  very  tender  sensible  ladies,  Madam 
Hoadly  and  her  old  friend  Mrs.  Goodenough,  that  your  epitaph  is  excellent,  but 
being  willing  it  should  be  superexcellent,  I  have  ventured  to  reform  it,  which  you 
may  think  deforming  it.  The  quintessence  of  these  things  is  truth,  not  poetry. 
Wherefore  I  think  the  looking  down  from  above,  or  again  exerting  his  filial  love,  (which 
is  obscure,)  not  to  be  admitted  in  this  kind  of  poetry.  The  parents’  hopes  of  their 
child’s  happiness,  and  their  sense  of  a  good  Providence,  either  in  its  dispensations  here 
or  to  come,  are  certainly  omissions.  Joy  and  comfort  are  too  nearly  the  same,  and 
seem  rather  a  botch  in  the  verse.  Adorn  seems  more  necessary  to  keep  up  the  alle¬ 
gory  than  bless.  These  few  little  remarks  occur  to  me,  as  you  desire  me  to  read  it 
carefully,  and  let  you  know  my  thoughts.  Such  as  they  are,  you  have  them  over¬ 
leaf.  I  cannot  give  up  both  map  and  memory  to  old  Charles,  be  he  ten  times  a 
governor.  I  stick  by  Bedfordshire  and  my  pun.  Neither  do  I  know  whether  Lord 
H.  is  gone  to  Wrest  or  to  Wimpole ;  nor  can  I  possibly  go,  at  the  time  you  mention* 
to  either  of  them,  as  summer  begins  already  to  be  precious,  and  the  annual  visit  to 
Farnham  can  hardly  be  evaded;  and  the  gouty  cough  continuing,  I  will  persuade 
Madam  that  change  of  air  is  good,  and  endeavour  to  be  with  you  the  25th  or  26th 
of  August. 

EPITAPH. 

With  thee  so  late  our  joy  and  boast, 

Did  every  blissful  vision  end  ; 

With  thee,  though  young,  at  once  we  lost, 

A  son,  companion,  and  a  friend. 

So  tine  thy  thread  of  life  was  spun, 

Nature  so  richly  wrought  thy  mind, 

That  she  proclaim’d,  the  work  was  done 

For  Heaven,  and  not  t’ adorn  Mankind. 


*  A  very  pleasant  and  ingenious  trifle  from  a  learned  man,  and  a  very  celebrated  physician. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


555 


With  patience  borne  from  ling’ring  pain, 

Now,  matchless  boy,  rest  ever  free  : 

Thy  own  example  only  can 

Teach  us  to  bear  the  loss  of  thee. 

Our  hopes,  though  all  thy  virtues  cheer, 

And  time  our  bleeding  hearts  may  heal ; 
The  parent  still  must  drop  a  tear — 

Heaven  would  not  teach  us  — not  to  feel. 

L.  4.  or  a  duteous  son,  a  feeling  cheerful  friend. 

All  our  loves. — Yours  ever, 


J.  Hoadly. 


EARL  CLANRICARDE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Barton,  Isle  of  Wight,  July  27,  1773. 

I  have  just  heard  from  our  friend  Smith  ;  and  take  the  first  opportunity  of 
thanking  you  for  your  very  obliging  recollection  of  Mrs.  Cartwright — the  person  we 
recommended  to  your  protection.  I  have  by  this  post  wrote  to  Mr.  Lacy,  who  I  hope 
will  co-operate  with  your  charitable  intentions,  in  favour  of  this  poor  woman.  I  was 
never  more  humbled  in  my  own  estimation,  than  by  your  contempt  of  our  late 
bustle.  I  had  some  faint  hopes  that  you  might  have  taken  a  peep  at  us,  and  in  that 
case  I  should  certainly  have  made  a  prize  of  you ;  but  how  chap-fallen  was  I  when  I 
heard  you  was  at  Hampton.  Methought  I  heard  Pope  addressing  you,  as  he  does 
Lord  Bolingbroke — 

“  Awake,  my  Garrick  !  leave  all  meaner  things 
To  low  ambition,  and  the  pride  of  kings  ; 

Let  us  (since  life  can  little  more  supply 
Than  just  to  look  about  us  and  to  die,) 

Expatiate,”  &c. 

And  yet,  all  Hermit  as  T  am,  I  must  acknowledge  that  it  was  a  noble  sight ;  and  what 
made  it  more  agreeable  was,  that  I  might  have  seen  it  from  my  cell.  But  I  am  now 
again  reduced  to  a  mere  Carthusian  monk  :  this  reflection  may  tempt  you  to  give  us 
a  look;  it  is  customary  abroad  for  the  greatest  and  busiest  of  men  to  retire  sometimes 
from  the  world  into  a  convent — suppose  you  was  to  try  the  experiment.  You  have 
seen  all  the  blaze  of  Knighton  ;  come  and  see  the  serene  moon-light  prospect  of  JSue/i 
Retiro  ;  they  are  very  great  contrasts,  and  ought  to  follow  each  other, — but  I  despair 
of  that  pleasure.  If  it  does  come,  I  shall  look  on  it  as  I  should  on  the  Millennium. 
My  good  friend  begs  your  acceptance  of  her  best  compliments.  The  packet  is 
getting  under  sail,  and  will  only  permit  me  to  add,  that  I  am,  with  the  truest  regard, 
Dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  and  very  obliged  humble  servant, 

Ci.anricarde,  &c* 

*  John  Smyth,  the  eleventh  earl,  who  died  in  1782. — Ed. 

4  b  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


55(> 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Leiston  Hall,  Saxmundham,  July  28th,  1773. 

I  am  now  too  well  convinced  of  the  unshaken  firmness  of  your  resentment,  to 
have  the  least  shadow  of  a  hope  of  softening  it :  yet,  I  still  flatter  myself,  my  fault  is 
ignoscenda  quidem  scires  si  ignoscere.  The  tide  of  my  fortunes,  perhaps,  is  not  en¬ 
tirely  in  your  hands,  though,  it  must  be  confessed,  that  of  my  happiness  is :  for  I  can 
most  truly  say,  I  have  not  known  an  hour’s  peace  since  I  received  your  letter  in  the 
Isle  of  Wight.  If  you  are  as  stern  a  judge  as  Minos,  you  will  say  I  am  the  author 
of  my  own  misfortunes.  If  so,  that  reflection  makes  them  still  more  pungent. 
Should  folly  be  punished  with  the  same  severity  as  vice?  Your  Shakspeare’s  Hot¬ 
spur  would  in  the  way  of  bargain  cavil  on  the  ninth  part  of  a  hair  ;  but  what  would 
he  not  give  to  “  a  deserving  friend  ?”  I  still  insist  that  I  never  refused  the  terms  you 
say  were  offered  me, — but  I  beg  pardon,  I  meant  not  thus  to  relapse,  and  I  blush  at  it. 

The  occasion  of  this  is  to  beg,  (as  I  find  it  is  well  known  that  you  did  me  the 
honour  of  treating  with  me,)  that  you  will  keep  secret,  to  what  humility  of  style  you 
have  reduced  me  ;  a  style  which  you  must  think  abject,  and  which  I  could  not  make 
use  of  to  any  being  on  earth  but  yourself :  nor  has  any  event  of  my  whole  life  ever 
given  my  spirits  so  great  a  shock  as  your  unkindness.  Let  this  rest  betwixt  us,  and 
as  my  letters  are  unworthy  of  an  answer,  at  least  vouchsafe  to  burn  them.  Oh,  Mr. 
Garrick,  amongst  all  your  friends,  you  have  not  one  whose  heart  has  been  more  yours 
than  that  of,  Your  sincere,  though  deserted  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

Since  the  beginning  of  June  I  have  wasted  thirteen  pound  in  weight,  and  should 
I  be  disengaged  at  the  theatre,  doubt  not  of  being  qualified  to  ride  at  Newmarket  in 
October  meeting. 

Endorsed, 

“  From  Mr.  Smith,  about  our  treaty, 

Aug.  3,  1773.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[We  now  enter  upon  a  very  agreeable  series  of  letters,  in  which  we  behold  a  great  man  released  from 
the  fatigues  of  Chancery  and  the  business  of  the  State,  passing  his  time  in  the  bosom  of  his  family  and 
his  friends,  and  closely  cultivating  that  cordial  intimacy  with  Mr.  Garrick,  which  all  but  identified  their 
interests,  which  united  them  as  executors  of  poor  Beighton,  whose  life  they  had  rendered  happy,  and  left  to 
Lord  Camden  the  care  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  concerns  when  he  had  dropped  into  the  grave. —  Ed.] 

DEAR  SIR,  Camden-place,  July  29th,  1773. 

Your  letter  found  me  upon  a  ramble  in  Sussex,  and  my  own  laziness  made  me 
postpone  my  answer  till  I  returned  to  Camden-place,  as  the  business  did  not  require 
immediate  dispatch. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  I  must  still  act  the  great  man,  by  lamenting  my  want  of 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


557 


power  to  obey  your  commands,  and  my  unfortunate  engagement  to  serve  another 
person  before  I  was  honoured  with  your  favour.  When  I  had  much  to  give,  I  could 
dismiss  a  friend  with  a  good  grace,  and  soften  the  refusal  by  a  future  promise  ;  but 
now,  alas  !  having  but  one  poor  vote  left,  which  is  not  worth  soliciting  above  once  in 
three  or  four  years,  I  am  truly  mortified  to  send  you  away  with  a  denial,  and  yet  I 
must,  for  my  friend  Dr.  Battie  commanded  my  vote  for  one  Dr.  Dowsett,  above  a 
fortnight  ago.  My  vote  being  thus  disposed  of,  my  interest,  if  one  could  be  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  other,  is  worth  nothing, — which  I  could  wish  otherwise  sometimes  for 
my  friend,  but  never  for  myself. 

This  little  business,  however,  has  with  me  some  merit,  as  it  has  produced  a  petty 
correspondence,  and  given  me  an  opportunity  of  inquiring  after  you  and  Mrs. 
Garrick  ;  and  since  you  have  given  so  uncomfortable  description  of  yourself,  you 
are  bound  in  conscience  to  inform  me  farther  of  the  state  of  your  health,  and  so  to 
continue  till  you  are  perfectly  recovered.  If  we  were  together,  perhaps  a  few 
morning  walks  would  have  a  quicker  effect  towards  restoring  your  health  than  any 
nostrum  in  the  physical  world.  But  Mistley*  is  the  only  mansion  you  deign  to  visit, 
and  so  Lord  Frederick  and  myself  are  forced  to  piece  up  a  half-party  without  you. 
We  are,  as  it  happens,  perfectly  well  at  present,  except  that  Fanny  is  confined  with 
a  dancing  cold  of  no  great  consequence.  Your  little  French  friend  fills  half  her 
letters  with  encomiums  of  the  Miss  Garricks,  to  whom  she  is  infinitely  obliged,  for 
I  believe  her  letters,  and  am  sure  her  commendations,  must  flow  from  gratitude,  being 
yet  too  young  to  flatter  or  dissemble. 

Let  me  know,  if  you  please,  what  is  your  destination  this  summer,  that  if  pos¬ 
sible  we  may  meet.  Mine  will  be  spent  principally  at  home,  till  I  am  called  upon 
towards  autumn  to  make  my  annual  visit  to  Bath.  I  am  happy  enough,  and  want 
nothing  but  the  company  of  one  of  your  literati  clubs  to  recall  the  memory  of  the 
classics,  and  revive  my  taste  for  Shakspeare,  being  at  present  but  too  much 
occupied  with  corn  and  hops.  Treat  me  then  with  an  epigram,  or  a  bit  of  a  pro¬ 
logue,  something  that  will  bear  carriage  by  the  post ;  or  if  you  have  nothing  of  that 
sort  in  readiness,  assure  me  of  your’s  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s  health,  and  I  will  be  content. 
My  lady  and  my  girls  desire  to  be  remembered  to  you,  and  to  join  their  compli¬ 
ments  with  mine  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  Yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOOTE. 

August  1,  1773. 

Mr.  Garrick  returns  his  best  compliments  to  Mr.  Foote.  Pie  has  too  long 
lamented  the  loss  of  his  society  not  to  accept  of  his  invitation  with  pleasure.  Had 
not  Mr.  Garrick's  inclinations  influenced  him  in  this  matter,  a  small  attention  to 


*  Mistley-Hall  in  Essex,  the  seat  of  the  Right  Hon.  Richard  Rigby. — Ed. 


558 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


his  honour  must  have  taken  him  to  North  End,  as  Mrs.  Garrick  was  resolved,  in  case 
of  any  prudery  on  his  part,  to  go  alone.  If  this  day  se’nnight  will  be  agreeable  to  Mr. 
Foote,  Mr.  Garrick  will  attend  him,  or  any  day  he  pleases  in  that  week  ;  till  then, 
he  is  engaged  with  his  old  friend  Clutterbuck,  at  Hampton.  He  must  likewise 
inform  him,  that  he  has  botli  a  wife  and  a  mistress  with  him,  and  should  one  be  left 
behind,  it  would  most  certainly  occasion  a  family  quarrel.  A  gentleman  who  loves 
and  understands  the  stage  and  law  of  “  Bankrupt,”*  last  Friday  declared  to  Mr.  G., 
that  it  is  the  author’s  best  performance,  that  there  was  a  full  house,  and  that  he  never 
was  better  pleased,  of  all  which  Mr.  Garrick  most  sincerely  wishes  the  author  joy. 


MR.  FOOTE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  August  1,  1773. 

I  am  happy  that  your  inclination  and  health  hold  for  Monday.  I  am  sorry  that 
Airs.  Garrick  should  think  any  preparation  necessary  for  bringing  any  person  she 
thinks  fit,  where  1  have  the  least  power. 

I  have  asked  Fitzherbert  and  Major  Mills  to  meet  you,  so  you  know  your  com¬ 
pany  :  I  beg  pardon,  Chetwynd,  who  is  much  yours,  will  be  here.  I  had  a  line  last 
night  from  the  North  ;  Woodward,  since  my  quitting  the  spot,  has  not  once  brought 
the  expenses.  Airs.  Jewell  has  been  vastly  followed.  I  am  exceedingly  obliged  to 
you  for  the  kind  conclusion  of  your  letter.  I  promise  you  I  should  not  have  hinted 
it  to  you,  but  in  the  confidence  of  your  friendship,  and  if  at  the  same  time,  I  could 
not  with  the  greatest  truth  say  that  I  am 

Most  sincerely  and  affectionately  yours, 

Samuel  Foote. 


MR.  W  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Stortford,  Aug.  4th,  1773. 

I  am  much  obliged  by  your  letter,  and  beg  to  be  forgiven  for  troubling  you  with 
any  repetition  of  our  past  affair,  which  I  never  will  mention  to  you  again,  after  say¬ 
ing  that,  at  our  first  treating,  you  told  me  you  would  give  me  the  same  salary  I  had  at 
Covent  Garden  ;  that  though  you  never  gave  guineas,  you  would  pay  the  difference 
of  the  shillings  out  of  your  own  pocket.  Now,  Sir,  I  think  I  may  affirm,  that  Mr.  G. 
Garrick  never  offered  me  twelve  guineas  but  only  pounds.  I  am  ashamed  of  taking 
up  your  time  thus,  and  have  done  with  the  dispute  for  ever. 

I  suppose  I  must  not  think  of  an  engagement  with  you,  and  I  am  more  unhappy 
than  you  can  imagine.  Will  you  accept  of  me  as  a  cadet,  or  if  I  quit  the  stage  for  a 
season,  will  you  engage  me  the  following,  I  know  net  [how]  to  apply  to  Mr.  Colman, 

*  “  Bankrupt” — an  allusion  to  Foote's  comedy  of  “  The  Bankrupt,”  then  acting  with  great  success  at 
his  theatre  in  the  Haymarket. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


559 


and  am  sure  he  never  will  to  me.  How  happy  it  is  in  your  power  to  make  me,  and 
I  should  think  without  hurting  yourself. 

I  am  now  at  Winter’s,  at  Stortford,  who  desires  his  respects  to  you.  I  do  not 
mean  to  trouble  you  to  write  again,  but  if  you  would  strain  your  friendship  a  little 
more  in  my  behalf,  you  may  relieve  me  from  a  very  miserable  state  indeed.  Con¬ 
sider  that  money  was  not  the  object  with  me,  but  rank  :  but  I  have  done. 

Believe  me  your  very  sincere  and  most  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

Mr.  Harris  lately  told  a  friend  of  mine  that  you  had  made  me  an  offer  which  he 
believed  I  had  accepted — Would  it  were  so ! 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  SMITH. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Aug.  6th,  1773. 

Why  will  you  repeat  that  disagreeable,  and  let  me  say  contradictory  business  of 
the  twelve  shillings  ?  You  have  really  done  a  simple  thing,  and  all  this  after-game 
of  words  only  makes  the  matter  worse.  Your  rank,  as  you  call  it,  stood  upon  terms 
— you  were  making  bargains,  instead  of  shaking  hands — were  you  to  know  all,  you 
will  find  that  I  can  produce  much  stronger  proofs  of  my  sincerity  than  you  can  of 
yours.  You  boggled  at  shilling's,  when  we  did  not  at  pounds,  besides  risking  things 
of  greater  consequence.  Let  the  business  drop,  I  hate  to  think  of  it ;  the  fact  is,  and 
you  should  own  it  like  a  man  as  you  are,  the  third  company  turned  your  head,  and 
you  had  forgot  what  your  heart  had  been  wishing  for  years.  I  will  say  and  write  no 
more  upon  the  subject;  I  can  now  promise  nothing  from  myself :  where  shall  you  be 
at  the  end  of  ten  days?  I  do  not  mean  to  stop  any  engagement  may  be  offered  you  ; 
but  should  a  circumstance  happen,  I  would  convince  you  that  I  have  not  the  least 
resentment,  but  am  still  your  friend  in  spite  of  your  folly. 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Remember  that  I  can  promise  nothing.  Pray  present  my  best  compliments 
to  Air.  Winter.  I  am  sure  he  shakes  his  head  at  you.  The  post  stays  for  my  letter, 
and  I  have  not  time  to  read  it. 

Endorsed, 

“  Another  letter  from  Mr.  Smith, 
and  my  answer,  Aug.  5th,  1773.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Camden  Place,  Aug.  5th,  1773. 

I  received  yours  this  morning,  and  am  so  well  pleased  with  the  contents,  that  I 
will  not  let  one  post  elapse  without  an  answer  to  tie  you  down  to  your  proposal, 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


560 

and  bind  the  bargain  with  the  most  explicit  assent  on  our  parts,  but  with  some  alter¬ 
ation  :  Monday  or  Tuesday  is  your  proposal ;  I  accept  it  with  my  construction  only 
of  the  word  or,  which  I  understand  to  be  the  same  as  and ;  and  if  you  will  consult 
your  learned  counsel,  he  will  inform  you  that  these  two  words  mean  the  same  thing, 
whenever  the  subject  matter  requires  such  a  construction :  and  that  is  the  case  here. 
Your  offer  of  either  proves  you  are  at  liberty  upon  both,  and  are  consequently  ready 
to  give  us  both  if  we  have  no  objection.  I  do,  then,  in  the  name  of  us  all,  declare  that 
we  take  advantage  of  this  offer  in  its  fullest  extent,  and  mean  to  claim  both  Monday 
and  Tuesday,  and  to  have  the  whole  of  both  these  days,  which  cannot  be  unless  you 
are  lodged  here  on  Sunday  night,  and  defer  your  departure  till  AVednesday  morning. 
This  visit  will  be  short  enough.  I  will  agree  to  lengthen  it  to  any  period,  but  I  will 
not  give  up  a  second  in  my  claim  upon  you  and  Airs.  Garrick. 

When  you  are  here,  we  will  settle  the  form,  time,  and  manner  of  returning  the 
visit,  together  with  the  number  of  the  visitors;  and  though,  in  a  common  call,  I  would 
wish  an  abatement  of  my  debt,  yet  in  this  I  mean  always  to  pay  liberally.  You  shall 
have  full  measure  and  running  over.  It  is  impossible  for  you  to  answer  this  letter  in 
time.  I  direct  it  to  Hampton  for  that  reason,  because  I  know  the  post  cannot  be 
intercepted,  or  the  letter  received  before  Saturday  next,  therefore  your  bed  will  be 
prepared  on  Sunday  night,  and  you  must  come  if  you  are  expected.  Parsons  is  with 
us,  and  will  stay,  if  you  come  on  Sunday.  Airs.  Garrick  knows  he  is  the  best  singer 
in  England,  which  is  more  than  you  know.  If  you  are  angry  with  me  for  this  tax¬ 
ation  of  your  ignorance,  I  shall,  instead  .of  asking  pardon,  repeat  the  affront  in  an¬ 
other  instance  that  concerns  yourself  much  more  nearly.  For  I  know  you  are  the 
best  actor  living,  which  is  likewise  more  than  you  know,  and  yet  it  is  true  never¬ 
theless. 

I  would  likewise  have  you  know  another  thing  which  perhaps  you  do  not,  and 
yet  there  I  shall  hardly  forgive  your  ignorance,  and  that  is,  that  I  am  at  all  times, 
yours  and  Airs.  Garrick’s,  Alost  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


MR.  H.  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Ross,  Aug.  6th,  1773. 

Before  Air.  Smith  left  London,  he  expressed  to  me  his  concern,  that  the  treaty 
between  him  and  you  did  not  end  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  you  both.  I  am  appre¬ 
hensive  that  a  misunderstanding  on  his  part  of  the  terms  he  supposed  you  to  have 
once  offered  him,  prevented  a  final  agreement  between  Air.  G.  Garrick  and  him. 

I  am  convinced  that  he  is  very  seriously  hurt,  by  the  apprehension  of  your  having 
taken  offence  at  some  part  of  his  conduct.  He  authorizes  me  to  say  so,  and  to  assure 
you  that  the  loss  of  a  place  in  your  good  opinion  would  give  him  very  deep  con¬ 
cern.  At  his  request,  and  with  very  earnest  wishes  of  my  own,  that  it  may  not  now 
be  too  late,  I  take  the  liberty  of  assuring  you  that  Air.  Smith  will  cheerfully  accept 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


561 


the  terms  proposed  by  Mr.  George  Garrick.  1  cannot  forbear  expressing  my  hopes 
that  nothing  happened  in  the  course  of  the  treaty,  or  has  since  occurred  in  your  thea¬ 
trical  arrangement,  to  prevent  a  connection  which  1  think  would  be  highly  advanta¬ 
geous  to  Mr.  Smith,  and  I  trust  will  be  satisfactory  to  you.  For  the  trouble  I  have 
heretofore  given  you  upon  this  subject,  and  the  liberty  I  now  take  in  renewing  it,  I 
will  make  no  apology  to  one  who  has  always  paid  a  very  friendly  attention  to  a  very 
impertinent  acquaintance.  I  should  have  wrote  to  you  sooner,  had  I  not  been  in¬ 
formed  that  you  was  not  at  your  villa  near  London.  I  am  now  enjoying  a  most 
comfortable  deviation  from  the  Oxford  Circuit,  under  the  roof  of  the  Rector  of  Ross. 
This  evening,  I  shall  join  the  main  body  at  Hereford :  a  city  which  has  the  advan¬ 
tage  over  the  famed  ones  of  Greece,  inasmuch  as  the  event  of  which  it  will  hereafter 
boast,  is  locally  as  incontestable  as  the  eminence  of  the  person  who  gives  so  much 
importance  to  that  event.  If  you  would  favour  me  with  a  line  directed  to  me  at 
Shrewsbury,  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  proof  of  your  excusing  the  liberty  I  have  taken. 
My  most  respectful  compliments  wait  upon  Mrs.  Garrick ;  and  be  assured  that  I  am, 

Your  very  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

N.  Cowper,  Jun. 

A  rumour  prevails  in  the  Oxford  Circuit  that  Lord  M.  resigns  before  the  next 
term.  God  forbid  it ! 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Cowper  about  Smith  of  Covent  Garden, 

Aug.  6,  1773.” 


REV.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  No.  5,  Gough-square,  Tuesday,  Aug.  10,  1773. 

I  never  intended  to  trouble  you  with  a  formal  petition  on  the  following  subject, 
had  not  my  late  very  bad  health,  and  my  want  of  power  to  be  industrious,  rendered 
it  necessary.  The  only  title  which  I  ever  thought  I  had  to  your  good  offices, 
was  your  active  and  well-known  humanity :  and  from  that  consoling  object,  more 
blooming  hopes  have  arisen  before  me  than  the  promises  of  a  thousand  obdurate 
Lords  could  have  afforded. 

I  proceed  in  communicating  the  state  of  my  mind  to  you  without  fear.  The  vul¬ 
gar  of  mankind  will  impute  to  idleness  and  profligacy  what  Mr.  Garrick  will  re¬ 
solve  into  the  anguish  of  a  susceptible  mind  harassed  out  by  misfortunes :  nor  will 
he,  like  them,  survey  with  a  menacing,  and  unforgiving  eye,  those  evils  which  that 
mind  may  have  partly  brought  upon  itself. 

Be  assured  I  did  not  relinquish  the  church  precipitately  and  impertinently  to 
throw  myself  on  your  protection.  But  it  had  sickened  my  soul  with  such  a  nausea, 
that  I  found  the  farther  toleration  of  it  would  be  to  me  the  worst  of  human  ills. 

After  a  painful  examination  of  my  external  circumstances  and  of  the  state  of  my 
mind,  it  too  evidently  appears  to  me  that  I  must  soon  either  tread  on  firm  ground, 

VOL.  i.  4  c 


562 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


or  drive  down  the  precipice  of  ruin.  But  from  the  latter  fate  I  strongly  hope  that 
a  great  and  benevolent  man  will  rescue  me,  who,  by  the  exertion  of  prodigious  genius, 
is  of  all  that  consequence  in  society  which  he  deserves  to  be  ;  who  is  one  of  those  supe¬ 
rior  beings  predestinated  by  the  original  and  general  laws  of  God,  to  save  the  misera¬ 
ble  and  weak,  to  correct  the  obliquities  of  conduct  and  of  fortune,  and  to  raise  sus¬ 
ceptible  minds,  sunk  in  obscurity  and  distress,  to  credit  and  to  happiness.* 

I  regret  not  that  the  Chaplainship  has  failed ;  for  you  yet  think  of  me  for  my 
good.  I  long  to  be  in  a  lay  capacity,  not  that  I  may  lead  the  life  of  a  licentious, 
but  of  a  free  and  ingenuous  man.  If  you  will  honour  me  with  your  interest,  to  pro¬ 
cure  for  me  a  creditable  and  permanent  office,  in  which  drudgery  would  not  be  re¬ 
quired,  of  which  I  am  unhappily  incapable,  I  should  be  the  happiest  of  men.  The 
metropolis,  notwithstanding  all  I  have  suffered  in  it,  yet  strongly  attracts  me.  But 
as  long  adversity  has  taught  me  to  think  that  I  merit  little  ;  I  should  be  content  to 
go  abroad  on  the  most  desperate  destination.  I  cannot  solicit  your  patronage  by 
any  stronger  plea  than  by  assuring  you  that  I  prefer  independence  and  honour  to 
every  other  consideration. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Percival  Stockdale. 

IS1.  B.  Best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  As  I  shall  soon  go  to  the  North,  I 
should  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  inform  me  of  your  arrival  in  town,  and 
favour  me  with  an  hour’s  private  conversation. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Leiston  Hall,  near  Saxmundham,  Suffolk,  Aug.  11th,  1 773. 

I  left  Winter’s  on  Friday,  and  received  not  your  favour  till  this  morning.  I 
cannot  enough  thank  you  for  it.  You  have  relieved  me  from  a  most  disagreeable 
state  of  mind ;  and  whether  I  am  happy  enough  to  be  with  you  or  not,  I  shall  at  least 
have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  you  are  my  friend.  I  believe,  nay  am  sure,  that 
Mr.  Harris  is  desirous  of  mediating  betwixt  Mr.  Colman  and  me,  but  while  there  is 
a  chance  of  my  being  at  Drury-lane  with  you,  I  shall  decline  all  other  engagement. 
I  will  say  no  more  about  shillings  or  guineas.  I  shall  with  pleasure  trust  my  fame 
and  fortune  in  your  hands.  If  I  have  been  wrong,  impute  it  to  the  error  of  my 
head,  not  my  heart.  I  own  the  golden  hopes  of  a  field-marshal’s  staff  misled  my 
judgment,  and  being  ill-advised  by  those  I  thought  wiser  than  myself,  added  still  to 
my  error.  I  never  doubted  your  sincerity,  and  am  convinced  you  meant  me  well 
from  the  beginning.  Instead  of  making  bargains,  I  shall  now  be  happy  to  shake 
hands,  and  my  heart  shall  go  with  them. 

I  understand  you  perfectly,  and  shall  wait  with  patience,  though  not  without 
some  anxiety,  till  I  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you  again.  You  will  see  my 

*  I  wish  even  misfortune  would  learn  to  be  less  abject  and  fulsome,  when  appealing  to  any  thing  really 
g  heat.  It  would  be  knavish  to  use  such  language  to  gull  outrageous  vanity  or  folly. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


563 


direction  at  the  top  of  this.  Where  would  you  wish  I  should  be  at  the  end  of  ten 
days  from  the  date  of  yours  ?  I  will  at  any  time  you  please  be  in  town,  at  two  days’ 
notice.  Or  if  you  are  to  be  with  Mr.  Rigby,  I  will  meet  you  at  Colchester ;  or  in 
short  where  you  like  best. 

Your  letter  has  given  me  such  spirits,  that  I  have  eat  two  rolls  this  morning  and 
swam  a  league  at  sea;  and  in  spite  of  fretting  you  shall  see  me  fit  to  start.  You 
have  made  me  happy. 

Sed  nisi  peccassem,  quid  tu  concedere  posses  ? 

Materiam  venise  sors  tibi  nostra  dedit. 

Si  quoties  homines  peccant,  sua  fulmina  mittat 
Jupiter,  exiguo  tempore  inermis  erit. 

You  see  I  have  been  reading  Ovid’s  Tristium.  Winter  did  indeed  shake  his  head, 
but  will  now  rejoice  as  does. 

Your  most  truly  obliged  and  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

I  should  think  it  base  in  me  now  to  conceal  any  thing  from  you  ;  so  shall  tell  you 
that  by  the  advice  of  a  friend,  who  had  been  talking  with  Harris  about  my  affairs, 
I  applied  to  him  to  make  up  matters  betwixt  the  proprietors  and  me.  I  at  that  time 
despaired  of  a  connection  with  you.  I  have  not  heard  from  Mr.  Harris,  so  shall  cer¬ 
tainly  go  no  farther  with  him  till  I  hear  your  determination. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  DAVID,  Old  Alresford,  Aug.  12th,  1773. 

I  was  so  happy  in  my  little  expedition  last  week  to  this  place,  and  the  motion 
and  air  agreed  so  well  with  us  both,  and  with  my  cough  especially,  that  I  am  tempted 
to  another,  in  hopes  to  put  a  finishing  stroke  to  he,  (an  Hampshire  cough,)  and 
write  from  my  sweet  cool  study  at  Alresford.  I  keep  my  resolution  for  the  25th 
or  26th,  if  the  gout  or  cough  keeps  from  me. 

If  there  are  any  particular  things  of  mine,  whether  plays  or  poems,  that  you 
think  may  be  an  hour’s  entertainment,  I  will  put  them  up  in  my  small  luggage. 

The  Bishop  takes  his  round  to  his  sons-in-law’s  houses  earlier  than  usual  this 
season,  which  prevents  my  spending  a  night  or  two  with  him  at  Farnham  Castle. 
This  enables  me  to  pay  my  respects  to  Dr.  Butler,  if  at  Farnham,  in  my  way  to 
you ;  where  a  bed  has  been  so  often  said  to  be  at  my  service.  An  Inn  is  my  aver¬ 
sion,  though  many  great  men  have  chosen  to  live  and  die  in  one :  and  I  have  heard 
it  contended  for,  that  the  service  you  pay  ready  money  for,  is  preferable  to  that  of 
a  wife ,  or  your  own  family  at  home — where  you  cannot  help  being  moved ,  and 
showing  damned  uneasiness  at  parting ;  which  is  very  unworthy,  one  would  think’ 
of  a  rational  being. 

Madam  joins  in  respectful  compliments  and  all  good  wishes  to  Airs.  Garrick ; 

4  c  2 


5G4 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  desires  no  better  care  may  be  taken  of  me,  than  she  would  take  of  Mr.  Garrick, 
were  lie  to  trust  his  person  to  her  keeping. 

I  am,  dear  David,  your’s  ever  till  death, 

We  return  to  St.  Maries  on  Saturday.  J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  SHELBURNE. 

MY  LORD,  August  15th,  1773. 

I  have  been  so  sincerely  flattered  with  a  message  delivered  to  me  by  Mr.  Bare- 
well,  who  is  now  with  me,  that  1  cannot  forbear  overflowing  with  impertinent  grati¬ 
tude  in  this  manner.  Mrs.  Garrick  and  I  shall  always  be  proud,  and  what  I  am  sure 
your  Lordship  will  like  better,  most  happy  to  pay  our  respects  at  Bowood.  Though  I 
cannot  fancy  myself  important  enough  to  have  deserved  this  mark  of  your  favour ; 
yet,  I  will  not  think  it  merely  an  act  of  your  Lordship’s  politeness,  for  La  Bruyere 
well  observes,  that  no  person  of  sensibility  can  truly  enjoy  any  honour  conferred 
upon  him,  unless  he  can  persuade  himself  that  he  has  some  small  right  to  it.  Not¬ 
withstanding  the  great  difficulty,  I  shall  set  my  ingenuity  immediately  at  work. 

I  am,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Garrick  begs  that  her  respects  and  best  acknowledgments  for  your  Lord¬ 
ship’s  goodness  may  be  presented  to  you: 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  to  Lord  Shelburne  upon  an  invi¬ 
tation  to  Bowood,  Aug.  15,  1773.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Camden-place,  Aug.  18th,  1773. 

I  write  with  fear  and  trembling  lest  my  ill-fortune  should  still  throw  difficul¬ 
ties  upon  every  plan  that  can  be  devised  for  our  meeting.  It  is  utterly  impossible 
for  us  to  reach  Hampton  before  the  week  after  the  Reading  races  ;  and  I  do  much 
suspect,  from  the  manner  of  your  note,  that  this  time  will  not  be  convenient  for  you. 
You  mention  Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  in  that  week,  and  here  you  stop, 
from  whence  we  fear  that  the  week  after  is  engaged.  If  it  is,  farewell  all  our  hopes ! 
Perhaps  my  fears  are  groundless.  Let  me  know  by  a  line,  by  the  first  opportunity, 
that  Tuesday,  the  last  day  in  this  month,  will  do  for  you  :  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  no 
earlier  day  will  do  for  us.  If  this  proposal  does  not  succeed,  I  shall  be  out  of  humour 
till  I  see  you  at  Bath. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 

You  will  accept  and  present  too  cur  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


565 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  SMITH. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sunday,  August  15th,  1773. 

I  received  yours  yesterday,  and  would  not  lose  one  post  in  desiring  you  by  all 
means  to  be  reconciled  with  Colman,  if  you  can  do  it  with  grace,  and  to  your  liking. 
I  must  entreat  you  not  to  delay  a  matter  of  such  consequence,  if  Harris  does  it  like 
your  friend.  Our  matters  are  uncertain,  and  I  should  ill  deserve  your  good  opinion, 
if  I  suffered  you  to  refuse  a  desirable  certainty  for  our  precarious  business.  Should 
you  succeed  with  the  managers  there,  let  me  know  it  immediately ;  you  may  depend 
upon  my  best  wishes,  and  best  offices,  when  they  may  be  exerted  to  our  mutual 
services.  Yours  most  truly, 

D.  G. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Camden-place,  Aug.  22d,  1773. 

I  wish  with  all  my  heart  that  you  was  not  half  so  much  in  request,  or  that  I  was 
a  little  more,  for  if  both  of  us  were  equally  insignificant,  we  should  have  leisure 
enough  for  each  other  ;  or  if  both  were  equally  sought  after,  our  time  would  be  per¬ 
petually  filled  up,  and  these  disappointments  would  not  be  so  vexatious.  I  had  an 
inward  feeling,  when  we  parted,  that  we  should  not  meet  again,  as  we  proposed,  and 
that  made  me  so  desirous  of  keeping  you  when  I  had  you.  But  now  I  despair  for 
the  remainder  of  the  summer.  You  and  Mrs.  Garrick  are  two  restless  people,  whose 
minds  are  always  upon  the  stretch  for  conversation  at  home  and  abroad,  and  are 
strangers  to  the  pleasure  of  one  day’s  solitude.  The  only  time  you  allot  for  thought 
or  reflection  is  eight  to  ten  in  the  morning  during  the  winter,  and  even  these  hours 
are  generally  interrupted  by  posts  and  boxlceepers.  You  see  how  fretful  your  letter 
has  made  me;  but  how  can  I  be  otherwise,  when  I  find  myself  deprived  of  a  pleasure 
that  I  have  lived  so  long  in  hopes  of?  I  conclude  that  your  poetical  chancellor 
will  insist  upon  his  day,  and  get  the  better  of  your  old  friend,  who  is  now  trampled 
upon  by  every  chancellor  with  impunity.  We  must,  in  our  return  to  Heading,  have 
the  mortification  to  pass  by  Hampton  unsaluted,  without  a  prospect  of  coming  back 
into  that  country ;  for  the  week  after,  my  hopping  begins,  and  when  that  is  over,  I 
doubt  I  must  take  a  journey  to  Deal.  I  once  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick  upon  Hounslow-heath.  Suppose  she  would  condescend  to  give  me  an  assigna¬ 
tion  in  the  middle  of  that  waste.  It  would  be  something  in  our  passage  to  get 
a  glimpse  of  you  both,  though  but  for  half  an  hour.  We  have  females  enough  to 
make  a  scene  of  witches,  and  you  and  I  might  personate  Macbeth  and  Banquo. 
But  to  be  serious,  if  you  will  be  so  good  to  send  me  a  line  on  Tuesday,  I  shall  receive 
it  here  on  Thursday  morning ;  but  if  you  miss  that  post,  we  shall  be  gone  to  Mr. 
Powys’s,  at  Fawley,  near  Ilenly,  Oxon,  to  which  place  you  must  direct  your  letter. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


566 

My  girls  are  gone,  so  I  have  no  compliments  to  send  you  from  this  place,  but 
Lady  Camden’s  and  Mrs.  Yeates’s,  our  Flashy. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  sincere  and  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

Camden. 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Loggon’s  Coffee-house,  Bristol,  Aug.  24th,  1773. 

The  latter  part  of  a  letter  I  received  from  you  last  night  would  have  made  me 
very  uneasy,  were  I  not  conscious  that  no  report  of  me  ought  to  make  you  so.  It 
would  have  been  kind  in  you,  my  dear  friend,  to  have  told  me  what  it  was,  instead 
of  filling  your  letter  with  that  idle  impertinent  woman,  who  ought  to  have  the  doors 
of  both  houses  shut  in  her  face.  Last  Sunday  night  I  had  a  very  violent  attack  of 
a  fever ;  but  thank  God  I  am  at  present  as  well  as  I  have  been  any  time  these  ten 
years.  Being  very  well,  I  am  vastly  inclined  to  be  in  good  humour — I  have  just 
finished  a  better  breakfast  than  we  used  to  have  at  Morgan’s,  at  Bath.  Hot  rolls 
and  butter  in  the  dog-days  !  By  the  by,  I  hear  you  open  with  “  The  Clandestine 
Marriage.”  The  handsomest  letter  I  ever  received  in  my  life  was  yesterday  from 
Hely  Hutchinson.  Mrs.  G.  and  yourself  are  very  kindly  remembered  in  it.  I  owe 
you  much  on  his  account ;  for  you  procured  me  his  friendship.  I  have  seen  some 
plays  here.  Mrs.  Hopkins  is  a  great  favourite,  but  had  but  an  indifferent  benefit. 
I  saw  her  Millwood  last  night  with  great  pleasure.  My  little  grey  mare  is  at  the 
door,  and  I  am  going  to  shake  down  my  breakfast  on  Durdham  Down.  God 
bless  you,  my  dear  Garrick ;  and  be  assured  that  I  have  been  so  long  used  to  admire, 
regard,  esteem,  and  love  you,  I  have  such  an  inveterate  habit  of  doating  on  your 
unaccountable  self,  that  I  could  not  divest  myself  of  my  affection  for  you,  were  I 
as  much  inclined  to  it  as  I  am  to  continue  most  cordially  and  unalterably, 

Yours,  G.  Colman. 

My  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  If  you  are  inclined  to  write,  give  me  a  line  directed  to  the  post-house  at 
Hath,  from  which  place  I  propose  setting  off  for  London  on  Wednesday,  Sept. 
2nd,  and  shall  be  at  Richmond  on  the  Friday  evening.  Nobody  here  (but  one) 
knows  that  I  have  heard  from  you,  or  that  I  write. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Archer 

Alzuma 

Antony  f“  AU  for  Love” 

Athelwold 

C“  Julius  Ceesar” 

Bajazet 

Alexander 

Biron 

Bevil 

Briton 

Caled 

Cambyses 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


567 


Coriolanus 

Jachimo 

Plume 

Chamont 

Jason 

Phocyas 

Castalio 

Kitely 

Publius — “  Roman  Father” 

Comus 

Lovemore 

Richard 

Edgar 

Loveless 

Rover 

Essex 

Leontes 

Timanthes 

Hamlet 

Leon 

Lord  Townley 

Hastings 

Young  Mirable 

Tancred 

Hengist — “  Rl.  Convt.” 

Macbeth 

Volpone 

Hippolitus 

Oakly 

Varan  es 

Henry  2nd 

Osmyn 

Valentine — “  Wit  without  Money. 

Do.  5th 

Osman 

Earl  of  W arwick 

Hotspur 

Orestes — “  Electra 

Sir  Harry  Wildair.* 

Herod 

Pierre 

DEAR  SIR,  Leiston  Hall,  near  Saxmundham,  Suffolk,  Aug.  24th,  1773. 

I  have  sent  you  a  list  of  what  parts  I  can  at  present  recollect  to  have  played : 
am  preparing  for  the  Plain  Dealer,  Pyrrhus,  and  Pierre.  The  former  I  fear  I  cannot 
do  much  with,  till  I  get  the  book.  If  you  have  any  business  for  me  that  requires 
dispatch,  or  any  parts  that  you  would  have  sent  to  me  hither,  my  sister  will  forward 
them,  if  you  will  order  them  to  her  house.  I  thought  on  you  on  Friday,  and  hope 
you  had  as  fine  a  day  as  we  had.  I  could  wish  to  stay  here  as  long  as  you  can 
spare  me.  I  have  seen  Bensley,  and  find  they  are  getting  ready  at  Covent-Garden 
“  As  you  Like  It,”  “  Hany  Fifth,”  and  “  Tancred.”  This,  entre  nous. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  most  sincere  humble  servant. 

W.  Smith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  SMITH. 

DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Aug.  25,  1773. 

I  am  this  moment  returned  from  Hertfordshire,  and  take  the  earliest  opportu¬ 
nity  to  let  you  know,  that  the  matter  I  hinted  to  you  has  failed.  I  will  tell  you 
more  when  I  see  you.  It  is  said  in  town  that  you  have  had  offers  from  Covent- 
Garden,  I  would  advise  you  to  accept  them  if  creditable.  In  the  mean  time  let  me 
assure  you,  that  if  you  and  Air.  Colman  still  continue  adverse  to  each  other,  the 
moment  there  is  an  opening  to  employ  you,  with  credit  to  you,  and  with  ease  and 
justice  to  ourselves,  we  shall  most  certainly  do  it.  I  write  in  a  great  hurry,  for  my 
coach  and  company  are  at  the  door  to  go  to  Hampton. 

Yours  sincerely,  though  in  a  hurry,  D.  Garrick. 

•  I  have  inserted  this  list  in  order  to  draw  from  it  an  inference  of  the  extent  and  mechanism  of  memory. 
These  fifty-two  characters,  in  which  Mr.  Smith  could  be  ready  at  a  short  notice,  amount  with  their  cues  and 
directions  to  probably  fixe  and  twenty  thousand  lines;  the  words  of  which  are  to  be  kept  in  their  exact  places, 
and  are  presented  by  the  memory  with  all  their  associations  of  place  on  the  stage,  action,  emphasis  and  ex¬ 
pression.  This  is  achieved  too,  not  by  a  man  of  plodding  scholastic  habits;  Mr.  Smith  delighted  in  the  table, 
the  chace,  and  the  race-course.  No  profession  that  we  know  displays  the  powers  of  memory  equally  with 
that  of  the  Actor. — Ed. 


568 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

St.  Maries,  August  26th,  1773. 

My  dear  hasty,  quarrelsome,  angry  friend,  audi  alteram  partem.  There  Lord 
Camden  will  agree  with  you,  and  do  me  justice.  I  followed  your  second  thoughts, 
your  more  mature  directions,  (as  they  are  generally  thought  even  to  a  proverb,)  and 
wrote  immediately  to  Hampton,  (not  to  Adelphi,)  as  your  letter  bade  me  in  a  post¬ 
script,  after  you  had  subscribed  yourself  mine  ever  and  most  affectionately.  Is  ever 
so  soon  over,  and  for  no  fault  at  all  ?  Perhaps  thou  dost  not  know  that  I  am  one 
of  the  most  punctual  youths  in  England.  I  cannot  accuse  myself  of  breaking  one 
single  appointment  through  my  life ;  nor  of  making  one  person  wait  one  single  half 
hour  on  business.  Indeed  I  have  a  bad  memory,  so  this  may  not  be  fact,  you  may 
say.  Ben  was  a  delinquent  this  way,  and  his  example  was  bad  enough  to  teach  me 
better.  He  used  to  argue  with  the  Bishop  that  he  was  a  more  punctual  man  than 
his  Lordship,  for  if  he  was  half  an  hour  behind  his  time,  the  Bishop  was  sure  to  be 
an  hour  before  it,  so  he  was  the  more  exact  by  half  an  hour.  This  is  plain  from 
calculation.  My  father,  who  to  be  sure  had  a  partiality  for  me,  used  to  say  in  my 
riddling-time,  “  Jack  is  such  a  lover  of  truth  that  he  cannot  make  a  riddle.”  It  was 
always  too  plain.  I  ever  hated  a  mystery :  I  hope  he  liked  me  never  the  worse  for 
that,  nor  will  you,  I  trust,  when  I  promise  you  myself  in  person,  D.  V.  on  the  2nd 
of  September : — Dinner,  I  cannot  say— I  may  take  pot-luck.  After  entertaining  a 
great  man  the  day  before,  I  shall  not  starve  if  I  come.  There  will  be  a  damnable 
hash  at  least.  My  letter  (which  I  trust  you  will  receive)  instructs  you  to  read, 
instead  of  Red  Lion,  Brentford,  George,  Hounslow. 

Madam  is  yours,  as  yours  is  mine. 

I  am,  dear  David,  au  revoir,  yours  affectionately, 

J.  Hoadly. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  August  26th,  1773. 

Cross  events,  unforeseen  impediments  and  difficulties  arising  from  time,  place, 
and  engagements,  are  the  plague  of  all  business  and  pleasure.  From  whence,  you 
will  say,  springs  this  reflection  ?  I  have  complied  with  all  their  desires ;  I  have 
cleared  my  house  to  receive  them,  and  I  have  supposed  my  Chancellor  sick,  dead,  or 
any  thing  else  for  their  sakes.  What  then  has  interposed  to  confound  a  plan  so  well 
concerted  ?  Sure  they  do  not  know  their  own  minds.  Indeed,  my  dear  Garrick, 
we  do,  but  we  do  not  know  the  minds  of  other  people.  You  see  by  the  enclosed 
that  Powys  and  his  family  are  discontented  at  our  plan,  and  demand  a  longer  visit 
from  the  ladies  at  Hardwick,  which,  all  circumstances  considered,  we  cannot,  accord- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


569 


ing  to  the  laws  of  courteous  hospitality,  refuse.  We  could  keep  to  our  appointment, 
and  be  happy  enough  at  Hampton  without  the  girls,  but  their  hearts  will  be  abso¬ 
lutely  broken  by  the  disappointment ;  and  you  would  be  sorry  even  at  your  time  of 
life  to  send  two  young  ladies  heart-broken  to  their  graves,  which  will  certainly  be  the 
case,  if  you  do  not  prevent  it  by  granting  us  two  or  three  days  more  before  our  visit. 
Can  you  give  us  till  Friday?  I  will  pre-suppose  your  answer;  for  when  things  are 
cross,  they  are  generally  very  cross.  I  therefore  expect  that  Chancellor  Hoadly,  to 
make  way  for  our  visit,  has  put  off  his  to  the  end  of  the  week,  and  that  will  be  your 
answer ;  to  which  I  reply,  that  if  he  comes  alone,  he  is  my  old  friend  and  I  shall  be 
glad  to  see  him,  and  we  will  take  our  chance  for  beds,  which  we  cannot  want,  if  there 
is  either  inn  or  barn  at  Hampton.  After  all,  I  will  put  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  to 
the  choice  of  two  or  three  plans.  First,  if  it  cannot  be  ordered  otherwise,  Lady 
Camden,  Sally,  and  myself,  will  wait  on  you  at  Hampton  next  Wednesday.  Second, 
which  is  best  of  all,  we  will  come  all  together  on  Friday.  Third,  you  shall  favour 
us  with  your  company  at  the  hopping,  and  we  will  return  the  visit  some  convenient 
time  before  the  end  of  next  month.  I  will  answer  for  myself  and  all  that  belong  to 
me  for  a  full  and  complete  performance  of  any  one  of  these  schemes  that  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick  shall  fix  upon.  I  have  wrote  to  Powys  to  tell  him  that  we  shall  not 
be  at  Hardwick  till  Monday  night,  and  have  sent  to  you  this  day  the  great  Tims  as 
my  ambassador  and  plenipotentiary  to  settle  the  terms  of  this  treaty,  with  full  powers 
to  consent  to  your  proposals. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 

Compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


J.  HOME,  ESQ.  TO  MR.  GARRICK 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Aug.  31,  1773. 

If  Shakspeare’s  statue  at  Hampton  had  pulled  off  one  of  his  marble  slippers,  and 
hit  me  a  slap  in  the  face,  I  could  not  have  been  more  astonished  than  with  your  let¬ 
ter.  It  would  not  have  surprised  me  to  hear  that  you  did  not  like  the  comedy,  that 
you  did  not  think  it  was  fit  for  the  stage ;  but  such  a  total  reprobation,  conveyed  in 
the  harshest  terms,  I  did  not  expect  from  you.  You  tell  me  that  I  have  been  mista¬ 
ken  in  the  plot,  the  characters,  and  the  dialogue ;  that  I  sent  you  a  parcel  of  long 
detailed  scenes,  without  force,  humour,  or  wit ;  and  finally,  that  the  piece  is  abso¬ 
lutely  incorrigible,  and  admits  of  no  remedy,  by  alteration,  addition,  or  omission. 
You  say  that  you  intend  to  read  it  a  second  time  :  if  you  entertain  more  favourable 
sentiments  then,  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  hear  from  you  ;  if  yon  do  not,  spare  me  the 
mortification  of  reading  a  second  invective  :  send  the  play  sealed  up,  and  directed  for 
me,  to  Becket’s;  let  the  comedy  and  your  opinion  of  it  be  forgot  by  you  and  me:  this 
VOL.  i.  4  D 


570 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


is  better  than  a  correspondence  of  contention  upon  a  subject  so  nice  as  this.  I  prefer 
friendship  to  authorship.  I  beg  leave  to  present  my  best  and  most  affectionate  com¬ 
pliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  as  much  as  ever,  yours, 

J.  Home. 

Endorsed, 

“  From  my  friend  Home.” 


J.  HOME,  ESQ.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Sept-  16,  1773. 

I  received  your  letter,  and  am  touched  with  the  kind  and  affectionate  concern 
you  express  from  the  apprehension  of  having  given  me  uneasiness.  I  am  still  of  the 
same  mind  to  show  the  play  to  nobody  but  you.  I  do  not  wish  to  appeal  to  any 
person  from  you,  nor  to  have  a  verdict  put  to  question,  or  prevail  against  your  judg¬ 
ment.  I  wait  with  patience  now  for  your  second  thoughts,  which  they  say  are  best : 
I  appeal  only  from  your  hasty  and  sudden  to  your  more  deliberate  judgment.  If 
you  then  think,  as  I  hope  you  will,  that  it  is  worth  the  trial,  that  you  can  suggest 
what  may  make  it  so,  I  am  ready,  you  know,  to  execute  with  alacrity  what  you 
propose.  Nobody  here  knows  of  the  play  but  Ferguson,  and  he  does  not  know,  nor 
shall,  as  long  as  I  can  help  it,  that  you  dislike  it,  till  this  matter  be  conducted  to  its 
end,  whatever  that  end  may  be,  by  ourselves  alone :  we  need  no  mediators.  If  any, 
there  is  but  one  whom  I  would  allow,  I  mean  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  whom  I  will  submit ; 
for  in  her  infallibility  I  believe,  and  am,  with  my  best  and  kindest  compliments  to 
her,  my  dear  friend,  Ever  most  affectionately,  yours, 

J.  Home. 

P.  S.  “  How  long  shall  you  keep  the  play  ?” — As  long  as  you  please.  Do  you 
think  I  intend  to  offer  it  to  any  body  else  ? 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  my  friend  Home.” 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

St.  Mary’s,  Sept.  19,  1773. 

You  will  not  be  displeased,  my  two  old  friends,  to  hear  that  your  patient  got 
safe  and  well  home  to  St.  Maries,  to  the  great  and  real  joy  of  one  very  good  woman, 
and  two  more  whom  I  reckon  not  so  good,  on  Friday  evening — perhaps  two  other 
men  may  think  them  quite  as  good. — Sad  wind  on  Wednesday — the  sandy  heath 
flew  about  our  ears,  though  the  rain  had  laid  the  dust  in  all  appearance.  We  met 
the  Butlers,  who  would  have  tempted  me  to  return  to  Farnborough  and  dine;  but 
not  personally  knowing  Mr.  Willmot,  I  declined  it,  having  three  men  and  four  horses 
with  me — and  I  rejoiced  afterwards,  as  I  had  not  Hebrew  enough,  nor  faith  enough, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


571 


to  enter  into  dispute  with  Dr.  B - and  Martin  Madan,  who  is  there  with  his  fa¬ 

mily.  Mr.  Willmot  having  declared  his  mind  settled  with  regard  to  the  thirty -nine 

articles,  fell  asleep.  Dr.  B - thought  it  dog  sleep ;  and  if  his  learned  wife  had  fallen 

into  a  similar  sleep,  it  had  been  but  a  judgment.  However  the  catches  and  glees 
sung  by  Madan  and  his  family  made  full  amends.  I  wish  he  had  seen  my  ballad 
of  “AU-a-Mad-ding.”  What  an  inconsistent  character!  I  domineered  alone  at  the 
Butlers,  had  my  boiled  chick,  &c.  and  received  them  handsomely  at  half-past  seven, 
as  the  modern  English  now  is.  Whither  are  we  going  down  the  hill  ?  would  Bishop 
Lowtli  and  Dr.  Johnson  say.  You  are  not  to  have  a  half  vessel  of  fine  mead  from 

Dr.  B - till  it  is  fine ,  which  is  an  unknown  point  in  futurity.  Madam  could  not 

meet  me  at  O.  A.  but  sent  my  honest  Welsh  Curate  and  his  wife  to  see —  my  bed 
well  aired,  and  their  son,  bound  to  an  apothecary  at  Aid. 

I  read  over  “  Albumazar,” — more  of  which  another  time.  The  weather  was  so 
rainy  on  Friday  morning,  that  I  wrote  by  the  post  to  excuse  my  coming  home ;  and 
was  there  before  it  came.  Airs.  Hoadly  would  send  a  card  with  ten  thousand 
compliments  to  Mrs.  and  Mr.  Garrick,  about  their  kindness  to,  and  care  of,  her  little 
husband  ;  but  she  has  never  a  card  gilt  on  the  edges,  and  she  cannot  be  persuaded  to 
write  plainly. 

I  bore  my  journey  very  well,  with  some  few  uneasinesses.  Adieu  !  G — grant  you  a 
new  colony  of  comedy-hands,  in  this  great  emigration  from  Ireland — and  grace  to  lay 
by  your  Christmas-tale,  and  not  look  at  it  till  three  months  hence ;  when  it  may  be 
a  new  entertainment  to  you.  I  remain,  with  many  thanks  for  your  hearty  enter¬ 
tainment  (not  your  beef  and  pudding)  of,  dear  David, 

Your  obliged  and  affectionate, 

J.  Hoadly. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  St.  Mary’s,  Sept.  25th,  1773. 

I  enclose  you  so  soon  a  prologue  for  my  Lord  Mayor’s  day,  because  I  foresee  I 
shall  have  no  time  for  such  important  matters  next  week,  having  my  visitation 
business  coming  thick  upon  my  hands.  The  word  three-man-beetle  is  so  obvious  in 
Falstaff,  and  the  opposition  so  much  stronger,  that  I  prefer  it  to  the  other  line.  The 
younger  child  of  the  old  man’s  dotage  is  always  the  favourite,  be  he  ever  so  rickety ; 
which  excuses  my  thinking  this  a  tolerable  prologue. 

Are  you  in  earnest  about  your  French  Manuscript?  I  would  not  take  pains 
quite  unnecessarily — it  is  an  ungrateful  and  unthankful  office.  Things  of  a  grave 
cast  have  succeeded  when  well  kept  up.  The  tale  is  pretty  enough  ;  and  if  your 
real  thoughts  are  in  its  favour,  I  may  find  a  time,  though  not  immediately.  Madam, 
though  very  indifferent  after  a  sleepless  night,  dined  out  to-day  at  Mr.  Copley’s, 

4  d  2 


5  72 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(with  me,  wlio  have  not  been  at  any  table  but  my  own.  Sir  J.  Mordaunt’s,  and  yours, 
for  this  twelvemonth,)  and  is  gone  to  the  Rooms  ;  and  gives  me  this  opportunity  of 
writing  over  the  prologue  and  sending  her  love  and  services. 

Yours  affectionately, 

J.  Hoadly. 


PROLOGUE  TO  EASTWARD  II OE. 

To  see  what  things  were  play’d,  ’twould  move  your  pity, 

In  former  days,  to  entertain  the  City. 

My  Lord  Mayor’s  play  out-mobb’d  my  Lord  Mayor’s  Show, 
And  nothing  served  but — Cuckolds  all  a-row; 

As  if  all  Grub-street  had  been  kept  in  pay, 

And  laureat  scavenger  had  writ  the  play. 

The  square-toed  alderman  still  went  to  pot, 

And  paid  for  all,  so  cully  like,  the  scot ; 

But  so  much  better  bred  and  better  dress’d, 

A  modern  alderman  is  no  such  jest. 

You  see  him  cook’d  and  frizz’d,  at  bed  and  board, 
Companion  for  my  lady  and  my  lord  : 

Perhaps  retaliating  the  modern  way, 

The  courtly  cuckoldom  of  Charles’s  day. 

Good  folk,  is  it  the  city  or  the  stage 
That ’s  so  reformed  in  this  enlighten’d  age  ? 

To-night  the  better  medium  we  shall  show, 

Ere  luxury  did  our  very  shops  o’erflow  : 

The  thrifty  sober  citizen  of  yore, 

Anxious  to  swell  by  honest  means  his  store ; 

Pointing  the  road  of  idleness  to  shame, 

Of  industry  the  path  to  wealth  and  fame. 

Ben’s,  Chapman’s,  Marston’s,  is  the  joint  design, 

And  woven  strong  the  undistinguished  twine. 

To  guide  such  satire,  lift  such  weight  of  Bays, 

Required  three  wits  of  our  forefathers’  days  : 

•This  Three-man-leetle  wields  one  modern  man — 

See!  our  own  Hogarth’s  self  adopts  the  plan. 

True  comic  genius  on  his  canvass  glow’d, 

Ne’er  deviating  to  farce  from  Nature’s  road  ; 

High  scenes  of  humour  did  his  pencil  write, 

And  in  pure  dramas  artfully  unite: 

When  on  the  stage  his  Prentices  are  shown, 

No  wonder  that  we  claim  him  for  our  own. 
fTis  yours  to  speak  the  piece,  with  critic  voice, 

Worthy  the  poet’s  and  the  painter’s  choice. 


*  Or,  Shoot  in  their  bow  one  only  modern  can — 
f  Or.  ’Tis  yours  to  speak  the  plan,  with  hand  and  voice. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


573 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  St.  Mary's,  Sept.  30th,  1773. 

I  have  put  a  few  thoughts  which  occurred  to  me  on  your  alteration  of  “  Hamlet*’ 
upon  paper,  which  you  are  welcome  to  make  use  of  or  not,  as  you  please :  if  I  had 
not  thought  them  consistent  and  agreeable  to  the  play,  and  almost  necessary  to  Ham¬ 
let’s  character,  I  had  not  wrote  them  down.* 

When  Ophelia  has  talked  to  her  father  of  repelling  Hamlets  letters,  it  would  not 
be  unnatural  for  her  to  give  a  late  one  of  Hamlet’s  to  him,  with  which  he  goes  imme¬ 
diately  to  the  King. — Several  critics  have  thought  that  the  death  of  her  father  only  is 
not  a  just  and  adequate  cause  for  Ophelia’s  madness  and  death  ;  and  as  many  have 
thought  the  character  of  Hamlet  much  injured  by  his  cruel  behaviour  to  Ophelia, — 

Qu.  Whether  it  would  not  take  off  greatly  from  these  objections,  to  make 
Hamlet  have  a  tender  sense  of  the  sufferings  of  Ophelia,  a  just  feeling  of  his  obli¬ 
gations  to  revenge  his  father’s  death,  and  a  conviction  of  the  impropriety  of  pursuing 
his  love  at  such  a  dreadful  time  ?  These  considerations  may  naturally  induce  him  to 
discourage  her  love  to  him,  to  slander  himself  purposely,  and  to  recommend  her  to  a 
nunnery.  All  which  Shakspeare  has  made  him  do  in  his  assumed  madness,  without 
intimating  any  design,  which  I  cannot  but  think  an  omission.  The  loss  of  her  love, 
concurring  with  the  death  of  her  father,  would  surely  be  a  more  adequate  cause  of  her 
madness  and  death,  which  I  think  may  be  preserved  with  Nature. —  Tantum,  if  tanti. 

In  the  second  scene  of  Ophelia  and  Polonius,  p.  262,  of  Theobald’s  8vo  Edition. 
I  would  leave  out 

“  Come,  go  with  me.  I  will  go  seek  the  King.” 

After  “  to  lack  discretion.” 

Oph.  .  .  .  There’s  his  last  letter  to  me : 

This  packet,  when  the  next  occasion  suits, 

I  shall  return. 

Pol.  .  .  .  Go  we  with  this  to  the  King. 

This  must  be  known. 

After  Hamlet’s  speech  “To  be,  or,  not  to  be” — 

“  Soft  you  now, 

The  fair  Ophelia  ! — I  have  made  too  free 

With  that  sweet  lady’s  ear.  My  place  in  Denmark, 

The  time’s  misrule,  my  heavenly-urged  revenge, 

Matters  of  giant-stature  gorge  her  love, 

As  fish  the  cormorant. — She  drops  a  tear. 

As  from  her  book  she  steals  her  eye  on  me. 


*  The  reader  may  be  amused  with  this  conspiracy  against  the  Prince  of  Denmark.  As  Lear  remarks, 

“  The  little  dogs  and  all. 

Tray,  Blanch,  and  Sweetheart,  see,  they  bark  at  me.” 

Surely  they  who  would  amend  the  writings  of  their  master  should  possess  some  powers  of  tragic  composition. 
Of  all  the  stuff  foisted  into  his  “  Hamlet,”  there  is  not  one  single  line  worthy  of  his  adoption, — Ed. 


574 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


My  heart! — Could  I  in  my  assumed  distraction 
(Bred,  says  the  common  voice,  from  love  of  her) 

Drive  her  sad  mind  from  all  so  ill-tim’d  thoughts 
Of  me,  of  mad  ambition,  and  this  world  ! 

Nymph,  in  thy  orisons  be  my  sins  remember’d  !” 

P.  328.  [Enter  Queen,  Horatio,  and  a  Gentleman .] 

“  What  would  she  have  ?” 

Gent.  She  speaks  much  of  her  father,  and  her  love,  &c. 

[Enter  King.  [Exit  Horatio. 

King.  This  is  the  poison  of  her  strong  conceptions, 

Sprung  from  her  father’s  death,  and  Hamlet’s  love,  &c. 

Laertes  enters  immediately  on  hearing  the  death  of  Ophelia.  Hamlet  is  on  the  stage. 

Ham.  Soft  you,  what’s  here  ? — Laertes  yet  in  Denmark  ! 

Laer.  Ophelia  ! — Dead  !  I ’m  angry  at  these  tears  : 

But  ’tis  our  trick — Nature  her  custom  holds. 

Let  shame  say  what  it  will ;  when  these  are  gone 
The  woman  will  be  out.  Oh  speak  the  manner. 

Ham.  If  I  weep  now,  they  must  be  tears  of  blood  !  (Apart.) 

Gent.  There  is  a  willow,  Src. 

Laer.  O  rose  of  May,  kind  sister,  sweet  Ophelia, 

By  Heaven,  thy  death  shall  be  o’erpaid  with  weight, 

Till  our  scale  turn  the  beam.  D’ve  see  this,  Gods, 

And  Hamlet  still  alive  ?  &c. 

P.  S.  I  have  almost  broke  my  little  finger,  which  has  brought  the  gout  into  my 
right  hand,  and  it  is  well  it  is  no  worse,  and  am  forced  to  make  use  of  good  Mr 
Davies,  who  though  a  Welsh  curate,  can  write ;  perhaps  that  is  in  his  other  capacity 
as  rector  of  Exton,  as  Sir  Jonathan  Trelawny,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  swore  in  the  cha¬ 
racter  fo  Baronet.  We  are  else  pretty  well,  and  join  in  compliments. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LADY  HERTFORD. 

MADAM,  October  1st,  1773. 

Yolti  Ladyship’s  last  note  to  Mrs.  Garrick  demands  our  best  and  warmest 
acknowledgments.  I  shall  always  be  proud  of  showing  the  sense  1  have  of  Lady 
Hertford’s  great  goodness  to  me.  As  I  fear,  from  some  late  observations  I  have 
made,  that  I  have  been  unhappy  enough  to  lose  his  Lordship's  favour,  I  think  my 
retreat  from  the  theatre  too  insignificant  to  announce  to  his  Lordship  ;  though  I  am 
vain  enough  to  imagine  myself  the  first,  and  not  I  hope  the  least  deserving  of  his 
theatrical  servants.  If  your  Ladyship  thinks  proper  to  mention  this  very  trifling 
circumstance  to  my  Lord  Chamberlain,  as  I  dare  not  trouble  him  myself  upon  the 
occasion,  it  will  add  to  the  many  favours  already  conferred  upon, 

Madam,  your  Ladyship’s  most  obedient,  Sec. 

Endorsed,  DaVID  GaRRICK. 

“  Answer  to  Lady  Hertford.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


575 


REV.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Portsmouth  Harbour,  October  2nd,  1773. 

The  hope  which  I  entertain  that  you  are  yet  disposed  to  be  my  friend,  not  a 
little  alleviates  the  torment  of  mind  which  I  suffer  on  account  of  my  late  egregious 
folly.  If  great  indiscretion  is  not  viewed  with  candour  by  you,  I  know  the  world 
so  well,  that  I  shall  expect  lenity  from  no  man  :  and  I  have  such  strong  reasons  to 
be  convinced  of  your  humanity,  that  I  flatter  myself,  if  you  knew  the  present  state 
of  my  breast,  your  resentment  for  my  misconduct  would  be  lost  in  your  compassion 
for  it.  I  am  afraid  I  shall  never  again  be  satisfied  with  myself,  and  therefore  never 
able  to  act  with  that  tempered  vivacity,  which  greatly  contributes  to  make  a  man 
agreeable. 

Were  I  at  peace  with  myself,  I  could  be  very  happy  here.  I  am  already  satis¬ 
fied  that  the  captain  and  lieutenants  of  this  ship,  by  their  behaviour  to  me,  by  their 
assiduity  to  accommodate  me  and  make  my  situation  every  way  agreeable,  are  very 
polite  people.  I  mess  with  the  lieutenants,  surgeon  and  purser — a  society  of  great 
temperance  and  decorum. 

I  have  been  thus  minute  in  the  description  of  my  situation,  because  I  know  you 
will  be  glad  to  find  that  there  are  yet  any  comforts  of  life  in  store  for  one,  whose 
heart  is  honest,  though  it  has  often  deviated  into  the  obliquities  of  imprudence.  I 
never  was  more  unfit  to  conciliate  new  acquaintance  than  I  am  at  present ;  but  I 
have  forced  myself  into  a  philosophical  drama,  which  has  hitherto  had  its  desired 
effect.  Before  the  expiration  of  a  month,  (and  God  knows  why  I  should  wish  to  be 
in  London)  I  fear  not  but  you  will  have  good  testimony  that  I  acquit  myself  here  to 
your  wishes. 

If  after  my  late  misfortune,  you  should  think  fit  to  have  my  advertisement  in¬ 
serted,  I  shall  send  it  to  Mr.  Becket ;  for  I  knew  not  what  I  was  about  when  I  left 
London,  and  brought  it  hither  with  me.  If  you  should  likewise  still  think  fit  to 
patronize  a  subscription  for  the  publication  of  what  I  have  written,  when  I  am  in 
town,  I  dare  say  I  shall  make  the  matter  practicable  as  far  as  Mr.  Flexney  is  concerned; 
and  be  assured  when  I  am  in  town,  I  shall  only  give  my  attention  to  such  objects  as 
may  promote  my  honest  interest. 

I  shall  write  to  the  worthy  Mr.  Ayrey  by  this  post.  Pray  make  my  most  respect- 
ful  and  grateful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  hope  you  will  soon  do  me  the 
honour  to  write  the  Chaplain  of  His  Majesty’s  ship  Resolution,  Portsmouth  Harbour. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  ever  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Percival  Stockdale. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


576 


REV.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thursday,  Gough  Square,  No.  5,  Oct.  4th,  1773. 

I  send  you  my  song,  as  you  were  kind  enough  to  promise  to  get  it  set  for  me  by 
Mr.  Dibdin.  If  it  is  agreeable  to  you,  I  should  wish  to  have  it  soon  done.  Perhaps 
it  may  have  the  honour  to  be  introduced  on  your  stage.  Yesterday,  Flexney  received 
from  an  unknown  hand,  (the  signature,  D.  L.)  a  very  high  encomium  on  my  poem. 
To  a  prose  letter,  the  author  adds  ten  or  twelve  verses,  the  purport  of  which  is  as 
follows :  He  laments  that  darkness  had  long  overspread  the  poetical  world,  till  light 
broke  upon  it  from  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  Chambers :  he  concludes  that  Apollo, 

“  Forth  from  the  Eastern  Chambers  sheds  his  ray, 

And  in  the  Poet  pours  a  flood  of  day.” 

In  his  letter  he  told  Flexney  that  he  might  publish  the  lines  where  and  when  he 
pleased,  if  he  thought  they  would  at  all  contribute  to  draw  attention  to  the  poem. 
Flexney  tried  to  get  them  into  the  Public  Advertiser ;  but  they  could  not  promise  to 
insert  them  for  many  days.  Unluckily  Thompson  called  at  Flexney’s,  and  the  blun¬ 
dering  bookseller  gave  them  to  him,  that  he  might  insert  them  in  an  evening  paper. 
I  could  have  wished  that  they  had  not  come  into  his  hand,  for  they  perhaps  may  be 
mangled  by  him,  or  not  inserted  at  all.  But  the  most  flattering  panegyric,  the  sale 
of  the  poem,  is  not  yet  vouchsafed  me.  Flexney  has  as  yet  sold  but  a  few.  I  am 
Sir,  with  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Percival  Stockdat.e. 

Thompson  called  on  me  yesterday,  and  desired  me  to  present  his  compliments  to 
you  and  your  lady.  Saturday  morning. 

N.  B.  I  have  advanced  in  my  poem  on  you.  Would  to  God  it  were  closed  to 
my  mind ! 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Stockdale,  with  a  good  Song,  1773.” 

LE  PHILOSOPHE  DE  SANS-SOUCI. 

I  care  not,  ye  Gods,  for  the  breath  of  a  name  ; 

I  request  only  pleasure,  give  great  men  their  fame ; 

I  seek  not  through  ages  my  glory  to  spread ; 

Let  me  live  while  I  live,  and  when  buried  be  dead. 

May  I  find  a  retreat,  where  the  sense  of  our  Isle 

And  its  liberty  flourish  with  spring’s  constant  smile ; 

Where  the  softness  of  climate  makes  pleasure  of  ease. 

Where  fragrance  and  health  are  convey’d  in  each  breeze. 

Then,  in  verdure  embower’d,  will  I  often  recline, 

And  thank  for  his  foliage  the  god  of  the  vine  ; 

Aet  let  not  life’s  current  inactively  roll, 

Let  my  friend,  nymph  and  bottle,  give  play  to  my  soul. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


577 


May  I  sometimes  read  authors  who  write  like  Montaigne, 
Who  speak  to  the  fancy,  but  plague  not  the  brain  ; 

And  when  a  gay  hour  brings  chimerical  views, 

As  I  sport  with  my  mistress,  I’ll  sport  with  my  Muse. 

Thus  the  pale  spectre,  Care,  may  I  still  chase  away, 

My  night  crown’d  with  rapture,  with  pleasure,  my  day : 
From  the  lumber  of  life,  and  its  knavery  released, 

The  lie  of  the  statesman,  the  gloom  of  the  priest. 

I  care  not,  ye  gods,  for  the  breath  of  a  name ; 

I  request  only  pleasure,  give  great  men  their  fame  ; 

May  I  live  to  myself,  while  to  others  they  shine  ; 

Let  theirs  be  the  Cloud,  let  the  Juno  be  mine.” 


LADY  HERTFORD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Monday,  Oct.  4th,  1773. 

Lady  Hertford  sends  her  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  thinks  herself  ex¬ 
ceedingly  obliged  to  him  for  the  favour  he  has  shown  Thomas  Wilson,  upon  her  re¬ 
commendation.  She  desires  to  share  with  Mr.  Garrick  in  his  retirement,  when  their 
Lord  Chamberlain  is  deposed ;  but  till  then,  she  thinks  she  can  answer  for  it,  that 
Lord  Hertford  will  take  every  opportunity  in  his  power  to  give  Mr.  Garrick  pleasure, 
and  never  agree  to  any  thing  that  can  give  him  pain.* 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CAUTHERLY.t 


§jj^  Adelphi,  Oct.  7th,  1773. 

Some  peculiarities  in  your  behaviour  of  late  demand  my  notice,  which  I  shall 
communicate  to  you  now,  and  from  this  time  all  correspondence  shall  cease  between 
us.  You  were  pleased  to  keep  the  part  of  Lelio  nine  days,  and  then  return  it  to  my 
brother.  As  the  taking  five  pounds  from  you,  for  your  giving  up  a  part,  (which  I 
most  certainly  shall  do,)  is  no  recompense,  or  excuse  for  your  behaviour,  I  shall  tell 
you  my  mind,  and  give  a  check,  if  I  can,  to  a  most  unjustifiable  importance  you  are 
pleased  to  assume,  which  having  no  foundation  but  in  your  own  brain,  is  as  insuf¬ 
ferable  as  it  is  foolish.  You  say,  that  if  I  desire  you  to  do  this  or  that,  you  will 

*  A  very  elegant  return  from  an  accomplished  woman,  to  the  irritable  curiosity  of  Garrick’s  announcement 
of  his  retreat  a  few  pages  back. — Ed. 

t  An  admirable  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  Mr.  Garrick  could  repress  the  presumption,  the  petulance, 
and  the  folly  of  his  troops.  All  times  supply  abundant  demands  of  such  remedies,  since  men  will  be  men, 
and  no  profession  excites  so  much  vanity  as  the  actor’s.  In  our  own  days,  the  Cauthcrlys  abound,  but  the 
managers  are  not  Garricks.  —Ed. 

4  E 


VOL.  I. 


578 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


condescend.  Sir,  I  will  receive  no  favours  from  you— I  cannot ;  but  I  will  desire  you 
to  do  your  business,  or  to  leave  it — one  or  the  other  you  must  and  shall  do.  You 
talked  to  my  brother  of  being  just  to  yourself—  a  foolish,  conceited  phrase ;  you  had 
better  take  care  to  be  just  to  other  people,  and  to  your  duty.  The  rank  and  im¬ 
portance  you  have  assumed,  I  have  given  you,  and  for  which  I  have  been  frequently 
abused,  publicly  and  privately.  The  character  of  Lelio  is  worthy  of  as  good  an 
actor ;  the  character  which  Mrs.  Abington  plays  is  much  inferior  to  Lelio,  which 
you  have  rejected  :  however,  it  is  disposed  of  to  one,  who  will  play  it  with  good- 
humour,  and  agreeably  to  the  public.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  throwing  “  The  Irish 
Widow”  in  my  teeth ;  depend  upon  it,  that  I  shall  always  think  of  your  condescension 
with  all  due  gratitude.  Would  Mrs.  Barry  be  satisfied,  I  would  not  let  you  appear  in 
it  again  upon  any  account.  As  you  are  growing  too  important  for  me,  and  as  I  shall 
not  submit  to  ask  favours  of  you,  if  you  will  not  do  your  business  as  you  ought,  1 
would  advise  you  to  make  the  best  and  properest  retreat  you  can,  with  justice  to  your¬ 
self;  and  I  am  not  displeased  that  you  are  in  such  a  happy  situation,  that  you  can  live 
without  the  stage.  Your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Be  assured  that  I  shall  no  more  hurt  your  importance  by  sending  you  any  parts. 

Endorsed, 

“  Copy  of  a  letter  to  Mr.  Cautherly.” 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Oct.  7th,  1773. 

I  am  just  now  favoured  with  your  letter  from  Lord  Palmerston,  and  very  happy 
to  hear  you  are  recovering  so  fast  from  your  late  indisposition.  All  your  friends  were 
much  alarmed  by  the  bad  accounts  of  your  health  in  the  papers,  and  nothing  could 
be  more  seasonable  than  your  two  last  letters  to  remove  my  apprehensions  for  your 
safety.  You  have,  I  suppose,  before  this  time,  received  my  answer  to  your  former 
letter  on  the  subject  of  Captain  Schaw  ;  you  will  find  in  that  an  anticipation  of  some 
part  of  what  I  might  now  say  on  the  subject  of  the  tragedy.  It  is,  I  believe,  at  pre¬ 
sent  in  the  possession  of  Air.  Courtney,  in  Bryanston-street,  Portman-square ;  I  find 
Air.  Sheridan  has  been  in  search  of  it  to  have  the  parts  studied.  If  it  cannot  be 
found,  or  you  think  it  necessary,  I  can  immediately  send  over  a  correct  copy,  which 
I  have  directed  to  you  under  cover  to  Air.  Chamier ;  but  if  it  is  found  with  Mr. 
Courtney,  or  by  his  means,  I  should  wish  to  postpone  sending  another  complete  copy 
till  I  have  an  opportunity  about  the  middle  of  November,  by  a  particular  friend,  who 
is  going  to  London,  and  will  deliver  it  into  your  hands.  As  it  is  material  to  me  to 
be  informed  upon  this  point  immediately,  may  I  request  you  will  let  me  know  your 
commands,  by  a  single  line,  as  soon  as  possible.  There  are  some  alterations ;  but 
though  it  might  be  difficult  to  send  them  in  detached  papers,  they  are  of  such  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


579 


nature  as  to  occasion  very  little  or  no  inconvenience  from  its  being  studied  according 
to  tbe  copy  now  in  London.  I  enter  perfectly  into  all  your  sentiments  about  Mr. 
Sheridan  senior,  and  know  how  difficult  it  will  be  to  keep  clear  of  his  jealousy  ;  but 
though  he  is  sufficiently  intractable  and  opinionated,  you  who  have  so  long  been  accus¬ 
tomed  to  govern  all  tempers,  will  not,  I  think,  be  at  a  loss  how  to  manage  his.  I  am 
infinitely  obliged  to  you  for  the  assistance  you  promise  me.  Mr.  Sheridan  senior 
ought  to  have  some  kindness  for  me,  for  I  have  served  him  very  essentially  on  some 
subjects  of  importance  to  him,  particularly  on  his  late  subscription  for  a  Dictionary. 
Mr.  Tighe  and  I  together  procured  above  twenty  times  more  names  in  his  list,  and 
more  money  in  his  purse,  than  all  his  other  agents  united.  He  cannot  do  me  a 
greater  kindness  than  leaving  this  matter  as  much  as  possible  to  your  direction.  On 
my  friend  Tighe’s  account,  I  was  very  attentive  and  serviceable  to  Henderson  when 
he  was  here,  and  have  no  doubt  of  his  exerting  himself  in  the  tragedy.  He  is  sensi¬ 
ble  and  well  tempered ;  but  as  to  his  merit  as  an  actor,  I  leave  it  to  be  determined  by 
better  judges  than  myself.  For  my  own  sake,  I  hope  the  public  will  be  satisfied  with 
him.  Digges,  when  I  saw  him,  was  one  of  the  most  spiritless,  inarticulate  mummers 
I  ever  beheld.  Time,  that  makes  a  calf  an  ox,  perhaps  may  have  made  him  a  good 
performer. 

Alas,  what  shall  we  do  for  an  epilogue !  I  know  no  friend  but  yourself  who 
writes  better  than  the  bellman.  I  am  a  miserable  hand  myself,  and  never  could  put 
together  six  lines  in  that  way  which  would  not  disgrace  a  school-boy.  My  wife 
desires  her  love.  Believe  me  ever,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  affectionate  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 


MR.  G.  FAULKNER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Oct.  9,  1773. 

Having  been  applied  to  by  Mr.  Lucas,  tbe  son  of  the  late  Dr.  Lucas,  to  write 
to  you  to  recommend  a  dramatic  piece  of  his,  “  The  Earl  of  Somerset,”  an  historical 
tragedy,  which  he  tells  me  has  been  approved  of  by  Mr.  Brooke,  Mr.  Sheridan,  and 
Mr.  Thomas  Wilkes  our  friend,  who  perused  it  with  much  minuteness,  and  had  wrote 
to  you  on  that  occasion,  and  that  a  recommendation  of  it  from  me  to  you  would  be  a 
means  of  having  it  acted  in  London.  I  have  not  seen  it,  nor  would  I  presume  to 
write  to  you  to  have  that  or  any  other  play  acted  on  my  account,  as  you  are  the  best 
and  most  universal  judge  of  what  will  please  the  public.  I  understand  there  is  a 
fair  copy  taken  of  it,  in  order  to  be  sent  to  you.  I  shall  not  trouble  you  more  on 
this  subject,  as  I  know  how  very  precious  your  time  is.  If  you  answer  this  letter,  it 
will  be  a  very  great  favour.  I  wish  Mr.  Wilkes  had  not  put  this  task  upon  me — 
you  have  made  him  the  most  happy  man  in  the  world  by  sending  your  picture  to 
him,  by  Mr.  Fitzmaurice,  in  whose  company,  when  he  was  last  in  Ireland,  I  had  the 
greatest  happiness  in  talking  of  you  and  your  great  merits,  and  universal  genius, 

4  e  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


580 

with  Mr.  Wallace,  Captain  Dodd,  and  Mr.  Barwell  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
always  toasted  your  health.  Some  time  ago,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Dawson,  whom 
he  feared  you  was  angry  with,  I  wrote  a  letter  in  his  alleviation  to  you ;  but  he  had 
not  the  happiness  of  seeing  you,  which  I  am  very’  sorry  for,  as  my  epistle  was  to 
intreat  you,  in  my  name,  and  the  whole  kingdom  of  Ireland,  for  you  and  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick  to  come  over  and  see  us ;  and  that  Neptune  would  insure  you  both  a  safe  pas¬ 
sage  hither  by  way  of  Scotland,  or  Holyhead  to  and  fro. 

As  I  understand  by  Mr.  Wilkes  that  he  frequently  writes  to  you,  and  is  favoured 
with  your  answers,  I  cannot  possibly  send  any  news  from  hence;  however,  I  will 
tell  you  what  I  hear:  Mr.  Rider,  the  present  manager,  told  me,  that  he  paid  Mr. 
Sheridan  more  than  1400/.  before  he  set  out  for  Corke  and  Limerick,  where  he  made 
more  than  TOO/.  That  Heaphy,  as  Sheridan  informs  me,  made  above  800/.  profit,  as 
being  proprietor  of  those  theatres.  I  must  conclude  this  letter  in  sorrow,  being  afraid 
that  Mrs.  Fitzhenry  and  other  passengers  are  no  more,  as  from  the  stormy  weather 
and  violent  rains,  they  waited  three  weeks  for  calms ;  and  that  last  Saturday,  she 
and  others  went  on  board  the  Clermont  Packet  Boat  at  Holyhead,  and  have  not  since 
been  heard  of.  although  we  have  had  four  mails  which  arrived  on  Thursday  last. 

I  shall  take  no  more  of  your  time  than  to  request  you  will  be  pleased  to  make  my 
best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  Mr.  Fitzmaurice,  Mr.  Wallace,  Mr.  Barwell,  and  Capt. 
Dodd,  which  will  oblige 

Your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

•  George  Faulkner. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  Oct.  10,  1773. 

The  theatre  is  opened,  and  you  are  now  upon  duty  at  Drury -lane.  Do  you  re¬ 
member  that  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  gave  me  a  promise  to  steal  down  here  some  holi¬ 
day  and  make  us  happy  in  your  company  ? 

“  Aude,  hospes,  contemnere  opes, - 

- rebusque  veni  non  asper  egenis.”* 

I  shall  set  out  for  Bath  towards  the  end  of  the  month,  and  it  is  yet  a  long  time 
before  I  can  hope  to  meet  you  in  mv  morning  walks,  and  therefore  I  do  beg,  when 
you  have  nothing  to  do,  and  are  wearied  with  the  drudgery  of  management,  that  you 
would  come  and  repose  yourself  here,  where  you  will  be  welcomed  by  a  family  who 
wish  to  preserve  a  perpetual  friendship  with  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


*  Virg.  Jineid.  S,  v.  364. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


581 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

% 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Oct.  Ilth,  1773. 

I  am  afraid,  before  this  time,  you  have  accused  me  in  your  own  mind  both  of 
unpoliteness  and  ingratitude,  as  our  edition  of  Shakspeare  has  been  long  advertised, 
and  yet  no  copy  of  it  sent  in  to  Mr.  Garrick,  who  had  an  undoubted  right  to  the 
very  first  that  was  delivered  from  the  press.  The  truth  is,  that  I  was  at  a  great 
distance  from  London  when  the  advertisements  appeared  in  the  papers ;  neither  had 
the  proprietors  given  me  the  least  previous  notice  of  their  intention,  or  furnished 
me  with  a  single  set.  It  seems  that  the  new  publication  of  Mr.  Bell  had  forced 
them  into  this  hasty  measure ;  though  they  profess  themselves  to  want  an  adequate 
apology  for  their  behaviour  in  announcing  it  to  the  world,  before  any  presents  were 
made  to  those  who  had  alike  deserved  them  from  both  editors  and  booksellers. 
Such  being  the  state  of  the  case,  I  am  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  apologising  to 
you  for  them  as  well  as  for  myself,  and  of  desiring  you,  at  the  same  time,  to  accept 
this  tardy  and  slight  acknowledgment  for  the  assistance  we  have  received  from  an 
examination  of  your  old  plays.  Dr.  Johnson,  as  I  am  informed,  is  still  absent,  and 
therefore  I  likewise  think  it  my  duty  to  return  you  thanks  in  his  name  as  well  as  in 
my  own. 

To  Mr.  Garrick,  a  single  glance  of  whose  eye  has  long  been  the  best  expositor 
of  Shakspeare’s  meaning,  our  cold  annotations  must  appear  tedious.  Such,  how¬ 
ever,  as  they  are,  they  are  now  before  the  public ;  and  if  those  who  have  not  Mr. 
Garrick’s  knowledge  of  the  author,  are  but  possessed  of  a  small  share  of  his  candour, 
the  junior  editor  will  have  the  less  to  apprehend  from  the  attacks  of  criticism. 

This  precipitancy  in  the  proprietors  has  vexed  me  a  good  deal,  as  it  has  obliged 
me  to  appear  uncivil  and  ungrateful  to  several  friends,  and  more  particularly  to 
you  ;  but  I  could  not  get  my  copies  even  done  up  in  this  slovenly  manner,  till  last 
night.  I  cannot  help  adding  that  I  enjoy  but  one  advantage  over  the  rest  of  the 
world,  in  respect  of  the  new  commentaries,  viz.  that  with  me,  the  task  of  reading 
them  is  happily  over. 

I  am,  with  great  truth,  your  much  obliged  and  most  obedient, 

G.  Steevens. 

P.  S.  You  very  kindly  promised  some  time  ago  to  speak  in  favour  of  my  friend 
Collins*  to  Mr.  Townly.  Collins  has  at  present  a  sort  of  claim  on  you,  for  the  St. 
James’s  Chronicle  must  have  shown  you  that  he  is  now  in  the  pillory  on  account  of 
Shakspeare.  Some  wicked  wag  has  got  hold  of  a  truly  valuable  note  of  his  about 
potatoes,  and  is  laughing  at  him  without  mercy.  But  I  must  beg  you  will  not  men¬ 
tion  his  profession  to  any  one,  as  that  circumstance  alone  might  prove  a  fresh  source 
of  merriment. 

*  A  worthy  harmless  apothecary,  whose  name  Mr.  Steevens  took  the  liberty  of  subjoining  to  a  very  provo¬ 
cative  note  in  his  Shakspeare,  written  obviously  by  himself.  I  presume  the  wicked  wag  in  the  St.  James’s  Chro¬ 
nicle  was  the  commentator  on  Shakspeare,  as  Johusou  said  of  him  “  uniformly  mischievous." — Ed. 


i)  82 


PRIVATE  CORRESPON DENCE  OF 


LADY  HERTFORD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


October  17th,  1773. 

Lady  Hertford*  sends  her  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  lias  the  plea¬ 
sure  to  inform  him,  that  the  managers  of  Drury -lane  and  Covent  Garden  Theatres 
have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  report  they  heard  about  another  theatre ;  but  she 
be<rs  not  to  have  her  name  mentioned  for  this  information.  She  desires  to  present 
her  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Oct.  25th,  1773. 

I  have  delayed  to  answer  your  very  polite  and  obliging  letter,  that  I  might  not 
trouble  you  before  I  had  seen  “  Macbeth but  of  his  performance  I  shall  have  no 
occasion  to  speak,  as  I  suppose  that  sound  critic,  Mr.  Becket,  gave  you  an  immediate 
account  of  it ;  and  he  is  certainly  the  ablest  man  alive  to  describe  the  graces  of  Mack- 
lin’s  action,  as  they  can  only  be  equalled  by  those  of  his  own. 

I  hope  you  will  think  you  owe  me  something  on  account  of  what  I  have  endured 
in  consequence  of  the  jog  you  gave  to  my  curiosity.  One  hour  I  was  squeezed  to 
death  at  the  door  in  Bow-street :  another  spent  I  in  the  pit  among  half  the  black¬ 
guards  about  town :  and  for  the  space  of  three  and  a  half  more  1  was  imprisoned  to 
hear  the  lines  of  Shakspeare  elaborately  pumped  up  from  the  bottom  of  a  well  as  deep 
as  that  in  Dover  Castle.  All  I  wish  to  have  in  return  for  these  my  sufferings  is,  a 
few  days’  notice  before  you  appear  in  Macbeth  yourself,  that  I  may  summon  some 
friends  out  of  the  country  who  have  never  seen  you  in  that  character,  and  will  delay 
their  annual  visit  to  me  till  I  can  get  previous  intelligence  of  when  you  play  it. 

I  am  highly  flattered  by  your  good  opinion  of  our  edition.  It  has  many  defects, 
I  know,  and  in  some  future  impression  they  shall  be  amended.  I  believe  I  shall  once 
more  trouble  you  for  some  of  your  old  plays,  which  I  did  not  examine  with  a  suffi¬ 
cient  degree  of  attention.  I  remain  obliged  to  you  for  your  many  favours, 

And  am  most  truly  and  sincerely,  yours,  &c. 

George  Steevens. 

Pray  is  not  Kenrick  the  conductor  of  the  penny  touch,  which  did  me  the  honour 
to  couple  your  name  with  mine  a  few  days  ago  ?  But  why  or  wherefore  I  suppose 
we  are  alike  ignorant.  I  suspect  K.  because  it  is  no  new  thing  for  him  to  praise 
himself. 

*  Ever  kind  and  gracious  !  How  this  great  man  was  beloved,  admired,  and  supported  I — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


583 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  S'-*  Mary’s,  Nov.  1 6th,  1773. 

I  have  just  recovered  hand  enough  to  ask  you  how  you  do;  which  I  think  I 
need  not  do,  seeing  your  name  so  often  in  the  news.  It  rejoices  the  cockles  of  my 
heart,  old  boy,  to  see  you  so  able  a  man.  As  promises  and  pie-crust  are  made  to  be 
broken,  so  opinions  and  (I  want  a  word  beginning  with  an  O)  are  made  to  be  changed 
Eastward-Hoe  not  on  Lord  Mayor’s-day.  The  Fair  Quaker,  which  we  agreed  to  be 
shimmed  milk,  (nay,  hogwash)  whipped  up  into  syllabub,  and  swallowed  by  a  foolish 
audience  as  if  substantial  as  roast  beef.  You  think  you  may  do  what  you  please  with 
Mr.  Town,  so  you  give  him  but  a  raree-show ;  but  take  a  little  care  he  does  not  revolt 
against  absolute  nonsense,  however  decorated.  Though  he  seems  not  to  have  great 
judgment  of  the  sword,  yet  he  may  be  sturdy  enough  to  fight  you  with  pistols. 

As  I  find  you  hold  your  opinion  of  the  Hours  Jealousy,  I  would  have  you  send  it 
me  back  again.  It  may  make  my  grand-children  laugh ;  for  by  that  time  our  de¬ 
clining  taste  may  be  bad  enough  to  think  it  a  fine  thing. 

I  should  be  glad  to  know  your  present  real  opinion  of  the  French  piece  you  en¬ 
trusted  me  with.  Would  you  truly  have  me  waste  any  time,  if  I  should  have  it  in 
my  power,  upon  the  translation  of  it?  You  seem  now  to  give  into  Dr.  Goldsmith’s 
ridiculosity  in  opposition  to  all  sentimentality.  If  so,  it  will  not  do  ;  this  being  of  a 
grave  cast.  Yet  your  “  Guardian”  did.  I  thought  of  calling  it  the  White  Lie ;  but 
the  News  say,  that  Colman’s  comedy  is  to  be  “  The  White  Liar.”  As  the  character  is 
represented  to  be  a  good-natured  fellow  betraying  himself  into  scrapes,  is  it  not  likely 
to  be  taken  from  my  Jack  Shatter,  which  Mr.  Colman  had  in  his  custody  a  good 
while  ? 

I  was  thinking  that  the  very  old  mock  play  of  “  Gammer  Gurton’s  Needle,” 
might  be  reduced  to  one  act  with  songs,  by  somebody  you  can  bid  do  any  thing, 
like  Bickerstaff. 

Another  question  or  two.  Would  you  really  have  me  send  you  up  my  scene  of 
the  Gods,  the  ridiculous  songs  of  which  you  laughed  at  so  at  Hampton,  of  Tragedy 
and  Comedy  turning  ballad-singers  ?  If  so,  I  must  have  it  copied,  having  the  copy 
but  in  a  bound  book  with  other  things.  Excuse  this  scrawl,  as  I  write  it  in  worsted 
gloves  ;  and  believe  me  and  Madam  much  yours  and  Madam’s. 

Your’s  sincerely, 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  W.  WOODFALL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Nov.  16,  1773. 

I  am  this  moment  informed  that  my  name  was  pretty  familiarly  treated  in  the 
green-room  of  Drury -lane  Theatre  this  morning  at  rehearsal,  and  that  you,  Sir,  declared 


584 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  had  acted  partially  as  a  printer  respecting  the  present  ridiculous  paper  war  between 
Mr.  Macklin,  Mr.  Reddish,  and  Mr.  Smith.  As  far  as  my  conduct  relates  to  Mr. 
Reddish,  you  surely  will  confess  I  acted  without  bias.  I  refer  you  to  Mr.  Smith, 
whether  I  did  not  behave  to  him  in  a  liberal  and  candid  manner.  Mr.  Smith  yes¬ 
terday  sent  me  a  letter  and  a  paragraph.  These  were  literally  inserted.  Mr.  Smith 
this  morning  sent  me  a  note,  declaring  that  I  had  omitted  a  postscript  of  his  which 
was  of  material  consequence.  I  immediately  sent  Mr.  Smith  an  answer,  and  en¬ 
closed  his  original  copy,  which  proved  that  he  had  sent  me  no  postscript.  I  now  en¬ 
close  you  Mr.  Smith’s  reply,  which  confirms  what  I  have  written. 

I  am  aware  I  am  not  bound  to  account  to  you,  or  any  other  theatrical  hero,  for  my 
conduct  as  a  printer.  But  as  I  professedly  print  a  free,  unshackled  theatrical  paper, 
and  am  thought  to  hold  a  literary  cat -o’-nin e-tails  to  flagellate  the  back  of  every  stage- 
offender,  I  will  not  rest  a  moment  under  the  suspicion  of  acting  partially  in  a  the¬ 
atrical  newspaper  squabble.  The  immortal  Roscius  and  every  actor  under  him,  shall 
find  1  will  on  all  occasions  give  fair  play  to  public  combatants.  It  is  for  that  reason, 
I  now  trouble  myself  to  write  and  encroach  upon  your  time  to  read  this  note. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

W.  WOODFALL. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  WOODFALL. 

i 

SIR,  Adel  phi,  Nov.  16,  1773. 

Though  I  am  in  the  midst  of  company,  I  cannot  but  say  a  word  to  your  very 
extraordinary  letter.  What  might  be  said  in  our  green-room  when  I  was  not  there, 
I  cannot  possibly  account  for — the  stage  hero  Roscius,  or  what  other  nick-name  you 
are  pleased  to  give  me,  was  not  there  three  minutes  all  this  morning,  and  he  must  be 
a  most  mean  despicable  being,  who  could  carry  so  false  a  tale  to  you — the  wretch 
who  could  betray  his  employer,  you  knew,  must  lie.  Something  I  remember  was 
said  about  Smith,  and  about  the  postscript ;  but  could  you  imagine  that  I  had  the 
least  thought  that  you,  or  any  printer  less  sensible  than  yourself,  would  knowingly 
and  designedly  omit  it?  You  cannot  believe  it.  Do  not  imagine  that  I  am  vindicat¬ 
ing  myself  to  desire  mercy  from  you ;  I  would  not  wish  that  you  should  spare  me : 
the  chiefs  of  every  profession  must  be  your  game,  and  when  I  am  less  taken  notice 
of,  it  will  be  the  best  hint  for  me  to  retire.  You  have  written  to  me  in  a  sort  of  pet 
unworthy  of  your  understanding,  of  which  I  have  a  good  opinion  and  always  have 
declared  it.  Shall  I  fairly  tell  you  in  confidence  of  one  man  to  another,  where  I  think 
you  have  been  a  little  partial  against  me?  You  were  pleased  to  tell  your  readers  that 
I  sent  to  the  King,  that  “  The  West  Indian”  could  not  be  acted,  but  that  I  could 
play  “  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,”  &c.  You  know  what  I  mean.  Could  you  be¬ 
lieve  this  strange  tale  ?  If  you  did  not,  I  think,  in  so  delicate  a  matter  as  my  beha¬ 
viour  to  his  Majesty  I  might  have  been  spared.  Could  you  believe  also  that  I  signified 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


585 


my  resignation  of  the  sock  and  buskin  to  the  King  ?  I  am  sure  you  could  not.  As 
for  other  matters,  I  never  thought  you  severe  upon  me.  Go  on,  and  prosper — and 
believe  me,  Your  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  think  you  acted  most  impartially  in  the  affair  with  Reddish  and  Macklin. 

I  can  scarce  read  my  scrawl  now  I  have  written  it,  but  my  company  must 
excuse  it. 

Will  you  let  me  know  from  whence  you  had  your  [intelligence]  this  morning  ? 

Endorsed, 

“  The  answer  to  that  puppy  Woodfall* 
by  my  husband,  1773.” 


MR.  W.  WOODFALL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Islington,  Nov.  18th,  1773. 

I  wish  mij  word  ever  to  be  received  as  my  bond ;  I  therefore  declare  myself  satis¬ 
fied  with  Mr.  Becket’s  assuring  me  that  you  did  not  arraign  my  impartiality  in  the 
manner  in  which  it  was  stated  to  me  you  did  at  Drury -lane  Theatre  last  Tuesday 
morning.  Your  conduct  in  the  affair  of  Reddish  was,  in  my  judgment,  extremely 
candid ;  I  took  especial  care  that  it  should  be  known  I  thought  so:  and  it  is  from  that 
opinion  that  I  am  willing  to  believe  your  trusting  an  industrious  go-between  with  a 
verbal  answer  to  my  mitten  charge  was  not  a  studied  indelicacy.  But  I  cannot  rest 
satisfied  with  the  existence  of  a  possibility  on  which  you  can  hang  a  doubt,  that  any 
person  who  receives  pay  from  you  was  my  informer  in  the  matter  which  I  charged 
you  with,  in  my  last  letter :  I  assure  you  on  the  word  and  honour  of  a  gentleman, 
that  I  received  my  information  in  my  own  closet  from  a  man  totally  unconnected 
with  the  theatre.  I  never  will  discover  the  name  of  my  informant,  because  I  am 
convinced  he  gave  me  a  friendly  information. 

You  and  I,  Mr.  Garrick,  have  better  employment  than  cavilling;  but  my  pre¬ 
serving  inviolate  my  character  for  impartiality  is  of  as  much  consequence  to  me  as 
your  preserving  the  character  you  have  on  the  best  grounds  established,  that  of 
being  the  most  capable  actor,  this  or  any  other  country  ever  produced. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  W.  WOODFALL. 

“  Puppy  Woodfall’s  answer  again  to 
my  husband’s  letter  in  1773.” 

*  To  judge  by  Dr.  Goldsmith’s  “  Retaliation,”  the  commerce  between  Garrick  and  the  Woodfalls  was  one 
of  the  “  most  honied  assent,” 

“  He  was  be-Roscius’d  and  they  were  be-prais’d.” 

Occasions,  we  see,  did  occur,  when  the  Editor  blustered  about  his  “  impartiality and  descended  in  his 
praise  to  the  unsatisfying  coarseness  of  “  the  most  capable  actor.”  Juno  has  devoted  him  in  her  auger. 

“  Tantaene  animis  ccelestibus  irae  ?” — Ed. 

4  F 


VOL.  I. 


586 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Dec.  6tb,  1773. 

Will  you  give  me  leave  once  more  to  trouble  you  for  your  old  plays?  I  will 
take  the  greatest  care  of  them,  and  return  them  as  soon  as  possible.  They  were  so 
slightly  examined,  a  few  years  ago,  when  you  indulged  me  with  the  use  of  them,  that 
1  cannot  permit  Shakspeare  to  be  prepared  for  the  press  again,  without  a  second  scru¬ 
tiny  into  the  works  of  these  his  contemporary  authors.  I  must  beg  you  will 
entrust  me  with  all  your  smaller-sized  quartos,  and  such  other  little  volumes  of  the 
old  dramatic  writers  as  you  have,  at  ouce ;  that  I  may  be  less  frequently  impertinent 
to  you,  as  well  as  render  the  task  of  comparing  their  dates  more  easy  to  myself.  If 
you  can  spare  them  on  Thursday  next,  I  will  send  my  cart  with  a  box,  and  a  servant 
with  paper,  &c.  to  pack  them  carefully  for  their  journey  to  this  place.  I  must  like¬ 
wise  beg  the  loan  of  the  catalogue  which  Mr.  Capell  drew  up  for  you.  This  is  asking 
for  a  great  trust  altogether  ;  but  he  who  conjures  in  the  name  of  Shakspeare  cannot 
fail  to  raise  the  spirit  of  your  good-nature  in  the  most  friendly  shape.* 

Have  you  any  communication  now  with  Schomberg?  Should  I  happen  to  be 
sick  at  Bath,  I  must  not  venture  to  take  any  of  his  physic.  In  Dr.  Johnson’s  chaos 
of  papers  there  are  some  quires  of  his  Annotations  ;  and,  alas  !  there  only  are  they  to 
be  found.  You  triumph  over  all  your  enemies  : — Macklin,  Kenrick,  are  fallen  ;  but 
as  Macbeth  says,  the  greatest  is  belli ncl.  I  heard  a  story,  which  I  do  not  believe,  viz. 
that  you  are  reconciled,  and  that  your  new  comedy  is  his.  Do  not  construe  this  into 
an  impertinent  question,  which  is  far  from  my  meaning.  I  had  a  letter  on  Saturday 
from  T.  Warton,  who  tells  me  his  “  History  of  English  Poetry”  ( i .  e.  the  first  vol.  of 
it)  will  be  published  at  Christmas. 

If  you  meet  with  any  glaring  mistakes  or  blunders  in  our  New  Edition,  or  hear 
of  any,  I  shall  be  much  obliged  if  you  will  point  them  out,  for  I  doubt  not  but  that 
there  is  enough  of  them.  A  book  prepared  by  fits  and  starts,  taken  up  after  a  long 
interval,  and  hastily  printed,  must  of  course  have  many  imperfections,  without 
seeking  for  a  better  reason  for  them. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  great  truth,  your  much  obliged, 

G.  Steevexs. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS,  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Dec.  8th,  1773. 

You  have  the  art  of  adding  value  to  your  favours,  by  your  manner  of  conferring 
them.  You  have  expressed  your  approbation  of  my  endeavour  to  illustrate  Shaks¬ 
peare  in  such  strong  terms,  that  I  think  the  vanity  of  ten  editors,  at  least,  might  be 

i 

"  Referring  to  the  great  Poet’s  Julius  Caesar, 

“  Conjure  with  ’em, 

Brutus  will  start  a  spirit,  as  soon  as  Caesar.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


587 


flattered  by  it,  if  they  were  not  unconscionable  rogues  indeed.  I  am  much  obliged 
to  some  of  Mr.  Hamilton’s  myrmidons,  in  the  “  Critical  Review,”  for  their  intention, 
but  very  little  for  their  performance.  He  who  would  recommend  another  effectually 
for  any  knowledge  he  may  have  shown,  should  make  it  appear  to  the  public  that  he 
knows  something  of  the  subject  on  which  he  pretends  to  decide ;  which  is  not  the 
case  with  my  panegyrist,  who  has  praised  me  very  awkwardly.  You  yourself  have 
not  always  escaped  a  literary  sign-post ;  for  among  such  a  variety  of  artists  as  your 
public  and  private  character  occasionally  sits  to,  some,  of  course,  must  be  errant 
daubers.  Your  commendation  of  my  labours  I  may  reasonably  value,  because 
no  man  understands  the  author  better;  and  no  circumstance  but  a  consciousness 
of  my  own  inability  could  prevent  me  from  swallowing  it  as  the  best  anodyne 
that  could  be  administered  to  a  commentator  who  is  likely  to  suffer  from  criticism. 

I  think  it  is  now  my  duty  to  inform  you,  that  I  am  not  without  hopes  of  vindi¬ 
cating  almost  every  rejected  reading  throughout  the  plays  of  Shakspeare,  by  bringing 
examples  from  contemporary  writers.  Of  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  verbal  criti¬ 
cism,  let  me  trouble  you  with  the  following  instances  : — In  “  The  Tempest,”  vol.  i. 
page  68,  I  have  been  blaming  Bailey,  the  Dictionary  writer,  for  inserting  the  word 
dowle  on  the  authority  of  a  passage  as  it  stands  in  the  first  folio — 

- “  As  diminish 

One  doule  that ’s  in  my  plume.” 

Bailey,  however,  was  right ;  for  dowle  is  the  true  reading,  of  which  I  have  discovered 
no  less  than  four  instances  in  the  course  of  this  week.  All  the  editors  had  agreed  to 
insert  the  word  down  in  its  place,  supposing  that  word  to  have  been  corrupted  by  the 
carelessness  of  the  first  printers.  Dowle  and  down  have  the  same  signification. 

Again,  in  “  All’s  Well,”  &c.  vol.  iv.  page  119.  The  folio  exhibited  this  uncouth 
stage  direction — “  Enter  a  gentle  Astringer”  I  thought  I  had  done  great  matters 
by  reading — a  gentle  stranger,  supposing  that  by  a  gentle  stranger  was  meant  a  strange 
gentleman ;  but  behold,  the  ancient  books  of  falconry  but  yesterday  informed  me 
that  an  astringer,  or  ostringer,  was  a  falconer,  or  rather  his  understrapper,  whose  busi¬ 
ness  it  was  to  feed  hawks,  &c. ;  a  character  very  likely  to  be  met  with  near  the  court 
of  France,  where  the  amusement  of  hawking  was  much  cultivated  ;  for  Hamlet  himself 
speaks  of  French  falconers  l  You  see  now  the  glorious  uncertainty  of  conjectures 
on  a  language  like  ours,  of  which  there  never  has  been  a  comprehensive  dictionary. 

To-morrow  you  shall  receive  an  exact  account  of  the  volumes  entrusted  to  me. 

I  wonder  none  have  been  already  lost,  considering  the  number  of  hands  through 
which  they  have  passed.  You  may  however,  depend  upon  my  care  of  them. 

The  remark  in  “  The  St.  James’s  Chronicle”  was  just,  and  I  immediately  availed 
myself  of  it,  as  I  shall  of  any  others  of  the  same  kind  that  may  reach  my  notice.  I 
shall  be  always  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  impound  any  stray  bit  of  criticism  that 
falls  in  your  way ;  for  I  take  in  no  other  papers  than  the  Public  and  St.  James's. 

I  wish  Lord  Camden,  who,  as  I  have  been  told,  is  a  great  reader  of  our  ancient 
romances  (to  which  in  some  measure  I  impute  his  uncommon  variety  and  fluency  of 
expression)  had  thought  of  Shakspeare  in  his  progress  through  these  pages  of  impro- 

4  F  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


588 

bability,  as  he  might  have  made  many  discoveries  of  consequence  to  us  who  deal  in 
the  haberdashery  of  words.  I  am  paying  his  lordship,  however,  no  great  compli¬ 
ment,  by  a  supposition  that  he  could  descend  to  such  minutiae  of  literature.  If  he 
has  never  read  “  The  Mirror  of  Knighthood,”  I  can  furnish  him  with  it,  as  I  am  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  master  of  the  only  complete  copy  in  being,  which  1  snatched  out  of  the 
jaws  of  Mr.  Walpole  at  Dormer’s  sale.  It  is  at  present  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Percy, 
from  whom  at  any  time  I  can  recall  it. 

Is  it  a  fair  question  to  ask  when  “  King  John”  is  to  appear  ?  If  you  are  not  in  it 
yourself,  I  desire  no  answer.  I  would  not  have  the  improvements  I  am  striving  to 
make  in  the  next  impression  of  our  book  mentioned,  as  it  may  hurt  the  sale  of  that 
already  before  the  public.  I  am  ashamed  to  see  how  much  paper  I  have  covered. 
Let  the  last  room  in  it  be  employed  to  assure  you  I  am  most  sincerely, 

Your  much  obliged, 

G.  S. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Dec.  9th,  1773. 

1  rather  send  you  my  thanks  than  bring  them,  as  I  know  your  time  is  precious 
to  you,  and  a  letter  is  sooner  burnt  than  the  bearer  of  his  own  compliments  turned 
out  of  doors.  Enclosed  you  receive  an  exact  list  of  your  volumes  entrusted  to  my 
care.  I  hope  Vol.  9  and  10  in  Letter  Iv.  are  not  lost.  I  shall  be  additionally 
obliged  to  you  for  the  catalogue  which  my  servant  waits  for. 

I  repeat  an  impertinent  question  ?  Do  you  appear  in  “  King  John,”  and  if  you 
do,  how  soon  may  we  expect  it  ?  I  wish  the  poet  of  to-night*  success,  though  I  shall 
not  be  a  spectator  of  it,  and  remain. 

Your  very  much  obliged  and  most  faithful, 

G.  Steevens. 


MR.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Dec.  10,  1773. 

I  have  received  a  very  kind  and  satisfactory  letter  from  Mr.  Sheridan  senior,  in 
which  he  tells  me  how  much  he  admires  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy,”  that  he  should 
on  account  of  its  own  merit  have  brought  it  out  with  all  possible  eclat,  and  that  his 
knowing  me  to  be  the  author  will  not  slacken  his  diligence.  He  intends  also  to  com¬ 
ply  with  my  inclinations  as  to  the  time  of  its  appearing,  which  Tighe  recommended 
to  be  on  the  29th  of  next  month.  He  now  thinks  that  as  Fielding’s  comedy  is  off 
the  stocks,  they  cannot  begin  too  soon  with  my  tragedy  to  make  room  for  Mr. 
Richard  Sheridan’s  opera,  which  Tighe  supposes  will  be  also  ready  to  appear  this  win¬ 
ter.  If  you  can  set  them  to  this  work  directlv,  so  much  the  better.  But  I  have  a 

*  Mr.  Steevens  alludes  to  “  The  School  for  Wives,”  a  comedy  by  Hugh  Kelly,  which  made  its  first 
appearance  at  Drury-iane  Theatre  on  the  11th,  (not  the  9th)  Dec.  1773. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


589 


more  particular  reason,  my  dear  Sir,  for  troubling  you  at  present.  Mr.  Sheridan  tells 
me  that  my  play,  like  every  other  he  has  ever  known,  must  undergo  some  retrench¬ 
ments,  and  if  I  trust  the  amputation  knife  to  him,  he  promises  to  use  it  very  tenderly. 
This  is  a  part  of  the  business,  which  though  in  appearance  I  was  obliged  to  permit,  yet, 
between  you  and  me,  I  think  him  of  all  men  the  least  qualified  for  it.  He  has  no 
ears,  and  no  taste.  He  reduces  verse  to  prose  with  the  quickness  of  a  conjuror,  and 
extracts  the  vital  spirit  of  poetry  witli  the  address  of  a  chymist.  His  version  of 
“  Macbeth,”  “  Othello,”  and  “  Hamlet,”  with  many  others  which  I  have  heard,  are 
melancholy  warnings  of  what  I  may  apprehend  from  his  leaden  pen.  I  have  no  ob¬ 
jection  to  necessary  omissions,  and  to  cutting  off  in  the  representation  all  superfluous 
poetry  which  does  not  promote  the  spirit  of  the  action,  but,  let  me  entreat  you  will 
not  suffer  them  to  make  additions  of  their  own,  or  to  substitute  their  words  for  mine, 
but  particularly  have  an  eye  to  our  friend  Sheridan.  If  you  do  not  choose  to  appear 
to  give  your  opinion  directly  upon  these  points,  you  may  prevent  his  doing  much 
injury  through  the  medium  of  his  son.  There  is  no  person  except  yourself  to  whom 
I  would  wish  to  trust  this  delicate  matter  ;  yet  I  am  obliged  to  appear  not  only  satis¬ 
fied,  but  obliged  to  Mr.  Sheridan  for  undertaking  this  office. 

He  slurs  over  the  transaction  between  you  and  himself  in  regard  to  the  rehearsal  of 
“  Mahomet,”  but  from  his  own  manner  of  mentioning  it,  I  shall  be  convinced  of  his 
absurdity.  He  tells  me,  however,  what  I  hope  is  true,  that  you  are  now  upon  easy 
terms.  I  am  ever,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  sincerely  affectionate  and  obliged  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

I  beg  you  will  not  communicate  this  letter  to  any  person,  for  fear  it  should  come 
to  the  ears  of  S - . 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  Mr.  Jephson,  of  Dublin.” 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Dec.  14,  1 773. 

Many  thanks  to  you  for  the  perusal  of  this  poor  playwight’s  discontented  pro¬ 
duction.  It  can  do  him  no  good,  nor  any  harm  to  you.  The  public  will  always 
pay  the  compliment  to  your  good  sense,  to  suppose  that  you  receive  the  best  plays 
you  can  get,  and  reject  the  worst.  I  know  very  well  who  Mr.  Mickle’s  informant, 
touching  the  difficulties  of  getting  plays  on  the  stage,  must  have  been  ;  for  I  have  heard 
him  say  all  this  in  London,  perhaps  before  he  communicated  it  to  the  Oxford  Bard. 

Whoever  undertook  the  binding  up  your  collection  of  plays,  has  used  you  very 
ill.  Some  very  common  ones  are  imperfect,  and  no  blank  leaves  left  to  complete  them 
in  manuscript.  Of  the  early  editions  of  Shakspeare,  I  suspect  that  some  copies  are 
completed  with  leaves  out  of  a  different  edition;  and  some  pieces  to  be  found  in  your 
volumes,  are  not  enumerated  in  your  catalogue.  Whenever  Shakspeare  shall  reach 
another  edition,  it  is  but  a  debt  of  gratitude  we  owe  you  to  publish  your  catalogue 


590 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


correctly.  I  mean  the  contents  of  each  of  your  volumes,  with  an  alphabetical  index. 
This,  however,  shall  not  be  thought  of  without  your  permission. 

I  am  highly  honoured  by  the  good  opinion  of  Mr.  Burke,  and  will  strive  to 
deserve  it  better  on  the  same  occasion.  I  shall  trouble  myself  no  further  about 
“  King  John.”  I  am  your  most  sincerely  obliged, 

G.  Steevens. 

I  forgot  to  add  on  the  card  which  I  enclosed  to  you,  that  I  have  likewise  Sir 
W.  Davenant's  Works  belonging  to  you. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Dec.  27th,  1773. 

In  the  St.  James’s  Chronicle  of  Thursday  last,  somebody  has  attacked  Mr.  Bell’s 
new  edition  of  Shakspeare;  and  his  reply  to  it  in  the  paper  of  Saturday  seems  to  in¬ 
sinuate  that  the  editors  as  well  as  publishers  are  in  conspiracy  against  him.  I  there¬ 
fore  take  the  earliest  opportunity  to  assure  you  that  the  letter  against  his  book  (which 
includes  some  censure  on  you)  was  not  mine  on  my  word  and  honour.  Should  I  have 
leisure  to  scribble  any  nonsense  on  the  occasion,  in  respect  of  yourself,  it  will  be  of  a 
different  tendency.  Yours  most  faithfully, 

G.  Steevens. 

I  have  troubled  you  with  this  note,  because  you  have  people  now  and  then  about 
you,  who  are  too  apt  to  mistake  their  own  groundless  suppositions  for  established 
truth. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Camden  Place,  Dec.  30th,  1773. 

We  are  all  concerned  at  hearing  you  have  been  so  much  indisposed,  but  presume 
so  far  upon  your  own  care  and  our  good  fortune  as  to  be  persuaded  you  will  be  per¬ 
fectly  recovered  before  next  Wednesday,  so  as  not  to  disappoint  a  family  where  even 
the  younger  part  of  it  would  prefer  your  company  to  a  partner.  We  are  obliged  to 
you  for  engaging  the  Jordans ;  and  the  more  so,  as  this  meeting  will  be  a  proper  intro¬ 
duction  to  a  closer  acquaintance  with  the  father  as  well  as  the  daughter.  I  shall  go 
to-morrow,  and  present  my  own  card,  but  I  must  carry  Lady  Camden’s  excuse,  for 
to  say  the  truth,  she  is  but  indifferent. 

We  consent  to  your  taking  up  your  abode  for  that  night  with  Mr.  Jordan,  because 
it  will  be  more  agreeable  and  convenient  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  to  retire  in  peace 
to  a  quiet  bed,  than  to  be  stowed  in  any  corner  of  our  house  in  that  night  of  riot. 
But  we  expect  this  shall  not  be  made  a  precedent. 

I  long  to  see  your  Christmas  gambol,  and  shall  make  interest  with  Johnson  for  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


591 


front  row  in  the  front  box  as  soon  as  I  come  to  town.  The  family  desire  to  be  re¬ 
membered  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  with  the  compliments  of  the  season. 

From  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Dec.  30th,  1773. 

Many  thanks  for  your  letters,  both  of  which  arrived  in  the  same  instant.  Your 
friend,  the  translator  of  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  might  have  known  that  his  labours 
were  anticipated  by  Shakspeare’s  true  and  trusty  Master  Holingshead,  whose  Chro¬ 
nicle  contains  all  you  sent  me  and  much  more  on  the  same  subject.  But  we  have 
nothing  to  do  with  historians.  The  old  play  and  the  old  song  were  Shakspeare’s 
originals.  One  ancient  poem  or  story-book  is  worth  a  thousand  of  these  flea-bitten 
chroniclers. 

I  strongly  suspect  that  you  mean  to  play  Othello,  and  therefore  must  be  imper¬ 
tinent.  No  performer  whom  I  have  ever  seen  has  done  justice  to  the  following 
passage  : 

“  I  think  she  stirs  again — No  !” 

He  is  alarmed  at  the  supposition  that  she  has  yet  life  in  her  ;  but  before  he  can  well 
express  that  fear,  he  begins  to  hope  it  is  well-founded ;  but  discovering  her  to  be 
quite  gone,  he  marks  his  disappointment  by  that  most  expressive  negative.  It  surely 
ought  to  be  delivered  with  a  sigh 

“ - So  piteous  and  profound. 

That  it  should  seem  to  shatter  all  his  bulk, 

And  end  his  being.”* 

1  have  not  expressed  my  meaning  very  clearly  ;  but  the  outline  drawn  by  Protogenes, 
Apelles  is  able  to  fill  up. 

Your  collection  of  old  plays  is  far  from  complete,  though  much  the  greatest  that  I 
know  of.  I  believe  I  must  trouble  you  for  the  remainder  of  them  soon,  and  will  then 
attempt  to  point  out  your  deficiencies  before  I  return  them.  Had  they  been  bound 
up  chronologically,  or  regularly  as  to  any  one  circumstance,  the  task  would  have  been 
easy.  I  will  strive,  however,  to  ascertain  your  wants  as  well  as  I  am  able. 

I  am  told  that  Mr.  Bell  is  much  disposed  to  make  folks  believe  that  you  had  a 
deeper  hand  in  this  edition  of  his  than  you  choose  to  acknowledge.  This,  I  think,  is 
the  only  supposition  on  which  his  work  is  likely  to  meet  with  purchasers.  The 
sanction  and  assistance  of  yours,  which  he  speaks  of  in  his  preface,  deserves  to  be 
laughed  at ;  for  no  one  who  reads  the  hiock-me-down  slang  in  which  his  notes  are 

*  This  is  a  beautiful  direction  to  an  actor,  who  should  be  able  to  convey  his  own  emotion  to  the  au¬ 
dience;  but  then  one  ought  to  be  near  enough,  to  see  the  cold  damps  of  agony  upon  his  forehead,  and  observe 
the  heaving  of  the  chest,  as  he  utters  this  monosyllable  of  unequalled  wretchedness. — Ed. 


592 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


written,  can  conceive  you  to  have  had  the  least  to  do  with  them.  If  you  will  tell 
me  what  he  means  by  your  sanction  and  assistance,  the  matter  shall  be  fairly  stated, 
should  his  future  impertinence  render  such  a  measure  necessary. 

AVlio  is  it  that  abuses  managers  at  such  a  rate  in  “  The  Morning  Chronicle  ?” 
I  thought  a  previous  word  or  two  in  my  own  defence  necessary  in  respect  of  the 
letter  about  Bell’s  Shakspeare,  because  fame  says  that  your  suite  at  present  is  well 
stocked  with  parsons ;  and  where  they  are — but  I  will  trouble  you  no  farther  at  pre¬ 
sent  than  to  add  my  thanks  with  assurances,  that  I  remain  your 

Very  faithful  and  obliged, 
_  G.  S. 


RIR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Friday  afternoon,  Dec.  31st,  1773. 

The  moment  I  received  your  letter  (which  was  this  morning)  I  wrote  a  short  bit 
of  stuff  to  Baldwin  in  almost  your  own  words,  and  desired  he  would  put  it  into 
Saturday’s  paper  without  fail.  I  was  unwilling  to  say  too  much,  as  Bell  may  reply, 
and  render  a  more  ample  state  of  the  affair  necessary.  Your  two  last  letters  have 
acted  on  me  like  the  Turkish  place  of  future  punishment.  You  have  alternately 
warmed  me  with  the  expectation  of  Othello,  and  froze  me  by  the  declaration  that 
you  do  not  mean  to  play  it. 

Adieu,  dear  Sir,  and  believe  me  yours  most  faithfully, 

G.  S. 

If  you  really  are  to  make  your  exit  this  winter,  I  shall  strive  to  see  you  in  your 
principal  characters  from  the  pit,  that  I  may  acquire  the  last  knowledge  of  Shaks 
peare  that  I  can  ever  expect  to  receive  from  the  stage. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Tuesday  Night. 

Receive  my  earliest  thanks  for  the  letters  enclosed.  I  have  read  Mr.  Swan’s 
Dissertation  on  Othello  very  attentively  over.  We  agree  in  the  main  point,  that  a 
dagger  is  necessary,  but  I  suppose  it  to  have  been  used  at  a  different  period  from 
that  pointed  out  by  him.  He  has  quite  mistaken  the  meaning  of — It  is  the  cause, 
& c.  He  talks  of  proofs,  which  I  am  certain  he  cannot  bring  in  support  of  his  opi¬ 
nions.  His  honesty  in  speaking  of  his  own  unsuccessful  attempts  to  write  for  the 
stage,  has  given  me  a  very  good  idea  of  his  heart.  The  picture  of  a  prompter  which 
he  has  drawn,  I  believe  to  be  a  very  just  one  of  all  the  prompters  that  have  ever 
existed,  especially  if  they  had  the  good  luck  to  be  well  with  a  manager  who  was 
himself  a  dramatic  author.  I  expect  little  from  his  notes,  but  shall  be  much  obliged 
to  you  for  a  perusal  of  them  when  they  arrive. 

From  his  letter,  however,  I  have  derived  a  'pleasure  superior  to  any  I  should 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


593 


have  felt  from  the  most  happy  restoration  in  the  text  of  Shakspeare.  It  appears  that 
you  have  thoughts  of  coming  on  in  “  Othello”  yourself,  or  you  would  not  have  been 
so  inquisitive  to  know  in  what  manner  it  was  performed  by  the  ancient  actors. 
From  this  letter,  likewise,  it  seems  that  you  are  soon  to  black  your  face.  I  remember 
how  you  served  me  in  respect  of  “  Hamlet,”  last  winter,  which  you  spoke  of  in  your 
letter  as  an  event  at  a  great  distance,  though  you  plajred  it  in  two  days  after  you 
wrote  to  me.  I  shall  be  distracted  unless  I  see  you  in  “  Othello,”  and  from  the  pit ; 
into  which,  when  you  advertise  it,  I  must  entreat  a  way  by  being  placed  within  the 
passage,  so  that  I  may  enter  among  the  first,  I  cannot  otherwise  observe  you  with 
the  verij  comment  of  my  soul.  You  may  depend  on  it  that  I  will  not  hint  your  inten¬ 
tion  to  a  creature  alive,  so  that  you  may  safely  trust  me,  if  my  suspicions  are  just.* 

The  critic  in  “  The  St.  James’s  Chronicle”  did  not  understand  my  note  concern¬ 
ing  the  death  of  Desdemona.  It  is  true  that  Othello  had  pre-determined  not  to  scar 
her  skin ;  and  we  are  to  suppose  he  would  have  kept  his  resolution,  but  that  he  could 
not  bear  the  thought  of  employing  those  means  of  death  again,  which  had  once 
appeared  to  be  uncertain  in  their  effect.  A  person  who  is  effectually  smothered,  cer¬ 
tainly  cannot  speak  afterwards.  One  who  is  stabbed  may  speak,  and  yet  die  very 
soon.  If  Desdemona  spoke  after  her  breath  had  been  suppressed  for  a  time,  she  was 
in  fact  unhurt;  but  her  speaking  again  and  her  subsequent  death  confirms  my  sup¬ 
position  that  some  other  instrument  than  a  pillow  had  been  employed.  I  have  dwelt 
on  this  circumstance  the  longer,  as  Mr.  Swan’s  letter  is  built  upon  it,  and  your  inqui¬ 
ries  appear  to  have  been  directed  to  that  particular. 

Swan’s  remark  on  the  time  in  which  he  supposes  “  Othello”  to  have  been  written, 
has  no  force  with  me  ;  Shakspeare  was  for  ever  inserting  particulars  of  knowledge  in 
his  plays,  as  fast  as  he  picked  them  up.  “  Othello”  had  been  ridiculed  by  Ben 
Jonson  long  before  the  period  at  which  Swan  conceives  it  to  have  been  produced. 

I  hope  if  you  revive  “  Othello”  (I  shall  not  change  the  expression,  for  I  have  never 
seen  him  alive  yet),  you  will  not  permit  his  jealousy  to  be  so  unnaturally  precipitated 
as  it  has  hitherto  been,  through  the  omission  of  the  listening  scene.  It  is  (to  use 
Hotspur’s  words)  a  perilous  gash,  a  very  limb  cut  off. 

*  Mr.  Steevens  knew  well  the  effect  which  Mr.  Garrick  could  nave  given  to  Othello.  At  the  same  time 
there  were  some  objections  to  his  resuming  the  character,  and  they  got  the  better  of  his  own  wish  to  exhibit 
his  terrible  energies  in  the  noble  Moor.  Had  the  expedient  occurred  to  him  of  helping  his  figure  by  the 
Moorish  costume,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  great  difficulty  would  have  been  removed.  In  our  own  time,  we 
have  seen  Mr.  Kean,  whose  stature  is  in  fact  under  that  of  Mr.  Garrick ;  and  no  capable  spectator  ever  ob¬ 
jected  to  his  figure  as  not  sufficiently  important.  But  fifty  years  ago,  the  Moor  would  only  have  appeared 
in  a  general’s  uniform  ;  scarlet  if  our  own,  white  if  Venetian  ;  and  the  black  face  above  such  clothing  begets 
a  ludicrous  association  at  first  sight,  which  an  actor  has  to  struggle  long  against,  and  remembers  himself,  un¬ 
fortunately,  when  the  spectator  has  forgotten  it.  If  such  a  notion  at  all  annoyed  Mr.  Garrick,  he  was  right 
in  declining  the  character.  The  criticism  of  Mr.  Steevens,  thus  presented  tome,  recalls  many  similar  instances 
of  his  profound  judgment  and  excellent  taste,  which  I  have  personally  heard  him  deliver.  He  talked  of  ob¬ 
serving  Mr.  Garrick  with  the  “  very  comment  of  his  soul,"  a  terrible  test  to  put  any  work  of  art  to  ;  but  which 
1  willingly  believe  Mr.  Garrick  stood  before  unappalled,  confident  of  the  truth  of  his  personations,  and  feeling 
that  he  was  the  general  organ  of  human  nature. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  4  G 


594 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  wrote  to  you  by  last  night’s  post,  and  must  now  beg  the  use  of  the  two  volumes 
returned  by  Mr.  Warton.  All  is  alike  to  me.  I  shall  read  through  thick  and  thin 
every  book  of  that  age  that  I  can  lay  my  hands  on. 

1  shall  at  all  times  be  obliged  to  you  for  any  critical  stuff  that  falls  in  your  way. 
Schomberg  is  a  goose  to  your  swan. 

Never  give  yourself  the  trouble  to  answer  my  nonsense,  but  when  you  have  no¬ 
thing  else  to  do.  My  servant  will  wait  for  K.  9.  and  10.  Excuse  the  haste  and  incor¬ 
rectness  of  this  miserable  scrawl,  and  believe  me  to  be  your  much  obliged  and  sincere 

G.  S. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Leiston  Hall,  Saxmundham,  Saturday  Morning. 

You  will  receive  two  letters  by  this  post.  One  was  writ  before  I  received 
yours.  You  know  not  how  you  have  sunk  me  again.  I  was  in  hopes  our  junction 
was  out  of  doubt.  Surely,  though  Mr.  Red — ’s*  affairs  may  be  again  settled,  you 
might  employ  me  as  you  intended,  when  first  we  treated,  and  he  was,  as  you 
thought,  unembarrassed.  I  hear  from  many  hands  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to 
appear,  but  of  this  you  most  likely  are  the  best  judge.  I  will  not  take  up  too  much 
of  your  time  on  this  subject,  but  assure  you  that  I  must  be  very  unhappy  without 
an  engagement  with  you.  You  do  not  absolutely  refuse  me,  yet  I  fear  you  mean 
so  :  though  you  still  seem  to  think  I  should  not  engage  with  Colman,  unless  I  can 
do  it  with  grace  and  credit.  I  cannot  do  it  with  peace  of  mind,  and  have  declined  it. 
I  beg  one  line  of  you  by  return  of  post,  as  I  shall  not  receive  it  unless  it  leaves 
London  on  Monday  at  latest.  Pray  be  positive  either  to  destroy  or  confirm  my 
wishes.  Have  you  more  obstacles  against  engaging  me  than  when  you  first  spoke 
to  me  on  the  subject, — and  is  not  the  precariousness  of  Mr.  Red — ’s  affairs  rather 
in  my  favour  ?  I  am  ever  your  most  sincere  and  obedient  servant, 

W.  Smith. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Leiston  Hall,  Saxmundham,  Wednesday  Night. 

Your  letter  by  this  night’s  post  has  damped  my  spirits,  which  were  much  raised 
by  your  former  one.  I  cannot  possibly  think  of  making  any  engagement  from  you, 
and  indeed  have  determined  to  decline  all  others.  I  hope  you  will  not  deny  me  the 
favour  of  a  line  as  soon  as  the  uncertainty  of  affairs  are  over  which  at  present  embar¬ 
rasses  you.  I  shall  be  unhappy  till  I  hear  from  you,  though  perhaps  more  so,  when 
you  write :  yet  any  thing  is  better  than  suspense.  I  will  not  acquaint  Winter  with 
what  has  passed  till  you  favour  me  again.  It  will  make  him  as  nearly  derange 
as  it  has  Your  most  sincere  and  obliged  friend  and  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 


*  Reddish’s. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


595 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday  Evening. 

I  sent  the  letter  to  the  Adelphi-buildings,  attended  by  a  roll  of  brown  paper, 
in  which  the  proof  is  enclosed.  I  have  called  my  servant  in,  and  he  attests  the 
delivery  of  it ;  but  he  says  he  represented  the  letter  as  of  consequence,  the  et  cetera 
of  no  consequence  at  all.  If  he  had  reversed  his  sentence,  it  had  been  right.  Pray 
send  me  your  opinion  when  you  see  the  figures.  A  coloured  copy  of  it  cannot  be 
of  so  much  use  to  any  one  as  to  yourself.  Let  Mr.  Davies,  Dr.  Kenrick,  &c.  fly 
with  the  other  false  Thanes,  or  crowd  them  all  into  the  French  Coronation,  which 
the  former  of  them  recommends  :  I  am  sure  that  he  wdiom  I  have  not  named,  derives 
his  laurel- wreath  from  the  French.  It  is  impossible  ever  to  find  you  at  home  for  a 
certainty,  and  therefore  I  must  wait  for  Anti-mendax  till  your  days  of  residence  in 
London  are  more  frequent.  Your’s  most  faithfully, 

G.  Steevens. 

Your  letter  did  not  arrive  till  this  moment,  and  the  postman  waits  to  return  you 
this  imperfect  answer.  I  think  my  character  almost  as  legible  as  your  own. 

You  desire  me  to  send  the  print  to  Soidharnpton-street.  I  suppose  this  is  as 
great  a  mistake  as  any  I  could  have  committed. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Tuesday  Evening. 

I  never  kept  a  copy  of  any  one  of  my  own  letters  in  my  life,  for  I  never  wrote 
but  to  those  who  I  supposed  would  make  no  ill  use  of  my  nonsense.  You,  I  am 
sure,  I  could  never  suspect  of  it ;  though  you  might  have  no  dislike  to  leading  me 
into  a  ridiculous  dilemma.  Shakspeare  (to  whose  words  your  memory  is  always 
faithful)  has  said  that  Juliet  would  appear  like  a  swan  among  crows ;  and,  if  I  re¬ 
member  right,  when  you  mentioned  Swan’s  communication,  long  before  it  arrived, 
I  expressed  my  fears  lest  your  swan  should  prove  a  goose.  So  much  for  our  mutual 
allusions  drawn  from  ornithology. 

You  may  say  what  you  please— that  I  am  sick,  dead— hanged,  &c.,  but  do  not 
oblige  me  to  thank  a  man  for  a  favour,  which  I  never  knew  was  designed  for  me 
till  1  heard  from  you  last.  I  heartily  wish  the  gout  out  of  your  thumb,  and  the  cri¬ 
ticisms  out  of  your  possession,  without  farther  inconvenience  to  either  of  us. 

Most  truly  and  affectionately  yours, 

G.  Steevens. 

Your  letter  was  Avritten  yesterday,  but  it  is  not  ten  minutes  since  1  received  it. 


4  g  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


596 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Lei ston,  Sept.  1st,  1774. 

I  find  I  must  be  unhappy,  and  more  so,  as  you  have  misinterpreted  something 
I  have  writ.  Believe  me,  Sir,  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  trouble  you  have  had  on 
my  account,  and  have  a  true  sense  of  every  step  you  have  taken  in  my  favour,  for 
which  I  owe  and  pay  you  my  most  sincere  thanks ;  my  best  services  will  follow 
whenever  you  please  to  command  them.  You  do  me  wrong  if  you  think  I  have  a 
doubt  of  your  disinterestedness.  I  named  Reddish  only  as  I  thought  it  might  have 
influence  on  Mr.  Lacy,  who,  I  well  know,  is  averse  to  your  engaging  me.  You  hear 
Mr.  Colman  has  made  me  a  genteel  offer.  It  does  not  appear  so  to  me  or  my  friends, 
who  have  insisted  on  my  refusing  it,  which  I  have  done.  I  would  rather  receive 
twelve  pounds  a  week  from  you  than  twenty  from  him  :  and  still  live  in  hopes  that 
something  may  happen  to  bring  us  together.  Farewell  !  you  have  my  best  wishes 
for  health  and  every  blessing.  Once  more,  permit  me  to  assure  you,  that  I  am,  with 
much  gratitude  for  your  friendship,  your  most  obedient  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

I  am  going  to  Winter’s,  at  Stortford,  for  ten  days.  Pray  do  not  let  Colman 
know  that  we  have  been  in  treaty.  I  have  writ  to  him. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Tuesday. 

Mr.  Steevens  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick  with  the  volume  of  Vol¬ 
taire.  He  desires  and  hopes  he  had  before  returned  a  volume  of  the  same  author, 
though  not  containing  the  same  criticisms,  which  he  himself  borrowed  of  Mr.  Garrick 
in  London. 

Mr.  Steevens  hopes  that  Mr.  Garrick  from  the  carelessness  with  which  he  heard 
him  betray  his  own  conspiracy,  will  not  stand  in  awe  of  him,  as  the  deepest  plot  he 
ever  contrived  against  him  he  has  suffered  him  to  overhear,  and  is  much  obliged  to 
him  for  taking  no  severer  method  after  the  detection  of  it. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Thursday  Evening. 

Mu.  Steevens  returns  his  best  thanks  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  the  use  of  this  volume, 
and  since  Shakspeare  was  able  to  raise  a  fabric  like  that  of  “  Measure  for  Measure,” 
out  of  the  rubbish  of  Promos  and  Cassandra,  he  makes  no  doubt  but  he  could  have 
exerted  his  talents  as  successfully  even  on  Dr.  Armstrong’s  “  Forced  Marriage.” 

Mr.  Steevens  hopes  Mr.  Garrick  will  not  make  his  threats  good,  and  unmercifully 
send  the  Doctor’s  works  back  again. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


597 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Monday  Night. 

I  sent  an  answer  to  your  first  letter  by  this  morning’s  post,  and  am  now  to  return 
you  thanks  for  your  packet  which  reached  my  hands  this  evening. 

I  have  neither  seen  Baldwin  nor  had  the  most  trifling  correspondence  or  inter¬ 
course  with  him  for  above  this  fortnight  past ;  nor  was  I  in  the  smallest  degree  acces¬ 
sary  to  that  injustice  of  which  Mr.  Bell  complains.  You  say  that  he  declares  he  told 
me  of  his  intended  edition.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  I  never  saw  him  in  my 
life ;  at  least  I  should  not  know  him  if  I  met  him.  I  might,  indeed,  soon  after  his 
proposals  appeared,  have  stepped  in  at  his  shop,  but  even  that  circumstance  I  cannot 
call  to  remembrance. 

I  have  not  mentioned  a  syllable  concerning  the  Davies’s  to  any  one.  I  am  much 
obliged  by  your  offer  relative  to  the  poor  girl,  but  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  get  through 
my  prison  scene  without  troubling  my  friends.  I  shall  be  fully  employed  in  this 
melancholy  business  till  the  end  of  the  week.  After  that  time,  and  always,  you  may 
command  Your  most  obliged  and  sincere 

G.  Steevens. 

I  hope  Mr.  Bell  does  not  enumerate  me  among  the  interested  people  ;  for  I  am  sure 
I  never  received  the  advantage  of  sixpence  from  any  publication  of  Shakspeare  in 
which  I  have  had  a  hand,  nor  ever  will  on  any  future  occasion. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Whenever  you  are  willing  to  employ  me,  you  have  an  undoubted  right  to  my 
best  services  ;  and  if  I  fail  to  answer  your  purpose,  I  assure  you,  your  disappointment 
will  happen  through  my  inability,  and  not  through  my  inattention. 

As  to  Mr.  Bell,  he  may  think,  say,  or  write  what  he  pleases.  I  shall  never  take 
the  pains  to  contradict  him.  A  rival  editor  of  Shakspeare  like  myself,  will  always  be 
considered  as  a  kind  of  town  bull ;  and  every  fatherless  letter  calved  in  the  news¬ 
papers,  on  this  subject,  will  of  course  be  laid  to  his  charge.  But  pray  whence  comes 
it  that  the  mighty  Tom*  is  so  much  your  adversary  ?  He  has  long  been  too  great  a 
man  for  me,  being  to  the  full  as  much  a  king  in  his  own  shop  as  ever  he  was  on  your 
stage.  When  he  was  on  the  point  of  leaving  the  theatre,  he  most  certainly  stole 

*  Tom  Davies,  whose  vanity  always  pulled  strongly  against  the  tide  even  of  his  own  interest.  Johnson 
used  to  entreat  forgiveness  for  him,  when  he  had  allowed  himself  to  seem  at  least  unthankful  to  his  friends. 
His  profession  of  actor  had  rendered  him  unfit  for  the  shop ; — he,  however,  had  more  literature  than  com¬ 
monly  attaches  to  either  bookseller  or  player;  and  did  not  want,  at  bottom,  a  proper  veneration  for  Garrick, 
which  indeed  he  showed  in  his  life  of  him. — Ed, 


598 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


some  copper  diadem  from  a  shelf,  put  it  in  his  pocket,  and  has  worn  it  ever  since. 
As  to  Lockyer,  I  know  little  more  of  him  than  that  he  seems  to  be  a  dry,  sapient, 
civil  gentleman,  and— is  said  to  conduct  the  Gazetteer. 

I  think  you  are  perfectly  right  in  wishing  to  let  all  defence  on  your  side  drop 
entirely.  I  should  not,  however,  have  said  so,  had  not  you  first  mentioned  it  your¬ 
self,  lest  you  should  think  I  was  unwilling  to  set  my  shoulders  to  the  wheel.  There 
has  been  so  long  a  connection  between  you  and  the  fair  traders  on  Shakspeare’s 
bottom,  that  you  would  have  acted  more  cautiously  had  you  silently  permitted  your 
prompter  to  make  the  most  of  his  run  goods,  without  allowing  such  a  demi-pirate  as 
Bell,  to  sail  with  your  colours  at  his  mast-head.  You  may  be  assured  that  every 
proprietor  or  bookseller,  who  can  arm  his  long-boat  with  pot-guns,  will  go  in  chase  of 
such  a  smuggler.  You  may  depend  on  it  that  I  will  not  write  another  line  on  the 
subject.  I  thought  it  necessary  for  you  to  say  as  much  as  has  been  said,  because  I 
could  not  know  Mr.  Bell  designed  to  publish  any  thing  in  your  defence,  and  had  been 
told  what  1  have  before  hinted. 

My  service  to  your  gout,  for  I  never  received  a  letter,  so  fairly  written  from  you 
before.  I  am  most  faithfully,  your  much  obliged 

G.  Steevexs. 


MR.  G.  C.  SWAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  York, Jan.  1,  1774. 

You  have  done  me  great  honour  by  introducing  me  to  the  acquaintance  of  a  gentle¬ 
man  of  Mr.  Steevens’s  great  merit ;  and  you  have  made  me  very  happy  by  saying  that 
you  will  engage  his  candid  opinion  of  my  remarks,  as  that,  with  your  own,  will  suffi¬ 
ciently  satisfy  my  vanity  in  case  you  shall  approve  the  work,  as  you  appear  to  do  the 
sample  of  it.  But  of  this  I  must  own  I  have  some  considerable  doubts,  for  my  principal 
design  has  been  to  undo  all  that  the  modern  commentators  have  been  labouring,  by 
endeavouring  to  show  that  the  readings  of  the  old  copies  are  preferable  to  those  of 
the  new  ones.  But  this,  by  the  by,  (even  though  I  may  have  succeeded,  as  my  friends 
here  seem  disposed  to  flatter  me  that  I  have,)  cannot  affect  Mr.  Steevens,  as  his  first 
edition  appears  to  me  to  have  been  formed  upon  the  same  plan  ;  his  latter  one,  in  con¬ 
junction  with  Dr.  Johnson,  I  have  not  yet  seen ;  nor  do  I  believe  I  shall,  as  I  cannot 
here  get  a  sight  either  of  that  or  Mr.  Bell’s  without  purchasing ;  and  I  have  already 
so  many  editions  of  this  author,  that  they  take  up  near  the  half  of  my  little  closet. 
But  this  is  now  immaterial,  as  you  and  that  gentleman  will  set  me  to  rights,  in  case 
you  should  find  that  I  have  interfered  with  them.  By  a  passage  in  yours,  I  incline 
to  believe  you  have  forgot  that  I  once  had  the  honour  to  manage  a  Theatre  Royal ; 
and  that,  in  the  year  17 42,  I  performed  Othello  in  Dublin ;  an  episode  in  my  life 
which  I  still  remember  with  pleasure,  as  it  was  the  causa  sine  qua  non  of  my  acquain¬ 
tance  with  Mr.  Garrick.  How  then,  say  you,  comes  it  that  I  should  not  have  known 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


599 


that  you  had  given  up  the  part  of  Othello  ?  Alas !  I  have  lived  quite  retired  from 
the  busy  world  now  twenty -five  years,  insomuch  that  I  scarce  know  what  has  of  late 
been  doing  in  the  most  conspicuous  parts  of  it.  You  must  therefore  expect,  and  I 
hope  too  you  will  excuse,  some  little  mistakes  of  this  sort.  Air.  Barry  is,  I  am  told, 
now  the  first  in  that  character,  and  I  hear  he  is  capital  in  it.  I  know  nothing  of  his 
merits,  as  I  never  saw  him  but  once,  in  Essex,  when  he  pleased  me  very  much ; 
though  in  general  I  thought  him  stiff’,  and  consequently  that  his  expression  was  not 
formed  from  his  own  conception  of  the  part :  but  this  was  many  years  ago,  and  I  may 
possibly  have  forgot  myself ;  and  if  not,  he  is  probably  much  mended  in  that  respect ; 
indeed  it  must  be  so,  or  he  could  not  possibly  have  been  so  great  a  favourite  with 
you  and  with  the  town.  He  would,  therefore,  I  should  imagine,  be  able  to  do  great 
justice  to  that  scene,  but  I  am  under  some  apprehension  that  he  will  not  choose  to 
hazard  the  trial  of  so  capital  an  alteration  in  the  manner  of  performing  it ;  and  espe¬ 
cially  as  I  hear  he  is  very  much  approved  in  playing  it  according  to  Mr.  Steevens's 
idea,  which,  however,  is  not  to  my  best  judgment  equal  to  yours :  for  the  words  in 
the  latter  lead  to  the  expression  of  rage  and  horror,  and  consequently  justify  your 
conception  of  that  part ;  but  in  the  place  where  Air.  Steevens  recommends  the  use  of 
the  poniard  (but  this  you  must  not  say  to  him)  the  words  of  the  author  convey  to  us 
a  very  different  idea : 

“  I  that  am  cruel  am  yet  merciful.” 

A  strange  idea,  sure,  of  mercy,  to  imbrue  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  a  dying  woman  ! 
But  I  may  be  mistaken,  though  from  the  repetition  “so,  so,”  one  would  incline  to  think 
that  if  the  dagger  was  here  used  at  all,  Othello  must  here  stab  her  twice ;  but  this 
I  leave  to  your  own  determination  when  you  have  more  attentively  considered  what 
I  offered  in  my  last  upon  this  head.  I  have,  since  I  wrote  to  you,  got  a  copy  made 
of  the  remarks,  but  by  so  wretched  a  scribe  that  it  has  taken  me  full  as  much  time 
to  correct  as  would  have  served  to  write  it  over,  and,  what  is  still  worse,  a  great  part 
must  again  be  transcribed,  and  when  that  is  done,  Mr.  Burgh,  a  most  ingenious  young 
gentleman,  from  whom  I  have  received  great  assistance,  desires  to  see  them  again ; 
that  I  fear  it  will  be  the  latter  end  of  January  before  I  shall  be  able  to  send  them  up. 
But  this  is  a  mischief  you  may  reap  some  benefit  from  ;  for  Wilkinson  being  expected 
with  his  company  here  this  day  se’nnight,  I  am  not  without  hopes  of  getting  Hitch¬ 
cock,  who  is  still  with  him,  to  write  out  a  copy  for  3mm  I  perceive  I  have  made  a 
lapse  in  naming  Air.  Burgh,  but  I  flatter  myself  his  name  is  very  safe  with  3-011.  He 
is  a  member  of  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  esteemed  one  of  the  best  speakers  there ; 
in  other  respects  he  is  as  3ret  unknown  in  the  literary  world,  where,  however,  he  must 
one  day  make  a  most  conspicuous  figure,  his  genius  being  more  quick  and  lively,  and 
his  style  more  correct  and  elegant  than  any  I  have  lately  met  with.  He  has,  as  be¬ 
fore  observed,  been  of  very  great  use  to  me  ;  as  has  likewise  Mr.  Mason,  the  author 
of  “  Elfrida the  latter  advises  to  publish  the  remarks  without  the  text,  and  has 
kindly  offered,  if  I  would  introduce  them  b)r  a  letter  addressed  to  you,  to  correct  and 
fit  it  for  the  press,  which  appears  to  me  a  strong  proof  of  his  approbation  of  the 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


GOO 

work.  I  have,  too,  received  some  little  help  from  a  Mr.  Tillard,  a  clergyman,  who, 
though  not  publicly  known,  is  exceedingly  clever,  as  you  will  see  by  a  note  of  his 
which  I  send  you  at  foot  as  a  specimen  of  his  abilities  ;  but,  as  1  hinted  in  my  last,  the 
names  of  these  gentlemen  must  not  be  mentioned  on  this  occasion.  I  hope  to  hear  in 
your  next  that  you  are  freed  from  all  the  pains  you  complain  of ;  and  I  too  shall 
be  glad  to  know  your  opinion,  what  effect,  as  you  apprehend,  the  bed  scene,  according 
to  my  plan,  would  have  ?  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

CrEO.  C.  Swan. 

The  following  was  written  by  my  friend  Tillard,  under  Johnson’s  only  note  in  his 
edition,  p.  456,  1.  14.  “  This  sorrow’s  heavenly” — which  see — 

“  Say  rather,  it  is  the  fate  of  Shakspeare  to  have  commentators  of  such  cold  consti¬ 
tutions  that  they  can  feel  no  warmth  even  when  his  fires  bum  brightest.  I  see  no 
reason  for  this  wish,  or  the  assertion  which  follows  it ;  the  lines  objected  to  are  only  a 
continuation  of  the  thought  immediately  preceding.  Through  the  whole  of  this  soli¬ 
loquy,  Desdemona’s  body  and  beauty  have  so  far  unprovided  Othello’s  mind,  that 
rage  and  the  rougher  passions  are  in  a  great  measure  extinguished  ;  they  are  the  fine 
feelings  of  the  soul  which  are  awake;  and  these,  though  he  continues  steady  in  his 
purpose  of  killing  her,  lead  him  in  doing  this  to  soften  as  much  as  possible  her  bodily 
and  his  own  mental  sufferings.  Let  us  consider  the  passage  in  this  light.  ‘  I  must 
weep,  but  they  are  cruel  tears’ — here  we  may  naturally  suppose  he  pauses  for  a  mo¬ 
ment,  then  resumes  the  thought — and  by  a  wonderful  piece  of  address,  gets  rid  of 
even  the  idea  of  cruelty  before  contained  in  it,  by  referring  himself  to  the  example 
of  Heaven,  which  strikes  where  it  doth  love.  These  are  the  touches  of  a  master,  and 
do  him  honour,  whilst  they  give  him  the  most  amiable  finishing  to  his  characters 
which  the  circumstances  they  are  drawn  in  will  admit.” 


MR.  DAVID  ROSS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  January  6,  1774. 

I  have  ever  treated  Mr.  Garrick  with  that  respect  and  good  manners  which  was 
due  to  him  ;  why  he  should  treat  me  so  very  illiberally  I  am  at  a  loss  to  guess,  unless 
he  meant  to  affront  me.  The  enclosed,  without  any  seal,  was  left  at  my  house,  that  his 
servant  and  mine  might  know  (I  suppose)  I  was  refused  an  engagement  at  Drury -lane. 
The  superscription  is  not  very  polite  :  however,  that  I  should  have  taken  no  notice  of ; 
but  the  other  seems,  if  meant,  to  cast  a  slight  or  an  affront,  which  I  beg  to  have  ex¬ 
plained.  My  feelings,  perhaps,  at  present  are  too  quick  ;  but  sure  I  have  enough  to 
make  them  so.  As  the  stage  stands,  it  is  a  shame  and  a  reflection  that  my  abilities, 
little  as  they  are,  should  be  excluded  from  the  public  and  rendered  useless  to  me. 
From  Mr.  Garrick  I  have  never  merited  ill  manners  or  disrespect :  however,  he  hurts 
himself  more  than  Your  most  humble  servant, 

David  Ross. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


601 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  D.  ROSS. 

SIR,  Wednesday,  February  13th,  1774. 

If  you  will  consider  the  date  of  your  bond,  your  repeated  promises  to  discharge 
it,  your  engagement  with  another  manager,  and  more  than  this,  our  overlooking 
your  frequent  disappointments,  your  warmest  friends  must  acknowledge,  what,  in¬ 
deed,  you  have  owned  in  your  letters,  that  you  have  some  obligations  to  us.  If  so, 
what  must  they  say  on  the  other  head,  at  your  very  gentlemanlike  return  to  these 
favours,  and  to  your  behaviour  to  me  in  particular  ? 

So  little  did  I  know  of  the  affairs  of  our  office,  having  so  much  employment 
upon  the  stage,  that  I  had  wholly  forgot  your  affair  till  your  account  was  sent 
round  to  me  last  week  ;  and  so  ignorant  was  I  of  the  whole  transaction,  that  I  could 
not  contradict  what  Mr.  Murphy  told  me  from  Mr.  Ross,  viz.  that  the  half  of  the 
honcl  was  paid.  As  to  the  money  business,  Mr.  Lacy  and  I  have  left  it  to  be  settled 
by  you  and  my  brother  ;  all  I  have  to  desire  of  you  is,  that  should  any  particular  time 
be  agreed  upon  by  the  parties,  the  day  may  be  the  second,  not  the  first,  of  April. 

I  most  sincerely  congratulate  you  upon  your  present  situation,  which  is  so  happy, 
that  it  brings  to  your  mind  the  great  hardships  you  underwent  at  Drury-lane  with 
Mr.  Garrick.  May  your  theatrical  felicity  long  continue,  and  may  you  never  again 
give  him  an  opportunity  to  confer  those  obligations  upon  you  which  you  mention 
in  your  letter.  I  am.  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  My  brother  will  be  at  home  any  morning  that  will  be  agreeable  to  you. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Jan.  7th,  1774. 

I  have  been  employed  ever  since  Monday  last  in  attempting  to  save  an  unfortu¬ 
nate  young  woman  from  transportation,  and  shall  continue  to  be  engaged  in  the  same 
service  till  Tuesday  or  Wednesday  next.  I  have,  therefore,  had  no  opportunity  of 
making  any  reply  in  your  behalf  to  the  letters  which  I  am  told  have  appeared  in  the 
“  St.  James’s for  I  have  not  looked  into  a  newspaper  till  this  instant,  where  a  long 
letter  from  Serle’s  Coffee-house,  Lincoln’s-inn,  almost  fills  a  column.  I  wish  you 
would  employ  some  friend  to  write  a  letter  in  answer  to  it ;  and  as  soon  as  my  hand 
is  at  leisure,  it  shall  be  at  your  service. 

In  order  to  ascertain  the  deficiencies  in  your  catalogue,  I  have  ordered  the  “  Com¬ 
panion  to  the  Theatre,”  (which  contains  the  most  accurate  list  of  plays  extant,)  to  be 
interleaved ;  and  will  correct  it  by  your  plays,  and  at  the  same  time,  mark  what 
is  wanting  to  complete  your  collection.  The  book  shall  then  be  your  own. 

VOL.  I.  4  II 


602 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OP 


Next  week,  I  shall  trouble  you  for  some  more  provender.  Sir  J.  Hawkins  has 
scut  to  desire  1  would  let  him  look  at  a  play  which  I  have  not  in  my  own  collection, 
though  it  is  in  yours,  and  in  my  keeping.  1  would  not,  however,  grant  the  request 
without  your  permission.  Your  trust  in  me  is  great,  and  my  fidelity  should  be  an¬ 
swerable  to  it.  I  am  most  faithfully  yours, 

G.  S. 

Excuse  this  hasty  scribble,  which  I  perceive  is  half  nonsense. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LAWRENCE. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Monday,  Jan.  10th,  1774. 

I  have  been  so  untuned  with  a  violent  cold  and  hoarseness,  that  in  justice  to  you 
and  myself,  I  would  not  read  the  comedy  you  put  into  my  hands  till  yesterday.  I 
have  considered  it  well,  and  sincerely  wished  that  I  might  have  an  occasion  to  show 
the  regard  I  have  for  you.  To  be  free  and  friendly  with  you,  I  think  the  comedy  not 
in  the  least  calculated  for  representation ;  and  if  I  did  not  know  your  hand,  and  that 
you  had  sent  it  to  me,  I  should  not  have  believed  it,  from  the  other  performances  I 
have  seen  of  yours,  to  have  come  from  the  same  author.  To  speak  my  mind  without 
constraint,  and  as  circumstances  occur  to  me,  the  character  of  your  Credulous  Man  is 
surely  unnatural  and  improbable  ;  his  swallow  is  too  large  and  too  farcical.  Can  it  be 
possible  that  he  could  be  so  gulled  by  Flam,  and  his  brother  cheat,  to  take  every  thing 
for  granted,  and  at  so  great  a  loss  too  ?  Or,  granting  that  he  could  swallow  all  their 
secrets,  is  it  credible  that  he  would  agree  to  give  his  daughter  at  once  to  a  stranger 
upon  a  day’s  acquaintance?  A  dupe  so  extravagantly  absurd  becomes  an  idiot,  and 
unfit  for  the  stage.  Let  us  pass  from  him  to  the  lover's  scheme,  and  I  fear  that  will 
prove  as  improbable.  He  is  thought  to  be  dead,  but  returns, — puts  on  a  bob-wig, 
visits  his  mistress  as  her  dead  lover’s  uncle,  and  is  not  found  out  till  he  discovers  the 
plot  himself.  I  will  grant  you  that  some  improbable  disguises  have  passed,  and  will 
pass  upon  the  stage  ;  but  though  Love  is  painted  blind,  lovers  are  supposed  to  have 
lynx’s  eyes  ;  and  it  is  unnatural  to  think  the  young  woman  should  converse  with  the 
object  of  her  passion  still  warm  in  her  heart,  and  but  lately  left  her,  and  not  know 
him  under  so  slight  a  concealment  ?  To  me  it  is  impossible,  and  I  fear,  would  have 
a  bad  effect  upon  the  stage.  But  supposing,  (and  it  is  supposing  a  great  deal,)  that 
these  circumstances,  which  are  the  main  ones  of  the  plot,  could  be  made  probable 
by  alteration,  yet  there  still  wants  the  sine  qua  non,  the  spirit  of  dialogue,  that  vis 
comica,  that  vein  of  pleasantry,  without  which  no  comedy  can  live  upon  the  stage. 
The  Credulous  Man  is  the  only  character,  and  him  I  think  too  exaggerated  to  be  pleas¬ 
ing  ;  and  we  have  so  many  cheaters  and  cheatees  upon  the  stage,  such  as  are  in  the 
“Alcbymist,”  “Albumazar,”  &c.  that  I  fear,  unless  some  very  new  method,  and  pleasant 
method  of  gulling  the  credulous  was  found  out,  an  audience  would  be  very  squeamish. 

The  Tychotholicon  of  Feignwell  would  be  thought  an  imitation  of  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


603 


Otakousticon  of  “Albumazar,”  and  the  transmutation  of  vegetables  put  them  in 
mind  of  the  transmutation  of  metals  in  the  “Alchymist.”  Pandolpho  and  Sir  Epi¬ 
cure  Mammon  are  the  old  gulls,  and,  to  be  sure,  had  their  effect,  when  the  transfor¬ 
mation  of  persons,  and  transmutation  of  metals,  were  talked  of  and  believed  by 
nineteen  in  twenty  :  even  now,  by  the  force  of  writing,  they  are  suffered — but, 
indeed,  it  is  by  a  force  upon  the  understanding,  and  are  but  barely  borne,  and  I  am 
certain  would  be  condemned,  (with  all  their  merit,)  were  they  now  for  the  first 
time  to  be  acted.  I  hope  my  sincerity  will  not  appear  impertinent.  I  should  think 
myself  unworthy  of  your  confidence  if  I  did  not  speak  to  you  as  to  my  thinkings,  as  I 
do  ruminate,  and  it  is  my  honest  opinion  that  you  would  have  been  unhappy  had 
either  Mr.  Colman  or  Mr.  Foote  brought  your  comedy  upon  the  stage. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  sincere  well  wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  write,  as  you  see,  with  the  gout  in  my  fingers.  I  can  scarce  hold  my  pen.  1 
have  written  slovenly  and  incorrectly,  but  you  will  excuse  every  thing.  To  con¬ 
vince  you  how  over-delicate  the  public  may  be  at  times,  I  will  relate  to  you  a 
passage  in  a  farce  called  “  Neck  or  Nothing.”  Two  servants  agree  to  impose  upon 
an  old  citizen,  StockweJl — one  of  them  is  to  pass  for  his  master,  and  to  receive  a 
portion  with  the  daughter,  whom  he  is  to  marry ;  they  agree  to  divide  the  booty 
and  run  away.  The  business  is  comically  enough  arranged,  and  had  great  applause, 
till  upon  the  old  citizen’s  asking  the  sham  gentleman  to  take  a  mortgage  upon  some 
houses  for  part  of  the  fortune,  the  other  answers,  “  He  is  sorry  that  he  could  not ; 
but  that  he  had  bargained  for  an  estate  that  was  contagious  to  his  own,  and  must 
be  obliged  to  pay  the  money  in  two  days  or  forfeit.”  “  Is  the  estate  good?”  says 
the  old  man.  “  In  fine  condition,”  answers  the  cheat,  “  and  the  wood  upon  it  will 
very  near  pay  the  purchase.”  "  Indeed  !”  “  O  yes  !”  says  the  confederate,  “  And 

then  the  fine  ponds  upon  the  estate.”  “  Ponds !”  cries  Stockwell.  “  What  signify 
ponds  ?”  “  Oh,  Sir,  they  make  a  great  deal  of  the  ponds,  many  pounds  a  year.” 

“  Indeed  !  What  are  they  good  for  ?”  Slip  replies,  “  To  catch  gudgeons,  Sir. 
Great  profit  and  pleasure.” 

I  thought  it  dangerous,  and  so  it  proved,  though  but  in  a  farce,  and  which  till 
the  gudgeons  came,  had  met  with  great  applause.  I  mention  this  only  to  show 
you,  that  an  audience  will  not  suffer  the  dupe  to  be  cheated  too  extravagantly  even 
in  a  farcical  piece. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN. 

dear  SIR,  Adelphi,  Jan.  12th,  1774. 

Your  letter,  which  surprised  me,  is  half  a  letter  of  complaint,  and  without  the 
smallest  foundation.  I  never  broke  my  word  with  any  body,  nor  do  I  expect  a 
murmur  against  me  from  a  liberal  mind  till  I  do.  13r.  Francklin  might  have  known 
by  the  papers  that  I  have  been  ill,  and  very  ill,  so  ill  as  to  keep  house  for  near  a 

4  II  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


604 

fortnight,  except  just  the  conveyance  of  me  from  the  Adelphi  to  Hampton,  by  way 
of  changing  the  air.  But  you  seem  to  think  it  hard  that  I  will  not  speak  to  Colonel 
Dow.  How  such  a  request  to  the  Colonel  could  be  conveyed,  is  not  in  my  power  to 
determine,  for  he  has  been  some  time  in  the  East  Indies,  and  left  his  play  in  guar¬ 
dianship  ;  this  I  thought  I  told  you.  It  lias  been  your  own  fault,  and  yours  only, 
that  you  have  not  had  your  play  and  other  plays  (if  you  had  chosen  it)  acted  at 
Drury-lane  Theatre  long  before  this.  As  you  seem  to  be  peevish,  I  will  speak  the 
truth,  because  I  will  have  none  of  your  faults  added  to  a  large  number  of  my  own. 
After  your  “  Warwick,”  you  were  given  to  coquetry;  and  after  you  had  mentioned 
an  intended  tragedy  to  me  often,  you  hung  back,  changed  your  mind,  &c.  &c.  &c., 
and  never  offered  me  one  till  that  which  I  read  last  summer.  I  have  told  you  from 
the  beginning  all  my  engagements,  and  therefore  it  is  very  hard  to  be  distressed 
about  a  matter  which  I  have  wished  to  be  able  to  do,  but  had  it  not  in  my  power. 
I  have  answered  this  upon  the  gallop,  but  could  not  rest  till  I  had  spoken  my  mind 
as  freely  as  you  have  done.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

What  can  you  possibly  mean  by  wishing  to  be  now  in  my  favour  ?  I  would  not 
break  my  word  to  gain  the  favour  of  kings,  nor  should  my  brother  be  preferred  to  a 
stranger,  had  I  given  my  word  to  the  latter.  The  gout  in  my  fingers  makes  my  letter 
scarce  legible. 


MRS.  C.  CLIVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR.  Twickenham,  Jan.  13th,  1774. 

I  should  suppose,  when  you  see  Twickenham,  you  will  not  presently  imagine 
whom  the  letter  can  come  from,  you  have  so  entirely  forgot  me.  I  write  because  I  am 
importuned  by  the  bearer  ;  and  to  solicit  a  great  man  looks  as  if  one  had  power, 

which,  you  know,  is  a  charming  thing.  Mr.  C -  tells  me  he  knows  you  very 

well:  he  lives  at  Twickenham,  is  a  wine-merchant,  lives  in  good  credit,  and  has  for 
many  years.  I  have  taken  my  wine  of  him  these  four  years,  which  is  the  reason  he 
thinks  I  ought  to  trouble  you  with  a  letter.  He  wants  to  get  his  son  into  the  excise. 
He  tells  me  you  are  at  the  head  of  the  commission,  and  can  do  whatever  you 

please:  you  could ,  I  know,  in  former  days ;  and  if  you  can  iioav  and  will,  Mr.  C - 

will  be  very  glad  of  it.  I  do  not  know  any  thing  of  the  young  man,  therefore 
cannot  recommend  him,  but  I  suppose  his  father  can,  for  he  is  a  fine  chatter-box ;  he 
will  up  and  tell  you  every  thing  about  him. 

Pray  how  does  my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick  do  ?  for  I  will  love  her  because  I  am  very 
sure  she  would  me  if  you  would  let  her;  but  you  are  a  Rudesby  yourself,  and  it  is 
your  fault  that  she  does  not  take  notice  of  me. 

I  might  date  this  letter  from  the  Ark :  we  are  so  surrounded  with  water,  that  it 
is  impossible  for  any  carriage  to  come  to  me,  or  for  me  to  stir  out,  so  that  at  present 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


605 


my  heavenly  place  is  a  little  devilish.  I  believe  I  must  win  a  house  in  the  Adelphi, 
and  come  to  town  in  the  winter  ;  but  when  I  come,  1  shall  not  have  the  happiness  to 
see  Macklin  in  “  Macbeth.”  What  a  pity  it  is  he  should  make  an  end  of  himself  in 
such  a  fine  part. 

Your  friend  Jemmy  and  Mrs.  Mestivur  desire  their  compliments  to  yourself  and 
Mrs.  Garrick.  I  suppose  we  shall  all  meet  next  summer  at  Mr.  Walpole’s. 

Adieu,  yours  ever, 

C.  Clive. 


MR.  MADAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Epsom,  Jan.  14th,  1774. 

I  do  not  forget  an  obliging  offer  you  made  me,  when  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
you  at  Hampton  last  summer,  which  was  to  favour  me  with  a  translation  of  the 
epitaph  which  I  wrote  on  my  dear  child’s  death.  I  believe  I  did  not  leave  you  a  copy 
of  it,  therefore  permit  me  now  to  send  you  one,  the  translation  of  which,  at  youir 
leisure,  you  will  favour  me  with. 

“  Hoc  jacet  Tumulo,  lethali  falce  recisus, 

Flos,  quo  non  forma  pulchrior  alter  erat. 

Jam  Paradisiaco  viget  insons  spiritus  horto. 

Quod  potuit  morti  cedere,  terra  tegit. 

Quanquam  nunc  saevos  jactes,  Mors  seeva,  triumphos, 

Te  victam  agnosces.  Is  redivivus  erit.” 

I  am  commonly  at  this  place  from  Wednesday  till  Saturday :  my  son  is  now  with 
me,  and  we  have  been  exercising  our  genius  with  making  Latin  verses.  The  subject 
fallen  to  my  share  to-day  is — Alter  et  Idem.  As  you  have  some  share  in  what  I  have 
written  this  morning,  I  will  trouble  you  with  them,  desiring  you  to  make  all  reason¬ 
able  allowance  for  my  having  left  school  thirty  years. 

ALTER  ET  IDEM. 

“  Aspice  Romano  noster  par  Roscius  extat, 

Quam  merito  plausu  lseta  Theatra  sonant ! 

Seu  tragica  attonitis  vi  spectatoribus  instat, 

Vel  gratas  sumat  Comica  Musa  vices. 

Eflfusis  lachrymis,  ingratae  crimina  mentis 
Deplorat  natis  Roscius,  ipse  Lear. 

Dura  representat  crudelis  facta  tyranni 

Richardi  ?  ante  oculos  ipse  tyrannns  adest ! 

Post  mortem  Regis  Scotorum  Roscius  intrat, 

Macbethi  trepidat  sanguinolenta  manus  ; 

Mox  tragieum  placide  deponens  ille  cotburnum, 

Idem  quam  subito  !  Roscius,  alter  erit ! 

Diffugiunt  lachrymae  tristes,  tragicaeque  tenebrae, 

Et  subeunt  risus,  et  sine  felle  sales  ! 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(JOG 


Mutatus  non  mutatur — vim  semper  eandem 

Seu  dolet,  aut  ridet,  vel  lachrymatur,  habet. 
Nemo  hominum  fuerit  toties  sic  Alter  et  Idem, 
Tam  sibi  dissimilis,  tarn  similisque  sibi, 
Unicus  hie  Alter  fuerit  nam  cum  velit  Idem, 
Unicus  hie  Idem  cum  velit  Alter  erit.” 


My  wife  and  daughters  are  at  K — bridge,  or  I  am  sure  would  join  me  in  kindest 
compliments  to  yourself  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  obedient  humble  servant, 

M.  Madan. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Jan.  13th,  1774. 

Last  night,  I  received  a  very  civil  note  from  Dr.  Kenrick,  together  with  the 
present  of  a  ticket  of  admission  to  his  intended  lectures  on  Shakspeare.  Fresh  game, 
1  suppose,  will  be  started  for  the  newspapers ;  and  therefore  I  trespass  once  more  on 
your  patience,  to  assure  you  that,  among  the  literary  hounds  who  may  follow  it,  I  will 
not  be  one.  Before  this  time  you  must  have  seen  the  Doctor’s  proposals  ;  and  I  should 
not  be  at  all  surprised  if  Mr.  Bell,  or  some  of  his  friends,  was  to  inform  the  public 
that  I  have  undertaken  to  stand  at  his  elbow,  and  snuff  the  candles  while  he  is  read¬ 
ing.  Shakspeare  himself  is  said  to  have  been  of  a  most  gentle  disposition ;  but  I 
am  sure  that  his  satellites  have  as  little  of  his  temper  as  of  his  genius  about  them.  I 
must  therefore  beg,  that  whatever  nonsense  may  appear  against  you  or  any  one  else, 
n  consequence  of  the  Doctor’s  plan,  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  declare  that  I  have 
no  hand  in  it.  I  am  most  truly  yours,  &c. 

G.  S. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Jan.  ISth,  1774. 

The  ingenious  and  modest  young  man  who  is  the  bearer  of  this,  is  the  favourite 
pupil  of  Mr.  Bartolozzi,  and  is  employed  to  execute  every  subject  which  his  master 
does  not  finish  with  his  own  hand.  Sherwin  is  now  engaged  to  make  a  design  for  a 
poem  which  is  to  be  dedicated  to  you.  It  is  on  a  Shakspearian  subject,  and  therefore 
he  will  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  give  him  those  directions  which  you,  and 
you  only  can  give.  A  hint  is  all  he  wants,  and  that  you  can  supply  in  a  moment. 

In  answer  to  Dr.  Kenrick’s  card,  I  told  him  I  hoped  he  would  print  his  lectures, 
as  business  would  not  permit  me  to  attend  on  them  regularly. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  faithfully, 


G.  Steevens. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


607 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Jan.  20th,  1 774. 

Let  me  now  trouble  you  for  the  remaining  part  of  your  collection  of  old  plays, 
and  I  will  very  soon  return  them  all  together,  that  is,  as  soon  as  I  can.  To  enable  me 
to  ascertain  your  deficiencies,  you  will  be  pleased  to  send  the  whole  number  of 
volumes  that  have  D.  G.  on  their  backs,  and  if  any  person  wants  any  of  them,  they 
shall  be  sent  where  you  direct ;  but  otherwise  not  a  book  shall  stray  out  of  my  pos¬ 
session.  You  will  be  kind  enough  likewise  to  send  an  old  quarto  volume,  which  is 
not  in  your  catalogue,  and  has  Cock  Lord's  Bote,  an  ancient  satire,  contained  in  it, 
among  other  pieces.  I  ought  to  send  you  a  bond  for  a  thousand  pounds,  considering 
how  great  a  trust  you  repose  in  me ;  but  I  assure  you,  if  my  house  were  on  fire,  your 
books  would  be  the  first  things  of  value  I  should  attempt  to  save.  My  servant  has 
paper,  &c.  to  pack  them  carefully. 

In  your  haste  you  have  certainly  written  what  I  told  you  relative  to  Bell.  I 
have  now  your  letter  before  me,  and  if  there  has  been  a  mistake,  I  know  not  whe¬ 
ther  to  charge  it  on  the  indistinctness  of  your  hand,  or  my  most  shameful  inability  to 
read  it. 

How  did  the  Doctor’s  lecture  go  off?  If  you  do  not  inform  me,  I  hope  the 
newspapers  will.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  faithfully, 

G.  Steevens. 

Bryan’s  book  is  not  yet  publish  ed. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Jan.  20th,  1774. 

Yesterday  at  noon  I  dispatched  a  note  to  you  by  a  gentleman’s  servant  who 
called  here,  and  he  promised  to  deliver  it  at  your  house  by  three  o'clock.  I  should 
not  otherwise  have  sent  for  the  books  this  morning;  and  beg  your  pardon,  most  sin¬ 
cerely,  for  such  a  seeming  neglect  of  your  very  proper  request.  It  should  appear 
from  the  account  brought  by  my  man,  that  some  other  mistake  has  happened  ;  for  lie 
tells  me  you  expected  to  see  me  to-day. 

I  foresaw  it  would  be  improper  for  me  to  attend  at  Dr.  Kenrick’s  lecture,  though 
I  have  sent  to  subscribe  to  it,  in  return  for  the  ticket  he  gave  me.  It  would  not 
become  me  to  hear  any  reflections  thrown  on  Dr.  Johnson,  who  has  done  me  the 
very  singular  honour  of  permitting  my  name  to  stand  in  the  same  title-page  with 
his  own. 

I  know  not  of  any  such  writer  as  Anti-mendax,  nor  in  what  paper  he  appears. 
I  take  in  only  the  Public  and  St.  James's,  and  occasionally  see  the  Morning  Chronicle, 


GOB 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


when  a  neighbour  desires  to  change  newspapers.  There  are  now  so  many,  that  one 
may  fairly  be  excused  from  the  drudgery  of  looking  into  them  all. 

I  believe  Mr.  T.  D.  may  be  in  the  right,  as  far  as  my  small  share  in  your  vindi¬ 
cation  went.  I  copied  almost  your  own  words,  that  I  might  be  sure  not  to  misre¬ 
present  your  meaning.  I  could  give  a  very  substantial  reason  why  such  a  declaration, 
authorised  by  you,  was  necessary  ;  as  I  knew  the  hand  that  was  ready  to  throw 
stones  if  you  had  been  totally  silent  on  the  affair.  I  leave  studious  elegance  in  such 
matters  to  the  mighty  Tom.  A  plain  narrative  of  facts  was  all  that  was  wanted,  and 
this  was  written  and  sent  off  to  Baldwin  in  a  few  minutes  after  you  had  given  me 
leave  to  send  it.  If  it  was  intelligible  to  the  public,  it  was  all  I  desired  it  to  be. 

When  you  have  done  with  Davies’s  letter,  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  for  a  sight  of 
it.  I  do  not  quite  understand  what  you  say ;  but  assure  you  that  I  have  not  seen 
the  writer  for  these  eight  months  past,  for  he  is  much  too  great  a  man  for  me.  His 
concern  ought  to  be  with  the  outside  of  books  ;  but  Dr.  Johnson,  Dr.  Percy,  and 
some  others,  have  made  such  a  coxcomb  of  him,  that  he  is  now  hardy  enough  to  open 
volumes,  turn  over  their  leaves,  aud  give  his  opinion  of  their  contents.  Did  I  ever 
tell  you  an  anecdote  of  him  ?  About  ten  years  ago  (in  order  to  wean  a  lazy  boy 
from  reading  Greek  with  a  Latin  version)  I  wanted  the  Oxford  Homer,  and  called  at 
Davies’s  to  ask  for  it,  as  I  had  seen  one  thrown  about  his  shop.  Will  you  believe 
me  when  I  assure  you,  he  told  me  “  he  had  but  one,  and  that  he  kept  for  his  own 
reading  ?”* 

The  volume  which  contains  Code  Corel's  Cote,  is  in  a  parchment  cover,  has  Hyck 
Scorner  with  it,  &c.  The  late  Mr.  Hawkins  borrowed  it  of  you,  because  I  know  he 
printed  from  it. 

Once  more  let  me  assure  you  that  I  care  not  a  farthing  what  Mr.  Bell  or  his 
friends  may  write  about  me,  or  the  part  I  had  in  the  late  edition  of  Shakspeare.  All 
the  booksellers  whom  I  have  accidentally  met,  assure  me  it  has  sold  well ;  and  I  ask  no 
better  proof  of  its  success,  except  it  be  your  own  approbation,  and  with  that  1  have 
been  already  favoured.  Our  book  will  never  appear  as  I  could  wish  it,  because  my 
coadjutor  is  determined  to  retain  the  useless  as  'well  as  the  useful  part  of  the  com¬ 
ment.  Where  a  certainty  has  been  once  obtained,  I  would  banish  all  controversy .j 

Wishing  you  a  speedy  riddance  of  the  gout,  I  remain, 

Yours  most  faithfully, 

G.  Steevens. 

*  This  anecdote  is  highly  characteristic  of  Steevens,  who  delighted  in  the  exposure  of  undue  pretensions. 
However,  not  to  bear  too  strongly  upon  poor  Davies,  even  learned  commentators  upon  Shakspeare  have  some¬ 
times  indulged  themselves  with  quoting  a  classic  from  a  French  translator,  or  rather  translated  his  French 
than  the  Greek  of  the  original  author.— Ed. 

t  Mr.  Steevens’s  expurgatory  plan  should  certainly  be  followed  in  the  publication  of  Shakspeare’s  plays, 
“  wherever  certainty  has  been  obtained but  opinions  fluctuate,  and  there  exist  friends  to  exploded  explana¬ 
tions.  Booksellers  cannot  be  expected  to  banish  willingly  any  readers.  We  all  remember  the  “  sapient 
Sir,”  who,  on  estimating  an  edition,  always  looked  whether  the  first  word  of  Othello  was  tush  ;  and  if  he  found 
the  copy  shorn  of  his  favourite  interjection,  pronounced  it  not  worth  Jive  farthings  '■ — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


609 


MR.  W.  SHIRLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Jan.  21st,  1  774. 

I  herewith  send  you  the  tragedy*  that  you  desired  to  see  again,  which  should 
carry  the  precautionary  salvo  with  which  merchants  sign  their  accounts,  of  errors  ex¬ 
cepted  ;  for  though,  I  thank  God,  my  health  is  mending  apace,  yet  I  do  not  think 
myself  quite  in  a  condition  for  putting  the  last  hand  to  such  a  performance ;  and 
therefore,  if  you  should  resolve  to  make  any  present  use  of  it,  I  beg  the  return  of  it 
for  one  more  attentive  perusal  before  any  farther  proceedings  therein,  which  shall 
occasion  no  material  delay. 

I  am,  with  respect,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

William  Shirley. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  HOPKINS. 

Friday  Morning,  Jan.  20th,  1774. 

Mrs.  Abington  sends  the  part  of  Letitia  in  “  The  Choleric  Man,”  to  Mr.  Hop¬ 
kins,  in  order  to  his  receiving  Air.  Garrick’s  commands  as  to  the  person  he  is  pleased 
to  give  it  in  study  to,  for  the  next  representation  of  the  play.  Air.  Cumberland  has 
obligingly  given  his  consentf  to  her  resigning  of  the  part ;  and  Airs.  Abington  flatters 
herself  that  Air.  Garrick  will  have  the  goodness  and  complaisance  to  relieve  her  from 
a  character  so  little  calculated  to  her  very  confined  style  of  acting. 

Mrs.  Abington  has  been  very  ill  for  some  days  past,  but  would  not  importune 
Mr.  Garrick  with  complaints,  as  she  saw  there  was  a  necessity  for  exerting  herself  till 
the  new  tragedy  was  ready. 

Received  ten  minutes  before  four.— W.  H. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Abington  with  the  part  of  Letitia 
in  ‘  The  Choleric  Man.’” 


MR.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIE  Portsmouth,  Saturday,  Jan.  22d,  1774. 

I  take  the  liberty  to  write  to  you  again  ;  for  I  yet  flatter  myself  that  my  wel¬ 
fare  is  not  altogether  indifferent  to  you. 

*  Perhaps  “  The  Roman  Sacrifice,”  founded  on  the  fierce  unnatural  conduct  of  the  elder  Brutus ;  a  tra¬ 
gedy  acted  in  1777,  but  coldly  received.— Ed. 

+  They  who  had  the  pleasure  to  know  Cumberland,  and  have  witnessed  his  irritation  and  acquiescence 
under  such  provocations,  will  have  a  just  notion  how  obligingly  he  consented  to  resign  the  best  actress  in  the 
theatre  on  the  getting  up  a  new  comedy.  Mrs.  Abington  was  excessively  perverse  even  to  such  a  manager 
as  Garrick. — Ed. 

4  I 


VOL.  I. 


610 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OE 


My  health  is  much  better;  I  am  now  comfortably  settled  here;  I  translate,  though 
1  am  yet  far  from  well,  two  guineas-worth  of  Becket’s  book  every  week.  It  is  a  most 
agreeable  and  excellent  compendium  of  ancient  customs  and  manners,  and  though  my 
present  work  is  a  translation  from  a  French  prose  author,  be  pleased  to  tell  Becket 
that  1  am  as  accurate  a  drudge  for  him, 

“  As  if  the  Stagyrite  o’erlook’d  each  line.” 

But  you  must  be  pleased  likewise  to  tell  him  who  the  Stagyrite  was,  and  of  what 
country,  and  how  famous,  how  severe  a  critic  he  was  ;  otherwise  my  account  of  my 
accuracy  will  fall  to  the  ground. 

But  what  I  am  most  watchful  and  assiduous  to  obtain,  is  a  prudent  conduct  and  a 
philosophical  equanimity.  I  hope  in  time  you  will,  on  some  grounds,  be  as  indulgent 
to  my  virtue  as  you  have  been  to  my  abilities. 

I  take  the  liberty  to  write  to  you  now  chiefly  to  beg  your  excuse  for  the  trouble 
which,  I  suppose,  the  humane  Mr.  Ayrey  will  give  you  on  my  account.  I  write 
him  a  long  letter  by  this  post,  in  which  I  request  your  advice  and  his  on  an  affair 
which  is  of  the  last  consequence  to  me.  Pray  make  my  most  respectful  compliments 
to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  acquaint  her  that  I  often  think  with  the  warmest  gratitude  on 
her  past  politeness  and  friendship  to  me.  If  it  is  not  too  presuming,  permit  me  to 
conclude  my  letter  with  the  following  lines  : 

“  Ut  nox  longa  quibus  mentitur  arnica,  diesque 
Pupillis,  quos  dura  premit  custodia  matrnm  ; 

Sic  mihi  tarda  fluunt  iftgrataque  tempora,  dum  tu 
Druricolis  nimis  interitus  mihi  scribe  re  tardus .” — Horace. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  most  grateful  servant, 

Percival  Stockdale. 


MRS.  C.  CLIVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

WONDERFUL  SIR,  Twickenham,  Jan.  23rd,  1774. 

U  ho  have  been  for  these  thirty  years  contradicting  an  old  established  proverb — 
you  cannot  make  brick  without  straw ;  but  you  have  done  what  is  infinitely  more 
difficult,  for  you  have  made  actors  and  actresses  without  genius ;  that  is,  you  have 
made  them  pass  for  such,  which  has  answered  your  end,  though  it  has  given  you  in¬ 
finite  trouble  : — you  never  took  much  with  yourself,  for  you  could  not  help  acting 
well,  therefore  I  do  not  think  you  have  much  merit  in  that ;  though,  to  be  sure,  it  has 
been  very  amusing  to  yourself  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  world,  for,  while  you  are 
laughing  at  your  own  conceits,  you  were  at  the  same  time  sure  they  would  cram  your 
iron  chests.  TV  hat  put  this  fancy  into  my  head  was  your  desiring  a  good  character 
of  young  Crofts.  It  is  a  sad  thing,  some  people  would  say,  that  such  a  paltry  being 
as  an  exciseman  cannot  get  his  bread  unless  he  has  behaved  well  in  the  world  ;  and 
yet  it  is  so  perfectly  right,  that  if  every  body  would  have  the  same  caution  not  to 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


611 


give  good  characters  where  they  did  not  deserve  them,  nor  receive  people  into  your 
family  for  servants,  or  any  kind  of  business,  who  had  them  not, —  if  this  was  made  an 
unalterable  rule,  the  world  must  in  time  become  all  good  sort  of  people. 

I  send  the  inclosed,  which  may  be  depended  on.  Mr.  Costard  is  our  rector,  one  of 
the  most  learned  and  best  sort  of  men  in  the  world :  they  say  he  has  more  knowledge 
in  the  stars,  and  amongst  all  the  sky-people,  than  any  body,  so  that  most  of  us  take 
him  for  a  conjurer. 

I  ought  to  make  an  apology  for  being  so  troublesome :  when  I  come  to  town,  I 
will  make  my  excuse,  when  I  shall  at  the  same  time  see  Mrs.  Garrick,  which  will 
always  be  a  real  pleasure  to  Dear  Sir,  yours, 

C.  Pivy. 

We  all  join  in  compliments  to  yourself  and  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  hear  your  “  Christ¬ 
mas  Tale”  is  the  finest  thing  that  ever  was  seen. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  GREY  COOPER. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Feb.  1st,  1774. 

It  is  not  possible  for  me  to  believe  what  my  servant  tells  me,  nay  I  should  scarce 
have  believed  my  own  eyes  had  I  seen  it.  He  tells  me,  that  Mr.  Cooper  in  company 
with  a  certain  Lord,  whom  I  most  honour  and  would  soonest  obey,  called  yesterday 
at  the  Adelphi !  Impossible  !  I  beg  and  beseech  you,  my  good  friend,  not  to  make 
me  too  vain  ;  but  if  there  are  any  commands  to  either  of  the  Indies  ;  if  it  is  thought 
proper  that  I  should  be  Commander-in-Chief  instead  of  General  Clavering,  whose 
nomination  I  and  my  friends  intended  to  support  next  Thursday ;  or  if  I  should  be 
fixed  to  make  the  Bostonians  drink  their  tea  as  they  ought,  or  send  them  after  the 
tea  into  the  Atlantic, — pray  let  me  know  directly,  that  I  may  resign  the  kingdoms 
of  England  and  Scotland  in  the  persons  of  Richard  the  Third  and  Macbeth,  and 
prepare  to  go  any  where  or  every  where,  as  that  noble  Lord  should  be  pleased  to 
command  me.  I  am  dear  Mr.  Cooper’s  most  obliged  and  obedient 

D.  Garrick. 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  3rd.  1774. 

The  wit  and  pleasantry  of  your  letter  have  delighted  us  all.  Lord  North  cannot 
afford,  either  on  the  account  of  his  taste  or  his  popularity,  to  send  the  favourite  of 
the  nation  to  such  barbarous  places  as  Bengal  or  Boston.  He  hopes,  however,  that 
you  will  soon  prove,  that  you  have  neither  abdicated  nor  deserted  the  kingdoms  of 
Scotland  or  England.  Ever  yours  most  faithfully, 

Grey  Cooper. 


4  i  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


612 


MR.  W.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Berners  Street,  Feb.  25th,  1774. 

As  Mr.  Wallis  and  Mr.  Sainsbury  differed  in  their  opinion  yesterday  on  the  con¬ 
struction  of  the  articles  between  you  and  my  late  father,  Mr.  Sainsbury  thought  it 
prudent  that  I  should  have  the  opinion  of  an  able  lawyer  thereon.  In  consequence 
of  which  we  afterwards  waited  on  Air.  Mansfield,  who,  on  reading  the  articles,  was 
clearly  of  opinion  that  I  have  an  equal  right  with  you  in  the  management  of  every 
branch  of  the  business  relative  to  the  theatre.  This  being  the  case,  I  am  sure  you 
would  not  wish  to  deprive  me  of  any  right  I  am  entitled  to,  as,  from  my  conduct,  I 
hope  you  have  no  reason  to  think  1  shall  make  an  improper  use  of  it. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  LACY. 

SIR,  Adelphi,  Saturday,  26th,  1774. 

After  waiting  till  three  o’clock  (according  to  your  appointment)  to  receive  your 
answer  on  my  several  proposals  for  referring  our  differences,  I  was  surprised  to  find 
(by  your  note,  which  I  received  late  last  night)  that  you  have  consulted  counsel  in  a 
less  amicable  way  than  I  proposed. 

You  do  me  justice  in  supposing  that  I  have  no  wish  to  deprive  you  of  any  benefit 
you  are  entitled  to.  I  commend  your  prudence;  and  before  I  give  you  a  final  an¬ 
swer,  1  shall  follow  your  example,  and  be  properly  advised. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  W.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Berners  Street,  Feb.  28th,  1774. 

Mr.  Lacy  is  very  sorry  to  be  deemed  wanting  either  in  politeness  or  friendship 
to  Mr.  Garrick.  He  really  understood  that  business  would  detain  him  at  home  all 
that  morning ;  if  otherwise,  he  craves  pardon  for  the  misapprehension.  In  respect 
to  the  application,  if  Mr.  Garrick  will  please  to  recollect,  his  own  proposals  warrant 
that  proceeding.  But  Mr.  Lacy  is  very  much  disposed  to  make  Mr.  Garrick  some 
proposals  which  he  has  cause  to  think  will  prove  very  acceptable.  Whenever  Mr. 
Garrick  is  at  leisure  to  attend  to  them,  he  will  please  to  command, 

His  very  humble  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


613 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  March  6th,  1 774. 

Many  thanks  both  for  your  suffrage  and  your  congratulations,  for  they  are 
equally  honourable  to  me.  I  shall  not  fail  to  join  the  club  on  Friday  evening.  Dr. 
Johnson  desires  I  will  call  on  him,  and  he  will  introduce  me.  Pray  what  is  the  usual 
time  of  meeting  ? 

Mr.  C.  Fox  pays  you  but  a  bad  compliment;  as  he  appears,  like  the  late  Mr. 
Secretary  Morris,  to  enter  the  society  at  a  time  when  he  has  nothing  else  to  do.  If 
the  bon  ton  should  prove  a  contagious  disorder  among  us,  it  will  be  curious  to  trace 

its  progress.  1  have  already  seen  it  breaking  out  in  Dr.  G - ,*  under  the  form  of 

many  a  waistcoat,  but  I  believe  Dr.  G - will  be  the  last  man  in  whom  the  symp¬ 

toms  of  it  will  be  detected. 

Once  more  I  thank  you  for  your  partiality  in  my  favour,  and  shall  live  in  the  hope 
of  meeting  you  on  Friday  evening.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  faithful, 

G.  STEEVENS-t 

Pray  who  is  this  offended  author  who  appeals  from  your  judgment  to  the  pub¬ 
lic?  Your  enemies  always  take  care  to  justify  your  conduct  by  exposing  their  own 
productions. 


CENSOR  DRAMATICUS  TO  *****  * 


Drury-lane,  March  10,  1774. 

A  gentleman  who  styles  himself  a  lover  of  innocent  amusements,  through  the 
channel  of  your  paper,  expresses  a  wish  that  the  Roscius  of  Drury-lane  would  oblige 
the  public  with  a  printed  collection  of  all  the  prologues  and  epilogues  he  has  at  dif¬ 
ferent  times  composed  ;  and  likewise  desires  to  know  the  reason  he  withholds  that 
treasure  from  the  public  at  large.  Now  the  reason  is  obvious  :  not  to  derogate  from 
the  honour  of  that  theatrical  Machiavel,  whoever  had  the  least  acquaintance  with  him 
will  scarce  attribute  that  forbearance  either  to  his  modesty  or  disinterestedness ;  but 

*  Dr.  G.  was  the  admirable  author  of  “  The  Traveller.”  Steevens  would  have  spared  this  piece  of  plea¬ 
santry,  could  he  have  anticipated  that,  in  less  than  a  single  month,  Dr.  Goldsmith  would  be  no  more  the 
subject  of  his  merriment.  Goldsmith’s  character  has  never  been  fully  displayed  ;  and  now  it  is  too  late  to 
try  what  might  be  done.  The  difficulty  would  be  to  preserve  the  respect  due  to  the  very  finest  powers, 
while  displaying  the  most  absurd  peculiarities.  Literary  characters,  like  Falstaff’s  assailants,  are  commonly 
shown  in  buckram  suits. — Ed. 

t  Mr.  Garrick  had  thought  it  prudent  to  pass  over  Mr.  Steevens’s  irreverence  as  to  the  Jubilee,  and  his 
parodies  of  its  poetry ;  to  throw  open  all  his  literary  stores  to  the  commentator’s  researches  ;  to  give  him 
his  suffrage  as  a  member  of  the  Literary  Club  ;  and  to  accept  as  much  of  his  friendship,  as  that  singular  man 
thought  proper  to  bestow  upon  any  body. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


C)  14 

account  for  it  from  the  more  obvious  consideration  of  his  ambitious  policy.  That 
little  great  man,  from  his  repository-general,  or  warehouse  of  old  and  obsolete  wit 
and  humour,  hath  at  different  times,  partly  by  modernizing,  new  vamping,  and  by 
the  addition  of  some  very  few  new  strokes,  characteristic  only  of  the  present  fashion¬ 
able  foibles,  produced  some  humorous  and  very  popular  petite-pieces ;  though  per¬ 
haps  his  last,  and  best  epilogue,  to  the  tragedy  of  “  Sethona,”  though  good  in  itself, 
owes  its  greatest  and  chief  merit  to  the  incomparable  manner  in  which  that  distin¬ 
guished  female  genius,  Mrs.  Barry,  delivers  it.  The  cunning  manager  knows  too  well 
the  inoriginality,  as  well  as  insignificancy  of  his  poetical  productions,  when  abstracted 
from  the  graces  of  his  own,  or  the  humour  of  other  actors  in  speaking  of  them  ;  he 
hath  been  taught  this  bit  of  self-knowledge  from  the  success  of  publishing  his  last 
Jubilee  Ode,  which,  notwithstanding  the  short-lived  and  unmerited  admiration  it 
gained,  while  spoken  by  himself,  when  since  read  and  perused  by  the  best  critics,  has 
turned  out  to  be  the  most  incoherent  rhapsody  that  was  ever  attempted  in  this  or  any 
other  language.  The  author  of  this,  therefore,  as  his  sincere  and  best  friend,  advised 
him  to  raise  the  solid  fabric  of  his  fame  entirely  on  his  manner  of  exhibiting  the 
more  ingenious  composition  of  others  ;  and  if  possible,  to  bound  his  ambition  on 
being  esteemed  the  greatest  player  of  his  age :  a  light  in  which  the  writer  of  this 
has  ever  admired  him  with  the  greatest  justice,  and  ever  will  as  long  as  he  continues 
to  ornament  the  British  Theatre. 

By  inserting  this  as  soon  as  possible,  you  will  oblige  a  whole  society,*  and,  among 
the  rest,  your  constant  reader  and  friend, . 

Censor  Dramaticus. 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Street,  March  17th,  1774. 

1  received  “  Minos”  back,  and  acquiesce  in  your  opinion  of  it.  It  was  not 
written  with  any  immediate  view  to  the  stage,  but  by  way  of  essay  towards  an 
imitation  of  my  favourite  author,  Lucian,  whom  I  am  now  translating ;  I  shall  there¬ 
fore  say  no  more  on  that  subject,  but  shall  be  glad  to  talk  with  you  on  another ,  the 
first  convenient  opportunitv.  I  flattered  myself  that  my  answer  to  a  note  which 
you  sent  me  last  year  might  have  brought  on  the  completion  of  a  little  treaty  be¬ 
tween  us  which  has  been  long  in  agitation  with  regard  to  a  tragedv  altered  from 
Voltaire ;  but  you  seemed,  for  what  reason  I  could  never  yet  learn,  unwilling  to 

*  A  whole  society. — I  shall  not  dispute  the  assertion  ;  but  it  must  be  among  the  hundreds  ot  Drury,  if  it 
could  be  found  at  all.  A  collection  of  prologues  and  epilogues,  however  sprinkled  with  fashionable  foibles,  if 
they  bear  any  relation  to  their  plays,  must  be  scarcely  intelligible  without  them.  Now  referring  neither  to 
Mr.  Garrick’s  “  modesty”  nor  “  disinterestedness/’yhey  are  published  where  they  should  appear  ;  and  he  is  a 
Machiavel  to  be  sure,  for  not  giving  to  such  trifles  a  form  quite  unsuitable  to  the  nature  of  the  composi¬ 
tion. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


615 


enter  into  any  correspondence  concerning  it,  though  I  informed  your  brother  that  it 
was  ready  for  you  whenever  you  thought  proper  to  accept  it :  it  has  lain  in  my 
drawer  ever  since,  and  must  continue  there  till  you  do  me  the  favour  to  call  it  into 
being.  When  all  your  other  more  deserving  friends  are  served,  I  shall  humbly  hope 
to  be  considered,  and  shall  be  glad  to  submit  it  to  your  inspection,  that,  if  you  ap¬ 
prove  of  it,  it  may  be  corrected  and  got  ready  for  representation  the  ensuing  season, 
as  I  am  confined  at  home  by  illness.  I  beg  the  favour  of  a  line  from  you  in  answer 
to  this,  which  will  much  oblige  Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  Francklin. 

NOTE  FROM  MR.  GARRICK  TO  HIS  BROTHER,  ON  TIIE  ABOVE. 

I  shall  answer  the  Doctor’s  letter  with  great  spirit  and  plainness.  Did  he  say  any 
thing  to  you  about  his  play — that  it  was  ready  for  me  ?  I  do  not  remember  it  ex¬ 
actly — let  me  know  minutely  what  passed,  for  I  shall  not  spare  him,  and  must  give 
your  answer  to  that  part  which  concerns  you. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  CAMPBELL. 


Hampton,  March  22nd,  1771. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  compliments  to  Dr.  Campbell.  He  remembers  well 
the  taking  some  receipts  from  the  Doctor  and,  in  his  removing  from  Southampton 
Street  to  the  Adelphi,  some  of  the  receipts  fell  into  his  hands ;  but  he  cannot  imme¬ 
diately  recollect  where  he  put  them  :  he  will  search  for  them,  and  what  he  cannot 
find  he  will  certainly  pay  for.  He  imagines  that  the  Doctor  had  Mr.  G’s.  own  sub¬ 
scription  ;  but  as  it  is  too  long  to  remember  correctly,  he  will  be  determined  by  the 
receipts  themselves,  when  he  is  lucky  enough  to  find  them. 


DR.  CAMPBELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Queen  Square,  Ormond  Street,  March  23rd,  1774. 

Dr.  Campbell  is  made  exceedingly  happy  by  his  good  friend  Mr.  Garrick’s 
obliging  favour  of  yesterday.  He  never  had  any  account  transmitted,  neither  can  he 
find  Mr.  Garrick’s  respectable  name  as  a  subscriber  to  the  Political  Survey  in  his 
general  list,  which  has  been  strictly  searched  for  that  purpose.  Shall  acknowledge 
with  the  greatest  gratitude  any  instance  of  regard  that  gentleman  may  honour  him 
with  in  the  patronage  that  either  himself  or  his  noble  and  honourable  friends,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  his  recommendation,  may  think  proper  to  show  to  his  work,  and  which, 
if  on  perusal  it  should  he  so  fortunate  as  to  merit  his  and  their  approbation,  will  at 
all  times  afford  him  the  greatest  pleasure. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN. 


DEAR  SIR,  March  27th,  1774. 

You  may  depend  upon  my  doing  every  thing  in  my  power  for  your  service.  I 
am  obliged  to  fulfil  my  engagements,  though  my  inclinations,  in  spite  of  the  company, 
would  lead  me  to  oblige  you  ;  however,  the  sooner  I  have  your  play  in  my  hands,  I 
shall  the  sooner  be  able  to  exert  my  care  in  your  favour.  Should  any  of  my  present 
engagements  fail,  you  may  depend  upon  my  bringing  your  tragedy  forward.  I  shall 
call  upon  you  when  I  can  get  myself  clear  from  the  hurry  of  changing  houses,  and 
the  fatigue  of  the  theatre,  though  I  am  a  miserable  visitor.  I  was  so  employed  about 
Mr.  Bayes  yesterday,  that  I  forgot  to  answer  your  lady’s  card.  Mrs.  Garrick  has 
promised  her  box,  the  next  time  of  “  The  Grecian  Daughter,”  to  Miss  Soane,  of 
Burlington  Street:  if  Mrs.  Francklin  will  see  “  Timoleon”  to-morrow  night,  the  box 
is  at  her  service. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  well-wisher  and  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Lille,  April  3rd,  1774. 

If  those  who  give  readily  are  said  to  give  doubly,  what  shall  be  said  of  you,  my 
most  valued  and  respected  friend,  who  have  by  your  unparalleled  manner  bestowed 
an  hundred-fold?  On  occasions  like  these  we  painfully  feel  the  deficiency  of  lan¬ 
guage  to  express  our  sentiments  ;  but  you,  great  master  of  the  human  heart,  can 
easily  imagine  what  a  better  pen  than  mine  would  be  unable  to  describe  ;  the  heart¬ 
felt  joy  of  receiving  the  most  essential  and  well-timed  service  from  the  person  we  best 
love,  in  short,  the  only  person  living  to  whom  I  am  proud  of  owing  and  acknowledg¬ 
ing  an  obligation,  since  it  is  an  additional  cement  to  a  friendship  I  shall  ever  esteem 
as  my  greatest  treasure.  Mr.  Pye  joined  with  me  in  pouring  the  libation  of  tears  at 
that  sacred  altar,  when  we  read  your  kind,  your  most  valued  letter.  I  write  to  Mr. 
Coppinger  by  this  post,  to  inspire  him  with  some  of  my  feelings,  that  his  punctuality 
in  discharging  his  part  of  the  obligation  may  justify  your  kindness  to  us;  our  part  we 
never  can  discharge,  for  we  shall  ever  boast  ourselves  your  debtors.  Something  too 
much  of  this ;  for  my  eyes  will  not  let  me  proceed  on  the  subject,  but  they  will  over¬ 
flow  and  prevent  the  progress  of  my  pen.  As  misfortune  is  always  a  great  recom¬ 
mendation  to  me,  I  had  spent  much  time  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Chase  in  the  prison, 
which  is  in  sight  of  our  house  ( in  terrorem,  as  Bayes  says) ;  and  yesterday  we  had  de¬ 
termined  to  pay  him  a  visit  before  we  had  received  your  letter,  which,  by  the  way,  we 
never  expected  till  Tuesday  next ;  but  judge  of  our  joy  when  we  found  he  had  also 
received  letters  from  his  father,  which  enabled  him  to  go  out  that  very  hour.  Never 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


617 


were  a  gayer  set  assembled  in  such  a  horrid  mansion  :  Langlart,  the  banker,  was 
there,  who  announced  to  each  of  us  the  kind  remembrance  of  our  friends,  and  de  tontes 
parts  nothing  Avas  heard  but  mutual  congratulations.  As  your  name  was  mentioned  in 
Langlart’s  letter,  he  asked  me  if  it  A\ras  Le  grand  Garrick  ?  judge  if  I  was  proud  to 
say  it  was  !  I  do  assure  you  I  became  in  that  moment  an  object  of  envy.  But  after 
all,  as  the  bailiff  Avas  present,  (dressed  in  crimson  velvet  and  gold  Brandenbourgs,)  Ave 
had  the  whole  matter  cam^assed,  Avhen  it  was  declared  to  be  the  Lays  of  Lille  and  the 
seventeen  united  provinces  that  all  strangers  may  be  arrested  for  debts  contracted  in 
their  oavii  country  by  means  of  the  debt  being  made  OATer  to  a  negociant  in  the  toAvn 
where  they  lhTe,  than  Avhich  nothing  is  more  easy,  as  they  are  all  trading  toAArns.  The 
man  made  some  little  apology  to  poor  Chase  for  breaking  down  his  door,  dragging  him 
out  of  bed  and  handcuffing  him,  as  he  said  he  acted  by  order ,  which  I  could  not  help 
observing  to  him  ay  as  a  grand  eloge  de  son  pais.  HoAveA^er,  the  money  Avas  answered 
for,  and  the  prisoner  set  at  liberty,  to  his  great  joy,  and  indeed  to  ours,  for  prisons  a  la 
mode  de  France  are  really  upon  a  very  mauvais  ton  !  As  to  us,  we  shall  not  disgrace 
England  much  ;  for  Ave  shall  march  out  of  the  toAvn  next  Wednesday  Avith  all  mi¬ 
litary  honours,  drums  beating  and  colours  flying,  which  to  be  sure  has  not  been  the 
method  of  late  ;  for  aboATe  ten  English,  since  Ave  haATe  been  resident  here,  have  stolen 
off  without  beat  of  drum,  which  Avas  not  likely  to  recommend  the  British  nation  to 
these  cold,  phlegmatic  people,  ever  more  apt  to  receive  and  retain  bad  impressions 
than  good  ones.  HoAveArer,  the  English  here  luiAre  presented  a  memorial  to  the  Hotel 
de  Yille,  to  knoAv  hoAV  far  they  are  likely  to  be  seized  on  without  a  iiroces,  but  as 
yet  they  haA^e  had  no  ansAver. 

When  last  I  had  the  pleasure  of  writing  to  you,  I  had  not  my  thoughts  suffi¬ 
ciently  free  to  tell  you  all  I  thought  of  Caillot :  but  let  me  noAv  declare  that  he  is  an 
eleve  of  yours,  and  does  honour  to  his  master.  He  acted  ten  nights  running  in  tAvo 
pieces  each  night,  and  in  that  constant  variety  gave  constant  and  various  proofs  of 
his  theatrical  powers :  his  voice  is  nothing,  but  his  jeu  mnet,  his  easy  natural  vein  of 
humour,  and  his  pathos,  are  really  amazing.  He  told  me  all  he  is,  is  entirely  oAving 
to  you,  and  I  really  believe  him  ;  for,  if  1  may  use  the  expression,  he  understands 
you  perfectly.  He  stayed  one  night  longer  at  Lille  than  he  intended,  on  purpose  to 
spend  the  evening  with  us,  which  was  last  Sunday  ;  and  he  set  off  for  Paris  at  fhTe  in 
the  morning.  In  society  he  is  charming ;  indeed  he  is  so  very  like  you,  that  is,  he 
does  and  says  a  hundred  little  things  like  you :  he  has  your  franchise,  your  vivacity, 
and  in  short  he  has  nothing  of  that  French  politeness,  Avhich,  as  Sterne  remarks, 
renders  all  the  nation  like  so  many  shillings  rubbed  smooth.  Our  talk  was  much  of 
you  :  he  talked  of  you  with  judgment  and  affection  ;  I  with  the  latter  only. 

But  noAv  what  shall  I  say?  I  fear  I  have  not  the  smallest  portion  of  judgment 
left,  as  I  declare  that  with  my  best  endeavours  for  three  nights  repeated,  I  never 
could  discover  the  merits  of  that  terrific  personage,  Le  Kain  !  He  played  Tancrede 
the  first  night ;  Comte  de  Warwick,  the  second  ;  and  Gustave,  the  third.  To  say  the 
truth,  it  A\ras  my  intention  to  get  the  better  of  my  fears  occasioned  by  his  first  ap- 
vol.  i.  4  k 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


618 

pearance,  and  invite  him,  as  I  had  done  Caillot  and  Aufrene,  on  the  merits  of  being 
honoured  with  the  title  of  your  friend  ;  but  when  I  found,  the  day  after  his  first  ap¬ 
pearance,  that  he  had  abused  the  audience,  inveighed  against  the  theatre,  and  scolded 
the  actors,  I  thought  it  most  prudent  to  let  him  alone,  as  I  had  not  one  sop  of 
sugared  flattery  prepared  to  soften  him ;  and  indeed  I  did  not  repent  it,  for  Mr. 
Pye  was  at  a  supper  given  by  some  officers  to  Caillot  and  him,  and  he  was  so  “  me¬ 
lancholy  and  gentlemanlike  that  they  could  not  get  a  word  out  of  him,  whilst  on  the 
other  hand  Caillot  kept  the  table  in  a  roar.”  After  all,  to  tell  the  truth,  his  whole 
style  of  acting  put  me  strongly  in  mind  of  Quin,  only  that  he  has  a  face  far  less  agree¬ 
able;  and  I  am  sure,  to  relish  him,  it  is  either  necessary  to  have  your  exquisite  judg¬ 
ment,  which  can  discover  the  minute  beauties,  or  to  be  born  in  France;  for  the  re¬ 
mark  of  our  judicious  countrywoman*  in  her  essay,  that  the  chief  pleasure  of  a  French 
audience  consists  in  their  reflections  on  the  difficulty  of  rhyming  in  their  language, 
was  never  better  exemplified ;  for  their  great  (doge  on  Le  Kain  is,  what  they  call  the 
amazing  beauty  of  his  declamation,  which,  as  it  revolts  my  nature,  does  not  please  my 
judgment.  Pray  tell  me  if  I  am  very  wrong  in  my  idea.  By  the  time  this  reaches 
your  hand  I  shall  be  on  my  journey,  and  as  soon  as  I  am  arrived  at  Dijon  I  shall  give 
myself  the  supreme  pleasure  of  writing  to  you,  and  as  soon  as  I  am  settled,  I  shall 
try  to  dress  Madame  la  Comtesse  Vergy  a  la  Anglaise,  and  shall  be  impatient  to 
transmit  the  beginning  to  you.  I  was  in  hopes  of  having  had  an  opportunity  of 
sending  to  you  by  a  private  hand  some  little  trifles,  but  point  de  tout,  my  young  Eng¬ 
lishman,  who  was  to  have  left  Lille  this  month,  met  me  at  Dover  in  his  way  to 
London  a  month  ago ;  but  I  shall  endeavour  to  convey  them  by  leaving  them  in  the 
hands  of  an  English  family  here,  who  are  kind  enough  to  undertake  to  forward  any 
little  matters  to  me  at  Dijon,  that  may  now  be  on  the  road.  Permit  me  to  wish  every 
happiness  to  yourself  and  to  the  amiable  partner  of  your  virtues,  to  whom  my  sincere 
love  !  Believe  me  with  the  warmest  sentiments  of  affection,  esteem,  and  gratitude, 

Your  most  sincere  and  obliged, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

I  could  not,  my  dear  Sir,  possibly  let  this  letter  go  without  assuring  you  under 
my  own  hand,  how  very  much  I  feel  your  great  kindness  towards  us,  and  of  begging 
you  to  be  assured  that  I  never  can  forget  my  obligation  to  you  for  it,  who  have  the 
honour  to  be,  Dear  Sir,  yours  most  entirely, 

Robert  Hampden  Pye. 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Norfolk-street,  April  4th,  1774. 

Though  I  have  but  little  reason  at  present  to  suppose  Mrs.  Barry  and  myself 
stand  in  your  opinion  in  a  very  favourable  light,  yet  as  we  are  not  conscious  of 

*  Mrs.  Montagu.  The  essay  defending  our  poet  from  French  misrepresentation. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


619 


having  deserved  to  be  in  that  situation,  vve  venture  to  take  the  liberty  of  request¬ 
ing  an  indulgence,  which,  if  granted,  will  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  us,  and  be 
attended  with  but  little  or  no  inconvenience  to  you. 

Mrs.  Barry  is  so  weak  from  her  distemper  (which  was  a  violent  inflammation 
on  her  lungs,  occasioned  by  her  great  exertion  in  “  Sethona,”)  that  there  is  no 
reason  to  think  she  will  be  able  to  perform  any  part  of  force  for  her  own  or  any 
other  benefit  during  the  season. 

The  favour,  therefore,  Sir,  we  request  of  you  is,  that  you  will  indulge  her  so 
far  as  to  give  her  leave  to  go  and  take  care  of  her  health  the  first  week  in  May  ; 
and  permit  me  at  the  same  time,  as  I  shall  not  be  wanted  at  the  theatre,  to  go  to 
Ireland,  where  my  affairs  are  in  so  ruined  a  situation,  that  nothing  but  my  own 
presence  can  give  me  the  smallest  chance  of  retrieving  them. 

As  there  are  but  very  few  benefits  after  the  first  week  in  May,  except  the  lower 
ones,  and  those  of  the  servants  of  the  theatre,  and  as  Mrs.  Barry  is  not  able  to 
perform  till  her  health  is  restored  by  air  and  exercise,  we  flatter  ourselves  you  will 
comply  with  a  request,  which  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  us  both,  and  will 
very  much  oblige,  Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  April  7th,  1774. 

I  ENCLOSE  you  a  speech  which,  very  contrary  to  my  inclinations,  has  made  its 
way  to  the  press,  and  I  think  it  is  probable  the  credit  I  got  by  it  on  the  delivery  may 
be  forfeited  by  the  serious  perusal ;  however,  if  it  has  any  merit  it  will  not  escape 
you,  and  you  will  be  a  friend  to  the  endeavour,  as  I  know  you  are  an  enemy  to  every 
species  of  oppression.  If  Mrs.  Garrick  continues  as  good  a  Catholic  as  usual,  I  flat¬ 
ter  myself  she  will  be  pleased  with  an  attempt  to  rescue  thousands  of  the  same  per¬ 
suasion  from  the  absurd  severity  of  laws  which  equally  impoverish  them  and  their 
oppressors.  I  beg  my  best  compliments,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Ever  your  affectionate  and  obliged  servant,. 

Robert  Jephson. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  St.  Mary’s,  April  10,  1774. 

I  feel  myself  greatly  deficient  in  my  correspondence  with  so  old  and  good  a 
friend ;  and  should  have  sooner  acknowledged  the  receipt  of  your  dramatic  parcel. 
Should  I  tell  you  all  the  remoras *  I  have  met  with,  they  would  exceed  even  General 
Clavering’s,  who  depended  on  his  spending  the  last  Christmas  at  the  Cape  of  Good 

*  Obstacles. — Ed. 

4  k  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


62  0 

Hope,  and  now  lias  very  little  hopes  of  saving  his  voyage.  Not  Commodore  Anson 
was  worse  used,  as  we  read  in  the  book. 

By  the  sudden  death  (raving  mad)  of  the  elder  brother,  almost  the  family  of  the 
Biddings  (my  nearest  relations,  children  of  a  niece  of  the  Bishop’s,  now  living  in 
the  close  of  Salisbury,)  are  fallen  upon  us.  Such  an  immense  debt  of  one  who  set  out 
with  such  uncommon  advantages  was  never  heard  of.  He  left  his  living,  almost 
400/.  per  annum,  on  the  Monday,  with  a  very  good  prospect  of  all  his  creditors 
agreeing  to  wait  the  sequestration  of  it,  and  take  such  yearly  sums  towards  the  debts 
as  should  be  allowed ;  but  ill  health  at  the  time,  his  poor  wife  with  child,  and  two 
children  besides,  going  to  her  brothers,  and  perhaps  a  strong  sense  of  his  follies, 
if  not  iniquities,  drove  him  raving  mad  the  third  day,  and  he  died  on  the  Friday  in 
that  condition.  Boor  Miss  Ridding,  whom  you  must  remember  at  Bath  with  us,  is 
utterly  undone ;  having  against  advice  trusted  this  brother  with  her  whole  little 
fortune  only  on  his  note  of  hand,  affectionately  but  imprudently.  How  wicked,  to 
give  a  beloved  sister  worse  security  than  he  had  done  to  all  his  common  creditors  ! 
She  is  willing  to  get  a  livelihood,  if  possible,  and  would  go  as  an  English  teacher 
to  any  school  of  reputation— but  we  find  French  is  everywhere  required.  If  any 
lady,  old  or  young,  wants  a  companion,  and  a  reader,  you  or  Madam  Garrick  may 
perhaps  hear  of  such.  I  have  fixed  one  son  in  Southampton  as  an  attorney,  and  hope 
here  will  be  a  good  opening  for  him  in  time  :  in  the  mean  time  I — but  that  be¬ 
tween  you  and  me.  The  youngest,  just  come  from  school,  not  seventeen,  a  fine 
young  fellow,  I  had  got  the  third  on  *  Lord  Sandwich’s  list  for  a  Lieutenancy  of 
Marines  (that  too  between  you  and  me) ;  but  his  antipathy  to  that  way  of  life  is  so 
great,  that,  much  to  my  disappointment,  he  refuses  it  with  great  humility — so  there 
I  am  to  seek  again.  I  am  afraid  he  must  be  hid  behind  a  counter  ;  but  there  he  may 
live  and  be  an  honest  man.  Add  to  this  our  concern  about  a  niece  and  a  nephew,  both 
ill  in  town,  not  yet  well  enough  to  return  to  their  father,  in  spite  of  all  the  endea¬ 
vours  of  the  great  Hawkins,  Patch,  and  Dr.  Addington.  The  young  man’s  side 
has  been  several  times  laid  open,  and  I  much  fear,  after  all  the  appearance  of  a 
perfect  cure,  is  getting  bad  again.  He  called,  on  your  encouragement,  three  times  at 
your  door,  but  was  so  unfortunate  as  to  miss  you.  He  is  gone  for  a  little  country 
air  to  Richard  Warner’s,  who  is  greatly  his  friend,  as  well  as  mine.  Excuse  this  me¬ 
lancholy  account,  as  a  friend  must  be  troubled  with  what  is  uppermost,  and  what 
has  been  in  reality  a  delay  to  his  writing. 

Before  I  forget  it,  I  fairly  let  you  off  from  your  promise  of  the  sons  of  the  clergy- 
money,  as  I  do  not  at  present  know  of  any  parson’s  lad  old  enough  to  be  bettered 
by  it. 

I  thank  you  for  your  parcel ;  but  must  wonder  at  some  things.  How  could  you 
let  such  a  thing  come  from  your  stage  as  “  The  Deserter,”  which  is  not  common 
English?  especially  as  it  had  made  so  brilliant  a  figure  on  the  French  Theatre.  I 
laughed  at  the  Newmarket  group,  and  almost  cried  at  the  old  General  and  Torring- 
ton.  So  utterly  the  reverse  of  what  the  characters  teach  one  to  expect.  The 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


621 


General,  with  a  boyish  face  and  manner,  and  Torrington,  the  worthy  and  respectable, 
with  a  worse  and  more  vulgar  look  than  a  low  Jew  broker  in  the  alley.  Fine  comic 
touches  in  the  “Note  of  hand  but  I  think  something  is  wanting  of  introduction  to 
the  lady’s  violent  passion  and  his  feelings  on  her  account,  to  reconcile  the  audience 
to  her  going  such  lengths,  and  his  seeming  want  of  proper  feeling  for  her  till  his 
imminent  ruin  forces  him  to  it.  I  suppose  Mrs.  Barry  makes  a  good  figure  in  the 
tragedy,  and  people  now  go  to  see  players  more  than  plays.  I  could  have  wished 
the  incidents  had  not  been  so  hacked  upon  the  stage  as  most  of  them  seem  to  be. 
Cresfontes  in  “  Merope”  is  too  much  the  same.  There  it  is  an  underplot  to  that  more 
interesting  one  of  mother  and  son  ;  here  it  is  the  principal.  I  am  told  there  is  too 
much  likeness  between  this  and  some  parts  of  Murphy’s  “  Grecian  Daughter,”  but 
they  did  not  occur  to  me.  You  might  have  improved  it,  no  doubt,  as  you  say  ;  but 
surely  “  The  Man  of  Business”  may  be  called  a  good  comedy  ;  as  “  The  Duellist” 
may  a  bad  one.  I  was  agreeably  surprised  with  “  The  Christmas  Tale,”  as  you  had 
said  you  would  not  print  it.  Tycho  is  a  good  figure,  but  surely  the  spirits  should 
have  burst  their  prison,  to  show  the  consequence  of  his  sleeping  and  dropping  his 
wand. 

I  cannot  think  you  can  make  any  thing  agreeable  to  the  present  audiences  out  of 
my  stuff  of  “  The  Gods  in  the  Clouds  you  are  the  best  judge.  If  it  makes  you  laugh 
a  little,  it  is  sufficient  for  me.  If  it  would  not  answer  the  first  intention,  when  bal¬ 
lads  were  more  fashionable,  it  will  hardly  do  for  a  secondary  one. 

I  believe  I  have  tired  you  :  write  when  you  can,  and  I  will  be  satisfied.  I  trust 
you  gain  ease  and  satisfaction,  as  well  as  emolument,  by  having  no  partner  in  the 
patent.  I  suppose  Master  Colman  is  tired  enough,  though  he  seemed  to  have  over¬ 
come  his  chief  difficulties. 

W  e  are  both  yours  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s.  My  Madam  has  too  frequent  returns  of 
bilious  complaints  in  her  stomach ;  and  I  have  but  just  got  rid  of  an  ugly  gouty 
cough.  I  am,  dear  David,  yours,  &c. 

J.  Hoadly. 


MR.  BOSWELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Edinburgh,  April  11th,  1774. 

w  hex  Mr.  Johnson  and  I  arrived  at  Inverary,  after  our  expedition  to  the  He¬ 
brides,  and  there  for  the  first  time,  after  many  days,  renewed  our  enjoyment  of  the 
luxuries  of  civilized  life,  one  of  the  most  elegant  that  I  could  wish  to  find,  was  lying 
for  me, — a  letter  from  Mr.  Garrick.  It  was  a  pine-apple  of  the  finest  flavour,  which 
had  a  high  zest  indeed  amongst  the  heath-covered  mountains  of  Scotia.  That  I  have 
not  thanked  you  for  it  long  ere  now,  is  one  of  those  strange  facts  for  which  it  is  so 
difficult  to  account,  that  I  shall  not  attempt  it.  The  Idler  has  strongly  expressed 
many  of  the  wonderful  effects  of  the  vis  inertia  of  the  human  mind.  But  it  is  hardly 


622 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


credible  that  a  man  should  have  the  wannest  regard  for  his  friend,  a  constant  desire 
to  show  it,  and  a  keen  ambition  for  a  frequent  epistolary  intercourse  with  him,  and 
yet  should  let  months  roll  on  without  having  resolution,  or  activity,  or  power,  or 
whatever  it  be,  to  write  a  few  lines.  A  man  in  such  a  situation  is  somewhat  like 
Tantalus  reversed. 

He  recedes,  he  knows  not  how,  from  what  he  loves,  which  is  full  as  provoking 
as  when  what  he  loves  recedes  from  him.  That  my  complaint  is  not  a  peculiar  fancy, 
but  deep  in  human  nature,  I  appeal  to  the  authority  of  St.  Paul,  who,  though  he  had 
not  been  exalted  to  the  dignity  of  an  apostle,  would  have  stood  high  in  fame  as  a 
philosopher  and  orator,  “  What  I  would,  that  do  I  not  F 

You  need  be  under  no  concern  as  to  your  debt  to  me  for  the  book  which  I  pur¬ 
chased  for  you.  It  was  long  ago  discharged  ;  for,  believe  me,  I  intended  the  book  as 
a  present.  Or  if  you  rather  choose  that  it  should  be  held  as  an  exchange  with  the 
epitaphs  which  you  sent  me,  I  have  no  objection. 

Dr.  Goldsmith’s  death  would  affect  all  the  Club  much.  I  have  not  been  so  much 
affected  with  any  event  that  has  happened  of  a  long  time. 

I  wish  you  would  give  me,  who  am  at  a  distance,  and  who  cannot  get  to  London 
this  spring,  some  particulars  with  regard  to  his  last  appearance. 

Dr.  Young  has  a  fine  thought  to  this  purpose,  that  every  friend  who  goes  before 
us  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  of  death,  makes  the  passage  to  us  the  easier.  Were 
our  Club  all  removed  to  a  future  world,  but  one  or  two,  they,  one  should  think,  would 
incline  to  follow. — By  all  means  let  me  be  upon  your  list  of  subscribers  to  Mr. 
Morell’s  “  Prometheus.”* 

You  have  enlivened  the  town,  I  see,  with  a  musical  piece.  The  prologue  is  admi¬ 
rably  fancied,  arripere  populum  tributim ;  though,  to  be  sure,  Foote’s  remark  applies  to 
it,  that  your  prologues  have  a  culinary  turn,  and  that  therefore  the  motto  to  your 
collection  of  them  should  be  Animus  jamdudum  patinis. 

A  player  upon  words  might  answer  him — any  pattens,  rather  than  your  “  Piety 
in  pattens.  I  wonder  the  wags  have  not  been  quoting  upon  you 

“  Whose  erudition  is  a  Christmas  Tale.” 

But  Mr.  Johnson  is  ready  to  bruise  anyone  who  calls  in  question  your  classical  know¬ 
ledge  and  your  happy  application  of  it.  I  hope  Mr.  Johnson  has  given  you  an  enter¬ 
taining  account  of  his  Northern  tour.  He  is  certainly  to  favour  the  world  with  some 
of  his  remarks.  Pray  do  not  fail  to  quicken  him  by  word,  as  I  do  by  letter.  Pos¬ 
terity  will  be  the  more  obliged  to  his  friends,  the  more  that  they  can  prevail  with 
him  to  write.  With  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  hoping  that  you  will  not 
punish  me  by  being  long  silent,  I  remain  faithfully  yours, 

James  Boswell. 

*  This  was  Dr.  Thomas  Morell,  the  lexicographer,  one  of  the  earliest  writers  in  the  “  Gentleman’s  Ma¬ 
gazine.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


623 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  YATES. 


MADAM,  Adelphi,  April  27th,  1774. 

In  all  dealings,  the  plain  and  simple  truth  is  the  best  policy.  As  Mrs.  Barry  is  in 
treaty  with  another  theatre,  it  is  natural  for  me  to  wish  a  treaty  with  another  lady  ; 
and  it  is  as  natural  that  my  inclinations  look  towards  you.  If  you  have  no  objections 
to  enter  into  a  treaty  with  me,  be  pleased  to  name  your  time  and  place,  and  I  shall  be 
as  punctual  as  I  ought  to  be,  to  so  fine  a  woman  and  so  good  an  actress. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MRS.  YATES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  King’s  Theatre,  Monday,  May  2nd,  1774. 

On  considering  every  circumstance  of  my  situation  here,  and  my  novelty,  to  say 
nothing  of  my  beauty,  I  think  I  cannot  in  conscience  take  less  than  700/.  a  year  for 
my  salary ;  for  my  clothes,  as  I  love  to  be  well  dressed,  and  the  characters  I  appear 
in  require  it,  I  expect  200/. ;  as  to  benefit  you  shall  settle  that  yourself,  but  as  I 
have  an  infinity  of  Scotch  pride,  had  rather  not  take  one,  though  I  am  sure  of  losing 
by  it.  Dickey,  who  considers  only  the  main  chance,  is  of  a  different  opinion  ;  but  I 
am  clear  the  worst  advice  a  woman  can  possibly  follow  is  that  of  her  husband,  and  I 
had  much  rather  you  should  determine  that  point  for  me  than  he. 

There  are  some  trifles  to  be  adjusted  when  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you, 
which  I  should  be  happy  might  be  to-morrow  morning,  as  I  have  a  good  deal  of 
masquerade  business  in  the  evening.  Hope  Mr.  G.  Garrick  is  better.  Mr.  Y.  de¬ 
sires  his  best  respects.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  devoted  humble  servant, 

M.  A.  Yates. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  YATES. 


MADAM,  May  4th,  1774. 

My  brother’s  dangerous  situation  has  made  me  unfit  for  business,  nor  did  I  see 
Mr.  Lacy  till  last  night :  this  I  hope  will  plead  my  excuse  for  not  calling  upon  you 
yesterday  morning.  W e  have  considered  your  letter,  in  answer  to  which  we  send  you 
the  following  proposals  :  we  agree  to  give  you  for  one,  two ,  or  three  years,  750/. 
including  your  clothes.  As  we  cannot  do  more,  we  hope  for  the  good  of  the  whole, 
if  Mrs.  Yates  will  accept  of  our  terms,  that  she  will  come  to  an  immediate  engage¬ 
ment.  I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


624 


As  to  the  benefit,  Mrs.  Yates  should  well  consider  that  matter — we  shall  not  stand 
upon  trifles,  if  nothing  else  can  hinder  our  engagement. 

Mr.  G.  desires  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Yates. 


INSTRUCTION  FOR  DRAWING  MRS.  YATES’S  ARTICLES. 


May  5th,  1774. 

Mrs.'  Mary  Ann,  wife  of  Richard  Yates,  gentleman,  agrees  to  perform  at  the 
Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane  for  two  years,  to  commence  from  the  first  of  September 
next  ensuing  the  date  hereof,  at  the  salary  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  and 
an  annual  sum  of  fifty  pounds  more  for  each  year ;  and  a  benefit  in  each  year  on  the 
usual  terms. 

The  said  Mary  Ann  Yates  to  provide  all  her  own  clothes  at  her  own  expense  for 
all  characters  in  tragedy  and  comedy.  Mrs.  Yates  desires  not  to  have  a  Saturday, 
but  the  Monday  following,  if  the  benefits  begin  on  a  Saturday.  Mr.  Yates  to  be 
engaged,  if  he  chooses  to  be  engaged,  at  Drury-lane  Theatre  for  the  last  year  of  the 
said  term  of  two  years,  provided  he  gives  notice  on  or  before  Mrs.  Yates’s  benefit  of 
such  his  intent  or  desire,  at  the  salary  of  12/.  per  week,  and  a  benefit  in  course  of 
salary. 


AGREEMENT  WITH  MRS.  ABINGTON. 


May  5th,  1774. 

It  is  agreed  this  day  between  Mrs.  Abington  and  Mr.  Garrick,  that  the  former 
shall  be  engaged  to  him  and  Mr.  Lacy  patentees  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane 
for  three  years  from  this  date,  or  three  acting  seasons,  at  the  sum  of  twelve  pounds  a 
week  with  a  benefit,  and  sixty  pounds  for  clothes ;  the  above  agreement  to  be  put 
into  articles  according  to  the  usual  form. 

»  Frances  Abington. 

D.  Garrick, 

For  Mr.  Lacy  and  himself. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  HAS  PLAYED  THIS  SEASON. 


Oct.  Sat.  7. 

Way  of  the  World. 

Fri.  27. 

Way  of  the  World. 

Bon  Ton 

Wed.  11. 

Rule  a  Wife. 

Mond.  30. 

Conscious  Lovers. 

Fri.  20. 

Stratagem. 

Tues.  31. 

Provoked  Wife. 

Sat.  21. 

Conscious  Lovers. 

Bon  Ton. 

Nov.  Wed.  1. 

Do. 

Do. 

Mond.  23. 

Do. 

Do. 

Mond.  6. 

Much  Ado. 

Tues.  24. 

Do. 

Do- 

Wed.  8. 

Do. 

Thurs.  26. 

Do. 

Do- 

Fri.  10. 

Do. 

DAVID  GARRICK.  025 


Tues.  14. 

Much  Ado. 

Bon  Ton. 

Thurs.  21. 

Rule  a  Wife. 

Sultan. 

Thurs.  16. 

Do. 

Sat.  23. 

Stratagem. 

Wed.  22. 

Do. 

Jan. 

Wed.  3. 

Hypocrite. 

Tues.  28. 

Maid  of  the  Oaks. 

Mond.  22. 

Discovery. 

Thurs.  30. 

Do. 

Wed.  24. 

Do. 

Fri.  1. 

Stratagem. 

Fri.  26. 

Do. 

Mond.  4. 

Maid  of  the  Oaks. 

Sat.  27. 

Do. 

Tues.  5. 

Rule  a  Wife. 

Mond.  29. 

Do. 

Wed.  6. 

Maid  of  the  Oaks. 

Do. 

Feb. 

Wed.  7. 

Do. 

Tues.  12. 

Do. 

Sultan. 

Thurs.  8. 

Maid  of  the  Oaks. 

Wed.  13. 

Do. 

Do. 

Sat.  10. 

Do. 

Bon  Ton. 

Thurs.  14. 

Do. 

Do. 

Mond.  12. 

Much  Ado. 

Fri.  15. 

Do. 

Do. 

Wed.  14. 

Rule  a  Wife. 

Sultan. 

Wed.  20. 

Rule  a  Wife. 

Do. 

Mond.  19. 

Do- 

Do. 

Endorsed, 

“  The  times  Mrs.  Abington  has  played.” 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  HOPKINS. 

SIR, 

Mrs.  Barry  is  rather  better  than  she  was,  but  not  yet  able  to  perform.  The 
moment  she  can  venture  upon  the  stage,  she  will  give  you  notice.  She  is  more  de¬ 
sirous  of  doing  her  duty  in  the  theatre  than  the  managers  are  to  require  it ;  therefore 
their  threats  have  been  unnecessary,  and  have  had  but  little  effect  on  her  or  me  :  we 
shall  endeavour  to  do  our  duty  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  and  when  more  is  ex¬ 
pected,  it  does  not  deserve  an  answer. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Spranger  Barry. 

P.  S.  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  perform  before  the  4th  of  November. 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  HOPKINS. 

SIR,  Monday  Morning,  May,  1774. 

I  am  sorry  to  inform  you  that  I  am  very  unluckily  attacked  with  a  fit  of  the  gout 
in  my  knee,  and  am  very  much  afraid  that  there  is  scarce  any  hopes  of  my  being  able 
to  perform  on  Thursday  next.  I  am  much  concerned  at  this  accident,  and  think  it 
would  be  best,  if  the  managers  should  be  out  of  town,  for  you  to  send  to  Mr.  Bed- 
dish,  who,  I  am  informed,  is  ready  in  Rhadamistus,  to  prevent  as  much  as  possible 
any  injury  to  the  business  of  the  theatre  through  my  indisposition. 

As  Mr.  Lacy  has  thought  fit  to  retract  his  promise  of  permitting  me  to  go  to 
Ireland  on  the  15th  of  May,  (which  must  have  been  of  no  inconsiderable  advantage 
to  me,)  I  have,  rather  than  go  at  the  very  end  of  the  season,  given  up  that  scheme 
VOL.  i.  4  L 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


626 

entirely  ;  so  that,  if  I  shall  be  fortunate  enough  to  get  over  my  present  indisposition, 
I  shall  be  ready  to  perform  any  days  next  week  the  managers  shall  think  proper. 
I  am  in  the  country,  where  1  have  neither  pens,  ink,  nor  paper. 

1  am,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Spraxger  Barry. 

If  you  have  any  commands  for  me,  my  servant  returns  to  me  this  night. 

Endorsed, 

“  Received  the  above  note  at  three  o’clock  on 
Monday  9th  of  May.  W.  Hopkins.” 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  HOPKINS. 

SIR, 

Mrs.  Barry  desires  you  will  present  her  respectful  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick. 
She  is  extremely  sorry  she  is  not  able  to  go  through  the  dance  in  “  The  Wonder.” 

As  she  had  Mr.  Garrick’s  permission  to  leave  town  this  week,  and  observing  the 
plays  advertised  for  every  night,  she  packed  up  and  sent  off  her  clothes,  not  supposing 
it  possible  she  could  be  wanted. 

Endorsed, 

“  Notes  from  Mr.  Barry  before  he 
quitted  Drury-lane,  May,  1774.” 


MRS.  YATES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

King’s  Theatre,  Friday  Morning,  May  7th,  1774. 

Mrs.  Yates’s  best  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick :  being  at  Mortlake  did  not 
receive  his  letter  till  yesterday  evening.  As  Airs.  Y.  thinks  business  cannot  be  so 
well  settled  by  letter,  she  will  be  happy  to  see  Air.  Garrick  any  day  and  hour  he  will 
please  to  appoint. 

Sorry  to  hear  Air.  G.  Garrick  is  no  better. 

Mr.  Yates’s  best  respects. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  YATES. 

MADAM,  Saturday,  May  7th,  1774. 

As  I  flatter  myself  by  your  note  that  you  have  accepted  of  our  terms,  I  shall  wait 
upon  you  this  evening  about  eight  o’clock,  and  will  bring  Mr.  Wallis  of  Aorfolk 
Street  along  with  me  to  draw  up  a  memorandum  of  our  agreement,  as  I  would  have 
it  immediately  settled  for  your  sake  as  well  as  mine. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 


D.  G. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


627 


If  you  choose  it,  you  will  have  a  friend  on  your  part.  I  beg  my  compliments  to 
Mr.  Yates. 

N.  B.  No  answer  to  this.  I  went  with  Mr.  Wallis  a  little  after  eight  o’clock, 
Mrs.  Yates  had  two  ladies  with  her,  and  would  not  accept  of  the  terms.  D.  G. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  DELAP. 


DEAR  SIR,  A  del  phi,  May  14th,  1774. 

The  very  dangerous  situation  of  my  brother’s  health  for  some  weeks  has  made 
me  incapable  of  any  business ;  however,  within  these  last  eight  days  I  have  well  con¬ 
sidered  the  tragedy,  and  read  it  twice.  Let  me  assure  you  by  every  thing  that  is  dear 
to  me,  that  the  writing  of  this  letter  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  disagreeable  tasks 
that  I  ever  undertook ;  and  the  reason  is,  because  I  fear  that  it  will  not  be  agreeable 
to  you,  whom  I  most  sincerely  wish  to  serve,  and  which  is  not  to  be  done  at  the 
expense  of  my  reason  and  judgment,  and  I  fear  of  your  reputation. 

I  most  willingly  resign  all  my  claims  to  any  knowledge  of  the  drama,  if  the 
tragedy  of  “  The  Royal  Exiles”  is  calculated  for  success  upon  the  stage.  The  first 
act,  with  some  small  alterations,  would  have  sufficient  merit  for  a  first  act ;  but  from 
the  beginning  of  the  second  to  the  end  of  the  fifth,  it  is  very  languid  and  undramatic, 
that  is,  without  a  spirited  interest  to  keep  up  the  attention  of  an  audience.  The  false 
oracle,  false  priest,  and  pitiful  character  of  Demophoon  sink  the  whole ;  the  death  of 
Macaria  by  accident,  the  unnatural  combat  of  the  brothers,  &c.  in  the  last  act,  are 
shocking,  but  without  effect :  however,  the  circumstances  of  the  last  act  (which  to  me 
is  much  the  worst,  and  ought  to  be  the  best)  might  be  altered ;  but  indeed  I  find  such 
a  languor  through  the  whole,  that  representation  can  never  support.  I  would  have 
desired  some  gentlemen  of  character  in  the  drama  to  have  given  me  their  opinion,  had 
I  had  your  consent.  Mr.  Whitehead  seemed  to  be  averse  to  any  farther  trouble 
about  plays,  when  we  consulted  him  about  a  former  tragedy.  I  am  really  so  much 
distressed  about  it,  that  I  could  wish  you  would  let  it  be  sent  to  the  other  house;  the 
managers,  since  the  parting  with  Mr.  Colman,  have  got  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry,  and 
should  they  accept  of  the  play,  they  would  be  more  capable  of  doing  it  justice  than  I 
possibly  could  with  my  present  company.  I  will  take  any  trouble  you  desire  me, 
and  be  assured  that  your  name  shall  always  be  concealed. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  sincere  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  have  had  an  attack  of  the  gout,  and  am  writing  this  scrawl  upon  my  bed :  I 
write  with  double  pain,  but  with  the  best  wishes  towards  you. 


4  l  2 


MRS.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Dijon,  May  16th,  1774. 

An  opportunity  offering  itself  of  troubling  you,  my  dear  Sir,  with  some  of  my 
dull  chat,  I  cannot  pass  it  over,  though  Heaven  knows  how  very  dtdl  my  letters 
must  be  when  I  am  obliged  to  toss  over  the  storehouse  of  my  own  brain  for  mate¬ 
rials,  no  one  circumstance  being  furnished  by  the  place  of  which  I  am  at  present  an 
inhabitant,  and  which  being  a  kind  of  limbo,  I  find  very  ill  adapted  to  my  taste.  As 
to  the  climate,  it  is  almost  as  uncertain  as  that  of  our  own  island,  with  this  difference, 
that  we  never  fail  of  a  severe  storm  of  thunder  and  lightning  in  the  course  of  the 
four  and  twenty  hours  ;  in  short,  it  is  our  pain  quotidien  ! 

Dijon  cannot  be  termed  expensive,  because  there  is  no  one  call  for  money,  but  for 
meat,  drink,  and  lodging ;  nor  can  it  be  called  cheap,  because  those  three  articles  are 
rather  high  than  otherwise.  Shall  I  own  the  truth  to  you  ?  (for  you  are  my  guide, 
philosopher,  and  friend!)  1  am  a  little  like  my  old  murmuring  forefathers  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Israel,  and  I  rather  sigh  after  the  leeks  and  onions  of  Lisle,  notwithstanding 
the  difference  between  Flemish  stupidity  and  French  vivacity;  but  the  truth  is,  that 
Dijon  was  six  years  ago  a  most  agreeable  town,  at  least  so  the  half  dozen  remaining 
inhabitants  tell  me,  which  is  as  much  satisfaction  to  me  as  it  is  to  the  hungry  traveller 
when  the  landlord  tells  him  of  the  game  and  poultry  that  was  eaten  in  his  inn  the 
week  before.  When  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  was  here,  he  gave  Mr.  Pye  a  parcel 
of  Public  Advertisers,  which  we  most  eagerly  devoured  as  you  will  easily  believe, 
and  by  those  I  find  Dr.  Goldsmith  has  published  a  poem  called  “  Retaliation if  it 
is  written  with  a  tithe  of  the  wit  and  poetical  fire  of  what  you  were  so  good  to 
impart  to  me  which  gave  occasion  to  it,  his  poem  is  fairly  worth  taking  a  journey  to 
England  on  purpose  to  read.  I  long  to  have  your  opinion  of  it.  The  death  of  the 
King  has  for  the  present  cast  the  same  face  of  sadness  over  the  whole  kingdom,  and 
Paris  is  but  a  larger  Dijon,  yet  there  are  always  resources  in  a  capital,  that  are  not  to 
be  found  in  small  towns.  I  have  not  yet  got  my  “  Gabrielle”  from  Paris,  though  it 
is  some  time  since  I  sent  for  it ;  that  once  arrived,  I  hope  to  find  my  time  pass  more 
to  my  satisfaction.  I  have  a  project  of  going  some  time  hence  to  pay  homage  at  the 
shrine  of  Voltaire,  as  his  abode  is  but  thirty  leagues  from  hence.  If  I  am  favoured 
with  a  letter  from  you  before  that  time,  what  a  passport  would  a  panegyric  on  him 
from  you  be  !  I  am  told  he  receives  the  English  very  graciously ;  and  he  is  now  come 
to  that  time  of  life  when  genius,  like  beauty,  is  rather  obliged  to  those  who  pay  it 
court, — that  is,  when  the  full  tyranny  of  both  begin  to  decline,  and  they  become 
thankful  for  what  they  once  scarce  deigned  to  accept.  But  perhaps  you  are  not  one 
of  his  enthusiastic  admirers  :  if  so,  I  am  sorry  that  I  am  of  that  number ;  for  though 
I  am  no  advocate  for  his  moral  character,  I  believe  scarce  any  nation  can  boast  a 
writer  of  such  universal  taste  and  excellence :  nay,  I  own,  I  think  we  are  under  a 
peculiar  obligation  to  him,  for  had  he  not  gone  beyond  his  depth,  and  injudiciously 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


629 


criticised  our  immortal  Shakspeare,  our  language  would  never  have  been  enriched  by 
its  masterpiece,  I  mean  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay,  which  does  honour  to  our  country, 
but  much  more  to  our  sex.  But  whither  am  I  wandering?  Did  I  not  tell  you,  at  first 
setting  out,  that  I  was  going  to  be  dull?  at  least  you  must  acknowledge  I  have 
pretty  well  kept  my  word.  But  permit  me  to  make  enquiries  upon  a  most  interest¬ 
ing  subject.  Is  your  glorious  campaign  finished,  and  are  you  going  to  repose  on 
your  fresh  harvest  of  laurels  in  perfect  health  at  Hampton  ?  Is  that  most  amiable  of 
women,  Mrs.  Garrick,  in  perfect  health  also?  Send  me  the  affirmative  to  these  two 
questions,  and  I  shall  say  it  is  the  best  news  I  have  learned  since  my  arrival  here.  I 
suppose  Foote  is  preparing  a  fresh  stock  of  satire  for  the  summer  season  ;  but  about 
him  I  own  I  am  not  very  curious,  for  I  must  honestly  own  I  never  was  one  of 
Foote’s  zealous  admirers ;  he  wants  the  variety  that  Heaven  has  been  sparing  of  to 
the  sons  of  Thalia  in  general,  and  which  it  never  lavished  but  on  one: — may  that 
one  maintain  his  glorious  course  in  undiminished  splendour  till  I  cease  to  be  his 

Most  ardent  admirer,  most  affectionate  friend. 

And  most  obliged  servant, 

J.  Henrietta  Pye. 

Mr.  Pye  joins  in  the  best  good  wishes  to  you  :  il  baise  les  mains  de  Madame,  et 
pour  moi  je  l’embrasse  (comme  je  l’aime)  de  tout  mon  cceur. 


REV.  MR.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR, 


Tuesday  noon. 


Since  I  am  not  fortunate  enough  to  meet  with  you  at  home,  let  these  few  lines 
thank  you  for  the  highest  entertainment  you  ever  yet  afforded  me.  Your  manage¬ 
ment  of  your  part  was  in  some  instances  new  ;  in  every  instance  it  was  great,  excel¬ 
lent,  and  just.  For  I  think  you  were  as  superior  to  yourself  in  Hamlet  that  night, 
as  you  are  superior  to  all  the  world  in  every  other  character  you  attempt.  I  will 
ask  one  more  favour  of  you,  and  then  farewell,  a  long  farewell,  till  next  year  ! 
It  is,  that  you  would  let  me  have  the  two  front  rows  in  either  of  the  green  boxes  when 
you  play  next.  Or  if  that  is  impossible,  that  you  would  indulge  me  with  five  places, 
where  I  may  both  see  and  show  to  some  choice  acquaintance  “  my  bosom’s  Lord”  to 
the  very  best  advantage.  You  know  I  am  in  waiting.  Come  and  dine  with  me 
Thursday,  Friday,  Saturday,  Sunday,  or  Monday  next  (name  your  own  day) :  I  shall 
be  rejoiced  to  see  you  at  half-past  three  o'clock.*  I  am  most  truly  yours, 

Sam.  Nott. 


Endorsed, 

“  Rev.  Mr.  Nott  about  Hamlet,  May  1774.” 


*  At  the  Chaplain’s  table. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


030 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  May  26,  1774. 

I  HAVE  sent  you  a  copy  of  the  tragedy  to  take  down  with  you  into  the  country, 
where  I  beg  you  will  at  your  leisure  carefully  revise  it  and  give  me  your  free  opinion 
on  those  parts  which  you  think  may  be  altered  or  improved,  as  we  have  now  time 
before  us  to  do  any  thing  which  the  subject  may  admit  of.  I  shall  rely  on  your  kind 
promise  to  bring  it  forward  the  ensuing  winter  with  all  the  advantages  of  your  favour 
and  attention,  which  will  principally  secure  the  success  of  it,  and  which  will  greatly 
oblige,  dear  Sir,  Your  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Francklin. 

P.  S.  I  have  a  word  for  your  private  ear,  which  I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity 
to  communicate,  and  will  wait  on  you  very  soon  for  that  purpose. 


THEATRICAL  FUND- 

Article  First.  That  David  Garrick,  Esq.  be  nominated  founder,  guardian, 
and  principal  trustee.  Carried  nem.  con. 

Second. — That  there  be  three  trustees.  Carried  nem.  con. 

Third. — That  George  Garrick,  Esq.  be  another  trustee.  Carried  nem.  con. 

Fourth. —  1  hat  Ihomas  Iving,  Esq.  be  another  trustee.  Carried  nem.  con. 

Propositions  consulted  and  agreed  to: — 

That  all  actors,  singers,  and  dancers,  contributors  to  this  fund,  are  allowed  claim¬ 
ants. 

That  all  persons  who  belong  to  this  theatre,  from  their  first  contribution  must  and 
shall  be  five  years  contributors  before  they  become  claimants,  unless  some  extraor¬ 
dinary  case  should  happen.  Ihe  committee  for  the  time  being  will  then  grant 
relief  as  they  think  meet. 

That  all  persons  who  have  contributed  in  any  manner  to  this  charity,  and  whom 
the  Committee  do  not  consider  as  claimants,  shall  have  their  monies  refunded  if 
demanded. 

That  no  levy  be  made  on  salaries,  or  otherwise  (annual  benefit  night  excepted)  for 
the  support  of  this  fund,  until  Mr.  Garrick  shall  decline  acting  for  it:  that  then  the 
Committee  shall  lay  on  a  tax  as  they  shall  think  fit. 

That  the  reason  Mr.  Garrick  declined  being  of  the  Committee  be  fully  expressed 
in  the  preamble  of  the  articles.* 

Such  was  the  outset  of  the  Benevolent  Fund  at  Drury-lane  Theatre. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


631 


MR.  D.  ROSS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  June  4,  1774,  Tavistock-row,  near  Mr.  Dancer. 

I  find  my  friend  Fountain  (who  ever  wishes  to  do  good)  has  communicated  to 
you  a  conversation  that  happened  between  us  :  he  is  apt  in  epistolary  correspondence 
to  use  a  little  too  much  circumlocution,  your  people  of  wit  you  know,  &c. 

He  says  you  gave  no  positive  answer  ;  lest  he  should  not  have  explained  my 
meaning,  I  give  you  this  trouble,  as  my  private  business  calls  me  to  Scotland  the 
beginning  of  the  wreek. 

I  think  my  abilities,  as  things  are  circumstanced,  may  be  of  some  small  use  at 
Drury -lane,  and  of  advantage  to  myself :  as  to  my  terms,  give  me  what  you  please 
when  I  may  have  deserved  it. 

You  have,  I  fear,  some  prejudices  against  me;  away  with  them,  and  be  assured 
I  pledge  myself  as  a  man  and  a  gentleman,  if  we  agree  you  shall  have  no  cause  of 
complaint,  and,  if  you  please.  Fountain  shall  guarantee  the  treaty. 

It  is  in  your  power  to  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  me  by  rescuing  me  from  my 
present  situation,  which  that  ungrateful  fellow  Colman  has  put  me  in,  by  giving 
the  preference  to  a  man  who,  in  my  poor  opinion,  never  spoke  one  line  naturally 
in  his  whole  life. 

I  think  there  are  many  of  the  late  Mr.  Quin’s  characters,  and  some  of  Mr.  Barry’s, 
I  could  appear  to  some  advantage  in  :  all  I  want  or  ask  is,  Mr.  Garrick  to  take  me  by 
the  hand  and  place  my  abilities  to  the  public  in  that  light  he  thinks  best  suited  to 
them  and  me.  I  am  so  hurt  and  stung  at  the  treatment  I  have  met  with,  you  may 
rest  assured,  what  I  can  do,  that  I  shall  do. 

If  Mr.  Garrick  has  any  other  person  in  view  that  can  do  all  the  business  that 
seems  to  be  wanting,  or  if  he  has  no  opinion  of  me  as  an  actor,  there  is  an  end  of  my 
hopes,  I  cannot  expect  as  a  matter  of  favour  an  engagement ;  but  if  he  has  no  per¬ 
son  in  view,  and  has  any  opinion  of  my  talents,  and  will  give  me  an  opportunity  to 
stand  before  the  public  under  his  judgment  for  one  season,  I  shall  ever  with  gratitude 
remember  and  acknowledge  it.  I  am,  with  esteem  and  my  best  wishes. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

David  Boss. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  D.  ROSS. 


SIR  Adelphi,  June  5th,  1774. 

The  present  arrangement  of  our  business  for  the  next  season  obliges  us  not  to 
enter  into  more  engagements  than  those  we  have  already  made.  Be  assured  that  it 
is  not  any  objection  to  your  abilities  in  your  profession  that  prevents  our  acceptance 
ot  your  offer.  I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  G. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


G32 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN. 

June  5th,  1774. 

Mr.  (  tarrick  has  sent  the  tragedy  to  Dr.  Francklin,  and  desires  him  to  finish  it, 
its  he  intends  it  shall  be  acted.  Mr.  Garrick  thinks  the  catastrophe  better  for  the 
alteration,  and  differs  with  the  gentleman  who  has  made  his  remark  upon  that  place. 
Mr.  Garrick  thinks  there  are  weak  parts,  or  rather  languid  scenes,  and  has  not  changed 
his  opinion  which  he  scribbled  with  a  pencil.  The  tragedy  appears  to  him  not  so 
dramatic  and  calculated  for  success  as  “  The  Earl  of  Warwick.”  lie  thinks  Dr. 
Francklin  should  read  the  play  to  Mrs.  Yates,  and  know  her  thoughts  upon  Matilda.* 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  June  6th,  1774. 

I  received  the  MS.,  and  as  soon  as  I  get  into  the  country  shall  look  it  care¬ 
fully  over,  and  endeavour  to  make  it  fit  for  your  stage  the  ensuing  winter.  I  think 
with  you  that  there  are  weak  parts  and  languid  scenes  in  it,  and  so  there  are  in  every 
tragedy  extant.  I  shall  endeavour  to  strengthen  and  animate  them.  With  regard 
to  the  catastrophe,  I  have  still  some  doubts  about  it ;  but  I  shall  submit  it  to  my 
friends,  having  resolved  to  show  the  whole  to  some  approved  judges,  and  request  their 
free  opinion  of  it.  I  assure  you,  whatever  you  may  think,  I  have  no  vanity  about 
me,  and  have  but  one  view  in  the  exhibition  of  it,  which  is,  money ;  as  nothing  but 
the  immediate  and  pressing  want  of  it  should  ever  oblige  me  to  write  for  the  stage. 

I  am  sorry  you  think  it  inferior  to  “  Warwick”  with  regard  to  dramatic  effect,  as 
in  my  own  opinion  it  is  much  superior.  I  should  always  be  ready  to  pay  a  great 
deference  to  so  good  a  judge  as  Mr.  Garrick ;  but  in  this  point,  I  know  not  how  it 
is,  the  best  judgments  are  often  deceived,  and  much  depends  on  capricious  taste. 
You  must  remember  that  when  I  first  presented  “  Warwick”  to  your  perusal,  you 
told  me  it  would  not  do  at  all ;  and  persuaded  me  to  withdraw  it,  as  totally  un¬ 
worthy  of  its  author,  objecting  to  many  scenes  as  languid  and  undramatic.  The 
play,  however,  though  exhibited  at  a  very  bad  time  of  year,  met  with  success,  and 
some  of  those  scenes  (particularly  the  council  scene  in  the  second  act)  was  received 
with  applause.  May  not  this  circumstance  flatter  me  with  the  hopes  that  you  are 
rather  too  severe  in  your  criticism  ? 

Be  that,  however,  as  it  may,  it  is  now  too  late  to  retreat,  unless  I  get  a  prize  in 
the  lottery  before  Christmas  next ;  jacta  est  alea,  and  I  must  abide  by  the  decision. 

Your  friendship  may  do  much  in  its  favour  if  you  think  proper  to  exert  it,  and 
which  (unaccountable  as  I  am)  I  shall  still  depend  on.  If  I  had  time,  I  would  explain 
that  matter  to  you  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  when  I  wrote  my  last  note  to  you,  I  wras 

*  “  Matilda”  was  acted  with  great  applause  at  Drury-lane  the  following  year.  It  was,  in  fact,  Vol¬ 
taire’s  “  Due  de  Foix,”  well  naturalized. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


633 


much  hurt  by  a  particular  circumstance  which  happened  just  after  I  left  you,  and 
produced  that  petulance  you  complained  of,  and  which  I  ask  your  pardon  for.  You 
know  what  Terence  says  about  the  unfortunate,  and  will  recollect  the  passage  without 
my  quoting  it. 

When  I  have  recovered  my  spirits,  which  have  been  not  a  little  oppressed  by  a 
series  of  disappointments,  I  will  endeavour  to  convince  you  that  I  am  not  altogether 
so  strange  a  creature  as  yon  seem  to  think  me,  and  that  I  am,  as  I  have  always  been, 

Your  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

Thos.  Francklin. 

P.  S.  I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity  of  showing  Matilda  to  Mrs.  Yates. 


MRS.  MARY  LATTER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Reading,  June  12th,  1774. 

Although  I  am  conscious  it  is  mere  folly  to  persist  or  even  reply  against  refusal, 
yet  you  know  to  your  vexation  how  often  it  is  the  case,  and  I  presume  it  will  always 
continue  so.  For  my  own  part,  however,  if  my  reasons  were  only  of  the  liachleyed 
sort, — I  mean  the  fond  influence  of  an  overweening  self-sufficiency,  stimulated  by  the 
impertinence  of  a  few  well-wishing,  though  perhaps  ill-judging  friends, — you  would 
not  have  had  this  among  the  number  of  persecutions  which  daily  occur  to  molest 
you.  I  am  not  preparing  to  litigate  your  opinion  ;  I  know  that  in  judgment  you 
stand  alone  :  I  am  well  aware  your  sentence  is  fate,  and  from  your  tribunal  lies  no 
appeal  !  I  have  no  other  hope  of  a  reprieve  from  your  condemnation,  than  that  I 
have  built  on  my  belief  in  your  candour ;  and  that  the  universal  approbation  “  The 
Siege  of  Jerusalem”  has  obtained  from  an  incredible  number  among  the  impartial  and 
judicious,  will  have  some  degree  of  weight  with  you  in  its  favour.  It  is  not,  Sir,  a 
raw  indigested  production,  like  many  that  (which  you  cannot  deny)  have  been  the 
reproach  of  a  public  exhibition — nor  like  many  others,  that,  by  attaining  this  honour, 
have  only  convinced  us  that  Mr.  Garrick’s  good-nature  will  frequently  predominate 
over  his  justice.  It  is  a  production  that  has  consumed  the  leisure  of  some  years  to 
cultivate  and  improve  it  to  its  present  small  title  to  perfection.  I  use  not  this 
epithet  from  an  attachment  to  vanity — I  presume  to  use  it  from  no  other  motive 
than  its  having  been  declared  so  nearly  perfect  by  several  theatrical  connoisseurs :  and 
was,  before  you  saw  it  last,  severely  scrutinized  by  the  severest  critics.  But  delicacy 
suppresses  what  truth  might  advance  respecting  this  particular  ;  moreover,  I  am  per¬ 
suaded  that  unless  sufficient  interest  can  appear  in  its  support,  the  intrinsic  merit  of 
the  most  finished  piece  is  a  very  precarious  foundation  to  fix  it  upon. 

I  am  bold  to  say,  and  I  dare  aver ,  that  I  have  a  more  substantial,  a  stronger  in¬ 
terest,  than  any  author  (whatsoever  his  rank  in  life)  that  ever  solicited  public  favour. 
There  is  hardly  one  city  or  town  of  consequence  throughout  the  whole  kingdom,  in 
which  I  have  not  a  reputable,  and  in  many  an  extensive  connexion ;  chiefly  among 

VOL.  i.  4  M 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


634 

those  who  belong  to  the  republic  of  letters.  In  and  near  London,  I  have  an  amazing 
number  ready  to  appear  in  my  behalf  whenever  the  play  is  represented  on  the  theatre  ; 
many,  very  many,  of  whom  are  capable  of  influencing  the  great  and  the  gay,  and 
confirming  the  success  of  it  through  the  whole  season,  beyond  your  most  sanguine 
expectation  ! 

Believe  me,  Sir,  when  I  declare  upon  my  utmost  sincerity  and  conscience,  that 
howsoever  incredible  this  may  appear  to  you,  I  have  not  exceeded  truth  in  the  least, 
nay,  I  am  short  of  it,  in  this  representation — that  nothing  but  the  withering  blast  of  a 
refusal  could  possibly  have  extorted  this  acknowledgment  from  my  breast,  as  it  so 
much  resembles  the  appearance  of  boasting.  I  flattered  myself  with  enjoying  that 
agreeable  surprise,  which  you  would  have  expressed  at  my  unexpected  and  sudden 
popularity. 

On  these  motives  I  have  at  length  persuaded  myself  once  more  to  intrude  on 
your  leisure — once  more  to  intreat  you  will  honour  the  play  with  your  farther,  your 
second,  your  most  serious  consideration.  I  intreat  it  in  consequence  of  that  assurance 
of  success  which  seems  within  a  step  of  infallibility.  I  cannot  but  say  I  am  positively 
convinced  you  will  hazard  nothing  either  in  expense  or  reputation  by  preferring  to 
exhibition  a  play  that  is  previously  so  well  respected  by  those  who  will  associate  to 
support  it  with  their  interest,  with  their  presence,  with  their  abilities. 

Still  hoping,  therefore,  your  candid  condescension  to  this  my  most  reasonable 
request,  and  that  you  will  add  me  to  the  number  of  those  whose  lays  you  deign  to 
render  illustrious, 

I  am,  Sir,  with  most  respectful' esteem,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

M.  Latter.* 

I  hope  and  believe  you  cannot  suppose  I  have  written  this  letter  to  deceive  you. 
I  am  sensible  that  by  an  attempt  to  impose  on  your  understanding  I  should  much 
more  essentially  injure  myself  in  the  event.  I  will,  if  you  desire  it,  send  a  list  in 
writing,  of  the  nobility,  gentry,  &c.  on  whose  interest  I  chiefly  depend ;  or,  if  requi¬ 
site,  will  attend  you  at  any  time  and  place,  and  satisfy  you  in  the  reality  of  my 
assertions. 

“  Indulgent,  spare  the  Muse  the  pain 
Of  sighing;  o’er  her  suit  in  vain  !” 

Dare  1  presume  to  request  your  reply  ?  Yes  !  I  am  sure,  if  you  retain  the  least 
grain  of  generosity,  you  will  certainly  acquiesce  in  my  favour ;  and  if  so,  I  have  more 
than  two  hundred  letters  to  write — some  to  go  as  far  as  Russia. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Latter,  from  Reading,  about  her 
Tragedy,  fine  and  conceited.” 

*  It  must  be  perfectly  warrantable  to  describe  this  lady  as  she  describes  herself,  as  an  inhabitant  of  Read¬ 
ing,  “  not  far  from  the  Market-place,  immersed  in  business  and  in  debt :  sometimes  madly  hoping  to  gain 
a  competency  ;  sometimes  justly  fearing  dungeons  and  distress.”  Authors  should  never  alarm  a  manager  with 
the  cro-dd  of  their  friends  who  will  come  to  support  them  ;  because  he  may  give  literal  credit  to  the  boast,  and 
merely  enquire,  who  is  to  support  him  ?  Rich  for  some  time  encouraged  this  silly  and  impudent  woman. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


635 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

June  1 4  th,  1774. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  dear  Sir,  for  the  favour  of  your  letter  by  Mr.  Smith, 
in  consequence  of  which  I  came  from  the  country  to  wait  upon  him,  and  to  offer  my 
services.  At  this  time  of  the  year  very  little  more  is  in  the  power  of  any  friend  than 
to  give  you  his  company,  and  to  desire  yours,  for  all  our  leading  people  are  gone,  and 
it  is  extraordinary  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry  have  been  able  to  draw  such  crowded 
audiences  when  most  of  our  civilized  people  are  retired  to  their  fields  and  villages. 
Poor  Smith  appeared  first  in  “  Richard,”  to  empty  benches  ;  and  next  night  Mrs. 
Hartley  and  he  played  together  in  “  Jane  Shore,”  to  about  fifteen  pounds.  As  to  Mrs. 
Hartley,  she  surpassed  my  expectations  in  one  respect,  and  disappointed  them  in  ano¬ 
ther.  I  think  she  has  more  merit  as  an  actress,  and  less  beauty  as  a  woman,  than  the 
world  gives  her  credit  for.  Her  figure  is  certainly  very  fine,  and  her  features  are 
unexceptionable,  but  her  countenance  is  neither  marked  nor  engaging.  She  seems  to 
have  made  Mrs.  Yates  her  model,  and  there  appears  to  be  a  natural  resemblance  in 
the  flatness  of  their  tones,  and  the  monotonous  heaviness  of  their  enunciation  ;  but  I 
only  speak  of  what  Mrs.  Yates  was  when  I  saw  her  a  good  many  years  ago.  She  is  less 
defective  in  the  expression  of  passion  than  of  sentiment ;  and  I  take  it  the  reason  is, 
that  in  our  dramatic  writers,  the  language  of  the  former  is  generally  so  strongly 
marked  as  not  to  be  easily  mistaken,  whereas  it  requires  education  and  discernment 
to  do  justice  to  the  latter.  Her  voice,  I  think,  wants  variety,  and  her  feelings  spirit ; 
but  she  wants  instruction  more  than  either,  and  in  your  hands  she  might  be  made  a 
very  valuable  acquisition  to  the  stage ;  but  if  she  is  left  to  herself  and  her  present 
teachers,  I  fear  she  will  rise  but  slowly,  if  ever,  above  an  uninteresting  mediocrity.  I 
ought  to  beg  pardon  for  offering  my  opinion  on  a  subject  of  which  you  are  so  much 
a  better  judge,  not  only  than  your  correspondent,  but  than  the  whole  tribe  of  critics 
put  together ;  and  I  do  it  rather  in  hopes  to  find  that  my  notions  correspond  with 
yours,  than  that  they  are  to  be  in  any  sort  a  guide  to  them. 

It  gives  me  very  sincere  pleasure  to  find  you  are  not  discontented  with  yourself ;  as 
I  think  you  are  likely4to  be  the  first  or  the  only  person  who  will  find  any  symptoms  of 
decay  in  those  powers  which  have  been  so  long  and  so  justly  the  delight  of  the  public. 
When  the  time  of  decay  comes  (which  yet  I  hear  is  far  distant),  you  may  console 
yourself  with  the  certainty,  that  the  ruins  of  a  temple,  constructed  with  all  the  beauty 
of  ancient  architecture,  will  have  more  admirers  than  the  perishable  ornaments  of  our 
modern  buildings.  I  do  not  wonder  you  should  determine  to  remain  where  you  are, 
rather  than  to  change  Drury-lane  and  Hampton  for  Crow-street,  and  the  Banks  of 
the  Liffey,  even  were  there  not  such  objections  as  a  passage  by  sea  and  the  enmity  of 
Mr.  Howard.*  The  last,  I  suppose,  you  have  incurred  by  refusing  to  disgrace  the 
English  stage  by  the  exhibition  of  some  of  his  pieces.  When  I  have  the  ill-fortune 

*  See  Burke’s  ironical  letter  in  this  volume,  offering  two  of  his  plays  to  Mr.  Garrick. — Ed. 

4  M  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


636 

to  meet  him,  I  will  contrive  to  put  him  on  your  subject,  and  I  expect  to  iiear  some 
such  sentiments  as  lie  gravely  pronounced  once  in  talking  of  Dryden  and  Pope,  “  that 
if  they  had  been  without  imagination  and  judgment,  they  would  have  made  excel¬ 
lent  Poets  ;  but  these  two  faculties  were  eternal  and  insurmountable  obstacles  to  all 
works  of  genius.” 

Mrs.  Jephson  joins  me  in  very  affectionate  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you. 
I  am  ever,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

My  letter  lias  waited  some  days  for  a  cover. 


MR.  G.  C.  SWAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  York,  June  18th,  1774. 

I  have  at  last,  with  the  assistance  of  two  or  three  different  hands,  got  finished  a 
copy  of  the  remarks,  which  are  this  day  gone  forward  for  London  ;  but  as  Mr. 
Cumage,  our  organist,  who  has  kindly  taken  charge  of  them,  will  not  be  in  town 
before  Tuesday  se’nnight,  you  must  not  expect  to  see  them  before  that  day  at  the 
soonest.  You  will  find  in  the  packet  two  books,  and  two  sheets  of  paper ;  the  largest 
of  the  former  is  Johnson’s  edition  of  Shakspeare  (I  should  have  said  “  Othello”)  in  the 
margin  of  which  you  will  find  many  alterations  which  are  not  remarked  upon,  but 
which  to  me  appear  the  best  readings  ;  and  which,  therefore,  in  case  you  should  think 
it  worth  the  public  notice,  I  could  wish  to  stand  in  the  text ;  and  I  think  there 
is  authority  sufficient  to  warrant  those  alterations  from  the  Doctor,  as  there  is  not  a 
single  one  but  what  is  taken  from  one  or  other  of  the  old  copies  ;  the  particulars  of 
which  are  marked  as  follows  : — Wherever  you  see  this  mark  [:]  you  will  find  the 
reading  in  the  folio  of  1632,  which  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  best  of  the  old  ones  ;  where 
this  mark  is  doubled  thus  [:  :]  the  old  folios  both  agree  ;  and  where  there  is  a  cross 
(t)  I  have  copied  from  the  quartos  :  the  two  former  I  had  by  me  and  collated  very 
carefully  ;  but  not  being  able  to  procure  a  quarto  in  this  place,  I  have  been  forced, 
in  respect  to  them,  to  pin  my  faith  on  your  friend  Steevens,  who,  I  trust,  is  to  be 
depended  on  ;  this  however  is  a  point  you  will  easily  settle,  as  I  doubt  not  but  you 
have  them  all,  or  know  where  to  get  at  them.  The  small  book,  as  you  will  see, 
contains  my  remarks,  and  I  have  sent  it  interleaved,  that  you  and  Mr.  Steevens 
may  make  your  observations  upon  them,  and  in  this  you  will  both,  I  hope,  deal 
most  freely  with  me :  the  loose  papers  are  observations  by  a  friend  of  mine  here, 
who  must,  for  the  present,  be  nameless;  but  whom  you  will  find  to  deserve  some 
attention.  I  shall  say  no  more  on  this  head  till  I  hear  from  you.  I  hope  I  have  not 
given  offence  by  asking  if  you  had  ever  performed  the  part  of  Iago :  I  had  a  reason 
for  it  which  I  dare  not  yet  communicate  ;  though  I  may,  perhaps,  when  I  have  the 
pleasure  to  see  you,  which  may  probably  be  some  time  the  next  winter ;  as  I  have 
seriously  thought  of  attending  my  Lord  Sandwich’s  oratorios  at  Christmas,  and  if  I 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


637 


do,  shall  certainly  come  forward  to  London  ;  but  this,  his  Lordship  will  tell  you,  is 
not  altogether  to  be  depended  on.  I  yesterday  received  a  letter  from  my  old  friend 
Colonel  St.  Leger,  who  tells  me  that  he  saw  you  at  the  birtli-day  ;  that  you  were 
as  usual,  gay,  and  looked  very  young  for  a  middle-aged  man.  I  congratulate  you 
upon  it  ;  may  these  looks  long  continue,  and  may  they  indicate  truly  !  but  I  will  not 
proceed  lest  you  should  think  me  a  flatterer — a  character  I  abominate.  Pray  have 
you  seen  the  Jacksons?  and  have  I  done  justice  to  them,  and  to  their  perform¬ 
ances  ?  I  am  somewhat  surprised  that  I  have  not  yet  heard  from  him,  and  the  rather 
as  he  left  his  wardrobe  at  my  house,  and  knew,  before  he  left  York,  that  I  should  go 
to  Scarborough  on  Monday  the  27th  of  this  month,  and  that  I  purposed  to  stay  there 
with  my  family  till  the  back-end.  of  September.  1  had  almost  forgot  to  observe  that 
the  alterations  in  the  margin,  either  made  with  a  pencil  or  by  any  other  hand  than  my 
own,  are  only  offered  for  your  consideration,  and  not  intended  by  me  at  present  to 
stand.  You  will,  too,  find  in  the  remarks  some  lines  underdrawn  with  a  pencil :  those 
are  not  mine,  and  being  somewhat  illiberal,  I  have  thoughts  of  expunging,  but  chose 
you  should  see  them  first ;  as  I  have  likewise  a  variety  of  remarks  on  the  same  pas¬ 
sages  by  different  hands  for  you  to  select  such  as  you  shall  most  approve,  or  that  you 
may  from  the  whole  form  new  ones,  according  to  your  own  opinion  upon  duly  con¬ 
sidering  the  whole ;  and  I  have  the  rather  omitted  to  point  out  which  of  these  are 
my  own,  as  I  would  wish  to  have  your  unbiassed  judgment  about  them.  I  believe  I 
have  before  told  you  that  Mr.  Mason  had  left  York,  and  that  he  had  resolved  to  defer 
publishing  Gray’s  posthumous  Works  till  the  next  spring.  Pray  have  you  yet  seen  a 
book  printed  here  and  published  the  beginning  of  this  month,  called  Scriptural  Con¬ 
futations  ?*  If  not,  send  for  it  directly,  as  you  may,  I  verily  think,  depend  that  the 
perusal  will  give  you  great  pleasure.  It  is  an  answer  to  the  apology  of  the  noted 
Mr.  Lindsey,  late  vicar  of  Caterick,  and  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  best  written  book  I  ever 
read  upon  the  subject.  The  author  is  here  guessed  at,  but,  as  I  am  under  a  strict 
promise  not  to  name  him,  I  dare  not  yet  do  it :  Mr.  Mason  is,  too,  very  intimately 
acquainted  with  him,  and  perhaps  may  not  be  under  the  same  injunction;  but  even 
this  you  must  not  admit  to  have  come  from  me.  He  is  really  a  layman,  and  every 
thing  he  says  of  himself  is  literally  true  to  my  knowledge.  His  genius  is  amazing, 
and  Mason  will  vouch  with  me  that  he  has  read  and  well  digested  more  good  authors 
than  any  man  of  his  day  ;  in  short,  he  is  a  prodigy,  therefore  read  his  book,  and  if  you 
approve  of  it,  I  will  find  means  that  you  shall  one  day  read  the  man.  I  expect  him 
in  town  to-morrow,  and  if  he  will  then  give  me  permission,  1  will  name  him  to  you. 
He  has  promised  to  come  to  me  at  Scarborough  in  August,  and  to  stay  there  some 
weeks.  You  are,  I  know,  a  man  of  spirit ;  suppose  you  were  there  to  give  him  the 
meeting ;  the  waters  will  contribute  to  the  continuance  of  your  youthful  look,  and 
Mrs.  Garrick  would,  I  am  certain,  reap  some  benefit  from  them.  I  could  add  much 


*  Written,  I  think,  by  Mr.  Burgh,  who  edited  the  Sy/xa ,  and  who  wrote  a  commentary  upon  the  English 
Garden  of  Mason. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(538 

more  to  induce  you  to  take  this  trip,  but  as  your  friend  Horace  says,  though  upon 
an  occasion  far  less  interesting, 

“  In  publica  commoda  peccem, 

Si  longo  sermone  morer  tua  tempora 

I  therefore  conclude  with  an  assurance  that  I  am, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

George  Corn8.  Swan. 

It  would  give  me  great  pleasure  to  hear  that  my  old  friend  Billy  Howard  was 
alive  and  well ;  should  he  fall  in  your  way,  pray  remember  me  kindly  to  him. 


MR.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  High-street,  Portsmouth,  June  22nd,  1774. 

I  thank  you  for  your  letter,  and  for  sending  it  to  Mr.  Becket.  I  have  written 
a  letter  to  him  by  this  post,  which  I  hope  will  remove  his  fears  concerning  the 
translation. 

What  I  have  suffered  both  from  you  and  from  Mr.  Ayrey,  your  hearts,  I  dare  say, 
would  not  have  inflicted  had  you  known  my  constitution.  A  moderate  protection 
of  me  against  injurious  attacks  would  have  secured  my  happiness,  and  should  not 
have  discredited  either  his  or  your  reputation.  With  philosophical  calmness  I  impute 
your  severity  to  error,  but  to  error  which  hath  sunk  me  for  ever. 

A  person  who  lately  possessed  those  talents,  in  some  degree,  which  absurdly  ex¬ 
cite  the  malignity  of  mankind,  had  likewise  lately  obtained  some  very  respectable 
connexions ;  unfortunately  for  himself,  he  has  lost  those  connexions.  When  such  a 
man  is  at  once  without  fortune  and  friends,  the  benevolent  world  around  him  keep 
alive  in  his  breast  the  sense  of  his  calamity.  I  say  no  more ;  but  you  may  hence 
infer  (to  use  your  own  expression)  “  that  my  cares  and  anxieties  take  their  colouring 
from  my  present  situation.” 

I  hope  you  will  excuse  this  frankness  from  one  who  once  admired,  idolized  you, 
independently  of  any  paltry  views  of  interest ;  from  one,  who,  as  he  hath  renounced 
all  hope  of  every  human  enjoyment,  can  be  induced  by  no  motives  to  soften  either 
his  sentiments  or  his  language. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

P.  Stockdale. 


MR.  W.  BRERETON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  June  24th,  1774. 

I  think  it  my  duty  to  inform  you  that  Air.  Barry  opens  Crow-street  next 
winter.  My  reception  here  has  induced  him  to  make  me  an  offer  of  remaining  in 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


639 


a  first  situation,  and  will  article  with  me  for  two  years  at  seven  and  eight  guineas 
per  week.  I  am  sure  I  need  not  tell  you  that  my  heart  is,  and  ever  will  be  at 
Drury -lane,  while  you  are  concerned  with  it ;  but  as  three  pounds  a  week  is  much 
below  what  I  can  live  for  in  London,  I  am  sure  you  cannot  blame  me  for  embracing 
so  very  capital  a  difference.  If  a  situation  could  be  made,  and  business  allotted  to 
me,  that  would  entitle  me  to  six  pounds  weekly,  I  should  be  happy  in  returning ; 
but  whether  it  can  or  not,  I  shall  always  remain  deeply  impressed  with  gratitude  for 
the  signal  marks  of  favour  you  have  shown  me,  and  beg  leave  to  assure  you,  that 
I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  devoted  humble  servant, 

W.  Brereton. 

I  request  the  favour  of  a  speedy  answer. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sunday,  June  26th,  1774. 

I  thank  you  for  your  favour,  and  am  happy  to  find  you  so  well  recovered  from 
your  late  indisposition.  You  know  I  have  often  said  it  is  a  pity  you  are  not  immor¬ 
tal  :  but 

- “  Nec  te  tua  plurima,  Pantheu, 

Labentem  pietas,  nec  Apollinis,  &c.” — Virg. 

“  Pulvis  et  umbra  sumus.” — Horace. 

So  much  for  moralizing! — now  to  the  matter.  On  finding  Barry  had  secured  the  only 
nights  on  which  there  was  a  possibility  of  getting  any  thing,  I  declined  playing  any 
more,  and  gave  the  poor  manager  all  the  money  back,  which  by  my  agreement  I 
received  from  him,  i.  e.  thirty  guineas.  He  was  no  gainer  notwithstanding.  After 
this,  at  the  request  of  many  people  I  put  up  Richard  a  second  time  for  myself, 
which  I  played  on  Thursday  last  to  a  very  great  house,  great  applause,  and  the 
repeated  compliment  of  the  curtain  ordered  down  at  my  death.  Mrs.  Hartley 
played  the  Queen,  and  much  admired.  After  the  play,  we  had  messages  from  five  or 
six  persons  of  distinction  to  repeat  “  Jane  Shore,”  which  we  did  (on  share  of  profits) 
last  night,  to  a  genteel  but  thin  house,  though  the  boxes  were  well  let.  Nothing 

can  exceed  the  applause  Mrs.  H - most  deservedly  received.  The  curtain  ordered 

down,  and  repeated  proofs  of  the  approbation  of  the  audience.  She  is  admired  here 
beyond  my  most  sanguine  expectations.  We  shall  not  play  any  more  here  this  sum¬ 
mer,  though  “  Macbeth”  and  “  Rosamond”  are  much  requested,  hut  are  going  to 
Cork  on  good  terms  and  certainty.  She  is  determined  (at  all  events)  not  to  return 
to  Covent-Garden,  and  I  (at  all  events)  am  determined  to  be  with  her.  I  am  in  love 
and  pleased  with  ruin.  Cold  complexions  may  talk  of  keeping  amours  secret,  but 
who,  when  in  love  with,  and  beloved  by  such  a  woman,  can  live  a  moment  from  her? 
Every  day  is  still  but  as  the  first.  Barry  has  been  and  still  is  ill  with  the  gout  or 
rheumatism,  and  has  not  played  some  time  :  they  have  had  no  night  so  good  as 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(540 

mine.  Dodd  has  been  dismissed ;  is  to  play  Don  John  for  his  benefit  to-morrow, 
and  will  not  have  charges.  Nobody  here  doubts  of  Harry’s  engagement  at  Covent- 
Garden.  I  wish  you  joy  of  Yates  and  Young.  Hartley  is  worth  a  hundred  of  them, 
and  will  bring  more  money.  When  I  asked  my  honoured  friend’s  advice  about 
staying  in  Ireland,  I  only  meant  as  far  as  related  to  my  theatrical  interest,  no  more. 
I  would  not  leave  my  Rose,  for  botli  the  English  patents.  Reason  is  a  beggar,  and 
Passion  shuts  the  door  against  him.  I  am  Antony  from  top  to  toe,  only,  thank 
God,  somewhat  younger.  You  will  perhaps  say  old  enough  to  be  wiser ;  but  I  do  not 
believe  your  England  contains  virtue  and  wisdom  enough  to  resist  such  charms  and 
goodness  as  1  am  in  possession  of.  Do  not  think  1  want  feeling  for  some  others  ;  it  is 
not  so  :  but  I  have  no  power  to  struggle  against  the  impulse  of  my  heart,  which 
beats  all  one  way.* 

You  caution  me  against  agreements  with  people  who  think  only  for  themselves. 

Will  you  put  it  in  my  power  to  make  one  with  him  that  does  not  ?  I  thank  you 

for  your  friendly  offices  much  :  but  you  tell  me  that  your  partner  will  make  an 

effort  upon  the  stage,  and  that  much  will  depend  on  that.  Am  I  to  understand  that 

it  will  prevent  your  engaging  with  me  ?  In  plain  terms:  will  you  engage  the  Hartley 

and  me  this  ensuing  season,  or  the  succeeding  one  ?  We  had  as  lieve  stay  here  next 

year,  but  shall  be  happy  to  join  you  after  it  (or  this,  if  you  like  better)  ;  and  whatever 

I  may  be,  she  will  be  worth  your  bidding  for,  I  am  sure.  It  is  my  wish  and  my 

pride  to  be  with  you,  but  I  will  not  leave  my  Rose  for  the  world.  Jephson  has 

been  very  civil  to  me ;  and  Mrs.  Jephson  invited  Mrs.  Hartley  to  dine  with  her  at 

» 

the  Black  Rock,  and  is  much  pleased  with  her.  The  idea  here  is  not  so  criminal  as 
your  London  folks  have  it :  a  pretty  parcel  of  d — d  lies  in  your  papers.  I  see.  Let¬ 
ters  from  Dover,  &c.  Mrs.  Smith  is  with  her  father,  and  writes  to  me  as  if  she  knew 
nothing  of  the  matter,  but  desires  me  not  to  play  often  enough  to  hurt  my  health, 
though  it  should  delay  my  return  to  England.  Pray  let  me  hear  from  you,  and  be 
explicit  about  your  intentions  of  engaging  with  us  or  not.  What  will  be  best  to  do 
with  Harris  about  Mrs.  Hartley’s  article  ?  She  will  not  play  there  on  any  account. 
I  fear  Mr.  Yates  and  your  partner  have  rather  cooled  you  in  your  design  of  en¬ 
gaging  with  us  ;  but  I  beg  you  will  let  me  know  your  real  sentiments  about  the 
season  following.  I  am  with  true  respect 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  faithful, 

W.  Smith. 

Dodd’s  benefit  to-night,  the  worst  house  that  ever  was.  He  plays  Don  John  in 
“The  Chances”— not  fifteen  pounds. 

Pray  direct  to  me  at  Mr.  Kisling’s,  Dorset-street,  Dublin,  or  else  desire  Mr.  Wilks 
to  send  my  letter  there.  I  will  deliver  your  message  to  him. 

And  Mrs.  Smith,  my  dear  Sir!  how  will  she  consider  the  fair  Rosamond  ?  But  Smith  was  kept  in 
sufficient  countenance,  on  the  stage  and  off.  It  was  surely  indecent  to  consider  Mr.  Garrick  at  fifty-eight,  a 
proper  confident  in  such  irregular  attachments.  Smith  is  both  shameless  and  boyish.  The  Jephsons  too ! 
but  the  fires  do  not  live  under  the  ashes. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


641 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden  Place,  July  11,  1774. 

I  have  been  engaged  either  at  home  or  abroad  since  I  left  London,  and  to  this 
time  have  not  had  any  leisure  to  plan  our  meeting  with  Jordan  at  Camden-place.  I 
am  now  settled,  having  dispatched  my  girls  into  Cheshire,  whom  I  attended  in  their 
first  day’s  journey,  and  took  that  opportunity  of  making  a  visit  to  an  old  friend  in 
Bedfordshire,  from  whence  I  am  just  now  returned.  I  am  at  present  at  your  com¬ 
mand,  and  shall  so  remain  for  a  fortnight,  at  the  end  of  which  I  shall  take  a  trip  to 
Calais  to  see  Jenny,  and  shall  be  happy  to  execute  any  commission  you  or  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick  will  favour  us  with.  Jordan  is  in  the  country  at  the  end  and  in  the  middle  of 
the  week,  so  that  you  may  be  sure  to  meet  him  here  any  Wednesday,  Saturday,  Sun¬ 
day,  or  Monday,  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  appoint  during  my  stay  here  before  my 
French  expedition.  But  I  shall  by  no  means  be  satisfied  with  a  day’s  visit  from  you 
and  Mrs.  Garrick,  but  must  insist  upon  a  longer  time.  Indeed  you  owe  it  us,  and 
it  will  be  a  wholesome  change  of  temperance  and  sobriety  at  our  spare-table. 

I  was  in  some  expectation  of  meeting  you  last  Sunday  se’nnight  at  Mr.  Dun¬ 
ning’s,  but  you  are  too  much  in  request  to  be  had  upon  short  notice.  That  idol 
popularity,  that  has  ruined  my  fortune  and  made  yours*  will  yet  spoil  your  constitu¬ 
tion  ;  for  perpetual  feasting  and  riot  will  break  you  down  at  last,  and  you  will  be 
demolished,  though  you  are  stronger  than  Nuttall. 

I  do  very  much,  dear  Garrick,  wish  for  a  quiet  day  or  two  with  you,  when  you 
are  not  interrupted  every  minute  with  authors  and  actors.  Our  noisy  girls  are 
gone,  and  the  house  is  at  peace.  Lady  Camden,  Sally,  and  our  Flasby  desired  to 
be  remembered  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  whom  you  will  be  pleased  to  add  my 
very  best  respects.  I  am,  dear  Garrick, 

Your  most  sincere  and  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

Camden. 

My  great  neighbour  and  I  visit  upon  the  most  friendly  terms — I  mean  of  civility. 
In  looking  over  Jack’s  verses  I  have  found  a  dialogue  between  you  and  Johnson. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden  Place,  July  22nd,  1 774. 

I  was  happy  in  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  and  pray  to  God  that  you  may  escape 
Rigby’s  hospitality  and  elegant  temptation  without  some  fresh  distemper.  I  have 
lately  had  two  attacks  of  my  old  complaint — the  cramp  in  the  stomach ;  but  by  the 
help  of  laudanum  I  soon  got  well,  and  am  now  in  perfect  health,  but  at  the  same 

*  Does  the  ex-chancellor  here  confess  that  he  sacrificed  to  the  idol  Popularity  ?  Principles  are  sacred 
things.  A  virtuous  statesman  sees  without  regret  the  mediocrity  of  fortune  which  he  has  provoked. — Ed. 

VOL.  I.  4  N 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(J42 


time  so  seriously  alarmed  with  these  repetitions,  that  I  determine  for  the  future  to 
be  an  example  of  abstinence.  But  who  can  be  deaf  to  the  admonitions  of  sickness? 
Even  Nuttall  is  turned  philosopher,  and  is  now  under  the  regimen  of  a  vegetable 
diet,  which  is  to  last  for  a  year,  during  all  which  time  he  is  neither  to  taste  wine  nor 
even  brandy,  and  yet  he  is  determined  to  persevere,  and  you  know  the  resolution  of 
the  man. 

We  go  to  Dover  on  Monday,  and  no  further,  for  as  we  have  engaged  a  gentle¬ 
man  to  carry  Jenny  back  in  six  weeks,  we  shall  bring  her  home,  and  so  Mrs.  Des- 
combes  will  cross  the  water  instead  of  us.  Tims  has  received  your  money,  and  I 
shall  take  care  to  execute  your  commission  with  exactness  and  punctuality. 

My  girls  are  gone  to  Cheshire,  so  that  if  you  love  flattery  but  half  so  well  as 
Goldsmith  affirms,  you  will  lose  the  daintiest  part  of  your  entertainment  if  you 
favour  us  with  your  company  at  Camden  Place.  I  will  however  supply  that  want 
in  my  own  person.  As  soon  as  we  are  returned  you  shall  hear  from  us,  and  I  expect 
that  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  hold  yourselves  in  readiness  to  obey  the  first  summons. 

Lady  Camden  and  Sally,  together  with  our  Flasby,  join  in  their  compliments  to 
yourself  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

% 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  July  12th,  1774. 

As  I  could  not  perform  before  Thursday  last,  I  did  not  choose  to  trouble  you 
sooner  with  a  letter.  I  played  Richard  to  a  very  bad  house,  but  a  most  indulgent 
and  applauding  audience,  who  paid  me  every  compliment  in  their  power.  On 
Friday  we  played  “  Jane  Shore”  to  a  better  house,  though  not  a  good  one,  and  Mrs. 
H  —  received  equal  applause,  with  the  same  compliment  of  the  curtain  being 
ordered  down  before  the  end  of  the  play.  Barry  having  secured  the  only  nights 
that  can  prove  profitable,  occasions  my  declining  playing  much  oftener ;  but  I  shall 
repeat  Richard  at  the  request  of  several  persons  of  distinction,  on  Friday  next. 
Dodd  and  Mrs.  Bulkeley  are  here,  but  will  not  get  a  farthing.  Barry  carries  on  the 
farce  of  a  pretence  of  not  being  engaged  next  season.  Something  has  passed  betwixt 
us  of  a  coalition  of  parties,  but  as  it  is  not  probable  they  will  play  with  me  what  I 
should  expect,  I  have  dropped  the  pursuit.  I  have  had  but  one  opportunity  of  seeing 
Mrs.  Sparks,  in  Miss  Hardcastle,  in  “  She  Stoops  to  Conquer.”  I  think  her  a  pretty, 
promising  actress,  with  a  middling  person,  seemingly  inclined  to  grow  fat.  She  is  a 
favourite  here.  Now  to  more  serious  business.  Some  scandalous  (i.  e.  false)  reports 
have  appeared  in  the  public  papers  here  copied  from  London.  I  have  only  in  general 
terms  contradicted  them,  and  none  have  appeared  since.  My  friends  tell  me  (as  I 
expected)  that  heavy  censure  falls  on  me  in  England.  As  you  are  no  stranger  to 
my  affairs,  I  may  tell  you  a  continued  series  of  unhappiness  at  home  for  many  years 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


643 


(though  concealed  even  from  my  acquaintance)  makes  me  feel  less  on  this  occasion 
than  I  perhaps  ought  to  do ;  and  at  times  1  have  thoughts  of  not  returning  to  Eng¬ 
land  ;  and  indeed,  should  I  stay,  I  am  offered  terms  that  would  tempt  me,  even  if 
there  was  nothing  disagreeable  at  home.  Will  you  give  me  your  opinion  ?  and  will 
you,  if  I  should  stay  here  a  season,  engage  with  me  and  Mrs.  H.  for  the  succeeding 
one  ?  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  your  friendship  for  your  recommendations.  I  had 
the  honour  of  seeing  the  Provost,  who  was  obliged  to  leave  Dublin  the  day  after  on 
a  tour  which  his  bad  state  of  health  made  necessary :  but  in  consequence  of  your 
letter  I  have  been  visited  by  several  friends  of  his,  who  promised  me  much  encou¬ 
ragement  if  I  will  stay.  Mr.  Jephson  has  called  on  me.  He  is  one  of  the  most 
agreeable  men  I  have  seen.  I  shall  dine  with  him  on  Tuesday,  at  the  Black  Rock. 
Mr.  Wilkes  is  seldom  in  town,  but  I  have  seen  him,  and  a  damned  bad  picture  of 
you,  which  I  did  not  know  was  designed  for  you.  I  have  heard  nothing  from  Mr. 
Harris.  Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  oblige  me  with  a  letter?  I  expect  a  severe 
one  :  but  how  weak  is  reason  when  affection  pleads.  God  bless  you  !  Defend  me 
where  you  can,  and  pity  me  when  you  cannot.  I  owe  much  to  your  friendship,  and 
hope  I  shall  not  forfeit  it.  Let  my  indiscretions  be  as  they  may,  I  am  on  all  occa¬ 
sions  most  faithfully, 

Your  very  sincere  and  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

I  expect  your  letter  at  Mr.  Wilkes’s. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Cork,  Saturday,  July  16th,  1  774. 

I  have  this  moment  received  your  very  short  letter,  which  has  thrown  me  into 
the  greatest  dilemma  in  the  world.  My  determination  of  my  whole  year's  business 
depended  on  your  answer,  and  I  am  now  as  much  at  a  loss  as  if  I  had  not  writ  to 
you.  I  never  till  now  could  have  supposed  you  irregular  in  business,  or  that  your 
sagacity  and  experience  could  have  been  misled,  in  an  event  which  totally  depended 
on  myself,  by  the  reports  of  others.  You  would  have  been  the  first  to  have  heard 
from  me  that  I  intended  being  in  England  had  it  been  so,  but  I  waited  for  your  an¬ 
swer  before  I  could  give  one  to  the  manager  in  Dublin.  I  am  now  totally  derangL 
Had  you  been  kind  enough  to  say,  you  either  would  or  would  not  engage  me  for  the 
ensuing  season,  I  should  have  known  what  to  have  done.  I  particularly  requested 
you  to  be  explicit  with  me.  If  you  do  not  engage  me,  it  cannot  be  worth  my  while 
to  return  to  England,  for  I  will  not  be  at  Covent-Garden  with — Rosamond  will 
keep  herself  unemployed  rather  than  return  thither ;  but  that  will  not  interfere  with 
your  engaging  with  me,  which  you  may  remember  you  told  me  you  would  do,  if  I 
determined  not  to  return  to  my  old  station. 

I  now,  Sir,  beg  your  positive  answer,  and  will  wait  in  Cork  (where  I  have  played 
Richard  and  Hamlet  with  much  applause  and  tolerable  profit)  for  it.  I  shall  not 

4  N  2 


private  correspondence  of 


644 

enter  into  any  particulars  relative  to  private  affairs,  but  shall  desire  Mrs.  Smith  to 
come  over  to  Ireland,  if  I  do  not  return  to  England,  which  your  letter  will  deter¬ 
mine  ;  and  I  beg  you  will  favour  me  with  one  by  return  of  post,  as  I  will  not  stir 
hence  till  I  get  it.  Your  very  affectionate  and  sincere  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

The  Lady  you  desired  me  to  note  particularly  is  a  dish  of  skim-milk.  Pray 
write  immediately,  for  I  can  resolve  on  nothing  till  you  do. 

Damn’d  paper,  damn’d  pens,  and  a  damn’d  pi - . 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Cork,  July  24th,  1774. 

I  am  at  length,  by  the  advice  and  persuasion  of  Rosamond,  determined  to  return 
to  England,  where  I  flatter  myself  I  shall  be  fixed  with  you  :  otherwise  I  must 
return  again  to  Ireland.  I  wish  I  could  prevail  on  Rosamond  to  join  her  friends  at 
Covent-Garden,  and  rub  through  the  remainder  of  her  article  ;  but  the  fear  of  scandal, 
and  a  very  precarious  situation  of  health,  alarm  her  so  much,  that  I  fear  she  will  not 
be  able  to  undertake  the  fatigue  of  the  theatre  next  season,  at  least  in  England.  I 
have  used  every  argument  in  my  power  to  overcome  her  objections,  but  in  vain. 
Mrs.  Smith  and  I  have  constantly  corresponded,  and  I  propose  returning  to  her  as 
soon  as  I  arrive  in  England.  She  has  never  hinted  at  a  suspicion  of  my  having  a 
connexion ;  and  if  you  hear  it  mentioned,  I  wish  you  would  do  all  that  is  proper  to 
check  the  idea.  My  sincere  attachment  will  continue  where  it  is  ;  but  I  shall  not  by 
any  means  avow  it,  or  set  decency  so  much  at  defiance,  as  to  let  it  appear  openly.  In 
full  confidence  of  your  honour  and  friendship,  I  lay  my  heart  bare  to  you.  AYe  have 
had  a  letter  from  Bate,  who  says  he  has  seen  you.  He  presses  much  to  have  her 
return  to  Coven t-Garden,  though  he  was  the  first  adviser  to  have  the  article  cancelled. 
I  am  quite  of  his  opinion  now,  and  wish  she  may  have  resolution  to  follow  his  and 
my  advice.  Though  it  will  be  irksome  to  be  at  different  theatres,  yet  I  think  it  will 
in  some  measure  take  off  suspicion.  I  expect  the  favour  of  a  line  from  you  before 
you  receive  this ;  but  do  not  write  again,  as  I  hope  to  see  you  in  England  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  next  month. 

I  think  I  gave  you  my  opinion  about  Mrs.  Sp — s.  I  have  now  seen  a  good  deal 
of  her.  She  is  what  may  be  called  handsome,  but  clumsy,  vulgar,  and  inanimate,  and 
has  the  brogue  very  strong.  I  am  not  clear  that  Rosamond  will  dare  venture  to  sea 
at  present.  If  not,  she  will  remain  with  very  proper  friends  here.  I  do  assure  you 
she  has  the  most  noble,  disinterested,  honest  heart  in  the  world,  and  notwithstanding 
her  slip  with  me,  if  her  real  worth  was  known,  she  would  be  more  admired  for  that 
than  her  beauty.  I  need  not  tell  you  that  no  view  of  gain  brought  me  hither  ;  how¬ 
ever,  we  have  got  more  than  all  expenses,  considerably.  Shall  I  confess  so  much 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


645 


weakness  or  rashness  as  to  declare  I  believe  I  should  not  have  had  resolution  to  return 
to  England,  had  not  Rose  insisted  on  it.  We  have  had  the  most  earnest  assurances 
of  encouragement  from  many  of  the  first  people  in  Dublin  (amongst  whom  is  the 
Duke  of  Leinster,  who  writ  to  me  to  Cork)  if  we  would  perform  there  next  winter, 
but  your  answer  will  determine  that.  I  writ  a  very  civil  letter  to  Mr.  Harris,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  one  from  the  treasurer,  to  tell  me  that  they  had  settled  their  business  for 
the  ensuing  season,  without  a  view  to  my  assistance. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  ever  your  obliged  and  affectionate, 

W.  Smith. 

I  shall  sail  by  the  first  ship  after  the  31st. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  of  Smith’s  from  Dublin 
Summer,  1774.” 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  July  31st,  1774. 

I  know  I  ought  not  to  say  I  am  sorry  I  was  at  church  when  you  left  Mr.  Swan’s 
commentaries  with  me,  and  yet  peradventure  I  stand  accountant  for  as  great  a  sin. 
I  perceive  that  twice  or  three  times  Mr.  Swan  and  I  have  concurred  in  opinion.  I 
suppose  he  means  to  publish  them  hereafter.  Do  you  know  whether  he  has  pre¬ 
pared  any  more  plays  for  the  press  ? 

I  have  sent  you  the  proof  of  an  unfinished  plate,  which  I  mean  for  the  future  ex¬ 
planation  of  more  than  half  a  dozen  passages  in  Shakspeare,  viz. — The  dress  of  the 
Fool  in  “  As  You  Like  It his  bauble  mentioned  in  “  All’s  Well,  &c.”  and  “  Romeo 
and  Juliet;”  and  his  Coxcomb  in  “King  Lear;”  the  Hobby-horse  in  “Hamlet,” 
Maid  Marian  in  “  Henry  IV.”  and  Friar  Tuck  in  “The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,” 
&c.  The  drawing  was  made  from  a  window  about  three  hundred  miles  off,  and  con¬ 
tains  all  his  figures  in  the  ancient  morrice-dance.  I  coloured  this  proof  from  the 
original  with  such  wretched  paint  as  I  could  procure  at  a  country  shop.  Hereafter 
you  shall  receive  a  copy  illuminated  in  a  better  style  :  the  present  one  hardly  deserves 
a  place  in  Mr.  Johnston’s  manufactory  of  birds  and  beasts  in  Drury -lane  Theatre.  I 
know  you  laugh  at  all  this  kind  of  illustration  ;  but  take  my  word  for  it,  there  is  no 
better  way  of  explaining  our  author  than  by  occasional  appeals  to  such  ancient  re¬ 
cords.  I  beg  you  will  not  mention  the  future  use  for  which  this  plate  is  designed,  as 
you  might  thereby  injure  the  sale  of  our  present  edition. 

Most  faithfully  yours, 

G. Steevens 

The  glass  was  painted  about  the  year  1600. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


040 


SIR  JOSHUA  REYNOLDS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Leiccster-fields,  August  2,  1774. 

The  connexion  which  I  have  with  the  author  of  the  tragedy  which  accompanies 
this,  makes  it  impossible  for  me  to  refuse  him  the  favour  of  presenting  it  to  you. 
I  shall  take  it  as  a  great  [favour]  if  you  will  take  the  trouble  of  reading  it,  and  give 
your  opinion  of  it,  if  it  will  do. 

I  should  not  take  this  liberty  if  I  was  not  in  some  measure  authorised  by  the  ap¬ 
probation  of  Edmund  Burke  and  Johnson  ;  the  latter,  contrary  to  his  custom,  read  it 
quite  through. 

The  author  will  readily  make  any  alterations  that  may  be  suggested  to  him. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect,  yours, 

Joshua  Reynolds. 

mr.  Garrick’s  critique  on  this  tragedy. 

[Note. —  Mr.  Garrick  preserved  a  copy  of  his  remarks  upon  this  tragedy,  which  I  give  because  they  point 
out  in  the  work  of  a  man  of  some  talent  the  sort  of  errors  into  which  young  authors  are  apt  to  fall.  The  sub¬ 
ject  of  “  Zaphira”  seems  to  have  been  treated  by  Francis  Gentleman  at  the  same  time  as  Dr.  Brown  wrote 
his  “  Barbarossa indeed  the  gentleman  appeared  on  the  stage  before  the  divine. — Ed.] 

Act  I. — The  first  scene  very  good.  The  situation  of  the  young  Prince  amiable 
and  interesting.  The  manners  of  Bulongar  abrupt,  and  not  sufficiently  accounted 
for.  Upon  the  whole,  the  act  not  a  bad  one. 

Act  II. — Not  so  good  as  the  first ;  several  thoughts  obscurely  expressed.  The 
scene  between  Eupliron  and  Organa  exactly  like  Osmyn  and  Zara,  in  “  The  Mourn¬ 
ing  Bride.”  Bulongar’s  character  not  at  all  marked  by  his  behaviour  at  discovering 
them,  as  it  is  very  proper  and  just.  Euphron  quite  forgetful  of  Zaphira. 

Act  III. — This  act  full  of  business  and  spirit,  but  too  much  like  “  Barbarossa.” 
Bulongar  not  alarmed  at  Araxes  discovering  himself  to  be  the  Prince  of  Persia.  The 
act,  upon  the  whole,  interesting. 

Act  IV. — Euphron’s  soliloquy  much  too  long  and  philosophical ;  makes  no 
mention  of  Zaphira.  Scene  between  Euphron  and  Zaphira  tame  ;  he  charges  himself 
with  what  he  is  not  guilty  of.  Organa  has  a  good  scene. 

Act  V. — The  speeches  and  whole  act  much  too  long.  Euphron  takes  no  notice 
of  Zaphira’s  death  when  Organa  tells  him  of  it.  Bulongar's  character  not  properly 
drawn,  as  the  latter  part  of  his  behaviour  seems  justified  by  his  wife’s  infidelity. 
Zaphira  not  a  very  shining  character ;  Organa  too  extravagant,  but  consistent  upon 
the  whole. 

The  tragedy,  even  with  some  alterations  and  shortenings,  is  not  likely  to  succeed, 
as  it  wants  a  great  and  interesting  scene  in  the  last  act.  The  language  in  general  na¬ 
tural  and  spirited. 

Endorsed  by  Garrick, 

“  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s  nephew’s  play.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


647 


MRS.  CHARLOTTE  LENNOX  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  August  4th,  1774. 

Enclosed  is  the  letter  we  agreed  I  should  write,  but  in  sending  it  you,  I  must 
beg  leave  to  declare,  (for  the  sake  of  my  own  reputation  for  candour,  which  I  do  not 
think  I  have  ever  yet  forfeited,)  that  what  relates  to  Mrs.  Yates,  though  written  ex¬ 
pressly  for  her  perusal,  are  my  real  sentiments. 

Mr.  Colman  can  tell  you  that  I  spoke  in  the  same  manner  to  him,  and  at  a  time 
when  it  was  heresy  to  say  she  was  equal  to  her  great  theatric  rival  Mrs.  Barry  ;  I  was 
a  bold  and  daring  schismatic,  and  always  maintained  she  was  superior  to  her.  This, 
indeed,  following  the  rules  of  politeness,  would  not  be  fit  to  say  to  you,  if  Mrs. 
Barry  held  the  same  rank  in  your  house  which  she  did  last  winter ;  but  as  things  are, 
I  conceive  I  am  at  liberty  to  speak  my  sentiments.  You  will  perceive  that  this  arti¬ 
cle  of  flattery  is  a  nice  point  with  me  :  I  own  it.  I  would  not  for  any  consideration 
fall  under  the  suspicion  of  it.  It  is  true,  that  when  I  praise,  it  is  with  warmth — with 
a  kind  of  enthusiasm  ;  such  is  my  natural  temper ;  but  I  mean  what  I  say,  and  it  is 
well  worth  a  life  of  habitual  sincerity,  to  purchase  the  pleasure  of  being  believed 
when  one  gives  vent  to  the  effusions  of  one’s  heart;  as  at  present,  when  I  tell 
you  that  your  disinterested,  kind,  and  noble  manner  of  proceeding  with  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds’s  nephew’s  play,  proves  you  to  be  as  good  a  man  as  you  are  a  great  actor ; 
and  I  think  no  flight  of  flattery  can  go  beyond  that  plain  and  simple  truth. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Charlotte  Lennox. 


MRS.  CHARLOTTE  LENNOX  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  August  4th,  1774. 

I  need  not  tell  you,  who  are  so  good  a  critic  in  the  French  drama,  that  Racine’s 
“  Bajazet”  is  allowed  by  all  good  judges  to  be  one  of  the  best  of  his  tragedies  ;  my 
own  humble  opinion  coinciding  with  this  general  one,  I  resolved  to  translate  it,  and 
by  hazarding  a  few  alterations,  adapt  it  to  the  taste  of  an  English  audience.  The 
principal  female  character  in  this  play,  if  acted  by  Mrs.  Yates,  would  alone,  I  think, 
ensure  its  success.  The  haughty,  the  impassioned,  the  beautiful  Roxana,  seems 
drawn  expressly  for  such  an  actress.  She  is  in  her  look  and  acting  the  very  image  of 
the  poet’s  thought,  and  I  had  her  in  my  eye  in  every  line  that  I  translated  of  this 
part.  The  alterations  I  propose  to  make  will  be  in  the  fifth  act,  which  is  not  busy 
enough  for  our  taste.  I  think  it  might  be  turned  entirely  new,  and  by  one  of  those 
sudden  revolutions,  common  enough  in  the  Turkish  government,  Bajazet,  instead  of 
being  murdered,  might  be  placed  upon  the  throne.  As  for  Roxana,  if  the  general 
plan  of  the  play  makes  it  necessary  that  she  should  die,  her  death  might  be  rendered 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


G48 

more  affecting  by  some  circumstances  of  terror  and  pity,  which  are  not  found  in  the 
original. 

Upon  the  whole,  Sir,  1  submit  it  to  your  judgment ;  give  it  a  reading,  and  if  you 
think  it  may  he  made  fit  for  representation,  I  will  be  guided  by  your  advice  in  even- 
alteration  to  be  made  in  it. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Charlotte  Lennox. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Cork,  August  5th,  1774. 

I  received  the  favour  of  yours  this  morning,  and  am  engaged  to  you,  I  hope,  as 
long  as  I  play  the  fool  on  any  stage.  I  shall  leave  the  terms  to  you ;  you  know  what 
I  was  engaged  for  at  Covent-Garden,  and  I  have  no  doubt  but  you  will  let  your 
friend  experience  your  generosity  as  well  as  every  body  else.  I  mean  to  meet  you  in 
perfect  friendship ;  and  when  either  my  merit,  or  rather  use,  will  entitle  me  to  ad¬ 
vancement,  I  know  I  am  sure  to  find  it.  I  shall  be  ready  for  Richard  on  the  day 
vou  mention,  but  could  wish  it  might  be  postponed  for  a  day  or  two  later,  that  I 
might  have  part  of  a  private  rehearsal  with  you.  Will  you  have  it  inserted  in  the 
papers  that  I  am  engaged  with  you  ?  My  answer  to  Mr.  Harris’s  letter  was,  that  he 
had  (by  his  engagements  with  a  man  with  whom  no  one  was  safe)  as  much  excluded 
me  from  his  company,  as  by  all  the  forms  that  could  be  used.  Rosamond  desires  her 
respects  to  you,  and  wishes  to  be  with  you  this  season  ;  and  is  not  a  little  happy  at 
the  thoughts  of  it  next.  She  is  so  alarmed,  and  so  far  from  well,  that  I  fear  she  will 
not  be  able  to  venture  to  perform  this  year.  I  wish  we  could  get  her  article  given 
up.  Some  letters  have  passed  betwixt  Hull  and  me  on  the  subject.  Macklin  is  en¬ 
gaging  people  from  Dublin,  but  entre  nous,  there  is  not  one  worth  ten  shillings  per 
week.  I  sail  for  England,  if  the  wind  will  permit,  on  Wednesday  next,  and  shall 
most  likely  take  Hampton  in  my  way  to  town  ;  if  not,  shall  wait  on  you  there.  You 
will,  I  hope,  do  what  you  can  for  Rosamond.  Justice,  and  not  partiality,  bids 
me  assure  you  she  possesses  qualities  worthy  your  notice  and  protection.  If  you 
knew  the  goodness  of  her  heart,  you  would  be  really  in  love  with  her.  Her  ret  lateri. 

I  must  now  thank  you  for  your  letter  and  your  friendship.  It  is  true  I  was 
peevish,  for  I  had  promised  to  give  the  Dublin  manager  a  positive  answer  on  or 
before  the  2.5th  of  last  month.  His  offers  were  very  great ;  all  the  security  I  could 
desire.  I  hope  you  had  good  sport  at  Yewmarket.  Were  you  in  the  secret  ?  I  do 
not  know  but  I  should  have  made  more  money  there  than  in  this  damned  Cork.  I 
wish  it  was  in  a  bottle  of  aqua  fortis,  and  a  burning  screw  through  it.  As  you  have 
been  at  Yewmarket,  I  hope  you  will  now  and  then  step  down  in  the  Meetings,  and 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


649 


that  I  shall  hear  you  proposed  a  member  at  the  first  Jockey  Club.  God  bless  you ! 
As  we  shall  soon  meet,  I  will  release  you,  and  beg  you  will  believe  me, 

Your  most  sincere  and  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

My  best  respects  wait  on  Mrs.  Garrick. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  August  5tli,  1774. 

It  is  such  a  long  time  since  we  met,  that  I  begin  to  feel  that  kind  of  desire  to  see 
you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  that  makes  a  Swiss  sick  when  he  has  [been]  absent  any  consi¬ 
derable  time  from  his  own  country  ;  and,  therefore,  I  write  now  to  inquire  where  you 
are,  and  what  are  your  schemes  for  the  summer.  We  returned  from  Dover  a  few 
days  ago,  and  have  brought  Jenny  back  to  stay  a  month  with  us,  after  which  she  is 
to  return  with  Air.  and  Airs.  Robinson.  Your  nieces  were  in  perfect  health  when 
Mrs.  Descombes  left  them,  and  we  are  entertained  every  day  with  their  panegyric  by 
Jenny.  I  executed  your  commission,  and  every  thing  succeeded  in  this  little  expe¬ 
dition  as  I  could  wish.  Now,  then,  I  hope  that  as  we  are  free,  you  will  not  be  en¬ 
tangled  with  any  engagements  that  may  prevent  our  meeting.  Jordan’s  country 
days  are,  W  ednesday  in  the  middle,  and  Saturday  at  the  end  of  the  week ;  and  you 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  name  some  day  the  most  convenient  to  yourselves,  and 
you  may  conclude  it  fixed  without  waiting  for  an  answer. 

I  have  lately  had  two  sore  attacks  of  the  cramp  in  the  stomach,  but  am  perfectly 
well  at  present,  and  have  no  fear  of  any  return  so  long  as  1  am  attentive  to  my  diet ; 
for  I  am  sorry  to  say,  that  I  never  suffer  this  way  but  through  my  own  fault.  The 
rest  of  the  family  are  perfectly  well,  and  beg  to  be  remembered  to  you  and  Mrs. 
Garrick,  to  whom  you  will  be  pleased  to  add  my  best  respects. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 

By  the  papers  I  received  to-day,  it  appears  that  all  America  is  in  a  flame ;  that 
they  are  hastening  with  all  possible  expedition  to  meet  in  one  general  Congress,  and 
make  the  attack  upon  Boston  a  common  cause. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  August  8tli,  1774. 

You  now  receive  Maid  Marian  and  her  troop,  in  their  proper  colours.  I  am 
sorry  this  place  would  afford  no  better  protection  for  them  than  a  deal  frame;  but 
VOL.  i.  4  o 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


650 

the  imitative  arts  are  not  in  the  highest  degree  of  cultivation  at  Hampstead,  and  con¬ 
sequently  their  auxiliars  are  neglected. 

The  marginal  directions  which  Mr.  Swan  has  introduced  to  get  rid  of  the  absur¬ 
dity  attending  the  death  of  Desdemona,  perhaps  are  preferable  to  my  own.  Of  this 
he  seems  to  be  thoroughly  convinced,  and  has  almost  made  a  convert  of  your 

Most  faithful  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

G.  Steevens. 

I  take  this  opportunity  to  return  Mr.  Swan’s  volumes,  and,  with  your  permission, 
shall  quote  the  marginal  directions  already  mentioned,  as  found  in  a  copy  belonging 
to  a  veteran  performer,  who  has  quitted  the  stage.  I  hope  no  one  will  suppose  I 
mean  Macklin.  I  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  burn  the  former  proof  of 
the  “  Morris-dancers  and  remember,  that  what  I  now  send  you  lays  claim  to 
no  higher  merit  than  that  of  being  a  faithful  copy  from  its  original. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Steevens’ s  letter  about  the  ‘  May  Morris,’ 
with  a  copy  of  it.” 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead-heath,  August  9tb,  1774. 

Many  thanks  to  you  for  the  critical  controversy  between  the  Yorkists,  though  I 
freely  confess  I  do  not  understand  the  pnerits  of  it.  As  to  Mr.  Swan,  he  has  much 
more  adroitly  supported  his  own  conjecture  in  the  notes  which  I  returned  to  you 
yesterday.  His  opponent  (if  he  has  any  meaning)  seems  to  favour  my  supposition. 
From  the  use  of  a  technical  term  or  two,  I  suspect  him  to  be  an  itinerant  surgeon, 
who  would  naturally  be  angry  with  another  who  invaded  his  rights  by  presuming  to 
phlebotomize  on  a  stage.  I  hope  Mr.  Moody  will  preserve  such  letters  as  may  ap¬ 
pear  hereafter  on  the  same  subject. 

The  plate  is  not  finished,  and  is  to  be  explained  by  the  help  of  numerals  annexed 
to  it.  I  am  persuading  the  owner  of  the  window  to  undertake  the  task  of  illustra¬ 
tion,  and  have  sent  him  materials  for  that  purpose.  Indeed.  I  am  not  able  to  describe 
all  the  characters.  Perhaps  such  as  are  not  mentioned  by  some  of  our  ancient 
writers,  are  the  mere  G)rse  and  Cloanthi  of  the  dance.* 

Let  me  once  more  entreat  that  you  will  destroy  the  first  copy  of  the  plate. 
When  it  is  finished,  you  shall  receive  another  illuminated  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
last.  The  colours  of  the  former  would  disgrace  the  stars  on  a  schoolboy’s  kite. 

I  am  happy  to  find  that  my  obscure  industry  can  merit  your  approbation.  I  have 
done  at  least  as  much  since  the  time  of  publication,  as  I  had  done  before  it ;  but  the 
task  will  never  be  completely  finished,  unless  we  can  procure  an  Act  of  Parliament  to 
call  in  all  the  ancient  books  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  Shakspeare. 

Pray  do  you  remember  that  the  fool  was  ever  represented  on  the  stage,  with  his 

*  See  the  Fifth  Book  of  the  immortal  iEneid. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


651 


bauble  in  his  hand  ?  or  do  the  armamentaria  theatri  contain  such  an  instrument  ? 
When  you  have  leisure,  (if  that  time  can  ever  be  expected)  I  shall  be  much  obliged 
to  you  for  a  short  account  of  the  manner  in  which  your  collection  of  plays  was 
formed  ;  i.  e.  who  purchased  them  for  you,  and  whence  they  were  chiefly  brought. 
I  have  very  particular  reasons  for  troubling  you  with  this  last  query,  though  none  so 
strong  as  for  subscribing  myself  Your  most  faithful,  &c. 

G.  Steevens. 


MR.  F.  AICKIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR?  Bedford  Coflfee-Heuse,  Wednesday,  10th  of  August,  1774. 

Not  having  received  a  written  dismission  from  either  yourself,  Mr.  George 
Garrick,  or  the  prompter,  the  method  hitherto  observed,  I  have  endeavoured  to  flatter 
myself  that  the  violence  of  your  resentment  is  by  this  time  abated,  and  I  may  yet 
hope  for  the  pleasure  of  serving  under  your  command — a  situation  the  most  agreeable 
to  my  wishes,  if  to  be  maintained  upon  principles  consistent  with  honour  and  man¬ 
hood.  I  think  I  may,  without  the  smallest  violation  of  truth,  affirm,  that  no  man 
ever  showed  a  stronger  inclination  to  pay  Mr.  Garrick  more  voluntary  regard  than 
myself,  or  treat  his  merits  with  that  distinction  they  justly  claim  ;  and  Mr.  Garrick’s 
justice  will  likewise  tell  him  that  mean  sacrifices,  as  it  is  impossible  they'  should  ever 
be  sincere,  so  they'  are  as  unworthy  his  acceptance  as  they'  are  beneath  an  ingenuous 
mind  to  offer.  With  my  usual  reliance  on  Mr.  Garrick’s  candour,  I  shall  wait  his 
answer,  and  am  his  Most  obedient  humble  servant, 


Endorsed, 

41  Mr.  Aickin’s  first  letter.” 


Frax.  Aickix. 


MR.  J.  F.  RICHARDSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR?  Chapel-street,  Bedford-row,  11th  August,  1774. 

I  have  a  small  Essay  put  into  my  hands  upon  reading,  or  the  Art  of  Delivering 
Written  Language,  in  which  the  subject  is  treated  in  a  philosophical  manner,  and 
which  perhaps  may  be  thought  to  be  more  calculated  for  the  curious  and  ingenious  men 
of  speculation  than  for  men  in  general.  The  author,  who  considers  your  manner  of 
pronunciation  and  delivery  to  be  the  modern  standard  of  true  pronunciation,  would 
be  exceedingly  obliged  to  you  to  permit  a  dedication  of  this  small  attempt  to  you,  in 
a  short  complimentary  manner  to  that  effect ;  and  in  order  that  yrou  may  judge 
whether  it  merits  y'our  permission  or  not,  he  has  desired  me  to  send  the  same ;  and  at 
the  same  time  it  will  be  necessary'  for  me  to  apologise  for  the  liberty'  I  have  taken  in 
troubling  yTou,  and  the  more  particularly  so,  as  I  have  not  the  honour  of  being  per¬ 
sonally  known  to  you,  but  hope  from  your  general  good-nature  and  politeness,  if  it 
should  not  be  so  fortunate  as  to  meet  with  y'our  approbation,  it  will  meet  with  your 

4  o  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


excuse,  and  consider  it  in  the  true  light  it  was  intended,  which  was  a  compliment  to 
real  merit,  and  the  most  proper  person  existing  to  dedicate  a  thing  of  this  nature  to. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Jno.  Flete.  Richardson. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  F.  AICKIN. 


SIR,  Hampton,  12th  Aug.  1774. 

It  is  true  you  had  not  a  written  dismission  from  the  prompter,  because  it  was 
thought  more  civil  to  convey  it  by  your  brother  :  as  this  was  well  understood  by  him, 
and  confirmed  by  Mr.  King,  I  am  a  little  surprised  at  the  mention  of  it.  So  far  am 
I  from  having  any  violent  resentment,  that  I  most  sincerely  wish  you  success  wherever 
your  interest  or  inclination  may  lead  you. 

Various  circumstances  (which  I  will  not  repeat)  happened  in  the  course  of  last 
winter,  by  which  I  could  not  but  imagine  that  you  intended  we  should  part.  I  hope 
I  may  say  without  vanity,  that  Mr.  Aickin  has  met  with  some  indulgence  in  Drury- 
lane ;  and  if  I  expected  in  return  some  small  regard  to  me  as  the  older  soldier,  and  to 
my  rules  and  orders  as  a  commanding  officer,  I  flatter  myself  that  such  an  expectation 
is  not  inconsistent  with  honour  and  manhood,  and  may  be  answered  without  malting  any 
mean  sacrifices.  I  am  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  Copy  of  a  letter  to  Mr.  Aickin.” 


MR.  F.  AICKIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sjr.  Bedford  Coffee-house. 

Knowing  you  were  busied  last  week  with  some  domestic  concerns,  I  thought  it 
an  improper  time  to  trouble  you  with  any  thing  from  me,  though  impatient  to  ex¬ 
culpate  myself  from  the  charges  against  me  in  your  last.  I  think  I  may  say  with 
justice,  that  no  member  under  your  command  ever  obeyed  with  more  implicit 
respect  your  directions  as  a  superior  officer  than  myself,  not  merely  as  duty  from  your 
station,  but  proud  of  paying  a  conscious  tribute  to  your  abilities  and  experience.  If 
I  wished  to  part  with  Mr.  Garrick,  I  certainly  should  have  taken  some  previous  steps 
to  provide  myself  a  situation  somewhere  else,  which  I  solemnly  declare  1  have  not 
done,  nor  shall,  till  I  am  ultimately  convinced  an  accommodation  of  my  unfortunate 
misunderstanding  with  him  is  impossible. 

If  Mr.  Garrick  will  allow  me  modestly  to  bring  the  circumstance  a  little  to  review, 
I  flatter  myself  a  candid  consideration  of  it  will  satisfy  him  there  could  not  possibly 
be  any  premeditation  in  my  conduct.  How  mean  must  be  my  spirit,  how  detestable 
my  principles,  if  I  even  had  a  desire  to  quit  the  service  of  the  Muses  under  him,  to 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


653 


prepare  it  by  so  unworthy,  so  disingenuous,  and  so  unmanly  a  mode !  I  have  no 
doubt  but  Mr.  Garrick  will  readily  acknowledge  that  all  my  proceedings  with  him 
have  been  regulated  by  more  respectable  sentiments.  At  the  time  the  unhappy 
affair  happened  (I  call  it  unhappy,  not  as  it  has  merely  deprived  me  of  my  bread,  but 
as  it  has  unfortunately  robbed  me  of  your  favour),  I  was  paying  a  pleased  respectful 
attention  to  you  ;  at  such  a  time,  when  my  mind  was  void  of  every  thing  but  the 
pleasure  I  received  from  your  performance,  [I  was]  reprimanded  for  wearing  my  hat 
behind  the  scenes  before  a  number  of  hair-dressers,  tailors,  and  many  other  servants 
of  the  house  ;  for  doing  even  what  they  were  doing  :  if  taken  so  unexpectedly,  with¬ 
out  time  for  recollection,  I  did  give  any  little  hasty  abrupt  answer,  I  should  imagine 
from  a  person  of  much  less  candour  than  Mr.  Garrick  the  offence,  after  the  provoca¬ 
tion,  by  no  means  merited  so  serious  a  resentment.  You  are  pleased  to  wish  me  suc¬ 
cess  wheresoever  my  interest  or  inclination  shall  lead  me  :  if  Mr.  Garrick  is  sincere  in 
that  wish,  lie  will  gratify  both  by  forgiving  the  error  of  a  transport  at  most,  kindly 
restoring  me  to  his  favour,  and  admitting  me  to  rank  in  his  veteran  corps  again  ;  in 
the  hope  of  which,  though  not  a  confident  one,  I  remain,  most  sincerely, 

His  obedient  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  FRAN.  AlCKIX. 

“  Mr.  Aickin’s  second  letter  without  date. 

August  1774.” 


MR.  J.  WHITEHEAD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Porto,  Aug.  15,  17  74. 

Some  time  ago,  I  had  the  honour  to  receive,  most  unexpectedly,  a  medal,  with 
a  good  likeness  of  you,  and  of  excellent  workmanship.  If  I  had  found  a  genuine 
copper  Otlio,  it  would  not  have  given  me  half  the  pleasure ;  for  I  certainly  esteem 
your  bust  before  any  emperor’s  in  the  world.  I  was  always  fond  of  the  theatre,  and 
for  many  years  I  constantly  attended  your  representations :  I  have  frequently  car¬ 
ried  the  book  with  me,  and  I  confess  to  you  I  have  been  astonished  at  the  exquisite 
propriety  of  your  speaking. 

My  uncle,  the  late  Dr.  Nichols  of  the  Charter  House,  was  a  good  judge  of  thea¬ 
trical  merit,  though,  having  resided  chiefly  in  Portugal,  he  had  seen  few  plays. 
When  I  first  carried  him  to  your  Lear,  he  expressed  his  admiration  in  terms  that 
would  give  offence  to  your  delicacy  in  repeating.  It  hath  not  been  my  good  fortune 
to  reside  for  many  years  past  in  England  ;  however,  I  rejoice  to  see  my  native  country 
is  now  carrying  even  the  fine  arts  to  a  great  degree  of  perfection.  The  art  of  good 
speaking  I  consider  as  one  of  the  first  movers  of  our  government,  from  the  lowest 
parish  meeting  to  the  House  of  Lords.  Your  talents  this  way  would  have  undoubt¬ 
edly  carried  you  very  far  in  any  other  channel ;  but  it  is  happy  you  made  choice  of 
the  stage ;  for  otherwise  many  beauties  of  the  immortal  Shakspeare  would  have  re- 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OE 


654 

muiued  without  the  proper  notice.  Now  your  names  will  go  to  posterity  together, 
and  1  am  exceedingly  glad  the  public  love  of  this  enlightened  age  hath  accompanied 
you  while  living. 

The  name  of  Garrick  stands  singly  eminent.  If  it  was  possible  for  me  to  become 
poet,  I  should  be  confounded  with  two  poets  already  of  my  name.*  So  I  believe  I 
must  content  myself  with  having  a  title  to  an  humble  office  that  was  once  a  word  of 
consequence. 

Upon  this  occasion  I  beg  your  patience  for  a  small  theatrical  story.  I  had  the 
honour  to  be  acquainted  with  the  late  judicious  Mrs.  Porter,  and  dined  with  her  on  a 
day  I  was  invited  to  hear  Mr.  Whitehead  read  his  “  Roman  Father”  to  Mr.  Barry 
and  some  others :  I  acquainted  her  where  I  was  going,  upon  which  site  said,  she 
could  venture  to  assure  me  I  should  hear  a  play  very  ill  read ;  for  all  the  time  she 
belonged  to  the  stage  she  had  always  found  that  authors  read  their  works  abominably. 
If  modest,  they  hurried  and  mumbled  them  over  :  if  not,  they  marked  with  so  strong 
an  emphasis  what  they  thought  good,  as  to  spoil  all  that  way.  She  added  that  she 
was  present  when  several  of  the  principal  nobility  were  to  hear  Mr.  Addison  read  his 
“  Cato”  for  the  first  time ;  which  he  did  very  badly,  erring  on  the  modest  side  :  and 
the  applause  they  were  all  bursting  to  give  him,  which  he  perceived,  confounded 
him  the  more.  However,  I  thought  my  namesake  read  his  play  very  well;  though 
the  company  was  a  little  disturbed  by  a  person  coming  to  challenge  the  master  of  the 
house  to  fight  the  next  day. 

One  of  my  nephews  now  residing  in  London  will  have  the  honour  of  delivering 
you  this  letter.  1  hope  you  will  pardon  me  for  trespassing  on  your  time,  as  well 
as  for  the  liberty  I  have  taken  of  offering  you  a  few  plums  of  this  country.  I 
have  further  to  offer  you  my  service  for  any  thing  I  can  do  in  this  place  ;  and 
you  will  do  me  a  particular  pleasure  in  employing  me  for  yourself  or  your  friends. 

I  suppose  you  are  very  little  addicted  to  our  wine,  though  it  is  no  thin  pota¬ 
tion  ;  and  who  knows  but  the  generous  port  I  have  sent  Lord  Chatham,  may  have 
engendered  happy  thoughts  in  that  great  master  of  eloquence  ? 

I  crave  your  pardon  once  more  for  the  length  of  my  epistle,  and  I  am,  with  the 
highest  esteem,  dear  Sir,  Your  very  obedient  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

J.  Whitehead. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-Place,  August  20th,  1 774. 

I  have  avoided  answering  your  letter  till  this  day,  because  I  could  not  find  in 
my  heart  to  invite  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  hither,  while  I  was  under  the  dejection  of 
that  most  dispiriting  disorder  the  jaundice.  I  am  now,  thank  God,  perfectly  recovered 
from  that  complaint,  and  my  skin  is  restored  to  its  own  natural  hue ;  and  indeed, 
except  that  my  stomach  is  still  weak,  and  requires  the  utmost  attention  in  its 
management,  am  absolutely  well.  But  still  the  house  has  the  air  of  sickness,  and  the 

The  two  poets  of  his  name  were  Paul  and  William  Whitehead. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


655 


master  is  reduced  to  such  a  course  of  fasting,  that  he  is  not  fit  for  convivial  riot,  and 
incapable  consequently  of  joining  in  those  boisterous  spirits  that  naturally  flow  from 
good  cheer  and  high-mettled  company.  After  this  description,  will  you  and  your 
wife  come  and  see  us  out  of  charity,  and  sacrifice  wit  for  a  few  days  to  friendship  ? 
If  you  will,  you  will  make  me  happy.  AVe  shall  get  Jordan,  which  is  all  the  animal 
entertainment  I  can  promise  you.  Jack  is  gone,  and  I  have  nobody  here  but  Black- 
heart  and  the  young  Parisian.  I  am  pleased  as  well  as  flattered  with  the  Chancel¬ 
lor’s  verses,  and  wish  it  was  possible  to  convey  him  hither  with  you.* 

If  I  hear  nothing  from  you,  I  shall  expect  you  Wednesday  next,  and  if  you  can 
trust  me  with  a  farther  advance  of  credit,  being  already  but  too  much  your  debtor,  I 
will  beg  you  to  bring  me  Steevens’s  edition  of  Shakspeare.  . 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 

You  receive  of  course,  together  with  Airs.  Garrick,  the  best  wishes  and  compli¬ 
ments  of  this  place. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  F.  AICKIN. 

August  24th,  1 774. 

That  no  time  may  be  lost,  I  take  the  first  opportunity  since  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  to  answer  it.  I  must  beg  leave  to  repeat,  that  I  cannot  enter  into  a  discussion 
of  the  disagreeable  circumstances  which  happened  last  season.  I  am  sorry  to  say, 
that  my  ideas  of  them  are  very  different  from  those  of  Air.  Aickin.  Some  late  en¬ 
gagements  which  the  Alanagers  of  Drury-lane  Theatre  have  entered  into,  would 
make  it  inconvenient  both  to  you  and  them,  to  alter  their  plan  for  the  ensuing 
winter.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  Answer  to  Mr.  Fran.  Aickin’s  letter, 

August  24th,  1774.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CUMBERLAND. 

my  DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  August  29th,  1774. 

Had  you  directed  your  letter  (as  I  have  always  desired  you)  to  the  Adelphi,  you 
would  have  had  my  answer  to  your  last  three  days  sooner.  I  have  been  at  Lord 
Camden’s  ;  your  letter  went  to  Hampton,  and  was  returned  to  London,  as  I  was  going 
to  the  former  place,  so  that  I  did  not  receive  it  till  this  evening  by  the  coach  ; 
therefore  Air.  Hanbury  and  you  must  excuse  this  seeming  neglect  of  his  and  your 
friendly  invitation. 

I  have  consulted  with  my  nephew,  who  is  as  desirous  as  myself  of  his  having  the 
honour  of  making  one  in  your  most  liberal  amusements.  He  is  obliged,  as  he  will 
tell  Air.  Hanbury,  to  be  at  Cambridge  the  8th  of  October,  and  term  begins  the  10th, 
when  he  will  be  fastened  by  the  leg  till  Christmas  :  could  he  have  been  there  of  the 

*  He  means  Iloadly,  the  Chancellor  of  Winchester. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


656 

least  service,  he  should  have  obeyed  your  commands  with  pleasure.  I  really  think 
(this  I  would  not  tell  him)  that  his  figure  in  any  parts  of  tragedy  would  rather  bor¬ 
der  on  the  ridiculous.  He  speaks  well,  and  would  not  displease  in  a  character  of 
weight  and  spirit ;  but  surely  he  is  too  unwieldy  for  any  but  comic  characters ;  but 
as  he  does  not  feel  it,  I  should  not  feel  it  for  him,  if  his  University  business  would 
permit  him.  As  for  me,  you  may  command  an  epilogue  if  you  should  want  one,  or 
any  thing  in  my  power ;  but  alas !  how  can  I  be  spared  from  my  troops,  With  so 
formidable  an  alliance  against  me?  It  will  be  impossible,  with  the  business  I  am 
preparing  and  must  produce  with  all  convenient  speed,  to  quit  the  field.  You,  who 
know  my  attendance  at  the  theatre,  and  that  nothing  can  or  will  be  done  without  me, 
must,  as  my  friend,  be  my  advocate  to  Mr.  Hanbury  and  his  sister  :  indeed,  my  dear 
friend,  I  will  confess  to  you,  that  my  time  is  so  employed  at  this  instant,  that  I  could 
wish  even  to  be  excused  from  the  epilogue ;  but  rather  than  you  should  want  that, 
or  any  thing  in  my  power  to  do  for  you — all  causes  shall  give  way  ! 

I  could  wish  to  have  “  The  Passionate  Man”  in  my  hands,  and  also  that  you 
would  send  me  a  cast  of  the  parts,  according  to  your  notion  of  the  matter  ;  the  sooner 
the  better.  I  have  seen  the  lady  author  we  talked  about ;  she  is  most  worthy  of  your 
friendship  and  regard  ;  she  is  very  clever  and  very  modest,  and  what  will  still  make 
you  more  her  friend,  she  is  distressed.  I  have  her  play  in  my  hands  :  she  "would  be 
much  honoured  if  you  would  see  it,  or  give  your  opinion  freely :  she  deserves  all 
encouragement.  If  I  knew  how  to  send  her  play,  I  would  ;  we  wish  much  for  your 
sentiments — you  will  be  surprised,  I  assure  you.*  Pray  write  to  me  soon  again,  and 
speak  your  wishes,  which  I  shall  always  be  happy  to  fulfil. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Garrick  joins  with  me  in  all  respect  and  warm  regard  to  Mrs.  C.,  Mr.  Han¬ 
bury,  and  Mrs.  Thy. 

Among  other  misfortunes  I  have  sprained  my  leg,  and  am  afraid  of  a  long  con¬ 
finement — a  very  disagreeable  business.  We  have  engaged  Smith,  and  Mademoiselle 
Hidoux  from  Paris  to  dance  with  Slingsby. 


MR.  W.  HAWKINS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Whitchurch,  near  Bridport,  Dorset,  Aug.  29th,  1774. 

I  have  some  time  been  in  hopes  of  the  favour  of  a  line  from  you  on  the  subject 
of  the  two  plays  put  into  your  hands  the  last  summer.  The  one  of  them,  viz.  “  The 
Queen  of  Lombardy,  or  The  Ambitious  Lover,”  (for  it  hath  borne  both  names,  and 
may  either,)  though  it  hath  formerly  had  the  approbation  of  no  incompetent  judges,  I 

*  The  Lady  Author  here  hinted  at  was  the  late  Mrs.  Cowley  ;  and  the  play  her  first  comedy,  called  the 
“  Runaway.”  Her  modest  merit  secured  her  the  friendship  of  Mr.  Garrick.  She  wrote  it,  as  she  assured  me, 
in  about  a  fortnight,  and  sent  it  anonymously.  It  was  produced  at  Drury-lane  Theatre  on  the  13th  of 
February,  1776. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


657 


have  thoughts  of  putting  into  a  quite  different  state,  and  reserving  for  a  future  oppor¬ 
tunity  ;  and  shall  accordingly  be  obliged  to  you,  if  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  send 
it  properly  tied  and  sealed  up,  and  directed  for  me,  to  Mr.  Palmer’s,  mercer,  on  Lud- 
gate-Hill,  who  will  have  instructions  to  forward  it  to  me.  The  other  play,  viz. 
“  Troilus  and  Cressida,  6cc.”  I  have  frequently  been  encouraged  (as  heretofore  I  have 
informed  you)  to  consider  as  fit  for  the  stage,  at  least  after  a  very  little  re-touching, 
&c.  It  is  chiefly  with  regard  to  this,  that  I  have  been  expecting  the  favour  of  your 
comments.  However,  Sir,  this  is  not  the  sole  occasion  of  my  present  troubling  you. 
Since  my  last  to  you,  I  have  altered  “Alfred,”  agreeably  to  the  plan  proposed  to  you, 
on  which  you  threw  so  much  cold  water.  I  think  I  gave  you  to  understand  I  should 
give  you  no  farther  trouble  on  this  head ;  but  as  the  performance  in  its  new  state  has 
been  submitted  to  the  judgment  of  able  and  proper  judges,  I  think  you  ought  to  be 
made  acquainted  with  their  opinions.  These  judges  are  our  common  friend  Mr. 
Warton,  and  Dr.  Wheeler,  present  poetry  professor  in  Oxford,  to  both  whom  the 
history  of  the  play  hath  been  honestly  communicated ;  to  the  latter  indeed  in  the 
most  full  and  explicit  terms.  I  do  not  know  but  I  may  have  told  you  before,  that 
his  original  strictures  and  criticisms,  in  the  main,  coincided  with  yours ,  the  justness  of 
which  you  may  remember  I  ever  admitted.  But  it  is  now  his  clear  judgment  that 
“  I  have  removed  all  material  objections ;”  and  indeed  the  very  few  exceptions  he 
now  has  to  the  tragedy  are  absolutely  trifling,  as  lie  calls  them  himself,  and  re¬ 
movable  in  a  few  hours.  As  to  Mr.  W.  he  has,  it  is  true,  one  little  objection  to 
it ;  but  what  is  totally  different  from  the  kind  and  complexion  of  yours  as  expressed 
in  your  last.  He  thinks  the  play  somewhat  deficient  in  point  of  hustle,  &zc.  according 
to  the  turn  and  taste  of  modern  times;  but  in  all  other  respects  he  is  entirely  with 
me.  So  far  as  this  objection  goes,  he  seems  to  think  the  success  of  representation 
may  be  affected.  But  this  opinion  (admitting  it  to  have  ground)  cannot,  I  presume,  in 
common  candour  be  supposed  to  affect  a  right  of  representation.  In  short,  Sir,  your 
objections  are  none  with  them.  Dr.  W.  has  nothing  like  a  material  one  ;  and  this  last 
is  Mr.  W:  s  only  one. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  think  it  in  a  manner  incumbent  on  me,  for  very 
obvious  reasons,  to  tender  “  Alfred”  once  more  to  your  acceptance  ;  and  hoping  to  be 
favoured  at  your  first  leisure  with  an  answer  hereunto,  remain,  with  my  best  respects 
and  wishes.  Sir,  your  obliged  and  very  obedient  servant, 

W.  Hawkins. 


ANSWER  TO  THE  PRECEDING,  WITHOUT  SIGNATURE  OR  DATE. 

SIR, 

You  flatter  me  much  by  your  polite  letter.  I  am  very  sorry  that  you  did  not 
send  your  play  to  me  sooner,  that  I  might  have  considered  it  as  I  ought,  during  my 
best  leisure  time  in  the  summer,  for  in  September  my  theatrical  cares  come  round 


VOL.  i. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(1.38 


An  appeal  to  friends  in  these  affairs  is  always  disagreeable.  They  will  not  dis¬ 
oblige  an  author  by  giving  judgment  against  his  performance,  so  that  a  manager 
must  either  receive  the  play  lie  may  disapprove,  or  be  greatly  censured  for  differing 
with  his  superiors.  I  would  not  choose  to  put  my  good  friends  and  yours,  the 
Wartons,  in  so  unpleasant  a  situation.  I  shall,  when  I  have  read  and  considered  the 
performance,  give  at  least  an  honest  opinion  of  it,  and  you  may  be  assured-  of  the 
utmost  secrecy  in  this  matter  from,  Yours,  &c. 

I  must  inform  you  that  the  managers  of  Drury -lane  Theatre  are  engaged  to  as 
many  new  performances  as  (if  none  of  them  are  withdrawn)  will  be  sufficient  for  the 
two  next  winters — unless  you  have  no  objection  to  the  play’s  being  acted  in  the 
month  of  November,  after  the  next  winter. 


SIR  JOSHUA  REYNOLDS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Leicester- fields,  Sept.  4th,  1774. 

I  thought  of  delaying  to  answer  your  note  till  I  should  hear  from  the  author, 
who  is  in  the  country ;  but  on  second  thoughts  it  must  needs  be  altogether  unne¬ 
cessary  to  give  you  the  trouble  of  reading  the  play,  as  you  say  it  cannot  be  acted, 
even  if  you  should  approve  of  it,  for  these  two  years  to  come.  He  will  undoubtedly 
understand  your  answer  to  be  an  absolute  refusal  to  take  it  at  any  rate;  I  must, 
therefore,  beg  that  it  may  be  returned. 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

Joshua  Reynolds. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  JOSHUA  REYNOLDS. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  September  5th,  1774. 

I  was  too  much  in  pain  to  write  to  you  yesterday.  Whoever  will  undoubtedly 
understand  my  answer  to  he  an  absolute  refusal  to  tahe  the  play  at  any  rate ,  will  do 
me  great  injustice.  So  far  from  refusing  plays,  the  complaint  is  that  I  take  too 
many ;  or  supposing  me  capable  of  such  a  practice  with  authors,  at  least  do  not  think 
me  so  lost  to  my  interest,  to  refuse  a  play,  a  line  of  which  I  never  saw,  and  which 
comes  so  recommended  to  me.  What  I  wrote  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  was,  upon 
my  honour,  the  real  situation  of  my  affairs  at  present.  I  have  no  less  than  seven 
plays,  each  of  five  acts,  and  two  smaller  pieces  for  representation ;  these,  with  our 
revived  plays,  will  be  as  much  as  any  manager  can  thrust  with  all  his  might  into  two 
seasons.  When  a  disappointed  author  hears  that  I  am  so  furnished,  it  is  natural  for 
him  to  imagine,  and  to  say,  that  I  do  not  care  to  receive  his  performance ;  but  that 
my  acquaintance  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  should  think,  for  the  author,  that  I  would 
say  the  thing  that  is  not,  to  clear  myself  from  a  performance  recommended  by  him, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


659 


Dr.  Johnson,  and  Mr.  Burke,  is  not  a  little  unpleasing  to  me.  To  clear  myself  from 
so  disagreeable  a  suspicion,  I  will  trust  your  honour  with  a  sight  of  the  plays,*  and 
in  confidence  you  shall  know  the  names  of  the  authors. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

David  Garrick. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  September  5th,  1774. 

I  have  employed  the  leisure  of  some  weeks  in  an  attempt  which  I  hope  will 
meet  with  your  approbation  and  encouragement,  and  have  now  brought  it  so  near 
a  conclusion,  that  I  venture  to  divulge  it  to  you.  Fortune  did  not  seem  inclined 
to  enable  me  to  repay  you  the  sum  you  so  kindly  assisted  me  with  long  ago,  so  I 
have  been  obliged  to  resort  to  the  poor  exchequer  of  my  own  brain,  and  try  wThat 
that  could  do  for  me.  In  short,  I  have  finished  four  acts,  and  part  of  the  fifth  of  a 
tragedy ;  and  as  the  business  of  what  remains  is  already  digested,  even  to  the  order  of 
the  scenes,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  the  w'hole  will  soon  (if  ever)  be  fit  for  your 
perusal.  The  few  friends  who  have  seen  it  express  the  strongest  approbation  of  the 
fable,  the  conduct,  the  situations,  and  diction ;  but  as  their  praises  may  be  addressed 
rather  to  my  diffidence  than  to  the  merits  of  the  piece,  I  must  remain  in  a  state  of 
uncertainty  till  it  undergoes  your  inspection.  If  it  answers  in  the  representation,  I 
should  wish  you  would  permit  me  to  cancel  my  debt  out  of  the  profits  of  those 
nights  which  fall  to  the  share  of  the  author.  Should  there  be  more  produced  than 
w  ill  answer  this  purpose,  I  need  not  tell  you  how  acceptable  it  will  be  to  me ;  I  have 
long  wished  to  pay  a  visit  to  London,  but  the  want  of  a  hundred  pounds  beforehand 
(though  my  income  is  tolerable)  obliged  me  to  defer  that  desirable  expedition.  Our 
friend  Mr.  Tighe  goes  soon  to  London,  and  has  engaged  to  present  you  with  the 
copy  from  me :  as  he  is  fond  of  every  thing  theatrical,  he  has  promised  to  inform  me 
of  the  progress  of  this  matter,  as  I  suppose  your  great  hurry  and  business  will  engage 
you  too  much  to  allow  time  for  particulars.  His  kind  partiality  has  been  a  consider¬ 
able  incitement  to  my  going  so  far  through  a  task  of  which  I  did  not  foresee  half  the 
difficulty  till  I  was  too  far  engaged  to  recede.  As  to  the  disposition  of  the  characters 

*  The  seven  already  under  promise.  The  whole  plea  is,  however,  nugatory.  This  precedency  was  no 
patent  right.  The  very  next  letter  in  the  collection  shows  that  five  out  of  the  seven  authors  could  be  passed 
over  for  Mr.  Jephson,  who  on  the  5th  of  September  announces  for  the  Jirst  time,  that  he  has  four  acts  of  a 
tragedy  written,  and  part  of  the  fifth  act.  Now  it  is  absolutely  certain,  that  “  Braganza,”  the  play  in 
question,  was  brought  out  so"  early  as  the  17th  of  the  following  February.  I  hope  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 
never  heard  the  secret  as  to  the  recent  acceptance  of  Jephson’s  tragedy  ;  it  might  half  incline  him  to  doubt 
his  friend  Garrick’s  sincerity.  The  truth  is,  that  a  manager  is  blameable  for  giving  any  pledge  beyond  the 
simple  declaration  “  that  the  play  shall  be  brought  forward  when  the  interests  of  the  theatre  require  it." 
The  novelties  of  the  season  1774 — 5  were  thus  timed.  Mr.  Cumberland’s  “  Choleric  Man’’  on  the  19th 
Dec. — Dr.  Francklin’s  “  Matilda”  on  the  21st  Jan. — and  Mr.  Jephson’s  “  Braganza”  on  the  17th  Feb.— Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE. 


G60 

among  the  performers,  it  must  be  left  entirely  to  your  determination.  There  is  but 
one  woman’s  part,  and  I  hope  it  is  so  suited  to  the  powers  of  Mrs.  Yates  as  to  make 
it  worth  her  acceptance  and  exertion.  If  you  see  reason  to  prefer  Miss  Younge  or 
any  other  performer,  I  can  have  no  objection ;  though  from  what  I  remember  of 
Mrs.  Yates,  I  wish  her  to  be  my  heroine.  The  story  of  the  piece  is  taken  from  the 
Abbe  Yertot’s  short  account  of  the  Revolution  of  Portugal.  I  have  introduced 
several  incidents  merely  of  invention,  which  I  think  with  probability  arise  from  the 
subject,  and  interweave  with  it  so  as  to  make  a  very  unobvious  though  a  very  natural 
interest.  The  situations  excite  great  expectation,  which  is  preserved  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion.  The  unities  are  sufficiently  preserved,  and  the  decorations  will  not  be  expen¬ 
sive.  Till  you  have  it  in  your  hands  I  cannot  expect  your  being  able  to  form  any 
judgment,  and  at  present  I  only  wish  to  know  whether  your  other  engagements  have 
room  for  its  being  (if  fit  for  the  stage)  exhibited  this  approaching  season.  If  not,  the 
longer  it  remains  in  my  hands  the  better.  Let  me  have  the  favour  of  a  line  from 
you  under  cover  to  Mr.  Secretary  Waite,  at  the  Castle  of  Dublin,  and  if  it  were  not 
too  much  trouble,  I  should  be  glad  of  a  duplicate  addressed  to  me  as  usual ;  so,  I  shall 
be  certain  of  no  miscarriage  in  your  letter.  Mrs.  Jephson  joins  me  in  best  compli¬ 
ments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  I  am  ever, 

Dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

I  have  the  best  reasons  for  wishing  my  name  may  be  concealed,  and  beg 
your  secrecy. 

Endorsed, 

“  Jephson’s  first  letter  about  ‘  Braganza.’  ” 



--- VOLUME II ---


THE 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


DAVID  GARRICK. 

VOL.  II. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED  BY  SAMUEL  BENTLEY, 

Dorset  Street,  Fleet  Street. 


THE 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


DAVID  GARRICK 

WITH  THE 


MOST  CELEBRATED  PERSONS  OF  HIS  TIME; 


NOW  FIRST  PUBLISHED  FROM  THE  ORIGINALS, 

AND 

ILLUSTRATED  WITH  NOTES, 

l 

AND 

A  NEW  BIOGRAPHICAL  MEMOIR  OF  GARRICK. 


ecotiU  igtfittan. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  II. 


LONDON: 

PUBLISHED  FOR  HENRY  COLBURN 

BY  R.  BENTLEY.  SOLD  BY  ALL  BOOKSELLERS. 


MOCCCXXXV, 

i  I  t 


5 

7^ ,  09 L 
(3-/95 

ms 

•  i '.L 


h.w. 


CONTENTS 


OP  THE  SECOND  VOLUME. 


Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Page 

1 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

Page 
.  29 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  to  Ditto 

2 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  J.  Aickin  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  30 

Mr.  Vernon  to  Ditto 

3 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

31 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Vernon 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  32 

Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

4 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  S.  Foote  to  Ditto 

5 

Rev.  E.  Lloyd  to  Ditto  . 

.  33 

Rev.  W.  Hawkins  to  Ditto 

6 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

34 

Mr.  Garrick  to  the  Rev.  W.  Hawkins 

8 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  35 

Lieut.-General  Burgoyne  to  Mr  Garrick 

10 

Mrs.  Jephson  to  Mr.  E.  Tighe 

36 

Rev.  W.  Hawkins  to  Ditto 

.  11 

Rev.  D.  Williams  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  37 

*  *  *  *  *  to  Ditto 

13 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Rev.  D.  Williams 

33 

Mr.  Maldon  to  Ditto 

.  14 

Mr.  J.  Henderson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  J.  Henderson  to  Ditto 

15 

Mr.  J.  Taylor  to  Ditto 

39 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  16 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Lieut.-General  Burgoyne  to  Ditto 

17 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  J.  Taylor 

40 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  18 

Mr.  G.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

•  41 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Ditto  .... 

19 

Mr  Garrick  to  Mr,  J.  Taylor  . 

ib. 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  20 

Ditto  to  Mrs.  Abington 

.  42 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Ditto  .... 

21 

Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 

43 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  22 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Ditto  .... 

ib. 

An  Account  of  the  Receipts  of  “  Matilda” 

.  44 

Scenes  and  Dresses  required  for  “  Braganza” 

.  ib. 

Mr.  J.  Henderson  to  Mr.  J.  Taylor 

.  45 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Mr.  Garrick 

23 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  R.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Antonio  Carara  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Ditto 

24 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

47 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  ib- 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

25 

Mr.  F.  Gentleman  to  Ditto  . 

48 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

.  ib. 

Dr.  Robertson  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

26 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Smith 

49 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Miles 

.  50 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

27 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

.  51 

Ditto  Ditto 

28 

Antonio  Carara  to  Ditto 

52 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Dr.  Robertson  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

29 

Miss  Macklin  to  Ditto 

53 

VOL.  II. 

b 

K  i  « 

04-2-  <r 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Page 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Brooke 

.  54 

Mr.  F.  Gentleman  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

• 

82 

Mr.  C.  Macklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

83 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  C.  Macklin  . 

.  55 

*  *  •  *  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  C.  Macklin  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Dr.  Arne  to  Ditto 

85 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

86 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Griffith  . 

56 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

87 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Fountain 

.  57 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

89 

Miss  Pope  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  Whitehead  to  Ditto  . 

90 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Miss  Pope 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

91 

Miss  Pope  to  Mr.  Garrick 

58 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto  . 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Miss  Pope 

.  ib. 

Miss  Pope  to  Ditto  . 

• 

92 

Miss  Pope  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Miss  Pope 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Miss  Pope 

.  59 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Brereton  . 

• 

93 

Mr.  Spranger  Barry  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

ib. 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  S.  Cautherley  to  Ditto 

.  60 

Rev.  E.  Lloyd  to  Ditto 

• 

95 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  W.  Parsons  to  Ditto 

.  61 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

96 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

62 

Mr.  S.  Reddish  to  Ditto  . 

98 

An  Agreement  with  Signora  Paccini 

.  63 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

• 

99 

The  Marquis  of  Hertford  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  T.  Linley  to  Dr.  J.  Hoadly  . 

ib. 

Capt.  Alexander  Schomberg  to  his  Brother 

.  ib. 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

• 

101 

Miss  Younge  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

64 

Mr.  H.  Kelly  to  Ditto 

102 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Miss  Younge 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  H.  Kelly  . 

• 

103 

Miss  Younge  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

65 

Mr.  H.  Kelly  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Miss  Younge 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  J.  Bate  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

66 

Ditto  Ditto 

104 

Mr.  W.  Brereton  to  Ditto 

.  67 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

105 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Ditto  . 

. 

ib. 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto  . 

.  68 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Yates 

• 

106 

Mr.  H.  Kelly  to  Ditto 

69 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Fountain 

• 

107 

Rev.  H.  R.  Rigby  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  W.  Brereton  to  Ditto 

70 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Smith 

. 

108 

Lord  Cowper  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

The  Proprietors  of  Covent-Garden 

Theatre  to  Mr. 

Mr.  D.  Wray  to  Ditto 

71 

Garrick 

• 

• 

ib. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mrs.  Desmoulins 

.  72 

Mr.  Garrick  to  the  Proprietors  of 

Covent-Garden 

Lord  Camden  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Theatre 

• 

• 

109 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Brereton 

.  73 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Fountain 

• 

• 

b. 

Mr.  Bensley  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

ib. 

Lord  Edgcumbe  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

• 

• 

ib. 

Mrs.  Mary  King  to  Ditto 

.  74 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Yates 

• 

• 

110 

Mr.  J.  Moody  to  Ditto 

75 

Mrs.  Yates  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  H.  King  to  Mr.  George  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Dr.  Arne  to  Ditto 

• 

. 

Ill 

Mr.  H.  King  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

76 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Arne 

• 

. 

112 

Mrs.  C.  Lennox  to  Ditto 

.  77 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

• 

ib. 

Dr.  Arne  to  Ditto 

78 

Mr.  De  La  Bere  to  Mr.  Siddons  . 

• 

. 

11? 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Arne 

.  79 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  R.  Jephson 

• 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  W.  Falconer  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  W righten  to  Mr.  Garrick 

. 

• 

114 

Ditto  Ditto 

•  80 

Mr.  J.  Blundell  to  Ditto 

• 

• 

ib; 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

• 

81 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Ditto 

• 

• 

116 

Mr.  G  E.  Ayscough  to  Ditto 

• 

82 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Smith 

• 

• 

177 

CONTENTS. 

Vll 

Page 

Page 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  117 

The  Duke  of  Portland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  149 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Colman 

118 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  J.  Caldwell 

150 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  ib. 

Miss  F.  Cadogan  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  C.  Dibdin  to  Ditto 

119 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Ditto 

151 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Ditto 

.  120 

Lady  Colebrook  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Dr.  T.  Francklin  to  Ditto 

121 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

152 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  G.  Cooper 

.  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Governor  Johnstone  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

153 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  122 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Colman  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto 

123 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick 

154 

Mr.  W.  Whitehead  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Lord  Walpole  to  Ditto  . 

.  155 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

ib. 

The  Right  Hon.  R.  Rigby  to  Ditto 

.  125 

Sir  J.  Eliot  to  Ditto 

.  156 

Mr.  Garrick  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Smith  . 

ib. 

Governor  Johnstone  to  Ditto  . 

ib. 

Memorandum,  Garrick  to  Sir  W.  Youns:  . 

.  126 

*  *  *  *  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  R.  Tickell  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  R.  Tickell  to  Ditto 

157 

Mr.  R.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  George  Hay  . 

.  ib. 

Mr,  J.  Clutterbuck  to  Ditto  . 

127 

Sir  George  Hay  to  Mr.  Garrick 

158 

Mrs.  C.  Clive  to  Ditto 

.  128 

Sir  W.  Young  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Steevens  to  Ditto  .  * 

129 

Lady  Simpson  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Miss  Pope  to  Ditto 

.  130 

Mrs.  H.  More  to  Ditto  . 

.  159 

Mr.  T.  Linley  to  Ditto 

131 

Mr.  Mrs.  and  Miss  Potts  to  Ditto 

160 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Smith  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  T.  Grist  to  Ditto 

132 

Mr.  P.  Pott  to  Ditto  . 

161 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Hopkins  . 

.  133 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Madame  Necker  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Hopkins  to  Mrs.  Abington  . 

.  ib. 

Ditto  to  Mr.  T.  King 

162 

Mr.  R.  Y.  Walsingham  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  to  Lord  Sandwich 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  134 

Mr.  T  King  to  Mr.  Garrick  • 

163 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  B.  Victor  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  W.  Woodfall  to  Ditto 

.  135 

Miss  H.  Moore  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

136 

Sir  James  Marriott  to  Ditto 

.  164 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Fountain 

.  138 

*  *  *  *  to  Ditto 

165 

Miss  Pope  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mrs.  F.  Brooke  to  Ditto 

.  167 

Dr.  J.  Hoadly  to  Ditto 

.  139 

On  Mr.  Garrick’s  leaving  the  stage  . 

168 

Case. — Drury-lane  .... 

140 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lady  Spencer 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Countess  Spencer  to  Mr.  Garrick 

169 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

.  142 

Sir  John  Fielding  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  Abington  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Sir  John  Fielding 

170 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Lodge 

.  143 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Bate’s  Affidavit  .... 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Fountain 

171 

Captain  E.  Thompson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  144 

Mr.  T.  Wilkes  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  J.  Dunning  to  Ditto 

145 

Lord  Sandwich  to  Ditto 

173 

Mr.  E.  Gibbon  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Sandwich  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Capt.  E.  Thompson  . 

ib. 

Mr.  H.  Bate  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  the  Bishop  of  London 

.  146 

Capt.  L.  Gale  to  Ditto 

.  171 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  L.  Gale  to  Ditto  . 

177 

Mr.  T.  Grist  to  Ditto 

.  147 

Sir  Watkin  Williams  Wynn  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Sir  Grey  Cooper  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Season  1775  and  1776 

178 

Miss  Hannah  More,  to  Rev.  Dr.  Stonehouse 

.  148 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Rev.  Mr.  Smith 

149 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  G.  Colman 

• 

179 

V1U 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .179 

The  Right  Hon.  R.  Rigby  to  Ditto  .  .  180 

Mr.  R.  13.  Sheridan  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

The  Duchess  Dowager  of  Portland  to  Ditto  .  183 

Mrs.  Montague  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Sir  Robert  Chambers  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  ib. 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Ditto  .  .  .185 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Davy  Pavy  to  Haly  Paly  .  .  .186 

Mr.  P.  Stockdale  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  ib 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Ditto  ....  188 
Mr.  Garrick  to  Madam  Necker  .  .  189 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .191 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  192 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  193 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Buckingham  .  .194 

Lord  Buckingham  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  •  ib. 

Lord  Sandwich  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .195 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Rev.  H.  Bate  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .196 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Lord  Spencer  to  Ditto  ....  197 
Mr.  H.  Bate  to  Ditto .  .  .  ib. 

General  Fitzroy  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .198 

Mr.  G.  Garrick  to  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Lord  Villiers  to  Ditto  .  .  .  .199 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Mr.  Sheridan  .  .  200 

Colman,  as  Warburton,  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Ditto  .  .  .201 

Mr.  T.  B.  to  Ditto  ....  202 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Tighe  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  H.  Moore  to  Mr.  Garrick  .  .  .  203 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Ditto  ....  204 

General  Burgoyne  to  Ditto  .  .  .  205 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  ib 

Mr.  R.  Cumberland  to  Ditto  .  .  .  206 

Mr.  1.  Bickerstaff  to  Ditto  .  .  .  207 

Mr.  G.  Butt  to  Ditto  ....  208 
Lord  Camden  to  Ditto  .  .  .213 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Portrait  d’une  Anglaise  .  .  .  .215 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Winch  .  .  .  217 

Mr.  D.  B.  Dignan  to  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto  .  .  .  218 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto  .  .  .220 

Mrs.  H.  Moore  to  Ditto  .  .  ib. 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto  .  .  .  221 

Mrs.  H.  Cowley  to  Ditto  .  .  .  222 


Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Cowley 

Page 

.  224 

Mrs.  Cowley  to  Mrs.  Garrick 

ib. 

Colonel  St.  Paul  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  225 

Rev.  H.  Bate  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto  . 

:  226 

Lady  Bathurst  to  Ditto 

228 

Mrs.  H.  More  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  J.  Robinson  to  Ditto 

230 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib- 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  231 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

232 

Sir  Watkin  Williams  Wynn  to  Ditto 

.  234 

Lord  Pembroke  to  Ditto 

235 

Mr.  T.  King  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  T.  King 

237 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Mr.  E.  Capell  to  Ditto 

238 

Miss  F.  Cadogan  to  Ditto 

.  239 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

240 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  242 

Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

.  244 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

246 

Mr.  T.  Becket  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  T.  Becket  to  Mr.  G.  Colman 

248 

Miss  H.  Moore  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  251 

Mr.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

252 

Miss.  H.  More  to  Ditto 

.  253 

Lord  Camden  to  Ditto 

254 

Miss  FI.  More  to  Ditto 

.  255 

Mr.  Gibbon  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

.  257 

Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto 

258 

Hannah  More  to  Ditto  . 

.  259 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Fountain 

ib. 

Mr.  A  Wallis  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  260 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Ditto 

261 

Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto  . 

.  262 

Mr.  Jones  to  Ditto 

263 

Mr.  J.  Chouquet  to  Ditto 

.  264 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  J.  Chouquet 

ib. 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  265 

Ditto  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  266 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto  . 

.  267 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  J.  Chouquet  to  Ditto 

.  ib. 

CONTENTS. 


IX 


Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Chouquet 

Page 

268 

Mr.  T.  Evans  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  T.  Evans 

269 

Mr.  T.  Evans  to  Mr.  Garrick 

•  .  ib. 

Mr.  T.  Evans  to  Mr.  W.  Woodfall 

.  .  270 

Lord  Palmerston  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  .  ib. 

Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto 

271 

Mr.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  272 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Camden 

ib. 

Mr.  G.  Colman  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

.  273 

Hon.  R.  Cholmondeley  to  Ditto 

274 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto  . 

.  275 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Ditto 

.  .  ib. 

Mr.  Jephson  to  Ditto 

.  276 

Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto 

278 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  .  ib 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

279 

Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Ditto 

.  281 

Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto 

.  .  ib. 

Mr.  R.  Cumberland  to  Ditto 

.  282 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

284 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  285 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

286 

Mr.  T.  Warton  to  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Abington 

287 

Ditto  to  Mrs.  Hobart 

.  .  ib. 

Dr.  Monsey  to  Mr.  Garrick  . 

288 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  .  ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Monsey 

289 

Mr.  H.  Stanley  to  Mr.  Garrick 

.  ib 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

290 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Messrs.  Lacy,  Ford,  Sheridan,  and 


The  Earl  of  Rochford  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Mr.  T.  Holcroft  to  Ditto 

Mr.  R.  Tickell  to  Ditto  .  .  .  . 

Ditto  Ditto 

Mr.  B.  Victor  to  Ditto  .  .  .  . 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Messrs.  Lacy,  Ford,  Sheridan,  and 
Linley  ..... 
Ditto  to  Mr.  Lacy  . 

Mr.  Lacy  to  Ditto 
Mr.  R.  Tickell  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto  . 

Mauritius  Lowe  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Linley  to  Ditto 
Mr.  E.  Capell  to  Ditto 
Rev.  H.  Bate  to  Ditto 
Mr.  W.  Lacy  to  Ditto 
Mr.  Garrick  to  the  New  Patentees 
Mr.  W.  Jackson  to  Mr.  Garrick 
Lord  Camden  to  Ditto  . 

Mr.  E.  Tighe  to  Ditto 
Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto 
Lady  Bathurst  to  Ditto 
Princess  de  Dashckow  to  Ditto  . 

Miss.  H.  More  to  Ditto 
Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Ditto 
Mrs.  E.  Griffith  to  Ditto 
Mr.  R.  Tickell  to  Ditto  . 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Ditto 
Ditto  Ditto  . 

Curtius  to  Ditto 
Rev.  S.  Nott  to  Ditto 
Miss  H.  More  to  Ditto 


Linley  .... 

.  291 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Curtius  . 

Mr.  W.  Lacy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

292 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Mr.  Garrick 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

The  Right  Hon.  R.  Rigby  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Lacy 

293 

Mr.  T.  Fosbrook  to  Ditto 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  T.  Becket  to  Ditto  . 

Mr.  Lacy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

294 

Antonio  Carrara  to  Ditto 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Tighe  to  Ditto 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Lacy 

.  ib. 

The  Countess  Spencer  to  Ditto  . 

Mrs.  Clive  to  Mr.  Garrick 

295 

Curtius  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Clive 

.  296 

Mr.  J.  Walker  to  Ditto  . 

Mrs.  J.  H.  Pye  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Mr.  T.  Becket  to  Ditto 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  R.  Berenger 

.  297 

Mr.  W.  Hopkins  to  Ditto 

Mr.  R.  Berenger  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Lord  Sandw  ch  to  Ditto 

Mr.  J.  Reed  to  Ditto 

.  298 

Mr.  T.  Becket  to  Ditto  . 

Mr.  Garrick  to  the  Earl  of  Rochford 

300 

Curtius  to  Ditto 

Page 

301 

302 
ib. 
ib. 

303 

ib. 

ib. 

304 
ib. 

305 
ib. 

306 

307 

308 

309 

310 
ib; 
ib. 

311 

312 

314 
ib. 
ib. 

315 

316 

317 
ib. 

318 
ib. 

319 

320 

321 

322 
ib. 

323 
ib. 
ib. 

325 
ib. 

326 

327 
ib. 

32  8 
ib. 

329 
ib. 

330 


X  CONTENTS. 


Page 

Page 

Mr.  J.  Taylor  to  Ditto  .... 

331 

Mr.  Garrick  to  M.  de  Voltaire 

• 

.  365 

Mr.  T.  Wilkes  to  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  to  General  Hale  . 

• 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  Younger  to  Ditto  .  . 

332 

Mr.  Cumberland  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

.  366 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

333 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Fountain 

335 

Lord  North  to  Ditto 

.  367 

Ditto  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Smith 

336 

Lady  Ossory  to  Ditto 

• 

368 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

ib. 

Lady  Edgcumbe  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Ditto  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire 

337 

Mrs.  Bunbury  to  Ditto  . 

.  369 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Lloyd 

ib. 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  Churchill  to  Mr.  Garrick 

338 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  370 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Churchill 

339 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Mr.  Churchill  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  371 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Kenrick  . 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

. 

*b. 

*  *  *  *  *  to  Mr.  Garrick 

340 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  372 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Dr.  Kenrick  . 

341 

Ditto  Ditto 

. 

373 

Ditto  to  Dr.  Brocklesby 

342 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  374 

Lord  Sandwich  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Lord  Halifax 

343 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

.  375 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Macklin,  in  defence  of  his  Ju- 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

376 

bilee  Ode  .... 

ib. 

Sketch  of  the  Character  of  Mrs.  Montagu  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  B.  Wilson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

346 

Mrs.  Montagu  to  Mr.  Garrick 

• 

377 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  Telltruth 

347 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Montagu 

. 

.  ib 

Mr.  Wilson  to  Mr.  Garrick 

348 

Mr.  R.  B.  Sheridan  to  Ditto  . 

ib. 

M.  Noverre  k  M.  Garrick 

. 

379 

Mr.  G.  Keate  to  Ditto  .... 

349 

M.  Patu  to  Mr.  Cleland 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Sheridan,  Sen.  to  Ditto  . 

350 

M.  Noverre  a  M.  Garrick 

. 

381 

Chitty’s  Creed  ..... 

351 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Samuel  Reddish  to  Mr.  Garrick 

352 

M.  Patu  to  Ditto 

• 

383 

Dr.  P.  Hiffernan  to  Ditto 

353 

M.  Noverre  a  Ditto 

.  386 

Ditto  Ditto 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

. 

ib. 

Mr-  Garrick  to  Mr.  Williams 

354 

M.  Patu  a  Ditto 

.  387 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Ramus  . 

ib. 

M.  Noverre  a  Ditto  . 

. 

389 

To  those  Choice  Spirits  and  Enterprising  Geniuses 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  390 

who  call  themselves  the  Town 

355 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

391 

Mr.  Garrick  to  R.  B.  Sheridan,  Esq. 

357 

M.  Patu  a  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Wilmot  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

• 

396 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Wilmot  _. 

358 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  403 

Ditto  to  Mr.  Marsh 

359 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

• 

407 

Mr.  W.  Rice  to  Mr.  Garrick 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  410 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mr.  W.  Rice 

360 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

. 

413 

Ditto  to  his  Grace  the  Archbishop  of  York 

ib. 

M.  Freron  a  M.  Garrick  . 

.  414 

To  the  King  of  Denmark 

ib. 

M.  Patu  a  Ditto 

. 

415 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Mrs.  Bradshaw  . 

361 

M.  Roger  a  M.  Patu 

.  417 

Ditto  to - 

ib. 

M.  Patu  a  M.  Garrick 

• 

419 

Ditto  to  M.  de  Voltaire 

362 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  ib. 

Arthur  Murphy  to  Mr.  Garrick 

363 

M.  Camp  a  Ditto 

• 

• 

421 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Arthur  Murphy  . 

364 

Madame  Noverre  a  Ditto  . 

.  ib. 

Mr.  Pitt  to  Mr.  Berenger 

ib. 

M.  Fenouillot  a  Ditto  . 

• 

• 

422 

CONTENTS. 

xi 

Page 

Page 

M.  Diderot  it  M.  Garrick 

.  42  3 

M.  l’Abbe  Bonnet  a  M.  Garrick . 

463 

M.  Algarotti  a  Ditto 

• 

.  ib. 

M.  Grimm  k  Ditto 

465 

M.  Algarotti  au  Marquis  Monvi  . 

• 

.  424 

M.  J.  L.  Faesch  k  Ditto 

466 

M.  Duclos  a  M.  Favart 

• 

.  ib. 

M.  Gravelot  a  Ditto 

467 

M.  Marmontel  a  M.  Garrick 

.  426 

M.  Cailhava  d’Estandoux  h  Ditto  . 

# 

468 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

427 

M.  Cailhava  a  Ditto  . 

469 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

. 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

470 

M.  Grimm  a  Ditto 

. 

.  428 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto 

471 

Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  Ditto 

• 

.  ib. 

M.  Le  Kain  k  Ditto 

• 

473 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

.  ib. 

M.  de  la  Place  a  M.  Monnet . 

ib. 

Lettre  a  M.  Monnet  k  l’occasion  de  l’Anthologie 

M.  le  Kain  a  M.  Garrick 

• 

474 

Framjoise 

• 

.  429 

M.  Grimm  a  Ditto 

475 

M.  Mole  a  M.  Garrick  . 

• 

430 

Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  Ditto 

• 

476 

M.  l’Abbe  Morellet  a  Ditto 

. 

.  431 

M.  l’Abbe  Bonnet  a  Ditto 

ib. 

Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  Ditto 

. 

432 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

477 

M.  Preville  a  Ditto 

, 

.  ib. 

Le  Baron  de  Grimm  a  Ditto  . 

479 

M.  Mole  a  Ditto 

. 

434 

Madame  Riccoboni  k  Ditto 

• 

480 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

. 

•  435 

M.  Watelet  a  Ditto 

481 

M.  Monnet  k  Ditto 

437 

M.  le  Kain  a  Ditto 

482 

Etat  des  effets  que  M.  Garrick  m’a 

laisses 

.  438 

M.  Favart  a  Ditto 

483 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chastellux  a  M.  Garrick 

438 

M.  le  Baron  de  Grimm  a  Ditto 

. 

486 

M.  Le  Kain  h  Ditto 

.  439 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

487 

Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  Ditto  . 

.  440 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

a 

489 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

.  441 

M.  Preville  a  Ditto 

490 

M.  Mole  a  Ditto 

• 

442 

MM.  le  Tendre  et  Dornay  a  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

M.  Le  Kain  a  Ditto 

.  443 

M.  de  Vigny  a  Ditto  . 

491 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  . 

• 

.  444 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

• 

• 

492 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  445 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  . 

494 

Ditto  a  Madame  Garrick 

• 

.  ib. 

M.  Bursay  a  Ditto 

495 

Ditto  a  Monsieur  Garrick 

.  446 

M.  Gravelot  a  Ditto  . 

496 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

. 

.  ib. 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

• 

497 

M.  Cailhava  d’Estandoux,  a  Ditto 

.  448 

M.  Helvetius  a  Ditto  . 

498 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

• 

.  450 

M.  Monnet  k  Ditto 

• 

499 

Ditto  a  Madame  Garrick 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

500 

Ditto  a  Monsieur  Garrick 

• 

451 

Madame  Riccoboni  h  Ditto 

. 

ib. 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

.  ib. 

M.  Favart  a  Ditto 

502 

Ditto  Ditto 

, 

452 

M.  Monnet  h  Ditto 

• 

507 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  453 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

509 

Ditto  Ditto 

. 

.  ib. 

M.  Monnet  h  Ditto 

. 

511 

L’Engagement  du  Sieur  Guidetti 

.  454 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  a  Ditto 

• 

513 

M.  Monnet  a  M.  Garrick 

• 

455 

M.  Elie  de  Beaumont  a  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

.  456 

M.  Fenouillot  a  Ditto 

• 

514 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

. 

457 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

• 

515 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

.  458 

Ditto  Ditto 

. 

ib. 

M.  Wieland  a  Ditto 

• 

.  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

516 

M.  l’Abbe  Morellet  4  Ditto 

.  459 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  Ditto 

• 

460 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto 

• 

518 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto 

.  461 

Ditto  Ditto  . 

• 

519 

Ditto  a  Madame  Garrick 

. 

462 

Ditto  Ditto 

• 

ib. 

XU 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

M.  Monnet  h  M.  Garrick  .  .  .521 

Ditto  Ditto  .  ...  522 

M.  Villieres  k  Ditto  ....  523 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  ,  .  524 

M.  Fenouillot  de  Falbaire  k  Ditto  .  •  52G 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  528 

M.  Monnet  a  M.  B.  Raymond  Gilbert  .  .  529 

M.  Monnet  a  M.  Garrick  .  .  .  530 

Mademoiselle  Auguste  a  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

M.  Fenouillot  de  Falbaire  a  Ditto  .  .  532 

M.  Gravelot  k  Ditto  ....  533 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  534 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  536 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  537 

M.  Le  Kain  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

M.  Preville  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .539 

M.  de  la  Place  a  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .  540 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  542 

Ditto  M.  Carara  .  .  .  545 

Ditto  M.  Garrick  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  546 

Ditto  Ditto  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  548 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  549 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  550 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .551 

M.  Victor  Chastellux  k  Ditto  .  .  .  552 

M.  Cailhava  d’Estandoux  a  Ditto  .  .  553 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .554 

Ditto  Ditto  ...  .  555 

Madame  Riccoboni  .  .  .  .556 

M.  Caron  de  Beaumarchais  a  Ditto  .  .  559 

M.  Ducis  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .560 

M.  l’Abbe  Morellet  a  Ditto  .  .  .  562 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .  563 

M.  Cazotte  a  Ditto  ....  565 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .  566 

M.  de  Villiers  a  Ditto  .  .  .  567 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto  ....  568 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  569 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .570 

M.  d’Arnaud  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .571 

Madame  Riccoboni  it  Ditto  .  .  .  ib. 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  ....  573 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .574 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  576 


Page 

M.  Le  Kain  a  M.  Garrick  .  .  .  577 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  ....  578 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  580 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  .581 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  582 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chatellux  a  Ditto  .  .  583 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  ....  584 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  585 

Ditto  Ditto  ....  586 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  .588 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  589 

Madame  Riccoboni  k  Ditto  .  .  .  590 

M.  Monnet  a  Ditto  ....  592 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .  593 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  595 

M.  de  Belloy  a  Ditto  ....  597 
Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  598 

M.  De  la  Place  a  Ditto  ....  600 
Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .601 

M.  l’Abbe  Morellet  a  Ditto  .  .  .  604 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  605 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto  ....  607 

M.  Ducis  a  Ditto  ....  608 

M.  Beaumarchais  a  Ditto  .  .  .  609 

From  Mr.  R.  E.  Raspe  .  .  .  610 

M.  de  la  Place  a  M.  Garrick  .  .  .612 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .613 

Le  Comte  de  Lauraguais  a  Ditto  .  .614 

Mr.  Garrick  to  Count  Lauraguais  .  .616 

Madame  Necker  a  M.  Garrick  .  .  617 

Le  Baron  de  Reden  a  Ditto  .  .  .618 

M.  d’Arnaud  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Le  Baron  Koch  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .619 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto  ....  620 

Madame  Wity  Nee  Garrick  h  Ditto  .  .621 

M.  Preville  a  Ditto  .  .  .  622 

M.  Suard  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Madame  Necker  a  Ditto  .  .  .  624 

Mr.  Garrick’s  answer  to  Madame  Necker  .  625 

Madame  Necker  a  M.  Garrick  .  .  '  .626 

Madame  Riccoboni  a  Ditto  .  .  .  627 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  .  629 

Ditto  Ditto  .  .  632 

Madame  Necker  k  Ditto  .  .  .  634 

M.  Ducis  a  Ditto  ....  635 

M.  Grimm  a  Ditto  .  .  .  .  ib. 

Le  Baron  Rathsamhausen  a  Ditto  .  .  636 

Louis  Prince  of  Hesse  D’Armstadt  to  ditto  .  ib. 
Rev.  Henry  Maty  to  Ditto  .  .  ib. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE 


OF 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  Sept.  7th,  1774. 

Unless  you  want  or  wish  to  have  the  gout,  I  hope  the  account  in  the  papers  is 
false.  If  it  is  true,  I  am  yet  at  a  loss  whether  to  congratulate  or  condole  with  you. 
In  this  state  of  suspense  between  grieving  or  rejoicing,  I  desire  very  much  to  have 
the  state  of  your  health  ascertained  to  me,  and  to  be  informed  whether  the  fit  be 
gentle  or  severe.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Bath  water  is  absolutely  necessary  for  your 
health  ;  and  that  it  behoves  you,  for  certain  reasons  that  I  do  not  choose  to  mention, 
to  repair  to  that  city  before  the  end  of  this  present  September. 

My  stomach  remains  still  weak :  in  other  respects  I  am  perfectly  well.  We  set 
out  for  Bath  next  Saturday  se’nnight ;  but  before  that  time  I  expect  Mrs.  Descombes 
in  England,  and  probably  at  Camden-place.  She  comes  to  take  under  her  care  two 
young  ladies,  the  daughters  of  Mr.  Heron,  who  lately  bought  Sir  Robert  Colebrook’s 
seat  in  East  Kent.  If  that  should  be  the  case,  you  shall  have  notice  in  time,  and  if 
Mrs.  Garrick  should  be  disposed  to  see  her,  and  will  drag  you  with  her  to  Camden- 
place,  it  will  be  a  happy  event  for  us,  and  make  some  atonement  for  the  shortness  of 
your  last  visit. 

I  have  been  employed  since  I  saw  you  in  reading  Ben  Jonson  ;*  for  as  I  have 
waked  generally  at  five  o’clock  in  the  morning,  I  have  spent  three  hours  every  day  in 
bed  in  reperusing  my  old  favourite.  I  make  no  comparison,  hut  I  do  assure  you  I  am 

*  It  is  with  sincere  pleasure  that  I  find  so  good  a  judge  as  Lord  Camden  a  hearty  admirer  of  Ben 
Jonson.  The  volume  put  together  and  published  by  the  bard  himself  in  the  year  J61G,  containing  all 
that  he  was  willing  to  consider  his  tvorks,  is  a  treasure  of  dramatic,  idiomatic,  and  characteristic  com¬ 
position. — Ed. 

VOL.  II. 


B 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


O 


beyond  expression  charmed  with  the  dramatic  powers  of  that  author,  and,  in  my  opi¬ 
nion,  the  genius  of  the  writer  is  equal  to  his  art ;  nay,  so  far  is  lie  from  being  defi¬ 
cient  in  the  first,  that  his  own  fund  would  have  supplied  him  with  every  faculty 
of  wit,  humour,  and  nature,  though  he  had  been  no  scholar.  His  principal  fault,  in 
my  judgment,  arises  from  a  pedantic  imitation  of  the  ancients.  His  prose  dialogue 
is  elegant ;  his  verse  hard  and  too  much  laboured,  hut  by  no  means  difficult  or 
obscure.  Read  him  again,  as  I  have  done,  without  prejudice,  and  forget  Shakspeare 
while  you  are  doing  it,  which  is  but  just ;  for,  to  say  tiie  truth,  he  that  reads 
an  author  with  proper  attention ,  has  no  leisure,  while  lie  is  so  employed,  to  think  of 
any  other. 

As  an  orator,  I  should  have  bespoke  your  favour  by  a  panegyric  upon  Shakspeare 
before  I  had  presumed  to  introduce  an  inferior  to  your  notice ;  but  that  subject  has 
been  so  hackneyed  by  all  mankind,  that  I  can  say  nothing  new  upon  it.  My  Lady, 
&c.  join  with  me  in  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  your  sincere  and  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

Camden. 

Is  Lord  Mansfield  gone  to  Paris  to  deprecate  peace  ?  He  is  all-sufficient. 
Junius*  has  taken  the  advantage  of  his  absence  to  give  him  another  stab  in  the 
“  Morning  Chronicle.” 


SIR  JOSHUA  REYNOLDS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Leicester-fields,  Sept.  9th,  1774. 

I  confess  to  you  I  could  not  conceive  that  you  could  possibly  be  engaged 
for  two  years  to  come,  and  thought  I  ought  to  understand  it  as  a  refusal ;  but  I 
am  now  perfectly  satisfied  that  I  was  mistaken.  At  any  rate,  to  make  use  of 
the  same  expression,  any  appearance  of  solicitude  from  Mr.  Garrick  that  there  should 
be  no  misunderstanding,  is  very  flattering  to  his  sincere  friend  and  admirer, 

Joshua  Reynolds. t 


MR.  J.  AICKIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  London,  Sept.  9th,  1774. 

The  moment  I  got  to  town  I  saw  Mr.  Vernon,  and  delivered  your  message  to 
him  as  literally  as  I  possibly  could,  and  in  the  manner  I  think  you  would  wish  to 
have  it  conveyed.  He  seemed  a  good  deal  hurt,  but  determined  upon  having  an  ad¬ 
dition  to  his  salary  of  two  pounds,  and  rank  of  benefit  according.  I  urged  to 

*  This  notice  as  to  Junius  is  at  variance  with  the  received  opinion,  which  closes  the  public  communica¬ 
tions  of  that  writer  a  year  earlier.  But  Camden,  I  should  think,  knew  that  “  Roman  hand"  tolerably  well.  If 
he  be  right,  it  puts  an  end  to  the  claim  of  Francis,  who  was  then  in  India. — Ed. 
t  See  the  close  of  the  First  Volume. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


3 


him  strongly  the  impropriety  of  insisting  upon  it  now,  as  your  engagements  were  all 
made  and  business  quite  settled,  and  that  it  certainly  would  wear  the  appearance  of 
want  of  candour,  breeding,  and  method :  he  said  he  could  not  think  himself  at  all  de¬ 
ficient  in  either ;  that  he  had  mentioned  it  very  seriously,  and  that  it  was  no  fault  of 
his  if  it  was  not  attended  to.  I  do  suppose  you  will  hear  from  him.  I  made  use  of 
a  number  of  arguments,  (as  from  myself,)  in  the  course  of  our  conversation,  but  to 
little  effect.  I  told  him  I  thought  it  was  but  respectful  to  see  you,  but  lie  did  not 
seem  very  desirous  of  that.  Upon  the  whole,  I  think  a  few  arguments  from  yourself 
will  make  every  thing  easy,  notwithstanding  his  seeming  resolution. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  all  respect,  your  humble  servant, 

J.  Aickin. 

I  was  quite  ashamed,  when  I  opened  Mrs.  Garrick's  [note,]  of  the  trouble  I  had 
put  her  to.  We  beg  her  acceptance  of  our  sincere  and  grateful  thanks. 


MR.  VERNON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  10tll>  l775- 

I  am  extremely  sorry  there  should  be  the  least  misunderstanding  between  us  at 
this  time,  but  upon  my  word,  I  depended  on  your  brother,  to  whom  I  spoke  in 
March.  The  alteration  I  expect  is  two  pounds  a  week  addition  to  my  salary,  and  my 
benefit  in  rank  of  salary :  these  I  thought  I  told  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  but  by  your  mes¬ 
sage  by  Mr.  Aickin,  1  find  I  did  not.  I  have  ever  testified  the  warmest  regard  and 
respect  for  Mr.  Garrick,  and  would  rather  be  with  you  at  that  salary  than  double  any 
where  else.  I  have  some  business  to  transact  which  takes  up  most  of  my  time, 
or  I  would  certainly  have  seen  you  at  Hampton.  \  our  answer  to  Mr.  Becket 
immediately  will  much  oblige,  Dear  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

J.  Vernon. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  VERNON. 

Hampton,  Sunday,  Sept.  11th,  1774. 

I  DID  not  expect  to  receive  such  a  message  and  letter  from  Mr.  Vernon,  and  a 
week  only  before  the  opening  of  the  house.  What  would  the  world  have  said  had 
we  discharged  Mr.  Vernon  at  this  time  without  any  other  notice  than  that  which  you 
have  o-iven  me  ?  Though  I  am  well  accustomed  to  strange  things  in  a  theatre,  yet 
I  must  own  that  your  behaviour  in  particular  has  surprised  me  ;  it  is  as  ungenteel  as 
it  is  unjustifiable.  1  have  been  all  the  summer  (three  weeks  excepted)  between 
Hampton  and  London, — nay,  I  met  you  at  Lord  Stanley’s  in  the  month  of  May,  and 
vou  never  gave  me  the  least  hint  of  your  intentions  till  jesterda^  .  Accoiding  to  the 
rule  and  custom  of  the  theatres,  you  should  have  given  me  notice  at  the  end  of  the 

b  2 


4 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


last  season  that  you  expected  an  increase  of  salary  for  the  next,  or  by  the  same  rule 
and  custom  I  had  a  right  to  expect  your  attendance  upon  the  same  terms.  Had  you 
demanded  double  your  salary  at  the  proper  time,  I  should  have  no  complaint ;  I  should 
only  not  have  agreed  to  your  proposal  and  we  had  parted  ;  but  to  have  no  letter  or 
message  from  you  till  yesterday ,  is  very  particular  indeed.  I  have  depended  upon 
you  for  the  next  season  ;  have  planned  my  business  accordingly ;  your  salary  shall  not 
be  diminished,  and  your  benefit  shall  come  in  course  and  at  a  very  good  time. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 
Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  Answer  to  Vernon’s  letter  of  the  10th  of 
September  1774,  answered  the  11th.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[When  I  read  these  letters  upon  dramatic  subjects,  written  by  a  great  lawyer  to  the  greatest  of  actors, 
and  dated  from  Camden-place,  Chislehurst,  a  crowd  of  recollections  press  for  communication  to  the  general 
reader.  Camden-place  was  the  seat  in  former  times  of  the  learned  antiquary  of  his  country,  the  venerable 
author  of  the  Britannia  ;  the  biographer  of  the  Great  Queen  ;  and  the  classical  tutor  at  Westminster  of 
Ben  Jonson.  To  him  that  excellent  comic  writer  dedicated  his  “  Every  Man  in  bis  Humour,”  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  manly  language : — “  Now  I  pray  you  to  accept  this ;  such,  wherein  neither  the  confession  of  my 
manners  shall  make  you  blush  ;  nor  of  my  studies  repent  you  to  have  been  the  instructor  :  and  for  the  pro¬ 
fession  of  my  thankfulness,  I  am  sure  it  will  with  good  men  find  either  praise  or  excuse.”  Nor  is  this 
all;  for  at  Chislehurst  the  Lord  Keeper,  father  of  the  great  Francis  Bacon,  Viscount  Saint  Alban’s, 
was  born,  and  also  that  consummate  statesman,  Sir  Francis  Walsingham.  It  is  the  perfection  of  good  taste 
to  choose  such  a  residence ;  and  the  highest  happiness  for  the  fortunate  possessor  of  it,  to  feel  from  the 
still  voice  within,  and  the  consenting  chorus  without,  that  he  is  worthy  to  reflect  or  repose  among  its  sacred 
shades. — Ed.] 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  Sept.  17th,  17 73. 

Mrs.  Descombes  came  here  last  night,  and  is  obliged  to  go  to  London  to-mor¬ 
row,  where  she  will  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  either  Thursday 
or  Friday.  Thus  you  see  the  plan  I  had  laid  for  tempting  you  once  more  to  Cam¬ 
den-place  is  overthrown,  and  I  shall  go  to  Bath  without  that  satisfaction.  You  will 
be  pleased,  however,  to  be  informed  that  I  am  stronger  and  better  every  day,  and 
believe,  if  I  durst  run  the  hazard,  I  could  get  well  here  ;  but  in  this,  like  a  true  stoic, 
I  compel  inclination  to  submit  to  prudence,  though  I  suspect  that  fear  rather  than 
virtue  is  the  real  motive  to  my  wisdom.  I  agree  with  you  in  a  great  measure,  though 
not  altogether,  in  your  judgment  upon  Jonson.  He  thought  admirably,  but  was  no 
master  of  expression  when  he  attempted  a  higher  diction  than  mere  prose,  for  that  is 
good ;  whereas  his  verse  is  not  so  obscure  as  it  is  laboured,  and  he  is  hardly  ever 
happy  in  his  words  and  sentences,  though  sometimes  strong.  Therefore  he  is  verbose 
and  coarse ;  always  attempting  to  imitate  Juvenal  without  success ;  for  though  he 
had  language  enough,  he  did  not  know  how  to  choose  it.  Ben  was  a  great  dramatic 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


5 


genius,  but  no  poet.  Shakspeare  was  divine  in  both,  though,  in  my  opinion,  his 
poetic  faculties,  as  1  have  more  than  once  ventured  to  assert  to  you,  are  the  most 
astonishing.  But  what  am  I  about  ?  Venting  my  own  idle  criticism  to  the  greatest 
judge  as  well  as  actor  of  these  compositions  !  A  common  lawyer  at  my  years  to  be 
dabbling  in  plays  and  poetry  !  Burn  my  letter,*  and  conclude  it  to  be  the  delirium 
of  the  jaundice.  Adieu  till  we  meet  between  the  two  houses ;  present  our  best 
respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe  me, 

Yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 


MR.  S.  FOOTE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  15th,  1774. 

I  am  sorry  I  could  not  see  you  before  my  quitting  this  country,  and  am  more 
concerned  at  the  cause ;  but  as  I  find  your  gouty  fit  was  in  form,  I  flatter  myself 
there  will  be  a  long  parenthesis  betwixt  this  and  the  next :  consider — 

“  You  have  no  leisure  to  be  sick 
In  such  a  justling  time.” 

Your  opponents  are  numerous,  and  Solomon  says,  in  “  a  multitude  of  counsellors  there 
is  safety;”  but  I  should  suppose  his  counsellors  are  of  a  different  stamp  from  the  con¬ 
gregation  at  Covent-Garden. 

There  is  more  of  prudence  than  pleasure  in  my  trip  to  the  Continent  :  to  tell  you 
the  truth  I  am  tired  with  racking  my  brain,  toiling  like  a  horse,  and  crossing  seas  and 
mountains  in  the  most  dreary  seasons,  merely  to  pay  servants’  wages  and  tradesmen’s 
bills.  I  have  therefore  directed  my  friend  Jewel  to  discharge  the  lazy  vermin  of  my 
Hall,  and  let  my  Hall  too,  if  he  can  meet  with  a  proper  tenant  :f  help  me  to  one  if 
you  can. 

*  Happily  Mr.  Garrick  knew  when  to  disobey  an  injunction,  and  thus  has  preserved  some  true  critical  feel¬ 
ing  from  oblivion  ;  not  “  the  repeated  air”  of  common-place  judgment,  often  nothing  more  than  ambitious 
sentences,  which  show  the  vanity  of  the  writer,  rather  than  his  knowledge  of  the  subject ;  such  characters  as 
have  been  sometimes  given  in  verse,  by  modern  poets,  of  their  ancient  predecessors,  of  whose  works  they  sub¬ 
sequently  acknowledged  themselves  to  have  been  completely  ignorant. — Ed. 

f  This  happy  determination  of  Foote  to  let  his  theatre  in  the  Haymarket,  produced  an  event  which  every 
lover  of  the  stage  must  be  happy  to  commemorate — I  mean  the  accession  of  Mr.  Colman  to  a  situation  for 
which  he  was  exactly  calculated.  The  divisum  imperium  of  Covent-Garden  was  not  at  all  to  his  taste  ;  but 
in  the  Haymarket  he  luxuriated  ;  and  produced  a  series  of  pieces,  that  must  live  while  we  deserve  to  be  en¬ 
tertained,  and  a  succession  of  performers  distinguished  for  genius  and  devoted  to  their  accomplished  leader. 
His  son  succeeded,  with  a  different,  and  I  think  a  more  powerful  genius,  and  the  theatre  flourished  in  spite 
of  the  ruinous  avarice  of  the  winter  patentees.  But  the  plan  of  the  theatre  had  been  well  conceived  ;  and 
when  the  present  spirited  proprietor  Mr.  Morris,  his  brother-in-law,  rebuilt  the  house,  he  did  not  very 
much  enlarge  its  bounds,  though  he  increased  its  comforts,  and  allowed  some  latitude  to  the  skill  of  the 
architect. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(; 


You  need  not  doubt  but  I  shall  be  happy  to  hear  from  you :  my  epistolary 
debts  it  will  be  always  in  my  power  to  pay  ;  the  others  1  pay  when  I  can  :  is  it 
in  man  to  do  more?  With  any  thing  that  France  produces  1  shall  be  proud  to 
supply  you.  Your  commands  will  reach  me  by  being  directed  to  Panchaud. 

I  kiss  Mrs.  Garrick’s  hands. 

And  am,  most  truly  and  sincerely  yours, 

Samuel  Foote. 


REV.  W.  HAWKINS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Whitchurch,  Dear  Bridport,  Doiiet,  Sept.14,  1774. 

I  cannot  help  considering  your  very  laconic  note  as,  in  effect,  a  rejection  of 
“  Alfred.”  However,  as  matters  are  brought  to  this  crisis,  1  think  myself  bound  in 
delicacy  to  tender  the  performance  once  more  to  your  acceptance  ;  and  before  you 
decline  this  final  tender  could  wish  you,  for  your  own  sake,  to  consider,  whether  you 
have  not  at  different  times  furnished  me  with  circumstances,  which,  if  fairly  laid  be¬ 
fore  the  public,  would  do  little  credit  either  to  your  candour  or  your  judgment.  I 
think  I  can  put  your  refusal  of  more  pieces  of  mine  than  one  to  the  account  of  a  prin¬ 
ciple  which  you  would  willingly  disavow.  At  first  sight,  probably,  you  will  treat 
this  insinuation  with  contempt ;  but  be  pleased  to  hear  what  I  have  to  support  it 
with.  Remember,  I  formerly  gave  you  offence  in  the  business  of  “  Henry  and 
Rosamond and  of  all  animals,  I  believe,  a  manager  is  allowed  to  be  the  sorest. 
Some  years  after  that  affair,  you  rejected  my  “  Siege  of  Aleppo,”  because  it  was 
“  wrong  in  the  first  concoction,”  as  you  said,  or  on  some  such  general  consideration. 
Xoav,  Sir,  this  performance  Avas  honoured  with  the  intire  approbation  of  the  following 
personages,  confessedly  eminent  in  the  republic  of  polite  literature — the  present 
.Judge  Blackstone,  Mr.  Smart  of  Cambridge,  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson,  and  to  name  no 
others,  our  common  friend  Mr.  T.  Warton,  aaJio  “  A\Tithout  flattery”  (those  Avere  his 
AA'ords)  “pronounced  the  performance  admirable,”  kc. ;  and  Avas  so  far  from  conceiving 
that  it  Avould  be  ultimately  rejected  that  he  desired  to  Avrite  the  prologue.  I  must 
add  too  that  Mr.  Quin  expressed  much  satisfaction  at  the  reading  of  this  play,  and 
declared  to  my  late  Right  Honourable  friend  Sir  T.  Philipps,  that,  had  he  not  quit¬ 
ted  the  stage,  it  would  have  been  a  pleasure  to  him  to  haA'e  performed  the  part  of 
Theodore.  On  the  strength  of  these  facts,  let  me  ask  you,  Sir,  whether  in  common 
justice  I  might  not  call  upon  you  to  bring  this  tragedy  upon  the  stage  even  now  ? 
Some  feAV  years  after  this  you  declined  accepting  the  play  of  “  Troilus  and  Cressida” 
from  the  hands  of  my  just  mentioned  friend,  although  in  terms  that  did  honour  to  it 
at  the  same  time ;  his  report  to  me  being  that  you  had  not  performers  enough  to  do 
justice  to  so  many  capital  parts,  but  that  the  play  itself  Avas  highly  approved,  kc.  or 
to  that  effect.  You  may  recollect,  Sir,  I  reminded  you  of  all  this  in  my  letter  some 
time  since  from  Wells.  This  indeed  Avas  rather  a  genteel  evasion  than  a  refusal ;  but 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


7 


how  will  you  reconcile  it  with  your  late  criticism  on  the  performance,  in  the  only  letter 
I  ever  received  from  you  on  that  subject?  The  merit  of  that  criticism,  considered 
apart,  I  have  not  room  to  examine  here  ;  but  will  be  bold  to  say,  and  would  undertake 
to  prove,  that  the  best  play  that  could  be  written  would  never  maintain  its  ground 
against  such  objections.  And  now,  Sir,  for  the  tragedy  of  “  Alfred  which,  I  frankly 
confess,  I  put  into  your  hands  with  a  design  to  sound  your  present  disposition  towards 
me.  The  original  plan  of  this  piece  I  acknowledge  to  have  been  in  many  respects 
improperly  digested;  and  accordingly  I  readily  admitted  the  justness  of  your  first 
exceptions.  But,  Sir,  can  you  lay  your  hand  upon  your  heart  and  say,  that  your  late 
cavalier  note  is  a  satisfactory  answer  to  my  last  letter  to  you  on  this  subject  ?  In  one 
of  your  former  letters  to  me  you  say,  “  it  is  very  improbable,  and  consequently  unna¬ 
tural,  that  Alfred  and  his  friend  should  go  to  tell  fortunes  in  the  Danish  camp,  when 
they  must  know  that  many  there,  and  particularly  Hubba,  to  whom  they  first  address 
themselves,  knew  them.”  Are  appearances  in  disguise,  then,  things  so  new  upon  the 
stage  ?  But  even  allowing  this  objection  to  have  some  weight ;  let  us  hear  what 
you  have  to  say  in  a  subsequent  letter.  Your  language  here  is,  that  “  it  was  not  any 
part  of  the  performance  in  particular  that  you  objected  to,  but  to  the  very  foundation 
of  the  fable  in  all  its  branches.”  Now,  Sir,  Alfred’s  going  into  the  Danish  camp  in 
the  character  not  of  a  fortune-teller,  but  harper  or  minstrel,  is,  as  you  well  know,  the 
foundation  of  the  fable  in  its  present  state ;  and  it  will  be  very  hard,  methinks,  if 
that  should  not  be  a  proper  foundation  of  a  fable,  which  happens  to  be  matter  of  fact. 
You  tell  me  farther,  in  another  part  of  this  letter,  that  “  you  very  much  doubt  whe¬ 
ther  any  of  the  proposed  changes  will  make  4  Alfred’  fit  for  the  stage and  in 
another  you  “  wish  me  to  advise  with  my  friends  of  knowledge  in  these  matters,”  &c. 
You  find  I  have  so  done.  Sir,  and  yet  you  seem  to  be  as  much  disposed  to  differ  from 
them  as  with  me.  The  words  of  your  note  are,  that  you  “  are  very  sorry  to  differ  in 
opinion  with  such  great  men”  as  I  had  mentioned  to  you ;  but  that  I  must  forgive 
you  if  you  speak  your  mind,  and  freely,  upon  every  thing  that  concerns  you  and 
your  theatre.  But  pray,  Sir,  is  not  this  referring,  tacitly  at  least,  to  a  third  judg¬ 
ment,  and  yet  rejecting  it?  Is  it  not  to  say,  in  effect,  that,  as  a  manager,  you  will 
not  submit  your  judgment  to  that  of  the  wisest  mortal  upon  earth?  Let  me  now 
again  intreat  you  seriously  to  consider  whether  I  have  not  very  good  grounds,  from 
the  whole  course  of  your  proceeding,  for  the  afore-mentioned  insinuation.  It  will 
be  impossible  for  you  to  elude  the  substance  of  what  I  have  been  alleging  so 
much  to  your  disadvantage.  You  say,  I  must  forgive  you  if  you  speak  freely  upon 
every  thing  which  concerns  you  and  your  theatre;  and,  Sir,  you  must  forgive  me  if 
I  speak  as  freely  upon  every  thing  which  concerns  me  and  my  reputation  as  an  au¬ 
thor.  You  cannot  wonder  if  the  public  character  1  once  had  the  honour  of  sustain¬ 
ing  (and  I  hope  with  some  credit  too)  renders  me  somewhat  jealous  in  this  respect : 
especially  as  under  that  character  dramatic  poetry  was  the  subject  of  my  lectures.* 
In  short.  Sir,  the  world  will  be  a  proper  judge  whether,  on  the  whole,  I  have  been 
*  Hawkins  had  the  honour  of  succeeding  Lowth  in  the  Poetry  Professor’s  chair. — Ed. 


8 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


candidly  treated  by  you  ;  whether  (to  repeat  some  of  my  own  late  words)  you  have 
not  thrown  cold  water  most  profusely  upon  me  and  my  performance ;  and  whether, 
under  a  few  plausible  expressions  and  affected  declarations  of  regard,  &c.  at  the  close 
of  a  letter,  &c.  it  has  not  been  your  artful  aim  to  give  me  many  sensible  mortifica¬ 
tions.  After  all.  Sir,  I  do  not  desire  to  come  to  an  open  rupture  with  you.  I  wish 
not  to  exasperate,  but  to  convince ;  and  I  tender  you  once  more  my  friendship  and 
my  play.  I  have,  however,  too  much  knowledge  of  human  nature  in  general, 
and  of  the  particular  pride  almost  peculiar  to  your  situation,  to  look  for  any  good 
effect  from  this  amicable  overture,  and  have  only  to  add  that  your  answer,  or  indeed 
your  silence,  will  determine  the  future  measures  of,  Sir, 

Your  much  dissatisfied  humble  servant, 

W.  Hawkins. 

P.  S.  You  would  have  heard  from  me  before,  had  I  been  at  home  when  the 
packet  arrived.  Excuse  haste,  &c. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  HAWKINS. 

SIR,  Sept.  20,  1774. 

Though  your  threatening  letter  found  me  in  a  fit  of  the  gout,  which  is  a  very 
peevish  disorder,  yet  I  assure  you  it  added  nothing  to  my  ill-humour,  nay  I  could  have 
laughed,  though  in  pain,  had  not  the  more  humane  sensation  of  pity  prevented  it. 

Notwithstanding  your  former  flattering  letters  to  me,  which  I  have  luckily  pre¬ 
served,  you  now  accuse  me  of  pride,  rancour,  evil  designs,  and  the  Lord  knows  what, 
because  I  have  refused  your  plays,  which  I  most  sincerely  think  unfit  for  representa¬ 
tion,  and  which  (some  of  them,  if  not  all)  have  had  the  same  fortune  with  other  ma¬ 
nagers.  You  are  pleased  to  say  that  “  of  all  animals  a  manager  is  the  sorest.”  Pray, 
Mr.  Hawkins,  had  you  no  feelings  at  the  time  you  wrote  this  which  contradicted  the 
assertion  ?  Can  you  really  believe  that  this  unprovoked,  intemperate  behaviour  can 
make  me  submit  to  your  inquisitorial  menaces?  “  Perform  my  plays  or  I’ll  appeal 
to  the  public  !”  If  you  will  publish  your  plays  with  your  appeal,  I  will  forgive  you 
the  rest. 

Your  insinuation  that  I  formerly  mortified  you  because  you  “once  offended  me 
in  the  business  of  ‘  Henry  and  Rosamond,’”  is  unworthy  of  an  answer.  It  is  very 
■well  known  that  I  bear  no  malice  ;  and  the  offence  which  you  so  well  remember  is  as 
much  forgotten  by  me  as  “  Henry  and  Rosamond,”  the  cause  of  it. 

You  value  yourself  much  upon  “laying  a  design  to  sound  me,”  that  is,  to  catch 
me  tripping  in  order  to  expose  me  :  a  very  liberal  design  truly  for  a  scholar  and  a 
divine,  and  I  wish  you  joy  of  your  success  ;  but  to  convince  you,  if  possible,  how 
much  your  intemperate  zeal  contradicts  itself,  you  confess  that  “  Alfred,”  your  tra¬ 
gedy-trap,  was  not  well  prepared  ;  that  the  play  was  (as  you  are  pleased  to  express  it) 
“improperly  digested,  and  you  readily  admit  the  justness  of  my  exceptions:”  nay 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


9 


you  go  farther  and  say  “  you  give  up  ‘  Alfred,”  and  acquiesce  in  my  judgment.”  Can 
any  thing  I  write  vindicate  my  conduct  more  than  your  own  ivords  ?  Have  I 
seen  “  Alfred”  since  your  above  confession  ;  have  I  refused  to  see  it  ?  I  know  my 
duty  too  well — I  am  obliged  by  my  situation  to  read  all  you  are  pleased  to  send  me ; 
but  I  have  the  same  right  to  reject  a  play,  which  I  think  a  bad  one,  as  you  have  to 
compose  it. 

May  I,  without  offence,  differ  in  opinion  with  a  gentleman  who  once  was  a 
credit  to  the  Professorship  of  Poetry  in  Oxford  ?  “  It  will  be  very  hard,  methinks, 

(these  are  your  own  words)  “  if  that  should  not  be  a  proper  foundation  of  a  fable 
which  happens  to  be  matter  of  fact :”  indeed,  Sir,  the  best  dramatic  critics  I  have 
read  tell  me  that  matters  of  fact  are  not  always  proper  foundations  for  dramatic 
fables. 

You  say  I  wrote  a  cavalier  note:  if  it  were  so,  your  very  cavalier  letter  pro¬ 
duced  it — I  never  begin  first.  Your  last  letter  begot  this,  but  I  hope  it  is  very 
unlike  its  father. 

You  conclude  with  saying  “you  do  not  desire  to  come  to  an  open  rupture  wdth 
me,  and  that  you  wish  not  to  exasperate,  but  to  convince ;  and  you  again  tender  me 
your  friendship  and  your  play.”  So  far  you  seem  to  be  returning  to  temper  and 
reason  ; — but  how  was  I  deceived  ! — for  in  order  to  promote  the  good  work  and  bring 
about  a  reconciliation,  you  add,  that  “  you  have  too  much  knowledge  of  human  na¬ 
ture  in  general,  and  the  particular  pride  of  my  situation,  to  look  for  any  good  from 
this  amicable  overture.”  Ought  you  not  as  a  gentleman  and  a  clergyman,  and  in  jus¬ 
tice,  reason,  and  good  manners,  to  have  waited  for  my  answer,  before  you  had  been 
guilty  of  such  outrageous  behaviour? — or  is  it  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hawkins’s  method  of 
convincing  and  not  exasperating ,  to  call  names,  while  he  is  making  a  tender  of  his 
friendship  ?  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Give  me  leave  to  make  another  observation  upon  your  peculiar  behaviour  to  me 
and  to  your  friends.  Though  you  seem  to  think  me  inexcusable  for  daring  to  differ 
•with  them,  yet  -when  they  do  not  agree  with  you  it  is  to  stand  for  nothing.  For 

example _ Mr,  Warton  tells  you  that  your  present  “  Alfred”  “is  deficient  in  point  of 

bustle  according  to  the  turn  and  taste  of  the  times ;”  and  you  tell  me  “  so  far  as  the 

objection  goes,”  Mr.  AY - “  seems  to  think  the  success  of  representation  may  be 

affected — but  this  opinion  (supposing  it  to  have  ground)  cannot,  you  presume,  affect 
a  right  of  representation.”  Indeed! — I  do  not  know  which  most  to  admire,  your 
logic,  or  politeness  to  your  friend.* 

*  This  is  one  of  Garrick’s  neatest  replies.  Hawkins’s  rejoinder  does  not  turn  a  single  point  in  it — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


C 


10 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


FROM  LIEUTENANT-GENERAL  BURGOYNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

[With  the  “  Maid  of  the  Oaks  ;  or,  a  Fete  Champfctre.”] 

October  3rd,  1774. 

The  author  of  the  little  piece  sent  with  this  letter  begs  Mr.  Garrick  would  take 
the  trouble  of  looking  over  it,  and  if  he  finds  it  worth  representing,  makes  no  doubt 
lie  will  give  it  the  first  vacant  opportunity  this  season  to  the  public.  He  will  see 
that  it  is  taken  in  some  degree  from  the  French.  Mr.  Garrick’s  determination  will 
be  sent  for  to  his  house  the  latter  end  of  the  week. 

IRISH  SONG  FOR  MOODY. 

Ye  brave  jolly  blades  of  the  brush,  line,  and  rule, 

Who  owe  all  to  ganus,  and  nothing  to  school, 

Come,  join  in  full  chorus,  rejoice  and  be  glad, 

For  while  you  are  merry,  you’ll  never  be  sad. 

Then  away  to  Shampater,  Shampater,  away  ! 

To  work  at  Shampater  is  nothing  but  play  ; 

As  I  know  nothing  of  it,  no  more  will  I  say, 

But  Shampater  for  ever,  for  ever  and  aye! 

You  may  guess  what  a  sight,  for  it  ne’er  was  yet  seen  ; 

Heaven  bless  her  sweet  face,  ’tis  a  sight  for  a  queen, 

For  lords,  and  for  earls,  and  for  gentlefolks  too, 

All  the  busy  beau-monde  who  have  nothing  to  do. 

Then  away  to  Shampater,  &c. 

While  light  you  ’ll  see  nothing,  but  when  dark  you  shall  see 
That  the  darker  it  is  the  more  light  there  will  be  ; 

The  moon  and  the  stars  they  may  all  go  to  bed — 

We  can  make  better  sunshine  than  ever  they  made. 

Then  away  to  Shampater,  &c. 

Such  crowds  and  confusion,  such  uproar,  delight, 

With  lamps  hung  by  thousands  to  make  day  of  night : 

There’ll  be  Russians,  Turks,  Prussians,  and  Dutchmen  so  gay, 

And  they  ’ll  all  be  so  fine,  they  ’ll  have  nothing  to  say. 

Then  away  to  Shampater,  &c. 

Then  let ’s  take  a  drink  to  the  Squire  of  the  Oaks  : 

May  no  crabbed  critics  come  here  with  their  jokes  ; 

If  they  did,  I  could  make  the  dear  souls  change  their  notes, 

Might  but  Paddy’s  best  brush  sweep  clean  their  foul  throats. 

Then  away  to  Shampater,  my  boys,  come  away, 

To  work  at  Shampater  is  better  than  play  ; 

As  I  know  nothing  of  it,  no  more  will  I  say, 

But  away  to  Shampater,  my  boys,  come  away! 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


1] 


REV.  W.  HAWKINS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Whitchurch,  Oct.  7th,  1774. 

\  our  favour  of  Sept.  22nd  being  directed  to  me  in  Devon  instead  of  Dorset, 
came  not  to  hand  but  a  post  or  two  ago.  I  should  not  think  of  continuing  our 
correspondence,  did  not  you  seem  to  me  to  misunderstand  or  to  misrepresent  some 
passages  in  my  last  letter,  and  in  your  answer  to  offer  something  which  you  would 
have  me  take  for  argument.  You  say  “  I  accuse  you  of  pride,  rancour,  evil  designs, 
and  the  Lord  knows  what.”  Sir,  I  did,  and  do  still  accuse  you  of  pride ;  but  when 
or  where  did  I  ever  bring  so  odious  a  charge  against  you  as  the  other  words  import  ? 
I  put  your  “  refusal  of  more  plays  of  mine  than  one  to  the  account  of  a  principle  you 
would  willingly  disavow.”  But  I  do  not,  as  I  take  it,  thereby  intimate  you  had  ever 
a  design  to  knock  my  brains  out.  Is  there  no  such  thing  as  a  negative  kind  of  ill- 
will,  which  only  means  to  do  a  man  harm  by  doing  him  no  good  ?  I  impute  what 
I  cannot  help  considering  as  a  final  rejection  of  “Alfred,”  from  the  terms  of  your 
note,  as  I  told  you  before,  to  a  certain  degree  of  resentment  of  old  provocations.  I 
told  you  why,  too,  in  my  last.  Have  you  cleared  yourself  of  this  sort  of  charge  by  a 
general  disavowal  of  malice  prepense,  or  by  an  affected  forgetfulness  of  such  provoca¬ 
tions,  and  the  cause  of  them  ?  Have  you  said  one  syllable,  Sir,  in  answer  to  those 
passages  in  my  letter,  by  which  such  charge  is  so  very  much  supported  : — those,  I 
mean,  relating  to  the  “  Siege  of  Aleppo,”  and  “  Troilus  and  Cressida  ?”  Yet  you  ask 
me  (with  what  propriety  judge  yourself,  when  you  are  in  temper,)  whether  you  have 
seen  “  Alfred”  since  my  acknowledgment  of  your  first  just  exceptions;  or  whether 
you  have  refused  to  see  it  f  Absolutely,  I  grant  you  have  not ;  but  have  you  not  in 
effect  ?  I  made  a  tender  of  this  performance  to  you  in  my  last.  Must  I  look  upon 
the  letter  before  me  as  an  acceptance  of  that  tender?  If  so,  you  are  very  unhappy 
in  your  expressions,  or  I  in  my  apprehension.  To  prevent  farther  mistakes,  I  hereby 
tender  it  to  you  again  ;  but  I  beg  the  favour  of  a  direct  and  positive  reply.  It  seems, 
however,  that  cavalier  note  of  yours,  (which  1  did,  and  still  do,  look  on  as  a  tacit  re¬ 
jection,)  was  produced  by  my  more  cavalier  letter.  Let  that  letter  speak  for  itself.  It 
was  written  under  an  animating  sense  of  the  approbation  of  persons,  whom  you  your¬ 
self  justly  call  great  men,  and  to  whose  judgment  you  had  in  effect  referred  me ;  and 
I  must  add,  it  was  dictated  by  feelings  of  that  cold  water ,  (to  use  again  my  former 
expression,)  that  slight  and  discouragement  with  which  the  preceding  letter  of  yours 
abounds.  In  that  letter,  you  tell  me,  “  it  was  not  any  part  of  the  performance  in 
particular  that  you  had  objected  to,  but  to  the  very  foundation  of  the  fable  in  all  its 
branches;”  that  “you  despair  of  seeing  an  interesting,  pathetic  drama  made  from  the 
play,”  &c. ;  that  “  there  was  nothing  but  some  part  of  the  writing  that  you  thought 
dramatic,”  &c.  Now,  Sir,  who  began  frst?  After  the  receipt  of  this,  methinks  it 
was  high  time  to  have  done  with  flattery,  and  to  come  to  plain-dealing.  \\  ere  I  dis¬ 
posed  to  return  your  wit,  I  should  tell  you  there  is  no  occasion  for  a  trap  when  you 

c  2 


12 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


have  caught  the  - .  But  as  I  stand  upbraided  with  illiberal  conduct  under  this 

article  of  flattery,  and  with  having  acted  inconsistently  with  the  character  of  a  scholar 
or  a  divine,  I  am  called  upon  to  say  a  word  in  my  own  justification,  which  is  briefly 
this — that,  circumstanced  as  I  was,  I  am  not  conscious  of  having  deservedly  incurred 
such  a  censure  by  the  artifice  used  in  my  application  to  you  ;  but  that,  if  I  shall 
be  thought  so  to  have  done  by  impartial  judges,  i.  e.  the  sensible  and  candid  part  of 
the  world,  I  shall  readily  take  shame  to  myself,  and  ask  your  pardon  ;  it  being 
a  maxim  with  me  that,  next  to  the  merit  of  acting  right,  is  that  of  acknowledging 
our  having  acted  wrong.  And  give  me  leave  to  recommend  this  maxim  to  your 
serious  and  unbiassed  attention.  But  it  seems,  “  the  best  dramatic  critics  you  have 
read  tell  you,  that  matters  of  fact  are  not  always  proper  foundations  for  dramatic 
fable.”  I  do  not  believe,  Sir,  any  critic,  good  or  bad,  ever  pronounced  them  so  to  be, 
from  the  days  of  Thesjris.  However,  I  apprehend  the  question  to  be,  whether  such 
a  matter  of  fact  as  that  of  so  great  a  man  as  Alfred  going  into  the  Danish  camp  in 
disguise,  &c.  be  not  a  proper  foundation  of  fable  ?  You  tell  me,  “  you  know  your 
duty — you  are  obliged  by  your  situation  to  read  all  I  am  pleased  to  send  you  ;  but 
that  you  have  the  same  right  to  reject  a  play  which  you  think  a  bad  one,  as  I  have  to 
compose  it.”  True,  Mr.  Garrick,  if  I  acknowledge  it  to  be  a  bad  one  ;  or  if  the 
competent  judges  I  consult  are  of  that  opinion.  But  must  any  play  be  thought  a 
bad  one,  merely  because  you  arbitrarily  pronounce  it  so  ?  or,  for  crude  and  indigested 
reasons,  call  it  so  ?  If  this  be  the  case,  you  will  probably  injure  more  authors  by  the 
exertion  of  your  privilege  than  you  will  oblige  by  the  discharge  of  your  duty.  Let 
anv  indifferent  person  determine  what  is  like  to  become  of  the  play ,  if  the  writer  has 
unluckily  offended  you !  With  respect  to  other  managers  (whose  usage,  if  ill,  will  be 
no  cloke  for  yours,)  I  have  only  room  to  say,  that  I  have  heretofore  had  reason  to  be¬ 
lieve  them  to  have  acted  under  the  pitiful  direction,  and  contemptible  influence,  of 
party-prejudice.  Our  difference  I  consider,  at  least,  as  much  more  personal.  After 
all,  Sir,  why  so  disgusted  by  menaces  you  so  utterly  despise  and  defy  ?  You  say,  “  if 
I  will  publish  my  plays  with  the  appeal,  you  will  forgive  me  all  the  rest.”  The  tables 
are  turned,  then,  and  you  are  become  the  party  aggrieved  at  last !  This  is  pleasant 
enough,  though,  indeed,  nothing  uncommon.  But,  Sir,  if  you  can  honestly  look  upon 
yourself  in  this  light,  how  comes  it  that  under  all  the  airs  of  your  epistle,  as 
well  witty  as  triumphant,  I  can  plainly  discover  at  the  bottom  so  much  spleen,  petu¬ 
lance,  and  vexation  f  In  the  same  recriminating  vein,  too,  you  ask  “  whether  I  had 
no  feelings  at  the  time  I  wrote  ?”  &c.  Upon  honour,  no,  Sir ;  I  would  have  Mr.  G. 
know  that  I  am  hurt  by  nothing  but  self-reproach.  Neither,  Sir,  can  I  revoke 
my  last  offensive  paragraph.  It  is  strange  you  should  be  angry  with  me  for  proving 
a  true  prophet.  It  was  then  my  wish, 'and  it  is  still,  not  to  exasperate,  but  to  convince ; 
but  at  the  same  time,  in  justice  to  myself,  I  cannot  avoid  resolving  the  impediments 
to  such  conviction  into  their  true  grounds,  viz.  the  pride  of  managers,  who  are  not 
used  to  be  talked  to  in  this  strain.  I  repeat  it  again,  I  wish  to  be  upon  good  terms 
with  you,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  passed ;  but  does  Mr.  G.  mention  the  word 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


13 


logic,  and  yet  not  know  that  wish  is  one  thing  and  expectation  another  ?  Upon 
the  most  dispassionate  retrospect,  I  see  nothing  to  retract  either  as  a  gentleman  or  a 
clergyman,  either  in  point  of  justice  or  good  manners ,  upon  this  occasion.  I  have  not 
room  to  take  notice  at  large  of  the  passage  in  yours  relating  to  Mr.  W.’s  opinion.  I 
have  only  to  say,  in  general,  and  do  still  say,  that  a  small  circumstance  concerning  the 
success  of  representation  will  not,  i.  e.  ought  not  to  affect  a  right  of  representation. 
And  I  have  no  doubt  but  our  friend  will  say  the  same.  However,  the  objection 
was  not  yours,  and  I  do  not  see  how  you  can  fairly  avail  yourself  of  it.  Upon  the 
whole,  Sir,  let  me  recommend  it  to  you  for  your  own  sake,  coolly  and  deliberately  to 
reconsider  this  matter  ;  and  I  am  confident  you  will  find  it  impossible  (as  I  said  be¬ 
fore)  to  elude  the  substance  of  what  I  have  alleged  to  your  disadvantage.  I  am 
sorry  to  be  under  a  necessity  of  subscribing  myself  once  more, 

Sir,  your  dissatisfied  humble  servant, 

W.  Hawkins. 

P.  S. — An  Anecdote  ! — While  the  “  Siege  of  Aleppo”  was  under  consideration, 
and  it  was  not  a  clear  point  who  was  the  author,  a  respectable  friend  of  yours  told  a 
most  worthy  friend  of  mine,  that  if  that  play  was  my  production  you  would  not  act  it, 
or  to  that  effect.  This  he  must  have  had  from  yourself ;  and  though  neither  of  the 
gentlemen  (as  being  uninterested  in  the  affair)  may  recollect  this,/  will  make  affidavit 
of  it  at  any  time. 

N.  B.  Not  a  word  of  this  affair  has  yet  transpired  from  me.  I  speak  of  our  dif¬ 
ference  in  general. 


*  *  *  *  *  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Oct.  14th,  1774. 

As  I  understand  that  Shakspeare’s  elegant  and  pleasing  comedy  of  “  As  \ou 
Like  It,’’  is  shortly  to  be  played  again  at  your  theatre  (where  in  general  every  thing 
is  conducted  most  excellently)  I  cannot  help  submitting  to  your  acknowledged  taste 
and  judgment,  the  opinion  of  several  ingenious  gentlemen  upon  your  representation 
of  it,  which  in  one  scene  appears  to  them  to  be  faulty.  It  is  the  first  scene  of  the 
second  act,  in  “  The  Forest  of  Arden.”  The  conversation  lies  between  the  banished 
Duke,  Lord  Amiens,  and  some  other  Lords  :  upon  the  former’s  proposing  to  go  and 
kill  venison,  and  descanting  at  the  same  time  upon  the  cruelty  of  so  doing,  one  of 
the  Lords  immediately  introduces  us  to  the  character  of  the  melancholy  Jacques  in 
a  most  lively  and  picturesque  description  of  the  spot,  where  the  Lord  Amiens  and 
himself  stole  behind  and  overheard  him  moralizing  alone.  In  your  representation, 
you  make  Jacques  utter  his  beautiful  reflections  himself  in  personal  conversation 
with  the  Duke.  To  the  gentlemen  as  above  mentioned  this  seems  fault \  :  the\ 
think  that  what  the  Lord  in  Shakspeare  so  beautifully  recites  of  Jacques,  is  entiieh 
matter  of  soliloquy  and  involuntary  ejaculation,  or  in  other  words,  thinking  aloud ; 


14 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  that  it  never  could  have  been  known  at  all  unless  he  had  been  overheard;  and  in 
short  they  esteem  the  alteration,  in  a  great  measure,  contrary  to  nature.  This,  Sir, 
is  a  matter  easily  rectified,  either  by  following  Shakspeare  closely,  or  if  that  brings 
more  Lords  upon  the  stage  than  are  necessary,  with  a  trifling  alteration,  the  Lord 
Amiens  might  recite  it.  If,  upon  mature  consideration,  you  see  this  matter  in  the 
light  aforesaid,  I  doubt  not  but  that  you  will  rectify  it.  At  all  events  I  must  entreat 
that  you  will  forgive  this  trouble,  from  one,  who  is  never  so  much  mortified  as  when 
unable  to  get  a  place  to  see  you  perform,  being,  beyond  all  expression,  an  admirer  of 
Shakspeare,  and  consequently  of  his  and  “  Great  Nature’s  Proxy.”* 


MR.  MALDON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Girdlers’  Hall,  Oct.  17th,  1774. 

I  did  myself  the  pleasure  on  Saturday  evening  last  of  attending  your  theatre ; 
where,  I  must  confess,  I  received  very  singular  satisfaction  in  the  performance  of 
Mrs.  Yates  and  Mr.  Smith  in  their  respective  characters  ;  but  I  am  under  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  acquainting  you  that  I  observed  one  speech  very  inconsistent  with  the  reli¬ 
gion  of  this  country,  and  which  I  think  well  deserves  the  appellation  of  prophane  ? 
Perhaps  you  may  not  have  taken  notice  of  it,  for  I  make  no  doubt,  if  you  had,  that 
you  would  have  expunged  it,  and  substituted  some  other  in  its  room.  The  speech  I 
refer  to  is  that  made  by  Orestes,  when  Pammenes  reproves  him  for  breaking  his  oath 
by  discovering  himself  to  Electra,  where  he  says, 

“  -  If  heaven  expects  obedience, 

It  should  give  us  laws  we  can  obey.”f 

Now,  Sir,  however  proper  this  may  sound  on  the  French  stage,  I  think  it  is  very 
much  the  reverse  on  the  English  one  to  initiate  bad  principles  into  the  minds  of  an 
audience.  Every  man  of  true  Protestant  principles  allows,  and  it  cannot  be  doubted, 
but  that  all  the  commandments  given  by  the  Supreme  Being  to  us  are  not  of  so  diffi¬ 
cult  a  nature  that  we  cannot  obey  them  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  of  so  simple  a 

*  The  absurdity  of  this  stage  alteration  is  and  always  was  apparent ;  but  a  nameless  lord  cannot  be 
theatrically  trusted  with  a  speech  of  such  moment  as  the  one  in  question.  Besides,  if  Jacques  were  to  be 
robbed  of  his  own  reflections,  assigned  to  him  by  managers,  the  character  would  be  too  unimportant  for  a 
great  performer’s  notice ;  and  thus  the  best  things  in  the  play  would  be  the  worst  spoken.  In  the  original 
play,  Jacques  is  a  humourist  rather  described  by  others,  than  self-exhibited.  We  are,  therefore,  to  put  the 
awkwardness  of  making  him  recite  his  own  feelings  and  reflections  on  a  distant  event,  with  a  wretched 
“  quoth  I”  to  introduce  them,  against  the  alternative  of  throwing  fine  matter  at  heads  too  thick  to  under¬ 
stand  it. — Ed. 

f  The  play  here  alluded  to  was  Dr.  Francklin’s  translation  of  “  Electra”  from  Voltaire.  The  reader  is 
therefore  to  pronounce  whether  a  Grecian  fable  is  to  be  fitted  up  with  “  true  Protestant  principles”  instead  of 
those  belonging  to  its  characters  ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  lay  the  judgment  of  Dr.  Francklin  at  the  feet  of  Mr. 
E.  Maldon  of  Girdlers’  Hall. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


15 


nature,  and  laid  down  to  us  in  such  plain  terms,  that  we  might  with  a  little  attention 
obey  them  with  the  greatest  facility  and  pleasure,  and  without  any  interruption  to 
our  worldly  concerns. 

In  my  opinion  it  shows  a  man  to  be  possessed  of  a  very  narrow  knowledge  of  the 
principles  of  religion  to  think  himself  a  better  judge  of  what  is  right  than  his  Creator; 
whom  in  this  case  he  calls  to  account,  as  if  he  was  the  judge  of  the  Almighty. 

Mr.  Pope  speaks  very  judiciously  on  this  subject  in  the  1st  book  of  his  “  Essay 
on  Man,”  where  he  says : — 

“  Go,  wiser  thou !  and  in  thy  scale  of  sense 
Weigh  thy  opinion  against  Providence; 

Call  imperfection  what  thou  fancy’st  such  ; 

Say,  here  he  gives  too  little,  there  too  much  ; 

Destroy  all  creatures  for  thy  sport  or  gust, 

Yet  cry,  if  man’s  unhappy,  God ’s  unjust ; 

If  man  alone  ingross  not  Heaven’s  high  care, 

Alone  made  perfect  here,  immortal  there : 

Snatch  from  his  hand  the  balance  and  the  rod, 

Re-judge  his  justice,  be  the  God  of  God." 

I  shall  now  conclude  by  requesting  you  to  substitute  some  other  speech  for 
Orestes  instead  of  that  I  mention,  and  not  permit  it  any  longer  to  be  repeated  on 
your  stage. 

An  answer  to  this  per  penny  post,  directed  as  under,  will  be  esteemed  a  particular 
favour  by,  Sir,  your  sincere  admirer, 

E.  Maldon. 


MR.  J.  HENDERSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Nov.  4th,  1774. 

I  return  you  my  thanks  for  the  letter  you  were  so  obliging  to  write  Mr.  Palmer 
concerning  me :  I  am  sure  you  intended  me  a  kindness  because  it  is  almost  impos¬ 
sible  to  disunite  the  most  amiable  temper  from  abilities  so  sublime,  and  under¬ 
standing  so  enlarged,  as  yours.  The  effect,  however,  was  different  from  what  your 
goodness  might  expect,  or  what  even  justice  might  hope.  Mr.  Palmer  was  pleased 
to  express  himself  in  very  angry  and  dissatisfied  terms,  that  I  should  have  com¬ 
plained  to  you  about  his  treatment  of  me ;  in  a  word,  he  came  to  a  downright  quarrel 
with  me.  I  answered  that  your  interposing  in  my  behalf  was  an  honour  you  had 
done  me  without  my  knowledge,  and  that  I  felt  it  more  particularly  on  that  account. 
I  added  that  I  had  merely  related  what  had  passed  between  himself  and  me — that 
you  told  me  I  played  too  much,  and  that  I  felt  myself  unequal  to  the  great  demands 
made  upon  me.  We  parted,  and  he  has  since  behaved  to  me  with  great  artificial 
politeness — they  still  keep,  however,  sending  me  parts,  as  before.  A  fortnight  ago 
I  played  Skyloclc ;  I  am  now  studying  Posthumus,  and  have  Lovemore  in  “  The 


16 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Way  to  Keep  Him,”  already  given  me.  The  first  week  I  came  here  this  season,  1 
played  successively  Macbeth,  Benedick,  Belville,  Bayes,  and  Don  John.  I  was  not 
informed  of  Macbeth  till  the  very  morning  I  was  to  play  it,  having  prepared  myself 
for  Ilamlet  according  to  the  advice  Mr.  Palmer  was  pleased  to  send  me  by  letter  a 
week  before  I  came  down. 

I  hope,  dear  Sir,  you  will  excuse  the  liberty  I  take  of  troubling  you  with  so 
much  of  myself.  I  had  in  some  measure  your  commands  for  doing  so,  since  you 
desired  me  to  let  you  know  how  I  went  on.  I  heard  with  great  joy  of  your  reco¬ 
very  from  the  gout,  and  of  your  being  well  enough  to  appear  on  the  stage  as  never 
man  appeared  before,  or  I  fear  will  ever  again.  I  am  ashamed  to  offer  my  feeble 
praises  after  the  great  and  noble  panegyrics  you  have  received  from  the  most  dis¬ 
cerning  and  enlightened  minds ;  I  will  therefore  silently  wonder  at  your  genius,  and 
subscribe  myself,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  Henderson. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Nov.  9,  1774. 

I  am  much  obliged  by  your  enquiries  after  my  health.  I  am  very  well,  and  am 
very  glad  to  hear  from  you,  though  it  seems  you  have  drawn  me  into  a  scrape,  and 
are  therefore  in  duty  bound  to  bring  me  safely  out  of  it.  Unless  my  memory  be 
treacherous  in  the  extreme,  and  my  pen  a  little  less  guarded  than  I  think  it  was,  I 
avoided  to  deliver  any  sentiment  whatever  concerning  my  brother  Swan’s  critical 
productions.  I  returned  them  to  you  with  only  thanks ;  and  that  favourable  opinion 
of  mine  which  he  mentions,  is  I  believe,  the  child  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  own  politeness. 
I  enquired  indeed,  if  Swan  designed  to  publish  ;  but  was  not  at  all  solicitous  about 
his  determination.  I  beg  leave  to  decline  all  selection  of  his  notes.  To  correct  mv 
own  is  load  enough  for  my  shoulders.  Far  be  it  from  me,  however,  to  speak  disrepu¬ 
tably  of  his  performance  ;  though  I  must  confess,  that  his  observations  in  general  are 
too  prolix  for  publication  at  the  bottom  of  any  page  of  whatever  size.  I  have  placed 
his  stage  directions  concerning  the  death  of  Desdemona  in  opposition  to  my  own ; 
and  have  added,  that  I  found  them  in  a  copy  of  the  play  belonging  to  a  veteran  of  the 
theatre ;  for  no  histrionic  name  but  yours  shall  ever  find  its  way  into  our  book,  as 
long  as  the  conduct  of  it  is  in  my  hands.  Swan  has  availed  himself  of  my  printed 
opinion  more  than  once,  without  acknowledgment ;  and  I  shall  probably  be  the 
richer  for  the  same  number  of  hints  as  silently  received  from  him,  though  his  re¬ 
marks  in  their  original  clothing  (as  I  said  before)  would  have  been  too  bulky.  At 
a  dance  in  a  small  room,  no  hoops  can  be  admitted. 

You  will  please  to  recollect,  that  if  Mr.  Swan  expected  me  to  point  out  his 
beauties,  or  observe  on  his  defects,  this  is  the  first  time  I  have  ever  heard  of  either 
of  his  requests,  as  well  as  of  his  intention  that  his  comment  should  be  communicated 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


17 


to  me  at  all.  You  are  like  Gonzalo  in  “  The  Tempest,” — “  the  latter  end  of  your 
commonwealth  forgets  its  beginning.”  I  must  beg  you  will  pen  an  escape  for  me 
down  the  back-stairs  ;  for  all  my  guilt  on  this  occasion  consists  in  having  read  the 
comments  which  Mr.  Garrick  lent  me. 

The  history  of  the  affair  is  briefly  this.  Mr.  G.  though  he  wished  to  know  some¬ 
what  about  this  Mr.  Swan,  was  too  lazy,  or  too  much  better  employed,  to  read  his 
dissertations  ;  or,  as  probably,  was  terrified  at  their  length :  he  therefore  gave  them 
to  Mr.  S.  whose  leisure  he  might  command,  and  whose  opinion  of  them  he  thought 
he  might  adopt  if  favourable,  or  qualify  if  unfavourable.  Mr.  S.  being  somewhat 
aware  of  this,  forbore  to  offer  any  judgment  at  all.  Thus  situated,  Mr.  G.  was  re¬ 
duced  to  the  necessity  of  supplying  such  an  answer  as  he  supposed  Mr.  S.  ought  to 
have  delivered,  and  Mr.  Swan  might  expect  to  receive.  I  thank  you,  Mr.  Garrick. 
I  leave  you  now  to  clear  yourself  and  me  as  adroitly  as  you  can,  and  after  what 
flourish  your  nature  will ;  while  at  the  same  time,  without  any  flourish  at  all,  I  sub- 
cribe  myself  Your  sincere  and  obliged, 

G.  Steevens. 

Your  letter  is  dated  the  7th,  but  did  not  reach  this  place  till  about  half  an 
hour  ago. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Steevens’s  letter  to  me  about  Mr.  Swan’s 
Notes  upon  Shakspeare.” 


LIEUT. -GENERAL  BURGOYNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday,  Nov.  9th,  1774. 

Your  obliging  and  most  friendly  letter  was  delivered  to  me  yesterday  at  the 
moment  I  was  sitting  down  to  dinner  with  company,  or  I  should  have  endeavoured 
on  the  moment  to  return  my  acknowledgments,  with  a  warmth  of  expression  due  to 
that  with  which  you  have  honoured  me. 

In  regard  to  the  very  signal  distinction  you  propose  to  me  of  the  freedom  of  the 
house,  and  the  manner  of  presenting  it,  I  hope  you  will  permit  me  to  decline  the 
parade,  and  at  the  same  time  believe  me  truly  sensible  of  the  honour  of  it.  I  should 
feel  myself  as  proud  to  be  seated  in  Drury-lane  by  your  deliberate  judgment  of  my 
talents,  as  ever  an  old  Roman  did  in  acquiring  the  freedom  of  his  theatre  by  public 
sendees ;  but  you  are  at  present  too  partial  towards  me,  and,  till  I  appear  in  my  own 
eyes  more  worthy,  I  must  request  you  to  bound  your  kind  intentions  to  an  order  for 
admittance  occasionally  to  your  green-room,  where  I  promise  neither  to  criticise  your 
men  ill-naturedly,  nor  lead  astray  your  ladies.  The  having  contributed  the  songs 
and  music,  and  other  reasons  alleged  for  my  introduction  to  your  rehearsals,  will,  I 
conclude,  equally  pass  with  the  company  for  this  additional  favour,  without  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  any  farther  discovery.  Rut  as  you  kindly  insist  upon  my  directions,  I  desire 
it  to  be  done  by  a  simple  order  to  Johnston,  and  no  gold  box,  nor  silver  box,  not 

D 


VOL.  II. 


18 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


even  a  mulberry  one:  you  must  give  me  a  reception  Hamlet-like ;  I  will  have  no 
appurtenances  of  welcome. 

I  think  1  may  without  vanity  congratulate  you  upon  the  piece  having  laid  hold 
of  the  audience  last  night.  A  general  relish  was  very  discernible.  I  could  not  help 
agreeing  with  a  critic  who  sat  near  me,  and  who  expressed  himself  delighted  with  the 
genteel  scenes,  that  the  introduction  of  the  lamp-lighters  was  too  coarse  to  assort 
with  the  rest.  Suppose  three  or  four  of  your  girls  were  introduced  in  the  act  of 
weaving  cords  of  dowers,  such  as  the  dancers  use  in  the  second  act.  They  might  bx 
one  end  of  the  cord  to  the  scene,  and  keep  slipping  back  as  they  weave  the  dowers,  in 
the  manner  the  rope-makers  do,  which  would  be  picturesque.  In  that  case,  O’Daub’s 
part  might  begin  with  his  conversation  with  the  architect,  and  he  might  present 
himself  to  the  girls  in  some  nonsense  like  the  following:  — 

O' Daub — “  If  these  pretty  maids  would  pay  me  with  a  kiss  a-piece,  ’faith,  I ’d 
paint  them  all  round  for  nothing  at  all.  Sure  they  look  as  bright  as  a  May  morning 
already,  and  a  touch  of  my  brush  will  make  them  remembered  by  those  who  never 
saw  ’em.” 

If  after  this,  the  two  additional  verses  of  the  song  were  added,  the  words  would 
apply,  and  with  Moody’s  action  might  have  effect.  Should  you  approve  this  idea, 
or  any  one  like  it,  the  alteration  is  so  short  it  might  be  studied  and  acted  in  half  an 
hour ;  but  I  submit  it  to  you  on  the  sudden,  like  many  crudities  with  which  I  have 
troubled  you. 

Lord  Stanley  is  come  to  town,  and  very  earnest  to  see  “  The  Maid  of  the  Oaks.” 
I  send  to  Johnston  for  a  box  for  Lady  Betty  to-morrow,  that  she  may  do  him  the 
honours,  and  1  hope  I  shall  succeed. 

If  you  could  send  me  the  copy  this  afternoon,  I  would  return  it  in  time  for  you 
to  put  it  into  the  printer’s  hands  to-morrow  afternoon. 

Believe  me,  with  the  truest  sense  of  the  value  of  your  friendship. 

Dear  Sir,  your  faithful  and  obedient,  &c.  &c. 

J.  Burgoyne.* 


LIEUT. -GENERAL  BURGOYNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAREST  SIR,  The  Oaks,  Sunday,  1774. 

May  I  request  of  your  friendship  to  entrust  to  my  re-perusal  the  lines  of  your 
very  bne  prologue  which  touch  upon  the  fortune  of  Caractacus.  They  rest  not  upon 
my  memory  so  completely  as  I  wish  every  thing  to  do  that  comes  from  your  pen ; 
and  I  entertain  a  doubt  (very  possibly  from  the  imperfection  of  my  recollection) 

*  This  was  the  unfortunate  general,  but  successful  dramatist,  Lieutenant-general  John  Burgoyne.  The 
piece  alluded  to  was  “  The  Maid  of  the  Oaks,”  a  dramatic  entertainment  in  honour  of  the  present  Earl  of 
Darby’s  marriage  with  Lady  Betty  Hamilton,  and  referring  to  a  ftte  champetre  given  at  the  Oaks  in  Kent 
on  that  occasion. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


19 


whether  one  line  may  not  convey  an  interpretation  very  different  from  what  1  am 
sure  you  wish  to  give  it. 

The  servant  who  will  deliver  this,  goes  forward  to  London,  and  returns  here 
early  to-morrow.  Should  he  find  you  at  home,  I  am  sure  of  your  goodness  and  your 
ready  pen  to  write  down  those  few  lines  ;  the  copy  shall  be  sacred. 

Should  my  servant  not  find  you  at  home,  he  has  orders  to  make  Hampton  his 
road  at  his  return  hither  to-morrow. 

I  hope  Mrs.  Garrick  has  found  relief  to  her  cold  in  the  good  air  of  Hampton 
My  best  respects  attend  her,  and  I  am  with  inviolable  truth,  my  dearest  Sir, 

Your  most  faithful  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

J.  Burgoyne. 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR  Inner  Temple,  Nov.  25th,  1774. 

Now  that  you  have  “  ruled  and  had  your  wife,”  I  will  venture  to  answer  your 
obliging  note  from  Hampton. 

The  trouble  I  alluded  to  was  yours,  not  mine ;  as  I  cannot  but  know  how  much 
your  time  and  head  are  occupied  by  necessary  and  immediate  business.  As  to  me, 
although  I  really  have  many  affairs  of  various  sorts  and  of  no  small  importance  to  me 
upon  my  hands,  yet  1  would  postpone  almost  every  thing  for  the  Duke  of  Br aganza, 
because  I  admire  him,  and  have  promised  him  my  best  assistance. 

That  you  have  not  found  time  to  look  at  him  I  am  not  surprised,  considering  the 
varietv  of  your  engagements  ;  but  I  hope  you  will  give  him  some  attention  when  he 
shall  be  restored  to  you  by  Mr.  Whitehead,  and  I  promise  you,  as  I  believe  I  did  once 
before,  that  whenever  you  do  examine  him,  he  will  amaze  you. 

Now,  dear  Sir,  to  the  cause  of  my  teazing  you  with  this  note.  I  object  to  the 
play’s  being  written  out  in  parts,  until  I  have  a  new  copy  from  the  author,  which  is 
now  preparing  according  to  your  ideas,  as  well  as  I  could  collect  them  from  your 
rough  and  warm  judgment  given  upon  my  reading.  N.B.  1  do  not  think  lightly  of 
such  criticism  in  theatrical  matters,  for  how  are  an  audience  otherwise  to  judge? 

Mv  humble  advice  and  request  are  that  you  will  resolve  (if  possible)  to  do  the 
play  this  season,  otherwise,  in  my  opinion,  the  wings  of  this  swan  will  be  so  damped 
that  he  will  hardly  recover.  I  know  his  nature,  and  saw  him  once  a  week  in  the  pro¬ 
gress  of  his  muse. 

Please,  therefore,  to  take  three  weeks  for  criticism.  I  engage  that  he  shall  execute 
every  improvement  which  you  can  suggest  in  three  weeks  more,  and  the  tragedy 
may  be  got  up  in  three  weeks.  Here  are  nine  weeks,  and  two  for  travelling ;  I 
will  say  (to  give  full  measure)  twelve  weeks,  and  if  you  will  give  me  to-morrow 
twelve  weeks  for  the  first  night,  1  will  answer  for  the  Duke’s  being  ready  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  gorgeous  majesty.  The  last  week  of  February  and  the  two  first  weeks  of 

d  2 


20 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


March  will  answer  very  well,  with  other  accidental  nights  afterwards,  taking  in  the 
idea  of  Lent  and  benefits  as  I  do.  In  the  interim  there  is  time  for  Cumberland’s 
comedy  and  Franklin’s  tragedy.  As  to  putting  the  Duke  upon  the  shelf,  besides 
my  certainty  of  his  despondency  in  consequence,  I  have  another  objection  from  the 
end  of  an  old  song : 

“  Who  can  know 
Where  we  shall  go 
To  be  merry  another  year  ?” 

In  the  author’s  last  letter  there  is  this  passage.  “  If  I  had  Mr.  Garrick’s  ideas,  I 
could  do  all  I  can  ever  do  in  a  week  as  well  as  in  a  year.  The  matter  does  not 
deserve  much  more  pains  than  I  have  already  taken.”  These  are  his  words,  and 
I  know  he  is  in  earnest.  He  says  one  week ;  I  give  him  three  ;  and  if  you  can  let 
me  have  your  observations  and  hints  before  December  15th,  I  promise  you  a  new  and 
finished  copy  before  January  15th. 

Excuse  my  zeal,  which  is  not  for  a  plaything  or  hobby-horse,  but  for  a  work 
of  great  merit  and  a  most  ingenious  friend.  Your  obliged  and  sincere, 

E.  Tighe. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Nov.  29th,  1774. 

Your  approbation  gives  me  the  greatest  pleasure;  it  is  the  only  incense  which 
is  entirely  grateful  to  the  vain  nostrils  of  an  author.  In  consideration  of  your  pre¬ 
cious  time  and  patience,  I  proceed  to  business  immediately  without  further  flourish  or 
compliment.  If  you  can  contrive  it,  without  great  inconvenience,  1  wish  much  the 
Duchess  should  appear  on  your  boards  this  season  for  many  reasons.  Till  her  fate  is 
determined,  I  cannot  think  of  entering  on  any  other  work  of  the  same  nature,  and  the 
suspense  keeps  me  inactive  and  uncomfortable.  Many  accidents  may  intervene  to 
prevent  my  enjoying  any  satisfaction  from  a  representation  postponed  till  next  season. 
My  excellent  friend  Tighe  cannot  be  spared  next  winter  to  attend  the  fate  of  Por¬ 
tugal,  as  he  will  be  wanted  to  assist  in  the  Irish  Senate;  and  you  know  how  useful  he 
is,  from  his  friendship  to  us  both,  and  his  competent  knowledge  of  every  thing  dra¬ 
matical.  We  have  had  approbation  enough  from  a  variety  of  tastes  to  promise  most 
favourably  for  our  success  :  all  the  material  alterations,  I  can  make  in  a  fortnight  with 
ease,  I  think,  to  myself,  and,  I  hope,  to  your  satisfaction.  The  alterations  in  the  second 
act  will  give  me  most  trouble ;  but  as  you  and  many  other  excellent  judges  object  to 
the  introduction  of  a  new  scene  between  the  Duchess  and  the  Spanish  Minister  (in 
which  I  agree  with  you  entirely),  I  think  retrenching  a  good  deal  of  the  narrative, 
getting  the  Duke  properly  off*  the  stage,  and  throwing  a  little  more  variety  into  the 
strain  of  the  Duchess  with  his  friends  after  the  Duke’s  exit,  will  improve  that  act, 
and  make  it  more  conformable  in  some  measure  to  modern  ideas.  Retrenchment  in 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


21 


other  places  will  be  also  necessary  ;  but  I  can  bear  the  knife  when  I  am  certain  my 
surgeons  are  too  skilful  to  let  out  the  life-blood.  I  shall  smart  a  good  deal  under  the 
amputations  of  the  third  act ;  but  it  is  the  longest,  and  must  be  cut.  I  have  an  idea 
of  improvement  for  the  dream  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  act,  which  I  think  will 
turn  that  excrescence  not  only  into  a  beauty,  but  into  a  vital  part.  The  dream  shall 
not,  as  now,  be  of  the  night  before,  but  of  a  fewr  hours  before  his  telling  it ;  the  hor¬ 
rors  of  the  dream  shall  be  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  the  Spanish  Minister’s  going  on 
the  water  to  try  to  compose  the  disturbance  of  his  mind.  He  knows  the  time  the 
Monk  is  to  return  from  the  murder  of  the  Duke,  and  comes  back  to  hear  his  account 
of  it.  This  gives  a  cause  for  what  was  accidental  in  the  history,  and  removes  any 
cavil  that  may  arise  at  the  improbability  of  a  man's  going  on  a  party  of  pleasure  while 
such  an  act  was  perpetrating.  Besides,  he  might  choose  that  time  to  avoid  any  sus¬ 
picion  of  being  concerned  in  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Braganza.  I  am  in  a  great 
hurry,  and  have  not  time  to  read  over  what  I  write,  but  hope  I  explain  myself  to  your 
satisfaction.  I  expect  with  impatience  your  serious  observations  after  a  deliberate 
perusal,  as  they  must  be  my  best  guides.  I  shall  write  more  fully  to  our  friend 
Tighe,  when  I  get  a  cover  to  enclose  a  large  packet.  Adieu,  my  dear  Sir  :  believe  me 
ever,  Your  sincere,  obliged  and  affectionate  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

My  future  labours,  if  any  come  to  birth,  shall  also  be  first  offered  to  you ;  and  I 
wish  the  fate  of  this  was  decided,  to  make  room  for  others  yet  in  embryo.  I  hope  it 
will  be  for  our  mutual  credit  and  advantage. 

Mrs.  J.’s  best  love  attends  you  and  Mrs.  G. 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Temple,  Dec.  16th,  1774. 

I  hope  you  have  by  this  time  examined  the  Duke  of  Braganza,  and  that  you 
think  (provided  the  proposed  alterations  are  well  executed)  he  will  be  ready  to  make 
his  appearance  about  February  loth.  The  author  has  promised  me  a  complete  copy 
before  January  10th  ;  and  unless  you  (who  must  and  shall  be  absolute  in  this  matter) 
forbid,  I  think  it  my  duty  to  press  for  his  coming  out  this  season.  The  reasons  for 
this  are  many,  but  a  principal  one  is  that  I  fear  I  cannot  be  in  London  at  the  time  of 
bringing  on  new  plays  next  season,  and,  though  my  assistance  may  not  be  great,  the 
author  builds  much  upon  it  in  every  view. 

In  short,  Covent-Garden  wrants  it ;  and  will  not  you  either  bring  it  out  at  your 
house,  or  let  them  do  it  ?  You  must  and  ought  to  have  the  preference,  and  I  heartily 
wish  it  to  be  done  with  you.  But  I  cannot,  injustice,  delay  the  representation.  I 
go  to  Cambridge  this  day,  to  return  on  Monday  night.  Pray  let  me  have  an  answer 
at  the  Turk's-head  Coffee-house  on  Monday.  Your  sincere  and  obedient, 

E.  Tighe. 


22 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead  Heath,  Dec.  20th,  1774. 

To  one  so  hurried  as  you  are,  short  thanks  are  at  present  best.  Any  places  you 
please,  except  in  the  back  rows  of  your  front  boxes, 

“  Where  function 

Is  smother’d  in  surmise,  and  nothing  is 
But  what  is  not.” 

That  your  fit  of  the  gout  may  be  as  short  as  my  letter,  is  the  sincere  wish  of, 

Your  very  faithful 

G.  S. 


MR.  TIGllE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Temple,  Dec.  20th,  1774. 

I  cannot  hesitate  a  moment,  or  hear  any  body  speak  upon  the  subject,  before  I 
tell  you  that  my  wishes  are  that  the  Duke  of  Braganza  shall  appear  at  Drury -lane. 
And  yet  we  must  all  allow  (indeed  you  yourself  said  so)  that  the  Barrys  were  born 
for  the  parts.  Nothing  but  this  consideration,  and  the  fear  of  your  not  being  able 
from  your  engagements  to  bring  out  the  play  this  season,  could  make  me  think  of  any 
other  house  but  yours.  You  are  the  natural  parent  and  protector  ;  and  nothing  but 
your  desire,  founded  upon  your  inability  to  give  a  place  to  the  tragedy,  shall  induce 
me  to  change  the  scene  of  action,  though  I  am  pressed  by  multitudes  so  to  do  on 
account  of  the  Barrys.  Your  sincere  and  obedient, 

E.  Tighe. 

I  am  just  this  moment  come  in. 


SCENES  AND  DRESSES  REQUIRED  FOR  BRAGANZA. 


1.  A  Piazza  of  Lisbon. 

2.  An  Antechamber  in  the  Palace. 

3.  A  Chamber  in  the  Duke’s  Palace. 

4.  Alvaro  (the  Spanish  Minister’s) 

Chamber. 


5.  Apartment  in  the  Castle  of  Almada. 

6.  Street  with  some  view  of  the  Tagus. 
Dress  for  the  Spanish  Minister. 

The  rest  Portuguese. 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Temple,  Dec.  20th,  1774. 

I  request  that  you  will  come  to  some  resolution  about  the  Duke  of  Braganza .* 
In  justice  to  the  admirable  author,  the  representation,  in  my  opinion,  ought  not  to 

*  It  is  reasonable  to  attribute  some  of  Garrick’s  irresolution  to  his  recollection  of  what  had  but  just 
passed  between  himself  and  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


23 


be  postponed.  If  you  can  act  it  immediately  after  Dr.  Francklin’s  tragedy,  which  I 
suppose  will  come  out  about  January  15,  I  am  satisfied.  In  that  case  I  suppose  the 
Duke  may  appear  about  February  20,  (a  month  before  the  benefits.)  If  you  know 
that  you  cannot  perform  the  tragedy  this  season,  I  hope  that  you  will  now  desire  that 
it  may  be  performed  (as  it  can  be)  immediately  at  Covent-Garden.  I  expect  the 
final  copy  in  about  ten  days.  Your  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  Tighe. 

Please  to  send  an  answer  to  the  Turk’s  Head  Coffee-house. 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Dec.  23rd,  1774. 

Many  thanks  for  your  last  kind  letter  of  the  13th  from  Hampton.  I  did  not 
receive  it  till  yesterday  evening,  just  as  the  curtain  was  going  to  rise  for  our  second 
and  last  night’s  exhibition  on  Mr.  Gardiner’s  stage  at  the  Phoenix  Park,  where  I  have 
been  unavoidably  engaged  since  the  15th  of  last  month,  and  entirely  taken  up,  except 
for  a  few  days  that  I  was  obliged  to  be  in  town  for  a  feverish  complaint  with  ugly 
symptoms.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  kind  intention  of  bringing  the  play 
on  this  season,  and  doubt  not  of  its  meeting  every  assistance  from  your  skill  and 
friendship.  I  shall  now  have  no  interruption  that  I  can  foresee,  and  hope  to  have  at 
least  two  acts  ready  by  the  time  you  mention,  the  first  week  in  January.  1  have 
received  many  excellent  observations  since  the  play  was  sent  over,  principally  by  the 
communication  of  our  most  valuable  friend  Air.  Tighe  ;  so  many,  indeed,  that  I  should 
be  perplexed  in  the  choice  of  improvements  was  I  not  determined  to  abide  for  the 
most  part  by  those  made  by  Mr.  Whitehead ;  he  was  so  good  carefully  to  peruse 
the  manuscript.  The  alterations  he  has  suggested  I  think  very  judicious;  they  may 
easily  be  made  without  demolishing  much  of  the  main  building.  Airs.  Jephson  and 
I  are  but  just  returned  from  the  Park  not  a  little  fatigued  as  you  may  suppose,  from 
a  scene  of  so  much  exertion  as  we  have  been  lately  engaged  in  ;  but  I  would  not  try 
my  bed  till  I  acknowledged  your  favour  and  sent  our  best  wishes  for  all  good  things 
to  you  and  Airs.  Garrick.  We  are  heartily  sorry  for  your  gouty  complaints,  and 
pray  that  they  may  at  least  be  a  security  to  your  frame  against  all  others.  Adieu, 
my  dear  Sir :  believe  me  sincerely, 

Your  much  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

ItoBEUT  Jephson. 


24 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Wednesday  Morning,  1774. 

Indeed,  Sir,  I  could  not  play  Violante  to-morrow  if  my  happiness  in  the  next 
world  depended  upon  it ;  but  if  you  order  me,  I  will  look  it  over,  and  be  perfect  as 
soon  as  possible.  Mrs.  Sullen  is  ready ;  and  I  am  sure  if  you  are  pleased  to  give  your¬ 
self  a  moment’s  time  to  reflect  upon  my  general  conduct  in  the  theatre,  you  will  see 
that  I  ever  made  my  attention  to  my  business  and  my  duty  to  you  my  sole  object 
and  ambition.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

F.  Abington. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 


DEAR  MADAM,  Adelphi,  Sept.  26th,  1774. 

As  no  business  can  be  done  without  being  explicit,  I  must  desire  to  know  if  you 
choose  to  perform  Mrs.  Sullen.  The  part  is  reserved  for  you,  and  the  play  must  be 
acted  soon  :  whoever  does  it  with  Mr.  Smith  must  do  it  with  me — supposing  that  I 
am  ever  able  to  be  the  rake  again.  We  talked  a  great  deal  last  night,  and,  I  am  sorry 
to  say  it,  without  my  having  the  least  idea  what  to  do  in  consequence  of  it.  If 
“  The  Tender  Husband”  can  be  done  with  credit,  I  shall  immediately  set  to  work, 
and  with  “  The  Hypocrite.”  I  cannot  create  better  actors  than  we  have,  and  we 
must  both  do  our  best  with  them.  Could  1  put  you  upon  the  highest  comic  pin¬ 
nacle,  I  certainly  would  do  it ;  but  indeed,  my  dear  Madam,  we  shall  not  mount 
much  if  your  cold  counteracting  discourse  is  to  pull  us  back  at  every  step.  Don’t 
imagine  that  the  gout  makes  me  peevish  ;  I  am  talking  to  you  in  the  greatest  good 
humour ;  but  if  we  don’t  do  our  best  with  the  best  we  have,  it  is  all  fruitless  mur¬ 
muring  and  inactive  repining.  Something  too  much  of  this.  I  shall  write  to  the 
author  of  the  piece  to-morrow  night,  which  I  read  to  you.  I  have  yet  obeyed  but 
half  his  commands,  as  he  wrote  the  character  of  Ladij  Bah *  for  your  Ladyship.  I 
must  beg  of  you  to  speak  your  thoughts  upon  that,  which  after  I  had  read  it  to  you, 
I  promised  to  let  him  know  your  sentiments.  I  could  wish,  if  you  say  any  thing  to 
me  of  our  stage  business,  you  would  send  it  separately  from  your  opinion  of  “  The 
Maid  of  the  Oaks”  and  “  Lady  Bab with  your  leave  I  could  wish  to  enclose  what 
you  say  of  the  last  to  the  author.  Yours  most  truly, 

David  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  to  Mrs.  Abington,  in  which  her  manner 
of  doing  and  saying  is  not  described  amiss.” 


*  Lady  Bab  Lardoon  in  “  The  Maid  of  the  Oaks,"  which  she  acted  beautifully. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


9A 


O 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Monday  Night,  March  6th,  1775. 

Mr.  Garrick  behaves  with  so  much  unprovoked  incivility  to  Mrs.  Abington, 
that  she  is  at  a  loss  how  to  account  for  it ;  and  her  health  and  spirits  are  so  much 
hurt  by  it,  that  she  is  not  able  to  say  what  or  when  she  can  play.  If  he  had  been 
pleased  to  have  given  her  a  day’s  notice,  she  could  have  played  her  part  in  “  The 
West  Indian  but  it  was  not  possible  for  her  at  three  o’clock  to  read  her  part,  get 
her  clothes  ready,  and  find  a  hair-dresser  all  by  six  o’clock,  and  that  too  at  a  time 
wrhen  she  is  in  a  very  weak  and  ill  state  of  health. 

If  Mr.  Garrick  really  thinks  Mrs.  Abington  so  bad  a  subject  as  he  is  pleased  to 
describe  her  in  all  the  companies  he  goes  into,  she  thinks  his  remedy  is  very  easy,  and 
is  willing  on  her  part  to  release  him  from  so  great  an  inconvenience  as  soon  as  he 
pleases ;  and  only  begs,  while  he  is  pleased  to  continue  her  in  his  theatre,  that  lie  will 
not  treat  her  with  so  much  harshness  as  he  has  lately  done. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 

Adelphi,  March  7,  1775. 

Whether  [it  be]  a  consciousness  of  your  unaccountable  and  unwarrantable  be¬ 
haviour  to  me,  or  that  you  have  really  heard  of  my  description  of  you  in  all  companies, 
I  will  not  enquire  ;  whatever  I  have  said  I  will  justify,  for  I  always  speak  the  truth. 
Is  it  possible  for  me  to  describe  you  as  your  note  of  yesterday  describes  yourself? 
You  want  a  day’s  notice  to  perform  a  character  you  played  originally,  and  which  you 
have  appeared  in  several  times  this  season:  you  knew  our  distress  yesterday  almost  as 
soon  as  I  did,  and  did  not  plead  the  want  of  a  day’s  notice,  clothes,  hair-dresser,  be. 
but  you  refused  on  account  of  your  health,  though  you  were  in  spirits  and  rehearsing 
a  new  farce.  You  suffered  us  to  be  obliged  to  another  lady,  of  another  house,  to 
do  your  business,  when  neither  our  distresses,  the  credit  of  the  theatre,  or  your  own 
duty  and  justice,  could  have  the  least  influence  upon  you.  How  coidd  I  give  you 
a  day’s  notice  when  I  knew  not  of  Mr.  Reddish’s  illness  but  in  the  morning  ?  and 
you  were  the  first  person  I  sent  to  between  twelve  and  one,  and  not  at  three  o’clock. 
It  was  happy  for  us  that  we  found  a  lady,  though  not  of  our  company,  who  had 
feeling  for  our  distress,  and  relieved  us  from  it  without  requiring  a  day’s  notice,  or 
wanting  any  thing  but  an  opportunity  to  show  her  politeness.  These  are  serious  truths, 
Madam,  and  are  not  to  be  described  like  the  lesser  peccadillos  of  a  fine  ladv.  A  little 
time  will  show  that  Mr.  Garrick  has  done  essential  offices  of  kindness  to  Mrs.  Abing¬ 
ton,  when  his  humanity  only,  and  not  his  duty  obliged  him.  As  to  your  wishes  of 
delivering  me  from  the  inconvenience  of  your  engagement,  that,  I  hope,  will  soon 
VOL.  II. 


E 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


20 


be  another’s  concern  :  my  greatest  comfort  is,  that  I  shall  soon  be  delivered  from 
the  capriciousness,  inconsistency,  injustice,  and  unkindness,  of  those  to  whom  I 
always  intended  the  greatest  good  in  my  power.  I  am,  Madam, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Your  refusing  to  play  this  evening  has  obliged  me,  though  but  just  recovered 
from  a  dreadful  disorder,  to  risk  a  relapse. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIRj  Tuesday  morning,  March  7,  1775. 

From  your  not  recollecting  some  circumstances,  your  letter  is  a  misrepresentation 
of  facts  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 

You  are  pleased  to  say  “  The  West  Indian”  has  been  performed  several  times 
this  season  ;  it  has  really  been  acted  but  once,  and  that  at  the  very  beginning  of  the 
winter.  You  say  I  was  well  and  in  spirits  at  the  rehearsal.  Indeed,  Sir,  whoever  told 
you  so,  deceived  you  ;  I  was  very  ill,  and  not  able  to  hold  myself  up  in  my  chair. 
You  say  I  knew  the  distress  of  the  theatre  at  twelve  o’clock.  I  saw  very  little  dis¬ 
tress,  for  it  was  plain  that  “  The  Country  Girl”  could  have  been  acted  from  the  in¬ 
stant  that  Mr.  Reddish’s  illness  was  known ;  the  design,  therefore,  of  changing  it  to 
“  The  West  Indian”  could  only  be  to  hurt  and  hurry  me ;  and  if  I  refused,  it  was  a 
good  pretence  for  borrowing  a  performer  to  play  my  part,  in  order  to  give  colour  to 
the  abuse  that  was  intended  for  me  in  the  papers  this  morning.  I  have,  however,  been 
too  attentive  to  my  business,  and  too  faithful  a  servant  both  to  you,  Sir,  and  to  the 
public,  to  suffer  from  such  malice  and  ill-nature  ;  and  if  you  refuse  me  the  indul¬ 
gence  that  is  due  to  me  for  all  the  labour  and  attention  I  have  given  to  the  theatre, 
for  this  winter  in  particular,  and  for  many  years  past,  I  must  at  least  remember  what 
is  due  to  myself ;  and  if  the  newspapers  are  to  be  made  the  vehicles  of  your  resent¬ 
ment  to  me,  I  must  justify  myself  in  the  best  manner  I  can. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  and  most  humble, 

F.  xVbington. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 

MADAM,  Adelphi,  March  7,  177 5. 

I  beg  that  you  will  indulge  yourself  in  writing  what  you  please  and  when  you 
please.  If  you  imagine  that  I  in  the  least  countenance,  or  am  accessory  to  any  scrib¬ 
bling  in  the  papers,  you  are  deceived.  I  detest  all  such  methods  of  showing  my  re¬ 
sentment.  I  never  heard  of  the  disorder  which  was  occasioned  in  “  The  Maid  of  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


27 


Oaks I  was  too  ill  to  be  troubled  with  it :  and  Mr.  King,  whom  you  have  always 
unjustly  suspected,  never  mentioned  it  to  me,  nor  did  I  know  of  the  paragraph  you 
allude  to  till  it  \vas  shown  to  me  this  morning.  Could  “The  Country  Girl”  have 
been  done  with  credit  yesterday,  I  should  not  have  distressed  myself  to  have  applied 
to  you,  or  to  have  borrowed  a  lady  from  another  theatre.  As  I  will  always  retract 
the  most  insignificant  mistake  I  may  have  made,  I  find  by  the  prompter  that  “The 
West  Indian”  has  been  performed  but  once.  May  I  venture,  if  “  Braganza”  cannot 
be  performed  on  Thursday,  to  put  your  name  in  the  bills  for  Lady  Bab  in  “The 
Maid  of  the  Oaks,”  or  for  any  other  part  ?  I  most  sincerely  assure  you  that  I  do 
not  ask  this  to  distress  you,  but  to  carry  on  the  business  in  the  best  manner  I  am 
able.  I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Yates  has  not  yet  sent  word  that  she  cannot  play  on  Thursday,  and  I 
hope  you  may  be  excused.  I  ask  the  question  to  prevent  trouble  to  both. 

The  writing  peevish  letters  will  do  no  business. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Thursday,  two  o’clock,  1775. 

“  A  paragraph  to  say  that  the  4  Sultan’  is  withdrawn”*  would  be  a  very  singular 
and  a  very  new  object  :  however,  as  that  threat  is  only  meant  in  harshness  and  in¬ 
sult  to  me,  it  is  neither  new  nor  singular ;  and  all  the  answer  I  should  make  to  such 
a  paragraph  would  be  that  I  had  withdrawn  myself  from  the  theatre,  which  I  should 
most  undoubtedly  have  done  some  years  since,  but  that  Mr.  Garrick  has  so  much  real 
goodness  in  his  nature,  that  no  ill  effects  need  ever  be  dreaded  in  a  situation  where  he 
has  the  entire  government. 

I  will  endeavour,  and  I  think  it  is  possible  to  be  ready  by  Tuesday,  as  I  see  “  The 
Sultan”  is  advertised  for  that  day  ;  but  I  shall  want  many  little  helps,  particularly  in 
the  business  of  the  dinner-scene,  and  about  my  song,  as  I  am  at  best  a  bad  stick  in 

that  line  as  well  as  in  most  others,  God  knows.  I  am,  Sir,  &c.  &c. 

F.  Abington. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wednesday  Morning. 

Mrs.  Abington  has  kept  her  room  with  a  fever  for  some  days  past,  or  she  would 
have  complained  to  Mr.  Garrick  of  a  letter  she  has  received  from  Mr.  Hopkins, 
dictated  in  the  spirit  of  incivility  and  misrepresentation.  lie  says  it  is  written  by 
order  of  Mr.  Garrick,  which  Mrs.  Abington  is  the  more  surprised  at,  as  she  is  not 

*  A  farce  really  written  by  Bickerstaff. — Ed. 


28 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


conscious  that  her  conduct  in  the  theatre  has  deserved  so  much  acrimony  and  ill- 
humour.  She  apprehends  that  for  some  time  past  she  has  had  enemies  about  Mr. 
Garrick;  and  it  is  to  them  she  supposes  herself  indebted  for  the  very  great  change 
in  Mr.  Garrick’s  behaviour,  after  all  the  fatigue  she  has  undergone,  and  the  disap¬ 
pointments  she  has  experienced  in  respect  to  the  business  that  was  by  agreement  to 
be  done  for  her  this  winter. 

She  hopes  that  Mr.  Garrick  has  got  some  person  to  perform  the  part  of  Lastitia 
in  “  The  Choleric  Man;”  and  in  respect  to  the  epilogue,  she  takes  the  liberty  of 
referring  him  to  Mr.  Hopkins,  with  whom  she  left  a  message  upon  that  subject. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Tuesday,  three  o’clock. 

Mrs.  Abington  presents  her  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  is  very  sorry  to 
read  of  his  indisposition  ;  she  is  very  ill  herself,  and  exceedingly  hurt  that  he  should 
accuse  her  of  want  of  zeal  for  the  cause,  as  she  flatters  herself  that  Mr.  Garrick  is 
fully  persuaded  she  has  never  been  wanting  in  duty  and  attachment  to  the  business 
of  his  theatre. 

But  she  thinks  she  is  entitled  to  the  same  degree  of  indulgence  that  is  given  to 
other  performers,  and  hoped  that  Mr.  Garrick  would  have  had  the  goodness  to  let 
her  come  out  in  some  part  of  stronger  comic  humour  than  that  of  Millamant. 

SIiq  begs  that  he  will  not  be  angry,  or  treat  her  with  harshness,  as  he  will  cer¬ 
tainly  find  her  a  very  faithful  and  useful  subject,  if  he  will  condescend  to  think  her 
worth  a  very  little  degree  of  attention  and  consideration. 

She  will  play  in  “  The  Hypocrite”  and  “  Bon  Ton”  on  Saturday  if  he  pleases, 
and  will  be  ready  in  “  The  Way  of  the  World”  the  beginning  of  the  next  week,  but 
must  trouble  him  for  an  answer  if  that  measure  is  approved. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Abington  about  acting.” 

O  O 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR  GARRICK. 


Sir,  Monday,  May  27th. 

I  am  very  much  indisposed,  and  desire  to  be  excused  when  I  tell  you  I  cannot 
act  to-morrow  night. 

If  the  consideration  of  the  salary  I  receive  is  a  reason  for  my  being  called  out  to 
play  to  empty  benches,  I  must  beg  leave  to  decline  receiving  any  more  pay  at  your 
office ;  at  the  same  time  I  take  the  liberty  of  assuring  you,  that  I  shall  be  ready  and 
willing  to  stay  in  town  for  the  purpose  of  acting  with  you,  if  you  think  proper  to 
call  for  my  services,  and  in  such  case  shall  accept  of  any  proportion  of  my  salary  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


29 


you  may  think  I  deserve  for  such  attendance.  I  beg  you  will  not  take  the  trouble 
of  writing  an  answer,  as  I  am  sure  your  spirits  ought  to  be  composed  for  the  great 
business  of  this  evening.  I  hope  you  are  perfectly  well,  and  am  with  great  respect. 
Sir,  Your  most  humble  servant, 

Frances  Abington. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Thursday,  June  29th,  1775. 

I  received  the  favour  of  your  message  by  Mr.  Hopkins,  and  have  sent  the 
farce  as  you  was  pleased  to  command. 

I  am  very  certain  that  a  few  of  your  nice  touches,  with  a  little  of  your  fine  polish, 
will  give  it  that  stamp  of  merit  as  must  secure  it  a  reception  with  the  public,  equal 
to  the  Avarmest  of  my  expectations. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 


July  1st,  1775. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Abington,  and  she  may 
depend  upon  his  doing  his  best  to  give  her  piece  success.  Had  the  author  A'oucli- 
safed  to  have  communicated  Avith  Mr.  G.  the  matter  Avould  have  been  better  managed. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Abington’s  note  and  my  answer  about  her  petite  piece.” 

“  This  was  sent  by  me  the  same  day. — T.  B.”  i.  e.  Tho.  Becket,  the  Bookseller. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Southampton-street,  July  14th,  1775. 

I  take  this  method  of  expressing  my  thanks  for  the  very  polite  message  you  Avas 
pleased  to  send  to  me  by  Mr.  Hopkins,  of  Avliich,  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you,  I  am  en¬ 
tirely  sensible. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  I  am  as  little  read  in  dramatic  as  in  other  authors ;  but  Avere  I 
more  conversant  in  this  respect,  I  Avould  not,  in  a  theatre  Avhere  Mr.  Garrick  is  ma- 
nager,  take  the  liberty  of  catering  for  myself;  I  can  only  say,  that  the  parts  to  which 
the  actresses  of  my  time  haA'e  OAied  their  fame,  are  in  the  possession  ot  other  per¬ 
formers,  particularly  Beatrice,  Mrs.  Sullen,  Clarinda,  &c. ;  and  ot  those  otlui  s  in 
which  I  haAre  been  most  favourably  received  by  the  public,  the  plays  are  so  altered 
by  the  death  of  actors,  the  giA'ing  up  their  parts,  or  other  accidents,  that  they  ait  no 
longer  of  use  to  the  catalogue. 


30 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


In  the  choice  of  new  ones,  therefore,  I  would  certainly  wish  to  be  directed  by 
you,  nor  will  it  be  wondered  at  that  1  am  anxious  for  your  assistance  in  a  point 
so  very  essential  to  my  interest  and  reputation. 

Whilst  you,  Sir,  continue  upon  the  stage,  it  will  be  the  ambition  of  every 
performer  to  have  their  names  appear  with  yours  ;  I  cannot,  therefore,  help  remind¬ 
ing  you  of  your  intention  to  play  Don  John,  and  of  your  sometimes  hinting  that  it 
was  not  impossible  but  you  might  appear  in  the  character  of  the  Copper  Captain. 

If  such  an  event  should  at  any  time  take  place,  it  would  gratify  my  utmost 
wishes ;  in  the  mean  time,  I  have  only  to  hope  that  your  present  disposition  in 
my  favour  may  continue,  and  I  have  nothing  farther  to  desire  in  this  world. 

1  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Frances  Aeington. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Abington  about  Pope’s  parts.” 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Southampton-street,  Nov.  26th,  1775. 

I  am  encouraged  by  the  kind  assurances  you  have  favoured  me  with,  and  from  a 
conversation  I  was  accidentally  engaged  in  last  night  with  Mr.  Murphy,  to  be  a  little 
importunate  with  you  on  a  subject  which  has  been  the  source  of  much  discon¬ 
tent  and  unhappiness  to  me. 

Mr.  Murphy  says  his  new  comedy  is  not  yet  cast,  and  flattered  me  much  by 
assuring  me  it  was  your  opinion  that  it  would  be  for  the  advantage  of  the  piece  that 
I  should  be  in  it  as  well  as  Mrs.  Barry  ;  however,  if  the  character  which  the  author 
very  kindly  intended  for  me  is  to  be  given  to  that  lady,  from  what  I  remember 
of  it,  I  fear  that  I  cannot  undertake  any  other  part  without  more  disadvantage  to 
myself  than  you  would  choose  to  lay  me  under. 

Permit  me,  dear  Sir,  to  observe,  that  if  I  had  been,  at  this  time,  on  a  more 
respectable  footing  at  the  theatre,  I  apprehend  Mr.  Murphy  would  not  have  thought 
it  necessary  for  the  interest  of  his  play  to  have  withdrawn  his  promise  to  me 
in  favour  of  any  other  actress  ;  and  you  will  perhaps  not  think  there  is  any  very 
inexcusable  vanity  in  this  opinion,  when  you  are  told  that  upon  his  showing  me 
the  complimentary  verses  on  Mrs.  Barry,  which  were  afterwards  prefixed  to  “  The 
Grecian  Daughter,”  he  was  so  obliging  as  to  say  that  he  would  do  as  much  for  me  if 
Mr.  Garrick  would  let  him — that  is,  (as  I  understood  it,)  if  you  received  the  play,  the 
capital  part  of  which  he  then  designed  for  me. 

It  is  in  your  power,  dear  Sir,  I  know  it  is,  at  any  moment  to  put  me  on  such  a 
respectable  footing  with  the  public,  and  of  course,  with  authors,  that  I  should  be 
thought  not  unequal  to,  nor  be  ill  received  in  such  light  and  easy  characters  of 
comedy  as  my  talents  confine  me  to  :  the  part  in  question  is  one  of  those. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


31 


I  am  not  insensible  of  Mrs.  Barry’s  extensive  merit ;  I  know  that  she  is  singularly 
excellent  in  the  pathetic :  in  the  new  comedy  there  is  a  character  of  that  kind  which 
might  be  made  worth  her  acceptance.  But  I  beg  pardon.  Sir ;  I  have  perhaps  said 
too  much  on  this  point ;  the  end  of  my  application  is  sufficiently  obvious,  and  I 
flatter  myself,  Sir,  you  will  not  think  it  unreasonable  or  impertinent,  but  favour  it 
with  your  kind  attention. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  very  humble  servant, 

Frances  Abington. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 

MADAM,  Adelphi,  Friday,  Nov.  27th,  1775. 

I  am  always  happy  to  see  the  performers  of  merit,  who  belong  to  us,  happy  and 
satisfied ;  but  if  I  were  to  make  myself  uneasy  when  they  are  pleased,  right  or 
wrong,  to  be  discontented,  I  cannot  pay  them  the  compliment  to  mortify  myself  for 
nothing.  After  I  have  said  this,  let  me  be  permitted  to  say  farther,  that  I  never  yet 
saw  Mrs.  Abington  theatrically  happy  for  a  week  together ;  there  is  such  a  continual 
working  of  a  fancied  interest,  such  a  refinement  of  importance,  and  such  imaginary 
good  and  evil,  continually  arising  in  the  politician’s  mind,  that  the  only  best  substan¬ 
tial  security  for  public  applause  is  neglected  for  these  shadows.  That  I  may  hear  no 
more  of  this  or  that  part  in  Mr.  Murphy’s  play,  I  now  again  tell  you,  that  every 
author,  since  my  management,  distributed  his  parts  as  he  thinks  will  be  of  most  ser¬ 
vice  to  his  interest,  nor  have  I  ever  interfered,  or  will  interfere,  unless  I  perceive  that 
they  would  propose  something  contrary  to  common  sense.  As  1  cannot  think  this 
to  be  the  case  between  Airs.  Barry  and  you,  I  must  beg  leave  to  decline  entering 
into  the  matter.  I  sincerely  wish,  for  all  our  sakes,  that  you  may  have  a  character 
worthy  of  you,  as  well  as  Airs.  Barry.  I  can  no  more.  You  sometimes  pay  me  the 
compliment  to  say  that  you  would  do  any  thing  I  should  advise  ;  I  flatter  myself,  if 
you  had  done  so,  you  would  not  have  repented  of  your  politeness.  I  never  advised 
you  to  play  Ophelia,  though  that  has  been  unjustly  laid  to  my  charge.  I  advised 
you  to  take  Maria,  and  was  polite  enough  to  send  you  the  play  ;  you  sent  both  the 
part  and  book  back,  with  incivility  to  me,  and  great  injustice  to  yourself.  Mrs.  B. 
has  discovered  what  you  would  not,  and  has  taken  it — wisely  taken  it.  Remember 
to  tell  your  friends  that  you  might  have  played  Maria,  but  political  refinement, 
the  bane  of  all  our  actions,  prevented  you.  I  shall  in  no  wise  hinder  Mr.  Murphy 
from  paying  you  any  compliments  his  friendship  or  kindness  may  intend  you  ;  and  if 
they  depended  upon  my  accepting  his  play,  I  have  done  my  part  towards  it,  for  it  is 
accepted.  I  am  sure  Mr.  Murphy  means  you  well,  and  thinks  justly  of  your  talents; 
and  I  would  not  have  you  quarrel  with  him  because  his  gratitude  for  the  favours  lie 
has  received  in  “  The  Grecian  Daughter”  may  have  made  him  willing  to  oblige  Mrs. 
B.  by  another  part  in  his  next  play.  Now,  Madam,  I  have  done.  You  wished 


32 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


to  play  “  The  Scornful  Lady  I  fetched  an  alteration  of  that  play  from  Hampton 
on  purpose.  I  am  very  willing  to  do  you  all  the  justice  in  my  power,  and  1  could 
wish  you  would  represent  me  so  to  persons  out  of  the  theatre,  and,  indeed,  for  your 
own  sake,  for  I  always  hear  this  tittle-tattle  again,  and  have  it  always  in  my  power 
to  prove  that  I  am  never  influenced  by  any  little  considerations  to  be  unjust  to 
Mrs.  Aldington  or  any  other  performer. 

1  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

1  would  have  answered  your  letter  last  night,  but  I  was  prevented  by  company. 
A  sister,  arrived  from  the  country,  has  taken  up  all  my  time  till  this  moment. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sill,  Southampton-street,  Friday  night,  Nov.  27th,  1775. 

Your  letter  is  very  cross,  and  such  a  one  as  I  had  no  apprehension  T  should  pro¬ 
voke  by  what  I  intended  as  a  respectful  application  for  your  favour  and  protection. 

Among  the  long  train  of  accusations  you  unkindly  urge  against  me,  give  me  leave 
to  exculpate  myself  of  one  only — I  mean  the  charge  of  incivility  to  you  in  returning 
the  part  of  Maria  in  “  The  Duel.”  When  you  recommended  that  part  to  me,  Mr. 
Hopkins  gave  me  the  play,  and  desired  I  would  return  it  in  the  morning ;  it  was 
then  late  at  night.  1  gave  it  a  hasty  reading,  and  returned  it  accordingly,  telling  him 
I  could  not  see  much  in  the  part ;  however,  I  would  play  it  if  Mr.  Garrick  desired  or 
insisted  upon  it.  The  part  was  never  sent  me  ;  the  charge,  therefore,  of  my  sending 
it  back  with  incivility  to  you,  must  certainly  have  arisen  from  some  misinformation. 

There  is  a  coldness,  a  severity,  in  your  letter,  which  at  this  time  adds  greatly  to 
the  affliction  of  your  distressed  humble  servant, 

Frances  Abington. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Mrs.  Abington  has  great  complaints  to  make  to  Mr.  Garrick  respecting  a 
servant  in  his  theatre  for  very  impertinently  writing  against  her  in  the  newspapers 
last  night,  only  for  begging  leave  to  sit  in  the  prompter’s  box  to  see  one  act  of  a  play 
on  a  night  that  she  was  to  perform  in  “Bon  Ton;”  when  her  head  was  dressed, 
ready  to  begin  the  farce,  which  was  the  reason  she  could  not  so  conveniently  go  to 
any  other  part  of  the  house. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


33 


REV.  E.  LLOYD  TO  RIR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  New  Year's-day* 

I  have  seen  belts  advertised  to  guard  against  the  infection  of  the  plague.  You 
have  given  me  repeated  proofs  that  you  carry  something  of  this  kind  about  you. 
Without  some  such  preservative,  how  could  you  possibly — you,  who  are  so  much 
among  the  great — have  kept  untainted  by  their  manners  ?  But  so  it  is,  and  vour 
friendship  continues  as  active  and  sincere,  as  if  you  had  never  seen  a  court.  I  should 
make  some  apology  for  tempting  so  good  a  friend,  and  so  conspicuously  placed,  to  act 
so  much  out  of  the  fashion  ;  but  the  soft  flowers  that  should  compose  the  nosegay  of 
apology,  grow  not  on  our  mountains,  so  I  must  go  to  bed  to-night,  with  the  above 
additional  imperfection  on  my  head.  What  a  melancholy  world  do  we  live  in  ! 
People  are  for  ever  chewing  the  cud,  and  ruminating  on  the  unsuccessful  passages  of 
their  lives— no  recollection  of  their  good  fortunes !  I  would  as  soon  be  a  commis¬ 
sioner  of  bankruptcy,  a  coroner,  or  an  undertaker,  as  be  for  ever  poring  on  the  dark 
side  of  things.  I  am  led  to  the  thought  by  comparing  my  own  state  of  mind  at  pre¬ 
sent,  with  that  which  some  gloomy  souls,  that  I  could  name,  would  have  fallen  into 
on  a  similar  occasion.  The  last  post  brought  me  your  packet,  wherein  I  learn  that 
the  late  shepherdless  flock  is  consigned  to  the  care  of  another.  “  Joy  to  the  shepherd 
and  health  to  the  sheep  !”  is  my  little  canticle  on  the  occasion.  I  remember  my 
worthy  friend  Mr.  Legge  used  to  observe  in  raillery,  with  a  little  dash  of  the  serious, 
that  people  affect  on  most  disappointments  a  complacency  and  acquiescence  bordering 
on  triumph.  Such  behaviour  is  in  general,  I  believe,  constrained  ;  but  I  have,  thanks 
to  Nature,  as  comfortable  a  “  revenue  in  good  spirits”  as  Horatio  had,  and  sing  the 
above  little  canticle  as  cheerily  as  any  Hodge  of  the  valley  whistles  after  his  team — 
and  as  to  the  want  of  success  in  our  last  application,  all  I  say  of  it  is — 

“ - non,  si  male  nunc,  et  olim 

Sic  erit - .” 

The  living  solicitude  does  not,  to  be  sure,  fall  in  cleverly  with  the  line  of  my  con¬ 
nexions  :  there  are  others  that  would  suit  better,  and  we  shall  see  what  “  Time  and 
chance,  that  happen  to  all,”  will  do  relative  to  them.  I  wish,  when  you  next  are 
King,  (which  high  office  I  have  frequently  seen  you  support  most  royally)  you  would 
appoint  Lord  Camden  your  Chancellor ;  we  should  then  have  two  strings  to  our  bow. 

Joy  on  the  success  of  your  new  comedy.  I  hope  the  Christmas  Tale  proved  a 
very  mince-pie  to  pit,  box,  and  gallery.  A  prologue  by  Father  Christmas  is  a  lucky 
thought.  How  did  you  dress  the  merry  good-humoured  Antic?  Did  you  give 
him  cross-garters  about  the  legs,  and  a  twelfth-cake  on  his  head  ?  1  am  perfectly 

hungry  for  the  prologue.  1  have  had  so  many  dainty  bits  from  the  same  hand,  that 
I  know  not  whether  Apollo  lives  better. 

*  I  should  think  this  must  be  really  written  in  1774,  by  the  pieces  which  it  refers  to. — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


F 


34 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


For  the  last  instance  of  your  friendship,  thanks,  sincerest  thanks.  If  it  be  as 
pleasant  to  receive  them  as  1  feel  it  to  return  them,  tins  half  sheet  will  not  be  insipid 
to  you,  as  its  principal  business  is  to  declare  how  gratefully  I  feel  myself,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  humble  servant, 

E.  Lloyd. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  by  one  of  Mrs.  Wilmot’s  letters  that  Mrs.  Garrick  is  not  well — 
if  I  were  JEsculapius,  it  should  not  be  so  long.  I  beg  my  best  respects  to  her.  Pray 
would  you  have  Mrs.  Wilmot’s  letters  returned  you  ?  Shall  I  see  your  prologue  ? 


MR.  R.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Jan.  2nd,  1775. 

I  send  you  the  first  act  of  “  The  Duke  of  Braganza,”  with  the  altered  passages  in 
red  ink,  that  the  comparison  with  the  old  copy,  either  in  your  hands  or  Mr.  Tighe’s, 
may  be  made  easier  by  that  visible  distinction. 

I  think  it  in  many  respects  better  for  the  actors,  as  I  have  deprived  it  of  some 
declamation  and  figures  with  which  it  abounded.  As  much  as  the  time  would  admit, 
I  have  endeavoured  to  conform  to  the  judicious  observations  of  Mr.  Whitehead,  which 
Mr.  Tighe  communicated  to  me.  They  will  be  of  still  greater  use  as  guides  to  my 
unpractised  judgment  in  the  four  subsequent  acts.  They  shall  follow  as  fast  as  I  can 
finish  them,  and  I  think  I  can  engage  to  have  the  whole  copy  completely  in  your 
hands  by  the  middle  of  this  month.  The  second  act  will  give  me  some  trouble,  but 
I  hope  to  have  it  finished  and  sent  in  a  few  days.  Several  transpositions  and  some 
omissions  are  necessary,  particularly  the  long  narrative  by  the  Duchess,  which  is  cold 
and  undramatical.  I  have  given  the  substance  of  the  material  part  of  it  in  a  speech  of 
Almada’s,  in  the  scene  between  him  and  Bibiro,  beginning  with  these  words,  written 
in  red  ink  in  the  copy  :  — 

- “  Urge  that  home, — 

Urge  how  the  Duke’s  affections  to  his  country,  &c.” 

The  third  act  will,  I  think,  require  little  but  retrenching  ;  so  the  performers  may 
set  to  study  the  first  act  and  the  third  immediately. 

The  greatest  part  of  the  fourth  act,  at  least  to  the  entrance  of  Ribiro  to  the  Duke 
and  Duchess,  may  remain  as  it  is.  I  propose,  from  a  hint  of  Mr.  Whitehead’s,  to 
bring  the  Duke  in  to  the  conspirators  towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  act. 

The  scenes  of  the  fifth  act,  from  the  first  entrance  of  the  Duchess  to  the  death  of 
Velasquez,  (so  I  now  call  the  Spanish  minister,  who  was  Alonzo,)  may  remain  as  they 
are,  for  I  cannot  make  them  better.  I  propose  making  Velasquez,  not  Pizarro,  stab 
the  Monk.  It  will  better  account  for  the  strong  effect  upon  Velasquez,  when  he 
sees  a  man  appear,  whom  he  was  certain  he  had  dispatched.  This  I  think  a  great  im¬ 
provement.  I  owe  it  to  the  communication  of  our  friend  Tighe.  I  send  him  this 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


35 


night  a  duplicate  of  the  first  act.  Adieu,  my  dear  Sir :  I  am  ill,  and  miserably  fatigued 
with  my  new  labours  as  an  author,  but  ever 

Your  greatly  obliged  and  affectionate  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 

Airs.  Jephson,  in  our  joint  names,  has  requested  Mrs.  Garrick’s  interest  with  you 
for  a  prologue.  I  hope  your  fertile  brain  will  devise  something  for  me. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAREST  SIR,  Hampstead  Heath,  Jan.  2nd,  1775. 

My  friends  returning  yesterday  to  Winchester,  receive  my  best  thanks  for  the 
indulgence  you  have  shown  them.  I  think  you  never  played  Lusignan  so  happily 
as  on  Saturday  night ;  at  least  you  never  affected  me  in  it  so  much  before.  But  what 
shall  I  say  of  your  other  performers  ?  Are  there  words  to  be  found  that  can  convey 
any  adequate  idea  of  their  incomparable  badness?  Had  I  been  a  cannibal,  I  think 
I  could  scarce  have  ventured  to  sup  upon  them,  so  surely  should  I  have  been  sick 
with  gorging  such  cat’s-meat  and  dog’s-meat.  Have  you  no  better  stuff  behind  the 
scenes  ?  or  can  you  be  so  mistaken  as  to  suppose  you  need  these  wretched  foils  to 
show  you  off  to  advantage  ?  Whether  Miss  Sherry,  Miss  Younge,  Mr.  Brereton,  Mr. 
Reddish,  or  Mr.  Aickin,  was  the  most  contemptible,  I  really  think  no  unprejudiced 
spectator  could  honestly  determine.  Even  sentiment  itself  had  no  effect,  but  could 
scarce  procure  a  feeble  clap  from  our  hard-handed  friends  above-stairs.  To  say  the 
truth,  I  never  saw  such  a  miserable  pack  of  strollers  in  quiet  possession  of  a  Theatre 
Royal.  I  suppose  the  singular  propriety  of  introducing  the  Provencale  dance  after 
the  second  act,  was  hinted  to  you  by  some  lady  of  quality,  who  was  desirous  to  see 
both  Slingsby  and  Garrick  perform  together,  and  yet  was  unwilling  to  arrive  too 
late  at  Lady  Fiddle-faddle’s  rout.  The  play  was  so  cut,  that,  though  we  stayed  it 
out,  we  were  here  at  supper  by  half  an  hour  after  nine.  Every  line  not  absolutely 
necessary  to  the  action  seemed  to  be  omitted.  I  would  have  stayed  part  of  “  The 
Cobbler,”  if  you  would  have  permitted  the  second  act  of  it  to  be  played  before  the 
first,  which  you  might  easily  have  agreed  to,  as  I  am  informed  that  such  a  change 
would  have  been  by  no  means  injurious  to  the  construction  of  the  piece,  and  not  a 
soul  who  has  seen  the  first  act,  can  endure  the  second  into  the  bargain.  If  on  Satur¬ 
day  night  you  had  not  afforded  the  public  a  transient  glimpse  of  yourself,  you  would 
not  have  had  money  enough  in  the  house  to  pay  for  candles.  I  think,  in  a  future 
season,  if  you  have  no  better  actors,  we  may  fairly  excuse  you  from  the  expense  of 
wax,  you  only  granting  11s  in  our  turn  the  ancient  privileges  of  Sadler’s  Wells  ;  viz. 
a  free  use  of  pipes,  porter,  and  shrimps.  Heavens  preserve  you  !  and  keep  me  from 
ever  seeing  more  of  Zara  than  the  second  act ! 

Once  more  let  me  thank  you  for  our  places,  and  believe  me, 

Your  very  sincere  and  obliged, 

v  2 


G.  Steevens. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


36 


MRS.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  E.  TIGHE. 


DEAIt  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Jan.  5th,  1775. 

Mu.  Jephson  lias  again  put  the  pen  into  my  hands: — the  first  act  has  been 
finished,  since  the  second  of  this  month.  Unluckily  there  has  not  been  a  packet  at 
this  side,  or  you  would  by  this  time  have  received  it.  Mr.  Lees  (for  expedition) 
enclosed  one  copy  to  you,  with  almanacks,  6cc.  and  another  copy  directed  to  Mr. 
Garrick.  He  is  advancing  in  the  second  act,  according  to  the  ideas  which  have  been 
communicated  by  you  from  London,  and  several  excellent  hints  from  the  judicious 
here.  He  says  this  will  be  the  most  troublesome  part  of  the  whole — that  he  is  to 
collect  the  fragments  of  his  own  incapacity,  and  obliged  to  live  upon  nothing  else  till 
they  are  digested.  He  begs  you  will  prepare  Miss  Younge  in  the  fourth  and  fifth 
acts,  as  her  part  in  them  will  be  very  little,  if  at  all  altered.  If  you  can  have  in¬ 
terest  with  the  rest  of  the  performers,  and  prevail  upon  them  to  get  ready  in  the  first, 
third,  and  fourth  acts,  he  thinks  it  would  be  of  use,  and  all  the  fifth  as  it  stands  in 
your  copy  from  the  entrance  of  the  Duchess  and  Ines,  as  very  little  alterations  are 
necessary  to  be  made  in  them.  He  hopes  to  have  the  second  act  finished  in  a  few 
days,  and  put  into  your  hands ;  the  rest  will,  I  hope,  soon  follow.  With  Mr.  Jeph- 
son’s  best  wishes  and  mine,  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  much  obliged  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

Jane  Jephson. 

Can  you  send  me  a  list  of  the  actors’  names  to  the  dramatis  personas  ? 

I  flatter  myself  Mr.  Smith  will  exert  himself  for  an  acquaintance,  and  that  you 
will  have  time  to  mellow  his  enunciation,  which  is  sometimes  rather  harsh. 

Ever  yours, 

R.  J. 


(Note  enclosed  in  this  letter,  directed  “  Edward  Tighe,  Esq.  No.  2,  King’s  Bench  Walk, 

Inner  Temple,  London.”) 

Will  you  be  so  good  as  to  change  the  following  hemistich  (line  265  of  Act  I.) 

“  And  brave  King  Philip’s  anger,” 

into  this, —  “  And  rank  himself  with  monarchs.” 

Pizarro’s  answer  must  be, — 

“  Oh  take  heed, 

Consider,  Sir,  that  power  still  awes  the  world.” 

Alter  also  line  209  of  the  same  act,  spoken  by  Almada,  from 

“  Thou  art  a  true  one,” 

into  this,  “  Honest  Ribiro  !” 

Y ours  most  sincerely, 


The  second  act  will  go  off  in  two  or  three  days  at  most. 
Castle,  Friday,  6th  January. 


R.  Jephson. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


37 


REV.  D.  WILLIAMS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Chelsea,  Jan.  7,  1775. 

The  most  unfortunate  event  that  could  have  befallen  me,  the  loss  of  an  excellent 
and  affectionate  wife,  has  been  the  occasion  of  your  not  hearing  from  me  immediately 
on  Mr.  Mossop’s  death. 

I  had  it  not  in  my  power  to  attend  him  in  the  first  days  of  his  illness.  I  found 
him  preparing  for  death  with  that  extraordinary  solemnity  which  accompanied  all  his 
important  actions.  He  had  gone  through  the  general  forms  of  the  church  ;  but  I  be¬ 
lieve  only  as  religious  and  edifying  forms,  and  unattended  with  any  discourse  on 
the  state  of  his  mind.  His  conversations  with  me  were  the  most  interesting  that 
can  well  be  conceived ;  and,  from  the  extreme  dejection  of  my  own  mind,  and 
the  high  and  tragical  tone  in  which  he  expressed  himself,  they  made  a  dreadful  im¬ 
pression  on  me.  His  religion  was  tinctured  by  the  characters  he  had  studied  ;  and 
many  of  the  attributes  of  God  were  the  qualities  of  a  Zanga  or  a  Bajazet. 

Among  other  things  which  gave  him  uneasiness,  and  made  him  greatly  appre¬ 
hend  the  displeasure  of  that  God  before  whom  he  was  going  to  appear,  his  behaviour 
to  you  was  not  the  least  distressing.  He  accused  himself  severely  of  having  attri¬ 
buted  motives  of  conduct  to  you,  which  he  firmly  believed  you  incapable  of.  He 
had  thought  himself  neglected  by  you  in  his  distress,  and  that  you  sent  him  terms 
which  you  knew  he  would  not  comply  with,  because  you  did  not  wish  to  see  him  on 
the  stage.  He  saw  that  he  had  been  deceived  by  an  excessive  pride  ;  and  lamented 
the  injustice  he  had  done  you,  not  only  in  some  pecuniary  articles,  which  he  did 
not  thoroughly  explain  to  me,  but  in  giving  ill  impressions  of  your  character  to  his 
acquaintance.  The  very  night  in  which  he  died,  he  renewed  this  conversation.  He 
often  cried  out,  “  Oh,  my  dear  friend,  how  mean  and  little  does  Mr.  Garrick’s  present 
behaviour  make  me  appear  in  your  eyes,  to  whom  I  have  given  so  different  an 
idea  of  him  !  Great  God  forgive  me !  Witness,  my  dear  Williams,  that  1  die,  not 
only  in  charity  with  him,  but  that  I  honour  him  as  a  virtuous  and  great  man.  God 
Almighty  bless  and  prosper  him  for  ever !” — I  asked,  if  he  chose  I  should  make 
any  public  use  of  what  he  had  said,  as  a  kind  of  satisfaction  to  Mr.  Garrick.  He  was 
then  much  exhausted,  and  would  only  say,  “  I  will  leave  it  to  your  discretion.” 

My  intention,  for  some  days,  was  to  convey  the  substance  of  this  letter  to  you 
through  the  channel  of  the  public  papers.  But  on  second  thoughts,  this  method 
appeared  to  be  the  best.  Though  you  may  know  but  little  of  me,  and  Mr.  John¬ 
ston  of  your  theatre  was  the  only  person  besides  who  had  heard  him  say  things  of  this 
nature,  I  dare  say  you  will  not  doubt  the  authenticity  of  the  information.  And  I 
think  it  must  give  you  pleasure,  not  only  as  a  testimony  to  your  character,  which 
cannot  be  suspected,  but  as  reflecting  some  honour  on  the  memory  ot  a  man,  who, 
though  he  was  unfortunate  and  faulty,  possessed  many  great  and  good  qualities. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  D.  W  illiams. 

Endorsed  : — “  Rev.  Mr.  Williams’s  letter  to  me  upon 
Mossop’s  death  and  my  answer.” 


38 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  REV.  D.  WILLIAMS. 


SIR,  Adelphi,  Jan.  8th,  1775. 

I  thank  you  for  your  most  affecting  letter.  Your  account  of  poor  Mossop’s  death 
distressed  me  greatly.  I  have  been  often  told  that  his  friends  never  spoke  kindly  of 
me  ;  and  I  am  now  at  a  loss  to  guess  what  behaviour  of  mine  from  the  first  moment 
I  knew  him  till  the  time  of  his  death  could  have  given  him  that  unkind  and,  I  hope, 
unmerited  turn  of  mind  against  me.  With  regard  to  his  returning  to  us,  it  was  his 
own  peculiar  resolution  of  not  letting  us  know  his  terms,  that  prevented  his  engage¬ 
ment  at  our  theatre.  Had  I  known  his  distress,  I  should  most  certainly  have  relieved 
it.  He  was  too  great  a  credit  to  our  profession  not  to  have  done  all  in  our  power  to 
have  made  him  easy  at  least,  if  not  happy. 

The  money  transaction  is  past ;  he  is  gone  and  I  had  long  ago  forgotten  that  I 
thought  in  that  instance  he  behaved  not  kindly  to  me.  Let  me  once  again  thank 
you  for  your  very  polite  and  agreeable  manner  in  giving  me  this  intelligence  of  our 
departed  friend,  for  he  was  truly  mine  in  those  moments  when  the  heart  of  man  has 
no  disguise.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 

Excuse  my  scrawl,  as  I  have  the  gout  in  my  hand. 


MR.  J.  HENDERSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Bath,  Jan.  9,  17 75. 

It  was  no  small  surprise  to  me  to  receive  this  morning  your  letter  of  the  7th  inst. 
so  strongly  expressive  of  resentment  against  me  for  what  I  did  myself  the  honour 
of  writing  to  you  on  the  4th.  I  immediately  had  recourse  to  the  copy  in  my  book, 
the  first  paragraph  of  which  I  should  presume  might  pass  uncensured,  as  it  is  merely 
complimentary.  The  second  was  in  consequence  of  your  own  proposals  in  your  letter 
to  Mr.  Taylor ,  wherein  you  say  (after  disapproving  my  offer  of  submitting  my  talents 
to  your  inspection  for  two  nights  this  present  season,)  “  So  much  for  your  scheme,  my 
dear  Sir  ;  now  for  mine:  if  Mr.  Henderson  chooses  to  be  with  me,  why  should  he  not 
choose  three  parts,  Hamlet,  Shy  lock,  Benedict,  or  what  he  pleases  to  appear  in  next 
season,  and  so  have  elbow  room  to  display  all  his  comic  and  tragic  powers  ?  I  will 
either  come  into  certain  terms  with  him,  or  conditioned,  as  he  and  his  friends  please.5' 

From  the  above  I  mentioned  my  proposals,  and  cannot  find,  on  looking  over 
them,  that  any  insult  can  be  gathered  from  them — at  least  I  am  sure  none  was  in¬ 
tended.  The  third  paragraph  is  only  declaratory  of  my  reasons  for  stipulating  for 
certain  characters,  agreeable  to  your  own  permission  for  the  first  season,  and  what  I 
concluded  might  be  equally  necessary  for  my  reputation  (which  you  will  pardon  me 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


39 


if  I  have  an  eye  to)  the  remainder  of  the  term  that  I  might  engage  with  you.  At  the 
same  time  please  to  observe,  that  from  my  mentioning  my  hopes  of  having  the  opinion 
of  Mr.  Garrick,  I  very  plainly  pointed  out  that  I  should  with  great  cheerfulness  put 
myself  forward  in  such  other  characters  as  he  might  propose,  provided  I  did  not 
feel  myself  absolutely  incapable  of  appearing  in  them.  The  last  paragraph  is  merely 
on  the  consideration  of  salary :  if  there  is  any  insult  in  that,  both  your  friends 
and  mine  may  have  given  me  expectations  which  I  am  undeserving  of : — and  as  to  the 
engagement  for  no  shorter  term  than  three  years,  it  is  what  I  always  proposed, 
let  me  engage  with  whichsoever  London  theatre  I  might. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

J.  Henderson. 


MR.  J.  TAYLOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Circus,  January  9th,  1775. 

Mr.  Henderson  showed  me  a  very  extraordinary  letter  he  received  from  you  in 
answer  to  some  proposals  he  made  of  coming  to  Drury -lane.  You  say,  whether 
it  was  written  by  himself,  or  dictated  by  his  friends,  it  is  equally  insulting.  I  feel 
myself  slanted  at  in  that  expression,  as  I  know  you  must  be  convinced,  not  only 
of  my  attachment  to  him,  but  of  the  treaty  having  in  some  measure  passed  through 
my  hands ;  and  therefore  I  cannot  avoid  replying  to  it.  I  confess,  I  did  advise  the 
answer,  and  your  own  letter  to  me,  wherein  you  propose  his  coming  and  playing 
Hamlet,  Shylock,  Benedict,  or  what  he  pleases,  in  the  next  season,  and  that  you 
would  come  either  into  certain  or  conditional  terms  with  him,  was  the  foundation  of 
it.  I  never  advise  what  I  will  not  openly  avow  ;  or  stand  silent  by,  and  see  an  inno¬ 
cent  man  censured,  where  no  blame  lies. 

Henderson,  therefore,  is  not  the  principal  in  this  matter,  but  /  am  ;  and  will  in 
any  shape  justify  it,  both  as  a  civil  and  proper  answer,  when  a  negotiation  is  on  foot, 
whereon  the  future  reputation  and  livelihood  of  a  deserving  young  man  so  essentially 
depends.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

John  Taylor. 


MR.  J.  TAYLOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


Bath,  Saturday  Evening. 


I  send  this  as  a  messenger  to  know  how  you  stand  affected  to  me.  Are  you 
in  wrath,  or  the  same  friendly  man  I  ever  found  you  l  I  shall  draw  my  conclusion 
by  either  hearing  from  you  or  not,  on  Tuesday  evening  next,  at  Mr.  Luthei  s, 
in  Mount-street,  Grosvenor-square.  A  line  or  two  will  inform  me  whether  I  may 


40 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


call  on  you  without  a  shy  look,  which  I  would  not  let  you  have  the  pain  of  giving, 
nor  myself  of  receiving. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

John  Taylor. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  J.  TAYLOR. 

DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Jan.  13th,  1775. 

My  health  obliging  me  to  go  into  the  country,  I  did  not  receive  your  letter 
till  this  afternoon.  What !  is  Mr.  Taylor’s  friendship,  so  warmly  expressed  hereto¬ 
fore,  and  not  forfeited  by  any  neglect  of  mine,  to  be  given  up  to  the  later  acquaint¬ 
ance  ?  I  will  not  quote  Shakspeare  upon  you,  lest  I  should  make  bad  worse.  I  will 
say  a  few  words  upon  this  disagreeable  subject,  and  never  trouble  you  or  your  friend 
again  upon  it.  Let  the  adviser  of  the  proposals  to  me  be  whom  he  may,  he  can  have 
little  knowledge  of  the  concerns  of  a  theatre,  if  he  thinks  any  manager  in  his  senses 
will  accept  them.  But  you  say.  Sir,  that  these  proposals  are  built  upon  mine.  What  ! 
because  I  would  not  let  the  young  man  run  any  risk  by  playing  twice  this  season, 
but,  like  a  friend,  offered  every  assistance  for  his  appearance  in  the  next  to  the  greatest 
advantage,  that  therefore  I  should  have  this  young  man  to  say  no  to  my  opinion ; 
that  he  should  have  his  choice  of  parts  for  three  years  afterwards,  without  regard  to 
public  approbation,  justice  to  other  performers,  or  the  rights  of  a  manager?  His 
words  are  so  very  extraordinary  that  I  will  copy  them  for  your  reconsideration. 
After  saying  that  he  will  choose  four  characters  the  first  year,  four  the  second, 
and  four  the  third,  “  which  are  to  be  chosen  from  our  plays  in  acting,”  he  adds, 
“  reserving  to  myself  the  same  privilege  of  rejecting  any  parts  but  what  I  shall  my¬ 
self  agree  for  at  the  beginning  of  each  season.  My  reasons,  Sir,  for  stipulating 
so  particularly  are  not  in  the  least  from  an  apprehension  of  your  allotting  me  im¬ 
proper  characters,  or  forcing  me  to  appear  to  my  disadvantage,”  (then  why  is  my 
right  of  judging  to  be  taken  from  me  ?  We  shall  hear,)  “  but  lest  your  good-nature 
and  partiality  to  me  might  lead  you  to  think  more  favourably  of  my  talents  than 
they  deserve,  and  of  which  I  must  beg  leave  always  to  have  a  power  of  judging 
myself,  and  from  my  own  feelings.”  Thus,  I  say  again,  this  young  actor  is  to  be  abso¬ 
lute  manager  of  himself,  “  though  he  has  not  the  least  apprehension  of  my  allotting 
him  improper  characters,  or  forcing  him  to  appear  to  his  disadvantage.”  Surely,  this 
reason  for  depriving  me  of  my  right  of  judging  is  very  particular,  at  least.  Towards 
the  end  of  your  letter,  you  are  pleased  to  say,  “  that  you  will  justify  in  any  shape 
that  the  proposals  were  both  civil  and  proper  to  which  I  answer,  that  I  totally  differ 
with  you  in  every  shape,  and  declare  that  Mr.  H.’s  proposals  were  not  only  both  un¬ 
civil  and  improper,  but  impracticable. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


41 


MR.  G.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  BROTHER,  Jan.  17th,  1775. 

Yesterday  I  received  yours,  but  I  was  so  indifferent  that  I  was  obliged  to  send 
an  excuse  to  Lord  Vernon  that  I  could  not  dine  with  him,  and  it  rained  so  very 
hard  all  day  that  I  durst  not  venture  out,  and  behold,  when  I  went  this  morning  with 
Mr.  Taylor’s  letter,  I  found  he  was  set  out  early  in  the  morning  with  his  son  to  Hack¬ 
ney  school.  I  was  greatly  vexed  ;  but  I  left  the  letter,  and  whilst  I  was  talking  to 
the  servant,  up  came  Mr.  Henderson.  Mrs.  Taylor  will  send  it  to  him  in  a  trunk.  I 
told  our  friend  Mr.  Sharpe  the  whole  story,  who  laughed  at  him  for  his  ignorance 
and  folly ;  and  indeed,  by  his  letter  he  wrote  to  you  last,  you  have  no  great  loss  of 
his  friendship.  Our  friend  Sharpe  observed  that  for  some  time  Taylor  never  so 
much  as  mentioned  your  name,  which  surprised  him  much,  and  that  he  thought 
he  knew  better  and  more  of  theatrical  matters  than  to  vindicate  such  terms.  I 
suppose  you  will  see  him  when  in  town,  and  that  Cumberland  will  bring  you  to¬ 
gether.  Mr.  Foote  set  off  for  town  yesterday  morning,  but,  what  is  very  extraor¬ 
dinary,  is  to  dine  with  General  Smith,  (at  Sir  Matthew  White’s,)  and  likewise  lie  all 
night  in  his  way  there,  and  this  by  strong  invitation.  Foote  is  afraid  they  will  put 
him  in  the  coal-hole.  I  have  sent  him  the  copy  of  your  letter,  and  likewise  Mr. 
Taylor’s  and  Henderson's  last,  lest  you  should  want  them.  I  intend  setting  off  for 
town  next  week,  but  cannot  tell  the  day,  as  I  come  with  a  partner  in  a  post-chaise. 
Love  to  sister  and  the  boys,  and  Yours  ever  most  truly  and  affectionately, 

George  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Palmer  called  on  me  this  morning,  and  begs  his  best  respects.  I  find  he 
has  given  Henderson  this  month  to  consider  if  he  will  sign  the  articles.  Henderson 
plays  Lear  on  Thursday.  Palmer  goes  on  very  well,  and  gets  a  great  deal  of  money. 
I  will  send  you  a  full  account  of  Lear.  I  like  your  last  letter  well. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  J.  TAYLOR. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Jan.  20th,  17 io. 

Much  business  at  the  theatre  prevented  my  writing  to  you  this  morning.  I 
cannot  alter  my  opinion  of  Mr.  H’s  proposals.  Io  say  no  more  of  them,  you  seem 
to  wish  that  he  should  make  his  appearance  upon  our  stage.  As  I  have  not  seen 
him  act,  and  cannot  guess  at  his  merit,  which  is  so  variously  spoken  of,  1  will  agree 
that  Mr.  Henderson  shall  perform  any  two  parts  at  the  beginning  of  next  season 
which  he  shall  please  to  fix  upon,  and  afterwards  upon  others  that  we  shall  both  agree 
upon  ;  for,  after  his  choice  of  two,  I  cannot  give  up  my  right  of  proposing  and  con¬ 
senting  to  any  body.  After  he  has  performed  ten  or  twelve  times,  and  the  public 


G 


VOL.  II. 


42 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


voice  will  be  known,  let  two  gentlemen,  who  know  something  of  theatrical  matters, 
one  chosen  by  him  and  one  by  me,  meet,  and  let  them  fix  upon  his  salary  for  that 
season.  Upon  their  disagreement,  a  third  may  be  called  in,  and  he  must  determine 
the  difference.  I  cannot  do  or  say  more,  but  that  I  am  very  truly, 

Your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 

To  make  something  certain  for  Mr.  H.  and  the  referees  to  go  upon,  suppose  we 
agree  that  his  salary  shall  not  be  less  than  five  pounds  a  week,  nor  more  than  ten  for 
the  season,  with  a  benefit. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 


MADAM,  Hampton,  Jan.  28th,  1775. 

The  famous  French  writer  Fontenelle  takes  notice  that  nothing  is  so  difficult 
to  a  man  of  sensibility  as  writing  to  a  lady,  even  with  just  grounds  of  complaint. 
However,  having  promised,  I  must  answer  your  last  very  extraordinary  note.  You 
accuse  me  of  incivility  for  writing  to  you  through  Mr.  Hopkins.  Did  not  Mrs. 
Abington  first  begin  that  mode  of  correspondence  ?  and  without  saying  a  word  to  me, 
did  she  not  send  back  her  part  in  the  new  comedy,  and  say  that  she  had  settled  that 
matter  with  Mr.  Cumberland  ?  Could  a  greater  affront  be  offered  to  any  manager  ? 
And  was  not  your  proposing  to  Mr.  Hopkins  that  you  would  speak  my  epilogue 
written  for  the  character,  while  another  person  was  to  perform  the  part,  not  only  mere 
mockery  of  me,  but  destroying  the  play  at  once  ?  Let  your  warmest  and  most 
partial  friend  decide  between  us.  Whenever  you  are  really  ill,  I  feel  both  for  you 
and  myself;  but  the  servant  said  last  Wednesday,  that  you  were  well  and  had  a  great 
deal  of  company. 

You  mention  your  great  fatigue.  What  is  the  stage  come  to,  if  I  must  continu¬ 
ally  hear  of  your  hard  labour,  when  from  the  beginning  of  the  season  to  this  time 
you  have  not  played  more  than  twice  a  week  ! 

Mrs.  Oldfield  performed  Lady  Townley  for  twenty-nine  nights  successively.  Let 
us  now  examine  how  just  and  genteel  your  complaint  is  against  me.  I  promised  you 
that  I  would  procure  a  character  of  consequence  to  be  written  on  purpose  for  you, 
and  that  it  should  be  your  own  fault,  if  you  were  not  on  the  highest  pinnacle  of 
your  profession.  I  have  been  at  great  pains,  and  you  know  it,  to  be  as  good  as  my 
word. 

I  directed  and  assisted  the  author  to  make  a  small  character  a  very  considerable 
one  for  you ;  I  spared  no  expense  in  dresses,  music,  scenes,  and  decorations  for  the 
piece;  and  now  the  fatigue  of  acting  this  character  is  very  unjustly,  as  well  as  un¬ 
kindly,  brought  against  me. 

Had  you  played  this  part  forty  times  instead  of  twenty ,  my  gains  would  be  less 
than  by  any  other  successful  play  I  have  produced  in  my  management. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


43 


The  greatest  favour  I  can  confer  upon  an  actress  is  to  give  her  the  best  character 
in  a  favourite  piece ;  and  the  longer  it  runs,  the  more  merit  I  have  with  her,  and 
ought  to  receive  her  thanks  instead  of  complaints.  In  short.  Madam,  if  you  play,  you 
are  uneasy,  and  if  you  do  not,  you  are  more  so.  After  what  you  said  to  Mr.  Becket, 
and  what  I  promised,  I  little  thought  to  have  your  farce  drawn  in  to  make  up  the 
bundle  of  complaints.  However,  to  make  an  end  of  this  disagreeable  business,  as 
the  piece  is  written  out,  I  am  now  ready  to  do  it,  and  that  you  may  have  Palmer,  I 
will  give  up  the  revived  comedy  ;  but  even  this,  I  know,  will  not  satisfy  you — nor 
can  you  fix  in  your  mind  what  will. 

Were  I  to  look  back,  what  real  complaints  have  I  to  make  for  leading  me  into  a 
fool’s  paradise  last  summer  about  a  certain  comedy  !  and  an  alarming  secret  you  told 
me  lately  of  a  disagreeable  quarrel.  On  my  return  home  the  same  morning  I  met 
one  of  the  parties,  and  instead  of  a  quarrel  between  them,  they  were  upon  the  best 
terms,  had  never  had  the  least  difference,  and  Mr.  M.  [Murphy]  was  writing  at  Mr. 
T’s  [Tighe’s]  desire,  a  prologue  for  his  friend’s  [Jephson’s]  new  tragedy. 

Air.  Garrick  most  solemnly  assures  Mrs.  Abington  that  nobody  has  in  the  least 
influenced  him  in  this  affair,  and  he  hopes  the  above  recital  will  convince  her  of  the 
truth  of  his  assertion.  I  am,  Madam,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  This  letter  to  Mrs.  Abington  was  not  sent.” 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  Monday,  Jan.  31,  1775. 

As  the  Pantheon  is  unfortunately  postponed  till  to-morrow,  I  am  satisfied  that  it 
will  so  affect  my  benefit  as  to  render  it  of  no  service  to  me,  nor,  if  it  stands  for  that 
night,  shall  I  expect  to  get  a  single  shilling.  I  most  humbly  entreat  you  therefore  to 
assist  me  at  this  crisis,  and  shall  ever  acknowledge  it  as  the  greatest  kindness  to  me 
if  you  will  defer  my  second  benefit  to  Thursday  or  Saturday  next,  and  either  play 
yourself,  or  substitute  some  strong  play  in  the  stead  of  it.  I  am  at  present  in  the 
greatest  anxiety  on  this  affair,  and  beg  you  will  relieve  me  as  soon  as  possible  by  a 
line  to,  Sir,  Your  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

T.  Francklin. 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  kind  offer  of  a  few  lines  to  my  prologue, 
which,  I  doubt  not,  will  be  much  better  than  any  I  can  myself  produce.  I  suppose 

G  2 


44 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


they  will  suit  the  tragic  as  well  as  the  comic  muse,  but  of  that  we  must  consider 
when  you  return  to  town.  In  the  mean  time,  if  any  thing  occurs  to  you  that  may 
serve  for  the  groundwork  of  an  epilogue,  you  will  communicate  it  to  me,  and  I  will 
work  it  up  myself. 

The  scene  of  action  is  supposed  to  lie  in  the  North,  somewhere  near  York.  The 
first  scene  may  be  an  open  country  field,  &c.  with  an  opening  or  front  of  a  tent 
appearing  at  the  extremity,  supposed  to  be  fitted  up  for  Matilda,  and  to  which  she 
retires  on  seeing  Morcar  at  a  distance. 

The  scene  at  the  opening  of  the  second  Act  may  be  not  a  prison,  but  a  private 
apartment  in  some  castle  or  fortress  in  the  possession  of  Morcar. 

In  Act  third,  the  scene  may,  I  think,  be  the  same  as  in  the  first. 

Act  fourth,  the  scene  must  be  in  an  apartment  belonging  to  Siward. 

Act  fifth,  Morcar’s  habitation  :  lvhatever  you  please  to  make  it — an  old  envious 
castle,  &c.  the  same  throughout  the  act. 

As  we  have  no  triumphs,  processions,  altars,  &c.  in  the  piece,  I  could  wish  to 
have  a  pleasing  scene  or  two,  especially  to  the  first  Act ;  with  good  old  English 
dresses,  as  worn  in  the  time  of  William  the  Conqueror. 

But  all  this  I  submit  to  your  own  taste,  judgment,  and  inclination  ;  and  am  in 
great  haste,  Your  obliged  friend  and  servant, 

T.  Francklin. 

I  shall  revise  and  shorten  the  scenes  as  you  desire. 


AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  RECEIPTS  OF  “  MATILDA.” 


1775. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

Jan.  21st, 

1st  Night 

.  220 

7 

6 

23rd, 

2nd  Do 

.  153 

13 

0 

26th, 

4th  Do. 

.  174 

9 

6 

28th, 

5th  Do. 

.  205 

14 

0 

31st, 

6th  Do. 

.  165 

1 

0 

Feb.  2nd, 

7th  Do. 

.  221 

4 

0 

Manager’s 

six  nights 

1140 

9 

0 

Ditto  charges  at  100/.  per  night 

600 

0 

0 

540 

9 

0 

Loss  by  Author’s  three  nights 

undercharged 

79 

10 

0 

Manager’s  balance 

£460 

19 

0 

Endorsed, 


“  Letters  from  the  righteous  Dr.  F - n 

about  his  tragedy,  with  the  account 
of  Matilda’s  receipts. 


AUTHOR’S  NIGHTS. 


£ 

s. 

d. 

Jan.  24th,  3rd  Night 

.  196 

9 

0 

Feb.  3rd,  8th  Do. 

.  170 

8 

0 

7th,  9th  Do. 

.  190 

0 

0 

5.56 

17 

0 

Three  nights  charged  at 

73/.  1 0$.  per  Night 

.  220 

10 

0 

Author’s  balance 

£336 

7 

0 

DAVID  GARRICK. 


45 


MR.  J.  HENDERSON  TO  MR.  J.  TAYLOR. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Feb.  1,  1775. 

I  ask  your  pardon  for  not  acknowledging  sooner  your  favour  of  the  21st  of 
January.  I  am  almost  sure  you  will  excuse  me  when  I  tell  you  the  true  reason,  which 
is,  that  my  benefit  was  appointed  just  at  that  time,  and,  as  we  have  only  a  week's  notice, 
that  week  is  generally  very  fully  employed  in  arranging  our  small  interests,  &c. ;  at 
least  it  was  so  with  me. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  proposals,  dear  Sir,  I  cannot  positively  reply  to,  because  the  post 
following  them  brought  me  offers  from  Mr.  Harris  of  Covent-Garden  Theatre,  which 
I  have  under  consideration.  I  am  very  sorry  Mr.  Garrick  still  has  that  unfavourable 
opinion  of  me,  which  I  am  sure  must  be  very  strong,  since  your  arguments  and 
mediation  have  not  power  to  change  it :  I  am  not,  however,  the  less  obliged  to 
you,  and  shall  through  life  retain  the  liveliest  sense  of  your  candour  and  liberal 
spirit.  I  am,  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  dear  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

John  Henderson. 


MR.  J.  HENDERSON  TO  MR.  J.  TAYLOR. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Feb.  2,  1775. 

Since  I  did  myself  the  honour  of  writing  to  you  last,  I  have  received  farther 
offers  from  Mr.  Harris ;  and  as  he  proposes  to  engage  me  for  three  years,  Mr.  Garrick 
only  for  one:  and  as  there  appears  to  be  more  obstacles  to  my  rising  at  Drury- 
Lane  than  at  Covent-Garden,  Mr.  Reddish  and  Mr.  Smith  having  possession  of 
those  very  characters  in  which  I  must  chiefly  hope  to  distinguish  myself,  I  cannot 
help  thinking  it  most  for  my  advantage  to  engage  at  Covent-Garden  :  this  I  thought 
proper  to  acquaint  you  with,  that  Mr.  Garrick  may  have  no  complaint  against  me 
on  this  subject. 

I  flatter  myself,  Sir,  that,  as  you  are  acquainted  with  Mr.  Harris,  you  will  speak 
of  me  to  him  with  the  same  friendly  candour  and  warmth  which  I  have  hitherto  had 
so  many  occasions  to  thank  you  for. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged,  &c. 

,T.  Henderson. 


ANTONIO  CARARA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Venice,  Feb.  8th,  1775. 

I  received  the  favour  of  yours,  and  am  vastly  pleased  to  find  that  you  have  still 
the  same  opinion  of  your  faithful  Antonio.  Nothing  could  be  more  flattering  to  me 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


46 


than  your  confidence,  placed  (give  me  leave  to  say)  a  propos.  I  have  already  found  out 
the  woman,  and  have  almost  settled  the  affair.  She  is  not  handsome,  but  young.  For 
her  figure,  one  ought  rather  to  be  pleased  than  otherwise,  but  her  legs  are  superior  to 
any  I  ever  saw,  so  rapid  they  are  in  their  motion  ;  she  is  legere ,  and  very  vigorous, 
and  more  comic  than  serious  in  her  way  of  dancing.  In  a  word,  I  think  her  by  far 
superior  to  Mademoiselle  Hidoux  in  every  respect.  Had  not  our  countrymen 
brought  on  our  side  of  the  Alps  the  notion  of  your  customs  and  your  wealth,  we  could 
have  things  at  a  very  cheap  rate  ;  but  now  tout  est gate.  Nevertheless,  for  the  salary, 
I  hope  to  reduce  her  to  three  hundred  and  twenty-five  pounds,  which  I  think  she 
really  deserves; — consider  that  from  Venice  to  London  and  back  again  she  is  absolutely 
to  spend  the  third  part  of  her  salary.  With  regard  to  the  benefit,  though  a  stranger 
to  your  country,  she  knows  that  it  is  customary,  and  she  insists  upon  it :  therefore,  if 
you  think  proper  to  give  her  the  benefit,  and  what  I  have  mentioned,  I  flatter  myself 
you  may  have  her,  though  her  last  word  yesterday  was  three  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds.  Observe  that  she  has  here,  for  the  Carnival  only,  one  hundred  and  forty  Eng¬ 
lish  pounds.  Should  these  propositions  be  acceptable,  you  must  be  so  kind  as  to  send 
me  immediately  the  contract  with  your  signature,  in  which  you  must  likewise  call  her 
first  dancer  i  conditio  sine  qua  non  : — for  the  other  formalities,  as  usual  in  all  the  agree¬ 
ments  you  make  in  your  theatrical  contracts.  Could  you  find  any  person  in  London 
to  write  this  contract  in  Italian,  it  would  be  more  pleasing  to  the  girl.  Don't  lose 
time,  because  she  goes  away  towards  the  latter  end  of  next  month,  and  we  have  not 
in  Italy  her  second  :  depend  entirely  upon  me  for  this.  Her  name  is  Puccini.  With 
regard  to  the  men,  we  have  here  at  present  two  very  good,  but  their  pretences  are 
superior  to  those  of  the  lady,  who,  though  in  my  idea  at  least  equal  to  them,  is  still 
more  moderate  in  her  demands,  being  willing  to  come  to  England,  where  she  pro¬ 
bably  expects  some  other  profits  peculiar  to  her  sex.  The  demand  for  the  dancers  is 
four  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  which  I  think  exorbitant.  Let  me  know  your  in¬ 
tentions  about  them  likewise  ;  but  if  you  have  Slingsby,  I  don’t  see  why  you  should 
have  two  dancers  of  the  same  character,  as  they  dance  grotesco  and  mezzo  carattere. 
I  beg  an  answer  immediately,  and  the  contract  with  the  answer,  if  you  like  the  pro¬ 
posals. 

Mrs.  Carara  desires  you  would  be  so  obliging  to  present  her  best  respects  to 
Mrs.  Garrick.  Accept  the  same  from  us  both.  Please  to  direct  as  usual,  chez  Con- 
rade  Martens,  Esq.  Believe  me  Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Antonio  Carara. 

P.  S.  My  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  Pray,  Sir,  let  me  know  how  they 
like  Mademoiselle  Hidoux. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


47 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  March  llth,  1775. 

Your  haste  in  parting  with  me  prevented  a  possibility  of  my  explaining  myself. 

1  meant  not  to  quit  yon  unhandsomely,  or  without  acquainting  you  with  the  causes 
of  my  uneasiness,  which  had  you  given  me  leave  to  do,  perhaps  you  might  have  been 
inclined  to  remove.  I  have  no  engagement  elsewhere,  so,  had  my  situation  been  made 
agreeable  to  me,  I  should  have  been  at  your  command.  It  has  not  been  so  this  season 
either  in  terms  or  employment ;  but  had  you  offered  me  much  less,  I  should  not  have 
said  one  word  against  them.  I  own  I  flattered  myself  (on  Mr.  Lacy’s  withdrawing) 
with  some  little  consideration  ;  and  I  have  met  with  many  inconveniences  in  the  bu¬ 
siness,  which  I  would  not  trouble  you  about. 

I  wish  you  would  indulge  me  with  an  interview  and  permit  me  to  speak  fully  on 
this  subject,  as  I  value  your  good  opinion  above  that  of  any  man  alive,  and  think  you 
too  generous  to  condemn  me  totally  unheard. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  vour  most  obliged  and  still  sincere, 

W.  Smith. 

If  you  favour  me  with  your  notice,  pray  direct  to  me  at  the  house.  I  hope  you 
will  see  me. 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  March  14th,  1775. 

Though  you  have  made  my  intention  of  leaving  your  theatre  very  public,  I 
hope  I  may  trust  to  your  honour  and  discretion  not  to  mention  a  certain  person 
as  the  occasion  of  it. 

I  think,  Sir,  from  every  thing  that  has  passed  between  you  and  me  relative  to 
that  person,  you  could  not  possibly  expect  me  to  remain  with  you  unless  you  could 
have  engaged  us  both.*  I  am  with  a  very  true  sense  of  the  many  obligations  I  have 
received  from  you, 

Your  most  sincere  and  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

AY.  Smith. 

*  Smith  has  himself  said  before,  that  Mrs.  Hartley’s  being  at  the  other  house  might  tend  to  lessen  the 
scandal  as  to  the  connexion  ;  but  the  policy  was  sufficiently  obvious,  it  secured  two  salaries,  if  the  manager 
wished  really  but  for  one  of  the  parties. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


48 


MR.  F.  GENTLEMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Castle-yard,  Holborn,  March  14th,  1775. 

You  it  very  condescending  favour,  though  dated  the  8th,  did  not  reach  my  hands 
till  last  night ;  as  to  its  solid  contents,  being  more  than  I  formed  any  idea  of,  they 
forcibly  call  on  gratitude,  and  shall  by  no  means  fail  of  that  feeling,  which  a  heart 
capable  of  proper  sensibility,  can  entertain  as  to  the  point  wherein  you  totally  differ 
from  my  apparent  opinion.  Let  me  assure  you,  that  my  promidged  theatrical  senti¬ 
ments  have  been  adopted  ones,  received  from  persons  I  thought  much  better  judges 
than  myself,  and  on  whose  integrity  I  judged  it  safe  to  rely.  Without  the  smallest 
shadow  of  compliment,  allow  me  to  aver,  that  Mr.  Garrick’s  single  intimation,  which 
now  lies  before  me,  has  effectually  determined  me  against  any  future  Utopian  criti¬ 
cism,  let  the  person  who  communicates  it  be  ever  so  respected  or  useful.  From  the 
first  view,  I  ever  had  a  confirmed  veneration  for  Mr.  Garrick’s  eminent  abilities,  and 
have  often  lamented  that  my  perturbed  state  of  mind  and  distracted  circumstances 
for  several  years  have  checked  me  from  enjoying  many  of  his  unparalleled  per¬ 
formances.  That  any  part  of  my  little  biographical  sketch  gave  amusement,  rejoices 
me;  that  you,  Sir,  are  in  an  improved  state  of  health  pleases  much  more;  and 
that  you  may  long  continue  so,  is  the  most  sincere  wish  of, 

Sir,  your  obedient  and  grateful 

F.  Gentleman. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  note  to  F.  Gentleman  was  delivered  according  to  its  genteel  purport 
by  Mr.  J.  Bell,*  Monday  evening,  March  13th 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Gentleman,  formerly  a  player,  1775.” 


DR.  ROBERTSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  College  of  Edinburgh,  March  14th,  1775. 

Every  man  must  pay  a  price  for  his  fame.  Permit  me  to  add  a  little  to  that 

which  must  be  paid  by  you.  My  eldest  son,  who  has  been  lately  called  to  the 

bar  here,  goes  to  London  in  order  to  look  about  him  for  two  months,  and  to  rub  off 

corners.  He  so  often  hears  me  mention  your  name  with  respect  and  affection, 
that  he  has  requested  a  letter  of  introduction  to  you,  and  I  cannot  refuse  him  that 
satisfaction.  I  do  not  mean  that  you  should  take  any  great  burthen  of  so  young  a 
man.  His  business  at  present  is  to  see  the  sights  of  London  ;  it  is  hereafter  that  he 
must  hope  to  gain  admission  into  society.  All  I  wish  is,  that  you  will  permit  him  to 

*  For  whom,  it  will  be  remembered,  Mr.  Gentleman  edited  Mr.  Steevens’s  horror,  the  Playhouse 
Shakspeare. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


49 


wait  upon  you  once  or  twice  in  a  morning,  that  he  may  be  able  to  boast  among  his 
children,  that  he  had  not  only  admired  Mr.  Garrick  in  public,  but  had  been  under 
his  roof  and  heard  him  speak  and  talk.  If  you  can  rely  on  a  father’s  testimony,  I 
flatter  myself  that  you  will  find  the  young  man  modest,  and  not  ill-informed 
for  his  age. 

I  was  alarmed  some  days  ago  with  an  account  of  your  indisposition  in  the  news¬ 
papers.  I  hope  it  has  not  been  any  very  serious  matter,  as  it  was  soon  followed  with 
information  of  your  being  recovered.  Present  my  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Garrick,  and  believe  that  I  am  with  the  truest  affection, 

Your  affectionate  and  faithful  servant, 

William  Robertson. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  SMITH. 


SIR,  Adelphi,  March  15th,  1775. 

You  have  forced  me  to  write  this  my  last  letter  to  you,  and  with  this  I  beg  that 
our  correspondence  may  end.  Your  intention  of  leaving  our  theatre  was  talked  of 
behind  our  scenes,  and  laughed  at  by  me  as  impossible,  before  you  opened  your 
mind  to  me  last  Saturday.  You  then  hinted  at  other  reasons  for  leaving  me,  nay, 
even  condescended  to  speak  of  your  dressing-room ;  and  in  your  letter  of  that 
day,  you  mention  that  your  terms  and  employment  were  not  agreeable.  I  will  venture 
to  say  that  you  have  profited  by  your  employment  at  Drury-lane,  and  the  terms,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  are  more  than  you  ever  received,  which  I  did  not  know  till  yesterday — another 
circumstance  of  surprize  !  In  your  conversation  with  me  on  Saturday,  you  told  me 
you  were  neither  engaged  nor  in  treaty  with  another  theatre.  Some  of  the  managers 
of  Covent-Garden  make  no  secret  of  some  offers  you  made  to  them  before  our  meet¬ 
ing  and  separation  on  Saturday  last ;  be  that  as  it  may,  I  received  you  with  open 
arms  the  moment  I  heard  you  were  discharged,  and  1  have  in  every  particular  done 
you  not  only  justice,  but  shown  you  friendship,  to  the  great  uneasiness  of  other  per¬ 
formers.  I  had  great  satisfaction  in  being  connected  with  you,  and  now  I  know 
your  regard  for  me,  I  am  not  miserable  by  the  separation. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 

You  may  depend  upon  my  not  mentioning  a  certain  person  indiscreetly,  whom  I 
regard  and  am  obliged  to ;  but  a  gentleman  told  me  yesterday,  unconnected  with 
any  theatre,  that  Mr.  S.’s  reason  for  quitting  me  and  offering  himself  elsewhere,  was 
that  the  person  in  question  wanted  a  protector.  Mr.  S.  should  desire  his  present 
friends  not  to  be  indiscreet. 


VOL.  II. 


ii 


50 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  MILES. 


Sill,  Adelphi,  March  15th,  1775. 

Though  I  particularly  urged  to  you  my  ill  state  of  health,  my  great  hurry  of 
business,  my  brother’s  dangerous  situation,  and  my  great  disinclination  to  write  upon 
nothing,  yet  you  resolve  to  do  nothing  that  1  desire  you,  and  to  persecute  me  with 
letters  ;  nay,  you  not  only  disoblige  me  that  way,  but  you  make  me  your  letter-car¬ 
rier  to  other  people.  I  sincerely  think  myself  very  ill  used  and  treated  by  you,  and 
must  beg  leave  to  waive  all  this  matter  for  the  future.  You  ask  my  advice  upon 

sending  trifles  to  the  children  of - :  in  my  opinion  you  would  destroy  any  interest 

you  might  have  there  for  ever ;  that  Lord  immediately  abandons  any  person  who 
thinks  to  make  an  interest  through  that  channel. 

You  will  have  another  affair  of  more  consequence  to  take  care  of  when  you  come 
to  England.  Mr.  Macklin  has  got  a  verdict  in  his  favour,  and  if  the  parties  (some  of 
whom,  I  hear,  intend  to  take  the  business  to  the  House  of  Lords)  do  not  make  it  up 
with  him,  fine  and  imprisonment  must  be  the  event :  this  is  the  consequence  of  the 
most  childish,  wanton  imprudence  that  a  man  in  your  disagreeable  circumstances 
could  have  been  guilty  of.  The  testimony  of  Evans  was  very  severe  against  you — 
in  short,  the  madness  and  injustice  of  that  night’s  riot,  and  your  unjustifiable  letter 
in  the  papers  afterwards,  made  more  irrational  by  signing  your  name,  appeared  in  its 
full  folly,  and  brought  on  your  condemnation  from  all  sides.  Indeed,  Mr.  Miles,  you 
are  the  most  thoughtless  acquaintance  I  ever  had ;  and  by  what  you  call  spirit,  and  an 
unfeeling  perseverance  with  regard  to  me,  you  make  me  almost  lament  that  I  ever 
had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you.  In  my  opinion,  your  writing  to  Mr.  Bates  may 
be  thought  too  officious,  unless  you  were  desired  ;  and  however  it  be,  I  must  be  ex¬ 
cused  from  the  office  of  go-between.  As  to  the  affair  of  “  The  Maid’s  Tragedy,”  I 
shall  not  prevent  your  going  on  with  it,  though  if  you  wish  to  know  my  thoughts  of 
that  too,  it  is  my  sincere  opinion,  by  what  I  have  seen,  that  you  have  no  turn  for  the 
drama,  and  are  losing  your  time  in  that  alteration. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  D.  GaIIRICK. 

“  My  answer  to  some  of  Mr.  Miles’s 
letters  from  Holland.” 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  March  16th,  1775. 

I  shall  trouble  you  no  more  than  with  this,  which  is  to  assure  you  solemnly, 
that,  though  I  saw  Mr.  Harris  by  accident  before  I  mentioned  my  intention  of 
leaving  your  theatre  to  you,  all  that  passed  between  ns  was,  that  I  should  acquaint 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


51 


you  with  it,  and  then  should  be  open  to  a  treaty  with  him.  No  terms  were  men¬ 
tioned,  or  engagement  made,  nor  any  yet  spoke  of.  I  am  sensible  of  and  shall  ever 
acknowledge  my  obligations  to  you  ;  and  if  our  separation  adds  to  your  ease  and  hap¬ 
piness,  I  shall  never  regret  it,  though  it  should  lessen  my  own. 

I  am,  Sir,  ever  your  obliged  and  sincere  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

N.B.  Mr.  Smith  offered  himself  to  Mr.  Harris  on  Thursday  9th  of  March,  1775, 
and  told  me  Saturday  the  11th  ditto  that  he  was  neither  engaged  nor  in  treaty. 

[Signed]  D.  Garrick. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Smith’s  exit  and  letters.” 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead  Heath,  March  26th,  1 775. 

Mr.  Coi.man  informed  me  that  you  intend  setting  off  for  Bath  on  Tuesday. 
Let  me  therefore  intreat  you  to  leave  me  out  a  few  volumes  of  your  old  plays  before 
you  go.  1  heartily  wish  I  was  possessed  of  anything  which  you  could  stand  in  need 
of  half  so  often,  that  I  might  find  some  way  of  returning  those  favours  which  I 
have  so  frequently  solicited  and  so  constantly  received.  The  plays  I  want  are  the 
following : — 

Promos  and  Cassandra,  4to. 

King  Henry  V.  4to.  [Not  Shakspeare’s,  but  anonymous.] 

All  your  copies  of  Tamburlaine,  or  the  Scythian  Shepherd. 

Selimus,  4to. 

Wars  of  Cyrus,  4to. 

Terence’s  Andria. 

Ditto. 

Magnificence,  an  interlude,  folio. 

The  interleaved  catalogue  which  I  sent  you,  will  direct  you  how  to  find  the  latter 
of  these,  as  it  is  not  entered  in  your  own,  the  title  being  wanting. 

llobin  Hood,  a  May-game,  4to. 

If  it  be  inconvenient  to  you  to  look  out  these,  and  you  will  trust  me  with  the 
key  of  the  case  (as  you  did  once  before),  you  may  rely  on  my  care  and  fidelity,  as  I 
shall  leave  a  receipt  for  such  volumes  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  borrow. 

To  desire  a  written  answer  from  one  who  has  not  the  less  to  do  on  account  of 
Tuesday’s  expedition,  is  too  unreasonable.  Please  only  to  tell  the  servant  who 
brines  this,  that  the  books  shall  be  made  accessible  to  me  one  way  or  the  other,  and 
I  am  satisfied. 

When  you  are  at  Bath,  pray  feel  Schomberg’s  pulse  about  our  edition  and  make 

h  2 


52 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


that  intelligence  valuable,  by  sending  me  word  that  Bath  has  lessened  your  com¬ 
plaints.  I  am  your  faithful  and  obliged, 

G.  Steevens. 

My  servant  is  not  to  bring  the  books,  but  I  shall  fetch  them  the  first  time  I 
am  in  town  with  a  carriage. 


ANTONIO  CARARA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR, 


Venice,  April  15th,  1776. 


I  received  the  favour  of  yours,  and  shall  take  care  to  get  the  contract  at  the 
place  37ou  mentioned,  which  I  shall  forward  to  the  girl,  who  is  actually  at  Florence. 
I  shall  likewise  get  another  like  that  which  is  on  the  road  now,  as  I  suppose,  signed 
by  her,  which  you  will  receive  as  soon  as  possible.  You  must  now,  in  case  you 
should  have  any  commands  for  me,  be  so  kind  as  to  direct  yours  to  me  at  Florence, 
chez  Ambrogio  Ambrogi,  as  I  intend  to  go  there  towards  the  latter  end  of  next  month, 
and  where  I  shall  stay  several  months,  my  wife  being  engaged  for  first  woman  in  the 
serious  opera  for  next  autumn  and  Carnival,  my  small  income  at  Venice  being  not 
sufficient  to  keep  us  in  a  manner  suitable  to  our  former  custom. 

I  thank  you  kindly  in  name  of  m3'  wife  also  for  your  bounty.  She  desires  her 
best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  which  I  wish  you  would  be  so  kind  as  to  present 
mine  likewise.  I  need  not  say,  how  much  I  hope  37ou  will  be  pleased  with  the  acqui¬ 
sition  of  this  dancer ;  had  not  I  been  convinced  of  her  merit,  I  should  never  have 
thought  of  her;  but  3rou  shall  see  her,  and  I  flatter  m37self  that  3rou  shall  find  me  even 
in  this,  as  I  have  always  been,  Your  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

Antonio  Carara. 


Endorsed, 

“  Signior  Antonio  Carara,  about 
a  dancer,  Signora  Paccini." 


DR.  ROBERTSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Lower  Grosvenor  Street,  May  11th. 

As  I  set  out  for  Scotland  to-morrow,  I  regret  extremely  37our  excursion  to 
Hampton,  as  it  deprives  me  of  the  pleasure  of  seeing  3'ou,  and  the  advantage  of 
hearing  3’our  remarks  upon  the  “  Prince  of  Tunis.”  I  am  much  indebted  to  37ou  for 
the  obliging  attention  you  have  given  to  the  perusal  of  that  work.  If  you  are  so 
good  as  to  commit  3'our  observations  to  writing,  the  author  has  good  sense  and  inge¬ 
nuity  enough  to  receive  them  with  gratitude,  and  to  improve  by  them.  I  have 
desired  Mr.  Gordon,  a  common  friend  of  the  author  and  of  me,  to  wait  upon  3'ou 
and  to  receive  the  play  from  you.  He  is  a  man  of  letters  and  parts,  to  whom  you 
may  communicate  any  remarks  which  you  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  write. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


53 


Be  so  good  as  to  present  my  most  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and 
believe  that  though  I  must  now  take  my  leave  of  you  for  some  time,  you  have  no¬ 
where  a  more  sincere  and  faithful  friend  than 


Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Robertson’s  letter  to  me  about  a  tragedy.” 


William  Robertson. 


MISS  MACKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Great  Queen  Street,  Lincoln’s-inn-fields,  May  14th,  1775. 

Did  not  I  think  that  you  would  be  pleased  with  what  I  am  going  to  lay  before 
you,  I  assure  you  I  should  not  have  taken  the  liberty  of  troubling  you  with  it. 

Being  deprived  of  the  assistance  of  my  father’s  playing  last  year,  I  had  no  benefit : 
from  that  loss,  and  from  a  presentiment  that  our  friends  are  susceptible  of  at  least 
the  likelihood  of  an  injury,  many  of  them,  and  indeed  many  strangers  also,  have 
expressed  their  concern  at  your  having  appointed  the  benefit  for  the  Theatrical  Fund 
to  be  upon  the  same  night  that  is  settled  for  mine.  They  apprehend  that  the  Fund, 
with  your  performance  added  to  it,  will  prevent  my  house  from  being  so  full  as  they 
wish,  and  as,  without  your  opposition,  it  might  be. 

When  you  advertised  your  intention  to  play  on  the  18th,  I  do  not  suppose  you 
knew  that  my  benefit  had  been  often  advertised  before  your  notice  for  the  same  day. 
If  you  had,  I  think  you  would  not  have  shown  such  a  mark  of  unkindness,  such  a 
powerful  opposition  to  my  interest  at  this  juncture  in  the  midst  of  my  distress,  by 
pitching  upon  that  particular  day ;  more  especially,  when  every  other  day  unappro¬ 
priated  was  at  your  command,  and  when  it  would  have  been  equal  in  its  consequence 
which  day  you  chose,  as  your  performance  can  at  any  time  fill  the  theatre. 

When  I  was  under  your  direction  in  your  theatre,  you  made  me  proud  and 
happy  by  your  approbation  of  my  conduct,  on  and  off  the  stage.  I  hope  I  have  not 
forfeited  that  esteem  ;  if  I  have,  the  loss  will  hurt  my  spirits  much  more  than  a  bad 
benefit,  or  even  the  entire  loss  of  one.  Patience  and  a  few  days  will  abate  the  flurry  ; 
but  the  loss  of  the  esteem  we  are  proud  of  is  not  to  be  repaired,  though  the  pain  of  it 
may  be  blunted  by  a  consciousness  that  neither  the  heart  nor  the  will  had  any  share 
in  the  demerit  that  caused  it.  But  if  I  still  stand  in  your  opinion  as  I  wish,  I  flatter 
myself  that  you  will  remove  the  benefit  for  the  Fund,  as  any  night  will  do  for  that 
as  well  as  the  18th  ;  and  coidd  my  father’s  performance  in  “  Rove  a-la-Mode  add  to 
the  entertainment  of  your  audience  to  the  Fund,  he  would  be  proud  of  the  honour  of 
showing  his  inclination  to  add  his  mite  to  that,  though  he  is  sensible  it  could  not 
contribute  to  the  profit  of  it.  I  am,  Sir,  with  great  esteem  and  sincerity, 

Your  most  devoted  and  obliged  humble  servant, 
Endorsed,  MARIA  MACKLIN. 

“  Miss  Macklin  to  wish  me  to  defer  the  Fund  Benefit, 

May  14th,  1775.  I  did  the  business.” 


54 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  BROOKE. 


MADAM,  Adelphi,  May  15th,  1775. 

I  have  obeyed  your  commands.  I  love  to  oblige,  though  sometimes  to  my  own 
inconvenience.  You  are  pleased  to  say,  you  are  sure  1  have  changed  the  night  inad¬ 
vertently.  Indeed,  Madam,  I  have  neither  made  the  one  change  nor  the  other  inad¬ 
vertently ,  for  1  mean  by  both  to  be  very  civil  and  obliging  with  my  eyes  open.  Miss 
Macklin  has  every  claim  to  my  good  wishes  and  services;  though  she  belongs  to 
another  theatre,  she  has  very  generously  exerted  herself  to  carry  on  our  business,  when 
the  ladies  belonging  to  us  would  not. 

I  beg  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Yates  and  your  brother,  and  am, 

Dear  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 
Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  My  letter  to  Mrs.  Brooke,  about  the 
Opera,  and  agreeing  to  her  desires.” 


MR.  C.  MACKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  James  Street,  Covent-Garden,  May  19th,  1775. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  civility  to  Miss  Macklin,  in  removing  the 
benefit  for  the  Theatrical  Fund  from  her  night  to  the  25th  instant,  and  shall  always 
remember  it  as  an  obligation.  Yet  this  civility,  Sir,  and  the  fear  of  a  fresh  source  of 
misrepresentation  being  opened  upon  my  conduct,  have  brought  me  into  a  most  dis¬ 
agreeable  dilemma,  which  only  you  can  relieve  me  from. 

By  the  compromise  I  made  in  Westminster  Hall,  I  was  obliged  to  play  three 
nights  this  season,  in  order  to  admit  one  hundred  pounds’  worth  of  tickets  on  each 
night  for  the  admission  of  the  defendants  and  their  friends :  but  that  part  of  the  com¬ 
promise  that  related  to  the  managers,  they  generously  remitted. 

The  only  vacant  nights  they  had  at  the  time  of  the  compromise  were  the  25th 
and  the  30th  instant,  and  on  those  they  then  settled  that  I  should  act. 

But  unforeseen,  it  has  so  happened  that  you  from  your  kindness  to  Miss  Macklin 
have  removed  the  Benefit  of  the  Fund  to  the  25th,  on  which  night,  as  by  agreement, 
I  am  ordered  to  play.  Now  if  I  obey  that  order,  it  is  most  probable  that  my  old  friend 
the  Morning  Post  will  accuse  me  of  ingratitude  to  you  in  return  for  your  kindness  to 
my  daughter,  and  of  a  want  of  good-will  to  my  brethren,  in  opposing  so  laudable  an 
establishment  as  the  Fund. 

On  the  other  hand,  should  I  refuse  to  play  on  the  25th,  I  may  incur  the  resent¬ 
ment  of  the  managers,  and  am  liable  to  be  abused  for  disobedience,  turbulency,  and  a 
breach  of  contract,  which  might  involve  me  in  a  pecuniary  censure.  I  say  it  might — 
though  it  is  far  from  my  belief  that  it  would. 

But  were  I  sure  that  that  would  be  the  case,  I  should  choose  to  suffer  whatever 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


55 


loss  might  arise  from  my  refusal  to  act,  rather  than  be  accused  of  ingratitude,  or  want 
of  good-will  to  my  brethren. 

Upon  these  premises,  Sir,  I  request  that  you  will  give  me  your  opinion,  whether 
my  acting  on  the  25th  will  be  operative  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Theatrical  Fund  on 
that  night,  or  will  make  me  liable  to  the  imputation  of  ingratitude  to  you.  If  you 
determine  in  the  negative,  I  shall  act ;  if  in  the  affirmative,  I  shall  not. 

1  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Charles  Mackhn. 

P.  S.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  for  an  answer  as  soon  as  conveniency  will  permit. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  C.  MACKLIN. 


SIR,  May  19th,  1775. 

I  sHALii  be  always  ready  to  show  my  regard  to  Miss  Macklin  ;  she  has  ever 
behaved  in  the  best  manner  to  me.  If  you  are  engaged  to  the  managers  of  Covent- 
Garden,  and  they  have  fixed  you  to  play  upon  the  25th  I  cannot  see  how  you  can 
avoid  performing  on  that  night.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  C.  MACKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


May  19th,  1775. 

I  am  engaged  to  the  managers  of  Covent-Garden  Theatre  ;  the  engagement  was 
made  before  the  day  of  sentence  slightly,  and  confirmed  after  it — yet  still  if  you 
thought  that  my  acting  on  the  25th  would  prejudice  the  Fund,  I  vow  I  would  not 
perform. 

I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  attention  to  Miss  Macklin,  and  am,  Sir, 

Your  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  CHARLES  MaCKLIN. 

“  Mr.  Macklin’s  letter,  and  my  answer,  with 
his  reply,  May  19th,  1775.” 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


May  30,1775. 


As  your  winter  campaign  is  now  happily  concluded,  may  I  venture  to  intrude  a 
little  upon  your  leisure,  and  mention  a  request  which  I  have  long  wished  to  make? 
My  husband  is  gone  to  Ireland  upon  business  that  will  detain  him  there  some 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


50 

months.  During  his  absence,  I  would  wish  to  employ  my  time  in  some  way  that 
may  be  serviceable  to  my  family.  You  know  that  I  have  for  this  purpose  made 
several  fruitless  efforts  in  the  dramatic  way,  which  have  discouraged  me  from  making 
any  future  attempts,  merely  upon  my  own  strength ;  but  if  you  would  be  so  good  as 
to  point  out  any  plan  for  me  to  go  upon,  I  should  have  no  doubt  of  its  success.  You 
have  read  and  know'  every  thing,  and  the  quickness  of  your  genius  can  with  a  single 
glance  discover  what  is,  and  what  is  not,  likely  to  succeed  upon  the  stage.  Let  me 
entreat  you,  my  dear  Sir,  to  give  but  a  hint  of  any  subject  you  may  think  suited  to 
the  theatre,  and  I  will  exert  my  utmost  powrers  in  the  execution  of  your  plan  ;  and 
should  they  fail,  I  will  submit  to  your  decision  without  repining,  though  I  have 
reason  to  hope  that  with  your  assistance,  without  which  I  well  know  no  piece  suc¬ 
ceeds,  I  may  again  retrieve  my  dramatic  fame,  which  is,  I  own,  a  wish  that  sits, 
perhaps,  too  near  my  heart. 

I  will  venture  to  say  that  amongst  the  many  authors  you  have  obliged,  not  one 
of  them  has  been  more  truly  grateful  for  kindness  than  myself ;  continue  it  to  me  but 
once  more,  my  dear  Sir,  and  I  promise  you  that  I  will  never  trespass  upon  your 
friendship  again. 

I  perfectly  know  howr  great  the  favour  is  that  I  solicit,  but  I  also  know  the  un¬ 
bounded  benevolence  of  your  heart ;  relying  on  that,  and  that  only,  to  second  my 
suit,  I  will  hope  for  your  compliance,  and  on  this,  and  every  other  occasion,  be  happy 
to  subscribe  myself.  Your  truly  obliged  and  affectionate  friend, 

E.  Griffith. 

I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Griffith’s  with  my  answer.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  GRIFFITH. 


DEAR  MADAM,  Adelphi,  June  3,  1 775. 

The  breaking  up  of  the  company  for  the  summer,  and  the  hurry  of  settling  our 
affairs,  prevented  my  answering  your  letter  sooner.  Indeed,  my  dear  Madam,  it  will 
not  be  in  my  power  to  follow  my  inclinations  and  oblige  you.  The  business  of  the 
theatre  is  grown  too  mighty  for  me,  and  I  shall  retreat  from  it  with  all  good  speed. 
Mrs.  Lennox,  who  was  so  unfortunate  at  Covent-Garden  Theatre,  put  into  my  hand 
last  year  an  altered  play,  which,  upon  my  honour,  I  have  not  yet  had  leisure  to  con¬ 
sider  as  I  ought.  Another  lady  of  great  merit  has  likewise  entrusted  me  with  a  per¬ 
formance  of  five  acts,  which  I  must  immediately  look  over  with  all  the  care  and  de¬ 
licacy  due  to  her  sex  and  her  talents.  These  matters,  with  my  other  necessary  busi¬ 
ness,  will,  I  protest  to  you  most  solemnly,  engage  more  time  than  I  can  possibly  spare 
in  the  present  precarious  situation  of  my  health.  If,  notwithstanding  what  I  have 
said,  any  plays  to  be  imitated  from  the  French,  or  revived  from  our  old  stock. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


57 


should  appear  to  me  worthy  of  your  notice,  I  will  give  you  immediate  intelligence, 
and  shall  be  very  happy  to  convince  you  that  I  am,  dear  Madam, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Upon  my  word,  I  have  read  no  French  play,  or  old  English  one,  of  late, 
that  I  think  will  bear  transplanting  or  reviving  upon  our  stage. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 

Sunday  Night,  (no  date.) 

I  am  really  so  hurried  with  a  double  share  of  business  on  account  of  George’s 
dangerous  illness  and  absence  from  me,  that  I  scarce  have  time  to  write  this.  Why 
will  you  vex  and  fret  yourself  about  the  Knight  and  what  he  says?  [Sir  John 
Fielding.]  You  praise  him  one  day,  and  blame  him  the  next :  you  are  an  honest 
man,  but  too  warm  ;  you  are  likewise  a  very  just  man,  and  should  recollect  that  blind¬ 
ness  is  a  great  misfortune,  and  no  object  of  resentment.  Converse  and  talk  over  your 
grievances  calmly  with  your  wise  friend,  and  avoid  altercation  with  the  Bow-street 
Magistrate — it  really  hurts  you.  As  for  the  friend  or  fiend  you  meet  upon  West¬ 
minster  Bridge,  be  assured  that  it  is  somebody  who  has  been  much  obliged  to  me. 
Let  him  publish  and  publish  again,  and  do  you  laugh  at  hind  and  despise  him  as  I 
do,  be  he  as  great  or  as  little  a  being  as  he  will.  I  fear  none  of  the  scribbling  pest. 
If  you  can  see  in  any  body’s  hands  any  promise  of  my  brother’s  given  for  me,  be 

assured  I  will  at  any  time  fulfil  it ;  but  for  the  threats  of  Sc - s,  [scoundrels,]  I  have 

had  so  many,  and  yet  am  beloved  by  the  good  and  creditable,  that  it  is  not  worth 
mine  or  any  of  my  friends’  while  to  listen  to  their  nonsense. 

I  am,  in  great  haste,  yours  most  truly,  D.  Garrick. 


MISS  POPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wednesday,  May  31st,  1775. 

The  verbal  agreement  which  passed  between  us  three  seasons  ago  is  this  year  at 
an  end.  I  should  be  glad  to  make  a  new  engagement,  and  beg  to  know  the  terms 
you  propose.  I  have,  Sir,  the  honour  to  be 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  J  pOPE. 

“  Miss  Pope’s  letter  and  my  answer.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MISS  POPE. 

Adelphi,  June  3rd,  1775. 

The  proprietors  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane  present  their  compliments 
to  Miss  Pope,  and  hope  she  has  no  objection  to  continue  her  engagement  with  them 
for  three  years  more,  or  as  long  as  she  pleases, 
vou.  II.  i 


.38 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MISS  POPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Monday,  June  5th,  1775. 

Miss  Pope  presents  her  respectful  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  or  to  the  Pro¬ 
prietors  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane ;  did  not  imagine  they  would  have  named 
a  term  of  years  without  an  addition  of  salary  :  as  they  are  well  assured  of  her  dislike 
to  change,  and  as  she  has  never  asked  them  any  thing  that  has  been  unreasonable, 
she  throws  herself  upon  Mr.  Garrick’s  or  the  Proprietors’  generosity,  to  name  what 
addition  to  her  appointment  they  think  her  diligence  deserves. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MISS  POPE. 

Adelphi,  June  9th,  1775. 

Mr.  Garrick’s,  compliments  to  Miss  Pope,— his  brother’s  great  danger  for  these 
four  days  has  prevented  his  attending  to  any  business.  The  Patentees  sincerely  wish 
that  Miss  Pope  would  have  no  objection  to  continue  her  present  agreement  with 
them.  They  should  be  very  sorry  to  lose  her,  and  hope  that  they  may  depend  upon 
her  being  at  Drury-lane  for  many  years  to  come.  Should  Miss  Pope  be  induced  to 
quit  her  present  situation,  they  shall  expect  an  answer  in  the  course  of  next  week, 
as  her  place  will  be  with  great  difficulty  supplied.  If  they  have  no  answer  to  this, 
they  shall  depend  upon  her  continuing  with  them.  They  not  only  acknowledge  her 
diligence,  but  her  merit. 

Endorsed, 

“  The  reply  to  Miss  Pope.” 


MISS  POPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Saturday,  June  10th,  1775. 

Miss  Pope  presents  her  respects  to  the  Patentees  ;  is  very  much  honoured  in 
their  commendations,  both  as  to  her  merit  and  her  diligence :  the  former  she  never 
thinks  of,  as  she  lias  been  infinitely  overpaid  by  the  public,  who  have  ever  shown  her 
the  greatest  favour,  without  even  a  paragraph  to  prejudice  them.  Her  diligence 
respects  the  managers,  and  from  them  she  looks  for  the  reward  due  to  it, — an  equal 
portion  with  others  that  rank  in  the  same  situation ; — can  assure  them  that  such  is  her 
partiality  for  Drury-lane,  that  she  shall  quit  it  with  infinite  regret,  and  it  is  their 
fault  alone  that  she  is  not  there,  as  long  as  her  acting  powers  shall  subsist ;  but  she 
is  determined  at  length  to  shake  all  affection  off,  and  like  the  Swiss  to  perform  only 
with  those  that  pay  best.  Her  demand  is  ten  pounds  per  week,  the  sum  usually 
paid  to  actresses  in  her  walk.  If  the  Patentees  have  any  objection,  desires  they  may 
part  in  friendship,  as  she  cannot  upon  other  terms  remain  at  Drury-lane. 

Endorsed, 

“  Miss  Pope’s  answer  and  our  reply, 

June  12th,  1775.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


59 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MISS  POPE. 

June  12th.  1775. 

The  Patentees,  with  their  best  wishes  to  Miss  Pope,  feel  as  much  regret  in  losing 
her,  as  she  can  possibly  do  in  quitting  them.  Though  they  cannot  agree  to  the  ad¬ 
dition  which  she  insists  upon  to  her  present  salary,  they  assure  her  that  they  part  on 
the  terms  of  friendship  she  desires ;  they  wish  her  every  happiness  that  her  change  of 
place  and  sentiments  can  give  her :  at  the  same  time,  they  beg  leave  to  observe,  that 
if  Mr.  Garrick  would  have  agreed  to  let  Mrs.  Barry  perform  Beatrice  and  Clorinda, 
and  Mr.  Barry  to  have  had  for  his  benefit  the  day  which  he  gave  last  year  to 
Miss  Pope,  they  should  not  have  lost  those  capital  performers.  Mr.  Garrick  takes 
no  merit  to  himself  in  having  done  this,  but  that  of  showing  a  little  more  than  Swiss 
attachment  to  Miss  Pope. 

Endorsed, 

“  Reply  to  Miss  Pope  about  an  engage¬ 
ment  for  the  season  1775.” 


MR.  SPRANGER  BARRY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

Be  assured  there  are  few  persons  living  who  have  a  greater  respect,  or  stronger 
attachment  for  you  than  I  have.  Therefore  I  beg  you  will  not  be  offended  at  my 
not  taking  a  benefit.  I  most  sincerely  assure  you  I  do  not  mean  to  give  you  the 
least  uneasiness ;  but  my  friends,  as  well  as  myself,  think  me  slightly  treated  in  this 
whole  business.  Miss  Pope  certainly  has  no  right  to  complain.  Her  night  is 
not  changed  bv  my  having  the  Monday,  but  comes  in  due  course  ;  and  if  such  like 
trumpery*  are  to  contend  with  us  without  right  or  reason,  I  would  rather  endure 
any  distress  or  inconvenience  than  submit  to  it. 

I  am  most  sincerely  and  respectfully  yours, 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick  himself,  SPRANGER  BaRRY. 

“  Barry’s  letter,  where  he  talks  of  Pope 

and  such  like  trumpery  !”  _ _ _ _ 

*  “  Trumpery,”  forsooth  !  Barry  is  quite  outrageous,  and  reasons  like  ancient  Pistol :  — 

Pist.  These  be  good-humours,  indeed.  Shall  pack-horses, 

And  hollow-pamper’d  jades  of  Asia, 

Which  cannot  go  but  thirty  miles  a-day, 

Compare  with  Cresars,  and  with  Cannibals, 

And  Trojan  Greeks  ?  Nay,  rather  damn  them  with 

King  Cerberus,  and  let  the  welkin  roar.”  Second  Part  King  llcnry  IV .  Act  II. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


60 


MR.  S.  CAUTHERLEY  TO  MR.  GARIUCK. 


DEAR  SIR,  June  6th,  1775. 

I  am  told,  and  I  make  no  doubt  of  its  truth,  that  some  person,  envious  of  the 
happiness  I  enjoyed  in  your  friendship,  has  been  endeavouring  to  injure  me  in  your 
opinion,  by  informing  you,  that,  out  of  mere  ill-nature,  I  refused  to  perform  a  part 
for  Mr.  Jefferson,  and  that  I  have  been  persecuting  a  poor  woman,  to  whom  I  have 
had  obligations,  for  money,  in  a  most  cruel  manner.  Mr.  Jefferson,  it  is  true,  asked 
me  to  do  a  part  for  him,  which  part  1  had  felt  myself  so  bad  in  at  my  benefit,  that  I 
begged  he  would  excuse  me,  referring  him  to  Mr.  Brereton,  who  had  likewise  done 
it ;  nor  did  I  know  he  had  not  succeeded  with  that  gentleman,  till  I  saw  Mr.  Jeffer¬ 
son’s  name  in  the  bills.  Had  I  known  that  Mr.  J.  had  taken  his  place  in  the  coach, 
or  that  Mr.  Brereton  had  not  been  in  town,  I  would  have  endeavoured  to  have  done 
it  in  the  best  manner  I  had  been  able ;  but  this  I  was  not  given  to  understand. 
With  regard  to  Mrs.  Bradshaw,  I  never  mentioned  the  word  money  to  her  in  my 
life,  till  about  three  weeks  ago,  when  I  wrote  as  genteel  a  letter  as  I  possibly  could, 
requesting  to  know  if  it  would  be  convenient  to  her  to  let  me  have  25/.,  and  I  would 
beg  her  acceptance  of  the  remaining  25/.  This  letter  she  now  has  ;  and  even  this  I 
should  not  have  done,  if  part  of  my  family  had  not  been  advised  to  go  to  the  salt 
water,  and  I  was  fearful  the  expense  would  be  too  much  for  me ;  but  so  far  from 
wishing  or  desiring  to  distress  Mrs.  Bradshaw,  I  called  the  other  day  for  an  answer ; 
and  when  she  told  me  it  was  not  in  her  power  to  comply  with  my  request,  and  that 
she  was  very  unhappy  it  was  not,  T  begged  she  would  not  make  herself  uneasy  on 
that  account,  but  accept  the  whole.  I  must  now  entreat  your  pardon  for  being  ab¬ 
sent  at  the  settling  of  the  fund,  which  day  had  quite  escaped  my  memory.  The  ear¬ 
nest  desire  I  have  of  retaining  the  good  opinion  of  my  benefactor  and  best  friend, 
whose  favours  shall  ever  be  thought  of  with  gratitude,  will,  I  hope,  plead  my  ex¬ 
cuse  for  troubling  you  with  this,  and  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Dear  Sir,  your  obliged  and  respectful  humble  servant, 

S.  Cautheri.ey. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead-heath,  June  8th,  1775. 

Let  me  entreat  an  audience  of  a  minute.  I  have  nine  volumes  of  your  old  plays. 
I  am  not  using  them  at  present,  but  shall  want  them  before  the  end  of  the  year. 
Shall  they  be  sent  back  now,  or  remain  in  my  custody  ? 

I  wish  you  could  learn  of  Capell,  if  he  has  ever  seen  the  “  Taming  of  a  Shrew,” 
•ito.  1607.  When  he  set  forth  his  edition,  he  had  not  met  with  it.  It  is  of  some 
consequence  to  me  to  be  informed  as  to  this  particular.  When  the  “  Taming,  (Sec.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


61 


shall  have  been  published,  with  some  others  of  the  same  relation  to  Shakspeare,  the 
original  copy  shall  find  its  way  into  a  volume  which  I  mean  to  bind  up  for  your 
collection. 

Let  me  add  another  query,  and  release  you.  I  am  told  that  a  very  extraordinary 
personage,  who  is  represented  to  be  not  a  little  of  a  coxcomb,  and  whose  name  is 
A — d — ws,  comes  often  to  this  place,  where  he  boasts  of  so  strict  an  intimacy  with 
you,  that  he  spends  three  days  in  a  week  with  you, — that  he  has  a  dramatic 
piece  which  you  are  to  act,  &c.  &c.  What  an  author  so  publicly  boasts  of,  a  manager 
is  hardly  bound  to  keep  as  a  secret ;  and  therefore  I  hope  my  inquiry  may  escape  the 
charge  of  impertinence.  You  are  too  well  acquainted  with  nature  not  to  know  the 
utmost  value  of  every  character  within  its  circle,  and  therefore  may  find  a  use  for  that 
being,  which  to  less  discerning  eyes  appears  to  have  been  born  only  to  flatter  itself, 
and  be  the  trumpet  of  its  own  praises.* 

Pray  remember  Capell,  and  believe  me  most  sincerely  yours, 

G.  Steevens. 

Are  Mortimer’s  heads  published,  and  ready  to  be  delivered  ? 


MR.  W.  PARSONS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  June,  1775. 

Nothing  on  earth  shall  induce  me  to  abuse  the  confidence  you  have  reposed  in 
me.  You  may  rest  assured  my  attachment  to  you  is  inviolable,  and  that  I  have  the 
highest  pleasure  in  obeying  your  commands.  I  seriously  think  Mr.  Reddish  has  not 
the  least  idea  of  quitting  your  theatre.  He  has  never  dropped  the  most  distant  hint 
of  any  such  intention.  He  can  go  no  where  where  he  is  not  already  in  debt — where 
his  debts  cannot  follow  him,  or  where  his  appointments  will  be  so  genteel,  or  so 
punctually  paid  him.  With  respect  to  the  service  he  will  be  able  to  do  the  theatre 
next  season,  I  am  sorry  to  tell  you  I  have  great  doubts,  and  he  himself  has  very 
dreadful  apprehensions.  He  fell  down,  and  continued  very  long  in  a  fit  eight  days 
ago,  and  has  not  been  able  to  perform  since  his  arrival  here.  His  countenance  under¬ 
goes  the  most  sudden  alterations.  His  memory  fails  him,  and  he  has  all  the  alarming 
symptoms  of  a  disorder  hastening  to  insanity.  Rut  as  this  is  a  circumstance  of  real 
moment  to  you,  I  beg  I  may  be  permitted  to  trouble  you  with  another  letter  on  the 

*  Steevens’s  astonishment,  that  Garrick  should  condescend  to  Miles  Peter  Andrews,  is  very  amusing  to 
us  of  the  present  day,  who  remember  his  progress-  The  Commentator  accosts  the  Manager,  as  his  own 
Hamlet  does  Horatio,  on  the  entrance  of  Osrick — 

“  Dost  know  this  waterfly  ?” 

Steevens  himself  lived  to  see  this  writer  of  farces  in  possession  of  a  splendid  fortune,  and  entertaining,  at  his 
palace  in  the  Green  Park,  most  of  the  royal  and  noble,  and  all  the  wealthy  parts  of  the  community. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


62 


least  appearance  of  alteration  in  his  health.  This  matter  I  will  carefully  attend  to 
myself,  and  beg  others  to  do  the  same. 

Mr  Lee  has  deceived  you,  or  Reddish  has  very  grossly  imposed  on  us  all  ;  for  lie 
has  solemnly  and  repeatedly  declared,  both  in  London  and  this  place,  he  never  made 
use  of  your  name  to  Lee,  Sparkes,  or  any  person  whatever,  relative  to  Macklin’s 
affair.  This  I  am  ready  at  any  time  to  make  oath  of :  he  has  likewise  affirmed  he 
had  no  hand  or  influence  in  that  silly  combination,  and  is  perfectly  easy  about  con¬ 
sequences.  I  have  heard,  indeed,  that  Mr.  Lee  has  a  minute  on  his  books  of  a  sum 
paid  by  Reddish  for  some  such  mean  purpose  ;  but  this  must  be  a  falsehood  of  Lee’s 
for  a  purpose  I  cannot  comprehend.  However,  Sir,  I  will  urge  this  matter  again 
and  again.  Your  character  will  not  be  injuriously  attacked,  and  be  left  without 
defenders.  You  have  an  army  of  them  both  in  and  out  of  the  theatre,  and  ever  will 
have,  unless  it  be  a  sin  to  be  a  good  as  well  as  a  great  man.  We  have  played  four 
times  to  tolerable  audiences ;  and  though  I  think  Henderson  is  rather  worse  than  he 
was  a  twelvemonth  ago,  he  has  still  merit  enough  not  to  make  our  manager  uneasy. 
There  is  a  severe  criticism  in  our  papers  on  his  performance.  Mr.  Cautherley  is  much 
liked  in  Bristol.  Miss  Younge  is  adored,  and  the  people  are  exceeding  angry  at  the 
nature  of  her  engagements.  She  goes  to  Birmingham  in  ten  days.  If  you  should  have 
a  quarter  of  a  minute  and  a  scrap  of  paper  to  spare,  do.  Sir,  send  it  to  Bristol  to  him 
who  was,  is,  and  will  be  Affectionately  and  respectfully  yours  to  command, 

Elldorsed,  W.  Parsons.* 

“  Parsons  about  Reddish.” 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead  Heath,  June  12th,  1775. 

I  would  not  have  plagued  you  on  the  score  of  Capell,  but  that  1  believed  you  to 
be  the  only  person  who  was  at  peace  with  him.  I  supposed  too,  that  he  would  have 
continued  in  town  till  after  the  birth-day.  Now  you  must  know  I  have  a  great 
curiosity  which  he  has  never  seen,  and  he  has  two  others  which  I  want  to  see.  Such 
a  general  as  you  are  might  have  brought  about  a  treaty  ;  and  provided  a  chalk-line 
was  drawn  across  the  stage  of  Drury -lane,  I  would  have  met  him  and  exchanged 
hostages.  This  measure,  however,  might  prove  impracticable.  I  have  therefore  only 
to  beg  your  pardon,  for  troubling  you  about  him.  I  am  obliged  to  you  likewise  for 
your  account  of  the  gentleman-opera-monger, f  and  many  other  kindnesses. 

Yours  most  sincerely,  G.  Steevens. 

Shakspeare  stole  almost  his  whole  “  Taming  of  the  Shrew some  of  the  dialogue 
as  well  as  the  plot. 

“  The  thief  of  all  thieves  was  a  Warwickshire  thief.” 


*  This  devoted  attachment,  from  an  actor  of  the  greatest  merit,  had  no  higher  pecuniary  bribe  than  a 
salary  of  51.  per  week. — Ed. 

t  Garrick  had  written  to  him  about  Andrews.— Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


63 


AN  AGREEMENT  WITH  SIGNORA  PACCINI. 

June  20th,  1775. 

I  do  agree  for  my  partner,  Mr.  Willoughby  Lacy,  and  myself,  to  engage  Signora 
Paccini  as  first  dancer  at  our  theatre,  the  ensuing  season,  which  commences  the  first 
week  in  September  1775,  and  finishes  the  end  of  May  1776  ;  for  which  the  said 
Signora  shall  receive  from  us,  by  weekly  or  monthly  payments  as  she  pleases,  the 
sum  of  three  hundred  and  twenty-five  pounds  sterling,  and  she  is  likewise  to  have  a 
benefit  in  course  of  salary,  and  at  the  best  time  of  the  year,  for  which  she  is  to  dance 
whenever  called  upon,  to  the  best  of  her  power  and  abilities.  This  engagement  the 
managers  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane  engage  to  fulfil  on  their  part,  under 
the  penalty  of  five  hundred  pounds  sterling.  Witness  my  hand  this  nineteenth  day 
of  June,  1775. 

Signed  and  sealed  in  the  presence  of  David  Garrick 

Endorsed,  for  Willoughby  Lacy  and  himself. 

“  Our  agreement  with  Signora  Paccini,  dancer. 

June  20th,  1775.” 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  HERTFORD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Grosvenor-street,  June  20th,  1775. 

Having  received  the  most  pressing  solicitation  from  a  friend  of  mine  to  recom- 
nend  Miss  Ambrose  to  your  protection,  will  you  permit  me  to  do  it  ?  Her  merit  as 
in  actress,  you  are  a  better  judge  of  than  I  am.  All  I  have  any  title  to  say  is,  that 
I  should  be  glad  to  contribute  to  her  being  placed  under  your  countenance  at  Drury- 
lane  Theatre,  in  any  situation  you  may  think  her  fit  for. 

Excuse  my  making  this  application,  at  the  request  of  a  person  whom  I  should  be 
happy  to  oblige,  and  permit  me  to  subscribe  myself,  with  very  great  truth. 

Sir,  your  very  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

Hertford. 


CAPTAIN  ALEXANDER  SCHOMBERG  TO  HIS  BROTHER. 

IL  MIO  CORE,  Chester,  June  26th,  1775. 

Here  I  am  again.  I  have  landed  one  teller  of  the  exchequer, Sir  Harry  Cavendish. 
I  believe  the  business  of  the  treasury  is  so  languid,  that  his  attendance  is  not  very 
necessary.  4<  Wfith  lnm  along5'  came  Harry  "W  oodward,  who  piobably  has  oi  will  pn) 
you  a  visit,  and  give  you  “  our  travel’s  history.”  He  was  so  kind  as  to  take  a  parcel 
for  Garrick  (I  can  no  more  say  Mr.  Garrick  than  could  I  say  General  Caesar.)  Pray 
tell  him  that  1  esteem  myself  happy  in  being  the  instrument  of  his  convenience,  and 
shall  always  be  ready  and  alert  in  receiving  and  obeying  his  commands.  1  would 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(34 

write  to  him,  but  you  will  negotiate  this  for  me,  and  it  will  spare  him  the  trouble  of 
answering  a  letter.  My  best  respects  to  his  lovely  partner.  Remember  me  also  to 
all  the  sour-lcrout  set,  and  to  the  Crown  and  Anchor.  The  weather  is  hot,  and  I  am 
without  a  frank  and  in  much  company,  on  which  account  a  single  sheet  is  sufficient 
to  assure  you  I  am. 

My  dearest  brother,  your  ever  and  ever  affectionate  brother,  &c. 

Dr.  Schomberg.  ALEXANDER  ScHOMBERG. 

Address  to  Dublin.  I  call  there  for  a  few  days,  and  then  sail  the  yacht  to  Holy- 
head,  for  the  Bishop  of  Kildare.  Mrs.  S.  goes  with  me  :  she  promised  to  give  the 
meeting  to  the  Bishop’s  lady. — Patience !  A  wife  on  shore  and  afloat  too  is  rather 
too  hard. 

Two  pints  of  Usque  Bagh*  set  off  soon  for  Maze-hill.  I  wrote  and  abused  you 
as  usual. 


MISS  YOUNGE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  King-street,  Bristol,  June  30th,  1775. 

Though  I  fear  you  will  think  I  take  an  undue  liberty  in  addressing  a  letter  to 
you  without  the  sanction  of  business  for  it,  1  hope  you  will  pardon  the  freedom  for 
the  sake  of  my  frankness,  when  I  declare  I  can  no  longer  resist  the  pleasure  of  scrib¬ 
bling  something  to  you,  and  owning  I  feel  myself  inexpressibly  happy  in  the  reflec¬ 
tion  of  being  once  more  under  the  shelter  of  your  fostering  wing.  My  heart  rejoices 
in  the  thought,  and  if  I  know  it  at  all,  will  impel  me  to  endeavour  at  least  at  deserv¬ 
ing  your  future  regard.  If  as  the  scene  of  business  draws  on,  you  find  occasion  to 
transmit  me  any  commands,  it  will  be  a  most  pleasing  task  to  fulfil  them.  In  the 
interim,  do  me  the  favour  to  accept  my  best  wishes,  and  believe  me, 

Dear  Sir,  faithfully  your  obliged  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  ELIZABETH  YOUNGE. 

“  Miss  Younge’s  letter  from  Bristol, 
upon  her  return  to  Drury-lane.’’ 


[The  three  following  letters  relate  to  the  misunderstanding  with  the  actress  during  the  year  preceding.] 

MR.  GARRICK  TO  MISS  YOUNGE. 

MADAM,  Monday,  10th,  1774. 

If  my  business  would  have  permitted  me  I  should  have  sat  down  to  write  you  a 
long  letter,  for  I  have  much  to  say  and  to  be  sorry  for.  If  you  are  able  to  play  Viola, 
I  suppose  you  will,  as  his  Majesty  of  England,  not  the  copper  one  of  Drury-lane, 
commands  it.  If  you  should  not  find  yourself  fit,  I  will  do  the  best  in  the  power  of, 

Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


*  Water  of  Life. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


65 


MISS  YOUNGE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR, 

I  am  compelled  in  my  own  justification  to  trouble  you  a  third  time  to-day.  I 
do  not  understand  what  you  mean  by  his  Majesty  of  England  and  the  copper  one  of 
Drury -lane.  I  have  on  all  occasions,  without  airs  or  finesse,  come  out  to  do  my  busi¬ 
ness,  and  felt  it  my  pleasure  as  well  as  duty ;  and  therefore  cannot  think  myself  hu¬ 
manely  treated,  when  I  complain  and  feel  the  bad  effects  of  playing  with  a  cough,  that 
you  should  send  me  this  haughty  style  of  letter.  I  am  already  too  low-spirited  with 
the  pain  I  feel  at  my  chest,  and  think  it  cruel  in  you  to  wish  to  wound  me  more. 
You  do  not  want  feeling  for  other  people,  and  why  will  you  appear  so  unlike  yourself 
when  1  am  the  object  addressed  ?  I  have  the  honour  to  remain 

Your  humble  servant, 

E.  Younge. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MISS  YOUNGE. 


MADAM,  Adelphi,  June  10th,  1774. 

I  have  really  been  much  hurt  at  what  your  sister  said  to  Johnston  the  first  night 
of  the  “  Distressed  Mother,”  that  if  you  played  Viola  on  the  Friday,  you  would  not  play 
Hermione  on  the  Saturday.  This  I  knew  nothing  of  till  the  night  of  “  The  Provoked 
Wife,”  when  it  was  doubtful  whether  you  would  play,  or  not,  and  I  was  obliged  to  get 
a  lady  of  the  other  house  to  undertake  the  part.  As  you  said  you  were  not  taken  ill 
till  Friday  morning,  I  was  much  hurt  at  your  sister  s  speech.  You  likewise  said  in 
the  green-room  that  I  promised  you  should  not  play  on  the  Monday.  Had  I  promised 
you  the  most  difficult  thing  in  my  power,  I  always  keep  my  word — but  indeed  it 
was  impossible  to  promise  that,  as  it  was  impossible  you  should  not  have  heard  it 
given  out  on  Saturday  night. 

I  am  very  warm  and  sincere  in  my  attachments,  but  if  I  find  any  actor,  or  actress, 
distressing  me,  or  the  business,  unjustly  or  fantastically,  I  will  withdraw  my  attach¬ 
ment  the  moment  that  they  show  me  they  have  none.  The  theatre  is  quite  destroyed 
by  a  new  fashion  among  us.  I  was  long  the  slave  of  the  stage,  I  played  for  every¬ 
body’s  benefit,  and  even  revived  parts  for  them,  and  sometimes  acted  new  ones.  This 
was  at  a  time  when  by  myself  I  could  fill  a  bouse — that  favour,  luckily  for  me,  the 
public  still  continues,  or  we  might  play  to  empty  benches.* 

While  Miss  Younge  continues  a  friend  to  me  and  herself,  I  shall  do  every  thing 

*  It  was  fashion  only  that  could  have  led  Miss  Younge  into  such  teasing  conduct;  and  the  Manager  in¬ 
dignantly,  but  truly  and  properly,  reminds  a  very  pleasing  actress,  that  the  real  magnet  of  the  house  was 
himself ;  and  that,  in  consequence,  he  was  not  compelled  to  put  up  with  a  practice,  which  so  unprofitably 
embarrassed  the  business  of  the  stage.  However,  the  very  accomplished  actress  in  question  lived  to  become 
the  most  steady  as  well  as,  on  the  whole,  the  ablest  supporter  of  Covent-Garden  Theatre  ;  and  at  her  death 
was  pronounced  by  Mr.  Harris  to  be  “  the  greatest  loss  he  could  possibly  sustain.-’ — En. 

VOL.  II. 


K 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


66 

in  my  power  to  support  her ;  but  I  could  wish  tliat  her  sister  would  not  prophesy  to 
Mr.  Johnston,  and  that  she  herself  would  not  mention,  in  the  green-room,  promises  I 
never  made,  or  her  intentions  of  not  playing  to  any  body  but  to 

Her  very  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  will  not  mention  some  circumstances  which  claim  a  double  portion  of  your 
regard  to  the  interest  of  the  theatre — but  I  shall  be  ready  to  mention  them  and 
much  more  whenever  I  am  called  upon. 


MR.  J.  BATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Catherine-street,  Wednesday  evening. 

However  odd  my  last,  or  this  present  letter  may  appear  to  you,  I  cannot  suffer 
any  thing  mysterious  to  arise  between  myself  and  the  man  I  so  much  esteem,  without 
discovering  an  anxiety  for  its  speedy  elucidation. 

I  must  be  open  enough  to  declare  that  I  am  hurt  at  your  interference  in  behalf  of 
Mr.  Foote,  to  my  prejudice,  and  the  rest  of  the  people  with  whom  I  am  concerned. 
As  far  as  respects  me  individually,  I  shall  always  thank  you  for  your  counsel ;  but  I 
own  I  cannot  see  what  peculiar  claims  of  friendship  Air.  Foote,  of  all  men  living,  can 
possibly  have  upon  you,  that  the  proprietors  of  “  The  Comic  Mirror,”  in  compliment 
to  that  gentleman,  must  be  deprived  of  their  principal  performer  by  your  imme¬ 
diate  influence. 

The  letter  I  received  from  Camden-place  was  intended,  I  fancy,  more  to  convey 
your  displeasure,  than  an  answer  to  the  contents  of  mine,  or  I  should  not  have  had 
my  doubts  rather  increased  than  satisfied.  You  must  excuse  me  if,  in  justification 
of  Mr.  Bannister,  I  remind  you,  that  he  applied  to  me  by  your  express  desire  : 
therefore  I  cannot  think  him  reprehensible  in  making  use  of  your  name.  Let  me 
assure  you,  he  has  never  done  it  improperly.  He  only  intimated  his  apprehen¬ 
sions  of  your  displeasure,  if  he  continued  with  us ;  and  your  answer  has  confirmed 
to  me  that  they  were  well  founded,  and  indeed  that  he  knew  more  than  he  thought 
it  prudent  to  utter.  He  declared  repeatedly,  that,  had  it  not  been  for  you,  he  would 
play  for  us,  notwithstanding  Mr.  Foote’s  most  positive  injunctions.  What  therefore 
am  I  to  conclude,  but  that  the  interests  of  many  persons  totally  unconnected  with 
any  of  Mr.  Foote’s  disputes  with  me,  are  to  be  sacrificed  to  your  present  predilec¬ 
tion  in  favour  of  that  very  grateful  gentleman? 

I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  truly, 
Endorsed,  J.  Bate* 

“  Mr.  Bate’s  extraordinary  letters, 

July,  1775.” 


*  Joah  Bate,  musical  conductor. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


67 


MR.  W.  BRERETON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  July  10th,  1775. 

I  am  amply  content  with  your  very  generous  conduct  to  me  as  to  my  salary,  and 
will  return  to  you  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness.  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you,  that  my 
neglect  of  mentioning  the  matter  before  I  left  England  was  owing  to  my  ignorance 
of  the  usage  of  the  theatre  in  such  cases,  as  I  should  think  myself  a  most  ungrateful 
reptile,  could  I,  voluntarily,  act  ungenteelly  to  you,  from  whom  I  have  received  such 
marks  of  favour  and  preference. 

If  the  pound  a  week  might  be  added  to  the  second  year  of  my  article,  instead  of 
making  me  up  four  pounds  for  last  year,  I  should  like  it  better,  as  it  would  give  me  a 
kind  of  rank  in  the  theatre  ;  nor  will  you,  I  am  sure,  blame  me  for  that  kind  of  emu¬ 
lation  ;  but  if  you  think  otherwise,  I  am  very  willing  to  submit  to  your  pleasure. 

If  you  approve  of  playing  the  “  Quaker,”  my  debt  may  be  deducted  from  what 
you  shall  think  proper  to  allow  me  for  it,  which  I  will  leave  entirely  to  your  judg¬ 
ment  and  your  justice,  as  I  ever  have  had  the  highest  respect  and  reverence  for  both, 
as  well  as  whatever  business  you  may  think  proper  to  entrust  to  my  care.  I  am 
afraid  I  expressed  myself  badly  upon  this  subject,  as  I  did  not  in  any  manner  mean 
what  you  have  conceived. 

If  you  will  do  me  the  favour  of  an  answer  to  let  me  know  that  I  am  forgiven 
my  seeming  impropriety  of  conduct,  you  will  complete  the  felicity  of  one  who  will 
be  ever  happy  to  subscribe  himself,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

W.  Breketon. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  July  9th,  1775. 

The  inclosed  came  to  me  yesterday  in  a  letter  from  Palmer,  and  Mr.  Pott  has  pro¬ 
mised  me  to  put  it  into  the  post  to-night.  This  gives  me  an  opportunity,  which  my 
laziness  might  otherwise  have  delayed,  of  inquiring  after  yours  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s 
health,  and  to  remind  you  of  your  promise  to  give  us  a  few  days  this  summer. 
We  are  at  last  almost  settled  at  this  place,  for  the  last  waggon  comes  down  to¬ 
day.  Next  week,  therefore,  my  lady  will  be  perfectly  at  her  ease,  and  most  happy, 
as  well  as  myself,  to  see  you  both.  How  did  you  escape  the  temptations  at  Mist- 
ley  ?  Can  you  condescend,  after  the  voluptuous  feasting  with  Rigby,  to  fast  with 
a  forgotten  Chancellor?  I  am  abstinence  itself.  You  ought  to  be  of  my  mess; 
and  then  we  have  nobody  to  provide  for  but  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  the  German 
kitchen  is  not  very  expensive.  We  are  all  well ;  but  my  neighbour,  the  great 
Earl,  is  very  ill.*  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  affectionately, 

Camden. 


Lord  Chatham,  then  at  Hayes.— Ed. 
K  2 


68 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  J.  IIOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Maries,  July  25th,  1775. 

Where,  and  whose,  Mistley  is,  from  whence  you  date  your  last  letter,  is  entirely 
unknown  to  me.  Riot  and  revelry  make  Comus’s  Court,  whether  they  happen  to 
prevail  at  Bath  or  Billingsgate.  I  am  glad  I  had  done  what  you  wished  done — sent 
you  the  Mask  (not  of  Hercules)  of  “  Love’s  Artifice,”  which  may  be  alive  and  spirited 
by  rage  and  jealousy,  but  the  subject  will  not  allow  any  pleasantry ,  as  you  will  see 
at  once  running  it  over.  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  its  fate,  or  whether  you  would  use 
it,  or  that  of  Hercules,  or  that  of  “  Love’s  Revenge,”  which  every  body  is  enamoured 
with,  and  which  must  suit  and  recommend  your  new  Jew  girl.  Let  me  know  whe¬ 
ther  you  think  Miss  Trotter  more  or  less  improbable  than  I  do.  Have  done  with  the 
thoughts  of  brute  Brutus,  except  you  get  a  new  Shakspeare  who  would  show  him  in 
the  light  of  a  pretended  idiot,  breaking  out  at  last  in  the  blaze  of  a  real  patriot.  Lee 
has  attempted  it,  but  poorly.  Some  fine  things,  and  the  greatness  of  the  subject, 
show  the  want  of  art  in  the  poet,  (as  you  have  long  ago  observed  of  Shakspeare  him¬ 
self  and  others,)  by  introducing  the  death  of  Lucretia  in  person,  in  the  first  act,  which 
leaves  all  the  rest  insipid. 

I  have  had  a  pleasant  letter  from  my  friend,  Dick  Goodenough,*  who  has  quitted 
Hampshire,  and  gone  into  a  house  of  his  own  at  Hurley,  near  Maidenhead,  where 
last  year’s  floods  drove  out  a  bad  tenant.  He  compares  Moody  to  the  hare  with 
many  friends ;  for  he  gave  the  unset  songs  of  his  farce  to  some  musical  acquaintance, 
which  some  lost  and  others  had  not  time  to  compose,  (a  sad  fault  in  musical  folk,) 
&c.  All  deserted  him,  and  one — borrowed  money  of  him.  So  it  is  dormant  again, 
and  may  never  be  waked  from  its  nap.  I  still  think  he  might  be  of  use  to  you.  His 
songs  are  certainly  delicate  and  humorous,  as  the  subject  requires.  He  has  not 
been  idle,  I  find.  We  should  hardly  suspect  him  entering  into  politics  ;  but  he  has 
written  a  kind  of  parody  of  Puffy  Pensioner’s!  “  Taxation  no  Tyranny,”  under  the 
noble  title  of  “  Resistance  no  Rebellion,”  which,  I  hear,  is  well  received.  He  has 
bound  them  together,  and  sent  them  me  by  the  coach.  I  wonder  they  did  not 
quarrel  in  the  boot,  and  tear  the  binding  to  pieces.  I  tell  him  I  am  sorry,  like  Sir 
Roger  De  Coverley’s  head  upon  the  sign-post,  that  so  much  may  be  said  on  both 

*  Richard  Josceline  Goodenough  ;  lie  wrote  only  a  single  ballad  farce,  called  “  V  illiam  and  Nanny,” 
which  was  acted  at  Covent-Garden  Theatre  in  1779.  I  am  sorry  to  add  this  amiable  and  liberal  gentleman 
to  the  list  of  many  ornaments  of  the  world,  who,  from  the  want  of  rigid  prudence,  think  at  last  a  pistol  their 
only  resource. — Ed. 

f  This  irreverent  combination  is  levelled  at  Mr.  Garrick’s  oldest  friend,  Johnson.  Hoadly  was  a  decided 
Whig,  which  Mr.  Garrick  certainly  was  not.  The  American  question  seems  every  where  renewed  at  the  pre¬ 
sent  moment.  Colonies  arrived  at  full  growth,  like  children,  are  disposed  to  desert  the  Parent  State  ;  but 
the  error  of  an  attempt  to  prolong  obedience  by  arms  is  now  beyond  all  question.  If  such  parties  retain  the 
partiality  of  family  for  each  other  when  dependance  has  ceased,  it  is  all  that  nature  or  sound  policy  requires: 
all  exasperation,  therefore,  is  insanity.  The  reasoning  of  Hoadly  on  the  subject  is  acute  and  forcible _ Ed, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


69 


sides.  Sure  we  are  upon  a  ruinous  scheme,  upon  a  foolish  point  of  honour,  not 
worthy  of  a  stage.  Fools  throwing  about  firebrands  and  death,  and  saying — are  we 
not  in  sport!  Wanton  cruelty,  that  surely  might  have  been  prevented.  Now  we 
are  in,  we  must  get  out  as  well  as  we  can  ;  I  doubt  never  with  honour.  Our  season 
begins  late  here,  and  never  lasts  long.  We  are  at  present  very  full.  Yours  to  the 
Falls  of  Niagara, 

J.  and  D.  Hoadly. 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

An  accident  prevented  my  receiving  your  letter  till  this  afternoon  (Saturday ; 
July  24th,)  which  will  account  for  its  not  being  answered  sooner.  I  am  very  sorry 
you  should  think  the  labour  of  altering  the  play*  so  herculean.  “False  Delicacy,”  you 
know,  was  in  a  much  more  deplorable  state  at  this  period  of  the  year  1767,  and  nei¬ 
ther  of  us  lost  credit  or  money  by  it.  Far  be  the  wish  from  my  heart  of  injuring 
your  interest  in  the  smallest  degree,  and  I  can  have  no  desire  of  injuring  my  own.  I 
therefore  only  beg  that,  if  I  produce  you  a  play,  of  which  you  yourself  entertain 
a  favourable  opinion,  you  will  give  me  a  turn  this  winter,  as  the  pot-boiling  rea¬ 
sons,  I  have  once  before  mentioned,  make  it  essentially  necessary.  I  have  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  your  remarks  upon  what  has  been  already  offered,  and  am  certain  of  working 
out  something,  which  I  trust  will  neither  wholly  disgrace  Drury-lane,  nor  give  you 
reason  to  be  ashamed  of  the  indulgence  hitherto  shown  to, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  and  most  obliged, 

Hugh  Kelly. 

P.  S.  I  am  at  present  on  no  other  literary  work  whatever. 


THE  R.  H.  R.  RIGBY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  Mistley,  July  28th,  1775. 

Till  yesterday  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  never  signified  to  me  his  ducal  pleasure 
what  day  he  would  make  himself  happy  with  the  enjoyment  of  your  company 
at  Hampton.  He  has  now  fixed  the  9th  of  August  for  the  festival,  and  on  that  day 
we  propose  dining,  not  dancing,  at  Hampton.  You  need  not  put  yourself  to  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  trumpets  and  kettle-drums,  we  will  make  noise  enough.  My  best  respects 
to  Madame  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  David,  very  truly  and  faithfully  yours, 

11  ic hard  Rigby. 

*  This  was  the  comedy  called  “  The  Man  of  Reason,”  acted  the  year  following  at  Covent-Garden  The¬ 
atre.  Kelly  trusted  Woodward  with  the  principal  character,  and  failed,  it  is  said,  from  the  actor’s  miscon¬ 
ception  of  it.  But  Mr.  Garrick  thought,  it  seems,  that  the  play  itself  was  radically  faulty;  and  Kelly  then 
found,  to  his  sorrow,  that  the  man  of  reason  was  at  the  other  house. — Ed. 


70 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  W.  BRERETON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  July  30th,  1775. 

I  conceived  I  gave  a  very  substantial  proof  that  I  valued  your  favour  infinitely 
more  than  the  raising  my  salary,  when  I  was  willing  to  give  up  so  considerable  a  dif¬ 
ference  in  point  of  money  to  return,  and  also  to  run  the  risk  of  the  penal  sum  of  the 
article  which  I  have  been  so  unfortunate  as  to  sign  with  Mr.  Barry. 

I  executed  the  article,  supposing  that,  if  I  agreed  with  you,  it  would  be  given 
up  to  me,  and  imagined  I  had  good  grounds  for  that  supposition,  in  which  I  have 
been  most  grossly  deceived.  The  only  favour  I  am  to  expect,  it  seems,  is  to  be 
excused  from  the  last  year  of  it,  as  I  would  only  make  it  for  two  years  ;  I  am 
therefore  under  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  remaining  here  next  winter,  at  the  end 
of  which,  if  you  should  find  any  occasion  for  my  little  services,  I  shall  be  happy  to 
treat  with  you,  nor  shall  I  be  so  uneasy  as  I  otherwise  would,  as  you  gladly  release 
me  from  you.  I  beg  leave  to  assure  you,  Sir,  that  I  never  could  be  guilty  of  such 
low  chicane  as  to  send  any  thing  relative  to  myself  to  the  newspaper,  and  am  very 
much  concerned  that  you  could  entertain  such  an  opinion  of  me.  “  The  Quaker” 
is  yours,  if  you  approve  of  it,  for  100/.,  which  I  conceive,  from  its  reception,  even 
badly  as  it  was  performed,  it  must  be  honestly  worth  to  you,  and  request  to  know 
your  determination  respecting  it  soon  to  the  Cork  Theatre,  where  I  am  now  set¬ 
ting  off  for.  If  you  should  agree  to  this,  be  pleased  to  deduct  from  it  my  debt, 
which  I  believe  is  55l.  and  remit  me  the  balance  in  my  favour.  I  should  appre¬ 
hend  that  I  do  not  less  deserve  the  additional  pound  a  week,  which  you  promised 
me  for  the  last  season,  though  I  unhappily  cannot  return  :  of  that  you  will  be  so 
kind  as  to  judge ;  I  will  willingly  submit  to  your  candour  and  generosity. 

I  have  seen  Mr.  Jephson  and  Tighe  very  often  since  I  have  been  here,  and  re¬ 
ceived  great  civilities  from  them,  which  I  attribute  to  their  respect  for  you.  Mr. 
Jephson  desired  this  morning  that  I  might  present  his  service  to  you.  Hopltins  has 
prompted  me  in  all  the  parts  I  have  ever  played,  except  here ;  and  Palmer  promised 
me  that  he  would  call  on  you  as  soon  as  he  got  to  town. 

I  am  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

W.  Brereton. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barry  desire  then'  best  compliments. 

Endorsed, 

“  Brereton’s  second  letter  :  how  unlike  the  first !’’ 


LORD  COWPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Florence,  Aug.  2nd,  1775. 

The  bearer  of  this  letter  to  you  is  La  Signora  Gertrude  Paccini,  who  is  to  dance 
at  your  theatre  in  Drury -lane.  As  she  is  quite  a  stranger  to  the  country  where  she 


David  garrick. 


71 


is  going,  I  take  the  liberty  of  recommending  her  to  you,  and  when  you  have  seen  her 
dance,  you  will  agree  with  me  that  she  is  one  of  the  best  grotesca  dancers  you  ever 
saw  :  as  all  merit  stands  in  need  of  protection,  she  will  be  over  happy  in  yours.  Sir, 
and  you  will  greatly  oblige  one  who  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  at  Florence  some 
years  ago,  and  who  is  with  the  greatest  sincerity  and  esteem, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

COWPER. 

I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


MR.  D.  WRAY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dean-street,  Aug.  2nd,  1775. 

When  your  letter  came  to  my  house,  I  was  setting  out  on  a  little  journey,  and 
am  now  just  returned,  which  must  excuse  my  not  acknowledging  your  favour  sooner. 
I  am  to  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  you  give  me  of  ranking  among  the  beaux 
esprits.  But  alas !  whatever  I  was,  I  was  of  the  last  age ;  and  Dr.  Goldsmith  did 
not  begin  to  sing  before  I  had  lost  my  ear  for  music.  So  it  becomes  me  decently  to 
retire ;  and  to  leave  to  those  ingenious  gentlemen,  who  had  the  happiness  of  the 
Doctor’s  friendship  or  acquaintance,  the  pleasing  task  of  paying  those  honours  to  his 
memory,  without  which  John  Dyer,  Thomas  Edwards,  and  Thomas  Gray,  sleep  in 
peace,*  but  which  should  not  be  refused  to  extraordinary  merit.  As  to  the  chapter 
of  the  Earl,  I  find  myself  by  no  means  qualified  to  interfere  in  the  differences  of  great 
men.  Had  I  the  talents  of  Atticus,  I  would  certainly  reconcile  Messala  and  Boscius. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 
t,  ,  ,  Daniel  Wray. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Wray’s  letter  to  me  about  Hum - .” 


*  Sleep  in  peace.  I  cannot  let  this  truism  pass  without  a  little  explanation.  John  Dyer  was  the  author 
of  that  delicious  poem  Grongar  Hill.  Thomas  Edwards  was  the  witty  “  other  gentleman  of  Lincoln’s  Inn,” 
who  wrote  the  Canons  of  Criticism,  and  reduced  Warburton’s  Shakspeare  to  waste  paper — and  Thomas  Gray 
was  the  great  Lyric  Poet  of  England,  the  classic  bee,  who  distilled  the  choicest  flowers  ol  the  ancients,  and 
left  a  honied  repast  to  his  country,  of  slender  quantity,  but  exquisite  flavour.  Dr.  Goldsmith’s  circumstances 
at  his  death  wrere  found  too  scanty  to  permit  of  a  splendid  funeral  in  Westminster  Abbey  ;  and  where  people 
think  more  of  themselves  than  of  the  friend  they  lose,  they  are  not  apt  to  volunteer  any  private  respect. 
Oliver  Goldsmith,  one  of  the  ornaments  of  the  Literary  Club,  was  attended  to  his  grave,  in  the  Temple 
Burial  Ground,  by  Mr.  Hugh  Kelly,  Mr.  Hawes,  the  Rev.  Joseph  Palmer,  and  a  few  merely  coffee-house 
acquaintance,  and  he  “  sleeps  in  peace  — Ed. 


72 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  JOHNSON  TO  MRS.  DESMOULINS. 


MADAM,  Lichfield,  Aug.  5th,  1775. 

Mr.  Garrick  has  done  as  he  is  used  to  do.  You  may  tell  him  that  Dr.  Hawkes- 
worth  and  I  never  exchanged  any  letters  worth  publication.  Our  notes  were  com¬ 
monly  to  tell  when  we  should  be  at  home,  and  I  believe  were  seldom  kept  on  either 
side.  If  I  have  any  thing  that  will  do  any  honour  to  his  memory,  I  shall  gladly 
supply  it,  but  I  remember  nothing.  I  am.  Madam,  your  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  SaML.  JOHNSON. 

“  Dr.  Johnson  about  Dr.  Hawkesworth.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden  Place,  Aug.  6th,  1775. 

I  am  much  obliged  for  that  treasure  of  fable  which  you  have  sent  me.  History 
is  not  half  so  entertaining  or  so  valuable  :  and  how  well  you  judged  of  my  passion 
for  miracle  and  legend,  by  thrusting  the  Seven  Champions  into  the  parcel !  I  do  not 
believe  I  shall  read  one  line  of  common  sense  till  I  have  finished  this  collection  :  yet 
I  wonder  a  little  how  you  could  bring  your  mind  to  admit  Mrs.  Lennox*  into  vour 
library,  who  treats  your  Sliakspeare  with  so  much  indecent  asperity  ;  for,  according 
to  her,  he  has  spoiled  every  story  he  meddled  with.  I  forgive  her,  but  I  cannot 
account  for  your  introducing  her  to  my  acquaintance. 

I  have  looked  into  the  almanack,  and  find  that  I  shall  be  able  to  pay  my  com¬ 
pliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  on  the  28th  of  this  month,  and  give  you  this  timely 
notice,  that  you  may,  upon  deliberation,  inform  me  whether  that  time  will  be  agree¬ 
able  to  you.  If  it  is,  we  propose — my  lady,  self,  and  the  two  girls,  to  dine  with  you 
that  day  ;  which  will  be  Monday.  A  day  earlier  or  later  will  not  be  quite  so  well, 
but  if  the  time  is  totally  inconvenient,  I  shall  be  sorry,  because  in  that  case  I  shall 
not  be  at  liberty  till  the  end  of  September. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Camden. 

*  it  seems  so  very  extraordinary  for  a  mere  literary  adventurer  to  expect  a  livelihood  from  attacking 
the  great  dramatic  poet  of  England,  that  we  must  suppose  her  to  derive  courage  from  the  declared  opinions 
of  some  eminent  authors  who  seconded  aud  patronized  her  efforts.  The  result  of  this  attack  by  the  female 
Quixote  is,  that  Shakspeare  has  generally  spoiled  every  story  on  which  his  plays  are  founded,  by  “  torturing 
them  into  low  contrivances,”  “  absurd  intrigues,”  and  “  improbable  incidents.”  This  surely  was  not  her  claim 
to  the  aid  of  the  Earl  of  Cork  and  Orrery  and  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson;  who  contributed,  and  not  slightly,  to 
her  English  version  of  Brumoy’s  Theatre  des  Grecs.  Garrick,  I  suppose,  expected  this  rebuke  from  Lord 
Camden,  who  could  be  misled  by  neither  fable  nor  fact. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


>*Vk-v 

/3 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  BRERETON. 

Sill,  Hampton,  Aug.  9th,  1775. 

The  spirit  of  your  last  letter  is  so  very  different  from  your  former  one,  that  I  am 
obliged  to  say  a  few  words  to  you,  which  shall  be  the  last  you  shall  ever  be  troubled 
with  from  me.  Had  I  not  seen  your  name  at  the  bottom  of  your  letter,  and  known 
your  hand-writing,  I  could  never  have  imagined  that  such  a  letter  could  have  come 
from  you. 

You  write  me  word  that  you  are  offered  seven  pounds  a  week  to  stay  in  Ireland, 
but  if  I  will  give  you  six,  you  had  rather  return  to  me,  for  whom  you  have  the  great¬ 
est  regard,  and  what  not.  You  desire  me  to  send  a  speedy  answer,  because  you  are 
pressed  for  an  engagement,  and  you  will  wait  my  answer.  I  write  directly,  and  make 
you  an  offer  of  what  falls  a  trifle  short  of  your  demand,  with  a  hint  at  your  “Quaker,” 
to  oblige  you  as  much  as  possible.  To  this  you  reply — in  the  warm  spirit  of  gratitude, 
“  that  you  are  amply  content  with  my  very  generous  conduct  to  you,”  &c.  &c.  &c.  and 
that  I  may  depend  upon  you.  Upon  this  I  rested  assured  of  you.  But  behold,  an¬ 
other  letter  comes,  which  tells  me — what?  that  you  had  signed  articles  with  Mr. 
Barry  before  your  offer  to  me,  and  that  you  cannot  be  at  liberty  to  fulfil  your  engage¬ 
ment  to  me ;  and  this  you  tell  me  in  an  angry  manner,  “  that  you  conceived  you 
gave  me  a  very  substantial  proof  of  your  valuing  my  favour  infinitely  more  than 
raising  your  salary,  &c.  &c.”  It  must  first  be  known  what  advantages  you  will  gain 
and  what  lose.  I  will  venture  to  foretell,  that  you  have  lost  the  very  critical  time  of 
your  theatrical  life,  and  that  you  will  sorely  repent  your  unkind,  I  had  very  nearly 
said,  ungrateful  behaviour  to  me.  What !  does  Mr.  Brereton  (to  whom  and  to  whose 
family  I  have  shown  the  most  immovable  attachment)  offer  me  his  services  after 
having  engaged  them  to  another  ?  This,  Sir,  I  did  not  expect  from  you  of  all  men — 
and  I  will  even  continue  my  open  behaviour  to  you,  and  assure  you  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  you  can  ever  be  engaged  with  me  again.  I  wish  you  no  harm,  but  hope 
when  you  meet  with  a  better  friend  of  a  manager,  that  you  will  treat  him  more 
kindly.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  cannot  give  a  hundred  pounds  for  your  farce.  What  do  you  mean  by  chicane  ? 
I  accused  you  of  none  ;  I  only  told  you  that  I  heard  (from  a  friend  of  yours)  you 
had  put  your  engagement  to  Barry  in  the  papers ;  but  what  chicane  was  there  in 
that?  Your  own  letters  confirm  that  you  were  engaged,  and  the  papers  said  true. 


MR.  BENSLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR  Halesworth,  12th  Aug.  1775. 

I  have  just  received  the  favour  of  yours,  which  has  made  me  exceedingly  happy. 
Your  confidence  and  friendship  flatter  me  in  the  highest  degree  ;  and  I  hope  l  shall 


VOL.  II. 


L 


74 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


prove  worthy  of  both.  There  can  be  no  such  spur  to  my  good  endeavours,  as  your 
good  wishes.  You  puzzle  me  in  giving  me  the  choice  of  what  character  I  shall  play 
first.  I  had  rather  be  guided  by  your  judgment  than  my  own,  in  this  case  as  in 
every  other.  You  will  see  when  we  meet  whether  or  not  I  shall  disgrace  “  The 
Plain  Dealer.”  I  am  more  inclined  to  that  than  any.  Manly,  Brutus,  and  Caled, 
are  the  only  characters  I  have  played  of  the  list  you  have  sent  me  ;  and  I  have  by 
me  parts  of  those  only.  I  think  with  you,  that  Brutus  is  the  very  finest  of  all  fine 
characters.  How  can  I,  after  this,  say  that  I  felt  myself  easy  in  it  ?  There  is  nothing 
I  should  study  with  so  much  pleasure,  (for  I  must  plead  “  what  I  will  be,  not  what 
I  have  been,”)  nor  any  part  I  could  (under  your  auspices)  so  much  endeavour  to  make 
myself  master  of.  This,  I  think,  bids  fair  for  my  succeeding  better  in  it  than  in  any 
other — which  is  not  saying  much,  perhaps.  Cato,  (in  dramatic  affinity)  I  take  to  be 
the  younger  brother  of  Brutus.  If  I  can  master  one,  I  think  I  may  be  bold  enough 
to  encounter  the  other.  If  you  will  give  orders  for  the  parts  being  sent  to  Charlotte- 
street,  Bloomsbury,  they  will  be  immediately  forwarded  to  me.  Velasquez  and  Ed¬ 
win  seem  to  be  the  first  wanted  :  if  so,  you  will  please  to  have  them  sent  first.  I  beg 
you  once  more  to  accept  my  heartiest  thanks  for  the  favourable  sentiments  you  enter¬ 
tain  of  me.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  most  humble  servant. 

„  ,  Robt.  Bensley 

Endorsed, 

“  Bensley’s  letter  to  me.” 


MRS.  MARY  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Chester,  Aug.  14th,  1775. 

I  had  the  favour  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  George  Garrick,  dated  Bath,  13th  April,  in 
consequence,  he  mentions,  of  some  gentlemen  having  spoke  much  in  my  commenda¬ 
tion — desiring  to  know  whether  I  intended  quitting  the  York  theatre,  and  if  it  would 
be  agreeable  he  should  mention  me  to  you  ?  I  wrote  an  immediate  answer  addressed 
to  him  at  Bath,  wherein  I  assured  him  I  should  leave  York  and  should  esteem  it  an 
obligation  if  (as  he  proposed)  lie  would  mention  me  to  you. 

From  the  nature  and  politeness  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  letter  1  undoubtedly  expected 
some  farther  information  on  the  subject,  as  I  told  him  I  would  acquaint  Mr.  King, 
who  was  then  in  London,  with  the  contents,  who  no  doubt  would  enter  into  no 
engagement  till  I  had  the  favour  of  hearing  farther  from  him. 

Now,  Sir,  as  I  have  waited  all  this  time  and  have  received  no  answer,  and  the 
commencement  of  the  season  approaches,  I  should  be  greatly  obliged  to  you  to  be 
informed  whether  you  have  given  the  matter  any  consideration,  and  whether  you 
think  my  abilities  can  be  of  use  in  the  present  situation  of  your  engagements  ? 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect,  your  humble  servant, 

Mary  King. 

Mr.  King  and  I  are  engaged  to  play  here  a  few  nights  ;  therefore  a  line  directed 
to  me  at  the  theatre  will  come  safe  to  hand. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


75 


MR.  J.  MOODY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Liverpool,  Aug.  16th,  1775. 

Your  letter  of  the  11th  inst.  did  not  reach  me  until  this  day  ;  so  pray,  Sir,  do 
not  let  me  labour  under  the  censure  of  neglect,  or  ill-manners.  I  have  noted  the 
contents  of  your  letter  very  heedfully,  and  I  am  very  unhappy  to  find,  that  instead  of 
complying  with  what  I  thought  a  modest  request,  of  a  small  addition  to  my  little 
salary,  that  any  character  of  mine  should  be  given  to  Mr.  Yates,  who  (you  must  par¬ 
don  my  vanity  when  I  positively  assert)  is  not  a  better  actor,  however  fortunate  he 
may  be  to  have  a  better  income.  I  have  gone  through  every  stage  of  your  business 
with  great  cheerfulness,  since  that  gentleman  meanly  left  you  ;  and  I  think  it  very 
hard  to  give  him  up  my  honest-earned  laurels  without  a  recompense.  Indeed,  Sir, 
I  feel  myself  highly  honoured,  by  your  so  civilly  requesting  what  you  can  command  : 
and  I  hope  my  behaviour  and  attachment  to  your  interest,  since  1  have  had  the 
honour  to  serve  you,  will  so  far  prevail  on  you,  as  not  to  insist  on  my  being  of 
your  company,  at  the  expense  of  my  happiness. 

Shuter  is  a  deplorable  object!  but  I  think. he  gets  better  notwithstanding  his 
calamity.  He  is  very  profligate  and  wicked  ;  he  has  been  but  once  on  the  stage 
these  six  weeks. 

I  hope,  Sir,  you  will  not  think  me  troublesome  to  request  your  answer,  and  be 
assured  whatever  fate  attends  me,  you  shall  never  want  my  hearty  wishes  for  your 
health  and  long  life.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  very  truly, 

Your  very  humble  servant, 

J.  Moody. 

I  have  received  Mr.  Hopkins’s  letter,  which  I  hope  he  will  accept  this  as  answer  to. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  strange  letter  from  Mr.  Moody, 

Received  Aug.  20,  1775.” 


MR.  H.  KING  TO  MR.  GEORGE  GARRICK. 

Chester,  Aug.  17th  1775. 

I  find  by  the  contents  of  yours,  which  I  received  this  morning,  that  Mrs.  King’s 
answer  to  you  has  occasioned  a  mistake,  which  accounts  for  our  not  having  the 
favour  of  hearing  from  you  before,  as  I  find  her  having  mentioned  my  being  in 
London  inclined  you  to  expect  that  I  should  naturally  wait  on  you,  or  Mr.  Garrick, 
and  certainly  should  have  done  so,  but  before  the  contents  of  your  letter  arrived  in 
London,  I  was  on  my  journey  to  York,  and  as  you  had  kindly  proposed  mention¬ 
ing  Mrs.  King  to  Mr.  Garrick,  we  daily  expected  to  hear  farther  from  you  on 
the  subject,  especially  as  Mrs.  King  had  promised  to  hold  herself  disengaged  till 
then,  and  accordingly  has  done  so — but  such  a  length  of  time  elapsing,  we  began  to 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


76 


fear  her  letter  had  miscarried,  and  that  we  should  appear  neglectful  of  your  obliging 
proposal.  Mrs.  King  therefore  addressed  a  few  lines  to  Mr.  Garrick,  the  day  before 
yours  came  to  hand,  acquainting  him  with  the  particulars  of  what  had  passed,  and 
desired  to  know  his  determination.  In  regard  to  terms,  we  must  and  are  willing  in 
some  respect  to  submit  that  to  Mr.  Garrick.  AVe  are  engaged  in  this  theatre  till 
the  middle  of  September,  at  which  time  we  shall  be  happy  to  attend  your  com¬ 
mands.  T  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect,  your  very  humble  servant,  &c. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  King’s  letter  from  Chester  about 
engaging  his  wife  and  him,  1775.” 


Henry  King. 


MR.  H.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Chester,  Aug.  30th,  1775. 

I  had  the  favour  of  your  kind  letter  from  Hampton,  and  agreeable  to  your  re¬ 
quest,  shall  answer  you  with  that  frankness  and  sincerity  which  ever  has  and  shall  be 
the  standard  of  my  conduct.  Our  wish  is  to  be  settled  in  the  capital,  and  nothing 
can  afford  us  more  satisfaction  than  to  be  thought  worthy  the  notice  of  so  great  a 
man  as  you  ;  our  study  will  be  to  merit  your  kindness  and  friendship,  nor  will  I  on 
any  occasion  appear  unreasonable  or  impatient.  I  well  know  it  is  in  your  power  to 
bring  Airs.  King  into  fame,  and  she  is  willing  to  be  in  all  respects  guided  by  you, 
whom  every  one  allows  to  be  the  most  capital  actor  in  the  world.  As  to  terms,  I 
in  a  letter  to  Air.  George  Garrick  mentioned  my  desire  of  leaving  them  to  you  ;  but 
since  you  press  me  to  demand,  I  must.  I  beg  leave  to  observe,  Sir,  that  the  stage 
requires  expensive  decorations,  when  supported  with  proper  dignity ;  nor  can  per¬ 
formers  of  any  rank  in  the  theatre  reflect  a  credit  on  their  situation,  without  some 
little  regard  to  appearances  in  private,  however  frugal  and  economical  their  desires 
may  be.  AVe  have  ever  supported  some  degree  of  gentility,  though  always  steered 
exceeding  wide  from  foolish  prodigality.  Our  income  in  York  would  have  been  made 
three  hundred  a-year.  This  in  the  country,  Sir,  is  considerable,  and  I  cannot  but 
hope  you  will  think  me  reasonable,  if  I  request  for  Airs.  King’s  service,  five  pounds 
a  week,  and  according  as  you  find  her  abilities  and  utility,  shall  be  willing  for  the 
future  to  submit  entirely  to  your  judgment,  candour,  and  friendship.  I  have  by 
your  desire  sent  a  list  of  Airs.  King’s  parts,  and  have  marked  a  few  of  those  she 
esteems  favourite  ones. 

AVith  respect  to  myself,  my  usual  way  of  performing  has  been  in  genteel  comedy, 
and  some  of  the  coxcomical  and  smart  characters;  but  if  there  should  be  any  doubt 
of  my  being  worthy  employment  in  that  way,  or  should  you  not  be  in  any  want  of  my 
assistance,  I  shall  with  the  utmost  cheerfulness  resign  my  pretensions  to  an  engage¬ 
ment  :  nor  shall  a  declaration  of  that  nature  in  any  degree  retard  Airs.  King’s  accept¬ 
ance  of  the  present  or  future  connection,  I  have  only  to  say,  that  in  all  things  we 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


77 


submit  ourselves  to  your  friendship,  instructions,  and  commands.  Confirmed  in  this 
opinion,  I  beg  leave  (with  Mrs.  King’s  best  respects)  to  subscribe  myself, 

Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

Henry  King. 

P.  S.  I  must  beg  your  indulgence  for  a  few  days  longer  than  you  mention.  The 
principal  motive  of  our  engagement  here  was  to  play  the  assize  and  race  weeks,  which 
do  not  conclude  till  Saturday  the  16th  of  September.  Our  benefits  are  the  chief 
reward.  They  cannot  come  on  till  Monday  the  18tli,  and  Wednesday  the  20th 
September.  I  must  therefore  entreat  your  leave  till  that  time,  and  on  the  Thursday 
will  infallibly  set  out  for  London  with  the  utmost  expedition. 


*Lady  Townley 

Miss  Walsingham 

Sethona 

*Lady  Betty  Modish 

Miss  Hardcastle 

Isabella 

*Clarinda, — “  Suspicious  Husband” 

Miss  Sterling 

Jane  Shore  and  Alicia 

^Belinda, — “  All  in  the  Wrong” 

Ann  Lovely 

*Monimia 

*Araminta 

Estifania 

*Juliet 

*Lady  Brampton 

Amanda 

Desdemona 

Millamant 

Miss  Aubrey 

*Athenais 

*Widow  Belmour 

Chances,  2nd  Const. 

*Belvidera 

*Mrs.  Sullen 

*Sylvia, — “  Recruiting  Officer” 

*Calista 

Mrs.  Harley 

*Portia, — “  Merchant  of  Venice” 

*  Rutland 

Charlotte, — in  “  The  Refusal” 

*  Rosalind 

Almeria 

Miss  Montague 

Hippolita 

Rosamond 

*Rossetta, — in  “  The  Foundling” 

^Grecian  Daughter 

Imogen 

*Violante 

*Hermione 

Imoinda 

Miranda 

*Mandane, — in  “  Cyrus” 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots 

Lady  Sadlife 

*Horatia, — “  Roman  Father” 

Emmeline 

Indiana  and  Phillis 

*Zaphira 

Eleanora 

Oriana  and  Bisarre 

*Arpasia 

Matilda 

^Beatrice 

Cleopatra 

Statira. 

Miss  Rusport 

*Lady  Macbeth 

These,  Sir,  are  the  chief  of  what  Mrs.  King  has  performed,  but,  as  I  have  at  pre¬ 
sent  no  regular  list  of  her  parts,  some  few  may  have  escaped  my  recollection.  In 
regard  to  her  first  appearance,  I  could  wish  to  consult  your  opinion  on  our  arrival, 
but  we  think  in  comedy  either  Sylvia  in  “  The  Recruiting  Officer,”  or  Lady  Toivnley 
—but  I  could  wish  your  opinion  and  advice. 


MRS.  C.  LENNOX  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Aug.  20th,  1775. 

When  your  letter  was  left  for  me,  I  was  confined  to  my  bed  by  a  fever  :  I  am 
now  better,  and  hope  to  be  able  to  attend  your  summons  to  the  Adelphi.  Indeed 
you  wrong  me,  if  you  suppose  I  did  not  take  pains.  It  is  true  I  depended  upon  your 
assistance ;  you  permitted  me  to  do  so,  and  I  well  know  how  easy  it  is  for  you  to 


78 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


make  that  piece  as  pleasing  as  any  we  have  had  for  a  long  time.  I  am  not  indiffer 
ent  to  theatrical  rewards ;  could  I  obtain  them,  they  would  assist  me  to  bring  up  my 
little  boy  and  my  girl  ;  but  having  once  failed,  when  1  had  to  a  certain  degree  pleased 
myself,  and  several  others,  whose  judgment  I  relied  on  more  than  my  own,  I  am 
grown  diffident,  so  diffident  that,  if  I  have  any  genius,  I  dare  not  trust  it.  A  little 
success  would  embolden  me,  and  this  success  I  hope  to  owe  to  you  :  and  I  shall  be 
always  ready  to  acknowledge  to  others,  with  the  same  sincerity  that  I  do  now  to 
you,  that  if  from  this  piece  I  should  have  any  share  either  of  reputation  or  profit,  it 
will  be  entirely  your  gift.  I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  servant, 

Charlotte  Lennox. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Lennox  about  the  play. 


DR.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Aug.  21st,  1775. 

Dr.  Arne  presents  his  best  respects  to  Mr.  Garrick,  heartily  returning  thanks 
for  his  permission  to  several  of  his  company  to  perform  in  the  intended  new  comedy 
at  the  Opera-House,  for  the  Doctor’s  advantage.  He  is  unluckily,  and  indeed  ungen- 
teelly  cut  out  of,  at  least,  a  clear  100/.  by  Mrs.  Greville’s  accepting  and  promising  to 
perform  the  principal  comic  character,  and  (after  keeping  it  near  three  weeks  when 
it  was  too  late  to  substitute  another)  returning  the  part  with  frivolous  excuses. 

The  Doctor  knows  not  whether  he  is  rightly  informed  ;  but  has  heard  that  Mr. 
Garrick  discharged  Mr.  Dibdin.  If  (as  he  has  likewise  been  told)  Mr.  Garrick  has 
engaged  Mr.  Arne*  in  the  other’s  place,  the  Doctor  can  better  reconcile  his  being 
neglected  ;  otherwise  should  have  thought  himself  at  least  as  capable  of  the  busi¬ 
ness  as  any  other  person,  and  that  his  name  and  credit  in  the  profession  would  have 
brought  no  disgrace  on  his  friendly  employer.  Cannot  help  regretting  likewise  that 
(though  he  has  ever  maintained  the  most  cordial  respect  and  regard  to  Mr.  Garrick 
for  many  signal  good  qualities,  as  well  as  for  his  being  incontestably  the  first  genius 
of  this  age  in  all  that  he  professes)  any  young  person’s  belonging  to  him,  though  ever 
so  conspicuous  for  his  abilities,  is  sufficient  cause  for  his  rejection. 

These  unkind  prejudices  the  Doctor  can  no  otherwise  account  for,  than  as  arising 
from  an  irresistible  apathy,  to  which  (though  painfully)  he  submits ;  but  will  never 
(notwithstanding)  deviate  a  tittle  from  that  respect,  with  which  he  has  ever  been  Mr. 
Garrick’s  most  obedient  servant. 


*  He  means  Michael  Arne,  who  was  greatly  inferior  to  the  Doctor. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


79 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  ARNE. 


DEAR.  SIR,  Drury-lane  Theatre,  Aug.  24th,  1775. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  Mrs.  Greville  (to  whom  I  gave  free  leave  to  assist  you) 
should  behave  so  ill  to  you,  and  more  so,  that  your  loss  will  be  so  great  by  her  ill- 
behaviour. 

The  managers  of  Drury-lane  have  no  intention  to  employ  a  constant  composer, 
but  to  engage  with  different  gentlemen,  as  business  may  arise  in  the  theatre. 

How  can  you  imagine  that  I  have  an  irresistible  apathy  to  you  ?  I  suppose  you 
mean  antipathy,  my  dear  Doctor,  by  the  construction  and  general  turn  of  your  letter. 
Be  assured,  as  my  nature  is  very  little  inclined  to  apathy,  so  it  is  as  far  from  conceiv¬ 
ing  an  antipathy  to  you  or  any  genius  in  this  or  any  other  country. 

You  ask  me  why  I  will  not  make  use  of  your  pupils?  —  Shall  I  tell  you  fairly? 
because  I  have  not  the  opinion  of  them  which  you  have.  I  tried  Mrs.  Bradford, 
Miss  Weller,  and  I  have  now  Mr.  Fawcet :  the  two  first  tas  I  in  a  most  friendly  man¬ 
ner  foretold)  did  no  credit  to  you  or  myself  by  appearing  in  a  piece  which  you 
obstinately  insisted  upon  bringing  out,  though  you  knew  it  would  be  the  means  of 
making  a  coolness  between  us.  In  short,  dear  Sir,  your  heart  and  your  genius  seem 
more  inclined  to  the  theatre  of  Covent-Garden  than  that  of  Drury-lane ;  and  when 
I  consider  the  additional  music  to  “  King  Arthur,”  and  the  music  to  “  Elfrida,”  I 
trust  that  I  am  justified  in  my  opinion. 

Whether  I  am  mistaken  or  not,  I  have  not  the  least  antipathy,  I  give  you  my 
honour  1  have  not,  to  Doctor  Arne  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  if  I  had  a  work  of  conse¬ 
quence,  I  should  wish  to  employ  him,  notwithstanding  that  our  theatrical  connections 
have  not  yet  been  serviceable  to  either  of  us. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  very  sincere  well-wisher,  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Endorsed, 

“  Dr.  Arne’s  letter  and  my  answer 
about  apathy ,  Aug.  21st,  1775.” 


MR.  W.  FALCONER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  AuS-  21st>  1775. 

I  this  morning  heard  from  my  brother,  in  which  after  making  his  best,  acknowledg¬ 
ments  to  you,  he  requests  you  to  recollect  that  you  thought  it  better  to  wait  awhile, 
until  the  last  volume  of  Mr.  Pennant’s  “  Tour,”  which  I  believe  contains  only  draw¬ 
ings,  should  be  published,  that  it  may  be  seen  which  of  my  brother’s  are  there  en¬ 
graved,  as  he  lent  the  drawings  to  Mr.  Pennant  to  choose  such  as  he  liked  to  copy 
and  have  engraved  ;  but  this  will  not  be  long,  as  that  book  is  advertised.  My  brother 
likewise  observes,  that  the  sketches  on  the  side  leaf,  which  are  to  explain  the  manu- 


80 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


factories,  must  be  engraved  as  well  as  the  drawings,  else  the  hook  will  he  in  those 
parts  unintelligible.  He  cannot  likewise  at  that  distance  know  what  drawings  it 
would  he  proper  to  retain,  and  which  reject;  hut  that  must  he  determined  in  part  by 
the  descriptions,  But  this  will  he  easily  got  over  by  sending  him  the  MS.,  which 
he  will  return  in  a  few  days.  If  Mr.  Beeket  would  enquire  when  Mr.  Pennant’s 
last  volume  will  he  published,  it  might  direct  the  time  of  this  in  a  great  measure,  as 
it  might  he  begun  as  soon  as  it  was  known  what  plates  should  be  engraved.  As  to 
terms,  my  brother  says  he  will  leave  that  entirely  to  you,  and  that  he  shall  not  com¬ 
plain  at  all,  provided  they  are  easy  enough  to  the  purchaser,  and  lie  does  not  com¬ 
plain.  Your  brother  G.  you  have,  1  suppose,  seen;  he  is  nearly  renovated.  The 
same  course  of  life  that  restored  will  preserve  his  health,  but  no  latitude  is  allowable 
beyond  it.  I  have  seen  another  instance  of  the  efficacy  of  distilled  water  in  your  case. 
I  wish  you  much  to  try  it,  as  it  contains  two  of  the  best  qualifications  of  a  medicine, 
being  tut  a  et  jucunda ;  I  wish  I  could  add  celer ;  but  I  believe  we  may  make  no  bad 
substitute  even  for  that,  which  is  certa.  I  have  need  of  many  apologies  from  my 
brother  and  myself,  but  will  not  repeat  them  to  make  this  letter  more  troublesome 
than  is  necessary.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

W.  Falconer. 


MR.  W.  FALCONER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  About  Aug.  31st. 

I  received  the  favour  of  yours  this  morning,  and  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for 
the  trouble  you  have  had.  I  wish  only  you  bad  given  me  your  opinion  as  to  the 
propriety  of  the  publication,  relative  to  Mr.  Pennant’s  Work ;  but  as  you  send  the 
proposals  of  the  bookseller,  I  suppose  you  do  not  esteem  that  to  be  any  objection, 
which  I  have  sufficiently  declared  to  be  my  opinion  also.  I  have  sent  your  letter 
and  Mr.  Becket’s  to  my  brother  at  Chester.  He  will,  I  am  sure,  be  glad  to  accept  of 
any  thing  from  Mr.  Beeket,  that  any  moderate  person  shall  fix.  He  did  not,  1  know, 
write  them  with  the  least  view  to  publication,  and  therefore  I  am  sure  he  will  not 
be  desirous  of  more  than  any  indifferent  person  should  think  the  bookseller  ought  to 
divide  with  the  author  from  the  profit  on  the  sale.  As  a  proof  of  this  part  of  his 
character,  he  is  now  about  to  publish  an  edition  of  “  Strabo’s  Geography,”  with 
copious  Latin  notes  of  his  own,  in  three  volumes  folio,  at  the  request  of  the  Univer- 
sity  of  Oxford,  from  which,  except  the  credit  of  it,  he  will  never  get  one  shilling 
advantage,  though  it  has  been,  and  will  be,  a  work  of  several  years.  The  copy  is  to 
belong  to  the  University.  But  he  will  write  to  you  on  the  business  of  “  The  Scotch 
Tour”  himself. 

Your  brother  George  is  as  well  as  I  ever  saw  him,  his  countenance  clear  and  fat, 
his  appetite  good,  and  every  sign  of  health  about  him  :  nay  his  fingers,  which,  at  his 
coming  here,  were  nearly  useless,  are  now  able  to  write  and  handle  cards,  in  which 
last  occupation  they  have  been  of  late  frequently  and  successfully  exercised.  He  is 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


81 


set  off  for  Devizes  with  Mr.  Squire,  and  stays  there  till  Tuesday,  when  he  sets  off 
for  town.  Poor  Mr.  Squire  has  had  a  monstrous  discharge  of  blood  by  vomit ;  we 
all  gave  him  up  for  some  days,  but  he  is  now  much  better,  and  gone  to  Devizes  to 
take  a  little  fresh  air. 

But,  my  dear  Sir,  1  must  speak  freely  about  your  brother’s  health.  He  is 
now  well,  and  may,  I  believe,  with  care,  so  continue — but  facilis  descensus.  No 
course  of  life  can  agree  with  him  that  is  not  connected  with  air  and  exercise,  and 
that  not  occasional,  or  by  fits  and  starts,  but  regular  and  constant ;  you  must  insist, 
without  being  denied,  that  he  rides  at  least  two  hours  or  ten  miles  every  morning, 
and  that  early,  and  that  he  spend  some  part  of  his  time  in  the  country.  This  is  the 
basis  of  his  health.  Medicines  may  assist  occasionally,  but  they  will  be  ineffectual 
without  such  foundations. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  great  esteem  and  friendship,  yours  very  faithfully, 

W.  Falconer. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  St.  Mar'es,  Aug.  27th,  17 75. 

You  are  in  such  an  eternal  hurry  of  business  and  spirits,  that  I  should  not 
wonder  (especially  as  you  have  gone  under  more  than  any  highwayman  in  England) 
if  you  forgot  your  own  name.  You  are  still  blundering  about  the  names  of  my 
things  :  a  list  of  them,  perhaps,  may  set  you  right,  though  I  will  not  swear  that. 

“  Love’s  Revenge”  (a  printed  book)  where  Florimel  is  introduced.  This  I  do 
not  want  again ;  and  if  you  have  lost  the  copy,  which  I  abridged,  I  will  send  another 
so  abridged. 


“  Phoebe,”  a  whole  Pastoral  Opera  of  three  acts,  an  old  written  copy,  in  a  green 
and  gold  coat. 

“  Love's  Artifice,”  a  Mask,  from  “  Don  Quixote.” 

“  The  Choice  of  Hercules,”  a  Mask,  set  by  Dr.  G. 

“  The  Song  of  Moses,”  paraphrased  for  music. 

“  The  Beggar's  Garland,”  a  ballad  scene,  which  I  imagine  (with  an  introduction 
by  the  beggar  grown  old,  author  of  “  The  Beggar's  Opera  ’)  would  be  a  fine  thing 
for  Sadler’s  Wells.  I  fancy  my  friend  Mr.  Sturges,  chaplain  to  his  Majesty,  comes 
out  of  town  Monday  or  Tuesday,  and  will  call  at  the  Adelphi  too  soon  for  your 
packet;  so  do  not  trouble  your  head  about  it.  1  have  a  letter,  by  the  last  post, from 
Mr.  Linley,  who  will  be  greatly  obliged  to  me  for  either  of  my  two  (unset)  pieces. 
I  should  be  obliged  to  you  as  much  if  you  would  forward  them  both  to  him  at  Bath, 
as  soon  as  convenient :  “  Love’s  Artifice,”  from  “  Don  Quixote,  and  ‘  1  he  Song  of 
Moses,”  from  an  old  book,  not  quite  so  comical.  "W  hen  you  talk  of  introducing 
Hercules  into  another  entertainment,  I  am  sure  you  are  not  aware  of  its  taking  up 
three  quarters  of  an  hour  in  the  performance.  There  is  a  French  piece,  in  a  volume 
of  our  poor  friend  Warner’s,  which  I  once  lent  you,  called  “  Les  Originaux,  v  here 

VOL.  II.  M 


82 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


a  governor  shows  his  young  pupil  a  number  of  originals  for  his  contempt  and  im¬ 
provement.  This  Mask,  being  on  a  classical  Greek  foundation,  would  become  this 
governor’s  character,  to  introduce  for  a  Clincher ,  and  confirm  the  young  man  in  his 
good  resolutions.  I  think  this  concurs  with  your  thought  too  much  to  be  neglected ; 
if  any  thing  of  that  kind  should  be  done.  If  so,  I  cannot  see  how  Hercules  can  be 
abridged  at  all,  except  by  speaking  the  recitative.  How  could  the  Duchess*  be  so 
overseen,  as  they  say,  as  to  enter  the  dirty  sheets  of  a  newspaper  with  such  a  fellow’s 
wooden  leg  ?  She  was  resolved  to  have  a  new  hick,  and  he  has  given  it  her  to  the 
purpose.  ^  ours  ever, 

J.  H. 


MR.  G.  E.  AYSCOUGH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampton  Court,  Aug.  28th,  1775. 

I  have  got  my  tragedy  transcribed,  and  I  now  take  the  liberty  of  sending  it  to 
you  for  your  perusal.  Whatsoever  alterations  you  may  think  it  wants,  I  will  endea¬ 
vour  to  make,  and  should  deem  myself  for  ever  obliged,  if  you  would  favour  me 
with  your  able  assistance,  in  rendering  it  fit  for  the  stage.  As  to  the  objection  you 
made  me  acquainted  with  in  your  letter,  viz  :  that  of  your  being  full  for  the  ensuing 
winter,  it  has  had  no  weight  with  me ;  as  whether  it  appears  this  year,  the  next,  or 
even  the  year  after,  is  to  me  a  matter  of  indifference,  so  as  it  does  but  come  out  at 
last  at  your  theatre  and  under  your  inspection  and  direction ;  for  I  am  well  convinced 
that  every  piece  comes  out  with  so  much  greater  eclat,  and  so  much  better  chance  of 
success  at  Drury-lane,  that  it  must  be  rejected  and  refused  by  you,  before  I  should 
think  of  offering  it  to  Covent  Garden. 

I  am  at  present  your  near  neighbour,  being  appointed  to  command  the  guards  at 
Hampton-court,  from  this  time  till  the  end  of  next  month ;  and  I  mean  to  take  the 
first  opportunity  of  calling  to  pay  my  respects  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  to  whom  I 
beg  my  compliments,  and  remain, 

Dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  friend  and  servant, 

G.  E.  Ayscough. 


MR.  F.  GENTLEMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR, 

Though  I  cannot  satisfactorily  clear  up  whether  this  address  is  justifiable  or  not, 
yet  under  cover  of  peculiar  circumstances,  I  venture  to  approach  you.  A  summer 
harassed  with  illness  and  disappointments,  absence  from  town  of  my  capable  friends, 
and  a  total  inability  of  exercising  my  intellectual  faculties,  have,  with  the  charge  of 
two  children,  whom  I  wish  to  act  the  paternal  part  by,  thrown  me  into  a  state  of  finance 
I  shall  not  attempt  to  describe,  lest  truth  might  seem  exaggeration.  In  brief,  thev 
have  effectually  brought  me  to  a  stand  still.  Some  amendment  of  health  has  enabled 

*  The  Duchess  of  Kingston’s  dispute  with  Foote. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


83 


me  to  execute  a  scheme  I  have  long  meditated,  and  am  invited  for  to  Eaton  and  Ox¬ 
ford,  which  is,  dramatic  lectures,  of  a  nature  different  from  any  yet  attempted  ;  liberal, 
I  hope,  and  useful  in  their  nature  :  but  my  externals  have  so  unfavourable  an  appear¬ 
ance,  that  I  cannot  produce  myself  with  any  comfort  or  hope  of  success.  If  in  such 
a  dilemma,  occasioned  by  no  neglect  or  extravagance,  I  may  be  indulged  with  a  tem¬ 
porary  assistance  of  five  guineas  by  Mr.  Garrick’s  feeling  consideration,  it  probably 
may  stop  approaching  ruin  from  falling  on  a  heart,  which  will,  upon  thorough  know¬ 
ledge,  be  found  very  different  from  what  it  really  is*  A  heart  that  will  peculiarly 
study  to  make  every  honest  and  grateful  acknowledgment.  I  submit  without  multi¬ 
plying  arguments  the  matter  at  large,  and  am,  with  true  respect, 

Sir,  your  obliged  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

Francis  Gentleman. 

I  have,  from  a  circumstance  of  dangerous  sickness  where  I  lodged,  been  obliged 
to  take  refuge  at  the  Black  Lion,  Little  Russell-street. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Gentleman  for  five  guineas.” 


MR.  F.  GENTLEMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Aug.  29th,  1775. 

From  experience  I  may  venture  to  assert  that  the  heart  which  is  not  impressed 
by  favours  conferred,  has  least  power  of  verbal  acknowledgment.  This,  I  trust,  will 
apologize  at  present  for  barely  mentioning  that  your  very  essential  and  particularly 
kind,  because  immediate  assistance,  reached  me  according  to  your  benevolent  inten¬ 
tion.  I  intrude  upon  your  acceptance  a  written  acknowledgment,  which  I  earnestly 
hope  and  probably  believe  with  a  former  one,  I  shall  be  able  legally  to  fulfil  shortly. 
Mr.  Garrick’s  good  wishes  are  extremely  grateful,  and  will  give  additional  spirit  to 
my  humble  endeavours.  If  my  wishes  for  every  enjoyment  of  good  health,  &c.,  can, 
be  of  use  to  Mr.  Garrick,  they  never  were  nor  ever  will  be  wanting  from, 

Sir,  your  infinitely  obliged  and  very  faithful  servant, 

Francis  Gentleman. 

On  demand,  I  promise  to  pay  David  Garrick,  Esq.,  or  his  order,  five  pounds  five 
shillings,  value  received  by 

Endorsed,  FltANCIS  GENTLEMAN. 

“  Mr.  Gentleman’s  letter  and  note-of-hand.” 


TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR, 


Aug.  31st,  1775. 


Accustomed  as  you  must  doubtless  be  to  receiving  letters  from  strangers,  ani¬ 
mated  by  all  the  various  motives  arising  from  the  expectation  of  pleasure,  from  views 


*  Misery  is  sacred  from  criticism.  I  cannot  correct  the  confusion  here;  let  it  plead  in  the  poor  man’s 
favour,  as  I  have  no  doubt  it  did  with  Mr.  Garrick,  who  sent  the  sum  wanted  immediately. — Ed. 

M  2 


84 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


of  interest,  curiosity,  anti  vanity,  which  severally  lead  them  to  aspire  at  the  honour  of 
your  acquaintance,  I  have  no  apprehension  of  exciting  surprise,  by  the  liberty  I 
now  take  of  addressing  you  :  but  what  may  well  appear  singular  to  you,  and  what  1 
regard  as  my  particular  unhappiness,  is,  that  though  I  even  obtrude  myself  upon  your 
time  by  letter,  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  way  to  my  ever  hoping  for 
the  honour  of  your  notice  in  person. 

I  will  not,  however,  make  apologies,  which  1  hope  you  abhor  as  much  as  I  do,  nor 
impertinently  keep  you  in  suspense  of  the  reason  of  my  writing. 

The  innumerable  instances  on  record  of  the  obligations  which  theatrical  authors 
have  acknowledged  to  the  good  offices  and  abilities  of  Mr.  Garrick,  have  encouraged 
one,  who  has  no  claim  to  his  friendship,  to  solicit  his  patronage  :  for  from  those  who 
have  done  most,  most  will  still  be  expected. 

My  situation  in  life  is  such  as  totally  forbids  my  ever  being  known  as  an  author, 
unless,  indeed,  I  were  willing  to  incur,  and  to  brave  the  utmost  bitterness  of  a  cen¬ 
suring  world,  which,  I  confess,  my  courage  is  by  no  means  equal  to.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  for  my  sins, — 

“  Some  demon  whisper’d — Clodio,  write  a  play  !” 

I  listened  to  him  with  that  peculiar  eagerness  which  we  are  so  apt  to  feel  where 
our  propensities  are  involved  in  difficulties.  The  piece  is  written.  But  it  has  only 
been  read  by  myself — and  consequently,  you  will  easily  believe,  has  not  been  too 
rigorously  criticised  :  but  I  would  rather  risque  even  the  destruction  of  my  piece, 
than  the  discovery  of  my  name. 

Thus,  then,  with  all  its  imperfections  on  its  head,  I  am  reduced  to  make  its  Jirst 
inspector  the  man  in  the  world  who  ought  to  be  its  last ! 

But,  previous  to  sending  you  my  MS.  Sir,  I  should  be  extremely  glad,  if  it  is 
possible,  to  be  informed  if  your  plan  of  operations  for  the  ensuing  season  is  already 
so  far  arranged  as  to  render  my  application  too  late  ;  in  which  case,  I  would  defer  to 
a  future  time  giving  you  the  trouble  to  read  it. 

The  piece  is  in  three  acts  ;  and  should  you  think  it  worth  hazarding  on  the 
stage,  I  shall  be  happy  to  leave  it  entirely  to  your  own  decision  whether  to  have 
it  performed  as  a  short  play,  or  as  a  long  farce,  which  latter,  however,  is  best  suited 
to  its  style. 

And  should  you  reject  it — there  is  not,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  world,  an  author 
who  would  pochet  such  an  affront  with  equal  quietness. 

If  you  honour  this  letter  with  any  answer,  it  will  come  safe  to  my  hands  by  being 
directed  to  A.  B.  to  be  left  at  the  Orange  Coffee-house,  Haymarket,  till  called  for. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect. 

Your  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


85 


DR.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  3rd,  1775. 

I  received  the  favour  of  your  reply  to  my  letter,  which  I  could  not  doubt  of, 
you  being  never  deficient  in  politeness. 

You  are  certainly  in  the  right  to  suppose  that  (if  I  wrote  the  word  apathy)  I 
meant  antipathy.  Did  I  make  the  blunder,  or  is  it  a  joke,  like  Mrs.  Cibber’s  asking 
you  how  you  could  possibly  spell  King  with  a  Q  ? 

I  must  beg  your  permission  to  assure  you  that  you  are  greatly  mistaken  in  two 
points.  First,  when  you  imagine  that  I  have  the  least  partiality  either  in  favour  of 
the  other  theatre  or  its  patentees  :  next,  in  saying  that  the  music  in  “  Elfrida”  is  much 
superior  to  the  music  I  composed  for  you  in  “  King  Arthur.” 

The  principal  songs,  which  for  air  and  mastership  I  have  never  excelled,  have  not 
been  performed.  They  were  written  for  the  late  Mrs.  Arne,  and  fashioned  to  her 
sweet  voice  and  glaring  abilities.  Air.  Arne  expected,  from  the  music  and  her  per¬ 
formance  of  it,  that  they  would  be  productive  of  the  highest  pleasure,  that  a  judicious 
audience  ever  received  from  either  of  our  endeavours,  and  several  eminent  masters 
thought  as  he  did  :  but  when  those  coups  de  maitre  came  out  of  the  mouths  of  persons 
who  could  neither  sing  in  time  nor  tune,  nor  turn  on ejeu  de  la  voix  in  them,  the 

result  was  much  the  same  as  if  an  approved  author  had  written  a  fine  part  for - (I 

was  near  hurting  your  delicacy,  in  nominating  a  gentleman,  with  whose  acquaintance 
I  am  honoured,)  and  this  part  through  an  unfortunate  event,  should  be  acted  by 
Jemmy  llaftor,  or  Dagger  Marr. 

Champness’s  songs,  the  chorus  in  the  first  scene  of  Mr.  Vernon’s  “  Come  if  you 
dare,”  and  several  other  things  that  employed  my  utmost  efforts,  were  laid  aside,  in 
favour  of  Purcell’s  music,  which  (though  excellent  in  its  kind)  was  cathedral,  and  not 
to  the  taste  of  a  modern  theatrical  audience.  But  never  was  my  surprise  greater 
than  when  I  perceived  that  a  drama  so  fertile  of  invention  and  elegant  in  poetry, 
which  brought  so  much  to  Harry  Gifford,  and  lately  in  Dublin  should  (though 
strongly  performed  and  at  a  vast  expense  at  Drury -lane)  fail  in  making  that  impres¬ 
sion  on  the  public,  which  the  managers  had  an  undoubted  right  to  expect. 

You  frankly  say  that  you  have  not  engaged  any  of  my  pupils,  because  you  have 
not  the  same  opinion  of  them  that  I  have.  Be  pleased  to  remember  that  I  did  not 
recommend  Miss  Weller  as  an  accomplished  singer  ;  but  as  a  young  girl,  with  a  good 
person,  who  would  be  useful  in  musical  pieces  ;  but  whose  talents  in  speaking  and 
acting,  might,  with  your  friendly  encouragement,  in  a  little  time  bring  so  pretty  a 
figure  to  be  a  shining  object.  Had  you  seen  her  play  Mrs.  Cadwallader,  in  Foote’s 
farce  at  Covent-Garden,  your  candour  would  induce  you  to  think  with  that  company, 
who  all  declared  that  no  young  actress  ever  did  better. 

When  I  offered  you  this  girl,  you  wanted  an  accomplished  singer.  When  I  re¬ 
commended  Miss  Jameson  as  such,  I  was  to  whistle  an  angel  from  Heaven,  or  you 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


80 

were  full ;  though  you  brought  out  a  raw  nothing  last  year,  and  have  taken  Mrs. 
.Jewell  and  a  Jewess  this  season.*  I  hope  you  will,  as  you  have  kindly  done,  excuse 
this  frankness  in  me,  and  give  me  leave  to  add,  that  I  will  positively  bet  a  hundred 
pounds  upon  Miss  Jameson,  against  any  singer  you  can  name  in  either  theatre — I 
might  safely  a  hundred  to  one. 

I  wish  you  would  ponder  on  the  contents— not  now,  because  your  cast  is  rather 
overloaded — but  hereafter,  when  it  may  not  be  so.  And  now  Sir,  to  the  last  matter  I 
shall  at  present  trouble  you  with. 

Bickerstaff  added  songs  to  the  Oracle,  and  brought  it  out  by  the  title  of  “  Daphne 
and  Amintor,”  at  Drury -lane,  which  succeeded  very  well. 

I  remember  a  piece  of  Mr.  Lloyd’s,  called  the  “  Capricious  Lovers,”  when  per¬ 
formed  in  Clive’s  time.  Every  body  liked  the  burletta,  but  none  were  pleased  with 
the  music — which  has  induced  me  to  reset  it.  Now,  Sir,  if  you  think  it  will  (with 
the  addition  of  my  new  music)  fill  up  a  vacancy,  till  the  town  fills,  the  vocal,  instru¬ 
mental,  and  speaking  parts,  are  ready  drawn  out :  the  title  may,  and  should  be  alter¬ 
ed  to  “  The  Country  Girl  at  Court,”  being  the  original  one,  viz. : — “  La  Contadina 
in  Corte,”  and  (for  a  sixth  night)  1  will  attend  the  getting  up  of  the  musical  part,  and 
deliver  up  the  composition  to  your  use.  If  you  don’t  want  it,  make  no  ceremony  in 
saying  so  ;  for  it  will  be  of  no  small  service  to  me,  with  my  catches  and  glees. 

Have  I  been  studying  the  longitude  ?  Perhaps  so  ;  but  if  I  have  tired  you,  it  is 
more  than  you  could  do  by  me,  were  you  to  fill  a  ream  of  paper. 

This  requires  no  other  answer,  than  just  whether  you  can,  with  advantage  to  your 
undertaking,  make  use  of  my  new  composition  or  not. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  due  respect,  ever  your  friend  and  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Augustine  Arne. 


DR.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

Mr.  Johnston  informing  me  of  your  desire  to  receive  my  demand  for  the 
composition  of  the  music  in  “  The  Little  Gipsy,”  I  beg  leave  to  expatiate  a  little 
thereon. 

I  think  a  musician,  with  regard  to  theatrical  employment,  under  an  unfortunate 
predicament,  if  comparatively  considered  with  the  author  of  any  little  piece,  for  the 
following  reason.  They  should  both  have  learning,  invention,  and  a  perfect  know¬ 
ledge  of  effects;  but  an  author  of  a  petite  piece  can  instantaneously  write  down  his 
thoughts,  as  they  arise,  whereas,  the  poor  musician,  when  he  has  conceived  an  air,  in 
every  respect  suitable  to  the  sense,  and  emphatically  expressed  every  part,  has  done 
but  half  his  business ;  for  he  has  all  the  instrumental  accompaniments  to  study  and 
write  down  ;  insomuch  as,  that  in  a  composition  of  ten,  twelve,  or  more  different 
parts,  when  he  has  written  a  whole  side  of  music  paper,  he  has  the  mortification  to 

*  The  Jewess  was  Miss  Abrams. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


87 


have  composed  but  one  line;  all,  except  the  voice  part,  being  requisite  to  that  one 
line.  And  yet  an  author  of  a  farce  will  frequently  make  upwards  of  100/.  by  his 
sixth  night,  besides  50/.  by  the  sale  of  his  copy  to  the  printer ;  while  the  poor 
devil  of  a  crotchet-monger*  is  thought  well  paid  with  50/.  for  six  times  the  study 
and  labour. 

This  last  observation,  though  strictly  just,  is  not,  in  me,  productive  of  a  single 
complaint  or  grumble ;  but  convictive  that  I  have  taken  infinite  pains  to  be  master 
of  a  scurvy  profession. 

As  to  my  bill,  it  amounts,  at  my  constant  and  reasonable  rule  of  charging,  but  to 
45/.  13s.  6d.  If  you  should  think  I  have  employed  extraordinary  time  and  care  to 
make  the  composition  proper  and  perfect  in  its  kind,  you  will  not  overpay  me  with 
50/. — But  do  as  you  please ;  I  shall  be  satisfied,  and  am,  with  true  respect, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  THOMAS  AUGUSTINE  ArXE. 

“  Dr.  Arne,  about  bill  for  1  May  Day.’ 

I  gave  him  the  501.  desired.” 


DR.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

I  was  never  so  conceited  of  any  abilities,  as  non  cedere  majoribus ;  but  then  I 
ever  was  above  servility,  and  could  not  pay  a  compliment  to  the  opinion  of  Socrates 
or  Seneca,  at  the  expense  of  my  reason.  Humanum  est  errare — therefore  the  main 
study  of  every  wise  man  is  to  arrive  at  rectitude,  which  cannot  possibly  be  accom¬ 
plished  by  giving  an  implicit  concession  to  our  first  determinations.  But  shall  Arne, 
a  musician,  have  the  hcirdiesse  to  dispute  with  Garrick,  in  his  own  way?  Yes— if 
Garrick,  not  giving  himself  time  to  debate  on  the  natural  effects  arising  from  their 
causes,  peremptorily  gives  his  ego  dixi  to  what  does  not  (to  Arne)  appear  natural. 
But  where  Garrick  is  pleased  to  exercise  his  judgment,  as  in  his  own  parts,  by  a  fair 
trial  of  his  opinion,  pro  and  con  ?  No,  Arne  would  as  soon  dispute  with  Sir  Isaac 
Newton  (if  living)  on  his  doctrine  of  colours. 

Sed  ad  proposition. 

When  Miss  Weller  rehearsed  part  of  Polly’s  character  in  the  green-room,  I  knew 
it  would  be  in  vain  to  attempt  a  justification  of  her  manner,  at  that  juncture,  and 
therefore  reserved  nuj  sentiments  for  this  occasion.  I  shall  only  particularize  the 
soliloquy.— “  Now  I’m  a  wretch  indeed”— which,  in  all  the  Pollys  I  ever  saw,  had 
no  effect  on  the  audience,  except  when  Mrs.  Cibber  played  the  character,  who  spoke 

*  As  far  as  the  treasury  of  the  theatre  is  to  pay  him,  this  is  true  as  to  the  crotchet-monger — but  then  let 
us  look  to  the  fortune  which  he  sometimes  catches  from  any  vain  or  silly,  or  profligate  woman  s  warbling  upon 
the  stage  a  ballad  about  nothing,  which  every  body  must  run  to  hear  and  try  to  sing.— I  will  not  sully  paper 
with  the  contemptible  titles  of  these  annoyances. — Ed. 


88 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  acted  it  in  the  same  manner  as  Miss  Weller  does;  and  Mrs.  Barry  had  the  same 
idea  of  it.  Every  action  should  arise  from  the  circumstances  that  excite  it.  In  you 
this  position  is  glaringly  illustrated.  Now,  in  regard  to  Polly’s  situation,  it  is  this. 
She  has  been  soliciting  her  husband’s  life  with  her  parents,  which  (instead  of  moving 
their  obdurate  hearts)  has  had  no  other  effect,  than  her  father’s  leaving  her  mother 
with  a  determination  to  prepare  matters  at  the  Old  Bailey  for  his  death.  Polly, 
overhearing  this,  comes  on  in  agony  of  grief,  says — “  now  I’m  a  wretch  indeed!” — 
thinks  she  sees  him  already  in  the  cart — that  she  hears  vollies  of  sighs  from  the 
windows  in  Holborn — then  abruptly  breaks  out — “  I  see  him  at  the  tree — the  whole 
circle  are  in  tears — even  butchers  weep.” 

Can  it  be  natural  that  the  sight  of  a  beloved  husband  at  the  gallows  should 
excite  fainter  emotions  in  a  doating  wife,  than  arise  in  butchers  exercised  in  offices 
of  cruelty  ?  Would  not  an  apple-woman,  who  should  see  so  fine  a  youth,  merely  in 
the  cart,  naturally  clap  her  hands  together,  through  depth  of  concern,  and  exclaim, 
“  Ah,  poor  soul !  God  bless  him  and  take  him  to  his  mercy  !’’ — perhaps  shed  tears  ? 
Certainly ;  then  Polly’s  emotion  on  figuring  him  at  the  fatal  tree,  where  the  whole 
circle,  through  mere  humanity,  are  in  tears,  can  be  nothing  short  of  distraction,  and 
any  action,  short  of  the  force  she  gave  it,  must  appear  trifling,  faint,  and  unfeeling. 
You  are  far  from  having  seen  the  best  of  her  in  that  character,  which  appears  in  her 
scenes  of  love,  fondness,  fears,  and  strokes  of  tenderness  with  Mackheath.  But  I  was 
not  willing  to  give  you  too  much  trouble,  and  besides,  I  plainly  saw  that  you  could 
not  divest  yourself  of  prepossession  ;  else,  how  was  it  possible  that  a  very  fine  voice 
both  for  speaking  and  singing ;  action  open,  easy,  and  graceful ;  an  unexceptionable 
person  and  figure,  with  a  countenance  free  from  the  least  distortion,  could  be  pro¬ 
ductive  of  such  faint  approbation  ? 

You  have  often  said  you  regarded  me — but  (as  in  the  case  of  Miss  Brent)  were  I 
to  produce  an  angel,  her  being  ushered  by  me  would  create  coolness  and  indifference. 
This  observation,  which  I  could  more  forcibly  illustrate,  I  plainly  see  has  put  you 
out  of  humour.  Give  me  leave  to  say,  so  it  has  me,  who  am  not  without  my  feeling 
on  so  mortifying  an  occasion. 

You  are  possessed  both  of  fortune  and  merit;  the  one  considerable,  the  other 
supreme.  I  pay  you  no  particular  respect,  on  account  of  the  former ;  but  the  highest 
imaginable  on  account  of  the  latter.  Providence,  by  placing  you  in  this  beneficial 
situation,  meant  you  as  the  sun  and  rain,  to  cheer  and  water  plants  of  genius.  Your 
own  talents,  and  the  just  encouragement  they  have  met  with,  demand  (as  a  debt) 
those  beneficent  offices  from  you.  The  pay  given  to  three  nothings  would  be  a  suit¬ 
able  reward  to  a  rising,  promising  genius,  whose  industry  and  advancement  could 
never  fail  of  repaying  you  tenfold  in  return. 

Having  faithfully  kept  my  promise  to  take  no  material  step,  without  first  ac¬ 
quainting  you  with  my  design,  and  therefore  given  you  a  fair  offer  of  Miss  Weller. 
I  will  trouble  you  with  no  more  letters,  or  applications  on  her  account ;  so  shall  only 
add,  that  if  you  are  inclined  to  encourage  and  cherish  her,  as  you  have  done  by  many 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


89 


others,  with  much  lesser  talents  and  requisites,  I  am  desirous,  and  immediately  ready 
to  give  you  the  preference ;  but  if  otherwise,  (as  I  have  only  my  small  merit  and 
hard  labour  to  subsist  on )  let  it  never  be  a  matter  of  the  least  difference  between  us, 
that  I  have  acted  like  a  man  of  honour,  and  you — overlooked  a  jewel. 

I  am,  Sir,  as  I  ever  was, 

Your  sincere  friend,  and  most  obedient  servant, 

Thos.  Augne.  Arne. 


DR.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  3rd. 

Having  just  received  a  letter  from  the  ingenious  author  of  the  two  operas,  and 
“  Pennyworth  of  Wit,”  under  your  kind  inspection,  wherein  he  begs  concealment  of 
his  name,  till  the  fate  of  one  or  other  of  his  pieces  is  determined,  I  thought  I  could 
not  do  better  than  in  transcribing  it  verbatim,  which  runs  as  follows : — 

“  Dear  Doctor — What  you  lately  conveyed  to  me,  as  Mr.  Garrick’s  remark  on 
the  fable  of  4  The  Rose,’  gives  me  some  concern,  as  I  should  rather  have  judged  his 
principal  objection  to  be  an  article  in  its  favour,  and  am  thereby  under  the  disagreeable 
predicament  of  differing  in  opinion  from  a  gentleman,  for  whose  talents,  abstracted 
from  his  great  performance,  I  have  the  utmost  veneration. 

“  I  thought  the  grounding  an  allegorical  fable  on  popular  opinion,  which  ab  origine 
has  obtained  and  drawn  the  most  superstitious  conclusions  from  dreams,  an  unde¬ 
niable  poetica  licentia.  If  otherwise,  many  of  the  best  dramatic  pieces  (particularly 
of  Shakspeare’s)  must  be  exploded ;  and  surely  it  cannot  be  deemed  a  demerit  in  an 
author  to  conceal  the  exposition,  or  rather  the  discovery,  of  his  allegory,  whether  con¬ 
veyed  by  riddle  or  other  temporary  perplexity,  till  cleared  up  in  the  catastrophe,  lest 
he  should  be  guilty  of  an  Irish  blunder,  in  finishing  his  piece  before  it  is  done. 

“  If  Mr.  Garrick  will  obligingly  give  himself  the  trouble  attentively  to  read  the 
other  opera,  which  may  be  titled,  4  The  Lost  Sheep  Found,’  or  (alluding  to  the  inci¬ 
dent  of  the  handkerchief,)  4  The  Lucky  Exchange,’  perhaps  he  may  give  it  the 
preference,  having  a  greater  mixture  of  comedy,  and  the  fable  not  being  veiled  in 
allegory. 

44  As  to  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  friend,  relative  to  the  part  of  Simkin,  as 
bearing  a  similitude  to  Squire  Richard  in  4  The  Provoked  Husband,’  or  any  other 
character  that  I  know  of,  I  am  certain  he  did  not  give  himself  the  trouble  to  com¬ 
pare  them  ;  if  he  had,  he  would  soon  have  been  convinced  that  it  has  no  other  resem¬ 
blance  than  what  one  fool  naturally  bears  to  another,  in  being  a  subject  of  ridicule 
and  laughter. 

44  4  The  Pennyworth  of  Wit’  was  written  to  indulge  my  own  feelings,  which 
were  sensibly  struck  with  the  fable;  but  the  two  operas  were  penned  with  the  pro- 

N 


VOL.  II. 


90 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


spect  of  being  embellished  by  your  music ;  nor  should  I  have  employed  myself  in  that 
style,  had  I  not  some  knowledge  in  the  science  of  harmony,  and  been  flattered  by 
you  and  my  University  friends,  that  I  have  some  talent  for  lyrics. 

“  On  revisal  of  *  The  Rose,’  I  find  an  absolute  necessity  for  transplacing  of  two 
scenes,  viz.  the  second  scene  between  Lord  Quaintlove,  Sir  Humphry,  and  Rattle, 
must  be  removed  into  the  second  act;  and  the  first  scene  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Violet, 
Clara,  and  Serina,  which  is  in  the  second  act,  must  be  substituted  in  its  place.  This 
improvement  is  obvious,  as  it  considerably  varies  the  characters. 

“  If  Mr.  Garrick  shall  be  pleased  to  bring  either  of  these  pieces  on  the  stage, 
notwithstanding  the  above  (I  think)  rational  justification,  I  will  implicitly  submit  to 
any  alteration,  which  he,  on  due  reflection,  shall  think  necessary.” — (Thus  far  the 
poet  writes.) 

This,  Sir,  except  some  compliments,  which  would  be  unbecoming  to  insert,  is  the 
sum  and  substance  of  my  worthy  friend’s  letter,  and  which  I  thought  necessary  to 
communicate. 

Now  give  me  leave  to  wish  that  you  would  consult  your  assured  friend  in  the 
musical  productions  of  your  theatre,  which  (waving  your  own  consequence,  unde¬ 
niably  the  first  with  the  public)  might  produce  the  best  second  dish  at  the  feast. 

Though  half  a  ghost  myself,  I  have  more  honour  than  the  whole  ghost  in 
“  Hamlet.”  He  was  forbid  to  tell  the  secrets  of  his  prison-house — I  tell  them  not, 
through  principle ;  but  this  I  may  say,  in  confidence,  you  actually  want  strength  for 
the  exhibition  of  musical  performances — and  why  should  you? — Mr.  Garrick,  (though 
I  wish  him  immortal,)  to  the  grief  of  the  discerning  world,  is  not  so — sickness,  pain, 
mortality,  may  intervene.  Let  it  not  be  said,  that  so  great  a  master  of  his  art  is  deaf 
or  blind  to  rising  merit. 

I  tell  you  bond  fide,  that  the  young  woman  and  young  girl  (Miss  Weller’s  sister) 
whom  I  recommended,  are  real  objects  of  your  notice,  as  handsome  women,  complete 
figures,  and  promising  actresses,  abstracted  from  their  utility  as  singers. 

Pray  be  so  obliging  as  to  let  me  hear  from  you  as  soon  as  you  come  to  town,  and 
be  assured  that  if  my  skill  or  connexions  are  of  any  value,  they  shall  be  exerted  to 
the  utmost,  in  testimony  of  the  respect  with  which  I  am, 

Dear  Sir,  your  faithful  friend,  and  humble  servant, 

Thos.  Augne.  Arne. 


MR.  WHITEHEAD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Nuneham,  Sept.  3rd,  1775. 

It  was  not  in  my  power  to  show  you  my  play  again  before  I  left  London.*  I 
had  but  just  time  enough  to  put  it  into  Dr.  Hurd’s  hands,  and  to  talk  it  over  with 

*  Was  this  the  tragedy  of  “  CEdipus,”  which  he  wrote  in  conjunction  with  Mason,  and  which  they  did 
not  print  ? — ■  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


91 


him.  He  is  a  very  favourable  judge,  and  was  so  much  struck  with  the  conduct  as  to 
be  almost  blind  to  its  other  imperfections.  I  mentioned  every  objection  you  had 
made,  and  some  of  them  we  tried  to  remove,  but  always  found  that  every  alteration 
hurt  the  mechanism  of  the  whole,  and  agreed  at  last,  that  it  must  stand  or  fall  as  it 
is.  I  have,  however,  softened  some  parts  a  little,  and  thrown  in  lines  here  and  there, 
to  make  it  clearer  to  the  audience  at  a  first  hearing. 

I  shall  probably  be  in  town  about  the  middle  of  October,  when  you  shall  see  it 
again.  If  your  objections  continue  as  strong  as  when  you  saw  it  last,  I  shall  be  so 
far  from  desiring  you  to  take  it,  that  I  Avill  by  no  means  let  you  have  it  to  be  a 
detriment  to  yourself  out  of  complaisance  to  me. 

My  best  respects,  &c.  attend  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Whitehead. 

P.  S.  If  you  should  have  any  occasion  to  write  to  me  before  I  see  you,  a  letter 
enclosed  to  the  Earl  of  Jersey,  Grosvenor  Square,  will  certainly  find  me. 

Endorsed, 

“Mr.  Whitehead  about  his  new  tragedy,  3x-d  Sept.  1775, 
answered  the  10th  do.” 


MR.  WHITEHEAD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


Mount-street,  Tuesday  morning,  Sept.  4th,  1775. 


I  have  been  constantly  engaged  with  one  trifle  or  other  ever  since  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  your  letter.  I  have  endeavoured,  however,  to  melt  the  two  epitaphs  into 
one  of  eight  lines,  that  you  may  play  the  critic  in  your  turn.  Characters,  in  epitaphs, 
should  certainly  suit  that  person  only  for  whom  they  are  designed.  I  have  therefore 
tried  to  bring  in  every  circumstance  that  seemed  characteristic,  and  agreed  with  the 
account  you  gave  of  him  in  your  letter.  I  have  kept  to  your  thoughts  and  to  your 
words  too.  His  friends  will  certainly  know  every  particular  which  is  alluded  to ; 
but  will  the  generality  of  the  world,  without  notes? — that  should  be  considered.  I 
was  sorry  to  find  you  give  so  bad  an  account  of  your  health,  and  sincerely  hope  this 
will  find  you  much  better.  You  have  been  used  to  a  great  deal  of  activity,  and  must 
not  rest  too  fast.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  sincerely,  &c.  &c. 

W.  Whitehead. 


Endorsed, 

“  W.  Whitehead,  Esq.  about 
Paul  Whitehead’s  epitaph.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden  Place,  Sept.  5,  1 775. 

We  shall  begin  to  pick  the  hop-garden,  at  the  foot  of  the  Fox-hole  bench,  next 
Saturday.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  country",  and  we  shall  be  happy  to  see  you  and  Mrs. 

N  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


go 


Garrick,  and  Mr.  Carrington,  morning,  noon,  or  night.  Breakfast,  collation,  dinner, 
and  supper.  \\  hat  more  could  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  either  promise  or  give  to  his 
friend?  Money  he  might,  but  nobody  gives  that,  so  the  bounty  of  wealth  and 
poverty  is  exactly  equal.  Charity  you  do  not  want.  Welcome  and  a  hospitable 
reception  you  shall  have.  Carmina  non  possumus,  donare. 

Yours  most  affectionately, 

Endorsed,  CaMDEN. 

“  Lord  Camden,  Aug.  1775. 

Hop- gathering.” 


MISS  POPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Twickenham,  Sept.  7th,  1775. 

When  I  reflect  how  extremely  rash  I  have  been,  and  how  much  reason  you  have 
to  be  disobliged  at  my  conduct,  I  have  very  little  hope  this  will  have  any  effect :  but 
though  you  have  refused  the  mediation  of  Mr.  Rafter,  your  compassion,  I  am  sure, 
will  be  excited,  when  you  read  the  enclosed,  and  know  I  have  no  resource  but  going 
to  Ireland,  which,  though  it  prove  advantageous,  must  render  me  miserable,  as  it 
separates  me  from  my  family,  with  whom  I  have  ever  lived  in  the  most  perfect 
affection.  You  will  have  the  goodness  to  remember  that  this  is  the  first  disagree¬ 
ment  we  ever  had  in  the  course  of  fourteen  years,  and  you  will  the  readier  pardon  it, 
when  you  consider  that  a  little  vanity  is  almost  inseparable  from  our  profession,  and 
that  I  unfortunately  listened  to  its  dictates,  and  have  made  myself  unhappy.  You 
cannot  suffer,  but  the  reflection  that  it  was  in  your  power  to  lessen  my  uneasiness, 
will,  I  think,  be  an  argument  with  your  humanity  to  forgive  an  error  not  proceeding 
from  a  bad  mind  but  a  foolish  one. 

As  I  know  no  excuse  to  palliate  my  wrong  conduct,  I  must  rely  upon  your  gene¬ 
rosity  to  forgive  and  still  to  be  my  friend.  I  have,  Sir,  the  honour  to  be 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

J.  Pope. 

P.  S.  It  was  Mr.  Rafter’s  opinion  that  you  were  so  determined,  I  had  nothing  to 
hope  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  I  made  an  application  to  Mr.  Harris. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  Miss  Pope,  Sept.  7th, 
with  one  enclosed  from  Mr.  Harris  to  her, 
which  I  returned.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MISS  POPE. 

MADAM  Adelphi,  Sunday,  Sept.  10th,  1775. 

I  was  from  home  upon  a  visit,  or  you  should  have  heard  from  me  directly. 
Your  two  last  letters  have  given  me  much  uneasiness  ;  I  need  not  say  why  the  first 
occasioned  it,  as  I  had  always  been  not  only  just  and  friendly,  but  fatherly  to  Miss 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


93 


Pope.  The  expressions  of  want  of  affection,  turning  Swiss,  fyc.  were  as  harsh  as  unex¬ 
pected.  However,  I  would  not  precipitately  prevent  you  from  recollecting  yourself, 
and  therefore  I  waited  more  than  two  months  in  hopes  of  your  seeing  your  error 
and  returning  cheerfully  to  your  business  ;  and,  let  me  add,  (in  spite  of  your  frequent 
incivilities  to  me,)  to  your  best  friend. 

My  hopes  were  deceived,  and  as  I  could  not  but  imagine  you  were  engaged,  I 
thought  it  time  to  prepare  for  your  loss.  Many  of  your  parts  were  disposed  of,  and 
sent  at  the  time  I  mentioned  (which  was  in  August)  to  the  different  performers,  in 
order  to  be  ready  for  the  opening  of  the  season. 

Why  I  am  still  more  unhappy  at  the  receipt  of  your  last  letter  is,  that  from  the 
particulars  already  mentioned,  added  to  some  new  engagements  I  have  made,  it  is 
not  in  my  power  to  give  you  a  situation  in  our  theatre  for  the  next  season,  that  can 
possibly  be  agreeable  to  you.  I  am,  Madam, 

Your  most  humble  servant  and  well-wisher, 

Endorsed,  DaVID  GaRRICK. 

“  Miss  Pope’s  letter  and  my  answer  to  it.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  BRERETON. 


Adelphi,  Sept.  9th,  1775. 

Though  I  had  resolved  never  to  write  to  you  again,  yet  lest  you  should  add  error 
to  error,  and  plunge  yourself  deeper  into  mistakes,  which  may  become  a  very  serious 
consideration,  I  shall  once  more  say  a  word  or  two,  in  answer  to  yours.  By  your  own 
account,  your  circumstances  are  none  of  the  best,  and  your  taking  such  an  expensive 
journey  and  voyage  to  England,  to  convince  me  that  you  have  not  behaved  unkindly 
and  unjustly  to  me,  will  be  as  ineffectual  as  expensive,  unless  you  could  give  me  a 
new  head  to  conceive  differently,  and  a  new  heart  not  to  feel.  Your  proposition  of 
breaking  your  article  to  come  to  me,  at  all  events,  is  adding  worse  to  bad,  and  what  I 
would  never  consent  to,  had  you  all  the  talents  of  ail  the  great  actors  put  together. 
That  you  may  not  be  misled  again  by  a  false  light,  or  deceive  yourself  with  an  ex¬ 
pectation  of  what  cannot  happen,  I  once  more  assure  you  that  it  will  not  be  in  my 
power  to  give  you  the  situation  you  might  have  had,  while  I  continue  manager  of 
the  theatre.  You  may  depend  upon  it  that  this  is  the  resolution  of  your  once 
very  sincere  friend,  and  not  your  ill-wisher  even  now,  H.  G. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  St.  Maries,  Sept.  10th,  1<  75. 

I  here,  as  you  desired,  send  you  “  Love’s  Revenge,”  hashed  and  slashed.  I 
suppose  not  exactly  the  same  with  the  former,  but  I  think  better.  Part  ot  the 


94 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


overture,  we  agreed,  should  be  left  out.  That  of  the  second  interlude  (minuet  with 
French  horns)  I  would  certainly  retain,  as  it  is  so  very  pleasing  and  so  adapted  to  the 
Satyr’s  appearance.  (That  gentleman’s  motions  and  songs  would  admit  of  some¬ 
thing  in  the  comic  cast.)  You  may  be  able  to  abridge  it  a  little,  by  leaving  out 
some  of  the  l)a  Capos.  That  will  be  best  judged,  when  you  hear  it  altogether.  I 
think  the  repetition  of  the  duet  in  chorus  will  be  a  good  ending,  without  the  in¬ 
tended  grand  chorus  ;  and  the  few  lines  which  I  have  taken  from  the  songs,  and 
added  to  the  speaker,  will  be  necessary. 

See  how  good  wits  jump,  though  one  of  them  cannot  walk.  I  am  not  sure  about 
the  length  of  Hercules,  not  having  taken  the  dimensions  of  his  foot.  Dr.  Boyce 
will  inform  you  better.  I  cannot  well  see  how  that  can  be  abridged  except  in  the 
music,  the  story  being  told  too  shortly  already.  For  that  too  you  must  consult  Dr. 
Boyce. 

If  you  ever  shall  have  any  thought  of  musical  things,  qua  music,  there  is  a  most 
charming  little  opera  of  John  Hughes’s,  in  his  works,  of  “  Calypso  and  Telemachus 
and  there  must  be  good  stuff  in  the  composition,  as  it  was  set  by  Galliard,  a  most 
genteel  and  knowing  composer  (witness  my  “  Early  Horn,”  hacked  and  yet  repeated 
at  this  day,  though  made  for  Rich,  in  the  Cambridge  stage-coach,  1731.) 

We  old  fellows  decay  in  judgment  as  well  as  composition.  That  may  be  the 
case  with  me,  who  think  your  “  May  Verses”  are  not  to  be  compared  with  those 
upon  “  Grace.”  But  they  are  your  last  child,  and  that  is  always  a  favourite.  I  do 
not  recollect  whether  I  sent  you  mine — “  High  Treason  upon  the  High  Heads  at 
Dawson's  ball,  our  Master  of  the  Ceremonies.” 

What  think  you  of  a  farce  to  be  called  “  The  Hair  Dressers  ?”  Methinks  they 
might  make  a  good  figure  upon  the  stage.  An  old  aunt  highly  in  the  fashion — 
a  good  agreeable  girl,  whose  lover  continues  to  get  at  her  in  the  habit  of  a  hair¬ 
dresser.  The  whole  family’s  confusion  at  being  deceived  by  their  hair-dresser  on  a 
great  night.  The  aunt  falling  in  with  the  lover,  and  forcing  him  to  dress  her  head, 
before  he  goes  to  her  niece,  and  he  knowing  nothing  of  the  matter,  and  making  a 
fright  of  her.  Her  real  dresser  coming,  and  discovering  that  he  knows  nothing — 
quarrelling  as  with  a  rival  in  the  business,  and  resolving  to  expose  him.  This  to  be 
laughed  over  with  Miss  afterwards.  Fine  nonsense  ! 

O 

Madam  desires  to  be  joined  in  all  good  wishes  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you. 

We  must  make  fine  work  at  Southampton  Theatre  with  “  Matilda”  and  your 
“  Harlequin’s  Invasion,”  which  was  played  last  night.  I  suppose  Edwin  makes  fun 
enough.  I  hope  Franklin  got  some  money  by  “  Matilda.”  How  very  simple  is  his 
tale  there,  and  how  romantic  in  “  The  Earl  of  Warwick.”  There  seems  to  be  some 
very  masterly  strokes  in  Morcar’s  scenes  after  the  supposed  murder ;  but  sure  Siward 
goes  too  far  in  his  account  to  Morcar.  The  same  incident  repeated  in  a  page  or  two, 
of  S - ’s  preventing  him  and  M - ’s  preventing  Matilda  from  stabbing  them¬ 
selves,  seems  too  inartificial.  Adieu  !  Yours,  <Scc. 

J.  Hoadly. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


95 


REV.  E.  LLOYD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Vron,  18th  Sept.  1775. 

It  is  high  time  to  know  how  you  do.  Your  long  vacation  is  nearly  over,  and 
“  bustle,  bustle,”  will  be  the  word  shortly.  Your  theatrical  campaign  opens  about 
this  time,  and  I  hope  you  have  health  enough  to  support  you  through  all  the  murders 
which  you  are  to  commit  and  suffer.  I  hope  no  gout  has  so  podagra  cl  you  as  to 
occasion  your  being  taken  in  Mr.  Strictland’s  house  ;  nor  chiragrcCd  you  so  as  to  let 
Richmond  have  the  crown,  without  good  hard  knocks  to  follow  it.  I  expect  you 
shortly  in  the  papers,  covered  with  fresh  laurels ;  but  where  they  will  stick  them,  I 
know  not,  unless  they  make  a  perfect  grove  of  you  :  then  you  may  laugh  at  “  Bir- 
nam  wood”  on  its  march  to  Dunsinane,  for  you  will  be  quite  a  match  for  it.  I  am 
not  yet  fit  to  be  weaned  from  my  good  nurses  the  goats.  May  I  not  hope  to  vie 
with  Romulus,  for  surely  I  suck  more  reputable  teats  ?  I  will  not,  however,  under¬ 
take  to  make  Bala*  rival  Rome.  I  have  desired  a  trusty  friend  in  town  to  send  you 
some  Sussex  ortolans  in  my  name.  Whenever  they  come  to  table,  pray  call  them  a 
dish  of  thanks — for  they  are  only  intended  as  a  small  token  of  the  gratitude  with 
which  I  am,  dear  Roscius,  Yours  most  devotedly, 

E.  Lloyd. 

Compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Until  the  approbation  of  the  public  had  stamped  some  value  on  his  perform¬ 
ance,  the  translator  of  the  Basia  confesses  he  had  not  courage  to  introduce  his  favou¬ 
rite  author  to  your  acquaintance.  For  though  it  be  the  certain  mark  of  superior 
parts,  like  yours,  to  overlook  smaller  errors  and  mistakes,  he  was  yet  afraid,  lest  you 
should  spy  out  many  blemishes,  which  had  not  the  same  excuse  of  inattention  to 
make  them  pardonable.  But  as  he  is  called  upon  from  more  than  one  quarter  for  a 
second  edition  of  his  work,  it  would  now  be  as  unjust  to  esteem  it  of  no  worth,  as  it 
would  have  been  presuming  to  have  thought  too  highly  of  it  before. 

If  the  ao-e  in  which  we  live  stood  remarkable  for  that  severity  of  manners  which 
formerly  distinguished  us  from  other  nations,  the  translator  would  find  himself  with¬ 
out  excuse  for  holding  up  a  picture,  where  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  expres¬ 
sion  is  too  warm,  and  where  the  colouring  is  evidently  too  high  and  beautiful.  But 
when  in  consequence  of  great  ease  and  great  prosperity,  the  reins  of  prudence  begin 
to  hang  more  remiss,— when  knowledge  has  overleaped  the  modesty  of  her  own 
bounds,  and  above  all,  when  the  sweet  shrine  of  Nature  is  perceived  every  day  to 
[lament]  the  seductions  of  art, — under  these  circumstances  to  attempt  by  any  means 
to  revive  a  flame,  at  which  Love  might  again  light  his  nuptial  torch  and  to  recall 

*  The  postmark  of  the  letter  “  Bala,  ’  Merionethshire — Ed, 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


96 

sensations  of  all  others  the  finest  and  the  best, — this,  in  the  opinion  of  the  translator, 
is  the  duty  of  a  good  and  honest  citizen ;  and  he  has  to  hope,  not  only  that  the  poem 
itself,  so  considered,  will  be  judged  useful ;  but  in  his  own  endeavours  to  make  it 
better  known,  that  he  shall  be  thought  (a  character  of  all  others  which  he  reveres 
most)  the  friend  and  the  promoter  of  virtue. 

Formed,  my  dear  Sir,  to  act  the  same  good  part  in  private  life,  which  you  have 
hitherto  done  with  such  wonderful  abilities  on  the  stage,  you  will  encourage  every 
attempt,  where  the  end  proposed  is  deserving  of  encouragement :  and  it  is  in  this 
belief,  conscious  I  mean  well,  that  I  offer  my  little  book  to  your  perusal.  United 
with  your  name,  it  will  find  an  easy  admittance  into  the  assemblies  of  the  learned. 
And  should  it  be  esteemed,  which  I  suspect  it  may,  unworthy  of  such  a  companion ; 
yet  for  the  very  sake  of  that  name — a  name  to  which  no  polite  country  is  a  stranger, 
and  to  which  every  man  of  real  genius  is  a  friend — he  is  sensible  that  it  will  meet 
with  the  greater  favour  and  indulgence.  1  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Yott.* 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Brighthelmstone,  Sept.  19,  1775. 

The  very  day  after  I  received  the  favour  of  your  letter,  I  set  out  for  this  place  : 
Mrs.  Nott’s  ill  state  of  health  made  the  journey  necessary ;  and  I  had  the  less 
objection  to  what  I  thought  would  be  a  scene  of  quiet  and  retirement,  as  I  might 
then  have  better  leisure  to  examine  into  my  abilities,  and  to  find  whether  my  imagi¬ 
nation  had  played  me  fair,  when  I  supposed  The  Pilgrim  capable  of  many  good  and 
pleasing  alterations.  With  this  idea,  I  carried  my  papers  along  with  me.  But  I 
perceive,  however  wholesome  it  may  be  for  the  body,  that  sea-bathing  is  a  “  whore¬ 
son  enemy”  to  the  improvement  of  the  mind.  Beside  that  flux  of  company  which  is 
for  ever  stealing  a  man  from  himself,  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  idleness  creeping 
over  one,  not  to  be  resisted.  But  I  break  these  bonds  of  sloth  on  Thursday  next, 
when  I  intend  paying  another  visit  to  St.  James’s. 

The  folly,  the  insolence  of  F - 1  is  beyond  endurance.  You  know  I  never 

loved,  never  admired  him.  His  heart  is  bad,  and  his  parts  are  dangerous.  It  is  one 
of  the  many  things  which  is  to  be  lamented  in  these  times  of  universal  liberty  and  con¬ 
fusion,  that  those  very  people  in  whose  hands  alone  the  right  of  punishment  is  lodged, 
should  want  fortitude  and  resolution  enough  to  exert  that  right.  To  be  offended, 
and  yet  not  to  show  our  resentment !  to  dislike,  and  yet  to  countenance  !  are  con¬ 
tradictions  hardly  to  be  imagined.  And  yet,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  this  is  no 
fancied  character,  but  a  real  one.  Let  genius  weep  over  it  in  silence. 

*  The  author  of  an  elegant  paraphrase  of  the  Basia  of  Secundus — the  work  here  offered  to  Mr.  Garrick. 
Perhaps  the  reverend  poet  had  been  excited  to  his  task  by  the  Buisers  of  Dorat.  But  Secundus  had  not 
escaped  the  notice  of  Pope,  as  I  see  by  his  letters. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


97 


It  is  impossible  for  you  to  have  an  enemy  amongst  my  friends,  but  whether  an 
acquaintance  of  mine  is  as  just  to  you  as  he  ought  to  be,  that  I  will  not  venture  to 
determine.  I  suspect  him  :  I  have  plainly  hinted  to  him  my  suspicions.  And  you 
know  not  (nor  did  I  ever  design  you  should  know  it)  with  what  satisfaction  I  have 
now  and  then  seized  some  little  opportunity  or  other  to  render  his  attempts  con¬ 
temptible,  and  his  wishes  fruitless.  Were  I  in  humour  enough  with  him  to  say  any 
thing  in  his  defence,  I  would  entreat  you  to  look  for  his  perverse  conduct  in  his 
head,  rather  than  his  heart :  a  Bristol  stone  to  some  eyes  has  just  the  same  lustre  as 
a  diamond  ;  but  I  am  not  in  humour.  If  he  wore  the  poppy-wreath  upon  his  brow 
only,  in  the  name  of  dulness  let  it  hang  there  undisturbed  as  its  proper  ornament ; 
but  when  he  presumes  to  place  it  upon  *  *  *  *  *  So  that  the  whole  world  *  *  *  *  * 
I  then  have  no  patience.  But  come,  let  us  change  the  subject — that  before  us  is  a 
melancholy  one. 

I  am  now  going  to  require  a  proof  of  your  trust— of  your  secrecy.  May  I  depend 
upon  both  ?  My  heart  tells  me  that  I  may.  Oh,  how  easily  does  the  heart  believe, 
where  it  wishes  not  to  be  deceived  !  Well  then,  do  you  recollect  a  book  which  was 
put  into  your  hands  some  months  ago  ?  a  translation  of  the  Basia  of  Secundus  !  It 
has  sold  rapidly,  and  there  are  now  frequent  demands  for  a  second  edition— that 
edition  is  in  great  forwardness — and  having  some  little  knowledge  of  the  author,  I 
believe  he  thinks  of  dedicating  it  to  you.  What  say  you?  Has  he  your  leave  for 
such  dedication  ?  I  will  myself  engage  that  it  shall  not  be  a  foolish  or  an  improper 
one.  Perhaps  you  may  be  told  hereafter,  that  he  forbore  making  this  request,  till 
he  found  what  degree  of  credit  the  work  had;  but  now — where  am  I  running? 
Were  my  particular  friend,  or  were  the  grave  bench  of  bishops  to  guess,  that  I  but 
countenanced  so  pleasant  a  work,  on  how  narrow  an  edge  of  hope  would  my  future 
preferment  stand  !  How  much  more  so,  then,  if — but  again  I  correct  myself. 
Adieu  !  Tell  me  in  what  degree  you  mean  to  comply  with  our  author’s  wishes, 
and,  believe  me,  with  greater  truth  than  what  commonly  ends  a  modern  letter,  my 
dear  Sir,  Yours  affectionately, 

Samuel  Nott. 

I  wish  I  was  at  your  elbow,  to  go  along  with  you  and  see  your  alterations  at 
Drury-lane.  The  papers  tell  me  that  your  army  takes  the  field  on  Saturday  next, 
and  that  your  poets,  painters,  carpenters,  with  the  wdiole  train  of  auxiliaries,  have 
for  a  long  time  been  giving  “dreadful  note  of  preparation.”  Every  common  nightly 
excursion  I  shall  not  attend  to ;  but  when  the  Thane  of  Cawdor  is  determined  on 
a  pitched  battle — then,  O  then,  remember  me ! 


VOL.  II. 


o 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(J8 


MR.  S.  REDDISH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sunday  Morning,  Sept  24th,  1775. 

It  was  my  intention,  at  my  arrival  in  town,  to  have  waited  upon  you  myself  with 
the  enclosed  fifty  pounds,  in  part  of  the  sum  which  I  am  indebted  to  you — but  upon 
consideration  I  thought  it  better  to  adopt  the  present  method.  From  the  success 
I  have  met  with  at  Bristol,  my  payment  should  have  been  much  larger,  had  I  not 
thought  myself  bound  by  Mr.  Lacey’s  very  kind  indulgence  to  clear  all  the  arrears 
due  to  him  upon  the  share  of  the  Bristol  theatre,  which  I  purchased  of  his  father. 

I  shall  wait  upon  him  on  Monday  morning  for  that  purpose,  and  meantime  have 
only  to  request  you  will  be  so  obliging  as  to  let  me  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing 
my  servant  has  delivered  this,  and  that  you  will,  before  the  hurry  of  the  season  begins, 
give  orders  to  Mr.  Evans  to  make  my  account  clearly  out,  which  I  have  frequently 
requested  of  him,  but  hitherto  without  effect.  And  I  dare  say  you  will  agree  with 
me  in  opinion,  that  every  man  ought  certainly  to  be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  his 
own  affairs. 

I  have  paid  great  attention  to  the  part  of  Sir  John  Dorilant,  from  the  moment  I 
received  it  from  Mr.  Hopkins.  But  never  once  read  it  through  till  then.  I  like  the 
part  extremely,  and  hope  to  be  ready  whenever  you  call  on  me.  But  if  you  will 
indulge  me  with  a  few  days  more,  I  am  certain  I  shall  do  infinitely  more  credit  to 
you  and  myself  in  the  execution  of  it ;  more  especially  when  I  consider  how  it  was 
originally  performed. 

In  the  mean  time,  Sir,  I  shall  be  ready  to  play  any  other  characters  I  am  digested 
in :  and  as  I  find  my  health,  I  thank  God,  quite  restored,  and  my  mind  at  present 
happy  and  at  peace,  should  both  continue  undisturbed,  I  hope  to  compensate  this 
season  for  the  disappointments  of  the  last. 

I  found  from  Mr.  George  Garrick  at  Bristol,  that  the  money  I  left  last  season 
for  the  dividends  to  my  creditors,  had,  on  account  of  his  illness,  been  neglected.  I 
should  esteem  it  a  favour,  Sir,  if  orders  were  given  for  its  immediate  payment  to  Mr. 
Burns,  in  Cecil-street,  who  was  appointed  by  me  to  make  the  dividends— and  I  hope 
the  produce  of  my  next  benefit  will  nearly  close  that  account. 

With  respect  to  the  sum  I  am  still  indebted  to  you,  Sir,  you  may  depend  on  its 
being  punctually  paid,  with  my  sincere  thanks,  before  the  expiration  of  my  article, 
without  giving  you  the  trouble,  or  me  the  mortification,  of  any  future  stoppages  at 
the  office.  I  have  been  cruelly  injured,  and  may  be  so  again ;  but  I  am  resolved  to 
do  my  part  for  the  future,  and  leave  the  rest  to  fate. 

I  remain,  dear  Sir,  with  great  respect  and  truth. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Samuel  Reddish. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Reddish’s  penitent  letter.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


99 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID,  St.  Maries,  Sept.  27th,  1775. 

I  received  the  inclosed  ingenious  and  good  letter  from  Mr.  Linley,  to  which  l 
think  you  have  a  good  right,  as  he  speaks  so  handsomely  of  you,  and  with  real 
concern  for  his  own  situation,  which  your  liberal  mind  will  make  allowances  for. 

I  suppose  your  having  Mr.  Smith,  and  perhaps  some  more  of  the  Covent-Garden 
folk  in  your  company,  determines  you  to  open  your  house  with  “  The  Brothers,” 
which  you  did  not  use  to  act. 

I  thought  to  have  set  out  this  day  for  a  day  or  two’s  visit  at  Farnham  Castle, 
with  my  annual  companion,  Mrs.  Ricketts  :  but  the  gout  yesterday  laid  hold  of  my 
toe,  and  I  am  in  yarn  and  wool,  and  have  sent  that  excuse  by  the  coach  to  Farnham. 
This  is  the  second  time  I  have  been  disappointed  this  year. 

*  *  *  *  *  #  # 

Have  you  had  any  more  thoughts  about  “  Les  Originaux  ?” 

I  have  a  very  poor  weak  wife.  *  *  *  *  Riding  before 

breakfast,  with  a  raw  egg  in  her  stomach,  gets  her  no  flesh  ;  though  she  has  a  better 
appetite,  and  few  or  no  returns  of  her  bilious  cholic. 

I  am,  dear  David,  your  very  affectionate, 

J.  Hoadly. 

Send  Linley’s  letter  back  again  next  time  you  write. 

MR.  T.  LINLEY  TO  DR.  J.  HOADLY. 

SIR,  Bath,  Sept.  22nd,  1775. 

I  am  just  returned  from  Gloucester,  where  there  has  been  a  very  fine  meeting, 
and  the  musical  performances  gave  universal  satisfaction.  I  have,  since  my  return, 
considered  your  poems  with  attention,  and,  as  you  have  commanded  me,  I  shall  com¬ 
municate  my  thoughts  with  freedom  on  that  subject. 

The  Song  of  Moses  is  triumphant  and  glorious,  and,  as  far  as  1  am  capable  of  judg¬ 
ing,  you  have,  in  putting  it  into  verse,  shown  great  judgment  and  genius.  But  it 
would  be  very  unbecoming  in  me  to  attempt  to  be  particular  on  this  head ;  therefore 
I  shall  speak  in  general  terms,  and  make  such  general  observations  as  I  can  conceive 
may  possibly  be  against  the  whole,  as  a  poem,  to  be  set  to  music  :  and  one  of  the 
most  consequence  is,  that  the  Song  of  Moses  is  already  set  by  Handel,  (although  it  is 
not  so  denominated,)  and  makes  by  much  the  finest  part  of  his  Oratorio  of  Israel  in 
Egypt.  The  chorus  of  “  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  lie  hath  triumphed  glo¬ 
riously,”  &c.,  is  confessedly  one  of  the  greatest,  if  not  the  very  greatest  composition 
of  that  kind  he  ever  wrote  ;  and,  as  1  before  observed,  that  part  of  the  Oratorio 
taken  from  the  Song  of  Moses,  is  the  most  beautiful  and  sublime.  Another  general 
observation  I  would  make  is,  that  the  idea  of  reducing  poetry  to  verse,  in  order  to 

o  2 


100 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


make  it  fit  for  musical  expression,  is  (especially  in  great  and  serious  subjects)  ge¬ 
nerally  wrong :  for  it  is  the  imagery  and  sentiments  conveyed  by  the  words  that 
ought  to  inspire  the  musician,  and  not  any  particular  kind  of  verse,  and  the  variety  of 
rhythm  and  poetical  feet  are  oftcner  found  in  poetical  prose,  or  blank  verse,  than  in 
verses  which  rhyme.  You  will  forgive  this  remark  and  what  follows,  and  1  hope 
will  believe  1  take  such  liberties  in  order  to  be  informed. 

It  has  always  appeared  to  me  that  good  poetry  of  every  kind  is  regulated  by 
measure,  and  that  there  are  a  much  greater  variety  of  feet  in  every  poem  of  genius 
than  the  writers  themselves  (if  I  may  judge  from  their  describing  their  lines  as 
divided  by  trochees,  dactyls,  &c.  &c.)  suppose,  and  where  this  measure  is  found  per¬ 
fect  in  the  text  (supposing  the  subject  of  the  poem  to  be  taken  from  the  Bible)  it  can 
seldom  he  altered  for  the  better ;  for  it  appears  to  me,  that  in  all  kinds  of  poetry, 
wherever  the  numbers  flow  without  design,  their  motion  is  consonant  and  in  har¬ 
mony  with  the  emotions  raised  by  the  imagery  ;  and  if  that  is  beautiful,  the  numbers 
must  be  so  consequently,  notwithstanding  the  line  may  contain  a  fewer  or  greater 
number  of  syllables  than  the  rules  of  verse  demand.  Verse  appears  to  me  to  he  in 
poetry,  what  air  or  melody  is  in  music,  and  is  therefore  generally  necessary  for  a 
song;  hut  for  the  chorusses  and  recitative,  I  think  it  is  oftener  better  for  music  to  be 
measured  prose,  or  blank  verse.  Short  quantities  give  the  greatest  latitude  to  the 
musician ;  and  an  heroic  verse  is  often  unmanageable,  as  it  occasions  an  odd  bar  in  the 
musical  rhythm,  which  in  general  has  a  bad  effect  upon  the  ear,  and  is  not  allowed  in 
the  composition  of  instrumental  music.  I  must  once  more  repeat,  that  I  make  these 
observations  as  general  ones,  and  in  hope  of  being  corrected  ;  for  I  really  think  there 
is  a  great  and  beautiful  variety  in  the  numbers  of  your  poem,  and  that  it  is  capable 
of  admitting  all  the  powers  of  musical  composition,  and  I  shall  from  this  time  make 
it  the  subject  of  my  thoughts,  and  begin  to  set  it :  but  I  cannot  promise  you  to  get 
it  ready  by  the  next  Lent,  as  I  have  engaged  to  assist  my  son-in-law  Sheridan  in 
composing  an  opera,  which  he  is  to  bring  out  at  Covent-Garden  this  winter.  I  am  a 
good  deal  distressed  that,  from  some  misunderstanding  between  him  and  Mr.  Garrick, 
he  is  not  connected  with  Drury -lane  house  ;  for  though  I  believe  they  are  now  on 
very  good  terms,  yet  Sheridan  thinks  he  has  been  so  honourably  treated  by  Mr.  Har¬ 
ris,  that  he  ought  not  to  keep  any  thing  he  has  hitherto  written  from  him.  Hoav- 
ever,  I  hope  Mr.  Garrick  will  not  take  any  thing  amiss  in  my  assisting  him  on  this 
occasion  ;  for  it  is  a  matter  of  absolute  necessity  that  he  should  endeavour  to  get 
money  by  this  means,  as  he  will  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  let  his  wife  sing.  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick’s  extraordinary  genius  and  merit,  the  noble  fortune  he  deservedly  possesses,  and 
the  universal  sense  he  must  know  the  world  has  of  his  just  claim  to  every  attention 
and  respect,  I  doubt  not,  has  inspired  him  with  that  enlarged  sentiment,  which  I  think 
he  with  particular  propriety  is  entitled  to  assume,  of  being  the  patron  and  protector 
of  dramatic  genius,  in  what  place  or  shape  soever  he  may  find  it ;  and  in  this  opinion 
I  rest  satisfied  that  he  Avould  rather  promote,  than  discourage,  my  assisting  Sheridan, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


101 


for  whose  success,  nature  will  not  permit  me  to  be  indifferent,  although,  at  the  same 
time,  I  confess  the  obligations  I  am  under  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  the  notice  he  has  ho¬ 
noured  me  with,  that  I  am  myself  connected  with  his  theatre,  and  profess  myself  his 
friend.  As  I  proceed  in  setting  your  poems,  whenever  I  have  any  doubts,  I  will 
take  the  liberty  of  writing  to  you.  I  have  reserved  for  another  opportunity,  what 
has  and  may  occur  to  me  on  reading  Camacho’s  Wedding,  as  I  will  read  the  story 
first,  as  it  stands  in  Don  Quixote,  which  I  have  not  an  opportunity  of  doing  at  pre¬ 
sent,  and  which  I  have  forgot.  In  the  mean  time  I  remain,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Linley. 


MR.  T.  LINLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Sept.  28th,  1775. 

I  ought  long  since  to  have  acknowledged  the  receipt  of  the  poems  you  have  been 
so  kind  to  procure  me  from  Dr.  Hoadly,  and  to  have  thanked  you  for  so  great  a 
favour.  But  I  was  that  instant  setting  off  for  the  Gloucester  Music  Meeting  when 
your  letter  came,  and  am  but  just  returned  so  as  to  remain  in  Bath.  I  will  most 
certainly  set  them,  as  soon  and  in  the  best  manner  I  am  able.  The  song  of  “  Moses,” 
as  far  as  I  am  capable  of  judging,  is  extremely  clever.  I  think  “  Camacho’s  Wed¬ 
ding,”  as  an  entertainment  for  the  stage,  seems  to  want  a  greater  variety  and  contrast 
amongst  the  performers.  If  Sancho  could  be  introduced  with  a  few  humorous 
songs,  would  it  not  be  enlivened  ?  I  shall  make  both  these  pieces  the  immediate 
object  of  my  attention,  and  work  upon  them  at  what  leisure  I  have,  which  indeed  is 
usually  very  little,  after  the  commencement  of  the  Bath  season,  which  is  now  begun. 

There  is  a  circumstance,  because  relative  to  myself  in  the  good  opinion  I  wish 
you  should  preserve  of  me,  that  I  must  mention,  otherwise  I  know  not  if  I  ought : 
it  is,  that  as  often  as  I  am  called  upon,  I  have  promised  to  assist  Sheridan  in  com¬ 
piling,  I  believe  is  the  properest  term,  an  opera,  which,  I  understand  from  him,  he 
has  engaged  to  produce  at  Covent-Garden  this  winter.  I  have  already  set  some 
airs  which  he  has  given  me,  and  he  intends  writing  new  words  to  some  other  tunes 
of  mine.  My  son  has  likewise  written  some  tunes  for  him,  and  I  understand  he  is  to 
have  others  from  Air.  Jackson,  of  Exeter.  This  is  a  mode  of  proceeding  in  regard  to 
his  composition,  I  do  not  by  any  means  approve  of.  I  think  he  ought  first  to  have 
finished  his  opera  with  the  songs  he  intends  to  introduce  in  it,  and  have  got  it  entirely 
new  set.  No  musician  can  set  a  song  properly  unless  he  understands  the  character 
and  knows  the  performer  who  is  to  exhibit  it.  For  my  part,  I  shall  be  very  unwill¬ 
ing  for  either  my  own  name,  or  my  son’s,  to  appear  in  this  business,  and  it  is  my 
present  resolution  to  forbid  it ;  for  I  have  great  reason  to  be  diffident  of  my  own 
abilities  and  genius,  and  my  son  has  not  had  experience  in  theatrical  compositions, 


102 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


though  I  think  well  of  his  invention  and  musical  skill.  I  would  not  have  been  con¬ 
cerned  in  this  business  at  all,  but  that  1  know  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  him 
to  endeavour  to  get  some  money  by  this  means,  as  he  will  not  be  prevailed  upon  to 
let  his  wife  sing ;  and  indeed  at  present  she  is  incapable,  and  nature  will  not  permit 
me  to  be  indifferent  to  his  success.  You  are  deservedly  at  that  point  of  fame  which 
few  of  the  great  geniuses  the  world  has  produced  ever  arrived  at,  above  the  reach  of 
envy,  and  are  the  protector  of  dramatic  merit,  in  what  place  or  shape  soever  you  find 
it,  and  I  look  up  to  you  as  the  Patron  and  Director  of  both  theatres,  virtually,  if  not 
officially.  I  hope  Sheridan  has  done  nothing  to  forfeit  the  protection  you  have 
hitherto  shown  him,  and  that  you  believe  me  to  be  with  sincerity,  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Lixley. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Linley’s  letter,  Oct.  3rd,  1775,  answered.” 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday,  Oct.  1775. 

I  owe  you  many,  many  thanks,  for  your  very  obliging  solicitude  about  my  inte¬ 
rest,  but  my  obligations  have  been  of  long  standing,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that,  after 
having  yourself  been  a  principal  architect  in  my  little  fortunes,  you  should  look  with 
a  generous  satisfaction  upon  what  has  been  materially  the  work  of  your  own  hands. 

“  Numa”  is  mine,  and  many  other  signatures  are  mine  also.  Your  friends  are 
satisfied  with  my  assiduity  at  least,  whatever  they  may  think  of  my  works  ;  and  let 
the  writer  be  never  so  indifferent  in  their  opinion,  they  are  frequently  very  flattering 
to  the  attachment  of  the  man. 

The  piece  I  hinted  at,  my  dear  Sir,  is  not  a  petite  piece ;  it  is  a  full  five  act  piece, 
and  I  flatter  myself  most  egregiously,  if  you  will  not  find  the  cub  (to  use  a  good- 
humoured  expression  of  your  own  upon  a  former  occasion)  extremely  lickable. 

Mrs.  Kelly  presents  her  best  compliments  to  you  ;  pray  make  mine  to  Mrs. 
Garrick,  and  believe  me  ever,  with  the  strictest  truth,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  faithful  and  most  obliged, 

Hugh  Kelly. 

I  like  your  idea  of  the  Covent-Garden  Riflemen  vastly.  I  think  there  is  an 
epigram  about  Barry  and  you,  when  he  was  at  that  house,  which  bids  the  Drury  - 
lane  Israel  rejoice,  for  though  their  foes  are  headed  by  a  Goliali ,  yet  they  have  a 
David  at  their  head.  There  was  prettiness  in  the  thought,  and  it  was  expressed  very 
happily.  The  Riflemen  would  make  a  good  epigram. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


103 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  H.  KELLY. 


Oct.  16th,  1775. 

Indeed,  my  dear  Sir,  you  have  put  into  my  hands  a  performance  of  very 
great  hurry,  and  which  cannot  possibly  be  represented  with  success.  I  never  read 
more  dangerous  scenes  in  all  my  life.  The  idea  of  a  fribble  officer  and  a  fox-hunting 
girl  (though  the  last  is  in  another  play)  is  a  good  one,  but  there  are  no  circumstances, 
no  comic  incidents,  to  show  them  off.  That  of  the  Widow  Keenly’s  against  Well- 
would,  with  Dr.  Dismal,  in  my  opinion,  is  very  dangerous,  though  in  imitation  of 
Moliere.  But  what  is  still  more  disheartening  than  all  the  rest  is,  the  want  of  a 
spirited  interest  in  the  plan  ;  the  wheels  of  the  fable  are  clogged  with  the  dialogue,  go 
heavily  on,  and  become  languid  and  without  effect.  In  short,  for  both  our  sakes,  I 
cannot  receive  this  comedy,  nor  can  I  propose  any  alteration  that  will  take  away  my 
strong  objections  to  it.  These  are  my  sincere  sentiments,  which  I  communicate  to 
you  with  all  the  freedom  of  friendship.  I  am,  most  truly,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant. 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Gough-square,  1775. 

I  wish  you  would  have  the  goodness  to  favour  me  with  a  quarter  of  an  hour’s 
audience,  the  first,  time  your  engagements  will  admit. 

I  have  something  for  your  consideration  which  will  fill  up  the  place  of  all  the 
matter  you  object  to,  and  blend  very  happily  with  the  rest.  Indeed  so  happily,  that 
I  should  not  despair,  before  the  end  of  the  month,  to  recover  my  credit  with  you, 
and  to  give  you  once  more  a  favourable  idea  of,  dear  Sir,  Yours  most  truly, 

H.  Kelly. 

If  I  do  not  rob  you,  be  kind  enough  to  send  me  an  order  or  two  for  this  evening. 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  October  20th,  1 775. 

Do  not  be  frightened  when  you  see  my  name ;  for  this  is  not  a  letter  of  impor¬ 
tunity  but  of  apology.  Pardon  me  for  re-agitating  the  business  of  the  play  in  my 
note  of  yesterday,  and  believe  me,  I  am  not  only  satisfied,  but  obliged  by  the  liberality 
as  well  as  the  friendship  which  you  have  manifested  on  this  occasion.  I  was  hurt  at 
disappointing  your  expectations;  therefore  wished  to  recover  my  credit  with  you, 


104 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  though  I  shall  be  uneasy  till  that  is  done,  you  shall  undergo  no  further  perse¬ 
cution  this  winter.  Pray  be  composed,  and  get  well  for  every  body’s  sake.  I  beg 
my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir,  with  the  utmost  regard,  yours  ever  faithfully, 

Hugh  Kelly. 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  Morning,  October. 

On  coming  home  from  Drury-lane  last  night,  where  I  was  so  highly  charmed 
with  your  inimitable  performance,  I  wrote  a  note  to  Mr.  Baldwin,  of  “  The 
St.  James’s  Chronicle,”  requesting  a  corner  for  an  account  of  “The  Chances”  this 
evening. 

Sending  this  morning  for  Mr.  Baldwin’s  answer,  he  wrote  me  the  note  enclosed, 
to  which  you  will  see  my  answer,  and  by  both  you  may  form  some  certain  opinion  of 
Mr.  B.  I  purpose  writing  an  account  to-day,  and  sending  it  for  to-morrow,  either  to 
“  The  Morning  Chronicle,”  or  to  “  The  Morning  Post.” 

There  is  a  Masquerade,  my  dear  Sir,  this  evening,  and  I  should  be  much  obliged 
to  you  if  you  would  give  my  servant  an  order  for  the  nun’s  dress,  worn  by  Miss 
Jenny  in  “The  Provoked  Husband.”  Pardon  this  freedom,  and 

Believe  me  ever  yours, 

Hugh  Kelly. 


MR.  BALDWIN  TO  MR.  H.  KELLY. 


Thursday  Morning. 

H.  Baldwin  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Kelly,  and  will  think  himself 
obliged  for  a  short  and  candid  account  of  “  The  Chances,”  under  the  head  of  Thea¬ 
trical  Intelligence.  The  want  of  room  obliges  him  to  request  it  may  be  short :  and 
he  hopes  Mr.  Kelly  will  avoid  prejudice  or  gross  partiality,  though  the  alteration  be 
the  work  of  a  Garrick. 

H.  B.  is  sorry  he  was  from  home  when  Mr.  Kelly’s  note  came  to  hand. 

MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  BALDWIN. 

SIR,  October. 

I  did  not  expect  an  affront  where  I  proposed  a  civility.  There  was  no  necessity 
to  warn  me  against  gross  prejudices  against,  or  gross  partiality  in  favour  of,  any  body. 
The  account  I  meant  to  send,  I  meant  should  be  a  candid  one,  and  thought  that  when 
I  gave  Mr.  Baldwin’s  paper  a  preference  to  all  others,  I  was  at  least  to  be  allowed 
my  own  manner  of  writing.  I  decline  therefore  the  honour  of  a  place  so  condescend- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


105 


ittgly  offered  me,  and  beg  Mr.  Baldwin  will  remember  that  if  I  was  capable  of  lite- 
raiy  piostitution,  there  might  be  still  a  connexion  between  him  and  his 

Humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  HUGH  KELLY. 

“  Mr.  Kelly’s  correspondence  with  Baldwin, 

St.  James’s  Chronicle.” 


MR.  H.  KELLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

Infinitely  happy  have  I  made  two  clergymen’s  families  by  the  two  orders. 
Forget  you  I  never  can  ;  what  I  owe  you  is  engraven  on  my  heart  foolish  I  am, 
but  ingratitude  is  not  among  the  number  of  my  vices.  The  fact  however  is,  that 
the  paper  you  allude  to  is  not  yet  published.  A  torrent  of  advertisements  has  pre¬ 
vented  it  till  to-morrow,  when  I  shall  send  it  to  you  certainly. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  everlastingly  yours, 

Hugh  Kelly. 

In  bed.  Oh  the  curse  of  bad  company  ! 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Thursday,  twelve  o’clock. 

The  servant  has  brought  me  word  that  Mr.  Garrick  is  very  angry  at  my  not 
attending  rehearsal  this  morning. 

I  do  not  believe  him.  I  am  sure  Mr.  Garrick  did  not  expect  I  could  be  able  to 
go  out  this  morning,  after  the  labour  I  have  very  willingly  gone  through  for  three 
nights  past.  I  am  ill  to  death,  and  really  not  able  to  stand;  I  cannot,  therefore, 
think  that  much  apology  for  my  staying  away  is  necessary,  when  the  cause  is  so  well 
known. 

I  am  not  perfect  in  the  part  in  “  The  Sultan,”  and  have  been  put  out  of  humour 
with  it  by  being  told  that  Mr.  Andrews  talks  of  the  farce  at  the  coffee-houses  as  the 
work  of  Mr.  Kelly,  which  is  so  far  from  being  a  fact,  that,  I  declare  to  God,  Mr. 
Kelly  has  never  so  much  as  seen  it ;  and  the  report  can  only  be  meant  to  bring 
popular  prejudice  against  it.  I  most  sincerely  wish  that  Mr.  Andrews’s  farce  was 
out,  and  had  received  that  approbation  which  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  meriting ; 
he  would  then  perhaps  not  take  the  trouble  of  considering  about  who  was  the  author 
of  “  The  Sultan,*”  or  at  least  not  give  it  to  a  gentleman  who  has  never  seen  a  line 
of  it. 

I  have  once  more  to  hope  that  Mr.  Garrick  will  let  it  come  out  after  Christmas, 

•  It  was  really  Bickerstaff's. — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


P 


106 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


as  the  present  powerful  run  of  “  Bon  Ton”  makes  it  very  hard  upon  me,  in  the  idea 
of  being  constantly  upon  the  stage  in  two  farces,  one  of  which  is  like  something 
dropped  from  the  clouds,  and  only  made  its  appearance  at  the  benefits  last  year,  or  I 
should  not  have  interested  myself  about  the  other,  knowing  the  impossibility  of  my 
attempting  that  line  of  business  while  I  am  necessarily  engaged  in  so  many  plays. 

I  am,  Sir,  kc. 

F.  Abington. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  YATES. 


SIR,  Suuday,  Oct.  29,  1775. 

I  shall  beg  leave  to  discuss  our  theatrical  matters  with  you,  in  order  to  prevent 
their  being  discussed  any  where  else,  which  they  must  be,  if  our  business  for  the 
future  is  to  be  unsettled  and  destroyed  by  our  present  uncertainty.  You  left  word 
with  Mr.  Hopkins  that  we  are  to  think  no  more  of  Mrs.  Yates,  till  she  will  let  us 
know  her  pleasure,  or  words  to  that  effect.  Do  you  and  Mrs.  Yates  imagine  that 
the  proprietors  will  submit  to  this  manner  of  going  on,  or  that  they  will  pay  such  a 
large  sum  of  money  for  having  their  business  so  destroyed,  as  it  was  in  great  part  of 
the  last  season,  and  has  been  wholly  this,  by  waiting  for  Mrs.  Yates’s  pleasure  to 
perform  ?  She  played  but  thirty  times  last  season,  and  as  she  goes  on,  in  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  four  times  in  six  weeks,  she  will  play  twenty  times  in  this  season.  Indeed, 
Mr.  Yates,  this  will  not  do,  and  I  give  you  fair  notice.  We  lost  greatly  by  her  not 
playing  the  first  night  she  was  advertised,  and  to  this  day  no  reason  could  be  given 
for  the  disappointment,  nor  did  you  offer  any  to  my  brother,  but  “  that  you  could 
not  help  it,  and  you  did  all  in  your  power  to  oblige  her  to  act.”  It  was  observed  by 
many  of  the  audience  last  night,  that  she  never  performed  better,  and  therefore  she 
gives  notice  that  she  must  not  be  advertised  till  she  pleases.  As  I  was  at  the  theatre, 
and  heard  with  my  OAvn  ears  that  her  voice  was  never  clearer,  I  shall  not  submit  to 
this  very  unaccountable  and  unreasonable  behaviour.  I  passed  over  your  own  ill- 
defended  argument  about  Sterling,  and  think  myself  very  ill-used  in  that  matter. 
— But  now  to  something  very  unaccountable  indeed  !  Mrs.  Yates  desired  to  have 
some  comedy  parts — you  mentioned  Araminta,  in  “  The  School  for  Lovers,”  and 
Hippolita  in  “  She  Would  and  She  Would  Xot.”  They  were  immediately  given  to 
her ;  and  then  indeed  she  would  not,  because  she  would  not  be  so  indelicate  as  to 
take  them  from  a  performer  who  only  played  them  because  our  great  ladies  would 
not.  Yet  she  would  take  Belinda,  in  “  All  in  the  Wrong,”  though  it  has  long  been 
in  the  possession  of  a  capital  actress.  What  a  contradiction  ! — But  to  go  on  still 
farther :  she  that  wants  to  save  herself  by  acting  comedy,  has  refused  to  perform  the 
Widow  Knightly,  in  “  The  Discovery,”  with  me,  though  she  did  it  originally,  and  it 
is  now  revived  for  the  entertainment  of  her  Majesty.  To  finish  this  business  at  once, 
and  that  we  may  be  more  explicit,  it  is  my  greatest  pleasure  to  live  in  the  greatest 
harmony  with  my  capital  performers,  and  more  particularly  so  with  Air.  and  Mrs. 


DAVID  GARRICK 


107 


Yates.  But  if  they  persist  to  distress  us,  and  Mrs.  Yates  is  resolved  to  withdraw 
herself  so  often,  and  sometimes  without  a  cause,  I  shall  be  obliged  to  do  what  I  would 
most  wish  to  avoid.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

A  little  gout  in  my  right  hand  obliges  me  to  make  use  of  another’s  to  write 
the  letter. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 

Oct.  31st,  1775. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  best  wishes  to  Mr.  Fountain,  and  is  greatly  obliged  to 
him  for  his  friendly  advice ;  but  it  is  from  the  dark  hints  and  insinuations  which  the 
slanderer  throws  out,  of  matter  to  be  produced,  &c.  that  Mr.  G.  is  resolved,  for  the 
peace  of  mankind,  his  own  credit,  and  (he  hopes)  to  the  confusion  of  the  most  aban¬ 
doned  profligate,  to  have  the  business  thoroughly  canvassed  in  a  court  of  law.  Mr. 
G.  defies  the  malice  of  the  Devil  and  the  Doctor  in  conjunction. 

I  forgot  to  thank  you  for  the  mention  of  the  stone  remedy.  When  I  have  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  you,  we  will  talk  it  over.  I  am  well  at  present,  and  am  promised 
a  radical  cure. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sunday  Morning,  ten  o’clock. 

Mrs.  Abington  was  surprised  at  receiving  a  message  from  Mr.  Garrick  last 
night  respecting  the  part  of  Araminta,  in  “  The  School  for  Lovers,”  as  she  had 
flattered  herself  that  he  understood  her  reasons  for  wishing  to  resign  that  character; 
if  he  does  not,  she  refers  him  to  a  note  which  she  wrote  to  Mr.  Bensley  on  Friday 
morning. 

Mrs.  Abington  takes  leave  to  acquaint  Mr.  Garrick  that  she  is  very  ill,  and  has 
been  so  for  some  days ;  though  she  was  not  willing  to  trouble  him  with  an  account 
of  her  indisposition ;  nor  would  she  wish  to  be  excused  from  the  business  of  the 
theatre  when  she  is  at  all  able  to  put  on  her  clothes,  or  walk  upon  the  stage. 

She  is  greatly  surprised  to  see  “  The  Hypocrite”  advertised  for  Wednesday,  and 
begs  it  may  not  be  continued  with  her  name  in  it,  as  she  certainly  cannot  play  in  it 
on  Wednesday;  indeed,  if  she  was  well  enough  to  perform  so  long  a  part  as  that  of 
Charlotte,  Mr.  Garrick  knows  that  the  play  will  not  bring  half  a  house,  and  it  would 
be  very  hard  that  she  should  be  obliged  to  play  to  empty  benches*  merely  to  gratify 
Mr.  Garrick’s  present  resentment  to  her.  Mrs.  Abington  told  Mr.  Garrick  that  she 

*  When  I  remember  this  lady’s  excellence,  I  am  ashamed  of  her  perverse  dishonest  arts.  Il  the  play  of 
itself  will  fill  a  house,  she  will  act  in  it ;  if  it  will  not,  she  cannot  act  to  empty  benches  :  she  will  add  attrac¬ 
tion  to  strength,  but  always  refuse  it  to  weakness.  The  power  of  a  manager,  indeed  !  what  is  it  to  an  actress 
of  powerful  talent,  backed  by  half  the  women  of  fashion  in  the  metropolis? — Ed. 

P  2 


108 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


would  play  in  any  farce  after  that  play  that  might  be  supposed  to  have  strength 
enough  to  help  to  fill  the  house;  but  his  answer  was,  that  he  was  Manager.  She 
understands  perfectly  well  his  power  as  a  manager ;  and  is  very  willing  to  submit  to 
it,  when  it  is  not  exercised  in  endeavours  to  destroy  her  health,  her  peace  of  mind, 
and  her  credit  with  the  public. 

She  is  willing  to  act  in  any  plays  that  are  ready,  and  can  be  creditably  per¬ 
formed  :  if  the  plays  are  not  ready,  and  that  Mr.  Garrick  has  no  occasion  for  Mrs. 
Abington,  she  repeats  the  recpiest  she  made  last  year,  that  he  will  give  her  up  her 
agreement,  and  not  make  “  The  Morning  Post”  the  vehicle  of  his  resentment.. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  SMITH. 

Adelphi,  Wednesday  morning,  Nov.  1st,  1775. 

In  the  middle  of  the  play  last  night,  I  received  your  very  extraordinary  note. 
I  gave  you  leave  to  quit  the  theatre  for  a  few  days,  upon  your  own  private  business  ; 
but  I  little  thought  that  my  management  was  to  be  arraigned  during  that  absence  by 
Mr.  Smith.  I  believe  he  is  the  first  actor  that  lias  been  pleased  to  find  fault  with  the 
acting  any  plays  during  the  absence  of  that  actor  from  the  business  of  the  theatre.  I 
would  have  Mr.  Smith  know,  that  I  am  as  incapable  of  doing  an  unjust  thing,  as  I 
think  myself  very  ill-used  to  be  called  to  an  account  for  what  the  accuser  has  not  the 
least  shadow  of  right  to  interfere  in.  I  shall  not  describe  my  distresses  and  troubles, 
for  many  days  last  past,  in  fixing  upon  plays.  I  have  waited  three  and  four  hours  at 
the  playhouse  before  I  could  ascertain  a  single  play  for  the  next  day.  But  is  an 
absentee,  who  may  partly  be  the  occasion  of  those  distresses,  when  he  returns 
to  town,  instead  of  seeming  obliged  for  the  favour  that  has  been  done  him,  to 
announce  his  return  with  a  complaint  of  the  manager  ?  Indeed,  these  frequent  billets 
of  complaint  betray  an  unsatisfied  mind ;  and  I  am  as  little  able  to  account  for  this 
dissatisfaction,  as  I  find  that  no  art  of  mine  is  able  to  remove  it. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

D.  G. 


THE  PROPRIETORS  OF  COVENT-GARDEN  THEATRE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Thursday,  Nov.  2,  1775. 

If  it  would  be  agreeable  to  Mr.  Garrick  that  Drury-lane  only  should  be  open  to¬ 
morrow,  and  to  give  Covent- Garden  Tuesday  next,  or  to  make  any  arrangement  of 
the  kind,  now  in  the  time  of  dearth  and  sickness,  it  would  be  complied  with  by  his 

Very  humble  servants  of  Coyent-Garden  Theatre. 

Endorsed, 

“  Note  from  the  Proprietors  of  Covent-Garden, 
and  mv  answer.” 

J 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


109 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  PROPRIETORS  OF  COVENT-GARDEN  THEATRE. 

GENTLEMEN,  Adelphi,  Nov.  2,  17 75. 

I  believe  no  precedent  can  be  produced  of  the  managers  returning  to  five  days 
a-week,  after  they  had  played  six  ;  and  indeed,  though  I  should  be  very  happy 
to  oblige  you,  such  a  measure,  at  this  time,  would  not  only  subject  us  to  very  in¬ 
jurious  suspicions,  but  it  would  likewise,  as  it  is  a  time  of  dearth  and  sickness,  bring 
great  distresses  upon  the  lower  part  of  our  company.* 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

My  Company  has  but  this  moment  left  me. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sunday,  5th  Nov.  1775. 

After  all,  I  am  told,  by  a  letter  received  from  France,  that  the  Chevalier 
[D’Eon]  proves  an  Amazon: — Is  it  true?— and  more,  which  I  am  glad  to  hear, — that 
15,000  livres  per  annum  are  settled  upon  him  or  her.  Pray  resolve  me  this  question. 
I  have  been  very  ill— am  not  well,  and  do  not  know  when  I  shall  be. 

Yours  ever,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 


LORD  EDGCUMBE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Grosvenor- street,  Nov.  14th,  1775. 

Alas  !  mv  dear  Sir,  the  Standard-bearer  lives,  and  does  not  mean  to  die.  He 
is  onlv,  as  we  say  in  the  West,  a  little  out  of  his  parts,  or  beside  himself.  Should 
he  care  to  sell,  (as  I  wish  he  would,  for  he  has  done  no  duty  since  I  have  been  at 
the  head  of  this  amiable  corps,)  or  Abraham  take  him  to  his  bosom,  your  nephew,  as 
far  as  depends  upon  me,  shall  stand  first  oars.  His  figure,  you  say,  is  a  good  one,  and 
none  can  doubt  his  morals,  when  Pembroke  answers  for  them. 

I  desire  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick :  she  will  hear  from  Lady  E - 

to-day  ;  and  I  hope  you  will  not  only  hear  from  her  too,  but  grant  her  petition. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

Edgcumbe. 

*  How  immense  Garrick’s  superiority — in  wisdom,  in  charity ! 


110 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  YATES. 


MADAM,  Nov.  16th,  1775. 

Your  letter  of  yesterday  came  to  me  while  I  Avas  at  dinner.  Though  fatigue  in 
the  morning  for  near  six  hours  made  me  incapable  of  e\rery  thing  after  dinner  but 
sleep' ng  in  my  great  chair,  I  take  the  first  moment  of  leisure  to  answer  your  favour  : 
at  the  same  time,  I  cannot  but  lament  that  our  theatrical  affairs  require  so  much  Avri- 
ting  about.  You  Avish  to  be  quit  of  the  part  of  Almeria,  because  you  say  it  is  unfit 
for  you,  and  that  you  had  given  it  up  by  my  consent  fourteen  years  ago.  I  dare  not 
contradict  you ;  and  if  I  Avas  to  OAvn  the  charge,  it  has  nothing  to  do  Avith  the  present 
question.  You  are  pleased  to  say,  it  is  not  fit  for  you.  If  so,  why  Avould  you 
take  it  again,  unsolicited  by  me  ?  But  why  is  it  unfit,  if  it  is  the  capital  part  of  the 
play,  and  always  performed  by  the  first  actresses  ?  But  there  is  still  a  stronger  reason 
for  urging  the  necessity  of  your  appearing  in  that  character.  At  the  time  of  the 
benefits  last  year,  hearing  how  much  the  plays  suffer  by  the  performers  taking  parts 
for  one  night  only,  I  put  up  an  order  in  the  green-room,  that  the  manager  would 
expect  eArery  performer  to  do  for  the  house  what  they  should  do  for  the  benefits,  and 
for  this  good  reason ;  why  is  not  the  public  at  large  to  be  as  Avell  entertained  as 
the  friends  of  any  single  actor? — and  why  are  not  the  proprietors  to  be  profited 
by  the  performance  of  Mrs.  Yates  in  Almeria,  as  Avell  as  Mr.  Cautherley  ?  To  con- 
ATince  you  how  injurious  this  business  Avould  be  to  you,  as  Avell  as  to  the  proprie¬ 
tors — Mr.  Reddish  sent  Avord  that  he  only  performed  Claudio  in  “  Measure  for  Mea¬ 
sure,”  to  oblige  Mr.  King  ;  and  that  it  would  be  hard  upon  him  to  act  such  a  part 
again.  I  sent  word  that  the  injury  AATould  be  to  the  play,  (consequently  to  Mrs. 
Yates,)  to  the  public,  and  to  the  proprietors ;  and  that  I  insisted  upon  his  performing 
the  part :  he  has  consented.  I  hope,  therefore,  that  Mrs.  Yates  Avill  not  be  the  only 
one  to  oppose  so  reasonable  an  order  of  the  manager,  and  make  him  guilty  of  an  act 
of  injustice.  I  must  therefore  entreat  her  to  comply  Avith  my  request,  and  to  appear 
in  Almeria  next  Tuesday  night ;  which  I  intend  immediately  to  adA’ertise,  as  it  Avas  in 
the  papers  a  feAV  days  ago.  I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  The  forfeit  in  this  case  cannot  be  accepted :  the  part  is  not  a  new  one ;  you 
voluntarily  accepted  of  it,  and  performed  it  for  a  benefit. 


MRS.  YATES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  King’s  Theatre,  Nov.  17th. 

It  is  hard  to  be  governed  by  laAvs  of  which  one  is  ignorant :  this  is  the  first  time 
I  ever  heard  of  your  order  in  respect  to  benefits,  which  Avill  make  me  a  little  more 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


Ill 


cautious  for  the  future.  In  respect  to  Almeria,  I  think  it  a  part  unworthy  of  a 
capital  actress :  the  table  of  forfeits  is  clearly  in  my  favour,  nor  can  I  accept  of  the 
character  as  mine :  but  if  my  playing  it  a  few  nights  will  oblige  you,  1  am  ready  to 
do  it.  I  cannot  help  concluding  with  a  few  lines  from  your  favourite  author : — 

“  Oh  !  ’tis  excellent 
To  have  a  giant’s  strength,”  &c.  &c. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

M.  A.  Yates. 


DR.  ARNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Nov.  17th, 

As  you  have  causelessly  dropped  the  friend,  I  have  sense  enough  to  write  at  a 
becoming  distance.  You  will  undoubtedly  hear,  by  the  freshest  advice,  the  tete-a-tete 
altercation  between  your  brother  and  me.  How  could  it  happen  otherwise,  when 
the  first  salutation  I  received  was,  “  Dr.  Arne — we  have  considered  of  the  farce,  and 
protest  against  it;'  which  nearly  led  me  into  a  mistake;  for  how  could  I  suppose  he 
meant  the  farce  you  had  first  promised  to  do,  and  after  the  last  rehearsal  concluded 
on  ?  But  on  his  warm  repetitions,  I  found  that  I  should  have  protested  against  the 
farce  that  has  been  so  long  acting  ex-parte  managers,  and  tragedy  on  the  composer’s 
part.  I  answered — “  I  am  not  surprised,  it  tallies  exactly  with  the  treatment  I  have 
all  along  received,”  (meaning  not  only  on  account  of  the  farce,  but  the  discharge  of 
two  young  women,  handsome,  perfect  figures,  and  possessed  of  better  talents  than 
most  on  either  stage  have  set  out  Avith :)  I  scorn  to  retract  my  words,  and  think  Mr. 
G.  Garrick  will  equally  scorn  to  aggravate  them.  The  young  women  brought  three 
very  good  houses  for  the  opening  of  a  season,  and  met  with  more  public  applause 
than  I  ever  heard  ;  and  though  inexperience,  mixed  with  sensibility,  might  intimidate 
Miss  Weller  so  as  sometimes  to  exceed  the  exact  sound,  it  was  so  little  that  the  audi¬ 
ence  were  not  susceptible  of  it. 

If  you  had  no  intention  to  retain  them,  one  night’s  performance  had  surely  been 
sufficient  for  their  condemnation  ;  but  they  had  not  then  been  supplanted  by  my  son’s 
application  ; — permit  me  to  give  you  joy  of  the  acquisition.  As  to  singing  in  tune, 
by  my  salvation  !  not  above  three  in  botli  theatres  can  do  it,  though  several  have  had 
nearly  twenty  years’  experience. 

I  did  not,  as  has  been  done  to  you  more  than  once ,  impose  my  young  pupils  on  you 
as  finished  singers ;  why  then  should  they  have  been  discharged  for  what  you  knew 
before  their  appearance,  especially  after  three  warm  receptions?  Your  public  declara¬ 
tion  this  morning  appeared  as  meant  to  complete  the  many  shocks  which  I  and  mine 
have  received — it  was  ineffectual :  I  shall  think  myself  happy  to  he  mistaken.  If 
you  are  willing  to  show  a  friendship  which  I  shall  deem  an  honour  to  receive,  it  will 


112 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


not  be  sufficient  that  you  perform  the  piece ;  I  shall  have  the  presumption  to  hope 
that  you  will  further  its  success  ;  though  I  fear  that  the  cold  breath  of  the  manager, 
like  a  wintry  blast,  has  chilled  the  hearts  of  his  dependents :  it  is  a  distemper  as 
catching  as  the  itch.  There  has  yet  been  hut  one  decent  rehearsal,  which  was  in 
your  presence ;  though,  even  then,  two  principals  were  absent ;  nor  can  I  expect  any 
better,  till  the  manager  will  either  graciously  appear,  or  at  least  send  his  general 
mandate :  and  (but  for  the  respect  due  to  the  author)  I  had  long  since  withdrawn  the 
prettiest  music,  in  the  light  style,  that  I  ever  wrote;  but  I  will  not,  uncompelled, 
incur  the  resentment  of  a  gentleman,  a  man  of  fortune  and  a  scholar,  respected  by 
the  first  personages  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  by  assuring  him,  from  your  promise, 
that  his  piece  will  be  performed  with  all  possible  expedition  ;  then,  that  it  is  in 
rehearsal,  and  now,  by  writing  him  word  that  “  you  protest  against  it  ?” 

I  had  once  a  sparring  of  this  kind  with  Mr.  Rich  ;  he  generously  acknowledged 
that  he  had  not  treated  me  kindly,  and  the  misunderstanding  was  the  cement  of  our 
friendship  ever  after.  May  this  candid  explanation  prove  equally  successful  !  It 
shall  not  be  my  fault  if  it  does  not,  being  ever  desirous  of  proving  myself 

Your  real  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  ThOs.  AltGne.  ArNE. 

“  Dr.  Arne’s  letter  and  my  answers.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  ARNE. 

DEAR  SIR, 

I  have  read  your  play  and  rode  your  horse,  and  do  not  approve  of  either.  They 
both  want  that  particular  spirit  which  alone  can  give  pleasure  to  the  reader  and  the 
rider.  When  the  one  wants  wit,  and  the  other  the  spur,  they  jog  on  very  heavily. 
I  must  keep  the  horse,  but  I  have  returned  you  the  play.  I  pretend  to  some  little 
knowledge  of  the  last ;  but  as  I  am  no  jockey,  they  cannot  say  that  the  knowing  one 
is  taken  in.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  D.  G. 

“  Designed  for  Dr.  Arne,  who  sold  me  a  horse, 
a  very  dull  one  ;  and  sent  me 
a  comic  opera,  ditto.” 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dec-  12th>  1775- 

I  cleared  up  one  of  your  doubts  a  few  days  ago ;  and  let  me  now  beg  you  will 
disperse  a  cloud  or  two  for  me.  To  what  Essay  on  the  Theatre  does  Mr.  C.  refer  at 
the  top  of  p.  9  of  his  dedication  ? — and  what  does  he  mean  by  “  except  in  the  case 
of  one  unhappy  gentleman,”  in  the  last  paragraph?— and  “  something  more  worthy 
of  their  approbation,  and  less  dependent  upon  yours  ?” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


113 


I  suppose  you  are  already  painting  the  barriers  for  “  King  Richard  the  Second.” 
Are  you  aware  that  Tate  altered  it  under  the  title  of  “  The  Sicilian  Usurper?” 
There  are  four  lines *  in  Shakspeare’s  play,  which  if  spoken  will  he  applied  to  the 
present  reign.  Whether  they  should  be  continued  or  omitted  you  are  the  best 
judge.  Yours  sincerely, 

G.  Steevens. 


MR.  DE  LA  BERE  TO  MR.  SIDDONS. 

SIR,  Cheltenham,  1 3th  Dec.  1775. 

I  have  received  two  or  three  letters  since  you  were  here  from  the  gentlemen  of 
Covent-garden  theatre,  respecting  the  proposals  to  and  from  Mrs.  Siddons  for  en¬ 
gaging  her  at  that  house. 

They  consider  her  subsequent  engagement  to  Mr.  Garrick  as  an  infringement  of 
the  agreement  subsisting  between  them  and  Drury-lane,  and  they  have  no  doubt 
that  Mr.  Garrick,  when  he  comes  to  he  informed  that  she  was  in  treaty  with  them* 
will  refuse  to  take  her,  and  of  this,  if  she  persists  in  refusing  their  offers,  he  will 
certainly  be  informed.  Their  offers  are  to  engage  both  her  and  you  for  the  remainder 
of  this  season.  If  at  the  end  of  it  you  do  not  like  to  continue  with  them,  you  will 
be  at  your  liberty  to  engage  for  the  next  season  at  Drury-lane.  I  have  only  to  recom¬ 
mend  it  to  your  consideration,  whether  you  will  not,  on  the  footing  of  the  agreement 
between  the  two  houses,  lose  the  chance  of  getting  into  either,  and  to  add  that  Mr. 
Blackwell  has  taken  up  this  affair  with  great  resolution,  on  the  part  of  Covent-garden, 
and  he  says  that  Mrs.  Siddons  absolutely  promised  him  to  drop  all  thoughts  of  con¬ 
necting  herself  with  Drury-lane.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

John  de  la  Bere. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  R.  JEPHSON. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Dec.  18th,  1775. 

I  took  “  Vitellia”  with  me  to  Hampton,  and  I  not  only  read  it  myself  to  myself, 
but  to  some  ladies  and  a  gentleman  of  great  taste  in  theatrical  matters.  They  were 
ignorant  of  the  author,  but  agreed  that  it  was  not  at  all  calculated  for  success  upon  the 
stage — that  it  was  romantic,  and,  what  was  worse,  unaffecting.  Indeed  you  will,  in 
my  opinion,  rue  the  hour  that  it  is  brought  upon  the  stage.  Your  reputation  is,  at 
present,  high  on  our  dramatic  list,  and  why  you  would  venture  to  throw  away  your 

*  Four  lines — I  suppose  the  following,  agreeably  to  the  notions  then  entertained  on  the  subject  ot 
America. 

Sails.  I  see  thy  glory,  like  a  shooting  star, 

Fall  to  the  base  earth  from  the  firmament ; 

The  sun  sets  weeping  in  the  lowly  west, 

Witnessing  storms  to  come,  woe,  and  unrest. — Act  Second. — Ed. 


VOL.  II 


Q 


114 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


well-earned  fame  upon  an  uncertainty,  at  the  best,  I  cannot  conceive.  In  short,  I 
am  so  certain  of  my  judgment  in  the  present  business,  that  I  cannot  consent  to  your 
undoing  your  well-doing  in  the  same  theatre. 

I  beseech  you  to  consult  your  sincere  and  knowing  friends — call  a  grand  jury  of 
them,  and  let  our  friend  Tighe  be  the  foreman;  and  after  they  have  sworn  upon  our 
dramatic  gospel  Shakspeare,  let  them  bring  “  Yitellia”  in  a  true  bill  if  they  dare. 
You  have  made  me  unhappy ;  but,  nevertheless,  my  best  and  warmest  wishes  attend 
you  and  yours.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately  yours, 

D.  G. 

P.  S.  It  is  impossible  that  any  thing  worthy  of  you  should  be  resolved  or  done 
in  this  hurry-scurry  patch-work  way.  You  adventure  too  much. 


MR.  WRIGHTEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Silt,  Drury-lane,  Dec.  20th,  1775. 

From  the  general  tenor  of  your  conduct  to  Mrs.  Wrighten  and  myself,  I  have 
not  a  doubt  of  your  acceding  to  any  proposition,  strictly  reasonable,  which  might 
apparently  add  to  our  happiness  :  should  the  following  appear  unreasonable,  a  refusal 
is  my  sincere  desire. 

From  having  some  time  since  furnished  my  apartments,  and  other  concurring 
circumstances,  I  wish  to  be  in  possession  of  one  hundred  pounds  ;  but  ac  I  am  con¬ 
scious  people  holding  property  in  any  of  the  funds,  &c.  make  an  annual  advantage  of 
that  property,  so  I  by  no  means  desire  the  loan  of  so  considerable  a  sum  to  the  actual 
prejudice  of  the  person  who  should  oblige  me ;  especially  as  it  would  be  two  years 
before  it  could  be  totally  paid  off  by  the  method  1  propose,  viz.  two  guineas  each  full 
week,  the  first  payment  to  commence  the  beginning  of  next  season,  as  this  season 
will  be  nearly  taken  up  in  paying  the  remaining  twenty-five  pounds,  of  a  note  of 
forty-two,  which  you  favoured  me  with  prior  to  my  leaving  London  last  May. 

Should  that  kindness  we  have  so  often  experienced  actuate  you  to  a  compliance 
with  our  request,  we  can  only  (as  we  ever  must)  consider  you  as  our  friend.  Should 
it  be  disagreeable,  and  we  in  consequence  meet  with  a  refusal,  we  must  still  esteem 
you  for  the  favours  already  conferred  ;  and,  as  an  addition  to  them,  entreat  your  par¬ 
don  for  the  trouble  now  given  you  by 

Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  (sincerely)  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  JAMES  WRIGHTEN. 

“  Wrighten’s  letter  about  100/.” 


MR.  J.  BLUNDELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  . .  Dec.  22nd,  1775. 

The  reason  I  did  not  answer  yours  before  was  owing  to  its  being  kept  in  town, 
as  my  friends  did  not  know  my  direction  till  I  had  first  written  to  them.  You  say 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


115 


I  should  not  have  talked  of  increase  of  salary  and  leaving  the  orchestra,  where  you 
placed  me  with  some  difficulty, — this  I  well  remember.  When  I  came  to  your 
orchestra,  there  was  not  one  in  London  (capable  of  doing  your  business)  that  would 
have  played  on  the  terms  I  did.  Had  you  put  me  in  when  I  first  came  from  the 
West  Indies  (as  you  promised  me  I  should  have  that  place  which  was  then  vacant) 
you  would  have  done  me  a  friendly  favour,  but  you  filled  it  with  a  stranger  ;  and  had 
it  not  been  for  my  friends  I  must  have  starved,  for  I  depended  so  much  on  your  word 
that  I  divested  myself  of  all  other  engagements  at  that  time  ;  but  when  I  found  I  had 
been  deprived  of  my  expectations,  I  had  no  other  remedy  but  to  seek  for  bread  else¬ 
where,  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  make  friends  every  day.  I  laboured  hard  at  the 
violoncello,  and  with  the  kind  assistance  of  my  worthy  master  I  got  business ;  and  at 
the  time  I  was  improving  myself  and  doing  very  well,  you  put  me  into  your  orches¬ 
tra  at  a  less  salary  than  you  gave  the  other  person  :  but  as  it  was  not  in  my  power 
to  discharge  your  bill  (though  in  a  fair  way  for  it),  I  was  under  the  necessity  of  play¬ 
ing  on  those  terms;  for,  had  I  refused,  you  certainly  would  have  expected  your  bill 
to  be  paid  then  ;  and  borrowing  of  money  I  always  detested,  though  I  had  many 
offers  (more  than  that  sum)  made  me  by  my  friends  ;  but  I  wished  to  pay  it  with  my 
own  industry,  and,  thank  God,  I  have  at  last  accomplished  it.  And  now,  Sir,  I  have 
one  more  thing  to  add,  which  I  hope  will  not  intrude  too  much  on  your  time,  and 
then  will  take  my  leave.  I  long  wished  to  make  you  acquainted  with  the  losses  I 
sustained  by  playing  at  so  great  a  disadvantage  in  your  orchestra,  but  the  fear  of 
incurring  your  anger  made  me  unhappy.  At  last  I  was  advised  to  get  some  able 
person,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  profession,  to  speak,  who  could  better  in¬ 
form  you  of  my  small  abilities  :  I  applied  to  Mr.  Barthelemon,  who  promised  me 
he  would  take  an  opportunity  of  doing  it.  The  man  could  have  no  other  motive 
than  a  desire  to  serve  me  ;  and  I  think  you  would  have  appeared  more  my  friend  to 
have  heard  him  through,  without  using  such  words  as  “  ungrateful  fellow,  and  you 
would  turn  me  out  immediately  for  thinking  of  such  a  thing  as  asking  for  more 
money;  that  I  was  indebted  to  you  a  bill  when  I  went  to  the  West  Indies,  which 
you  expected  to  be  paid.”  This  last  speech  (whatever  you  may  think)  hurt  me  so 
much,  that  I  was  determined  at  all  events  to  discharge  it  as  soon  as  I  could,  if  I  dis¬ 
tressed  myself  by  it.  What  must  be  the  feelings  of  a  mind  that  was  ever  sensible 
of  the  debt,  and  wished  for  an  opportunity  of  paying  it  ?  But  to  be  told  of  it  in 
such  a  manner  must  make  a  stranger  (to  the  affair  between  us)  imagine  I  had  no 
principle  of  honour.  What  was  I  to  expect  after  such  a  saying  ?  Indeed  I  must 
confess,  it  was  treating  me  different  from  the  manner  I  always  expected  to  be  treated 
by  you.  You  say  your  bill  is  2 'll.  odd;  I  am  fearful  of  sending  the  money  from 
the  country  ;  and  as  I  am  doing  well,  I  shall  not  be  in  town  these  few  weeks  ;  there¬ 
fore  you  will  be  so  obliging  to  send  the  account  to  my  friend,  Mr.  Howell,  in  Mary- 
le-bone-street,  who  will  see  it  properly  discharged,  as  I  am  anxious  for  it  to  be  set¬ 
tled.  And  now,  Sir,  I  again  repeat  that  my  prayers  shall  ever  be  offered  to  the 

Q  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


116 

Almighty  for  a  long  continuance  of  your  health,  and  hope  you  will  still  have  a  good 
opinion  of  me,  and  not  think  I  am  wanting  of  gratitude. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

J.  Blundell. 

N.  B.  I  never  had  the  least  thought  of  distressing  you.  Why  did  you  tell  me 
you  had  already  engaged  one  in  my  place  ?  Indeed,  Sir,  it  is  not  in  my  nature  to 
behave  ill,  especially  to  one  whom  I  thought  at  that  time  my  greatest  friend. 

Endorsed, 

“  Blundell’s  impudent,  ungrateful  ignorance.” 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Great  Queen-street,  Dec.  22nd,  1775. 

To  accomplish  your  design  of  settling  all  stomachs,  let  us  all,  my  dear  Sir,  take 
the  same  food. 

When  “  The  Jubilee”  was  first  produced,  splendid  as  it  was,  it  reaped  some  addi¬ 
tional  credit  from  the  capital  performers  appearing  in  the  procession,  (Mr.  Barry  only 
excepted,  who  was  excused  on  account  of  his  infirmities).  In  the  name  of  God,  are 
we  bettered  since  that  time  ?  I  fear  not. 

Fix,  my  dear  Sir,  if  you  please,  different  characters  for  us ;  and  let  us  all,  for  the 
credit  of  the  piece  and  support  of  the  theatre,  appear  barefaced ;  let  this  be  done,  and 
I  shall  rejoice  in  attending  an  hundred  successive  play-nights.  I  am  sorry  you  think 
it  necessary  to  make  one  in  the  Pageant ;  trebly  so  when  your  condescension  has 
not  the  desired  effect.  However,  the  Ladies,  worthy  creatures  !  I  suppose  will  con¬ 
tinue  obstinate  ;  I  shall  therefore  leave  them  to  themselves,  and  mention  the  o-entle- 
men  only.  If  you  cannot  prevail  with  them  all  to  walk,  which  I  think  they  ought 
on  this  occasion  to  do,  take  yourself  out  of  the  piece,  and  let  such  as  you  may  please 
to  call  the  upper  part  of  the  company,  take  turn  about  in  wearing  the  domino,  as  we 
may  be  on  the  spot,  concerned  in  the  play,  or  what  not,  to  make  it  agreeable  to  each 
other  ;  if  not,  I  must  decline  accepting  any  share  in  the  matter.  I  owe  Mr.  Garrick, 
as  Mr.  Garrick,  more  perhaps  than  I  shall  ever  be  able  to  pay  ;  let  him,  however,  as 
Mr.  Garrick,  task  my  power,  and  I  will  be  contented  to  be  branded  with  the  title  of 
an  Ingrate,  if  I  leave  an  opportunity  untried  to  oblige  him  ;  but  I  consider  myself  as 
writing  to  the  Manager  of  Drury-lane  Theatre,  (to  whom,  when  he  is  wholly  at  lei¬ 
sure  and  in  thorough  good  humour,  I  have  many  things  to  say,)  and  to  him  I  declare, 
I  cannot  think  of  appearing  in  any  procession  where  any  male  of  the  company 
thinks  it  a  disgrace  to  make  one.  It  may  perhaps  be  said  the  disorder  may  be 
catching,  and  run  down  to  the  lowest  ranks  of  the  theatre ;  not  at  all  unlikely. 
I  think  there  are  but  two  paths  to  take  in  this  business — either  to  make  it  general, 
or  at  once  say,  the  manager  has  power  to  draw  a  line:  let  some  stand  above  it, 
and  the  rest  below  it ;  if  I  should  be  ranked  with  the  latter,  1  fancy  I  shall  at  least  be 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


117 


able  to  conduct  myself  through  the  affair  with  decency  and  good  manners  ;  farther 
I  cannot  promise.  I  am  the  humble  servant  of  the  manager, 

And  Mr.  Garrick’s  ardent  well-wisher  and  much  obliged  friend, 

Thomas  King. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  SMITH. 

SIRj  Tuesday,  Dec.  26th,  17 75. 

You  have  proved  to  me  that  you  have  no  attachment  to  me  or  my  affairs.  Would 
your  wearing  a  domino  and  mask,  to  take  turn  about  with  me  in  walking  down  the 
stage,  be  an  injury  to  your  importance  ?  1  hope  not :  it  would  have  been  of  conse¬ 

quence  to  t;  The  Jubilee,”  which  is  got  up  at  a  great  expense  to  support  your  and  other 
performers’  importance,  which,  without  it,  has  suffered,  and  may  suffer  more ;  but  I 
am  now,  I  must  say,  fully  convinced  that  our  connexion  is  not  rooted  in  the  heart, 
or  in  a  mutual  desire  to  serve  each  other.  I  am,  &c. 

D.  G. 

I  am  this  moment  come  home,  and  found  your  letter  upon  the  table.  I  am  like¬ 
wise  in  a  great  hurry,  for  I  am  obliged  to  make  one  at  “  The  Jubilee.” 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Smith’s  letter  and  my  answer  about  “  Jubilee.” 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR.  SIR,  Dec.  27th,  1775. 

I  aim  extremely  unhappy  that  you  put  such  an  interpretation  on  my  desire  to  be 
excused  attending  “  The  Jubilee.”  I  never  have  affected  importance,  and  perhaps  am 
as  conscious  of  my  want  of  it  as ’any  performer  on  the  stage  ;  yet  whilst  any  are  ex¬ 
empted  from  so  disagreeable  a  task  as  that  in  question,  I  hoped  I  might  be  entitled  to 
the  same  indulgence.  It  is  not  many  years  ago,  when  talking  with  you  on  this  very 
subject,  I  told  you  it  was  so  painful  to  me,  that  rather  than  submit  to  it  I  would 
forego  the  advantage  of  the  stage,  which,  thank  God  !  notwithstanding  the  Morning 
Post,  I  am  not  quite  indebted  to  for  bread.  I  would  do  any  thing  in  my  power  to 
serve  you  when  my  peace  was  not  immediately  concerned ;  here,  in  spite  of  my  ab¬ 
surdity,  it  is  ;  but  I  hope  this  will  not  be  deemed  a  proof  of  my  having  no  attach¬ 
ment  to  you  or  your  affairs. 

It  grieves  me  that  you  say  our  connexion  is  not  rooted  in  the  heart.  I  have  not 
yet  doubted  your  desire  to  serve  me  ;  yet  when  I  consider  how  little  I  have  been 
employed  in  business,  that,  with  your  assistance,  might  have  given  me  some  small 
importance,  and  how  you  now  wish  to  employ  me  in  the  shadow  of  a  character  I 
never  represented,  and  in  which  after  you  (for  your  importance  gives  importance)  I 


118 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


cannot  fail  making  a  very  poor  figure,  I  own  it  might  lead  a  more  suspicious  man 
than  myself  to  fear  you  had  not  his  interest  at  heart. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  sincere  and  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  W.  SMITH. 

“  Mr.  Smith  about 4  Jubilee.’” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  COLMAN. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Dec.  29th,  1775. 

As  I  promised  to  let  you  know  before  I  parted  with  my  theatrical  property,  that 
you  might  be  the  purchaser  if  you  pleased — I  must  now  seriously  acquaint  you  that 
I  shall  most  certainly  part  with  it.  I  saw  a  gentleman  yesterday  of  great  property, 
and  who  has  no  objection  to  the  price,  viz.  :  35,000/.  for  my  part.  I  must  desire  you 
to  speak  out,  whether  you  have  any  thoughts  of  succeeding  me  in  Drury-lane,  for  I 
must  see  the  party  again  on  Saturday  evening  to  talk  over  the  matter  and  determine 
on  my  part.  I  beg  you  will  write  to  me  directly,  and  be  explicit,  for  I  must  deter¬ 
mine,  or  perhaps  lose  my  market.  My  disorder  increases  and  distresses  me  much. 
My  friend  Pott  is  to  search  for  the  cause  next  week.  I  beg  that  your  letter  may  be 
determinate.  Once  again,  many  happy  years  to  you.  I  am,  dear  Colman, 

Most  affectionately  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  have  sent  our  friend  Becket  on  purpose,  as  this  matter  is  of  great  consequence, 
and  I  would  not  trust  any  other  person  with  it.  The  party  wants  to  purchase  the 
whole  ;  I  must  desire  you  to  keep  this  business  a  secret  for  more  reasons  than  one. 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Richmond,  Dec.  30th,  1775. 

The  only  day  I  have  dined  and  slept  out  since  I  left  London  was  yesterday,  and 
Becket,  I  hear,  came  with  your  letter  the  moment  I  was  set  out.  The  last  time  we 
talked  over  your  proposed  sale,  I  told  you  that  whenever  you  were  absolutely  fixed, 
and  would  acquaint  me  with  particulars,  of  which  I  am  still  totally  ignorant,  I 
would  give  you  as  speedy  an  answer  as  you  yourself  should  think  reasonable,  or 
indeed  possible,  in  a  matter  of  so  much  importance.  If,  however,  your  letter  of 
Thursday  means  to  offer  me  the  refusal  of  only  your  share  of  the  property,  to  that 
offer  I  can  immediately  and  most  determinately  say  XO.  I  would  not  for  worlds 
again  sit  on  the  throne  of  Brentford  with  any  assessor,  except  it  were  yourself.  And 
you  may  remerpber  I  told  you  so  at  the  time  above-mentioned,  assigning  as  my 
reason,  that  you  were  the  only  man  in  the  kingdom  I  would  suffer  to  govern  me, 
and  I  did  not  know  a  man  in  the  kingdom  who  would  suffer  me  to  govern  him — 
therefore  I  can  have  no  other  partner.  If  you  are  enabled  to  treat  for  the  ichole,  or 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


119 


to  reserve  your  own  half,  we  must  talk  farther.  But  if  the  gentleman  you  speak  of 
is  ready  and  willing  to  buy  your  part  only,  and  there  is  no  more  upon  sale,  let  who 
will  buy  for  me,  and  I  wish  the  purchaser  a  merry  Christmas. 

Your  account  of  your  disorder  gives  me  the  greatest  concern,  and  I  hope  Pott 
will  afford  speedy  relief ;  for  believe  me,  my  dear  Garrick,  I  love  and  honour  you, 
and  have  never,  in  my  most  petulant  moments,  gone  beyond  the  amantium  irce. 
Take  care  of  yourself ;  your  dear  good  woman  will,  1  know,  take  care  of  you.  And 
if  Heaven  has  years  of  life  in  store  for  me,  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  that  can 
attend  them,  will  be  to  see  two  valuable  persons,  whom  I  so  truly  love  and  esteem, 
continue  in  a  state  of  comfort  and  happiness. 

Yours,  my  dear  Garrick,  yours  most  affectionately. 
Endorsed,  G.  COLMAN. 

“  Colman  about  buying  my  share.” 


MR.  C.  DIBDIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Richmond,  Tuesday  Evening,  1775. 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  send  you  a  piece  which  has  employed  my  leisure  time 
for  these  two  years  past.  It  has  cost  me  indeed  infinite  pains,  the  music  especially  ; 
and  if  I  am  fortunate  enough  to  have  your  approbation  of  the  design  and  dialogue, 
I  do  not  despair  of  getting  reputation  by  it. 

I  may  properly  call  it  “  The  Offspring  of  Gratitude  for,  as  my  debt  in  the  office 
is  very  large,  and  as  my  circumstances  lately  have  very  much  inconvenienced  me,  I 
was  alarmed  lest  I  should  be  longer  obliged  to  abuse  a  generosity,  which  has  laid  me 
under  such  frequent  and  unmerited  obligations.  This  motive  gave  me  perseverance 
to  put  the  finishing  stroke  to  what  I  have  often  laid  by,  as  an  attempt  infinitely 
beyond  my  abilities. 

Mr.  Hopkins  informs  me,  Sir,  that  Mr.  Lacy  and  you  understand  I  have  broken 
my  article  :  I  took  the  liberty  of  explaining  that  matter  once  before  when  there  Avas 
a  dispute  about  a  piece  of  Mr.  Cumberland’s. 

I  know,  if  I  considered  myself  obliged  to  abide  by  the  letter  of  my  article,  that  I 
cannot  compose  a  note  of  music  publicly  or  privately  without  your  consent  in  writing. 
But  when  I  objected  to  this  as  hard  terms,  at  the  time  the  article  was  drawn  up,  you 
yourself  allowed  it  to  be  only  matter  of  form,  and  gave  me  every  reason  to  believe 
it  would  never  be  exacted  from  me.  In  consequence  of  this,  I  have  composed  several 
entire  new  pieces  for  llanelagh,  for  Mr.  King,  for  the  Haymarket,  &c. ;  and  I  must  of 
course  imagine,  if  it  has  all  along  been  thought  unnecessary  to  get  permission  for 
composing  new  music  for  these  places,  that  it  would  have  been  highly  absurd  in  me 
to  trouble  you  about  a  piece  where  there  is  not  a  note  of  new  music.  I  therefore 
brought  out  “  The  Waterman”  without  applying  to  you  for  your  consent,  because 
I  thought  it  would  be  giving  you  a  trouble  there  was  no  occasion  for. 


120 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


With  regard  to  the  piece  I  have  now  done  myself  the  honour  to  send  you,  you 
will  immediately  see  that  the  main  design  is  taken  from  one  of  Marmontel’s  Tales.* 
I  will  take  the  liberty  of  paying  my  respects  to  you  at  Hampton,  the  beginning  of 
the  week,  and  in  the  mean  time  shall  take  it  as  a  particular  favour  if  you  will  look 
over  it.  A  very  little  time,  if  I  am  so  happy  to  find  you  approve  it,  will  render  it  fit 
for  representation.  I  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 
Endorsed,  C.  Dibdin. 

“  Mr.  Dibdin’s  letter  to  me  about 
his  breach  of  articles.” 


OBSERVATIONS  WITH  REGARD  TO  THE  MANAGERS  OF  DRURY-LANE 

RECEIVING  MY  PIECE. 

I  agree  that  it  shall  be  brought  out  in  October,  or  earlier,  as  it  shall  suit  their 
convenience.  I  also  agree  to  pay  eighty  guineas  for  the  charges  of  the  benefit  night. 

C.  Dibdin. 

With  regard  to  the  fifty  pounds  draught  which  they  will  be  so  good  to  accept, 
it  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  profits  of  my  benefit  for  the  piece ;  or  if  that  should  fail,  by 
a  stoppage  of  five  pounds  per  week  out  of  my  salary. 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  MR.  GARRICK,  Queen  Street,  Friday  Morning. 

Ten  thousand  thanks  for  the  friendly  gratulation  in  your  note,  and  your  apparent 
solicitude  for  the  success  of  my  night.  I  hope  you  believe  me  incapable  of  forgetting 
these  or  any  of  the  many  tokens  of  regard  you  have  shown  me.  1  purposed  calling 
on  you  on  'Wednesday,  but  I  was  so  fagged  with  the  preceding  night’s  fatigue,  that 
I  could  not  stir  in  the  morning,  and  at  one  1  had  engaged  to  meet  my  troops  at 
Islington,  whither  indeed  I  went,  and  afterwards  found  myself  worse  for  gallanting 
it  in  the  open  air. 

Mr.  Sheridan  Jun.  is  to  be  with  me  at  twelve  to-day  by  appointment.  Have 
you  beforehand  any  thing  to  communicate  on  the  subject?  To  say  the  truth,  I  have 
no  devotion  to  the  deed ;  and  am  still  rather  inclined  to  be  off  than  on,  however 
willing  the  parties  may  be  to  gratify  me.  Could  I  dispose  of  my  public  property, 
without  bustle,  for  its  real  value,f  I  would  not  for  five  thousand  pounds  be  an  hire¬ 
ling  actor  under  any  man  but  yourself,  who  have  long  been  an  object  of  my  admira- 

*  1  imagine  it  to  be  his  comic  opera  of  “  The  Seraglio.”  Garrick  declined  it,  and  it  did  nothing  to  serve 
Covent- Garden  in  1776 — Ed. 

t  Mr.  King  was  proprietor  of  Sadler’s  Wells  Theatre  at  this  time. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


121 


tion  and  esteem,  and  will  for  ever  be  entitled  to  the  warmest  wishes  and  best 
services  of.  Your  devoted, 

Thos.  King. 

Pray  be  kind  enough.  Sir,  to  present  my  best  and  most  friendly  respects  to  Mrs 
Garrick. 

Sure  there  never  was  such  an  infernal  woman  as  Mrs.  Abington — she  has  been 
endeavouring  to  breed  a  misunderstanding  between  Vaughan  and  me  about  his  farce. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  King’s  letter  to  me  about  his  benefit.” 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Queen  Street,  Monday. 

My  servant  informs  me  that  you  told  him  I  put  you  all  in  confusion,  and  that  I 
should  have  mentioned  it  to  you  last  night :  how  could  I  mention  it  last  night,  when  I 
did  not  know  any  thing  of  it  myself  till  after  I  saw  you  at  the  house  this  morning, 
and  read  in  the  papers  that  the  Pantheon  was  put  off? 

I  beg  you  would  not  keep  me  in  suspense.  I  cannot  in  my  present  circumstances 
afford  to  lose  100/.  My  poor  family  are  all  in  tears  on  the  occasion. 

I  am,  Sir,  yours  in  the  greatest  anxiety, 

T.  Francklin. 


DR.  T.  FRANCKLIN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Queen  Street,  Tuesday  Morning. 

I  received  your  message,  and  prefer  Tuesday  to  Thursday  for  my  last  benefit. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

Tho.  Francklin. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday  Morning. 

Unfortunately  for  you,  a  passage  in  your  letter  provokes  a  reply — I  have 
seen  but  two  plays  in  the  course  of  this  season  :  one  of  them  was  your  “  Alexander 
the  Pig,”  when  I  was  afraid  the  farthing  candle  would  have  burnt  through  the  horn 
of  the  lantern  ;  the  other  wras  “  Zara,”  when  I  was  only  sorry  that  the  catastrophe  in 
the  fifth  act  was  not  in  earnest.  Covent-Garden  I  have  not  entered  ;  for  being 
indebted  to  Mr.  Harris’s  politeness  for  a  place  on  the  liberty-list,  (without  the  slightest 

it 


VOL.  II. 


private  correspondence  of 


199 

1  <w<w 

pretensions  of  my  own  to  an  exemption  from  paying  like  other  folks,)  I  should 
regard  myself  as  having  no  longer  a  right  to  speak  freely,  and  with  that  privilege 
the  better  part  of  my  amusement  would  be  lost.  I  should  however  add,  that  I 
suppose  I  owe  this  honourable  exclusion  to  our  friend  Mr.  Longman  ;  and  it  is 
easier  for  me  to  stay  away  from  any  theatre,  than  refuse  what  is  meant  as  an  act  of 
kindness  by  a  man  I  love.  You  should  know,  therefore,  I  can  only  speak  of  what 
I  can  see  without  restraint.  He  who  has  earned  the  liberty  of  a  playhouse,  has  not 
lost  his  own  ;  but  he  who  is  so  circumstanced  as  to  be  obliged  to  accept  it  as  a 
favour,  ties  up  his  opinion,  or  runs  the  hazard  of  being  called  ungrateful  by  those 
whose  oppressive  civilities  he  could  not  avoid.  That  your  new  medicine  may  restore 
you  to  the  stage  and  your  friends,  is  one  of  the  sincerest  wishes  of, 

Your  affectionate, 

G.  St E EVENS. 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Tuesday  Night. 

I  am  not  sorry  to  be  called  out  to  give  evidence  in  favour  of  old  Cibber.  The 
lines  about  which  you  inquire*  are  undoubtedly  his  own — at  least,  I  can  assure  you 
they  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  most  obscure  comer  of  any  of  Shakspeare’s  plays, 
nor  in  those  of  any  other  author  that  I  have  read.  Cibber  was  unsuccessful  in 
seriously  descriptive  poetry,  but  yet  he  might  have  had  a  lucid  interval. 

As  to  King  Richard  the  Second,  it  is  surely  the  most  uninteresting  and  flattest 
of  all  the  number.  A  few  splendid  passages  will  not  maintain  a  play  on  the  stage. 
For  my  own  part,  I  had  rather  see  any  of  the  parts  of  King  Henry  the  Fourth.  If 
you  revive  King  Richard,  I  beg  that  proper  regard  may  be  paid  to  old  puss  in  boots, f 
who  arrives  so  hastily  in  the  fifth  act.  Surely  Troilus  and  Cressida  would  do  more, 
if  it  were  well  clipped  and  doctored.  Quin  played  Thersites  with  success  ;  and  what 
has  once  pleased  may  please  again.  Your  Antony  and  Cleopatra  was  a  splendid 
performance  ;  but  you  were  out  of  love  with  it  because  it  afforded  you  few  oppor¬ 
tunities  of  showing  those  sharp  turns,  and  that  coachmanship  in  which  you  excel  all 
others.  Do  not  you  long  to  hear  the  roarings  of  the  old  lion,J  over  the  bleak  moun¬ 
tains  of  the  Korth  ?  Yours  most  sincerely, 

G.  Steevens. 

*  The  fine  soliloquy  upon  conscience  in  Cibber’s  “  Richard  the  Third,”  which  is,  in  fact,  written  up  to 
Shakspeare  himself.  A  lucid  interval  indeed! 

+  The  old  Duchess  of  York,  who  doubts  not  “  to  ride  as  fast  as  her  husband”  to  save  her  son,  and 
succeeds  with  Bolingbroke  by  earnest  and  very  dramatic  supplication. 

X  Dr.  Johnson,  then  in  Scotland. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


123 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sunday,  One  o’clock. 

Your  letter  being  sent  to  me  sealed  up,  prevented  my  receiving  it  till  this 
moment ;  had  your  commands  been  sent  open,  or  verbally,  they  would  have  reached 
me  in  three  hours.  It  is  now  too  late  for  me  to  appear  as  Benedick  in  the  Procession, 
as  I  never  undertook  any  thing  of  the  kind,  and  am  totally  unacquainted  with  the 
business.  I  would  do  much  to  secure  your  friendship  and  esteem,  but  at  the  same  time 
beg  to  assure  you  (and  I  hope  you  will  not  be  offended  at  it)  that  there  cannot  be  a 
situation  in  the  world,  either  on  or  off  the  stage,  that  would  be  more  irksome  to  me 
than  what  you  request.  You  may  perhaps  think  me  impertinent  in  my  objecting,  as 
you  yourself  condescend  to  do  it.  You,  Sir,  are  too  considerable  in  every  respect  to 
suffer  by  it ;  I  am  not ;  and  as  Mr.  King  is  already  concerned  in  the  “  Jubilee,”  it  can 
be  of  very  little  moment  to  him.  If  my  feelings  are  absurd,  I  hope  you  will  pardon 
them  ;  but  should  you  insist  on  my  compliance,  you  will  really  render  my  situation 
miserable.  I  am.  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  most  sincere  humble  servant, 

AY.  Smith. 


MR.  W.  WHITEHEAD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Mount-street,  Jan.  5th,  1776. 

I  am  most  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  your  letter :  the  only  motive  of  mine 
was  that  we  might  end  the  affair  explicitly  and  amicably.  It  would  have  given  me 
very  little  satisfaction  to  have  brought  on  a  play  under  your  direction,  which  you 
trembled  for  the  success  of.  Your  apprehensions  would  have  awakened  mine;  and 
the  whole  time  of  the  getting  it  up,  and  the  representation,  would  have  been  an  hu¬ 
miliating  scene  of  anxiety  which  I  should  not  wish  to  go  through. 

My  obligations  to  you  will  certainly  not  admit  of  any  coldness  on  my  side,  and 
I  hope  the  regard  you  so  obligingly  express  for  me  will  still  continue. 

Whenever  you  determine  to  rob  the  world  of  your  excellencies,  I  most  heartily 
wish  it  may  be  with  real  pleasure  and  advantage  to  yourself. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  sincerely. 

Endorsed,  AY.  WHITEHEAD. 

“  Mr.  Whitehead  about  his  tragedy.” 


DR.  J.  IIOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  DAVID  Manes,  Jan.  14th,  1  776. 

I  am  told  you  are  very  soon  to  bring  out  Ben  Jonson’s  “  Silent  A\  Oman.”  There 
few  things,  I  think,  worth  dropping  upon  paper  concerning  the  play,  which  I 

r  2 


are  a 


124 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


submit  to  your  consideration,  if  not  too  late.  I)o  not  slabber  over  the  principal  part, 
as  has  formerly  been  done.  I  hope  Mr.  King  performs  Old  Morose.  Though  not 
the  most  brilliant,  it  requires,  as  your  Kitely  does,  a  judicious  actor  and  a  good 
speaker  to  support  it,  through  so  much  action ,  or  rather  passion,  i.  e.  suffering.  I 
think,  also,  that  the  two  knights  are  enough  shamed  before  the  ladies  by  the  confes¬ 
sion  they  make  of  having  tasted  the  bride’s  favours.  For  that,  and  all  other  reasons 
in  the  world,  I  would  by  no  means  have  Epicene  acted  by  a  woman.  A  young 
smooth-face  certainly,  if  you  have  one  in  the  company ;  the  force  is  entirely  lost  by 
its  being  acted  by  a  woman.  Sex  is  so  strong  in  every  body’s  mind,  especially  of 
your  more  vulgar  hearers,  that  it  is  impossible  to  be  separated. 

To  resume.  Truewit  is  flat,  by  being  overdone  with  plot  and  mechanical  wit. 
I  would  cut  out  the  whole  almost  of  his  exploits  with  the  knights  to  prove  them 
cowards,  which  the  audience  know  before ;  and,  as  I  said,  they  are  exposed  enough  to 
their  ladies,  and  the  ladies  to  the  world  on  their  account,  by  their  confession  of  the 
bride’s  favours.  What  will  you  do  with  the  two  Doctors  of  law,  which  is  now  obso¬ 
lete,  but  they  make  such  fun,  that  I  would  let  them  stand,  as  well  as  Tom  Otter’s 
bull,  bear ,  and  horse.  They  are  all  good  pictures  of  the  times. 

I  have  read  the  play  lately,  and  with  attention ;  and  am  astonished  at  the  likeness 
to  Congreve’s  writings,  not  only  as  to  plot,  but  even  the  brilliancy  of  wit  and  con¬ 
versation.  The  first  act  is  as  witty,  as  natural,  nay,  as  easy,  as  any  modern  gentlemen 
upon  the  stage.  The  stiffness  of  Jonson  so  much  complained  of  is  almost  entirely 
laid  aside ;  and  the  introduction  of  the  audience  to  the  knowledge  of  his  characters  is 
admirable,  and,  what  is  more,  natural.  I  am  convinced  Jonson  was  Congreve’s  great 
stage-master,  and  not  his  own  observations  on  nature.  I  see  a  great  number  of  his 
characters  modernized  in  Congreve.  Bobadil  is  his  Noll  Bluff — Lady  Haughty  and 
her  (Coterie)  College  is  Lady  Wishfort  and  her  club — Fast.  Brisk,*  is  the  original  of 
his  fops  and  wits,  &c. 

Bon  Ton,  I  find,  I  remember :  I  think  it  was  acted  by  children,  and  shocked 
people  to  hear  such  sentiments  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings. 

Sir  John  Trotley’s  servant,  Davy,  is  too  like  Spy,  in  “  The  Rival  Candidates.” 
The  prologue  is  too  good,  and  anticipates  the  piece,  which  Colman  was  always 
against,  and  so  are  most  of  yours.  Another  theatrical  letter — and  so  I,  or  rather 
we.  are  your  humble  cum-dumble-dums. 

J.  and  E.  HoADLY.f 

*  Fastidius  Brisk.  A  character  in  “  Every  Man  out  of  his  Humour.” — Ed. 

+  Perhaps  the  best  specimen  of  Doctor  Hoadly’s  critical  talents.  Like  Lord  Camden,  he  had  discovered 
the  genius  of  Ben  Jonson,  and  saw  that  he  was  perhaps  the  only  faithful  painter  of  the  manners  of  his  own 
times.  In  Ben  Jonson  you  have  local  society.  Shakspeare,  to  use  Ben’s  own  language — 

“  Was  not  of  an  age,  but  for  all  time.” 

[Ed.] 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


125 


THE  RIGHT  HON.  R.  RIGBY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  DAVID,  Mistley,  Jan.  1 7th,  1 776. 

You  do  me  but  justice  in  thinking  that  I  have,  and  have  long  had,  a  very  sincere 
regard  for  you  :  you  shall  have  my  plaudit,  quit  your  theatrical  life  when  you  please, 
and  my  friendship  as  long  as  you  preserve  your  natural  one. 

I  do  not  know,  nor  you  neither,  till  you  have  tried  it,  how  you  will  relish  an  idle 
life,  who  have  been  always  used  to  a  most  active  one :  if  your  quitting  the  stage  will 
contribute  to  your  health,  that  is  the  first  consideration  ;  amusement  is  the  next,  and 
that  people  do  not  always  find  as  they  grow  older,  especially  those  who  have  been 
used  to  much  business. 

Public  applause,  in  your  situation  too,  is  something  to  part  with,  because  it  has 
been  obtained  by  your  own  merit.  But  I  have  great  faith  in  your’s  and  Mrs. 
Garrick’s  judgment  and  discretion,  and  therefore  shall  believe,  if  you  carry  this  pro¬ 
ject  into  execution,  you  have  chose  the  proper  time  for  doing  it. 

For  my  friend,  the  boroughmonger,  if  it  should  fall  in  my  way  to  be  of  service 
to  him,  I  shall  have  great  pleasure  in  publicly  marking  the  regard  I  privately  profess 
to  have  for  you. 

I  hope  Pott’s  searches  turned  out  to  both  your  satisfactions  :  I  have  had  the 
gout  searching  for  me  in  my  foot  for  some  days  past,  but  the  pain  is  gone,  and  has 
only  left  weakness  and  swelling  enough  behind  it  to  prevent  my  being  a  beau  garcon 
at  the  birth-day  to-morrow. 

I  beg  my  best  compliments  to  Madame  Garrick,  who  am,  dear  David, 

Your  very  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  RlCHAItD  RlGBY. 

“  Mr.  Rigby’s  most  friendly  letter 
in  answer  to  mine.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  SMITH* 

MY  DEAR  JOSEY,  Saturday  Evening. 

Lest  Vaillant  should  mistake  what  I  desired  him  to  say  to  you  and  your  better- 
half,  take  it,  my  dear  friend,  from  myself. 

If  the  weather  continues  fine,  we  are  advised  by  our  workmen  to  finish  our  house 
at  once,  which  will  oblige  us  to  open  one  part  of  it  and  retire  to  London  a  tveek 
before  our  time.  If  this  scheme  is  put  in  execution,  we  cannot  possibly  have  the 
pleasure  of  giving  you  and  Mrs.  Smith  a  bed  in  the  house,  but  we  can  give  you 
hearty  meals  with  a  heartier  welcome,  and  must  put  you  over  to  the  public-house  for 
your  nocturnal  incubations. 

Pray  will  you  let  Mr.  Vaillant  know  that  I  have  signed  the  papers  he  left  for  me, 
and  that  if  he  will  call  at  Hampton  to-morrow  at  breakfast,  I  will  pay  him  the 

*  The  Rev.  Mr.  Smith,  of  Stanmore,  Middlesex. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


126 

money  ?  It  will  not  be  much  out  of  his  way,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  him.  Let 
me  tell  you  once  more  with  the  greatest  sincerity,  that  I  am,  and  ever  shall  be, 

Your  zealous  friend  and  well-wisher, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  write  in  the  midst  of  company,  and  have  not  made  myself  intelligible. 


MEMORANDUM,  GARRICK  TO  SIR  W.  YOUNG. 

Jan.  10th,  1776. 

I  have  ventured  to  produce  “  Hamlet,”  with  alterations.  It  was  the  most  im¬ 
prudent  thing  I  ever  did  in  all  my  life  ;  but  I  had  sworn  I  would  not  leave  the 
stage  till  1  had  rescued  that  noble  play  from  all  the  rubbish  of  the  fifth  act.  I  have 
brought  it  forth  without  the  Grave-digger’s  trick  and  the  fencing-match.  rI  he  altera¬ 
tion  was  received  with  general  approbation,  beyond  my  most  warm  expectations. 

I  shall  play  “  Lear”  next  week,  and  “  Macbeth”  (perhaps)  in  the  old  dresses,  with 
new  scenes,  the  week  after  that,  and  then  exit  Roscius. 

I  wrote  a  farce,  called  “  The  Irish  AVidow,”  in  less  than  a  week. 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

sIR5  Bond-street,  Jan.  18th,  1776. 

I  did  not  hear  till  yesterday  that  you  had  been  indisposed. 

Allow  me  to  make  my  inquiries  for  your  health  in  this  way  ;  for,  believe  me,  a 
common  inquiry  would  do  injustice  to  my  sincere  anxiety  on  this  subject. 

For  God’s  sake,  remember  how  short  our  acquaintance  has  been,  and  in  justice  to 
me  live  these  fifty  years. 

Believe  me,  dear  Sir,  your  sincere  and  faithful  friend, 

R.  Tickell. 


MR.  R.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Ann-street,  Jan.  20th,  1776. 

The  manner  in  which  the  public  prints  announce  your  having  disposed  of  your 
patent,  confirmed  by  what  I  hear,  leaves  me  no  room  to  doubt  but  that  the  theatre 
has  lost  its  brightest  ornament.  The  moment,  therefore,  which  puts  my  sincerity 
beyond  the  reach  of  misconstruction  conveys  to  you  the  grateful  acknowledgments 
of  a  man,  who  fairly  owes  to  your  judgment  a  share  of  the  little  fame  he  has 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


127 


gathered  from  the  drama,  and  to  your  friendship  many  kind  and  obliging  offices, 
which  subsequent  misunderstandings  cannot  obliterate.  The  Muse  may  have  refine¬ 
ments  which  the  man  disclaims  :  while  you  continued  in  the  administration  of  the 
theatre,  I  should  have  continued  to  have  esteemed  you  without  telling  you  so ;  now 
that  you  have  quitted  your  vocation,  I  throw  off  my  reserve,  and  seize  the  first  op¬ 
portunity  of  wishing  you  all  possible  happiness,  and  assuring  you  that  I  am,  with 
real  affection,  dear  Sir,  Your  most  faithful  and  obliged  servant, 

Richard  Cumberland. 


MR.  J.  CLUTTERBUCK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Jan.  23rd.  1776. 

Joy  !  much  joy !  to  my  dear  Garrick  for  having  wound  up  his  bottom  so  wisely. 
You  have  made  a  retreat  as  glorious  as  that  of  Xenophon.  (Baldwin,  whom  I  believe 
you  have  seen  at  the  Grove  Coffee-house,  would  have  written  the  Greek  name  Zeno- 
phun  ;  because,  as  he  would  tell  you,  it  implies  being  merry  and  wise) ;  however,  I  most 
heartily  congratulate  you  upon  the  event,  and  thank  you  for  authenticating  the  news 
so  much  like  a  true  friend.  Only  let  me  caution  you  during  the  march  to  beware  of 
ambuscades ;  for  though  I  see  in  the  list  of  purchasers  four  names,  yet  such  is  my 
blindness,  I  do  not  perceive  one  Monsr.  Argent-Comptant,  whom  I  should  prefer  to 
all  the  rest;  though,  I  beg  Dr.  Ford’s  pardon,  perhaps  he  is  the  man,  and  not  know¬ 
ing  him  may  argue  myself  unknown.  I  doubly  rejoice,  because  now  you  may  have 
time  to  pursue  that  inestimable  treasure,  health,  and  provide  against  that  worst  of 
evils,  old  age,  which  I  am  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with.  The  vulgar  have  in 
many  places  a  notion,  that  whenever,  after  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog,  the  hydrophobia 
appears,  the  unhappy  patient,  by  virtue  of  an  act  of  parliament,  is  to  be  smothered 
between  two  feather  beds ;  and  if  so,  methinks  it  is  pity  that  the  act  were  not  ex¬ 
tended  to  paralytic  cases,  which  generally  leave  the  object  in  such  a  condition  as 
makes  it  cruelty  to  endeavour  at  a  prolongation  of  his  life.  But  gadso’,  1  forget  I  am 
writing  a  letter  of  felicitation,  and  that  therefore  the  Book  of  Lamentations  ought  to 
be  kept  shut;  yet  I  must  on,  and  tell  you  that  the  severe  weather  hath  embarrassed 
me  with  a  cough  of  a  long  continuance,  which  mars  my  sleep  and  blunts  my  appetite. 
My  dearest  Molly,  you  may  be  sure,  takes  the  lead  of  me  in  suffering,  and  the  frosty 
weather  almost  kills  her ;  however,  she  partakes  in  your  success,  and  sends  her  kindest 
love  to  both  of  you. 

We  are  much  nearer  to  Bath  than  when  at  the  place  I  last  dated  from,  yet  have 
not  had  any  communication  there  since  the  third  instant.  Your  letter  of  the  18th, 
which  I  did  not  by  reason  of  the  roads  receive  till  yesterday,  goes  to  Sharpe  by  the 
same  messenger  who  brings  this  to  the  post-house.  But  whether  he,  his  three 
daughters,  Captain  Porklington  and  his  little  girl  Pop,  and  Dan.  Bayne,  with  all  of 
whom  I  dined  this  day  three  weeks,  be  alive  or  no,  is  to  me  quite  problematical ; 


128 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  return  of  my  envoy  will,  I  hope,  bring  some  certainty  to  your  and  my  dearest 
Madam’s  ever  obliged  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

James  Clutterbuck. 

Love  and  wishes  of  many  happy  new  years  attend  on  ye  all. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  friend  Clutterbuck  upon  the 
sale  of  my  patent.” 


MRS.  C.  CLIVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  Slit  Twickenham,  Jan.  23rd,  17/6. 

Is  it  really  true,  that  you  have  put  an  end  to  the  glory  of  Drury-lane  theatre  ? 
if  it  is  so ,  let  me  congratulate  my  dear  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  on  their  approaching 
happiness:  I  know  what  it  will  be;  you  cannot  yet  have  an  idea  of  it;  but  if  you 
should  still  be  so  wicked  not  to  be  satisfied  with  that  unbounded,  uncommon  degree 
of  fame  you  have  received  as  an  actor,  and  which  no  other  actor  ever  did  receive — 
nor  no  other  actor  ever  can  receive ; — I  say,  if  you  should  still  long  to  be  dipping 
your  fingers  in  their  theatrical  pudding  (now  without  plums),  you  will  be  no 
Garrick  for  the  Pivy. 

In  the  height  of  the  public  admiration  for  you,  when  you  were  never  mentioned 
with  any  other  appellation  but  the  Garrick,  the  charming  man,  the  fine  fellow, 
the  delightful  creature,  both  by  men  and  ladies ;  when  they  were  admiring  every 
thing  you  did,  and  every  thing  you  scribbled, — at  this  very  time,  I,  the  Pivy,  was  a 
living  witness  that  they  did  not  know,  nor  could  they  be  sensible,  of  half  your  per¬ 
fections.  I  have  seen  you,  with  your  magical  hammer  in  your  hand,  endeavouring  to 
beat  your  ideas  into  the  heads  of  creatures  who  had  none  of  their  own — I  have  seen 
you,  with  lamb-like  patience,  endeavouring  to  make  them  comprehend  you ;  and  I 
have  seen  you,  when  that  could  not  be  done — I  have  seen  your  lamb  turned  into  a 
lion :  by  this  your  great  labour  and  pains  the  public  was  entertained ;  they  thought 
they  all  acted  very  fine, — they  did  not  see  you  pull  the  wires. 

There  are  people  now  on  the  stage  to  whom  you  gave  their  consequence ;  they 
think  themselves  very  great ;  now  let  them  go  on  in  their  new  parts  without  your 
leading-strings,  and  they  will  soon  convince  the  world  what  their  genius  is ;  I  have 
always  said  this  to  every  body,  even  when  your  horses  and  mine  were  in  their  high¬ 
est  prancing.  While  I  was  under  your  control,  I  did  not  say  half  the  fine  things  I 
thought  of  you,  because  it  looked  like  flattery  ;  and  you  know  your  Pivy  was  always 
proud  :  besides,  I  thought  you  did  not  like  me  then  ;  but  now  I  am  sure  you  do, 
which  makes  me  send  you  this  letter. 

What  a  strange  jumble  of  people  they  have  put  in  the  papers  as  the  purchasers 
of  the  patent !  I  thought  I  should  have  died  with  laughing  when  I  saw  a  man-mid¬ 
wife  amongst  them  :  I  suppose  they  have  taken  him  in  to  prevent  miscarriages ! 
1  have  some  opinion  of  Mr.  Sheridan,  as  I  hear  every  body  say  he  is  very  sensible ; 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


129 


then  he  has  a  divine  wife,  and  I  loved  his  mother  dearly.  Pray  give  my  love  to  my 
dear  Mrs.  Garrick  ;  we  all  join  in  that.  Your  Jemmy  is  out  of  his  wits  with  joy  and 
grief ;  he  rejoices  at  your  escape,  and  cries  from  wanting  to  make  his  own  to  Lon¬ 
don  ;  it  is  dreadful  here,  but  I  believe  it  is  much  worse  there.  Pray  send  me  a  line 
to  let  me  know  how  you  do,  and  how  the  world  goes,  for  we  are  rather  dull,  though 
my  neighbours  do  pick  their  way  to  come  and  see  me.  I  have  since  the  snow  been 
once  out  in  my  carriage  ;  did  you  not  hear  me  scream  ? 

Now  let  me  say  one  word  about  my  poor  unfortunate  friend  Miss  Pope  :  I  know 
how  much  she  disobliged  you  ;  and  if  I  had  been  in  your  place,  I  believe  I  should 
have  acted  just  as  you  did.  But,  by  this  time,  I  hope  you  have  forgot  your  resent¬ 
ment,  and  will  look  upon  her  late  behaviour  as  having  been  taken  with  a  dreadful 
fit  of  vanity,  which  for  that  time  took  her  senses  from  her,  and  having  been  tutored 
by  an  affected  beast,  who  helped  to  turn  her  head  ;  but  pray  recollect  her  in  the  other 
light,  a  faithful  creature  to  you,  on  whom  you  could  always  depend,  certainly  a  good 
actress,  amiable  in  her  character,  both  in  her  being  a  very  modest  woman,  and  very 
good  to  her  family ;  and,  to  my  certain  knowledge,  has  the  greatest  regard  for  you. 
Now,  my  dear  Mr.  Garrick,  I  hope  it  is  not  yet  too  late  to  reinstate  her  before  you 
quit  your  affairs  there ;  I  beg  it,  I  entreat  it ;  I  shall  look  upon  it  as  the  greatest 
favour  you  can  confer  on  your  Ever  obliged  friend, 

C.  Clive. 


Endorsed, 

“  My  Pivy,  excellent  !”* 


MR.  G.  STEEVENS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Hampstead,  Jan.  26th,  1776. 

“  Evermore  thanks,  th’  exchequer  of  the  poor,”  as  Shakspeare  says,  and  I  am  sure 
I  shall  not  try  to  express  the  same  thought  in  better  language. 

Since  I  wrote  to  you  last,  I  discovered  within  the  case  of  your  catalogue  the 
enclosed  testimonies  to  Mr.  Hawkins’s  having  borrowed  the  book.  I  have  returned 
them,  lest  you  should  want  evidence  to  justify  your  claim  to  it  whenever  it  is  found. 
I  assure  you,  the  volume  in  question  is  invaluable  to  a  literary  antiquarian. 

Mr.  Bryant’s  book  has  deprived  me  of  a  great  part  of  my  rest  for  these  two  nights 
past.  The  mass  of  learning  which  he  has  wrested  to  his  purpose  is  truly  astonish¬ 
ing  ;  but  I  hope  he  will  never  meddle  with  Shakspeare  ;  for  the  man  who  can  prove 
a  dragon  to  have  been  no  more  than  an  enclosed  garden,  and  a  Cyclop  only  a  watch- 
tower,  could  with  equal  ease  convert  King  Lear  into  a  cross  old  shock-dog,  or  turn 
Macbeth  into  a  roll  of  brimstone.  If  such  a  writer,  in  a  future  age,  should  undertake 

*  It  is,  in  truth,  every  way  excellent.  I  may  be  allowed,  however,  to  admire  most  her  steady  friendship 
for  Miss  Pope,  whom  she  thus  aided  from  first  to  last.  That  excellent  actress  was  replaced  in  her  situation 
at  Drury-lane,  and  continued  there,  zealous,  useful,  respected,  and  admired,  to  the  close  of  her  labours,  on 
the  2Cth  of  May,  1808. — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


s 


130 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


your  history,  God  knows  what  lie  might  prove  you  to  have  been,  or  whether  he  would 
allow  that  you  ever  existed  at  all.  I  should  not  wonder,  were  he  to  assert  you  to 
have  been  the  very  Serpent  concpiered  by  Cadmus,  and  that  from  your  teeth  (when 
they  were  sown)  the  present  crop  of  actors  was  raised ;  a  fact  which  none  of  us  are 
likely  to  support  by  any  concurrent  testimonies  we  may  chance  to  leave  behind  us. 
Mr.  Bryant’s,  however,  is  a  most  truly  respectable  performance,  both  on  account  of 
its  [learning  and  its]  audacity ;  and  though  I  cannot  consent  to  forget  Polyphemus 
as  a  giant,  or  give  up  my  belief  in  the  Argonautic  expedition,  he  is  justly  entitled  to 
every  commendation  that  can  be  bestowed  on  his  undertaking. 

Can  you  wonder  that  Tom*  should  prove  your  enemy,  after  you  had  afforded  him 
so  gross  a  provocation  ?  A  proud  man,  who  has  a  heart  averse  to  honest  obligations, 
will  generally  hate  the  person  who  has  had  it  in  his  power  to  serve  him.  I  once  lent 
an  intimate  friend  500/.  ;  the  consequence  was,  that  from  that  instant  I  lost  my 
friend ;  a  very  fit  prologue  to  the  loss  of  half  my  money,  which  has  happened  since. 

I  beg  I  may  see  his  letters,  for  it  is  not  impossible  but  I  may  be  able  to  assist 
your  future  discoveries.  Your  favour,  which  is  dated  on  Friday  last,  did  not  reach 
me  till  this  morning.  Your  servant  never  puts  your  letters  into  the  General  Pennv 
Post,  but  leaves  them  at  some  chandler’s  shop,  or  other  receiving  house. 

I  got  the  poor  girl  off  at  Hicks’s  Hall  on  the  Saturday  before  last.  Mr.  Lucas, 
the  counsel,  discovered  such  an  irregularity  in  Sir  John  Fielding’s  proceeding,  that 
she  was  acquitted  without  trial,  and  was  above  threescore  miles  distant  from  this  place 
before  night. 

If  Anti-mendax  is  Tom  D.  I  hope  you  will  give  him  a  trimming.  The  first  time 
I  am  in  town,  I  will  have  recourse  to  a  file  of  newspapers  for  a  sight  of  his  per¬ 
formances.  I  am  most  truly,  your  much  obliged, 

G.  Steevens. 

P.  S.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  repeated  remarks  in  favour  of  our  late 
publication ;  but,  to  say  the  truth,  the  errors  of  Warburton  and  Johnson  are  often 
more  meritorious  than  such  corrections  of  them  as  the  obscure  industry  of  Mr.  Farmer 
and  myself  can  furnish.  Disdaining  crutches,  they  have  sometimes  had  a  fall ;  but 
it  is  my  duty  to  remember,  that  I,  for  my  own  part,  could  not  have  kept  on  my  legs 
at  all  without  them. 

When  do  you  expect  an  attack  from  Lincoln’s  Inn  ? 


MISS  POPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

snq  Dublin,  Jan.  28,  1776. 

As  every  interested  view  is  at  an  end  between  us,  from  your  having  relinquished 
the  theatre,  what  I  shall  say  cannot  be  deemed  flattery,  but  you  will  permit  me  with 
the  rest  of  your  admirers  to  lament  that  event  exceedingly,  and  to  think  with  the 

*  Thomas  Davies,  the  Bookseller. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


131 


lovers  of  the  stage  that  you  have  been  the  father  of  it,  the  protector,  and  have  brought 
it  to  that  perfection  in  which  we  now  see  it,  and  of  which  you  alone  was  capable. 
I  am  not  sorry  this  was  my  year  of  banishment,  since  it  would  have  given  me  much 
greater  pain  to  have  been  present ;  and  though  small  was  the  fault  which  caused  our 
separation,  and  severe  the  penalty,  yet  believe  me  you  never  had  a  sincerer  votary. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

J.  Pope. 


MR.  T.  LINLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Jan.  29th,  1776. 

My  heart  tells  me  I  ought  not  to  defer  acknowledging,  and  thanking  you  most 
sincerely  for  the  friendship  you  have  shown  to  me  and  Sheridan,  in  permitting  us  to 
purchase  a  part  of  your  share  in  the  patent  of  Drury-lane  Theatre. 

The  loss  to  be  sustained  by  the  public,  by  your  quitting  the  stage,  will  be  truly 
felt,  but  cannot  justly  be  described  ;  no  person,  I  may  boldly  say,  will  ever  appear 
after  you,  but  with  diminished  lustre.  You  are  a  centre  star  of  glory  on  this  stage 
of  the  world ;  and  that  you  may  long  shine  a  light  to  us  that  walk  in  darkness, 
and  then  retire  but  to  “  new  trick  your  beams  and  flame  in  the  forehead  of  the  morn¬ 
ing  sky”  of  the  next,  is  the  sincere  wish  and  prayer  of 

Your  ever  obedient  and  most  devoted  humble  servant, 

Thomas  Linley. 

I  shall  be  in  town  in  about  ten  days,  and  you  may  depend  upon  my  punctuality 
in  fulfilling  my  part  of  the  engagement  betwixt  us.  I  beg  my  best  respects  to  Mrs. 
Garrick  and  your  brother. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Linley’s  letter  to  me  upon  the  purchase 
of  my  share  in  Drury-lane.” 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Half-past  one  o’clock,  Jan.  29,  1  776. 

I  am  in  haste  to  thank  you  for  your  very  obliging  note :  I  shall  be  very  happy 
to  see  you  on  Wednesday  or  Thursday  morning  between  nine  and  ten  o’clock:  half- 
an-hour’s  conversation  with  you,  as  often  as  you  can  afford  to  give  me  that  plea¬ 
sure,  will  be  as  cheering  and  refreshing  to  my  mind,  after  the  many  melancholy 
and  dreary  memorials  and  reports  it  passes  through,  as  a  fall  of  water,  or  a  grove 
of  trees  must  be  to  a  caravan  passing  over  the  Great  Desert  to  Bussorah.  I  honour 
you  much  for  your  idea  of  establishing  and  securing  the  fund  for  your  invalids  of 
the  stage.  I  feel  with  all  the  world  much  regret  that  you  must  leave  it.  But  that 
you  may  leave  it  with  every  possible  satisfaction,  and  that  your  retreat  may  be  as 

s  2 


1 32 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


graceful  as  all  the  exits  and  entrances  which  you  have  ever  made  since  you  trod 
it,  is  my  very  sincere  wish  ;  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  contribute  my  assistance  to 
the  execution  of  the  plan  you  propose,  if,  upon  farther  consideration,  we  think  it 
can  be  brought  to  bear.  Lord  North  will  be  much  inclined  to  promote  whatever 
you  desire  to  be  done.  Lady  Cooper  is  much  mortified  that  her  festive  engagement 
prevents  her  from  visiting  “  Sir  Anthony”  to-night.  But  if  you  play  either  that  or 
any  other  part,  she  begs  to  have  a  box  for  Friday  night.  We  join  in  our  best  com¬ 
pliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  Ever  yours  most  faithfully, 

Endorsed,  GrEY  COOPER.* 

“  Sir  Grey  Cooper  about  the  Act  of  Parliament, 

Jan.  1776.” 


MR.  T.  GRIST  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  AND  HONOURED  SIR,  Norwich,  Jan.  29,  1776. 

This  post  brought  me  your  kind  favour,  and  permit  me,  Sir,  with  a  heart  full  of 
gratitude,  to  return  you  my  most  sincere  thanks  for  your  great  and  unmerited  good¬ 
ness  to  me.  Every  body  here  is  under  real  concern  on  having  the  disagreeable  news 
of  your  quitting  the  theatre  confirmed.  How  much  more,  then,  must  I  feel  who 
thought  myself  so  interested  in  your  continuance  in  it ;  but  I  experienced  enough  to 
convince  me  I  shall  meet  with  your  protection,  as  long  as  I  continue  to  deserve  it. 
Your  kind  letter,  Sir,  has  encouraged  me  to  solicit  your  interest  with  the  gentlemen 
who  have  purchased  your  share  in  my  favour ;  as  a  situation  in  Drury -lane  house  is 
far  more  eligible,  and  would  be  more  satisfactory  to  me  and  my  friends,  than  in  any 
part  of  the  kingdom.  If  by  your  interest,  Sir,  I  could  procure  an  engagement  in 
Drury-lane  on  such  terms  as  you  think  I  deserve,  it  would  make  me  happy.  I 
think,  Sir,  as  I  am  now  at  Norwich,  it  would  be  best  to  remain  here  for  this  season  ; 
as  by  that  means  I  shall  be  better  studied  at  my  return  to  town.  You  will  be 
pleased,  good  Sir,  to  consider  this  matter  for  me ;  and  if  any  thing  can  be  done,  I 
humbly  hope  for  the  favour  of  another  letter  from  you  when  convenient.  Mr. 
Griffiths  pays  his  respects  to  you,  Sir.  As  my  poor  wishes  are  all  I  have  to  offer  in 
return  for  your  great  goodness  to  me,  it  is  my  sincere  and  constant  prayer  that  it  will 
please  Almighty  God  to  continue  you  and  your  good  lady  in  health  and  happiness 
for  many  years  to  come  in  this  world,  and  crown  you  with  everlasting  felicity  in  the 
next.  I  am,  honoured  Sir,  your  most  humble 

(Though  at  present  sorrowful)  servant, 
Eodorsed’  Tho.  Gkist. 

“  Mr.  Grist,  actor.” 

*  sir  Grey  Cooper  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  elegant  writers  and  most  accomplished  gen¬ 
tlemen  of  his  time.  There  is  a  mild,  unaffected  beauty  in  the  comparison  of  the  great  desert  with  the 
melancholy  and  dreary  memorials  before  the  treasury,  which  will  strike  every  reader  of  taste,  and  feeling, 
and  memory.— Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


133 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  HOPKINS. 


SIR, 


Tuesday,  three  o’clock,  January  30th,  1776. 


You  will  be  pleased  to  let  the  manager  know  that  I  am  ill  (though  I  thank  God 
I  have  not  lost  the  use  of  my  limbs  as  he  has  been  pleased  to  tell  the  public) ;  but  I 
am  too  ill  to  attempt  to  perform  to-morrow  night.  My  friends  will  take  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  thanking  Mr.  Garrick  for  his  humanity  and  civility  to  me,  which  you  will 
have  the  goodness  to  tell  him,  and  that  I  am  his  Most  humble  servant, 

F.  Abington. 


Endorsed  by  Hopkins, 

“  Received  this  letter  ten  minutes  before  5.” 


MR.  HOPKINS  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 

MADAM,  Tuesday  Night,  January  30th,  1776. 

I  sent  your  letter  to  Mr.  Garrick,  who  ordered  me  to  inform  you  that  he  told 
no  more  than  your  servant  delivered ;  and  that  he  will  both  answer  your  letter  and 
your  friends  at  a  proper  time. 

As  to  the  part  of  Lady  Fanciful,  both  Mr.  Garrick  and  myself  have  been  in¬ 
formed  that  you  said  you  never  intended  to  perform  it  again. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

William  Hopkins. 


MR.  R.  Y.  WALSINGHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Tuesday  Evening,  Feb.  1 776. 

The  receipt  of  yours  has  relieved  me  from  a  state  of  great  anxiety,  for  many 
reasons,  and  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  it. 

I  got  a  cut  in  my  hand  last  night,  by  wrenching  a  knife  from  a  fellow,  who,  I 
believe,  was  pursuing  one  of  your  people ;  and  whilst  I  Avas  wrapping  it  up,  the 
door-keeper  said  he  hoped  I  would  intercede  with  Mr.  Garrick,  for  he  was  threatened 
to  be  turned  out,  for  admitting  me  (emphatically) ;  on  which  I  asked  him  if  he  meant 
me  in  particular,  he  said  yes.  I  own  I  felt  hurt  at  this  to  a  great  degree,  which  occa¬ 
sioned  the  trouble  I  gave  you  this  morning.  I  am  sure  the  man  meant  me  no  offence, 
for  what  he  said  was  spoke  with  great  civility,  and  he  seemed  greatly  alarmed  at  his 
own  situation.  It  is  very  possible  your  brother  might  have  reproved  him,  but  lie  said 
Mr.  Garrick,  which  I  concluded  was  you. 

I  really  shall  be  very  unhappy  if  the  man  is  discharged ;  therefore  you  will  oblige 
me  greatly  by  forgiving  him. 


134 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  enclose  you  a  letter  I  received  just  now,  which,  as  a  well-wisher  of  his,  I  am  sure 
will  give  you  pleasure. 

I  beg  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  am, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  bumble  servant, 

R.  Y.  Walsingham. 

Excuse  baste. 


MR.  R.  Y.  WALSINGHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Twelve  o’clock,  Feb.  1776. 

If  you  call  on  me  before  we  have  a  four  o’clock  appointment  in  Portugal-street, 
I  shall  not  take  it  friendly,  as  such  I  claim  and  wish  to  improve  your  acquaintance ; 
I  had  an  idea  of  calling  last  night,  but  I  was  apprehensive  I  might  have  interrupted 
you,  and  declined  it. — He  was  a  most  ill-looking  and  determined  scoundrel ;  he  at¬ 
tempted  drawing  it  through  my  hand,  but  I  seized  his  elbow  first  and  prevented  him, 
and  paid  him  the  compliment  he  intended  for  me,  which  my  ruffles  can  testify :  in 
the  scuffle  I  got  a  cut  in  my  finger,  which  will  be  well  in  a  day  or  two  :  God  knows 
what  mischief  he  might  have  done,  for  the  expression  of  “  I  will  cut  his  liver  out,” 
first  drew  my  attention — the  lights  were  putting  out  at  this  time,  and  in  the  dark 
and  confusion  he  got  away  from  me.  I  will  call  on  you  some  morning  about  ten, 
which  I  think  is  your  breakfast  hour,  or  perhaps  this  evening. 

I  lament  your  gout,  and  wish  most  sincerely  you  could  (for  the  benefit  of  your 
friends)  transmit  it,  and  whatever  else  you  please,  to  whoever  else  you  please. 

Yours  very  sincerely, 

R.  Y.  Walsingham. 


MR.  R.  Y.  WALSINGHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Portugal-street,  Feb.  6th,  1776. 

I  find  myself  under  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  doing  two  things  I  should  wish 
to  avoid  ;  asking  you  a  favour ,  and  making  you  an  apology.  The  first  is,  that  you 
will  be  so  good  as  to  pardon  the  stage-door  keeper  for  admitting  me  last  night.  The 
next  is  to  assure  you,  my  motive  was  founded  on  friendship,  for,  as  I  saw  the  riot 
was  greatly  extending,  I  thought  the  appearance  of  gentlemen  in  that  part  of  the 
house  might  have  prevented  mischief,  (which  I  fortunately  did ;)  but  when  your  ser¬ 
vant  delivered  your  commands  to  me,  I  left  it  as  an  intruder,  which  I  might  sooner 
have  discovered,  had  I  not  imputed  it  to  your  anxiety. 

As  this  requires  neither  answer  nor  apology,  I  must  request  you  to  destroy  it  as  soon 
as  you  have  read  it ;  for  I  am  as  unwilling  to  be  the  topic  of  theatrical  conversation, 
as  I  shall  be  ever  to  interfere  on  a  similar  occasion. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

R.  Y.  Walsingham. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


135 


MR.  W.  WOODFALL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  February,  1776. 

I  have  heard  from  more  than  one  quarter,  that  you  think  I  have  showed  some¬ 
thing  nearer  to  rancour  than  necessary  impartiality  respecting  “  The  Blackamoor,” 
which  has  given  you  so  much  unnecessary  trouble.  Were  it  not  now  well  known  that 
you  will  soon  quit  the  theatre,  I  should  be  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  attempt  an 
explanation  ;  but  I  am  ever  eager  to  clear  up  the  doubts  of  the  private  gentleman  as  I 
am  resolute  in  disdaining  the  least  resemblance  of  submission  to  the  manager.  You 
cannot,  Mr.  Garrick,  but  know  that,  as  the  printer  of  the  Morning  Chronicle,  I  am 
the  servant  of  the  public — their  message  carrier — their  mouth-piece.  As  far  as  con¬ 
cerned  myself,  (although  on  that  head  I  should  surely  stand  excused  if  I  were  silent,) 
I  was  most  cold  and  cautious  respecting  the  piece.  The  first  day  after  its  appearance, 
I  stood  aloof,  as  my  friends  tell  me,  to  a  fault ;  the  second  day,  I  was  under  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  coming  nearer  the  point,  and  even  then  I  spoke  an  unwilling  language,  although 
I  was  forced  either  to  lose  my  character  for  impartiality,  or  to  confess  that  it  was  ob¬ 
vious  the  piece  was  recited  before  a  packed  jury.  On  the  Saturday  evening,  the 
party  of  the  author  did  not  content  themselves  with  ill-language  and  hard  words,  but 
fell  to  hard  blows.  I  myself  narrowly  escaped  being  murdered,  and  some  persons,  as 
you  are  by  this  time  doubtless  well  acquainted,  rue  to  this  hour  the  conflict  of  that 
evening.  As  a  person  who  dares  insolently  profess  himself  a  kind  of  self-created 
guardian  of  the  theatres,  it  was  official  in  me,  not  only  to  notice,  but  loudly  to  repro¬ 
bate,  a  conduct  which  was  neither  consonant  with  the  necessary  decorum  of  a  school 
of  morality,  nor  likely  to  encrease  either  the  entertainment  or  the  safety  of  the  public. 
But  even  here,  restrained  by  my  partiality  for  you,  I  wrote  a  half  serious  and  half 
jesting  description  of  what  passed.  After  that  description  was  sent  into  the  printing- 
house,  I  received  what  appeared  last  Monday  under  the  title  of  “  Theatrical  Intelli¬ 
gence  Extraordinary,”  from  a  very  old  and  a  very  valuable  correspondent  of  my 
paper ; — to  have  refused  it  admittance  where  the  subject  so  fairly  warranted  the  manner 
and  matter,  would  have  been  at  once  a  personal  insult,  and  a  direct  violation  of  my 
repeatedly  boasted  impartialit}r.  I  gave  it  place  in  compliance  with  the  rule  of  conduct 
I  Had  long  since  established  as  the  etiquette  of  the  Morning  Chronicle,  and  it  was  not, 
by  many,  the  first  occasion  on  which  I  had  sacrificed  my  private  feelings  to  my  pro¬ 
fessional  integrity.  What  followed  afterwards  ?  There  was  a  disturbance  at  the 
theatre  on  Monday  evening ;  I  gave  an  account  of  it  on  Tuesday.  Did  I  exaggerate 
a  tittle  of  what  passed  ?  On  the  contrary — did  I  not  rather  take  the  side  of  the 
manager  and  author  ?  Tuesday  brought  me  loads  of  letters  reprobating  you  and  the 
author  in  the  severest  terms.  If  I  had  been  rancorously  inclined  to  either,  could  I 
not  have  put  you  both  to  daily  torture  ?  But  was  this  my  conduct  ?  I  selected  one 
letter  from  the  many,  and  rejected  all  the  rest.  Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  the  mode  of 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


13(> 

rejection  was  severe.  I  own  it ;  I  meant  that  it  should  appear  so.  It  wras  necessary, 
for  the  preservation  of  my  own  character,  that  it  should  not  seem  as  if  the  rejection 
arose  from  partiality — it  was  clearly  incumbent  upon  me  to  show  no  favour ;  and  it 
was,  I  presume,  for  that  reason,  justifiable  to  give  one  cut  myself,  rather  than  suffer 
you  to  run  the  gauntlet  through  a  long  range  of  envenomed-whipped  scribblers. 

That  such  displeased  correspondents  were  not  confined  merely  to  my  paper,  is 
evident  from  my  brother’s  answer  to  several  writers,  who  took  up  the  subject  in  the 
same  manner.  You  are,  without  doubt,  a  man  of  great  genius  and  ability  ;  but,  like  all 
other  triumphant  heroes,  you  are  surrounded  with  interested  flatterers,  and  serious  truth 
so  rarely  meets  your  ear,  that  it  comes  with  an  unwelcome  sound.  No  man  admires, 
no  man  reveres  you  more  than  I  do :  be  it  my  post,  like  the  person  placed  behind  the 
victor  in  a  Roman  triumph,  to  cry  out  “  Remember  thou  art  but  a  man.”  I  love 
sincerity,  and  perhaps  I  sacrifice  too  much  at  its  shrine.  Re  that  as  it  may,  I  shall 
still  speak  the  honest  truth,  and,  in  spite  of  every  opposing  cause,  shall  continue,  like 
the  flappers  of  Laputa,  to  remind  great  men  of  their  foibles. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  WlLLIAM  AVOODFALL.* 

“  Mr.  Woodfall’s  two  letters  to  me.” 


MR.  W.  WOODFALL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

13EA11  SIR,  Dorset-street,  Salisbury-court,  Feb.  13th,  1776. 

You  and  I  stand  nearly  on  the  same  ground  with  regard  to  hurry  and  business. 
I  believe  you  to  be  much  engaged,  and  I  trust  you  will  take  it  for  granted  I  am  not 
a  man  of  leisure.  If  I  mistake,  we  are  both  involved  in  error ;  and  to  a  man  who 
thinks  me  worth  his  confidence,  I  will  at  least  endeavour  to  remove  the  cloud.  I 
neither  did  heretofore,  nor  do  now,  arraign  your  conduct  respecting  “  The  Blacka¬ 
moor.”  Knowing  something  of  the  wood  and  wire-work,  I  certainly  felt  the  prin¬ 
ciple  (and  the  justification  of  the  principle)  on  which  you  acted;  but  my  experience 
could  not  be  imparted  to  my  correspondents.  I  acted  against  you,  not  as  Air. 
AA'oodfall,  who  honours  and  respects  you,  but  as  the  printer  of  the  Morning  Chro¬ 
nicle,  who  ought  to  know,  to  hear,  to  see — not  through  his  own  organs,  but  those  of 
his  correspondents.  I  have  already,  clearly,  as  I  conceive,  pointed  out  the  line  I  took 
myself  as  a  scribbler ;  there  partiality  might  operate  unobserved,  and  there  it  had 
its  force.  As  the  conductor  of  a  public  paper,  a  very  different  mode  was  neces¬ 
sary  to  be  followed — it  was  not  the  object,  what  Air.  AAroodfall  would  wish  to  print 
against  his  friend  Mr.  Garrick,  but  how  far  the  editor  of  the  Alorning  Chronicle  found 

*  A  very  sufficient  reply  to  the  hint  of  subserviency  in  Goldsmith’s  poem  of  Retaliation.  Woodfall  had 
much  greater  talent  than  was  generally  supposed ;  but  he  steadily  devoted  himself  to  the  unparalleled 
drudgery  of  the  daily  press,  having  written  considerably  more  than  any  man  of  his  time ;  and,  as  a  reporter, 
been  at  all  events  the  clear  amber,  in  which  the  more  splendid  characters  of  the  age  were  enshrined. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


137 


it  absolutely  necessary  to  go  to  save  his  character  for  theatrical  impartiality — a  cha¬ 
racter,  by  the  by,  which  is  the  very  basis  of  the  paper. 

A  man  of  your  perception  will  surely  see  that  this  distinction  is  by  no  means 
sophistical ;  but  that  it  is  proper,  that  it  is  warrantable,  and,  what  is  more,  that  it 
is  indispensable.  Give  me  leave  to  say  you  were  deceived,  egregiously  deceived, 
when  you  heard  “  The  Blackamoor”  went  off  with  applause  on  the  Saturday  evening, 
till  Roper  and  his  friends  grew  turbulent.*  In  defiance  of  every  informant  who 
spoke  to  you  on  the  subject,  in  defiance  of  the  whole  green-room,  I  assert,  positively 
assert,  that  it  was  much  hissed  throughout  the  first  act.  I  was  myself  in  the  gallery, 
and  as  I  make  it  an  invariable  rule  either  to  applaud  or  be  silent,  I  listened  atten¬ 
tively,  and  can  rely  on  the  evidences  of  my  senses  on  the  occasion.  Again  you  are 
wrong  in  saying  there  were  many  cards  or  letters  in  Monday’s  paper,  to  exasperate 
the  audience  against  you.  There  was  only  one  letter  (beside  the  “  Theatrical  Intelli¬ 
gence  Extraordinary,”)  which  at  all  tended  to  criminate  you ;  and  although  I  solemnly 
declare  I  am  the  author  of  neither  the  letter  nor  the  intelligence,  I  confess  that  from 
the  face  of  matters  in  the  theatre,  I  even  now,  in  a  moment  of  coolness  and  consi¬ 
deration,  think  that  both  were  justifiable. 

I  thank  you,  most  heartily  thank  you,  for  the  openness  and  candour  with  which 
your  letter  is  written ;  and  in  perfect  unison  of  mind  I  declare,  that  I  am  the  last 
man  in  the  world  who  would,  at  hap-hazard,  print  an  accusation  merely  because 
I  knew  I  had  it  in  my  power  to  wipe  it  off  by  a  next  day’s  reply.  I  act,  or  at  least 
endeavour  to  act,  on  a  much  more  liberal  principle.  I  think  I  see  a  strong  necessity 
for  my  appearing  to  be  unbiassed  as  the  Morning  Chronicle  printer :  in  conformity 
to  that  vision,  I  frequently  (as  I  said  in  my  last  letter)  sacrifice  my  private  feelings ; 
but,  for  God’s  sake !  while  I  am  doing  an  act  of  necessary  insensibility,  do  not  sup¬ 
pose  I  am  governed  by  so  mean  a  motive  as  personal  enmity.  For  what  should  I  be 
your  enemy  ?  I  held  you  at  a  distance,  if  I  may  use  the  phrase,  till  I  found  my 
endeavours  to  raise  myself  on  the  ground-work  of  universal  but  not  illiberal  censure 
successful.  I  have  not  since  even  whispered  a  word  of  ill-nature.  You  have  lately 
loaded  me  with  favours  ;  as  an  ill-return,  you  certainly  merit  my  resentment ;  but  I 
flatter  myself,  such  seeds  give  rise  to  very  different  fruit  when  sown  in  my  soil. 

The  observation  about  flattery,  with  which  I  ended  my  last,  was  perhaps  trite;  but 
I  know  myself  to  be  a  downright  Jack  Roast-beef.  I  dare  swear  you  have  often 
thought  me  very  rude — be  assured,  though  my  manner  may  be  unpleasant,  you  shall 
never  find  me  insincere. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  WOODFALL. 

*  “  The  Blackamoor”  was  written  by  Henry  Bate,  and  excited  the  utmost  confusion  for  four  nights.  The 
partisans  of  the  author  made  a  furious  attack  upon  the  censurers  of  the  piece,  and  the  theatre  was  a  bear¬ 
garden,  until  Mr.  Garrick,  coming  a  second  time  upon  the  stage,  closed  the  contention  by  withdrawing  the 
sable  intruder.  Bate  was  conductor  of  the  Morning  Post,  which  alone  was  sufficient  to  take  away  all  chance 
of  an  impartial  sentence. — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


T 


138 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


1'  rom  the  very  little  time  /  have  to  spare,  I  can  easily  account  for  your  hurry, 
therefore  desire  no  answer  till  we  have  a  viva  voce  explanation. 


Endorsed, 

“  \V.  Woodfall’s  letter  to  me  about 
‘  The  Blackamoor.’  ” 


I 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 


DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  15th,  1776. 

I  am  always  happy  when  matters  are  set  right  with  men  of  talent  and  worth — 
such  I  esteem  the  Chevalier  D’Eon.  I  never  in  thought,  word,  or  deed,  meant  him 
the  least  slight:  it  would  have  been  impertinent,  which  I  hope  I  never  am.  I  grieve 
you  had  not  the  Doctor  yesterday.  I  should  have  written  to  you  before,  had  1  not 
been  troubled  with  the  gout  in  my  hand,  and  played  so  last  Saturday ;  this  morning 
I  could  not  meet  the  excellent  Lord  Camden  for  a  sore  throat,  which  distresses  me 
upon  many  accounts  this  moment.  I  hope  you  will  be  entertained  to-night  with 
Aristophanes  :  he  is  a  genius  and  ought  to  be  encouraged.  He  means  me  no  harm,  I 
am  sure ;  and  I  hope  and  trust  that  you  and  your  friends  go  to  support  the  cause, 
the  cause  of  wit,  humour,  and  genius  ;  you  cannot  have  a  better.  I  wish  him  success 
from  my  soul.  Yours  ever, 

D.  Garrick. 

Gout,  stone,  and  sore  throat !  yet  I  am  in  spirits. 


MISS  POPE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Feb.  20th,  1776. 

The  last  instance  of  your  friendship,  wherewith  you  have  honoured  me,  requires 
infinitely  more  gratitude  than  I  have  power  to  say  :  when  the  heart  is  full,  words 
faintly  express  its  meaning  ;  but  I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  not  felt  more  pleasure 
at  being  something  established  in  your  good  graces,  than  I  do  in  the  prospect  of  (1 
trust)  a  permanent  situation  in  the  theatre.  That  you  had  entirely  discarded  me  has 
been  a  source  of  the  greatest  concern  ;  and  the  renewal  of  our  friendship  (if  you  will 
permit  me  to  call  it  so)  will  never  end,  I  hope,  but  with  our  lives  ;  and  if  I  should 
once  more  have  the  happiness  of  seeing  you,  you  will  receive  me  again  as  a  prodigal 
daughter. 

You  have  added  still  more  to  your  kind  intention,  by  desiring  me  to  name  what 
terms  I  would  wish  to  be  reinstated  on.  Perhaps  I  am  mistaken,  and  those  already 
determined  for  me.  If  so,  I  shall  acquiesce,  because  it  has  been  your  advice;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  if  an  addition  can  be  obtained  to  my  former  income,  without  any 
impropriety,  you  will,  I  hope,  perfect  the  work  you  have  begun,  and  say  something 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


139 


more  in  my  favour  upon  that  head.*  I  am  somewhat  shy  of  new  acquaintance  ;  and 
though  from  the  general  cast  of  my  temper  I  may  be  tolerably  happy  with  my  new 
masters,  I  had  rather  not  treat  with  them,  but  suppose  that  every  thing  at  Drury 
remains  just  where  I  left  it,  and  you  still  the  director. 

Pardon  my  detaining  you  so  long,  but  I  am  made  so  happy,  and  in  such  good 
spirits,  I  had  quite  forgot  myself. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

J.  PopE.f 

I  met  your  old  acquaintance  Mr.  Wilks,  and  delivered  your  letter  to  him  :  he  is 
coming  to  England  on  purpose,  I  believe,  to  see  you  act  once  more,  before  you  end 
your  theatrical  reign. 


DR.  J.  HOADLY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  St.  Mary’s,  Feb.  22,  1776. 

As  you  cannot  yet  feel  yourself  emptied  of  any  theatrical  stuff,  I  must  give  you 
another  theatrical  letter.  I  have  uncommon  curiosity  to  see  this  lost  sheep  of 
Fielding’s.i  Can  it  easily  be  gratified,  without  a  chance  of  losing  it  again  ?  Yet, 
it  is  not  worth  the  risque.  He  never  composed  a  single  play,  that  has  kept  its  foot¬ 
ing  on  the  stage.  His  muse  was  a  bunter — he  never  knew  what  even  a  decent 
woman  was.  I  began  to  think  he  never  had  written  such  a  comedy,  any  more  than 
Miller  had  three  acts  of  “  Sir  Roger  de  Coverley,”  as  he  asserted ;  or  than  brother 
Ben  had  “  The  Absent  Man,”  which  the  whole  town  believed  and  expected. 

I  hear  the  Poet  Laureat  has  lately  offered  you  a  comedy,  which  you  have  refused. 
I  suppose,  duller  as  he  grows  older.  I  hear  it  had  great  merit,  but  you  did  not  care 
to  hazard  it ;  particularly  objecting  to  a  character  as  unnatural,  of  a  man  who  marries 
for  love,  and  afterwards  wants  to  get  rid  of  his  wife.  I  take  for  granted  his  manage¬ 
ment  had  made  it  unnatural ;  for  there  cannot  be  a  character  more  in  nature  nor  more 
frequent.  It  is  seldom  that  men  who  marry  for  love  have  much  more  in  their  eye 
than  the  person  of  the  lady,  which  is  not  foundation  strong  enough  for  a  very  lasting 
superstructure — or  the  opposition  he  meets  with  commonly  from  parents,  be.  makes 
him  more  obstinate  and  resolved  to  carry  on  the  siege — or,  be.  You  will  say  I  write 
this  with  no  very  good  grace  when  I  tell  you,  yesterday  (Ash Wednesday,  poor  Ben’s 
birth-day  too)  we  two  poor  souls  had  been  married  forty  years,  and  agreed  we  would 
do  the  same  the  next  morning.  And  yet  I  think  I  married  for  love,  as  I  never  heard 
of  fortune’s  being  concerned  in  the  matter.  I  hear  too  that  John  Home  has  a  tragedy 
for  Covent-Garden  and  Mrs.  Barry,  which  was  to  wait  till  next  season,  to  make  room 

*  Her  former  income  had  been  8/.  per  week. — Ed. 

f  We  now  see  the  advantage  of  the  Pivy’s  generous  patronage  of  Miss  Pope,  whom  she  had  encouraged 
from  a  child,  and  who,  it  has  been  said,  was  an  excellent  pupil  of  that  great  actress  Catherine  Clive. — Ed. 

J  “  The  Fathers,  or  the  Good-natured  Man.” 


140 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


for  an  excellent  comedy — I  hope,  not  “  The  Man  of  Reason,*”  which,  it  seems,  will 
be  no  hindrance.  I  think  the  papers  must  play  booty ;  for  nothing  sure  could  be 
worse  than  they  represent  it.  Wrote  by  one  of  the  managers,  I  suppose,  and  so  not 
to  be  refused.  They  make  amends  by  the  account  given  of  a  Mrs.  Cowley’s  comedy 
of  “  The  Runaway,”  which  has  too  much  the  appearance  of  a  puff'.  Give  me  your 
assurance  not,  and  I  will  draw  in  my  horns  with  great  pleasure.  Who  is  she  ? 

Now  for  self.  I  have  been  this  fortnight  past  confined  to  bed  and  bed-chamber, 
with  ugly  spasms  of  gout  and  pains  of  weakness  in  my  loins.  Volatile  frictions  and 
cordials  of  that  sort  have  set  me  up  again  ;  and  yesterday  was  the  first  of  my  dining 
below — on  water  souchy  (old  Nick  knows  how  to  spell  the  Dutch  word)  and  apple 
dumpling.  I  grieve  that  I  cannot  take  my  airings:  I  write  now  in  a  storm  of  wind, 
hail,  snow,  and  rain ;  and  a  monstrous  high  tide,  which  is  now  overflowing  my 
garden.  My  second  self  has  held  it  amazingly  well  till  last  night,  when  she  had  no 
sleep  at  all.  It  seems,  I  thawed  first. t 


CASE.— DRURY-LANE. 

Lincolu’s-Inn,  March  1st,  1776. 

Mrs.  Abington  is  engaged  as  a  performer  for  the  season  at  a  salary  and  a  benefit 
night.  Benefits  are  generally  fixed  according  to  the  rank  of  the  performer,  and  that 
rank  is  determined  by  the  rate  of  salary.  The  highest  salary  has  the  first  choice  of 
the  day,  and  so  on  :  Mrs.  Abington  stands  in  the  fourth  degree  of  eminence  ;  Miss 
Vounge,  the  next. 

About  a  fortnight  ago,  when  the  benefits  Avere  fixing,  Mrs.  Abington  had  the 
choice  of  Saturday  the  16th  of  March,  or  Monday  the  18th,  for  her  benefit.  She  had 
objections  to  both  :  Saturday  Avas  Opera-night ;  Monday  degraded  her,  for  she  then 
must  give  precedence  to  Miss  Younge.  After  duly  Aveighing  these  important 
points,  rank  and  precedence  prevailed  over  interest ;  she  chose  Saturday  the  1 6th,  and 
Monday  Avas  given  to  Miss  Younge.  The  next  day,  interest  seemed  to  preponderate, 
and  she  rather  Avished  for  Monday  ;  but  this  night  being  engaged,  and  not  to  be  had, 
she  gave  out  that  the  managers  refused  to  give  her  any  night  for  a  benefit,  and  she 
has  hitherto  declined  to  adATertise  or  make  any  preparations  for  the  16th  of  March. 

The  managers  are  someAvhat  distressed  by  this  untoAvard  conduct,  though  they 
are  not  concerned  in  point  of  interest ;  but  should  she  not  prepare  for  that  night, 
there  will  be  no  performance  ;  the  consequence. 

They  ha\’e  thought  of  giving  her  a  notice  to  the  following  purport : — 

“  I  am  directed  by  the  managers  to  acquaint  you  that,  conformable  to  your  choice 
of  Saturday  the  Kith  of  March  for  your  benefit,  that  day  Avas  immediately  allotted, 
and  is  kept  for  the  purpose ;  and  you  will  consequently  name  your  play,  that  it  may 
be  got  ready,  and  other  matters  prepared  in  proper  time. 

*  An  unsuccessful  comedy  by  Hugh  Kelly.  f  Alas  !  he  died  on  the  16th  of  the  following  month. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


141 


“  It  may  be  right  to  inform  you  that,  in  consequence  of  your  choice  of  that  day, 
all  others  have  been  settled  and  fixed  for  the  other  subsequent  performers,  and  that 
there  is  no  other  day  vacant  till  Easter.” 

And  if  she  persists  in  her  stubbornness  till  a  few  days  before  the  16th  of  March, 
then  to  give  her  notice,  that  a  play  will  be  performed  in  which  she  has  a  part,  and 
which  will  be  appropriated  for  her  benefit.  Or,  ought  the  managers  to  let  the  house 
be  shut  up,  and  no  play  be  performed  ?  Or,  will  this  conduct  of  her’s  be  deemed  a 
waiver  of  her  benefit  at  night  ? 

COUNSEL’S  OPINION. 

“  I  think  the  managers  should  send  a  person  not  interested  in  the  house  to  inform 
her,  that  the  managers,  observing  she  has  made  no  preparations  for  her  benefit,  are 
desirous  to  know  whether  she  intends  to  take  that  night  or  not,  as  they  wish  to 
prevent  a  disappointment  to  the  town,  by  giving  a  play  that  night  if  she  declines  her 
benefit.  This  will  produce  an  immediate  answer ;  whereas  a  notice  may  keep  the 
managers  in  suspense.  If  she  declines  a  benefit  that  night,  the  managers  may  give 
a  play  on  their  own  account,  without  any  danger  of  being  responsible  to  her  for  the 
profits.  It  may  be  thought  candid  on  the  part  of  the  managers  to  make  her  an  offer 
of  any  unappointed  night ;  declaring  they  do  it  not  from  any  obligation  they  con¬ 
ceive  themselves  under,  but  to  convince  her  they  have  no  design  to  take  advantage 
of  her  refusal  to  accept  of  her  benefit  as  a  waiver  of  her  right  to  one,  which  they 
apprehend  it  to  be :  if  she  refuses  this  offer,  which  is  probable,  then  I  think  she  will 
have  no  colour  to  claim  a  benefit.” 

J\  W  ALLACE. 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Leicester-fields,  March  4,  1776. 

As  it  has  been  for  some  time  my  fixed  determination  to  quit  the  stage  at  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  present  season  and  not  return  to  it  again,  I  thankfully  accept  your 
very  obliging  intention  to  play  for  my  benefit  in  May ;  you  will  therefore  please  to 
dispose  of  Saturday  the  16th  inst.  in  any  manner  most  agreeable  to  yourself. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  very  much  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

Frances  Abington. 

“  The  above  is  a  true  copy  of  the  letter,  examined  word  by  word,  of  that  worst  of 
bad  women  Airs.  Abington,  to  ask  my  playing  for  her  benefit,  and  why?” — 

Endorsed, 

“  A  copy  of  Mother  Abington’s  letter 
about  leaving  the  stage.” 


142 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 

MADAM,  March  7th,  1776. 

At  my  return  from  the  country,  I  found  your  letter  upon  my  table.  I  read  it 
with  great  surprise,  and  can  yet  scarce  believe  that  you  are  in  earnest.  It  would  per¬ 
haps  be  as  vain  as  impertinent  in  me  to  caution  you  against  being  too  rash  in  deter¬ 
mining  upon  so  serious  a  matter.  My  reasons  for  quitting  the  stage  are  many,  and 
too  strong  to  be  withstood  ;  you  can  have  none  but  will  be  easily  conquered  by  your 
inclinations.  It  will  therefore  be  worth  your  while  to  consider  seriously  ;  and  if  you 
have  the  least  reason  to  repent  of  your  late  determination,  the  best  night  for  a  benefit, 
which  is  the  last  night  of  acting  before  the  holidays,  and  which  the  proprietors  have 
purchased,  is  at  your  service.  If  you  are  still  absolutely  resolved  to  quit  the  stage 
for  ever,  I  will  certainly  in  May  do  for  Mrs.  Abington  what  I  have  done  for  others 
who  have  made  the  same  resolution. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 
Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  Mrs.  Abington’s  letter,  dated  March  4th, 
and  my  answer  to  it,  sent  by  Ralph,  7th  do.  1776.” 


MRS.  ABINGTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Sjjq  Leicester-square,  April  7th,  1776 

Upon  reading  the  paragraph  which  you  were  pleased  to  send  me  yesterday,  two 
objections  immediately  started  to  me.  I  thought  it  might  carry  an  air  of  arrogance, 
and  be  liable  to  expose  me  to  censure,  as  making  myself  of  too  much  importance 
with  the  public  :  and  next,  the  style  might  be  thought  rather  abrupt  and  impertinent. 
I  wish  for  nothing  more  than  to  retire  in  peace,  without  any  pretensions  to  that 
eclat  which  must  necessarily  attend  your  retreat. 

Mr.  Lodge  assures  me  that  you  were  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  written  declara¬ 
tion  I  sent  you  ;  and  that  you  were  so  far  from  requiring  any  farther  condition,  as  to 
declare  you  were  ready  to  play  for  my  benefit,  even  though  my  name  should  not  be 
announced  in  the  bills. 

Air.  Lodge  waited  on  you  a  second  time,  to  acquaint  you  that  I  thankfully  ac¬ 
cepted  of  your  offer  to  play  for  me  : — and  I  confidently  concluded,  from  the  unfet¬ 
tered  generosity  of  the  above  declaration,  that  this  business  would  not  be  farther 
embarrassed  by  advertisements,  or  any  other  unnecessary  conditions. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Frances  Abington. 


Endorsed, 

“  A  fal-lal  from  Mrs.  Abington.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


143 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LODGE. 

SIR,  Hampton,  Easter  Monday,  1776. 

If  1  am  not  mistaken,  I  have  received  a  letter  written  by  you,  and  signed  by 
Mrs.  Abington.  Though  this  a  little  carries  an  air  of  ill-will  to  correspond  with  me  by 
her  solicitor  ;  yet,  as  you  are  a  gentleman,  I  shall  rather  think  she  does  me  a  favour 
than  an  incivility.  Upon  my  word,  I  cannot  conceive  what  fetters  I  have  put  on  my 
generosity  by  any  advertisement  I  have  sent  her ;  and  if  you  will  be  pleased  to  un¬ 
chain  the  lady  (though  she  is  apt  to  behave  a  little  unruly  to  me,)  I  shall  be  much 
obliged  to  you  :  indeed,  Sir,  without  a  figure,  I  most  sincerely  am  at  a  loss  to  guess 
her  meaning.  If  she  does  not  choose  to  advertise  as  Mrs.  Pritchard  and  Mrs.  Clive 
did,  pray  let  us  have  no  more  trouble  about  the  matter,  but  let  her  please  herself ; 
if  she  has  any  more  to  say,  or  to  unsay,  about  this  business,  I  shall  be  in  town  on 
Wednesday  morning,  and  a  note  from  you  shall  settle  it  with  me  at  least. 

“  Varium  et  mutabile  semper.” 

Be  assured  that  I  am  quite  satisfied  with  the  declaration  she  has  given  me  of  her 
quitting  the  stage,  and  I  am  ready  to  fulfil  my  part  of  the  agreement  on  the  7th  of 
May  ;  therefore  I  hope  that  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  most  refined  and  active  ima¬ 
gination  to  raise  more  doubts  :  though,  if  they  should  give  me  an  opportunity  of  seeing 
you,  I  shall  certainly  be  a  gainer,  for  I  feel  myself  at  this  moment  better  for  your  re¬ 
commendation  of  Dr.  Miersbach.  I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  have  the  gout  in  my  hand,  and  must  send  you  this  scrawl. 


MR.  BATES  AFFIDAVIT. 

Sth  March,  1776. 

I  Henry  Bate  do  most  solemnly  and  voluntarily  swear,  that  David  Garrick, 
Esq.  never  furnished  a  single  article  of  the  matter  contained  in  a  letter  signed 
A  Mermaid,  respecting  a  certain  gentleman,  in  answer  to  one  which  that  gentleman 
had  written  in  the  London  Packet,  signed  The  Elephant  of  Drury -lane  Theatre — but 
on  the  contrary,  that  he  was  so  far  ignorant  of  the  contents  thereof,  that  he  never 
knew  such  letter  was  written,  or  intended  for  publication,  till  it  appeared  in  the 
Morning  Post  of  Friday,  March  1st,  1776. 

I  also  most  solemnly  swear,  that  all  the  passages  contained  in  the  said  letter  re¬ 
specting  money  matters,  were  advanced  by  me  (in  imitation  of  many  of  the  Elephant's 
fictions,  which  gave  rise  to  them)  on  mere  speculation,  without  any  real  information, 
as  I  never  heard  Mr.  Garrick  say  he  had  given  or  lent  any  sums  or  sum  of  money  to 
the  aforesaid  gentleman.  And  as  for  that  part  of  the  letter  which  mentions  that 


144 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


gentleman’s  getting  rank  in  the  Navy,  through  the  friendship  or  interest  of  Mr. 
Garrick,  I  likewise  most  solemnly  swear,  1  have  for  years  past  heard  it  spoken  of 
by  this  officer's  friends ;  and  therefore  I  conceive  it  had  been  publicly  mentioned  by 
the  said  officer,  as  a  testimony  of  his  gratitude. 

And  lastly,  I  solemnly  swear,  that  Mr.  Garrick,  the  first  time  he  saw  the  author 
of  the  letter  signed  The  Mermaid,  after  its  appearance  in  print,  expressed  great  con¬ 
cern  and  surprise  at  the  publication  thereof ;  wondering  how  he  could  have  procured 
some  particulars  therein  mentioned  ;  adding,  “  the  satire  must  be  ill-founded,  as  he 
was  firmly  persuaded  the  gentleman  could  not  be  the  author  of  the  letter  in  the 
London  Packet  signed  The  Elephant  of  Drury-lane  Theatre ,”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

Sworn  before  me,  this  eighth  day  of  March,  1766. 

T.  Treslove. 


CAPT.  E.  THOMPSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Drury-lane  Theatre,  past  nine,  Saturday,  March,  1776. 

For  such  you  will  ever  be  to  me,  in  spite  of  all  the  mistakes  and  random  hits 
made  in  “The  Mermaid.”  I  have  just  seen  your  brother,  who  has  shown  me  Mr. 
Bate’s  affidavit.  There  needed  no  oath  to  the  circumstance,  Mr.  Bate  having  de¬ 
clared  to  me  before,  on  his  honour,  that  they  were  random  shots,  and  not  anecdotes 
supplied  by  any  person.  When  a  gentleman  calls  his  honour  forth  on  such  occasion, 
I  have  nothing  farther  to  say.  The  expression  of  preferring  the  Muses  to  Neptune 
was  the  strongest  circumstance  that  alarmed  me ;  for  I  had  so  written  you  in  a  letter 
from  Scotland  :  when  I  mentioned  this  to  Mr.  B.  he  confessed  the  whimsicality  of  the 
hit.  I  am  extremely  sorry,  on  my  part,  for  any  pain  I  may  have  given  you.  I  never 
directly  accused  you  of  the  business  ;  but  I  confessed  myself  hurt,  alarmed,  and 
stabbed.  To  the  last  period  of  my  life  I  will  own  my  gratitude  to  you;  and  if  you 
think  upon  the  matter  now  as  I  do,  there  is  not  a  circumstance  of  my  life  which 
will  be  more  grateful  to  me,  than  ever  acknowledging  myself  your  friend, 

And  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

E.  Thompson. 

Give  me  leave  to  mend  it  :  we  sent  to  you  by  Mr.  Bate,  that  Mr.  Crawford  and 
I  would  wait  on  you  the  Tuesday  noon.  Mr.  Crawford  was  prevented  till  two,  and 

I  enclosed  his  card  with  one  from  myself  to  Mr.  B - ;  we  came  to  his  rooms  at 

two,  and  he  said  it  was  not  convenient  for  you  to  see  us,  but  he  would  inform  us  when 
it  was.  I  never  heard  of  you  farther  till  this  day  by  your  brother.  As  I  have  said 
before,  I  still  repeat — that  whatever  these  crudities  produced  on  my  part,  in  regard  to 
you  I  am  very  sorry,  and  unhappy  they  should  be  ever  mentioned  to  give  you  any 
uneasiness.  I  am.  Sec.  E.  Thompson. 

Endorsed, 

“  The  last  letter  I  shall  ever  (I  hope)  receive  from 
my  good  friend  Capt.  Thomason.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


145 


MR.  J.  DUNNING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s  Inn,  Tuesday  Morning,  8th  March. 

Mr.  Dunning  returns  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  his  very  obliging 
note. 

If  he  fails  to  find  relief  from  an  experiment  he  is  just  making  of  a  long  journey, 
he  will  give  Mr.  Garrick  a  chance  of  proving  himself  as  skilful  in  curing  the  dis¬ 
orders  of  the  body  as  in  those  of  the  mind. 

The  obstinacy  of  his  patient’s  complaint  is  such  as,  he  fears,  will  not  yield  to  the 
art  of  a  less  extraordinary  physician. 


MR.  E.  GIBBON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bentinck-street,  March  11th,  1776. 

I  know  not  whether  I  ought  to  think  myself  the  most  obliged  to  you  or  to  Lord 
Camden  :  to  him  for  so  flattering  an  encomium,  or  to  you  for  so  friendly  a  communi¬ 
cation.  With  regard  to  the  wish  which  his  Lordship  so  politely  expresses  of  my 
being  made  known  to  him,  you  must  give  me  leave  to  say,  that  if  he  were  still  a 
chancellor  or  a  minister,  I  might  perhaps  be  inclined  to  meet  his  advances  with  some 
degree  of  coldness  and  reserve  ;  but  as  he  is  now  reduced  to  be  nothing  more  than  a 
great  man,  I  shall  eagerly  embrace  the  first  proper  occasion  of  paying  my  respects  to 
him,  and  shall  consider  the  honour  of  his  acquaintance,  as  the  most  satisfactory  reward 
of  my  labour.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

E.  Gibbon.* 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  CAPT.  E.  THOMPSON. 


Sir,  Adelphi,  March  .  .  .  1776. 

As  I  never  satirized  my  friend,  so  I  can  never  forget  any  unprovoked  satire  from 
one  I  once  called  my  friend.  It  is  impossible  that  Captain  Thompson  and  I  can  ever 
look  upon  each  other  but  with  pain,  though  for  different  reasons ;  and  therefore  the 
less  we  see  each  other  the  better.  I  can  never  forget  the  very  adverse  manner  with 
which  you  came  to  the  Adelphi  with  a  friend,  whose  gentleman -like  behaviour  too  I 
can  never  forget.  You  have  owned  yourself  the  author  of  a  paper  which  was  pub¬ 
lished  some  days  before  “  The  Mermaid  in  that  paper  I  am  represented  by  the 

*  No  man  supplied  one  of  these  complimentary  tributes  to  a  powerful  mind,  with  more  grace  than  Edward 
Gibbon.  The  same  turn  of  thought,  as  to  Camden’s  no  longer  holding  office,  occurs  in  the  great  historian’s 
dedication  of  his  work  to  Lord  North. — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


U 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


140 

author  as  consulting  about  and  abetting  a  design  to  destroy  the  force  of  the  Syrens 
at  the  other  house  :  1  cannot  conceive  a  more  severe  attack  upon  me  as  a  man,  a 
manager,  and  a  gentleman. 

You  are  pleased  to  say  that  there  was  something  in  a  letter  of  yours  written  to 
me  years  ago  from  Scotland  which  was  mentioned  in  “The  Mermaid!”  Can  Mr. 
Thompson  imagine  that  the  man  whom  he  lias  known  and  tried  so  long  could  be 
guilty  of  so  much  baseness  as  to  give  up  private  letters  for  public  ridicule? — lie 
assured.  Sir,  that  I  have  as  totally  forgotten  whatever  you  may  have  written  to  me 
from  every  part  of  the  Avorld,  as  I  will  endeavour  to  forget  that  such  a  person  as  the 
writer  and  his  unkindness  ever  existed,  and  Avas  once  connected  with,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

I).  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  BISHOP  OF  LONDON. 

MY  LORD,  Adelphi,  April  2nd,  1776. 

1  have  been  av holly  engaged  for  these  three  days  in  comforting  an  almost  dis¬ 
tracted  friend,  Avliose  son,  a  most  hopeful  youth  at  Westminster-school,  was  droAvned 
last  Friday.*  The  distress  of  the  father  so  affected  me  that  I  forgot  my  duty  in  not 
returning  your  Lordship  my  most  respectful  acknoAvledgments  for  Avhat  you  Avere 
pleased  to  say  to  Mr.  ToAvnly.  Your  great  kindness  to  my  nephew,  and  your  confi¬ 
dence  in  me,  demand  our  Avarmest  expressions  of  gratitude :  but  I  haxre  more  in¬ 
stances  in  my  mind  of  your  Lordship’s  partiality  to  me ;  and  my  heart  feels  that 
in  particular  which  Avas  ghren  this  winter  so  publicly,  and  which  did  so  much 
honour  to,  My  Lord,  your  Lordship’s 

Most  obliged,  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  -D- 

“  Copy  of  a  letter  to  the  Lord 
Bishop  of  London. ”f 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Saturday  Night,  April  13th,  1776. 

Becket  brought  me  your  note  this  morning,  with  the  proposed  alternative  con¬ 
cerning  the  benefit.  An  alternative  includes  a  dilemma.  Be  not  surprised,  there¬ 
fore,  at  my  endeaAmuring  to  get  rid  of  it,  in  the  best  manner  I  am  able. 

In  consideration  of  the  A’ery  disadvantageous  time  of  the  season  in  Avhich  “  The 

*  The  son  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  excellent  friend  and  solicitor,  Albany  Wallis,  Esq. — Ed. 

f  This  was  the  admired  Dr.  Robert  Lowtii,  whose  “Hebrew  Prelections”  are  without  a  rival  among 
our  academical  lectures.  When  I  say  this,  I  do  not  forget  those  of  Judge  Blackstone,  or  the  chemical  ele¬ 
ments  of  Dr.  Watson.  I  yield  the  palm  on  their  behalf  to  the  fascination  of  the  sublimest  poetry,  displayed 
by  the  most  elegant  criticism  in  existence. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


147 


Spleen’'*  was  produced,  is  it  too  unreasonable  in  the  author  to  request,  and  impos¬ 
sible  for  you  to  grant,  the  aid  of  your  own  performance  on  his  night?  Without  that 
powerful  assistance,  stuck  in  edgeways  between  the  benefits,  and  overlaid  by  Rane- 
lagh,  Sadlers  Wells,  the  interest  of  the  performers,  &c.  I  see  little  or  no  probability 
of  his  deriving  from  his  piece  half  that  emolument  that  he  has  hitherto  reaped  from 
his  labours  in  the  service  of  the  theatre. 

I  will  certainly  attend  you  to-morrow  evening.  In  the  mean  time,  “  Oh,  ponder 
well!  be  not  severe”  With  your  very  faithful  and  affectionate, 

G.  Colman. 


Endorsed, 

“  A  particular  letter  from  Mr.  Colman.” 


MR.  T.  GRIST  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MOST  HONOURED  SIR,  Norwich,  April  15th,  1776. 

How  shall  I  sufficiently  thank  you  for  your  great  goodness  ?  It  shall  be  my  con¬ 
stant  study  to  deserve  the  good  opinion  you  have  of  me,  which  I  doubt  not  of  ever 
preserving  by  a  strict  adherence  to  those  principles  that  distinguished  the  real  honest 
man  from  the  pretender.  Sir,  your  taking  notice  of  me  to  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  is  a 
favour  that  claims  my  warmest  thanks.  I  have  attempted  the  character  of  Iachimo 
twice,  and  had  the  happiness  to  succeed  before  a  crowded  audience.  “  The  Run¬ 
away”  has  been  performed  here  to  very  good  houses  with  success.  Cato  I  shall  play 
(by  desire)  for  one  of  the  benefits. 

I  have  nothing  worthy  your  attention  to  communicate  at  present,  therefore  con¬ 
clude  with  my  sincere  prayers  for  your  health  and  felicity,  and  believe  me,  Sir, 

I  am  most  assuredly  your  very  grateful. 

And  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thos.  Grist. 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  April  29th,  1776. 

Lord  and  Lady  North  desire  to  be  placed  in  the  list  of  subscribers  to  your 
friend’s  book,  and  Mr.  Charles  Townshend  and  your  humble  servant  wish  to  be 
of  the  party.  Our  conversation  to-day  at  dinner  rested  on  no  subject  for  any  time 
but  the  delight  of  seeing  you  on  Saturday  night.  Lord  and  Lady  North  command 
me  to  thank  you  in  t lie  most  particular  manner  for  that  high  entertainment,  and 
their  appetite  is  so  much  increased  by  it  that  they  wish  for  a  box  to  laugh  with  Sir 
Johnt  to-morrow  night. 

*  “  The  Spleen,”  or  “  Islington  Spa,”  not  the  most  successful  of  Mr.  Colman’s  farces. — Ei>. 
f  Sir  John  Brute. 

u  2 


148 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


1  observed  you  on  Saturday  with  the  “  very  comment  of  my  soul every  word 
look,  and  gesture.  My  hypercritieism  could  not  discover  the  least  trip  or  disallow¬ 
ance  in  any  of  them,  and  in  my  mind  you  never  did  so  well.  You  were  as  Quin¬ 
tilian  says  of  Cicero,  in  the  great  cause  of  Yerres,  that  he  excelled  himself  non  solum 
in  concitatis  sed  in  re  missis  affectibus.  The  last  shows  the  master  most.  There  were 
two  or  three  passages  which  you  played  con  sordina ,  which  gave  great  expression  and 
pathos  to  them. 

By  the  hv,  did  you  ever  consider  seriously  and  conscientiously  that,  when  you 
leave  the  stage,  Shakspeare  will  probably  leave  it  with  you  ;  and  it  is  far  from  impro¬ 
bable  that  this  just  pride  of  the  English  nation  may  relapse  into  the  condition  in 
which  he  was,  when  Otway’s  play  of  “  Caius  Marius”  was  exhibited,  in  which  many 
whole  scenes  are  taken  word  for  word  from  “  Borneo  and  Juliet,”  if  I  remember 
right.  Reflect  on  this,  or  rather  do  not  trouble  yourself  with  such  speculations, — 
you  will  be  remembered  as  long  as  there  is  any  taste  in  this  country.  My  wife  is 
far  from  well :  she  hopes  to  have  one  more  “  longing  lingering  look”  of  you,  and 
desires  a  box  for  any  night  in  which  you  play  in  the  course  of  next  -week.  Is  it 
impossible  for  you  to  give  us  “  Macbeth  ?”  I  had  someAvhat  of  a  sort  of  a  ministerial 
promise*  from  you,  with  a  gentle  squeeze  of  the  hand,  and  a  measured  smile  of 
consent,  about  two  months  ago. 

I  am  ever  yours,  most  faithfully  and  affectionately. 

Grey  Cooper. 


EXTRACT  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  MISS  HANNAH  MORE,  OF  BRISTOL, 
TO  THE  REV.  DR.  STONEHOUSE. 


May,  1 776. 

“  I  have  at  last  had  the  entire  satisfaction  to  see  Garrick  in  ‘  Hamlet.’  I  would 
not  wrong  him  and  myself  so  much,  as  to  tell  you  what  I  think  of  it ;  it  is  suffi¬ 
cient  that  you  have  seen  him :  I  pity  those  who  have  not.  Posterity  will  never  be 
able  to  form  the  slightest  idea  of  his  perfections.  The  more  I  see  him,  the  more  I 
wonder  and  admire :  whenever  he  does  any  thing  capital,  they  are  so  kind  as  to  get 
me  into  the  pit,  which  increases  the  pleasure  tenfold.  He  has  acted  almost  all  his 
comic  characters  for  the  hist  time.  I  have  seen  him  within  these  three  weeks  tahe 
have  of  Benedict,  Sir  John  Brute,  Ivitely,  Abel  Drugger,  Archer  and  Leon.  It 
seems  to  me,  on  these  occasions,  as  if  I  was  assisting  at  the  funeral  obsequies  of  the 
different  poets.  I  feel  almost  as  much  pain  as  pleasure.  He  is  quite  happy  at  the 
prospect  of  his  release.” 


I  am  glad  you  have  kept  her  to  see  Hamlet.  Had  you  not  in  a  manner  com¬ 
pelled  her  to  stay,  such  is  her  fear  of  intruding,  that  she  would  have  left  London 

*  A  portrait  by  an  able  master.  Let  the  ministerial  promise  be  henceforth  defined  “  a  gentle  squeeze  of 
tiio  Vin^ri  ^nd  a  measured  smile  of  consent.” — F.d. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


149 


without  seeing  what  she  had  so  ardently  desired.  The  day  after  you  have  done  act¬ 
ing,  she  will  set  out,  I  presume,  for  Bristol,  ever  mindful,  I  am  very  sure,  of  your  great 
favours,  and  ever  grateful  for  them. 

Mrs.  Stonehouse  and  my  daughter  join  Avitli  me  in  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  ; 
and  I  am,  dear  Sir,  with  very  great  regard,  much  yours. 

J.  Stonehouse. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  REV.  MR.  SMITH. 

DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  May  8th,  1776. 

I  SHALL  be  very  happy  to  meet  you  at  any  time  or  place,  and  shall  expect  and 
have  the  satisfaction  which  ever  attends  the  meeting  of  old  friends.  The  present 
situation  of  my  affairs— the  last  hours  of  my  theatrical  life,  and  my  preparing  for 
another,  not  to  mention  the  shifting  of  so  great  a  property  as  my  patent,  scenes,  &c. 
into  other  hands,  will  require  my  attendance  in  town  till  the  middle  of  next  month, 
when  I  shall  be  glad  to  fix  the  where  and  when  as  soon  as  you  please.  A  Greek  play 
raises  indeed  my  curiosity  !  but  as  I  deal  in  raising  curiosity  myself,  and  have  not  yet 
left  off  trade,  I  cannot,  till  I  make  my  transfer,  be  absent  from  the  shop  one  night. 
I  am  sorry  that  you  have  a  fellow-feeling  with  me,  and  are  troubled  Avith  the  worst 
of  all  disorders— but  yours  Avill  be  easily  cured  with  a  proper  attention  and  perseve¬ 
rance  ;  such  an  old  friend  and  schoolfelloAv  as  you  are,  shall  command  my  best  advice 
and  experience.  If  you  Avill  take  Adams’s  Solvent,  which  is  iioav  knoAvn  to  be 
Perry’s,  and  be  a  little  careful  of  your  food  and  drink,  I  Avill  ansAver  for  your  cure. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  truly  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

Just  going  to  perform  Benedict  for  the  last  time. 


THE  DUKE  OF  PORTLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Burlington  House,  Monday,  May  13th,  1776. 

The  Duke  of  Portland  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick.  lie  is  much 
ashamed  of  having  so  long  delayed  his  thanks  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  the  very  obliging- 
attention  he  shoA\red  him  on  Thursday  last,  Avhich  Miss  Pelham’s  civility  made  it  un¬ 
necessary  for  him  to  take  advantage  of.  But  if  the  report  of  Mr.  Garricks  intention 
to  appear  in  the  character  of  Macbeth  should  be  founded  in  truth,  and  that  it  Avas  to 
be  fulfilled  either  before  Friday  next  or  after  Thursday  se’nnight  (in  Avhich  interval 
unavoidable  business  Avill  occasion  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  be  absent  in  the  coun¬ 
try,)  he  should  think  himself  very  particularly  obliged  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  indulging 
him  with  a  box  below-stairs ;  for  Avhich  he  is  the  more  anxious,  as  he  never  had  the 
good  fortune  to  see  Mr.  Garrick  in  that  wonderful  effort  of  human  genius. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


150 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  J.  CALDWELL. 

SIR,  Adelphi,  May  14th,  1776. 

Having  been  in  the  country  for  a  few  (lays,  your  letter  was  sent  after  me,  and 
upon  my  returning  to  town  a  day  sooner  than  my  servant  expected,  I  did  not  receive 
the  great  honour  you  have  done  me  till  the  day  before  yesterday.  I  really  want 
words  to  thank  you  for  the  kind  and  hospitable  invitation  you  have  made  me,  and 
most  sincerely  wish  that  it  may  be  in  my  power,  as  it  is  in  my  heart,  to  show  my 
gratitude  for  your  favours.  It  lias  been  long  my  wish  to  visit  a  kingdom  where  I 
was  honoured  with  every  mark  of  regard  and  kindness.  As  I  have  not  left  Mrs. 
Garrick  one  day  since  we  were  married,  near  twenty-eight  years,  I  cannot  now  leave 
her  ;  and  she  is  so  sick  and  distressed  by  the  sea,  that  I  have  not  had  the  resolution  to 
follow  my  inclinations  on  account  of  her  fears. 

Our  poor  friend  Wallis  has  been  most  miserable  indeed,  and  has  imparted  his 
distress  to  all  his  friends.  I  have  felt  more  on  his  account  than  I  ever  did  in  my  life. 
He  is  rather  better,  but  still  in  a  very  melancholy  way.  I  hope  some  few  jaunts  into 
the  country  and  taking  him  from  the  sight  of  the  Thames,  which  was  the  cause  of  his 
misery,  will  reinstate  him  in  health  and  spirits,  which  at  present  are  much  impaired. 
Whenever  I  can  settle  my  affairs,  which  at  this  time  are  in  some  confusion,  (as  I  am 
to  quit  the  direction  in  June,)  and  can  prevail  on  a  fearful  wife  to  cross  so  small  a 
branch  of  the  sea,  I  shall  most  certainly  pay  my  respects  at  Castle  Caldwell ;  in  the 
mean  time,  if  you  have  any  commands  which  my  care  and  gratitude  can  execute, 
I  shall  most  willingly  obey  them.  I  long  to  talk  over  Count  Firmian  and  my  plea¬ 
sures  with  him  at  Milan.  Mrs.  Garrick  begs  that  her  respects  may  be  joined  with 
mine,  and  bids  me  say  that  your  temptations  are  so  strong  that  they  have  almost 
conquered  her  fears. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  most  grateful  sense  of  your  politeness, 

Your  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MISS  F.  CADOGAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

May  ISth,  1776. 

Ever  since  I  have  had  the  happiness  of  being  acquainted  with  you,  my  dear  Sir, 
I  have  made  it  a  rule  never  to  trouble  you  about  places  for  my  friends,  and  number¬ 
less  are  the  entreaties  to  which  I  have  been  deaf  on  this  subject,  very  well  knowing 
how  much  you  are  teazed  every  time  you  act,  and  how  impossible  it  is  that  you  can 
oblige  half  those  friends  who  have  a  much  better  right  to  ask  favours  of  you  than  I, 
■whose  obligations  to  you  are  such  as  ought  to  silence  me  for  ever.  Yet,  in  spite  of 
these  reflections,  can  I  not  resist  sending  you  the  following  extract  of  a  letter  which  I 
last  night  received  from  my  friend  Mrs.  Pine;  thus  she  writes  :  — 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


151 


“  I  am  very  sorry  to  find  that  my  daughter  (whose  chief  inducement  to  visit 
London  this  year  was  to  see  the  man  you  adore)  is  likely  to  return,  without  having 
once  had  the  happiness ;  for  she  tells  me,  she  has  tried  in  vain  to  get  a  place  in  any 
part  of  the  house,  and  that  you  have  not  courage  to  plead  in  her  behalf  with  Mr. 
Garrick :  but  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that  if  the  dear  charming  man  were  reminded 
of  the  promise  he  made  to  the  Pines,  when  he  was  last  at  Bath,  he  would  be  as  good 
in  deed  as  in  word.  If,  however,  you  think  it  too  great  a  favour  to  ask  him  for  any 
obscure  corner  in  box,  pit,  or  gallery,  where  she  might  only  once  behold  him  in  safety, 
she  must  give  it  up ;  for  I  will  not  venture  her  in  the  crowd.” 

Thus  far  my  letter,  to  which  I  will  not  add  a  word ;  for  I  know  your  benevolent 
heart  will  induce  you  (more  than  any  arguments)  to  make  this  poor  girl  happy  if  you 
can.  At  all  events,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  this  liberty,  which,  as  it  is  the  first  I  have 
taken  of  this  kind,  so  it  shall  be  the  last ;  and  it  is  with  the  utmost  reluctance  I  now 
have  taken  up  my  pen  on  a  subject  so  unpleasing  to  you.  Pray  forgive  me,  my  dear 
Sir,  and  let  me  not  sink  in  your  esteem,  which  I  prize  above  all  earthly  treasures. 
Adieu  !  believe  me  when  I  assure  you  that  my  gratitude,  veneration,  and  affection  for 
you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  can  never  end  but  with  my  life. 

F.  Cadogan.* 

My  father  fears  the  young  person  you  sent  to  him  is  in  a  consumption  ;  but  you 
may  depend  on  his  best  endeavours  to  restore  her  health. 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  May  25th,  1 776. 

From  your  never  mentioning  “  The  Silent  Woman,”  I  am  really  in  doubt  whe¬ 
ther  it  has  slipped  your  memory,  or  whether  I  am  to  conclude  from  your  silence,  that 
you  do  not  think  the  piece  deserves  that  indulgence  from  the  theatre,  usually  ex¬ 
tended  to  other  altered  plays.  If  the  first  is  the  case,  I  must  beg  you  to  excuse  my 
now  reminding  you  of  it ;  if  the  latter,  I  have  only  to  regret  having  given  you  the 
trouble,  and  myself  the  mortification,  of  getting  it  up  at  your  theatre, — and  to  remain, 
dear  Garrick,  '  Yours  most  entirely  and  most  heartily, 

G.  Colmax. 


LADY  COLEBROOKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Soho-square,  Saturday  May  25th,  1776. 

Lady  Colebrooke  presents  her  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick:  she  would  not 
have  presumed  to  have  troubled  him,  had  she  not  been  informed  at  the  theatre,  that 
application  must  be  made  to  the  Committee  for  places  for  the  night  of  the  Theatrical 
*  The  daughter  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  friendly  physician,  Dr.  Cadogan. — Ed. 


152 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Fund;  not  knowing  the  Committee,  she  conceives  she  cannot  err  when  she  applies 
to  Mr.  Garrick,  as  their  best  friend,  for  a  box  for  that  night.  She  acknowledges  that 
though  she  considers  it  a  very  laudable  charity,  and  worthy  of  encouragement,  yet 
she  has  a  selfish  wish  to  gratify,  when  she  is  to  see  Mr.  Garrick  for  the  last  time  in 
her  life,  and  is  desirous  that  her  children  may  be  present  at  such  representation,  that 
they  may  talk  of  it  fifty  years  after  she  is  departed.  If  unfortunately  the  house  is 
engaged  by  those  who  have  been  more  early  and  knowing  in  their  applications,  Lady 
Colebrooke  has  only  to  express  a  hope  that  Mr.  Garrick  will  enjoy,  in  his  retreat  from 
the  stage,  all  the  happiness  which  this  world  can  give  him. 

If  a  side-box  cannot  be  granted,  Lady  Colebrooke  wishes  for  eight  places  in  the 
front-boxes,  as  near  the  stage  as  possible ;  and  she  is  ready  to  contribute  an  extra  sum 
as  a  present,  if  Mr.  Garrick  thinks  that  woidd  be  the  means  of  insuring  her  success. 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  May,177ti. 

We  accept  the  very  kind  offer  of  the  row,  and  have  not  a  complaint  to  make  to 
you  after  the  fatigue  of  writing  so  many  notes  this  morning. 

But  if  I  remember  right,  you  promised  me  some  particular  attention  for  moving 
your  Fund  Bill  at  the  beginning  of  the  Session.  I  have  heard  that  a  certain  Mons. 
Yecker,  and  a  certain  Dean  of  Derry,  have  boxes  every  night  you  play.  There  is  not 
one  of  all  the  foreigners,  and  not  of  all  the  native,  that  can  have  a  higher  pleasure 
and  a  truer  relish  of  you  and  your  excellencies,  or,  what  is  much  better,  a  more  affec¬ 
tionate  regard  for  the  man,  than  I  have,  and  I  am  ever  most  faithfully  yours, 

Grey  Cooper. 

I  make  it  a  point  of  having  a  box  for  the  next  night  of  your  playing  after 
Monday. 

Endorsed, 

“  Sir  Grey  Cooper’s  letter  and  my  answer 
about  Boxes,  Fund  Bill,  &e.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  G.  COOPER. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Sunday,  May  26th,  1 776. 

Your  letter  this  morning  has  hurt  me  greatly.  When  have  I  been  inattentive 
to  your  and  Lady  Cooper's  commands?  I  appeal  to  her  ladyship  if  lever  was 
remiss  in  showing  my  regard  to  both.  Her  health  indeed  for  some  time  rendered 
her  attendance  at  the  theatre  uncertain  ;  but  my  regard  was  as  constant  and  regular 
as  the  sun.  What  you  tell  me  of  the  Dean  of  Derry  was  quite  a  secret  to  me  ;  by  my 
honour,  he  never  yet  got  a  single  place  through  me.  If  bribery  and  corruption  have 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


153 


crept  behind  the  scenes,  I  am  sorry  for  it ;  and  though  my  hands  are  clean,  the  box- 
keepers  may  plead  the  example  of  their  betters.  The  last  box  I  procured  for  you 
has  caused  much  mischief  to  your  humble  servant ;  and,  my  life  on  it,  you  never  till 
your  last  note  mentioned  a  desire  to  see  “  King  Lear.”  My  likings  and  attachments 
to  my  friends  will  I  hope  be  remembered,  when  my  fool’s-cap  and  bells  will  be 
forgotten. 

What  you  said  about  the  conditions  of  your  moving  for  the  Fund  Bill  had 
escaped  me.  I  declare  to  you,  and  I  back  my  word  with  my  honour,  that  my  readi¬ 
ness  to  oblige  Sir  Grey  Cooper  was  ever  independent  of  my  interest,  and  I  have 
found  that  his  kindness  was  always  exerted  without  conditions  towards 

His  most  obliged  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  plead  guilty  to  Madam  Necker :  I  received  many  favours  from  her  in  France : 
she  came  over  on  purpose  to  see  me  act,  and  I  thought  myself  bound  in  duty 
and  gratitude  to  be  attentive  to  her. 


GOVERNOR  JOHNSTONE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Shooter’s-hill,  May  27th,  1776. 

On  my  way  to  Gravesend  I  hear  of  your  charitable  disposition  on  Thursday 
next :  I  shall  return  on  that  day.  If  amongst  so  many  friends  and  admirers  you 
can  find  room  to  oblige  me,  I  wish  to  observe  the  setting  sun  before  he  hides  his 
head  in  the  west.  JDo  not  take  any  trouble  in  writing  or  sending  to  my  house  ; 
I  shall  send  my  servant  at  Jive.  If  there  are  any  places,  it  is  joyful ;  if  they  are  full, 
I  shall  think  more  of  what  I  have  lost  and  be  contented.  I  am,  with  infinite  respect 
and  esteem,  Dear  Sir,  your  obedient  and  obliged  servant, 

George  JohnstOxVe. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  COLMAN. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  May  27th,  1776. 

Your  letter,  which  has  astonished  me,  came  to  my  hands  at  the  most  unluck v 
time,  as  I  have  so  much  already  upon  my  mind.  Was  I  in  a  dream  when  I  imagined 
that  you  gave  us  the  alteration  of  “  The  Silent  Woman  ?”  Did  you  not  say  so,  and 
write  so  ?  I  think  no  trouble  too  much  for  a  performance  with  a  friend’s  name  to  it, 
nor  do  I  ever  spare  any  expense  to  set  it  off. 

“  The  Silent  Woman,”  with  all  our  care,  did  not  succeed,  and  was  left  off  under 
charges  at  the  fourth  night,  though  we  added  “The  Jubilee”  to  it :  the  impossibility 
of  giving  it  a  fashion  was  felt  by  you  as  well  as  myself.  If  you  intended  to  be  con- 


VOL.  II. 


X 


L34 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


sidered  as  the  alter  er,  not  as  the  donor,  why  would  you  delay  to  this  time  to  let  me 
know  your  expectations?  You  must  be  sensible  that  I  would  not  that  you  of  all 
persons  should  have  a  bad  bargain. 

Pray  let  me  know  what  I  must  do,  for  I  cannot  have  such  a  burden  upon  my 
mind  at  this  very  distressing  time,  when  my  theatrical  life  is  so  near  its  end.  It 
is  the  trouble  of  an  evil  conscience  upon  my  death-bed. 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  ike. 

D.  G.* 

If  1  am  confused  or  unintelligible,  impute  it  to  Richard — what  an  operation  ! 

Endorsed, 

“  Colman’s  letter  about  his  ‘  Silent  Woman,’ 
and  my  answer,  May  26th,  1776. 

Est-il  possible  ?” 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Soho  Square,  May  28th,  1 776. 

I  am  very  sorry  my  letter  came  so  mal-a-propos,  and  still  more  sorry  that  you 
should  be  disturbed  for  a  single  moment  about  such  a  trifle. 

God  knows,  I  had  no  thoughts  of  profit,  or  a  bargain,  about  “  The  Silent  Woman 
yet  I  really  did  not  pretend  to  make  a  gift  of  it — for  to  say  the  truth,  at  the  time 
I  offered  it  to  your  theatre,  I  did  not  think  we  were  quite  on  good  terms  enough  to 
warrant  my  taking  the  liberty  of  making  you  a  present ;  but  I  am  much  pleased  and 
flattered  to  find  that  you  were  of  a  different  opinion.  As  to  the  popularity  of  the 
piece,  you  can  Avitness  for  me  that  it  was  what  I  never  expected  from  it.  Like 
Swift’s  Mrs.  Harris,  all  I  stood  upon  was  the  credit  of  the  house ;  and  I  must  confess 
myself  so  jealous  for  the  honour  of  the  old  school,  that  I  think  “  Epicene”  (for  the 
honour  of  the  managers  also)  ought  to  keep  the  stage.*  All  I  endeavoured  was  to 
remove  the  objections  that  deprived  it  of  a  place  there,  held  by  pieces  every  way 
inferior.  And  this  labour,  trifling  as  it  was,  I  thought  might  deserve  the  same  con¬ 
sideration  allowed  to  other  altered  plays. 

I  would  not  have  wrote  to  you,  but  from  my  utter  aversion  to  the  smallest  idea 
of  reserve  with  a  friend ;  and  when  friends,  true  friends,  once  understand  each  other, 
there  never  can  subsist  any  difference. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  most  affectionately  yours, 

G.  Col  max. 

Mrs.  Siddons  was  then  one  of  the  College  Ladies,  “  unknown  and  like-esteemed,"  to  use  the  language 
of  her  favourite  Milton. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


155 


LORD  WALPOLE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Bruton  street,  May  28th,  1776- 

You  may  possibly  be  rather  surprised  at  being  troubled  with  a  letter  from  me, 
and  your  astonishment  will  not  be  less  when,  upon  perusal,  you  find  the  purport  and 
tenor  of  this  epistle  is  a  modest  demand  of  an  annuity  arising  from  the  profits  of 
your  estate  at  Drury -lane  for  some  years  to  come,  and  farther,  a  demand  of  some 
arrears  already  due :  all  this  may  perhaps  have  slipped  your  memory ;  it  would  have 
escaped  my  recollection,  had  not  the  additional  tax  of  one  shilling  in  the  pound  upon 
land,  and  of  twenty  shillings  upon  every  four-wheel  carriage,  which  my  wife  says 
must  be  paid,  (as  she  pretends  old  age,  and  for  that  reason  cannot,  or  rather  Avill  not, 
walk  a-foot,)  made  it  necessary  for  me  to  think  a  little  how  I  might  scrape  together 
every  penny  I  could  find,  without  incurring  the  danger  of  being  hanged,  or,  what  is 
still  worse,  the  penalty  inflicted  by  the  new  act,  to  be  forced  to  dig  ballast  in  the  river 
Thames. 

Be  it  known,  therefore,  to  you  and  your  associate  Mr.  Lacy,  that  my  brother 
Robert  Walpole  having,  in  Nov.  1761,  entered  into  certain  articles  of  agreement  with 
you  both  for  the  annual  payment  of  315/.  in  lieu  of  certain  advantages  arising  to  him 
by  virtue  of  certain  letters  patent  granted  to  yourself  and  Mr.  Lacy  under  the  great 
Seal  in  the  month  of  Oct.  1761,  hath  signed  a  declaration  reciting  that  he  entered 
into  the  above-mentioned  agreement  for  the  sole  proper  use  and  benefit  of  myself, 
my  executors,  administrators,  and  assigns,  which  declaration  I  have  in  my  possession, 
together  with  the  assignments  relative  to  this  matter.  It  appears  by  the  agreement, 
that  the  first  payment  commenced  on  the  25th  day  of  December  177-1,  consequently 
one  annual  payment  wras  due  in  December  last;  you  will  therefore  be  so  good  as  to 
inform  me  at  your  leisure,  when  you  would  wish  to  peruse  the  declaration  of  trust 
made  by  my  brother,  which  I  suppose  you  may  think  proper,  previous  to  the  farther 
adjusting  this  matter.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

W  ALPOLE. 

P.  S.  Lady  Walpole  desires  her  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


SIR  GREY  COOPER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  May  28tli,  1776. 

I  am  much,  very  much,  concerned  to  find  that  my  letter  of  Saturday  night  has 
hurt  you  :  I  very  sincerely  assure  you,  that  I  had  no  such  intention  when  1  wrote  it  ; 
and  if,  in  the  eagerness  and  anxiety  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  hearing  and  seeing  you 
as  often  as  possible,  any  impatient  or  petulant  word  has  escaped  me,  I  beg  your  par¬ 
don,  and  I  assure  you  that  I  am  Yours  very  faithfully  and  affectionately, 

Grey  Cooper. 


x  2 


]  ;jf) 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


SIR  J.  ELIOT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  Sill,  May  31st,  1776. 

You  astonished  me  last  night.  In  your  life  you  never  was  greater ;  I  think 
never  so  great. 

You  must  strain  a  point  to  do  me  a  kindness.  I  must  see  you  on  Saturday.  One 
place  you  will  give  me  surely  :  I  depend  on  you.  If  you  could  do  more,  if  you  could 
give  me  other  three  places,  which  I  know  is  practicable,  it  would  do  infinite  good  to 
my  health,  and  enable  me  to  exert  more  helps  to  restore  that  of  others,  particularly  of 
those  who  have  so  often  entertained  and  instructed  me  from  the  theatre. 

I  am  yours  most  truly, 

John  Eliot. 


GOVERNOR  JOHNSTONE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Old  Bond-street,  31st  May,  1776. 

1  thank  you  with  the  utmost  gratitude  for  the  most  perfect  entertainment  I  ever 
received  during  my  life.  It  was  a  struggle  last  night  between  the  head  and  the 
heels,  and  I  suppose  both  parties  retired  to  their  different  standards.  I  never  was 
better  satisfied  than  with  the  part  I  embraced,  and  shall  think  of  it  during  my 
existence. 

Trespassing  on  your  goodness  so  often  may  lessen  me  in  your  opinion,  but  I 
regret  so  much  having  ever  lost  a  pleasure  I  cannot  soon  overtake,  that  I  am  again  a 
suppliant  for  three  places  on  Saturday.  I  am,  with  the  warmest  friendship, 

Your  sincere  admirer  and  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  Johnstone. 

P.  S.  I  send  my  tribute  to  the  fund. 

Endorsed, 

“  Gov.  Johnstone’s  very  friendly  letter  to  me 

about  ‘  Hamlet,’  May  29th,  1776.” 


*  *  *  *  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Saturday  afternoon. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  excuse  is  requested  for  the  present  liberty,  but,  as  it  is  essential, 
entreats  his  pardoning  it. 

Certain  theatrical  men  wish  to  know  if  his  property  in  Drury -lane  is  positively 
disposed  of.  If  not,  they  can  and  will  immediately  lay  down  the  whole  sum  pub¬ 
licly  said  to  be  demanded. 

The  reason  their  names  are  concealed  is,  it  might  prejudice  their  present  situ¬ 
ations  if  this  were  known  and  the  application  should  prove  too  late. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


157 


As  this  is  a  serious  and  consequential  business,  and  really  comes  from  the  prin¬ 
cipals,  hope  Mr.  Garrick  will  look  on  it  as  such,  and  take  the  trouble  of  sending  a 
single  line  in  answer,  directed  for  Mr.  Theos.  Jewel,  Piazza  Coffee-House,  any  time 
before  three  to-morrow. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  among  many,  about  purchasing  the  Patent.” 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Tuesday. 

I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  kind  attention,  to  which  I  owe 
Lady  Bathurst’s  politeness  in  mentioning  me  to  Mr.  Thurlow. 

I  have  been  directed  by  your  advice  in  writing  to  the  Chancellor-elect,  relating 
merely  the  removal  from  mistake,  and  the  promise  Lord  Bathurst  gave  me  of 
reinstatement.  I  added,  that  in  submitting  these  particulars  to  his  consideration, 
I  was  sensible  they  could  form  no  claim  for  his  patronage — they  appeal  only  to  his 
good-nature  ;  and  that  it  would  be  a  sufficient  happiness  for  me  if  they  prevented 
my  being  prejudiced  in  his  good  opinion. 

As  to  Lord  North,  I  wrote  to  his  secretary,  who  is  very  much  my  friend,  and 
told  him  how  kindly  Mr.  Garrick  had  exerted  himself  with  Lord  Bathurst  in  my 
favour,  and  that  too  without  solicitation — Hoc  jurat  et  nielli  est ; — in  consequence  of 
which  I  had  been  mentioned  to  Mr.  Thurlow,  but  that  Lord  North’s  speaking  for  me 
would  still  be  necessary,  and  add  to  my  happiness  in  being  served;  and  Mr.  Brum- 
mel,  in  his  answer,  assures  me  of  Lord  North’s  readiness  to  assist  me.  “  Thus  far 
we  run  before  the  wind but  my  good  mother  still  lives  and  reigns ;  yet  I  must 
drop  the  parallel, — I  would  rather  not  ever  count  nnj  golden  spoils  than  owe  them  to 
her  loss. 

Once  more  let  me  acknowledge  your  so  flattering  attention.  Believe  me,  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

B.  Tickei.l. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  GEORGE  HAY. 

Adelphi,  Jane  2,  1776. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  respects  to  Sir  George  Hay  ;  he  could  not  withstand 
the  solicitations  of  his  old  friend  Beard  to  send  him  the  enclosed  letter ;  at  the  same 
time  he  feels  himself  very  awkward,  without  the  least  right,  to  give  Sir  George  this 
trouble ;  but  if  some  of  the  happiest  hours  of  his  life,  passed  with  him  heretofore, 
may  be  some  claim  to  his  favour,  he  begs  to  plead  it  on  the  present  occasion. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


158 


SIR  GEORGE  HAY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Doctors’-commons,  June  2,  1776. 

You  are  grown  formal  in  your  old  age,  my  dear  friend. 

Jolmny  Beard  had  no  occasion  to  interpose  so  great  a  power  in  so  slight  a 
business.  Kiss  the  blooming  wrinkles  of  my  ancient  love  for  my  sake,  and  believe 
me  always  yours  and  hers, 

G.  Hay. 


Endorsed, 

“  Sir  George  Hay,  June  4,  1776,  upon  my 
asking  a  favour  for  Beard.” 


SIR  W.  YOUNG  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bond-street,  June  6th,  1776. 

I  thank  you  for  your  kind  note  of  yesterday,  and  the  very  high  entertainment 
it  admitted  me  to.  \  our  sun  will  set  without  declining,  and  the  memory  of  its 
splendour  continue  to  warm  and  animate  us,  even  when  it  is  seen  no  more.*  That 
the  evening  of  your  day  may  be  sweet  and  composed,  and  no  cloud  interrupt  the 
enjoyment  of  it,  is  the  sincere  wish  of  your  old  and  affectionate  friend, 

W.  Young. 

P.  S.  My  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 


LADY  SIMPSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

June  9th,  1776. 

Lady  Simpson  presents  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  should  esteem  it  a  favour  to 
procure  her  two  places,  or  a  single  one  for  herself,  for  the  play  to-morrow,  to  have  the 
honour  of  seeing  him  perform,  by  report,  for  the  last  time.  She  sincerely  condoles 
with  the  public  loss  of  parting  with  so  capital  a  character  from  the  stage.  If  Lady 
S.  has  made  an  improper  request,  hopes  Mr.  Garrick  will  excuse  her,  she  having 
sent  almost  every  day  of  his  performance  in  her  own  name,  but  never  could  get  a 
place  but  by  friends  that  are  out  of  town and  to  know  in  what  box  where  her  man 
may  keep  places,  if  there  are  any  to  be  had. 

*  The  famous  figure  of  Junius  a  little  injured  by  one  term  : — The  sun  cannot  set  without  “  declining." — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


159 


MRS.  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  June  10th,  1 776. 

I  have  devoured  the  newspapers  for  the  last  week  with  the  appetite  of  a  famished 
politician,  to  learn  if  my  General  had  yet  laid  down  arms  ;  but  1  find  you  go  on  with 
a  true  American  spirit,  destroying  thousands  of  his  Majesty’s  liege  subjects,  breaking 
the  limbs  of  many,  and  the  hearts  of  all. 

When  I  promised  I  would  not  plague  you  with  any  of  my  nonsense  till  you  were 
disengaged,  could  I  possibly  divine  you  would  be  so  very  good  as  to  honour  me  with 
a  letter? — ay,  and  a  charming  letter  too,  albeit  a  little  one — it  made  me  so  proud 
and  so  happy  ! — but  you  are  so  used  to  make  folks  proud  and  happy,  that  it  is  nothing 
to  you  ;  and  what  would  be  a  violent  effort  to  other  people,  slides  naturally  into  your 
ordinary  course  of  action. 

I  think  by  the  time  this  reaches  you  I  may  congratulate  you  on  the  end  of  your 
labours,  and  the  completion  of  your  fame — a  fame  which  has  had  no  parallel,  and  will 
have  no  end.  Yet,  whatever  reputation  the  world  may  ascribe  to  you,  I,  who  have 
bad  the  happy  privilege  of  knowing  you  intimately,  shall  always  think  you  derived 
your  greatest  glory  from  the  temperance  with  which  you  enjoyed  it,  and  the  true 
greatness  of  mind  with  which  you  lay  it  down.  Surely  to  have  suppressed  your 
talents  in  the  moment  of  your  highest  capacity  for  exerting  them,  does  as  much 
honour  to  your  heart,  as  the  exertion  itself  did  to  your  dramatic  character  :  but  I  can¬ 
not  trust  myself  on  this  subject,  because,  as  Sterne  says,  I  am  writing  to  the  man 
himself ;  yet  I  ought  to  be  indulged, — for,  is  not  the  recollection  of  my  pleasures  all 
that  is  left  me  of  them  ?  Have  I  not  seen  in  one  season  that  man  act  seven  and  twenty 
times,  and  rise  each  time  in  excellence,  and  shall  I  be  silent  ?  Have  I  not  spent 
three  months  under  the  roof  of  that  man  and  his  dear  charming  lady,  and  received 
from  them  favours  that  would  take  me  another  three  months  to  tell  over,  and  shall 
I  be  silent  ? 

But  highly  as  I  enjoy  your  glory  (for  I  do  enjoy  it  most  heartily,  and  seem  to 
partake  it  too,  as  I  think  a  ray  of  it  falls  on  all  your  friends),  yet  I  tremble  for  your 
health.  It  is  impossible  you  can  do  so  much  mischief  to  the  nerves  of  other  peo¬ 
ple,  without  hurting  your  own — in  Richard  especially,  where  your  murders  are  by 
no  means  confined  to  the  Tower,  but  you  assassinate  your  whole  audience  who  have 
hearts; — I  say,  I  tremble  lest  you  should  suffer  for  all  this  ;  but  it  is  over  now,  as  I 
hope  are  the  bad  effects  of  it  to  yourself.  You  may  break  your  wand  at  the  end  of 
your  trial,  when  you  lay  down  the  office  of  liaut  'attendant  of  the  passions  ;  but  the 
enchantment  it  raised  you  can  never  break,  while  the  memories  and  feelings  remain  of 
those  who  were  ever  admitted  into  the  magic  circle. 

This  letter  is  already  of  a  good  impudent  length,  and  to  the  person  of  all  others 
who  has  the  least  time  to  read  nonsense.  I  will  not  prolong  my  impertinence  but  to 
beg  and  conjure  that  I  may  hear  a  little  bit  about  your  finishing  night,  'l’lie  least 


1()0 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


scrap,  printed  or  manuscript,  paragraph  or  advertisement,  merry  or  serious,  verse  or 
prose,  will  be  thankfully  received  and  hung  up  in  the  temple  of  reliques. 

Pray  tell  my  sweet  Mrs.  Garrick  I  live  in  the  hope  of  hearing  from  her ;  and  tell 
her  farther  that  she  and  you  have  performed  a  miracle,  for  you  have  loaded  one  per¬ 
son  with  obligations,  and  have  not  made  an  ingrate. 

Viva  V.  M.  Mille  Anos  ! 

H.  More. 

And  has  “  The  Nine”  really  been  called  for?  What  a  comfort  was  that  piece  of 
flattery  ! 

I  send  the  Bristol  play-bill  “by  the  King’s  servants.”  Do  not  you  think  the 
King  has  a  great  many  servants  that  neither  he  nor  any  body  else  ever  heard  of? 


MR.  MRS.  AND  MISS  POTTS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Lincoln’s-inn-fields,  June  11th,  1776. 

Mr.  Mrs.  and  Miss  Potts  present  their  love  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  return  him  a 
thousand  thanks  for  his  very  polite  and  friendly  attention  to  them.  He  has 
afforded  them  opportunities  of  passing  many  delightful  evenings,  and  not  only  made 
them  extremely  happy  at  the  time,  but  the  remembrance  will  always  afford  them 
the  greatest  satisfaction,  though  it  will  preclude  them  from  the  very  possibility  of 
ever  being  again  entertained  at  any  theatre.  Mr.  Garrick’s  friends  begin  to  flatter 
themselves  with  the  hopes  that  his  future  leisure  will  engage  him  to  indulge  them 
with  more  frequent  visits.  He  cannot  pay  them  to  any  where  they  will  give  more 
real  joy  than  to  the  family  of  Lincoln’s-inn-fields. 

Mr.  Mrs.  and  Miss  Potts  join  in  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  design  them¬ 
selves  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  her  very  soon. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Mrs.  and  Miss  Potts  to  me 
upon  leaving  the  stage.” 


MR.  W.  SMITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Beaufort-buildings,  June  10th,  1776. 

As  a  visit  at  this  time  might  probably  interrupt  your  attention  to  more  material 
affairs,  I  beg  leave  in  this  manner  to  offer  my  farewell. 

I  am  desirous  that  the  little  theatrical  disagreements  we  have  had,  may  be 
attributed  to  a  (perhaps)  false  delicacy  in  my  temper,  rather  than  any  other  cause, 
and  therefore  hope  they  may  be  forgotten.  As  a  private  man,  I  am  under  obli¬ 
gations  to  you  which  I  shall  ever  remember  gratefully.  The  only  returns  I  have 
to  make  are  my  best  wishes  for  your  long  enjoyment  of  health  and  happiness  :  to 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


161 


these  permit  me  to  add  my  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  my  iiopes  that  you  will 
do  me  the  favour  to  believe  me, 

Sir,  your  sincere  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

W.  Smith. 

Mrs.  Smith  desires  to  offer  her  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you,  with  her  thanks 
for  your  politeness  to  her. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Smith’s  farewell  note  upon 
my  leaving  the  stage.” 


MR.  P.  POTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  June  14th,  1776. 

I  love  and  esteem  you  more  than  most  other  people,  and  therefore  feel  all  your 
obligations  more  powerfully.  This  morning  I  gave  away  my  dear  Bessy  (a  very 
sincere  admirer  of  you) :  the  whole  family  are  gone  to  Mr.  Pott’s  uncle,  Mr.  Hindley, 
at  Twickenham  ;  I  follow  to  dinner,  and  the  pair  will  stay  there  a  few  days. 

You  are  sure  in  your  retirement  to  enjoy  the  otium  cum  dignitate,  and  I  hope 
to  God  it  will  also  be  cum  salute.  Believe  me  always  and  truly  yours, 

P.  Pott. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MADAME  NECKER. 

MADAM,  Hampton,  June  18th,  1776. 

I  cannot  say  whether  I  am  most  happy  or  distressed  by  your  very  elegant  and 
affectionate  letter :  such  a  sincerity  of  praise  from  such  a  lady  has  added  a  cubit  to 
my  stature ;  but  the  self-conviction  I  have,  that  I  cannot  answer  it  as  such  a  letter 
ought  to  be  answered,  makes  me  miserable.  I  defy  the  whole  French  Academy, 
with  my  most  critical  and  worthy  friend  Sicard  at  their  head,  to  give  such  power  to 
words  as  you  have  done  ;  nor  is  it  in  their  power  to  lower  the  joy  of  my  mind,  or  the 
pride  of  my  heart,  from  the  present  exalted  state  you  have  raised  them  to.  Though 
every  poet  was  a  Voltaire,  and  every  proseman  a  Rousseau,  I  now  defy  the  devil  of 
criticism  and  all  his  works.  I  can  say  with  our  Waller, 

“  She  smiled,  and  from  her  smiles  were  sped 
Such  darts  as  struck  the  monster  dead.” 

I  flatter  myself  that  you  will  not  be  displeased  to  know,  that  I  departed  my 
theatrical  life  on  Monday  the  10th  of  June — it  was  indeed  a  sight  very  well  worth 
seeing  !  Though  I  performed  my  part  with  as  much,  if  not  more  spirit  than  1  ever  did, 
yet  when  I  came  to  take  the  last  farewell,  I  not  only  lost  almost  the  use  of  my  voice, 
but  of  my  limbs  too  :  it  was  indeed,  as  I  said,  a  most  awful  moment.  You  would  not 
have  thought  an  English  audience  void  of  feeling  if  you  had  then  seen  and  heard 

VOL.  II. 


Y 


162 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


them.  After  1  had  left  the  stage,  and  was  dead  to  them,  they  would  not  suffer  the 
petite  piece  to  go  on  ;  nor  woidd  the  actors  perform,  they  were  so  affected  :  in  short, 
the  public  was  very  generous,  and  I  am  most  grateful. 

Mrs.  Garrick,  who  has  taken  your  letter  from  me  by  force  and  keeps  it  locked 
up,  begs  to  join  her  most  affectionate  respects  with  mine  to  you  and  Mr.  Necker.  If 
my  multiplicity  of  business  would  permit,  I  should  be  at  your  feet  almost  as  soon  as 
this  reaches  your  hands :  but  we  have  made  a  vow  to  be  happy  as  soon  as  our 
worldly  cares  will  permit  us  ;  till  when,  we  beg  that  our  warmest  and  best  wishes 
may  be  presented  to  your  fellow-traveller,  the  Chevalier  Chatteleux,  and  all  our 
friends  :  we  never  can  forget  them  or  your  most  flattering  kindness. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  truth,  Madam,  your  most  obedient  and  devoted, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  T.  KING. 

DEAR  KING,  Adelphi,  June  25th,  1 776. 

Accept  a  small  token  of  our  long  and  constant  attachment  to  each  other. 

I  flatter  myself  that  this  sword,  as  it  is  a  theatrical  one,  will  not  cut  love  between 
us ;  and  that  it  will  not  be  less  valuable  to  you  for  having  dangled  at  my  side  some 
part  of  the  last  winter. 

May  health,  success,  and  reputation  still  continue  to  attend  you  ! 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly, 

D.  Garrick. 

“  Farewell,  remember  me  /” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  SANDWICH. 

MY  GOOD  LORD,  Monday. 

Ever  since  your  Lordship’s  invitation  to  dine  with  you  to-morrow,  I  have  been 
really  unhappy  that  I  could  not  attend  you.  The  person  I  was  engaged  to  has  given 
me  leave  to  follow  my  inclinations,  and  therefore  they  naturally  point  to  the  Admi¬ 
ralty.  Will  it  not  appear  impertinent  to  desire  to  be  asked  again  ?  It  is  not  (I 
know)  selon  les  regies  du  bon  ton ;  but  when  I  consider  that  I  am  near  sixty,  and  that 
many  such  holidays  will  not  fall  to  my  share,  may  I  be  permitted  to  hope  for  a 
remission  of  my  sins,  and  an  admission  to  your  table  to-morrow.  I  am,  <kc. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


163 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Islington,  June  28th,  1776. 

Your  retiring  from  the  stage  being  justly  considered  as  a  severe  stroke  to  every 
performer  on  it,  and  regretted  by  every  admirer  of  the  drama,  how  must  I  feel,  who 
not  only  suffer  in  each  of  those  capacities,  but  lament  at  the  same  time  the  absence 
of  a  worthy  patron  and  most  affectionate  friend  ? 

Please  to  accept  my  warmest  thanks  for  the  token  sent  me,  which  I  look  on 
with  pleasing  pain — happy,  however,  in  the  reflection,  that  my  endeavours  have  not 
passed  unnoticed  by  you,  to  whom  they  were  devoted,  though  conscious  they  have 
been  very  unequal  to  the  favours  repeatedly  bestowed  on, 

Dear  Sir,  your  constant  admirer,  ardent  well-wisher. 

And  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Tho3.  King. 

Accumulated  blessings  attend  you  and  your  family  ! 

Endorsed, 

“  Tom  King’s  answer  to  my  note  with  my  foil.” 


MR.  B.  VICTOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Charles  Street,  Friday  Morning. 

You  have  sent  me  almost  to  death  with  this  instance  of  your  goodness  to  me.  I 
cannot  answer  it  properly  at  present.  I  am  just  going  to  the  office  to  stay  all  day, 
and  thank  you  for  sending  me  amusement  if  I  should  have  a  moment’s  leisure — your 
commands  shall  be  obeyed  before  ten  o'clock  this  evening,  when  the  papers  and  the 
proposals  shall  wait  on  you  with  thanks  from  Your  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  ^  ICTOR. 

“  Victor’s  note  of  thanks  for  my 
subscription  to  his  Works.” 

N.  B.  I  gave  him  up  his  note  of  70/.  which  with  interest  came  to  above  100/. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  July  1,  1776. 

I  take  the  liberty  to  intrude  on  you  with  my  two  first  acts,  according  to  your 
kind  permission.  I  have  made  some  alteration  in  my  story  and  my  personages. 
I  remember  I  once  heard  you  say  that  English  names  and  an  English  story  lapped 
round  the  very  hearts  of  an  English  audience.  On  this  hint  it  occurred  to  me  to 
contrive,  if  possible,  to  make  my  story  interesting,  by  supposing  it  to  happen  among 

Y  2 


164 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OE 


persons  with  whose  names,  at  least,  every  one  is  acquainted.  I  hope  you  will  not 
disapprove  of  my  placing  the  interest  in  the  Douglas  and  Percy  families.  I  have 
supposed  it  to  happen  some  time  after  the  battle  of  Chevy  Chace — no  offence  to 
history  if  1  have  been  guilty  of  a  few  anachronisms ;  for,  luckily  for  me,  I  believe 
the  whole  story  of  Chevy  Chace  to  be  purely  legendary,  as  I  cannot  find  the  date,  or 
even  the  event,  in  any  history.  If  you  please  to  look  into  the  first  volume  of 
“  Percy’s  Reliques,”  page  253,  you  will  see  on  what  I  have  founded  the  quarrel 
between  Earl  Raby  and  Percy.  1  have  called  the  father  Earl  ltaby  less  because  it 
was  a  favourite  name  at  that  period,  than  because  of  placing  the  scene  at  Raby 
Castle,  the  ruins  of  which  I  believe  still  exist  somewhere  near  Northumberland. 

I  feel  it  cruel  to  disturb  your  newly-tasted  repose  with  my  nonsense  ;  but  I  have 
learnt,  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  to  take  advantage  of  your  goodness,  and  your  great 
disposition  to  oblige  and  serve. 

Do  not  spare  the  rod,  dear  Sir  ;  you  know  the  consequences  with  which  the 
proverb  threatens  those  who  do. 

I  imagine  this  will  find  you  in  the  inspiring  and  inspired  shades  of  Hampton, 
enjoying  “a  poet’s  dignity  and  ease.”  May  the  most  uninterrupted  health  be  added 
to  your  leisure,  your  muse,  your  friendships,  your  fame,  and  your  wife !  This  votive 
line  includes,  I  apprehend,  all  this  world  has  to  give  ;  that  you  may  long  enjoy  that 
all,  is  the  most  hearty  and  constant  wish  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  ever  grateful,  most  obliged,  and  faithful  servant, 

Han.  More. 

My  most  respectful  regards  attend  my  ever  dear  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  had  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  sending  this  parcel  to  Mr.  Cadell,  or  should  have  made  it  a  little  more 
correct. 

Endorsed, 

“  July  1,  1776,  from  Miss  More, 
with  two  acts  of  a  tragedy.” 


SIR  JAMES  MARRIOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

College  of  Advocates,  Doctors’-Commons,  July  6,  1776. 

When  I  met  you  a  few  days  ago  it  was  with  singular  pleasure  I  saw  a  man  who 
had  just  departed  this  stage  look  so  wonderfully  well.  You  have  had  the  philo¬ 
sophy  to  resign  thrones  and  diadems  in  good  time  and  with  good  grace;  a  great  exit 
is  every  thing ;  and  I  hope  now  you  will  have  philosophy  enough  never  to  repent  it 
as  the  few  kings  and  emperors  in  history,  who  have  resigned,  I  fear  always  have  done. 
Your  epitaph  may  be  almost  as  short  as  Ben  Jonson’s ;  it  may  be  said  of  you,  “  He 
followed  Nature  and  he  died.”  You  must  have  one  great  satisfaction  in  reflecting 
that  you  will  always  live  in  the  minds  and  memories  of  your  countrymen  and  in 
their  history,  while  the  world  of  arts  and  letters  shall  exist ;  and  that,  till  you  really 
quit  for  the  true  last  time  the  scene,  the  respect  you  will  meet  with  from  all  orders 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


165 


of  men  will  alleviate  many  a  pain  and  many  a  chagrin.  Your  countrymen  have 
been  too  long  inspired  by  you  with  exalted  sentiments,  and  been  relieved  by  your 
vivacity  and  fire  from  the  weight  of  their  blood  and  atmosphere,  ever  to  forget  the 
obligations  they  owe  to  you.  Although  you  lay  aside  the  dagger  and  the  sceptre, 
the  sock  and  the  buskin,  you  still  hold  your  pen  ;  if  you  use  it,  it  will  contribute  to 
keep  you  in  health  and  spirits,  and  to  give  life  to  others.  Continue  then  to  adorn 
the  scene  with  your  wit,  which  you  have  filled  so  greatly  with  your  action.  You 
cannot  leave  the  world,  nor  will  it  leave  you.  Upon  the  conversation  turning  some 
time  ago  in  company  upon  your  then  intended  retirement,  it  was  proposed  to  try 
some  short  verses  upon  this  subject.  The  following  are  in  this  sentiment,  com¬ 
posed  sur  le  champ—  but  I  fear  they  will  hardly  make  you  amends  for  the  heavy 
ecclesiastical  law  which  I  sent  you. 

Garrick  retires — whence  ? — from  the  world — and  whither? 

Not  from  the  world,  for  they  have  lived  together. 

In  Fame,  in  Nature,  and  the  Muses’  eye, 

Who  live  together  must  together  die. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  very  great  truth  and  respect, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

James  Marriott. 


*  *  *  *  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  July  G,  1776. 

Hitherto  have  I  waited  in  hope  that  your  heart  would  be  affected  with  the 
distress  of  an  old  and  most  valuable  friend;  and,  consequently,  that  your  purse 
would  have  been  opened  for  his  relief ;  but  so  long  a  time  having  elapsed  since  your 
receipt  of  my  last  letter,  without  any  notice  being  taken  of  him,  forbids  my  longer 
indulging  this  pleasing  expectation.  On  this  occasion  I  cannot  reject  the  impulse  I 
feel  to  expostulate  with  you.  Persons  in  your  situation  being  accustomed  to  a 
variety  of  applications  that  cannot  be  complied  with,  are  too  apt  to  contract  a  habit  of 
throwing  them  unregarded  by,  without  considering  the  merits  of  the  cause;  and  this 
I  would  gladly  suppose  to  have  been  here  the  case,  as  the  only  apology  that  with  any 
face  of  reason  can  be  made  for  your  taking  no  notice  of  the  information  given  you 
in  my  last  letter. 

That  you  have  done  many  generous  things  1  know  to  he  true  ;  but  then  it  has 
been  to  some  members  of  that  society  of  which  you  have  been  many  years  the  head  ; 
and  if  your  generosity  is  confined  to  that  circle,  it  no  longer  deserves  this  name,  but 
must  be  resolved  into  a  principle  of  self-interest,  as  those  people  were  as  necessary  to 
you,  in  their  several  departments,  as  you  were  to  them  ;  consequently  the  assistance 
was  mutual,  and  equally  for  the  service  of  each  other.  The  heaven-born  principle  of 
generosity  is  above  all  interested  views,  and  actuated  by  a  uniform  desire  of  commu- 


16(3 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


nicating  good  and  happiness  to  the  utmost  extent  of  its  ability,  to  objects  which  have 
no  other  recommendation  but  their  distress.  The  case  I  mentioned  to  you  had  a 
more  peculiar  recommendation, — it  was  the  case  of  a  man  with  whom  you  have  had 
a  long  and  intimate  acquaintance,  and  whose  uncommon  merit  is  perfectly  known  to 
you  ;  and  yet  you  have  not  been  able  to  prevail  with  yourself  to  deliver  him  out  of 
his  present  distress,  and  give  ease  and  comfort  to  the  whole  of  his  remaining  life  by 
advancing  a  sum  not  exceeding  that  of  your  diurnal  income  for  many  years.  Putting 
religion  out  of  the  question,  is  there  a  reason  that  can  be  urged  in  justification  of,  or 
even  in  excuse  for  a  conduct  so  repugnant  to  the  principles  of  common  humanity  ? 
Consider,  Sir,  by  what  means  you  have  amassed  a  very  large  fortune :  the  best  light 
it  can  be  placed  in  is,  that  no  person  was  ever  in  the  smallest  degree  improved  by 
theatrical  entertainments,  whatever  sound  morality  might  be  contained  in  some  parts 
of  the  pieces  represented.  In  this  fairest  light  there  is  evidently  nothing  that  can  be 
reflected  on  with  approbation  ;  but  when  we  take  into  the  account  all  that  may, 
perhaps  with  too  much  truth,  be  said  on  the  other  side,  will  there  not  arise  the 
strongest  motive  for  making  the  best  use  of  wealth  that  has  been  acquired  by  such 
means ;  that  the  proper  employment  of  it  may  in  some  measure  compensate  for  the 
method  by  which  it  was  obtained  ?  for  that,  whatever  we  may  persuade  ourselves  to 
think  of  it  during  our  passage  through  this  world,  can  never  afford  any  pleasing  re¬ 
flection  when  going  out  of  it.  You  have  passed  your  whole  life,  Sir,  in  a  mimic 
scene ;  realities  therefore,  on  which  you  have  been  unaccustomed  to  think,  do  not 
yet  perhaps  strongly  strike  your  mind ;  but  the  time  is  hastening  wherein  they  must 
be  felt  with  all  the  force  that  is  due  to  them ;  and  what  will  it  avail  you  to  have  al¬ 
ways  gone  off  the  little  theatre  with  peals  of  loud  applause,  if  at  the  end  of  the  great 
Drama,  when  the  curtain  of  Mortality  drops,  the  dreaded  hiss  should  grate  your  ear? 
I  hope  this  will  not  be  the  case,  for  there  is  yet  time  to  escape  so  fatal  a  catastrophe ; 
and  I  wish  you  may  have  retired  from  the  stage  with  a  design  of  retiring  more  fully 
into  yourself,  by  a  close  examination  of  your  heart,  in  which  alone  can  be  found  all 
that  must  constitute  the  happiness  or  misery  of  your  eternal  duration.  Old  age  is 
coming  swiftly  on,  and  points  at  death  in  the  rear,  which,  however  distant  it  may 
now  be  thought,  cannot  be  out  of  view ;  for  but  a  few  intervening  years  can  in  the 
course  of  Nature  possibly  intercept  the  prospect,  through  which  the  eye  may  with 
certainty  discern  his  daily  nearer  approach.  When  this  visitor  arrives,  who  will  not 
be  denied  admittance,  and  gives  his  awful  irreversible  summons,  will  any  satisfaction 
arise  from  the  idea  of  having  collected  together  a  mountainous  heap  of  useless  wealth, 
that  can  be  no  longer  retained,  no  more  enjoyed  ?  Your  heart,  if  asked,  must  answer 
in  the  negative.  To  that  heart  I  appeal,  if  in  the  awful  moment  of  dissolution  it 
would  not  be  glad  to  enjoy  the  inexpressible  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  it  had  given 
so  full  and  perfect  a  relief  to  the  distress  of  this  Avorthy  man,  as  to  impart  lasting 
comfort  to  the  remainder  of  his  life.  This,  and  this  only,  is  the  way  Avherein  money 
can  be  laid  out  in  a  purchase  which  may  be  carried  with  us  into  eternity,  accompanied 
by  the  prayers  of  all  good  men,  a  blessing  of  much  more  value  than  is  generally 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


167 


supposed,  which  all  tacitly  acknowledge  in  the  closing  scene  of  life  by  their  desiring 
to  receive  it. 

The  papers  say  you  have  received  51,000/.  for  your  share  of  the  house  ;  it  was  but 
the  moiety  of  the  odd  thousand  that  I  asked  for  your  distressed  friend,  and  that  only 
as  a  loan,  which  he  would  be  able  to  pay  with  interest  in  a  few  years ;  though  I  con¬ 
fess  I  had  hopes  that,  in  remembrance  of  your  former  amity,  you  would  have  gene¬ 
rously  made  him  a  present  of  a  sum  which  could  never  have  been  wanted,  or  even 
missed  by  yourself ;  and  would  not  only  have  delivered  him  from  the  great  per¬ 
plexity  he  has  for  many  years  laboured  under,  but  would  have  put  him  in  possession 
of  his  utmost  wishes  on  this  side  the  grave.  I  could  not  have  thought  it  possible 
that  the  information  I  gave  you  of  his  unhappy  situation  could  have  been  thus  long 
passed  by  unregarded ;  and  wish,  for  your  own  sake  as  well  as  his,  that  this  remem¬ 
brance  may  have  its  due  weight  on  your  mind,  and  then  I  am  sure  you  will  certainly 
remove  the  present  load  of  sorrow  from  his  oppressed  heart.  He  knows  nothing 
either  of  this  or  my  former  letter  to  you,  as  I  chose  not  to  raise  an  expectation  with¬ 
out  being  certain  that  it  would  not  be  disappointed. 

I  shall  trouble  you  no  more  on  this  or  any  other  subject,  and  conclude  with  ar¬ 
dently  wishing  that  it  may  please  the  Great  Disposer  of  all  events  to  soften  your 
heart  in  behalf  of  your  old  and  most  worthy  acquaintance,  and  make  you  a  blessed 
instrument  of  imparting  all  the  assistance  he  so  well  deserves  to  receive,  which  in  the 
end  would  most  assuredly  prove  a  more  advantageous  acquisition  to  you  than  it  can 
be  to  him,  as  the  pleasure  arising  from  good  actions  is  much  higher  and  more  durable 
than  money  can  bestow. 

As  you  know  me  not,  there  would  be  no  use  in  subscribing  the  name  of,  Sir, 

Your  real  friend  and  humble  servant. 

I  hope  this  remonstrance  will  have  its  due  weight  with  you,  and  produce  an  im¬ 
mediate  generous  resolution  worthy  of  a  good  man  ;  be  convinced  that,  should  it  prove 
otherwise,  a  time  will  most  assuredly  come,  when  the  neglect  of  it  will  give  an  incura¬ 
ble  wound  to  the  peace  of  your  mind,  and  be  reflected  upon,  too  late,  with  inexpres¬ 
sible  misery. 

Endorsed, 

“  Letter  about  Payne  the  bookseller.” 


MRS.  F.  BROOKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Glanville-street,  July  18th,  1776. 

I  should  last  year  have  asked  your  protection  for  an  opera  begun  in  the  autumn, 
had  I  not  been  told  you  had  engagements  which  rendered  your  receiving  any  thing 
more  impossible.  As  it  is  now  earlier  in  the  season,  you  will  exceedingly  oblige  me 
by  favouring  it  with  a  perusal,  after  I  have  made  a  few  alterations,  which  will  be 
finished  in  a  week  or  ten  days. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


168 


If  this  little  piece  appears  to  you  fit  for  the  stage,  I  will  flatter  myself  you  will 
give  it  a  trial  ;  if  otherwise,  that  you  will  return  me  as  early  an  answer  as  is  consist¬ 
ent  with  your  avocations.  I  am  influenced  to  expect  this  by  my  firm  belief,  that 
unless  when  obliged  to  a  different  behaviour  by  the  too  general  duplicity  of  mankind, 
plainness  of  conduct  in  business  is  inseparable  from  great  superiority  of  understand¬ 
ing  and  talents.  Of  that  superiority  and  those  talents,  I  had  rather  speak  to  any 
other  person  than  Mr.  Garrick,  and  to  him  on  any  occasion  rather  than  this.  Even 
modest  praise  appears  flattery  at  the  moment  of  soliciting  a  favour,  and  the  variety  of 
applications  made  to  you  by  writers  of  the  first  merit  makes  this  a  very  unimportant 
one.  I  am,  Sir,  with  the  greatest  esteem,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Fr.  Brooke.* 


Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  from  Mrs.  Brooke  about  an  Opera, 
Dated  July  13th.  Answered  d°.  15th.” 


ON  MR.  GARRICK’S  LEAVING  THE  STAGE. 

Alas  !  poor  old  Drury,  thy  life ’s  near  its  end, 

To  lose  thy  old  master,  and  patron,  and  friend  ! 
The  day  he  departs  is  thy  own  dying  day  ; 

What  body  can  live  when  the  soul  dies  away  ? 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LADY  SPENCER. 

MY  VERY  FIRST  OF  LADIES,  Hampton,  Tuesday,  July  23,  1 776. 

You  will  perceive  the  ill  consequences  of  smiling  upon  an  impudent  fellow.  As 
our  intended  jaunt  into  Wiltshire  is  put  off  for  some  days,  may  not  your  humble 

*  I  incline  to  think  “  Rosina”  the  opera  thus  introduced  to  Mr.  Garrick’s  notice.  His  answer  does  not 
appear  ;  but  the  nature  of  it  may  be  confidently  presumed.  He  thought  that  Boaz  and  Ruth,  or  their  modern 
representatives  Palemon  and  Lavinia,  were  little  furnished  with  dramatic  interest.  He  may  be  pardoned  for 
not  foreseeing  the  exquisite  charm  with  which  the  genius  of  our  lamented  Shield  invested  “  Rosina”  in  the 
vear  17S3.  The  music  of  that  opera,  as  a  series  of  natural  and  rural  strains,  has  not  yet  been  equalled,  and 
cannot  be  excelled. 

But  Mrs.  Brooke  had  higher  merits  than  she  ever  dramatically  displayed.  As  a  writer  of  romance,  she 
occupies  a  very  high  place  indeed  ;  for  her  pathos  has  dimmed  the  bright  eyes  of  her  sex  to  a  better  purpose 
than  has  been  either  conceived,  or  perhaps  wished,  by  her  almost  countless  successors.  A  writer  in  the 
assumed  character  of  the  virtuous  owner  of  Hagley  Park  thus  expresses  himself  as  to  her  Emily  Montague  : — 

“  Yes,  I  have  read  Emily  Montague,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure.  Mrs.  Brooke  is  a  most  ingenious 
woman.  Her  works  are  disgraced  by  the  common  appellation  of  novels.  They  are  amiable  and  interesting 
pictures  of  life  and  manners,  not  absolutely  perfect  in  resemblance,  but  sketched  by  the  pencil  of  benevolence, 
and  tinged  with  the  delicate  colouring  of  refined  sentiment.  Her  descriptions  of  Canada  in  this  work  would 
do  honour  to  an  historian.  She  transports  our  imagination  thither.  We  listen  enraptured  to  the  Falls  of 
Montmorenci.'' — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


169 


servants  at  Hampton  hope  that  Saturday,  Sunday,  or  Monday  next  be  appointed  a 
day  of  mortification  ?  We  entreat  you  to  make  yourself,  and  to  persuade  my  Lord 
to  be,  miserable  upon  one  of  those  days.  Whatever  companions  in  affliction  you 
would  choose,  we  will  endeavour  to  procure :  we  should  rejoice  that  the  name  of 
Howe  (ever  partial  to  my  follies)  should  be  of  the  chosen  wretched.  Your  Ladyship 
and  Lord  Spencer  have  long  promised,  and  we  could  wish  that  Lady  Harriet,  Miss 
Lloyd,  Lord  Altrop,  General  Kock,  and  Mr.  Crawfurd,  would  attend  upon  the 
melancholy  occasion  with  whomsoever  else  your  Ladyship  pleases :  whatever  the 
company  suffer,  we  shall  be  most  happy,  and  most  grateful  for  the  honour  conferred 
upon  us.  I  am,  ever  was,  and  ever  shall  be,  your  Ladyship’s  most  devoted, 

D.  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  My  letter  of  invitation  to  charming 
Lady  Spencer  and  her  Ladyship’s  answer.” 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wimbledon  Park,  July  23,  1776. 

The  resignation  with  which  every  individual  here  submits  to  their  fate  is  quite 
edifying — in  plain  English,  we  shall  all  be  charmed  to  attend  your  summons  on  Mon¬ 
day  next.  Miss  Lloyd  is  gone,  and  General  Kock  is  absent  at  present,  but  may  pos¬ 
sibly  return  before  Monday  ;  Mrs.  Howe  has  put  off  her  journey  on  purpose  to  be 
of  the  party ;  my  brother  and  Mrs.  Poyntz,  the  Duke  of  Roxburgh  and  Mr.  Craw¬ 
furd,  will  probably  be  with  us,  and  will,  I  am  sure,  be  happy  to  partake  of  the  idea- 
sure  we  propose  ourselves  in  passing  a  few  hours  with  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  in  your 
delightful  habitation. 

We  will  be  with  you  about  half  an  hour  after  four,  and  I  will  let  you  know  on 
Sunday  how  many  our  caravan  consists  of. 


SIR  JOHN  FIELDING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

July  23,  1776. 

Sir  John  Fielding  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  does  most 
sincerely  congratulate  him  on  his  retirement  from  the  theatre  whilst  in  the  full  pos¬ 
session  of  his  extraordinary  talents,  and  whilst  riches  and  fame,  with  united  charms, 
invited  his  longer  stay  on  the  stage.  From  this  manly  resolution  there  is  every 
reason  to  hope  that  this  retirement  will  be  adorned  by  elegance,  hospitality,  and 
cheerfulness,  to  the  great  benefit  of  his  select  friends.  And  though  it  has  fallen  to 
his  lot  to  be  the  object  of  a  very  premature  resentment,  who  ought  to  be  that  of  his 
esteem  and  respect,  he  shall  always  take  delight  to  say  (as  he  can  do  it  with  justice) 

z 


VOL.  II. 


170 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


that  the  chastity  of  Mr.  Garrick,  as  a  manager  of  a  public  theatre,  and  his  exemplary 
life  as  a  man,  have  been  of  great  service  to  the  morals  of  a  dissipated  age ;  and  whilst 
posterity  shall  behold  him  as  an  inimitable  actor,  they  will  no  less  admire  him  as  a 
good  man.  These,  Sir,  are  the  sentiments  of 

Your  sincere  friend,  and  obedient  humble  servant. 

J.  Fielding. 

P.  S.  This,  Sir,  is  a  tribute  which  I  have  already  paid  to  the  distinguished  merit 
of  many  whose  retirement  like  yours  has  been  the  effect  of  wisdom  and  prudence. 

Endorsed, 

“  Sir  John  Fielding’s  letter  of  reconciliation, 
and  my  answer.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  SIR  JOHN  FIELDING. 

July  23,  1776. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  best  compliments  to  Sir  John  Fielding,  and  is  very 
happy  in  receiving  so  flattering  a  mark  of  the  approbation  of  one,  whom  he  always 
esteemed  and  respected.  No  man  is  more  sensible  of  Sir  John  Fielding’s  merit  and 
probity  than  Mr.  Garrick,  nor  has  more  publicly  declared  it :  if  Mr.  G.  appeared 
hurt  and  jealous  that  an  old  family  connexion  of  love  and  regard  was  given  up  to  a 
later  acquaintance,  he  will  bring  old  Montaigne,  a  most  natural  writer,  to  justify  him; 
he  says  that  friendship,  in  minds  of  great  sensibility,  almost  equals  the  warmth  and 
weaknesses  of  love,  and  jealousy  is  as  sure  a  mark  of  one  as  the  other.  Mr.  G.  is 
much  obliged  to  Sir  John  for  his  very  friendly  wishes,  and  shall  be  much  more 
cheerful  in  his  retirement,  if  Sir  John  will  now  and  then  partake  of  his  hospitality 
with  those  select  friends  he  mentions  in  his  note. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  of  reconciliation  with 
Sir  John  Fielding.” 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Soho,  Wednesday.  Aug.  2Sth,  1776. 

As  the  devil  would  have  it,  King  went  to  Hampton  but  this  morning,  not  to 
return  till  Friday,  so  till  Friday  nothing  can  be  done  ;  yet  if  he  refuses,  it  will  be 
just  time  enough  P.  to  you  on  Saturday.  Many  many  thanks  for  the  prologue, 
which  I  believe  will  be  the  first  that  ever  was  spoken  at  the  end  of  a  piece. 

Yours,  my  dear  Garrick,  yours  most  truly, 
Endorsed,  G.  COLMAN. 

“  Column's  letter  about  prologue  to  his  prelude.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


171 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 


DEAR  SIR,  July  31st,  1776. 

You  may  depend  upon  my  calling  upon  you  the  next  time  I  take  a  broil  in 
London.  The  winding-up  of  my  theatrical  matters  has  taken  up  almost  all  my  time ; 
the  little  I  had  to  spare  was  spent  in  a  visit  or  two  to  some  friends  in  Suffolk  and 
Essex. 

The  little  favours  I  conferred  upon  you  were  not  worth  the  thanks  you  have 
given  ;  besides,  I  pleased  myself  more  than  I  could  you  in  bestowing  them  ;  so  let  that 
matter  rest.  I  have  heard  of  Sir  Thomas’s  remarkable  room  ;  I  have  not  yet  seen  it ; 
it  was  mentioned  to  me  as  a  most  ridiculous  affair,  but  I  will  take  your  word.  We 
do  not  quite  set  our  horses  together,  though  I  have  done  a  piece  of  service  lately  he 
knows  nothing  of,  nor  ever  shall. 

What  you  mean  by  the  b/ach  but  fair  defect,  except  that  most  worthless  creature 

A - ,  I  do  not  know  ;  she  is  below  the  thought  of  an  honest  man  or  woman  ;  she  is 

as  silly  as  she  is  false  and  treacherous.  When  I  see  you  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  the  ring 
you  speak  of ;  I  have  very  little  faith  in  such  matters,  nor  can  I  yet  believe  that  the 
gallant  chevalier  is  a  female.  C'est  un  peu  trop  fort  pour  moi,  mon  ami.  As  to  Mr. 
Rayner,  I  will  meddle  no  more  in  that  business ;  the  moment  I  can  lay  my  hand  upon 
my  letter  and  his  father’s  answer,  you  shall  have  them  :  his  letter  is  a  bitter  one 
indeed.  I  really  think  the  son  to  blame.  If  he  is  what  you  say,  and  all  say  in  his 
profession,  the  discredit  falls  upon  him  that  he  cannot  take  care  of  his  own  subsist¬ 
ence  and  fame.  I  have  my  objections  to  some  part  of  his  conduct,  though  I  did  my 
best  endeavours  to  serve  him.  His  father  and  I  are  at  present  almost  unknown  to 
each  other  ;  he  is  very  ailing,  and,  I  am  told,  cannot  last  long.  I  beg  I  may  hear  no 
more  of  that  business.  The  letters  you  shall  have  when  I  look  over  my  papers.  We 
must  take  care  of  ourselves  and  our  own  credit,  and  let  Mr.  Rayner  sen.  have  his 
own  feelings — nay  he  will  have  them  ; — and  he  has  so  much  sense  and  resolution,  that 
all  we  can  say  would  only  prejudice  the  object  of  our  wishes.  He  is  very  clear  and 
strong  in  his  accusations,  and  some  fathers  would  think  that  he  had  been  very  ill- 
used.  I  am  going  into  Wiltshire  for  some  time.  Yours,  dear  Sir,  most  truly, 

1).  Garrick. 

I  write  upon  the  gallop,  and  have  not  time  to  read  it  over  ; — so,  yours. 


MR.  T.  WILKES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

I  should  have  answered  yours  before, 
where  we  have  had  most  dismal  weather. 


Dublin,  7th  September,  1776. 
but  have  been  three  weeks  in  the  country, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  that  the  picture 


z  2 


172 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


is  agreeable  to  you  :  the  only  account  I  can  give  you  of  it  is,  that  in  the  summer  of 
1751,  1  was  at  Bromesgrove  in  Worcestershire,  with  an  uncle  (Mr.  Thomas  Wilkes); 
he  gave  me  two  pictures,  which  were  a  present  to  him  from  our  relation  Mr.  Robert 
Wilkes,  in  return  for  some  cider  and  perry  which  he  used  to  send  him  almost  every 
summer.  Mr.  Wilkes  told  him  they  were  a  present  to  him  from  Mr.  Congreve  with 
some  others :  one  was  the  picture  1  sent  you  ;  the  other,  a  head  of  Milton,  with  his 
name  and  age  on  it  (forty),  the  painter  not  known,  which  picture  I  gave  to  the  late 
Alderman  Faulkner,  and  is  now  in  nephew  Todd’s  collection.  I  brought  them  up  to 
London,  and  showed  them  to  the  late  Mr.  Ellys,  the  painter,  who  lived  in  Somerset 
House;  he  knew  them,  and  told  me  that  he  heard  from  Mr.  Robert  AVilkes  that 
Sir  Peter  Lely  made  a  present  of  four  pictures  of  his  painting  to  Mrs.  Bracegirdle, 
who  gave  them  to  Mr.  Congreve ;  and  he  gave  yours,  Milton’s,  a  head  of  Dryden,  Sir 
G.  Kneller,  &c.  to  Mr.  Wilkes  ;  the  latter  Mr.  Ellys  purchased  from  his  widow. 
Mr.  Ellys  advised  me  to  let  a  mezzotinto  print  be  taken  from  yours,  and  sent  a  man 
(I  think  his  name  was  Faber)  to  me,  who  wanted  me  to  leave  it  for  three  months  with 
him,  which  I  declined :  this  is  all  I  can  tell  you,  dear  Sir,  relative  to  it.  Mr.  Faulk¬ 
ner  desires  his  compliments  to  you  ;  hopes  you  have  found  benefit  from  the  whisky ; 
if  you  should  want  any  more  it  is  at  your  service  :  I  make  no  doubt  it  will  be  of 
service  to  you.  Our  Lord  Lieutenant  and  several  of  our  nobility  dined  with  Mr. 
Faulkner  the  day  of  our  franchises,  but  the  morning  before  our  Lord  Lieutenant 
sent  his  secretary  to  know  if  Mr.  Faulkner  would  accept  of  being  knighted,  which  he 
declined.  I  suppose  you  heard  of  Macklin’s  behaviour  to  poor  Ellis.  After  I  left 
London,  Macklin  made  an  offer  to  Ellis  of  a  piece  of  his  writing  for  his  puppet-show, 
provided  he  would  let  him  be  a  partner,  which  he  refused,  and  in  a  few  days  after, 
Mr.  Harris  returned  Ellis’s  plan  of  the  pantomime,  &c.  and  has,  I  am  told,  refused  to 
pay  him  a  shilling  of  what  he  agreed  with  him  for.  As  Ellis  has  his  letters,  &c.  and 
as  he  brought  him  over  to  London,  sure  equity  will  relieve  him  :  however,  Macklin 
was  most  certainly  the  occasion  of  this.  According  to  promise,  I  drew  up  an  account 
of  your  two  theatrical  campaigns  in  Ireland  in  order  to  send  you,  and  gave  it  to  a 
man  to  copy ;  but  when  I  was  in  the  country  the  man  went  to  London,  but  left  a 
letter  for  me  that  he  would  finish  it  there,  and  leave  it  at  your  house  ;  pray  have  you 
got  it  ?  If  you  should  have  any  commands  for  Captain  Heard,  he  lives  at  No.  2, 
Bury  Court,  St.  Mary  Axe.  I  request  you  will  present  my  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  sincerely  your  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thos.  AATlkes. 

My  compliments  to  your  brother,  &c. 

Not  any  theatrical  news  here,  only  that  Ryder  opens  his  theatre  21st  of  next 
month,  and  pays  upwards  of  1600/.  a-year  for  our  three  theatres. 

Endorsed, 

“  From  Dublin,  Wilkes’s  letter  about 
the  picture  he  gave  us.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


173 


LORD  SANDWICH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Admiralty,  Saturday  Evening,  1776. 

I  fear  the  attending  in  London  upon  a  literary  business  and  the  duty  of  a  sea 
chaplain  are  incompatible,  especially  as  he  can  receive  no  pay  but  in  consequence  of 
his  attending  musters  regularly  on  board  his  ship  :  if  a  fortnight’s  leave  of  absence 
would  enable  Mr.  Stockdale  to  finish  his  pamphlet,  I  could  strain  a  point  to  make  it 
easy  to  him ;  but  I  could  not  go  any  farther  without  subjecting  you  who  recom¬ 
mend  him,  and  myself  who  have  appointed  him,  to  a  good  deal  of  well-founded 
abuse.  I  shall  be  at  home  every  morning  between  this  and  Friday  ;  and  if  you  have 
any  farther  commands  for  me,  I  shall  be  very  happy  to  see  you  whenever  it  suits 
you  best,  between  ten  and  eleven  o’clock. 

I  am  your  most  humble,  obedient  servant, 

Sandwich. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  SANDWICH. 


my  LORD,  September  9th,  1776. 

You  have  bestowed  a  great  favour  upon  a  man  of  letters  and  talents  when  he 
most  wanted  it.  Though  the  sons  of  the  church  in  general  are  not  remarkable  for 
their  gratitude,  I  trust  as  Mr.  Stockdale  has  nothing  of  the  hypocritical  part  of  his 
profession,  that  he  has  more  of  the  moral.*  For  myself,  my  Lord,  as  Benedick  says, 
I  myself  will  bear  witness  that  your  Lordship  has  not  a  more  grateful,  more  obliged, 
and  more  obedient  humble  servant  than 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  H.  BATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Robert-street,  Adelphi,  Sept.  13th,  1 776. 

As  I  know  no  man  who  ever  showed  so  hearty  a  desire  of  serving  me  as  yourself, 
I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  applying  to  you  for  your  interest  with  your  successors 
relative  to  the  playbills  :  the  object  would  be  considerable  to  me,  and  I  think  their 
end  would  be  fully  answered  in  advertising  with  us.  You  hinted  some  time  ago, 
that  Linley  spoke  something  of  the  playbills  being  given  in  common  to  the  four 
papers;  if  you  cannot  serve  the  Morning  Post  in  particular,  favour  that  plan  as  much 
as  possible,  and  you  will  much  oblige  me. 

*  Mr.  Garrick  appears  to  have  particularly  remembered  to  whom  he  was  writing,  in  this  disrespect  to  the 
clerical  order.  May  we  presume  to  ask  what  that  order  thought  of  the  moral  part  of  the  noble  Lord  ? — Ed. 


174 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  am  going  to  Hagley  with  Lyttelton.  You  have  heard,  no  doubt,  of  his  giving 
me  the  reversion  of  a  good  living  in  Worcestershire,  the  incumbent  of  which  is  near 
ninety.  Wonders  will  never  cease.  You  fought  me  a  good  fight  there  !  What  a 
happy  man  are  you,  roving  from  pleasure  to  pleasure,  delighting  and  delighted.  1 
will  not  take  up  more  of  your  time  with  my  nonsense,  but  to  make  my  warmest 
respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe  me, 

My  dear  friend,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Id.  Hate. 

P.  S.  If  I  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you  in  answer,  let  it  be  addressed 
to  me  under  cover  to  Lord  L - ,  at  Hagley,  as  I  shall  remain  there  three  weeks. 

Endorsed, 

“  Bate’s  letter  about  the  Post.” 


CAPT.  L.  GALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Fort  William,  Sept.  20th,  1776. 

I  am  favoured  with  your  letter  of  the  20th  of  July,  in  answer  to  mine  dated  in 
February,  1775,  through  the  means  of  Mr. Patterson,  and  lam  flattered  in  your 
having  introduced  to  me  a  gentleman  for  whom  you  express  an  esteem,  particularly 
as  he  arrives  at  a  time  that  from  my  station  and  local  connexions  I  may  make  my 
little  services  useful  to  him  as  a  young  and  inexperienced  traveller:  and  I  beg  to 
assure  you,  Sir,  that  no  introduction  will  more  seriously  challenge  my  attentions  than 
one  from  Mr.  Garrick. 

I  have  been  most  happily  situated  for  a  twelvemonth  past  in  the  Governor-Ge¬ 
neral’s  family :  in  September  last  I  was  appointed  his  aid-de-camp,  and  the  necessary 
closeness  of  connexion  arising  from  that  station  induces  him  to  flatter  me  by  exact¬ 
ing  my  farther  services  as  a  private  secretary ;  and  I  can  with  truth  and  with  pleasure 
boast  the  intimacy  and  friendship  of,  in  my  poor  opinion,  one  of  the  first  characters 
in  the  world.  His  private  virtues  are  in  my  serious  and  decided  judgment  unpa¬ 
ralleled.  He  is  esteemed  by  many  a  reserved  man — a  great  mistake  that :  he  is  na¬ 
turally  open  and  unsuspecting,  and  is  in  select  companies  what  you  are,  for  the  most 
part,  in  all  companies— cheerful,  witty,  and  intelligent.  His  public  virtue  and  poli¬ 
tical  principles  I  shall  avoid  speaking  of :  you  have  doubtless  heard  the  pour  et  contre 
too  frequently  and  too  ably  discussed,  to  admit  any  thing  I  can  say  upon  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  be  either  entertaining  or  interesting  ;  besides,  I  am  partial. 

Our  intestine  disputes  you  must  also  have  been  well  informed  of :  concluding 
you  acquainted  with  them  too,  I  forbear;  for,  from  your  familiar  intercourse  with 
managers  (I  mean  ministers),  you  are  possibly  better  acquainted  with  the  springs  and 
hinges  which  our  present  impolitic  systems  turn  upon,  and  are  set  a-going  by,  than 
we  are  who  are  in  a  measure  the  ostensible  agents.  We  are  here  in  a  state  of 
agitation  and  suspense;  the  attempt  made  by  the  directors  in  May  last  and  the 
spirited  opposition  of  the  proprietors,  have  alarmed  and  posed  both  parties,  (of  which 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


l/o 


strange  business  Mr.  Hastings  had  intelligence  by  the  way  of  Suez  in  less  than  three 
months  after  it  happened.)  You  know  perhaps  the  ultimate  result  of  that  affair ;  I 
most  heartily  wish  I  did !  it  may  be  sport  to  the  minister  and  matter  of  indifference 
to  some  of  the  principals  engaged  in  it,  but  I  shudder  whenever  a  doubt  arises :  I  am 
now,  my  dear  Sir,  playing  for  a  deeper  stake  than  ever  I  did  in  my  life  before.  Mr. 
Hastings  victorious,  I  cannot  fail  of  fortune.  I  have  a  plan  laid  down  to  me,  the 
success  of  which  cannot  miss  to  ensure  me  a  fortune,  and  eventually  it  may  procure 
me  fame.  I  shall  however  count  upon  nothing  that  is  to  be  governed  by  such 
remote  combinations,  but  wait  with  Christian  patience  the  issue  of  an  event,  on 
which  my  future  good  or  ill  so  essentially  depends.  I  am  in  a  very  fit  frame  of 
mind  to  philosophize,  having  just  heard  of  the  death  of  my  poor  dear  mother;  it  has 
broke  in  upon  my  most  flattering  prospect  of  happiness — the  pleasure  of  making 
the  best  of  parents  happy  in  her  latter  days,  which,  I  call  God  to  witness,  was  my 
strongest  stimulus  to  every  enterprise  I  ever  engaged  in.  I  attributed  my  successes 
to  her  interest  in  Heaven,  and  the  fruits  I  always  looked  upon  as  her  own.  Ah,  my 
dear  Mr.  Garrick,  my  feelings  were  never  violently  affected  before — just  at  a  time 
when  my  self-cultivated  fortunes  had  taken  root,  were  rising  above  the  earth,  and 
promising  a  little  harvest,  then — but  I  shall  become  troublesome.  I  have  a  sister 
left,  and  upon  her  will  I  bestow  all  my  cares.  God  help  her !  I  am  afraid  she  needs 
them  too  much :  she  is  gentle,  good,  and  inherently  virtuous ;  my  father's  fugitive 
life  has  left  her  without  a  protector  or  a  friend.  She  is  a  Roman  Catholic,  and  I 
believe  she  is  very  strenuously  attached  to  the  tenets  of  her  religion.  Excuse,  Sir, 
the  liberty  I  am  about  to  take ;  let  nature  and  necessity  plead  my  cause.  Will  you 
introduce  her  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  obtain  that  lady’s  influence  and  instructions  for 
my  dear,  dear  deserted  girl  ?  I  can  at  all  events  allow  her  fifty  pounds  a-year,  which 
I  shall  take  care  to  have  paid  in  advance — one  day  I  may  do  more.  I  do  not  want 
to  make  a  fine  lady  of  her;  my  wish  is  to  have  her  upon  genteel  terms  in  a  worthy 
family :  or  that  she  become  a  pensioner  in  a  reputable  convent  in  France  ;  or,  if  more 
advisable,  in  England,  though  I  think  the  convent  preferable,  as  there  she  might 
either  pass  the  remainder  of  her  life  in  peace,  or,  coming  out,  be  in  a  condition  to 
partake  with  me  of  the  more  cheerful  world.  She  is,  thank  God  !  too  ordinary  and 
too  good  for  me  ever  to  wish  to  see  her  here :  though  I  may  hereafter  wish  to  tempt 
my  brother  out,  that  is  by  no  means  my  present  wish,  yet  he  must  be  removed  from 
the  line  he  is  now  in;  he  is  not  my  immediate  concern, — my  dear  girl  is.  If  your 
leisure  will  allow  you  to  assist  me  in  the  affair,  I  shall  to  the  latest  hour  of  my  life 
acknowledge  the  obligation.  I  shall  make  no  apology  for  this  particular  trouble,  as 
I  am  convinced  that,  if  yon  cannot  comply  with  my  request,  you  have  strong  reasons 
for  a  refusal ;  and  if  you  do  comply,  you  have  in  your  own  breast  a  fund  of  feeling 
sufficient  to  repay  any  pain  you  may  be  at  in  so  good  a  cause.  You  see,  my  dear 
Sir,  1  treat  you  without  reserve  as  mine,  and  as  the  friend  of  mankind. 

I  did  not  neglect  to  make  your  most  friendly  remembrances  to  Mr.  Justice  Cham¬ 
bers,  and  I  shall  either  enclose  a  letter  from  him  to  you,  or  his  note  to  me,  showing 


17G 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


what  right  I  had  to  expect  such  a  letter.  I  derive  great  pleasure  from  the  agreeable 
footing  on  which  I  am  with  the  gentlemen  of  the  long  robe,  though  on  a  less  inti- 
mate  one  with  Mr.  Chambers  than  with  any  other  judge:  he  is  too  domestic  himself 
to  make  any  one  else  wish  to  be  domesticated  chest  lid;  his  book  and  his  wife  are 
almost  his  only  companions, — the  good  lady,  his  mother,  1  beg  her  pardon,  1  had 
forgot  her.  Mr.  Chambers  is,  as  you  observe,  an  honour  to  his  country ;  he  is  a 
learned  and  an  upright  judge,  though  he  is  the  only  avowed  adherent  to  the  majo¬ 
rity  ;  he  is  connected  with  and  attached  to  them  and  their  cause;  nevertheless,  when 
Mr.  Hastings’  plan  for  the  new  mode  of  governing  this  country  was  completed  and 
revised  by  the  Chief  Justice,  previous  to  its  being  submitted  to  parliament,  Sir  Elijah 
Impey  and  his  brethren  annexed  separate  letters  to  the  work,  to  be  transmitted  home 
with  it.  Mr.  Chambers  wrote  a  sensible  and  a  spirited  one  in  his  judicial  capacity, 
recommending  in  the  strongest  terms,  that  the  power  to  decide  in  many  particular 
cases,  relative  to  the  revenue  branch,  “  should  rest  solely  with  the  Governor-General, 
without  appeal  to  either  court  or  council.”  This  necessary  (strange  as  it  may  strike 
you)  proviso  his  brethren  had  overlooked;  they  were  jealous;  they  squabbled  upon 
the  subject ;  the  majority  were  displeased ;  they  frowned  :  Mr.  Chambers  smiled  ;  he 
was  in  the  right,  his  conscience  told  him  so,  and  he  insisted  upon  the  insertion  of  his 
letter — it  was  inserted. 

I  wish  you  were  prime  minister,  or  that  I  could  have  the  same  confidence  that  I 
have  in  you,  in  the  premier :  from  my  local  knowledge  in  all  the  intricate  parts  of 
this  complicated  government,  and  my  unrestrained  access  to  the  interior  of  the 
cabinet,  I  think  that  my  informations  with  your  judgment  would  serve  the  com¬ 
pany  and  serve  the  kingdom. 

Your  friend  Dow  hath  relinquished  the  office  of  Commissary-General;  he  has 
got  a  separate  command,  the  garrison  of  Chunar.  I  heartily  lament  your  abdication, 
but  am  reconciled  to  it  for  two  reasons.  I  had  probably  never  seen  you  again 
though  you  should  have  extended  your  reign  a  few  years  longer ;  and  I  do  not  know 
a  person  in  the  world  who  hath  a  better  right  “  to  rest  in  fortune’s  shade  reclined.” 

There  is  strange  work  carrying  on  at  Madras,  which,  lest  you  may  not  have  heard, 
I  will  give  you  a  very  brief  account  of.  Lord  Pigot,  at  high  variance  with  his 
council,  finds  a  majority  against  him,  to  break  the  neck  of  which  he  commands  two 
members  of  the  Board  (while  it  was  sitting)  out  of  the  room  (Messrs.  Stratton  and 
Brooke) ;  they  foolishly  obeyed,  and  in  their  absence  my  Lord  and  his  party  (then  a 
majority)  voted  them  suspended  the  service,  and  they  were  suspended.  Matters  con¬ 
tinued  thus  but  for  a  short  time.  Stratton  and  Brooke,  by  the  advice  of  their  friends, 
disavowed  the  legality  of  the  suspension,  assumed  their  seats  in  council,  have  sus¬ 
pended  Lord  Pigot  and  his  friend  Claude  Russell,  second  in  council.  They  then 
seized  on  the  person  of  Pigot,  clapped  him  into  close  confinement,  and  Stratton  is 
proclaimed  Governor  of  Madras !  There  is  a  revolution  for  you !  match  it  if  you 
can  in  all  the  annals  of  all  the  world.  Yo  troops  in  disguise — no  concealed  army  at 
Ivnightsbridge !  all  done  above-board  in  the  face  of  open  day,  and  without  a  single 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


177 


blow  !  The  parties  have  appealed  for  redress  and  for  support  to  our  supremacy,  and 
our  council  have  been  deliberating  upon  the  unprecedented  acts  committed  on  both 
sides  for  these  three  days  past ;  we  can  but  enjoin  conciliatory  measures  ;  our  honour¬ 
able  masters  (or  their  right  honourable  masters)  must  finally  determine,  and  I  hope 
with  severity  in  a  matter  of  so  apparently  dangerous  a  tendency :  one  party  must  be 
made  a  striking  example  of.  I  think  the  Madras  folks  are  playing  at  schoolboys, 
“  King,  King  I  am  !” 

I  never  had  the  pleasure  of  learning  from  you  that  Mrs.  Garrick  received  a  piece 
of  muslin  and  a  small  bottle  of  otta  that  I  took  the  liberty  to  send  her  by  a  Mr. 
Brasier,  and  I  fear  it  has  miscarried.  I  send  by  Mr.  Dickey,  a  purser  (of  the 
Shrewsbury)  in  this  service,  a  small  parcel,  which  I  hope  Mrs.  Garrick  will  receive, 
and  I  entreat  your  good  offices  to  make  its  contents  acceptable.  Adieu,  my  dear 
Sir ;  let  me  beg  that  you  write  me  by  the  first  occasion,  and  that  you  will  honour 
me  by  esteeming  me  on  all  occasions  with  respect  and  affection, 

Your  obliged  and  devoted  servant, 

Lawrence  Gale.* 

P.  S.  Our  theatrical  committee  return  you  many  thanks  for  your  polite  atten¬ 
tions,  and  purpose  to  solicit  your  future  countenance. 


MR.  L.  GALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 


26th  September,  1776. 


Since  I  closed  my  long  letter  to  you  per  this  packet,  the  face  of  affairs  here  has 
taken  a  new  complexion.  Yesterday  evening,  at  half-past  nine,  the  Honourable 
Colonel  Monson  gave  up  the  ghost.  We  have  now  a  dead  majority;  but  I  am  afraid 
that  the  spirit  of  moderation,  which  hath  governed  Mr.  Hastings’  conduct  through 
life  will  operate  in  the  present  instance  to  the  prejudice  of  his  friends.  Adieu,  my 
dear  Sir,  Most  faithfully  yours, 

Lawrence  Gale. 


SIR  WATKIN  WILLIAMS  WYNN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DE4R  SIR,  Wynnstav,  September  27th,  1776. 

I  am  ashamed  not  to  have  thanked  you  before  this  time  for  your  very  obliging 
letter  with  the  names  of  several  plays  fit  for  our  performance,  but  I  deferred  answer¬ 
ing  it  till  after  the  opening  of  Drury -lane  Theatre,  when  you  might  be  better  able  to 
know  your  own  engagements,  and  whether  we  might  flatter  ourselves  with  the  plea¬ 
sure  of  seeing  you,  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  your  nephew,  at  Wynnstay  this  year.  1  intend 

*  I  can  add  nothing  to  the  real  information  of  Mr.  Gale’s  own  letter — there  is  heart  in  every  line 
of  it. — Ed. 

2  a 


VOL.  II. 


178 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


being  in  London  for  the  meeting  of  the  Parliament,  and  coming  back  here  for  the 
Christmas  holidays  ;  and  if  I  could  tempt  you  to  return  with  us,  nothing  would 
make  us  more  happy.  1  must  own  I  do  not  know  abetter  companion  at  that  sociable 
season  than  old  Falstaff.  I  will  not  now  press  it  farther,  but  hope  when  we  meet  in 
London  to  have  more  conversation  on  the  subject.  My  wife  desires  her  compliments 
to  you,  and  joins  me  in  the  same  to  Mrs.  Grarrick,  and 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

Wat.  Wms.  Wynn. 


SEASON  1775  AND  1776. 


Cash  to  David  Garrick,  Esq. 


To  Salary  . 

To  Management 


Dr. 

£  s.  d. 
800  0  0 
500  0  0 


Per  Contra 

By  187  days  paid  at  the  Office  at 
£34.  3s.  0 d.  per  week  . 
Balance  due  . 


Cr. 

£  s.  d. 

1064  6  10 

235  13  2 


£1300  0  0 


£1300  0  0 


Endorsed, 

“  My  account  at  the  Theatre,  June  30th,  1776.” 


To  balance 
Due  on  dividend 


235  13  2 

400  0  0 

£635  13  2 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK, 

It  was  begun  and  concluded,  perhaps  too  precipitately,  during  your  last  excur¬ 
sion  ;  I  am  somewhat  frighted,  but  have  chose  two  consolations.  Without  very 
great  ill-fortune  I  cannot  lose,  and  I  could  even  now  dispose  of  it  to  advantage. 
Besides,  I  have  hopes — but  I  ’ll  tell  you  all  my  hopes  and  fears,  and  schemes,  when  I 
see  you  next.  When  it  is  too  late  to  give  a  man  advice,  it  is  most  charity  to  assist 
him  ;  nobody  can  assist  me  so  much  and  so  well  as  yourself.  I  do  not  wish  to  clash 
with  others,  or  pretend  to  overcome  your  partiality  for  the  old  spot ;  but  our  line  is 
different ;  mine  is  but  a  little  gig,  and  must  be  all  alive  and  merry  ;  theirs  is  a  great 
town-top ,  and  may  hum  and  sleep  in  security. 

Farewell,  remember  me  ! 

I  am  waiting  for  a  gentleman,  or  would  have  been  with  you.  Adieu,  adieu  !  It 
is  at  his  desire  the  matter  is  not  avowed. 

Health  and  happiness  to  you  and  Mrs.  G. 

Endorsed, 

“  Colman’s  letter  about  his  purchase  of 
the  Haymarket  Theatre.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


179 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  G.  COLMAN. 


DEAR  COLMAN,  October  8,  1 776. 

I  aim  this  moment  setting  off  for  Hampton.  I  wish  you  most  sincerely  success 
and  every  pleasure  from  your  new  engagement.  I  am  truly  partial  to  the  old  spot, 
from  an  old  habitual  liking,  but  likewise  from  a  principle  of  honesty  that  makes  me 
attached  to  people  who  have  bought  my  property  and  behave  so  well  to  me.  Were 
you  manager  at  the  other  house  I  should  have  been  much  distressed,  for  then  honour 
would  say,  do  this,  and  tender  love  say,  nay.  I  am  sorry  the  place  is  let  to  a  puppet- 
show,  and  I  rejoice  you  have  not  (as  I  hope)  made  a  bad  bargain — but  more  when  I 
see  you.  I  could  wish  that  there  were  a  proper  gentleman-like  agreement  about 
matters  between  you  all.  More  when  I  see  you  ;  in  the  mean  time,  God  bless  you, 
my  dear  friend !  Yours  ever,  &c.  D.  G. 

I  was  very  near  losing  20/.  as  my  vanity  conceived  I  should  have  heard  of  your 
engagement 'before  it  had  been  in  the  papers — no  friendly  miff,  I  assure  you. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  answer  to  Colman’s  letter  upon  his  purchase 
of  the  Haymarket  Theatre.” 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Althorpe,  October  6th,  1776. 

You  must  acknowledge  you  are  shabby  to  have  put  us  off  from  the  sixth,  which 
was  the  day  you  originally  fixed,  to  the  twelfth  ;  but  you  will  have  your  own  way, 
and  therefore  we  must  acquiesce.  Our  coach  shall  certainly  attend  you  at  New¬ 
port  Pagnell ;  and  if  you  set  out  from  thence  about  one  o’clock,  you  will  be  here 
full  time  enough  to  dress  for  dinner. 

I  shall  likewise  send  directions  to  have  Holywell  House  at  St.  Alban’s  ready  for 
you,  in  case  you  should  like  to  lie  there  on  Friday  night ;  the  beds  and  rooms  are 
well  aired,  and  more  comfortable  than  at  an  inn,  and  that  would  make  the  journey  to 
Newport  Pagnell  very  easy  for  your  own  horses.  We  have  no  servants  there,  so 
that  you  must  have  your  dinner  or  supper  sent  from  the  inn,  which  you  will  have  no 
difficulty  in,  as  they  are  used  to  it. 

You  must  allow  me  to  add  that  our  servants  are  not  allowed  to  take  any  thing. 

Pray  make  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  believe  me,  Sir, 

Your  faithful  humble  servant, 

G.  Spencer. 


Endorsed,  by  Garrick  himself, 

“  Lady  Spencer’s  letter  from  Althorp. 
Nature  for  ever !” 


2  A  2 


180 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


THE  RIGHT  HON.  R.  RIGBY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Pay-office,  Oct.  11th,  1776. 

I  should  have  been  very  glad  to  have  seen  you,  had  you  called  this  morning ;  as 
I  shall  be  still,  if  you  can  call  before  one  o’clock.  I  would  show  you  Grant’s  letter 
to  me,  which  is  worth  reading. 

Poor  George  !  I  did  not  know  he  had  occasion  for  an  operation,  and  am  sorry  for 
him.  I  intended  this  very  morning  to  have  proposed  to  him  to  go  with  me  to  Mistley 
next  Tuesday  ;  a  dull  shooting  party  for  a  week. 

My  best  respects  to  Madame  Garrick. 

You  are  going  to  the  first  woman  in  the  world.*  The  only  rub  in  my  political 
life  has  been,  that  it  has  frequently  set  me  at  a  distance  from  more  acquaintance 
with  her. 

The  victory  is  complete.  Yours  sincerely, 

Endorsed,  RlCHARD  RlGBY. 

“  Mr.  Rigby  about  Lady  Spencer.  Ail  gospel.” 


MR.  R.  B.  SHERIDAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Oct.  15tli,  1776. 

I  should  have  written  to  you  yesterday,  but  as  I  found  Mr.  Wallis  had  sent  you 
an  account  of  our  situation,  I  thought  I  might  as  well  defer  it  till  I  could  give  you 
some  more  decisive  intelligence.  I  have  never  been  to  the  theatre  nor  interfered  with 
the  business  of  it  since  I  saw  you,  a  resolution  which  at  first  appeared  precipitate  even 
to  our  own  party,  and  particularly  to  our  friend  Wallis.  However,  they  are  now 
convinced  that  it  was  positively  the  only  step  which  could  have  prevented  Lacy’s 
signing  with  the  parties,  or  have  put  us  on  the  footing  which  I  hope  we  shall  be  on 
after  a  meeting  we  are  to  have  to-morrow. 

I  was  convinced  that  every  thing  had  passed  between  Lacy,  Thompson,  and 
Langford,  on  Friday,  except  the  actually  having  executed  the  deeds,  and  I  had 
reason  to  think  that  the  next  day  was  appointed  for  this  to  be  clone.  It  was  not  to 
be  supposed  that  argument,  or  indeed  any  consideration  whatever,  would  prevail  with 
Captain  T.  to  quit  his  hotel  (when  he  had  so  much  at  stake)  if  he  could  by  any 
means  maintain  it :  the  only  method,  therefore,  which  the  exigence  admitted  of,  was 
to  convince  those  who  were  to  find  the  money,  that  they  were  going  to  embark  their 
property  on  a  vessel  that  was  on  flames,  and  at  the  same  time  to  let  Lacy  see  that, 

*  Such,  by  the  uniform  consent  of  opposite  parties  in  the  state,  was  the  Countess  Spencer. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


181 


by  thus  dividing  his  share,  he  would  ruin  the  whole  of  it.  Accordingly,  after  I  left 
you,  I  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Langford  and  Thompson,  stating  the  injustice  and  ille¬ 
gality  of  the  business,  and  informing  them  of  my  determination  if  they  persisted 
in  it.  This  Mr.  W.  delivered  to  Langford  before  five  o’clock.  At  eight,  I  sent  Hop¬ 
kins  to  Lacy  with  a  more  formal  and  written  notice  to  provide  for  the  business  and 
management  by  himself.  He  scarcely  believed  till  then  that  I  would  actually  do 
this,  and  sent  Hopkins  back  to  me,  &c.,  but  as  I  would  not  talk  even  relative  to  the 
theatre,  he  returned  to  L.  who  was  in  great  confusion.  Mrs.  A.  having  refused  to 
play,  and  “  The  Christmas  Tale”  (not  being  ready  from  the  evening  rehearsal,  which 
had  waited  for  my  coming)  being  stopped,  at  twelve  “  Richard”  and  the  Panto¬ 
mime  were  fixed,  the  performers  not  having  heard  any  thing  of  our  change.  The 
next  day  (which  I  am  convinced  was  the  day  they  would  otherwise  have  signed 
and  sealed  on)  Hopkins  found  them  all  three  in  great  confusion  and  perturbation ; 
Mr.  Langford  particularly,  on  hearing  from  H.  that  he  did  not  think  lie  could  keep 
the  house  open  a  week.  However,  T.  spirited  them  as  much  as  possible  to  stand  to 
the  business  ;  but  (as  I  suppose  Langford  began  to  have  qualms  about  advancing 
the  money)  it  was  determined  to  try  what  a  civil  letter  to  me  would  do,  which  they 
sent  hoping  to  be  friendly,  with  a  compliment  to  my  abilities  and  so  forth  ;  and  at 
night,  and  again  on  Sunday  morning,  Lacy  sent  by  Hopkins  to  entreat  I  would 
return  to  the  management,  and  that  he  would  do  every  thing  in  his  power  to  procure 
matters  to  be  settled  to  my  satisfaction,  and  would  give  up  the  point  if  he  could 
prevail  on  them.  As  I  was  aware  of  this,  and  felt  on  what  secure  ground  I  stood, 
I  still  declined  hearing  any  thing  on  the  subject,  so  that  they  soon  found  that  the 
whole  of  their  stock,  after  changing  their  play  several  times,  was  reduced  to  the 
Committee,  and  that  after  Tuesday  they  had  not  one  play  which  they  could  perform. 
This  appeared  to  have  a  great  effect  in  settling  the  matter,  and  in  consequence 
(though  our  meeting  yesterday  ended  in  nothing)  we  were  to-day  very  friendly 
together,  and  received  a  positive  promise  that  the  point  should  be  given  up,  and  Mr. 
Lacy’s  word  that  he  would  never  part  with  his  share,  or  any  part  of  it,  but  to  us. 
We  are  to  meet  at  night  at  Mr.  Wallis’s,  where  we  are  to  receive  a  letter  from 
Captain  T.  and  Mr.  L.  renouncing  the  business,  though  I  do  not  expect  we  shall 
come  to  the  point  till  to-morrow.  I  have  seen  none  of  the  performers  (purposely) 
except  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr.  King,  who  called  on  me  in  Orchard-street,  since  the  affair 
happened.  King  has  acted  particularly  well.  However,  from  one  motive  or  other, 
almost  all  the  principal  performers  declined  playing,  on  various  pretences ;  even  one 
or  two,  who  I  believe  he  thought  would  stand  forward,  have  been  taken  ill :  indeed 
there  never  was  known  such  an  uncommonly  epidemic  disorder  as  has  raged  among 
our  unfortunate  company  ;  it  differs  from  the  plague  by  attacking  the  better  sort 
first  ;  the  manner  too  in  which  they  are  seized,  I  am  told,  is  very  extraordinary  ; 
many  who  were  in  perfect  health  at  one  moment,  on  receiving  a  billet  from  the 
prompter  to  summon  them  to  their  business,  are  seized  with  sudden  qualms,  and, 
before  they  can  get  through  the  contents,  are  absolutely  unfit  to  leave  their  rooms  ; 


182 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


so  that  Hopkins’s  notes  seem  to  operate  like  what  we  hear  of  Italian  poisoned  letters, 
which  strike  with  sickness  those  to  whom  they  are  addressed  :  in  short,  if  a  successful 
author  had  given  the  company  a  dinner  at  Salt-hill,  the  effects  could  not  be  more 
injurious  to  our  dramatic  representations.  And  what  has  been  still  more  alarming 
is,  that  those  who  being  indisposed  sent  for  our  Doctor,  found  themselves  on  the 
first  visit  (an  effect  which  Doctors  often  produce)  worse  than  they  were  before, 
with  this  difference  only  in  the  process,  that  instead  of  learning  his  patient’s  case, 
he  related  his  own.  However,  I  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  procure  a  bill  of  health 
very  soon  ;  and  as  their  confinement  stands  entirely  on  the  ground  of  their  dislike 
of  playing  under  they  know  not  whose  management,  I  shall  be  particularly  cautious 
that  there  shall  be  no  precedent  for  sickness,  as  I  have  been  from  giving  any  au¬ 
thority  for  it ;  and  indeed  I  believe  they  were  most  of  them  actuated  by  the  same 
considerations  and  obvious  foresight  of  the  event,  which  had  influenced  me  to  desist 
from  any  part  in  the  direction. 

1  shall  not  seal  this  letter  till  we  have  met  to-night,  when  it  is  possible  I  may  have 
the  pleasure  to  tell  you  that  matters  are  firmly  accommodated. 


October  1 6th,  Wednesday  Morning 

I  had  not  an  opportunity  last  night  to  get  at  my  letter,  and  indeed  what  I  could 
have  said  was  not  decisive  enough  to  have  made  me  anxious  for  it.  The  business 
of  the  house  is  all  stopped,  by  Lacy’s  desire,  sooner  than  let  it  be  known  to  his 
proposed  partners  (which  another  play,  the  effect  of  my  interfering,  must  have 
informed  them  of)  that  we  were  already  agreed  on  our  old  terms !  We  dine 
together  to-day  at  Wallis’s,  when  the  affair  must  be  decided ;  but  I  will  not  keep 
this,  as  Mr.  Wallis  will  have  time  more  fully  to  inform  you  of  the  event,  as  I  spe¬ 
culate  on  rehearsing  “  The  Christmas  Tale”  at  ten  o’clock  for  Friday.  I  have  run 
this  vile  scrawl  (which  I  beg  you  will  excuse  being  written  in  haste)  to  such  a 
length,  I  have  scarcely  room  to  say  how  much  we  feel  your  friendship  in  this 
business,  and  how  sincerely  I  am  your  obliged  friend  and  humble  servant, 

R.  B.  Sheridan* 

I  beg  mine  and  Mrs.  S.’s  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

*  This  is  probably  the  longest  letter  that  Sheridan  ever  wrote  ;  it  is  really  very  pleasant,  and  with  his 
usual  fine  temper  -witty  even  in  perilous  circumstances.  The  allusion  to  the  Doctor  (Ford)  is  like  the  pointed 
dialogue  of  his  “School  for  Scandal,”  or  “  Critic.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


183 


THE  DUCHESS  DOWAGER  OF  PORTLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Bullstrode,  October  20th,  1776. 

My  indifferent  state  of  health  has  prevented  me  till  now  acknowledging  the  re¬ 
ceipt  of  your  letter.  I  should  always  be  glad  to  oblige  you,  but  in  this  case  I  do  not 
think  myself  a  competent  judge,  without  consulting  a  friend,  whether  it  would  be 
agreeable  to  Mr.  Prior’s  intentions  to  have  his  manuscripts  published,  and  when  I 
come  to  town  I  will  let  you  know  the  result  of  it. 

I  hope  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  (to  whom  I  beg  my  compliments)  are  in  perfect 
health.  Mr.  Burke  gave  me  hopes  he  would  bring  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  to  Bull¬ 
strode.  1  hope  you  will  never  be  in  my  neighbourhood  without  letting  me  have  that 
pleasure.  I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

M.  E.  Portland. 


MRS.  MONTAGUE  TO  MR.  AND  MRS.  GARRICK. 

Hill-street,  October  20th,  1  776. 

Mrs.  Montague  presents  her  compliments  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  desires 
to  know  how  they  do.  She  has  the  pleasure  of  conveying  to  Mrs.  Garrick  a  packet 
which  she  received  from  Madame  Neckar ;  and  which,  lest  the  Philistines  at  the 
Custom-house  should  have  seized,  she  brought  in  her  pocket ;  by  which  means  she 
has  torn  Mr.  Garrick’s  letter,  but  hopes  he  will  pardon  the  accident.  Mrs.  M.  cannot 
help  intimating  that  she  never  felt  such  pity  and  terror,  which  it  is  the  business  of 
tragedy  to  excite,  as  at  the  French  theatre,  where  Mr.  Le  Kain  roars  like  a  mad  bull, 
and  Mole  rolls  his  eyes,  and  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  man  in  a  phrensy.  Every 
one  at  Paris  talks  as  they  ought  to  do  of  Mr.  Garrick,  and  the  persons  of  real  taste 
seem  convinced  of  the  false  taste  prevalent  in  their  tragedies.  Certainly,  Punch  in  a 
puppet-show  is  more  like  a  grave  magistrate,  than  their  dramatic  characters  are  like 
heroes.  Mrs.  M.  has  sent  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  Voltaire’s  paper,  which  was  read  at 
the  Academy. 


SIR  ROBERT  CHAMBERS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Calcutta,  28th  October,  1 776. 

Like  an  Oxford  muse  upon  the  death  of  one  king  and  the  accession  of  another, 
I  approach  you  with  tears  on  this  side  of  my  face  for  the  loss  the  public  has  sustained, 
and  smiles  on  that  for  the  ease  that  you  have  acquired.  I  congratulate  you  on  your 
wisdom  in  knowing  when  to  retire,  and  your  fortitude  in  retiring  even  in  spite  ot  the 
allurements  of  power  and  praise. 


184 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  first  account  I  received  of  your  resolution  to  become  a  private  man  was  con¬ 
tained  in  a  letter  of  yours  to  Mr.  Gale,  wherein  you  do  me  very  great  honour,  and, 
what  is  better,  give  me  a  very  great  proof  of  your  friendship ;  the  sweets  of  which  I 
hope  I  shall  yet  live  to  enjoy,  at  my  return  to  England,  without  either  the  impe¬ 
diments  of  business  or  the  bitterness  of  absence. 

Whether  that  return  shall  be  in  four  or  five  years,  or  be  delayed  for  double  that 
time,  will  probably  depend  on  the  success  of  an  application  that  I  am  now  making  to 
the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company.  The  death  of  Colonel  Monson 
has  made  vacant  an  office  (that  of  a  member  of  the  Supreme  Council  here)  to  which 
I  have  been  encouraged  to  look  forward,  from  the  time  of  my  accepting  my  present 
employment.  The  right  of  filling  up  this  vacancy  is  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  vested 
in  the  Court  of  Directors,  who  are  empowered  to  nominate  with  the  consent  of  the 
King,  signified  under  his  sign  manual,  the  person  that  shall  succeed ;  and  I  have 
reason  to  hope  that,  on  this  occasion,  the  interest  of  his  Majesty’s  ministers  with  that 
Board  will  be  exerted  in  my  favour.  But  how  powerful  soever  their  recommendation 
may  be,  I  apprehend  that,  to  ensure  its  efficacy,  familiar  applications  to  the  Directors 
by  their  private  friends  and  acquaintance  are  absolutely  necessary.  If,  therefore,  you 
are  known  to  any  of  those  gentlemen,  you  may  probably,  by  the  influence  and  ascen¬ 
dant  power  that  you  have  throughout  your  sphere,  do  me  very  important  service ; 
though  it  be  only  by  fixing  the  choice  of  a  doubter,  or  softening  into  neutrality  the 
asperity  of  a  stern  anti-courtier. 

This  letter  will  be  delivered  to  you  by  Air.  Smoult,  a  young  gentleman  who  is  a 
kinsman  of  mine,  and  whom  I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  send  express  to  Eng¬ 
land  by  way  of  Suez  and  Grand  Cairo  upon  this  occasion. 

My  mother  and  wife  join  with  me  in  compliments  and  good  wishes  to  yourself 
and  Mrs.  Garrick.  Pray  remember  me  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  and  Mr.  Beauclerk, 
and  to  all  our  friends  at  the  Club,  if  you  go  thither,  as  I  hope  you  do.  I  write  to 
Dr.  Johnson  by  this  conveyance,  and  hope  also  that  I  shall  be  able  to  write  to  Dr. 
Percy  and  Mr.  Jones ;  but  if  I  should  not,  I  trust  they  will  grant  me  some  indul¬ 
gence  on  account  of  my  present  hurry. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  sincere  attachment  and  regard, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Robt.  Chambers.* 

*  Dr.  Johnson’s  friend  the  Judge,  Sir  Robert  Chambers. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


185 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Althorpe,  October  30th,  1776. 

The  perverseness  that  guides  most  people  in  most  things,  inclines  me  to  leave 
many  necessary  letters  unwritten  to  write  an  unnecessary  one  to  you  ;  but  I  cannot 

resist  thanking  for  your  twro  letters,  especially  the  last.  Your  reception  at - is 

just  what  I  should  have  supposed.  There  never  vras  any  body  had  the  talent  of 
making  other  people  feel  ill  at  ease  so  supremely  as  that  person  :  I  sincerely  pity  her 
connexions,  who  deserved  a  happier  lot.  I  am  afraid  I  am  wicked  enough  to  enjoy 
the  thoughts  of  hearing  Mrs.  Garrick’s  account  of  all  her  distresses.  Pray  give  my 
affectionate  compliments  to  her.  I  shall  send  this  letter  by  my  Lord,  vrho  is  just 
going ;  so  that  I  have  only  time  to  add  that  I  am  detained  here  by  a  slight  indisposi¬ 
tion  ;  that  it  is  possible  1  may  be  kept  till  it  will  not  be  worth  while  to  go  to  town 
at  all ;  and  that,  if  you  are  charitably  disposed,  you  will  let  me  hear  often  all  the 
sense  or  nonsense,  news,  chit-chat,  or  scandal,  that  comes  in  your  way. 

If  your  charade  to  Miss  Lloyd  means  Rayshill,  it  is  a  vile  one ;  and  your  “  is  or  is 
not”  to  Harriet  we  cannot  make  out.  Adieu  ! 

Endorsed, 

“  Heavenly  Lady  Spencer  to  me.” 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Richmond,  November,  1776. 


My  dear  boy,  who  is  just  recovered  from  a  sore  throat  and  fever,  is  going  to  take 
a  ride,  and  I  have  sent  this  scrawl  by  him.  Indeed,  my  friend,  I  deserve  no  miffs, 
unless  perhaps  I  ought  to  be  angry  with  myself  for  not  waiting  for  your  return  and 
good  advice.  The  matter  was  scarce  in  embrio  just  as  you  were  going  to  Lord 
Spencer’s,  and  I  went  three  or  four  times  to  the  Adelphi  and  the  house  on  purpose  to 
consult  you,  but  you  were  so  lost  in  the  dust  made  by  the  new  brooms ,  that  I  could 
not  seize  a  favourable  moment,  and  indeed  I  did  not  then  believe  him  in  earnest.  As 
to  the  accommodation  with  the  parties  you  mention,  your  influence  will  always  be 
very  powerful  with  me,  and  I  am  sure  it  ought  with  them.  I  wish  to  avoid  all  hos¬ 
tilities,  and  I  know  you  wrill  not  advise  me  to  submit  to  any  oppression  ;  for  that,  coute 
qu'ilcoute ,  I  shall  most  certainly  resist.  But  I  will  not  quarrel  for  three  pence.  About 
the  middle  of  the  week  I  hope  to  see  you  in  town,  till  when  and  ever  I  remain,  with 
every  good  wish  for  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  Most  affectionately  yours, 


Endorsed, 

“  Colman  about  his  Haymarket  purchase.” 


G.  Colman. 


2  B 


VOL.  II. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


18(5 


DAVY  PAVY  TO  HALY  PALY. 

Adelphi,  Friday. 

Most  unfortunately,  my  dear  Haly  Paly,  the  Hamptonians  are  engaged  to  go  on 
Thursday  next  to  Farnborough  Place,  and  stay  there  five  or  six  days.  Put  why  may 
not  that  other  parti/  take  place  at  our  return.  We  shall  expect  you  and  Lady  Glyn 
Monday  or  Tuesday,  or  what  say  you  to  Sunday  next  ?  Cadogan  and  his  very  amia¬ 
ble  daughter,  with  the  celebrated  Hannah  More,  will  be  with  us  ;  and  if  you  can  take 
any  pleasure  in  a  roasted  Doctor,  and  have  no  aversion  to  roasted  venison,  we  will 
treat  you  with  both.  Open  your  mind  to  me,  I  beseech  you,  my  dearest  Haly,  in  all 
naked  simplicity  !  hearken  with  joy  and  gladness  to  tidings  I  shall  declare  unto  you. 
On  or  about  the  7th  or  8th  of  the  next  month,  the  royalty  of  Mistley  will  honour 
Hampton  with  his  presence;  and  as  I  would  choose  to  have  him  in  all  his  glory,  I 
would  wish  to  have  him  attended  by  his  satellites ;  therefore  let  the  Halys,  the 
Wrotsleys,  the  Molly s,  the  Dimples,  and  the  Cupids,  be  kept  for  that  high  festival ! 
To  which  let  the  Reynolds,  the  Chamier,  and  the  Adam,  the  first  of  men,  be  called  by 
the  sound  of  trumpet ;  and  let  the  Loves  and  Graces,  with  the  Iniquities,  attend,  like 
the  first  of  women,  Eve,  without  the  fig-leaf,  that  his  Highness  may  regale,  en  Turc, 
not  with  that  unexpected  ablution  you  were  pleased  once  to  direct  him  to,  but  with 
the  most  refined  spiritual  sensuality  in  the  Temple  of  Shakspeare.  I  am  writing  this 
half  asleep  at  the  hour  of  seven,  but  the  subject  has  roused  miraculously  (en  astro- 
nome)  le  pauvre  inspecteur  de  Pave,  and  I  shall  wait  for  your  answer  by  the  return  of 
my  courier.  Choose  Sunday,  Monday,  or  Tuesday  next  for  the  private  conference — 
th e public  rejoicings  must  be  established  by  royal  authority. 

Yours,  my  dearest  Paly,  in  all  truth,  naked  truth,  and  most  affectionate  warmth 
of  mysterious  conjunction,  Davy  Pavy. 

Pray,  if  possible,  an  explicit  answer  by  the  bearer. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  ridiculous  letter  to  Haly  Paly  about 
meeting  Mr.  Rigby  at  Hampton.” 


MR.  P.  STOCKDALE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Portsmouth,  Nov.  1,  1776. 

I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  your  letter  from  Althorp.  I  have  many  cir¬ 
cumstances  here  to  make  my  situation  disagreeable  and  melancholy ;  so  many,  and  so 
galling,  that  if  you  knew  them  all,  you  would  think  that  my  late  literary  exertion 
proved  me,  if  not  a  scholar,  a  man  of  spirit. 

Your  very  obliging  letter  I  intended  some  time  hence  to  answer  with  that  deli¬ 
berate  respect  which  it  deserved.  But  I  am  obliged  to  write  to  you  now,  however 
inaccurately ;  for  time,  and  my  evil  destiny,  press  hard  upon  me.  The  Resolution  is 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


187 


ordered  immediately  for  sea ;  and  it  is  my  resolution  rather  to  die  than  to  sail  in  her. 
How  cruel  soever  my  necessities  may  be,  I  am  determined  not  to  sacrifice  to  this  hor¬ 
rible  life  (as  it  relates  to  me)  my  constitution  of  mind  and  my  natural  pretensions. 
When  you  were  so  good  as  to  apply  for  me  for  this  Chaplainship,  neither  you  nor  I 
thought  that  in  consequence  of  obtaining  it  I  should  be  obliged  to  be  near  the  ship 
or  on  board.  I  have  now  had  this  Chaplainship  three  years ;  and  my  heart  is  yet 
warmly  grateful  to  you  for  the  interest  which  procured  it.  But  I  flatter  myself  that 
your  humanity  will  not  desert  me  at  a  critical  juncture ;  that  you  will  still  think, 
what  you  said  you  once  thought,  that  my  present  situation  was  (in  some  degree,  I  sup¬ 
pose)  unworthy  of  me  ;  that  you  will  sink  in  oblivion  my  past  obliquities  of  conduct, 
and  espouse  my  cause  once  more  as  if  they  had  never  existed.  This  will  be  to  verify 
my  sincere  eulogium  of  you  that  you  are  “  as  great  in  Garrick  as  in  Lear it  will 
give  great  pleasure  to  your  own  moral  sentiments,  and  it  shall  be  demonstrated  to 
you  that  I  deserve  your  attention  by  my  future  life  and  writings. 

Soyons  amis,  China ;  c'est  moi  qui  ten  convie.  Pardon  my  apparent  vanity  ;  but 
mon  cceur  s'epanouit — I  feel  within  me  what  in  some  measure  warrants  the  quotation. 
It  is  impossible  for  me  exactly  to  point  out  what  I  would  wish  you  to  do  for  me : 
you  know  my  cast  of  mind ;  you  know  what  I  am  qualified  for ;  you  know  the 
range  I  formerly  gave  you,  when  you  were  generously  active  to  serve  me.  As  I  am 
determined  at  this  time,  for  a  thousand  reasons,  to  resign  rather  than  to  go  to  sea, 
a  determination  which  may  be  of  ugly  consequence  to  me,  I  will  lay  two  or  three 
objects  before  you.  The  Sandwich,  a  ninety-gun  ship,  is  put  into  commission  here  ; 
she  must  have  a  Chaplain.  A  ninety-gun  ship  is  now,  or  immediately  will  be,  put 
into  commission  at  Chatham.  If  I  cannot  obtain  one  of  them,  as  my  health  is,  in 
truth,  very  indifferent,  Lord  Sandwich  might  dispense  with  my  being  kicked  about 
in  the  Channel  this  winter.  But  pray  be  so  good  as  fix  me  on  terra  firma  if  you 
can  ;  I  am  sea-sick  to  death  already.  On  the  naval  objects  I  have  mentioned  I  would 
neither  wish  to  waste  my  interest  with  you,  nor  that  you  should  waste  your  interest 
for  me  ;  for  if  in  one  of  them  you  should  succeed  for  me,  you  will  only  raise  me 
from  the  fire  to  the  frying-pan  ;  therefore  I  only  propose  them,  if  nothing  better  can 
be  done  for  me.  Trust  me,  to  whatever  you  recommend  me,  I  shall  fill  my  sphere 
with  diligence  and  honour.  Pray  excuse  all  inaccuracies  ;  time  is  precious,  and  the 
post  is  going. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  very  gratefully  and  respectfully, 

Your  most  faithful  obedient  servant, 

Percival  Stockdale. 

Pray  write  to  me  soon.  The  Resolution  is  at  Spithead;  she  is  ordered  to  be  in 
immediate  readiness  for  sea. 

Respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  hope  yet  to  deserve  her  friendship. 


2  ii  2 


188 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sandleford,  November  3rd,  1776. 

As  the  grave  and  the  sage  love  retirement,  and  the  idle  and  the  foolish  love 
variety,  you  would  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  for  some  reason  or  other  I  stole  into 
the  country  as  soon  as  I  could  after  my  arrival  from  Paris.  When  the  action  is  good, 
I  do  not  love  people  should  too  curiously  enquire  into  the  motive  ;  but,  as  we  live  in 
a  prying  world,  somebody  may  tell  you,  if  I  do  not,  that  I  came  hither  to  enjoy  a 
scene  and  mode  of  life  the  most  different  that  was  possible  from  what  I  had  been  at 
Paris.  Mine  is  the  fable  of  Dame  Baucis  reversed.  I  am  metamorphosed  into  the 
rural  cottager;  sunk  into  a  cultivator  of  potatoes,  and  feeder  of  pigs :  all  this  won¬ 
derful  change  was  wrought  without  any  operation  of  Jupiter  or  Mercury,  but  merely 
by  mortal  postilions,  who  brought  me  through  the  turnpike-road  to  Sandleford ; 
where,  with  all  the  fine  visions  of  theory,  and  all  the  energies  of  action,  I  am  the 
most  delighted  and  most  prosperous  farmer  that  is  possible  ;  and  while  the  rural  ob¬ 
jects  and  amusements  were  new,  I  did  not  imagine  I  should  revert  to  what  I  had 
seen  at  Paris,  or  regret  what  I  might  have  enjoyed  in  London,  till  I  had  the  favour 
of  your  letter,  which  told  me  you  had  intended  to  call  upon  me,  and  give  me  an 
hour  of  your  conversation,  which  I  prefer  to  every  thing  either  town  or  country  could 
offer.  I  have  not  yet  fixed  my  day  for  leaving  this  place.  If  I  loved  to  give  myself 
airs  of  importance,  I  should  tell  you  I  had  not  yet  done  all  the  business  I  came  to  do ; 
but,  to  confess  the  honest  truth,  I  came  to  do  idleness,  and  it  is  not  all  done.  I  know 
verbal  critics  would  condemn  the  phrase,  and  say  no  one  can  do  idleness — the  very 
essence  of  idleness  is  not  doing ;  but  there  is  an  idleness  to  be  done  as  much  as  a 
darkness  that  may  be  visible,  and  is,  like  the  other,  a  state  and  a  condition,  and  a  very 
pleasant  and  gentle  one,  when  the  working-day  of  bustle  and  hurry  is  over  ;  but,  seri¬ 
ously  speaking,  I  found  it  necessary  for  my  health  and  spirits  to  get  a  little  quiet 
and  tranquillity  here,  and  not  to  pass  from  the  flutter  of  Paris  to  the  racket  of 
London. 

I  am  rejoiced  that  you  tell  me  Shakspeare  shall  be  revenged  on  the  base  attack 
made  on  him  at  the  Academy.  I  felt  the  same  indignation  and  scorn  at  the  reading 
Voltaire’s  paper  as  I  should  have  done  if  I  had  seen  Harlequin  cutting  capers,  and 
striking  his  wooden  sword  on  the  monument  of  a  Caesar  or  an  Alexander  the  Great. 
I  would  give  you  an  account  of  all  that  passed  on  the  occasion,  but  that  I  have 
already  written  it  to  two  or  three  of  my  correspondents,  and  it  is  tedious  to  tell  as 
well  as  to  listen  to  the  twice-told  tale.  I  told  it  indeed  with  variations:  to  the 
Greek  scholar  I  complained  at  the  same  time  of  the  indignities  offered  to  Homer ; 
to  the  wit,  of  the  absurdities  and  inconsistencies  so  apparent  as  that,  while  the  study 
and  imitation  of  great  and  original  genius  was  recommended,  our  bard,  the  greatest 
and  most  original  of  geniuses,  was  abused  and  ridiculed  for  errors  to  which  the  most 
sublime  writers  are  most  liable.  Xow,  my  dear  Sir,  as  in  you  are  united  all  the  tastes 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


189 


and  all  the  excellencies  of  the  scholar,  the  wit,  the  critic.  &c.,  to  provoke  the  full  and 
utmost  of  your  indignation  and  contempt,  I  must  repeat  to  you  every  offence  which 
genius,  wit,  and  sense  received ;  therefore  I  will  reserve  the  history  of  this  affair  till  I 
have  the  happiness  of  seeing  you.  I  must  do  due  justice  to  the  Academy  by  saying, 
that  it  was  much  against  the  inclination  of  all  but  three  or  four  that  this  paper  was 
read.  I  must  say  I  felt  for  Shakspeare  the  anxiety  one  does  for  a  dead  friend,  who 
can  no  longer  speak  for  himself.  When  Mr.  Garrick  was  on  the  stage,  I  should  have 
defied  the  utmost  malice,  as  he  was  then  alive,  and  consequently  invincible.  Indeed, 
my  dear  Sir,  you  must,  from  filial  piety  and  paternal  duty  (for  I  reckon  you  both  the 
son  and  the  father  of  Shakspeare  in  many  respects),  defend  him  against  this  pert 
Frenchman.  There  are  many  of  the  French  who  greatly  admire  Shakspeare ;  but, 
except  those  who  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  see  his  spirit  walk  the  stage,  few  1 
fear  that  have  felt  him. 

I  assure  you  I  am  more  alarmed  for  Mrs.  Garrick’s  interests  than  ever ;  Madle. 
Gregory  at  Paris  was  more  desperately  in  love  with  you  than  Miss  Gregory  at  Lon¬ 
don.  The  naughty  girl  laughed  most  heartily  at  the  tragedies  when  she  should  have 
cried ;  conscious  at  last  how  she  exposed  herself,  she  declined  going  to  the  spectacle. 

I  have  not  yet  absolutely  fixed  the  day  for  my  return  to  Hill-street ;  but  as  soon 
as  I  arrive  there,  I  will  send  a  petition  to  the  Adelphi  to  obtain  the  promised  visit. 
My  best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  Miss  Gregory  is  much  her  humble  servant ; 
I  am  ashamed  to  say  whose  humble  servant  she  is  most.  With  the  most  perfect 
esteem,  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged, 

And  most  affectionate  and  obedient  humble  servant, 

Eliz.  Montagu. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MADAM  NECKER. 


MADAM,  Hampton,  Nov.  10th,  1776. 

By  the  gracious  permission  of  the  gout,  which  has  prevented  my  doing  my  duty 
till  now,  I  take  up  my  pen,  with  fear  and  trembling,  to  thank  you  from  my  heart  of 
hearts  (as  Shakspeare  calls  it)  for  the  most  flattering,  charming,  bewitching  letter 
that  ever  came  to  my  hand :  I  shall  keep  it  as  the  most  precious  monument  of  your 
unbounded  partiality  to  me,  and  of  my  own  vanity  :  it  shall  be  left  by  my  will  to  be 
kept  in  the  famous  mulberry-box  with  Shakspeare’s  own  handwriting,  to  be  read  by 
my  children’s  children  for  ever  and  ever,  and 

“  Exegi  Monumentum  !”  &c. 

V,  ill  you  pardon  me  for  a  fault  for  the  sincerity  of  confessing  it?  Mr.  Gibbon, 
our  learned  friend  and  excellent  writer,  happened  to  be  with  me  when  I  received  the 
bewitching  letter:  in  the  pride,  and  grateful  overflowings  of  my  heart,  I  could  not 
resist  the  temptation  of  showing  it  to  him  ; — he  read  —  stared  at  me — was  silent — then 


190 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


gave  it  me  with  these  emphatical  words  emphatically  spoken—  “  This  is  the  very  best 
letter  that  ever  was  written  upon  which,  a-la-moile  d’Angleterrei  the  writer  was 
remembered  with  true  devotion,  and  in  full  libations.  An  old  English  ballad  says — 

“  Let  your  heart  and  your  wine  overflow 
To  all  that  is  matchless  below  /” 

And  so  they  shall,  as  long  as  they  can  overflow  with  me.  I  am  so  bewitched  to  this 
subject,  that  I  had  almost  forgot  my  wife — Avho  is  so  full  of  her  warm  acknowledg¬ 
ments  for  the  honour  and  pleasure  she  received  with  your  most  elegant  present,  that 
her  great  sensibility  upon  the  occasion  requires  a  more  powerful  pen  than  mine  to 
describe  it.  She  begs  me  in  particular  to  present  her  respects  to  Mrs.  Necker,  and 
that  were  she  able  to  tell  her  feelings,  neither  Shakspeare  nor  his  interpreter,  her 
husband,  should  outdo  her  in  the  true  sentiments  of  the  heart. 

It  would  be  thought,  in  general,  very  strange  that  I  should  not  before  felicitate 
you,  Madam,  and  Mr.  Necker,  upon  his  late,  as  it  is  called,  promotion.  I  have  a  very 
particular  way  of  thinking  upon  these  matters ;  and  as  I  have  the  honour  of  knowing 
Mr.  Necker,  I  sincerely  think  that  no  change  of  situation  can  be  any  promotion  to 
such  a  mind  and  such  abilities.  I  must  beg  leave  to  apply  to  you  and  him  a  stanza 
in  a  little  Ode  which  I  wrote  upon  being  asked  if  I  had  been  to  visit  Lord  Camden, 
and  give  him  joy  of  his  appointment  to  the  Great  Seal. 

“  Wish,  him  joy,  and  for  what?  I  beseech  you,  declare, 

No  changes  new  honours  can  bring : 

To  Necker  the  place  will  be  labour  and  care, — 

Wish  joy  to  his  country  and  king.” 

These  are  my  real  sentiments  in  prose  as  well  as  rhyme  ;  and,  to  be  a  little  selfish,  what 
shall  I  get  by  the  matter  ?  Instead  of  seeing  (should  I  go  to  Paris)  the  warm,  bene¬ 
volent,  smiling,  social,  communicative,  open-hearted  Mr.  Necker,  I  shall  behold  the 
thoughtful,  absent,  deep,  wise,  grave  politician  ;  scheming  every  kind  of  good  for 
France;  and  perhaps  in  the  moment  that  I  am  enjoying  every  hospitable  pleasure 
under  his  roof,  he  may  be  planning  mischief  for  poor  Old  England.  I  cannot  bear 
it.  No ;  I  will  stay  for  his  return  to  social  and  private  happiness,  and  then  I  will  be 
the  first  to  felicitate  my  best  and  much  honoured  friends.  If  I  can  finish  a  little 
thought  that  I  have,  I  will  send  it :  the  only  merit  will  be  its  sincerity.  I  have  left 
no  room  for  Voltaire  and  Shakspeare.  There  are  rods  preparing  for  the  old  gentle¬ 
man  by  several  English  wits :  his  letter  to  the  French  Academy  is  no  addition  to  his 
genius  or  his  generosity,  and  his  errors  are  without  end.  I  pity  his  ill-placed  anger. 

I  am  your  most  faithfully  affectionate  and  devoted  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  have  the  gout  in  my  hand. 

*  It  will  be  found  in  the  foreign  part  of  “  The  Correspondence.” — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


191 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Althorp,  November  11th,  1776. 

I  must  own  you  have  made  thorough  amends  for  your  silence  at  first  by  the  two 
letters  you  have  sent  me,  which,  besides  their  own  personal  merit,  had  every  possible 
advantage ;  for  things  told  any  way  are  interesting  to  people  deserted  as  we  are,  and 
you  may  easily  imagine  how  much  more  so  when  they  are  told  your  way.  I  am 
ashamed  of  having  mistaken  opposite  extremes  in  your  last  charade ;  it  is  certainly 
better  cold  than  hot,  but  is  but  a  moderate  business  at  best.  The  Duchess  of  Devon¬ 
shire  and  Mr.  Isted  (whom  you  met  some  time  ago  at  Mr.  Tlmrsby’s)  have,  I  think, 
outdone  you  all ;  they  have  each  of  them  written  three  or  four,  of  which  I  shall 
give  you  the  two  following,  by  way  of  specimen  : 

MR.  ISTED. 

Quand  le  heros  triomphe  apr&s  la  victoire, 

Mon  premier  le  re^oit,  il  fait  briber  sa  gloire  ; 

Quand  la  mer  est  troublee  par  l’orage  et  le  vent, 

Mon  second  sait  sauver  le  vaisseau  perissant ; 

Mon  tout  est  a-la-mode,  on  l’ecrit,  on  le  lit, 

Et  les  gens  hebetes  le  brulent  par  depit. 


THE  DUCHESS  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

My  first  no  life  or  feeling  blesses, 

My  second  every  sense  possesses; 

And  nothing  more  affronts  my  second, 

Than  when  it  like  my  first  is  reckon’d. 

United  they  a  being  show, 

The  greatest  nuisance  that  we  know. 

The  first  is  Charade;  the  next,  Blockhead. 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire  has  likewise  made  some  very  good  ones  ;  but  as  you  are 
probably  as  much  tired  of  them  as  we  are,  I  shall  not  worry  you  with  any  more. 

Many  thanks  for  your  epilogue:  I  like  it  much,  and  have  taken  a  copy  of  it ;  but 
I  will  not  show  it  to  any  body,  except  Miss  Lloyd  and  Mrs.  Thursby,  till  you  tell 
me  I  may.  By  the  by,  as  you  have  a  good  amanuensis,  you  might,  I  think,  from 
time  to  time  send  me  a  few  of  the  contents  of  the  hook — the  Dialogue  between  the 
two  Buildings,  &c.  as  well  as  all  your  new  productions,  for  which  I  shall  be  very 
thankful. 

I  am  sorry  for  what  you  say  of  public  affairs  ;  it  is  a  subject  I  hate  to  think  upon, 
as  the  general  good  that  can  be  attained,  even  by  the  most  justifiable  war,  is  so  inade¬ 
quate  to  the  innumerable  ills  and  heart-breaking  miseries  it  occasions. 

Your  arrangement  of  the  illuminations  for  people's  heads  is  not  ill-adapted  ; 


192 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


though  we,  who  are  approaching  towards  old,  shall  think  it  hard  to  be  allowed  less 
light  merely  because  we  have  occasion  for  more. 

I  have  at  last  wrote  to  Mrs.  M.  ;  but  I  do  not  believe  I  shall  ever  make  you  my 
secretary  again,  for  it  is  inconceivable  how  much  trouble  I  had  to  lower  your  letter, 
till  it  was  dull  and  common  enough  to  pass  for  my  own. 

Pray  tell  Mrs.  Garrick— no,  you  shall  not,  for  I  will  tell  her  myself. 

I  wish  both  you  and  she  had  the  talent  of  travelling  with  a  house  on  your  back ; 
for  1  should  delight  in  having  you  here  during  the  Christmas  party,  if  I  thought  I 
could  any  way  ensure  you  a  room ;  but  as  it  stands  at  present,  I  have  no  idea  how  to 
cram  in  the  persons  who  are  to  come. 

Pray  continue  to  write,  and  be  assured  I  am  always  thankful  for  your  letters 
whether  I  answer  them  or  not. 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SUBSCRIPTIONS. 


Thursday,  17  76. 


Duke  of  Devonshire. 
Duchess  of  Devonshire. 
Lord  Spencer. 


Lady  Spencer. 
Lord  Althorp. 


You  know  we  are  all  your  toad-eaters,  at  least  I  answer  for  myself. 

Many  thanks  to  Mrs.  Garrick  for  indulging  me  with  a  place  the  night  I  so  much 
wish  for  one. 

May  I  expect  a  box  on  Monday,  and  what  will  it  be  ? 

I  am,  Sir,  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  G.  SPENCER. 

“  Lady  Spencer’s  sweet  note  about 
Victor’s  subscription.” 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Nov.  27th,  1776. 

I  would  have  returned  you  the  letters  sooner,  but  in  attempting  to  cut  a  cheese 
my  hand  slipped  from  the  handle  all  down  the  blade  of  the  knife,  and  is  horribly 
cut  in  five  different  places ;  however,  there  is  no  essential  mischief  done,  and  the 
wounds  heal  very  fast,  as  you  may  suppose,  from  my  being  already  able  to  write 
so  irell  with  it.  I  have  no  great  partiality  for  studied  letters,  nor  do  1  much  admire 
those  you  have  sent,  except  one  expression  which  I  like  in  Madame  Xecker’s : — 
Vous  n’avez  ape  rat  que  son  caclavre ;  mats  je  Tai  vu,  ?noi,  quand  son  dme  animait 
son  coips. 

Pray  let  me  hear  from  you  soon,  and  tell  me  what  you  mean  to  do  with  yourself 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


193 


from  this  time  till  the  middle  of  January,  because  my  Lord  says  he  should  be  very 
happy  to  see  you  and  Mrs.  G.  ;  every  body  else  says  the  same,  and  I  am  not  singular 
upon  this  occasion.  The  only  difficulty  is  about  room,  which  we  think  we  can 
manage  very  well ;  therefore  pray  inform  me  what  part  of  the  time  will  suit  you  best ; 
and  do  not  shake  your  head  and  invent  any  excuses,  for  I  shall  not  be  in  a  humour  to 
receive  them. 

Endorsed, 

“  Lady  Spencer,  always  natural !” 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Althorp,  Dec.  10th,  1773. 

And  so  you  will  not  come,  after  all  the  pains  I  have  been  taking  to  make  room 
for  you.  I  am  sorry  for  it;  there  are  ten  or  twelve  red-coats  here  already,  and  yours 
would  have  looked  very  smart  among  them. 

My  fingers  and  hand  are  got  quite  well ;  and  as  to  any  other  vile  reports,  do  not 
believe  them,  for  I  am  not  in  the  wicked  way  you  suppose,  I  do  assure  you  ;  so, 
beware  not  to  cast  such  a  slur  upon  a  woman  of  my  years  and  discretion. 

The  Duchess  begs  you  will  believe  that  she  never  knew  of  your  being  at  D. 
House,  or  she  would  not  have  refused  herself  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  :  she  acknow¬ 
ledges  that  she  got  up  unreasonably  late  the  whole  time  she  was  in  town,  and  was 
probably  in  bed  when  you  called  upon  her. 

It  is  said  at  Paris  that  after  the  meeting  at  the  Academy  broke  up,  one  of  the 
members  expressed  his  concern  to  Mrs.  M.  lest  Voltaire’s  letter  should  have  shocked 
or  displeased  her ;  to  which  she  answered,  “  Not  at  all,  Sir ;  for  I  never  professed 
myself  to  be  the  friend  of  Monsieur  Voltaire.”  She  does  not  mention  this  in  her 
letter  either  to  you  or  to  me,  but  they  reckon  it  an  excellent  answer. 

You  promised  some  time  ago  to  write  often  to  me,  and  to  send  me  from  time  to 
time  some  little  things ;  which,  I  assure  you,  is  no  bad  scheme,  for  I  am  quite  like 
Moliere’s  old  woman,  I  know  nothing  of  rules  or  science  ;  but  where  I  laugh  or 
cry,  like  or  dislike,  you  may  depend  upon  it,  the  generality  of  the  world  will :  as  a 
proof  of  it,  I  liked  your  epilogue  for  Mrs.  Hobart  exceedingly  ;  and  I  have  since  had 
the  pleasure  of  hearing  it  commended  by  all  who  have  seen  it,  though  I  have  been 
so  faithful  to  my  trust  as  never  to  show  it  to  any  body  myself.  Give  my  affectionate 
compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  tell  her  I  will  not  yet  despair  of  seeing  you  here, 
if  she  will  undertake  the  cause,  and  bring  you  hither  bon  gre,  mol  gre.  Adieu  ! 

G.  Spencer. 


o 


c 


VOL.  II. 


194 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  BUCKINGHAM. 

MY  LORD,  Adelphi,  Dec.  12th,  1776. 

Though  I  have  for  near  forty  years  faced  the  most  formidable  critics,  yet  I  could 
not  till  this  moment  have  resolution  enough  to  write  and  send  this  letter  to  your 
Lordship  ;  nothing  indeed  ought  to  distress  a  man  of  sensibility  more  than  giving 
trouble  without  the  least  right  or  pretence  for  it;  thus,  my  Lord,  having  no  excuse 
for  my  presumption,  I  must  necessarily  appeal  to  your  goodness  for  my  pardon.  I 
have  a  nephew,  my  namesake,  whose  dangerous  state  of  health  obliged  him  some  time 
ago  to  sell  out  of  Lord  Pembroke's  Dragoons.  We  never  expected  that  he  would 
have  got  the  better  of  his  disorder — he  is  now  quite  recovered,  is  a  young  man  with 
a  tolerable  person,  and  his  character  a  good  one.  Lord  Pembroke  and  the  officers  of 
the  regiment  speak  of  him  with  great  partiality  ;  his  situation  at  present  is  very 
disagreeable  to  him,  and  if  your  Lordship  would  take  pity  on  him,  and  honour  him 
with  your  commands  to  attend  your  suite  in  any  capacity  you  should  think  proper, 
he  would  think  himself  most  particularly  happy,  and  I,  my  Lord,  should  never  forget 
the  obligation.  I  might  have  procured  a  more  powerful  interest  for  this  solicitation, 
but  I  was  resolved  to  owe  any  favour  I  might  receive  to  Lord  Buckingham  alone,  or 
that  he  might  have  no  difficulty  in  refusing 

His  Lordship’s  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


LORD  BUCKINGHAM  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Dec.  13th,  1776. 

Mr.  Garrick  would  have  had  some  difficulty  in  finding  a  deputy  solicitor  whose 
wishes  would  have  been  more  readily  complied  with  than  his  own,  and  it  is  with  real 
concern  that  I  feel  myself  obliged  to  enter  into  the  reasons  of  my  refusal. 

My  taking  the  young  gentleman  with  me,  without  a  prospect  of  making  a  per¬ 
manent  provision  for  him  in  Ireland,  would  be  only  leading  him  and  his  friends  into 
an  unavailing  expense.  There  are  many  things  undoubtedly  in  the  gift  of  the  Lord 
Lieutenant,  but  there  are  ten  times  more  solicitors  ;  some  of  the  Irish  must  be 
obliged,  and  certainly  in  general  have  a  better  right  to  the  emoluments  of  their  own 
country,  than  those  who  only  occasionally  come  there  in  the  suite  of  a  new  governor. 
This  reasoning  will  necessarily  lessen  the  number  of  my  family  :  I  shall  unavoidably 
displease  many  ;  but  it  is  surely  better  to  incur  the  displeasure  of  twenty,  than  essen¬ 
tially  to  injure  and  disappoint  one.  Believe  me,  Sir, 

With  real  regard,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Buckingham. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


195 


LORD  SANDWICH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Admiralty,  December  17th,  1776. 

I  am  exceedingly  happy  to  hear  we  are  to  have  the  pleasure  of  your  company  to 
dinner  to-morrow.  You  do  not  put  me  to  trial  whether  I  am  of  a  forgiving  disposi¬ 
tion,  as  you  have  never  yet  sinned  against  me  to  my  knowledge;  therefore,  when  I 
write  to  or  speak  of  you,  1  have  no  choice  but  panegyric.  I  am,  with  great  truth, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  faithful  servant. 

Sandwich. 

A  man-of-war  is  just  arrived  at  Plymouth  that  left  New  York  on  the  13th  of 
November ;  but  Lord  Howe’s  principal  dispatches  are  on  board  another  ship,  which  is 
not  yet  arrived,  though  she  sailed  with  the  other  :  from  circumstances,  however,  I  do 
not  believe  that  when  these  ships  sailed  any  thing  material  had  happened  between 
the  two  armies. 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


December  19th,  1776. 

Many  thanks  for  your  letter :  we  all  like  Sheridan’s  epilogue,  and  I  am  much 
obliged  to  you  for  sending  it ;  but  I  could  not  hear  it  so  much  commended,  and  know 
I  had  so  excellent  a  one  in  my  possession  as  yours  for  Mrs.  Hobart,  without  pro¬ 
ducing  it ;  and  it  was,  as  it  deserves  to  be,  universally  approved. 

I  did  not  show  the  prologue,  because  I  do  not  like  it :  there  is  wit  in  it ;  but 
remember  Whitehead’s  advice,  which,  though  written  upon  another  occasion,  is 
always  suitable : — 

“  A  nation’s  taste  depends  on  you, — 

Perhaps  a  nation’s  virtue  too.” 

I  am  not  sure  I  quote  right,  but  you  will  know  what  I  mean. 

The  anecdote  from  Mr.  Rigby’s  and  the  epigram  must  have  occasioned  a  fine 
jolly  scene.  I  should  like  to  have  been  among  you. 

Pray  let  me  hear,  without  loss  of  time,  how  Mrs.  Garrick  does  ;  she  must  not  ail 
anv  thing; — you,  I  am  sure,  can  neither  see,  hear,  nor  understand,  without  her.  After 
all,  it  is  comfortable  to  find  that  a  few  people  can  live  a  good  many  years  together 
without  wishing  one  another  at  the  d — .  It  will  to-morrow  be  one-and-twenty 
years  since  Lord  Spencer  married  me,  and  I  verily  believe  we  have  neither  of  us 
repented  of  our  lot  from  that  time  to  this. 

Pray  convey  this  letter  (not  the  one  I  am  writing ;  do  not  mistake  me)  to  Mr. 
Beard.  1  do  not  know  his  direction,  and  probably  you  do. 

I  did  not  intend  writing  three  lines,  and  I  am  already  in  the  third  page.  You  will 

2  c  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


196 

think  me  a  very  troublesome  correspondent;  but,  instead  of  increasing  the  evil  by 
excuses,  I  will  have  done. 

Every  body  desire  their  compliments,  particularly  my  Lord,  the  Duke,  and 
Duchess. 

Endorsed, 

“  Lady  Spencer,  delightful  and  natural.” 


REV.  H.  BATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Buckingham-street,  Saturday. 

I  have  availed  myself  of  all  your  masterly  hints  and  emendations,  having  only  to 
regret  that  I  cannot  make  use  of  the  enclosed  fine  scene,  which  would  be  totally 
destroyed  by  Brett's  insipidity,  though  in  proper  hands  its  effect  would  be  capital. 
Thank  you  for  “  Every  Hero  has  his  day  it  fills  up  the  vacuum  charmingly.  All 
the  cuttings  that  you  have  made  are  so  judicious  that  they  were  ratified  by  me  the 
moment  I  saw  them.  I  have  now  only  to  thank  you  most  cordially  for  your  friendly 
attention  to  it,  and  to  assure  you  that  this  is  enrolled  with  me  among  the  numberless 
other  obligations  you  have  conferred  upon  me.  If  towards  the  last  rehearsal  you 
could  take  a  peep  at  them,  I  should  feel  myself  more  at  ease  about  the  propriety  of 
the  representation  ;  for,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  have  no  reason  yet  to  place  any 
great  confidence  in  other  people’s  abilities  or  sincerity ;  verb.  sat.  Adieu !  and 
believe  me  Yours  most  sincerely, 

H.  Bate.* 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

December  22nd,  1776. 

Never  send  me  such  a  Jeremiade  again,  as  long  as  you  live.  I  doat  upon  all  your 
nonsense,  but  I  shall  never  dare  make  any  more  saucy  observations  upon  it,  if  you 
take  what  I  say  in  such  sober  sadness.  I  was  in  hopes  you  would  either  have  ac¬ 
knowledged  the  truth  of  my  lesson,  and  have  kissed  the  rod,  or  that  you  would  have 
been  as  pert  as  I  was,  and  have  called  me  prude,  or  any  thing  else  your  passion  sug¬ 
gested  ;  instead  of  which  you  send  me  a  serious  justification,  which  I  will  not  forgive 
you  for,  till  you  have  found  out  some  method  of  proving  that  you  have  forgiven  me. 

I  wanted  much  to  know  how  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  did,  but  not  a  word  of  the 
health  of  either  of  you  could  I  find  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  letter  in 
short,  there  is  but  one  sensible  thing  in  it,  which  is  where  you  bid  me  not  write  to 
you  so  often  ;  and  yet  you  see  that  is  of  no  use — but  I  could  not  help  it  this  once, 
and  if  you  will  send  me  a  pretty  answer  to  this,  I  will  promise  not  to  worry  you  any 
more,  at  least  for  the  present. 

5  Relates  to  his  unlucky  Black-a-moor  washed  white. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


197 


I  wish  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  could  still  contrive  to  give  us  a  few  days  any  time 
between  this  and  the  10th  of  January.  You  cannot  imagine  how  happy  it  would 
make  us  all,  especially  me,  as  it  would  give  me  an  opportunity  of  scolding  you  for 
your  letter,  which  you  really  deserve.  Adieu  ! 

My  affectionate  compliments  attend  Mrs.  Garrick. 


LORD  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Chiswick,  Tuesday,  1 1  o’clock. 

I  thank  God  I  am  enabled  to  give  a  much  more  comfortable  account  of  my  dear 
Georgiana  than  I  have  yet  been  ;  she  has  had  a  very  quiet  night,  and  is  waked  much 
refreshed :  the  throat  is  almost  well,  the  fever  much  abated,  and  the  eruption  going 
gradually  off ;  but  great  care  must  be  taken,  as  this  horrible  disorder  is  liable  to 
returns  upon  the  slightest  cold,  and  Doctor  Warren  will  not  look  upon  it  as  over 
till  the  fourteenth  day,  and  to-day  is  only  the  seventh. 

I  am  sorry  you  have  not  been  well.  Adieu  ! 


MR.  H.  BATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Adelphi,  25th  December,  1776. 

I  have  this  instant  received  your  entertaining  and  most  kind  favour.  This  is  an 
instance  of  friendship  beyond  what  I  could  possibly  have  expected  even  from  so  warm 
a  friend  as  I  have  ever  found  you.  As  to  the  salary  for  your  labours,  we  must  defer 
entering  upon  that  subject  till  your  wants  require  it  or  my  fortune  will  enable  me 
to  do  justice  to  your  merit  and  services,  neither  of  which  seems  very  likely  at  present ; 
and  therefore  you  must  content  yourself,  as  is  your  custom,  with  doing  good  to  others 
— for  the  very  sake  of  doing  good  alone  !  I  admire  the  intelligence  exceedingly  ;  it 
abounds  with  that  singular  spirit  of  narration  that  interests  while  it  entertains  the 
readers.  But,  my  dear  friend,  do  not  let  your  friendship  for  me,  or  your  zeal  for  the 
poor  Morning  Post,  betray  you  into  a  situation  that  is  likely  to  endanger  your  health. 
Did  you  read  my  foolish  religious  Ode  on  this  day  to  take  the  unwary  in,  who  cannot 
fail,  after  this,  I  think,  to  set  me  down  among  the  long  list  of  the  truly  pious  pro¬ 
fessors  of  the  g - 1  ?  When  you  sit  in  judgment  on  it  as  a  critic,  remember  that  I 

wrote  it  yesterday  while  my  hair  was  dressing.  I  will  take  particular  care  of  all  the 
copy,  and  give  it  to  you  when  next  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you.  It  has  struck 

me  that  Madame  Ab - n  would  have  smoked  something  if  I  had  so  instantaneously 

popped  upon  her  after  her  refusal  to  play,  as  she  would  naturally  ask  herself  how  the 
devil  came  this  prompter  to  hear  so  soon  of  this  circumstance  unless  he  is  leagued 

with  the  managers,  or  that  arch  manager  of  all  managers,  D - G - ?  Am  I 

not  at  least  a  prudent  politician  ?  We  are  going  to  dine  with  our  friend  Wallis,  to 


198 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


meet  the  Linleys,  Sheridans,  and  Vaughans.  1  expect  some  sour  looks  from  Dapper  ! 
My  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  The  compliments  of  the  season  I  most 
sincerely  greet  you  with  ;  and  may  you,  my  dear  friend,  meet  with  many  a  happy 
return  of  this  festival,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of  Yours  for  ever  and  most  truly, 

Endorsed,  H.  BaTE. 

“  Letter  of  thanks  from  Bate,  Dec.  25th,  1776.” 


GENERAL  FITZROY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  December  26th,  1776. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  receipt  you  was  so  good  as  to  send  to  me,  and 
Hatter  myself  that  you  will  not  again  have  occasion  to  use  that  or  any  other.  The 
world  is  so  much  indebted  to  you  for  pleasure,  that  if  they  could  guide  the  hand  of 
Fortune,  no  pain  should  approach  you ;  at  least  you  have  the  comfort  of  knowing 
that  they  must  partake  of  every  thing  that  can  affect  your  happiness. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  C.  F ITZROY. 

“  General  Fitzroy  in  answer  to  mine, 

Dec.  26th,  1776.” 


MR.  G.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  BROTHER,  27th  December,  1776. 

The  great  agitation  of  mind  I  have  been  in  will,  I  hope,  plead  my  excuse  for  not 
returning  you  sooner  my  most  affectionate  thanks  for  your  very  kind  and  brotherly 
answer  to  my  letter.  Indeed,  my  dear  brother,  you  have  affected  me  much  with 
your  great  kindness,  and  I  could  now  dash  out  my  brains  that  I  should  either  have 
neglected  or  offended  you  ;  for  I  can  assure  you  that  the  pangs  I  have  felt  from  your 
withdrawing  your  love  and  affection  from  me  for  a  long  time  had,  at  times,  not  only 
deprived  me  of  my  senses,  but  almost  of  my  life  ;  for  indeed  it  has  been  the  cause 
of  my  many  and  very  long  as  well  as  very  expensive  illnesses.  But  I  hope  you  will 
not  imagine  that  I  have  been  totally  without  expense  as  to  my  children.  I  have  paid 
large  sums  (and  happy  I  was  that  I  had  it  for  them)  for  their  schooling  and  other 
necessaries,  and  that  too  at  a  time  when  I  could  least  afford  it,  which  consequently 
threw  me  very  back,  as  I  was  at  a  very  low  salary  at  the  theatre  for  many  years. 
This  I  hope  will,  among  others,  in  some  measure  account  for  my  application  to  you  ; 
but  you  will  wrong  me  much  should  you  in  the  least  think  that  1  have  not  the 
warmest  sense  of  gratitude  and  affection  to  my  sister  and  you  for  your  unbounded 
goodness  to  my  children.  Give  me  leave  to  assure  you  botli  that  I  shall  ever  feel  it, 
and  that  I  shall  never  forget  it.  And  I  am  sure  I  can  answer  for  them  that  they 
never  will.  And  I  hope  that  during  the  term  of  eight-and-twenty  years  and  upwards 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


199 


that  I  have  attended  you  in  bustling  through  the  great  fatigues  and  management  of 
so  great  a  theatre,  even  the  insinuation  of  ingratitude  or  disaffection  could  never 
justly  be  produced  against  me, — I  am  sure,  not  intentionally.  My  very  bad  state  of 
mind  and  health  for  two  or  three  years  past  will,  I  hope,  plead  very  much  for  me  in 
mitigation  of  my  neglect  in  Formignac’s  affairs.  I  do  not  mean  to  infer  that  1  have 
not  been  neglectful :  but  you  may  be  assured  that  I  will  as  soon  as  possible  make 
out  the  accounts  and  bring  them  for  your  inspection ;  and  that  I  will  do  every  thing 
else  that  can  restore  your  love  and  affection,  for  without  it  I  shall  ever  remain  the 
most  miserable,  and  unhappiest  of  brothers. 

Endorsed,  Geo.  GaRRICK. 

“  A  letter  from  brother  George,  Dec.  27th,  1776.” 


LORD  VILLIERS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Phillis-Court,  December  28th,  1776. 

I  am  so  much  ashamed  of  troubling  you  again  with  a  letter,  that  I  do  not  know 
how  to  begin ;  but  as  you  have  certainly  often  found  that  those  to  whom  you  have 
shown  the  greatest  indulgence  only  encroach  the  more,  so  I  fear  you  will  think  I 
merit  to  be  put  among  that  number  ; — in  short,  the  whole  troop  is  met,  and  all  wished 
me  much  to  speak  eight  or  ten  lines  as  introductory  to  it.  What  could  I  do,  dear 
Sir,  in  this  case?  I  dared  not  refuse  it;  you  have  experienced  how  difficult  they  are 
to  manage,  but  whom  to  apply  to  you  will  easily  imagine,  who  I  knew  could  do  it  the 
best,  but  shame  to  trouble  you  again  almost  prevented  me ;  but  as  I  have  received  so 
much  kindness  from  you  on  this  occasion,  might  I  beg  literally  ten  or  twelve  lines 
a-propos  to  the  occasion,  I  would  not  think  or  wish  for  any  more.  If  this  is  not  too 
unreasonable,  it  will  add  a  fresh  obligation  to  those  you  have  already  conferred. 

I  shall  say  nothing  of  our  play  till  you  see  it;  nor  can  indeed  much  be  said  of  it 
till  we  have  seen  you  again  ;  I  am  sure  Lord  Townlev  for  one  would  never  think  of 
turning  his  Lady  out  of  doors,  unless  you  raise  his  spirits  to  it.  We  are  all  very 
happy  to  see  you  here  on  the  3rd  by  one  o'clock ;  my  horses  shall  he  at  the  castle  at 
Salt  Hill  tiie  night  before.  I  hope  Mrs.  Garrick  continues  well ;  I  beg  my  best  com¬ 
pliments  to  her  :  all  here  desire  to  join  with  me  in  thanks  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick 
forgiving  us  the  pleasure  of  your  company.  Believe  me  to  be,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

Endorsed,  VlLLIERS. 

“  Lord  Villiers  about  his  play.” 


200 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  SHERIDAN. 

SIR, 

I  am  informed  by  Mr.  Garrick  that  you  have  been  so  obliging  as  to  express  a 
readiness  to  receive  a  tragedy  of  my  writing,  and  to  give  it  a  representation  if  you 
find  it  deserving.  This  unfortunate  production  is  under  such  peculiar  circumstances, 
that  I  cannot  omit  expressing  to  you  in  the  most  earnest  manner  my  sensibility  on 
this  occasion  ;  at  the  same  time,  though  I  believe  it  is  not  unknown  to  you,  that  I  am 
tendering  a  piece  rejected  at  the  other  theatre,  yet  I  think  myself  bound  to  remind 
you  of  this  particular  in  its  disfavour ;  and  so  absolute  were  the  terms  of  its  dismis¬ 
sion,  that  I  ought  and  should  have  despaired  of  its  merits,  if  I  had  not  had  a  pretty 
long  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  stage,  and  what  produces  stage  effect, — if  I 
had  not  given  infinite  pains  and  attention  to  this  composition  for  very  many  years, 
and,  above  all,  if  I  had  not  been  supported  by  the  unanimous  suffrages  of  every  per¬ 
son  to  whose  judgment  I  have  committed  it.  I  really  say  this  to  you,  not  for  the  sake 
of  parade,  but  in  the  way  of  excuse  for  persisting  in  any  degree  of  self-opinion,  after 
I  had  received  judgment  against  me:  I  beseech  you,  therefore,  Sir,  to  read  it  with 
as  much  malice  as  you  are  capable  of,  considering  that  an  author  is  an  ill  judge  in  his 
own  cause.  Before  I  conclude,  I  shall  do  justice  to  the  proprietors  of  Covent-Garden 
Theatre,  so  far  as  to  say,  that  the  piece  hath  undergone  corrections  and  amendments 
since  it  passed  through  their  hands,  though  to  no  considerable  extent.  I  beg  leave 
to  add,  that  as  this  piece  ought  always  to  be  considered  as  standing  in  a  doubtful  pre¬ 
dicament,  I  shall  consider  myself  in  honour  engaged  not  to  draw  any  profits  from 
your  treasury  till  I  am  convinced  your  treasury  is  profited  by  it.* 


COLMAN,  AS  WARBURTON,  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  OLD  GO-BY-THE-WALL,  Jan.  3rd,  1  777. 

I  rejoiced  yesterday  at  hearing,  by  fat  Harry,  that  you  was  better ;  but  1  do  not 
approve  of  your  living  too  low  in  the  gout.  Gout  is  an  excrement,  and  all  nature  is 
in  an  uproar  to  expel  him ;  you  should  therefore  encourage  the  militia,  and  ask 
General  Fever  to  your  table.  The  general,  I  warrant  you,  with  a  few  kind  words, 
and  a  glass  or  two  of  good  wine,  (which  to  a  man  of  your  fortune  costs  absolutely 
nothing,  as  a  man  may  say,)  will  drive  the  dog  into  Calabria,  which  you  know  is  the 

*  This  tragedy  might  be  “  The  Battle  of  Hastings,”  which  was  acted  at  Drury-lane  Theatre  in  1778. 
Cumberland  was  not  fashioned  for  the  heroic ;  yet  it  would  be  hard  to  refuse  him  praise,  even  as  a  tragic 
writer,  and  remember  his  “  Carmelite.”  However,  the  bent  of  his  genius  was  to  inoral  comedy,  impassioned 
and  characteristic. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


201 


foot  of  Italy.  But  to  what  purpose  have  you  read  Shakspeare  not  to  find  out  that 
he  describes  the  gout  in  the  following  lines  ? — 

“  As  the  Pontick  sea, 

Whose  icy  current  and  compulsive  course 
Ne’er  knows  retiring  ebb,  but  keeps  due  on 
To  the  Propontis  and  the  Hellespont.” 

The  Pontick  sea  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  gout,  morbus  arthriticus,  or  dcOunr, 
because  the  joints  serve  as  a  bridge  for  the  inflammable  matter  to  pass  over :  icy  cur¬ 
rent,  because  the  gout  is  a  cold  humour  (mistaken  by  Moorfields’  quacks  for  an  hot 
one)  and  compulsive  course,  because  it  drives  every  thing  before  it.  Then  the  sweet¬ 
eyed  poet  couches  his  advice  (perhaps  prophetically  to  you  who  are  his  eldest  son)  by 
saying,  it  ne'er  knows  or  feels  (that  is,  never  should  know  or  feel)  retiring  ebb :  in 
other  words,  it  should  be  still  drove  on  to  the  Propontis  (i.  e.)  the  os  pubis,  and  the 
Hellespont ;  which,  by  the  by,  is  a  false  reading,  for  the  author  certainly  wrote  it 
Heel’s  Point. 

Warburton.* 

P.  S.  Love  to  Mrs.  Garrick :  roundabout  compliments  que  vous  expliquere%  en 
Francois  to  your  niece.  We  will  drink  your  health  to-morrow ;  and  if  you  have  any 
spare  game  in  your  larder,  lend  me  some. 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  January  7th,  1 777. 

For  fear  of  a  relapse,  (a  thing  not  uncommon  in  the  gout,)  I  send  once  more  to 
ask  how  you  do,  notwithstanding  the  implied  veto  in  the  card  you  sent  me.  I  have 
been  prevented  coming  to  see  you  by  family  accidents,  otherwise  you  would  have 
been  thanked  in  person  for  your  noble  pheasant,  and  the  hearty  benedictions  you 
sprinkled  over  me  and  my  guests.  I  may  truly  say  we  were  excepto  quod  non  simul 
esses,  ccetera  Iceti.  The  truest  indication  of  your  recovery  was  the  spirit  and  humour 


*  This  letter,  signed  Warburton,  is  a  pleasantry  of  Colman’s.  The  signature  must  not  mislead  the 
reader.  The  learned  Bishop  was  still  living;  but  dead  to  every  thing  sportive,  and  plunged  in  the  deepest 
dejection  by  the  loss  of  his  only  son  ;  he  lingered  in  melancholy  abstraction  from  the  world,  until  1779.  His 
friend  Hurd  saw  him  during  that  interval — 


“  The  brilliant  sun  of  genius  then  was  set, 

And  shadows,  clouds,  and  darkness  rested  on  it.” 

I  hope  Garrick  read  this  pleasantry  of  Colman’s  with  a  sigh  that  went  beyond  the  gout,  for  Warburton 
appears  to  have  been  sincerely  attached  to  Garrick — certainly  not  the  least  of  the  honours  which  attended 
his  course. — Ed. 

2  D 


VOL.  II. 


202 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


with  which  you  describe  Major  Jennings :  when  you  are  ill  again,  I  Avill  endeavour 
to  send  you  the  pendant  to  that  portrait.  Perhaps  I  may  call  on  you  in  a  day  or 
two,  if  you  let  in  the  monde ;  till  then  adieu.  Yours  most  affectionately, 

J.  Rust.* 


MR.  T.  B.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  Night. 

I  received  your  packet  by  the  coachman,  and  am  just  returned  from  Woodfall, 
who  will  take  great  care  of  it,  and  is  greatly  obliged  to  you  indeed  ;  we  like  it  much, 
and  as  this  affair  is  carried  on  between  him  and  I  [me]  only,  we  are  safe.  I  have  got 
the  copy  of  the  former  one  locked  up.  I  explained  the  matter  about  the  commis¬ 
sioners ,  and  lie  will  take  care  of  it ;  he  says  Anacreon  can  never  be  old ;  so  say  I : 
this  gig  will  be  of  great  service  to  him.  I  never  saw  such  show  and  nothingness  as 
Bell’s  is  in  my  life.  You  will  not  find  there  the  great  and  noble  Bacon,  Boyle, 
Locke,  Sidney,  Harington,  Ludlow,  &c.  &c.  &c.  but  you  may  find  Jack  the  Giant- 
killer,  the  Seven  Champions,  Guy  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  such  stuff ;  he  will  puff 
himself  till  he  bursts,  and,  as  you  say,  overdo  the  business,  as  Henderson’s  foolish 
friends  have  done  his.  This  brings  you  four  letters,  and  another  packet  in  a  frank, 
“  The  Morning  Post”  and  “  Public  Advertiser.”  I  will  take  care  of  covers  for  you. 
I  am  sorry  to  hear  you  was  not  well,  but  your  next  packet  must  bring  me  better 
news.  I  am  sorry  to  tell  you  that  news  arrived  at  the  India  House  this  morning, 
that  the  London  East  Indiaman,  Captain  Webb,  is  lost,  by  the  Russell  man-of-war 
running  her  down  in  a  storm.  She  was  outward-bound,  with  stores  and  provisions 
for  St.  Helena.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  ever  obliged, 

[Thomas  Beckett.] 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  TIGHE. 

1)E  All  TIGHE  Lincoln’s-inn,  Jan.  11th,  1777. 

I  know  your  good  nature  will  forgive  me,  especially  when  you  consider  how  I  am 
tossed  from  pillar  to  post.  I  came  to  town  this  day,  and  am  going  to-morrow  morn¬ 
ing  into  Suffolk  with  Sir  P.  Blake  for  a  week  or  ten  days.  My  hurry  will  not  allow 
me  to  wait  on  you,  to  thank  you  for  your  negotiation.  I  do  sincerely  thank  you,  for 
1  really  wish  for  some  signal  of  peace  between  Mr.  Garrick  and  me.  I  hate  the  recol¬ 
lection  of  former  quarrels.  Whatever  may  have  been  my  jealousies,  suspicions,  or 
whatever  you  please  to  call  them,  Mr.  Garrick’s  public  merit  was  always  so  bright, 
that  every  thing  else  ought  to  be  forgotten.  I  wage  no  war  with  genius.  When  I 
come  to  town  I  will  wait  on  you  to  thank  you,  and  on  him  also  for  obliging  me  with 
-*  yiie  Rnst  of  the  venerable  commentator,  whose  name  Mr.  Colman  used  in  the  preceding  letter.’’ — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


203 


an  epilogue.  If  he  wants  the  play  he  shall  have  it.  The  subject  I  think  will  prove 
fertile  under  his  pen.  The  title  of  the  play,  I  believe,  will  be,  “  Know  your  own 
mind.”  Audiences  do  not  always  know  their  own  mind  ;  the  ladies  do  not ;  critics 
do  not ;  authors  do  not.  The  author  of  the  present  comedy  has  not  known  his  mind  : 
he  would  bring  out  the  play,  and  he  would  not;  he  coquetted  about  it.  He  now  is 
leaving  off  trade : — will  he  know  his  mind  ?  At  present  he  is  resolved  :  he  thanks  the 
public  for  all  favours,  and  takes  his  leave. 

It  is  free  and  easy  in  me  to  throw  out  these  hints  :  better  will  occur,  and  I  shall 
be  proud  of  the  epilogue.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  seriously  yours, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

Pray  present  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Tighe. 


MRS.  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR, 


Bristol,  Jan.  14th,  177/ 


It  is  impossible  to  tell  you  how  much  your  kind  letter  yesterday  relieved  my 
mind,  which  had  suffered  greatly  for  three  or  four  days  on  the  report  of  your  illness, 
which  we  heard  of,  in  so  alarming  a  way  as  to  make  us  very  unhappy.  As  I  heard 
Dr.  Cadogan  attended  you  I  took  the  liberty  to  write  a  line  to  Miss  Cadogan,  to 
know  how  you  were,  not  daring  to  trouble  my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for  your  kind  hints  respecting  Dragon,  written  too  when 
you  were  so  weak  !  As  I  value  myself  on  my  truth,  which  I  really  have,  and  not  on 
my  wit,  which  I  have  not,  I  would  sooner  burn  the  whole,  than  lower  what  you  un¬ 


justly  call  the  compliments.  Do  you  know  it  is  in  the  press,  and  almost  printed  off? 
Do  not  think,  however,  that  I  am  like  the  woman  who  asked  her  friend’s  opinion  of  a 
match  she  pretended  to  have  in  view,  when  she  had  been  privately  married  three 
weeks  to  the  man. 

I  waited  for  your  answer  till  the  last  moment,  not  dreaming  you  were  ill  but 
out  of  town.  It  is  printed  in  quarto,  like  “  The  Ode  to  Pinchbeck.  I  have  bid 
Cadell  put  as  low  a  price  on  it  as  can  be  afforded,  to  speak  in  the  trading  way . 

Mr.  Cambridge,  Dean  of  Derry,  Sir  Joshua  Jerningham,  and  my  female  critics,  all 
voted  the  expulsion  of  the  last  stanza,  and  agreed  that  the  “  Setting  Sun’  was  the 
best  ending  it  could  possibly  have ; — so  that  stands.  ^  our  idea  ot  “  1  he  Dragon, 

“  Dome,”  “  Moonshine,”  “  Thames,”  &c.  is  a  tine  picture, — but  quere,  whether  it 
would  do  for  the  ending  ?  Would  not  the  moon  after  the  sun  be  an  “  Anticlimax  ? 

I  am,  however,  so  struck  with  it,  that  I  shall  try  to  work  it  up,  and  cram  it  in  among 
the  former  stanzas,  though  now  too  late  to  be  inserted. 


*  It  was  published  at  sixpence — and  fairly  worth  the  price  ;  which  I  cannot  say  for  Dragon  s  answer, 
too  dear  at  an  half-penny. — Ed. 


2  D  2 


204 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


As  to  curs,  such  as  Kenrick,  why  let  them  bark  ; — I  expect  it.  If  real  critics  rail , 
/’//  hiss  the  rod,  and  try  to  mend. 

Forgive  this  trouble,  dear  Sir,  but  I  could  not  forbear  telling  you  what  joy  it 
oives  me  that  you  are  so  much  better. 

O  v 

My  most  affectionate  respects  to  your  dear  lady,  and  ask  her  if  she  will  be  so 
good  as  to  accept  a  jar  of  codlings  done  in  tbe  Indian  pickle,  which  is  on  the  road 
to  her. 

All  here  join  their  heartiest  wishes  for  your  health  to  those  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  ever  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Hannah  More. 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Winchester,  Jan.  15th,  1777. 

This  is  the  first  letter  I  have  written  for  some  weeks.  I  have  been  dangerously 
ill  of  a  dreadful  fever  ;  but  I  am  now  so  far  recovered  as  to  attend  (you  see)  even  to 
trifles.  The  silly  performance  is  in  great  forwardness,  and  I  send  you  the  dedication 
for  your  last  perusal.  Alter  it  to  your  own  mind.  1  have  long  ago  entered  into  my 
creed,  that  what  pleases  you  stands  the  best  chance  of  pleasing  others.  It  is  my  real 
opinion,  and  like  Benedick  “  I’ll  die  in  it  at  tbe  stake.”  I  send  you  also  a  few  lines 
describing  what  I  actually  thought  and  felt  during  my  severe  attack.  Pray  how  are 
you  ?  How  do  you  spend  your  time  ?  Elegantly,  I  have  no  doubt,  and  I  hope 
contentedly.  The  Suave  mari  magno,  8%c.  of  Lucretius  is  to  none  so  applicable  as  to 
yourself.  Do  you  not,  in  the  poet’s  meaning,  enjoy  the  storm?  And  is  not  the 
calm  voice  of  truth  and  friendship  (which  perhaps  you  now  hear  for  the  first  time) 
a  thousand  times  to  be  preferred  to  the  uproar  of  the  many  ;  and  to  those  numberless 
delicate  embarrassments  which  a  person  in  a  public  station,  and  whose  merit  like 
yours  is  of  the  first  class,  cannot,  if  he  would,  avoid?  But,  alas  !  what  will  become 
of  my  favourite  diversion  !  King  and  Abington,  the  only  good  fruit  you  left  behind 
you,  seem  hardly  tasted  ;  and  every  paltry  newspaper  not  only  pretends  to  find 
fault,  but  they  even  take  these  new  managers  to  task  for  not  following  their  direc¬ 
tions  !  Where  will  this  end  ?  “  It  is  not  and  it  cannot  come  to  good  !” — Let  me 

ask  you  a  question.  Did  you  ever  receive  a  kind  of  a  farewell  epilogue  which  I  sent 
vou  in  June  last  (when  I  was  on  the  church  progress)  from  the  Devizes?  It  was 
put  under  cover  without  any  letter,  and  even  without  a  name,  for  the  deuce  is  in  it, 
thought  I,  if  he  can  mistake  my  writing.  I  beg  my  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Garrick  :  and  even  now,  when  you  have  laid  aside  your  magic  wand,  I  desire  you  to 
believe  that  I  oivn  your  power ;  and  that  I  am,  with  the  same  truth  and  with  the  same 
esteem  that  I  ever  felt  for  you,  My  dear  Sir,  your  real  friend, 

Samuel  Xott. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


205 


GENERAL  BURGOYNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hertford-street,  Jau.  1  7th,  1 777. 

When  I  saw  you  last,  you  may  remember  I  projected  a  dinner,  which  I  hoped 
would  be  a  prelude  to  as  much  more  of  your  amiable  society  as  you  could  spare  me 
during  my  short  residence  in  England.  A  friend  or  two  whom  I  wished  to  meet 
you  being  out  of  town,  and  my  journey  to  Bath  taking  place  sooner  than  I  intended, 
prevented  me  the  pleasure  of  that  engagement. 

The  day  before  I  left  town  1  heard  you  had  a  slight  touch  of  the  gout ;  at  Bath, 
Beauclerk  told  me  it  was  a  serious  fit ;  and  at  my  return  yesterday,  which  is  repeated 
in  the  papers  to-day,  I  find  the  report  that  the  attack  had  amounted  to  confinement, 
fever,  acute  pain,  and  all  the  attendant  inconveniences  and  trials  of  that  earthly 
plague. 

You  will  not  suppose,  my  dear  friend,  that  had  I  been  apprised  of  your  state 
I  should  have  contented  myself  with  a  formal  “  how  d’ye”  at  your  door.  I  write  to 
you  to  vindicate  myself  from  the  possible  suspicion  of  such  coldness,  and  to  satisf}' 
myself  of  the  truth  of  your  recovery.  Believe  me,  among  all  that  love  and  honour 
you,  and  large  is  the  number,  there  is  not  one  more  anxious  for  your  welfare,  nor 
more  interested  in  it  from  the  consolation  your  friendship  affords  him,  than. 

My  dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  and  affectionate, 

J.  Burgoyne. 

My  best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick. 


GENERAL  BURGOYNE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Saturday  Night. 

I  have  found  a  call  for  to-morrow  morning1,  which,  were  I  to  obey  it  strictly, 
might  interrupt  the  pleasure  you  promised  me  too  soon. 

As  you  assured  me  the  two  mornings  (Sunday  and  Monday)  were  equal,  may  I 
take  the  liberty  to  make  it  the  latter. 

If  upon  reflection,  or  any  engagement  arisen  since  I  saw  you,  Monday  should  be 
less  convenient  to  you  than  to-morrow,  I  claim  your  sincere  confession  of  it,  and  in 
that  case  Ministers  or  their  business  shall  he  postponed,  rather  than  a  possibility  of 
losing  the  delightful  breakfast  you  have  promised  me. 

Your  answer,  my  dear  Sir,  and  your  excuse,  if  this  is  not  intelligible  ;  being  just 
risen  from  rather  too  much  claret. 

If  my  proposal  suit  you,  I  shall  expect  you  precisely  at  a  quarter  before  ten 
on  Monday,  when  the  best  of  coffee  shall  be  ready  for  you. 

Yours  most  affectionately, 

J.  Burgoyne. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


20() 


MR.  R.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Ann-street,  Jan.  18th,  1777. 

I  am  thankful  to  your  horse,  and  to  the  serenity  of  our  climate,  for  the  relief  they 
have  brought  you  ;  I  propose  to  myself  much  happiness  in  the  evening  of  our  days, 
if  Heaven  shall  give  us  good  health  and  peace  of  mind.  I  have  been  four  hours  on 
my  legs  in  the  Drawing-room,  which  was  as  full  as  loyalty  could  cram  it;  the  women 
were  charmingly  dressed,  and  so  uniform  in  their  style,  that  you  would  have  sworn 
they  had  all  been  equipped  by  the  hands  of  one  and  the  same  milliner  ;  not  a  feather 
in  the  Court,  but  as  fine  as  could  be;  how  amazingly  has  that  taste  advanced  in  my 
time,  which  has  no  very  long  retrospect !  The  men  were  in  general  plain  and 
under-dressed  :  the  richest  habit  at  Court  was  Lady  Warwick’s  :  Sir  George  Warren 
had  his  order  snatched  off  his  ribbon,  encircled  with  diamonds  to  the  value  of  700/. 
Foote  was  there,  and  lays  it  upon  the  parsons,  having  secured  (as  he  says)  his  gold 
box  in  his  waistcoat-pocket  upon  seeing  so  many  black  gowns  in  the  room.  The 
dramatic  literati  and  the  American  refugees  made  a  large  corps.  The  King  and 
Queen  both  spoke  particularly  long  to  Mrs.  Montagu.  Mr.  Colman  was  there,  and 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  thanking  him  for  a  copy  of  his  dramatic  works  in  four 
volumes,  newly  printed  by  Beckett ;  the  present  surprised  and  at  the  same  time 
pleased  me  ;  it  surprised  me,  because  I  understood  he  is  author  of  a  very  clever  copy 
of  verses  entitled  Bath,  &c.  in  which  I  am  honoured  with  a  satirical  couplet ;  and  it 
pleased  me,  because  peace  is. become  so  valuable  and  so  necessary  to  my  composition, 
that  1  cannot  endure  a  face  of  hostility  on  a  human  pair  of  shoulders;  nay,  I  have 
not  even  nerves  to  quarrel  with  my  dog,  Colman  talked  to  me  about  his  theatre, 
and  asked  me  naturally  enough  about  my  tragedy,  which  he  had  heard  was  in  Mr. 
Sheridan’s  hands  ;  I  told  him  the  short  story,  and  what  you  had  done  ;  I  was  forced 
to  add,  that  having  written  a  letter  on  Friday  se’nnight  to  Mr.  Sheridan  in  the  most 
candid  and  fair  terms  1  could  devise,  he  had  not  to  this  moment  acknowledged  the 
receipt  of  it,  and  we  both  agreed  that  such  a  conduct  must  be  altered,  or  would 
operate  to  his  disgrace  and  ruin  ;  in  my  particular  it  is  of  small  consequence,  though 
it  is  not  easy  to  put  a  case  where  his  politeness  was  more  called  upon  :  let  his  reply 
come  when  it  will,  it  comes  with  no  grace.  I  beseech  you  not  to  molest  yourself 
one  moment  about  it ;  but  my  experience  with  the  world  assures  me  that  there  is 
no  man  who  can  keep  his  place  in  the  good-will  and  esteem  of  those  he  has  to 
deal  with,  if  he  so  totally  throws  off  the  forms  of  politeness,  which  even  a  prime- 
minister  cannot  dispense  with,  and  which  we  shall  only  excuse  in  him  from  his 
ignorance  of  good  breeding*  What  can  I  do  about  Sir  Thomas  Overbury?  What 

*  I  do  not  think  Mr.  Sheridan  was  ignorant  of  the  forms  of  good  breeding;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  a  man 
of  very  polished  manners.  What  I  should  say  of  him  is,  that  he  was  only  regular  in  irregularity.  He  was 
so  amiable  that  his  apologies  were  always  accepted  ;  and  yet  he  constantly  had  them  to  make,  for  to  break 
all  appointments  was  the  rule  of  his  habit.  How,  at  five-and-twenty,  he  should  have  become  so  independent 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


207 


I  cannot  do  I  well  know,  and  that  is,  I  cannot  refuse  what  you  request ;  but  I  must 
see  the  tragedy  ;  I  will  send  to  Mr.  Woodfall  and  endeavour  at  a  prologue,  though  I 
think,  upon  reading  Dr.  Johnson's  account  of  Rivers,  that  he  was  a  bad  man,  and  one 
for  whose  memory  I  have  no  idolatry. 

Every  ship  that  comes  from  the  continent  of  America  brings  tidings  of  comfort : 
we  have  letters  which  inform  us  of  a  great  defection  in  the  colony  of  Georgia  from 
the  banners  of  rebellion  ;  three  entire  companies  laid  down  their  arms  and  submitted. 
Bullock,  the  rebel  governor  of  Georgia,  with  a  number  of  converts  to  loyalty,  signed  a 
petition  to  the  King  for  mercy,  and  signified  their  submission.  This  is  a  pin  out  of 
the  scaffold,  and  the  whole  edifice  of  revolt  seems  tottering  to  its  fall.* 

Farewell! — if  you  stay  any  time  in  the  country,  write  to  me.  Thanks  to  your 
good  consort  for  her  box  ;  we  kept  peace,  and  were  well  entertained  with  a  full  house. 

I  am  yours, 

R.  Cumberland. 


Sunday  19th,  1777. 

I  have  just  received  a  note  from  Mr.  Sheridan,  calling  me  to  a  conference.  I  do 
not  know  when  you  come  to  town,  so  I  shall  appoint  him  to  come  to  the  office  to¬ 
morrow  evening,  if  it  is  convenient  to  him. 


MR.  I.  BICKERSTAFF  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  March  18th,  1  777- 

So  little  do  I  know  of  the  world  in  the  remote  nook  in  which  I  breathe,  that  it 
is  but  very  lately  I  accidentally  heard  of  your  having  quitted  the  stage  :  whenever 
that  event  happened,  it  was  my  intention  to  wrrite  to  you, — not  to  beg,  but  to 
complain. 

It  is  now  somewhat  more  than  four  years  since  I  was  informed,  that  about  that 
time  you  not  only  joined  in  favour  of  an  ungrateful,  perjured,  dishonest  wretch,  who 
was  cutting  my  throat  with  my  own  weapons,  to  drag  a  brand  of  infamy  upon  me 
that  utterly  deprived  me  of  the  means  of  earning  bread,  but  that  you  also  lent  your 
wit  upon  the  occasion  ;  writ  letters  in  newspapers,  particularly  some  in  the  Morning 
Post,  with  an  intent  to  destroy  me,  as  far  as  the  work  was  still  to  be  done.  As  I 
never  in  my  life  offended  you  either  in  word  or  deed,  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  every 
means  possible  endeavoured  to  recommend  myself  to  you,  as  I  was  highly  in  your 

of  forms,  in  a  condition  too  far  from  affluence,  and  as  to  genius,  having  only  then  “The  Rivals”  and  “  The 
Duenna,”  to  challenge  so  much  forbearance  and  submission  from  others,  was  one  of  the  wonders  in  which 
perhaps  he  might  delight. — Ed. 

*  Cumberland,  as  a  politician,  seems  to  have  seen  only  with  his  hopes.  The  mind  of  obedience  had 
been  shaken  in  the  contest — restoration  was  impossible. — Ed. 


208 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


good  graces,  and  really  deserved  to  be  so,  as  far  as  the  most  devoted  attachment  can 
be  termed  desert ;  you  may  imagine  this  account  could  not  reach  me  without  causing 
me  the  most  bitter  anguish,  and  in  a  manner  utterly  depriving  me  of  both  head  and 
heart.  In  a  word,  Sir,  you  have  shown  implacable,  unprovoked  resentment  against 
the  most  unhappy  of  men  ;  while  you  thought  proper  to  pardon  the  vilest  miscreant 
that  ever  dishonoured  a  pretension  to  literature,  and  for  whom  there  should  be  a  whip 
in  the  hand  of  every  honest  man  to  lash  him  out  of  human  society.*  1  need  not 
say  who  this  monster  is,  nor  shall  I  dwell  upon  matters  that  overwhelm  me  with 
passion  and  indignation.  I  will  come  at  once  to  the  purport  of  this  letter. 

I  have  already  said,  that  when  I  first  designed  to  write  to  you,  it  was  not  to  beg 
but  to  complain  ;  "but  necessity  changes  all  things.  I  am  in  the  greatest  distress,  so 
great  that  words  cannot  express  it.  I  remember,  that  during  the  interval  of  my  small 
prosperity,  I  presented  you  at  different  times  with  some  trifles ;  their  value,  I  believe, 
might  be  about  ten  pounds  ;  these  would  now  feed  and  clothe  me.  I  need  not  say 
more;  what  must  be  the  circumstances  capable  of  wringing  from  me  so  much  ! 

If  this  letter  should  produce  in  your  mind  the  goodness  and  compassion  natural 
to  you,  and  you  should  not  afterwards  reason  yourself  out  of  them,  any  thing  sent 
to  Mr.  Cartony,  opposite  Somerset  House,  will  come  safe  to  my  hands  without  his 
knowing  who  sent  it.  If,  on  the  contrary,  this  letter  produces  no  effect,  you  will 
still  remember  there  is  something  due  to  the  unfortunate  as  to  the  dead,  and  that  as 
it  is  addressed  solely  to  your  own  breast,  and  designed  for  your  own  eye,  it  ought 
not  to  be  exposed.  On  this  instance  of  your  justice  and  generosity  I  rely,  and  am 

Sir,  your  obedient  humble  servant, 

I.  B  .  .  .  FF.f 


MR.  G.  BUTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Stanford,  March  22,  1777. 

A  man  must  have  a  very  blunted  apprehension,  that  does  not  discover  upon  the 
shortest  acquaintance  with  you,  that  you  are  distinguished  in  a  very  eminent  degree 
by  a  heart  of  friendship :  this  is  no  small  praise,  and  I  am  no  flatterer.  I  am  tho¬ 
roughly  possessed  with  this  idea  of  you,  and  therefore  you  will  not  wonder  if  my 
respect  for  you  is  very  great ;  it  is,  and  what  reason  is  there  that  I  should  not  say  it 
is  ?  I  know  none,  excepting  that  your  time  is  too  valuable  to  be  lavished  in  atten¬ 
tions  to  those  instances  of  respect  which  reflect  more  honour  on  the  giver  than 
receiver.  If  I  stood  upon  the  same  line  of  fame,  acknowledged  genius  with  your¬ 
self,  the  case  would  be  altered.  I  am  obscure  and  insignificant;  yet  I  never  thought 


*  He  means  Kenrick. 

t  I  will  venture  a  few  words  upon  the  subject  of  this  letter.  It  should  be  remembered,  that  the  severest 
annoyance  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  life  sprung  from  the  encouragement  he  had  given  to  this  person’s  writings.  That 
he  should,  however,  either  from  indignation  or  derision,  have  exercised  his  wit  in  the  Morning  Post  on  a 
quondam  friend  driven  into  exile,  I  cannot  believe  :  it  is  much  more  likely  that  he  sent  the  implored  relief 
silently,  and  perhaps  added  to  its  amount — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


209 


myself  less  the  latter  than  when  you  told  me  at  our  last  meeting  in  London,  that  you 
liked  me  vastly  :  my  heart  bounded  in  me  when  I  heard  those  words,  and  I  will  not 
swear  upon  my  honour  that  I  have  been  able  to  conceal  from  some  particular  friends 
that  Mr.  Garrick  addressed  them  to  me. 

The  civilities  which  you  showed  me  when  I  was  at  Westminster  School,  were 
such  as  you  paid  in  common  to  all  your  Lichfield  connexions,  and  for  which  we 
are  collectively  obliged  to  you  as  Lichfieldians,  and  should  not  forget  them.  But  a 
higher  degree  of  gratitude  should  be  excited  in  me,  when  I  recollect  the  extraordinary 
kindness  by  which  you  testified  your  good-will  to  me  in  the  examination  of  my  play, 
and  in  undertaking  to  assist  me,  by  your  interest  with  Mr.  Hoare,  in  accomplishing 
an  affair  of  great  moment  to  me. 

Your  censures  on  my  play  were  the  censures  of  sincere  friendliness  and  exquisite 
judgment ;  they  were  kind,  candid,  plain,  and  accurate  :  the  instinctive  plainness 
and  pointed  accuracy  of  your  criticisms  taught  me  what  was  commendable  in  my 
unlicked  cub,  and  threw  a  blaze  of  daylight  upon  its  deformities.  My  parental 
blindness  was  instantly  dissipated,  though  I  am  fearful  that  I  did  not  altogether 
conduct  myself  so  well  under  them  as  I  ought. 

Some  of  my  particular  friends  are  among  those  few  in  this  French-bitten  age, 
whose  accurate  view  of  ancient  literature  enables  them  to  decide  with  great,  and  of 
one  of  them,  (the  Archbishop  of  York,)  I  may  say  with  acknowledged  authority,  upon 
literary  talents.  I  will  be  bold  to  say  (O  pudor,  Master  Butt  !)  that  I  am  not  in  ill 
estimation  with  them  ;  a  circumstance  that  may  extenuate,  it  cannot  justify,  any  little 
vanity  which  might  peep  out  of  me  at  Hampton ;  but  I  hope  you  will  believe  that  I 
drove  the  rogue  in  as  fast  as  I  could.  Apparent  vanity  is  a  teazing  kind  of  vermin, 
and  in  your  manifold  rencounters  with  poetasters,  you  must  have  often  been  stung  by 
it ;  so  that  gratitude  and  good-nature  should  oblige  me  not  to  add  even  a  mite  of  vex¬ 
ation  to  one  who  from  the  irritable  fraternity  has  received  more,  infinitely  more,  than 
his  official  share  of  it,  in  his  long  Chief  Justiceship  of  wit.  Yet,  to  bespeak  your  favour, 
I  cannot  avoid  mentioning  that  there  is  something  in  my  situation  as  a  young  play¬ 
wright  which  is  pitiable  enough  :  certain  friends,  who  have  a  great  authority  with  me, 
lay  before  me  some  sheets  of  paper,  put  a  pen  into  my  hand,  and  command  me  to 
write  a  tragedy  :  nolens  volens,  I  must  write  it,  yet  I  am  as  nolent  as  a  fat  man  to 
mount  a  hill,  or  a  lame  man  to  run  a  race.  Yet  per  force  I  must  write,  though  I  tell 
them  that  the  Emperor  of  Critics  has  evicted  the  station  of  the  tragedian  to  be  upon 
the  summit  of  Parnassus,  and  in  this  respect  I  am  fat,  it  is  a  huge  steep  hill ;  and 
that  the  drama  is  a  course  wherein  I  must  run  with  Euripides  and  Sophocles,  Cor¬ 
neille  and  Shakspeare,  and  in  this  respect  I  am  lame  :  and,  by  the  by,  I  cannot  help 
mentioning  that  I  subscribe  to  the  sentence  of  Aristotle  respecting  the  superior  use  of 
tragedy  to  all  other  poems. 

The  lyric  poem  flies  over  the  head  of  the  many, 

“  Sailing  with  supreme  dominion 
Through  the  azure  deep  of  air.” 

Useless  therefore  to  most,  as  few  can  shoot  flying. 

2  E 


VOL.  II. 


210 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  epic  poem  takes  too  wide  a  compass,  addresses  principally  to  the  imagination, 
occasionally  only  to  the  passions;  but  the  tragedy, borrowing  graces  from  both,  there¬ 
with  enforces  its  more  immediate  application  to  the  passions,  and  by  the  predomi¬ 
nance  of  this  application  in  its  constitution,  clearly  becomes  the  fittest  awakener  to 
moral  action.  A  good  tragedy,  at  least  in  this  age  of  irreligious  indifference,  will 
outprcach  a  thousand  sermons;  a  man  claps  his  shield  on  his  arm,  and  bids  the  poor 
parson  pepper  away — telumque  imbelle  sine  ictu  conjicit. 

But  the  tragic  moralist  aims  his  dart  at  the  unprotected  breast,  and  wakes  the 
soul  and  amends  the  heart  by  those  tender  strokes  of  his  muse,  which  strike  be¬ 
cause  they  are  not  warded  off.  And  this  use  of  tragedy  leads  me  to  dissent  in  a  certain 
degree  from  Aristotle’s  famed  definition  of  it ;  but  perhaps,  like  many  of  my  betters 
who  have  studied  Aristotle  till  they  could  not  understand  him,  with  poring  myself 
blind  I  may  have  mudded  my  brain  into  a  misconception  of  bis  sentiments.  Sure  I 
am,  however,  that  I  do  not  approve  of  his  definition,  if  he  means  thereby  that  tragedy 
effects  by  the  means  of  terror  and  pity  (alone)  the  purgation  of  these  or  the  like 
passions  ;  indeed,  if  this  hurrying  of  the  human  system  by7  the  sound  smiting  of 
it  with  terror  and  pity  (alone)  can  purge  away  all  bad  passions,  can  most  effectually 
moralize  the  human  heart,  then  the  end  effected  consecrates  the  means,  and  the 
means  and  end  taken  together  form  a  full  and  adequate  definition  of  this  noble  poem  ; 
but  I  think  something  more  should  be  added  to  Aristotle’s  definition,  in  order  to 
give  us  an  adequate  description  of  tragedy.  Perhaps  the  tragedy*  might  be  called 
a  serious  poem,  which  exciting  terror  and  pity  by  a  fable,  conducted  secundum  me- 
rita  virtutum  et  scelerum,  tends  to  moral  improvement,  and  thus  a  definition  is 
formed  by  the  contributions  of  Aristotle  and  Bacon  ;  for  the  latter,  yrou  know, 
makes  it  the  useful,  ennobling  circumstance  of  poetry  in  general,  in  contradistinc¬ 
tion  to  history,  that  “  Cum  Historia  vera  successus  Rerum  minime  pro  Meritis 
Virtutum  et  Scelerum,  narret;  corrigit  earn  Poesis,  et  Exitus,  et  Fortunas  secundum 
Merita  et  ex  Lege  Nemeseos,  exhibet.”*  Now  either,  according  to  Bacon,  the  tragedy 
is  not  the  noblest  poem,  if  the  circumstance  that  most  ennobles  poetry7  in  general  is 
not  made  an  essential  part  of  it ;  or  Aristotle’s  definition  is  an  inadequate  description 
of  it  in  totally  excluding  this  essential  circumstance.  Having,  therefore,  put  these  two 
geniuses  to  loggerheads,  (it  is  not  the  first  time  that  they7  have  been  in  this  situation,) 

I  shall  proceed  to  declare  that  I  am  entirely  British  in  my7  opinion  respecting  this 
matter,  toto  ccelo  a  Baconian  :  and  I  really7  think  that  the  circumstance  on  which 
Bacon  lays  so  great  a  stress  as  to  poetry  in  general  has  not  been  sufficiently  attended 

*  A  proper  veneration  for  so  great  a  man  leads  me  to  insert  the  whole  passage  in  the  note. — Ed. 

“  Quapropter  cum  Res  gestee,  et  Eventus,  qui  verae  Historise  subjiciuntur,  non  sunt  ejus  Amplitudinis,  in  ✓ 
qua  Anima  humana  sibi  satisfaciat,  praesto  est  Poesis,  quae  facta  magis  heroica  confingat :  cum  Historia  vera 
successus  Rerum,  minime  pro  Meritis  Virtutum  et  Scelerum,  narret;  corrigit  earn  Poesis,  et  Exitus  et  For¬ 
tunas  secundum  Merita  et  ex  Lege  Nemeseos,  exhibet :  cum  Historia  vera  obvia  rerum  Satietate  et  simili- 
tudine,  Anima;  humana?  fastidio  sit,  reficit  earn  Poesis,  inexpectata,  et  varia  et  Vicissitudinum  plena  canens. 
Adeo  ut  Poesis  ista  non  solum  ad  delectationem,  sed  etiam  ad  Animi  Magnitudinem,  et  ad  Mores  conferat.” 

— De  Augmentis  Scientiarum,  Lib.  2,  Cap.  13. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


211 


to  in  the  construction  of  tragedies  in  particular.  And  the  dictate  of  Aristotle  has 
occasioned  in  part,  (other  causes  might  be  assigned,  but  I  am  writing  a  letter,  and 
not  a  treatise,  and  the  Lord  knows  how  I  got  into  this  vein,  saving  that  writing  to 
Mr.  Garrick  I  might  naturally  enough  think  of  the  sublimest  circumstances  of  the 
drama,)  that  men  have  more  regarded  the  solemn  delight  immediately  resulting  from 
a  fine  tragedy,  than  the  great  end  to  be  answered  by  that  delight :  if  that  end  is  not 
at  all  regarded,  the  delight  will  not  be  produced,  yet  it  may  be  produced  if  that  end 
is  not  totally  disregarded.  What  advice  do  you  think  Socrates  would  have  given  to 
Euripides  respecting  the  degree  in  which  this  end  was  to  be  regarded  ?  I  am  bold  to 
say,  having  some  small  acquaintance  with  the  opinions  of  that  sage,  that  he  would 
have  ordered  his  dramatic  friend  to  make  morality  his  pole-star,  and  never  to  steer 
the  goodly  vessel  of  his  fable  but  by  that  direction.  I  have  some  notion,  that  some 
such  advice  was  once  given  to  Euripides  by  this  father  of  human  wisdom,  by  him 
that  first  lighted  that  Grecian  lamp  which  now  illuminates  the  polished  parts  of  the 
earth.  There’s  for  you ! — give  this  letter  to  Dr.  Johnson  to  light  his  pipe  by  ;  for, 
upon  my  veracity,  in  whatever  form  I  may  have  expressed  these  sentiments,  I  beg 
now  they  may  be  understood  in  the  form  of  a  query,  and  I  should  not  be  surprised 
if  you  or  your  friend  pronounced  with  justice  that  they  were  absurd.  But,  however,  I 
cannot  help  thinking,  pace  vestrum ,  that  the  dignity  of  tragedy  in  the  rank  of  poems 
essentially  depends  on  the  circumstance  above  mentioned ;  or  wherefore  have  your 
herculean  labours  been  employed  to  cleanse  that  Augean  stable  the  stage  from  that 
dirt  with  which  a  century  had  grimed  it?  Your  correction  of  “  King  Lear”  was  in 
my  opinion  the  result  of  your  love  of  virtue.  Did  this  correction  take  from  its 
pathos  ?  no,  in  truth,  but  it  removed  a  circumstance  of  horror,  for  it  was  not  con¬ 
ducted  secundum  merita ,  and  by  a  judicious  sleight  of  your  hand  you  gave  a 
glorious  direction  to  the  strong-aimed  spear  of  your  beloved  demigod.  Having 
few  people  to  talk  to  in  the  country,  I  vent  my  chattative  humour  in  letter,  and 
this  being  particularly  my  humour  at  present,  I  must  intrude  upon  your  patience 
(though,  by  the  by,  you  have  no  compulsion  to  read  farther  than  you  like),  and 
return  again  to  the  narrative  of  my  own  pitiable  condition  as  a  play-wright :  for 
however  lame-witted  I  may  be,  or  heavy-witted,  (to  remind  you  of  my  elegant  me¬ 
taphors,)  for  a  man  is  very  apt  when  he  has  got  a  pretty  conceit  to  dandle  it  about  a 
little,  yet  I  am  still  lashed  on  by  the  aforesaid  friends  till  the  due  complement  of 
acts  is  effected.  But  where  is  the  fable? — the  bricks,  the  stone,  the  timber,  it  may  be, 
are  well  enough  ;  but  what  is  the  design — what  the  general  architecture  ?  A  tragedy 
is  a  palace,  and  yet  I  mar  this  palace  by  bringing  a  wheelbarrow  into  the  presence- 
chamber,  or  by  placing  the  throne  in  a  kitchen.  I  make  a  statesman,  a  very  knowing- 
fellow  too,  start  at  a  ghost  in  the  asra  of  1777  (when  all  spirits  are  condensing  into 
matter  as  fast  as  they  can),  and  I  kill  my  hero,  the  premier  of  Sicily,  by  a  blackguard 
porterlike  Broughton-like  fellow  of  Palermo,  give  him  the  decisive  stab  with  a 
here,  hie  preesto  !  and  then  make  my  athletic  cumber-limhed  colossus  begone  with 
the  skipping  nimbleness  of  a  harlequin.  Such  an  edifice  was  “  Gondolpho,”  as  my 

2  e  2 


212 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Roscian  Vitruvius  convinced  me :  yet  maugre  “  Gondolpho,”  as  soon  as  the  summer 
days  were  fled,  and  I  could  no  longer  ramble  among  the  beautiful  scenes  of  wild 
nature  which  surround  my  hermitage,  than  the  aforesaid  friends  came  again,  laid  the 
blank  sheets  before  me,  true  upon  my  honour,  and  again  I  was  set  to  my  marplot- 
ting  for  my  employment  in  these  winter  evenings,  and  I  have  finished  another  edi¬ 
fice, — would  I  might  with  propriety  say  finished  one  such  as  my  friendly  Vitruvius 
might  fix  his  liceat  upon  ;  for  I  am  not  insensible  to  Fame,  that  would  be  sordid  ; 
nor  to  profit  (when  profit  is  necessary)  for  that  would  be  foolish.  And  now,  Sir,  I 
have  concluded  my  dramatic  history,  which  naturally  enough  reminds  me  to  mention, 
that  the  person  who  is  principally  responsible  for  my  violation  of  the  chaste  Mel¬ 
pomene  is  a  friend,  whose  friendship  for  me  is  my  richest  possession,  and  hereafter 
may  be  my  greatest  honour.  His  name  is  Woodhouse,  (and  we  too  “  were  nursed 
upon  the  self-same  hill,”  that  very  hill  on  which  with  a  deliberate  falsity  I  have  often 
roundly  asserted  that  you  were  nursed  ;)  his  father  was  the  late  Dr.  Woodhouse,  of 
Lichfield  ;  he  is  well  known  to  your  friend  the  Archbishop  of  York,  to  whom  I  refer 
you  for  his  character,  as  you  would  receive  it  from  me  with  a  suspicion  of  some 
friendly  garnishing.  I  have  made  this  mention  of  my  friend,  as  he  is  ambitious, 
when  opportunity  serves,  of  being  introduced  to  your  acquaintance  ;  and  as  one  thing 
brings  on  another,  according  to  the  common  profound  and  brilliant  observation,  the 
mentioning  of  Mr.  Woodhouse  reminds  me  of  the  exchange  of  the  livings  wherein 
you  have  so  kindly  interested  yourself ;  for  he  is  the  patron  and  incumbent  of  that 
living  by  which  the  exchange  is  to  be  negotiated.  I  received  a  letter  yesterday 
from  Mr.  Sherwood,  who  informs  me  that  you  wish  to  see  me  soon  in  London,  and 
have  good  hopes  to  melt  the  flinty  D —  into  compliance  with  a  scheme,  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  executing  which  for  my  advantage  I  am  daily  more  and  more  sensible  of. 
You  will  be  so  good  as  to  tell  Mr.  Hoare  that  Mr.  Tyson,  banker  in  Hatton-street,  is 
also  my  good  friend  in  this  business ;  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  every  particular 
proposed,  is  also  a  friend  of  Messieurs  D.  and  Morgan  ;  is  a  very  necessary  agent  in 
the  drama,  as  he  is  in  possession  of  some  deeds  of  Mr.  Woodhouse’s  execution,  and 
has  also  consulted  his  friend  and  neighbour  in  the  country,  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln, 
and  is  apprised  of  his  sentiments  in  every  particular  relative  to  the  method  of  effect¬ 
ing  the  exchange :  and  as  you  see  occasion,  I  trust,  if  you  find  the  leisure,  for  I  am 
convinced  you  will  not  want  the  will,  you  will  permit  Mr.  Sherwood  to  wait  upon 
you.  If  Mr.  D —  can  be  made  hearty  in  the  affair,  the  business  is  effected,  not  other¬ 
wise  ;  and  I  hear  continually  that  I  have  very  formidable  rivals  at  Hereford  in  case 
of  Morgan’s  death  before  the  execution  of  this  scheme,  and  I  will  roundly  assert  that 
there  is  not  a  shadow  of  a  reason  to  be  urged  by  Mr.  D —  for  his  opposing  the  appli¬ 
cations  of  so  many  friends  of  Mr.  Morgan  as  well  as  mine.  He  caught  a  prejudice 
earlv,  viresque  acquir'd  eundo. 

This  is  a  very  long  letter,  but  I  will  not  make  it  more  tedious  by  flourishing  it 
down  with  a  long  apology  for  it.  I  shall  be  in  town  in  Easter-week. 

Mrs.  Butts  unites  with  me  in  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  yourself,  and  I 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


213 


beg  you  will  kindly  remember  me  to  your  brother,  whose  friendly  manners  have 
very  much  captivated  me.  A  man  receiving  from  any  quarter  great  obligations, 
expresses  his  respect  with  some  disadvantage ;  but  I  flatter  myself  that  the  selfish 
particles  are  not  so  predominant  in  me  as  those  of  honour  and  benevolence  ;  and 
therefore  I  may  aspire  with  less  impropriety  to  the  friendship  of  Mr.  Garrick,  whose 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  great  esteem, 

Sincerely,  affectionately,  gratefully, 
Endorsed,  G.  BUTT.* 

“  A  letter  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  Butt,  March 
22nd,  1777,  about  Tragedy.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wilderness  Park,  March  30th,  1777. 

I  heard  the  other  day  that  you  had  not  been  quite  well ;  pray  send  me  word 
how  you  do ;  and  if  you  have  any  virtue  you  will  write  to  me  once  or  twice  during 
the  next  fortnight  that  we  are  going  to  hunt  in  a  vast  forest  in  Northamptonshire. 
My  direction  is  at  Farming-woods,  near  Thrapston  ;  but  pray  be  very  particular  in 
your  account  of  yourself,  as  I  cannot  possibly  allow  you  to  be  sick  or  sad. 

Camden. 

How  does  Mr.  Rigby  do  ?  And  do  you  intend  to  vote  for  poor  Lord  Pigot 
to-morrow  at  the  India-house  ?  And  have  you  a  vacancy  for  a  fiddler  at  Ranelagh  ? 
I  beg  pardon  for  not  putting  these  handsomely  into  my  letter,  but  I  thought  of  them 
too  late. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Paris,  May  30th,  1 777. 

Although  I  have  not  been  favoured  with  one  single  line  from  you,  and  though 
I  have  often  heard  it  said  in  a  tone  of  voice  which  I  shall  never  forget,  “  That  new 
made  honours  do  forget  men’s  names,”  yet  I  will  flatter  myself  that  you  will  recollect 
a  friend  whose  admiration  and  affection  for  you  no  space  nor  time  can  obliterate. 

*  The  Rev.  George  Butt  was  a  native  of  Lichfield,  a  member  of  the  University  of  Oxford  ;  in  his  progress 
honoured  with  very  valuable  church  preferments,  and  in  1783  appointed  one  of'the  Chaplains  in  Ordinary  to 
the  late  King.  His  clerical  discourses  are  distinguished  by  originality,  brilliant  thoughts,  and  a  flow  of  cor¬ 
rect  and  elegant  expression.  The  above  letter  will  evince  how  natural  it  was  to  him  to  effuse  his  mind  in 
dissertation,  and  will  also  show  how  perfectly  the  theory  of  any  art  may  be  known  by  one  whom  Nature  for¬ 
bade  to  realize  his  own  conceptions.  A  gentleman  of  such  very  fine  powers,  patronized  too  by  his  old  friend 
Bishop  Newton,  was  secure  of  Garrick’s  favourable  attention  when  he  submitted  “Timoleon”  to  his  judgment. 
That  judgment  was  however  so  firmly  adverse  to  its  production  upon  the  stage,  that  the  Reverend  author  then 
closed  his  theatrical  pretensions  entirely,  and  confined  himself  to  studies  closely  allied  to  his  profession — Ed, 


214 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  have  long  waited  for  an  opportunity  of  addressing  you,  and  the  present  event 
seems  to  furnish  me  with  one.  1  know  not  how  to  congratulate  you,  because  I 
know  of  no  title  that  can  add  lustre  to  the  name  of  Garrick.  1  can  ordy  wish  that 
you  may  wear  your  present  honours  as  many  years  in  health  and  happiness,  as  you 
have  hitherto  borne  the  admired  name  so  universally  known  and  so  universally 
esteemed.  With  all  this  1  should  not  perhaps  so  long  have  forborne  to  reproach  you 
with  forgetfulness,  had  I  not  been  for  many  weeks  past  labouring  under  the  greatest 
anxiety  and  distress  of  mind.  Mr.  Pye  is  ordered  to  America,  as  I  suppose  you 
know,  which  has  been  a  very  severe  shock  to  me  ;  for  though  it  may  seem  very 
absurd  to  say  so  whilst  he  was  in  London  and  I  at  Paris,  yet  I  never  thought  myself 
separated  from  him  till  now.  I  have,  however,  the  satisfaction  of  finding  that  there 
is  not  an  officer  in  his  Majesty’s  service  who  has  set  out  on  the  expedition  with  more 
spirit  and  alacrity,  though,  in  the  present  state  of  our  affairs,  it  has  been  little  less 
than  ruin  to  us  both,  from  the  excessive  expenses  it  has  occasioned  him.  Every 
body  here  are  in  the  highest  expectations  of  seeing  you  here  this  spring :  I  flatter 
myself  you  will  not  disappoint  their  hopes  ;  as  to  myself,  I  can  most  sincerely  declare 
that  England  does  not  now  contain  any  one  person  I  should  see  with  half  so  much 
pleasure.  By  the  way,  in  the  last  autumn  I  sent  you  over  a  lady  and  a  cane-string ; 
but  I  imagine  you  liked  neither,  for  I  have  never  heard  from  you  since. 

I  wish  I  could  send  you  some  theatrical  intelligence ;  but  although  I  live  in  sight 
of  the  Comedie  F ran^aise,  I  very  seldom  go,  nor  do  I  oftener  visit  the  Italiens;  my 
present  state  allows  me  no  more  than  those  amusements  which  are  unattended  with 
expense  and  the  society  of  half  a  dozen  amiable  people.  I  must  however  tell  you, 
that  I  am  going  to  be  engaged  in  a  very  arduous  undertaking,  which  is  no  less  than 
an  association  with  the  translators  of  Shakspeare.  You  will  think  me  no  doubt  very 
presuming ;  but  I  believe,  without  any  great  degree  of  vanity,  I  may,  after  having  so 
long  studied  Shakspeare  in  my  closet,  and  seen  him  illustrated  by  you,  venture  to 
assist  those  Frenchmen  in  some  points  where  they  totally  mistake  the  sense.  The 
“Othello”  abounds  with  horrible  blunders;  there  is  one  glaring  one  in  “The 
Tempest;”  I  have  found  nothing  in  “Julius  Caesar”  glaringly  reprehensible.  Per¬ 
haps,  however,  whilst  I  am  working  here  with  Monsr.  Le  Tourneur,  you  will  be 
much  more  effectually  serviceable  to  the  Comte  de  Catuelan,  who  is,  I  find,  in  Eng¬ 
land.  I  wish,  however,  I  knew  your  sentiments  upon  the  undertaking  in  general ; 
there  are  very  strong  parties  pro  and  con  here  at  Paris.  All  the  Voltairians  cry  it 
down  ;  others,  again,  are  more  enthusiastic  (if  possible)  than  we  are  who  have  tasted  of 
the  Avon.  For  my  own  part,  the  best  that  I  can  say  of  it  is,  that  it  is  Shakspeare 
reduced  to  the  simple  state  of  nature,  despoiled  of  his  gorgeous  pomp  and  majesty, 
his  brilliancy  and  his  graces,  but  not  disfigured.  “  Julius  Csesar”  seems  the  best 
as  yet. 

There  is  a  most  elegant  and  spirited  translation  has  lately  appeared  here  of  “  Gib¬ 
bon’s  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,”  by  a  young  gentleman  I  mentioned 
to  you  last  year,  a  Monsr.  Le  Clerc.  The  Duchess  of  Kingston  is  here  at  present ;  I 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


215 


saw  her  at  this  hotel  a  few  days  ago  at  Lady  Berkley’s  so  strangely  dressed !  I  hear 
there  are  French  plays  in  London :  pray  on  what  footing  are  they,  under  whose 
direction,  and  how  do  they  succeed?  I  beg  to  repeat  all  my  best  wishes  to  your 
cliere  and  amiable  moiti'e ,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  am,  with  the  greatest  sincerity, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate  and  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

Address,  if  you  please  (as  usual),  k  l’Hotel  de  Malthe,  Rue  St.  Nicaise,  Paris, 
where  you  yourself  lived  when  last  at  Paris. 


PORTRAIT  D  UNE  ANGLAISE. 

Je  serois  un  peu  au  dessus  de  la  moienne  taille,  si  mon  trop  d'embonpoint  n’em- 
portoit  quelque  chose  sur  ma  grandeur.  J'ai  la  tete  petite,  la  figure  a  la  Romaine, 
des  cheveux  d’un  beau  noir  de  jais,  d’une  excellente  qualite  et  tres  bien  pi  antes  mais 
pas  en  grande  quantite.  Mon  front  n’est  ni  grand  ni  petit,  mais  bien  forme. 

Mes  yeux  sont  noirs,  bien  fendus,  brillans  et  penetrans,  et  seroient  beaux  si  je  ne 
louchois  un  peu  de  l’oeil  gauche,  mais  ce  n’est  que  dans  certains  momens ;  ils  expri- 
ment  mieux  le  caractere  de  mon  esprit  que  celui  de  mon  cceur.  Mes  sourcils  sont 
noirs  et  assez  beaux,  mon  nez  est  grand  et  aquilin,  et  ne  seroit  pas  mal  s’il  n’etoit  de 
travers.  Ma  bouche  est  des  plus  propres  et  des  plus  fraiches,  et  seroit  assez  jolie  si  la 
Rvre  superieure  n’etoit  si  courte  qu’elle  decouvre  mes  dents  qui  heureusement  sont 
d  une  blancheur  qui  saute  aux  yeux,  et  n'accompagnent  pas  mal  des  levres  vermeilles. 

IMon  menton  est  bien  form6,  et  donne  de  la  grace  a  fair  de  mon  visage.  J’ai  le 
teint  olivatre,  mais  frais  et  sain,  la  petite  verole  l’a  un  peu  embrouille,  mais  je  dois  le 
pardonner  puis  qu’elle  ne  m’a  laiss6  d’autres  marques.  J’ai  la  peau  douce  et  fine,  la 
gorge  assez  belle,  mais  le  col  trop  court.  Les  bras  et  les  mains  bien  faites,  mais  pas 
blanches.  La  jambe  belle,  et  le  pied  ni  bien  ni  mal.  J’ai  la  demarche  noble,  et  l’air 
de  condition,  je  me  mets  avec  gout,  j  ’aim e  la  toilette  et  je  m’y  connois ;  je  connois 
aussi  ma  figure,  ainsi  je  me  conforme  aux  modes  sans  les  suivre  aveuglement.  En 
voila  trop  sur  un  sujet  qui  n’en  vaut  gueres  la  peine :  venons  a  mon  caractere,  ou  il 
n’y  a  pas  peu  a  dire.  J’ai  l’esprit  fort  et  le  coeur  foible ;  avec  un  abord  liaut,  froid  et 
reserve,  j’ai  le  caractere  doux,  tendre  et  compatissant.  Je  suis  charitable  et  g^nereuse, 
m&me  prodigue.  Je  n’aime  pas  l’argent,  et  ce  n’est  que  depuis  peu  que  j’ai  appris 
l’art  de  le  manager ;  par  ce  moien  j’ai  plus  dissip6  que  je  n’ai  depens6,  et  de  toutes  les 
sciences  l’oeconomie  (s’il  est  permis  de  l'appeller  ainsi)  est  pour  moi  la  plus  difficile  et 
la  plus  incomprehensible.  Je  m’attache  facilement,  et  je  me  dthache  avec  peine:  je 
me  suis  fait  des  ennemis  en  suivant  les  premiers  mouvemens  de  mon  ressentiment, 
qui  sont  tres  vifs  chez  moi,  mais  ils  passent  comme  un  Eclair.  Naturellement  tres 
franche,  je  me  livre  sans  reserve  a  ceux  que  j’aime,  et  j’ai  souvent  eue  lieu  de  m’en 
repentir.  J’ai  l’imagination  d’une  ardeur  et  d’une  activite  extraordinaire,  et  beaucoup 


2\() 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


plus  d’esprit  que  dc  jugement ;  car  de  cc  dcmier,  Dieu  sait  que  je  suis  assez  mal 
partagd.  J’ai  le  cceur  d’une  sensibilitd  extreme,  et  de  cette  sensibilitd  qui  rend  tres 
malheureux  ceux  qui  le  possddent.  Je  suis  fort  aisde  a  vivre,  parceque  je  suis  tres 
indifferente  pour  la  plupart  du  monde,  mais  un  rien  me  blesse  de  la  part  de  ceux  que 
j’aime. 

Ma  passion  dominante  et  ma  plus  grande  ambition  dds  ma  plus  tendre  enfance 
etoit  d’exciter  l’admiration,  et  comme  j’ai  ddcouvert  de  bonne  lieure  que  je  ne  tirerois 
jamais  partie  de  ma  figure,  je  me  suis  donnd  toutes  les  peines  possibles  pour  cultiver 
mon  esprit,  et  j’y  aurois  mieux  rdussie  si  je  n’avois  pas  passd  plusieurs  anndes  dans  une 
dissipation  perpdtuelle  et  une  succession  d’amusemens  frivoles. 

J’aime  la  lecture,  particulidrement  les  ouvrages  de  morale,  de  philosophic,  ou  de 
sentiment,  car  pour  l’histoire  je  n’ai  pas  beaucoup  de  gout.  Quand  on  voit  des  evdne- 
mens  qui  se  passe  presque  sous  nos  yeux,  si  mutilds  et  si  defigures  que  l’on  ne  peut 
s’assurer  de  la  verite,  comment  se  fier  a  des  historiens  pour  des  faits  dloignds?  J’ai 
toujours  regardd  l’histoire  ancienne  comme  un  roman  sublime  et  instructif,  et  la 
moderne  comme  une  narration  tres  sdche  et  trds  pen  intdressante.  Mais  la  poesie  est 
ma  passion  ;  j’ai  mdme  assez  bien  rdussie  a  faire  des  vers,  quoique  j’en  ignore  les  rdgles 
les  plus  communes,  mais  mon  oreille  ddcide  pour  la  cadence,  et  mon  cceur  pour  le 
sentiment. 

J’ai  la  mdmoire  tres  ingrate ;  il  est  vrai  que  mon  imagination  supplee  &  ce  defaut, 
et  je  profite  de  ma  lecture  en  gros,  mais  pas  assez  en  ddtail,  pour  rendre  ma  conversa¬ 
tion  amusante,  par  des  citations  heureuses. 

J’aime  le  plaisir  a  l’exces,  et  cependant  personne  n’en  supporte  la  privation  mieux 
que  moi.  Je  passerois  un  mois  dans  les  veilles  et  les  plaisirs  bruians,  sans  en  ressentir 
la  moindre  fatigue  de  corps  on  d’esprit,  et  j’en  passerois  six  dans  la  solitude  sans 
m’ennuier.  Je  connois  le  monde  et  les  liommes,  et  je  donne  d’excellens  conseils  aux 
autres,  mais  je  n’en  profite  jamais  moi-meme,  car  je  pense  en  homme  et  j’agis  en 
femme. 

Quoique  j’ai  dtd  tres  repandue,  j’ai  une  mauvaise  lionte  que  je  ne  saurois  vaincre, 
ce  qui  fait  que  je  ne  m’exprime  librement  que  dans  un  petit  cercle,  car  dans  les 
grandes  assemblies  je  ne  parle  que  trds  peu ;  je  ne  me  livre  qu’a  ceux  a  qui  je  crois 
plaire,  et  le  nombre  n’est  pas  grand.  Je  mets  ceci  en  rang  de  mes  ddfauts,  car  il  tire 
son  principe  de  la  vanite  et  de  lamour  propre.  J’ai  le  tempdrament  fort,  et  une 
sante  peu  commune ;  je  les  dois  en  partie  a  ma  fa<;on  de  vivre,  car  je  suis  trds  mo- 
deree :  je  n’aime  pas  les  petites  indulgences  que  la  plupart  des  femmes  recherchent,  et 
quoiqu’accoutumee  autrefois  a  toutes  les  aisances  que  donne  la  fortune,  je  m’en  passe 
aisement,  et  sais  me  borner  au  simple  necessaire  sans  qu’il  m’en  coute.  Avec  tout 
cela,  j’aime  la  toilette,  les  bijoux,  et  les  colifichets,  et  a  quarante  ans  je  conserve  encore 
mes  gouts  de  quinze  ans.  J’dcris  avec  une  grande  facilite,  mais  avec  une  rapiditd  qui 
rend  mon  stile  incorrect,  parceque  mes  iddes  vont  encore  plus  vite  que  ma  plume, 
mais  je  n’ai  pas  mal  rdussie  dans  le  genre  dpistolaire. 

Je  suis  au  desespoir  de  viellir,  parceque  la  viellesse  porte  atteinte  aux  facultes. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


217 


inais  je  ne  cherche  ni  a  deguiser  mon  age  ni  a  la  cacher.  Yoila  a  peu  pr£s  ce  que  je 
suis  si  je  me  connois;  je  laisse  a  une  plume  plus  habile  a  finir  mon  portrait,  et 
ajouter  les  traits  qui  m’ont  6chapp6s. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Pye’s  letter  and  portrait  by  herself  from 
Paris,  and  written  in  French.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  WINCH. 


MADAM,  Hampton,  April  8th,  1  777. 

Last  night  1  received  a  note  from  Kirke.  He  remembers  very  well  the  taking 
down  three  trees,  and  that  old  Blanchet  brought  them  over  from  Mr.  Winch  with 
the  branches  on  :  at  the  time,  he  told  me  the  loppings  were  mine  ;  but  I  said  that  1 
would  have  no  dispute  with  a  neighbour  for  such  a  trifle, — nor  will  I  with  you, 
Madam,  for  ten  times  as  much,  as  the  widow  of  one  I  very  much  esteemed. 

The  persons  in  the  parish  who  understand  these  matters,  all  agree  that  the  lop¬ 
pings  are  the  tenant’s,  and  that  there  is  no  instance  to  the  contrary.  I  likewise 
believe  that  your  brother  thinks  so ;  because,  when  I  saw  him,  he  did  not  object  to 
my  having  them,  as  my  gardener  signified  to  you.  Mr.  Mansel,  whose  word  I  would 
have  taken,  could  not  give  it  upon  this  occasion  : — in  short,  be  they  my  property,  or 
be  they  not,  if  you  think  they  belong  to  you,  I  will  certainly  have  no  dispute  about 
the  matter,  but  I  will  give  orders  that  your  will  shall  be  obeyed  directly. 

I  am,  Madam,  your  most  sincere  well-wisher  and  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  D.  B.  DIGNAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  April  11th,  1777. 

My  unfortunate  situation  is  the  only  apology  I  can  make  for  presuming  to  trouble 
you  again  with  a  repetition  of  the  request  which  I  made  to  you  last  night,  to  procure 
me  a  pardon  on  condition  of  my  leaving  his  Majesty's  dominions. 

Your  humanity  will,  I  am  sure,  plead  in  my  favour ;  and  if  it  should  go  so  far  as 
to  determine  you  to  act  for  me,  there  would  be  no  doubt  of  success.  No  minister  in 
Europe  could  refuse  Mr.  Garrick  a  favour ;  and  I  am  confident  that  the  ministry  of 
this  country  would  pay  the  highest  deference  to  any  request  or  recommendation 
coming  from  you.  My  fate,  Sir,  is  in  your  hands  ;  it  is  in  your  power  to  save  me  from 
slavery,  ruin,  and  infamy. 

I  think  it  unnecessary  to  trouble  you  with  any  new  arguments  or  reflections,  to 
make  my  innocence  appear  to  you,  after  what  you  were  so  obliging  as  to  allow  me  to 
represent  to  you  last  night  on  the  state  of  my  case. 

VOL.  II.  2  V 


218 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


You,  who  are  the  superior  of  De  Voltaire  in  some  branches  of  literature,  and 
his  rival  in  almost  all,  show  yourself  his  rival  also  in  protecting  unfortunate  and 
oppressed  innocence.  What  he  did  for  Colas  and  Sirven,  do  you  for  me.  I  shall 
owe  you  a  new  life,  and  as  long  as  it  continues  I  will  retain  the  sentiments  of 
gratitude  which  are  due  to  a  saviour,  and  those  of  admiration  and  respect  which 
are  inspired  by  your  extraordinary  abilities  that  have  so  long  astonished  all  Europe. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  most  profound  respect, 

Your  very  obliged  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  D.  BROWNE  DlGNAN. 

“  An  extraordinary  letter  from  Brown  Dignan,  before  he  went 
on  board  the  Justitiae,  at  Woolwich,  April  11th,  1777.” 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Hotel  de  Malthe,  Rue  St.  Nicaise,  April  15th,  1777. 

I  cannot  let  the  post  go  out,  my  much  honoured  and  worthy  friend,  without  a 
full  vindication  of  myself  in  respect  to  those  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours  which 
in  your  long-wished-for  favour  I  stand  charged  with.  I  say,  crimes,  because  in  my 
opinion  (and  in  yours,  I  am  sure)  neglect  and  lukewarmness,  whether  in  love  or 
friendship,  are  most  unpardonable  ones.  Upon  my  honour  then,  and  as  I  am  a 
gentlewoman  and  a  soldier's  wife,  I  have  not  seen  your  handwriting  since  Mrs.  Beliard 
left  Paris  ;  and  what  is  more,  in  her  very  last  letter,  which  I  received  four  days  before 
yours,  she  makes  heavy  complaints  that  she  never  has  been  able  to  get  a  sight  of  you. 
How  may  these  things  be  ?  Why,  I  will  tell  you  :  I  do  imagine  that  you  made  some 
mistake  in  the  direction  of  your  letter,  by  which  means  it  never  reached  me,  and 
Mrs.  Beliard’s  duncial  servants  never  told  her  that  you  had  done  her  the  favour  of 
calling  on  her. 

As  to  Mrs.  Garrick ;  she  may  perhaps  find  it  difficult  to  pay  her  debts  to  me,  for 
she  owes  me  the  return  of  such  sincere  sentiments  of  esteem  and  affection  as  I  cannot 
in  reason  expect  from  her,  till  I  merit  them  as  well  as  she  does.  However,  pray  tell 
her  that  I  will  undertake  no  more  commissions  for  her, — I  do  insist  upon  her  coming 
and  doing  them  herself.  Why  should  you  delay  ?  You  will  never  be  less  persecuted 
by  officious  friendship  and  admiration  in  England,  were  you  to  stay  there  for  a  cen¬ 
tury  :  then  e’en  take  post,  and  leave  the  gout  and  stone  behind  you  ;  they  are  con¬ 
traband,  and  will  not  be  suffered  to  pass  at  Calais. 

I  wish  you  would  give  me  a  commission  to  secure  you  the  apartment  on  the  first 
floor  in  this  hotel.  It  consists  of  a  noble  ante-chamber,  a  handsome  salle  a  manger ,  a 
superb  salon,  an  excellent  bed-chamber,  out  of  which  a  boudoir  for  Madam,  and  a 
dressing-room  for  Monsieur.  A  door  out  of  the  salon  into  the  garden  ;  and  out  of 
the  garden  an  iron  gate,  which  leads  directly  to  the  Tuileries;  the  opera  so  near,  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


219 


it  is  scarcely  worth  while  to  get  into  a  carriage.  What  think  you  of  it?  But  in¬ 
deed  you  ought  to  be  a  judge  of  the  apartment,  because  old  Younge  told  me  you 
occupied  it  the  last  time  you  was  at  Paris. 

Do  be  kind  enough  to  write  soon,  and  let  me  know  how  you  stand  affected  to  this 
salutary  trip  ;  and  at  the  same  time  send  me  the  address  of  the  lady  in  question,  whom 
I  shall  wait  upon  with  the  greater  pleasure,  as  I  shall  be  secure  of  a  good  reception 
from  such  a  recommendation. 

Have  you  read  the  Quinzaine  Anglaise  ?  It  has  made  a  great  noise  here,  and  as, 

I  am  told,  its  fame  has  reached  London - but  I  will  send  it  you,  with  all  the  names 

written  in  it ;  for  the  work  is  nothing  without  the  key. 

I  do  most  sincerely  rejoice  to  find  that  you  are  not  sunk  into  Sir  David;  for,  as 
I  said  before,  titles  can  add  nothing  to  fame  like  yours.  Indeed  1  should  never 
have  supposed  it  to  be  a  matter  of  your  own  seeking ;  for  it  has  ever  been  re¬ 
marked,  to  your  honour,  that  you  have  never  employed  your  ample  fortune  to  excite 
envy  and  make  fools  stare,  but  in  the  rational  and  sober  enjoyment  of  life.  How¬ 
ever,  I  will  not  allow  you  the  whole  merit  of  this  neither ;  most  men’s  follies  are 
owing  to  their  wives,  and  you  have  a  wife  whose  judgment  is  as  near  infallible 
as  ever  fell  to  the  lot  of  a  mortal :  entre  nous,  had  my  husband  had  such  a  one, 
we  should  not  have  lain  so  long  on  different  sides  of  the  Channel.  However,  as 
they  say,  every  one  is  to  be  fool  or  physician  at  forty,  and  1,  having  reached  that 
dreaded  era,  have  turned  physician  to  my  own  mind,  and  by  the  help  of  some 
bitter  doses  of  distress  and  deep  draughts  of  adversity,  begin  to  hope  1  shall  esta¬ 
blish  a  perfect  cure  beyond  the  fear  of  a  relapse.  And  I  am  apt  to  believe  my  little 
volatile  lord  and  master  (should  I  be  happy  enough  to  recover  him  from  the  Ame¬ 
rican  hazards)  will  begin  to  think  that  there  are  some  pleasures  to  be  found  in  the 
names  of  husband  and  father,  and  will  be  glad  to  sit  quietly  down  by  his  fire¬ 
side  with  his  ancient  helpmate.  In  one  thing  we  both  agree,  which  is,  that  if 
ever  we  meet  again,  we  separate  no  more  “  till  death  do  us  part.”  By  the  way, 
I  was  misled  by  a  private  letter  about  your  baronetage,  for  I  know  our  London  papers 
too  well  to  trust  them. 

I  find  they  have  been  very  busy,  and  very  cruelly  and  falsely  so,  about  a  person 
who  has  lately  left  Paris,  —  I  mean  Lady  Berkley  ;  not  one  word  which  they  have 
advanced  about  her  being  true.  She  has  passed  the  winter  in  this  hotel,  and  be¬ 
haved  as  properly  as  any  woman  could.  We  all  know  what  she  was  when  she 
had  a  good  stock-in-trade,  and  we  none  of  us  know  what  she  would  be  yet  if  she 
had  the  same  advantages ;  but  she  is  now  more  eminently  ugly  than  ever  she  was 
handsome,  and  she  seems  to  have  no  other  thought  but  for  her  daughter,  of  whom 
she  is  very  careful.  I  cannot  help  speaking  on  this  subject,  because  I  hate  unjust 
abuse ;  for,  though  we  lived  in  the  house  together,  I  have  no  particular  partiality 
for  her. 

Two  months  before  Mr.  Pye  was  ordered  to  America,  I  sent  him  “  Gabriella  de 
Vergy,”  which  I  wish  you  to  read,  and  favour  me  with  your  judgment.  It  is  shrunk 

2  F  2 


220 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


down  to  a  ballad  about  the  length  of  “  Eldrcd  of  the  Bower  I  wish  it  had  any  thing 
else  in  common  with  that  sAveet  poem.  I  shall  write  to  iny  brother  and  desire  him  to 
send  it  to  you.  It  was  very  much  approved  by  d’Arnaiul,  and  several  other  French¬ 
men  who  read  English  : — poor  evidence  in  its  favour,  you  will  say  ;  however,  so  I 
should  say  of  almost  any  evidence  save  yours,  because  I  equally  rely  on  your  judg¬ 
ment  and  sincerity. 

W1  len  first  I  came  to  Paris,  I  had  a  seal  with  a  tolerable  cast  of  your  profile  from 
Wed  gwood  and  Bentley :  it  was  stolen  from  me.  I  have  since  written  to  know  if 
I  could  have  another,  but  Mr.  Pye  told  me  it  was  not  to  be  bad  ; — truth  is,  I  suspect, 
he  never  enquired.  May  I  take  the  liberty  of  troubling  you  to  that  purpose?  I 
have  written  a  shameful  long  letter,  but  I  hope  to  be  forgiven,  or  to  receive  a  rebuke 
in  writing.  I  sincerely  embrace  dear  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  remain. 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  sincere  and  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

J.  H.  Pye. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  W.  B.  Street,  April  19,  1777. 

Lady  Camden  has  just  showed  me  a  letter  from  Mr.  Taylor  of  Bath,  desiring 
to  join  my  name  with  yours  as  a  trustee.  I  presume  you  are  acquainted  with  the 
nature  of  the  business  wherein  we  are  to  be  engaged  by  virtue  of  this  trust,  and 
unless  it  is  likely  to  be  attended  with  much  trouble  or  hazard,  should  be  much 
honoured  in  being  your  companion  in  parchment,  having  already  been  both  joined 
together  as  executors.  If  among  your  numberless  engagements  you  can  find  time 
to  inform  me  of  the  nature  of  this  trust,  you  will  oblige, 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  faithful  servant, 
Endorsed,  CaMDEN. 

“  Lord  Camden,  upon  Taylor  of  Bath’s  business.” 


MRS.  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  April  17,  1777. 

I  was  overjoyed  at  receiving  my  dear  good  Mrs.  Garrick’s  kind  letter,  and  your 
short  but  very  friendly  appendix.  After  worrying  and  baiting  you  for  letters,  as  is 
my  custom,  you  will  fancy  I  am  growing  very  indifferent  or  very  disinterested,  when 
I  tell  you  that  I  take  the  liberty  of  sending  you  this  scrawl,  purely  to  save  you  the 
trouble  of  writing.  The  truth  is,  I  intend  setting  out  next  week  to  spend  a  little 
time  in  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  among  my  relations,  and  propose  spending  two  or  three 
weeks,  in  my  way  there,  in  London,  with  a  very  particular  friend  who  lives  near 
Portman  Square,  with  whom  I  was  engaged  to  spend  the  Spring,  had  I  not  been 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


221 


rather  disagreeably  prevented  by  John  the  Painter,  and  the  consequences  of  his  ex¬ 
ploits.  I  beg  your  pardon,  dear  Sir,  for  this  tedious  detail,  which  is  only  meant  to 
tell  you  that  I  hope  to  have  the  honour  and  very  great  happiness  of  seeing  you  in 
about  a  week ;  which  intelligence  also,  though  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  me,  I 
should  not  have  thought  important  enough  for  your  notice,  but  that  I  should  be  in 
despair  if  I  should  miss  the  favour  of  your  promised  criticism,  by  its  passing  me  on 
the  road. 

Your  not  coming  to  Bath  has  been  a  terrible  disappointment.  We  had  set  our 
hearts  on  it.  I,  as  usual,  was  not  without  my  selfish  motives,  as  I  had  a  design  on 
you  to  correct  some  essays  for  me  which  I  have  in  the  press,  for  the  edification  of 
young  damsels.  One  of  them  has  already  had  the  benefit  of  your  correcting  hand, 
and  I  wished  heartily  to  bespeak  the  same  advantage  for  his  companions. 

I  suppose  the  rumour  of  Mrs.  Macaulay’s  absurdities  has  diverted  you  as  much  as 
it  has  the  people  in  this  region.  I  am  actually  ashamed  of  her.  Many  imagined  the 
history  of  her  birthday  was  a  ridicule,  but  it  was  a  serious  narrative. 

My  most  respectful  regards,  with  those  of  all  this  family,  attend  your  dear  lady. 
I  am,  with  all  the  esteem  in  the  world, 

Dear  Sir,  your  ever  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

H.  More. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  May  1,  1 777. 

Why,  my  dear  Sir,  all  that  you  told  me  last  summer;  and  in  consequence  thereof 
I  saw  Preville  at  your  desire,  and  told  him  what  you  said  ;  but  you  never  informed 
me  till  now  of  the  lady’s  name.  To-morrow  I  shall  send  again  to  Preville  ;  and  as 
soon  as  I  know  her  place  of  abode,  I  shall  wait  on  her  in  your  name.  By  the  way, 
I  think  your  friend's  friend  has  travelled  very  slowly,  for  I  never  received  your  favour 
till  the  day  before  yesterday.  I  am  infinitely  obliged  to  you  for  furnishing  me  with 
the  means  of  becoming  acquainted  with  Madame  Riccoboni :  I  shall  avail  myself  of 
your  letter  to  introduce  myself  to  her,  for  I  have  long  been  one  of  her  constant 
readers  and  very  great  admirers.  You  rate  my  abilities  too  high  to  suppose  me 
capable  of  translating  any  of  her  productions  :  it  would  be  an  undertaking  I  should 
be  very  fond  of,  did  I  not  fear  that  I  should  not  do  justice  to  my  author  or  credit  to 
myself.  I  met  your  friend  Younge  several  times  at  Lady  Berkley’s,  but  I  suppose 
he  did  not  like  me  well  enough  to  come  and  see  me;  indeed  he  is  not  liberal  of  his 
likings,  I  believe  ;  he  is  a  sensible,  good  sort  of  an  odd  mortal,  but  I  am  not  fond  of 
an  old  bachelor.  You  will,  I  am  sure,  readily  agree  with  me,  that  there  is  always 
something  unsocial  and  unpleasing  in  the  mind  of  a  man  who  has  passed  through 
life  without  exerting  the  best  and  tenderest  affections  of  the  soul.  In  my  opinion, 
it  is  just  as  well  for  one’s-self  (and  for  society)  to  be  an  oyster,  or  a  bunch  of  turnips, 


222 


private  correspondence  of 


as  to  be  a  human  being  who  eats,  drinks,  and  sleeps,  and  then  sinks  into  the  grave 
unloving  and  unloved. 

I  wish  you  would  come  with  Mr.  Gibbon  ;  for  sure  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  who 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  “  say  to  this  man,  Come,  and  be  cometh,  and  to  that  man, 
Go,  and  he  goeth,”  are  just  as  soon  put  en  train  as  any  bachelor  of  them  all. 

A  propos!  Mr.  Gibbon,  I  suppose,  has  told  you  of  his  French  translator:  if  you 
recollect,  I  showed  you  an  English  letter  from  that  young  gentleman  last  spring :  he 
has  succeeded  admirably  in  his  translation  of  that  excellent  work  ;  and  indeed  his 
talents  do  as  much  honour  to  his  country,  as  his  character  does  to  human  nature.  If 
we  are  so  happy  as  to  have  you  among  us,  I  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  presenting 
him  to  you  ;  and  I  will  not  give  up  that  point  even  to  Mr.  Gibbon  himself.  I  have 
also  got  another  person  to  introduce  to  you,  whom  1  will  even  permit  to  supplant  me 
in  your  favour;  it  is  a  nut-brown  maid:  no  beauty,  it  is  true;  but  I  have  not  been 
admiring  your  eyes  for  these  thirty  years  to  no  purpose,  and  I  think  I  have  succeeded 
tolerably  well.  If  I  was  not  afraid  that  you  would  think  me  a  foolish  mother,  I 
would  tell  you  of  my  Kate,  that 

“  Her  person  far  exceeds 
What  my  most  blooming  youth  could  boast ; 

And  her  firm  mind  is  wisdom’s  aged  strength, 

With  all  youth’s  graces  softened.” 

Excuse  my  folly,  but,  without  partiality,  I  flatter  myself  you  will  be  pleased  with 
my  daughter. 

As  to  the  apartment,  I  am  amazed  you  do  not  recollect  it,  as  you  have  already 
inhabited  it :  it  is  certainly  more  grand  than  gay;  but,  as  it  opens  into  the  garden,  it 
is  pleasant  and  healthful.  We  have  had  the  Emperor’s  good  company  here  for  this 
month  past ;  he  is  much  approved  of  by  the  nobility  and  gentry  ;  but  1  have  not  seen 
him,  for  two  good  reasons, — that  I  could  not  possibly  get  a  peep  at  him  without  ex¬ 
pense  and  trouble  ;  and  the  first  does  not  suit  my  purse,  nor  the  second  my  turn  of 
mind  :  and  I  conclude  that  the  exterior  of  an  Emperor  differs  but  little  from  that  of 
another  man.  I  hope  by  this  time  you  are  quite  free  from  your  gout,  and  that  you 
will  soon  give  me  the  pleasure  of  knowing  it  under  your  hand.  With  the  sincerest 
and  warmest  affection,  je  vous  embrasse ,  ainsi  que  la  chere  JSIadame  Garrick.  Toute 
a  vous.  J.  H.  Pye. 


MRS.  H.  COWLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Corporation  Row,  Spa  Fields. 

I  hope  this  letter  will  have  the  good  fortune  to  be  put  into  your  hands,  in  one 
of  those  moments  which  to  you  cannot  be  unfrequent ;  I  mean  those  calm  moments 
in  which  the  mind,  indulging  itself  in  a  retrospect  of  the  past,  and  looking  forward  to 
the  future,  beholds  a  continued  chain  of  interesting  and  delightful  events.  If  any  of 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


223 


a  darker  hue  appear,  they  seem  like  shades  in  a  rich  painting— absolutely  necessary  to 
its  formation  and  beauty.  I  fancy  such  reflections  must  leave  the  mind  in  the  most 
perfect  state  of  benignity,  and  open  to  no  impressions  but  the  tenderest  and  best.  I 
have  a  sort  of  prophetic  assurance  that  yours  will  be  precisely  in  this  state,  whilst 
you  are  reading  what  I  have  written.  Let  me,  then,  seize  the  auspicious  moment, 
before  the  ungentler  feelings  have  time  to  collect  themselves  to  oppose  my  design. 

I  have  lost  your  friendship  !  It  is  strange  that,  with  a  heart  full  of  gratitude,  I 
should  have  offended  the  patron  to  whom  that  heart  is  devoted.  My  sentiments  for 
you.  Sir,  arose  to  enthusiasm — Why  do  I  say  arose  ?  They  are  still  the  same,  nor 
shall  any  unkindness  I  may  experience  from  you  ever  alter  them.  I  insist,  then,  on 
the  privilege  such  sentiments  bestow,  to  talk  freely  of  the  affair. 

I  had  never  the  most  distant  idea  that  you  had  conceived  any  thing  like  resent¬ 
ment  towards  us,  till  Mr.  George  Garrick  told  Mr.  Cowley  that  you  thought  us  un¬ 
grateful  in  not  having  called  on  you  during  the  summer,  and  that  you  were  highly 
offended  at  our  inattention.  Surely  it  is  the  first  instance  in  which  an  excess  of  hu¬ 
mility  ever  lost  a  friend.  Believe  me,  Sir,  when  1  tell  you  that,  whilst  you  were 
accusing  me  of  neglect,  and  steeling  your  mind  against  my  ingratitude,  I  fretted, 
cried,  and  was  miserable,  from  the  idea  that  you  had  forgot  me,  or  thought  of  me  with 
contempt.  Had  I  conceived  that  the  continuance  of  our  intercourse  depended  on  me, 
I  should  have  flown  to  the  Adelphi  with  transport ;  but  I  imagined  that  your  en¬ 
gagements  in  the  great  world  allowed  you  no  time  for  little  folks  ;  and  the  mere  ap¬ 
prehension  of  being  thought  impertinent  prevented  me  from  waiting  on  you  twenty 
times.  I  must  confess,  Sir,  that  this  idea  received  additional  strength  when  I  reflect¬ 
ed  on  the  last  visit  I  had  the  honour  to  make  you.  That  visit  I  really  thought,  from 
your  manner,  you  would  have  gladly  spared.  Wounded  to  the  heart  with  such  a  proof 
of  disesteem  from  you,  I  came  home  in  tears  ;  yet  1  thought  it  my  duty  to  forget  it  : 
I  did  forget  it,  and  imputed  the  coldness  I  had  observed  to  a  thousand  causes,  in  which 
I  had  no  concern.  Yet  I  must  acknowledge  that,  after  this,  I  flattered  myself  that  I 
should  have  received  an  invitation  from  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick :  if  such  a  hope  was 
presumption,  I  have  been  sufficiently  punished  in  the  mortification  attending  the 
disappointment.  Determined,  however,  to  preserve  a  reason  for  calling  on  you  unin¬ 
vited,  I  very  cunningly  kept  back  a  “  Runaway,”  which  was  bound  in  a  manner  i 
remembered  you  liked  (and  in  which  1  had  written  the  dedication)  reserving  it  as  an 
apology  for  Mr.  Cowley’s  intrusion,  or  mine,  whenever  we  might  be  admitted.  Mr. 
Cowley  accordingly  put  it  in  his  pocket  every  time  he  went  to  the  Adelphi,  and 
every  time  brought  it  back  with  concern.  Mr.  Cowley  has  spirit,  Sir, —  he  has  a  great 
spirit, — and  nothing  less  than  his  sentiments  for  you  could  have  enabled  him  to  submit 
to  such  repeated  denials,  delivered  by  your  servants  in  the  most  insulting  manner. 
I  am  sure  you  are  the  only  man  in  the  kingdom  who  could  have  so  humbled  him  ; 
but  his  reverence  for  you  is  sufficient  to  conquer  all  his  resentments. 

You  will  perhaps,  Sir,  do  me  the  injustice  (as  you  have  already  mistaken  my 
character)  to  impute  this  letter,  this  earnestness,  to  some  selfish  motive — to  some 


224 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


expected  favour  : — I  have  no  motive  but  the  anxiety  I  feel  to  be  restored  to  the  place 
in  your  good  graces  that  1  flatter  myself  1  lately  held.  Providence  hath  raised  me 
friends  in  the  highest  ranks  of  life  ;  and  I  look  forward  with  a  lively  expectation,  both 
of  fame  and  fortune.  Behold  me  then,  Sir,  in  all  the  arrogance  of  such  hopes,  again 
soliciting  your  friendship,  your  esteem.  Nay,  I  demand  them  as  a  right— and  I 
swear  I  will  never  give  up  the  claim. 

I  am  going  to  spend  the  summer  in  Devonshire.  One  of  the  first  questions  my 
father  will  ask  will  be,  when  I  saw  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  ?  I  am  sure  you  cannot 
have  the  heart  to  let  me  say,  “Sir,  Mr.  Garrick  will  not  see  me  ;  he  despises  me,  and 
won’t  let  me  enter  his  doors.”  Such  an  answer,  I  believe,  would  make  my  father 
turn  me  from  his  doors  ;  for  surely  he  must  think  I  have  been  much,  much  to 
blame.  Have  I  ? — Then  I  ask  your  pardon,  ten  thousand  thousand  times.  Will  you 
grant  it,  Sir  ?  Have  the  goodness  to  give  me  this  one  proof  of  it — bid  me  come  and 
see  you.  1  am,  Sir,  most  truly  your  devoted  and  obedient  servant, 

Hannah  Cowley. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  COWLEY. 


MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Adelphi. 

If  my  mind,  as  you  imagined,  had  been  changed  upon  your  account,  the  letter 
I  received  yesterday  would  have  disj>ersed  any  little  clouds  that  might  have  been 
upon  it.  Be  assured  that  my  wishes  for  you  were  always  the  same.  I  had  indeed 
been  told  that  Mr.  Cowley  had  expressed  himself  somewhat  strangely  with  regard  to 
me,  which  surprised  me  at  the  time,  and  was  quickly  forgotten.  1  might  indeed  have 
thought,  perhaps  with  too  much  sensibility,  that  I  was  rather  neglected  after  the 
comedy  had  been  played ;  but  I  could  not  have  expected  to  have  seen  you  in  the 
summer,  because  I  was  many  miles  from  London,  and  my  residence  at  Hampton  is 
always  uncertain.  As  to  my  servant  behaving  impertinently  to  Mr.  Cowley,  had  he 
sent  me  word  of  it,  I  should  immediately  have  discharged  the  offender.  I  never 
heard  of  Mr.  Cowley’s  calling  upon  me  but  in  my  illness,  and  when  I  was  incapable 
of  seeing  any  body  but  my  own  family.  If  you  should  be  disengaged  on  Sunday 
next  to  breakfast  about  ten,  and  the  morning  should  be  fine,  Mrs.  Garrick  and  1 
shall  be  happy  to  see  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cowley  at  the  Adelphi. 

I  am,  dear  Madam,  your  most  obedient  servant,  and  sincere  well-wisher, 

D.  Garrick. 


MRS.  COWLEY  TO  MRS.  GARRICK. 

MADAM,  Corporation-Row,  Spa-Fields,  Saturday  Morning. 

The  accident  which  deprived  me  of  your  intended  favour  was  a  very  malicious 
one.  I  was  at  home,  and  should  have  been  happy  to  have  returned  you  thanks  in 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


225 


person,  for  the  honour  of  your  visit.  Yet,  in  charity  to  my  neighbours,  I  ought  per¬ 
haps  to  rejoice  at  the  servant’s  mistake ;  for  Mrs.  Garrick’s  coach  at  a  door  in  so 
obscure  a  corner  of  the  world  would  have  been  a  phenomenon  to  have  engaged  the 
attention  of  all  the  good  housewives  in  the  parish,  who  would  have  cracked  their 
wits  in  attempting  to  account  for  it. 

About  two  hours  ago  I  received  your  card  from  a  troublesome,  provoking  woman, 
who  plagues  every  body.  It  gives  me  fears  that  my  disappointment  was  not  the 
only  ill  occasioned  by  the  mistake ;  for  I  suppose  she  considered  the  card,  when  left 
at  her  house,  as  a  command  to  attend  you  ;  and,  as  the  good  lady  is  exceedingly 
earnest  in  her  vocation,  I  am  afraid  it  subjected  you  to  disagreeable  importunities. 

Permit  me  to  acquaint  you,  Madam,  that  Lord  H - -  was  with  me  yesterday, 

to  tell  me  he  had  altered  his  mind  about  my  patroness.  A  letter  lately  published  and 
addressed  to  the  Duchess,  gives  him  an  idea  that  it  would  be  very  improper  to  apply 
to  her  on  the  present  occasion  ; — so  he  will  turn  the  business  into  another  channel. 

Pray,  Madam,  have  the  goodness  to  make  my  best  respects  to  Mr.  Garrick,  whom 
I  love,  honour,  and  revere.  The  same  sentiments  naturally  extend  to  you — you, 
Madam,  who  form  his  happiness  and  embellish  his  life. 

Believe  me  to  be,  with  the  highest  respect,  your  most  devoted  humble  servant, 

H.  Cowley. 


COLONEL  ST.  PAUL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Tuesday  afternoon,  June  3rd,  1777. 

Colonel  St.  Paul  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  and  begs  leave  to 
trouble  him  with  the  inclosed  letter  to  Mr.  Bate:  he  returned  home  very  late,  or 
would  have  sent  it  sooner.  Colonel  St.  Paul  agrees  entirely  with  Mr.  Garrick  and 
Mr.  Bate,  that  a  proper  answer  to-morrow  to  this  troublesome  correspondent  may 
silence  him  for  the  future ;  and  is  sure  that  every  thing  Mr.  Bate  will  say  upon  this 
occasion  will  be  perfectly  right.  Mr.  Robinson  has  been  invisible  hitherto,  notwith¬ 
standing  Colonel  St.  Paul  has  called  both  in  Parliament-street  and  at  the  Treasury  ; 
but,  the  birthday  over,  he  hopes  to  be  more  successful,  and  will  then  either  wait 
upon  Mr.  Garrick,  or  write  to  him,  to  let  him  know  the  result  of  his  conversation 
with  him. 


REV.  H.  BATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Adelphi,  June  11th,  1777. 

How  shall  I  ever  be  able  to  repay  you  even  in  thanks  for  the  many  friendly 
services  you  have  so  warmly,  as  well  as  kindly,  done  me  ?  Believe  me,  however,  his 
icorship  is  all  gratitude  upon  the  present,  as  well  as  upon  every  former  occasion  ; 
VOL.  it.  2  G 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


22(> 

though  unable  to  give  that  gratitude  a  grace,  by  not  having  it  in  his  power  to  return 
the  obligations.  We  are  as  stupid  in  this  deserted  metropolis  as  dulness  and  the  dog- 
days  can  possibly  make  us.  Little  Colman  went  on  swimmingly,  according  to  Joe 
Vernon’s  witticism,  so  long  as  the  “  rains  descended  and  the  floods  came.”  You  see 
I  am  neither  quite  so  graceless  nor  so  unlettered  in  the  sacred  way  as  the  pious  Arch¬ 
bishop  of  C - y  was  pleased  to  pronounce  me; — but  no  more  of  an  old  woman’s 

story.  No  sooner  did  the  god  of  day  return  to  his  charge  with  a  clean-washed  face, 
than  theatrical  matters  took  a  different  turn  in  the  Haymarket,  and  the  great  Mr. 
Henderson  played  to  almost  empty  benches.  Poor  Foote  sighs  his  soul  out  for  the 
loss  of  his  dramatic  diadem  : — is  the  man  mad?  Or  does  he  think  that  mankind  will 
be  apt  to  make  a  distinction  between  the  two  theatrical  abdications  of  1776,  and  view 
one  monarch  retiring  by  his  own  choice,  crowned  with  never-fading  laurels,  and  the 
other  driven  to  it  by  the  reproaches  of  his  own  conscience,*  no  reckoning  made  “  with 
all  his  imperfections  on  his  head.” 

You  must  have  seen  the  account  of  Mr.  Bowes’s  conduct  behind  the  scenes. 
What  think  you  of  such  a  man  ? — is  he  not  a  pest  to  society?  Some  curious  letters 
have  passed  between  us  on  the  occasion,  which  I  mean  to  show  you.  I  rejoice  that 
the  weather  is  set  in  favourable  at  last,  that  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you  may  enjoy  the 
rural  charms  of  Mistley  in  full  perfection.  I  beg  to  be  remembered  to  her,  and  that 
in  no  common  terms.  In  what  manner  shall  I  thank  your  hospitable  friend,  and  the 
Ford  Lieutenant  of  Essex,  for  the  honour  they  have  done  me  in  putting  my  name 
into  the  commission  of  the  peace?  But  of  that  you  will  inform  me  when  I  have 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  the  beginning  of  next  week. 

I  remain,  my  dear  friend,  yours  ever  and  most  sincerely, 

H.  Bate. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  June  12th,  1777. 

I  cannot,  without  ingratitude,  delay  any  longer,  my  dear  Sir,  returning  you  my 
sincere  thanks  for  the  great  pleasure  you  have  procured  me  in  the  acquaintance  of 
the  charming  Madame  Riccoboni  and  her  amiable  friend.  She  is  all  and  every  thing 
you  say  of  her,  and  twice  a-week  I  have  the  happiness  of  passing  the  evening  with 
her.  Your  friend,  Mr.  Younge,  is  so  obliging,  constantly  to  call  and  take  me  there 
and  bring  me  back.  He  desires  me  to  assure  you,  he  is  highly  sensible  of  your  kind 
remembrance  of  him.  Madame  Riccoboni  has  been  so  good  to  make  out  a  catalogue 
of  her  library  on  purpose  for  me.  I  need  not  tell  you,  it  is  well  chosen  ;  so  that,  by 
her  means,  I  have  plenty  of  books,  which  hitherto  has  not  been  the  least  of  my  wants 
here.  It  is  true,  I  have  had  some  lent  me  here  and  there,  but  not  many ;  and  as  to 
subscribing,  it  is  only  money  thrown  away,  for  I  am  too  old  to  read  in  the  Polly 
*  That  is, — no  cash  laid  by. — This  explanation  is  that  of  the  letter-writer. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


227 


Honeycomb  style,  and  few  novels  please  me.  Our  friend’s  writings  I  admire  in 
general ;  but  I  own  I  prefer  those  which  she  has  given  in  the  narrative  style,  to  those 
in  letters.  I  wish  to  know  if  you  are  of  my  opinion.  The  persons  who  are  at 
Madame  Biccoboni’s,  when  Mr.  Younge  and  I  are  there,  have  a  strange  time  of  it, 
for  our  chief  conversation  is  about  you  and  your  most  amiable  partner.  I  do  assure 
you,  that  at  those  times  you  are  talked  of  by  people  who  most  sincerely  love  and 
honour  you. 

I  find  Mrs.  Beliard  sent  to  the  Adelphi  before  she  set  out  for  Paris,  but  you  were 
gone  out.  This  was  joyful  news  to  me,  as  it  convinced  me  of  your  recovery.  May 
you,  my  dear  friend,  enjoy  perfect  health,  for  your  own  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of 
those  friends  whom  you  make  happy!  I  find  that  acquaintance  did  not  succeed: — - 
entrenous,  I  am  not  surprised  at  it ;  for  under  the  seal  of  secrecy  I  must  tell  you,  that 
nothing  in  nature  can  be  more  opposite  than  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Mrs.  B. — ce  n’estpas 
faire  Veloge  de  la  derniere ;  but  so  it  is,  and  I  cannot  help  it.  There  is  in  the  Courier 
de  V Europe  a  most  disgraceful  tale  of  my  friend  Ayscough,  which  I  flatter  myself  is 
not  absolutely  true.  I  always  foresaw  that  the  illness  which  prevented  his  going  to 
America  would  cast  some  disagreeable  doubts  on  his  military  character;  but  if  this 
story  is  true,  he  has  confirmed  them  by  his  conduct.  Oh,  my  God  !  when  I  reflect 
on  this  event,  how  thankful  I  am  to  Providence  that  no  stop  interfered  to  prevent 
my  husband’s  going  !  Obliged  as  he  was  to  raise  300/.  in  less  than  a  fortnight,  his 
letters  to  me  were  written  almost  in  a  state  of  distraction,  lest  he  should  be  detained. 
In  one  of  them  he  says,  “  The  people  who  see  me  as  pale  as  death,  and  grown  thin 
with  vexation,  attribute  it  to  fear :  let  them  think  so,  I  shall  not  take  the  trouble  of 
undeceiving  them.”  But  he  was  too  much  of  a  gentleman  to  evade  going,  and  I  am 
sure  he  is  too  much  of  an  Englishman  not  to  behave  properly  when  there.  I  have 
this  day  received  a  letter  from  him,  sent  by  a  French  ship,  dated  the  26th  of  April. 
He  says  that  they  are  at  that  time  four  hundred  leagues  from  Yew  York  ;  and  that 
the  winds  are  so  contrary,  that  they  expect  to  be  six  weeks  longer  ere  they  arrive ; 
that  they  had  had  a  very  dreadful  storm,  and  two  of  their  convoy  out  of  nineteen 
were  missing. 

I  have  not  yet  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  out  the  lady  your  relation :  Preville 
does  not  know  where  she  lives,  but  has  promised  to  inquire.  You  know,  however, 
what  sort  of  dependence  there  is  to  be  placed  on  Preville.  If  you  should  chance  to 
find  her  direction,  I  beg  you  will  favour  me  with  it ;  I  will  in  consequence  imme¬ 
diately  wait  on  her. 

Gracious  Heaven  !  what  a  stroke  !  I  this  moment  receive  a  letter  that  gives  me 
the  severest  affliction.  When  Air.  Pye  went  away,  he  enjoined  me,  with  the  most 
pathetic  earnestness,  to  remove  his  son  from  Dijon,  and  to  have  him  underbuy  own 
eye :  in  his  letter  to-day  he  says,  he  hopes  his  boy  is  with  me.  The  circumstances 
of  Mr.  Pye’s  going  were  such  as  to  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  do  it  without  assist¬ 
ance  :  I  had  fondly  flattered  myself  with  having  my  son  under  my  own  care,  and 
my  brother’s  letter  informs  me  he  cannot  succeed.  In  the  whole  rich  and  unfeeling 

2  G  2 


228 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


family,  with  the  Chancellor  at  the  head,  I  cannot  get  them  to  advance  me  sixty 
pounds,  though  I  could  so  easily  secure  the  payment.  1  beg  your  pardon  ten  thou¬ 
sand  times  for  troubling  you  with  my  distresses ;  but  the  letter  lies  before  me,  toge¬ 
ther  with  that  of  my  husband,  and  my  heart  is  full.  Excuse  me,  my  ever  respected 
friend,  if  I  break  off  the  delightful  task  of  conversing  with  you,  to  indulge  the  fresh 
affliction  that  presses  hard  on  Your  most  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

My  love  to  dear  Mrs.  G. 


LADY  BATHURST  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR,  SIR,  Brighthelmstone,  June  12tli,  1777. 

I  cannot  be  silent  a  moment  after  receiving  so  agreeable  a  token  of  your  re¬ 
membrance  as  the  Serenade,  which  pleased  me  extremely,  as  every  thing  does  you  do 
or  say.  But,  my  good  Sir,  I  am  not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  fine  speeches  transmitted 
me  by  Mrs.  Wilmot ;  you  must  do  something  more,  and  must  make  Mrs.  Garrick 
tell  me  what  kind  of  house  she  wants :  tell  her  (with  my  compliments)  I  will  take 
care  of  the  pots  and  pans,  and  she  shall  have  no  other  trouble  than  telling  me  what 
you  like.  I  am  persuaded  there  is  nothing  so  salutary  as  the  sea-air  : — do  come  and 
take  a  peep  of  this  fine  ocean;  it  is  one  of  those  very  few  things  one  never  tires  of ; 
and  if  I  can  conduce  to  your  health  or  pleasure,  I  shall  be  highly  gratified  by  it, 
being  very  sincerely  Your  obliged  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  Tryphena  Bathurst. 

“  Lady  Bathurst’s  most  obliging  letter,  1777.” 


MRS.  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bungay,  June  16th,  1 777- 

I  beg  to  return  you  my  most  hearty  thanks  for  your  great  goodness  in  sending 
me  your  delightful  Prologue.  That  you  should  think  me  not  unworthy  to  possess 
so  great  a  treasure,  flatters  more  than  my  vanity;  and  that  you  should  send  it  me  so 
soon,  makes  it  doubly  gratifying. 

I  have  read  and  re-read  it  with  all  the  malice  of  a  friend,  and  do  pronounce  that 
I  never  saw  a  sweeter,  more  beautiful  thing.  The  first  stanza  is  strikingly  descrip¬ 
tive,  the  second  elegantly  pathetic,  the  image  of  the  sun  and  shower  very  fine,  and 
the  third  is  highly  poetical.  The  truth  of  the  allusion  is  not  once  violated  through¬ 
out,  but  is  maintained  with  much  spirit  and  exactness  ;  the  two  extreme  and  difficult 
points  to  attain,  I  apprehend,  in  fable-writing.  There  is  great  ease  too  in  your  ver¬ 
sification,  without  the  flimsiness  which  too  often  attends  irregular  numbers.  I  have 
wrote  my  sincere  sentiments,  with  the  same  frankness  I  should  have  done  had  they 
been  less  in  favour  of  the  poem  ;  and  I  speak  with  the  more  confidence  of  this  com- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


229 


position,  as  I  have  now  had  an  opportunity,  by  reading  it  myself,  of  forming  a  fairer 
judgment  than  I  could  have  done  from  your  repeating  it. 

We  have  at  this  place  the  “  Tragedians  of  the  City”  of  Norwich,  who  sojourn 
here  a  month  once  in  two  years,  in  their  progress  through  the  two  counties.  The 
dramatic  furor  rages  terribly  among  the  people, — the  more,  I  suppose,  for  its  being 
allowed  to  vent  itself  so  seldom.  Every  body  goes  to  the  play  every  night ;  that  is, 
every  other  night,  which  is  as  often  as  they  perform.  Visiting,  drinking,  and  even 
card-playing,  is  for  this  happy  month  suspended  ;  nay,  I  question  if,  like  Lent,  it  does 
not  stop  the  celebration  of  weddings,  for  I  do  not  believe  there  is  a  damsel  in  the 
town  wrho  would  spare  the  time  to  be  married  during  this  rarely-occurring  scene  of 
festivity.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  the  good  folks  have  no  bad  taste.  You 
are  the  favourite  bard  of  Bungay: — to  prove  that  this  is  truth,  I  must  tell  you  that 
I  have  already  been  to  “  The  Maid  of  the  Oaks,”  and  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage  ;” 
and  among  this  week’s  amusements  already  given  out  are  “  Cymon,”  “  Bon  Ton,” 
and  “  Little  Gipsey.”  A  certain  Mrs.  Ibbott  plays  Mrs.  Heidleburg  more  than 
tolerably,  and  a  pretty -looking  Mrs.  Simpson  was  very  pleasing  in  Fanny.  Griffith 
(the  Norwich  manager)  did  Lord  Ogleby,  but  was  rather  languid  than  elegant,  and 
mistook  a  feebleness  of  exertion  for  a  refinement  of  breeding  ;  yet,  in  my  poor  judg¬ 
ment,  he  rather  did  it  deficiently  than  falsely.  I  think  the  part  of  Hurry  was  pretty 
well  conceived,  though  inadequately  acted,  by  one  Dancer.  It  was  received  with 
great  applause.  I  find  I  have  been  sadly  mauled  in  some  of  the  daily  papers  ;  I 
cannot  get  to  see  them.  I  did  not  think  I  was  of  consequence  enough :  they  tell 
me  it  is  Kenrick. 

I  hear  Barretti  has  been  so  civil  as  to  send  me  one  of  his  books  on  Shakspeare, 
but  I  have  not  got  it  here.  It  is  a  strange  undertaking !  Slippery  ground,  I  think. 
An  Italian  author  to  write  about  our  divine  English  dramatist  in  the  French 
language ! 

The  day  before  I  came  out  of  town,  I  received  a  present  from  De  l’Olme  of  his 
new  book  ;  I  have  only  dipped  in  it.  The  truth  is,  I  am  half  afraid  to  read  it,  for 
it  was  accompanied  with  a  very  sprightly  agreeable  letter,  apologising  for  some  queer 
things  in  it,  which  he  expects  I  shall  censure  very  much,  or  at  least  look  very  grave 
at.  I  suppose,  however,  it  may  safely  be  read  by  a  good  Protestant ;  it  being,  I 
suspect,  a  satire  on  the  foolish  austerities  of  the  Church  of  Rome;  something  in 
Stillingfleet’s  way.  Many  thanks,  dear  Sir,  for  your  good  and  wholesome  advice 
about  my  play.  I  do  nothing  except  regret  my  own  idleness.  I  tremble  for  my 
Fifth  Act,  but  I  am  afraid  I  shall  never  make  others  tremble  at  it. 

My  love  and  duty  to  my  sweet  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  my  thankful  compliments  to 
the  young  lady  to  whose  transcription  I  am  so  much  obliged.  She  is  astonishingly 
correct, —  not  the  smallest  error.  Pardon  this  nonsense, 

Dear  Sir,  in  your  obliged  and  obedient  H.  More. 

If  the  leisure  of  Hampton  ever  allows  you  five  minutes,  you  can  never  throw  the 
produce  of  them  away  where  it  will  be  more  valued. 

Does  Sir  Peter  Palaver  go  on  ? 

O 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


230 


MR.  J.  ROBINSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Sion  Hill,  June  16th,  1777.  9  A.  M. 

I  am  this  instant  favoured  with  your  letter.  The  bad  weather  yesterday,  I  find, 
has  operated  equally  on  us  both;  my  intention  was,  as  yours,  to  ride  to  Hampton  ; 
perhaps  by  this  we  might  have  missed  each  other,  and  therefore  it  may  be  the  same 
as  it  is.  I  am  this  instant  going  to  town,  where  I  have  run  every  day  since  the  rising 
of  Parliament,  and  returned  here  late  each  night :  in  ten  days  time,  I  trust,  we  shall 
have  more  leisure,  and  then  meet  to  laugh.  However,  I  will  certainly  see  you  in 
the  course  of  your  being  in  town  from  to-morrow  till  Thursday,  and  acquaint  you 
with  my  master’s  sentiments  on  the  business  mentioned  by  Mr.  St.  Paul,  on  which 
as  yet  1  have  not  received  his  ultimatum.  My  females  desire  me  to  present  best 
compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  yourself,  and  believe  me  ever  most  truly, 

My  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

John  Robinson. 


MR.  J.  ROBINSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Sion-hill,  June  21st,  1777. 

A  bad  morning,  and  some  unexpected  visitors  at  this  place  on  business,  have  pre¬ 
vented  me  the  pleasure  which  I  intended  myself,  of  coming  to  see  you  this  morning, 
having  missed  you  in  town.  Agreeable  to  the  assurances  I  gave  you,  I  have  talked 
with  Lord  Xorth  on  the  proposition  suggested  to  me  by  Mr.  St.  Paul.  His  Lordship 
directed  me  to  desire  you  to  thank  the  gentleman  very  much  for  his  offer  of  services ; 
but  at  the  same  time  begged  that  you  would  tell  him  that  at  present  there  is  no 
occasion  to  trouble  him.  My  wish  was  to  put  this  out  of  suspense  as  soon  as  possible; 
and  being  disappointed  seeing  you  to-day,  I  trouble  you  with  this  letter ;  it  shall 
not,  however,  save  you  from  a  visit  from  me  the  first  day  I  can  steal  leisure,  or  from 
assuring  you  in  person,  as  I  now  subscribe  myself,  that  I  am  always,  with  great  truth 
and  regard.  My  dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

John  Robinson. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  July  3rd,  1 777. 

A  poor  woman  called  upon  me  this  morning,  who  pretends  she  is  a  great-niece  of 
Mr.  Beighton,  for  some  charitable  assistance.  Her  husband,  according  to  her  account, 
was  lately  released  from  prison  by  the  Insolvent  Debtors’  Act,  and  they  have  four 
small  children.  Her  father  was  son  to  Mr.  Beighton ’s  own  sister.  She  signs  herself 
Ironmonger,  late  Toples,  which  I  suppose  was  her  maiden  name.  Upon  this  tale, 
without  knowing  more  than  she  told  me  herself,  I  sent  her  to  London  with  a  guinea 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


231 


in  her  pocket,  and  directed  her  to  apply  to  you,  who,  from  your  long  friendship  with 
our  good  friend,  might  probably  know  more  of  his  family  than  I  could, — and  might 
be  abler  to  detect  the  imposture,  if  there  was  any.  I  wonder  a  little  that  so  good  a 
man  should  overlook  a  near  relation,  the  son  of  his  own  sister,  and  leave  every  thing 
to  strangers,  unless  this  nephew  had  by  his  own  misconduct  rendered  himself  un¬ 
worthy  of  his  notice.  If  that  should  be  the  case,  what  prevented  his  bounty  ought 
to  check  in  some  sort  our  charity.  But  if  through  vanity  he  has  thought  fit  to 
leave  his  own  kindred  neglected,  and  abandoned  them  without  their  own  demerit  to 
poverty,  I  think  we,  who  have  shared  the  old  man’s  substance,  ought  to  take  this 
poor  family  into  consideration.*  But  as  the  examples  of  imposition  are  so  frequent, 
you  will  do  well  to  make  a  strict  inquiry  into  the  truth  of  these  pretences. 

And  now,  my  dear  Garrick,  since  this  application  has  opened  a  correspondence 
between  us,  give  me  leave  to  inquire  after  your  health  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s,  for  we  of 
late  have  lived  at  a  strange  distance  from  each  other.  I  am  so  retired  from  the  world, 
that  now,  in  the  close  of  my  life,  I  avoid  company,  being  grown  too  nice  to  be  satis¬ 
fied  with  such  trash  as  I  meet  with  among  the  nobility  ;  whereas  you  have  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  being  courted  by  them,  and  so  yield  yourself  to  every  invitation,  by  which 
means  I  have  lost  you.  Yet  methinks  it  is  a  pity  we  should  suffer  the  whole  summer 
to  elapse  without  one  meeting.  I  am,  dear  Garrick, 

Yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 

Fanny ,1  your  former  favourite,  is  safely  brought  to  bed  of  a  girl,  and  is  as  well  as 
possible.  I  am  sure  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  will  be  pleased  with  this  news.  The  rest 
of  the  family,  with  myself,  present  our  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick ; — you  are  a 
favourite  with  them  all. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  July  1 1th,  1 777. 

1  know  too  well  the  courtship  you  receive  from  the  first  families  in  this  kingdom 
to  be  either  surprised  or  displeased  with  the  multiplicity  of  your  engagements ;  but  it 
so  happens  that  the  importunity  of  those  who,  to  gratify  their  own  vanity,  are  con¬ 
tent  to  see  you  once  in  a  year,  and  who  are  so  numerous  that  a  day  for  each  would  fill 
up  the  whole  year,  do  so  engage  your  time,  that  others,  whose  better  motive  of 
friendship  makes  them  wish  to  see  you  often,  are  almost  totally  deprived  of  your 
company.  Not  that  I  consider  your  visit  at  Mistley  among  those  frivolous  engage¬ 
ments  I  have  been  alluding  to  ;  that  is  a  party  that  both  Socrates  and  Alcibiades 
would  envy,  for  it  would  equally  suit  the  wisest  and  the  most  voluptuous.  Even 

*  The  suspicion  implied  in  this  sentence,  however  unfavourable  one  way  to  our  species,  is  gratifying  in 
another.  It  was  proper  for  a  great  judge,  if  he  profited  by  the  gift  of  vanity,  to  hasten  with  the  spoils  to  the 
kindred  he  had  injured. — Ed. 

t  The  wife  of  Robert,  first  Marquess  of  Londonderry. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


232 

I,  with  all  my  temperance,  would  have  hazarded  the  temptation  of  Mr.  Rigby’s  table, 
for  the  sake  of  his  company.  Rut  acquaintance  is  not  worth  having  where  po¬ 
litics  forbid  an  intimacy.  You  must  conclude,  after  what  I  have  said,  that  I  do 
most  eagerly  catch  at  your  offer  of  letting  me  see  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  at  Camden- 
placc ;  and  the  week  after  next  happens  to  suit  me  better  than  any  other  time,  with 
an  exception  only  of  Friday,  the  25th,  for  that  day  is  sacred  to  a  grand  ball,  given 
by  Sir  J.  Shaw,  upon  his  son’s  coming  of  age.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  congra¬ 
tulation  upon  Fanny’s  becoming  a  mother.  She  continues  extremely  well,  for  we 
hear  every  day,  and  will  be  happy  to  be  informed  of  your  good  wishes,  which  will 
be  by  this  post.  You  seem  to  allude  to  some  other  happy  event.  I  know  of  none, 
nor  do  I  think  fortune  has  any  in  store  for  me,  unless  the  enjoyment  of  health  can 
be  classed  among  fortunate  events.  That  indeed  is  the  greatest  of  all  blessings;  but 
the  accession  of  an  estate,  a  great  office,  or  the  marriage  of  a  daughter,  and  such  like, — 
these  are  those  sudden,  unexpected,  and  rapturous  events  that  I  bid  adieu  to.  George 
Hardinge  is  going  to  be  married,  and,  according  to  the  common  opinion,  well  married. 
The  fortune  handsome  as  well  as  the  woman;  but  the  Gods  only  know,  qui pueri, 
qualisque futura  sit  uxor ;  so  I  dare  not  as  yet  rejoice  overmuch  at  this  event.  We 
are  all  in  good  health  and  the  best  spirits.  I  have  lately  had  Cornaro’s  book,  and  am 
so  persuaded  of  the  efficacy  of  his  regimen,  that  I  am  determined  to  pursue  it.  Did 
you  ever  read  this  Treatise?  If  you  have,  read  it  again  with  attention.  If  you 
have  not,  begin  it  immediately.  I  think  his  discourse  is  demonstration.  I  had  in 
great  measure  adopted  his  plan  before  I  saw  the  book,  which  has  now  confirmed  me. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  most  sincerely  and  affectionately  yours, 

Camden. 

When  I  see  you,  we  will  confer  about  Mrs.  Ironmonger.  We  shall  hope  to  see 
your  niece,  and  to  stay  with  us  as  long  as  you  can :  I  shall  not  be  content  with  a 
dinner.  We  can,  when  we  meet,  settle  how  to  return  the  compliment  at  Hampton. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  July  6th,  1777. 

Your  favour,  my  dearest  and  best  friend,  I  only  got  last  Thursday  evening,  or 
I  should  not  have  suffered  the  post  to  go  from  hence  without  the  acknowledgment 
it  deserved.  What  am  I  to  say,  or  what  language  can  I  make  use  of,  to  express 
what  I  have  felt  from  the  complicated  emotions  of  joy,  surprise,  and  gratitude  that 
rushed  upon  me  at  reading  your  letter,  and  which  have  engrossed  my  thoughts  ever 
since?  Indeed,  indeed,  indeed,  my  dear  Mr.  Garrick,  it  is  Godlike.  Your  own 
feeling  heart  will  best  represent  to  you  what  mine  must  experience  as  a  wife  and 
mother,  depressed  by  refusal,  and  soured  by  the  unfeeling  insolence  of  sour,  unrelent¬ 
ing,  money-loving  wretches,  to  be  at  once  relieved  by  a  person  to  whom  every  sen¬ 
timent  of  esteem  and  affection  makes  it  a  pleasure  to  be  obliged !  But  I  must  check 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


233 


my  pen,  or  the  subject  would  indeed  know  no  end !  I  went  yesterday  to  Pancliaud, 
and  asked  him  if  he  had  seen  Noverre  ?  He  answered  in  the  affirmative.  Had  he 
settled  your  balance  ?  He  looked  surprised  ;  said  he  did  not  well  know  how  to  an¬ 
swer  me ;  that  he  feared  he  should  be  indiscreet  unless  I  explained  to  him  what  con¬ 
cern  I  took  in  the  affair.  1  had  too  much  pride  and  pleasure  in  it,  not  to  declare  the 
whole.  His  behaviour  was  perfectly  genteel ;  he  told  me  he  had  as  yet  no  balance  of 
yours,  but  should  very  soon  :  however,  that  made  no  difference ;  your  name  was  suffi¬ 
cient,  and  I  should  have  the  money  when  I  pleased,  by  endorsing  the  note  in  your 
letter  and  a  draft  for  the  other  twenty ;  this  is,  1  believe,  as  you  understand  it.  And 
now,  my  dear  Sir,  permit  me  to  ask  you,  if  you  would  wish  me  to  deposit  a  note  in 
the  hands  of  Pancliaud,  or  whether  I  shall  send  it  to  you  ?  The  absence  of  my  husband, 
I  am  informed,  renders  my  note  binding  in  law ;  1  am  sure  it  is  so  by  the  laws  of 
honour,  and  will  be  held  sacred  by  me,  or  in  case  of  my  death,  by  my  husband  or  my 
brother.  One  favour  more  I  have  to  entreat, — I  hope  you  will  not  condemn  me  on 
this  occasion  to  a  painful  silence,  but  permit  me  to  proclaim  to  my  family  the  generosity 
that  restores  my  son  to  me.  My  God  !  how  shall  I  gladden  my  husband’s  heart  by 
the  news  !  My  dear  Sir,  he  alone  can  judge  of  my  pleasure  on  the  occasion,  because 
he  best  knows  how  sincere  an  affection  I  bear  towards  the  author  of  this  blest  event. 
I  immediately  wrote  to  the  Abbe  at  Dijon  to  send  me  his  account,  and  my  son  at 
the  same  time  ;  I  shall  have  his  answer  by  the  latter  end  of  the  week,  and  then  shall 
avail  myself  of  your  kind  permission.  I  am  myself  pleasuring  in  the  country  just 
by  St.  Cloud,  which  is  the  reason  I  did  not  get  your  letter  sooner,  and  therefore  have 
not  seen  iNoverre,  but  I  got  a  friend  to  enquire  about  him.  He  is  at  Versailles ;  but 
I  shall  be  at  Paris  about  Thursday,  and  will  make  it  my  business  to  assist  him  as  far 
as  I  am  able  in  the  commission  you  have  charged  him  with.  I  am  here  upon  a 
charitable  office  :  some  English  friends  of  mine  have  taken  a  very  pretty  house, 
which  they  do  not  at  all  know  how  to  manage,  not  having  the  language ;  and  as 
those  who  have  been  most  imprudent  for  themselves  are  sometimes  best  able  to 
counsel  others,  I  am  endeavouring  to  put  them  in  a  method  of  going  on  with  some 
tolerable  degree  of  economy.  As  to  myself,  there  is  not  such  another  well-regulated 
little  manage  in  all  Paris.  I  pay  somewhat  dearer  for  my  lodging,  because  by  that 
means  I  avoid  the  expense  of  coach-hire,  being  between  the  Thuilleries  and  Palais 
Roy  ale ;  I  have  no  femme  de  clmmbre,  and  no  other  servant  but  an  honest  old  Swiss, 
whom  I  keep  for  use  and  not  for  show ;  my  daughter  dresses  my  hair  and  her  own, 
we  divide  the  family  business  and  work  between  us  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  after¬ 
noon  we  are  fine  ladies  and  see  our  friends.  I  never  go  to  public  places,  and  my 
amusement  consists  in  the  society  of  about  half  a  dozen  sensible  people,  whom  I 
esteem,  and  who  seek  my  company  for  its  own  sake,  car  je  ne  don/ie  pas  a  manger. 
The  muckworms  of  the  Pye  family  are  all  mistaken ;  they  rejoice  at  our  downfal, 
and  think  that  they  can  keep  me  down  :  they  are  all  in  the  wrong;  I  sought  plea¬ 
sure  by  throwing  away  money,  and  found  it  to  be  truly  vanity  and  vexation  of 
spirit :  when  that  was  gone,  I  sought  for  reason  in  my  mind,  which  I  was  before 
VOIi.  II.  2  II 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


234 


unacquainted  with ;  and  1  can  truly  say,  I  feel  a  satisfaction  I  was  before  totally 
ignorant  of. 

I  would  not  be  indiscreet,  but  I  hope  the  family  affairs  that  detain  you  from  us 
are  not  of  a  nature  to  give  you  pain.  God  forbid  that  a  heart  so  benevolent  should 
ever  know  sorrow !  I  wish  Madame  Necker's  solicitations,  added  to  those  of  your 
English  friends,  may  yet  draw  you  hither  before  autumn ;  and  I  am  sure  you  can 
never  come  among  people  who  more  sincerely  love,  honour,  and  esteem  you,  than 
the  little  society  in  Rue  Poisson i£re.  I  suppose  you  know  Crebillon  is  dead;  and 
the  French  are  like  Jacky  Meggot  with  his  monkey  ; — now  he  is  dead,  they  begin  not 
to  abide  him. 

I  most  sincerely  embrace  the  best  and  most  amiable  of  women,  my  dear  Mrs. 
Garrick,  and  beg  you  to  excuse  the  length  and  incoherence  of  this  letter;  but  my 
heart  is  too  full  to  give  liberty  to  my  pen  to  express  any  other  sentiments  than  those 
of  the  gratitude  with  which  I  am  and  ever  shall  be, 

My  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately  and  faithfully  yours, 

J.  Hen.  Pye. 

I  have  compliments  to  you  from  Mr.  De  Meunier. 


SIR  WATKIN  WILLIAMS  WYNN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wynnstay,  July  8th,  17 77. 

I  cannot  avoid  taking  the  earliest  opportunity  to  inform  you  that  our  assizes 
(the  only  engagement  that  I  shall  have  this  summer)  are  fixed  for  the  first  and 
second  weeks  of  August,  and  to  assure  you  how  happy  we  shall  be  to  see  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick  here,  whenever  it  may  be  most  convenient  to  you  after  that  time.  I 
was  very  much  disappointed  by  a  message  you  sent  me  by  Sidebotham  :  I  wish  that 
you  could  be  preATailed  on  to  change  your  resolution,  as  nothing  would  flatter  me  so 
much  as  your  honouring  my  theatre  with  your  own  performance.*  My  wife  desires 
her  compliments  to  you,  and  joins  me  in  the  same  to  Mrs.  Garrick  ; 

And  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

Wat.  Wms.  Wynn. 

*  No  actor  of  great  talents  should  ever  do  this.  As  a  public  man,  his  place,  his  only  place,  is  a  public 
theatre.  All  private  exhibitions  tend  to  lower  and  degrade  the  art.  It  needs  to  be  kept  at  a  certain  dis¬ 
tance  from  its  admirers.  For  myself,  I  can  say,  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  that  I  soon  desisted  from  seeing 
the  performers  whom  I  respected  and  admired,  so  near  as  the  side-scenes  of  the  stage.  I  could  not  there 
even  feel  their  superiority. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


235 


LORD  PEMBROKE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Thursday  Night,  July,  1777. 

The  lady,  my  dear  Sir,  is  at  Liverpool :  will  you  be  good  enough  to  write  your 
orders  to  her  there  at  the  Theatre  Royal,  or  to  tell  me  what  they  are,  and  order  me 
to  send  them  to  her  there.  Ten  thousand  thanks  to  you. 

Wilts  is  a  very  unlucky  county  indeed,  if  it  is  not  in  the  way  to  some  of  the 
shires  of  this  kingdom,  and  Lady  P.  and  I  shall  expect  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you 
and  Mrs.  Garrick,  with  any  body  else  you  please,  at  Wilton. 

I  heard  something  this  morning  of  what  you  hint  at.  The  most  any  one  can  do 
is  to  answer  for  himself,  especially  so  frail  a  sinner  as  your  humble  servant :  but  by 
what  I  did  hear,  I  really  believe  you  are  wrong,  if  you  take  any  thing  seriously  ill. 
Some  nonsensical  joke  about  your  subscription  to  a  journal, — -par parenthese,  the  worst 
I  ever  read  ! — Was  it  not  ? 

You  remember,  I  trust,  what  I  told  you  as  to  the  Sieur  de  la  Morande.  Yow  the 
cloud,  you  know,  is  dispelled  for  every  body ;  and  D’Eon  reconnue  femme  *  Our 
best  compliments  wait  on  Mrs.  G.  and  you. 

Ever  yours,  my  dear  Sir,  most  obediently  and  sincerely,  <kc. 

Pembroke. 


MR.  T.  KING  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  MR.  GARRICK,  Great  Queen  Street,  July  1 1th,  1 777. 

You  may  perhaps,  in  your  present  mood,  deem  me  impertinent  for  attempting  to 
hint  that  you  have  been,  and  are,  in  the  wrong.  I  shall  however  run  the  risk ;  for  I 
should  think  myself  at  least  equally  blameable,  were  I  calmly  and  silently  to  let  you 
brood  over  an  error,  that  may  greatly  diminish,  if  not  totally  destroy,  that  friendship 
you  have  long  professed  for  me,  which  I  have  ever  been  proud  of  possessing,  and 
solicitous  to  preserve. 

I  have  lately  (to  my  great  astonishment)  more  than  once  heard,  that  you  have 
declared  you  were  coolly,  not  to  say  indelicately  treated,  on  the  day  you  honoured 
the  Theatrical  Committee  with  your  presence ;  and  that  I  was  equal  to  any  one  in 

*  An  indecent  lie  of  the  Sieur  is  here  suppressed. 

It  may  just  be  worth  a  single  word  to  say  that,  when  juries  of  matrons  had  examined,  and  D’Eon  had 
been  irrevocably  sentenced  to  the  petticoat,  the  fact  absolutely  lay  the  other  way ;  and  after  the  death  of 
that  extraordinary  person,  surgeons  of  character  pronounced  it  unambiguously  male ;  which  indeed  the  back 
of  the  figure  sufficiently  denoted  during  life,  to  those  who  were  not  more  than  sand-blind,  high  gravel-blind. 
— Yet  the  chevalier  always  withdrew  from  table  with  the  ladies.  I  once  dined  with  him  and  John  Hokne 
Tooke,  and  he  lost  his  temper  at  the  coolness  of  the  philosopher. — Ed. 

2  h  2 


236 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  neglect,  nay  the  foremost  in  tokens  of  disrespect.  First,  for  the  body  let  me 
speak  : — I  am  certain  there  was  notan  actor  at  that  table  who  does  not  hold  you,  your 
name  and  opinions  in  the  highest  veneration ;  nor  has  there  been  one  of  them,  that  I 
have  heard  of,  who  has  not  expressed  concern  and  surprise,  on  hearing  you  had  found 
any  thing  amiss  in  their  conduct  towards  you.  That  we  were  insufferably  dull,  I 
most  readily  acknowledge;  that  I  was  hurt,  on  entering  the  room,  at  seeing  Palmer 
and  Wrighten  there,  I  freely  confess;  the  former  having  just  before  dishonoured  the 
body  by  a  degrading  plea  in  a  public  court,  and  the  latter  having  broken  a  solemn 
engagement  made  with  one  manager  (whom  he  left  in  the  utmost  distress)  for  no 
other  reason  than  because  he  could  enter  into  a  new  one  with  another  on  terms  more 
advantageous.  To  mend  the  matter,  the  first  of  these  worthies  sat  directly  opposite 
to  me ;  and  I  found  myself  hard  set  to  conceal,  what  I  shall  ever  think,  an  honest 
indignation.  We  had  very  little  general  conversation :  what  small  portion  we  had, 
turned  chiefly  on  the  Birmingham  Theatre — the  chance  of  Mr.  Dodd’s  being  whipped 
as  a  vagrant — the  likelihood  of  Messrs.  Mattocks  and  Younger  being  sent  to  the  House 
of  Correction.  This  stuff,  though  jocularly  delivered,  I  could  not  think  any  great 
credit  to  the  parties  who  uttered  it ;  who  were,  professionally  speaking,  the  brethren 
of  Mr.  Garrick,  then  sitting  at  the  head  of  the  table.  I  say,  my  dear  Sir,  I  thought 
we  were,  by  such  ribaldry,  lessening  ourselves  in  the  opinions  of  those  we  had  in¬ 
vited.  Now,  though  the  circumstances  T  mention  might  sour  my  temper,  I  should 
be  sorry  to  think  it  possible  they  could  so  far  work  a  change  in  my  disposition  as  to 
render  me  offensive  to  you ,  for  whom  I  had,  have,  and  ever  must  retain,  the  utmost 
respect  and  esteem.  What  can  I  say? — I  disclaim  all  intentional  offence.  Yon 
have  been  too  hasty  in  condemning  me.  Why  not  let  me  know  by  a  line,  that  I 
had  displeased  you?  I  cannot  write  as  I  ought  on  the  subject;  nor  do  I  wish  you 
to  do  it  at  all.  I  may  perhaps  think  too  highly  of  myself;  but  1  declare  there  is  but 
one  man  on  earth,  yourself  excepted,  that  1  would  take  the  pains  to  set  right,  if  he 
had,  as  I  conceive  you  have,  improperly,  or  at  best  lightly,  taken  exception.  But  to 
you  I  shall  say,  as  I  would  to  him,  I  would  rather  wound  myself  than  you  ;  that  the 
friendly  intercourse  we  have  had,  has  been  one  of  the  greatest  comforts  of  my  life  ; 
and  that  I  would  rather  have  that  life  shortened,  than  the  usual  communication 
should  be  cut  off,  or  diminished.  This,  however,  depends  on  your  own  will ;  for 
(after  having  thus  opened  myself  to  you)  though  I  respect  you,  love  you,  admire  you 
— yet  I  cannot,  will  not  seelc  you.  I  shall  in  future  shape  my  behaviour  by  yours. 
If,  when  we  meet,  there  should  appear  in  you  a  pleasure  that  we  should  continue  to 
do  so,  I  shall  be  immeasurably  happy.  If  it  should  be  more  agreeable  to  you  to  be 
on  the  reserve,  that  too  I  will  endeavour  to  assume,  but  in  my  heart  can  never  be 
other  than  Your  most  affectionate  well-wisher, 

As  well  as  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thos.  King.* 

*  Mr.  Thomas,  as  Garrick  calls  him,  seems  to  have  done  his  brethren  but  justice:  could  they  act  nowhere 
but  upon  the  stage?  When  their  great  master,  friend,  and  patron,  honoured  them  with  his  company  on  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


237 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  T.  KING. 

DEAR  KING,  Hampton,  Thursday,  July  1 7th,  1 777. 

Though  you  would  not  seek  me,  I  have  sought  you  this  morning.  You  are  a 
male  coquette,  Mr.  Thomas,  but  have  such  winning  ways  with  you,  that  we  readily 
forget  your  little  infidelities.  I  must  confess  that  my  reception  at  the  Fund  Dinner 
was  as  surprising  as  it  was  disagreeable  and  unexpected.  I  seemed  to  be  the  person 
marked  for  displeasure,  and  was  almost  literally  sent  to  Coventry.  Though  I  ven¬ 
tured  among  you  after  a  very  severe  illness,  and  had  dressed  myself  out  as  fine  as 
possible,  to  do  all  the  honour  I  could  to  the  day  and  the  Committee,  I  never  was 
more  unhappy  for  the  time  :  however,  let  it  be  forgotten ;  and,  when  we  meet,  let 
not  a  word  be  said  of  what  is  past.  Poor  old  Drury  !  It  will  be,  I  fear,  very  soon 
in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines.  Yours  ever  most  truly. 

Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK.* 

“  My  note  to  King  in  answer  to  his  letter 
received  at  Mistley,  July  13,  1777.” 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Bologne  pres  St.  Cloud,  July  11th,  1777. 

I  take  the  opportunity,  my  ever  respected  friend,  of  Mr.  Noverre’s  departure,  to 
renew  my  acknowledgments,  and  to  inform  you  that  I  have  endorsed  your  draft  on 
Panchaud  for  40/.  and  drawn  on  you  for  24/.,  that  sum  making  exactly  sixty  Louis. 
I  flatter  myself  I  have  not  exceeded  your  intention,  as  it  answers  the  purpose  I  wished 
it  for.  To  my  great  concern,  I  have  not  been  able  to  meet  with  Mr.  Noverre,  though 
I  have  been  twice  to  Paris  for  that  end,  and  consequently  could  not  assist  him  in  the 
execution  of  your  business,  but  on  every  future  occasion  I  hope  you  will  command 
me.  I  have  not  yet  received  an  answer  from  Dijon,  concerning  my  son’s  leaving 
that  place.  I  confess  I  feel  all  the  fond  impatience  of  a  mother  on  the  occasion  :  two 
years  and  a  half  make  an  amazing  difference  at  his  age  ;  and  whenever  my  mind  dwells 
on  that  idea,  yours  is  so  connected  with  it,  that  my  heart  throbs  with  the  liveliest 
emotions  of  gratitude.  When  he  is  safely  landed  at  Paris,  I  intend  to  make  one 
more  attack  on  the  family  of  the  Flints,  in  regard  to  his  future  destination.  I  mean 

festive  occasion,  was  that  the  season  to  cock  their  hats  in  each  other’s  faces,  and  fasten  upon  Palmer’s  legal 
plea,  and  Wrighten’s  breach  of  engagement,  as  grounds  for  saluting  their  Roscius,  by  implication,  with  the 
title  of  vagabond,  which  the  hornet  J  uni  us  had  rendered  startling  enough  to  his  ear?  They  proved,  in  fact, 
by  their  manners,  that  they  neither  knew  how  to  respect  him  nor  themselves.  King’s  letter,  however,  is  even 
masterly. — Ed. 

*  The  close  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  letter  reminds  one  of  a  character  he  had  often  played. 

“  O,  my  poor  kingdom,  sick  with  civil  blows  ! 

When  that  my  care  could  not  withhold  thy  riots, 

What  wilt  thou  do,  when  riut  is  thy  care  ? 

O,  thou  wilt  be  a  wilderness  again  !” — Second  Part  of  Hairy  IV.  Act  4th. — Ed. 


238 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


to  write  to  the  Chancellor,  to  recommend  him  to  his  protection  as  a  god-son  of  the 
late  Lord  Bathurst’s,  and  to  solicit  his  interest  to  get  him  into  the  Prince  of  Wales’s 
family,  when  his  household  is  formed.  You  well  remember,  that  in  Mr.  Newton’s 
affairs  the  Chancellor’s  plea  for  protecting  Miss  Sortfeagcr  (very  unjustly)  was  her 
being  a  god-daughter  of  his  father’s.  If  I  am  not  mistaken,  you  remarked  on  this  in 
your  pamphlet,  with  infinite  wit  and  truth.  This  step  I  shall  take,  not  because  I 
expect  success,  but  because  I  ought  to  do  it.  They  are  a  sad  set,  that  is  the  truth 
on ’t,  from  the  Right  Honourable  that  dozes  on  the  Bench,  to  the  good  lady  in  St. 
James’s  Place,  who  gives  great  dinners,  and  leaves  her  grand-son  without  the  least 
assistance. — But  whv  should  I  complain  ?  I  have  a  friend,  whom  I  love,  honour, 
and  look  up  to;  and  whenever  I  am  out  of  humour  with  the  worthless  part  of  the 
creation,  I  turn  my  thoughts  towards  him,  and  instantly  grow  better  and  happier. 
Is  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  I  can  get  no  intelligence  from  Preville  about  the  lady  ? 
If  she  prove  half  as  amiable  as  Madame  Riccoboni,  she  is  worth  the  search,  and  I 
shall  not  give  over.  My  best  and  most  affectionate  wishes  attend  the  dear  Mrs. 
Garrick,  and  accept  those  of  Your  ever  grateful,  obliged,  and  affectionate, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

I  believe  I  begin  to  write  very  bad  English,  but  you  must  excuse  it : — I  am 
writing  in  the  confusion  of  Babel,  a  mixture  of  tongues  ! 


MR.  E.  CAPELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Hastings,  July  1 8th,  1 777. 

That  I  must  have  seemed  very  blameable,  and  have  in  some  respect  been  so,  in 
not  giving  you  the  information  your  friendship  requested  of  me,  I  am  fully  conscious. 
My  excuse  must  be,  that  I  had  not  been  thus  criminal,  could  I  have  overcome  a  con¬ 
viction,  that  my  writing  to  you  on  the  subject  expected  was  giving  trouble  to  your¬ 
self  to  no  sort  of  purpose,  and  exposing  me  to  indignities  :  application  for  an  engage¬ 
ment  on  any  terms  will  meet  every  where  with  a  refusal.  The  word  is  gone  forth 
among  the  trade — to  keep  under  the  edition  itself,  and  all  that  might  give  repute  to 
it ;  and  they  have  reasons  of  interest,  which  it  may  not  become  me  to  mention.  I 
am  not  deceived  in  the  thought,  and  could  give  you  proofs  that  I  am  not :  but  should 
any  motive  of  zeal  for  Shakspeare,  (who  you  may  think  will  be  served  by  it)*  induce 
you  to  make  the  trial,  and  trial  should  give  the  lie  to  my  afore-declared  sentiment,  all 
I  will  or  need  say  upon  this  detestable  subject,  is — that  I  am  ready  for  publication ; 

*  This  alludes  to  three  volumes  in  quarto  containing  his  School  of  Shakspeare,  notes,  glossary,  and  talks, 
all  referring  to  his  own  edition  of  the  Poet  in  ten  volumes,  1768.  But  Steevens  had  now  become  lord  of  the 
ascendant,  and  impressed  Mr.  Garrick’s  mind,  as  to  Capell,  with  his  own  notions.  As  an  editor,  Capell  had 
taken  great  pains  with  his  author ;  but  his  own  explanations  are  often  so  uncouth  and  ill-constructed,  as  to 
be  unintelligible  and  disgusting. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


239 


ready  to  accept  of  terms  the  most  reasonable,  with  all  indulgence  of  terms  respecting 
payment ;  and  will  listen  to  any  person  that  comes  to  me,  sent  by  you,  upon  any 
morning  following  the  second  week  in  October.  1  shall  address  this  to  you  in  the 
Adelphi,  where  I  suppose  it  will  find  somebody  that  will  take  it  in  and  convey  it  to 
you.  A  few  words  from  you,  after  its  receipt,  assuring  him  of  your  own  and  Airs. 
Garrick’s  good  health,  will  comfort  greatly  an  anchorite ;  as  is  he,  who  with  the 
greatest  warmth  and  sincerity  has  the  honour  to  write  himself 

Your  friend  and  faithful  servant, 

Endorsed’  E.  Capele. 

“  Mr.  Capell’s  note  to  me — an  odd  devil !” 


MISS  F.  CADOGAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Hurlingham,  July  19th,  1777. 

Accept  my  best  and  earliest  thanks,  my  dear  Sir,  for  your  most  kind  and  friendly 
letter ;  but  I  beg  of  all  loves,  you  will  not  call  Mrs.  Brooke  mij  friend.  Had  she 
been  so,  I  would  now  disclaim  her  for  ever  ;  but  most  solemnly  I  assure  you,  that  I 
never  saw  her  but  once  at  Mr.  Roffey’s,  whither  she  came  to  dine  with  her  colleagues, 
the  Yateses;  and  I  was  much  disappointed  in  her  manners  and  appearance,  as  I  had 
formed  the  most  pleasing  ideas  of  her  from  her  writings,  which,  I  must  say,  (to 
give  the  devil  her  due,)  appear  to  me  to  have  considerable  merit  in  the  novel  style: 
but  a  head  without  a  heart  is,  as  you  say,  but  little  worth  !  “  Eet  it  pass  by  you  like 

the  idle  wind,  that  you  respect  not !”  She  is  not  of  consequence  enough  to  excite 
your  anger ; — treat  her  with  the  contempt  she  merits.  While  you  will  continue  to  be 
good  and  great,  you  must  expect  your  share  of  abuse.  Eet  them  all  “  spill  their 
blood,”  (that  is,  ink  you  know ;)  let  them  put  you  into  the  fire  every  day,  you  will 
only  come  out  like  gold,  so  much  the  brighter ;  and  let  them  analyse  you  as  much  as 
they  can,  they  can  neither  diminish  your  value,  nor  destroy  your  lustre — “  so  much  for 
Buckingham  !” — And  now  I  must  again  thank  you  for  your  sweet  invitation  to  your 
sweet  Hampton,  but  not  as  /should  answer  it,  believe  me.  Dr.  Goth  loquitur — “  Tell 
Mr.  Garrick  he  is  a  scrub  ;  he  never  cares  one  farthing  for  me,  but  when  he  is  in  pain  ; 
here  did  I  go  myself  to  Bliss’s,  to  get  his  medicines  well  made,  and  took  a  great  deal 
of  pains  and  sent  them  to  him  ;  he  has  never  touched  a  drop  of  them  ;  but  the  moment 
he  gets  a  little  ease,  away  he  goes  to  Rigby’s  and  plays  the  devil.”  F.  C.  “  But,  Sir, 
this  is  no  answer  to  Mr.  Garrick’s  invitation.” — Dr.  Goth,  “  Why,  1  know  I  must  go, 
or  you  will  never  let  me  rest :  say,  then,  that  I  am  too  old  to  go  abroad  (though  I 
had  rather  go  to  Hampton  than  to  any  other  place) ;  and  that  if  he  will  be  troubled 
with  me,  I  must  stay  all  night,  for  my  horses  are  aged  as  well  as  myself,  and  cannot 
be  hurried ;  so,  if  you  please,  name  Sunday  the  27th  instant,  when,  if  nothing  parti¬ 
cular  happens,  I  will  endeavour  to  go.”  Thus  spoke  the  Doctor,  totidem  verbis,  l  do 
assure  you.  Will  you,  then,  allow  us  to  come  at  that  time,  and  will  you  put  us  off 


240 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(like  friends)  if  any  thing  should  arise  to  make  it  greatly  inconvenient  to  you  ?  In 
some  degree,  I  know  it  must  be  so ;  but  if  ye  will  be  free  horses,  ye  must  be  ridden  to 
death  ;  you  shall  not  be  written  to  disgrace,  that  is  flat !  I  scribble  three-quarters’ 
speed,  and  hardly  know  what  I  say ;  but  this  I  know,  that  whilst  I  live  I  shall  be 
most  affectionately  and  gratefully  yours, 

F.  Cadogan. 

A  thousand  loves  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  thanks  for  her  billet-doux;  it  will  be  laid 
up  in  lav ender,  with  all  your  and  her  notes,  cards,  &c.  which  I  keep  as  so  many  talis¬ 
mans  to  preserve  me  from  mischief. 

Endorsed, 

“  Excellent  letter  from  Miss  Cadoo-an.” 

O 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Bologne  pr£s  St.  Cloud,  July  21st,  1777. 

I  RECEIVED  your  favour  last  night,  my  dear  Sir,  by  which  I  find  you  have  not 
as  yet  seen  Xoverre.  When  you  do,  he  will  deliver  to  you  a  letter  from  me,  wherein 
you  will  find  that  Panchaud  very  obligingly  paid  me  the  money  immediately  on 
my  draft,  only  making  me  endorse  the  note  you  sent.  I  shall  however  leave  a  receipt 
in  Panchaud  s  hands  when  I  go  to  Paris,  and  can  only  return  you  new  and  repeated 
thanks  for  this  new  instance  of  your  friendship,  which  I  hope  I  shall  never  be  capa¬ 
ble  of  forfeiting  or  abusing.  It  is  now  almost  a  month  since  I  saw  Madame  Ricco- 
boni,  because  I  have  been  at  Paris  but  for  a  few  hours  at  a  time  for  better  than  three 
weeks  ;  but  I  have  written  to  her  and  heard  from  her  more  than  once,  for  she  is  indeed 
all  that  you  say  of  her,  sensible,  ingenious,  amiable,  and  well-bred.  I  do  assure  you 
you  have  hitherto  wronged  me  :  I  never  was  jealous  of  the  eulogiums  you  bestowed 
on  her  merit ;  perhaps  I  have  felt  a  pang  of  that  kind,  at  your  declaring  “  that  she 
has  a  stronger  pull  at  your  heart-strings  than  any  of  her  sex  on  this  sidetiie  water.” 
I  am  willing  to  flatter  myself,  some  saving  clause  was  meant,  but  forgotten  in  your 
hurry,  such  as  any  of  her  sex  of  the  same  nation  ;  or,  again,  except  the  person  you 
were  writing  to.  I  do  assure  you,  my  vanity  is  quite  calm,  quiet,  and  undisturbed : 
but  my  affections  are  not  quite  so  much  at  their  ease  on  the  occasion. 


Mr.  Johnes  has  great  reason  to  say  what  he  does  about  Madame  Riccoboni,  for 
she  is  really  and  seriously  angry  with  him  for  sending  her  Robertson’s  History  :  but  as 
vou  are  pleased  to  consult  me,  I  must  tell  you,  (and  that  without  any  compliment,) 
that  whatever  is  stamped  with  your  resemblance  is  so  calculated  to  create  admiration 
and  disarm  anger,  that  I  am  sure  she  would  receive  such  a  ring  as  you  mention,  (as 
she  ought,)  with  pleasure  and  gratitude.  As  to  a  gold  medal,  the  gentleman  you 
speak  of  was  but  half  in  fault,  for  he  gave  her  a  silver  one,  and,  as  she  imagines,  kept 
the  gold  one  for  himself.  She  showed  it  me,  and  I  was  struck  with  the  likeness. 
\  ou  see,  therefore,  the  sending  another  medal  would  be  quite  superfluous,  unless 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


241 


you  send  her  a  gold  one,  and  recommend  it  to  her  to  transfer  the  silver  one  to  some 
other  of  your  friends.  I  partly  expect  my  brother-in-law  here  next  month  ;  I  shall 
direct  him  to  send  to  you,  or  wait  on  you,  before  he  sets  out ;  and  if  you  will  entrust 
to  his  hand  the  present  you  intend  for  Madame  Riccoboni,  I  will  answer  for  its 
being  safely  conveyed  and  delivered. 

The  same  post  that  brought  me  your  letter  was  replete  with  good  tidings,  for  it 
brought  me  also  a  letter  from  my  husband,  dated  New  York,  June  4th.  He  writes 
in  good  health  and  great  spirits,  and  talks  of  taking  the  field  next  day,  as  if  he  talked 
of  going  to  a  ball.  He  is  in  raptures  with  the  country  itself,  though,  after  nine 
weeks’  navigation,  any  thing  in  the  shape  of  terra  Jirma  must  doubtless  be  delightful ! 
There  is  a  tender  strain  of  affection  and  feeling  for  his  family,  and  anxiety  about  his 
son  in  particular,  that  gave  me  fresh  occasion  to  think  of  you  with  the  warmest  gra¬ 
titude.  How  happy  have  you  made  me,  by  putting  it  in  my  power  to  make  him  so  ! 
In  three  days  I  hope  to  be  able  to  write  to  him  an  account  of  that  child  ;  the  money 
is  paid,  the  Abbe  pleased,  the  boy  on  the  road,  and  myself  in  raptures  ! 

One  thing  more: — you  say  you  were  to  pass  a  few  days  with  Lady  Bathurst,  and 
you  admire  her ;  so  do  I  ;  she  is  a  sensible,  and  (what  is  better)  a  good  woman.  You 
may  recollect  I  told  you  my  intention  of  writing  to  the  Chancellor  about  young 
Hampden  ;  I  shall  not  put  my  design  in  execution  till  you  have  favoured  me  with 
your  advice,  whether  I  should  not  do  better  to  address  myself  to  the  Lady  :  your 
opinion  will  determine  me  on  this  nice  point.  Gabrielle  de  Yergy  is  now  acting  with 
great  success  on  the  French  Theatre.  I  need  not  send  you  that,  because  you  have  it ; 
but  other  matters  relative  to  theatrical  performances  and  transactions  I  shall  make  it 
my  business  to  collect,  and  send  to  you  by  the  hands  of  a  young  gentleman,  a  friend 
of  mine,  who  is  just  going  over  to  England.  I  shall  also  direct  my  little  poem  of 
“  Gabrielle  de  Yergy”  to  be  sent  to  you  ;  it  is  in  England.  If  you  will  bestow  a  few 
minutes  on  the  reading,  you  would  do  me  a  great  pleasure,  as  I  should  think  it  might 
be  printed  with  some  better  hopes  of  success  (if  it  meets  your  approbation)  from  the 
circumstance  of  its  making  an  eclat  in  its  theatrical  dress  at  Paris. 

Pray,  who  is  Madame  Brookes  ?  If  it  be  the  author  of  “  Emily  Montague,”  I 
never  liked  her  ;  and  always  thought  she  had  more  ill-nature  than  genius.  Please  to 
direct  to  me  at  Paris,  whither  I  return  to-morrow.  When  I  write  to  you,  I  never 
know  when  to  stop  ;  but  hope,  if  I  am  too  diffuse,  you  will  give  me  a  hint  of  it.  In 
the  mean  time,  with  my  love  to  my  amiable  Madame  Garrick,  I  remain,  my  dear  Sir, 
with  the  highest  degree  of  admiration  and  gratitude, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  obliged, 

J.  H.  Pye. 


2  I 


VOL.  II. 


242 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  July  27th,  1777. 

I  have  made  it  my  business,  ever  since  your  last  favour,  my  dear  Sir,  to  enquire 
by  my  literary  friends  what  is  passing  in  the  theatrical  world,  but  can  hear  of 
nothing.  The  whole  attention  of  Paris  is  so  engrossed  by  the  Gluckists  and  Picci- 
iiists,  the  poor  Comeclie  F rimy tise  is  totally  neglected.  I  would  have  sent  you  Mar- 
montel’s  pamphlet,  but  Monsieur  Demeunier  told  me  it  was  quite  superfluous,  as 
Marmontel  himself  has  sent  it  to  you  already. 

I  have  not  seen  Madame  Riccoboni  since  I  came  to  town,  (which  is  but  a  few 
days)  having  been  indisposed  ever  since;  but  I  flatter  myself  I  shall  be  able  to  go 
there  on  Thursday.  The  same  reason  has  prevented  my  going  to  Panchaud’s  to  give 
the  receipt,  which  I  should  however  have  done,  notwithstanding  illness,  had  there 
not  been  an  acknowledgment  of  my  debt  and  obligation  in  the  letter  I  sent  you  by 
Noverre ;  but  1  shall  go  also  to  Panchaud’s,  car  j' dime  a  faire  les  clioses  en  regie,  and 
your  uncommon  generosity  would  not  justify  me  in  my  own  eyes  for  the  least  neg¬ 
lect.  I  take  this  opportunity  of  acquainting  you  that  last  night  the  effects  of  your 
goodness  arrived  here  in  perfect  health.  This  letter  will  be  delivered  to  you  by  a 
very  worthy  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  Taylor,  who  has  passed  some  months  here.  As  he 
is  this  instant  setting  out,  I  have  only  time  to  assure  you  of  the  everlasting  gratitude 
and  affection  of  Your  ever  obliged, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

My  best  love  to  dear  Mrs.  Garrick.  Monsieur  Demeunier,  who  is  with  me,  de¬ 
sires  me  to  assure  you  of  his  most  grateful  remembrance  of  your  civilities  to  him. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  July  28th,  1777. 

Io  triumphe!  I  am  almost  out  of  my  wits  for  joy  !  Is  it  possible  that  }’ou  and 
Mrs.  Garrick  can  come  so  far  out  of  the  way  to  see  such  poor  miserable  animals  ? 
Your  promise  has  made  us  happy  past  all  expression,  and  proud  past  all  enduring. 
What  we  want  in  wit  and  wealth,  we  will  make  up  in  love  and  gratitude,  et  nous 
vous  logerons  dans  nos  coears.  I  thankfully  restore  Mrs.  G.  her  loan,  but  the  best 
thing  that  has  appeared,  I  think,  on  a  certain  subject,  was  a  long  prose  history  in 
the  General  Evening :  I  know  not  who  wrote  it,  but  in  general  it  was  extremely 
well  done.  I  had  it  reprinted  here ;  and  if  Mrs.  G.  wants  a  copy,  it  is  at  her  service. 
Please  to  give  my  affectionate  respects  to  that  dear  lady,  and  tell  her  I  rejoice  I  am 
in  so  good  hands  :  I  beg  she  will  reduce  me  to  the  precise  point  of  dramatic  slen¬ 
derness.  She  is  heartily  welcome  to  set  about  the  same  reformation  in  reducing  my 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


243 


personal  overmuch  ness,  if  she  can  effect  it  without  much  “  castigation  and  much 
fasting.”  Seriously,  there  is  no  person  on  earth  by  whose  opinion  I  shall  more  impli¬ 
citly  abide ; — “  Except  mine,”  methinks  I  hear  you  exclaim.  I  cannot  help  making 
my  scenes  too  long,  but  care  not  how  much  of  the  rubbish  is  cut  out. 

As  to  Reddish  and  his  corps,  they  go  on  miserably  enough.  The  fresh  cause  of 

offence  that  he  gave  here,  was  intending  Mrs. - (who  has  taken  his  name  for 

the  summer)  to  act  the  principal  parts  :  besides  this,  he  brought  the  worst  set  that 
ever  spoke  out  of  a  barn,  “  names  you  would  think  did  ne’er  exist,”  except  one  or 
two.  The  Bristolians  attempted  to  kindle  up  the  few  sparks  of  spirit  they  had  into 
a  little  bit  of  a  blaze,  and  hissed  him  very  violently  the  first  time  he  appeared,  which 
was  in  Richard,  after  having  previously  told  us  in  the  papers,  “  that  the  long  and 
impatient  expectation  of  the  town  to  see  him  in  this  character  should  at  length  be 
gratified” — this  was  his  modest  expression.  He  had  however  the  prudence  not  to 
suffer  the  woman  to  appear,  but  got  a  certain  Miss  Mansel  from  Bath,  and  one  or  two 
better  actors.  This  is  the  second  or  third  wife  he  has  produced  at  Bristol :  in  a  short 
time  we  have  had  a  whole  bundle  of  Reddishes,  and  all  remarkably  unpungent. 

They  have  very  often  not  charges  at  the  best  plays,  and  on  Monday  last  he 
summoned  up  all  his  strength  of  the  house,  all  his  own  powers  of  previous  puffing 
and  praising,  and  afterwards  of  acting,  and  came  out  in  Hamlet ;  and  after  all  these 
vigorous  exertions  there  was  only  eighteen  pounds  in  the  house.  They  have  not  had 
one  good  house  ;  “  The  Runaway”  one  of  the  best,  but  far  from  good, — it  was  acted 
twice. 

Reddish  pronounced  Orisons*  the  other  night  in  Hamlet,  on  the  second  syllable, 
the  same  as  Horizon — and  I  dare  say  he  thought  the  princely  Dane  used  it  as  a 
philosophical  term  ! 

There  is  now  a  fresh  uproar  amongst  them.  One  Robinson,  of  the  company, 
challenged  Reddish  to  fight  a  duel  with  him  for  some  breach  of  articles.  The  poor 
wretch,  alarmed  to  the  last  degree,  wrote  to  beg  he  would  put  it  off  till  after  the 
thirteenth  of  August,  the  day  of  his  benefit,  for  that  he  was  so  poor  he  could  not 
afford  to  die. 

The  Arab  is  grateful  for  your  goodness  to  her  ;  her  eyes  are  vastly  better,  and 
her  health  almost  perfectly  restored  ;  never  any  creature  felt  such  great  and  sudden 
amendment :  you  and  Mr.  Pott  have,  I  believe,  a  constant  place  in  her  orisons. 

All  here  present  their  best  respects — please  to  present  mine  to  my  agreeable 
friends  in  Jermyn-street.  I  hope  they  continue  to  improve  in  the  language  of 
Petrarch,  and  in  every  other  thing  that  is  useful  or  elegant. 

*  Orisons.  Miss  More  is  perhaps  too  severe  upon  the  actor’s  understanding.  No  man  capable  of  learning 
the  part  of  Hamlet  could  think  any  such  thing  ;  as  the  sentence  might  have  shown  her, 

“  Nymph,  in  thy  orisons 
Be  all  my  sins  remembered.” 

He  might  fancy  the  line  required,  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable—  the  original  word  is  oraisons — 

The  fair  |  Ophelia — nymph  |  in  thy  |  orrsons, — 
and  in  the  Latin  oratum,  prayer,  the  a  is  long. — Ed, 

2  I  2 


244 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Re  so  good,  when  your  route  is  settled,  as  let  me  know  about  when  we  may 
expect  the  pleasure  which  awaits  us  ;  and  believe  me, 

My  dear  Sir,  your  ever  faithful  and  obliged  servant, 

H.  More.* 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.. GARRICK. 


Paris,  July  31st,  1777. 

1  shoui.d  have  returned  you  my  thanks,  my  most  honoured  and  beloved  friend, 
by  the  return  of  the  post,  but  that  I  waited  to  put  your  orders  in  execution,  which 
I  have  done  to  the  best  of  my  power,  but  not  quite  to  my  satisfaction. — And  first 
for  Monsieur  d’Arnaud.  I  wrote  immediately  to  desire  him  to  come  and  partake  with 
me  of  a  letter  from  you,  in  which  he  was  concerned.  The  next  day  he  sent  a  tall, 
handsome  young  man  (his  friend)  to  visit  me,  and  to  assure  me  that  he  should  have 
been  with  me  on  the  instant,  but  that  he  was  that  very  minute  setting  out  for  Ver¬ 
sailles,  to  present  his  new  work  the  Sire  cle  Crequy,  to  the  Queen  and  Madame 
d’ Artois,  and  that  I  should  see  him  as  soon  as  he  returned  to  Paris.  I  have  how¬ 
ever  seen  nothing  of  him  since ;  and  when  I  do,  should  he  seem  to  wish  to  hear  from 
you  under  your  own  sign  manual,  I  shall  let  you  know  :  and  I  must  honestly  tell 
you  that,  if  he  is  content  with  what  you  say  to  a  third  person,  instead  of  desiring  to 
have  your  sentiments  in  your  own  French,  which  cannot  be  bad,  I  shall  hold  him  the 
cheaper  as  long  as  I  live. — Next  for  Preville.  He  came  to  me  on  Monday  morning; 
I  translated  those  paragraphs  of  your  letter  that  related  to  the  business  and  to  him. 
With  the  latter  he  was  much  flattered  ;  and  as  to  the  former,  it  does  not  appear  that 
he  interests  himself  much  for  the  persons  whom  he  does  not  know,  and  who,  he 
seems  to  think,  are  no  more  related  to  you  than  Prester  John.  But  withal,  we  both 
agreed  that  Ave  did  not  blame  any  one  that  endea\*oured  to  prcwe  a  relationship  or 
affinity  with  you ;  and  as  for  him,  he  said  he  Avished  with  all  his  heart  he  was  your 
father,  your  grandfather,  or  any  thing  belonging  to  you.  For  my  part,  I  Avas  not 
pleased  to  hear  that  your  ancestors  were  Gascons.  I  am  jealous  to  think  that  France 
Avill  boast  of  you  as  deriving  from  their  sprightly  Languedocian  blood  that  more 
than  Promethean  fire  that  sparkles  in  your  eyes  and  animates  every  motion,  and  Avill, 
I  hope,  continue  so  to  do  till  the  next  century.  If  any  thing  more  remains  to  be 
done  in  this  business,  or  any  other,  you  have  but  to  let  me  knoAV,  and  I  shall  be  punc¬ 
tual  and  exact,  for  I  look  on  myself  as  your  charge  des  affaires  en  France :  a  charge 
I  Avould  not  exchange  to  be  that  of  a  croAvned  head. 

Miss  More  is  probably  accurate,  but  we  know  that  Reddish  died  insane  ;  and  with  regard  to  his 
companion,  she  could  have  had  no  intention  of  giving  her  name  to  the  public.  The  fact  is  too  well  known  by 
those  conversant  with  stage  history  to  need  elucidation  from  me:  and,  as  to  others,  it  is  of  little  moment 
: chat  unfortunate  character  is  protected  by  our  dash  from  farther  obloquy. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


245 


We  have  very  little  theatrical  news  stirring:  “La  bonne  Femme,”  a  parody  on 
“  Alceste”  at  the  Italiens,  has  had  but  ill  success.  Nothing  new  at  the  Fran^ais.  I 
am  afraid  they  will  soon  lose  Madame  Sainval  ;  she  and  Mademoiselle  Yestris  are 
professed  rivals  ;  and  about  a  fortnight  ago,  when  “  The  Bajazet  of  Bacine”  was  acted, 
both  the  ladies  dressed  for  the  part  of  Boxane,  which  they  both  laid  a  claim  to ;  but 
Yestris  carried  the  day,  and  does  in  all  their  contentions  ;  so  that,  although  Sainval  is 
a  favourite  with  the  judges,  she  will  be  obliged  to  retire  ;  in  which  case,  she  goes  to 
Lyons,  where  she  is  adored.  Le  Kain  is  gone  to  Ferney,  to  regulate  Yoltaire’s  thea¬ 
tre,  and  to  act  there  for  some  time,  by  the  King’s  leave.  I  suppose  you  know  that 
the  celebrated  Mademoiselle  du  The  is  gone  to  England.  I  assure  you,  we  miss  her 
very  much  here,  especially  in  the  Palais  Boyale,  where  she  used  to  make  vocal  every 
spray,  all  the  fine  evenings  after  supper.  You  are  much  expected  and  wished  for 

here,  and  I  join  most  sincerely  in  those  wishes.  As  to  Mrs.  B - I  am  sorry  I  ever 

mentioned  her ;  I  am  so  jealous,  and  she  is  so  vain,  that  I  have  almost  a  mind  to  sup¬ 
press  the  compliments,  acknowledgments,  &c.  which  she  charges  me  with.  I  have 
never  yet  seen  the  dismal  face  of  Onos :  then  will  you  say  is  my  state  the  more  gra¬ 
cious  !  You  say  you  have  heard  sad  stories  of  him  :  to  tell  the  truth,  I  heard  sad 
hints  of  him  ;  and  that  implies  something  one  cannot  express,  because  one  always  hopes 
it  cannot  be  possible.  If  you  understand  me,  I  am  right ;  if  not,  I  will  say  no  more, 
because  I  would  not  be  the  first  to  propagate  an  ill  report.  I  beg  you  will  be  kind 
enough  to  assure  Mrs.  Garrick,  1  have  not  forgot  the  commission  she  gave  me  ;  but  it 
was  very  late  in  June  before  the  mournings  were  laid  aside,  which  was  past  the 
season  for  what  she  wanted ;  and  after  that  I  observed  nothing  new  in  the  trim¬ 
mings  :  so  many  women,  so  many  different  fashions,  but  all  gauze, — and  now  their 
gowns  and  polonoises  are  made  of  nothing  else  but  gauze,  we  are  all  flying  away ; 
and  even  I,  grave  as  you  know  me,  stand  indicted  of  wearing  a  white  feather,  half-an- 
ell  long  :  but  that  is  nothing,  for  I  assure  you  I  have  at  least  four  or  five  lovers  ;  mats 
cela  ne  tire  pas  a  consequence,  for  they  are  a  much  more  harmless  animal  in  France 
than  England,  and  it  is  well  if  the  little  captain  does  not  endanger  my  head  more 
than  I  do  his.  But  you  cannot  imagine  how  refreshing  it  is  to  an  Englishwoman 
d’une  certain  age,  to  hear  talk  of  her  charms  and  her  attractions.  When  I  go  home 
again,  I  shall  be  put  on  the  shelf,  like  an  almanack  out  of  date ! — Apropos  !  did  you 
see  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  last  night  ?  It  was  here  extremely  visible  indeed.  I  saw  it 
in  the  gardens  of  the  Palais  Boyale,  where  was  an  amazing  concourse  of  people,  who 
all  seem  to  have  much  the  same  idea  of  that  sublime  phenomenon  as  they  have  of  an 
illumination  at  Torre’s.  The  Parisians  enjoy  every  thing,  and  reflect  upon  nothing. 
I  beg  you  will  never  think  of  answering  every  paragraph  of  my  letters,  for  I  do  not 
even  expect  you  to  read  them  all ;  but  you  desired  me  to  write  long,  chatty  letters ; 
and  as  the  time  I  devote  to  you  is  the  happiest  time  I  pass,  I  set  my  pen  adrift,  as  I 
am  apt  to  do  my  tongue  when  I  am  in  the  Adelphi,  and  I  sometimes  flatter  myself 
that  you  take  the  opportunity  of  reading  them  when  you  are  in  your  easy  chair  after 
dinner,  and  that  at  least  they  may  promote  a  nap,  if  they  procure  you  no  better 


246 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


amusement.  As  to  your  letters,  though  they  never  can  be  long  enough,  I  look  upon 
it  that  I  am  now  giving  you  change  for  your  Louis  il'or  in  Hards,  and  I  return  you 
quantity  for  quality.  Panchaud  I  have  not  yet  seen,  my  scanty  calls  in  the  money 
way  not  having  carried  me  there.  I  think  you  are  quite  right  about  him.  I  flatter 
myself,  as  you  say  you  always  know  those  who  are  attached  to  you,  that  you  are 
convinced  of  the  gratitude,  respect,  and  sincere  attachment  with  which 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  affectionately  yours, 

J.  H.  P. 

v. 

Ten  thousand  loves  to  my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick.  Please  address  “  A  Madame 
Madame  Pye,  (Anglaise,)  a  l’Hotel  de  Malthe,  line  St.  Xicaise,  a  Paris.” 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-Place,  Aug.  3rd,  1777. 

If  you  have  forgot  to  engage  the  painter  you  recommended  to  us,  I  forgive  you, 
because  it  was  too  trifling  a  business  to  be  remembered.  But  if  you  have  an  oppor¬ 
tunity,  I  should  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  send  him  down  to  Camden  Place. 
The  sun  is  returned  at  last  to  England,  and  the  season  prompts  me  to  begin  this 
necessary  work  as  soon  as  possible.  I  think  every  day  of  my  intended  visit  to 
Hampton,  but  am  afraid  I  cannot  bring  it  to  bear  for  some  time.  Fanny  is  quite 
recovered  from  her  lying-in,  and  gives  us  hopes  of  seeing  her  by  the  end  of  the 
month  ;  in  which  case,  I  shall  be  confined  at  home,  and  you  must  take  a  second  jour¬ 
ney  here.  We  are  all  well,  and  desire  our  compliments.  Is  it  not  strange  that  we 
meet  so  seldom  either  in  town  or  country  ?  Too  many  engagements  prevent  the 
first,  and  I  suppose  the  distance  hinders  the  other :  but  so  it  is,  that  friendship 
depends  upon  neighbourhood,  which  if  I  had  known  earlier,  I  should  have  settled 
upon  the  banks  of  the  Thames  ;  or,  if  you  had  known  its  importance  better,  you  would 
have  secured  me  a  house  at  the  Adelphi.  By  some  accident  you  forgot  to  show  us 
Sheridan’s  verses  when  you  were  here  : — would  it  be  too  much  to  beg  a  copy  ? 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  most  sincerely  and  affectionately  yours, 

Camden. 


MR.  T.  BECKET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Aug.  6th,  1777. 

I  must  intreat  your  pardon  for  troubling  you  with  this  letter,  but  the  nature  of 
the  business  is  such,  that  I  have  no  other  friend  in  the  world  that  I  can  communicate 
my  griefs  to.  Without  any  further  preface  then — I  mean  my  present  disagreeable 
and  unhappy  situation  with  Mr.  Colman,  who  has  in  the  strangest  manner  turned 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


247 


himself  from  me,  and  seemingly  withdrawn  that  friendship  and  good-will  towards 
me,  which  I  once  flattered  myself  to  be  possessed  of.  You  are  not  unacquainted 
with  the  many  (seventeen)  years  I  have  known  him,  and  have  been  upon  such 
friendly  terms,  and  so  truly  attached  to  him,  that  it  must  become  rather  a  "wonder 
that  any  difference  should  arise  between  us ;  but  it  is  a  happiness  to  me  that  the 
cause  of  it  (I  mean  what  Mr.  C.  thinks  is)  is  what  you  yourself  have  the  knowledge 
of,  and  can  with  the  strictest  truth  acquit  me  of  the  charge. 

The  purchasing  the  right  of  printing  Mr.  Colman’s  plays  in  volumes,  (which  he 
had  reserved  to  himself  at  the  time  of  our  several  agreements,)  and  for  which  I  agreed 
to  pay  him  three  hundred  guineas,  has  been  the  ground-work  of  this  very  extraor¬ 
dinary  affair.  This,  with  some  other  purchases,  put  me  under  the  necessity,  as  you 
well  know,  of  making  my  wants  known  to  some  friends,  and  among  others  to  Mr. 
Colman.  You,  my  good  Sir,  I  troubled  in  a  particular  manner  ;  and  when  I  mentioned 
my  friends  Hamilton  and  Robinson  to  you,  that  I  should  be  glad  to  consult  them 
respecting  my  situation,  you  hearkened  to  it  in  the  most  kind  and  friendly  manner,  and 
desired  to  see  them  at  your  house.  Upon  my  laying  before  you  and  them  the  great 
expenses  I  had  brought  upon  myself  by  three  purchases,  viz.  Mr.  Colman’s  Plays, 
Mr.  Williams’s  History  of  the  Five  Northern  Nations,  and  Mrs.  Dobson’s  Petrarch, 
amounting  to  upwards  of  1200/.,  ways  and  means  -were  thought  of  to  gain  some 
time  respecting  the  copy-money  of  these  books,  and  Mr.  Robinson  took  upon  him 
to  call  on  Mr.  Colman  and  Mrs.  Dobson  (Mr.  Williams  being  abroad,  and  as  1  had 
given  him  my  bill  for  200  guineas,  nothing  could  be  done  in  that  matter)  to  repre¬ 
sent  the  inconvenience  I  lay  under,  and  to  beg  more  time  to  pay  them  in — and  no 
doubt  was  made  by  any  of  us,  but  my  friend  Mr.  C.  would  have  most  readily 
assisted  me.  Mr.  Robinson  not  meeting  with  Mrs.  Dobson,  I  took  that  part  upon 
me,  and  she  very  obligingly  desired  I  would  take  my  own  time.  You  know, 
Sir,  well  what  passed  respecting  Mr.  Robinson’s  errand  to  Mr.  Colman,  which  was 
nothing  more  than  to  relieve  my  then  embarrassments.  I  am  now  accused  by  Mr 
C.  of  using  him  ill,  and  affronting  him  by  threatening  him  with  a  bill  in  Chancery, 
if  he  did  not  return  me  the  copy-money,  and  something  or  other  about  his  taking 
fifty  copies  from  the  printer  without  my  consent.  It  is  very  happy  for  me  that  this 
transaction  was  in  your  presence ;  for,  by  all  that  is  sacred !  no  such  thought  ever 
entered  my  head  about  a  bill  in  Chancery .  I  knew  I  had  made  the  bargain,  and  was 
ready  to  stand  by  it  to  the  best  of  my  power.  If  Mr.  R.’s  zeal  for  me  led  him  to 
say  any  thing  offensive  to  Mr.  C.,  am  I  to  suffer  for  that  ?  All  I  wished  or  desired 
him  to  urge  was,  that,  as  my  friend,  he  would  excuse  me  for  a  time  in  paying  the 
300  guineas. 

I  have  declared  to  Mr.  C.,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  my  total  ignorance  of  this 
transaction  ;  for  no  such  thing,  as  you  well  know,  ever  passed.  I  think  Mr.  C.  might 
have  taken  my  word  for  it.  Instead  of  relieving  me,  or  giving  himself  the  least 
concern  about  me,  (nay,  not  even  answering  my  letter,)  in  order  to  add  to  my  unea¬ 
siness,  he  has  found  out  new  publishers,  a  very  unlooked-for  reward  for  my  honest 


248 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


and  most  affectionate  attachment  to  him,  whenever  it  was  in  my  power.  Indeed, 
my  good  Sir,  this  affair  has  so  unhinged  me,  that  I  am  obliged  to  ask  your  kind 
interference,  and  to  acquit  me  of  the  charge  Mr.  C.  has  brought  against  me  as  the 
ground  for  his  deserting  me.  Thus  I  stand  an  innocent  man  respecting  Mr.  C., 
having  never  hurt  him  either  in  thought,  word,  or  deed — and  yet  I  am  treated  by 
him  as  having  done  him  the  greatest  injury :  this  I  cannot  bear,  without  venting  my 
feelings  to  my  friends.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

Thos.  Becket. 


MR.  T.  BECKET  TO  MR.  G.  COLMAX. 


SIR,  August,  1777. 

Were  I  as  indifferent  to  you,  as  you  seem  to  be  to  me,  I  should  not  have  trou¬ 
bled  you  with  this  letter ;  but  my  attachment  to  you  is  such,  that  I  cannot  sit  down 
with  a  resolution  to  think  no  more  of  it.  My  mind  is  very  uneasy — my  heart  is  too 
full — and  I  must  give  vent  to  it.  Was  I  conscious  of  having  done  any  thing  to 
cause  this  very  sudden  and  strange  alteration  of  your  conduct  towards  me,  it  would 
be  then  impertinent  in  me  to  take  up  a  moment  of  your  time,  or  plead  an  excuse  ; 
but  as  the  contrary  is  the  case,  (which  I  would  declare  on  my  death-bed,)  it  becomes 
me  to  vindicate  myself,  and  then  leave  the  event  to  your  better  understanding.  I 
have  had  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance  for  these  seventeen  years  past,  and  have 
been  upon  such  happy  terms  with  you  that  it  has  raised  the  jealousy  of  some  of  my 
brethren,  and  I  gloried  in  the  acquisition  :  this  long  acquaintance — friendship  I  will 
call  it — is  surely  a  proof  of  your  good  opinion  of  me.  We  went  on,  hand  in  hand,  in 
all  our  matters  of  business  to  our  mutual  satisfaction,  nor  do  I  remember  we  ever 
had  a  single  difference  about  the  price  which  you  -were  pleased  to  fix  upon  your  per¬ 
formances,  nor  have  you  ever  had  the  least  room  of  complaint  respecting  the  pay¬ 
ments  till  this  last  and  unfortunate  purchase  of  the  four  volumes.  I  say,  unfortunate, 
because  it  has  been  the  ground-work  of  this  unhappy  difference  between  us.  To  me 
it  must  be  a  most  mortifying  circumstance  (after  giving  you  such  a  price,  because 
you  should  not  have  reason  to  say  I  left  you)  to  find  you  give  your  favours  to  an¬ 
other.  That  I  must  be  void  of  all  feeling,  could  I  be  silent  on  the  occasion.  It  has 
given  the  alarm  to  some  of  my  friends,  and  I  must  and  will  vindicate  myself  to 
them. 

You  must  be  sensible  of  my  firm  and  faithful  attachment  to  you.  I  have  stood 
by  you,  tooth  and  nail,  against  every  attack  made  against  you  during  your  adminis¬ 
tration  at  Covent  Garden,  as  well  as  since.  There  are  snakes  in  the  grass,  and  you 
seem  to  foster  them.  I  have  shown  myself  your  friend  by  serving  you  when  in  my 
power  :  when  you  found  it  necessary  to  trouble  your  particular  friends  respecting  the 
payment  of  your  share  of  the  patent,  you  applied  to  me,  among  others,  and  begged 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


249 


not  only  my  assistance,  but  that  of  my  friends,  in  all  I  could  get.  As  I  had  no 
friends  I  could  trouble  for  any  thing  considerable,  I  gave  you  all  I  had,  which  was 
one  thousand  pounds ;  and  I  declare  to  God  I  had  scarce  a  guinea  left  when  I  gave  it 
you :  but  poor  Airs.  Colman  begged  of  me  to  do  all  I  could — and  I  did  it :  she,  the 
best  of  women,  came  and  thanked  me  in  the  kindest  manner,  and  told  me  how  much 
you  were  obliged  to  me,  for  you  looked  upon  my  mite  more  than  all  you  had  from 
any  other  quarter ;  and  I  now  take  this  opportunity  to  declare  to  you,  that  if  I  had 
had  at  that  time  ten  thousand  pounds,  I  would  have  lent  you  every  shilling.  It  is  a 
very  disagreeable  circumstance  for  me  to  mention,  nor  do  I  do  it  with  any  other  view 
than  to  prove  to  you  my  readiness  to  oblige  you,  when  in  my  power— that  power  is 
now  over,  owing  to  some  imprudent  purchases  I  have  made  at  sales  and  elsewhere  : 
this  has  caused  me  latterly  to  be  somewhat  troublesome  to  you  ;  but  surely  a  true  and 
real  friend  would  have  pitied  my  misfortunes,  and  relieved  some  temporary  wants’ 
(for  they  were  nothing  else,)  and  not  have  withdrawn  that  assistance  that  was  so 
humbly  solicited  for. 

When  I  lately  applied  to  you  for  the  small  sum  of  200/.  out  of  which  I  proposed 
to  pay  Mr.  Garton  60/.,  being  the  last  payment  on  the  300  guineas,  I  told  you  that 
the  want  of  it  might  be  attended  with  some  disagreeable  circumstances,  and  urged 
the  loan  of  it  for  six  months  as  strong  as  I  could,  but  you  never  so  much  as  answered 
my  letter  ;  and  therefore  suffered  me  to  run  the  risk  of  that  inconvenience  I  pointed 
out  to  you.  Had  any  body  told  me  I  should  live  to  receive  such  treatment  from 
you,  I  would  have  told  them  they  were  false  prophets.  I  told  you  how  pressing  Mr. 
Garton  was,  and  that  he  had  put  my  notes  into  his  attorney’s  hand,  and  I  have  had 
his  notice  that  he  shall  arrest  me,  if  not  immediately  paid.  I  spoke  to  you  particu¬ 
larly  about  the  60/.,  and  you  said  I  had  nothing  to  fear  from  that :  but  you  see  the 
contrary ;  and  had  you  spoke  to  Mr.  Garton,  or  thought  proper  to  settle  for  me  tins 
small  sum,  I  should  not  have  been  thus  insulted,  after  paying  you  such  sums  as  I 
have  done — 500  guineas  for  “  Terence,”  991/.  for  your  plays  and  farces,  and  altera¬ 
tions  ;  300  guineas  for  the  right  of  the  four  volumes ;  and  to  be  refused  so  trifling  a 
request  is  more  than  cruel.  There  is  a  little  circumstance,  though  hardly  worth 
mentioning,  yet  it  proves  your  inattention  to  me;  that  is,  the  “New  Brooms.” 
Would  any  man,  after  receiving  300  guineas  for  the  volumes,  not  have  thrown  such 
a  petit-piece  into  the  bargain  ?  Instead  of  which,  you  took  30  guineas  from  me,  be¬ 
cause  it  should  be  made  a  shilling ;  and  when  “  The  Morning  Post”  took  notice  of  it, 
you  desired  I  would  alter  the  price  to  sixpence,  to  prevent  being  abused.  I  did 
so,  and  returned  the  money  for  the  few  I  had  sold ;  yet  you  have  not  been  kind 
enough  to  make  me  an  allowance  for  it — am  I  not  entitled  to  it  ?  Have  you  not 
broken  the  engagement  ?  and  does  it  not,  of  course,  stand  cancelled  ?  There  is 
another  thing :  although  you  know  my  present  wants,  yet  you  have  not  been  kind 
enough  to  pay  me  for  the  fifty  copies  you  had  from  the  printer;  for  the  amount 
of  these  fifty,  with  an  allowance  upon  the  “  New  Brooms,”  would  near  pay  Gar¬ 
ton.  This  is  a  very  disagreeable  task  to  me ;  and  it  was  with  difficulty  I  could 

VOL.  II.  2  K 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


250 

bring  myself  to  a  resolution  to  open  my  mind  to  you  ;  but  my  uneasiness  has 
been  such,  that  I  could  not  refrain  any  longer.  I  now  declare  1  do  not  know  any 
one  thing  I  have  done  to  you  to  cause  this  strange  desertion  on  your  part.  As 
to  what  you  accuse  me  of,  respecting  what  Mr.  Robinson  said  to  you  about  a  bill 
in  Chancery,  I  am  as  ignorant  of  it  as  the  child  unborn.  I  have  the  best  of  evidence 
to  prove  the  truth  of  it ;  for  my  best  of  friends  were  privy  to  the  message,  for  the 
conversation  was  in  his  house,  and  at  his  request.  I  coidd  not  muster  up  courage 
enough  to  explain  myself,  and  Mr.  Robinson  undertook  it,  not  doubting  but  you 
would  readily  relieve  me,  for  his  message  was  nothing  more  than  to  explain  to  you 
the  inconvenience  of  advancing  .so  much  money,  and  to  beg  an  indulgence  of  a  farther 
time  to  pay  it  in.  I  had  unluckily  at  that  time  two  other  engagements  on  hand, 
which  took  near  800/.  from  me  before  publication,  and  one  of  the  books  cannot  be 
published  till  November  next.  Had  I  not  believed  you  my  true  friend  and  well-wisher, 
1  should  not  have  taken  this  liberty  with  you  ;  but  being  at  that  time  confirmed  in 
my  own  opinion  you  were  so,  I  thought  I  had  nothing  to  do  but  make  known  my 
situation,  and  the  rest  would  follow  of  course. 

Every  one  must  imagine  I  have  done  something  to  you  very  unbecoming  me.  I 
do  hereby  declare,  by  all  that  is  sacred,  that  I  am  not  conscious  of  any  one  act  deserv¬ 
ing  your  censure.  If  my  offence  is  owing  to  some  liberties  I  have  occasionally  taken 
in  begging  the  favour  of  your  note  for  a  few  months,  the  necessity  of  it  pleads  its 
excuse.  I  think  I  troubled  you  twice  for  250/.,  which  wras  duly  paid.  When  I 
agreed  for  the  300  guineas,  I  gave  you  my  note  at  six  months,  because  it  was  pro¬ 
posed  the  book  should  be  printed  in  that  time  ;  instead  of  which,  it  was  near  eighteen 
months.  You  had  paid  my  note  away,  which  I  never  dreamt  you  would,  as  you 
knew  the  book  could  not  be  done  in  the  time.  However  it  was  so,  and  in  conse¬ 
quence  I  was  obliged  to  trouble  you  for  your  bills  to  get  discounted,  that  1  might 
honour  my  first  bill  to  you.  The  work  still  remaining  unfinished,  I  was  under  the 
necessity  of  repeating  this  favour,  and  now  it  is  all  paid  except  the  60/.  above-men¬ 
tioned.  In  all  these  transactions,  I  took  no  money  from  you,  only  the  credit  of  your 
bills,  which  was  done  as  private  as  possible,  for  I  put  them  into  the  hands  of  Mr. 
Coutts  and  Mr.  Gosling,  to  prevent  their  being  negotiated  into  several  hands.  I 
mention  these  particulars,  because  I  do  not  know  you  have  any  other  charge  against 
me,  if  it  can  be  called  so.  Nothing  but  the  feelings  of  my  heart  at  the  thoughts  of 
losing  you  could  make  me  say  this.  I  shall  trouble  you  no  more,  and  leave  the 
event  to  your  due  consideration,  and  trust  to  that  candour  I  know  you  are  pos¬ 
sessed  of.  I  am,  &c. 

T.  Becket.* 

*  As  Mr.  Garrick  thought  fit  to  preserve  this  letter  of  Becket's  to  his  friend  Colman,  it  may  stand  here. 
The  little  manager  was  not  a  rich  man,  and  Becket  had  given  too  much  for  the  four  volumes;  which,  in  fact, 
were  reprints  of  his  comedies,  and  plays  adapted  from  Shakspeare,  Jonson,  and  Fletcher. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


251 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Bristol,  August  7th. 

“  Talk  not  of  comfort,  ’tis  for  lighter  ills.” 

To  say  we  were  sorry  or  grieved,  would  be  talking  coldly  ;  to  say  we  were  dis¬ 
appointed,  would  be  talking  nonsense.  It  was  not  simply  lamentation  and  mourn¬ 
ing, — it  was  roaring  and  howling  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

Only  think  of  my  task  who  received  your  letter  alone,  and  was  obliged  to  break 
it  to  all  the  family  !  Mrs.  Garrick,  who  lias  bowels  of  tenderness,  (and,  I  find,  bad  no 
part  in  this  wicked  scheme,)  will  pity  me.  I  was  glad  enough  when  it  was  over,  for 
they  fell  on  me  as  if  it  had  been  my  fault ;  and  instead  of  comforting  one  another, 
as  good  Christian  sisters  ought  to  have  done,  we  immediately  began  quarrelling  about 
who  was  the  sorriest :  “  But  it  cannot  affect  you  as  it  does  me,”  quoth  the  Arab  to 
Prosey,  “  for  you  have  seen  ’em  this  year,” — “Therefore  I  want  to  see  ’em  again.” — 
“  But  I  know  so  little  of  them,”  quoth  another. — “  Therefore  you  cannot  be  so  anx¬ 
ious  as  those  who  know  more,”  vociferated  a  third.  This  was  the  riot  for  a  long  while, 
till  at  length  it  ended  in  one  general  and  concurring  yell.  It  is  very  noble  in  me  not 
to  add  reproaches  to  my  complaints  ;  and  I  hope,  Sir,  that  you  are  fully  aware  of  my 
greatness  of  mind  on  this  occasion. 

But  may  we  really  hope  that  ce  qui  est  differe  n' est point  perdu  ? — is  there,  indeed 
a  probability  of  our  seeing  you,  though  on  a  remoter  day  ?  or  did  you  out  of  huma¬ 
nity  amuse  us  with  this  delightful  though  but  distant  hope  ? 

I  am  very,  very  sorry  that  your  dear  good  lady  is  not  well.  I  shall  not  be  happy 
till  I  hear  she  is  perfectly  so,  for  I  am  deeply  and  sincerely  interested  in  what  re¬ 
gards  her. 

Attending  the  benefit  of  her  “  criticisms”  and  your  “  jobations ,”  I  have  gone  oil 
scribbling  nonsense  in  blank  verse :  in  a  few  days  I  shall  have  a  means  of  sending  it 
to  town,  and  shall  take  the  liberty  to  order  it  to  be  conveyed  to  the  Adelphi.  You 
will  correct  me  at  your  leisure  ;  but  if  I  do  not  gallop  on  while  it  is  fresh  in  my  head, 
I  am  afraid  my  evil  genius,  the  Demon  of  Indolence,  will  not  let  me  go  on  at  all. 

I  suppose  this  stupid  scroll  will  find  you  on  your  return  from  Wiltshire.  You 
will  forgive  my  plaguing  you  so  soon  :  I  should  not  have  had  the  courage,  but  that 
you  permit  it,  and  your  permissions  are  commands. 

Beddish  is  so  disgusted  at  his  ill-success  this  summer,  that  he  has  sold  his  share. 
His  woman  had  112/.  to  “  The  Maid  of  the  Mill.”  Quick  about  as  much  to  “  Am- 
phitrite,”  the  only  good  houses.  Reddish  has  “  Charles  the  First”  next  Monday,  and 
soon  after  decamps  to  play  six  nights  at  Plymouth.  Miss  Younge  is  come  here  on 
a  visit,  but  does  not  play. 

Our  united  respects  attend  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  ever  obliged,  though  once  disappointed, 

H.  More. 


2  k  2 


252 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

my  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  August  7th,  1777. 

My  friend  Mr.  Tighe  tells  me  that  he  wrote  to  you  some  time  ago  to  request 
you  would  inform  him  whether  there  will  be  room  next  winter  at  Drury-lane  for  a 
new  tragedy  of  your  humble  servant’s.  The  present  contests  about  the  future  govern¬ 
ment  of  that  theatre  perhaps  may  have  made  it  difficult  for  you  to  give  an  answer, 
or  his  letter  may  have  miscarried.  Should  the  last  have  happened,  I  believe  it  con¬ 
tained  little  more  than  his  desire  of  information  upon  the  point  I  have  mentioned, 
and  his  good  opinion  of  the  piece,  for  the  appearance  of  which  he  is  anxious.  When 
you  have  leisure,  we  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  for  a  line  either  to  him  or  me 
upon  this  subject.  As  I  have  the  highest  opinion  of  your  judgment,  no  less  than  the 
greatest  reliance  upon  your  kindness  and  candour,  I  wish  you  to  have  this  play  in 
your  hands  before  it  is  offered  to  any  managers.  You  have  promised  to  rub  down 
my  Pegasus,  and  to  give  him  gentle  physic,  should  it  be  necessary  :  and,  let  his  state 
be  what  it  will,  I  am  convinced  that  a  prescription  of  yours  will  improve  both  his 
speed  and  vigour.  We  are  such  ill  judges  of  our  own  productions,  that  the  partiality 
of  an  author,  I  think,  ought  to  pass  for  nothing  :  I  should  therefore  hardly  mention 
to  you  that  this  piece,  which  I  call  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy,”  appears  to  me  much 
more  interesting  than  “  Braganza”  or  “  Yitellia,”  did  not  all  the  friends  who  have 
heard  it  concur  in  the  same  opinion.  Four  acts  are  entirely  finished,  and  the  fifth 
only  waits  for  a  little  touching  in  a  scene  or  two  to  be  almost  complete.  After  1 
hear  from  you,  (unless  you  do  not  choose  to  be  troubled  with  it,)  1  will  send  it  to  you 
separately  by  acts,  or  the  whole  together  under  a  post-office  cover,  which  franks 
parcels  of  any  bulk  as  you  please  to  give  directions.  If  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy” 
should  be  as  much  your  favourite  as  it  is  mine,  I  hope  you  will  do  me  the  favour  to 
grace  it  with  a  prologue  or  epilogue,  as  you  find  yourself  disposed  to  write  good 
verses,  either  serious  or  jocular.  Though  I  know  with  what  wonderful  facility  these 
compositions  (which  to  me  appear  most  difficult)  glide  from  your  pen,  I  shall  esteem 
myself  highly  obliged  to  you  for  your  assistance.  By  such  head  and  tail-pieces  you 
have  saved  many  a  miserable  performance  from  perdition,  and  I  am  certain  they  are 
great  props  and  embellishments  to  those  of  a  different  class.  It  would  make  me  very 
happy  to  hear  that  Sheridan  le  Pere  was  secure  of  some  creditable  situation  at  his 
son’s  theatre.  Surely,  in  the  present  dearth  of  theatrical  merit,  that  man's  powers 
are  not  contemptible.  Though  I  am  by  no  means  his  indiscriminate  admirer,  like 
some  of  my  countrymen,  yet  for  his  own  sake,  and  for  the  public,  I  heartily  wish  to 
hear  of  his  being  established  to  his  satisfaction  at  Drury-lane.  Mrs.  Jephson  joins 
with  me  in  most  affectionate  compliments  to  you  and  Airs.  Garrick.  Believe  me, 
my  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  faithful  humble  servant, 


Robert  Jephson. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


253 


I  shall  have  the  favour  of  a  line  from  you  with  more  certainty  under  cover  to  the 
Right  Honourable  Thomas  Waite,  Dublin  Castle. 

P.  S.  Should  Drury -lane  be  occupied  by  engagement  for  tbe  ensuing  season,  I 
wish  to  have  a  place  secured  for  me  eventually  on  the  failure  of  withdrawing  of 
any  piece,  or  certainly  for  the  season  after  next,  provided  my  tragedy  is  likely  to  be 
successful. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  August  10th. 

1  have  this  moment  the  pleasure  of  receiving  from  you  the  most  friendly  and 
most  entertaining  letter  that  ever  was  written.  I  heartily  thank  you  for  it,  as  well 
as  for  every  other  act  of  goodness  of  every  sort,  which  you  and  my  dear  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick  are  continually  heaping  upon  me.  I  feel  my  obligations  to  you  both  most 
deeply  ;  but  where  the  heart  is  very  strongly  sensible  of  kindnesses,  I  question  if  even 
all  your  wit  can  furnish  language  to  satisfy  its  inward  feelings  : 

“  For  needed  most,  we  seldom  find 
The  key  that  should  unlock  the  mind.” 

Thank  you,  Sir,  for  the  restoration  of  the  most  musical  of  all  blackbirds ;  though,  to 
my  surprise,  on  trying  to  treat  my  sisters  with  it,  I  found  I  was  perfect  in  every 
word:  it  was  lucky,  or  I  should  have  been  turned  into  the  street.  I  have  indulged 
the  few  rational  creatures  here  with  repeating  it,  and  they  felt  more  than  pleasure, 
and  expressed  more  than  admiration. 

As  to  Mr.  Wallis,  he  is  the  very  Mirror  of  Chivalry.  Never  was  a  wayfaring 
damsel  protected  by  a  more  courteous  knight.  He  was  in  high  spirits,  repeated 
Allan  Ramsay’s  Pastoral,  and  taught  me  Scotch,  all  the  way.  He  and  Mr.  Linley 
spent  Saturday  evening  here  with  us,  and  yesterday  morning  my  gallant  knight  set 
out  on  a  solitary  pilgrimage  over  the  Cambrian  mountains.  I  left  your  letter  with 

Mr.  - .  The  girl  is  returned,  and  they  expect  the  man  will  marry  her:  I 

wish  he  may,  for  the  sake  of  the  poor  father  and  mother.  She  must  be  a  silly,  ro¬ 
mantic  girl  :  once  I  find  she  has  eloped  in  her  feathered  head  and  full  dress,  after 
playing  Miss  Tittup.* 

I  assure  you,  I  set  a  higher  value  on  my  accidental  “  Eightpence,”  than  on 
Philips’s  elaborate  “  Shilling.”  You  can  turn  the  errors  and  negligences  of  your 
friends  to  favour  and  to  prettiness.  However,  I  really  think  it  was  an  act  of  prudence 
and  consideration  in  me  to  contrive  by  that  means  to  pay  for  this  scrawl,  which  1 
honestly  confess  is  not  worth  a  groat. 

My  kind  respects  attend  my  beloved  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  mourn  over  her  flower¬ 
less  borders,— and  while  1  adore  Hampton,  execrate  Bowden. |  He  adorn  my  lyrics 
indeed! 

*  An  elopement  in  the  “  feathered  head  and  full-dress”  of  the  stage  was,  to  be  sure,  perfectly  inexpiable. 
The  parties,  however,  were  married  on  the  24th  of  the  following  September  ;  and  thus  an  end  was  decidedly 
given  to  every  thing  “  silly  and  romantic”  on  the  lady's  side. — Ed. 

f  Mr.  Garrick’s  gardener. — Ed. 


254 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


My  compliments  to  Miss  Betty  Fiirst,  London,  at  the  Adelpln,  Mr.  Garrick’s 
house. 

Is  your  cold  quite  gone? 

All  here  are  gratefully  and  respectfully  yours.  They  never  allow  me  to  speak  of 
any  body  else,  even  though  I  have  been  among  all  their  cousins  in  Norfolk  ;  so  de¬ 
natured  are  they,  that  they  neglect  their  own  flesh  and  blood  to  listen  to  accounts  of 
your  wit  and  spirit ;  which,  you  may  be  sure,  lose  most  shamefully  in  passing  through 
so  gross  a  medium.  I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  much  more  than  I  can  tell  you, 

Your  for  ever  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

H.  More. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden  Place,  August  11th,  1777. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  letter  and  the  Painter.  He  seems  to  be 
honest  and  industrious,  and  of  that  country  Lady  C.  and  myself  have  a  particular 
affection  for — he  is  a  Welshman.  I  have  returned  the  verses  you  were  so  good  to 
lend  me,  and,  considering  they  are  mere  panegyric,  (the  most  insipid  species  of  poetry,) 
are  extremely  good.  The  girls  have  taken  a  copy,  perhaps  without  leave  ;  but  if  you 
think  Mr.  Sheridan  may  be  displeased  with  this  liberty,  it  shall  be  burnt.* 

Your  Birmingham  counterfeit  has  stolen  your  buskin,  and  runs  away  with  all 
your  applause  into  the  bargain  ;  but  I  shall  soon  see  him  stripped  to  the  skin,  and 
exposed  in  all  his  Scotch  nakedness  to  the  world.  I  hope  your  friend,  Colman,  is 
not  privy  to  the  trash  we  see  every  day  in  the  papers  to  puff  off’  this  clumsy  fellow. 

Charles  Fox  dined  here  yesterday,  and  thinks  as  I  do  of  Henderson.  He  admires 
Sheridan’s  verses,  and  agrees  with  me  in  marking  him  for  the  first  genius  of  these 
times. 

I  hope  you  profit  as  I  do  under  the  precepts  of  Cornaro,  and  then  we  may  expect 
to  meet  at  Hampton  in  the  next  century.  Farewell !  if  Fanny  [continue  well,]  you 
shall  hear  from  us,  and,  at  all  events,  you  may  depend  upon  a  visit  from  some  part 
of  the  family  in  the  autumn. 

I  am,  dear  Garrick,  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

Camden. 

Please  to  present  our  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  her  niece. 

*  These  verses  were  “  a  Portrait”  sent  with  “  The  School  for  Scandal”  to  Mrs.  Crewe.  I  think  they 
have  a  heavy,  elaborate  ingenuity  about  them,  without  warmth.  They  are  prefixed  to  his  own  edition  of  the 
play. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


255 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Aug.  12th,  ]  777. 

I  again  presume  to  appear  before  you  with  my  third  and  fourth  acts,  such  as 
they  are.  I  have  endeavoured  to  differ  from  Belloy  as  much  as  possible,  particularly 
bv  introducing  the  father  and  Sir  Hubert :  I  have  followed  him  where  it  was  neces- 
sary,  in  his  plan  ;  as  to  the  rest,  I  do  not  believe  I  have,  in  the  whole,  ten  lines  from 
him.  I  shall  leave  the  fifth  unfinished  till  I  am  so  happy  as  to  be  indulged  with 
your  instructions.  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  manage  it.  As  to  madness,  it  is  a  rock  on 
which  even  good  poets  split ; — what  then  will  become  of  me  ?  It  is  so  difficult  and  so 
dangerous,  I  am  afraid  of  it.  You  will  see,  Sir,  that  I  have  not  been  so  liberal  of  my 
nonsense  in  these  two,  not  having  made  them  two-thirds  as  long  as  the  first.* 

How  is  the  dear  lady  ?  Pray,  say  something  for  me  to  her  that  shall  be  respectful, 
and  kind,  and  grateful,  and  affectionate  ;  for  even  you,  with  all  your  eloquence,  can¬ 
not  say  more  than  I  feel. 

Reddish’s  benefit  was  last  night :  he  was  pelted  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  they 
would  let  him  speak ;  but  he  did  not  mind  that,  for  he  had  a  great  house.  He  spoke 
his  old  address,  with  the  new  lines  he  sent  to  you  on  your  quitting  the  stage.  I  was 
wrongly  informed  about  Quick,  who  had  160/.,  which  was  ten  or  fifteen  pounds 
more  than  ever  was  known  in  this  house.  I  have  not  been  once  this  summer.  Adieu, 
my  dear  Sir.  I  am,  with  my  duty  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 

Her  and  your  faithfully  obliged  and  most  obedient, 

H.  More. 

Did  you  receive  a  mournful  epistle  from  me  on  our  sad,  sad  disappointment  ? 

Be  so  good  to  give  the  enclosed  to  Mr.  Victor.  I  was  very  much  entertained 
with  many  of  his  letters. 

Endorsed, 

“  Miss  More’s  letter  about  her  tragedy.” 


MR.  GIBBON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Paris,  Aug.  14,  1777. 

The  other  day  Madame  Xecker  made  me  very  happy  by  the  communication  of 
your  entertaining  and  obliging  letter.  It  is  pleasant  to  find  one’s-self  mentioned  with 
friendship  by  those  whom  posterity  will  mention  with  admiration.  Foreign  nations 
are  a  kind  of  posterity,  and  among  them  you  already  reap  the  full  harvest  of  your 
fame.  I  can  assure  you  that  in  every  polite  circle  there  is  not  any  name  so  fre¬ 
quently  repeated  as  the  name  of  Garrick.  The  persons  who  have  been  in  England 
before  the  fatal  month  of  June,  1776,  describe  with  transport  what  they  have  seen 

*  This  was  her  tragedy  of  “  Percy,”  acted  the  year  following. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


250 


and  what  they  have  felt;  and  those  who  propose  to  undertake  the  same  journey,  ex¬ 
press  their  regret  that  the  principal  object  of  their  curiosity  no  longer  subsists.  So 
much  for  your  numerous  admirers.  Your  friends,  and  they  are  many,  who  have 
enjoyed  your  social  qualities,  are  sincere  and  earnest  in  their  wishes  that  you  would 
execute  your  promise  of  visiting  this  country;  and  I  sometimes  hear  them  exclaim, 
with  the  good-natured  vanity  which  constitutes  no  unamiable  part  of  the  French 
character:  “  Ce  Monsieur  Garrick  6toit  fait  pour  vivre  parmi  nous.”  In  the  mean 
while  send  ns,  without  a  moment’s  delay,  your  elegant  fable.  From  the  impartial 
account  which  I  have  given  Madame  Necker,  she  is  impatient  to  see  it;  and,  though 
a  good  subject,  I  will  venture  to  say  that  she  is  as  capable  of  tasting  its  beauties  as 
any  monarch  in  Christendom. 

You  have  reason  to  envy  me,  for  I  can  truly  declare  that  I  reckon  the  three 
months  which  I  have  now  passed  in  Paris  among  the  most  agreeable  of  my  life. 
My  connection  with  a  house,  before  which  the  proudest  of  the  Gallic  nobles  bow  the 
knee,  my  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  language,  and  a  natural  propensity  to  be 
pleased  with  the  people  and  their  manners,  have  introduced  me  into  very  good  com¬ 
pany ;  and,  different  in  that  respect  from  the  traveller  Twiss,  I  have  sometimes  been 
invited  to  the  same  houses  a  second  time.  If  besides  these  advantages  your  par¬ 
tiality  should  ascribe  any  others  to  your  friend,  I  am  not  proud  enough  entirely  to 
disclaim  them.  I  propose  to  stay  at  Paris  about  two  months  longer,  to  hook  in  (if 
possible)  a  little  of  the  Fontainbleau  voyage,  and  to  return  to  England  a  few  days 
before  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  where  I  suppose  we  shall  have  some  warm  scenes. 
You  cannot  surely  be  satisfied  with  the  beginning,  or  rather  no  beginning,  of  the 
American  campaign,  which  seems  to  elevate  the  enemies  as  much  as  it  must  humble 
the  friends  of  Great  Britain. 

At  this  time  of  year,  the  society  of  the  Turk’s-head  can  no  longer  be  addressed  as 
a  corporate  body,  and  most  of  the  individual  members  are  probably  dispersed  :  Adam 
Smith  in  Scotland;  Burke  in  the  shades  of  Beaconsfield ;  Fox,  the  Lord  or  the  devil 
knows  where,  kc.  &c.  Be  so  good  as  to  salute  in  my  name  those  friends  who  may 
fall  in  your  way.  Assure  Sir  Joshua,  in  particular,  that  I  have  not  lost  my  relish  for 
manly  conversation  and  the  society  of  the  brown  table.  I  hope  Column  has  made  a 
successful  campaign.  May  I  beg  to  be  remembered  to  Mrs.  Garrick  ?  By  this  time 
she  has  probably  discovered  the  philosopher’s  stone  :  she  has  long  possessed  a  much 
more  valuable  secret, — that  of  gaining  the  hearts  of  all  who  have  the  happiness  of 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately  yours. 

Hotel  de  Modene,  Rue  Jacob,  Fauxbourg  St.  Germain.  E.  GlBBOX.* 


knowing  her 


*  Mr.  Gibbon  excelled  in  epistolary  communication.  To  the  polished  urbanity  of  a  gentleman,  he  adds 
that  elegant  point  and  zest  to  a  compliment,  which  demand  care,  and  are  seldom  seen  but  in  the  writings  of 
professed  authors.  The  letters  of  Voltaire  are  fine  models  of  this  finished  style. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


257 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Paris,  Aug.  1 8th,  1 777. 

Your  friend,  Mr.  Vandergucht  called  on  me  to  consult  concerning  some  books 
for  you.  It  was  my  intention  to  have  sent  you  Les  Trois  Theatres  de  Paris,  by 
Dessessarts,  (if  I  had  not  heard  from  you,)  by  an  acquaintance  of  mine  who  is  going 
to  England.  I  shall  likewise  take  care  that  you  have  “  L’Amant  Bourru,”  which  is 
acted  Avith  success,  and  is  the  work  of  Monvel  of  the  Fran^ais,  and  is  taken  from  our 
friend’s  novel  of  Madame  de  Sancerre.  “  The  Dixhuitieme  Siecle”  you  shall  like¬ 
wise  have ;  as  to  pamphlets  on  the  theatre,  I  hear  of  none.  As  to  the  other,  I  fear  it 
will  be  more  difficult :  as  I  have  made  it  my  business  to  enquire,  the  best  account  I 
can  get  is  the  following  from  Monsr.  Demeunier,  Avho  is  zealous  in  every  thing  that 
relates  to  you.  “  II  y  a  en  Fran^ais  un  ouvrage  estim6,  intitule  Dictionnaire  portatif 
des  Gens  de  Lettres,  Artistes,  &c.  qui  se  sont  rendus  celebres  dans  tous  les  pays  du 
monde,  en  6  \Tol.  in  8vo.  Cet  ouvrage  a  paru  d’abord  en  1770,  en  4  vol.  L’annee 
derniere  on  l’a  augment^  de  deux  volumes.  On  y  trouve  ce  que  dit  Air.  Garrick,  c’est 
a  dire  des  notices  tres  bien  faites  sur  les  caract£res,  les  ouArrages,  et  les  actions  des 
hommes  ou  des  femmes  c6l£bres.  Ce  livre  est  tres  philosophique,  on  croit  cependant 
qu’il  ait  6t6  fait  par  des  Benedictins.” 

Now,  I  should  be  glad  if  you  would  favour  me  with  a  line  by  return  of  post,  in¬ 
forming  me  if  this  is  the  book  you  want ;  because  I  should  not  choose  to  send  it  au 
hasard,  lest,  as  it  has  been  published  so  long,  you  may  already  have  it.  I  shall  there¬ 
fore  wait  your  answer ;  and  if  it  should  arrive  too  late  for  Mr.  Vandergucht,  I  will 
take  care  to  convey  it  to  you,  by  a  safe  hand,  immediately  after  your  decision. 

I  am  glad  you  have  found  the  lady’s  direction  ;  I  shall  wait  on  her  this  Aveek. 
Her  having  borne  the  name  of  Garrick  is  sufficient  to  render  me  desirous  of  culti- 
vating  her  acquaintance.  I  am  rejoiced  to  find  from  Mr.  Vandergucht,  that  you 
enjoy  so  good  a  state  of  health :  long  may  you  do  so,  and  may  it  be  attended  Avith 
every  blessing  HeaAren  can  bestoAv  on  its  noblest  Avork  !  I  ha\Te  been  detained  till 
the  post  is  just  going  out ;  therefore  have  only  time  to  desire  my  love  to  dear  Mrs.  G., 
and  to  assure  you  of  the  lively  sentiments  of  esteem,  Avith  which  I  eA^er  am, 

My  best  of  friends,  your  ever  affectionate  and  obliged, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

I  hope  Noverre  has  been  more  exact  in  delivering  my  letter  to  you,  than  he  Avas 
in  delivering  a  book  I  sent  to  Air.  Jerningham. 


2  L 


VOL.  II. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


258 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Aug.  21st,  1 777. 

If  you  could  be  sensible  of  the  real  timidity  with  which  I  now  address  you,  it 
might  perhaps  interest  you  more  in  favour  of  my  request,  than  any  other  plea  I  can 
possibly  make ;  for  even  conscious  gratitude  for  former  obligations  does  not  bestow 
a  right  to  solicit  new  ones.  On  what  then  can  I  found  my  claim?  Most  truly  and 
sincerely  1  will  answer  that  it  must  rest  entirely  on  my  opinion  of  your  good-nature. 
But  let  me  farther  preface  my  request  by  assuring  you,  that  should  you  absolutely 
refuse,  it  will  not  abate  my  unfeigned  esteem  for  you,  or  prevent  me  from  flattering 
myself  that  you  have  some  little  regard  for  me. 

Xow  to  the  matter  in  question.  I  have  never,  my  dear  Sir,  made  any  secret  to 
you  that  the  difficulty  of  my  circumstances  was  the  sole  motive  which  induced  me 
to  write ;  and  though,  with  gratitude  to  Heaven  and  the  best  of  sons,  I  acknowledge 
that  my  situation  is  easier  than  it  has  formerly  been,  yet  I  still  feel  the  strongest 
wish  to  assist  myself,  and  lighten  the  weight  which  my  Richard’s  generosity  has 
voluntarily  undertaken,  of  supporting  his  family. 

The  uncommon  talents  with  which  providence  endowed  you,  have  from  your 
early  youth  exempted  you  from  the  painful  feeling  of  soliciting,  or  receiving  obliga¬ 
tions  :  you  were  placed  in  the  opposite  line,  and  have  always  experienced  the  trans- 
cendant  pleasure  of  conferring  happiness  ; — long,  very  long,  may  you  enjoy  it ! 

But  to  my  suit.  I  have  two  comedies,  or  rather  sketches,  (say  skeletons,  if  you 
will,)  lying  by  me :  when  I  say  that  you  have  seen  them  both,  I  will  not  presume  to 
boast  that  there  is  much  merit  in  either ;  but  this  I  will  venture  to  say,  relying  much 
more  on  your  genius  than  my  own,  that  if  you  would  be  so  kind  as  to  take  the 
trouble  of  looking  them  over,  you  could,  I  am  persuaded,  with  ease  to  yourself,  and 
happiness  to  me,  point  out  such  alterations  as  might  perhaps  render  one  of  them  fit 
for  representation  ;  and  were  that  the  case,  I  think  your  goodness  would  extend  still 
farther,  and  prompt  you  to  recommend  the  piece  to  Mr.  Sheridan,  as  from  a  nameless 
author.  You  see,  my  dear  Sir,  how  quick  I  have  travelled  and  settled  the  whole 
affair  in  a  few  words ;  but  though  my  pen  has  hurried  on  so  fast,  it  is  far  from  my 
intention  to  hurry  you :  do  but  accept  this  task,  and  your  leisure  shall  be  my  time. 
I  know  you  are  above  ceremony  ;  I  will  not  therefore  vainly  attempt  to  apologize 
farther  for  this  liberty,  but  conclude  with  assuring  you,  that  I  am,  and  ever  shall 
be,  with  the  sincerest  esteem,  * 

Your  affectionately  grateful  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  Griffith. 

My  Kitty  begs  to  join  me  in  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  would  be  bold 
enough,  if  I  permitted,  to  send  her  love  to  you. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


259 


HANNAH  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

WRITTEN  EXTEMPORE  ON  PASSING  A  DAY  AT  MR.  GARRICK’S  VILLA  NEAR  HAMPTON. 

Where ’s  Happiness?  say  all  our  sages, 

Terrestrial  Bliss,  where  is  she  found  ? 

Is  she  confined  to  life’s  high  stages, 

Or  haply  strays  on  lowly  ground  ? 

Nor  high  nor  low  can  boast  the  art 
The  vagrant  goddess  to  confine  ; 

Her  seat  is  fix’d  within  that  heart 
Which  sense  and  elegance  refine. 

I  have  seen  her,  a  whole  summer’s  day, 

On  Thames’s  banks  display  her  charms ; 

Now  on  the  upland  path  she  lay, 

Now  on  the  terrace  spread  her  arms. 

In  various  shape  she  courts  my  friends, 

And  woos  true  merit  to  be  blest ; 

Wit,  spirit,  grace  on  her  attend, 

In  all  their  liveliest  colours  drest. 

But  now  the  changeful  goddess  shines 
In  Juliana’s  form  confest ; 

Glad  round  her  neck  his  arms  he  twines, 

And  clasps  the  charmer  to  his  breast. 

Is  Mrs.  Garrick’s  name  Juliana?*  your  nephew  says  it  is.  I  hope  both  you  and 
she  will  forgive  my  taking  the  liberty  of  sending  what  I  could  not  resist  the  pleasure 
of  scribbling  ;  for,  next  to  my  own  happiness,  that  of  contemplating  yours,  to  whom  I 
am  so  much  obliged,  must  be  my  most  agreeable  idea.  I  hope  to  finish  my  fourth 
act  to  your  satisfaction,  and  meet  you  in  London  on  Thursday,  if  the  weather  will 
permit,  but  it  is  dreadful  at  present. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Aug.  22nd,  1777. 

Since  my  return  from  North  Wales  I  have  been  much  indisposed.  I  hope  to  be 
in  town  some  time  next  week,  when  I  shall  call  upon  you  ;  in  the  mean  time,  I  must 
desire  you  not  to  publish  any  of  those  things  you  mention  :  they  are  for  private  in¬ 
spection,  and  it  would  be  very  wrong  to  make  them  public. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

*  Certainly  not, — Eva  Maria.  What  is  meant  by  -written  extempore  is  not  very  apparent.  It  implies,  at 
all  events,  the  time  occupied  in  the  writing, — surely  sufficient  for  stuff  so  very  poor.  Could  it  aid  the  fourth 
act  of  “  Percy”  with  Juliana,  as  this  intimate  lady  misnames  her  dear  friend  ? — Ed. 

2  I.  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


2f)0 


MR.  A.  WALLIS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, — (mind  that,)  Robston  Hall,  Aug.  22rid,  1777. 

You  have  heard  from  the  niece  how  we  journeyed  from  the  Adclphi  to  Bath,  and 
of  the  dangers  she  escaped  from  thunder,  lightning,  rain,  and  spirits  (of  brandy)  be¬ 
tween  Bath  and  Bristol,  after  her  elopement  from  her  fellow-traveller.  Now  you 
will  expect  to  hear  of  the  dangers  I  have  passed,  and  the  hair-breadth  escapes  in  the 
dreadful  Welsh  precipices ;  how  I  have  been  taken  by  the  friendly  foe,  and  impri¬ 
soned  whole  days  and  nights,  fed  upon  nothing  but  fish,  venison,  claret,  and  Welsh 
ale,  in  the  finest  country  in  the  world.  All  these  to  hear  will  make  your  mouth 
water.  Wales,  for  variety  and  beauty  of  scenery,  plenty,  and  conveniency,  exceeds 
every  place  which  has  come  within  my  ken.  From  my  leaving  Bristol,  to  this  place,  1 
was  scarce  ever  more  than  five  miles  distant  from  the  sea,  and  never  half-an-hour  out 
of  its  sight,  which,  with  mountains,  rocks,  rivers,  cataracts,  castles,  valleys,  kc.  kc. 
form  the  most  delightful  of  countries. 

I  am  now  in  Milford  Haven,  at  a  good  inn,  after  the  manner  of  that  at  Hampton  ; 
my  landlord  keeps  a  yacht  for  the  amusement  of  his  guests.  He  took  me  a  cruise 
into  a  thousand  creeks  ;  we  hailed  as  many  vessels,  and  took  twice  that  number  of 
prisoners,  such  as  john  dories,  mullets,  bretts,  kc.  which,  according  to  the  ancient  laws 
and  customs  of  Wales,  we  eat  alive  ;  and  conformable  to  more  modern  customs,  intro¬ 
duced  from  England,  drink  our  claret,  eat  our  pines,  grapes,  cherries,  &c.  all  of  the 
captain’s  own  manufacture ;  and  in  the  evening  returned  to  our  inn,  where  I  am  again 
a  close  prisoner,  unable  to  pay  my  ransom,  or  to  make  my  escape.  I  wish  you  and  Pen. 
and  my  fair  niece,  would  come  to  my  relief,  or  you  will  lose  my  custom  at  Hampton. 

This  country  affords  remedies  for  all  complaints,  as  you  will  see  by  the  inclosed, 
which  my  landlord  sends  you  with  his  compliments,  and  an  offer  of  his  inn  for  your 
accommodation.  He  is  a  very  civil,  obliging  man  ;  keeps  a  good  larder  ;  has  laid  in 
a  large  stock  of  the  best  wines,  which  he  perfectly  understands  the  management  of, 
tastes  them  all  himself ;  pays  the  utmost  attention  to  his  guests,  whether  they  drink 

wine,  sea-water,  or - ,  as  I  have  experienced.  In  short,  he  is  very  clever  in  his 

way,  having  been  long  in  business,  and  can  only  be  excelled  by  the  politeness  of  my 
two  landladies,  who,  to  their  perfect  knowledge  in  the  management  of  the  public 
business  of  the  inn,  add  the  benevolence  of  administering  health  to  their  neighbours ; 
but  have  by  that  means  introduced  a  most  barbarous  custom  into  the  country,  of  not 
giving  burial  to  the  dead,  under  100  years  of  age,  for  which  reason  the  people  never 
begin  to  be  sick  till  99.  The  consequence  is,  the  ladies  are  worshipped  as  divinities, 
the  churchyard  lies  fallow,  and  the  sexton  is  ruined,  and  must  either  dig  a  grave  for 
himself,  or  lie  above-ground.  His  place,  not  like  the  places  at  St.  James’s,  is  not  even 
solicited  for ;  nor  will  any  one  accept  it,  unless  the  parson  take  it  as  a  sinecure,  and 
then  he  must  take  the  burial  fees  at  the  time  of  baptism,  or  he  too  will  be  ruined.* 

*  Here  is  a  lawyer  as  witty  as  Foote  himself.  From  the  “barbarous  custom”  to  the  “baptism,”  few 
comedies  can  show  brighter  sentences. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


261 


I  have  seen  Newton,  which  commands  the  finest  view  in  the  Haven.  But  this  is 
not  the  Newton  whose  landlord  you  are  acquainted  with,  and  which  every  one  says  is 
not  to  be  equalled. 

The  landlord  of  that  Newton  and  this  inn  give  each  other  a  character  ;  they  drive 
to  each  other’s  houses,  which  are  both  pretty  decent  Welsh  inns,  make  very  reasona¬ 
ble  bills,  and  have  met  with  great  encouragement  from,  and  are  well  known  to,  the 
noblemen  and  gentlemen  travelling  this  road.  They  hope  for  your  custom  as  you 
pass  this  way,  having  already  secured  that  of  your  friend, 

Endorsed,  A.  W  ALLIS. 

“  Wallis’s  letter  from  Wales. — Excellent." 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  August  23rd,  1777. 

I  thank  you  for  your  obliging  favour  of  July  30th,  and  am  much  pleased  that 
you  are  able  to  ramble,  as  I  believe  it  to  be  very  good  for  you.  Henderson’s  success 
is  even  beyond  my  hopes,  although  they  were  great;  but  I  agree  with  you,  that 
extravagant  puffing  in  newspapers,  after  the  man  has  shown  himself,  is  ill-judged, 
and  may  well  provoke  ill-natured  criticism  and  even  enmity.  I  have  said  this,  and 
written  letters  to  tiy  to  prevent  it,  ever  since  this  foolish  work  began.  I  do  not  see 
the  Morning  Post,  and  therefore  know  not  how  they  treat  him.  I  hope,  well,  though 
not  extravagantly.  As  to  your  behaviour  towards  him,  I  have  no  doubt  that  you 
judge  the  matter  rightly.  All  I  wished  for  was,  that  he  should  have  had  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  owning  his  ignorance  and  weakness,  and  asking  your  forgiveness.  I  really  be¬ 
lieve  that  he  means  well,  and  is  heartily  sorry  that  he  ever  incurred  your  displeasure. 

I  told  him  that  I  was  present  when  you  strongly  recommended  him  to  Mr. 
Sheridan,  long  before  his  arrival  at  the  Haymarket,  and  he  is  very  sensible  of  his 
obligation  to  you.  But  what  is  to  become  of  him  and  of  Drury  itself,  if  this  civil  war 
is  to  continue  ? — I  do  not  mean  in  America,  but  behind  the  curtain.  Will  these 
perturbed  spirits  never  rest  ?  I  hope  that  you,  who  must  be  powerful,  (whether  York 
or  Lancaster  win  the  day,)  will,  upon  every  good  account,  secure  a  place  for  Sheridan. 
You  know  that  it  is  scandalous  to  hear  such  men  as  Bensley,  &c.  drag  out  the  Greeks 
and  Romans,  while  such  a  man  as  S.  is  suffered  to  be  useless.  You  know  what  he 
can  do,  and  what  he  is  worth  ;  how  much  the  stage  wants  every  aid,  and  how  much 
he  wants  a  situation  there,  at  least  for  one  season.  Let  him  have  three  clear  benefits, 
and  play  ten  nights  before  Christmas,  and  ten  after.  Surely  that  will  not  be  too 
much  performance  or  too  much  money.  Sheridan,  Henderson,  and  any  tolerable 
young  lover,  would  make  at  least  a  decent  set  for  tragedy,  and  without  them  there  is 
next  to  nothing.  Jephson  has  received  your  letter  of  the  15th.  His  play  is  almost 
complete,  and  should  be  ready  in  a  week,  if  he  had  a  place  for  next  season,  (which, 
however,  he  of  course  does  not  expect,  if  you  and  others  do  not  like  his  play) ;  but  I 


262 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


know  lie  is  not  fond  (nor  am  I  for  him)  to  bind  himself  to  any  manager  for  a  distant 
day,  not  knowing  how  the  company  may  stand  at  that  distant  day.  You  know  you 
bespoke  a  place  for  this  day  without  a  name  so  long  ago  as  November  last,  when  I 
met  Mr.  Sheridan  and  his  partners  at  your  house.  I  was  not  indeed  very  explicit 
about  it,  for  the  reasons  which  I  have  now  given  you.  And  Mr.  Sheridan  very 
politely  said  (upon  your  asking  him  fora  place  for  next  season)  that  he  should  always 
be  happy  to  receive  any  piece  of  Mr.  Jephson’s,  and  I  believe  he  civilly  added  of  my 
recommending,  and  “  that  you  knew  better  than  any  body”  whether  he  could  promise 
a  place  or  no.  I  remember  that  you  smiled  at  this. 

In  truth,  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy”  is  almost  ready ;  but  the  author  is  unwilling 
to  part  with  it,  I  believe,  till  he  has  some  hopes  of  its  being  performed  next  season, 
in  case  you  approve.  Without  such  approbation,  he  does  not  expect  any  thing. 
However,  1  shall  urge  him  to  send  the  manuscript  to  you  as  soon  as  possible.  I  shall 
mention  you  and  Wilkes  again  to  Mr.  Heron ;  and  in  return,  I  expect  your  generous 
and  liberal  mind  will  contrive  something  for  Tom  O’Bedlam,  as  you  call  him.* 

Your  very  sincere,  obliged,  and  affectionate  servant, 

E.  Tighe. 

My  wife  joins  me  in  true  regard  and  best  wishes  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am  not  as  I  should  be,  though  I  hope  not  worse,  and  I  keep  strictly  to  my 
regimen,  kc.  kc. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  August  23rd,  1777. 

I  take  the  liberty  to  trouble  you  with  a  line,  just  to  know  whether  you  have 
left,  or  are  near  leaving  Hampton.  The  reason  of  my  asking  this  is,  because  I  pro¬ 
mised  Mr.  Harris  to  send  him  the  play  the  first  week  in  September.  I  hope  to  keep 
my  word  with  him  (indeed  I  work  very  hard)  ;  but  I  wish  it  cotdd  pass  through  your 
hands,  and  that  you  would  favour  it  with  another  reading,  as  I  have  made  consider¬ 
able  additions ;  and  if  you  are  at  home,  I  will  trouble  you  with  it.  You  will  also  be 
so  good  to  tell  me  whether  you  would  have  me  ask  Mr.  Sheridan  to  write  the  epi¬ 
logue  ;  if  so,  whether  I  should  write  to  request  it  of  him,  or  would  you  be  so  kind  to 
speak  to  him.  If  you  do  not  approve  of  this,  I  think  to  ask  Johnson,  though  there 
is  a  great  chance  of  his  refusing.  I  want  to  get  a  promise  from  some  proper  person, 
as  I  expect  and  dread  applications  from  improper  ones.  I  am  sure  you  will  give  me 
your  most  friendly  advice,  and  forgive  all  the  trouble  I  give  you. 

Looking  the  other  day  into  the  last  volume  of  the  Bath  Easton  rhyme-book  for 
the  last  year,  I  was  surprised  to  see  your  little  gypsey  song  of  “  O  spread  thy  rich 
Mantle”  introduced  there,  as  if  written  originally  for  the  vase.  What  shifts  they 


*  Tlie  elder  Sheridan — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


263 


have  recourse  to,  to  get  the  name  of  a  real  genius.  I  am  always  angry  when  they 
get  yours. 

Pray  tell  me  how  the  “  Phoenix”  goes  on  ?  I  am  much  obliged  for  your  care  in 
sending  my  letters.  One  of  them  was  a  very  polite  one  from  the  Kennicotts,  in¬ 
viting  me  to  Oxford  in  my  way  home,  with  many  a  warm  wish  to  see  you  and  Mrs. 
Garrick  there  ;  also  to  beg  your  sweet  verses  on  Sir  Eldred,  with  which  (I  mean 
the  verses)  they  are  delighted.  Say  every  thing  for  me  to  my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick. 
All  here  are  entirely  yours,  as  is,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  ever  grateful, 

H.  More. 

Best  compliments  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick,  with  thanks  for  his  remembrance  of  me, 
and  all  his  other  kindnesses. 


MR.  JONES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Aug.  28th,  1777. 

I  am  very  sorry  I  should  every  way  be  so  troublesome  to  you,  and  particularly 
that  my  last  letter  should  be  so  ambiguous  that  you  could  not  understand  it.  I  will 
explain  here  in  a  few  words  :  it  was  meant  to  ask  you  what  fault  I  had  been  guilty 
of,  (as  I  certainly  thought  you  were  very  angry,)  that  I  might  avoid  it  in  future  ;  for, 
be  assured.  Sir,  there  is  no  man  on  earth  I  should  be  so  loth  to  give  offence  to  as 
yourself ;  and  permit  me  to  say,  now  once  for  all,  that  however  strange  and  unac¬ 
countable  my  letter  might  seem,  there  was  no  affectation  of  sensibility  in  it ;  and  I 
hope  to  have  your  forgiveness,  if  I  repeat,  that  I  wished  your  servants  out  of  the  way 
when  you  were  (as  I  thought)  in  such  a  passion  with  me  for  I  did  not  know  what. 
I  trust  I  have  sense  enough  to  make  necessary  distinctions.  Your  freedom  with  me 
I  always  did,  and  always  shall,  consider  as  an  honour.  I  know  howto  value  correc¬ 
tion  from  such  a  man  as  you,  but  it  must  be  the  correction  of  a  friend,  and  not  before 
a  certain  sort  of  witnesses.  As  to  your  deeds.  Sir,  (not  only  with  regard  to  me,  for 
which  I  shall  be  ever  thankful,)  they  never  will  be  without  my  warmest  praise  and 
admiration,  however  feeble  and  inadequate  they  may  be  in  their  consequences  to  your 
deserts.  But,  Sir,  not  to  take  up  too  much  of  your  time,  I  shall  say  no  more  now 
than  that  (whatever  you  may  think  of  me)  I  shall  be  happy,  very  happy,  even  at  the 
risk  of  my  life,  to  show  you  that 

I  am  your  most  faithful  and  grateful  humble  servant, 

Maurice  Jones. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


2()4 


MR.  J.  CHOUQUET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

No.  102,  High  Street,  Marybone,  London,  Aug.  28th,  1777. 

If  you  can  recall  to  mind  that  about  two  years  ago  you  contradicted  some  para 
graphs  inserted  in  “  The  Public  Ledger”  by  the  late  Mr.  Kelly,  concerning  the 
comedy  of  “  The  Barber  of  Seville,”  &c.  and  that  a  stranger  (myself)  waited  on  you 
in  the  Adelphi  about  said  piece,  when  you  said  that  my  application  to  you  for  that 
season  was  made  too  late. 

Mr.  Sheridan’s  promise  (the  following  year)  of  his  protection  to  that  piece,  ren¬ 
dered  any  further  applications  elsewhere  unnecessary.  If  any  of  the  aforesaid  cir¬ 
cumstances  are  not  effaced  from  your  memory,  your  taking  notice  of  this  application 
by  a  line  to  Mr.  Colman,  who  I  dare  say  would  not  be  guilty  of  an  illiberal  action, 
which  would  be  one,  when  satisfied  of  what  I  have  asserted,  if  he  brought  out  that 
piece  to  my  prejudice.)  Not  doubting  but  common  justice  will  induce  you  to 
comply  with  my  request,  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  JAMES  CHOUQUET. 

“  Mr.  Chouquet’s  letter  about 
‘  The  Barbier  de  Seville.’  ” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  J.  CHOUQUET. 

Hampton,  Aug.  29th,  1777. 

Many  things  in  my  hurry  of  business  may  have  escaped  my  memory,  but  I  will 
assure  you  that  I  have  not  at  present  the  least  recollection  of  the  circumstances  you 
mention.  When  I  saw  a  translation  of  the  comedy  advertised  and  dedicated  to  Mr. 
Sheridan,  I  bought  it,  but  had  not  the  least  suspicion  of  its  being  intended  for  the 
stage,  or  that  I  had  ever  seen  the  play  in  English,  or  the  translation.  If  any  conver¬ 
sation  on  this  subject  will  be  of  the  least  service  to  you,  I  shall  be  at  the  Adelphi  on 
Tuesday,  and  at  your  commands  between  eleven  and  twelve. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

Endorsed,  D-  GaRRICK. 

“  My  answer  to  a  Mr.  Chouquet,  about  '  The 
Barbier  de  Seville,’  Aug.  31st,  1777. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


265 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  GARRICK,  Richmond,  Monday  Night. 

If  you  have  any  charity,  you  will  bestow  an  epilogue  for  Rosina,  on  “  The  Poor 
Spanish  Barber.”  If  you  should  come  to  town  any  day,  you  shall  run  the  piece  over ; 
but  you  know  enough  from  the  French  to  furnish  matter  for  the  tail-piece,  which, 
without  your  assistance,  will  not  be  supplied ;  for  the  prologue  and  rehearsals  will  be 
sufficient  employment  for  me.  I  expect  Texier  to  breakfast  to-morrow  morning, 
when  I  will  present  him  with  the  entree  of  the  Haymarket.  1  called  on  Clive  this 
evening  for  the  first  time  this  year,  and  heard  she  was  gone  to  dine  at  Hampton.  I 
hope  you  got  home  last  night  without  any  accident  or  firing  the  blunderbuss,  and 
not  worse,  I  hope,  for  your  walk  in  our  gardens.  Remember  me  to  Mrs.  Garrick, 
and  believe  me  Most  truly  yours, 

G.  Colman. 

I  suppose  O’Hara’s  piece*  and  the  Barber  will  keep  me  in  town  all  the  rest  of  the 
week.  Good-night,  good-night ! 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  G.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Soho  Square,  Thursday  Morning. 

Hearing  I  have  been  most  infamously  traduced  by  Mr.  Becket,  from  whom  I 
last  Monday  received  a  most  insolent  letter,  sent  in  the  most  insolent  manner,  and 
fearing  I  may  have  suffered  in  your  good  opinion,  as  well  as  your  brother’s,  I  take 
the  liberty  of  submitting  to  you  the  inclosed,  as  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  my  declara¬ 
tion  to  you  the  other  morning ;  an  incontrovertible  proof,  unless  I  can  be  supposed 
to  be  base  and  mean  enough,  first  to  distress  a  man  by  an  arrest,  and  afterwards  to 
suborn  witnesses  to  conceal  it.  Garton’s  character,  as  well  as  my  own,  will,  I  trust, 
preserve  me  from  such  an  imputation.  Of  the  transactions  between  Becket  and  the 
printer,  I  was  equally  ignorant.  The  rest  of  his  friends  will  not,  I  hope,  experience 
the  baseness  and  ingratitude  which  he  has  shown  to  me.  I  would  not  trouble  you 
with  this  scrawl,  if  I  could  spare  a  servant  to  ride  to  Hampton  to-day.  Pray  return 
me  the  inclosed,  and,  if  you  can  readily  find  it,  the  letter  I  gave  you  at  the  playhouse 
about  Digges.  If  you  are  not  engaged,  I  should  be  very  happy  to  see  you  to-day  at 
four  o’clock,  to  dinner.  Yours  most  truly, 

G.  Colman. 

*  A  burletta  of  three  acts,  called  “  April  Day,”  performed  at  the  little  theatre  this  season. — Ed. 


VOL.  II. 


2  M 


266 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Saturday  noon. 

I  am  sorry  I  shall  not  be  in  town  to-morrow  evening.  The  two  letters  enclosed 
will  convince  you  how  shamefully  I  have  been  vilified.  Had  I  been  sent  to  when 
the  arrest  happened,  it  would  have  been  immediately  decided  that  I  was  not  privy  to 
it ;  but  a  false  compassion  was  to  be  raised  at  my  expense.  The  best  men  may  be 
unfortunate,  but  in  their  misfortunes  will  show  their  characters  to  be  good. 

Yours  in  much  haste,  but  ever  yours, 

G.  Colman. 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  GARRICK,  Richmond,  Sunday  Night,  Aug.  31st,  1777. 

So  many  people  coming  round  to  me  last  night,  so  hurried  and  flurried,  I  could 
not  write  early  enough  for  the  post  to  tell  you  of  our  success,  which  I  the  less  regret¬ 
ted  as  I  saw  your  brother’s  name  in  the  account,  and  suppose  he  gave  you  a  line. 
Your  epilogue,  in  spite  of  the  ill-name  you  had  industriously  given  it  abroad,  was 
extremely  well  received,  and,  I  think,  not  ill-spoken.  At  least,  I  did  my  best  to  polish 
her,  and  took  the  liberty  of  transposing  two  lines,  because  I  found  the  parenthesis 
puzzled  and  embarrassed  her ;  and  indeed  I  think  they  will  even  read  better  at  the 
end  of  the  clause  as  they  were  last  night  spoken.  Not  what  is  gold,  &cc.  The  whole 
piece  was  received  far  beyond  my  warmest  expectations. 

Le  Texier  gave  me  the  music  of  the  song,  attended  two  rehearsals,  and  was  of 
infinite  service. 

I  am  very  sorry  you  did  not  mention  Becket’s  affair  when  I  saw  you.  The  first 
I  heard  of  it  was  from  your  brother.  Though  I  am  persuaded  he  has  not  used  me 
well,  I  never  had  an  adverse  thought  towards  him  ;  and  had  I  been  capable  of  enter¬ 
taining  it,  your  interference  in  his  favour  would  have  extinguished  it.  Coming  at  that 
moment,  it  fluttered  me  very  much, — and  the  more,  because  neither  Garton  nor  the 
attorney  were  to  be  found,  both  being  out  of  town.  I  really  think  his  behaviour 
must  have  been  very  irritating  to  drive  Garton,  who  has  great  humanity,  to  such  a 
needless  extremity.  I  find  I  have  been  very  plentifully  abused  and  belied,  but  I  have 
been  long  used  to  it,  and,  I  am  sorry  to  add,  from  that  quarter.  Pray  Heaven  I  may 
rather  suffer  some  hard  thoughts  from  you,  than  you  should  be  undeceived  at  your 
own  expense!  More  of  this  when  we  meet ;  till  when  and  ever  I  remain 

Yours  most  faithfully, 

G.  Colman. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


267 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Sept.  1st,  1777. 

Many  thanks  for  your  kind  letter.  An  opportunity  offering  of  sending  by  a 
private  hand,  I  thought  it  better  to  dispatch  the  play  ;  for,  it  is  so  large,  it  would  have 
filled  a  great  number  of  franks.  I  was  very  desirous  to  convey  it  to  Mr.  Harris 
through  your  hands,  as  you  kindly  offered  to  take  that  trouble.  I  have  made  great 
alterations  ;  I  shall  rejoice  to  find  that  you  think  I  have  made  some  improvements. 
I  shall  be  most  ready,  and  willing,  and  thankful  for  any  farther  hint.  I  wish  for 
nothing  so  much  as  to  improve  it.  Whatever  Mr.  Harris  may  propose  to  you,  you 
will  be  so  good  as  answer  for  me,  from  your  own  judgment,  as  if  I  were  upon  the 
spot.  I  write  nonsense,  being  in  the  greatest  hurry  lest  I  should  be  too  late.  My 
kind  respects  to  dear  Mrs.  G. 

Believe  me,  dear  Sir,  your  ever  obliged  and  grateful, 

H.  More. 

Do  you  think  Mrs.  Barry  will  act  Elwina  ?  I  long  to  know. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Thursday  Night,  Gerrard-street. 

H.  More  presents  her  best  respects  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  begs  leave  to 
enquire  how  they  do.  She  is  just  come  to  town,  and  had  proposed  waiting  on  them 
to-moiTOW  morning  early ;  but  as  she  has  caught  a  great  cold  on  her  journey,  and  as 
she  imagines  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  may  be  at  Hampton,  she  is  sure  they  will  have  the 
goodness  to  excuse  her  calling  in  the  Adelphi,  till  she  is  informed  whether  they  are 
there.  As  soon  as  she  hears  they  are  in  town,  she  will  joyfully  hasten  to  assure  them 
of  her  warmest  gratitude  for  all  their  goodness  to  her. 

A  thousand  sincere  thanks  for  the  alterations,  &c.  in  “  Percy,”  which  her  hurry 
made  her  most  shamefully  neglect  in  her  letters  to  Mr.  G. 


MR.  JAMES  CHOUQUET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Wednesday  Morning,  12  o’clock. 

Your  polite  offer  to  settle  the  matter  in  dispute  with  Mr.  Colman  was  too  flatter¬ 
ing  not  to  be  gratefully  accepted ;  but  as  Mr.  Sheridan  will  be  in  town  in  a  few  days, 
I  humbly  request  you  will  defer  till  then  taking  any  notice  of  this  matter,  fearing  my 
eagerness  should  have  made  me  act  with  impropriety  in  considering  myself  the  prin- 

2  M  2 


2(58 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OE 


cipal  party  aggrieved,  when  with  more  reason  said  gentleman  might  be  thought  so. 
My  ignorance  of  subjects  of  that  kind  could  alone  make  me  err,  as  I  should  be  de¬ 
sirous  of  emulating  the  liberal  principles  I  have  found  in  him ;  my  interest  would  be 
a  poor  sacrifice  to  his  generosity  !  as  I  had  no  claim  to  the  piece  after  I  addressed 
it  to  him,  but  from  his  promise  of  protecting  it  for  my  advantage. 

Beseeching  you  to  be  persuaded,  that  the  desire  of  acting  consistently  is  my  reason 
for  this  request,  in  doing  which  I  hope  to  merit  a  favourable  opinion  of  my  umpire, 
and  assuring  you  how  much  I  have  the  honour  to  be  most  respectfully,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

High  Street,  Mary-bone,  No.  102.  JaAIES  ChoUQUET. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CHOUQUET. 

SIR,  Wednesday,  Sept.  3rd,  1777. 

I  have  not  yet  seen  Mr.  Colman,  nor  will  I  mention  the  business  to  him.  Indeed 
I  could  not  well  do  it,  for  I  am  going  from  home  for  some  time  :  but  you,  Sir,  mis¬ 
took  my  proposal.  I  had  no  intention  to  propose  myself  for  an  umpire,  nor  do  I 
know  of  any  tiling  to  be  determined  by  a  third  person.  I  said  I  would  speak  to  Mr. 
Colman  about  the  liberty  of  his  theatre,  but  I  could  not  undertake  for  any  thing  else, 
nor  would  it  have  been  delicate  to  propose  myself  as  an  umpire  between  my  friend 
and  a  stranger.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  Air.  Chouquet’s  second  letter  and  my  answer 
about  Colman.” 


MR.  T.  EVANS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR-  SIR,  Strand,  No.  50,  Sept.  6th,  1777. 

You  very  kindly  gave  me  permission  to  bring  my  wife  to  see  Hampton.  I  am 
very  Sony  to  hear  ),'ou  have  been  so  much  indisposed,  and  therefore  have  avoided 
coming;  but  as  I  belieA7e  I  shall  go  abroad  soon,  I  could  wish  to  know  whether  I  may 
have  that  pleasure  first. 

Gratitude  for  the  favours  I  have  received  from  you  would  not  suffer  me  to  see 
the  abuse  that  had  been  (and  especially  when  I  heard  more  was  to  follow)  against  you 
in  “  The  Morning  Chronicle”  and  be  silent.  I  enclose  you  a  copy  of  a  letter  1  have 
sent  to  AVoodfall  on  that  subject. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  humble  servant, 

T.  Evans. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


269 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  T.  EVANS. 

DEAR  SIR,  Tuesday,  Sept.  6th,  177.7. 

I  beg  that  you  will  bring  your  company  here,  whenever  you  please.  My  nephew 
(as  I  am  not  able)  will  attend  you  and  show  you  every  thing.  I  am  sorry  upon  this 
account  that  this  nasty  gout  confines  me  still  to  my  couch; — dreadful  work,  a  lame 
general  and  so  strong  an  alliance  in  the  field !  You  have  shown  great  partiality  to 
me  in  your  letter  to  Mr.  Woodfall.  Whatever  he  might  have  been  pleased  to 
publish  against  me,  I  never  thought  they  were  so  unmanly  to  go  farther.  I  am 

rather  sorry  you  wrote  to  him,  Mr.  W - ,  about  me  ;  he  may  think  that  I  applied 

to  you  upon  that  matter.  What  I  may  have  unwittingly  done  to  that  gentleman,  I 
know  not,  but  I  mu^t  certainly  have  done  him  or  his  family  some  great  injury.  I 
seldom  now  read  the  paper,  (which,  by  the  by,  I  think  the  most  diverting,)  because 
I  would  not  trust  my  sensibility  with  some  of  the  violent  paragraphs  which  are  too 
often  to  be  found  there.  I  say  this  in  confidence,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  obliged  servant. 

D.  Garrick. 

Though  I  cannot  see  your  company,  I  shall  desire  you  to  come  to  my  bed’s  side. 
Pray  tell  me  when  you  will  come. 


MR.  T.  EVANS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Thursday,  Sept.  8th,  1777. 

I  mean  to  accept  of  your  kind  invitation,  and  come  to  Hampton  on  Tuesday 
next.  I  hope  I  shall  find  you  entirely  recovered.  The  lame  general  has  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  operations  of  the  field,  even  if  unable  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  fight ; 
the  experience  of  so  many  campaigns  must  give  victory  to  the  troops  who  fight 
under  the  orders  of  so  accomplished  a  commander.  Marshal  Saxe  conquered,  though 
'  carried  in  a  litter,  and  the  superior  genius  of  one  man  (the  King  of  Prussia)  triumphed 
over  the  most  formidable  alliance ;  and  if  the  public  can  give  you  additional  laurels, 
you  most  certainly  will  acquire  them. 

Mr.  Woodfall  has  written  me  a  letter,  wherein  he  acknowledges  the  justness  of 
my  complaint,  and  the  illiberality  and  scurrility  of  the  verses,  and  assures  me  the 
author  shall  no  more  poison  the  paper. 

With  respect  to  Mr.  F.  A.*  he  acknowledges  himself  also  wrong,  and  says 
Mr.  Foote  undeceived  him;  and  indeed  I  must  do  Mr.  Foote  the  justice  to  declare, 
that  when  I  dined  at  North  End,  and  in  his  green-room  was  speaking  of  Mr.  A.,  he 
talked  in  a  manner  I  woidd  wish  him.  I  saw  Mr.  Harris  this  morning;  he  tells  me 
the  Barrys  are  very  unfortunate  in  striving  to  get  Mr.  A.  an  engagement  at  Covent- 
Garden.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Thos.  Evans. 


*  Francis  Aickin. — Ed. 


270 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  T.  EVANS  TO  MR.  W.  WOODFALL. 

DEAR  SIR, 

As  1  cannot  be  present  this  evening  at  the  meeting  of  the  partners  of  “  The 
Morning  Chronicle,”  I  cannot  help  privately  remonstrating  with  you  how  prejudicial 
it  is  to  your  own  character  to  suffer  such  illiberal  abuse  on  Mr.  Garrick  in  your 
paper;  there  is  not  a  man  who  does  not  highly  condemn  the  verses  on  his  fete  cham- 
pctre ;  the  insult  offered  to  a  lady  is  in  the  highest  degree  base ;  but  I  have  taken  upon 
me  to  assert,  from  my  knowledge  of  you,  they  must  have  crept  into  the  paper  without 
your  knowledge.*  However,  as  I  hear  the  wretched  author  intends  offering  you 
more,  I  hope,  injustice  to  yourself,  you  mean  to  omit  them.  Mr.  G.  will  no  doubt 
treat  such  paragraphs  with  the  contempt  they  deserve ;  but  if  you  suffer  “  The 
Morning  Chronicle”  to  be  the  vehicle  for  every  insolent  actor  to  abuse  a  manager, 
I  think  we  should  not  be  partial,  but  let  us  proclaim  that  “  All  servants,  &c.  who 
have  behaved  ill,  and  are  discarded  by  their  masters,  are  wrelcome  to  abuse  gratis  in 
the  paper.” 

You  possess  an  understanding  and  liberality  of  mind  superior  to  most  of  your 
profession,  and,  I  am  persuaded,  will  thank  me  for  this  friendly  hint.  Though  I  am 
very  happy  in  being  able  to  boast  of  the  friendship  of  Mr.  G.,  whom  I  think  an 
honour  to  our  age  and  nation,  yet  I  am  not  pleading  his  cause  alone ;  for,  let  us  not 
thrive  by  unprovoked  slander.  Yours, 

T.  E. 


LORD  PALMERSTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Broadlands,  (near  Romsey,)  Sept.  11,  1777. 

When  I  had  last  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you  at  Hampton, 
you  were  both  so  kind  as  to  promise  me  a  visit  in  Hampshire,  and  I  assure  you  such 
a  promise  was  too  agreeable  to  me  not  to  make  me  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of 
reminding  you  of  it.  I  did  not  then  attempt  fixing  any  time,  because  my  friend 
and  neighbour,  Mr.  Stanley,  who  is  equally  concerned  in  this  matter  with  myself, 
was  out  of  England.  He  is  now  returned,  and  desires  me  to  make  his  best  compli¬ 
ments  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  yourself,  and  joins  with  me  in  acquainting  you  that  we 
shall  both  be  at  home  whenever  it  will  suit  you  best  to  come  to  us,  bettveen  this 
time  and  the  middle  of  November ;  and  that  we  promise  ourselves  very  great  plea¬ 
sure  in  seeing  you  in  this  part  of  the  -world  at  any  time  you  will  fix.  We  are  such 
near  neighbours,  that  wre  enjoy  the  society  of  each  other’s  house  with  the  greatest 

*  Woodfall’s  diligence,  I  should  think,  rendered  this  impossible ;  but  Evans,  with  “  King  Lear,’’  left  him 
to  his  reflections. — 


“  Let  shame  come  when  it  will, — I  do  not  call  it.” 


[Ed.] 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


271 


ease ;  but,  as  we  shall  both  hope  for  the  pleasure  of  receiving  you,  we  beg  you  would 
contrive  to  give  us  as  long  a  time  as  you  can  possibly  spare  from  other  engagements. 
My  house  is  in  your  way,  and  therefore  I  hope  you  will  make  your  first  stop  here. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

Palmerston. 

P.  S.  I  shall  hope  for  the  honour  of  seeing  Mrs.  Garrick’s  niece,  if  she  is  still 
with  you. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Sept.  12,  1777. 

I  peel  myself  so  very  much  obliged  to  you,  though  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
are  at  home  or  abroad,  and  though  I  do  know  that  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  you, 
but  to  repeat  my  thanks  over  and  over,  and  though  it  is  not  post-day,  yet  I  should 
not  have  a  quiet  conscience,  nor  sleep  in  my  bed,  if  I  attempted  to  get  into  it  before 
I  sat  down  to  thank  you,  which  I  do  very  sincerely,  for  all  your  goodness  and  loving 
kindness  to  me.  I  should  reckon  the  not  writing  to  you  to-night  the  next  deadly 
sin  to  not  saying  my  prayers.  I  also  beg  the  favour  of  you  to  present  my  hearty 
acknowledgments  to  Mr.  G.  Garrick :  pray  tell  him  he  is  no  common  benefactor,  for 
he  cured  my  ague  and  presented  my  play ;  and  you  know  that  my  life  and  my 
tragedy7  are  objects  of  no  small  concern  to  me. 

I  am  as  much  delighted  and  as  vain  as  you  supposed  I  should  be.  Pray  Heaven 
my  pride  may  not  have  a  fall !  I  am  strongly7  tempted  just  in  this  place  to  transcribe 
a  passage  from  a  letter  I  just  now  received  from  a  great  favourite  and  friend  of  mine, 
not  because  it  praises  y7ou,  but  because  the  thought  itself  is  so  well  expressed.  Mrs. 
Boscawen  is  on  a  visit  at  her  daughter’s,  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort,  in  tins  neighbour¬ 
hood.  I  sent  her  the  play',  desiring  her  criticism ;  in  answer  to  which,  she  says — 
“Your  play7,  I  doubt  not,  has  already7  received  the  criticism  of  Mr.  Garrick:  I  have 
no  idea  it  can  have  or  want  any'  other.  Law  and  criticism  must  stop  somewhere ;  the 
former,  from  appeal  to  appeal,  ends,  en  dernier  resort,  with  the  House  of  Lords.  Mr. 
Garrick  is  indisputably  the  House  of  Lords  to  dramatic  poets ;  they7  can  go  no  far¬ 
ther  for  decision  of  what  is  right  or  wrong:  his  fiat  precludes  all  other  judgment.” 

When  will  your  prologue  to  Colman’s  “  Barber"  be  printed  ?  I  long  to  see  it ; 
the  papers  give  it  a  great  character.  I  hope  the  Phoenix  will  get  out  of  her  spicy 
nest,  and  flourish  on  the  Cambrian  mountains.  My7  best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick  and  her  fair  niece.  I  go  to  Bath  in  a  week  or  two,  for  a  short  visit,  with  the 
Arab,  who  is  ordered  to  drink  the  waters :  she  is  better.  Can  I  be  of  any7  service  to 
my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick  there? 

All  here  are  faithfully  and  gratefully  yours,  as  is,  my7  dear  Sir, 

Endorsed,  Your  ever  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

“  Miss  More,  alias  The  Nine.”  H.  MORE. 


272 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Sept.  16th,  1777. 

I  send  by  your  direction,  under  cover  to  Mr.  Chamier,  “  The  Law  of  Lom¬ 
bardy.”  it  was  finished  some  time  before  you  received  my  last  letter,  as  1  believe 
I  told  you  ;  but  the  irksome  labour  of  transcribing  a  fair  copy  (from  which  I  was 
often  called  by  other  business)  prevented  my  completing  that  part  of  the  task  so 
speedily  as  1  wished.  It  has  been  deeply  felt  and  greatly  admired  by  every  person 
here  to  whom  I  have  read  it,  but  by  no  one  more  than  my  Lord  Lieutenant,  who  is 
the  most  universally  acquainted  with  the  drama  of  any  one  I  ever  met  with,  from 
the  “  (Edipus”  of  Sophocles,  down  to  the  “  Fourberies  de  Scapin.”  However,  I  am 
most  impatient  for  your  opinion,  which  I  hope  you  will  let  me  know,  after  you  have 
had  time  to  give  it  a  serious  perusal.  I  commit  it  to  your  care,  with  the  partiality 
of  a  parent  for  a  favourite  child.  It  will  be,  I  believe,  my  last  attempt  in  this  way, 
for  1  never  again  expect  to  finish  any  Avork  of  the  kind  half  so  much  to  my  satisfac¬ 
tion.  Mrs.  Jephson,  with  me,  desires  to  be  most  cordially  remembered  to  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick.  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,  ever  most  affectionately, 


Endorsed, 

“  Letter  from  Jephson  about  his  second  tragedy, 
‘  Law  of  Lombardy,’  and  other  matters.” 


Your  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  CAMDEN. 

MY  GOOD  LORD,  Hampton,  Sept.  16th,  1777. 

It  is  observed  by  a  French  writer,  that  many  things  which  seem  severe,  if  spoken 
as  a  joke,  will  pass  as  such,  but  that  they  grow  serious  by  repetition.  Your  Lord- 
ship  has  long  (jokingly  as  I  thought  and  hoped)  been  pleased  to  twit  me  with  a 
wavering  in  that  faith  in  which  I  have  lived  with  pleasure  and  wish  to  die.  Though 
this  want  of  virtue  in  me  (for,  if  true,  it  certainly  would  be  so)  hath  been  often 
repeated ;  yet  still,  being  a  great  laugher  myself,  I  always  looked  upon  it  as  mere 
pleasantry,  and  rather  as  an  ironical  compliment  than  any  thing  else ;  and  yet  the 
message  brought  me  by  Mr.  Palmer,  of  Bath,  has  made  me  half  consider  the  matter 
as  a  kind  of  reproach,  which  of  course  will  make  me  a  little  serious.  A\  henever  I 
cannot  have  the  honour  as  usual,  and  which  I  flattered  myself  would  be  annual  at 
least,  of  seeing  Lord  and  Lady  Camden,  and  the  Miss  Pratts,  at  Hampton,  I  am 
sincerely  disappointed  ;  but  at  the  same  time  am  bound  to  believe,  for  my  own  credit, 
that  other  engagements  prevent  my  happiness.  \  our  journey  into  Kent  to  Mr. 
Pratt,  and  the  expectation  of  Mrs.  Stewart,  were  urged  to  soften  my  disappointment 
this  summer.  To  make  the  fall  as  easy  as  possible,  I  begged  of  Lady  Camden  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


273 


Miss  Pratt  might  pass  a  few  days  with  us — impossible : — to  give  me  some  small 
satisfaction  for  this  refusal,  I  was  told  that  I  should  know  when  Mrs.  Stewart  came, 
that  I  might  pay  my  respects  at  Chiselhurst.  I  hear  that  lady  has  been  arrived  more 
than  a  fortnight,  in  which  time  I  wrote  to  your  Lordship  upon  other  matters,  but 
received  neither  answer  nor  notice  of  the  lady’s  being  arrived.  Mrs.  G.  and  I  have 
endeavoured  to  put  off  our  Welsh  journey  to  Sir  Watkin,  and  imagined  his  being  at 
Brighton  with  Miss  Grenville  would  have  brought  it  to  bear  ;  but  all  my  wishes  on 
that  account  are  frustrated  by  the  enclosed  letter,  which  will  oblige  us  to  go  imme¬ 
diately  to  Litchfield,  where  my  family  expects  me,  and  a  marriage  to  be  soon  com¬ 
pleted  between  a  niece  of  mine  and  a  gentleman  in  the  neighbourhood.  Let  me 
assure  your  Lordship,  from  the  sincerity  of  my  heart,  that  our  going  without  paying 
our  respects  at  Chiselhurst  is  very  mortifying  to  us ;  but  I  cannot  agree  that  this 
mortification  proceeds  from  my  want  of  gratitude,  taste,  or  attention,  nor  from  any 
other  cause  but  your  Lordship’s  total  neglect  of  me  in  this  business,  or  rather  having 
something  better  to  think  of.  Your  Lordship  calls  me  a  courtier.  If  I  am  a  courtier, 
it  is  without  interest  or  prospect  of  interest.  1  have  friends  who  are  both  in  and  out 
of  place,  and  I  hope  that  my  conduct  to  both  is  without  reproach.  The  greatest  man 
shall  not  speak  ill  of  my  friend  without  some  decent  reprehension  ;  and  some  opinions 
I  have  that  my  greatest  friend  cannot  alter.  I  have  many  weaknesses,  but  I  hope 
among  the  number  I  can  never  be  seriously  accused  of  want  of  the  most  affectionate 
and  steady  fidelity  and  attachment  to  Lord  Camden  and  his  family, 

I  am,  ever  was,  and  ever  shall  be,  your  Lordship’s  most  faithful  servant, 

D.  Garrick.* 

I  beg  that  my  best  respects  and  wishes  may  be  presented  to  all  about  you.  I  spoke 
yesterday  to  Mr.  Wombwell  to  get  Ironmonger  some  little  place  in  the  India  House. 
If  Captain  Smith  would  speak  with  that  gentleman,  the  business  would  be  done. 

If  I  am  too  foolishly  serious  in  my  letter,  I  hope  your  Lordship  will  excuse  me. 


MR.  G.  COLMAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Richmond,  Monday  morning,  Sept.  18th,  1777. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  I  cannot  take  the  five  minutes  you  offer  me,  but  must  run 
to  the  Umber,  who  waits  for  me  in  town,  and  has  too  little  time  to  dispense  with 
any  of  my  attendance.  If  you,  that  have  always  been  so  powerful  before,  should  be 
impotent  now,  I  hope,  like  Lord  Vane,  you  will  ascribe  it  to  an  excess  of  desire  to 

•  As  the  correspondence  advanced  between  the  noble  Earl  and  Mr.  Garrick,  I  began  to  expect  some 
such  friendly  comment  as  the  preceding,  from  the  frankness  of  Garrick’s  nature.  Cornaro  surely  thought 
long  life  itself  might  be  lengthened  by  kind  hearts  and  bright  imaginations;  but  the  ladies  might  be  other¬ 
wise  disposed,  when  there  existed  no  farther  competition  for  places,  and  the  actor’s  fashionable  distinction 
had  been  dropped  for  ever. — Ed. 

VOL.  II.  2  N 


274 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


please.  Not  knowing  you  were  grown  so  chary  of  your  name,  I  have  mentioned  my 
application  to  you,  so  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  answer  for  that  total  silence  you 
wish  for ;  but  I  will  certainly  observe  your  directions  not  to  advertise  the  epilogue, 
till  you  give  proper  authority  for  it.  1  will  give  every  instruction  in  my  power  to 
the  speaker,  whom,  however,  nobody  could  instruct  half  so  well  as  the  author. 
French,  1  fear,  she  knows  nothing  of;  but  I  will  endeavour  to  frenchify  her.  By  the 
by,  my  prologue,  which  is  already  in  Parsons’s  hands,  runs  on  French  ideas — but  no 
imitation  of  Frenchmen  in  it.  I  hope  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you  are  both  in  perfect 
health.  Every  happiness  attend  you,  prays  Your  very  faithful 

G.  Col  man. 


HON.  R.  CHOLMONDELEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  London,  Sept.  25th,  1777. 

I  arrived  here  last  night,  and  by  appointment  met  your  friend  Mr.  Wallis  this 
morning,  who  in  the  most  polite  manner  accommodated  me  with  the  400/.  on  the 
joint  bond  of  my  nephew  and  self.  I  had  in  my  letter  explained  the  whole  matter 
fully  to  him,  because  in  money  matters  with  friends  I  am  particularly  nice  that  no 
inconvenience  or  hazard  may  attend  it.  The  interest  will  be  regularly  paid. 

And  now,  my  dear  Sir,  I  have  nothing  to  add  upon  the  subject,  but  to  return  you 
a  thousand  sincere  thanks  for  the  favour  of  your  great  dispatch  in  the  business,  which 
has  much  added  to  your  kind  attention  to  my  request. 

What  delightful  weather  you  have  had  for  your  journey,  and  what  delightful 
spirits  you  must  have  arrived  in  !  Felix  ter  et  amplius  is  Sir  Watkin,  who  will  enjoy 
for  an  uninterrupted  time  that  happiness  which  every  one  who  knows  you  must 
envy  him.  I  hope  he  is  worthy  of  the  blessing,  or  else  you  are  damned  beyond  all 
hopes  for  flying  to  such  a  distance  from  all  who  delight  in  and  can  really  taste  you. 

We  have  no  sort  of  news  ;  either  the  express  or  the  Howes  are  very  dilatory  :  if 
we  do  not  hear  something  good  from  them  soon,  Burgoyne  will  reap  all  the  laurels. 

I  have  not  as  yet  reaped  any  advantage  from  my  letter  to  a  great  personage ;  but 
I  hope,  as  they  have  provided  and  given  large  pensions  to  several  governors  and  per¬ 
sons,  and  even  to  some  who  have  done  hurt  to  the  cause,  though  last,  I  shall  not  be 
least  in  love,  and  have  an  equivalent  made  to  me  by  building  my  faith  upon  a  rock, 
that  is,  being  seated  in  a  good  Cathedral.  I  am  sure  I  shall  have  your  good  wishes. 

I  am  determined  not  to  let  the  matter  rest :  the  widow  in  the  Gospel  prevailed 
with  the  judge  by  dint  of  application  ;  and  therefore  if  I  cannot  owe  it  to  the  beauty 
of  the  address,  (which  met  your  applause,)  I  hope  to  owe  it  to  the  force  of  im¬ 
portunity. 

I  left  Brighthelmston  with  great  regret :  I  believe,  idleness  and  amusement  are  a 
sovereign  remedy  for  nervous  disorders,  and  a- losing  game. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


275 


I  hope  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  are  perfectly  well,  and  fed  with  the  pleasantest  food, 
amove  jocisque,  and  that  your  niece  is  well. 

Pray  remember  me  most  kindly  to  your  better-half  as  well  as  yourself,  and  believe 
me  no  one  in  the  circle  of  your  friends  bears  you  warmer  wishes  and  attentions 
than,  dear  Sir,  Your  most  sincere  and  much  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

R.  Cholmondeley. 

P.  S.  Mr.  Wallis  desired  his  compliments  to  you  and  yours. 

Endorsed, 

“  Hon.  Mr.  Cholmondeley,  about  the 
loan  of  400/. — done.” 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  Oct.  5th,  1777. 

Well,  my  dear  and  very  best  friend,  I  think  we  begin  to  see  daylight :  at  length 
I  have  got  the  name  of  two  books  which  bid  fair,  one  of  them,  to  be  those  you  are  so 
anxious  about.  The  title  of  one  is  “  Si&cle  de  la  Litterature,”  par  l’Abbe  Rosier, 
Librarian  to  the  King,  and  published  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  months,  in  four 
volumes ;  the  other  is  “  l’Homme  de  Gout,”  either  in  the  press  or  just  published,  the 
author  unknown.  If  neither  of  these  be  it,  I  fear  there  are  little  hopes  of  tracing  it : 
I  beg  therefore  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  let  me  know  whether  I  have  been  fortunate 
in  my  enquiries  ;  and  if  I  have,  I  will  forward  it  to  you  immediately.  If  you  want 
any  numbers  of  the  “  Journal  du  Theatre,”  and  mark  which  they  are,  I  will  also  send 
you  those. 

I  know  not  if  you  have  already  got  “  The  Comedien,”  but  it  was  sent  me  the 
night  before  Mr.  Brusby  went  off  for  England,  and  as  it  was  well  spoken  of,  I  thought 
I  would  forward  it  to  you,  and  hope  it  has  pleased  you.  Let  it  at  least  serve  to  con¬ 
vince  you,  that  it  is  my  ardent  wish  to  prove  to  you,  upon  every  occasion,  with  what 
esteem  and  gratitude  I  am  till  death,  (and  beyond  it,  I  doubt  not,) 

Your  ever  obliged  and  affectionate, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

I  embrace  dear  Mrs.  Garrick.  Excuse  this  little  incorrect  scrawl,  for  I  have  pack- 
eted  you  lately,  and  I  am  hurried  to  death. 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Fontainbleau,  Oct.  7th,  1777. 

I  am  afraid  I  appear  very  ungrateful  in  not  having  thanked  you  sooner  for  your 
letters  ;  but,  by  some  strange  management  of  yours  or  the  posts,  I  did  not  receive  them 
till  I  had  left  Spa  and  was  on  my  road  to  Paris.  I  need  not  say  how  much  we  were 
charmed  with  Mistley  :  the  place  and  the  reception  we  met  with  there  were  such  as 

2  N  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


27  C) 

you  have  so  often  and  so  enchantingly  described.  We  were  very  lucky  in  our  wea¬ 
ther  through  Holland,  where  we  passed  near  a  month  very  agreeably.  If  you  never 
made  that  tour,  I  advise  you  by  all  means  to  do  it ;  for  it  is  a  most  curious  country, 
especially  the  northern  parts  of  it,  and  very  unlike  every  thing  else.  We  had  fine 
weather  likewise  at  Spa,  where  my  Lord  drank  the  waters,  which  agreed  with  him 
as  well  as  usual ;  and  he  is  now  dining  and  supping  away,  as  if  he  did  not  know  what 
it  was  to  have  a  complaint  in  the  stomach. 

We  shall  not  stay  here  long  ;  but  I  may  just  receive  one  letter  more,  in  answer  to 
this,  if  you  are  graciously  disposed  to  indulge  me  with  one  ;  and  I  wish  to  have  one, 
because  I  want  to  know  how  you  dispose  of  yourselves  this  Christmas,  and  whether 
we  shall  be  happy  enough  to  see  you  at  Althorp.  I  went  last  week  to  see  Le  Quin 
[Kain]  play  in  “Zaire”  for  the  last  time.  He  was,  as  I  think  he  always  is, grimacier  and 
unnatural  to  a  great  degree  ;  but  there  were  a  few  strokes  which  he  played  very  finely 
indeed,  and  this  I  can  venture  to  affirm,  not  only  from  the  effect  it  had  upon  myself, 
but  from  the  sensation  of  the  whole  house,  whose  hearts  answered  by  a  kind  of 
audible  sigh  (I  do  not  know  whether  you  will  understand  me)  before  their  hands  had 
time  to  applaud.  The  two  chief  strokes  were  where,  in  the  midst  of  his  resentment, 
he  says,  “  Zaire,  vous  pleurez  and  after  having  stabbed  her,  when  he  says  to  her 
brother,  “  Regardez-la pray  look  over  the  scenes,  and  read  them  both  to  me  some 
time  or  other,  for  I  have  his  expression  strongly  in  my  head,  and  I  shall  like  to  see 
yours. 

A  French  Duke,  the  other  day,  with  all  the  conceit  and  importance  that  could 
be  assumed,  was  giving  me  a  most  horrible  description  of  the  barbarity  that  still  was 
to  be  found  in  our  manners  in  England.  Somebody  mentioned  you  ;  upon  which  he 
said,  “  .Te  l’ai  vu  jouer;  mais,  en  verite,  je  n’en  ai  pas  ^te  bien  emerveille.”  I  said, 
“  L’avez-vous  compris,  Monsieur  ?”  to  which  he  answered,  “  Non,  Madame  ;  mais  c-'est 
£gal.”  I  hope  you  are  as  much  delighted  with  this  answer  as  I  was.  Adieu  ! 

My  direction  is,  Chez  Messrs.  Panchaud’s,  Banquiers,  a  Paris. 


MR.  JEPHSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  D F. All  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  30th  Oct.  1777. 

I  am  delighted  to  hear  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy”  finds  favour  in  your  sight  ;  it 
is  my  favourite  piece,  and  I  believe  will  be  my  last ;  for  the  situations  appear  to 
me  so  interesting,  and  the  incidents  so  ingenious,  that  I  despair  of  ever  finding 
another  story  so  much  to  my  satisfaction.  I  am  really  afraid  of  what  I  say  to  you 
upon  any  work  of  my  own,  and  shall  be  more  so  if  you  think  that,  when  I  tell  you 
how  much  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy”  has  been  admired  here,  I  mean  to  knock  your 
judgment  on  the  head  by  other  authorities.  I  would  rather  have  your  approbation 
than  that  of  all  the  great  men,  and  all  the  great  critics,  from  Aristotle  down  to  this 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


277 


instant ;  and  when  I  mentioned  the  number  of  opinions  in  its  favour,  I  meant  no 
more  than  that  I  would  not  submit  to  your  sagacity  a  piece,  which  appeared  to  have 
merit  only  to  the  author.  There  is  an  infallible  touchstone  for  all  the  works  of  genius 
in  your  head  and  your  heart.  The  writer  who  succeeds  after  they  have  condemned 
him,  must  make  his  appeal  to  an  audience  without  the  genuine  feelings  of  nature, 
and  destitute  of  discernment.  I  am  happy  beyond  measure,  in  finding  you  are  so 
well  satisfied  with  this  play :  if  my  situation  would  allow  of  it,  I  would  go  to  Lon¬ 
don  for  the  pleasure  of  hearing  you  read  it.  In  objecting  to  some  words  and  passages 
in  the  first  act,  where  you  say  I  seem  to  pump  for  poetry  before  I  grow  warm  in  the 
subject,  you  have  looked  into  the  true  state  of  my  mind  when  I  was  writing  it.  I 
am  conscious  of  the  fault,  and  believe  you  refer  to  some  laboured  passages  in  the 
second  scene  between  the  King,  Princess,  and  Paladore.  The  first  act,  however,  is 
fortunately  longer  than  usual,  and  a  good  deal  may  be  retrenched  with  advantage — 
any  passage  or  word  you  object  to  (when  you  are  so  good  to  let  me  know  them)  I 
will  leave  out  or  alter  immediately.  Bireno’s  killing  Ascanio  in  the  last  act,  I  think, 
is  unnecessary,  nay,  almost  ludicrous,  and  I  wish  to  have  it  omitted.  I  beg  you  will 
be  so  good,  after  the  Princess  says  in  the  last  scene :  “  Haste  to  the  King,  proclaim 
this  blessed  event,”  to  insert  these  two  lines  in  the  mouth  of  Bireno : — 

Perfidious  chance  !  caught  in  my  own  device  ! 

Accursed — Ha  !  they  drag  me,  tear  me, — Oh  ! —  ( dies J 

and  to  strike  out  the  passage  of  Bireno’s  stabbing  Ascanio. 

You  ask  me  why  I  do  not  write  to  Mr.  Sheridan  to  secure  a  good  birth  for  the 
tragedy.  I  was  in  hopes,  from  what  Tighe  told  me,  that  you  would  do  it  for  me. 
However,  I  will  write  to  Mr.  Sheridan ;  but  what  can  I  say  that  will  have  so  much 
weight  with  a  manager  of  sense,  as  that  Mr.  Garrick  thinks  well  of  the  play  I  offer 
to  him  ?  If  I  could  venture  to  trespass  farther  upon  your  friendship,  I  should  re¬ 
quest  as  a  ver\r  great  favour,  that  you  would  read  "  The  Law  of  Lombardy”  to  him. 
Should  it  be  acted  this  season  or  the  next,  what  will  become  of  it  unless  you  are  so 
good  to  give  them  some  instructions  at  the  rehearsals  ?  Considering  the  number  of 
bad  plays  you  have  saved  by  a  good  epilogue,  I  flatter  myself  you  will  not  refuse  me 
one  for  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy I  mean  to  ask  Mr.  Sheridan  for  a  prologue. 

I  mentioned  to  Mr.  Tighe  your  wishes  about  Mr.  Wilkes.  You  may  rely  upon 
it,  he  is  anxious  upon  all  occasions  to  assist  your  wishes.  He  is  as  yet  so  new  in 
office,  and  the  Government  so  chaste  about  new  charges  upon  the  establishment,  that 
I  should  fear  lie  could  not  yet  propose  a  provision  for  Mr.  Wilkes,  unless  there  should 
be  some  appointment  vacant  suitable  to  that  gentleman. 

For  many  reasons  I  wish  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy”  may  be  acted  at  Drury- 
lane.  I  knoAv  there  are  no  men  tragedians  at  Covent-Garden,  though  I  mean  to 
keep  your  opinion  and  my  own  upon  that  point  secret. 

Mrs.  Jephson  joins  me  in  most  affectionate  remembrances  to  you  and  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick.  I  am  ever,  My  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

Robert  Jephson. 


278 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Nov.  2nd,  1777. 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  troubling  you  with  an  entire  new  copy  of  “  Percy,” 
as  I  have  made  some  little  alterations  here  and  there  throughout.  I)o  me  the  favour 
to  exchange  copies  with  Mr.  Harris,  and  keep  that  he  now  has,  for  me. 

As  you  think  it  proper  for  me  to  be  in  London,  I  will  certainly  be  there  about 
the  middle  of  this  month  ;  though,  as  you  are  so  very  good  as  to  trouble  yourself 
with  this  affair,  1  think  I  can  be  of  no  use,  any  farther  than  for  my  own  gratification. 

I  shall  pay  attention  to  what  you  say  about  the  bookseller.  Cadell  says  he  has 
offered  me  as  much  as  Mr.  Jephson  had,  and  more  than  has  been  given  for  any  other 
tragedy — mats  nous  verrons. 

I  shall  write  to  Dr.  Aikin  immediately.  I  was  the  other  night  at  the  rehearsal 
of  “  The  School  for  Scandal,”  by  Palmer’s  desire.  I  there  saw  Mr.  Sheridan,  and 
thanked  him  with  great  sincerity,  1  am  sure,  for  his  obliging  intention  in  my  favour. 
He  was  very  polite  indeed,  which  I  attribute  to  the  right  cause,  namely,  your  par¬ 
tiality  for  me. 

It  is  very  odd,  but  I  never  see  -  but  he  is  harping  on  the  same  string,  the 

Ex - n,  and  the  Rev — w,  not  that  he  has  the  slightest  suspicion  ;  but  it  is  so  indi¬ 

gestible,  he  cannot  get  it  out  of  his  maw.  He  has  more  meanness  and  malice  than  I 
suspected,  yet  I  never  thought  him  deficient  in  either. 

I  have  no  particular  notion  for  the  prologue.  Your  first  thought  was  a  good  one, 
about  Chevy  Chace,  a  very  favourite  story. 

I  think  Barry  is  too  long.  I  could  not  write  from  my  heart. 

Please  to  give  my  best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  tell  her  that  Mr.  Hales  con¬ 
fesses  that  he  has  received  her  orders  a  long  while  ago,  but  neglected  to  write  till 
they  were  executed,  which  will  be  in  about  a  fortnight. 

With  the  Arab’s  respects,  I  conclude  myself,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obliged, 

H.  More. 

I  have  marked  with  inverted  commas,  in  the  first  act,  where  some  speeches  of 
Douglas  may  be  shortened. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Nov.  15th. 

I  am  extremely  unlucky.  I  thought  to  have  seen  you  to-day,  instead  of  writin 
to  you  ;  but  two  of  my  sisters  are  most  exceedingly  ill  in  bed  ;  one  of  them  has  not 
stirred  hand  or  foot  this  fortnight,  and  now  I  myself  am  also  confined  to  my  room, 
and  cannot  leave  it  without  danger.  I  hope,  however,  that  a  few  days  will  release 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


279 


me ;  I  will  set  out  the  instant  I  can  do  it  with  safety.  What  trouble  you  have  ! 
The  papers  announced  to  us  the  honour  you  did  “  Percy”  and  me  by  reading  him. 
What  a  treat  for  the  audience !  Indeed  my  obligations  to  you  are  inexpressible,  and 
I  injure  my  feelings  in  trying  to  express  them.  I  have  written  to  Cadell,  so  that  I 
hope  a  few  days’  delay  will  hinder  nothing. 

Pray  see  the  Exc - n  reviewed  in  the  Westminster  Mag  (I  think)  for  August ; 

it  was  done  by  Griffith,  and  is  unquestionably  the  best  paragraph  he  ever  wrote. 

Mr.  Colman  came  over  here  to  dinner  a  few  days  ago — more  of  that  when  we 
meet,  wdiich  I  hope  will  be  soon.  I  write  with  pain,  having  been  let  blood  two  or 
three  times,  but  am  always,  with  great  and  real  gratitude,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  faithful  and  obliged  servant, 

H.  More. 

Will  you  favour  me  with  a  line?  for  indeed  I  want  comfort.  Pespects  to  your 
dear  lady. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  Nov.  1  7th,  1777. 

Many  thanks,  dear  Sir,  for  your  kind  punctuality  in  answering  my  letter;  I  am 
particularly  happy  to  find  that  1  have  anticipated  your  friendly  counsel  by  writing  to 
Mr.  Bate,  and  not  only  acknowledging  my  obligation  to  him,  but  sending  him  all  the 
news  I  could  glean  at  the  time,  which  I  shall  continue,  if  he  approves  my  specimen. 
I  have  set  apart  the  “  Colonel”  and  “  Les  trois  Fermiers,”  which  will  be  sent  with 

your  books,  as  also  the  “  Faucon  :”  I  would  have  sent  him  the  music,  but  alas  ! _ I  hope 

he  will  get  my  letter  safe,  but  it  was  directed  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bate,  Adelphi,  Lon¬ 
don.  Your  books,  which  are  three  volumes  of  “  Siecles  de  la  Litterature”  plainly 
bound  (as  you  desired) ;  four  volumes  of  “  Biblioth^que  d’un  Homme  de  Gout,”  and 
three  numbers  of  “  Journal  du  Theatre,”  together  with  Mrs.  Garrick’s  Papier  Broiiil- 
larcl,  will  all  go  off  from  hence  the  20th  inst.  under  the  care  of  Monsieur  d’Armand, 
a  silk-merchant,  a  very  sober,  good  sort  of  a  young  man,  who  returns  here  in  January, 
and  to  whose  care  you  may  safely  entrust  whatever  you  mean  to  send  to  Madame 
Riccoboni.  By  the  way,  I  do  believe  the  only  acceptable  present  you  could  send 
would  be  Mrs.  Garrick’s  picture  and  yours  for  bracelets,  but  very  plainly  set.  The 
gold  medal  she  does  not  wish  by  any  means ;  all  gold  is  dross  in  her  eyes,  for  she 
has  a  most  princely  soul,  and,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  she  had  much  rather  give  than 
receive. 

You  wonder  that  I  say  nothing  about  Linguet  :  truly  I  did  not  choose  to  dirty 
my  paper  with  his  name  ; — however,  thus  much  I  must  tell  you.  On  Friday  last  I 
was  admitted  to  partake  of  a  little  dinner  at  our  dear  friend  Riccoboni’s,  where 
there  were  no  guests  but  myself.  After  dinner  Madame  Riccoboni,  Mademoiselle 
Bianchetti,  (her  friend,)  and  myself,  drank  an  amazing  bumper  with  this  toast, 


280 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Health  and  happiness  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  confusion  to  Linguet  and  Mrs. 
Brooke ! 

Since  you  have  given  so  fair  an  opening,  I  must  confess  we  are  all  sick  of  that 
human  guinea-pig,  Mr.  Younge,  whose  visits  are  equally  divided  between  sleep  and 
invectives  against  the  English  nation,  to  my  no  small  annoyance : — the  two  ladies  are 
tired  of  him  beyond  all  bearing ! 

But  is  not  this  continual  persecution  against  me  very  extraordinary?  And  after 
all,  “  I  have  scotched  the  snake,  not  killed  it for  another  species  of  persecution  is 
started  up  against  me.  There  is  an  Indian,  Mrs.  Campbell,  here,  whom  I  used  to 
visit  three  years  ago,  but  whose  acquaintance  I  dropped  from  very  good  reasons, 
which  reasons  I  informed  her  of  in  a  letter  written  with  a  pen  dipped  in  gall,  (it  was 
the  last  drop  1  had — prudence  and  adversity  have  since  dried  up  all  the  rest,)  and  since 
the  time  I  have  lost  sight  of  her,  and  indeed  all  thoughts  of  her.  But  some  months 
ago,  it  seems,  she  was  libelled  in  the  newspapers  as  I  am  now ;  and,  not  content  with 
that,  the  author  (or  supposed  author)  sent  the  paragraph  to  her  husband,  at  that  time 
either  in  Scotland  or  in  the  country.  Now,  as  my  evil  genius  is  ever  busy,  the 
husband  (whom  I  do  not  know)  and  the  wife  both  unite  to  fix  on  me  as  the  author; 
both  loudly  assert  to  every  one  that  it  is  so  ;  and  Colonel  Campbell  vows  revenge,  and 
declares  his  intentions  of  insulting  me  wherever  he  meets  me. — But  this  is  not  all. 
1  received  this  intelligence  from  Lady  Berkley,  who,  when  she  had  good-naturedly 
exposed  to  me  the  danger  I  was  in  from  the  Colonel’s  threats,  and  yet  more  good - 
naturedly  hinted  to  me  that  she  really  believed  me  to  be  the  author,  after  some  little 
hesitation  informed  me,  that  there  had  been  an  anonymous  letter  written  to  the 
Vicomtesse  du  Barri,  in  which  she  was  most  scandalously  abused,  and,  to  tell  me  the 
truth,  she  did  not  doubt  that  I  was  the  author!  You  may  imagine  how  I  was  thun¬ 
derstruck  at  such  an  accusation,  and  at  the  quality  assurance  of  the  person  who  chose 
to  visit  me  on  purpose  to  make  me  such  a  compliment.  I  asked  her  how  she  could 
suspect  me  of  such  an  action  ?  Her  answer  was,  “  Why,  you  know,  Mrs.  Pye,  who  can 
I  suspect?”  What  folly  !  what  insolence  !  She  took  me  in  a  moment  when  my  spirits 
were  depressed  by  the  complicated  anxiety  on  the  American  affairs  and  my  own ;  and 
therefore,  instead  of  answering  her  as  I  ought,  I  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears.  She  then 
told  me  that  she  meant  it  out  of  friendship ,  as  I  had  every  thing  to  fear  from  Colonel 
Campbell’s  resentment.  So  fatal  are  newspapers  to  my  tranquillity !  I  have  only 
room  to  desire  my  love  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  am 

Most  gratefully  and  affectionately  yours, 

J.  H.  Pye. 

Pray,  have  you  received  a  letter  which  I  sent  by  a  private  hand  a  fortnight  ago  ? 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


281 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  St.  James’s,  November  19tli,  1777. 

How  very  long  a  time  it  is  since  I  have  either  seen,  written  to,  or  heard  from 
you !  It  was  therefore  the  greater  mortification  when  I  called  yesterday  to  find  you 
were  not  at  home. 

I  left  Winchester  on  the  Sunday,  and  Dr.  Warton,  just  recovered  from  a  dan¬ 
gerous  illness.  I  shall  return  again  to  chapter  business  on  the  23rd.  But  before  I 
go,  I  must  pay  a  visit  to  poor  old  Drury  ;  for  though  my  theatric  life  expired  in 
the  same  moment  with  your  own,  yet,  like  a  ghost,  I  love  now  and  then  to  wander 
over  scenes  that  were  once  so  very  dear  to  me.  And  if  your  box  should  be  disen¬ 
gaged  for  next  Saturday  night,  you  will  do  a  kind  thing  in  letting  me  have  a  proper 
ticket  of  admittance  for  it. 

Pray  did  Davies,  (who  knows  nothing  of  me,  but  whom,  by  the  by,  I  know  to 

be  a  little  bit  of  a  s - 1)  ever  send  you  “  A  Translation  of  the  Sonnets  and  Odes  of 

Petrarch  ?”  Honestly,  how  do  you  like  them  ?  The  “  Basia”  will  be  published  in 
about  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks ;  he  has  orders  to  send  you  that  also.  But  I  lament 
the  loss  of  your  name  to  the  preface.  You  have  convinced  me  it’s  right.  But  it  is 
like  binding  up  a  little  garland,  and  then  robbing  it  of  its  choicest  flower. 

How  have  you  passed  your  summer?  I  hope  without  pain  or  illness.  From 
Brighthelmstone  (where  they  flattered  me  with  the  hopes  of  seeing  you,)  I  went  to 
spend  some  time  at  Lord  George  Lennox’s  at  Stoke.  I  there  often  met  with  a  gen¬ 
tleman,  who  desired  his  particular  remembrances  to  you — Mr.  Smith,  of  Ashlin.  1 
admired  him  as  an  agreeable  companion ;  but  I  went  very  near  to  love  him,  for  his 
striking  resemblance  of  a  person  to  whom  I  owe  many  obligations,  and  who  will 
always  be  most  dear  in  the  esteem  of  His, 

Sam.  Nott. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Dec.  21st,  1777- 

I  received  your  kind  letter  with  great  joy,  for  I  thought  indeed  that  it  was 
almost  an  age  since  I  had  heard  from  you,  though  I  had  heard  of  you  occasion¬ 
ally  by  my  other  friends.  I  am  truly  grieved  that  my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick  has  been 
so  ill.  No  human  creature  can  rejoice  more  at  her  recovery  than  myself,  for  no 
one  better  knows  her  value,  or  more  truly  loves  or  honours  her,  I  mean  except 
yourself. 

You  will  be  so  good,  at  your  entire  leisure,  as  to  put  me  into  a  way  to  recover 
the  right  road  from  which  I  have  strayed  so  far  in  my  fourth  act ;  1  have  blundered 

from  the  path,  and  cannot  get  back  to  it.  Was  it  my  good  Mrs.  G - ’s  remark,  or 

2  o 


VOL.  II. 


282 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


yours,  that  the  ingenious  Twiss  was  the  jack-o-lantern  that  had  led  my  wits  into 
this  hog?  So,  that  entertaining  man  is  returned,  is  he?  I  believe  I  have  done 
with  him  too  ;  for  he  sent  me  a  curious  old  Horace  before  I  left  the  Adelphi,  for 
which  I  did  not  write  to  thank  him,  and  I  have  never  heard  a  word  about  him  since. 
I  have  tried  in  vain  to  get  the  poem  that  was  writ  against  him  in  Ireland.  Was  it 
clever  ? 

Of  all  the  prologues  I  have  seen,  from  the  sober  narratives  of  the  Roman  Terence, 
to  the  sprightly  satires  of  the  British  Roscius,  I  think  that  to  “  Semiramis”  is  the 
dullest.  I  long  to  see  the  epilogue. 

Now,  my  dear  Sir,  1  expect  so  much  candour  and  confidential  friendship  from 
you,  that  I  am  going  to  make  you  judge  even  in  your  own  cause;  but  you  cannot 
do  it  truly  without  supposing  it  to  be  the  cause  of  some  other.  You  must  know 
then,  that  though  I  have  never  given,  or  suffered  to  be  given,  but  two  copies  of  the 
little  “  Ode  to  Dragon,”  yet  I  have  received  within  these  few  days  five  or  six  letters 
from  my  friends  in  town,  earnestly  requesting  to  have  it  published,  for  that  so  many 
people  can  repeat  several  of  the  stanzas  that  I  shall  certainly  have  a  mutilated  copy 
get  into  print.  Now,  my  dear  Sir,  no  King,  minister,  or  bankrupt,  can  be  more  afraid 
of  a  newspaper  than  I  am.  I  am  therefore  almost  come  to  a  resolution  to  publish  it 
myself.  My  friends  are  quite  eager  about  it.  What  I  beg  of  you  is  to  give  me 
your  true  and  real  sentiments  whether  you  think  it  worth  printing,  or  if  you  think  it 
will  discredit  you  or  myself  ?  I  know  it  is  an  awkward  thing  to  ask,  but  I  depend  on 
your  sincerity,  as  you  may  on  my  prudence  to  keep  your  opinion,  &c.  to  myself. 
The  last  stanza  shall  be  omitted  ;  the  conclusion  is  more  perfect  without  it,  and  one 
or  two  others  mended.  If  any  improvement  occurs  to  you  for  any  part  of  it,  you  will 
be  so  good  as  tell  me. 

Your  parcel  of  love  to  this  house  was  received  with  gratitude,  and  is  returned 
with  interest. 

With  my  most  affectionate  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  I  remain,  dear  Sir, 

Your  faithful  and  ever  obliged, 

H.  More. 

I  like  your  stanzas  to  Mr.  Bunbury  much.  The  thought  mighty  pretty,  and  the 
measure  not  common. 


MR.  R.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sunday  evening,  Jan.  4th,  1778. 

Nothing  can  be  kinder  than  your  opinion  so  candidly  given  about  my  epilogue  : 
you  are  perfectly  right  in  your  judgment;  it  is  a  poor  thing,  ill-conceived,  and  I 
thank  you  for  your  rejection.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  much  mended  it  by 
the  inclosed,  as  I  wrote  it  post-haste  directly  upon  reading  your  letter  ;  such  as  it  is, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


283 


I  send  it,  fearing,  however,  that  I  intrude  too  much  upon  your  better  time,  and  pester 
you  with  nonsense  and  bad  verses. 

I  consider  myself  doubly  honoured  to  be  heard  by  such  an  audience  and  read  by 
such  a  master:  I  expect  your  correction  with  impatience,  for  though  your  applause 
would  highly  flatter  me,  your  emendations  would  profit  me  ;  and  in  my  present  situa¬ 
tion,  I  cannot  scruple  which  to  prefer.  We  have  as  yet  had  no  rehearsal,  nor  can  I 
tell  when  we  shall.  Thank  you  for  your  advice ;  I  persuade  myself  I  have  antici¬ 
pated  it,  and  shall  certainly  not  lose  the  battle  for  want  of  temper :  without  some 
prudence  and  patience  1  should  never  have  got  the  ladies  cordially  into  their  business, 
nor  should  I  not  only  have  avoided  a  jar  with  Mr.  Smith,  but  so  far  have  impressed 
him  in  my  favour  as  to  draw  an  offer  from  him  (though  too  late)  of  taking  the  part 
of  Edwin  ;  but  it  was  in  other  hands  ;  and  the  kindness  with  which  these  good 
people  have  engaged  themselves  to  me,  would  make  any  reversal  unpardonable. 

I  am  ever  most  faithfully  yours,  R.  Cumberland. 

No  news  whatever.  Pray  burn  the  copy  of  my  epilogue. 

Lady  George  Germain  is  extremely  ill  and  in  much  danger. 

PROLOGUE  TO  THE  BATTLE  OF  HASTINGS. 

To  Holy  Land  in  Superstition’s  day, 

When  barefoot  pilgrims  trode  their  weary  way, 

By  Mother  Church’s  unremitting  law, 

Scourg’d  into  grace,  with  shoulders  red  and  raw, 

Kneeling  demure  before  the  saintly  shrine, 

On  the  hard  flint  they  begg’d  the  boon  divine — 

Pardon  for  what  offending  flesh  had  done. 

And  pity  for  the  long,  long  course  they ’d  run  ; 

Fines,  pains,  and  penalties,  securely  past, 

Slow-paced  forgiveness  met  their  prayer  at  last  ; 

Full  absolution  from  conceding  Rome, 

Cancell’d  all  sin,  past,  present,  and  to  come. 

Your  poet  thus,  prophanely  led  aside 

To  tread  o’er  tragic  ground  through  paths  untried ; 

To  pick,  perhaps,  with  no  invidious  aim, 

A  few  cast  fallings  from  the  tree  of  Fame ; 

Damn’d,  though  untried,  by  the  despotic  rule 
Of  the  stern  Doctors  in  Detraction’s  school  ; 

Lash’d  down  each  column  of  a  public  page, 

And  driv’n  o’er  burning  plough-shares  to  the  stage  ; 

Be-rhym’d,  be-ridiculed,  with  doggrel  wit, 

Sues  out  a  pardon  from  his  Pope — the  Pit. 

Pensive  he  stands  in  penitential  weeds, 

With  a  huge  rosary  of  untold  beads, 

Sentenc’d  for  past  offences  to  rehearse 
Ave  Apollon  !  to  the  God  of  Verse  ; 

And  sure  there’s  no  one  but  an  author  knows 
The  penance  which  an  author  undergoes. 

2  o  2 


284 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


If  then  your  worships  a  few  stripes  award, 

Don’t  let  your  beadles  lay  them  on  too  hard  ; 

For  in  this  world  there’s  not  a  thing  so  thin, 

So  full  of  feeling,  as  your  poet’s  skin  : 

What  if  perchance  he  snatch’d  a  playful  kiss 
From  that  free-hearted  romp,  the  Comic  M  iss, 
That  frolic’s  past,  he’s  turn’d  to  years  of  grace, 
And  a  young  sinner  now  supplies  his  place  : 

You’ll  not  deny  a  little  sober  chat 
With  the  demure  old  tabby  Tragic  cat. 

This  lady  would  be  known  for  one  of  those 
Who  yet  have  left  some  character  to  lose  ; 

You’ll  see  her  soon,  a  stiff,  starch’d,  stately  wench. 
Who  thinks,  acts,  speaks,  no  syllable  of  French  ; 

No  charge  lies  here  of  conversation  crim. — 

He  hopes  you’ll  think  her  fame  no  worse  for  him. 


MR.  R.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Monday  evening. 

I  beg  you,  my  dear  Sir,  to  receive  and  to  render  ten  thousand  thanks  from  the 
author  of  the  tragedy,  which  has  been  so  highly  honoured.  There  is  both  pleasure 
and  profit  in  your  friendship ;  pleasure  in  your  approbation,  and  profit  in  your  cor¬ 
rection.  I  am  greatly  flattered  by  the  last ;  there  is  nothing  gratifies  like  the  candid 
censures  of  a  real  judge,  and  on  the  score  of  criticism  you  know  I  am  more  indebted 
to  you  than  to  any  man  living.  The  whole  which  you  recommend  is  done :  Ed- 
wina’s  simile  of  the  Tower  (act  the  first)  is  made  very  impassioned ;  the  conclusion 
of  the  fourth  act  was  before  your  criticism  came  to  hand  entirely  reformed,  and  I 
owed  the  correction  to  Miss  Younge’s  protest  against  the  simile  of  the  lightning; 
your  observation  tallying  with  what  I  had  done  was  particularly  pleasing.  In  the 
close  of  the  fifth  act,  out  of  fifty-three  lines  which  followed  after  the  death  of 
Matilda,  twenty-nine  only  remain,  so  that  all  things  are  now  settled,  and,  what  gives 
me  infinite  comfort,  settled  with  your  judgment  on  my  side.  We  are  advertised  for 
next  week,  viz.  Saturday.  Henderson  returns  Saturday  next,  and  we  shall  have 
three  practices  this  week.  I  called  yesterday  on  Mr.  Sheridan  and  quickened  him, 
but  all  in  good  humour  and  perfect  harmony,  having  strictly  followed  your  good 
advice  in  all  particulars.  John  Home  comes  out  on  Saturday,  so  we  escape  a  colli¬ 
sion  ;  which  I  am  very  glad  of  on  all  accounts ;  it  is  not  pleasant  at  my  time  of  life 
to  be  running  races  with  rival  authors,  where  every  thing  is  risked  and  little  can  be 
gained.  How  rejoiced  shall  I  be  when  you  come  to  town.  I  have  this  moment 
received  the  copy  safe  and  sound,  and  I  thank  you  for  the  most  obliging  note. 
What  can  I  say  to  your  fair  and  amiable  audience?  If  their  fine  eyes  have  been 
obscured,  it  is  not  my  doing ;  the  whole  fault  is  yours,  and  if  you  had  recited  “  The 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


Roman  Sacrifice,”  I  believe  you  would  still  have  been  irresistible.  My  women  will 
be  very  good,  and  are  in  high  good-humour  with  their  parts.  I  am  interceding  with 
Mr.  King  to  speak  my  prologue. 

I  have  no  news  for  you  of  a  public  sort :  Lady  George  continues  most  danger¬ 
ously  ill,  and  I  have  little  hopes  of  her  recovery  :  nothing  can  exceed  the  distress  inci¬ 
dent  upon  her  loss ;  her  truth  of  character,  charity,  and  domestic  virtues,  are  almost 
without  parallel ;  but  being  a  latent  character  without  any  brilliancy,  they  are  only 
known  to  those  who  feel  her  merits,  and  live  under  their  influence :  my  time  is  pain¬ 
fully  employed  in  continual  attendance  on  distress. 

Adieu  !  May  Heaven  keep  such  misfortunes  from  you  and  yours. 

I  am,  ever  yours, 

R.  Cumberland. 

My  good  woman  and  the  dear  girls  send  love  and  compliments. 


MR.  R.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Monday  evening,  ten  o’clock. 

I  was  favoured  with  your  letter,  and  hope  you  will  be  under  no  apprehension 
about  the  matter  of  the  epilogue,  having  burnt  your  letter  long  ago,  and  not  endan¬ 
gered  any  misunderstanding  relative  to  what  your  partiality  was  so  kind  to  say  about 
that  trifle.  My  remonstrance  drew  a  very  handsome  letter  from  the  editor,  with 
assurances  of  candour  and  impartiality,  &c.  & c.  and  excuses  for  his  point-blank  charge 
of  plagiarism :  1  have  so  many  just  debts  to  you,  that  I  scorn  to  pick  your  pocket 
besides. 

I  read  the  tragedy  in  the  ears  of  the  performers  on  Friday  morning ;  I  was  highly 
flattered  by  my  audience,  but  your  successor  in  management  is  not  a  representative 
of  your  polite  attention  to  authors  on  such  occasions,  for  he  came  in  yawning  at  the 
fifth  act,  with  no  other  apology  than  having  sate  up  two  nights  running.  It  gave 
me  not  the  least  offence,  as  I  put  it  all  to  habit  of  dissipation  and  indolence ;  but  I 
fear  his  office  will  suffer  for  want  of  due  attention,  and  the  present  drop  upon  the 
theatre  justifies  my  apprehensions.  The  poor  author  of  “The  Roman  Sacrifice”  had 
the  thinnest  house  on  his  third  night  that  perhaps  was  ever  assembled  on  any  exhi¬ 
bition  ;  such  a  spectacle  was  never  seen ;  but  I  believe  Mr.  Sheridan  has  been  very 
generous  to  him,  of  which  he  seems  truly  capable.  In  the  mean  time,  the  author 
seems  to  have  suffered  without  the  pity  of  a  single  soul,  not  being  blest  with  the 
fairest  fame.  Mr.  Smith  made  good  my  apprehensions,  and  refused  taking  any  part 
in  my  tragedy  but  that  of  Edgar.  He  was  disposed  to  take  this  step  with  some 
small  accompaniments  of  asperity,  but  as  I  wished  not  to  give  him  offence,  so  I 
laboured  hard  to  prevent  his  taking  any,  and  we  parted,  as  I  hope,  in  perfect  friend¬ 
ship  and  good  understanding.  Mr.  Bensley  plays  Harold;  Mr.  Palmer,  Edwin;  Mr. 


280 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Brereton,  Waltheof ;  and  Mr.  Aickin,  Northumberland :  Miss  Younge  is  Matilda,  and 
Mrs.  Yates,  Edivina.  So  stand  my  forces. 

I  have  no  news  of  a  public  nature ;  abundance  of  proposals  and  subscriptions  for 
raising  troops.  Lord  Galloway  has  subscribed  to  the  city  purse,  for  recruiting,  the 
sum  of  1000  guineas.  A  great  many  fine  matches  in  the  matrimonial  way.  Lady 
George  Germaine  is  alarmingly  ill  with  the  measles,  caught  by  nursing  her  children. 
The  Duke  of  Dorset  has  got  a  sore  throat  inclining  to  the  putrid  kind,  which  is 
very  epidemic.  I  hope  you  and  your  good  lady,  with  all  the  noble  household  about 
you,  enjoy  health  and  recreation.  I  and  my  women  are  perfectly  well,  God  be 
thanked  !  I  am,  most  affectionately  yours, 

11.  Cumberland. 


MR.  R.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Tuesday  Evening. 

I  have  this  morning,  my  dear  friend,  rehearsed  the  “Battle,”  and  a  brave  battle 
we  made.  Madam  Yates  rehearsed  without  book  her  whole  part ;  all  was  harmony, 
zeal,  and  good  will :  nothing  lagged  or  hobbled  in  the  whole  ;  and  the  new  correc¬ 
tions  (especially  the  finale  to  the  fourth  act)  were  applauded.  The  fifth  act,  which 
was  long,  is  now  very  brilliant,  and  I  am  well  contented  to  take  my  trial.  Saturday 
se’nnight  is  fixed  as  the  latest  day.  “  Alfred”  comes  out  next  Saturday. 

So  much  on  the  side  of  comfort ;  the  reverse  is  very  melancholy,  at  least  on  the 
score  of  friendship.  I  am  just  come  from  Lord  George’s,  where  I  almost  live.  I  fear 
there  are  small  hopes  for  this  excellent  woman,  and  what  his  sufferings  must  be,  I 
can  only  judge  from  what  they  are.  Adieu  !  Pray  present  my  humble  but  earnest 
respects  to  Lady  Spencer. 

R.  Cumberland. 


Endorsed, 

“Mr.  Cumberland’s  letters  to  me  when 


at  Althorp,  in  Dec.  1777,  about 
‘The  Battle  of  Hastings  — a  true 
picture  of  the  man.” 


MR.  T.  WARTON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Trin.  Coll.  Oxon.  Feb.  11th,  1778. 

I  should  have  acknowledged  the  favour  of  your  very  obliging  letter  before, 
but  I  waited  till  the  book  came  to  hand.  It  is  not,  however,  yet  arrived.  I  wished 
to  see  this  Morality ,  and  to  say  something  of  it ;  because  it  places  Shelton  in  a  new 
light,  that  is  a  dramatic  writer,  and  before  the  year  1490.  I  believe  it  is  one  of  the 
earliest  moralities  not  anonymous.  I  once  saw  another  of  Shelton’s  moralities  shown 
me  by  Collins  the  poet,  entirely  unknown  to  the  literary  antiquaries  ;  I  however  lost 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


287 


ail  account  of  it ;  for  at  his  death,  which  happened  soon  after,  his  books  were  dis¬ 
persed.  It  was  called  “  The  Nigromansir”  (Necromancer)  dull  enough,  but  a 
curiosity.  I  am,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  affectionate  and  faithful  servant, 

T.  Wakton. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  ABINGTON. 


MADAM,  Feb.  12  th,  1778. 

I  sincerely  agree  with  Montaigne  that  the  smallest  token  of  sorrow  from  a 
lady  ought  to  melt  the  hardest  heart,  and  bring  it  to  what  state  of  feeling  she  is 
pleased  to  give  it.  If  Mrs.  Abington  has  inadvertently  mentioned  me  as  the  author 
of  the  Characters  in  question,  I  trust  in  her  justice  that  she  will  not  suffer  any  false 
impression  of  me  to  remain  among  her  friends, 

I  am,  Madam,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  HOBART. 

MADAM, 

There  was  too  much  company  on  Sunday  night,  and  you  were  too  well  em¬ 
ployed,  for  me  to  say  all  I  had  to  say  to  you  upon  a  business  of  very  great  conse¬ 
quence  to  me. 

A  friend  of  mine  assured  me,  that  you  were  lately  in  company  with  Mrs. 
Abington,  who  declared  that  I  was  the  author  of  the  application  of  the  words  of 
Shakspeare  to  modern  characters  in  “  The  Morning  Post.”  Though  I  shall  no 
longer  appear  before  the  public,  yet  it  is  incumbent  upon  me  to  show  that  I  am  not 
altogether  unworthy  of  their  favour,  which  I  certainly  should  be,  were  I  guilty  of 
what  that  mischief-making  lady  is  pleased  to  accuse  me. 

I  flatter  myself  that  those  who  know  that  lady  and  me  will  not  give  the  least 
credit  to  so  false  and  malignant  a  suggestion ;  all  I  beg  of  you,  Madam,  is,  that  you 
will  satisfy  me  whether  you  were  in  company  and  heard  Mrs.  Abington  accuse  me 
of  being  the  author  of  the  Characters  from  Shakspeare  in  that  paper. 

Mrs.  Hobart  may  be  assured  that  I  will  not  let  her  name  be  mentioned  in  any 
appeal  I  shall  make ;  and  I  hope  that  she  will  not  refuse  the  request  I  have  made. 

I  am.  Madam,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  D.  GaRKICK. 

“  My  letter  to  Mrs.  Hobart  about 
Madam  Abington’s  slander.” 


288 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DR.  MONSEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Chelsea  College,  Feb.  13th,  1778. 

Between  fifteen  and  twenty  years  ago  I  lent  you  Miss  Carter’s  translation  of 
“  Epictetus”  and  a  “  Macrobius’s  Saturnalia;”  I  should  be  glad  to  have  them  again  ; 
presuming  you  have  done  with  them.  I  also  lent  you  “  ltcmarks  upon  the  Minute 
Philosopher,”  which  are  supposed  to  be  Middleton’s.*  This  I  value  full  as  much  as  I 
do  either  of  the  others,  and  should  be  glad  to  have  it.  If  I  could  have  picked  it 
up  at  an  old  stall,  I  would  not  have  given  you  the  trouble  of  looking  for  it. 

I  was  told  that  you  was  lately  facetious  about  or  upon  me ;  as  I  am  conscious 
I  am  a  good  butt  for  your  wit,  I  am  not  at  all  concerned  about  it,  and  am  rather 
pleased  that  I  can  he  a  matter  of  amusement  to  you  and  your  friends.  I  know  there 
was  no  harm  meant,  and  therefore  there  is  no  room  left  for  any  petulant  concern  about 
it ;  hut  there  is  one  thing  gave  me  pain,  (I  do  not  speak  of  a  late  time,)  and  that  was 
that  I  had  done  you  ill  offices  with  the  Duke  of  Deeds.  Being  fully  conscious  I  had 
not,  it  gave  me  so  much  pain  I  applied  to  his  Grace,  who  said  in  these  words,  or 
very  like  them,  “  Done  Garrick  ill  offices  with  me  !  Dord,  Doctor,  I  dare  say  I  have 
used  you  ill,  for  puffing  him  to  me  perpetually,  and  making  me  believe  there  was  not 
his  fellow  upon  earth.”  This  I  was  told  by  a  very  respectable  man,  and  whom  you 
think  so ;  and  so  the  matter  lies  between  you  and  him,  and  there  let  it  lie.  He  told 
me  himself  that  you  said  so  to  him.  I  never  thought  of  it  more  ;  I  knew  you  had 
wit  and  joke,  but  never  thought  you  dealt  in  malice.  The  first  instance  you  showed 
of  it  to  me  was  in  that  very  unfriendly  and  abusive  letter  you  wrote  me,  and  an 
anonymous  one  too,  upon  a  d — d  confounded  lie  told  you  upon,  I  thought,  a  very 
pardonable  freedom  :  however,  these  matters  are  all  over  and  done  with,  and  when 
you  are  at  leisure,  look  out  for  a  man  who  has  a  greater  respect  and  esteem  for  you 
than  I  had.  Indeed  I  can  say  with  very  great  sincerity  and  love,  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  humble  servant, 

M.  Monsey. 


DR.  MONSEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Chelsea  College,  Feb.  1778. 

I  had  yours  of - ,  (I  was  going  to  name  the  date,  and  there  is  none,)  with  these 

three  tickets  enclosed,  which  I  suppose  was  done  by  mistake,  so  I  send  them  back 
again. 

As  to  the  “  Epictetus,”  it  not  being  my  own,  I  shall  be  glad  to  have  it  in  my 
power  to  restore  it.  If  I  gave  you  the  “  Macrobius,”  pray  keep  it,  that  I  may  do  by 
you  what  to  the  best  of  my  memory  you  never  did  by  me  for  any  favour  shown  to  you. 

As  to  the  matter  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds,  I  have  done  with  it  after  what  I  have 

*  I  suppose  Berkley’s  “  Alciphron,”  the  delusion  in  metaphysics,  which  can  neither  be  credited,  nor 
dispelled. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


289 


said  in  my  last.  The  gentleman  who  told  it  me  spoke  of  it  the  next  day,  or  a  very 
few  days  after  ;  whether  he  mistook  you,  or  I  him,  I  neither  know  nor  care.  I  shall  say 
nothing,  but  I  have  my  own  thoughts.  You  affirm  you  have  no  malice  in  your  consti¬ 
tution,  but  in  a  world  so  tainted  with  it  as  this  is,  a  very  cautious  man  may  have  a 
little  stick  to  him  in  spite  of  his  care.  I  think  I  have  seen  the  shadow  of  it  in  you, 
but  whether  you  have  a  load  of  the  substance  in  you  I  know  not ;  and  care  very 
little,  since  I  am  now  in  all  probability  removed  far  from  any  severe  or  very  injurious 
stroke  of  it. 

The  title  of  the  pamphlet  is  “  Remarks  upon  the  Minute  Philosopher.” 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  M.  MONSEY. 

“  Two  of  Monsey’s  foolish  lying  notes, 
and  my  answer.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  MONSEY. 

DEAR  DOCTOR,  February,  1778. 

Let  your  warmest  friend  read  our  two  notes,  and  pronounce  which  heart  has  the 
most  malice  in  it.  Indeed  you  are  grown  very  peevish,  and  some  of  your  college 
friends  say  as  much.  I  have  sent  two  of  your  books,  and  I  will  get  the  third,  if  there 
is  one  to  be  got  in  the  three  kingdoms. 

You  are  in  the  right  to  drop  your  intelligence  about  the  Duke  of  Leeds ;  but 
you  had  been  more  right  not  to  have  mentioned  at  all  such  a  silly  improbable  busi¬ 
ness.  You  are  pleased  to  say  that  I  never  gave  you  any  thing  for  any  favour  shown 
to  me.  Your  favourite  Horace,  and  all  the  best  writers  say,  that  friendship  can  inter¬ 
change  no  gifts  but  those  of  the  heart ;  however,  let  us  pleasantly  reconsider  this  charge 
— you  as  a  physician,  and  I  as  a  manager  of  a  theatre,  who  dealt  in  tragedy,  comedy, 
and  farce — you  had  always  free  egress  and  regress  into  my  shop,  and  why  should  not 
I  have  a  peep  into  yours  ?  Our  drugs  indeed  worked  in  different  ways,  but  I  hope 
and  believe  that  mine  were  as  wholesome  and  salutary  as  yours.  However,  if  you 
find  that  any  balance  is  due  to  you  for  particular  favours,  I  am  ready  to  discharge  it, 
notwithstanding  Hudibras’s  axiom  : 

“  When  friends  begin  to  take  account, 

The  devil  with  such  friends  may  mount.” 

Yours,  my  dear  Doctor,  most  obediently, 

D.  G. 


MR.  H.  STANLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Privy  Garden,  February  15th,  1778. 

According  to  the  permission  you  were  pleased  to  give  me,  I  send  you  the  Odes 
of  Pindar,  and  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  in  perusing  them  you  will  mark  any 
VOL.  II.  2  p 


290 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


place  that  you  think  wants  correction,  or  any  amendment  that  occurs  to  you,  on  a 
separate  piece  of  paper.  I  can  very  sincerely  assure  you  that  there  are  very  few 
persons  whose  criticisms  or  emendations  I  shall  think  so  likely  to  improve  that  work  ; 
1  need  not  remind  you  of  our  conversation  with  regard  to  Mr.  Mason,  which  I  think 
was  so  entirely  understood  between  us.  I  am  with  the  highest  esteem  and  regard. 

Dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  H.  STANLEY. 

“  Mr.  Stanley  about  Pindar." 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  February  21st,  1778. 

Your  letter,  my  dear  Sir,  contains  great  good  tidings,  since  it  informs  me  that 
you  laugh  and  grow  fat;  I,  on  the  contrary,  cry  and  grow  fat ;  the  reason  of  each  I 
take  to  be  obvious — I  am  almost  sick  of  the  difficulties  which  render  life  one  conti¬ 
nual  struggle :  and  were  I  to  adopt  the  heathen  mythology,  I  might  at  least  bid  de¬ 
fiance  to  the  torments  of  Sisyphus  in  the  other  world,  after  having  so  long  past  my 
time  in  rolling  a  stone  up  hill  in  this.  Madame  Riccoboni,  who  is  at  once  my  con¬ 
fidante  and  my  consolation,  calls  me  nothing  but  “  Le  chien  brisquet  qui  alia  au  bois 
pour  manger  le  loup,  et  le  loup  le  mangea.”  But  enough  of  this  tedious  tale.  I  con¬ 
gratulate  you  on  the  approaching  marriage  of  your  nephew  :  if  he  is  not  altered  since 
I  saw  him,  he  is  one  of  the  prettiest  young  fellows  in  England ;  but  you  may  tell 
him  from  me,  that  if  he  slays  his  thousands,  there  is  another  David  who  has  slain  his 
ten  thousands,  of  which  I  (one  of  the  slain)  can  bear  witness.  May  his  partner  be 
like  yours,  and  may  he  make  you  his  model,  and  I  cannot  wish  greater  happiness  to 
either;  but,  to  crown  the  whole,  may  you  live  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  union  your 
generosity  has  contributed  to  bless,  and  to  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  a  numerous  and 
prosperous  family. 

I  am  in  a  dreadful  rage  with  Mr.  Eltoft  for  not  delivering  the  books,  Sec.  but 
imagine  he  is  not  yet  got  to  England ;  he  has  taken  some  religious  freak  by  the  way, 
and  is  retired  to  some  Chartreuse  or  other  to  pass  a  few  months.  I  am  affronted  that 
you  say  nothing  about  the  translation  of  Gibbon’s  work.  Are  you  very  sorry  for 
Le  Rain’s  death  ?  I  own  I  am  not ;  for,  according  to  my  poor  opinion,  he  was  in 
Quin's  style,  but  much  more  disagreeable ;  it  would  be  sacrilege  to  say  as  much  here. 
The  only  subject  of  conversation  is  Voltaire ;  all  Paris  goes  to  see  him,  except  me,  I 
should  say  ;  but  the  old  saying  that  one  fool  makes  many,  has  hitherto  kept  me  away  ; 
however,  when  the  crowd  is  over,  I  shall  perhaps  venture.  Dr.  Franklin  has  been  to 
see  him,  and  Voltaire  told  him  he  was  sorry  he  was  not  young  enough  to  be  an  In¬ 
surgent.  I  dare  say  his  will  would  be  good,  though  I  should  a  little  doubt  his  cou¬ 
rage.  Mademoiselle  Clairon  has  also  been,  and  on  entering  the  room  threwr  herself 
at  his  feet ;  he  raised  her,  and  said,  “  Ah,  fa,  asseyez-vous,  et  parlons  raisonnablement.” 
He  works  all  night  at  his  tragedy  of  “  Irene,”  which  will  be  given  very  soon.  Those 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


291 


who  admire  him  most  are  sorry  for  it ;  it  is  the  weakness  of  great  geniuses  never  to 
know  when  to  stop  ;  there  never  was  but  one  great  man  who  had  judgment  and  for¬ 
titude  to  stop  short  in  the  full  career  of  applause,  and  before  even  envy  or  ill-nature 
could  say  that  he  declined.  Perhaps  you  do  not  know  the  person,  but  Mrs.  Garrick 
does,  and  indeed  all  England.  I  am  glad  Pye’s  letters  arrived  safe ;  he  expresses 
himself  indeed  most  warmly  on  the  subject  to  me ;  I  assure  you,  notwithstanding  all 
my  fears  on  his  account,  I  am  happy  that  he  has  hitherto  conducted  himself  very 
properly  ;  I  was  particularly  pleased  with  his  joining  the  regiment  after  a  severe  ill¬ 
ness,  at  the  peril  of  his  life,  in  the  boat  that  carried  provisions  through  the  midst  of 
the  enemy’s  fleet,  with  the  oars  muffled.  He  tells  me  General  Matthews  gave  him 
a  gentle  reproof  for  his  rashness,  which  amounted  to  a  compliment :  for  my  part,  I 
could  not  help  exclaiming  with  Cato,  “  Thanks  to  the  Gods !  my  boy  has  done  his 
dutv.” 

I  delivered  your  loves  and  compliments  to  the  Rue  Poissoniere,  and  return  you 
the  like  with  equal  warmth ;  accept  mine  also,  which  will  ever  attend  dear  Mrs 
Garrick  and  you,  whilst  I  remain  (which  is  to  say,  as  long  as  I  live,) 

Your  affectionate 

J.  H.  Pye. 

I  am  not  surprised  at  the  fall  of  Henderson.*  I  never  thought  he  wrould  prove 
[a  Hero.] 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MESSRS.  LACY,  FORD,  SHERIDAN,  AND  LINLEY. 


GENTLEMEN,  Adelphi,  March  16th,  1778. 

Mr.  Bateman,  of  Maiden-lane,  sent  to  Mr.  Wallis  of  Norfolk-street,  the  14th  of 
November  last,  to  desire  an  account  of  Mr.  Lacy’s  mortgage  to  me,  as  he,  Mr. 
Bateman,  had  authority  to  pay  Mr.  Lacy’s  debts.  Mr.  Wallis  complied  with  his 
desire ;  but  I  have  not  yet  had  notice  when  I  was  to  receive  my  money.  I  must 
therefore  desire  you,  gentlemen,  as  you  are  all  parties  concerned,  to  take  care  that 
Mr.  Bateman's  notice  to  my  solicitor  may  be  complied  with  on  your  part,  as  I  am 
ready  to  comply  with  it  on  mine. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  My  letter  of  the  16th  of  March,  1778,  to  Messrs. 
Lacy,  Ford,  Sheridan  and  Linley.” 


*  The  “  fall”  of  Henderson,  indeed  !  Such  an  actor  as  Smith  would  have  looked  more  of  a  stage  hero  ; 
but  the  play  was  extremely  weak  and  uninteresting, — Cumberland’s  “  Battle  of  Hastings  brought  out  on  the 
24th  of  January.  Even  Mrs.  Pye  thought  she  should  gratify  Garrick,  by  this  silly  persecution  of  a  very  able 
man  ;  indeed,  the  ablest  in  Mr.  Garrick’s  own  school. — Ed. 


2  p  2 


292 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  W.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Queen-street,  Thursday,  1778. 

A  letter  from  you  was  loft  at  the  treasury,  addressed  to  the  proprietors  of  the 
theatre,  on  the  subject  of  your  mortgage,  informing  them  Mr.  Bateman,  of  Maiden- 
lane,  sent  to  Mr.  Wallis,  of  Norfolk-street,  to  desire  an  account  of  Mr.  Lacy’s  mort¬ 
gage  to  you,  as  he  had  authority  to  pay  Mr.  Lacy’s  debts.  Give  me  leave,  Sir,  to 
observe  that  matter  was  fully  explained  to  you  when  we  met  at  your  solicitor’s  in 
Norfolk-street,  and  at  other  times  by  Mr.  Bateman  to  Mr.  Wallis.  As  I  had  not 
found  any  hidden  treasure,  or  had  any  large  fortune  lately  bequeathed  to  me,  I  could 
not  give  an  order  (wwcalled  on)  to  discharge  such  a  sum  as  two  and  twenty  thousand 
pounds  ;  seven  of  that  sum  I  had  made  an  effort  to  pay  you  off,  but  it  failed  of 
success.  You  told  me  at  Mr.  Wallis’s  that  you  imagined  I  should  have  paid  you 
from  the  sale  of  my  estates.  You  must  have  been  sensible,  from  an  account  you 
have  often  had  of  my  affairs,  that  the  sale  of  these  estates  would  but  a  very  little 
above  discharge  the  incumbrances  on  them.  The  further  loan  I  mentioned  to  you, 
and  which  I  explained  to  you  was  the  reason  of  Mr.  Bateman’s  sending  to  Mr. 
Wallis,  was  to  get  rid  of  that  judgment  given  to  Mr.  Frederick  on  account  of  a  debt 
of  my  father’s,  and  to  adjust  some  addition  to  my  debt,  which  had  unavoidably 
encreased,  from  my  receiving  last  season  from  the  treasury  but  five  hundred  pounds, 
and  being  obliged  this  season  to  support  myself  on  money  entirely  advanced,  the 
profits  of  the  theatre  being  appropriated  to  the  management  of  your  interest-money, 
and  to  a  discharge  of  six  thousand  pounds,  a  debt  on  the  theatre.  If  any  fears  for 
the  safety  of  your  money  had  arose  on  the  idea  of  a  third  theatre ,  1  should  have  sup¬ 
posed  that  Mr.  Garrick  woidd  rather  have  taken  measures  for  the  security  and  sup¬ 
port  of  that  theatre  my  father  and  he  had  been  so  long  connected  in,  than  have 
endeavoured  to  distress  me  by  calling  at  this  critical  juncture  for  the  repayment  of 
his  money.  But  I  beg  leave  to  declare  that,  as  no  unkind  treatment  shall  ruffle 
my  temper,  or  make  me  decide  uncandidly,  on  the  proposals  I  now  wait  for — on 
the  other  hand  no  distress,  no  oppression,  shall  force  me  to  consent  to  what  I  could 
not  otherwise  acquiesce  in. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  all  due  respect,  your  very  humble  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 


MR.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Street,  March  21st,  1778. 

As  I  thought  the  idea  you  had  taken  up  of  my  having  intended  to  give  you 
notice  of  the  payment  of  your  money  had  been  fully  explained  to  the  contrary,  I 
could  not  suppose,  from  the  tenor  of  your  letter,  but  that  you  were  desirous  it  should 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


293 


not  be  so ;  and  the  formal,  and,  I  thought,  unkind  manner  of  your  apprizing  me  of  it, 
hurt  me  beyond  expression,  which  I  hope  will  apologize  for  any  hasty  or  improper 
manner  I  might,  in  that  state  of  mind,  address  you.  I  am  fully  sensible  how  much 
I  am  obliged  to  you  for  the  loan  of  so  considerable  a  sum  on  my  property,  nor  shall 
I  ever  seek  for  that  assistance  from  any  other  friend  while  you  continue  satisfied  with 
the  security,  and  are  kind  enough  to  honour  me  with  your  friendship. 

I  remain,  dear  Sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obliged  and  very  humble  servant 

W.  Lacy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LACY. 

SIR.  Sunday,  Wimbleton,  March  22nd,  1778. 

Your  answer  to  my  brother  to  my  message  was  very  unsatisfactory,  and  has 
more  convinced  me  that  the  trouble  you  have  given  me  has  been  very  ill  returned  : 
as  my  transactions  and  my  conduct  are  more  particularly  known  to  your  relation, 
Mr.  Sainsbury,  I  must  desire  you  will  appoint  him  to  meet  us  at  Mr.  Wallis’s, 
when  I  shall  make  him  a  judge  of  this  matter,  and  not  those  persons  who  have 
instigated  you  to  wrrite  me  an  unkind,  unjustifiable,  and,  let  me  add,  an  ungrateful 
letter.  I  shall  be  ready  to  meet  Mr.  Sainsbury  at  Mr.  Wallis’s  any  time  to-morrow, 
or  the  next  day,  between  the  hours  of  eleven  and  two. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  must  desire  you  to  appoint  Mr.  Sainsbury  as  soon  as  possible,  that  I  may 
appoint  Mr.  Wallis. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LACY. 

(THE  ABOVE  LETTER  WAS  INCLOSED  IN  THIS.) 

SIR, 

If  you  had  been  pleased  to  have  written  your  last  letter  without  the  first,  there 
would  have  been  no  occasion  for  the  enclosed,  which  I  had  written  at  Lord  Spencer’s 
before  your’s  arrived ;  however,  there  are  such  particular  circumstances  in  your  first 
letter,  that  I  must  again  repeat  my  desire  of  your  appointing  a  meeting  at  Mr. 
Wallis’s  with  your  friend  and  relation,  Mr.  Sainsbury.  I  will  then  open  my  heart 
to  you,  as  I  hope  you  will  explain  something  very  mysteriously  marked  in  yours, 
which  indeed  you  have  promised  by  my  brother.  If,  after  some  particular  proofs  of 
my  regard  to  you,  I  am  to  be  suspected  of  partiality  against  you,  it  would  be  much 
better  that  our  correspondence  should  end.  I  am,  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 


294 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Queen-street,  Sunday  Afternoon. 

Mr.  Lacy’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick,  he  will  go  this  evening  to  Mr.  Sains- 
bury’s  to  know  if  he  is  able  to  meet  Mr.  Garrick  either  of  those  days  he  has  ap¬ 
pointed,  and  will  let  him  know  this  evening. 


MR.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  Sunday  Night,  11  o’clock. 

I  could  not  see  Mr.  Sainsbury  till  very  late  this  evening.  He  is  engaged  to¬ 
morrow,  but  will  meet  you  at  Mr.  Wallis’s  at  twelve  o’clock  on  Tuesday  with,  dear 
Sir,  Your  very  humble  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 


MR.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Queen-street,  Wednesday  Morning. 

I  had  something  very  particular  to  have  disclosed  to  you  when  I  so  abruptly 
called  last  night.  But  perhaps  it  is  better  as  it  is.  I  now  sit  down  to  inform  you 
that  I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  your  kind  letter,  and  am,  dear  Sir,  with  all 
respect,  Your  obedient  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LACY. 

[The  last  of  the  Correspondence. — A  note  after  we  had  met  at  Mr.  Wallis’s.] 

March  24th,  1778. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Lacy  ;  in  the  hurry  and  warmth  of  their 
conversation  to-day  at  Mr.  Wallis’s,  he  was  pleased  to  say  that  he  never  had  any 
thoughts  of  taking  the  mortgage  out  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  hands,  though  he  had  it  in  his 
power,  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  favour  to  continue  it.  Mr.  Garrick,  in  answer  to  that, 
begs  that  if  he  should  have  such  an  offer  again,  that  he  would  accept  it,  as  it  would 
greatly  oblige  Mr.  Garrick  to  be  paid  off.  On  the  other  hand,  that  Mr.  Lacy  may 
not  be  distressed  or  oppressed ,  Mr.  Garrick  will  suspend  the  notice  of  calling  in  the 
money  till  Mr.  Lacy  shall  have  settled  his  matters  with  his  partners. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  correspondence  with  Mr.  Lacy  about 
the  Mortgage,  in  March,  1778.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


295 


MRS.  CLIVE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Twickenham,  March  22nd,  1778. 

There  is  no  such  being  now  in  the  world  as  Pivy ;  she  has  been  killed  by  the 
cruelty  of  the  Garrick ;  but  the  Clive  (thank  God)  is  still  alive,  and  alive  like  to  be, 
and  did  intend  to  call  you  to  a  severe  account  for  your  wicked  behaviour  to  her ; 
but,  having  been  told  of  your  good  deeds  and  great  achievements,  I  concluded  you 
was  in  too  much  conceit  with  yourself  to  listen  to  my  complaints  ;  and  would  pay 
no  more  regard  to  my  remonstrances  than  the  King  does  to  my  Lord  Mayor’s,  and 
therefore  the  best  thing  I  could  do  would  be  to  change  my  anger  into  compliment  and 
congratulations.  I  must  needs  say  I  admire  you  (with  rest  of  the  world)  for  your  good¬ 
ness  to  Miss  More  ;  the  protection  you  gave  her  play,  I  dare  say,  she  was  sensible  was 
of  the  greatest  service  to  her  ;  she  was  sure  every  thing  you  touched  would  turn  into 
gold ;  and  though  she  had  great  merit  in  the  writing,  still  your  affection  for  tragedy 
children  was  a  very  great  happiness  to  her,  for  you  dandled  it,  and  fondled  it,  and 
then  carried  it  in  your  own  arms  to  the  town  to  nurse ;  who  behaved  so  kindly  to  it, 
that  it  run  alone  in  the  month.  Poor  Mr. — what’s  his  name — Mr.  Mountgomery  ! 
So  Cumberland's,  I  hear,  did  not  meet  with  such  good  fortune,  for  it  died  with  the 
Rickets. 

I  must  now  mention  the  noblest  action  of  your  life,  your  generosity  to  nephew 
David  ;  all  the  world  is  repeating  your  praises ;  those  people  who  always  envied 
you,  and  wished  to  detract  from  you,  always  declaring  you  loved  money  too  much 
ever  to  part  from  it,  now  they  will  feel  foolish  and  look  contemptible  ;  all  that  I  can 
sav  is,  I  wish  that  Heaven  had  made  me  such  an  uncle. 

I  know  the  young  lady,  am  acquainted  with  her ;  she  is  extremely  agreeable, 
with  a  temper  as  sweet  as  her  voice,  and  she  sings  like  an  angel. 

I  hope  my  dear  Mrs.  Garrick  is  perfectly  well ;  happy  she  must  ever  be  ;  she  has 
a  disposition  which  will  make  her  so  in  all  situations  ;  you  and  I,  you  know,  can  alter 
our  tempers  with  the  weathercock.  We  are  all  here  at  present  but  queer ;  1  have 
had  a  violent  cold  and  a  little  fever ;  Mr.  Mastwin  is  not  sick  (but  sorry) ;  your 
Jemsey  is  neither  one  thing  nor  the  other — always  dreaming  of  Garrick  and  the  opera. 

Everybody  is  raving  against  Mr.  Sheridan  for  his  supineness  ;  there  never  was  in 
nature  such  a  contrast  as  Garrick  and  Sheridan  :  what,  have  you  given  him  up  that  he 
creeps  so  ?*  The  country  is  very  dull ;  we  have  not  twenty  people  in  the  village,  but 
still  it  is  better  than  London.  Let  me  see  you — let  me  hear  from  you,  and  tell  me  all 
the  news  you  can  rap  and  rend  to  divert  your  ever 

Affectionate  and  forgiving, 

C.  Clive. 

Our  brother  and  sister  join  in  compliments  to  your  lady  and  self. 

*  Alas  !  yes  ;  and  the  supineness  became  habitual. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


29() 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  CLIVE. 


MY  DEAR  PIVY,  Hampton,  Friday  Morning. 

H  ad  not  the  nasty  bile,  which  so  often  confines  me,  and  has  heretofore  tormented 
you,  kept  me  at  home,  I  should  have  been  at  your  feet  three  days  ago.  If  your 
heart  (somewhat  combustible  like  my  own)  has  played  off  all  the  squibs  and  rockets 
which  lately  occasioned  a  little  cracking  and  bouncing  about  me,  and  can  receive 
again  the  more  gentle  and  pleasing  firework  of  love  and  friendship,  I  will  be  with 
you  at  six  this  evening  to  revive,  by  the  help  of  those  spirits  in  your  tea-kettle  lamp, 
that  flame  which  was  almost  blown  out  by  the  flouncing  of  your  petticoat  when  my 
name  was  mentioned. 

“  Tea  is  a  sovereign  balm  for  wounded  love.” 

Will  you  permit  me  to  try  the  poet’s  recipe  this  evening?  Can  my  Pivy  know 
so  little  of  me  to  think  that  I  prefer  the  clack  of  Lords  and  Ladies  to  the  enjoyment 
of  humour  and  genius?  I  reverence  most  sincerely  your  friend  and  neighbour,  not 
because  he  is  the  son  of  one  of  the  first  of  first  ministers,  but  because  he  is  himself 
one  of  the  first  ministers  of  literature.*  In  short,  your  misconception  about  that  fatal 
champatra  (the  devil  take  the  word  !)  has  made  me  so  cross  about  every  thing  that 
belongs  to  it,  that  I  curse  all  squibs,  crackers,  rockets,  air-balloons,  mines,  serpents, 
and  Catherine-wheels,  and  can  think  of  nothing  and  wish  for  nothing  but  laugh,  gig, 
humour,  fun,  pun,  conundrum,  carriwitchet,  and  Catherine  Clive! 

I  am  ever,  my  Pivy’s  most  constant  and  loving,  &c. 

D.  Garijick. 

My  wife  sends  her  love,  and  will  attend  the  ceremony  this  evening. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  March  23rd,  1778. 

Once  more  I  take  the  opportunity,  my  dear  Sir,  of  sending  some  papier  brouil- 
lard  to  Mrs.  Garrick,  which  my  son  will  have  the  honour  of  presenting  to  her.  I 
beg  leave  to  recommend  him  to  your  notice  ;  I  think  the  sight  of  him  must  give  you 
pleasure,  as  it  will  recall  to  your  mind  an  act  of  generosity,  and  as  I  have  the  vanity 
to  flatter  myself  it  will  recall  also  the  remembrance  of  a  friend  who  is  most  gratefully 
and  sincerely  attached  to  you. 

I  wish  I  had  any  news  to  send,  but  public  events  you  know  as  well  or  better  than 
I,  nor  are  they  of  a  nature  pleasing  enough  to  talk  about ;  and  as  to  private  events, 
they  are,  as  far  as  relates  to  myself,  too  disagreeable  also  to  trouble  my  friends  with. 
I  flatter  myself  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  let  me  hear  from  you,  whilst  yet  the 
communication  remains  open,  after  which  our  letters  must  travel  by  the  wTay  of  Hol- 

*  Horace  Walpole. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


297 


land.  You  will  easily  imagine  my  anxiety  about  my  husband.  God  knows  what 
distress  he  will  suffer,  or  what  will  be  his  fate  ! — Oh,  England,  England  !  how  are  thy 
glories  fallen  !  This  war  destroys  every  glimmering  hope  that  was  left  me  of  seeing 
better  days,  and  a  conflict  between  the  country  that  gave  me  birth,  and  that  which 
gives  me  an  asylum,  affects  me  nearly  ;  I  love  them  both,  though  I  must  own  I  prefer 
this.  My  dear  Madame  Riccoboni,  and  her  most  amiable  friend,  both  desire  to  be 
kindly  remembered  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  you.  I  have  only  to  add,  that  no  time, 
absence,  or  events,  can  lessen  that  grateful  sense  of  your  favours,  and  that  tender 
attachment  with  which  I  am,  and  ever  shall  remain, 

My  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate  and  obliged  friend  and  servant, 

J.  Hex.  Pye. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  R.  BERENGER. 

DEAR  BERENGER,  March  29th,  1 778. 

I  did  not  hear  till  last  night,  and  1  heard  it  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  that  your 
friends  have  generously  contributed  to  your  and  their  own  happiness.  No  one  can 
more  rejoice  at  this  circumstance  than  I  do ;  and  as  I  hope  wre  shall  have  a  bonfire 
upon  the  occasion,  I  beg  that  you  will  light  it  with  the  inclosed.* 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  most  truly  yours, 
Endorsed  by  Garrick,  E).  GaRRICK. 

“  March  29th,  1778.  Letter  sent  to  Berenger 
with  his  bond  for  280/.  10s.” 

[Written  by  Garrick  on  the  second  page  of  this  copy.  “  March  29th,  1778,  with  the  letter  on  the 
other  side  I  inclosed  his  bond  for  two  hundred  and  eighty  pounds  ten  shillings,  which  bore  date  the  fourth 
of  February,  the  2nd  year  of  the  reign  of  George  the  Third,  1762. — D.  G.”] 


MR.  R.  BERENGER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

March  29th,  1778. 

Though  I  never  can  be  surprised  at  any  mark  of  your  compassion  and  genero¬ 
sity  to  me,  yet,  my  dearest  Sir,  I  was  so  struck  when  I  opened  your  letter,  that 
for  awhile  I  could  only  thank  you  with  my  tears.  What  honour  do  I  not  receive 
in  receiving  such  a  mark  of  your  approbation  and  friendship  ?  which,  together  with 
the  bounty  of  my  other  friends,  will  be  the  boast  and  pride  of  my  future,  happier  life. 
My  heart  is  too  full  to  allow  me  to  say  more  than  that  I  still  owe,  and  must  ever  owe, 

*  Davies  has  very  idly  encreased  this  obligation  to  a  note  for  500/.  a  very  different  matter.  The  penal 
sum  of  a  bond  is  twice  the  amount  lent.  140/.  with  the  interest,  which  might  have  been  unpaid  during  the 
sixteen  years  of  its  loan,  was  still  a  considerable  benevolence, — but  not  extraordinary,  in  Mr.  Garrick’s 
friendships.  The  Duke  of  Northumberland  used  Garrick’s  expression,  when  he  returned  the  bond  of 
Kemble. — Ed. 

2  Q 


VOL.  II. 


298 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


the  debt  which  your  bounty  has  cancelled ;  for  nothing  shall  ever  cancel  the  re¬ 
membrance  of  your  kindness,  nor  my  respect,  affection,  and  gratitude  to  you,  my 
honoured  friend  and  benefactor. 

R.  Berenger. 


MR.  J.  REED  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  April  2nd,  1778. 

Had  you  a  connection  with  me  sufficient  to  form  a  perfect  judgment  of  my  real 
temper,  I  should  not  entertain  the  least  doubt  of  your  readily  acquitting  me  of  imper¬ 
tinent  impropriety  for  venturing  an  address  for  pecuniary  favours,  as  you  would  be 
easily  convinced  I  would  much  rather  confer  a  hundred  than  ask  one,  and  even  not 
that  without  great  reluctance,  and  most  important  and  absolute  necessity.  But  being 
almost  an  entire  stranger  to  you,  and  as  I  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  slender  know¬ 
ledge  which  you  incidentally  had  of  me  some  years  since  is  still  in  your  memory,  I 
can  assure  you  that  after  being  not  a  little  distressed  for  some  time,  respecting  excuses 
in  any  degree  self-satisfactory,  I  could  not  presume  this  freedom  till  the  result  of 
several  mental,  sharp,  and  doubtful  conflicts  determined  in  favour  of  self-preservation, 
the  first  law  of  Nature,  that  superior  impulse  which  you  are  too  perfect  a  judge  of  to 
need  my  enlargement  on.  This  sacred  injunction,  a  short  detail  of  the  calamitous 
situation  which  I  have,  by  unforeseen  and  unsuspected  accidents,  been  suddenly 
plunged  into,  and  the  enclosed  memento  of  my  person,  ever  a  true  and  warm  lover, 
friend,  and  admirer  of  the  Muses,  without  the  vanity  of  assuming  the  appellation  of  a 
son,  I  flatter  myself  may  plead  such  apologies  in  my  favour,  in  the  mind  of  a  gentle¬ 
man  of  your  delicacy,  penetration,  and  candour,  as  may  obtain  a  pardon  for  the  in¬ 
truding  trouble,  if  not  attended  with  essential  success.  Permit  me,  therefore,  to 
acquaint  you,  that  having  contracted  an  intimacy  with  two  gentlemen  of  reputed 
very  considerable  fortunes  in  estates  and  other  property,  transacted  several  affairs  of 
consequence,  received  and  paid  large  sums  of  money  for  them  for  several  years  past, — 
about  nine  months  since,  acquainting  me  of  their  shortness  of  cash  through  unex¬ 
pected  disappointments,  and  requesting  me  to  raise  them  some,  I  procured  them  about 
100/.  on  their  promissory  notes  and  my  indorsement ;  which  I  readily  assented  to 
oblige  them  in,  without  the  least  scruple  or  apprehension  of  risk  in  respect  of  due  dis¬ 
charge.  But  I  happened  very  unfortunately  to  be  mistaken,  to  my  great  trouble, 
surprise,  and  detriment ;  for  near  a  month  since  I  was  very  unexpectedly  arrested  on 
one  of  those  notes  of  25/.  in  the  promiser’s  absence,  in  consequence  of  his  not  paying 
it,  and  am  still  in  custody  of  the  sheriff’s  officer,  though  daily  expected  the  affair  to 
be  settled,  either  by  his  or  some  of  my  professed  friends  or  my  debtors.  I  have  been 
twenty  years  in  London,  in  or  near  the  very  same  neighbourhood  ;  sustained  many 
injuries  and  losses,  by  humane  and  generous  services  to  others  ;  my  bodily  frame  very 
tender,  yet  by  continual  frugality  and  industry  lived  the  whole  time  in  good  esteem 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


299 


and  unembarrassed.  But  this  disaster  rushed  on  me  like  a  sudden  clap  of  thun¬ 
der  and  a  whirlwind,  at  the  worst  time  that  it  could  have  happened,  when  quite 
unprovided  with  necessary  aids,  being  then  rendered  very  short  of  money  by  expen¬ 
sive  illnesses,  and  a  total  obstruction  to  business  for  near  seven  months.  The  heavy 
charges,  unavoidably  arising  from  the  arrest,  and  the  want  of  the  benefit  of  the  air  in 
my  infirm  and  sickly  state  of  health,  advance  of  years,  and  consequent  languors  and 
oppressions  of  mind,  render  my  complicated  afflictions  great  beyond  description,  such 
as  I  think  would  be  even  difficult  to  bear,  was  I  animated  with  the  patience  and 
piety  of  Job,  the  philosophy  and  magnanimity  of  Cato.  I  knew  much  of  the  world 
before,  and  often  felt  the  smart  of  its  fallacies  and  ingratitude,  but  never  saw  so  true 
a  picture  of  the  base  and  cruel  desertions  and  deceptions  of  mankind  exemplified  at 
full  length,  as  since  my  late  adversities.  For  some  persons,  whom  I  had  all  the  reason 
imaginable  to  depend  on  as  sure  and  firm  friends  in  respect  of  long  intimacy  and 
essential  services  done  them,  would  scarcely  vouchsafe  a  useless  visit ;  and  several 
others  who  had  previously  made  the  warmest  professions  of  friendship,  now  in  known 
good  circumstances,  and  had  often  experienced  my  kind  and  friendly  offices,  declined 
affording  me  the  little  assistance  I  wrote  for  on  the  most  futile  and  evasive  pretences, 
though  they  must  be  conscious  my  request  was  more  a  matter  of  right  than  a  favour, 
and  that  I  should  gladly  have  tried  every  method  in  my  power  for  their  relief,  in 
similar  or  any  other  distresses  that  might  befall  them  ;  and  one  in  particular  deceived 
me  after  an  absolute  promise  above  a  week  since,  and  should  in  justice  have  served 
me  to  his  utmost ;  and  to  complete  the  ungrateful  scene,  scarce  any  of  my  debtors 
will  come  or  write  to  me. 

In  this  degen’rate  age  how  few  sincere, 

Grateful  and  firm,  in  adverse  turns  adhere! 

Most,  Persian-like,  adore  the  rising  sun, 

But  friends  oppress’d,  like  plague  and  famine  shun, 

Slight  and  desert  more  swift  than  eagle’s  flight, 

Late  their  chief  glory,  boast,  and  dear  delight ; 

As  objects  of  reproach,  insult,  disdain, 

Of  all  ingratitude’s  traducing  train, 

Assassins  vile,  of  freedom,  right,  and  fame, 

Dire  persecutors,  want  an  equal  name. 

More  worthy  the  contempt  of  noble  breast 

Than  fierce  revenge,  though  worse  than  viper’s  nest, 

May  I  e’er  soar  above  such  reptile  things, 

Sublimely  brave  were  they  e’en  scepter’d  kings. 

Despise  their  dazzling  gems  and  idle  ore, 

Where  Gratitude,  Truth,  Honour,  are  no  more, 

Of  Justice,  kind  humanity  bereft, 

Where  scarce  the  shade  of  grace  or  virtue  left ; 

Yet  still  forgive,  strive  to  avert  my  eyes 
From  their  atrocious  crimes,  whate’er  the  dyes. 

Survey  sweet  Hope,  bright  anchor  of  the  soul, 

To  cheer,  exalt,  and  all  life’s  storms  control ; 

2  Q  2 


300 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Dispel  sad  glooms,  and  make  the  mind  serene, 
Each  trial  nobly  bear,  and  tragic  scene, 

That  still  may  rise  a  just,  a  feeling  friend 
My  troubles  to  alleviate  or  end, 

Though  now  mountainous  roll,  like  raging  waves, 
Like  lions  roar,  gape  like  devouring  graves.* 


I  should  not  try  your  patience  with  comments  on  false  friendships,  who  have  such 
an  universal  knowledge  of  mankind,  was  not  my  motive  in  that  respect  to  show  that 
extreme  necessity,  after  almost  a  general  defection  of  intimates  and  cruel  injustice  of 
debtors,  impelled  this  appellation,  a  self-vindication  which  I  hope  may  appear  justi¬ 
fiable,  and  induce  you  to  favour  me  with  some  assistance  in  my  present  exigencies. 
It  will  be  very  acceptable  ;  you  cannot  do  a  greater  act  of  compassion  to  any  one  that 
can  be  more  sensible  of  your  goodness,  and  of  the  great  value  of  a  friend  in  need,  or 
more  solicitous  to  render  all  due  acknowledgments,  and  I  hope  not  altogether  unwor¬ 
thy  your  benevolence.  But  whatever  sentiments  you  may  have  of  my  request,  I 
shall  retain  the  satisfaction  of  exemption  from  every  doubt  in  point  of  secrecy  was  I 
not  even  to  inform  you  that  I  have  not  heard  that  my  present  misfortunes  are  yet 
known  to  my  neighbours,  who,  I  am  told,  think  I  am  in  the  country  for  the  benefit 
of  my  health  ;  therefore,  still  may  get  matters  timely  settled  to  prevent  worse  conse¬ 
quences.  The  bearer  is  my  housekeeper ;  she  can  fully  inform  you  in  regard  of  any 
inquiries  you  may  be  pleased  to  make  concerning  my  situation  ;  will  convey  to  me 
any  favour  that  it  may  be  agreeable  to  you  to  confer,  which  I  shall  esteem  a  double 
obligation  at  this  critical  juncture.  I  have  the  honour  to  subscribe  myself,  with  all 
due  respect,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

Jos.  Reed. 

P.  S.  As  this  epistle  is  written  at  a  place  of  horror  and  affliction,  with  a  mind 
replete  of  troubles,  I  make  no  doubt  but  you  will  be  ready  to  make  due  allowances 
for  all  its  defects  on  that  account,  and  my  age  and  sickness.  I  have  nothing  to  assist 
and  animate,  but  many  discomposing  and  shocking  scenes  ;  you  will  not  therefore 
wonder  at  any  incorrectness  ;  will  pardon  inadvertencies  and  errors  of  every  sort. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  EARL  OF  ROCHFORD. 

MY  GOOD  LOUD,  April  12th,  1778. 

As  you  are  vrell  known  to  smile  upon  me,  I  am  addressed  on  all  quarters  to  be¬ 
friend  some  petition  or  other.  Let  me  assure  your  Lordship  this  is  at  least  as  dis- 

*  What  a  problem  is  the  literary  character !  that,  in  the  abode  of  horror  and  affliction,  can  delay  even  its 
calls  upon  benevolence,  till  they  can  be  accompanied  by  the  pride  of  verse.  I  have  left  the  lines,  without  an 
attempt  to  construe  them ;  but  must  not  suppress  my  astonishment,  that  they  should  proceed  from  a  man, 
whose  tragedy  of  “  Dido”  was  acted  even  for  a  benefit,  at  Drury-lane  theatre.  See  Mr.  Garrick’s  letter  on 
the  subject,  at  page  252  of  our  first  volume. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


301 


agreeable  to  me  as  it  can  be  to  you — but  what  can  I  do  ?  Not  to  continue  the 
delusion,  that  I  have  some  interest  with  Lord  Rochford,  would  be  such  a  loss  of 
importance,  that  I  cannot  very  readily  give  it  up  ;  and  as  it  will  only  give  your  Lord- 
ship  the  trouble  of  reading  now  and  then  my  impertinence,  I  am  in  hopes,  from  your 
usual  kindness  to  me,  that  you  will  permit  me  to  indulge  my  vanity.  Mr.  Glover, 
who  is  too  deserving  a  man  not  to  comply  with  his  request,  desires  me  to  apply  to 
your  Lordship  that  he  may  have  the  honour  of  being  surgeon  to  the  Essex  militia. 
He  is  a  most  skilful,  worthy  man,  is  a  good  writer,  and  has  always  been  a  steady 
friend  to  Government.  I  have  known  him  long,  he  is  much  beloved,  and  the  worst 
thing  I  ever  heard  of  him  was,  that  by  his  skill  in  his  profession  he  recovered  a  thief 
after  he  had  hung  half  an  hour,  and  which  thief,  before  he  had  quite  healed  the  circle 
the  rope  had  made,  picked  his  friend  Glover’s  pocket  by  way  of  gratitude,  and  never 
so  much  as  thanked  him  for  his  good  offices.  Will  your  Lordship  favour  me  with 
a  line  to  convince  this  worthy  man  that  I  have  not  broke  my  word  with  him  ? 

I  am  your  Lordship’s  most  devoted  and  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

As  I  am  made  an  Essex  gentleman  by  the  purchase  of  General  Clark's  farm  near 
Colchester,  I  had  some  thoughts  of  applying  to  your  Lordship  for  a  commission,  as 
you  want  officers ;  but  I  believe  that  I  must  confine  myself  to  the  command  of 
Bayes’s  troops.* 


THE  EARL  OF  ROCHFORD  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  St.  Osyth,  19th  April,  1778. 

I  did  not  conceive  that  a  letter  from  you  could  have  given  me  pain,  but  your 
last  really  did,  as  I  am  under  an  impossibility  of  doing  what  you  desire.  The  case  is 
as  follows  :  the  surgeon  to  the  regiment  I  command,  has  been  surgeon  to  it  and  Lieu¬ 
tenant  in  it  for  some  years  ;  he  is  a  good  surgeon,  and  liked  by  the  corps ;  I  cannot 
therefore  get  rid  of  him.  He  eats  more  than  Dr.  Gough,  and  should  he  by  chance  be 
choked  when  he  over-gorges,  your  friend,  Mr.  Glover,  shall  superintend  my  raga¬ 
muffins,  and  as  Falstaff  says,  “  I  will  lead  them  where  they  shall  be  peppered,”  and 
find  him  work  enough.  You  will  make  me  very  unhappy  if  my  disappointing  you 
now  through  impossibility  prevents  your  laying  any  future  commands  upon  me  that 
are  in  my  power  to  obey,  being  ever, 

Dear  Garrick,  your  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

Rochford. 

*  And  that  command,  alas !  he  had  given  up. — Ed. 


302 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  T.  HOLCROFT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Saturday,  April  25th,  1778. 

The  Committee  for  managing  the  affairs  of  the  Theatrical  Fund  established  at 
the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury -lane,  present  compliments  and  good  wishes  to  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick,  its  friend,  founder,  and  patron,  respectfully  informing  him  they  shall  hold  a 
meeting  on  Sunday,  at  seven  in  the  evening,  the  third  of  May,  at  the  Globe  Tavern, 
Fleet-street,  where  his  presence  will  be  esteemed  an  honour. 

Thos.  Holcroft,  Secretary. 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  London,  4th  May,  1778. 

Allow  me  to  express  my  gratefulness  for  the  kind  manner  in  which  (Mr.  Wal- 
singham  and  Mr.  Sheridan  inform  me)  you  have  mentioned  the  little  trifles  I  took 
the  liberty  to  send  you. 

It  is  very  good  of  you  to  see  these  exertions  in  a  favourable  light ;  I  must  attri¬ 
bute  your  commendations  much  more  to  your  feelings  than  your  judgment.  You 
have  heard  of  my  embarrassments,  and  you  do  not  think  ill  of  the  motives  and  prin¬ 
ciples  which  involved  me  in  them. 

Something  too,  Mr.  Walsingham  mentioned,  of  your  wish  to  speak  favourably  of 
me  to  Lord  North  and  the  Chancellor.  This  thought  gave  me  the  greatest  satis¬ 
faction.  I  know,  indeed,  it  is  too  much  to  wish  for ;  yet  I  must  own  there  is  no 
recommendation  I  should  more  rejoice  to  be  honoured  with  than  that  of  Mr.  Garrick. 
To  rise  by  any  appearance  of  merit  would  enhance  the  value  of  good  fortune ;  and 
your  praise  would  certainly  raise  me  in  the  opinion  of  every  one.  I  hope  you  will 
forgive  my  intruding  on  you,  but  I  was  anxious  to  acknowledge  the  politeness  you 
have  shown  me,  and  to  assure  you  of  my  respect  and  esteem. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

R.  Tickell. 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  London,  Monday. 

I  received  your  very  obliging  letter,  and  am  sensible  how  kindly  you  have 
interested  yourself  in  my  welfare. 

I  have  written  to  Mr.  Sheridan  to  thank  him  for  having  mentioned  me  to  you. 
Your  explanation  of  his  expressions  has  entirely  removed  my  hasty  and  ill-grounded 
fears. 

I  beg  you  to  accept  my  best  thanks  for  your  polite  and  friendly  conduct,  and  to 
believe  me,  Sir,  your  very  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

R.  Tickell. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


303 


MR.  B.  VICTOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Drury-lane  Theatre,  May  6th,  1778. 

I  am  directed  by  the  proprietors  to  inform  you  that  it  will  not  be  in  their  power 
for  the  future  to  pay  the  interest  of  Mr.  Lacy’s  mortgage  until  the  debts  and 
expenses  of  the  theatre  are  discharged. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

B.  Victor. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MESSRS.  LACY,  FORD,  SHERIDAN,  AND  LINLEY. 

GENTLEMEN,  May  7th,  1778. 

I  am  rather  surprised  at  the  letter  I  received  from  you  yesterday,  and  as  it  is 
impossible  for  me  to  know  when  your  debts  and  expenses  will  be  discharged,  and  as 
I  imagine  that  my  mortgage  is  as  just  a  debt  as  any  upon  the  theatre,  and  that 
it  is  as  reasonable  for  me  to  expect  my  interest  should  be  paid  as  punctually  as  anyr 
other  expense  of  the  theatre,  I  cannot  defer  a  moment  giving  you  notice,  gentlemen, 
that  I  expect  the  mortgage  to  be  paid  off  at  the  time  mentioned  in  the  deeds,  taking 
this  day  for  the  notice  which  is  to  be  given  to  you  by, 

Gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LACY. 

May  7th,  1778. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Lacy,  and  is  very  sorry  to  find 
that  the  proprietors  have  so  ill-managed  their  affairs  as  to  make  it  necessary  for  them 
to  send  him  such  a  letter  as  he  received  yesterday.  He  is  greatly  alarmed  at  the 
contents  of  it,  and  not  much  pleased  with  the  manner ;  however,  lie  has  sent  an 
answer  to  the  office,  which  he  hopes  will  not  be  disagreeable  to  Mr.  Lacy. 


January  3rd,  1777. 

Bond  from  Lacy,  Sheridan,  Linley,  and  Ford,  to  David  Garrick,  in  the  penalty 
of  £44,000  for  payment  of  £22,000  and  interest. 

(Signed)  W.  Lacy,  B.  B  Sheridan, 

Witnessed  A.  W.  T.  Linley,  J.  Ford 

Endorsed, 

“  An  account  of  my  security  from  the  pro¬ 
prietors  of  Drury-lane  Theatre  for  my 
Mortgage  there.  Tis  a  thumper  !” 


304 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Queen  Street,  May  15th,  1778. 

I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  polite  intimation  in  your  letter  sent  to 
my  house  last  Friday.  My  answer  to  the  business  you  had  occasion  to  write  on  is 
this:  although  I  subscribe  to  the  [ill]  management  of  our  affairs,  I  deny  that  there 
was  any  just  cause  or  necessity  to  have  wrote  you  the  letter  you  inform  me  of.  Your 
interest  has  been  completed  for  this  season,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
theatre  is  not  to  admit  of  a  dividend  of  2,200/.,  unless  there  was  a  resolution  to  ruin 
the  property,  which  I  believe  is  not  the  case.  The  letter  to  you  was  wrote  without 
my  approbation,  without  my  consent.  I  know  not  in  what  manner  it  was  worded  ; 
I  am  then  not  responsible  for  the  contents.  I  only  beg  leave  to  declare,  that  while  I 
retain  any  interest  in  the  property  through  your  means,  /  never  will  give  my  consent 
to  your  interest  being  otherwise  paid  than  was  at  first  mutually  agreed  on. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 


To  this  I  sent  an  answer  by  my  brother  from  Hampton,  that  he  might  depend 
upon  my  not  distressing  him.  Before  George  saw  him,  Mr.  Lacy  had  bargained  to 
sell  his  share  to  Mr.  Sheridan  at  an  enormous  price. 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  London,  May  11th,  1778. 

It  gave  me  the  truest  satisfaction  to  receive  the  very  kind,  though  flattering, 
letter  you  had  the  goodness  to  send  me. 

Your  attention  to  a  person,  who,  so  far  from  being  recommended,  or  even  intro¬ 
duced  to  you,  must  appear  under  many  disadvantages,  is  far  more  than  I  had  the 
least  pretensions  to  hope  for.  But,  without  encroaching  on  that  liberal  attention, 
allow  me  to  repeat  my  wishes,  that  in  whatever  manner  is  most  agreeable  to  you, 
the  application  you  proposed  may  be  made  to  the  Chancellor.  Nothing  could  give 
me  greater  happiness — nothing  could  do  me  more  service,  or  more  honour. 

I  am  sorry  Mr.  Sheridan  could  think  so  lightly  of  those  points  as  to  treat  either 
my  difficulties  or  your  wish  to  overcome  them  with  indifference.  He  has  too  much 
sense  not  to  know  and  justly  prize  your  friendship  and  patronage :  but  he  should 
not  check  your  good  intentions  towards  another,  who,  without  any  of  his  advantages, 
is  oppressed  with  misfortunes  he  has  never  known. 

Whatever  may  be  the  result  of  any  services  you  attempt  to  render  me,  let  me 
assure  you,  Sir,  your  interference  will  always  be  a  subject  of  satisfaction  and  pride  to 

Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

R.  Tickelt.. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


305 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR, 

It  was  not  till  this  evening  that  I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  your  very  kind 
letter,  inclosing  Lady  Bathurst’s  extract.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  express  the  sense  I 
entertain  of  the  honour  you  have  done  me  on  this  occasion.  I  feel  that  it  would  be 
wholly  impossible  to  say  how  much  you  have  obliged  me. 

Lady  Bathurst  mentions  my  having  left  England,  and  the  improbability  of  my 
return.  This  shows  how  very  unjustly  I  have  been  misrepresented  to  the  Chancellor, 
as  I  really  have  never  quitted  England,  nor  had  any  thoughts  of  it.  And  as  to  the 
other  gentlemen  of  my  list  complaining  of  my  absence,  I  wish  his  lordship  could 
know  that  they  withheld  my  share  of  the  profits,  and  that  I  had  given  them  notice 
of  my  speedy  return  to  the  business. 

You  will  at  once  see  how  hard  it  is  that  my  place,  taken  away  without  the  causes 
existing  which  are  given  for  it,  should  now  be  restored  as  a  favour  to  my  friends,  not 
as  a  right  to  the  injured. 

But  your  knowledge  of  the  world  will  say,  I  must  kiss  the  rod  that  stings  my 
pride — my  consolation  is,  that  this  misfortune  introduced  me  in  some  degree  to  your 
notice.  I  cannot  guess  howr  far  I  may  ever  avail  myself  of  Lord  Bathurst’s  promise. 
I  am  wholly  dependent  on  my  grandmother’s  assistance.  For  several  months  past,  I 
have  been  urging  her  to  extricate  me  from  my  brother’s  embarrassments,  and  she 
actually  had  given  her  agent  here  instructions  to  settle  matters.  Her  pride  wras  in¬ 
terested  to  preserve  this  unlucky  place,  and  now  that  it  is  gone,  she  does  not  see  the 
necessity  for  serving  me  so  soon  as  she  intended.  Your  friend  Tighe  is  my  advo¬ 
cate  with  her.  Good-natured  and  zealous  as  he  is,  I  begin  to  despond.  I  have 
written  to  tell  him  how  kindly  you  have  interested  yourself  for  me.  Forgive  this 
detail  of  trifles,  but  I  thought  some  explanation  wras  due  to  what  I  may  truly  term 
your  friendship  ; — I  am  very  proud  of  flattering  myself  with  that  word. 

Believe  me,  Sir,  your  very  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

R.  Tickell. 


MAURITIUS  LOWE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Sliq  No.  3,  Hedge  Lane. 

Your  goodness  in  promising  to  assist  me  in  the  disposal  of  the  drawing  of 
Homer  (of  which  you  have  some  of  the  descriptions)  makes  me  hope  you  w  ill  pardon 
my  reminding  you,  and  especially  as  my  now  most  calamitous  situation  renders  me 
totally  incapable  of  doing  any  thing  to  save  myself  from  perishing,  and  have  no  hope 
but  that  of  disposing  of  the  works  I  have  already  done.  This,  from  want  of  being 
known  and  patronized,  is  out  of  my  power;  but  with  your  assistance  wrould  be 
VOL.  it.  2  it 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


30() 

effected  with  little  difficulty.  The  drawing  has  met  with  universal  approbation,  and 
Mr.  Cipriani  (an  artist  well  known)  valued  it  as  cheap  at  a  hundred  guineas. 

Should  neither  the  merit  of  the  drawing  nor  the  circumstances  induce  any  single 
person  to  purchase  it,  it  might  be  done  by  raffle :  were  it  introduced  by  such  a  person 
as  yourself  at  the  Savoir  Yivre,  I  should  think  it  could  not  fail  of  success. 

Wherever  these  requests  may  appear  too  importunate  or  improper,  I  rely  on 
your  goodness  to  pardon  me,  who  well  know  that  necessity  will  drive  a  man  to  do 
what  otherwise  he  would  scarce  dare  to  think. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  utmost  gratitude  and  respect, 

Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

Mauritius  Lowe. 

Since  I  wrote  the  above,  your  brother  called  on  me,  and  gave  me  the  mortifying 
information  of  your  intention  to  drop  the  work  that  I  am  engaged  in  for  you,  and 
substitute  the  above  drawing  in  its  place.  My  being  in  possession  of  that  drawing  is 
the  only  reason  my  creditors  have  left  me  so  long  at  liberty,  as  hoping  from  the  sale 
of  it  to  get  their  money :  was  I  to  sell  it  for  less  than  was  sufficient  to  pay  them,  my 
fate  would  be  certain  to  perish  in  a  gaol.  My  parting  with  it  for  less  than  a  hundred 
guineas,  instead  of  essentially  serving  me,  would  be  my  certain  ruin.  It  is  my  all, 
and  my  only  resource. 

Three  years’  illness  has  thrown  me  so  far  behind,  that  had  I  the  whole  hundred  it 
would  serve  but  to  stop  and  pay  in  part  the  debts  I  have  been  forced  to  contract.  I 
therefore  most  earnestly  beg,  and  hope  you  will  continue  in  your  first  kind  intention 
of  patronizing  your  portrait,  which  1  will  (with  your  permission)  finish  as  soon  as  my 
health  will  permit,  and  consider  the  drawing  of  Homer  as  a  thing  apart ;  the  sale  of 
which  if  you  can  effect,  will  greatly  repair  the  miseries  which  illness  hath  involved 
me  in,  and  the  publishing  your  portrait  may  lay  the  ground  of  a  future  subsistence. 

May  15th,  1778. 

Received  of  Mr.  David  Garrick  the  sum  of  ten  pounds  by  me. 

Mauritius  Lowe. 

The  drawing  of  the  Homer  is  at  Mr.  Hancock’s,  Glass  Manufactory,  the  corner 
of  Cockspur-street. 

Endorsed, 

“  Mauritius  Lowe’s  receipt  and  letter.” 


MR.  LINLEY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Norfolk-street,  20th  May,  1  778. 

Mr.  Sheridan  came  to  me  yesterday,  and  informed  me  that  you  are  offended 
by  a  paragraph  which  has  appeared  in  the  Morning  Chronicle,  and  of  which  you 
entertain  suspicions  that  it  was  written  by  me,  in  consequence  of  one  which  had  been 
published  in  the  same  paper  reflecting  upon  Dr.  Ford  and  myself,  accusing  us  of 
absurdity  in  our  theatrical  conduct,  and  of  ingratitude  towards  you.  As  1  trust  I 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


307 


cannot  tell  a  lie,  so  I  must  be  unhappy  while  an  appearance  of  any  thing  like  dis¬ 
sembling  subsists  from  me  towards  you  ;  therefore,  for  my  own  satisfaction  and  your 
true  information,  I  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  saying  that  it  was  I  who  wrote  it, 
and  that  I  meant  it  as  a  general  reply  to  the  paragraph  first  published,  and  to  many 
others  which  have  been  aimed  with  the  like  honest  and  benevolent  intent.  I  am 
certain — unless  the  words  are  perverted  from  their  true  meaning — there  is  nothing 
said  that  conveys  any  idea  that  does  not  place  you  in  a  respectable  situation  ;  and  if  I 
had  not  laughed  in  my  turn,  I  must  have  taken  no  notice  at  all  of  what  appeared  to 
me  to  have  been  inserted  with  no  good  intent :  nor  do  I  understand  upon  what  ground 
any  person  should,  thus  unprovoked,  treat  me  in  so  unjust  and  contemptuous  a  manner 
as  that  paragraph  does  ;  and  as  I  never  take  liberties  of  this  kind  with  any  person 
whatsoever,  I  think  I  have  a  right  at  least  to  laugh  at,  if  not  resent,  any  such  beha¬ 
viour  towards  myself.  I  never  thought  that  you  wrote  the  first  paragraph,  but  I 
thought  it  very  possible  some  humorous  sally  of  yours  or  Sheridan’s — which  had  I 
heard,  I  am  sure  I  should  have  enjoyed — might  have  suggested  the  malicious  and 
impertinent  turn  given  it  to  some  retailer  to  a  newspaper,  and  I  hoped,  if  you  took 
any  notice  at  all  of  what  was  said  in  reply,  it  would  have  been  directed  to  the  person 
who  had  so  wantonly  made  use  of  your  name  as  to  provoke  an  answer.  It  is  evident 
that  no  inconsiderable  degree  of  insolence,  profligacy,  and  imposition  prevails  in  the 
theatre,  when  the  proprietors  dare  not  correct  a  servant  for  misconduct  without  being 
Chronicled ;  but  I  think  they  will  richly  deserve  the  appellations  bestowed  upon  them 
should  they  on  that  account  be  disturbed  from  their  enquiries.  I  beg  pardon  for 
thus  intruding  on  you,  but  I  wish  not  to  conceal  any  action  of  mine  from  you.  If 
I  have  inadvertently  given  you  offence,  I  am  very  sincerely  sorry  for  it,  and  am 
ready  to  make  any  atonement  you  can  require,  and  to  wait  upon  you  the  moment  I 
hear  you  are  in  town.  I  can  only  say  I  never  meant  to  give  you  cause  of  reproach ; 
for,  without  deceit  or  flattery,  I  feel  myself  more  obliged  to  you  than  to  any  man 
living,  and  there  is  no  man  living  of  whose  merit  and  worth  I  have  a  higher  opinion, 
and  am  with  my  whole  heart  sincerely  Yours, 


Endorsed, 

“  Linley’s  letter  about  a  paragraph.” 


Thos.  Lin  ley. 


MR.  E.  CAPELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  May  26th,  1 778. 

W  hy  will  you  give  me  cause  to  accuse  you  of  breach  of  promise,  repeated 
breaches  of  it  ?  I  cannot  stir  to  see  you,  and  it  is  but  seldom  I  hear  of  you,  yet 
none  wishes  to  do  it  oftener,  and  that  each  hearing  may  bring  account  of  your  wel¬ 
fare.  I  shall  be  getting  soon  (about  this  day  four  weeks)  into  the  box  that  is  to 
bear  me  to  Hastings,  where  I  never  visit,  am  visited  rarely ;  and  when  my  airing  is 
over,  another  like  box  will  be  re-conveyer  of  me  to  my  winter  prison  in  this  place. 

2  r  2 


-308 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


My  business  then  will  be — putting  into  the  press  the  work  that  is  promised,  and 
cannot  now  be  receded  from  ;  of  which  you  have  been  some  promoter,  and  I  have 
hopes  will  be  more  so,  for  that  person  breathes  not  who  has  it  more  in  his  power : 
without  assistance  from  somebody,  1  must  be  a  very  great  sufferer,  which  a  foe  will 
call  hard.  The  enclosed  paper  is  a  list  of  such  persons  whose  subscriptions  I  owe  to 
you,  as  I  think  ;  but  I  have  no  first  payment  from  them,  nor  means  to  get  at  it :  can 
it  be  done  by  you,  or  through  you  ?  you  have  receipts  in  your  hands  for  the  two 
managers  ;  and  more  shall  be  sent  you  to  such  number  as  you  shall  name.  The 
gentleman  who  has  waited  on  you  from  me  is  but  just  arrived  from  the  country,  and 
is  something  lame ;  he  will  tell  you  by  what  accident,  for  he  means  shortly  to  pay 
his  respects  to  you,  and  impart  to  you  some  other  matters  from  me,  who  am,  with 
truest  affection  and  a  grateful  sense  of  your  services,  Yours  entirely, 

Edw.  Capell.* 

Favour  me  with  an  answer,  and  the  knowledge  of  your  health  and  Mrs.  Garrick’s. 


REV.  H.  BATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Buckingham-street,  16th  July,  1778. 

Ten  thousand  thanks  for  your  friendly  attention  to  the  “  Flitch  of  Bacon 
every  touch  tells  so  admirably,  that  I  shall  not  lose  a  tint  thereof  for  the  world. 
Your  idea  of  Edwin’s  song  was  perfectly  right,  and  enables  me  to  make  it  truly 
comic.  I  have  ended  it  thus : 

Good  lack  ! 

His  long  back 

Like  a  building  so  weak  is,  it  never  can  stand, 

But  would  snap  short  in  two,  like  a  twig  in  this  hand  ! 

Bannister’s  air  is  likewise  much  improved  :  your  objection  to  the  blood,  <kc.  was 
critically  just ;  but  I  have  been  obliged  to  retain 

tc  Revenge  (instead  of  honour )  desiring,” 

on  account  of  a  fine  accompaniment  in  the  music,  though,  I  assure  you,  much  against 
my  will.  I  fear  you  will  find  an  arduous  task  of  it  in  the  second  act ;  but,  as  your 
friendship  has  carried  you  thus  far,  you  must  not  look  back.  I  should  like  a  comic 
procession,  of  all  things,  from  the  church  ;  and  indeed  a  certain  space  of  time  must 
absolutely  be  employed  in  that  or  some  other  manner,  to  make  it  probable  that  Eliza 
should  have  been  at  church  and  back  again  after  she  parted  with  her  uncle.  The 
first  act  I  have  sent  to  Colman,  with  the  emendations  already,  who  was  very  impa¬ 
tient  for  it. — By  the  by,  who  do  you  think  is  prime  minister  to  the  Haymarket 
manager  at  this  juncture  ?  the  atheistical  parson  Williams,  who  is  shrewdly  sus- 

*  Alludes  to  the  three  4to  vols.  of  his  notes  upon  Shakspeare — the  most  unintelligible  publication  of  the 
British  press. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


309 


pected  of  having  belaboured  Sheridan,  &c.  so  unmercifully  last  year.  Let  little 
George  alone  for  “  making  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness”  in  time  of 
danger !  And,  to  complete  the  rural  scene,  he  is  going  to  bring  out  a  bawdy  and 

blasphemous  Welsh  farce  for  him,  which,  it  is  conjectured,  will  entail  d - n  on 

the  irreligious  priest  and  infidel  manager  at  one  stroke !  “  The  Suicide”  has  already 

done  its  do,  I  fancy,  for  not  a  word  is  now  spoke  of  it  from  one  end  of  the  town  to 
the  other.  The  passengers  who  have  hitherto  taken  places  in  this  new  four-wheeled 
machine  complain  sadly  of  the  springs,  and  its  disjointed  construction  ;  so  that  the 
only  chance  the  proprietor  seems  to  have  is  to  cut  it  down  (according  to  the  prologue) 
to  a  two-wheeled  Buggy,  when  perhaps,  with  a  little  more  dramatic  greasing,  it  may 
run  the  season  out. 

News  we  have  none — except  that  all  the  world  talk  of  peace  !  With  my  most 
respectful  compliments  to  Airs.  G.  Yours  in  great  haste,  but  most  truly, 

H.  Bate. 


MR.  W.  LACY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Cork,  July  24th,  1778. 

I  take  the  first  opportunity  after  my  performance  to  express  my  acknowledg¬ 
ments  for  that  very  kind  and  friendly  mark  of  your  attention  in  the  introduction  you 
favoured  me  with  for  this  place,  which  had  the  desired  effect,  and  has  been  the  means 
of  the  very  kind  and  favourable  reception  I  have  met  with  in  the  character  of 
Hamlet,  which  I  appeared  in  on  Wednesday  last.  Miss  Younge  makes  her  first 
appearance  this  evening  in  the  Countess  of  Salisbury.  The  next  character  I  per¬ 
form  is  Lord  Townley.  Mr.  Heaphey’s  “  Belisarius”  answers  every  expectation  I  had 
formed.  We  had  a  very  pleasant  journey  best  part  of  the  way,  and  a  passage  of 
twelve  hours  from  Holyhead  to  Dublin  ;  the  travelling  from  Dublin  here  was  very 
tedious,  having  the  same  horses  all  the  way.  Cork  is  a  very  pleasant  place,  but 
the  town  is  all  up  in  arms  ;  every  gentleman  of  the  place  wears  uniform,  and  is 
under  military  discipline.  The  ladies  are  very  dressy  ;  one  of  the  streets  is  a  sort 
of  Mall,  where  the  ladies  walk  in  full  dress. — Dear  Sir,  I  hope  to  be  favoured  with 
a  few  lines  from  you,  and  that  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  that  you  and  Mrs. 
Garrick  are  well,  to  whom  Mrs.  Lacy  joins  with  me  in  compliments  ;  and  believe  me. 

Dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  very  humble  servant, 

W.  Lacy. 

P.  S. — Dear  Sir, 

I  took  the  liberty  of  requesting  your  assistance  relative  to  a  draft  I  received  of 
Air.  Moody,  in  part  of  the  payment  of  purchase  of  my  share  in  the  Bristol  theatre. 
Should  be  obliged  if  the  request  made  in  the  letter  was  not  agreeable  that  you  will 
favour  me  with  that  draft,  or  be  so  obliging  as  to  send  it  to  Mr.  Moody,  as  in  its 
present  form  it  is  not  of  any  use  to  me. 


310 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  NEW  PATENTEES. 

GENTLEMEN,  Saturday,  Aug.  16th,  1778. 

The  rudeness  of  your  letters,  which  is  always  the  sign  of  a  bad  cause,  I  shall  pass 
over  with  the  utmost  contempt ;  but  as  you  have  proposed  to  my  friend  Mr.  Wallis, 
and  my  brother,  an  arbitration,  I  cannot,  as  an  honest  man,  refuse  to  meet  you  upon 
any  ground ;  I  therefore  desire  that  your  attorney  will,  without  delay,  in  concurrence 
with  Mr.  Wallis,  settle  and  prepare  this  matter,  and  that  all  other  correspondence  may 
cease  between  you  and  Your  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  W.  JACKSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Lyon’s  Inn,  Aug.  28th,  1778. 

Doctor  Schomberg  yesterday  favoured  me  with  the  sight  of  a  card  which 
he  had  received  from  you.  It  contained  a  complaint  that  I  had  made  use  of  your 
name  in  a  very  unfriendly  manner  in  The  Ledger.  Whoever,  Sir,  gave  you  that 
information,  made  a  very  improper  use  of  my  name,  by  ascribing  to  me  a  conduct 
which  I  am  incapable  of  adopting.  That  two  or  three  unfavourable  pieces  have 
gained  admission  into  the  paper,  I  admit.  That  my  pen  gave  them  existence,  your 
candour,  I  trust,  will  permit  me  to  deny. 

To  this  ingenuous  declaration  give  me  permission,  Sir,  to  add,  that  I  have  exerted 
my  influence  with  the  printer  to  obviate  any  complaint  of  the  kind  in  future.  I  did 
this  with  alacrity,  because  I  found  it  conformable  to  the-wishes  of  my  good  friend 
Doctor  Schomberg ;  and  it  is  my  boast  that  I  perfectly  coincide  with  him  in  enter¬ 
taining  the  highest  estetem  for  the  abilities,  and  respect  for  the  character,  of  Mr. 
Garrick.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  Jackson. 


LORD  CAMDEN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Camden-place,  Sept.  15th,  1778. 

I  have  been  much  alarmed  by  an  account  in  the  papers  of  your  having  been  ill, 
and  yesterday  I  ordered  my  servant  to  call  at  the  Adelphi  and  inquire  into  the  real 
state  of  your  health,  where  he  was  informed  you  had  been  very  ill,  but  was  now  in 
effect  recovered.  This  does  not  quite  satisfy  me,  for  I  cannot  be  easy  till  I  receive 
this  account  confirmed  by  your  own  hand.  I  have  arrived  at  a  time  of  life  when 
the  loss  of  an  old  friend  is  irreparable;  and  however  it  has  happened  that  we  have  not 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


311 


lately  met  as  often  as  formerly,  my  friendship  is  as  warm  as  ever,  and  I  am  sure  there 
is  not  one  among  your  large  catalogue  of  friends  who  is 

More  affectionately  yours  than 

Camden. 

We  are  all  well,  and  desire  our  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  Study  Cor- 
naro,  and  you  ’ll  be  as  well  as  I  am. 

Endorsed, 

“  Lord  Camden — most  affectionate.” 


MR.  E.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Sept.  16th,  1778- 

After  an  absence  of  fifteen  months,  (which  is  longer  than  1  ever  was  from 
London  since  I  can  remember,)  I  cannot  forbear  entering  into  a  little  theatrical 
gossip,  although  at  so  great  a  distance  from  Roscius. 

A  quo  seu  fonte  perenni 
Actorum  Aoniis  ora  rigantur  aquis. 

I  have  many  subjects— Your  friend  Wilks,  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy,5'  Henderson, 
&c.  As  to  Wilks,  I  have  mentioned  him  often,  so  often  that  Sir  Richard  says, 
“  I  see  you  know  how  to  speak  for  your  friends,  &c.”  But,  in  truth,  these  people 
have  had  nothing  to  give,  and  the  parliamentary  monster  has  a  large  swallow,  and 
nothing  to  feed  him. 

A  place  executed  by  deputy  of  a  thousand  pounds  per  annum  to  Sir  R.  Heron, 
and  a  trifling  addition  of  about  two  hundred  to  myself,  are  all  the  favours  in  the  civil 
way  which  Lord  B.  has  had  it  in  his  power  to  bestow.  But  your  pretensions  shall 
not  be  suffered  to  die  away  whenever  any  opportunity  shall  offer. 

As  the  time  of  my  return  to  London  is  as  yet  very  uncertain,  I  must  early 
remind  you  of  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy.”  The  poet  has  your  promise  of  assistance 
in  the  green-room  and  upon  the  stage  (by  daylight,  I  mean) ;  but  I  begin  to  fear  that, 
as  the  Oxford  bucks  supposed  of  Foote  in  the  orators,  you  must  do  it  all  yourself 
i.  e.  not  only  instruct  and  animate  the  soldiery,  but  blow  the  trumpet,  stick  the 
bills,  &c.  Manager  Sheridan,  i.  e.  Scandal  Sheridan,  has  promised  to  produce  the 
play  whenever  the  author  pleases,  and  I,  for  the  author,  have  named  the  beginning 
of  January  for  the  first  reading.  I  hope  that  time  will  suit  your  convenience,  and 
is  agreeable  to  your  judgment :  I  take  January  29  to  be  the  best  day  that  can  be 
given  for  the  first  night* 

Henderson  was  very  well  received  at  Dublin  and  its  neighbourhood  for  the 
space  of  ten  weeks.  He  played  with  great  eclat  and  moderate  profit.  I  believe 

*  Alas  !  some  days  before  this,  Mr.  Jephson’s  very  sincere  friend  had  closed  his  acquaintance  with  “  day¬ 
light”— and  all  service  was  to  be  expected.  from  negligence  itself !— Ed. 


:312 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


lie  made  about  250/.  and  about  100/.  more  at  Liverpool,  in  August.  Jephson  and 
Dean  Barnard  are  particularly  pleased  with  him,  and  he  was  invited  to  the  country- 
seats  of  Mr.  Conolly,  Mr.  Clements,  Mr.  Mason,  the  Duke  of  Leinster,  Mr.  Gardener, 
and  the  Lord  Lieutenant.* 

I  am  unwilling  that  he  should  play  Palador,  the  gallant  and  amorous  hero  of 
“  The  Law  of  Lombardy.”  It  is  clearly  the  best  part,  and  Henderson  is  not  equal 
to  it.  Who  is  then  ?  is  the  natural  question  both  for  him  and  others.  Why,  not 
Smith,  and  yet  lie  must  do  it.  There  is  a  noble  villain  fitter  for  Henderson,  and 
fitter,  indeed,  for  Smith  ;  for,  in  fact,  Palador  is  too  magnificent  a  character  for  modern 
shoulders.  He  is  a  Postlmmus.  Bireno  is  of  the  cast  of  Iachimo,  but  inferior,  and 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  part  most  fit  for  either  of  the  generals. 

Henderson  has  so  much  humility  and  good  sense  added  to  the  highest  veneration 
and  respect  for  you  and  your  abilities,  in  spite  of  appearances,  that  Jephson,  Barnard, 
and  I,  cannot  help  wishing  that  he  should  be  restored  to  some  degree  of  your  favour 
and  protection.  Indeed  I  think  he  deserves  it.  His  Shylock,  Falstaff,  Don  John, 
and  King  Richard,  have  surely  very  great  merit.  They  astonished  the  Prime  Ser¬ 
jeant,  Gardiner,  Jephson,  &c.,  and  the  other  few  knowing  ones  about  Dublin. 

I  beg  (in  order  to  carry  on  the  plot  better)  that  you  will  write  to  Robert  Jephson 
instead  of  me,  speak  of  “  The  Law  of  Burgundy,”  and  mention  your  friend  for  the 
copy,  or  for  half  of  it.  It  is  not  yet  disposed  of.  Poor  Davisius  was  to  have  given 
200/.  Advise  your  friend  to  offer  that  sum,  and  the  copy  will  be  his. 

I  am  now,  however  unwilling,  forced  to  remind  you  of  a  vile  piece  of  fraud 
which  you  and  your  eldest  nephew,  Carrington,  have  committed  against  me.  I  had 
a  list  of  above  a  hundred  characters  which  you  had  performed  in  my  memory,  most 
of  which  I  myself  had  seen.  You  promised  me  a  perfect  list,  and  took  away  forcibly 
my  old  one.  I  now  have  neither  my  own  list  nor  an  amended  one.  I  beg  in  earnest 
that  the  Rev.  Mr.  C.  Garrick  may  be  presented  with  my  best  respects  and  regard 
with  a  memorandum  of  this  matter,  which  he  can  easily  adjust  by  enclosing  a 
genuine  list  of  your  characters  from  1741  to  1776.  I  could  gossip  on  in  this  sort  of 
scratching  way  for  another  hour,  but  must  now  have  mercy  on  you,  (not,  however, 
without  paying  mine  and  my  wife’s  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick,)  by  assuring  you 
that  I  am  Your  sincere,  faithful,  obedient,  and  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

Edward  E.  Tighe. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Sept.  22nd,  1 778. 

I  should  not  think  of  giving  you  the  trouble  to  read  a  letter  from  me  after  the 
very  alarming  accounts  we  have  lately  had  of  your  health,  but  that  Mr.  Jolmes  told 
me  he  saw  Mr.  Wallis  in  town  a  few  days  ago,  who  assured  him  you  were  pretty 


*  St.  Wolston’s  (a  seat  of  Dean  Barnard’s,  inhabited  by  his  Excellency). 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


313 


well  recovered.  I  long  for  a  confirmation  of  this  most  excellent  news  under  your 
own  hand,  which  will  relieve  many  aching  hearts  in  this  house.  I  was  exceedingly 
distressed  how  to  get  any  news  of  you  that  might  be  depended  on,  and  thought  of 
writing  to  Dr.  Cadogan,  but  recollected  he  was  at  the  camp,  and  probably  not  near 
enough  to  attend  you.  1  have  been  like  to  die  myself,  for  that  matter ;  but  what 
signifies  half  a  hundred  such  lives  as  mine  ?  Mrs.  Barry  that  was,  did  very  well 
here ;  I  believe  she  got  near  three  hundred  pounds  the  few  nights  she  played.  She 
took  Percy  for  her  benefit.  Her  husband  is  handsome,  volatile,  and  noisy,  a  dozen 
years  younger  than  herself,  and  by  his  own  account  not  worth  a  penny,  but  in  debt. 
He  is  most  desperately  in  love  with  his  new  wife,  and  in  mourning  for  his  old  one. 
I  was  very  civil  to  her  for  certain  wise  reasons ;  and  this  marriage  has  put  her  in  such 
good  humour,  that  she  was  all  smiles  and  graciousness.  Poor  man !  I  believe  he 
thinks  her  an  angel ; — pity  these  fine  delusions  cannot  last.  I  could  think  of  nothing 
but  of  Horace’s  miser/  qaibus  intentata  nites.  The  man  has  one  great  merit  in  my 
eyes, — he  perfectly  adores  you,  and  frequently  hints  that  Barry  was  no  actor.*  She 
also,  to  do  her  justice,  spoke  of  you  in  the  highest  terms  of  esteem  and  gratitude,  and 
told  the  story  of  her  behaviour  at  the  Rehearsal,  very  much  to  her  own  discredit. 
Your  friends  Messrs.  Williams  and  Jones  are  absolutely  wild  with  your  Baldwin 
verses.  I  have  longed  to  show  them  once  or  twice  to  some  people,  but  did  not  gra¬ 
tify  my  desire  at  the  expense  of  my  veracity.  I  congratulate  you,  dear  Sir,  on  your 
prologue  to  Bonduca  :f  it  is  admirable  !  I  happened  to  dine  at  our  Bishop's  the  day 
it  came  out ;  he  was  quite  in  raptures,  and  read  it  to  me  till  he  could  repeat  the  best 
part  of  it.  He  has  a  doubt,  however,  about  the  last  line  of  the  first  triplet :  he  says 
it  is  far  from  abaci  line ;  but  the  two  preceding  ones  are  so  noble,  that  he  is  of  opinion 
there  cannot  be  a  finer  ending  to  that  thought  than  the  second  line,  “  And  Edward’s 
valour  shone  the  leading  star:”  I  believe  that’s  it,  but  have  not  the  book  by  me.  I 
told  him  I  would  write  you  his  criticism,  and  he  bade  me  add  that  the  whole  is 
written  in  the  true  spirit  of  poetry,  and  the  compliment  to  Lord  Chatham  truly  noble. 
I  hear  a  sad  character  of  our  little  friend’s  comedy  ;  Lord  Shelburne,  and  Lady  Corke, 
and  Mrs.  Poyntz,  told  me  the  other  day  that  it  was  a  wretched  thing,  and  dis¬ 
honoured  him  both  as  an  author  and  a  man  ;  this  paper  would  not  hold  all  the 
severe  things  they  said  of  it,  especially  Mrs.  P.  who  spoke  of  it  with  an  aversion  that 
almost  approached  to  abhorrence,  as  she  said  the  most  intimate  family  secrets  were 
exposed  and  ridiculed.  J 

My  very  best  respects  attend  your  dear  good  lady,  and  Miss  F urst. 

All  here  beg  to  assure  you  of  their  joy  at  your  recovery.  It  would  be  impossible 
to  tell  you  that  of,  dear  Sir,  Your  ever  obliged  and  faithful  servant, 

H.  More. 

*  As  to  Ciawford,  he  was  a  fine  figure  ;  but,  as  lie  hints,  it  seems,  of  Barry,  certainly  “  no  actor.” — Ed. 

t  Bonduca.  Recently  altered  by  Colman,  and  produced  at  his  theatre  in  the  summer.  The  Caratach 
(Caractacus)  of  Digges  was  a  performance  absolutely  perfect.— Ed. 

t  I  never  understood  the  critical  and  fashionable  persecution  of  “  The  Suicide.” — Ed. 

VOL.  II.  2  s 


314 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


LADY  BATHURST  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Cirencester,  Sept.  28th,  1778. 

One  such  head  as  yours  is  worth  all  our  six  put  together;  however,  I  must,  in  the 
name  of  them  all,  thank  you  for  the  entertainment  your  obliging  letter  gave  us ;  you 
were  very  good  to  be  at  the  trouble  of  answering  so  much  stuff;  the  only  merit  we 
have  is,  it  was  a  true  picture  of  the  very  sincere  regard  and  esteem  every  part  of  this 
family  have  for  you.  The  Wilmots  left  us  before  I  received  your  favour,  but  I  have 
transmitted  them  a  copy.  I  am  amazed  you  could  decipher  the  giant’s  writing  ;  I 
never  saw  any  thing  so  ill-wrote  and  so  full  of  blots. 

I  do  not  venture  to  direct  this  to  Lord  Palmerston’s,  because  I  think  you  are  too 
volatile  to  stay  more  than  a  week  in  one  place.  My  Lord  joins  with  the  rest  of  the 
family  in  compliments  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

T.  Bathurst. 


PRINCESSE  DE  DASHCKOW  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR, 

Le  gout,  le  g6nie  et  l’art  r^unis  en  vous  ne  laissent  de  place  que  pour  l’indulgence, 
qui  n’est  la  compagne  que  de  ce  degre  de  perfection  qui  n’est  donne  qu’a  peu  de 
mortels.  C  est  a  cette  derniere  quality,  que  je  nommerai  volontiers  vertu,  et  que  Ton 
nomine  indulgence,  a  qui  je  m’addresse :  elle  guidera  doucement  votre  gout  pour 
decouvrir  dans  le  musique  que  je  joins  ici,  les  traits  que  la  sensibility,  avec  un  peu 
d’harmonie  naturelle,  sans  le  secours  de  l’art,  a  produits,  et  alors  elle  vous  fera  passer 
par  dessus  les  defauts,  qu'il  pourroit  y  decouvrir.  Hart  que  vous  possedes  vous  fera 
sentir  que  quand  l’on  n’en  a  point,  l’on  a  un  certain  myrite  a  n’y  point  prdtendre. 
C’est  ainsi  que  je  mettrai  a  profit  vos  talents,  et  que  ce  qui  vous  rend  superieur 
m’aidera  a  faire  passer  a  vos  veux  (peut-etre)  pour  bon,  ce  qui  n’est  que  passable. 
Mes  complimens  s’il  vous  plait  a  Madame  Garrick,  j’espere  l’annee  qui  vient  la  voir 
a  Hampton,  et  vous  assurer  de  vive  voix  de  l’estime  parfaite  de  votre  devolve 

Princesse  de  Dashckow. 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Oct.  10th,  1778. 

I  never  in  my  life  felt  more  real  joy  than  on  receiving  your  most  kind  letter 
from  Hampshire,  with  the  account  of  your  recovery  ;  yet  it  was  not  a  very  mirthful 
kind  of  joy,  for  I  shed  many  tears  at  a  part  of  it,  which  is  not  to  be  answered,  nor 
even  thought  of ;  and  when  I  read  it  to  the  rest,  we  had  a  concert  of  crying. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


315 


Few  things  could  vex  me  more  than  that  that  little  bard  should  get  into  the 
winter  management  (if  that  can  be  called  management  which  appears  to  me  all 
anarchy  and  wild  uproar  ;  but  at  this  distance  I  cannot  pretend  to  judge):  should  he 
get  in,  it  would  be  the  greatest  mortification  to  me  ever  to  have  any  transactions 
with  him;  and  I  am  very  sure  he  would  do  all  in  his  power  to  crush  any  attempts  of 
mine.  I  hear  he  is  in  this  country,  so  I  shall  probably  see  him.  I  am  not  at  all 
astonished  that  “  The  Monthly  Review  of  the  Wreath  of  Fashion”  has  been  of  such 
service  to  the  poem  ;  1  read  it  over  twice  with  great  pleasure,  though  I  could  have  no 
notion  who  the  author  was.  It  was  written  with  so  much  warmth,  liberality,  and  so 
far  removed  from  the  common  routine  of  criticism,  that  I  was  much  pleased  both 
with  its  spirit  and  elegance,  and  I  have  heard  it  taken  notice  of  by  other  people.  If 
you,  my  dear  Sir,  are  at  a  loss  about  marginal  notes  in  the  Dean  of  Glo’ster’s  book, 
what  must  I  be?  I  have  told  him  about  your  delicacy  and  your  scruples,  and  he 
will  be  greatly  hurt  and  disappointed,  if  you  do  not  criticise.  I  really  cannot,  for  I 
know  as  much  of  the  art  of  war,  as  of  the  subjects  of  which  he  treats,  though  I 
always  find  his  reasoning  very  perspicuous. — A  propos  of  the  art  of  war  !  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  hearing  you  looked  perfectly  well  in  the  field  at  Winchester :  a  sweet 
girl,  a  friend  of  mine,  stood  near  you,  and  forgot  to  look  at  the  King  or  his  troops. 

Did  you  know  your  friend  Wallis  was  a  poet?  Whether  he  has  caught  the 
inspiration  from  the  Shades  of  Mona,  or  carried  it  with  him  from  the  Adelphi,  I 
know  not ;  but  this  I  know,  that  I  have  received  two  copies  of  verses  dated  from  a 
cottage  in  Carmarthenshire ;  one  on  you,  and  the  other  on  myself ;  and  if  he  is  not 
the  author,  I  know  not  who  is,  as  he  called  on  me  and  told  me  he  was  going  thither. 

I  have  taken  the  liberty,  dear  Sir,  to  send  you  my  first  act.  I  have  greatly 
changed  my  plan,  as  you  will  see :  Emmeline  is  now  my  heroine,  and  Orlando  my 
hero.  Be  so  good  as  treat  me  with  your  usual  candour,  and  tell  me  how  I  have 
failed  or  succeeded  in  unfolding  the  story  and  characters  ;  and,  above  all,  if  you  can 
recollect  any  other  tragedy  that  it  is  like,  as  I  shall  be  most  careful  of  that. 

Mr.  Johnes  and  I  are  great  friends :  he  treated  me  with  a  sight  of  your  letter. 

Pray  make  my  affectionate  respects  to  my  dearest  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  accept  the 
grateful  esteem  of  this  whole  house,  as  well  as  of,  my  dear  good  Sir, 

Your  ever  faithful  and  obliged, 

H.  More. 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

St.  James’s,  Nov.  3,  1778. 

Your  letter,  my  dear  Sir,  is  so  truly  kind,  that  I  want  words  to  thank  you  for  it. 
Give  me  your  own  language,  and  I  would  tell  you  with  what  gratitude  I  accept  the 
assistance  of  your  pen.  Without  it  I  had  determined  to  let  the  opera  sleep  upon  my 
shelf.  But  now,  “  Liber,  ibis  in  urbem  !”  I  only  regret  the  trouble  I  shall  give  you. 

2  s  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


31() 

Many  will  be  the  necessary  alterations:  I  know  they  will.  All  I  can  urge  in  return 
is,  that  I  shall  wait  your  own  time  patiently  and  thankfully.  I  am  not  urgent  for 
this  season  ;  I  shall  be  content  with  the  next.  And  however  formerly  you  may  have 
served  unworthy  men,  be  assured  in  this  instance  that  you  help  a  man  who  most  loves, 
values,  honours  you.  1  wait  now  only  for  your  directions,  when  I  shall  send  you  the 
acts,  and  where  to  ?  Respectful  compliments  to  Mrs. Garrick. — Are  you  settled? 
Do  you  like  your  situation  ?  Do  the  waters  agree  with  you  ?  Take  great  care  of 
yourself.  Remember,  even  now,  Proclis  publica  cur  a  ! — Farewell ! 

I  am  truly,  that  is,  unalterably  yours, 

Sam.  Nott. 


MRS.  E.  GRIFFITH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Friday,  Nov.  6th,  1778. 

I  have  sent  thrice  to  the  Oracle  of  Drury ,  not  Delphos,  without  obtaining  any 
answer  !  Had  the  priests  of  the  latter  been  as  carelessly  silent  as  he,  their  altars  would 
have  ceased  to  blaze.  I  shall  make  one  effort  more  this  afternoon,  and  you  shall 
know  my  success. 

I  have  done  my  possible  with  Mr.  Le  Texier’s  third  act :  I  think  it  improved,  but 
am  still  of  opinion  that  it  is  much  too  long,  particularly  that  capital  scene  between 
Somerton  and  Westfield.  Do,  my  dear  Sir,  use  your  judicious  style,  and  strike  out  all 
the  languid  parts  of  it.  I  have  left  in  part  of  the  first  scene  on  account  of  the  song, 
as  I  think  the  act  is  barren  of  music.  I  have  also  translated  an  addition  which  Mr. 
Le  Texier  has  thought  proper  to  make  at  the  end  of  the  piece ;  which  I  by  no  means 
approve,  as  I  think  the  former  conclusion  was  much  better  ;  but  this  matter  will  be 
submitted  to  you,  and  I  am  certain  your  judgment  will  be  right. 

I  have  not  been  one  hour  well  since  I  came  to  town  ;  the  noise  and  bustle  of  Lon¬ 
don  have  hurried  my  spirits,  and  given  me  a  constant  pain  in  my  head ;  but  patience 
and  shuffle  the  cards,  you  fancy,  is  my  motto. 

My  servant  is  again  returned  with  a  non  est  inventus  from  Queen-street.  What ’s 
to  be  done  ?  as  Mrs.  Candour  says.  Do,  my  dear  Sir,  give  me  a  line  of  advice,  for  I 
am  quite  at  a  loss  how  to  act  with  such  an  eccentric  genius.  W  ith  best  respects  to 
Mrs.  Garrick,  and  every  grateful  and  good  wish  for  you, 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged  and  affectionate, 

E.  Griffith. 

Kitty  insists  on  my  sending  her  love,  but  I  think  you  have  it  already. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


317 


MR.  R.  TICKELL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Sir9  London,  Nov.  7th,  1778. 

I  was  not  in  town  when  Becket  sent  me  your  message,  which  contained  so  flatter¬ 
ing  a  mark  of  your  good  opinion.  You  may  be  assured  Mr.  Garrick’s  wishes  shall 
always  have  the  force  of  commands  with  me ;  but  when  I  acquaint  you  that  at  pre¬ 
sent  (as  when  I  have  the  pleasure  of  meeting  you  I  can  more  fully  explain)  I  am 
employed  in  a  work  that  may  make  or  mar  my  fortune,  I  can  scarcely  think  you 
would  wish  to  interrupt  my  attention  to  it  by  a  matter  which  certainly,  if  I  under¬ 
took  it,  would  take  up  much  time ;  for  I  could  never  think  of  executing  any  plan 
you  suggested  in  a  careless  manner ;  besides,  a  prologue  must  be  laboriously  finished 
to  keep  pace  with  one  of  your  most  hasty  epilogues.  A  couplet  of  yours  in  the  pro¬ 
logue  to  “  The  Invasion”  saved  the  whole  prologue  and  farce.  After  so  recent  a 
proof  of  your  established  superiority,  how  can  you  be  so  ungrateful  to  your  Muse  to 
suffer  the  least  degree  of  rivalship  ?  In  short,  in  every  view,  good-nature,  propriety, 
effect,  &c.  &c.  believe  me,  you  ought  to  dispense  with  repeating  your  request. 

Believe  me,  Sir,  very  truly,  your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

R.  Tickell. 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Althorp,  Nov.  13th,  1778. 

Did  not  you  promise  and  vow,  when  first  we  entered  into  correspondence,  that 
you  would  never  expect  me  to  be  punctual,  but  write  on  from  time  to  time,  whether 
I  answered  your  letters  or  not :  I  own  this  reproach  is  but  an  ungrateful  return  for  a 
letter  that  gave  me  much  real  satisfaction,  for  I  was  seriously  alarmed  by  the  accounts 
I  had  had  of  you,  and  sent  Townsend  himself  twice  to  your  house;  but  no  informa¬ 
tion  from  him  could  be  so  satisfactory  as  a  letter  from  yourself,  only  this  should  have 
been  followed  in  due  time  by  another  to  tell  me  you  continued  well. 

I  will  promise  never  to  ask  you  to  read  when  Lord  March  (that  was)  is  by  ;  but 
then  I  will  make  a  wow,  which  is,  never  to  have  him  with  me,  if  I  can  help  it,  at  the 
same  time  with  you.  Who  the  other  person  is,  I  cannot  guess. 

Pray,  Mr.  Garrick,  where  are  you  now?  what  are  you  about?  and  how  do  you 
do  ? — these  are  three  questions  I  must  have  answered.  We  shall  be  in  town  for  the 
meeting  of  the  Parliament,  and  hope  you  will  be  ready  to  return  with  us  here  as  soon 
as  that  sets  us  at  liberty.  Give  my  best  compliments  to  Madame,  and  tell  her,  if  her 
winter  habiliments  are  not  bought,  there  is  a  certain  scarlet  and  white  silk  to  be  had 
at  Mr.  King’s,  the  mercer’s,  which  we  have  fixed  upon  as  a  sort  of  uniform  for  the 
ladies  of  the  Althorp  party.  I  would  not  have  her  make  it  up  till  I  see  her  in  town  ; 
but  if  she  is  so  gracious  as  to  intend  to  have  one,  she  had  better  send  Mr.  King 
notice,  lest  there  should  be  a  scarcity  of  the  silk. 


318 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  Duke  and  Duchess  and  George  are  all  arrived  here  from  their  respective 
camps,  and  look  extremely  well.  They  desire  their  best  compliments  to  you  and 
Mrs.  Garrick. — Pray  write  soon,  and  send  me  some  news,  if  there  is  any. — Adieu  ! 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

November  20th,  1778. 

I  really  have  some  unavoidable  business  upon  my  hands  to-day,  which  allows 
me  but  a  moment  to  write  to  you  ;  but  I  must  just  thank  you  for  your  letter  and 
prologue,  both  of  which  gave  me  infinite  pleasure.  The  opening  of  the  latter  is 
beautiful,  and  the  characters,  if  well  spoke,  must  have  a  good  effect,  and  are  admi¬ 
rably  hit  off*.  But  to  show  my  obedience,  I  made  Lord  John  Cavendish,  Lord 
Spencer,  and  the  Duchess,  summon  up  the  utmost  malice  of  criticism,  and  then  read 
it  twice  over  with  attention ;  the  result  was,  that  some  of  the  characters  might  per¬ 
haps  bear  a  little  shortening,  and  that  the  lines  they  least  approved  were  the  two  last 
of  Parson  Adams  and  those  of  Slip-slop. 

This  is  the  first  time  I  ever  played  the  part  of  a  critic,  and  with  your  leave  shall 
be  the  last ;  for  it  is  a  vile  occupation  to  set  one’s  wits  to  pick  out  a  fault  where  one 
may  be  so  much  better  employed  in  admiring  a  thousand  beauties. 

1  shall  attend  you  with  pleasure  to  the  play  on  Saturday.  Have  you  room  for 
Harriet  ?  tell  me  truly  ;  and  give  my  best  compliments  to  Madame. — Adieu  ! 

I  wish  you  would  call  upon  me  at  eleven  o’clock  next  Thursday. 

Endorsed, 

“  Lady  Spencer’s  letter  Nov.  1778, 
upon  the  prologue  to  Fielding’s  posthumous  play.”* 


CURTIUS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  November  21st,  1  778. 

I  enclose  you  the  letter  of  Curtius  to  the  Bishops.  It  is  Curtius  himself  pays 
you  the  compliment  of  a  copy.  Do  not  affect  to  undervalue  what  you  will  feel  to 
be  important.  What  Curtius  writes  may,  without  a  sacrifice  of  time,  be  read  by  Mr. 
Garrick  :  but  this  is  not  the  motive  for  sending.  It  is  a  labour,  Sir,  which  Curtius 
hath  imposed  on  himself  to  show  to  his  countrymen,  popular  men  and  popular  subjects 
in  new  lights.  The  State  and  the  Stage  are  both  his  objects.  The  name  and  the 
nature  of  the  best  actor  living  will  occupy  three  letters.  Plume  yourself,  Sir,  on 
being  sufficiently  important  to  engage  so  amply  even  the  generous  severity  of  Curtius. 

*  It  was  called  “  The  Fathers,”  and  was  acted  for  the  first  time  at  Drury- lane  Theatre  on  the  30th  of 
November,  1778.  It  lived  the  usual  nine  nights. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


319 


The  public  have  hitherto  seen  you  only  in  the  polished  mirror  of  a  parasite’s  adu¬ 
lation,  the  flattering  glass  hath  shown  its  figures  falsely  ;  but,  in  the  position  wherein 
Curtius  will  place  it,  the  public  will  perceive  it  neither  magnifies  nor  diminishes.  Yet 
the  exact  reflection  will  astonish  ;  for  the  universe  will  see  its  mistake,  and  Garrick’s 
nature  must  be  humbled  to  the  dust.  Indeed,  Sir,  my  Lord  North  will  scarce 
blacken  under  my  pen  like  the  man  who,  for  many  years,  has  enjoyed  the  idolatry  of 
affection,  without  meriting  one  single  sentiment  of  sufferance  abstracted  from  his 
mimical  talents.  Yet  Curtius  can  praise  as  well  as  blame  :  his  resentment  has  no 
rancour.  Perhaps  he  may  be  possessed  of  some  facts  that  are  distorted,  and  others 
that  are  unjust.  He  will  therefore  show  to  Mr.  Garrick  a  lenity,  not  to  say  ^ gene¬ 
rosity,  which  will  be  refused  to  statesmen,  who,  perhaps,  are  not  quite  so  well  entitled 
to  it ;  for  Roscius  hath  rags.  Curtius  then  (if  desired)  will  send  a  fair  copy  of  three 
letters,  which  in  a  short  time  will  appear  under  Mr.  Garrick’s  address  :  they  shall  be 
lodged  with  him  two  days  ;  and  if,  in  examining  the  swelling  heap  of  charges  they 
contain,  Mr.  G.  can  obviate  some,  they  shall  be  expunged  from  a  publication  which, 
it  is  conceived,  shall  travel  to  posterity  with  the  mistaken  character  which  it  analyzes. 
No  eye  but  that  of  Curtius  sees  his  letters  till  they  are  sent  to  the  printer  of  The 
Ledger ;  and  it  is  impossible  any  traces  should  be  found  of  the  author  even  by  the 
ministers  of  Mr.  Garrick.  The  veil  may  one  day  be  voluntarily  withdrawn,  and 
whenever  that  happens  it  cannot  be  to  his  disgrace — it  must  be  to  his  triumph. 
Would  to  God  it  was  not  necessary  to  enroll  the  downfal  of  Roscius,  as  a  man,  in 
the  list  of  his  victories. — Farewell,  Sir  !  Treat  me  respectably  for  my  frankness.  If 
your  wisdom  can,  for  once,  prevail  over  your  horrid  timidity,  you  will  keep  this  letter 
to  yourself.  But  should  you  think  fit  to  reject  the  clemency  I  hold  out,  it  shall  be 
published,  to  show  that  Curtius  is  a  noble  enemy.  No  man  shall  see  your  answer 
except  myself,  and  it  may  be  directed  to  H.  L.  T.  X.  under  a  cover,  to  the  care  of 
T.  Brewman,  Globe  Court,  Shoe  Lane. 

Curtius.* 


REV.  S.  NOTT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Winchester,  Nov.  22nd,  177S. 

It  is  not  to  trouble  you  with  business,  but  it  is  to  enquire  after  your  health,  that 
I  am  now  sat  down  to  write  to  you.  You  know  not  with  what  anxiety  1  at  any 
time  hear  of  your  illness,  or  with  what  truth  I  love  you.  Ah,  my  friend  !  I  like  not 
these  frequent  applications  to  different  medicines.  Mind  and  body,  at  your  time  of 
life, — and  having  deserved  as  you  have  deserved, — you  ought  to  be  free,  and  to  be  at 
ease,  and  to  be  happy  !  Instead  of  “  wandering  about”  for  health,  public  honour  and 
domestic  tranquillity  ought  to  sit  smiling  at  your  door,  and  to  say  to  every  one  who 
passes  by,  “  Here  lives  a  man  /” 

*  The  gulf  to  be  leaped  by  a  Curtius  of  Shoe-lane,  is  clearly  Fleet -ditch. — Ed. 


320 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  speak  not  this  out  of  flattery — why  should  I  flatter?  Thank  God,  my  wishes 
and  possessions,  like  two  friends,  go  hand  in  hand.  But  I  speak  it  from  conviction ; 
if  there  be  any  virtue  in  the  warmth  of  friendship,  any  merit  in  sincerity,  or  any 
value  (as  surely  there  is)  in  parts  uncommonly  blended, — elegant,  and  fine,— that  you 
have  a  demand  upon  our  gratitude,  our  praise,  our  esteem  ! 

With  regard  to  the  opera,  I  have  determined  it  shall  not  be  offered  this  season, 
so  that  there  will  be  abundance  of  time  to  revolve  that  matter  over  in  our  minds 
frequently.  I  shall '  return  to  St.  James’s  about  the  12th  of  next  month  for  the 
winter,  and  then,  if  in  the  course  of  many  weeks  you  can  pick  out  some  few  leisure 
hours,  and  will  always  tell  me  when  to  call  on  you,  1  will  catch  each  improving  hint 
from  my  friend’s  lips,  and  perhaps  work  up  the  performance  more  to  your  liking  and 
my  own.  At  present,  I  acknowledge  every  objection. 

The  songs,  I  agree  with  you,  are  not  void  of  merit.  Indeed,  they  laid  the  foun¬ 
dation  for  the  opera.  For  having  written  one  or  two  I  scarce  knew  why,  I  liked 
them,  and  then  first  thought  of  some  vehicle  to  write  more.  So  that  in  fact,  and 
between  ourselves,  the  opera  was  written  for  the  songs,  and  not  the  songs  for  the 
opera.  Farewell ! — assure  me  of  your  health,  and  believe  me 

Yours  affectionately, 

Endorsed,  Sam.  NoTT. 

“  Rev.  Mr.  Nott  about  an  opera.” 


MISS  H.  MORE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bristol,  Nov.  23rd,  17  78. 

I  shall  make  no  apology  to  Mr.  Johnes  for  the  trouble  of  carrying  this  pacquet 
of  nonsense,  as  he  will  be  so  richly  rewarded  by  having  the  honour  and  pleasure  of 
giving  it  into  your  hands. 

I  plague  you,  my  dear  Sir,  most  unmercifully ;  but  I  consider  that  the  sooner  I 
have  done,  the  sooner  your  trouble  as  well  as  mine  will  be  over ;  and  then  I  shall 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  go  to  Bath  and  drink  like  a  fish,  which  I  am  advised  to 
do,  for  my  bilious  torments.  Nothing  in  this  world  can  give  me  more  happiness 
than  to  know  that  you  are  well,  and  nothing  more  pleasure  than  to  know  you  are 
writing. 

My  kind  respects  attend  my  beloved  Mrs.  Garrick.  All  here  are  yours  with 
true  devotion,  as  is  from  the  veiy  bottom  of  her  heart,  with  more  gratitude  and 
affection  than  words  can  tell.  My  dearest  Sir,  your  ever  obliged  and  faithful, 

H.  More. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


321 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  CURTIUS. 

SIR,  Hampton,  Nov.  24th,  1778. 

Though  it  is  not  customary  to  answer  letters  written  in  a  disguised  hand,  and 
with  an  assumed  signature,  yet  I  shall  pay  Curtius  a  compliment,  in  return  for  his,  to 
trust  myself  with  him  in  spite  of  that  horrid  timidity  which,  with  as  little  justice  as 
politeness,  he  has  attributed  to  me.  There  is  such  a  mixture  of  harsh  language  with 
a  seeming  regard  for  me,  that  I  am  at  a  loss  to  guess  how  I  could  deserve  the  first 
and  yet  be  favoured  with  the  last. 

Curtius  says,  that  he  can  praise,  as  well  as  blame  — his  “resentment  has  no  ran¬ 
cour” — and  yet  “  I  am  to  blacken  under  his  pen,”  and  “  my  nature  must  be  humbled 
to  the  dust.” — How  can  these  matters  be  reconciled  ?  Hoes  Curtius  really  think  of 
me  as  he  writes  ?  I  hope,  I  believe  not ;  for,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  this  terrible,  most 
abominable  culprit,  has  received  some  marks  of  good-will  from  his  present  accuser. 
Would  not  Curtius  laugh  at  me,  should  I  take  any  notice  of  the  spies  and 
flatterers  which  he  has  made  part  of  my  present  retinue?  No  flattery  has  reached 
my  retirement,  but  that  in  which  Curtius  seems  to  join  with  others,  viz.  the  praise 
of  my  talents  as  an  actor. — Now,  Sir,  for  the  friendly  part  of  your  letter. 

You  kindly  offer  “  to  send  me  a  fair  copy”  of  the  three  letters,  written  purposely 
against  me,  “  and  if  I  can  obviate  some  of  the  heap  of  charges  against  me,  they  shall  be 
expunged  from  a  publication,  which,  it  is  conceived,  shall  travel  to  futurity  with  the 
mistaken  character  it  analyzes.”  Will  Curtius  take  the  word  of  the  person  accused  for 
his  innocence?  He  cannot  surely  do  it;  nor  can  Mr.  G.  obviate  any  charge  against 
him  in  this  way.  “  Would  to  God  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  enroll  the  downfal  of 
Roscius  in  the  list  of  his  victories.”  He  will,  he  ought  to  inquire  after  the  character, 
not  from  idle  reports,  from  malicious  or  disappointed  men,  nor  from  Roscius  him¬ 
self  (as  you  are  pleased  to  call  him),  but  from  those  who  have  known  him  long,  and 
will  speak  of  him,  “  Nothing  extenuating,  or  setting  down  aught  in  malice :”  do  this 
calmly,  assiduously,  and  impartially,  and  then  spare  or  give  no  quarter  (as  truth  will 
warrant)  from  the  stage  to  the  state,  from  the  lowest  note  to  the  top  of  the  compass. 
“  All,  all  but  truth  drops  still-born  from  the  press  !”  By  saying  thus  much  frankly, 
I  hope  that  Curtius  will  not  think  himself  treated  disrespectfully  for  his  frankness. 
I  will  honestly  assure  you,  that  I  had  much  rather  have  your  praise  than  your 
blame  ;*  but  I  would  as  much  scorn  to  obtain  it  meanly,  as  you  would  scorn  to  grant 
it.  I  will  likewise  honestly  assure  you,  that  the  horrid  timidity  you  accuse  me  of 
will  not  be  in  the  least  alarmed,  though  the  pen  of  Curtius  was  to  drop  its  gall 
to-morrow  upon  the  private  character  of  Your  very  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

*  “  Much  rather  have  the  praise'’ — Nothing  upon  earth  ever  more  astonished  me  than  such  a  declaration 
from  such  a  man.  A  ruffian  writes  three  anonymous  letters,  which  he  offers  to  the  inspection  of  the  person 
whom  he  chooses  to  assail — he  intends  them  to  destroy  the  fame,  the  moral  fame,  of  his  victim  ;  and  yet  the  gen¬ 
tleman  thus  threatened  would  prefer  the  scribbler’s  praise  to  his  blame  ! — Oh,  where  were  his  friends  Wallis 
and  Patterson  at  this  weakest  moment  of  his  life,  to  snatch  the  great  man  from  his  present  humiliation  ? — Ed. 

VOL.  II.  2  T 


322 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


The  letters,  as  you  seem  to  desire,  and  1  would  wish,  shall  never  be  seen  by  any 
eyes  but  Curtius’s  and  my  own,  as  far  as  that  power  is  in  me. 

This  answer  should  have  been  sent  sooner,  had  not  I  been  from  home  for  some 
days. 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin  Castle,  Nov.  29th,  1778. 

I  wrote  to  you  in  September  last,  hoping  at  that  time  to  have  had  the  pleasure 
of  waiting  on  you  at  the  Adelphi  before  this  time.  Partly  upon  that  account,  and 
partly  because  I  heard  you  had  been  very  ill,  I  released  you  from  the  obligation  of 
an  answer.  But  I  must  tell  you  that  I  by  no  means  released  you  from  your  actual 
debts. — Where  are  my  goods,  my  property,  Mr.  Quidnunc  ?  Did  not  I  one  Satur¬ 
day  evening,  in  your  own  box  at  Drury-lane,  give  you  a  list  of  more  than  a  hundred 
characters  which  I  had  seen  you  perform  ?  and  did  not  you  promise  me  in  return  a 
complete  list  ? 

You  did,  you  did,  and  never  have  performed. 

For  God’s  sake,  take  care  of  “The  Law  of  Lombardy,”  as  I  fear  I  cannot  be  in 
London  for  some  time  to  come. 

The  author  depends  upon  its  being  read  to  the  green-room  on  January  2  or  3  ; 
that  it  shall  be  brought  out  upon  the  stage  in  a  morning  about  15,  and  appear  before 
the  public  on  Friday  29. 

There  is  no  man  on  the  stage  fit  for  the  part  of  Palador,  and  I  foresee  that  the  old 
King  and  Alinden  will  both  be  savagely  butchered. 

If  you  have  a  mind  to  urge  the  cause  of  Wilks,  you  have  a  glorious  opportunity. 
Sir  Richard  Heron  is  now  in  London.  Tell  him  I  sent  you  to  him.  You  will  hear 
where  he  lives  at  Lord  Buckingham’s  in  Bond-street,  and  I  am  sure  he  will  be  glad 
to  see  you. 

Our  true  regards,  &c.  wait  upon  your  honour  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 

Your  very  sincere,  obedient,  and  affectionate  servant, 

E.  T. 

Send  me  your  titles,  or  you  will  hear  of  it. — My  compliments  to  Mr.  Carrington — 
he  can  write  them. 

Both  Jephson  and  I  have  written  to  old  Bubble-and-squeak  * 


THE  RIGHT  HON.  R.  RIGBY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Pay-office,  Sunday  Morning,  Dec.  6th,  1778. 

I  am  sorry  I  missed  seeing  you  when  you  did  me  the  favour  to  call.  I  have  had 
a  meeting  with  Anticipation ,|  and  like  him  very  much  ;  I  wish  to  have  some  dis- 

*  The  elder  Sheridan. — Ed.  +  Mr.  Tickell. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


323 


course  with  you  upon  that  subject.  Could  you  call  here  to-morrow  morning  about 
eleven?  and  you  will  oblige  Yours  sincerely, 

Richard  Rigby. 

Tell  Madame,  with  my  best  respects,  that  I  have  heard  nothing  of  her  mercer. 


MR.  T.  FOSBROOK  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Drury-lane  Theatre,  Dec.  7th,  1778. 

I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you  we  have  got  a  very  fair  house  to-night ;  the 
best  we  have  had  to  the  play,  the  first  excepted.  The  account  is  as  follows  : — 

FIRST  ACCOUNT. 


Boxes. 

Pit. 

First  Gallerv. 

J 

Second  Gallery. 

234 

310 

330 

210 

SECOND  ACCOUNT. 

80 

30 

160 

80 

As  I  suspected,  Mrs.  Abington  has  sent  word  she  is  ill  and  cannot  play  to-morrow, 
and,  I  am  sorry  to  say  it,  “  The  Fathers-’  is  given  out  for  to-morrow  with  “Harle¬ 
quin’s  Invasion.”  This,  I  am  afraid,  will  greatly  injure  the  piece ;  I  wish  I  may  be 
mistaken.  I  am,  Sir,  Your  greatly  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

T.  Fosbrook. 


MR.  T.  BECKET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Saturday  Night,  1778. 

Your  letters  have  made  me  truly  miserable. — Good  Gop  '  how  has  this  happened  ? 
You  seemed  in  good  spirits  when  you  set  off;  but  I  am  happy  to  think  all  is  safe. 

I  wish  you  was  at  home.  Do  not  think  of  the  W - ;  we  can  do  without  till  next 

Saturday.  There  are  two  good  letters  in  to-day’s  paper  addressed  to  the  author  ;  the 
printer  has  made  an  apology  for  not  sending  them  to  the  author,  who,  he  hopes,  will 
be  satisfied.  We  carry  on  this  affair  charmingly  together,  and  not  a  soul  knows  it. 
I  will  trouble  you  no  more  now,  only  that  I  am  yours, 

T.  B. 


ANTONIO  CARARA  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  V enise, ce  lime.  Decembre,  177S. 

Si  je  suis  quelque  chose  an  monde,  si  je  respire,  si  j’existe,  pour  ainsi  dire,  c’est 
a  vous.  Monsieur,  que  je  le  dois  ;  je  m’en  souviens  de  tout  ce  que  je  vous  dois,  et  je 
trouve  grav£  dans  moil  ame  le  dclicieux  souvenir  d’avoir  trouve  dans  votre  coeur  bien- 

2  t  2 


324 


private  correspondence  of 


faisant  un  protecteur,  un  ami ;  permettez-moi  de  grace,  Monsieur,  cette  digression, 
c’est  un  tribut  qui  vous  est  du,  mais  le  seul  que  je  suis  en  etat  de  payer.  Connoissant 
votre  belle  ame  au  fond,  et  sacliant  que  lorsque  vous  le  pouvez,  vous  y  trouvez  du 
plaisir  en  vous  interessant  pour  les  personnes  qui  out  eu  le  bonheur  de  vous  approcher, 
j’ose  vous  demander  une  grace. 

Vous  n'ignorerez  pas  certainement  que  ma  femme  chante  au  Theatre ;  vous  igno- 
rerez  peut-etre  ses  progres ;  elle  a  rempli  le  poste  de  premiere  chanteuse  avec  beau- 
coup  de  succes  sur  les  premiers  Theatres  de  ITtalie,  tels  que  Florence  pour  deux 
saisons,  Venise  pour  autant,  Turin  le  Carnival  pass6  en  compagnie  du  Chatre,  que 
vous  avez  actuellement  a  Londres,  Genes  le  printems  passe,  Treviso  avec  le  fameux 
Aprile  cet  dernier  automne,  place  que  1‘occasion  rendoit  respectable.  A  Turin  elle 
doit  retourner,  lorsque  elle  se  trouvera  desengag^e,  et  le  choix  de  l’annde  lui  est 
accord^e,  pour  preuve  de  son  succes.  Vous  S£avez  deja,  Monsieur,  que  Turin  est,  sans 
contredit,  le  Theatre  plus  respectable  de  toute  ITtahe,  sans  en  excepter  Naples,  ou 
elle  ira  pas  encore  ete,  quoique  recherchee  en  trois  difFerens  terns,  faute  d'etre  engagee 
ailleurs.  Tous  ces  brillans  succes  de  ITtalie  ne  peuvent  suffire  a  mon  ame,  ni  a  celle 
de  men  epouse.  Nous  desirous  de  revoir  Londres,  et  par  clioix,  et  par  interet  ;  cette 
benite  Isle  a  trop  d  attraits  pour  nos  ames,  et  e'est  a  vous,  Monsieur,  que  je  m’addresse  ; 
e'est  vous,  Monsieur,  que  j'implore  pour  raccompbssement  de  mes  voeux ;  votre 
credit,  votre  pouvoir  pourra,  sans  doute,  dissiper  les  nuages  qui  s’elevent  contre  notre 
bonheur.  La  voix  de  la  verity  ne  parvient  pas  jusqu’a  Londres  pour  cet  choix. 
Encore  dans  cette  annee  on  lui  a  prefere  une  femme,  qui  ne  la  vaut  pas  certainement. 
J’en  scais  toute  la  ruse,  mais  en  vous  l'exposant,  je  craignerois  de  vous  ennuyer 
davantage.  Soyez,  Monsieur,  mon  bienfaiteur  encore  dans  cette  occasion,  vous  le 
pourrez,  au  moins  je  m’en  flatte,  et  soyez  assuree  que  vous  n’aurez  point  des 
reproches  pour  votre  recommandation.  Si  vous  ne  voyez  pas  possible  d’obtenir  l’en- 
gagement  du  Theatre  d'Haymarket  pour  elle,  je  serois  charm 6  qu’elle  fut  engagee 
au  Pantheon :  je  desire  qu’on  l’entende  a  Londres  :  apr£s  six  annees  d  absence,  on 
ne  la  reconnoitra  plus.  Je  vous  donne  plein  pouvoir  de  fixer  le  prix,  que  vous  trou- 
verez  apropos  d’accorder  ;  je  signerai  vos  ofFres,  ou,  pour  mieux  dire,  les  engagemens, 
que  vous  pourrez  etablir  avec  les  directeurs  ou  de  l’un  ou  de  l’autre  spectacle,  sans 
y  ajouter  que  mes  remercimens.  Vous  etes  a  portee  deja  de  scavoir  ce  qu'on  donne 
a  la  premiere  chanteuse  ou  de  l’Opera  ou  du  Pantheon.  Faites  agr^er  a  Madame 
Garrick  mes  tres  humbles  respects,  et  ceux  de  ma  femme  aussi,  et  priez  la  de  vouloir 
bien  s'interesser  aussi  pour  notre  sort,  vous  qui  avez  un  aussi  grand  pouvoir  sur  son 
ame.  Je  suis,  avec  le  plus  profond  respect, 

Votre  tres  humble  et  tres  obeissant  serviteur, 

Antonio  Carara. 

P.  S. — La  reponse,  si  vous  plait,  a  moi,  ferma  in  posta,  Venise. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


325 


MR.  TIGHE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Dec.  19th,  1778. 

I  have  great  doubts  whether  the  place  of  Poet  Laureat  of  Ireland  is  yet  en¬ 
gaged.  Sir  Richard  Heron,  who  I  believe  is  returned  to  his  house  in  Grosvenor- 
square,  can  inform  you.  If  it  does  not  suit  the  gentleman  to  whom  it  has  been 
offered  (which  I  think  very  probable),  I  think  it  will  suit  your  friend  Wilks,  whom 
you  recommended  to  his  Excellency,  to  Sir  R.  Heron,  and  to 

Your  very  faithful  servant, 

E.  Tighe. 

Why  should  not  young  Bannister  have  a  part  in  “  The  Law  of  Lombardy  ?” 
Enter  a  caveat  against  J.  Aickin  and  Hensley. 

I  wish  you  would  write  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  in  favour  of  Wilks  for  the  place 
of  Laureate. 


MRS.  J.  H.  PYE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  Dec.  22nd,  1778. 

I  am  obliged  to  put  my  love  to  dear  Mrs.  G.  at  the  top ;  but  when  there,  she  is  in 
her  proper  place,  for  she  still  remains,  with  me,  the  first  of  her  sex. 

I  cannot  defer  one  instant,  my  dear  Sir,  returning  you  my  thanks  for  your  most 
kind  letter,  and  also  for  your  most  friendly  manner  of  acting  in  the  affair  I  took  the 
liberty  of  mentioning  to  you.  I  am  quite  of  your  opinion  concerning  the  publi¬ 
cation  ;  and  have  laid  aside  all  thoughts  of  that  nature,  as  it  might  widen  the  breach, 
and  could  produce  no  good  effect.  As  to  the  letter  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Adolphus,  the 
warmth  of  my  feelings  might  give  a  certain  energy  to  my  expressions,  which  cannot 
be  wondered  at  in  a  person  who  was  eye-witness  to  the  distressed  situation  of  that 
poor  young  woman.  But  because  I  would  do  nothing  rashly,  I  showed  it  to  a  very 
prudent  and  sensible  friend  of  mine,  a  man  advanced  in  life,  who  is  here  for  the 
education  of  his  daughter,  a  fine  girl  of  seventeen,  and  he  much  approved  it ;  how¬ 
ever,  when  you  see  Adolphus  again,  desire  him  to  show  you  the  letter,  and  I  will 
abide  by  your  judgment.  I  have  also  been  busied  for  her  here  ;  we  have  presented 
a  Memoire  to  the  Prince  de  Montbarie  (Minister  of  War)  to  obtain  a  pension  for 
her  ;  we  went  and  presented  it  ourselves  at  his  audience  ;  we  met  with  a  most  gra¬ 
cious  reception  ;  but  as  yet  there  is  nothing  decided.  Her  friends  insisted  on  my 
drawing  up  the  Memoire ;  and  if  poor  Madame  Depiennes  gains  nothing  from  it, 
I  however  have  gained  vast  credit  by  it ;  I  wish  with  all  my  heart  that  it  were  the 
reverse,  for  I  really  believe  her  to  be  a  very  deserving,  and  I  am  sure  she  is  a  much 
injured  woman.  If  you  could  obtain  from  her  uncle  his  countenance  and  protection, 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


it  is  all  she  desires,  for  she  means  to  go  to  England.  Do  you  think  she  should  write 
to  him  ? 

Long  before  this  reaches  you,  you  will  know  that  we  are  all  disappointed  by  the 
birth  of  a  Princess ;  however,  Paris  will  be  in  a  blaze  this  and  the  two  ensuing 
nights.  It  must  be  confessed,  they  do  not  welcome  the  fair  stranger  into  the  •world 
with  true  French  gallantry ;  but  may  say  one  thing,  the  first  moment  of  coming  into 
life  is  the  only  time  a  woman  has  to  complain  of  in  France,  for  they  are  happy  here 
from  fourteen  to  fourscore,  if  being  put  on  an  equal  or  superior  footing  to  the  men 
can  make  them  so.  We  have  a  noble  tragedy  going  on,  “  (Edipe  chez  Admete 
great  strokes  of  the  sublime, — no  love, — strong  passages,  and  in  short,  in  the  Shak- 
spearian  style  ;  it  is  wonderfully  approved  by  the  very  best  judges,  from  some  of  whom 
I  have  my  accounts,  for  I  never  go  to  Spectacles.  I  am  extremely  concerned  to  hear 
that  you  have  been  ill ;  I  hope,  however,  you  have  paid  the  tax  for  the  whole  winter, 
and  that  you  will  enjoy  perfect  health,  and  all  the  happiness  I  wish  you.  I  will  cer¬ 
tainly  deliver  your  message  to  our  dear  and  worthy  friend ;  but  I  advise  you  not  to 
send  her  your  picture  through  me,  for  I  do  not  answer  for  being  lionester  than  the 
Irishman,  though  from  a  far  different  motive.  I  own  I  should  greatly  like  to  see 
your  late  prologue  and  epilogue  ;  I  have  no  doubt  of  their  merit ;  and  I  own  it  would 
gladden  my  heart  to  read  any  production  of  yours,  for  time  and  absence  have  no 
other  power  on  my  mind  than  to  strengthen  and  confirm  my  tender  and  grateful 
affection  for  the  best  of  friends.  Except  yourself,  the  ties  are  all  loosened  that  held 
me  to  my  native  land  ;  and  though  I  glory  in  the  name  of  a  Briton,  my  first  wish  on 
earth  is  to  be  an  inhabitant  of  France.  My  boy  indeed — but  Mr.  Pye’s  family  would 
have  him  from  me  ;  they  tore  from  me  one-half  of  my  existence ;  and  I  wish  it  may 
answer,  but  I  doubt  it.  I  had  a  letter  lately  from  my  wild  American ;  he  writes  in 
amazing  spirits,  which  gave  me  the  greatest  pleasure.  I  have  but  just  room  to  assure 
you  how  sincerely  and  gratefully  I  am  ever  yours, 

PVE. 


THE  COUNTESS  SPENCER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


December  28th,  1778. 

We  shall  [be]  happy  to  see  you  on  Thursday,  either  well  or  ill-dressed ;  but  do 
not  put  us  off  any  longer. 

Will  it  not  be  more  convenient  to  you  to  dine  at  Holywell  House  than  at  an  inn  ? 
if  it  will,  you  know  you  may  always  command  it ;  and  as  it  is  constantly  aired,  a 
line  addressed  to  Mrs.  Maitland,  (that  same  prating  civil  dame  you  remember,)  and 
sent  over-night  by  the  post,  will  reach  her  time  enough  to  have  it  in  readiness  for 
you  the  next  day,  as  the  post  gets  in  there  by  nine  or  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning. 

Poor  Lord  Jersey  has  been  very  ill,  but  is  recovering. — Adieu  ! 

My  love  to  Madam.  I  have  told  our  people,  if  they  have  any  packet  to  send, 
they  may  trouble  you  with  it. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


327 


CURTIUS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  December  31st,  177S. 

There  is,  inserted  in  The  Ledger  of  to-day,  a  reason  for  the  silence  of  Cur- 
tius,  which,  it  is  presumed,  will  serve  to  excuse  him  to  the  public  and  to  you. 
Taken  up  by  a  duty  to  the  political  sovereign,  he  hath  been  obliged  to  defer  that 
which  he  owes  to  the  theatrical  potentate.  But  the  hour  of  leisure  is  again  returning, 
when  he  will  re-devote  himself  to  Roscius.  He  however  pledges  his  honour  to 
transmit  a  private  letter  to  Mr.  Garrick  previous  to  any  public  expostulation  ;  and  in 
the  interval,  the  whole  subject  is  deposited  in  the  bosom  of  the  person  who  chooses 
to  assume  the  signature  of 

Curtius. 


MR.  J.  WALKER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

January  1st,  1779. 

I  yesterday  heard  the  author  read  the  farce  I  told  you  of.  Perhaps  I  am 
growing  too  crusty  for  a  modern  critic,  but  must  own  it  does  not  please  me  at  all ; 
the  thought  is  a  good  one,  but  it  wants  language,  humour,  character,  wit,  and  even 
good  sense.  Mr.  Sheridan,  I  hear,  is  to  have  the  inspection  of  it  to-day.  The  author 
told  me  that  Mr.  Bate,  and  several  others  whom  I  know  to  be  men  of  sense  and  taste, 
approved  of  it  highly  ;  but,  for  my  part,  I  could  not  be  so  complaisant  to  him.  He 
seems,  however,  to  be  in  raptures  with  it  himself,  and  will  therefore  be  the  more 
mortified  at  a  disappointment.  I  need  not  beg  you  will  keep  this  opinion  of  mine  an 
entire  secret;  for  the  poet  seems  to  have  one  quality  of  his  art  in  great  perfection, 
and  that  is  the  irritabile. 

I  am  told  by  a  friend  of  mine,  that  one  Mr.  Gordon  of  Aberdeen  (a  priest,  by  the 
by)  has  written  imitations  of  Horace,  so  as  to  gain  the  admiration  of  many  of  his 
most  sensible  countrymen.  An  Irish  gentleman,  avIio  tells  me  this,  adds,  that  there 
is  at  least  ten  per  cent,  discount  to  be  allowed  in  the  character  of  one  Scotchman  of 
another :  perhaps  I  am  partial  to  that  nation,  but  I  think  we  seldom  give  them  suf¬ 
ficient  credit  for  their  real  value  till  they  have  proved  it  by  their  books.  I  cry  you 
mercy  for  the  pun.  I  hear  you  have  had  the  perusal  of  these  admirable  imitations  ; 
and,  if  you  should  write  a  line  in  answer  to  this  stuff,  which,  take  notice,  I  do  not 
expect,  should  be  glad  of  your  opinion.  I  met  Mr.  Racket  to-day,  who  says  Mrs. 
Racket  is  well,  and  your  niece  in  high  spirits  :  we  have  had  a  dreadful  storm  of 
wind;  the  streets  are  covered  with  bricks  and  tiles.  I  just  made  a  tack  round  the 
terrace  of  the  Adelphi  this  morning,  to  see  how  the  hospitable  roof  of  an  old  friend 
of  mine  was,  and  did  not  see  a  single  brick  or  tile  out  of  its  place.  I  hope  this  cold 
weather  does  not  disagree  with  you  or  Mrs.  Garrick ;  it  cannot  at  least  be  said  to 
come  unexpectedly.  Mr.  Airey  desires  to  be  kindly  remembered  to  you  and  Mrs. 


328 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Garrick  :  his  great  joy  this  new  year  is,  that  he  has  one  less  to  live.  Dr.  Johnson  is 
not  in  town,  or  I  would  have  stirred  his  gall  a  little  by  a  praise  of  acting  and  read¬ 
ing,  and  by  insisting  upon  a  possibility  of  their  being  in  some  measure  taught.  Well, 
I  dare  say  you  have  not  received  so  bad  a  new  year’s  gift  as  this  I  present  you  with, 
but  heartily  wish  we  may  both  live,  that,  stupid  as  it  is,  it  may  be  often  repeated. 
My  most  respectful  compliments  wait  on  Mrs.  Garrick,  whom  I  include  in  the  same 
wish  with,  Sir,  yours  most  cordially, 

J.  Walker. 


MR.  T.  BECKET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  January  4th,  1779. 

I  AM  very  unhappy  at  your  letter  just  received.  I  wish  you  was  at  home  and  at 
rest  in  your  arm-chair,  for  I  am  afraid  they  will  make  too  much  of  you,  and  make 
you  ill.  I  am  to  see  George  after  he  comes  from  the  pantomime  to-night,  so  he  will 
write  you  about  it,  and  the  trees  also ;  but  I  hope  they  are  safe,  as  he  said  nothing 
to  me  of  any  damage.  I  shall  send  you  “  The  Morning  Chronicle”  of  to-morrow, 
and  of  Wednesday,  as  I  suppose  he  Avill  give  you  an  account  of  the  pantomime. 
You  mistake,  my  good  Sir,  the  “  Whisperer”  was  promised  for  Saturday.  I  sent  you 
“  The  New  Evening  Post”  in  my  last.  I  am  told  Covent  Garden  is  very  full ; — 
Drury-lane  but  so  so.  I  am  ever  and  ever  yours, 

T.  Becket. 


MR.  W.  HOPKINS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  London,  Jan.  6th,  1  779. 

I  have  been  silent  thus  long  in  hopes  to  have  sent  you  an  account  of  the  new 
pantomime  which  is  again  obliged  (on  account  of  the  scenery’s  not  being  ready)  to  be 
deferred  till  Friday.  This  delay  has  been  attended  with  very  bad  houses,  having 
nothing  ready  to  perform  but  the  common  hacknied  plays,  as  you  will  see  by  the 
papers. 

“The  Touchstone”  at  Covent  Garden  was  performed  on  Monday,  and,  by  what  I 
can  hear,  it  will  prove  successful. 

We  played  last  night  “  Much  ado  about  Nothing,”  and  had  an  apology  to  make 
for  the  change  of  three  principal  parts.  About  twelve  o’clock  Mr.  Henderson  sent 
word  he  was  not  able  to  play.  We  got  Mr.  Lewis  from  Covent  Garden,  who  supplied 
the  part  of  Benedick.  Soon  after  Mr.  Parsons  sent  word  he  could  not  play.  Mr. 
Moody  supplied  the  part  of  Dogberry  ;  and  about  four  in  the  afternoon  Mr.  Vernon 
sent  word  he  could  not  play.  Mr.  Mattocks  supplied  his  part  of  Balthazar.  I 
thought  myself  very  happy  in  getting  these  wide  gaps  so  well  stopped.  In  the  middle 
of  the  first  act,  a  message  was  brought  me  that  Mr.  La  Mash  (who  was  to  play  the 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


329 


part  of  Borachio)  was  not  come  to  the  House.  I  had  nobody  there  that  could  go  on 
for  it,  so  I  was  obliged  to  cut  his  scenes  in  the  first  and  second  acts  entirely  out,  and  got 
Mr.  Wrighten  to  go  on  for  the  remainder  of  the  part.  At  length  we  got  the  play 
over  without  the  audience  finding  it  out.  We  had  a  very  bad  house.  Mr.  Parsons 
is  not  able  to  play  in  “  The  School  for  Scandal”  to-morrow  night ;  do  not  yet  know 
how  we  shall  be  able  to  settle  that.  I  hope  the  pantomime  may  prove  successful, 
and  relieve  us  from  this  dreadful  situation. 

I  shall  write  again  on  Saturday,  as  I  am  pretty  certain  the  pantomime  will  come 
out  on  Friday.  Mrs.  Hopkins  joins  with  me  in  duty  to  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick; 
wishing  you  both  all  health  and  happiness.  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Hopkins.* 


LORD  SANDWICH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Admiralty,  Jan.  8th,  1779. 

The  enclosed  letter  is  from  a  very  honest  and  ingenious,  though  indigent  man, 
who,  from  civilities  shown  to  me  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  has  certainly  a  just 
claim  to  any  proper  support  that  I  can  give  him.  I  believe  he  has  lost  some  emolu¬ 
ment  he  had  in  Trinity  College,  of  which  he  is  a  Fellow,  on  account  of  his  attach¬ 
ments  to  me,  which  led  him  to  oppose  the  Master  upon  some  points  in  which  I  inter¬ 
fered  ;  but  this  cannot  be  proved,  and  therefore  must  remain  as  a  surmise  only 
between  you  and  me  under  the  seal  of  secrecy. 

I  have  a  good  deal  of  vanity  in  my  composition,  and  therefore  should  be  very 
sorry  to  be  godfather  to  a  bad  play.  I  am  determined  not  to  read  it,  lest  I  should 
find  myself  obliged  to  strangle  my  child  before  its  baptism  ;  you  are  of  course  har¬ 
dened  in  all  business  of  this  kind,  and  therefore,  if  our  play  is  a  bad  one,  will,  I  con¬ 
clude,  have  no  compassion  for  poet  or  patron  :  all  therefore  that  I  apply  for  is,  that 
you  should  act  the  part  of  Minos  and  Rhadamanthus,  and  give  a  just  and  peremp¬ 
tory  decision.  When  your  sentence  is  passed,  I  will  read  the  play,  and  not  before ; 
but  I  shall  read  it  with  a  prejudice  against  it ;  for  if  it  is  worse  than  most  of  the 
tragedies  that  have  been  produced  lately,  it  must  be  very  bad  indeed. 

I  am  most  faithfully  yours, 

Sandwich. 


MR.  T.  BECKET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  London,  Saturday  Night,  Jan.  10th,  1779. 

I  had  wrote  you  last  night  to  go  by  the  coachman  this  morning  to  St.  Alban’s, 
but  your  packet,  which  came  late  last  night,  prevented  it.  I  now  send  you  a  packet 

*  Here  was  a  management  to  succeed  that  of  Garrick. — Ed. 

2  u 


VOL.  II. 


330 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


from  George,  and  “The  Morning  Chronicle”  (3)  which  has  the  account  of  the  pan¬ 
tomimes.  He  abuses  Drury,  which  is  unkind,  as  they  have  been  at  such  expense ; 
to  be  sure,  the  business  should  have  been  better,  but  yet  it  will  do  ;  the  scenery  is 
grand  indeed.  Grimaldi  is  the  life  of  it,  and  the  second  night  he  was  much  more 
laughable,  and  the  tricks  had  an  excellent  effect ;  the  pit  and  gallery  thronged,  but 
the  boxes  so  so.  I  have  not  seen  Covent  Garden,  but  hear  it  will  be  of  great  service 
to  them  ;  indeed  it  is  much  wanted. 

I  have  this  night  received  your  letter  dated  Friday  night,  and  have  made  the  alte¬ 
rations  as  you  desired  :  “  it  was  after  they  had  drew,”  &c.  I  have  made  it  drawn. 
I  have  struck  out  Sir  H.  P.  and  put  in  Dr.  H — t-y  ;  spiritual  instead  of  ecclesiasti¬ 
cal,  and  added  the  two  new  ones.  It  is  a  good  one,  but  how  you  could  write  it  in 
your  state  is  astonishing  :  it  will  make  a  noise.  Woodfall  is  in  high  spirits  about  it, 
but  very  low  to  hear  you  have  been  so  ill.  You  will  see  by  my  note  last  night  there 
are  two  answers  in  yesterday’s  paper,  which  is  now  sent  you.  I  send  you  the  maga¬ 
zine  and  review,  and  the  St.  James’s  of  last  night.  I  cannot  find  the  others  at  the 
Adelphi,  nor  what  they  have  done  with  them. 

Your  two  last  notes  have  given  me  fresh  spirits,  for  I  find  you  are  coming  round 
again.  Pray  take  care  of  a  relapse,  and  do  not  come  out  too  soon  ;  get  quite  well  and 
strong  first — what  a  hard  bout !  I  will  take  care  of  every  thing,  and  so  God  bless 
you.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  ever  obliged, 

T.  B. 

The  King,  Queen,  and  the  young  ones,  come  to-morrow  to  Drury,  to  the  “As 
you  like  it,”  and  “  The  Peak.” 


CURTIUS  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

London,  Jan.  12th,  1779. 

It  is  this  moment  that  Curtius  has  heard  of  the  illness  of  Mr.  Garrick,  and 
Curtius  assures  Mr.  G.  nothing  shall  pass  from  him  to  the  press  till  he  has  heard 
again  privately  from  Mr.  G.  or  at  least  till  he  understands  that  gentleman  is  in  a  state 
of  body  to  answer  any  public  charges,  should  he  deem  any  such  answer  requisite. 
Curtius  does  not  threaten — he  will  only  expostulate,  “  Nothing  extenuating  or  setting 
down  aught  in  malice nor  shall  a  single  accusing  sentence  be  uttered  but  in  appeal 
to  the  memory  of  the  public.  The  reply  will  still  be  to  L.  S.  P.  when  Mr.  G.  recovers  ; 
which,  to  preserve  amongst  us  a  relique  of  stage  genius,  Curtius  wishes  may  be  speedy. 
He  is  not  the  foe  of  Roscius’s  talents  or  person.  He  hopes  to  be  the  explainer  and 
corrector  of  his  affectation,  and  tyranny,  and  jealousy,  and  partiality.* 

*  I  know  not  who  this  fellow  was,  and  hardly  wish  to  know, — but  when,  eight  days  only  after  his  imper¬ 
tinence,  this  Curtius  heard  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  death,  had  he  then  leaped  any  gulph  of  destruction,  his  despair 
would  have  somewhat  improved  his  character. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


331 


MR.  J.  TAYLOR  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Jan.  14th,  1779. 

In  the  long  list  of  your  friends,  there  is  not  one  who  more  sincerely  wishes  your 
health  and  happiness  than  myself.  The  account  therefore  which  I  saw  in  the  papers 
of  your  late  attack  gave  me  great  uneasiness  and  anxiety.  Pray  let  me  have  a  line 
(if  you  are  able  to  write)  letting  me  know  how  you  are  at  present ;  for  newspapers 
are  such  false  vehicles,  that  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  them,  even  in  matters  abs¬ 
tracted  from  politics. 

Presuming  and  hoping,  however,  you  may  be  wrell  enough  to  kill  a  moment  with 
looking  over  a  few  dull  lines  from  a  real  friend,  I  will  venture  to  add  a  paragraph 
relative  to  our  stage  matters  ;  and  it  is  only  to  do  justice  to  an  excellent  actress  which 
has  appeared  here  this  season,  (a  Mrs.  Siddons,)  who  I  really  think  is  as  much  mis¬ 
tress  of  her  business  as  any  female  1  ever  saw  ;  I  have  attended  to  her  with  the  most 
critical  attention  I  was  master  of,  and  I  declare  my  opinion  of  her  to  be  all  that  my 
ideas  can  reach.  You  must  know  I  have  ever  in  my  mind  that  excellent  rule 
of  our  great  bard  : — 

“  Not  to  o’erstep  the  modesty  of  nature." 

Her  Portia,  Belvidera,  and  other  pathetic  parts  in  tragedy,  are,  I  think,  exquisitely 
fine.  You  have  seen  her  on  your  stage.  Am  I  right  or  not  ?  For  your  judgment 
will  ever  wreigh  with  me  against  any  other. 

Palmer  goes  on  bravely.  I  wish,  however,  Sheridan  would  wrrite  no  more,  for 
nothing  now  will  go  down  but  “  School  for  Scandal”  and  “  Duenna.”  “  The  Camp” 
too  is  just  pitched,  and  as  many  go  to  see  it  as  did  to  Coxheath. 

I  go  on  painting  away,  and  wish  to  show  you  some  of  my  late  works.  I  flatter 
myself  they  would  please  your  critical  eye. 

Pray,  do  you  ever  intend  to  come  to  Bath  again  ? 

My  wife  joins,  as  does  my  young  fry,  in  sincerest  and  best  good  wishes  and  com¬ 
pliments  to  yourself  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  truly  your  faithful  and  obedient, 

John  Taylor. 


MR.  T.  WILKES  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Dublin,  Jan.  14th,  1779. 

I  was  favoured  with  your  two  letters,  for  which  I  return  you  most  sincere 
thanks  ;  I  am  certain  of  your  kind  intention  to  serve  me.  I  have  been  several  times 
at  the  Castle,  but  cannot  hear  a  word  ;  it  is  said  there  that  not  any  one  as  yet 
is  mentioned  to  succeed  Mr.  Yictor ;  perhaps  time  may  operate  in  my  favour,  and 

2  u  2 


332 


CORRESPONDENCE  OF  D.  GARRICK. 


hope  you  will  remind  Sir  Richard  Heron  when  you  see  him.  Dublin  is  very  dull 
at  this  time.  Yesterday  died  Mr.  Leyster,  husband  to  Barsanti ;  on  the  death  of  his 
father  he  was  entitled  to  an  estate  of  upwards  of  1500/.  a-year.  Fielding’s  play  is 
printing  here;  we  have  not  as  yet  seen  your  prologue  or  epilogue.  It  was  reported 
at  our  coffee-houses  last  week,  that  old  Sheridan  had  behaved  in  a  very  impolite 
manner  to  you  at  the  theatre  ;  but  the  story  is  told  here  in  so  many  different  ways, 
that  I  should  wish  to  know  the  truth  of  it.  The  only  dependence  poor  Ryder  has 
left  is  from  the  opera  of  “  King  Arthur,”  which  has  cost  him  for  scenes,  &c.  upwards 
of  300/. ;  it  is  to  be  performed  next  month.  A  Mr.  and  Miss  West,  dancers  from 
Drury-lane,  have  performed  here  a  few  nights  with  some  applause.  I  am  wishing 
you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  the  return  of  many  happy  years. 

Dear  Sir,  most  sincerely  your  much  obliged  humble  servant, 

Thos.  Wilkes. 

It  is  reported  that  Sir  Richard  Heron  is  expected  here  in  a  few  days. 


MR.  YOUNGER  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Monday,  January  ISth,  1778. 

Mr.  Younger’s  respectful  compliments  Avait  on  Mr.  Garrick,  is  extremely  con¬ 
cerned  to  hear  he  has  been  so  ill,  but  hopes  every  hour  brings  him  better  health. 
Mr.  Younger  would  have  paid  his  respects  to  Mr.  Garrick  in  person,  to  return  him 
thanks  for  the  civilities  which  Miss  Farren  tells  him  she  has  received  from  Mr. 
Garrick,  and  the  notice  he  has  been  pleased  to  honour  her  Avith,  but  that  he  thinks  it 
Avould  be  inconA'enient  at  present.  He  begs  to  assure  Mr.  Garrick,  he  shall  ever 
retain  a  most  grateful  sense  of  them,  and  hopes  his  pupil  Avill  use  all  her  endeaA^ours 
to  deserve  his  favour. 


LETTERS  OF  UNCERTAIN  DATE. 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Tavistock  Row,  Friday  noon. 

Returning  home  last  night  too  late  for  the  post,  1  found  the  favour  of  yours 
on  my  table,  and  I  now  embrace  the  first  opportunity  of  making  my  answer,  which 
I  am  afraid,  from  the  nature  of  the  subject,  must  run  into  some  length.  I  am 
extremely  sorry  to  find  myself  reduced  to  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  defending 
and  proving,  which  I  was  determined  to  avoid,  if  possible,  with  you,  as  I  should  be 
glad  that  all  intercourse  between  us  subsisted  upon  terms  of  mutual  good-liking. 
If  my  letter  was  extraordinary,  (for  having  wrote  it  with  the  same  ease  and  freedom 
that  I  would  speak,  I  do  not  recollect  a  single  passage  of  it,)  I  hope  you  will  allow 
that  it  was  occasioned  by  a  very  extraordinary  meeting.  As  my  expedition  to  Rich¬ 
mond  was  in  consequence  of  your  own  appointment,  I  could  not  help  being  surprised 
at  the  reception  I  met  with ;  and  when  you  tell  me  that  your  darkness  proceeded 
from  my  want  of  light,  I  cannot  induce  myself  to  consider  Mr.  Garrick  as  an  opaque 
body  that  wants  to  be  shone  upon.  However  Shakspeare  may  irradiate  your  mind, 
I  cannot  pretend  to  it ;  and  indeed  I  always  thought  you  had  internal  light  enough 
of  your  own,  and,  in  a  case,  where  the  only  question  is  whether  I  am  or  am  not 
worth  your  while,  the  managers  of  Drury-lane  can  discern  what  is  expedient  for 
themselves.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  any  delicacy  you  may  entertain  towards  me, 
but  must  say  that  I  think  my  conduct  has  deserved  more  frankness  than  I  have  met 
with  at  your  hands,  as  I  persuade  myself  that  I  behaved  in  every  respect  like  a  gen¬ 
tleman  to  you  and  your  whole  company.  A  review  of  my  connections  with  the 
managers  of  Drury-lane  will  set  this  matter  in  a  clear  light. 

When  Mr.  Lacy  treated  with  me  last  summer,  he  may  recollect  that  I  was  reluc¬ 
tant  to  engage,  and  that  I  yielded  at  last  to  his  fair  promises  and  very  warm  persua¬ 
sions.  His  words  were,  “  Murphy,  be  advised  by  me — you  will  find  your  account 
in  it :  do  not  stand  out  for  money  ;  we  always  make  additional  presents  to  our  actors 
at  the  close  of  a  season  ;  we  gave  such  a  one  fifty  pounds,  and  such  a  one  an  hundred,’ 
&c.  L"pon  my  hinting  a  suspicion  about  Mr.  Garrick’s  partiality  to  Mr.  Mossop, 
his  words  were — “  By  God !  Mr.  Mossop  nor  no  man  shall  supplant  you.  If  Mr. 
Garrick  shoidd  have  a  mind  for  him,  I  will  oppose  it — depend  upon  me,  Murphy — 
Mossop  has  two  left  legs  and  two  left  arms,”  &c. 


334 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OP 


Induced  by  expressions  of  this  nature,  I  agreed  with  Mr.  Lacy,  and  at  my  first 
interview  with  Mr.  Garrick,  he  was  not  so  fervent  in  his  promises,  but  his  words 
were  that  Mr.  Mossop  nor  no  man  should  ever  hurt  me;  and  he  went  so  far  as  to 
mention  to  me  some  persons,  who  had  wished  him  joy  that  Mr.  Mossop  was  gone. 
I  have  now  by  me  a  list  of  parts,  in  your  prompter’s  handwriting,  which  I  was  to 
perform  on  Drury-lane  stage;  in  consequence  of  all  which  things  together,  I  had  a 
pleasing  prospect  before  me,  until  I  heard  from  a  gentleman,  who  had  conversed 
with  Mr.  Mossop,  and  an  intimate  of  his  at  Tom’s  Coffee-house,  that  Mr.  Mossop 
dined  with  Mr.  Garrick  at  Hampton  the  very  day  after  my  first  appearance  on  Drury- 
lane  stage ;  that  every  thing  was  made  up  between  them  ;  that  were  it  not  for  a  mis¬ 
understanding,  they  never  would  have  parted,  and  that  he  should  return  to  Drury- 
lane  from  Dublin,  it  never  being  intended  that  his  place  should  be  filled  up  by  me, 
as  was,  he  said,  pretty  visible  from  my  having  played  nothing  but  Osmyn  twice,  in 
about  six  weeks.  You  may  believe,  Sir,  that  all  this  threw  a  damp  upon  my  spirits, 
and  the  impression  was  farther  increased,  when  I  was  informed  that  all  the  players  of 
Drury-lane  made  it  their  business  to  propagate  this,  and  to  abuse  me,  which  last,  I 
am  credibly  informed,  they  never  dare  do  towards  a  person  to  whom  they  think  Mr. 
Garrick  means  well.  I  must  assure  you,  Sir,  that  Mr.  Davies  never  was  a  whisperer 
of  mine,  but  rather  seemed  to  me  desirous  of  teazing  me  with  Mr.  Mossop’s  return, 
and  I  must  add  he  was  not  the  only  person  of  the  company  who  used  to  ring  that 
affair  in  my  ears :  particularly  young  Holland  told  me  that  you  deferred  playing 
Othello  until  his  return  to  play  Iago,  and  he  farther  said  an  agreement  was  made 
before  the  season  was  any  thing  advanced.  I  could  name  a  few  gentlemen  to  whom 
Mr.  Mossop  boasted  of  his  treaty  ;  and  I  have  seen  those  from  Dublin  who  have 
given  me  the  strongest  assurances  of  his  declarations  there  ;  and  in  the  city  it  has 
been  asserted,  long  before  I  appeared  in  any  of  his  characters.  With  all  these  dis¬ 
couraging  circumstances,  it  is  not  surprising  that  my  spirits  carried  me  through  at 
any  rate.  But  whatever  my  feelings  might  be  on  the  occasion,  I  was  determined  to 
suppress  them,  though  I  was  sensible  I  was  not  in  my  proper  cast  of  acting,  of  which 
I  was  convinced  by  Mr.  Garrick’s  own  judgment,  who  told  me  the  year  before,  that  1 
should  always  make  the  best  figure  in  the  JafRer  way. 

But  the  deceased  Mr.  Tray,  you  say,  made  free  with  you :  if  he  did,  it  is  more 
than  I  know  ;  and  I  assure  you  he  had  no  commission  from  me  so  to  do.  Mr.  Ross 
has  whispered  to  you  that  I  have  complained.  I  do  not  desire  to  enter  into  any  sort 
of  competition  with  so  frivolous  a  man  as  Mr.  Ross  ;  and  I  think  I  have  some 
right  to  be  believed  when  I  aver,  however  I  might  be  jealous  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  inten¬ 
tions  towards  me  as  an  actor,  Mr.  Ross  never  heard  me  say  a  disrespectful  word  of 
you  ;  and  if  I  thought  it  worth  my  while  to  put  him  to  the  test,  I  am  convinced  he 
would  make  a  very  sorry  figure.  I  will  go  a  step  farther  ;  I  never  heard,  during  the 
last  winter,  any  person  speak  in  depreciatory  terms  of  you,  but  I  was  your  warmest 
advocate ;  and  it  is  notorious  that  Cibber’s  impertinence  carried  me  beyond  bounds. 

I  do  not  mean  to  make  a  merit  of  any  thing  of  this  sort,  but  surely  it  is  a  proof  that 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


335 


I  never  was  the  author  of  disagreeable  givings  out.  I  will  venture  to  add,  that  most 
of  the  enemies  I  have  in  the  theatrical  way  were  created  by  the  over-warmth  of  my 
zeal  for  you,  when  I  wrote  a  weekly  paper ;  and  though  perhaps  you  may  say — 

Non  tali  auxilio,  nec  defensoribus  istis 
Tempus  eget — 

I  think,  at  least,  it  may  serve  to  evince  my  disposition  towards  Mr.  Garrick.  As 
you  would  not  have  me  mind  the  reports  of  this  or  that  person,  why  will  you,  on 
your  part,  be  accessible  to  tale-bearers,  and  the  insignificant  false  suggestions 
of  Fanny  Murray’s  Cull?  Upon  the  whole,  I  have  nothing  to  say  against  Mr. 
Mossop ;  and  if  I  had,  I  should  suppress  it  on  this  occasion :  he  is,  with  my  free 
consent,  most  heartily  welcome  to  the  whole  race  of  tyrants,  from  Bajazet  and  Barba- 
rossa,  down  to  Gothmund  in  the  last  new  play  :  but  whether  it  is  compatible  with 
my  ease  and  reputation  to  be  in  one  company  with  him,  must  be  decided  by  the 
manager,  who  can  employ  both  in  their  proper  walks,  to  his  own  advantage  and 
their  mutual  satisfaction.  As  I  have  acquitted  myself  with  integrity  in  my  last 
articles,  I  cannot  see  why  an  indignity  should  be  put  upon  me  now  ;  and  therefore, 
if  the  managers  of  Drury-lane  think  an  agreement  can  be  made  with  me  as  an 
actor  and  a  dramatic  author,  I  shall  with  pleasure  meet  them  when  and  where  they 
please ;  but  if  they  are  determined  to  think  me  a  dog  not  worth  whistling  for,  in  that 
case  I  very  heartily  wish  them  farewell,  and  am  Mr.  Garrick’s 

Most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

If  I  hear  nothing  to  the  contrary,  I  will  be  at  Mr.  Lacy’s  at  eleven  o’clock  on 
Monday  morning  next. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  FOUNTAIN. 

DEAR  SIR, 

I  never  had  a  political  illness  in  my  life.  I  was  at  Covent-Garden  not  with  my 
brother,  but  with  Becket,  and  there  I  believe  I  caught  what  now  I  suffer.  I  came  to 
town  from  Hampton  after  four,  and  took  it  on  a  sudden  in  my  head  to  see  “  Rosa¬ 
mond  a  finer  creature  than  Mrs.  Hartley  I  never  saw — her  make  is  perfect.  Yesterday 
morning  I  was  seized  with  the  gout  in  Southampton-street,  and  have  kept  house  ever 
since.  I  love  your  suspicions;  they  are  friendly  ones,  but  ill-founded.  You  may 
depend  upon  my  secrecy,  but  I  cannot  think,  as  I  am  situated,  that  the  scheme  can 
ever  take  place.  I  thank  you  for  your  foisirs ;  I  shall  look  into  the  book  this  after¬ 
noon.  In  the  mean  time  I  am,  dear  Sir,  very  weak,  but  yours  truly, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  am  free  from  pain,  and  have  my  cloth  shoe  on.  I  am  subpoenaed  by  Mr.  Foote 
in  a  cause  with  him  and  Mr.  Ross. 


33G 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  SMITH. 

SIR, 

We  have  granted  all  our  charity  plays  and  tickets  for  this  year,  and  our  list  is 
full  for  the  next.  If  twenty  pounds  would  make  the  family  happy,  I  am  surprised 
a  lady  of  fashion,  consequence,  and  humanity,  should  debate  a  moment  about  the 
means.  I  wish  it  was  in  my  power  to  oblige  and  serve  all.  I  do  as  much  as  I  can, 
and  I  would  I  could  do  more.  How  you  come  to  imagine  that  you  had  no  interest 
with  me  (as  well  as  the  coldness  of  your  letter)  surprises  me ! 

But  as  I  must  imagine  that  your  notion  is  merely  the  result  of  your  inclination, 
you  must  give  me  leave  to  subscribe  myself  as  coldly, 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Garrick  joins  with  me  in  compliments  to  Mrs.  Smith. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  SMITH. 


DEAR  JOSEY, 

I  was  out  of  town  when  your  obliging  letter  came  to  my  house.  I  most  sin¬ 
cerely  thank  you  and  Mrs.  Smith  for  thinking  of  me  and  mine.  I  met  with  such  a 
kind  of  treatment  at  Grove,  that  I  have  conceived  resentment  and  dislike  against  the 
place.  We  are  told  that  some  persons  of  family  and  fortune  are  about  it; — I  shall 
therefore  not  contend  with  my  betters,  especially  as  the  bone  in  question  does  not 
absolutely  hit  my  tooth. 

To  have  been  near  you,  would  have  been  my  principal  inducement ;  but  as  that 
must  be  had  upon  very  unreasonable  and  some  disagreeable  terms,  I  shall  content 
myself  with  the  bank  of  the  Thames.  I  have  a  place  in  my  eye  that  I  think  will 
suit  us  ;  and  if  I  should  purchase  it,  let  me  tell  you  from  my  heart,  that  nobody  will 
be  more  welcome  to  me  and  my  wife  than  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Smith. 

I  am  yours  most  sincerely, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Our  playhouse  meeting  was  to-day,  and  I  am  so  hurried,  vexed,  and  what 
not,  that  I  beg  you  will  excuse  this  scrawl. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  SMITH. 

DEAR  SMITH,  Fr°m  Mr.  Vaillant’s  shop,  Monday. 

Mrs.  Garrick  and  your  humble  intend  to  travel  your  way  to-morrow,  for  rea¬ 
sons  and  causes ,  look  ye.  We  cannot  pass  by  Stanmore  without  asking  old  friends 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


337 


how  they  do.  We  shall  be  with  you  between  nine  and  ten  ;  and  if  your  water  boils 
and  your  heart  is  willing,  why  we  will  adjourn  with  thee  and  thine  for  half  an  hour. 
My  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Smith,  and  believe  me  thine  ever  and  sincerely, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 


MY  LORD, 

Though  I  hate  to  give  trouble  or  be  impertinent,  I  am  afraid  that  I  am  going  to 
do  both.  I  have  not  the  least  right  to  solicit  your  Lordship’s  favour ;  and  if  I  escape 
with  a  denial  only,  without  being  thought  too  presuming,  1  shall  think  myself  very 
happy.  I  have  met  with  such  success  in  my  applications  before  now  at  Devonshire 
House,  that  I  must  fail  there  before  I  can  apply  elsewhere.  The  person  for  whom  I 
have  ventured  to  ask  your  interest  is  a  brother  whom  I  esteem,  and  who,  if  he  had 
the  least  right  to  it,  is  not  unworthy  of  your  Lordship’s  favour.  Though  a  promise 
from  the  late  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury  may  be  of  no  service  to  us,  yet  I  shall 
conceal  nothing  from  your  Lordship.  Mr.  Carrington,  my  brother’s  father-in-law, 
applied  to  Mr.  Grenville  that  my  brother  might  succeed  a  Mr.  Fitzgerald  in  a  place 
which  he  now  holds,  the  particulars  of  which  are  in  the  enclosed  paper:  I  likewise 
used  my  interest  with  Mr.  Jenkinson  to  assist  us.  We  had  their  promises  for  it, 
but  Mr.  Grenville  pleaded  the  abruptness  of  his  leaving  the  Treasury  in  excuse  for 
not  performing  his  part.  Thus,  my  Lord,  it  stands,  and  thus  have  I  dared  to  ask 
your  Lordship’s  favour  in  my  brother’s  behalf.  He  is  the  bearer  of  this  letter, 
should  you  honour  him  with  asking  any  questions  about  this  affair.  I  shall  say  no 
more,  my  Lord,  but  I  wish  that  I  had  services  to  offer  that  might  lessen  the  im¬ 
pertinence  of  this  letter. 

I  am,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most  humble  and  most  obedient, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  LLOYD. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hampton,  Friday. 

Whenever  I  am  happy  in  the  acquaintance  of  a  man  of  genius  and  letters,  I 
never  let  any  mean,  ill-grounded  suspicions  creep  into  my  mind  to  disturb  that  hap¬ 
piness.  Whatever  he  says,  I  am  inclined  and  bound  to  believe ;  and  therefore  1  must 
desire  you  not  to  vex  yourself  with  unnecessary  delicacy  upon  my  account.  I  see 
and  read  so  much  of  Mr.  Churchill’s  spirit,  without  having  the  pleasure  of  his  ac¬ 
quaintance,  that  I  am  persuaded  that  his  genius  disdains  any  direction,  and  that 
resolutions  once  taken  by  him  will  withstand  the  warmest  importunity  of  his  friends. 

2  x 


VOL.  II. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


338 


At  the  first  reading  of  his  “Apology,”  I  was  so  charmed  and  raised  with  the  power 
of  his  writing,  that  I  really  forgot  that  I  was  delighted  when  I  ought  to  have  been 
alarmed.  This  puts  me  in  mind  of  the  Highland  officer,  who  was  so  warmed  and 
elevated  by  the  heat  of  the  battle,  that  he  had  forgot  till  he  was  reminded  by  the 
smarting,  that  he  had  received  no  less  than  eleven  wounds  in  differents  parts  of 
his  body. 

All  I  have  to  say,  or  will  say,  upon  the  occasion  is  this  : — if  Mr.  Churchill  has 
attacked  his  pasteboard  majesty  of  Drury -lane  from  resentment,  I  should  be  sorry  for 
it,  though  I  am  conscious  it  is  ill-founded.  If  he  has  attacked  me  merely  because  I 
am  the  Punch  of  the  puppet-show,  I  shall  not  turn  my  back  upon  him,  and  salute 
him  in  Punch’s  fashion,  but  make  myself  easy  with  this  thought — that  my  situation 
made  the  attack  necessary,  and  that  it  would  have  been  a  pity  that  so  much  strong, 
high-coloured  poetry  should  have  been  thrown  away,  either  in  justice  or  in  friendship, 
to  so  insignificant  a  person  as  myself. 

In  his  Rosciad  he  raised  me  too  high  ;  in  his  “  Apology”  he  may  have  sunk  me  too 
low  :  he  has  done  as  his  Israelites  did,  made  an  idol  of  a  calf,  and  now — “  The  idol 
dwindles  to  a  calf  again !”  He  has  thought  fit,  a  few  weeks  ago,  to  declare  me  the 
best  actor  of  my  time  (which,  by  the  by,  is  no  great  compliment,  if  there  is  as  much 
truth  as  wit  in  his  4  Apology’) ;  and  I  will  show  the  superiority  I  have  over  my  brethren 
upon  this  occasion,  by  seeming  at  least  that  I  am  not  dissatisfied,  and  appear,  as  I  once 
saw  a  poor  soldier  on  the  parade,  who  was  acting  a  pleasantry  of  countenance,  while 
his  back  was  most  woefully  striped  with  the  cat-o'nine-tails.  To  be  a  little  serious  : 
you  mentioned  to  me  some  time  ago,  that  Mr.  Churchill  was  displeased  with  me — 
you  must  have  known  whether  justly  or  not: — if  the  first,  you  should  certainly  have 
opened  your  heart  to  me  and  have  heard  my  apology ;  if  the  last,  you  should,  as  a 
common  friend  to  both,  have  vindicated  me,  and  then  I  might  have  escaped  his 
44  Apology  but,  be  it  this  or  that,  or  the  other,  I  am  still  his  great  admirer,  and, 

Dear  Sir,  your  sincere  friend  and  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  CHURCHILL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  MR.  GARRICK, 

Half  drunk — half  mad — and  quite  stripped  of  all  my  money,  I  should  be  much 
obliged  if  you  would  enclose  and  send  by  the  bearer  five  pieces,  by  way  of  adding  to 
favours  already  received  by  Yours  sincerely, 

Charles  Churchill. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


339 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  CHURCHILL. 

DEAR  CHURCHILL, 

I  sent  to  you  last  night,  but  could  not  hear  of  you.  I  cannot  conveniently  this 
week  obey  your  commands,  but  I  will  the  latter  end  of  the  next.  I  have  made  a 
purchase  that  has  beggared  me ;  however,  should  you  be  greatly  pressed,  I  will  strain 
a  point  before  that  time,  though  I  suppose  it  is  the  same  thing  to  you.  I  was  in 
hopes  your  ghost  was  laid,  or  at  least  your  acrimony  against  the  Laureate,  for  still  I 
cannot  get  it  into  my  mind  that  your  attack  upon  him  is  a  justifiable  one. 

I  must  intreat  of  you,  by  the  regard  you  profess  to  me,  that  you  do  not  tilt  at  my 
friend  Hogarth  before  you  see  me.  You  cannot  sure  be  angry  at  his  print?  there  is 
surely  very  harmless,  though  very  entertaining  stuff  in  it.  He  is  a  great  and  original 
genius  :  I  love  him  as  a  man,  and  reverence  him  as  an  artist.  I  would  not,  for  all  the 
politics  and  politicians  in  the  universe,  that  you  two  should  have  the  least  cause  of 
ill-will  to  each  other.  I  am  sure  you  will  not  publish  against  him  if  you  think  twice. 
I  am  very  unhappy  at  the  thoughts  of  it.  Pray,  make  me  quiet  as  soon  as  possible, 
by  writing  to  me  at  Hampton,  or  seeing  me  here. 

I  am,  dear  Churchill,  your  most  obedient, 

At  the  Rev.  Mr.  Porter’s,  Woolwich.  D.  GaKRICK. 


MR.  CHURCHILL  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Wednesday  Night. 

I  am  this  moment  come  to  town,  or  would  have  sent  to  you  sooner. — Poor  Gar- 
nier  !  I  much  lament  that  such  men  should  die.  Remember  me  in  Italy,  and  know 
me,  with  the  greatest  sincerity,  Ever  yours, 

C.  Churchill. 

Thursday  Morning,  five. 

I  heartily  beg  pardon  for  breaking  time  with  you,  but  the  reason  was  this. 
The  above  was  written  whilst  my  man  was  gone  for  the  notes.  On  his  return  I 
learned  that  my  mother  had  lost  or  mislaid  one  of  twenty  pounds  The  search  after 
that  made  it  impossible  for  me  to  send  last  night ;  and  the  not  finding  it,  together 
with  your  haste,  hath  made  me  ten  pounds  worse  than  my  word,  which  will  not,  I 
hope,  be  material. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  KENRICK. 

Monday,  March  26. 

Mr.  Garrick’s  compliments  to  Mr.  Kenrick,  he  is  very  sorry  he  had  not  Mr. 
lv.’s  play  the  time  he  desired  to  have  it.  He  may  be  assured  of  having  his  play 
acted  in  its  turn ;  but  it  is  proper  that  he  should  know  that  there  are  no  less  than 
three  plays  to  be  acted  now  in  Mr.  Garrick’s  hands  before  Mr.  Ivenrick’s  can  have  its 

2x2 


340 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


turn.  If  that  gentleman  will  trust  his  performance  with  Mr.  Garrick,  lie  will  give 
him  his  opinion  directly,  and  he  may  be  assured  of  having  all  the  justice  done  to  it  in 
Mr.  Garrick’s  power.  He  may  likewise  depend  upon  secrecy.  Should  any  of  the 
above-mentioned  plays  be  withdrawn,  Mr.  K.  may  depend  on  having  the  advantage 
of  coming  sooner.  Mr.  G.  writes  in  a  great  hurry,  having  several  gentlemen  with  him. 


*****  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

A  very  sincere  friend  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  acquaints  him  that  the  unheard-of  attack 
which  that  desperate  villain  Kenrick  has  made  upon  Mr.  G’s  character  is,  since  the 
publication  of  his  letter,  more  than  ever  the  subject  of  conversation  in  all  companies  : 
it  is  a  justice,  therefore,  that  Mr.  G.  owes  to  himself  to  repeatedly  show  to  the  world 
that  he  did  not  bring  an  action  against  this  villain  till  he  refused  giving  him  the 
satisfaction  of  a  gentleman. 

This  cowardly  rascal,  to  recover  his  reputation,  and  the  contempt  with  which  he 
has  been  treated  amongst  his  acquaintances,  now  declares  in  all  places  where  he  goes, 
as  he  has  lately  done  in  his  Appendix,  that  he  is  ready  to  give  Mr.  Garrick  the  satis¬ 
faction  of  a  gentleman  ;  and  to  cover  his  cowardice,  he  now  swaggers  with  a  sort  of 
Hussar’s  spadron  by  his  side,  and  hints  to  people  that  laugh  in  his  face  that  he  wears 
it  to  fight  Mr.  Garrick,  though  it  is  well  known  amongst  his  acquaintance  that  his 
cowardice  is  even  superior  to  his  infamy. 

A  Swiss  gentleman,  about  a  year  ago,  wrote  a  History  in  French,  which  was  put 
by  a  bookseller  into  Kenrick’s  hands  to  translate  into  English  ;  but,  during  the  trans¬ 
lation,  he  behaved  to  the  foreigner  with  so  much  brutal  insolence,  that  he  was  forced 
to  demand  satisfaction  as  a  gentleman ;  and  he  wrote  Kenrick  a  challenge,  but  he 
behaved  in  the  affair  like  a  coward,  and  locked  himself  up  in  his  chamber  for  several 
days. 

No  man,  from  spleen,  malice,  and  envy,  ever  took  so  much  pleasure  and  pains  to 
blacken  distinguished  characters  as  this  fellow  has  done :  lie  sits  hours  together  wri- 
ting  in  his  garret  anonymous  paragraphs  against  his  brother  authors ;  but  against 
Lord  Chatham  he  has  long  been  most  infamously  scurrilous ;  for,  during  the  time 
he  was  Secretary  of  State,  this  fellow  was  employed  by  Government  as  a  spy  in  Hol¬ 
land  to  communicate  intelligence  of  what  passed  in  the  sea-ports  in  France;  but  for 
his  insolence  and  misdemeanors  Mr.  Pitt  turned  him  out,  and  since  that  he  has  not 
ceased  to  vilify  him  ;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  now  Mr.  Garrick  will  bring  him  to 
condign  punishment,  and  clear  up  his  own  character.  It  seems  likely  that  Kenrick 
has  made  this  attack  with  the  hopes  of  recommending  himself  to  the  managers  at 
Covent  Garden  house  :  if  Mr.  Garrick  has  prudence  enough  to  keep  this  letter  a 
perfect  secret,  he  shall  hear  what  reception  he  meets  with  there. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  about  Kenrick’s  business,  supposed 
to  be  written  by  himself.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


341 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  KENRICK. 


SIR, 

I  am  really  sorry  for  the  figure  you  have  made  in  the  late  transaction  with  me. 
Could  not  you  have  finished  a  little  better  for  the  sake  of  that  honour  which  so 
readily  drops  from  your  pen  ?  What,  talk  of  dangers  and  attacks  which  were  never 
conceived,  and  which  even  you  could  not  be  frightened  enough  to  believe  !  Your  sug¬ 
gestions  about  Griffin,  Becket,  and  your  publisher,  is  a  poor  tale  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end.  Do  you  imagine  that  I  would  have  risked  my  reputation  to  have  acted 
unlike  a  man  even  to  him  who  has  been  ungratefully  vilifying  me  in  every  manner 
that  his  falsehood  and  malignity  could  invent?  No,  Sir;  1  would  have  honoured 
you  by  giving  the  satisfaction  of  a  gentleman,  if  you  could  (as  Shakspeare  says)  have 
screwed  your  courage  to  the  sticking  place,  to  have  taken  it.  What  single  instance  of 
my  neglect  or  injustice  to  you  can  you  produce?  You  say  that  the  comedy  ought 
to  have  been  acted  four  years  ago.  Gentlemen  of  your  cast  should  have  better 
memories.  The  first  offer  of  your  comedy  was  in  March  1770  ;  and  if  you  would 
have  put  it  into  my  hands,  (for  I  have  not  yet  seen  a  line  of  it,)  provided  it  had  been 
approved,  it  had  been  played  the  last  season.  You  have  now  withdrawn  it  from  me, 
till  it  shall  be  an  honour  to  be  one  of  my  literary  favourites.  My  literary  favourites 
are  men  of  the  greatest  honour  and  genius  in  this  nation,  and  have  all  had  the  honour 
with  myself  of  being  particularly  abused  by  you.  Your  pretence  of  my  having,  in 
conjunction  with  Dr.  Goldsmith  and  others,  abused  you  in  the  Morning  Chronicle, 
I  most  solemnly  protest,  is  false;  nay,  more,  I  never  saw  such  abuse,  or  heard  of  it 
till  within  this  hour.  But  it  is  vain  and  needless  to  answer  all  these  inventions, 
for  you  cannot  wish  to  be  convinced  of  what  you  never  believed. 

When  I  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  I  will  thank  you  as  I  ought,  for  your 
past  and  those  future  favours  which  you  are  pleased  to  say  you  will  confer  upon  me. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  a  proper  contempt  for  all  you  can  scribble, 

D.  Garrick. 

May  every  enemy  I  have,  whether  open  or  secret,  behave  as  you  have  done ! 
There  can  be  but  one  answer  given  to  your  falsehood  and  malignity,  which  may  be 
as  speedy  as  you  please  :  I  will  take  care  that  it  is  explicit. 

D.  Garrick. 

N.B.  This  not  sent  to  the  scoundrel  Dr.  Kenrick. 

This  note  was  intended  to  be  sent,  but  it  was  judged  best  not  to  answer  any  more 
of  Dr.  Kenrick’s  notes,  he  had  behaved  so  unworthily. 


private  correspondence  of 


342 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  DR.  BROCKLESBY. 


MY  DEAR  DR.  Hampton,  July  20th. 

I  know  your  very  friendly  disposition,  and  therefore  address  myself  to  you.  You 
have  the  honour  of  conversing  with  Mr.  Townshend,  which  I  once  had.  Meminisse 
juvabit — why  I  have  lost  it,  my  stars  must  tell  you,  for  I  cannot.  I  may  truly  say 
with  CEdipus,  “  my  hands  are  guilty,”  &c. 

A  plague  on  all  scribbling,  still  say  I — but  no  more  of  that.  All  I  have  to  beg 
of  you  is,  that  you  will  prepare  that  gentleman  for  seeing  his  name  among  the  sub¬ 
scribers  to  the  Calas  family.  The  case  was  this — Mr.  T.  promised  me,  at  Mr.  Cow- 
per’.s,  to  be  in  my  list.  I  was  so  proud  of  the  honour,  that  I  did  not  rest  till  my  good 
friends  at  Paris  were  made  acquainted  with  it.  I  likewise  signified  as  much  to  Dr. 
Maty  and  others.  I  ventured  very  lately  to  trouble  Mr.  T.  with  a  card  upon  this 
subject,  but  was  not  honoured  with  an  answer.  Thus  I  was  left  to  think  for  myself, 
and  the  fear  of  being  thought  a  boaster  abroad,  and  making  a  ridiculous  figure 
at  home,  induced  me  to  make  use  of  a  name  for  which  indeed  I  had  some  kind  of 
sanction.  However,  all  I  have  to  wish  now  is,  that  that  gentleman  will  be  pleased  to 
feel  the  awkwardness  of  my  situation,  and  not  impute  his  name  being  there  to  my 
impertinence  or  insolence.  This  is  all  the  favour  I  have  to  ask.  I  would  not  dare 
to  write  to  him  again,  and  am  very  sorry  that  I  am  obliged  to  trouble  him  with  a 
message  from  me  even  at  second-hand. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  you  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant. 
Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  Letter  to  Dr.  Brocklesby  about 
Mr.  Townshend.” 


LORD  SANDWICH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Way  24th. 

The  Duke  of  Bedford  and  myself  are  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  the  trouble 
you  have  given  yourself  about  our  scenes  ;  and  if  you  will  let  my  servant,  the 
bearer  of  this,  know  how  much  is  due  to  you  on  that  account,  I  will  order  the  money 
to  be  paid  directly.  We  are  under  one  distress  that  you  may  possibly  help  us  out  of : 
the  opera  not  being  yet  over,  we  cannot  have  the  scimitars  that  we  borrowed  the  last 
year,  and  we  can  think  of  no  way  of  furnishing  ourselves  unless  you  would  be  so 
good  as  to  speak  to  Mr.  Fleetwood  to  lend  us  four  scimitars  and  a  Spanish  toledo : 
if  you  have  any  such  things  that  are  not  now  in  use,  I  will  take  care  that  they  shall 
come  to  no  damage,  and  be  returned  in  a  fortnight’s  time. 

We  think  to  begin  our  performance  on  Friday  se’nnight,  and  I  believe  it  will 
last  all  the  next  week  :  if  you  in  that  time  should  find  leisure  to  straggle  to  Woburn, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


343 


you  may  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  both  tragedy  and  comedy  very  ill-treated 
by  a  set  of  bunglers.  I  would  have  called  on  you  myself,  but  that  I  am  this  instant 
going  out  of  town,  and  am  Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

Sandwich. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  LORD  HALIFAX. 


MY  LORD,  .  Sunday  night. 

Though  I  have  been  forbid  the  use  of  pen  and  ink,  yet  I  shall  break  through  all 
rules  to  pay  my  duty  to  your  Lordship.  I  have  indeed  suffered,  though  an  unworthy 
sinner,  the  martyrdom  of  saints  for  ten  days  last  past.  I  am  still  very  weak,  or  I 
should  pay  my  respects  to  your  Lordship. 

When  our  old  friend  Quin  was  once  ill,  and  had  received  a  present,  (I  believe, 
from  the  same  bounteous  hand  that  has  sent  me  mine,)  his  doctor  told  him  that  he 
would  not  be  fit  to  touch  such  a  thing  for  a  fortnight.  “  Sha’n’t  I  ?”  says  Quin  ; 
“  then  by  G — it  shall  travel  with  me  till  I  am  fit  !”  I  am  in  the  same  predicament 
with  Quin,  and  shall  most  certainly  take  the  wild  turkey  with  me  to  Bath  on  Tuesday 
morning.  I  am,  my  Lord,  with  the  most  grateful  sense  of  your  Lordship’s  goodness 
to  me,  Your  Lordship’s  most  obliged  and  most  devoted  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

My  hand  shakes  so,  I  can  scarce  write  legibly. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  letter  to  Lord  Halifax,  in  answer  to 
his  sending  me  a  turkey,  &c.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  MACKLIN,  IN  DEFENCE  OF  HIS  JUBILEE  ODE. 

DEAR  SIR,  1769. 

I  most  sincerely  thank  you  for  your  observations  upon  the  ode.  I  am  sure  you 
are  sincere,  and  therefore  will  excuse  me  to  be  as  sincere  in  my  turn.  I  shall  write 
loosely,  and  to  be  returned  to  me  when  you  have  read  it.  I  am  afraid  (God  help  me  !) 
that  I  differ  totally  with  you,  and  yet  I  have  an  humble  opinion  of  the  performance. 

“  Blest  Genius  of  the  Isle”  can  mean  no  other  but  the  Isle  we  are  upon,  and  in 
my  opinion  is  more  poetical  than  this, 

“  The  envious  nations  round.” 

I  am  surprised  at  your  objection  to  this  expression  ;  it  is  constantly  made  use  of  by 
the  best  poets — vide  Shakspeare,  Milton,  Dryden,  Pope,  &c. 

I  agree  that  unconquered  is  not  the  characteristic  epithet.  Clutterbuck  woidd 
have  had  me  change  it  to  all-conquering.  It  would  be  better,  but  is  not  quite 
right. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


;344 


“  Done  with  men” — and,  “  The  deed  had  done.” 

1  stand  by  the  expression,  because  it  is  Shakspeare’s,  and  a  very  favourite  one  of  his, 
“  I  ’ve  done  the  deed” — “  If  it  were  done.”  1  know  no  word  more  emphatical,  and 
which  Shakspeare  lias  made  use  of  more  forcibly. 

The  poet  may  either  create  or  narrate  as  he  pleases.  Homer  and  Milton  both 
tell,  and  why  not  poor  Garrick  ? 

“  To  tell  how  sitting,  &c.” 

I  cannot  possibly  give  up  my  telling,  because  I  am  much  more  able  to  tell  than  to 
show ;  and  as  all  the  great  poets  do  both,  I  may  take  my  choice. 

“  Unaided,  and  alone," 

by  his  own  powers  from  his  own  source,  unassisted  by  classical  knowledge,  or  by 
other  dramatic  writers, — Greeks,  Romans,  French,  or  English.  I  say  again,  and 
again,  “  unaided  and  alone  !”  the  great  characteristic  difference  between  Shakspeare 
and  all  other  poets  whatsoever.  I  know  you  think  you  have  caught  me  about  the 
passions,  but  I  will  try  to  break  through  your  sophistry.  Such  is  the  power  of 
Shakspeare,  that  he  can  turn  and  wind  the  passions  as  he  pleases ;  and  they  are  so 
subjected  to  him,  that,  though  raging  about  and  unchained,  they  wait  upon  his  com¬ 
mands,  and  obey  them  when  he  gives  the  word.  It  appears  to  me  a  strong  figure, 
and  consistent  from  the  first  word  to  the  last.  But,  my  dear  Sir,  do  not  say  with 
the  shill  of  a  jochey ,  but  rather  say  with  the  skill  of  Harry  Monmouth, 

“  To  turn  and  wind  a  fiery  Pegasus, 

And  witch  the  world  with  noble  horsemanship  !” 

What  do  you  really  mean  by  saying  that  here  the  dreams  are  realized,  and  there 
they  seem — and  why  not  ? — his  plays  are  the  appearances  or  images  of  persons  and 
things,  but  are  so  much  in  ^Nature  that  they  are  realized  by  his  pen  and  deceive  you, 
and  yet  they  do  but  seem.  This  would  pass  in  warm  figurative  prose  ;  pray,  your 
worship,  let  it  pass  in  poetry. 

“  Ingratitude  would  drop  a  tear,  &c.” 

I  differ  totally  and  essentially  with  your  criticisms  upon  this  passage.  I  say,  and 
will  confirm  my  saying  by  fact,  that  the  person  who  has  been  ungrateful  “  may  drop 
the  tear,”  and  even  cruelty  be  softened.  I  will  give  you  a  hundred  instances  of  the 
effect  of  the  drama  upon  hardened  hearts :  there  is  a  particular  story  in  “  The  Co- 
medien  of  St.  Albini,”  will  overturn  all  the  logic;  but  the  facts  are  innumerable  to 
contradict  the  assertion. 

“  Art  or  bribe.” 

Art  is  the  only  word.  Power  may  mean  riches,  the  same  as  bribe.  I  meant  by 
“  art  or  bribe,”  cunning  ox  power. 

A  monster  may  feel ;  but  to  make  the  marble-hearted  monster  feel,  is  an  operation 
for  the  genius  of  Shakspeare. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


345 


“  When  our  magician,  more  inspired.” 

It  certainly,  in  the  poetical  language,  requires  more  inspiration  to  create  new 
worlds  and  imagine  new  beings,  than  paint  those  you  see  and  converse  with. 

“  But  soon  these  horrors  pass  away, 

Through  storms  and  night,”  &c. 

Surely  the  day  may  be  said  to  break  through  night  and  storms — a  very  common 
piece  of  philosophy ; — and  if  he  smiles  and  inclines  to  write  comedy,  the  horrors  of 
tragedy  may  figuratively  be  said  to  vanish  from  his  mind,  as  the  witches  into 
air ;  and,  of  course,  all  the  pomp  of  tragedy,  the  buskined  heroes,  disappear  with 
them,  &c.  You  cannot  have  the  horrors  without  the  buskined  heroes,  and  therefore 
if  you  have  one  you  must  have  the  other,  and  so  I  flatter  myself  your  objection  falls 
to  the  ground. 

“  Spurious  birth — ” 

a  false  unnatural  birth,  like  the  mouse  from  the  mountain.  Mine  is  the  reverse  of 
that  fable.  I  find,  in  my  hurry,  I  have  let  pass  some  of  your  criticisms,  by  your 
papers  being  loose  and  my  not  regarding  the  pages  of  them  : — to  go  back,  then,  to  an¬ 
swer  your  long  passage  upon  woncler-teeming  mind,  as  short  as  I  can.  When  Shak- 
speare  wrote  his  “  Tempest,”  in  which  are  Ariel,  Caliban,  &c.  I  say  that  his  mind  in 
particular  then  teemed  with  wonders — they  were  monsters  and  spirits  of  his  own 
creating,  and  therefore  wonders.  What  does  Shakspeare  mean  by  wonder-wounded 

hearers  ?  That  the  stars  stand  still,  to  hear  something  out  of  the  common - And  here, 

Sir,  let  me  remark  upon  a  position  that  you  have  laid  down,  that  all  poetry  must  be 
fact.  I  say  not,  and  that  a  mere  matter-of-fact  poet  is  a  damned  poet :  the  poetical 
figures  will  allow  stars  to  be  wonder-wounded  hearers,  when,  God  knows,  they  mind 
no  more  what  we  are  doing,  than  you  perhaps  what  I  am  writing. — But  now  for  a 
stroke  of  humour  on  your  part,  which  might  pass  in  a  comical  man’s  mouth,  but  not 
from  your  philosophical  pen.  You  have  heard  of  raising  cabbages,  &c.  but  never  of 
worlds  before.  I  am  sorry  for  it.  You  have  heard  of  reusing  palaces  and  monuments, 
I  believe : — would  not  that  phrase  have  been  less  severe  and  more  friendly  ? 

But  I  will  convince  you  that  heaven  and  earth  may  be  raised.  See  Milton’s 
“  Paradise  Lost,”  book  xii.  line  546. 

- “  Then  raise 

From  the  conflagrant  mass,  purg’d  and  refin’d, 

New  heavens,  new  earth,”  &c. 

These  are  not  cabbages  or  cucumbers  : — there  is  likewise  something  better  than  cab¬ 
bages  raised  in  book  v.  line  757  : 

“  Rais’d  on  a  mount,  with  pyramids  and  tow’rs, 

From  diamond  quarries  hewn,  and  rocks  of  gold. 

The  palace  of  great  Lucifer  !”  &c. 

“  What  Nature  had  disjoined,”  &c. 

.Sure,  Poetry  may  say  that  Nature  intended  children  to  be  grateful  and  old  age  to  be 
calm,  and  the  reverse  of  mad,  from  its  powers  being  wasted  and  enfeebled.  Lear  is 

VOL.  II.  2  Y 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


-340 


>1  \ei\  singular  character,  and  has  nothing  like  it  in  the  whole  circle  of  the  drama; 
and  what  happens  to  him  could  happen  to  no  other  being  ;  and  1  really  think  no 
poet  but  Shakspeare  could  have  introduced  such  a  wonderful  tragedy  upon  the  stage. 


“  Should  harass’d  Nature,  &c.” 

I  really  cannot  answer  your  objections,  for  I  really  do  not  understand  them.  All  that 
is  meant  is,  “  Should  the  guilty  man,  worn  out  with  fatigues  and  watchings,  sink  to 
rest  from  mere  weakness,  or  forgetfulness  of  his  crimes,  the  scorpion  is  waked,  &c.” 
Can  any  thing  be  more  plain  ?  If  penitential  is  a  religious  technical  term,  sure  the 
poet  who  by  long  representation  makes  the  guilty  partner  feel  and  repent  of  his 
crimes,  may  be  said  to  draw  forth  the  tear  of  penitence. 


“  In  transport  dies." 

a  common  expression  with  poets.  What  think  you  of  the  famous  line  of  Pope’s,  in 
which  he  makes  Kloisa  dissolve  away  in  Hallelujahs  ? — figurative,  my  good  friend. 

“  And  dies  in  joys  unknown  before 

I  do  not  see  how  I  can  make  Shakspeare  lie  in  transports,  as  I  am  afraid  the  last 
time  we  saw  him  he  was  sitting.  I  am  glad  you  do  not  meddle  with  my  bees  ;  I  be¬ 
lieve  they  would  sting  you  if  you  did.  I  have  the  best  opinion  upon  my  hive  ;  and 
the  laughers  may  enjoy  their  joke,  as  I  will  that  part  of  the  ode. 

lhe  rainbow  is  a  rich  subject  for  ridicule,  you  say.  I  beg  leave  to  think  other¬ 
wise  ;  and  I  know  no  comparison  that  seems  to  me  to  suit  Shakspeare  better. 

Endorsed, 

“  Critique  of  my  ode  by  Macklin 
answered  by  me. 

“  1  m>ght  have  spent  my  time  better  than  supporting 
a  foolish  business  against  a  very  foolish  man.”* 


MR.  B.  WILSON  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

Whenever  Mr.  Wilson  overflows,  you  may  be  assured,  it’ is  only  to  his  friends. 
If  M.  Delaval  has  thought  proper  to  please  himself  by  acquainting  Mr.  Foote,  the 
humorist,  with  the  painter’s  adventure,  be  assured,  it  was  contrary  to  my  advice  and 
inclination. 

I  do  admit  that  there  are  secrets  you  keep  very  well,  particularly  all  those  that 

*  Very  ingenuous,  at  all  events.  In  all  the  points  noticed  the  objections  were  frivolous.  As  an  ode  it 
was  too  theatrical;  but  whatever  it  wanted  of  the  majesty  which  Gray  could  have  given  to  the  poem,  I  am 
quite  sure  that  it  produced  more  effect  from  the  great  actor,  than  even  the  “  Bard’’  would  have  done  had  he 
recited  it  in  public.  Actors  have  always  been  fond  of  speaking  it.  It  has  no  stage  rival  but  Collins’  “  on  the 
Passions,”  where  they  act  the  description  of  the  passion,  as  though  the  passion  itself  spoke  the  verses. —  Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


347 


respect  my  German  friend,  Zoffani.  And  I  think  a  conversation-piece  upon  that 
subject  might,  if  properly  executed,  make  a  most  excellent  picture.  Perhaps  it  would 
merit  being  in  the  collection  of  your  right  honourable  neighbour  the  Admiralty 
Lord.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

B.  Wilson. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Wilson’s  letter  and  my  answer.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  TELLTRUTH. 

DEAR  MR.  TELLTRUTH,  Hampton. 

Mr.  Wilson  may,  if  he  pleases,  tell  you  that  he  only  overflows  to  his  friends ; 
but  I  have  heard  lately  of  his  complaining  in  the  streets  to  other  people :  he  may 
likewise  say  that  it  was  contrary  to  his  advice  and  inclination  that  his  friend  should 
tell  again  ;  yet,  as  he  gave  his  promise  that  it  should  not  be  told  at  all,  his  overflowing 
can  be  no  excuse  for  the  breach  of  his  word.  But,  that  he  may  be  quite  easy  for  the 
future,  be  pleased  to  let  him  know  that  he  may  release  his  tongue  from  any  tie  with 
me ;  and  that  I  beg  he  would  make  use  of  all  the  skill  in  his  profession,  to  colour 
highly  the  curious  tale  which  has  occasioned  these,  perhaps,  involuntary  overflowings 
of  his  lips  :  he  will  stick  to  truth  for  many  reasons,  and  for  his  own  sake,  as  there  are 
now  no  more  secrets  between  us.  He  need  not  employ  his  out-runners  and  spies  to 
discover  what  Zoffani  is  doing  at  my  house ;  it  will  save  some  expense  in  feeing 
them,  and  save  themselves  from  a  ducking  if  they  should  be  caught  near  our  part 
of  the  river.  By  your  friend  Mr.  Wilson’s  letter,  one  would  imagine  that  he  has  an 
article  with  me  as  he  has  with  Zoffani  about  pictures  and  painters  ;  but,  that  he  may 
not  vex  his  poor  heart  about  secrets  and  suspicions,  I  desire  that  you  will  inform  him 
that  I  shall  do  his  German  friend  all  the  good  offices  in  my  power ;  he  was  warmly 
recommended  to  me  by  my  acquaintance,  is  a  man  of  merit,  and  well  behaved  in  my 
family  ;  and  that  my  right  honourable  neighbour  is  not  the  only  nobleman  that  will 
employ  him  through  my  means ; — and  therefore  he  will  be  now  at  liberty  to  begin 
the  conversation-piece  he  mentions :  I  rely  on  his  fancy  to  make  it  a  most  excellent 
picture  ;  and  I  shall  endeavour,  in  my  way,  but  at  humble  distance,  to  prepare  a 
proper  companion  for  it.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  add  a  little  advice 
to  him  from  an  old  friend  : — as  Providence  has  blessed  him  with  genius,  he  should  not 
descend  to  little  jealousies  with  his  friends  about  pictures,  as  he  formerly  did  with 
Dr.  and  Mr.  &c. ;  and  lastly  beseech  him,  as  he  loves  his  own  quiet,  not  to  meddle 
any  more  with  wit  and  humour ;  they  are  at  best  but  small  game,  and  much  below 
the  consequence  and  attention  of  a  great  philosopher. 

I  am,  dear  Mr.  Timothy,  your  most  obliged 

And  obedient  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


2  y  2 


348 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  [WILSON]  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Monday. 

On  coming  to  town  this  morning,  I  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  inquire 
after  my  very  worthy  brother  artist  Zoffani.  But,  alas  !  how  unlucky !  he  had  left 
his  work,  and  was  gone  to  breakfast  loaded  with  pencils,  & c.  in  an  invisible  convey¬ 
ance.  As  you  will  chance  to  see  him  before  I  shall,  you  will  oblige  me  by  desiring 
him  to  fulfil  his  engagements,  and  act,  if  he  can,  like  an  honest  man. 

In  that  case,  he  will  not  only  deserve  your  favour,  but  that  of  every  other  person 
who  shall  choose  to  employ  him. 

I  am,  with  respect,  your  simple  friend  and  admirer, 

Timothy  Lovetrutii. 


MR.  R.  B.  SHERIDAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Great  Queen  Street,  January  10th. 

I  have  been  about  finishing  the  verses  which  were  to  have  followed  you  to 
Althorp  every  day  since  you  left  town  ;  and  as  idle  as  such  an  employment  is,  I  have 
been  drcerted  from  it  by  one  thing  or  other  still  more  idle  even  than  rhyming.  I 
believe  I  shall  give  up  all  attempts  at  versifying  in  future,  for  my  efforts  in  that  way 
always  bring  me  into  some  foolish  predicament :  what  I  write  in  a  hurry,  I  always 
feel  to  be  not  worth  reading ;  and  what  I  try  to  take  pains  with,  I  am  sure  never  to 
finish.  However,  such  as  it  is,  the  poem  shall  salute  your  return,  and  it  will  then 
have  the  advantage  of  finding  you  less  at  leisure  to  be  critical ;  though  indeed,  but 
that  I  am  not  sure  of  your  even  receiving  this  at  Althorp,  I  would  endeavour  to 
acquit  myself  of  my  promise,  though  something  after  the  time.  I  mean  to  be  vastly 
civil  to  female  talent  of  all  sorts,  and  even  to  the  affectation  of  it  where  the  person  is 
very  handsome,  (for  the  grace  of  Venus,  which  passes  all  understanding,  atones  for 
an  abundance  of  frailty,)  and  my  bards  shall  be  very  easily  recompensed. 

In  due  proportion  she  rewards  their  toils, 

Bows  for  a  distich — for  a  stanza  smiles  ; 

Familiar  nods  an  epigram  attend  ; 

An  ode  will  almost  rank  you  as  a  friend  ; 

A  softer  name  fond  elegy  bestows  ; 

But  nearest  to  her  heart  a  sonnet  flows. 

I  need  not  attempt  to  write  you  any  news.  I  hear  every  where  how  valiantly 
you  are  fighting  Cumberland’s  battles  for  him.  I  hope  the  bugle  meets  with  due 
honour. — I  must  send  this  away,  or  I  shall  be  too  late  for  the  post. 

Your  most  sincere  and  obedient, 

R.  B.  Sheridan. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


349 


MR.  G.  KEATE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  GARRICK,  Margate,  August  23rd. 

While  you  are  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  placid  Thames,  under  shades  of  your 
own  planting,  planning  the  operations  of  a  next  winter’s  campaign,  we  are  in  the 
wish-wash  way  at  Margate,  amidst  deep  caverns,  high  cliffs,  and  expanded  waters, 
enjoying  the  less  calm,  but  more  sublime  objects  of  Nature.  Could  you  treat  your 
Muse  with  a  ducking  by  the  sea-side,  in  the  group  of  characters  that  are  imported 
and  exported  to  this  place,  she  might  meet  with  some  not  unworthy  her  notice. 
Though,  if  report  says  right,  (which  once  in  an  hundred  times  it  does,)  your  imagina¬ 
tion  is  at  sea  at  this  time,  for  we  learn  that  the  British  navy  is  to  sail  over  your  trap¬ 
doors,  and  that  all  Drury -lane  will  be  laid  under  water.  The  idea  of  a  sea  on  dry 
land  is  far  from  new,  though  the  actual  execution  will  be  so.  We  acknowledge 
Canterbury,  York,  Durham,  and  about  three-and-twenty  more  churches,  though  built 
on  terra finna,  to  be  in  the  midst  of  Sees,  yet  know  for  certain  there  is  not  more 
water  about  them  than  will  serve  to  christen  a  child — no  bad  fishing  or  rowing,  my 
master,  neither ;  and  the  lawn  sleeves  worn  by  those  who  win  the  badge,  may  be 
analogous  to  the  clean  white  shirt  in  which  competitors  contend  who  row  for  the 
prize  on  common  water. 

I  called  two  or  three  times  at  the  Adelphi  before  I  left  town,  to  know  if  you  had 
any  vacancy  in  your  dominion,  as  I  wished  by  a  recommendation  to  serve  a  sober, 
handy,  industrious  woman,  and  to  serve  you  by  a  person  who  would,  I  think,  dis¬ 
charge  her  duty  by  you.  She  is  neither  fit  for  comedy,  tragedy,  pastoral,  or  farce, 
nor  can  sing  or  dance,  unless  you  could  give  her  a  little  employment,  which  would 
probably  make  her  do  both.  To  be  serious,  she  is,  I  believe,  between  forty-five  and 
fifty  ;  is  very  sober,  very  honest ;  her  profession  is  a  mantua-maker,  in  which  she  is 
ingenious ;  but  a  life  of  peqietual  sitting  and  labour  but  ill  agrees  with  her 
health  :  if  you  was  in  want  of  a  person  about  the  wardrobe,  to  assist  in  taking  care  of 
the  clothes,  of  managing  or  putting  them  up,  or  any  business  about  the  house,  (ex¬ 
cept  a  mere  dresser,)  I  would,  I  think,  be  bound  for  her  integrity,  and  I  conceive  she 
would  do  you  all  imaginable  justice,  and  her  profession  might  render  her  also  useful : 
— if  you  should  not  at  present  want  such  a  person,  you  may  possibly  at  another  time. 

I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you,  my  good  Signora  is  well,  and  begs  to  be 
remembered  to  you  and  Airs.  Garrick  in  the  kindest  terms,  as  does  your  humble  ser¬ 
vant.  The  Infanta  grows  apace,  talks  almost  every  thing,  and  still  speaks  of  your 
rapturous  kisses. 

Your  neighbour,  Mr.  Lovibond,  and  his  son  are  here,  and  dine  with  me  to-day, 
when,  like  good  friends,  we  will  drink  your  health  in  a  bumper. 

I  write  in  great  haste,  to  save  the  post :  excuse  the  scrawl,  and  believe  me, 

Dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  and  obedient  servant, 

G.  Keate. 


350 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  SHERIDAN,  SEN.  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

As  Mr.  Sheridan  intends  to  pass  the  ensuing  winter  in  London,  in  order  to  pro¬ 
secute  a  point  which  will  take  up  a  good  deal  of  his  time,  yet  not  so  much  but  that 
lie  shall  have  leisure  also  to  do  something  in  his  theatrical  capacity,  he  is  willing  to 
enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  Managers  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Drury-lane,  to 
perform  there  in  such  a  manner,  and  at  such  times,  as  may  be  consistent  with  his 
other  pursuits. 

He  has  two  plays,  never  performed  in  this  kingdom,  nor  published,  but  which 
were  represented  on  the  Dublin  stage  with  success ;  either  or  both  of  which  he  will 
undertake  to  get  in  readiness  for  acting  in  as  short  a  space  of  time,  and  with  as  little 
trouble  to  the  managers,  as  possible. 

He  is  ready  in  a  number  of  plays  which  have  not  been  acted  these  many  years  at 
Drury-lane  ;  most  of  which  might  be  revived  with  reasonable  hopes  of  success,  even 
without  the  advantage  of  Mr.  Garrick's  performing  in  them. 

He  is  prepared  in  several  plays  which  have  been  for  some  time  in  the  stock  at 
Drury-lane,  in  which  Mr.  Garrick  has  no  part,  and  in  each  of  which  at  present  a 
capital  character  wants  to  be  supplied. 

He  is  ready  also  in  several  plays  in  which  Mr.  Garrick  performs,  in  any  of 
which,  at  the  choice  of  Mr.  Garrick,  he  shall  at  any  time  be  ready  to  appear.  The 
managers  are  best  acquainted  with  their  own  plan  of  operations^  and  can  best 
judge  how  far,  and  in  what  proportion,  Mr.  Sheridan’s  performance  may  be  of  use 
to  them.  In  his  treaty  with  them,  Mr.  Sheridan  would  govern  himself  by  the  fol¬ 
lowing  maxims  : 

He  neither  expects  nor  desires  that  any  part  of  the  general  views  and  interests  of 
the  theatre  should  give  way  to  his  particular  views  or  interests. 

If  it  should  appear  that  there  will  be  but  seldom  occasion  for  Mr.  Sheridan’s 
assistance,  and  but  few  opportunities  offer  of  his  contributing  to  the  advantage  of 
the  whole,  it  will  fall  very  well  in  with  his  system  that  he  should  perform  but 
seldom. 

If  upon  trial  it  should  be  found  advantageous,  or  by  unforeseen  accidents  it 
should  be  thought  necessary,  that  his  performances  should  be  more  frequent,  he  will 
extend  his  theatrical  plan  as  far  as  he  can  consistently  with  his  other  undertaking, 
and  borrow  as  much  time  from  the  pursuit  of  that  point  as  may  be  spared  without 
endangering  its  success.  Mr.  Sheridan  is  desirous  that  the  emoluments  which  are  to 
accrue  to  him  from  his  performances,  may  be  proportioned  only  to  the  benefits  which 
will  result  from  them  to  the  theatre ;  and  therefore  Avould  choose  to  run  the  risque  of 
their  success,  by  receiving  such  a  share  of  the  profits  on  the  nights  of  his  performance 
as  shall  be  agreed  upon.  What  this  modus  should  be  may  easily  be  settled  on  sure 
grounds  and  equitable  principles  to  both  parties. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


3.51 


If  these  general  outlines  of  his  plan  be  approved  of,  he  is  ready  to  enter  upon  a 
more  minute  and  circumstantial  delineation  of  its  parts  whenever  the  managers  shall 
think  proper  to  appoint  a  time  for  that  purpose. 

Endorsed  by  Garrick, 

“  Mr.  Sheridan’s  plan  for  acting  with  the 
managers  of  Drury-lane.” 


CHITTY’S  CREED. 

1  believe  in  Mr.  Charles  Macklin,  Mr.  Samuel  Foote,  Dr.  John  Hill,  Mr.  R. 
Dexter,  my  wife,  and  myself. 

I  believe  the  first  to  be  the  greatest  scholar,  the  second  to  be  the  greatest  wit, 
the  third  to  be  the  finest  writer,  the  fourth  to  be  the  best  actor,  the  fifth  to  be  the 
sweetest  singer,  and  myself  to  be  the  greatest  critic,  that  ever  England  saw.  I 
believe  myself  superlatively  happy  in  taking  Miss  Betty  Norris  to  wife,  as  I  believe 
Miss  Betty  Norris  superlatively  honoured  in  having  me  for  a  husband.  I  believe, 
now  my  wife  has  left  Drury-lane  Theatre,  that  Garrick  is  the  worst  actor  and 
manager  that  ever  the  stage  was  cursed  with,  and  that  nothing  is  done  there  with 
the  least  genius,  decorum,  or  propriety.  I  likewise  believe  just  the  contrary  of  my 
worthy  friend  Rich,  who  has  certainly  some  intentions  of  taking  my  aforesaid  wife 
into  his  service  next  year. 

I  believe  (for  reasons  best  known  to  myself)  that  Woodward  is  a  very  sad  fellow, 
and  that  the  cascade  of  real  water  which  he  has  introduced  in  “  The  Genii”  at  Drury- 
lane,  is  not  half  so  natural  as  that  of  tin  which  is  exhibited  in  the  fair  at  Covent 
Garden. 

I  believe  that  the  late  poem  called  “  The  Hilliad”  is  the  dullest  of  all  compo¬ 
sitions  ;  not  that  I  believe  this  from  my  own  knowledge,  but  because  I  am  informed 
so  by  my  worthy  and  learned  friend  Dr.  John  Hill,  who,  I  most  sincerely  believe, 
has  not  told  one  single  lie  since  he  knew  me  and  praised  my  wife. 

I  likewise  believe  in  all  the  virtues  of  tar  water ;  that  they  will  be  able  to  rectify 
the  acid  juices  of  my  body,  blunt,  lubricate,  and  sheath  those  pungent  particles  which 
corrode  my  mind  and  heart,  strengthen  the  present  debilitated  state  of  my  carcass, 
and  preserve  it  some  time  longer  from  the  worms. 

Lastly,  I  believe  there  is  no  such  a  thing  as  a  soul ;  for,  as  I  have  had  no  feelings 
of  one  here,  I  cannot  believe  that  I  shall  be  troubled  with  one  hereafter. — Amen. 


352 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  SAMUEL  REDDISH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Sunday  afternoon. 

As  I  know  your  time  must  be  greatly  taken  up  with  the  business  of  the  season, 
I  would  not  wish  to  intrude  on  it  by  a  personal  explanation  of  my  conduct  and  sen¬ 
timents  relative  to  “  The  Heroine  of  the  Cave,”  on  which  matter  you  just  hinted  the 
other  morning  at  rehearsal,  but  could  not  afford  time  to  hear  my  answer. 

The  attention  and  applause  with  which  this  play  went  off  the  first  time  it  was 
acted  here  in  its  very  imperfect  state,  and  want  of  due  attention  to  the  music  of  the 
ode  and  solemn  hymn,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  received  since  at  Bristol 
by  an  intelligent  and  candid  audience,  where  it  was  performed  three  times,  convince 
me,  was  it  worthy  your  notice  for  a  few  hours  to  plan  one  scene  for  the  representation 
of  the  cave,  and  to  regulate  the  order  of  the  music,  a  very  nonvelle  play  might  be 
launched  at  a  trifling  expense,  at  this  early  season  of  the  year,  that  would  excite  curio¬ 
sity,  and  give  no  more  trouble  to  your  company  than  any  of  the  old  stock-plays ; 
and  by  the  performance  of  which,  I  trust,  no  small  credit  in  the  acting  would 
redound  to  Miss  Younge  and  me,  as  well  as  emolument  to  the  theatre.  It  would 
at  the  same  time  give  great  respite  to  your  numerous  company  to  get  ready  in  all 
your  other  business. 

The  play  is  up,  the  characters  in  general  well  cast,  and,  was  it  approved  by  you, 
might  be  done  next  week.  The  prologue  and  epilogue  are  well  adapted,  and  have 
been  well  received  when  spoken  by  Miss  Younge  and  me. 

From  the  situation  of  the  theatres  in  this  early  part  of  the  season,  and  the  pros¬ 
pect  of  the  play’s  success  under  your  correction  and  alteration,  I  must  confess  my 
partiality  for  the  theatre  in  which  I  am  concerned  warmly  recommends  it  to  your 
attention.  Be  assured,  Sir,  I  am  possessed  of  none  of  that  lukewarmness  you  was 
pleased  to  mention  to  me  in  your  first  letter  ;  but  am  determined  to  use  every  effort 
this  season,  not  only  to  convince  you  of  my  utility,  but  desire  to  improve  in  my  pro¬ 
fession,  in  which,  as  nature  has  not  been  very  niggard,  I  will  be  vain  to  say  I  can ; 
and,  which  perhaps  may  please  you  more,  I  am  resolved  to  regulate  my  future  con¬ 
duct  by  the  principles  of  strictest  punctuality  and  honour,  both  to  myself  and  all 
mankind. 

I  ask  no  advantage  from  the  play’s  being  done ;  being  well  convinced,  shoidd  it 
exceed  your  expectations,  and  answer  mine,  you  want  neither  justice  or  generosity. 
Nor  have  I  the  least  doubt  but  the  sale  of  the  copy  will  amply  compensate  Hif- 
fernan  for  the  first  act  and  the  last,  which  he  wrote  by  my  direction. 

I  remain,  Sir,  your  truly  obedient  humble  servant, 

Samuel  Reddish. 


Endorsed, 

“  Reddish  to  me  about  *  The  Heroine  of  the  Cave.’  ” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


353 


DR.  P.  HIFFERNAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Sept.  11th,  1774. 

In  consequence  of  my  last,  relative  to  “  The  Heroine  of  the  Cave,”  it  cannot 
be  amiss  to  observe  to  you  that  it  has  been  most  favourably  received  at  the  Bristol 
theatre  by  the  greatest  audience  ever  known  there,  for  Mr.  Reddish.  The  strong 
impression  which  it  made,  induced  Mr.  Clarke,  the  other  manager,  to  change  his 
fore-chosen  play  of  “  Elfrida”  for  that,  granted  to  him  as  a  favour  by  Mr.  Reddish, 
and  for  which  purpose  appeared  Mr.  Clarke’s  congratulatory  address  to  his  friends 
in  the  playhouse  newspaper  of  that  city.  He  indeed  has  amply  reaped  the  sweets, 
his  receipt  falling  but  little  short  of  the  former’s ;  and  the  piece  met  with  increase  of 
applause. 

I  am  hence  encouraged  to  hope,  being  served  by  a  gentleman  who,  in  the  cause  of 
truth,  or  of  any  the  least  pretensions  to  merit,  needs  neither  advocates  nor  accu¬ 
mulated  arguments  to  influence  him ;  and  were  it  necessary,  I  might  adduce  an  evi¬ 
dence  in  two  lines,  which  I  am  sure  he  would  not  dare  to  oppose,  and  that  deserve 
to  be  written  in  characters  of  gold. 

“  Yet  to  his  friends  be  this  his  fame, 

His  heart’s  eternally  the  same.” 

I  am,  Sir,  your  much  obliged,  most  obedient,  and  very  humble  servant, 

Paul  Hiffernan. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Hiffernan’s  letter  to  the  same  purpose 
with  Reddish’s.  Par  nobile  !” 


DR.  P.  HIFFERNAN  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Dec.  8th. 

The  intimation,  by  my  friend  Mr.  King,  of  your  indulging  me  with  the  freedom 
of  the  theatre,  since  most  courteously  confirmed  by  Mr.  George  Garrick,  calls  upon 
me  for  a  written  acknowledgment  of  gratitude,  lest  an  occasion  of  personally  acquit¬ 
ting  myself  may  not  so  soon  offer  as  were  to  be  wished  for. 

Perhaps,  conformably  to  the  strict  etiquette  of  polite  life,  I  ought  to  wait  upon 
you  at  your  house;  but,  as  the  Romish  casuists  phrase  it,  although  more  reconciled  to, 
(than  for  some  time  past,)  I  do  not  as  yet  feel  myself  “  regenerated  to  a  sufficiency  of 
grace”  for  that  step ;  and  till  I  shall  be  deemed  so,  remain. 

Sir,  your  very  much  obliged,  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  servant, 

Paul  Hiffernan. 


Endorsed, 

“  Curious  letter  of  Dr.  Hiffernan’s.” 


VOL.  II. 


2  Z 


354 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  WILLIAMS. 


SIR, 

I  address  you  as  a  public  writer  of  Ethics  and  a  private  teacher  of  them. 
Give  me  leave  to  put  a  case  to  you,  and  entreat  your  reason  and  your  learning 
(of  both  which  I  have  a  great  opinion)  to  determine  for  me.  The  matter  is  this : — 
There  is  a  person  of  no  small  abilities  has  been  lately  discovered,  beyond  a  doubt 
discovered,  (for  many  proofs  are  in  my  hands,)  to  have  been  writing  the  most  false, 
wicked,  and  scandalous  papers  and  pamphlets  against  a  person  with  whom  he  has 
not  the  least  acquaintance,  and  of  whom  he  can  know  nothing  but  by  hearsay. 
This  you  will  pronounce  sufficiently  scandalous  and  infamous  ;  but  what  will  you 
think  when  yrou  are  told  that  the  same  person,  under  a  false  signature  and  pre¬ 
tence  of  friendship,  writes  to  the  person  he  has  so  injured  and  calumniated,  points 
out  himself  as  a  person  of  great  talents  whom  he  has  discovered  to  be  his  most 
inveterate  enemy,  and  intending  to  pursue  his  rancour,  with  a  hint  that  he  should 
endeavour  by  all  means  to  conciliate  matters,  and  blunt  the  edge  of  his  displeasure  ? 
To  bring  this  about,  he  tells  him  with  whom  the  libeller  (viz.  himself)  is  ac¬ 
quainted,  and  subscribes  himself  his  friend,  but  with  great  threats  of  vengeance 
if  he  should  give  any  kind  of  hints  about  the  writer  of  the  anonymous  letter. 
Such  a  complicated  scene  of  treachery  and  falsehood  was  scarce  ever  heard  of,  and 
of  which  I  am  sure  you  have  a  proper  detestation.  Will  you  give  your  advice  to 
an  admirer  of  your  talents,  whether  you  think  it  would  be  best  to  publish  the  whole 
matter,  with  the  evidence,  to  expose  the  monster,  or  whether  you  would  advise 
the  injured  person  to  desire  a  meeting  with  the  party,  and,  as  he  is  a  man  of 
abilities,  make  him  conscious  of  his  evil  doings,  and  like  a  true  Christian  and  a 
Philosopher  forgive  him  ?  A  line  directed  to  P.  M.  at  the  Somerset  Coffee-house, 
will  be  safely  delivered  to  your 

Well-wisher  and  admirer. 

The  writer  of  this  letter  will  see  you  whenever  ymu  please. 

Endorsed, 

“  A  letter  intended  to  be  sent  to  one  Williams, 
a  dissenting  parson,  upon  his  abuse  of  me.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  RAMUS. 


DEAR  SIR,  Adelphi,  Oct.  30th. 

Notwithstanding  all  my  pains  and  care  to  have  a  correct  copy  of  the  trifle 
which  I  was  in  hopes  to  lay  at  her  Majesty’s  feet,  with  the  alterations  and  additional 
characters,  I  find,  upon  examination,  that  the  transcriber  has  not  done  his  duty. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


355 


I  have  therefore  got  a  person  with  me  who  has  undertaken  to  make  it  less 
unworthy  of  her  Majesty  s  acceptance.  I  shall  therefore  desire  to  see  you  and  my 
other  friends  to  dinner  on  Friday  se’nnight  instead  of  next  Wednesday,  when  I 
hope  to  put  it  into  your  hands  a  better  dressed  gentleman  than  you  saw  yesterday, 
though,  like  other  fine  gentlemen,  I  fear  he  will  be  found  to  have  little  wit,  and  not 
deserving  of  the  honour  to  be  introduced  into  her  Majesty’s  company. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Endorsed,  D.  GaRRICK. 

“  My  letter  to  Mr.  Ramus,  about  the  manuscript 
letter  I  sent  to  her  Majesty.” 


TO  THOSE  CHOICE  SPIRITS  AND  ENTERPRISING  GENIUSES  WHO  CALL  THEMSELVES 

THE  TOWN. 

[In  Garrick’s  handwriting.] 

GENTLEMEN, 

As  I  look  upon  gratitude  to  be  one  of  the  chief  moral  virtues,  I  dedicate  the 
following  performance  to  you  ;  for,  from  my  intimate  acquaintance  with  your  persons, 
my  knowledge  of  your  abilities,  and  my  observations  upon  your  conduct  and  beha¬ 
viour,  I  have  been  able  to  collect  materials  for  a  treatise  upon  the  “  Art  of  Modern 
Criticism,”  by  which  “  any  young  gentleman  of  a  moderate  fortune  may  attain  the 
character  of  critic  in  a  very  short  time,  without  the  assistance  of  parts  or  education.” 
Many  people  who  are  ignorant  of  the  town  and  this  art  will  wonder  that  I  have  made 
it  necessary  for  a  gentleman  who  would  be  a  critic  to  have  a  moderate  fortune  :  in 
the  first  place,  as  a  professed  critic  cannot  well  follow,  nor  indeed  is  fit  for  any  other 
business,  he  will  find  great  convenience  in  some  hereditary  assets  ;  and  in  the  next 
place,  as  1  chiefly  confine  the  art  to  the  playhouse,  where  its  professors  chiefly  exert 
themselves,  there  is  no  admittance  into  the  pit  upon  credit ;  not  but  by  the  great  in¬ 
genuity  and  intrepidity  of  some  of  you  gentlemen,  the  expenses  there  are  considerably 
diminished,  particularly  in  the  boxes ;  and  I  do  not  doubt  but  by  a  proper  economy, 
and  an  occasional  use  of  your  crab-sticks  among  the  box-keepers,  (who  must  not  resist,) 
you  may  obtain  that  by  conquest  which  has  been  hitherto  got  by  contrivance  only. 
This  scheme  is  well  worthy  your  attention,  and,  if  accomplished,  will  greatly  redound 
to  the  honour  and  interest  of  your  community  ;  and  I  dare  affirm,  upon  a  just  calcula¬ 
tion  of  the  expenses,  that  if  this  is  brought  about,  any  young  gentleman  may  be  a 
perfect  master  of  the  whole  Art  of  Modern  Criticism  for  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  pounds  a-year,  including  taxes  and  repairs.  I  have  indeed  known  some  few 
gentlemen  of  no  fortune,  who,  having  commenced  critics  upon  the  slender  foundation 
of  a  small  running  credit  and  some  little  address,  have  bustled  one  winter  through 
the  box-keepers,  taylor,  haberdasher,  shoemaker,  &cc.  meat,  drink,  washing,  lodging, 
&c. ;  but  as  I  look  upon  such  experiments  to  be  not  only  troublesome  and  dangerous, 
but  often  fatal  too,  I  can  never  propose  their  examples  for  imitation. 

2  z  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


356 

This  Treatise  is  designed  as  preparatory  to  the  use  of  the  Catcall,  which  instru¬ 
ment  I  shall  slightly  touch  upon  at  the  end  of  the  work  ;  and  that  it  might  be  of  real 
benefit  to  those  youths  of  vivacity  and  spirit  who  are  or  shall  be  members  of  your 
“  Critical  Society,”  I  have  taken  care  to  adapt  it  to  the  meanest  capacity  ;  and  as  there 
are  many  among  you,  gentlemen,  who,  either  from  the  weakness  of  their  eyes  or  some 
other  natural  imperfection,  do  not  care  to  undergo  the  fatigue  of  reading  themselves, 
I  humbly  beg  leave  to  propose  myself  for  that  purpose,  and  am  willing  to  read  lec¬ 
tures  upon  Taste  and  Judgment  one  night  every  week  during  the  winter,  at  the  easy 
rate  of  threepence  a-head  ;  and  if  any  of  the  young  gentlemen  of  the  Society  have  a 
mind  to  recover  their  reading,  I  will  attend  them  privately,  at  their  own  time  and 
place,  at  half-a-crown  a-month  per  youth,  which,  I  believe,  considering  the  pains  I 
must  take,  cannot  be  accounted  unreasonable. 

That  the  Rides  I  have  laid  down  in  the  following  work,  for  modelling  and  com¬ 
pleting  a  man  of  taste,  might  not  be  looked  upon  as  merely  imaginary,  I  must  beg 

leave  to  relate  the  case  of  one  Mr.  Christopher - ,  only  son  to  Abraham  - 

Esq.  justice  of  peace,  of  a  small  fortune,  in  the  hundreds  of  Essex.  I  happened  to 
spend  a  week  at  the  justice’s  house  with  a  relation  of  his,  about  last  Christmas  was 
two  years,  in  which  time  Master  Kit  came  home  from  school  for  the  holidays.  I 
found  he  was  a  young  man  of  a  most  hopeless  capacity,  which  was  not  much  im¬ 
proved  by  his  country  education.  The  old  gentleman,  who  had  rather  more  sense  than 
his  son,  though  not  over-wise,  taking  a  liking  to  me,  made  me  the  confidant  of  his 
uneasiness,  and  lamented  his  son’s  inabilities,  and  with  tears  in  his  eyes  told  me  one 
day,  “  Sir,”  (said  he,)  “  my  disappointment  in  my  son  Kit  almost  distracts  me :  I  had 
once  made  myself  happy  with  the  hopes  of  seeing  him  make  a  figure  as  a  justice  of 
peace  when  old  age  had  rendered  me  unfit  for  the  business  ;  but,  alas  !  Sir,  I  am  not  so 
blind  to  my  son’s  defects  but  I  can  perceive  he  wants  capacity  for  it  ;  and  the  utmost 
I  can  do  now  is  to  send  him  immediately  to  one  of  the  universities,  and  breed  him  a 
clergyman.”  I  did  not  approve  of  the  justice’s  intention,  and  told  him  if  his  son  was 
to  see  the  world,  dress  a  little,  and  take  upon  him  the  man  of  taste,  he  would  find  a 
great  alteration  for  the  better.  “  Ay,”  said  the  old  gentleman,  “  I  wish  I  could  see 
him  aim  at  wit  once,  I  should  have  hopes  of  him,  and  would  indulge  him  in  any 
thing.”  In  short,  I  took  upon  me  his  education.  I  brought  him  to  town,  put  him 
clerk  to  an  attorney,  and  by  the  method  I  laid  down  in  this  Treatise,  the  next  winter 
he  became  one  of  the  ringleaders  of  taste,  and  principal  deciders  in  all  theatrical  con¬ 
troversies  :  his  natural  dulness  wras  changed  to  smartness  and  vivacity :  he  has  run 
his  father  in  debt  some  hundred  pounds ;  and  has  acquired,  by  his  particular  talent  of 
humour,  the  nickname  of  Kit  the  Smoker.  And  the  justice  has  very  readily  mort¬ 
gaged  his  estate  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  his  son  a  wit,  and  has  never  failed  express¬ 
ing  his  gratitude  to  me  by  continual  presents  of  hares  and  partridges. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


357 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  R.  B.  SHERIDAN,  ESQ. 

DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  night,  almost  eleven. 

You  must  oblige  me  with  the  sight  of  Fielding’s  play,  or  it  will  be  impossible 
for  me  to  write  an  epilogue,  which  I  suppose  you  intend  for  Miss  Younge.  Pray 
assure  your  father  that  I  meant  not  to  interfere  in  his  department :  I  imagined  (fool¬ 
ishly  indeed)  my  attending  Bannister’s  rehearsal  of  the  part  1  once  played,  and  which 
your  father  never  saw,  might  have  assisted  the  cause,  without  giving  the  least  offence.* 
I  love  my  ease  too  well  to  be  thought  an  interloper,  and  I  should  not  have  been  im¬ 
pertinent  enough  to  have  attended  any  rehearsal,  had  not  you.  Sir,  in  a  very  particu¬ 
lar  manner  desired  me.  However,  upon  no  consideration  will  I  ever  interfere  again 
in  this  business,  nor  be  liable  to  receive  such  another  message  as  was  brought  me  this 
evening  by  young  Bannister. 

You  must  not  imagine  that  I  write  this  in  a  pet: — let  me  assure  you,  upon  my 
honour,  that  I  am  in  perfect  peace  with  you  all,  and  wish  you  from  my  heart  all  that 
yours  can  wish.  Ever  and  very  sincerely  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  was  well  diverted  to-night  at  Covent  Garden  with  “  Three  Hours  after  Mar¬ 
riage,”  which  I  never  saw  before.^  It  is  well  acted,  and  very  entertaining.  Was 
likewise  glad  to  see  a  good  house. 


MR.  WILMOT  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


MY  DEAR  SIR,  Thursday  evening. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  send  you  the  enclosed  :  the  Vicar  of  Wrexham  is  the  Bishop’s 
own  son.  What  does  he  mean  about  “performing  quarantine?”  has  Mr.  Lloyd  any 
enemies  about  him,  or  is  the  Bishop  dainty  in  his  clergy  ?  or  is  Mr.  Lloyd  too  lively 
for  his  cloth  ?  I  am  inclined  to  believe  he  has  too  much  wit  for  his  neighbours  to  be 
his  friends,  and  I  am  very  much  inclined  to  wish  him  well  for  his  wit,  and  as  your 
friend.  What  therefore  is  this  living  of  St.  George  that  he  mentions  ?  Is  it  easily 
within  Lady  Apsley’s  interest  with  the  Chancellor?  for  if  it  is,  I  would  try  my 
interest  with  her.  Tell  me  if  I  shall ;  that  is,  whether  it  is  probable  to  be  granted,  and 
suitable  to  Mr.  Lloyd  if  granted.  I  will  do  any  thing  you  would  wish  me  to  do ; 
and  whatever  is  done  should  be  done  directly,  as  you  know  how  early  applications 
are  made  for  all  crown  livings.  Sincerely  yours, 

S.  Wilmot. 

*  The  part  of  Zaphna.  This  is  a  lively  proof  of  old  Sheridan's  insane  importance. — Ed. 

+  This,  1  apprehend,  was  the  three-act  comedy,  so  named,  written  by  Pope  and  Arbuthnot,  and  fathered  by 
Gay.  Dennis  and  Woodward  would  always  be  diverting  to  those  acquainted  with  critics  and  naturalists. — Ed. 


358 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  WILMOT. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  18,  Adelphi. 

I  aa'isii  you  were  not  half  so  good,  that  I  might  have  an  opportunity  of  being  a 
little  angry  with  you  sometimes  for  neglecting  me.  Your  friendship  and  affection 
is  all  turnpike,  and  there  is  not  a  single  jog  upon  the  whole  road.  Now,  thanks  to 
the  frailty  of  human  nature,  my  other  connexions  keep  me  in  good  exercise,  and 
like  the  old  pavement,  do  not  suffer  me  to  sleep  in  my  coach.  When  I  am  with 
you  or  write  to  you,  my  passions  are  so  subdued  and  made  stagnate,  that  if  I  were  to 
see  you  often  and  stay  long  with  you,  my  blood  would  grow  too  thick,  and  some 
morning  I  should  be  found  dead  of  an  apoplexy  in  the  conservatory  among  your 
balsams  and  geraniums.  I  therefore  never  choose  to  stay  long  with  you  at  a  time, 
but  get  home  with  my  dear  Avife,  Avho  takes  care  by  proper  exercise  to  keep  my 
springs  in  motion,  by  which  I  throAV  off  those  heavy  particles  of  ease  and  happiness 
which  haAre  too  much  clogged  them  at  Farnborough. — Mais  retour  non  s  a  nos  moutons. 
Why  are  you  to  plague  yourself  about  four  years  old  sheep  ?  three  year  old,  or 
partly  one  and  partly  the  other,  (if  that  is  possible,)  vv ill  do  Aery  Avell  for  me.  I  want 
the  sheep  to  feed  upon  my  land,  and  not  for  me  to  feed  upon  : — however,  a  piece  of 
mutton  of  my  own  feeding,  though  it  be  tough  and  tasteless,  would  certainly  give 
me  an  importance  in  my  neighbourhood.  Therefore,  my  dear  Madam,  you  must  get 
me  what  you  can  easily  get.  Pray,  should  not  they  be  marked  with  a  red  G.  to 
ascertain  my  property  if  they  should  be  given  to  wander?  If  so,  pray  let  your 
marksman  do  that  business ;  but  let  him  be  particularly  careful  not  to  spoil  the  \\Tool, 
as  I  intend  to  run  it  into  France  at  a  very  great  price.  And  now,  my  dearest  Mrs. 
Wilmot,  do  not  vex  yourself  from  morning  to  night  that  you  cannot  get  the  oldest, 
the  smallest,  and  the  finest  sheep  in  the  county  for  me  :  let  me  have  a  score  of  what 
you  Avill  of  the  first  that  come ;  for,  without  a  joke,  I  want  to  make  my  grass  finer 
than  it  is,  which  I  am  told  sheep  will  do ;  and  if  I  can  get  a  good  chop  into  the  bar¬ 
gain,  so  much  the  better :  but  I  shall  hate  my  flock,  and  will  never  touch  mutton 
more,  if  you  have  the  least  trouble  about  this  matter. 

My  lo\re  to  your  amiable  sister  and  sAveet  daughter.  My  Avife  sends  her  best 
to  you  all,  and  I  am,  My  dear  Mrs.  Wilmot,  most  unalterably  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  must  desire  you,  Avith  your  usual  benevolence,  to  cement  my  friendship  with 
Dr.  Butler  more  and  more.  Tell  him  Avhat  a  prodigious  agreeable  creature  I  am  :  he 
Avill  take  your  Avord,  and  not  mine. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


359 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  MARSH. 

Wednesday  morning. 

Mr.  Garrick  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Marsh,  and  is  greatly  obliged  to 
him  for  his  friendly  solicitude  about  the  play  to-night.  It  never  entered  the  least 
into  Mr.  Garrick’s  mind  that  any  application  could  be  made  by  the  most  malignant 
foes  of  loyalty  ;  and  would  not  the  gentlemen  whose  zeal  prompts  them  to  take  notice 
of  this  matter  be  the  makers  of  the  application  ? 

The  play  of  “  Hamlet”  was  promised  the  week  before  last  to  the  public,  and 
before  any  news  came  from  Denmark.  It  was  deferred  on  account  of  Mr.  G.’s  in¬ 
disposition,  and  now  performed  to  keep  his  word.  Would  not  the  stopping  the  play 
have  given  great  offence,  and  occasioned  enquiries  why  it  was  put  off.  If  Mr. 
Marsh  will  reflect  a  little,  he  will  find  there  is  not  a  single  circumstance  in  the  play 
like  any  of  those  many  stories  (supposing  them  all  true)  which  have  appeared  in  the 
papers.*  Mr.  Garrick  hopes  he  is  well  known  to  be  as  loyal,  as  far  as  in  him  lies,  as 
any  gentleman  whose  sensibility  may  be  hurt  on  this  occasion ;  and  that  he  would 
rather  forego  any  reputation  or  profit  that  might  arise  from  acting  any  character,  than 
have  his  loyalty  called  in  question.  The  moment  his  brother  told  him  of  Mr.  Marsh’s 
obliging  message,  he  sent  to  St.  James’s  to  hear  if  any  thing  was  imagined  there  of 
the  impropriety  of  acting  “  Hamlet.” — The  answer  was, — Not  at  all. 

Endorsed, 

“  Note  to  Mr.  Marsh  about  ‘  Hamlet,’  in 
answer  to  an  impertinent  one  of  his.” 


MR.  W.  RICE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Suffolk-street,  June  22nd. 

I  did  myself  the  honour  to  call  at  your  door,  and  not  being  so  fortunate  as 
to  meet  with  you  at  home,  I  take  the  liberty  to  trouble  you  with  this  note ;  I  do 
it  on  the  circumstantial  information  of  a  gentleman,  respecting  a  few  lines  which 
lately  appeared  in  the  Morning  Post,  so  particularly  pointed  to  me  the  application 
could  not  possibly  be  mistaken.  The  civil  and  gentlemanlike  behaviour  I  have 
always  received  from  you  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  illiberal  cast  of  the  matter 
in  question  on  the  other,  never  could  admit  of  any  suspicion  on  my  part  of  its 
proceeding  from  Mr.  Garrick ;  however,  from  the  serious  manner  in  which  this 
circumstance  has  been  communicated  to  me,  I  think  myself  under  the  necessity  (even 
in  point  of  justice  to  you)  to  intreat  you  to  satisfy  me  fully  that  you  are  in  no  shape 
whatever  the  author  of  the  enclosed  libel.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir, 

With  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

Woodford  IIice. 

*  The  reader  will  remember  that  the  Princess  Caroline  Matilda  of  England  married,  in  the  year  176b, 
Christian  the  Seventh,  King  of  Denmark  ;  and  Mr.  Marsh,  it  appears,  ran  hastily  into  an  application  where 
there  was  not  the  slightest  parallel;  and  would  have  suggested  all  that  he  wanted  to  veil. — Ed. 


360 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MR.  W.  RICE. 


SIR,  Hampton,  Sunday  at  dinner. 

I  a.m  most  sincerely  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  polite  manner  of  commu¬ 
nicating  the  false  and  scandalous  suspicion  of  my  being  the  author  of  the  enclosed 
libel.  I  have  always  been  treated  by  Mr.  Rice  with  the  greatest  civility,  and  1 
have  never  done  any  thing  that  could  forfeit  that  civility.  I  am  as  incapable  of 
doing  so  base  an  action  by  a  gentleman  who  never  offended  me,  as  I  think  him 
incapable  of  truth  who  could,  in  a  serious  manner,  hint  to  you  that  I  was  the  author. 
Let  me  assure  you,  upon  my  honour,  that  I  never  in  my  life  wrote  a  single  line 
upon  you  of  any  kind  whatsoever,  and  that  I  am  totally  ignorant  of  the  author  of 
the  enclosed  printed  lines.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mr.  Rice’s  letter  about  verses  against  him  in 
the  Morning  Post,  with  my  answer.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  HIS  GRACE  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK. 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  GRACE, 

I  should  not  have  dared,  with  all  the  sins  and  follies  of  my  profession  on  my 
head,  to  have  approached  your  Grace,  could  I  have  had  recourse  to  Lord  Kinnoul’s 
interposition  in  behalf  of  the  poor  old  woman  I  once  ventured  to  recommend  to  his 
Lordship.  His  absence  from  town  makes  me  take  this  great  liberty ;  but  as  we  are 
told  that  charity,  and  consequently  that  even  the  endeavours  to  be  charitable,  will 
hide  a  multitude  of  faults,  I  flatter  myself  that  your  Grace  will  pardon  me  for  men¬ 
tioning  again  the  poor  old  woman  whom  I  last  year  recommended  to  Lord  Ivinnoul, 
and  who  has  lived  ever  since  in  hopes  of  receiving  some  small  relief  from  your 
Grace’s  bounty.  I  am,  may  it  please  your  Grace, 

Your  most  dutiful  and  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

L).  Garrick. 


TO  THE  KING  OF  DENMARK. 

SIR, 

Among  the  numerous  instances  of  your  royal  condescension  and  favour  since 
you  honoured  this  kingdom  with  your  presence,  your  permitting  me  to  offer  this 
small  tribute  to  your  Majesty  will  be  accounted  one  of  the  greatest;  however,  I  should 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


361 


not  have  dared  to  have  indulged  my  vanity,  had  not  the  public  approbation  of  the 
following  trifle  made  my  ambition  less  ridiculous. 

It  was  my  lot  to  produce  the  only  dramatic  performance  during  your  Majesty’s 
stay  in  England — thus  my  good  fortune  has  given  me  an  advantage  over  my  more 
deserving  brethren. 

I  have  read  that  an  Indian  sent  a  feather  from  his  cap  to  a  great  Prince,  and 
thought  he  had  conferred  a  great  honour  upon  him.  I  am  not  so  ignorant  as  the 
Indian,  for  I  am  truly  sensible  that  I  have  presented  your  Majesty  only  with  a 
feather,  but  your  accepting  of  it  so  graciously  is  doing  me  an  honour  which  will  be 
remembered  hereafter,  when  this  trifle  and  all  the  others  I  have  written  shall  be 
totally  forgotten. 

Endorsed, 

“  My  Dedication  to  the  King  of  Denmark 
for  Bickerstaff.”  * 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  BRADSHAW. 


MADAM, 

When  the  Pope  takes  possession  of  his  spiritual  government,  he  is  presented 
with  keys  to  show  that  he  has  his  entree  into  heaven.  You  are  made,  Madam,  the 
infallible  disposer  of  our  Eden  by  having  possession  of  the  inclosed  key.  Every 
angel  that  we  leave  behind,  whether  male  or  female  (for  we  have  of  both  sexes,  and 
equally  angelic,)  will  obey  your  commands  in  the  temple  of  Shakspeare ;  and  when¬ 
ever  you  give  orders  for  any  fruit,  such  as  it  is,  (though  forbidden  to  all  other  mor¬ 
tals)  you  will  be  most  punctually  obeyed.  I  am,  Madam,  your  most,  &c. 

D.  Garrick. 


Endorsed, 

“  Mrs.  Bradshaw,  with  the  key  of  a 
tea-chest  at  Hampton.” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  - f 


DEAR  SIR, 

When  I  was  busied  about  that  foolish  hobby-horse  of  mine  the  Jubilee,  my  good 
friend  Master  Steevens  was  busying  himself  every  other  day  in  abusing  me  and  the 
design;  into  which  he  drew  an  old  friend  of  his,  a  Mr.  Iveate,  a  most  worthy 
sensible  man,  and  who  to  this  moment  has  not  the  least  idea  how  he  could  offend 
Mr.  Steevens. 

As  I  found  that  this  gentleman’s  rancour,  and  fun  as  he  calls  it,  was  not  confined 
to  ridiculing  the  business,  but  at  times  became  personal,  I  was  resolved  to  come  to  an 

*  A  Dedication  of  “  The  Padlock.”  t  Perhaps  Baldwin,  or  Woodfall. — Ed. 

3  A 


VOL.  II. 


3(3  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


explanation,  and  a  very  grave  one,  with  this  unaccountable  satirist.  lie  heard  of 
my  intentions,  and  spoke  to  a  Mr.  Zach.  Stephens,  in  Chancery-lane,  to  desire  him 
to  assure  me,  upon  his  word  and  honour,  that  lie  did  not  write  those  things  which  I 
had  particularly  marked  out  as  personal  and  slanderous ;  but  confessed  he  was  the 
author  of  three  pieces  against  the  Jubilee,— the  parody  of  “  Dryden’s  Ode  to  St. 
Cecilia,”  a  humorous  paper  upon  the  ingredients  of  the  cauldron,  which  the  Witches 
prepare  in  “  Macbeth,”  and  another,  the  subject  of  which  I  cannot  recollect. 

Some  time  after,  lie  had  totally  forgotten  that  he  had  given  his  honour  to  Mr. 
Zach.  Stephens  and  me;  and  bragged  to  the  partners  of  “  The  St.  James’s  Chronicle” 
that  he  had  written  them  all,  thirty-five  or  forty  in  number,  and  likewise  confessed 
the  same  to  you,  Sir,  with  this  liberal  addition,  that  it  teas  fun  to  vex  me.  In  the 
midst  of  a  most  friendly  correspondence  he  began  an  abuse  on  me  and  Mr.  Colman 
in  “  The  St.  James’s  Chronicle,”  after  which  I  would  never  converse  with  him. 
Many  other  stories  of  his  behaviour,  too  many  to  trouble  you  with,  being  told  and 
well  vouched,  I  was  resolved  to  keep  no  terms  with  him,  and  will  always  treat  him 
as  such  a  pest  of  society  merits  from  all  men.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

D.  G. 

He  is  continually  talking  about  me,  and  that  I  have  said  so  and  so.  If  he  will  be 
pleased  to  speak  to  me,  I  will  answer  every  question  with  great  truth,  for  I  never  lie. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  M.  DE  VOLTAIRE. 

SIR,  Nancy,  (no  date.) 

I  think  myself  greatly  honoured  by  a  paragraph  in  a  letter  which  you  were 
pleased  some  time  ago  to  write  to  Mr.  Camp,  at  Lyons,  and  had  it  been  in  my  power 
to  have  followed  my  inclinations,  I  should  have  paid  my  respects  at  Ferney  long 
before  this  time ;  but  a  violent  bilious  fever  most  unluckily  seized  me  on  the  road, 
and  confined  me  to  my  bed  five  weeks  at  Munich,  and  now  my  affairs  are  so  cir¬ 
cumstanced  that  I  am  obliged  to  go  to  Paris  as  expeditiously  as  my  present  weak 
state  of  health  will  permit  me.  You  were  pleased  to  tell  a  gentleman  that  you  had 
a  theatre  ready  to  receive  me  :  I  should  with  great  pleasure  have  exerted  what  little 
talents  I  have,  and  could  I  have  been  the  means  of  bringing  our  Shakspeare  into 
some  favour  with  Mr.  de  Voltaire,  I  should  have  been  happy  indeed.  No  enthu¬ 
siastic  missionary,  who  had  converted  the  Emperor  of  China  to  his  religion,  would 
have  been  prouder  than  I,  could  I  have  reconciled  the  first  genius  of  Europe  to  our 
dramatic  faith.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  Though  I  have  called  Shakspeare  our  dramatic  faith,  yet  1  must  do  my 
countrymen  the  justice  to  declare,  that  notwithstanding  their  deserved  admiration  of 
his  astonishing  powers,  they  are  not  bigoted  to  his  errors,  as  some  French  journalists 
have  so  confidently  affirmed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


363 


ARTHUR  MURPHY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Sunday  3  o’clock. 

I  have  been  so  impressed  by  “  Macbeth,”  that  I  have  read  the  whole  play  over, 
and  I  have  had  you  in  my  eye  all  the  way.  Though  I  think  the  performance  greatly 
superior  to  your  former  outdoings,  yet  there  are  two  places,  which,  upon  reflection, 
you  seem  to  me  not  to  have  executed  so  happily  as  before.  This  is  but  fair  play  : 
for  as  your  acting  at  maturity  is  the  only  criticism  that  could  be  upon  what  we  have 
heretofore  seen  you  do  ;  so  now,  by  way  of  reprisal,  the  youth  of  Mr.  Garrick  seems 
to  correct  his  riper  judgment. 

The  scene  I  mean  is  the  first  in  the  second  act,  where  you  converse  with  Ban- 
quo.  For  a  man  just  going  to  commit  a  murder,  and  so  strongly  possessed  with  the 
horror  of  the  deed,  as  in  a  moment  after  to  see  a  dagger, — were  you  not  a  little  too 
disengaged,  too  free,  and  too  much  at  ease  ?  I  will  tell  you  how  I  have  seen  you  do 
it: — you  dissembled  indeed,  but  dissembled  with  difficulty.  Upon  the  first  entrance 
the  eye  glanced  at  the  door  ;  the  gaiety  was  forced,  and  at  intervals  the  eye  gave  a 
momentary  look  towards  the  door,  and  turned  away  in  a  moment.  This  wTas  but  a 
fair  contrast  to  the  acted  cheerfulness  with  which  this  disconcerted  behaviour  was 
intermixed.  After  saying,  “  Good,  repose  the  while the  eye  then  fixed  on  the 
door,  then  after  a  pause  in  a  broken  tone,  “  Go,  bid  thy  mistress,  &c.”  If  I  had  been 
to  give  an  account  of  the  manner  wTith  which  Mr.  Garrick  acquitted  himself  in  this 
scene,  it  should  have  been  to  the  above  purport.  Pray  observe,  that  as  you  assume  a 
freedom  and  a  gaiety  here,  it  will  be  also  a  contrast  to  the  fine  disturbance  of  mind 
and  behaviour,  in  the  night  gown,  after  the  murder  is  committed,  when  no  cheerful¬ 
ness  is  affected :  I  am  sure  this  was  the  way  formerly,  and  I  own  it  strikes  me  most. 
If  I  am  wrong,  you  must  thank  yourself  for  it. 

The  other  passage  is,  “  Doctor,  the  Thanes  fly  from  me it  used  to  be  a  strong 
involuntary  burst  of  melancholy,  and  the  other  night  I  thought  it  sounded  very  dif¬ 
ferently.  You  see  I  have  had  my  telescope  at  the  sun  for  the  dear  delight  of  finding 
a  few  spots,  and  if  I  have  found  them,  you  are  the  optician  yourself  who  furnished 
me  with  the  medium  to  look  through. 

You  will  excuse  all  this  nonsense,  for  it  is  well  meant  by,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

Arthur  Murphy. 

How  piously  you  have  made  me  pass  the  morning ! 


3  a  2 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


3()4 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  ARTHUR  MURPIIY. 


DEAR  SIR,  Monday  morning. 

The  next  best  thing  to  saying  your  prayers  was  certainly  reading  “  Macbeth,” 
so  you  have  not  much  to  answer  upon  my  account. 

„  I  am  always  happy  to  agree  with  you,  and  which  I  do  most  sincerely  in  your 
opinion  of  the  scene  with  Banquo.  I  was  indeed  not  quite  master  of  my  feelings 
till  I  got  to  “  clutching  the  air-drawn  dagger.”  I  like  your  description  of  the  state 
of  Macbeth’s  mind  and  body,  at  the  time  he  affects  cheerfulness  to  Banquo;  it  is  a 
well  painted  picture,  but  I  will  not  flatter  myself  that  ever  I  played  up  to  your 
colouring. 

You  are  certainly  right  in  your  account  of  my  speaking — “  Doctor,  the  Thanes 
fly  from  me” — but  I  differ  a  little  with  you  in  opinion,  that  I  formerly  spoke  it  in 
“  a  burst  of  melancholy.” — Macbeth  is  greatly  heated  and  agitated  with  the  news 
of  the  English  force  coming  upon  him  ;  his  mind  runs  from  one  thing  to  another, 
all  in  hurry  and  confusion  :  would  not  his  speaking  in  a  melancholy  maimer  in  the 
midst  of  his  distraction  be  too  calm  ?  “  Come,  put  my  armour  on  ' — “  Give  me  my 

staff — Seyton,  send  out” — “  Doctor,  the  Thanes  fly  from  me  !” — “  come,  Sir,  despatch” 
— “pluck  it  off” — “  bring  it  after  me,  &:c.”* 

You  have  flattered  me  much  by  your  very  obliging  letter  ;  and  I  shall  profit  by 
your  criticisms  this  evening,  if  I  should  happen  to  be  in  order.  I  am  an  old  hunter, 
touched  a  little  in  wind,  and  somewhat  foundered  ;  but  stroke  me,  and  clap  me  on 
the  back,  as  you  have  kindly  done,  and  I  can  make  a  shift  to  gallop  over  the  course. 
Once  more,  1  thank  you  for  your  letter,  and  atn  most  truly. 

Your  obliged  humble  servant,  D.  Garrick. 

P.  S.  I  returned  too  late  last  night  from  Hampton  to  answer  your  letter. 


MR.  PITT  TO  MR.  BERENGER. 

Friday,  one  o’clock. 

Lady  Hester  and  Mr.  Pitt  hope  Mr.  Berenger  is  better,  and  return  him  many 
thanks  for  his  obliging  good  offices  with  Mr.  Garrick.  Inimitable  Shakspeare  !  but 
more  matchless  Garrick  !  always  as  deep  in  Yature  as  the  Poet,  but  never  (what  the 

*  It  should  be  remembered  that  Murphy’s  expression  is  “a  strong,  involuntary,  burst  of  melancholy5' — 
it  is  a  varied  emotion,  but  has  no  calmness  surely  about  it,  and  I  think  is  finely  descriptive  of  the  deserted 
tyrant’s  condition.  Mr.  Garrick  forgot  that  Macbeth,  who  had  received  no  fresh  news  since,  in  the  very 
speech  preceding,  puts  to  this  same  doctor  the  most  truly  melancholy  question  that  human  misery  ever 
articulated  into  language. 

“  Canst  thou  not  minister  to  a  mind  diseased, 

Pluck  from  the  memory  a  rooted  sorrow  ?”  See. 

In  hurry  itself,  he  sees  and  feels  all  his  wretchedness. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


365 


Poet  is  too  often)  out  of  it.  Continue  to  give  us  your  good  offices  if  you  like  to  be 
truly  thanked,  or  your  friend  to  be  truly  admired. 

On  the  back  of  the  note : 

“  The  note  on  the  other  side  I  received  from  Mr.  William  Pitt,  and  it  is  in  his 
own  handwriting. 

“  Richard  Berenger.” 

In  Garrick’s  handwriting  : 

“  A  note  from  Mr.  Pitt  to  Berenger  about  me — having  at  his  request  acted 
Macbeth.  Rich  and  exquisite  flattery  !” 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  M.  DE  VOLTAIRE. 

SIR, 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  offering  my  small  poetical  tribute  to  the  first  genius 
in  the  world.  As  nobody  has  written  so  well  and  so  forcibly  against  the  principles 
of  intoleration,  as  Monsieur  de  Voltaire,  I  hope  he  will  excuse  the  excess  of  zeal  witlT 
which  I  have  endeavoured  to  paint  in  this  Ode  the  powers  of  our  great  dramatic  poet, 
Shakspeare,  who  is  both  the  founder  and  chief  supporter  of  the  English  stage. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  and  sincere  admirer, 

D.  Garrick. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  GENERAL  HALE. 

MY  DEAR  GENERAL,  Adelphi,  July  2nd. 

I  am  glad  you  have  broke  the  ice ;  I  wanted  much  to  write  to  you,  but  was  told, 
and  think  with  great  propriety,  that  I  should  but  keep  your  wounds  open,  which  * 
ought,  for  all  our  sakes,  to  be  healing,  if  not  closed. 

Though  I  am  far  from  valuing  myself  upon  my  powers  of  argument,  yet  I  could 
wish  to  have  thrown  in  my  friendly  feeling,  and  if  I  could  not  have  convinced  your 
reason,  I  might  at  least  have  sympathized  with  you,  and  have  partaken  of  your 
affliction.  You  have  paid  me  a  compliment  and  done  me  an  honour,  which  at  this"’ 
moment,  as  I  am  writing,  fills  my  eyes  with  tears.  You  may  depend  upon  every 
affectionate  endeavour  in  my  power  to  answer  your  fatherly  wishes.  Yes,  my  dear 
friend,  I  did  love  your  son  ;  and  had  he  not  had  every  qualification  to  soothe  the 
cares  and  indulge  the  pride  of  a  parent,  I  should  have  loved  him,  for  I  saw  with 
sorrow  that  your  soul  Avas  ay  rapt  up  in  him — I  say,  with  sorrow  I  saAv  it,  for,  alas  !  I 
feared  that  the  thread  on  which  your  joys  depended  Avas  too  finely  spun.  I  fore- 
saAV  your  misery,  and  feel  it  at  this  moment,  though  I  think  the  dear  object  of  it  is 
released  from  his.  Let  that,  my  Avorthy,  afflicted  friend,  in  some  measure  be  your  con¬ 
solation.  EA*ery  comfort  in  my  reach  shall  be  administered  unto  you,  and  happy, 


3G6 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


truly  happy  I  shall  be,  if  I  can  produce  any  thing  worthy  of  the  child  and  pleasing 
to  the  father.  I  am,  my  dear  General,  most  affectionately  yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

We  set  out  to-morrow  morning  betimes  for  Mistley.  As  I  would  obey  your  com¬ 
mands  as  your  friend,  and  to  my  credit,  I  shall  perhaps  not  please  myself  so  soon  as 
you  may  wish — but  you  must  give  me  time. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Bath,  Tuesday,  six  o’clock. 

When  your  brother,  my  dear  Sir,  first  met  my  eyes,  I  never  beheld  such  a 
spectacle  of  sickness  and  despair.  His  death  appeared  inevitable  and  near ;  I  was 
shocked.  Behold  the  change  of  two  or  three  days  !  he  is  now  as  safe  as  you  and  I ; 
has  been  out  in  his  chair,  drank  the  waters,  and  is  established.  So  that  I  have  laid 
down  my  charge  and  my  care. 

I  leave  this  town  on  Saturday  evening  next,  or  Sunday  morning ;  but  I  beg  you 
will  give  me  a  line  on  Thursday  night  from  the  theatre  directed  to  me  hither,  to 
inform  how  the  comedy  went  off,  and  pray  write  without  flattery,  faithfully. 

Henderson  is  on  the  point  of  agreeing  for  a  new  contract  with  Mr.  Palmer :  if 
you  would  take  my  judgment,  you  should  engage  him  ;  the  more  1  see  of  him  the 
more  I  am  persuaded  he  would  be  the  most  valuable  accession  you  could  possibly 
make.  His  agreement  with  Mr.  Palmer  would  have  been  made  this  day,  if  I  had 
not  stopt  it ;  I  think  you  should  by  all  means  empower  your  brother  to  strike  a 
bargain  with  him.  I  am  most  sincerely, 

R.  Cumberland. 


MR.  CUMBERLAND  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Bath,  Thursday,  six  o’clock. 

I  thank  you  for  your  obliging  letter.  I  think  that  the  cast  of  the  comedy  will 
be  strong  in  the  parts  of  Jack,  Andrew  Nightshade,  Lsetitia,  Lucy,  Dibble  and 
Gregory ;  and  that  being  the  case,  I  beg  you  will  please  yourself  in  the  part  of 
Charles :  I  rather  lean  to  Reddish,  as  thinking  his  figure  tallies  better  in  some 
respects  with  that  of  Weston  than  Buxton’s,  and  as  Jack  is  to  wear  his  clothes,  it 
seems  more  consistent.  But  I  believe  we  have  comedy  enough  and  to  spare,  without 
being  exact  about  it ;  I  entreat  you  will  fill  it  up  most  to  your  own  ease  and  content. 
I  approve  much  of  Baddeley ;  I  beg  you  will  favour  me  in  your  next  with  the  bill  of 
fare,  and  tell  me  when  you  think  it  will  come  out.  I  cannot  help  persuading  myself 
it  will  be  highly  successful. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


367 


I  have  attended  Mr.  Henderson*  once  in  the  part  of  Benedick,  and  am  greatly- 
disposed  in  his  favour ;  if  he  pleases  me  as  well  in  other  casts,  I  shall  write  very 
warmly.  I  sent  for  him  to  me,  and  desired  him  to  play  his  principal  tragic  part, 
and  he  has  chosen  “  Hamlet,”  in  which  I  hear  he  excels.  I  am  thinking  of  going 
to-night  to  see  him  in  Posthumus,  and  on  Saturday  he  takes  you  off  in  the  prologue  to 
“  The  Rehearsal.”  I  advised  him  against  it,  but  it  was  too  late  and  printed  in  the  bills. 
Nature  has  not  been  beneficent  to  him  in  figure  or  in  face ;  a  prominent  forehead, 
corpulent  habit,  inactive  features,  and  not  a  quick  eye ;  nevertheless  he  has  great 
sensibility,  just  elocution,  a  perfect  ear,  good  sense,  and  the  most  marking  pauses 
(next  to  your  own)  I  ever  heard :  in  the  latter  respect  he  stands  next  to  you, 
very  near  you.  His  memory  is  ready  to  a  surprising  degree,  and  lie  is  (as  he 
tells  me)  sober  and  regular.  I  shall  be  able  soon  to  speak  more  particularly  to  you, 
but  I  am  confident  he  would  at  all  events  be  a  great  accession  to  your  theatre  ; 
and  what  is  more,  he  is  to  be  had,  and  will  give  the  preference  to  you,  though  he 
thinks  you  do  not  esteem  his  performance.  Mr.  Palmer  has  this  morning  very 
politely  sent  me  the  entrance  into  his  theatre. 

As  for  Lord  Camden,  it  is  a  long  story,  and  is  a  losing  one  on  his  side.  Every 
one  here  is  against  him.  The  place  is  in  confusion  ;  the  rooms  in  separation.  I  am 
at  present  too  ill  to  write  particulars.  I  am  so  much  fatigued  by  attending  the  whole 
morning  to  the  business  of  accommodation  on  the  part  of  the  new  rooms,  that  I 
am  grievously  reduced.  I  spoke  long  and  often,  gave  in  a  string  of  qualifying 
resolutions  to  sheath  the  angry  spirits  which  Lord  C.  has  enflamed,  and  received 
the  thanks  of  the  meeting.  These  things  are  too  ridiculous  in  the  latitude  of 
London,  but  here  they  are  mountains,  and  indeed  much  may  depend  upon  them. 
The  worst  is,  I  am  ill,  weakened  very  much  by  medicine,  and  not  relieved  from 
my  disorder ;  I  have  a  heavy  cold  besides,  and  the  waters  lie  heavy,  and  must,  I 
doubt,  be  suspended.  In  short,  I  have  just  strength  to  tell  you, 

I  am  ever  most  faithfully  }Tours, 

R.  Cumberland. 


LORD  NORTH  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


Sunday  Evening,  1775  or  G. 

Lord  North  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick.  He  was  so  unfortunate 
as  to  be  prevented  from  seeing  “Lear”  on  Monday  last,  by  attending,  much  against 
his  will,  his  duty  in  the  House  of  Commons.  He  determines  to  neglect  his  duty 
on  Tuesday  next,  if,  as  he  hears  in  the  world,  Mr.  Garrick  is  to  perform  either 
King  Lear,  Macbeth,  or  King  Richard,  and  if  Mr.  Garrick  can  let  Lady  North  have 

*  This  character  of  Henderson  is  honourable  to  Cumberland.  The  other  people  who  write  about  him 
seem  to  set  out  with  two  erroneous  notions — first,  that  nobody  but  Garrick  could  act  at  all — and  second, 
that  Garrick  would  be  pleased  that  they  should  think  and  say  so. — Ed. 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


-368 

a  box.  Although  Lady  North  lives  in  a  house  where  unreasonable  requests  are 
sometimes  made,  she  is  not  yet  grown  impudent  enough  to  desire  him,  after  his 
repeated  civilities,  to  procure  a  box  for  her  on  Tuesday,  and  therefore  she  has  em¬ 
ployed  Lord  North  to  ask  it  in  her  stead. 


LADY  OSSORY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

SIR,  Ampthill  Park,  Sept.  19th. 

Encouraged  by  Lord  Ossory,  I  venture  to  take  this  liberty,  and  I  trust  you 
will  show  me  you  do  not  think  it  impertinent  by  granting  the  request  I  mean  to 
make.  You  will  not  be  surprised  that  any  thing  you  do  or  say  should  be  known, 
but  it  is  very  tantalizing  only  to  hear  of  your  verses  and  not  see  them  ;  I  therefore 
should  take  it  a  very  particular  favour  if  you  would  be  so  good  to  send  a  copy  of  your 
“  Petition  to  the  Custom-house  Officers,”  which  is  so  much  admired  in  Bedfordshire. 
Lord  Ossory  desires  to  offer  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick  his  compliments  :  I  hope  she  will 
also  accept  of  mine.  I  am.  Sir,  with  great  regard,  your  most  obedient,  &c. 

Anne  Upper  Ossory. 


LADY  OSSORY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Tuesday. 

Lady  Ossory  sends  her  compliments  to  Mr.  Garrick.  At  the  same  time  that  she 
enquires  after  his  health,  she  also  begs  leave  to  offer  her  mite  of  praise.  It  is  quite 
impossible  to  say  what  she  thinks,  and  if  she  could,  it  would  net  be  worth  Mr. 
Garrick’s  attention. 

Lady  Ossory  is  much  obliged  to  Mr.  Garrick  for  his  civilities  in  procuring  her  a 
box.  Lord  Ossory,  who  is  just  gone  out  of  town,  left  his  best  compliments  to  Mr. 
Garrick. 


LADY  EDGCUMBE  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

Friday  Morning,  Dec.  8th. 

Lady  Edgcumbe  presents  her  compliments  to  Air.  and  Airs.  Garrick,  and  desires 
the  favour  of  their  company  on  Wednesday  evening  next  soon  after  eight  o’clock. 

She  supposes  it  impossible  Mr.  Garrick  should  not  have  heard  Monsieur  Texier. 
If  he  has,  he  certainly  will  like  to  hear  him  again.  If  it  should  happen  that  he  has 
not,  she  ventures  to  recommend  it  to  him  as  an  object  of  great  curiosity,  and  shall 
think  herself  equally  happy  to  be  able  to  obtain  for  Air.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  a  very 
great  pleasure,  and  for  Monsieur  Texier  the  satisfaction  of  receiving  applause  from 
the  auditor  most  capable  of  all  to  do  him  justice. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


369 


MRS.  BUNBURY  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  Barton,  Sept.  3. 

I  sent  yesterday  by  the  Bury  coach  a  waistcoat  I  have  worked,  in  the  hopes  you 
will  do  me  the  favour  to  accept  it.  I  am  quite  ashamed  of  troubling  you  with  a  let¬ 
ter  about  such  a  trifle ;  but,  as  parcels  are  sometimes  forgot  to  be  delivered,  I  was 
afraid  that  might  be  the  fate  of  this,  if  I  did  not  mention  it.  We  hope  Mrs.  Garrick 
is  quite  well,  and  join  in  best  compliments,  and  I  am,  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  obedient, 

Katherine  Bunbury. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Saturday  Night. 

I  cannot  go  to  sleep  till  I  thank  you  for  the  honour  you  did  your  country, 
your  wit,  and  your  friends,  and  the  infinite  delight  you  gave  to  their  excellencies  and 
the  rest  of  the  company.  I  dare  not  repeat  to  you  what  was  said,  lest  it  should  look 
like  flattery ;  but  I  will  tell  you,  that  Madame  de  Koailles  thanked  me  above  an  hun¬ 
dred  times  for  the  pleasure  and  surprise :  she  was  thanking  me,  and  wondering  at 
you  all  the  way  she  went  down-stairs  so  earnestly,  I  was  afraid  she  would  fall  and 
break  her  bones.  Though  they  had  heard  so  much  of  you,  they  had  not  the  least 
idea  such  things  were  within  the  compass  of  art  and  nature,  though  their  sphere  is 
great.  To  hear  my  friend  and  my  countryman  so  admired,  was  delightful ;  but  all 
worldly  joys  have  their  allay,  and  apprehensions  began  to  torment  me,  that  you  might 
catch  cold  going  out  into  the  air,  when  warmed  with  that  fire  of  genius  which  ani¬ 
mated  every  look  and  gesture.  The  ambassador  added  to  his  admiration  great  sense 
of  your  good-nature  and  politeness  ;  and,  in  short,  there  was  such  a  chorus  of  praise 
and  thanks  as  cannot  be  represented ;  and  while  they  were  uttering,  Lady  Spencer’s 
eyes  were  more  expressive  than  any  human  language.  Then  she  amazed  them  with 
telling  them  how  you  could  look  like  a  simpleton  in  Abel  Drugger,  and  many  comic 
arts  equally  surprising,  when  murderous  daggers  and  undutiful  daughters  were  out 
of  the  question.  With  what  pleasure  shall  I  reflect  on  this  evening,  if  you  have  not 
got  cold  ! — Accept,  my  dear  Sir,  my  sincerest  thanks  ;  and  though  you  have  added  to 
my  pride,  you  have  made  me  more  than  ever 

Your  humble  servant,  and  most  obliged  and  devoted, 

E.  Montagu. 

Best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  The  Duchess  of  Manchester,  who  called  on 
me  after  the  play,  tells  me  it  was  much  applauded. 


3  B 


VOL.  II. 


370 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

“  The  Wonder  !  a  Woman  keeps  a  Secret,”  lias  been  as  well  acted  in  Hill-street  as 
ever  it  was  in  Drury-lane.  Donna  Felicia  feasted  on  the  hope  of  seeing  “  Dear,”  and 
said  nothing  of  her  internal  joy ;  she  hid  it  in  smiles,  which  time  has  deepened  so  far 
as  to  look  somewhat  like  the  wrinkle  of  age,  so  that  Mirth  and  Care  might  dispute  to 
which  they  belong.  As  to  Madam  Vesey,  she  can  do  any  thing  for  her  friends  but 
keep  a  secret.  I  will  give  her  a  place  in  the  box  you  are  so  good  as  to  provide  for 
me,  if  you  continue  your  intention  of  appearing  on  the  stage  ;  and  I  think  it  would  be 
civil  for  me  to  offer  places  in  my  box  to  the  Prince  and  Princess  Czartorinski  ;  and  he 
is  such  a  favourite  of  mine,  I  wish  to  give  him  so  fine  an  entertainment ;  but  in  this  I 
will  not  proceed  till  I  hear  your  intentions.  I  see  “  The  Alcliymist”  is  advertised  :  if 
you  appear  in  it,  I  will  hope  for  a  box  above  or  below,  or  where  you  please. 

I  had  the  good  fortune  last  night  to  meet  at  Lady  Darlington’s  with  a  very  polite, 
agreeable  woman  in  the  dress  of  Mrs.  Ford  :*  she  showed  me  a  face  which  was  a  very 
good  assortment  with  her  pleasing  and  agreeable  manners,  but,  being  short-sighted,  I 
could  not  be  sure  that  I  knew  the  face ;  she  said  I  did  not ;  her  brother  she  called 
Mr.  Pye.  I  found  she  was  an  intimate  friend  of  yours,  and  from  your  partial  report 
had  conceived  a  much  better  opinion  of  me  than  I  deserve.  Now  I  must  beg  of  you, 
at  some  convenient  opportunity  to  help  me  to  lay  hold  on  this  lady  in  her  proper 
character.  I  am  afraid  she  should  escape  me  through  the  help  of  her  disguise.  She 
has  prepossessed  me  as  much  in  her  favour,  as  you  have  prepossessed  her  in  mine.  I 
have  indeed  personal  security  for  my  good  opinion;  you  have  a  little  cheated  her  out 
of  hers  by  a  report ;  but  it  is  your  business  to  keep  her  deceived  as  long  as  you  can, 
and  you  may  safely  answer  for  my  being  very  grateful  for  her  goodness  to  me. 

I  beg  my  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am  a  little  worn  out  with  the  late 
hours  of  last  night.  The  decayed  Maccaroni  sang  an  admirable  ballad. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  much  obliged, 

E.  Montagu. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

The  verses  are  indeed  very  pretty,  and  I  thank  you  much  for  them,  for  I  should 
not  have  sought  for  so  beautiful  a  muse  in  a  newspaper.  How  I  envy  all  who  are  to 
see  Lear  to-night !  Dr.  Beattie  says  he  dreamt  of  Lear  all  last  night,  and  he 
counts  the  moments  till  the  curtain  draws,  more  than  ever  impatient  lover  for  the 
hour  of  assignation  with  his  mistress.  I  will  get  the  poem  you  mention  ;  I  heard 

*  Her  Ladyship,  I  suppose,  saw  masks  ;  and  Mrs.  Pye  was  dressed  as  Mrs.  Ford,  in  “  The  Merry  Wives.” 
Mrs.  Montagu  could  not  but  distinguish  her.  The  reader  has  not  forgotten  the  naive  character  of  this  lady, 
written  by  herself  in  the  French  language,  nor  her  sprightly  and  affecting  letters  to  Garrick. — Er. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


371 


much  in  its  praise,  but  that  it  was  satirical,  and  I  am  such  a  pigeon-livered  thing  that 
I  rarely  meddle  with  satire.  Mr.  De  Luc  told  me  some  days  ago,  that,  if  he  met  a 
promise  of  being  admitted  to  Lear,  he  should  not  be  able  to  sleep  all  the  night 
before ;  so  you  see  how  you  make  some  see  visions,  others  lie  awake  in  pleasing 
reveries. 

I  am  getting  well,  I  hope,  and  shall  take  the  first  opportunity  to  thank  you  for 
your  indulgence  to  Mr.  De  Luc,  who  is  happy  in  his  ticket,  and  I  dare  say  would  as 
easily  surrender  the  Charter  of  Geneva  as  the  precious  ticket. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

I  made  your  compliments  to  the  Lord  and  Lady  of  Hayes,  who  received  them 
with  great  cordiality,  but  would  receive  Mr.  Garrick  with  a  more  enraptured  wel¬ 
come  :  Lady  Chatham  will  bring  up  all  her  family  to  attend  you  on  Saturday.  I  had 
fixed  my  journey  to  Tunbridge  for  to-morrow,  but  should  have  been  tempted  to  have 
stayed  in  town  for  the  great  delight  of  Saturday  night’s  play,  but,  as  Lady  Chatham 
brings  all  her  little  ones,  I  must  sit  in  a  back  row,  and  should  be  quite  fainting  for  want 
of  air :  I  will  therefore  depart  to  the  Wells  a  disconsolate  invalid.  If  you  could  have 
bestowed  another  box  on  me,  I  could  not  have  separated  myself  from  Lady  Chatham, 
who  wants  me  to  be  of  her  party,  and  I  could  not  civilly  tell  my  reason.  If  the  box 
reserved  be  a  stage  box,  I  believe  I  might  venture. — I  am  in  the  greatest  haste,  dear 
Sir,  Your  infinitely  obliged. 

Best  respects  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  E.  M. 

I  have  acted  “  The  Wonder!  a  Woman  keeps  a  Secret,”  as  you  act— to  the  life. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

As  I  had  always  said  Mr.  Garrick  was  one  of  the  very  few  who  with  great 
genius  and  talents  had  yet  the  good  gift  of  common  sense,  how  could  I  suppose  he 
was  an  inhabitant  of  London  in  the  month  of  July?  Do  you  prefer  the  screams 
of  brick-dust  Moll  to  the  morning-hymn  of  the  lark  ?  Oh  that  I  had  even  guessed 
or  suspected  you  could  be  guilty  of  a  blunder,  an  absurdity  ;  then  had  I  availed  my¬ 
self  of  my  friend’s  iveakness,  and  turned  it  to  my  own  advantage,  as  is  very  usual  in 
the  way  of  this  world.  I  intended  to  stop  a  few  days  in  town  merely  to  dispatch  a 
little  business,  and  to  see  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick,  and  to  dine  with  Mr.  Cambridge, 
to  whom  I  had  promised  a  visit  for  these  three  years,  and  said  promise  is  yet  unful- 

3  B  2 


372 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


filled.  The  day  after  I  came  to  town,  my  little  nephew  was  taken  very  ill  of  a  fever; 
so  all  my  projects  were  suspended.  Dr.  James,  I  thank  God,  set  the  little  man  upon 
his  legs  very  soon,  and  he  is  to  be  carried  into  the  country  to-day.  My  anxiety  being 
over,  1  intended  to  call  on  you  yesterday  at  Hampton,  but  I  was  indisposed  by  a 
cold.  It  occurred  to  me  you  might  be  gone  to  Mount  Edgcumbe,  or  to  some  friend 
at  a  distance  ;  so  I  ordered  a  servant  to  inquire,  and  lo !  I  found  you  were  at  your 
house  in  London.  How  did  I  grieve  at  that !  and  the  more,  as  my  horses  carry  the 
servants  to  Saiulleford  to  set  out  with  the  coach  to-morrow ;  so  that,  after  this  day, 
I  shall  not  have  the  means  of  seeing  you  at  Hampton.  My  servant  says  you  had 
some  thoughts  of  calling  on  me  this  morning,  but  was  uncertain.  He  says  also,  you 
are  going  to  Hampton.  I  must  contrive  to  get  a  glimpse  of  you  here  or  at  Hamp¬ 
ton.  If  you  will  call  here,  I  will  wait  for  you ;  if  not,  I  will  go  to  Mr.  Cambridge’s 
to  dinner,  and  drink  tea  with  you  in  the  evening  at  Hampton.  I  do  not  leave 
London  till  Tuesday  ;  so,  if  you  return  to  town  on  Monday,  I  might  profit  thereby. 
I  long  to  see  you ;  so,  pray,  contrive  that  I  may  enjoy  that  happiness.  I  have  heard 
of  your  generous  and  noble  behaviour  to  the  Adams’s  :  I  never  can  be  surprised, 
though  I  am  pleased,  at  hearing  any  instance  of  noble  conduct  in  Mr.  Garrick ;  be¬ 
cause  I  know  the  character  of  his  soul  is  noble,  and  he  full  of  the  enthusiasm  of 
virtue,  which  acts  with  an  energy  unknown  to  little  minds. — Best  respects  and  ten- 
derest  love  to  Mrs.  Garrick.  Miss  Gregory  presents  her  adorations. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged, 

E.  Montagu. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Hill-street,  Saturday  Morn. 

It  is  a  shame  that  Mrs.  Garrick  keeps  her  eyes  shut  when  you  and  Phoebus  rise 
so  early  and  so  bright !  If  her  ladyship’s  jealousy  was  equal  to  little  Gregory’s  love, 
she  would  never  sleep  at  all.  My  little  nephew  is  quite  wild  about  you.  The  other 
day,  having  a  tableful  of  guests,  1  ordered  him  and  his  governor  to  dine  in  their  study  ; 
“  With  all  my  heart,”  quoth  the  little  man  ;  “  I  do  not  desire  to  dine  at  table,  unless 
when  Mr.  Garrick  comes.”  I  assured  him  you  did  not  keep  such  paltry  company, 
but  promised  he  should  peep  at  you  in  the  afternoon ;  and  I  have  led  a  weary  life 
ever  since  to  know  when  you  would  come,  and  he  did  not  at  all  approve  of  my  for¬ 
bearing  to  solicit  the  performance  of  your  promise.  On  some  accounts  I  will  fix 
you  for  Wednesday,  though  1  should  naturally  name  the  first  day.  Whenever  you 
want  hares  and  partridges,  send  to  me,  for  I  am  rarely  unprovided,  and  they  will  be 
ever  at  your  service.  Your  estates  near  London  are  better  furnished  with  nightin¬ 
gales  ;  but  our  frozen  regions  furnish  more  game,  or,  at  least,  more  comes  to  the  lord 
or  lady  of  the  manor’s  share.  Respects  and  love  to  her,  who,  “sleeping  or  awake, 
shoots  forth  peculiar  graces.”  I  will  endeavour  to  allure  Mr.  Texier  hither  on  Wed- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


373 


nesday :  when  I  have  your  name  to  conspire  with,  what  can  withstand  me? — Dear 
Sir,  remember  Wednesday.  I  shall  anticipate  the  day  with  pleasure,  and  recollect  it 
with  delight.  How  few  things  in  this  life  bless  the  future,  the  present,  and  the 
past !  I  am  ever,  with  perfect  regard,  yours, 

E.  M. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  22nd. 

I  find  that  Apollo  has  left  off  physic,  and  addicts  himself  entirely  to  poetry  ;  so, 
while  he  guides  your  hand  as  it  strikes  the  lyre,  he  quite  forgets  that  your  toe  is  in 
pain.  As  great  wits  are  apt  to  be  absent,  we  would  have  some  indulgence  for  this 
frailty  in  the  god  of  wit  in  any  other  case : — let  him  refuse  his  healing  art  when  the 
gouty  alderman  begs  to  be  enabled  to  take  a  turn  in  the  alley,  or  the  judge  sues  for 
ease,  that  he  may  take  a  nap  on  the  bench,  while  the  poor  man’s  cause  is  trying 
unpitied  by  the  unpitying  spoilers  of  the  East.  But  can  the  great  Apollo  forget  that, 
in  vain,  if  you  are  sick,  has  he  inspired  what,  in  any  age, 

“  Ennobled  hath  the  buskin’d  stage  ?” 

Not  only  Shakspeare,  Jonson,  and  all  our  bards,  will  fade  away,  but  the  Tragic  Muse 
will  be  robbed  of  her  terrors,  her  pathetic,  her  sublime ;  and  her  laughing  sister,  of  all 
the  archness  of  her  smiles.  I  will  hope  that  you  will  soon  get  well,  and  shall  be 
happy  when  I  receive  a  summons  to  come  and  congratulate  you  on  the  return  of 
health.  I  was  ashamed  of  not  answering  your  obliging  card;  but  Mr.  Montagu  was 
taken  very  ill  with  the  asthma,  and  I  was  in  constant  attendance  upon  him :  he  was 
very  ill  for  three  days,  but  is  now  better.  I  must  tell  you  that  Lord  Lyttelton  and 
I  suspect  you  of  the  verses  upon  the  advertising  a  new  edition  of  Shakspeare.  The 
fame  of  the  verses  reached  my  ear  before  I  met  with  them ;  they  seemed  to  me  to  be 
of  a  very  superior  kind.  I  showed  them  to  Lord  Lyttelton,  who  says  they  are  as 
good  as  any  in  Pope’s  Dunciad.  This  is  enough  to  fix  them  upon  you  : — but  I  have 
a  stronger  reason  ;  I  think  no  one  but  Mr.  Garrick  would  have  done  me  the  honour  to 
have  joined  me  to  him  as  another  supporter  of  Shakspeare.  Alas  !  he  leans  his  whole 
weight  and  person  upon  you,  while  I  only  can  perform  the  little  office  of  keeping  the 
fringes  on  his  train  out  of  the  dirt,  or  drive  off  the  malicious  [ape]  who  would  tread 
on  his  imperial  robes. — My  best  wishes  attend  you  ;  and  when  Mrs.  Garrick  has  nursed 
you  well  again,  I  shall  be  glad  of  the  honour  and  pleasure  of  seeing  her ;  and  I  know 
I  shall  then  see  in  her  that  cheerfulness  which  is  so  natural  to  her  disposition,  and  so 
agreeably  diffused  through  her  conversation.  With  perfect  esteem  and  regard, 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged,  obedient, 

And  faithful  humble  servant, 

Eliz.  Montagu. 


374 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


DEAR  SIR, 

Several  weeks’  indisposition,  a  little  dastardly  fever  lurking  about  me,  lias 
hindered  my  coming  to  the  Adelphi,  though  I  longed  to  see  you  and  Mrs.  Garrick. 
I  had  hoped  to  call  on  you  as  soon  as  you  returned  this  week  from  Hampton,  but 
was  last  night  obliged  to  put  myself  into  the  hands  of  a  conjuror,  who  with  cups  and 
lancets  (not  cups  and  balls)  conveyed  away  some  of  my  feverish  blood;  so  I  am  better 
to-day,  but  dare  not  expose  myself  to  the  foul  fiend,  the  black  north-easterly  wind.  I 
assure  you,  it  gives  me  great  concern  to  find  a  certain  person  has  behaved  in  such  a 
manner  to  you  ;  and  I  rejoice  that  the  great  personage  acted  so  properly  on  the  occa¬ 
sion.  Envy  can  have  no  poize  upon  you.  In  your  profession,  not  only  unrivalled  by 
all  your  contemporaries,  but  unparalleled  from  the  beginning  of  time.  Greece  and 
Home,  which  have  produced  the  best  geniuses  in  every  other  art  or  science,  never 
gave  an  equal  to  you  in  yours.  As  to  the  famous  Roscius,  he  could  not  have  shone 
like  you  in  either  Lear  or  Benedick,  much  less  in  both.  In  private  life,  who  so 
beloved  and  respected  as  Mr.  Garrick !  It  seems  to  me  a  perfect  act  of  insanity  in 
Mr. - to  attempt  what  he  undertook. 

Dr.  Beattie  has  called  on  you  two  or  three  times,  but  unsuccessfully.  I  dare  sa}-, 
you  will  stuff  him  in  some  corner  to-morrow  night.  Mr.  De  Luc  was  transported 
with  Don  John ;  he  longed  to  see  you  again,  but  I  was  afraid  to  be  too  importunate. 
I  have  applied  to  your  prime  minister,  Mr.  Johnson,  to  put  Mr.  De  Luc  into  some 
corner  to-morrow  night ;  and  if  he  does  not  grant  my  request,  I  must  trouble  you  ; 
for  Mr.  De  Luc,  I  really  think,  would  run  distracted  if  he  should  be  disappointed  ;  he 
admires  you  with  an  enthusiasm  that  shows  him  worthy  to  be  admitted  to  this  noblest 
of  all  entertainments. — My  best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged,  grateful,  and  affectionate, 

E.  Montagu. 

Mr.  De  Luc  has  been  reading  “  Lear”  this  week,  that  he  may  the  better  enter 
into  the  action,  not  being  under  any  difficulty  to  understand  the  words. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Saturday  Morn. 

I  am  quite  mortified  that  the  thaw  should  have  brought  me  a  rheumatic  head¬ 
ache  to-day,  when  I  might  have  enjoyed  an  hour  of  your  conversation.  I  will  tell 
you  the  state  of  my  future  engagements.  To-morrow,  if  I  am  well  enough,  I  dine 
at  the  French  Ambassador’s.  You  know,  at  such  places  dinner  is  not  easily  over,  from 
the  multitude  of  guests  and  of  dishes.  The  next  day  I  dine  at  Lord  Lucan’s  with 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


375 


the  said  Ambassador,  but  I  presume  the  dinner  will  be  sooner  over ;  if  you  will  accept 
of  me  then,  I  will  wait  on  you.  On  Tuesday  I  shall  have  company  at  dinner  at 
home,  and  they  will  probably  stay  late.  On  Wednesday  1  dine  at  the  Dean  of 
Derry’s,  and  perhaps  stay  the  afternoon.  I  long  to  see  you  ;  and  did  not  you  promise 
that  still  Shakspeare  should  be  under  your  protection  ?  I  flatter  myself  that  you  are 
doing  something  now  to  defend  him  from  foreign  foes ;  at  home  you  had  made  (him) 
triumph  even  over  envy  ;  for  the  ugly  thing  durst  not  trip,  but  silently  fed  on  the 
venom  of  its  own  spleen. 

Best  compliments  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  am  much  concerned  that  you  are  in¬ 
disposed.  May  better  health  attend  you,  with  every  joy  in  her  train  !  With  most 
perfect  esteem,  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  affectionate  and  most  obliged  humble  servant. 

E.  Montagu. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR, 

Lord  Lyttelton  is  more  volage ,  more  difficult  to  fix,  than  any  of  Messieurs 
les  Maccaronis ;  I  believe  we  shall  hear  of  his  making  a  figure  upon  the  turf,  and 
being  a  favourite  of  the  coterie.  He  is  horribly  le  bon  ton.  I  have  endeavoured  to 
engage  him  to  meet  you  here  at  dinner ;  he  has  more  appetite  and  relish  for  such  a 
guest  at  table,  than  an  alderman  of  London  or  Bristol  has  to  turtle;  yet  he  answers 
me  that  he  is  engaged,  or  apprehends  there  will  be  business  at  the  House  of  Lords  ; 
but  on  Saturday  or  Sunday  we  might  get  him,  for  the  Peers  are  as  inactive  as  Jews 
on  Saturday,  and  as  jolly  as  the  idlest  Christians  on  Sunday.  I  mean  for  Saturday 
or  Sunday  se’nnight ;  for,  being  engaged  on  Sunday  evening  and  Saturday  morning, 
my  spirits  will  not  be  all  dedicated  to  enjoying  your  conversation,  to  which  I  would 
give  the  attention  of  an  hundred  heads  if  I  had  them.  Mr.  de  Castuelan  has  been 
with  me  this  morning ;  he  is  to  bring  me  some  of  his  translations  of  our  Bard  on 
Saturday  morn.  When  does  “  Don  Felix”  appear?— Pray  present  my  respects  to 
Mrs.  Garrick,  and  I  hope  you  will  both  fix  on  some  day  to  give  me  the  greatest  of 
pleasures,  your  conversation.  I  should  have  waited  on  Mrs.  Garrick  before  this  time, 
but  I  have  been  hurried  to  death  with  assemblies,  and  I  am  forced  to  manage  mon 
souffle  de  vie.  By  the  by,  there  are  hopes  of  seeing  Dr.  Beattie  in  the  South.  Pity 
so  sweet  a  flower  of  Parnassus  should  for  ever  shiver  and  wither  in  a  northern  climate  ! 
but  I  cannot  get  any  thing  done  for  him. 

Fie  upon  the  great !  He  talks  of  coming  to  England  for  his  amusement  this 
summer.  Answer  all  this  nonsense  only  by  one  valuable  line,  when  you  will  give  us 
the  happiness  of  seeing  you.  Ever  your  most  obliged,  &c. 

E.  Montagu. 


376 


PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 


SIR, 

Considering  how  much  I  admire  and  regard  William  Shakspeare  and  David 
Garrick,  Esq.  and  how  very  tenderly  I  love  the  author  of  the  Essay,  I  may  hardly 
be  received  as  an  impartial  witness  in  the  cause  of  the  verses,  but  I  assure  you  they 
have  been  universally  admired.  Mr.  Montagu,  who  rises  early,  was  impatient  till  I 
got  up,  to  present  them  to  me.  Before  dinner,  great  numbers  of  my  friends  sent 
them.  Some  attributed  them  to  you,  some  to  Lord  Lyttelton,  some  to  the  Wartons. 
From  a  certain  masterly  stroke,  I  suspected  you.  There  are  many  rhymers,  few  poets  : 
it  was  plain  they  were  the  work  of  a  poet.  Every  body  was  charmed  with  the  verses, 
though  they  might  not  think  the  subject  deserved  praise. — I  am  glad  you  did  not 
venture  to  the  masquerade  last  night.  During  this  severe  weather,  I  dare  not  ven¬ 
ture  to  any  great  distance  from  home  ;  but  if  the  frost  becomes  less  severe,  I  will  be 
ready  to  wait  on  Mrs.  Garrick  any  afternoon,  except  Friday,  that  she  will  favour  me 
with  her  commands.  With  great  admiration,  warmed  by  gratitude, 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 

Best  compliments  attend  Mrs.  Garrick. 


SKETCH  OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  MRS.  MONTAGU. 

Amongst  the  many  accomplished  characters  that  do  honour  to  the  fair  sex,  Mrs. 
INI.  may  justly  be  reckoned.  This  lady  is  possessed  of  a  sprightly  genius,  a  sound 
judgment,  and  an  unprejudiced  understanding.  She  is  visited  by  almost  all  the 
literati  of  the  age,  who  know  too  well  what  they  owe  themselves  not  to  respect  her. 
She  is  admitted  to  the  houses  and  assemblies  of  the  great,  who  are  too  sensible  of 
her  worth  to  neglect  her.  Yet,  while  this  lady  receives  all  these  marks  of  respect 
from  persons  of  the  greatest  note,  she  preserves  the  most  modest  and  engaging 
deportment  towards  every  one,  and  is  equally  friendly,  courteous,  and  charitable. 

As  a  proof  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  literary  abilities,  her  Essay  on  the  Genius  and 
Writings  of  Shakspeare  will  be  handed  down  to  future  generations  ;  as  a  proof  of 
her  benevolence,  it  will  be  at  the  same  time  recorded,  that  she  appropriated  the 
profits  of  that  well-finished  performance,  to  wipe  the  tear  from  the  cheek  of  sorrow, 
to  comfort  the  distressed  and  afflicted :  she  bestowed  the  monies  which  arose  from 
the  sale  of  her  book,  in  relieving  a  poor  widow,  whose  necessities  rendered  her  a  real 
object  of  such  a  charity. 

It  is  superfluous  to  add  more  here  concerning  a  character  which  is  its  own  pane¬ 
gyric  ;  what  has  been  said  is  such  a  tribute  paid  to  truth,  as  all  that  know  this 
excellent  lady  can  testify,  as  none  but  the  envious  and  ungenerous  can  entertain  a 
thought  or  wish  to  suppress. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


377 


Mrs.  Elizabeth  Montagu,  whose  maiden  name  was  Robinson,  is  the  daughter  of 
Matthew  Robinson,  Esq.  of  Horton  in  the  county  of  Kent. 

She  discovered  a  lively  imagination  in  the  early  part  of  life,  and  had  a  peculiar 
talent  for  epistolary  writing,  and  her  person  was  handsome. 

She  married  Edward  Montagu,  Esq.  grandson  to  Admiral  Lord  Sandwich,  a  gen¬ 
tleman  of  very  considerable  fortune  in  the  county  of  York,  with  whom  she  has  lived 
many  years. 

Her  literary  productions  are :  “  An  Essay  on  the  writings  and  genius  of  Shak- 
speare,  compared  with  the  Greek  and  French  dramatic  poets  ;  with  some  Remarks 
upon  the  misrepresentations  of  Monsieur  de  Voltaire.”  A  work  which  is  deservedly 
applauded  by  men  of  true  taste. 

Also  the  three  last  dialogues,  published  in  an  octavo  volume  by  Lord  Lyttelton, 
under  the  title  of  “  Dialogues  of  the  Dead.” 


MRS.  MONTAGU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

DEAR  SIR,  Wednesday  Morn. 

You  know  that  I  am  too  apt  to  presume  on  your  indulgence,  yet  still  your  good¬ 
ness  is  equal  to  all  possible  presumption ;  on  my  part,  I  flatter  myself  therefore,  that 
you  will  excuse  my  telling  you,  that  my  friend  Mrs.  Yesey  is  very  solicitous  that 
Mr.  Yesey  should  be  admitted  of  the  Club,  and  one  favourable  word  from  you,  who 
are  the  Minos  of  the  club,  would  at  once  put  him  in  elysium.  Such  an  honour 
would  make  Mr.  Yesey  more  fond  of  England ;  and  his  wife  loves  England,  and 
is  beloved  by  many.  Mr.  Yesey  is  good-humoured  and  obliging  in  society,  an 
admirer  of  every  species  of  merit,  and  more  desirous  to  be  thought  an  amateur  than 
ambitious  to  be  esteemed  a  connoisseur;  so  he  has  no  impertinent  pretensions  to  criti¬ 
cism  and  cavil,  but  will  love  and  honour  the  whole  Society,  and  think  himself  under 
infinite  obligations  to  it  if  he  is  admitted.  I  beg  of  you  not  to  take  the  trouble  to 
answer  this  letter,  only  pardon  it,  and  believe  me  with  perfect  esteem  and  attach¬ 
ment,  dear  Sir,  Your  most  obliged  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

E.  Montagu. 

My  foreigners  were  transported  with  Don  John,  and  I  return  you  a  thousand 
thanks  for  them.  My  best  respects  attend  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  have  been  confined  by 
a  cold,  which  has  prevented  my  waiting  on  her. 


MR.  GARRICK  TO  MRS.  MONTAGU. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Hampton. 

I  must  open  my  heart  to  you,  because  I  know  you  have  an  excellent  one;  but  it 
is  not  upon  that  account  only  that  I  address  myself  to  you, — my  business  too  requires 
vol.  ir.  3  c 


378 


CORRESPONDENCE  OF  DAVID  GARRICK. 


judgment  and  friendship  ;  and  indeed  I  should  not  have  given  you  this  impertinent 
trouble,  could  I  have  known  where  to  find  the  needful  (a  polite  phrase)  any  where 
else.  I  will  enter  upon  the  matter  : — Two  very  particular  friends  of  mine  dined  lately 
with  Foote,  where,  much  to  their  surprise,  and  little  to  their  pleasure,  they  met  Mr. 
Lyttelton  ;  in  the  course  of  conversation,  my  name  was  brought  up  (you  must  know, 
to  my  credit  be  it  spoken,  that  Foote  hates  me) ;  Mr.  Lyttelton  had  a  mind  to  flatter 
his  host,  and  was  pleased  to  say,  Garrick  is  so  mean — one  of  my  friends  stopped  him 
short — “  Sir,  I  shall  hear  nothing  against  Mr.  Garrick,  lie  is  a  man  of  honour,  and  my 
friend,  and  you  do  not  know  him  my  other  friend  seconded  him,  and  were  too 
partial  on  the  opposite  side.  If  Mr.  Lyttelton  meant,  by  mean,  having  principles 
and  qualities  the  very  reverse  of  his  own,  I  am  very  mean  indeed  !  nor  should  I  have 
regarded  what  he  had  said,  had  not  he  intimated  that  his  father,  who  knew  me  better, 
was  of  the  same  opinion,  or  something  tantamount.  They  desired  him  to  desist, 
for  if  his  father  said  so,  he  knew  as  little  of  me  as  the  son  did,  or  words  to  that  effect. 
Now,  Madam,  though  I  have  no  concern  for  what  a  young  crack-brained  profligate 
may  say  of  me,  yet  even  to  have  it  said  by  the  devil  himself  that  one  of  the  most 
virtuous  characters,  and  most  esteemed  and  honoured  by  me,  should  be  of  the  same 
opinion,  has  a  little  alarmed  me.  My  sensibility,  perhaps,  may  go  too  far,  and  therefore 
I  have  not  hinted  the  least  word  of  this  business  even  to  my  wife,  nor  will  I ;  my 
Lord  too  shall  not  know  a  syllable  of  the  matter,  for  if  he  bears  me  the  good-will 
which  I  have  long  flattered  myself  he  does,  his  delicate  mind  would  suffer  for  it.  All 
I  would  wish  to  know  is,  whether  it  may  not  be  possible  from  any  action,  or  beha¬ 
viour  of  mine,  or  my  not  writing  to  his  Lordship  upon  his  son’s  marriage  (which  I 
certainly  did  not,  and  upon  principle,  as  I  believe  I  told  you),  that  his  opinion  of  me 
may  be  somewhat  altered,  and  so  have  given  a  little  ground  for  falsehood  and  malice 
to  build  upon  ; — should  this  be  the  case,  I  should  most  sensibly  feel  it.  Now,  my  dear 
Madam,  if  you  have  in  the  least  perceived  any  change  in  his  Lordship  towards  me,  I 
should  esteem  it  as  an  additional  act  of  friendship  to  the  many  I  have  been  honoured 
with,  if  you  would  not  suffer  the  least  mist  to  lie  upon  me  where  I  would  wish  to  be 
seen  in  the  clearest  light.  Though  I  value  myself  upon  being  blackened  by  the  one, 
I  should  be  miserable  to  be  even  slighted  by  the  other  : 

May  Heaven  my  blessing  to  my  wish  bestow, 

The  Sire  to  be  my  friend,  the  son  my  foe. 

I  hope  I  have  not  imposed  too  difficult  a  task  upon  your  goodness. 

I  am,  my  dear  Madam, 

D.  G. 

I  came  here  very  ill  and  feverish,  but  good  nursing  and  quiet  have  recovered  me : 
I  shall  be  in  town  on  Wednesday  night :  a  line  from  you  of  information  and  advice 
would  make  me  happy. 

Endorsed, 

“  To  Mrs.  Montagu,”  &e. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE. 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MONSIEUR,  Paris>  ce  21  Sepbre,  1754. 

Mr.  Silvain  vient  de  me  communiquer  la  lettre  que  vous  lui  avez  ecrite  a 
mon  sujet.  Les  propositions  que  vous  me  faites  ne  peuvent  me  convenir,  puisque 
je  gagne  a  Paris,  pour  cinq  mois,  deux  cents  cinquante  louis,  sans  compter  mes 
ecoliers. 

Si  vous  avez  envie  de  m’avoir  a  votre  theatre,  Monsieur,  je  demande  trois  cents 
cinquante  guinees  et  un  benefice,  sans  remboursement  d’aucun  frais  ;  etcommeje 
scais  que  votre  talent  est  superieur,  et  qu’il  entraine  les  suffrages  de  votre  nation, 
mon  interet,  et  le  plaisir  de  la  patrie,  me  determine  a  vous  engager  a  y  r£pr£senter. 

Si  mes  propositions  vous  conviennent,  nous  ferons  un  engagement  pour  un  hiver ; 
si  je  vous  conviens,  nous  le  renouvellerons  ensuite.  Ayez  la  complaisance  de  vous 
informer  de  moi,  et  A’ous  verrez  que  je  ne  me  sers  point  de  l'agrement  que  j’ai  de 
plaire,  pour  demander  plus  que  je  ne  vaux. 

Au  reste,  Monsieur,  c’est  mon  dernier  mot :  ayez  la  bont£  de  vous  decider,  parce- 
queje  ne  veux  point  repondre  aux  propositions  de  la  Cour  de  Bavi&re,  que  je  ne 
sache  vos  dernieres  intentions.  J’attends  votre  decision,  et  j’ai  1’honneur  d'etre,  avec 
respect,  Monsieur,  v6tre‘tr£s-humble  et  tr^s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Noverre. 

J’ai  ma  sceur,  qui  est  une  jolie  danseuse,  pour  laquelle  je  demande  cent  guinees. 

Mon  addresse  est  dans  1’Abbaye  St.  Germain  des  Pr&s,  commune  des  Moines. 


M.  PATU  TO  MR.  CLELAND. 

Covent- Garden,  Sunday,  Nov.  31st,*  1754. 

At  length,  my  dear  Sir,  I  send  you  back  “  The  Ipermestra,”  a  play  which,  in  my 
little  opinion,  is  pretty  far  from  being  the  master-piece  of  its  great  author,  Metas- 
tasio.  I  keep  still  upon  my  table  the  first  volume  of  his  works,  the  perusal  of  which 
is  almost  over.  I  had  returned  it  to  you  with  my  thanks  many  days  ago,  were  not 


*  It  is  extraordinary  to  see  such  a  man  as  Patu  adding  a  day  of  fogs  to  the  month  of  November. — Ed. 

3  c  2 


380 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I  reading  for  the  third  time,  but  always  with  the  first  pleasure,  your  well-named 
**************  *.  «  Relieve  me  for  rny  honour,  and  have  respect  to 

mine  honour,  that  you  may  believe,”  I  am  not  a  flatterer,  but  I  cannot  forbear  to  tell 
you  I  am  more  and  more  pleased  with  the  beauties  of  the  style,  the  liveliness  of  the 
descriptions,  and  the  wondrous  variety  of  the  characters  :  but  oh,  my  grave  friend,  my 
venerable  philosopher,  how  bold,  how  unjust  are  you  to  chide  me  so  imperiously, 
even  to  threaten  me,  as  you  did  last  Wednesday,  about  my  conduct,  when  your  own 
pictures  warm  my  flesh  and  blood,  and  must  insinuate  in  any  youth  this  very  poison 
you  would  have  me  struggling  with  !  Like  in  this  our  delicious  writer  Cr^billon, 
I  say : 

“  Non  ce  vieux  monstre  du  Permesse, 

Ce  Scythe,  inspirant  la  terreur, 

Qui  dans  ses  vers  boufis  de  carnage  etd’horreur 
Brule,  roue,  et  donne  sans  cesse 
La  question  a  son  lecteur  ; 

Mais  son  fils,  cet  aimable  auteur, 

Ce  divin  favori  de  1’enfant  de  Cithere, 

Qui  dans  son  style  seducteur, 

Maitre  en  Part  d’instruire  et  de  plaire. 

Nous  depeint  les  fautes  de  cceur, 

Et  porte  lui-meme  a  les  fuire.” 

I  would  not  pay  such  a  compliment  to  the  insipid  “  Memoirs  of  the  Shakspeare  s 
Head,”  a  poor  insignificant  book,  some  pages  of  which  I  read  three  days  ago,  at  a 
lady  of  my  acquaintance’s.  To  understand  it  perfectly,  I  confess,  is  an  honour  I  am 
not  entitled  to;  but,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  it  is  the  lowest  style,  the  meanest  scrawl¬ 
ing  I  ever  looked  upon  since  I  am  in  England.  Besides,  fie  on  the  author  who 
chose  such  a  place  for  the  scene  of  his  stories  !  a  nasty  bawdy  tavern,  I  hate  the  very 
name  of! 

I  long  to  wait  on  Mr.  Garrick,  and  return  him  viva  voce  my  sincere  thanks  for 
his  truly  French  politeness.  My  being  civil  or  uncivil  towards  him  is  entirely  in 
your  power,  since  you  may,  at  your  pleasure,  hasten  or  delay  the  time  of  your  leading 
me  to  his  house.  If  you  get  any  occasion  of  seeing  him  before,  I  shall  be  obliged  to 
you  to  assure  him  I  am  not  a  stranger  to  his  talents,  and  though  I  cannot  accept  of 
his  kind  proposal,  I  take  it,  however,  as  an  obligation  I  am  glad  to  lie  under.  Fare¬ 
well,  my  friend  ;  I  come  back  to  Milton.  By  the  way,  I  will  tell  you  that  I  went 
last  Thursday  night  to  hear  Mr.  Macklin,  who  was  (according  to  the  papers)  to  speak 
in  public,  and  explain  to  the  audience  both  the  fabric  and  ornaments  of  the  Pan- 
daemonium.  But  “  oh  what  a  falling  off  was  there  !”  I  heard  a  man  mimicking  any 
sort  of  birds,  cats,  and  dogs,  &c.  a  great  many  personal  injuries,  words  to  no  purpose, 
and  all  the  speech  pretty  well  seasoned  with  a  good  deal  of  impudence.  Adieu  ! 
That  is  a  pleasure  you  may  meet  with  as  soon  as  you  please  ;  in  the  mean  time,  I  kiss 
your  hands,  and  am  what  you  know,  kc. 


Patu. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


381 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  10  Janvier,  1755. 

J’ai  eu  l’honneur  de  voir  Mr.  Silvain,  qui  m’a  communique  la  lettre  que  vous 
lui  avez  ecrite  a  mon  sujet.  Comme  les  propositions  que  je  vous  ai  faites  dans 
ma  derniere  me  semblent  justes,  je  ne  puis  rien  en  rabatre;  je  sacrifierai  cependant  a 
mes  interets  en  payant  les  frais  du  benefice  mentionne  dans  votre  lettre,  moins  pour 
me  conformer  aux  usages  de  votre  theatre  que  pour  vous  donner  une  preuve  du  desir 
que  j’ai  de  me  trouver  avec  vous. 

Je  ne  m’engagerai  que  pour  une  saison  seulement,  et  si  mes  talens  vous  con- 
viennent,  nous  renouvellerons  l’engagement.  Cette  conduite  de  ma  part  doit  vous 
prouver  que  mon  dessein  n’est  ni  de  vous  tromper  ni  de  profiter  de  l’opinion  que  vous 
avez  de  ma  capacite. 

Voici,  Monsieur,  les  clauses  de  mon  engagement. 

Primo,  Trois  cent  cinquante  guinees  pour  mes  appointemens,  et  le  troisieme 
b6n6fice ;  c’est  a  dire,  immediatement  apr&s  les  deux  premiers  que  vous  accordez  a 
vos  deux  premiers  acteurs  ou  actrices. 

2°.  Que  la  pi£ce  de  mon  benefice  sera  a  mon  choix,  et  que  vous  vous  engagerez  a 
y  representer  comme  vous  me  faites  la  grace  de  me  le  promettre  dans  votre  lettre  a 
Mr.  Silvain  :  comme  encore  de  lever  tous  les  obstacles  ou  difficult^  qui  pourroient 
retarder  ou  porter  prejudice  au  dit  benefice. 

3°.  Cent  guinees  pour  ma  sceur,  qui  s’engagera  a  danser  seule,  pas  de  deux,  &c. 
et  figurer  meme  dans  mes  ballets  pour  futility  de  votre  spectacle,  et  que  vous  lui 
fournirez  toutes  les  choses  n^cessaires  a  son  emploi. 

Quand  a  moi,  Monsieur,  je  m’engagerai  pour  etre  Maitre  des  Ballets  en  clief ;  et 
pour  composer  et  faire  ex6cuter  a  votre  choix  les  ballets  d’invention  en  tous  genres, 
tels  que  je  les  donne  a  Paris,  en  me  procurant  toutefois  les  choses  necessaires,  soit  pour 
l’execution,  soit  pour  rembellissement  des  dits  ballets. 

J’ose  esperer,  Monsieur,  que  vous  voudrez  bien  ne  point  tarder  a  me  faire  une 
reponse  decisive  par  le  canal  de  Mr.  Silvain  ;  et  d&s  que  nous  aurons  conclu,  je 
ne  manquerai  pas  de  vous  faire  part  de  tous  les  6claircissements  qui  pourront  con- 
tribuer  au  bien  de  votre  spectacle.  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre.  Monsieur,  avec  bien  de 
l’estime,  Votre  tr£s  humble  serviteur, 

Noverre. 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  31  Janvier,  1755. 

\  ous  trouverez  ci-joint  mon  engagement:  je  vous  prie  d’en  faire  un  double  exacte 
et  de  me  l’envoyer  par  distance  de  courier. 


382 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Mr.  Silvain,  qui  no ’a  fait  la  lecture  (le  votre  lettre,  m’a  determine,  par  tout  le 
bien  qu’il  m’a  dit  de  vous,  ft  ne  point  prendre  garde  au  temps  de  mon  b6n£fice,  et  a 
m’en  raporter  h  votre  £quit6.  J’esp&re  cependant  que  je  ne  serai  point  le  dernier,  et 
que  vous  aurez  egards  aux  soins  et  aux  peines  que  je  me  donnerai  pour  vous  faire 
gagner  bien  des  guin^es. 

Je  me  chargerai  avec  bien  de  plaisir  du  soin  de  faire  faire  tons  les  habits  neces- 
saires  a  mes  ballets  :  mon  dessein  est  de  vous  en  faire  faire  un  dans  cliaque  caractcre 
en  toile  ou  en  taffetas  ;  si  cela  vous  convient,  ils  vous  serviroient  d’^ch antilions,  et  vous 
r^gleroient  pour  le  prix,  de  sorte  que  vous  sauriez  au  juste  ce  qu’il  vous  en  couteroit 
pour  habiller  votre  ballet,  et  le  benefice  que  vous  auriez  de  les  faire  faire  a  Paris. 

Je  me  chargerois  encore  de  tous  les  instrumens  n^cessaires  a  mon  ballet  Chinois, 
des  guirlandeset  berceaux  de  fleurs  pour  ma  Fontaine  de  Jouvence ;  ainsi  du  reste ;  le 
port  seroit  peu  considerable,  et  avec  une  permission  de  vos  magistrats,  ou  de  l’Ein- 
bassadeur  de  France,  vous  ne  payerez  point  de  droit :  la  chose  me  paroit  d’autant  plus 
aise  a  obtenir  que  ces  sortes  d’effets  ne  sont  point  n^gociables,  et  ne  peuvent  faire 
aucun  tort  aux  marchands  ;  le  tout  £tant  employ^  a  l’usage  de  votre  theatre.  Quand 
a  l’assemblage  de  votre  danse,  il  faudra  que  vous  m’instruisiez  du  nombre  de  figurants 
et  de  figurantes  que  vous  avez,  afin  que  je  puisse  vous  engager  ceux  et  celles  qui 
vous  manqueroient,  et  qui  me  sont  n^cessaires.  Fa  foire  St.  Laurent,  qui  est  toujours 
bien  fourni  en  danse,  me  procurera  la  facilite  de  vous  fournir  de  bons  sujets  tous 
dresses  a  mon  genre  de  composition. 

Si  vous  avez  besoin  d’un  tr^s-bon  danseur  pantomime,  je  vous  en  engagerai  un 
bon  :  il  se  nomme  Monsieur  de  Laitre,  et  fait  grand  plaisir  a  Paris,  tant  par  sa  legercte 
que  par  sa  vigueur :  vous  aurez  la  bonte  de  me  mander  vos  intentions  au  sujet  de 
tous  les  articles  qui  concernent  ma  lettre. 

Soyez  persuade,  Monsieur,  du  desir  que  j’ai  de  vous  connoitre,  et  de  vous  donner 
des  preuves  de  mon  z&le  et  de  mon  attachement  a  vos  interets. 

J’espere  que  le  temps  me  mettra  a  meme  de  vous  convaincre  de  mes  sentimens 
pour  vous,  et  de  la  parfaite  estime  avec  laquelle  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr^s-humble  et  tr&s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Xoverhe. 


Xous  soussignes,  Jean  George  Xoverre  d’une  part,  et  David  Garrick  d’autre  part, 
sommes  convenus  de  ce  qui  suit,  S9avoir  que  moi  Xoverre  m’engage  a  me  transporter 
a  mes  frais  a  Londre  le  quinze  du  mois  d’Octobre  de  la  presente  annee,  pour  y  com¬ 
poser  tous  les  ballets  d’invention  au  choix  du  dit  Signor  Garrick  pour  le  temps  de 
la  saison  ;  e’est  a  dire,  jusqu’a  la  cloture  de  son  theatre  ;  et  si  je  suis  en  etat  de  danser,  je 
m’engage  de  le  faire  ;  com  me  aussi  de  mener  ma  soeur,  en  qualite  de  seconde  danseuse, 
et  pour  figurer  meme  dans  les  ballets  en  cas  de  besoin.  Le  Signor  Garrick  s’engage 
de  sa  part  a  me  payer  le  temps  de  la  saison  la  somme  de  quatre  cent  cinquante  louis 
d’or  de  France  par  portions  egales  de  mois  en  mois,  qui  me  seront  paves  a  ma  volont^, 
soit  a  Paris  par  Mr.  Silvain  Banquier,  ou  a  Londre  par  le  dit  Signor  Garrick. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


383 


Les  susdits  quatre  cent  cinquante  louis  d’or  serviront  d’appointemens  pour  moi  et  ma 
soeur,  s^avoir  trois  cents  cinquante  guinees  ou  louis  d’or  de  France  pour  moi,  et  cent 
louis  pour  ma  soeur  ;  et  outre  le  dit  Signor  Garrick  s’oblige  a  m’accorder  un  benefice,  et 
a  y  representer  moyennant  que  je  paye  les  frais  ordinaires  de  son  theatre  ;  et  s’engage 
a  me  fournir  toutes  les  choses  n^cessaires  a  1’usage  de  son  spectacle  et  a  1’ execution  de 
mes  ballets.  Voulons  que  le  present  engagement,  fait  double  entre  nous  par  distance 
de  poste,  ait  autant  de  force  et  de  valeur  que  s’il  etoit  pass6  par  devant  Xotaire,  aux 
peines  de  cent  louis  d’or  de  dedit  pour  les  premiers  contrevenans  ;  et  a  cet  effet 
nous  hipotecquons  pour  la  solidite  du  present  engagement  tous  nos  biens  meubles  et 
immeubles,  presents  et  a  venir ;  si  mon  accident  m’empechoit  de  danser,  cela  ne 
changeroit  aucune  chose  a  mon  engagement,  et  je  serois  paye  en  entier  de  mes 
apointemens  seulement  pour  la  composition  des  ballets.  En  foi  de  quoi  nous 
avons  signe  le  present  engagement  par  distance  de  poste.  A  Paris,  ce  cinq  Fevrier, 
mil  sept  cent  cinquante  cinq. 

J.  G.  XoVERRE. 


M.  PATU  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

S1r5  Paris,  Tuesday,  Feb.  25th,  1755. 

Though  I  am  conscious  of  my  innocence,  and  far,  very  far  indeed  from  having  any 
ingratitude  to  upbraid  myself  with,  I  heartily  confess  that,  of  all  the  men  in  London, 
you  could  have  brought  me  in  guilty  with  the  highest  appearance  of  justice,  for  the 
same  appearance  of  a  breach  to  friendship  and  acknowledgment.  However,  I  will 
use  no  clearing  of  my  behaviour,  no  precarious  defence,  no  vain  apology,  as  it  is  some 
times  our  fashion  in  such  cases.  I  will  remember  that  I  deal  with  an  Englishman, 
an  enemy  to  ceremony,  a  lover  to  sincerity  and  truth  ;  and  am  pretty  sure  you  will 
excuse  me  willingly  when  you  know,  if  I  have  delayed  my  writing  to  you  longer  than 
the  politeness  you  showed  me  in  England  should  have  suffered,  it  was  owing  to  a 
reason,  which,  to  speak  poetically,  is  not  to  be  reasoned  down, — a  mere  impossibility. 
At  my  arrival  at  Paris,  that  cursed  cold,  which  I  got  in  your  foggy  air,  and  oppressed 
me  so  long,  seized  upon  me  again,  and  put  me  quite  down  in  such  a  manner,  that 
spitting  blood,  and  with  the  shortest  breath  I  ever  knew,  I  was  obliged  immediately 
to  keep  my  chamber,  wherein  I  lived  hitherto  upon  nothing  but  chemical  drugs, 
medicinal  waters,  low  spirits,  sadness,  and  melancholy.  It  would  be  to  no  purpose 
to  descend  with  you  into  all  the  particulars,  since  I  begin  to  be  a  good  deal  better ; 
but  indeed  I  was  then  so  very  weak  that  even  the  sight  of  a  pen,  of  a  book,  of  any 
tool  of  application  whatsoever,  was  insupportable  to  me.  Xature  and  tranquillity, 
two  excellent  physicians,  recovered  me  a  little  ;  but  I  had  hardly  begun  to  enjoy  the 
dear  return  of  my  health,  when  I  was  forced  away  to  run  from  visits  into  visits,  both 
by  the  insipid  ceremonies  of  Paris,  and  the  domestic  businesses  which  called  me  back 
to  France;  which  is  the  second  reason  :  — this  moment  of  leisure  I  take  to  write 
these  lines  is  the  very  first  one  I  could  meet  with.  So,  my  dear  Sir,  you  see  that  I 


384 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


am  more  to  be  pitied  than  to  be  blamed,  and  have  been,  as  I  thank  my  stars  I  shall 
be  always,  a  great  way  off  from  repaying  with  cold  indifference  all  the  kindness  you 
showed  me  in  London,  as  soon  as  I  had  the  happiness  to  get  acquainted  with  you. 
Let  me  then  give  over  so  prolix  a  preamble,  and  pass  on  to  something  else. 

I  will  henceforth  keep  my  word  very  carefully,  but,  for  the  present,  beg  to  be 
excused  if  I  cannot  talk  to  you  about  our  modern  plays,  because  my  sickness  in¬ 
dulged  me  but  very  seldom  in  going  to  the  playhouse.  I  was  ready  to  give  you  a 
full  account  of  “  The  Triumvirat,”  which  1  read  over  with  all  the  attention  a  dull 
soporiferous  reading  can  afford  ;  but  I  considered  it  was  too  late  very  likely,  and  after 
such  a  while  the  play  must  have  been  brought  to  you ;  to  you,  I  say,  who,  born  to 
be  an  excellent  author,  as  well  as  an  excellent  actor,  feed  upon  any  sort  of  literature, 
and  enrich  your  mind  with  all  the  treasures  of  both  our  languages.  However,  I  will 
most  heartily  perform  my  promise  about  this  very  subject,  if  you  will  have  me  do  so; 
and  flatter  myself  beforehand  that  your  judgment  upon  this  play  is  the  same  as 
mine,  viz.  you  take  it  for  a  cold  insignificant  work  without  any  action,  any  concern, 
any  situation  except  that  of  the  last  scene,  any  well-contrived  part,  and  with  the 
lowest  pictures  and  weakest  style  it  is  possible  to  look  upon  ;  in  short,  such  a  play, 
that,  as  many  people  cried  aloud  in  Procope’s  coffee-house,*  had  it  not  been  an  old 
man’s  writing,  it  should  have  been  a  schoolboy  s.  I  am  sorry  for  it,  for  Crebillon’s 
sake;  but  indeed  he  ought  to  have  remembered  those  verses  of  Horace,  the  most 
judicious  poet  of  antiquity  : 

“  Solve  senescentem  mature  satius  equum,  ne 
Peccet  ad  extremum  ridendus,  et  ilia  ducat.” 

But  far  from  being  in  the  least  concern  at  such  an  advice,  he  threatens  more  and 
more ;  he  swears  with  a  thundering  voice  that  poor  Voltaire’s  fame  is  at  an  end  ;  and 
his  dreadful  Cromwel  will  be  as  fatal  to  him  as  he  has  been  formerly  to  your  Charles. 
God  forgive  him,  and  call  him  back  to  the  thought  of  his  salvation  !  it  should  be  hard 

indeed,  very  hard  to  him  to  be  d - in  the  other  world,  for  having  ended  his  career 

in  ours  with  d - plays.  As  soon  as  “  Philoctete,”  a  new  given-out  tragedy,  written 

by  Monsieur  de  Chateaubrun  the  author  of  the  “  Troyennes,”  will  be  brought  on  the 
stage,  I  will  send  you  a  full  account  of  it.  The  rest  of  our  public  news  I  have  no 
mind  to  tire  you  with,  for,  to  speak  to  you  of  our  Archbishop's  perseveringt/«««//,sw, 
of  the  parliament’s  persevering  wisdom,  of  the  King’s  last  answer  to  the  first  presi¬ 
dent,  and  accordingly  the  prelate’s  new  banishment  to  Champeaux  near  Melun,  of 
our  Greve  the  Tyburn  of  Paris,  which  is  full  every  day  of  wheels  and  gibbets,  so 
very  great  in  the  prisons  is  the  number  of  robbers  and  murderers,  &c.  & c.  <Scc.,  it 
would  be  a  repeating  to  you  old  news  you  heared  of  already,  and  an  interfering  pre¬ 
cariously  with  the  charming  authors  of  your  daily  papers.  If  a  long  letter  give  a 
right  to  an  answer,  yours,  Sir,  I  have  a  title  to  aspire  to :  I  expect  it  therefore,  and 

*  The  great  scene  of  playhouse  criticism  at  Paris,  as  the  Bedford  once  was  with  us.  The  usage  might 
return,  if  the  Theatres  closed  at  ten  o’clock  ;  there  would  be  time  for  talking  over  the  spectacle.  At  mid¬ 
night,  the  rage  of  hunger  is  predominant. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


385 


desire  you  to  be  persuaded  that  nothing  can  be  more  agreeable  to  me  than  such  a 
commerce  with  a  man  of  your  talents.  I  will  write  sometimes  in  English,  pitifully 
to  be  sure,  but  what  is  that  to  me,  since  error  is  the  only  way  to  truth ;  and  besides  a 
true  Englishman  considers  thoughts  more  than  words?  Sometimes  in  French,  to 
make  myself  gratified  with  a  French  answer,  the  perusal  of  which  will  encourage  my 
pen  and  invite  it  to  do,  if  possible,  in  your  language,  what  noble  ambition,  work  and 
sagacity  made  you  able  to  do  in  ours.  Meantime,  do  not  forget,  I  beseech  you,  to 
give  me  some  news  of  your  stage,  your  warm  interesting  stage,  the  remembrance  of 
which  strikes  still  to  my  very  heart.  Oh,  Sir,  how  must  I  lament  the  state  of  our 
scene  !  it  shall,  it  must  fall  down,  if  nobody  is  bold  enough  to  enlarge  our  fetters,  to 
lessen  the  heavy  burdens  we  have  been  imposed  upon  by  custom,  pre-occupation,  and 
that  foolish  tyranny  which  makes  us  jurare  in  verba  magistrorum ;  or  rather  to  rise 
against  those  blind  prepossessed  critics,  and  shake  off  the  vile  obedience  they  exact.  I 
forced  great  many  of  my  countrymen  to  confess  such  a  truth,  though  they  are 
enemies  to  great  Shakspeare,  who  is  called  among  them  the  absurd,  ridiculous  poet, 
and  whom  they  never  understood  a  line  of.  But  oh  !  how  find  in  one’s  heart  to 
come  to  so  great  an  attempt,  when  I  am  certain  that  those  many  ignorant  lovers  of 
the  Greek  plays  (which  they  mistake,  since  I  maintain  to  my  last  breath  they  are  far 
from  our  bondage)  would  excite  all  the  nation  and  pursue  a  novelty  on  the  stage  as  a 
crime  of  high-treason ;  moreover,  if  our  very  theatre,  close,  undeep,  and  narrow,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  crowd  of  men  and  benches  it  is  full  of  on  both  its  sides,  cannot  be  fit 
for  the  warmth  of  action,  and  support  the  necessary,  absolutely  necessary  changing  of 
scenes !  Well,  let  us  have  fine  verses,  interesting  speeches,  &c.  but  no  heat,  no  passion 
at  all,  &c.  Before  ten  or  twelve  years,  I  do  assure  you,  every  body  will  keep  Cor¬ 
neille,  Racine  and  Campistron  in  his  own  library,  and  prefer  the  fair  of  St.  Germain 
to  the  French  play-house:  that  is,  a  spectacle  smiling  to  fancy,  pleasing  to  eyes, 
and  so  answering  its  only  end,  to  a  spectacle  which,  destined  to  strike  at  home,  to 
affect  the  very  heart,  to  seize  upon  all  the  faculties  of  our  soul,  misses  its  aim  and 
hardly  keeps  its  empire  over  the  mind  and  around  the  ears.  I  could  write  to  you  a 
thousand  other  lines  on  the  same  subject,  were  not  I  afraid  to  tire  your  patience. 
Whatever  might  happen,  forgive  me,  pray,  and  remember  two  fine  verses  of  Mr.  Pope. 

.  .  “  Of  the  two,  less  dangerous  is  the  offence 

To  tire  our  patience,  than  mislead  our  sense," 

I  pray  you  to  be  so  good  as  to  present  my  humble  compliments  to  Mrs.  Garrick. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  a  just  regard  and  high  esteem, 

Your  most  obedient  bumble  servant,  Patu.* 

My  direction  “  A  Monsieur,  Monsieur  Patu,  Avocat  en  Parlement,  chez  Mr.  le 
Commissaire  Cadot,  Rue  St.  Honor£,  a  Paris.” 

*  A  few  faults  as  to  idiom  will  occasionally  provoke  a  smile  in  the  English  letters  of  Patu.  But,  for  so 
young  a  man,  he  seems  to  have  collected  an  astonishing  fund  of  our  language ;  and  to  have  imbibed  much  of 
our  insular  taste  and  feeling.  The  great  difficulty  as  to  Shakspeare  with  foreigners  is,  however,  not  so  much 
in  the  tragic,  as  the  comic  display  of  his  genius.  I  have  known  many  French,  German,  and  Italian  critics, 
positively  converts  to  Ilamlet,  Lear,  Macbeth,  Othello  ;  but  never  one  who  made  the  slightest  approach  to  the 
enjoyment  of  Falstaff ;  on  the  contrary,  the  humours  of  a  distant  age  only  excited  their  disgust. — Ed. 

VOL.  II.  3  13 


386 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  NOVERIIE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  26  Fevrier,  1755. 

J’ai  re^u  raon  engagement  par  la  voye  de  JNIr.  Silvain,  qui  a  eu  la  complaisance 
de  me  faire  la  lecture  de  votre  lettre. 

Je  vous  remercie  de  la  bonne  opinion  que  vous  avez  de  moi,  et  j’ose  esperer  que  le 
temps  et  les  effets  vous  prouveront  beaucoup  mieux  que  les  paroles,  mes  sentimens 
et  ma  fa^on  de  penser. 

Vous  souhaitez,  Monsieur,  que  j’aille  a  Londres,  et  je  le  desire  ardemment. 
Mr.  Silvain  m’a  offert  de  votre  part  vingt  louis-d’or  ;  mais  je  doute  que  je  puisse 
faire  ce  voyage  avec  cette  somme.  L’agr^ment  que  j’aurai  d’avancer  notre  con- 
noissance,  et  de  la  cimenter,  me  fera  fermer  les  yeux  sur  le  sacrifice  que  je  vous 
ferai  de  mon  temps,  puisque  je  refuse  d’aller  gagner  de  l’argent  en  province  dans  1  in¬ 
terval  des  deux  foires  :  vous  voyez  qu’il  ne  seroit  pas  juste  que  je  perdisse  de  deux 
cot^s,  et  qu’il  faut  que  vous  me  defrayez  de  mon  voyage. 

Je  partirai  de  Paris  le  1  d’Avril,  et  conime  je  vais  en  poste,  je  compte  arriver  a 
Londres  le  3  ou  le  4.  Je  vous  prie  de  me  dire  si  vous  voulez  que  je  vous  apporte 
les  modeles  des  differents  habits  dont  j’aurai  besoin  pour  mes  ballets. 

Je  compte  arriver  assez  tot  pour  voir  votre  spectacle,  et  pour  rem^dier  aux  clioses 
qui  pourroient  vous  manquer  et  m’£tre  n^cessaires. 

]\Ir.  de  Laitre  vous  ecrit  par  ce  meme  ordinaire.  II  fait  toujours  plaisir  a  Paris, 
et  je  crois  qu’il  en  fera  beaucoup  a  Londres;  je  juge  par  l’envie  qu’il  a  de  voir  cette 
ville  qu’il  diminueroit  quelque  chose  de  ses  int£r6ts :  comme  je  me  trouve  charge  de 
cette  n^gociation,  je  vous  prie  de  la  terminer  par  une  prompte  decision  de  votre  part, 
afin  que  je  ne  me  trouve  point  dans  le  cas  du  reproche. 

J’attends  de  vos  nouvelles  aux  sujets  de  tous  les  articles  de  ma  lettre,  et  vous 
supplie,  Monsieur,  d’etre  persuade  du  d6sir  que  j’ai  de  vous  etre  utile,  et  de  vous  don- 
ner  des  preuves  de  mon  amiti6,  et  de  l’estime  avec  laquelle  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr£s  humble  serviteur, 

Noverre. 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  19  Mars,  1755. 

J’ai  recpu  la  lettre  que  vous  m’avez  fait  l'amiti6  de  m’ecrire :  je  l’ai  communique 
a  Mr.  de  Laitre,  qui  a  accepte  vos  offres ;  je  suis  charg6  de  son  engagement,  et  j'ai 
tout  lieu  de  croire  que  vous  serez  content  de  cette  acquisition.  Je  partirai,  malgre 
toutes  les  affaires  que  j’ai  ii  Paris,  Dimanche  apr£s  midi,  et  j’arriverai  Mardi  matin  a 
Calais,  et  Jeudi  a  Londres  :  du  moins  je  l’espere.  Je  ferai  toute  la  diligence  possible 
pour  me  rendre  aupr&s  de  vous ;  je  serai  enchante  de  vous  connoitre,  et  de  vous  as¬ 
surer  de  vive  voix  des  sentimens  avec  lesquels  je  suis, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr£s  humble  et  tres  obeissant  serviteur, 

Noverre. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


387 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  6  Mai,  1755. 

J’ai  re^u,  mon  trfes-cher  Monsieur,  votre  reponse  obligeante,  et  vous  etes  trop 
juste  a  coup  sur  pour  douter  un  seul  moment  du  plaisir  qu’elle  m’a  fait.  Rien  de 
plus  precieux  pour  moi  que  les  sentimens  d’amitie  et  de  consideration  que  vous  voulez 
bien  m’y  exprimer  :  ils  ne  peuvent  etre  £gales  que  par  ma  vive  reconnoissance.  Re- 
cevez  a  ce  sujet  mes  remerciemens  tr£s-sinc£res,  et  sans  m’accuser  d’une  flatterie 
meprisable,  faites  moi  la  justice  de  croire,  que  votre  nom,  et  le  bonheur  que  j’ai  eu 
de  vous  connoitre,  suffiront  toujours  pour  m’inspirer  toute  1’estime  et  toute  la  ten- 
dresse  due  k  vos  rares  talents,  et  a  votre  ame,  superieure  encore  a  vos  talents. 

J’apprens  avec  une  joye  bien  sensible  que  votre  campagne  vous  a  remis  totalement 
des  fatigues  de  l’hyver.  Mr.  Noverre  m’a  continue  ce  que  votre  lettre  m'avoit  dit,  et 
j’ai  aim6  ce  jeune  homme  d  inclination  d£s  que  j’ai  su  que  vous  enfaisiez  cas.  Je  n’ai 
point  6t6  a  portae  de  juger  moi-meme  de  son  talent.  J’^tois  a  Londres  bien  plus  oc¬ 
cupy  de  vous  et  de  votre  admirable  Shakspeare,  que  des  fnmeux  ballets  dont  ndtre  ha¬ 
bile  danseur  encliantoit  Paris.  Je  vous  felicite,  sur  la  foi  publique,  et  sur  le  dire  de  tous 
mes  amis  particuliers,  de  l’acquisition  que  vous  en  avez  faite  pour  la  saison  prochaine: 
il  me  paroit  penetre  d’estime  pour  vous,  et  pour  tout  ce  qui  vous  apartient.  Raison 
nouvelle  pour  que  je  sois  son  partisan.  Si  mon  voyage  d’ltalie  ne  peut  avoir  lieu 
cette  ann6e,  je  ne  desesp£re  point  d’aller  dans  le  meme  terns  que  lui,  continuer  1’etude 
de  votre  theatre,  et  me  perfectionner  dans  votre  langue.  En  attendant,  je  lis  Shak¬ 
speare  avec  mon  ami  Mr.  Flint,  et  le  livre  nous  tombe  des  mains  a  chaque  page. 
Quelle  clialeur  d’action  !  quelle  verite  de  portraits  !  quelle  variete  dans  les  descrip¬ 
tions  !  Quelle  foule  de  pr^ceptes  instructifs,  de  remarques  sages,  de  beaut^s  de  toute 
esp£ce  !  Quelle  connoissance  du  cceur  et  de  la  Nature !  Je  travaille  maintenant  a 
un  ouvrage  sur  votre  literature,  qui  me  donnera  lieu  de  m’expliquer  sur  ce  genie 
merveilleux.  Que  mes  compatriotes  me  traitent  la-dessus  d’enthousiaste,  et  d’homme 
sans  gout ;  a  la  bonne  lieure:  ma  reponse  sera  simple.  Etudiez  la  langue,  et  d^pouil- 
lez-vous  de  vos  pr^juges.  Vous  rougirez  alors  de  vos  injures  gratuites,  et  de  vos  ana- 
themes  pueriles.  En  attendant,  soufrez  que  je  vous  dise  que  quand  toute  une  nation 
admire,  et  que  des  homines  d’un  gout  aussi  sur  qu’un  Pope,  qu’un  Addison,  qu’un 
Rowe,  &c.  adorent  un  auteur  en  le  tirant  de  son  si&cle  et  des  imperfections  de  son 
terns,  il  vous  sied  mal  de  juger  ex  cathedra ,  et  de  blamer  aveuglement  ce  que  vous 
n’avez  jamais  connu.  La  Place  a  traduitces  d^fauts,  le  genie  est  rest£  dans  l’original : 
cherchez-le,  ce  g£nie,  et  vous  reconnoitrez  que  son  privilege  exclusif  est  de  couvrir 
les  vices  d’une  forme  irr6guli£re,  et  d’attacher,  de  fraper,  de  p^netrev  malgre  les 
regies,  tandis  que  les  regies  sans  le  genie  ennuyent,  assonnnent,  assoupissent,  et  ne 
servent  qu’ct  consacrer  le  ridicule  de  vos  Mailhols,  et  de  vos  Marmontels.  Cessez 
done  de  m^priser  Hamlet  sur  le  seul  vers  : 

“  How  now,  a  rat! — Dead  for  a  duckat,  dead  !” 

3  D  2 


388 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


et  ties  chefs-d’oeuvre  tels  que  Macbeth,  Othello,  King  Lear,  &c.  sur  quelques  trails 
([ue  les  Anglois  m£me  d^saprouvent,  et  tlont  vous  ne  devez  pas  juger. 

Telles  seront,  Monsieur,  ines  r^ponses  &  nos  jeunes  Aristarques.  Au  reste,  je  ne 
les  pr£cherai  qu'autant  qu’ils  me  paroitront  dignes  de  voir  la  lumi&re,  et  qu’ils  n’au- 
ront  pas  la  sotise  de  cherir  leurs  t£n&bres.  II  me  sufit  d’etre  heureux  en  mon  par¬ 
ticular  dans  ma  juste  admiration  pour  vos  grands  hommes,  admiration  qui  ne  d£roge 
en  l  ien  celle  que  j’ai  pour  les  ornemens  de  notre  Parnasse.  Je  ne  serai  ravi  de  faire 
partager  mon  bonheur  qu’au  petit  nombre  d’^lus  dignes  de  s’asseoir  a  la  table  du  dieu 
du  gout.  Mon  logis  est  assez  grand  pour  eux  ;  et  de  la  fa^on  dont  les  esprits  sont 
tourn6s,  Socrates  avoit  plus  d’amis  que  nous  n’avons  iei  de  vrais  connoisseurs ;  je  dis 
de  gens  d£barrass£s  du  fardeau  des  premieres  impressions,  et  sinc&rement  persuades 
que  le  Beau  croit  partout,  et  qu’on  ne  doit  juger  un  ^crivain  que  conform^ment  aux 
moeurs,  au  style,  au  genie,  h  la  loi  de  son  pays. 

Je  suis  charme  que  mon  avis  sur  la  pi&ce  du  “  Triumvirat”  vous  ait  paru  juste  et 
r^flechi.  Le  bonhomme  Cr6billon  seroit  heureux  si  la  force  de  sa  verve  r^pondoit 
encore  a  la  vigueur  de  ses  membres.  On  m’assure  qu’a  son  4ge,  les  femmes  se  louent 
de  ses  exploits,  et  qu’il  n’y  a  pas  plus  de  six  ans  qu’un  homme  de  la  cour  ayant  pari6 
de  l’emporter  sur  lui,  il  riposta  plaisamment :  Prenez  garde,  Monseigneur,  je  ne  le 
cede  qu’a  un  ane.  “  Plnloct&te,”  trag^die  par  Mr.  de  Chateaubrun,  a  eu  du  succes. 
Que  voulez-vous,  Monsieur  ?  “  Sharp  misery  has  worn  us  to  the  bones.”  On  est 

contraint  de  se  contenter  de  peu.  Point  d’action :  un  inter6t  manque  puisqu’Ulisse 
est  plus  le  heros  de  la  piece  que  Philoctete  lui-m£me,  une  versification  dure,  froide  et 
hach^e,  voila  l’ouvrage.  Son  succes  est  venu,  —  1°,  de  notre  pauvret£  ;  2°,  d’un 

certain  nombre  de  pr^ceptes  moraux,  de  descriptions  qui  ont  paru  nouvelles  aux 
femmes,  enfin  de  portraits  passablement  traces.  On  a  dit  :  cette  pi£ce  n’est  pas  d’un 
poete,  mais  elle  est  d’un  honnete  homme,  claquons-la.  C’est  connne  si  l’on  disoit : 
ma  soupe  est  mauvaise,  mais  n’importe,  mon  cuisinier  est  un  honnete  gallon.  Je  cri¬ 
tique,  Monsieur,  mais  qu’on  me  donne  lieu  de  louer,  et  je  le  ferai  dans  la  joye  de  mon 
ame.  J’attens  avec  une  douce  esp^rance  l’ouvrage  de  Air.  Bret,  auteur  dont  je  fais 
cas.  C’est  une  comedie  en  cinq  actes,  en  vers,  intitule  “  Le  Jaloux.”  Ce  n’est  plus 
ce  caractere  vu  et  saisi  dans  tel  ou  tel  aspect.  C’est  le  jaloux  dans  toute  son  etendue, 
dans  tous  ses  aspects,  dans  toutes  ses  cir  con  stances,  un  homme  n£  jaloux,  et  jaloux  de 
sa  maitresse  avant  que  de  l’etre  de  sa  femme.  Comme  j’estime  fort  ma  nation  pour 
le  comique,  pour  le  coup  je  serai  ravi  de  vous  en  faire  part,  et  vous  pouvez  vous  at- 
tendre  a  un  detail  dans  toutes  les  formes. 

Je  vous  conjure,  Monsieur,  de  saisir  d^sormais  pour  vos  reponses  les  premiers 
momens  de  loisir  que  vous  laisseront  vos  affaires  et  des  plaisirs  plus  interessans.  Si  je 
pars  pour  l'ltalie,  l’eloignement  me  forceroit  a  rompre  pour  quelques  mois  ma  pr6- 
cieuse  correspon dance,  et  je.veux  jusque-la  mettre  a  profit  le  terns  qui  me  reste. 
Graces  soient  rendues  a  ceux  qui  ont  appais6  nos  malheureux  bruits  de  guerre.  Que 
je  vous  aime  de  n’approuver  d’autres  batailles  que  celles  qu’on  livre  sur  votre  scene,  et 
que  les  fureurs  nationales  sont  petites  aux  yeux  du  philosophe !  En  depit  des  injures 
de  Thomas  Touchit  de  Spring-gardens,  je  louerai,  j'aimerai,  j’estimerai  tonjours  ceux 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


389 


d’entre  vous  qui  voudront  bien  etre  mes  confreres  dans  les  lettres  et  dans  la  probit6, 
et  je  ne  desire  rien  tant  que  de  voir  unies  deux  nations  qui  president  a  l’Europe 
entire.  Je  vous  f^licite  du  fond  de  mon  coeur  de  votre  noble  entreprise  k  Hampton. 
Nos  acteurs  n’ont  pas  le  meme  zele  pour  la  memoire  de  Corneille  :  la  raison  en  est 
qu’ils  n’ont  ni  vos  talens  ni  votre  grandeur  d’ame.  A  ce  defaut,  nous  avons  un 
homme,  un  citoyen  unique  dont  je  vous  parlerai  un  jour  : — c’est  Mr.  Titon  du  Tillet. 

Je  finis,  mon  tr£s-cher  Monsieur,  en  presentant  mes  respects  a  Madame  Guarick, 
et  en  vous  assurant  que  je  serai  toujours  avec  les  sentimens  que  vous  me  connoissez 
pour  vous,  Votre  tr&s-humble  et  tr&s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Ma  premiere  let.tre  sera  Angloise.  Patu. 

“  Alternis  cantemus,*  amant  alterna  Camenae.” 

Envoyez-moi,  je  vous  prie,  votre  sentiment  sur  le  Dictionaire  de  Mr.  Johnson,  et 
sur  le  poeme  des  “  Night  Thoughts”  par  Mr.  Young. 

Angleterre  : 

“  To  Mr.  Garrick,  the  Manager  of  Drury-lane’s  play-house, 
in  Southampton-street,  London.” 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  9  Mai,  1 755. 

Quoique  je  n’aie  point  re^u  de  vos  nouvelles.  Monsieur,  je  vous  £cris  pour  vous 
informer  de  ce  que  j’ai  fait ;  et  comme  cette  lettre  est  relative  a  vos  affaires,  je  vous 
suplie  de  me  r6pondre  exactement  a  tous  les  articles  qui  y  seront  contenus. 

1.  J’ai  pave  vos  habits  quinze  louis,  et  Mr.  Silvain  en  a  le  retpu  de  celui  qui  les  a 
fournis. 

2.  J’ai  vu  l’esquisse  des  quatre  decorations  qui  sont  utiles  tant  a  mon  ballet  Chi- 
nois  qu’ama  Fontaine  de  Jouvence  ;  mais  je  n’ai  pas  voulu  les  prendre  parce-que  cela 
m’a  paru  trop  cher  ;  au  reste,  j’ai  trouve  ces  desseins  magnifiques. 

3.  Mr.  Boquet,  qui  est  a  la  tete  des  fetes  de  la  cour  de  France,  voyant  que  je 
n’acceptois  pas  cette  proposition,  m’en  a  fait  un  autre  que  je  n’ai  pas  plus  accepte 
que  la  premiere,  ne  voulant  rien  faire  qui  ne  vous  soit  agr^able  et  utile,  voici  de  quoi 
il  est  question. 

4.  Le  Sieur  Boquet  vent  s’engager  a  aller  a  Londres  pour  y  faire  ex^cuter  ses 
quatre  decorations  ;  et  faire  faire  sous  ses  yeux  tous  les  habits  n^cessaires  a  mes 
ballets;  faire  arranger  votre  theatre  dans  le  genre  le  plus  moderne  ;  et  faire  peindre 
vos  loges  ;  6clairer  votre  theatre  sans  lustre,  et  le  rendre,  enfin,  celui  le  plus  agr^able 
de  Londres  ;  il  demande  pour  cela  tant  pour  son  voyage  que  pour  ses  peines  et  four- 
niture  de  ses  desseins  cent  cinquante  louis,  aux  conditions  que  vous  lui  fournirez 
des  ouvriers,  parce-que  son  temps  lui  est  precieux,  et  qu’il  ne  pouroit  rester  que  six 
semaines  a  Londres. 

5.  J’ai  engage  trois  figurants,  bons,  sages,  et  qui  ne  d^shonnoreront  pas  notre 
nation  ;  je  cherche  les  trois  autres. 

*  Alternis  dicetis  is  Virgil’s  expression.—  Ed. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


390 

C.  II  est  impossible  d’avoir  des  figurantes  a  quarante  louis  ;  vous  s^avez  que  la 
femme  est  une  marchande  ch£re  quoique  comune,  ainsi  j’attends  vos  ordres  a  cet 
effet. 

7.  II  me  faut  un  jeune  enfant  pour  danser  l’Amour.  Jen  ai  trouve  un  qui  poura 
figurer,  voulez-vous  que  je  l’engage? 

8.  J’ai  vu  la  veille  de  mon  depart  douze  enfants  que  Mr.  Levier  faisoit  danser. 
Je  vous  prie  de  ne  point  les  negliger  :  j’en  aurai  besoin,  et  j’en  tirerai  bon  parti.  Je 
voudrois  que  vous  leur  donniez  un  maitre  j usqiul  mon  arrive,  et  le  figurant  Fran¬ 
cois  de  chez  vous  seroit  en  etat  de  leurs  enseigner  les  pas  n^cessaires  au  ballet. 

9.  J’ai  command^  les  chenilles  tant  en  or  qu’en  soie,  ainsi  que  les  gaze  et  fleurs 
qui  vous  sont  necessaires. 

1 0.  Je  n’ai  point  d’argent  pour  payer  tout  cela. 

11.  II  m’en  faudroit  pour  mon  compte,  et  je  vous  serois  bien  oblige  de  donner 
vos  ordres  en  consequence ;  car  je  suis  mal  dans  mes  affaires,  et  Mr.  Silvain  ne  me 
donnera  rien  sans  des  ordres  plus  precis  que  ceux  que  vous  m’avez  donnes. 

12.  Je  ne  pourrai  point  vivre  a  Londres  sans  ma  femme;  voyez  si  elle  peut  vous 
£tre  utile  pour  vos  pantomimes,  elle  danseroit  dans  mes  ballets  :  quels  sont  les  apointe- 
mens  que  vous  pouriez  lui  donner. 

R6pondez-moi,  Monsieur,  a  tous  ces  articles,  et  donnez-moi  des  nouvelles  de  votre 
sant6,  et  de  celle  de  Madame  Garrick.  J’ai  eu  bien  du  chagrin  depuis  mon  retour : 
j’ai  perdu  deux  bagues  de  soixante  louis-d’or,  que  ma  femme  avoit  mise  a  la  chaine 
de  ma  montre  sans  fermer  le  crochet,  et  je  les  ai  perdues  en  allant  chez  Mr.  Silvain. 
J’ai  fait  battre  le  tambour,  fait  courir  des  billets,  j’ai  fait  afficher,  mais  inutilement : 
enfin,  il  faut  se  consoler  prendre  philosophiquement  les  accidents  qui  nous  arrivent. 
Adieu,  Monsieur ;  j’attends  de  vos  nouvelles,  je  suis  attentif  aux  clioses  qui  peuvent 
vous  etre  utile ;  etjevous  prie  de  crone  que  je  suis  aussi  v^ritablement  votre  ami 
que  votre  tr&s  humble  et  tres  obeissant  serviteur, 

Noverre. 

Madame  Noverre  vous  assure  de  ses  civilites,  et  vous  prie  ainsi  que  moi  de  faire 
agreer  a  Madame  Garrick  les  assurances  de  nos  respects. 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

19  May,  1755. 

Comme  la  foire  St.  Laurent  ne  finit  que  le  liuit  d’Octobre,  je  ne  puis  pas  me 
trouver  a  Londre  avant  le  12  ;  ainsi  il  est  absolument  necessaire  que  les  decorations, 
habits,  et  ustancilles  necessaires  a  mes  ballets,  soient  prets,  parce-que  je  mettrai  le 
premier  divertissement  en  quatre  ou  cinq  jours  de  temps. 

Comme  je  me  trouve  extr&mement  presse,  et  que  le  courier  va  partir,  je  vous 
enverrai  par  le  premier  ordinaire  mon  engagement. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


391 


DE  M.  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  24  May,  1755. 

J’ai  re^u  la  lettre  charmante  que  vous  m’avez  fait  l’amitie  de  m’^crire ;  je  suis 
extremement  sensible  a  vos  marques  d’estime;  votre  stile  est  admirable,  et  a  et£  ap- 
prouve  par  toutes  les  personnes  a  qui  j’ai  fait  la  lecture  de  votre  lettre :  enfin,  vous 
etes  un  homme  divin,  et  tous  les  artistes  et  les  S9avans  de  ce  pays  voudroient  avoir  le 
bonheur  de  vous  connoitre. 

J’ai  vu  INlr.  Camus,  et  j’ai  et 6  cbez  Ini ;  car  il  a  pens6  perdre  la  vie :  il  com¬ 
mence  a  jouir  d’une  tr£s  foible  convalescence ;  mais  son  z£le  et  l’attachement  qu’il  a 
pour  l’Angleterre  le  determine  a  partir  Lundi ;  je  souhaite  qu’il  arrive  a  bon  port,  car 
il  est  tr£s  foible  et  hors  d’etat  de  soutenir  de  grande  fatigue.  Je  lui  ai  remis  les 
oeuvres  de  Fagan  et  l’Annee  Literaire  de  Freron.  Je  n'ai  point  voulu  vous  envoyer 
les  Lettres  du  meme  auteur  sur  les  diff6rens  Merits  du  temps,  que  je  ne  sache  si  son 
stile  vous  plaira.  J’aurai  soin  de  vous  porter  la  suite  de  l’Ann6e  Literaire,  et  de 
l’acheter  a  mesure  qu’eile  paroitra. 

Mr.  de  Macmabon  s’est  charge  des  autres  emplettes  que  j’ai  faite  pour  vous 
et  pour  Madame  Garrick,  a  qui  je  presente  mes  respects,  ainsi  que  ma  pauvre  femme, 
qui  a  pense  mourir  d’un  laict  rependu. 

Parlons  du  peu  de  nos  affaires.  Mr.  Monnet,  par  sa  negligence,  vient  de  perdre 
sa  premiere  danseuse  ;  il  n’en  a  point :  elle  a  rompu  avec  lui,  ainsi  il  faut  que  vous 
ayez  la  bont6  de  vous  en  precautionner  d’une  bonne  ;  car  je  me  trouve  dans  l’impos- 
sibilite  de  vous  en  faire  avoir  une. 

Je  finis,  car  les  envelopes  coutent  trop  cher ;  d’ailleurs,  Messieurs  Camus  et 
Macmahon  sont  charges  de  deux  lettres.  Adieu,  Monsieur  ;  je  vous  souhaite  une 
bonne  sant6  ;  je  vous  aime  de  toute  mon  ame,  et  je  vous  suis  attach^  autant  qu’a 
moi-meme.  Ne  doutez  point  des  sentimens  sinc&res  de  votre  tr£s  humble  serviteur, 

Noverre. 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  IS  Juin,  1755. 

Je  suis  si  charmc,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  de  ce  commerce  utile  et  agitable  que  vous 
voulez  bien  avoir  avec  moi,  que  j’aurois  a  rougir  de  moi-meme,  si  je  ne  faisois  tous 
mes  efforts  pour  en  serrer  les  nceuds  aussi  etroitement  qu’il  m’est  possible.  Le  public 
n’a  encore  aucun  droit  a  mon  terns  ;  et  connne,  grace  au  ciel,  mes  affaires  les  plus 
importantes  ont  ete  jusqu’ici  mes  amis  et  les  lettres,  je  regarderai  toujours  comme  les 
mieux  employes  de  mes  moments  ceux  qu’il  ine  sera  permis  de  consacrer  ii  notre 
amiti6. 

Je  vous  fdlicite  de  tout  mon  cceur  sur  votre  tranquillite  actuelle.  Il  est  doux  au 


392 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


sortir  de  la  carri&re  dc  sc  rcposer  un  pen  sur  des  lauriers  qui  content  tant  a  cucillir; 
et  si  je  n’etois  ami  de  votre  gloire  autant  que  de  vos  rares  talents,  je  vous  souhaiterois 
volontiers  la  devise  de  Mercure-Sosie  dans  Amphitrion,  Moins  d'lionneur ,  et  plus  de 
repos.  Continuez,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  a  reparer  a  votre  campagne  une  sant6  qui  doit 
etre  si  pr^cieuse  il  tous  les  gens  de  gout,  Elevez  toujours  k  la  mdmoire  de  votre 
“  immortal  Shakspeare”  ce  Temple  dont  vous  m’avez  parl£,  en  attendant  qu’un  jour, 
(puisse-t-il  n’arriver  que  fort  tard  !)  votre  nation  vous  traite  coniine  Mrs.  Oldfield,  et 
vous  6rige  a  Westminster  un  mausol^e  que  vous  meriterez  bien  autant  qu’elle.  Je 
vous  suplie  trks  instamment  de  m’envoyer  dans  votre  r^ponse  le  prologue  que  vous 
avez  fait  et  prononc6  dans  votre  role  du  “  Drunken  Sailor.”  Votre  modestie  vous  a, 
sans  doute,  empecli^  de  m’en  faire  mention  ;  mais  vos  feuilles  publiques  n’ont  pas 
et6  si  discrettes,  et  vous  devez  sentir  la  part  que  j’ai  prise  a  des  applaudissemens  aussi 
legitimes.  J’exige  done  ce  petit  present  de  notre  amiti£,  et  je  vous  conjure  raeme  de 
ne  me  pas  faire  attendre.  Vous  &tes  maintenant  assez  libre,  et  vous  ne  sauriez  croire 
le  plaisir  que  vous  me  feriez,  si  avant  Septembre  je  recevois  plus  d’une  de  vos  lettres. 
Je  compte  toujours  partir  pour  l’ltalie.  Si,  cependant,  quelque  fatalite,  que  je  ne 
puis  prdvoir,  ne  me  permettoit  pas  encore  un  voyage,  auquel  je  compte  mettre  dix- 
liuit  mois,  je  n’ai  point  perdu  l’esp6rance  de  retourner  a  Londres  l’hyver  prochain, 
pour  y  jouir  de  nouveau  de  la  liberte  du  pays,  pour  y  suivre  votre  theatre,  pour  donner 
ii  Shakspeare  et  a  M.  Garrick  cette  admiration  qui  leur  est  due,  et  qui  coute  si  peu 
a  mon  coeur ;  enfin,  pour  puiser  dans  votre  conversation  les  connoissances  qui  me 
sont  encore  n^cessaires  dans  l’idee  ou  je  suis  d’ex^cuter  un  jour  mon  grand  projet 
d’une  Histoire  exacte  et  reflechie  de  La  Literature  Angloise.  Vous  comprenez  a 
merveille  quel  role  y  jouera  votre  tragedie  et  son  ^tonnant  cr6ateur.  J’ai  mille  choses 
a  dire,  sans  pr6jug£s,  ce  me  semble,  sans  mauvaise  humeur,  sans  partialite  nationale, 
sur  cette  divine  action,  sur  cette  clialeur  d’ inter  et  qui  caracterise  tant  de  vos  pieces,  et 
qui  les  rendent  sur  la  scene  si  preferables  aux  notres,  dont  la  plupart  ne  sont  que  de 
tres-belles  elegies  et  de  charmantes  poemes ;  mais  je  suis  encore  bien  jeune,  et  j’ai 
besoin  de  certaines  lumi&res  que  je  saisirai  mieux  a  Londres  qu'ici.  Je  crois  done 
devoir  remettre  ce  grand  coup  a  quelques  ann^es,  et  me  contenter  en  attendant  de 
porter  quelques  bottes  a  cet  Amour  Tyrannique  que  nous  inspirent  par  prescription 
les  regies  cVunites,  et  surtout  a  cette  id6e  modeste,  ou  sont  nos  gens,  qu’««  theatre 
eomme  en  tout  nous  sommes  les  arbitres  souverains.  Heureux  si  ma  sant6,  qui  con¬ 
tinue  k  etre  assez  chancelante,  ne  me  faisoit  craindre  l'hyver  de  votre  ville,  et  si  les 
brouillards  de  la  Tamise  et  la  fumee  de  charbon  convenoient  autant  a  ma  poitrine, 
que  les  homines,  leurs  moeurs,  et  les  pieces  tragiques,  s’y  accordent  avec  mon  gout ! 

Je  viens  maintenant,  mon  cher  ami,  a  ce  que  vous  me  dites  du  Jaloux.  Je  suis  fort 
en  £tat  de  vous  parler  de  celui  du  pauvre  Bret,  puis-que  j’en  ai  vu  les  quatre  uniques 
representations.  C’est  vous  dire  assez  clairement  que  la  piece  n’a  point  rthissi,  et  ne 
doit  vous  empecher  en  aucune  sorte  de  suivre  votre  travail.  J’ai  £te  tres-sensible  a 
cet  accident,  parce-que  l’auteur  est  reellement  un  homme  d’esprit,  un  sujet  laborieux, 
un  citoyen  plein  de  probity.  Deux  ouvrages  qu’il  nous  avoit  d6ja  donnes,  et  qui 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


393 


out  eu  de  la  reussite  (L’Ecole  Amoureuse,  et  La  Double  Extravagance)  m’autori- 
soient  a  vous  en  parler  comme  j’ai  fait.  Aussi  suis-je  bien  loin  de  m’en  repentir, 
Ce  seroit  bien  le  diable  apr&s  tout,  si  entre  nous  autres  auteurs,  nous  ne  nous  passions 
quelques  chutes. 

Hanc  veniam  petimusque  damusque  vicissim.  Badinerie  a  part,  celle  de  Mr.  Bret 
m’a  fait  peine.  Tout  ennemi  que  je  suis  des  prejuges  de  ma  nation,  je  lui  soubaite 
du  bien  aussi  ardemment  que  Thomas  Touch'd  de  Spring-gardens  lui  veut  du  mal,  et 
j’aurois  hte  ravi  de  voir  un  nouveau  chef-d’oeuvre  ajoute  au  tr&s-petit  nombre  de  ceux 
qui  nous  ont  distingu6s  depuis  le  commencement  du  si£cle. 

Le  sujet  est  pris  du  fameux  roman  de  Zayde  par  Madame  de  la  Fayette,  amie  et 
contemporaine  de  la  celfebre  Sevign6.  Figurez-vous  un  homme  (Damis,  si  je  ne  me 
trompe)  amoureux,  fou  d’une  jeune  demoiselle,  et  qui  non  content  d’etre  jaloux  des 
vivants  qui  l’environnent,  s’avise  encore  de  le  devenir  d’un  Lindor  qui  l’a  aimee 
avant  lui,  qui  passe  pour  etre  mort  de  ses  rigueurs,  et  au  trepas  duquel  la  nature  seule 
a  oblig6  Orphine  de  donner  quelques  larmes.  Ce  trait  bizarre,  bon  pour  etre  mis 
en  charge  dans  une  petite  pi6ce  d’un  acte,  qu'on  eut  intitulee,  je  supose,  La  Jalousie 
ridicule,  est  pourtant  Tame  de  l’ouvrage  entier,  et  le  tronc  dont  sortent  toutes  les 
branches.  Dans  ses  fureurs  contre  le  pauvre  defunt,  le  jaloux  le  rapelle  du  sein  des 
enfers,  et  souhaiteroit  qu’il  rebuilt  a  la  vie,  pour  la  lui  aracher  de  nouveau  sur  le 
champ  de  bataille.  Ce  furieux  a  un  ami,  qui  demande  sa  grace,  a  deux  genoux,  a  sa 
maitresse  indign6e  d’un  pareil  caractere.  Le  valet  du  jaloux  l’appercoit  dans  cette 
attitude,  et  court  le  rapporter  a  son  maitre,  qui  sur  le  champ  se  met  en  tete  que  son 
ami  le  trahit.  En  consequence,  point  d’excuses,  point  de  raisons,  point  d’explica- 
tions  ;  6pees  tiroes  de  part  et  d’autre.  Orphine  arrive,  et  sur  ce  nouveau  trait  d’une 
jalousie  insens^e  rompt  pour  toujours  avec  son  lunatique.  Yoila  quelle  etoit  la  pi&ce 
dans  laquelle  on  n’a  trouv6  de  plaisant  que  la  situation  qui  suit.  Lucelle,  soeur  du 
Jaloux,  a  pour  amant  cet  ami  dont  je  viens  de  vous  parler,  et  qui  se  nomme  Cli- 
tandre.  Cette  fille,  jeune,  et  sans  experience,  en  croit  son  fr£re,  qui  l’assure  fort 
£nergiquement  qu’il  ne  peut  y  avoir  de  veritable  amour  sans  une  excessive  jalousie, 
et  que  le  seul  moyen  d’eprouver  celui  de  son  clier  Clitandre,  c’est  de  le  mettre  sur  ce 
cliapitre.  Elle  ob^it  au  jaloux,  sonde  son  amant,  le  trouve  a  cent  lieues  de  toute 
inquietude,  se  d^sole,  et  dans  son  risible  chagrin,  tantot  le  traite  d’ingrat,  de  parjure, 
de  traitre,  &c.  &c.,  tantot  veut  lui  persuader  qu’il  est  jaloux  comme  un  tigre,  sans  le 
scavoir ;  enfin,  prend  toutes  ses  excuses  pour  autant  d’injures  qui  ne  servent  qu’& 
l’irriter  contre  lui.  Cela  n’est-il  pas  assez  comique,  et  ne  pouroit-il  pas  r&issir  meme 
sur  votre  theatre  comme  trait  particulier  ?  Au  reste,  le  style  de  cet  ouvrage  etoit 
tres-defectueux,  les  vers  laches,  coupes,  sans  coloris,  &c.  Quant  aux  roles,  les  voici : 
Granval  jouoit  le  jaloux ;  Mademoiselle  Gaussin,  Orphine  ;  Belcour,  que  vous  ne 
connoissez  pas,  Clitandre ;  une  Mademoiselle  Grieau,  tr^s-jolie  fille  et  tr£s-mauvaise 
actrice,  Lucelle  ;  et  Provide,  excellent  valet,  celui  du  jaloux. 

Je  vous  remercie  de  ce  que  vous  me  dites  sur  le  Dictionaire  de  Mr.  Johnson,  et  sur 

VOL.  II.  3  E 


394 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF, 


les  lugubres  Night  Thoughts  que  jc  me  suis  mis  i\  lire  tous  les  soirs  avant  (le  prendre 
moil  night-cap.  II  y  a  de  plus  mauvais  soporatifs. 

Mr.  Titon  du  Tillet,  dont  vous  exigez  que  je  vous  parle,  est  un  excellent  citoyen 
d’une  de  nos  meilleures  families  de  Paris.  Ce  digne  vieillard,  ag6  de  plus  de  quatre- 
vingt-sept  ans,a  vu  renouveller  n6tre literature  depuis  le  terns  de  Racine,  et  m£me  de  la 
Fontaine,  qu’il  a  connus  dans  ses  premieres  anuses.  Aussi,  est-ce  un  puids  d’anecdotes. 
Epris  pour  les  arts  d’une  ardente  admiration,  il  vouloit  eriger  a  la  m^moire  de  nos 
plus  grands  poctes,  peintres,  sculpteurs,  Ac.  un  monument  qui  put  faire  un  lionneur 
immortel  a  la  nation.  11  en  a  chez-lui  le  plan  sculptd  en  bronze,  peint  et  grave  par 
d’habiles  mains :  tous  les  Strangers  le  vont  voir,  pour  peu  qu’ils  s^journent  a  Paris. 
II  avoit  propose  qu’on  l’ex^eutAt  en  grand  dans  une  de  nos  places  publiques,  comme 
un  monument  6ternel  a  la  gloire  de  la  France.  II  avoit  m6me  demande  qu’on  le  fit 
Fermier-g6n^ral,  jusqu’a  ce  qu’il  l’eut  fait  eriger  a  ses  propres  depens:  quitte  a  se 
voir  ensuite  priv6  d’une  place  dont  il  ne  se  soucieroit  gu&res,  d&s  que  son  unique  am¬ 
bition  seroit  satisfaite.  On  a  admir6  a  la  cour,  l’homme  et  ses  projets.  Le  Cardinal 
de  Fleury  lui  disoit  souvent  en  l’embrassant,  qu’il  n’y  avoit  personne  qui  pens&t 
comme  lui;  mais  il  se  contentoit  de  le  lui  dire.  Peut-6tre  mcme  pensoit-il  en  lui- 
m6me  comme  le  fameux  Cardinal  Dubois,  qui  appelloit  les  ecrits  du  bon  Abbe  de 
St.  Pierre,  les  races  d/un  homme  de  hien.  Je  suis  fort  lie  avec  ce  Mr.  Titon,  et  j’ai 
pour  lui  toute  la  veneration  due  a  un  citoyen  aussi  respectable,  et  aussi  z^le  pour  la 
gloire  de  notre  patrie. 

Pour  ce  qui  est  des  livres  qui  pourroient  vous  mettre  au  fait  du  courant  de  notre 
litterature  actuelle ;  j’ai  peine  a  vous  conseiller  les  vingt  vol.  de  la  Biblioth£que  Fran- 
(poise.  L’auteur  (l’Abb6  Goujet)  Janseniste  outre,  a  rempli  son  ouvrage  de  morceaux 
polemiques,  de  dissertations  pieuses,  d’historiettes  de  parti,  Ac.  qui  vous  amuseroient 
peu,  et  vous  instruiroient  encore  moins.  Ce  que  vous  pourriez  faire  de  mieux  a  mon 
avis,  ce  seroit  de  joindre  ensemble  les  journeaux  de  l’Abb6  Des  Fontaines  et  les 
Feuilles  Courantes  de  Freron,  que  je  connois  tres  particulierement.  Vous  verrez  par 
la  note  exacte  qu’il  m’en  a  donnee  lui-meme,  et  que  je  vous  envoye  cy-jointe,  que  le 
nombre  des  volumes  formeroit  une  suite  assez  considerable,  et  vous  meneroit  a  des 
frais  un  peu  etendus ;  mais  aussi  auriez-vous  la  meilleure  idee  qu’il  fut  possible,  de 
l’etat  habituel  de  notre  litterature  depuis  vingt  ans.  Freron  ne  manque  ni  de  graces, 
ni  de  precision,  et  vous  serez,  je  crois,  tres-content  de  son  style.  Je  soubaiterois  seule- 
ment  qu’il  y  eut  cliez  lui  plus  d’analvses  que  de  tristes  details,  plus  de  jugemens  que 
d’epigrammes,  plus  de  saines  instructions  que  de  traits  de  satyre ;  enfin,  qu’il  s’atta- 
chat  sans  cesse  a  tirer  I’or  du  fumier  d? Ennius,  au  lieu  de  mettre  impitoyablement  les 
ecrits  a  l’alambic  pour  n’en  exposer  que  le  caput  mortuum.  Vous  verrez  dans  la 
douzieme  feuille  du  troisieme  tome  de  cette  annee,  une  epitre,  en  vers,  contenant  des 
“  Adieux  a  Londres,”  ouvrage  d’un  Suisse,  dont  j’ai  ete  l’ami  en  Angleterre,  que  j’ai 
corrige  moi-meme,  et  que  j’ai  fait  mettre,  par  pure  attention  pour  l’auteur,  dans  le 
journal  de  Freron.  Comme  il  y  est  parie  de  vous,  je  vais  detacher  la  piece  de  cette 
douzieme  feuille,  et  vous  l’envoyer  avec  un  feuillet  de  la  treizieme,  dans  laquelle  vous 
verrez  l’auteur  desavouer  ces  jolis  vers  par  une  modestie  a  la  Suisse,  dont  on  a  beau- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


395 


coup  ri.  Longa  est  injuria,  longer  ambages.  Je  suis  fache  qu’il  ait  si  fort  maltraitd 
Rich,  quoiqu’il  soit  bien  vrai  que  durant  notre  sejour  a  Londres,  nous  n’ayons  pas 
une  seule  fois  a  Covent-Garden  sans  nous  y  ennuyer.  La  premiere  strophe  sur 
Londres  est  aussi  un  pen  forte ;  mais  de  grace,  ne  l’attribuez  pas  a  ma  fa^on  de  penser. 
Sinner  a  voulu  que  je  suivisse  ses  idees  dans  mes  corrections.  Auriez-vous  mieux 

aim6  la  platitude  de  l’original  ? 

“  Adieu  !  singuliere  Cite, 

Asyle  du  libertinage ! 

Bien  plus  que  de  la  liberte  ;* 

Ou  la  debauche  et  la  beaute 
N’ontpas  emprunte  le  visage 
Du  fard,  et  de  la  volupte  !” 


Quel  galimathias  que  ces  trois  derniers  vers  !  Le  visage  du  fard — Bon  Dieu !  A 
propos  de  l’ouvrage  de  Freron,  s^avez-vous  bien  que  j’ai  une  querelle  a  vous  faire? 
Vous  avez  charg£  Mr.  Xoverre  de  vous  faire  une  emplette  de  livres.  Je  vous  avoue 
que  je  suis  jaloux  de  cette  preference,  et  que  je  ne  soufrirai  pas  volontiers  que  Ton 
empiette  sur  les  droits  de  ma  correspondance.  Ne  doutez  pas,  mon  cher  ami,  que  je 
ne  me  charge  avec  grand  plaisir  de  vous  faire  ici  (avec  tous  les  soins,  et  toute  Intel¬ 
ligence  dont  je  suis  capable,)  les  achats  qui  vous  seront  necessaires,  en  quelque  genre 
que  ce  soit,  pour  vous  oil  pour  vos  connoissances.  Disposez  de  mes  services,  je  vous 
en  conjure,  et  soyez  bien  persuade  que  je  vous  en  voudrai  beaucoup,  si  vous  ne  me 
mettez  en  etat  de  r^pondre  en  quelque  sorte  a  l’exc^s  de  vos  politesses. 

Que  pensez-vous  de  Mr.  Gay,  et  de  ses  ouvrages  ?  Je  vous  avoue  que  je  prens 
un  gout  singulier  a  ses  vers,  et  que  je  crois  y  decouvrir  un  tour  qui  n’est  qu’a  lui,  et 
qui  m’attache  infiniment.  Redressez-moi  si  je  me  trompe. 

Grande  dispute  entre  Mr.  Flint  et  moi :  dans  le  vers  du  fameux  monologue  de 
Hamlet : 

“  When  we  have  shuffled  off  this  mortal  coil,”  &c. 


Que  veut  dire  ce  dernier  mot  coil?  Flint  soutient  qu’il  signifie  un  cable,  et  qu’ainsi 
“  this  mortal  coil”  veut  dire  ici  ce  cable  niortel  qui  nous  serre,  qui  nous  lie,  nous  en- 
toure,  &cc.  metaphore  prise  de  la  marine.  Pour  moi,  jusqu’a  ce  que  vous  nous  ayez 
eclaircis,  je  pense  avec  Warburton,  que  coil  se  prend  la  pour  bustle,  noise,  tumult,  tur¬ 
moil,  &c.  d’autant  plus  qu’il  est  mis  en  contraste  avec  le  sommeil  de  la  mort.f 


“  That  sleep  of  death,”  &c. 

Je  connois  bien  le  verbe  to  coil,  qui  signifie  en  Francois  vrillonner,  ou  vriner  un  cable  ; 
mais  je  ne  sache  pas  que  vous  ayez  le  substantif  a  coil  pris  en  ce  sens.  Jugez  nous, 
Mr.  Flint  se  soumet  a  voire  decision.  II  a  £t6  mon  maitre ;  mais  j’ai  trop  appris  a 
voler,  pour  ne  me  pas  fier  a  mes  propres  ailes.  Dieu  veuille  que  vous  ne  disiez  pas 
de  moi  comme  d’Icare:  “  And  yet,  for  all  his  icings,  the  fool  was  drown'd?' — Je 


*  Le  joli  jeu  de  mots  ! 

|  Though  we  have  the  noun  which  he  questions,  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  “  hasty  spark"  from 
his  friend  Flint  only  tended  to  mislead  him.  Warburton’s  light  here  was  steady,  a  somewhat  rare  occur¬ 
rence. — Ed. 


3  E  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


396 


pr&ente  incs  respects  tr&s-humbles  a  Madame  Garrick,  et  finis  ma  longue  lettre  en 
vous  assurant  que  je  suis,  avec  toute  la  sinc6rit6  possible,  mon  tr£s  cher  Monsieur, 

Votre  tres  humble  ct  tres  devou6  serviteur, 

Patu. 

P.  S.  Je  rouvre  cette  ennuyeuse  pancarte  pour  vous  remercier  encore  de  m’avoir 
procure  la  connoissance  de  M.  Noverre.  J’estime  tous  les  hommes  qui  se  distinguent 
par  leur  probity  et  par  leurs  talents  dans  quelque  art  que  ce  soit.  II  me  pria  a  sou- 
per  ces  jours-ci,  et  n’eut  point  de  reMclie  que  je  ne  lui  eusse  donn6  ma  parole,  le  tout 
i\  votre  consideration.  Je  suis  convaincu  que  si  sa  femme  l’accompagne  a  Londres, 
vous  serez  charm  £  comme  moi  de  son  esprit  et  de  sa  douceur.  II  m’engage  i  vous 
dire  un  mot  sur  le  prix  que  vous  voulez  mettre  a  vos  figurants.  Pardon  si  a  sa  solli- 
citation  je  me  mfile  d’une  chose  qui  n’est  gueres  du  district  d’un  homme  de  lettres. 
Je  ne  crois  pas  en  honneur  qu’il  vous  soit  possible  d’avoir  des  sujets  a  quarante  ni 
m^me  a  quarante-cinq  guin^es  :  les  bons  sont  chers  partout,  les  mauvais  ont  ici  trop 
de  ressources.  D’ailleurs,  ne  voila-t’il  pas  trois  petites  gueuses  qu’on  a  vues  a  Londres 
engages  par  Yaneschi  a  soixante-quinze  guin6es  chacune,  qui  d^crient  le  pays  parmi 
leurs  camarades,  comme  si  tout  Londres  devoit  eitre  responsable  de  la  grossieret^  des 
Italiens  avec  lesquels  elles  ont  v6cu,  ou  de  l’incivilit6  de  quelque  Bail//.  Mr. 
Noverre  me  prie  aussi  de  vous  dire  qu’il  attend  avec  impatience  la  demoiselle  que 
vous  lui  annoncez,  et  que  vous  ne  devez  douter  ni  du  zele  ni  des  soins  de  sa  cliere 
femme  pour  lui  faire  connoitre  Paris.  Je  crois  k  cet  6gard  pouvoir  vous  r^pondre  de 
leur  bonne  volonte.  Je  ne  doute  pas  un  seul  moment  que  Mademoiselle  Pritchard  ne 
se  trouve  chez  eux  en  tr£s-bonnes  mains.  Excusez-encore  une  fois  le  babil  d’un 
homme  qui  a  peine  a  s’arracher  d’avec  vous,  et  qui  apr&s  avoir  gat£  tant  de  papier  s  en 
voit  encore  un  peu  de  reste. 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Passy,  ce  23  Aoust,  1755. 

Ce  que  c’est  que  la  vie,  mon  tr£s-cher  Monsieur!  Faut-il  que  notre  amitid  voye 
interrompre  sa  correspondance  par  des  maladies  qui  nous  soient  particulieres,  et  que 
nous  ayons  a  craindre  par  dessus  le  march 6  la  maladie  generale  de  nos  deux  nations, 
cette  malheureux  guerre  dont  on  ne  cesse  de  nous  menacer  ! 

Je  vous  remercie  tr^s-fort  de  ne  m’avoir  appris  votre  accident  qu’en  m’informant 
de  votre  gu^rison.  Attache  comme  je  le  suis  a  vos  talents,  a  votre  caractere,  h  tout 
ce  qui  vous  regarde,  aurois-je  pu  m’empecher  d’etre  sensible  k  votre  etat,  et  de  par- 
tager  vivement  vos  justes  inquietudes?  Au  nom  de  vous  m6me,  mon  ami,  fuyez 
tout  ce  qui  pouroit  vous  occasionner  une  rechute.  Fuyez  les  bavards  si  communs 
dans  la  societe,  les  musiciens  fous  de  leur  art,  les  voix  rauques  qui  se  tuent  de  d^ton- 
ner  a  table,  le  fracas  d’une  ville  telle  que  Londres  dans  une  saison  ou  vous  ne  lui  etes 
plus  necessaire :  et  que  Dieu  soit  a  jamais  beni  de  vous  avoir  fait  naitre  dans  une 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


397 


religion,  ou  le  bruit  des  cloches  lie  vous  casse  point  la  tEte  a  triples  carillons  !  A 
l’heure  que  je  vous  parle,  pauvre  Catholique  que  je  suis,  j’ai  la  cervelle  rompue,  le 
timpan  abimE,  les  oreilles  assourdies  du  vacarme  insuportable  du  clocher  de  ce  vil¬ 
lage  pour  la  fete  de  n6tre  bon  Roy,  le  bienheureux  St.  Louis.  Fuyez  surtout  le 
danger  le  plus  a  craindre  pour  quelqu’un  de  votre  esprit  et  de  votre  profession  :  l’im- 
portunite  d’un  poete  qui  vous  poursuit,  comme  un  bourdon,  pour  vous  assommer  de 
ses  vers,  et  pour  vous  lire  d’une  voix  tonnante  les  faits  et  gestes  de  ses  heros. 

“  Non  missura  cutem  nisi  plena  cruoris  hirudo.”* 

Vous  lui  proposerez,  sans  doute,  la  lecture  du  cabinet,  comme  plus  propre  a  vous 
faire  juger  de  son  ouvrage ;  mais  en  vain  :  quoique  vous  et  moi  nous  soyons  du 
metier,  il  faut  convenir  entre  nous  qu’un  poete  est  souvent  un  petit  etre  boufi 
d’orgueil ;  et  moi  qui  vous  parle,  mais  n’allez  pas  me  traliir,  n’ai-je  pas  quelquefois 
dans  1’idEe  que  lorsque  je  lis  mes  vers,  j’y  donne  seul  le  ton  qui  leur  convient,  et  que 
si  nos  comEdiens  lisoient  eux-m  Ernes,  ou  faisoient  lire  a  tout  autre  qu’a  moi  une 
piEce  de  ma  fa^on,  ils  ne  la  veroient  peut-etre  pas  sous  un  aspect  aussi  avantageux  ? 

AprEs  cette  confession  badine,  mon  clier  ami,  j’en  reviens  a  votre  lettre,  qui  m’a 
procure  comme  les  deux  premieres  ce  plaisir  si  pur  que  je  goute  lors  que  je  re^ois  de 
vos  nouvelles.  J’y  aurois  rcpondu  beaucoup  plustdt  sans  ma  mauvaise  santE  ;  mais 
que  direz-vous  d’un  homme,  et  surtout  d’un  jeune  homme,  qui  depuis  huit  mois  ne 
fait  presque  que  languir,  et  qui  se  donne  en  vain  toutes  les  peines  du  monde  pour 
regagner  le  dessus ?  Je  me  flatte,  enfin,  d’en  venir  a  bout,  si  letat  ou  je  me  trouve 
maintenant  continue,  et  si  l’air  de  la  campagne  que  je  respire  a  une  lieue  de  Paris 
m’est  toujours  aussi  favorable.  Le  pis  est  que  je  ne  sais  trop  ce  que  j’ai.  Mon 
mEdecin  accuse  mon  sang  d’etre  scorbutique ;  d’autres  pretendent  que  non  :  en  tout 
cas,  ses  remEdes  sont  done  propres  a  plusieurs  maux ;  car,  grace  a  ma  patience,  ainsi 
qu’a  la  laitue,  4  la  chicorEe,  au  becabunga,  au  sue  d’oseille,  de  cresson,  de  cochlearia, 
enfin,  je  me  sens  mieux.  Je  boirai  du  lait  tout  Septembre,  et  nous  verrons  ensuite 
ce  que  le  sort  dEcidera.  Une  de  mes  gentillesses,  dont  pourtant  je  me  passerois  a 
merveille,  ce  sont  des  crachements  de  sang  de  la  gorge,  qui  m’avoient  pris  il  y  a  pres 
de  trois  ans,  et  qui  rn’ont  repris  depuis  mon  sejour  a  la  campagne.  La  saignEe  est  le 
seul  moyen  de  les  arreter.  Cette  fois-ci  ils  m’ont  pris  huit  fois  en  quinze  jours,  cela 
est  assez  honnete ;  mais  d’une  force  a  teindre  deux  mouchoirs  a  chaque  Evacuation ; 
enfin,  je  me  suis  fait  saigner,  et  les  voila  Eteints  jusqu’a  nouvel  ordre.  Pardonnez- 
moi,  de  grace,  un  dEtail  aussi  dEplacE,  et  qu’a  coup  stir  je  ne  me  permetrois  pas,  si 
j’Ecrivois  a  tout  autre  qu’  a  un  ami.  Souvenez-vous  de  la  belle  strophe  du  MEtastase : 
elle  est  mon  excuse,  quoique  je  n’en  sois  pas  encore  a  chanter  victoire. 

Dopo  il  crudel  cimento 
Narra  i  passati  sdegni ; 

Di  sue  ferite  segni 
Mostra  il  guerrier  cosi : 


*  The  last  verse  of  Horace,  de  Arte  Poetica. — Ed. 


398 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Mostra  cosi  contento 
Schiavo  che  usci  di  pena 
La  barbara  catena 
Che  strascinava  un  di. 

Je  suis  ravi  que  Mr.  Pritchard  ait  £t6  content  des  lagers  serv  ices  que  j’ai  chcrch6 
lui  rendre.  Outre  qu’ils  n’^toient  rien  par  eux-m&mes,  et  que  son  indulgence  seule 
a  pu  leur  donner  quelque  poids,  il  seroit  bien  indigne  d’un  Francois  de  ne  pas 
faire  tout  ce  qui  est  en  lui  pour  rendre  a  nos  voisins  les  politesses  et  les  amities  dont 
les  honnfites  gens  d’entr’eux  nous  comblent  en  Angleterre.  Je  crois  tr£s-sinc£rement 
que  Mademoiselle  sa  fille  ne  sauroit  etre  en  meilleure  £cole  pour  la  danse,  et  pour 
ce  qui  concerne  l'&Uication  corporelle;  mais  j’imagine  que  Mr.  Pritchard  n’a  pas 
une  envie  decid^e  qu’elle  apprenne  notre  langue.  Le  meilleur  et  peut-^tre  le  seul 
moyen  eut  6t6  delui  donner  un  maitre  habile,  et  de  lui  faire  joindre  ainsi  les  princ-ipes 
a  l’habitude.  Au  reste,  comme  elle  a,  sans  la  flater,  plus  d’esprit,  plus  de  jugement, 
en  un  mot,  plus  d’heureuses  dispositions,  qu’il  n’est  ordinaire  d’en  trouver  chez  nos 
jeunes  demoiselles,  je  ne  doute  point  qu’elle  ne  tire  de  ses  quatre  mois  et  de  sa  com- 
pagnie  ou  elle  est,  toute  l’utilite  qui  d6pendra  d’elle.  Je  ne  puis  vous  dire  ou  elle  en 
est,  car  je  suis  tomb£,  apr£s  le  depart  de  Monsieur  son  p&re,  dans  un  £tat  d’oppression, 
et  m&me  de  vapeurs,  qui  m’a  contraint  de  me  renfermer  chez  moi,  et  maintenant  me 
voici  a  la  campagne,  de  sorte  que  je  n’ai  pu  la  voir  qu’une  ou  deux  fois,  encore 
n’etoit-ce  point  chez  Madame  Noverre,  mais  a  l’opera  comique  ou  j’allois  dissiper  ma 
m^lancolie.  Entre  nous,  et  sans  que  cela  nous  passe,  j’aurois  voulu  pour  son  avantage 
qu'on  la  menat  plus  souvent  a  notre  comedie  Fran^oise  qu’a  ces  mis^res  de  Monnet, 
et  qu’on  eut  soin  de  lui  faire  lire  la  pi&ce  pour  la  mettre  a  portae  de  l’entendre  dans 
la  bouche  de  l’acteur.  C'est  une  recette  dont  je  me  suis  trouv6  tres-bien  pour 
l’Anglois,  et  que  je  prkche  a  tout  le  monde.  Le  beau  profit  que  j’aurois  fait,  si 
j’eusse  prefere  Bertoldo  alia  corte,  V Arcadia  in  brenta ,  et  force  Pantomimes,  aux 
chef-d’ceuvres  de  votre  nation  ! 

Me  voila,  je  pense,  revenu  pour  cette  ann6e  de  mon  voyage  d’ltabe :  mes  amis, 
mes  connoissances,  mes  parents  meme  me  pressent  de  ne  songer  qu’a  ma  sante,  et 
de  remettre  la  partie  a  l’annee  procliaine.  Si  cela  est  ainsi,  je  ne  d6sesp&re  pas  de  me 
revoir  a  Londres  au  printems,  assez  tot  pour  jouir  encore  de  quelques  lines  de  vos 
representations.  Vous  me  flattez,  mon  ami ;  je  sens  combien  il  me  manque  de  choses 
dans  une  langue  aussi  riche,  aussi  6nergique,  dans  une  litt^rature  aussi  etendue  que 
la  votre.  Trois  ou  quatre  mois  me  sont  indispensables  pour  m’y  perfectionner,  et 
surtout  pour  recueillir  avec  soin  les  mat^riaux  n6cessaires  a  l’oeuvre  que  je  m^dite. 
Je  serai  alors,  je  l’espfere,  en  etat  d’y  penser  s^rieusement.  A  l'heure  qu’il  est,  on  me 
defend  un  travail  assidu,  et  j’ai  peine  a  obtenir  de  la  faculty  trois  ou  quatre  heures  par 
jour.  Dissipez-vous ,  voila  leur  grand  mot. 

Que  je  vous  suis  oblige  de  vos  charmantes  Prologues  !  Vous  moquez-vous,  de  me 
faire  peur  comme  du  Loup  noir  de  deux  ou  trois  badineries  ?  N’etes  vous  pas  le 
peintre  de  la  nature,  et  n’auriez-vous  pas  tous  les  torts  du  monde,  si  par  une  ddi- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


399 


catesse  mal-entendue,  vous  manquiez  a  saisir  le  vrai  genie  de  vos  matelots,  et  les  ex¬ 
pressions  fanfarons  qui  leur  sont  propres  ainsi  qu’aux  notres  ?  Songez,  de  grace,  a 
me  tenir  la  promesse  obligeante  que  vous  me  faites  de  m’envoyer  de  terns  a  autre  ce 
qui  paroitra  de  vos  ouvrages  dramatiques. 

Mr.  Titon  du  Tillet,  a  qui  j'ai  present^  vos  compliments,  y  est  on  ne  peut  pas  plus 
sensible.  II  me  charge  de  vous  assurer  de  sa  reconnoissance,  et  de  l’estime  qu’il  a  pour 
un  homme  dont  le  nom  et  les  talents  sont  aussi  celebres  que  les  votres.  Pourquoi 
me  parlez-vous  de  l’aller  voir  dans  ma  compagnie,  si  vous  etes  si  peu  dispose  a  venir? 
Ne  me  flattez  d’un  projet  qui  me  seroit  si  agreable,  que  lorsque  vous  serez  pr&t  a 
l’accomplir,  et,  pour  me  servir  d’un  terme  que  j’envie  a  votre  langue,  ne  tantalize % 
point  mon  amiti6. 

Je  passe  aux  nouvelles  litt6raires,  qui  malheureusement  sont  en  petit  nombre. 
Nous  avons  eu  depuis  le  Jaloux,  une  feerie,  une  drogue,  intitulee  Zelide,  on  lart 
d  aimer  et  de  plaire,  rechaufe  de  l’oracle  et  de  Zcneide.  Assez  d’esprit,  peu  de  jus- 
tesse,  style  hache,  mauvais  tour  de  vers,  voila  cet  ouvrage,  qui  d’ailleurs  £toit  d’un 
froid  a  glacer.  Je  compte  apres-demain  aller  k  Paris  pour  y  voir  la  troisieme  ou 
quatri&me  representation  de  “  l’Orphelin  de  la  Chine,”  trag^die  nouvelle  de  notre  grand 
Voltaire.  On  m’assure  qu’entre  autres  beautes,  il  y  a  un  morceau  qui  surpasse  ce 
qu’il  a  fait  de  mieux.  Soyez  sur,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  d’en  avoir  dans  ma  premiere 
lettre  un  detail  des  plus  travailles.  Dieu  veuille  que  cela  accel&re  votre  reponse  a 
celle-ci !  Vous  n’£tes  plus  malade,  au  moins  je  m’en  flatte,  et  vous  devez  savoir  que 
ce  qui  me  vient  de  vous,  met  dans  mon  sang’  un  baume  dont  il  a  tr&s- grand  besoin. — 
A  propos  de  Voltaire,  connoissez-vous  son  epitre  addressee  a  sa  nouvelle  maison 
proche  le  Lac  de  Gen&ve,  et  faite  en  Mars  dernier  ?  Pour  peu  que  vous  en  soyez 
curieux,  nous  l’avons  imprim^e,  et  je  me  ferai  un  vrai  plaisir  de  vous  en  envoyer  un 
exemplaire.  Disposez  toujours  de  moi  pour  Tachat  des  livres  qui  pouront  vous  etre 
utiles,  et  pour  toutes  les  commissions  imaginables.  Ce  sera  le  seul  moyen  de  me 
prouver  que  vous  me  conservez  votre  estime,  et  que  vous  ne  diminuez  rien  a  des  sen¬ 
timents  qui  me  seront  toujours  si  pr^cieux.  En  revanche,  si  vous  trouvez  quelque 
occasion,  sans  la  chercher  beaucoup,  de  me  faire  tenir  par  un  voyageur  de  votre  con- 
noissance  les  Poesies  de  plusieurs  dames  Angloises,  recueillies  depuis  peu,  en  2  vol.  in 
12°,  vous  me  ferez  plaisir.  J’en  remettrai  le  prix  a  la  personne  qui  voudra  bien  s’en 
charger.  Je  serois  aussi  tr&s-curieux  d’une  Edition  de  Chaucer,  qui  ne  fut  point  in 
folio. 

L’Abb6  Prcvost  vient  de  se  d^mettre  du  Journal  Litteraire,  et  c’est  maintenant 
Fr6ron  qui  en  est  charg^.  Le  voila,  graces  au  ciel,  accabE  de  travail.  Est-ce  le 
moyen  de  nous  donner  une  meilleure  besogne?  Anri  sacra  fames  l  Je  lui  ai  fait 
present  ces  jours-ci,  par  pure  amitie,  d’un  extrait  de  Barberousse  qui  m’a  coute  quel¬ 
que  peine.  J’ai  pris  la  liberty  d’y  joindre  quelques  objections  critiques ;  mais  je  me 
flatte  que  s’il  les  fait  imprimer  telles  qu’elles  sont  (comme  il  le  doit  sans  doute,  pour 
peu  qu’il  ait  envie  que  je  lui  rende  dans  la  suite  d’autres  services  du  meme  genre,) 
vous  ne  serez  mecontent  ni  du  fond  ni  de  la  tournure  de  mes  remarques.  Si  le  nom 


400 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


de  l'auteur  n’est  plus  un  secret,  je  vous  prie  instamment  de  me  le  mander  pour  le 
faire  mettre  dans  le  premier  journal. — Adieu,  mon  tres-cher  ami :  je  ne  finirois  pas  si 
je  n’c'coutois  que  mon  coeur,  et  si  je  ne  songeois  qu’il  ne  faut  point  fatiguer  les  gens 
du  plaisir  qu’on  a  de  les  entretenir.  Mes  respects  a  Madame,  et  mes  compliments 
tres-liumbles  au  puissant  Mr.  Pritchard.  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  avec  un  tendre 
d^vouement,  Votre  tr£s-sinc£re  et  tr&s-affectionn£  serviteur, 

Patu. 

Vous  trouverez  cy -joint  preincrement  une  pCce,  de  vers  et  de  prose,  4  Air.  Lorry, 
mon  medecin,  jeune  homme  qui  joint  h  toute  la  science  du  metier  une  vaste  littera- 
ture  ;  secondement,  l’envoi  de  mes  Adieux  du  Gout  a  une  dame  d’un  esprit  infini  avec 
laquelle  j’etois  brouill6  depuis  pen.  Sa  reponse  qu’elle  m’envoya  quatre  lieures  apres 
est  un  job  morceau  pour  une  femme. 


ENVOI  DES  ADIEUX  DU  GOUT. 

A  MADAME  DE  *  *  *. 

Je  vous  offre  un  stoique  hommage: 

Vos  talents  flattent  ma  fierte  : 

Tandis  que  mon  coeur  enchante, 

Loin  du  tumulte  et  de  l’orage, 

Goute  sa  chere  liberte, 

Mon  esprit  est  encore  tente 
De  vous  ravir  vbtre  sufrage. 

Que  de  1 ’amour  disgracie 
L’oubli  soit  le  juste  partage  ; 

Mais  que  mon  livre  k  tant  d’outrage 
Ne  soit  jamais  sacrifie, 

Et  par  un  reste  de  pitie, 

Lorsque  vous  lirez  cet  ouvrage, 

Prenez  les  yeux  de  l’amitie. 

Puissiez-vous  n’y  point  reconnoitre, 

Et  le  clinquant  et  les  defauts 
Que  pour  complaire  a  ses  rivaux 
L’auteur  vous  a  laisse  paroitre  ! 
Puissent  vos  vers  ingenieux, 

Votre  prose  aimable  et  polie, 

Prouver  a  la  France  ravie, 

Que  ce  depart  trop  furieux 
Du  gout  desertant  sa  patrie, 

N’est  que  la  sombre  reverie 
D’un  rimeur  pale  et  bilieux  ! 


DAVID  GARRICK 


401 


II  regne  encore  dans  notre  ville  ; 
Malgre  ses  Adieux  menajants, 

Ce  Dieu  qu’ignorent  tant  de  gens, 

Et  qui  d’un  pas  lihre  et  facile, 

Vous  suit,  en  tous  lieux  en  tout  tems, 
Aura  toujours  pour  domicile 
Le  cercle  ou  brillent  vos  talents. 


REPONSE. 

Je  refois  votre  hommage  avec  avidite, 

Quoiqu’ofFert  par  la  vanite  : 

La  voix  de  la  reconnoissance 
Etouffe  dans  mon  sein  le  cri  de  la  fierte  ; 

Ceci  passe  la  vraisemblance, 

Sans  atteindre  a  la  verite. 

Au  plaisir  d’estimer  mes  resseutiments  cedent, 

Je  n’eprouve  pour  vous  ni  haine,  ni  mepris, 

Des  talents,  quelqu’ils  soient,  mon  coeur  toujours  epris, 

Ne  voit  point  de  defauts  dans  ceux  qui  les  possedent. 

Temoin  de  vos  succes  mon  gofit  en  est  flatte ; 

Et  je  prendrois  votre  deffense, 

Si  le  fiel  de  la  medisance, 

Par  un  jaloux  orgueil  contre  vous  excite, 

Osoit  fletrir  en  ma  presence 
Un  laurier  si  bien  merite. 

Vous  voyez,  mon  clier  ami,  que  nous  avons  aussi  nos  femmes  poetes.  Je  vous 
envoye  ces  deux  morceaux  pour  payer  en  quelque  sorte  le  present  de  vos  prologues. 
Mes  foibles  vers  soutenus  de  ma  bonne  volonte,  voila  ce  que  j’ose  mettre  dans  l’autre 
fleau  de  la  balance,  pour  tenir  une  sorte  d’^quilibre  entre  vous  et  moi. 

A  propos  du  livre  de  Rouquet,  je  ne  l’ai  point  lu ;  mais  il  me  semble  qu’on  n’en 
fait  pas  plus  de  cas  que  vous. 


DE  PATU. 

LETTRE  ECRITE  A  MR.  LORRY,  MON  MEDECTN. 

Ce  Samedi,  19  Juillet,  1755. 

Je  vous  attens,  mon  clier  Docteur,  comme  les  Turcs  attendent  les  Houris.  C’est 
beaucoup  dire  assur^ment,  car  il  s’en  faut  bien  que  vos  juleps,  vos  m^decines,  et  vos 
bouillons  amers  soient  d’une  jouissance  aussi  agitable  que  ces  vierges  sacr6es  dont  le 
Prophete  a  dit :  Si  rune  d'elles  crac/ioit  dans  Voctan,  d  l instant  meme  ses  eaux  derien- 
droient  douces.  Ma  jambe  va  beaucoup  mieux,  et  depuis  que  j’ai  pens6  voir  Morand, 
la  coquine  a  craint  la  consulte  et  se  cicatrise  de  toute  part.  J’en  suis  ravi,  car  t\  vous 
dire  vrai,  il  m'eut  paru  bien  dur  h  moi  qui  n’ai  pas  pris  Bergopzoom  de  p^rir  comme 
son  conquerant. 

VOL.  II.  3  F 


402 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Je  ne  suis  point  cet  autre  Achille, 

Ce  fier  Danois,  ce  Lowendhal, 

Qui  d’un  air  gay,  d’un  pas  agile 
Vous  marchoit  pour  prendre  une  ville 
Comme  un  Franfois  ouvre  le  bal. 

Je  suis  un  citoyen  vulgaire 
Content  de  mon  obscurite  : 

Trop  ami  de  l’humanite 
Pour  aller  cueillir  a  la  guerre 
Ces  lauriers  dont  la  vanite 
Decore  un  heros  redoute, 

Qui  sur  les  debris  de  la  terre 
S’eleve  a  l’immortalite. 

Que  ceux  qui  se  sont  vus  pendant  leur  vie  de  vrais  monies  a  te  deum,  comme  les 
appelle  la  chanson,  deviennent  quand  il  leur  plaira  des  monies  a  requiem  !  Pour  inoi, 
qui  n’ai  point  a  esp^rer  les  honneurs  pompeux  de  leurs  catafalques,  ni  les  fastueux 
61oges  de  leurs  oraisons  fun^bres,  cette  pauvre  terre  me  sied  on  ne  peut  pas  mieux. 

Viens  done,  6  toi,  dieu  tutelaire, 

Appui  de  mes  jours  languissans, 

Toi  la  moitie  d’un  tendre  Frere* 

Qui  tel  qu’une  fleur  passag&re 
Me  fut  ravi  dans  son  printems; 

Toi  dont  il  partagea  deux  ans, 

Et  l’amitie  pure  et  sincere, 

Et  les  travaux  et  les  talents, 

Honneurs  de  sa  prompte  carriere, 

Charme  de  ses  derniers  moments, — 

Viens,  parle,  et  que  ta  main  savante, 

Dans  ce  corps  ne  pour  la  douleur, 

Ce  corps  dont  ma  verve  brulante 
Pompe  les  sues  et  la  vigueur 
Malgre  mes  Nieces  et  ma  Soeur, f 
Fixe  mon  &me  chancelante. 

Surtout  retablis  mes  poumons  : 

Force  la  nature  maratre 
A  les  combler  de  ces  beaux  dons 
Qui  font  briber  sur  le  theatre, 

Et  nos  Le  Kains  et  nos  Clairons. 

Tu  le  peux  :  je  sfais  tes  miracles ; 

J’entens  partout  conter  des  faits 
Qui  vont  me  faire  desormais 
Croire  en  aveugle  a  tes  oracles. 

Je  sais  qu’au  fils  J  de  Richelieu, 

Que  malgre  les  honneurs  du  pere, 

Et  tout  l’eclat  d’un  cordon  bleu, 

Deux  fois  la  Parque  meurtriire 

*  Mort  en  Fevrier  1749,  dge  de  21  ans.  -f  Mes  hcritieres.  J  Mr.  le  Due  de  Fronsac. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


403 


Alloit  ravir  a  la  lumiere, 

Deux  fois  tu  rendis  ce  beau  feu, 

Et  cette  purete  premiere, 

Qui  sied  au  sang  d’un  demi-dieu. 

Je  sais  meme,  et  la  Renommee 
Seme  au  loin  ces  bruits  etonnants, 
Que  pour  payer  ces  faits  brillants 
Dont  la  cour  entiere  est  charmee, 

On  voit  les  promesses  des  grands 
Ne  s’exhaler  plus  en  fumee. 

Je  sais  qu’il  n’est  aupres  du  Roy 
Ni  Marquis,  ni  Due,  ni  Princesse, 

Ni  fat,  ni  petite  maitresse, 

Que  tu  n’enchaines  sous  ta  loi ; 

Que  pour  guerir,  non  sans  adresse, 
Tous  leurs  Bobos  minutieux, 

Maux  d’estomac,  rhume,  foiblesse, 
Vapeurs  surtout,  ce  rien  affreux 
Qui  les  tourmente,  qui  les  presse, 

A  l’aspect  d’un  mari  facheux, 

Grace  k  ta  riante  jeunesse, 

Nos  femmes  t’aiment  cent  fois  mieux, 
Que  1’Hipocrate  de  la  Grece  : 
Qu’enfin  pour  ne  plus  m’arreter, 

Tu  fais  partout  tant  de  merveilles, 
Qu’il  nous  faudroit  sans  le  vanter, 
Pour  les  dire,  et  les  ecouter, 

£t  trente  jours  et  trente  oreilles. 

Je  sais  tout:  mais  en  verite, 

Je  finirois  mal  ton  eloge, 

Si  malgre  ta  celebrite, 

J’allois  me  voir  trop  tot  cite 
Dans  le  nombreux  Martirologe 
De  ta  salubre  Faculte. 


DE  M.  PATU  A  MR.  GARRICK. 


Passy,  ce  23  Septembre,  1755. 

J’ai  peine  a  trouver  dansma  langue,  mon  clier  Monsieur,  les  expressions  qu’il  me 
faudroit  pour  vous  temoigner  ma  vive  reconnoissance.  Que  vous  etes  bon  de  vous 
int6resser  si  tendrement  k  ce  qui  me  regarde,  et  de  m’en  assurer  dans  votre  lettre 
d  une  manure  si  amicale,  si  energique !  Croyez  qu’on  ne  peut  vous  aimer  avec  plus 
d'ardeur,  et  plus  de  sinc^rite  que  moi,  et  qu’un  sentiment  de  cette  sorte  joint  a  la 
juste  estime  que  j’ai  pour  Mr.  Garrick,  est  fait  pour  n’essuyer  aucune  vicissitude. 


404 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Vous  louez  beaucoup  trop  mes  vers  il  mon  ami  Lorry.  Si  je  ne  vous  connoissois 
pour  rhomme  du  monde  le  plus  franc,  je  serois  tent6  de  prendre  pour  un  vrai  per¬ 
siflage  la  comparaison  ([ue  vous  faites  il  ce  sujet.  C’est  moi  qui  gagnerai,  lorsque  vos 
ouvrages  seront  le  prix  des  miens,  et  je  vous  avoue  (pie  j’irois  volontiers  aux  Indes  si 
Ton  y  donnoit  des  effets  du  m^rite  de  vos  pieces  pour  des  bagatelles  de  ma  compo¬ 
sition.  Tenez-moi  parole,  je  vous  en  conjure,  et  que  j’aye  de  terns  4  autre  le  plaisir 
de  voir  et  de  revoir  vos  productions  ou  fugitives,  ou  theatrales.  Vous  allez  bientot 
jouir  de  Mr.  Noverre,  car  la  saison  s’avance.  Vous  aurez  lieu,  je  l’esp&re,  de  vous 
louer  de  son  attention  pour  Mademoiselle  Pritchard,  et  des  progres  de  la  jeune  de¬ 
moiselle.  Ces  dames  envoy&rent  ces  jours  passes  un  expr&s  a  Passy,  pour  me  de- 
mander  ma  soupe  du  lendemain.  Je  fus  au  desespoir,  pareeque  j’attendois  une 
compagnie  de  sept  personnes,  entre  autres  Mr.  et  Madame  Fr£ron.  Je  compte  la 
partie  remise  a  dimanche  prochain.  Je  serai  ravi  de  juger  par  moi-m^me  de  ce 
qu’elle  sait  de  Francois.  Si  ses  progres  r6pondent  a  la  part  que  j’y  prens,  taut 
pour  elle  que  pour  Mr.  son  p£re,  ils  seront  tres-6tendus.  Mr.  Titon,  chez  lequel 
je  dinai  il  y  aura  demain  huit  jours,  est,  on  nepeut  pas  plus,  sensible  a  vos  politesses. 
Je  lui  ai  parl6  de  v6tre  projet  si  poli,  de  placer  son  nom  dans  votre  poeme  intitule  Le 
Gout.  II  vous  menace  a  son  tour  de  mettre  le  votre,  ainsi  que  votre  z£le  pour 
Shakspeare,  dans  une  nouvelle  edition  de  son  ouvrage.  Votre  monument  de  cam- 
pagne  aiguillonera,  dit-il,  nos  citoyens  engourdis  sur  les  beaut^s  de  nos  grands  maitres, 
et  sur  les  honneurs  qu’on  devroit  leur  rendre. 

Que  je  suis  enchant^  de  votre  projet  pour  l’annee  prochaine,  et  qu’il  me  sera  doux 
de  vous  voir,  de  vous  embrasser,  et  de  presenter  a  mes  amis  un  liomme  unique  qui 
joint  a  la  bonte  du  coeur,  cette  excellente  partie  de  nous-memes,  un  esprit  si  cultiv6, 
si  lumineux  ;  un  liomme,  enfin,  dont  la  moindre  quality  est  d’etre,  du  jugement  uni- 
versel,  le  premier  acteur  de  l’Europe !  Coulez,  lieures,  coulez  :  vous  m’allez  faire 
marcher  vers  la  vieillesse  du  pas  le  plus  d^libere,  et  prier  le  terns  de  voler  vers  moi  a 
tire  d’aile.  Vous  avez  jug6  Fr^ron  un  peu  sCverement ;  mais  il  le  m^rite,  et  je  le  lui  ai 
dit.  Au  reste,  plus  il  a  ecrit,  plus  il  s’est  6clair£.  Vous  reconnoitrez  dans  l’Annee 
Litteraire,  plus  de  sagesse,  plus  d’ordre,  plus  de  sagacity,  que  dans  les  Lettres  sur  les 
Merits  de  ce  terns,  &c.  Il  n’a  jamais  connu  votre  langue  ;  mais  il  commence  a  sentir 
qu’il  ne  la  connoit  pas,  ce  qui  est  beaucoup.  Je  puis  me  flater  d’avoir  contribu6  un 
peu  a  son  changement  depuis  mon  retour  de  Londres.  Il  a  un  excellent  fond,  et 
prend  a  merveille  les  v£rit6s  que  je  lui  dis  ex  intimo.  Pour  ce  qui  est  de  “  Barbe- 
rousse,”  l’extrait  que  je  lui  en  ai  donn6  va  paroitre  ces  jours-ci  a  la  tete  du  journal 
d’Octobre.  N’imaginez  pas  que  j’aye  voulu  faire  une  critique :  j’ai  vis£  a  faire  un 
61oge ;  j’ai  pris  beaucoup  d’int6r£t  a  la  piece,  et  si  je  ne  l’eusse  crue  digne  d’etre  con- 
nue,  je  n’aurois  pas  cherch6  a  la  faire  connoilre.  Mais,  enfin,  le  soleil  a  ses  taches,  et 
j’ai  propose  mes  doutes  avec  la  modestie  dont  je  ne  m’^carterai  jamais.  Je  me  doute  que 
l’auteur  est  Mr.  le  Docteur  Brown  ;  mais  je  suis  discret,  et  l’anonyme  lui  sera  gard6 

“  L’Orphelin  de  la  Chine”  is  over.  La  maladie  subite  de  Le  Kain  a  interrompu 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


405 


la  piece  a  la  neuvieme  representation.  Je  vous  envoye,  pour  abreger  ma  lettre,  une 
esp£ce  d’analyse  qu’on  en  a  faite,  en  attendant  que  je  trouve  line  occasion  de  vous 
faire  tenir  l’ouvrage  lui-meme.  Je  trouve  cette  pi£ce  chaude,  interessante,  et  gene- 
ralement  £crite  a  la  Voltaire;  mais  vous  en  jugerez.  La  preface,  qu’il  a  mise  a  la 
t£te,  et  que  vous  verrez  lorsqu’elle  pourra  vous  parvenir,  ne  manquera  pas  de  vous 
r^volter.  J’ai  pen  vu  de  choses  (de  lui  surtout)  aussi  mal  dig^r^es,  je  airois  presque 
aussi  mal  Writes.  II  y  traite  les  pieces  de  Shakspeare  de  farces  monstr  ileuses,  et  en 
parle  avec  un  mepris  souverain.  J’en  suis  d’autant  plus  indign6  que  les  moindres 
paroles  de  ce  grand  ecrivain  sont  prises  ici  pour  des  oracles,  et  que  j’en  aurai  d’autant 
plus  d’hydres  a  terrasser.  N’importe :  A  vaincre  sans  peril,  on  triomphe  sans  gloire. 
En  attendant  mieux,  je  compte  donner  a  Freron  une  idee  du  mauvais  livre  [me 
trompai-je  ?]  de  Mrs.  Lenox,  intitule  Shakspeare  illustrated,  ou  plutot  ill-treated. 
J’en  prendrai  occasion  de  parler  de  “  Romeo  et  Juliet.”  Le  public  verra  si  quelque 
chose  d’aussi  naturel,  d’aussi  tendre,  d’aussi  patlietique,  peut  passer  pour  une  farce, 
encore  moins  pour  une  farce  monstrueuse. 

J’ai  tant  de  choses  dans  l’idee  lorsque  j’^cris  a  mon  cher  Garrick,  que  mes  pensees 
sont  diffuses  et  tr&s-souvent  assez  mal  exprimees.  Vous  etes  trop  bon  pour  prendre 
garde  aux  paroles  d’un  homme  qui  les  arrange  sur  le  papier  selon  qu’elles  se  pre- 
sentent  a  sa  plume.  A  une  chose  pres,  voila  tout  ce  que  j’ai  a  vous  dire  pour  cette 
fois.  Et  quelle  est  cette  chose? — bien  plus  interessante  pour  moi  que  celles  dont  je 
viens  de  parler :  la  void. 

L’Abbe  Prevot  a  annonce  dans  deux  de  ses  journaux  le  recueil  si  mal  fait  des  vies 
de  vos  poetes  par  Cibber.  Cette  annonce  a  fait  connoitre  le  livre,  et  la  faim  presse 
assez  nos  auteurs  pour  qu’au  premier  jour  on  en  voye  paroitre  une  traduction  vrai- 
ment  digne  de  l’original.  Quel  livre  qu’  une  collection  mal  digeree,  oil  la  populace 
se  confond  parmi  les  grands,  oil  d’ailleurs  on  ne  traite  ni  de  l’histoire  de  votre  po6sie, 
ni  de  ses  progr&s,  &:c. !  Vous  sentez  d’avance  a  quoi  j’en  veux  venir.  J’ai  resolu, 
decidement  resolu,  de  commencer  au  plutot  un  ouvrage,  en  quatre  volumes,  dont 
voici  le  titre  : — 

Le  Parnasse  Anglois,  ou  Vies  des  principaux  Poetes  qui  ont  illustre  la  Grande- 
Bretagne,  pour  servir  a  l’Histoire  de  la  Poesie  Angloise. 

A  oici  maintenant  de  quelle  sorte  je  con^ois  mon  plan.  Je  commence  par  une 
Preface  qui  doit  faire  un  morceau  d’eclat  sur  l’dude  de  votre  langue  aujourd’huy  si 
repandue;  sur  ses  avantages,  surtout  pour  la  poesie.  Je  fais  voir  combien  il  est 
necessaire  de  marcher  dans  cette  £tude  par  un  cliemin  sur,  de  se  faire  des  choses  des 
idees  justes,  de  ne  point  confondre  le  style  d’un  auteur  du  si^cle  de  la  Reine  Anne 
avec  celui  de  Cowley,  de  Waller,  &c.  de  distinguer  le  theatre  actuel  de  ce  qu’il  etoit 
sous  Shakspeare  et  Ben  Jonson.  Que  sais-je  ?  mes  id6es  sont  confuses,  et  je  les 
rends  telles.  Je  parlerai  de  nos  traductions  si  dangereuses  par  leur  peu  d’exactitude, 
&c.,  j’exhorterai  les  jeunes  gens  i\  ne  decider  sur  rien  que  d'apr£s  les  originaux,  &c., 
je  ferai  sentir  combien  un  pared  ouvrage  dans  lequel  seront  contenues  les  vies  de 


406 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


vos  principaux  poetes  peut-etre  utile  aux  homines  de  lettres  peu  versus  dans  l’idiome 
Anglois,  on  5  cciix  qui  commencent  i\  l’aprendre,  &c.  Enfin,  lorsque  j’aurai  a  peu 
pres  tout  dit,  et  de  moil  mieux,  sur  mon  but  en  composant  cet  ouvrage,  j’ajouterai 
une  premiere  dissertation  sur  le  premier  age  de  votre  po^sie  depuis  Chaucer  jusqu’a 
la  lleine  Elizabeth,  ann6e  1560:  a  la  tete  du  second  age,  depuis  1560  jusqu’a  1660, 
aniuSe  de  la  Restoration,  sera  une  scconde  dissertation  :  troisieme  dissertation  a  la 
tete  du  troisieme  age,  depuis  Charles  II.  jusqu  a  la  Reine  Anne  :  quatrieme  disser¬ 
tation,  enfin,  depuis  1700  jusqu ’au  terns  actuel.  Pour  ce  qui  est  de  l'arrangement 
des  quatre  volumes,  voici  a  peu  pr£s  mon  idee.  Premier  vol. :  La  Preface.  La 
premiere  dissertation.  Les  vies  des  poetes  du  premier  age.  Seconde  dissertation. 
Les  poetes  du  second  age.  Nous  voici  a  Charles  II. — Second  vol.  Troisieme  disser¬ 
tation.  Vies  des  poetes  du  troisieme  age.  Quatri&me  dissertation.  Une  moiti6  des 
poetes  du  quatrieme  age : — le  reste  fera  le  Troisieme  volume. — Quatrieme  vol.  enfin, 
Vies  de  vos  Femmes  poetes,  et  quelques  6claircissemens  sur  les  poetes  vivants,  ainsi 
(pie  sur  leurs  ouvrages. 

Toute  confuse,  toute  grossi&re,  toute  informe  que  soit  cette  peinture,  ne  concevez- 
vous  pas,  mon  ami,  que  cet  ouvrage  bien  fait  sera  d’une  utility  tr&s-etendue,  et  mettra 


le  Francis  a  port6  de  connoitre  les  progress  de  votre  theatre  tragique  et  comique, 
independamment  des  autres  genres  de  votre  po£sie?  J’ajouterai  a  chaque  vie  le 
catalogue  des  ouvrages  de  vos  poetes.  Que  de  gens  vont  devenir  habiles  a  bon 
compte !  mais  aussi  que  d’hommes  lettres,  et  dont  les  occupations  sont  diff^rentes  de 
celles-ci,  seront  ravis  de  trouver  une  besogne  toute  faite  pour  eux !  Au  reste,  si  vous 
ne  consentez  pas  a  me  donner  vos  id6es  sur  mes  quatre  dissertations  qui  doivent 
regarder  les  progr&s  de  votre  po6sie,  je  ne  puis  rien  faire.  Je  vous  conjure,  mon  cher 
ami,  de  me  rendre  ce  service.  Cela  vous  fera  dans  Paris  un  honneur  dont  vous  serez 
bien  digne.  Je  vous  rendrai  dans  ma  Preface  tout  ce  qui  vous  apartiendra,  et  me 
ferai  gloire  d’avoir  £crit  sous  votre  dict^e.  Fr^ron,  qui  me  paroit  trks-content  de 
mon  projet,  m’aidera  aussi  de  ses  conseils,  et  parlera  dans  ses  feuilles  de  votre  gen£- 
rosite  vraiment  amicale.  Je  vais  commencer  par  6tablir  ma  preface,  ou  ma  disquisi¬ 
tion  litteraire,  &c.  En  attendant  qu’elle  soit  faite,  consacrez-moi,  de  grace,  quelques 
instans ;  d^robez  les  a  votre  immense  travail  pour  le  theatre.  Jettez  sur  le  papier  vos 
idees  sur  le  premier  et  sur  le  second  age  de  votre  po£sie.  Retranchez  de  la  liste  de 
Cibber  (the  Lives  of  the  Poets,  3  vols.)  toute  la  racaille  qui  vous  paroitra  m6riter  peu 
l’honneur  d’etre  connue  :  indiquez-moi  les  livres  qui  pouroient  metre  utiles,  et  tachez 
de  les  joindre  au  Chaucer  et  aux  Poems  by  eminent  Ladies.  Les  vies  recueillies  par 
Langbaine,  par  Jacob,  &c.  me  sont-elles  n^cessaires  ?  J  imagine  que  pour  les  poetes, 
depuis  v6tre  bon  Chaucer  jusqu’a  ceux  de  Charles  II.,  Cibber  me  suffira.  Les  vies 
deviendront  ensuite  plus  int6ressantes.  Fiez-vous  &  moi  pour  celle  du  divin  Shak- 
speare,  dans  mon  premier  volume.  Je  finis  ce  grifonage  abominable,  et  dont  je  suis 
honteux;  figurez-vous  qu’il  est  minuit,  que  j’ecris  au  courant  d’une  plume  effroyable. 
— Adieu,  mon  ami :  accordez-moi  la  gr&ce  que  je  vous  demande,  et  pour  le  coup, — 
eris  mild  magnus  Apollo ;  je  veux  faire  un  bon  ouvrage  pour  moi,  pour  vous,  pour 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


407 


en  prevenir  un  mauvais.  Voila  clone  ce  que  j’attens  a  votre  aise,  quoiqu’a  dire  vrai 
le  plutot  doit  &tre  le  mieux  :  Vos  id^es,  vos  secours,  vos  lumi&res  sur  le  premier  et  sur 
le  second  age  de  votre  poesie:  sur  le  premier  depuis  Chaucer  jusqu’a  Elizabeth,  ann. 
1560 ;  sur  le  second  depuis  les  poetes  du  terns  d’Elizabeth  jusqu’a  Charles  II. 
mati&re  du  premier  volume.  Quand  cela  sera  fait,  nons  songerons  aux  autres. 
Voila  l’ouvrage  utile,  int6ressant,  auquel  je  vais  consacrer  mon  hy  ver  et  le  retour  de 
ma  sant6.  Que  je  serois  heureux  d’etre  en  Angleterre !  Je  crois  en  verite,  que  s’il 
vous  etoit  impossible  de  traiter  la  chose  par  ecrit,  je  serois  homme  a  vous  aller  trouver, 
mais  les  rhumes,  les  brouillards,  le  punch,  et  mes  poumons,  voila  ce  qui  s’accommode 
tr&s-peu.  J’attens  de  vous  une  reponse  d’engagement ;  quatre  mots  sufisent  pour  me 
mettre  l’esprit  en  repos.  Encore  une  fois,  si  vous  ne  voulez  pas  que  nous  travaillions 
cet  ouvrage  de  concert,  et  si  vous  en  voulez  a  la  nation  Franchise  au  point  de  lui 
refuser  vos  lumi&res,  j’abandonne  mon  projet.  J’ai  port£  ce  matin  a  l’imprimeur  le 
fruit  de  mon  loisir  rustique  jusqu’a  ce  jour,  la  traduction  de  six  de  vos  petites  pieces: 
in  tenui  labor.  L’Op^ra  du  Gueux  y  est  avec  preface,  anecdotes,  notes,  &c.  J’ai  tra- 
duit  les  airs  le  plus  galamment  et  le  plus  po6tiquement  que  j’ai  pu.  “  Measure  for 
Measure,”  j’ai  donn6  prose  pour  prose,  vers  pour  vers.  Vous  rirez  aussi  d’y  voir 
Comment  I'apellez-vous  ?  What  d'ye  call  it  ?  Quelques  heures  d’amusement  me 
mettent  des  livres  dans  ma  biblioth£que.  C’est  tout  ce  que  j’en  pretens.  Adieu, 
pour  la  troisi&me  fois  :  aimez-moi  toujours  le  quart  de  ce  que  je  vous  aime.  Mes 
respects  tr&s-liumbles  a  Madame  Garrick.  Dieu  vous  fasse  la  grace  de  ddchifrer 
cette  lettre  !  Je  suis,  avec  un  d^vouement  inalterable,  mon  tres-cher  Monsieur, 

Votre  tr£s-humble  et  tr£s-affectionn6  serviteur, 

Path. 

Mr.  Fr6ron  se  propose  de  vous  ecrire  au  premier  jour  a  l’occasion  de  son  journal. 

Ma  foi !  ma  lettre  est  trop  grosse  pour  que  j’y  joigne  l’Analyse  imprimee.  Je 
vais  cliercher  d£s  demain  une  occasion  pour  vous  envoyer  la  pi&ce. 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Geneve,  ce  1  Novembre,  1755. 

Je  vous  demande  pardon,  mon  cher  et  digne  ami,  d’avoir  differ 6  si  longtems  a 
vous  repondre  au  sujet  de  votre  lettre  du  deux  Octobre,  car  je  ne  suis  point  homme  a 
compter  pour  quelque  chose  le  billet  que  j’ai  remis  a  Air.  Noverre.  Je  suis,  on  ne 
peut  pas  plus,  sensible  4  vos  expressions  obligeantes,  <\  vos  marques  d’estime,  4  cette 
franchise  qui  denote  la  vraye  amiti6 ;  mais,  croyez  moi,  vou  saurez  beau  faire ;  vous 
n’augmenterez  jamais  dans  mon  coeur  la  reconnoissance  qu’il  vous  doit,  ni  cette  affec¬ 
tion  inalterable  qu’il  vous  a  vouee.  L’une  et  l’autre  sont  a  leur  comble. 

Je  profiterai  desormais  de  la  charmante  permission  que  vous  voulez  bien  me  don- 
ner  de  paroitre  devant  vous  avec  mes  pantoufles  et  ma  robe-de-chambre  ;  et  vous 


408 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


pouvez  etre  tres-sur  qu’a  l’avenir  mes  lettres  seront  aussi  simples,  aussi  liaturelles  que 
Test  mon  vif  attachement  pour  tout  ce  qui  rcgarde  mon  eher  Garrick. 

Je  vous  <'*cris  de  la  maison  du  grand  liomme,  je  vcux  dire  de  chez  notre  illustre 
Voltaire,  dans  la  compagnie  duquel  je  viens  de  passer  une  huitaine  prtaieuse  des  ])lus 
agr^ables  jours  que  j’aye  connus  dans  ma  vie.  Ils  m’ont  rapeliy  ceux  que  j’ai  passes 
a  Londres  dans  votre  aimable  soci£t6,  terns  si  court,  si  voluptueux !  et  que  suivit  de 
trop  prfcs  mon  depart  pour  la  France.  Quel  homme  que  le  divin  cliantre  de  la  Hen- 
riade,  O  mon  tr&s-cher  ami,  ct  que  c’est  avec  joye  qu’on  analyse  une  si  grande  time ! 
Figurez-vous  avec  l’air  d’un  mourant  tout  le  feu  de  la  premiere  jeunesse,  et  le  brillant 
de  ses  aimables  6crits  !  Si  je  juge  des  defauts,  des  vices  monies  qu’on  impute  i  Mr.  de 
Voltaire  par  l’avarice  dont  je  l’ai  entendu  taxer,  que  ses  calomniateurs  me  paroissent 
des  animaux  bien  vils  et  bien  ridicules !  Jamais  on  n’a  vu  une  ch£re  plus  splendide, 
jointe  it  des  manures  plus  polies,  plus  affables,  plus  engageantes.  Tout  Geneve  est 
enchant^  de  l’avoir,  et  ces  heureux  rdpublicains  font  leur  possible  pour  le  fixer  aupr&s 
d’eux.  Je  n’avois  entrepris  ce  voyage  que  pour  le  voir,  mais  la  sensibility  qu’il  m’en 
temoigne  chaque  jour  m’en  paye  avec  usure.  On  va  a  Rome,  en  Grece,  en  Turquie, 
pour  voir  des  monuments,  des  inscriptions,  des  mosquees  :  un  devot  Catholique 
court  au  loin  pour  de  vains  pelerinages  :  un  grand  homme  est  bien  une  autre  cu¬ 
riosity.  Je  n’ai  pas  manque  de  lui  dire  ce  que  je  pensois  de  ses  expressions  si  fausses, 
si  peu  ryfl6chies  au  sujet  de  Shakspeare.  II  est  convenu  de  bonne  foi,  que  c’etoit  un 
barbare  aimable,  un  fou  seduisant ;  ce  sont  ces  propres  termes  :  le  grand  article  qui 
le  met  de  mauvaise  humeur  est  l’irrygularit6  des  plans  de  cet  illustre  poete,  irr£gu- 
larite  dont  vous  £tes  bien  loin  d’etre  le  deffenseur.  Quant  au  naturel,  a  la  chaleur, 
aux  id£es  admirables,  repandues  dans  les  pieces  de  Shakspeare,  il  est  tomby  d’accord, 
et  convient  en  riant  que  si  vous  nous  preniez  moins  de  vaisseaux  et  ne  piratiex  pas 
ainsi  sur  l’ocean,  il  auroit  plus  mynagy  le  cryateur  de  votre  thyatre.  Je  frapai  liier 
par  l’activity  dont  je  soutins  mon  opinion :  je  tirai  mon  livre  et  lui  lus  la  sc^ne  de 
Romeo,  entre  ce  jeune  homme  et  le  fr^re  Laurent : 

“  Romeo,  come  forth  !  &c.” 

Il  commen9a  par  rire  de  mon  feu,  mais  a  ces  vers  : — 

“’Tis  torture  and  not  mercy  ;  heaven  is  here 
Where  Juliet  lives  .... 

O  Father,  hadst  thou  no  strong  poison  mixt, 

No  sharp-ground  knife,  no  present  means  of  death, 

But  banishment  to  torture  me  withal  ?” 

- il  s’anima  et  dit  franchement  que  cela  ytoit  tres-beau,  tres-toucliant,  tres-natu- 

rel,  mais  ce  fut  bien  autre  chose  lorsque  j’eus  continuy  la  scene,  et  qu’il  entendit 
cette  admirable  enumeration  de  parties  qui  prouve  mieux  que  dix  tragedies  combien 
Shakspeare  ytoit  yloquent : — 

“  Thou  canst  not  speak  of  what  thou  dost  not  feel : 

Wert  thou  as  young  as  I,  Juliet  thy  love, 

An  hour  but  married,  Tybalt  murdered, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


409 


Doting  like  me,  and  like  me  banished, 

Then  roight’st  thou  speak,  then  might’st  thou  tear  thy  hair 
And  fall  upon  the  ground,  as  I  do  now, 

Taking  the  measure  of  an  unmade  grave.” 

il  ne  connoissoit  gu^res  cette  pi£ce  qu'il  a  lue  peut-etre  il  y  a  plus  de  trente  ans,  mais 
il  me  la  demanda  pour  la  relive,  et  fut  enchante  de  la  catastrophe  telle  que  vous  en  avez 
peiut  les  circonstances.  Je  lui  parlai  de  mou  cher  Garrick.  Oh  vraiment,  m’a-t’-il 
dit,  c’est  un  acteur  inimitable  que  ce  Mr.  Garrick,  a  ce  que  disent  ceux  qui  l’ont  vu ; 
Ma  niece  (en  parlant  a  Madame  Denys,  qui  demeure  depuis  long  terns  avec  son  oncle,) 
si  j’etois  moins  vieux  et  que  je  digerasse,  il  faudroit  Taller  voir  jouer  ;  mais  n’aurions 
nous  pas  aussi  quel  que  franc  cap  ucin  pour  nous  donner  le  role  du  Fr&re  Laurent? 
Je  fis  de  mon  mieux  pour  la  reputation  du  bon  Havard;  mais,  entre  nous  soit  dit, 
sa  cause  n’^toit  pas  ais£e. 

J’ai  fait  ressouvenir  auiourd’huy  meme  ce  grand  homme  du  trait  sublime  de 
Macduff— 

“  He  has  no  children 

de  la  sc£ne  entre  le  jeune  Arthur  et  son  gouverneur  Hubert :  et  de  bien  d’autres 
beaut^s  de  Tinimitable  Shakspeare.  Jene  doute  presque  pas  queje  neTamenasse  a  ma 
fatzon  de  penser  a  ce  sujet,  si  j’aAmis  le  terns  de  faire  a  Geneve  un  sejour  plus  long,  mais 
je  quitte  le  dieu  de  notre  litterature  apr^s-demain,  et  je  reviens  a  Paris  sans  voir  ni  Tou¬ 
lon,  ni  Marseille,  ni  Avignon,  connne  j’en  avois  d’abord  quelque  envie.  Adressez-moi 
votre  reponse  a  mon  domicile  ordinaire ;  et  connne  je  m’arrete  huit  ou  dix  jours  a  Briare 
sur  Loire,  faites,  je  vous  prie,  assez  de  diligence,  pour  que  je  la  trouve  a  mon  arrivee. 

Je  n’avois  pas  encore  re^u  a  mon  depart  de  Paris  les  Poems  by  Eminent  Ladies, 
que  at>us  m’a\'ez  annonc^s.  Je  me  flatte  de  les  trouver  chez-moi  a  mon  retour,  aA^ec 
les  autres  livres  queje  A’ous  demande,  accompagnes  de  la  note  de  A’os  debourses,  que 
je  prierai  Mr.  Xoverre  d’acquitter  sur  le  champ.  Il  me  faut  aussi,  mon  tres-cher, 
(songez  a  quoi  Amtre  g^nerosite  A'ous  engage,)  un  recueil  precis  de  atos  reflexions,  1°. 
sur  la  naissance  de  ATotre  poesie,  sur  l’£tat  de  A’otre  langue  au  terns  de  Chaucer,  et  de 
ses  pred^cesseurs,  et  2°.  sur  le  changement  qui  a  pu  se  faire  vers  la  Reine  Elizabeth, 
et  sur  les  variations  de  ATotre  harmonie  jusqu’au  regne  de  Charles  II.,  premier  et 
second  sujet  des  deux  dissertations  qui  doivent  prec6der  dans  mon  ouvrage  le  premier 
et  le  second  age  contenus  dans  le  premier  volume,  si  A’ous  daignez  A’ous  rapeller  mon 
plan.  Il  s’agit  de  faire  un  ouvrage  solide,  utile,  refLclii,  sans  prejug^s,  sans  sotises 
litteraires.  Puis-je  aspirer  a  une  gloire  plus  desirable  ?  c’est  a  vous,  a  vos  sages  avis 
queje  la  devrai,  mon  illustre  ami ;  et  si  le  livre  a  le  succ£s  dont  je  me  flatte,  cette 
gloire  retombera  sur  vous  parmi  les  bons  esprits  de  ma  nation,  puisque  je  compte 
bien  en  tirer  vanitd,  et  n^me  en  faire  un  aA'eu  tr£s  authentique  a  la  t6te  de  Touvrage.* 

*  To  us,  who  know  how  very  imperfect  or  doubtful  the  researches  even  of  Tyrwhitt,  Warton,  and  others 
have  been  into  our  ancient  Poetry,  with  the  Museum,  the  Bodleian,  and  at  least  a  score  of  other  repositories  to 
assist  them, — there  seems  something  highly  characteristic  in  the  airy  aspiration  of  this  highly-gifted  French¬ 
man,  who,  under  the  auspices  of  the  great  actor ,  has  no  doubt  of  producing  a  work  solid,  useful,  critical,  and 
unprejudiced,  on  a  subject  which  he  was  to  study  too,  while  he  wras  composing  his  very  dissertations!  —  Ed. 

VOL.  II.  3  G 


410 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Je  souhaite  ;\  Mr.  Noverre  line  pleine  r^ussite  vis-a-vis  de  vos  galcries,  et  cela, 
pour  l’ami  de  lui-m6me,  car  il  me  paroit  (entre  nous  soit  dit)  assez  tristement,  je 
dirois  presque  assez  risiblement  outr6  contre  le  public  de  Paris.  On  lie  lui  a  pas 
donn6  grand  nombre  d’Ecoliers,  sa  haute  reputation  n’a  point  fait  acheter  de  ses 
liqueurs  (qui  diable  iroit  imaginer  qu’un  supot  de  la  danse  fut  en  inline  terns  distilla- 
teur  ?)  voih\  ses  griefs  affreux,  et  les  causes  vraiment  tragiques  d’une  sc&ne  de  jurons, 
d’imprccations,  de  fureurs  dans  le  gout  de  celles  d’Oreste,  ou  de  votre  bon  Hoy 
Lear,  qui  fut  Lime  d’un  diner  dont  il  me  pria  trois  jours  avant  de  quitter  la  France. 
Je  vous  avoue,  mon  clier  ami,  que  cette  sc&ne  m’a  trop  fait  redouter  son  caractere 
ardent,  pour  qu’il  puisse  convenir  a  mon  6tat,  il  mon  humeur,  a  tout  ce  que  je  me 
dois,  de  former  jamais  avec  lui  aucune  sorte  d’intimit6.  Je  vous  en  avertis  d’avance, 
parcequ’a  dire  le  vrai,  j’en  ai  re9u  bien  des  politesses  a  votre  intention,  et  que  dans 
la  triste  n£cessit£  ou  je  me  vois  d’y  r^pondre  il  l’avenir  assez  froidement,  je  suis  bien 
aise  que  vous  sacbiez  ici  mes  v^ritables  raisons.  On  ne  peut  me  soup^onner  de  vou- 
loir  le  desservir  aupres  de  vous,  puisque  ce  jeune  homme  vous  est  utile  pour  le  g^nie, 
l’invention,  le  dessein,  en  un  mot,  tout  ce  qui  regarde  la  danse ;  quality  qu’il  possede, 
dit-on,  dans  un  degr6  tres-^minent ;  et  qu’il  ne  s’agit  dans  mes  reproches  que  d’un 
manque  de  savoir  vivre.  Un  autre  article  qui  m’a  fait  peine,  c’est  qu’ils  ayent  rem- 
pli  la  tete  de  votre  aimable  Miss  Pritchard  de  cent  petits  pr6jug£s  qui  sont  naturels 
au  mari  et  a  la  femme,  au  sujet  de  bien  des  choses  et  surtout  de  nos  com^diens. 
Vous  ignorez  peut-etre  que  Madame  Noverre  s’est  presentee  pour  etre  reni£,  et  a  ete 
refus^e  apres  quelques  semaines  d'essay.  L’aigreur  qu’elle  en  a  con^ue  contre  plu- 
sieurs  de  la  troupe,  me  paroit  fort  injuste.  Il  falloit  plaire  au  public,  et  c’est  a  quoi 
elle  n’a  pu  parvenir,  faute  de  talens  pour  la  scene,  de  danseur  ;  la  gentillesse,  1’affa- 
bilit6,  tout  cela  rend  une  personne  aimable  dans  le  particular,  mais  au  theatre  cela  ne 
sufit  pas.  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  quoiqu’en  dise  Madame  Noverre,  est  de  tous  points 
la  plus  etonnante  actrice  que  l’on  ait  vu  depuis  notre  fameuse  Le  Couvreur,  et  je  suis 
aussi  certain  qu’elle  vaut  pour  le  moins  Madame  Cibber  et  meme  Madame  Pritchard, 
que  je  suis  sur  (compliment  a  part)  qu’il  nous  manque  un  Garrick. — Adieu,  mon  cher 
ami ;  je  vous  embrasse  avec  la  plus  sincere  cordialite :  assurez,  je  vous  suplie, 
Madame  Garrick  de  mes  respects  tr^s- humbles.  Je  me  flatte  qu’aux  premiers  jours 
d’Avril  vous  me  verrez  a  Londres.  Quelle  joye  !  quel  charme  pour  mon  amiti6  !  Je 
vous  destine  un  present  qui  a  coup  sur  vous  sera  precieux.  C’est  la  divine  Pucelle 
de  notre  Voltaire,  ouvrage  imit6  d’Arioste,  poeme  unique,  6tonnant,  et  le  s6jour  des 
graces,  de  la  plaisanterie,  de  l’urbanite,  que  de  s6v£res  defFenses  de  la  part  du  gou- 
vernement  emp&chent  d’imprimer,  attendu  que  les  moines,  les  saints,  et  autres 
canailles,  y  sont  trails  trfes-cavalierement. 

Bon  soil-  encore  une  fois,  mon  digne  et  cher  ami. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


411 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  28  Novembre,  1755. 

A  mon  arrivee  cle  Geneve,  mon  cher  et  digne  ami,  je  trouve  sur  men  bureau 
deux  de  vos  lettres  qui  me  sont  parvenues  durant  mon  absence:  l’une  est  dat6  du 
28  Septembre,  renferm^e  dans  le  paquet  des  Poems  by  Ladies ;  l’autre  du  16  Oc- 
tobre,  contenant  l’instruction  du  Docteur  Birch.  Je  m’etois  flatt6  d’avoir  aussi  une 
r6ponse  a  ma  lettre  de  Geneve ;  mais  vos  occupations  vous  en  auront,  sans  doute, 
empeche.  Je  vous  remercie  mille  et  mille  fois  du  livre  que  vous  m'avez  fait  tenir. 
Je  ne  trouve  point  de  plus  sure  voye  pour  vous  en  faire  remettre  le  debourse,  que 
d’^crire  a  Mr.  Noverre.  Je  le  prie  dans  cette  incluse  d’acquitter  cette  petite  dette, 
et  toutes  celles  que  je  pourrai  contracter  avec  vous  pour  de  pareils  services.  Je  le 
rembourserai  lui-meme  soit  a  Paris  a  son  retour,  soit  a  Londres,  si  vos  diantres 
d’armateurs  laissent  la  mer  libre  au  printems  prochain.  So  much  for  this  matter. 

Je  m’en  tiens  de  bon  eoeur  a  ce  que  vous  me  dites  sur  Chaucer.  J’aurois  et£  bien 
aise  de  l’avoir  in  12mo,  ou  tout  au  plus  in  8vo ;  un  in  4to,  a  plus  forte  raison  un  in 
folio,  ne  seroit  nullement  de  mon  gout. 

Je  pense  comme  vous  sur  l’^pitre  de  Mr.  de  Voltaire  ;  il  y  a  de  tr&s-beaux  vers, 
mais  beaucoup  moins  de  feu  que  dans  ses  premieres  productions.  Pour  ce  qui  est  de 
la  Pucelle,  e’est,  j’ose  le  dire,  un  ouvrage  inimitable.  Ce  n’est  ni  l' Orlando  Furioso, 
ni  le  Hudibras,  e’est  une  pi£ce  d’un  ton  inconnu  jusqu'ici,  d’un  style  qui  n’apartient 
qu’a  Voltaire,  le  maitre  de  tous  nos  genres,  de  tous  nos  styles,  de  toutes  nos  har¬ 
monies.  Je  vais  en  faire  tirer  une  copie  sur  la  mienne  qui  me  vient  de  Madame  la 
Duchesse  de  Luxembourg,  et  que  l’auteur  lui-meme  m’a  assure  £tre  tr£s-fidelle. 
Vous  la  recevrez,  mon  tr&s-cher  ami,  comme  un  des  pr^sens  les  plus  chers,  et  les  plus 
pr6cieux  que  je  puisse  vous  faire  dans  ma  fac^on  de  penser  :  je  reconnoitrai  par-la  en 
quelque  chose  les  politesses  dont  vous  me  comblez,  et  les  peines  que  vous  voulez 
bien  prendre  pour  ma  petite  biblioth^que.  Ce  sera,  je  m’en  flatte,  un  veritable  cadeau 
pour  les  gens  de  lettres  qui  composent  votre  soci£t6,  et  que  j’espere  connoitre  un  jour. 
INIille  et  mille  remerciemens  a  Mr.  Pritchard.  Je  l’exhorte  a  conserver  sa  grosseur  et 
l’amitie  qu’il  me  temoignoit  a  Paris.  Je  souhaiterois  de  tout  mon  coeur  qu’on  prit 
des  commissaires  de  sa  taille  pour  regler  nos  differents.  Sa  stature,  a  ce  que  j ’imagine, 
le  rendroit  ami  de  la  paix,  mere  du  Bepos.  Cela  vaudroit  bien  mieux  que  vos  grands 
61ances  de  matelots  qui  ne  demandent  que  la  guerre  et  des  courses. 

J’ai  fait  part  a  Mr.  Freron  de  vos  sentiments  flatteurs  a  son  egard.  Je  ne  doute 
pas  qu’il  ne  vous  fasse  bientot  ses  remerciemens,  et  qu’il  ne  se  mette  a  portae  de 
meriter  de  plus  en  plus  votre  estime  par  une  £tude  plus  refFchie  de  vos  auteurs,  et 
moins  de  t6merite  dans  ses  decisions.  Je  ne  l’ai  point  encore  vu  depuis  mon  arrivee. 
.T’irai  lui  parler  demain  un  peu  de  lui,  tr&s-peu  de  Voltaire,  et  beaucoup  de  mon  cher 
Garrick.  Ce  sera,  je  pense,  dans  le  journal  prochain  (de  Dccembre)  qu’il  ins^rera  mon 

3  g  2 


412 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


article  sur  le  Shakspeare  illustrated  de  la  Lennox.  Rorsque  vous  l’anrez  lu,  vous  me 
direz  de  gn\ce,  ce  que  vous  pensez  des  attaques  que  je  lui  livre,  quoiqu’a  dire  vrai, 

- “  Nullum  memorabile  nomen 

Feminei  in  poen;i  est,  nec  habet  victoria  laudem.” 

Je  viens  maintenant,  mon  cher  Garrick,  a  l'article  qui  me  tient  le  plus  a  cceur, 
l’ouvrage  que  je  projet  te.  J’avois  compt6  que  le  premier  volume  seroit  mon  occupa- 
tion  favorite  cet  hyver,  mais  j’y  vois  tant  de  difficulty,  qu’avec  tout  le  courage  pos¬ 
sible,  pen  s’en  faut  que  je  ne  recule.  Ce  n’est  pas  dans  le  plus  ou  moins  d’etendue 
que  gisent  ces  difficulty.  Mon  intention  a  toujours  £t£  de  ne  parler  que  des  poetes 
connus,  lus,  estimes  jusqu’il  un  certain  point,  et  de  mettre  a  part  la  populace.  Au- 
trement,  je  n’aurois  qu’a  prendre  tout  uniment  les  vies  rassemblees  par  Cibber,  et 
traduire  sans  clioix,  sans  ordre,  &c.,  chose  dont  je  suis  si  dloign£,  que  e’est  pr6cis6ment 
pour  empecher  les  autres  de  faire  un  si  mauvais  ouvrage  que  je  me  suis  d£termin6  a 
en  faire  un  dissert^,  reflechi,  digne  de  nos  deux  nations.  D’ailleurs,  mon  tr&s-cher, 
vous  savez  ce  que  vous  m’avez  promis.  Ce  seroit  i\  vous  a  trier,  pour  ainsi  dire,  les 
poetes  qui  composeroient  chaque  age,  (vous  vous  souvenez  toujours  de  ma  distribu¬ 
tion,)  et  je  ne  travaillerois  qu’a  la  vie  de  ceux  que  vous  m’auriez  vous-meme  indi- 
ques.  Toute  la  difficulty  consiste  dans  le  nombre  et  dans  la  grosseur  des  livres  qu’il 
me  faut  consulter,  puisqu'il  m’est  impossible  de  m’en  tenir  au  m^chant  recueil  du 
pauvre  Cibber.  Si  pourtant  vous  veniez  a  croire  que  ce  recueil  tel  que  joint  aux 
collections  de  Langbaine  et  de  Jacob  put  me  sufire,  mandez-le  moi,  et  j’en  serai  ravi, 
car  je  brule  de  commencer  un  ouvrage  qui  nous  manque,  qui  seroit  tr&s-utile,  et  qui 
d&s  lors  me  feroit  beaucoup  d’honneur.  Si  au  contraire  vous  croyez  la  liste  de  Mr. 
Birch  et  les  livres  qu’il  y  enonce  absolument  necessaires,  je  prendrai  en  enrageant  le 
parti  d’attendre  au  printems,  saison  dans  laquelle  ma  sante  et  lues  affaires  me  permet- 
tront  peut-etre  d’aller  rassembler  a  Londres  dans  votre  soci^te  les  materiaux  entiers 
de  l’edifice.  Remerciez  pour  moi,  mon  tr&s-cher  ami,  le  Docteur  Birch,  ainsi  que  les 
autres  messieurs  qui  veulent  bien  s’interesser  a  mon  projet,  et  me  preter  leurs  lu- 
mieres.  J’attens  votre  rdponse  avant  de  tracer  ma  premiere  ligne.  Ma  preface  est 
toute  diger^e.  Je  consentirois  encore  a  faire  venir  de  chez-vous  les  in  12mo.,  men- 
tionnes  par  Air.  le  Secretaire  de  votre  Societe  Royale.  Pour  ce  qui  est  des  in  fol°. 
ce  sont  des  monuments  inebranlables  qu’il  faut  consulter  sur  les  lieux.  Souvenez- 
vous,  mon  bon  ami,  qu’au  cas  que  vous  m’exhortiez  a  commencer  l’ouvrage,  il  me 
faut  absolument  des  remarques  de  votre  main  sur  le  premier  age  de  votre  poesie,  sur 
l’etat  oil  votre  langue  se  trouvoit  alors,  sur  le  ton,  le  gout  qui  regnoit  dans  les  lettres 
encore  barbares,  &c.  avec  une  note  exacte  des  poetes  que  vous  choisirez  comme  les 
principaux  de  ce  premier  age  (depuis  Chaucer,  ou  le  premier  poete  quelqu’il  soit,  si 
vous  etes  Pr^chaucerite,  jusqu’ii  la  lieine  Elizabeth.) — Adieu,  mon  tres-cher  ami.  Je 
suis  si  accable  de  visites,  d  affaires,  de  tracasseries  ^  mon  arriv^e,  que  je  ne  sais  trop  ce 
que  je  vous  6cris.  X  importe :  je  profiterai  toujours  avec  joye  de  la  permission  etablie 
entre  nous  de  paroitre,  l’un  devant  l’autre,  avec  nos  pantoufles  et  nos  robes-de-chambre. 
— Adieu,  encore  une  fois  !  Redoublez  vos  voeux  pour  la  paix  :  Aurea  Pax!  au t re¬ 
men  t,  je  prevois  les  malheurs  qui  vont  couper  court  a  notre  correspondance.  Je  sens 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


413 


pourtant  combien  elle  m’est  n^cessaire,  par  le  chagrin  cruel  que  me  causent  mes  seules 
inquietudes.  Payer  des  impdts  tres-pesants,  et  ne  point  voir  mon  cher  Garrick,  ce 
seroit  pour  moi  le  sort  du  monde  le  plus  triste.  Mes  respects  a  Madame  Garrick,  et 
mes  tr^s-humbles  compliments,  je  vous  prie,  a  Mr.  et  a  Mademoiselle  Pritchard.  J’y 
joindrois  Madame  Pritchard,  si  j’avois  le  bonheur  de  la  connoltre,  comme  j’ai  eu  celui 
de  l’admirer.  “  L’Orphelin,”  repris  avec  un  succ£s  des  plus  brillants,  est  interrompu 
de  nouveau  par  un  accident  survenu  a  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  l'hdroine  de  notre 
scene. — Je  suis,  avec  un  parfait  d^vouement,  mon  cher  et  illustre  ami, 

Vrotre  tr^s-humble  et  tres-ob6issant  serviteur,  Patu. 

P.  S.  Apropos  de  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  I  hope,  my  dear  friend,  that  your  friend¬ 
ship  and  good  sense  kept  you  from  showing  my  last  letter  to  Mr.  Noverre,  as  I  am 
not  to  forget  this  gentleman’s  politeness  :  the  severe,  though  unfeigned  description 
of  his  temper  is  a  thing  I  would  by  no  means  have  him  acquainted  with. 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  9  Decembre,  1755. 

O  mon  ami,  mon  cher  et  digne  ami,  quelles  nouvelles  viens-je  d’aprendre,  et  que 
mon  coeur  en  est  p^netre  !  Je  commencois  a  etre  un  pen  surpris  de  votre  long  silence, 
mais  je  n’en  vois  que  trop  les  fatales  raisons.  Je  me  hate  de  prendre  la  plume  pour 
vous  marquer  combien  je  suis  sensible  a  votre  situation.  J’aurois  attendu  plus 
d’egards  pour  un  homme  qu’on  regarde  a  si  juste  titre  comme  les  delices  du  theatre, 
du  moindre  portefaix  de  la  cite.  II  eut  ete  bien  naturel  que  votre  populace,  cette 
populace  dont  la  haine  nous  fait  rire,  eut  sacrifie  ses  cris  ridicules  de  tolle,  crucifige, 
aux  obligations  qu’elle  vous  a.  Voila  le  peuple,  quelqu’il  soit :  ingrat,  insensible, 
aveugle  dans  sa  coltTe.  La  ferocite  la  plus  indomptable  ach&ve  le  portrait  du  votre. 
Je  suis  bien  aise  pour  votre  nation,  et  fach£  pour  la  notre,  que  votre  noblesse  ait 
marqutj  tant  de  z£le  pour  vous  defendre.  Je  souhaiterois,  en  bon  Francois,  qu’ils  se 
fussent  tous  conduits  a  l’instar  de  la  canaille  :  la  sotise  eut  £te  gen6rale,  et  l’Europe 
entiere  pouroit  attribuer  a  tous  les  Anglois  un  ridicule  qui  de  fait  n’appartient  qu’a 
votre  plus  vile  populace.  Voila  ce  qu’on  distingue  a  Paris,  oil  la  justice  et  la  civilite 
sont  autant  en  vogue  qu’un  mepris  absolu  pour  les  tthnoignages  impuissants  d’une  haine 
si  risible. — Adieu,  mon  cher  ami :  je  suis  d£sol6  de  tout  ceci ;  un  peu  pour  l’amour 
du  pauvre  Mr.  Noverre,  qui  va,  sans  doute,  revenir  : 

“  Hostibus  infensis 
Nec  non  infensus  amicis 

mais  bien  davantage  pour  mon  tr&s-cher  Garrick.  J’ai  eu  les  larmes  aux  yeux  a  la 
lecture  d’une  relation  cruelle  envoyee  de  Londres.  Quoi  !  ni  votre  theatre,  ni  vdtre 
maison,  ni  votre  associ£,  ni  vous,  rien  n’a  et6  epargne !  O  peuple,  peuple ; 

“  He  that  will  give  good  words  to  thee,  will  flatter 
Beneath  abhorring 


*  Coriolanus. — Ed. 


414 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


et  le  reste  de  la  tirade.  .Fattens  de  vous  une  description  exaete  de  ce  ddastre,  lorsque 
vous  serez  rendu  vous-meme.  .T’esp&re  que  vdtre  zele  pour  ceux  que  vous  nommiez 
avec  taut  de  raison  your  French  adventurers,  ne  vous  fera  qu’un  tort  tr£s-passager,  et 
que  votre  Mob  vous  rendra  justice  lorsqu’il  aura  cuv6  son  punch,  sa  forte  bi£re,  et 
sa  haine  dont  il  nous  honore.  Mes  respects  a  Madame  Garrick,  que  ces  circonstances 
fachcuses  ont  du  bien  affliger.  Je  suis,  jusqu’a  la  mort, 

Mon  cher  ami,  votre  tres-tendre  et  tr&s-d£vou6  serviteur, 

Patu. 

P.  S.  A  propos,  aprenez,  je  vous  prie,  dans  quelque  prologue  a  ces  terribles  en- 
nemis  de  notre  pauvre  France,  qu’une  lotterie  de  trente  millions,  pour  leur  faire  malgre 
nous  cette  guerre  quits  exigent,  vient  d’etre  remplie  en  trois  jours,  (trente  millions  en 
trois  jours!)  et  qu’on  en  va  cr£er  une  nouvelle.  Cela  poura  leur  faire  voir  qu’on 
aboye  peu  chez-nous,  mais  qu’on  est  pret  a  mordre. 

Hatez-vous  de  m’envoyer  un  mot,  un  seul  mot,  pour  me  tirer  d’inquidude. 


DE  M.  FRERON  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  12  Janvier,  1756. 

Je  ne  puis.  Monsieur,  vous  exprimer  l’obligation  que  j’ai  a  Mr.  Patu  de  m’avoir 
procure  votre  connoissance.  Rien  n’est  plus  flatteur  pour  moi  que  d’avoir  quelque 
liaison  avec  les  gens  c61£bres  en  quelque  genre  de  talens  que  ce  soit ;  jugez  combien 
me  doit  etre  chere  celle  d’un  homme  qui  comme  vous,  Monsieur,  avez  acquis  une  si 
grande  reputation  a  tant  de  titres,  et  qui,  comme  notre  Moli&re,  rdmissez  si  sup6ri- 
eurement  le  genie  de  l’auteur  et  l’intelligence  de  l’acteur.  Je  suis  enchant^,  Mon¬ 
sieur,  que  vous  me  rendiez  le  service  d’entrer  avec  moi  en  un  petit  commerce  de 
lettres.  Je  vous  le  demande.  Monsieur,  et  pour  le  bien  de  ma  patrie,  et  pour  l’hon- 
neur  de  la  votre,  et  pour  votre  gloire  particulidre,  si  cependant  mes  foibles  doges 
pouvoient  y  ajouter  quelque  chose  ;  je  n’ai  pas  la  vanite  de  le  croire.  Ainsi  neprends 
pas  garde  a  ce  que  je  viens  de  dire,  et  soyez  seulement  persuade  de  moil  zde,  de  mon 
admiration  pour  vous,  et  de  l’extreme  envie  que  j’ai  de  vous  en  donner  des  preuves 
en  toute  occasion.  En  void  une  qui  se  prdente,  et  j’en  profite  pour  vous  envoy er 
les  journaux  Strangers  qui  vous  manquent.  Mr.  Xoverre  a  du  vous  remettre  ceux 
de  Septembre  et  d’Octobre.  Je  n’ai  commence  qu'au  mois  de  Septembre.  Vous 
recevrez  ceux  de  Xovembre  et  les  deux  de  Ddembre  que  je  vous  adresse.  Je  souhaite 
que  vous  en  soyez  content.  Je  ne  demande  pas  mieux  que  de  satisfaire  les  differentes 
nations,  et  surtout  la  votre,  dont  les  ouvrages  de  literature  entrent  dans  le  plan  de  ce 
journal.  Mais  je  ne  puis  rien  faire  que  d’apres  mes  corrdpondans ;  et  l’essentiel  est 
que  j’en  aye  de  bons.  J’en  avois  un  a  Londres  si  detestable  que  j'ai  £t£  oblige  de  le 
remercier  :  il  avoit  et6  plac6  la  par  mon  pr£d6cesseur,  M.  l’Abbe  Provost,  et  je  ne 
s^ai  comment  il  pouvoit  faire  pour  s’en  accommoder.  Il  ne  m’envoyoit  que  des  ex¬ 
traits  de  livres  theologiques  et  de  pi6t^  :  ce  n’est  pas  assurdnent  ce  qu’on  s’attend  a 
recevoir  d’Angleterre.  J’avois  pri£  Mr.  Xoverre  de  me  chercher  un  autre  corrd 
spondant,  d^s  qu’il  seroit  a  Londres.  Il  vient  de  m’^crire  que  Mr.  Macmahon  veut 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


415 


bien  se  charger  de  cet  emploi.  J’en  suis  fort  aise  et  je  m’en  felicite  d’avance ;  on 
m’a  dit  que  c’etoit  un  homme  d'esprit,  et  qui  connoissoit  bien  la  literature  Angloise. 
Mr.  Noverre  me  marque  en  meme  temps  que  vous  avez  la  bonte  de  fournir  quelque- 
fois  a  Mr.  Macmalion  des  articles  concernant  votre  theatre  ;  avec  ce  secours.  Mon¬ 
sieur,  je  suis  bien  sur  de  procurer  a  mon  journal  un  merite  qu’il  n’a  point  eu  jusqu’ici. 
Je  vous  serai  infiniment  oblige.  Monsieur,  de  dire  a  INIr.  Macmahon  de  ne  m’envoyer 
que  des  choses  piquantes  qui  puissent  faire  honneur  a  l’Angleterre  et  plaisir  a  la 
France.  Je  vous  renouvelle  mes  sincferes  remerciemens  de  toutes  vos  bont^s,  et  vous 
assure,  Monsieur,  que  je  serai  toute  ma  vie,  avec  la  plus  haute  estime  et  l’attachement 
le  plus  inviolable,  Votre  tr&s-humble  et  trfes-obeissant  serviteur, 

Freron. 

Si  vous  voulez,  Monsieur,  me  faire  le  plaisir  de  m’envoyer  quelquefois  soit  des 
articles  de  votre  fa^on,  soit  des  reflexions  sur  quelques  ouvrages  Anglois,  soit  meme 
quelques  critiques  des  mauvais  auteurs  de  votre  nation,  soyez  sur  que  je  vous  gar- 
derai  le  secret  quand  vous  me  le  demanderez,  et  que  je  vous  nommerai  dans  mon 
journal  quand  vous  me  le  permettrez.  Pour  me  faire  parvenir  promptement  et  sans 
frais  tout  ce  que  vous  me  ferez  l’honneur  de  m’envoyer,  vous  pourez  vous  servir  de 
l’adresse  que  j’envoye  a  Air.  Macmahon  dans  la  lettre  que  je  lui  6cris,  et  que  je  vous 
prie  de  lui  faire  remettre.  J’ecris  aussi  a  Air.  Noverre :  je  vous  serai  bien  oblige  de 
lui  faire  tenir  ma  lettre. 

“  A  Monsieur  Monsieur  Garrick,  Directeur  de  la  Comedie  h  Londres.” 

Endorsed  by  Mr.  Garrick  : 

“Mr.  Freron’s  letter  to  me,  and  the  accounts  of  the 
different  French  Journals.  To  be  kept.” 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 


A  Paris,  ce  23  Janvier,  1756. 

Ma  sant6,  mon  tres-cher  ami,  quelques  affaires  de  famille,  et  plus  que  tout  le  reste, 
l’ennuyeux  c£r£monial  de  nos  commencements  d’ann^es,  m’ont  empeche  de  r^pondre 
aussitot  que  je  l’aurois  voulu  a  votre  d emigre  du  11  Decembre.  Je  b^nirois  pourtant 
la  coutume,  toute  fatiguante  qu’elle  est,  si  je  n’etois  contraint  d’assurer  de  mes  voeux 
que  les  personnes  pour  qui  j’en  forme  aussi  sincerement  que  pour  vous.  Depuis 
l’heureux  jour  oil  j’ai  comm  mon  cher  Garrick,  son  amiti6  m’a  toujours  paru  tres- 
pr^cieuse  ;  mais  je  sens  mieux  que  jamais  combien  elle  m’est  n^cessaire,  depuis  que  je 
vois  la  discorde  prete  a  troubler  notre  correspondance.  Je  d^sesp^re  que  la  paix 
puisse  se  r^tablir  entre  nos  deux  nations,  apr&s  la  reponse  que  le  Roy  d'Angleterre 
vient  de  donner  a  notre  requisition,  et  je  prevois  avec  toute  l’Europe  la  guerre  la  plus 
vive  et  la  plus  sanglante.  N’est-ce  done  point  assez  que  les  elements  semblent  con- 
pires  pour  detruire  la  race  humaine,  et  faut-il  encore  qu’une  malheureuse  politique 
les  porte  les  uns  les  autres  k  se  dechirer  de  leurs  propres  mains!  malheur  a  ceux  qui 
fomentent  ces  divisions,  de  quelque  pays  qu’ils  soient !  malheur  a  ceux  dont  les 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


416 

conseils,  l’ambition,  et  la  fureur  troublent  cette  paix  tranquille  qui,  depuis  si  pen 
d'annees, 

“  In  our  country’s  cradle 
Draws  the  sweet  infant  breath  of  gentle  sleep  !”* 

Ce  tjni  me  d&sole,  mon  ami,  c’est  l’impossibilit^  oil  je  vais  etre,  d’entreprendre  l'ou- 
vrage  qui  me  tient  a  coeur.  Vous  savez  ce  que  je  veux  dire:  vos  reflexions  me 
paroissent  de  la  derniere  justesse,  et  je  sens  ti  merveille  que  ce  n  est  qu’a  Londres, 
sous  vos  yeux,  sous  ceux  des  gens  de  lettres  dont  vous  me  procureriez  la  connois- 
sance,  que  je  pourais  assembler  les  matiriaux  absolument  necessaires  a  la  construction 
de  cet  Edifice.  Aussi  malgr£  mes  occupations  actuelles,  malgr6  une  charge  que  je 
poursuis,  malgr6  la  d<Jicatesse  de  ma  poitrine,  j'avois  r^solu  d’aller  en  Avril  passer  un 
mois  dans  votre  capitale:  un  mois  sans  plus,  mais  que  ce  mois  m’eut  £t£  cher,  qu’il 
m’eut  sembl£  court !  Que  1’emploi  en  auroit  et6  delicieux  !  Je  vous  aurois  revu, 
mon  digue  ami,  je  vous  aurois  embrass£,  suivi,  applaudi !  j’aurois  admire  encore  les 
talens  universels  du  premier  acteur  de  l’Europe,  depuis  Richard  III.  jusqu’a  Abel 
Drugger.  En  un  mot,  j’eusse  £te  avec  mon  ami.  II  n"y  faut  plus  penser,  puisque 
tout  s’y  oppose.  Du  moins,  si  la  haine  pubiique  tarde  un  peu  a  ^clore  dans  toute  sa 
rage,  menagez-moi  ces  instants.  Ecrivez-moi,  et  surtout  n’oubliez  pas  combien  je 
vous  suis  attach^.  Apr£s  cet  epanchement  d’un  coeur  tr£s-afflig6,  je  viens  a  votre 
lettre,  ou  plutot  a  quelques  articles  de  votre  lettre.  Je  suis  ravi  que  vous  ayez  la 
Pucelle,  quoique  je  1’eusse  ete  bien  davantage  qu’elle  vous  fut  venue  de  ma  main. 
Votre  premier  jugement,  permettez-moi  de  vous  le  dire,  m  a  paru  un  peu  precipit^. 
Vous  porterez  sur  l’ouvrage  des  graces  une  sentence  moins  am£re,  lorsque  vous  l’aurez 
lu  avec  plus  de  reflexion.  Les  impietes  sont  de  trop,  mais  je  ne  les  crois  pas  de  Mr. 
de  Voltaire,  au  moins  la  fameuse  tirade  il phit  enfin  au  maitre  du  tonnerre,  au  crcateur 
.  .  .  .  de  se  faire  homme,  etce  qui  pis  est  Juif.  Le  grand  homme  reclame  contre  : 

il  proteste,  affirme,  se  dechaine  :  ne  le  jugeons  que  d’apr&s  ce  qu’il  avoue  :  autrement, 
summum  jus  summa  injuria.  Mr.  Bouquet  m’a  remis  vos  deux  vols.  du  Poetical 
Register,  un  peu  tard  a  la  verite,  mais  n’importe.  Au  nom  de  Dieu,  mon  ami,  re- 
prenez  vos  d^bourses  de  Mr.  Noverre,  a  qui  je  les  rendrai  a  Paris.  A  propos,  reste- 
t’-il  ?  revient-il  ?  ni  lui,  ni  iMadame,  ni  Baletti,  personne  ne  m’ecrit,  cela  est  affreux  : 
au  reste,  j’ai  tort  de  me  plaindre  de  ce  dernier,  puisqu’il  n’^crit  pas  meme  a  sa  respec¬ 
table  famille.  Sa  mere,  Madame  Sylvia,  est  une  des  plus  dignes  femmes  que  je 
connoisse  a  Paris.  Esprit,  graces,  noblesse,  talents,  bon  naturel,  voila  son  caractere. 
Il  en  est  de  meme  du  pere  et  du  frere  ain£ :  vous  serez  ravi  de  les  voir,  j’en  suis  sur, 
si  jamais  les  circonstances  vous  permettent  de  venir  en  France.  Ils  me  chargent  tous 
de  leurs  civilites  pour  vous,  et  vous  suplient  de  gronder  leur  cher  fils  sur  sa  paresse  a 
leur  egard  :  marquez-moi  en  quel  etat  est  sa  sant6  ;  ie  leur  ferai  moi-meme  un  vrai 
plaisir  de  leur  en  donner  des  nouvelles.  Est-il  vrai  que  le  ballet  Chinois  va  main- 

*  A  passage  in  Shakspeare’s  Richard  II.  which  proves  that  M.  Patu.  greatly  to  his  honour,  was  not  a 
mere  smatterer  in  the  acting  plays  of  the  Poet ;  but  a  diligent  reader  of  his  works  ;  and  selecting  his  beauties 
with  a  taste  truly  English.  I  may  here  remind  the  reader  of  his  attack  upon  the  prejudices  of  \  oltaire,  to 
whom  he  boldly  recited  the  impassioned  scenes  of  Romeo. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


417 


tenant  a  miracle,  et  que  les  memes  personnes  qui  s’doient  recrCes  contre,  le  de- 
mandent  a  tue-t6te?  Voilabien  des  questions,  et  des  plus  mal  arranges,  mais  j’ecris 
au  courant  de  la  plume.  Vous  vous  rapellez,  sans  doute,  la  permission  que  vous  m’avez 
accordee  de  paroitre  devant  vous  with  my  slippers  and  nightgown. — Adieu,  adieu, 
mon  inestimable  ami.  J’attens  de  vos  nouvelles  le  plutot  qu’il  vous  sera  possible  de 
m’en  envoyer.  Contentez  mon  impatience,  et  encore  une  fois  profitons  entre  nous 
des  moments  bien  courts  qui  nous  restent.  Maudite  guerre  !  maudites  divisions  ! 
Que  l’on  vivroit  heureux,  tranquilles,  unis,  si  l’on  nous  en  croyoit,  nous  autres  poetes, 
race  douce,  pacifique,  ennemie  du  sang  et  du  bruit  des  armes !  Que  je  jetterois  de 
bon  cceur  au  fond  de  La  Manche  vos  canons,  vos  bombes,  vos  mortiers  pde-mele  avec 
les  notres,  en  adressant  a  chacun  d’eux  ces  vers  que  le  bon  Arioste  met  dans  la  bouche 
de  Roland : 

“  O  maladetto,  o  abominoso  ordigno 
Che  fabbricato  nel  Tartareo  fondo 
Fosti  per  man  di  Belzebu  maligno, 

Che  ruinar  per  te  disegno  il  mondo ; 

All’  inferno,  onde  uscisti,  ti  rassigno  !”  &c. 

Je  vous  prie  de  presenter  mes  respects  tr&s-humbles  a  Madame  Garrick,  et  de  me 
croire  pour  la  vie  le  plus  tendre,  le  plus  sincere,  le  plus  passiomC  de  vos  serviteurs. 

F reron  vous  envoy e-t’-il  exactement,  comme  il  s’en  est  charge,  le  Journal  etr anger  ? 
Reponse  precise  sur  cet  article. 

Angleterre : 

“  To  Mr.  Garrick,  the  Manager  of  Drurydane’s  Play-house, 

Southampton- street,  London.” 


DE  M.  ROGER  A  M.  PATU. 

MONSIEUR,  Londres,  7  Fevrier,  1756. 

Je  vais  vous  faire  part  d’une  histoire  assez  singulide,  qui  vient  de  m’arriver  avec 
Mr.  Garrick,  a  votre  occasion.  Je  ne  S9ais  point  si  Mr.  Noverre  fils  vous  a  fait  voir, 
ainsi  que  je  l’en  avoit  prie,  une  traduction  prdendue,  d’un  discours  addresse  en  forme 
de  lettre  au  peuple  d’ Angleterre,  concernant  l’affaire  des  danseurs  Francois.  Ce  dis¬ 
cours,  c’est  moi  qui  l’ai  fait ;  et  quoique,  a  la  solicitation  du  libraire  Anglois,  il  ait 
d6  imprind  sous  le  nom  auguste  de  Voltaire,  il  ne  faut  pas  cependant  £tre  grand 
Grec  pour  s’appercevoir  qu’il  sort  d’une  jeune  facture.  Enfin,  le  livre  s’est  bien 
vendu,  et  plus  de  la  moiti6  des  lecteurs  ont  cru,  et  croyent  encore,  qu’il  est  de  Mr.  de 
Voltaire.  Void  ce  qu’en  dit,  entre  autre  chose,  le  January’s  Monthly  Review.  “  The 
Author,  by  comparing  the  conduct  of  our  ancestors,  endeavours  to  show  us  to  the 
world  in  a  despicable  light  .  .  .  If  it  be  not  wrote  by  Mr.  Voltaire,  it  is,  at 

least,  a  good  imitation  of  his  manner.”  Aprd  cela,  jugez  si  le  comrnun  des  lecteurs 
Anglois,  gens  de  pudding  et  de  bide,  ont  domC  dans  le  panneau.  Outre  cela,  un 
certain  Rousselet  comnddien,  ou  danseur  Francois,  s’est  meC  d’en  faire  une  critique, 
qui  est  imprinCe  et  publid.  Enfin,  ce  discours  a  excite  de  grandes  disputes  h  Cam- 

3  H 


VOL.  II. 


418 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


bridge,  raison  de  certaines  propositions  ^parses  de  cote  et  d’autre,  contre  le  commerce 
en  general.  Un  Esquire  du  pays  a  fond6  en  consequence  deux  prix  de  vingt  gui- 
nces  chacun  sur  la  Throne  du  Commerce.  On  en  a  mthne  d£ja  d^signe  le  sujet,  pour 
le  mois  de  Mai. 

Tout  cela  commen^oit  a  me  donner  de  bonnes  esp^rances.  Je  m’imaginois  que 
si  quelque  liomme  de  m£rite  en  connoissoit  l’auteur,  il  pourroit  luy  rendre  service. 
Je  me  fis  connoitre  d’abord  a  Mr.  Cleland,  je  lui  parlai  ensuite  de  mon  dessein.  II 
me  dit  que  je  pensois  a  merveilles  ;  et  que  je  n’avois  rien  de  mieux  a  faire,  que  d’aller 
voir  Mr.  Garrick ;  qu’il  me  le  conseilloit  en  ami ;  et  que  surement  ma  lettre  faisant 
son  61oge  d’une  manure  qui  n’a  rien  de  bas  ni  d’affect^,  il  en  seroit  reconnoissant. 
Tope :  j’y  donne  les  mains :  je  hazarderai.  Pour  donner  encore  plus  de  poids  a  ce 
qu’il  disoit,  Mr.  Cleland  ajouta,  “  Dites-lui  que  vous  connoissez  Mr.  Patu,  qu’il  vous 
a  6crit  de  l’aller  voir ;  que  c’est  lui  qui  vous  a  donne  ma  connoissance,”  &c.  Allons  : 
a  merveilles  :  je  parts,  et  je  vais  chez  INIr.  Garrick.  “  Your  most  humble  servant,  &c. 
Je  viens,  Mr.,  vous  faire  bien  des  compliments  de  la  part  de  Mr.  Patu,  et  je  suis  bien 
charme  de  trouver  cette  occasion,  pour  vous  presenter  mes  tres-humbles,”  &c.  “  Ah  ! 

je  vous  entends,  Mr.,”  me  dit  Mr.  G.,  “  vous  £tes  la  personne  qui  devez  avoir  une 
lettre  et  un  livre  pour  moi ;  vous  ne  faites  que  d’arriver  de  Paris?”  .  .  .  “  Non, 

Mr.,  je  suis  a.  Londres  depuisun  an ;  et  ce  n’est  que  depuis  peu  de  jours,  que  j’ai  re<^u 
une  lettre  de  Mr.  Patu.”  .  .  .  “  Et  comment  vous  appellez-vous,  Mr.  ?”  .  .  . 

“  Roger.”  .  .  .  “  Mais  j’ai  re^u  depuis  trois  jours  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Patu,  et  sure¬ 
ment  il  ne  me  dit  mot  a  votre  egard.”  .  .  .  “Mais  Mr.”  .  .  .  “  Je  n’ai  pas  le 

temps.”  .  .  .  Puis  il  s’enfuit ;  et  moi,  je  sorts  fort  modestement,  quoique  je  passasse 
alors  pour  un  hardi  avanturier.  Je  reviens  chez  Mr.  Cleland,  que  je  venois  de  quitter 
depuis  une  demie  heure ;  nous  rions  et  nous  lions.  Si  je  n’etois  pas  brouilE  avec 
Garrick,  me  dit  Cleland,  je  vous  aurois  bientot  fait  faire  connoissance  avec  lui ;  mais 
connne  il  me  croit  picqu6  contre  lui,  parce  qu’il  n’a  pas  joue  ma  trag^die,  je  le  laisse 
dans  ces  sentiments. 

Mais  moi,  bon  diable,  me  voici  cependant  avec  la  reputation  d’avanturier,  et  dans 
l’esprit  de  qui  ?  de  celui  aupr&s  duquel  je  passerois  le  moins  pour  i’etre,  si  j’eusse 
seulement  cause  un  quart  d’heure  avec  lui.  Enfin,  je  n’attends  ni  chaud,  ni  froid  de 
Mr.  Garrick;  mais  je  suis  choque  qu’il  me  prenne  pour  un  avanturier,  je  n’en  puis 
revenir.  Vous  pouvez  aisement  me  disculper  aupr£s  de  lui,  et  me  rendre  le  calme, 
en  lui  mandant  seulement  qu’il  est  vrai  que  vous  me  connoissez,  et  que  s'il  peut  me 
procurer  quelque  ecolier  ou  ecolicre,  pour  apprendre  la  langue  Fran^oise,  il  verra 
qu’il  n’aura  pas  rendu  service,  ni  a  un  ingrat,  ni  a  un  avanturier. 

Au  reste,  si  vous  ne  jugez  pas  apropos  de  le  faire,  ne  le  faites  pas  ;  si  vous  craignez 
que  cela  ne  vous  avilisse,  en  lui  parlant  de  moi,  n’en  parlez  pas.  Je  ne  me  ressou- 
viendrai  pas  moins  de  tous  les  services  que  vous  m’aurez  rendu,  et  je  n’en  serai  pas 
moins,  avec  une  respectueuse  reconnoissance, 

Votre  tr^s-humble  et  tr&s-obeissant  serviteur. 


Roger. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


419 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  13  Fevrier,  1756. 

Je  suis  desol6,  mon  tr&s-cher  Garrick,  de  n’avoir  aucune  de  vos  nouvelles  ;  mais 
j’aime  mieux  attribuer  mon  malheur  a  celui  du  terns,  a  la  grandeur  de  vos  occu¬ 
pations,  a  tout,  enfin,  qu’au  refroidissement  de  votre  coeur.  Cette  idee  me  seroit  trop 
cruelle :  je  la  rejette  pour  en  venir  en  hate  au  sujet  de  ces  lignes.  Le  ridicule  amuse 
quelquefois.  C’est  a  ce  titre  que  je  vous  renvoye  a  Londres  une  lettre  qui  vient  de 
me  parvenir  il  n’y  a  pas  deux  heures  par  une  voye  tr^s-bisarre.  Cette  lettre  vous 
expliquera  en  plein  les  raisons  folles  de  la  visite  que  le  Sieur  Roger  vous  a  faite  de  ma 
part,  sans  la  moindre  mission.  Vous  y  verrez  combien  ce  nouveau  Voltaire  est  de¬ 
sole  que  vous  l’ayez  pris  pour  un  avanturier,  et  que  tout  son  but  etoit  que  vous  pro- 
curassiez  du  pain  au  juge  de  l’Angleterre.  Commeje  le  connois  un  peu  depuis  que 
Fr^ron  me  l’adressa  a  Londres,  pour  lui  donner  un  caractere,  ce  sera  celui  d’un  simple 
d'esprit,  et  non  d’un  homme  4  mauvais  desseins.  Pour  ce  qui  est  de  Cleland,  il  faut 
qu’il  soit  devenu  fou  de  conseiller  aux  gens  d’aller  vous  voir  de  la  part  d’un  ami  de 
Paris  sans  montrer  la  lettre  qu’ils  pr6tendent  avoir  re^ue.  Je  vous  prie  done  d’ex- 
cuser  cette  sotise-ci  et  de  traiter  a  l’avenir  comme  vous  avez  fait  Roger,  quiconque 
prendra  mon  nom  vis-a-vis  de  vous  sans  preuve  par  6crit.  Vous  connoissez  mes 
principes,  et  vous  savez  que  je  ne  suis  pas  homme  a  abuser  de  votre  amitie.  Tout 
a  vous.  Patu. 

Angleterre  : 

“  To  Mr.  Garrick,  the  Manager  of  Drury-lane’s  play-house, 

Southampton-street,  London.” 


DE  M.  PATU  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Naples,  ce  15  Novemb.  1756. 

Si  vous  pouviez  concevoir,  mon  clier  et  illustre  ami,  combien  je  vous  suis  attache, 
en  depit  des  maudites  haines  qui  s^parent  nos  deux  nations,  combien  je  suis  inquiet 
sur  tout  ce  qui  vous  regarde,  et  quel  plaisir  j’aurois  de  converser  avec  vous,  a  coup 
sur  vous  n’auriez  pas  eu  la  cruaut6  de  laisser  dans  l’oubli  les  deux  lettres  que  je  vous 
ai  6crites  depuis  quelques  mois.  Peut-etre  au  reste  la  voye  de  Hollande,  trfes-longue 
et  tr&s-incertaine,  ne  vous  a-t’-elle  pas  permis  de  les  recevoir ;  en  ce  cas,  je  suis  plus  a 
plaindre  que  vous  n’etes  a  condamner ;  mais  pour  celle-ci,  je  suis  bien  convaincu 
qu’elle  vous  parviendra,  et  je  me  flatte  de  plus  que  vous  ne  me  ferez  pas  languir  apr£s 
la  reponse.  Je  vous  en  conjure  au  nom  de  notre  amitie  et  de  l’envie  extreme  que  j’ai 
de  savoir  au  plutot  des  nouvelles  de  mon  clier  Garrick,  cpielles  sont  ses  occupations 
actuelles,  ses  amusements,  ses  travaux  litt^raires,  &c.  <Nc. 

Mr.  Bedlam,  jeune  Anglois  avec  qui  j’ai  le  plaisir  de  demeurer,  se  charge  de  faire 
tenir  ma  missive  a  quelqu’un  de  sa  connoissance  a  Londres,  et  de  prier  la  personne 

3  h  2 


420 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


en  question  tie  vous  la  porter  ellc-mfime.  Adressez-moi  votre  reponse  4  Rome,  chez 
Mr.  le  Comte  tic  Stainville,  Ambassadeur  de  France,  et  t4chons  un  peu  de  nous 
arranger  pour  entretenir,  malgrd*  notre  sotte  guerre,  un  commerce  si  utile  et  si  agr^able 
pour  moi.  Si  Noverre  est  maintenant  avec  vous,  comme  il  £toit  r^solu  de  s’y  rendre, 
je  le  trouve  fort  heureux  de  vous  voir  et  de  joiiir  en  liberty  d’une  conversation  apres 
laquellc  je  soupire  infiniment.  Faites  lui  de  ma  part  mille  amities,  et  dites  lui  que  je 
lui  serai  tr4s-oblig6  s’il  vous  sert  tie  secretaire  lorsque  vos  affaires  ne  vous  permetront 
pas  de  m’^crire.  Vous  voyez,  mon  bon  ami,  que  je  suis  maintenant  dans  ce  voyage 
que  j’ai  si  longtems  prem6dit6.  II  semble  que  je  me  trouve  au  bout,  puisque  me 
void  4  Naples,  mon  nee  plus  ultra;  et  point  du  tout,  je  ne  fais  que  le  commencer.  Ma 
raison  est,  que  sur  ma  route  je  me  suis  content^  de  donner  un  coup  d’ceil  aux  cu¬ 
riosity  antiques  et  m od ernes,  et  d’en  prendre  une  connoissance  tres-leg&re,  pour 
m’apliquer  ensuite  bien  d’avantage  4  cette  6tude  pendant  les  s6jours  assez  longs  que 
je  compte  faire  k  mon  retour  dans  les  differentes  villes  telles  que  Rome,  Florence, 
Boulogne,  Venise,  Milan,  G4nes,  &c.  Je  reserve  a  ma  premiere  lettre  ce  que  j’ai  a 
vous  dire  sur  le  pays  ou  je  me  trouve,  car  le  papier  et  le  terns  ne  me  peraiettent  pas 
aujourd’huy  de  vous  ddailler  les  motifs  tie  ma  juste  admiration  ;  et  puis,  que  vous 
dire  apr4s  Misson,  Addison,  et  tant  d’hommes  de  merite  qui  ont  si  bien  £crit  ce  qu  ils 
ont  vu  ?  On  me  flatt.e  ici,  et  ce  sont  des  Anglois  qui  me  l’assurent,  que  vous  avez 
quelque  envie  de  venir  a  Naples  au  printems  procliain.  O  mon  ami,  on  croit  difficile- 
ment  lorsqu’on  est  sense,  les  choses  trop  agr^ables ;  mais  que  celle-ci  seroit  pour  moi, 
et  que  ne  donnerois-je  pour  que  la  prophetie  put  se  r^aliser  ?  Soyez  sur,  si  vos  occu¬ 
pations  ne  vous  emp^chent  pas  de  faire  un  voyage  si  charmant  et  si  utile — soyez  sur, 
dis-je,  que  nous  nous  verrons  en  quelque  endroit  de  l’ltalie  que  je  me  trouve  alors ; 
la  longueur  entiere  de  la  Botte*  ne  poura  s’opposer  a  l’envie  que  j’ai  de  vous  revoir,  et 
que  de  choses  n’aurai-je  pas  4  vous  dire  ?  II  s’en  faut  de  beaucoup  que  j’aye  aban¬ 
don^  mon  projet  sur  la  poesie  Angloise,  et  Dieu  veuille  accel^rer  la  paix  pour  que 
je  puisse  4  Londres  rassembler  les  materiaux  n6cessaires  ! 

Adieu,  mon  cher  ami.  Je  finis  en  vous  r6it6rant  mes  vives  instances  au  sujet 
d’une  reponse  prompte,  et  qui  ne  me  fasse  languir  que  le  terns  necessaire.  Je  suis 
harass^  d’une  visite  que  j’ai  rendue  liier,  4  10  lieures  du  soir,  au  terrible,  4  l’Cpou- 
vantable  V^suve.  Les  torrents  de  feu  qu’il  jette  4  present,  et  la  lave  qui  en  d^coule, 
nous  ont  fait  trembler,  je  ne  m’en  cache  pas.  Aussi  nous  sommes  nous  retires  au 
bout  d’un  gros  quart  d’heure.  Demain  ou  apr&s-demain  je  vais  voir  les  curiosit^s  de 
Baye,  Pouzole,  6cc. :  celles  de  l’antique  Herculaneum  sont  prodigieuses  en  tout 
genre. — Adieu  !  “  Remember  me .”  JMes  respects  tr^s-humbles  4  IMadame  Garrick. 

I  am  for  ever  yours, 

Patu. 

*  De  la  botte.  An  allusion  to  the  figure  of  Italy  in  our  maps. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


421 


DE  MADAME  NOVERRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Lyon,  18  Janvier,  1758. 

J’ai  re^u  votre  lettre  il  y  a  deux  jours,  et  Mr.  Xoverre  y  r^pondra  d£s  qu’il  sera 
de  retour  ;  je  l’attends  dans  douze  jours  au  plus  tard  ;  et  je  ne  doute  point  de  son  exac¬ 
titude  a  repondre  a  tons  les  articles  de  votre  lettre,  et  4  vous  satisfaire  sur  toutes  les 
choses  que  vous  me  dites  ;  quand  a  moi,  Monsieur,  je  n’ai  jamais  doute  de  votre  poli- 
tesse,  et  de  votre  galanterie ;  je  s^ais  que  vous  etes  1’ Anacreon  de  l’Angleterre,  et  le 
Roscius  de  votre  nation,  c’est  une  justice  que  je  vous  rend  avec  plaisir. 

Mais  vous  me  permettrez  de  vous  dire,  qu’il  y  a  cependant  de  la  singularity  a  vou- 
loir  contraindre  les  gouts,  et  que  je  ne  m'imaginois  pas  p^cher  en  vous  disant  le  mien 
sur  Monsieur  Lecy:  ce  n’est  point  ma  faute  s’il  ne  me  paroit  point  aimable.  31a 
petite  philosophie  est  douce,  et  laisse  faire  a  mon  coeur  toutes  ses  volontes ;  la  votre 
est  plus  severe  parcequ’elle  est  plus  raisonn^e  et  plus  politique  :  je  tiens  la  mienne  de 
la  nature,  et  la  votre  est  perfectionnee  par  l’etude  et  le  s^avoir.  Recevez,  Monsieur, 
mes  compliments  sur  la  nouvelle  annee  et  les  vceux  que  je  fais  pour  vous  et  Madame 
Garrick,  a  qui  je  pr^sente  les  assurances  de  mon  attachement. 

J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  avec  une  parfaite  consideration, 

Monsieur,  votre  trfes-humble  et  tres-obeissante  servante, 

Femme  Noverre. 


DE  M.  CAMP  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Lyon,  le  16  Decembre,  1763. 

Je  crains,  Monsieur,  que  vous  ne  me  taxiez  de  n6gligence ;  je  vous  avois  promis  de 
vous  donner  des  nouvelles  de  Mr.  de  Voltaire,  et  je  n’en  ai  rien  fait,  mais  l’article  de 
ma  lettre  ou  je  lui  parlois  de  vous,  lui  avoit  echape,  et  ce  n'est  qu’hier  que  j’en  re^us 
une  de  lui  ou  il  me  marque : — 

“  Je  crains  d’avoir  oublie  dans  mes  reponses  l’article  du  celebre  Air.  Garrick  ; 
vous  me  ferez  un  extreme  plaisir  de  lui  marquer  que  s’il  a  jamais  la  bont6  de  passer 
par  Ferney,  il  y  trouvera  des  admirateurs  qui  font  autant  de  cas  de  sa  personne  que 
de  ses  talens.” 

Vous  voyez,  Monsieur,  que  vous  serez  le  tr&s  bien  venu  aupr£s  de  M.  de  Voltaire. 
Ferney,  dont  il  vous  parle,  est  la  terre  qu’il  liabite  ii  deux  lieues  de  Geneve  ;  je 
souhaite  fort  que  vous  ne  preniez  pas  d’autre  route,  puisque  de  Geneve  vous 
passerez  necessairement  ici,  ou  je  serai  enchant^  d’avoir  le  plaisir  de  vous  revoir,  et 
de  vous  renouveller  les  assurances  de  la  parfaite  consideration  et  du  sincere  devoue- 
ment  avec  lequel  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Votre  tres-humble  et  tr&s-ob&ssant  serviteur, 

Camp. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


109 

*  'W  .*w 


Je  vous  j)rie  de  faire  agreer  mes  ob^issances  &  Madame  Garrick;  j’espcre  que votre 
voyage  aura  cte  heureux,  et  je  l’aprendrai  avec  un  grand  plaisir. 

J’oubliois  de  vous  dire  que  Fr6ron  s’est  retracte  sur  le  jugement  qu’il  avoit  6crit 
que  vous  portiez  des  acteurs  du  Theatre  Francois  ;  il  a  mand£  k  la  mthne  personne 
qu’il  avoit  ct£  mal  inform^,  et  que  vous  n’aviez  rien  dit  de  semblable. 

“  A  Monsieur 

Mods.  Garrick,  chez  Mess.  Frescobaldi  et  fils,  'a  Florence.” 


DE  M.  FENOUILLOT  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  20  Janv.  1763. 

Je  n’ai  point  l’honneur,  Monsieur,  de  vous  connoitre  personnellement,  ni  d'etre 
connu  de  vous  ;  mais  je  connois  vos  talens,  votre  reputation,  et  je  sais  que  votre  ame 
n’est  point  de  tout  au-dessous ;  malgr^  la  distance  des  lieux  et  la  difference  des  pays, 
le  gout  d’un  art  que  je  cultive,  et  que  vous  embellissez,  doivent  nous  rapprocher,  ainsi 
que  l’amitie  de  INI.  Diderot,  qui  nous  est  commune  a  tous  deux.  L’un  et  l’autre 
m’authorisent  a  vous  demander  un  service  que  je  sais  que  vous  avez  rendu  a  plusieurs 
autres  avec  lesquels  vous  avez  6t 6  en  socidt6  de  travail,  pour  les  aider  a  composer  des 
pieces  dignes  de  vous  avoir  pour  acteur.  J’ai  fait  une  comedie  dans  un  genre  assez 
particulier,  et  qui  ne  peut  etre  jouee  en  France  parceque  le  protestantisme  en  est  la 
base,  et  que  c’est  proprement  la  tolerance  mise  en  action.  Je  crois,  Monsieur,  qu’elle 
pourroit  reiissir  sur  votre  theatre,  si  vous  aviez  la  bonte  de  la  traduire  et  de  l'accom- 
moder  a  votre  sc£ne.  C’est  un  vrai  service  que  vous  me  rendriez,  et  que  j’ose  esperer 
de  vous ;  tous  les  gens  de  lettres  et  les  honnetes  gens  n’ont  qu’une  patrie,  et  je  sais 
qu’a  ces  deux  titres  on  peut  tout  attendre  de  Monsieur  Garrick.  Je  vous  envoy e 
ma  pi&ce  sous  l’enveloppe  de  i’ambassadeur  de  France,  chez  qui  je  vous  prie  de 
vouloir  bien  la  faire  prendre.  Je  vous  laisse  absolument  le  maitre  de  tous  les 
changemens  que  vous  jugerez  necessaires,  et  je  suis  sur  que  mon  ouvrage  gagnera 
beaucoup  a  passer  par  vos  mains.  Si  ce  premier  drame  me  procure  l’avantage  d’entrer 
avec  vous,  Monsieur,  en  soci6t6  de  travail,  j’en  serai  trop  flatte  pour  ne  pas  la  con¬ 
tinuer.  J’ai  actuellement  sur  le  metier  une  tragddie  d’un  genre  aussi  tr&s-neuf,  qui 
par  le  sujet  et  les  allusions  int^ressera  particulierement  votre  nation,  et  que  la 
hardiesse  des  pensees  et  de  l  intrigue  rendent  trop  forte  pour  la  mienne.  C’est  un 
second  enfant  que  je  vous  prierai  encore  d’adopter,  et  auquel  je  tacherai  de  donner 
d’autres  fibres,  dans  la  confiance  que  vous  prendrez  de  tous  le  meme  soin.  Au  reste, 
Monsieur,  de  quelque  utility  que  me  soit  jamais  cette  correspondance,  l’avantage  le 
plus  precieux  et  le  plus  flatteur  que  j’y  envisage,  c’est  l’amiti^  que  j’esp^re  qui  en 
r6sultera  entre  nous  :  l’envie  que  j’ai  de  m6’iter  et  d’acqudrir  la  votre  est  £gale  aux 
sentimens  d’estime  et  de  consideration  avec  lesquels  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Votre  tr£s-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Fenouillot. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


423 


M.  DIDEROT  A  M.  GARRICK.* 

A  Paris,  ce  20  Janv.  1763. 

Monsieur  et  tr£s-honor6  Roscius,  c’est  moi  qui  ai  donne  au  poete  qui  vous  ecrit 
au  coin  de  mon  feu,  le  conseil  de  travaiUer  plutot  pour  le  theatre  de  Londres  que  pour 
le  notre.  II  est  jeune,  mais  il  a  l’ame  haute,  et  il  pense  que  s’il  n’est  pas  permis  de 
mettre  sur  la  scene  les  pretres,  les  rois,  leurs  ministres,  en  un  mot,  tous  les  grands 
belitres  de  ce  monde,  il  n’y  a  qu’4  fermer  boutique.  Res  personnages  les  plus  ridi¬ 
cules,  les  moines,  les  religieuses,  les  abb^s,  les  eveques,  les  prdsidens  au  mortier,  nous 
sont  interdits ;  tant  c’est  une  chose  impeccable  pour  nous  qu’une  croix  et  un  capucin. 
Celui  qui  oseroit  intituler  son  drame,  Jacques  Clement,  Henry  Quatre,  Richelieu, 
Damien,  Coligny,  risqueroit  d’obtenir  un  logement  aux  depens  de  l’£tat  a  la  Bastille 
ou  a  Bicetre ;  et  la  fantaisie  de  mon  jeune  ami  seroit  de  m^riter  cette  faveur  et  de  ne 
pas  l’obtenir.  La  piece  que  vous  recevrez,  et  qu’il  vous  soumet,  est  son  coup  d’essai. 
S’il  est  possible  de  l’ajuster  a  votre  costume,  je  vous  demande  par  l’amitie  que  vous 
avez  pour  moi,  et  que  je  vous  rends  bien,  et  par  l’int&ret  que  vous  devez  a  un  talent 
qui  nait,  et  qui  promet,  s’il  est  encourage,  de  vous  en  occuper.  Mr.  Fenoiiillot  n’est 
point  du  tout  indigne  que  vous  fassiez  pour  sa  gloire  et  pour  sa  fortune,  ce  que  vous 
faites  pour  la  gloire  et  la  fortune  de  Mr.  Colman.  S’il  arrive  qu’apres  que  vous  vous 
serez  bien  grate  le  front  et  rong£  les  ongles  pour  reussir  en  commun,  le  pi6  vous 
glisse,  la  chute  sera  pour  lui  seul ;  en  cas  de  succfes  il  sera  tr£s  flatte  de  voir  son  nom 
en  accolade  avec  le  votre ;  et  pardieu,  je  le  crois  bien.  Du  reste,  vous  en  userez  avec 
lui  comme  il  vous  plaira :  quoiqu'il  soit  presqu’aussi  gueux  qu’il  convient  4  un  enfant 
d’ Apollon,  il  aimeroit  encore  mieux  une  feuille  de  laurier  qu’une  grosse  pluie  d’or. 
Il  a  lu,  je  ne  serais  oil,  qu’anciennement  ceux  qui  machoient  du  laurier  prophetisoient, 
et  il  a  grand  appetit  de  ce  fourrage.  Adieu,  Monsieur,  et  tr^s-aimable  Roscius. 
Souvenez-vous  de  terns  en  terns  de  la  synagogue  de  la  rue  Rovale,  et  du  petit  sanc- 
tuaire  de  la  rue  Neuve  des  Petits  Champs.  On  y  fait  souvent  commemoration  de 
vous,  le  verre  a  la  main,  et  l’on  vous  y  boit  en  bourgogne,  en  champagne,  en  malaga, 
en  toutes  couleurs,  en  tout  pays.  Je  suis,  comme  vous  S9avez,  votre  admirateur,  et  je 
serois  bien  fach6  que  vous  ne  comptassiez  pas  au  nombre  de  vos  amis, 

Diderot. 

Rue  Tarronne,  vis-a-vis  la  rue  St.  Benoit. 


DE  M.  ALGAROTTI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Pise,  ce  19  Mars,  1764. 

Permettez  que  je  vous  desob^isse  pour  le  coup.  Mon  amour-propre  y  est  trop 
int£ress6.  Comment  ne  voudrois-je  pas  faire  connoitre  a  toute  l’ltalie,  si  je  le  pou- 
vois,  que  je  suis  serviteur  d’un  des  premiers  homines  du  sifecle,  d’un  de  ces  hommes  a 
mettre  du  rang  des  Federig  et  de  Pierre, f  et  que  cet  homme  m’honore  de  son  amiti6? 

*  This  letter  from  Diderot  introduces  to  Garrick  the  author  of  the  Hunntte  Criminel. — Ed. 
f  As  founders  of  their  respective  states  alike. — Ed. 


424 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Void  deux  lettres,  Monsieur,  qui  ne  satisfont  qu’en  trfcs  petite  partie  mes  d^sirs,  mais 
qui  vous  marqueront  au  moins  ma  bonne  volonte. 

J’aurois  renonce  k  Voltaire,  avec  qui  je  suis  lie  depuis  trente  ans,  s’il  avoit  pu 
penser  autrement  sur  votre  compte,  Monsieur,  de  ce  qu’il  faut.  Mais  c’auroit  ete 
l’offenser  dans  le  plus  vif  que  de  l’en  soup^onner  seulement ;  c’auroit  ( \X.(t  blasphemer 
Melpomene  et  Thalie,  ses  plus  chores  divinit6s.  Vous  etes  excellent  dans  tons  les 
roles ;  meme  dans  celui  de  m^decin  ;  et  le  printems  prochain  je  suivrai  votre  ordon- 
nance  du  Tar  Water.  Je  l’essayerai  au  moins.  Je  vous  remercie  de  ce  que  vous 
avez  bien  voulu  £crire  en  Angleterre  pour  les  vers  dont  vous  me  fites  rhonneur  de 
me  parler  a  Florence. 

A  votre  arriv^e  k  Venise  vous  trouverez  entre  les  mains  de  Mr.  Murray,  votre 
Ministre,  les  deux  premiers  volumes  de  mes  ouvrages.  Gardez  les  comme  une 
marque  de  l’estime  infinie,  et  de  la  tendre  amitiy  avec  lesquelles  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr&s-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Algarotti. 


DE  M.  ALGAROTTI  AIJ  MARQUIS  MONVI. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Pise,  ce  3  Mai,  1764. 

L’illustre  Mr.  Garrick,  le  Roscius  du  si£cle,  passeroit-il  par  Bologne,  sans  que 
je  Pannon^asse  a  Mr.  le  Marquis  Monvi,  a  Madame  la  Marquise  Scappi,  it  Mon¬ 
seigneur  le  Cardinal,  it  la  seule  coterie  digne  de  le  voir  et  de  l’entendre  ?  Je  ne  veux 
pas  absolument,  mon  cher  General,  avoir  rien  a  me  reprocher  la-dessus.  Vous  verrez 
que  l’amabilite  va  de  pair  en  lui  avec  la  superiority  des  talens ;  et  je  suis  persuade, 
mon  clier  General,  que  vous  me  scaurez  gre  de  vous  avoir  fait  connoitre  un  homme 
si  excellent,  et  si  unique  dans  tous  les  genres. 

Oserois-je  vous  prier  de  faire  mes  tr£s  humbles  respects  a  la  respectable  et  aimable 
Casanuovo.  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  avec  l’attacbement  le  plus  inviolable  et  le  devoue- 
ment  le  plus  parfait,  Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Algarotti. 

“  A  son  Excellence  Monsieur  le  Marquis  Monvi, 

Colonnel  du  Regiment  Royal  Italien,  et  Lieutenant- 
General  dans  les  armees  de  France. — A  Bologne. 


DE  M.  DUCLOS  A  M.  FAVART. 

MONSIEUR,  De  St.  Petersbourg,  le  25  Juin,  1764. 

Plus  je  m’eioigne  et  plus  je  pense  a  vous  par  consequent,  je  prends  la  liberty  de 
vous  donner  de  mes  nouvelles,  et  vous  marquer  ma  reception  ici.  Je  vous  dirai, 
Monsieur,  que  le  lendemain  de  mon  arrivee,  je  fus  presente  a  Messieurs  les  Mare- 
ebaux  de  la  Couronne,  qui  dirigent  le  spectacle  de  sa  Majesty ;  ils  m’ont  tres  bien 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


425 


re^u,  ils  m’ont  compliment^  sur  mon  arrivde,  et  m’ont  accorde  un  logement  de  cinq 
pieces  de  plein  pied  dans  un  des  pavilions  du  Palais  de  sa  Majesty,  qui  est  de  toute 
beauts.  Ensuite  le  Grand  Marechal  m’a  invite  a  sa  table  tous  les  Vendredis ;  que 
mon  terns  me  le  permette  ou  non,  mon  couvert  est  toujours  mis  :  de  plus,  j’ai  du 
bois  de  la  Cour  pour  me  chauffer  a  ma  volontd,  car  il  en  faut  dans  ce  pays-la,  et  huit 
cents  roubles  par  an  ;  mais  j’espdre  etre  augmente  a  mesure  qu’ils  connoitront  mon 
merite.  Je  viens  de  faire  sur  le  theatre  un  feu  d’artifice  sans  poudre,  avec  des  gerbes 
et  soleils  qui  tournent  et  changent  de  couleur,  enfin  sans  qu'il  entre  aucune  compo¬ 
sition  ni  ustenciles  de  l’artifice ;  ce  qui  a  surpris  beaucoup  S.  M.  et  toute  la  Cour. 
De  plus,  j’ai  fait  paroitre  le  nom  de  S.  M.  dans  une  gloire  dont  les  rayons  s’allongent 
et  se  racourcissent  avec  tant  de  precipitation  que  cela  eblouit,  et  cependant  il  n’y  a 
aucun  mouvement  de  machine.  Sa  Majeste  m’a  envoye  son  Grand  Chambelan  pour 
me  faire  des  complimens.  Je  suis  presentement  a  faire  paroitre  dans  le  fond  du 
theatre  plus  de  cent  mille  Romains,  qui  marchent  tous  en  ordre  de  bataille,  et  changent 
de  position  d’une  vitesse  qu’a  peine  peut  on  le  voir.  J’espdre  que  ce  morceau-la 
achevera  de  faire  ma  reputation.  L’agrement  que  j'ai  ici,  c’est  que  l’on  me  donne 
carte  blanche,  et  plein  pouvoir  de  travailler  a  ma  volonte.  Jugez  quel  agrement  c’est 
pour  moi,  et  de  n’y  avoir  pas  trouve  un  second  Comte  de  Durazzo  :  mon  nom  et  ma 
conduite  sont  cit£s  par  tout  Petersbourg ;  cela  a  6te  jusqu’a  Mr.  Du  Roucerai  votre 
beau-frere.  Ah  !  quelle  surprise  pour  moi  quand  je  l’ai  vu  chez-moi !  il  s'est  jette  a 
mon  col,  il  ne  pouvoit  me  quitter  de  joie.  Je  1’ai  fait  diner  avec  moi,  ou  il  m’a 
conte  ses  disgraces  ici ;  mais  comme  je  ne  connois  pas  son  adversaire,  je  ne  sais  qui  a 
tort  ou  raison.  En  le  quittant  je  lui  ai  fait  offre  de  mes  services,  et  que  je  ferois 
tout  au  monde  pour  lui,  en  reconnoissance  de  ceux  que  j’ai  requ  de  son  beau-frdre, 
ainsi  que  de  Madame  sa  soeur.  Il  est  trds-bien  avec  le  Grand  Veneur  de  S.  M.  :  je  me 
suis  trouve  a  la  table  oil  il  £toit  invite,  et  meme  il  m’a  paru  y  manger  autant  de  fois 
qu’il  veut.  Ce  seigneur  lui  veut  du  bien,  et  il  airne  beaucoup  les  gens  a  talens  :  il  1'a 
men 6  un  jour  au  Palais  d'Ete,  ou  il  y  a  un  jardin  superbe  enrichi  de  belles  figures 
antiques  que  Pierre  Premier  a  fait  venir  de  Rome. 

Parlons  du  pays  :  Petersbourg  est  dans  la  plus  belle  situation  du  monde.  Au 
bout  de  la  ville  il  y  a  le  Golfe  de  Finelande,  borde  du  cot£  de  la  ville  de  belles  forets, 
et  le  reste  est  a  l'infini  oil  l’on  voit  arriver  les  vaisseaux  marchands  a  pleines  voiles 
par  trente  a  quarante  a  la  fois.  Du  c6t£  de  la  terre  aux  environs,  c’est  rempli  de 
Palais  superbes ;  il  y  a  un  Palais  de  S.  M.  dont  les  colonnes  sont  de  lapis,  et  les  cha- 
piteaux,  bases,  et  ornemens,  tout  est  dol’d  ;  enfin,  ornd  de  cascades  et  jets-d’eau  ;  enfin, 
je  n’ai  jamais  rien  vu  de  si  beau,  et  cela  m’a  d’autant  plus  surpris  que  j'ignorois  qu'il 
y  eiit  de  si  beaux  monumens  dans  des  pays  si  dloignds.  Je  viens  de  voir  des  ele- 
phans,  des  ours  blancs,  des  renards  blancs,  des  renards  noirs  :  il  y  a  ici  des  Calmoucks, 
qui  sont  positivement  comme  des  Chinois  ;  ils  ont  des  yeux  singuliers  ;  et  beaucoup 
de  Tartares,  de  Cosaques,  ce  sont  des  figures  a  peindre.  Enfin,  ce  que  je  trouve  de 
singulier  c’est  que  les  lievres  a  present  sont  comme  les  notres,  et  dans  l’hiver  ils 
sont  blancs,  sans  taches.  Une  autre  particularity  qui  m’a  beaucoup  surpris  —  a 

3  i 


VOL.  II. 


426 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


present  le  solcil  se  couche  k  ilix  heures,  et  se  l&ve  deux  lieures  du  matin,  de  sorte 
qu’il  n’y  a  point  de  nuit,  on  y  voit  a  lire  et  k  6crire  comme  en  plein  jour.  On  a  fait 
ici  des  fetes  singulieres  dans  l’liiver,  qui  est  bien  rude  :  on  jette  des  fosses  des  eaux 
color^es,  sitot  que  cela  est  pris,  qui  s’entend  gel6,  on  en  forme  des  facades  de  palais, 
des  colonnes,  des  vases  creux,  on  met  toutes  ces  coupes  les  unes  sur  les  autres,  et  cela 
se  congele  tout  de  suite,  et  1’on  voit  un  tr£s-beau  palais.  Notez  que  l’on  met  des 
lumi&res  en  quantity  derriere  ;  la  glace  devient  transparente,  et  fait  un  vrai  palais 
de  f6es. 

Le  Grand  Marshal  vient  de  me  donner  commission  pour  faire  venir  un  peintre 
de  Paris  :  comme  vous  &tes  le  protecteur  des  talens,  je  prens  la  liberty,  comme  vous 
etes  sur  les  lieux,  de  vouloir  bien  nous  en  procurer  un.  Le  Grand  Mardchal  vous  auroit 
bien  des  obligations  de  lui  procurer  un  bon  peintre  th^atral,  tant  pour  les  operas  que 
comedies,  et  surtout  capable  de  repr^senter  ce  qu’on  appelle  ces  beaux  points  de  vue 
si  necessaires  aux  ballets.  Vous  sentez,  Monsieur,  que  par  la  je  d^signe  un  homme  de 
gout,  d’esprit,  et  plein  d’un  feu  poetique,  propre  a  embrasser  toutes  sortes  de  sujets, 
et  de  les  rendre  en  tableaux  agr6ables  et  frappans.  Yoila  a  peu  pres  le  peintre  qu  il 
nous  faut ;  on  lui  donneroit  rnille  cinq  cents  roubles,  dont  le  rouble  fait  cinq  livres 
de  France,  son  quartier  et  son  chauffage;  c’est  un  parti  a  offrir  a  un  homme  a  talens, 
et  il  pent  faire  d’autres  travaux  pour  son  compte ;  car  on  ne  travaille  pas  ici  tous  les 
jours.  Si  vous  voulez  bien  avoir  cette  complaisance-la  pour  moi,  sur  votre  lettre  on 
enverra  une  lettre  de  change  pour  les  frais  de  son  voyage.  Surtout  dans  le  choix  que 
vous  ferez,  point  de  moulin,  ni  de  fourre ;  mais  au  reste,  tout  ce  qui  vous  plaira  ;  le 
plustot  sera  le  meilleur,  car  nous  allons  avoir  de  grands  travaux  pour  les  operas. 
Nous  avons  ici  un  Italien,  dont  on  n’est  point  content,  ce  qui  nous  oblige  d'avoir  re- 
cours  a  Paris.  En  attendant  votre  reponse,  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre, 

Monsieur,  votre  humble  serviteur,  et  le  plus  reconnoissant, 

Du  Clos. 


DE  M.  MARMONTEL  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  Mercredi. 

Je  vous  rends  mille  graces,  Monsieur  et  cher  ami,  du  beau  present  que  vous  me 
faites.  Il  va  decorer  mon  oratoire  a  cot6  de  Mademoiselle  Clairon  ;  et  quand  je 
voudrai  me  pen^trer  l’ame,  et  l’61ever  au  ton  de  la  grande  et  belle  nature,  je  jetterai 
les  yeux  sur  ce  tableau.  C’est  de  plus  un  gage  de  votre  amiti£  qui  me  sera  cher 
toute  ma  vie.  Conservez  bien  ce  tendre  sentiment  pour  un  homme  qui  fait  mieux 
que  vous  admirer,  qui  vous  honore  et  qui  vous  aime  de  tout  son  cceur, 

Marmontel. 

Si  vous  etes  chez-vous  l’un  de  ces  matins,  j’irai  vous  embrasser. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


427 


DE  M.  MARMONTEL  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Mr.  le  Marquis  de  Brancas,  mon  cher  ami,  a  du  passer  chez-vous  pour  vous 
inviter  a  diner  Mardi.  Vous  m’aviez  donne  le  ehoix  du  Lundi  ou  du  Mardi,  j’esp^re 
que  vous  n’avez  pas  pris  d’engagement  contraire.  Marquez-moi,  je  vous  prie,  a 
quelle  heure  vous  voulez  que  je  me  rende  chez-vous  afin  que  nous  y  allions  ensemble. 
Vous  dinerez  avec  ce  qu’il  y  a  de  plus  poli  dans  toute  la  noblesse  Fran^oise,  et  avec 
le  plus  tendre  et  le  plus  d6vou6  de  vos  amis, 

Mar  monte  l. 


DE  M.  MARMONTEL  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Le  sommeil  n’a  point  efface,  Monsieur,  l’impression  que  vous  m’avez  faite.  J'es- 
pere  meme  qu’elle  ne  s’effacera  jamais  ;  et  Linage  de  Macbeth  sans  cesse  presente  a 
mon  esprit,  sera  pour  moi  le  modele  intellectuel  de  la  declamation  th^atrale  a  son  plus 
haut  point  d’energie  et  de  v6rit6.  Vous  m’avez  rendu  concevable  ce  qu’on  nous  dit 
d'Hilas  et  de  Pilade,  ou  plutot  vous  l’avez  r6alis6.  Si  nous  avions  des  acteurs  comme 
vous,  nos  scenes  ne  seroient  pas  si  diffuses  :  nous  laisserions  parler  leur  silence,  et  il 
en  diroit  plus  que  nos  vers.  Vous  serez  done  pour  moi  un  objet  continuel  d’etonne- 
ment  et  de  regrets.  Je  puis  dire  que  j’ai  vu  r6unis  le  premier  acteur  et  la  premiere 
actrice  du  rnonde  ;  mais  j’ai  la  douleur  de  penser  que  le  meme  theatre  ne  les  ras- 
semblera  jamais  ;  et  e’est  un  grand  malheur  pour  nous  :  car  avec  deux  moyens  si 
puissans  d’6mouvoir,  le  g£nie  des  poetes  s’6l6veroit  a  un  genre  de  tragedie  plus  her, 
plus  hardi,  plus  pathetique.  Enfin,  Monsieur,  si  vous  voulez  savoir  a  quel  point  la 
force,  la  verite,  la  chaleur  de  votre  jeu  m’ont  frappd,  jettez  les  yeux  quelque  jour  sur 
l’article  declamation  de  l'Encyclopedie.  Vous  jugerez  par  mes  principes  du  cas  que  je 
fais  d’un  acteur  tel  que  vous. 

Je  vous  envoye  “  Venceslas”  tel  que  je  l’ai  remis  au  theatre,  non  pas  refondu 
comme  je  l’aurois  voulu,  mais  purge  de  ses  grossi^retes  les  plus  choquantes.  J'ai  ete 
oblig6  de  prendre  autant  qu’il  a  £t6  possible  le  ton  et  le  stile  de  l’original,  afin  d’eviter 
les  disparates  ;  mais  en  traduisant  ce  poeme  on  effaceroit  les  d&fauts  du  stile,  et  un 
homme  habile  pourroit  y  r^pandre  un  coloris  que  Rotrou  n’avoit  pas, — ce  qu’il  ne 
m’a  pas  £t6  permis  de  lui  donner ;  votre  langue  y  pourroit  mettre  encore  plus  de 
v6h£mence  et  de  precision,  et  e’est  alors  que  “  Venceslas”  seroit  une  belle  tragedie. 
Je  souhaite,  JMonsieur,  que  le  gLrie  de  vos  poetes  tragiques  reponde  a  vos  talens.  II 
ne  manquera  rien  h  leur  gloire.  L’interet  que  je  prens  a  la  votre  est  fond6  sur  l’ad- 
miration  que  vous  m’avez  causfee,  et  sur  les  sentimens  avec  lesquels  j’ai  l’honneur 
d’etre,  Monsieur,  votre  tr^s-humble,  et  tres-ob6issant  serviteur, 

Marmontel. 


3  I  2 


428 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  GRIMM  A  M.  GARRICK. 

J’envoie  chercher,  illustre  Roscius,  ce  qui  doit  embcllir  ma  solitude.  Que  Dieu 
vous  garde  et  vous  donne  la  grace  de  nous  aimer,  et  de  nous  regretter  autant  que 
nous  vous  aimons  et  regrettons !  Amen  !  Si  vous  avez  des  ordres  h  donner  en  ce 
pays-ci,  accordez-moi  la  preference.  Mes  respects  il  Madame  Garrick. 


DE  MADEMOISELLE  CLAIRON  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Si  ce  que  vous  desirez  dependoit  de  moi,  vous  6tes  bien  sur  que  cela  seroit  fait ; 
mais,  mon  cher  ami,  tout  est  lou6,  et  je  ne  puis  oter  de  loge  &  personne.  Yotre  ami 
pouroit  se  faire  garder  des  places  dans  le  parquet,  il  y  avoit  bier  vingt  femmes  au 
moins.  Je  suis  bien  fachee  de  n’avoir  pas  de  meilleur  expedient  a  vous  offrir.  Bon 
soir,  mon  cher  ami ;  vous  savez  combien  je  vous  aime. 

Clairon. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Mon  ami,  Mr.  Woulf,  Banquier,  qui  compte  passer  un  mois  a  Londres,  a  bien 
voulu  se  charger  de  ma  lettre,  et  de  mon  affaire  aupr&s  de  Mr.  Lattroppe :  faites-moi 
le  plaisir  de  lui  donner  1259f.  12  sols,  dont  je  vous  tiendrai  bon  compte. 

Vous  avez  du  recevoir  le  petit  paquet  que  je  vous  ai  fait  tenir  par  Mr.  Lascelle  et 
Mr.  Becket,  cent  exemplaires  de  mon  chansonnier:  il  seroit  n^cessaire  a  1 ’entree  de 
l'hiver,  lorsque  tous  vos  gens  ue  qualite  seront  revenus  a  Londres,  de  faire  annoncer 
cet  ouvrage  dans  vos  papiers  publics,  par  un  article  en  forme  de  Lettre  i\  peu  pres 
dans  la  forme  de  celle  que  je  joins  ici,  et  qui  a  £te  mise  dans  le  Mi  nerve  de  France  du 
mois  de  Juillet  dernier.  J’ai  6crit  a  Mr.  Becket,  que  je  m’en  raporterois  enticement 
a  vous,  pour  fixer  le  benefice  que  je  lui  donnerai  pour  la  vente  de  chaque  exemplaire 
de  mon  livre. 

On  donnera  ce  soir  la  cinqui&me  representation  de  la  piece  de  notre  ami  Favart, 
qui  a  toujours  le  plus  grand  succes.  Fdle  est  imprimee,  mais  on  ne  la  mettra  en  vente 
que  Samedi.  J’en  ai  fait  demander  un  exemplaire,  pour  vous  l’envoyer  par  Mr. 
'Woulf,  mais  la  femme  de  ce  Air.  Favart  est  si  beste — mais  si  beste,  que  je  n’ai  jamais 
pu  lui  faire  entendre  que  je  voulois  profiler  de  l’occasion  que  j’avois  pour  vous  la 
faire  parvenir  promptement.  Elle  m’a  fait  dire  avec  sa  maniere  et  ses  politesses 
outlies  qu'elle  vouloit  avoir  le  plaisir  elle-meme  de  vous  l’envoyer :  pendant  qu’on 
joue  cette  pi£ce,  Favart  plante  des  choux  a  Belleville. 

On  a  fait  l’ouverture  ces  jours  derniers  d’un  salon  oil  l’on  expose  tous  les  deux  ans 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


429 


les  productions  de  nos  artistes  dans  tous  les  genres  :  il  y  a  de  tres  bonnes  choses, 
entre  autres  votre  buste  par  Le  Moine,  que  j’ai  trouv6  tr£s  bien  du  cote  de  la  ressem- 
blance  et  du  talent  de  l’artiste.  Tous  ceux  qui  l’ont  vus  et  qui  vous  connoissent  sont 
de  mon  avis;  je  voudrois  que  vous  et  Madame  Garrick  pensassiez  de  m&me.  Je 
joins  ici  l’explication  de  ce  salon  :  je  souhaite  que  cela  puisse  vous  amuser  un 
moment. 

J’aurois  bien  souhaite  vous  voir  k  Londres  cette  ann6e,  mais  cela  n’a  pas  ete  en 
mon  pouvoir.  J’ai  remis  mon  voyage  au  Careme  prochain  pour  revenir  ici  dans  le 
printems  ;  si  vous  voulez,  nous  reviendrons  ensemble. 

Je  n’ai  pas  pu  decouvrir  ce  Mr.  Vivie  pour  lequel  vous  m’avez  envoye  un  petit 
paquet ;  celui  qu’on  m’avoit  indique  ne  vous  connoit  pas  :  dites-moi  la  rue  ou  demeure 
le  votre,  et  a  qui  il  faut  que  je  remette  ce  Dictionnaire  Anglois  que  vous  m’avez 
envoys  peu  de  jours  apr&s  votre  depart.  Je  vous  embrasse  mille  fois,  et  je  vous  prie 
d’en  faire  le  partage  avec  Madame  Garrick.  Monnet. 

“  LETTRE  A  MR.  MONNET  A  L’OCCASION  DE  L’ANTHOLOGIE  FRAN9OISE. 

“  A  Paris,  ce  29  Aout,  1764. 

“  J’ai  re^u,  Monsieur,  avec  beaucoup  de  plaisir,  l’exemplaire  de  l’Anthologie  que 
vous  m’avez  fait  remettre :  je  croyois  avec  beaucoup  de  gens  de  lettres,  que  cet 
ouvrage  manquoit  a  notre  literature,  et  j’en  suis  convaincu  depuis  que  j’ai  lu  la 
s^avante  Preface  de  Mr.  Meunier  de  Querlon  a  la  tete  de  votre  belle  Edition.  Je  ne 
doute  pas  que  vous  n’eprouviez  beaucoup  de  critiques  sur  le  choix  quevouzavez  fait. 
C’est  le  sort  de  toutes  les  collections  :  chaque  lecteur  condamne  indistinctement  tout 
ce  qui  ne  se  rencontre  pas  dans  le  cercle  de  ses  gouts  d’habitude  :  peu  de  gens 
d’ailleurs  ont  une  idee  juste  de  la  chanson  Fran^oise.  Les  Grecs  et  les  Latins 
avoient  des  chansons,  nous  les  connoissons  sous  le  titre  d’odes.  Sec.  Cela  leur  donne 
toute  une  autre  consideration  que  celui  de  chansons ;  cependant,  c’est  exactement  la 
mcme  chose.  Vous  avez  voulu  montrer  a  la  nation  un  tableau  des  progressions  de 
l’esprit  dans  un  genre  qui  avoit  jusqu’a  present  caract^rise  notre  talent  national.  Vous 
avez  donne  des  modeles  de  poesie  leg^re,  dans  la  plupart  desquels  on  trouve  ce  que  le 
sentiment,  les  graces  de  l’esprit,  la  d^licatesse  du  gout,  et  l’amour  de  la  volupte  ont 
dicte  de  plus  agreable  a  nos  meilleurs  auteurs.  Je  ne  crois  pas  qu’on  ait  encore  vu 
en  France  rien  d’aussi  agreable,  d’aussi  soign6  et  d’aussi  parfait,  que  la  partie  typogra- 
phique  de  vos  trois  volumes  :  on  y  apper^oit  les  connoissances  d’un  homme  de  gout, 
et  toutes  les  precautions  d’un  £diteur  jaloux  de  remplir,  et  meme  de  surpasser  ses 
engagemens  avec  le  public.  “  J’ai  l’honneur,  Sc c . ” 

Vous  ferez,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  l’usage  que  vous  jugerez  k  propos  de  cette  lettre. 
File  est  d’un  homme  de  beaucoup  d’esprit,  peu  connu.  Si  vous  la  inettez  dans  vos 
papiers  publics,  je  serois  d’avis  qu’on  la  mit  sous  le  nom  de  Mr.  de  Voltaire,  ou  celui 
de  Mr.  Piron ;  plutot  du  dernier:  je  l’en  pr£viendrai. 


430 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  MOLE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Du  Fort  L’Ev&que,  a  Paris,  ce  26  Avril,  1765. 

Mon  clicr  ami,  nous  croyons  devoir  t\  l’int^ret  que  vous  avez  bien  voulu  prendre 
;\  nous  avant  votre  depart,  des  remercimens  et  mille  assurances  de  notre  recon- 
noissance ;  voila  pour  le  moment  ou  nous  en  sommes  reduits ;  mais  c’est  un  fonds 
(pie  vous  pouvez  cultiver  quand  il  vous  plaira,  et  qui  ne  deviendra  jamais  aride  : 
c’est  ce  que  nous  pouvons  en  toute  surety  vous  garantir.  Nous  voudrions  pouvoir 
vous  donner  des  nouvelles  ;  il  n’y  en  a  point,  pas  m6me  de  cbangement  sur  notre  6tat : 
nous  en  voila  reduits  encore  notre  premiere  alternative,  ou  nous  deshonorer,  nous 
fletrir  de  notre  volont£,  ou  garder  pour  azile  celui  des  mallieureux  ou  des  criminels, 
et  pourtant  quelquesfois  celui  des  honnetes  gens. 

Vous  sentez  que  notre  clioix  n’est  pas  douteux,  et  qu’entre  le  m6pris  et  l’estime 
il  n’y  a  pas  a  h^siter,  quelque  prix  qu’il  en  coute.  Voila  pour  le  compte  de  mes 
camarades  et  de  moi,  je  vais  maintenant  vous  parler  de  moi  seul ;  je  suis  loin  de 
vouloir  jamais  s Sparer  ma  cause  de  la  leur,  mais  ceci  ne  peut  regarder  que  moi.  Vous 
nous  avez  fait  offres  de  services,  je  pense  que  c’est  faire  un  digne  usage  de  votre 
ame,  que  de  l’en  croire  sur  ses  expressions,  et  profiter  de  ses  mouvemens.  Ceci  peut 
devenir  plus  long  que  nous  n’avions  pense  ;  l’on  n’obtiendra  jamais  de  nous  n6tre 
d^shonneur,  et  il  faudra  n^cessairement  qu’on  se  contente  de  toute  autre  justice  a 
l’autoritd  bless^e  de  M.  le  Marshal  de  Richelieu  ;  mais,  en  m6me  terns  cpie  je  plaide 
la  cause  de  ma  probity,  je  voudrois  d’ailleurs  ne  la  blesser  en  lien.  J’ai  pris  quelques 
engagemens  sur  les  revenus  de  mon  6tat ;  mais  ils  p^riclitent  beaucoup  ;  ceci  cause  un 
derangement  qui  fait  grand  tort  a  la  recette,  et  une  des  peines  la  plus  sensible  pour 
moi  seroit  de  manquer  a  mes  billets  :  je  n’y  manquerois  certainement  pas  en  vendant 
ce  que  j'ai  pour  y  satisfaire,  mais  cette  ressouree  est  la  derni^re  que  je  voudrois  em¬ 
ployer  ;  c’est  vous-meme,  mon  cher  ami,  qui  m’avez  enhardi  a  recourir  a  vous,  et  les 
offres  volontaires  d'un  galant-homme  sontpourlui-memeun  engagement.  Il  s'agiroit 
de  deux  cent  louis.  Cette  somme,  toute  considerable  qu’elle  est,  ne  m’effraye  pas 
a  emprunter ;  elle  ne  sera  pas  de  surplus  a  mes  dettes,  puisque  c’est  pour  les  payer, 
et  il  me  restera  dans  tous  les  terns  ce  que  je  poss&de  pour  l’acquiter.  Si  les  affaires 
prennent  une  tournure  promte,  je  n’en  ferai  aucun  usage,  et  je  vous  les  ferai 
remettre  comme  je  les  aurai  re^us  ;  si  non,  je  m’en  servirai ;  et  l’argent  que  j’aurois 
employe  a  tenir  mes  engagemens,  je  l’employerai  a  remplir  celui  que  je  prens  avec 
vous.  Voila  mon  arrangement,  mon  cher  Garrick ;  voyez  si  vous  en  etes  content, 
et  si  votre  situation  vous  permet  de  m’aider ;  la  franchise  de  ma  demarche  vous 
prouve  ma  con  fiance,  et  n’^tant  pas  assez  heureux  pour  vous  obliger,  j’aime  mon 
accident  qui  me  met  dans  le  cas  de  r^clamer  de  vous  un  bienfait,.  J’attens  avec  la 
plus  grande  impatience  votre  reponse,  quelle  qu'elle  soit ;  je  vous  prie  de  l'adresser 
sous  double  envelope  a  Paris,  a  quelqu’un  de  vos  amis  qui  sera  exact  a  me  le  faire 
tenir. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


431 


N’oubliez  pas  aussi  surtout  de  porter  de  notre  part  a  Madame  Garrick  nos  plus 
chores  amities  :  rendez-lui  t6moignage  de  l'hommage  que  nous  rendons  a  ses  qualites 
respectables,  et  soyez  convaincu  a  jamais  de  mon  estime,  de  mon  attachement,  et  de  la 
plus  vive  reconnoissance. 

Mole. 


DE  M.  L’ABBE  MORELLET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Vous  voulez  done  bien,  mon  cher  Sliakspeare,  travailler  a  me  procurer,  a  votre 
retour  a  Londres,  les  ouvrages  Anglois  qui  pouvent  m’£tre  utiles  pour  mon  Diction- 
aire  de  Commerce.  C’est  une  bonne  action  que  vous  ferez.  Mais  quand  vous  en 
feriez  cent  de  cette  espfece,  vous  ne  vous  feriez  pas  pardonner  le  mal  que  vous  allez 
faire  en  nous  quittant.  II  n’y  a  qu’une  mani&re  de  nous  adoucir  le  chagrin  de  votre 
depart,  c’est  de  nous  promettre  de  venir  nous  voir  de  temps  en  temps,  par  exemple 
tous  les  hyvers ;  mais  je  crains  bien  que  vous  n’en  fassiez  rien,  et  que  vous  ne  vous 
rendiez  a  l’empressement  de  vos  amis  Anglois  en  renon^ant  a  la  societe  de  ceux  que 
vous  avez  fait  parmi  nous.  Vous  savez  pourtant  que  nous  sommes  de  bonnes  gens, 
et  vous  devriez  bien  vous  partager  un  peu  entre  vos  compatriotes  et  nous.  Venez. 
Je  vous  lirai  du  Plutarque  et  du  Rabelais,  et  vous  nous  jouerez  Shakspeare,  que  j’en- 
tendrai,  s’il  plait  a  Dieu,  dans  peu  de  temps.  Je  viens  a  la  promesse  que  vous  m’avez 
faite  de  parler  de  moi  a  Mr.  Taulmsen,*  et  de  l’interesser  au  succ^s  de  mon  travail. 
Je  d^sirerois  done  que  vous  lui  demandassiez  une  note  des  livres  les  meiHeurs  dans 
votre  langue  sur  Veconomie  politique.  II  n’est  pas  question,  comme  vous  le  voyez,  de 
la  politique  pure,  dont  je  ne  m’occupe  point,  mais  de  1’administration  du  commerce 
et  des  finances  dans  votre  pays,  de  votre  navigation,  de  vos  loix  de  commerce,  des 
r&glemens  de  vos  manufactures,  &c.  J’ai  deja  plusieurs  ouvrages  de  ce  genre  ;  je 
marquerai  ceux  que  je  n’ai  point,  et  dont  Mr.  Taulmsen  pensera  le  plus  avantageuse- 
ment :  vous  pourrez  ensuite  me  faire  passer  ceux  auxquels  je  me  serai  arrete.  Vous 
voyez  queje  me  suis  d^voueaun  travail  long  et  penible,  lorsque  je  pouvois  m’occuper 
de  literature  et  de  philosophie.  N’ai-je  pas  fait  la  un  petit  sacrifice  a  futility  pub- 
lique,  qui  merite  de  la  part  des  amis  du  genre  humain  quelque  reconnoissance?  Je 
dis,  de  la  part  du  genre  humain,  car  je  ne  crains  pas  de  vous  avouer  que  ce  n’est  pas 
pour  mon  pays  que  je  travaille.  On  ne  profitera  pas  de  long  temps  de  ce  que  je 
pourrai  avoir  dit  de  bon  dans  ce  pays-ci,  et  on  ne  m’en  saura  peut-etre  pas  grand  gre. 
Mais  je  suis  cosmopolite,  et  si  je  puis,  en  developpant  les  principes  d’une  science  aussi 
vaste,  et  j’ose  dire  assez  inconnue  jusqu’a  present,  etre  utile  a  quelque  nation  que  ce 
soit,  fut-elle  notre  ennemie,  je  me  croirai  bien  paye  de  mes  travaux.  Dites  a  Mr. 
votre  ami,  que  je  l’estime,  et  que  je  l’honore  sur  tout  ce  que  vous  m’en  avez  dit ;  et 
que  vous  avez  augment^  de  beaucoup  le  desir  que  j’avois  d’aller  a  Londres,  par  l’idee 
du  plaisir  que  j’aurai  de  le  connoitre. 

*  Perhaps  Tomlinson,  or  Toulmin. — Ed. 


432 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  MADEMOISELLE  CLA1RON  A  M.  GARRICK. 

De  Paris,  ce  9  May,  17G5. 

INIox  ame,  a  jamais  p^netr^e  d’un  traitement  aussi  barbare  qu’injuste,  avoit  besoin, 
mon  clier  ami,  du  plaisir  que  votre  lettre  vient  de  lui  faire.  Cette  lettre  a  suspendu 
quelques  momens  l’indignation  et  la  douleur  qui  me  consument.  Jamais  ma  sante 
n’a  donn^  de  si  grandes  inquietudes  pour  ma  vie,  jamais  les  accidents  auxquels  je  suis 
sujette  n’ont  6te  aussi  multiplies  et  aussi  violents;  mais  soyez  tranquille,  mon  courage 
est  encore  au-dessus  de  mes  maux. 

Lc  croirez-vous  ?  mes  camarades  sont  encore  en  prison  ;  moi,  Ton  m’en  a  fait  sor- 
tir  le  cinqui£me  jour  ;  mais  on  m’a  mise  aux  arrets  chez-moi,  avec  defense  de  rece- 
voir  plus  de  six  personnes  nominees.  On  dit  que  Dubois  a  demande  son  conge,  on 
esp&re  qu’il  sera  accepte,  et  que  nous  serons  libres  ce  soir  ou  demain  :  il  en  est  terns. 
Comme  on  n’a  voulu  permettre  a  aucun  de  mes  camarades  de  me  venir  voir,  j’ignore 
ce  qu’ils  pensent,  et  ce  qu’ils  feront  tons. 

Je  suis  deddee  a  ne  leur  donner  aucun  conseil,  a  ne  m’occuper  que  de  moi,  et 
surtout  de  l’estime  des  lionnetes  gens  ;  je  l’obtiendrai,  j’ose  en  6tre  sure.  Je  ne  vous 
ferai  point  part  de  toutes  mes  reflexions  sur  le  passe,  le  present,  et  l’avenir ;  non  que 
je  craigne  de  les  soumettre  a  vos  lumieres  et  votre  amitie,  mais  ma  lettre  peut-etre 
ouverteon  pouroit  m’interpreter  mal ;  je  ne  veux  donner  aucun  pretexted  la  persecu¬ 
tion.  Embrassez  pour  moi  Madame  Garrick  ;  soyez  surs  tous  deux  que  je  vous 
aime,  vous  estime,  et  vous  regrette  autant  qu'il  est  possible,  et  que  vous  avez  droit  de 
l’attendre  du  coeur  le  plus  sensible  et  le  plus  reconnoissant.  Clairon. 

Ma  petite  soci^te  vous  fait  mille  et  mille  complimens.  Si  vous  voyez  Milord 
Farnham,  excusez-moi  de  ne  lui  avoir  pas  repond u. 

Le  Comte  de  Valbelle  a  arrange  votre  “  Siege  de  Calais vous  l’auriez  depuis 
longtems  sans  une  estampe  qu’il  y  veut  inserer,  et  qui  n’est  pas  encore  finie. 


DE  M.  PREVILLE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

J’ignore  les  usages  de  votre  pays,  je  ne  scais  pas  l’effet  que  peut  faire  sur  vous 
et  vos  concitoyens  une  demarche  que  l’on  se  reserve  de  faire  dans  ces  momens-ci,  afin 
qu’elle  soit  appuyee  de  Pesp^ce  d’impossibilite  de  rien  refuser  a  qui  prend  cet  instant 
pour  demander.  Entendons-nous  toutesfois,  il  n’est  question  que  de  graces,  et  voila 
ce  que  je  sollicite  pour  mes  etrennes.  Vous  etes  peut-etre  assez  pique  pour  que  je 
vous  trouve  recalcitrant  sur  cela ;  tant  mieux  pour  mon  amour  propre,  et  point  tant 
pis  a  aucuns  egards,  car  vous  etes  juste,  et  avec  une  bonne  confession  generate  que  je 
vais  vous  faire  apr£s  une  penitence  que  vous  m’imposerez,  j’aurai  mon  absolution,  et 
sur  cette  assurance  j’entre  en  mature. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


433 


Je  ne  vous  dis  pas  que  j’ai  de  l’attachement  pour  vous,  ce  n'est  pas  faute  que  cela ; 
mais  j’ai  en  l’air  de  n’en  avoir  pas  autant  que  j’en  ressens  :  vous  etes  meme  en  avance 
avec  moi  a  cet  egard  et  voila  ma  faute.  Elle  seroit  atroce  si  vraiment  j’eusse  et£  froid 
sur  cela,  si  je  n’avois  pas  senti  le  prix  de  votre  amitie  ;  j’irai  meme  plus  loin,  je  serois 
plus  qu’ingrat,  je  serois  bete,  car  l’amiti6  que  vous  avez  pour  moi  a  ajout£  a  la  con¬ 
sideration  que  me  procure  mon  £tat,  et  je  serois  bien  gauche  de  negliger  une  chose 
qui  m’est  si  avantageux :  mon  cceur  et  mon  amour  propre  y  trouvent  leur  compte. 
Voyez  d’ici  tous  les  droits  que  vous  avez  sur  moi.  Si  je  ne  parlois  pas  a  un  pliilosoplie, 
je  me  garderois  bien  de  me  mettre  si  fort  a  decouvert  avec  vous,  mais  si  cette  philo¬ 
sophic  ne  vous  rend  pas  aussi  lache  que  ceux  qui  batten t  leurs  adversaires  quand  ils 
se  mettent  a  terre,  elle  m’ouvre  aussi  de  plus  sur  chemin  de  votre  ame.  Cest  une 
justification  qui,  si  elle  n’est  pas  forte  pour  tous  ceux  qui  ne  voient  qu’eux  et  leur 
offense,  est  une  arme  triomphante  sur  ceux  qui  s’oublient  eux-memes  pour  ne  voir 
que  l’humanite  et  tout  ce  qui  l’el^ve  et  l’humilie.  Les  positions,  les  circonstances 
mal  vues  et  mal  interpretees  font  un  homme  m^prisable  de  tel  qui,  justifie,  fait  rougir 
son  juge  de  l’arret  qu'il  a  prononce  contre  lui.  Voila  bien  du  verbiage  peut-etre  in¬ 
utile  :  mais,  enfin,  je  veux  vous  disposer  en  ma  faveur,  et  les  cliens  sont  bavards. 
Ah !  ca.  Je  viens  an  fait  d’abord :  vous  avez  dit  que  je  ne  vous  avois  pas  6crit,  et 
cependant  je  vous  avois  fait  l’histoire  veritable  et  remarquable  de  la  suite  de  l’avan- 
ture  de  notre  theatre,  aprfes  l’emprisonnement  de  nos  camarades ;  j’ai  montr£  la  copie 
de  ma  lettre  a  plusieurs  de  vos  amis  ici,  et  sans  me  flatter,  ils  en  ont  £te  fort  contens. 
Je  vous  y  faisois  des  remercimens  d’un  present  que  vous  m’avez  fait ;  je  vous  de- 
mandois  d’etablir  une  correspondance  comique  entre  nous ;  je  vous  disois  enfin  tout 
ce  qu’il  est  possible  de  dire  quand  on  entreprend  de  peindre  son  sentiment,  et  vous 
accusois  ma  foiblesse  sur  les  expressions  ;  je  vous  peignois  ma  sensibility,  sans  trouver 
de  couleur  assez  vive  de  fa^on  pourtant  de  vous  persuader,  comptant  sur  votre  inter¬ 
pretation  sur  ce  qui  pouvoit  y  manquer ;  finalement,  je  vous  disois  que,  toute  putain 
que  j’etois,  vous  m’aviez  fixe,  et  que  quelque  leg£rete  que  je  montrasse  sur  ma  liaison 
avec  les  honnetes  gens,  je  n’y  etois  pas  moins  attache,  et  qu’en  consequence  j’^tois 
pyn6tre  d’attachement  pour  vous,  et  tout  ce  qui  tient  a  vous.  Vous  n’avez  pas  re<^u 
cette  lettre  a  ce  qu’on  m’a  dit :  ai-je  tort,  si  je  l’ai  6crite?  Ne  recevant  point  de 
reponse,  j’aurois  du  recrire,  j’en  conviens,  et  c’est  la  le  moment  pour  vous  d’etre  phi- 
losophe.  Mes  excuses  demandent  a  etre  entendues  par  une  ame,  et  je  ne  les  adresse 
qu’a  la  votre. 

Vous  s^aviez,  sans  doute,  que  j’avois  des  chagrins  domestiques,  ils  6toient  d’une 
nature  a  ne  recevoir  de  consolation  que  du  temps  et  de  la  dissipation.  Je  ne  portois 
partout  qu’une  gaiete  factice  qui  laissoit  ignorer  a  tout  le  monde  la  fletrissure  de  mon 
ame,  et  que  la  contrainte  augmentoit  encore :  seul  je  me  reprochois  le  temps  que 
j’avois  emploie  a  me  tromper  en  trompant  les  autres,  et  il  sembloit  que  pour  reparer 
cela,  les  idees  tristes  et  facheuses  ytoient  celles  qu’il  me  convenoit  de  me  retracer,  et 
je  me  plaisois  a  les  multiplier  ;  une  telle  position  est  au-dessus  de  la  force  humaine, 
et  j’allois  y  succomber,  lorsque  le  hazard  me  fournit  un  moyen  de  distraction.  Les 

VOL.  II.  3  K 


434 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


sens  endormis  chez-moi  depuis  trois  ans  se  r^vcillerent ;  mle  jeune  et  jolie  personne 
malheureuse  me  fut  addressee,  j’eus  le  bonheur  de  lui  6tre  utile,  mes  bienfaits  m’at- 
tacherent  it  elle.  Je  fus  la  dupe  de  moi-meme,  et  trouvant  quelqu’un  aussi  foible  que 
moi,  je  me  liai  sans  m’en  appercevoir,  bref  je  tombai  d’un  mal  dans  un  pis,  je  laissai 
prendre  trop  descendant  sur  moi.  Les  premiers  moments  de  notre  liaison  furent 
delicicux,  mais  ce  bien  apparent  s’est  bientot  Eclipse  pour  faire  place  a  un  mal  plus 
grand  que  ceux  que  j’avois  endur6  :  cette  femme,  sure  de  son  ascendant  sur  moi,  m’a 
regie  avec  une  sceptre  de  fer  ;  die  doit  inquire,  jalouse,  et  intdessd.  En  conse¬ 
quence,  elle  a  exig6  de  moi  de  tout  quitter  pour  elle.  Les  autres  femmes  lui  fai- 
soient  ombrage,  et  elle  avoit  tout  it  craindre  de  mes  amis  ;  pour  moi,  qui  ne  voyoit  et 
ne  craignoit  qu’elle,  je  lui  ai  fait  mon  sacrifice  tout  entier.  Hercule  a  file  pour  Om- 
})liale,  et  moi  pour  elle.  II  faut  conclure  qu’Hercule  et  moi  nous  sommes  deux  J  .  .  . 
f  .  .  . ;  enfin,  bon  ami,  j’ai  ouvert  les  yeux ;  je  me  ruinois,  je  donnois  sur  moi  des 
droits  qu’on  n’avoit  point  eu.  J’etois  trompe  ;  et,  le  croiriez-vous  ?  je  l’ai  vu  seul  et 
seul ;  j’ai  rompu  mes  liens;  la  nature  a  pr6te  des  forces  a  ma  raison.  J’ai  vu  mes 
enfans  prets  a  payer  de  leur  etat  des  fautes  qu’ils  n’ont  pas  commises  ;  ma  femme 
malade,  et  ne  demandant  que  quelqu’un  qui  lui  tendit  la  main  pour  rentrer  dans  la 
route  qu’elle  est  faite  pour  tenir.  J’ai  fait  ce  que  j’ai  du ;  j’ai  secoue  un  joug  avi- 
lissant  pour  prendre  celui  de  la  nature ;  je  suis  avec  ma  femme,  mes  enfans,  depuis 
un  mois,  et  je  suis  heureux.  Je  suis  plus  digne  d’avoir  des  amis,  de  retrouver  ceux 
dont  je  m’dois  doign6,  et  je  cherclie  a  me  raprocher  de  vous ;  ne  me  refusez  pas,  et 
vous  ajouterez  it  mon  bonheur. 

Je  suis,  avec  tout  l’attachement  possible,  votre  serviteur, 

Preville. 

Bon  jour  et  bon  an  ! 


DE  M.  MOLE  A  xM.  GARRICK. 


A  Paris,  le  11  Mai,  17G5. 

Il  y  a  aujourd’hui  quinze  jours,  mon  cher  Garrick,  que  j’ai  fait  partir  pour  vous 
une  lettre  de  laquelle  j’esp^rois  une  rdponse  quelle  qu’elle  fut ;  maintenant  que  le 
terns  de  la  recevoir  est  passe,  je  l’attends  de  jour  en  jour  ;  car  je  ne  doute  pas  de  la 
franchise  de  vos  prem  ikres  offres  lorsque  rien  ne  vous  y  obligeoit,  et  puisque  jjai  fait 
la  demarche  de  reclame  r  de  vous  un  service,  demarche  toujours  couteuse,  mais  que  la 
confiance  que  vous  m’avez  inspiree  m ’avoit  rendu  plus  facile,  j'attendrai  pour  le  sol¬ 
licker  de  quelqu’autre,  que  vous  m’ayez  marque  si  vous  etes  dans  l’impossibilit^  de 
me  le  rendre.  Notre  affaire  est  enfin  terminee  depuis  avant-hier  au  soir,  apr£s  vingt- 
quatre  jours  de  prison  pour  d’Auberval,  vingt-trois  pour  Brizard,  et  vingt-deux  pour 
Le  Kain  et  moi.  Vous  savez,  sans  doute,  que  lelendemain  cle  votre  depart  de  Paris, 
notre  chere  Clairon  etant  fort  malade  au  Fort  l'Eveque  ;  elle  fut  renvoyee  chez-elle, 
avec  ordre  de  n’y  recevoir  personne  exactement  que  son  medecin  et  quatre  amis 
nomm£s :  enfin,  Jeudi  dernier  au  soir,  nous  sommes  sortis  de  l’Abaye,  prison  mili- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


435 


taire  ou  nous  avions  ete  conduits  parceque  le  Fort  l’Eveque  affectoit  nos  sant£s,  a 
cause  de  la  mauvaise  odeur.  Vous  saviez  que  nous  ne  voulions  pas  jouer  avec  le 
Sieur  Dubois,  dont  vous  n’ignorez  pas  la  coquinerie.  Nous  n’y  avons  pas  jou£,  on 
l’a  forc6  a  demander  son  conge,  il  l’a  fait,  et  grace  au  del,  nous  voila  debarrass^s  de 
1’homme  le  plus  ddhonorant.  Nous  esperons,  mon  cher  Garrick,  qu’a  force  de  r6gu- 
larit6  de  moeurs,  d’honneur  et  d’honnetete,  nous  obtiendrons  des  chers  Francois  un 
peu  de  cette  distinction,  dont  les  talens  sont  honoris  en  Angleterre  et  dans  tous  les 
pays  de  l’Europe.  Mademoiselle  Clairon  ne  se  porte  pas  encore  bien,  elle  peut  a 
peine  se  soutenir,  tant  elle  est  affaiblie  par  ses  pertes  continuelles.  II  court  un  bruit 
sourd  qu’elle  ne  jouera  plus  a  Paris,  et  moi,  qui  vous  parle,  je  peux  en  avoir  quelques 
notions  ;  je  souhaite  me  tromper,  mais  j’en  ai  peur.  N’oubliez  pas,  s’il  vous  plait,  de 
dire  de  ma  part  a  Madame  Garrick  tout  ce  qu’elle  doit  attendre  d’une  ame  sensible 
et  juste.  J’attends  pour  le  coup  une  rdponse,  quoique  je  ne  perds  pas  l’espoir  d’en 
recevoir  une  de  ma  premiere  lettre. 

A  Monsieur  MOLE. 

Monsieur  Garrick, 

Directeur  des  Spectacles,  a  Londres. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  15  Mai,  1765. 

“  There  is  my  drug,  my  stuff,  my  foolery,  what  call  you  it  ?”  J’ai  grand  plai- 
sir,  Monsieur,  a  vous  l’envoyer,  a  vous  ecrire,  a  vous  dire  que  je  vous  aime  bien,  que 
je  vous  regrette  beaucoup,  et  que  j’ai  toujours  devant  les  yeux  cette  belle  et  grande 
lady,  si  bien  faite,  si  jolie,  et  l’heureux  mari  dont  les  regards  lui  disent  sans  cesse, 
“  I  love  you.”  Je  repete  mille  propos  flateurs  a  votre  portrait ;  et  quand  je  me  rap- 
pelle  la  vivacite  de  celui  qu’il  represente,  je  ne  s^aurois  assez  m’6tonner  de  le  voir 
immobile,  et  dans  la  meme  place. 

On  vous  aura,  sans  doute,  6crit  que  les  comediens  Francois  font  emport6  sur  le 
Mar6chal  de  Richelieu.  Dubois  (poor  rascal)  est  retire,  mais  avec  les  honneurs  de  la 
guerre,  se  plaisant  de  l’aventure,  c’est  qu’il  a  demande  son  conge,  ne  pouvant,  dit-il, 
vivre  avec  un  tas  de  maroufles  comme  ses  camarades.  Enfin,  le  combat  est  fini,  et  le 
champ  de  bataille  reste  a  Clairon.  Ses  ennemis  fach^s  de  sa  victoire,  font  courir  le 
bruit  que  vous  avez  dit  a  Milady  Holland,  “  Mademoiselle  Dumenil  est  tr&s-superieure 
a  Mademoiselle  Clairon.”  C’est  assur^ment  de  quoi  fletrir  ses  lauriers,  les  entrelacer 
d'absinthe.  Un  certain  Monsieur  Fox  est  nomm£  dans  ce  caquet.  Que  dira  Clairon  ? 
Helas  !  que  les  biens  de  la  vie  sont  meEs  !  O  cette  terre  !  ces  fourmis  qui  l’habitent  ! 
ces  insectes  qui  s’entre-devorent : — comment  trouvez-vous  ma  morale  ?  ne  ressemble- 
t’-elle  pas  a  celle  de  Mistress  Lovemore?*  Ah,  que  Monsieur  Garrick  doit  etre  char- 
mant  dans  ce  role  !  la  pi&ce  est  jolie,  bien  faite,  j’aime  mieux  ce  mari  lionteux,  comique, 
*  A  character  in  Murphy’s  “  Way  to  Keep  Him.”  Garrick  acted  Lovemore,  the  mari  lionteux. — Ed. 

3  k  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


43() 

que  s^rieux  ;  il  prete  davantage  ;  les  deux  pieces  Francoises  sont  tres-bien  fondues,  et 
l’Angloise  est  extremement  plaisante.  Le  denouement  est  vif.  La  veuve  Belmour 
parleroit  trop  sur  le  m£me  sujet  k  la  fin,  si  votre  jeu  muet  ne  renouvelloit  les  ris£es 
toutes  les  fois  qu’elle  vous  adresse  la  parole.  Je  devine  cela,  et  je  crois  voir  en 
mouvement  cette  jolie  mine  dont  vous  faites  tout  ce  que  vous  voulez.  Mais  otez- 

vous  de-la ;  je  veux  parler  k  Madame  Garrick, -  otez-vous  done:  faut-il  que  vous 

entendiez  tout  ce  qu’on  lui  dit  ? 

Bon  jour,  aimable  dame;  comment  vous  portez-vous?  vous  rappellez-vous 
quelquefois  un  pays  ou  vous  6tes  aimee,  ou  l'on  pense  avec  plaisir  a  vous,  ou  l’on 
conserve  ch^rement  l’esperance  de  vous  revoir?  II  est  doux,  tres-doux  d’etre  votre 
amie :  ce  titre  me  flateroit  plus  que  tous  ceux  dont  l’orgueil  d£core.  Ma  compagne 
dit  comme  moi,  elle  embrasse  the  dear,  dear  Madame  Garrick,  et  toutes  deux  nous 

vous  assurons  du  plus  sincere,  du  plus  tendre,  et  du  plus  constant  attachement : - 

ne  voila-t’-il  pas  Monsieur  Garrick  qui  regarde  du  coin  de  l’oeil  ?  II  est  jaloux,  je 
crois,  il  vous  vent  toute  enti&re  pour  lui ;  je  vous  embrasse  done  bien  vite,  et  je 
retourne  a  lui,  de  peur  d’elever  du  bruit  dans  le  charmant  manage. 

Ca,  Monsieur  :  a  present  parlons  d’affaires.  J’ai  re<pu  hier  par  un  libraire  de  Paris 
des  complimens  tr^s-bonnetes  d’une  Madame  Broock,  ou  Brock,  je  ne  m’en  souviens 
plus.  C’est  la  traductrice  de  Milady  Catesby  :  elle  ecrit  qu’elle  en  est  a  la  quatri&me 
edition.  Cela  est  fort  different  de  Monsieur  Becket,  qui  s’est  ruin6  avec  Miss  Jenny. 
Cette  dame  me  fait  demander  la  permission  de  m’envoyer  ses  ouvrages.  J’avois  des- 
sein  de  lui  faire  tenir  les  miens ;  mais  Monsieur  Hume  ne  la  connoissoit.  point,  et 
s’avisa  de  donner  cette  malheureuse  Jenny  a  Monsieur  Becket,  qui  en  a  fait  un 
garde-boutique,  un  fond  de  magazin  pour  ses  arrives  neveux.  J’ai  encore  de  la 
rancune,  comme  vous  voyez. 

Dans  le  petit  envoi,  des  cent  buit  livres  restes  entre  les  mains  de  Monsieur  Becket, 
je  vous  serai  oblige  de  pref^rer  les  comedies  aux  tragedies,  et  les  comedies  modernes 
aux  anciennes.  Au  reste,  pourtant,  votre  choix  sera  toujours  bon,  et  je  m’en  conten- 
terai  assurement. 

O  quelle  longue  lettre  !  voila  bien  de  quoi  s’^crier  je  deteste  !  la,  patience  ;  je 
finis.  Vous  me  donnerez  bien  le  terns  de  vous  embrasser,  peut-etre  ?  Allons,  voy- 
ons  si  vous  resterez  en  repos  !  Voulez-vous  me  baiser, — si,  o,  no  ?  Addio  amico  mio 
dilettissimo ;  baccio,  no  i  mani  de  vostra  Signoria,  ma  bene  gli  vostri  ocelli  mali- 
tiosi. — Adieu,  Madame  ;  adieu,  Monsieur.  Adieu  tout  de  bon,  tout  de  bon.  Je 
vous  epargne  la  platte  formule  complimenteuse,  et  suis,  de  tout  moil  coeur,  de  toute 
mon  ame,  votre  sincere  amie, 


Riccoboni. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


437 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  20  Mai,  1765. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re^u  v6tre  lettre,  a  laquelle  j’aurois  r6pondu  plutot  sans  le  retard  de 
vos  estampes  qui  ne  sont  arrives  ici  que  depuis  quatre  jours.  Madame  la  Marquise 
de  Yilleroi  a  re^u  la  sienne  avec  satisfaction,  en  me  disant  beaucoup  de  bien  de 
vous  et  en  me  priant  de  lui  donner  de  vos  nouvelles  toutes  les  fois  que  j’en 
recevrois.  Vous  verrez  par  la  lettre  ci-joint  les  remerciemens  de  Mr.  le  Comte  du 
Luc :  je  vous  fais  les  miens  pour  celle  que  vous  m’avez  donn6e.  II  m’en  reste 
deux  dont  je  disposerai  lorsque  vous  m’aurez  nomine  les  personnes  pour  lesquelles 
elles  sont  destinees.  Mr.  Briasson  m’a  remi  aussi  une  grammaire ;  a  qui  dois-je  la 
remettre  ? 

J’ai  fait  toutes  les  commissions  dont  vous  m’avez  charg6  en  partant.  Mr.  de  la 
Place  a  6t6  tres-satisfait  de  1’ excuse  que  je  lui  ai  fait  de  votre  part,  et  le  valet-de- 
chambre  du  Baron  d’Holbach  bien-content  de  l’6cu  de  six  f.  que  vous  m’avez  dit  de 
lui  remettre. 

Mr.  Boquet  me  donnera  a  la  fin  de  ce  mois  les  deux  desseins  que  vous  lui  avez 
demands,  et  je  vous  les  ferai  parvenir  par  la  voie  la  plus  sure  et  la  plus  prompte. 

J’ai  din6  il  y  a  deux  jours  chez  Mrs.  Cazeau ;  nous  avons  beaucoup  parle  de  Ma- 
demoiselle  Allard :  nous  aurions  bien  voulu  vous  la  faire  avoir,  mais  il  n’y  a  point  de 
danseur  ici  qui  puisse  aller  avec  elle,  et  Balletti  n’est  pas  non  plus  de  son  genre. 
D’ailleurs,  on  offre  a  cette  danseuse  cinq  cent  louis,  et  voyage  pay6,  pour  aller  passer 
trois  mois  l’hiver  prochain  a  Stutgard  avec  Vestris.  Toutes  les  raisons  doivent  vous 
determiner  a  renoncer  a  Mademoiselle  Allard  pour  l'ann^e  prochaine.  J’ai  6crit  au- 
jourd’hui  a  B6gina,  et  je  lui  ai  marqu6  positivement  que  vous  etiez  pret  de  lui  faire 
un  engagement  s’il  pouvoit  vous  procurer  une  bonne  danseuse  de  son  genre,  pour  aller 
a  Londres  avec  lui.  Je  vous  ferai  part  de  sa  r^ponse  sitot  que  je  l’aurai ;  mais  je 
crains  bien  que  le  retard  que  vous  avez  mis  dans  celle  que  vous  deviez  lui  faire,  ne 
lui  ait  donne  le  terns  de  s’engager  ailleurs. 

Je  vous  enverrai  avec  les  desseins  de  Boquet,  le  portrait  de  Voltaire,  que  je  vous 
ai  promis.  J’y  joindrai  l’arbre  chronologique  que  vous  avez  demand^  a  L6vi£s. 

J’ai  sorti  tous  vos  habits  du  vilain  coffre  ou  vous  les  aviez  mis,  je  les  ai  fait  ar¬ 
ranger  dans  une  armoire,  et  vous  trouverez  ci-joint  un  etat  des  effets  que  vous  m’avez 
laisses. 

Je  vous  remercie  des  soins  que  vous  voulez  bien  vous  donner  pour  mon  Antho- 
logie.  Mr.  Becket  peut  recevoir  des  souscriptions  jusqu’au  20  du  mois  prochain  ;  et 
apres,  vous  me  marquerez  le  nombre  d’exemplaires  qu’il  faudra  que  je  fasse  passer  en 
Angleterre. 

Le  pauvre  Clairant,  votre  ami,  vient  de  mourir  d’une  fitivre  maligne ;  c’est  un 
grand  homme  de  moins,  et  g^n^ralement  regrette. 


438 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ETAT  DES  EFFETS  QUE  MR.  GARRICK  M'A  LAISSfcS. 

Une  paire  de  pistolcts. 

Une  paire  de  chandeliers  argent  £s. 

Un  petit  chandelier  aussi  argent^;  et  des  mouchettes  d’acier. 

Une  £p£e  noire,  et  un  fleuret. 

Une  bo£te  de  fer  blanc  oil  il  y  a  du  th£. 

Deux  coussins  de  toile  k  carreaux. 

Un  habit,  veste,  et  eulotte  verd  en  soie,  gallonn^e  d’argent. 

Un  habit,  veste,  et  eulotte  de  soie  lustrine  jaune  et  [meL]  d’or. 

Un  habit,  veste,  et  eulotte  toile  grise. 

Un  habit,  veste,  et  eulotte  de  ratine. 

Un  morceau  de  lustrine  de  soie. 

Vingt-sept  brochures  ou  livres  relics. 

Un  paquet  de  quatre  bougies. 

Je  reconnois  avoir  les  effets  ci-dessus  nommes  apartenant  a  Mr.  Garrick,  que  moi, 
ou  mes  h6ritiers  lui  rendront  4  la  premiere  demande  qu’il  en  fera. 

A  Paris,  ce  20  Mai,  1765.  Monnet. 

Tous  vos  amis  vous  font  des  compliments,  principalement  Favart,  qui  vous  aime 
autant  que  moi.  Bien  des  respects  a  Madame  ;  et  croyez,  mon  ami,  que  je  vous  suis 
d6vou6  pour  la  vie,  Monnet. 

N’oubliez  pas,  mon  ami,  d’aller  avec  Madame  Garrick  voir  les  quatre  tableaux 
de  Messrs.  Boucher  et  Vernet,  chez  Mrs.  Thornhill,  Berkeley  Square. 

A  Monsieur 

Monsieur  David  Garrick, 
in  Covent  Garden,  h  Londres. 


DU  CHEVALIER  DE  CHASTELLUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  29  Mai,  1765. 

J’ai  re^u,  mon  cher  ami,  le  papier  que  vous  m’avez  eu  la  bont6  de  me  renvoyer, 
et  j’ai  re^u  avec  bien  plus  de  plaisir  encore  les  assurances  que  vous  me  donnez  de 
votre  amiti6.  Croyez  que  vous  avez  en  moi  plus  qu’un  admirateur  de  vos  talens ; 
puisque  personne  n’apr6cie  mieux  que  moi  vos  vertus  sociales,  et  les  charmes  de  votre 
caract^re,  qui  vous  rendront  &  jamais  pr4cieux  a  tous  ceux  qui  vous  connoissent. 
Je  vous  exacte  a  venir  tous  les  ans  voir  vos  amis  en  France.  C’est  avec  bien  du 
plaisir  que  je  me  mets  a  leur  t6te  pour  vous  en  presser.  Personne  ne  jouira  mieux 
que  moi  de  votre  presence,  et  personne  n’aura  jamais  pour  vous  un  attachement  plus 
sincere  que  celui  avec  lequel  j’ai  l’lionneur  d’etre,  mon  cher  Garrick, 

Voire  tr£s-humble,  et  tr£s-ob£issant  serviteur, 

Le  Ch.  de  Chastellux. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


439 


Je  pars  ce  soir  pour  aller  4  Landau,  ou  est  mon  regiment :  si  vous  m’ecriviez, 
adressez  votre  lettre  a  Mr.  Hume,  ou  au  Baron  d’Holbach. 

Je  vous  envoye  un  petit  ouvrage  qu’on  m’a  engage  a  faire  imprimer.  Je  sou- 
haite  de  bien  bon  coeur  que  vous  en  soyez  content. 

J’ai  vu  votre  buste  chez  Le  Maire :  c’est  un  chef-d’oeuvre. 


DE  M.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  ler.  Juin,  1765. 

Vous  voudrez  bien  m’excuser,  mon  cher  Garrick,  si  j’ai  tant  tarde  a  vous  donner 
des  nouvelles  de  la  suite  de  notre  malheureuse  aventure.  Nous  nous  en  sommes  tir£s 
assez  glorieusement,  mais  aux  depens  de  notre  recette  et  de  notre  liberty  c’est  ainsi 
que  l'on  gagne  toujours  son  proems  en  France  contre  les  gens  de  quality.  Monsieur 
le  Marshal  de  Richelieu  fait  tout  ce  qu’il  peut  pour  nous  faire  6prouver  la  suite  de 
son  ressentiment ;  mais  il  aura  beau  faire,  il  ne  pourra  dissimuler  a  qui  que  ce  soit 
qu’il  est  honteux  d’attendre  que  l’on  soit  Marshal  de  France,  et  que  l’on  ait  soixante 
dix  ans,  pour  faire  des  6tourderies  dignes  d’un  jeune  mousquetaire.  J’ai  vu  le  mo¬ 
ment  ou  cette  partie  d’administration  alloit  ctre  enlev^e  par  le  Parlement  a  Messieurs 
les  premiers  gentilhommes  de  la  chambre ;  c’est  la  partie  qui  a  et6  cause  que  le 
Marechal  a  6t6  oblige  de  fl^chir  et  de  consentir  a  l’expulsion  de  Dubois,  comme  nous 
l’avions  exig6.  Vous  voyez,  mon  cher  Garrick,  qu’en  France,  comme  dans  tout  autre 
pays,  on  n’obtient  la  justice  qu’a  force  de  fermete  et  de  perseverance.  On  dit  ici  que 
vos  fabriquants  de  soie  ont  jette  des  pierres  dans  la  voiture  de  Monsieur  le  Due  de 
Bedford,  pour  l’avertir  seulement  qu’un  pair  de  la  Grand  Bretagne  ne  doit  pas  s’op- 
poser  a  ce  que  desire  le  peuple  ;  on  dit  aussi,  qu’il  n’a  £te  fait  aucune  justice  de  l’in- 
sulte  faite  a  Monsieur  de  Bedford,  et  que  plusieurs  bataillons  du  milice  ont  jug6  le 
proems  ;  ce  jugement  ne  me  parait  pas  trop  dans  les  regies,  mais  aujourd’hui,  mon 
cher  ami,  Le  clroit  canon  me  semble  le  droit  favori  de  tons  les  potentats.  Quand 
les  loix  le  cadent  la  force,  il  faut  renoncer  aux  loix  ;  mais  il  faut  aussi  convenir 
que  les  homines  sont  si  injustes  et  si  incons^quens  qu’il  faut  soutenir  les  loix  par  la 
force,  si  l’on  veut  les  faire  respecter. 

Vous  avez  vraisemblablement  reparu  sur  la  scene,  et  les  Anglois  vous  ont  re^u, 
sans  doute,  avec  tout  le  fanatisme  d’une  nation  ivre  des  vrais  talens ;  voila,  mon  cher 
ami,  ce  qui  int^resse  vivement  tons  ceux  qui  cherissent  votre  personne  et  vos  talens. 
Si  vos  affaires  vous  laissent  un  moment  de  repos,  n’oubliez  pas  les  prisonniers  du  Fort 
l’Ev£que.  Ecrivez  tout,  et  parlez  beaucoup  de  vous  :  si  votre  modestie  vous  en  em- 
p&che,  6crivez  un  mot,  et  nous  suppleerons  aureste.  Je  vous  enjoins  aussi,  au  nom  de 
notre  amiti6  pour  vous,  de  nous  donner  des  nouvelles  de  Madame  Garrick  :  nous 
n’oublierons  jamais  l'exc&s  de  toutes  les  bont£s  qu’elle  a  eu  pour  nous.  Permettez, 
mon  cher  Garrick,  qu’au  nom  de  tous  les  d6vou£s  j’adresse  a  votre  adorable  femme 
les  horn  mages  sinceres  de  notre  respectueuse  reconnoissance. 


440 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


C’cst  un  de  mes  parens  qui  vous  remettra  ce  petit  mot  de  lettre :  si  vous  pouvez 
lui  6tre  de  quelq’utilite,  je  vous  en  aurai  pour  ma  vie  une  entiere  obligation. — Adieu, 
mon  oher  ami ;  continuez  a  faire  l’omement  et  les  plaisirs  de  votre  nation  ;  vous 
ferez  les  notres  si  vous  voulez  bien  encore  vous  ressouvenir  des  quatre  d^voues  qui 
vous  aimeront  jusqu’au  dernier  moment. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  et  vous  salue  de  tout  mon  cceur, 

Le  Kain. 


DE  MADEMOISELLE  CLAIRON  A  M.  GARRICK  • 

Mr.  de  Marolles,  conseiller  a  la  cour  des  aides,  homme  d’esprit  et  de  merite, 
ayant  deja  beaucoup  voyag6,  curieux  d’admirer  ce  qui  distingue,  honore,  embellit 
chaque  nation,  veut.  faire  connoissance  avec  vous,  et  croit  que  vous  m’aimez  assez 
pour  le  bien  traiter  k  ma  seule  recommandation.  Je  suis  trop  flat^e  de  cette  id£e 
pour  lie  pas  1’adopter:  je  le  dois  d’autant  plus,  que  personne  lie  vous  aime  plus  que 
moi,  ne  sait  mieux  tout  ce  que  vous  valez,  et  ne  vous  croit  plus  juste. 

Je  voudrois  bien  pouvoir  vous  donner  le  detail  exact  de  tout  ce  qui  s’est  pass6 
depuis  votre  depart :  ma  foiblesse  ne  me  le  permet  pas,  je  ne  puis  qu’esquisser. 

On  m’a  fait  sortir  de  prison  le  cinqui&me  jour,  on  m’a  conduite  cliez  le  lieutenant 
de  police  corame  mauvais  train,  la  on  m’ordonna  de  la  part  du  Roi  de  garder  les 
arrets  jusqua  nouvel  ordre  ;  de  ne  recevoir  que  six  personnes,  et  de  donner  leurs 
noms  par  ecrit ;  au  bout  de  vingt-quatre  jours  on  rendit  la  liberte  a  mes  camarades, 
et  l’on  oublia  de  me  rendre  la  mienne,  qui  enfin  arriva  vingt-quatre  heures  apres.  Mr. 
le  Due  d’Aumont,  que  je  vis  alors,  me  demanda  quels  etoient  mes  projets  pour  l’ave- 
nir  ;  je  lui  repondis  que  je  ne  parlerois  de  moi  que  lorsque  la  comedie  seroit  entice¬ 
ment  calmde.  Au  mois  de  Juin  tout  ayant  prisson  cours  ordinaire,  d’accord  avec  Le 
Kain  et  Mold,  pour  lesquels  je  m’dtois  sacrifie,  je  signifiai  mon  conge ;  on  me  re- 
pondit  que  le  Roi  me  le  refusoit,  j’insistai,  et  INlr.  le  Due  d’Aumont  vint  alors  me 
demander  au  nom  du  Roi,  du  public,  et  de  la  comedie,  de  suspendre  au  moins  jus- 
qu’a  mon  retour  de  Geneve,  oil  j’avois  dit  que  j’allois.  Les  motifs  de  sa  demande 
etoient  raisonnables :  je  m’y  rendis.  II  m’offrit  alors  pour  rentrer  au  theatre  tout  ce 
qui  peut  sdduire  une  ame  ambitieuse  ou  intdressee  ;  je  refusai  tout,  je  ne  voulus  faire 
le  sacrifice  de  ma  vengeance  et  de  ma  vie  qu’a  la  gloire ;  je  dis,  que  si  l’on  vouloit 
abolir  l’infame  prdjugd  attache  a  la  comedie,  lui  accorder  tous  les  droits  dont  jouissent 
tous  les  autres  citoyens,  je  reparoitrois,  mais  que  c’dtoit  a  ce  seul  prix  :  on  me  promit 
d’y  travailler.  A  mon  retour,  j’apris  que  cette  affaire  avoit  la  plus  grande  publicity  ; 
personne  ne  doutoit  de  son  succds,  mais  l’dtourderie,  la  mal-adresse  et  la  mecliancete 

*  When  the  memoirs  of  Clairon  first  appeared,  there  seemed  to  be  some  doubt  whether  she  had  ever 
displayed  that  elevated  mind  which  is  attributed  to  her  by  the  writer  of  them.  But  we  now  see,  from  her 
letters  written  during  the  events  which  called  her  into  action,  that  the  swelling  sentiments  she  had  uttered 
on  the  stage  passed  really  into  her  character,  and  rendered  her  a  very  intractable  subject  to  either  the 
menaces  or  the  entreaties  of  the  ruling  powers. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


441 


Font  fait  manquer,  au  point  meme  que  les  com^diens  sont  pis  qu’ils  n’ont  jamais 
De-la  je  suis  libre.  Cependant  on  s’obstine  a  me  refuser  toujours  mon  congd  ;  il  n’est 
point  de  persecutions  que  je  n’eprouve,  je  viens  d’en  etre  a  la  mort,  mais  dussois-je 
peril',  je  ne  changerois  pas.  Ce  seroit  foiblesse  ou  lachete  :  mon  ame  est  incapable  de 
l’une  et  de  l’autre,  ma  fermete  lassera  les  persecuteurs  :  gloire  entiere,  ou  repos  ;  voila 
mon  seul  refrain. 

Bon  jour,  mon  cher  ami :  ressouvenez-vous  de  moi ;  priez  votre  charmante  femme 
d’en  faire  autant,  et  venez  nous  revoir  le  plustot  possible. 

II  faut  encore  que  je  vous  dise  que  le  plus  coquin,  le  plus  fourbe,  le  plus  mediant 
des  homines  est  Mr.  Le  Kain  ;  ce  n’est  pasun  oui-dire,  j’en  ai  les  preuves  par  ecrit  de 
sa  main.  Cependant,  c’est  a  moi  seule  qu’il  doit  un  quart  de  plus  pour  sa  femme,  une 
pension  du  Roy  pour  lui,  et  un  certificat  sur  sa  probite,  attaqide  par  un  de  ses  su- 
perieurs  meme,  et  plus  que  suspectee  par  les  autres. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  15  Juin,  1765. 

Mon  ami,  la  lettre  que  vous  avez  donnee  a  Mr.  Hochereau  ne  m’a  et&  remise  que 
Mardi  dernier.  J’ai  fait  vos  deux  commissions,  et  je  vous  enverrai  avec  les  desseins 
de  Mr.  Boquet  un  reverbd’e,  et  deux  modeles  differents  de  la  lampe,  que  vous 
voulez  pour  eclairer  la  rampe  de  votre  theatre.  II  y  a  deux  sortes  de  reverbd-es, 
ceux  que  foil  place  dans  une  niche  contre  la  muraille,  a  une  m£che,  et  ceux  de  sus¬ 
pension  en  forme  de  lustre,  a  cinq  mcches  :  les  premieres  et  les  plus  convenables  (a 
ce  que  je  crois)  pour  Eclairer  votre  salle  valent  quinze  livres,  etles  autres  depuis  trente- 
six  livres  jusqu’a  soixante-et-douze  livres,  suivant  la  grandeur  et  les  ornemens  qu'on 
y  met.  Je  vous  en  enverrai  d’abord  un  de  quinze  livres.  Si  vous  en  voulez  dans  la 
suite  un  grand,  vous  me  le  ferez  s^avoir,  et  vous  aurez  toujours  l’attention  de  me 
marquer  l’endroit  et  la  grandeur  du  lieu  pour  lequel  vous  le  destinerez.  Quand  aux 
lampes  pour  Eclairer  votre  theatre,  il  y  en  a  deux  sortes  ;  1’une  de  terre  en  forme  de 
biscuit,  a  six  ou  huit  meclies,  oil  l’on  met  de  l’huile,  et  1’autre  de  fer  blanc,  en  forme 
de  bougie,  avec  un  ressort  ou  l’on  met  des  bougies.  Les  premieres  sont  moins  cou- 
teuses,  et  donnent  plus  de  lumicre.  Mais  il  faut  pour  que  cela  ne  donne  point 
d’odeur,  employer  la  meilleure  huile,  et  la  plus  grande  proprete  dans  les  lampes. 

Mr.  Boquet  vous  auroit  d£ja  envoye  les  desseins  qu’il  vous  a  fait  de  Castor  et 
Pollux  ;  mais  il  veut  y  joindre  la  cascade  du  nouvel  opera  qu’on  repr^sentera  Mardi 
prochain  pour  la  premiere  fois ;  il  veut  en  voir  l’effet  pour  terminer  ce  qui  vous  regarde. 

Une  personne  qui  est  a  Londres  il  y  a  huit  k  dix  jours,  a  du  vous  faire  remettre 
de  ma  part  le  portrait  de  Mr.  de  Voltaire,  l’arbre  chronologique,  et  la  brochure  de¬ 
pen  dan  te  de  cet  ouvrage. 

Je  s^ais  de  bonne  part  que  Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  demande  sa  retraite,  et  cpi'on 
la  lui  a  accord^.  A  propos  de  theatre,  nous  avons  eu  ces  jours  derniers  au  Fran- 

3  i. 


VOI..  II. 


442 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


cois,  un  debutant  qui  a  eu  beaucoup  de  succfcs :  des  gens  qui  ont  vus  Baron,  osent  le 
comparer  lui  dans  bien  des  clioses:  pour  moi,  je  lui  ai  trouv6  une  grande  intel¬ 
ligence,  ct  une  declamation  naturelle.  Cet  acteur  se  nomine  Aufrenne,  il  est,  dit-on, 
Genevois,  et  bien  determine  de  lie  pas  rester  a  Paris  a  moins  qu’on  ne  lui  donne  une 
demi  part  en  entrant  ;  il  s’offre  de  partager  l’emploi  de  Brizard,  et  de  jouer  dans  le 
comique,  oil  l’on  dit  qu’il  est  assez  bon. 

11  est  inutile  de  m’envoyer  les  noms  dcs  personnes  qui  ont  souscrit  pour  mon 
Anthologie ;  je  prie  seulement  Mr.  liecket  de  me  marquer  au  plutdt  combien  il  lui 
en  faut  d’cxemplaires  :  je  voudrois  bien  aussi,  qu’il  put  vendre  un  pen  du  Comte  de 
Comminges  ;  car  le  pauvre  Arnauld  de  Baccular  a  encore  plus  besoin  d’argent  que 
moi,  et  je  suis  toujours  fach6  de  ne  vous  en  avoir  pas  gliss6  secretement  cinq  a  six 
cents  exeinplaires  dans  votre  coffre. 

Je  viens  de  payer  a  Mr.  George  Edoulfe,  banquier  de  Mr.  Robert  Lathropp, 
2000  livres  pour  cette  comedie  Franchise  que  j’ai  mene  a  Fondres.  Je  vous  prie  de 
le  voir,  et  de  lui  dire  que  vous  lui  payerez  vous-m<hne  le  20  Juillet  prochain,  1259 
livres,  12  sols,  que  je  lui  dois  encore:  vous  me  ferez  ce  plaisir-la  sur  l’argent  que  vous 
retirerez  de  mes  souscriptions  ;  s’il  n’y  en  a  pas  assez,  je  vous  enverrai  le  surplus. 

Le  dessein  que  vous  avez  donn6  a  Mademoiselle  Clairon  est  grav6 ;  on  le  vend,  et 
Mr.  de  Crebillon  est  tr£s-fach6  de  ce  qu’on  a  mis  son  pere  apres  Voltaire,  e’est  a  dire, 
au-dessous  le  dernier  des  volumes  sur  lesquels  Mademoiselle  Clairon  est  appuyC  J’ai 
jett^la  faute  sur  Mr.  Gravelot,  en  lui  disant  que  vous  faisiez  trop  de  cas  des  talens  de 
son  p£re  pour  avoir  fait  une  erreur  de  cette  nature  :  effectivement,  quand  au  tragique 
Crebillon  passe  avant  Voltaire,  ne  seroit-ce  que  par  ordre  de  date.  Nos  amis  vous 
font  des  compliments ;  faites  les  miens,  je  vous  prie,  a  Madame  Garrick  ;  vous  s^avez 
combien  je  vous  aime  tous  deux.  Monnet. 

Toujours  chez  Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc,  rue  Beauregard,  quartier  de  Bonnes 
Nouvelles. 

Vous  devriez  £crire  a  Mr.  Favart ;  il  vous  aime,  et  il  merite  du  souvenir  de  votre 
part :  il  loge  rue  Mauconseil,  pr£s  la  Comedie  Italienne. 


DE  M.  MOLE  A  MR.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  15  Juin,  1765. 

Voila  le  parti  que  je  prens,  &  moins  qu’on  ne  rem^die  a  tous  les  maux  que  nous 
eprouvons,  et  qu’ils  ne  soient  r£par£s  authentiquement.  Vous  me  demandez  pour- 
quoi  je  ne  vous  ai  pas  fait  le  detail  de  mes  besoins  dans  l’instant  oil  vous  m’avez  fait 
offre  et  services.  J'^tois  loin  de  prosumer  que  notre  demarche,  dont  le  motif  £toit 
estimable,  produiroit  un  d6sordre  et  des  effets  aussi  facbeux ;  j’esp^rois  jouir  de  mon 
6tat  et  remplir  mes  engagemens,  sans  etre  a  charge  a  mes  amis.  Vous  savez  que 
e’est  le  dernier  remede  ou  l’on  doit  recourir,  et  plus  vous  avez  mis  de  franchise  et  de 
zele  a  nous  vouloir  obliger,  plus  j’ai  cru  devoir  &tre  scrupuleux  dans  l’usage  que  je 
devois  faire  de  vos  offres. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


443 


Aujourd’hui,  je  crois  voir  le  moment  de  les  mettre  a  profit  ;  non  que  je  sois  sur 
qu’on  m’accordera  ma  retraite  que  je  vais  demander  sous  peu  de  jours.  Peut-etre  me 
la  refusera-t’-on  pour  le  moment ;  auquel  cas,  ce  que  j’attens  de  votre  amitie  me  seroit 
inutile,  et  je  le  remettrois ;  mais  comme  il  faut  tout  prevoir,  et  que  dans  le  moment 
ou  ma  probit6  est  mon  seul  guide,  ce  seroit  mal  l’entendre  que  de  me  mettre  dans  le 
cas  de  manquer  a  des  engagemens  pris,  je  crois  ne  rienfaire  de  mieuxque  de  rGlamer 
sur  cela,  celle  d’un  galant  homme  digne  de  confiance,  et  fait  pour  entendre,  sentir,  et 
se  preter  au  motif  qui  me  fait  agir.  J’attens  votre  r6ponse  par  la  meme  voie  que  la 
derni&re ;  je  vous  prie  de  m’y  marquer  positivement  ce  que  vous  pouvez  faire,  et 
pour  quel  terns  au  juste  je  devrai  compter  sur  vous;  je  prendrai  les  arrangemens 
les  plus  prompts  qui  me  seront  possible,  et  qui  pourront  le  mieux  vous  convenir. 
Comptez,  mon  cher  Garrick,  qu’avec  moins  d’exactitude  que  j’en  ai,  je  ne  serois  pas 
dans  le  cas  de  me  livrer  a  toute  ma  confiance  en  vous. 

Mille  assurances  d’attachement,  de  consideration,  et  de  respects  a  Madame  Gar¬ 
rick,  que  je  salue  de  tout  mon  cceur  ainsi  que  vous. 

Mole. 


DE  M.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  ce  21  Juillet,  1765. 

Je  ne  puis  vous  exprimer,  mon  cher  et  digne  ami,  le  plaisir  que  m’a  fait  la  lettre 
que  vous  avez  eu  la  bont6  de  m’Grire;  le  part  que  vous  prenez  a  ma  situation 
prouve  que  vous  vous  intGessez  bien  vivement  a  ce  qui  me  regarde,  et  je  vous  en 
remercie  de  tout  mon  cceur.  II  n’est  que  trop  vrai  que  le  theatre  Francois  se  dG 
garnit  de  jour  en  jour  de  ce  qu  il  a  de  mieux,  et  le  tout  par  une  mauvaise  admi¬ 
nistration  :  ce  ne  sera  jamais  par  la  fortune  ni  par  l’interet  que  l’on  engagera  les 
artistes  de  France  a  ne  prendre  une  emulation  que  1’avilissement  leur  aura  ot£e  ;  il 
faut  a  ces  etres  extraordinaires  plus  d’estime  et  de  consideration,  c’est  le  seul  bien 
par  lequel  on  peut  leur  faire  faire  des  miracles,  et  c’est  celui  que  la  noblesse  n’en- 
tend  pas. 

Je  n’ai  pas,  comme  Moise,  le  don  de  lire  dans  les  choses  a  venir ;  mais  autant  que 
je  puis  m’y  connoitre,  il  faut  que  notre  etablissement  ou  culbute,  ou  se  releve  a 
Paques  prochain  sous  une  autre  forme.  Nous  ne  pouvons  pas  demeurer  diffamG 
comme  nous  le  sommes ;  mais  telle  chose  qu’il  en  puisse  arriver,  soit  que  je  me  retire 
dans  une  cellule  philosophique,  soit  que  je  paroisse  sur  le  grand  theatre  du  monde, 
je  vous  demanderai  en  grace,  mon  cher  et  bon  Garrick,  la  permission  de  vous  rendre 
ma  visite  a  Londres,  soit  avant  la  cloture  de  Paques,  soit  a  la  rentr6e. 

Je  veux  mettre  au  nombre  de  mes  bons  jours,  celui  ou  j’aurai  pu  acquGir  ma 
libert6,  et  ou  il  me  sera  permis  de  vous  contempler  dans  toute  votre  gloire.  Il  me 
sera  bien  doux  de  joindre  mes  applaudissemens  a  ceux  que  vous  recevez  tons  les  jours 
d’une  nation  dont  vous  avez  eu  quelquefois  a  vous  plaindre,  mais  qui  a  immortalisd 

3  L  2 


444 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


vos  talons,  ct  cimcntc  votre  fortune  :  avcc  do  pareils  d^dommagcmens,  mon  clier  ami, 
l’on  pardonne  bien  des  choses.  Vous  £tes  dans  lcs  bonnes  graces  de  votre  clerge,  et 
notre  archevfeque  nous  envoye  a  tons  les  diables  ;  vous  &tes  votre  maitre,  et  nous 
sommes  esclaves  ;  vous  jouissez  d’une  gloire  veritable,  et  la  notre  nous  est  toujours 
dispute;  vous  avez  une  fortune  brillante,  et  nous  sommes  pauvres :  voila.  de  furi- 
ouses  oppositions.  Quoiqu’il  cn  soit,  j’oublierai  peut-ctre  tout,  quand  j’aurai  le 
plaisir  de  vous  voir. — Adieu,  mon  clier  et  bon  ami ;  faites  moi  1’amitE  d’assurer 
Madame  Garrick  de  mes  civilites  ;  assurez-la  bien  que  je  n’oublierai  jamais  toutes  les 
bont^s  dont  clle  nous  a  comblees  :  ma  reconnoissance  et  toute  mon  estime  vous  sont 
acquises  ;  je  serai  trop  content  si  j’ai  pu  meriter  la  votre. — Adieu  encore  une  fois, 
mon  clier  ami.  Je  vous  embrasse  du  meilleur  de  mon  coeur, 

Le  Ivain. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

M audit  soit  l’etourdi ! — S^avez-vous  de  qui  je  parle,  mon  ami?  De  moi,  sans  doute , 
allez-vous  dire.  Eh  non  !  c’est  de  Mr.  Sturz :  il  a  bien  de  l’esprit,  mais  c’est  la  plus 
mauvaise  t6te  !  Ecoutez  mon  histoire. 

Je  lui  conte  bonnement  mes  petites  affaires,  je  lui  dis  que  j’attends  le  courier  de 
Mr.  Francois  pour  vous  envoyer  ma  lettre,  et  notre  traduction.  Pouf!  le  voila 
eomme  un  fou.  Un  paquet  ad r esse  a  Mr.  Garrick,  d  mon  ami,  donnex-le-moi,—je  lui 
ecris  aussi,je  remettrai  le  tout  encles  mains  sures.  Je  me  laisse  persuader;  il  emporte 
les  livres,  la  lettre  ; — apr&s — oh,  devinez  !  c’est  a  Coppenhague  qii’il  envoye  les  deux 
exemplaires  destines  a  Mr.  Murphy,  et  a  votre  lordship.  Je  l’aurois  tue  :  j’ai  jur£, 
peste,  tapp6  du  pied,  et  puis  je  me  suis  tranquillis^e  en  voyant  mes  lettres  entre  les 
mains  d’un  de  vos  compatriotes,  assez  obligeant  pour  reparer  le  mal.  Il  veut  bien  se 
charger  de  vous  remettre  ce  petit  paquet. 

Je  n’ai  pas  un  chat  ici,  que  je  puisse  employer  a  faire  passer  mes  lettres  a  Londres, 
si  ce  n’est  cet  ami  de  Air  Francois.  Votre  inconstant  gouvernement  m’est  insup¬ 
portable  ;  je  ha'is  les  deux  chambres  en  perfection,  surtout  la  maison  des  lords.  Je 
ne  suis  pas  consoEe  de  Mr.  Porter,  et  ce  petit  vilain  Air.  Heyden,  qui  juroit  de  ne 
pas  rester  a  Londres. — A  present,  je  me  soucie  de  l’embassadeur  et  des  secretaires 
eomme  de  rien  du  tout.  Vous  verrez  qu’ils  ne  bougeront  de  Paris.  On  m’avoit 
annonc6  le  retour  de  Mr.  Hume,  j’en  recevois  les  complimens,  mais  c’est  un  faux 
bruit. — Me  voila  eomme  vous,  finissant  in  a  hurry, — on  vient, — c’est  une  belle  dame, 
— vous  rappellez-vous  une  charmante  petite  personne  que  vous  vites  chez-moi  ?  elle 
etoit  alors  Madame  Daugni,  sous  le  nom  de  Mademoiselle  de  Riancour.  Son  manage, 
fait  depuis  cinq  ans,  est  declare.  Si  vous  voyez  Mr.  Porter  et  Air.  Hume,  donnez- 
leur  cette  nouvelle  :  elle  leur  fera  plaisir,  j’en  suis  sure. — Adieu,  bon  jour!  Je  vous 
embrasse,  et  Madame  Garrick  aussi.  Dame !  je  suis  press^e,  il  fait  un  froid  tenible, 
et  j Ecris  loin  du  feu. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


445 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK, 

Paris,  ce  29  Juillet,  1765. 

Je  lie  me  suis  pas  pressee  de  vous  ecrire,  Monsieur ;  j’esp^rois  une  lettre  d’avis,  un 
balot  de  livres ;  je  comptois  devoir  bientot  vous  rendre  grace  de  vos  soins,  de  la  dili¬ 
gence  de  Mr.  Becket,  et  joindre  mes  remercimens  a  ma  reponse ;  mais  vous  m’avez 
oubliee  :  j’en  suis  fachee,  bien  fachee  assurement,  car  je  me  souviens  de  vous,  et  j'ai- 
merois  a  vous  le  prouver.  Pour  ce  libraire  maudit,  tr&s-maudit,  mille  et  mille  fois 
maudit !  vous  Aroyez  s’il  m’est  possible  de  garder  la  pair  avec  lui ;  vous  m’avez  en- 
gagee  a  lui  pardonner,  il  recommence  a  m’impatienter.  The  devil  take  him  !  Vous 
ne  me  dites  point  si  on  vous  a  remis  le  petit  volume  qui  a  du  accompagner  ma  lettre. 

II  seroit  bien  difficile,  je  crois,  de  mettre  du  trouble  dans  votre  joli  manage :  vous 
mentez.  Madame  Garrick  trouve  bon  qu’on  aime  son  clier  mari,  et  vous  etes  bien 
aise  qu’on  rende  justice  a  votre  aimable  compagne.  Ainsi  je  ne  me  reproche  point 
ma  lettre.  Si  elle  a  61ev6e  une  petite  querelle,  c’est  tant  mieux,  vous  lui  aurez  du  le 
plaisir  d’un  doux  raccommodement. 

Vous  me  croyez  done  un  tinder  heart  ?  vous  vous  trompez,  en  v£rite.  J’en  avois 
un  tr&s-sensible,  tr&s-tendre,  et  fort  constant  dans  ses  affections.  J’imagine  comme 
vous,  que  Madame  Garrick  et  mon  ami  ont  beaucoup  de  rapports  dans  le  caractere. 
Douces,  poshes  toutes  deux,  leur  fa^on  d’aimer  pourroit  etre  la  meme,  ou  du  moins 
leur  fa^on  d’exprimer  le  sentiment  ;  car  pour  celle  de  le  sentir  je  la  crois  egale  dans 
toutes  les  creatures.  Nous  avons  vous  et  moi  plus  de  vivacity  apparente,  nos  mouve- 
mens  sont  plus  marques,  plus  impetueux  aux  yeux  des  autres,  nous  nous  montrons, 
nos  passions  se  peignent  sur  nos  traits,  elles  £clatent ;  en  sont-elles  plus  fortes  ?  je  ne 
le  crois  pas.  Nous  nous  agitons  au  dehors;  une  personne  d’un  naturel  doux  s’agite 
au  dedans  d’elle-meme  ;  si  elle  se  blesse,  elle  ne  crie  pas,  en  sent-elle  moins  de  dou- 
leur?  demandez  a  Madame  Garrick,  elle  vous  dira  non. 

Est-ce  bien  un  compliment  de  ne  pas  vouloir  de  vingt  ann6es  s’il  falloit  que  votre 
coeur  (V amadou  s’attacha  a  mon  coeur  de  meche,  de  soufre,  et  de  toute  matiere  combus¬ 
tible.  Cela  est  un  peu  traduit  comme  Madame  Belot,  n’est-ce-pas  ?  jamais  je  n’eus 
un  coeur  passionne ;  et,  malgre  la  vivacite  de  mon  esprit,  j’ai  et6  tendre  en  amour  et  le 
suis  en  amitie.  Mais  voila  un  beau  caquet  pour  une  honnete  vieille  qui  ne  voudroit 
pas  etre  jeune,  et  ne  regrette  point  la  saison  des  roses,  dans  la  crainte  de  se  rappeller 
qu’elle  est  aussi  celle  des  epines.  3/orale  de  savetier,  diroit  le  General  Clerk,  et  il 
n’auroit  pas  tort. 

A  MADAME  GAKRICK. 


Ah,  Madame,  vous  avez  un  bien  malitieux,  un  bien  m^chant  mari.  Il  me  dit 
des  menteries,  il  neglige  mes  affaires  ;  son  libraire  est  un  enrage,  un  papiste,  un  Je- 
suite  !  il  a  jur6  de  me  desoler.  Je  vous  demande  votre  protection  contre  lui :  vrai- 
ment  si  j’etois  sa  Dulcinee,  je  l’exilerois  en  Sibcrie.  Je  voudrois  bien  etre  Monsieur 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


446 

le  Baron  d’Holbach,  je  voudrois  l’etrc  pour  cent  mille  raisons  ;  il  va  vous  voir, 
vous  parler,  vous  embrasser,  c’est  un  bonheurqueje  lui  envie,  je  desirerois  le  partager 
avec  lui.  Vous  aurez  bien  de  la  joie  a  le  recevoir  chez-vous.  Ma  compagne  vous 
fait  les  plus  tendres  complimens,  elle  vous  prie  de  vous  souvenir  quelquefois  com  bien 
elle  vous  aime :  moi,  je  vous  demande  une  petite  place  dans  ce  cceur  tender,  et  non 
pas  tinder. 

A  MONSIEUR. 

Ca,  mon  aimable  correspondant,  qui  mettez  votre  t6te  avec  celle  de  Mr.  Becket, 
et  ne  faites  rien  qui  vaille ;  je  ne  vous  en  aime  pas  moins,  malgr£  votre  oubli.  J’avois 
un  peu  trop  pr6sum£  de  mon  credit  a  Land  res,  de  mes  amis  de  Land  res ;  je  me 
vantois,  patience.  Je  dirai  que  nos  sages  voisins  sont  un  peu  legers,  un  peu  n£gli- 
gens,  un  peu  £tourdis,  un  peu  Francois.  Oui  vraiment,  je  le  dirai:  quitte  a  me 
d£dire  quand  vous  m’aurez  prouv6  le  contraire.  Je  vous  embrasse,  [avec]  un  pochetin 
di  rabbia,  ma  non  importa :  je  vous  souhaite  de  la  joie,  de  la  sant£,  des  d£sirs ;  car 
c’est  un  bonheur  d’en  avoir,  et  de  les  satisfaire. — Addio,  mio  caro,  caro  amico. 

Eut-elle  tous  les  talens  du  monde,  Alistriss  Brooke  n’aura  jamais  mes  ouvrages  : 
pour  moi,  je  liais  l’esprit  vindicatif,  et  les  satiriques  me  sont  en  horreur. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  31  Juillet,  1765. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re^u  bier,  a  mon  retour  de  Compiegne,  les  lettres  et  les  deux  petits 
paquets  que  vous  m’avez  fait  tenir  par  le  Chevalier  Lambert.  J’ai  fait  toutes  les 
clioses  dont  vous  m’avez  charges,  a  l’exception  de  Mr.  Duvivier,  dont  vous  ne  m’avez 
pas  donn6  l’adresse.  Quand  vous  me  1’aurez  indiqu6e,  ou  queje  l'aurai  d^couvert,  je 
lui  remettrai  ce  qui  lui  appartient. 

J’ai  remis  a  Mr.  Vanderguck,  peintre,  votre  reverbere  et  les  deux  modules  de 
lumieres  que  vous  m’avez  deman  des  pour  6clairer  votre  theatre ;  celui  qui  £claire  par 
de  la  bougie  se  fera  facilement  en  Angleterre.  Si  vous  n’avez  pas  la  facility  de  faire  les 
biscuits  de  terre  qui  eclairent  avec  de  l’huile,  je  vous  en  ferez  faire  ici  le  nombre  dont 
vous  aurez  besoin.  J’ai  remis  aussi  a  Mr.  Vanderguck  une  boite  de  fer  blanc,  dans 
laquelle  il  y  a  les  desseins  de  Mr.  Boquet,  et  ceux  de  Pillemant,  dont  vous  voulez 
vous  accommoder  pour  l’argent  que  Mr.  Levies  vous  doit.  Mr.  Boquet  n’a  pas  eu 
le  terns  de  vous  faire  la  lettre  qui  vous  est  n^cessaire  pour  l’explication  et  l’in- 
telligence  de  ses  desseins ;  mais  il  me  la  donnera  Samedi  prochain,  et  je  vous 
la  ferai  remettre  par  un  ami  Anglois,  qui  retournera  a  Londres  vers  le  10  ou  le  12 
du  mois  prochain.  Levies  et  sa  femme  se  louent  beaucoup  de  vous  :  vous  avez 
bien  fait  de  les  obliger  ;  quand  vous  voudrez,  je  leur  rendrai  le  billet  que  le  mari 
vous  a  fait. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


447 


J’ai  fait  partir  le  23  de  ce  mois  une  caisse  de  cent  exemplaires  de  mes  chansons  a 
l’adresse  de  Becket.  Je  vous  prie  de  lui  faire  dire  de  les  retirer  de  la  douanne,  j’en 
ai  pay£  le  port  jusqu’a  Calais:  il  en  payera  l’entrde  a  Londres,  dont  je  lui  tiendrai 
compte  sur  la  vente  qu’il  en  aura  fait  jusqu’a  present,  ou  celle  qu’il  fera  l’hiver 
prochain.  Je  vous  ai  dit,  moil  ami,  que  rien  ne  me  pressoit  moins  que  la  vente 
de  ce  livre ;  quelque  sorte  qu’il  eusse  en  Angleterre,  je  serai  toujours  content. 
Quand  a  Mr.  Lattrop,  un  de  mes  amis,  banquier,  qui  doit  passer  a  Londres  dans 
quelque  terns,  arrangera  et  finira  cette  affaire  avec  vous.  N’ayez  a  ce  sujet  nulle 
inquietude. 

Je  vous  ai  marquee  par  une  lettre  que  Regina  m’avoit  ecrit,  et  qu’il  me  recom- 
niandoit,  ses  inffrets  aupr&s  de  vous.  Vous  avez  trop  d’exp6*ience  pour  ne  pas 
prendre  toutes  les  mesures  convenables  pour  vous  mettre  a  l’abri  des  ruses  des  gens 
de  son  esp£ce. 

J’ai  encore  un  dictionnaire  Anglois  a  vous :  quand  vous  voudrez,  vous  me  direz  a 
qui  il  faut  que  je  le  remette. 

]Mr.  Le  Kain  et  Mademoiselle  Clairon  ne  quitteront  pas  le  theatre ;  j’en  suis 
garant.  Mademoiselle  Clairon  vous  a  paru  peut-etre  indifferente  sur  la  gloire  de  son 
6tat,  mais  je  n’en  crois  rien  ;  et  si  elle  £toit  assez  sotte  pour  le  quitter,  elle  perdroit 
cent  pour  cent  de  sa  consideration.  Les  com^diens  se  sont  conduits  comrne  des  sots, 
et  les  sup^rieurs  encore  plus  mal. 

Je  me  rapelle  que  vous  m’avez  dit  dans  une  de  vos  lettres,  que  vous  aviez  encore 
fait  l’acquisition  d’une  terre  de  trois  mille  livres  sterling.  Je  croyois,  au  contraire, 
que  vous  vouliez  vendre  pour  acheter  en  France :  vous  l’aimez,  vous  y  avez  et£ 
accueilli ;  et  finalement,  je  crois  que  vous  feriez  bien  de  partager  l’annee  entre  Lon¬ 
dres  et  Paris. 

Notre  ami  Favart,  qui  me  charge  de  vous  dire  bien  des  choses  pour  lui,  donnera 
deux  pieces  aux  Italiens  l’hiver  prochain,  qui  doivent  r^ussir. 

Je  ne  manquerai  pas  de  faire  votre  cour  a  Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc :  il  est  a  sa  cam- 
pagne,  oil  j’irai  le  joindre  demain.  J’ai  fait  monter  les  deux  estampes  que  vous  nous 
avez  envoy 6,  magnifiquement  et  voluptueusement,  et  dans  un  ecusson  qui  est  dans  le 
haut  de  la  bordure  j’ai  fait  mettre  les  quatre  vers  suivants: 

Entre  Thalie  et  Melpomene, 

Admirez  l’embarras  du  heros  de  la  sc^ne  ; 

Sous  les  traits  de  Garrick,  l’une  voit  iEsopus  : 

L’ autre  reclame  Roscius. 

Je  n’ai  pas  besoin  de  vous  dire  que  JEsopus  £toit  le  plus  cdfebre  acteur  qu’aient 
eu  les  Romains,  et  Roscius  le  plus  parfait  [comique]  de  l’ancienne  Rome. 

A  propos  d’estampes,  je  vous  envoie  avec  les  desseins  de  Boquet  onze  epreuves  de 
la  gravure  de  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  que  Mr.  Gravelot  m’a  donn£,  en  me  chargeant 
de  bien  des  compliments  pour  vous  ;  pour  moi,  je  ne  vous  en  fait  point ;  je  me  con- 
tente  de  vous  aimer  de  tout  mon  coeur. 


Louis  Cezare  Auguste  Monnet. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


44tS 

ltenouvellez,  jc  vous  prie,  a  Madame  Garrick  ines  tendres  et  fiddles  sentimens 
pour  ellc. 

Vous  me  donnez  des  regrets  quand  vous  me  parlez  du  lieu  enchant*;  (pie  vous 
habitez.  Je  voudrois  y  £tre,  et  je  ue  le  puis  pas  dans  ce  moment,  mais  je  ferai  Tim- 
possible  pour  vous  joindre  dans  le  mois  de  Septembre  prochain,  et  avec  mon  chien 
et  pollichinelle. 


DE  M.  CAILIIAVA  D’ESTANDOUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR  A  Paris,  le  22  Aout,  de  l’hotel  du  Cornet  d’Or,  rue  Ste.  Marguerite. 

Je  suis  trop  mon  ami,  pour  ne  pas  continuer,  puisque  vous  me  le  permettez,  un 
commerce  epistolaire,  qui  flute  ma  vanity  et  mon  coeur.  Les  nouvellcs  de  Paris  ne 
m6ritent  pas  d’occuper  mthne  votre  loisir.  Quand  au  theatre  Francois,  il  est  toujours 
le  champ  des  intrigues,  de  la  haine,  de  la  jalousie :  la  cabale  y  regne,  et  en  chassera  a 
la  fin  les  talens  :  j’en  suis  sinccrement  fach£,  parceque  j’aime  la  comedie  pour  elle- 
meme.  Votre  ami  Provide  est  revenu  faire  le  plaisir  de  Paris,  apres  avoir  fait  celui 
de  Compiegne,  oil  il  a  pris  beaucoup  de  peine,  et  gagnd  beaucoup  d’argent.  Je  lui 
ai  parl6  de  votre  habit,  il  l’a  re<pu,  il  vous  a  raeme  dcrit  pour  vous  remercier,  et  vous 
ddtailler  les  affaires  de  la  comedie.  Il  a  meme  dtd  fort  surpris  de  ne  pas  recevoir  de 
vos  nouvelles,  jusqu’au  moment  ou  Mademoiselle  Clairon  lui  a  dit  que  sa  lettre  ne 
vous  etait  pas  parvenue  prdcisement  a  cause  des  details  oil  il  etait  entrd.  Mademoi- 
selle  Clairon  nous  menace  en  effet  du  coup  affreux,  que  vous  redoutez  avec  tous  les 
gens  de  gout ;  elle  a  commence  de  vendre  sa  garderobe,  elle  a  meme  dcrit  de  chez 
Tronchin,  auprds  de  qui  elle  est,  que  l’Hipocrate  moderne  la  condamnait  a  la  mort  la 
plus  prompte,  si  elle  jouait  encore.  J’espdre  cependant  que  tout  cela  est  fait  pour 
nous  rendre  plus  prdcieux  ce  jour  heureux,  oil  elle  daignera  embellir  notre  scdne. 
Elle  a  dit  avant  de  partir,  que  le  seul  moyen  qu’il  y  avoit  pour  l’y  determiner,  dtait 
de  ranger  les  com6diens  dans  la  classe  des  citoyens,  en  les  fesant  jouir  des  privileges 
qu’a  meme  le  dernier  des  mecaniques.  On  ramasse  pour  y  reussir  toutes  les  pieces 
qui  prouvent  qu’un  com^dien  ne  deroge  pas.  Il  sera  ais6  de  faire  remarquer  que 
puisqu’un  acteur  ne  cesse  pas  d’etre  gentilhomme,  il  ne  doit  pas  etre  infame.  Quand 
a  Texcommunication,  elle  tombera  alors  d’elle-meme,  en  tout  cas  on  s’en  moque. 
Avant  de  finir  l’article  de  notre  Melpomene,  il  faut  que  je  vous  fasse  part  d'une 
aventure  qui  lui  est  arrivee  chez  Mr.  de  Voltaire  ;  elle  entre  chez-lui,  on  lui  dit  que 
le  doyen  des  poetes  6tait  presque  aneanti,  entre  son  medecin,  son  chirurgien,  &c.  mais 
que  si  elle  voulait  lui  reciter  quelques  uns  de  ses  vers,  elle  le  ressusciterait ;  elle  s’y 
prete  de  bonne  grace,  et  declame  avec  tant  de  force  son  role  dans  “  TOrphelin  de  la 
Chine,”  que  l’auteur  enchant^,  ravi,  oublie  sa  maladie. 

Vous  savez  que  Belcour  £toit  le  parain  d'une  comedie  qu’il  a  voulu  faire  jouer 
avant  la  mienne.  Elle  n’a  ^t^  que  jusqu’au  seconde  acte,  et  je  crois,  jalousie  d’auteur 
it  part,  qu’elle  meritait  sa  chute.  Il  y  avoit  un  faquin  de  maitre  a  danser,  qui  d’un 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


449 


air  fort  impertinent  jetait  son  gand  a  une  jeune  demoiselle,  lui  ordonnait  de  le  ramasser 
avec  grace.  La  pi£ce  ne  fut  pas  plus  loin.  Belcour  piqu6  de  ce  qu’on  ne  voulait  pas 
£couter  son  role,  demanda  au  parterre  s’il  voulait  qu’on  continuat,  ou  qu’on  cessat ; 
il  r^pondit  oui ;  l’equivoque  embarassa  les  acteurs,  et  les  spectateurs  rirent  tant  de 
leur  embarras,  qu’ils  ^toufferent  la  piece.  L’interet  que  Belcour  y  prenait,  fit  croire 
qu’il  en  etait  le  pere  :  on  eut  la  lachete  de  lui  envoyer  le  soir  meme  plusieurs  lettres 
anonimes,  ou  l’on  le  dechirait ;  alors  il  nomma  Mr.  Bret.  Les  uns  blament  son  indis¬ 
cretion,  les  autres  disent  qu’il  a  bien  fait. 

Autre  chute  !  Le  Kain  prot^geait  une  pi£ce  intituEe  “  Pharamond  le  second  acte 
etait  passable,  mais  le  reste  ne  valait  rien ;  cependant  le  parterre,  qui  ce  soir-la  etait 
le  plus  docile  parterre  qui  se  soit  jamais  vu,  applaudit  toute  la  piece,  en  faveur  de  ce 
qui  l’aATait  amus6.  On  l’anon9a  pour  la  seconde  representation,  et  il  n’y  eut  personne. 
Voila  bien  des  fausses  couches  :  il  faut  esperer  que  les  demoiselles  Dubois  et  L’Epin£, 
qui  sont,  dit-on,  grosses,  seront  plus  heureuses. 

Xous  avons  un  nouvel  acteur  nomme  Aufrene,  qui  fait  tourner  la  tete  a  tout 
Paris.  On  l’a  plac6  tout  de  suite  non  seulement  au-dessus  de  Brisard,  mais  a  cot£  du 
grand  Baron.  La  v^rite  est  qu’il  a  quelque  talent,  et  que  si  sa  presomption  et  l’im- 
becilit6  du  public  lui  pennettaient  de  se  placer,  il  serait  excellent  dans  les  roles  de 
raisonneur.  Il  n’a  point  d’entrailles ;  il  n’a  que  trois  gestes  qu’il  place  a  contre-sens, 
et  il  joue  trop  les  mots,  ce  qui  l’empeche  de  jouer  la  chose.  Brisard  a  pris  le  sage 
parti  de  le  laisser  jouer  tous  les  jours,  et  les  fanatiques  sont  en  plus  petit  nombre. 

Marsan,  que  vous  avez  connu,  a  6te  obliger  de  quitter.  L’avocat  Achet,  que  vous 
avez  vu  debuter  et  tomber,  l’a  engag6  dans  la  troupe  du  Roi  de  Pologne,  dont  il  est 
directeur. 

IMademoiselle  Doligni  a  debute  dans  le  tragique  :  elle  a  joue  tous  les  roles  dans  le 
gout  et  sur  le  ton  qu’elle  joue  l'Oracle  ;  cela  n’a  pas  plu. 

Madame  Provide  a  et6  bien  mal.  Les  infhElites  de  Mole  lui  donneront  la  mort, 
et  Preville  est  assez  bon  pour  en  etre  fach£. 

Voila  tout  ce  qu’on  dit  des  acteurs  et  des  auteurs.  Ma  piece  est  a  l'etude ;  je 
vous  prie  de  la  recommander  a  Preville,  et  aux  amis  que  vous  avez  a  Paris. 
Soyez  de  grace  toujours  le  mien.  Je  suis,  avec  tout  l’attachement  et  l’estime  possible. 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-lmmble  serviteur, 

Cailhava  d’Estandoux. 

Le  jeune  homme  qui  peint  les  comediens  A’oulait  vous  envoyer  liuit  tableaux  : 
dites-moi,  ou  il  faut  les  porter,  pour  qu’ils  ne  vous  coutent  rien  de  port. 

“  A  Monsieur,  INlonsieur  Garrick, 

Directeur  des  Comediens  du  Roi,  a  Londres.” 


3  M 


VOL.  II. 


450 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  2  Aout,  1765. 

Mon  Dieu,  la  mauvai.se  t6te!  je  parle  dela  mienne,  et  vous  le  jugez  bien.  Votre 
lettre  est  arriv^e  <\  Paris  le  mfime  jour  que  notre  aimable  Baron  en  partoit,  charg6  de 
trois  pages  de  mes  impertinens  reproches.  Je  vous  le  dis  en  secret,  je  suis  etourdie, 
impatiente,  grondeuse,  petulante,  insupportable  ! — au  reste,  la  meilleure  creature  du 
monde  :  quand  j’ai  fait  cent  sottises,  je  me  chagrine,  je  me  d^sole;  je  vois  mes  torts, 
je  les  sens,  je  m’en  repends,  je  les  avoue.  Me  voib\  dans  le  cas :  your  pardon,  my 
dear,  dear  friend,  I  write  to  you  upon  my  knees.  Vous  meritiez  mille  et  mille 
remerciemens  ;  je  vous  ai  querelE,  trait6  comme  un  chien  ;  il  faudroit  m’assommer  ; 
mais  you  are  so  good,  j’esp&re  ma  grace  ;  forgive  this  fault :  je  n’y  retournerai  plus 
jamais,  jamais,  jamais.  Et  cet  honnete  libraire,  poor  man  !  n’allez  pas  lui  dire  que  je 
le  reconnois  pour  un  bon,  un  tres-bon  Protestant;  je  lui  eorirai,  quand j’aurai  re9U 
son  envoi ;  ne  me  trahissez  pas  :  chut!  paix  !  Faites  lui  bien  des  complimens  de  ma 
part,  bien  des  civilit^s ;  c’est  un  digne  homme  que  Monsieur  Becket, — a  galant  man 
a  very  good  man  ;  I  kiss  him. 

De  tant  de  presens  que  vous  voulez  bien  me  faire,  vos  oeuvres  sont  le  plus  prG 
cieux  pour  moi.  J’aurais  bien  du  plaisir  it  lire  ce  qu’une  plume  guidee  par  un  cceur 
noble,  par  un  esprit  per^ant  et  naturel,  aura  trac6  sur  le  papier.  Monsieur  Garrick, 
vous  etes  mon  fr£re  en  vivacity  ;  vous  en  convenez  ;  et,  malgr6  your  tinder  heart, 
vous  etes  aussi  mon  frere  en  sentimens. 

J’essayerai  de  traduire  tout  ce  qui  me  paroitra  pouvoir  ne  rien  perdre  de  son  agrG 
ment  dans  notre  langue  ;  ce  travail  me  delassera  d’un  ouvrage  qui  m’applique  et 
m’ennuye.  Notre  bien-aime  Baron  sera  assez  complaisant  pour  me  revoir  et  me  cor- 
riger.  Je  ne  livrerai  jamais  une  traduction  ala  presse,  qu’il  n’en  soit  content.  N’au- 
rez  vous  pas  bien  surpris,  bien  charme  de  le  voir  !  il  devroit  avoir  plus  de  foi 
qu’un  autre  :  assurement  son  esprit,  son  intelligence,  toutes  les  lieureuses  qualit6s  de 
son  ame,  sont  eman^es  des  mains  d’une  divinity. 

Vous  remercierai-je  de  vos  dons  utiles  et  agreables  ?  non,  les  recevoir  avec  plaisir, 
c’est  vous  donner  la  seule  preuve  de  ma  reconnoissance  qui  puisse  vous  flater.  Ma 
piloder  femelle  n’a  que  le  balot  dans  l’esprit,  la  moindre  haleine  du  vent  l’epouvante : 
elle  tremble  pour  le  packet-boat.  Jamais  elle  ne  redouta  tant  les  orages.  Les  oeuvres 
de  Monsieur  Garrick  sur  le  terrible  element  lui  rappellent  tous  les  naufrages  excites 
par  Eole  depuis  le  Deluge.  Elle  est  prete  a  sacrifier  au  cruel  Neptune  tous  les  poetes, 
les  moralistes,  les  romanciers,  le  gros,  grand,  et  fameux  David  Hume  meme !  pourvu 
que  la  blanche  Thdtis  conduise  au  port  les  petits  volumes  composes  per  il  delittissimo 
amico,  the  litle  DaA'id. 

A  MADAME  GARRICK. 

La,  Madame,  la  ;  ne  vous  fachez  pas  !  eh  bien  oui,  on  aime  votre  dear  husband. 
On  est  de  votre  gout,  on  pense  comme  vous ;  est-ce  un  mal  ?  ferez-vous  du  bruit  ? 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


451 


ne  vous  aime-t’-on  pas  aussi  ?  en  le  trouvant  un  homme  charmant,  ne  yolis  trouve-t’- 
on  pas  une  dame  accomplie  ?  Si  vous  grondez,  on  ne  vous  aimera  pas  moins  tous 
deux  ;  ainsi  prenez  patience.  Permettez  qu’on  vous  embrasse,  et  qu’on  se  chagrine 
de  vous  embrasser  de  si  loin. 

A  MONSIEUR. 


Adieu,  mon  tres-aimable  et  tres-cher  ami.  Portez-vous  bien,  amusez-vous.  La 
gayet6  est  le  charme  de  la  vie.  Ecrivez-moi  quelquefois,  ne  m’oubliez  jamais,  et 
soyez  sur  d’avoir  en  moi  une  veritable,  une  sincere,  une  tendre  et  constante  amie. 

Riccoboni. 


“  A  Monsieur,  Monsieur  Garrick, 
au  Theatre  Royal,  in  Drury  Lane,  a  Londres.” 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  14  Aout,  1765. 

Mon  ami,  sur  l’ordre  quevous  m’avez  donn6,  j’ai  remis  a  Antonio  l’habit,  la  veste, 
etla  culotte  de  rattine :  ce  gar^on  se  loue  beaucoup  de  votre  g£nerosit6,  et  des  bontes 
que  vous  avez  eu  pour  lui.  A  propos  d’habit,  nous  avons  eu  ici  pendant  quelques 
jours  les  plus  grandes  chaleurs  ;  pour  les  suporter  et  pouvoir  courrir  le  matin,  j’ai  cru 
que  rien  ne  convenoit  mieux  qu’un  habit  de  toile  comme  celui  que  vous  m’avez  laiss6. 
Mais  mon  tailleur  m’a  demand^  huit  jours  pour  en  faire  un  :  j’ai  pris  tout  naturelle- 
ment  le  votre,  qui  me  va  tres-bien.  Quand  vous  viendrez  a  Paris,  j’en  serai  quitte 
pour  vous  en  faire  faire  un :  vous  voyez,  mon  ami,  que  j’en  use  sans  fac^on  ;  cela  doit 
vous  engager  a  faire  de  meme  avec  moi. 

J’ai  reve  cette  nuit,  que  vous  aviez  absolument  renonce  au  theatre,  et  fait  un 
traite  avec  une  personne  pour  la  cession  de  votre  part  de  la  direction.  Je  le  souhaite 
pour  votre  repos,  et  pour  l’interet  que  jeprends  a  tout  ce  qui  peut  faire  votre  bonheur. 
Vous  etes  riche,  sans  enfans,  et  couvert  de  gloire  :  vous  ne  devez  pr^sentement  vous 
occuper  que  de  votre  sante,  et  vous  en  aurez  tant  que  vous  voudrez  quand  vous 
pourrez  prendre  sur  vous  (comme  je  l'ai  fait)  d’61oigner  toute  affaire  et  embarras. 

Antonio  m’a  dit  que  Mr.  Becket  lui  avoit  demand^  cent  exemplaires  de  mon  Clian- 
sonnier.  II  doit  les  avoir  re^u  :  a  present,  je  ne  vous  fais  point  de  remerciemens  siu- 
les  soins  que  vous  vous  etes  donn&s  pour  cette  souscription  ici ;  je  ne  veux  point  ex¬ 
citer  le  coeur  pour  mettre  l’esprit  dans  mes  inter&ts,  ils  se  servent  trop  bien  l’un  et 
l’autrechez  vous  ;  je  desire  seulement  que  vous  me  conserviez  toujours  un  pen  de  part 
dans  votre  amiti6. 

Mr.  Bragge  et  Latliroppe  demeurent  l’un  et  l’autre  en  St.  James’s  Street.  Vous 
pouvez  les  voir,  mais  ne  pas  les  payer,  comme  je  vous  l’ai  d6ja  marque,  que  Mr. 
Woulf,  leur  banquier,  ne  soit  k  Londres ;  ce  sera  dans  peu  de  jours  ;  pour  lors  vous 
arrangerez  cette  affaire. 


3  m  2 


452 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Mr.  Aufresne  continue  avec  succ&s  dans  les  roles  qu’il  joue.  Cet  liomme  est 
froid ;  il  a  des  d&fauts ;  mais  il  a  une  declamation  naturelle,  et  je  le  crois,  tres-n£ces- 
saire  a  la  Com^die  Fran  (poise.  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  comme  vous  le  savez,  est  a 
Gen&ve  pour  sa  sant£,  sous  la  direction  du  Docteur  Tronchin  :  elle  a  decking  cliez 
Mr.  de  Voltaire,  qui  nous  <k:rit  qu’elle  Pa  rajeuni  de  vingt  ans:  le  med6cin  lui  sera 
plus  essentiel  que  Mr.  de  A'oltaire,  car  celui-ci  a  souvent  gat6  ceux  qui  ont  eu  la 
foiblesse  de  se  tier  a  ses  compliments,  on  pour  mieux  dire  a  sa  faussetA 

Je  joins  ici  la  lettre  de  Mr.  Boquet  pour  l’explication  des  desseins  qu’il  vous  a 
envoy e :  je  vous  fais  bien  ses  compliments. 

J’ai  d^eouvert  Mr.  Duvivier :  il  est  a  la  campagne.  Sitot  qu’il  sera  de  retour, 
je  lui  rcmcttrai  le  paquet  que  vous  m’avez  fait  remettre  pour  lui. 

On  donne  aujourd’hui  pour  la  premiere  fois  a  la  Com6die  Fran^oise,  “  Fbaramond,” 
trag^die  ;  on  ignore  l’auteur :  et  a  la  Com6die  Italienne,  une  petite  pi£ce  de  notre 
ami  Favart.  Je  serois  bien  trompe  si  elle  n’avoit  pas  un  grand  succ&s.  Il  vous  fait 
bien  des  compliments,  et  je  me  charge  du  soin  de  vous  faire  tenir  un  exemplaire  de 
cette  pi&ce. 

Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc  est  bien  sensible  &  votre  souvenir,  et  il  m’a  bien  recom- 
mande  de  vous  renouveller  son  estime  et  son  amiti6  pour  vous. 

Vous  devez  avoir  re<pu  le  r^verbere  et  les  lampes ;  je  souhaite  que  le  tout  soit  a 
votre  gre. 

J’ai  dine  bier  avecdix  de  vos  compatriotes,  qui  m’ontrompus  le  timpan  de  l’oreille 
a  force  de  parler  Anglois  :  je  me  suis  bien  vengC;  j’ai  mang6  comme  un  diable,  et  crie 
comme  quatre.  Mr.  Lascelles,  l’un  d’eux,  [qui]  est  fort  aimable,  a  bien  voulu  se 
charger  de  vous  faire  remettre  ce  paquet.  Je  vous  embrasse,  et  je  vous  prie  de  rei- 
terer  moil  attachement  inviolable  a  Madame  Garrick. 

Monnet. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Mon  ami,  depuis  ma  lettre  6crite,  j’ai  vu  hier  la  premiere  representation  de 
“  Dame  Gertrude,  ou  l’Ecole  de  Prudes,”  de  notre  ami  Favart.  Cette  piece  a  eu  le 
plus  grand  succ&s  :  vous  la  connoissez  puisqu’il  vous  en  a  fait  voir  le  plan,  et  il  pre¬ 
tend  que  vous  lui  avez  donne  des  conseils  sur  ce  sujet  dont  il  a  tire  un  bon  parti. 
Il  vous  remercie,  il  vous  embrasse ;  il  ne  vous  ecrit  pas  parcequ’il  ne  voit  goute,  mais 
vous  aurez  le  premier  exemplaire  de  sa  pkce. 

Vous  avez,  sans  doute,  S911  la  mort  du  pauvre  Vanloo  :  le  Roi  vient  de  donner  k 
la  veuve  2400  1.  de  pension,  et  un  logement. 

Mon  ami  Boucher  est  premier  peintre  du  Roi,  avec  6000  1.  de  pension.  Michel 
Vanloo,  que  vous  avez  eu  a  Londres  quelque  terns,  1600 1.  de  pension,  et  la  conduite 
de  la  petite  £cole  de  peinture. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


453 


Par  la  premiere  occasion,  ne  manquez  pas  de  m’envoyer  une  de  vos  estampes  pour 
Mr.  Duclos ;  je  l’ai  promis,  et  cet  homme  vous  aime. 

]\lr.  Lescalier,  secretaire  du  Comte  de  Guerchy,  me  marque  qu’il  a  pass6  chez 
Becket,  et  que  ce  libraire  lui  avoit  dit  que  je  pouvois  lui  envoy er  cent  cinquante 
exemplaires  de  mon  chansonnier;  je  vous  ai  dit  par  ma  lettre,  que  je  n’en  avois  en¬ 
voy  e  que  cent ;  s’il  en  veut  davantage,  il  me  le  fera  s^avoir,  et  je  pense  qu’il  aura 
l’attention  de  faire  mettre  dans  les  papiers  publics  que  ce  recueil  est  arrivee  a  Londres. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MON  AMI,  Ce  12  Septembre. 

Mr.  King,  porteur  de  ma  lettre,  a  6t6  trop  peu  de  terns  ici  pour  avoir  pu  eprouver 
de  ma  part  tout  ce  que  j’aurois  bien  voulu  faire  pour  lui ;  mais  je  lui  ai  offert  de  bon 
coeur  tous  mes  services  tant  pour  le  present  que  pour  l’avenir.  Mr.  de  Villeneuve 
est  retourne  a  Strasbourg  avec  sa  fille,  ou  je  lui  ferai  tenir  dans  peu  v6tre  lettre  et 
les  estampes.  Je  ferai  aussi  votre  commission  aupr£s  de  Mr.  Dannetaire  au  retour 
d’une  campagne,  ou  il  est  all6  passer  huit  jours,  sous  la  condition,  mon  ami,  que  vous 
ne  negligerez  pas  de  m’envoyer  par  la  premiere  occasion  une  medaille  comme  la 
sienne,  bien  dor£e,  avec  une  petite  boete,  que  je  conserverai  comme  la  prunelle  de 
mes  yeux.  Je  donnerai  celle  de  cuivre  que  vous  m’avez  fait  remettre  par  Mr.  Ja- 
quet  Droz,  k  Mr.  Cailhava.  Mr.  King  a  fait  l’engagement  de  Fontaine  danseur  :  le 
dernier  partira  bientot,  et  je  crois  que  vous  l’aurez  pour  l’ouverture  de  votre  theatre. 
— Adieu,  mon  ami ;  aimez-moi  toujours,  et  agr£ez  les  amities  de  Madame. 

Monnet. 

Mr.  King  vous  remettra  “  La  Belle  Arsene.”  Dites  quelque  chose  pour  moi  k  mon 
ami  Jaquet  Droz. 

“  Pour  Mr.  Kings,  rue  du  Colombier, 

Hotel  de  Bruxelles.” 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MON  AMI,  Ce  8  Septembre. 

Je  vous  fais  tenir  par  Mr.  Jaquet  Droz  le  n°  seize  de  Fr^ron,  et  plusieurs  feuilles 
des  affiches  et  annonces.  Mr.  Leak  vous  a  remis,  sans  doute,  ce  que  je  lui  ai  confk : 
je  n’ai  pas  pu  vous  envoyer  “  La  Belle  Arsene.”  Vous  l’aurez  quand  elle  sera  im- 
prim^e :  l’auteur  vous  remercie  de  votre  bon  souvenir,  et  il  vous  fait  mille  compli¬ 
ments.  Je  n’ai  pas  jug6  a  propos  de  souscrire  pour  la  nouvelle  Edition  de  Piron  ;  je 
connois  l’^diteur  de  cet  ouvrage  ;  trop  prevenu  sur  les  clioses  m^diocres  de  cet  auteur, 
il  fera  quatre  vols.  qu’on  auroit  dut  r^duire  a  deux.  On  pr^ferera  toujours  l’ancienne 


454 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


meilleure  pi£ce  tie  Mr.  Piron  :  vous  en  jugerez  quandla  nouvelle  paroitra.  Le  Sieur 
Fontaine  compte  partir  Samedi  prochain  pour  Londres,  sous  la  ])romesse  de  cent 
quarante  guinles,  pour  danser  une  saison  sur  vdtre  theatre,  et  quinze  guin^es  que  je 
lui  donnerai  en  avance. — Adieu,  mon  ami;  je  joins  ici  une  petite  note  de  d^bourse, 
qui  m’a  6t6  [pay6]  par  mon  ami  Jaquet  Droz :  je  le  recommande  toujours  a  votre 
amiti6.  Jean  Monnet. 


Theatre  de  Campagne,  4  vols.  broch^s 
Th64tre  de  Le  Sage,  2  vols.  brocli^s 
Taconer 


frs.  s. 
18  0 
4  0 

0  12 


frs.  22  12 


L’ ENGAGEMENT  DU  SIEUR  GUIDETT1. 

\ 

A  Paris,  ce 

Nous  sousign6es,  Jean  JMonnet,  charge  de  procuration  de  David  Garrick,  Direc- 
teur  du  Theatre  Royal  de  Drury-Lane,  a  Londres,  d’une  part :  et  moi,  Jean  Guidetti, 
d’autre  part,  sommes  convenus  de  ce  qui  suit ;  s^avoir  :  que  moi,  Guidetti,  m’en- 
gage  avec  le  Sieur  Garrick,  en  qualite  de  premier  danseur,  et  pour  faire  les  ballets 
pendant  vacance  tli^atrale,  au  theatre  de  Drury-Lane,  moyennant  la  somme  de 
cent  cinquante  guin^es  ou  louis  d’or,  et  de  trois  cent  livres  argent  de  France, 
pour  mon  voyage.  Et  moi,  Monnet,  promets  et  m’engage  de  faire  payer  par  M. 
Garrick,  la  somme  ci-dessus  6noncee  au  dit  Sieur  Guidetti,  et  promets  en  outre  de 
lui  faire  donner  un  b£n6fice  dans  le  terns  et  le  mois  qu’on  le  donne  a  ceux  qui  ont 
tenu  jusqu'ici  la  place  de  Maitre  de  Ballets  et  de  premier  danseur,  sous  la  con¬ 
dition  que  sur  quelque  pr^texte  que  ce  soit  le  dit  Sieur  Guidetti  ne  dansera  a  aucun 
theatre  sans  une  permission  de  Mr.  Garrick  ;  et  que  lui,  Sieur  Guidetti,  se  rendra  & 
Londres  le  huit  du  mois  de  Septembre  prochain. 

Et  pour  derni^re  clause,  moi,  Monnet,  je  m’engage  de  faire  payer  par  M.  Garrick, 
au  dit  Sieur  Guidetti,  la  somme  de  douze  guin^es  et  demie,  pour  revenir  en  France, 
dans  le  cas  oil  il  plairoit  a  mon  d.  Sieur  Garrick  ne  pas  renouveller  son  engagement 
avec  le  Sieur  Guidetti. 

Fait  double  entre  nous,  et  sous  les  conditions  ci-dessus  £nonc6es;  voulons  que  le 
present  ait  la  meme  force  que  s’il  etoit  passe  devant  notaires. 

Io.  Giovanni  Guidetti,  scritto 
come  sopra  mano. 

Monnet. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


455 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  18  Aout,  1766. 

Mon  ami,  vous  avez  sans  doute  re^i  l’engagement  du  Sieur  Guidetti  que  je 
vous  ai  envoye,  par  lequel  vous  avez  du  voir  que  j’avois  menage  vos  int^rets,  si  ce 
danseur  r6pond  a  tout  ce  que  j’en  esp&re  ;  mais,  comme  je  vous  l’ai  deja  dit,  je  crois 
que  vous  serez  content  de  lui  a  tous  egards.  II  part  demain  pour  Londres,  avec 
l’Abbe  Martinelli ;  il  a  voulu  profiter  de  cette  occasion  pour  avoir  un  interpr^te  dans 
la  route,  pour  arriver  plutot  aupres  de  vous,  pour  pouvoir  disposer  les  choses  oil  il 
pourra  vous  etre  utile  dans  la  saison  prochaine,  et  pour  avoir  le  terns  de  former  a  sa 
maniere  la  danseuse  que  vous  lui  destinerez.  Cet  liomme,  qui  s'est  ruin6  dans  l’en- 
treprise  d’un  spectacle  qu’il  a  fait  en  Italie,  m’a  demande  vingt  louis  d’avance,  que  je 
lui  ai  fait  donner  par  Mr.  Foley,  et  pour  laquelle  somme  vous  trouverez  son  recu  ci- 
joint :  en  deduisant  les  douze  louis  et  demi  que  vous  devez  lui  donner  pour  le  voy¬ 
age,  il  vous  sera  redevable  de  sept  louis  et  demi,  que  vous  lui  ferez  retenir  sur  ses 
appointemens  dans  le  courant  de  la  saison.  Mr.  Fittro,  qui  m’a  procur6  ce  danseur, 
l’a  adress6  et  recommande  a  Mr.  Angelo,  comme  il  ne  S9ait  ni  le  Francois  ni  l’An- 
glois.  Pour  le  bien  de  votre  theatre,  je  crois  qu’il  seroit  a  propos  que  vous  le  recom- 
mandassiez  k  ce  coquin  de  Grimaldi,  qui  lui  servira  d’interpr&te  aupres  de  vos  figu¬ 
rants  et  de  vos  figurantes ;  mon  ami,  voila  assez  parler  danse. 

Votre  sante,  celle  de  Madame  Garrick,  comment  vont-elles  ?  pour  la  mienne,  elle 
est  merveilleuse.  Je  suis  occupe  presen tement  &  faire  meubler  un  appartement,  qui  fera 
une  partie  du  bonheur  de  ma  vie ;  et  quand  vous  le  verrez,  je  suis  assure  d’avance, 
que  vous  serez  bien  fache  de  n’avoir  pas  loue  celui  que  je  vous  ai  propos6,  et  qui  tient 
au  mien.  A  propos  d’appartement,  Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  quitt6  le  sien  pour  en 
prendre  un,  rue  Vivienne,  pr&s  le  Palais  Royal ;  et  pour  surcroit  de  bonheur,  Mr.  de 
Valbel,  son  ami,  vient  de  faire  un  gros  heritage  de  son  fr&re,  qui  est  mort  depuis 
dix  jours. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami,  et  je  vous  prie  de  dire  a  Madame  Garrick  que  je  suis 
toujours,  et  serai  jusqu’au  dernier  moment  de  ma  vie,  son  tres-humble  serviteur, 

Monnet. 

J’ai  requ  de  Mr.  Garrick,  par  les  mains  de  Mr.  Monnet,  quatre  cent  quatre  vingt 
livres  argent  de  France,  k  compte  sur  mes  appointemens,  et  sur  ce  qu’on  doit  me 
payer  pour  mon  voyage. — A  Paris,  ce  quinze  Aout,  1766. 

Io.  Giovanni  Guidetti,  Scritto  come  sopra  mano  propria. 


456 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Je  profite  de  l’occasion,  mon  ami,  pour  vous  envoyer  presque  tous  les  livres  que 
vous  m’avez  demands,  al’exception  des  Hommes  Illustres,  et  L’Almanach  des  Pluses 
annle  1766.  On  r&mprime  le  dernier,  que  je  vous  enverrai  aussitbt  qu’il  sera  im- 
prime,  et  on  ne  veut  pas  donner  les  tomes  vingt-et-un  et  vingt-deux  des  Hommes 
Illustres  sans  prendre  le  corps  complet,  parcequ’il  n’y  a  plus  du  vingt-et-un  ni  du 
vingt-deux.  Le  libraire  m’a  bien  donn6  l’esp^rance  qu’on  r^imprimeroit  ces  deux 
vols.,  mais  il  n’a  pas  pu  me  dire  quand  :  marquez-moi  ce  que  vous  voulez  que  je  fasse 
;\  ce  sujet.  J’ai  ajoutd  aux  livres  que  vous  m’avez  demandes  quelques  brochures,  qui, 
je  crois,  ne  vous  deplairont  pas. 

Le  Due  d’York  est,  comme  vous  savez,  a  Compiegne,  oil  il  a  retpu  du  Roi  toutes 
les  marques  de  distinction  et  d’amiti6.  Il  vient  a  Paris  Lundi,  pour  s’egayer  avec 
nos  demoiselles  de  l’Op^ra,  qui  l’attendent  avec  empressement. 

Mr.  Changuion,  que  j’ai  vu  hier,  et  qui  m’a  charge  de  vous  faire  des  compliments, 
m’a  dit  que  le  petit  Barthelomon  6toit  reparti  pour  Londres  :  vous  le  verrez,  sans 
doute,  et  vous  me  ferez  le  plaisir  de  lui  remettre  une  lettre  que  j’ai  mis  dans  votre 
paquet. 

Vous  n’oublierez,  mon  ami,  la  derni&re  redingotte  que  je  vous  ai  pri6  de  me  faire 
faire,  et  de  donner  a  Madame  Sayde,  ou  au  Docteur  Gent,  tout  ce  que  vous  aurez  a 
m’envoyer. — A  Madame  Garrick  bien  des  choses  pour  moi ;  et  n’oubliez  pas  que  je 
vous  aime  tous  deux  bien  tendrement. 

Monnet. 

Guidetti  vient  de  m’6crire  pour  quelques  difficult^  qu’il  a  avec  votre  tr^sorier 
pour  le  payement  de  trois  cents  livres,  qui  lui  ont  et6  accordes  pour  son  voyage  :  je 
vous  prie  d’arranger  cette  affaire.  Je  ne  suis  pas  fache  que  vous  gardiez  cet  liomme. 
Il  m’a  paru  bon  diable,  et  je  lui  crois  quelque  merite  pour  vos  ballets. 

ETAT  DES  LIVRES. 


Almanach  des  Muses,  1765 

• 

.  2  0 

Lettres  de  Julie 

•  • 

.  1 

0 

Feuille  No.  14,  Freron 

10 

Theagene 

•  • 

.  2 

0 

Declamation  Theatrale 

.  4  10 

Le  Tuteur  dupe  . 

•  • 

.  1 

0 

Reponse  de  Valcourt 

.  1  10 

L’Orpheline  legue 

•  • 

.  1 

0 

Regulus 

.  2  0 

Les  Scythes 

•  • 

.  1 

4 

Les  Tourterelles 

.  2  0 

Guillaume  Tell  . 

•  • 

.  1 

4 

Lettres  en  vers 

.  2  0 

Lettre  de  Valcourt 

•  • 

.  1 

10 

J’ai  fait  avoir  la  plus  grande  partie  de  ces  livres  au  prix  marchand. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


457 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  31  Aofit,  1765. 

You  whirlwind,  you  bomb-shell,  you  devil  to  pay — you — basta. 

Oh  pour  cela  oui !  vous  m’avez  ecrit  en  poste,  sur  un  cheval  de  course,  courant  au 
grand  galop.  I  have  tired  my  eyes  out  in  reading  your  scrawling  Vous  aviez  le 
Baron  dans  la  tete,  et  le  diable  tout  au  travers  de  l’esprit,  you  quicksilver.  J’espere 
que  le  mistere  est  d£voil6  ;  vous  aurez  vu  notre  charmant  ami ;  il  vous  aura  donn6 
ma  lettre  ;  tout  est  expliqu6.  Au  reste,  good  master  impatience,  quand  vous  d£si- 
rerez  une  r^ponse  prompte,  6crivez-moi  a  ma  demeure :  Mr.  Suard  oublie  de  m’en- 
voyer  vos  lettres ;  celle  dat£e  du  15  m’est  arrivee  le  30. 

J’ai  remis  a  Mr.  Foley  la  petite  somme  dont  j’6tois  redevable  a  Mr.  Becket. 
Remerciez-le  bien  pour  moi,  I  charge  you.  Je  ne  lui  6cris  point,  dans  la  crain te 
qu’il  ne  se  fasse  lire  ma  lettre  par  son  traducteur,  qui  y  trouveroit  une  foule  de  male¬ 
dictions  contre  lui.  Jenny  est  pitoyable ;  une  traduction  lache,  froide,  pleine  de 
contresens,  de  repetitions,  de  plates  epith&tes,  snowy  hands,  the  fountain  of  love,  fy,  eh, 
fy  !  rien  de  plus  long,  de  plus  maussade,  ce  n’est  ni  mon  style  ni  mes  idees.  En 
appliquant  a  la  personne  qui  parle  des  maximes  g6nerales,  le  traducteur  a  l’art  de 
mettre  un  nonsense  a  la  place  d’une  reflexion  juste  ou  raisonnable.  Poor,  poor  Er¬ 
nestine  !  elle  aura  bon  air  en  sortant  des  pattes  de  ce  Monsieur,  elle  sera  a  pretty 
stuff.  Mistress  Brooke  s’est  trompee  lourdement  en  cinquante  en  droits  de  Catesby  ; 
mais  il  faut  lui  rendre  une  justice  due ;  ce  qu’elle  entend,  elle  exprime  tres-bien. 

Nous  lisons  vos  pieces  avec  un  extreme  plaisir.  Je  vous  en  parlerai  dans  la  suite  ; 
mais  puisque  vous  avez  fait  un  si  bon  usage  de  quelques  idees  Francoises,  vous  devriez 
bien  mettre  sur  votre  theatre  La  coupe  enchantee.  C’est  une  tres-jolie  com6die,  dont 
tous  les  personnages  ont  du  jeu.  Si  personne  ne  vous  a  prevenu,  vous  en  feriez  une 
charmante  farce,  comme  vous  les  nommez :  il  y  a  un  precepteur  que  Mr.  Garrick 
joueroit ;  il  seroit  bien  plaisant  dans  sa  bouche,  dans  sa  s^duisante  bouche. 

Mr.  Hume  et  moi  nous  sommes  tout  au  mieux ;  il  m’a  fait  present  de  son  His- 
toire  ;  il  m’a  amen6  INlr.  Elliot,  un  homme  de  m^rite,  un  tr£s-aimable  homme.  Paris 
regrettera  Nlr.  Hume :  il  va  en  Irlande,  you  know. 

Madame  Garrick  envoye  des  complimens,  et  jamais  un  petit  mot  de  sa  snoivy 
hand.  N’importe,  nous  l’aimons  toujours,  nous  en  parlons  toujours  avec  plaisir. 
Nous  ne  l’oublions  jamais. 

Une  nouvelle  :  les  artificiers  du  boulevard  ont  saute  ces  jours  passes.  Un  baril  de 
poudre  s’est  enflamm6  ;  il  a  enlev6  la  charpente,  tue  cinq  hommes,  ebranie  les  mai- 
sons  voisines,  cass6  les  glaces,  les  vitres ;  il  a  comble  un  puits ;  nous  en  avons  senti 
l’impulsion  a  notre  fenetre,  comme  celle  d’un  leger  tremblement  de  terre.  Par  bon- 
heur,  ce  n’etoit  pas  un  jour  de  representation.  On  va,  je  crois,  defendre  un  si  dan- 
gereux  amusement. 

Vous  me  dites  bien  des  douceurs,  bien  des  injures  ;  je  ne  vous  en  aime  pas  moins ; 

VOL.  II.  3  N 


458 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


je  ne  saurois  vous  en  aimer  davantage;  on  ne  peut  rien  ajouter  aux  sentimens  que 
j’ai  pour  vous.  Ainsi,  my  dear  friends,  mettez-vous  4  votre  aise  ;  criez,  pestez,  ju- 
rez  ;  caressez,  ou  grondez  ;  je  dirai  toujours  a  Mr.  Garrick,  I  love  you,  1  esteem, 
value,  regard,  prize  you: — moil  Anglois  n’est-il  pas  Turc?  j’en  ai  peur. — Mais  vous 
devinerez,  I  hope. 

Encore  un  peu  d’embarras.  Nous  voudrions  avoir  la  Vie  de  Colley  Cibber,  £crite 
par  lui-meme  :  Emily,  or,  the  History  of  a  Natural  Daughter  :  History  of  two 
Orphans,  by  W.  Tordervey : — en  observant  que  ces  deux  romans  ne  soient  point  des 
traductions.  Mr.  Becket  les  remettroit  4  Mr.  le  Baron  d’Holbach,  qui  auroit  la 
bont£  de  les  payer  et  de  me  les  apporter.  Pour  la  Vie  de  Colley  Cibber,  elle  doit  etre 
curieuse,  parce-qu’elle  sert,  sans  doute,  4  l’liistoire  de  votre  theatre.  Oh,  j’allois  l'ou- 
blier  !  “  Le  Joueur,”  une  trag^die  bourgeoise  ;  ou  le  joueur  meurt  empoisonn£. 
Est-ce  tout  ?  Non  :  nous  voudrions  Mr.  et  Madame  Garrick,  si  le  Baron  vouloit 
nous  les  apporter  !  Adieu,  my  dear  friend  ;  adieu,  charming  devil ;  je  vous  embrasse, 
vous,  la  belle  dame,  la  petite  chienne,  tout  ce  que  vous  aimez,  tout  ce  qui  vous  ap- 
partient.  Ma  compagne  dit  corame  moi. — Adieu,  adieu, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MON  AMI,  Ce  31  Aout,  1765. 

Je  vous  envoie  par  Mr.  Leak  les  livres  que  vous  m’avez  demands  :  oui,  j’ai  ajoute 
un  requete  presentee  au  Roi  par  le  Sieur  Mercier,  qui  vous  fera  plaisir.  Ces  livres, 
que  je  n’ai  pas  eu  le  terns  de  faire  relier,  sont,  Le  Theatre  de  Campagne,  en  4  vol. ; 
celui  de  Le  Sage,  en  2  vol.  ;  La  Vie  de  Taconet ;  et  cinq  feuilles  de  Fr^ron,  Nos. 
11,  12,  13,  14,  et  15.  Je  vous  ai  tout  envoys  de  ce  qu’il  a  paru  jusqu’a  present,  et  je 
continuerai  :  mais  je  vous  repute,  que  vous  feriez  bien  d'avoir  pour  vos  gens  de  la  poste 
une  adresse  pour  recevoir  plus  exactement  ce  journal,  sans  quoi  vous  l’aurez  toujours 
incomplet.  J’ai  vu  assez  souvent  Mr.  Leak  et  son  associ6 ;  je  crois  qu  ils  vous 
diront  du  bien  de  moi,  et  je  suis  tr&s-content  de  l’un  et  de  l’autre.  Je  vous  embrasse, 
mon  ami,  et  je  vous  recommande  sur  toutes  clioses  le  soin  de  votre  sant6, 

Monnet. 

Envoyez-moi  done  de  vos  medailles  pour  Mr.  Dannataire  ;  Mr.  Cailhava,  qui 
vous  fait  ses  compliments,  me  tourmente  aussi  pour  en  avoir  une. 


DE  M.  WIELAND  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Paris,  ce  17  Septembre,  1765. 

J’ai  eu  l’honneur  de  presenter,  il  y  a  un  mois,  mon  ouvrage  a  son  Excellence 
Madame  l’Ambassadrice,  dont  elle  me  paroit  tr£s-satisfaite ;  en  meme  temps  me 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


459 


demandant  si  j’avois  quelque  occasion  a  vous  l’envoyer,  Je  dis  que  non.  Madame 
m’a  r6pondu,  Je  veux  moi-meme  le  porter  a  Mr.  Garrick  :  donnez-le  moi ;  et  s’il  y  a 
quelque  chose  a  d^bourser  pour  cela,  je  vous  le  donnerai.  N’ayant  pas  d’ordre  de 
votre  part,  je  n’ai  point  accept^  cet  offre  si  gracieuse.  L’ordre  et  la  Jarretiere  sont 
ajust^es  dans  un  6tui  de  rousset.  Le  voyage  de  son  Excellence  est  fixe  au  21  du 
mois:  .T’espere  d’aprendre  que  mon  ouvrage  vous  soit  remis,  et  vous  jugerez  vous- 
meme  si  je  puis  mieux  faire.  S’il  y  a  quelque  autre  chose  de  mon  ouvrage  qui  vous 
pourroit  faire  plaisir,  Monsieur,  je  vous  prie  de  m’ordonner,  en  vous  promettant  une 
prompte  expedition,  et  de  m’honorer  de  votre  confiance  en  toute  commission  que 
Monsieur  et  Madame  pouront  avoir  a  Paris.  Je  me  ferai  un  plaisir  de  me  dire,  avec 
toute  estime  et  consideration, 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Wieland. 


MEMOIRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Fourni 

Un  Ordre  d’Angleterre,  en  pierres  .  .  .  .16  louis. 

La  Jarretiere,  en  vingt  lettres  .  .  .  .  .12 

Pour  cet  etuis  et  la  monture  de  l’Ordre  et  la  Jarretiere  .  .  2 


La  somme  fait  totale 


30  louis  d’or. 


DE  M.  L’ABBE  MORELLET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR  ET  CHER  AMI,  4  Nov.  1765. 

Je  trouve  une  occasion  de  me  rappeller  a  votre  souvenir,  et,  j’ose  ajouter,  de  vous 
prouver  que  je  ne  vous  ai  pas  oublie  moi-meme,  et  je  ne  veux  pas  la  laisser  echapper. 
J’ai  dit  a  Mr.  Mallet,  qui  vous  donnera  cette  lettre,  que  vous  le  recevriez  tr&s-bien 
s’il  vous  6toit  address^  par  votre  cher  Abb6.  Independamment  de  toutes  les  raisons 
qui  peuvent  vous  determiner  a  accueillir  un  homme  aussi  instruit  et  aussi  philosophe 
que  lui,  je  vous  avertis  que  notre  bon  ami  le  Baron  est  de  moiti6  dans  les  sollicita- 
tions  que  je  vous  fais.  II  auroit  joint  une  lettre  a  la  mienne,  mais  comme  je  l’ai  pris 
au  depourvu,  et  que  je  ne  lui  ai  gu&res  donn6  de  temps,  il  m’a  charge  de  vous  6crire 
pour  nous  deux.  II  m’a  raconte  avec  beaucoup  de  sensibility  la  manure  obligeante 
dont  vous  1’avez  traits,  et  je  vous  ai  bien  reconnu  a  tout  ce  qu’il  m’a  dit  du  plaisir 
que  vous  avez  eu  a  le  voir.  Je  vous  ai  bien  reconnu  encore  aux  choses  que  vous  lui 
avez  dites  pour  moi.  II  m’assure  que  vous  ne  m’oubliez  point,  et  que  j’occupe  une 
place  distingu^e  parmi  les  amis  que  vous  avez  fait  en  France.  Ce  n’est  pas  peu  dire, 
car  j’ai  beaucoup  de  rivaux  :  nous  ne  parlons  de  vous  qu’avec  attendrissement,  et  nous 
desirons  bien  v6ritablement  que  vous  nous  reveniez  voir  de  temps  en  temps  ;  donnez- 
nous-en,  au  moins,  l’espyrance.  Si  mes  occupations  ne  m’arretoient  pas  ici,  j’irois  bien 
prendre  chez-vous  le  logement  que  vous  m’avez  offert,  et,  malgry  tous  les  liens  qui 

3  N  2 


400 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


m’attachent,  j’irois  vous  chercher  a  Londres,  et  vous  ramener  a  Paris.  Mais  je  suis 
forc£  de  remettre  l'ex^cution  d'nn  projet  aussi  agr&ible  k  un  temps  encore  eloignC 
Le  Baron  m’a  dit  qu’il  vous  avoit  lu  un  petit  papier  que  j’ai  barbouill^  depuis  votre 
depart  de  Paris,  et  qui  fait  l’apologie  de  la  Gazette  Litt^raire  de  notre  ’ami  Suard 
contre  des  fanatiques  qui  l’avoient  attaqu^e :  comme  ce  petit  morceau  n’est  pas  pr6- 
cisement  poldmique,  que  l’objet  en  est  utile,  puisqu’il  tend  a  £tablir  la  tolerance  et  la 
liberty  de  la  presse,  et  k  venger  et  a  d6fendre  des  gens  de  lettres,  avec  lesquels  tout 
bom  me  6clair6  doit  faire  cause  commune,  et  qu'enfin  vous  avez  paru  d&sirer  d’en  avoir 
un  exemplaire,  je  vous  sacrifie  le  seul  qui  me  reste ;  tous  les  autres,  except^  dix  ou 
douze,  ayant  6t6  confisqu^s  et  an6antis  au  nombre  de  quinze  cent,  par  la  vigilance  de 
notre  police  et  l’humeur  du  ministre,  Mr.  le  Due  de  Praslin.  Je  charge  Mr.  Mallet 
de  vous  le  remettre,  et  vous  mettrez,  s’il  vous  plait,  la  tete,  by  my  friend,  &c.  Le 
Baron  m’a  dit  que  vous  songiez  a  me  procurer  une  r^ponse  a  mes  questions  :  vous 
me  ferez  plaisir  de  vous  en  occuper  aussi  bien  que  de  la  note  des  iivres  rtdatifs  aux 
mati&res  d'administration,  dont  je  m’occupe,  et  que  devoit  vous  donner  Mr.  Charles 
Takhausen  :  addressez  ce  que  vous  pouvez  me  procurer  en  ce  genre,  “  A  Mr.  de 
Montigny,  Intendant  des  Finances,  rue  des  Vieilles  Andriettes,  a  Paris,”  et  au  dedans 
pour  toute  addresse,  mettez,  “  Pour  l’Auteur  du  Dictionnaire  de  Commerce,”  sans 
nom  :  par  ce  moyen,  vos  lettres  et  paquets  m’arriveront  francs  de  port  et  trfes-sure- 
ment.  Je  salue  tr&s-respectueusement  votre  aimable  et  respectable  femme.  Le 
Baron  vous  embrasse  de  tout  son  coeur ;  et  je  vous  prie  de  croire  que  je  vous  estime 
et  vous  aime  autant  que  lui,  et  que  je  suis  pour  la  vie,  et  sans  cer^monie,  votre  ami, 

L’Abbe  Morellet. 


DE  MADEMOISELLE  CLAIRON  A  M.  GARRICK. 

De  Paris,  ce  29  Decembre,  1765. 

Une  des  choses  que  j 'aime  le  mieux  dans  le  monde,  e’est  mon  Garrick:  j’irois 
surement  le  voir  si  j’en  6tois  la  maitresse,  mais  comment  voyager  sans  fortune?  La 
Com^die  Fran^aise  ne  procure  que  de  la  fatigue  et  des  infirmit^s,  l’honneur  de  loger 
quelquefois  chez  le  Roi,  comme  vous  l’avez  vu,  voila  tout.  11  faudra  bien  que  ce 
soit  vous  qui  me  veniez  voir.  Vous  n’attendrez  pas,  sans  doute,  que  je  rejoue,  puisque 
vous  avez  de  l’amiti6  pour  moi ;  vous  savez  que  je  ne  suis  pas  capable  de  faire  une 
demarche  foible  et  basse.  J’ai  fait  pendant  vingt-deux  ans  le  bien  de  ma  soci6t6,  et 
les  plaisirs  du  public;  je  n’ai  jamais  eu  un  tort;  j’ai  sauv6e  la  com^die  ;  j’^tois  l’amie 
de  mes  superieurs  ;  a  peine  ai-je  de  quoi  vivre,  et  l’on  m’a  trainee  mourante,  et  sans 
m’entendre,  dans  une  prison.  Quel  seroit  mon  espoir  ?  Je  trouve  dans  mon  ame 
tout  ce  qu'il  faut  pour  pardonner  la  barbarie,  l’injustice,  l’injure ;  mais  je  m’en  res- 
souviendrai  jusqu’a  mon  dernier  soupir.  Si,  comme  vous,  je  n'avois  de  maitre  que  le 
Roi,  je  n’h6siterois  pas.  Mais — mais — mais — D’ailleurs,  je  me  porte  a  merveille 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


461 


depuis  que  je  ne  joue  plus,  et  Tronchin  m’a  condamn6e  k  perdre  la  vie  si  je  rejouois  ; 
de-la  tout  est  dit.  On  pretend  cependant  que  tout  n’est  pas  dit ;  on  espere  pouvoir 
donner  aux  com^diens  l’^tat  que  j’ai  desiree  ;  l’envie  de  me  ravoir,  fait  travailler  a  ce 
projet  avec  ardeur :  s’il  r6ussit,  il  me  couvrira  de  gloire,  et  je  rentrerai  sans  doute  ; 
mais  comme  il  me  paroit  impossible  qu’il  ait  lieu,  je  reste  fort  tranquille.  On  me 
refuse  toujours  mon  cong6,  on  me  retient  mon  fond,  je  ne  jouis  point  de  ma  pension, 
on  veut  que  je  re^oive  toujours  ma  part  qui  est  en  s£questre,  autre  bassesse  que  je  ne 
ferai  surement  pas  ;  les  comediens  paroissent  oublier  que  j’existe  encore:  voila,  mon 
cher  ami,  oil  en  sont  toutes  mes  affaires.  Mais  je  me  porte  bien,  j’ai  des  amis  qui 
flattent  ma  vanite,  un  amant  qui  fait  le  bonheur  de  ma  vie,  et  point  de  besoins. 
Votre  anana  £toit  le  meilleur  du  monde  :  votre  lettre  m’a  fait  le  plaisir  le  plus  sen¬ 
sible,  et  s’il  vous  £toit  possible  de  me  donner  quelques  uns  de  ces  momens  delicieux 
que  vous  passez  avec  vos  amis  et  cette  femme  charmante,  quoiqu’elle  soit  la  votre, 
vous  contribueriez  beaucoup  au  bonheur  de  ma  vie,  parceque  c’est  tr^s-reellement  et 
tr&s-vivement  que  je  vous  aime. 

J’ai  trouv6,  a  mon  retour  a  Paris,  un  rouleau  de  toutes  vos  estampes,  et  un  billet 
de  Mr.  Kaye,  qui  me  les  envoy oit ;  ne  sachant  oil  adresser  ma  reponse,  je  n’ai  pu  le 
remercier  de  son  attention  ;  faites-le  pour  moi,  je  vous  en  prie,  et  dites-lui  bien  qu’il 
ne  pouvoit  pas  me  faire  une  galanterie  qui  me  fut  plus  ch£re.  Le  Comte  de  Yal- 
belle,  le  Marquis  de  Villepente,  et  Mr.  de  Keledinski,  vous  font  mille  et  mille  com- 
plimens  :  faites  les  miens  a  Madame  Garrick  le  plus  tendrement  que  vous  le  pourez, 
et  causez  quelquesfois  ensemble  de  la  pauvre  Clairon,  qui  vous  aime  a  jamais  tous  les 
deux. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  16  Janvier,  1766. 

The  devil  take  you,  my  dearest  friend  !  comment  vous  me  croyez  un  tinder  heart, 
et  vous  avez  la  malice  de  charger  Mr.  Burke  d’une  lettre  pour  moi.  Cela  s’appelle 
vouloir  mettre  le  feu  a  la  m£che,  et  faire  sauter  la  mine.  O  barbarian  !  ma  foi,  par 
ma  foi,  ce  Sir  Richard  Burke  est  a  very  pretty,  a  very  charming  creature :  des  graces 
de  l’esprit  comme  un  ange,  une  noble  aisance,  deux  grands  yeux  a  bruler  le  monde, 
une  bouche  si  belle,  un  si  joli  sourire,  et  tout  cela  vient  £tudier  le  Francois  au  coin 
de  mon  feu. — The  devil  take  you,  I  say.  Par  bonheur,  la  vanity  m’a  armee  de  sept 
plaques  d  airain.  Mais  si  plus  jeune  et  moins  raisonnable  j’avois  eu  un  pared  ecolier, 
je  ne  l’aurois  pas  gard6  un  mois  de  peur  d’accident.  Sans  badiner,  Mr.  Burke  est  un 
des  plus  aimables  hommes  que  l’on  puisse  voir ;  et  si  nos  dames  le  couroient  comme 
elles  ont  fait  Mr.  Hume,  cela  seroit  tout  simple  et  plus  naturel.  A  present,  venez 
icij  <lue  je  yous  gronde  comme  un  chien  :  est-il  bien,  Monsieur,  de  negliger  une  bonne 
et  tendre  amie,  qui  conserve  de  vous  un  souvenir  si  vif  ?  vous  ne  repondez  point, 


4G2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


vous  m’^crivez  un  chiffon  de  lettrc  pour  me  dire^'e  vous  ecrirai,  et  sans  le  voyage  de 
Mr.  Burke  je  n’aurois  plus  entendu  parler  de  vous — a  pretty  friendship  indeed !  Soyez 
juge  dans  vdtre  propre  cause  ;  pardonnez-vous  si  vouspouvez  ;  moi  je  suis  fach^e,  oui, 
tr6s  facli^e. 

A  MADAME  GARRICK. 

Vous  ferez  sagement,  Madame,  de  tenir  Mr.  Garrick  a  une  grande  distance  de 
vous :  c’est  un  paresseux,  un  negligent,  un  ingrat,  il  ne  m^rite  pas  d’etre  aime. 

Soyez  huit  jours  sans  l’embrasser,  pour  le  punir  de  son  indifference, - pas  huit  jours 

pourtant,  il  n’est  pas  assez  criminel,  le  suplice  surpasseroit  le  debt,  mais  vengez-moi 
je  vous  en  prie.  Agr^ez  mes  plus  ardents  souhaits  pour  votre  bonheur,  et  pour  le 
plaisir  de  vous  revoir  en  France;  ma  compagne  vous  assure  de  son  plus  tendre  sou¬ 
venir,  et  nous  vous  embrassons  toutes  deux. 


Je  reviens  vous,  dear  monster ;  le  Baron  d’Holbach  se  plaint  aussi  de  votre 
paresse.  S^avez-vous  qu’il  a  rompu  ses  Jeudis,  ses  Dimanches,  qu’il  ne  va  point  les 
Mardis  chez  Helvetius.  Il  prie,  il  assemble  ceux  qu’il  veut ;  plus  de  confusion, 
plus  de  bruit,  on  ne  crie  plus  a  ses  diners,  on  se  parle,  dit-il,  on  s’^coute,  on  se  r£- 
pond :  je  n’en  crois  rien.  J’ai  remarqu^  toute  ma  vie,  que  nos  gens  d’esprit  parlent 
toujours,  et  ne  causent  jamais. 

Grande  nouvelle  !  la  traductrice  de  Mr.  Hume,  en  d^pit  des  nonsenses  Anglois, 
des  barbarismes  Francois,  vient  de  se  marier;  yes,  forsooth,  et  a  Air.  le  President  de 
Meiniere :  elle  a  un  carrosse,  trois  laquais  ;  est  plus  digne,  plus  pedante,  plus  jeune, 
et  plus  complimenteuse  que  jamais.  Quand  elle  in’a  fait  sa  visite  de  noce,  j’ai  beau- 
coup  regarde  the  bridegroom,  an  ugly  old  devil.  Le  carrosse  et  le  titre  m’ont  paru 
achet6  tr^s-chers.  Je  vous  suis  fort  obligee  de  vos  offres,  mon  tr&s-aimable  ami.  J’ai 
renonc6  a  ce  projet  d’histoire  du  theatre,  mais  quand  vous  aurez  fait  l’ouvrage  dont 
vous  me  parlez,  je  le  traduirai,  si  vous  voulez.  Je  prends  actuellement  des  lemons  de 
votre  langue.  Je  lis  a  faire  horreur,  mais  je  m’entends  bien  :  je  commence  a  ecrire 
des  nonsenses  ;  avec  le  terns  je  deviendrai  plus  habile,  et  quand  je  le  serai,  mes  talens 

seront  a  votre  service _ Adieu,  on  me  presse,  on  m’attend;  ma  patiente  compagne  crie 

comme  Job ,Jinirez-vous,  viendrez-vous,  dquoi  bon  ennuyer  Monsieur  Garrick? — Allons 
done,  je  laisse  tout  la.  Mille  et  mille  complimens  a  Madame  Garrick.  Vous  em- 
brasserai-je,  ou  non  ?  Je  suis  encore  en  colere. 

Mr.  Burke  is  turned  Papiste  :*  il  a  6t6  hier  a  la  grande  messe,  et  a  prie  la  Vierge 
Marie  a  Notre  Dame. 

*  This  was  Richard  Burke,  Edmund’s  brother,  who  went  to  Grenada.  See  her  letter  of  3d  Jan.  1767. 
A?  to  his  praying  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  Richard  was  a  man  of  great  sensibility,  but  not  quite  so  easily  con¬ 
verted.  He  led  the  life  of  a  man  of  pleasure,  was  an  etourdi,  and  a  bon  •chant,  hardly  serious  in  any  thing 
but  his  reverence  for  his  brother  Edmund. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


463 


M.  L’ABBE  BONNET  TO  MR.  GARRICK. 

From  Paris,  20th  January,  1766. 

You  expect,  nay  you  require  a  thousand  excuses  from  your  Abbe  Bonnet  for 
his  silence,  and  you  are  in  the  right  for  aught  you  know  :  but  when  better  informed 
of  my  misfortunes,  you  will  readily  confess  that  I  am  unhappy,  but  nothing  more. 
The  golden  apple,  once  more  fatal  to  the  man  that  delivered  it,  was  a  source  of  trouble 
to  me.  Before  I  begin  such  a  lamentable  story,  I  must,  however,  let  you  know  that 
a  very  fine  pine-apple  has  been  delivered  to  Mademoiselle  Clairon  by  me,  and  from 
you,  that  you  may  not  be  uneasy  about  it ;  but  the  identick  one,  in  the  language  of 
Hudibras,  my  favourite  author,  which  you  charged  me  with,  was  left  at  St.  Omer. 
I  had  brought  it  in  my  own  hands  as  far  as  Calais,  but  being  obliged  to  ride  post, 
and  being  no  longer  able  to  keep  it  in  that  position,  I  trusted  one  of  Mr.  Mead’s 
servants  to  put  it  into  the  post-chaise.  Don’t  you  guess  at  what  happened  ?  jubes 
renovare  dolorem : — but  I  am  not  master  enough  of  the  energy  of  your  language  to 
draw  in  English  the  picture  of  my  despair.  I  arrived  at  Douai,  and  found  no  such 
thing  as  a  pine-apple  in  the  post-chaise.  Mr.  Mead,  being  a  witness  of  my  deso¬ 
lation,  was  so  kind  as  to  write  immediately  to  London,  to  try  if  he  could  get  me  one. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  wrote  to  the  innkeeper  where  we  had  slept  the  night  before  ; 
but  for  all  that  I  was  no  less  uneasy,  being  afraid  that  every  place  from  London  to 
Paris  would  prove  another  St.  Omer.  I  strove  to  forget  your  and  Mademoiselle 
Clairon’s  existence,  which  I  could  not  by  any  means,  because  of  the  many  proofs  of 
goodness  and  friendship  I  had  received  from  you.  1  leave  you  to  judge  if,  in  such  a 
situation,  it  was  very  entertaining  to  me  only  to  think  of  writing  to  you.  You  will 
say  not ;  but  I  must  add  something  more ;  I  would  not  even  go  out  of  my  room  in 
such  circumstances,  out  of  fear  of  being  asked  some  questions  or  other  that  would 
call  my  disgrace  to  my  mind.  So  I  was  during  a  whole  month,  when  at  last  I  was 
relieved  by  two  pine-apples,  yours  and  Mr.  Mead’s.  But  yours  being  quite  spoiled, 
I  carried  the  other,  that  was  very  fine,  and  did  not  choose  to  let  Mademoiselle  Clairon 
know  my  accident  till  yesterday,  a  fortnight  after  my  first  visit.  I  don’t  know 
whether  it  would  afford  you  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  to  repeat  you  all  the  pretty 
things  she  told  me  on  your  subject.  I  suppose  you  have  heard  the  same  things  from 
her  and  many  others,  that  your  sensibility  must  be  quite  worn  out  in  that  respect. 

Brisard  told  me,  that  had  he  known  at  first  how  long  the  play-house  would  be 
shut  up,  he  would  have  paid  you  a  visit.  For  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  I  think  her 
health  will  not  allow  her  to  make  that  voyage,  though  she  was  better  when  travelling 
than  now  at  Paris.  I  saw,  last  Thursday,  the  first  appearance  of  a  young  actress  who 
played  the  part  of  Pha?dra;  she  was  received  with  great  applause,  and  deserved  it, 
which  is  saying  a  great  deal  for  one  who  appears  after  La  Dumesnil  and  La  Clairon. 
I  suppose  you  have  received  an  account  of  the  “  Philosophe  sans  le  Savoir,”  a  comedy 
of  Mr.  Scdaine,  and  a  very  interesting  one ;  some  critics  will  say  that  it  is  but  a 
sketch  of  a  play,  that  there  are  some  childish  scenes  in  it,  et  que  cela  n’est  pas  rempli ; 


4G4 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


but  the  author  did  so  on  purpose;  being  well  acquainted  with  the  abilities  of  the 
players,  he  depended  much  upon  their  actions  and  gestures,  thinking  it  better  by 
much  than  fine  speeches  in  the  circumstances  of  a  violent  passion,  after  the  great 
principle  of  Horace,  so  that  his  play  is  written  in  a  quite  new  way.  We  have  also 
on  the  stage  another  new  little  thing,  “  La  Berg^re  des  Alpes,”  from  Marmontel’s 
Moral  Tales ;  a  very  little  thing,  indeed ;  but  Marmontel  himself  is  now  about 
putting  that  same  tale  into  the  form  of  a  play,  being  angry  with  the  author,  who 
spoiled  it  without  paying  him  any  compliment.  Now  1  am  upon  the  subject  of  the 
stage,  I  cannot  help  telling  you  that  our  authors  will  never  do  you  justice  in  that 
respect.  Mr.  Suard,  your  friend,  tu  quoque  Brute,  as  you  said,  must  have  answered 
your  letter  some  days  ago,  and  you  will  know  by  his  letter  that  I  am  in  the  right  to 
say  so.  I  confess  that  there  is  a  standard  of  true  taste  which  is  founded  in  nature  ;  but  at 
the  same  time  nobody  can  deny  that  there  is  so  much  art  in  any  production  of  genius 
whatsoever,  that  every  nation  is  apt  to  call  true  taste  its  own,  artificial  and  habitual 
mixed  with  the  natural  one.  I  see  daggers  and  cups  of  poison  on  our  theatre ;  I  saw 
on  your’s  people  besmeared  with  blood,  and  others  handling  skulls ;  but  I  can’t  find 
any  law  in  nature  which  allows  us  to  represent  horrid  and  shocking  deaths,  and 
forbids  us  to  represent  its  accessories.  A  skeleton  was  far,  you  know,  from  being 
held  as  a  subject  of  horror  among  the  Romans.  There  will  be  a  peculiar  good  taste 
to  every  nation,  as  there  are  many  particular  kinds  of  beauty.  How  many  handsome 
women,  though  never  so  little  resembling  one  another;  some  will  give  for  model  a 
Venus  of  Medicis,  and  others  a  Mistress  Garrick ;  and  howjustly,  every  body  knows  it 
that  was  happy  enough  to  see  her.  Art  is  poor  and  confined,  nature  is  rich  and  varied.* 

II  faut  que  je  finisse  ma  lettre  en  Francois,  de  peur  de  mal  rendre  les  sentimens 
dont  je  suis  pen6tre  pour  vous  et  pour  Madame  Garrick.  Je  n’oublierai  jamais  les 
bont6s  dont  vous  m’avez  combk,  et  j’espere  que  mon  silence,  apr£s  les  raisons  que  je 
vous  ai  dites,  ne  me  fera  point  soup^onner  d’ingratitude.  Je  voulais  a  la  verite  vous 
6crire  imm^diatement  apris  ma  visite  a  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  qui  vous  prie  tres  fort 
de  ne  pas  attendre  qu’elle  joue  pour  la  venir  voir,  pareeque  ce  serait  un  peu  tard,  dit- 
elle;  mais  je  voulais  voir  vos  amis,  et  je  ne  pus  tous  les  rencontrer  qu’hier.  Ils  vous 
font  mille  compliments.  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  qui  avait  6t6  un  peu  indispos^e,  se 
trouve  mieux ;  Mr.  l’Abbe  Morellet  me  dit  vous  avoir  envoy£  sa  traduction  des 
Peines  et  des  Dalits,  je  ne  le  suis  alle  voir  que  depuis  quelques  jours,  pareeque  j’avais 
pri6  Mr.  Suard  de  faire  votre  commission  aupriri  de  lui.  Les  lettres  dont  Mr. 
Wilson  m’avait  charge  entreront  dans  la  Gazette  Litteraire.  Je  traduis  celle  de  Mr. 
Delaval  pour  l’Abbe  Nollet  qui  m’en  a  pri6.  L’homme  que  Mr.  Bickerstaff  avait 
soup^onne  n’est  point  celui  qui  a  rendu  compte  de  “  L’Ambitious  Stepmother.”  Bien 
des  choses,  je  vous  prie,  pour  moi  a  ces  Messieurs,  dont  je  vous  dois  la  connaissance. 

Je  vous  prie  de  faire  agrier  mes  respects  a  Madame  Garrick,  et  de  les  agreer  aussi 
pour  vous  ;  je  vous  recommande  toujours  mon  Mr.  Daws. 

*  The  Abbe  Bonnet  was  certainly  under  no  necessity  of  changing  the  language  he  composed  in  for  any¬ 
thing  so  trivial  as  complimentary  effusion.  He  wrote  English  beautifully. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


465 


Mon  adresse  est  a  l’Abbe  Bonnet,  chez  Mr.  Chocquart,  Pension  Militaire  rue  et 
barriere  St.  Dominique  a  Paris.  Servez-vous-en  un  peu  pour  ne  pas  me  laisser 
croire  que  vous  etes  fach6  contre  moi,  et  faites-moi  le  plaisir  de  me  donner  vos 
commissions. 


DE  M.  GRIMM  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  15  Fevrier,  1766. 

J’espere,  illustre  David  Roscius,  que  M.  Noel,  votre  compatriote,  vous  aura 
remis  la  lettre  dont  je  l’ai  charge  a  son  depart  de  Paris.  C’est  un  trfes-habile  vir¬ 
tuose,  et  un  des  plus  belles  tetes  que  j’aie  entendu  en  fait  de  poesie  musicale.  Son 
instrument  est  presque  unique  en  Europe.  Je  suis  persuade  que  si  vous  pouvez  con- 
tribuer  a  son  succ£s  a  Londres,  vous  le  ferez  en  digne  et  loyal  ami  de  tous  ceux  qui 
aiment  et  professent  les  arts.  La  lettre  qu’il  vous  a  remise  de  ma  part  ne  vous  aura 
dit  que  tres  imparfaitement  combien  j’ai  6t6  touchy  de  la  marque  d’amitie  que  vous 
m’avez  donnee  dans  votre  lettre  a  notre  ami  M.  d’Holbach.  Je  vous  assure  que  je 
n’en  suis  pas  encore  revenu,  et  que  je  serois  bien  fache  que  M.  Rousseau  n’eut  pas  eu 
cette  estimable  intention  de  r^pandre  sur  moi  une  partie  de  son  fiel,  puisque  j’aurois 
6t£  priv6  de  la  marque  d’interet  que  vous  m’avez  donnee,  et  qui  me  sera  a  jamais 
precieuse.  J’espere  que  nous  verrons  ici  les  fruits  de  sa  plume  qu’il  prepare ;  et  si 
mon  sort  veut  que  j’en  sois  marque,  il  faudra  bien  quejelui  en  fasse  un  remerci- 
ment  aussi  public  que  son  souvenir. 

En  attendant,  mon  clier  et  illustre  Roscius,  j’ai  pris  a  M.  Foley  deux  cent 
quarante-sept  livres  dix  sols  pour  votre  compte,  et  cette  somme  m’a  servi  a  vous  faire 
expedier  l’Encyclop^die.  Si  vous  n’avez  pas  £te  un  des  premiers  servis,  prenez-vous 
en  a  notre  6toile.  Imaginez  que  tout  le  monde  savait  que  l’Encyclopedie  paraissait 
en  pays  Stranger  except^  nous,  y  compris  le  philosophe  Diderot,  qui  vous  aime 
autant  que  moi.  C’est  lui  qui  m’a  donn6  votre  souscription,  et  qui  m’a  prie  de  vous 
faire  expedier  votre  exemplaire.  Vous  verrez  par  le  billet  ci-joint  le  jour  du  depart 
du  ballot,  et  qu’il  vous  est  adress£  a  votre  adresse  Southampton-street. 


U.  so. 

J’ai  paye  pour  les  dix  volumes  in  folio  de  texte  ....  200  0 

Pour  le  volume  de  planches  relie  en  carton  (les  trente  sols  sont  pour  la  relieure)  .  37  10 

Comme  ces  Messieurs  ne  commettent  a  personne  l’expedition  du  ballot,  il  a  fallu 

leur  payer  pour  emballage,  frais  de  douane,  &c.  .  •  •  10  0 


Somme  pareille  a  celle  que  M.  Foley  m’a  donnee  .  •  •  247  10 


Je  garde  la  reconnoissance  que  les  libraires  m’ont  donnee  pour  les  volumes  de 
planches  qui  doivent  encore  suivre.  A  mesure  qu’ils  paraitront  je  vous  les  ferai 
tenir.  Edifiez-vous  en  attendant  avec  ce  que  vous  allez  recevoir.  Mes  respects  a 
Madame  Garrick.  M.  d’Holbach  m’a  dit  qu’il  vous  a  £crit  ces  jours  derniers.  Man- 
VOL.  ii.  3  o 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


46(3 

dez-lui  dans  votre  reponse  (juc  vous  avez  re^n  le  ballot,  afin  que  nous  soyons  tran- 
<1  n illes.  Mille  complimens  M.  Maty,  si  vous  le  voyez.  J’ai  re^u  sa  lettre,  et 
recommande  le  tout  son  z&le  philosophique.  Je  vous  aime  et  vous  einbrasse,  cher 
et  charmant  David,  de  tout  inon  coeur. 

Madame  d’Epinay  ne  me  pardonnera  de  sa  vie  de  ne  vous  avoir  pas  parK  d’elle; 
ni  taut  d’autres.  Nous  vous  attendons,  et  si  vous  ne  venez  pas,  je  ferai  imprimer 
([lie  vous  cites  un  noir,  un  ingrat,  un  monstre. 


DE  M.  J.  L.  FAESCH  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  16  Fevrier,  1766. 

L’honneur  que  vous  avez  fait  a  mes  ouvrages,  de  les  juger  dignes  de  quelque 
attention,  m’a  engag6  a  vous  en  presenter  un  petit  supplement  que  Mr.  Monnet  s’est 
charge  de  vous  faire  parvenir.  Je  prens  la  liberty,  Monsieur,  de  vous  en  envoyer 
encore  quelques  uns,  qui  manquent  ik  la  collection  que  je  vous  ai  faite.  Je  me  flatte, 
que  vous  me  ferez  la  grace  d’accepter  ce  petit  cadeau,  ou  plutot,  de  consentir  a  un 
troc  que  j'ose  vous  proposer  :  c’est  de  votre  portrait  en  estampe  que  je  souhaiterois 
en  ^change.  II  seroit  si  flatteur  pour  moi,  de  joindre  au  plaisir  que  me  feroit  le  por¬ 
trait  d’un  homme  illustre,  l’avantage  de  le  tenir  de  lui-meme,  que  je  ne  sqaurois  re¬ 
sister  au  d^sir  de  vous  le  demander.  J'esp^rois,  Monsieur,  de  jouir  ce  printems  du 
plaisir  devous  voir  a  Londres,  et  de  joindre  mes  applaudissemens  a  ceux  de  l’Angle- 
terre ;  mais  j’ai  appris  par  Mr.  Le  Kain,  que  vous  preniez  les  eaux  de  Bath,  et  que 
vous  ne  passeriez  pas  l’6te  a  Londres :  j’ai  remis  le  voyage  au  mois  de  Septembre,  ou 
d’Octobre :  l’honneur  de  vous  voir,  et  de  vous  approcher  etant  la  seule  chose  qui 
puisse  rendre  le  s6jour  de  l’Angleterre  int6ressant  pour  moi.  La  personne  qui  vous 
remettra  les  petits  tableaux  est  Mr.  Kuff,  negotiant  tiabli  a  Londres.  C’est  aussi  a 
lui,  que  vous  pourriez  remettre  votre  estampe,  si  vous  m'accordez  la  grace  que  j’ose 
vous  demander.  Les  portraits  que  je  vous  envoye,  sont  Mr.  Preville,  Mr.  Brisard, 
Mr.  Le  Kain,  Air.  Anger,  Madame  Preville,  et  Madame  Favart  en  vieille,  role  qu’elle 
a  joue  avec  le  succ&s  le  plus  brillant. 

Je  souhaite,  Monsieur,  que  ces  petits  tableaux  vous  fassent  autant  de  plaisir  que 
j’en  ai  a  vous  les  presenter.  Daignez  les  agreer,  aussi  bien  que  les  assurances  de  la 
consideration  distinguee  avec  laquelle  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre. 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tr^s-obeissant  serviteur, 

J.  L.  Faesch. 

Mr.  Preville,  a  qui  j'ai  dit  que  j’aurois  l’honneur  de  vous  6crire,  vous  fait  mille 
complimens. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


4(37 


DE  M  GRAVELOT  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR  ET  CHER  AMI,  A  Paris,  ce  8  Mars,  17o6. 

Je  suis  extremement  fache  de  ne  m’etre  pas  trouve  au  logis  quand  Mr.  Grimaldi 
a  eu  la  bonte  d’y  passer,  et  il  y  a  annonc6  son  depart  si  prompt,  que  la  crainte  de  ne 
le  pas  trouver  chez-lui,  m’a  prive  du  plaisir  de  lui  faire  mille  questions  a  votre  sujet, 
et  a  celui  de  Madame,  auxquels  on  ne  peut  pas  s’int6resser  plus  que  je  fais.  Je 
remercie  sinc&rement  Madame  de  conserver  quelque  curiosite  pour  mes  bagatelles  : 
elles  seroient  d’un  autre  prix  si  mon  talent  repondoit  au  desir  que  j’aurois  d’etre  digne 
de  son  approbation ;  mais  dans  tout  ce  qui  paroit  de  moi,  il  faut  songer  que  la  main 
du  graveur  y  a  pass6,  et  c’est  souvent  passer  par  les  baguettes. 

Il  est  terns  de  vous  remercier  de  votre  aimable  lettre,  dat^e  du  20  Juin  dernier,  et 
que  j’ai  re^ue  le  20  Decembre,  par  l’attention  singulikre  de  Mr.  Bergeret.  N’im- 
porte ;  j’y  ai  appris  avec  une  grande  satisfaction  que  vous  aviez  retrouve  cette  sant6 
propre  a  vous  rendre  capable  de  jouer  le  fermier  de  campagne  ;  et  encore  plus,  j’y  ai  vu 
avec  quelque  pride  des  temoignages  du  souvenir  de  Madame  Garrick  :  enfin,  j’ai  en 
meme  terns  re^u  votre  charmante  fable,  que  ce  boureau  Delaplace  ne  m’a  pas 
encore  rendue. 

J’ai  a  la  hate,  pour  repondre  a  l’im patience  de  Mr.  de  Grimaldi,  joint  au  petit 
almanach  de  cette  annee,  quelques  echantillons  de  mes  occupations.  Il  y  a  quelques 
6preuves  des  planches,  pour  une  edition  Italienne  de  la  Secchia  rapita,  ainsi  que 
quelques  estampes  pour  la  traduction  en  prose  de  Lucain  par  Mr.  de  Marmontel, 
laquelle  j’en  suis  sure  vous  fera  un  grand  plaisir.  Mais  a  propos  de  lui,  comme  je 
l’ai  vu  aujourd’hui,  et  que  je  lui  ai  dit  que  j’aurois  l’honneur  de  vous  ecrire,  je  suis 
charg6  de  sa  part  de  mille  amities  pour  vous,  et  pour  Madame  votre  6pouse. 

Ces  deux  ouvrages  sont  finis  de  ma  part,  et  presque  de  celle  des  graveurs.  Je  me 
promets  dans  le  terns  devous  faire  tenir  les  deux  suites  complettes.  Je  suis  actuelle- 
ment  a  traiter  le  Tasse,  et  enfin  on  va,  je  crois,  graver  le  Voltaire,  qui  j’espfere,  si  on 
me  fait  justice,  me  fera  quelque  honneur.  J’ai  joint  aux  echantillons  en  question  les 
quatre  estampes,  bonnes  epreuves  de  la  com^die  de  La  Partie  de  Chasse  de  Henri  IV. 
par  Mr.  Coll6,  piece  qu’apparemment  vous  connoissez  k  present,  puisqu’il  y  a  d6ja 
quinze  jours  qu’elle  parait  imprimee. 

Que  puis-je  joindre  encore  a  tout  ce  verbiage,  si  ce  n  est  le  t^moignage  sincere  de 
l’envie  que  j’aurois  de  vous  revoir  ici.  Je  partage,  assur&nent,  ce  desir  avec  tous  ceux 
qui  ont  eu  le  plaisir  de  vous  y  connoitre,  mais  personne  plus  ardemment  que  moi. 
Revenez  done  voir  votre  portrait  en  place,  et  que  j’ai  continuellement  sous  les  yeux, 
comme  j’ai  ch^rement  l’original,  et  son  amitie,  dans  mon  souvenir. 

Mille  respects,  et  j’ose  le  dire  mille  sentimens  d’aflfection,  comme  d’estime,  a  vdtre 
chere  Spouse.  C’est  avec  de  pareils  sentimens  que  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Votre  tr^s-bumble,  et  tr&s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Gravelot. 


3  o  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


468 

Si  vous  avez  quelques  momens  i\  perdre  oil  a  sacrifier  a  l’amiti6,  faites-moi  le 
]>laisir  dc  me  donner  de  vos  nouvelles :  ma  demeure  est  Rue  St.  Honors,  la  maison 
neuve  an  coin  de  l’Oratoire. 

Faites  attention,  je  vous  en  prie,  que  ce  que  je  vous  envoye  n’est  rien,  et  que  je 
vous  garderai  de  ces  clioses  les  mieux  conditionnfees:  ce  sont,  comme  je  vous  dis,  de 
pures  ('•elumtillons. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick,  Directeur  de  la  Com6die  Royale 
de  Drury  Lane,  London.” 


DE  M.  CAILHAVA  D’ESTANDOUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  De  l’hotel  du  Cornet  d’Or,  Paris,  le  14  Mars,  rue  Ste  Marguerite,  F.  S.  G. 

Il  etait  bien  flateur  pour  moi  d’avoir  tin  commerce  6pistolaire  avec  un  liomme 
de  votre  merite,  et  j’ai  ressenti  le  plus  grand  chagrin  en  le  voyant  cesser.  D’abord, 
apr&s  l’impression  de  mon  Tuteur  Dupe  je  n’oubliai  pas  que  je  devais  en  partie  son 
succ&s  a  vos  judicieux  conseils,  et  je  me  hatai  d’en  remettre  un  exemplaire  a  Mr. 
Monet  pour  qu’il  eut  la  bonte  de  vous  le  faire  parvenir.  Cependant  vous  n’avez  pas 
eu  la  complaisance  de  r6pondre  a  la  lettre  que  je  vous  6crivis  en  meme  terns.  Je 
sens  que  vos  momens  vous  sont  pr6cieux,  qu’ils  le  sont  au  public  dont  vous  faites 
les  delices  ;  mais  il  faut  faire  quelque  chose  pour  ses  amis.  C’est  a  ce  titre  que  vous 
m’avez  permis  de  prendre,  que  je  vais  vous  demander  un  service  important. 

J’ai  entrepris  un  ouvrage  oil  je  taclie  de  reduire  l’art  de  la  com^die  en  preceptes, 
par  des  exemples  pris  dans  les  meilleurs  auteurs  comiques  de  tous  les  ages  et  de  toutes 
les  nations.  Je  poss&de  bien  mon  ancien  theatre,  j’6ntends  l’Espagnol  et  l’ltalien  ; 
mais  jene  puis  connaitre  votre  theatre  que  par  les  pieces  qui  sont  traduites.  Vou- 
drez-vous  bien  me  marquer  si  ce  sont  les  meilleures,  en  quoi  votre  theatre  l’emporte  sur 
le  notre,  ou  lui  est  inferieur  ?  quelles  sont  les  comedies  ou  je  pourrai  trouver  des  exem¬ 
ples  frappans  de  force  dans  les  caract&res/de  v&ite  dans  la  peinture  des  moeurs,  tkc.  &cc* 

J’ai  fait  traduire  votre  Valet  Menteur,  et  si  la  ressemblance  qu’il  a  avec  notre  Soupe 
mal  aprete  me  prive  du  plaisir  d’en  enrichir  notre  sc&ne,  j’en  ferai  usage  dans  mon  ouv¬ 
rage.  Je  vous  ai  entendu  dire  que  vous  aviez  traduit  notre  Pupitte ;  j’ai  ete  frappe 
des  scenes  de  vos  Parieurs.  Je  vous  demande  en  grace  de  m’indiquer  le  moyen  de 
me  procurer  vos  ouvrages  afin  que  je  puisse  les  citer,  ou  de  m’en  donner  une  analyse 
s’ils  ne  sont  pas  imprimis.  Je  vous  prie  encore  de  m’indiquer  les  pieces  que  vos 
auteurs  ont  imitees  des  notres ;  et  surtout  de  Molifcre. 

Comme  j’aurai  occasion  de  parler  dans  mon  ouvrage  des  excellens  acteurs,  et  que 

*  It  is  not  a  little  singular,  that  so  busy  a  man  as  Mr.  Garrick  should  be  solicited,  by  very  slight  ac¬ 
quaintance,  to  compose  for  them  profound  dissertations  on  our  drama,  and  that  of  other  countries ;  and 
that  men,  who  were  perfect  stammerers  in  English,  should  presume  even  to  think  about  our  ancient  lan¬ 
guage. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


469 


(soit  dit  sans  la  moindre  flaterie)  les  connoisseurs  seraient  piques  de  n’y  pas  trouver 
votre  nom,  je  vous  prie  de  me  faire  parvenir  la  scene  comique  du  Marchand  de 
Tabac,  et  celle  de  VIvrogne,  pour  l’opposer  a  une  sc&ne  tragique  d’Hamlet,  et  prouver 
par  la  qu’un  talent  superieur  peut  briller  dans  les  genres  les  plus  opposes.  Ayez  aussi 
la  bont6  de  me  marquer  s’il  est  vrai,  comme  on  le  dit  ici,  que  vous  ayez  6t6  vous  faire 
peindre  sous  trois  figures  differentes  par  le  meme  peintre  sans  qu’il  vous  ait  reconnu  ; 
et  si  l’estampe  ou  l’on  vous  represente  riant  d’un  oeil  avec  la  Com6die,  et  pleurant  de 
l’autre  avec  la  Tragedie,  a  6te  dessine  d’apr&s  vous.  Pardon,  Monsieur,  de  la  peine 
que  je  vous  donnerai  si  vous  exaucez  ma  prikre  ;  mais  je  vous  aurai  une  obligation 
infinie  ;  et  mon  coeur  en  sera  toujours  reconnoissant. 

Notre  theatre  est  perdu  sans  ressource,  la  cabale  fait  renvoyer  tons  les  acteurs  qui 
debutent  avec  du  talent,  et  recevoir  le  rebut  de  la  province.  Tous  les  comediens  se 
laissent  gouverner  par  Mol6,  qui  leur  fait  et  leur  dit  mille  impertinences  impunement. 
II  dit  r  autre  jour  en  plein  foyer  a  Yenel,  qu’il  lui  donnerait  des  coups  de  baton  ;  et 
lui  cracha  dessus.  II  en  est  quitte  pour  n’&tre  pas  chez-lui,  quand  on  va  lui  deman- 
der  raison,  et  tout  est  dit.  La  moiti£  des  acteurs  [solicitent]  le  parterre  pour  eux, 
et  contre  leurs  camarades. 

Chacun  d’eux  ne  veut  recevoir  qne  les  pieces  ou  il  a  un  beau  role.  Enfin,  la 
com^die  n’est  plus  qu’un  brigandage.  Le  Kain  est  malade,  et  Mademoiselle  Dubois 
est  grosse,  par  consequent  plus  de  tragique.  Anger  a  debute  dans  les  roles  de  Le 
Kain,  et  a  ete  bien  plaisant. 

Adieu,  Monsieur ;  conservez-moi  votre  amiti6,  et  croyez  que  personne  n’est  plus 
que  moi,  et  l’admirateur  de  vos  talens,  et  votre  affectionne  serviteur, 

Cailhava  d’Estandoux. 

Pourriez-vous  m’adresser  ici  a  quelque  Anglais  de  merite,  avec  qui  je  puisse 
raisonner  de  votre  theatre  ?  ce  serait  un  grand  coup  ! 

Gardez-moi,  s’il  vous  plait,  le  secret,  et  sur  mon  ouvrage,  et  sur  ce  que  je  vous 
6cris  des  comediens. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick,  Directeur  du  Theatre  de 
Drury-Lane,  a  Londres.” 


DE  M.  CAILHAVA  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MONSIEUR, 

J’ai  recu  les  pr^cieux  pr6sens  que  vous  avez  bien  voulu  me  faire.  Un  de  mes 
amis  qui  sait  l’Anglois,  me  traduit  tous  les  jours  quelque  sc£ne  de  vos  ouvrages,  et 
je  vais  m’empresser  d’apprendre  votre  langue,  pour  r^doubler  mes  plaisirs  en  les  lisant 
moi-m^me. 

J’ai  donn6  de  votre  part  a  mon  ami,  les  gravures  des  deux  Shakspeares.  J’ai  fait, 
sans  doute,  un  tr&s-grand  sacrifice  ;  mais  j’en  ai  6t6.  recompense  par  l’entousiasme  avec 


470 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


laquelle  mon  ami  les  a  revues.  II  prend  la  liberty  de  vous  6crire;  son  honn6tet£  le 
rend  digne  de  cct  honneur,  sans  cela  je  me  serais  bien  gardt*  de  le  lui  procurer. 

II  n’y  a  aucune  nouvelle  int^ressante  au  Fran^ais.  On  a  donn6  un  pi&ce  en 
trois  actes,  de  ma  fa^on,  qui  a  eu  un  grand  succ&s  le  premier  jour ;  rnais  comine  elle 
est  dans  l’ancien  genre,  et  que  les  com^diens  m’ont  forc6  a  prendre  les  jours  de  la 
semaine  oil  il  n’y  a  personne  chez-eux,  je  suis  martir  de  l’etiquette. 

II  n’y  a  aucun  nouvcl  acteur  depuis  ma  derni£re  lettre.  Venel  est  mourant ;  Mol6 
fait  venir  un  de  ses  freres,  pour  le  remplacer.  Belcour,  qui  voulait  absolument  par- 
tir,  nous  reste.  On  pretend  qu’il  va  se  s^parer  d’avec  sa  femme.  Elle  l’a  trouv6  en 
bonne  fortune  avec  line  sceur  eadette  qu’elle  a ;  cela  lui  a  deplu,  elle  a  fait  tapage. 
Belcour  lui  a  dit  pour  le  calmer,  que  lorsqu’il  avait  su  autrefois  qu’elle  avait  couch^ 
avec  un  fr&re  a  lui,  il  n'avait  pas  sonn6  le  tocsin  ;  tout  cela  ne  l’a  pas  apaisee.  II  est 
des  choses  sur  lesquelles  les  femmes  n’entendent  pas  raison. 

D6s  que  ma  pi&ce  sera  imprimee,  et  que  je  trouverai  une  occasion  pour  Londres, 
je  vous  l’enverrai  avec  mes  Etrennes  de  V Amour.  Adieu,  Monsieur  ;  aimez-moi  tou- 
jours  un  peu,  je  vous  en  prie,  mon  coeur  en  a  besoin.  Je  suis  avec  tous  les  sentimens 
imaginables,  Votre  tres-humble,  et  tr£s-ob£issant  serviteur, 

Cailhava. 

J’assure  Madame  de  mes  respects. 


DE  M.  CAILHAVA  D’ESTANDOUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR, 

Mr.  Fect  que  vous  avez  vu  a  Paris,  que  je  vous  avais  deja  annonc£,  veut  faire 
connaitre  ses  talens  a  Londres,  et  les  y  faire  admirer  comme  ici.  Je  saisis  avec  em- 
pressement  l’offre  obligeante  qu'il  me  fait  de  se  charger  d’une  lettre  pour  vous. 

Je  suis  tres-flatt6  du  conseil  que  vous  me  donnez  au  sujet  de  mon  ouvrage ;  j’en 
profiterai,  et  les  Fran^ais  n’auront  pas  lieu  de  se  plaindre.  J’ai  vu  avec  le  plus  grand 
plaisir  le  Monsieur  qui  m’a  remis  votre  lettre.  Il  me  parait  tres-instruit,  il  connait 
bien  son  theatre,  et  m’a  trfes-bien  expliqu6  ce  que  vous  ne  fesiez  que  m’indiquer.  Il  a 
oubli6  a  Londres  le  present  pr^cieux  que  vous  avez  la  bonte  de  me  faire  ;  je  l’attends 
avec  la  plus  grande  impatience  ;  et  je  brule  de  connaitre  vos  ouvrages.  J’apprends 
1’ Anglais  expr&s,  d’ailleurs  j’ai  des  amis  qui  me  les  traduiront. 

On  joue  aux  Italiens  une  pi&ce  imit^e  d’une  des  vdtres,  je  n’ai  pas  pu  la  voir  en¬ 
core  ;  je  me  procurerais  ce  plaisir  au  premier  jour:  afin  de  le  mieux  gouter,  jou- 
blierai  l’auteur  Fran9ais  pour  songer  a  1’ Anglais,  et  me  souvenir  qu’il  me  fait  la  grace 
d’etre  de  mes  amis,  et  de  me  permettre  de  me  dire  le  sien. 

Cailhava  d'Estandoux 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick,  Directeur  du  Theatre  de 
Drury  Lane,  a  Londres.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


471 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  16  Mars,  1776. 

Non,  David  Garrick  n’est  pas  fait  pour  £tre  oubli6 ;  malheur  a  moi  si  je  l’oubliois 
jamais,  je  ne  m^riteriois  pas  de  l’avoir  connu  ;  j’aime  sa  personne  autant  que  j’honore 
ses  rares  talens ;  son  amitie  me  flatte,  sa  corr^spondance  m’interesse,  et  cependant,  voila 
je  n’ose  dire  combien  de  terns  que  je  ne  lui  ai  donn6  de  mes  nouvelles.  Je  lui  en 
demande  pardon,  et  a  la  sainte  amitie  a  qui  j’ai  manque.  Je  me  mets  sinc&rement  a 
vos  genoux,  O  cher  Garrick,  pardonnez-moi,  aimez-moi  toujours,  et  imposez-moi  telle 
penitence  que  vous  voudriez,  j’y  souscrit.  A  present  que  j’ai  confesse  ma  faute, 
souffrez  que  je  cherche  a  en  diminuer  l’enormite.  Si  je  vous  disois  que  je  suis  marie 
depuis  pr&s  de  trois  mois,  a  une  jeune  personne  jolie,  vertueuse  et  sensible,  que  j’aimois 
et  qui  m’aimoit  depuis  pr£s  de  trois  ans ;  si  je  vous  disois  encore  que  les  preparatifs  et 
les  embarras  de  cette  grande  revolution  dans  mon  etat  absorboient  depuis  long  terns 
mon  loisir  et  mes  pensees ;  si  je  vous  ajoutois  que  la  personne  que  mon  coeur  a  choisie 
est  une  Mademoiselle  Panckoucke,  soeur  du  libraire  que  vous  avez  vu  et  connu  ici,  je 
suis  bien  sur  que  mes  torts  vous  paroitroient  moins  graves,  et  que  vous  seriez  si  con¬ 
tent  de  me  savoir  heureux  que  vous  oublieriez  que  je  suis  coupable. 

Ma  ch£re  petite  femme  qui  vous  a  vu,  qui  se  souvient  de  vous  comrne  tous  ceux 
qui  vous  out  vu  seulement  une  fois,  a  ete  t&noin  des  angoisses  qui  m’ont  saisi  en 
ouvrant  votre  lettre;  je  n’osois  pas  acliever  le  peu  de  lignes  qu’elle  contient,  et  je  n’ai 
pris  ce  courage  qu’en  m’imposant  la  loi  de  vous  ecrire  sur  le  champ,  ce  que  je  fais,  et 
k  chaque  ligne  que  j’ecris  je  sens  ma  conscience  alleg^e.  J’ai  senti  aux  pincemens  du 
remors  que  les  grands  criminels  devoient  avoir  la  poitrine  bien  robuste. 

A  propos  de  remors,  il  ne  tient  pas  a  vous,  mon  clier  Roscius,  que  je  n’en  aye 
aussi  pour  avoir  imprime  cet  extrait  de  “  1’ Ambitious  Stepmother,”  qui  vous  a  si  fort 
d£plu.  Quel  grand  mal  y  a-t’-il  done?  Nous  avons  dit  que  Rowe  est,  apr&s  Shakspeare 
et  Otway,  le  meilleur  de  vos  poetes  tragiques,  cela  n’est-il  pas  vrai  ?  Nous  avons  dit 
que  “  l’Ambitious  Stepmother”  avoit  eu  un  grand  succ^s,  e’est  a  dire  dans  son 
origine,  et  je  l'ai  lu  dans  votre  “  Companion  of  the  Playhouse.”  Nous  avons  dit  que 
cette  piece  fournissoit  une  nouvelle  preuve  de  la  difference  qui  se  trouve  entre  votre 
theatre  et  le  notre,  et  cela  est  tout  simple  ;  car  une  pi£ce  Fran^aise  tissue,  et  ecrite  dans 
le  gout  de  celle-la,  n’auroit  pas  £t6  suport^e  sur  notre  theatre  jusqu’au  second  acte. 
Vous  me  dites  que  Rowe  n’a  quelque  reputation  que  pour  avoir  fait  sa  “  Belle  Peni- 
tente”  et  “  Jeanne  Shore.”  La  premiere  de  ces  pieces  est  traduite  d£s  long  terns,  et  n’a 
jamais  pu  etre  jouee  malgr6  toutes  les  modifications  imaginables.  “  Jeanne  Shore”  pa- 
roitroit  a  nos  lecteurs  encore  plus  absurde  dans  sa  conduite  que  les  deux  autres ;  cette 
fille  qui,  condamnee  a  p6rir  de  faim,  meurt  a  la  lettre  d’inanition  an  cinqui^me  acte- 
auroit  fait  mourir  de  rire  un  parterre  Francois.*  D'ailleurs  nous  n’avons  eu  garde 

*  Fond  as  this  parterre  might  be  of  laughing  at  what  was  unusual,  I  doubt  extremely  this  assertion  of 
M.  Suard.  For  it  is  not  simply  dying  of  inanition,  which  they  had  to  feel,  (no  laughing  matter  ;)  but  a 
character  which  had  previously  won  their  hearts,  by  beautv,  gratitude,  devotion  to  the  royal  offspring,  and 


472 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


de  comparer  Rowe  t\  Shakspeare.  Les  monstres  de  celui-ci  ont  bien  un  autre  carac- 
t&re.  Pardon,  si  je  parle  ainsi  de  votre  divinity ;  mais  apr£s  tout,  pourquoi  dissimuler 
son  opinion  sur  des  poetes  qui  ne  sont  plus?  et  qu’importe  a  la  gloire  d’un  grand  poete 
Anglois,  qu’un  Francois,  qui  sait  peine  b^gayer  votre  langue,  en  dise  et  en  pense  du 
bien  ou  du  mal  ?  et  qu’importe  surtout  h  l’illustre  Garrick,  dont  la  gloire  est  bien 
independante  de  celle  du  theatre  Anglois,  que  nous  pr£f6rions  Corneille  a  Shakspeare, 
et  Racine  a  Otway?  Nous  ne  devons  aux  morts  que  la  v£rit6;  je  suis  un  des 
homines  de  ce  pays-ci  qui  admire  le  plus  Shakspeare,  mais  je  l'admire  comme  un 
barbare  plcin  de  g£nie :  vous  m’aviez  echauf6  la  tete  sur  les  b^autes  de  ce  poete ;  je 
voulus  fair  un  morceau  sur  son  caract&re,  et  je  me  mis  a  le  relire,  mais  je  fus  si  £pou- 
vant6  des  extravagances  et  des  pu^rilit^s  qui  ddfiguroient  les  plus  belles  choses,  que  la 
plume  me  tomba  des  mains.  Encore  une  fois,  il  faut  renon^er  a  tout  principe  de 
gout,  de  nature,  et  de  convenance,  et  bruler  les  modules  de  l’antiquit6  ou  convenir 
que  les  drames  de  Shakspeare  sont  monstreux,  et  que  son  g£nie  est  comme  l’or  en- 
croute  dans  la  mine.  Vit'ium  non  hominis  sed  temporis. 

Je  n’ai  qu’un  mot  a  vous  dire ;  c’est  qu’il  n’y  a  pas  une  seule  sc&ne  dans  cet 
homme  extraordinaire  dont  la  traduction  litt^rale  et  enti&re  puisse  etre  avec  succ^s 
donnee  en  aucune  langue  et  jou£e  sur  aucun  theatre.  Shakspeare  doit  beaucoup 
aux  homines  c^lebres  qui  l’ont  loue,  mais  celui  a  qui  je  orois  qu’il  doit  le  plus  c’est 
vous ;  c’est  vous  qui  avez  6t6  son  plus  heureux  et  plus  adroit  commentateur.  Vous 
verrez  dans  une  des  premieres  feuilles  de  ndtre  Gazette  Littdraire,  si  vous  la  lisez, 
quelques  reflexions  en  passant,  sur  ce  poete :  je  peux  y  placer  un  mot  sur  mon  ami 
Garrick,  comme  je  le  sens  et  le  pense,  et  il  ne  faut  pas  qu’il  se  scandalise  de  tout  cela. 
C’est  dans  la  rdpublique  des  lettres  que  la  liberty  d’ecrire  doit  etre  sans  limites ;  qu’on 
nous  rdponde  aussi  vivement  qu’on  voudra,  et  je  traduira  fidelement  la  critique  qu’on 
fera  de  nos  bavarderies. 

Le  papier  et  le  terns  me  manquent ;  je  finis.  Re^ois,  mon  tres-cher  et  obligeant 
Mr.  Garrick,  tous  mes  remercimens  pour  les  politesses  dont  vous  avez  combl6  l’Abb6 
Bonnet.  Ma  femme  veut  que  vous  vous  souveniez  d’elle.  Je  prie  Madame  Garrick  de 
vouloir  bien  se  souvenir  de  moi,  et  agreer  mes  respects,  et  j’embrasse  de  tout  mon 
cceur  son  cher  et  illustre  mari.  INlille  complimens  a  Mr.  Colman.  Si  j’etois  digne  de 
voir  cette  com^die  qui  reussit  si  bien,  ce  “  Clandestine  Mariage,”  fruit  d’un  manage 
tr&s-bien  assorti,  j'en  demanderois  un  exemplaire  par  le  premier  courrier. 

resistance  to  tyranny  ;  such  a  woman,  exposed  to  the  public  scorn,  to  the  hatred  of  her  bosom  friend  Alicia, 
perishing  in  the  arms  of  her  injured  husband,  who  risks  his  own  life  to  relieve  her, — such  a  character,  I  repeat, 
could  never  be  well  acted,  without  affecting  deeply  even  the  parterre  of  Paris.  This  has  been  very  recently 
proved  upon  the  critical  nation.  An  English  actress  of  very  humble  talents  has  within  the  last  two  years, 
in  this  despised  Jane  Shore,  moved  them  even  to  agony.  This,  it  should  be  remembered  too,  did  not  at  all 
interfere  with  the  grand  dispute  about  the  “  barbarian ”  Shakspeare — It  was  nature,  that  appealed  to  her 
children,  and  triumphed  over  prejudice. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


473 


DE  M.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Londres,  ce  1  Avril,  1766. 

Rien  de  plus  aimable,  et  qui  excite  plus  ma  reconnoissauce,  mon  cher  et  bon  ami 
Garrick,  que  les  deux  lettres  que  votre  amiti6  m’a  dicffies ;  j’aurais  satisfait  a  vos 
d^sirs,  et  a  mon  inclination  naturelle,  si  le  terns  m’eut  permis  d’entreprendre  le  voyage 
de  Bath;  mais  nctre  ambassadeur  ne  veut  pas  permettre  que  je  prolonge  mon  voyage 
sous  aucun  pr^texte.  On  m ’attend  a  Paris  pour  la  rentree  du  theatre ;  tous  mes 
momens  sont  compt6s ;  jugez  de  ma  douleur  et  de  mon  chagrin  d’avoir  traverse  le 
Detroit  sans  vous  voir,  et  sans  vous  assurer  moi-meme  des  sentiments  du  cceur  le 
plus  sensible  et  le  plus  reconnoissant.  Vous  m’offrez  vos  secours  pecuniaires  ;  je  les 
accepterais  avec  bien  du  plaisir  si  j’en  avais  besoin,  mais  j’esp£re  que  j’aurai  suffisam- 
ment  de  quoi  retourner  a  Paris.  Permettez  done  qu’en  bon  Francois  je  vous  rentier  - 
cie,  vous  charmant  et  digne  Anglois,  de  vos  bons  offices ;  j’en  suis  reconnoissant  a 
jamais  ;  j’accepte  avec  tout  le  plaisir  imaginable  l’offre  que  m’a  faite  votre  ami,  d’aller 
voir  votre  maison  d’Hampton  Court.  Nous  irons  Jeudi  prochain  :  soyez  sur,  mon 
cher  ami,  que  je  me  prosternerai  devant  la  statue  du  fameux  Shakspeare,  a  la  m^moire 
duquel  vous  avez  fait  clever  un  superbe  monument  ;  ce  trait  est  digne  du  fameux 
Garrick.  Votre  conduite  est  une  belle  lefon  pour  les  grands,  mais  les  grands  sont 
petits,  et  les  petits  voudraient  en  vain  s’61ever  jusques  aux  grands. — Adieu,  mon  cher 
Garrick ;  soyez  sur  qu’en  quittant  la  Grande  Bretagne,  je  pars  le  cceur  navre  de  de- 
plaisir,  de  ne  pouvoir  vous  embrasser ;  je  suis  mille  fois  plus  malheureux  que  Dio¬ 
genes,  qui  passa  sa  vie  sans  trouver  un  homme  ;  vous  etes  le  seul  que  je  d^sirais  voir, 
vous  existez,  et  tout  s’oppose  a  mes  d^sirs  ;  j’eusse  sans  doute  £t£  trop  heureux,  mais 
enfin,  je  le  suis  encore  suffisament,  si  vous  etes  bien  convaincu  que  personne  au 
monde  ne  vous  estime  et  ne  vous  aime  plus  que  votre  bon  ami, 

Le  Kain. 

“  To  Mr.  David  Garrick,  Esq.  Presently  to 
Bath,  in  England.” 


DE  M.  DE  LA  PLACE  A  M.  MON  NET. 

Le  3  Avril,  1766. 

Pardon,  mon  cher  ami  !  je  suis  presque  aveugle  :  j’ai  bien  rnalade  depuis  que 
je  ne  vous  ai  vu.  Cela  va  mieux,  et  je  vous  souhaite  un  bon  voyage.  Embrassez 
bien  l’ami  Garrick  pour  moi.  Dites-lui  que  je  ne  le  boude  presque  plus,  et  que  si  je 
ne  l’eusse  pas  aim6  de  tout  mon  cceur,  je  ne  l’aurois  pas  boud6  du  tout.  Quant  a 
Madame  ;  oh  !  dites-lui  tout  ce  que  vous  savez  que  je  suis  et  pense  sur  son  compte : 
e’est  a  dire,  tout  ce  qu’une  femme  aussi  aimable  et  aussi  estimable  qu’elle  a  droit 
d’inspirer  t\  quiconque  a  le  bonheur  de  laconnoitre,  et  de  savoir  l’app racier.  En  voila 
VOL.  II.  3  p 


474 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


bien  pour  un  aveugle ;  mais  le  sentiment  ne  l’est  jamais :  e’est  aussi  pourquoi  je 
salue,  embrasse,  et  aime  mon  clier  fr&re  Aquilon  de  tout  mon  coeur,  &c.  &c.  &c. 

De  La  Place. 

1*.  S.  Allez  voir  mon  neveu. 

Voyez  mes  commissions  en  l’autre  part. 

Note  des  livres  que  M.  de  la  Place  prie  M.  Monnet  de  vouloir  bien  lui  acheter 

4  Londres. 

The  Dramatic  Censor.  Sold  by  Richard  Manby,  jun.  Ludgate  Hill. 

The  Companion  to  the  Stage.  Sold  by  - 

The  Dramatic  Works  of  Roger  Boyle,  Earl  of  Orrery  ;  2  vols  in  8vo.  Sold  by 
Dodsley,  in  Pall  Mall. 

England’s  Heroical  Epistles,  in  imitation  of  Ovid’s  Epistles.  By  the  same. 

L’Euripide  de  Glascow,  en  Grec  et  en  Latin  :  in  8vo. 

Et  les  pieces  de  Theatre  depuis  six  mois :  e’est  a  dire  les  nouvelles,  ainsi  que  les 
historiettes,  et  jolies  brochures  nouvelles.  Les  Romans,  idem,  s’ils  passent  pour 
fttre  jolis. 


DE  M.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  Vendredi,  4  Avril,  1766,  4  heures  du  matin. 

Sei.on  toutes  les  apparences,  mon  cheret  digne  ami,  je  perdrai  devue,  dans  vingt- 
quatre  heures,  les  cotes  de  l’Angleterre,  mais  en  quittant  la  Grande  Bretagne,  je  n’ou- 
blierai  jamais  les  soins  de  l’amitie  dont  vous  m’avez  combl6.  J’ai  pris  la  liberty  de 
charger  Monsieur  votre  fr&re  de  vous  porter  toutes  mes  remercimens ;  j’eusse  6t6 
bien  plus  flatte  de  vous  les  faire  moi-m^me,  mais  les  circonstances  les  plus  facheuses 
s’y  sont  opposes;  peut-etre  une  autre  fois  serai-je  plus  heureux.  Vous  prdsumez,  sans 
doute,  queje  forme  encore  le  projet  d’un  voyage,  et  vous  n’avez  pas  tort,  mais  le  terns 
precis  ne  m’en  est  pas  conn  ft  ;  je  laisse  le  tout  a  la  fortune ;  Dieu  veuille  qu’elle  me 
rappelle  aupr&s  de  vous,  et  qu’elle  me  fournisse  les  moyens  de  vous  assurer  de  ma 
vive  reconnoissance,  et  de  ma  tendre  amide.  J’aurais  trop  a  vous  dire,  si  j’entre- 
prenais  ici  de  vous  peindre  mon  extase  a  la  vue  du  monument  que  vous  avez  elev6  a 
la  memoire  de  Shakspeare ;  je  laisse  a  vos  compatriotes  le  soin  de  vous  donner  les 
louanges  que  vous  meritez.  Les  £loges  d’un  Francois  seraient  aussi  sinc£res  que 
les  leurs,  mais  ils  ne  pouvaient  fttre  aussi  ^loquents ;  je  me  tais  sur  ce  chapitre,  pour 
vous  parler  d’un  bien-aimable  Russe  que  j’ai  amen£  avec  moi  en  Angleterre,  et  dont 
je  vous  ai  deja  fait  le  portrait :  il  reste  ici  pour  vous  voir,  vous  parler,  vous  entendre, 
et  vous  admirer.  C’est  ainsi,  mon  cher  ami,  que  vous  attirez  a  vous  tous  les  homines 
des  extremity  des  deux  poles,  a  qui  il  reste  encore  un  peu  de  goftt,  dans  le  si£cle  de 
la  plus  grande  frivolity.  Je  vous  recommande,  en  partant,  mon  aimable  Russe,  et 
j’ose  me  flatter  que  quand  vous  le  connoitrois,  vous  serez  convaincu  que  la  fameuse 
Catherine  s^ait  eclairer,  instruire,  et  policer  les  peuples  que  le  Czar  Pierre  a  tir6s  de 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


475 


la  barbarie. — Adieu,  mon  cher  ami :  mille  tendres  compliments  a  Madame  Garrick, 
cent  mille  assurances  pour  vous,  et  de  la  plus  parfaite  estime,  et  de  la  plus  tendre 
amiti6  de  celui  qui  vous  est  d^voue  jusqu’a  la  vie  eternelle, 

Le  Ivain. 


DE  M.  GRIMM  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  13  Avril,  1766. 

J’ai  lu,  illustre  David  Roscius,  tout  ce  que  vous  m’avez  adress6  de  gracieux  dans 
la  lettre  de  notre  ami  de  la  Rue  Royale.  Oui,  Roscius,  plus  que  jamais,  apres  ce  que 
le  Docteur  Gatti  m’a  dit  de  ce  qu’il  a  vu  sur  votre  theatre.  II  m’a  fait  comprendre, 
clair  comme  le  jour,  que  quoique  j’aie  eu  le  plaisir  de  vous  voir  ici  six  mois  de  suite, 
je  ne  puis  cependant  me  former  une  idee  de  votre  talent ;  en  sorte  qu’il  ne  nous  reste 
que  le  parti  de  nous  embarquer  au  premier  jour  tant  que  nous  sommes,  faire  un  tour 
a  Drury  Lane,  et  nous  eerier  veni,  vicli.  Ce  pauvre  Docteur  Gatti  n’auroit  jamais 
retrouve  David  Garrick  en  Lusignan,  s’il  ne  vous  avoit  reconnu  a  la  main.  Rendez 
grace  au  ciel  d’etre  venu  dans  un  si£cle  ou  la  mode  des  sorciers  est  pass£e,  et  ou  l’on 
traite  les  homines  de  g^nie  en  inspires  plutot  qu’en  poss6d£s.  Quel  fagot  seroit  assez 
grand  pour  vous  bruler,  si  l’on  savoit  une  bonne  fois  que  les  miracles  que  vous  faites 
ne  s’op&rent  pas  par  la  puissance  divine.  Tout  considere,  ce  qui  vous  reste  le  plus  a 
craindre,  e’est  qu’un  bon  matin  vous  ne  voyiez  d^barquer  toute  la  caravanne  de  la 
Rue  Royale,  et  vous  pouvez  compter  que  Madame  d’Epinay  sera  du  voyage. 

Mais  notre  ami  Gatti  ne  m’a  pas  seulement  parle  de  vos  talens,  il  m’a  aussi  parl6 
de  votre  credit,  et  il  m’a  convaincu  qu’il  d£pendra  absolument  de  vous  de  faire  la 
fortune  de  notre  souscription  pour  l’estampe  de  cette  malheureuse  famille  Calas.  Il 
m’a  assure  que  nous  aurons  autant  de  guin^es  qu’il  vous  plaira  de  fois  d’ouvrir  la 
bouche  en  faveur  de  notre  projet.  Puissiez-vous  l’ouvrir  deux  mille  fois  !  M.  le 
Docteur  Maty  me  mande  qu’il  vous  a  envoye  le  projet  qui  a  6te  im prime  a  Londres, 
et  que  votre  absence  est  un  grand  malheur  pour  nous.  Daignez  le  rCparer,  cher  et 
charmant  David.  Il  me  sera  bien  doux  de  dire,  que  cette  famille  vous  doit  tout  ce 
qu’une  nation  libre  et  g6nereuse  aura  fait  pour  elle.  Reunir  a  des  talens  uniques 
une  ame  pleine  de  noblesse  et  de  gen6rosit6 ;  voila  le  portrait  de  David  Roscius,  que 
j’aime  a  avoir  sous  les  yeux.  L’esprit  de  notre  souscription  est  de  donner  l’argent 
qu’on  veut  pour  pen  d’estampes,  de  payer  pour  quatre,  pour  aix,  pour  cent,  et  de 
n’en  prendre  qu’une.  Lorsque  vous  aurez  recueilli  quelque  chose,  vous  aurez  la 
bont6  de  me  mander  le  nombre  d’estampes  qu’il  vous  faudra,  et  de  me  faire  passer  la 
liste  des  souscripteurs,  alors  j’aurai  soin  de  vous  faire  passer  les  estampes  par  quelque 
ministre  nouveau  s’il  est  possible,  ou  du  moins  relives,  et  puis  vous  ferez  passer  les 
funds  a  la  famille  Calas. 

Je  n’ai  pas  ete  peu  surpris  d’apprendre  que  vous  n’avez  pas  encore  re<pu  l’Ency- 
clop^die.  J’espere  que  vous  l’aurez  req:u  depuis.  Ayez  la  bont6  de  me  tranquilizer 
la-dessus  :  vous  voyez  par  la  lettre  ci-jointe  qu’il  n’y  a  pas  de  ma  faute. 

3  r  2 


47  6 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Je  pr^sente  mes  respects  i\  Madame  Garrick,  et  je  veux  mourir  si  je  vous  nomine 
un  seul  de  nos  amis,  pas  meme  Diderot  le  philosoplie.  Ils  voudroient  tous  que  je 
vous  parlasse  d’eux  :  mais  quand  je  vous  aurai  assez  parle  j)our  mon  compte,  leur 
tour  viendra  peut-Ctre.  Cher  et  charmant  David,  je  vous  embrasse.  Pour  Dieu, 
aimez-moi  un  peu. 


DE  MADEMOISELLE  CLAIRON  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Depuis  le  15  d’Avril,  je  eours  journellement  risque  de  la  vie,  et  du  jour  que  Mr. 
l’Abb6  Bontems  m’a  remis  le  paquet  de  gaze  dont  vbtre  charmante  femme  a  eu  la 
bonte  de  le  charger,  j’ai  6t6  si  mal  que  je  n’ai  pu  songer  meme  a  la  remercier.  Je  ne 
vois  pas,  j’entends  k  peine,  je  ne  puis  sans  aide  aller  d’une  chaise  a  l’autre  ;  la  mort 
me  seroit  mille  fois  moins  cruelle  que  mon  etat ;  mais  cependant  le  cceur  est  encore 
entier,  il  est  reconnoissant,  il  vous  aime  tous  deux  a  jamais,  et  ne  desire  rien  tant  que 
de  vous  le  prouver.  Le  Sieur  Carara,  que  je  ne  puis  trop  remercier  de  ses  attentions, 
vous  dira  le  reste  ;  je  ne  peux  plus  !  alii ! 


DE  M.  L’ABBE  BONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


SIR,  De  Paris,  19  Avril. 

Mademoiselle  Clairon  is  once  more  the  principal  cause  of  my  silence  :  she 
desired  me  to  wait  for  some  days,  that  she  could  write  a  few  lines  in  my  answer. 
Having  not  been  able  this  great  while  to  see  her,  and  finding  an  opportunity  to  write 
you,  I  will  not  let  it  scape.  I  send  you  an  answer  of  Madame  Riccoboni,  wherein 
she  gives  you  all  the  particulars  concerning  your  Melpomene,  as  she  told  me ;  and 
so  I  need  but  add,  that  she  has  been,  and  is  still  very  ill.  I  suppose  you’ll  be  very 
glad  to  see  some  verses  lately  addressed  to  her  by  M.  Dorat.  I  hope  you'll  let  them  be 
seen  by  Air.  Liston,  a  friend  to  Madame  Riccoboni,  whom  she  recommends  to  you  ; 
’tis  a  friend  of  mine  too,  and  one  of  your  admirers,  but  you  have  so  many  in  the 
known  world,  that  you  must  make  a  voyage  to  the  Austral  lands  to  get  new  ones, 
provided  you  would  carry  me  along  with  you ;  for  I  would  not  give  you  such  an 
advice  without  that  condition.  I  hope  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  reading  your  new 
play  within  a  few  days,  and  I  long  for  it.* 

Auteur,  acteur,  trag6dien,  com^dien,  il  n’y  a  que  Shakspeare  et  vous  qui  puissent 
r6unir  tout  cela  ;  et  la  post£rit6  placera  le  ministre  a  cote  de  l’idole  dans  le  meme 
temple.  Madame  Garrick  sera  entre  les  deux,  car  dans  l’autre  monde,  comme  dans 
celui-ci,  il  faut  des  femmes  charmantes  ;  et  tous  ceux  qui  l’auront  connue,  lui  rend- 
ront  les  meraes  hommages  dans  un  siecle  aux  Champs  Elis6es,  bon  gre  mal  gre  la 
quality  des  eaux  de  votre  Lethe. 

*  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage,”  which  appeared  in  the  month  of  February  preceding. —Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


477 


Madame  Riccoboni  est  diablement  en  colde  contre  vous ;  je  vis  bier  chez-elle 
Gouy,  que  vous  lui  envoyez  pour  venger  vos  griefs,  et  quand  je  fus  instruit  de  la 
plaisante  lettre  dont  il  etoit  porteur,  je  lui  dis  qu’il  comptait  bien  sur  le  droit  des 
gens  pour  s’en  etre  charge.  Vous  avez  bien  su  que  Mole  a  ete  sur  le  point  d’epouser 
Mademoiselle  d’Epinay.  Madame  Preville  en  afailli  a  mourir ;  elle  voyoit  sans  doute 
que  son  ame  allait  passer  dans  un  autre  corps,  ce  qui  n’est  pourtant  qu’une  M6temp- 
sicose.  Je  dinai  l’autre  jour  avec  un  conseiller  de  la  Chambre  des  Comptes,  chez  Mr. 
Mead  le  cadet :  ce  conseiller  compte  aller  bientot  a  Londres  avec  un  savant  natu- 
raliste,  Mr.  Bomard  de  Valmont,  connu  par  un  Dictionnaire  d’Histoire  Naturelle,  en 
cinq  volumes  in  8vo.  Je  serai  oblige  de  lui  donner  une  lettre  pour  vous,  a  la  requete 
et  au  nom  de  Mr.  Mead.  J’ai  6t6  a  “  La  Reine  de  Golconde,”  ballet  h6roique,  donn6 
depuis  trois  ou  quatre  jours  au  grand  opera  par  Sedaine,  la  musique  est  de  Monsigny. 
C’est  un  genre  nouveau,  qui  n’est  pas  fait  pour  reussir ;  il  est  6crit  platement,  quoique 
“  Aline,”  petit  conte  charmant  du  Chevalier  de  Boufflers,  en  ait  fourni  le  sujet. 
La  musique  n’a  pas  et6  applaudie  non  plus. 

Il  faut  a  present  que  je  vous  parle  un  peu  de  votre  sante  ;  vous  ne  la  menagez 
pas  assez.  Je  conviens  qu’il  vous  faut  de  l’agitation  et  des  affaires  pour  consumer  votre 
vivacite,  de  peur  qu’elle  ne  vous  consume  vous-meme ;  mais  il  vous  en  faudrait  un 
peu  moins.  Si  votre  indisposition  pouvait  vous  engager  a  entreprendre  un  second 
voyage  en  France,  on  pourroit  dire,  “  a  wind  must  be  very  bad  that  blows  no  good 
thing.”  Vous  savez  combien  tous  vos  amis  le  d^sirent  ;  votre  Abbe  aurait  le  plaisir 
d’aller  prendre  du  the  tous  les  jours  avec  vous.  Si  tout  cela  ne  vous  touche  pas,  je 
forme  dans  ce  moment-ci  le  projet  de  vous  aller  voir  dans  un  an  au  mois  de  .  .  .  . 
avec  un  de  mes  amis.  Je  vous  ecrirai  de  terns  en  terns  pendant  cet  intervalle,  pour 
que  vous  ne  m’oubliez  pas  tout  a  fait.  Mes  respects,  je  vous  prie,  a  Madame  Gar¬ 
rick,  et  soyez  persuade  de  l’attachement  et  de  la  reconnoissance  avec  laquelle  je  suis, 
et  serai  toujours,  Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tres-obdssant  serviteur, 

Bonnet. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK.* 

15  Avril,  1766. 

Help,  help!  murder,  murder!  dear  Theresa,  make  haste,  give  my  some  relief, — 
I  am  in  a  fit,  I  am  distracted — Cut  off  Air.  Burke’s  throat — mercy  on  us  !  forbear, — 
O  tyrant  !  Mais  il  n’est  pas  prudent  d’irriter  ce  m^chant  diable — Honest  Mr.  Noise, 
I  implore  your  pity  :  upon  my  knees  I  crave  your  pardon  !  Be  good,  be  merciful, 
do  not  cut  nothing  to  the  lovely  Dick  — Faith,  his  eyes  are  fine  eyes — his  smiles  are 

*  I  will  not  correct  this  lively  lady’s  English  ;  but  I  must  indulge  a  wish  that  she  had  expressed  herself 
uniformly  in  that  language  of  which  she  was  a  perfect  mistress.  Not  that  she  mistakes  the  meaning  of 
her  English  phrases  ;  but  that  she  is  ignorant  that  the  natives,  of  her  own  sex,  cannot  without  indelicacy  so 
plainly  manifest  their  feelings  ;  and  this  is  the  almost  insurmountable  difficulty  in  writing  a  foreign  language. 
—Ed. 


478 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


sweet  smiles — well,  and  what  for  this?  Venez  ici,  r^pondez  &  ma  question  :  tenez- 
vous  li\,  soyez  sage.  Est-ce  que  depuis  le  voyage  de  Mr.  Burke  en  France,  je  vous 
en  aimc  moins,  dites,  my  little  irrational?  est-ce  que  je  m6rite  toutes  ces  dures  £pi- 
thfetes  ?  You  are  too  hasty,  Sir.  En  parlant  de  Mr.  Burke,  je  dis  le  bel  Anglais,  ou 
mon  aimable  ccolier  :  en  parlant  de  Mr.  Garrick,  je  dis  the  dearling  of  my  heart, — the 
charming  David, — my  dear,  my  sweet  friend ! — 1  call  you  an  ungrateful  monster,  are 
you  not?  Quel  torrent  d’injures  !  et  les  terminer  par  woman,  woman  !  Zounds,  Sir  ! 
a  pretty  piece  of  insolent  vanity,  indeed!  Mais  je  m’honore  du  nom  de  femme,  a  la 
barbe  de  toute  l’impertinente  tribe  de  votre  esp&ce ;  je  ne  voudrois  pas  changer  de 
sexe,  non,  depend  on  it,  man,  lofty  man  ! 

The  bearer  of  your - je  ne  serais  comment  nommer  cette  chienne  de  lettre,  le 

porteur  done,  m’a  paru  un  homme  tres-poli,  tres-instruit,  trfes-spirituel,  tr&s  tout  ce 
qu’il  vous  plaira :  mais  il  adore  l’ltalie,  a  papist,  a  devilish  papist.  The  creature, 
faire  oublier  Mr.  Burke,  etre  aimc  a  son  tour,  pugh !  e’est  comparer  Rossinant^  a 
Buc^phale ;  on  pent  estimer  cela,  voila  tout.  A  propos  de  cheval,  je  n’entends  point 
parler  de  ma  commission.  J’ai  £crit  a  Mr.  Burke,  il  ne  m’a  pas  encore  repondu.  Je 
ne  me  hate  point  de  m’impatienter ;  j’attends,  je  suis  paisible  moi,  ce  n’est  pas  comme 
vous  ;  mais  cela  ne  durera  pas. 

La  divine  Clairon  ne  rentre  point.  Melpomene  s’en  d6sesp£re.  Le  roi  tr£s-chrG 
tien  laisse  cette  grande  princesse  aux  portes  des  enfers,  il  ne  veut  pas  ordonner  a 
Saint  Pierre  de  lui  ouvrir  les  deux  battans.  Themis  est  sourde,  et  l’autoritd  se  tait. 
Cette  fille  vouloit  immortaliser  son  nom  en  donnant  a  son  theatre  celui  d  Acad^mie 
Dramatique.  Pour  r^ussir  dans  ce  projet,  il  eut  fallu  joindre  aux  talens  des  moeurs, 
et  pour  obtenir  le  droit  d’etre  estim^e,  etre  estimable. 

Le  Roi  de  Prusse  vient  d^chouer  aussi  dans  un  de  ses  projets.  Il  vouloit  attirer 
Helvetius  a  sa  cour,  et  l'y  fixer.  Ses  ambassadeurs  ont  harangu6  Madame  Helv6- 
tius  ;  elle  a  repondu  qu’elle  aimoit  la  campagne  et  son  mari ;  qu’au  reste,  la  chose  du 
monde  dont  elle  se  soucioit  le  moins,  e’etoit  un  roi.  Madame  Geoffrin  n’est  pas  si 
peu  vaine  :  elle  va  voir  her  son  the  King.  Elle  part  pour  la  Pologne,  et  les  medisans 
pretendent  qu’elle  ira  en  Russie.  On  se  moque  un  peu  de  la  bonne  femme,  et  de  son 
voyage ;  non  pas  chez  le  Baron  notre  ami,  mais  par  tout  Paris. 

A  MADAME  GARRICK. 

Vous  me  laissez  done  gronder,  quereller,  injurier,  Madame  ;  moi,  qui  vous  aime 
tant,  qui  me  souviens  si  tendrement  de  vous,  qui  conserve  un  d6sir  si  vif  de  vous 
revoir  !  je  suis  sure  que  vous  aimez  ce  m6chant  d6mon,  qui  me  fait  enrager.  Eh 
bien  !  baisez-le  a  mon  intention,  je  vous  en  prie.  Voyez,  je  rends  le  bien  pour  le 
mal ;  en  vous  regardant,  en  vivant  avec  vous,  peut-il  dire,  woman,  woman !  et  cela 
pour  dire  une  injure :  je  suis  furieuse  quand  j’y  songe — ne  le  baissez  pas,  non,  don- 
nez-lui  plutot  un  bon  soufflet,  je  le  rendrai  au  premier  de  ses  amis  qui  m’apportera 
une  lettre  de  sa  part.  Ma  compagne  vous  prie  de  recevoir  les  assurances  de  son 
amitie,  et  de  vous  rappeller  quelquefois  combien  nous  vous  sommes  toutes  deux 
attaches. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


479 


TO  YOU,  Mil.  TEMPEST. 

A  pres  tout  vdtre  tapage,  il  faut  done  vous  aimer:  vous  avez  l’audace  de  vouloir 
qu’on  vous  aime  ?  Hum  !  si  je  pouvois  vous  hair?  mais  mon  cceur  ne  peut  y  con- 
sentir.  II  faut  c^der  a  son  penchant ;  s’y  laisser  entrainer  malgre  soi-meme  et  la 
raison.  Ainsi  ce  n’est  pas  par  complaisance  que  je  vous  aime,  mais  pareeque  je  ne 
s^aurois  m’empecher  de  vous  aimer. — Adieu,  my  dear  friend,  always  remember  me, 
and  be  assured,  I  can  never  forget  you. 

Dans  votre  premiere  lettre,  mettez,  je  vous  prie,  votre  demeure,  je  l’ai  oubliee. 


DU  BARON  DE  GRIMM  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  27  Avril,  1766. 

Voici,  cliarmant  et  illustre  David  Roscius,  un  papier  qui  vous  procurera  votre 
Encyclopedic,  si  vous  ne  l’avez  pas.  On  dit  qu’en  envoyant  ce  papier  a  la  Douane 
de  Londres,  votre  enorme  ballot  vous  sera  incontinent  delivr6.  Ainsi  soit-il.  Amen. 

M.  Suard  nous  assure  que  vous  avez  quitt6  le  theatre  de  votre  gloire :  je  m’en 
consolerois  si  j’avois  pass6,  comme  le  Docteur  Gatti,  deux  mois  a  Londres  cet  hiver, 
mais  je  ne  m’en  consolerois  jamais,  a  moins  que  le  parti  que  vous  avez  pris  ne  vous 
mette  en  £tat  de  passer  la  moiti6  de  votre  vie  a  Paris. 

Ajoutez,  je  vous  supplie,  a  votre  gloire  immortelle  un  autre  genre  de  gloire,  et 
qu’il  soit  dit  dans  les  fastes  de  l'humanit^,  que  David  Garrick  a  et£  dans  les  Isles 
Britanniques  le  plus  ferme  appui  d’une  famille  illustre  par  ses  malheurs,  a  laquelle 
les  philosophes  de  toutes  les  nations  se  sont  empresses  de  consacrer  leur  z£le  et  leur 
secours.  Quand  vous  aurez  fait  votre  operation,  j’aurai  soin  de  vous  fournir  toutes 
les  estampes  que  vous  me  demanderez.  Nous  avons  eu  dans  les  differentes  villes  des 
receveurs  fort  zel6s  ;  il  me  sera  bien  doux  de  vous  mettre  dans  la  liste  de  ces  rece- 
veurs,  a  la  t&te  de  la  souscription  et  de  son  produit  en  Angleterre.  Vous  savez  qu’il 
nous  faut  le  nom  et  la  qualite  de  chaque  souscripteur  avec  la  note  de  l’argent  sous- 
crit,  et  du  nombre  d’exemplaires  qu’on  demande.  Et  pour  ce,  et  tout  ce  que  vous 
ferez  pour  le  succfes  de  cette  noble  et  g^nereuse  entreprise,  le  Dieu  de  Shakspeare  et 
de  tous  les  homines  de  g£nie,  ce  Dieu  qui  est  aussi  le  votre,  vous  benira,  et  vous 
comblera  de  sante  et  de  joie,  et  vous  conservera  vos  yeux,  afin  qu’il  ne  passe  pas  un 
seul  original  devant  eux,  sans  vous  divertir. 

Je  pr6sente  mes  hommages  a  Madame  Garrick.  Madame  d’Epinay  veut  que  je 
vous  dise  mille  choses,  et  puis  toute  la  Rue  Royale.  An  diable  les  autres,  je  ne 
veux  vous  parler  de  personne.  Nous  fetons  de  notre  mieux  le  Prince  de  Brunswic,  que 
vous  nous  avez  envoys.  Avez-vous  re^i  “  Le  Philosoplie  sans  le  savoir  ?”  Je  compte 
que  cette  pi£ce  aura  eu  votre  suffrage.  Il  n’est  pas  donne  a  tout  le  monde  de  sentir 
ce  qui  y  est.  \  ous  savez  qu’en  ce  pays-ci,  les  belles  phrases  et  les  beaux  bras  sont 
souvent  tout  ce  qu’il  y  a  de  plus  beau  dans  les  pieces  ;  mais  “  Le  Philosoplie  sans  le 
savoir,”  n’en  sait  pas  faire. 


480 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Illustre  David,  je  vous  embrasse  dans  l’esperance  de  vous  rcvoir  bientot,  et  d’avoir 
en  temps  et  lieu  des  nouvelles  du  succes  de  vos  soins  pour  cette  souscription. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

25  Mai,  1766. 

Comme  j’ai  l’avantage  d’etre  aussi  6tourdie  que  vous,  je  ne  S9ais  si  vous  avez  re^u 
ma  r^ponse  a  votre  pert  letter.  Je  l’ai  donn^e  a  un  abb6,  l’abbd  a  un  £colier,  l’^colier 
a  son  maitre,  le  maitre  a  un  aini,  l’ami  a  un  voyageur,  le  voyageur  au  grand  diable 
d’enfer,  peut-6tre  :  en  ce  cas,  elle  pourra  vous  parvenir,  vous  avez  la  des  connoissances, 
you  devil,  you  ! 

Les  beaux  yeux  de  Mr.  Burke  sont  devenus  gris,  verd  ;  j’ai  envie  d’aller  a  Lon- 
dres  pour  les  lui  arracher ;  ne  vous  donnez  pas  la  peine  de  le  tuer,  c’est  un  malhon- 
nete,  un  mauvais  coeur,  un  ingrat,  un  .  .  .  un  .  .  .  un  homme. 

A  la  v6rit6,  quelqu’un  a  dit,  un  autre  m’a  redit,  que  Air.  Burke  disoit  .  .  .  . 
voyez,  quel  caquet ! — il  disoit  done,  ce  mediant  Mr.  Burke,  qu’il  ne  trouvoit  point  le 
cheval  demand'e.  Belle  raison,  de  ne  pas  ecrire !  on  dit,  je  cherche,  prenez  patience , 
je  ne  tons  onblie  pas,  je  me  souviens  de  la  bete  et  de  vous :  mais  ne  pas  repondre  a  ma 
lettre. — Je  suis  d’une  col&re, — otez-vous  de  la,  laissez-moi  lui  crever  ses  vilains  yeux 
bleus.  Si  vous  voyez  the  pretty  monster,  dites-lui  que  rien  ne  presse.  Si  le  hasard 
lui  presente  le  cheval  souhaitd  je  serai  charm  6e  de  l’avoir ;  s’il  ne  peut  l’envoyer,  je 
ne  lui  en  s^aurai  pas  mauvais  gre  ;  je  ne  suis  ni  exigeante  ni  injuste ;  mais  il  ne  m’a 
pas  £crit,  j’en  suis  tres-irrit^e ;  je  me  declare  son  ennemie,  et  il  peut  jurer  la  paix 
contre  moi. 

Mr.  Changuion  n’a  pas  mal  rempli  vos  intentions,  comme  vous  voyez  :  s’il  doit  etre 
aime  et  onblie,  je  vous  conseille  d’envoyer  bien  vite  l’ami  que  vous  tenez  en  reserve 
pour  vous  venger  de  lui,  dep£chez-vous,  cela  presse;  si  vous  ne  vous  hatez,  je  pour- 
rois  bien  dire  a  votre  ambassadeur,  tardi  venisti  il  male  e  senza  rimedio. 

Comment  se  porte  Madame  Garrick  ?  pense-t’-elle  quelquefois  a  nous,  nous  son- 
geons  bien  souvent  a  elle ;  ne  reviendrez-vous  point  en  France?  vous  y  avez  taut 
d’amis !  ils  sont  legers,  dit-on,  les  Francois,  peut- etre ;  mais  quand  ils  aiment,  ils 
aiment  beaucoup.  Je  ne  dis  rien  des  autres  nations,  Dieu  me  preserve  de  mal  pen- 
ser  de  mon  prochain,  but,  this  insufferable  Mr.  Burke  ...  I  hate  him. 

Un  jeune  Ecossois,  homme  de  mdite,  et  fort  mon  ami,  m’avoit  demand6  une 
lettre  pour  vous  la  rendre,  et  jouir  du  plaisir  d’entretenir  Mr.  Garrick  avant  de  re- 
tourner  en  Ecosse,  et  s’en  repartir  pour  faire  le  tour  de  l’Europe ;  mais  vous  6tiez  a 
Bath  ;  il  ne  vous  aura  pas  vu. 

Ah,  ah  !  mon  bon  ami,  vous  avez  done  la  goutte !  Libertin  !  voila  oil  conduit  a 
tinder  heart ;  moi,  qui  eut  toujours  a  tender  heart,  j’ai  pleure  quelquefois,  mais  je  me 
porte  tres-bien. 

A  propos,  une  bonne  querelle  :  A'ous  faites  une  comedie,  elle  r^ussit,  vous  en 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


481 


envo)rez  a  Paris,  et  vous  m’oubliez  .  .  .  .  Je  he  m’etonne  pas  si  vous  aimez  Mr. 
Burke,  vous  vous  ressemblez  tous  deux. 

Mille  tendres  complimens  a  Madame  Garrick ;  ma  compagne  me  prie  de  vous 
dire  bien  des  choses  agreables  de  sa  part,  mais  je  n’en  veux  rien  faire. — Adieu,  mon 
aimable  et  cher  ami,  je  vous  embrasse  de  tout  mon  coeur.  Quoique  je  vous  gronde 
un  peu,  je  ne  vous  en  aime  pas  moins. 

Le  Prince  IJereditaire  de  Brunswick  est  re^i  a  Paris  comme  1’aine  des  Amours  le 
seroit  a  Paphos.  On  lui  donne  des  fetes,  les  dames  le  courent,  et  veulent  lui  plaire. 
Si  Mr.  Hume  £toit  ici,  il  s’ecrieroit,  oh,  les  inconstantes !  Vraiment,  le  Prince  n’est  pas 
philosophe,  mais  il  est  jeune,  poli,  agreable :  nos  dames  voudroient  bien  tourner 
cette  tete-la.  Celle  de  Mr.  de  Lally  m’a  bien  inquietee,  je  disois  en  lisant  ses  me- 
moires,  coupez-moi  9a.  Poor  rascal !  on  l’a  jug6  comme  je  le  jugeois. 


DE  M.  WATELET  A  M.  GARRICK, 

Ce  26  Mai,  1766. 

Il  y  a  un  si£cle,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  que  je  ne  me  suis  entretenue  avec  vous,  et 
je  craindrois  a  la  fin  que  vous  ne  m’oublieriez  tout  a  fait.  Je  comptois  pouvoir  aller 
vous  rendre  visite  sur  les  bords  de  la  Tamise  cette  annee,  avec  Mr.  le  Comte,  et 
l’Abb£,  mais  des  occupations  nous  ont  empeches  de  satisfaire  notre  d£sir,  et  nous 
n’avons  plus  que  l’esperance  d’etre  plus  heureux  l’annee  prochaine ;  ou  de  vous  voir 
a  Paris  cet  hyver.  En  attendant,  je  profite  du  voyage  que  fait  a  Londres  une  per- 
sonne  de  nos  amis,  pour  vous  rappeller  le  souvenir  d’une  societe  qui  vous  a  vou6  des 
sentimens  d’attachement  et  d’estime,  que  l’eloignement  et  le  terns  n’affoiblissent  point. 

Mr.  Fleuri^re  de  la  Tourelle,  qui  occupe  a  Lyon  une  place  distinguee  dans  la 
magistrature,  et  qui  avec  les  qualites  personnelles  les  plus  estimables,  a  des  connois- 
sances  profondes  dans  la  phisique  et  dans  les  arts,  dont  il  s’occupe,  vous  remettra  cette 
lettre :  il  avoit  le  plus  grand  desir  de  faire  connoissance  avec  vous  ;  et  moi,  d£s  que 
j’ai  s^u  qu’il  alloit  a  Londres,  j'ai  pense  a  le  charger  d’un  renouvellement  de  ce  traits 
d’amitie  que  nous  avons  fait  sur  les  rives  de  la  Seine,  et  qui  doit  certainement  etre 
continue  sur  celles  de  la  Tamise.  Recevez  done,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  les  complimens 
et  amities  sinc^res  de  Mr.  le  Comte,  de  notre  bon  Abbe,  et  tous  les  sentimens  que  je 
vous  ai  voue.  Donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles:  quelles  sont  vos  occupations  ?  ne  puis- 
je  pas  vous  etre  ici  de  quelque  utilite  ?  avez-vous  fait  usage  de  la  petite  pi£ce  qui 
vous  avoit  plu  ? 

Vous  s^avez  que  notre  theatre  Francois  est  pour  le  moment  dans  un  triste  £tat. 
Mademoiselle  Clairon  est  absolument  retiree ;  il  parut  une  nouvelle  actrice  que  je 
n’ai  point  vu,  pareeque  je  suis  a  la  campagne,  oil  je  m’occupe  beaucoup,  et  ou  je  suis 
si  heureux  par  l’amiti6  et  par  nos  gouts,  que  ie  ne  suis  pas  souvent  tente  de  retourner 
a  Paris.  Je  reconunande  a  votre  amiti^  Mr.  de  la  Tourelle,  qui  vous  rendra  ma 
lettre,  et  je  vous  aurai  une  veritable  reconnoissance  des  temoignages  que  vous  voudrez 

VOL.  11.  3  Q 


482 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


bien  lui  cn  donner.  Faitos-moi  le  plaisir  de  presenter  mes  ci vilites  bien  sinc&res 
Madame  Garrick.  Comment  va  sa  sant6  ?  se  souvient-elle  encore  du  petit  moulin, 
et  de  ceux  qui  l’habitent.  Vous  m’aviez  promis  votre  portrait,  et  si  vous  ne  me  l’en- 
vovez  pas,  je  l’irai  prendre,  llecevez,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  les  assurances  bien  sin- 
c£res  et  inviolables  de  l’amitte,  et  des  sentimens  avec  lesquels 

J’ai  l'honneur  d’etre,  votre  trcs-humble,  et  tres-ob^issant  serviteur, 

Watelet. 


DE  M.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  23  Juin,  1766. 

J’ai  bien  tarde,  mon  cher  Garrick,  4  r6pondre  a  la  lettre  que  vous  m’avez  fait 
l’amitie  de  me  faire  tenir  par  le  Russe  aimable  que  je  vous  avois  adress6  ;  mais  vous 
m’excuserez  sans  doute,  quand  vous  Sijaurez  que  la  nouvelle  forme  que  l’on  a  mise  k 
la  com^die  nous  a  donne  beaucoup  d’occupation,  nous  a  occasionn6  beaucoup  d’as- 
sembl^es,  nous  a  fait  faire  beaucoup  de  m^moires,  et  le  tout  pour  parvenir  a  une 
forme  de  gouvernement,  peut-etre  trop  sage  et  trop  r^flechi  pour  qu’il  ait  une  longue 
dur^e.  Void  en  deux  mots,  ce  dont  il  s’agit :  nous  sommes  parvenus  a  dablir  un 
conseil  de  jurisprudence  qui,  par  la  connoissance  entide  qu’il  a  de  toutes  les  affaires, 
forme  une  balance  juste,  entre  l’autorite  injuste  de  nos  supdaeurs,  et  les  caprices  con- 
tinuels  de  tous  les  comediens  ;  vous  voyez,  mon  cher  ami,  que  nous  pouvons  main- 
tenant  en  appeller  de  l’injustice  la  plus  complette,  a  la  justice  la  plus  integre.  Dieu 
veuille  que  nos  despotes  ne  sentent  pas  les  entraves  qu’ils  se  sont  impos6es,  et  que 
nous  ayons  dorenavant  assez  de  fermete  pour  soutenir  des  droits  qui  nous  sont  donnas 
sous  le  bon  plaisir  du  Roi.  II  y  a  toute  apparence  que  notre  petite  r^publique  se 
ressentira  bientot  de  cette  bonne  administration,  puisque  les  punitions  seront  toujours 
proportionnees  aux  recompenses. 

Vous  s^avez,  sans  doute,  mon  cher  Garrick,  que  le  Roi  s’est  expliqu6  tr£s-claire- 
ment  sur  la  solidite  et  sur  l’honn£tet6  de  notre  etat,  et  que  sa  Majeste  s’est  reservee  de 
donner  tous  actes  necessaires  contre  quiconque  voudroit  nous  disputer  a  l’avenir  tous 
les  droits  de  citoyens  et  de  fideles  sujets.  Quoique  cette  declaration  n’ait  ete  faite 
que  verbalement,  elle  a  cependant  le  plus  grand  credit  aupr^s  des  grands,  et  de  la 
magistrature.  II  est  bien  malheureux  que  Mademoiselle  Clairon  ne  se  soit  pas  con- 
tentee  d’une  declaration  aussi  satisfaisante  pour  nous  tous,  et  qu’elle  ait  abandonee 
sa  societe,  comme  un  compose  de  gens  infames,  et  sans  le  moindre  soup^on  d’honneur  ; 
je  vous  avouerai,  mon  cher  ami,  que  cette  conduite  a  prodigieusement  revolte  la  cour 
et  la  ville  contre  elle,  et  que  moi,  tout  le  premier,  j’ai  ete  indigne  qu’elle  ait  ose  pen- 
ser  qu’une  societe  entiere  d’honnetes  gens  put  etre  meprisable  a  ses  yeux. 

Cet  egoisme  est  le  comble  de  l’insulte,  et  a  aliene  tout  le  monde  contre  elle :  elle 
a  consequemment  demande  son  conge,  et  le  Roi  le  lui  a  donne  dans  le  meme  instant ; 
tous  ceux  qui  avaient  une  tr^s-grande  opinion  de  sa  grandeur  dame  et  de  son  desin- 
teressement,  ont  ete  fort  surpris  qu’elle  ait  exige  sa  part  de  l’annee  dans  laquelle  elle 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


483 


n’a  pas  jouee  ;  je  conviens  que  j’en  ai  moi-meme  et6  surpris,  et  que  je  ne  l’ai  nulle- 
ment  reconnu  dans  une  pareille  conduite. 

Quoiqu’il  en  soit,  cette  perte  est  affreuse  pour  le  theatre,  elle  ne  sera  pas  reparable 
de  long  terns.  II  faut  un  nombre  d’ann6es  considerable  pour  former  un  liomme  a 
talents,  et  le  moindre  6v£nement  le  detruit.  Au  moment  ou  je  vous  £cris,  mon  cher 
ami,  je  relis  votre  lettre,  et  je  ne  con^ois  pas  ce  que  vous  voulez  me  dire,  en  me  fai- 
sant  entendre  qu'il  ne  tenait  qv'a  moi  de  prevent  r  tout  le  desordre  qui  est  arrive.  Ou 
vous  avez  6t6  fort  mal  instruit,  ou  vous  ne  s^avez  pas  que  tout  ce  baccanal  se  pre- 
parait  dans  le  terns  que  j’6tais  encore  en  Angleterre;  je  n’ai  s^u  qu’a  mon  retour  que 
le  Roi  s’6tait  explique,  et  que  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  n’ayant  pu  obtenir  complette- 
ment  ce  qu’elle  avait  exige,  avait  pris  le  parti  de  la  retraite.  J’ignore,  mon  cher  ami, 
quelles  sont  les  personnes  mal  instruites  qui  vous  ont  porte  ces  instructions,  mais  il 
est  tr^s-certain  que  l’on  ne  vous  a  pas  fait  un  rapport  juste  de  ce  qui  s’^tait  pass6  ;  je 
vous  dis  la  simple  et  pure  verite,  et  je  ne  vous  instruis  que  de  ce  que  tout  le  monde 
S9ait  comme  moi. 

Adieu,  mon  cher  Garrick ;  daignez  recevoir  tous  mes  remercimens  de  l’accueil 
agitable  que  vous  avez  bien  voulu  faire  a  mon  Russe  polic6 ;  vos  lei^ons,  votre  con¬ 
versation,  et  vos  talents,  l’ont  tr^s-instruit  sur  le  genre  de  la  declamation  Anglaise,  dont 
il  n’avait  aucune  idee :  vous  avez  fondu  dans  son  ame  tous  les  gla^ons  du  Nord  qu’il 
avait  apporte  dans  notre  partie  Septentrionale.  Je  crains  bien  qu’un  jour  a  venir,  ces 
diables  d’habitans  de  l’ancienne  Scythie,  apr£s  s’etre  chauffes  dans  nos  foyers,  ne 
tombent  un  beau  jour  sur  nos  bourgades,  et  ne  deviennent  les  maitres  du  Septentrion 
avec  la  meme  rapidit6  que  les  Romains  se  sont  rendus  les  despotes  de  l’Espagne,  de 
l’Afrique,  et  de  la  Germanie.  Je  laisse  a  vos  politiques  a  creuser  mon  raisonnement, 
e’est  a  vous  autres  Anglois  a  pr^venir  les  6v£nemens  futurs  ;  pour  nous,  doux  et  com- 
patissans  Gaulois,  nous  nous  en  remettons  a  la  providence :  e’est  Instruction  sacr^e 
que  nos  moines  et  nos  pretres  nous  donnent  d^s  notre  tendre  enfance. — Adieu  encore 
une  fois,  mon  cher  et  respectable  ami :  je  vous  demande,  comme  une  grace  sp^ciale, 
d’assurer  Madame  Garrick  de  mes  tr&s-hu rubles  civilit^s  ;  daignez  recevoir  les  miennes, 
et  les  assurances  du  sincere  attaclrement  de  votre  bon  ami,  Le  Kain. 


DE  M.  FAVART  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MON  CHER  GARRICK,  Paris,  ce  24  Juillet,  1766. 

Oui,  mon  cher  Garrick,  car  l’amiti6  que  vous  m’avez  t^moignee  et  celle  que  je 
vous  ai  vouee,  me  donnent  des  droits  pour  me  servir  de  ce  terme  familier,  qui  est 
l’expression  de  mon  cceur  :  done,  mon  cher  Garrick,  j’ai  vu  l’ami  JMonnet,  qui  m’a 
rempli  de  joye,  en  m’apprenant  que  vous  vous  portiez  bien,  ainsi  que  votre  tendre  et 
respectable  moiti6. 

Il  s’etoit  ici  r^pandu  un  bruit  que  votre  dernier  voyage  en  France  vous  avoit 
attir6  quelques  disgraces  en  Angleterre ;  notre  ami  Monnet  m’a  tranquillis^  en 

3  Q  2 


484 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


m’assurant  que  vous  £tiez  plus  heureux  que  jamais.  Je  n’ai  pas  de  peine  a  le  croire: 
avec  de  l’aisance,  de  la  philosophie  et  de  la  gait£,  le  moindre  citoyen  doit  vivre  j)lus 

content  epic  tous  les  souverains  de  la  terre.  Votre  sort  est  a  desirer ;  mais  personne 

ne  vous  l’envie,  vous  l’avez  trop  bien  m^rite  par  vos  talens. 

Notre  ami  m’a  beaucoup  flatt£  en  me  disant  que  vous  vous  etiez  souvent  entre- 
tenu  de  moi  avec  lui.  Je  ne  sais  s’il  a  eu  dessein  de  caresser  mon  amour-propre; 

mais  en  tout  eas  il  s’y  est  bien  pris,  car  je  n’ai  jamais  rien  tant  d£sir6  que  d’occuper 

line  place  dans  votre  souvenir. 

Mr.  Monnet  m’a  men 6  cliez  Mr.  Colman,  votre  compatriote.  Nous  n’avons  reste 
ensemble  qu’un  quart  d’lieure ;  mais  dans  ce  peu  d’espace  il  m’a  6t6  facile  de  con- 
noitre  que  e’est  vdritablement  un  homme  de  talent.  Il  m’a  parle  de  sa  traduction  de 
Terence  en  versi  sciolti,  ou  versblancs;  il  m’a  communique  quelques  lines  de  ses 
recherches  pour  enricliir  les  notes  de  cet  ouvrage  ;  je  ne  doute  point  d’apr^s  son  plan 
([lie  sa  traduction  ne  soit  bien  re^ue  a  Londres.  Je  vous  prie  de  m’en  6crire  inter  nos 
votre  sentiment,  ainsi  que  d’une  comedie  de  sa  facon,  intitule  “  The  Clandestine 
Marriage,”  dont  il  a  eu  la  bonte  de  me  faire  present,  quoique  je  ne  sache  pas 
l’Anglois. 

11  nous  est  venu  ici  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Hume,  qui  presente  l’auteur  “  d’Emile” 
comme  un  monstre  qui  deshonore  les  lettres  et  l’humanite.  Ces  deux  cHebres  au¬ 
teurs  que  j  ai  vus  la  veille  de  leur  depart,  me  paroissoient  tendrement  unis ;  quel  sujet 
si  grave  a  done  pu  les  diviser  ?  Tout  le  monde  litteraire  se  dechaine  contre  le  phi- 
losoplie  de  Geneve. 

Il  paroit  une  critique  anonyme  de  l’eioge  funebre  du  Dauphin,  compose  par  Mr. 
Thomas  ;  Mr.  Rousseau  y  est  attaque  personellement ;  les  Encyclopedistes  n’y  sont 
pas  plus  m6nag£s.  Nos  devots  veulent  rendre  nos  philosophes  modernes  responsables 
des  ecarts  d’une  imagination  deregiee,  que  des  principes  mal  con 911s  ont  conduite  au 
fanatisme  de  l’impiete,  car  tout  a  son  fanatisme  jusqu’a  l’incredulite  ra^me  ;  e’est  par 
cette  raison  que  l'on  defend  a  Paris  l’entree  du  Dictionnaire  Encyclopedique ;  e’est 
pour  le  meme  sujet  que  l’on  a  jette  au  feu  avec  le  jeune  homme  d’ Abbeville  le  Dic¬ 
tionnaire  de  Mr.  de  Voltaire. 

Ce  jeune  homme,  appelie  Mr.  le  Febvre  de  la  Marre,  a  ete  condamne  a  avoir  la 
tete  tranchee,  et  son  corps  jette  au  feu,  pour  avoir  insulte  une  image  de  Christ.  Le 
jour  de  1’ execution,  on  lui  lut  sa  sentence  comme  il  est  d’usage ;  il  l’ecouta  tranquille- 
ment,  et  se  mit  a  rire.  Le  confesseur  s’empara  de  lui ;  mais  le  jeune  homme  ne  l’en- 
tretint  jusqu’a  l’heure  du  diner  que  de  propos  legers  et  plaisans.  Ils  se  mirent  a 
table  ;  apr£s  avoir  bien  mange,  Mr.  le  Febvre  demande  au  Docteur  s’il  ne  lui  seroit 
pas  permis  de  prendre  du  caffe.  “  Je  n’y  vois  pas  d’inconv^nient,  ’  repond  celui-ci. 
“  Vous  avez  raison,”  ajoute  Mr.  le  Febvre  toujours  gaiment,  “  cela  ne  troublera  pas 
rna  digestion.”  On  vient  le  prendre  pour  le  conduite  au  supplice,  il  fait  voir  la 
meme  tranquillity  d’ame ;  mais  en  mettant  le  pied  sur  r6chaffaut,  il  parut  un  peu 
d’alt6ration  sur  son  visage  :  ££  Ah  !  vous  avez  done  peur  de  la  mort,”  s’^crie  le  Pretre. 
££  Point  du  tout ;  mais  je  remarque  avec  indignation  plusieurs  de  mes  ennemis  qui 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


485 


sont  dans  la  foule,  et  qui  viennent  se  repaitre  du  spectacle  de  ma  mort.  Tenez  :  les 
voyez-vous,  ici,  la?  jusqu’a  quel  point  se  portent  lahaine  et  l’animosite  des  homines  !” 
Le  Docteur  veut  profiler  de  cette  occasion  pour  lui  parler  du  passage  redoutable  de  la 
vie  a  la  mort.  “  Eh  !  Mr.  le  Cure,  dans  un  instant  j’en  saurai  sur  cette  mati&re  au- 
tant  que  vous.  Quel  est  ce  mor^eau  de  papier  qui  danse  au  bout  d’une  corde  ?” — 
“  C’est  l’effigie  de  votre  malheureux  complice  ce  qui  fit  rire  encore  Mr.  le  Febvre. 
Ensuite  il  dit  d’un  ton  plus  r^flechi,  “  Cet  homme-la  devoit  etre  r6ellement  pendu 
pour  son  honneur,  il  s'est  enfui  comme  un  j  :  f : !”  II  appei^oit  a  un  coin  de  l’6chaf- 
faut  sept  Messieurs  fort  bien  mis,  il  demande  qui  ils  sont ;  on  lui  repond,  que  ce  sont 
des  bourreaux — “  Comment,  sept  bourreaux  pour  moi,  pour  moi  tout  seul  ?  voila 
qui  est  fort  plaisant.”  Il  fait  signe  du  doigt  a  l’un  d’eux  de  s’approcher  :  “  INIr.  vous 
etes  done  Bourreau?” — “  Oui,  Monsieur,  de  Paris;  j’ai  cet  honneur-la.” — “  Ah,  ah! 
est-ce  vous  qui  avez  coup£  la  tete  a  Mr.  De  Lalli  ?” — “  Oui,  Monsieur,  j’ai  encore  eu 
cet  honneur-E.” — “  Ecoutez  done,  mon  ami ;  on  dit  que  vous  vous  y  etes  pris  assez 
mal ;  vous  l’avez  manqu£.” — 44  II  est  vrai,  Monsieur,  mais  ce  n’est  pas  ma  faute,  il  ne 
vouloit  pas  avoir  la  complaisance  de  se  tenir  comme  il  faut.” — “  Eh  bien ;  dites-moi 
comment  il  faut  que  je  me  tienne ;  je  vous  avouerai  que  je  ne  suis  pas  trop  au  fait ; 
c’est  la  premiere  fois  que  l’on  me  coupe  la  tete.  Placez-moi  vous  meme.” — “  Tres-vo- 
lontiers,  mon  cher  Monsieur.” — Le  bourreau  le  met  en  situation,  mais  le  patient  s’etant 
derange  un  peu  sans  s’en  appercevoir,  il  entend  que  l’exfcuteur  dit  tout  bas  au  pretre  : 
“  Il  se  tient  mal alors  il  se  retourne  en  disant :  “  Eh  que  diable  !  placez-moi  done 
mieux  ;  c’est  votre  affaire ;  si  vous  me  manquez,  vous  direz  encore  que  ce  sera  ma 
faute.”  Il  est  plac6  de  nouveau. — “  Suis-je  bien  ?” — L’executeur  lui  repond  par  un 
coup  de  sabre,  qui  fait  voler  la  tete.  On  lance  ensuite  le  corps  dans  le  bucher,  et 
comme  je  l’ai  dit,  le  Dictionnaire  Philosophique,  pareeque  Mr.  le  Febvre  de  la  Marre 
s’etoit  vant6  de  l’avoir  lu. 

Cette  execution  me  rappelle  une  anecdote  au  sujet  de  Mr.  De  Lalli,  avant  son 
depart  pour  le  gouvernement  de  Pondicheri.  Il  etoit  a  diner  cliez  Madame  Garrick, 
avec  plusieurs  dames  et  seigneurs  de  la  cour ;  il  y  avoit  la  un  vieux  militaire  a  bon 
mots  qui  rioit  et  crioit  par  intervalle,  parcequ’il  avoit  un  rhumatisme  gouteux  qui 
contrarioit  sa  gaite.  Comme  les  acces  de  ses  souffrances  dtoient  violens,  chacun  s’em- 
pressoit  a  indiquer  son  remade.  Une  personne  de  la  compagnie  dit  qu’il  n’y  en  avoit 
point  de  plus  efficace  que  la  graisse  de  pendu,  dont  il  falloit  se  frotter.  “  Ou  trouver 
de  la  graisse  de  pendu  ?” — “  Chez  Chariot,  le  Bourreau,  qui  demeure  a  la  Villeneuve.” 
Remarquez  que  l’on  £toit  au  dessert,  on  avoit  sabl6  du  vin  de  Champagne,  on  fait  la 
partie  d’aller  chez  Chariot.  Mr.  De  Lalli  emboite  dans  sa  voiture  le  vieux  militaire, 
qui  jurant,  criant,  riant  et  souffrant,  fut  conduit  a  la  maison  de  Mr.  Chariot.  Ce 
grand  maitre  des  hautes  oeuvres  fut  honors  de  cette  visite;  il  donna  autant  de  graisse 
qu’on  en  volut.  Apr&s,  Mr.  De  Lalli  demanda  a  voir  son  cabinet  d’histoire  naturelle, 
qu’on  lui  avoit  beaucoup  vantC  Chariot  commenca  par  lui  montrer  des  potences, 
des  cordes,  des  roues.  Sec.  ensuit  il  ouvre  une  petite  armoire  d’ou  il  tire  un  Damas,  et 
le  faisant  voir  a  nud  a  Mr.  De  Lalli,  “  Tout  ce  que  je  vous  ai  presente  jusqu’ici,”  dit-il. 


486 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


“  ne  sont  qu’au  supplice  de  ces  gucux,  de  ces  pauvres  diables  qui  sont  fripons,  parce- 
qu’ils  n’ont  pas  le  moyen  d’etre  honnete  gens  ;  mais  voici  pour  vous,  Monseigneur, 
qui  £tes  un  tr^s-bonnCte  gentilhomme.”  Mr.  De  Lalli  et  toute  sa  suite  rirent 
beaucoup  de  la  simplicity  de  Mr.  Cliarlot ;  mais  le  Gouvemeur  de  Pondicheri  auroit 
pu  regarder  cela  comme  un  presage. 

Si  Ton  en  croit  le  cri  public,  ce  Mr.  De  Lalli  £toit  un  monstre.  On  dit  que,  pen¬ 
dant  le  siege  de  Pondicheri,  une  pauvre  femme  accabke  de  mis£re  vint  se  prosterner 
a  ses  pieds  en  lui  demandant  du  pain  pour  trois  enfans  qu’elle  avoit: — “  Tu  as  trois 
enfans  et  tu  te  plains,”  dit  ce  barbare,  “  mange-les, — tu  auras  de  quoi  vivre  pour  plus 
de  quinze  jours.” 

Mademoiselle  Durancy  quitte  l’opera  pour  entrer  au  theatre  Francis.  On  pr^- 
tend  que  e’est  une  digne  rivale  de  Mademoiselle  Clairon,  et  que  l’on  n’a  point  vu  de 
talent  plus  d^cidy.  IMademoiselle  Laru  quitte  aussi  l’opyra. 

On  doit  donner  aujourd’hui  a  la  Comydie  Italienne  une  petite  piece  en  vers  et  en 
ariettes,  intituiye  “  La  Clochette.”  Ce  sujet  est  tir6  de  La  Fontaine.  Les  paroles 
sont  de  Mr.  Anseaume,  et  la  musique  de  Mr.  Duni. 

Quand  je  saurai  quelque  chose  d’intyressant,  je  vous  en  ferai  part  aussitot,  car  je 
veux  Sparer  mes  torts  avec  vous,  vous  seul  £tes  capable  de  vaincre  ma  paresse. 

Adieu,  mon  cber  Garrick  ;  soyez  bien  persuady  que  je  serai  toujours 

Votre  serviteur  et  sincere  ami, 

Favart. 

Je  vous  prie  de  prysenter  mes  respects  a  Madame  Garrick. 

Ma  femme  vous  fait  a  l’un  et  a  l’autre  un  million  de  complimens. 


DE  M.  LE  BARON  DE  GRIMM  A  MR.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  9  Aout,  1766. 

Cette  lettre,  illustre  David,  vous  sera  remise  par  le  P£re  Frisi,  savant  distingu6 
d’ltalie  et  d’ailleurs  bomme  de  tr£s  bonne  compagnie,  qui  a  passy  quelques  mois  avec 
nous  dans  la  sociyty  de  M.  le  Baron  D’Holbach  que  vous  aimez.  II  ne  sera  qu’un 
moment  &  Londres ;  mais,  comme  il  est  naturel,  il  veut  pendant  ce  moment  avoir  eu 
l’avantage  de  vous  connaitre. 

Permettez-moi  que  je  profite  de  cette  occasion  pour  vous  demander  si  vous  avez 
pu  ryaliser  la  gynyreuse  rysolution  que  vous  aviez  prise  en  faveur  de  notre  projet  de 
souscription  pour  la  famille  Calas.  En  ce  cas,  je  vous  demanderois  en  grace  de 
m’yerire  sur  le  champ  pour  savoir  le  nombre  d’exemplaires  qu'il  vous  faudroit  de 
notre  estampe.  Les  autres  receveurs  de  Londres  out  fait  leur  demande,  et  nous 
voudrions  bien  ne  pas  envoyer  a  deux  reprises  differentes,  vu  la  difficulty  des  entryes. 
D£s  que  vous  aurez  fixy  le  nombre  des  estampes  dont  vouz  aurez  besoin  pour  les 
personnes  qui  ont  souscrit  cliez-vous,  je  ferai  partir  le  paquet  tout  entier.  Apr£s 
quoi  je  vous  demanderai  la  liste  des  souscripteurs  avec  leur  nom  et  quality,  pareeque 
le  projet  de  la  rendre  publique  subsiste  toujours. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


487 


Madame  D’Epinay,  le  Philosophe  Diderot,  toute  la  soci6t6  vous  dit  mille  clioses 
ainsi  qu’4  Madame  Garrick.  Quand  reviendrez-vous  ?  Voila  la  question  6ternelle 
que  nous  ferons  jusqu’a  votre  r^ponse  decisive.  Vous  abhorrez  peut-etre  un  pays  ou 
l’on  brule  les  enfans  quand  ils  n’ont  pas  mis  chapeau  bas  devant  la  procession  ;  mais 
du  moins  vous  y  vivrez  avec  des  gens  qui  ont  ces  atrocit^s  en  liorreur. 

Savez-vous,  illustre  Roscius,  que  j’ai  beaucoup  vu  ce  Prince  Ii6r6ditaire  de 
Brunswic  que  vous  nous  avez  pret6,  et  que  tout  mon  sang  Germanique  a  tressailli  en 
mes  veines  de  voir  un  Prince  Germain  de  ce  mdrite.  Votre  Roi  n’aura  jamais  mieux 
marie  ses  soeurs :  aussi  avec  connaissance  de  cause  je  lui  ai  vou6,  a  ce  Prince  li^redi- 
taire,  le  plus  tendre  attachement. 

C’est  bien  aussi  avec  connaissance  de  cause  que  je  suis,  tr&s-cher  et  illustre 
David,  votre  tres-humble  et  trks-ob6issant  serviteur, 

Grimm. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  Dimanche,  10  Aout,  1766. 

J’imaginois,  qu’avant  de  quitter  Paris,  Monsieur  votre  bel  esprit  daigneroit  me 
revoir,  se  charger  d’une  lettre  pour  vous,  et  recevoir  mes  complimens  sur  sa  piece. 
Comme  il  a  tromp6  mon  attente,  Mr.  Changuion  voudra  bien  vous  faire  passer  ma 
r6ponse.  Je  ne  vous  dis  point  ce  que  je  pense  de  lui,  vraiment  je  n’ai  pas  envie  de 
vous  rendre  son  ennemi  jur6  * 

Vous  n’avez  point  re^u  la  visite  de  mon  jeune  Ecossois ;  en  retournant  a  Edin- 
bourg  il  m’a  ecrit  dans  l’amertume  de  son  coeur,  je  riai  point  vu  Mr.  Garrick. 
Votre  maudit  not  at  home  a  desoblig6  un  de  mes  amis.  Il  vous  admiroit  trop  pour 
se  battre  avec  vous,  mais  croyez-moi,  Mr.  Bully,  vous  ne  l'auriez  pas  tu6.  Il  se  seroit 
defendu  pour  l’honneur  de  son  amie. 

V ous  plairoit-il  de  quitter  cette  humeur  massacrante  ?  le  joli  commerce  !  toujours 
aux  couteaux  tir£s,  nous  finirons  par  nous  Strangler.  Je  ne  vous  parlerai  plus  de 
mes  amities  Ecossoises,  car  pour  des  Anglois  je  n’en  vois  pas  un.  Allons,  remettez 
votre  £p£e  dans  le  foureau.  Pierre  fut  repris  du  Seigneur  pour  une  mdchante  oreille 
de  Malchus ;  voyez  ce  qui  vous  arriveroit,  si  vous  coupiez  la  tete  a  l’un,  je  ne  s^ai 
quoi  a  l’autre. — Mon  ami,  faisons  une  bonne  paix,  tranche  et  solide.  Je  vous  aime 
mieux  que  tout  le  monde.  Cet  aveu  doit  vous  satisfaire. 

J’ai  lu  avec  beaucoup  de  plaisir  “  Le  Clandestine  Mariage  la  pi£ce  est  amusante, 
le  d^noument  vif  et  singulier ;  les  scenes  du  mari  charmantes  par  sa  situation,  le  doigt 
que  vous  avez  mis  au  pat6  l’a  surement  tr&s  bien  assaisonn6.  Recevez  mes  compli¬ 
mens  sur  l’ouvrage,  sur  son  succ&s ;  mes  remerciemens  du  present  et  mes  excuses  de 
vous  avoir  querell6  mal  a  propos.  Accoutumez-vous  a  me  pardonner  souvent,  car  je 
suis  incorrigible :  vous  vous  en  doutiez,  n’est-ce  pas  ? 

*  The  bcl  esprit  alluded  to  was  Colman.  Favart,  it  seems,  did  not  know  of  Garrick’s  “  finger  in  the  pye,” 
as  this  lady  styles  his  share  of  “  The  Clandestine  Marriage.” — Ed. 


488") 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


La  rupture  (le  Mr.  Hume  et  tie  Jean-Jacques  a  fait  un  bruit  terrible  ici.  Les 
gens  tie  lettres  sont  pour  Mr.  Hume;  et  les  personnes  sens6es  ne  le  soup^onnent 
point  d’avoir  tort.  Un  naturel  doux,  sensible ;  un  eoeur  honn^te,  un  esprit  juste, 
voila  les  garands  de  l’liistorien.  Rousseau  cherche  la  cel6brit6,  il  la  pr^fere  a  tout ;  il 
ne  restera  pas  tranquille  dans  l’asile  qu’il  a  desir6.  N’est-il  pas  bien  inconsequent? 
Sa  conduite  et  ses  principes  ne  se  dementent-t-ils  point?  Quand  on  m Uprise  les 
homines  peut  on  d^sirer  de  les  occuper  ?  On  est  trop  heureux  d’etre  oublie  tie  ceux 
dont  on  dedaigne  les  moeurs,  dont  on  croit  le  coeur  incapable  de  bont£,  de  reconnois- 
sance  et  d’amiti£. 

A  la  honte  de  la  philosophic,  de  l’esprit,  du  s^avoir,  nos  academies  sont  remplies 
d’extravagans.  Tous  ces  sublimes  raisonneurs  n’ont  pas  le  sens  commun.  L’orgueil 
les  guide  et  les  £gare.  En  voulant  etre  admire,  on  perd  la  douceur  d’etre  aime,  le 
bonheur  d’aimer  soi-meme.  C’est  la  confiance,  e’est  l’amitie  qui  diminuent  les  peines 
tie  la  vie,  qui  les  entremelent  tie  plaisir  et  d’agrement.  Se  croire  entoure  de  trom- 
peurs,  d’ennemis,  de  creatures  toujours  pretes  a  nuire ;  c’est  etre  bien  a  plaindre. 

Mais  pourquoi  Rousseau  ne  croit-il  pas  a  la  bonte,  a  l’extreme  bonte,  lui  qui 
admire  Alexandre  parceque  ce  prince  croyoit  a  la  vertu,  y  croyoit  an  peril  de  sa  vie  ? 
Douter  qu’il  existe  un  homme  capable  d’obliger  sans  int^ret !  Ah  fi,  je  ne  voudrois 
pas  avoir  l’esprit  de  Rousseau,  sa  reputation,  celle  de  Pope,  d'Isaac  Newton,  meme 
de  votre  ami  Sheaxpire !  et  trouver  ce  doute  dans  mon  cceur. 

En  verity,  le  monde  n’est  pas  si  corrompu  que  ces  Messieurs  le  pretendent ;  la 
bonte  n’est  pas  rare  ;  chaque  nation  offre  a  celui  qui  les  cherche  une  infinite  d’hommes 
estimables,  portes  par  leurs  principes  on  par  leur  naturel  a  aimer,  a  servir  ceux  qui 
leur  ressemblent :  par  tout  le  mdrite  et  l’honneur  trouvent  de  l’appui,  ties  secours,  des 
amis.  Une  vanite  mal  entendue,  une  trop  haute  opinion  de  soi-meme  pent  seule 
eloigner  de  la  soci6te.  Quand  on  y  porte  un  coeur  droit  et  des  intentions  pures, 
quand  on  veut  en  faire  partie  et  non  pas  la  dominer,  l’assujettir,  on  ne  la  trouve 
point  un  assemblage  de  monstres  odieux :  mais  ne  pouvant  6galer  le  vainqueur  de 
Darius,  Diogtme  voulut  au  moins  le  braver  du  fond  de  son  tonneau.* 

Job  et  Rousseau  se  presentent  toujours  de  compagnie  a  mon  esprit,  nos  bons 
p&res  admirerent  la  patience  de  Job.  Jamais  diable  dans  un  b^nitier  ne  cria  de 
meilleur  courage.  Si  on  peut  paroitre  noble  par  sa  pauvretd,  c’est  en  la  supportant 
en  silence,  c’est  en  la  cachant,  c’est  en  n’insultant  point  le  riche  dont  on  refuse  les 
dons,  c’est  par  une  conduite  uniforme,  que  l’on  mdrite  cette  admiration  qu’inspire  a 
tous  les  homines  la  veritable  grandeur  d’ame. — Eh  bon  Dieu,  quel  verbiage !  baillez- 

*  This  favourable  and,  I  think,  just  view  of  life  is  extremely  well  written,  and  does  honour  to  the  lively  lady. 
The  passion  she  has  at  times  for  inserting  colloquial  English  in  her  epistles  dishonours  her  composition  ;  because 
the  terms  she  catches  up  are  of  the  lowest  order,  such  as  no  English  lady  ever  uses,  and  consequently  utterly 
unsuitable  to  a  French  gentlewoman,  a  wit,  and  a  most  agreeable  novelist.  But  she  intended  to  divert  Mr. 
Garrick  by  ribaldry  from  a  polished  pen,  and  gave  the  sort  of  pleasure  that  we  derive  from  children  when 
they  are  taught  a  set  of  graceless  words  which  they  do  not  understand  ;  but  the  children  are  subsequently 
beaten,  if  they  do  not  leave  off  what  it  was  no  fault  of  theirs  originally  to  have  acquired. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


489 


vous  ?  dormez-vous  ?  &tes  vous  mort  d’ ennui,  dites,  mon  aimable  ami ;  an  accursed 
lecture,  indeed  ! 

Mille  et  mille  tendres  complimens  a  Madame  Garrick.  Je  l’aime  toujours  de 
tout  mon  coeur.  Ma  compagne  vous  embrasse  tout  les  deux  ;  et  moi  done  !  est-ce- 
que  je  ne  baise  pas  vos  deux  yeux,  et  le  front  serein  de  votre  ch&re  compagne  ? 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  14  Aout,  1766. 

Mon  ami,  vous  trouverez  ci-joint  l’engagement  du  danseur  dont  je  vous  ai  parld 
dans  ma  preeddente.  Pour  des  raisons  qu’il  est  inutile  de  vous  deduire,  son  d6but  ici 
ne  lui  a  pas  6t6  favorable.  Mais  je  crois  pouvoir  vous  avancer  qu’il  vaut  beaucoup 
mieux  que  n’a  jamais  valu  P6gina,  et  que  vous  en  tirerez  un  bien  meilleur  parti :  il 
est  bon  pantomime,  il  a  Pexecution  brillante,  il  fait  bien  les  ballets,  il  dessine  un  peu, 
il  a  du  gout  pour  les  habits  qui  le  concernent,  et  il  a  une  prodigieuse  quantite  de 
musique  pour  la  danse  et  pour  le  chant,  dont  il  a  fait  collection  en  Italie.  Les  gens 
qui  le  connoissent  m’ont  assure  qu’il  joignoit  a  cela  de  la  douceur,  de  l’honnetet6  et 
de  la  sagesse.  Par  le  tableau  que  je  lui  ai  fait  de  votre  equite  et  des  bons  conseils 
que  vous  pouviez  lui  donner,  il  a  la  plus  grande  envie  de  vous  plaire.  Si  tout  cela 
se  realise,  je  lui  ai  promis  que  vous  seriez  favorable  a  son  benefice,  et  quoique  restant 
avec  vous  une  seconde  ann^e,  vous  ne  manqueriez  pas  de  lui  donner  pour  gratification 
les  douze  louis  et  demi  dont  il  est  question  dans  son  engagement  pour  revenir  en 
France.  Ce  danseur  partira  d’ici  au  lr  de  Septembre :  je  l’addresserai  a  un  homme 
qui  enseigne  la  langue  Framboise  chez  Mr.  Angelo,  qui  le  logera  et  qui  en  aura 
soin.  Je  l’aurois  bien  address^  a  Grimaldi,  mais  je  craindrois  qu’ils  ne  s’accor- 
dent  point.  A  propos  de  Mr.  Angelo,  il  m’a  ecrit  qu’il  viendroit  a  Paris  dans  le 
mois  prochain :  vous  m’obligerez  de  le  charger  de  la  redingotte  que  je  vous  ai 
deman  de ;  vous  y  joindrez  les  Memoires  de  lNIad.de  Pompadour,  ecrits  par  elle- 
meme,  que  vous  trouverez  chez  Mr.  Becket.  Je  voudrois  bien  avoir  aussi  six 
cendom  de  gaze ;  on  m’a  assure  qu’il  y  en  avoit  a  Londres.  INIon  voyage  de  Hol- 
lande  a  6te  remis  a  l’ann^e  prochaine  par  une  colique  d’estomac  arrive  a  mon  cama- 
rade  de  voyage  ;  celui  de  Mr.  Colman  a  ete  bon  sans  doute.  Faites-lui,  je  vous  prie, 
mes  compliments,  et  dites-lui  que  je  l’aime  bien,  et  qu’il  ne  doit  pas  oublier  que  je 
suis  ici  a  son  service. 

Cette  maudite  caisse  ou  j’ai  mis  vos  portraits  n’est  pas  encor  arrivee  de  Dun¬ 
kerque:  ell’arrivera  sous  lniit  jours  au  plus  tard ;  n’aie  nulle  inquietude  a  ce  sujet,  il 
n’y  a  pas  de  ma  faute. 

Nous  allons  demain  avec  Mr.  Gouet  passer  six  jours  a  la  campagne  du  Comte 
du  Luc :  ce  dernier  me  charge  de  vous  dire  qu’il  vous  reverra  ici  avec  bien  du 
plaisir. 

Je  reviens  au  Sieur  Guidetti ;  je  n’ai  point  trouv6  de  femme  ici  pour  danser  avec 

3  it 


VOL.  II. 


490 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


lui  qui  en  valut  la  peine.  J’en  ai  vu  une  a  votre  theatre  qui  pourra  lui  convenir  et 
qu’il  formera  a  sa  manifere.  Je  n’ai  rien  4  vous  dire  pour  Madame  Garrick  ;  vous 
s^avez  tons  deux  ce  queje  pense  pour  vous  et  combien  je  vous  aime :  je  vous  prie 
seulement  de  vous  ressouvenir  que  j’ai  une  place  au  chevet  de  mon  lit  qui  attend  un 
tableau  que  vous  m’avez  promis. 

Monnet. 


DE  M.  PREVILLE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Compeigne,  ce  24  Aofjt,  176G. 

Ah  Dame !  voila  ce  que  c’est  d’etre  un  homme  aimable,  d’etre  un  homme  de 
m^rite,  on  est  pers£cut6 ;  c’est  votre  faute,  comme  vous  savez,  et  point  de  tout  la 
mienne ;  on  croit  que  vous  avez  de  l’amiti6  pour  moi,  et  l’on  me  prie  quand  on  va  en 
Angleterre  de  vous  £crire,  pour  avoir  un  honnete  pretexte  de  s’approcher  de  vous, 
pour  pouvoir  se  vanter  a  son  retour  d’avoir  vu  un  homme  rare  ;  et  moi  je  vous  ^cris 
parceque  je  suis  flatt6  qu’on  me  croye  au  nombre  des  gens  que  vous  aimez,  et  que 
cela  me  met  au  moius  dans  le  cas  de  vous  assurer  de  tous  les  sentimens  d’amiti6  que 
je  vous  ai  voue. 

Air.  Bursay  qui  vous  remettra  cette  lettre,  est  un  homme  honnete  et  instruit ;  si 
vous  voulez  lui  donner  quelque  marque  d’attention,  vous  le  connaitrez,  et  me  s^aurez 
gre  de  vous  l’avoir  recommande.  Envoyez-moi  quelqu’un  qui  vous  int^resse,  et  vous 
verrez  comme  je  serai  reconnoissant.  II  n’y  a  pas  grandes  nouvelles  th^atrales.  On  a 
donn6  Artaxerce,  qui  a  eu  un  demi  succ&s  au  moins.  Je  deviens  raisonnable  et  crois 
pouvoir  vous  promettre  une  corr^spondance  comique  reglee  et  qui  pourra  vous 
amuser.  J'ai  quelques  faits  deja  ramassds.  Mandez-moi  si  cela  peut  vous  faire 
quelque  plaisir.  Adieu,  bon  et  aimable  ami,  c’est  avec  transport  que  je  me  dis  le 
votre,  Preville. 


DE  MM.  LE  TENDRE  ET  DORNAY  A  MR.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Londres,  ce  4  Septembre,  1766. 

Deux  Strangers,  attires  en  Angleterre  par  le  desir  de  voir  les  raretes  qu’elle  pos- 
s&de  et  de  connaitre  les  grands  hommes  qui  la  rendent  c61&bre,  desireroient  d’avoir 
1’honneur  de  faire  visite  a  celui  qui  a  s^u  embellir  Shakspeare,  et  qui  partage  avec  lui 
les  hommages  des  gens  du  gout.  Mr.  le  Docteur  Maty,  auquel  nous  6tions  recom- 
mandes,  et  qui  a  eu  pour  nous  toutes  les  politesses  imaginables,  nous  a  assures  d’une 
reception  agitable  de  votre  part,  Monsieur;  il  a  meme  eu  la  bonte  de  nous  donner  une 
lettre  pour  vous  ;  permettez.  Monsieur,  de  vous  demander  le  jour  et  l’heure  que  nous 
pourrions  vous  la  presenter.  Nous  aA*ons  stpu  que  vous  £tiez  bier  en  ville,  et  nous 
aurions  desir£  de  nous  rendre  chez-vous  aujourd’hui,  mais  un  voyage  projett^  dans 
les  environs  de  Londre  pour  en  connaitre  les  beaut6s,  nous  en  empeche.  Nous  nous 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


491 


£tions  proposes  (Taller  admirer  votre  beau  sejour  de  Hampton  Court  Samedi  prochain, 
faites-nous  la  grace  de  nous  marquer  par  le  porteur  si  nous  pourons  esperer  d’avoir 
l’avantage  de  vous  y  trouver. 

Nous  avons  l’honneur  d’etre,  avec  les  sentiments  qui  sont  dus  aux  talents 
sublimes,  Monsieur,  vos  tr^s-humbles  et  tr^s-obeissants  serviteurs, 

Le  Tendre.  Dornay. 

“  Loges  au  Cigne  chez  Mr.  Morgan, 
a  la  descente  du  pont  de  Westminster.” 


DE  M.  DE  VIGNY  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MONSIEUR,  Au  King's  Bench,  in  State  House  number  7,  ce  5  Septembre,  1766. 

Vous  trouverez  sans  doute  bien  extraordinaire  que  quelqu’un  qui  n’est  nullement 
connu  de  vous,  vous  prie  de  lui  rendre  un  service.  Mais  si  je  vous  suis  inconnu,  vous 
ne  me  l’etes  point.  J’ai  si  souvent  entendu  faire  l’eloge  de  votre  ame,  que  je  vous  ai 
trouve  aussi  cel^bre  par  vos  sentimens,  que  par  vos  talens.  D’apres  cette  persuasion 
j’ai  cru  pouvoir  vous  confier  ma  peine :  peut-etre  vous  touchera-t’-elle,  et  je  craindrois 


de  vous  ofFenser  en  en  doutant. 

Je  suis  ici  depuis  dix  mois  pour  300  pieces  :  j’ai  eprouve  tout  ce  qui  peut  affliger 
un  coeur  tendre  et  sensible :  si  vous  joignez  a  cela  de  manquer  du  necessaire  depuis 
deux  mois,  vous  jugerez  de  quel  prix  seroit  le  service  que  vous  me  rendriez.  J’ai 
cache  a  ma  famille  et  a  mes  amis  en  France  ma  detention,  j’ai  cru  devoir  le  faire:  je 
n’en  re^ois  point  de  secours,  un  domestique  m’a  emporte  mes  plus  pretieux  effets,  j’ai 
ete  force  d’engager  les  autres ;  je  m’efforce  de  cacher  ici  mon  etat,  je  souffre  en 
silence,  craignant  le  mepris  qui  suit  le  besoin,  mais  je  ne  puis  plus  le  tenir  secret,  on 
commence  a  s’en  appercevoir,  et  sans  respect  pour  mon  malheur,  on  me  tourmente 
pour  quelques  avances  contractees  par  l’affreuse  necessite. 

Je  vous  prie  done  d’adoueir  mes  douleurs  en  me  pretant  dix  ou  douze  guinees 
dont  j’ai  besoin  tant  pour  acquitter  des  dettes  humiliantes,  que  pour  vivre  en  atten¬ 
dant  que  je  prenne  des  arrangemens.  Je  vous  les  rendrai  d£s  que  je  pourrai :  elles 
ne  seront  pas  perdues,  et  je  vous  devrai  beaueoup.  J’ai  juge  que  n’etant  pas  cre£ 
pour  les  clioses  communes  et  ordinaires,  vous  eoureriez  des  risques,  que  personne  peut- 
£tre  ne  voudroit  courir,  pour  honorer  l’humanite.  Vouz  avez  tant  de  fois  fait  sentir 
la  nature,  qu’il  fautqu’elle  soit  cliez-vous  divine,  pour  la  communiquer  ainsi  a  tout  un 
monde  entier. 

Etranger  dans  ces  lieux,  personne  ne  me  tend  une  main  secourable ;  victime  d’un 
cruel  prejug^  contre  ma  nation  du  peuple  dans  ce  pays,  qui  confond  tous  les  Fran¬ 
cois,  je  suis  oblige  de  le  combattre  par  les  preuves  de  mon  Education  ;  j’ai  beau  faire, 
je  suis  souvent  vaincu.  Je  erois  en  vous  seul,  et  j’y  fonde  mon  espoir. 

Si  cette  occasion  pouvoit  me  procurer  l’honneur  de  vous  connoitre,  j'en  serois  bien 
flatte,  je  l’ai  d£sir6  bien  des  fois  quand  j’&ois  heureux.  L’infortune  n’a  change  que 

3  it  2 


492 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


mon  etat.  Si  vous  n’avez  point  tie  repugnance  pour  venir  ici,  faites-moi  cette  faveur. 
J’ai  souvent  v6cu,  ct  partout,  avec  les  liommes  c£lebres.  Je  m’instruirai  a  penser 
comme  vous,  si  je  ne  puis  agir  aussi  grandement.  Sinon,  envoyez-moi  quelqu’un  de 
vos  amis  ou  de  confiance,  qui  prenne  connoissance  de  la  triste  verity  que  je  vous 
accuse. 

Je  vous  cnvoie,  Monsieur,  une  lettre  de  recommandation  que  m’avoit  donn6  un 
conseiller  an  Parlement  de  Bretagne  de  mes  amis  pour  un  gentilhomme  des  siens,  qui 
vous  fera  connoitre  qui  je  suis  :  je  n’ai  pu  remettre  la  lettre,  cette  personne  <£tant  alle 
i\  l’Amerique.  Elle  est  peut-6tre  trop  mon  avantage,  mais  n’en  croyez  que  ce  qu’il 
faut  pour  me  donner  un  caract&re  aupr&s  de  vous.  Je  vous  prie  de  la  garder  comme 
un  titre  de  v£rit6  jusqu’k  ce  que  j’aye  rempli  mon  devoir  envers  vous,  si  vous  me 
faites  la  grace  de  m’obliger. 

Un  de  mes  plaintifs,  touch6  de  mon  £tat,  m’a  fait  la  proposition  du  monde  la  plus 
honnete  ;  si  je  puis  en  profiter,  mon  premier  soin  sera  consacr6  a  la  reconnoissance,  en 
allant  aussitot  vous  assurer  de  la  consideration  tout  particuliere  avec  laquelle  j’ai 
l’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur,  votre  tr&s-humble  et  tres-ob6issant  serviteur, 

Jean  Rene  De  Vigny, 

Ancien  Mousquetaire  et  officier  dans  une  des  compagnies 
de  la  garde  du  Roi  de  France. 


DE  MADAME  R1CCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

11  Septembre,  17G6. 

Avez-vous  un  d&mon  familier?  un  genie  dirige-t’-il  vos  mouvemens?  une 
f6e  expose-t’-elle  a  vos  yeux  les  d^sirs  de  vos  amis?  —  Le  Vicaire  de  Wakefield ! 
quoi,  lui-m&me !  en  personne  ?  vrai,  en  honneur,  il  est  la !  rien  de  plus  etonnant,  je 
vous  le  jure. 

Jamais  ent£te  Protestant  n’eut  plus  d’horreur  pour  la  terre  papiste,  et  sans  enchan- 
tement  il  £toit  impossible  de  l’engager  a  passer  la  mer.  Un  chien  d’Ecossois  m’ecrit 
au  commencement  de  Mai,  m’annonce  un  Mr.  Jenkinson  venant  a  Paris,  m’apportant 
le  Vicaire  de  Wakefield.  Moi  de  me  repandre  en  remerciemens !  J Ion  Dieu,  ISlon- 
sieur,  votre  souvenir,  votre  attention,  vous  etes  charmant,  et  mille  autres  betises.  Je  fais 
des  voeux  pour  l’heureux  passage  de  Mr.  Jenkinson.  Je  m’occupe  de  lui,  je  guette 
l’instant  de  son  arriv^e ;  je  tourmente  Mr.  Changuion,  Mr.  Smith  ;  point  de  nouvelle- 
Le  gracieux  Caledonien  passe  un  mois  a  faire  ses  adieux  a  sa  ch£re  patrie,  se  donne 
les  airs  de  prendre  le  plus  long;  se  repose  d’un  cote,  s’amuse  de  l’autre,  se  prom£ne, 
s’instruit;  je  le  maudis  du  fond  du  coeur.  Enfin  quand  il  jfiait  au  ciel  l'indolent 
Mr.  Jenkinson  arrive.  On  m’avertit,  me  voilk  bien  contente.  LTn  fort  aimable 
pbilosophe  va  lui  demander  le  Vicaire;  un  joli  colonnel  l’assiege  pour  avoir  le  Vicaire. 
Mr.  Changuion  a  la  bont6  d’envoyer,  d’ecrire,  d’aller  lui-meme:  —  O  rage!  o  fureur! 
le  tranquille  Ecossois  n’a  ni  cure,  ni  sacristain,  ni  vicaire ;  ne  scait  ce  que  e’est,  n’v 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


493 


comprend  rien  ;  ne  connoit  ni  moi,  ni  le  vicaire,  ni  l’^glise,  ni  ses  pretres,—  c’est  un 
grand  hasard  s  il  connoit  Dieu  :  Et  moi  de  jurer  comme  un  payen  :  sang  et  furies  !  — 
Patience,  disoit  Mr.  Changuion,  eh,  mon  Dieu,  patience  !  Le  vicaire  viendra,  je  vous 
assure  qu’il  viendra. 

Peu  de  jours  apres,  voila  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Burke.  Un  style  charmant,  des 
excuses  de  sa  longue  negligence,  mille  politesses,  un  badinage  leger,  de  l’esprit,  de 
l’agrement,  de  la  finesse ;  rien  de  plus  joli.  II prend  la  liberte  de  m  envoy er,  il  a  llion- 
neur  de  me  presenter, — qui,  quoi?  devinez, — Le  Vicaire  de  Wakefield.  Un  Irlan- 
dois  doit  me  le  remettre,  avec  le  livre  de  jNIr.  Burke  l’aind. 

Je  connois  cet  Irlandois,  il  est  attache  a  un  de  nos  princes.  On  va  chez-lui :  il  est 
malade.  On  y  retourne,  il  est  absent,  puis  marie,  puis  cocu,  je  crois.  Je  perds 
patience,  je  crie,  je  peste,  je  m’arrache  les  clieveux.  La !  doucement,  disoit  Mr. 
Changuion,  d’un  air  pose,  paisible  a  le  faire  assommer :  il  viendra,  ce  diable  de  Vicaire, 
croyex-nl en,  il  viendra. 

LTn  soir  on  me  demande  de  la  part  de  Mr.  Wilkes  :  moi,  qui  ne  suis  point  du  parti 
de  l’opposition,  moi,  l’amie  des  Ecossois,  je  fremis  a  ce  nom.  Un  valet  de  chambre 
me  remet  un  paquet  adresse  a  Mr.  Colman,  puis  a  moi :  j’ouvre,  c’est  un  billet  de 
Mr.  Garrick,  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Becket,  et  ce  Vicaire  si  desire,  si  long-terns  attendu  ! 
je  pousse  un  cri  de  joie,  charmee  de  le  voir,  plus  charmee  de  le  tenir  de  vous,  de  votre 
amitie.  A  present  il  en  arrivera  une  douzaine,  celui  de  Mr.  Changuion  est  venu,  les 
autres  le  suivront,  j’en  leverai  magazin. 

Vous  avez  raison  de  dire  qu’il  ne  m’apprendra  rien.  C’est  un  liomme  qui  va  de 
malheurs  en  malheurs  assez  rapidement,  et  de  bonheurs  en  bonheurs  tout  aussi  vite. 
Cela  ne  ressemble  guere  a  la  vie  du  monde.  On  devroit  s’appliquer  a  peindre  les 
situations  les  plus  ordinaires,  celles  ou  beaucoup  de  person  nes  peuvent  se  trouver. 
Alors  les  lemons  de  conduite  seroient  utiles.  Je  ne  suis  pas  un  juge  competent  du 
style,  mais  le  plan  de  l’ouvrage  ne  m’a  pas  int6ress£e  ;  le  pathetique  annonce  par  Mr. 
Burke  ne  m’a  point  frappee :  le  plaidoyer  en  faveur  des  vouleurs,  des  petits  larrons, 
des  gens  de  mauvaises  moeurs,  est  fort  eloign  6  de  me  plaire.  Il  faut  dire  aux 
homines :  soyez  toujours  honnetes,  Vlionneur  perdu  ne  se  recouvre  jamais.  C’est  les 
d£sesp£rer,  dira-t’-on,  c’est  leur  oter  le  d£sir  de  rentrer  dans  leur  devoir.  Mon  ami, 
l’exp^rience  prouve,  que  celui  dont  la  misere,  dont  le  besoin  a  tourne  les  id£es  vers  la 
bassesse,  vers  le  crime,  qui  a  pu  envisager  la  honte  et  s’exposer  a  la  m^riter,  est  un 
homme  dont  le  cceur  est  corrompu.  Le  Vicaire  prbche  des  coquins,  les  convertit ;  je 
ne  voudrois  pas  rencontrer  sa  congregation  dans  un  bois,  si  j’avois  mille  louis  dans  ma 
poche. 

Eh  bien,  Messieurs  les  Anglois,  comment  supportez-vous  l’absence  de  Mr.  de 
Lauraguais.  Il  est  a  la  Bastille,  et  son  beau  cheval  de  course  se  promkne  comme  si 
de  rien  n'etoit.  C’est  pourtant  l’animal  au  pied  leger  qui  tient  son  maitre  prisonnier. 

On  dit  Air.  Hume  et  Jean-Jaques  raccommodes.  Est-il  vrai?  Comment  fait-on 
pour  se  raccommoder?  de  ma  vie  je  n’ai  compris  cela.  La  mort  de  Mademoiselle  de 
Malboissibre  a  ete  imprevue,  comme  vous  l’aurez  s^u  :  le  Colonnel  Wedderburne  en 


494 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


est  desold,  confondu,  d£sesp£r6,  ancanti,  et  damn£  par-dessus  le  marclie.  Car  il  croit 
la  definite  sainte,  il  l’invoque,  il  l’atteste,  il  la  prie.  Poor  soul !  c’est  dommage  qu’il 
perde  l’esprit,  car  il  a  une  jolie  mine,  une  taillc  noble,  et  la  conversation  vive  et  tr6s- 
s^duisante.  Ma  foi,  s’il  n’avoit  pas  £t6  s’enterrer  chez  Madame  de  Malboissi&re,  il 
auroit  fort  reussi  aupr&s  de  nos  dames. 

Recevez  mes  tendres  remerciemens.  Faites  bien  mes  complimens  &  Madame  Gar¬ 
rick  ;  embrassez-la  pour  moi  et  pour  ma  compagne ;  nous  l’aimons  toujours.  On 
m’imprime.  Je  vous  enverrai  le  premier  exemplaire  qui  sera  sec.  Cela  ne  presse 
pas,  m’allez-vous  dire,  je  ne  vous  attends  pas  comme  vous  Jaisiez  le  Vicaire.  X’im- 
porte,  vous  aurez  le  premier  exemplaire.  Adieu,  moil  aimable  ami. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  13  Septembre,  1766. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  rec^u  ce  que  vous  m’avez  envoys  par  Antonio,  a  l’exception  de  la 
petite  note  que  Madame  Garrick  lui  a  donn^e  pour  des  clioses  qui  la  regardent :  il 
devoit  m’apporter  cette  note,  mais  cet  homme,  qui  n’aime  pas  vraisemblablement  4  se 
lever  matin,  ne  peut  pas  se  determiner  a  quitter  le  lit  pour  me  trouver  chez  moi 
avant  lmit  beures,  terns  qu’on  peut  me  rencontrer. 

Ce  n’est  pas  de  ma  faute  si  vos  dessins  color^s  sont  restes  k.  la  Douanne  de 
Douvre ;  croyant  n^cessaire  de  laisser  toute  l’6t  endue  de  ceux  qui  sont  sur  du  grand 
papier,  je  n’ai  pas  pu  trouver  des  feuillets  de  cette  grandeur.  Levies  a  voulu  s’en 
charger  en  me  promettant  de  vous  les  faire  tenir  par  une  de  ses  amis.  Mr.  Colman 
les  a  pris,  il  vous  sera  facile,  je  pense,  de  les  retirer  k  peu  de  frais. 

Le  caisse  oil  j’ai  fait  mettre  tons  vos  portraits  et  que  j’ai  envoy e  par  Dun¬ 
kerque  ne  m’est  pas  encore  parvenue,  des  circonstances  en  sont  la  cause,  mais  ne 
craignez  rien,  ce  retard  ne  vous  portera  aucun  dommage :  dans  peu  tout  cela  arrivera 
a  bon  port. 

Antonio  m’a  dit  que  vous  aviez  absolument  besoin  d’une  danseuse :  j’en  ai  trouv6 
une  jeune,  jolie,  qui  n’a  pas  un  talent  bien  sup6rieur,  mais  qui  pourroit  reussir  a 
Londres  par  la  figure  et  la  gentillesse  qu’elle  a.  Elle  a  d6but6  aux  Italiens  avec  un 
peu  de  succes.  Elle  s’appelle  Mademoiselle  Desforges  ;  elle  veut  cent  cinquante 
livres  d’appointemens  et  un  b6n6fice,  elle  veut  en  outre  vingt-cinq  louis  d’avance.  Je 
lui  ai  offert  cent  vingt-cinq  louis.  Marquez-moi,  a  lettre  vue,  vos  intentions  a  ce 
sujet. 

Je  joins  ici  un  paquef  de  lettre  pour  Mr.  Guiaetti,  pour  lequel  j’ai  pay6  quatorze 
livres,  que  vous  lui  retiendrez  sur  ses  appointemens :  vous  me  direz,  s’il  vous  plait,  ce 
que  vous  avez  pay6  pour  la  redingotte  et  les  Memoires  de  Madame  de  Pompadour, 
pour  que  je  puisse  me  faire  payer  par  ceux  qui  m’ont  charg6  de  cette  commission. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


495 


Je  finis,  pour  profiter  d’une  occasion  qui  se  pr^sente  pour  vous  faire  passer  ce  paquet 
a  Londres.  Bien  des  amities,  mon  ami,  pour  vous  et  pour  Madame  Garrick. 

Monnet. 

Comme  j’allois  fermer  ma  lettre,  la  caisse  de  Dunkerque  oil  sont  vos  portraits  est 
arriv6  chez-moi  en  tres-bon  ordre.  Le  plutot  que  je  le  pourrai,  je  donnerai  mes  soins 
a  cet  objet,  et  je  ferai  tout  ce  qui  dependra  de  moi  pour  vous  contenter.  Antonio  est 
entre  dans  le  meme  terns  dans  ma  chambre,  il  m’a  remis  une  note  des  commissions  de 
Madame  Garrick,  et  celle  de  faire  monter  un  ordre  de  St.  George  :  sitot  que  cela  sera 
fait  je  vous  l’enverrai  par  la  premiere  occasion. 

J’ai  charge  mon  ami  Collot,  de  payer  pour  moi  a  Guillaume  Webb,  marchand 
dans  Cheapside,  la  somme  de  douze  livres  sterling,  douze  cheling  ;  s'il  ne  l’a  point  fait, 
et  qu’on  vienne  vous  presenter  mon  billet,  je  vous  prie  de  l’acquitter :  je  vous  en 
tiendrai  compte.  Je  me  rappelle  que  je  devois  quinze  guinees  a  Mr.  Webb.  Mr. 
Changuion  que  je  vois  dans  ce  moment,  me  dit  que  vous  avez  pay6  cet  liomme,  je 
vous  en  remercie.  N’ayez  nulle  inquietude  sur  Guidetti ;  vous  en  serez  content. 
Repondez-moi  sur  Mademoiselle  Desforges ;  je  vous  dis  qu'elle  est  jeune,  jolie,  bien- 
faite,  et  que  je  lui  crois  autant  de  talent  qu’a  celles  que  j’ai  vues  a  votre  theatre. 
Mr.  Changuion  embrasse  Mr.  et  Madame  Garrick. 


DE  M.  BURSAY  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Douvres,  30  Septembre,  1766. 

Au  moment  oil  je  partais  de  Londres,  j’ai  re^u  une  lettre  que  j'aurais  dii  avoir  le 
plaisir  de  vous  remettre  moi-meme,  pour  me  procurer  celui  de  vous  revoir :  vous  me 
fites  un  accueil  si  honnete,  que  je  regrette  de  n’avoir  pu  me  procurer  plusieurs  fois  le 
mime  avantage :  c’^toit  pour  en  jouir,  Monsieur,  que  j’avais  engage  votre  jadis-ami 
Provide,  a  m’envoyer  un  esp&ce  de  passeport  pour  parvenir  jusqu’a  vous :  je  l’ai 
re£U,  et  je  vous  prie  de  m’excuser,  si  je  vous  le  communique.  C’est  enfin  une  lettre 
de  Preville  :  puisse-t’-elle  commencer  a  vous  ramener  ii  lui,  si  vous  l’avez  vraiment 
aim£.  Je  voudrois  de  tout  mon  cceur,  que  vous  lui  donnassiez  au  moins  un  demi- 
pardon  de  sa  negligence :  il  promet  de  se  corriger,  il  tiendra  parole :  je  suis  certain, 
Monsieur,  qu’il  aprendra  avec  une  vraie  douleur  votre  juste  refroidissement  a  son 
£gard.  Donnez-moi,  Monsieur,  donnez-moi,  je  vous  prie,  la  satisfaction  de  voir  se 
raprocher  deux  homines  a  qui  les  deux  premiers  theatres  de  l’Europe  doivent  infini- 
ment.  Voila  les  raisons  qui  me  deter minent  ii  vous  adresser  ce  billet,  et  a  saisir 
l’occasion  de  me  dire, 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble,  tres-ob&ssant  serviteur, 

“  Bursay,  chez  M.  Armand,  BURSAY. 

h  la  Comedie  Fran^aise,  a  Paris.” 


496 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  GRAVELOT  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  ET  CHER  AMI,  A  Paris,  ce  14  Decembre,  1 766. 

Votre  lettre  m’a  rcmpli  de  satisfaction,  parcequ’elle  m’est  une  preuve  du  bon 
£tat  de  votre  sant£  et  de  celle  de  Madame,  que  je  salue  de  tout  mon  coeur. 

Que  ne  puis-je  me  charger  de  ce  que  souhaite  votre  ami  Doctor  Ilawkes worth, 
que  je  remercie  mille  fois  pour  la  bonne  opinion  qu’il  a  de  moi.  Mais  la  meme  raison 
qui  m’a  empechy  de  satisfaire  aux  desirs  de  Mr.  Colman,  et  aux  miens,  au  sujet  de  son 
excellente  traduction  de  Terence,  meretient  de  nouveau  :  c’est  l’embarras  de  r^pondre 
de  la  diligence  et  de  l’exactitude  de  nos  graveurs,  qui  sont  si  occup^s,  la  manie  des 
estampes  ytant  actuellement  celle  de  la  typographic,  que  je  n’ose  me  mettre  entr’eux 
et  la  personne  qui  voudroit  me  charger  de  pareilles  entreprises.  Je  crois  avoir  pro¬ 
ven  u  Mr.  Colman  qu’il  n’auroit  pu  avoir  ses  six  planches  que  vers  la  fin  de  May  au 
plus  tot,  ce  qui  m'a  emp6ch6  de  continuer  mes  dessins,  puisqu’il  souhaitoit  avoir 
dessins  et  gravures  avant  le  mois  pass6. 

Or  le  Tel^maque  a,  si  je  ne  me  trompe,  vingt-quatre  livres,  ce  qui  feroit  vingt- 
quatre  vignettes,  et  peut-^tre  presque  autant  de  cul  de  lampes,  c’est  quarante  planches 
et  tant.  Est-ce  que  Mr.  Grignon  et  d’autres  oil  vous  etes,  ne  pourroient  pas  ex6- 
cuter  mes  dessins  ?  C’est  ce  que  j’avois  proj>osy  a  INIr.  Colman,  pr6voyant  les  dif¬ 
ficult^  que  je  sentois  ici  pour  l’execution  de  son  ouvrage.  Grignon,  qui  a  £t6  mon 
yieve,  s’il  n’a  pas  d^gen6r6,  a  du  gout  et  du  m6rite;  et  je  ne  doute  pas  qu’il  n'y  en 
ait  d’autres  capables  de  satisfaire  le  Docteur  votre  ami,  qui  ne  me  paroit  desirer  que 
du  gout.  Une  autre  observation  par  rapport  aux  cul  de  lampes  est,  qu'il  faut  qu’ils 
soient  de  grandeur  relative  a  l’espace  que  laissera  l  impression,  ce  que  je  ne  puis 
deviner.  Enfin  je  serois  cliarme  assur&nent  d’etre  bon  a  quelque  chose  a  vous  et  a 
vos  amis,  mais  encore  une  fois  il  faut  le  terns,  c’est  a  dire  la  possibility  de  l’execution : 
d’ailleurs  je  prevois  que  quarante  et  tant  de  dessins  et  leur  gravure  feront  une  d6- 
pense  assez  considerable.  On  grave  actuellement  mes  dessins  du  Voltaire,  qui  sont 
pay£s  cent  £cus  piece  aux  graveurs :  ceux  du  Corneille  ytoient  pay£s  sept  louis 
chacun. 

A  present,  laissons  l’essor  aux  mouvemens  de  l'amitiy.  Vos  lettres  me  seront 
toujours  une  bonne  fortune,  et  le  souvenir  de  votre  ch^re  Spouse  a  true  blessing. 
.I’esp^re  lui  faire  tenir  incessament  un  nouvel  almanach,  oil  elle  pourra  se  reconnoitre, 
puisque  c’est  une  suite  des  vertus.  C’est  avec  les  sentimens  de  la  plus  sincere  estime 
et  de  ce  que  l’amitiy  a  de  plus  sensible,  que  je  suis, 

Monsieur  et  ami,  votre  tr^s-humble  et  obyissant  serviteur, 

H.  Gravelot. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


497 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  20  Octobre,  1766. 

Mon  ami,  je  profite  de  l’occasion  pour  vous  faire  tenir  les  nouvelles  productions 
de  Air.  D’Arnaud,  que  je  vous  ai  promis  par  ma  precedente  lettre  ;  je  souhaite  qu’elles 
puissent  vous  plaire.  Vous  avez  du  recevoir  derni^rement  des  brochures  avec  le 
Calendrier  des  Theatres,  que  je  vous  ai  envoyes  par  un  musicien ;  et  sitot  que  l’annee 
1766  de  l’Almanach  des  Muses  sera  r&mprime,  vous  l’aurez.  11  y  a  plus  de  dix  jours 
que  votre  buste,  de  Mr.  le  Moine,  est  parti  par  Calais,  et  j’en  ai  pay6  le  port  jusqu’a 
Londres.  Accusez-moi  la  reception  de  ces  differentes  clioses  dans  la  premiere  lettre 
que  vous  m’ecrirez,  pour  que  je  sache  si  vous  les  avez  revues. 

Madame  Sayde,  qui  est  de  retour  ici  depuis  quelques  jours,  m’a  dit  que  vous  ne 
lui  aviez  rien  fait  remettre  pour  moi.  Je  crois  cependant  que  vous  m’avez  marqu6 
par  votre  derniere  lettre,  (que  j’ai  malheureusement  perdu)  que  vous  aviez  envoye  a 
son  adresse,  la  derniere  redingotte  que  vous  m’avez  fait  faire ;  au  nom  de  Dieu,  mon 
ami,  envoyez-la  moi  par  la  premiere  personne  que  vous  trouverez  :  JNlr.  Panckoucke, 
qui  doit  etre  a  Londres,  voudra  bien  s’en  charger,  ou  Aladame  de  l’Ormel,  dont  vous 
s^aurez  la  demeure  chez  Air.  Angelo.  C’est  elle  qui  a  bien  voulu  mettre  dans  son 
coffre  les  dessins  colons  en  petit  papier  de  Air.  de  BufFon,  et  son  mari  m’a  fait  le 
plaisir  de  faire  mettre  les  grands  dans  un  ballot  d’estampes  qu’il  a  envoys  a  Londres ; 
il  y  a  quelques  terns  que  vous  devez  avoir  re^u  l’un  et  l’autre. 

Par  une  lettre  que  vous  avez  ecrite  a  Air.  Panchaud,  votre  banquier,  vous  assurez 
que  j’aurai  bientot  ce  que  vous  avez  remis  pour  moi  a  Air.  Alant.  Vous  avez  trop 
d’affaires  pour  vous  en  occuper,  mais  je  vous  ai  deja  dit  de  prier  Air.  de  Villier  de  ma 
part,  de  vouloir  bien  se  charger  de  pers^cuter  ce  fripon-la  dont  je  ne  veux  pas 
absolument  etre  la  dupe.  S'il  a  vendu  la  redingotte,  le  cottillon,  et  mang6  le  fro- 
mage,  en  remboursant  la  valeur  je  serai  tr^s- content.  A  propos  de  redingotte,  vous 
ne  serez  plus  embarrass^  de  pareilles  commissions  ;  j’ai  fait  la  decouverte  ici  d’un 
drap  beaucoup  meilleur,  et  aussi  leger  que  le  votre,  que  j’ai  fait  couper  sur  le 
patron  de  la  redingotte  Angloise  :  depuis  un  mois  j’en  ai  fait  faire  dix  pour  mes 
amis.  On  les  a  de  telle  couleur  que  1’on  vent,  et  de  huit  francs  de  meilleur  march£ 
qu’a  Londres. 

Depuis  un  mois  il  paroit  trois  petits  ouvrages  de  Air.  de  Voltaire  :  “  L’Ing6nu,” 
“  La  Defense  de  mon  Oncle,”  et  “  Chariot,  ou  la  Comtesse  de  Givri,”  piece  drama- 
tique.  Il  y  a  d’assez  jolies  choses  dans  les  deux  premiers,  mais  on  a  a  present  de  la 
peine  a  les  avoir,  surtout  le  second  :  et  ils  sont  cliers  pour  ce  qu’ils  valent.  Je  vous 
envoie  la  pi£ce  dramatique  qui  a  £t6  repr£sent6  a  Ferney,  sur  le  theatre  de  l’auteur. 
Vous  la  trouverez  mauvaise,  mais  elle  ne  coute  que  trente  sols  ;  si  vous  voulez  “  L’ln- 
genu,”  et  “  La  Defense  de  mon  Oncle,”  je  vous  les  enverrai,  c’est-A-dire  je  tacherai 
de  les  avoir. 

Il  paroitra  dans  le  mois  de  D^cembre  prochain,  plusieurs  pieces  de  Air.  Coll£,  qui 
vol.  ir.  3  s 


498 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ont  dtd  joud  sur  le  theatre  de  Socidtd  de  Mr.  le  Due  d’Orldans,  “  La  ATdritd  dans  le 
A’in,”  et  autres;  sitot  qu’elles  seront  imprimees  je  vous  les  enverrai. 

Noverre  ne  m’a  pas  encore  rdpondu  i\  votre  sujet,  et  Mr.  Favart,  qui  est  actu- 
ellcment  chez-moi,  me  charge  de  bien  des  compliments  pour  vous.  II  demande  si 
vous  viendrez  a  Paris  l’dtd  prochain.  Nous  avons  tous  deux  une  furieuse  envie  de 
vous  voir,  et  si  votre  nation  magnifique  et  opulente  vouloit  faire  un  pout  de  Douvres 
a  Calais,  nous  serions  souvent  chez-vous.  Nos  amities  et  respects  a  Madame  Garrick 
que  nous  aimons  autant  que  vous. 

Monnet. 

Mr.  Garrick  aura  la  bontd  de  faire  remettre  cette  lettre  a  Mr.  de  AJllier.  A-t’-on 
envoyd  k  Mr.  Garrick  un  drame  en  cinq  actes,  intitule  “  Eugenie,”  qui  a  6t (t  joue 
aux  comddiens  Francois  l’dtd  dernier,  et  qui  a  ete  imprimd  depuis  peu  ?  Cette  piece 
a  eu  un  mddiocre  succds,  et  les  situations  qui  ont  fait  de  l'effet  sont  connues  et  prises 
dans  differents  romans. 


DE  M.  HELVET1US  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Paris,  ce  30  Decembre,  1766. 

Les  amities  que  vous  m’avez  tdmoignds  pendant  votre  sejour  a  Paris,  m’enliardissent 
a  vous  demander  une  grace  :  void  le  fait. 

Mr.  O’Conor,  auteur  de  la  tragddie  que  j’ai  l’honneur  de  vous  envoier,  est  fort 
amy  ;  il  desireroit  que  sa  pidee  fut  joude  a  Londres.  Ce  n’est  que  vous  qui  pouvez 
lui  rendre  ce  service;  e’est  done  votre  protection  que  j’implore.  Je  ne  vous  parle 
point  de  cette  tragddie,  vous  en  jugerez  mieux  que  moy,  j’y  ai  trouvd  de  la  force,  du 
spectacle,  et  de  la  chaleur.  Mr.  AVilkes  m’assure  qu’elle  est  bien  ecrite.  IMais  con- 
vient-elle  au  thdatre  de  Londres,  je  ne  connois  certainement  pas  assez  le  gout  de  la 
nation,  pour  porter  aucun  jugement.  J’entrevois  bien  qu’il  y  auroit  encore  quelques 
petits  changements  a  faire  a  cette  pidee  :  si  vous  le  croyez  de  mdme,  vous  etes  le 
maitre  de  faire  tous  ceux  que  vous  jugerez  a  propos. 

Au  cas  que  cette  piece  fut  joude  et  qu’elle  eut  du  succds,  l’auteur  vous  recom- 
mande  ses  interets,  et  s’en  rapporte  avec  grande  raison  a  ce  que  vous  voudriez  faire 
pour  lui.  Air.  AAdlkes  appuira  ma  recommandation  auprds  de  vous,  et  j’espdre 
beaucoup  en  son  credit.  Je  puis  cependant  vous  assurer,  que  si  la  profonde  estime 
pour  vos  talents  et  votre  genie,  etoit  un  titre  pour  obtenir  votre  amitie  et  protection, 
personne  ne  la  meriteroit  mieux  que  moy. 

J  ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  avec  le  plus  sincere  et  le  plus  inviolable  attachement, 

Monsieur,  votre  trds-lmmble  et  trds-obeissant  serviteur, 

Helvetius. 

Oserois-je  vous  prier  de  presenter  mes  respects  a  Madame  ? 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


499 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  9  Decembre,  1766. 

Mon  ami,  Mr.  Foley  m’a  remis  l’argent  que  vous  avez  touch6  pour  Mr.  de  Cre- 
billon,  et  il  m’a  communique  votre  lettre  par  laquelle  vous  demandez  un  module  et 
un  edaircissement  sur  les  flambeaux  dont  les  diables  se  servoient  dans  l’op^ra  de 
“  Castor  et  Pollux.”  Mr.  Boquet,  qui  est  depositaire  de  toutes  ces  diableries,  fait 
faire  ce  modele,  et  je  vous  l’enverrai  par  la  premiere  occasion.  Grimaldi  votre  dan- 
seur  a  £crit  a  ce  sujet  a  Mr.  le  Jeune,  de  la  com^die  Italienne.  Ce  dernier  m’a  dit 
qu’on  lui  avoit  refuse :  pourquoi,  mon  ami,  ne  vous  etes-vous  pas  adresse  d'abord  a 
moi  ?  vous  ai-je  refuse  quelque  chose?  J’en  use  differemment  avec  vous;  et  quoique 
j’aie  des  amis  tr£s-serviables  a  Londres,  cependant  je  vous  donne  toujours  la  prefe¬ 
rence  ;  en  voici  une  nouvelle  preuve. 

Un  tres-grand  Prince  auquel  je  suis  fort  attache,  grand  politique  et  fort  instruit, 
desireroit  s^avoir  des  premiers  les  choses  importantes  qui  sont  agitees  pendant  la  tenue 
de  votre  Parlement,  et  les  changemens  qui  se  font  dans  votre  ministere.  Je  ne  vous 
demande  pas  le  secret  de  l’etat,  car  je  suis  convaincu  que  vous  ne  l’avez  pas,  mais  des 
choses  que  vos  papiers  publics  apprennent  a  toute  la  terre,  et  qu’on  souhaiteroit  d’ap- 
prendre  avant.  On  voudroit  aussi  une  note  des  livres  Francois  qui  s’impriment  a 
Londres,  et  de  certaines  singularity  plus  frequentes  chez-vous  que  partout  ailleurs. 
Vous  avez  trop  d’affaire  pour  que  vous  puissiez  vous  occuper  de  tout  cela,  mais  vous 
avez  des  amis  dans  le  Parlement,  et  au  fait  de  tout  ce  que  je  vous  demande.  Vous 
n’aurez  que  la  peine  de  les  6crire  ou  de  les  faire  ecrire  :  ne  craignez  pas  ce  qui  m’en 
coute  des  ports  de  lettres. 

Je  vous  demande  aussi  un  bon  fromage  instanter ,  pezant  environ  vingt-cinq  k 
trente  livres,  avec  une  redingotte  semblable  de  taille  et  de  quality  a  la  derni^re  que 
vous  m’avez  envoy^e  par  votre  valet-de-chambre  Italien,  Antonio.  V otre  tailleur  a 
cette  mesure.  Je  voudrois  aussi  un  jupon  de  l’^toffe  de  cette  redingotte  pour  une 
vieille  femme  qui  n’est  ni  grande  ni  petite :  elle  pretend  que  cela  est  chaud  et  leger  : 
il  faut  que  ce  jupon  soit  tout  fait  et  peu  ample :  c’est  pour  mettre  sur  la  chemise. 
Madame  Garrick,  a  qui  je  presente  mon  respect,  aura  la  bonte  de  me  faire  cette 
commission,  et  vous  aurez  celle  de  faire  remettre  le  tout  a  la  bourse  au  Capitaine 
Clairebock  ou  autre,  qui  le  remettra  a  Mr.  Audibert  le  fils,  a  Calais,  qui  me  le  fera 
tenir.  Je  ne  crois  pas  ces  effets  prohibes. 

Je  me  suis  donn6  tons  les  mouvements  possibles,  pour  faire  graver  le  dessin  de 
votre  portrait  que  vous  m’avez  confie  a.  mon  depart  de  Londres :  mais  tous  nos  bons 
graveurs  pour  le  portrait  sont  occup6s.  Il  faut  que  vous  attendiez,  si  vous  voulez 
avoir  quelque  chose  de  bien.  Mais  croyez  que  je  ne  negligerez  rien  pour  cela. — 
Adieu,  mon  ami,  je  vous  embrasse  mille  fois ;  des  compliments  a  Monsieur  votre 
fr£re,  et  a  Mr.  Colman.  Monnet. 

Dites  bien  des  choses  pour  moi  k  l’ami  Changuion  :  s’il  vient  bientot,  il  pourra 
bien  se  charger  de  ma  redingotte. 

3  s  2 


500 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I)E  RI.  MONNET  A  MR.  GARRICK. 

Ce  17  Decembre,  17CC. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  remis  4  Mr.  Angelo  le  module  du  flambeau  que  vous  m’avez  de- 
mande :  il  vous  expliquera  la  fa^on  dont  il  faut  s’en  servir.  Je  n’ai  pas  eu  le  terns  de 
le  faire  peindre  en  rouge  comme  il  faut  qu'il  soit.  J’ai  joint  a  ce  flambeau  un  petit 
paquet  dc  la  poudre  dont  il  est  dcja  rempli,  qu’on  nomine  ici  licopodium,  que  vous 
trouverez  ais6ment  a  Londres.  Il  faut,  pour  humecter  la  in6che,  le  plus  fort  et  le 
meilleur  esprit  de  vin  que  vous  pourrez  trouver.  Vous  observerez,  pour  le  bien  du 
service  de  ce  flambeau,  de  lie  le  remplir  qu’d  moiti6,  c'est  a  dire,  jusqu’i  la  croix  que 
j’ai  fait  sur  le  fer  blanc.  Je  vous  prie  de  repondre  a  ma  pr^cedente  lettre,  de  pre¬ 
senter  mon  respect  a  Madame,  et  d’etre  bien  convaincu  que  je  vous  suis  d6vou6  pour 
la  vie.  Monnet. 

J’ai  dine  il  y  a  deux  jours  avec  notre  ami  Favart;  il  est  enchante  d’avoir  vdtre 
portrait,  sur  lequel  il  a  fait  des  vers  charmants  qu’il  vous  enverra  avec  une  lettre. — 
Etes-vous  toujours  content  de  Guidetti  ? 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  3  Janvier,  1767. 

Vraiment  notre  ami  Mr.  Changuion  disoit  bien,  parloit  tres-juste.  Quand  il 
partit,  je  vous  faisois  une  moue  terrible,  et  je  ne  s<;ais  si  nous  sommes  parfaitement 
raccommodes.  Votre  lettre  est  charmante,  elle  est  flateuse,  elle  est  plus  encore,  elle 
est  tendre  ;  je  l’ai  traduite  pour  la  montrer  a  mes  amis  ;  on  etoit  curieux  de  la  voir, 
on  l’a  fort  applaudie,  mais  les  admirateurs  de  votre  style  ne  s^avent  pas  combien  cette 
plume  legere  et  brill  ante  est  paresseuse.  Allons,  je  veux  oublier  votre  longue  neg¬ 
ligence  :  en  amour  elle  est  un  crime  irr^missible ;  en  amitie  c’est  une  faute,  on  la 
sent,  mais  on  la  pardonne.  L’indulgence  et  1 ’amitie  doivent  etre  deux  compagnes 
inseparables. 

Vos  doutes  sur  le  plaisir  sensible  que  vos  lettres  me  donnent,  seroient  le  fond 
d’une  querelle  bien  vive,  si  en  m’asseyant  pour  ecrire  je  ne  m’6tois  promis  d’etre  douce 
et  paisible.  Cependant,  mon  tres-aimable  ami,  je  ne  puis  me  dispenser  de  vous  le 
dire  ;  ce  doute  n’est  pas  dans  votre  cceur,  c’est  une  excuse,  et  meme  une  mechante 
excuse, — n’en  parlons  plus  :  un  rien  peut  allumer  ce  tinder ; — vite,  je  pardonne  et 
me  tais. 

Est-il  la  Mr.  Burke  ?  je  le  croyois  a  la  Grenade.  Je  ne  dis  rien  de  ses  beaux 
yeux,  de  peur  de  vous  facher,  mais  ma  foi,  ils  sie'gent  bien  a  son  joli  visage.  J  ai 
dans  mon  secretaire  une  lettre  que  Mr.  Smith  m’avoit  prie  d’ecrire,  il  devoit  la  porter 
a  Air.  Burke,  ma  bete  de  philosophe  est  partie  sans  songer  a  la  prendre.  Vous  ne 
1’avez  pas  encore  vu,  Mr.  Smith  ?  c’est  la  plus  distraite  creature  !  mais  c’est  une  des 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


501 


plus  aimables.  Je  l’aime  beaucoup,  et  je  l'estime  encore  d’avantage.  Je  n’ai  point 
requ  les  livres  que  Mr.  Burke  a  envoyds  pour  moi.  Cependant  il  faut,  s’il  vous  plait, 
le  remercier  de  l’intention.  Voulez-vous  bien  prendre  ce  soin  ?  Si  je  lui  £cris,  je 
l’impatienterai ;  je  veux  lui  epargner  l’embarras  de  me  repondre,  ou  le  reproche  de  lie 
me  repondre  pas.  Voyez  si  j’ai  de  la  complaisance  pour  les  paresseux  !  je  prierai 
vol  on  tiers  Madame  Garrick  de  lui  faire  une  petite  caresse  de  ma  part,  si  ce  n’etoit  pas 
vous  offenser  doublement. 

Je  ne  s^ais  si  Mr.  Becket  ne  sera  point  la  dupe  de  sa  traduction.  Les  mceurs  de 
notre  noblesse,  c’est  a  dire  de  notre  noblesse  honnete,  le  ton  de  notre  corn*  facile  a 
outrer,  rarement  saisi  juste,  voila  tout  lemerite  des  “  Lettres  de  Madame  de  Sancerre.” 
Le  fond  du  roman  n’est  rien,  un  16ger  interet  de  curiosite  conduit  a  le  suivre  sans  ennui. 
Est-ce  assez  pour  se  soutenir  dans  une  langue  etrangdre  ?  les  faits  perdent  naturelle- 
ment  par  la  difference  des  usages;  mais  les  details  tombent  absolument  par  celle  du  style. 
J’ai  bien  peur  de  ruiner  mon  ami  Becket,  et  qu’a  la  longue  il  ne  donne  au  diable  la 
plume  dont  vous  lui  faites  dire  qu’il  veut  se  parer.  Je  lui  ai  propose  un  petit  com¬ 
merce  d’interet  entre  nous,  et  je  vous  prie  de  l’engager  a  me  repondre  oai  ou  non  sans 
complaisance.  Cette  proposition  tend  a  me  faire  un  petit,  bien  petit  fond  a  Londres, 
pour  Pemployer  k  ma  fantaisie.  En  me  parlant  d’y  passer  un  peu  de  terns,  vous 
toucliez  le  ressort  le  plus  propre  a  emouvoir  mon  coeur ;  c’est  mon  projet  le  plus  fla- 
teur,  c’est  mon  chateau  en  Espagne ;  mais,  mon  ami,  si  le  desir  1’eLve,  la  raison  le 
detruit  a  chaque  instant.  J’ai  une  mere  qui  se  croiroit  morte  si  elle  me  perdoit  de 
vue  ;  elle  n’est  pas  comme  celle  de  Pope,  douce  et  caressante,  mais  je  ne  lui  dois  pas 
moins  des  egards  ; — et  puis,  mon  ami,  je  suis  Here,  cent  fois  plus  fi£re  que  Jean-Jaques 
Rousseau.  Que  serois-je  dans  un  pays  ou  l’on  prise  la  fortune,  ou  elle  est  plus  nd- 
cessaire  qu’a  Paris,  ou  il  n’est  pas  honnete  de  loger  au  second  ?  Je  paroitrois  a  dirty 
author  in  a  garret, — il  n’y  faut  pas  songer.  Si  mon  etat  changeoit, — mais  comment 
changeroit-il  ?  On  ne  donne  point  de  pension  en  France,  on  en  accorde,  c’est  assez 
vous  dire  que  je  n’en  aurai  de  ma  vie :  toutes  mes  esperances  se  r^duisent  a  penser 
que  le  terns  me  debarrassera  de  pourvoir  pour  les  autres  ;  si  je  reste  seule,  ma  mode¬ 
ration  me  tiendra  lieu  d'un  accroissement  de  fortune,  et  peut-etre  alors  irai-je  voir 
mes  amis  en  Angleterre.  Je  suis  bien  eloignee  de  traiter  de  barbare  un  peuple  libre 
et  genereux,  dont  l’estime  est  le  sceau  du  merite;  je  me  trouverois  bien  heureux  de 
l’obtenir,  plus  heureuse  encore  si  j’osois  me  flater  d’en  etre  digne. 

J’ai  recu  bier  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Changuion,  tres-gaye,  tres-agr^able ;  je  l’aime  de 
tout  mon  coeur.  A  present  qu’il  ne  voit  pas  mes  lettres  je  vous  le  dis,  s’il  restoit  k 
Paris,  il  remplaceroit  l’ami  que  je  perdis  pendant  que  vous  y  £tiez  ;  sa  douceur  et  sa 
bcnte,  son  amitie,  ses  attentions  me  rappellent  sans  cesse  ce  tendre,  cet  ancien,  ce  sage 
et  prudent  ami.  Voulez-vous  bien  faire  mettre  a  la  poste  la  lettre  incluse  dans  la 
votre  ?  Voulez-vous  bien  embrasser  pour  moi  votre  charmante  compagne  ?  voulez- 
vous  bien  recevoir  l’un  et  l’autre  mes  complimens  sur  la  nouvelle  annee  ?  voulez-vous 
bien  que  mon  amie  vous  embrasse  tous  deux  ? — Et  vous,  Madame,  allez-vous  dire, 
voulez-vous  bien  me  laisser  en  r^pos  ! — Taccid. 


502 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  FAVART  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MON  CHER  GARRICK,  9  Janvier,  1767. 

Nous  sommes  dans  l’usage  d’ecrire  p^riodiquement  au  renouvellement  de  cliaque 
ann6e  a  nos  superieurs  et  a  nos  pr^tendus  amis.  Ces  especes  exigeantes  se  formali- 
seroient  si  l’on  manquoit  a  ce  devoir  ridicule.  II  faut  done  leur  payer  tons  les  ans 
un  tribut  de  fadeurs  dont  ils  pourroient  bien  se  passer.  L’amiti6  veritable  ne  connoit 
point  de  termes.  Tous  les  jours,  tous  les  momens  lui  sont  £gaux  ;  elle  est  toujours  la 
meme,  et  n’a  pas  besoin  de  protestations;  et  chaque  nouveau  serment  seroit  pour 
elle  une  nouvelle  injure.  Vous  m'avez  dit  que  vous  m’aimez,  je  le  crois ;  si  vous 
etes  ^galemcnt  sur  de  mon  amiti6,  tout  est  dit  pour  la  vie.  Vous  m’^crirez  quand  la 
fantaisie  vous  en  prendra,  et  je  vous  r6pondrai  de  m6me.  A  propos,  si  je  ne  vous 
savois  pas  indulgent,  je  croirois  que  vous  etes  fache  contre  moi,  pour  ne  vous  avoir 
pas  encore  remerci6  du  present  que  vous  m’avez  fait ;  e’est  un  des  plus  agr^ables  que 
j’aye  jamais  retpus.  Voici  l’epigraphe  que  j’ai  mise  au  bas  de  portrait  de  notre  cher 
Garrick. 

PLURES  IN  UNO. 

Les  vers  suivans  expriment  ma  pensee. 

En  lui  seul  on  voit  plusieurs  hommes. 

Lui  seul  nous  offre  les  tableaux 

De  mille  et  rnille  originaux, 

Tant  des  siecles  passes  quedu  siecle  ou  nous  sommes. 

Les  ridicules,  les  erreurs 
Sont  traces  d’apres  eux  par  ce  Peintre  fidele  ; 

Mais  pour  representer  l’honnete  homme  et  ses  mceurs, 

II  n’a  pas  besoin  de  modele. 


En  recevant  ce  charmant  portrait,  je  vous  avouerai  qu’il  m’a  fallu  quelques  mo¬ 
mens  pour  en  demeler  la  ressemblance,  et  mon  incertitude  a  donn£  lieu  a  ces 
autres  vers. 

Est-ce  toi,  cher  Garrick  ?  et  l’art  de  la  peinture 
Offre-t’-il  a  mes  yeux  le  Roscius  Anglois  ? 

Tu  changes  a  ton  gre  de  forme  et  de  figure  ; 

Mais  ton  cceur  ne  change  jamais. 

Si  l’artiste  eut  pu  rendre  avec  des  traits  de  flamme 
L’amitie,  la  franchise,  et  l’amour  du  bienfait, 

Esprit,  gout,  sentimens,  genie  .  .  .  enfin  ton  ame, 

J’aurois  reconnu  ton  portrait. 

Nous  avons  eu  depuis  quelque  terns  plusieurs  debuts  a  nos  diffbrens  theatres.  Je 
me  crois  dispense  de  vous  en  parler. 

Mr.  Le  Miere  a  donne  au  theatre  Francois  une  nouvelle  tragedie,  intitulee 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


503 


“  Guillaume  Tell.”  Vous  savez  que  Guillaume  Tell  fut  le  liberateur  de  la  nation 
Helv^tique.  On  sait  gre  a.  l’auteur  d’avoir  suivi  exactement  l’histoire,  et  de  l’avoir 
embellie  par  des  traits  heureux.  Ce  sujet  si  interessant  pour  les  Suisses,  n’a  pas  fait 
a  Paris  la  meme  sensation  qu’il  auroit  pu  faire  dans  les  Treize  Cantons. 

On  a  donn6  a  la  Comedie  Italienne,  “  Esope  a  Cytliere.”  Les  paroles  sont  de 
Dancourt,  surnomm6  l’Arlequin  du  Roi  de  Prusse ;  la  musique  est  du  Sieur  Trial. 
Cette  pi&ce  est  compos^e  de  scenes  episodiques  assez  ordinaires  ;  mais  la  derniere 
sc£ne,  qui  est  une  critique  de  la  Comedie  Fran^oise  et  de  l’Opera,  a  fait  aller  cette 
bagatelle  jusqu’a  neuf  representations  bien  suivies. 

Cette  pi£ce,  toute  mediocre  qu’elle  est,  a  cause  une  fermentation  g6n6rale  en  atta- 
quant  le  vieux  gout  de  musique  de  nos  anciens  Operas.  On  pretend  que  ce  badinage 
n’a  pas  peu  contribu6  a  degouter  Messrs.  Rebel  et  Francceur  de  la  direction  du  grand 
spectacle  lyrique ;  ils  remettent  leur  sceptre  entre  les  mains  de  Messrs.  Le  Breton  et 
Trial.  Le  nouveau  r&gne  commencera  a  Paques  prochain. 

Je  sens  que  tout  cela  ne  vous  interesse  guere ;  mais  pour  vous  d6dommager  de 
l’ennui  que  je  vous  cause,  je  vais  vous  conter  une  petite  avanture,  dont  je  crois  que 
l’on  pourroit  faire  une  piece  pour  le  Theatre  Anglois :  1’acteur  principal  est  tr£s- 
connu ;  mais  il  n’est  pas  necessaire  que  je  vous  le  designe  autrement  que  par  lettre 
initiale. 

Air.  B.  etoit  a  sa  petite  maison  de  campagne  avec  une  nombreuse  compagnie :  an 
dessert  une  laquais  lui  vient  annoncer  une  vieille  dame,  qui  vouloit  absolument  lui 
parler.  “  Dis-lui  que  je  n’y  suis  pas  — “  Mais,  Monsieur.” — “  Va  done,  veux-tu 
que  j’aille  moi-meme  le  dire  ?” — “  Mais,  Monsieur  .  .  .  .” — “  Quoi  ?” — “  Elle  a  avec 
elle  une  fille  charmante.” — “  Oui !  fais  entrer.”  Aussitot  le  valet  introduit  une 
femme  en  deuil,  suivie  d’une  jeune  demoiselle  modestement  vetue.  Sa  gorge  etoit 
ccuverte  d’un  fichu  de  batiste  assez  mal  joint,  elle  avoit  les  yeux  baisses,  mais  pour 
peu  qu’elle  les  ouvrit,  il  en  sortoit  des  eclairs  qui  frappoient  Air.  B.  La  vieille  dit : 
“  Pardon,  pardon,  Messieurs,  Mesdames  ;  mais  vest  que  e’est  une  affaire  qui  m’in- 
teresse  beaucoup,  et  j’ai  besoin  de  la  protection  de  Monsieur elle  entile  le  detail  d’un 
proems  ou  personne  ne  comprenoit  rien,  quoique  l’on  fit  semblant  de  l’entendre,  parce- 
que  tous  les  regards  6toient  fix^s  sur  la  jeune  personne,  et  par  la  meme  raison  Mr.  B. 
trouva  la  cause  tr&s-juste.  La  vieille  le  pria  de  passer  dans  son  cabinet  pour  lui 
parler  en  particular.  Quand  ils  y  furent,  la  bonne  lui  dit :  “  Monsieur,  mon  proces 
n’est  qu’une  fable ;  mais  la  jeune  personne  que  j’ai  avec  moi  est  une  r&dite  ;  j’ai 
remarqu6  l’impression  qu’elle  a  faite  sur  vous.  Si  vous  voulez  nous  faire  un  sort, 
vous  pouvez  disposer  de  mon  elkve.  Mr.  B.  lui  dit,  “  Serez-vous  satisfaite  de 
quatre  mille  livres  de  rente  ?” — “  C’en  est  assez,”  l^plique  la  vieille  ;  “  demain,  vous 
nous  donnerez  votre  signature,  apres  demain  nous  vous  demandrons  a  souper,  et  vous 
serez  le  Sultan  favori.”  File  rentre  dans  la  chambre  ou  elle  avoit  laiss6  sa  fille,  et  la 
ram£ne  a  Paris.  Elle  lui  declara  l’arrangement  quelle  a  fait  avec  Mr.  B.  La  fille 
6toit  sage  ;  elle  est  fort  surprise  du  discours  que  lui  tient  sa  mere,  car  elle  la  croyoit 
telle ;  elle  lui  fait  meme  des  reproches  tr&s-vifs  sur  une  pareille  demarche.  “  Ma 


504 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


m&re,”  lui  dit-elle,  “  vous  m’avez  toujours  donn6  des  principes  honnfites,  eli  !  pour- 
quoi  avez-vous  tout  d’un  coup  change  de  caractcre?  Le  respect  que  j’avois  pour  vous 
£toit  pour  mon  ame  une  sensation  d&icieuse.  Ce  que  vous  me  dites  est  assur^ment 
une  feinte  pour  m’^prouver,  vous  ne  voudriez  pas  me  priver  du  bonheur  cpie  je  sens 
a  vous  estimer.”  La  bonne  ne  savoit  que  rcpondre,  elle  tranche  net :  “  Apprenez 
que  je  ne  suis  pas  votre  m&re.  Je  vous  ai  achete  de  celle  qui  vous  a  donn£  le  jour. 
Vous  savez  que  je  n’ai  l  ien  £pargn6  pour  votre  Education,  il  est  terns  que  je  recueille 
lc  fruit  de  mes  depenses  et  des  soins  que  j’ai  pris  de  vous.  Allez,  Mademoiselle, 
allez-vous  couclier,  et  disposez-vous  a  remplir  d&s  demain  mes  volont^s.”  La  pauvre 
enfant  ne  put  fermer  l’oeil  de  toute  la  nuit.  “  Quel  affreux  passage !  quels  sont  done 
mes  parens  ?”  Elle  prend  une  resolution  ;  elle  se  leve  avant  le  jour,  trompe  ses  sur- 
veillans,  et  va  se  jetter  aux  pieds  du  lieutenant  de  police  en  lui  declarant  sa  situation, 
Ce  juge  Equitable  la  rassure:  “  ]\Ia  pauvre  petite,  ne  faites  semblant  de  rien  ;  suivez 
votre  pr6tendue  mere  chez  Mr.  B.,  et  soyez  sure  qu’il  ne  vous  arrivera  rien  de  facheux, 
je  vous  en  donne  ma  parole.”  Dans  cette  confiance  elle  retourne  chez  la  matronc, 
qui  n’etoit  pas  encore  levee,  et  qui  ne  se  doutoit  de  rien.  Elies  vont  ensemble  au 
rendez-vous. 

Mr.  B.  avoit  rassemble  quelques  amis  particuliers  pour  etre  temoins  de  sa  bonne 
fortune,  car  dans  ces  sortes  de  liaisons,  il  entre  moins  de  plaisir  que  de  vanity.  On  se 
met  k  table,  la  conversation  s’anime,  la  petite  rougit :  l’innocence  rougiroit  a  moins. 
Dans  ces  instans  de  vivacity,  on  voit  entrer  un  Exempt :  “  Monsieur,”  dit-il,  en 
s’adressant  a  Mr.  B.,  “  je  sais  que  vous  6tes  le  maitre  de  recevoir  chez-vous  qui  bon 
vous  semble ;  mais  vous  ne  connoissez  point  cette  dame  et  cette  jeune  fille  que  vous 
avez  a  votre  table  ;  j’ai  ordre  de  les  arreter.  Je  vais  conduire  Madame  a  l’hopital,  et 
Mademoiselle  dans  le  couvent  qu’elle  choisira;  mais  avant  que  je  sorte  d’ici,  il  faut 
que  cette  gueuse”  (montrant  la  vieille)  “  declare  a  l’instant  quelle  est  la  veritable  m£re 
de  la  jeune  personne  qu’elle  a  voulu  vous  prostituer.”  La  vieille  £tonn£e,  dit  en 
balbutiant,  que  la  veritable  mere  ^toit  Mademoiselle  Frederic: — “  Fr£d6ric!  la  Fr£- 
d^ric,”  s’^erie  Mr.  B.,  “  je  l’avois,  elle  n’eut  qu’un  enfant,  e’etoit  une  fille.  Ah  !  e’est 
toi,  e’est  toi,  je  te  reconnois !”  11  se  pr^cipite  dans  les  bras  de  la  jeune  personne. 

L’Exempt  attendri  par  cette  reconnoissance  ou  l’on  voyoit  tous  les  sentimens  de  la 
nature,  laissa  la  jeune  demoiselle  a  son  p&re,  et  conduisit  la  fausse  m£re  a  la  maison 
de  force. — Mr.  B.  a  gagne  au  change  ;  au  lieu  d’une  maitresse,  il  trouve  une  fille  tendre, 
sage  et  vertueuse,  qui  servira  d’exemple  a  la  famille. 

Je  vous  envoye  une  epitre  de  Mr.  de  Voltaire,  qui  n’est  point  encore  imprimee. 
Il  est  aise  de  voir  qu’il  n’a  eu  pour  objet  que  d’accabler  notre  celebre  Jean-Jacques. 
En  vous  faisant  part  de  cette  satyre,  j’espere  que  vous  ne  la  rendrez  pas  publique. 
Il  est  affreux  pour  des  hommes  qui  pensent  d’aggraver  le  malheur  d’un  homme  de 
lettres  &  qui  l’on  ne  pent  rien  reprocher  qu’une  philosophie  mal  entendue  dont  il 
est  la  victime. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


505 


L’HYPOCRITE. 

Mes  chers  amis,  il  me  prend  fantaisie 
De  vous  parler  ce  soir  d’hypocrisie. 

Grave  Vernet,  soutiens  ma  foible  voix. 

Plus  on  est  lourd,  plus  on  parle  avec  poids. 

Si  quelque  belle  a  la  demarche  here, 

Aux  gros  tetons,  a  l’enorme  derriere, 
litale  aux  yeux  ses  augustes  appas, 

Les  rimailleurs  la  nommeront  Pallas  : 

Une  beaute  jeune,  fraiche,  ingenue, 

Se  nomme  Hebe  :  Venus  est  reconnue 
A  son  sourire,  a  l’art  de  volupte, 

Qui  de  son  charme  embellit  la  beaute. 

Mais  si  jadis  un  visage  sinistre 
Au  teint  jauni,  l’oeil  empese  d’un  cuistre, 

Un  front  hideux  sur  un  moignon  penche, 

Un  oeil  de  pore  a  la  terre  attache, 

(Miroir  d’une  ame  a  ses  remords  en  proye, 
Toujours  terni  de  peur  qu’on  ne  le  voye,) 

Sans  hesiter,  je  vous  declare  net, 

Que  ce  magot  est  Tartuffe  ou  Vernet. 

C’est  done  a  toi,  Vernet,  que  je  dedie 
Ma  tres-honnete  et  courte  rapsodie 
Sur  le  sujet  de  notre  ami  Guignard, 
Fesse-mathieu,  devot  et  grand  paillard. 
Avant-hier  advint  que  de  fortune 
Je  rencontrai  ce  Guignard  sur  la  brune, 

Qui  chez  Fanchon  s’alloit  glisser  sans  bruit, 
Comme  un  hibou  qui  ne  va  que  de  nuit. 

Je  l’arretai  d’un  air  assez  fantasque 
Par  sa  jaquette,  et  je  lui  criai :  Masque  ! 

Je  te  connois ;  l’argent  et  les  catins 
Sont  a  tes  yeux  les  seuls  objets  divins. 

Tu  n’eus  jamais  un  autre  catechisme  : 

Pourquoi  venir  de  ton  plat  rigorisme 
Nous  elaler  le  dehors  imposteur? 

Tromper  le  monde  et  mentir  a  ton  coeur, 

Et  tout  petri  d’une  douce  luxure, 

Parler  en  Paul  et  vivre  en  epicure  ? 

Le  sicophante  alors  me  repondit, 

Qu’il  faut  tromper  pour  se  mettre  en  credit ; 

Que  la  franchise  est  toujours  dangereuse, 

L’art  bien  re^u,  la  vertu  malheureuse, 

La  fourbe  utile,  et  que  la  verite 
Est  un  jargon  bien  repu,  trbs-vante, 

D’un  fort  grand  prix,  mais  qui  n’est  pas  d’usage. 
Je  repliquai :  Ton  discours  paroit  sage. 

3  T 


VOL.  II. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


50(5 


L'hypocrisic  a  du  bon  cjuelquefois; 

Pour  son  profit  on  trornpe  tou3  les  rois. 

On  dupe  aussi  le  stupide  vulgaire 

Pour  le  gagner  bien  plus  que  pour  lui  plaire. 

Lorsqu’il  s’agit  d’un  trdne  episcopal, 

Ou  du  chapeau  qui  coeffe  un  Cardinal, 

Ou  qu’on  en  veut  il  la  triple  couronne 
Que  quelquefois  1’arai  Belzebut  donne  ; 

En  pareil  cas  peut-£tre  il  seroit  bon, 

Qu’on  employat  quelque  tour  de  fripon. 

L’objet  est  beau  ;  le  prix  en  vaut  la  peine  ; 

Mais  se  gener  pour  nous  mettre  it  la  gene  ; 

Mais  s’intposer  le  fardeau  deteste 
D’une  penible  et  triste  faussetfe, 

Du  monde  entier  meprisee  et  maudite, 

C’est  etre  dupe  encore  plus  qu’hypocrite. 

Que  Perctti  se  deguise  en  Chretien, 

Pour  Otre  Pape,  il  se  conduit  fort  bien. 

Mais  toi,  pauvre  homme,  excrement  de  College, 
Dis-moi  quel  bien,  quel  rang,  quel  privilege, 

Il  te  revient  de  ton  maintien  devot  ? 

Tricher  au  jeu  sans  gagner,  est  d’un  sot. 

Le  monde  enfin  aisement  devine, 

On  reconnoit  un  Castard  h  sa  mine, 

Chacun  le  hue.  On  aime  a  decrier 
Un  charlatan  qui  fait  mal  son  metier. 

Mais  convene z  du  moins  que  mes  confreres 
M’appluudiront  ...  Tu  ne  les  connois  gueres. 
Dans  leur  tripot  on  les  a  vu  souvent 
Se  comporter  comme  on  fait  au  courant. 

Tout  penaillon  y  vante  sa  besace, 

Son  institut,  ses  miracles,  sa  crasse, 

Mais  en  secret  l’un  de  l’autre  jaloux, 
Modestement  ils  se  detestent  tous. 

Tes  ennemis  sont  parmi  tes  semblables. 

Les  gens  du  monde  au  moins,  sont  plus  traitables 
Ils  sont  railleurs  ;  les  autres  sont  mechans. 
Crains  les  siflets,  mais  crains  les  malfaisans. 
Crois-moi,  renonce  a  la  bigoterie, 

Mene  uniment  une  plus  noble  vie. 

Rougissant  moins,  sois  moins  embarrasse. 

Que  ton  col  tors,  desormais  redresse 
Sur  son  pivot,  garde  un  juste  equilibre, 

Leve  les  yeux,  parle  en  citoyen  libre, 

Sois  franc,  sois  simple,  et  sans  affecter  rien, 
Essaye  un  peu  d’etre  un  homme  de  bien. 

Le  Mecreant  alors  n’ose  en  repondre  ; 

J’etois  sincere.  Il  se  sentit  confondre, 

Il  soupira  d’un  air  sanctifie, 

Puis  detournant  un  ceil  humilie, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


507 


Courbant  en  voute  une  raoitie  d’echine, 

Et  du  menton  se  battant  la  poitrine, 

D’un  pied  cagneux,  il  alia  chez  Fanchon 
Pour  lui  parler  de  la  religion. 

Mr.  De  Marigni,  fr£re  de  feue  Madame  la  Marquise  de  Pompadour,  vient 
d’epouser  Mademoiselle  Filleul,  qui  est  une  chef-d’oeuvre  de  beaute.  On  a  dit  de 
ce  mariage  que  Madame  Marigni  6toit  une  syr&ne.  Comment  cela  ?  C’est  une 
belle  femme  depuis  la  t£te  jusqu’a  la  ceinture,  et  que  le  reste  est  une  queue  de 
poisson. 

Nota  que  Mr.  Marigni  se  nomme  Poisson,  et  que  l’on  fait  allusion  a  sa  queue. 

Yous  m’avez  promis,  mon  cber  Garrick,  de  m’envoyer  la  traduction  d’une  comedie 
Angloise  d’Otway,  ou  de  Dryden :  je  ne  me  souviens  pas  du  titre,  mais  le  sujet  est 
un  mari  qui  oblige  sa  femme  de  ceder  aux  instances  de  son  rival.*  Comme  j’ai  un 
sujet  a  pen  pres  semblable,  je  ne  ferai  point  scrupule  de  profiter  des  beautes  de  la 
comedie  Angloise.  Je  suis  avec  le  plus  inviolable  attachement, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr^s-humble  et  tr^s-obeissant  serviteur  et  ami, 

Favart. 

Mes  respects  a  la  plus  beureuse  des  femmes,  et  a  la  plus  digne  de  l’etre. 

Ma  femme  vous  embrasse  de  tout  son  coeur  ainsi  que  Madame. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  26  Janvier,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  remis  a  Mr.  Samuel,  marchand  de  la  cit^f,  les  cinq  livres  de  tico- 
podium  que  vous  m’avez  demandes,  que  vous  auriez  eu  plutot  si  j’avois  trouve 
l'occasion  de  vous  les  faire  parvenir. 

Je  suis  bien  faclie  de  votre  incommodity,  et  je  voudrois  bien  que  vous  fussiez  plus 
occupe  du  soin  de  votre  sante  que  des  affaires  de  votre  theatre :  vous  stpavez  tout  ce 
que  je  vous  ai  dit  a  ce  sujet,  tant  pis  pour  vous  si  vous  ne  le  faites  pas.  Je  ne 
voudrois  pas  pour  tout  le  bien  de  vos  trois  royaumes  reprendre  une  direction  de 
spectacle  :  si  je  m’en  etoit  souci6,  j’aurois  demand^  celle  de  l’Op^ra  de  Paris  qui  vient 
d’etre  vacante,  et  certainement  je  l’aurois  eu  ;  mais  je  connois  trop  l  esprit  de  laliberte 
et  de  la  tranquillity  pour  me  remettre  dans  l’esclavage. 

J'ai  yt6  voir  Pr6ville  et  sa  femme  ;  tous  deux  ont  6te  bien  sensible  a  votre  sou¬ 
venir,  et  l’un  et  l’autre  m’ont  cbarg6  de  mille  compliments  pour  vous.  Preville  a  eff, 
comme  vous,  malade  d’une  maladie  de  nerfs.  Ce  mariage  me  paroit  bien  r^uni,  et 

*  1  imagine  Mr.  Garrick  really  spoke  of  the  “  Fox”  by  B.  Jonson.  In  the  seventh  scene  of  the  third 
act  of  that  astonishing  play,  Corvino  carries  his  wife  Celia  to  Volpone’s  house,  and  under  the  most  horrible 
menaces,  leaves  her  to  his  pleasure.  What  follows  between  the  revived  impostor  and  the  abused  wife  seems 
to  have  strongly  impressed  Milton,  when  composing  the  scene  of  temptation  in  his  “  Comus.” — Ed. 
f  “  Mr.  Samuel,  Negociant,  d’ldol  Lane,  Lombard  Street.” 

3  T  2 


508 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


selon  lcs  apparences  ccla  durera,  et  je  suis  tonjours  convaincu  que  Pr^ville  a  donn6 
lieu  un  pen  la  d^routte  de  sa  femme,  qui,  malheureusement  pour  elle,  a  rencontr^ 
ce  brigand  de  Mol£.  A  propos  de  Mole,  il  a  fait  une  souscription  pour  une  b£n£fice, 
par  laquelle  il  a  d£ja  amass6  mille  louis,  sans  ce  qu'il  aura  la  porte  :  il  a  si  bien  fait 
son  compte  pendant  le  courant  de  sa  maladie,  qu’en  demandant  du  vin  k  tout  le 
monde,  on  lui  en  a  envoy6  plus  qu'il  ne  pourra  boire  pendant  six  ans. 

J’ai  re^u  une  lettre  de  Mr.  de  Yilliers,  qui  est  p£n6tre  de  vos  bont^s  et  de  vos 
politesses  pour  lui.  Mr.  Boquet  vous  en  remercie,  et  moi  aussi:  nous  vous  prions  de 
continuer  ;  cet  homme  m£rite  votre  amiti6  a  tous  6gards. 

Je  vous  prie  d’envoyer  le  plutot  possible  la  redingotte,  et  le  fromage  que  je  vous 
ai  demands. 

J’oubliois  de  vous  dire  que  les  com6diens  Francois  alloit  donner  une  com6die  de 
cinq  actes,  tir£  d’un  sujet  Anglois.  Preville  m’en  a  dit  beaucoup  de  bien.  Corame  il 
y  a  une  fille  grosse  dans  cette  pi&ce,  et  que  nos  moeurs  ne  sont  pas  accoutume  a  cette 
indecence,  je  ne  s^ais  pas  comment  le  spectateur  prendra  cela. 

Si  vous  avez  encore  besoin  de  licopodium,  je  vous  conseillerois  de  le  faire  venir  en 
droiture  de  Francfort.  Vous  l'aurez  plus  ais^ment  et  a  meilleur  marche.  J’ai  fait 
part  a  notre  ami  Favart  du  succ&s  de  votre  nouvelle  piece;  vous  savez  combien  il 
vous  aime,  et  vous  devez  avoir  re^u  une  lettre  de  lui  avec  les  vers  qu’il  vous  a  fait  en 
remereiement  de  votre  portrait.  A  propos  de  portrait,  j’ai  parle  a  Mr.  Vattelet  de 
celui  que  vous  m’avez  charge  de  faire  graver :  je  dois  le  voir  au  premier  jour  pour 
faire  le  clioix  du  graveur,  et  nous  tacherons  de  faire  en  sorte  que  vous  soyez  content. 

Vous  n'avez  pas  oubli6  que  j’ai  un  coffre  ou  il  y  a  des  habits  qui  vous  appar- 
tiennent.  Si  vous  n’etes  pas  assure  de  venir  ici  le  printems  procnain,  je  vous  conseil¬ 
lerois  de  les  vendre.  On  change  de  mode,  et  d’ailleurs  cela  peut  devenir  6troit  ou 
trop  large.  Marquez-moi  votre  volonte,  et  croyez  qu’il  n’existe  pas  un  homme  qui 
vous  aime  plus  que  moi.  Vous  ne  me  parlez  pas  de  Madame  Garrick:  je  ne  laime 
pas  moins  que  vous. 

Moxnet. 

Connne  j'allois  fermer  ma  lettre,  Barthelemon  est  entre  dans  ma  chambre.  Je 
l’ai  fort  dispose  a  s’arranger  avec  vous  :  en  le  prenant  je  crois  que  vous  feriez  une 
bonne  acquisition  pour  votre  theatre  :  il  doit  vous  £crire  sur  cela.  Suivez  votre 
volonte,  et  croyez  que  je  ne  prends  d’autre  inter£t  que  le  votre.  Un  ami  me  tour- 
mente  pour  vous  faire  prendre  un  figurant  pour  votre  danse  qui  ne  vous  convient 
pas  ;  dans  la  premiere  lettre  que  vous  m’6crirez,  n’oubliez  pas  de  me  marquer  que 
vous  n’en  avez  pas  besoin. 

Ci-joint,  je  vous  donne  l’adresse  du  Major.  “  —  Mant  Esq.,  at  Charles  Gould’s, 
Esq.  Horse  Guards,  Whitehall.” 

Dans  “  Le  Mercure”  du  mois  dernier,  on  a  parle  tr&s-avantageusement  des  talens  de 
Barthelemon.  Vous  lui  ferez  plaisir  et  lui  rendriez  service  si  vous  voulez  traduire 
son  article,  et  le  faire  mettre  dans  un  de  vos  papiers  publics  le  plus  connus  :  il  vous 
en  prie. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


509 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  Jeudi,  29  Janvier,  1767. 

Vous  attachez  trop  de  prix  a  une  bagatelle,  raon  tr^s-aimable  ami.  Le  dessein 
de  vous  d6dier  Les  Lettres  de  Madame  de  Sancerre,  m’a  fait  entreprendre  et  con¬ 
tinuer  l’ouvrage  ;  ainsi  je  vous  dois  la  petite  gloire  passag£re  que  le  succ&s  d’un  roman 
peut  donner.  Je  n’en  croirai  certainement  pas  Mr.  Becket  sur  V excellence  de  sa  tra¬ 
duction,  mais  je  l’en  croirai  toujours  sur  le  bien  qu’il  dira  de  vous.  Sa  derni&re  lettre 
est  un  £loge  de  “  Cymon”  et  de  son  charming  author.  Je  suis  de  son  avis.  La 
pi£ce  est  bien  faite,  bien  6crite :  la  vari£t6  des  caract&res,  la  bonne  plaisanterie,  se 
melent  avec  justesse  a  l’int^ret  du  drame;  lejugeet  Linco  sont  deux  personnages 
trfes-comiques  ;  la  premiere  sc&ne  des  amans  est  ingenue  et  touchante,  celle  de  Fatime, 
quand  elle  les  observe,  est  tr&s-neuve.  Tout  est  vrai,  tout  est  agreable :  c’est  un 
ouvrage  fait  pour  reussir  dans  tons  les  terns  et  dans  tous  les  pays.  Vous  avez  ce  qui 
manque  a  la  plupart  de  vos  auteurs,  du  naturel  et  du  gout ;  ce  que  vous  appellez 
humour  n’est  pas  rendu  par  le  mot  gout ;  Fielding,  Swift,  ont  ce  humour,  mais  rare- 
ment  du  gout.  Mettre  tout  k  sa  place,  dire  ce  qu’il  faut,  ne  jamais  s’ecarter  de  la 
veritc,  suivre  la  nature  et  ne  pas  l’outrer,  voila  le  gout,  et  votre  piece  en  est  remplie. 
Recevez  mon  tr&s-sinc£re  compliment.  Vous  n’aurez  jamais  un  sujet  dejoie  qui  n’en 
soit  un  de  plaisir  pour  moi. 

Je  suis  fachee  que  le  porteur  de  cette  jolie  comedie  soit  pret  a  quitter  Paris.  II 
a  de  l’esprit,  un  heureux  naturel,  et  je  le  crois  capable  d’aimer  tendrement  ses  amis. 
Ce  qu’il  a  trouv6  de  plus  seduisant  en  Angleterre  c’est  Mr.  Garrick,  Bath,  et  le 
menuet  dans6  par  Madame  Garrick.  II  r£p£te  avec  attendrissenient  les  conseils 
qu’elle  a  bien  voulu  lui  donner,  il  pense  au  pays  de  Galles,  ses  regrets,  ses  desseins, 
tout  cela  l’occupe  sans  que  sa  conversation  en  soit  moins  vive  et  moins  gaye.  Je 
suis  mortifiee  de  ne  le  voir  qu’en  passant. 

Je  vis  bier  le  Baron  d’Holbach.  II  est  un  peu  jaune,  il  paroit  chagrin.  Je  lui 
montrai  votre  lettre  ;  il  vous  assure  de  sa  plus  tendre  arnitie.  Clairon  n’est  point  du 
tout  philosophe.  Elle  se  repent  de  ce  jour  glorieux  oil  elle  deva  la  rage  du  public 
en  pensant  attirer  son  admiration  :  pale  et  verte  le  matin,  le  rouge  de  l'apr^s  diner  ne 
cache  point  la  lividite  de  ses  lis  emprunt^s.  Le  parterre  l’a  tout-a-fait  oubliee  :  elle 
s’efforce  en  vain  de  rappeller  son  attention.  Elle  paroit  dans  une  loge,  modestement 
d’abord,  a  derni  cachee  sous  son  6ventail,  puis  elle  se  baisse  un  peu,  puis  entiere- 
ment.  Les  vilains  yeux  de  ce  parterre  s’ouvrent  sur  elle,  on  la  voit,  on  la  connoit, 
on  dit,  voila  Clairon.  Mais  on  le  dit  simplement,  on  ne  le  crie  pas,  on  ne  fait  £clater 
ni  regret,  ni  d6sir  ;  on  applaudit  a  son  nez,  a  sa  barbe,  toutes  les  laides  guenons  qui 
osent  aspirer  k  remplir  son  trone.  L’empire  de  Melpomene  est  en  proie  a  deux 
maussades  divinites.  La  meilleure  et  la  plus  laide  est  Mademoiselle  Saintval ;  son 
visage  est  une  grimace;  quand  elle  s’anime,  c’est  une  furie.  Elle  a  un  amant, — oui, 
Monsieur.  Il  lui  fait  des  enfants,  et  lui  donne  des  coups  de  couteaux,  par  jalousie, — 


.510 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


lie  vous  (Uplaise.  Le  Due  de  Duras  et  le  lieutenant  de  police  out  voulu  en  imposer  & 
ce  terrible  am  ant,  mais  l’actrice  tragique  en  est  contente,  elle  le  veut,  on  le  lui  laisse. 
L’autre  laidron  est  la  petite  Duranci,  aidee  de  la  eabale  du  Prince  de  Conti ;  en  copiant 
froidement  et  gaucliement  Clairon,  elle  se  fait  des  partisans.  O  terns !  O  mceurs  ! 
O  divine  Clairon !  mais  il  reste  un  ressource  pour  rappeller  ce  public  6gar£,  Eger, 
inconstant.  Il  faut  montrer  la  deesse :  la  taciturne  Madame  de  Villeroi  en  a  imaging 
le  moyen.  MoE  a  6E  si  malade  qu’on  l’a  cru  mort.  On  va  faire  jouer  Clairon  au 
profit  du  convalescent.  A  la  ConEdie  F ran^oise  on  ne  le  peut :  on  loue  un  theatre 
bourgeois,  on  fait  deux  mille  billets  a  un  louis  piece,  on  tourmente  tout  l’univers 
pour  en  prendre,  cbacun  se  Evolte  contre  l’impot,  mais  l’agr&ible  MoE  va  lui-meme 
de  porte  en  porte  en  offrir ;  la  Marquise  de  Villeroi  et  Clairon  les  pr£sentent,  il  faut 
ceder  a  leurs  instances.  Les  fermiers  g6n6raux,  tax^s  a  en  prendre  cent,  en  ont  ren- 
voy6  quatre-vingt-et-huit :  fy  des  Francois,  m’allez-vous  dire  !  ce  sont  des  crasseux. 
Oui  et  non.  Cette  esp&ce  de  contribution  nEtant  pas  consacEe  ici  par  1’ usage,  comrae 
elle  Test  a  Londres,  nous  la  regardons  tres-differemment,  et  dans  le  cas  ou  est  MoE, 
elle  nous  paroit  tr&s-ind6cemment  exigee.  C’est  un  homme  sans  besoin,  qui  se  met 
bassement  dans  la  classe  des  mendians,  devient  le  proteg6  de  sa  camarade,  et  s’enrichit 
par  une  queste. 

Cette  desoEe  Clairon  fit  dire  au  Roi  qu’elle  joueroit  a  Versailles  quand  Sa  Ma- 
jeste  l’ordonneroit.  CEtoit  au  commencement  de  l’hyver.  Sa  Majeste  a  r6pondu 
qu’elle  trouvoit  les  autres  actrices  fort  bonnes.  O  rage !  O  d^sespoir  !  Je  vous 
rendrai  compte  de  cette  representation,  dont  on  espere  le  retour  de  Clairon  sur  la 
scEne  Fran^oise. 

Oui,  Preville  a  repris  sa  femme.  Il  eut  peut-etre  aussi  bien  fait  de  la  laisser. 
L’estime  est  fort  necessaire  en  manage,  et  je  la  crois  plus  propre  a  maintenir  la  paix 
que  l’amour  meme.  Comment  se  parler  quand  le  reproche  est  toujours  pret  a 
echapper  ? 

Jeviens  de  recevoir  deux  paquets  de  Londres.  L’un  vient  de  Mr.  Becket :  l’autre 
de  mon  ami  Changuion.  La  pEce  dont  vous  me  parlez  est  une  des  quatre  dont 
mon  chevalier  errant  me  fait  present.  Je  l’en  remercierai.  Les  livres  sont  pour  moi 
plus  que  l’or  et  les  pierreries.  J’espere  revoir  cet  obligeant  Mr.  Changuion  au  mois 
de  Mars,  ce  sera  un  grand  plaisir :  mais  il  durera  peu.  Est-ce  que  vous  n’etes  pas 
las  a  mourn’  de  lire  ?  Quelle  sotte  lettre  ! — mais  mon  ami,  je  suis  malade,  oui,  aussi 
malade  que  bete.  Depuis  trois  mois  je  tousse,  je  mange  peu,  et  je  ne  dors  gu^re. 
Cela  me  rend  imbecile.  Je  ne  vous  lEpete  pas  mes  raisons  sur  le  voyage  dont  vous 
me  parlez  avec  tant  d’amiti6,  ce  sont  de  chiennes  de  raisons  qu’il  n’est  pas  doux  de  se 
rappeller.  O  ce  voyage  !  .  .  .  .  La  jeune  Madame  de  Stinville  en  vient  de  faire 
un  contre  son  gre.  La  petite  folle  adoroit  Clerval  de  la  Comedie  Italienne.  Ce 
serait  miracle  si  la  belle  sceur  d  un  ministre  puissant  trouvoit  de  la  resistance.  Par 
prices,  par  menaces,  elle  a  s£duit  Clerval.  Le  Due  de  Choiseul,  informe  par  le  public 
de  ce  commerce  peu  cache,  a  parl6  doucement  a  sa  belle  sceur.  Elle  a  promis  de 
rompre  avec  Clerval,  mais  elle  a  toujours  ete  son  train.  Mr.  de  Stinville  instruit  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


511 


son  tour,  a  obtenu  une  lettre  de  cachet.  On  le  blame  de  l’avoir  presentee  lui-meme 
a  sa  femme.  Au  milieu  de  la  nuit  il  l’6veilla,  la  fit  lever,  liabiller,  la  conduisit  a  son 
carrosse  attele  de  six  chevaux,  y  monta  avec  elle,  et  la  mena  au  couvent  a  Nanci. 
Bien  des  gens  sont  en  peine  de  S9avoir  ce  qu’ils  se  dirent  en  route.  Voila  une  femme 
perdue  a  jamais.  Clerval  fut  6veill6  aussi  ;  le  lieutenant  de  police  retiroit  les  lettres 
de  la  dame,  pendant  qu’elle  voyageoit,  On  a  redemande  jusqu’aux  bijoux :  cela 
n’est  pas  fort  g^n^reux. 

Voulez-vous  bien  vous  charger  de  dire  a  Mr.  Becket  que  j’envoye  a  son  adresse  le 
balot  de  mes  ouvrages,  dont  il  a  la  complaisance  de  vouloir  bien  embarrasser  un  petit 
coin  de  son  magazin.  J’ai  fait  suivre  les  frais.  Il  les  retirera  sur  les  fonds  qu’il  a 
entre  ses  mains.  A  l’6gard  du  prix  de  la  vente  en  France,  il  le  trouvera  a  la  t6te  des 
Lettres  de  Madame  de  Sancerre.  Je  lui passerai  chaque  volume  a  unlivre  de  France. 
Ce  qu’il  en  retirera  au-dessus  les  frais  rabatus,  sera  pour  payer  le  loyer  de  la  planche 
qu’ils  occuperont.  S’il  croit  convenable  de  me  donner  du  surplus,  je  le  recevrai  en 
comedies,  ou  en  romans,  et  m’en  rapporterai  enticement  a  lui  et  a  sa  bonne  foi. 
Vous  avez  bien  assez  d’affaire  upon  your  hands  sans  les  miennes,  n’est-ce  pas  ?  Mr. 
Becket  trouvera  dans  le  balot  trois  exemplaires  des  lettres  nouvelles.  Il  les  gardera 
s’il  lui  plait  jusqu’au  retour  de  Mr.  Changuion,  et  les  lui  remettra  ensuite.  Air. 
Changuion  en  s^ait  l’emploi. — Adieu,  mon  aimable,  mon  tendre,  mon  cher  ami.  Ma 
douce  compagne  vous  embrasse,  vous,  et  la  dame  qui  danse  le  menuet  avec  tant  de 
grace  et  de  noblesse.  Je  la  remercie  de  sa  prevention  en  n6tre  faveur.  Je  re(pois  ses 
souhaits  avec  reconnoissance,  mais  je  n’ose  former  des  vceux  pour  elle :  que  d^sirer  a 
votre  femme  !  elle  ne  vous  changeroit  pas  pour  Cymon,  j’en  suis  sure,  et  pourtant 
Cymon  is  a  charming  fellow. — Adieu,  je  vais  lire  “  The  Country  Girl ce  sera 
encore  etre  avec  vous.  J’ai  lu  cette  piCe  autrefois,  mais  je  me  la  rappelle  tr£s-peu. 

Vous  ai-je  pri6  de  remercier  Mr.  Becket  de  ses  quatres  comedies?  Je-ne  s^ais  : 
ah,  la  maudite  tete  que  j’ai ! 

Vous  avez  vu  Mr.  Smith,  est-ce  chez-vous  ?  vous  a-t’-il  port6  ma  lettre  ?  c’est  un 
homme  charmant,  n’est-ce  pas  ? 


Vendredi,  30. 

Hier.  tomba  une  pi&ce  au  Francois.  L’auteur,  Mr.  de  Beaumarchais  ;  Provide 
y  joua  comme  un  ange.  Ce  sont  des  personnages  Anglois,  mais  ni  connoissance  des 
usages  du  pays,  ni  connoissance  du  monde  poli,  ni  connoissance  du  coeur.  Je  ne 
s^ais  plus  rien.  Oh  vraiment  si.  Clairon  a  6t6  applaudie  Mercredi  au  d^but  de  La 
Pinel  en  tragique. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  28  Fevrier,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  par  la  lettre  que  vous  avez  £crit  cl  Air.  Favart,  vous  dites  que  vous  n’en 
avez  pas  rec^u  de  moi  depuis  long-terns,  et  vous  craignez  que  je  ne  sois  fach6  contre 


5 12 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


vous  du  refus  que  vous  m’avez  fait  concernant  les  nouvclles  politiques  :  1°.  Vous 
avez  du  recevoir  line  lettre  il  n’y  a  pas  longtems  que  je  vous  ai  fait  remettre  par  un 
negotiant  de  la  cite,  ou  il  etoit  question  de  Provide,  et  du  module  de  flambeau  que 
je  vous  ai  envoy*? :  je  ne  vous  ai  pas  £crit  depuis,  n’ayant  eu  rien  d’int^ressant  a  vous 
dire,  ni  commission  de  votre  part  qui  men  ait  fourni  l’occasion.  Quand  aux  nou- 
vellcs  politiques,  j’ai  senti  et  approuv£  les  raisons  de  votre  refus,  etje  connois  trop 
bien  votre  coeur,  et  vdtre  amitie  pour  moi,  pour  me  facher  et  pour  exiger  de  vous  des 
clioses  que  vous  ne  devez  ni  ne  pouvez  faire. 

Gardez  la  redingotte,  le  cottillon  et  le  fromage.  Si  ndtre  ami  Changuion,  qui 
doit  venir  ici  dans  le  mois  prochain,  ne  peut  pas  s’en  charger,  le  Major  Mant,  qui  part 
d’ici  dans  quelques  jours  et  qui  reviendra  dans  deux  mois,  s’en  chargera.  J’aimerois 
beaucoup  mieux  que  ce  fut  le  premier.  J’en  jouirois  plutot. 

Mon  ami,  je  me  plains  4  mon  tour  de  ce  que  vous  ne  me  r^pondez  pas  sur  diffe- 
rents  articles  de  ma  pr£c£dente  lettre.  Avez-vous  fait  usage  du  flambeau  ?  &tes-vous 
toujours  content  du  danseur  que  je  vous  ai  donne  ?  votre  sante,  qui  m’est  beaucoup 
plus  ch^re  que  tout  cela,  comment  va-t’-elle?  Notre  ami  Favart  est  enchant^ 
de  votre  lettre,  de  vos  vers,  et  de  vous.  “  Eugenie,”  cette  mauvaise  pi£ce  dont 
je  vous  ai  parle,  qu’on  a  donn6e  depuis  peu  aux  Francois,  qui  a  tombe  a  plat  le 
premier  jour,  et  qui  s’est  relev6  an  second,  vient  d’etre  interrompue  par  la  maladie 
de  nerf  qu’avoit  Pr6ville,  et  qui  l’a  repris  plus  fort  que  jamais  :  on  craint  beaucoup 
pour  lui. 

On  a  donn6  ces  jours  passes  sur  un  theatre  particular  une  representation  pour 
Mole,  qui  s’est  fait  par  souscription,  ou  Mademoiselle  Clairon  a  joue.  Cette  represen¬ 
tation  a  valu  12,0001.  a  Mole,  tout  frais  fait. 

Mr.  Cochin  m’a  remis  trente  epreuves  de  votre  portrait  pour  vous,  qu’il  a  fait 
dessiner  et  graver ;  il  m’a  charge  de  vous  les  faire  tenir  avec  des  compliments :  vous 
lui  devez  pour  cela  des  remerciemens,  que  vous  pourrez  lui  faire  dans  la  premiere 
lettre  que  vous  m’ecrirez.  Vous  devriez  aussi  dire  quelques  choses  pour  Mr.  le 
Moine,  qui  vous  a  fait  un  buste  tres-estime  ici  par  tous  ceux  qui  l’ont  vu,  et  cet 
artiste  vous  l’auroit  dej A  envoye  sans  l’esperance  que  je  lui  ai  donnee,  que  vous  seriez 
ici  au  printemps  procliain.  Je  vous  enverrai  les  Epreuves  de  Mr.  Cochin  dans  un 
livre  que  je  dois  faire  passer  h  Mr.  Angelo. 

Je  suis  enfin  dans  mon  nouvel  appartement ;  quand  Madame  Garrick  le  verra, 
toute  difficile  qu’elle  est,  je  suis  assure  d’avance  qu’elle  dira  qu’il  n’y  a  pas  dans  les 
trois  royaumes  un  logement  aussi  joli  que  celui-la,  et  plus  propre  pour  mettre  le 
comble  a  mon  bonheur :  je  voudrois  vous  y  tenir  tous  deux.  Assurez-la  bien  de 
mon  respect  et  de  mon  attachement. 

Vous  rappellez-vous  une  robe  de  vos  toiles  peintes  que  j’ai  choisi,  et  que  vous 
m’avez  donnee  pour  une  jeune  personne  a  laquelle  je  m'interesse  ?  Si  j’en  avois  deux 
mille,  je  les  vendrois,  tant  on  la  trouve  jolie. 

Des  compliments,  je  vous  prie,  a  votre  bon  fr^re,  4  Mr.  Colman,  et  a  tous  nos 
amis  ;  et  croyez  que  personne  ne  vous  aime  plus  que  moi,  Monnet. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


513 


Pour  eviter  les  frais  de  la  Douanne  de  Douvre,  j’ai  fait  brocher  ce  que  Mr.  Cochin 
m’a  remis  pour  vous,  avec  1’escrime  de  Mr.  Angelo  :  vous  detacherez  vos  portraits  le 
plus  doucement  que  vous  pourrez,  pour  ne  rien  d6chirer  de  ce  qui  regarde  Mr.  An¬ 
gelo,  et  vous  lui  enverrez  le  reste  avec  sa  lettre  :  vous  me  ferez  le  plaisir  d’envoyer 
les  trois  autres  a  leur  adresse. 


DU  CHEVALIER  DE  CHATELIJX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  4  Mars,  1767. 

C’est  maintenant  mon  tour  de  me  plaindre,  et  je  vais  bien  prendre  ma  revanche. 
Comment,  mon  cher  David,  je  vous  envoye  deux  ou  trois  couriers  tout  expr&s,  et 
quels  couriers  !  la  fleur  de  nos  seigneurs  Francois.  Je  les  charge  de  mes  depeches 
pour  vous,  je  leur  recommande  de  plus  de  vous  parler  de  moi  sans  cesse,  meme 
jusqu’a  vous  en  ennuyer,  et  depuis  ce  tems-la,  vous  ne  m’avez  pas  donne  signe  de  vie. 
Voila  ce  que  c’est  que  de  jouer  des  roles  d’amoureux  ;  cela  vous  fait  oublier  vos 
amis.  Pour  moi,  rien  dans  le  monde  ne  me  fait  oublier  mon  cher  Garrick,  ni  son 
aimable  compagne :  rien  ne  pourra  m’empecher  de  regretter  leur  charmante  society, 
et  de  dire  que  mon  bonheur  seroit  de  vivre  avec  eux  ;  soit  que  je  vinsse  partager 
leur  gloire  an  sortir  d’un  beau  spectacle  a  Drury-lane ;  soit  que  je  fusse  assis  pr£s  de 
ce  beau  saule  pleureur,  dont  les  branches  semblent  se  baisser  vers  la  Tamise  pour  se 
refraichir  dans  ses  belles  eaux. 

J’ai  fait  toutes  vos  commissions.  J’ai  lu  votre  charmante  lettre  a  tous  nos  amis 
de  la  rue  Roy  ale,  de  la  rue  St.  Jacques  ;  tous  vous  aiment  tendrement,  tendrement; 
tous  sont  enchantes  de  l’esp^rance  que  vous  leur  donnez  de  venir  a  Paris.  Songez, 
mon  cher  ami,  que  je  suis  porteur  de  cette  promesse,  et  n’allez  pas  me  faire  passer 
pour  un  faux  proph&te.  J’ai  imaging  que  vous  seriez  bien  aise  d’avoir  le  poeme  des 
Saisons,  ouvrage  de  Mr.  de  St.  Lambert,  que  vous  avez  surement  connu  a  Paris  :  cet 
ouvrage  a  un  grand  succ£s  parmi  nos  gens  de  lettres.  Je  n’ai  done  pas  voulu  perdre 
un  moment  a  vous  l’envoyer ;  lisez-le,  et  faites  le  lire  aux  amateurs  de  poesie  fran- 
^oise.  Toute  la  recompense  que  je  vous  deman  de,  c’est  de  m’en  dire  votre  avis.  Je 
me  hate  d’envoyer  chez  Madame  du  Chatelet  avant  que  son  courier  ne  parte,  et  je 
vous  griffonne  bien  vite  ce  petit  mot,  ayez  un  peu  d’indulgence  pour  mon  6criture, 
et  figurez-vous  que  tout  le  monde  ne  peut  pas  £crire  une  si  belle  main  que  vous. — 
Adieu,  adieu,  dear,  ever  dear  Garrick  :  aimez-moi  toujours,  et  ecrivez-moi  quelque- 
fois. 


DE  M.  ELIE  DE  BEAUMONT  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Paris,  22  Mars,  1767. 

J’ai  l’honneur  de  vous  presenter  mon  m^moire  pour  la  famille  Sirven,  non  moins 
innocente,  non  moins  infortun^e  que  celle  des  Calas,  victime  du  mfime  fanatique,  des 
VOL.  II.  3  u 


514 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


mthnes  fureurs,  clans  le  m£me  pays  et  dans  le  mfime  terns.  Quels  ^v&nemens !  quels 
traits !  Non  :  la  plupart  ties  sujets  que  votre  sublime  talent  rend  vivans  en  vous, 
n’ont  rien  de  si  terrible  et  de  si  th&itral  cpie  cette  cruelle  aventure,  a  laquelle  il  lie 
manque  qu’un  Garrick  pour  dmouvoir  tout  l’univers.  J’ai  t4ch6  d’interesser  pour 
eux,  peut-etre  y  ai-je  r^ussi,  mais  quels  grands  effets  vous  auriez  produits  ! 

J’irai,  Monsieur,  n’en  doutez  point,  les  admirer  a  Londres  avec  Madame  de  Beau- 
mont,  qui  me  charge  de  mille  complimens  pour  vous  et  ]iour  Madame,  a  laquelle  j’ai 
l’honneur  de  presenter  mon  respect.  Ici  les  talens  sont  caches  et  ne  se  montrent 
presque  que  dans  les  t£n&bres.  IMademoiselle  Clairon  a  quelquefois  la  complaisance 
de  jouer  cliez  ses  amis,  et  ce  divin  talent  s’est  concentre  dans  une  cliambre.  Demain 
je  dois  souper  avec  elle,  et  la  voir  jouer  cliez  Madame  de  Florian,  ni&ce  de  Mr.  Yol- 
taire,  dont  on  donne  Jeudi  pour  la  premiere  fois,  “  Les  Scythes.”  Du  reste,  rien  de 
nouveau  ici :  tout  y  est  dans  une  stagnation  profonde.  II  ne  nous  appartient  pas 
d’avoir,  comme  vous,  une  scene  agit^e,  et  des  tableaux  nouveaux.  Je  vous  reitere 
bien  vraiment  et  pour  la  vie  les  assurances  de  l’estime  et  de  l’attachement  avec 
lesquels  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Votre  tres-liumble,  et  tr£s-ob6issant  serviteur, 

Elie  de  Beaumont. 


DE  M.  FENOUILLOT  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  29  Mars,  1767- 

Je  profite,  Monsieur,  de  l’occasion  d’un  de  mes  amis  qui  est  alle  passer  quinze 
jours  a  Londres,  et  pour  avoir  surement  de  vos  nouvelles,  et  savoir  si  vous  avez  rec^u 
les  deux  lettres  que  j’ai  eu  l’honneur  de  vous  6crire,  ainsi  que  la  com^die  qui  6toit 
jointe  a  la  premiere,  je  l’ai  pri6  de  vous  envoyer  celle-ci,  et  de  m’en  rapporter  lui- 
meme  la  r6ponse.  J’espere  que  vous  voudrez  bien  la  lui  remettre ;  etje  vous  prie 
aussi,  dans  le  cas  ou  vous  ne  pourriez  pas  me  rendre  le  service  que  Mr.  Diderot  et 
moi  avions  os6  vous  demander,  de  joindre  mon  manuscrit  a  votre  r^ponse,  et  de  faire 
du  tout  un  paquet,  que  Mr.  D’Orsy  me  rapporteroit.  Je  ne  puis  rien  ajouter  a  ce 
que  j’ai  eu  l’honneur  de  vous  mander  dans  mes  lettres  precedentes,  sinon  que  mes 
sentimens  a  votre  egard  sont  tres-independans  de  la  grace  que  j’en  attends,  et  que, 
quand  vous  ne  me  l’accorderiez  pas,  je  ne  serois  pas  moins  oblig6  a  mon  ami  Mr. 
Diderot,  de  m’avoir  engag6  a  vous  la  demander,  et  de  m’avoir  mis  par  la  dans  le  cas 
de  vous  assurer  de  l’estime  particuliere,  et  de  toute  la  consideration  avec  lesquelles 
j’ai  l’lionneur  d’etre,  Monsieur,  votre  trfes-humble,  et  tr^s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Fenouillot. 

Si  par  votre  absence  de  Londres  ou  quelque  autre  6v£nement,  Mr.  D'Orsi  ne 
pouvoit  me  rapporter  lui-m£me  votre  r6ponse,  je  vous  prie,  Monsieur,  de  l’adresser 
cliez  Mr.  Diderot,  grande  rue  Taranne,  Fauxbourg  St.  Germain;  parceque  je  vais 
changer  de  logement. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


515 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  30  Mars,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  £cris  un  mot  par  Mr.  Loisel,  qui  est  ici  depuis  huit  jours  et 
qui  repart  pour  Londres  ;  le  mthne  qui  a  fait  remettre  des  dentelles  a  Madame 
Garrick  et  des  maraboux  il  y  a  quelques  terns.  Yous  avez  du  recevoir  aussi  par  Mr. 
le  Major  Mant  une  brochure  ou  il  y  a  plusieurs  6preuves  de  votre  portrait,  grav£  par 
Mr.  Cochin,  et  un  article  concernant  Mr.  Angelo.  Si  la  redingotte,  le  petit  cotillon, 
et  le  fromage  que  vous  avez  achet6  pour  moi  n’ont  pas  6te  remis  a  Mr.  Changuion, 
qui  doit  arriver  ici  dans  pen,  Mr.  Mant  m’a  promis  de  s’en  charger  :  je  lui  £cris  par 
le  meme  ordinaire  a  ce  sujet,  et  dans  le  cas  qu’il  ne  passat  pas  chez-vous,  vous  me 
ferez  le  plaisir  d’envoyer  le  tout  a  son  adresse,  cliez  Mr.  Charles  Goulds,  Esq.  Horse 
Guards,  Whitehall.  Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami,  et  je  vous  prie  de  me  r^pondre  sur 
tout  ce  que  je  vous  ai  marqu6  dans  mes  pr6c6dentes  iettres,  et  donnez-moi  au  nom 
de  Dieu  des  nouvelles  de  votre  sant6. 

Monnet. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  19  Avril,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  je  n’ai  que  le  terns  de  vous  6crire  un  mot  pour  r^pondre  a  la  lettre  que 
vous  m’avez  fait  6crire  par  Air.  de  Villiers.  Je  me  suis  acquitt6  des  choses  dont  vous 
m’avez  charges  aupres  de  Messieurs  Cochin,  Le  Moine,  et  Favart :  le  second  est  tr&s- 
sensible  aux  offres  que  vous  lui  faites,  de  lui  faire  parvenir  les  bustes  d’albatre  qu’il 
vous  avoit  demandes ;  mais  il  me  parut,  par  ce  qu’il  m’a  dit,  que  vous  lui  feriez  plus 
de  plaisir  de  lui  envoyer  un  livre  d’anatomie  pour  les  chevaux  qui  se  trouve  a  Lon¬ 
dres.  Mr.  Riland,  graveur  du  Roi,  marchand  d’estampes,  vis-a-vis  la  Bourse,  vous 
l’indiquera,  et  vous  le  fera  avoir  a  bon  compte  en  lui  disant  que  c’est  pour  Mr.  le 
Moine,  ami  intime  de  Mr.  Boucher.  Vous  direz  a  Mr.  Riland  que  c’est  le  meme 
livre  qu’il  avoit  envoye  a  Mr.  Bergeret ;  que  par  parentheze  il  lui  a  renvoy£.  Ce 
livre  n’est  pas  bon  marche ;  mais  je  crois  que  vous  ferez  bien  de  faire  cette  galanterie 
a  Mr.  le  Moine,  qui  vous  enverra  votre  buste  en  terre  cuite,  qu’on  regarde  ici  comme 
un  des  meilleurs  morceaux  qu’il  ait  fait,  et  je  le  crois. 

Madame  Garrick,  a  laquelle  je  presente  respect  et  civilit^s,  aura  son  cotillon  et  son 
entoillage  par  la  premiere  occasion ;  il  y  a  a  peu  pr£s  un  an  que  j’etois  a  Bath  avec 
vous  ;  que  ne  suis-je  petit  oiseau,  j’y  volerois,  et  je  reverrois  le  superbe  tombeau  de 
Montmorency  et  le  grand  Dupr6. 

On  me  dit  bier  que  Caillot  6toit  alle  a  Londres  passer  quatre  jours :  c’est  bien 
prendre  son  terns  pour  vous  voir.  Yous  avez  sans  doute  S£u  que  Mademoiselle 
Clairon  devoit  passer  chez  le  Roi  de  Rologne  pour  y  jouer,  mais  elle  vient  d’etre  con- 
tremand^e  :  cela  a  un  peu  humilie  sa  dignity. 

3  u  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


516 

Si  vdtre  santd  se  r^tabli,  vous  ferez  bien  do  venir  me  surprendre,  ct  do  passer  un 
mois  i\  Paris.  Vous  aurez  chez  un  de  vos  amis  et  des  miens,  dans  le  quartier  du 
Palais  Royal,  un  appartement  qui  vous  conviendra  bien. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  prie  de  faire  donner  des  ordrcs  chez-vous,  pour  qu’on  n’oublie 
pas  de  remettre  Mr.  Changuion  ou  a  Mr  Mant  ce  que  vous  devez  m’envoyer ;  et 

dites  au  Roi  de  Bath,  qu’il  s’aille  faire - .  Ce  jeune  Blondin,  maitre  de  vos 

c£r£monies,  m’a  toujours  rest6  dans  la  cervelle. 

J’oubliois  de  vous  demander  combien  vous  avez  re^u  d’epreuves  du  portrait  que 
Mr.  Cochin  vous  a  envoys :  j’en  ai  remis  vingt-cinq  a  Mr.  Mant,  dites-moi  ce  qu’il 
en  est. 

3Iarquez-moi  aussi,  s’il  est  vrai  que  vous  ayez  ecrit  et  fait  des  propositions  Mr. 
Noverre,  qui  est  ici  depuis  un  mois  :  le  Prince  de  Wirtemberg  a  renvoy6  toute 
sa  danse. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  et  je  vous  recommande  bien  votre  sant6. 

31  ON  NET. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  30  Avril,  1767. 

31  ON  ami,  cette  lettre  est  uniquement  pour  vous  recommander  un  bon  cuisinier 
Francois,  qui  est  a  Londres  depuis  quelques  jours,  et  qui  n’est  sorti  de  Paris  que 
pour  avoir  fait  un  enfant  a  une  fille  :  si  vous  ou  vos  amis  en  avez  besoin,  je  puis  vous 
assurer,  qu’il  strait  bien  son  metier,  et  qu’il  a  de  bonnes  mceurs.*  Vous  stpaurez  sa 
direction,  chez  le  Suisse  de  Mr.  le  Comte  de  Guercliy,  Ambassadeur  de  France,  Soho 
Square.  Sous  pen  de  jours,  Mr.  Thornhill  vous  fera  remettre  du  drap,  et  de  la 
doublure;  je  vous  prie  de  les  recevoir,  jusqu’a  ce  que  j’aie  trouv6  une  occasion  de 
faire  venir  cela  a  Paris. 

3Iadame  Garrick  a  demande  un  jupon  de  quinze  francs  ;  elle  a  oubli6  le  prix  en 
satin  gris  piqu6,  je  les  ai  toujours  paye  trente  francs ;  je  la  prie  de  s’expliquer  a  ce 
su jet,  et  de  bien  lui  faire  mes  compliments.  Donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles,  surtout 
de  votre  sant6.  Je  vous  ecris  de  la  main  droite,  de  la  gauche  je  tire  l’oreille  de  mon 
chien,  qui  me  charge  de  vous  dire  bien  des  choses  de  sa  part. 

3Ionnet. 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  19  Mai,  1767- 

J’ai  re^u,  mon  clier  3Ionsieur,  vos  deux  lettres  et  votre  fable,  et  je  vous  remercie 
de  tout  cela ;  c’est  de  la  pature  pour  mon  coeur  et  pour  mon  esprit :  votre  souvenir 
me  sera  toujours  cher,  et  vos  Merits  toujours  agr^ables.  J’aime  a  vous  voir  si  sensible 
*  Bonnes  mceurs-'  Yes,  he  has  just  given  proof  of  that  possession. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


517 


a  l’amiti6  que  vous  avez  inspire  a  tous  les  honnetes  gens  qui  vous  ont  vu  de  pres 
ici  ;  c’est  une  justice,  car  vous  n’avez  pas  de  meilleurs  amis  dans  votre  patrie.  Vous 
nous  avez  laisse  de  sinc&res  regrets,  et  l’esp^rance  de  vous  revoir,  mais  quand  ?  Vous 
voila  rengag6  de  nouveau  dans  le  tourbillon  des  affaires,  caresse  de  la  cour,  adore  de 
la  ville,  necessaire  a  la  direction  de  votre  theatre  ;  vous  allez  ranimer  la  scfene  par 
votre  presence,  car  vous  ne  pourrez  pas  vous  refuser  au  cri  public  ;  tous  ces  liens  vont 
vous  rattacher  a  votre  good  England.  Ajoutons  a  cela,  l’aise  et  le  repos  qu’on  ne 
trouve  que  chez-soi,  l’empire  des  amities  et  habitudes  anciennes,  et  puis  une  maison 
charmante,  et  ce  temple  de  Shakspeare  oil  vous  allez  dire  chaque  jour  une  prikre,  ou 
je  voudrois  bien  aller  bruler  un  grain  d’encens  a  votre  Dieu,  qui  n’est  pas  encore  le 
mien,  mais  qui  le  deviendroit,  s'il  me  parloit  toujours  par  votre  bouche.  On  nous  dit 
que  Phidias  augmentale  culte  de  Jupiter  par  la  belle  statue  qu'il  fit  de  ce  Dieu;  vous 
etes  le  Phidias  de  Shakspeare  :  si  votre  belle  maison  de  campagne  6toit  a  moi,  j’y 
mettrois  votre  statue  a  cote  de  la  sienne.  Ne  la  verrai-je  done  pas  un  jour  cette 
maison  ? — 

“  0  rus,  quamlo  tc  aspiciam  ?” 

Je  n’ose  m’occuper  de  ces  idees;  je  suis  attache  ici  avec  une  chaine  de  fer,  et  je  ne 
vois  encore  aucun  moyen  de  la  rompre. 

J’ai  parle  de  vous  a  tous  nos  amis  communs,  moil  cher  Garrick,  et  tous  n’ont  eu 
qu’un  cri  pour  vous  ;  ils  se  recommandent  a  votre  amitie,  et  vous  r6pondent  de  la 
leur.  Madame  d’Holbaeh  et  Madame  d’Epinay  m’ont  charge  de  mille  complimens 
pour  vous  et  pour  Madame  Garrick,  a  qui  je  vous  prie  de  faire  agr6er  mes  respects. 
J’ai  fait  tenir  vos  lettres  a  Mademoiselle  Clairon  et  au  Chevalier  de  Chatelux.  J’ai 
meme  vu  ]\Iademoiselle  Clairon  ;  elle  m’a  charge  de  vous  dire  que  sa  sant6  est  tou¬ 
jours  tr&s-foible,  (et  cela  est  vrai)  et  qu’elle  vous  ecriroit  au  premier  jour.  Elle  m’a 
tr^s-bien  parle  de  vous,  et  j’ai  tache  de  bien  repondre.  Vous  savez,  sans  doute,  le 
denoument  de  la  grande  querelle.  Nos  dramatic  heroes  ont  lasse  la  persecution  ;  le 
public,  qui  d’abord  avoit  cru  sa  Majeste  offensee,  a  bientot  senti  que  son  humeur  se 
tournoit  contre  ses  plaisirs,  et  comme  par-dessus  tout  il  veut  £tre  amus6,  il  a  rede- 
mand6  les  prisonnieres,  et  malgre  le  petit  despotisme  de  Cour,  il  a  bien  fallu  les 
rendre  :  ils  sont  sortis  de  prison  glorieux,  et  ont  faitle  meme  jour  une  aparition  triom- 
phante  a  l’Op6ra.  Le  surlendemain  ils  ont  paru  dans  “  Semiramis,”  et  ont  et6  accueillis 
avec  transport.  Dubois  se  retire  avec  une  pension  de  quinze  cent  livres,  et  quatre 
mille  en  argent  comptant.  Mademoiselle  Dubois  nous  reste,  plus  insolente  et  aussi 
mediocre  que  jamais.  Voila  l’etat  des  choses.  Vous  m’aviez  promis  de  faire  mettre 
le  r6cit  de  la  querelle  dans  quelqu’un  de  vos  papiers  :  cela  auroit  fait  un  bon  effet 
ici;  mais  vous  m’avez  promis  bien  des  choses;  ce  portrait  de  Preville?  je  fattens 
toujours ;  vous  m’avez  promis  de  conserver  de  l’amitid  pour  moi,  voila  surtout  ce 
dont  je  ne  vous  tiendrai  jamais  quitte. 

J’ai  lu  le  Sick  Monkey  avec  bien  du  plaisir ;  la  fable  me  paroit  ing^nieuse  et 
adroite  pour  l’id^e,  et  cont6  avec  beaucoup  de  grace  et  de  naturel,  peut-etre  un  peu 
de  surabondance  dans  le  stile,  et  trop  de  digressions  dans  les  details,  mais  cette  sorte 


518 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


tie  luxuriancy  va  bien  au  ton  facil  du  r£cit.  Je  l’annoncerai  dans  La  Gazette  LittG 
raire,  et  je  serai  tr£s-discret  sur  le  nom  de  l’auteur :  j’imagine  ais^ment  qu’on  doit  y 
£tre  embarrass^. 

Eon  jour,  mon  clier  Monsieur,  m^nagez  votre  sant6,  conservez-moi  de  l’amiti£  ; 
que  la  distance  et  le  terns  n’affoiblissent  pas  le  souvenir  de  vos  amis  de  Paris,  et 
songez  que  de  tous  ceux  que  vous  y  laissez,  il  n’y  en  a  pas  un  qui  vous  soit  plus  sin- 
c^rement  attach^  que  moi.  Mettez  mon  amiti£  k  l’epreuve  ;  vous  m’obligerez  en  me 
procurant  l’occasion  de  vous  servir.  Yale  et  me  ama. 

SUARD. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  20  Mai,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  Mr.  de  Yilletanneuse,  qui  a  bien  voulu  se  charger  de  vous  remettre  ma 
lettre  et  un  portrait  de  Provide,  a  le  plus  grande  envie  de  vous  connoitre,  par  tout  le 
bien  qu’il  a  oui  dire  de  vous ;  et  je  crois  vous  faire  un  plaisir  en  vous  procurant  sa 
connoissance.  C’est  un  homme  de  m6rite,  ami  des  arts  et  des  talens,  et  de  plus  proche 
voisin  de  notre  bon  II oi  Henri  IV.  qui  en  valoit  bien  un  autre.  Le  sujet  de  son 
voyage  en  Angleterre  a  £te  uniquement  de  revoir  Londres,  et  d’y  accompagner 
Madame  Sayde,  femme  aimable  et  estimable,  qui  tient  ici  le  plus  gros  commerce  dans 
tout  ce  que  vous  avez  de  plus  beaux  et  de  plus  recherch^s  en  Angleterre.  Si  pendant 
le  s6jour  qu’ds  y  feront  Tun  et  l’autre,  vous  pouvez  leur  etre  de  quelqu’utilite,  je 
joindrai  cette  obligation  a  toutes  celles  que  je  vous  ai  deja.  Madame  Sayde  a  eu  la 
bont6  de  me  promettre  qu’ede  se  chargeroit  du  drap  bleu,  et  de  la  doublure  qu’on  a  du 
remettre  cliez-vous  pour  moi.  Si  Mr.  Mant  et  M.  Changuion  ne  venoient  pas  bien- 
tot  a  Paris,  ede  me  fera  encore  le  plaisir  de  prendre  la  redingotte,  le  cotidon,  et  le 
fromage. 

Par  votre  dernikre  lettre  vous  me  marquez  que  vous  pourrez  bien  venir  a  Paris 
cet  6t£  :  pourquoi  ne  pas  vous  decider  la-dessus  ?  vous  ferez  plaisir  a  bien  des  gens, 
surtout  a  moi  et  a  Favart,  qui  vous  fait  mille  remerciements  et  compliments.  Comme 
je  suis  loge  agreablement  et  un  peu  grandement,  je  vous  offre  de  bon  coeur  mon  bel 
appartement,  que  vous  devez  prendre  sans  fa^on,  comme  j’ai  pris  le  votre. 

Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc  me  demande  souvent  de  vos  nouvedes,  et  d  seroit  fort  aise 
de  vous  revoir  a  Paris. 

Mr.  Cazeau  auteur,  d’Odvier,  Messrs.  Wils  et  Goy  dineront  chez-moi  demain, 
et  surement  nous  boirons  a  votre  sante. 

Bien  des  amities  et  des  respects,  je  vous  prie,  a  Madame  Garrick.  Dieu  vous 
maintienne  l’un  et  l’autre  en  joie  et  en  sante  ! 


Monnet. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


519 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  29  Mai,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  £cris  un  mot  bien  vite,  pour  vous  prier  de  dire  a  Madame 
Garrick  qu’elle  m’a  fait  demander  par  la  lettre  que  Mr.  de  Villier  a  6crit,  dix  a 
douze  aulnes  d’entoillage  de  blonde,  semblable  a  celle  qu’on  lui  a  d£ja  envoye  :  Ma¬ 
dame  Tocquefol,  rue  du  Spulcre,  lui  a  bien  fourni  quarante-cinq  aulnes  de  petite  den- 
telle  pour  garnir  une  robe,  mais  non  pas  de  l’entoillage  ;  il  faut  done  que  Madame 
Garrick  me  fasse  tenir  par  la  premiere  occasion,  un  6chantillon  de  ce  qu’elle  veut,  et 
qu’elle  me  marque  en  meme  terns  si  e’est  un  jupon  de  satin  gris  piqu6  dont  elle  a 
besoin,  ceux-la  valent  trente  francs. 

Le  petit  Barthelemon  sort  de  chez-moi,  il  m’a  racont6  son  aventure  a  Londres, 
qui  est  malheureuse  pour  lui :  il  compte  passer  d’ici  h  Nantes,  a  Bordeaux,  et  de-la 
en  Italie.  Il  m’a  charge  de  vous  demander  si  vous  £tes  dans  le  dessein  de  continuer 
la  pi£ce  qu’il  a  commence  avec  vous  :  il  dit  qu’il  y  a  un  acte  de  fait,  que  si  vous 
voulez  lui  envoyer  le  second,  qu’il  le  fera  dans  sa  route,  et  que  vous  l'aurez  de  tres- 
bonne  heure  pour  la  saison  prochaine. 

M^nagez  v6tre  sant£,  et  donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles. 

Monnet. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  6  Juillet,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re$u  il  y  a  quelques  jours  vdtre  derniere  lettre,  et  je  vous  envoie 
par  une  tr£s-jolie  demoiselle  Angloise,  le  jupon  que  vous  m’avez  demande  pour 
Madame  Garrick  :  elle  n’a  pas  pu  se  charger  des  livres,  mais  je  vous  les  ferai  tenir 
par  la  premiere  occasion  qui  se  pr^sentera  :  je  vous  ai  d£ja  fait  des  offres  de  services 
a  cet  6gard,  e’est  a  dire,  de  vous  envoyer  tout  ce  qui  paroitroit  de  bon  et  de  nouveau 
dans  notre  literature ;  quoique  je  ne  soie  pas  homme  de  lettres,  je  suis  en  £tat  de 
vous  satisfaire  dans  cette  partie.  Favart  vous  aime  bien,  et  il  a  assur^ment  la  meil- 
leure  volonte ;  mais  il  est  trop  negligent  sur  ses  propres  affaires  pour  pouvoir  penser 
aux  votres,  n^anmoins  le  mari,  la  femme,  et  Mr.  l’Abb£  de  Voisenon  avec  lesquels  je 
dinai  bier,  m'ont  charge  de  bien  des  amities  et  des  compliments  pour  vous  et  Madame 
Garrick.  Notre  ami  Favart  a  trois  pieces  sur  le  metier,  une  presque  finie,  et  les 
autres  bien  avanc^es. 

J’ai  fait  part  a  Barthelemon  de  l’article  qui  le  concernoit  dans  votre  lettre :  il  a 
6t6  sensible  a  votre  amiti6,  et  aux  offres  que  vous  lui  avez  fait,  et  il  m’a  bien  recom- 
mand6  devous  dire  que  lorsqu’il  sera  de  retour  a  Londres,  il  travaillera  a  finir  la  pi£ce 
qu’il  a  commence  avec  vous.  Ce  jeune  homme  a  eu  beaucoup  de  succ^s  ici,  il  a  joue 
au  concert  spirituel  avec  les  plus  grands  applaudissements  du  public,  et  des  gens  de 


520 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Part;  il  a  fort  r^ussi  tl  Versailles,  oil  il  est  depuis  huit  jours  :  en  mon  particulier,  je 
pense  qu’il  a  du  genie  et  du  gout,  ct  que  vous  feriez  bien  de  lui  donner  la  place  de 
compositeur  de  votre  theatre.  Il  est,  dit-on,  mari6  k  une  femme  qui  a  une  jolie  voix 
dont  vous  pourriez  tirer  partie. 

J’ai  din6  aujourd’hui  avec  Mr.  Changuion,  qui  est  a  Paris  depuis  trois  jours  :  il 
n’a  point  apport£  le  livre  pour  Mr.  le  Moine,  et  le  drap  bleu  que  vous  m’avez  an- 
none^s  ;  il  pense  que  vous  aurez  fait  porter  l’un  et  l’autre  cliez  Mr.  le  Chevalier 
Gray,  qui  doit  passer  ici  pour  aller  en  Espagne.  A  propos  d’envois,  la  redingotte,  le 
cotillon,  et  le  fromage  que  je  vous  avois  demandcs,  sont  encore  cliez  le  Major  Mant  a 
Londres,  qui  ne  viendra  pas  a  Paris  cette  ann6e  selon  toutes  les  apparences  ;  je  vais 
lui  6crire  pour  qu’il  vous  fasse  remettre  le  tout,  et  vous  me  ferez  le  plaisir  d’en  char¬ 
ger  Madame  Sayde,  que  je  vous  ai  recommand^e.  Ce  mfime  Mr.  Mant  a  du  vous 
remettre  des  exemplaires  de  votre  portrait  que  Mr.  Cochin  a  fait  graver,  et  je  vou- 
drois  s^avoir  pour  raison  combien  il  vous  en  a  remis  ;  ce  Monsieur-la  a  bien  peu 
r6pondu  aux  politesses  que  je  lui  ai  fait  a  Paris.  Dor^navant,  j’en  ferai  a  ceux  qui 
les  m^riteront. 

N’ayez  point  d’inqui6tude,  mon  ami,  sur  le  portrait  dont  vous  m’avez  charg'6  en 
partant  de  Londres,  pour  faire  graver.  Je  vous  ai  fait  part  il  y  a  long  terns,  de  la 
difficult^  qu’il  y  avoit  d’avoir  un  bon  graveur :  je  suis  toujours  dans  le  meme  em- 
barras ;  nous  devons  cependant  nous  rassembler  au  premier  jour  avec  Mr.  Yattelet, 
pour  conferer  sur  cet  objet,  il  a  des  connoissances  sur  la  gravure ;  peut-etre  determi- 
nerons-nous  quelque  chose. 

Il  y  a  bien  de  l’apparence  que  vous  ne  viendrez  point  a  Paris  cette  ann£e  :  j’en 
suis  fach6,  car  je  m’ennuie  a  ne  pas  vous  voir.  Ce  sera  done  pour  la  procliaine  annee, 
j’y  compte,  et  je  fais  les  veeux  les  plus  sinc&res  pour  que  vous  soyez  debarrass6  de 
toute  affaire  de  th64tre,  joyeux  et  bien  portant.  J’ai  des  compliments  sans  n ombres 
a  vous  faire,  de  tous  vos  amis  et  de  ma  cousine  ;  je  ne  vous  en  fais  point,  je  me  con- 
tente  de  vous  aimer  de  tout  mon  cceur. 

Monnet. 

Votre  ami,  mon  coquin  de  cliien,  me  donne  plus  de  chagrin  qu’il  ne  vaut ;  il  a 
viole  la  petite  chienne  favorite  de  Mr.  le  Due  de  Choiseul,  pour  ce  on  veut  le  faire 
mettre  a  la  Bastille.  Je  ne  scai  pas  si  je  pourrai  obtenir  sa  grace. 

Je  reviens  a  ce  Major  JMant,  qui  a  peut-etre  mang6  mon  fromage,  et  perdu  la 
redingotte,  et  le  cotillon  que  vous  lui  avez  fait  remettre  il  y  a  bien  deux  mois  ;  comme 
il  y  a  bien  de  l’apparence  qu’il  ne  reviendra  pas  a  Paris,  je  vous  prie  d’envoyer  chez- 
lui  pour  s^avoir  ce  que  tout  cela  est  devenu  :  je  lui  ecris  par  la  meme  voie.  Faites- 
moi  encore  le  plaisir  de  faire  dire  a  votre  tailleur,  qu’il  me  fasse  une  redingotte  pour 
moi,  semblable  de  grandeur  et  de  meme  £toffe  a  la  premiere  qu’il  m’a  fait ;  il  a  ma 
mesure.  Vous  ferez  remettre  le  tout  k  JMadame  Sayde.  Yoila,  mon  ami,  bien  de 
l’embarras  et  de  1’ argent  que  je  vous  dois.  Marquez  bien  exactement  les  avances  que 
vous  me  faites,  comme  je  les  fais  de  mon  cote.  Envoyez-moi  le  petit  comj)te  que 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


521 


nous  avons  ensemble,  que  je  puisse  vous  payer,  sans  quoi  vous  me  chagrinerez  : 
nous  avons  un  proverbe  qui  dit  que  les  bons  comptes  font  les  bons  amis. 

J’assure  Madame  Garrick  de  mon  respect,  et  je  la  prie  de  ne  pas  oublier  que  je 
suis  a  ses  ordres,  et  que  rien  ne  me  flatte  tant  que  de  pouvoir  lui  etre  de  quelque 
utilite. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


A  Paris,  ce  27  Aout,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  requ  mon  drap  bleu  et  le  livre  que  vous  avez  envoyes  a  Mr.  le 
Moine :  il  vous  fait  des  compliments,  et  beaucoup  de  remerciemens  du  present  que 
vous  lui  avez  fait ;  il  n’a  pas  mis  de  retard  a  sa  reconnoissance  ;  il  a  sur  le  champ  fait 
encaisser  votre  buste  pour  vous  l’envoyer,  et  je  me  suis  charge  de  cette  commission. 
Je  pense  que  la  meilleure  faqon  de  vous  le  faire  parvenir,  sera  de  l’envoyer  par  eau  a 
Rouen,  et  de-la  a  Londres ;  mais  avant  de  l’embarquer,  faites-moi  sqavoir  a  qui  vous 
voulez  que  je  l'adresse.  Vous  avez,  sans  doute,  des  amis  a  votre  Douanne ;  ne  pour- 
riez-vous  pas  les  prevenir  pour  eviter  l’embarras,  et  encore  plus  les  droits  qu’il  faut 
payer  ?  Dites-moi  ce  que  vous  voulez  que  je  fasse  a  ce  sujet. 

Vous  avez  du  recevoir  les  livres  que  je  vous  ai  envoy 6  par  Mylord  Rochefort. 
C’est  a  Mr.  Changuion  a  qui  vous  en  avez  l’obligation  ;  il  a  bien  voulu  se  charger  de 
lui  faire  prendre  ce  paquet  pour  vous. 

Je  suis  fach£,  mon  ami,  des  tourmens  que  je  vous  donne  pour  la  redingotte,  le  petit 
cotillon,  et  le  fromage  que  vous  avez  fait  remettre  il  y  a  plusieurs  mois  a  IMr.  Mant. 
Je  lui  ai  6crit  a  ce  sujet  il y  a  plus  d’un  mois;  il  m’a  fait  r6ponse  qu’il  avoit  envoys  le 
tout  a  Dunkerque  il  y  a  plus  de  quatre  mois,  et  qu’il  alloit  6crire  une  seconde  fois. 
Mais  comme  je  ne  compte  pas  beaucoup  sur  les  paroles  de  cet  homme,  faites- 
moi  le  plaisir  de  prier  de  ma  part  Mr.  de  Yillier  de  vouloir  bien  passer  chez-lui,  et  de 
ne  lui  pas  donner  de  quartier  qu’il  ne  lui  ait  rendu  compte  de  ce  dont  il  est  ques¬ 
tion.  Si  cela  est  perdu,  Mr.  Mant  ne  pent  pas  se  dispenser  de  rembourser  a  Mr.  de 
Villier  ce  que  ces  trois  objets  ont  coiites. 

Je  vous  ai  encore  demande  par  ma  prec6dente  lettre  une  seconde  redingotte  de 
ma  taille.  Votre  tailleur  a  ma  mesure  :  je  vous  prie  de  la  faire  faire  et  remettre  a 
Madame  Sayde,  qui  doit  revenir  a  Paris  bientot ;  et  je  vous  proteste  que  je  ne  vous 
donnerai  pas  davantage  de  commissions  de  cette  nature ;  elles  sont  trop  d6sagr6ables 
pour  vous  et  pour  moi. 

Notre  ami  Favart  vous  fait  bien  des  compliments  :  il  vient  de  finir  une  pi£ce  en 
trois  actes,  pour  la  Comedie  Italienne,  intitulee  “  Les  IMoissonneurs.”  Je  crois  qu’elle 
aura  le  plus  grand  succ£s. 

Des  compliments,  s’il  vous  plait,  il  Mr.  Barthelemon  ;  dites-lui  que  j’ai  re<^u  la 
lettre  qu’il  m’a  £crit  de  Calais,  que  je  ne  l’oublie  pas  aupr&s  de  Clairval,  pour  la  piece 
qu’il  lui  a  promis,  et  qu’il  auroit  dej5  si  cela  dependoit  de  moi :  nous  sommes  dans 
un  si£cle  oil  l’on  promet  plus  qu’on  ne  tient. 

3  x 


VOL.  II. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


',99 


Mon  ami,  sur  tontes  clioses,  mille  mille  tendres  amities  a  Madame  Garrick  ; 
diteslui  qu’elle  n’oublie  pas  (pie  je  suis  ici  a  ses  ordres,  et  (pie  je  vous  aime  bien 
tons  deux. 

Monnet. 

Dites  quelques  cboses  pour  moi  k  votre  bon  fr&re.  Mr.  Vattelet,  que  je  vis  bier 
a  l'Op^ra,  vous  fait  ainsi  qu’a  Madame  Garrick  bien  des  compliments.  Nous  devons 
nous  voir  apr&s  demain  matin,  pour  conf^rer  encore  sur  la  gravure  de  votre  portrait 
que  vous  m’avez  remis  en  partant  de  Londres. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  31  Aout,  17G7. 

Mon  ami,  je  n’ai  S911  qu’hier  que  vous  aviez  £crit  a  Mr.  Panchaud  ;  j’ai  passe  chez 
lui  ce  matin ;  il  m’a  communique  les  articles  de  votre  lettre,  et  il  m’a  remis  a  pen  pr£s 
trois  cent  et  douze  dessins  colores  de  Mr.  de  BufFon,  cent  soixant-huit  en  orand 
papier,  et  cent  quarante-quatre  en  petit.  Madame  de  l’Ormel,  qui  part  la  nuit  pro- 
chaine  pour  Londres,  a  bien  voulue  se  charger  des  derniers.  Je  vous  enverrai  les  autres 
par  la  premiere  occasion. 

Noverre  est  k  Vienne  depuis  deux  mois,  je  vais  lui  ecrire,  et  je  vous  ferai  part  de 
sa  r^ponse  sitot  que  je  l’aurai. 

Vous  demandez  un  danseur  et  une  danseuse,  pour  la  saison  prochaine  sans  doute, 
mais  vous  vous  y  prenez  trop  tard ;  il  vous  faudroit  un  homme  comique  qui  eut  de 
la  vigueur  et  du  brillant  dans  la  jambe ;  il  n’y  en  a  pas  ici ;  il  auroit  fallu  pour  ce  avoir 
ecrit  il  y  a  quatre  mois  en  Italie  et  ailleurs.  Il  y  a  trois  femmes  a  Paris  qui  pour- 
roient  vous  convenir,  Mademoiselles  Allard,  Pelem,  et  Frederic  l’ainee:  les  deux  pre¬ 
mieres  a  l’Op^ra,  et  l’autre  a  la  Comedie  Italienne.  Mademoiselle  Allard,  danseuse 
etonnante  et  unique,  n’ira  pas  en  Angleterre  a  moins  de  quatre  a  cinq  cent  louis  pour 
une  saison  ;  la  seconde  trois  cent,  et  la  dernikre  deux  cent  louis,  et  encore  beaucoup  de 
difficultes  pour  avoir  l’une  ou  l’autre. 

En  pieces  sur  notre  theatre,  nous  n’avons  rien  de  bon  ni  de  comique  qui  puis- 
sent  vous  convenir.  Les  comediens  Francois  ont  donne  ces  jours  derniers  la  pre¬ 
miere  representation  d’une  trag6die  intitulee  “  Cosroes  II. c’est  le  debut  de  Mr. 
Le  Fevre,  auteur  d’un  ode  sur  la  mort  de  Mr.  le  Dauphin,  dont  on  ne  dit  pas 
grand  bien. 

J’ai  re^u,  comme  je  vous  l’ai  marque,  mon  drap  bleu,  et  le  livre  que  vous  avez 
envoy^s  a  Mr.  le  Moine  ;  mais  je  croij  au  diable  le  fromage,  la  redingotte,  et  le 
cotillon,  si  vous  ne  faites,  pas  bombarder  le  - qui  s’en  est  charge. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami,  et  je  vous  prie  de  ne  pas  oublier  que  je  vous  aime 
bien.  Monnet. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


523 


DE  M.  VILLIERES  A  M.  GARRICK 

MONSIEUR,  Dantzig,  le  11  Novembre,  1767. 

Quelque  precipit6  qu’ait  ete  mon  depart  de  votre  ville,  (puisque  je  n’ai  eu  que 
trois  jours  pour  faire  mes  pr6paratifs,  la  lettre  qui  m’appelloit  ici,  et  le  vaisseau  qui 
devoit  m’y  porter  ne  m’ayant  laiss6  que  ce  court  intervalle,)  j’ai  cependant  eu  l’hon- 
neur  de  me  presenter  trois  fois  a  votre  maison,  pour  prendre  conge  de  vous,  et  vous 
t£moigner  toute  ma  reconnoissance  des  politesses  et  des  faqons  obligeantes  que  j’ai 
cprouvees  de  votre  part.  Si  votre  absence  m’a  prive  de  vous  rendre  ce  devoir  en  per- 
sonne,  les  sentimens  de  la  vraie  et  sincere  reconnoissance  dont  mon  cceur  est  pen£tre 
pour  toutes  vos  traitemens  honnetes  ne  me  permettent  pas  de  demeurer  sans  vous 
les  exprimer  an  moins  de  cette  mani^re.  Oui,  Monsieur,  soit  que  la  fortune  qui  m’a 
appele  ici  m’y  retienne,  soit  qu’elle  me  prom^ne  ailleurs,  les  sentimens  de  ma  grati¬ 
tude  seront  toujours  independants  des  lieux  que  j’habiterai.  Je  me  ressouviendrai  par 
tout  avec  une  secrete  vanite,  que  j’ai  eu  le  plaisir  de  connoitre  a  Londres  un  homme 
aussi  estimable  par  les  quality  sociales  qui  constituent  le  galant  homme,  qu’admirable 
par  les  talens  superieurs  qui  constituent  l’homme  extraordinaire ;  que  dans  les  inter- 
valles  que  ses  grandes  occupations  lui  laissent,  il  n’a  pas  dedaignd  de  m’admettre  a  sa 
conversation  famili^re,  et  que  cette  faveur  m’a  mis  a  portee  de  pouvoir  rendre  autant 
de  justice  a  son  cceur  qu’a  ses  talents.  Si  votre  modestie  d’un  cote,  Monsieur  ;  si  de 
l’autre,  quelque  reste  de  prejuge  contre  la  sinc£rit6  de  ma  nation,  vous  faisoient  soup- 
9onner  la  sinc6rite  de  mes  expressions,  je  vous  prie  de  reflechir  que  je  suis  eloigne  de 
vous,  que  je  n’ai  pas  d’esperance  de  vous  revoir,  et  que,  par  consequent,  nul  autre  motif 
que  celui  de  payer  une  dette  ldgitime  ne  m’engage  a  vous  ecrire.  Oserois-je,  Mon- 
sieur,  en  consideration  de  mon  admiration  et  de  mon  attachement  pour  vous,  vous 
faire  une  pri£re?  Vous  s^avez  que  nous  autres  Catholiques  Romains  tenons  beaucoup 
au  culte  des  images.  Quelqu’exempt  que  je  puisse  me  flatter  d’etre  d’ailleurs  des 
superstitions  de  mon  eglise,  je  tiens  neanmoins  beaucoup  a  celle-ci,  non  pas  a  la  verity 
pour  les  images  des  Saints,  mais  pour  celles  des  grands  homines.  Quelle  devotion  ne 
porterois-je  done  pas  a  votre  portrait,  si  vous  vouliez  m’en  honorer  !  Je  vous  puis  assu¬ 
rer  qu’une  jeune  fille  qui  languit  apr£s  un  mari,  ne  s’extasie  pas  plus  d^voteusement 
devant  l’image  du  saint  qui  envoie  des  maris,  ou  un  moine  vigoureux  devan t  l’image 
d’une  belle  Vierge  qu’il  convoite,  que  je  le  ferois  devant  un  portrait  qui  dans  lui  seul 
me  repr£senteroit  tous  les  caract&res  que  les  Muses  Tragique  et  Comique  ont  jusqu’a 
present  produit  sur  la  sefene.  Mais  je  m’apper^ois  que  mon  enthusiasme  m’emporte 
trop  loin,  et  la  raison  m’avertit  que  l’admiration  qu’on  porte  a  quelqu’un  n’est  pas  un 
titre  a  ses  faveurs.  Vous  pourrez  done,  Monsieur,  rejetter  ma  priere  comme  indis¬ 
crete,  sans  que  ce  jugement  s^v^re  influe  en  rien  sur  les  sentimens  d’admiration, 
d’attachement,  et  de  reconnoissance  avec  lesquels  j’ai  l’bonneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Arotre  tres-humble  et  tres-ob£issant  serviteur,  I)e  A'iulieiies. 

Chez  Mr.  le  Staroste  Nowouieyskys. 


3x2 


52  4 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Messrs.  Henckell  et  Mason  se  ehargeroient  du  portrait  s’il  ytoit  &  l’addresse  de 
Mr.  Gill,  W.  Roberts  et  Co.  a  Dantzig. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBON1  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  14  Novembre,  1767. 

Apufes  un  long  sommcil,  Monsieur  s’^veillc  et  me  conte  son  rcve.  31 y  poor  Gar- 
rich!  O  le  mediant!  croyez  ce  qu’il  dit :  tant  d’affaires,  la  crainte  de  trouble/-,  (Tim- 
portuner — vieilies  excuses  des  paresseux;  ensuite  des  injures  pour  se  raccommoder. 
Moi  Pamie  de  Saint  Foix?  c’est  une  abominable  calomnie,  et  j’en  porterai  mes 
plaintes  a  la  Maison  des  Lords.  Yous  avez  un  poete  en  tete  ;  moi,  j’aime  les  li^ros  ; 
j’ai  jette  le  livre  i\  l’endroit  oil  ce  Breton  hargneux  et  maussade  attaque  le  Prince 
Noir ;  guerrier  aussi  r6v6r6  des  Francois,  que  clid’i  de  sa  propre  nation.  Je  n’ai  pas 
voulu  lire  une  ligne  de  plus,  j’ai  dit,  autre  Smollet,  va  au  diable.  Mais  pensez-vous, 
Monsieur,  que  l’on  admire  cet  ennuieux  proems  contre  Rapin  ?  Detrompez-vous,  ce 
supldnent  a  fait  tomber  les  essais  sur  Paris.  L’aigreur  et  la  partiality  deplaisent  aux 
Francis,  ils  ne  se  pament  point  sur  des  betises  oil  l’on  pretend  les  flater  ;  un  men- 
songe  grossier  les  revoltent,  ils  ne  riroient  point  de  ce  qui  attire  les  Eclats  du  peuple 
de  Londres,  et  si  on  vouloit  leur  persuader  que  les  Anglois  vivent  de  grenouilles, 
meurent  de  faim,  que  leurs  femmes  sont  barbouiliyes,  et  jurent  par  toutes  les  lettres 
de  l’alphabet,  ils  leveroient  les  epaules,  et  s’6criroient,  quel  sot  ose  ecrire  ces  miseres 
la  f  mais  a  Londres,  diantre  cela  prend  !  Smollet  est  un  charming  author!  vil  gredin, 
qui  ne  connoit  pas  mieux  les  mceurs  de  son  pays  que  ceux  de  la  France,  et  dont  tous 
les  ouvrages  sont  detestables  :  oui,  d^testables. 

"Foils  me  dites  une  ancienne  et  une  triste  vyrite.  Ob,  sans  doute,  il  est  des  pre- 
juges  nationnaux :  l’orgueil  les  enfante,  l’ignorance  les  nourrit,  et  la  mauvaise  foi  les 
soutient.  Chaque  peuple  ose  se  donner  la  prefyrence,  et  croit  enfin  la  meriter.  Cette 
pretention  est  la  source  d’une  yternelle  division  entre  les  enfans  d’Adam :  mais  plus 
on  etend  ses  connoissances,  plus  on  aprofondit,  plus  on  trouve  d’uniformite  entre  tous 
ces  foibles  humains  repandus  sur  ce  globe  immense ;  des  nations  se  vantent  en  vain 
d  une  marque  distinctive,  elle  est  dans  leurs  habitudes,  elle  n’est  point  dans  leurs  sen- 
timens.  Si  en  arrivant  au  milieu  d’une  terre  ytrangere  un  voyageur  est  frappy  par 
des  usages  singuliers,  s’il  croit  voir  des  homines  nouveaux,  l’examen  fait  bientot  dis- 
paroitre  ces  nuances  legeres,  il  retrouvera  chez  l’homme  le  plus  sauvage  une  partie  de 
ses  dysirs,  de  ses  affections,  de  ses  vices,  et  de  ses  vertus.  Orgueilleux  insulaires ! 
vos  passions  sont  les  notres,  elles  sont  le  sceau  de  rhumanite ;  elles  raprochent  tous 
les  ytres,  elles  les  rendent  tous  ressemblans  les  uns  aux  autres :  nous  sommesfous? 
vous  l’etes  aussi :  nous  devrions  nous  chercher,  nous  aider  ;  nous  aimons  mieux  nous 
agacer,  nous  ygratigner,  nous  mordre,  nous  dechirer.  C’est  votre  sexe  maudit,  qui 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


525 


d6truit  la  paix,  les  femmes  s’arrangeroient ;  oui,  Monsieur.  Disputez  cela,  et  je  vous 
6tranglerai.* 

II  est  en  Angleterre  une  dame  plus  sens£e,  plus  admirable  que  tous  vos  philo- 
sophes.  C’est  Lady  Betty  Germain :  ennemie  de  la  politique,  de  l’esprit  de  parti ; 
franche,  aimable,  solide,  gdiereuse ;  defendant  avec  chaleur  son  amie  contre  cet 
enrage  de  Swift,  elle  joint  a  la  plus  belle  ame  la  delicatesse  de  l’esprit  et  les  graces 
d’un  style  noble  et  16ger.  Voila  la  femme  de  tous  les  terns,  de  tous  les  pays  ; 
respectable  pour  toutes  les  nations ;  cent  fois  au-dessus  de  votre  Lady  Mary  Mon¬ 
tague;  l’une  a  l’avantage  de  bien  ecrire,  Lady  Betty  y  ajoute  celui  de  bien  penser. 
Mais  je  vous  querelle,  je  crois  ?  est-ce  que  l’esprit  des  Smollet  et  des  Saint  Foix 
m’anime?  suis-je  une  furie  ?  j’ai  bien  raison  d’aimer  ma  solitude,  de  m’y  renfermer  ; 
l’injustice  me  desole,  et  quand  je  vois  des  menteurs,  des  mechants,  des  perfides,  par 
douceur,  par  humanity,  je  les  etoufferois.  Mon  premier  mouvement  pass6,  je  suis 
bonne  et  indulgente.  Allons,  faisons  la  paix  ;  je  vous  tends  la  main,  je  fais  un  pas 
vers  vous  ;  avancez  aussi,  nous  nous  embrasserons.  Soyez  moins  negligent  a  l’avenir, 
ne  me  laissez  pas  ignorer  pendant  six  mois  que  vous  conservez  un  peu  d’amitie  pour 
une  femme  incapable  de  vous  oublier ;  votre  charmante  compagne  et  vous,  vous  serez 
toujours  present  a  mon  coeur. 

Ce  Monsieur  Becket  qui  me  consid&re  tant,  me  traite  moins  comme  un  auteur 
que  comme  un  libraire.  II  m’a  demande  cinquante  exemplaires  de  Madame  De  San- 
cerre  pour  son  compte,  et  cinquante  pour  le  mien.  Du  retour  point  de  nouvelles : 
excepte  ces  cent  exemplaires  dont  je  souhaite  d’etre  payee,  je  veux  employer  en  livres 
Anglois  le  produit  de  mes  autres  ouvrages,  envoyes  a  Mr.  Becket,  et  re^'us  par  lui  a 
ma  pri&re.  Je  voudrois  par  la  premiere  occasion  les  pieces  de  theatre  suivantes : 


Anna  Boleyne,  by  Banks. 

Amorous  Widow,  by  Betterton. 

Artful  Husband,  by  Taverner. 

All  in  the  Wrong,  by  Mr.  Murphy. 
Minor,  by  Je  ne  spai  qui.  [Foote] 
Orators,  by  Mr.  Foote. 

School  for  Lovers,  by  Mr.  Whitehead. 
Englishman  at  Paris,  by  Mr.  Foote. 
- Returned,  by  the  same. 


Knights,  by  Mr.  Foote. 

Intriguing  Chambermaid. 

High  Life  Below  Stairs. 

Old  Maid,  by  Mr.  Murphy. 

Taste,  by  Mr.  Foote. 

Upholsterer,  by  Mr.  Murphy. 

Whim  or  Miser’s  Retreat. 

The  Apprentice,  by  Mr.  Murphy. 
Suspicious  Husband,  by  Dr.  Hoadly. 


le  tout  en  brochure:  on  pent  addresser  ce  petit  paquet  a  mon  libraire  a  Paris,  si  on 
ne  trouve  pas  la  facilite  d’en  charger  quelqu’un.  Ca,  vous  entendez  bien.  II  faut 
engager  Mr.  Becket  a  me  payer  d’ici  au  mois  de  Janvier,  les  lettres  de  Madame  De 

*  The  ironical  persiflage  of  this  lively  writer  is  extremely  diverting.  Nor  is  there  a  want  of  sound 
philosophy  in  her  criticism.  Smollet  and  Goldsmith  are  secure  in  their  brilliant  reputations  ;  yet  I  cannot 
say  that  her  censures  are  without  foundation,  and  her  very  objections  are  not  national.  They  apply  to 
manners  and  to  morals,  which  she  discovers  to  be  faulty. — Ed. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


.32(3 

Sancerre.  Le  reste  de  mes  ouvrages  est  destine  a  augmenter  ma  bibliothfcque  An- 
gloise.  Vraiment  je  fais  a  Mr.  Becket  un  roman  mel6  d’Anglois,  de  Francois,  de 
lettres,  d’avantures  ;  il  sera  charmant,  ou  abominable,  je  n’en  s£ai  rien ;  mais  malgre 
tous  les  Smollet  du  monde,  les  Anglois  ne  s’appercevront  point  de  ma  col&re  contre 
eux.  Je  suis  actuellement  k  leur  egard  comrae  une  maitresse  offens^e,  qu’un  rien 
peut  appaiser,  parcequ’elle  aime  encore. 

Adieu,  moil  tr&s-aimable  ami ;  ma  plume  est  mauvaise,  ma  toilette  m’attend,  je 
suis  bete,  et  malade.  Embrassez  trois  fois  Madame  Garrick  a  mon  intention,  autant 
a  celle  de  ma  compagne,  et  croyez-moi  toujours  la  plus  sincere,  la  plus  tendre,  et  la 
plus  constante  de  vos  amies, 

Riccoeoxi. 


DE  M.  FENOUILLOT  DE  FALBAIRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Rue  et  vis-a-vis  l’Hutel  da  Buloy,  a  Paris,  le  18  Nov.  1767. 

J’ai  l’honneur  de  vous  envoyer,  Monsieur,  un  exemplaire  d’une  petite  pi£ce  que 
vous  connoissez  deja,  et  dont  il  m’a  paru  que  vous  faisiez  quelque  cas,  quoique  vous 
ne  l’ayiez  pas  jugee  propre  a  votre  theatre.  Je  travaille  actuellement  a  une  tragedie 
qui,  j’espere,  sera  plus  heureuse.  C’est,  au  jugement  de  Mr.  Diderot,  le  sujet  le  plus 
thdatral  et  le  plus  terrible  qui  ait  ete  mis  sur  la  scene  :  il  interesse  particulierement 
votre  nation,  et  je  pourrai  vous  envoyer  la  pi£ce  pour  Paques,  en  vous  demandant  le 
plus  grand  secret  jusqu’a  ce  qu’elle  paroisse.  Si  vous  voulez,  Monsieur,  me  rendre 
le  service  de  la  traduire,  vous  aurez  tout  l’ete  pour  le  faire,  et  vous  serez  en  £tat  de 
la  jouer  sur  votre  theatre  au  commencement  de  l'hiver  prochain  :  terns  pour  lequel 
elle  paroitra  imprimee  ici  de  la  me  me  fa^on  que  celle  que  je  vous  envoie.  Les  dessins 
en  sont  meme  deja  tous  faits  par  Mr.  Gravelot,  votre  ami  et  le  mien,  qui  pense,  ainsi 
que  Mr.  Diderot,  que  si  vous  voulez  bien  lui  donner  vos  soins,  cette  piece  ne  peut 
manquer  de  reussir  sur  votre  scene.  Je  compte  done,  Monsieur,  sur  les  offres  obli- 
geantes  de  service  que  vous  nravez  faites  dans  votre  reponse,  mais  je  n'en  avois  pas 
besoin  pour  etre  toujours  avec  l’estime  et  la  consideration  la  plus  vraie. 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-liumble  et  tr£s-ob6issant  serviteur, 

Fexouillot  de  Faebaiee. 

31essrs.  Diderot  et  Gravelot  me  chargent  de  mille  amities  pour  vous. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  20  Novembre,  1767. 

Mox  ami,  j’ai  recu  il  y  a  quelques  jours  une  lettre  de  Maitre  Antonio  Carara,  par 
laquelle  il  me  demande  ma  protection  pour  le  faire  entrer  au  service  de  Mr.  Du  Chatelet, 
nomm6  depuis  peu  pour  TAmbassade  de  France  a  Londres.  Dites-lui,  je  vous  prie, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


527 


que  Mr.  Du  Chatelet  n’est  pas  actuellement  a  Paris,  il  est  a  son  regiment ;  mais  que 
je  l’ai  bi^n  recommand£  a  Mr.  Francois,  secretaire  d’Ambassade,  et  l’ami  de  l’Ambas- 
sadeur,  et  que  je  lui  ai  bien  dit  tout  ce  que  Antonio  Carara  valoit.  Antonio  Carara 
aura  done  l’attention  vers  la  fin  de  ce  mois,  de  s’informer  de  l’arrivee  de  Mr.  Francois 
en  Angleterre,  et  d’y  aller  de  ma  part ;  il  sera  bien  reipu,  et  il  fera  certainement  tout 
ce  qui  sera  en  son  pouvoir  pour  lui  rendre  service  dans  le  cas  qu’Antonio  Carara 
puisse  convenir  a  cet  Ambassadeur.  Prevenez-le  que  la  protection  de  Mylord  et  de 
Mylady  Spencer  sera  d’un  grand  poids  aupr£s  de  son  Excellence. 

Antonio  m’a  aussi  demand^  pour  Madame  Garrick  un  dessin  color6  de  la  facon 
dont  les  dames  Francoises  du  bon  ton  s’habillent,  et  se  coeffent  actuellement :  je  vous 
en  envoie  trois  (que  vous  lui  remettrez  de  ma  part),  que  j’ai  fait  faire  par  Mr.  Boquet, 
beaucoup  plus  capable  et  plus  au  fait  que  le  petit  peintre  qu’Antonio  m’avoit  in- 
diqu6,  et  qui  ont  £te  dessine  d’apr&s  les  deux  femmes  de  Paris  les  plus  coquettes  et 
les  mieux  mises  conform^ment  aux  modes  actuelles :  bien  des  respects  et  amities  a 
Madame  Garrick,  et  dites-lui  que  je  serai  toujours  bien  content  quand  je  pourrai  lui 
etre  de  quelqu’utilit6. 

Mr.  Barthelemon  m’a  £crit,  et  il  m’a  fait  part  de  son  £tat  present  en  Angleterre, 
et  de  la  bonne  volont6  que  vous  aviez  de  lui  etre  utile.  Je  voudrois  bien  scavoir  le 
succ£s  de  la  pi&ce  que  vous  avez  fait  ensemble.  Ce  jeune  lionnne  a  de  l’esprit,  des 
talens,  et  je  lui  veux  beaucoup  de  bien  :  s’il  vous  remet  trois  louis  que  je  lui  ai  prates 
a  Paris,  vous  les  prendrez  ;  ce  sera  autant  de  diminud  sur  ce  que  je  vous  dois  a  cet 
6gard ;  je  m’acquitterai  envers  vous  quand  vous  le  jugerez  a  propos. 

J’ai  re^u  il  y  a  quatre  jours  de  votre  part  une  redingotte,  e’est  sans  doute  celle 
que  vous  aviez  fait  mettre  cliez  Mr.  Duval ;  je  l’ai  trouv6e  beaucoup  plus  commune 
que  celle  que  votre  tailleur  a  fait  pour  moi  dans  mon  voyage  d’ Angleterre.  On  a 
m&me  oubli£  d’y  mettre  une  ceinture.  Ayez  la  bont£  dans  la  premiere  lettre  que 
vous  m’^crivez,  de  me  marquer  ce  qu’elle  a  cout^e ;  mon  dessein  n’etant  pas  d’en  faire 
present  a  la  personne  qui  m’a  charge  de  la  faire  venir,  il  est  n^cessaire  que  je  sache  ce 
qu’elle  vaut  pour  pouvoir  m’en  faire  payer. 

Quand  a  celle  que  vous  avez  fait  remettre  a  Mr.  Mant  avec  le  cotillon  et  le  fro- 
mage,  je  ne  l’ai  pas  re^u,  et  vraisemblablement  je  ne  recevrai  rien.  Mais  Antonio 
Carara,  homme  ferme  et  intelligent,  pent  finir  cet  objet  en  allant  lui-meme  chez  cet 
homme,  lui  dire  tout  naturellement  que  ne  pouvant  pas  avoir  les  effets,  j’en  demande 
la  valeur  en  argent :  trois  guinees  a  peu  pr£s  l’acquitteront  vis-a-vis  de  moi.  Cette 
somme  n’est  pas  assez  considerable  pour  qu’il  puisse  r6sister  a  cette  proposition.  Si 
Antonio  re^oit  cet  argent,  il  seroit  inutile  de  faire  faire  une  autre  redingotte  :  je  dirai 
a  la  personne  qui  me  l’avoit  demande  qu’elle  est  perdue.  Vous  m’enverriez  seuie- 
ment  un  fromage  par  la  premiere  occasion. 

A  ous  avez  du  recevoir  par  Mr.  Panchaudles  propositions  de  Noverre,  que  je  vous 
ai  envoy£;  je  ne  s^ai  pas  ce  que  vous  ferez  a  cet  egard,  mais  je  vois  dans  tout  cela 
beaucoup  de  pretentions  de  sa  part,  et  beaucoup  d’embarras  pour  vous.  Dieu  veuille 
que  cela  tourne  a  bien. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


528 

Je  vous  envoie  l’Almanach  des  Muses,  et  le  re^ii  de  l’Avant-Coureur.  Yous  me 
ferez  le  plaisir  d’envoyer  a  leurs  adresses  les  trois  lettres  ci-joint :  je  voudrois  que 
celle  de  Mr.  Thornhill  fut  remise  i\  lui-mfime. 

Si  vous  voyez  Mr.  Panchaud,  banquier,  qui  doit  6tre  a  Londres,  dites-lui,  je  vous 
prie,  que  Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc  compte  sur  ses  soins  pour  le  drap  bleu  qu’il  lui  a 
prom  is.  II  me  charge  aussi  de  vous  faire  ses  compliments. 

Vous  direz  a  Madame  Garrick  que  nous  avons  ici  un  livre  fait  par  un  perruquier, 
nomm6  Le  Gros,  qui  indique  quarante-cinq  fa^ons  de  se  coeffer.  Mr.  De  la  Place  a 
fait  l’&oge  de  cet  ouvrage  dans  son  Mercure  du  mois  dernier.  Ce  livre  est  clier,  et 
bien  mauvais  a  mon  gr6. 

On  s^aura  la  demeure  de  Mr.  Mant,  at  Charles  Gould,  Esq.  Horse  Guards, 
Whitehall. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami,  et  je  vous  recommande  toujours  d’avoir  grand  soin 
de  votre  sant6. 

Monnet. 

N’oubliez  pas  que  je  loge  pr^sentement  rue  de  Clery,  pres  la  rue  St.  Philippe. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  3  Decembre,  1767. 

Mon  ami,  je  profite  a  la  hate  de  l’occasion  qui  se  pr^sente  pour  vous  dire  que  Mr. 
Panckoucke  m’a  remis  bier  matin  une  note  de  Madame  Garrick,  par  laquelle  elle  me 
demande  des  dessins  de  la  nouvelle  parure  des  dames  Francoises,  de  la  dentelle,  des 
jupes,  des  manchettes  brodees,  et  une  esp£ce  de  cotton  qui  sert  de  doubleure.  1°.  Les 
dessins  sont  partis  il  y  a  cinq  jours  ;  Madame  Garrick  doit  les  avoir  re^us  a  present, 
ou  les  recevra  demain  ou  apr&s. 

La  dentelle ;  il  n’a  pas  6te  possible  d’en  avoir  du  meme  dessin,  on  la  fera  faire,  et 
je  l’enverrai  par  la  premiere  personne  que  je  trouverai. 

Les  jupes,  je  ne  puis  lui  faire  parvenir  que  par  des  femmes  ;  cela  se  trouve  rare- 
ment ;  cependant  je  ne  n^gligerai  rien  pour  la  satisfaire  a  ce  sujet. 

Je  lui  envoie  trois  paires  de  manchettes  brodees,  de  bas  prix ;  si  elle  en  veut  de 
plus  chores,  il  y  en  a  a  deux  rangs  jusqu’a  cinquante  francs  la  paire,  et  a  trois  rangs 
jusqu’a  cent  francs. 

Pour  le  cotton,  soit  que  Mr.  Panckoucke  en  ait  perdu  l’^chantillon,  ou  que 
Madame  Garrick  ait  oublie  de  lui  donner,  je  ne  puis  pas  lui  en  envoyer. 

Mr.  Canter,  porteur  de  ma  lettre,  decorateur,  bon  peintre  dans  differents  genres, 
41eve  du  fameux  Golli,  que  vous  avez  surement  connu,  arrive  d’Espagne,  ou  il  a  eu 
beaucoup  de  succ£s :  il  passe  en  Angleterre  pour  sa  famille.  Il  sera  fort  aise  de  vous 
connoitre,  et  je  pense  que  vous  pourrez  tirer  partie  de  ses  talens  ;  je  vous  le  recom¬ 
mande  coniine  un  bon  et  honnete  gar^on. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


529 


Aii  nom  de  Dieu,  mon  ami,  accusez-moi  done  tout  ce  que  je  vous  ai  envoys ;  j’ai 
des  inquietudes  a  ce  sujet. 

Air.  Panckoucke  m’a  dit  que  vous  aviez  vu  Mant  a  la  Cour,  et  qu’il  puoit  le 

fromage  coraine  un  -  qu’il  est.  Si  Antonio  Carara  ne  me  fait  pas  payer  le 

mien,  la  redingotte,  et  le  petit  cotillon,  dites-lui  que  je  le  ferai  chatre. 

Provide,  Vernet  le  peintre,  et  Goy  ont  soupe  bier  chez-moi,  avec  trois  princesses 
les  plus  elegantes  de  l’Opera.  Goy  a  fait  le  My  lord  :  nous  avons  diablement  ri  et 
bien  bu  a  votre  sante.  Bien  des  amities  et  des  respects  a  Madame,  et  dites-lui  que 
les  trois  paires  de  manchettes  coutent  cinquante-trois  francs  prix  marchand. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami;  donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles  souvent,  ne  craignez  pas 
de  me  ruiner  par  les  frais  de  la  poste. 

Monnet. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  B.  RAYMOND  GILBERT. 

A  Paris,  ce  30  Decembre,  1767. 

J’ai  re^i  votre  lettre,  Monsieur,  et  par  le  dernier  ordinaire  j’ai  £crit  et  marqud  a 
Mr.  Garrick  tout  le  bien  que  ie  pensois  sur  votre  compte,  en  le  priant  de  vous  pro¬ 
curer  des  ecoliers,  et  certainement  il  le  fera  si  l’occasion  s’en  pr^sente :  mais  prodi- 
gieusement  occupe  des  affaires  de  son  theatre,  et  peu  dans  le  courrant  du  monde,  je 
crains  bien  qu’il  ne  puisse  pas  faire  grande  chose  pour  vous.  Par  l’ev^nement,  vous 
voyez  que  vous  avez  mal  fait  d’etablir  line  ecole  ;  il  falloit  vous  en  tenir  a  votre  petit 
casuel ;  vous  auriez  proportionn6  votre  depense  a  votre  gain,  et  vous  ne  seriez  pas 
aujourdhui  dans  l’embarras  pour  le  loyer  de  votre  maison,  et  peut-etre  encore  pour 
celui  de  vos  meubles. 

J’ai  vu,  Mr.  votre  oncle,  qui  est  tout  aussi  bien  que  moi  touch6  de  votre  situation, 
mais  il  ne  peut  rien  ;  il  m’a  promis  seulement  d’^crire  en  votre  faveur  a  Madame 
votre  m&re.  S’il  en  obtient  quelques  secours,  nous  vous  les  ferons  tenir  :  il  me  charge 
de  bien  des  complimens  pour  vous. 

Votre  Abbe  Whittingham  du  seminaire  Anglois,  pour  la  souscription  de  Cor¬ 
neille  est  inaccessible.  J’y  ai  envoy6  deux  fois,  on  ne  peut  pas  le  joindre  ;  j’y  en- 
verrai  encore,  et  avant  qu’il  soit  peu,  je  vous  rendrai  compte  de  cette  commission. 

Je  serois  fort  aise  de  voir  la  traduction  que  vous  avez  fait  de  Milton,  mais  je  ne 
crois  pas  vous  avoir  dit  que  Mr.  Crebillon  s^ut  1’ Anglois :  e’est  Mr.  De  la  Place, 
encore  entend-t’-il  tr^s-mal  cette  langue. 

Je  vous  prie  de  voir  Mr.  et  Madame  Angelo,  et  de  leur  dire  bien  des  clioses  de 
ma  part,  que  je  les  aime  bien  ;  au  mari,  qu’il  me  fera  plaisir  de  ne  pas  in’oublier  pour 
le  volume  que  je  lui  ai  demande  de  l’Espion  Chinois. 

Je  voudrois  bien,  mon  clier,  pouvoir  vous  rendre  quelques  services,  mais  duns  ce 

3  Y 


VOL.  IT. 


530 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


monde,  sans  influence,  ni  credit  d’aucune  espece,  je  ne  puis  que  vous  plaindre,  et 
d^sirer  que  Dieu  vous  ait  en  sa  sainte  garde. 

Mon  net. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  B.  Raymond  Gilbert,  at  No.  9, 

in  Furnival’s  Inn  Court,  Holborn,  London.” 


DE  M.  AlONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  8  Janvier,  1768. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  envoie  les  deux  paquets  de  blonde  et  entoillage  que  Madame 
Garrick  a  fait  demander  a  Mr.  Panckoucke,  en  attendant  que  je  trouve  l’occasion  de 
lui  faire  passer  les  jupons. 

J’ai  ^crit  au  Sieur  Gilbert  que  je  vous  l’avois  recommand6  pour  des  ecoliers,  mais 
que  vos  grandes  affaires  et  le  courrant  du  monde  oil  vous  etiez,  vous  empecheroient 
de  lui  rendre  tous  les  services  que  vous  voudriez  bien  :  vous  en  voila  debarrasse. 
Comme  je  vous  l’ai  dit,  c’est  un  bon  et  honnete  ganpon,  mais  c’est  une  manure  de  fou 
et  d'imbecile,  qui  n’est  propre  qu’a  enseigner  la  langue  Framboise,  et  tout  aussi  bien 
que  beaucoup  de  gens  que  vous  avez  a  Londres. 

On  a  donne  bier  pour  la  premiere  fois,  a  la  Com^die  Italienne  “  L’Isle  Sonnante,” 
interm^de  en  trois  actes,  paroles  de  Mr.  Colle,  et  musique  de  Mr.  Monsigny :  il  y  a 
des  choses  tres-plaisantes  de  la  part  des  deux  auteurs.  Sitot  que  cette  piece  sera 
imprim6,  je  vous  l’enverrai  avec  les  oeuvres  de  Mr.  Colle,  dont  on  vient  de  faire  une 
edition. 

On  donnera  celle  de  Mr.  Favart  vers  la  fin  de  ce  mois,  intitulee  “  Les  Mois- 
sonneurs,”  je  vous  l'enverrai  aussi ;  il  vous  fait  des  compliments. 

Vous  croyez  que  ce - de  Mant  payera  le  fromage,  j’en  doute,  et  je  le  souhaite. 

Je  vous  ai  marqu6  par  ma  precedente  l’usage  que  vous  feriez  de  ce  remboursement. 
Menagez  votre  sante :  dites  quelque  chose  pour  moi  a  Madame  Garrick.  Il  fait  si 
froid  oil  je  vous  ecris,  que  la  plume  me  tombe  des  mains. 

Moxnet. 


DE  MADEMOISELLE  AUGUSTE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Versailles,  ce  12  Fevrier,  1768. 

Le  nombre  des  ann£es  qui  se  sont  ^coulees  depuis  que  j’ai  eu  l’honneur  de  vous 
appartenir  en  qualite  de  danseuse,  me  fait  croire  avec  juste  raison  que  je  dois  etre 
bien  eloign6  de  votre  souvenir  ;  mais  encouragee  par  la  connoissance  que  j’ai  de  votre 
divin  caract^re,  et  autorisee  par  la  certitude  que  toutes  creatures  infortunees  sont  des 
etres  qui  ne  s’effacent  jamais  dans  des  cceurs  tels  que  le  votre,  ma  plume  se  met 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


531 


comme  d’elle-meme  a  ma  main,  pour  exciter  votre  bont6  a  me  rendre  service  dans  une 
malheureuse  affaire  qui  a  du  parvenir  a  votre  connoissance  en  1755  par  Mr.  Beren- 
ger,  4  qui  j’avois  pris  la  libert6  d’^crire  en  consequence. 

Cet  honnete  Monsieur,  n’ayant  pu  par  sa  rcponse  me  donner  les  eclaircissements 
que  j’aurois  souhaites  pour  agir,  et  de  mon  cote,  ayant  tt6  obligee  de  vacquer  a  plu- 
sieurs  engagements  que  j’avois  contractees  pour  differentes  cours  d’ltalie,  il  m’a  fallu 
de  toute  n6cessit£  negliger  cette  affaire,  qui  n’est  pas  de  pen  de  consequence  pour  moi, 
puisqu’elle  fait  la  plus  grande  partie  de  ce  que  je  possedois.  En  void,  Monsieur,  un 
detail  le  mieux  concis  et  le  plus  laconique  qu’il  me  sera  possible  de  vous  le  faire. 

En  partant  de  Londres  au  mois  de  ]Mai  1754,  et  comptant  de  retourner  la  saison 
d’ensuite  pour  votre  service,  je  laissai  a  Mr.  Kent,  employ^  et  demeurant  ct  l’office  du 
Roy  for  taxes,  Westminster,  cinq  coffres,  trois  grandes  boetes,  deux  petites  boetes, 
une  petite  boete  carree  de  chene,  et  deux  paquets,  le  tout  contenant  linge,  dentelle, 
habits  de  ville,  habits  de  theatre,  et  quelque  peu  d’argenterie. 

Le  vingt-cinq  de  Juillet,  de  la  meme  annee,  je  rectus  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Kent,  sans 
signature  a  la  vdite,  mais  ou  son  cachet  existe  encore  ainsi  que  la  contremarque 
d’Angleterre,  dans  laquelle  il  me  marque  qu’il  etoit  determine  de  me  venir  voir  a 
Paris,  et  que  si  j'avois  besoin  de  quelques  choses  ou  de  mes  coffres,  qu’il  se  feroit  un 
plaisir  de  me  l’apporter,  preuve  que  ce  dit  Mr.  Kent  en  etoit  en  possession  ainsi  que 
de  mes  clefs ;  une  seconde  preuve  qui  n’est  pas  equivoque  est,  que  tous  ces  effets  lui 
ont  £t6  remis  par  Mr.  Harris,  marchand  de  gants,  demeurant  Jago  Court,  Covent- 
Garden,  cliez  lequel  je  demeurois  alors.  Mais  pour  revenir  a  la  lettre  de  Mr.  Kent,  je 
ne  profitai  point  de  son  offre,  et  ne  lui  demandai  rien  dans  la  crainte  de  l'incommoder 
sur  sa  route :  il  vint  effectivement  a  Paris  dans  Aout,  y  resta  cinq  jours,  et  s’en  re- 
tourna  comme  il  etoit  venu,  e’est  a  dire,  a  franc  dtrier.  Apres  son  depart,  plusienrs 
mois  se  pass&rent  sans  que  jen  re^usse  aucune  nouvelle,  ce  qui  me  d^termina  a  £erire 
de  Bordeaux  oil  j’etois  alors,  a  Mr.  Berenger,  qui  m’apprit  par  sa  reponse  que  Mr. 
Kent  etoit  parti  de  Londres  avec  une  dame  d  une  fortune  considerable,  qu’il  avoit 
dpousee,  sans  qu'on  put  savoir  dans  quelle  partie  du  monde  il  6toit  alle. 

Quelques  personnes  me  dirent  ensuite  que  Mr.  Kent  avoit  laiss6  mes  effets  sous  la 
garde  d’un  nomine  Mr.  A.  Leigh,  en  faveur  de  qui  il  s’^toit  demis  de  sa  charge  a  l’office 
du  Roy  ;  e’est  jusqu’a  present  tout  ce  que  j’en  ai  pu  savoir.  J’ai  charg6  Mr.  l)espe- 
nan,  ami  de  Madame  Meunier,  de  ma  procuration  et  du  m^moire  de  tout  ce  qui  6toit 
dans  mes  coffres  :  e’est  lui  qui  m’a  appris  que  Mr.  George  Garrick  est  l’executeur 
testamentaire  de  Mr.  Kent ;  cette  nouvelle  a  donn6  de  la  force  a  mes  esperances,  et 
j’ai  pens6,  Monsieur,  que  personne  mieux  que  vous  ne  pourroit  engager  ce  cher  frere 
a  me  rendre  justice ;  j’ose  vous  demander  cette  grace  au  nom  du  ciel  et  de  celui  qui 
gouverne  toutes  choses,  bien  persuadee  qu’il  vous  rendra  avec  usure  le  bien  qu’il  en 
pourra  rdsulter  pour  moi.  Si  vous  croyez,  IMonsieur,  qu’il  soit  necessaire  de  mettre 
dans  mon  parti  toutes  les  vertus  accompagnees  des  graces,  faites,  s’il  vous  plait,  que 
Madame  Garrick  se  joigne  k  vous  aupr&s  de  Mr.  George. 

Avec  de  tels  protecteurs,  il  faudroit  que  mon  nom  fut  ecrit  en  gros  caract^res 

3  y  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


dans  It*  livre  des  infortun£es  si  je  ne  recouvre  pas  mes  effets ;  et  s’il  en  est  ainsi,  je  me 
eonsolerai  de  leur  perte;  je  m’en  croirai  bien  d6dommag£e  par  l’inter&t  que  vous  aurez 
pris  tons  deux  mon  sort,  et  j’en  conserverai  uti  pnScieux  ressouvenir 

“  Jusqu’a  l'instant  qui  doit  terminer  ma  carri^re, 

Moment  affreux,  moment  si  redoute, 

Moment  qui  fait  se  jetter  en  arriere ; 

Craignant  la  nuit  et  la  lumiere, 

Et  l’horreur  du  ncant  et  1’im mortality.” 

Je  ne  suis  pas,  Monsieur,  dans  le  cas  d’offrir  des  services  d’une  grande  importance, 
mais  si  vous  et  Madame  Garrick  me  jugiez  capable  de  vous  ctre  bonne  en  quelques 
choses  k  Paris,  de  quelque  nature  qu’elles  puissent  6tre,  j’ose  vous  assurer  que  per- 
sonne  ne  vous  y  serviroit  avec  plus  de  z£le  et  plus  d’ardeur  que  celle  qui  se  fait  gloire 
d’etre,  avec  les  sentiments  les  plus  distingu6s, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr&s-humble  et  tres-obeissante  servante, 

Auguste. 

Si  ce  n’est  pas  trop  me  flater,  Monsieur,  que  d’oser  esp^rer  une  reponse,  mon 
adresse  est  chez  Mr.  Peire,  au-dessus  de  l’Hotel  d’Avignon,  avenue  de  Sceau,  a 
Versailles. 


DE  M.  FENOUILLOT  DE  FALBAIRE  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Rue  du  Bouloy. 

J’ai  l’honneur,  Monsieur,  de  vous  envoyer  un  exemplaire  de  la  seconde  Edition  de 
mon  “  Honnete  Criminel.”  Comme  cette  piece  a  ete  jouee  ici  plusieurs  fois  avec 
succfes  chez  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Villeroy,  je  l’ai  fait  r&mprimer  avec  tous  les 
changemens  que  j’y  avois  faits  pour  la  representation.  Je  crois  que  vous  en  serez 
plus  content  dans  l’etat  ou  elle  est  maintenant :  mais  ce  qui  vous  int^ressera  certaine- 
ment  plus  que  l’ouvrage,  c’est,  INlonsieur,  l’histoire  du  heros  de  la  piece  que  vous 
verrez  dans  la  preface.  II  vit  encore,  et  j’ai  la  satisfaction  de  voir  que  ce  foible  essai 
lui  sera  utile:  que  je  lui  ai  donne  de  puissans  protecteurs  qui  s’occupent  du  soin  de 
rendre  son  destin  plus  doux.  On  y  travaille  ici,  et  vous  avez  d’illustres  compatriotes 
qui  veulent  aussi  avoir  part  a  cet  acte  dhumanite  et  de  bienfaisance.  Milord  Pem¬ 
broke  a  promis  d’y  concourir  avec  ses  amis.  II  avoit  propose  de  faire  une  souscription 
k  Londres  pour  cet  objet,  mais  cela  auroit  nui  ici  et  k  l’liomme  en  faveur  de  qui  elle 
etlt  ete  faite,  et  peut-etre  a  tous  ceux  de  sa  croyance.  II  ne  faut  point  que  la  chose 
se  fasse  avec  eclat. 

Les  occupations  que  j’ai  eu  depuis  trois  mois  pour  tout  cela,  jointes  a  des  ma¬ 
ladies  frequentes,  m’ont  empeche  de  travailler  a  l’autre  piece  dont  j’ai  eu  l’honneur  de 
vous  ecrire,  et  pour  laquelle  vous  avez  bien  voulu,  Monsieur,  me  promettre  vos  bons 
offices :  les  promesses  que  vous  m’avez  faites  a  cet  egard,  et  les  assurances  d’amitieque 
vous  m’y  temoignez  sont  pour  moi  d’un  tres-grand  prix ;  aussi  j’en  profiterai  certaine- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


ment.  C’est  pour  vous  envoyer  un  ouvrage  plus  digne  de  l’interet  que  vous  me  pro- 
mettez  d’y  mettre,  et  plus  fait  pour  rGissir  sur  votre  theatre,  que  j’aime  mieux  le  tra- 
vailler  avec  plus  de  soin.  J’ai  montr^  ici  ce  que  j’ai  fait  a  plusieurs  de  rnes  amis  qui 
sont  tous  les  votres,  et  s’accordent  a  dire  que  la  piece  doit  faire  le  plus  grand  effet  sur 
votre  theatre,  et  est  particulierement  propre  a  votre  nation.  Mais  pour  la  rendre  plus 
terrible  encore,  je  vais  faire  plusieurs  changemens  considerables  dans  le  plan,  et  la 
travailler  de  nouveau,  comme  si  je  n’y  avois  rien  fait,  quoique  M.  Gravelot,  a  qui  je 
laisse  une  place  ici  pour  vous  ecrire,  vous  dira  que  les  trois  premiers  actes  etoient  deja 
versifies,  et  qu’il  en  etoit  fort  content.  M.  Diderot  et  M.  Marmontel,  dont  je  suis 
fort  l’ami,  comme  vous  le  verrez  dans  ma  preface,  me  chargent  de  milles  amities  pour 
vous  ;  et  de  vous  dire  qu’ils  meritent  les  sentimens  que  vous  avez  pour  eux  par  tous 
ceux  qn’ils  ont  pour  vous.  Nous  gardons  M.  Marmontel,  et  s’il  est  aboy6  ici  par 
des  cuistres,  et  des  tetes  a  rabat  ou  a  capuchon,  il  y  est  lion  or  6  et  aime  de  tous  les 
honnetes  gens.  Croyez,  Monsieur,  que  vous  avez  ici  des  amis  bien  vrais  et  aussi 
sinc&res  que  vos  admirateurs,  et  rendez-moi  la  justice  de  me  compter  dans  le  nornbre 
des  uns  et  des  autres.  J’en  partage  tous  les  sentimens,  et  suis  avec  autant  d’estime 
que  de  consideration  et  d’attachement, 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tr&s-ob&ssant  serviteur, 

Fenouillot  de  Falbaire. 

DE  M.  GRAVELOT  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Je  profite.  Monsieur,  avec  le  plus  grand  plaisir,  de  l’occasion  que  M.  de  Fenoiiil- 
lot  me  procure  de  vous  renouveller  les  sentimens  de  la  plus  vive  amitie,  aussi  que 
de  ma  reconnoissance  pour  le  souvenir  que  vous  conservez  de  moi.  J’y  joins  mes 
respects  a  Madame  Garrick,  dont  le  souvenir  me  sera  toujours  cher. 

Si  vous  pouvez  avoir  quelque  opinion  de  mon  sentiment  sur  le  nouvel  ouvrage 
de  Mr.  de  Falbaire,  je  crois  qu’en  effet  c’est  un  sujet  propre  a  avoir  le  plus  grand 
succ&s  sur  le  theatre  Anglois.  II  est  aussi  grand  que  terrible :  c'est  seulement  dom- 
mage  que  la  sante  de  son  auteur  l’ait  empeche  jusqu’ici  d’y  donner  la  derni^re  main. 

Vous  nous  aviez  flattes  qu’on  auroit  la  satisfaction  de  vous  revoir  ici :  ce  qui  je 
vous  assure  charmeroit  tous  ceux  qui  ont  le  bonheur  de  vous  connoitre,  c'est  a  dire 
de  vous  aimer,  autant  s’il  se  peut,  que  votre  sincere  ami, 

Gravelot. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  26  Fevrier,  1768. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  envoie  par  Mr.  Loisel,  plusieurs  ouvrages  qui  viennent  de 
paroitre. 

Deux  volumes  par  Mr.  Coll6. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


534 

L’Isle  Sonnante,  du  mfime  auteur. 

Une  com^die  en  un  acte,  qui  a  6t6  jou£  aux  Francois  avec  succ£s. 

Et  la  pi&ce  de  notre  ami  Favart,  qui  a  fait  un  effet  prodigieux  sur  tout  le  monde. 
Caillot  yjoue  son  role  superieurement. 

A-t’-on  remisil  Madame  Garrick  la  blonde  que  je  lui  aienvoy^e,  et  qu’elle  m’avoit 
fait  demander  par  Mr.  Panckoucke?  Je  vous  ai  demand^  une  note  de  tout  ce  que 
vous  recevez  de  ma  part ;  pourquoi  ne  me  la  donnez-vous  pas,  et  comment  voulez- 
vous  que  je  sache  ce  que  vous  avez  re<pu  ?  Je  s<j;ais  que  vous  6tes  fort  occupy,  mais 
on  a  bientot  £crit  recu  telle  chose:  j’aime  l’ordre. 

Madame  Gerffaux,  femme  d’un  jeune  homme,  jouaillier,  actuellement  a  Londres, 
a  dti  vous  remettre  un  paquet :  elle  a  marqu6  ici  que  vous  lui  aviez  donn£  des  entries 
a  votre  spectacle.  Je  vous  prie  de  ne  point  trop  prodiguer  cette  faveur,  ni  autre 
service,  surtout  aux  personnes  que  je  ne  vous  recommande  pas. 

Vos  amis  ici  me  demandent  continuellement  si  vous  viendrez  a  Paris  cet  6t6  :  que 
voulez-vous  que  je  dise?  en  mon  particulier,  j'en  serois  fort  aise.  Bien  des  amities  et 
des  respects  a  Madame  Garrick.  Quand  j’aurai  l’occasion  de  lui  faire  passer  des 
jupons,  je  le  ferai.  Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami,  et  je  vous  prie  de  ne  pas  m’^pargner 
dans  les  choses  ou  je  pourrai  vous  &tre  utile.  Mr.  Mant  a-t’-il  pay£  la  redingotte  et 
le  fromage  ? 

Monnet. 

Je  voudi'ois  s^avoir  aussi  si  Mr.  Bartbelemon  vous  a  pay6  ce  qu'il  me  doit ;  et  je 
crois  que  vous  pouvez  traduire  “  La  V6rit6  dans  le  Vin”  de  Mr.  Colie ;  et  je  pense 
que  cette  petite  pi£ce  reussira  sur  votre  theatre. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  14  Avril,  1768. 

Je  vous  pr^viens,  mon  ami,  que  vous  recevrez  dans  les  premiers  jours  du  mois 
prochain  tout  ce  que  vous  et  Madame  Garrick  m’avez  fait  demander  par  Antonio 
Carara.  C’est  le  nomm6  Rocli  de  sa  connoissance  qui  vent  bien  se  charger  du  tout ; 
mais  qui  ne  peut  partir  qu’a  la  fin  de  ce  mois.  A  propos  de  Carara ;  descendroit-il 
de  cette  illustre  famille  de  Padoue  dont  le  chef  fut  empoisonn^  en  prison  par  les 
ordres  de  la  republique  ? 

Vous  direz,  je  vous  prie,  a  Madame  Garrick  que  je  lui  envoie  par  cet  homme  tout 
ce  qu’elle  a  desire,  a  l’exception  de  l’£tui  a  curedent  et  des  boucles  a  soulier;  attendu 
que  ces  sortes  de  choses  se  font  mieux  et  plus  solidement  en  Angleterre  qu’en  France. 
Madame  Sayde  tire  cette  marcliandise  de  Londres,  c’est  a  dire  les  petites  boetes  de 
chagrin-verd  :  quant  aux  boucles  on  les  fait,  et  je  compte  qu’elle  les  aura  dans  le  mois 
prochain. 

J’ai  ajout6  aux  livres  que  vous  m’avez  designes  un  ouvrage  nouveau  en  deux  vol. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


535 


sur  les  Sauvages,  et  un  drame  intitule  “  La  Vestale.”  Les  comediens  Francois 
avoient  re^u  cette  pi£ce,  mais  la  police  n’a  pas  voulu  en  permettre  la  representation' 
Je  crois  que  vous  pouvez  en  tirer  parti  pour  votre  theatre. 

Pourquoi  ne  souscrivez-vous  pas  pour  les  Metamorphoses  d’Ovide,  represents 
en  une  suite  de  cent  quarante  Estampes  in  4°.  ?  cet  ouvrage  est  digue  de  votre  biblio- 
th^que.  Je  vous  en  ferai  passer  le  Prospectus ;  si  vous  jugez  a  propos  de  souscrire, 
comme  je  connois  les  graveurs  de  cet  ouvrage,  vous  aurez  de  belles  epreuves.  Vous 
devriez  aussi  prendre  le  Dictionnaire  de  Musique  de  Jean  Jacques  liousseau,  qui 
paroit  depuis  pen  avec  succes. 

J’ai  pay 6  a  Mr.  de  la  Combe  ce  que  vous  lui  deviez  pour  l’Ann6e  Littaire ;  je 
n’ai  pas  souscrit  pour  l’avenir,  ne  sachant  pas  si  votre  volonte  est  de  continuer  pour 
cette  feuille. 

Le  Kain  a  ete  fort  malade :  il  vajouer  quatre  on  cinq  fois ;  ensuite  il  ira  prendre 
des  eaux  a  Forges,  et  pendant  son  absence  on  donnera  “La  Gageuse,”  comedie  nou- 
velle  en  un  acte  de  Mr.  Sedaine,  sujet  tir6  de  la  premiere  nouvelle  de  Scarron.  Le 
meme  auteur  a  fait  aussi  une  pi&ce  pour  les  Italiens,  qui  a  pour  titre  “  Le  Dcserteur 
quand  l’une  et  1'autre  seront  imprimees,  j’aurai  soin  de  vous  les  faire  tenir. 

Mon  ami,  j’aurois  la  plus  grande  envie  de  vous  aller  voir  cette  annee,  et  j’y  suis 
fortement  invite  par  Messieurs  Thornhill  et  Lascelles,  mais  je  ne  le  peux  pas:  partie 
remise  a  l’ann^e  prochaine,  sous  la  condition  que  vous  viendrez  celle-ci  a  Paris  passer 
un  mois ;  ce  peu  de  terns  ne  vous  privera  pas  du  plaisir  de  jouir  de  votre  campagne 
que  je  crois  charmante  a  present  par  la  reparation  que  vous  y  avez  fait. 

Je  vous  ai  deja  pari  6  des  effets  que  vous  m’avez  laisses  dans  un  mauvais  coffre ; 
que  voulez-vous  que  j’en  fasse  ?  je  serois  d’avis  de  vous  envoyer  par  la  premiere  occa¬ 
sion  les  deux  habits  de  soie,  l’un  de  lustrine  et  1’autre  verd  galonne  d'argent ;  j’y  join- 
drai  la  veste  de  cirsaca  blanche  et  or  ;  ce  qui  restera  sera  fort  peu  de  chose. 

Je  vous  enverrai  aussi  une  note  des  petites  avances  que  j’ai  fait  pour  vous  et 
Madame  Garrick :  nous  ferons  nos  petits  comptes  en  deduisant  ce  que  vous  avez  paye 
pour  moi  au  Sieur  Guillaume  Webb  negotiant,  &c. ;  et  dans  la  suite  je  serai  tr£s 
exact  a  vous  envoyer  les  prix  sur  chaque  chose  dans  les  commissions  dont  vous  voudrez 
bien  me  charger.  En  voici  une  que  je  vous  prie  de  me  faire  le  mieux  et  le  plus 
promptement  possible.  Mr.  Greuze  que  vous  connoissez,  Peintre,  voudroit  avoir  un 
habile  graveur  de  votre  maniere  noire.  Si  vous  pouvez  lui  trouver  un  jeune  honnne 
sage  et  tres  habile  qui  veuille  venir  a  Paris,  il  le  logera  chez-lui,  et  il  lui  fera  un  bon 
parti.  Mr.  Greuze  vous  fait  bien  des  compliments,  et  il  compte  toujours  vous  faire 
un  petit  tableau  qui  vous  arrivera  au  moment  que  vous  y  penserez  le  moins. 
A  propos  de  tableaux,  je  vois  bien  des  difficult  pour  pouvoir  faire  graver  le  votre ; 
on  me  demande  fort  cher ;  mais  je  ne  concluerai  rien  sans  votre  avis.  D’ailleurs  ce 
portrait  (entre  nous  soit  dit)  a  beaucoup  de  d^faut  dans  les  mains  et  les  jambes  sur- 
tout ;  il  n’y  a  que  la  tete  qui  est  belle  et  pleine  d’expressions. 

Au  nom  de  Dieu,  mon  ami,  ne  faites  point  de  grace  a  Mr.  Mant:  je  ne  veux 
pas  en  ctre  la  dupe  ;  envoy ez  y  Carara  jusqu’a  ce  qu’il  en  soit  payti 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


536 


Le  jeune  Barthelemon  me  doit  trois  louis :  par  une  lettre  qu’il  in’a  ecrit,  il  me 
demande  a  qui  je  veux  qu’il  les  remette.  Je  vous  prie  de  vous  en  charger. 

Quant  au  fromage  que  vous  voulez  absolument  m’envoyer;  adressez  le  tout 
naturellement  ;\  Mr.  de  Yimeux  n^gociant,  a  Calais. 

Mademoiselle  Auselin,  qui  a  dans6  il  y  a  deux  oil  trois  ans  tl  l’Op^ra  de  Londres, 
est  ici  depuis  quelques  jours :  elle  a  mi  engagement  assez  fort  pour  la  eour  de  l’Elec- 
teur  Palatin  :  les  Directeurs  de  notre  Opera  l’ont  engage  pour  danser  trois  fois,  je  l’ai 
vu  r£p6ter  liier,  je  l’aime  mieux  que  Mademoiselle  Allard.  Elle  arrive  de  Stutgard,  ou 
elle  a  travails  deux  ans  avee  Noverre :  je  pense  qu’elle  feroit  beaucoup  d’effet  sur 
vbtre  theatre  ;  si  vous  en  avez  besoin,  je  t&cherai  de  vous  la  faire  avoir  pour  la  saison 
prochaine. 

]Mr.  de  Voltaire,  qui  a  £crit  contre  le  Vieux  et  le  Nouveau  Testament  depuis  MoYse 
jusques  au  dernier  des  Prophetes,  qui  a  traits  ouvertement  Jesus  Christ  comme  un 
charlatan,  vient  de  communier  son  chateau  de  Ferney,  et  de  faire  un  sermon  a  ses 
habitans  sur  l’ivrognerie  et  la  friponnerie:  il  est  vrai  que  quelques  jours  avant  il  avoit 
£t6  vol6,  et  qu’il  avoit  fait  un  r&ve  oil  le  Diable  l’emportoit  avee  tout  son  monde. 
Que  JNIr.  Wilks,  proscrit,  et  ayant  manque  de  respect  a  son  Roi,  parvienne  a  faire 
trembler  vos  ministres  et  a  se  faire  recevoir  membre  du  Parlement !  Je  ne  vois  que 
lui  et  le  Roi  de  Prusse  pour  prendre  des  mesures  aussi  justes. 

Mon  ami,  prdsentez  mon  respect  et  mes  amities  a  Madame  Garrick.  Repondez  a 
tous  les  articles  de  ma  lettre ;  et  aimez-moi  toujours. 

Mon  net. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK- 

Ce  18  Avril,  1768. 

Mon  ami,  Mr.  Roch  vous  remettra  tout  ce  que  je  lui  ai  donn6  pour  vous  con- 
formement  au  m&noire  ci-joint.  Je  vous  recommande  ce  bon  garqon  :  il  a  de  l’esprit, 
de  l’intelligence,  et  des  talens ;  il  voudroit  trouver  un  Anglois,  pour  voyager  en  Italie 
avee  lui.  Si  vous  pouvez  lui  en  procurer  un,  je  pense  que  la  personne  qui  le  prendra 
en  aura  de  la  satisfaction. 

Il  n'y  a  plus  d’exemplaires  du  vingt-premiere  et  vingt-deuxifeme  volumes  des 
Homines  Illustres  ;  on  va  les  reimprimer  :  sitot  qu’ils  paroitront,  je  vous  prie  de  me 
faire  reponse  le  plutot  possible  sur  la  pr£c6dente  lettre.  Monnet. 


ETAT  DE  L’ENVOI  FAIT  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Dictionnaire  des  Portraits  Historiques,  3  vols. 
Les  vies  des  Hommes  Illustres,  4  vols. 
Description  de  l’ltalie,  6  vols. 

Dictionnaire  des  Auteurs  Classiques,  3  vols. 
Bibliotheque  du  Theatre  Francois,  3  vols. 
Voyages  aux  Indes  Occidentales,  2  vols. 
Fantaisies  de  Dorat. 

Eugenie,  comedie. 


La  Vestale,  drame. 

Almanach  des  Muses,  2  parties. 

Une  paire  de  boucles  de  brillants  a  jarretiere. 
Une  seringue  et  sa  boete. 

Un  jupon  gris  de  soie. 

Trois  paires  de  manchettes  pour  femmes. 
Deux  pieces  de  ruban  blanc. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


537 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  30  Avril,  1768. 

Mon  ami,  je  profite  cle  l’occasion  d’un  gentilhomme  Anglois  pour  vous  faire  par- 
venir  le  Dictionnaire  des  Graveurs  que  vous  m’avez  demand^  par  votre  d emigre 
lettre :  j’y  ai  joint  le  Prospectus  des  Metamorphoses  d’Ovide,  dont  je  vous  ai  parl6s 
dans  ma  pr^ccdente.  Vous  me  ferez  S9avoir  si  vous  voulez  souscrire  pour  cet 
ouvrage. 

Vous  devez  avoir  re<^u  a  present  tout  ce  que  je  vous  ai  envoye  par  Mr.  Rocque : 
accusez  m’en  la  reception,  et  repondez-moi  fidelement  a  tous  les  articles  d’une  trks 
longue  lettre  que  je  vous  ai  6crite  qui  a  precede  cet  envoi. 

A  propos  de  ce  Mr.  Rocque,  je  vous  l’ai  recommand^,  et  vous  ferez  bien  de 
l’obliger  si  vous  le  pouvez ;  mais  je  me  suis  reserve  de  vous  dire  que  je  ne  l’ai  vu 
que  deux  fois  chez  moi  ou  il  est  venu  de  la  part  d’Antonio  Carrara. 

J’ai  fait  votre  commission  aupres  de  Mr.  Gravelot,  et  de  Mr.  Favart  et  son 
epouse  bien  des  remerciements  et  des  compliments. 

J’ai  form6  le  projet,  mon  ami,  de  vous  mener  a  Londres  Fannie  prochaine,  sur  la 
fin  du  mois  de  Mars,  Favart,  Caillot,  et  Preville ;  les  deux  derniers  resteront  huit  a 
dix  jours  avec  vous,  et  Favart  plus  long  terns.  Je  pense  que  ce  projet  sera  de 
votre  gout. 

Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami,  et  je  vous  souliaite  une  eternelle  jouissance. 

Monnet. 

A  Madame  Garrick  bien  des  respects,  et  dites-lui  que  je  jouis  d’avance  du  plaisir 
que  j’aurai  de  la  revoir  en  Angleterre  :  je  voudrois  qu’elle  eut  un  peu  plus  de  gout 
pour  Paris,  et  elle  en  auroit  si  elle  y  faisoit  un  second  voyage  ;  je  fais  des  voeux 
pour  cela. 

Je  loge  depuis  plus  d’un  an  chez-moi,  rue  de  Clery,  pres  la  rue  St.  Philippe. 

Je  suis  toujours  en  amiti6  avec  Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc  ;  il  vous  aime,  et  il  voudroit 
bien  vous  revoir  ici. 


DE  I\l.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  ce  18  Mai,  1768. 

S’annoncer  a  vous,  mon  cher  Garrick,  avec  le  titre  d’un  honnne  a  talents,  n’est- 
ce  pas  porter  avec  soi  la  recommandation  la  plus  forte,  et  la  mieux  fondle  ?  C’est 
done  sous  ces  auspices  qu’un  tr£s-bon  Suisse,  et  que  vous  connaissez  d6ja  par  des 
miniatures  qui  vous  ont  fait  plaisir,  se  presente  a  vous,  pour  vous  suplier  de  lui  pro- 
mettre  l'entr^e  de  votre  theatre,  afin  qu'il  lui  soit  fibre  de  vous  y  voir,  et  de  nous 
raporter  ici  la  ressemblance  d’un  honune  qui  sert  de  module  a  tous  ceux  qui  professent 
son  art ;  c’est  un  petit  vol  que  je  vous  ferai  moi  de  tout  mon  cceur,  et  duquel  je  vous 

3  z 


VOL.  II. 


538 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


prio  do  n’6tre  point  fftch6.  Vous  voyez,  men  cher  Garrick,  que  les  intentions  de  mon 
Suisse  sont  pures  :  que  si  d’un  cot6  elles  choquent  un  peu  votre  modestie,  de  l’autre, 
il  est  juste  que  le  public  et  vos  amis  voient  dans  un  portrait  vivant,  quand  l’un  et 
l’autre  sont  priv^s  du  plaisir  de  vous  entendre. 

Je  suis  trop  instruit  par  moi-mdne  de  la  manure  honnete  dont  vous  accueillez 
les  Strangers,  pour  croire  (pie  vous  ne  recevrez  pas  avec  bontd  un  Helvdique  franc  et 
loyal,  qui  nc  connait  le  cd^bre  Garrick  que  de  reputation,  et  qui  meurt  d’envie  de  le 
connaitre  plus  particuli&rement.  Daignez  done  vous  rendre  ses  d£sirs,  mon  cher 
ami,  et  recevoir  par  lui  les  assurances  de  la  plus  profonde  estime  qu’il  a  pour  votre 
personne  et  pour  vos  talents,  quoiqu’il  n’ait  que  faiblement  l’lionneur  de  vous  con¬ 
naitre.  J’envie  dans  ce  moment  le  sort  de  cet  honn£te  homme,  car  il  franchit  le  pas 
de  Calais  pour  honorer  et  connaitre  un  grand  homme ;  et  moi,  je  traverse  les  deserts 
de  la  Champagne  pour  me  rendre  a  Aix-la-Chapelle,  a  l’effet  d’y  prendre  les  eaux 
propres  k  d&ruire  les  obstructions  dont  je  suis  incommode  depuis  neuf  mois ;  ces 
deux  offices  sont  assurement  bien  differ ents,  mais  il  me  faut  en  passer  par  la,  ou  me 
r6soudre  a  partir  dans  peu  de  ce  bas  monde,  pour  en  occuper  un  peut-etre  encore  plus 
bas  :  vous  voyez,  mon  cher  ami,  quel’alternative  demande  que  l’on  y  porte  quelqu’at- 
tention,  aussi  n’ai-je  pas  balance  a  pr6f£rer  l’un  a  l’autre. 

Vous  avez  peut-etre  d£j£t  s^u  que  Mr.  Saurin,  l’un  de  nos  acad^miciens  Francois, 
avait  ajust6  a  notre  theatre  votre  trag^die  bourgeoise  du  “  Joueur  qu’il  avait  rendu 
la  catastrophe  de  ce  poeme  beaucoup  plus  atroce  qu’elle  ne  Test  dans  l’original,  et  que 
n^anmoins  ce  genre  de  trag6die  avait  fait  un  tr^s- grand  plaisir  a  notre  nation  dont  le 
gout  est  si  delicat.  C’est  tout  ce  que  j’en  ai  pu  s^avoir  par  le  cri  public,  car  je  ne  l’ai 
point  vu  ;  je  suis  a  la  campagne  depuis  quinze  jours,  pour  refaire  un  peu  ma  malheur- 
euse  sant6,  et  non  pour  jouir  du  plaisir  diabolique  de  voir  un  pere  qui  veut  tuer  son 
fils  innocent,  dans  l’unique  dessein  de  ne  pas  laisser  vivre  un  malheureux  apr&s  lui ; 
j’avoue  que  les  beaut^s  simples  de  la  nature  me  plaisent  infiniment  plus  dans  mon 
desert,  que  ces  beaut^s  hors  d’ceuvre  que  l’art  a  raffin6es. 

Adieu,  mon  tr^s-cher  ami ;  daignez-vous  souvenir  encore  de  moi,  et  vous  bien 
convaincre  que  votre  estime  et  votre  amiti6  m’honorent  beaucoup  plus  que  les  plates 
adulations  d’un  peuple  qui  client  mon  art,  en  le  rangeant  dans  la  classe  des  6tats 
m^prisables  ;  vous  devez  penser,  sans  doute,  qu’il  faut  etre  Fran^ais  pour  concilier 
des  contradictions  si  absurdes,  et  vous  aurez  bien  raison  ;  je  pense  connne  vous,  et 
c’est  tout  ce  que  je  puis  faire. 

Permettez-moi  d’assurer  Madame  Garrick  de  mes  tr^s-humbles  cixnlites.  Recevez 
les  miennes,  et  les  assurances  du  sincere  attachement  de  votre  tr^s-humble  serviteur, 
et  de  votre  bon  ami, 


Le  Kain. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


539 


DE  M.  PREVILLE  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  ler  Juillet,  1 70S. 

Il  est  des  gens  qui  voyageant  d’un  pays  a  un  autre  cherchent  a  avoir  des  lettres 
de  recommandation  pour  etre  moins  Strangers,  et  trouver  des  connoissances  :  il  en  est 
qu’on  recommande  quelquefois  assez  leg£rement,  et  qui  ne  font  ni  honneur  aux 
recommandans  ni  a  leurs  pays ;  il  en  est  d’autres  qui  honorent  et  l’un  et  l’autre,  et 
Mr.  La  Garde  qui  va  aLondres,  est  certainement  un  des  derniers.  Je  ne  m’avise  pas 
de  le  recommander,  mais  je  vous  donne  avis  pour  la  pr6sente  qu’il  est  bien  fait  pour 
vivre  avec  vous :  vous  me  s^auriez  mauvais  gre  de  ne  vous  pas  avertir  que  c'est  un 
talent  distingue,  et  qu’en  outre  c’est  un  homme  charmant ;  la  bonne  compagnie  dans 
la  force  du  mot  (car  tel  est  nommee  comme  cela  qui  est  pourtant  bien  mauvaise), 
mais  la  decidemment  bonne,  en  fait  tout  le  cas  qu’il  merite,  et  se  fait  honneur  de  vivre 
avec  lui.  Du  talent,  de  l’esprit,  de  l’honnetete,  de  la  gaiet£,  &c.  &c.  &c.,  voila  ses 
titres  et  ses  droits  sur  l'attachement  de  tout  le  monde.  Vous  connoissez,  sans  doute, 
ses  oeuvres  en  musique,  et  c’est  un  cadeau  a  vous  faire  que  de  vous  mettre  a  meme 
de  vous  lier  avec  1’auteur.  Tous  les  honnetes  gens  d’ici  vous  en  s^auront  gr6,  et  vous 
leur  ferez  plaisir  en  en  prenant  beaucoup. 

Ma  femme  me  charge  de  vous  dire  mille  choses  de  sa  part,  et  de  vous  prier  de 
presenter  ses  civilites  a  Madame  Garrick.  Nos  nouvelles  comiques  soht  rares  et  assez 
plates.  Vous  S9avez,  sans  doute,  la  reussite  du  “  Joueur  elle  est  6tonnante,  aussi 
en  suis-je  tr^s-etonne ;  mais  il  faut  s’attendre  a  tout.  Notre  gout  change,  mais 
quelque  variation  qu’il  ait,  il  ne  m’otera  pas  celui  du  bon ;  et  moins  encore  l’admira- 
tion  de  vos  talens ;  il  ajouteroit  s’il  6toit  possible  a  mon  attachement. 

Je  suis  du  plus  profond  de  mon  cceur, 

Votre  tres-humble,  et  tr^s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Preville. 


DE  M.  DE  LA  PLACE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Le  4  Juillet,  1768. 

Mon  bon,  brave,  et  illustre  ami,  je  n’ai  qu’un  instant  pour  vous  dire  que  malgre 
tous  mes  d^fauts,  dont  la  paresse  est  le  moindre,  je  n’en  aime,  cheris,  et  honore  pas 
moins  Mr.  et  Madame  Garrick  ;  que  leur  souvenir  me  sera  toujours  cher ;  que  j’as- 
pire  apres  l’heureux  moment  de  les  revoir,  de  les  embrasser  ici  de  tout  mon  coeur, 
et  d'etre  assez  heureux  pour  pouvoir  vivre  quelquefois  avec  eux.  Que  je  serois  bien 
plus  heureux  encore  si  je  pouvois  me  flater  de  pouvoir  lui  &tre  ici  bon  a  quelque 
chose ;  que  s’ils  en  doutent  tant  soit  peu,  ils  peuvent  me  mettre  k  l’^preuve,  et  que 
ce  sera  pour  moi  la  marque  d’amiti6  la  plus  ch&re  qu’ils  puissent  me  donner. 

Apres  tout  ce  verbiage,  qui  cependant  contient  autant  de  vcritds,  je  les  prie  de 

3  z  2 


540 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


recevoir  les  dix  derniers  volumes  de  mon  Mercure,  dont  je  viens  de  c6der  les  profits 
an  Sieur  de  la  Combe,  Libraire,  en  me  retirant  de  cette  eruelle  occupation  avec  5000 
livres  de  pension,  dont  megratifie  notre  bon  Roi. 

Le  paquet  leur  sera  remis  par  Mr.  de  la  Garde,  maitre  de  musique  de  Mesdames 
de  France,  auteur  connu  de  tr&s-bons  ouvrages  tant  a  I’Op^ra  qu’ailleurs,  gar^on 
aimable,  voyant  la  meilleure  compagnie  de  Paris,  et  qui  plus  est,  tr6s-galant  homme, 
et  mon  ami.  S’il  ne  partoit  dans  le  moment,  j’en  aurois  bien  encore  a  dire,  car  je 
n’enverrai  jamais  A  mon  cher  ami  Garrick  que  des  gens  dont  je  puisse  r^pondre  comme 
de  moi-meme. 

Sur  quoi  et  ensuivant,  je  le  salue,  l’aime,  l’honore,  et  l’embrasse  du  meilleur  de 
mon  coeur,  &c. 

1)e  La  Place. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK 

Paris,  Mercredi,  27  Juillet,  1768. 

My  ladyship  is  infuriata.  Les  Francois  sont  inconstans,  les  Francoises  legeres, 
dites-vous  cela,  Monsieur  ?  Very  well,  indeed.  Je  vous  abandonne  le  sexe  masculin, 

mais  pour  le  mien  respectez-le,  I  charge  you,  at  your  peril.  Ecrivez-moi  vite,  ou - 

des  menaces,  ma  foi !  patience  ;  1  am  not  in  such  a  hurry  as  your  lordship,  my  Lord 
Storm.  Je  n’ai  pas  tort  :  je  vous  ai  6crit,  vous  ne  m’avez  point  r^pondu  ;  je  vous  ai 
donn6  une  commission,  vous  ne  l’avez  point  faite  :  moi,  paisible,  douce,  j’ai  boud£, 
cri6,  peste,  jur6;  j’ai  dit  un  mal  horrible  de  vous,  cent  fois  moins  que  je  n’en  pensois, 
mais  beaucoup, — est-ce  oublier  ?  tant  que  l’on  a  du  d^pit,  de  la  bailie,  le  sentiment  n’est 
point  6teint,  le  moindre  souffle  peut  le  ranimer,  lui  rendre  sa  chaleur  et  son  activity. 
Si  j’^coutois  mon  coeur,  je  vous  aimerois  encore,  mais  —  c’est  vous  qui  etes  un  incon¬ 
stant, — je  veux  etre  fach^e. 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  a  re^u  trois  coups  d’^pee  depuis  que  vous  ne  l’avez  vu, 
il  se  porte  bien.  Je  ne  lui  ai  point  fait  de  plaintes  de  Mr.  Becket ;  je  lui  ai  conte 
historiquement  la  rage  ou  j’^tois  de  ne  pouvoir  tirer  des  livres  d  un  pays  ou  j’avois  un 
petit  fond.  S’il  a  dit  autre  chose,  c’est  de  sa  tete.  Au  reste,  ce  Mr.  Becket  est  trop 
occupe  pour  songer  a  moi,  et  je  ne  l’embarrasserai  de  ma  vie.  Je  ne  suis  pas  fort  habile 
en  calcul ;  mais  il  ne  me  paroit  point  du  tout  avantageux  de  recevoir  au  bout  de 
deux  ans  cent  soixante-cinq  livres  de  Mr.  Becket,  quand  je  pouvois  en  avoir  deux 
cents  de  Mr.  Humblot  pour  le  meme  objet.  Ne  tracassez  pas,  taisez-vous  ;  c’est  une 
bagatelle ;  je  vous  en  parle  seulement  pour  que  vous  ne  croyez  pas  ma  fortune  faite 
avec  Mr.  Becket.  Nos  marches  ne  le  ruineront  point,  I  assure  you. 

Mr.  Carera,  apres  m’avoir  cherchee  dans  la  rue  Royale,  ou  vous  m’avez  adress^e 
votre  lettre,  est  venu  chez-moi,  la  veille  de  son  depart.  Je  n’^tois  pas  6veill£e,  je  ne 
l’ai  point  vu.  Je  vous  suis  fort  obligee  de  vos  brochures ;  je  n’ai  encore  lue  que  la 
petite  pibce  compos^e  par  the  acting  manager  qui  n’aime  pas  les  grands  heros,  je  l’ai 
trouv6e  tr£s-folle  et  tres-jolie.  Il  faut  vous  expliquer  pourquoi  je  me  suis  si  fort  im- 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


541 


patientee  contre  Mr.  Becket  et  contre  vous.  Ce  n’est  point  une  simple  fantaisie  qui 
me  faisoit  souhaiter  les  pieces  dont  je  vous  avois  envoyee  la  liste.  Je  vais  vous  mettre 
dans  mon  secret,  car  e’en  est  un.  Je  me  lasse  de  faire  des  romans,  tout  au  beau 
milieu  de  celui  que  j’ai  ecrit  a  moitie  ;  le  degout  et  l’ennui  me  l’ont  fait  laisser  la.  Je 
le  reprendrai  peut-etre.  En  attendant,  pour  employer  mon  terns,  a  la  pri&re  de  mon 
libraire,  j’ai  entrepris  une  traduction  de  votre  theatre,  e’est  a  dire  des  comedies  nou- 
velles.  On  en  a  donne  plusieurs,  mais  mal  ecrites.  Je  mettrai  du  soin  a  cet  ouvrage, 
et  loin  d’affoiblir  l’original,  je  tacherai  par  de  leg&res  corrections  a  soutenir  l’honneur 
de  cette  coquine  de  nation  que  je  ne  puis  m’empecher  d’aimer.  Le  premier  volume 
est  pret.  On  n’y  mettra  point  mon  nom,  mais  Humblot  ne  se  taira  pas.  Nous 
sommes  convenus  qu’il  seroit  le  maitre  de  dire  la  verity,  etmoi  la  maitresse  de  mentir. 
Tout  cela  pour  6viter  la  criaillerie  du  peuple  traducteur  qui  va  m’arracher  les  yeux. 

Ca,  ecoutez-moi  bien ;  ceci  est  de  consequence  pour  moi.  Vous  me  demandez 
l’occasion  de  m’obliger,  de  m’etre  utile, — la  voila.  Otez  ma  liste  de  votre  tete:  j’ai 
charg6  l’aimable  Mr.  Porter  de  cette  affaire  ;  elle  ne  vous  regarde  plus  ;  ce  que  je 
vous  demande,  avec  instance,  e’est  un  catalogue  des  pieces  joues  sur  les  deux  theatres 
depuis  vingt  ans,  environ.  Point  de  tragedies,  point  d’op^ras  comiques,  des  comedies, 
de  celles  qui  ne  sont  pas  faites  sur  les  notres,  a  moins  quelles  ne  s’eloignent  absolu- 
ment  de  la  conduite  Franfoise.  11  ne  faudroit  pas  que  ce  catalogue  fut  £crit  par 
votre  jolie  patte  de  chat,  mais  par  une  main  qui  forma  des  caract&res  lisibles.  Serez- 
vous  assez  tranquille  en  parcourant  ma  lettre  pour  la  lire  tout  du  long  ?  Dieu  vous 
a  donne  un  bon  esprit,  mais  une  chienne  de  tete!  vous  lisez  en  courant,  vous  oubliez 
tout,  et  puis  vite  vite,  par  ami  tie,  par  g^nerosite,  par  bonte  de  coeur,  vous  prenez  tout 
ce  qui  se  trouve  sous  votre  main,  vous  me  l’envoyez.  Je  suis  sensible  a  cette  amitie, 
reconnoissante  de  vos  dons ;  mais  quand  je  vois  une  lettre  a  un  eveque — par  Saint 
George,  j’entends  les  propos  d’un  eveque  comme  le  haut  Allemand. 

J  ai  tous  vos  ouvrages.  On  vient  de  traduire  “  Le  Mariage  Clandestin.”  Quand 
vous  ferez  un  recueil  complet,  je  serai  charmee  de  le  tenir  de  vous,  et  d’en  parer  ma 
petite  bibliotheque. 

Comment  se  porte  votre  charmante  compagne  ?  dites-lui  de  ma  part  et  de  celle 
de  mon  amie,  tout  ce  que  vous  imaginerez  de  plus  tendre :  son  souvenir  nous  est 
toujours  cher.  Je  regr&te  beaucoup  Mr.  Porter,  que  le  Roi  de  la  Grande  Bretagne 
vient  de  deplacer.  C’est  un  homme  doux,  poli,  prudent,  sensible,  obligeant.  J’ai  requ 
de  lui  mille  petits  services  !  tout  le  monde  l’aimoit :  son  successeur  sera  bien  heureux 
s'il  reussit  apres  lui ;  pour  moi  je  le  hais  a  la  mort,  quel  qu’il  soit. 

Le  Baron  d’Holbach  est  a  la  campagne  :  il  est  las  de  l’esprit,  de  la  philosophic, 
des  autres,  de  lui-m&me  !  il  a  le  spleen.  Les  biens  sont  partag^s,  le  riche  s’ennuie,  et 
souvent  le  pauvre  s’amuse.  Pope  a  raison, — tout  est  bien. 

Vous  repeterai-je  votre  le^on  ?  j’en  aibien  envie.  Un  catalogue, — entendez-vous, 
mon  bel  ami  ?  Je  vous  prie  aussi  de  me  faire  avoir  l’avenir  toutes  les  pieces  nou- 
velles.  Je  ferai  6crire  a  Mr.  Francois  par  un  de  ses  amis,  vous  lui  remettrez  ce  que 
vous  voudrez,  et  son  courier  me  l’apportera.  Je  vous  enverrai  le  nom  de  cet  ami. 


542 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Voycz  :  ricn  n’est  mieux  explique,  plus  minutieusement ;  gageons  que  vous  ne  s$avez 
pas  un  mot  de  tout  ce  que  je  vous  ai  dit. 

Saurin  a  fait  “  Le  Joueur”  de  Mr.  Moore.  II  y  a  mis  du  noir,  de  l’affrcux.  II  a 
pris  dans  le  roman  de  Cleveland  un  endroit  oil  le  lniros  veut  tuer  ses  cnfans.  Cela 
n’est  pas  mal  dans  Cleveland,  dont  la  bonne  conduite  lui  fait  croire  le  malheur  insG 
parable  de  la  vie ;  mais  Beverley,  qui  a  ruin6  son  fils,  est  un  sot  de  vouloir  le  tuer. 
Cela  fait  un  ridicule  singulier  :  car  ayant  un  poignard  kla  main  dans  la  prison,  Saurin 
pouvoit  au  moins  ^pargner  le  poison.  On  a  dit  un  mal  horrible  de  la  piece,  mais  on  a 
couru  pour  la  voir,  et  Mol£  a  paru  merveilleux  dans  un  rble  oil  je  voudrois  bien 
vous  voir. 

Ma  compagne  vous  embrasse  une  fois,  et  Madame  Garrick  deux.  Moi,  je  vous 
remercie,  et  je  vous  embrasse  de  tout  mon  coeur,  vous,  et  cette  dame  si  bien  faite,  et 
si  aimable,  your  lady,  Sir. 

Adieu,  mon  tr^s-cber  ami ;  je  vous  querelle,  je  vous  tourmente,  je  ne  vous  en 
aime  pas  moins.  Je  ne  suis  point  une  inconstante,  mais  une  bonne  et  sincere  amie 
du  little  acting  manager.  Croyez  que  je  suis  avec  les  plus  tendres  sentimens  toute 
it  vous, 

Riccoboxi. 

Youdrez-vous  bien  faire  mettre  l’incluse  k  la  poste:  vous  m’obligerez  infiniment. 
On  auroit  bien  du  placer  ici  mon  pauvre  Changuion  Que  diantre  fait-on  en  Es- 
})agne  !  il  y  prendra  les  moulins  k  vent  pour  des  grants.  Poor  soul !  e’est  une  bonne 
et  honnete  creature.  Bon  jour.  Your  very  humble  servant. 


DE  MADAME  RTCCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Nox,  Monsieur,  non,  je  ne  suis  ni  ingrate,  ni  malhonn£te.  Say  you  so,  Mrs. 
Pert?  Oui,  mon  ami,  et  je  le  jure  dans  la  v£rit6  de  mon  coeur.  Les  apparences  me 
condamnent,  je  l’avoue.  Si  on  daigne  penser  a  moi  dans  cette  isle,  ou  je  voudrois 
habiter,  e’est  pour  m’accuser  d’une  impardonnable  negligence.  A  saucy  woman  !  dit 
Mr.  Murphy  :  no  answer !  a  pretty  piece  of  French  insolence  !  a  very  thankful  minx, 
indeed  !  Mr.  Becket,  poor  soul !  croit  son  balot  perdu,  maudit  son  sort ;  j’ecrie  ;  God 
bless  me !  Ma’am  is  bawling,  and  bawling  again  and  again  !  Yotre  charmante  com¬ 
pagne  avec  ce  souris  fin,  qui  lui  sied  si  bien,  vous  badine,  vous  raille  :  you  are  too 
good,  my  dear ;  why  do  you  trouble  yourself  with  such  insufferable  a  creature  ?  I 
hate  the  thing  extremely.  Et  vous,  mon  aimable  David,  plus  sacre  pour  moi  que  le 
saint  Roi  d’Israel,  etes-vous  faclie,  bien  fach6?  H^las !  loin  de  m^riter  les  reproches 
de  mes  amis,  j’aurois  excit6  leur  piti6  s’ils  avoient  pu  deviner  mes  tristes  occupations. 
Enferm^e,  voyant  a  peine  le  jour,  entour^e  de  medecins,  de  pretres,  servant  une 
malade  exigeante,  de  mauvaise  humeur,  exagerant  les  maux,  se  pr^tendant  a  1  agonie, 
en  d6pit  de  la  faculty  je  me  ruine,  je  m’ennuie,  je  me  d6sole ;  et  pour  comble  de 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


chagrin,  je  fais  partager  a  ma  bonne,  a  ma  tendre  amie,  toute  l’amertume  de  ma 
facheuse  situation  !  et  cela  pendant  trois  mois.  Cette  malade  est  ma  m£re.  Elle  me 
con^ut  en  se  jouant,  me  vit  grandir  avec  chagrin,  ne  m’aima  jamais,  et  me  contraria 
toujours.  Elle  ne  s’en  croit  pas  moins  en  droit  de  tout  attendre  de  ma  reconnoissance. 
Une  jolie  femme  devroit  mourir  a  trente  ans,  au  moins  celle  qui  n’a  rien  a  mettre  a 
la  place  de  la  beaute  :  en  cessant  d’etre  jeune,  elle  devient  insociable. — Mais  laissons 
ce  sujet,  il  conduit  a  de  terribles  reflexions  sur  l’humanitd.  Femele ,  direz-vous  ?  Eh, 
mon  Dieu  !  les  deux  sexes  se  ressemblent  cruellement,  et  l’un  ne  doit  pas  rire  des 
travel’s  de  l’autre. 

Vous  croyez  m  aimer  plus  que  je  ne  vous  aime  ?  une  personne  vaine  seroit  peut- 
etre  flat^e  de  vous  laisser  cette  idee,  mais  une  ame  sensible  en  est  bless6e.  Vous 
m’avez  donnd  plus  de  preuves  de  votre  amitie  qu’il  ne  m’a  et6  possible  de  vous  en 
donner  de  la  mienne,  je  conviens  de  cette  v£rite.  Mais  faites  naitre  des  occasions, 
calculez  ensuite,  et  si  vous  me  trouvez  en  reste  je  consens  a  etre  nominee  an  ungrate¬ 
ful  devil !  Cet  endroit  de  votre  lettre  m’a  touche,  je  vous  l’assure  ;  il  m’est  doux  d’avoir 
un  ami  tel  que  vous  ;  cette  certitude  est  une  des  plus  eonsolantes  pensees  oil  j  aime  a 
m'arreter  dans  les  momens  oil  je  cherche  a  diminuer  mes  peines  par  d’agreables 
compensations. 

Ce  que  j’envie  le  plus  au  Roi  de  Danemark  est  le  plaisir  qu’il  a  du  sentir  en  vous 
voyant.  Ce  Prince  est  l’idole  de  la  cour,  et  l’objet  de  la  curiosite  de  la  ville  :  on 
s’empresse  a  le  regarder,  on  parle  beaucoup  de  son  esprit.  J’ai  trouv£  dans  un  de  ses 
sujets  toutes  les  qualites  que  vous  m’annonciez  :  Mr.  Stourz  est  a  la  fois  un  homme 
de  nitrite,  et  un  tr^s-aimable  homme.  On  ne  pent  trop  regreter  que  son  sejour  ici 
soit  un  passage.  Il  est  facheux  de  lier  une  simple  et  courte  connoissance  avec  une 
personne  dont  on  aimeroit  a  faire  un  ami.  Il  est  malicieux  pourtant,  il  se  mele  de 
caract^riser  les  nations.  Lasse  d’entendre  r6p6ter  les  propos  de  son  maitre :  eh  quoi, 
s’est-il  £crie,  toujours  “  il  a  dit,”  “  il  a  repondu  ?”  A  Londres  on  contoit  ses  actions,  a 
Paris  on  conte  ses  ions  mots.  Moi,  Framboise,  j’appelle  cela  une  impertinence,  en- 
tendez-vous  ?  en  Angleterre  vous  aurez  le  front  de  trouver  cela  joli. 

A  present  parlous  d’affaires.  J’aurois  profit^  de  vos  avis,  s’il  m’avoit  ete  possible 
de  rappeller  a  ma  memoire  cette  merveilleuse  lettre  que  vous  me  vantez.  Je  me  suis 
souvenue  de  deux  ou  trois  lignes,  vous  les  reconnoitrez  dans  l’avertissement  de  ce  bel 
ouvrage,  tr&s-propre  a  persuader  qu’en  me  donnant  les  airs  de  traduire,  je  n’entends 
pas  un  mot  d’Anglois.  Vous  voudrez  bien  remettre  a  Mr.  Murphy  l’exemplaire  qui 
lui  est  adress6.  Je  souhaitois  placer  a  la  fin  du  volume  un  petit  61oge  de  la  pi£ce 
Angloise  ;  mais  comine  il  eut  fait  la  critique  du  prejuge  ala  mode, la crainte  d’offenser 
les  partisans  de  cette  com^die  m’a  forceede  le  suprimer.  Un  autre  motif  m’y  a  deter¬ 
mine  :  je  promets  de  ne  pas  m’^tablir  juge  entre  les  deux  nations,  et  c’eut  ^t6  man- 
quer  ^  ma  parole.  La  pi&ce  de  Mr.  Murphy  a  charme  le  censeur,  c’est  Cr6billon.  Il 
l’a  trouvee  neuve,  comique,  et  fort  au-dessus  des  deux  originaux.  J’espire  que  le 
public  rendra  la  m^me  justice  a  Mr.  Murphy. 

S^avez-vous  pourquoi  j’ai  demand^  si  obstinement  les  comedies  que  par  votre 


544 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


inoyen  j’ai  enfin  revues  ?  Oh  devinez  :  c’cst  que  mon  ami  Changuion  les  avoit  marquee 
sur  un  catalogue  :  et  moi  de  m’entfiter  de  son  choix  !  Stuff,  very  stuff!  La  maladie 
de  ma  mere  ne  m’a  pas  laiss6  le  loisir  d’^crire  une  ligne,  maisj’ai  lu  :  de  mauvais  fonds 
puis&s  dans  le  Francois,  rien  de  vif,  de  singulier ;  des  caractdes  annonds,  sans  £tre 
soutenus  ;  des  satyres  personnclles  ou  locales,  rien  de  bon  pour  nous.  J’ai  relu  toutes 
vos  jolies  pieces:  vous  avez  embelli  beaucoup  de  nos  sujets,  mais  ils  sont  trop  connus 
pour  les  presenter  a  des  lecteurs  avides  de  nouveaut^s.  C’est  grand  dommage !  car 
sans  vouloir  vous  flater,  ce  que  vous  appellez  vos  farces,  sont  les  plus  charmantes 
comedies  du  monde;  vous  avez  fait  du  “  Souper  mal  Appr6t6,”  sujet  triste,  maussade 
en  Francois,  qui  finit  mal,  une  pikce  bien  conduite,  tres-amusante,  et  qui  se  termine 
par  le  bonheur  d’un  homme  que  le  Francois  laisse  ou  il  l’a  pris. 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chastelux  n’a  gude  ete  resident  a  Paris  depuis  sa  gudison  :  il 
n’a  pas  re^u  vos  lettres,  et  me  t^moigna  hier  un  regret  veritable  de  s’etre  attir£  le 
reproche  obligeant  que  vous  lui  faites.  Il  aime  les  Anglois,  il  le  dit  hautement. 
L’Abb6  Gagliani  pretend  qu’on  ne  doit  les  croire,  ni  l’un  ni  l’autre,  sur  le  rdit  dif¬ 
ferent  qu'ils  font  des  habitans  de  la  Grande  Bretagne  :  le  petit  pantalon  d’Abbe  n’a 
vu  que  des  moines  a  Londres,  des  moines  tr&s-bien  regies  !  mais  en  recompense  il  a 
fait  le  plus  grand  eioge  des  boutiques.  Xe  vous  ai-je  pas  deja  ecrit  cette  betise-la  ? 
Le  Chevalier  a  vu  des  homines  estimables,  et  comme  il  est  un  des  plus  honnetes  gen- 
tilshommes  de  France,  il  dit  son  sentiment  avec  une  noble  franchise,  en  depit  de  tous 
les  philosophes.  Ces  Messieurs  n’aiment  plus  les  Anglois,  parcequ’ils  pensent  que 
les  Anglois  veulent  soutenir  la  religion,  et  la  croyent  utile  au  gouvernement.  “  L’hon- 
neur  suffit,”  disent-ils,  ie  l’honneur  est  le  dieu  de  la  terre.”  Il  s’en  faut  bien,  mon 
ami,  que  ces  partisans  zeies  de  I'honneur  suivent  les  loix  qu’ils  imposent ;  la  plupart  ne 
les  connoissent  pas.  Ils  ont  des  tetes  exaltees,  et  des  cceurs  froids  et  insensibles  :  ce 
sont  des  foux  dangereux,  qui  donnent  des  iddes  et  detruisent  le  sentiment. 

Vous  voudrez  bien  faire  tenir  l’incluse  a  Mr.  Murphy,  et  puis  vous  informer  tout 
doucement,  sans  faire  semblant  de  rien,  s’il  a  toutes  les  betises  de  votre  amie.  S’il 
n’en  a  pas  une,  vous  les  prendrez  chez  Mr.  Becket,  pour  les  lui  donner  de  ma  part ; 
s’il  en  a  une  partie,  vous  la  compl6terez,  enfin  vous  arrangerez  cela  pour  le  mieux 
avec  votre  prudence  accoutumd. 

Adieu,  mon  aimable,  mon  tendre  ami.  Souvenez-vous  de  la  liste  ;  comptez  sur 
ma  reconnoissance  et  sur  tous  les  sentimens  que  vous  mditez  a  tant  de  titres. 

J’ose  embrasser  la  belle  dame  que  vous  nommez  jalouse  ;  toute  en  colere,  toute 
impatiente  qu’elle  est  de  vous  voir  drire.  A  fib.  Je  l’aime  trop  pour  me  persuader 
qu’elle  soit  insensible  a  mon  affection. 

Ma  compagne  est  toute  honteuse  d’avoir  fait  une  traduction,  elle  mouroit  de  peur 
que  Mr.  Moore  ne  vint  l’etrangler.  On  lui  a  dit  qu’il  etoit  mort,  elle  en  a  bdii  le 
del;  puis  s’est  drie,  il  viendra  me  tirer  les  pieds,  mais  je  l’ai  assume  que  les  Protestans 
ne  se  donnoient  pas  la  peine  de  revenir  de  l’autre  monde,  et  qu’il  falloit  etre  bon 
Catholique,  et  tr&s-romain,  pour  s’amuser  a  ces  gentillesses.  Elle  vous  embrasse, 
vous  et  votre  aimable  compagne.  Eh  bien,  finirai-je  ?  oui.  Adieu,  adieu,  mon  bon 
ami.  Riccoboni. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


545 


Remerciez,  je  vous  prie,  Mr.  Becket :  je  n’ai  pas  le  terns  de  lui  ecrire  a  present ; 
mais  je  n’oublie  point  que  je  dois  le  faire.  La  convalescence  de  ma  mere  m’occnpe 
presque  autant  que  sa  maladie. 

J’ai  toutes  les  pieces  qui  sont  sur  votre  liste :  they  will  not  do,  except  “  The 
False  Delicacy,”  et  “  The  Deuce  is  in  Him.” 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  CARARA. 

A  Paris. 

Vous  me  tirez,  Monsieur,  d’une  grande  inquietude.  Accoutum6e  a  l'exactitude 
de  Mr.  Garrick,  je  ne  concevois  pas  la  raison  de  son  silence.  Elle  me  chagrine  beau- 
coup  ;  je  lui  suis  fort  attachee,  moins  pour  la  superiority  de  ses  talens  que  pour  son 
m^rite  r6el.  Je  profiterai  de  votre  complaisance  en  vous  envoy  ant  quatre  exemplaires 
dun  livre  que  j’ai  promis  a  Mr.  Garrick,  et  que  je  manquois  d’occasion  pour  faire 
passer  a  Londres. 

Je  suis  facliee,  Monsieur,  que  ma  solitude  soit  assez  eioign^e  du  monde  pour 
paroitre  un  pyierinage  a  faire  a  ceux  qui  habitent  le  Fauxbourg  St.  Germain.  Je  me 
souviens  fort  bien  que  vous  y  vintes  un  matin,  et  que  vous  laissates  a  la  fille  qui  me 
sert  l’id^e  du  plus  bel  homme  du  monde.  Cela  me  console  de  ne  vous  point  voir. 
Comme  je  suis  un  peu  romanesque,  votre  apparition  m’auroit  peut-etre  frappee  comme 
elle,  et  j’aurois  6t6  forc^e  de  courir  sur  vos  pas,  et  de  voyager  toute  ma  vie. * 

On  vous  portera,  Dimanche,  le  paquet  adresse  k  Mr.  Garrick. 

J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre  votre  tres-humble  servante, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Malade  !  ne  pouvoir  Ecrire !  eh,  mon  Dieu  !  qu’avez-vous  done,  mon  aimable  et 
cher  ami  ?  Dans  quel  terns  je  vous  embarrasse  de  mes  plates  affaires !  que  je  suis 
touchee  de  votre  situation  !  H^las,  on  ne  peut  done  etre  heureux  ?  avec  de  la  for¬ 
tune,  tant  de  c61£brite,  de  merite,  d’agr^mens,  une  si  charmante  compagne,  souffrir, 
se  voir  enlever  la  douceur  de  la  vie  !  Grand  sujet  de  penser,  de  s’attrister  par  ses  re¬ 
flexions  ;  mais  je  ne  veux  pas  ennuier  mon  pauvre  ami,  que  je  plains  de  tout  mon  coeur. 

Voudrez-vous  bien  faire  remettre  les  exemplaires  a  leur  adresse  ;  je  n’ai  os6  charger 
Mr.  Carara  d’un  gros  paquet,  de  peur  qu’il  ne  le  jettat  dans  la  mer.  II  n’a  jamais  pu 
se  resoudre  a  venir  me  voir,  a  cause  de  leloignement  de  nos  quartiers  ;  cela  me 
persuade  que  e’est  un  vrai  paresseux.  Faites-moi  donner  de  vos  non velles,  je  vous 
en  prie.  Je  m’occupe  beaucoup  des  personnes  que  j’aime,  et  je  ne  penserai  point  h 

*  The  reader  remembers  that  it  was  the  business  of  M.  Carara  to  travel.  With  this  hint,  he  will  perhaps 
agree  with  the  Editor  in  admiring  the  present  paragraph,  as  a  beautiful  specimen  of  grace,  ease,  and  neat¬ 
ness.  In  English,  the  same  ideas  would  look  strained  and  vulgar.  See  the  reason  of  this  from  the  fair 
•writer’s  pen,  page  547- — Ed. 

VOL.  II. 


4  A 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


54t> 

vou8  faire  chagrin  jusqucs  au  moment  ou  japprendrai  le  parfait  r^tablissement  de 
vdtre  sante. 

Voik\  un  exemplaire  pour  Mr.  Becket.  Je  ne  veux  pas  le  lui  donner.  Je  pre¬ 
tends  le  troquer  contre  un  roman  qu’il  alloit  debiter  quand  Mr.  Changuion  est  parti 
de  Londres.  C’est,  je  crois,  “  The  Feeling  Man.”  Si  ce  livre  n’est  pas  du  maudit 
radoteur  qui  a  fait  “  John  Buncle,”  je  serai  bien  obligee  a  Mr.  Becket  de  me  l’en- 
voyer,  s’il  trouve  une  occasion  de  le  faire  passer  en  France. 

Je  ne  veux  pas  abuser  de  votre  loisir,  encore  moins  de  votre  patience.  Adieu, 
moil  tres-aimable  ami.  Je  le  repute,  donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles,  et  qu’elles  soient 
bonnes.  J’assure  Madame  Garrick  des  plus  tendres  sentimens.  Ma  compagne  vous 
embrasse  tous  deux,  et  je  finis  vite  de  peur  de  vous  lasser,  et  de  vous  donner  la 
migraine.  Riccoboni. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Si  en  partant  pour  Londres,  un  Francpois  me  prioit  d’^crire  a  Mr.  Garrick,  s'il 
s’empressoit  a  lui  porter  ma  lettre,  a  se  procurer  le  plaisir  de  voir  et  d’entretenir  un 
homme  dont  la  reputation  est  connue  ici,  cela  me  paroitroit  tout  simple :  mais  c’est 
un  Ecossois,  qui  rempli  d’admiration  pour  vos  talens,  d’estime  pour  votre  caractere, 
souhaite  que  je  l’introduise  aupr&s  de  vous,  et  veut  absolument  voir  de  pres  the  charm¬ 
ing  Mr.  Garrick,  avant  de  retourner  dans  sa  patrie. 

Mr.  Liston  est  cet  Ecossois,  c’est  un  jeune  homme,  mais  c’est  un  homme  sense, 
honnete,  instruit,  sage  dans  sa  conduite,  et  distingue  par  ses  principes  :  il  a  de  l’esprit, 
du  merite,  et  de  la  modestie.  Je  lui  ai  beaucoup  d’obligation ;  il  a  bien  voulu  s’en- 
nuier  quelquefois  a  m’entendre  lire  de  l’Anglois :  je  lui  dois  de  la  reconnoissance,  et 
ses  aimables  qualit6s  m’attaclient  sinc&rement  a  lui.  Je  ne  veux  plus  voir  d’Anglois, 

je  crois  ;  on  forme  des  liaisons,  on  commence  des  amities,  et  puis . et  puis  il 

faut  tout  rompre,  tout  briser ;  ce  sont  des  chagrins  que  l’on  se  prepare.  Est-ce  que  je 
ne  regrette  pas  Mr.  Burke  ?  est-ce  que  je  n’ai  pas  ete  toute  attendrie  de  son  brusque 
depart  ?  est-ce  que  je  ne  me  desole  pas  tous  les  jours  de  ne  pouvoir  pas  quitter  ce 
vilain  Paris  ?  est-ce  que  je  ne  voudrois  pas  aller  a  Londres  embrasser  Madame 
Garrick  ?  admirer  son  cher  mari  ?  Eh,  mon  Lieu  !  j’ai  bien  assez  de  raison  de  m’at- 
trister  sans  remplir  mon  coeur  de  vains  projets,  d’inutiles  d^sirs,  et  de  mille  regrets 
douloureux.  Adieu,  mon  aimable  et  cher  ami.  Si  ma  lettre  vous  ennuye,  prenez- 
vous  en  a  Mr.  Liston.  Sans  lui,  je  ne  songeois  pas  a  vous  tourmenter.  Mes  plus 
tendres  complimens  a  Madame  Garrick :  ma  compagne  l’embrasse  a  l’etouffer. 

Marie  Riccoboni. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  7  Septembre,  1768. 

Si  je  n’^tois  pas  votre  amie,  votre  tendre,  votre  constante  amie,  vous  pourriez  me 
nommer  an  ingrateful  slut.  Je  vous  querelle,  je  vous  tourmente,  et  sans  vous  lasser 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


547 


de  mes  impertinences,  vous  m’obligez,  vous  me  rendez  mille  services ;  croyez-le,  mon 
tr^s-cher  et  tres-aimable  ami,  je  vous  conserve  line  sincere,  une  vive  affection  :  ma 
reconnoissance  l’augmente,  et  jamais  le  terns  ne  l’affoiblira.  S’il  m’etoit  possible 
d’aller  vous  faire  une  visite  dans  cette  charmante  campagne,  oil  vous  avez  la  bonty  de 
me  d6sirer,  la  crainte  de  facher  Madame  Garrick  ne  me  retiendroit  pas ;  on  ne  lui 
deplait  point  en  cherissant  l’homme  qu’elle  pr^ftre  a  tous  les  autres,  et  puis,  je  suis 
une  belle  guenon  en  v6rit6,  pour  inspirer  de  la  jalousie  a  une  jolie  femme.  A  sa 
place  je  vous  battrois,  je  vous  demanderois  raison  de  ce  caquet-la:  j'en  serois  fort  en 
col^re. 

Parlons  de  mes  maudites  affaires,  puisque  vous  voulez  bien  vous  en  meler. 
Jamais  contrariety  ne  m’a  yte  plus  sensible,  ne  m’a  tant  revoltee.  Pendant  le  cours 
d’une  ann6e,  ne  pouvoir  faire  venir  de  Londres  une  vingtaine  de  comedies  !  je  les 
aurois  eu  de  la  Chine.  J’ai  jure  comme  un  payen  ;  a  present  je  prends  patience,  mais 
Dieu  vous  dise  avec  quelle  rage. 

N’ayant  pas  de  quoi  faire  un  second  volume,  j’ai  arret6  l’impression  du  premier ; 
il  paroitra  dans  deux  mois  au  plutot.  Vous  l’aurez  au  sortir  de  la  presse.  Peut-etre 
n'en  serez  vous  pas  aussi  content  que  votre  prevention  en  ma  faveur  vous  le  fait 
esp^rer.  Vous  trouverez  une  grande  alteration  dans  le  dialogue  ;  j’ai  pris  de  furieuses 
libert^s,  je  vous  en  avertis.  Les  deux  auteurs  Anglois  crieront  a  l'ineptie,  a  l’igno- 
rance  ;  diront  qu’on  ne  les  a  pas  entendus !  Ils  auront  raison  a  Londres,  mais  ils 
auront  tort  ici.  Je  n’ai  pas  pretendu  les  corriger,  mais  rendre  leur  ouvrage  plus 
capable  de  plaire  a  mes  compatriotes. 

Mon  ami,  legoiit  de  toutes  les  nations  se  r^unit  sur  de  certains  points  :  le  naturel, 
la  verity,  le  sentiment  intyressent  ygalement  l’Anglois,  le  Francois,  le  Russe,  et  le 
Turc.  Mais  l’esprit,  le  badinage,  la  saillie,  le  ton  de  la  bonne  plaisanterie,  changent 
de  nom  en  changeant  de  climat.  Ce  qui  est  vif,  Mger,  gracieux  dans  une  langue, 
devient  froid,  lourd,  insipide,  ou  grossier  dans  une  autre:  la  prycision,  la  justesse, 
sources  de  l’agrement,  ne  s’y  trouvent  plus.  Ce  qui  yieveroit  un  eclat  de  rire  en 
France  pourroit  attirer  une  hue  a  Londres  ou  a  Vienne.  Partout  la  plaisanterie  dy~ 
pend  d’un  rien,  et  souvent  ce  rien  est  local.  En  genyral,  ceux  qui  se  font  un  metier 
de  traduire,  ont  peu  d’idee  de  ces  nuances  dyiicates :  aussi  n’ai-je  jamais  vu  une  tra¬ 
duction  supportable. 

J’ai  choisi  “  The  Way  to  Keep  Him;”  ma  compagne  a  traduit  “  The  Foundling.” 
La  premiere  de  ces  deux  pMces  est  en  vyrity  tres-bien  faite.  Le  caractyre  du  mari 
me  paroit  mieux  imagine  que  celui  du  “  Prejuge  a  la  mode.”  II  est  plus  naturel,  plus 
singulier.  II  devient  plaisant  en  Anglois  ;  en  Francois  il  est  trop  raisonnable  pour 
adopter  un  pryjuge  qui  n’existe  en  aucun  pays  du  monde,  car,  aprfes  tout,  c’est  si  peu 
un  ridicule  d’aimer  sa  femme,  que  dans  l’eloge  d’un  honn£te  homme  on  y  fera  toujours 
entrer  ses  egards  pour  la  sienne.  IMr.  Murphy  a  fondu  admirablement  les  deux  sujets 
dont  il  a  fait  une  comydie  toute  nouvelle,  son  denouement  est  plein  d’art  et  d’agrement ; 
je  voudrois  avoir  toutes  les  pMces  qu’il  a  composees. 

“  Tlie  Foundling”  est  un  trys-joli  roman.  La  scyne  de  Sir  Roger  et  de  son  fils 

4  a  2 


.348 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


est  un  chef-d’oeuvre,  etquand  vous  la  jouez  elle  doit  en  etre  deux  ;  mais,  n’en  d^plaise 
l’amour  paternel  de  Mr.  Moore  pour  Faddle,  ce  personnage  est  detestable,  on  lie 
peut  le  souffrir  vis-a-vis  d  une  fille  decente  ;  comme  je  vous  le  disois  tout  a  l’heure, 
nous  avons  gate  tout  cola  :  oui,  ma  foi,  gate,  massacre  pour  l’Angleterre.  Lcs  deux 
auteurs  nous  donneront  au  diable,  mais  ils  recevront  ici  des  applaudissemens  dont 
l’exactitude  les  auroit  prive,  et  ceux  qui  n’entendent  pas  la  langue  Angloise,  ne  se 
douteront  pas  des  changemens  qu’on  a  faits. 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  m’a  pr&t6  le  “  Suspicious  Husband.”  Itien  ne  res- 
semble  mieux  a  line  piece  Italienne, — beaucoup  d’intrigue,  point  d’interet,  un  person¬ 
nage  qui  ne  tient  point  au  sujet.  On  ne  supporteroit  point  ici  Pindecence  de  Ranger. 
Les  tr£s-indecens  Francois  deviennent  deiicats  sur  lcur  theatre,  k  mesure  qu’ils  le 
sont  moins  dans  leur  conduite.  L’oreille  chaste  est,  dit-on,  partout  une  preuve 
assuree  de  la  depravation  des  moeurs,  et  je  le  croirois  assez.  Quand  nos  peres  etoient 
des  saints,  on  representoit  devant  eux  des  horreurs  qui  feroient  fuir  les  athees  de 
notre  siede. 

II  m’est  bien  egal  d’avoir  des  pieces  representees  a  Londres,  a  Dublin,  a  Edin- 
bourg,  en  province,  ou  dans  le  colonnies,  pourvu  qu’elles  soient  bonnes,  singulieres, 
ou  plaisantes.  Les  anciennes  ne  conviennent  point  au  plan  de  mon  ouvrage.  On  a 
pris  les  plus  jolies,  on  les  a  traduites,  personne  ne  les  lit.  Quand  vous  aurez  fait  faire 
une  liste,  envoyez-la  cachetee  chez  Mr.  Francois,  a  l’adresse  de  Mr.  de  Bourdonne. 
C’est  un  de  ses  amis  qui  lui  ecrira  pour  le  prevenir ;  par  cette  voye  j’aurai  prompte- 
ment  et  surement  ce  que  vous  voudrez  bien  me  faire  passer. 

Adieu,  mon  digne  et  cher  ami ;  si  vous  souhaitez  mobliger  et  nCetre  utile,  comme 
vous  avez  la  bonte  de  me  le  dire,  des  qu’il  paroitra  une  pi£ce  nouvelle,  faites-la  moi 
tenir  avant  que  les  petits  traducteurs  a  la  feuille  puissent  s’en  emparer.  Et  pour  me 
rendre  une  liberte  que  vous  m’avez  otee,  consentez  a  tenir  un  petit  compte  des  frais, 
nous  le  reglerons  tous  les  ans,  et  Mr.  Higden,  secretaire  de  votre  Ambassadeur,  se 
chargera  du  remboursement.  Alors  je  serai  plus  hardie,  je  vous  donnerai  plus  d’em- 
barras,  mais  je  vous  aimerai  encore  davantage,  si  pourtant  cela  est  possible.  Ma 
compagne  vous  embrasse,  vous  et  votre  charmante  wife.  Et  moi,  je  vous  assure  tous 
deux  de  ma  plus  tendre  amitie. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 


6  Octobre. 

Encoee  une  lettre  !  oh,  prenez  patience,  mon  bon  ami :  avant  pen  vous  en  aurez 
une  autre,  et  puis  encore  une  autre  peut-£tre.  Ce  sera  le  diable  celle-la  :  vous  verrez. 
Aujourd’huy  je  vous  £cris  uniquement  pour  vous  prevenir  sur  une  visite  que  vous 
recevrez  a  Londres.  Mr.  Smith,  un  Ecossois,  homme  d’un  tr^s-grand  mirite,  aussi 
distingu6  par  son  bon  naturel,  par  la  douceur  de  son  caractfcre,  que  par  son  esprit  et 
son  sfavoir,  me  demande  une  lettre  pour  vous.  \  ous  verrez  un  philosophe  moral  et 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


549 


pratique  ;  gay,  riant,  a  cent  lieues  de  la  p6danterie  des  notres.  II  vous  estime  beau- 
coup,  et  desire  vous  connoitre  particulierement.  Donnez  son  nom  a  votre  porte,  je 
vous  en  prie,  vous  perdriez  beaucoup  a  ne  pas  le  voir,  et  je  serois  d£sol6e  de  ne  pas 
recevoir  de  lui  un  detail  du  bon  accueil  que  vous  lui  aurez  fait. 

L’obligeant  Air.  Changuion  a  la  complaisance  de  vous  faire  passer  toutes  mes  im¬ 
pertinences.  Si  j’ai  le  malheur  de  le  voir  aller  je  ne  s^ai  ou,  je  vous  laisserai  bien 
plus  tranquille,  et  j’en  serai  fachee.  Je  voudrois  bien  que  votre  cour  l’employat  ici, 
mais  a  peine  ai-je  un  ami  qu’on  me  l’enl&ve.  J’ai  bien  envie  de  faire  un  parti  et  de 
troubler  votre  gouvernement.  Si  je  pouvois  entrer  dans  cette  remuante  Chambre  des 
Communes,  je  vous  ferois  ma  foi  bannir  en  France,  vous,  Madame  Garrick,  et  cinq 
ou  six  autres,  surtout  vous,  Mr.  Changuion  et  Mr.  Smith.  Donnez  son  nom  a  votre 
porte,  je  vous  le  r6p£te.  S’il  ne  vous  voit  pas,  je  vous  Strangle.  Adieu,  mon  aimable, 
mon  tendre  ami.  Comptez,  vous  et  votre  pr^cieuse  compagne,  sur  toutes  les  affec¬ 
tions  de  mon  cceur. 

Riccoboni. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Mardi,  4  Novembre. 

Comptez  sur  les  sermens  d’une  femme  !  Je  ne  voulois  plus  vous  6crire  :  si,  disois- 
je  :  ne  me  parlez  jamais  de  ce  negligent  Garrick.  Une  occasion  se  pr^sente,  a  melan¬ 
choly  one  indeed ;  je  me  vois  aupr&s  de  mon  secretaire,  le  papier  est  la,  mes  doigts 
touchent  une  plume,  je  n’ai  pas  le  moindre  dessein  de  m’en  servir,  je  ne  S9ais  comment 
cela  se  fait,  mais  je  la  tiens,  elle  court,  et  qui  la  guide  ?  l’idee  du  petit  paresseux. 

J’esp^rois  que  Mr.  Changuion  nous  resteroit,  je  le  d^sirois  au  moins  ;  vous  aviez 
bien  raison  de  dire  qu’il  seroit  ciime  a  son  tour,  mais  la  moitie  de  la  prediction  ne  seja 
pas  aussi  juste,  il  ne  sera  point  oublie  a  son  tour,  non  jamais.  Je  vous  remercie  de  me 
l’avoir  fait  connoitre.  Vous,  mon  aimable  ami,  remerciez-le,  je  vous  en  prie,  de 
toutes  les  attentions  qu’il  a  bien  voulu  avoir  pour  moi :  he  is  a  sweet  creature ;  an 
amiable,  a  worthy  gentleman.  I  shall  never  forget  him.  Je  voudrois  &tre  une  Lili- 
putienne,  je  me  mettrois  dans  sa  manche  pour  aller  vous  voir. 

Nous  avons  enfin  la  relation  de  la  querelle  de  Air.  Hume  et  de  Jean-Jaques. 
Madame  Garrick  y  est  nomm^e,  elle  ne  s’attendoit  pas  A  entrer  dans  ce  caquet-la.  11 
6toit  bien  naturel  de  pr£f£rer  le  plaisir  d'etre  avec  elle,  a  celui  d’entretenir  Air.  Pen- 
neck  ;  ni  pretres,  ni  museum  ne  valent  sa  compagnie.  Rousseau  est  foil ;  le  succes 
de  ses  ouvrages  a  d6rang6  sa  tete.  Peu  de  gens  sipavent  etre  nobles  quand  ils  pos- 
s£dent  une  grande  fortune,  peu  de  gens  d'esprit  ont  le  coeur  assez  droit  pour  soutenir 
une  grande  reputation :  je  dis  le  cceur,  car  il  influe  sur  l’esprit,  il  le  rend  juste  ;  il 
porte  h  apprecier  son  propre  m^rite,  a  ne  pas  s’estimer  au  dela  des  bornes  prescrites 
par  la  modestie,  a  se  voir  tel  que  l’on  est.  Rousseau  croit  toute  la  terre  occupde  de 
lui :  sa  lettre  est  remplie  de  fatuity,  d’orgueil  et  de  petitesses.  J’aurois  souhaite  que 
les  editeurs  eussent  moins  appuy6  sur  la  reconnoissance  que  Air.  Hume  devoit  en 


550 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


attendre,  on  a  trop  r6p6t6  le  mot  service,  il  falloit  passer  plus  Egerement  sur  tout  ce 
qui  prouve  1’ingratitude  de  Rousseau,  son  proc£d6  suffisoit  pour  l’en  convaincre.  Je 
suis  fdch^e  aussi  qu’on  ait  imprime  la  lettre  adress^e  k  Mr.  Mairan.  On  ne  sauroit 
trop  manager  l’homme  que  l’on  a  oblige  plus  on  a  fait  de  bien  k  quelqu’un,  plus  on 
s’est  ot£  le  droit  de  s’en  plaindre.  Nos  philosophes  assez  amis  de  Mr.  Hume,  mais 
enrages  contre  Rousseau,  n’ont  pu  cacber  entierement  leur  aigreur.  Je  suis  sure  que 
Mr.  Hume  ne  desiroit  pas  qu’on  se  servit  contre  Rousseau  d’une  lettre  que  personne 
n’avoit  le  droit  de  publier,  au  moins,  en  parlant  de  mes  propres  principes,  je  puis  me 
tromper.  V raiment,  je  ne  dis  pas  cela  dans  le  monde.  Mr.  Changuion  et  Mr.  Smith 
ont  dt£  mes  seuls  confidents  a  cet  £gard.  Je  plains  sinc&rement  Mr.  Hume  de  n’avoir 
pas  voulu  croire  ses  amis  en  France;  il  eut  pu  rendre  service  a  Rousseau,  mais  il 
n’auroit  pas  entrepris  d’etre  1’ami  d’un  extravagant,  incapable  de  reconnoissance  et 
d’amitiG  Vous  allez  me  demander  de  quoi  je  me  m&le,  d’oii  vient  que  je  vous 
ennuie  de  tout  cela  ?  I  have  done. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Je  suis  bien  vaine,  my  dear  JVIr.  Garrick,  de  pouvoir  vous  donner  ce  que  je  perds 
avec  un  regret  tres-vif,  le  plaisir  de  voir  Mr.  Smith.  Ce  charming  philosopher  vous 
dira  combien  il  a  d’esprit,  car  je  le  d£fie  de  parler  sans  en  montrer.  Je  suis  vrai- 
ment  fachee  que  la  politesse  m’oblige  a  lui  donner  ma  lettre  ouverte  :  cet  usage 
etabli  retient  mon  coeur  tout  pret  a  lui  rendre  justice,  mais  sa  modestie  est  aussi 
grande  que  son  nitrite,  et  je  craindrois  que  la  plus  simple  vdrite  ne  parut  a  ses  yeux 
une  grosse  flaterie  ;  je  puis  vous  dire  de  lui,  ce  qu'il  disoit  un  jour  d’un  autre, — le 
metier  de  cet  liomme-la  est  d’etre  aimable.  J’ajouterai, — et  de  meriter  l’estime  de 
tous  ceux  qui  ont  le  bonheur  de  le  connoitre. 

Oh  ces  Ecossois  !  ces  chiens  d’Ecossois  !  ils  viennent  me  plaire  et  m’affliger.  Je 
suis  comme  ces  folles  jeunes  filles  qui  ecoutent  un  amant  sans  penser  au  regret,  tou- 
jours  voisin  du  plaisir.  Grondez-moi,  battez-moi,  tuez-moi !  mais  j’aime  Mr.  Smith, 
je  l’aime  beaucoup.  Je  voudrois  que  le  diable  emportat  tous  nos  gens  de  lettres,  tous 
nos  philosophes,  et  qu’il  me  rapportat  Mr.  Smith.  Les  homines  supthieurs  se 
cherchent.  Rempli  d'estime  pour  Mr.  Garrick,  d^sirant  le  voir  et  l’entretenir,  Mr. 
Smith  a  voulu  etre  introduit  par  moi.  Il  me  flate  infiniment  par  cette  preference  ; 
bien  des  gens  se  melent  de  presenter  un  ami  a  un  autre  ami,  peu  sont  comme  moi 
dans  le  cas  d’etre  sure  de  la  reconnoissance  du  tous  deux.  Adieu,  mon  tres-aimable, 
et  tr£s-paresseux  ami.  Embrassez  pour  moi  votre  gracieuse  compagne.  La  mienne 
vous  assure  l’un  et  l’autre  de  sa  plus  tendre  amitie. 


Riccoboni. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


551 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Je  ne  S9aurois  voir  partir  un  de  vos  plus  aimables  compatriotes,  sans  profiter  de 
l’offre  obligeante  qu’il  veut  bien  me  faire,  de  remplir  mes  desirs  a  Londres.  Malheu- 
reusement,  mon  unique  desir  a  present  est  d’ecrire  a  Monsieur  Gan'ick.  Pendant  un 
peu  de  terns  j’ai  contraint  ce  d£sir ;  je  me  disois,  on  ouvre  les  theatres  a  Londres, 
Mr.  le  Manager  a  des  occupations  s^rieuses,  ma  lettre  viendra  tout  au  travers  d  un 
embarras,  on  maudira  l’indiscrette  Franchise,  on  dira  je  deteste,  je  deteste  l  et  je  serai 
damn6e  comme  une  pidce  nouvelle.  Apres  tout,  qu’il  s’accommode  ce  Manager,  je 
veux  ecrire  4  mon  bon,  a  mon  tendre  ami,  le  remercier  de  la  Vie  de  Cibber,  et  des 
comedies,  qu’il  m’a  fait  remettre  avec  une  attention  qui  ajoute  tant  a  ma  recon- 
noissance.  Je  ne  s^aurois  vous  exprimer  le  plaisir  que  j'ai  senti  en  recevant  ce  petit 
paquet  apr£s  le  retour  du  Baron,  revenu  sans  avoir  entendu  parler  de  ma  commission. 
II  m’a  reproche  son  voyage  a  votre  compagne  pendant  que  vous  couriez  le  chercher 
a  Londres.  A  frolick,  disoit  Madame  Garrick :  vraiment,  Madame,  je  ne  suis  pas  si 
malicieuse.  II  est  vrai  qu’en  arrivant  la  premiere  ma  lettre  n’avoit  pas  le  sens 
commun. 

Je  vais  vous  dire  pourquoi  j’ai  souhait6  la  Vie  de  Cibber  :  en  lisant  Mr.  Victor, 
ou  elle  est  souvent  cit^e,  il  m’a  pris  envie  de  composer  des  deux  ouvrages  une  his- 
toire  du  Theatre  Anglois,  et  d’y  joindre  la  traduction  de  quelques  comedies  modernes. 
J’y  travaillerai  l’6te  prochain,  et  je  vous  demanderai  des  anecdotes  sur  ce  sujet,  si  vous 
jugez  a  propos  de  m’en  communiquer,  et  votre  avis  sur  le  clioix  des  pieces.  A  pre¬ 
sent  je  suis  un  autre  objet,  un  maudit  roman,  dans  le  gout  de  Catesby.  II  m’occupe, 
il  m’ennuie,  il  ne  veut  pas  avancer  ;  je  defais  en  un  matin  l’ouvrage  de  trois  semaines  ; 
je  me  lis,  je  me  deplais,  crac,  tout  en  pieces.  Nous  lisons  vos  comedies  avec  delices, 
elles  sont  bien  ecrites,  on  les  entend  a  merveilles,  mais  nous  aimons  trop  l’auteur  pour 
ne  pas  les  juger  avec  un  peu  de  partiality.  Mon  chateau  en  Espagne  est  d’aller  a 
Londres  seulement  pour  voir  jouer  cet  auteur  aimable  ;  mais  tant  de  liens  m’attachent 
ici,  que  je  ne  vois  pas  un  point  d’appui  capable  de  soutenir  mon  foible  batiment.  Je 
vous  prie  de  vouloir  bien  faire  rendre  mon  petit  billet  a  Mr.  Becket.  Je  ne  lui  ai 
point  encore  accus£  la  reception  de  son  balot,  mais  Air.  Foley  en  m’acquittant  lui 
aura  appris  que  je  l’avois  re^u.  Adieu,  Monsieur  ;  mille  et  mille  complimens  a  votre 
bien  aim^e  compagne.  Mr.  Hume  me  dj^eit  l'autre  jour,  “  Madame  Garrick  a  tant  de 
noblesse  dans  sa  figure  qu’elle  rappelle  au  souvenir  ces  illustres  dames  Romaines  dont 
on  se  forme  une  id£e  si  majestueuse.”  Apr£s  avoir  bien  cherchy,  nous  convinmes  tons 
deux  qu’elle  ressembloit  a  Octavie.  Embrassez  done  pour  moi  la  soeur  d’ Auguste, 
si  elle  daigne  vous  le  permettre. 

Je  ne  vous  dis  rien  de  ma  pilader,  elle  est  en  deuil.  Sa  soeur  est  morte,  elle 
pleure.  Sa  tristesse  m’afflige.  Nous  faisons  toutes  deux  les  plus  sottes  reflexions  du 
monde.  Un  des  malheurs  de  la  vie  est  d’aimer,  e’est  le  plus  grand,  e’est  le  seul,  peut- 
ytre  ;  mais  quel  bonheur  goute-on  en  n’aimant  rien  ?  est-ce  vivre  ?  Il  faut  done 
s’aimer,  se  perdre,  se  pleurer,  et  subir  le  sort  de  l’liumanity. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


552 

Mr.  Hume  va  retoumer  k  Londres,  je  le  regrette.  II  m’a  donn6  une  connois- 
sance  que  je  suis  bien  fAch£e  de  perdre  aussi :  Mr.  Klliot  a  achev£  de  me  persuader 
(prim  Anglois,  qui  a  de  Pesprit  et  du  mdrite,  possede  sup^rieurement  ces  quality : 
vous  £tes  vraiment  une  nation  noble,  remplie  de  courage  et  de  g£nerosit6 :  quel  dom- 
nuige  que  deux  peuples  si  voisins  ne  se  lient  pas  d’une  amiti6  durable  et  constante ! 
Nos  rois  ont  6t6  freres  d’armes  autrefois ;  a  present  ils  se  querellent  pour  de  vilaines 
monies.  Cela  me  fache  bien  fort. 


DE  M.  VICTOR  CHASTELLUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  3  Janvier,  1769. 

Dois-je,  mon  cher  et  tres-cher  Garrick,  avoir  la  pr&omption  de  vous  6crire,  tan- 
dis  que  vous  recevez  tous  les  jours  des  billets-doux  si  tendres  de  la  tragedie  et  de  la 
comedie,  ou  pour  mieux  dire,  de  toute  une  nation  dont  vous  faites  les  ddlices,  mais 
outre  que  je  pourrois  plaider  la  cause  de  ma  nation,  et  tandis  qu’on  vous  demande  sur 
le  theatre  dramatique  de  Londres  vous  demander  avec  autant  de  justice  sur  le  grand 
theatre  de  la  societe  de  Paris  ?  En  effet  que  les  Anglois,  dont  vous  avez  tantot  nourri 
et  tantdt  dirig6  la  melancholie,  cherissent  en  vous  Pauteur  de  leurs  plaisirs  publiques, 
je  ne  vois  la  rien  que  de  fort  simple,  ni  qui  engage  beaucoup  votre  reconnoissance  ; 
mais  que  les  Frampois,  chez  qui  vous  etiez  venu  vous  gu^rir  des  incommodites  que 
vous  aviez  apport^es  d’Angleterre,  et  pour  lesquels  vous  n’aviez  aucun  frais  k  faire, 
aucune  fatigue  a  vous  donner,  aient  vu  dans  le  cel&bre  acteur  Garrick  un  homme 
aimable,  un  homme  d’esju-it,  un  homme  sociable,  un  homme  dont  les  talens  distingues 
sont  toujours  unis  au  talent  de  plaire ;  voila,  mon  Garrick,  ce  qui  exige  votre  recon¬ 
noissance  et  votre  amitie.  Or,  je  conclus  que  les  Anglois  veulent  maintenant  sacri- 
fier  votre  sant6  a  leur  plaisir,  et  que  par  consequent,  vous  devez  faire  an  elope  to 
France  pour  vous  defaire  de  ces  sollicitations,  et  vivre  tranquillement  avec  vos  amis. 

J'ai  ete  tr^s-flatte  de  ce  que  vous  m’avez  dit  au  sujet  de  mon  petit  essai  sur 
l’Union  de  la  Po^sie  et  de  la  Musique,  et  je  suis  enchant^  qu’on  ne  l’ait  pas  regarde 
en  Angleterre  as  a  damned  Grub-street .  Vous  m’aviez  mande  qu’un  homme  de 
lettres  de  vos  amis  vous  avoit  dit  qu’il  en  feroit  usage.  S’il  1’a  fait,  vous  me  ferez 
plaisir  de  me  mander  oil  et  comment.  Adieu,  mon  cher  Garrick,  j’ai  bien  des  lettres 
a  ecrire.  Je  profite  du  depart  de  Mr.  Hume  pour  vous  faire  tenir  celle-ci.  Ce  n’est 
pas  la  un  cloudy  messenger *  comme  celui  que  nous  avons  vu  ensemble  dans  “  Mac¬ 
beth:’  renvoyez-le  nous  bien  vite,  ou  pour  mieux  dire,  revenez  avec  lui.  Farewell, 
my  dearest  Garrick ;  do  never  forget  your  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

Victor  de  Chastellux. 

See  the  last  scene  of  the  third  act  of  Shakspeare’s  “  Macbeth.” 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


553 


DE  M.  CAILHAVA  D’ESTANDOUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  le  6  Fevrier,  1769,  de  la  rue  du  Petit  Lion,  F.  S.  G. 

Il  me  semble,  Monsieur,  que  vous  me  ndgligez  beaucoup,  et  mon  coeur  en  est 
alarme :  je  crains  que  vous  ne  m’ayez  oublid.  Souvenez-vous  de  grace  que  vous 
m’avez  promis  deux  choses  bien  essentielles — vos  ouvrages  et  votre  amitie. 

Les  comddiens  Fran^ais  qui  me  font  toujours  la  grace  de  me  persdcuter,  ont  donne 
le  premier  de  l’an  une  petite  piece  de  ma  fa^on.  C’est  une  bagatelle,  un  rien,  une 
espece  d’impromptu  dramatique,  que  le  public  a  re^u  avec  toute  l’indulgence  possible  ; 
comme  il  ne  vaut  en  vdrite  pas  le  port,  j’attends  une  occasion  pour  vous  l'envoyer. 
C’est  assez  vous  entretenir  de  mes  affaires  particulieres,  parlons  de  notre  theatre  en 
general.  Il  est  a  tous  les  diables,  si  l’on  n’y  met  ordre.  Les  comddiens  se  dechirent 
entre  eux,  et  font  l’un  contre  l’autre  des  cabales  effroyables.  Le  Rain,  Provide,  Mold, 
se  sont  mis  dans  la  tete  de  se  faire  les  directeurs :  il  y  a  dans  tout  ce  tripotage-la  des 
dessous  de  carte  ou  le  diable  ne  voit  goutte. 

Mole  a  si  bien  cabald,  qu’il  oblige  Belcour  et  sa  femme  a  se  retirer ;  c’est  pour 
prendre  les  grands  petits-maitres,  et  entre  nous,  je  crois  qu’il  s’y  dcrasera.  Sa  taille, 
sa  voix,  son  sautillement,  vont  aux  petits  faquins,  et  non  a  ceux  qui  demandent  une 
certaine  dignite  mdlee  a  la  fatuite.  La  cabale  qui  lui  est  opposee  allait,  pour  lui  faire 
place,  renvoyer  Mademoiselle  Lupine,  avec  laquelle  il  vivait,  et  qui  par  parenthese 
est  une  tres-mauvaise  actrice  ;  il  l’a  dpousde,  et  le  public  pour  avoir  le  mari  se  voit 
contraint  de  souffrir  la  femme. 

Le  Rain  a  fait  ddbuter  dans  les  roles  tragiques  Madame  Vestris,  belle  soeur  du 
danseur  de  ce  nom  ;  elle  fait  courir  tout  Paris.  File  est  d’une  jolie  figure,  mais  sans 
dignitd :  bien  faite,  mais  petite  ;  elle  a  beaucoup  d’art,  raisonne  trds-bien,  mais  je  la 
soupc^onne  de  manquer  de  force  et  d’entrailles.  Tout  le  parti  oppose  a  Mole  et  a 
Mademoiselle  Dubois  la  soutient  beaucoup;  mais  ce  meme  parti  pourroit  bien  chan¬ 
ger  bientot,  puisqu’elle  doit  ddbuter  dans  le  comique :  son  art,  la  finesse  de  ses  rai- 
sonnemens  et  de  ses  details,  pourrait  bien  donner  du  chagrin  a  toutes  les  amoureuses. 
Elle  est  cause  qu’on  a  joud  le  trait  le  plus  affreux  a  Mr.  Du  Belloy.  On  alloit 
reprendre  son  “  Sidge  de  Calais,”  Mademoiselle  Dubois  y  avoit  un  role  qu’elle  avoit 
travaille  avec  le  plus  grand  soin :  elle  se  flattait,  et  ses  amis  aussi,  qu  elle  y  feroit 
oublier  Madame  Vestris ;  dds-lors  les  comddiens  n’ont  plus  voulu  donner  la  pidce. 
Mr.  Du  Belloy  piqud,  l’a  retirde  avec  sa  “  Gabrielle  de  Vergis,”  et  son  “  Chevalier 
Bayard,”  deux  pidces  qui  dtaient  regies;  cette  affaire  fait  beaucoup  de  bruit,  on  ne 
sait  ce  qu’elle  deviendra.  Si  une  pidce  qui  a  porte  taut  d’argent  aux  comddiens,  et 
qui  est  la  pidce  de  l’dtat  essuie  taut  de  traverses,  a  quoi  les  auteurs  ne  doivent-ils  pas 
s’attendre?  Voila  a  peu  prds  tout  ce  qu’il  y  a  de  nouveau  dans  notre  tripot.  Vous 
sentez  combien  il  est  important  que  vous  me  gardiez  le  secret,  le  moindre  mot  aug- 
menterait  le  nombre  de  mes  ennemis.  C’est  ici  un  ami  qui  parle  -a  son  ami,  et  qui 
est  sur  de  sa  discrdtion. 

4  B 


VOL.  II. 


554 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Un  de  tncs  bons  amis,  et  qui  serait  le  votre  si  vous  le  connaissiez,  parcequ’il  est 
trfes-honn6te,  a  fait  recevoir  aux  Fran^ais  une  trag^die  imide  de  1’ Anglais :  c’est 
“  Hamlet,”  il  y  fait  quelques  corrections,  il  d&sirerait  6tre  anime  par  Pauteur  et  l’acteur 
inimitable  de  ce  chef-d’oeuvre  dans  son  genre.  C’est  pourquoi  je  me  joins  a  lui  pour 
vous  prier  de  nous  envoyer  l’estampe  de  Shakspeare,  et  la  vdtre  repdsentant  Hamlet. 
Mon  ami  vent  respirer  le  feu  du  Shakspeare  mort  et  du  Sliakspeare  vivant ;  mais  il 
vous  conjure  d’envoyer  les  meilleures  estampes,  et  les  plus  chores  par  consequent  ;  il 
est  riche,  et  un  ou  deux  louis  plus  ou  moins  ne  feront  rien  a  l’affaire.  Vous  n’avez 
qu’a  m'indiquer  la  personne  a  qui  il  faut  remettre  la  somme,  elle  lui  sera  compde 
tout  de  suite. 

Adieu,  mon  cher  Monsieur:  mon  grand  ouvrage  sur  la  conddie  ne  paraltra  que 
dans  l’hiver  prochain  ;  je  me  ferai  un  plaisir  et  un  honneur  de  le  soumettre  tout  de 
suite  a  votre  jugement.  J’ambitionne  beaucoup  le  suffrage  d’un  homme  de  votre 
merite.  Aimez-moi  toujours,  je  vous  prie  ;  en  bonne  foi  vous  le  devez  par  recon- 
noissance :  je  vous  souhaite  une  bonne  annde  et  vous  embrasse  de  tout  mon  cceur. 
J’assure  Madame  de  mes  respects. 

Cailhava. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick,  Directeur  du  Theatre  du  Roy, 
a  Londres.” 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  20  Fevrier,  1769. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  requ  hier  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Cramer  pleine  de  remercimens  pour 
toutes  les  politesses  et  bonnes  facons  que  vous  avez  eues  pour  lui  et  pour  son  frere;  en 
mon  particular  je  vous  en  sqais  bon  gre,  et  je  suis  assud  que  vous  n’avez  pas  oblige 
des  ingrats.  Ils  sont  enchantes  de  Madame  Garrick,  cela  ne  m’6tonne  pas,  et  sans 
pousser  plus  loin  son  (doge,  je  crois  que  les  femmes  de  son  esp£ce  sont  rares.  Mr. 
Cramer  me  dit  que  vous  comptez  venir  a  Paris  cet  ete,  (  je  n’en  crois  rien);  que 
vous  voulez  envoyer  un  de  vos  neveux  a  Geneve,  que  vous  le  laisserez  a  Paris  trois 
semaines.  Par  la  bonne  opinion  que  vous  devez  avoir  de  ma  logique  et  de  mon  bon¬ 
neted,  j’ai  tout  lieu  d’esp^rer  que  vous  me  le  confierez,  et  qu’il  mangera,  et  qu’il 
logera  chez-moi.  J’ai  une  chambre  bien  propre  k  lui  donner,  pds  de  la  mienne;  ainsi 
Mr.  David  Garrick  voudra  bien  ne  pas  oublier  ce  que  je  lui  dis. 

Vous  avez  sans  doute  requ  les  lettres  que  je  vous  ai  £crites  en  dernier  lieu  ;  l’une 
par  Mr.  Foot  avec  deux  almanacks,  l’autre  par  Antonio  Carara. 

Vous  m’avez  demand^  par  une  de  vos  lettres  un  detail  sur  mon  affaire  avec  ce 
coquin  de  Mant,  contre  lequel  je  suis  dellement  piqu6 :  vous  devez  vous  en  ressou- 
venir,  puisque  vous  m’ecrivites  dans  le  terns  que  vous  lui  aviez  fait  remettre  un  gros 
fromage,  une  redingotte  et  un  petit  cotillon  de  la  meme  (itoffe ;  les  deux  derniers 
objets  peuvent  valoir  a-peu-pds  trois  guinees ;  quant  au  fromage,  je  n’en  sqais  pas 
le  prix. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


555 


Vous  m’avez  demande  aussi  la  note  des  petites  avances  que  j’ai  faites  pour  vous  : 
vous  la  trouverez  ci-joint ;  j’en  prendrai  le  montant  cliez  Mr.  Panchaud,  qui  vous 
enverra  mon  re^u. 

J’ai  toujours  vos  habits,  dites-moi  done  ce  que  vous  voulez  que  j’en  fasse  :  si  Mr. 
Carrara  s’6toit  donn6  la  peine  de  me  parler  pendant  cinq  ou  six  jours  qu’il  a  rest6  a 
Paris,  je  lui  aurois  remis  une  veste  de  cirsaca  blanche  et  or,  que  vous  auriez  tr&s-bien 
pu  porter  a  Londres.  Mon  ami,  je  vous  embrasse,  et  je  vous  renouvelle  toujours 
mon  amitie  pour  vous  et  pour  Madame  Garrick. 

Monnet. 


Le  11  Juillet,  un  Dictionnaire  Typographique  relie  2.  vols. 

Du  17  Aotit,  souscription  pour  le  Mercure 

La  Maniere  d’Appendre  les  Langues 

L'Esprit  de  l’Abbe  Desfontaines 

Observations  sur  la  Litterature,  l’Abbe  de  la  Porte 

Souscription  pour  l’Annee  Litteraire,  et  l’Avant  Coureur 

La  Bibliographie  Instructive 


frs.  cts. 

.  9 

.  32 

.  3  10 

5 

.  14 

.  44 

.  42 

frs.  149  10 


II  reste  le  Commentaire  sur  Racine  que  je  n’ai  pas  encore  paye  a  Panckoucke, 
mais  que  je  payerai. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  16  Mars,  1769. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re9u  votre  lettre  en  date  du  28  F&vrier  :  votre  maladie  m'a  fait  de 
la  peine ;  vous  s^avez  mieux  que  personne  ce  qui  peut  vous  soulager  et  meme  vous 
gu6rir ;  si  vous  ne  le  faites  pas  tant  pis  pour  vous. 

J’ai  fait  porter  cliez  Mr.  Bazan  vos  oiseaux :  il  s’est  charge  de  les  faire  relier,  et  de 
vous  les  faire  parvenir  par  la  premiere  caisse  qu’il  enverra  a  Londres,  les  livres  du 
Chevalier  Watkin  £tant  partis,  il  y  a  du  terns. 

J’ai  achet6  les  neuf  volumes  de  L’Histoire  du  Theatre  Italien,  et  de  L’Opera  Co- 
mique.  Je  ne  sais  pas  comment  le  premier  est  fait,  mais  pour  le  dernier  e’est  de¬ 
testable;  nous  en  sommes  convenus  ce  matin  avec  Favart,  qui  par  parentese  me  charge 
de  vous  faire  des  compliments.  Je  n’ai  point  d’occasion  pour  vous  envoyer  ces  deux 
Theatres  avantle  3  d’Avril  prochain  par  Mr.  Thornhill,  qui  est  ici :  neuf  volumes  font 
un  objet,  on  risque  de  les  gater,  ou  de  trouver  des  gens  qui  n’aiment  pas  l’embarras. 

Mr.  le  Marquis  de  Yoyer,  fils  du  Ministre  d’Argenson,  que  vous  avez  connu,  qui 
vous  a  donn6  h.  diner  chez-lui,  qui  a  beaucoup  d’esprit  et  de  grandes  connoissances, 
grand  ami  du  Comte  du  Luc,  partira  Samedi  prochain  pour  voir  l’Angleterre ;  il  m’a 
demande  une  lettre  pour  vous,  que  je  lui  ai  donnee  avec  plaisir.  Son  but  est  de  voir 
Londres  en  courant,  et  de  parcourir  toutes  vos  belles  campagnes.  Si  vous  le  voyez, 

4  B  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


55( > 


je  pense  (pic  vous  aurez  des  £gards  ])our  lui ;  il  peut  vous  rcndre  un  compte  juste  des 
talens  de  Mademoiselle  Vestris  ;  je  lui  aurois  bien  donn6  vos  livres,  mais  ils  n’^toient 
]>as  relies,  ct  il  n’avoit  pas  assez  de  place  pour  les  porter. 

Mr.  Cramer  est  ici  depuis  liuit  jours  ;  il  part  pour  la  Ilollande  dans  quatre  :  il  sera 
de  retour  it  la  fin  de  ce  mois ;  si  vous  vous  d^tcrrninez  pour  Mr.  votre  neveu,  il  l’em- 
menera  avec  lui  it  Geneve ;  mais  pour  cela  il  faudroit  que  vous  l’envoyassiez  a  Paris 
an  plus  tard  dans  la  quinzaine.  Certainement  Mr.  Cramer  lui  rendra  tous  les  ser¬ 
vices  qui  dependront  de  lui  dans  cette  ville  oil  j’ai  beaucoup  d’amis  qui  se  feront  aussi 
un  plaisir  de  l’obliger ;  je  pense  comme  vous,  les  habits  que  vous  m’avez  laiss&s  pour- 
ront  tr^s-bien  servir  pour  ce  neveu. 

Comme  je  suis  tr^s-certain  que  vous  ne  viendrez  pas  a  Paris  avec  Madame  Garrick 
cette  annee,  je  vous  conseille  de  remettre  la  partie  it  l’annee  prochaine,  vous  aurez  de 
plus  le  mariage  de  Monseigneur  le  Dauphin.  Nous  avons  pour  le  mois  procliain  celui 
de  Monseigneur  le  Due  de  Chartres  avec  Mademoiselle  de  Penthi&vre. 


On  a  doling  trois  representations  d’une  piece  dont  je  vous  ai  parle  dans  une  de 
mes  lettres,  intitulee  “  Le  D6serteur,”  intermede  par  Messieurs  Sedaine  et  Monsigny. 
Cette  pi^ce  n’a  pas  eu  tout  le  succes  qu’on  en  attendoit ;  les  auteurs  profitent  de  la 
cloture  de  nos  theatres  pour  y  faire  des  changements. 

On  nous  promet  pour  l’apres  Paque,  “  Le  Chevalier  Bayard,”  tragedie,  par  Mr. 
du  Belloy,  l’auteur  du  “  Siege  de  Calais.” 

Bellecour  et  sa  femme,  qui  avoient  un  engagement  tres-considerablepour  la  Russie, 
viennent  de  le  rompre  pour  rester  a  la  Comedie  Franchise.  Je  vous  embrasse,  et  je 
suis  votre  ami. 


Monnet. 


Mon  ami,  j’ai  place,  a  ce  dernier,  emprunt  que  le  Roi  a  fait,  sur  ma  tete  et  celle  de 
ma  femme  7000  frs.  Cela  a  retr^ci  un  peu  mes  finances,  a  cet  effet  j’ai  vendu  le  reste 
de  mon  Anthologie.  J’ai  encore  un  tableau  dont  je  veux  me  defaire,  peint  par 
Boucher  il  y  a  vingt  ans ;  ce  tableau  est  voluptueux,  et  meme  trop  nud  pour  un 
homme  de  mon  age ;  e’est  une  femme  couchee  qui  sort  du  bain  ;  il  a  de  la  couleur ;  je 
l’enverrai  sur  la  fin  de  ce  mois  a  Mr.  Lascelles  ;  je  compte  que  vous  voudrez  bien 
concourir  avec  lui  pour  le  faire  vendre  ;  je  veux  le  vendre  trente  louis. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 


17  Mars,  1769. 

Si  j’avois  une  baguette  de  fee  je  m’en  servirois  pour  vous  fixer  pres  de  votre 
table  quand  vous  m’^crivez ;  j’arr&terois  la  rapidity  de  cette  plume  leg£re,  qui  court, 

vole,  et  laisse  a  peine  sur  le  papier  des  traces  de  son  passage  : - eh,  que  je  suis  bete  ! 

si  je  la  poss^dois  cette  baguette,  j’irois  vous  voir,  vous  embrasser,  causer  avec  vous : 
ce  seroit  un  plaisir  bien  vif,  bien  delicieux,  mais  comment  l’espererois-je  ?  mes  chaines 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


557 

se  rivent  tous  les  jours  ;  g^n^e  par  mes  tristes  entours,  j’ai  vecu  pour  les  autres,  et 
mourrai  sans  avoir  goute  la  douceur  de  vivre  pour  moi-meme. 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chastelux  m’a  montre  la  plus  jolie  lettre  du  monde  :  vous  vous 
plaignez  de  moi,  moil  ami,  de  ma  paresse  :  vos  expressions  seroient  trop  flatteuses  si 
je  m^ritois  des  reproches,  mais  j’ai  retarde  d’ecrire,  pensant  toujours  que  Monsieur 
Francois  alloit  retourner  a  Londres  et  qu’il  vous  porteroit  ma  lettre.  J’en  ai  re^u 
une  de  vous  avec  des  comedies.  C’est  dommage  que  la  piece  refaite  par  Mr.  Bicker- 
staff  soit  toujours  un  sujet  pris  de  Moli^re  ;  elle  est  tr^s-agreable,  et  je  la  crois  fort 
bien  £crite,  mais  je  n’en  puis  faire  usage.  L’ami  de  Mr.  Sturz  a  du  vous  remettre 
deux  lettres  de  moi,  une  troisi^me  adressee  k  Mr.  Murphy,  et  deux  exemplaires  de 
notre  traduction  :  comment  trouvez-vous  cela, — mauvais,  detestable ! — mon  libraire 
vous  dira,  cela  est  bon,  excellent !  n’en  deplaise  a  tous  les  beaux  g^nies  de  l’univers, 
le  jugement  d'un  libraire  sera  toujours  d’un  grand  poids  dans  la  litterature.  Le  second 
volume  est  actuellement  sous  presse.  Mr.  Kelly  et  Mr.  Colman  ne  se  doutent  pas  du 
tour  que  nous  leur  jouons.  J’ai  traduit  “  The  False  Delicacy;”  ma  compagne  la 
“  Femme  Jalouse”  and  “  The  Deuce  is  in  Him.’’  Un  leger  soup9on  que  la  derniere 
est  de  vous,*  nous  a  rendues  plus  exactes  a  suivre  l’original ;  la  piece  est  jolie  et  con- 
duite  avec  autant  de  simplicity  que  de  raison.  A  l’egard  des  deux  premieres,  les 
auteurs  nous  regarderont  comme  deux  singes  entr^s  dans  un  verger,  qui  taillent, 
^m  on  dent,  arrachent,  et  croyent  faire  merveille  en  gatant  tout.  Mr.  Kelly  me 
paroit  le  plus  honnete  des  creatures  ;  s’il  n’est  pas  un  ange  il  est  un  diable  :  mais  sans 
etre  bon  peut-on  imaginer  le  caracUre  de  Cecil  ?  Je  lui  ai  conserve  toute  son  aima- 
ble  singularity,  mais  le  laisser  malpropre,  je  n’ai  pu  m’y  rysoudre  ;  il  est  simple,  uni, 
vytu  grossierement  sans  etre  sale.  Les  Anglois  ont  encore  le  defaut  d’outrer  leurs 
caracteres  et  d'aller  un  peu  trop  loin  quand  ils  peignent  la  nature.  Elle  est  belle, 
charmante,  mon  ami,  mais  un  rien  l’enlaidit.  La  piyce  de  Mr.  Kelly  plaira  beaucoup 
aux  Francois.  Je  ne  me  suis  pas  vantye  des  changemens  que  le  gout  national  m'a 
forcy  de  faire  ;  ils  ne  sont  pas  considerables,  mais  ils  etoient  absolument  nycessaires 
pour  ranimer  l’interet.  A  l’ygard  de  Mr.  Colman,  c’est  un  massacre  abominable  que 
cette  traduction  de  ma  compagne :  au  fond,  les  scynes  principals  de  cette  comydie  ne 
sont  point  du  tout  varies,  la  jalouse  est  plus  imperieuse  que  sensible,  une  lettre 
qu’on  ne  lit  point,  ne  fonde  pas  assez  ses  soup^ns,  il  a  fallu  tout  le  merite,  toute  la 
supyriorite  de  vbtre  jeu  pour  soutenir  des  scynes  si  uniformes.  Charles,  ivre  comme 
un  laquais,  est  un  objet  degoutant ;  ilne  conservera  pas  ce  defaut  en  Fraimois,  comme 
vous  1’imaginez  bien.  Les  deux  campagnards  sont  bien,  sont  plaisans  ;  l'lrlandois  peut 
l’etre  a  Londres,  ici,  point  du  tout,  on  l’a  fort  abrege.  Avec  l’impudence  de  Lady 
Belaston,  Mr.  Colman  devoit  donner  a  sa  Lady  Freelove  un  motif  d’etre  mechante. 
Une  femme  de  qualite  se  preter  a  des  projets  si  noirs  pour  mettre  un  Lord  dans  sa 
famille,  cela  n’a  pas  le  sens  commun.  Elle  devoit  aimer  Charles,  en  etre  mCprisye,  et 
se  venger  de  lui  sur  sa  maitresse.  A  mon  avis  la  demure  scene  de  cette  piyce  est  si 
longue,  est  uue  si  froide  l-ypytition  de  la  premiyre  que  je  ne  saurois  concevoir  com- 

*  The  Deuce  is  in  Him  was  really  written  by  Colman. — Ed. 


558 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


ment  on  pent  en  soutenir  l’ennui.  Mais  vous  ttes  la,  vous  animez  tout,  vous  versez 
sur  tout  l’agr^ment  et  la  chaleur : — si  Changuion  m’entendoit,  il  me  battroit ;  son  ami 
Colman  insuite! — n’allez  pas  lui  montrer  ma  lettre  et  m’en  faire  un  ennemi:  je  vous 
dis  ma  pensee.  .Je  puis  me  tromper  au  reste,  et  vous  verrez  par  la  traduction  qu’en 
voulant  corriger  un  pen  la  fable,  nous  l’avons  peut-etre  ghthe  pour  les  Anglois. 

Je  n’ai  rien  a  prendre  dans  la  foule  de  pieces  dont  je  vous  envoyela  liste.  Si  vous 
en  connoissez  dont  le  plan  soit  tout  Anglois  vous  m’obligerez  en  me  les  indiquant, 
car  les  demander  sur  les  titres  pris  dans  les  catalogues,  c’est  risquer  d’avoir  des  sujets 
Francis,  habillds  it  l’Angloise,  mais  tr&s  reconnoissables. 

Mr.  de  Saint  Lambert  vient  de  donner  son  poeme  des  saisons.  Grande  rumeur 
au  Parnasse.  Les  philosophes,  ses  compagnons,  et  ses  amis,  ont  cri6  miracle !  mer- 
veille !  lumineux,  sublime!  ceux  qui  veulent  defendre  contre  eux  la  liberte  du 
gout  et  des  decisions,  ont  crie  de  leur  cot6,  Jroid,  insipide,  long,  ennuieux !  les  esprits 
doux,  raisonnables,  trouvent  l’ouvrage  un  peu  long  en  effet,  les  transitions  mauvaises, 
les  vers  souvent  negliges,  et  pensent  que  moins  vant6,  ce  poeme  ayant,  comme  beau- 
coup  d’autres,  des  d^fauts  et  des  beaut^s,  on  pardonneroit  les  uns  en  faveur  des 
autres,  si  une  petite  poign^e  de  juges  bautains  ne  vouloient  imposer  la  loi  et  ne  sem- 
bloient  dire  au  public  applaudissez,  je  le  veux. 

Mr.  Sturz  m’a  6crit,  sa  lettre  est  du  Francois  le  plus  pur  et  le  plus  Elegant.  II  se 
donna  les  airs  de  tirer  un  peu  sur  notre  nation  et  me  demande  des  details  sur  notre 
faipon  de  vivre  dans  ce  que  nous  appellons  soci^te.  Je  lui  r6ponds  ce  que  je  pense, 
— aucun  homme  encore  ne  m’a  paru  un  etranger.  Je  vous  envoye,  mon  tr^s-aimable 
ami,  une  liste  des  comedies  qui  sont  dans  ma  petite  biblioth^que,  afin  que  vous  y  jet- 
tiez  les  yeux  quand  vous  voudrez  m’en  donner.  La  plupart  sont  venues  de  Londres, 
deux  ou  trois  fois.  Les  lines  par  vous,  les  autres  par  Mr.  Becket.  Je  voudrois  bien 
S9avoir  s’il  existe  en  Anglois  des  contes  de  fees,  vraiment  nationnaux ,  ce  qu’on  appelle 
des  contes  d’enfant,  vous  en  avez  de  traduits,  ce  nest  pas  ce  que  je  demande:  il  les 
faudroit  absolument  Ano-lois. 

O 

Le  Baron  d’Holbach  a  eu  mille  chagrins.  Son  ami  l’Abb£  Morellet  a  recu  les 
complimens  d’une  place  de  dix  a  douze  mille  livres  de  rente,  et  puis  Mr.  Abeille  a 
re^u  la  place  meme.  A  present  le  poeme  de  Mr.  de  Saint  Lambert  lui  dechire  Tame. 
C’est  un  homme  sensible,  libre  et  riche :  il  n’est  point  heureux.  Est-il  done  impossi¬ 
ble  de  l’etre  ?  ce  court  voyage  appelle  la  vie  sera-t-il  toujours  fait  avec  tant  de 
peines  ?  on  a  tant  £crit  pour  en  applanir  la  route  !  une  main  invisible  y  seme-t-elle 
des  pierres  ?  y  creuse-t-elle  des  orni^res  ?  grand  sujet  de  reflexion  !  Comment  se 
porte  votre  charmante  compagne?  voulez-vous  bien  l’embrasser  pour  nous,  lui  dire 
combien  nous  l’aimons  ?  combien  nous  desirous  de  la  voir  dans  cette  riante  demeure 
que  tout  le  monde  admire,  heureux  qui  se  promene  au  bold  de  la  Tamise  !  Adieu, 
mon  bon  et  tendre  ami.  J’ai  toujours  ma  m&re  malade,  mon  mari  maussade.  Sans 
mon  amie  j'irois  me  pendre  pour  ne  plus  m’ennuier.  Madame  de  Buffon  est  morte 
apres  une  longue  maladie.  Son  mari  ne  s’en  consoleroit  point,  si  le  plaisir  de  la 
dissequer  n’appaisoit  sa  douleur.  Adieu,  vous  dis-je !  Je  vous  embrasse  de  tout 
mon  coeur,  de  toutes  mes  forces,  et  de  toute  mon  ame.  Biccoboni. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


•559 


DE  M.  CARON  DE  BEAUMARCHAIS  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  le  29  Mars,  1769. 

Cette  lettre,  Monsieur,  vous  est  6crite  par  un  homme  qui  n’a  l’honneur  de  vous 
connaitre  que  de  reputation,  mais  a  qui  les  nouvelles  de  Londres  ont  appris  qu’il 
vous  devoit  de  la  reconnoissance.  Vous  trouverez  peut-£tre  que  c’est  une  assez  sin- 
guliere  fapon  de  s’en  acquitter  que  de  vous  demander  encore  un  bon  office.  Mais, 
tout  considtre,  je  n’ai  point  trouv6  de  voie  plus  naturelle  pour  etre  instruit  de  ce  qui 
m’interesse  que  de  m’adresser  a  vous.  Je  suis  l’auteur  du  drame  d’Eugenie,  que 
vous  avez  bien  voulu  traduire  de  notre  theatre  sur  le  votre.*  J'ai  vainement  cherch6 
ici  les  papiers  Anglais  qui  ont  donne  l’analise  de  la  traduction,  le  detail  de  son  succbs, 
&c.  Je  vous  aurai  une  vraie  obligation,  Monsieur,  de  me  les  faire  passer  a  Paris,  et 
meme  la  traduction  entire  si  elle  est  imprim^e.  Les  traducteurs  Italien,  Allemand, 
et  Russe,  qui  ont  fait  k  mon  essai  dramatique  le  meme  honneur  qu’il  a  re^u  de  vous, 
m’ont  fait  le  plaisir  de  m’en  faire  passer  chacun  un  exemplaire  de  Florence,  Vienne,  et 
Petersbourg.  II  me  seroit  infiniment  agr^able  de  pouvoir  rassembler  sous  mes  yeux 
tous  mes  bienfaiteurs,  pour  reconnoitre  dune  mani&re  plus  honnete  le  double  service 
que  vous  m’aurez  rendu.  J’aurai  1’honneur  de  vous  faire  parvenir  aussitot  qu’il  aura 
6t6  joue  sur  notre  theatre,  l’extrait  d’un  nouveau  drame  que  j’ai  donne  aux  com^diens 
Francis,  et  qu’ils  rep^tent  pour  etre  repr^sente  dans  une  quinzaine  de  jours;  et  le 
premier  exemplaire  qui  en  sera  imprime  suivra  l’extrait  que  je  vous  aurai  address^. 

Recevez  mes  remerciments  et  l'assurance  de  l’estime  parfaite  et  de  la  haute  con¬ 
sideration  avec  laquelle  j’ai  l'honneur  d’etre, 

Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tr&s-obeissant  serviteur, 

De  Beaumarchais. 

Secretaire  du  Roi,  Lieutenant-general  de  ses  chasses.  A  Paris  rue  de  Conde 
pres  le  Luxembourg. 

J’esp£re  que  Milord  Rochfort  qui  a  quelque  amiti6  pour  nroi  et  a  qui  j’^cris  par 
le  meme  courier,  voudra  bien  se  charger  de  vous  faire  passer  cette  lettre,  car  j’ignore 
votre  adresse  a  Londres. 


DE  M.  DUCIS  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Paris>  ce  14  Avril»  1769. 

Je  ne  puis  vous  exprimer  toute  ma  reconnoissance  pour  les  deux  presens  que 
vous  avez  bien  voulu  me  faire.  Votre  gravure  dans  Hamlet  et  celle  de  Shakspeare 
sont  l’une  et  l'autre  sous  mes  yeuz  et  devant  ma  table.  C’eut  6t6  sans  doute  leur 
faire  souffrir  un  divorce  trop  cruel  que  de  les  s^parer.  Je  con^ois.  Monsieur,  que  vous 
avez  du  me  trouver  bien  t&n6raire  de  mettre  sur  le  theatre  Francois  une  pi£ce  telle 
qu’  Hamlet.  Sans  parler  des  irregularity  sauvages  dont  elle  abonde,  le  spectre  tout 

*  Translated  by  Mrs.  Griffith,  under  the  correction  of  Garrick,  and  brought  out  by  him,  under  the  title  of 
The  School  for  Rakes. — Ed. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


560 

avoul  qui  parle  long  temps,  les  comediens  de  campagne  et  le  combat  au  fleuret,  m’ont 
paru  des  ressorts  absolument  inadmissibles  sur  notre  sc^ne.  J’ai  bien  regrette  cepen- 
dant  de  ne  pouvoir  y  transporter  l’ombre  terrible  qui  expose  le  crime  et  demande 
vengeance.  J’ai  done  6t6  oblige  en  quelque  fa<j:on  de  cr^er  line  pidee  nouvelle.  J’ai 
taclie  seulement  de  faire  un  r61e  interessant  d’une  Heine  parricide,  et  de  peindre 
surtout  dans  Fame  pure  et  m&ancholique  d’Hamlet  un  module  de  tendresse  filiale. 
Je  me  suis  regarde,  en  traitant  ce  caract^re,  comme  un  peintre  religieux  qui  travaille  a 
un  tableau  d’autel.  Mais  pourquoi.  Monsieur,  ne  s^ais-je  pas  votre  langue!  pourquoi 
ne  ])uis-je  consulter  en  vous  le  ])lus  sur  confident  du  Genie  de  Shakspeare!  je  n’ai 
eu  qu’un  secours,  e’est  l’attrait  inexplicable  qui  soumet  mon  ame  ^  ce  poete  extra¬ 
ordinaire.  Je  vous  remercie  de  tout  mon  cceur  du  succ&s  que  vous  me  d^sirez.  On 
trouve  en  general  que  mon  ouvrage  est  simple  et  sans  incidens,  mais  mon  succes  fut- 
il  un  triompbe,  ce  que  je  suis  bien  loin  d’esperer,  recevez  d’avance  ma  protestation. 
Monsieur,  que  je  pose  ma  couronne  sur  la  base  et  aux  pieds  de  la  statue  de  Shak¬ 
speare.  C’est  d6ja  une  recompense  de  ma  hardiesse  que  cette  occasion  de  vous 
ecrire.  II  ne  tient  qu’a,  vous  d’y  ajouter  encore  en  me  permettant  de  cultiver 
l’honneur  de  votre  correspondance. 

Je  ne  vous  mande  aucune  nouvelle  litteraire :  c’est  a  Monsieur  de  Cailhava,  mon 
ami,  i  vous  parler  de  lui-m6me.  Je  me  borne  vous  dire  que  je  l’ai  vu  paroitre  Lundi 
dernier  sur  notre  theatre,  pour  y  recevoir  en  personne  tous  les  applaudissemens  que  le 
Public  a  donnas  a  la  premiere  representation  de  son  Mariage  Interrompu.  Je  ne 
doute  pas  que  tout  l’ouvrage  ne  vous  fasse  en  general  un  vrai  plaisir,  mais  j’ose  me 
r£pondre  que  vous  admirerez  surtout  la  fin  du  second  acte  et  le  commencement  du 
troisi&me.  L’auteur  est  digne  des  ennemis  que  la  resurrection  de  la  bonne  comedie 
lui  attire.  Je  l’encourage,  je  le  soutiens.  Nous  eprouvons  lui  et  moi  que  l’amitie  est 
la  plus  douce  consolation  de  deux  hommes  embarqu6s  sur  la  mer  orageuse  du  theatre. 
Je  regarderai  comme  un  des  fruits  les  plus  agreables  de  notre  amitie  que  vous  vouliez 
bien  etendre  un  pen  jusqu’a  moi,  d’avance,  les  sentimens  que  vous  accordez  a  son 
merite  personnel.  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  avec  une  reconnoissance  sincere  et  toute  la 
consideration  possible,  Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Ducis. 

Rue  Basse  Porte,  St.  Denis,  au  Magazin  de  Verrerie,  No.  4,  chez  Mr.  Prevot,  a  Paris. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick,  Directeur  du  theatre  de  Druri-lane, 
a  Lotidres.” 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  3  Mai,  1769. 

Vous  devez  avoir  recu  une  lettre  de  moi,  ecrite  deux  mois  avant  que  j’aie  trouve 
l’occasion  de  vous  l’envoyer.  Monsieur  Francois  etoit  a  la  campagne,  etoit  malade, 
on  ne  pouvoit  le  joindre,  je  m’impatientois.  A  present  je  me  chagrine,  oui,  je  me 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


561 


chagrine  et  bien  fort.  Qu’avez-vous  done  ecrit  au  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  ?  il  a  fait  le 
beau  discret,  n’a  pas  voulu  me  montrer  votre  lettre ;  mais  vous  vous  plaignez  de  moi, 
dit-il.  Vous  plaindre  de  moi,  vous,  mon  aimable  ami? — eh,  bon  Dieu  !  dou  vient  ? 
pourquoi?  vous  ne  s^avez  pas  combien  la  certitude  de  m^riter  un  reproche  de  votre 
part  me  causeroit  de  regret  et  d’amertume. 

J’ai  parly  d’apres  vos  compatriotes ;  j’ai  donn6  au  public  la  raison  que  les  Anglois 
m’ont  donn^e  a  moi-meme  de  la  difference  de  vos  pieces  et  des  notres.  Deur  senti¬ 
ment  uniforme  m’a  paru  d’accord  avec  mes  observations  sur  votre  theatre.  A  ous 
conviendrez  que  les  nobles  sont  peu  m6nag6s  par  vos  auteurs :  le  sot,  le  fat,  ou  le 
malhonnete  homme  meiy  dans  l’intrigue  est  presque  toujours  un  lord ;  semble-t-on 
travailler  pour  une  classe  que  Ton  s'applique  a  degrader,  que  l’on  expose  a  la  risee  ? 
est-ce  un  moyen  de  l’attirer  ?  ici  les  premiers  du  royaume  font  leur  sejour  habituel 
du  theatre  :  les  dames  ont  de  petites  loges  a  faunae,  la  comedie  est  le  rendez-vous 
de  la  bonne  compagnie.  A  la  v6'ite  elle  ne  divertit  gu^re,  mais  elle  occupe  beau- 
coup.  On  disserte,  on  prone,  on  juge,  on  cabale :  mille  fain6ans  titles  n*ont  d’autre 
ressource  contre  l’ennui  que  les  chauffoirs  des  trois  spectacles  ;  vit-on  ainsi  chez 
vous  ?  non,  sans  doute.  Aussi  les  auteurs  remplissent-ils  la  scene  de  Comtes,  de 
Marquis  ;  ils  n’osent  faire  parler  les  bourgeois  ;  la  nature  et  la  plaisanterie  sont  ban- 
nies  de  leurs  pieces,  et  comme  il  est  tr^s  ignoble  de  rire,  ils  cherchent  a  faire  pleurer. 

Dans  n6tre  brillante  capitale,  ou  dominent  les  airs  et  la  mode,  s’attendrir,  s’£mou- 
voir,  s’affliger  ;  e’est  le  bon  ton  du  moment.  Da  bonty,  la  sensibility,  la  tendre  hu¬ 
manity,  sont  devenues  la  fantaisie  universelle.  On  feroit  volontiers  des  malheureux 
pour  gouter  la  douceur  de  les  plaindre.  On  se  croit  bon  quand  on  est  sombre,  excel¬ 
lent  quand  on  est  triste  ;  on  ne  peint  plus  les  vertus  au  front  gai,  a  la  contenance 
assume,  on  les  reprysente  soucieuses  et  maussades.  J’avois  dit  tout  cela  dans  ce  mau- 
dit  avertissement ;  ma  prudente  compagne  a  craint  de  me  voir  lapider.  Soumise  a 
ses  avis  j’ai  retranche,  et  1’article  dont  vous  etes  blessy  a  peut-etre  yte  substitue  a  ce 
qu’elle  m’a  fait  effacer.  Eh,  je  vous  en  prie,  mon  ami,  croyez-le,  loin  de  vouloir 
avilir  la  scyne  Angloise,  j’ai  simplement  cherchy  a  excuser  un  genre  que  Moliere 
merae  n’a  pu  soutenir  en  France.  A  prysent  ses  pifeces  sont  traitees  de  farces,  on  les 
donne  les  mauvais  jours,  et  les  acteurs  qui  pensent  etre  bons  dedaignent  tous  ses  roles 
excepte  celui  de  Misantrope.  Rire  a  la  comedie  est  une  absurdite  chez-nous,  urie 
sottise,  un  ridicule  bourgeois.  On  pleure  a  l’opyra  comique  ;  et  si  je  n’avois  pas 
excusy  la  Grande  Bretagne  sur  un  gout  si  dyprave,  vous  passeriez  tous  ici  pour  des 
imbyciles.  Est-ce  que  Sedaine  n’a  pas  fait  une  piyce,  dont  le  hyros  est  un  dyserteur, 
on  va  le  pendre  ?  Rien  n’est  ci  charmant,  surtout  en  ariettes.  On  s  en  moque,  on  y 
court;  les  philosophes  trouvent  le  sujet  merveilleux. 

Ne  me  S9achez  done  point  mauvais  gi*y  de  ce  que  j’ai  dit  :  je  le  impute,  ce  sont  vos 
mauvaises  langues  de  compatriotes  qui  m  ont  dicte  eet  article.  A  la  seconde  ydition 
je  l’oterai,  et  ce  sera  de  tout  mon  coeur  puisqu  il  vous  deplait.  Pardon,  mon  ami, 
pardon.  J’ai  tort,  un  grand  tort,  si  je  vous  ai  fachy  :  rien  ne  pourroit  me  consoler  de 

VOL.  II.  4  c 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


o(  )2 

perdrc  votre  arniti^  ;  croyez-moi  b6te,  sotte  ;  mais  ne  me  croyez  jamais  impertinente, 
ni  ingrate. 

Je  vous  £crirai  encore  dans  le  cours  de  ce  mois  en  vous  envoyant  le  second 
volume  du  Theatre  Anglois.  Je  vous  vois  lever  les  £paules  ;  vous  souriez  ma- 
lignement.  Theatre  Anglois !  dites-vous,  Anglois  comme  9a:  tout  gate,  tout  bar- 
bouill£.  La  la,  con solez- vous,  probablement  le  mal  n’aura  pas  de  suite.  Au  diable 
si  je  s^-ais  oil  prendre  un  troisi^me  tome.  J’ai  achet6  une  mauvaise  "  Pamela,”  “  Love 
and  a  Bottle,”  “  The  Country  Lasses.”  II  y  a  dans  cette  derni&re  une  drole  d’id£e, 
mais  qui  ne  produit  rien  ;  si  vous  ne  me  faites  deux  ou  trois  jolies  pieces,  plus  de  tra¬ 
ductions.  Tout  ce  que  je  connois  ne  sauroit  me  servir.  Ce  travail  m’amusoit,  je  le 
quitte  regret.  Faire  encore  des  romans,  toujours  parler  d’ainour,  de  sentiment,  de 
passion  !  je  suis  bien  grande  pour  m'occuper  de  ces  propos  enfantins  ;  le  terns  oil 
j’aimois  est  si  loin  de  moi !  Quand  je  m’applique  a  peindre  les  transports  de  deux 
jeunes  amans  il  me  semble  que  je  radote.  Et  puis  Mr.  de  Buffon  m’a  gat6  l’esprit,  il 
estime  le  physique  de  l’amour,  et  pretend  que  le  moral  n’en  vaut  rien  :  nous  ne 
sommes  pas  du  meme  avis.  Si  le  physique  donne  un  instant  de  plaisir,  le  moral  rend 
tous  les  momens  lieureux ;  il  faut  que  l’aimable  naturaliste  ait  un  furieux  physique 
pour  lui  donner  cette  preference.  Son  livre  nous  cliarme  ;  il  est  impossible  de  mieux 
penser  et  de  mieux  6crire. 

Le  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  pretend  que  vous  6tes  enchante  du  poeme  de  M.  de 
Saint  Lambert.  On  n’en  parle  plus,  on  n’y  songe  plus,  e’est  un  ouvrage  oubli6.  Ma 
compagne  vous  prie  d’assurer  Madame  Garrick  de  son  attacliement ;  comme  traduc- 
trice  elle  n’ose  lever  les  yeux  devant  vous,  elle  vous  demande  humblement  votre 
indulgence.  Moi  je  l’embrasse,  cette  charmante  Madame  Garrick  ! — mon  Dieu,  ne  la 
reverrai-je  point  ?  vous,  je  ne  scais  que  vous  faire  :  vous  me  haissez,  peut-etre.  A 
peine  ai-je  le  courage  de  vous  demander  la  main  en  signe  de  paix,  l'idee  de  vous 
avoir  desoblig6  m’est  insupportable.  Adieu  !  mon  ami,  mon  bon  et  tendre  ami. 
Pardon,  mille  et  mille  fois  pardon. 


DE  M.  L’ABBE  MORELLET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

12  May,  1769,  Rue  Colbert. 

Mon  cher  ami  Mr.  Garrick  se  souvient-il  toujours  de  moi?  oui,  j’en  suis  sur> 
parcequ’il  connoit  combien  je  lui  suis  attache  tendrement ;  combien  j’aurois  de  desir 
de  le  voir,  de  vivre  avec  lui,  et  combien  j’estime  et  j’aime  son  esprit,  et  ses  talens,  et 
son  ame.  Voila  done  encore  de  quoi  lui  rappeler  mon  souvenir  plus  vivement.  Je 
lui  envoye  un  gros  livre  qu’il  ne  lira  peut-etre  pas,  parcequ’il  fera  mieux  d’employer 
son  temps  a  faire  quelque  ouvrage  agreable,  ou  a  commenter  Sliakspeare  (que  je 
voudrois  bien  lire  comments  par  lui),  mais  qu’il  recevra  toujours  comme  un  temoignage 
du  souvenir  qu’il  ma  laisse  de  lui,  qui  me  sera  toujours  precieux. 

Je  me  lasse,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  et  mon  cher  ami,  de  parler  en  tierce  personne. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


563 


Vous  ferez  et  vous  penserez  de  mon  livre  tout  ce  que  vous  voudrez,  pourvu  que 
vous  m’aimiez  toujours.  J’ai  mille  remercimens  a  vous  faire  de  la  grace  avec  la- 
quelle  vous  avez  re^u  tous  les  gens  que  je  vous  ai  adresses.  Mon  cousin  a  remport6 
de  Londres  beaucoup  de  recoil noissance  de  l’accueil  obligeant  que  vous  lui  avez  fait. 
Le  jeune  Bruyset  est  aussi  tres-touch^  de  vos  politesses.  Ils  m’ont  parE  tous  les 
deux  avec  sensibilite  des  bont^s  de  l'aimable  Madame  Garrick.  Tout  cela  me  met 
au  d^sespoir.  Moi !  qui  serois  bien  rec^u  aussi  de  tous  les  deux,  il  faut  qu’un  maudit 
travail  me  retienne  ici,  et  m’empeche  de  me  derober  six  semaines  pour  aller  voir  des 
gens  que  j'aime,  et  une  nation  qui  m’int^resse  si  vivement ! 

J’ai  cru,  mon  cber  ami,  que  j’allois  avoir  une  occasion  de  vous  rendre  une  partie 
au  moins  de  vos  bons  procedes.  Notre  ami  Suard  et  moi  nous  rencontrons  il  y  a  peu 
de  temps,  Monnet  et  un  job  jeune  homme  d’une  phisionomie  spirituelle  et  douce,  et 
de  beaux  yeux  pleins  de  feu  ;  on  nous  explique  que  c’est  la  le  neveu  de  notre  ami 
Garrick.  Nous  l’embrassons  ;  nous  nous  pr^parons  a  le  feter  a  le  soigner.  Point  du 
tout.  On  nous  declare  qu’il  part  pour  Geneve  ;  d’ou  il  ne  reviendra  que  dans  je  ne 
sais  combien  d’ann^es.  Eh  !  bien  done,  quand  il  reviendra,  il  faut  bien  que  nous  le 
voyions  et  que  nous  lui  soyons  utiles  a  Paris  si  nous  pouvons. 

Mais  vous-meme,  vous  deviez  venir  nous  revoir  et  vous  n’en  faites  rien.  Quand 
reviendrez  vous  ?  venez,  je  retournerai  peut-etre  avec  vous.  Mettez-moi  aux  pieds 
de  votre  aimable  et  respectable  epouse,  et  soyez  bien  persuad6  des  sentimens  d’estime 
et  d’attachement  tendre  que  je  vous  ai  vou6s  pour  la  vie. 

L’Abb£  Morellet. 

Vous  savez  bien  que  les  Helv^tius  et  le  Baron  d’Holbach  vous  regrettent  tous  les 
jours,  et  que  nous  parlons  souvent  de  vous  dans  ces  deux  societ^s.  Je  vous  fais  leurs 
amities  et  leurs  complimens. 

Tout  bien  consid£r£,  mon  cber  ami,  je  vous  prie  de  lire  mon  livre.  C’est  un 
sacrifice  de  plus  que  vous  ferez  a  l’amitie,  mais  cela  me  fera  grand  plaisir. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  16  Juin,  1769. 

Mon  tr^s-aimable  ami  Mr.  Francois  a  du  vous  remettre  deux  exemplaires  du 
second  volume  de  notre  imitation.  J’espere  qu’il  n’aura  pas  suivi  1’exemple  du  com¬ 
missionaire  de  Mr.  Stourz.  Le  petit  vilain  s’est  paye  par  ses  mains.  Pour  ce  volume 
que  vous  n’avez  pas,  quatre  se  sont  perdus  par  les  soins  de  cette  bonne  t£te  Duporte. 
Je  vous  renverrai  le  premier  tome  d&s  que  l’occasion  se  presen tera.  Peut-etre  Mr. 
Walpole  voudra-t-il  bien  avoir  la  bont6  de  vous  le  faire  tenir. 

J'ai  perdu  ma  mere  le  18  de  Mai.  Sa  fayon  de  vivre  avec  moi  ne  devoit  pas  me 
rendre  tres-sensible  h  cet  ev&nement.  Il  m’a  fait  cependant  une  vive,  inline  une 
cruelle  impression.  L’horreur  du  spectacle,  une  compassion  naturelle  m’ont  violem- 

4  c  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


.j()4 


ment  affect£e  ;  j’ai  £td  malade,  et  suis  fort  triste  encore.  Mon  mari  prend  soin  d’en- 
tretenir  dans  mon  coeur  le  poison  de  la  m61ancolie:  il  se  conduit  a  soixante  ans, 
conime  un  honnne  de  vingt,  et  c’est  moi  qui  paye  ses  sottises.  Eloignons  bien  vite 
ce  dd*sagreable  sujet.  Je  pourrois  6tre  heureuse  si  je  ne  tenois  a  personne,  mais  mon 
sort  est  de  souflrir  par  l'imprudence  d’autrui. 

Je  ne  r6p6terai  point  les  raisons  de  cette  phrase  maudite.  Je  devois  vous  con- 
suiter  sans  doute;  mais  pourquoi  me  serois-je  define  de  vos  compatriotes  ?  Les  jeunes 
voyageurs  de  votre  nation  me  sont  inconnus,  j’ai  converse  avec  des  gens  de  lettres,  ou 
des  personnes  en  place,  leurs  discours  uniformes  m’ont  jettee  dans  l'erreur  que  vous 
me  reprochez.  Je  ne  suis  ni  indocile,  ni  mechante.  Quand  on  a  mal  fait,  on  ne  peut 
qu’avouer  son  tort  et  s’cfforcer  de  le  rbparer. 

Votre  “  School  for  Lovers”  est  une  piece  de  Fontenelle,  tres-froide  dans  l’original ; 
en  parcourant  l’Angloise  elle  ne  m’a  pas  paru  trop  vive,  elle  est  actuellement  cliez  le 
relieur.  Je  la  relirai,  mais  j’en  espere  pen.  A  l’egard  du  “  Suspicious  Husband,” 
c’est  une  pi&ce  de  spectacle  et  de  jeu.  Je  S9ais  que  vous  la  rendez  tres-amusante, 
qu’on  en  suit  les  representations  pour  admirer  votre  jeu,  mais  otez-lui  Pagrement  que 
vous  lui  donnez,  il  restera  un  mari  dur,et  insipide  ;  rnalhonnete  sans  etre  comique  ; 
une  femme  qui  n’int^resse  point ;  une  amoureuse  dont  on  ne  se  soucie  point  du  tout ; 
une  dame  episodique,  folle,  et  point  plaisante ;  une  intrigue  chargee  et  tres-peu  atta- 
chante.  Au  fond  le  libertinage  de  Hanger  ne  m’embarrasseroit  pas  ;  mais  pour  qu’un 
caractere  soit  bon  au  theatre,  il  faut  que  tous  les  personnages  de  la  piece  tiennent  nG 
cessairement  a  lui ;  qu’il  preside  a  tous  leurs  interets,  qu’il  nuise  a  l’un,  afflige  l'autre  ; 
eleve  ou  detruise  des  esperances  ;  il  faut  que  le  repos,  le  bien-btre,  la  joie  ou  la  dou- 
leur  de  ses  parens,  de  ses  amis,  dependent  de  ses  demarches.  Yoyez  “  l’Avare”  de  Mo- 
liere,  le  “  Grondeur”  de  Bruis,  “  The  Provoked  Wife”  chez-vous.  Un  seul  homrne  dans 
ces  trois  comedies  desespere  tout  ce  qui  l’environne,  et  par  la  son  caractere  devient 
l  objet  de  Pattention  du  spectateur.  Ranger  est  tres-plaisant,  mais  on  pourroit  faire 
la  piece  sans  lui.  C'est  un  caractere  absolument  episodique.  Je  verrai  pourtant ;  car 
je  voudrois  vous  plaire  et  vous  contenter. 

Le  Baron  d’Holbach  m’a  envoye  Fletcher  et  Beaumont,  des  pieces  de  Ben  .Ton- 
son,  dix  volumes  d’anciennes  comedies,  j’en  ai  achete  six.  Tout  cela  est  si  confus,  si 
loin  des  mceurs  ;  tant  d'esprit,  si  peu  de  conduite,  de  raison,  de  decence,  de  nature], 
qu’en  verite  cette  lecture  est  un  terns  perdu.  Vos  auteurs  ont  pilie  ce  Fletcher, 
mais  ils  ne  Pont  pas  corrige  ;  je  retrouve  partout  le  fond  de  ses  scenes,  et  ne  les  vois 
pas  mieux  amenees.  Apres  tout,  mon  ami,  ce  que  je  dis  de  votre  theatre,  un  Anglois 
le  diroit  du  notre  s’il  le  lisoit  avec  l’intention  d’en  faire  le  meme  usage.  Kos  vieilles 
pieces  sont  abominables,  et  les  nouvelles  n’ont  pas  le  sens  commun. 

Mr.  Colman  ne  sera  pas  aussi  doux,  aussi  bon  que  Mr.  Murphy,  peut- etre.  Il 
regrettera  l’ivresse  de  Charles.  Si  vous  n’avez  pas  encore  parl6,  taisez-vous  ;  n’aver- 
tissez  ni  lui,  ni  Mr.  Kelly.  Ils  ignoreront  qu’on  les  a  traduits.  Je  le  souhaite  pour 
leur  repos  et  pour  le  mien. 

Votre  pamflet  est  parfaitement  bien  6crit.  Les  reflexions  sur  Voltaire  sont  justes. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


565 


On  pourroit  meme  lui  faire  de  plus  grands  reproches,  et  relever  ce  trait  de  m£chancete 
qu’il  a  mis  dans  Hamlet.  Ce  prince  dit,  tout  est  corrompu ;  Voltaire  dit,  tout  est 
pourri.  Votre  auteur  le  traite  d’ignorant,  moi  je  l’accuse  d’une  basse  jalousie,  im- 
pardonnable  a  un  homme  de  genie.  On  attaque  trop  vivement  Corneille  dans  ce  petit 
ouvrage.  Je  suis  assez  du  sentiment  de  votre  critique  sur  les  oeuvres  de  ce  poete, 
mais  je  ne  voudrois  pas  en  faire  un  aveu  public :  Pierre  Corneille  est  revere  des 
Francois.  II  faut  respecter  les  opinions  generales,  meme  celles  qu’on  desapprouve, 
quand  elles  ne  blessent  ni  la  morale  ni  l'honneur. 

Vous  ne  lisez  pas  mes  lettres,  ou  du  moins  vous  n’y  r^pondez  jamais.  Je  vous 
priois  de  me  dire  si  vous  aviez  des  contes  de  fees,  vraiment  contes  Anglois.  Vous  ne 
m’avez  dit  ni  oui,  ni  non. 

Adieu,  mon  aimable  et  cher  ami ;  chargez-vous  de  faire  passer  l’incluse  dans  les 
mains  de  Mr.  Murphy.  II  m’a  £crit  la  plus  agr6able  lettre  du  monde,  trop  flatteuse 
pourtant ;  c'est  un  homme  desprit ;  s’il  avoit  moins  pris  chez  nous  je  prendrois  davan- 
tage  cliez  lui.  Fst-ce  qu'il  ne  travaille  plus  ?  ce  seroit  dommage  qu’il  fut  paresseux, 
car  il  a  beaucoup  de  talents.  Adieu,  vous  dis-je.  Je  vous  embrasse,  si  les  caresses 
d’une  vaporeuse  ne  vous  fatiguent  pas.  Hites  mille  choses  tendres  a  INIadame 
Garrick  :  ma  compagne  et  moi  nous  pensons  toujours  a  elle.  Souvenez-vous  de  nous 
si  vous  avez  quelques  nouveau tes. 

Belcour  de  la  Com^die  Francoise  ira  peut-6tre  a  Londres.  II  voyage  pour  son 
plaisir.  II  s’est  avise  de  prendre  de  l’amour :  et  c’est  la  soeur  de  sa  femme  dont  il 
fait  sa  maitresse.  Sa  femme  l’a  trouve  mauvais,  elle  a  mis  sa  soeur  au  couvent,  son 
mari  a  la  porte  ;  a  present  elle  se  desole,  et  joue  la  belle  abandonnee.  Adieu,  adieu. 

Riccoboni. 


DE  M.  CAZOTTE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Pierry  par  Epernay,  ce  7  Septembre,  1769. 

Je  suis.  Monsieur  et  tres-cher  ami,  de  retour  dans  mon  manoir  champetre,  apr£s 
avoir  passe  quatre  mois  a  Paris  dans  la  dissipation  que  vous  s^avez  que  I  on  y  trouve. 
Je  me  suis  un  peu  trop  livre  pour  un  paysan  qui  a  perdu  Habitude  des  amusemens 
dangereux  a  la  sante.  Je  suis  revenu  chez  moi  presque  malade  ;  mais  du  repos,  des 
eaux  ferrugineuses  excellentes  qui  sont  dans  mon  voisinage,  et  du  bon  vin,  vont  me 
remettre,  il  n’y  paroitra  plus.  Je  ne  puis  songer  au  contretems  qui  nous  a  empeches 
de  nous  trouver  ensemble  a  Paris,  sans  en  etre  encore  mortifie ;  nous  nous  fussions 
trop  rejouis.  C’est  une  partie  remise  a  laquelle  il  faut  penser ;  en  attendant,  je  ne 
perds  pas  de  vue  la  promesse  que  vous  me  faites  de  venir  me  relancer  chez  moi. 
Void  le  terns,  Monsieur  :  nous  allons  cueillir  le  meilleur  raisin  qui  ait  jamais  pendu  a 
vigne  depuis  que  Noe  la  planta.  Venez  en  manger  avec  Madame  Garrick.  Je  lui 
offre  ma  maison  et  a  Arous  de  tout  mon  eceur.  Une  vendange  est  un  spectacle.  La 
compagne  est  alors  meublee  de  fa^on  a  ne  point  faire  regretter  la  ville  ;  tout  y  est  en 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


action,  en  tableaux,  ct,  comme  la  r^colte  flatte  ceux  qui  la  font,  tout  y  est  en  joie. 
Nous  boirons  du  meilleur  que  j’aie,  et  nous  preluderons  sur  les  folies  que  nous  aurons 
k  faire  en  terns  et  lieu.  La  saison  proinet  d’etre  riante  ;  nos  coteaux  sont  couronn^s 
de  forets  perches  comme  le  sont  les  pares  des  grands  princes.  Nous  ferons  des  pro¬ 
menades  i\  perte  de  spleen  ;  et  si  vous  ou  quelqu’un  de  vos  intimes  veulent  du  vin  de 
premiere  goutte,  vous  le  prendrez  sur  le  fait.  Faites  agr^er  a  Madame  Garrick  mes 
respects.  Madame  Cazotte  vous  prie  de  recevoir  tous  deux  les  assurances  de  ses  tres- 
bumbles  civility.  Moi,  je  vous  dis  tout  franchement  que  je  vous  aime,  pareeque 
vous  m’avez  plu,  me  plaisez,  et  me  plairez ;  mais  si  vous  venez  camper  en  Cham¬ 
pagne,  je  vous  en  dirai  bien  davantage. 

Cazotte. 

Mille  remercimens  de  nous  avoir  procure  les  conseils  de  votre  ami,  Mr.  le 
Docteur  Sharpe. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  David  Garrick,  Ecuier,  Directeur  du 
Theatre  de  Druri-Lane,  &  Londres.” 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

12  Septembre,  1769. 

Occupe  de  l’apotlieose  de  Shakspeare,  sacrificateur  et  favori  du  dieu  dont  vous 
consacrez  le  temple,  daignerez-vous  ecouter  la  voix  d’une  simple  mortelle  ?  Mes  foi¬ 
bles  accents  ne  se  perdront-ils  pas  au  bruit  des  acclamations  d’un  peuple  adorateur  et 
du  poete,  et  de  son  grand  pretre  ?  du  milieu  de  votre  gloire  baisserez-vous  les  yeux 
sur  une  terrestre  amie  ?  ne  lui  crierez-vous  point,  “  Retirez-vous,  prophane !”  11  se  prd- 
sente  une  occasion  de  vous  6crire ;  je  la  saisis.  J’en  aimerois  mieux  une  autre.  Le 
bon,  l’obligeant  ami  que  vous  m’aviez  donne  semble  avoir  fini  ses  courses,  il  retourne 
k  Londres;  et  peut-etre  ne  le  reverrai-je  de  ma  vie.  Je  le  regrette, — en  verit6  je  le 
regrette  beaucoup.  II  veut  bien  vous  porter  le  volume  que  l’on  vous  a  vol6,  et  mille 
assurances  des  sentimens  de  ma  compagne  et  des  miens  :  nous  vous  aimons  toujours, 
raeme  quand  vous  nous  oubliez. 

Les  “  Pens^es  Nocturnes”  de  Young  ont  fait  fortune  ici.  C’est  une  preuve  sans 
r6plique  du  changement  de  l’esprit  Francois.  J’ai  lu  la  moitie  de  l’ouvrage,  et  malgr6 
sa  beaute  je  n’ai  pu  le  poursuivre.  On  lit  sans  peine  un  traite  sur  la  mort,  il  attriste 
sans  etonner,  sans  fixer  de  sombres  images  dans  l’esprit ;  mais  il  faudroit  n’avoir  point 
d'amis,  pour  lire  ce  poete  sublime  et  noir.  LTne  personne  sensible  fremit  en  son- 
geant  que  demain,  ce  soil’,  a  l’instant  peut-etre,  elle  va  causer  ou  ressentir  une  dou- 
leur  si  veritable,  si  profonde,  que  le  terns  et  la  reflexion  ne  pourront  jamais  l’adoucir. 
^  oung  est  malheureux  que  les  vapeurs  fussent  connues  avant  ses  vers ;  il  eut  ete  le 
createur  de  cette  maladie  de  lame,  et  sa  memoire  seroit  precieuse  a  toutes  les  faculties 
de  1’ Europe.* 

*  One  ot  the  happiest  pleasantries  that  have  ever  been  written  upon  this  melancholy  subject.  Young’s 
poem  is  all  elch  church-yard,  the  abode  of  death,  but  dressed  in  chaplets  of  the  loveliest  flowers. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


567 


Je  ne  stpais  si  vous  avez  re9u  une  lettre  de  moi,  datee,  je  crois,  des  premiers  jours 
de  Juin  ?  elle  renfermoit  line  r^ponse  a  la  tr^s-jolie  et  tr&s-flateuse  epitre  de  Mr. 
Murphy.  Depuis  trois  mois  je  suis  en  doute  si  elle  vous  est  parvenue.  La  raison 
de  ce  doute  est  facile  a  deviner ;  mais  il  ne  faut  pas  vous  gronder,  n'est-ce  pas  ?  vous 
avez  tant  d'affaires ! 

Je  ne  veux  pas  vous  troubler  plus  long  terns.  Adieu,  mon  aimable  ami :  portez- 
vous  bien  ;  embrassez  pour  nous  vbtre  charmante  compagne  ;  et  si  dans  cette  vie  agitee 
vous  trouvez  un  instant  de  loisir,  rappellez-vous  deux  femmes  dont  vous  etes  tendre- 
ment  aimd.  I  have  done. 


DE  M.  DE  VILLIERS  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  St.  Petersbourg,  3-14  May,  1770. 

Le  souvenir  de  la  reception  honnete  que  j’ai  ^prouvee  de  votre  part,  quand  j’etois 
dans  votre  ville,  ne  peut  pas  plus  sortir  de  ma  m^moire  que  celui  de  votre  excellence 
decid^e  dans  l’art  le  plus  difficile.  Et  quand  on  parle  du  Roscius  de  notre  siecle,  (ce 
qui  ne  manque  jamais  d’arriver  partout  oil  l’on  court  le  spectacle,  et  ou  l’on  en 
parle,)  je  me  fais  un  singulier  plaisir  de  pouvoir  aj outer  il  l'eioge  qui  suit  infaillible- 
ment  la  superiority  de  vos  talens,  celui  de  l’honnetete  de  votre  cceur,  de  l'affabilite 
modeste  de  vos  manures,  et  de  la  douceur  de  votre  societe  que  j’ai  eu  l’avantage 
d’6prouver.  En  tenant  cette  conduite,  je  suis  bien  eloign  e  de  penser  comme  Ciceron 
l  a  fait,  ou  a  paru  le  faire,  pour  sacrifier  peut-etre  aux  pr6juges  de  son  siecle,  que  l’ex- 
cellence  dans  votre  art  ait  besoin  d’un  correctif.  Mais  c’est  que  si  la  superiority  des 
talens  donne  des  droits  a  l’admiration,  les  qualitys  du  cceur  en  donnent  a  l’estime,  et 
que  je  me  croirois  coupable  d’un  parjure  de  reticence,  si  ayant  ete  temoin  des  droits 
Egitimes  que  vous  avez  a  l’un  et  a  l’autre,  je  vous  laissois,  par  mon  silence,  priver 
d’une  partie  de  ce  qui  vous  est  du.  Votre  reputation  ne  me  laissant  rien  a  faire  sur 
le  premier  objet,  je  me  dedommage  sur  le  second. 

Avec  ces  sentiments.  Monsieur,  il  ne  doit  point  vous  paroitre  extraordinaire  que 
je  cherche  les  occasions  de  me  rappeler  de  temps  a  autre  a  votre  souvenir,  et  de  ne  pas 
laisser  eteindre,  faute  de  les  remuer  quoique  doucement  et  par  intervalles,  les  etincelles 
d’une  connoissance  dont  je  suis  si  glorieux  :  j’en  trouve  une  occasion  favorable  que  je 
saisis  avec  empressement,  dans  le  voyage  que  Mr.  Belissen,  qui  s’est  bien  voulu  charger 
de  vous  remettre  la  presente,  va  faire  a  Londres.  Admirateur  jusqu’a  present  sur 
parole  de  la  superiority  de  vos  talens  dans  un  art  dont  il  connoit  toute  la  difficulty,  par 
les  efforts  heureux  qu’il  a  faits  lui-meme  pour  les  vaincre,  il  a  voulu  devenir  temoin 
oculaire  de  ce  que  la  renommee  en  publie.  Ce  motif  d’une  curiosity  honnete,  joint  a 
ses  qualites  personnelles,  le  recommandera  mieux  aupres  de  vous  que  je  ne  pourrois  et 
que  je  n’ai  droit  de  le  faire. 

Si,  par  hazard,  vous  etiez  curieux  de  s^avoir  quelque  chose  de  la  situation  presente 
d’un  homme  qui,  par  l’attachement  qu’il  vous  porte,  m elite  quelque  reminiscence  de 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


5G8 

votre  part,  jc  voiis  dirois  bri^vement  que,  venu  dans  ce  pays  pour  un  objet  que  je 
trouvai  manqu£  ii  mon  arriv^e,  je  comptois  tout  uniment  m’en  retourner,  quand  Sa 
Majesty  Imp6riale,  a  qui  on  avoit  parl6  de  moi,  jugea  A.  propos  de  me  faire  offrir  l’em- 
ploi  de  Consultant  du  Procureur-Gcffieral  de  la  Commission  des  Loix,  dont  il  se  prepare 
un  nouveau  code.  J’ai  accepte  avec  joye  et  avec  reconnoissance  cette  place  honnete 
quej’occupe  depuis  deux  ans,  et  pendant  ce  temps  j’ai  re£u  des  marques  flatteuses 
de  la  bonffi  et  de  la  gen^rosite  de  Sa  Majesty  Imperiale.  Ces  liens  de  soie  m’attachent 
ici,  et  m’emp^cheront  par  line  douce  violence  d’en  sortir  jusqu’&  ce  que  mes  services 
deviennent  inutiles  dans  la  partie  ou  je  suis  employ^.  Mais  en  jouissant  de  ce  bien- 
etrc,  je  n'oublie  pas  que  c’est  a  deux  Anglois  que  j’en  suis  redevable ;  a  Mr.  Robert 
Dingley,  qui  me  donna  avant  mon  depart  de  Londres  une  lettre  de  recommandation 
pour  un  de  ses  amis  en  cette  famille;  et  a  Mr.  King,  qui  est  ce  meme  ami,  Ministre 
de  la  congregation  Angloise  en  ce  pays.  C’est  a  ce  dernier  que  j’ai  l’obligation  de 
m  avoir  procure  la  connoissance  qui  m’a  valu  ma  place.  Ainsi  quand  par  la  tournure 
naturelle  de  mon  esprit  que  j’ai  tache  de  bonne  heure  de  degager  des  prejuges  con- 
traires  a  la  bienveillance  universelle,  je  n’aurois  pas  aime  la  nation  Angloise  estimable 
tant  de  titres,  j’aurois,  dansles  obligations  que  j’ai  a  des  particuliers  de  cette  meme 
nation,  des  raisons  de  le  faire,  et  dont  je  lie  pourrois  me  defendre,  sans  manquer  a  la 
reconnoissance. 

Pour  vous,  Monsieur,  qui  reunissez  les  deux  titres,  d’illustrer  et  de  faire  aimer 
votre  nation,  vous  devez  sentir  avec  quels  sentimens  de  la  plus  parfaite  consideration, 
et  de  l’estime  la  plus  sincere,  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre 

Votre  tr&s-humble  et  tr&o  obeissant  serviteur, 

De  Villiers. 

J’esp^re  et  je  souhaite  que  Madame  soit  en  bonne  sante,  et  je  vous  prie  de  me 
reccmmander  a  l  honneur  de  son  souvenir. 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  2  Juiilet,  ]  770. 

Vous  etes  bien  aimable  et  bien  g£n6reux,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  de  vous  ressouvenir 
de  moi  apr£s  mon  impardonnable  negligence,  et  de  m’aimer  encore  assez  pour  me 
demander  un  office  d’amitie;  mais  vous  rendez  justice  a  mon  coeur,  et  malgre  tous 
mes  torts,  je  n’ai  jamais  eu  celui  d’oublier  un  moment  et  le  prix  de  votre  amitie  et  les 
marques  que  vous  m’en  avez  donnees. 

J’ai  vu  avec  bien  du  plaisir  votre  ami  le  Docteur  Burney,  et  j’ai  et6  fach£  de  le 
voir  si  peu  de  terns.  II  est  fort  honnete,  fort  doux,  et  fort  instruit.  Je  lui  ai  donn6 
a  diner  avec  l’Abbe  Arnaud,  mon  ami,  l'homme  de  ce  pays-ci  et  peut-etre  de  toute 
l’Europe  qui  parle  le  mieux  de  la  musique.  Nous  avons  beaucoup  parle  de  musique 
et  de  vous,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  et  nous  avons  bu  de  bon  coeur  a  votre  sante. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


569 


Mon  cher  et  sublime  Roscius  sera  venge  du  plat  compilateur  de  la  rapsodie  de 
Londres.  J’ai  ecrit  une  lettre  a  ce  sujet  qui  sera  ins^r^e  dans  le  “  Mercure,”  dans 
“  l’Avant-coureur,”  et  dans  “  le  Journal  Encyclopedique  e’en  est  assez  pour  donner 
a  la  satisfaction  qui  vous  est  due  toute  la  publicity  possible.  J’esp&re  que  vous  serez 
content  de  Particle  ou  j’ai  parte  de  vous  d’apr&s  mon  coeur  :  d&s  qu’il  sera  imprime,  je 
vous  enverrai  le  feuillet. 

Je  vous  ai  envoye  dernierement  par  M.  Chamier,  depute  de  votre  Compagnie  des 
Indes,  trois  pieces  de  theatre  nouvelles :  j’esp&re  que  vous  aurez  recu  dans  leurs  terns 
d’autres  pieces  ou  brochures  que  je  vous  ai  adressees  par  differentes  occasions.  Lors- 
que  le  poeme  des  Saisons  parut  ici  je  vous  l’envoyai  par  un  valet  de  louage  que  j’avois 
eu  a  Londres  et  qui  etoit  venu  faire  un  tour  ici ;  il  vous  portoit  avec  ce  poeme  et 
quelque  autre  nouveaute  une  lettre  de  moi ;  c’est  la  seule  que  je  vous  aie  ecrite  de- 
puis  mon  retour,  et  j’ai  lieu  de  croire  que  vous  ne  l’avez  pas  re9ue,  puisque  dans  le 
billet  que  vous  m’avez  ecrit  il  y  a  quelque  terns,  vous  me  dites  que  vous  n’avez  point 
recu  de  nouvelles  de  moi ;  je  me  rapelle  que  je  vous  faisois  compliment  sur  votre 
convalescence :  je  n'ai  pas  besoin  que  les  accidens  se  joignent  a  mon  incurable 
paresse  pour  multiplier  mes  torts. 

Auriez-vous  le  loisir,  mon  cher  Garrick,  de  relever  dans  cette  rapsodie  de  Lon¬ 
dres  les  faussetes  et  les  balourdises  qui  s'y  trouvent,  et  de  me  les  indiquer  simplement 
sans  aucune  discussion ;  ou  si  vous  ne  pouviez  pas  vous  charger  de  cette  ennuyeuse 
commission,  ne  pourriez  vous  pas  en  charger  quelqu’un  ?  Je  ferois  usage  de  ces  notes, 
et  vous  m’obligeriez. 

Oh  !  que  j’ai  regrette  de  n’etre  pas  a  Stratford -sur- Avon  quand  vous  y  avez  c^tebre 
le  Jubile  de  Shakspeare  :  c’etoit  une  fete  digne  de  l'ancienne  Atltenes.  Je  ne  suis  pas 
digne  de  louer  votre  ode  ;  je  l’ai  trouvee  pleine  de  verve,  de  noblesse,  et  de  mouve- 
ment ;  mais  j’ai  senti  tout  ce  que  la  poesie  devoit  recevoir  du  spectacle,  de  la  mu- 
sique,  du  lieu,  et  surtout  de  votre  belle  declamation.  C’est  sans  doute  un  grand 
homme  que  Shakspeare,  mais  sans  David  Garrick,  William  Shakspeare  auroit  bien 
des  polices  de  moins.  Vivez  long-terns  pour  sa  gloire  et  pour  le  bien  de  tous  ceux 
qui  vous  connoissent.  Mettez-moi  aux  pieds  de  votre  charmante  et  respectable 
moitie,  et  rappelez-moi  a  son  souvenir  et  a  ses  bontes  ;  ma  femme  veut  aussi  que  vous 
agreiez  l’un  et  l’autre  ses  tendres  compliinens.  Bon  jour,  mon  cher  et  illustre 
Roscius,  je  vous  prie  de  compter  toujours  sur  tous  les  sentimens  d’estime  et  d'attache- 
ment  que  je  vous  ai  voites  pour  la  vie.  Suard. 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  12  Aout,  1770. 

Je  n’ai  que  le  terns,  mon  cher  Monsieur,  de  vous  dire  bon  jour,  en  vous  envoy  ant 
le  feuillet  de  “  l’Avant-coureur”  oil  est  imprinte  la  lettre  dans  laquelle  je  redresse  M. 
Grosley  sur  sa  ridicule  anecdote.  La  meme  lettre  sera  ins^ree  dans  les  deux  pre¬ 
miers  volumes  du  “Mercure”  et  du  “  Journal  Encyclopedique.”  C  est  par  oubli  qu  elle 

4  D 


VOL.  II. 


570 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


n’a  pas  d^j5  parn  dans  lc  dernier  “  Mercure.”  Au  reste,  la  premiere  copie  a  d^j^  fait 
son  effet  dans  Paris,  pareeque  “  l’Avant-coureur  ”  est  assez  r6pandu.  J’attends  les 
petites  notes  que  vous  m’avez  promises  sur  la  rapsodie  de  ce  voyageur  de  caffe,  qui 
d’aillenrs  est  un  assez  galant  liomme. 

Coniine  je  n’ai  pas  le  terns  d’ecrire  au  bon  Air.  Becket,  je  vous  prie,  moil  clier 
Monsieur,  de  lui  dire  quand  vous  le  verrez  que  je  n’ai  pas  pu  trouver  a  vendre  son 
nianuscrit,  parcequ’il  est  si  mal  6crit  qu’il  n’en  couteroit  pas  davantage  pour  faire 
traduire  la  traduction  que  pour  corriger  l’original,  qui  d’ailleurs  n’est  pas  interessant, 
surtout  sans  les  plans.  Ainsi  Mr.  Becket  pent  retirer  son  manuscrit  de  mes  mains  ; 
il  n’en  est  pas  sorti. 

Encore  une  importunite :  je  voiulrois  bien  avoir  le  nouveau  voyage  de  Baretti ; 
voudriez  vous  bien  avoir  la  complaisance  de  dire  &  Air.  Becket  de  la  faire  remettre 
cachete  4  un  des  commis  de  notre  ambassadeur  avec  moil  adresse.  Je  ne  vous  fais 
point  d’excuse  de  l’embarras  que  je  vous  donne,  pareeque  je  voudrois  faire  cent  mille 
fois  plus  pour  vous  plaire.  Adieu,  mon  clier  et  illustre  Roscius,  je  vous  salue  et  vous 
embrasse  de  tout  mon  cceur.  Faites  agreer  mes  humbles  hommages  a  Madame 
Garrick. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  4  Sept.  1770. 

Un  si  long  silence!  pas  la  plus  l£g£re  marque  de  souvenir! — puis  taisez- vous  ; 
point  d’excuses  ;  l’oubli  est  impardonnable.  Je  suis  trop  fach^e  pour  gronder.  Quand 
on  me  neglige,  je  d^daigne  de  me  plaindre,  il  nest  pas  dans  mes  principes  d’arreter 
celui  qui  fuit  ;  nous  voila  done  brouilles.  Je  lie  vous  6cris  pas  au  moins  ;  non,  sur 
mon  honneur,  je  ne  veux  pas  vous  4crire.  Tout  le  monde  me  parle  d  un  etre  aimable, 
appell6  David  Garrick ;  on  l’estime,  on  l’aime,  on  l’adore,  on  me  r£p6te  e'est  voire  ami. 
Je  r6ponds,  je  ne  le  connois  plus,  j’ignore  s’il  respire,  e’est  un  petit  maussade  qui  m’a 
laiss^e  la  comme  un  chien. 

La  personne  qui  vous  pr^sentera  cet  avant-propos  poli,  est  un  liomme  que  je  n’ai 
jamais  vu.  Madame  la  Marquise  de  Saint  Chamand  me  prie  de  le  charger  d’une  lettre 
pour  la  merveille  de  Londres  :  elle  me  dit  qu'il  est  d’une  famille  honn&te,  a  de  l’esprit, 
n’est  pas  riche,  et  cherclie  a  se  faire  connoitre.  Dispose  comme  vous  l’etes  a  obliger, 
s’il  a  du  merite  et  des  talens,  et  que  l’occasion  se  presente  de  le  servir,  vous  ferez 
plaisir  a  une  tres  aimable  dame  en  lui  procurant  quelques  avantages  dans  vdtre 
patrie. 

Mademoiselle  Biancolelli  s’ecrie  “  Eh  ji !  quoi,  serieusement  vous  enverrez  ce  chiffon 
de  papier  :  allons !  decliirez  cela,  e£dez  au  mouvement  de  votre  cceur,  6crivez  a  votre 
ami.”  ....  Je  n’en  ferai  rien :  laissez-moi,  Mademoiselle, — laissez-moi.  Je  ne 
voudrois  pas  pour  Punivers  entier  pouvoir  me  reprocher  une  bassesse,  et  n’en  seroit-ce 
pas  une  veritable  de  lui  dire  que  je  l’aime  encore  ? 


Riccoboni. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


571 


DE  M.  D’ARNAUD  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MONSIEUR,  A  Paris,  ce  24  Sep.  1770. 

Que  direz-vous  de  la  liberty  que  je  prends  ?  a  peine  ai-je  eu  l’honneur  de  vous 
voir  a  Paris  cliez  INIr.  Clairaut,  et  j’ose  vous  solliciter  en  faveur  d’un  jeune  homme 
qui  part  pour  l’Angleterre,  et  qui  auroit  besoin  de  trouver  des  protecteurs  en  ce  pays ; 
et  a  qui  puis-je  mieux  m’adresser  qu’a  vous,  dont  la  vertu  et  la  bienfaisance  £galent  le 
talent  et  le  genie?  II  n’est  point  de  prejug6s  pour  des  hommes  tels  que  vous;  un 
Francois  infortune  a  des  droits  sur  votre  coeur  comme  un  compatriote  ;  daignez  done 
tendre  une  main  gdiereuse  a  ce  jeune  etranger  qui  est  digne  de  vos  bont6s,  et  s’il  se 
peut  mettez-le  au  rang  de  tant  d’heureux  que  vous  avez  faits,  il  en  sera  pen6tre  de 
reconnoissance,  et  je  partagerai  ses  sentiments.  L’ami  Goy  s’interesse  aussi  a  lui. 
Au  reste,  vous  faut-il  d’autres  motifs  que  le  plaisir  d’obliger  ?  Vous  prouvez  bien  ce 
quejepense,  qu’il  est  impossible  qu’un  homme  de  genie  ne  soit  pas  un  etre  bien- 
faisant,  et  une  bonne  nature  (pour  me  servir  d’un  Anglicisme).  Ales  titres  aupres  de 
vous  sont  votre  propre  reputation,  je  ne  vous  parle  pas  du  Comte  de  Comminge  qui 
m’a  procure  l’honneur  de  vous  connaitre  a  Paris.  Agr£ez  mes  sentiments  de  v6n£- 
ration,  tous  les  liommages  dus  4  la  vertu  reunie  au  indite,  et  avec  lesquels  je  serai 
toute  ma  vie,  Monsieur,  votre  tres-humble,  et  tr£s-obdssant  serviteur, 

D’Arnaud. 

D’Arnaud,  Conseiller  d’Ambassade  de  la  Cour  de  Saxe,  rue  des  Postes,  pres  l’Estrapade  a  Paris. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

1  Octobre,  1770. 

A  la  pride  trd-indiserde  d’une  ancienne  ami,  je  vous  adressai  il  y  a  quinze  ou 
vingt  jours  une  sotte  petite  lettre,  soi-disant  de  recommandation.  Je  ne  connois  point 
du  tout  le  personnage  qu’on  pretendoit  mettre  sous  votre  protection.  Si  ce  chiffon 
de  papier  vous  est  pr6sent6,  jettez  au  feu  sans  vous  embarrasser  du  porteur,  a  moins 
qu’il  ne  vous  donne  des  garants  plus  surs  de  ses  mceurs  et  de  ses  talens.  Mr.  de 
Fleuri,  notre  avocat-gdidal,  s’y  interesse,  e’est  tout  ce  que  je  s^ais. 

Il  me  souvient  d’avoir  commence  une  grande  querelle  dans  cette  impertinente 
missive  ;  avec  votre  permission,  Monsieur,  je  pretends  la  continuer :  car  je  suis  fachee, 
oui,  bien  fachee.  Un  an  tout  entier  sans  une  ligne  de  vous !  negligent,  paresseux, 
mechant — mais  e’est  ma  faute  ;  je  m’y  prends  mal,  je  boude  comme  un  enfant,  je  vous 
laisse  tranquille,  je  me  tais:  oh,  je  vais  changer  de  m6thode,  vous  £crire  lettres  sur 
lettres,  toutes  les  semaines,  tous  les  couriers  un  gros  paquet.  Pas  un  Anglois  ne 
quittera  les  bords  de  la  Seine  sans  £tre  charge  de  mes  d^peches  pour  Air.  Garrick. 
D’ennui,  de  fatigue,  d’impatience  vous  parlerez  enfin,  ne  fut-ce  que  pour  dire, 
finisse%  done ! 


4  n  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Jo  me  flatte  pourtant,  mon  tr&s-aimable  ami,  que  vous  recevrcz  cette  premiere 
preuve  d’hostiliR*  sans  col£re,  que  vous  y  r^pondrez  avec  douceur  et  meme  avcc  ten- 
dresse  :  je  ne  puis  me  croire  tout-a-fait  oubli^e  de  vous,  et  j’ai  trop  bonne  opinion  d’un 
coeur  Anglois  pour  le  soup^onner  d’inconstance  ou  de  legdretL 

A  present  parlous  de  mes  affaires,  puisque  vous  voulez  bien  vous  en  meler.  Je 
vous  previens  d’abord  que  je  ne  regarde  point  l’offre  de  Mr.  Murphy  comme  un  en¬ 
gagement  de  sa  part  dont  il  ne  soit  pas  libre  de  se  d^dire.  Si  ses  occupations,  ses 
affaires,  ou  ses  amusemens,  ne  lui  permettent  pas  de  perdre  un  terns  qu’assurement  il 
pourroit  mieux  employer,  il  peut  s’en  expliquer  avec  franchise  ;  je  n'en  serai  pas 
moins  reconn oissante  de  son  intention,  et  du  tendre  int^ret  cpii  vous  portoit  a  saisir 
cette  occasion  de  m’obliger.  Xe  lisez  pas  ma  lettre  en  courant,  pesez  sur  cet  article, 
n’allez  pas  tourmenter  Mr.  Murphy,  parlez-lui  seulement  pour  sonder  ses  dispositions 
presentes.  Si  elles  n'ont  point  chang6,  je  ferai  une  copie  des  premiers  cahiers  de 
mon  ouvrage,  et  je  vous  l’enverrai.  Apres  1’avoir  quitte,  repris,  suivi,  interrompu,  je 
me  suis  determine  a  le  donner  cet  hiver.  Repondez-moi  tout  de  suite,  je  vous  en 
prie,  car  je  ne  veux  pas  travaiUer  a  la  copie  si  elle  devient  inutile. 

L’apoth6ose  de  votre  poete  ch£ri  a  tente  les  Francois,  peuple  imitateur,  de  con- 
sacrer  un  temple  a  leurs  plus  fameux  auteurs.  Grand  bruit  parmi  les  amateurs  de 
l’art  divin  d’ Apollon.  Les  connoisseurs  opinoient  pour  un  bien  petit  batiment,  les 
gens  de  lettres  pour  une  immense  rotonde,  les  fanatiques  proposoient  une  seule 
colonne,  et  la  destinoient  a  Voltaire.  De  vieux  enteUs  crioient  au  sacrilege,  et  Cor¬ 
neille  !  ou  le  mettrons-nous,  s’il  vous  plait  ? — les  indifferens  ont  fini  la  dispute,  ne 
faisons  rien,  ont-ils  dit,  leur  sentiment  a  pr^valu.  Cependant,  on  aura  la  statue  de 
Voltaire  par  souscription.  Scpavez-vous  ou  nous  la  placerons  ? — non : — eh  ! — bien,  ni 
nous  non  plus. 

Rousseau  est  ici.  On  l’a  un  peu  couru,  cela  s’est  ralenti.  Il  copie  de  la  musique, 
pour  vivre,  dit-il :  plate  affectation,  puisqu’il  poss&de  trop  pour  un  cynique.  Il  a 
declare  son  mariage  avec  la  tr£s-digne  le  Vasseur.  Madame  Bret,  une  femme  de  ma 
connoissance,  ent£t£e  du  grand  merite  de  cet  animal  bisarre,  a  voulu  le  voir,  lui  donner 
a  diner,  le  contempler  a  son  aise.  Mr.  Bret,  complaisant  pour  sa  femme,  va  chez  le 
philosophe,  son  ancien  ami,  l’invite,  le  prie,  et  pour  mieux  l’engager,  lui  conte  que  sa 
femme  a  un  portrait  de  lui,  qu’elle  aime  comme  ses  deux  yeux  ;  “  Quel  portrait,” 
demande  Rousseau  ;  “  est-ce  celui  ou  je  suis  represent^  en  Armenien  ?”  “  Oui,”  dit 

le  tendre  mari,  “  elle  l’adore  ce  charmant  portrait.” — “  Sortez  de  chez-moi,”  r^pond 
Rousseau  furieux  :  “  un  tableau  fait  pour  me  deshonorer,  pour  m’avilir,  je  ne  veux 
jamais  voir  la  femme  capable  de  regarder,  d’aimer,  de  conserver  ce  monument  de  ma 
honte  ; — diner  avec  elle  !  j’aimerois  mieux  mourir.”  La  pauvre  Madame  Bret  s’arrache 
les  cheveux,  ne  peut  se  consoler  d’avoir  si  cruellement  offense  Jean-Jacques.  Quelle 
brute  que  cet  homme  d'esprit ! 

J’ai  le  coeur  un  peu  serre  par  les  mauvais  propos  des  Francois,  et  meme  des  An¬ 
glois.  Un  bruit  sourd  m'alarme,  me  fait  craindre  une  rupture  entre  les  deux  nations, 
dont  je  souhaiterois  entretenir  la  bonne  intelligence.  Elies  s’aimeroient  si  elles  se 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


573 


connoissoient  mieux  ;  des  pr^juges  pris  dans  l’enfance,  conserves  sans  examen,  vous 
£loignent  de  nous.  Autrefois,  nos  rois,  nos  heros  etoient  fibres  d’armes,  une  garde 
Ecossoise  veilloit  a  la  surety  de  nos  princes  ;  on  s’allioit,  on  ne  se  haissoit  pas.  Com¬ 
ment  des  terns  plus  6clair6s  laissent-t-ils  regner  tant  de  prevention,  de  si  petites 
jalousies?  quoi,  tous  les  dix  ans  ces  fiers  insulaires  recommencent  a  nous  d^tester? 
le  plus  frivole  interet,  les  plaintes  d’une  petite  fregate,  les  cris  d  un  sot !  engagent 
un  peuple  g^nereux  a  sacrifier  toutes  les  douceurs,  tous  les  avantages  de  la  paix : — 
mon  ami,  je  ne  s^ais  qui  a  tort,  mais  je  hais  bien  ceux  qui  excitent  le  trouble. 

Cette  id6e  m’attriste.  Adieu,  r6pondez-moi  vite,  je  vous  en  prie.  Ma  compagne 
vous  embrasse,  et  toutes  deux  vous  prions  d’assurer  Madame  Garrick  de  notre  sou¬ 
venir  et  de  notre  constante  amitie.  Je  suis  avec  tous  les  sentimens  que  vous  me  con- 
noissez  pour  the  charming  little  David,  votre  tendre  et  sincere  amie, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  25  Octobre,  1 770. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re9u  votre  derniere  lettre  dans  son  terns,  et  je  vous  fais  bien  des 
remercimens  sur  l’envoi  que  vous  avez  fait  a  mon  ami  de  la  gazette  des  gazettes : 
mais  il  s’est  mal  expliqu6  avec  moi ;  il  vouloit  celle  intituEe  “  Say’s  Weekly  Journal.’' 
Si  vous  pouvez  en  faire  faire  l’echange  avec  l’autre,  vous  me  ferez  plaisir :  si  cela  ne  se 
peut  pas,  mon  ami  les  payera  toutes  deux,  suivant  la  regie  qu'il  y  a  de  payer  par 
mois  ou  par  ann£e  ;  mais  faites-moi  l’amitie  de  donner  vos  ordres,  pour  qu’on  envoie 
sur  le  champ  “  Say’s  Weekly  Journal,”  et  marquez-moi  ce  qu’il  faut  payer  pour  Pune 
et  pour  l’autre  gazette. 

J’ai  rencontr6  le  petit  et  vilain . d’Allemand ;  je  lui  ai  fait  part  de  vos 

reproches  et  de  son  ingratitude  a  votre  egard :  il  a  fait  pour  s’excuser  tout  ce  qu’il  a 
pu  ;  mais  je  lui  ai  prouv£  son  tort,  et  Madame  Garrick  en  a  beaucoup  de  ne  vouloir 
pas  s’adresser  £t  moi  quand  elle  a  besoin  de  quelque  chose  ;  elle  doit  s^avoir  combien 
j’ai  de  plaisir  a  faire  ce  qui  peut  lui  6tre  agr^able.  D’ailleurs  ce  petit  bon  homme  n’a 
ni  g^nie  ni  gout,  il  n’est  tout  au  plus  propre  qu’a  faire  des  caricatures  de  theatre  a 
six  francs  la  piece,  c’est  encore  trop  cher.  Les  eaux  de  Bath  vous  ont  sans  doute 
gueri  de  votre  goute  :  je  le  desire,  et  je  prie  Dieu  qu’il  vous  maintienne  en  joie  et 
en  sante. 

Vous  ne  m’avez  point  repondu  sur  tout  le  bien  que  je  vous  ai  dit  des  talens  de 
Air.  Torr6, je  vous  reitere  les  memes  raisons;  je  suis  fortement  convaincu  que  cet 
homme  6tabli  en  Angleterre  feroit  sa  fortune,  et  celle  de  ceux  qui  s’associeroient  avec 
lui.  Faites-moi  un  mot  de  reponse  que  je  puisse  lui  montrer. 

Quand  vous  voudrez,  nous  finirons  tous  nos  comptes  ;  puisque  vous  ne  voulez  pas 
entendre  parler  des  habits  que  vous  m’avez  laiss^s,  je  les  ferai  vendre,  et  je  vous 
tiendrai  un  fidele  compte  du  montant. 


574 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


On  parlc  ici  do  guerre  entre  l’Espagne  et  l’Angleterre  ;  si  cela  a  lieu,  nous  y  serous 
pour  quelque  ehose;  taut  pis,  et  j’en  serois  bien  fach<i.  Mais  il  est  certain  que  le  Roi 
d’Espagne  est  entet£,  qu’il  ne  doit  rien,  et  q’il  a  cent  cinquante  millions  argent  de 
France,  et  cent  bons  vaisseaux  bien  months,  et  tout-preit  &  se  battre.  Quant-au 
materiel  de  notre  marine,  on  dit  qu’il  est  mieux  qu  il  n’a  6t (t  depuis  long-terns. 

II  s’embrionne  dans  ma  t6te  un  projet  de  Journal,  dont  je  vous  ferai  part  a  la 
premiere  occasion.  Vous  en  serez  content,  et  il  plaira  beaucoup  a  Madame  Garrick  ; 
faites-lui  bien  mes  compliments. 

Une  lcttre  que  j’ai  re9ue  ce  matin  de  Gen&ve  m’apprend  que  Mr.  de  Voltaire  baisse 
beaucoup,  et  qu’il  ne  quitte  plus  sa  robe  de  chambre.  Mr.  Pigalle  travaille  a  la  statue 
de  ce  grand  et  l’on  pent  dire  en  meme  terns  vilain  liomme ;  surement  la  copie  sera 
plus  parfaite  que  l’original. 

Adieu,  mon  ami,  je  vous  embrasse  de  bien  bon  cceur,  et  je  vous  demande  toujours 
un  peu  de  part  dans  votre  amiti6. 

Monnet. 

Un  ami  de  Mr.  Cazeau  que  je  ne  connois  pas,  qui  doit  passer  a  Londres  avec 
rAmbassadeur,  me  demande  une  lettre  pour  vous :  je  la  lui  donnerai :  vous  ferez  k  cet 
eg ard  ce  que  vous  jugerez  a  propos. 

Madame  Monnet  me  charge  de  ses  compliments  pour  vous  et  pour  Madame  Garrick. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  27  Novembre,  1770. 

Vous  voilil,  je  vous  reconnois,  mon  tr£s-cher  et  tres-aimable  ami.  Prompt  comme 
1’^clair,  impetueusement  emport6  par  la  vivacity  de  votre  obligeant  naturel,  vous  avez 
crie  a  poor  Mr.  Murphy,  v'lte,  vite  !  le  livre  est  fait,  lisex,  traduisex,  imprimons  :  lui, 
paisible,  pos6,  a  song£,  pens6,  r^flechi,  dit  un  si,  un  mais,  et  peste  !  vous  m’ecrivez 
avant  qu’il  ait  achev6  de  parler. 

Eh  !  patience  :  rien  ne  presse.  De  huit  cahiers  de  papier  a  lettres,  qui  composent 
tout  l’ouvrage,  le  dernier  est  a  peine  au  milieu,  et  mon  esprit  n’est  pas  dans  une  situa¬ 
tion  assez  tranquille  pour  m’en  occuper  uniquement.  Si  la  guerre  se  declare,  la  moi- 
ti6  de  ma  tr&s  petite  fortune  court  de  grands  risques.  Cette  inquietude  et  la  perspec¬ 
tive  de  cesser  tout  commerce  avec  quelques  Anglois,  dont  j’aime  a  cultiver  l’amiti£, 
me  rendent  fort  m&ancolique  et  fort  paresseuse.  D’ailleurs  Humblot  ne  veut 
jamais  me  faire  paroitre  avec  la  foule  des  auteurs,  qui  au  mois  de  Janvier  inondent  le 
public  de  leurs  productions.  Le  tourbillon  des  visites  de  la  nouvelle  annee,  les  folies 
du  Carnaval,  qui  le  suivent  de  pr&s,  ne  laissent  a  personne  le  terns  de  lire.  Cependant 
tout  le  monde  veut  juger,  meme  sans  st^avoir  sur  quoi,  et  I  on  s’^crie,  tout  est  mau- 
vais,  tout  est  detestable  !  assez  souvent  on  a  raison.  C’est  done  vers  le  milieu  du 
Careme  que  mon  libraire  me  met  en  vente.  Si  je  vous  ai  demande  de  bonne  heure  les 
intentions  de  votre  ami,  c’^toit  avec  le  dessein  de  lui  envoyer  mes  cahiers  par  les  occa- 


DAVID  GARRICK.  575 

sions  qui  se  pr^senteroient.  N’en  parlons  plus.  Je  serois  bien  fach^e  de  lui  causer  le 
plus  l^ger  derangement. 

Je  consens  de  tout  mon  coeur  a  vous  laisser  le  maitre  de  choisir  un  traducteur. 
Avant  que  le  livre  paroisse,  vous  en  aurez  un  exemplaire  pour  vous,  un  pour  Air. 
Murphy,  un  troisieme  pour  en  disposer  a  votre  gre.  Ceux  qui  me  lisent  en  Anglois 
ne  connoissent  ni  mon  style,  ni  ma  facon  de  penser.  C’est  un  inconvenient  inevi¬ 
table.  V raiment  je  suis  bien  pis  en  Allemand  !  A  l’egard  des  deux  cent  exemplaires, 
si  Air.  Becket  les  veut,  Humblot  les  lui  enverra  sur  son  ordre.  J’ai  renonc6  a  mon 
privilege  d’auteur.  Je  n’imprime  plus  a  mes  depens.  On  me  contrefesoit  avec  tant 
de  furie,  que  je  me  suis  lassie  d’enrichir  des  fripons.  Un  colporteur  m’apporta  un 
jour  quinze  editions  d’un  de  mes  ouvrages,  et  me  conseilla  d’intenter  quinze  proems — 
a  moi,  qui  fuirois  au  bout  du  monde  pour  en  eviter  un. 

Je  suis  tres  sensible  a  la  preference  que  Madame  Garrick  veut  bien  me  donner,  et 
je  la  remercie  de  vous  accorder  la  permission  d’aimer  une  femme  qui  vous  est  sinc&re- 
ment  attach^e.  Vous  faites  injure  a  votre  aimable  compagne  en  la  nommant  j alouse. 
Avec  un  merite  aussi  distingue,  une  figure  aussi  attrayante,  on  est  si  sure  de  plaire  ! 
la  certitude  d’etre  aimee  bannit  le  soup^on  et  detruit  le  principe  du  sentiment  inquiet 
d’ou  s’eieve  la  plus  triste  et  la  plus  tourmentante  des  passions.  Vous  n’abuserez 
pas  de  la  genereuse  condescendance  de  Madame  Garrick.  Un  an  sans  m’ecrire,  sans 
songer  a  moi !  il  est  difficile  qu’un  coeur  deiicat  pardonne  l’oubli.  Je  ne  sqais  si  toute 
la  tendresse,  tout  l’agrement  de  vos  expressions  efFacent  enti&rement  du  mien  le 
chagrin  que  j’ai  senti  de  cette  longue,  de  cette  d6sobligeante  indifference. 

Le  president  Hainaut  et  Moncrif  viennent  de  mourir  :  ils  etoient  bien  vieux. 
Voila  deux  places  vacantes  a  l’Acad6mie  Fran9oise.  Donnez-nous  votre  voix  pour 
les  remplir.  Le  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  est  devenu  auteur  d£cid6  et  confirme.  II  a 
fait  deux  comedies  que  l’on  a  joules  tout  l’et6  a  la  Chevrette,  jolie  maison  a  trois 
lieues  de  Paris,  appartenante  a  Monsieur  de  Magnanville,  garde  du  tr^sor  royal.  On 
y  a  represent*?  derni&rement  le  chef-d’oeuvre  du  Chevalier :  c’est,  ne  vous  d^plaise, 
“  Romeo  et  Juliette.”  Toute  la  ville  s’est  mise  en  mouvement  pour  voir  cette  pre- 
tendue  imitation  du  poete  cheri  et  r6ver6  dans  la  Grande  Bretagne.  J’ai  suivi  le  tor¬ 
rent  avec  deux  Anglois  de  mes  amis,  fort  curieux  de  voir  Shakspeare  deguise  sous 
un  habit  Francois.  Nous  ne  l’avons  trouv6  ni  Gaulois,  ni  Breton,  ni  Italien :  point 
d’inter&t,  point  de  chaleur;  de  l’esprit  ou  il  faudroit  des  pensees,  de  grands  mots,  une 
petite  action  ;  le  dernier  acte  est  pr6cis£ment  une  attrape.  Au  lieu  de  s’amuser  a 
s’empoisonner,  a  se  poignarder,  Juliette  et  Romeo  s’en  vont  gaiement  de  la 
retraite  des  morts  pour  se  marier,  on  ne  s^-ait  ou,  })our  vivre  ensemble,  on  ne  scait 
comment,  pour  etre  heureux,  comme  il  vous  plaira  de  1’imaginer.  On  se  regarde,  on 
se  demande  oil  est  cette  terrible  catastrophe,  le  pathetique,  le  touchant  ?  la  toile  se 
baisse  et  laisse  le  spectateur  surpris  se  faire  autant  de  questions  qu’il  le  voudra. 

Adieu,  my  lovely,  my  beloved  friend.  Je  vous  rends  grace  de  tous  les  soins 
que  vous  voulez  bien  prendre  pour  moi.  Il  me  seroit  bien  doux  de  pouvoir  vous  en 
marquer  ma  reconnoissance.  Ma  compagne  embrasse  le  couple  heureux  et  charmant 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


;*>  76 

dont  le  souvenir  nous  cst  toujours  present  et  cher.  Le  sort  le  plus  facheux  est  line 
6ternelle  contradiction  dans  ses  vceux ;  c’est  un  supplice  inexprimable  de  nourrir  des 
d£sirs  qu’il  est  impossible  dc  satisfaire.  Celui  d’aller  a  Londres  me  suivra  dans  ma 
tombe.  Je  suis  avec  les  plus  sinccres  et  les  plus  tendres  sentimens,  votre  servante  et 
vbtrc  amie, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  30  Decembre,  1770. 

Mon  ami,  d’apr&s  les  commissions  dont  vous  m’avez  charge  par  la  lettre  que  vous 
avez  dcrite  a  Mr.  Pancbaud,  j’ai  vu  Mr.  l’Abb6  Arnaud ;  ce  dernier  n’a  aucun  sou- 
venir  de  vous  avoir  recommande  l’homme  dont  vous  avez  parle.  II  vous  laisse  libre 
a  cet  egard,  persuade  de  votre  bonne  volont6,  et  de  votre  amiti6  pour  lui,  comme  vous 
devez  l’titre  de  la  sienne  dans  toutes  les  occasions  ou  il  pourra  vous  en  donner  des 
preuves  ;  mais  il  ne  veut  point  en  abuser,  et  il  vous  prie  dorenavant  de  ne  vous  int£- 
resser  que  pour  les  personnes  qui  vous  seront  recommand^es  par  une  lettre  de  sa  main. 
Il  vous  fait  ses  compliments,  ainsi  que  Mr.  Suard. 

Mr.  T  orre,  charg£  depuis  long-terns  de  feux  d’artifices  qui  doivent  etre  executes  le 
mois  de  Mai  prochain  pour  le  mariage  de  Mr.  le  Comte  de  Provence,  ne  pourroit 
aller  a  Londres  que  dans  les  premiers  jours  de  Juin  :  si  cela  peut  vous  convenir,  il  vous 
fera  alors  ses  propositions,  mais  il  faudra  avant  me  marquer  pour  combien  de  terns  il 
sera  employ^  a  Londres,  et  s'il  s'obligera  de  faire  les  avances  de  cliaque  feu,  ou  si  on 
lui  donnera  une  somme  dont  on  conviendra  pour  ses  peines,  en  lui  fournissant  toutes 
les  choses  dont  il  aura  besoin  ;  dans  l’un  et  l’autre  cas,  il  est  bon  de  s'expliquer 
clairement. 

Quand  aux  trois  danseurs  et  danseuses  dont  je  vous  ai  paries,  je  les  aivus;  ils 
doivent  m’envoyer  sous  peu  de  jours  les  conditions  de  leur  engagement ;  comme  ils 
ne  peuvent  s’engager  avec  vous  que  pour  la  saison  prochaine,  nous  aurons  le  terns  de 
discuter  vos  int£r6ts. 

Mr.  Burney  sans  doute  est  arriv6  a  Londres  en  bonne  sant6,  faites-lui  mes  com¬ 
pliments  et  remettez-lui,  je  vous  prie,  la  note  ci-joint  pour  reprimer  une  erreurqu’on  a 
faite  dans  celles  que  je  lui  ai  fait  avoir  de  la  bibliotheque  du  Roi.  Il  vous  a  vraisem- 
blablement  fait  part  de  mes  nouveaux  malheurs  :  il  a  fallu  pour  terminer  cette  affaire 
le  pou voir  de  trois  amis  puissants  qui  se  sont  int^resses  pour  moi  aupr^s  d’un 
ministre ;  trois  cent  cinquante  louis  qu’il  a  fallu  payer  comptant,  c’est  a  dire  4000 
francs  a  present,  et  le  reste  dans  le  courant  de  deux  annees,  et  une  pension  de  600 
francs  par  an,  que  je  me  suis  engage  de  payer  pendant  tout  le  terns  de  ma  vie,  et  cela 
pour  la  chose  la  plus  injuste  et  la  plus  malheureuse.  Mylord  Grosvenor  Riche,*  qui 
(a  ce  que  j’ai  oui  dire)  a  donn£  lieu  a  la  mauvaise  conduite  de  sa  femme,  (ce  que  je 
n’ai  point  fait  a  l’egard  de  la  mienne,)  a  £t6  trait6  plus  favorablement  que  moi.  Cette 

*  I  suppose  Richard  Earl  Grosvenor. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


577 


affaire  m'a  donn6  beaucoup  de  chagrin,  et  m’a  mis  mal  a  mon  aise ;  mais  n’ayant 
point  de  reproches  a  me  faire  que  celui  d’avoir  ete  trop  facile  et  trop  plein  de  bonne 
foi,  je  me  console  avec  ma  femme,  qui  m’a  donn6  dans  tout  ceci  les  plus  grandes 
marques  de  tendresse  et  de  d^sint^ressement.  Faites  nos  compliments,  je  vous  prie, 
a  Madame  Garrick,  et  aimez-nous  toujours  un  peu  l’un  et  l’autre. 

Monnet. 

Yous  aA  ez  appris,  sans  doute,  l’exil  de  Mr.  le  Due  de  Choiseul,  et  les  troubles 
qu’il  y  a  dans  notre  Parlement ;  il  n’y  a  encore  personne  de  nomme  pour  remplacer 
ce  ministre.  Vous  devriez  venir  ici  avec  Madame  Garrick,  au  printemps  prochain, 
pour  voir  les  fetes  que  l’on  prepare  pour  le  mariage  du  Comte  de  Provence.  Je  vous 
offre  toujours  l’appartement  bleu  celeste,  les  guirlandes  de  fleurs,  les  amours,  et  le 
divin  Bacchus. 

N’oubliez  pas  de  nrenvoyer  la  note  de  ce  que  vous  avez  avanc6  pour  les  gazettes 
que  vous  avez  envoyees  a  mon  ami. 


DE  M.  LE  KAIN  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  ce  31  Janvier,  1771. 

Ne  m’avez-vous  pas  prouv6,  mon  cber  Garrick,  que  e’est  vous  obliger,  lorsqu’on 
vous  conjure  de  recevoir  avec  bont6  les  Strangers  qui  accourent  d’un  h6misph£re  a 
l’autre  pour  vous  voir  et  vous  entendre  ?  e’est  en  faveur  de  ce  z&le  que  vous  m’avez 
t6moigne  dans  plusieurs  occasions,  que  je  vous  supplie  d’accueillir  Mr.  Cellissen,  mon 
ancien  camarade,  qui  arrive  de  Russie,  et  qui  n’a  pas  voulu  revenir  en  France  sans 
connaitre  l’Angleterre,  et  sans  y  admirer  le  seul  homme  qui  puisse  lui  donner  dans 
son  art,  des  lemons  aussi  utiles  que  sages.  Mon  ami  Cellissen  est  un  Provencal,  tr£s- 
chaud  et  tr£s-petulant,  que  les  glaces  du  Nord  ont  peut-etre  un  peu  calme  ;  mais 
vous  trouverez  en  lui  un  homme  tres-instruit,  rempli  d’erudition,  et  surtout  idolatre 
de  vos  talents,  qu’il  ne  connait  encore  que  par  le  recit  que  lui  en  ont  fait  vos  com- 
patriotes  :  je  l’ai  flatte  dans  ma  derniere  lettre  que  vous  voudriez  bien  lui  procurer  le 
plaisir  de  vous  entendre.  Quoiqu’il  ne  soit  instruit  que  tres-imparfaitement  de  votre 
idiome,  cependant  e’est  toujours  gagner  beaucoup  que  de  vous  voir. 

Je  m’estimerai  tr£s-heureux,  mon  cber  Garrick,  si  a  ma  faible  recommandation, 
vous  daignez  accueillir  favorablement  un  ami  qui  m'est  plus  cber  que  moi-meme  ; 
e’est  la  requite  que  vous  presente  celui  qui  cherit  autant  votre  personne  qu’il  fait  de 
cas  de  vos  talents.  Mille  tendres  amities  a  votre  aimable  femme  ;  recevez  les  miennes, 
et  les  assurances  de  l’attachement  sincere  que  je  vous  ai  voue  pour  ma  vie.  Je  vous 
embrasse  du  meilleur  de  mon  coeur. 

Le  Kain. 


4  E 


VOL.  II 


.378 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  ce  18  Mars,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re^u  la  lettre  que  vous  in’avez  fait  remettre  en  dernier  lieu  par  Mr. 
Poitier.  Je  ne  s^ais  pas  pourquoi  vous  lie  voulez  pas  m’ecrire  en  Francois,  vous  6tes 
beaucoup  plus  intelligible  dans  cette  langue  (pour  moi)  que  vos  traducteurs  ne  le 
sont.  Dans  la  votre,  a  Particle  de  Mr.  d’Arnaud  de  Comminge  concernant  “  Le 
Secretaire  Perruquier,”  j’avois  entendu  l’Abb6  Arnaut.  Je  les  connois  tous  deux  ;  le 
premier  demeure  fort  loin  de  mon  quartier,  il  est  tout  nouvellement  mariy ;  je  le 
verrai  demain  ou  apr£s  pour  Sparer  ma  faute  ou  la  votre. 

Vous  n’aviez  pas  besoin  de  vous  justifier  de  nouveau  sur  l’amitiy  que  vous  et 
Madame  Garrick  avez  pour  moi.  Vous  m’en  avez  donne  de  trop  grandes  preuves 
Pun  et  l’autre,  pour  que  je  puisse  en  douter :  la  mienne  vous  est  consacr^e  pour  la 
vie,  ne  l’epargnez  pas,  et  recevez  mes  remerciments  sur  vos  offres  obligeantes  dont  je 
n’abuserai  jamais,  mais  dont  j’userai  sans  fa9on,  par  la  connoissance  que  j’ai  de  votre 
cceur,  et  de  votre  bonne  volont6  pour  moi. 

J’ai  eu  une  affaire  bien  malheureuse,  que  je  viens  de  terminer  moyennant  cinq 
cent  louis  comptant,  et  une  pension  de  600  francs  par  ann£e,  que  je  me  suis  engage 
de  payer  pendant  ma  vie.  Si  cette  cause  avoit  £t6  jugee  a  votre  tribunal  d’equite, 
bien  surement  je  l’aurois  gagnee,  mais  nous  n’avons  pas  de  cela  ici :  aussi  n’ai-je  pas 
plaide,  je  me  suis  content^  de  payer  et  de  retrancher  la  moiti6  de  ma  d^pense  pour 
reparer  un  pen  les  torts  que  ma  mauvaise  etoile  sans  doute  a  bien  voulu  me  procurer. 

Mylord  G - r  a  £t£  mieux  traits  que  moi :  ce  qui  fait  la  fortune  de  bien  des  gens, 

a  failli  me  mettre  a  l’hopital.  JMa  vie  a  £t£  un  tissu  de  malheurs,  sans,  j’ose  le  dire, 
les  avoir  merit^s.  L’&ection  de  Mylord  Trentham,  la  journ^e  de  Londres  m’ont  couty : 
tout  cela  est  fini,  et  bien  oublie.  J’ai  encore  un  bon  estomach,  un  peu  de  gaite,  et 
de  bons  amis  ;  je  ne  pense  qu’aux  moyens  de  pouvoir  payer  300  louis  que  j’ai  6te 
oblig'6  d’emprunter.  11  m’est  venu  plusieurs  id^es,  mais  surtout  une  que  vous 
approuverez.  Les  Caravanes  d’un  Directeur  de  Spectacles,  ou  le  Roman  Comique 
Moderne,  le  tout  renferm6  dans  deux  petits  volumes  bien  imprimes,  et  ornes  de 
gravures  et  vignettes;  cet  ouvrage  comprendra  ma  vie,  mes  aventures,  mes  direc¬ 
tions  de  spectacles,  mes  voyages  a  Lyon,  a  Londres,  la  vie  et  la  fa^on  de  vivre  des 
comediens  Francois  depuis  quarante  ans,  des  observations  sur  la  vari6t6  et  les  progres 
de  nos  differents  spectacles ;  j’ai  sur  cela  des  mat^riaux  en  abondance,  des  singularites, 
des  historiettes  dans  tous  les  genres,  des  secours  dans  les  gens  de  lettres,  pour  m’aider 
et  pour  me  donner  des  avis.  La  journee  de  Londres  donnera  bien  de  la  singularity  a 
cet  ouvrage,  celles  qui  arrivferent  aux  trois  representations  qui  furent  donn^es  au  petit 
theatre  d’Haymarket,  Election,  moil  sejour  avec  Thyodore,  un  des  rois  de  Candide  et 
de  Corse,  &cc.  &c.  &c.  Comme  je  n’ai  eu  en  gynyral  qu’a  me  louer  de  la  nation  An- 
gloise,  que  tout  le  mal  n’a  yte  occasionny  que  par  des  refugies  ou  quelques  personnes 
mal-intentionnees,  je  profiterai  de  l’occasion  pour  dire  sans  fadeur  le  bien  que  j’ai 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


579 


^prouve,  et  que  je  pense  des  Anglois.  Je  voudrois  aussi  en-bref  dire  quelque  chose 
de  vos  theatres,  de  vos  pieces,  de  vos  acteurs,  a  la  meme  6poque  que  les  notres  pendant 
les  quarante  derni&res  ann6es.  J’ai  oui  raconter  des  choses  plaisantes  de  Mr.  Quin. 
Goy  m’en  a  dit  plusieurs,  et  vous  pouvez  mieux  que  personne  me  donner  des  secours 
sur  ce  qui  est  mentionn6  ci-dessus,  en  Anglois  ;  je  le  ferai  traduire,  en  vous  promettant 
sur  cela  le  plus  grand  secret,  si  vous  l’exigez  ;  je  veux  de  la  gaitd  et  des  choses  in- 
t^ressantes  dans  cet  ouvrage,  sans  offenser  personne.  Vous  serez  libre  cet  6t6  a  la  cam- 
pagne,  je  vous  prie  de  penser  a  moi,  et  de  vouloir  bien  m’envoyer  par  la  premiere 
occasion  un  livre  que  vous  avez,  dit-on,  dans  votre  langue  sur  les  comediens.  Je  l’ai 
appris  par  Goy:  mais  il  n’a  jamais  pu  m’en  dire  le  titre  ni  l’endroit  ou  il  se  vend.  Pour 
finir  sur  mon  projet,  qui  aura  pour  titre  Le  Roman  Comique  Moderne,  il  faut  line 
victime,  c’est-a-dire  un  Ragottin ;  je  me  servirai  de  Poinsinet,  et  des  mistifications 
qu’on  lui  a  fait  pour  le  berner  ;  c’est  un  sujet  excellent  et  bien  conform  e  a  celui 
que  Scaron  a  employe. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  envoie  tous  les  livres  que  vous  m’avez  demand6s,  par  Mr. 
Thornhill,  qui  a  bien  voulu  s’en  charger;  quand  vous  passerez  dans  son  quartier, 
Berkeley  Square,  faites-lui  une  visite,  il  vous  fera  voir  deux  tableaux  de  Vernet  qui 
sont  bien  beaux.  Je  joins  ici  la  note  de  ces  livres,  ou  j'ai  ajout6  les  Metamorphoses 
d’Ovide,  le  Ciceronis  nouvellement  imprint  :  il  y  en  a  eu  un  autre  du  meme  format, 
intitule  De  Senectute,  qui  a  valu  neuf  francs,  qui  traite  de  la  vieillesse,  mais  l’edition 
est  vendue.  Si  j’en  trouve  un  de  hazard,  je  vous  l’acheterai. 

Il  n’y  a  eu  de  Palissot  que  sa  vision,  que  vous  avez  surement  vue;  dans  le  terns 
depuis  La  Dunciade  a  ete  reimprimee,  et  il  y  a  ajoute  plusieurs  chants  et  additions  ; 
on  m’assura  hier  qu’elle  etoit  ou  qu’on  alloit  l’imprimer  a  Geneve ;  quand  elle  paroitra 
je  vous  l’enverrai.  L’auteur  que  je  connois  beaucoup,  qui  est  actuellement  dans  la 
Lorraine,  sera  ici  dans  une  quinzaine  de  jours  ;  il  m’instruira  sur  cela. 

Vous  ferez  bien  d’acqu6rir  la  suite  des  feuilles  de  Mr.  Querlon,  il  y  en  avoit  une 
mais  elle  est  vendue :  j’ai  pr6venu  mon  ami  Querlon  de  votre  intention ;  s'il  s’en 
pr^sente  une  a  bon  compte  nous  vous  la  procurerons. 

Les  trois  danseurs  que  je  vous  avois  proposes  ayant  eu  l’impudence  de  demander 
neuf  cent  louis  pour  la  saison,  je  n’ai  pas  cru  devoir  leur  repondre,  ni  vous  faire  part 
de  leur  proposition.  Quand  a  Torr6,  il  est  charg6  d’un  grand  feu  d’artifice  qui  se 
tirera  le  15  de  May  pour  le  mariage  de  Mr.  le  Comte  de  Provence  ;  et  d’un  second 
feu  qui  se  tirera  le  4  Juin  a  Marly  pour  le  meme  sujet ;  mais  le  2  du  mois  prochain 
je  vous  marquerai  positivement  le  terns  qu’il  pourra  partir,  et  ses  conditions,  qui  ne 
seront  pas  d6raisonnables. 

Je  finis  par  oil  je  devois  commencer,  par  vous  plaindre  des  douleurs  que  la  goute 
vous  a  occasionn6es.  Je  vous  prie  et  je  vous  demande  comme  grace  d’eviter  et  de 
vous  priver  de  tout  ce  qui  peut  vous  attirer  cette  perfide  maladie ;  les  premiers  terns 
vous  couteront,  mais  ils  vous  ameneront  a  une  vie  plus  agr&ible  et  plus  solide. 

Le  Ivain  a  repris  ses  fonctions,  et  tout  le  monde  convient  qu’il  a  perfectionn6 
son  talent,  mais  il  n’y  a  plus  de  femme  pour  le  seconder.  Mademoiselle  Dumenil 

4  e  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


.">80 


vieillit,  ct  ne  j)eut  plus  jouer  ([lie  quelques  rdles  convcnables  son  age.  Made¬ 
moiselle  Dubois,  qui  a  et6  long-tems  malade,  a  voulu  jouer  il  y  a  quelques  jours  ;  elle  a 
retomb£,  et  l’on  croit  quelle  ne  pourra  plus  rejouer.  Une  Madame  Vestris,  qui  a  eu 
un  debut  assez  brillant,  avec  des  d6fauts,  beaucoup  d’intelligence  ct  de  feu,  est  sujette 
des  caprices,  a  de  petites  maladies  an  point  qu’on  a  6t6  oblig<$  de  faire  jouer  son 
role  dans  “  Tancrede”  par  Mademoiselle  Luzi,  la  troiseme  soubrette  de  ce  theatre. 

Adieu,  mon  ami  :  dites  bien  des  clioses  de  ma  part  et  de  ma  femme  a  Madame 
Garrick — nos  compliments  au  Docteur  Burney. 


Les  Metamorphoses  d’Ovide,  relie 

Un  Ciceronis,  relife 

7.  S,  et  9e  vol.  Sabatier,  relie 


Mon  net. 

2  Almanachs  des  Muses 
1  du  Thefetre 

LeTrfesordu  Parnasse,  6  vol.  relie. 


.Te  vous  ai  parl6  souvent  de  mon  logement  bleu  celeste,  il  est  compost  de  neuf 
pieces  sur  le  raeme  6tage  :  six  cbambres  d’un  cot£  et  trois  de  l’autre.  Le  Doc¬ 
teur  Burney  pent  vous  en  rendre  compte  :  s’il  se  pr^sentoit  quelque  Anglois  propre, 
honnete  et  stir  pour  ma  paye,  qui  voulut  passer  quatre  on  cinq  mois  a  Paris,  je  le 
lui  louerois  meuble,  avec  toutes  les  commodity  du  manage,  cuisine,  linge,  argenterie, 
porcelaine,  & c.  &c.  :  il  seroit  dans  un  beau  quartier,  pr&s  des  spectacles  et  des  pro¬ 
menades,  et  il  auroit  par  mon  secours  toute  sorte  d’agr^ments.  Je  louerois  l’aparte- 
ment  de  six  pieces  trois  cents  francs  par  mois ;  dans  aucun  endroit  de  Paris  on 
n’auroit  un  plus  joli  apartement  et  a  meilleur  marche  ;  s’il  se  trouve  quelqu’un  vous 
pouvez  me  l’indiquer. 

Si  le  livre  que  je  vous  ai  demande  existe,  sur  les  comediens  Anglois,  envoyez-le 
moi,  je  vous  prie,  par  Mr.  Changuion,  qui  doit  passer  en  France  vers  la  fin  de  ce 
mois.  Il  loge  a  Pons’s  Coffee-liouse,  Castle-street,  Leicester-fields. 

Je  ne  s^ais  pas  si  vous  aurez  pu  lire  mon  griffonnage.  Je  vous  envoie  un  petit 
m£moire  que  j’avois  fait  sur  mon  affaire,  pour  la  faire  juger.  Vous  le  lirez  et  vous 
me  le  renverrez,  si  vous  le  jugez  a  propos. 

J’apprends  dans  le  moment  que  Mademoiselle  Luzi  a  assez  bien  reussi  dans  le 
tragique,  il  y  a  des  clioses  qu’elle  a  tr£s  bien  dit.  Elle  est  belle  au  theatre  ;  elle  a  du 
feu  ;  je  juge  par  le  peu  d’esprit  qu’elle  a,  qu’il  en  faut  moins  pour  jouer  la  trag^die 
que  pour  jouer  la  comedie. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  4  Avril,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  envoie  les  quatre  pieces  de  Mr.  Coll6  que  vous  m’avez  de- 
mandees ;  effectivement  il  est  dommage  qu’il  se  soit  avise  si  tard  de  travailler  pour  le 
theatre,  car  il  avoit  bien  le  talent  qu’il  falloit  pour  faire  de  bonnes  clioses  ;  mais  il 
se  croit  trop  vieux  pour  imaginer,  et  il  craint  les  chutes.  Je  n’ai  point  fait  relier 
ces  quatre  comedies,  a  cause  que  “  La  M£re  Coquette”  n’est  pas  du  meme  format. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


581 


Vous  pourrez  la  faire  relier  k  la  suite  de  “  La  Mere  Coquette”  de  Quinault ;  elle  est 
de  m&me  grandeur. 

Vous  avez  1*0911  sans  doute  ce  que  j’ai  remis  a  Mr.  Thornhill  pour  vous,  et  sans 
aucun  donunage.  Je  vous  prie  de  vous  ressouvenir  de  moi,  le  plutot  sera  le  mieux, 
pour  ce  que  je  vous  ai  demande  concernant  mon  projet  du  Roman  Comique  Mo- 
derne.  Si  je  pouvois  avoir  en  m&me  terns  un  releve  en-bref  des  erreurs  qui  sont 
semees  dans  le  courant  de  ce  livre  intitule  Londres,  en  trois  vol. ;  si  j’avois  ce  petit 
objet,  je  trouverois  le  moyen  de  le  placer  bien  a  propos  dans  mon  ouvrage.  Vous 
avez  trop  d’affaires  pour  exiger  cela  de  vous,  mais  vous  pourriez  charger  quelqu’un  de 
cette  besogne,  soit  en  Frai^ois  soit  en  Anglois.  Cette  petite  critique  a  laquelle  il  ne 
faudroit  pas  donner  beaucoup  d’^tendue,  donneroit  de  la  valeur  a  mon  ouvrage. 

Le  15  ou  le  20  de  ce  mois,  je  vous  donnerai  une  r£ponse  positive  de  Mr.  Torre. 
Je  ne  S9ais  pas  ce  que  vous  pensez  du  succks  de  votre  nouveau  Pantheon,  mais  je 
S9ais  que  les  entrepreneurs  de  notre  Colis^e  moderne  (qui  doit  s’ouvrir  le  mois  pro¬ 
chain)  se  ruineront.  La  depense  en  est  trop  forte  pour  un  peuple  aussi  l^ger  et  aussi 
cliangeant  que  le  notre. 

On  croit  que  le  Roi  etablira  son  nouveau  Parlement  Mardi  prochain ;  je  ne  S9ais 
pas  ce  que  cela  deviendra,  mais  pour  le  moment  cela  inquiete  la  nation  et  la  met  mal 
a  son  aise. 

Votre  ami  Pelletier  fermier-g£n6ral  est  devenu  fou  :  si  je  n’^tois  pas  press6  de 
remettre  vos  livres  a  un  homme  qui  les  attend,  je  vous  conterois  son  histoire  qui  est 
bien  singuli£re. 

Je  S9ais  bon  gre  a  Mr.  Vaughan  de  vous  avoir  pay£  mon  D.  B. 

Bien  des  compliments  et  des  amities  a  Madame  Garrick  de  ma  part  et  de  celle  de 
ma  femme  :  nous  vous  embrassons  tous  deux. 

Monnet. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick,  Sqr.  in  Soustampton  Street, 

£i  Londres.” 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  18  Avril,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  Mr.  Torr6ne  pourra  pas  vous  joindre  cette  ann£e;  les  ouvrages  dont  il 
est  charge  pour  le  mariage  de  IMr.  le  Comte  de  Provence,  a  Versailles  et  a  Marli,  le 
retiendront  ici  jusqu  a  la  fin  du  mois  de  Juillet  prochain  :  alors  il  seroittrop  tard  pour 
aller  a  Londres  pour  y  faire  des  choses  avantageuses  pour  lui  et  pour  les  personnes 
qui  veulent  le  faire  travailler.  Si  on  veut  remettre  la  chose  a  l’annee  prochaine,  il 
s  engagera  pour  le  terns  que  Ton  voudra ;  il  ne  veut  pas  faire  de  marche  sur  cela  ;  on 
lui  payera  seulement  son  voyage,  et  la  recompense  sera  proportionnee  au  succ&s  qu’il 
aura.  Il  s’en  rapportera  absolument  if  la  bonne  opinion  que  je  lui  ai  dounde  de  votre 
justice  et  de  la  connoissance  que  vous  avez  des  talens.  Repondez  quand  vous  le 


582 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


pourrez  cette  lettre,  et  a  celles  que  vous  clevez  avoir  re£u  de  moi  en  dernier  lieu. 
Uien  des  amities  a  Madame,  et  ne  m’oubliez  pas  dans  vos  pri£res. 

Monnet. 

Nous  avons  ici  de  la  neige  et  du  froid. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  David  Garrick,  Esq.,  in  Soustampton-street, 
a  Londres.” 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  31  Mai,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  je  vous  seais  bien  bon  gr£  de  m’avoir  procure  encore  une  fois  le  plaisir  de 
voir  le  sublime  et  divin  Grimaldy,  il  s’est  acquits  on  ne  peut  pas  mieux  de  vos 
commissions  aupres  de  moi  :  il  m’a  fait  un  discours  dans  trois  langues  que  je  n’ai 
gu£re  plus  compris  que  lui,  mais  il  y  a  bien  supple  par  le  geste,  la  pantomime,  et  les 
graces  qui  lui  sont  acquises.  Il  m’a  remis  le  rouleau  de  Musique,  que  j’ai  donn6  sur 
le  champ  a  Mr.  D’Augny;  ce  dernier  a  £te  tr£s  content  de  cette  musique.  Il  en  fait 
ses  remerciements  k  Mr.  Abel  par  la  lettre  ci-joint  que  vous  voudrez  bien  lui  faire 
tenir ;  il  m’a  charge  en  meme  terns  de  lui  acheter  une  tres  belle  veste,  dont  il  veut 
encore  lui  faire  un  present,  que  je  lui  enverrai  par  la  premiere  occasion.  Mr. 
D’Augny  pour  la  tabati&re  comrae  pour  la  veste,  m’a  laiss6  le  maitre  du  choix  et  du 
prix  que  je  voudrois  y  mettre,  et  je  crois  que  je  m’en  suis  bien  acquit^  a  l’avantage 
de  Air.  Abel. 

J’ai  remis  k  Air.  Grimaldy  pour  Madame  Garrick  quarante  aulnes  de  blondes  et 
deux  pieces  de  ruban  blanc,  tels  que  sont  les  £chantillons  qu’elle  m’a  envoy^s.  Quant- 
aux  manchettes  brodees  qu’elle  demande,  dites-lui,  je  vous  prie,  qu’il  n’y  a  plus  que 
les  petites  bourgeoises  et  les  servantes  qui  en  portent  ici ;  que  si  elle  veut  en  avoir 
sur  de  la  belle  et  claire  mousseline  il  faudra  les  faire  faire  ;  j’attends  sur  cela  ses 
ordres,  et  qu’elle  me  dise  le  nombre  dont  elle  en  aura  besoin.  Dites-lui  bien  des 
choses  pour  moi  et  pour  Madame  Monnet. 

Mr.  Hilman  n’est  pas  encore  arriv£ :  sur  votre  recommandation  je  vous  promets 
d’avance  de  le  loger  chez  moi,  et  de  faire  pour  lui  tout  ce  qui  sera  en  mon  pouvoir. 

Je  me  rappelle  tres  bien  d’avoir  fait  pour  Mr.  votre  Neveu  lorsqu’il  partit  pour 
Gen&ve,  l’acquisition  de  l’histoire  de  France. 

Mr.  Torre  a  fait  ces  jours  derniers  k  Versailles,  pour  le  mariage  du  Comte  de 
Provence,  un  feu  d’artifice  superieur  a  tout  ce  que  j’ai  vu  en  France. 

Je  travaille  continuellement  a  mon  Roman  Comique,  et  je  pense  que  Mr.  Garrick 
ne  m’oubliera  pas  pour  ce  qu’il  m’a  promis.  J'ai  remis  a  Mr.  Grimaldy  le  Dis¬ 
cours  de  Mr.  l’Abbe  Arnauld  a  l’Academie  dans  le  cas  qu’il  ne  le  lui  ait  pas  envoys. 

Je  reviens  a  Mr.  Abel ;  Mr.  D’Augny  lui  marque  dans  sa  lettre,  qu’il  voudroit 
avoir  une  excellente  basse  de  viole :  que  si  cela  pouvoit  se  trouver  en  Angleterre 
qu’il  la  payeroit  bien.  Vous  voudrez  bien  k  cet  £gard  lui  faire  une  lecon  en  lui 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


583 


faisant  sentir  qu’il  est  de  son  intdret  de  traiter  et  de  se  comporter  honnetement  et 
consciencieusement  avec  Mr.  D’Augny ;  ce  dernier  est  gdnereux  et  noble  dans  ses 
procddes,  mais  il  aime  la  droiture.  Si  Mr.  Abel  vouloit  l’annde  prochaine,  l’etd  ou  il 
est  peu  occupe  a  Londres,  venir  en  France  passer  un  mois  dans  la  maison  de  Mr. 
D’Augny,  il  lui  payeroit  les  frais  de  son  voyage,  et  il  lui  feroit  certainement  un  bon 
present  en  argent.  Faites-lui  cette  proposition,  et  marquez-moi  sa  reponse. 

Grimaldy  m’a  dit  que  Mylord  Pembroke  dtoit  nommd  ambassadeur  en  France  et 
que  vous  le  connoissez  trds  bien  :  tant  rnieux,  il  vous  sera  utile  pour  les  envois  que 
je  voudrai  vous  faire. 

Je  suis  votre  serviteur,  et  votre  ami. 

Monnet. 


DU  CHEVALIER  DE  CHATELLUX  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  15  Juin,  1771. 

Mon  clier  ami,  je  me  hate  de  profiter  d’une  occasion  qui  se  presente  pour  me 
rappeler  dans  votre  souvenir  dont  je  crains  bien  d’etre  effacd,  car  il  y  a  long-terns  que 
je  ne  vous  ai  dcrit,  et  plus  long-terns  encore  que  je  n’ai  re9u  de  vos  nouvelles.  Cepen- 
dant  vous  vivez  bien  mieux  que  dans  ma  memoire ;  vous  vivez  dans  mon  coeur  qui 
vous  aime  tendrement,  et  qui  s’entretient  avec  la  plus  douce  reconnoissance  de  toutes 
les  marques  d’amitie  que  j’ai  revues  de  Madame  Garrick  et  de  vous,  tant  a  Paris  que 
pendant  mon  sejour  a  Londres.  Je  souhaite  que  cette  lettre  vous  trouve  a  Hampton, 
et  qu’elle  vous  soit  une  occasion  de  parler  de  moi  encore  une  fois  avec  Madame  Gar¬ 
rick  au  bord  de  la  Tamise  et  A  l’ombre  de  ce  charmant  saule  pleureur  dont  l’image 
est  toujours  presente  a  mes  yeux. 

L’ete  a  un  peu  disperse  vos  amis,  mais  je  les  vois  successivement.  Ils  vous  sont 
tons  bien  attaches,  entre  autres  Helvdtius,  le  Baron  d’Holbach,  Suard,  et  l’Abbd 
Morellet.  Il  n’y  a,  Dieu  merci,  aucun  changement  dans  nos  socidtds.  Xous  restons 
tous  unis  malgrd  le  malheur  des  terns  et  les  troubles  civils  qui  out  bien  attristd  cette 
nation  si  gaie,  et  fait  raisonner  a  perte  de  vue  ce  peuple  si  frivole.  Fdlictions-nous 
du  moins  de  la  paix  qui  unit  nos  deux  nations.  Puisse-t-elle  vous  amener  encore 
une  fois  parmi  nous  !  Je  voudrois  bien  vous  faire  juge  de  quelques  essais  drama- 
tiques  que  j’ai  faits,  et  qui  ont  eu  beaucoup  de  succds  jouds  en  socidtd  et  par  de  trds 
bons  acteurs.  Le  jeune  Maty  pourra  vous  en  parler,  mais  il  n’a  pas  vu  “  Borneo  et 
Julliette”  que  j’ai  ose  arranger  pour  un  theatre  Francois,  et  qui  me  paroit  avoir  fait  la 
plus  grande  impression.  J’ai  chang'd  en  grande  partie  l’intrigue,  et  j’ai  retranche  tout 
le  comique.  Je  suis  glorieux  d’avoir  eu  le  suffrage  de  quelques  Anglois,  mais  il  me 
faudroit  le  votre :  il  me  le  faut  dans  tous  les  cas  et  dans  tous  les  terns,  car  mon 
estime  pour  mon  clier  Garrick  est  egale  a  tous  dgards  a  l’attrait  qu’il  m’a  inspird  et  au 
tendre  sentiment  que  je  lui  voue  pour  toute  ma  vie,  ainsi  qu'A  sa  charmante  moitie. 

Je  vous  envoye,  mon  clier  ami,  un  ouvrage  qui  est  assez  estimd  pour  vous  plaire. 


584 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


I,e  sujct  en  est  int^ressant,  surtout  pour  un  Gallo- Breton  comme  vous.  S’il  parois- 
soit  quelque  drame  qi;i  valut  quelque  chose,  vous  me  feriez  plaisir  de  me  l’envoyer 
de  bonne  heure. 

He  jeune  homine  qui  vous  remettra  cette  lettre  est  le  fils  de  Mr.  Sayde  opticien 
qui  fait  un  gros  commerce  a  Paris,  particulierement  en  inarchandises  Angloises  :  je 
prends  la  libcrte  de  vous  le  recommander. 

De  Chatellux. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  20  Juin,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  remis  a  Air.  Noverre  tout  ce  que  vous  m’avez  demand^,  a  l’excep- 
tion  de  la  grammaire  Italienne  dont  il  n’y  a  plus  d’exemplaires ;  on  travaille  a  la 
seconde  Edition,  sitot  qu’elle  paroitra  vous  serez  satisfait.  Air.  Noverre  s’est  aussi  charg6 
d’un  paquet  qui  renferme  deux  ecrans  de  la  manufacture  des  Gobelins,  pour  Airs. 
Thornhill,  et  une  veste  d’^toffe  d’or  pour  Air.  Abel,  dont  Air.  D’Augny  lui  fait 
present.  Je  ne  s<pais  pas  si  Air.  Noverre  pourra  faire  passer  l’un  et  l’autre,  mais  en 
tout  cas  je  vous  prie  d’employer  tout  votre  credit  pour  les  faire  entrer  a  Londres,  et 
pour  les  faire  remettre  a  leur  destination.  Airs.  Thornhill  remboursera  tout  ce 
qu’il  en  aura  cout6  pour  cela. 

Air.  Hilman  et  sa  famille  sont  log^s  chez  moi,  et  je  crois  qu’ils  doivent  6tre  con¬ 
tents.  .Te  leur  ai  abandonne  mon  appartement  en  entier,  une  chambre  de  domestique, 
la  cave,  la  cnisine,  et  mon  domestique  qui  leur  sert  de  cuisinier  et  de  maitre  d’hotel. 
J’ai  6t6  oblig'6  de  me  loger  ailleurs  avec  ma  femme,  de  louer  deux  lits,  un  pour  Air. 
Hilman  le  fils,  et  l’autre  pour  Alademoiselle,  d’acheter  plusieurs  choses  pour  les  con- 
tenter  et  pour  leur  commodity  :  certainement  il  ne  seroit  pas  partout  ailleurs  aussi 
bien  que  chez  moi  pour  vingt-cinq  louis  par  mois,  outre  l’epargne  que  je  leur 
fais  faire  sur  leur  nourriture,  sur  trois  maitres  de  dessin,  de  langue  et  de  danse,  et 
les  soins  que  je  puis  me  donner  pour  eux  ainsi  que  ma  femme  ;  par  toutes  ces  con¬ 
siderations  je  crois,  mon  ami,  qu’il  ne  seroit  pas  injuste  de  ma  part  de  recevoir  de  Air. 
Hilman  quinze  louis  par  mois  de  mon  appartement,  qui  feront  soixante  louis  pour  les 
quatre  mois  qu’il  compte  rester  a  Paris.  Je  m’en  rapporte  sur  cela  a  votre  equity  ;  et 
dans  le  cas  que  vous  trouviez  cela  juste,  vous  me  ferez  plaisir  par  la  premiere  occasion 
d’ecrire  un  mot  a  Air.  Hilman  a  ce  sujet,  pour  l’engager  a  sen  rapporter  a  ma  con¬ 
science  la-dessus.  Si  j’etois  plus  riche  que  je  ne  suis  j’agirois  differemment. 

Autre  chose,  puisque  vous  voulez  bien  venir  a  mon  secours  pour  m  aider  a  reparer 
mes  malheurs  :  vTons  m’obligerez  de  me  faire  tenir  le  plustot  que  vous  le  pourrez,  ce 
que  vous  m’avez  promis  pour  l'ouvrage  que  j’ai  entrepris  ;  il  me  faudroit  en-bref,  l’his- 
toire  en  g6i6ral  de  vos  theatres,  de  vos  pieces,  et  de  vos  com^diens  actuels,  y  com- 
prendre  l’opera,  les  comedies,  le  theatre  de  Foote,  Sadler’s  Wells,  Vauxhall,  Rane- 
lagh,  Comely’s,  Almaclc’s  ;  une  idee  de  tous  les  spectacles,  divertissemens,  danses, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


585 


musique,  &c.  qui  se  donnent  a  Londres  pendant  le  cours  de  l’annee,  et  tout  cela  comme 
je  vous  l’ai  deja  dit  en  peu  de  mots.  Les  occupations  que  vous  avez  ne  vous  per- 
mettent  pas  de  donner  tout  le  terns  qu’il  faudroit  pour  faire  ce  que  je  vous  demande, 
mais  je  pense  que  vous  pouvez  vous  faire  aider  par  quelqu’un,  vous  avez  tant  de  gens 
4  vos  ordres ;  il  y  a  a  Londres  un  certain  Mr.  Cleland,  qui  m’a  paru  avoir  du 
merite,  vous  pouvez  le  faire  6crire  en  Anglois,  je  le  ferai  traduire  ici :  sur  tout  ce  que 
vous  ferez  pour  moi  a  cet  egard  je  garderai  le  plus  grand  secret. 

Mr.  Bazan,  que  j’ai  vu  ce  matin  avec  Mr.  Noverre,  m’a  charge  de  vous  dire  que 
vous  n'ayez  point  d’inquietude  sur  la  derni^re  souscription  que  vous  avez  faite  avec 
lui,  il  vous  contentera  d£s  qu’il  le  pourra. 

Mr.  Noverre  vous  donnera  une  quittance  de  quelques  petites  avances  que  j’ai  faites 
pour  vous,  et  qu’il  m’a  rembours^es.  Quand  vous  voudrez,  je  m’acquitterai  envers 
vous  de  ce  que  je  vous  dois,  si  vous  voulez  faire  mon  petit  compte.  Adieu,  con- 
servez  votre  santL 

Monnet. 

Sans  doute,  Madame  Garrick  a  re^u  la  blonde  et  le  ruban  blanc  que  je  lui  ai 
envoyes  par  Grimaldy. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  4  Juillet,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  pour  profiter  d’une  occasion  qui  se  presente,  je  vous  ecris  deux  mots  a 
la  hate  pour  repondre  aux  articles  qui  me  concernent  dans  la  lettre  que  vous  avez 
adressee  en  dernier  lieu  k  Mr.  Hillman.  J’ai  remis  bien  certainement  a  Mr.  votre 
Neveu  l’Histoire  de  France  en  vingt-un  volumes,  s^avoir  ce  qu’il  en  a  fait,  je  ne  puis 
vous  le  dire,  il  les  aura  laisses  a  Gen&ve  ou  dans  quelque  auberge  de  la  route;  on  bien, 
un  certain  maitre  d’armes  a  peu  pr£s  du  caractere  du  Major  Mant,  avec  lequel  il  est 
venu  de  Londres  a  Paris,  en  aura  fait  son  profit  ;  cet  homme,  qui  etoit  le  conseil  et  le 
guide  de  votre  Neveu,  aura  bien  pu  lui  jouer  ce  petit  tour  la.  J’^crirai  a  Mr.  Cramer 
pour  s^avoir  si  ces  livres  ne  sont  pas  restes  a  Geneve. 

Nous  allames  bier  avec  Mr.  Hillman  voir  la  danseuse  qu’on  vient  d’engager  pour 
l'Op^ra  de  Londres  :  il  n’en  fait  pas  autant  de  cas  que  moi,  mais  malgr6  sa  decision  je 
crois  que  c’est  la  plus  surprenante  danseuse  pour  la  belle  danse  et  le  genre  noble, 
qu’on  ait  vu  jusqu’a  present.  Elle  est  de  plus  jolie,  jeune,  grande,  et  bien  faite, — vous 
en  jugerez  vous-meme.  Le  directeur  de  votre  Op6ra  lui  a  fait  un  engagement  que 
j’ai  vu,  de  onze  cent  Louis  et  un  benefice,  pour  danser  depuis  le  mois  de  Novembre 
prochain  jusqu'au  mois  de  Mai. 

Je  vous  ai  marqu6  par  ma  dernicre  lettre  ce  que  je  voulois  de  votre  amiti6  et 
de  votre  complaisance  pour  mon  Roman  Comique  :  l’histoire  en  raccourci  depuis  vingt 
ans  de  vos  auteurs,  de  vos  acteurs  et  de  vos  theatres,  et  quelques  anecdotes  comiques 
et  int^ressantes.  Mr.  Foote  a  donn6  lieu  a  bcaucoup  de  plaisanteries,  la  creation  de  son 

4  T 


VOL.  II. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


086 

theatre  ;  les  sujets  qu’il  a  repr£sent£s  donneroient  line  id6e  de  votre  liberty,  et  donne- 
roit  du  piquant  a  mon  ouvrage.  Vous  pouvez  sur  cela  ne  me  rien  d^guiscr,  je  vous 
promets  sur  tout  ce  que  vous  ferez  pour  moi  le  plus  grand  secret,  et  je  vous  pro- 
mets  encore  que  je  ne  mettrai  rien  a  l’impression  que  vous  n’ayez  vu  et  approuv£ 
de  tout  ce  qui  regardera  la  nation  Angloise  dans  mon  livre.  Vous  m’aviez  promis 
de  m’envoyer  par  le  Docteur  Gem  votre  jeune  Scaron,  je  serois  bien  aise  de  l’avoir 
tel  qu’il  est. 

Vous  m’avez  bien  dit  par  la  lettre  de  Mr.  Hillman  que  vous  aviez  recu  un  pa- 
quet  de  ma  part  pour  Mr.  Abel,  mais  vous  ne  m’avez  pas  expliqu^  si  ce  paquet  con- 
tenoit  une  veste  et  deux  derails  des  Gobelins  dont  Mr.  Noverre  s  etoit  charg^.  Je 
serois  fort  aise  de  s^avoir  si  ces  deux  objets  sont  arrives  h  bon  port,  et  si  vous  avez 
eu  la  bont£  de  les  faire  remettre  a  leur  destination. 

Je  vous  embrasse  bien  fort,  et  je  vous  rdcommande  votre  sant£,  et  celle  de 
Madame  Garrick  :  dites-lui  bien  des  choses  pour  moi  et  pour  ma  femme. 

Monnet. 

P.S.  Je  vous  reitere  que  je  S9ais  que  vous  avez  tr£s  peu  de  terns  a  employer 
pour  6crire  vous  m&me  ce  que  je  vous  demande,  mais  je  pense  que  vous  pouvez 
faire  faire  la  plus  grosse  partie  de  cette  besogne  par  quelque  ami  qui  s  en  fera  un 
plaisir,  et  pour  plus  de  facility  l’ecrire  en  Anglois,  je  le  ferai  traduire  ici ;  je  vous 
avois  pari 6  de  Mr.  Cleland. 

Vous  avez  sans  doute  les  trois  vol.  de  Palissot,  qu’en  pensez-vous  ? 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  28  Juillet,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  tirez-moi  d’inquietude  sur  les  deux  6crans  de  Mr.  Thornhill  et  sur  la 
veste  d’etoffe  d’or  de  Mr.  Abel  :  a-t-on  recu  l’un  et  l’autre,  et  les  a-t-on  envoyes  a  leur 
destination  ?  a-t-on  remis  a  Madame  Garrick  la  gaze  d’or  qu’elle  avoit  fait  demander 
a  ma  femme  ?  Le  jeune  Vandergucht,  qui  est  ici  depuis  quelques  jours,  m’a  demand^ 
aussi  de  sa  part  des  manchettes  en  dentelle,  sans  autre  explication  ;  cela  ne  suffit  pas, 
il  faut  qu’elle  me  dise  son  gout  et  le  prix  qu’elle  y  veut  mettre.  Mr.  Hillman  est 
dans  son  lit  avec  la  goutte  ;  il  faut  esp^rer  que  cela  n’aura  pas  de  suite  ;  entre  nous  soit 
dit,  je  le  crois  bon  homme  et  fort  instruit,  mais  je  le  crois  aussi  fort  soumis  aux  volon- 
tes  de  sa  femme  et  un  peu  &  celles  de  ses  enfans.  La  femme  est  ffire,  defiante, 
difficile,  et  pas  assez  genereuse  ;  le  fils  me  paroit  indolent  ;  la  fille,  qui  a  beaucoup  de 
dispositions  pour  acquerir  des  talens,  ne  les  cultive  pas  assez.  Je  lui  avois  donne 
trois  bon  maitres,  un  pour  le  dessin,  un  pour  la  langue  Fran^oise,  et  un  pour  la 
danse  :  les  deux  premiers  sont  deja  renvoy^s.  Mr.  et  Madame  Hillman  pr^tendent 
que  Mademoiselle  Hillman  s£ait  parfaitement  les  principes  du  dessin,  et  qu’il  11’y  a 
pas  un  meilleur  maitre  a  Paris  que  celui  que  leur  fille  a  eu  a  Bath  ;  int^rieurement 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


587 


je  ne  le  crois  pas,  je  me  contente  de  les  laisser  dans  leur  opinion.  Je  menai  ces  jours 
derniers  le  p£re  pour  voir  la  plus  grande  et  une  des  plus  belles  collections  de  tableaux 
que  nous  ayons  a  Paris  ;  il  prit  des  originaux  pour  des  copies,  et  des  copies  pour  des 
originaux.  L’orchestre  de  notre  Op^ra,  qui  est  sans  contredit  ce  qu’il  ya  de  meilleur 
et  de  mieux  compost  a  ce  spectacle,  il  le  trouve  mauvais  ;  tout  cela  ne  m’empeche 
pas  de  voir  qu’il  est  tr&s-bon  et  tres-honnete  homme ;  j’ai  fait  jusqu’a  present  a  votre 
consideration  tout  ce  que  j’ai  pu  faire  pour  eux,  et  je  crois  qu’ils  doivent  etre  con- 
tens  ;  s’ils  s’ennuyent,  c’est  leur  faute  et  non  pas  la  mienne.  Mr.  Hillman,  selon 
toutes  les  apparences,  compte  bientot  quitter  Paris  avec  sa  famille  pour  passer  dans  la 
Bourgogne,  a  Gen&ve,  a  Lyon,  et  dans  la  Provence.  Je  A  ais  encore  vous  persecuter 
pour  ce  que  je  vous  ai  demande  pour  mon  Roman  Comique  :  je  scais  que  vous  avez  des 
affaires  par  dessus  la  tete,  mais  comme  je  vous  l’ai  deja  dit,  vous  pourriez  vous  faire 
aider;  je  me  suis.rappel6  a  cet  6gard  Mr.  Cleland,  que  vous  connoissez  et  que  j’ai 
aussi  connu  a  Londres.  J’ai  remis  une  lettre  pour  lui  au  jeune  Vandergucht :  vous 
la  lirez,  et  si  vous  croyez  necessaire  qu’on  la  lui  remette,  le  jeune  homme  s’en  char- 
gera  :  si  vous  la  croyez  inutile,  jetez-la  dans  le  feu,  j’en  serai  tout  console.  Le  Doc- 
teur  Burney  ne  peut-il  pas  vous  donner  quelques  secours  sur  mon  affaire?  Faites-lui 
bien  mes  compliments,  et  pensez,  mon  ami,  qu’il  faut  que  mon  petit  ouvrage  paroisse 
au  commencement  du  Careme  prochain.  Je  suis  fort  avance  pour  ce  qui  me  regarde  : 
j’en  lus  hier  quelque  chose  au  vieux  Piron  et  a  Colie,  9a  les  fit  rire  beaucoup,  et  je 
crois  que  cela  sera  plaisant.  Pourquoi  ne  voulez-vous  pas  m’envoyerle  jeune  Scaron  ? 
dites-moi  done  votre  sentiment,  sur  l’ouvrage  de  Palissot,  et  si  Becket  veut  de  cet 
ouvrage,  et  combien  il  veut  d’exemplaires.  J’ai  vu  le  Docteur  Gem  il  y  a  quelques 
jours,  nous  avons  beaucoup  parl6  de  vous :  si  Mr.  Hillman  n’avoit  pas  6t6  chez-moi, 
il  avoit  une  bonne  pratique  a  me  donner  pour  mon  logement.  Adieu,  mon  ami;  je 
vous  aime,  et  je  suis  l’homme  qui  vous  est  le  plus  attache. 

Monnet. 

Je  re^ois  a  l’instant  une  lettre  de  Mr.  Palissot  qui  m’ecrit  de  sa  campagne  ;  il  me 
prie  instannnent  par  sa  lettre  de  s^avoir  ce  que  vous  pensez  de  ses  trois  volumes,  et 
s’il  y  a  de  cet  ouvrage  a  Londres,  c’est  a  dire  si  on  le  vend.  Faites-moi,  je  vous  prie, 
un  mot  de  reponse  a  ce  sujet  que  je  puisse  lui  montrer. 

Mr.  Hillman  m’a  communique  les  articles  qui  me  concernent  dans  la  derni&re 
lettre  que  vous  lui  avez  £crite.  Madame  Garrick  aura  par  le  jeune  A'andergucht  les 
douze  aulnes  d’entoillage  qu’elle  a  demandees.  Je  n’ai  pas  encore  re^u  le  livre  que  vous 
m’avez  envoy6  par  une  de  vos  actrices.  Je  voudrois  toujours  avoir  le  jeune  Scaron 
tout  mauvais  qu’il  est.  Si  on  ne  le  trouve  plus  chez  les  libraires,  il  sera  dans  la 
biblioth^que  de  quelque  particulier  a  Londres  ;  si  on  veut  bien  me  le  preter,  je  vous 
le  renverrai  avec  toute  l’exactitude  possible  sitot  que  j’aurai  pris  ce  qui  me  sera 
necessaire. 


4  r  2 


.588 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  8  Aout,  1771. 

Mon  ami,  vous  m’avez  demand^  il  y  a  quelques  mois  une  collection  complete  des 
feuilles  de  Mr.  de  Querlon  depuis  leur  origine.  L’auteur  et  le  hazard  viennent  de 
m’en  procurer  une  en  dix-liuit  volumes  broches  dont  j’ai  erfi  devoir  profiter,  moyen- 
nant  la  somrae  de  cent-cinquante  livres  que  j’ai  pay6e,  et  sous  la  condition  que  si  vous 
trouvez  cette  collection  trop  ch&re,  on  me  rendra  mon  argent.  Marquez-moi,  a  lettre 
vue,  si  ce  march6  vous  convient,  et  observez  bien  surtout  que  cette  collection  ne  se 
reimprimera  jamais,  et  que  plus  vous  garderez  celle-la,  plus  elle  augmentera  de  prix. 
Si  vous  la  prenez,  Mr.  Bazan  la  fera  passer  dans  une  caisse  d’estampes,  ou  bien  je 
profiterai  de  la  premiere  occasion  qui  se  pr^sentera  pour  vous  la  faire  parvenir. 

Je  n’ai  pas  encore  recu  le  livre  que  vous  dites  avoir  fait  remettre  a  une  de  vos 
actrices  pour  moi :  je  crains  bien  que  l’un  et  l’autre  ne  soient  tomb^s  dans  la  mer. 
Tirez-moi  d’inqui6tude  a  ce  sujet,  et  envoyez,  je  vous  prie,  chez  Mr.  Noverre,  pour 
S9avoir  si  les  ecrans  et  la  veste  dont  il  s’etoit  charge  sont  arrives  a  Londres,  et  sachez 
aussi  si  Becket  vent  des  exemplaires  de  la  nouvelle  edition  de  Mr.  Palissot,  et  faites- 
moi  dans  la  premiere  lettre  que  vous  m’ecrirez  un  article  satisfaisant  pour  cet  auteur, 
qui  est  tr£s-empress6  de  s^avoir  ce  que  vous  pensez  de  son  ouvrage  ;  votre  suffrage  et 
celui  des  Anglois  le  flatteront  plus  que  tous  les  eioges  qu’on  pourroit  faire  ici  de  ses 
talens.  Mr.  Hillman  a  eu  une  attaque  de  goute  assez  vive,  mais  il  est  gu^ri  ;  je  ne 
s^ais  pas  quand  il  quittera  Paris,  mais  de  la  fa^on  dont  il  se  gouverne,  aussi  bien  que 
sa  famille,  il  ne  tireront  pas  un  grand  avantage  du  s6jour  qu’ils  y  auront  fait.  Au  nom 
de  Dieu,  Mr.  David,  repondez-moi  vite  et  en  Francois,  et  n’oubliez  pas  qu’il  faut  que 
mon  livre  soit  fait,  imprim6,  et  vendu  pour  le  Careme  prochain. 

Jean  Monnet. 

Je  pars  demain  avec  Mr.  le  Comte  du  Luc  pour  passer  huit  jours  a  sa  campagne 
avec  ma  femme  :  dites  bien  des  choses  pour  elle  et  pour  moi  a  Madame  Garrick.  Est¬ 
elle  contente  de  la  derniere  gaze  d’or  ? 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Ce  8  Septembre  1771. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  re^u  votre  derniere  lettre  hier,  j’y  repond  aujourd’hui  par  Made¬ 
moiselle  Abington,  qui  compte  partir  demain :  je  suis  arrive  ici  heureusement  de  la 
campagne  pour  pouvoir  lui  faire  quelques  politesses,  dont  j’ai  6t£  bien  recompense  par 
le  plaisir  que  j’ai  eu  de  remarquer  en  elle  de  l’esprit,  des  connoissances,  et  beaucoup 
d’honnetete.  Elle  a  produit  le  meme  effet  sur  tous  ceux  qu’elle  a  connu  ici  pendant 
le  peu  de  terns  qu’elle  y  a  rest6  :  elle  m’a  remis  les  livres  dont  vous  l’aviez  chargee,  ils 


DAVID  GARRICK.  589 

me  seront  de  tres-peu  d’usage :  je  vous  en  suis  toujours  bien  oblig6,  et  je  vous  les 
renverrai  par  la  premiere  occasion. 

Si  les  directeurs  du  Ranelagh  sont  toujours  dans  l'intention  de  faire  usage  des 
talens  de  Mr.  Torre,  pour  le  printems  et  l’ete  prochain,  il  croit  qu’il  seroit  necessaire 
qu’il  fit  un  petit  voyage  a  Londres  dans  le  courant  de  ce  mois,  pour  traiter  avec  les 
personnes  qui  veulent  l’employer,  pour  s’assurer  des  sujets  et  des  feux  qu’il  fera,  en 
un  mot,  pour  faire  des  arrangements  solides  et  utiles.  Repondez-moi  sur  cela 
promptement. 

Mr.  Hillman  et  sa  famille  ont  quitte  Paris  il  y  a  huit  jours  pour  aller  a  Lausanne. 
Ils  n’ont  reste  chez-moi  que  deux  mois  et  demi ;  pour  ce  j’ai  re^u  cinquante  louis,  et 
je  leur  ai  fait  une  quittance,  par  laquelle  je  me  suis  engage  de  les  reprendre  dans  mon 
appartement,  s’ils  reviennent  a  Paris,  pour  completer  les  quatre  mois  dont  nous  6tions 
convenus  pour  les  cinquante  louis :  ils  doivent  etre  contents  de  moi,  je  le  suis  d’eux. 
Cependant  si  vous  aviez  encore  quelqu’un  a  me  procurer  pour  deux  ou  trois  mois,  je 
ne  voudrois  pas  quatre  personnes,  cela  est  trop  incommode.  Neanmoins  je  vous 
remercie  beaucoup  du  service  que  vous  m’avez  rendu. 

Il  paroit  ici  une  brochure  intitulee  “  le  Gazetier  Cuirasse  a  cent  lieues  de  la  Bas¬ 
tille,”  qui  a  6te  imprim£e  a  Londres.  Si  cela  ne  coute  pas  plus  de  trois  ou  quatre 
chelings,  faites-moi  le  plaisir  de  me  l’envoyer  par  quelqu’un  de  sur,  car  cet  ouvrage 
est  bien  defendu  ici.  A  propos  de  Gazetier  ;  Mr.  le  Due  d'Aiguillon,  Ministre  de  la 
Guerre,  vient  d’oter  le  privilege  de  la  Gazette  a  Messieurs  Arnaud  et  Suard  pour  une 
imprudence  mal-entendue,  a  propos  d’un  de  vos  Princes  :  vos  papiers  vous  instruiront 
sans  doute  du  sujet. 

Je  vous  prie  d’envoyer  cette  lettre  a  Mr.  Noverre.  La  veste  et  les  derails  m’in- 
qui^tent  toujours.  Madame  Garrick  est-elle  contente  de  ce  que  ma  femme  lui  a 
envoy6  ?  disposez  d’elle  et  de  moi. 

Monnet. 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  18  Sept. 

Mon  ami,  j’ai  recu  votre  derni^re  lettre;  il  6toit  inutile  de  me  renouveller  votre 
affection  pour  moi ;  les  preuves  que  vous  m’en  avez  donn^es  jusqu’iei  sont  trop 
6videntes,  pour  que  je  puisse  en  douter  un  seul  instant ;  mais  vous  etes  bien  recom¬ 
pense  par  l’assurance  que  je  puis  vous  donner  que  dans  le  nombre  de  gens  que  vous 
avez  obliges  dans  le  courant  de  votre  vie,  il  n’y  en  a  pas  de  plus  reconnoissant  que  je 
le  suis  de  vos  bienfaits.  Nous  nous  sommes  mal  entendus  sur  ce  que  je  vous  ai 
d’abord  demande  pour  mon  Roman  Comique  ;  je  voulois  simplement  un  precis  de  la 
vie  privee  de  vos  comediens  Anglois,  et  quelques  anecdotes  courtes  et  plaisantes,  e’est 
a  dire  plaisantes  sur  le  papier,  car  il  y  en  a  qui  font  beaucoup  d’effet  quand  on  les 
racoute,  et  qui  en  feroient  tres-peu  a  les  6crire;  mais  ne  vous  inquietez  pas  d’avan- 
tage  ce  sujet,  je  tirerai  parti  de  ce  que  j’ai. 


590 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


II  est  vrai,  Mr.  Palissot  a  maltrait£  bcaucoup  de  gens  dans  son  ouvrage,  plusieurs 
dc  votre  connoissancc,  nomm^ment  Madame  Riccoboni,  pour  laquelle  vous  paroissez 
vous  affecter  le  plus,  et  je  vous  en  loue;  mais  la  plupart  de  ceux  qui  sont  nomm^s 
dans  ses  m^moires  l’avoient  accuse  bien  avant  d’avoir  vole  une  caisse,  viol<$  sa  soeur,  et 
vendu  sa  femme  :  vous  avez  vu  sa  justification  la-dessus;  elle  est  vraie  en  tout  point. 
Si  vous  le  connoissiez,  vous  l’aimeriez  beaucoup  ;  il  a  de  la  bile,  mais  il  est  bon  liomme, 
il  a  beaucoup  d’esprit,  et,  a  beaucoup  d’egards,  son  livre  est  fort  estiine  ici,  et  a  6te 
bien  vendu. 

Vous  direz,  je  vous  prie,  h  Mademoiselle  Abington  que  j’ai  fait  aupr£s  de  Air.  et 
Madame  Provide,  et  Madame  Belcour,  les  compliments  et  les  excuses  dont  elle  m’a 
charges  en  partant  de  Paris  :  dites  aussi  que  je  ferai  faire  son  habit  de  theatre  lorsque 
j’aurai  une  occasion  sure  pour  le  lui  envoyer.  La  danseuse  qu’on  a  engage  ici  pour 
l’Op^ra  de  Londres  en  a  fait  faire  six,  elle  ne  S9ait  pas  comment  pouvoir  les  faire  passer 
rien  n’est  si  difficile  a  present.  Bien  des  compliments  de  ma  part. 

Je  devois  vous  faire  tenir  la  pr^sente  par  Mr.  Conti,  qui  est  actuellement  4  Lon¬ 
dres,  je  vous  le  recommande  pour  des  pierres  en  bagues  rares  et  belles,  qu’il  veut 
vendre.  C’est  Mr.  Loisel  qui  s’est  charg6  de  ma  commission  :  mdnagez  votre  sant£, 
dites  bien  des  choses  pour  moi  a  Madame  Garrick,  et  r6pondez-moi  sur  Torr6. 

Monnet. 

Je  voudrois  s^avoir  a  peu  prfes  (annees  courantes)  ou  peuvent  aller  les  recettes  de 
vos  theatres  de  Londres  hyver  et  6te,  pour  calculer  la  difference  qu’il  y  a  du  produit 
entre  les  votres  et  les  notres:  vous  pourriez  me  marquer  en  meme  terns  les  recettes 
de  Sadler’s- Wells,  Foote’s,  Ranelagh,  Vauxhall,  &cc. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Paris,  24  Septembre,  1771. 

Vous  croyez  peut-£tre  que  je  vous  ai  parfaitement  oublie  ?  en  v^rite,  mon  tr£s- 
aimable  ami,  vous  seriez  injuste  de  le  penser.  Sans  fatiguer  ceux  que  j’aime  par  de 
fr^quentes  assurances  de  mes  sentimens,  je  conserve  leur  souvenir,  et  les  personnes 
dont  je  prise  l’estime  sont  toujours  pr^sentes  a  ma  imhuoire,  et  chores  a  mon  cceur. 

J’ai  attendu  de  mois  en  mois  a  vous  6crire,  ayant  dessein  de  joindre  a  ma  premiere 
lettre  un  exemplaire  de  mon  ouvrage  ;  mais  une  continuelle  indecision  fondle  sur  les 
ev^nemens  et  les  conseils  de  mes  amis,  ont  remis  de  jour  en  jour  1’impression  des 
deux  volumes.  Le  public  s’occupoit  beaucoup  des  affaires  de  l’etat.  L’abord  on 
parloit  de  la  guerre,  ensuite  la  disgrace  de  Air.  de  Choiseul  a  produit  des  nouveautes  : 
apr&s  l’exil  du  Parlement  on  n’a  song6  qua  lui ;  et  puis,  des  declarations,  des  arrets  du 
conseil,  des  edits,  ont  fix£  l’attention.  Je  suis  assez  vaine  pour  croire  mon  style  aussi 
agitable  que  celui  du  Controleur-Gen^ral,  mais  ses  Merits,  bien  plus  interessans  sans 
doute,  auroient  fait  grand  tort  aux  miens.  A  present  que  cet  important  auteur  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


591 


jete  son  premier  feu,  je  suis  determine  a  paroitre  quand  la  Cour  reviendra  de  Fon¬ 
tainebleau.  Ainsi,  vers  le  milieu  du  mois  prochain,  je  pourrai  vous  envoyer  l’exem- 
plaire  que  vous  m’avez  demands  pour  Air.  Becket,  un  pour  vous,  un  pour  Air. 
Murphy,  en  reconnoissance  du  plaisir  qu’il  m’a  fait  en  me  donnant  ses  oeuvres,  et 
deux  pour  Mr.  Hume,  que  je  vous  prierai  de  vouloir  bien  lui  faire  tenir  a  Edinburgh 
quand  vous  en  trouverez  l’occasion. 

VoiH  mon  projet.  Comment  l’ex^cuter?  je  l’ignore,  et  je  vous  en  demande  le 
moyen.  Un  ballot  si  petit  peut  se  perdre  en  route,  je  l’ai  experiments.  Je  n’ai  pas 
la  moindre  connoissance  chez  votre  Ambassadeur,  je  ne  vois  pas  un  seul  Anglois. 
Le  Baron  d’Holbach  est  un  sauvage,  toujours  aux  champs,  d’ailleurs  il  a  pen  de 
relations  en  Angleterre.  Voyez  done,  mon  bon  et  cher  ami, — arrangez  cela,  donnez- 
moi  vos  ordres ;  ils  seront  exactement  suivis. 

Comme  on  m’a  empSchSe  de  vendre  mon  manuscrit,  par  des  considerations  qui 
seroient  trop  longues  a  detailler,  le  livre  m’appartient ;  on  l’imprime  a  mes  frais,  on 
le  vendra  a  mon  profit.  Par  cette  raison,  je  vous  prierai  de  recommander  a  Mr. 
Becket  et  an  traducteur  de  ne  laisser  lire  l’ouvrage  a  personne.  Vous  aurez  la  bonte 
de  caclier  votre  exemplaire,  de  garder  celui  de  Mr.  Murphy  et  ceux  de  Mr.  Hume, 
jusques  au  jour  que  je  vous  indiquerai.  La  furie  des  contrefactions  Francoises  et 
etrangeres  m’engagent  a  prendre  toutes  sortes  de  precautions. 

Je  suis  inquiette  de  v6tre  santS.  Vous  allez  souvent  a  Bath,  dit-on  :  est-ce  pour 
vous  am  user,  ou  par  le  besoin  de  prendre  les  eaux  ?  donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles  et 
de  celles  de  votre  chSre  compagne.  Je  m’interesse  bien  sincSrement  a  ce  qui  vous 
touche  l’un  et  l’autre. 

L’esprit  est  devenu  si  commun  parmi  nous,  qu’on  n’en  fait  plus  de  cas.  Tous  les 
ouvrages  presen tes  aux  theatres  sont  sifles,  tous  les  livres  tombent.  Vous  s^avez  la 
disgrace  de  Suard  et  de  son  collegue  l’Abbe  Arnaud.  On  leur  a  ote  la  Gazette  :  ils 
sont  imprudens,  ou  leur  vue  n’est  pas  bonne.  LTne  rature  qu’ils  n’ont  pas  apper^ue, 
disent-ils,  les  prive  d’une  assez  jolie  petite  fortune.  L’Abbe  peut  s’en  passer,  son 
abbaye  lui  suffira  s’il  est  modere,  mais  Suard  a  une  femme,  des  enfans.  On  blame 
ces  Messieurs,  mais  on  les  plaint.  On  m’avoit  assur6  que  Mr.  Becket  viendroit  a 
Paris.  Je  l’attendois  avec  impatience,  pour  le  voir  premierement,  et  puis  pour  lui 
jeter  a  la  tete  son  maudit  “  John  Buncle.”  Mr.  Changuion  £toit  dans  la  bonne  foi, 
il  croyoit  m’apporter  la  plus  belle  chose  du  monde,  il  lui  a  6t6  impossible  d’en  lire 
quatre  pages. 

Adieu,  mon  tres-aimable  ami.  Mes  plus  tendres  complimens  a  Madame  Garrick, 
recevez  ceux  de  mon  ami,  qui  vous  aime  toujours  de  tout  son  coeur.  Hepondez-moi, 
et  surtout  rendez-moi  compte  de  votre  sante.  Je  vous  embrasse,  et  suis  avec  la  plus 
eonstante  amitie,  Votre  tr^s-humble  et  tres-ob^issante  servante, 

Riccoloni. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


592 


DE  M.  MONNET  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MON  AMI,  Ce  21  Octobre,  1771. 

J’ai  re^u  votre  derniere  lettre,  et  je  vous  suis  oblig£  des  soins  que  vous  vous  etes 
donne  pour  la  veste  d’Abcl  et  les  deux  6crans.  Mr.  Noverre  a  pay6  trois  louis  pour  le 
passage  des  trois  effets.  Mr.  Thornhill,  a  qui  j’6cris  par  le  meme  ordinaire,  vous  en 
fera  remettre  deux,  j’ai  laisse  le  troisieme  &  Mr.  Panehaud,  sur  la  somme  de  cent  dix- 
neuf  livres  dix-lniit  sols  que  j’ai  pris  cliez  lui  pour  la  gaze  d’or  que  Madame  Monnet 
a  envoy^e  a  Madame  Garrick  ;  nous  sommes  quitte  sur  cet  objet ;  quand  je  serai  un 
peu  plus  a  mon  aise,  je  finirai  un  ancien  compte  que  j’ai  avec  vous,  dans  lequel  je  crois 
vous  etre  redevable. 

Mr.  Torre  compte  partir  dans  quelques  jours  pour  Londres  ;  vous  serez  content 
de  lui :  je  l’ai  prevenu  sur  votre  compte,  et  il  scait  par  experience  que  les  Anglois  lie 
sont  ni  des  betes  ni  des  dupes. 

Mr.  de  Loutlierbourg,  un  de  nos  plus  grands  peintres,  et  gallon  fort  aimable, 
doit  dans  peu  faire  un  petit  voyage  a  Londres  pour  son  plaisir.  II  m’a  demande  une 
lettre  pour  vous,  comme  vous  aimez  les  arts  et  les  artistes,  je  la  lui  donnerai  :  je 
n’ai  nulle  inquietude  sur  la  fa^on  dont  vous  l’accueillerez,  en  vous  pr^venant  toujours 
que  je  ne  le  mets  pas  dans  la  classe  de  mes  amis  particuliers,  mais  vous  en  serez  con¬ 
tent,  si  s’il  n’est  point  trop  cher,  je  vous  conseille  fort  de  lui  faire  faire  trois  petits 
tableaux,  Pun  de  marine,  l’autre  en  paysage  dans  le  gout  du  Berghem,  le  troisieme 
une  petite  bataille, — il  est  charmant  dans  ces  trois  genres. 

J’ai  re^u  une  lettre  ces  jours  derniers  de  Mr.  Hillman  pleine  de  remerciments  et 
d’amitie  pour  les  bonnes  fa^ons  qu’il  pretend  que  raa  femme  et  moi  avons  eu  pour  sa 
famille;  il  est  a  Lausanne :  il  m’a  beaucoup  demande  de  vos  nouvelles. 

Dans  un  tr&s-petit  s^jour  que  Mr.  Foote  a  fait  ici,  je  l’ai  vu  plusieurs  fois  :  il  m’a 
fait  offres  de  service  pour  la  vente  de  mon  livre,  il  m’a  meme  conseill6,  pour  en  vendre 
d’avantage,  de  le  faire  traduire  et  imprimer  en  Anglois.  Je  ne  suis  pas  de  son  avis  ;  la 
difficult^  de  trouver  un  bon  traducteur  et  un  honnete  libraire  me  feroit  pr6f£rer  d’en 
faire  passer  un  certain  nombre  d’exemplaires  en  Francois  a  Londres,  a  moins  qu’un 
de  vos  libraires  ne  voulut  se  charger  pour  son  compte  de  la  traduction  et  de  l’impres- 
sion,  moyennant  une  somme  d'argent  qu’il  me  donneroit,  auquel  cas  je  lui  enverrois 
le  manuscrit  avant  que  de  le  faire  imprimer  ici.  Si  Pun  et  l’autre  vous  pouvez  en¬ 
gager  un  honnete  libraire  a  faire  cette  acquisition,  vous  pouvez  l’assurer  qu’il  trouvera 
de  ma  part  des  proc6des  francs  et  fiddles,  et  que  cet  ouvrage,  dans  la  forme  du  petit 
in  octavo,  n’excedera  pas  400  pages,  qui  ne  pourront  pas  faire  ici,  comme  a  Londres, 
une  d^pense  de  plus  de  vingt-cinq  louis  pour  les  frais  d’une  Edition  tir£e  a  deux  mille 
exemplaires :  j’ai  deja  fait  ce  calcul.  J’ai  encore  un  petit  service  a  vous  demander 
subito,  que  vous  pouvez  me  rendre  sans  peine  :  le  jeune  Yandergucht  m’avoit  promis 

m  en\  er  une  petite  description  simple  du  Pantheon  que  l’on  fait  batir  a  Lon¬ 
dres,  du  terns  que  l’on  en  fera  l’ouverture,  du  prix  a  peu  pr£s  que  cet  edifice  coutera, 


DAVID  GARRICK.  593 

et  sic’estpar  souscription  et  quelles  sont  les  sortes  de  gens  qui  ont  fait  cette  entreprise. 
Le  petit  Yandergucht  m’a  dit  qu'il  6toit  entre  dans  ce  Pantheon. 

*  *  *  *  * 

Nous  n’avons  rien  de  nouveau  iei  de  bien  inffiressant,  sinon  que  Madame  la  Da- 
cliesse  de  Chartres  est  accouchee  dune  fille  morte,  et  Madame  la  Comtesse  de  Pro¬ 
vence  a  eu  depuis  deux  jours  la  petite  v^role.  Je  vous  embrasse,  mon  ami. 

Moxnet. 

A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  David  Garrick, 

London. 


DE  MADAME  R1CCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Jeudi  2  de  Janvier,  1772. 

J’etois  fort  inquire  de  vous,  mon  aimable  et  cher  ami ;  j’allois  ecrire  a  Mr. 
Becket  pour  lui  demander  de  vos  nouvelles,  quand  votre  lettre  est  arrivee.  A  la 
rapidite  de  l’ecriture,  a,  l’agrement  du  style,  a  la  chaleur  des  expressions,  j’ai  juge 
votre  sanffi  parfaite  et  je  m’en  r^jouis  de  tout  mon  cceur.  Car  la  sant6  est  un  bien 
reel,  lui  seul  fait  apprecier  les  autres. 

La  commission  de  Mr.  Becket  est  remplie.  Son  ballot  part  demain  pour  Calais. 
J’ai  profits  de  l’occasion.  II  trouvera  trois  exemplaires  de  trop,  dont  je  vous  prie  de 
vouloir  bien  presenter  un  de  rna  part  a  Mr.  Young,  comme  une  marque  de  mon  sou¬ 
venir  et  une  l^gere  preuve  de  ma  reconnoissance  pour  la  bonffi  qu’il  a  de  s’ennuier 
a  corriger  mes  feuilles. 

Mais  ce  n’est  done  pas  Mr.  Becket,  c’est  done  vous  qui  presidez  a  cette  traduc¬ 
tion  ?  elle  se  fait  par  vos  ordres  et  sous  votre  direction  ?  voila  un  proced6  bien  An- 
glois  !  Eh  comment  prenez-vous  tant  de  peines  pour  une  etrang^re,  dont  l’unique 
merite  a  votre  6gard  est  de  vous  rendre  une  justice  que  personne  ne  vous  refuse  et  de 
cherir  en  vous  des  quality  que  tout  le  monde  prise?  il  me  seroit  difficile  de  vous  ex¬ 
primer  combien  je  suis  touchee  de  cette  amitie  noble  et  ardente  dont  vous  m’honorez. 
Car,  ne  vous  y  trompez  point,  l’esp£ce  de  fierte  que  j’ai  adoptee,  n’est  pas  cet  orgueil 
mal  entendu,  cette  insolente  opinion  de  soi-meme  qui  porte  a  rejeter  tous  les  services, 
a  confondre  les  soins  de  l’amiti6  avec  les  bienfaits  humilians  de  l’ostentation.  Je  crois 
a  la  bonffi,  au  plaisir  veritable  qu’une  ame  g6n£reuse  sent  a  obliger  :  La  reconnoissance 
ne  me  paroit  un  poids  que  pour  le  cceur  d  un  ingrat ;  celui  qui  craint  de  recevoir,  n'a 
jamais  senti  la  douceur  de  donner,  car  il  jugeroit  le  sentiment  de  son  ami  par  le  sien; 
j’ai  toujours  remarqu6  qu’une  personne  vaine,  6toit  une  personne  insensible. 

Vous  me  demandez  mon  histoire:  est-ce  que  vous  m  en  croyez  une?  je  composerois 
un  job  roman  de  celle  de  111a  mere.  J’ai  mis  dans  un  de  mes  ouvrages  l’evenement 
qui  a  chang£  les  premieres  dispositions  du  sort  a  mon  £gard,  et  sans  le  s^avoir,  le  pu¬ 
blic  s’est  vivement  int£ress6  des  malheurs  qu’il  a  regardes  comme  une  fiction.  Aucun 

VOL.  11.  4  G 


594 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


livre  n’a  parl6  (lc  moi  avec  connoissance,  on  ne  scait  qui  je  suis,  et  j’ai  toujours  gard6 
le  silence  sur  ce  qui  me  concerne.  Je  devois  6tre  riche,  je  devois  tenir  une  place 
honntHe  dans  le  monde ;  d&s  Page  de  six  ans,  la  perte  d’un  proces  m’enleva  mon  pere 
et  ma  fortune.  On  m’^leva  comine  une  fille  dont  le  cloitre  £toit  l’unique  ressource. 
On  ne  m’enseigna  rien,  on  fit  de  moi  une  bonne  petite  devote,  propre  seulement  a  prier 
Dieu,  puisque  Satan  la  forc^oit  de  renoncer  a  ses  pompes.  J’aimois  la  lecture:  une 
grande  pensionnaire  du  couvent  oil  je  vivois,  me  pretoit  des  livres.  11s  m’inspirerent 
du  d^gout  pour  la  vie  monastique.  Ma  m&re  me  fit  sortir  du  couvent :  j’avois  qua- 
torze  ans.  Kile  se  trouvoit  prdcis^ment  k  l’age  que  peu  de  femmes  supportent  avec 
patience.  Belle  encore,  accoutum^e  a  des  soins,  a  des  preferences,  elle  me  vit  trop 
grande  pour  me  considerer  a  ses  cot£s  sans  inquietude,  Victime  de  son  humeur,  cha- 
grinee,  quereliee,  maltraitee,  jecoutai  le  premier  liomme  qui  me  fit  esperer  une  so- 
ciete  plus  douce.  Je  me  mariai  pour  quitter  ma  mere :  des  les  premiers  jours  de  mon 
mariage  la  perte  des  deux  tiers  de  sa  fortune  m’obligea  de  la  prendre  chez  moi :  elle 
y  a  v£cu  jusques  a  sa  mort,  maitresse  souveraine  de  la  maison,  disposant  de  tout  et 
me  regardant  comme  une  imbecile,  trop  heureuse  d'etre  gouvern^e  par  elle. 

A  l’egard  de  notre  Fraternity  th&atrale  elle  ne  peut  fournir  aucun  trait  dont  je 
puisse  tirer  avantage.  Actrice  intelligente  et  froide,  je  n’ai  pas  brille  dans  Part  od 
vous  excellez.  Mon  talent  etoit  le  tragique,  les  comediens  Francois  me  vouloient 
avoir,  mon  mari  s’obstina  contre  eux,  contre  la  cour,  contre  ses  amis,  il  me  voulut  a  la 
com^die  Italienne.  De  mauvaises  pieces,  de  mauvais  roles,  ne  m’engag^rent  point  a 
travailler,  et  je  ne  S9ais  comment  j’^tois  applaudie  quelquefois,  car  je  ne  prenois  pas  la 
moindre  peine  pour  plaire.  Le  d6sir  de  quitter  la  com^die,  de  vivre  sans  assujettisse- 
ment  m’a  conduit  h  6crire ;  et  mes  ouvrages  m’auroient  procur6  de  1’aisance  sans  la 
piraterie  exerc^e  dans  la  librairie.  J’ai  acquis  de  la  consideration,  e’est  beaucoup. 
En  cessant  d'etre  jeune  une  femme  n’est  plus  rien,  j’existe  encore,  et  quand  je  ne 
devrois  &  ma  petite  reputation  que  votre  connoissance  et  votre  amiti£,  je  me  s^aurois 
tr&s  bon  gr£  de  m’etre  fait  auteur. 

Le  Chevalier  de  Lagramoso  nous  parle  souvent  de  vous.  II  aime  les  Anglois,  et 
vous  par-dessus  tous.  Ce  pauvre  Changuion !  est-il  mort  ?  Ce  Chevalier  m’a  dit 
qu'il  6toit  bien  mal.  Je  le  regretterois  fort.  II  6toit  tr^s  bon,  il  m’aimoit  et  je  l'esti- 
mois  comme  un  homme  honn^te  et  obligeant.  Helvetius  est  mort  en  sept  jours  de 
maladie.  Sa  femme  est  dans  une  douleur  dont  tout  Paris  s’occupe.  Le  Baron 
d’Holbacli  ne  la  quitte  pas  et  pleure  son  ami.  La  philosophic  ne  lui  fait  pas  re- 
garder  la  sensibilite  comme  une  foiblesse.  Il  a  le  cceur  tres  bon. 

ISlonsieur  Becket  voudra  bien  garder  les  deux  exemplaires:  je  crois  qu’on  ira  les 
prendre  chez  lui.  Je  le  prie  de  les  mettre  a  part  en  attendant. 

Vous  souhaiterai-je  la  bonne  ann£e?  eh  !  mais  oui :  nous  sommes  a  Paris  dans  la 
fureur  des  complimens  et  des  visites :  non  pas  moi,  qui  prends  le  deuil  aujourd’hui 
pour  le  porter  six  mois.  Ma  belle  m&re,  ag6e  de  86  ans,  est  morte.  Xous  allons 
nous  battre  mon  mari  et  moi  a  qui  restera,  car  nous  n’avons  plus  de  proches  parens, 
et  le  premier  grand  deuil  sera  pris  pour  l’un  ou  pour  l’autre. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


595 


Mille  et  mille  tendres  complimens  a  Madame  Garrick.  Ma  compagne  vous  em- 
brasse  tous  deux  avec  cette  tendresse  et  cette  v^rite  qui  forme  son  caract&re.  Je  ne 
veux  point  vous  remercier,  vraiment  vous  avez  bien  le  terns  de  m’6couter,  je  vous 
impatienterois  n’est-ce  pas  ?  Adieu,  done,  mon  tr&s  aimable,  mon  tres  cher  ami.  Je 
vous  embrasse,  et  suis  avec  tous  les  sentimens  de  l’estime  et  de  l’amitie  votre  tr&s 
humble  servante, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Lundi  27  Juillet,  1772. 

Par  votre  lettre  je  vois,  mon  tr£s  aimable  et  tres  cher  ami,  que  le  Chevalier  La- 
gramoso  ne  vous  a  point  remis  celle  dont  je  l’avois  charge  pour  vous.  Elle  etoit  sous 
l’enveloppe  de  Mr.  Becket  a  qui  j’^crivois  aussi.  Le  paquet  en  contenoit  deux  autres. 
Tout  est  perdu.  Ce  maudit  moine  militaire,  destructeur  des  hifideles,  est  un  chien  lui- 
meme,  et  surement  il  a  jett6  mes  d^peches  dans  la  Tamise.  Si  vous  le  voyez,  dites- 
lui,  je  vous  prie,  que  ne  pouvant  le  prendre  pour  une  bete,  il  faut  bien  que  je  le  re¬ 
garde  comme  negligent,  etourdi ,  ou  mal-adroit ;  qu’il  choisisse. 

Depuis  son  depart  j’ai  change  d’etat.  Il  me  laissa  dans  la  plus  facheuse  situation. 
Mais  il  etoit  bien  doign6  d’en  connoitre  toutes  les  horreurs.  J’ai  soigneusement 
cache  combien  mon  sort  avoit  de  rigueur,  et  ceux  qui  me  voyoient  le  plus  souvent  ne 
S9avoient  pas  la  cause  de  mes  chagrins,  et  de  la  continuelle  inquietude  qui  souvent 
paroissoit  malgre  moi.  ITn  £v£nement  a  termini  mes  peines  en  m’otant  le  sujet  de 
mes  plus  tristes  meditations ;  je  suis  veuve  depuis  le  14  de  Mai.  Mon  mari  tombe  en 
paralisie  le  ler  du  mois  s’est  tu6  en  formant  ses  m^decins  d’arreter,  malgre  eux,  l’effet 
des  vessicatoires  appliqu^es  a  ses  jambes.  On  lui  a  dit  qu’il  en  mourroit,  il  s’est 
emporte  et  son  obstination  lui  a  donne  la  mort.  Je  l’ai  plaint,  je  l’ai  oblige  jusques- 
au  dernier  instant,  j’ai  fait  plus  que  je  ne  pouvois,  j’aurois  voulu  le  sauver,  mais  je  ne 
puis  dire  que  je  le  regrette.  Jamais  homme  n’a  donne  plus  de  douleurs  a  ceux  qui 
tenoient  forcement  a  lui  et  patissoient  naturellement  de  ses  fautes.  Il  sembloit  avoir 
etudie  l'art  de  se  nuire  a  lui-m6me  et  de  desesperer  les  autres  :  non  qu’il  fut  mediant, 
mais  il  etoit  fou,  et  se  conduisoit  h.  soixante  ans  comme  on  blameroit  un  jeune  enfant 
de  seize  de  parler  et  d’agir.  Il  m’avoit  rendue  malheureuse,  et  pourtant  il  m’estimoit 
beaucoup ;  et  meme  m’aimoit  a  sa  maniere.  Cet  article  est  bien  long,  mais  je  suis 
encore  etonnee  de  cette  mort  imprevue,  et  le  repos  dont  je  jouis  me  paroit  quelque- 
fois  un  songe.  Passons  a  un  detail  que  votre  amitid  pour  moi  vous  fera  trouver  tr&s 
agr^able.  Le  deux  de  Juin  le  Roi  m’a  gratifiee  d’une  pension,  sans  que  je  l’aye  de¬ 
mands.  Je  n’ai  fait  aucune  demarche,  pri6  personne  de  parler  en  ma  faveur ;  mais 
Madame  la  Comtesse  du  Barri,  de  son  propre  mouvement,  a  trouv6  mauvais  qu’on 
n’eut  point  pens6  a  moi  dans  la  distribution  des  graces  de  la  cour;  elle  a  dit  an  Roi 

4  g  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


596 

que  je  meritois  d'etre  lteureu.se.  S;i  Majeste  a  daigtC  r^  pond  re  qn'elle  droit  raison. 
Monsieur  le  l)uc  d’Aumont  fut  charge  de  s^avoir  combien  je  d6sirois  pour  me  trou- 
ver  eontente.  Surprise  de  sa  demande,  je  l’assurai  qu’il  se  trompoit ;  nous  pensames 
nous  quereller,  tout  en  disputant  il  m’inscrivit  sur  l’etat  pour  une  gratification  annu- 
elle  de  deux  mille  livres,  somme  oil  j’ai  cru  devoir  borner  le  bienfait  de  sa  Majesty. 
Avec  moins  de  moderation  j’aurois  eu  davantage,  car  le  Due  d’Aumont  me  r£petoit 
mille  flateries  sur  mon  nitrite,  elevoit  mes  talens  aux  nues,  et  me  disoit  tout  bonne- 
ment  que  j’^tois  trap  modeste.  Mais  avec  la  meilleure  volontii  du  monde  il  me  ca- 
choit  un  petit  secret  qu’il  m’a  revile  ensuite,  e’est  qu’on  paye  fort  mal  aux  menus,  ou 
ma  pension  est  assignee,  et  que  si  je  veux  jouir  des  bontes  du  roi,  il  faut  tacher  de  la 
placer  ailleurs,  ce  qui  n’est  pas  impossible.  Le  mois  de  Juillet  m’est  aussi  favorable 
que  celui  de  Juin.  On  m’a  remis  de  la  part  de  mon  meilleur  ami  un  bijou  que  je  ne 
troquerois  pas  contre  un  diamant  du  meme  poids.  J’ai  trouv6  la  medaille  bien  frap- 
pee,  le  revers  tres  juste.  On  n’a  pu  saisir  dans  un  portrait  de  cette  esp&ce,  la  grace  et 
l’esprit  de  votre  phisionomie,  encore  moins  la  finesse  et  l’expression  qui  l’anime ;  mais 
ce  sont  vos  traits,  j'aime  a  les  voir;  ce  present  m’est  bien  cher,  en  v^rite  ;  je  le  gar- 
derai  toute  ma  vie,  et  la  personne  a  qui  je  le  donnerai,  quand  je  ne  serai  plus,  pourra 
se  flater  d’avoir  6t6  bien  distinguee  dans  mon  estime. 

Quand  j’aurai  vu  M.  Carera  je  r^pondrai  a  l’article  de  votre  lettre  qui  concerne  la 
traduction  de  Sophie.  J’ai  recu  le  livre  et  n’ai  pu  le  lire  encore  :  preincrement  parce- 
que  mes  ouvrages  m’ennuient  a  revoir  quand  ils  sont  imprimes,  et  puis  pareeque  je  ne 
me  suis  pas  assez  bien  portee  depuis  un  peu  de  terns  pour  etre  capable  d’application. 
On  a  mis  cette  Sophie  au  dessus  de  tout  ce  que  j’ai  compost,  et  son  succes  a  fort  aug¬ 
ment  6  ma  petite  reputation.  Vous  me  flatez  extr£mement  en  me  disant  qu’elle  reus- 
sit  a  Londres.  Le  suffrage  d’une  nation  £clair£e,  raisonnable  et  difficile  me  paroit 
plus  desirable  que  celui  de  la  mienne  ou  tout  est  mode ;  ou  I  on  applaudit  un  jour  ce 
que  l’on  siffle  six  mois  apiCs.  Si  je  n’ai  point  6prouve  l'inconstance  des  jugemens  de 
mes  compatriotes,  e’est  qu’il  est  encore  du  bon  air  de  me  trouver  interessante  et  natu- 
relle.  Nous  sommes  actuellement  dans  une  fureur  de  sensibilite,  qui  passe  toute 
imagination  ;  nos  dames  veulent  pleurer,  crier,  etouffer  aux  spectacles.  Les  auteurs 
cherchent  chez  vous  les  pieces  les  plus  tragiques,  celles  que  vous  rejettez  ;  ils  en  font 
des  operas  comiques.  Je  ne  desespere  pas  de  voir  le  roi  Lear  en  ariette,  ou  Richard 
le  Bossu  en  ballet  pantomime.  Le  sentiment  est  la  folie  du  jour,  on  se  l  est  mis  si 
fort  en  tete  qu’il  en  reste  bien  peu  dans  le  coeur. 

A  ous  voulez  done  vous  retirer  ?  gouter  enfin  les  charmes  d’une  vie  libre  et  sans 
assujettissement  ?  ce  repos  ou  vous  aspirez  est  la  perspective  de  tous  ceux  qui  entre- 
prennent  de  grands  travaux.  Tandis  qu’ils  s’agitent,  se  tourmentent,  se  fatiguent, 
leurs  veux  sont  fixes  vers  la  tranquillite,  source  veritable  du  bonheur.  Mais  peu 
atteignent  le  but  envisage  par  tous.  LTne  barriere  difficile  a  franchir  les  en  separe, 
din  visibles  liens  les  retiennent ;  ceux  qui  les  rompent  avec  effort  trouvent  sou  vent  la 
langueur  et  1  ennui  dans  cette  paix  desiree,  que  le  peu  d’habitude  d’en  jouir  leur  fait 
paroitre  une  triste  inaction.  Vous  n  eprouverez  point  ce  sort.  Vos  connoissances, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


597 


votre  esprit,  l’activitd  naturelle  de  votre  ame  ne  vous  laisseront  jamais  sans  une 
amusante  occupation.  Vous  sacrifierez  les  applaudissemens  publics,  mais  vous  re- 
cevrez  toujours  un  tribut  de  louanges  m^ritees.  On  vous  regrettera,  chaque  acteur 
qui  osera  se  charger  de  vos  roles  rappellera  a  vos  compatriotes  une  perte  irreparable ; 
jamais  le  souvenir  de  l’inimitable  Garrick  ne  s’aneantira  dans  l’Europe.  Vos 
heureuses  quality,  votre  bon  coeur,  votre  g^nerosite  vous  ont  acquis  pour  amis  tous 
ceux  qui  vous  connoissent ;  vous  avez  une  charmante  compagne,  line  delicieuse  ha¬ 
bitation,  comment  l’ennui  pourroit-il  approcher  de  votre  retraite  ?  et  cette  plume 
delicate  et  brillante,  que  vous  prenez  toujours  in  a  hurry,  quand  vous  aurez  le  terns 
de  la  laisser  courir,  ne  sera-t-elle  pas  la  source  de  mille  plaisirs  pour  vous  et  pour  les 
autres  ?  J’espere  gagner  a  votre  retraite,  et  mon  propre  interet  m’engage  a  l'approuver. 
Les  habitans  de  Londres  m’  6trangleroien t  s’ils  m’entendoient  appuyer  votre  dessein  ; 
je  me  date  qu’on  n’ouvre  pas  les  lettres  ;  sans  cette  confiance  je  ne  me  croirois  pas  en 
surety. 

Recevez  mes  tendres  remerciemens  pour  la  charmante  m^daille,  pour  vos  ex¬ 
pressions  affectueuses,  auxquelles  je  suis  toujours  plus  sensible,  pour  vos  soins  amicals 
et  g^nereux.  Je  m’etendrai  davantage  sur  ce  sujet  quand  mes  idees  seront  moins 
confuses. 

Je  vais  envoyer  ma  lettre  a  celui  qui  m’a  remis  votre  present ;  je  voudrois  bien 
qu’il  ne  partit  pas  avant  que  le  poeme  de  Monsieur  Helvetius  parut.  J’en  ai  retenu 
le  premier  exemplaire  debite,  je  voudrois  l’avoir  avant  le  depart  du  jeune  Anglois 
alin  qu’il  vous  le  portat. 

Madame  Garrick  est  bien  bonne  de  se  souvenir  encore  de  nous  :  nous  ne  l’oublierons 
jamais  assurement.  Si  les  livres  Francoises  pouvoient  se  changer  en  livres  sterling 
nous  irions  lui  faire  une  visite.  Mais  dans  ma  fortune  born^e  on  ne  forme  que  de 
vains  souliaits.  Adieu,  mon  aimable,  mon  bon,  mon  tendre  ami.  Ma  lettre  est  bien 
longue,  n’est-ce  pas  :  elle  le  seroit  bien  plus  si  je  disois  tout  ce  que  je  pense  de  vous. 
Ma  compagne  vous  embrasse,  vous  et  votre  cliere  moiti£,  et  moi  je  suis  avec  tous  les 
sentimens  que  vous  me  connoissez  pour  tous  deux,  votre  tr£s  vive  et  tr£s  sincere 
amie, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  M.  DE  BELLOY  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Rouen,  ce  2  Novembre,  1772. 

Je  comptais  recevoir  votre  reponse  a  Paris,  ou  je  devais  arriver  le  12  du  mois 
pass6 :  mais  une  maladie  tr&s-grave  m’a  retenu  ici  depuis  trois  semaines,  et  m’y  re- 
tiendra  peut-etre  encore  autant.  Je  suis  cependant  hors  de  tout  danger;  la  saison  et 
ma  foiblesse  rendront  ma  convalescence  un  peu  longue.  Ce  ne  sera  gucres  que  vers 
la  fin  du  mois,  que  je  pourrai  aller  a  Versailles  pour  faire  partir  ma  Tragfxlie  par  la 


598 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


voie  de  Mr.  le  Comte  de  Guignes.  Je  ne  le  connais  pas  personnellement,  pour  ainsi 
dire,  puisque  je  ne  l’ai  vu  que  deux  fois  ;  mais  je  connais  beaucoup  ses  parents  et  ses 
amis  ;  et  je  compte  lui  faire  adresser  le  paquet  par  Mr.  l’Abb£  De  la  Ville,  le  premier 
commis  des  affaires  £trang&res,  et  mon  confrere  4  l'Acad&nie  Fran9aise. 

Quant  ce  que  vous  me  mandez  au  sujet  des  conditions  a  faire  entre  nous,  je  vois 
bien,  Monsieur,  que  je  n’ai  pas  eu  le  bonheur  de  vivre  assez  avec  vous  pour  que  mes 
sentiments  aient  pu  se  manifester  i\  vos  yeux.  Je  n’ai  jamais  imaging  qu’un  Auteur 
Frai^ais  mit  a  contribution  le  Theatre  de  Londres.  Je  ne  demande  rien  que  la 
gloire  de  plaire  a  votre  nation  ;  voiltl  le  seul  motif  qui  m’inspire:  toute  id6e  d’int^ret 
degraderait  la  noble  ambition  dont  je  suis  anime.  Les  trois  representations  doivent 
appartenir  de  droit  au  Traducteur  qui  embellira  mon  ouvrage,  et  4  qui  je  devrai 
l’avantage  de  l’avoir  fait  connaitre  a  vos  compatriotes :  heureux  si  je  ne  lui  coute  pas 
des  peines  inutiles,  et  si  le  succes  couronne  ses  efforts  et  mes  vceux  !  Encore  une 
fois,  je  ne  veux  absolument  rien  ;  et  vous  sentez  que  ce  n’est  pas  par  fierte,  mais  par 
justice. 

Vous  me  permettrez,  en  vous  envoyant  la  Trag^die,  d’y  joindre  sur  un  papier 
s6par6  quelques  petites  observations,  pour  mieux  fixer  le  sens  de  mes  id£es  et  m£me 
un  peu  la  manure  d’executer  les  jeux  du  Theatre  ;  bien  entendu  que  je  soumets  le 
tout  h  vos  lumi&res,  et  que  je  m’en  raporte  a  vous  entierement  pour  me  rectifier  si  je 
me  trompe. 

Je  presume  que  votre  attaque  de  goutte  n’aura  pas  dur6  aussi  longtemps  que  ma 
maladie  ;  et  peut-etre  puis-je  vous  faire  compliment  de  votre  guerison.  Faites  agreer, 
je  vous  prie,  mes  respects  a  Madame  Garrick.  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre  avec  l’estime  la 
plus  distinguee,  et  un  veritable  attachement, 

Monsieur,  votre  tr6s-humble  et  tr&s-obeissant  Serviteur, 

De  Belloy. 

“  A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  David  Garrick, 

Directeur  de  la  Comedie,  k  Londres.” 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 


17  Janvier  1773. 

J’attendois  pour  r^pondre  a  votre  amicale  et  cliarmante  lettre,  que  j’eusse  vu  ce 
personnage  singulier  dont  vous  m’annonciez  la  procliaine  arriv^e.  Sa  parure,  son  air 
moitie  breton,  moiti6  gaulois,  m’auroit  fourni  le  fond  d’un  r6cit  amusant.  Mais  Mr. 
Becket  voyage  souvent  en  id6e,  et  la  plupart  de  ses  lettres  se  terminent  par  je  compte 
avoir  Tlionneur  cl' alter  a  Paris  dans  le  cours  de  l  ete prochciin.  Un  de  ses  confreres  a  du 
lui  remettre  un  petit  paquet  de  livres.  Je  lui  ai  £crit  pour  le  prevenir  et  le  prier  de 
faire  donner  ces  livres  a  Mr.  Foote  :  la  commission  m’int^resse  vivement,  je  ne  s^ais  si 
Mr.  Becket  a  rempli  mes  intentions,  car  il  n’a  pas  daign6  me  r^pondre.  Je  devine  ce 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


599 


qui  l’engage  au  silence  :  je  lui  ai  demand^  de  l’argent,  et  suis  assez  fondle  a  croire 
qu’il  hait  fort  k  en  donner.  II  a  pris  l’habitude  de  me  payer  quand  il  lui  plait,  et  je 
ne  stpais  pourquoi :  tous  les  libraires  Strangers  soldent  leurs  comptes  a  la  fin  de  l’ann^e. 
Humblot  est  satisfait  sur  ses  envois.  Apr£s  quinze  mois  et  plus,  je  demande  a  Mr. 
Becket  450  livres  de  France  qu’il  me  doit,  il  est  sourd  et  muet.  Je  m’en  plains  a  vous. 
Son  proc6d6  n’est  ni  honnete,  ni  exact,  et  je  vous  prie  de  l’engager  a  s’acquitter  de 
cette  petite  somme,  dont  il  d6duira  les  frais  de  ce  ballot,  que  Mr.  Elmsley  a  du  lui 
remettre. 

J’ai  commence  par  vous  ennuier  de  mes  affaires,  cela  n’est  guere  poli :  traitons  un 
sujet  plus  agreable,  parlons  de  vous,  mon  aimable  et  cher  ami,  de  vos  occupations,  de 
vos  soins,  de  vos  projets ;  avez-vous  toujours  celui  de  pref6rer  le  repos  a  l'eclat  ?  le 
nombre  treize  est  regarde  par  les  catholiques  romains  comme  un  nombre  funeste,  de- 
viendra-t-il  fatal  a  la  foi  protestante?  L’Angleterre  perdra-t-elle  cette  ann6e,  par 
votre  retraite,  un  des  objets  de  sa  vanity  ?  n’aura-t-elle  plus  a  dire  aux  Strangers, 
avez-vous  vu  David  Garrick?  Une  fi£re  nation  met  depuis  long-tems  votre  art  su- 
perieur  au  rang  des  avantages  dont  elle  se  glorifie  :  et  les  Francois  disent,  avec  autant 
de  regret,  que  de  depit :  sans  la  revocation  de  I'edit  de  Nantes  ce  trcsor  n'eiit  jamais  en- 
richi  la  Grande  Bretagne.  Ne  pouvant  nous  vanter  de  vous  avoir,  nous  nous  vantons 
au  moins  de  votre  origine  Fran^oise. 

J’ai  du  vous  paroitre  singulifere  en  ne  m’exprimant  jamais  ouvertement  sur  l’ex- 
treme  bont6  de  coeur  qui  vous  a  port6  a  faire  traduire  Sophie  de  Valliere,  et  a  m’en 
destiner  le  profit.  Mon  silence  etoit  peu  naturel  sur  cet  objet,  mais  je  craignois  de 
vous  chagriner  en  le  rompant.  Car  avec  tant  de  noblesse,  un  d&sir  si  passionn6 
d’obliger,  on  sent  de  la  peine,  on  en  sent  beaucoup  d’etre  travel's 6,  et  la  contradiction 
sur  ce  point  est  tr£s  r6voltante.  Avant  que  la  traduction  parut  a  Londres,  un  de  mes 
amis,  ignorant  vos  desseins,  m’ecrivit  que  les  auteurs  d’un  journal  se  preparoient  a 
assommer  Mr.  Mackinnon,  a  dire  un  mal  horrible  de  la  version,  a  relever  l’ouvrage  Fran¬ 
cois  aux  depens  du  traducteur.  Mon  ami  ajoutoit,  que  le  livre  Anglois  tomberoit 
tout  4  plat,  ce  journal  ayant  une  grande  influence  sur  l’esprit  des  bourgeois  de  Lon¬ 
dres  et  faisant  loi  dans  la  province.  Comme  mon  corr^spondant  partoit  pour  l’Ecosse, 
il  ne  put  m’instruire  davantage,  mais  Mr.  Becket  en  se  plaignant  de  la  vente  me  con- 
firma  dans  l’idee  que  la  pauvre  traduction  6toit  damn^e  a  tout  jamais.  Il  faut  se  con¬ 
soler  d’un  mal  ou  l’on  ne  peut  remedier.  Ma  reconnoissance  a  votre  6gard  n’en  est 
ni  moins  vive,  ni  moins  juste.  Nous  regardons  en  France  la  volonte  comme  le  fait , 
Ainsi,  mon  tendre,  mon  g£n6reux  ami,  mettez  vous  l’esprit  en  repos  sur  ce  desapoint- 
ment :  est-ce  par  l’6v6nement  qu’une  personne  sensible  et  raisonnable  apprecie  l’inten. 
tion  connue  d’un  ami  ?  le  manque  de  succ&s  ne  peut  en  diminuer  le  prix  qu’aux  yeux 
des  ingrats.  Je  vous  remercie  done  et  de  toute  mon  ame.  J’ai  fait  part  a  ma  society 
de  cette  preuve  decidee  de  votre  bon  coeur,  de  votre  ami  tie ;  vous  n’en  avez  pas 
perdu  le  merite.  J’aurois  6t6  bien  fach^e  de  vous  en  ravir  l’honneur.  J’en  con- 
serverai  le  souvenir  touchant  le  reste  de  ma  vie,  et  sentirai  toujours  du  plaisir  a  me  la 
rappeler. 


600 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


Encore  un  mot  de  Mr.  Rocket.  Voudrez-vous  bien  vous  clmrger  do  S9avoir  s’il  a 
rec  u  moil  petit  envoi  ?  je  le  priois  d’en  payer  les  frais  sur  ce  qu’il  me  doit,  d’adresser 
le  paquet  Mr.  Robert,  et  de  le  faire  porter  cliez  Mr.  Foote,  Durham-Yard. 
Comme  j’ai  trouv6  Mr.  Liston  fort  prompt  a  remplir  mes  commissions,  je  serois  mor- 
tilice  de  paroitre  manquer  d’exactitude  h  son  6gard.  J'abuse  de  vos  booths,  de  votre 
loisir ;  je  vous  tourmente  li’est-ce  ])as  ?  je  finis.  Comment  se  porte  votre  aimable 
compagne?  a-t-elle  oublie  la  France?  ne  vous  y  reverra-t-on  jamais  ?  vous  y  avez  tous 
deux  bien  dcs  admirateurs,  que  faites-vous  a  Londres  du  Comte  de  Lauragais  ?  On 
n’en  parle  plus  ici.  Est-il  mort,  ou  devenu  raisonnable?  Adieu,  mon  tr&s  cher  et 
tr6s  veritable  ami.  Je  vous  souhaite  du  plaisir  et  de  la  santd.  Ma  compagne  vous 
embrasse,  et  prie  Madame  Garrick  de  se  souvenir  combien  elle  l’aime.  Je  suis  avec 
tons  les  sentimens  de  l’estime,  de  l’amiti6,  et  de  la  plus  sincere  reconnoissance,  votre 
plus  tendre  amie, 

Riccoboni. 


DE  M.  DE  LA  PLACE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Bruxelles,  le  24  Janvier,  1773. 

Votre  lettre,  mon  clier  et  bon  ami,  m’a  combl6  de  plaisir,  car  quelque  abomina- 
blement  paresseux  que  je  sois,  je  vous  jure  et  proteste  que  j’ai  toujours  conserve 
ch^rement  votre  souvenir  et  celui  de  la  digne  et  charmante  Madame  Garrick.  Je 
vous  l’aurois  meme  prouv6  a  tous  les  deux,  en  allant  passer  l’hyver  a  Londres  et 
aupr&s  de  vous,  si  la  goutte  ne  m’eut  rendu  trop  poltron,  pour  hazarder  cette  grande 
aventure,  et  si  j’eusse  pu  remettre  l’impression  que  je  voulois  faire  ici  de  quelques-uns 
de  mes  ouvrages.  JMais  si  je  suis  libre  et  sans  goutte  au  printems  prochain,  soyez 
sur,  mon  clier  et  c61ebre  ami,  que  vous  me  verrez  arriver  au  moment  ou  vous  y 
compterez  le  moins,  pour  vous  embrasser  avec  tous  les  bras  de  l’amitie  la  plus  sincere, 
et  vous  demander  a  diner,  avec  la  permission  de  certaine  dame  quepersonne  n’estime, 
n’aime  et  n’honore  plus  que  moi. 

Recevez  tous  mes  complimens  sur  vos  succ&s  nouveaux,  et  surtout  sur  celui  de  la 
tr&s  hazardeuse  entreprise  que  vous  a$rez  tent^e  dans  la  refonte  dela  Tragedie  d’Ham- 
let.  J’aurois,  d’honneur,  fr6mi  pour  vous  (car  je  connois  la  populace  Angloise !)  de 
vous  voir  assez  tem6raire  pour  la  priver  de  la  scene  des  Fossoijeuj's ,  qui  de  tous  terns 
a  fait  ses  delices.  Cela  me  prouve,  mon  ami,  non  seulement  combien  vos  tr£s  rares 
talens  vous  ont  acquis  d’empire  sur  la  nation  comme  acteur,  mais  encore  la  parfaite 
estime  qu’elle  a  con^ue  pour  vos  lumieres  et  votre  gout  en  qualite  d’auteur :  deux 
litres  qui,  je  crois,  n’ont  jamais  £te  r6unis  que  sur  deux  tetes,  sur  celle  de  notre 
Molifcre  et  sur  la  votre.  II  s’en  falloit  pourtant  de  beaucoup,  si  Ton  en  croit  la  tra¬ 
dition  (et  j’aime  k  la  croire)  qu’il  fut  aussi  gen^ralement  renomm(  que  vous  dans  la 
premiere  quality.  Jouissez  done  brave  et  clier  JEsopus ,  jouissez  done  de  votre 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


601 


gloire.  Vivez  pom*  vous  maintenant,  pour  votre  aimable  moiti6,  pour  vos  amis,  pour 
gouter  encore  le  plaisir  de  vous  voir  regrette,  et  d’etre  sur  par  la  revision  et  l’im- 
pression  de  vos  ouvrages,  d’etre  encore  utile  au  Theatre  National  et  autres :  car  les 
bonnes  choses  sont  estimees  et  accueillies  partout.  Songez  meme,  mon  ami,  qu’il  y 
a  plus  de  six  ans  que  vous  aviez  projet6  l’edition  de  ces  memes  ouvrages,  que  je 
les  attends  avec  impatience,  et  que  je  ne  suis  pas  le  seul  dont  vous  ayez  tromp6 
l’espoir. 

Quant-a-moi,  qui  apres  avoir  envoy 6  Le  Mercure  au  diable,  avec  5000  livres  de 
pension  bien  assume,  en  attendant  six ;  qui  meme  ai  vendu  mon  cabinet  de  livres  et 
mes  tableaux,  pour  ne  plus  rien  devoir,  et  vivre  desormais  pour  moi  ;  qui  d’ailleurs, 
dans  notre  derni&re  revolution  ai  perdu  presque  tous  mes  anciens  amis,  et  que  la  goutte 
crucifioit  sans  relache  a  Paris  :  j’ai  pris  le  parti  de  chercher  un  air  plus  salubre,  et  le 
trouve  a  peu  pr&s  ici.  J’y  vais  meme  encore  faire  imprimer  trois  volumes  de  Melanges, 
que  je  me  suis  occup6  a  revoir  (c’est  toujours  un  amusement  !)  et  je  compte  avant  5 
a  6  mois,  vous  les  envoyer,  ou  peut-etre  vous  les  porter  moi-meme. 

J’ai  fait  une  Notice  assez  detaill^e  de  votre  double  succ£s,  relativement  a  Hamlet , 
pour  l’auteur  de  VObservateur  Francois  a  Loud  res,  qui  est  de  mes  amis,  dont 
l’ouvrage  Periodique  est  bien  fait  et  r&issit  beaucoup  depuis  trois  ans.  Fdle  est 
partie  hier,  et  sera  surement  recueillie  et  imprimee  dans  tous  les  autres  journaux, 
c-omme  chose  vraiment  interessante  et  digne  de  faire  Epoque. 

Le  porteur  de  cette  lettre  est  un  Libraire  Francis  etabli  a  Londres,  qui  a  de 
l’intelligence,  de  la  probity,  et  de  l’activit6.  Je  vous  le  recommande,  et  j’espere  que 
vous  n’en  serez  pas  facli6.  Donnez-lui,  je  vous  en  conjure,  votre  nouvel  Hamlet 
que  jebrule  de  voir;  et  si  vous  avez  encore  quelque  chose  de  vous  que  je  ne  connoisse 
pas  ;  faites  en,  de  grace,  un  petit  paquet  qu’il  me  fera  passer  ici,  ou  il  est  en  cor- 
r^spondance  avec  le  Libraire  qui  imprime  pour  moi.  Je  saurai  bien  qu’en  faire, 
mon  cher  ami,  soyez  en  sur, 

Vale,  et  tui  amantissimum  redama. 


De  La  Place. 

P.S. — En  me  relisant,  je  vois  combien  j’ai  bavarde.  Mais  c’est  mon  cceur  qui 
vous  6crit. 

Adressez  plutot  ce  que  vous  auriez  a  m’envoyer,  au  Consul  de  la  nation  Angloise 
a  Ostende,  avec  un  mot  de  lettre  pour  qu’il  le  fasse  tenir  h  M.  Gamier,  Consul 
Francois  qui  est  ici,  pour  me  le  remettre. 


VOL.  II 


4  ii 


602 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Mercredi  3  Fevrier,  1773. 

De  ma  vie  je  ne  vous  prierai  (le  gronder  personne,  pas  m6me  de  faire  la  mine  k 
mon  plus  grand  ennemi.  Poor  Mr.  Becket,  d6soE  de  votre  froide  reception,  du  ton 
dont  vous  lui  avez  lu  ma  lettre  et  de  vos  reproches,  inherit  avec  un  chagrin  si  amer, 
mi  d£sespoir  si  effrayant,  qu’en  v£rit6  je  meurs  de  peur  d’apprendre  qu’apres  de  si 
lamen  tables  expressions  il  ne  se  soit  pr£cipit6  in  Rosamond  pond,  ou  jete  la  t£te  la  pre¬ 
miere  dans  une  tonne  d’encre.  II  me  conjure  en  termes  fort  pressans,  de  vous  £crire 
immediately,  et  de  lui  rendre  votre  bienveillance  en  vous  assurant  que  j’ai  re9u  de  sa 
part  vingt  livres  sterling.  Cela  est  vrai.  Je  les  ai  recues.  La  lettre  de  Mr.  Becket, 
dat£e  du  15  Janvier,  est  arriv^e  a  Paris  le  27,  et  Mr.  Panchaud  m’a  tr&s  poliment  pay£e 
d£s  le  lendemain.  xVinsi,  mon  tr&s  vif  et  tres  aimable  ami,  ne  privez  plus  Mr. 
Becket  de  la  faveur  precieuse  de  vous  voir  lui  sourire,  il  ne  peut  supporter  un 
frown  sur  le  front  aimable  de  Mr.  Garrick,  surtout  k  l’instant  oil  il  se  prepare  k 
l’admirer  dans  le  role  de  Banger ;  si  vous  eussiez  6te  habill6  pour  repr^senter  Bichard 
Trois,  il  en  eut  moins  frappe  :  il  eut  jet6  la  moitie  de  votre  mauvaise  humeur  sur 
le  terrible  personnage.  Tout  au  milieu  de  ses  plaintes  Mr.  Becket  me  fait  une  pro¬ 
position  qui  a  pens6  elever  une  querelle  entre  ma  compagne  et  moi  sur  notre  habilete; 
nous  avons  £te  une  heure  a  decider  qui  de  nous  deux  s^avoit  lire.  Elle  pr^tendoit 
que  c’6toit  elle,  moi  je  la  renvoyois  it  son  a  b  c.  La  proposition  de  Mr.  Becket  est 
de  se  charger  de  l’edition  Angloise  de  Sophie,  en  me  donnant  vingt  louis-d’or  pour 
les  droits  que  je  puis  avoir  dessus.  Vous  allez  me  demander,  d’oti  naissoit  la  dis¬ 
pute  ?  c’est  qu’en  prenant  un  t  pour  une  s,  ma  compagne  faisoit  seventy,  de  twenty. 
Si  l’ecrivain  avoit  pu  1’ entendre  ilauroit  cri6  au  meurtre,  a  l’assassin,  seseroit  cru  ruin£. 
Cette  folie  nous  a  fort  amus^es.  Assurement  je  prendrai  tout  ce  qu’il  plaira  a  Mr. 
Becket  de  m’envoyer,  pourvu  que  vous  trouviez  l’affaire  convenable  et  que  vous  y 
donniez  votre  approbation.  En  mature  d'interet  on  traite  ais6ment  avec  moi,  et  dans 
cette  occasion  j’aurois  bien  mauvaise  grace  de  disputer.  Ma  compagne,  un  peu  arabe, 
insiste  pour  avoir  par  dessus  le  march  e  les  comedies  nouvelles  de  l'annee  passde  et  de 
cet  hyver  :  elle  laisse  cela  a  votre  bon  management. 

Mr.  Becket  s’est  un  peu  vengd  de  la  querelle  que  je  lui  ai  attir^e ;  il  me  dit,  Mr. 
Garrick  ne  peut  repondre  sitot  a  votre  lettre,  parceque  le  contenu  Va  vexe.  Eh !  bon 
Lieu,  vous  ai-je  rien  dit  qui  ait  pu  vous  chagriner  f  je  ne  me  le  pardonnerois  pas ;  je 
crois  vous  avoir  exprime  ma  reconnoissance  et  ma  tendre  amitie.  Ce  propos  de  Mr. 
Becket  me  paroit  une  petite  malice  de  sa  part.  Vous  devez  etre  bien  sur  de  mes 
sentimens,  et  je  vous  connois  trop  juste  pour  penser  que  vous  en  doutiez  jamais. 

Vous  a-t-on  deja  parle  du  prodige  de  la  comedie  Francoise.  Une  jeune  actrice, 
arriv6e  de  la  province,  oil  Ton  faisoit  peu  de  cas  de  son  merite,  est  venue  enlever  les 
suffrages  de  la  capitale.  Imitatrice  de  Clairon,  dont  elle  avoit  autrefois  re^u  des 
lemons,  instruite  a  son  retour  par  Brisart,  elle  a  debut6  avec  un  succ&s  si  fou,  qu’a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


603 


peine  elle  ouvroit  la  bouclie,  tournoit  la  tete,  on  remuoit  un  doigt  que  mille  voix 
s’61evoient  et  poussoient  des  cris  d'admiration.  On  applaudissoit  des  mains,  des  pieds, 
on  frappoit  par  tout,  sur  soi,  sur  ses  voisins :  jamais  l’entousiasme  ne  fut  port6  plus 
loin.  A  la  fin  de  la  trag^die  le  parterre  a  demand^  un  benefice  pour  la  nouvelle 
actrice,  et  l’a  demand^  avec  tant  de  bruit  et  d’ardeur  qu’on  a  6t6  oblig6  de  lui  r^pondre 
et  de  l’assurer  que  les  superieurs  seroient  inform^s  de  sa  requite  des  le  lendemain,  et 
satisferoient  ses  d6sirs  s'ils  le  jugeoient  a  propos.  Les  loges  sont  retenues  pour  tous 
les  jours  du  debut,  jusques  a  la  cloture  et  des  trois  heures  on  ne  trouve  plus  de  place 
au  theatre.  Les  gens  de  sang-froid  s'amusent  fort  de  cette  extravagance.  Ils  ne 
voyentrien  en  Mademoiselle  de  Raucour,  c’est  le  nom  de  cette  merveille,  qui  m6rite  ce 
concours  et  cette  affluence,  ils  disent  qu’elle  se  tient  mal,  que  ses  gestes  sont  horribles, 
qu’elle  en  fait  de  ridicules,  et  ressemble  quelquefois  a  une  marionnette ;  mais  que  sa 
voix  est  belle,  qu’elle  a  de  fame  et  promet  une  bonne  actrice,  si  la  tete  ne  lui  tourne 
pas  de  se  voir  deifiee  a  propos  de  rien.  La  cour  a  pris  la  m&me  passion  que  Paris. 
IMademoiselle  Raucour  a  rapport^  de  Versailles  le  premier  soir  200  louis,  et  autant  le 
second ;  le  troisi£me  Madame  du  Barri  lui  en  a  donn6  cent  autres  et  un  habit  de  4000 
livres.  Sa  garderobe  augmente  tous  les  jours,  bien  heureuse  la  dame  qui  peut  etre 
nomm£e  pour  avoir  contribu6  a  la  parer.  On  parle  actuellement  d'une  souscription 
destin^e  a  lui  acheter,  des  diamants.  Cette  fille  est  arriv6e  ici  presque  nue,  couverte 
seulement  de  sa  vertu,  aussi  pron^e  que  ses  charmes  et  ses  talens.  Son  p£re,  tres 
vertueux,  tr&sjaloux  de  l’honneur  de  sa  chaste  prog&nture,  montroit  a  tous  venans 
trois  pistolets  de  poche,  armes  pretes  a  tirer  contre  les  pauvres  amans.  Tous  les 
riches  financiers  entourent  Mademoiselle  de  Raucour,  on  l’entretient  de  terres,  de 
maisons,  de  contrats,  Tor  et  l’argent  sont  mis  en  masse  sous  ses  pieds.  On  dit  que  le 
bon  papa,  attendri  par  de  si  brillantes  offres,  a  d6ja  laiss6  sur  sa  table  un  de  ses  pis¬ 
tolets,  qu’un  autre  est  demont6,  et  qu’il  porte  le  troisieme  par  habitude,  mais  sans  y 
mettre  ni  poudre  ni  plomb.  L’auguste  Clairon,  qui  conservoit  toujours  l’espoir 
d’etre  rappel6e  par  ses  sujets  sur  un  trone  ou  personne  ne  soutenoit  dignement  le 
sceptre,  estconfondue  de  cet  6v6nement.  On  a  l'audace  de  dire,  der6p6ter  que  jamais 
actrice  n’approcha  de  la  debutante,  ne  peut  lui  etre  comparee  !  quelle  surprise  !  quelle 
douleur !  et  quelle  rage !  Comment  habiter  parmi  des  sauvages  assez  brutes,  assez 
ignorants,  assez  sots,  pour  prononcer  de  tels  blasphemes  ?  On  assure  qu’elle  va  par- 
tir,  aller  au  fond  de  l’Allemagne,  s’y  ensevelir,  v  cacher  sa  honte,  ses  regrets,  et 
deplorer  l’imb6cilite  de  sa  patrie. 

Si  vous  deviez  recevoir  une  aussi  longue  lettre  toutes  les  semaines  je  ne  s^ais  ou 
vous  iriez  pour  6viter  cette  persecution.  Adieu,  moil  tr£s  cher  et  tr£s  aimable  ami  ; 
nous  embrassons  vous  et  votre  charmante  compagne.  Qu'il  nous  seroit  doux  d’esp^rer 
que  ce  ne  sera  pas  toujours  en  idee  et  de  si  loin. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(504 


DE  M.  L’ABBE  MORELLET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Lundi  5  Avril  [1773.] 

Mon  cher  ami,  je  vous  tiris  a  la  hate  pour  avoir  une  r^ponse  positive  et  prompte 
au  sujet  ile  la  negotiation  que  j’ai  commencee  avec  le  Docteur  Hawkesworth.  Je 
vous  serai  infiniment  oblige  si  vous  voulez  bien  lui  ecrire  sur  le  champ  et  savoir 
pourquoi  il  ne  m’a  pas  encore  repondu  ?  et  pourquoi  la  publication  prochaine  de  son 
livre  etant  annoncee  dans  tons  lespapiers  publics,  il  ne  m'a  pas  encore  fait  parvenir  un 
de  ses  volumes  en  Anglois,  suppose  qu’il  soit  determine  a  me  prendre  pour  son  tra- 
ducteur.  Je  ne  conipois  point  du  tout  les  causes  de  ce  retardement  apres  les  offres 
qu  il  m’a  faites.  Seroit-ce  la  crainte  que  son  ouvrage  ne  parut  en  Francois  avant  de 
paroltre  en  Anglois.  Cela  ne  se  peut  pas,  1°  parceque  le  temps  de  le  traduire  et  de 
l’imprimer  lui  laissera  toujours  de  l’espace  pour  publier  le  sien  un  an  a  l’avance :  2° 
parceque  n’en  aiant  qu’un  volume,  on  ne  pourroit  jamais  le  publier  que  toute  son 
edition  n’eut  paru.  Ce  volume  d’avance  ne  servirait  entre  nos  mains  qu’a  nous  assurer 
la  propritie  de  la  traduction.  Je  vous  ai  marqiti  dans  ma  dernitie  que  je  m’asso- 
cierois  avec  Mr.  Suard,  notre  ami  commun,  l’homme  de  notre  pays  qui  entend  le 
mieux  l’Anglois  et  qui  tirit  le  mieux  notre  langue.  Cette  association  tioit  un  motif 
nouveau  pour  votre  ami,  et  je  vous  repete  que  ce  seroit  pour  lui  une  chose  agrtiible 
d’etre  traduit  avec  ce  soin  et  en  bon  Francois  dans  un  temps  ou  notre  langue  est 
encore ,  pour  une  grande  partie  de  l’Europe,  le  moyen  par  lequel  on  y  connoit  les 
ouvrages  Anglois.  Si  ces  considerations,  et  j’ose  ajouter  quelque  envie  de  m’obliger, 
ne  le  determinent  pas,  je  n’ai  plus  rien  a  dire.  Ayez  seulement  la  complaisance  de  me 
faire  savoir  promptement  sa  reponse.  afin  que  l’attente  de  ce  travail  ne  m’empeche 
plus  ni  Mr.  Suard  de  nous  livrer  a  d’autres  occupations. 

Votre  lettre  est  en  effet  a  Bruxelles,  car  je  n’en  ai  pas  entendu  parler.  Je  la 
regrette  quoique  vous  m’en  disiez,  et  en  adoptant  la  maxime  de  mon  ami  et  mon 
modele,  le  Dr.  Swift,  je  ne  la  crois  pas  applicable  a  ce  que  vous  m’tirivez.  Notre  ami 
Mr.  Burke  nous  a  quittes  trop-tot.  Nous  lui  aurions  peut-etre  fait  adopter  des 
maximes  de  tolerance  un  peu  plus  etendues  que  celles  qu’il  tiablit  a  la  chambre  des 
communes.  Dites-lui  de  ma  part  que  la  tolerance  doit  tire  ou  nulle  ou  universelle, 
qu’elle  doit  s’tiendre  meme  aux  sceptiques  et  meme  aux  atlties,  que  ceux  qui  lui 
donnent  toute  cette  extension  ne  sont  pas  pour  cela  atlties  eux-memes,  que  l’athtisme 
est  une  doctrine  trop  mtiaphisique,  trop  contraire,  d’ailleurs,  aux  idees  que  donnent  aux 
hommes  necessairement  les  phenom^nes  de  la  nature  et  les  malheurs  de  la  vie,  pour 
s’tiablir  dans  la  socititi  Qu’il  n’y  a  done  rien  a  en  craindre  pourvu  qu’on  ait  de 
bonnes  loix,  qu'il  faut  toujours  avoir,  et  sans  lesquelles  toutes  les  religions  du  monde 
ne  peuvent  rien  pour  le  bonheur  de  l’homme  sur  la  terre  ;  que  la  voie  la  plus  courte 
et  la  plus  sure,  et  la  seule  qui  puisse  conduire  a  avoir  de  bonnes  loix,  e’est  la  liberte 
entitie  et  illimitti  de  dire  et  d’tirire  tout  ce  qu’on  veut,  meme  les  folies,  les  sottises, 
les  immorality,  les  impietti.  Comme,  en  matiere  de  gouvernement,  un  peuple  qui 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


605 


lie  jouira  pas  de  la  liberte  d’attaquer  la  liberty  elle  merae,  n’arrivera  jamais  a  sefaire 
des  principes  fixes  et  certains  de  bon  gouvernement  et  de  bonne  administration.  Je 
le  prie  ainsi  que  vous  de  penser  a  ce  petit  nombre  de  principes,  et  j’esp&re  qu’il  en 
sera  convaincu  ;  si  non,  je  ne  l’en  aimerai  pas  moins  ainsi  que  vous  ;  car  il  faut  bien  que 
je  mette  mes  propres  lemons  en  pratique  en  vous  tolerant.  Sacliez  cependant  que  ce 
ne  seroit  pas  une  intolerance  que  de  ne  pas  tolerer  les  intolerants.  Je  vois  d’ici  Mr. 
Fits-Morice  riant  et  puis  meditant  sur  les  propos  de  sonpape  Morellet.  Rapellez-moi 
bien  a  son  souvenir  et  a  son  amitie. 

Mademoiselle  Rancour  a  vraiment  re^u  de  la  nature  les  plus  grandes  dispositions 
qu’elle  ait  jamais  donn6es  a  un  grand  acteur.  Mais  elle  n’est  point  a  finished  actress 
et  ce  ne  sera  pas  vous  qui  croirez  de  pareils  miracles.  Elle  pourra  etre  excellente 
dans  quelques  ann6es,  mais  n’attendez  pas  qu’elle  en  soit  la  pour  venir  nous  voir. 
Ah  !  si  elle  vous  voyoit,  et  si  elle  causoit  avec  vous,  vous  l’avanceriez  de  quelques  an- 
n6es  en  quelques  heures.  Mille  compliments,  je  vous  prie,  a  Mademoiselle  Heinel. 
J’embrasse  tr&s  respectueusement  Madame  Garrick.  Je  suis  bien  facli6  de  ce  que 
vous  me  dites,  que  vous  avez  eu  encore  quelque  tracasserie  de  votre  goutte  ou  de 
votre  gravelle,  car  on  dit  que  ces  deux  dames  sont  soeurs.  Je  suis  charme  de  votre 
tentative  sur  le  Roy  Lear :  sans  doute  vous  y  avez  fait  aussi  quelques  alterations. 
Je  voudrois,  s’il  est  possible,  avoir  Hamlet  et  celle-la  dans  l’etat  oil  vous  les  avez 
joules,  parceque  je  verrois  ce  qui  cesse  d’etre  en  1773  dans  le  gout  Anglois.  Je  vous 
embrasse  de  tout  mon  cceur. 

L’Abbe  Morellet. 


DE  M.  L’ABBE  MORELLET  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MON  TRES  CHER  AMI,  Le  14  Janvier. 

Je  ne  r^ponds  encore  que  pour  mon  compte  a  1’aimable  lettre  que  je  viens  de 
recevoir  de  vous,  parceque  je  ne  l'ai  que  d’liier  au  soir,  et  que  je  n’ai  pas  pu  la  com- 
muniquer  h  nos  amis  communs,  ainsi  que  je  me  propose  de  le  faire,  et  que  d  un  autre 
cote  je  n’ai  pas  voulu  perdre  une  occasion  qui  s’offroit  a  moi  de  vous  repondre  sur  le 
champ.  Je  ferai  tous  vos  complimens  et  toutes  vos  amities  aux  gens  dont  vous  avez 
conserve  un  souvenir  qui  leur  est  bien  agitable,  et  qui  de  leur  cote  ne  vous  oublient 
pas.  Je  leur  lirai  votre  lettre.  II  y  en  a,  n’en  doutez  pas,  a  qui  je  ferai  bien  plaisir 
en  leur  apprenant  que  vous  avez  os6  supprimer  les  fossoyeurs  de  Shakespear,  et  sur- 
tout  que  vous  les  avez  supprimes  sans  avoir  the  benches  thrown  at  your  head.  Nous 
mettons  icy  tous,  tant  que  nous  sommes,  autant  d’int6r6t  a.  vos  succ^s  et  a  votre  gloire 
que  si  nous  avions  le  bonheur  de  vous  voir  sur  le  trone  ou  vous  r6gnez  avec  tant 
d’eclat  et  de  partager  le  plaisir  que  vous  procurez  a  vos  concitoyens.  Votre  jugement 
des  petits  morceaux  que  je  vous  ai  envoyes  est  excellent  et  parfaitement  bien  motive. 
Mr.  de  la  Harpe  en  sera  surement  infiniment  flatt£,  et  quand  ce  ne  seroit  que  par  re- 
connoissance  pour  le  chantre,  l’&nule  et  le  ressusciteur  de  Shakespear,  il  adoucira  un 


COG 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


peu  la  s£v£rit6  de  son  jugement,  et  n’en  sera  que  plus  juste  envers  votre  lieros.  Au 
reste,  vous  pouvez  lui  pardonner  plus  ais6ment,  si  vous  consid^rez  qu’il  n’a  pas  traite 
notre  Corneille  avec  ]>lus  d’indulgence.  Nous  croyons  qu’on  peut  critiquer  et  rire 
m6me  quelques  endroits  de  votre  admirable  dramatique  (comme  je  faisois  de  si  bon 
cceur  a  Shine  out  fair  Sun,  <$c.)  pourvu  qu’on  fr^misse  et  qu’on  soit  saisi  de  terreur  et 
de  pitie  a  tant  de  beaux  traits  d’une  si  belle  et  si  forte  nature.  Voila  notre  apologie, 
mon  clier  ami,  dans  les  critiques  que  nous  faisons  du  divin  Shakespear.  Mais  ce 
qu’il  y  auroit  de  plus  juste,  et  j’en  conviens  avec  vous,  ce  seroit  de  ne  juger  que  les 
dramatiques  de  sa  nation.  .Te  vous  suis  bien  sincdrement  oblig£  de  l’offre  que  vous 
me  faites  de  votre  Bacon  :  mais  je  vous  en  remercie  s’il  n’y  a  que  deux  volumes ; 
l’tilition  doit  £tre,  comme  vous  le  dites,  incomplete,  car  l’in-folio  anttiieur  a  la  belle 
Edition  en  5  volumes  in  4to  doit  en  contenir  trois,  et  c'est  la  seule  que  je  voulusse 
avoir,  parceque,  quoique  un  peu  moins  complete  que  l’in  4to,  elle  renferme  tout  ce  qu’il 
y  a  d’important.  J’avois  imaging  que  vous  pourriez  avoir  envie  d’acquerir  la  plus 
belle,  et  qu’en  ce  cas  vous  voudriez  bien  me  c^der  l’in-folio,  bien  entendu  que  je  vous 
aurais  rendu  sa  valeur,  mais  a  moins  qu’elle  ne  renferme  3  volumes,  elle  ne  me  seroit 
pas  utile,  et  puisqu’elle  est  rare,  il  vaut  beaucoup  mieux  qu’elle  orne  votre  cabinet  que 
le  mien. 

Je  vous  suis  bien  oblig6  d'avoir  suivi  la  negotiation  dont  je  vous  avois  charge 
aupres  de  l’excellent  Dr.  Hawkesworth.  Je  lui  r^ponds.  Faites  lui  passer  ma  lettre 
tout  de  suite.  Causez  avec  lui  encore  sur  la  chose  dont  il  s’agit  entre  nous,  et  terminez 
cette  petite  affaire  de  concert.  Il  me  sera  tres  agr6able  d’tiablir  entre  lui  et  moi  une 
liaison  de  plus  dont  vous  serez  le  nceud,  et  je  crois  vtiitablement  qu’en  recevant  de  lui 
un  bon  office,  en  cela  je  lui  rendrai  moi-meme  un  petit  service  dont  il  me  saura 
quelque  grti  Pour  vcus,  mon  ami,  vous  ne  voulez  pas  de  traducteur,  mais  si  jamais 
vous  en  aviez  besoin,  et  que  je  puisse  rendre  toutes  les  graces  de  vos  Merits,  ce  aui  est 
bien  plus  difficile  que  de  traduire  un  voyage,  vous  savez  bien  que  vous  pouvez 
compter  sur  vos  amis  ici. 

Je  remercie  bien  toute  l’aimable  society  de  son  souvenir.  Mr.  Fitzmorice  est 
charg6  de  mes  commissions  pour  Madame  Garrick,  et  ce  soin  ne  vous  regarde  pas. 
Je  vous  sais  bien  bon  grd  des  politesses  que  vous  montrez  a  l’aimable  Mademoiselle 
Heinel.  Parlez-lui  de  moi  la  premiere  fois  que  vous  la  verrez,  et  faites-lui  dire  que 
si  elle  a  besoin  de  quelque  chose,  et  en  particulier  de  souliers,  je  pourrailui  en  envoyer 
par  une  occasion  que  j’aurai  dans  10  ou  12  jours,  pourvu  qu’elleait  une  permission  de 
les  faire  arriver  sans  qu’ils  soient  saisis  a  la  douane.  Je  vous  embrasse  de  tout  mon 
cceur,  et  vous  savez  bien  que  je  suis,  comme  vous  autres  Messrs,  les  Anglois,  tres  peu 
presse  de  dire  aux  gens  que  je  les  aime,  a  moins  que  je  ne  les  aime  veritablement. 

V.  T.  H.  S. 

L’Abbe  Morellet. 

Vous  pouvez  adresser  vos  lettres  avec  deux  enveloppes,  l’exttiieure  a  Monsieur 
Trudaine,  Intendant  des  Finances  a  Paris :  l’interieure  pour  le  Diet,  de  Commerce,  et 
point  mon  nom. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


607 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

18  May  1774. 

Awake,  my  Garrick!  r6veillez-vous  au  nom  de  Shakespear,  et  souvenez-vous 
enfin  des  amis  que  vous  avez  en  France  :  oui,  c’est  au  saint  nom  de  Shakespear 
que  je  viens  r^clamer  l’amitie  que  vous  m’avez  temoign^e  autrefois,  et  dont  le  sou¬ 
venir  m’est  toujours  bien  pr6cieux.  Au  fait :  une  belle  dame  de  ce  pais  cy,  amie  de 
plusieurs  de  vos  amis,  pleine  de  graces  et  de  talens,  et  tr&s  instruite  dans  votre 
langue,  s’est  livree  totalement  depuis  deux  ans  a  l’etude  de  Shakespear,  et  connoissant 
toute  la  difficult^  qu’eprouve  non  seulement  un  Fran9ois,  mais  meme  un  Anglois 
lorsqu’il  veut  entendre  parfaitement  cet  auteur,  elle  est  resolue  a  defricher  elle-meme 
le  terrein  oil  elle  vouloit  recueillir  de  riches  moissons.  Elle  a  done  fait  une  etude 
particuli^re  de  votre  sublime  auteur,  travaillant  d’elle-meme  et  consultant  les  Anglois 
les  plus  lettres  qu’elle  a  pu  trouver.  A  mesure  qu’elle  trouvoit  quelqu’explication 
satisfaisante,  elle  l’ecrivoit  en  marge,  et  elle  a  deja  deux  volumes  ainsi  commentes  et 
remplis  de  notes  qu’elle  a  faites.  Mais  dans  ces  deux  volumes,  il  s’est  trouv6  des 
passages  que  personne  n’a  pu  lui  expliquer,  pas  meme  Mylord  Stormont  et  Mr.  Maty, 
tous  deux  grands  admirateurs  de  Shakespear;  or  le  cahier  cy -joint  renferme  ces  pas¬ 
sages  inexpliqu^s,  mais  non  pas  inexplicables,  et  comme  vous  etes  l’homme  des  trois 
royaumes  qui  ait  le  plus  illustrc  Shakespear,  dans  toutes  les  acceptions  du  mot,  elle 
m’a  prie  de  vous  demander  la  solution  des  problemes  litteraires  quejeprends  laliberte 
de  vous  offrir.  Si  vous  voyez  Mylord  Palmerston,  il  vous  dira  qu'il  a  vu  cette  neophite 
de  Shakespear  joiier  sur  un  theatre  de  soci^te  une  comedie  Angloise  qu’elle  avoit  tra- 
duite  elle-meme  :  il  pourroit  m6me  vous  montrer  de  tr£s  jobs  vers  Anglois  qu’il  a 
faits  pour  elle  a  cette  occasion.  La  piece  qu’elle  a  traduite  est  le  Great  Indian, 
[  West  Indian,']  et  pour  tout  vous  dire,  son  nom  est  Madame  la  Marquise  de  Gleon. 
S’il  en  falloit  davantage  pour  vous  decider  a  nous  accorder  notre  demande,  je  vous 
dirois  qu’elle  a  joue  avec  grand  succ&s  le  role  de  Julliette,  dans  une  imitation  de 
Romeo  et  Julliette  que  j’ai  fait  representer  plusieurs  fois  sur  le  meme  theatre,  car  je 
suis  votre  confrere  comme  auteur,  si  je  ne  le  suis  pas  comme  acteur.  J’ai  os£  com¬ 
piler  quelques  comedies  qui  ont  et6  revues  favorablement,  mais  je  n’y  ai  pas  joue  de 
role,  pareeque  je  suis  very  awkwart  upon  the  stage.  Enfin  pour  conclusion,  vous  etes 
somm6  au  nom  de  Shakespear,  des  graces,  de  la  beaute,  et  de  la  galanterie  qu’on  vous 
a  toujours  connue,  de  nous  renvoyer  sans  delai  le  cahier  cy -joint  avec  des  explications 
de  chaque  passage  Merits  d’une  belle  ecriture  comme,  par  exemple,  la  mienne,  entend^z 
vous  bien  ? 

Maintenant  parlons  d’un  objet  bien  interessant,  et  qui  est  toujours  present  &  ma 
pensee,  c’est  de  Madame  Garrick  dont  tous  nos  Francois  reviennent  enthousiasmes, 
ce  qui  me  donne  tantot  de  la  satisfaction,  tantot  de  la  jalousie,  mais  ce  dernier  senti¬ 
ment  est  temp6r6  par  les  marques  de  souvenir  qu’elle  veut  bien  me  donner :  on  m’as- 
sure  qu’elle  daigne  quelquefois  penser  a.  moi  au  bord  de  la  Tamise,  et  sous  ce  saide 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


008 

vleureur  qui  ne  pleure  pas  cependant  autant  que  je  le  fais  lorsque  je  me  rappelle  des 
momens  d^licieux  quej’ai  passes  k  Hampton,  dans  Southampton-street,  et  surtout  a 
Drury -lane:  je  les  reverrai  ces  lieux  que  mon  ami  Garrick  rend  si  c<ff6bres  et  si 
cli^rs.  Je  les  reverrai  surement,  mais  quand  ?  je  l'ignore  encore :  cette  ann£e-cy  je 
me  repose  et  ne  sortirai  pas  de  mon  pays.  Savez-vous  que  j'ai  fait  une  longue  excur¬ 
sion  l’ann£e  passee,  et  quej’ai  eu  le  plaisir  de  retrouver  vos  vestiges  en  Italie?  C’est 
mi  bien  beau  voyage,  mais  en  v6rit6  je  n’ai  trouv6  dans  ce  pays-la  que  deux  personnes 
qui  m’ayent  inspire  un  veritable  attachement,  et  c’6st  le  Chevalier  Hamilton  et  sa 
femme.  Qu’elle  difference  des  Anglois  aux  Italiens ! — Vous  avez  bien  voulu,  mon 
clier  ami,  vous  int^resser  au  succ&s  de  mon  ouvrage  sur  la  F(dicit6  Publique.  Je  suis 
depuis  long-terns  en  corrcspon  dance  avec  le  traducteur :  il  s’appelle  Air.  Kent,  et 
habitoit  pr6c6demment  a  Brompton,  maintenant  pres  de  Canterbury.  II  me  mande 
que  la  traduction  est  prfcte  it  paroitre.  Je  vous  demande  votre  protection  pour  elle 
a  son  entree  dans  le  monde.  Adieu,  mon  ami,  voicy  une  lettre  ass&s  longue :  je  ne 
veux  pas  abuser  de  votre  patience  de  toutes  les  fa^'ons,  mais  je  ne  vous  fais  pas  grace 
des  explications  de  Shakespear.  Si  vous  ne  nous  les  envoyez  pas,  j  irai  la  lance  au 
poing,  sonner  du  cor  i\  la  porte  de  votre  chateau  de  Hampton,  et  vous  defier  au  com¬ 
bat. — Le  Baron  d’Holbach,  l’Abb6  Morellet  vous  embrassent. 

Suard. 


DE  M.  DUCIS  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Monsieur,  A  Paris  le  6  Juillet  1774. 

Je  profite  de  l’occasion  du  depart  de  Mr.  Suit  pour  vous  marquer  combien  je  suis 
vdritablement  sensible  aux  invitations  que  vous  m’avez  faites  d'aller  a  Londres,  et 
combien  je  suis  fache  de  n’avoir  pas  encore  fait  ce  voyage,  dont  le  plaisir  de  vous  ad¬ 
mirer  sera  le  principal  motif.  Je  porte  envie  a  Mr.  Suit.  C’est  un  homme  delettres 
distingu6,  qui  a  v6cu  long-terns  a  la  cour  de  Parme,  qui  a  parcouru  l’ltalie,  et  que  le 
desir  de  connaitre  votre  nation  conduit  actuellement  en  Angleterre.  II  est  infini- 
ment  sensible  au  plaisir  de  voir  un  homme  de  votre  reputation,  et  a  l’honneur  d’en 
obtenir  l’estime.  Je  vous  prie  done,  Monsieur,  de  vouloir  bien  le  distinguer  de  la 
foule  des  Francois  qui  sont  4  Londres,  et  lui  permettre  de  cultiver  votre  connois- 
sance  autant  qu’il  le  desire. 

Je  viens  de  terminer  une  nouvelle  trag6die.  C’est  Admete  et  Alceste,  sujet  tire 
de  notre  Euripide.  Je  suis  it  la  veille  de  la  faire  lire  a  la  comedie  Framboise.  Aussi- 
tot  qu’elle  aura  paru,  j’aurai  l’honneur  de  vous  en  envoyerun  exemplaire. 

Je  suis  maintenant  occup6  de  Macbeth.  Pourquoi  ne  puis-je  causer  avec  vous 
une  demie  heure,  et  vous  voir  dans  les  morceaux  terribles  de  cette  admirable  tra- 
gedie?  J’ai  affaire  a  une  nation  qui  demande  bien  des  m^nagemens  quand  on  veut 
la  conduire  par  les  routes  sanglantes  de  la  terreur.  Mon  ame  s’efforce  en  composant 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


609 


de  prendre  vos  vigoureuses  attitudes,  et  d’entrer  dans  la  profondeur  energique  de  votre 
g6nie.  Continuez-moi,  je  vous  prie,  les  sentimens  dont  vous  m’honorez,  et  soyez 
persuade  de  la  haute  estime  et  de  la  reconnoissance  avec  lesquelles  j’ai  Phonneur 
d'etre,  Monsieur, 

A"otre  tr&s-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Ducis. 


DE  M.  BEAUMARCHAIS  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Londres,  ce  23  Juillet  1774. 

Quelque  desir  que  j’eusse  de  vous  voir  avant  mon  depart,  mon  tr£s  aimable 
Monsieur  Garike,  et  de  presenter  mes  remercimens  et  mon  respectueux  hommage  a 
Madame  Garike,  mes  affaires  m’appellent  en  Hollande,  et  je  pars  demain  matin.  Je 
remets  done  cette  satisfaction  a  mon  prochain  voyage.  Les  avis  d’un  homme  aussi 
profondement  verse  dans  Part  du  theatre  n’ont  pu  manquer  a  faire  une  vive  impres¬ 
sion  sur  moi ;  et  les  sourires  fins  et  pleins  d’expression  de  Madame  Garike  m’ont 
assez  indique  sur  quoi  je  devais  compter  pour  la  reussite  de  mon  JSarbier  de  Seville , 
et  les  endroits  oil  je  devais  retoucher.  Votre  id6e  de  l’opium  a  l’eveille,  et  celle  de 
le  montrer  endormi  sur  la  sc£ne  a  et£  adoptee  sur  le  champ.  Cornrne  j’y  travaillais, 
une  lettre  de  France  m’a  appris  qu’il  y  avait  une  copie  de  ma  pi£ce  entre  les  mains 
d’une  Dame,  et  qu’on  en  faisait  des  lectures  dans  les  societ6s.  J’avais  la  tete  echau- 
fee :  j’ai  pris  sur  le  champ  la  resolution  de  mettre  la  piece  en  cinq  actes  ;  et  afin-que 
la  fraude  que  Pon  m’a  faite  en  France  sur  ce  manuscrit  ne  profite  pas  a  ceux  qui 
pretendent  faire  imprimer  la  pi£ce  en  mon  absence,  j’ai  6crit  sur  le  champ  a  Paris  que 
l’on  r^pandit,  que  j’avais  mis  la  pi£ce  en  5  actes,  et  que  c’^tait  ainsi  qu’on  la  jouerait  a 
la  com^die  Fran^oise  :  de  sorte-que  si  on  pousse  la  mal-honnetete  jusqu'a  la  faire  im¬ 
primer,  il  ne  s’en  vendra  pas,  pareeque  les  nouvelles  publiques  diront  que  ce  n’est 
qu’un  fragment  de  l’ouvrage  vol6  a  l'auteur. 

Je  vous  enverrai  bien  certainement  le  premier  exemplaire  qui  sortira  de  la  presse  : 
en  attendant  recevez  une  Edition  complette  de  mes  M6moires  comme  un  16ger 
t^moignage  de  l’amitie,  de  l’estime,  et  de  la  haute  consideration  avec  lesquelles  j’ai 
Phonneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Votre  tr&s-humble  et  tres-obeissant  serviteur, 

Beaumarchais. 

A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  David  Garike. 


4  I 


VOL.  II. 


G10 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


FROM  MR.  R.  E.  RASPE. 


Wednesday,  4th  October. 

According  to  our  yesterday’s  conversation,  I  send  you  the  copy  of  my  letter  to 
M.  do  Catt,  and  desire  you  the  favour  occasionally  to  introduce  me  to  the  great 
man's  acquaintance,  whose  admired  parts  and  virtues  are  the  best  and  natural  judges 
of  any  thing  relating  to  good  taste  and  public  utility. 

11.  E.  Raspe. 

Gotha,  Janv.  23,  1775. 

“  Encourage  par  les  ordres  que  Sa  Majesty  eut  la  grace  de  me  donner  a  mon  depart 
de  Potsdam,  je  vous  entretiens  aujourd’hui  d’une  nouveauty  littthaire  qui  me  semble 
faire  honneur  au  Genie  de  l’Allemagne.  C’est  un  nouveau  genre  de  Drame  ou  de 
Musique  dramatique.  J’en  ai  vu  ici  les  premieres  representations,  et  j’ai  cru  sentir 
non-seulement  tout  ce  que  le  Po6te  et  le  compositeur  voulaient  me  faire  sentir,  mais 
qui  plus  est,  que  l’art  est  a  la  veille  de  faire  un  nouveau  pas  vers  la  perfection.  Le 
gout  de  la  Princesse  Louise,  destin^e  pour  etre  marine  sous  pen  a  un  Prince  de  Meck- 
lenbourg- Schwerin,  lui  a  donn6  naissance,  et  il  se  peut  qu’elle  en  ait  pris  l'id^e  du 
Pigmalion  de  Jean  Jacques  Rousseau,  qui  en  fait  de  Musique  est  moins  h^terodoxe 
qu’en  toute  autre  chose.  C’est  sur  ses  ordres  que  Mr.  Brandes,  acteur  Allemand,  a 
donne  une  forme  dramatique  aux  malheurs  d’ Ariadne,  abandonn^e  a  Xaxos  ;  c’est  sui- 
ses  lumi&res  que  Mr.  Benda  a  employ^  heureusement  les  talens  h6reditaires  a  sa 
famille. 

“  Le  Drame  est  d’une  grande  simplicity.  Annonce  par  une  tres  belle  Symphonie,  le 
rideau  se  tire  et  vous  appercevez  Ariadne  dormante  dans  une  grotte  des  rochers  de 
Xaxos,  qui  sont  baign6s  par  la  mer.  La  Symphonie  finit  decrescende  pianissimo 
pour  ne  pas  eveiller  la  belle  dormeuse,  et  pour  vous  preparer  aux  sentimens  du 
gen^reux  et  fidelle  Th6sye,  qui  est  suppose  forc6  par  les  Grecs,  ou  par  un  Oracle 
suborn6,  de  l'abandonner.  II  la  voit  pour  la  derni^re  fois.  II  est  done  naturellement 
agity  par  sa  tendresse,  par  sa  reconnaissance,  par  l’honneur,  et  par  sa  mauvaise  con¬ 
science.  II  ne  voudrait  jamais  l’abandonner,  mais  un  signal  de  la  flotte,  que  vous 
entendez  dans  le  lointain,  l’appelle  aux  plus  cruels  des  devoirs  de  l’honneur.  II  la 
quitte,  et  vous  souffrez  avec  lui.  Ariadne,  d£s  ce  moment  l’objet  de  votre  compassion, 
parait  agitee  par  des  songes  affreux,  elle  s’e  veille  enfin.  Etonnee  de  ne  pas  trouver 
Thysee,  elle  s’amuse  pendant  quelque  terns  par  l’idye  que  la  beaute  du  jour  naissant 
aura  peut-etre  invite  son  hyros  a  la  chasse,  et  qu  il  reviendra  sous  peu  avec  les  depouilles 
de  quelque  Tigre  ou  de  quelque  Lion.  Mais  il  ne  revient  pas,  elle  commence  a 
craindre  pour  son  amant.  Elle  l’appelle,  et  dycouvrant  a  la  fin  que  la  flotte  a  fait 
voile,  elle  vous  perce  le  coeur  par  la  certitude  de  son  malheur.  Des  ce  moment  elle 
est  dydiiree  tour-k-tour  par  sa  tendresse  et  par  les  liorreurs,  auxquels  elle  est  aban- 
donnye  par  l’ingratitude  et  l’infidelite  de  son  clier  Thesye.  Souvenir  de  sa  beaute 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


611 


heroique,  de  son  heroisme  et  de  sa  tendresse — de  l’amour  mal  r6compens6  de  ses 
parens  qu’elle  avait  trahis — conscience  de  ses  torts — reproches  et  defense  des  doux 
pechers — imprecations  et  d^sespoir  se  succfedent  jusqu’au  moment  que  la  voix  d’une 
Oreade  invisible,  annoncee  par  quelques  coups  de  tonnerre,  lui  predit  la  grandeur 
future  de  Thes^e,  et  lui  ordonne  de  l’acheter  par  sa  mort,  pour  appaiser  Neptune 
enrage  contre  la  flotte  des  Grecs.  Yous  voyez  la  tempete  ;  et  Ariadne  se  soumettant 
aveugl^ment  aux  decrets  du  Sort,  en  se  precipitant  dans  les  dots  agites.  Yoila.  par 
oil  le  Drame  finit ;  et  par  ou  je  pourrais  commencer  de  le  critiquer.  Si  les  pontes 
ytaient  moins  maitres  de  leur  ytoffe,  et  s’il  n’y  avait  pas  moyen  de  r^compenser  la 
vertu  d’Ariadne  par  la  machination  des  Dieux,  qui  pourront  un  jour  quand  ils 
trouveront  a  propos  la  remettre  en  terre  ferine,  soit  dans  un  ballet  lie  a  la  piece,  ou 
dans  un  deuxi&me  acte  destiny  aux  amours  de  Bacchus. 

“  II  est  4crit  dans  une  prose  All  email  de  irregulierement  m^trique,  entre- coupee,  et 
telle  que  la  nature  la  fait  parler  aux  ames  sensibles  dans  les  grandes  passions.  II  n’y 
a  ni  rime  ni  aucune  de  ces  nombreuses  entraves  genantes,  que  les  critiques  modernes 
ont  pretendu  donner  au  genie.  Yous  sentez  bien  qu’il  n’y  pent  pas  etre  question  non 
plus  de  ces  malheureux  airs  a  l’ltalienne,  qui  ne  tiennent  au  feu  de  l’action  que  pour 
y  £tre  accoles  par  complaisance  pour  les  belles  voix.  II  y  a  au  contraire  la  plus  belle 
simplicity  du  stile  et  du  sentiment,  que  la  Muse  de  Gotha,  amie  de  la  verity,  s’est 
bien  gardee  d’offusquer  par  le  chant  oblige,  ou  d'affaiblir  par  la  secheresse  des  plins 
plans  des  rycitatifs  Italiens.  Elle  n’a  voulu  qu’une  simple  declamation  vraie  et 
pathetique.  Point  de  musique  que  dans  les  intervalles  de  repos,  de  meditation,  et 
d’epuisement,  que  la  force  des  passions  produit  naturellement.  Alais  c’est  la  qu'elle 
permit  au  gynie  de  Benda  de  se  deployer  ;  de  peindre  avec  discretion  l’objet  et  le  sen¬ 
timent  des  paroles  prycydentes — de  les  rappeler  avec  esprit  a  Tame  qui  en  est  occupye 
— de  les  graver  puissamment  dans  le  fond  du  coeur  bien  prepare  et  de  les  faire  sentir 
par  tous  les  prestiges  d’Orphee  jusques  dans  l’intyrieur  de  notre  etre  mysterieux  et 
harmonique.  Aussi  n’ai-je  entendu  de  ma  vie  aucun  opera,  et  j’oserais  presque  dire 
aucune  musique,  qui  m’eut  affecty  egalement ;  ce  qui  tient  ouvertement  a  la  nature 
du  drame  et  au  grand  myrite  du  compositeur.  Quant  au  compositeur  de  Gotha,  il 
a  connu  la  nature.  Sa  manure  n’est  pas  aux  depens  de  la  vyrite.  II  n’a  jamais 
laissy  Tacteur  et  l’auditoire  dans  l’embarras  de  la  Pantomime.  II  ne  lui  a  pas  fallu 
courir  en  tatonnant  par  les  dytours  des  variations  aprys  la  plus  juste  et  la  plus  belle 
expression.  Ad  Jinem  proper  at.  Sagement  il  a  S911  subordonner  et  coordoner  son  art 
a  celui  du  poete  et  de  Tacteur,  et  il  en  est  plus  triompliant. 

“  Quant  au  genre,  il  me  semble  tenir  de  bien  pres  a  la  declamation  des  anciens  ;  et 
eertainement  il  est,  bien  que  superieur  aux  opyras  Italiens,  susceptible  d’une  trys 
grande  perfection  et  mSme  d’une  tres  grande  variyte.  L’objet  de  la  musique  ytant 
constamment  bien  determine  par  Taction  et  la  declamation  de  Tacteur,  et  la  musique 
ne  se  faisant  entendre  qu’oii  elle  le  pent  avec  avantage,  1’efFet  qui  en  rysulte  n’est 
jamais  yquivoque.  Yoila  un  tr£s  grand  avantage.  Le  deuxieme  est  que  ces  sortes 
de  compositions  etant  entiyrement  indypendantes  des  paroles  et  des  syllabes  et  n’ex- 

4  1  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


612 


primant  que  les  choses,  les  idces  et  les  sentimens,  elles  se  peuvent  indistinctement 
adapter  aux  traductions  duns  les  langues  ytrangeres  avec  le  intime  effet  qu’a  l’original 
du  drame. 

“  Encore  n’exigent-elles  pas  des  lidrosou  des  Dieux  meliore  sui  parte  truncato.s,  qui 
coutent  si  cher  et  qui  font  si  peu  d’illusion.  Mais  pourquoi  vous  detailler  les  grands 
avantages  de  cette  nouvelle  espece  d’accompagnement  ?  Yous  les  sentez  aussi  bien 
que  inoi.  Vous  avez  et6  malheureux  dans  les  operas  Frantpais ;  vous  avez  bailie 
dans  les  operas  Italiens  et  vous  avez  lu  Algarotti.  Vous  s^aurez  done  bien  les  faire 
valoir  occasionnellement  aupr&s  du  ltoi,  qui  en  strait  plus  que  nous.  Encore  une  re- 
marque,  qui  tient  au  sujet.  Ariadne  parut  parfaitement  liabillee  a  la  Grecque,  sans 
corps,  sans  punier,  et  dans  la  grande  et  noble  simplicity  de  la  parure  et  de  la  frisure 
des  plus  elegantes  statues  de  l’antiquit^.  II  n’y  avait  pas  les  cent  mille  belles  baga¬ 
telles  hors  de  propos,  que  l’usage  des  theatres  a  sacr6  et  que  nos  seigneurs  les 
tailleurs  de  Paris  et  nos  souveraines  les  dames  Parisiennes,  de  concert  avec  quelque 
abby  antiquaire,  pourront  bien  un  jour  s’aviser  de  nommer  Grecques.  Madame 
Braudes,  qui  eut  ce  role,  n’en  parut  pas  moins  bien  faite.  Elle  s’acquitta  de  sa  partie 
avec  une  grande  verity,  faisant  beaucoup  d'honneur  a  l’ycole  de  Mr.  Erkhof,  qui  est 
notre  Garrick :  nous  lui  en  voulons  du  bien,  ytant  connne  toujours  et  connne  de  droit 
ami  du  talent,  et  “  Votre,  &c. 

“  R.  E.  Raspe.” 

A  M.  de  Catt,  Secretaire  des  Commandemens  du 
Roi  de  Prusse,  a  Potsdam. 


DE  M.  DE  LA  PLACE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Bruxelles,  le  15  Septembre,  1775. 

Je  n’ai  pu  refuser,  mon  cher  et  digne  ami,  a  Monsieur  Texier,  l’ami  de  tous 
nos  amis,  et  digne  d’en  trouver  partout,  le  plaisir  d’imaginer  qu’a  ma  recommandation 
il  jouiroit  plus  aisement  de  celui  de  voir  le  celebre  David  Garrick,  d’un  peu  plus 
prfes  que  les  autres.  Et  cette  idee  m’a  d’autant  plus  flatte,  qu’en  voyant  en  vous  tous 
les  etres  vivans  en  action,  vous  aimerez  probablement  en  lui  le  talent  qu’il  a  de  les 
rendre  aussi  vrais  qu’intyressans,  par  le  naturel  et  les  prestiges  d’une  rydtation  dont 
Paris  et  la  cour  ont  yte  aussi  surpris  qu’enchantes :  homme  aimable,  d’ailleurs,  bien 
ne,  avec  tout  ce  qui  s’en  suit ;  chez  qui  le  hazard  seul  a  fait  decouvrir  ce  talent  dont 
il  ne  s’ytoit  jamais  douty.  Ce  qui  a  fait  dire  a  notre  cliarmant  Chevalier  de  Boufflers, 

fl  Qu’uue  vertu  chez- lui  produisit  un  talent.” 

Monsieur  Texier  vous  dira,  mon  cher  et  digne  ami,  que  ma  vie  vraiment  philo- 
sopliique  a  Bruxelles,  a  retabli  ma  santy  et  mes  affaires,  au  point  que  je  compte  aller 
cet  hyver  passer  trois  mois  a  Paris,  avec  tous  mes  vieux  amis  et  ceux  de  mon  aimable 


DAVID  GARRICK.  (313 

et  digne  Roscius,  que  je  salue,  honore  et  embrasse  avec  tous  les  bras  de  l’estime  et 
de  Pamiti6,  que  lui  a  vouees  pour  la  vie. 

Son  tr&s-humble  et  tres-ob^issant  serviteur, 

De  La  Place. 

P.S.  Mille  graces  des  livres  dont  vous  m’avez  gratify  !  Et  autant  de  respec- 
tueuses  ob^issances  a  la  ch£re  et  charmante  moitie  de  mon  bon  ami. 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 


Paris,  le  28  Fevrier,  1776. 

Je  vous  remercie,  mon  cher  Roscius,  de  m'avoir  procure  la  connoissance  de  Mr. 
King ;  c’est  un  homme  fort  aimable  qui  a  beaucoup  d’esprit  et  de  savoir,  avec  des 
moeurs  douces  et  tres  sociales  :  les  pr&tres  de  cette  tournure-la  sont  fort  rares  partout. 
II  n’a  pas  eu  besoin  de  moi  pour  etre  re^u  et  bien  re^u  dans  nos  societes  ;  il  y  a  £te 
presente  comme  votre  ami ;  il  y  est  revenu  comme  digne  de  Petre.  Je  ne  lui  ai  pas 
ete  aussi  utile  que  j’aurois  voulu  l'etre ;  ma  femme  et  moi  nous  avons  £t£  malades  pen¬ 
dant  son  s6jour ;  Madame  Geoffrin  est  tomb^e  malade  aussi  le  jour  oil  je  devois  le 
mener  chez  elle.  Et  d’ailleurs,  le  Chevalier  de  Chastellux  s’est  empare  de  lui  avec 
son  activite  et  son  amabilite  ordinaire,  et  l’a  mieux  servi  que  je  n’aurois  pu  faire. 

J’ai  appris  avec  bien  du  plaisir  de  Mr.  King  que  votre  sant£  etoit  depuis  quelque 
terns  beaucoup  meilleure  qu’elle  n’avoit  6t£  les  annees  pr6c6dentes.  J’apprens  par  la 
renommee  que  vous  quittez  enfin  tout-a-fait  le  theatre  pour  jouir  en  paix  du  loisir 
et  de  Pamitie.  Je  m’en  r6jouis  pour  votre  bonheur  ;  mais  je  ne  peux  pas  penser  sans 
amertume  que  je  mourrai  sans  avoir  vu  mon  cher  Roscius  dans  toute  sa  gloire,  remu- 
ant  a  son  gr£  les  ames  d’un  peuple  entier,  et  remplissant  la  mienne  avec  les  autres  de 
terreur,  de  tendresse,  d’admiration  et  de  larmes  :  je  mourrai  sans  avoir  connu  tout 
l’empire  de  la  tragtklie  et  le  sublime  de  l’imitation  tragique !  cette  idee  m’afflige  plus 
que  vous  ne  pensez.  Pour  me  consoler,  venez  quand  vous  serez  libre,  faire  une  visite 
a  vos  amis  de  Paris.  Demandez  a  Mr.  King  si  votre  memoire  est  chdrie  parmi  nous. 

Je  vous  remercie,  mon  cher  ami,  des  soins  que  vous  avez  bien  voulu  prendre  pour 
les  affaires  de  Panckoucke.  Il  a  du  vous  6crire  lui-meme  et  vous  marquer  combien  il 
£toit  sensible  a  vos  bont6s. 

Vous  m’aviez  promis  solemnellement  de  faire  quelques  notes  an  manuscrit  de 
Diderot  que  je  vous  ai  laisse  en  1773.  Ces  notes  seroient  pour  moi  seules  si  vous 
l’exigiez,  et  j’en  aurois  besoin  pour  un  ouvrage  auquel  je  travaille.  Je  vous  sonnne  de 
votre  parole;  vous  voik\  libre;  vous  n’avez  plus  de  pr^texte,  et  je  serai  pour  vous  un 
chancier  impitoyable. 

Mais  auparavant  je  veux  etre  votre  debiteur.  Ayez  la  bont6  de  m’ecrire  en  qua- 
tre  mots: — 1".  Quelles  sont  les  representations  dont  on  donne  chez  vous  le  benefice  a 
Pauteur  d’une  pi^ce  nouvelle,  soit  en  5,  3,  2  ou  1  acte : — 2°.  Quand  est-ce  que  le 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


614 

droit  des  auteurs  cesse? — 3°.  Quand  est-ce  que  le  second  theatre  pent  jouer  une  pibce 
nouvelle  qui  a  6t 6  donn^e  tl  l’autre: — 4°.  Quels  inconv^niens  trouvez-vous  ti  vos 
arrangemcns  pour  le  salaire  des  pieces  no uvelles  : — 5°.  Quels  droits  les  auteurs  de  pieces 
de  theatre  ont-ils  d’ailleurs  pour  les  entries  au  theatre,  ou  autres,  &c.  Je  vous  de- 
niande  en  grace  de  me  r^pondre  sur  cliacun  de  ces  articles  le  plutot  que  vous  pourrez. 
Votre  r^ponse  pout  influer  sur  un  arrangement  qu’on  m^dite  ici  pour  les  internes  ob- 
jets  ;  mais  cela  est  secret. 

J’ai  une  autre  grtlce  &  vous  demander.  Je  suis  trds  presse  d’avoir  le  volume  de  Mr. 
Burney  sur  T Histoire  de  la  Musique ;  peut-6tre  en  ferai-je  faire  une  traduction  avec 
des  notes  de  mon  ami  l’Abb6  Arnaud,  un  des  hommes  de  l'Europe  qui  entend  le 
mieux  et  l’art  et  l’histoire  de  la  musique.  J’ai  £crit  au  bon  Mr.  Becket  de  m’envoyer 
l’ouvrage  de  Mr.  Burney  par  l’occasion  la  plus  prompte  qu’il  trouvera ;  je  vous  prie 
de  l’aider  a  trouver  un  voyageur  qui  veuille  se  charger  du  paquet,  et  si  vous  n’en  con- 
noissez  point  ni  l’un  ni  l’autre,  je  vous  prie  de  dire  tl  Becket  de  faire  de  ce  livre  un 
paquet  a  l’adresse  de  M.  Turgot,  Ministre  et  Controlleur  General  des  Finances,  en  £cri- 
vant  simplement  sur  la  couverture  du  livre,  Pour  M.  le  Marquis  de  Condorcet ;  d’en- 
voyer  tout  de  suite  le  paquet  a  Mr.  Gamier,  en  le  priant  de  le  faire  partir  par  le  pre¬ 
mier  courrier  pareeque  M.  Turgot  en  est  tres  press£. 

Mille  pardons,  mon  cher  Garrick,  de  toutes  les  peines  que  je  vous  donne  ;  je  suis 
accoutum^  a  exercer  votre  complaisance,  et  vous  m’avez  accoutumd  a  compter  sur 
votre  amitie.  Comptez  bien  sur  la  mienne,  sur  ma  reconnoissance,  et  dites  bien  a 
votre  aimable  et  digne  moiti6  que  ses  bont^s  comme  ses  agr6mens  sont  toujours  prG 
sens  a  mon  coeur.  Ma  femme  partage  mes  sentimens,  et  ne  parle  de  vous  qu’avec 
tendresse.  Demandez-le  a  notre  ami  le  Docteur  King.  II  vous  donnera  des  nou- 
velles  de  vos  anciens  amis. 

Bon  jour,  mon  cher  Garrick,  je  vous  embrasse  tendrement  en  coeur  et  en  esprit ; 
je  voudrois  bien  que  ce  fut  en  corps  et  en  ame.  Vale  et  me  ama  qui  te  diligo. 

P.S.  Je  vous  prie  de  faire  tenir  le  billet  ci-joint  a  Becket. 


DU  COMTE  DE  LAURAGUA1S  A  M.  GARRICK.* 

Welbeck-street,  le  9  Mars,  1776. 

On  dit  dans  le  monde,  Monsieur,  que  vous  prot^gez  M.  Texier.  J’ai  quelqu’in- 
ter^t  a  me  flatter  du  contraire,  car  vous  seriez  pour  moi  le  plus  dangereux  protec- 
teur  qu’il  put  avoir.  Aussi  je  veux  croire  que  vous  avez  trop  joui  du  sentiment 
exquis  d’exciter  l’admiration,  pour  n’etre  pas  jaloux  jusqu’aux  transports,  des  talens 
qui  pouraient  causer  la  votre.  Ainsi  quand  votre  indulgence  pour  les  rapsodies  mi- 

*  To  write  against  the  talent  of  Texier,  which  had  astonished  and  delighted  all  the  men  of  genius  in  Paris, 
with  Voltaire  at  their  head,  shows  only  the  violence  of  a  man  of  fashion,  who  can  see  no  merit  whatever  in 
a  person  with  whom  he  is  at  variance. — Ed. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


615 


miques  de  M.  Texier  font  penser  que  vous  etes  au-dessus  de  la  jalousie :  j’imagine 
que  vous  avez  la  faiblesse  de  descendre  a  une  comparaison  flatteuse  pour  votre  amour- 
propre,  quoique  sa  reputation  soit  aussi  comparable  a  la  votre,  que  sa  fortune  a  celle 
de  M.  Vanneck.  Ce  M.  Texier  n’a  jamais  6crit  que  des  livres  de  recettes  ou  de 
d^penses.  Le  talent  admirable  de  Moli£re,  le  votre  surtout,  celui  d’exprimer  sa  pro- 
pre  pens^e,  n’est  pas  meme  pour  M.  Texier  l’art  de  la  peindre.  Car  sans  nous  vanter, 
nous  avons  dans  la  grande  foire  de  la  soci6t6  de  Paris,  des  singes  qui  valent  beau- 
coup  mieux  que  lui  a  tous  ^gards.  Qu’il  vienne  ici!  qu’il  cherche  a  y  plaire !  cela 
serait  desirable,  meme  pour  ceux  qui  pourraient  plaire  ailleurs.  Qu’il  parvienne  a 
charmer  les  Anglois,  en  leur  lisant  de  mauvais  drames  Fran^ais  !  C’est  assur^ment  un 
grand  bonheur  pour  lui,  et  par  reconnaissance  il  devrait  avertir  quelques-uns  de  ses 
auditeurs,  des  momens  ou  il  est  convenable  de  pleurer,  et  de  ceux  ou  il  faut  absolu- 
ment  rire,  parcequ’on  dit  qu’il  y  a  parfois  d’^tranges  misprises  sur  les  effets  de  sa  de¬ 
clamation.  Mais  ils  n’en  sont  que  plus  surprenants,  et  n’en  sont  pas  moins  surs,  tout 
le  monde  est  dans  le  secret  de  sa  pretention,  et  ce  secret-la  est  bien  garde.  Quant-a 
moi,  bien  loin  de  m’occuper  a  connaitre,  et  surtout  a  divulguer  les  avantures  de  M. 
Texier,  je  vis  en  si  mauvaise  compagnie  a  Londres,  que  la  plupart  des  gens  que  j’y 
recherche  ne  surent  pas  seulement  qu’il  n’y  a  rien  de  plus  celebre  ici  que  M.  Texier. 
Enfin  si  j’avais  eu  l’esprit  de  deviner  que  M.  Texier,  qui  va  partout,  n’a  6te  presente 
nulle  part,  ou  que  j’eusse  cru  qu’on  n’eut  pas  trouv6  impertinent  a  moi  d’assurer 
my  Lady  Hertford,  qu’elle  ne  pouvait  pas  voir  meilleure  compagnie  que  INI.  Texier, 
je  n’eusse  pas  trouble  un  petit  instant  la  fraicheur  de  ses  succ&s.  Mais  je  vous  le 
repette,  je  passe  ma  vie  seul,  ou  avec  des  gens  qu’on  ne  voit  point.  De-sorte-que  je 
n’ai  pas  cru  que  la  politesse  Fran^aise  eut  fait  encor  plus  de  progres  a  Londres  que 
nos  modes  :  et  j’ai  pense  bonnement  qu’on  y  appelait,  comme  du  terns  grossier  de  Boi- 
leau,  un  chat,  un  chat:  et  Rollet,  un  fripon.  Mais  puisque  M.  Texier  n’en  est  pas 
moins  f£te,  j’ai  le  plaisir  d’avoir  a-peine  fane  ses  bouquets.  Il  a  fallu  seulement 
reduire  ce  qui  s’est  pass6  entre  nous  a  certains  faits,  que  M.  Texier  ferait  mieux 
d’eclaircir,  que  de  travailler  a  publier  sa  vie,  ou  meme  un  manifeste  adresse  a  ses 
admirateurs :  car  je  parie  qu’il  ne  contera  point  son  histoire  aussi  gaiment  qu’elle 
m^rite  de  l’6tre.  Je  sais  cependant  par  un  de  nos  amis  communs,  que  M.  Texier  a 
6tabli  la  reputation  de  son  courage,  en  6tablissant  dans  les  changemens  de  terns,  l’effet 
malheureux  de  sa  maladresse.  Ce  pauvre  homme  est  hardi  comme  Didon ;  et 
tantot  c’est  une  blessure,  tantot  une  autre,  qui  lui  arrachant  inopinement  des  sonpirs 
aigus,  trahissent  en  meme  terns,  le  secret  de  ses  avantures  :  ce  qui  prouve  assur6- 
ment  que  c’est  un  des  plus  braves  caissiers  que  le  roi  de  France  ait  dans  sa  grande 
arm£e  des  financiers.  Quant-k  son  avanture  de  Lion,  ce  que  j’en  ai  recueilli,  me  fait 
imaginer  que  voila  ce  qu’il  dit  aux  gens  qu’on  ne  peut  pas  faire  ses  dupes.  M. 
Texier  se  prend  de  querelle  avec  quelqu’un  qui  surement  etait  brutal,  il  lui  donne 
un  coup  d’cp6e,  c’est  le  moins  qu’il  put  faire ;  il  est  bless6,  il  fuit  de  Lion  sans  avoir 
par  consequent  le  terns  d’arranger  ses  affaires,  ses  ennemis  publient  qu'ila  fait  banque- 
route,  mais  ils  sont  bien  attrapes,  parceque  son  ami  M.  Boudin  se  trouve  trop  lieu- 


(>k; 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


reux  d’arranger  cette  bagatelle,  et  malgr6  la  d^licatesse  de  M.Texier  la  reconnoissance 
ne  l’importune  pas  a  son  £gard,  parceque  M.  Texier  ayant  eu  le  credit  de  lui  faire 
donncr  cette  m£me  caisse,  M.  Boudin  rattrapera  son  argent,  et  par  consequent  c’est 
M.  Texier  c]iii  le  lui  rend.  Assortment,  Monsieur,  je  conviens  qu’un  grand  coup 
d’^pee  doit  donner  des  forces  pour  courir,  mais  si  M.  I'exier  n’avait  pas  d’autres  raisons 
pour  courir,  pourquoi  a-t-il  couru  en  Hollande  plutot  que  dans  les  jardins  de  Lion? 
Mais  sans  lui  faire  mille  questions  qui  me  seraient  encore  plus  odieuses,  qu’elles  ne  lui 
seraient  redoutables,  son  esclandre  me  force  simplement  a  dire,  qu’il  ne  s’agit  pas 
plus  des  vertus  chrtdiennes  de  M.  Boudin,  s’il  lui  a  pardonn^  comme  sa  caution,  et  de 
ses  qualit6s  morales,  s’il  lui  a  pret6  oil  donn£  de  l’argent,  comme  son  ami ;  qu’il  ne 
s’agit  des  talens  de  M.  Texier,  mais  d’un  fait;  cependant  s’il  veut  se  contenter  a  mes 
yeux  de  D’etre  que  le  rival  du  singe  de  Nicolet,  je  ne  demande  pas  mieux 
qu’on  le  prenne  pour  un  £l£plmnt.  Enfin  comme  je  n’ai  pas  besoin  des  sottises 
qu’il  peut  faire,  si  vcus  voulez  lui  montrer  cette  lettre,  et  qu’il  la  mette  dans 
son  repertoire,  je  n’en  rirai  seidement  pas  avec  vous,  et  ce  sera  moi  qui  me  ferai 
presenter  a  M.  Texier  qui  ferait  fort  bien  de  reprendre  le  petit  collet.  Yoila  ce  que 
j’eusse  pu  dire  a  l’ami  de  Mecenes  s’il  avait  protege  des  marionettes,  et  que  je  fusse  ne 
sous  Auguste,  au  lieu  de  l’etre  sous  Louis  XV.  J’ai  l’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur,  avec 
la  plus  grande  consideration,  et  l’estime  la  plus  parfaite, 

Yotre  tr&s-humble  et  tr^s-obeissant  serviteur, 

Y.  L.  De  Lauraguais. 


FROM  GARRICK  TO  COUNT  LAURAGUAIS. 

March  11th  1776,  Adelphi. 

At  my  return  from  the  country  I  have  this  moment  received  the  honour  of  your 
letter.  As  I  shall  be  only  solicitous  to  declare  the  truth,  and  would  choose  to  be  as 
clear,  as  plain  in  my  answer,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  my  writing  in  my  own 
language. 

O  o 

I  should  have  been  greatly  flattered  with  your  favour,  had  I  not  so  high  an 
opinion  of  your  wit  that  I  cannot  but  imagine  you  are  exercising  it,  when  you  talk 
of  my  protection  of  M.  le  Texier.  The  humblest  have  their  attachments,  and  I 
must  confess  that  I  am  yet  prejudiced  in  his  favour:  by  a  recital  of  facts  I  depend 
upon  your  own  warmth  of  temper,  and  love  of  justice,  to  acquit  me  of  the  least  im¬ 
pertinence  to  you  in  my  present  regard  for  him.  He  was  recommended  to  me,  as  a 
man  of  probity,  family,  and  talents,  by  a  worthy  friend  of  mine  in  France,  and  from 
whom  I  had  received  many  favours.  If  I  may  be  allowed  to  judge  of  his  talents,  I 
most  sincerely  think  that  they  are  very  extraordinary,  and  therefore  I  am  bound  to 
believe  that  my  friend  has  not  deceived  me  in  other  particulars  till  I  have  certain 
proofs  to  the  contrary.  I  will  venture  to  declare  to  an  understanding  like  yours, 
which  never  loses  the  substance  in  pursuit  of  the  shadow,  that  the  Comte  de  Guignes 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


617 


saying  he  never  introduced  M.  le  Texier  to  any  body,  and  yet  making  frequent 
entertainments  at  his  house,  on  his  account,  is  a  distinction  without  a  difference.  M. 
le  Texier,  in  consequence  of  this  countenance,  and  this  introduction ,  (for  what  else  can 
it  be  called  ?)  became  a  favourite,  and  most  welcome  guest  everywhere  ;  nor  has  he 
yet  forfeited  this  general  partiality  to  him,  as  I  can  learn,  by  any  indiscreet  or  im¬ 
pertinent  behaviour. 

To  confirm  in  part  this  opinion  of  mine,  I  was  told  by  a  man  of  fashion,  whom 
you  well  know,  that  the  Comte  de  Guignes  assured  him  at  his  taking  leave,  that  INI. 
le  Texier  had  been  indeed  malheureux ,  but  not  mallionnete.  After  this  stating  of 
facts,  I  should  appear  very  ungrateful  to  my  friend,  and  show  little  of  the  spirit  of 
my  country,  were  I  inhospitably  to  withdraw,  what  you  so  pleasantly  call  my  pro¬ 
tection,  till  some  stronger  proofs  of  his  ill  conduct  are  produced. 

There  is  a  certain  unpolished  obstinacy  in  English  natures  that  will  give  way  to 
nothing  but  demonstration,  and  I  trust  in  the  good  sense  and  justice  of  the  Count  de 
Lauraguais  not  to  think  the  worse  of  me  for  continuing  my  good  wishes  to  INI  le 
Texier  till  that  demonstration  arrives. 

I  am  Sir,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Your  most  obliged,  humble,  and  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  shall  do  myself  the  honour  of  paying  my  respects  soon  in  Welbeck-street,  my 
indisposition  has  prevented  me  from  doing  it  sooner. 


DE  MADAME  NECKER  A  M.  GARRICK.* 

SUR  LE  LEAR  DE  GARRICK.  (14  May  1776.) 

Je  ne  sfais,  Monsieur,  ou  je  trouverai  des  termes  pour  rendre  l’effrayante  im¬ 
pression  que  vous  nous  avez  faite  hier ;  vous  vous  etes  rendu  maitre  de  notre  ame 
toute  entire,  vous  l’avez  boulevers6e,  vous  l’avez  remplie  de  terreur  et  de  piti6,  je  ne 
puis  penser  encore  aux  diff^rentes  expressions  de  votre  physionomie  sans  que  mes 
yeux  se  remplissent  de  larmes.  Quelle  superbe  et  touchante  le^on  vous  nous  avez 
donn^e !  quelle  horreur  pour  l’ingratitude !  quel  amour !  quel  respect  pour  la 
vieillesse !  meme  injuste,  m£me  £gar6e ;  oh  !  que  n’ai-je  encore  les  auteurs  de  ma  vie, 
que  ne  puis-je  porter  a  leurs  pieds  tous  les  sentiments  que  vous  avez  clevis  dans  mon 
coeur,  et  y  repandre  les  larmes  dechirantes  que  vous  m’avez  fait  verser.  Toute  ma 
pensee  se  concentre  sur  les  divers  caract&res  de  la  vieillesse  afflig6e ;  je  fuis  et  je 
cherche  cette  image,  et  jamais  rien  ne  s’est  grave  plus  profond&nent  dans  mon  souvenir. 
Pardon,  Monsieur,  je  ne  devois  pas  vous  £crire  aujourd’hui.  Point  de  reponse,  je 
vous  supplie;  j’ai  voulu  seulement  s^avoir  de  vos  nouvelles,  joindre  mon  hommage  a 
celui  d’un  public  enivr6,  et  presenter  a  Madame  Garrick  ma  vive  reconnoissance. 

*  Nothing  was  ever  more  truly  eloquent  than  one  passage  of  this  beautiful  letter.  The  lecture  as  to 
filial  ingratitude  inspiring  a  wish  for  the  revival  of  her  parents,  that  she  might  effuse  her  full  soul  before  them 
in  grateful  testimonies  of  her  love  ! — Ed. 

4  K 


VOL.  II. 


G18 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DU  BARON  DE  REDEN  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Londres,  ce2l  May,  1776. 

Sac ii a nt  que  ce  seroit  la  derni&re  saison  que  le  public  auroit  le  plaisir  de  vous 
voir,  je  suis  venu  expr&s  de  Paris  pour  6tre  Tun  de  vos  admirateurs.  Depuis  trois 
semaines  que  je  suis  ici  j’ai  tent6  inutilement  toutes  les  fois,  ou  d’envoyer  prendre 
des  places  ou  de  pen&rer  moi-meme  an  parterre.  Je  me  vois  done  oblig6  de  recourir 
a  la  seule  ressource  qui  me  reste,  et  que  le  Prince  Susapou  m’a  conseill6  d’employer  ; 
e’est,  Monsieur,  de  vous  implorer  de  vouloir  bien  m’admettre  pour  aujourd’hui  ou 
domain,  a  qu’elle  place  que  ce  soit,  pourvu  que  je  puisse  vous  voir  et  vous  entendre. 
Je  connois  assez  lAnglois  pour  ne  pas  renoncer  volontairement  au  dernier. 

Je  sens,  Monsieur,  que  vous  devez  etre  importune  tous  les  jours  par  de  pareilles 
demandes,  et  je  n’aurois  jamais  eu  le  courage  de  la  faire,  si  le  Prince  qui  m’avoit  dit 
avoir  eu  1’honneur  de  vous  connoitre,  ne  m’avoit  assure  de  votre  extreme  politesse  et 
bonneted,  surtout  envers  des  Strangers. 

Je  regarderai  et  j’estimerai  un  billet  de  votre  part  autant  que  la  faveur  d’un  sou- 
verain,  6tant  souvent  prodigu^es,  au  lieu  que  ceci  est  une  chose  que  je  ne  voudrois 
pas  perdre  avant  mon  depart  pour  tout  au  monde. 

J’ai  1’honneur  d’etre,  Monsieur, 

Votre  trfes-obeissant  serviteur, 

T.  G.  Baron  de  Reden. 

Si  cette  faveur  pouvait  s’dtendre  sur  mon  compagnon  de  voyage  le  Baron  de  Vel- 
thusu,  je  vous  serais  doublement  oblige. 

At  Mr.  Bosemberg’s,  Bury-street,  St.  James’s. 


DE  M.  D’ARNAUD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Paris,  ce  3  Juin,  1776. 

Je  suis  fait  pour  vous  avoir  des  obligations  sans  nombre  :  je  vous  dois  la  connois- 
sance  d’une  dame  qui  est  de  vos  amies,  et  ce  titre  ajoute  beaucoup  k  mes  yeux  aux 
excellentes  quality  qu’elle  parait  poss^der  ;  elle  m’a  fait  part  des  soins  que  vous  vous 
&tes  donnes  au  sujet  du  prospectus  que  j’ai  eu  l’honneur  de  vous  envoyer.  Je  ne 
s^aurois  trop  vous  temoigner  ma  reconn oissance  au  nom  de  l’auteur,  ou  plustot  de 
l’editeur  de  cet  ouvrage  :  vous  rendez  service  a  tous  nos  gens  de  lettres  ;  en  mon  par- 
ticulier  je  suis  sensible  au-dela  de  toute  expression  a  ce  que  vous  m’avez  fait  dire 
d’obligeant  par  Madame  Pye.  Elle  m’a  flatte  que  nous  puissions  vous  voir  en  ce  pays 
oil  vous  avez  autant  d’admirateurs  et  d’amis  qu’a  Londres.  II  est  done  vrai  que 
vous  quittez  le  theatre?  Votre  amie  m’a  procure  vos  adieux.  On  voit  bien  que 
e’est  le  cceur  meme  qui  vous  a  inspire,  aussi  n’ai-je  point  et£  surpris  que  vous  ayez 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


619 


vers6  des  larmes,  et  que  vous  en  ayez  fait  r^pandre  ;  j’ai  et6  moi-m^me  emu  jusqu’a 
l’attendrissement  a  la  lecture  de  ce  petit  morceau,  ce  qui  m’a  suggere  ces  vers  que  je 
vous  envoye  comme  le  tribut  du  sentiment,  d6nu6  des  ressources  de  Part : 

Garrick  a  done  quitte  la  sc&ne! 

Londres  perd  a  la  fois  Thalie  et  Melpomene ; 

Tout  est  frappe  de  ce  depart  affreux; 

Toutn’offre  qu’un  tableau  des  plus  vives  alarmes; 

Tes  spectateurs,  Garrick,  touches  de  tes  Adieux, 

Te  donnent  d’eternelles  larmes, 

Et  je  deviens  Anglais  pour  pleurer  avec  eux. 

Oui,  Monsieur,  je  ressens  comme  vos  concitoyens  la  perte  irreparable  qu’ils 
essuyent.  Vous  etes  un  de  ces  presents  de  la  nature  et  dont  elle  est  extremement 
avare.  Au  reste,  je  vous  fais  mon  compliment  comme  je  l’eusse  fait  a  Shakespeare 
lui-meme  quand  il  eut  le  courage  de  s’arracher  a  sa  glome  pour  aller  gouter  le  repos  : 
vous  qui  l’avez  assez  imite  en  tout,  vous  allez  jouir  de  vous-m6me,  vivre  pour  vous  et 
pour  vos  amis;  puisse  cette  nouvelle  carri&re  que  vous  avez  a  parcourir  n ’avoir  point 
de  terme,  du  moins  qu’il  se  perde  dans  l’insouciment  d’un  avenir  bien  61oign6,  bien 
£loigne.  Je  me  fais  une  veritable  fete  de  vous  voir  et  de  vous  embrasser  ici,  cet  au- 
tomne  ;  si  ce  bonheur  m’est  refuse,  je  compte  i’annee  prochaine  aller  vous  surprendre 
dans  votre  retraite,  voir,  admirer  le  grand  homme  en  deshabille,  et  jouir  de  vos  char- 
mantes  ouvertures  qui  lie  m'interesseront  pas  moins  que  votre  jeu  inimitable.  Daignez, 
Monsieur,  me  continuer  toujours  votre  bienveillance :  elle  m’est  plus  precieuse  que 
celle  de  plusieurs  souverains  que  j’ai  connus,  et  que  j’ai  oublies  ;  l’auteur  du  Comte 
de  Comminge  est  fait  pour  sentir  tout  ce  que  vaut  le  c61&bre  Garrick,  et  je  me  flatte 
que,  quoique  vous  soyez  rassasi6  d’applaudissements  et  de  tributs  d'admiration,  vous 
voudrez  bien  dans  cette  foule  d’hommages  appercevoir  le  mien :  il  vous  est  offert  par 
le  sentiment  meme,  oui  e’est  lui-meme  qui  vous  assure  du  respect  avec  lequel  je  suis, 
Monsieur, 

Votre  tr&s-humble  et  trfes-obeissant  serviteur, 

D’Arnaud. 

D’Arnaud,  Conseiller  d’Ambassade  de  la  Cour  de  Saxe,  Rue  des  Postes,  pres  l’Estrapade. 


DU  BARON  KOCH  A  MR.  GARRICK. 

J’ai  done  6t6  temoin  bier  du  dernier  soupir  de  la  sc&ne  Angloise,  et  j’ai  eu  le 
plaisir,  ou  la  douleur  (car  j’ai  eu  les  deux,)  de  le  rendre  avec  elle !  Apr6s  les  t£moi- 
gnages,  des  regrets  infinis,  que  vous  avez  requs  d’un  publice  clair 6,  il  seroit  hors  de  pro- 
pos  de  vous  parler  de  ceux  d’un  Stranger.  Mais  ce  qui  ne  me  semble  pas  hors  de 
propos,  e’est  de  vous  prier  de  vouloir  bien  recevoir  pour  la  rccette  d’hier,  la  part  que  je 

4  k  2 


620 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


me  suis  impost.  Apr£s  m’avoir  fait  le  plaisir  tie  me  donner  une  place,  pour  laquelle 
je  vous  fais  un  million  de  remerciments,  mais  dont  je  n’ai  pas  pu  payer  l’entr^e,  vous 
m’avez  appris  par  la  most  humorous  and  most  witty  adresse,  que  la  recette  £toit  des¬ 
tine  au  secours  des  pauvres  acteurs  tu£s,  estropi^s,  invalides,  &c.  Je  suis  un  invalide 
aussi,  et  ce  fellow-feeling  doit  me  rendre  encore  plus  scrupuleux  sur  l’acquit  de  la 
dette,  que  j’ai  contract^  avec  eux.  Je  vous  prie  de  vous  en  charger,  et  de  vous  sou¬ 
venir,  que  vous  m’avez  permis  de  venir  prendre  du  th6  k  votre  campagne  pour  me 
dddommager  dans  votre  socidtd  du  cruel  jamais  que  vous  avez  prononce  bier. 

Votre  tr&s-humble  et  trds-obdissant  serviteur, 

Le  Baron  Kock. 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 


MON  CHER  ROSCIUS,  A  Paris,  ce  12  Juin,  1776. 

Un  jeune  homme  plein  de  mdrite,  de  connoissances  et  de  zdle  pour  en  acquerir  de 
nouvelles,  qui  vient  de  publier  ici  un  ouvrage  trds  curieux  et  trds  savant,  qui  va 
passer  quelques  mois  en  Angleterre  pour  s’instruire  et  pour  connoltre  ce  que  l’An- 
gleterre  a  de  grands  homines  et  de  belles  choses,  doit  desirer  d’abord  d’y  voir  un  de 
ses  meilleurs  poetes  comiques,  et  le  plus  grand,  le  plus  extraordinaire  acteur  que  le 
monde  aura  jamais  vu.  Ce  jeune  homme  s’appelle  M.  Uemounier  ;  comme  je  l’aime 
et  l’estime  beaucoup,  je  n’ai  pu  lui  refuser  une  lettre  de  recommandation  pour  vous; 
mais  comme  il  est  trds  honnete  et  trds  discret,  il  ne  veut  que  vous  voir,  vous  connoi- 
tre,  vous  entendre ;  il  sait  combien  le  terns  est  cher  a  des  hommes  aussi  occupes  que 
vous,  et  il  n’abusera  point  de  la  permission  que  vous  lui  donnerez.  Il  est  connu  du 
Chevalier  de  Chastellux,  qui  vous  auroit  £crit  aussi  si  dans  ce  moment  il  n’^toit  en¬ 
core  retenu  dans  son  lit  par  des  acc&s  de  fi£vre  tierce  qui  le  tourmentent  beaucoup. 

Depuis  notre  retour  ici  nous  ne  faisons  que  parler  de  vous.  Pour  moi,  je  n’ou- 
blierai  de  ma  vie  les  impressions  que  m’ont  laissees  sm’tout  Lear  et  Richard.  Vous 
m’avez  donne  des  idees  de  votre  art  qui  ^toient  au-dessus  de  mes  conceptions ;  la  na¬ 
ture  s’est  agrandie  a  mes  yeux,  et  tous  ses  froids  et  mesquins  et  manier^s  imitateurs 
de  nos  theatres  ne  me  paroissent  plus  que  des  pigmies.  A  present  que  vous  avez 
quitt6  la  scene,  prenez  la  plume,  mon  ami,  et  laissez  au  monde  quelques  grandes 
lecons  sur  un  art  oil  vous  avez  montre  un  si  grand  module. 

Mr.  de  Gawills  est  enchante  comme  moi  et  de  vos  prodigieux  talens,  et  de  vos 
honnetet^s,  et  des  bont^s  pleines  de  grace  de  Madame  Garrick,  dont  nous  nous 
sonnnes  entretenus  cent  fois  toujours  avec  un  nouveau  plaisir.  M.  Demounier  me 
donnera  des  nouvelles  de  votre  sant6  et  de  celle  de  cette  charmante  moiti6.  Soyez 
Pun  et  l’autre  heureux  et  contens  autant  que  vous  le  meritez  ;  conservez-moi  un  peu 
d’amiti6,  et  venez  nous  voir  le  plutot  que  vous  pourrez. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


621 


Bon  jour,  grand  et  excellent  homme ;  soyez  sur  que  vous  n'avez  pas  dans  les  trois 
Royaumes  un  ami  qui  vous  soit  plus  sincerement  et  plus  tendrement  attache  que  je 
le  suis.  Suard. 


DE  MADAME  WITY  NEE  GARRICK  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  Paris,  ce  12  Juin,  1776. 

La  conformity  et  la  ressemblance  de  mon  nom  avec  le  votre  m’a  fait  penser  que 
peut-etre  j’avois  l’honneur  d'etre  de  votre  famille  ;  j’ai  en  consequence  pris  la  liberty 
de  vous  ycrire  d£s  le  6  Mars  1776  une  lettre  a  ce  sujet,  qui  est  restee  sans  reponse, 
sans  doute  parce-qu’elle  a  yty  interceptee. 

Maintenant  que  j’ai  trouvy  une  occasion  plus  favorable,  j’ai  pense  que  vous  ne 
trouveriez  pas  mauvais  que  j’en  fisse  usage :  j’y  compte  avec  d’autant  plus  de  raison 
que  M.  Preville  votre  ami  m’a  assure  de  votre  honnetete,  et  m’a  flatty  que  ma  de¬ 
marche  ne  pourroit  pas  vous  parroitre  desagreable. 

Voici  quel  etoit  l’objet  de  ma  premiere  lettre.  Depuis  quelque  terns,  des  affaires 
de  famille  m’obligent  a  etablir  ma  genealogie ;  l’yioignement  des  terns  et  la  disper¬ 
sion  de  mes  parents  (chose  assez  commune  dans  les  families)  ne  m’offrent  que  beau- 
coup  de  difficultes  a  surmonter. 

Mon  p£re  etoit  fils  de  Francois  Garrick,  Notaire  a  Gallicu,  ou  il  est  decede  le  2 
Fevrier  1712. 

Ce  dernier  etoit  originaire  de  Londres  et  avoit  plusieurs  fibres. 

Cette  derni£re  circonstance  m’a  donne  lieu  de  croire  que  si  j’avois  l’honneur  de 
porter  votre  nom,  peut-etre  etoit-ce  a  titre  de  parente,  et  que  vous  pourriez  me  don- 
ner  quelques  edaircissemens  a  ce  sujet. 

Si  cela  pouvoit  etre,  en  m£me  terns  que  vous  me  rendriez  un  service  signaie, 
j’aurois  encore  la  satisfaction  de  me  S£avoir  alliee  a  celui  qui  s’est  merite  la  plus  haute 
reputation  et  la  plus  grande  estime. 

Je  suis  avec  la  plus  parfaite  consideration, 

Monsieur, 

Votre  tres-humble  et  obeissante  servante 

Garrick  flie  Witv. 

Mon  adresse  est  Rue  de  la  Monnoye, 

maison  de  M.  Le  Brun,  Notaire,  a  Paris. 

David  Garrick’s  indorsement  : 

e. 

Letter  from  a  Widow  Lady  whose  maiden  name  was  Garrick,  as  she  says — 1776. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


()22 


DE  M.  PREVILLE  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Permettez,  cher,  bon  et  tr6s  respectable  ami,  que  je  profite  de  cette  occasion 
pour  vous  renouveler  l’assurance  de  tous  mes  sentimens  pour  vous.  Faites  un  mot 
de  r^ponse  sur  ce  qu’on  vous  demande :  vous  ne  devez  pas  6tre  surpris  qu’on  desire 
vous  tenir  de  pr£s  :  je  voudrois  que  vous  fussiez  mon  p6re,  mon  fils,  mon  oncle,  ou  du 
moins  mon  cousin.  J’en  ferois  et  ma  gloire  et  mon  bonheur. 

J’assure  de  mon  respect  tout  ce  qui  tient  a  vous,  et  suisavec  l’admiration  de  votre 
personne  et  de  vos  talens, 

Votre  tr&s-humble  serviteur  et  ami, 

Preville. 

A  Monsieur, 

Monsieur  Garrick, 
a  Londres. 


DE  M.  SUARD  A  M.  GARRICK. 

A  Paris,  le  25  Juin,  .... 

Je  viens,  mon  cher  Garrick,  me  plaindre  a  vous,  et  tr&s  am^rement,  de  ce  que  vos 
nieces  sont  ici  sans  que  je  sache  ou  elles  logent;  ce  sont  elles  qui  m’ont  apport6  sans 
doute  six  6ventails,  et  je  n’ai  pas  pu  les  en  remercier.  Vous  m’avez  permis  de  les 
voir;  j’en  ai  le  plus  grand  d^sir,  d’abord  parceque  j’ai  vu  les  beaux  yeuxnoirs  de 
l’ain^e  6clairer  la  plus  belle  peau  du  monde,  et  que  cela  est  toujours  bon  a  revoir  ;  et 
puis  elles  vous  appartiennent,  et  il  n’y  a  point  de  beau  visage  que  cela  n’embellit 
encore  a  mes  yeux.  Ma  femme  partage  mon  empressement,  parcequ’elle  partage 
tous  mes  sentimens  pour  vous,  et  surtout  ma  reconnoissance  pour  toutes  les  marques 
d’amiti6  que  j’ai  recues  de  vous  et  de  Madame  Garrick,  l’aimable  Madame  Garrick 
dont  je  n’oublierai  jamais  ni  les  bont6s  ni  les  graces  qu’elle  y  a  mises,  comme  a  tout 
ce  qu’elle  fait  et  ce  qu’elle  dit. 

Je  atous  somme  done,  mon  cher  ami,  de  m’6crire  tout-de-suite  l’adresse  de  ces 
deux  aimables  nieces,  qu’il  m’a  6te  impossible  de  decouvrir  quoique  je  l’aye  de¬ 
mand^  a  tous  les  Anglois  que  j’ai  rencontres.  Le  joyeux  Dr.  Gem  et  le  galant 
Abb6  Morellet  veulent  absolument  les  voir  aussi;  il  y  a  beaucoup  de  gens  qui 
raffolent  de  tout  ce  qui  porte  le  nom  de  Garrick.  Permettez  a  ma  femme  de  les 
aller  prendre  un  jour  pour  les  mener  diner  avec  elle  :  nous  taclierons  de  ne  pas  trop 
les  ennuyer. 

Mandez-moi  aussi  ce  que  coutent  les  six  eventails  que  j’ai  re^us :  e’est  une  com¬ 
mission  que  je  fais  pour  un  autre. 

Nous  traduisons  a  force  le  Voyage  de  Banks ;  savez-vous  que  votre  cher  Dr. 
Hawkesworth  l’avoit  envoy6  il  y  a  long  terns  a  Berlin  pour  le  traduire  en  Francis  ? 
mais  nous  ne  craignons  pas  cette  concurrence. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


623 


II  ne  paroit  rien  ici  d’intdessant  que  la  nouvelle  Edition  des  oeuvres  de  M. 
Thomas,  en  4  vol. :  les  deux  premiers  forment  un  ouvrage  tout  neuf,  plein  d’esprit, 
d’doquence  et  de  bonne  literature,  avec  encore  un  pen  de  roideur,  de  metaphysique 
et  d’enflure  :  il  a  un  grand  succes.  Les  deux  derniers  volumes  sont  fort  et  fort  bien 
corriges.  .Te  vous  envoye  cette  Edition,  M.  Matty  veut  bien  se  charger  de  vous  la 
porter  avec  ma  lettre. 

Souvenez-vous,  mon  cher  Roscius,  que  vous  m’avez  promis  quelques  observations 
sur  le  manuscrit  que  je  vous  ai  donn6,  et  que  je  ne  vous  l’ai  donn6  qu’a  ce  prix. 
Envoyez-les  moi,  je  vous  prie,  promptement ;  je  suis  press6  de  savoir  votre  avis  sur  la 
question  ;  j’y  suis  mtoie  int£ress6  ;  mais  ne  confiez  le  papier  a  personne. 

Je  vous  ai  parle  un  jour  d’un  petit  essai,  insert  il  y  a  deux  ou  trois  ans  dans 
quelques  newspapers,  et  qui  a  fait  beaucoup  de  sensation.  On  y  parloit  des  talens  et 
des  genres  d'eloquence  des  principaux  speakers  de  la  Chambre  des  Pairs ;  on  y  don- 
noit  surtout  un  echantillon  curieux  de  l’doquence  du  Due  de  Grafton.  J’ai  besoin 
de  ce  morceau  :  si  vous  pouviez  me  le  procurer  ou  une  copie  manuscrite,  vous  me 
feriez  un  grand  plaisir.  M.  Burke,  a  qui  j’en  ai  entendu  parler,  pourra  vous  le 
designer  plus  clairement. 

Adieu,  mon  cher  Garrick ;  donnez-moi  de  vos  nouvelles  ;  venez  voir  vos  nieces  ; 
e’est  la  seule  esperance  que  j’aye  de  vous  voir  did  a  bien  des  annees  ;  car  je  n’ai  plus 
rien  a  voir  a  Londres  ;  ce  qui  m'y  attiroit  principalement,  c’^toit  le  desir  de  voir  jouer 
une  des  grandes  pieces  de  Divus  Shakespear  ;  j’ai  vu  King  Lear  jou£  par  Mr.  Ross  ; 
je  n’ai  plus  rien  a  desirer. 

Adieu,  mechant  homme ;  je  vous  en  voudrois,  si  vous  n’etiez  pas  si  aimable,  et  si 
vous  n’aviez  pas  une  femme  plus  aimable  que  vous :  mettez-moi  a  ses  pieds.  Je 
voudrois  bien  pouvoir  lui  dire  sous  ce  beau  saule  pleureur  de  Hampton,  combien  je 
suis  touche  et  de  son  amabilite  et  de  ses  bontes.  Je  souhaite  bien  que  sa  sante 
devienne  meilleure,  et  que  la  v6tre  ne  soit  plus  attaquee  par  ces  coliques  redoutables. 
Pourquoi  le  grand  ouvrier  n’a-t-il  pas  reserve  les  graviers  et  les  vapeurs  pour  les 
medians  et  les  hypocrites  et  les  sots,  6cc. :  vous  vous  porteriez  tous  deux  a  merveille ; 
mais  ce  monde-ci  ne  seroit  qu’un  vaste  hdpital ;  il  n’y  auroit  pas  assez  de  monde  pour 
soigner  tous  les  malades.  Mais  Pope  a  dit  que  tout  est  bien  ;  je  crois  en  effet  que 
malgr£  la  goutte,  la  pierre,  la  fi&vre,  les  honnetes  gens  sont  encore  les  plus  heureux. 

Vale  et  me  ama  qui  te  diligo. 

SUARD. 

Rue  de  Louis  le  Grand,  vis-a-vis 
la  Rue  Neuve  St.  Augustin. 

Je  vous  prie  de  dire  mille  choses  pour  moi  a  Milord  Shelburne  et  a  M.  Fitz- 
maurice  s’ils  sont  encore  a  Londres.  J’ai  bien  k  me  louer  de  leur  bont6,  et  de  leurs 
attentions.  Mes  complimens  aussi  a  M.  Loutherbourg,  que  j’aurois  voulu  voir 
davantage,  et  a  l’lionnete  Mr.  Becket,  que  j’aime  et  que  j’aimerois  encore  davantage 
s’il  vouloit  regler  un  compte  que  nous  avons  ensemble  depuis  dix  ans. 


624 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


DE  MADAME  NECKER  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Ce  5  Octobre  1776. 

Mu.  IIo  a  he  n’a  reste  k  Paris  que  quelques  jours  :  j’en  ai  6t6  tr£s  fAch£e  car  je  me 
serois  fait  un  plaisir  infini  de  lui  montrer  mon  devouement  pour  Monsieur  et  Madame 
Garrick ;  tout  ce  qui  me  viendra  de  leur  part  aura  des  droits  sacr^s  sur  mon  cceur  et 
sur  mes  soins. 

S^avez  vous,  Monsieur,  que  Voltaire  et  d’autres  beaux  ^sprits  Francois  ont  profit^ 
de  l’instant  ou  vous  avez  quitt6  le  theatre  pour  chercher  a  d^troncr  Shakespear.  Quand 
a  moi  c’est  en  vain  qu’on  veut  me  montrer  dans  cet  auteur  quelques  fautes  de  gout, 
etmthne  dejugement;  je  r^ponds  touj ours,  Vous  n’avez  apper^i  que  son  cadavre,  mais 
je  l’ai  vu  moi,  quand  son  ame  animoit  son  corps.  11s  repliquent,  Vous  vous  trompez, 
ce  n’etoit  qu’un  majestueux  fantome  que  Monsieur  Garrick,  ce  puissant  enchanteur, 
avoit  evoqu6  du  sein  des  tombeaux,  le  charme  cesse,  il  faut  que  Shakespear  rentre 
dans  la  nuit.  Depuis  les  merveilles  que  j’ai  vues  k  Londres,  j’ai  perdu  ce  gout  vif 
que  j’avois  pour  nos  spectacles,  ce  ne  sont  plus  pour  moi  que  des  cliambres  obscures 
qui  font  paroitre  les  objets  avec  des  couleurs  plus  adoucies,  et  qui  en  m£me  terns  les 
ternissent  et  les  rapellent ;  nos  acteurs  me  paroissent  des  automates,  et  quand  ils  s’agi- 
tent  je  cherche  quel  ressort  les  fait  mouvoir.  IMadame  de  Montagu  vous  en  dira  infini- 
ment  davantage ;  comme  elle  avoit  sans  cesse  devant  les  yeux  un  modele  de  perfection, 
elle  s’est  un  peu  exager6  nos  ddfauts,  et  elle  n’a  pas  6t&  assez  souvent  au  spectacle  pour 
que  l’habitude,  en  eff^ant  nos  ridicules,  lui  permit  de  fixer  son  attention  sur  nos  avan- 
tages  ;  elle  avoit  trop  vecu  avec  un  geant  pour  juger  de  notre  veritable  mesure. 

Vous  m’avez  £crit  une  lettre  d&icieuse :  vous  faites  passer  a  votre  plume  la  flamme 
qui  anime  vos  roles,  tout  est  pour  vous  les  materiaux  de  la  vie.  Je  l’ai  lue  seule  cette 
lettre,  d’abord  avec  attendrissement,  ensuite  je  l’ai  relue  avec  orgueil  a  toute  ma 
societ6.  Sans  cesse  je  m’en  vois  entour6e,  on  me  dit,  Contez-nous  encore  un  peu  de  ce 
grand  homme,  Comment  jouoit-il  Hamlet?  le  Roi  Lear,  Sir  John  Brute?  Je  conte,  et 
l’on  pleure  ou  l’on  rit,  et  je  m’^crie  avec  cet  orateur  qui  lisoit  les  harangues  de  Demos- 
th£ne,  “  Que  seroit-ce  done  si  vous  l’aviez  entendu  lui-meme  ?”  Mais  non,  je  veux  enfin 
cesser  d’en  parler  de  ce  grand  acteur,  il  me  rapelle  trop  un  ami,  une  amie,  qui  m’ont 
combine  de  bontes,  que  j’ai  quittes  avec  desolation,  qui  vivent  et  qui  vivront  toujours 
loin  de  moi,  et  auxquels  je  ne  penserai  jamais  sans  plaisir  et  sans  amertume ;  qu’ils 
viennent  bien  vite  ;  nos  bras  leur  sont  ouverts,  tout  le  monde  me  fait  la  cour  d’avance. 
J’attends  cet  instant  comme  un  des  plus  beaux  de  ma  vie.  Nous  presentons,  Mr. 
Necker  et  moi,  a  Monsieur  et  a  IMadame  Garrick  nos  plus  tendres  bom  mages,  et  j’ai 
l’honneur  d’etre  de  tous  les  deux  avec  mille  sentiments, 

La  tr&s-humble  et  tr£s-ob£issante  servante, 

C.  Necker. 

IMadame  Montagu  veut  bien  se  charger  de  deux  pots  de  pate  d’amande  et  d’un 
petit  sac  de  grains  que  je  prends  la  liberte  de  presenter  a  Madame  Garrick. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


625 


MR.  GARRICK’S  ANSWER  TO  MADAME  NECKER. 

MADAM,  Hampton,  November  10,  1776. 

By  the  gracious  permission  of  the  gout,  which  has  prevented  my  doing  my  duty 
until  now,  I  take  up  my  pen,  with  fear  and  trembling,  to  thank  you  from  my  heart 
of  hearts  (as  Shakespeare  calls  it)  for  the  most  flattering,  charming,  bewitching  letter 
that  ever  came  to  my  hand.  I  shall  keep  it  as  the  most  precious  monument  of  your 
unbounded  partiality  to  me,  and  of  my  own  vanity ;  it  shall  be  left  by  my  will  to  be 
kept  in  the  famous  mulberry-box  with  Shakespeare’s  own  hand-writing,  to  be  read  by 
my  children’s  children  for  ever  and  ever,  and 

Exegi  monumentum,  &c. ! 

Will  you  pardon  me  a  fault  for  the  sincerity  of  confessing  it?  Mr.  Gibbon,  our 
learned  friend  and  excellent  writer,  happened  to  be  with  me  when  I  received  the  be¬ 
witching  letter;  in  the  pride  and  grateful  overflowings  of  my  heart,  I  could  not  resist 
the  temptation  of  showing  it  to  him— he  read — stared  at  me — was  silent,  then  gave 
it  me,  with  these  emphatical  words  emphatically  spoken — This  is  the  very  best  letter 
that  ever  was  written :  upon  which,  a  la  mode  d'Angleterre ,  the  writer  was  remem¬ 
bered  with  true  devotion,  and  in  full  libations. 

An  old  English  ballad  says, 

“  Let  your  heart  and  your  wine  overflow 
To  all  that  is  matchless  below !” 

And  so  they  shall  as  long  as  they  can  overflow  with  me.  I  am  so  bewitched  to  this 
subject,  that  I  had  almost  forgot  my  wife ;  who  is  so  full  of  her  warm  acknowledge¬ 
ments  for  the  honour  and  pleasure  she  received  with  your  most  elegant  present,  that 
her  great  sensibility  upon  the  occasion  requires  a  more  powerful  pen  than  mine  to 
describe  it :  she  begs  me  in  particular  to  present  her  respects  to  Mrs.  Necker,  and  that 
were  she  able  to  tell  her  feelings,  neither  Shakespeare  or  his  interpreter,  her  husband, 
should  outdo  her  in  the  true  sentiments  of  the  heart. 

It  would  be  thought  in  general  very  strange,  that  I  should  not  before  felicitate 
you,  Madam,  and  Mr.  Necker,  upon  his  late,  as  it  is  called,  promotion.  I  have  a  very 
particular  way  of  thinking  upon  these  matters,  and  as  I  have  the  honour  of  knowing 
Mr.  Necker,  I  sincerely  think  that  no  change  of  situation  can  be  any  promotion  to 
such  a  mind  and  such  abilities.  I  must  beg  leave  to  apply  to  you,  and  him,  a  stanza 
in  a  little  ode  which  I  wrote  upon  being  asked  if  I  had  been  to  wish  Lord  Camden 
joy  of  his  appointment  to  the  Great  Seal. 

“  Wish  him  joy  !  And  for  what?  I  beseech  you,  declare  : 

No  changes  new  honours  can  bring; 

To  Necker  the  place  will  be  labour,  and  care, 

Wish  joy  to  his  Country  and  King.” 

These  are  my  real  sentiments  in  prose  as  well  as  rhyme.  And  to  be  a  little  self¬ 
ish,  what  shall  T  get  by  the  matter?  Instead  of  seeing  (should  I  go  to  Paris,)  the 

VOL.  II.  4  L 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(32l> 


warm,  benevolent,  smiling,  social,  communicative,  open-hearted  Mr.  Necker,  I  shall 
behold  the  thoughtful,  absent,  deep,  wise,  grave  politician,  scheming  every  kind  of 
good  for  France;  and  perhaps  in  the  moment  that  I  am  enjoying  every  hospitable 
pleasure  under  his  roof,  he  may  he  planning  mischief  for  poor  Old  England. — I  can¬ 
not  hear  it. — No,  I  will  stay  for  his  return  to  social  and  private  happiness,  and  then  I 
will  he  the  first  to  felicitate  my  best  and  much  honoured  friends.  If  I  can  finish  a 
little  thought  that  I  have,  I  will  send  it :  the  only  merit  will  he  its  sincerity.  I  have 
left  no  room  for  Voltaire  and  Shakespeare.  There  are  rods  preparing  for  the  old  gen¬ 
tleman  by  several  English  wits;  his  letter  to  the  French  Academy  is  no  addition  to 
his  genius  or  his  generosity,  and  his  errors  are  without  end.  I  pity  his  ill-placed 
anger.  I  am  Your  most  faithfully  affectionate  and  devoted  servant, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  have  the  gout  in  my  hand. 


DE  MADAME  NECKER  A  M.  GARRICK.* 

Combien  do  remerciments  ne  dois-je  point  4  Monsieur  Garrick  pour  les  bont^s 
dont  il  m’honore,  meme  aux  depens  de  la  dame,  assez  pointue,  qu’il  a  mise  en  sc&ne 
devant  mes  yeux,  et  que  je  crois  voir  encore  agitant  sa  tete  et  son  £ventail ;  je  l’ai 
re^ue  cette  fable  si  naivement,  si  heureusement  cont^e,  ou  le  poete  semble  avoir  trans- 
porte  Part  de  l’acteur,  et  oil  il  nous  fait  appercevoir  les  gestes  par  la  pens^e,  comme 
il  nous  montroit  autrefois  la  pensee  par  les  gestes.  Ah  !  pourquoi  cet  ing^nieux  oiseau, 
bien  plus  cr£ateur  qu’imitateur,  n’est-il  plus  encore  le  maitre  de  nos  idees  et  de  nos  sen¬ 
timents?  Mais  que  dis-je?  il  Test  toujours  ;  le  souvenir  seul  de  ce  que  j’ai  vu,  malgrd  la 
distance  du  terns  et  de  l’espace,  s’empare  de  mon  ame  toute  entiere ;  je  pleure  ou  je 
ris  a  votre  gr6  d&s  que  je  me  retrace  votre  image  ;  et  combien  de  fois  je  me  la  retrace, 
tous  les  synonimes  de  votre  nom  me  transportent  en  Angleterre :  genie,  invention, 
talent,  esprit,  poete,  raret£,  ph^nomene,  et  mille  autres  mots  de  notre  langue  me  sem- 
blent  ces  deux  syllabes  Garrick,  renversees  de  mille  manures,  mais  toujours  faciles  a 
retrouver. 

Le  voila  votre  Tacite,  Tite  Live,  nous  ne  vous  l’avons  pas  gate,  malgre  tous  nos 
efforts.  S’il  avoit  un  pen  pris  Pair  de  ce  pays,  il  vous  diroit  que  nos  plus  belles  et  nos 
plus  grandes  dames  ont  d’abord  voulu  le  connoitre  par  curiosity,  et  qu’ensuite  elles 
n’ont  pu  s’en  s^parer  par  veritable  gout.  Mr.  Hume  etoit  a  la  mode  chez  nous,  parce- 
que  ses  mani&res  et  sa  bonhomie  contrastoient  un  peu  avec  sa  reputation,  qu’on  ne 
perdoit  jamais  de  vue ;  mais  Mr.  Gibbon,  pass6  les  premiers  instants,  a  derobe  tous  les 
hommages  qu’on  auroit  voulu  rendre  a  son  livre  ;  il  n’aura  rien  acquis  ici,  car  il  y 
avoit  tout  apporte ;  mais  il  retourne  cependant  avec  l’estime,  l’amiti6  et  les  regrets 

*  In  Garrick’s  hand  :  a  charming  letter  from  Mrs.  Necker.  This  relates  to  the  letter  beginning  “  Mr. 
Hoare  n’a  reste,”  and  though  called  one  letter,  they  are  two  distinctly. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


627 


douloureux  de  tous  les  honnetes  gens.  Qu’il  vous  parle  un  peu  de  moi,  je  vous  supplie ; 
qu’il  vous  dise  avec  quel  m6pris  profond  jecoute  les  Francois  quand  ils  me  demandent 
s’il  y  a  quelques  rapports  entre  la  maniere  de  jouer,  de  Messieurs  Provide  et  le  Kain, 
et  de  Garrick  ph^nix ;  quel  silence  je  garde  quand  on  me  fait  cette  impertinente  ques¬ 
tion  ;  je  re^ois  tous  ces  gens-la  comme  on  retput  ce  Savoyard  qui  s’ecrioit,  Si  le  Roi 
de  France  s'etoit  bien  conduit,  notre  Due  lui  auroit  donne  quelque  emploi ;  je  me  tais 
done  avec  dedain  ;  on  recommence ;  et  jetant  alors  un  coup  d’oeil  foudroyant  sur  le 
questionneur,  JNIr.  lui  dis-je,  quand  vous  me  parlerez  d’acteurs,  je  ne  puis  vous  repon- 
dre ;  ces  Messieurs  jouent  et  jouent  tr&s  bien  ;  mais  Monsieur  Garrick  ne  joue  point ;  il 
est  lui,  e’est  a  dire  seul ;  et  par  la  meme  il  n’est  pas  susceptible  de  comparaison  ;  mais 
comme  je  ne  puis  trouver  des  rapports  dans  ce  qui  n’en  a  point,  je  vous  indiquerai 
seulement  une  difference  pour  fixer  vos  idees :  nos  acteurs  se  metamorphosent  assez 
bien,  mais  Monsieur  Garrick  fait  autre  chose  ;  il  nous  metamorphose  tous  dans  le 
caract&re  qu’il  a  revetu,  nous  nous  animons  aux  combats  avec  Richard,  nous  sommes 
remplis  de  terreur  avec  Hamlet,  et  nous  sentons  avec  le  Roi  Lear  les  douleurs  et  les 
infirmites  de  la  vieillesse.  Oh  !  pourquoi  faut-il  que  le  terns  affoiblisse  de  si  vives  im¬ 
pressions  ?  pourquoi  ne  pourrai-je  me  les  retracer  vivement  quand  j’aurai  l’age  de  ce 
bon  Roi  ?  J’ai  fait  relier  ensemble  les  onze  pieces  que  je  vous  ai  vu  jouer  :  il  me 
semble  que  je  tiens  dans  ces  deux  petits  volumes,  l’histoire  d’une  grande  portion  de 
ma  vie ;  car  s’il  est  vrai  que  le  terns  se  mesure  par  la  multiplicity  des  id£es  et  des  sen¬ 
timents,  je  pourrois  bien  avoir  v6cu  a  Londres  des  milliers  d’ann6es.  Ayant  ainsi 
tous  les  genres,  il  n’est  pas  surprenant  que  vous  ayez  S911  prendre  tous  les  tons  de 
poesie:  vous  6tes  Anacreon  quand  vous  parlez  a  l’Aurore ;  Horace  et  La  Fontaine 
quand  vous  entretenez  votre  aimable  Reine ;  ces  deux  morceaux  exquis  dans  leur 
genre,  m’ont  fait  un  plaisir  extreme,  mais  ils  me  deviennent  plus  chers  encore  par  la 
touchante  attention  dont  ils  sont  la  preuve.  Quand  pourrai-je  dire  moi-meme  a  Mon¬ 
sieur  et  a  Madame  Garrick  combien  je  suis  p^neti-ye  des  bontes  qu’ils  me  marquent ; 
et  de  tous  les  sentiments  que  je  leur  ai  voues  tendrement  et  pour  toute  la  vie? 

C.  N. 


DE  MADAME  R1CCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Mardi,  11  Fevrier  1777. 

Jamais  young  coxcomb  ne  s’est  presente  chez  moi  de  la  part  de  Mr.  Garrick.  Ja¬ 
mais  des  expressions  badines  de  Mr.  Garrick  ne  m’ont  bless^e.  Jamais  rien  ne  in’a 
donne  d’humeur  contre  Mr.  Garrick.  Mais  deux  de  mes  lettres  restyes  sans  r^ponse 
m’ont  fait  penser  que  fatigu6  de  ma  con-yspondance  il  en  desiroit  l’interruption.  Je 
n’ai  voulu  ni  l’ennuier,  ni  le  g£ner  en  m’obstinant  a  lui  ycrire.  Je  ne  prytends  pas  me 
plaindre  de  votre  nygligence,  je  veux  seulement  me  defendre  de  celle  dont  vous  m’ac- 
cusez,  et  prouver  a  votre  charmante  compagne  que  je  n'ai  point  tort  avec  vous,  ni 
avec  elle.  Un  si  long  silence  n’a  banni  de  mon  cceur  ni  l’un  ni  l’autre  de  ces  amis 

4  l  2 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


G2S 

cli^ris ;  j’ai  toujours  demande  des  nouvelles  de  l'aimable  couple,  et  pris  le  plus  grand 
interest  aux  yv^nemens  qui  le  concernoient.  Mais  ne  songeons  plus  au  pass6,  il  est 
deja  loin  de  nous.  Je  re<,:ois  avec  un  extreme  plaisir  les  marques  de  votre  souvenir 
et  de  la  continuation  de  vos  premiers  sentiments.  Je  ne  doute  point  qu’apres  un  long 
assujettissement  vous  ne  jouissiez  d61ieieusement  des  douceurs  du  repos.  II  est  vrai- 
ment  faeheux  que  des  maux  aigus  vous  fassent  sentir  quelquefois  le  cruel  melange 
des  biens  de  la  vie:  et  puis,  les  regrets  de  vos  compatriotes  ne  troublent-ils  point 
aussi  cette  tranquillity,  goutee  aux  d^pens  d’un  plaisir  que  personne  ne  peut,  ni  ne 
pourra  jamais  leur  rendre  ?  !STi  l’Angleterre,  ni  le  reste  de  l’Europe  n’offriront  plus 
sur  la  sc£ne  le  brillant  phynom^ne  dont  Londres  tiroit  vanity.  On  verra  toujours 
dans  la  Grande  Bretagne  des  s^avans,  des  poetes,  des  orateurs,  mais  ou  chercher,  ou 
trouver  un  David  Garrick  ? — Je  ne  s<paurois  concevoir  sur  quoi  vous  avez  quereliy 
poor  Mr.  Bechet.  Ce  n’est  pas  lui,  c’est  moi,  qui  avois  manquy  d’exactitude.  Loin 
de  me  plaindre  de  ses  precedes  a  mon  egard,  je  lui  ycris  avec  amitiy,  et  vous  le  gron- 
dez  !  je  n’y  comprends  rien.  S'il  risque  du  papier  et  de  l’argent  pour  la  traduction  de 
ce  petit  ouvrage,  ce  ne  sera  pas  ma  faute :  je  l’avertissois  de  n’en  rien  faire.  Assury- 
ment,  mon  tr^s  aimable  ami,  je  recevrai  votre  lecture  avec  docility,  et  vous  m’en  de- 
vrez  une  bien  longue  si  vous  cherchez  dans  cette  brochure  une  histoire  intyressante  ; 
mais  si  vous  pouvez  vous  am  user  d’une  critique  douce  sur  le  changement  actuel  de 
nos  moeurs,  sur  la  fausse  philosophic  d’une  troupe  d’imbeciles  qui  nous  inondent 
de  plats  ycrits  dictes  par  1’enthousiasme  et  la  folie,  peut-^tre  trouverez-vous  dans  ce  pe¬ 
tit  livre  autant  de  raison  qu’il  est  permis  a  une  femme  d'en  montrer  sans  affecter 
le  pydantisme  ou  l’austyrity. — Quoi,  vous  lisez  des  journaux  Francois?  beaucoup  sont 
destines  pour  les  provinces,  et  bien  peu  font  fortune  a  Paris.  Celui  dont  La  Harpe 
compose  la  partie  litteraire  est  le  meilleur  a  cet  egard.  La  haine  publique  contre  ce 
nouvel  acadymicien  diminue  chaque  jour  le  nombre  des  souscripteurs.  II  juge 
bien.  II  ecrit  a  merveille.  Mais  il  offense  les  auteurs  et  leurs  partisans.  Pour  Mr. 
Dorat,  il  vaut  a  peine  le  terns  perdu  a  parler  de  ses  productions.  Une  cabale  de  fem¬ 
mes  vent  en  vain  les  soutenir,  il  a  pour  tout  talent  une  detestable  facility  de  rimer. 
Ces  deux  Messieurs  n’employeront  point  d’autres  armes  que  leurs  plumes.  Les  duels 
sont  defendus  sur  le  Parnasse,  on  s’)r  menace  a  tout  instant,  on  ne  s’y  bat  jamais. 
— Vous  avez  raison  de  croire  que  La  Harpe  attaquera  votre  poete  favori.  Il  est  en- 
ragy  contre  les  traducteurs  dont  la  sotte  pi-yface  a  revolte  tout  le  monde.  Shakespear 
n’avoit  pas  besoin  de  leurs  eloges  maladroits.  Il  ne  faut  jamais  dire  a  des  lecteurs, 
admirez !  mais  leur  laisser  apprecier  les  beautys  qu’on  met  sous  leurs  yeux.  Cette 
pi-yface  mal  ycrite,  plus  mal  raisonnye,  a  fait  un  tort  considerable  a  la  traduction, 
et  porte  a  relever  les  fautes  et  l'infidelite  qu’on  reproche  a  ses  auteurs. 

Ce  que  vous  demandez  pour  un  journaliste  Anglois  a  besoin  d’etre  explique.  Si 
c’est  une  simple  notice  des  nouveautes  et  des  pieces  remises  au  theatre,  la  correspon- 
dance  ne  seroit  pas  difficile,  et  toute  personne  pourroit  l’entreprendre.  Si  l’on  sou- 
haite  avec  cette  notice  un  jugement  impartial  et  raisonn6  des  ouvrages,  l’ycrivain  doit 
etre  un  homme  eclaire.  Exposez-moi  les  intentions  de  votre  ami,  et  je  m  efforcerai  de 
remplir  ses  dysirs.— Au  risque  de  tout  ce  qui  peut  en  arriver,  j’avoue  que  j’estime  et 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


629 


que  j’aime  Mr.  Jhones.  Je  1’ai  vu  quitter  la  France  avec  beaucoup  de  regret,  en  lais- 
ser  a  toils  ceux  dont  il  etoit  connu.  Plusieurs  traits  de  son  caractere  m’ont  6te  confi^s 
par  un  ami  commun,  et  je  puis  vous  assurer  qu’il  est  vraiment  sensible  et  genereux. 
Ne  lui  coupez  pas  la  gorge,  mais  veillez  un  peu  sur  lui.  Je  vous  avertis  qu’il  trou- 
voit  Madame  Garrick  la  plus  charmante  des  femmes .  Pour  prix  des  politesses  dont  il 
m’accable,  je  lui  fais  un  caquet.  C’est  etre  aussi  m6chante  que  La  Harpe,n’est-ce  pas  ? — 

Vous  parlez  de  guerre  :  eh  !  bon  Dieu,  j’esp&re  que  nous  n’y  songeons  pas.  Rien 
en  France  n’annonce  ce  fleau :  ni  Mr.  Francklin,  ni  son  bonnet  n’elkvent  ces  id£es  ici. 
Il  vit  avec  des  g^ometres  et  des  s^avans,  nation  paisible,  ennemie  du  fracas  des  armes, 
contente  de  mesurer  la  terre  et  peu  propre  a  Tenvahir. — Je  ne  puis  trop  vous  remer- 
cier  de  vos  tendres  invitations  et  des  facilites  que  vous  avez  la  bonte  de  m’offrir  pour 
mon  passage  en  Angleterre.  Le  seul  desir  de  vous  voir  m’y  attireroit,  si  plus  jeune 
et  moins  farouche,  je  pouvois  m’&oigner  de  mes  penates:  ma  compagne  et  moi,  plus 
retiree,  que  jamais,  bornons  tous  nos  plaisirs  a  la  lecture.  Grace  au  del  elle  existe, 
vous  boude  un  peu,  vous  aime  beaucoup,  et  vous  prie  d’assurer  your  pretty  nurse 
de  son  plus  sincere  attachement. 

Des  nouveaut6s  ici !  a  Paris  ?  on  n’y  invente  plus  que  de  mediants  romans,  ou  de 
pitoyables  drames  que  Ton  ne  lit  point.  Les  Francis  traduisent  et  retraduisent.  On 
vient  traduire  Tristram  Shandy  et  son  oncle  Toby  :  on  traduit  les  poesies  Erse.  On 
retraduit  Homere,  Virgile.  Personne  n'imagine,  tout  le  monde  6crit,  et  le  gout  se 
perd  absolument.  On  donne  au*  Frai^ois  une  tragedie  de  Mr.  le  F£vre  :  elle  attire, 
sans  plaire  gendalement.  Je  ne  connois  ni  l’auteur  ni  la  pi£ce.  Si  on  l’imprime,  je 
vous  en  enverrai  un  petit  extrait  pour  votre  journaliste,  en  attendant  qu’il  ait  un  cor- 
respondant  ici.  Le  proems  de  la  Duchesse  de  Kingston  m’a  fort  amusee.  J’en  ai 
meme  traduit  la  partie  historique  pour  une  amie  qui  ne  s^ait  pas  l’Anglois.  Rien  ne 
m’a  paru  plus  noble  que  l’assembld  des  pairs  et  l’extrdne  politesse  du  Grand  Steward 
pour  la  dame  accusee  et  convaincue.  JMais  vos  avocats  sont  bien  aussi  diffus  que  les 
notres,  et  je  les  vois  bien  habiles  dans  l'art  d'eluder  la  loi. 

Adieu,  mon  tres  aimable  et  tr£s  cher  ami.  Puisse  le  repos  contribuer  a  detruire  le 
germe  des  deux  maladies  dont  vous  souffrez  trop  souvent !  L’air  de  France  vous 
feroit  peut-etre  un  grand  bien,  et  vous  y  retrouveriez  des  amis  empresses  a  vous  le 
rendre  salutaire  par  leurs  soins.  Je  vous  embrasse  de  tout  mon  cceur,  et  suis  et  serai 
toujours  votre  tendre  et  constante  amie,  Riccoboni. 

Je  prie  Mr.  Garrick  de  m’^crire  par  la  poste.  Je  ne  regrette  jamais  le  port  de  ses  lettres. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBONI  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Jeudi,  17  Avril  1777. 

Je  ne  s^aurois  vous  exprimer,  mon  tres  aimable  et  tres  clier  ami,  combien  je  suis 
toucli6e  de  s^avoir  votre  bonheur  trouble  par  de  cruelles  maladies.  Quel  mauvais 
genie  mele  l’amertume  a  tous  les  biens  dont  l’humanit^  pourroit  jouir  ?  Dans  l’im- 
mensite  des  creatures  qui  habitent  ce  meilleur  des  mondes  possibles,  peut-etre  n’en 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


G30 

existe-t-il  pas  une  seule  parfaitement  lieureuse.  Le  plaisir  et  la  peine  sont  momentan- 
116s,  il  est  vrai ;  mais  l’instant  ou  la  joie  anime  notre  etre  fuit  rapidement,  au  contraire 
celni  de  la  douleur  semble  rallentir  la  inarche  du  terns ;  il  laisse  une  profonde  trace 
de  son  passage,  et  livre  l’ame  la  crainte  de  la  voir  renaitre.  Est-ce  Eve,  est-ce  Pan- 
dore  <pii  mit  sur  la  terre  cette  abominable  goutte  !  sortit-elle  de  la  boite  fatale,  ou  de 
la  pomme  partag^e  entre  nos  premiers  parens  ?  li^las !  qu’importe,  il  voudroit  mieux 
chercher  la  detruire  que  d^couvrir  son  origine.  On  ne  lui  connoit  encore  de  remade 
que  le  plus  impatientant  de  tous,  la  patience. — Ma  compagne  vous  remercie  de  vos 
obligeantes  excuses.  Elle  est  toujours  la  m6me  :  le  ciel  I’a  dou6e  d’un  excellent 
naturel,  la  temperance  entretient  en  elle  d’assez  bonnes  dispositions  physiques,  et 
beaucoup  de  douceur  et  d’dgalite  rendent  sa  fa^on  de  vivre  commode  pour  elle,  agr&- 
able  pour  les  autres.  Ces  deux  quality  ne  sont  pas  au  nombre  des  miennes  ;  notre 
commerce  n’en  est  pas  moins  paisible.  Elle  me  passe  mes  bourasques,  et  moi  je  lui 
pardonne  d’etre  la  plus  raisonnable  :  indulgence  qui  n’est  pas  aussi  commune  qu’on 
pourroit  I’imaginer. 

Vous  me  parlez  de  nos  journalistes  comme  si  je  les  connoissois.  Except^  La 
Harpe,  dont  le  collogue  donne  au  commencement  un  extrait  des  nouvelles  ^parses 
dans  le  ramas  de  feuilles  qui  nous  inonde,  je  n’en  lis  pas  un.  Je  hais  la  malignite  et 
m6prise  le  malin.  Palissot  est  un  infame,  rempli  d’insolence  et  de  bassesse.  Clement, 
un  lourd  animal;  Dorat  un  fat  ignorant;  l’ancien  Freron  disoit  pour  deux  ecus  du 
bien  ou  du  mal  d’un  ouvrage,  je  n’ai  rien  vu  de  son  fils.  Le  besoin  fait  toujours  de 
m^cbants  auteurs.  Tous  ces  plats  envieux  qu’une  rage  famelique  acharne  contre  le 
merite  et  les  talens,  sont-ils  des  juges  a  consulter  ?  sont-ils  admis  dans  les  soci6tes  ou 
le  gout  se  perfectionne  ?  Il  faut  de  la  politesse  et  de  l’6quite  pour  former  un  bon 
critique,  et  tous  ces  polissons  incapables  d’eclairer  ne  font  que  jeter  du  ridicule  sur  la 
literature.  La  France  doit  rougir  de  s’etre  amus^e  a  entendre  d^primer  par  ce  vil 
Freron,  le  gdiie  le  plus  aimable  qui  soit  n6  dans  son  sein.  Je  n’ai  point  de  liaison 
a vec  Voltaire,  je  l’examine  sans  enthousiasme  et  suis  toujours  plus  charmee  de  son 
esprit  et  de  la  grace  attach^e  a  tout  ce  qui  sort  de  sa  plume.  Il  se  r6p£te  a  present,  il 
hasarde  trop,  son  badinage  est  quelquefois  indecent ;  je  conviens  de  ses  defauts,  mais 
en  lisant  ses  vers  familiers  j’oublie  sa  princesse  de  Babilone  et  me  souviens  d’Alzire. 
Pope  6prouva  chez  vous  tous  les  traits  de  la  satire,  il  s’en  vengea.  Mr.  Young  pre¬ 
tend  qu’il  fit  bien,  tant  il  aime  la  Dunciade.  Moi  je  d^sirerois  que  jamais  Voltaire 
n’eut  nomm6  Frdron.  S’il  eut  dedaigne  ses  impertinences,  l’annee  litt^raire  fut  tombee 
vingt  ans  plutot  dans  la  capitale,  et  les  provinces  qui  la  soutiennent  encore  auroient 
cesse  de  la  lire.  Mr.  Becket  est  done  bien  obstin6  ?  quoi !  malgr6  mon  avis  il  fait 
traduire  mes  lettres  ?  il  desire  apparemment  une  augmentation  de  papier  imprint  pour 
parer  son  magazin.  Otez  a  my  Lord  Rivers  son  style,  il  ne  restera  rien.  Que  Mr. 
Becket  se  souvienne  au  moins  de  mes  bons  conseils,  et  ne  m’impute  pas  la  perte  de 
son  argent. 

Si  votre  ami  vient  a  Paris  avant  le  quinze  de  Mai,  je  le  verrai  avec  plaism.  Mais 
comme  on  doit  faire  des  reparations  a  notre  appartement,  nous  allons  dimanche  a 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


631 


Meudon  dans  le  dessein  d’en  prendre  un  pour  tout  l’dte  et  de  l’habiter  au  milieu  de 
Mai.  Vous  m’annoncez  des  marques  de  l’amitid  de  Madame  Garrick  et  de  la  votre  ; 
tout  ce  qui  m’assurera  de  ce  sentiment  de  votre  part  et  de  la  sienne  me  sera  cher 
assurdment;  maisquelles  preuves  d’estime  peuvent  etre  plus  flatteuses  que  la  continua¬ 
tion  d’une  corrdspondance  dont  j’ai  douloureusement  supports  la  privation?  Comrae 
je  n’aime  jamais  sans  raison,  la  perte  d’un  ami  m’est  extremement  sensible,  et  je  ne 
pouvois  me  consoler  de  cet  evdnement  bisarre :  je  m’en  accusois  et  craignois  beaucoup 
de  vous  avoir  desobligd  sans  y  penser. 

Puisque  vous  vous  divertissez  aux  depens  de  nos  beaux  esprits,  je  vais  vous  con  ter 
une  petite  anecdote  que  probablement  vous  ne  s^avez  pas.  L’Abbe  Arnaud  ayant 
donne  son  portrait  a  l’academie  apres  sa  reception,  Marmontel  le  voyant  fort  adrnird 
employa  le  meme  artiste  pour  faire  le  sien.  Le  peintre  travaille,  Marmontel  regarde, 
se  plaint  de  I’ouvrage,  demande  ou  est  l’esprit  et  le  feu  qui  rend  la  tete  de  l’Abbe  si 
vivante,  si  expressive  !  le  peintre  embarrass*}  se  servant  avec  politesse  des  termes  de 
son  art,  sans  lui  parler  de  la  froideur  de  sa  physionomie,  lui  dit,  Votre  visage  est  en 
repos;  celui  del’Abbdjoue  sans  cesse,  on  voit  toujours  ses  muscles  en  mouvement, 
les  votres  indiquent  un  naturel  paisible.  Marmontel  se  fache,  Cela  est  froid,  glacd, 
dit-il,  animez  cela,  mettez-moi  au  moms  les  yeux  du  genie.  Le  pauvre  peintre  s’ever- 
tue,  vent  le  contenter,  et  lui  fait  les  yeux  de  Junon.  Le  portrait  place,  les  aeademi- 
ciens  s’ecrient  Fi !  fi !  rien  n’est  plus  horrible,  rien  n’est  moins  ressemblant,  pourquoi  ces 
yeux  de  bceuf  ?  L’Abbe  Arnaud  s’approche,  prend  le  parti  du  peintre:  Est-il  repre¬ 
hensible  ?  demande-t-il,  Marmontel  veut  les  yeux  du  genie,  il  a  bien  fallu  les  mettre 
hors  de  sa  tete !  Cet  Abbe  est  devenu  la  terreur  de  Marmontel,  qu’il  caracterise  par 
l’auteur  long-lent-lourd.  Pour  lui  donner  raison,  il  a  fait  imprimer  l’hyver  dernier  ses 
Incas,  les  estampes  sont  jolies,  et  1’ouvrage  com  me  son  visage,  c’est-a-dire,  a  la  glace. 
D’une  histoire  tcute  dechirante,  il  a  compose  la  fable  la  moins  touchante.  Il  pretend 
que  c’est  un  poeme  en  prose,  mais  cette  prose,  negligee,  souvent  ignoble,  ni  soutenue, 
ni  cadencee,  est  tres  vulgaire,  chargee  d’dpithetes  deplacees  et  de  repetitions  choquantes  ; 
elle  fatigue  et  ne  plait  pas.  Depuis  le  renvoi  de  Mr.  Turgot,  nos  philosophes  sont 
consternes.  Son  rdgne  etoit  le  leur,  ils  pretendoient  tous  a  gouverner  l’etat,  ils  sont 
rentres  dans  l'ordre  ordinaire,  et  l’Amerique  occupe  seule  aujourd’hui.  Comme  je  ne 
puis  souffrir  le  Due  de  Richemont,  que  je  charge  de  la  mort  du  pauvre  Changuion,  je 
ne  s^aurois  etre  du  parti  de  l’opposition.  Mais  je  fais  des  voeux  sinedres  pour  la  paix. 
Mon  jeune  ami  Mr.  Jhones  est  un  zeld  royaliste,  il  annonce  toujours  une  reconcilia¬ 
tion.  Aucun  Anglois  ne  la  desire  plus  que  moi.  Mr.  Yong  a  pass*}  l'hyver  ici,  il  y 
est  encore  :  vous  ririez  de  sa  colere  contre  ce  qu’il  appelle  les  insurgens  Francois.  Il 
crie  comme  un  demon,  De  quoi  se  melent-ils  ?  que  leur  importent  ces  affaires  ?  quand 
on  l’a  mis  de  bien  mauvaise  humeur,  il  vient  respirer  avec  nous  pour  parler  raison  et 
maudire  l’Amdrique.  C’est  une  bonne  et  obligeante  petite  creature  ;  le  printems  le  con- 
duira  je  ne  S9ais  ou,  en  Espagne  je  crois  ;  comme  il  est  solide  et  prudent,  j’espdre  qu’il 
se  sauvera  des  griffes  de  l’inquisition  renouvellee  dans  toute  sa  splendeur.  Je  serai 
bien  charm  de  de  lire  votre  fable,  et  je  la  traduirai  pour  la  montrer,  si  pourtant  je  me 


G32 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


trouve  assez  habile  :  car  je  ne  voudrois  pasalterer  le  tour  d<*licat  de  vos  expressions  et 
la  charmante  vivacity  de  votrc  style.  Je  suis  bien  sensible  a  la  petite  dispute  qui 
s’^leve,  dites-vous,  entre  votre  aimable  compagne  et  vous  a  mon  sujet.  Yous  in  £tes 
bien  chers  tons  deux,  et  j’esp&re  qu’une  victoire  en  Am^rique  appaisera  vos  troubles, 
fixera  la  paix  entre  nos  nations,  et  vous  ram&nera  parmi  nous.  Le  changement  de 
climat  vous  seroit  peut-6tre  salutaire.  Ma  bonne  amie  vous  embrasse  deux  fois,  et 
Madame  Garrick  trois.  ]Moi,  je  vous  r6itfere  les  assurances  de  la  plus  tendre  et  de  la 
plus  constante  amiti£. 

Mon  adresse  est,  a  moi  Rue  Poissonniere,  passe  le  Boulevard. 


DE  MADAME  RICCOBON1  A  M.  GARRICK. 

Dimanche,  9  Octobre  1777. 

Non  en  verity,  je  ne  connois  point  Linguet,  pas  meme  une  seule  personne  qui  ait 
eu  la  moindre  liaison  avec  lui.  En  le  voyant  douter  de  vos  talens,  je  devinai  qu’il 
n’avoit  pu  s’introduire  chez  mon  trds  cher  et  tr£s  aimable  ami.  Plus  il  parle  de  vous, 
plus  on  le  trouve  absurde.  Cet  article  de  son  journal  fait  lever  les  £paules.  On  lui 
demanderoit  volontiers,  s’il  croit  aussi  facile  d’effacer  du  temple  de  m^moire  le  nom 
de  David  Garrick,  que  de  rayer  du  tableau  celui  d’un  insolent  avocat.  .  .  La  liberty  de 
la  presse,  dont  votre  nation  s’honore  et  s’applaudit,  n’est  assur^ment  pas  un  avan- 
tage  que  les  autres  peoples  doivent  lui  envier.  Elle  trouble  la  soci£t6,  donne  un 
champ  tr£s  vaste  a  la  calomnie  et  l'occasion  d’attaquer  avec  impunity  les  reputations 
les  mieux  ^tablies.  Debiter  d’odieux  mensonges,  casser  des  vitres,  briser  les  th&ltres, 
insulter  les  passans,  repandre  les  traits  d’une  satyre  envenimee  dans  une  foule  d’en- 
nuieuses  gazettes,  est-ce  une  liberte  convenable  a  des  hommes  rassembl^s  pour  s’aider 
et  se  servir?  C’est  plutot  une  licence  effren6e,  propre  a  rompre  les  liens  les  plus  res¬ 
pectables,  a  former  de  mauvais  sujets  et  de  plus  mauvais  citoyens.  Mais  on  objectera 
que  cette  liberte  contient  le  minist&re,  r^prime  le  gouvernement,  sert  d’appui  contre 
l’autorit6?  rien  n’est  plus  faux.  Votre  histoire  le  prouve.  Dans  tous  les  terns  l’or  et 
les  titres  ferment  les  bouclies  ouvertes  par  l'int^ret  ou  par  la  vanit6.  Mr.  Pulteney  mou- 
rut  lord  :  Mr.  Pitt  est  lord.  Le  d^sir  de  la  c£16brit6,  l’espoir  d’etre  cherement  achet6 

font  plus  de  patriotes  que  l’amour  du  bien  ou  le  z&le  national . ;  a  cet  endroit 

de  ma  lettre  vous  levez  les  yeux  sur  la  belle  amie  qui  se  chauffe  a  vos  cot£s  :  vous  lui 
dites  d’un  ton  chagrin  et  compatissant,  H61as,  ma  ch&re !  notre  ancienne  connoissance 
radote :  what  a  collection  of  nonsense  !  upon  honour,  the  woman  is  mad,  mad  past 
redemption  !  Point  du  tout,  j’ai  toute  ma  raison.  C’est  l’6quit6,  c’est  l’amiti^,  c’est  ma 
tendresse  pour  vous,  mon  estime  pour  Mistress  Pye  qui  me  portent  a  blamer  un  per- 
nicieux  usage  que  le  bon  sens  rejette  par  tout.  Vous  reprochez  a  votre  compatriote 
d’etre  sensible  4  l’ex^crable  libelle  dont  elle  est  l’objet  ?  moi,  je  ne  l’aimerois  plus  si 
elle  n’en  6toit  pas  blessee  jusques  au  fond  du  cceur.  JMoins  elle  merite  ces  injures  obs- 
c&nes  et  atroces,  plus  il  est  naturel  qu’elle  s’afflige  dime  si  cruelle  insulte.  Solitaire, 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


633 


paisible  dans  cette  brnyante  capitale,  dont  elle  ne  re^oit  pas  dix  habitans  ;  ou  elle  passe 
ses  jours  a  lire,  a  s’inquieter  de  son  mari,  a  s’informer  des  nouvelles  de  l’Amerique,  ou 
son  plus  grand  amusement  est  de  venir  chez  moi,  faut-il  qu’un  infame  la  dechire  avec 
tant  d’acbarnement,  de  bassesse  et  de  noirceur  ?  Fi !  fi  !  d’une  liberty  si  scandaleuse,  si 
barbare,  si  detestable.  O  benite  soit  a  jamais  mon  heureuse  patrie !  ou  mes  vitres 
sont  en  surete,  ma  personne  protegee,  et  ma  reputation  sacr6e.  Poor,  poor  Mistress 
Pye !  line  femme  si  douce,  si  honn&te,  si  vraie,  si  exacte  dans  sa  conduite,  6tre  en 
bute  a  la  rage  d’un  vilain,  d’un  homme  digne  de  la  corde  !  Je  le  repute  fi !  fi  !  de  votre 
cbienne  de  liberty,  elle  n’est  qu’un  monstrueux  libertinage  !  L’imbecile  gredin  dont 
vous  avez  envoy6  la  lettre  a  votre  amie,  lui  est  actuellement  connu.  Elle  ecrit  au 
journaliste  du  matin,  et  vous  lui  rendrez  un  service  essentiel  en  prenant  ses  int6rets 
dans  cette  occasion.  Cet  ignorant  maraut  est  aussi  bete  que  m6chant.  La  police  ne 
se  mele  point  de  l’int6rieur  des  maisons,  elle  n’empeche  point  les  sacrifices  faits  4 
Venus,  ni  au  t lieu  du  vin.  Si  on  ne  tire  point  des  epees  chez  une  prostituee  de  Paris, 
si  par  un  bruit  incommode  elle  n’excite  pas  les  plaintes  de  son  voisinage,  non-seule- 
ment  la  police  n’a  rien  a  lui  dire,  mais  personne  n’oseroit  meme  ni  de  voix,  ni  par 
6crit  l’appeler  du  nom  qui  designe  son  etat,  et  si  on  le  faisoit  elle  obtiendroit  des 
dommages  et  interets  tres  considerables.  Chacun  vit  sous  son  toit  a  sa  fantaisie:  tout 
Francois  est  parfaitemeut  maitre  de  ses  actions  pourvu  qu’il  ne  nuise  point  a  la  tran- 
quillite  publique  et  au  repos  des  sujets  du  roi,  ou  des  etrangers  qui  partagent  le  droit 
d’etre  en  surete  sur  les  terres  de  sa  domination.  Ainsi  Madame  Pye  tiendroit  table 
du  matin  au  soil*,  auroit  trente  amans  par  jour,  sans  que  la  police  ou  le  ministere  s’en 
embarrassat.  Cet  abominable  homme  seroit  tr£s  bien  a  Bicetre.  C’est  une  bonne 
betise  de  parler  de  cette  maison  a  propos  d’une  femme.  Elle  est  uniquement  remplie 
de  filoux,  de  tapageurs,  d’enfans  du  peuple,  dont  les  parens  sollicitent  la  correction. 
On  y  re^oit  les  fous,  et  la  pauvre  canaille  libertine  trouve  dans  son  hopital  le  remade 
d’un  vilain  mal  qu’on  y  guerit  par  charite. 

Vous  ne  me  devez  point  de  remerciment  sur  les  communications  de  Mr.  Jolines. 
Peut-etre  auriez-vous  ri  de  la  sc6ne  qui  se  passa  chez  moi.  Mr.  de  Meunier,  votre 
tr6s  grand  et  tres  sincere  admirateur,  entra  precis6ment  comme  je  venois  de  jeter  la 
plate  excursion  au  milieu  de  la  chambre  ;  ce  jeune  homme  me  eroyoit  la  meilleure  et  la 
plus  indulgente  des  creatures.  A  la  vivacite  de  mes  expressions,  a  la  rapidit6  de  mes 
execrations  contre  l’auteur,  il  leva  les  mains  de  surprise,  pensa  que  j’etois  ensorcel6e. 
INIadame  Pye  arriva,  surcroit  d’etonnement  pour  Mr.  de  Meunier,  nous  lui  parumes 
deux  furies,  deux  diables  incar n 6s,  mais  en  parcourant  l’ouvrage  de  la  M6g6re  An- 
gloise,  s’il  necria  pas  autant  que  nous,  au  moins  partagea-t-il  l’horreur  que  nous  inspi- 
roit  cette  vile  calomniatrice. 

Mr.  Johnes  repondra  a  l’article  du  signe  d’amitie  dont  vous  me  parlez.  Comme 
je  ne  veux  jamais  vous  facher,  si  je  puis  6viter  de  le  faire,  je  lui  ai  donn6  charge  de 
veiller  sur  ce  point  &  votre  conduite.  Je  l’aime  tous  les  jours  davantage,  Mr.  Johnes  ; 
et  son  exactitude  a  m’6crire  me  lie  veritablement  It  lui.  Ce  que  je  dis  n’est  pas  une 
finesse  pour  vous  appeler  paresseux.  Je  vous  aime  quand  vous  parlez  et  quand  vous 

4  M 


VOL.  II. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 


(>34 


vous  taisez.  Je  vous  aimerai  toujours  parceque  vons  m&itez  l’estime  etl’attachement 
de  tons  ceux  dont  le  coeur  est  sensible  et  capable  de  distingueren  vous  les  quality  au- 
dessus  m^ine  des  talens  qui  vous  ont  rendu  l’homme  le  plus  cblebre  de  votre  siecle. 

Mr.  Y  bung  pret  a  partir  pour  la  Provence,  s’est  frott6  les  yeux,  puis  les  mains,  puis 
il  a  baillb,  et  moitie  £veilld,  moiti6  endormi,  il  s’est  £crie,  On  est  si  bien  ici !  et  le  voili 
pour  tout  l’hyver  a  Paris.  Il  m’a  chargee  bier  de  vous  assurer  de  son  souvenir,  de 
son  amiti6  et  du  chagrin  qu’il  ressent  de  votre  negligence.  Madame  Pye  et  moi 
nous  pensions  que  l  air  de  Marseille  lui  auroit  fait  un  grand  bien.  Il  ne  veut  pas 
nous  croire,  patience.  Connoissez-vous  le  joli  secretaire  d’ambassade  de  sa  Majeste 
Britannique,  Mr.  Fullarton?  c’est  un  jeune  ministre  plein  d’agr^ment.  Nous  venons 
de  perdre  Madame  Dillon,  c’est-a-dire,  Mademoiselle  Harland  :  elle  est  morte  bien  vite 
apres  son  mariage,  et  n’a  pas  joui  long-terns  du  plaisir  de  briller  a  la  cour  de  France. 
On  s’arrache  les  yeux  ici  pour  on  contre  Gluck.  Suard  6crit  sous  le  nom  d’un  Ano- 
tiime  de  Vaugirurd ,  il  met  La  Harpe  en  pieces.  La  Harpe  le  lui  rend.  Les  parens, 
les  amis  se  disputent  et  se  brouillent  au  sujet  de  la  musique.  Marmontel  preche, 
l’Abb£  Arnaud  lance  des  Epigram mes :  on  ne  songe  plus  a  l’Am^rique  ;  la  melodie, 
l’harmonie,  voila  le  sujet  de  tous  les  Merits.  Que  je  me  trouve  heureuse  au  coin  de 
mon  feu,  sans  prejug^s,  sans  esprit  de  parti !  la  paix  lbgne  dans  moil  simple  hermitage. 
Nous  sommes  deux,  mais  nous  n’avons  qu’un  avis,  nous  disons  comme  Pantalon  dans 
la  comedie  ou  ses  filles  vont  parler  a  leurs  amants  qui  feignent  de  se  vouloir  battre  : 
“  Batelevi  Signori,  batelevi,  quanto  vi  piace.  Siete  patroni et  ses  filles  rentibes,  il 
ferme  sa  porte.  Ma  compagne  embrasse  votre  aimable  amie.  Je  la  baise  trois  fois, 
si  elle  me  le  permet,  et  vous  deux,  toujours  si  elle  le  permet.  Adieu.  La  plus 
tendre  et  la  plus  constante  de  vos  amies,  Riccoboni. 


SUPERSCRIBED  BY  GARRICK,  “  MRS.  NECKER’S  MOST  FLATTERING  BILLET.” 

Madame  Necker  vient  se  mettre  aux  pieds  de  Monsieur  Garrick  pour  lui  t6moi- 
gner  sa  vive  reconnoissance.  Il  lui  a  fait  6prouver  tous  les  sentiments  dont  le  coeur 
bumain  peut  etre  susceptible :  ce  nbtoit  pas  une  imitation,  cbtoit  la  belle  Nature  dans 
toute  sa  v£rit6  :  seul  il  a  scu  r^unir  deux  choses  qui  paroissent  incompatibles,  les 
nuances  les  plus  d61icates  jointes  aux  plus  grands  mouvements.  JMadame  Necker 
doit  a  Monsieur  Garrick  de  lui  avoir  donne  et  laissti  pour  jamais  l’idee  de  la  perfec¬ 
tion  ;  mais  elle  a  senti  en  meme  terns  que  tout  ce  quelle  avoit  vu  et  tout  ce  qu’elle 
verroit  a  l’avenir  se  compareroit  au  modele  qu  elle  aura  continuellement  devant  les 
yeux  et  lui  laisseroit  toujours  un  sentiment  de  regret  et  de  peine.  A  present,  son 
unique  affaire  a  Londres  sera  d’entendre  ou  d’esperer  d’entendre  Monsieur  Garrick. 

Madame  Necker  qui  prend  l’interet  le  plus  tendre  a  une  sante  si  pibcieuse, 
envoye  s’en  informer  avec  empressement :  elle  a  l'honneur  de  presenter  ses  hommages 
a  Madame  Garrick ;  et  elle  laisse  a  Air.  Necker  le  soin  d’exprimer  son  admiration. 


DAVID  GARRICK. 


635 


DE  M.  DUCIS  A  M.  GARRICK. 

MONSIEUR,  A  Versailles,  le  15  Septembre. 

Apres  avoir  mis  Hamlet  sur  notre  theatre,  je  viens  d’y  mettre  Ronko  et  Juliette. 
C’est  aujourd’hui  ma  dix-huitieme  representation.  Je  desire  que  vous  ne  soyez  pas 
rrkcontent  de  cette  nouvelle  trag^die,  dont  je  vous  prie  de  vouloir  bien  accepter  l’ex- 
emplaire  ci-joint.  Pourquoi,  Monsieur,  ne  vous  ai-je  point  vu,  ne  vous  ai-je  point 
entendu  ?  II  manquera  toujours  a  mon  4me  une  £nergie  dont  elle  a  le  soup^on,  tant 
que  je  n’aurai  pas  vu  Shakespeare  vivant  et  anime  sur  votre  theatre.  Vous  avez  bien 
voulu  m’y  accorder  mes  entries,  je  suis  bien  tentd  d’aller  les  mettre  a  profit,  pour  voir 
une  nation  respectable  dont  j’estime  le  caract&re  fort  et  prononce,  et  pour  causer  avec 
vous,  en  les  prenant  sur  le  fait,  des  plus  hauts  mysteres  de  la  tragedie. 

Je  vous  prie.  Monsieur,  de  me  continuer  les  sentimens  dont  vous  m’honorez,  et 
de  me  croire  pour  jamais  avec  la  reconnoissance  et  l’attachement  que  je  vous  dois. 

Monsieur, 

Votre  tres-humble  et  tr£s-ob£issant  serviteur, 

Ducis. 

Mon  adresse  est — Mr.  Ducis,  Rue  d’Enfer,  apres  le  Bureau 
des  Roulliers,  quartier  Place  St.  Michel  ;  a  Paris. 


DE  M.  GRIMM  A  M.  GARRICK* 

A  Stamford,  ce  1 1  Octobre. 

Illustre  Garrick,  apr£s  avoir  couru  pr£s  d’un  mois,  apr£s  avoir  vu  des  mer- 
veilles  de  l’heureuse  Angleterre  en  grand  nombre,  apr£s  avoir  couche  a  Lichfield 
qui  a  vu  Clever  votre  enfance,  apres  avoir  rencontrd  votre  portrait  de  distance  en 
distance,  sans  en  avoir  besoin,  puisque  vous  etes  toujours  present  a  notre  esprit  et  k 
notre  cceur  et  que  votre  nom  revient  periodiquement  dans  nos  conversations,  apr^s 
avoir  parl£  de  vous  avec  Miladi  Edgcumbe  pendant  toute  une  journ^e,  nous  nous 
rapprochons  enfin  de  Londres  avec  1’kEe  que  la  plus  grande  merveille  de  l’Angleterre 
nous  ne  l’avons  pas  encore  vue  et  que  nous  vous  la  devrons.  Tout  ce  que  vous  ferez 
pour  le  Prince,  j’aurai  la  pr^somption  de  croire  que  l’amiti6  que  vous  avez  pour  moi  y 
entre  pour  une  millieme  partie,  et  j’aurai  la  vanit6  de  me  croire  toute  ma  vie  votre 
oblig£,  comrne  j'ai  6te  depuis  long-temps  votre  admirateur  et  votre  ami.  Nous  ar- 
riverons  bien  prepares  sur  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  Rule  a  Wife  and  have  a  Wife, 
et  le  Suspicious  Husband ;  mais  s’il  fallait  absolument  encore  se  preparer  a  une  tra¬ 
gedie,  nous  passerions,  je  crois,  des  nuits  pour  l’etudier.  Ah,  quelle  indiscretion  vient 
de  m’^chapper  !  N’y  prenez  pas  garde,  je  vous  en  supplie,  et  pardonnez  i\  des  gens 

*  This  and  the  three  following  Letters  were  written  on  one  sheet  of  paper. 


FOREIGN  CORRESPONDENCE. 


()3(» 

qui  n’ont  qu’un  moment  a  rester  en  Angleterre.  Qui  n’a  plus  qu’un  momenta  vivre, 
n’a  plus  rien  a  dissimuler. 

Je  pr^sente  mon  hommage  k  Madame  Garrick.  Nous  arriverons  a  Londres  Mer- 
credi  16  de  ce  mois,  prets  marquer  dans  nos  fastes  les  jours  que  vous  voudrez  y 
rendre  immortels.  Grimm. 


DU  BARON  RATHSAMHAUSEN. 

Monsieur  !  l’on  exige  que  je  joigne  ma  requete  a  celle  que  vous  venez  de  lire :  je 
le  fais,  sans  avoir  d’autre  titre  que  le  Plaisir  que  vous  trouvez  a  obliger. 

Ratiisamhausen. 


sir, 

I  have  read  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  Rule  a  Wife  and  have  a  Wife,  and  the 
Suspicious  Husband,  these  Plays  are  so  handsome  and  spiritfull,  that  uppon  the 
Theater  the  Plays  cannt  are  agreable  from  itself,  when  but  the  ilustrious  Garrik 
Plays  itself  and  we  poor  Strangers  when  we  hear  him  alors,  nous  serons  dans  la  plus 
grande  satisfaction  d’avoir  vu  la  plus  belle  chose  de  lWngleterre,  osons-nous  l’esp^rer 
Monsieur  ?  Si  Madame  Garrick  avoit  la  bonte  d’interceder  pour  nous,  peut-etre  que 
nous  aurions  ce  bonheur.  Permettez-moi,  Monsieur,  d’y  mettre  maiun  finxs  fas- 
liingun  an  Madam  Garrick  Iind  nois  niumase  zii  roiinifisun  qu  elle  voulut  bien 
s’int^resser  a  notre  sort  aupr&s  de  Monsieur  son  mari 

Louis  Pr.  de  Hesse  Darmstadt. 

With  all  proper  apologies  for  the  impertinence  of  offering  to  give  security  with¬ 
out  being  worth  a  sixpence  myself,  I  Henry  Matty  Clerk  do  certify  that  Lewis 
Hereditary  Prince  of  Hesse  D’Armstadt,  notwithstanding  his  bad  English,  is  worthy 
to  receive  that  noble  pleasure  which  Mr.  Garrick  has  been  used  to  afford  the  great 
and  good  of  all  nations,  let  Mr.  Garrick  carry  that  pleasure  to  as  sublime  a  height  as 
he  dares  :  and  I  do  farther,  as  a  patriot,  call  upon  Mr.  Garrick  to  carry  that  pleasure  as 
high  as  he  can,  that  so  the  partiality  his  Serene  Highness  has  conceived  for  Old  Eng¬ 
land  may  be  fully  justified,  and  rendered  as  durable  as  his  life. 

Da  facilem  cursum,  atque  audacibus  annue  coeptis, 

Ignarosque  tui  mecum  miseratus  amicos : 

Ingredere,  et  Icarus  non  dedignare  vocari.* 

*  I  have  marked  by  italics  the  words  substituted  for  those  of  Virgil  in  the  1st  Georgic. — [Ed.] 


