LETTERS 

OF 

HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 

VOL. I. 



LETTEES 

OF 

HAEEIET COUNTESS GEMVILLE 

1810 — 1845 

EDITED BY HER SON 

THE HON. F. LEVESON GO WEE 

IN TWO VOLUMES— VOL. I. 



WITH PORTRAIT 



THIRD EDITION 



LONDON 
LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO. 

AND NEW YOEK : 15 EAST 16'" STEEET 
18S4 



All righU reiirveU 



INTEODUCTION 



It is not my intention to write a biography of my mother. It 
is difficult to write the life of a parent, and although it has 
been sometimes successfully achieved, it is a task I am unwil- 
ling to undertake. 

These letters were, with the exception of those addressed to 
Lady Harrowby and Mrs. Hamilton, written by my mother to 
hef brother and sister, and it is by the kindness of the late 
Duke of Devonshire, the present Duke, and Lord Carlisle that 
I am enabled to offer them to the public. My brother, who 
read some of them shortly before his death, desired their pub- 
lication. They will, I believe, both amuse and interest those 
who read them, and they appear to me to convey a useful lesson 
by showing how free from selfishness and worldliness a person 
may remain in the midst of a very worldly existence. It will 
be gathered from her letters that my mother's standard of what 
she thought right was high, and that whilst she greatly admired 
those who acted up to that standard, she was full of indulgence 
for others who fell short of it. Her opinions about people 
frequently varied, being founded on the impressions of the 
moment, the later impressions being generally the most favour- 
able. Her sense of the ridiculous was keen, and she freely 
indulged in it when writing to her near relations, confiding in 
their discretion. Her letters were looked upon as so private 
that they were never given to be read by friends or relations. 
It would have been unpardonable to repeat the contents, but 
their publication now has been made harmless by lapse of time. 
It is too much the fashion of the day, when letters are published, 
to omit ^11 that is not praise. This practice appears to me 



vi LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 

objectionable, as it gives a false view of tlie society described 
and it diminishes the value of the praise bestowed. There is 
not much scandal, but where it occurs I have, except in noto- 
rious cases, suppressed the names. 

There has been considerable difficulty in putting these letters 
in anything like their proper order. Those addressed to the 
Duke of Devonshire have their dates docketed by him, and the 
dates of the other letters written in England are generally to 
be ascertained either from the post-marks or from their being 
franked. But there is no such help with regard to the numerous 
letters sent in the Ambassador's bag. The dates which I have 
affixed to these are mere conjecture derived from incidents 
referred to. There are also frequent interruptions in the corre- 
spondence, which are due to the brother and sisters often 
residing in the same place. Still, I hope that a sufficiently 
continuous narrative has been preserved. 

Another difficulty has been the selection of the letters to be 
published, there being many which, for family and other reasons, 
are less suitable for publication. On the other hand, I have 
tried to carry out the views expressed by Archbishop Whately 
in a review he wrote of one of Miss Austen's novels, and which 
are equally applicable to letters. He writes : ' Let anyone cut 
out from a work everything which is devoid of importance and 
interest in itself, and he will find that what is left will have 
lost more than half its charms. We are convinced that some 
writers have diminished the effect of their works by being too 
scrupulous to admit nothing into them which had not some 
absolute and independent merit.' 

I have endeavoured to add to the interest of the letters by. 
describing in short notes the persons referred to— either the 
persons who were in intimate relation with Lady Granville, or 
those about whom the reader might like to know something. 
The descriptive notes only occur the first time any one is 
mentioned. 

Lady Harriet Cavendish was the youngest daughter of the 
fifth Duke of Devonshire. Before she came of age she lost her 
mother, the beautiful Duchess. \There are some letters extant, 



INTRODUCTION vii 

written by Lady Harriet to her mother just before her death, 
which show how much she was beloved by her daughter. In 
one of them she says : ' You would be tired of the endless repe- 
tition if I were to tell you how constantly I wish to be with you. 
I must be very different from what I am before I could feel 
worthy of belonging to you ; but if to love and admire you, not 
only as the most indulgent of mothers, but as superior to any 
human being I ever met with, is to deserve it, you would scarcely 
find any that could deserve it as much.' In another letter she 
says : ' I never knew thoroughly what I felt for you till I left 
you, and when I think of the happiness of seeing your dear 
smile, of hearing your beloved voice, I am almost mad with joy. 
I am sure you alone could inspire what I feel for you : it is 
enthusiasm and admiration that for anybody else would be 
ridiculous, but to deny it to you would be unnatural.' 

At the death of her mother in 1806 Lady Harriet was left 
in a painful and isolated position. She was fond of her father, . 
but, owing to circumstances _it_is needless to relateihis home ,; 
was not congenial to her. Her grandmother, the Dowager Lady 
Spencer, loved her and gave her good advice, but although Lady 
Harriet esteemed, and was grateful to her, there was not much 
sympathy between them. Her brother. Lord Hartington, at 
that time was only sixteen years old, and her sister, Lady 
Georgiana, was already married to Lord Morpeth. Lady Harriet, 
however, lived a good deal with her sister, and on all occasions 
turned to her for advice and support. This strengthened the tie 
of sisterly affection, which bound them together during the 
whole of their joint lives, and of which Lady Granville's letters 
give such a delightful picture. 

Three years after the death of his first wife the Duke of 
Devonshire married Lady Elizabeth Foster, the daughter of 
Lord Bristol, the eccentric Bishop of Derry, and the widow of 
Mr. Foster, an Irish gentleman. The Duke died in 1811, Lady 
Harriet having previously married in 1809 Lord Granville 
Leveson Gower. 

Lord Granville was the second son of the first Marquis of 
Stafford. He was sent to Oxford at the age of fifteen, and there 



viii LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 

formed a life-long friendsliip with Mr. Canning. After Lord 
Granville left the University, lie became a favourite of Mr. Pitt 
and was a frequent visitor at Walmer Castle. Mr. Pitt must 
have formed a high opinion of him to have sent him, at the early 
age of thirty-one, as Ambassador to Russia. On Mr. Pitt's 
death, though Mr. Pox pressed him to remain at his post, he 
came home to see his mother, who was in failing health, and who 
soon afterwards died. He resumed his post in 1806, but soon 
again relinquished it on the rupture between England and Russia 
consequent upon the alliance between the Czar and Napoleon. 

These letters confirm the account given of the married life 
of Lord and Lady Granville by Mr. Charles Greville in a notice 
which appeared in the ' Times ' the day after my father's death. 
' It was,' he wrote, ' an union that was crowned with more than 
common felicity, for, preserving as it did not merely an unin- 
terrupted harmony, but an unfailing freshness and vivacity of 
sentiment and aEfection, it proved incomparably the greatest 
of the many blessings vouchsafed to Lord Granville through the 
whole course of his prosperous career.' Lord and Lady Granville 
had five children. The elder daughter, Susan, married Lord 
Rivers, and was a devoted wife and mother; the younger daughter, 
Georgiana, married Mr. Fullerton,_and was well known for her 
delightful novels and saintly life. This is not the place to 
describe the distinguished career of the eldest son, the late Lord 
Granville, but there are many who will like to read in these 
letters the accounts of him in his childhood and early youth. 
The second son died at the age of seventeen, when his loss 
made on me a sad impression, which has never been effaced 
and now I, the youngest, am left of the five the only survivor. 

Lord and Lady Granville resided in England during the 
first fifteen years of their married life. They made short trips 
abroad — one in 1814, during the first Restoration ; another in 
1815, soon after the battle of Waterloo ; and another in 1817 
when they extended their tour to Switzerland and the Italian 
lakes. With these exceptions they remained in England, and 
divided their time between London and the country. They lived 
first at Tixal in Staffordshire, and afterwards at Wherstead in 



INTRODUCTION IX 

Suffolk, two places which Lord Granville rented. At both of them 
they gathered together a delightful society, comprising some of 
the most prominent politicians, the most attractive wqmen and the 
wittiest men of the day. Lady Harrowby, Lord Granville's sister 
and Lady Granville's correspondent, was the life and soul of this 
society. Mr. Greville in his journal gives the following charming 
description of her : ' Lady Harrowby is superior to any woman I 
have ever known. She has a noble, straightforward, independent 
character, a sound and vigorous understanding, penetration, judg- 
ment, taste. She is perfectly natural, open, and sincere, loves con- 
versation and social enjoyment ; with her intimate friends there 
is an abandon and unreserved communion of thoughts, feelings, 
ajid opinions which render her society delightful; of all the 
women I ever saw she united the most masculine mind with the 
most feminine tenderness.' Of Tixal itself he writes : ' Nothing 
could exceed the agreeableness of the life we led there. Every- 
body was pleased because each did what he pleased, and the 
tone of the society was gay, simple, and clever.' 

In the beginning of 1824, Lord Granville was named 
Ambassador at the Hague, and at the end of that year^was 
transferred to Paris. He remained there till 1828, when after 
the retirement of Mr. Huskisson a,nd the Canningites from the 
Duke of Wellington's Administration he resigned his post. He 
returned to Paris in 1830 upon Lord Grey becoming Prime 
Minister, and, with the exception of a few months during Sir 
Robert Peel's first Administration, he remained there as Ambas- 
sador for many years. 

During the whole time that Lord Granville represented 
England in France up to 1840, the relations between the two 
countries were cordial. In Mr. Greville's opinion this was 
largely due to the personal qualities of Lord Granville. In 
1840, when the two countries were on the verge of war, Lord 
Granville's influence contributed to the maintenance of peace. 
In the spring of the following year he was struck down by 
illness, which was supposed to be due to all the labour and 
anxiety he had undergone the previous year. If this was the 
case it may be truly said that he suffered in the holiest of causes. 



X LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 

He gradually recovered from his illness, but lie remained for 
tte rest of his life more or less of an invalid. He resigned the 
embassy in the autumn of 1841, after the general election had 
resulted in the triumph of the Tories. He spent the following 
winter in Nice ; he went to Germany the next summer, and the 
next winter he passed at Eome, and then made his way slowly 
to England, which he never again left. The two following 
winters were spent at Brighton in a house lent to him by the 
Duke of Devonshire. The rest of their time Lord and Lady 
Granville divided between London and the country houses of 
their friends and relations. He had sufficiently recovered his 
health to enjoy society, and Lady Granville was torn between 
her wish to provide amusement for him and her dread of the 
harm it might do him. In the autumn of 1845 he became 
seriously ill, and he died on January 8, 1846. 

My mother survived him fifteen years, and lived during her 
widowhood in complete retirement, seeing scarcely any one but 
her children, her brother and her sister's children. She especially 
dreaded meeting those whom she had known in happier days. 
Her immediate relations were always delighted to be with her. 
Her sympathetic nature and the gift she had of investing with 
amusement all the small incidents of life made her society always 
most delightful. The last four years of her life she resided at 
Chiswick House, which had been left to her by her brother. 
She read a great deal, and devoted much of her time to charity, 
one of her principal amusements being to invent a variety 
of articles, which were sold for the benefit of her poor. One 
year, she wished to _sell. the camelliasjn_the hot-houses in order 
to devote the proceeds injihadty, but she had some misgiving 
whether she was justified in doing so. No one raising any 
objection, she wrote in delight to a friend, ' Dear n ig, Jiovg rich 
my poorjvil]Jae-L!'\She died in November 1^62. Her loss~to 
her children was ii-reparable, and she was regretted by many 
who had not seen her for years, but who retained a loving 
remembrance of her in her brilliant days. 

F. L. G. 



LETTERS 

OP 

HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 



1810 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Stanhope Street. 

A violent storm of thunder and rain, added to my 
feeling a little heated with the different exertions I 
chose to make yesterday, have induced us to put off 
our journey till to-morrow. 

I got up early, walked in the Park and drove with 
Lady Harrowby, dined at Devonshire House, went to 
the Opera, supped at Devonshire House, and returned 
home between two and three. 

To-day has been very different — a solemn promise 
not to stir out of the house. I am perfectly well, which 
is Vessentiel. My entertainment yesterday did not keep 
pace with my activity. My drive was pleasant, because 
Lady Harrowby is always so, and it was droll to see 
Miss Long's ^ admirers riding about her carriage as the 
Guards do about the King's. Lady Catherine bolstered 
up in one corner and all the minor constellations 
backwards, each of whom are to have a hundred 

^ She married in 1812 Mr. Wellesley, who in 1845 succeeded his father 
as Lord Momington. 

VOL. I. B 



2 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRAXVILLE 1810 

thousand. Frederick Foster ^ says she has secretly 
determined in favour of him — I'homme pieux, qui s'est 
toujours tenu ecarte de lafoule. 

The dinner at Devonshire House was late, long, and 
dull. The opera very brilliant, but I was bored. Mr. 
Montagu '^ particularly chatsome, Mr. Ward ^ chirping, 
poor little Lord "Walpole after a bad illness no bigger 
than my thumb. I bid them all good-bye with an in- 
ward satisfaction that beggars description. At supper 
I sat by Mr. Ward. He praised Lord Morpeth beyond 
measure and you, varying the tone and cadence as 
usual. Mr. Tierney * sat by the Duchess and was enter- 
taining. 

To THE Marquis of Hartington. 

London : April 12, 1810. 

Dearest Hartington, — You must think me a brute 
for having been so long without writing to you, but I 
have been for some time the idlest of human beinss 

a 

We keep terrible late hours, and I do nothing from 
morning till night but think what an angel my hus- 
band is, which is more pleasant than profitable. Your 
absence furnishes me with conversation wherever I go. 
I really cannot explain your leaving London just now, 
your thinking Bath the best place for mathematics or 
Doctor Eandolph's attractions. Poor worn-out Lady 
Warwick rien peut plus with it, but with a tremu- 
lous voice, like cowards just before they dip into the 
sea, follows me about — 'Where is he gone, my dear 

' He was the eldest son of Elizabeth Duchess of Devonshire by her 
first husband. 

' He was the son of Lord Eokeby, whom he succeeded in 1831. 

* He was the son of Viscount Ward, and succeeded him in 1823. He 
was created Earl Dudley in 1827, and was Secretary for Foreign Affairs in 
1827 and 1828, imder Mr. Canning and Lord Goderioh. 

* The celebrated orator. He fought a duel with Pitt in 1796 filled 
various offices in the State, and in 1817 became leader of the Opposition 
in the House of Commons. 



1810 TO LADY G. MORPETH 3 

Lady Harriet, what can he be gone about ? ' There 
are shoals of Miss Mildmays, and the good-natured 
Dowager quite like a hen. Sir Henry and his wife go 
about in attitudes, but they match so well and look so 
handsome that one forgives them for it. 

You will have seen in the papers all that has 
been going on about Sir Francis Burdett. London is 
quiet and dull again. The mob entirely dispersed and 
nothing but soldiers to be seen. These riots have been 
very animating to different people in different ways. 
Lord Carlisle'- got well pelted with mud and dirt. 
Think of the nose of nice nobility. Little 0.^ was 
obliged to explain his politics to the mob, who were 
going to swallow him, I believe. He is so factious that 
if he was not so small and inarticulate he might some 
day or other get into mischief. As it is he is never 
heard and scarcely seen. So passe, passe, petit bon- 
homme, very harmless and very ridiculous. 

We all go to Court the day after to-morrow. Lady 
Stafford ^ presents me, Lady Liverpool the Duchess.* 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London: 1810. 

I went to Devonshire House last night and found 
the remains of a very dull dinner. Bessboroughs,* 

' He married Lady Caroline Leveson Gower, a daughter of the first 
Marquis of Stafford and half-sister to Lord Granville. He was Lord- 
Lieutenant of Ireland from 1780 to 1782. He wrote indifferent poetry, and 
was sneered at in English Bards amd Scotch Beviewers by his relative 
and ward, Lord Byron. 

" Lord Osstdston, who succeeded his father, Lord Tankerville, in 1822,. 
He married in 1806 Mile. Gorisande de Gramont, of whom there is 
frequent mention in these letters. 

' Countess of Sutherland, married in 1785 to the second Marquis of 
Stafford, half-brother to Lord GranvUle. He was Ambassador in Paris 
from 1790 to 1792. She did what she could for Marie Antoinette when 
in prison. c.^<\ ^ . 

* Elizabeth.Duchess of Devonshire. 

' Lord and Lady Bessborough. She was daughter of the first Lor^ 
Spencer and aimt to Lady Granville.* f-^vvu-v t^.av^^, , A l^-^ -,;:----N 

» 2 



4 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

W. Spencers,^ Lord John Townshend,^ and Mr. Chinnery. 
Lord John and Mr. Spencer whispering in a corner of 
the room, Mrs. Spencer acting nine years old with great 
success, and Mr. Chinnery faisant les frais with the 
rest of us. "We dine there to-day, with probably a 
second edition of yesterday. Je ne men fais pas une 
fete, but we thought it right the last day. 

Miss Berry* was with me yesterday, looking 
wretchedly ill and talking in the' most melancholy way 
of her own existence and prospects. 

Lady Oxford and Caroline William Lamb* have 
been engaged in a correspondence, the subject whether 
learning Greek purifies or inflames the passions. Caro. 
seems to have more faith in theory than in practice, to 
judge at le^st by those she consults as to these nice 
points of morality. The letter she repeats as having 
received from Lady Oxford is almost too good to be true. 
After a great many maxims and instances, she ends, 
' All the illiterate women of Athens were bad, but what 
does my sweet friend think of her virtuous Aspasia ? ' 

I have been to try and make Granville get up, and 
to quarrel with him for saying he will not go to-morrow 
if it rains. God bless you, my dearest sister. 

1 He was a relation of Lord Spencer and well known for his clever 
society verses. 

'' He was the son of the first Marquis of Townshend and father of 
the fourth Marquis. 

' She and her sister Miss Agnes were in their early youth intimate 
friends of Horace Walpole. He expressed his fear that, being so delicate, 
they would not live long, but both of them survived him fifty-five years. 
Miss Berry told her maid, who is stiU living, that Horace "Walpole said he 
had offered his hand and heart to her, and his hand and coronet to her 
sister. Their salon in London was considered very agreeable and was 
attended by the best society. Some ill-natured person nicknamed them 
Blackberry and Gooseberry. Lady Theresa Lewis wrote an interesting 
life of the elder sister. 

* She was a daughter of Lady Bessborough, Lady Granville's aunt. 
She entertained a violent passion for Lord Byron, but her conduct was 
so eccentric that she could hardly have been in her right mind. She mar- 
ried Mr. William Lamb, who became Lord Melbourne, the Prime Minister. 



1810 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 5 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Badminton : August 1810. 

Dearest sister, — ^I am sure you will be glad to hear 
of me in perfect health at the end of my fatigues. The 
journey itself has been a remedy, and I feel stronger and 
stouter than I have for some time past. The last four 
days have been perfectly delightful to me. We had 
time enough to travel only between the showers, and 
to be quite at home at the inns. 

I feel my happiness more and more every hour, and 
Granville's affection and angeUc kindness make me the 
happiest of human beings. 

I look forward to this week with great pleasure. 
The Duchess,^ Granville, and I perfectly alone, as the 
Duke, sons, and tutors go this morning to Monmouth. 
In spite of everything, I long for the 10 th of October, 
with all its pleasures, all its pains. 

There are eleven children here, little Eliots ^ in- 
cluded. They make too much noise for my nerves, 
and a great deal too much for Granville's. 

I left Miss Long, refusing to the right and left. 
Sheridan says he sat by Lady Catherine at supper, and 
that she munched and munched platesful of salad, till he 
took her for an old sow, and caught himself just going 
to say to the servants, ' Pray change this lady's trough.' 
Frederick Lamb ^ flirts with Lady Abdy and says he 
would not marry Miss Long if she has four times as 
much. This looks unpromising for the Melbourne 
speculation. 

It seems little worth while to send this aU up 

' The Duchess of Beaufort, a sister of Lord Granville. 

'^ Children of Lady Georgiana Eliot, who was a sister of Lord Granville 
and mother of the third Earl of St. Germans. 

^ He became a distinguished diplomatist. He was brother of Lord 
Melbourne and succeeded him in 1848, having been previously created 
Lord Beauvale. 



6 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

England, but I flatter myself that you will not be sorry 
to have the dull intelligence of my very great health 
and prosperity. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Badminton : August 1810. 

Wednesday. I had a letter from my grandmother ^ 
yesterday, which rather surprised me. She says she 
wishes very much to see me, and shall therefore be at 
the York Hotel at Bath to-morrow, only sixteen miles 
from Badminton and a good road. ' Call for pen, ink, 
and paper, and say at what hour I may expect you.' 
You may believe that Granville does not consent to 
this exploit, and, indeed, a drive of thirty-two miles, 
with the repose of an inn at Bath, would not have 
exactly suited my present state of health. 

Thursday. I forgot to tell you that the Duchess has 
invited my grandmother to come here, and I rather 
expect her to-day. The Duke, sons, and tutors return 
to-morrow, which diminishes my regret at leaving 
Badminton considerably. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Badminton : August 1810. 

My grandmother arrived here yesterday morning. 
She has been quite delightful, and it is so to me to see 
her so much pleased and at her ease with Granville and 
the Duchess. I should imagine that she had passed 
half her life here, and her perfectly good and dans 
son assiette manner in whatever society she falls into 
always excites my surprise and admiration. Very early 
hours, very good books, and most unwearied chess- 
playing are just what suit her. She is all kindness to 
me and, I think, pleased with our having wished to 

' The Dowager Lady Spencer, who was a Miss Poyntz, and married 
to the first Earl Spencer. She was mother of Georgiana Duchess of 
Devonshire. 



1810 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 7 

have her here so intimately. We exchange her to-day 
for the Duke and his appendages. The day after to- 
morrow we begin our journey. If I continue as well 
as I am now, I shall be equal to that or almost any 
exertion. 

Our route in case you should write to me during it 
is this : On Saturday we sleep at Gloucester, Sunday 
at Worcester, Monday at Wolverhampton, and reach 
Sandon on Tuesday. 

God bless you, dearest love. I must leave you, for 
we breakfast an hour earlier than usual for my grand- 
mother. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Badminton : August 1810. 

I write one line to tell you that we are setting out. 
I should regret leaving this place much more if the 
Duchess was not coming to Sandon the 22nd of Sep- 
tember, which will be a week before we leave it. 

The day is delightful, hot summer air. We do not 
go till two. Our mode of travelling enables us to be 
established at the different inns as at home. We dine 
regularly at six, walk, read Paley, etc., as if we were in 
Stanhope Street, and set off again in the same stately 
progress. ^^ ,, 

For the first three days at Sandon poor Granville <.- '''',' 
will be obKged to set off at nine every morning for the 
Assizes, and what is worse has to dine with the judges, 
but this last only once I believe. 

My hope and prayer is that nothing will prevent 
our going to Castle Howard next year. I certainly 
admire it more than any place I ever saw, and would 
it not be nice to be there together ? My wish, and as 
it is nearer almost a stronger one, is that you may go ^ 
to Saltram after my confinement. We certainly shall, ,/' /', 
and remaiii"there for some length of time. 



8 LETTERS OF HAEEIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

God bless you, my dear dearest sister. Granville is 
puUing up all his beautiful, regular features and saying, 
' Now do leave off. It is really too foolish, tiring your- 
self.' What an angel he is, eating buttered roll ! 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : August 25, 1810. 

I shall let you off easily to-night, for I have taken 
three walks and a drive of above three hours. My eyes 
are all but fast closed. 

We called on Lady Talbot to-day, in my finest laces, 
not to be outdone by the plum colour. She has a great 
deal of conversation and we got on very well together. 
Ingestre is a fine old place, flat but with some uncom- 
monly fine trees. Beeches that made me think of Eay 
Wood.i 

I have been writing to Hart ^ to ask him here. I 
cannot fancy anybody being at this place and not en- 
joying it, and I think he will particularly. It will be 
good for him in his recovering state, for we keep really 
early hours, take more air than exercise. 

The Duchess in her last letter hopes and believes 
Papa will go to Hardwicke in three weeks. He will as 
soon go to Japan. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : August 28, 1810. 

I am delighted with this place, and I do not think 
its faults great enough to prevent one's thinking it 
beautiful. We arrived here yesterday in time to drive 
over the park and the beautiful wood. The house is 
comfortable, with two fine rooms. 

We fared sumptuously at the rich man's table. 
Our reception has really been ridiculous, but you shall 

' A wood at Castle Howard. 
" Her brother. Lord Hartington. 



1810 TO LADY G. MORPETH 9 

judge. The dinner for us two was soup, fish, fricassee 
of chicken, cutlets, venison, veal, hare, vegetables of 
all kinds, tart, melon, pineapple, grapes, peaches, nec- 
tarines, with wine in proportion. Six servants to wait 
upon us, whom we did not dare dispense with, a gentle- 
man-in-waiting and a fat old housekeeper hovering 
round the door to listen, I suppose, if we should chance 
to express a wish. Before this sumptuous repast was 
well digested, about four hours later, the doors opened, 
and in was pushed a supper in the same proportion, in 
itself enough to have fed me for a w^eek. I did not 
know whether to laugh or cry. Either would have 
been better than what I did, which was to begin again, 
with the prospect of a pill to-night, and redoubled 
abstemiousness for a week to come. 

The house is full of portraits, which amuse me more 
than all the rest. Two of Lord Stafford, positive and 
important, three of her, one by Phillips, very fierce and 
foreign. Three of Lady Carlisle, all very handsome, 
but less so than I have always heard she was. Poor 
dear Lady Louisa Macdonald,^ very pretty and senti- 
mental, leaning upon an anchor ; and last, not least, 
Granville, between three and four, dancing with all his 
might with his sitters, and a drawdng of him, by Down- 
man, when he was seven and a half, in a sky-blue 
coat, making eyes, and perfectly angelic and beautiful. 
There are a few of Anne,^ which do not justify the , 
Archbishop in my eyes ; one of the late Lady Stafibrd,^ ^ . 
and several of her husband, who must' have been a, f '- 
magnificent old man. God bless you. I am summoned 
to an immense cold collation. We breakfasted two 
hours ago. 

' She wasa sister of Lord Granville. Her husband was Sir Archibald 
Maodonald, Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 

2 Anothsf^ster of Lord Granville, Lady Ann Vernon, married to the 
Archbishop of York. MtK^xt 1 L- fi-a- t C/' ti' '^ 

' Lord Granville's mother. 



10 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : August 29, 1810. 

How could you ever imagine I should be a careless 
correspondent to you? Writing to you and hearing 
from you are amongst my greatest pleasures, and I am 
too selfish ever to neglect or forfeit them. You do not 
know how necessary your affection is to my happiness. 
I never wished so much to see you again after any 
absence as I do now. To-day is my birthday, and the 
first I have been away from you for a long time, and 
have been all day thinking how triste it is not to see 
you. God bless you, my beloved G., and repay you 
for all your kindness to me. If you had loved me less 
I should have been a very unhappy and perhaps worth- 
less person. My heart would have been shut up 
against everything about me, the faults of my character 
would have been confirmed, and I should rieither have 
had fortitude nor almost the desire to struggle against 
a lot that without you would almost have been a hope- 
less one. All this you saved me from, and in fact have 
been the cause of all the happiness I have since felt. 
I do not exactly know what I say, but I know what I feel, 
and I do feel loVfe and gratitude to you very very hard 
to be expressed. I have time for very little to-day. 
We are going to drive in the curricle. We go long 
expeditions in it every day. 

How the Macdonalds ^ like to come upon one by 
surprise ! I mean Mr. and Mrs. We found their cards 
yesterday, and it is supposed they are staying at her 
father's, eight miles hence. 1 believe they are to be 
asked to come here. 

I have received letters from different quarters yes- 
terday. From Caroline,'^ enchanted with Castle Howard 

^ Mr. Macdonald (afterwards Sir James) was a son of the Chief Baron, 
and married to Miss Ehzabeth Sparrow. 

'^ Mrs. Lamb, wife of Mr. George Lamb, a brother of the Prime 
Minister, Lord Melbourne. 



1810 TO LA.DY Q. MORPETH 11 

and Lord Carlisle's graciousness to her. Erom the 
Duchess ^ about my bel bambino, contriving to make 
even that subject dull ; from Miss Trimmer,^ ' affec- 
tionate though wronged ; ' from my grandmother, all 
kindness and satisfaction at having embarked me at 
last in a regular, docketted correspondence. From 
Samuel, ' returning his respects and duty,' to announce 
his being made footman to the Prince of Wales. 

I dare say Lady Harrowby sends you her love, but 
I am too lazy to go into her room to ascertain it. My 
suspicion is grounded on her look of great satisfaction 
when I told her you sent her yours. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Lilleshall : September 4, 1810. 

The post is terrible here. Our letters are sent by 
opportunities to the post-town. Nothing is so difficult 
as to avail oneself of an opportunity, et cela fait perdre 
la tete only to think of them, at least such heads as 
mine. I ought not to complain of it now, as it brought 
me last night a long letter from you, one from Hart, 
and George's^ delightful tragedy. Clever, pompous 
darling. It is so much better than any of his grand- 
papa's productions that I suspect the tantarum to be 
jalousie de metier. 

To-day I have been entirely taken up with going 
all over the Iron Works and making the agreeable to 
Lady Carohne Wrottesley, who came thirteen miles to 
pay us a morning visit, and staid with us in proportion. 
She looks so like the Bennets that she bored me more 

' The Duchess of Devonshire. 

' Lady Granville's governess, a sister-in-law of the authoress Mrs. 
Trimmer. 

' Lord Morpeth's eldest son, who became Lord Morpeth in 1824 and 
Earl of Carlisle in 1848. A popular statesman, who played a dis- 
tinguished part in the House of Commons, and was Lord-Lieutenant of 
Ireland from 1855 to 1858 and from 1859 to 1864. 



12 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

in imagination than reality, for she has much more 
conversation and is less heavy in hand than any of 
them. Of all created things she is to me the ugliest, 
and you may see her as well as I did to-day if you will 
but fancy Lord 0.^ grown enormously fat, les larmes 
aux yeux, a red nose, with hands and feet like large 
cream cheeses, in a pink hat and feather, sash and 
shoes. 

The Dean of Lichfield dines with us to-morrow at 
Mr. Cotes' on his way home. We shall find there Mr. 
Tarplay, who rode over here yesterday and worried me 
till I was ready to cry about inns and roads, but very 
good-humoured and indefatigable in his researches into 
where we changed horses, where we had good dinners 
and beds, how far we came each day, and how safely we 
got down, the different hills. His whole soul must be 
devoted to topography. 

The Dean seems to me a delightful person. He is 
beautiful to begin with, and what one should have 
painted for a Dean before the purity of one's ideas 
upon the subject had been corruptfii^ by a sight of Mr. 
Edward Legge in that capacity, ^e is tall and thin 
and graceful in his look and manner. ' A gentleman 
indeed,' as Walker observed upon his opening a door 
for her to pass and taking off his hat. But she would 
have thought Parson Legge an Apollo Belvedere en 
pareil cas. He has immense brown eyes with straight 
black eyebrows, a regular profile, and the whitest teeth. 
He looks old and at times sallow, but some years ago 
he must have been exactly like Mrs. Inchbald's de- 
scription of Dorriforth.^ His wife has by all accounts no 
claim to Miss Milner's charms or frailties, as she is 
ugly, stingy, and faithful. But I shall not see her till 
next Tuesday, when the races begin and we are to take 

• She was Lord Ossulston's sister. 

^ The hero in Mrs. Inchbald's Simple Story. 



1810 TO LADY G. MORPETH 13 

up our abode at the Deanery. The Dean is bilious, a 
strong tie between us, as he eats no butter, dines upon 
fish without sauce, meat without salad, and has not 
touched fruit for years. He does eat eggs and pota- 
toes, but otherwise the sympathy is striking. My diet 
is become so known that I could not commit the slightest 
debauch if I was ever so inclined to it. Nobody thinks 
of me tiU thej'' see roast mutton or beef, and the servants 
bring me my boiled rice and glass of water as if I was 
doing penance upon it for some crime. It is astonish- 
ing how strictly virtuous this common consent keeps 
me, as any change in my regime would now be an event. 
I wish I could be compelled into the performance of 
some of my other duties in so effectual a manner. 

Granville is shooting this morning, and I submit to 
his absence with a good grace, for he comes home so 
radiant in health and seems to thrive upon it so much, 
that I cannot find it in my heart to be selfish about it. 
I really think I am happier every hour. There never 
was anything so adorable as he is in every way. I 
have enjoyed being here more than anywhere else, it is 
such perfect quiet and monopoly of him. Our dinner 
to-day I shall not dislike, though I should have preferred 
one here. 

Mr. Cotes, I hear, is the best old man in the world, 
adored in Stafibrdshire and Shropshire for his hearty 
good-humour and welcome to everything that comes 
within a yard of him. He has a mania for farming, 
even to asking the people, rich and poor, whom he 
meets on the high road to come and look at his wheat, 
potatoes, etc. He tells this story of himself, that, as he 
was one day crossing the road to his fields, he saw a 
poor Welshman walking along with whom he ' did not 
recollect having had any previous acquaintance, and 
according to custom very civiUy asked him if he would 
not like to see his farm. The man, who it seems had 



14 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

been before all over it, immediately took to his heels, 
calling out as he ran, ' Hurs seen it, hurs seen it.' 
Cannot you soothe Lord Carlisle with this anecdote ? 
I am sure it is as entertaining as ' More over the dog,' 
' A bird by G.,' and many more of those we have 
listened to often without crying out, ' Hurs heard it, 
hurs heard it.' 

My dearest sister, do look what quantities I have 
written. Lords M. and G. would make sarcastic 
remarks upon the events it must contain, but if I was 
to have met you at Lilleshall I should have talked three 
times as much ; therefore why is it odd to write a part 
of it ? "And as to retrenching from our intercourse with 
our friends everything but the downright needful and 
eventful, it would reduce three parts of the creation to 
un morne silence. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : September 1810. 

Indeed we are happy, and your happiness has the 
advantage of being confirmed by time and seven safe 
labours. I am superstitious and full of a levelling 
principle and things brought to an equality to all. 
There are sorrows in life. The harvest bugs bite, one 
loses one's needles, breaks one's thread in hemstitch, 
but I bear them like a man. 

Mr. and Mrs. Macdonald come to-day. She does 
very well, is intelligent, animated, and good-humoured, 
and I do not know why I feel that I never could, if 
hanging was the alternative, like her one bit better 
than I do. Her hair is grown dark, her complexion is 
brilliant, her features are fined down, her figure faite a 
peindre, and yet I cannot think her in the least pretty. 
No, not even with the help of yellow satin and cairn 
gorams. He or his tailor made his coats all too tight, 
which is my chief criticism sur son compte. But as 



1810 TO LADY G. MOKPETH 15 

they are delighted with each other, my sentiments upon 
the subject are not of much importance. God bless 
you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : September 24, 1810. 

Many thanks for your patience in bearing the kind 
enquiries of my friends. 

You cannot think what these Assizes are to me. I 
know it is no calamity, and that if it was it would be over 
by four o'clock to-day ; but Granville's constant kindness 
and attention, his reading to me, driving me, etc., make 
him so necessary to the enjoyment of every moment of 
my time, that I feel quite helpless without him, and as 
if my hands, feet, and understanding were all with him 
in the Town Hall at Stafford. 

I can as little describe the resource it is to me to 
write to you, and hardly understand it, considering the 
penance it is to me to write two lines to anybody else. 
Shame and postage often stop me when nothing else 
would, and I am sure Lord Morpeth must think it 
ridiculous, as I see Granville does. Men so little under- 
stand the comfort of talking a great deal about nothing 

at all. 

I shall never be easy till you have seen this place. 
It is really delicious, like iced water or strawberry and 
cream. Lord and Lady Harrowby are the two most 
independent people I know, which gives a great aisance 
to one's existence here. Society and comfort being the 
sentimental part of her character, I mean her highest 
idea of enjoyment, there is not an inch of the house or 
garden that is not formed for both, and Granville and I 
spend our time like la belle when she first got into the 
Botes' palace. At whatever hour we get up, we find 
breakfast prepared in a room to ourselves, opening with 
o-reat glass doors into a flower garden, sweeter and 



16 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1810 

more beautiful than anything but some of the descrip- 
tions in ' Ariosto ' and the ' Fairy Queen.' We might, if 
we pleased, never see a human being, for my dressing- 
room, which we are a good deal in later in the day, I 
could be content to pass my life in, one continued couch 
and flower-basket. But about four we all meet. Lady 
Harrowby drives me in a low chair ; Granville when he 
is here walks with it, and Lord Harrowby and Susan * 
ride. She is a delightful girl, and so improved in looks 
that I think she will end by being extremely pretty. 
She is grown and filled out, and the delicacy and 
symmetry of her figure is beautiful, with the nicest 
shaped head and white teeth. When she takes exercise 
she has a colour like rouge, and her eyebrows are 
grown dark, which with so fair a skin is very un- 
common. Her temper and disposition seem to me like 
Caroline, with the same sort of quiet intelligence and 
perfect tact in everything she does and says. She plays 
with uncommon expression on the pianoforte, and takes 
in science kindly from Mr. Smart. God bless you, my 
dearest sis. I am in rude health and very much in love 
with my husband. 

Eousseau says the onty two reasonable causes of 
sufiering are remorse and bodily pain. He would 
therefore account me at the very pinnacle of human 
happiness, which is a truth worth aU his paradoxes. I 
am in the middle of his ' Emile.' I think parts of it 
excellent, and the foundation of most of what has been 
since written on the subject of education. The parts I 
do not like seem to me more ridiculous than immoral, 
although Miss Trimmer sits as heavy on my soul at the 
moment I pass this judgment as she did upon poor 
Eousseau for having written the book. I have, how- 

' Lady Susan Ryder, eldest daughter of Lord Harrowby. Married in 
1817 to Lord Ebrington, who succeeded his father as Lord Portescue in 
1841, and was Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland from 1839 to 1841. 



1810 TO THE MARQUIS OF HARTINGTON 17 

ever, only read one volume and may sympathise with 
her at last. He has too much of looking up to the sky 
with larmes dans les yeux, which, though it may be 
a part and certainly is the consequence of sincere and 
ardent piety — I mean that sort of grateful emotion one 
feels in all the pleasures of fine weather and the works 
of Nature — is but a sad loophole or dependance for 
those who consider it as the whole. I said God bless 
you before this treatise, and I say it again and again. 
I dare not look forward to the happiness I may feel the 
end of October. I dare not think I deserve it. Addio. 

To THE Marquis of Hartington. 

Stanhope Street : November 23, 1810. 

I am getting strength very fast, but still unable to 
walk more than a few steps. I am ,gro\¥n very thin 
and paler than anything above ground. Corise, who 
dined with me yesterday, strongly recommends rouge. 
' Husbands never see those things — Lor 0.^ — never find 
it out, he would be furious with me,' and the little man 
would be so, for he is still wondering and exulting over 
her having left off being pea green. She says her boy is 
so beautiful that people goes to see him for a curiosite. 

Kitty Monk came to see me whilst she was here, and 
they quarrelled aU the time, both having heard more 
gossip than I thought their poor little heads would 
hold, from the very best authority, and all the facts in 
direct opposition to one another. Kitty appears in a 
new character this year — perfect independence and a 
very decide ton, talks of going into the country, taking 
Opera Boxes, etc., comme s'il ny avait point de Lady 
Elisabeth au monde. 

London is trying to be a little gay. The Duchess 
of Gordon gives parties, but I hear they are dull ones. 
I am glad to hear of Mr. Foster's susceptibilite, 'but 

' Lord Ossulston. 
VOL. 1. C 



18 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE I8I0 

when he next doth fall in love, may I be there to 
see it.' 

Miss Leveson Gower, if you please, sends her love 
and duty to you. She has long eyelashes and a round 
dimple. Her wet-nurse has been but six weeks in 
England, and Mrs. Griffiths, my month nurse, a treasure, 
and the most respectable of dames from Tower Hill, 
has her in the sort of horror some people have of 
an earwig or a toad. ' One of the Irish poor, a mere 
nothing, that has been, I dare say, aU her life, as those 
people are, in some dirty hole with her arms akimbo.' 
F. Foster should see his countrywoman. She has a very 
pretty face and talks in a plaintive brogue. When she 
is afraid of Mrs. Griffiths, she says, ' Ah Christ, she'll 
kiU me ! ' 



18U TO LADY G. MORPETH 19 



181I 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : August 23, 1811. 

I am afraid by your observations to-day that you 
are not amused. In a selfish point of view I hope you 
will be bored in September, as it wiU make Tixal, like 
the Duke of St. Albans, shine by comparison. 

Lady Stafford is, shutting one's eyes to the past, 
very delightful, kind, generous, natural, se laissant 
aller and seeming to adore us. 'Tis seeming all, but 
glissez, mortels, n'appuyez pas, wiU carry us through 
with her as well as on the ice. Lord Stafford provokes 
me with an importance about every trifle, sufficient 
to give a man weight in all the trying circumstances 
of his life, and he nods and stares and screws up 
his mouth about the distance he has walked in the 
morning, as if it was an event and a mystery to his 
audience. 

Lord Francis ' is quite a little Mros de roman, 
handsome, intelligent, the most perfect manners, and 
yet nothing precocious or pedantic. I think he must 
be something wonderful in time. He has grave, un- 
affected sort of zeal, a look and voice of enquiry about 
anything that interests, and a scornful smile when he 
does not believe or approve of what is said that puts 
me in mind of William Lamb, but double refined, and 
not a shade of conceit. 

' Lord Francis Leveson Gower, Lord Stafford's second son. He 
succeeded on his father's death to the Duke of Bridgewater's property 
and took the name of Egerton. He was created Earl of EUesmere in 
1846.. 

c 2 



20 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1811 



To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : September 18, 1811. 

Hartington goes to-morrow, in an agony lest I 
should spoil the pleasure he has of telling things by- 
writing them to you first. I am therefore tongue-tied 
on many subjects. 

■• Is it possible that the Duchess has written to you 
in her own name to ask you to lie in at Chiswick ? It 
is too hard, as that dear angel Hart, says, to rob him of 
the pleasure of doing those things himself. I may 
boast to you of his affection for us ; we really are at 
present his great objects. It is in everything, and a 
wish to be with us beyond all others. He is to be at 
Tixal the end of October again, and I will, if I possibly 
can, keep him there for you. 

We go to Tixal the day after to-morrow. I must 
take Mr. Vernon ^ away to flirt with my beauties there. 
It wiU not be dangerous for Lady Harriet, and Corise 
bears a charmed life. He will be proud beyond mea- 
sure and fancy both are in love with him. 

I have had a very affectionate letter from Caroline ^ 
since the one I mentioned to you, and a very odd one 
from her namesake, Caroline William,^ wishing the 
learned could explain the incongruity of her behaviour. 
They would be put to it indeed. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : October 5, 1811. 

You two very dearest people I hope are together 
for your own sake and for mine. I have been pre- 
vented writing by most wearing nervous headaches. 

' Eldest son of the Archbishop of York. Assumed the name of 
Harcourt at the same tune as his father. , ,' ^r, 'Kir- 

» Mrs. George Lamb.^.^B«A 4^A^'^^"'0 ^^^\ ' '" ' 
' Lady Caroline Larab, daughter of Lord Bessborough and wife of 
Lord Melbourne. 



1811 TO LADY G. MORPETH 21 

It has made writing, reading, or any exertion painful 
for the time, but I am now almost well again. 

We are au sein of Monseigneurs, and amazing noise, 
not propitious to a headache. Monsieur ^ forgets we are 
all beyond our teens and plays at bo-peep, etc., with 
Lady Stafford and me. The httle hideous Due de Berri ^ 
smouches us all. ' Ah ! que c'est vilain ! Mais, fi done, 
c'est abominable. Veut-on que je mange cela ? Teut- 
on que je fasse ceci ? ' Puys^gur very agreeable, and 
the Baron, lightened of the Baronne, quite outrageous 
with spirits and liberty. Lady Harrowby looking 
better and smarter than all of us put together. Cori- 
sande with des souffrances, rude to the French, in love 
with little 0., afraid of walking in the fields for fear of 
being tossed by the bull, saying, ' How. thin and wizel 
Puysegur's face is grown ! ' 

Pray write to me. You do not know how necessary 
you are to my happiness — more I think than ever- 
Granville, Hart, and you are very desirable things. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : October 6, 1811. 

My headache, which I made so much of yesterday, 
is nearly gone ; it is even callous to the noise. "We 
do everything with extreme onction. We play upon 
the pianoforte, harp, guitar, triangle, and castagnettes 
with all our might, all singing at once. We all talk 
at once, and play at cards at once. On Tuesday we 
all remove to Sandon, and I cannot tell you how much 
I long for the repose of Tixal. 

The Due de Berri is clever, sings well, but is difficile 
a vivre and tries Lady Stafford by finding fault. To-day 
the eggs at breakfast were abominable. ' Ma foi, Ma- 
dame, Mesdames vos poules ne s'acquittent pas bien.' 
They laugh unmercifully at the Baron, and you should 

' The Comte d'Artois, who became Charles the Tenth. 
^ Comte d'Artois' second son, who was murdered in 1820. 



22 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1811 

have heard the shout when he said by mistake, ' Mon- 
seigneur, si jamais j'ai le gouvernement d'une vieille,' 
instead of ville. They play at quinze half the night, 
too deep I think, as the Baron has lost 150/. 

The hfe here is a little less easy. We sit hours at 
breakfa.st and have a sort of conscience about coming 
down into the library. You should see us at this 
moment : Lady Stafford is at work, Puysegur a little too 
much devoue aux dames, little 0. perched on a book 
bigger than himself, Mr. Vernon conveniently placed to 
see every word I write. My husband is at Stone. 
They all think it a good joke my loving him, just as 
they might if I was amour acMe of some snuffy old 
Frenchman, shout if they find us together, pretend that 
I go pour hattre les huissons before him when he shoots. 
Lord help them ! Their only heros de roman are the 
Baron de EoUe and the Due de Castries. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon: October 11, 1811. 

My time has been taken up with nursing Granville, 
who has been tortured with the toothache, and making 
French civilities. 

Monsieur and the Due de Berri must have suffered 
une contrainte mortelle at Trentham. They are like 
birds out of a cage here, seem to breathe easier, and tread 
upon air. Monsieur, dear, good-natured man, does not 
like to be puzzled by persiflage, and here he may shout 
his lungs out if he pleases. The Due de Berri sings 
dehghtfuUy all the opera duets and trios with Lady 
Harrowby and la petite Suzanne, who sings beautifully. 
She grows prettier every day. They are all quite in 
love with her, and really she is a httle angel. She does 
everything equally well. Her waltzing is the prettiest 
thing that can be seen, she plays well on the pianoforte, 
and all this with the simplicity and diffidence of a child. 



1811 TO LADY G. MORPETH 23 

Luxury and Londesborough ^ are not easy to my 
imagination. I see a spinet, a few wooden chairs, and 
one crazy Pembroke table. 

The Baron has been following me all over the house 
to prove that the Baronne and he are not in love with 
each other. ' Nous nous convenons, voyez-vous ? Je 
vais de mon c6te, eUe va le sien. Je reste avec mes 
anciennes amies, elle demeure chez les siennes. C'est 
ce qu'il y a de raisonnable ; voilk ce que c'est de se 
comprendre.' Why with this sympathy of tastes it 
ever occurred to them tp make of two one, I do not 
understand. 

Monsieur de Puysegur is really concentre into one 
wrinkle. It is the oldest, gayest, thinnest, most withered 
and most brilliant thing one can meet with. When 
there are so many young, fat fools going about the world, 
I wish for the transmigration of souls. Puysegur might 
animate a whole family. Think of hearing my aunt 
George ^ cut a very good joke. 

I have been at the Stafford races,^ betting and court- 
ing aU the people at a great rate. It was a miniature of 
York, but really very amusing. Lord Bradford steward, 
a man who says, ' G. d you, how is Granville to- 
day ? ' It is difficult to meet this sort of fire and spirit 
in conversation with any degree of success. 

This is for you, brother mine, as G. does not know 
the personages. Monsieur went to Shugborough yester- 
day, and found "Lady Anson with about a dozen women 
prepared for him. You should have seen all her nerves 
at work, Mrs. George bursting, and every now and then 
a strong fit in a corner. Little Miss Black, more demure, 
more like Miss Trimmer than ever. Monsieur and. 

» The Duke of Devonshire's property. The house was subsequently 
pulled down and the estate was afterwards sold to Lord Francis Conyng- 
}iam, who was created Lord Londesborough in 1850. 

* Lady George Cavendish. 

' Lord Granville represented Staffordshire. 



24 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1811 

Berri balancing in the midst of them. Monsieur with 
the only joke he ever cuts. ' Ah ! Ah ! Lady Anson, 
Ha, ha ! ' and then universal shouts from all sides. There 
was a splendid meal prepared — entrees, ragouts of all 
sorts and sizes, wines, ices, prepared and devoured. 

This is a specimen of Staffordshire visits. They all 
returned — ' Charmante femme Lady Anson, des dents 
magnifiques, des trufFes, mais des trulTes comme on n'en 
voit pas.' The Baron — ' Je n'ai rien mang^.' ' Oh ! 
Baron ! ' ' He bien, Monseigneur, une douzaine d'ecri- 
visses, quelques glaces, je n'appelle pas cela manger.' 
This is a specimen of French stomachs. God bless you, 
dearests, both. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : October 20, 1811. 

What weather, my dearest sister ! It is brighter, 
milder, softer, sweeter than it can ever have been 
before. The only epreuve is that Granville shoots, and 
I am reduced to walk with nurses, grooms, and 
donkeys. Lord Harrowby will be a Godsend, for he 
walks like any apple-woman, and is more agreeable 
then than at any other time, as in general conversation 
he is a little too much ' squared to nicest rules.' The 
grammar is so good, and the period so neat. I do not 
mean to say that these are not desirable points ; but, 
as Hannah More says of good housewifery, one should 
see the effect and not the details. 

Lady Douglas ^ writes to Corise, ' Ever most ten- 
derly, most affectionately yours.' I hear she is more 
devoted to Lord Douglas than ever. Her heroes 
and heroines are not quite worthy of her, and 'that 
clever creature Mrs. Stewart '- is an instance certainly 
of want of discrimination as to talent. But I rather 

' Daughter of Mr. Beckford of Fonthill. Her husband succeeded as 
tenth Duke of Hamilton in 1819. 



1811 TO LADY G. MORPETH 25 

think she loves nobody enough to keep her from, 
loving everybody. It requires so much leisure to adore 
all one's common acquaintance. 

I am going to hunt for GranviUe and John Talbot 
among the turnips with Susan mounted on a donkey. 

To Lady. G. Morpeth. 

Lilleshall : October 28, 1811. 

I quite long to see you and dear Hart again. We 
are here for three daj^s, quite alone and very comfort- 
able. Blazing fires of Staffordshire coal, weather that 
allows one never to put one's nose out, an easy con- 
science upon it, two new reviews, early hours, whole- 
some dinners, and comfortable bed, and Granville, , 
adored ' Granville, who would make a barren desert 
smile. There is a tirade I do not often allow myself, 
and never but to you, and therefore do not say, as 
Charles EUis would, that it is not in good taste. 

I should reaUy like to be here all the year round 
with you and Lord Morpeth to spend as much time as 
you could endure here. It is so quiet, such thorough 
country, and so difficult of access to the world at large. 
You wiU think I am growing quite a misanthrope, but 
Chatsworth wiU make me worldly again. How smart 
we must be, and I have quite forgot how. It makes 
me laugh to think how popular we shall be. In 
sapphires and diamonds and amethysts as big as eggs 
doing I'impossihle to be gracious and agreeable, and 
how wiU dearest Hart be told by Mr. this and Lady 
that that we are adorable, perfect ! 

I really do think, as Walker says, that we do please 
very much when we try, and, with the wonderful 
efforts I foresee we shall make, I confess I see no limit 
to it. It is incumbent upon us to be dehghtful. I 
consider it quite as a debt and duty we owe my 
brother. 



26 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1811 



To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : October 1811. 

Lord Carlisle is a great deal too bad. It is like the 
Staffords, who would dine at four the day we were 
expecting the Hollands at Trentham, though we had no 
means of acquainting them with the hour, and they 
might have more reasonably expected it to be break- 
fast than dinner. Selfishness in these little details I can- 
not understand. In a great affair you may not have 
strength of mind to make a great sacrifice, you may not 
have principle enough to make a strong exertion ; but 
in trifles light as air, ten minutes' difference in the hour, 
walking to the right or the left, going in an open or 
a shut carriage, je m'y perds. Where is a mind little 
enough or a life long enough to make such matters of 
one moment's importance ? 

Granville, Mr. Luttrel,^ and Lord Harrowby pro- 
voke me with their chess. They are like three Spanish 
Dons, the unoccupied just as attentive as the others. 

I must go and coquette with Puysegur, or he will 
abuse Tixal et I'ennui mortel d!y etre,. avec une femme 
qui ne fait quecrire a ses parents. Mr. Luttrel I like 
better every hour. He has that don du del of never 
being de trop, and I never met with so independent a 
person. I attribute it partly to being used to float 
upon that great ocean, Brocket and Whitehall,^ where 
a person is forced to shift for himself without any clue 
to guide him. I hear they wander about there all 

' ' He was a natural son of Lord Carhampton. He never had any but 
a social position, but that was one of great eminence and success. He 
was looked upon as one of the most accomplished, agreeable, and enter- 
taining men of his day. His death has removed one of the last survivors 
of a brilliant generation, a conspicuous member of such a society as this 
world has rarely seen, nothing approaching to which exists at present, and 
such perhaps as it will never see again.' — Charles Greville's Journal. 

^ Lord Melbourne's residences in country and town. 



1811 TO LADY G. MORPETH 27 

day and sleep about all the evening ; no meal is at a 
given hour, but drops upon them as an unexpected 
pleasure. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : October 31, 1811. 

Dearest sister, — I have been a most wretched cor- 
respondent, but I have been at Trentham, making the 
agreeable far principe and playing at piquet pour me 
distraire. I could not have amused you, and it has 
been one of my worst fits of indolence. 

The Derby s^ are very agreeable people. He is 
round, good-humoured, and agreeable ; she is dignified, 
like a heroine in a genteel comedy, and seems a sensible, 
excellent, superior woman. She adores your George, 
she thinks him the most beautiful boy that ever was 
seen. He writes the cleverest letters to some little boy 
at Knowsley, full of Latin quotations. 

We are sleeping at Sandon to break over sixteen 
miles to Tixal, where we settle to-morrow. In addi- 
tion to what we left here are Mr. Wilberforce, hideous 
and very agreeable ; a Mr. Gisborne, who looks like 
an itinerant preacher, with eyes that squint inward, 
and a mouth that constantly grins outward, and a 
head combed, as Monsieur de Puysegur said, comme 
un artichaut renverse ; and a Lord Calthorpe, a young 
man who reads eighteen hours a day and looks only 
stultified in consequence. I wish I could tell you 
half the jokes we cut. These men are really droll 
beyond measure. Cannot you fancy Mr. Luttrel teUing, 
to prove the pride of the Scotch in their ancestry, that 
a man of the name of Grant, finding in the first book of 
Genesis, ' and there were giants in those days,' changed 
the i into an r, so that ever after it read, ' there were 
Grants in those days ? ' 

' The twelfth Earl of Derby married the celebrated actress Miss 
Farren. 



28 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1811 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : November 1811. 

It is very pleasant here just now. The Harrowbys 
are staying here and have brought Mr. Luttrel and 
Monsieur de Puysegur. Mr. Luttrel is a great walker, 
a great reader, and passionately fond of music. This 
makes him independent half the day and easily amused 
the other, and at dinner it is difficult to be more enter- 
taining. Puysegur is brilliant and witty to the greatest 
degree, but he has no other resource, which is a little 
too much. He thinks Mr. Ward will not come into 
StaiFordshire, as he says he would rather be tied to a 
whipping-post than go to his father's ; that his education 
was one of such strictness, and at the same time of such 
neglect, that he never can forgive it ; that they would 
have wished him to remain in perfect ignorance upon 
aU subjects, with no feeling but that of entire subser- 
vience to them ; and that Charlotte Hunloke recollects 
dining there when he was a boy, and upon his being 
left standing at dessert, to which at their request he 
came, somebody asked him to sit down, upon which 
Lord Dudley and Ward said, ' Oh no, John William 
never sits down here.' 

Our mornings are just what I like, a mighty maze 
without a plan. In one respect Lady Harrowby and I 
do not suit. She likes to be always en societe, I like to 
be nearly as much alone. But she is a most excellent, 
most delightful person. Honourable, sincere, open and 
vSridique almost beyond any person I ever met with. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire} 

Tixal: November 13, 1811. 

My dearest brother, — I cannot be angry with you, 
though I hope with Lady Scarsdale that your passion 

' He succeeded his father in July. 



1811 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 29 

for Londesborougli will abate. I look forward to seeing 
you with delight, and as G. will still be with me a fort- 
night hence, I bear the delay as well as can be expected. 

Tixal is at this moment full of very pleasant people. 
Charles Bagot, who does not know ' any such pretty 
fun as shooting rabbits in a turnip field ; ' Dick, who 
has left off snuff, which is the very essence of a Bagot, 
and Lady Harriet, perfectly beautiful and very pleasing 
and amiable. Mr. Luttrel, entertaining and agreeable 
to the greatest degree ; the Cannings, I spare you my 
enthusiasm, and Charles Elhs.^ 

I have a horror of family feuds, and you may depend 
upon my keeping all knowledge of them to myself and 
not going on, as somebody said of Lady Jersey,^ ' like a 
watch after the mainspring is broken.' 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Tixal : November 15, 1811. 

It is melancholy, and yet both G. and myself laughed 
at thinking how you would, if you had seen us yester- 
day, sitting over the fire with Mr. Hughes, a little apothe- 
cary from Stafford. G.'s manner is so affectionate that 
he seemed almost distressed, as if he had not draughts 
or pills enough to repay her for it. Till to-night she has 
lived almost entirely in her room, and has seemed very 
low and uncomfortable. 

Do you wish to see us to-night, G. with a veil and a 
shawl, near the fire, away from the doors and windows, 
Mrs. Canning by her, looking compassionate. Lady 
Harrowby in an arm-chair, with health and prosperity 
enough for half the women in the world, all over gera- 
niums and red embroideries, with Puysegur's withered 

• The intimate friend of Mr. Canning. Created Lord Seaford in 1826. 

'^ She was the daughter of the tenth Lord Westmorland, and inherited 
a large fortune from her grandfather, Mr. Child. She was beautiful. She 
married Lord Jersey, and for many years was ne of the leaders of London 
Society. 



30 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1811 

face and purple hair on one side, and Mr. Luttrel, still 
more hideous, on the other. Mr. Canning, Charles Ellis, 
and my husband extended at their full length reading, 
and Lord Harrowby and Lord Morpeth, those specimens 
of ' nice nobility,' examining folios. Mr. Elliot and I 
are writing letters, his probably as wise as mine are 
foolish. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : December 1811. 

I long to see you all. We shall be in town Sun- 
day. Lord Apsley and a friend of his come to-morrow. 
The youths are about, I see, and as Mr. Canning once 
said to Granville, walking about the street, ' The bores 
are about, let us go home,' I feel inclined to say now. 
The Duchess is really angelic, more so than ever, I 
think. Her piety, her devotion to her children, her 
earnest desire of doing right, seem to me stronger 
than ever. 

You, my dear G., are, after Granville, everything to 
me everywhere. I long to be with you, ' to tend your 
chamber all night, and squire you by day.' God bless 
you. Promise not to lay in without me. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London: 1811. 

You are a great deal too kind to me. How could I 
not love you, not think of your comfort, when I recol- 
lect that for years ^ you were the only person who gave 
any to me ! Happiness may have engrossed my time, 
and even altered my attentions to some of my friends, 
but for you I have invariably felt the same strong 
affection and anxious solicitude about everything that 
concerns you. I do love you and Granville with my 
whole heart, but selfishly, because I feel you are neces- 

' The years which elapsed between her mother's death and her own 
marriage. 



1811 TO LADY G MOKPETH 31 

sary to my happiness, and that unconnected with you 
both my life would be a blank. 

The Talbots and Lady Harrowby come to us to- 
morrow. 

My head is full of the Jews, the Talmud, and the 
Septuagint, and I have nothing more trifling to talk 
about, as Granville only reads me bits of the Apoca- 
Ij'pse occasionally. God bless you, my own dearest G. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : December 21, 1811. 

I am more pleased than I can say at your feeling 
better, and at your not delaying your journey any 
longer. 

Lady Spencer is certainly better without my 
grandmother, for they irritate and fidget each other 
from morning till night. My grandmother cannot 
tolerate Lady_Spencer^intolerance, and they have no , 
taste or pursuit in common. -' 

We dined and slept at Blithfield yesterday. Lady 
Bagot is a sensible, delightful person, more reserved 
than shy, and silent from habit, as I understand Lord 
Dartmouth never hked his children to join in general 
conversation. Her countenance is very intelligent and 
her tone of voice particularly pleasing. In short, I am 
much charmed with her. Lady Harriet was less agree-^ < 
able than I had ever seen her^'TooEng beautiful, but,C 
like some of her family, dawdhng and languid. Mrs. 
Bagot baffles all description in a sahnon-coloured 
gown with myrtle wreaths and rose-coloured ribbands 
twisted about her head, rouged to the eyes, more gay, 
more at her ease, more impudent than anything I 
could have believed ever could exist. Lady Talbot was 
petrified with astonishment. Mrs. Cnrzon, who was a 
Miss Bishop, finished this collection of very beautiful 
people. 



32 LETTERS or PIARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1812 



l8l2 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Stanhope Street : February 1812. 

I should have hked to have seen Mrs. Arkwright' 
extremely. I should think it was having more sense, 
rather than less nature, makes the difference between 
her and Lady Hunloke. The latter talks a little too 
much of herself. 

We supped at the Duchess's ^ last night. It was 
very pleasant — Mrs. Lamb, Corise, George Lamb, 
F. Foster, Mr. Ward, Mr. Nugent, and Granville. The 
last had been with the Hollands. I never saw Mr. 
Nugent in such spirits, though en fait de politique, 
everything seems to me beyond measure flat and un- 
profitable to those who may have expected or wished 
for any change. Mr. Ward told me ' Mr. Canning was 
gay and delightful, and long may he have the leisure to 
be both.' 

Everybody seems inclined to support ministers 
against the Company,^ though not thinking they go far 
enough. Tierney is in despair. He is for the Company 
and says : ' If we could but have been all of one mind, 
we might have given Government a jog here.' 

London swarms with Eussians. A fat nephew of 
the Princess Galitzin, a Prince something, Koslouski 
I believe, was going to Sardinia, but he has fallen 

' Miss Kemble, a niece of Mrs. Siddons, married Mr. Arkwright. She 
was very agreeable. She set a good deal of English poetry to music and 
sang dehghtfully. 

'' Beaufort. 

' Respecting the renewal of the Indian Company's charter. 



1812 TO LADY G. MORPETH 33 

SO desperately in love with, a beautiful girl, Mrs. Tom 
Sheridan's youngest sister, that he scarcely can, and 
the Lievens, who are very much liked. Madame de 
Genlis has written a new book, ' Les Amours de Mo'ise,' 
and a great deal of sentiment about Amram and 
Jochebed. I dislike historical novels, and more than 
dislike them when upon religious subjects. God bless 
you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

% 

Blandford Place : 1812. 

We leave this place at a quarter past seven to-mor- 
row, and I trust at Tixal I shall find some account of 
my brother. How I long to have you both with us at 
Tixal, or to be aU together at Chats worth. 

The Duchess is quite well. Mr. Ward has been 
charming us all by his wit. He says, if all this Eussian 
prosperity is true, he would rather be Tommy Tyrwhitt 
than Buonaparte. He says it is odd that George Vernon 
made his speech turn so much upon Providence and 
such archiepiscopal matters, it being his usual practice 
to affect the layman. He says many other things I have 
not time to record, and I am sorry he has left us for 
tougher stuff — that is to say, the Duke, Lord Apsley, and 
Lord William Somerset. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

London : May 10, 1812. 

Granville is gone to vote against Eeform,' and G. is 
at Spencer House. I am quite alone, very tired, have 
seen nobody, heard nothing, and it is therefore only 
upon the score of brotherly love that you can be glad 
to hear from me. My last gaiety was at Lady Essex's 
on Sunday, where Lady Hamilton did attitudes in a 

^ Mr. Canning and his Mends had gradually adopted Liberal opinions 
on most questions except Beform. After his death they most of them 
supported, Lord Grey in his Beform poliqy. 

VOL. I. D 



34 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1812 

shawl of Lady Essex's, who looked inspired and will I 
hope shortly take to doing them herself. 

I was at Mrs. Gordon's on Monday. It was very 
pleasant. She did the honours so sturdily and good- 
humouredly, that it made everything go off well. I 
saw my Aunt Spencer, grunting and elbowing through 
the crowd and afterwards squatting down with a bevy 
of respectable women about her. It must be dull for 
Georgiana,^ who seems to have no acquaintance but 
Lady Cork, theDowager Lady Pembroke, and Mrs. Howe. 

Dear Eawdqn was pushing about in a fury, her 
shawl upon her arm and in her countenance ' I will 
endure it no longer.' The daughter very pretty, but 
her blooming little face quite lost in curls and nose- 
gays. Lady Sandon, with her eyes shut, steered about 
between them. 

Lord Byron is still upon a pedestal and Caroline 
William doing homage. I have made acquaintance 
with him. He is agreeable, but I feel no wish for any 
further intimacy. His countenance is fine when it is 
in repose, but the moment it is in play, suspicious, 
malignant, and consequently repulsive. His manner is 
either remarkably gracious and conciliatory, with a 
tinge of affectation, or irritable and impetuous, and 
then I am afraid perfectly natural. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : June 1812. 

Dearest sister, — We have been here about four hours. 
Mr. Canning's negotiations ^ with ministers are certainly 
over and all prospect of his joining them at an end. 
He was willing to sacrifice a great deal, some of course 

' Her daughter. 

^ After the murder of Mr. Perceval, on May 11, much discussion 
ensued between Lords Liverpool, Wellesley, Grey, and Grenvilie and 
Mr. Canning respecting the formation of a new Ministry. It ended by 
the former Government remaining in power. 

■■. , • -. f . ■ "-y > r ^- ; ' / , 



1812 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 35 

will tMnk too much, and others too little ; but to act 
under Lord Castlereagh he has invariably refused, and 
in spite of all their shufflings and evasions they have 
never intended anything else, and at last have made 
this so clear that a complete rupture has been the con- 
sequence. I win two guineas, but, love of gain apart, 
I had much rather see these ruins crumble than my 
friends and relations prop them up. 

I have some quakes for the poor country, but I 
cannot believe that it will remain long in such hands. 

"We hope to have the Cannings very soon indeed. 
Tixal is in radiant beauty, all over roses, rain, sunshine, 
and a new fireplace in the hall. I really do love it 
beyond expression. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Tixal : July 31, 1812. 

My dearest brother, — My only regret in not return- 
ing to town is the not seeing you again before your 
perils by sea and land. 

The post to-day brought us an account of a final 
rupture of the negotiations between Mr. Canning and 
ministers, which of course renders our return to Lon- 
don unnecessary. I am delighted to be spared a few 
hundred miles more before my confinement, and upon 
less selfish grounds rejoice at Mr. Canning's refusal of 
an ofier, which dwindled itself down to one I think he 
could not with honour or consistency have accepted. 

I have travelled sixty miles and written six letters, 
enough to tire anybody. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : August 5, 1812. . 

There is a report of a great victory ^ to-day. I wish 
It may be true, but the account seems confused, and in 
some respects improbable. 

^ Salamanca. 



36 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1812 

Granville heard from Mr. Canning yesterday. He 
is going to Saltram, and I fear wiU not come here at 
all, as he has a number of visits to pay in the South, 
and not much time to spare before her confinement. 
I cannot say how much I rejoice at his being pohtically 
free again, as I have never thought the offers made to 
him such as to make it desirable for him to join the 
present Government without such a situation and such 
influence as would enable him to counteract the mis- 
chief they do or effect any good purpose himself. I 
am happy, too, in the conviction that he wiU be happier 
and better satisfied with the result than he would have 
been in the success of any scheme planned by these 
hopeful ministers to tack him on to their fortunes. 
They cannot flounder on much longer. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : August 1812. 

The Duchess of Eutland sits heavy on my soul. I 
will be unwearied next year. 

This great victory, the promising harvest, etc., 
must delight everybody, and I only grudge to ministers 
the thinking themselves conquest and sunshine, which 
they certainly will do, and I fear the good they have 
had a hand in will enable them to remain to do future 
harm. 

I hope you have some of this fine, hot weather in 
Yorkshire. We sit till near ten with the windows 
open. Good night, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth 

Tixal : August 1812. 

Mr. Macdonald dined with us to-day, and has been 
very agreeable and good-humoured. He seems anxious 
beyond measure that an union should be formed between 
the Opposition and Mr. Canning. I have done with 



1812 TO LADY G. MORPETH 37 

any indulgence in such bright visions, but it soothes 
me to hear them from others. The entire rupture 
between Mr. Canning and these ministers gives me 
decided pleasure, and whatever may happen must 
please me more than what ten days ago might have 
happened. 

The victory seems confirmed and most glorious. 
If it is true to the extent reported, its consequences 
may be of incalculable importance. I had a long letter 
from the Duchess yesterday, talking as if she intended 
to see more people and exert herself. Lady Harrowby 
complains of growing thin with the dissipation of 
London. Life and flesh might be better employed, 
and she has too much character and mind to lower 
both in such a routine. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal: 1812. 

My dearest sister, — We expect quite a houseful to- 
morrow. The Talbots and Binnings ^ are here, and 
the Wrottesleys come to-morrow. I am delighted to 
find Tixal so popular, for though I know people would 
always say so to me, yet they really appear to enjoy it, 
and I myself do think it so comfortable that I cannot 
help giving credit to those appearances. Lady Binning,, 
is a gossip and a bore. It is perceptible q^iTa vecu ' 
avec elk, but I like him very much. He is sensible, 
weU-informed, good-humoured, and interests himself 
about interesting things. I feel the weight of her want 
of understanding en tete-a-tete, and in that fiery trial, 
the time after dinner before the men come out. Her 
conversation is like what the ' Quarterly Eeview ' says of 
Sir John Carr's last work, ' a heavy fall of the lightest 

' Lord Binning succeeded his father as Lord Haddington in 1828. 
He was appointed Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in 1835 and first Lord of 
the Admiralty in 1841. 



38 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1813 

possible materials.' It requires a great deal of intelli- 
gence and brilliancy to make a thoroughly worldly con- 
versation tolerable to any person not much interested in 
what is called the world. Brighter talents than poor 
dear Lady B.'s often fail. Mr. Ward, Puysegur, and 
Lady Harrowby have as large a share of both as most 
people, and yet I have at times been wearied with their 
conversation. 

With Lady Talbot I feel very differently. She lives 
almost entirely out of the world, and yet with most of 
the people with whom I am intimately acquainted. 
Her understanding is a good without being a superior 
one. She has no pretension and no detail. The 
whole, independently of the sort of little complainings 
and moanings over her aches and ails, is about the edu- 
cation of her daughter, which gave me a strong interest 
in her conversation, and when we are alone anybody 
would take us for two governesses out of place. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : August 1812. 

The efforts ministers have not made do not surprise 
me, but that anything should have induced them to make 
any does. I believe their hatred of Lord Wellesley 
and fear of Mr. Canning to be the strongest feelings 
they have, and they are now in their kingdom, intend- 
ing to stand by their innate shabbiness, successes abroad, 
and what they imagine to be a good case against all the 
small, disjointed parties, who have refused to give up 
all shadow of reputation and character to assist them, 
and till some union somewhere or other is effected, I 
am convinced they will. 

La Princesse Wilhelmine ^ is not quite as interesting 
as she might be. There is so much detail of the pettiest 

' She was sister of Frederick the Great, whose memoirs were then 
for the first time published. 



1812 TO LADY G. MORPETH 39 

kind, all the valets and governesses brought so much 
sur la scene, but I have only read the first volume. Her 
descriptions, her abuse and her coarseness, put me 
much in mind of the Princess of Wales, whose early life 
was probably spent in much the same way. There is 
a great deal that is curious about her brother. I can 
hardly believe the old Zing buffeted and kicked them 
about as she represents him to have done. 

I am going to pay a visit to Mrs. Macdonald, who 
sets off for Scotland to-morrow, but not to Dunrobin. 
The Staffords seem to have turned their thoughts 
entirely to economy and the society of Scotch agents. 
They have sold Woohners for 36,000^., and are raising 
all their rents about here. They make Lord Gower 
their steward, and the advertisements are all published 
with, ' apply to Earl Gower.' 

Good-night, dearest. My letters are not amusing. 
The post brings me nothing, and those I receive from 
my aunt ^ are not eventful. They aU come here on their 
way from Ireland. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal: August 29, 1812. 

Dearest G., — Caro. gave me your letter to her 
to-day, and we are both delighted at your appearing 
in such good spirits. 

"We returned here this morning, both equally glad 
to return to the quiet of. Tixal. We have brought 
Pozzo di Borgo ^ with us. He is very agreeable, more 

' Lady Bessborough. 

* He was a Corsican, who in early life was intimate with Buonaparte, 
but having quarrelled with him became his Ufelong opponent, and 
contributed to his fall. In 1803 he entered the service of Bussia. After 
the interview at Tilsit he withdrew to England, where he remained 
several years. Upon the termination of the war he was appointed 
Eussian Ambassador in Paris, where he remained till 1835, when he w^s 
transferred to London. In 1839 he returned to Paris, where he lived in 
retirement until his death in 1842. 



40 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1813 

conversation than anybody, delivering up Ms quantity 
of information in the most agreeable manner. 

Caroline remains with me, which gives me great 
delight. By this arrangement I shall have her with 
me when the Irish horde pour in upon us, to my un- 
speakable comfort. I feel a little hke ' The Philistines 
are upon thee, Samson.' They intend being here on 
the 12th. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : September 11, 1812. 

Little Lady Harriet Bagot is a very nice person to 
have in the house. She goes her own way and works, 
reads, writes, plays tant bien que mat. George Yernon 
and the Baron are both at their best, and I am glad, 
which does not always happen, that they do not any of 
them seem to have the most distant idea of leaving us. 
Mr. Brummel se fait plutot attendre que desirer. I feel 
it a matter of perfect indifference whether he arrives at 
any moment or not at all. 

I do not think Lady Jersey en bonne odeur with the 
Dicks, and Lady Harriet ^ seems to compassionate her 
brother and to think him, in spite of good fortune, or as 
Newhouse would say 'plenty of money,' much to be 
pitied, and worn to the greatest degree with voluble 
tracasseries. She says she thinks Lady Jersey is very 
fond of you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : September 12, 1812. 

The Bessboroughs have been unpacked about a 
couple of hours. My aunt looks stout and well, but 
poor Caroline most terribly the contrary. She is worn 
to the bone, as pale as death and her eyes starting out 

' She was sister to Lord Jersey. 



1812 TO LADY G. MORPETH 41 

of her head. She seems indeed in a sad way, alter- 
nately in tearing spirits and in tears. 

I hate her character, her feelings, and herself when 
I am away from her, but she interests me when I am 
with her. and to see her poor careworn face is dismal, 
in spite of reason and speculation upon her extra- 
ordinary conduct. She appears to me in a state very 
short of insanity, and my aunt describes it as at times 
having been decidedly so. 

God bless you, dearest. Hart and William ' do not 
leave Ireland till the 20th. 

Caro. has been excessively entertaining at supper. 
Her spirits, whilst they last, seem as ungovernable as 
her grief. My aunt is very gay and amiable. Poor 
Lord Bessborough me pese sur le coeur et Vesprit. 
William Lamb laughs and eats hke a trooper. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : October 1812. 

The Ansons and Mr. Vernon are here, and I had 
weU-nigh forgot Mr. Grenville condescending. ' Now 
I will take Lady Harriet by the hand and ask her hov;- 
she does.' Mr. Vernon in a stewed-pea-coloured coat, 
with a ring carefuUy displayed on his little finger, 
bright and new, bought, I am persuaded, on his way 
out of town. He afiects an engouement for Mr. Frere,^ 
because Mr. Ward has one, and he praises Mr. Luttrel 
beyond either of them. I beUeve I think Mr. Frere 
has most wit of the three, but the charm of Mr. Ward''s 
conversation is exactly what Mr. Luttrel wants, a sort 
of abandon, and being entertaining because it is his 

' Mr. William Ponsonby. 

^ The diplomatist and accomplished scholar. As our Envoy at Madrid 
he ttrged Sir John Moore to advance upon that capital, for which he was 
much blamed. Soon after he was recalled, and spent the remainder of 
his life in retirement, and chiefly at Malta, where he devoted himself to 
literature. 



42 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1812 

nature and he cannot help it. I only mean Mr. Ward 
in his happier hour, for what I have said of him is the 
very reverse of what he is when vanity or humour seize 
upon him. 

Dowager Essex is in request here for Monsieur, who 
is not allowed to stay above a week, as he interfered 
with Tom^ and the Archbishop. 

This is oltra il dovere, and therefore I wiU not 
apologise for its shortness. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : October 18, 1812. 

I long to hear of your arrival at Castle Howard. 
I did not write yesterday, as Caro. did. She is as 
amiable as possible, and in high spirits, very different 
from what I have seen her at any time since her 
marriage. George arrived to-day in high good-humour, 
kind to her in his manner, and she in hers attentive 
and affectionate to him. Lord Gower,^ who left us this 
morning, seemed charmed with her, sat in her pocket 
all the evening, both in a titter. She likes him very 
much, and he was merry and amiable. Mr. Vernon 
has declined leaving us. I am afraid the Harrowbys 
wiU be seriously offended with him. Mr. Luttrel and 
Mr. Nugent come to-morrow for one night and for 
good the end of the month. The Cannings we have 
not yet heard from. 

I am perfectly well, drive every day, and live in the 
library. I dined with them to-day for the first time. 

My baby grows very beautiful. 

' The Eight Hon. Thomas GrenviUe, son of the distinguished states- 
man George Grenville, and brother of the no less distinguished Lord 
GrenviUe. 

"^ Lord Granville's nephew, who succeeded his father as the second 
Duke of Sutherland in 1833. Lady Granville frequently called him 
Govero. 



1812 TO LADY G. MOKPETH 43 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : December 30, 1812. 

Dearest sis, — I can find nothing but this elongated 
piece of paper to write upon. Thank you very much 
for your long entertaining letter from Althorp. 

Lady Shelley is not superior or clever. Indeed, 
indeed she is not. Do observe, pray, it is all common- 
place and superficial. She is not foolish, and she has 
had an education tres soignee, I believe, in every 
respect, but class me below Sir John if you find upon 
acquaintance a grain of superiority in her. 

Lady Ponsonby is beautiful beyond all description, 
and seems an engaging, affectionate, gentle person, with 
an understanding crushed by his affected contempt 
and brutahty, for I am convinced he is in fact des- 
perately in love with her all the time. They have, I 
hear, what is called come to an understanding. He is 
to give up Miss Wilson and all that sort of thing, as 
Lady Stafford would say, and she is to renounce all her 
little manoeuvres round the Eing, in the Opera. He is 
not to laugh at her with the Duchess of Bedford, 
and she is not to complain of him to Lord Tyr- 
connel. 

Lady Harriet is a little miracle of goodness. She 
is the quietest, best, and happiest person I ever met 
with ; Dick is a good sort of man and a very good 
husband. i^r 

Lord Ponsonby^ was very affected and agreeable, 
for his affectation is not offensive. It is not skin deep, 
like that- of many people, and therefore, as far as 
society goes, there is no cause of complaint. 

Heneage Legge was also at the Blithfield parsonage, 
from whence I returned this morning ; a dehghtful httle 

^ Ambassador at Constantinople from 1832 to 1833 and at Vienna from 
1846 to 1849. 



44 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1812 

man, quiet, clever, singing beautifully and drawing 
excellent caricatures, and all within five feet four I 
should imagine. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : November 3, 1812. 

Mr. Canning, Mr. Stratford Canning, and Mr. EUis 
arrived here yesterday. Mr. C. cannot stay with us 
beyond Wednesday or Thursday, alas ! But his little 
boy is not quite as well as he was, and Mrs. Canning is 
impatient to get to town. The new Mr. Canning seems 
to be very sensible and agreeable. 

Pozzo and the Beauforts are gone. 

I do not allow poor Edward Montagu to come till 
the day after Mr. C. leaves us. His hat and his switch 
would not at all suit the latter. 

The Duchess is improved in manner. She is rather 
graver and much older, in manner I mean, feels herself 
so, and is delighted at it. 

I do long to see you more than I can say. I cer- 
tainly love you better, or I believe it is that, having 
roused myself from the lethargy of a totally indolent 
and inactive life, all my enjoyments and feelings are 
proportionately stronger. My time used to be spent in 
reveries and dread of losing my happiness. I now feel 
only anxious to make myself worthy of it. God bless 
you. 



1813 TO LADY G. MORPETH 45 



1813 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : January 1, 1813. 

Dearest sister, — I arrived here this morning and 
found your letter. 

I see you are coming round to admire Lady Shelley. 
I see her with a sort of hoisted-up look in her figure, 
tight satin shoes, a fine thick plait of hair, bloodshot 
eyes, parched lips, fine teeth, and an expression of 
conscious accomplishments in her face. 

Lord Aberdeen and Baron Tripp are expected here 
to-morrow. Lady Harrowby might parody Ariel's song, 
'Where the beaux flock, there hve I.' They have a 
natural tendency towards her habitation. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : January 3, 1813. 

Dearest sister, — It is very pleasant here, and we 
intend putting off" going to Ingestre till Wednesday. 

Lord Aberdeen arrived this morning, and is very 
delightful. I acknowledge he looks beautiful, and 
there is something in the quiet enthusiasm of his 
manner and the total absence of frivolity in his mind 
and tastes as uncommon as it is captivating. He does 
not like me at all, which makes this praise doubly 
flattering to him and generous from me. 

Lord Harrowby, GranviUe, and he have been really 
very agreeable. Lady H. and I very attentive, and the 



46 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE J813 

Baron negative and gentlemanlike. Lord Aberdeen's 
spirits appear to me much what they used to be. He 
goes to Chatsworth from here, but I do not know 
what day. We shall be there on Saturday, unless some 
irresistible battue should intervene. God bless you. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire and Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : January 4, 1818. 

Dearest brother and sister, — I am glad to hear you 
are together and well, and on Sunday I trust I shall be 
with you. What time do you dine ? This sounds like 
coming. 

Lord Aberdeen seems uncertain whether he will 
have time to go to Chatsworth. I hope he will. 

The Bromleys are in Yorkshire, and the Talbots 
have their house full for a month to come. She is also 
nursing a gigantic baby, which confines her to the 
house and large mugs of hot ale and ginger, which she 
quaffs all day long. 

I can hardly talk upon common subjects, I have 
been hearing so much of poetry, eloquence, Athens 
and Mr. Payne Knight. 

Shall you be glad to see me, dear people ? 

What may Granville shoot — birds, roebucks, neigh- 
bours ? He must have something to kill. 

Dear G., how pleased you would be with Lord 
Harrowby ! It is half-past twelve, and he has read 
aloud to us since nine. I see Lady Harrowby in such 
a fidget with it that she can hardly keep from scream- 
ing. Granville bears it like a man, but Lord Aberdeen 
and I hang over him enamoured. 

The Baron is gone to Beaudesert again. The chil- 
dren set out for Chatsworth on Saturday, as they are 
to sleep at Ashbourne. Susan is the fattest, flattest, 
broadest, merriest darling. Georgiana a little Granville 
in a lace cap. God bless j^ou, dearests. 



1813 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 47 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Londesborough : September 1, 1813. 

WHat a remarkably bad sort of person you are ! 
We arrived here about six o'clock, and till past seven 
walked up and down the road listening to every rumbUng 
cart and spying at every donkey. 

I cannot tell you half how much we like this place. 
It is so quiet, so comfortable, and so enjoyable in a 
thousand ways. It is well that there are Morpeths arid 
constituents in the world, or I do not think you would 
ever get us out of it. 

Mrs. Knoulton is an angel, our rooms are so warm ; 
yesterday the best dinner that was ever eaten, and to- 
day what Newhouse calls a nack of venison. It is odd 
that all these pleasures do not move thee. 

I trust I shall meet you at Castle Howard to-morrow, 
or find that you are expected there. Can you resist 
going to see G. and aU her brood ? If you have left the 
Earl in ignorance or in suspense as to your intentions, 
what stormy weather we shaU. find there ! God bless 
you, dearest brother. Do not let us all meet every day 
at breakfast, some dejected, some exasperated at not 
hearing where you have been, where you are, or where 
you are going. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Castle Howard : September 6, 1813. 

Thanks, dearest brother, for your letter from Chester, 
and aU your kindness. 

We found, upon arriving here at about half-past 
four, the two Mr. Smiths upon the steps. ' Dinner will 
be upon the table in twenty minutes,' and a little further 
on among the statues G. in a bedgown and dishevelled 
and Lord M. 'pacing with hurried steps his room 
along.' The Earl had put off dinner for an hour, as 
four was the usual time. 



48 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1813 

However, this has been the only disturbance. He 
is in high good-humour. We dine at five, and he lets 
Granville shoot. 

To make the scene present to you, I will give you a 
sketch of us at dinner. Lord Carlisle, star-shining, lip- 
projecting, with a dish of his own, a sort of solid soup, 
by his side, which he offers to a chosen few. Next to 
him G. looking amiable and resigned, and very pretty. 
Lady Julia Howard by her side with a wreath of white 
roses, more rouge than ever and innumerable jewels. 
Granville, looking very good-tempered, between her and 
Lady Carlisle with a camelia japonica and a red pink 
in her cap, trying, like the busy bee, to extract conver- 
sation from us all by nodding and staring at us. Doctor 
Jones by her side, fat, pale, and looking rather frightened 
when we ask him what weather we shall have, if it is 
unusually hot for this time of year, lest his answer may 
not agree with Lord C.'s sensations. Lord Morpeth, 
George Forth, and I are too insignificant to be men- 
tioned but as background. Harry Howard is aide-de- 
camp at the joints of meat and never by any chance 
opens his lips. 

The mornings are delightful. We have it quite to 
ourselves, and the children come in the evening and 
are darlings. God bless you. I mean to write to you 
constantly. 



1814 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 49 



1814 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Spa : September 31, 1814. 

Dearest brother, — The Morpeths began their journey- 
to Paris this morning, and we set out to-morrow.^ I 
have liked this place on the whole very much. The 
country round is beautiful ; the waters have agreed with 
me, but not a bit more than any little strengthening 
mixture, swallowed anywhere, with early rising, strong 
exercise, and wholesome food. The play has been our 
great amusement, and the ease and w^ant of ceremony 
our great comfort. I have made no foreign acquaint- 
ances, partly from being lazy about it, as I think instead 
of English it is French coldness that is quite impene- 
trable, and partly from having so many people I like 
to see here. Lady Harrowby is here above a month 
longer, and bears it like a man. Lady Charlemont is 
here in great beauty, but not making much sensation, 
as she has no coquetterie, not even desir de plaire, 
which repels a Frenchman just as much as a humpback. 
The Portlands have taken the house we leave for a 
month from the 15th. The Duchess quite musters up 
a little suite with him and the beggars who follow 
with Tiny. She has grown quite fat and they call her 
Princesse. 

^ To join them. No letters written from Paris at that time are to be 
found. 

VOL. I. E 



50 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1814 
To Lady Carlisle. 

Tixal : October 1814. 

Dearest G.,— I long to show you Susan. Georgy ^ is a 
very foolish child, but I adore her. She is excessively 
fond of me and caressante, and she is so pretty and good 
that I do not mind her want of intellect. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Stanhope Street : November 9, 1814. 

I have seen Lady Harrowby, charmed with Paris, 
and full of very entertaining accounts of it. She was a 
great deal with Madame de Stael, and never missed 
going to some spectacle, and to near as many balls. 
Corisande has been with me, wild with joy at the 
thoughts of going there. 

In the evening Granville went to the House. There 
was little there. An attack of Mr. Whitbread upon 
Mr. Canning, answered to perfection by Charles Ellis, 
that is, with so much good feeling, so perfect a manner, 
and such evident affection for him he defended, that 
the whole House seemed pleased with him for it, and 
Tierney complimented him upon it. God bless you 
dearest. 

I have just been reading the debate. Tierney's 
seems a very good speech, and, alas ! a very fair attack. 
I abhor Mr. Whitbread, so I will not allow myself to 
talk of his. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Stanhope Street : November 18, 1814. 

Your dear boys are with me, the greatest darlings 
that ever were. They have nothing to amuse them but 

' Lady Georgiana FuUerton, the well-known novelist. She tui-ned 
out clever and an angel, but not pretty. 



1814 TO LADY G. MORPETH 51 

my conversation. Frederick ' is delightful, tall, hand- 
some, and agreeable. He seems in high spirits, and 
very kind to William,^ who is grave, but very conver- 
sible. He seems charmed with Miss Peirce for being 
strict, says it is such a good thing, and makes them all 
mind her. Freddy is extremely galant about Susan, 
says she is such a nice girl, and talks so funnily and 
sweetly. 

They went to Park Street, and got a boiled chicken. 
They are easily pleased, and begged just now for some 
toast-and-water, which seems a luxury. They talk to 
me incessantly, which makes my letter rather inco- 
herent. ' Do you know Lady Carlisle ? Ain't you the 
daughter of her ? What sort of relation ? ' Oh, they 
are loves. 

I cried last night over ' Belvidera.' I never did see 
such an actress. It is too dreadful, and I would not 
see her again in it for the world. 

William calls Freddy ' sir,' with a tone of irony. 
They are now disputing. I have given them a pine- 
apple — William says Miss Peirce will eat it. Freddy 
says she never can be so mean. God bless you. 

' Lord Morpeth's second son, accidentally killed 
' Her third son, succeeded as Lord Carlisle in 1864. 



E 2 



52 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRAISVILLE 1815 



1815 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : January 23, 1815. 

My dearest, — One line before I go to bed. ' The heart 
is grown full with the bore it has borne.' Lord and 
Lady Surrey^are arrived. Her manner is reserved, but 
*■*■ without the same appearance of shyness and unhappi- 
ness. She looks thin and the face is redder, but there 
is a look of goodness about her, and so sweet a smile 
that I think it quite amounts to beauty. He is very 
negative. The silence which prevails amongst us is 
quite ponderous. I think at meals mine is the only 
tongue that goes, and I feel that if I did not go to- 
morrow, it would stop. 

I have nothing to tell you. Little Mr. Sneyd was 
amusing whilst he stayed, as he is an excellent mimic, 
and told us many entertaining stories. My love to 
Lord M. and George. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : May 28, 1815. 

Dearest G., — I have only time for a single line. 
We have a great wish to ask Lord Morpeth to be god- 
father to our littl" boy, but the penalty attached to it 
makes me feel shy about it. If you are as poor as we 
are, the amassing such a sum would be impracticable. 
Do not therefore show him this, if some prosperity has 
not befallen your finances, but answer me quite honestly 
about it. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 53 

To-morrow I mean to establisli mj'-self in the library, 
and the next day to try and dine with them, for I only 
want a little courage and a little strength. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : June 25, 1815. 

Dearest sister, — We set out very early to-morrow 
morning. I have been so happy here that I cannot go 
without some sadness -and regret, but many things re- 
concile me to returning to town, and as to happiness, 
lo porto meco. If you see Miss Berry tell her that the 
two years have elapsed and that I am as hopeless a case 
as ever. In some ways I am not, however, for I feel a 
remorse for the indolent, inactive way in which I have 
spent my time, which will I am sure make me reform 
in many things, amongst others attentions and visits to 
those who may like or expect them. To old people 
especially I think them a real duty. 

We only go to Worcester to-morrow, and we shall 
leave Badminton on the 4th. 

We are busy putting up books and burning papers. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : July 12, 1815. 

We dined yesterday with Lord Bathurst and took 
Messrs. Luttrel and Nugent. The former told me he 
had lingered at Brighton, not to be the ' last well-in- 
formed gentleman from Paris,' and it is droll to hear, 
when each person asks him ' When did you arrive ? ' 
the deprecating voice with which he exclaims, ' Ma'am, 
I have left Paris these three weeks.' 

The French papers rouse even me from my political 
apathy, they are so curious. Fouche's ^ appointment is 

' Fouche voted for the death of Louis XVI. in the Convention. He 
became Minister of Police under Napoleon. After Waterloo he was 
elected President of the Provisional Government and treated with tha 



54 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

what excites most discussion. Jokes are made that 
as he is of the Interior, Louis will soon be of the 
exterior. 

Lord Tavistock moved the writ for poor Mr. Whit- 
bread yesterday and spoke remarkably well. Granville 
says he never witnessed greater emotion, Lord T. him- 
self and many of the members sobbing. 

I do not even try to say how much I regret you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : July 13, 1815. 

I saw Puysegur yesterday morning at Lady Har- 
rowby's. I do not think him very sanguine or very 
gay, and seems to think Fouche a bitter pill for the 
poor eld King to swallow. I find the King and Madame 
d'Angouleme had both consented to have him last 
time, which Puy. is convinced would have prevented all 
that has happened, but that Monsieur de Blacas ^ was 
violent against him and carried his point. The humilia- 
tion of now having him is great, but he is reasonable 
about it and thinks it a necessary evil. He says the 
worst of it is the impossibility of punishing anybody 
after Fouche has been rewarded. He thinks he is a 
man who will act for his own interest, without one con- 
sideration ol" feeling, and that by the resignation signed 
by him and some others yesterday he leaves himself a 
loophole for perfidy of any extent. He thinks Talley- 
rand as false as hollow, Chateaubriand, ' Bah! un bavard 
et ecrivain boursoufle.' 

The enthusiasm at Paris has been greater than 

Allied Powers. He was again Minister of Police under Louis XVIIL, 
but soon after fell into disgrace and died an exile at Trieste. 

1 He was with Louis XVIIL during his exile, and was at the head of his 
household aiterwards in Paris. In 1816 he was sent as Ambassador to 
Naples to negoiiate the marriage of the Due de Berri to the Princess 
Caroline. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 55 

ever, and, as Lord Bathurst said, ' they are quite wild 
with rapture at having been conquered again.' 

I went to the French Play. The sisters ^ were there, / ^i, 
but surrounded. Lady Fojey- in a blaze of diamonds g^v',-, 
and roses that made me laugh. It is quite droll to see ' '^ " 
anybody so enchanted at looking handsome. Madame 
de Lieven was with me, in high good-humour and 
spirits. 

Hart came and kept me up till near two. I am 
sorry to say he has taken her in aversion, and my 
fear is that he wiU not be barely civil, and as we all 
dine en petit comite with him to-day, it will be dis- 
tressing. 

I hear Mr. Lambton is almost distracted and as if 
he had had no preparation for his wife's death. 

I have just been taking leave of Miss Berry. She 
has been vehemently praising and envying Sir James 
and abusing Lady Mackintosh — his unfathomable, 
inexhaustible powers of mind, her little, sturdy, 
healthy body. I dare say you have heard it many 
a time, how he will cap you in an Italian sonnet or 
repeat you a long bit out of Cicero, and how she has 
tant de force et si peu de vie. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : JtJy 14, 1815. 

The little dinner at Devonshire House went off 
very well, though my brother, Mr. Burrell, Granville, 
Monsieur de Lieven, and Miss Mercer scarcely uttered ; 
Hart was testy and did not endeavour to conceal it ; 
Mr. Burrell^ fine. Madame de Lieven, Mrs. Burrell, 
and I were so talkative and the first so droll that I 
brought Granville to confess it was very agreeable to 

' The Duchess of Beaufort and Lady Harrowby. 

^ Succeeded his mother as Lord Willoughby De Eresby in 1828. 



56 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

hear us. I found Hart, had been pleased in spite of his 
resolution to the contrary. 

I went from there to the Duchess of Beaufort and 
found William Bathurst, the only one not paired, and 
therefore I fell into the sorrowful predicament of being 
his for the evening. He told me the accounts of the 
disturbances at Paris were perfectly correct. There is 
a second edition now screamed about the streets that 
the allied sovereigns have entered it, which may keep 
things quiet. The Prussians have been on the point 
of blowing up les Ponts de lena and Austerhtz and 
also la Colonne. Puysegur was cutting jokes, which 
I thought ill-timed. ' Ah ! ils les feront danser, le 
beau ballet,' but perhaps it is more excusable against 
Buonaparte's triumphant records. 

My brother's manner yesterday was very indijfferent, 
almost rude. Madame de Lieven kept saying, ' Mais 
nous le desesperons ; jamais je n'ai vu homme si de- 
sole d'avoir des femmes chez lui. Mais allons-nous en ; 
il n'en pent plus.' Poor dear, obliged to digest these 
wholesome truths. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London; July 18, 1815. 

Do not, my dearest sister, genez yourself to write, 
when it is a worry to you. I am too happy if I can by 
my letters amuse you for a moment. I am glad I 
wrote yesterday, as I find Hart did not, and he bids me 
say he cannot to-day, as he is gone to meet Madame 
d'Aguesseau at Chiswick. Think of his never teUing 
me, or I should have made a point of being there, but 
have now made other arrangements to go to Wimbledon 
to see Sarah ' on our way to an early dinner with the 
Duncannons at Eoehampton. I am delighted to hear 

* Lady Lyttelton. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 57 

that Sarali is with child and happy and well, beyond 
anybody that was so before. 

Now, dearest G., for the great events. Hart com- 
missions me to tell you that he has decided to go 
to Paris on Tuesday or Thursday at latest, and what 
appears to me a much greater event, there is just a 
chance of our going also ; Henry Pierrepoint goes to- 
morrow and has undertaken to get us lodgings. He 
says he has seen Sylvester, who was at Paris two 
days ago and tells him it is perfectly quiet and safe. 
Granville has a raging desire to see the allied armies, 
and although he is too kind even to think of it, I feel I 
ought almost to urge his going alone, if it is thought 
better for me to remain behind. 

I saw Lord ^ and Lady FitzEoy Somerset last night. 
He looks pale and thin but is doing perfectly well. She 
is in great beauty and has a look and manner of devotion 
to him without any display which interested me. He 
says F. Ponsonby ^ is still feeble and wounded all over. 
He was in dread of Caro's sisterly persecutions, but she 
was soon prevailed upon to prefer parading about the 
town at all hours. Borino ^ is very angry at his peerage 
being delayed three months. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Roehampton : July 21, 1815. 

We went to Holland House to-day, but did not see 
him. She was seated on the grass with Allen and a 
plate of baba, very cross and absurd about Buonaparte, 
'poor dear man,' as she calls him. 

' The youngest son of the fifth Duke of Beaufort. He married in 
1814 Harriet, the second daughter of the first Earl of Mornington. He 
lost his arm at Waterloo. He was raised to the Peerage as Lord Raglan 
in 1852. He commanded in the Crimea, where he died in 1855. 

"^ Sir Frederick Ponsonby, second, son of the third Earl of Bessborough. 
He was wounded at Waterloo. 

' Lord Boringdon, who was created Earl of Morley in November 1815. 



58 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

We set out Thursday, as I have begged for one more 
day to pack up. 

They are all well here. My aunt is grown thin, but 
looks uncommonly well and is happy about Frederick, 
who begins to move his arm, and is going on as well as 
possible. 

The Melbournes and Cowpers are at Cheltenham. 
Frederick Lamb is arrived, but I have not seen him. 
Poodle Byng and Mr. Motteux are in town, and after 
the Boulevards it does not look gay to them. 

The world is much occupied with Mr. Littleton's * 
conversation with Buonaparte, and there are different 
versions of it. Lady Holland represents it as having 
been insolent, brutal, and disgraceful. They all say 
here that he was not polished in his manner, but in- 
tended it to be complimentary and flattering, and that 
Buonaparte was charmed with him. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Calais : July 26, 1815. 

Dearest love, — We have been very prosperous. We 
left Dover at twelve last night, and landed here at half- 
past four. I was sorry that we arrived in a thick rain, 
nobody up, so that nothing marked its being France 
but about half a dozen clamorous sailors, the poissardes 
being all in their first sleep. I regret them as part of a 
very curious scene. Hart is in high good-humour and 
tearing spirits, malgre some contretemps. He was sick 
on board, and we found Lady Downshire in the good 
rooms, little Quilliac desoU at it. We have, however, 
a small but very clean and comfortable one, had an 
excellent breakfast at five, several hours' sleep since, 
and the garqon is now preparing us another. There is 
a play to-night, 'L'Aubergiste,' and something else I 
know not what. 

' Created Lord Hatherton in 1835. 



1816 TO LADY G. MORPETH 59 

We set out by break of day to-morrow for Abbe- 
ville. I am pleased to find myself very tranquil and 
easy in my mind. Granville has been talking with Eufe 
the messenger, who says the road is perfectly quiet, 
that there are plenty of horses. He came with the 
Russian army from the Ehine, and says that the Russians 
and Bavarians having met with some resistance, have 
been provoked into committing all sorts of devastations. 
This has been swelled into a report of a regular battle, 
which you will probably have heard of. 

The Ship Inn at Dover was more intolerable than 
ever, but the only thing my brother found it difficult to 
weather was a visit from Captain Sampson. God bless 
you. 

I wish you could see them at breakfast : Hart with 
one leg making side steps for joy all the time, Clifford c 
tittering with the garqon about the coffee and hot milk, 
Granville poring over an old ' Moniteur.' 

Mrs. Eidgway'is better than anything in Fielding's 
novels. She is enchanted with my conduct and Mrs. 
Lucas' feehngs on the occasion. ' You are more good- 
looking than you were, and my lord more attentive 
than ever.' Then with a look of sentiment — ' Your hair 
is grown tolerably well, your teeth are very yellow but 
uncommonly clean, and will probably last for ever, 
your disposition less changed than could have been 
expected.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : Jiily 29, 1815. 

Here we are, this moment arrived. Hart, Clifford, 
and Granville gone to the Musee and to call on Lady 
Castlereagh. I am left writing to you in the little back 
rooms in your lower apartment at I'Hotel de I'Empire, 
as the only shelter from noise and a burning sun. Our 
journey has been one of the greatest enjoyment, and my 
brother's spirits and perfect good humour have never 



60 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE ]81o 

failed him for a moment, in spite of several galling little 
circumstances. We remained a whole day at Calais, 
walked about the pier and went in the evening to the 
play. It was amusing but not good. Loyal songs were 
sung, and a great many old peaceable-looking gentlemen 
and all the women were in raptures, but the soldiers 
gloomy and silent to a degree not to be mistaken. I 
have not seen a smile upon any French soldier's face 
the whole way. But no words can describe how that 
enormous little plague Lady_I)ownshiEe has crossed us 
every step of our way. She appeared at the play, 
herself, children, tutors, governesses, footman, covered 
with white cockades, contrived, by her manoeuvres with 
an officer whom she had got quite in her pocket, to 
have ' God save the King ' sung, stood up, winked, waved 
handkerchiefs, in short displayed every demonstration 
of folly. The next morning, we having heard that she 
went at seven, determined to go at four, to keep quite 
clear of her. Hart bustled down to breakfast at that 
hour, just in time to meet her at the door, blinking and 
holding out her hand to him — ' Forgive me for playing 
you this trick.' He says he shook her oif, darted looks 
of fury at the girls, and almost knocked down the tutor, 
who began a conciliatory speech. On the road we were 
of course much distressed for horses, and at Montreuil 
detained nearly three hours. But we saw varieties of 
French bonnets, sat with two agreeable old milliners, 
who trimmed mine up half a mile high, and called one 
another Rosalie and something else, and bore it all like 
saints. At Abbeville the Hotel de I'Empire was all full 
of the little woman, and we were obliged to go to the 
other, which, however, turned out very well. 

Yesterday we set off again between three and four, 
fell in with the Duke of Orleans, stayed three hours at 
Beauvais and slept at Beaumont for want of horses, a 
wretched little inn onlj'^ twenty miles from Paris. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 61 

The journey has nevertheless been delightful, the 
pleasantest weather, tolerable health. It was a curious 
sight to see St. Denis full of English soldiers, officers 
and English women, galloping in and out of Paris, 

We have taken the most delightful suite of apart- 
ments at La Grange Batteliere ; we dine there at 
five, and go to the Feydeau. I cannot believe I have 
been out of Paris, or that anything extraordinary has 
happened in it. The Sovereigns have been to-day to 
see the Duchesse d'Angouleme, who is arrived. I will 
not finish my letter till they come home, as I may hear 
something more interesting. 

We are to dine at Lord Castlereagh's to-morrow. 

Four o'clock. — I have just trotted here between gut- 
ters and cabriolets, and am established in an immense 
drawing-room entre cow- et jardin. Lady Castlereagh 
and Lady Emma Edgecumbe' have been here. Lord 
Apsley and Punch Greville.^ I hear there is very little 
society, but Madame de Coigny^has sent to ask me 
to a reunion de quelques personnes chez elle ce soir, 
and the Duke of Wellington invites us to a great ball 
on Wednesday. I hear the society at Lady Castle- 
reagh's is terrible, nothing but English and extremely 
dull. 

I hear our troops behave well ; they can only enter 
Paris with passes from their Colonels. I think the 
accounts of the Prussians' ill-conduct must have been 
much exaggerated, as they never take a single thing 
from the houses where they have been quartered and 
commit no cruelties. 

My brother professes a determination of taking a 



' Married to Earl Brownlow in 1828. 

' Mr. Charles GreviUe, whose most interesting Journal was edited 
after his death by Mr. Henry Eeeve. Mr. GreviUe was nicknamed Punch. 

' A great friend of Marie Antoinette. She was very clever and witty, 
and during her exile intimate with the Duchess of Devonshire. 



62 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

large house here, not now but another year, and if he 
does but like it half as well, chemin faisant, as he does 
at his outset, I think he certainly will. 

We went to the Feydeau last night and saw ' Felicie,' 
a very pretty opera comique. Martin sang and acted 
delightfully. The thing at the end was all about Henri 
et les Bourbons, and the audience were in transports. 
Little Woronzow ^ came to see us, and can say nothing 
but, ' Oh, this is a nasty nation.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : July 31, 1815. 

I take advantage of every moment to write, and by 
that means I hope to give you a tolerably regular 
account of our proceedings. Yesterday was a very 
amusing and interesting day, but perhaps you may 
think it neither, to have begun it by sitting at home 
with H. Pierrepoint, Punch Greville, and Lord Apsley. 
But they had all their little possible to say. The first 
gave me the directions of the best fleuriste and lingers 
in Paris ; the second told me all the scandal of Paris, 
^ that Sir John and Lady Shelley ran after the great 
Duke in a very disgusting"~manner, but as they were 
together, ' sans peur et sans reproche.' Lord Apsley is 
full of the battle, in which he by all accounts put him- 
self forward as much as any who were not obliged to do 
so. He is a good-natured, friendly creature, and has 
shown great spirit where he might have got off without 
showing axij. 

I called upon Lady Castlereagh and found her in 
the Villa Borghese,^ forming the most complete con- 

' Comte Simon Woronzow was Russian Ambassador in London during 
three reigns. He died there in 1832. His daughter Catherine married 
in 1808 the eleventh Earl of Pembroke. 

^ Had been the residence of the Princesse Pauline Borghese. It was 
purchased by the English Government and has been ever since the 
English Embassy. 



1815 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 63 

traste to tlie locale, which is all Oriental luxury, she 
fitter for Wapping. Lord Stewart' came in all over 
stars and tenderness. I hear there never was anything 
like his vanity and extravagance. 

I met my brother at the Louvre. It appeared to 
me more beautiful than ever. Bllicher has taken down 
about sixteen pictures, but none that I remembered, 
no proof that they may not have been of the finest. 
The whole length of it was filled with soldiers of every 
nation, some Highlanders, who attracted great attention 
and took it as a great compliment. One of them said, 
' They look more at us than at the d d pictures.' 

From thence we went to Madame de Coigny^ who 
was so entertaining that I can only regret not re- 
membering every word she said. She has eyes and 
hands uplifted at the degradation of Paris. 'A Londres 
on parle de passer de I'opposition an ministere. Ici 
c'est plus facilement d'un regne a un autre.' Mme. de 
Souza^ is sent from Paris to-day. Charles de Flahault^ 

' Half-brother of Lord Castlereagh, whom he succeeded as third 
Marquis of Londonderry in 1822. 

'' The mother of the Comte de Flahault by her first husband. She 
was one of the most agreeable and charming women of her day. 
She left France with her son at the beginning of the Eevolution. 
Her husband, who remained, was guillotined. In her exile she supported 
herself by writing successful novels. She afterwards married the Marquis 
de Souza, a Portuguese diplomate. Soon after she returned to Paris, where 
she remained tiU her death in 1836. 

^ He distinguished himself in the Napoleonic wars. He was Aide-de- 
Camp to the Emperor, and was with him at "Waterloo. He then went to 
England, where in 1817 he married Miss Mercer, the daughter of Lord 
Keith. At her father's death she became Lady Keith and succeeded to a 
large fortune. Soon after their marriage they settled in Paris, where for 
years they took a leading part in society. He adhered to Louis Philippe 
and was an intimate friend of the Duke of Orleans. From 1841 to 1848 
he was Ambassador at Vienna. After the Coup d'Etat he adhered to 
Louis Napoleon and was Ambassador in London from 1860 to 1862, 
and on his return to France was appointed Chancellor of the Legion of 
Honour. He died in Paris at the beginning of the Franco-Prussian war. 
His eldest daughter married the fifth Marquis of Lansdowne, his youngest 
the Marquis de Lavalette. 



64 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRA^fVILLE 1815 

is with the army. She says that Buonaparte acted as a 
tahsman upon the troops, that it was il Bondocani over 
again. ' 11 faut avouer que cette fin-ci n'a pas ete belle,' 
that he fought ill, and, after the battle, had no thought 
but to preserve his life. That somebody observed to 
him, ' II fallait un pen tourner la chose,' that it re- 
quired great courage, force d'dine, etc., to bear life 
and to support his spirits as he did. Upon which he 
answered, ' Dame, c'est la seule propriete qui me reste, 
il faut bien que je la garde.' 

We dined at Lord Castle reach's. His manner is 
very good, and calculated to please ; but how he gets 
on in French I cannot imagine. He called out to the 
maitre d'hotel: 'A present. Monsieur, servez la diner.' 
Sir Charles Stuart^ is in a fever of mind, which he 
cannot conceal, from the fear of not remaining Am- 
bassador here, and from all I hear he seems to be 
the best person, being excessively liked by the French. 
He has great jealousy of Lord Stewart, who, it is said, 
is equally anxious to remain. 

But now for the cream of my story. We went to 
the Opera. The bouse was full and brilliant beyond 
measure, and my brother in raptures, as I must say he 
is from morning till night. All nations, all embassies, 
all English men, and scarcely a reputable woman besides 
myself. Boxes for every King and Emperor of the 
known world. But what do you think they shout at, 
applaud, pdment de rire over. They dance the battle 
of Waterloo in all its details. The Imperial Guard 
wounded form dejected groups, embrace the National 
Guard, whilst a smart English officer makes most brilliant 
entrees. This heros de la piece ends the ballet with 
presenting a French officer whom he has taken prisoner 
to his mistress, who had imagined him lost. They both 

' For many years Ambassador at the Court of France. Created Lord 
Stuart de Rothesay in 1828. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH t)5 

kneel to him and kiss the hem of his garment and 
dance a finale amidst bursts of applause. Metternich 
sat by me at supper at Lady Castlereagh's, and we 
agreed that it was worth coming any distance to see 
this proof of national character and confirmation of 
what that character is reduced to. Even the Emperor 
of Russia is shocked at their frivolity. He has only 
been into society three times, has taken a new and 
grave line ; se promene dans son jardin, and only with 
the ugly and the old. The King of Prussia prowls 
about after his own heart without exciting much atten- 
tion, and the Emperor of Austria is never seen at all. 
It is universally believed that Louis is only safe whilst 
the Allied Armies are here, at least unless it can be 
made so decidedly the interest of Fouche and others to 
keep him on the throne that no speculation of viUany 
and perfidy can profit them in a change. 

The baU at the Duke of Wellington's is a sort of 
test of female character. There are bets whether a 
Frenchwoman can stay away from a ball, but they 
have all professed a horror of going into public, and 
some la crainte des reproches. Monsieur de Mesnard^ 
has just been here. He says that he has advised them 
all to go, as a proof of what the Duke of Wellington's 
good conduct in Paris has effected, but few will believe 
in this motive, and I wish, for their sakes, those who 
have been most marked in their misfortunes or opinions 
may stay away. 

Frederick Lamb has been here and very enter- 
taining and agreeable. My rooms are so dehghtful, 
opening to a large garden and as quiet as possible, 
that both Granville and I are very lazy about going 
out in the heat of the day. My brother is in full 

^ He was Aide-de-Camp of the Due de Berri and was with him when 
j^e was assassinated. He came to France in 1832 with the Duchesse de 
Berri, an3"took part with her in her attempt to raise La Vendue. 

VOL. I. I' 



66 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 18ia 

pursuit of all the sights, and I mean to take up the 
metier when he has seen all that I need not re-see. 
We dine with him to-day at I'HCtel de I'Empire, and 
intend to walk on the Boulevards and in the Tuileries 
Gardens till we dress for the ball, giving ourselves 
reldche aux thedtres for to-night. On Wednesday I 
am to meet some of my old acquaintances at Mme. de 
Coigny's. I continue to be in the highest health, though 
at the moment I write to you I am quite knocked up 
with the shaking of the remise in which Mrs. Eidgeway 
and I have been shopping. I think I have been cheated 
as little as possible. Monsieur de Mesnard is low. He 
thinks the poor old King has so much to endure and 
that parts of France are still in so unpleasant a state. 
It is a joke among the Anti-Eoyalists to say that he has 
changed his name from Louis le Desire to Louis I'lnevi- 
table. Caroline Lamb is enquiring if women can come 
to Paris, which I trust she will not ascertain till I have 
left it. 

I long to hear from you and my children, but it 
faut se faire aux cir Constances, especially when there 
are winds and waves. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : August 1, 1815. 

The ball was a most extraordinary one, about 400 
men to forty women, for I did injustice to the French. 
I find they are for the first time subdued by misfortune, 
and that it is from real feeling that many of them stay 
away from every place of amusement. When I went 
into the Duke's I found in the first magnificent room 
about a hundred officers, but soon discovered many well- 
known bores under these false pretensions ; old Brooke 
and Mr. L-by, etc., mixed up with Platow' and the 

' A Cossack General, who greatly distinguished himself in Turkey anc 
then during the invasion of Russia hy France. He entered Paris witt 
the Allied Sovereigns, and visited it again on the second Restoration, wher 
he was made much of in the Paris salons. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 67 

bravest of tliem. In the doorway I met Talleyrand 
waddling out ; he did not speak to me, so I had only 
the satisfaction of seeing his dirty, cunning face and 
long coat for a moment. After him came Fouche, a 
little spare, shallow, shrewd-looking man, who seems to 
unite all parties in one common feeling — horror of his 
character, and the policy of not betraying it. He is, I 
conclude, the worst and the most useful man the King 
could have found in his whole dominions. 

The King of Prussia was the only Eoyal lion. He 
talked to me for about ten minutes, enquired affection- 
ately after you, still resents Lady Downshire having 
put him into her back room by himself, and appears to 
be just what he was last year, only more at his ease 
from not being followed and stared at. Pozzo di Borgo, 
Metternich, and Sir Charles Stuart are the people I 
like most to talk to here. The first tells one anything 
and everything one wishes to know from Adam till 
now, Metternich is more entertaining than anybody, 
and Sir Charles is like a good Court guide or book 
of reference. He discovers what others are about or 
would be about to a degree that must be very useful to 
him in his present situation. The demoralisation of the 
French nation is become too much like the cosmogony 
of the world in the ' Vicar of Wakefield ; ' one hears and 
talks of nothing else, and I would bet ten to one that 
every new person begins in English, French, German, 
Russian, or High Dutch, ' Was there ever a nation,' 
etc. There never were, au reste, such innumerable 
parties and shades of party, and Fouche for the last 
year has paid abject court in five different quarters—- 
to the Emperor, the King, the Duke of Orleans, the 
Jacobins, and the Duke of Wellington, to secure a 
retraite en Angleterre in case all the others had failed 
him. 

Lady Shelley pursues her pursuit with the most 

F 2 



68 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

unremitting diligence, and makes herself reaUy ridi- 
culous, as the Duke pays her no attention, and she 
follows and watches him quite laughably. There is no 
harm in her, I am sure, beyond inordinate vanify. He 
is only successor to the Spencer family. Sir John is 
quite charmed with it. Lady Kinnaird is very flourish- 
ing, but otherways in no one thing the least altered. 
A shining, flat head of hair, unbounded good-nature, 
and not one idea added to the stock. ' I'll be glad to 
hear when you last saw Cecilia Foley,' and not a thought 

about Emperors or Kings. Little Madame de with 

her fine eyes, was one of the very few French women 
there, and she waltzed as if her husband's head had not 
been laid open in a duel in the morning. I suppose 
they cannot help dancing. Mme. Juste de JSToailles, 
after a contredanse, met someone who asked her how 
she did. 'Aussi bien que Ton pent etre apres avoir 
danse sur le tombeau de sa patrie,' she answered, and I 
dare say danced another. 

I have been at home almost all this morning, as 
GranviUe has a swelled ankle, which quite disables 
him. It is either a sprain or gout. We dined at 
Eoberts', with only Hart, Clifl^ord, and Punch GreviUe, 
and then went to the play, to see ' Henri Quatre ' and ' Le 
Calife de Bagdad.' The royalty was received with the 
given quantity of applause, for, as Pozzo says, if harle- 
quin was proposed to them as King, one would hear 
nothing all over Paris but, ' Ah ! le joli homme, vive 
Arlequin ! ' In ' Henri Quatre ' the following words were 
left out, ' Le Eoi pardonnera, c'est son plus grand plaisir, 
et les plus coupables feront le plus de jaloux,' as not 
quite applicable to the proscription, I suppose, and there 
was a loud laugh in the ' Calife ' when the widow says, 
' Etonn^e ? Moi ? J'en ai tant vu ! tant vu ! que main- 
tenant tons les miracles de Mahomet, passes, presents et 
futurs, ne me paraitraient que des jeux d'enfans.' 



1816 TO LADY G. MORPETH 69 

To-morrow we go to see Mile. Mars, who happily 
for us has recovered her spirits and her politics, act in 
the ' Philosophe Marie.' 

I have not a notion of what we are to do. There is 
a grand review in ten days, but what change that may 
make in the affairs of men I do not know. Good night, 
my dear sister. 

3rd. — Only think of poor Granville being laid up 
with his first fit of gout. It must be confessed he has 
chosen his time ingeniously. He does not suffer violent 
pain, and he is not ill with it, but unable to move, and 
the ankle is enormous, and as hot as fire. 

I went with Hart to see Mile. Mars and was dis- 
appointed. She appears to me an excellent actress, but 
not a seduisante enchanter esse. Eyes and gesticulations 
as quick as lightning, but she puts me in mind of Miss 
Berry when she is showing off, and that does not bring 
the word ' captivating ' to my mind. My brother was 
much more pleased with her than I was. 

To Lady G. Mokpeth. 

Paris : August 4, 1815. 

Granville is better to-day. He has had a good 
night, and Dr. Tupper is sanguine as to his recovering 

speedily. 

I went to Mme. de Coigny's the night before last, 
where I found her with about half a dozen men. Mon- 
sieur de Lascours^ the only one I knew, all terribly 
gloomy, talking of la feue France, and groaning under 
the weight of nations. I think there is little illusion left 
on the subject of Napoleon, but it appe£|,rs to me that 
Louis' name should again be changed from V Inevitable to 
V Impossible. He has not more power in France than I 

' He fought under Lafayette in the American War of Independence. 
He was an active politician during the First Empire and during the 
Bestoration was in favour of the Bourbons, but opposed the reac- 
tionaries. 



70 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

have, and I think less consideration. Amongst Madame 
de Goigny's set there appears to me to be a strong 
Orleans penchant. They said there was a moment when 
' toute la France etait Orleaniste hors le Due lui-m^me, 
mais il etait trop grand pour le devenir.' I was much 
3,sked about Mme. d'Aguesseau et sa demoiselle. Mme. 
de Coigny said, ' On la dit hors d'eUe de tout ce qui 
se passe ici.' A thin, sallow, eagle-eyed young man, 
who I found afterwards was a young Segur, a great 
friend of Charles de Flahault, said, ' Madame d'Agues- 
seau est toujours hors d'elle, et eUe fait bien.' I went 
yesterday morning to Madame de Souza's, but she sees 
nobody, has Prussians quartered in every part of her 
house except the bedroom, where she remains ill and 
saying, ' Helas ! je n'ai ete que Flahaultiste.' Her son 
has given in his demission, and is not proscribed. I also 
drove with Madame de Coigny in the Bois de Boulogne, 
where the English are encamped. It is true what she 
says, ' Cela ressemble tant k une fete que c'est dommage 
que cela soit une conquSte ! ' 

L'Empereur Alexandre, as they announce Mr. Tom- 
kins in England. Poor Granville, with such twinges 
between gout and respect, and I felt so ashamed of 
bawling out French phrases, for he has grown very deaf. 
You made a great impression on the Sovereigns, dear 
Lady Morpeth ; they pester me with enquiries, about you. 

11 o'clock. — Granville is still mending, and hopes to 
see Talma to-morrow. I am just come from the Opera, 
and have seen a magnificent baUet, Achille in petti- 
coats, with people in the sea, in the air, and, in short, 
splendid. Baron Tripp and Henry Pierrepoint dined 
with us to-day, and the former was very agreeable, giving 
details, some of which I hope were true, of the battle^ 
The Due d'Angouleme is doing harm in the South, and 
has sported a green- white cockade, which caused great 
sensation. It is absurd, when so much has been sacri- 



1816 TO LADY G. MORPETH 71 

ficed by the King, to retain the white one. It seems 
that the Princes are extremely agissant, though their 
names are kept back as much as possible, too short- 
sighted to understand any measure of policy, and too 
presumptuous to foresee any difficulty ; they do all the 
harm that at such a moment ill-timed and ill-judged 
severity can do. 

The hon mot of the day is that somebody was com- 
plaining of the dreadful state of the finances, and was 
answered, ' Pourtant nous avons un Gros revenu.' Good 
night, dearest G. 

5th. — To-morrow I shall be very entertaining, as I 
am going to see Talma act Manlius to-night, and after- 
wards to Madame de Coigny's, to meet Benjamin Con- 
stant, and some of the curious, not to say factious. 
Granville is not better than yesterday, which is a 
disappointment, as, though the pain is not violent, it 
is a provoking and tedious confinement. 

7th. — I have only time to say that Granville is almost 
well, that Talma, hors the ranting, is magnificent as to 
dumb show, action, and countenance, and that none of 
the great guns were at Madame de Coigny's. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : August 1815. 

I must give you some account of what has happened 
since the last. On Monday I went with Hart to a 
great dinner at Lord Stewart's. We met the Duchesse 
de Sagan, who has forsaken Frederick Lamb and is 
now the regnante at the court of Prince Charles — for 
so Lord Stewart is universally called — La Baronne de 
Talleyrand, a little thing of sixteen and married to 
Talleyrand's nephew. Ladies Castlereagh, Shelley, and 
Kinnaird. The house is beautiful and belonged to the 
Comte de Montesquieu. The dinner very splendid, and 



72 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

Schwartzenberg,^ Czernichef/ some Princes, and all the 
Ambassadors present at it. I sat between Sir Charles 
and Lord Clancarty and was well amused. Talleyrand 
came in the evening and waddled about. Granville is 
only just beginning to go about again, but still lame. 
In the evening we saw ' Le Nouveau Seigneur du Vil- 
lage ' and ' Joconde.' To-day I have been to the Musee. 
Blllcher has taken the three small figures, from the 
Salle des Fleuves, of the child playing with les osselets 
and two small Venuses, which came from Berlin. Lady 
Malmesbury,^ Fanny Temple, and some other very odd- 
looking figures attracted much attention. The Grant- 
hams are arrived. She looks very handsome, but is 
intarissable in her talk. 

There was a Eussian Eeview yesterday, but we did 
not go. The three Allied Sovereigns, the great Duke, 
and Lady Shelley riding along the ranks and reviewing 
the whole. She makes an unprecedented fool of herself. 

Paris is in the same state. Monsieur de la Be- 
doyere's * fate undecided, the news of Ney's being taken 
having arrived to-day, little disturbances in the Public 
Gardens, and the Duke of Wellington having told some 
one that in six weeks the armies will have left France. 
What will happen then nobody even attempts to con- 
jecture, but poor Louis must, I think, end ill after all. 

Caroline and William Lamb are expected here to- 
day. We go on Sunday, and I am not sorry on all 
accounts to return. 

I hear the Prince of Orange is to marry the Grand 
Duchess Ann. 

God bless you, dearest G. I am just come from 
dinner. Hart, Clifibrd, and Punch Greville dined with 

■ Austrian Ambassador. 
^ Russian Ambassador. 

^ Wife of the first Lord Malmesbury, the distinguished diplomate. 
'' He was the first Colonel who went over to Buonaparte after his 
return from Elba, and was executed. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 73 

US. Hart says he has bought all Paris. I have bought 
you a green silk petticoat. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris: 1815. 

I have been more hurried and less amused since the 
last courier went, which has made me put off writing 
to the last moment. The fact is the novelty of the 
sight was its charm, and I am very glad to set off for 
England at four on Wednesday morning. In politics 
there is nothing new. Fouche is said to look very 
grave. The Emperor, whom Granville saw this morn- 
ing, says the state of affairs is quite inexplicable. Our 
military seem much amused, tearing up the Boulevards 
in the morning, filling the theatres at night, and losing 
their money at the Salon. 

Of sights I have seen the Halle au Ble, the Marche 
de Legumes, the model of the H6tel des Invalides, ser- 
vice performed at Notre Dame and the Duke of Eut- 
land in it, talking in a style prophetic of another Jour. 
' This is indeed a most striking and a most curious 
sight. It is indeed a state of things in which,' etc., his 
eyes in a tame phrenzy roUing. 

I have seen Talma and MUe. Georges act very 
finely in 'CEdipe' and Mile. Mars delightfully in the 
♦Misanthrope,' but the theatres are intolerably hot. 
The carriages rattle more than ever or than anything 
but Lady Castlereagh, whose society is now settled in 
Lady Camden and suite. Lady Grantham and EngUsh 
red coats. Madame de Coigny has difiiculty in re-unit- 
ing people chez elle, and if one meets a Frenchman 
there, he draws into his shell and sits in gloomy silence. 
Hart has seen and bought all that Bllicher has left, and 
intends to be at Saltram the 28th. 

Sovereigns, wits, Pozzo, Metternich never show the 
tips of their little fingers. The dandies are broken in 



74 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRAI^VILLE 1815 

hearts and fortunes. Lord Alvanley has taken a lodging 
at Versailles, Henry Pierrepoint has hurried back to. 
England, Baron Tripp gives us his honour that it is 
very good taste in us to go away, and P. Lamb has 
taken to his bed. 

Nothing is agissant but Caroline William in a purple 
riding habit, tormenting everybody, but I am convinced 
ready primed for an attack upon the Duke of Wellington, 
and I have no doubt but that she wiU to a certain 
extent succeed, as no dose of flattery is too strong for 
him to swallow or her to administer. Poor William 
hides in one small room, while she assembles lovers and 
tradespeople in another. He looks worn to the bone. 
She arrived dying by her own account, having had 
French apothecaries at most of the towns through 
which she passed. She sent here immediately for a 
doctor, but by mistake they went for the Duke of Wel- 
lington. 

God bless my own best of sisters. I pine for a 
pure air and country life in England, but I am glad 
to have been here. 

Lady HoUand, you may have heard, has had seven 
hundred pounds' worth of goods ripped from a feather- 
bed. 

Monday night. — I have just come from seeing 
Potier in the ' Ci-devant Jeune Homme ' and ' Je fais 
mes Farces.' Hart is gone to win a few parting pounds 
at Eoberts'. 

I trust my letters have reached you. I have never 
missed a post or opportunity. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : September 1, 1815, 

I went yesterday to the slate quarry and all over the 
beautiful wood in which it is. The day was dehcious, 
and this part of the country is beautiful. It puts me in 



1815 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 75 

mind of Bolton and some of the valleys between Theux 
and Spa. 

We had a dinner, Sir John Duckworth, another Sir 
Something, and a sensible, pleasing physician whom 
they swear by here. 

The Boringdons saw the Pole who has been allowed 
to go with Buonaparte. He seems really attached to 
him. Amongst other things he said of him, ' Mais il ne 
pense jamais k lui,' a new view of his character. There 
are different versions of all the stories of him and his 
companions. Some say that Madame Bertrand ' is very 
much in love with him, others that she detests him, 
and never calls him anything but I'homme. 

Borino ^ is so . long manoeuvring and marshalling us 
that I have time to tell you that I had a letter from my 
aunt. She had just seen the Hollands, Lady H. in 
grief at the failure of some presents she wanted to send 
to Buonaparte and Madame Bertrand. 

No women were present at the Duchess of Cumber- 
land's marriage. The Dowager Lansdowne proposed 
herself, and was refused. Caroline "William writes me 
word that she detests Paris, which she says is gay with- 
out interest, noisy beyond bearing ; that she is mag- 
nificently but uncomfortably lodged, alone or in a crowd ; 
and that every countenance bears the stamp of sup- 
pressed iU-humour if native, pique if Austrian or Eussian, 
open insolence or vulgar wonder if English, with the 
only exception of Hart, who sees everything couleur de 
rose and enjoys himself extremely. The Louvre, she 
says, is the prey of the spoiler, and Denon ^ looking as 
Jenny's mother did when ' she looked in her face till 
her heart was nigh to break.' Good-bye. 

' Wife of Comte Bertrand, Buonaparte's secretary. They both 
accompanied him to St. Helena and were present at his death. 

* Lord Boringdon. 

' Celebrated for his knowledge of art. He accompanied Buonaparte 
to Egypt, and was on his return named Director- General of the Museums, 
and retained the place till 1815. He had collected in the conquered 



76 LETTERS OF HARRIET COimTESS GRANVILLE 1815 
To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : September 3, 1815. 

Have you any recollection of Mount-Edgcumbe ? 
We were there the day before yesterday, and I think 
I never admired anything more. The day was beau- 
tiful, the sea covered with shipping, one large frigate 
saiUng so near the shore that you might fancy you 
could touch it. There are gardens of all nations, an 
Italian one with a large fountain in the middle, dolphins 
spouting out the water into a marble basin, and steps 
at the end with rails and statues of the Apollo, Venus, 
and a Bacchus, and on the basin a verse from Ariosto. 
The French one is all parterre, arbours with clematis 
hanging over them, and an urn with an inscription to 
his wife. The English garden is like the plantation at 
Tixal, with magnolias and arbutus, large trees and 
benches and comforts in abundance. A great bath, a 
room with tables and a divan round it. In another 
part of the place there is a temple with a bust of 
Milton and lines descriptive of the place from ' Paradise 
Lost.' Lord Mount-Edgcumbe is not a good Adam, 
but he was very civil, gave us a great deal of fruit and 
very little of his company. 

Lady Lagsdowne-^is the best little person in the 
worldT I really think she seems faultless. Her desire 
of gaining information in every possible way is par- 
ticularly laudable, as it is, I am sure, a more certain 
way of pleasing him than any other. Knowledge seems 
to be her deity, and he is like the account of King 
Solomon in the Book of Kings. We leave no stone 
unturned, and aU my ignorance comes to light on the 
occasion. 

The Cowpers will be here to dinner. I see I like 
Lady Jersey the best, as I wish for her much more than 

countries a great number of works of art, with which he enriched the 
museums of France. 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 77 

Lady C. The former takes everything in such good 
part, and is so frank and good-humoured that thinking 
the other the most agreeable does not turn the scale in 
her favour. The thoughts of the Earls sit heavy on 
my soul at moments when my spirits are not high, but 
I know I shall like it when they all come. The only 
black spot on the horizon is the system of joking, and 
that the muscles are unable to look gay and affable 
with the deep remorse for that inability. I always feel 
shy and an idiot in that society. Lady Boringdon is 
dehghtful, in high spirits, but not overpowering. 

We have just been at the most mitigated church 
service, as Mr. Ward would say. I was in fear lest 
Borino should, if the sermon exceeded his wishes, hold 
up a watch or drop a curtain. 

We are going to drive to Staddon Heights. It 
looks to me in the clouds, but I never make a remark, 
as I am permitted not to ride. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : September 5, 1815, 

The Jerseys do not come. She is not recovered and 
her child not quite well. I am sorry yet relieved. 
' TeU me, my sis, can this be love ? ' 

6th. — I was called away in the middle of a sentence 
and did not return to bless myself with food or rest till 
ten o'clock at night. We went up the Tamar to see 
Cotele, an old house of Lord Mount-Edgcumbe's. It is 
a lovely expedition but a fatiguing one, six miles of 
carriage road, a foot's pace up and down perpendicular 
hills. Fourteen miles of water, rowing against the tide, 
a long walk to see the place, which is very beautiful, 
sailing back and driving home in the dark, groping up 
the hills every now and then for safety. 

Lord Boringdon, Granville, and Mr. Harris stayed 
at home. I will describe the rest to you, walking up 



78 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

the steep hill at Cotele. First Lady Boringdon, with an 
old green shawl swinging over her shoulders, the corners 
aU wrong, her hair about her ears, a cap just sticking 
on to the back of her head and her hat in her hand, 
shouting out to the housekeeper to be in readiness for 
us. No wonder that a maid who first appeared told 
her she must not persu,me to come in. Lord Lansdowne, 
very fat and out of breath in a black chip hat much 
enfonce over his head. Lady Cowper swinging after 
them, her nose very red, a high hat tied on with a veil 
under her chin, flounces draggling, sash untying, shawl 
floating. Myself ditto. Lady Lansdowne towed up by 
Miss Smith in a little crushed muslin poke and a sweet 
smile. Lord Cowper striding after us, now and then 
stopping, taking a position with his hand, shading 
his eyes to look at the view en maitre; Granville 
Somerset closing the rear. 

We lead the life of tourists, have delicious weather, 
little repose and no time. My only spare moments are 
those in which I write my few and short letters to you. 

Lady Cowper is more animated than 1 ever knew 
her. She talks more, and it is not quite so much ' 'Tis 
seeming all ' as usual, but she occasionally looks bored 
and resigned and gives us sly cuts. 

Lady Lansdowne raves of you. She says to look at 
you is to love you, and her praise is invaluable, for she 
is sincerity and truth, walking about this bad world 
having escaped all its harm. 

I am writing for dear life. Lord Lansdowne and I 
are going to perform a journey on foot, Lady Boring- 
don in a whisky. Lady Cowper and the lords on horse- 
back. She has no habit and is a coward on any horse 
but her own ; but as Buonaparte used to say of himself 
we say of Borino, 'C'est une grande preuve de la 
faiblesse de I'esprit humain de croire qu'on pent me 
resister.' 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 79 

Lady Lansdowne has got a sister, whom she appears 
to love much as I do you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : September 8, 1815. 

The Lansdownes are this moment gone. I do not 
break my heart when Chloe goes, because she cares for 
nothing but husband, children, and sisters, and therefore, 
although I admire and really reverence her, it goes no 
deeper. She sends you her tenderest love, so I conclude 
you make greater impression. Mr. Huskisson is a great 
improvement. It is extremely pleasant. The weather 
is finer than ever, and Hart is so good-humoured and 
facile a vivre that he makes everything couleur de rose, 
the sure way to have it so. 

I hear that it is reported that the Duke of Welling- 
ton and Lord Castlereagh are upon bad terms, I do not 
know why. 

Your children must be delightful ; I only wish I did 
not so perpetually live away from mine. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : September 15, 1815. 

We are this moment ' setting out — Hart in his 
barouche, in which we were to have gone with him if 
it had been fine, but it is pouring. We are to sleep at 
Ilminster to-night, and he goes with us to Badminton 
to-morrow, where we shall arrive just in time for 
the Kingscote ball and races, to which the Duchess is 
going, as Lord Worcester is steward. They seem very 
sorry to part with us here. 

We had a visit from Miss O'Neill, who is odious. 
She snubbed us all, which is not prepossessing, struts 
about and throws out sentences in a low tragedy tone, 
looks short, thick, and vulgar, and coldly receives any 
conversation bearing upon her art. When Lady B. 



80 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 

mentioned Mr. Ward as having acted Jaffier tolerably 
at the Plymouth theatre, she said, ' Mr. Who ? I really 
was not aware of his name,' with the most dignified 
touchiness. God bless you, dearest. 



To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Badminton: 1815. 

I have but a moment to tell you we arrived here 
last night. They are alone here, and we stay with them 
till Tuesday. 

I dined at Holland House, and if she had been in 
better humour it would have been very agreeable, 
but she is not in a happy hour, and will not suffer 
others to be so without a little quiet course of pumping 
and teasing going on sotto voce. 

Their politics seem to be reduced to adoration of 
Buonaparte. The Jerseys, violent as they are, are 
driven to the other side of the question, and I sat in 
boiling water. 

Mr. Sheridan was there in his best, discussing all 
the young women of his acquaintance with much praise 
and some little cuts. He says Silence is a pretty, 
pushing, babbling stream, never stagnant. Lady Borino, 
his favourite, has hit the line between good-humoured 
frankness and vulgarity, just touch and run. 

At Lady Jersey's the night before last it was very 
pleasant. Lord Kinnaird, Mr. Nugent, Lady Cahir, who 
is there quite like a humble companion. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : September 26, 1815. 

We go to Lilleshall to-morrow and to Tixal again 
Thursday. The Vernons come to us on Sunday. I 
never saw people appear so happy and fond of each 
other. She is constantly employed, reading, drawing 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 81 

beautifully, and a great deal in her room. He is very 

much improved. / j ( 

Mizabeth^ Leveson is in her greatest beauty and'^ .; v/fj,^,, 
very amiable and agreeable. Lord Gower rather pre- / / 
occupied. ' ' 

I have been suffering torture in my fang. Oh ! 
that traitor Parkinson. 

The thought of seeing you makes me so happy. 

I see that Fouche has resigned. 

I beg your pardon for being so decousue, but I am 
very sleepy and happier than I have been for some 
time past, but much stupider. God bless our dear Sis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : September 28, 1815. 

I am sorry there should be any reports that dis- 
tress you. I really flatter myself that I never say a 
word of your proceedings relative to the C.'s^ that 
can be converted into mischief. Every one laments 
over your present sejour as a very melancholy one, 
and indeed you would be very odd sort of people 
if it was not ; but compassion is the only sentiment I 
now hear expressed for poor Lord Carlisle, and I feel 
convinced that your and Lord Morpeth's attention and 
whole behaviour to him can only excite admiration. 

You have no idea how well Mr. Vernon ^ and Lady 
Elizabeth go on together. No display, but an appear- 
ance of the greatest possible affection. The beauty is 
at present almost gone, but a very sweet countenance 
remains. Ehzabeth Leveson seems fond of her. Lady 
Stafford cries her up to the skies, and Lord Stafford is 
really amused and pleased with her. 

I have been a long ride this morning and should be 
quite a mon aise if my pony had not a great mind to 

' Lord and Lady Carlisle. ^S S ^ C^ 

' Mr. Vernon married Lady Elizabeth Bingham in May 1815. ^X^'t'^' 

VOL. ^~^^^^.^,^^,^k: '>' ^-^ .. s. ' ■ ■ ^^ -^ ^' 



82 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE ]815 

run away. He set off with me once. I tugged and 
hollowed to Granville. He would not come, but bade 
me hold my tongue and tug on, which succeeded. The 
pony has no vice and one is quitte pour la peur. I 
like him, for he is perfectly safe and sure-footed ; his 
faults are all spirit and play. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : September 29, 181S. 

The Beauforts come here on the 11th, and we all 
migrate to Chatsworth. Do you know if we are likely 
to find Hart, for go I will at all events ? 

I know of no very new books. I have been reading 
an old one in two volumes, two tiny ones, ' "Voyage en 
Italie,' par Dupaty. It was strongly recommended to me 
by Mr. Ward, and I can only say that it is as clever and 
as ridiculous as himself, and therefore very entertaining. 

' Fazio,' the new tragedy, is in parts very fine and 
in others as bad. It is written by a young Mr. Milman, 
son to the physician. It is well worth sending for. 
Some people think it beautiful. Lord Lansdowne 
brought it to Saltram and said it was one of the finest 
things he had ever read, so do get it. The woman's 
character is very interesting. 

By-the-bye, I believe you can get by this time 
' L'Ambassade de Pologne,' par I'Archev^que de Malines. 
I would almost go to Paris to fetch it, it is so very 
curious. God bless you, dear Sis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : October 1815. 
The ground is covered with snow to-night, and yet 
I have been walking and driving all day with Mrs. 
Huskisson. She is — but do not say so — a sort of harbour 
from Lady Barbara's society, which is to me like that 
of a tiresome child to whom one must not say, ' Don't do 



1815 TO LADY G. MORPETH 83 

that,' ' Don't say that,' or say ' Take her away.' William, 
however, seems very fond of her, which is I'essentiel. 
He is agreeable, talkative, and evidently very happy. 

We are going, after the next week, a round of visits 
to Trentham, Sandon, and Ingestre. 

I hear Charles de Flahault is at Woburn. Poor 
Madame de St. Leu ^ will sing all the romances about 
eternal constancy with a heavy heart, but a French 
ex-queen can never be long without consolation. 

Good night. Is it possible that this can be better 
than nothing ? 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : October 26, 1815. 

We arrived here yesterday. There are only the 
Huskissons and Lord Francis. 

I would have written last night, but was really 
palsied with cold and dulness. There are about three 
fires lit in the house, and those small and black and 
carefully blocked up with screens. Mr. Huskisson 
makes a few feeble attempts to speak, I try sometimes, 
and the darkness and silence are such that it gives an 
air of mystery, and we look as if we were performing 
some awful religious ceremony. 

I think the Macdonalds are in disgrace, but I 
endeavour to get on with smiles and sounds, avoiding 
committing myself in conversation. 

On Thursday we go, as from a seven years' trans- 
portation, to Sandon. The Huskissons go there for a 
night also. 

EHzabeth is really beautiful, and so much improved 
in manner and so sweet-tempered and attractive that I 
sometimes feel astonished why I am not fonder of her, 
and sometimes think myself unjust. 

' Queen Hortense. 



84 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1815 
To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : December 31, 1815. 

We are again reduced to a very small number, Mr. 
Nugent and ourselves. I do not know whether some 
people might not think the life we lead here wanted 
incident, but to me it is really luxury. Comfort is the 
word for it, and except practical jokes, expeditions, and 
secretaire there is a possibility of every sort of enjoy- 
ment. Lady Harrowby is delightful. She is losing 
every day the shades of I do not know what to call it 
that ever darkened an understanding and character in 
fact almost superior to any I know. But I am improv- 
ing, dearest Sis, at least I trust so. I think time and 
happiness must rub off many of one's angular faults ; 
they teach indulgence and shame selfishness. But I 
will not write all my moralising, you will have enough 
of it when we meet. 

Lady Talbot has been at Woburn, and I am rather 
curious to know what she says of it. I have only heard 
of her being charmed with Charles de Flahault and 
horror-struck with Lady Holland travelling with a 
train of sixteen people. If that was all. God bless 
you, dearest. 



1816 TO LADY G. MORPETH 85 



1816 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Stanhope Street : February 1816. 

Dearest sister, — I have been sorry to hear Mr. 
Brougham's speech very much abused. It seems to have 
been thought coarse and with Httle to recommend it. I 
understand his friends are much annoyed, his reconciled 
ones particularly, at a notice he has given for a motion 
about the Spaniards on Thursday, without consulting or 
even mentioning it to any of them. I do not think the 
peace between him and Lady Holland will be lasting, 
in which case it had been better not made. If he gives 
himself out as upon friendly terms with them, he should 
not act exactly as he would have done if he had con- 
tinued to be as independent of them in society as in 
politics. Lady Holland has taken up a line of civility 
and sweetness. To Mrs. Lamb I find she has been 
really licking the dust under her feet to get at the 
chestnuts. But it is not only when she has an object ; 
she ran to open the door for Berry, which little event 
has not missed its mark, for Miss B. repeats it every 
five minutes. Lady H. had an assembly in Savile Eow 
last night. Granville went there and to Madame de 
Lieven's, who has soirees and suppers every Sunday. 

All the Ponsonbys that ever lived are in town. 
Fanny very amiable and not at all troublesome. 

Your children all drank tea here last night. Blanche 
is too great a darling; she is shy in general, and I 
suppose it is from some likeness in voice and manner 
that she forgets with me that I am not you, calls me 



86 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1816 

Mama aud is full of jokes and animation. How pretty- 
she is ! Granville thinks Georgiana beautiful and very- 
like my mother. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Badminton : 1816. 

Dearest sister, — I heard yesterday from Hart, his 
letter dictated to Mrs. Lamb, as his eyes are bad. He 
tells me the new joke, that the Allies have made so 
good a peace, ' qu'ils n'ont laisse rien ^ Desire.' ^ They 
also call him, instead of Louis Dixhuit, ' Louis deux fois 
neuf.' 

I cannot tell you how I long for Tuesday, though 
I shall be very sorry to leave the Duchess. God bless 
you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth^ 

London: 1816. 

Madame de Lieven, whom you enquired about, is 
become famous for civility and empressements to every- 
body. Her manner is much softened, and, as far as the 
most perfect propriety in all one sees and the most 
amicable terms with her husband and greatest egard 
for him go, a great change has taken place. We dined 
there on Sunday. It was a dinner quite unrivalled in 
the records of dulness. The Archdukes — who scarcely 
utter, though the eldest looks intelligent, but the 
youngest is without vivacity, and it is said they are 
j ust as much bored as they look — Lord Liverpool, Lord 
Castlereagh, Lord Bathurst, nearly as silent, and Fernan 
Count Munster, and the Marquis d'Osmond, who was all 
the time whispering with his neighbours. Esterhazy 
crowned this flow of soul. He is silly and tiresome to 
the supremest degree. 

I went from thence to Savile Eow,^ which always 

' Louis XVIII. was so called. 
'' Lord Holland s London house. 



1816 TO LADY G. MORPETH 87 

looks as if there was to be a revolution the next morn- 
ing. Lord Kinnaird whispering, gesticulating, and 
prophecising. Flahault, who is discreet upon politics 
and devoue aux dames, jesting with Corise about un 
bonnet du temps de ma grand'mere. 

I was distressed at meeting Lord Alvanley.^ He is 
aU but worshipped in that society, and was received 
with shouts and acclamations. He had the grace upon 
seeing me to be quite petrified ; he did not speak or 
smile, and I saw a general astonishment in all their 
faces. God bless jovl, my dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Leamington : August 9, 1816. 

We arrived here yesterday in fine weather. The 
place is very pretty, but so full that we cannot have a 
house till Monday, and are in a clean but very small 
room at an hotel. Excepting Lord and Lady Henley, 
whose house we inherit, there is not a soul here I ever 
heard of. 

You ask me about the Princesse Esterhazy. She 
does, perhaps, weU to be as coquette as possible, and 
she is all but ugly and quite foolish, and without great 
painstaking runs the risk of a most dull and easy 
course of conjugal happiness with Paul. She sings 
pretty odd Tyrolese airs with no voice, incessantly roUs 
eyes with but little expression in them, talks the veriest 
German nonsense, and by dint of aU has a lover or two, 
par ci, par la. Lady Aberdsen^ gained upon me. She '^'^^^' 
is duU, but I do'Tiot think her silly, and appears the ' 
best and most amiable person possible. She would be 
beautiful if she had one grain of countenance, and she 

' He was supposed to have led Lord Worcester into some money 
scrape. 

^ The widow of Lord Hamilton, Lord Abercorn's son, and the second 
wife of Lord Aberdeen. She was the mother of the first Dulie of 
Abercorn. 



88 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1816 

winks and does her moutli about in a disagreeable 
manner. He gives me more the idea of excessive 
attention and egard than of any great love, but this 
is not at all the version of it at the Priory.' 

Lady Charlotte Campbell's daughter,^ who is just 
come out, is decidedly, as far as one day's experience 
of a person can go, the girl I should prefer Hart's 
marrying. She is beautiful and dans le meilleur genre, 
with the sweetest manners I ever met with. She is 
really quite enchanting. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal: 1816. 

Dearest love, — Lady Harrowby and Susan are arrived, 
and I repose my cares upon them, knowing that to 
Messrs. Standish and Montagu at least they are every- 
thing. They are all in the library reading out loud 
and shouting with laughter over the two new reviews. 
I had rather read and, like Mary Bennet,^ laugh by 
myself. Good night, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal: 1816. 

Lord John Eussell is the nicest little man that ever 
was, and his dog Witty the nicest dog. Did you ever 
hear that Lord William was very much in love with 
Miss Eawdon and" that they would marry if they had 
de quoi ? I know it upon no good authority. 

Lord Talbot came to see us to-day, and filled me 
with horror with details of discontent, poverty, and 
ruin. As to us, we are singing our sweet dying notes, 
and shall soon beg at your hospitable doors. 

Fanny is very French in her toilettes and more 
infantine in her manner than ever. She walks out and 

' Lord Aberoorn's country house. 

^ She married in 1819 Lord Uxbridge. 

' In Miss Austen's novel, Pride and Prejudice. 



1816 TO LADY G. MORPETH 89 

meets fearful objects, and falls down and hurts lierself, 
and laughs and starts and looks unutterable things. 

To Lady G. Morpeth^ 

Tixal : November 1, 1816. 

Dearest G., — I was indeed very much shocked at 
hearing of poor Baron Tripp's death. There are various 
reports. One of pecuniary distress ; one that he was in 
love with that pretty little Mrs. Fitzherbert, who was a 
Miss Chichester, and that he sent to her husband to 
borrow the pistols with which he destroyed himself; 
and another that upon Mr. Capel sending to tell him 
he no longer would oppose his marrying his daughter, 
he avowed a secret marriage and said he had a wife 
and five children, and then, unable to reconcile the 
difficulties of this situation, shot himself. It was on 
returning from a party. His servant heard the report 
of a pistol and found him lifeless. How horrible ! 

We shall be in town I hope on Wednesday. How 
I long to hear the tenth squall ! I trust I shall be in 
time. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London: 1816. 

Thank you, my dearest sister, for your letter. I 
have not seen your girls again. The weather has been 
so terrible, a mixture of snow and yellow fog, that I 
have not liked to ask them to come out, and have not 
left the house myself. 

Granville went to see Miss O'Neill last night in 
'Measure for Measure.' Monsieur de Flahault and 
Benjamin Constant ^ were there. It is a bad play for 
foreigners to see, and he says they seemed terribly 
wearied. Benjamin has brought over a novel which he 
is going to read to a select few in Cavendish Square 

' The well-known author and politician, and devoted friend of Madame 
de Stael. 



90 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1816 

next week. I mean to be present, and I have begged 
C. W. Lamb may, to cry and make sensation for us. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

London : December 15, 1816. 

I went yesterday to Whitehall, followed the page 
and Lady AsgiU through the dark and winding passages 
and staircases. I was received with rapturous joy, 
embraces, and tremendous spirits. I expected she ^ 
would have put on appearance of something, but to do 
her justice she only displayed a total want of shame and 
consummate impudence, which, whatever they may be 
in themselves, are at least better or rather less disgust- 
ing than pretending or acting a more interesting part. 

I was dragged to the unresisting William, and dis- 
missed with a repetition of embassades and professions. 
I looked, as I felt, stupified. And this is the guilty, 
broken-hearted Calanthe who could only expiate her 
crimes with her death. I mean my visit to be annual. 

We went to Drury Lane, Granville, Lord Harrowby 
and myself. I admired Kean extremely and Mr. 
Wallack. How magnificent Kean's countenance is ! 
Sometimes he looks like Lord Byron, sometimes like 
little Lord Johnny, and sometimes like Mr. Luttrell. 

To-morrow we go to see ' Love and the Toothache,' 
and Listen, I trust, a martyr to both. God bless you. 

/ n 

' Lady Caroline Lamb. ■ . ,, ' ■;, , 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 91 



1817 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Chatsworth : January 13, 1817. 

Hart is quite well again. His eye is still bloodshot, 
but nothing to signify. 

I went yesterday morning to Edensor Church. Mr. 
Smith preached an excellent sermon. He has persuaded 
Hart to have a stove in the Chapel, which will be a 
great point gained, as the distance from the Church 
makes it often, from weather or hours, impracticable to 
many people here. 

Yesterday evening we had no whist, and the 
evening passed rapidly, a great deal of reading, talking, 
and some music. The whole difference to me is Hart's 
no longer having habits of doing nothing, and his 
library here facilitates everything. The dinners are 
very good, the rooms well lit, no appearance of re- 
tranchement, and much more consistent appearance in 
everything than at the time there was extravagance and 
profusion, with much that was manque. 

Mrs. Cavendish^ is agreeable, clever, and even 
rigidly good. I imagine her a very religious person, 
and she appears very fond of Henry. 

We go to Tixal Thursday. The Army and Navy, 
as Eogers always calls Frederick and Bob,^ font mes 
delices. I have no more time, dear. 

' Wife of General Cavendish, Lord George's second son. 
* Ponsonby and Spencer. 



92 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

February 26, 1817. 

Dearest brother, — I write not to lose a good habit, 
but I have nothing worth telling you. 

I saw Lady Harrowby yesterday, but as I found 
Lord Ebrington chirping to her, I staid but a moment. 
She is going to Claremont the week after next. I hope 
she will be able to inoculate the presumptive with some 
good sense, and she will not shrink from so sprack an 
adviser. 

I read some more of the letters yesterday evening 
and came to dear G.'s birth. Also to Mr. Faulkner's 
advertisement for the beautiful English terrier, especially 
the reward : ' To be thanked by the Duke in as few 
words as possible, and to receive any sum of money he 
may think fit to ask for.' 

It makes me laugh to think of sweet Lieven's 
surprise when she hears of your pilgrimage with mon 
Grand Due. If it was possible, she would go as far 
the other way. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

London: March 25, 1817. 

I received your letter from St. Omer the day before 
yesterday, and I have just been reading one from Mau- 
beuge at G.'s. Both the viscounts ^ were present, and 
les deux Jeans ^ were pleased. If you can please both 
laughing and crying philosophers you are safe. My 
blessing to the Grand Duke for behaving as he ought, 
and I wish you joy of the perfect answering of your 
expedition ^ as far as it has gone. I admire you at the 
Eeview, and envy you Poitier. I envy you also the 
variety of people you will get acquainted with. Narish- 

' Lords Granville and Morpeth. 
' ' Jean qui plem-e et Jean qui rit.' 

^ The Duke of Devonshire made a journey to Russia, where he formed 
a friendship with the Ozarewitch. 



1817 TO LADY G, MORPETH 93 

kin is the hero of foreigners, and was very much hked 
by the Enghsh who knew him. Woronzow is more 
highly tliought of than almost anybody. 

I went last night with G. to Lady Abercorn's. The 
Eegent was there, with Lady Stafford in yellow velvet, 
and Lady Elizabeth Palk in fits of respectful laughter 
as his supporters. Madame de Lieven with the ends of 
her mouth drawn down ; something had discomposed 
her. I do not believe they have as yet got the Em- 
peror's permission to go to Paris. Lady Morpeth was 
received with acclamation on her first appearance. She 
is going to-night with me to the Duchess of Cumberland. 
It is said that the Princess Charlotte is certainly with 
child. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Dover : May 12, 1817. 

As the wind is against us to-day, we are not to sail ^ 
till four o'clock to-morrow morning. The ecstasies of 
Mile. Eward and Susan quite repay me for any regrets 
I may have indulged in upon this expedition. They 
have seen every inch of Dover, and Susy writes a jour- 
nal, which is quite perfect, out of her own little shrewd 
head. Even Georgy is more gentille and amiable than 
you can conceive. The brown room, the visits from 
Mr. Simpson, describing his taking you over many 
years ago, and the interviews with our Captain are the 
least exhilarating moments we have passed. 

Granville is uncommonly well. God bless you, my 
dear, dearest sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Amiens : May 15, 1817. 

Dearest G., — Our journey has been very pleasant 
and prosperous. We slept at Montreuil last night, 

' Lord and Lady Granville started with their children on a foreign 
tour, first to Paris and then Switzerland and Northern Italy. 



94 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

in tolerably good rooms. To-night we are lodged mag- 
nificently, a salon and bedroom like those at Paris. 

We found Lady Oxford and daughters living in a 
lodging at Calais, which seems to have become a sort of 
purgatory for half-condemned souls. 

I have been walking about, looking at the Cathedral 
here, which is, I think, the finest I ever saw. 

This would not seem to me worth sending, if it was 
not that I think you would like to hear that we are well 
— neither gout, toothache, or colick. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Chantilly : May 16, 18l7. 

We are within five-and-twenty miles of Paris, dearest 
sister, where we shall go after seeing the Palace here, 
which the Due de Bourbon is repairing, and, if we are 
to believe the lady of the inn, making superb. The 
family will do better if they will take that line. The 
journey has reconciled Granville to the idea of Switzer- 
land. He had no idea of children being no incumbrance. 
They are neither troublesome, sick, or dainty, and have 
never made him wait a minute, the exact reverse of 
what he expected. What an encouragement for the 
mother of countless babes ! The road we have travelled 
you know, but though it is in itself ugly, the beauty of 
the weather and the quantities of trees in blossom made 
it look gay and almost pretty. I saw some lilacs in full 
bloom yesterday, and thought of you on the terrace of 
Chiswick, where I trust j^ou are at this moment. 

Paris, Wednesday. — Here we are, lodged in the most 
delightful manner, the prettiest salons for ourselves and 
children, with a large garden in an hotel at the end of 
the Boulevards nearest the Tuileries, as quiet as Chis- 
wick, and making one feel a wish never to stir beyond 
it into the rattle, strife, and tourhillon of Paris. 

Charles Ellis was here yesterday, and we dine with 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 95 

him to-daJ^ Eliza ^ has been very ill again, but I hope 
not alarmingly so. The boys are very handsome men, 
the second like his mother. Lord and Lady Morley 
came to us last night. She tells me there is no society 
amongst the French. English drums, of which Jack 
Thompson and her nieces form the chief ornament ; 
scarcely any difference of dress between French and 
English women, and that a cheap bonnet or two will set 
me up, for that it is not the season for grande parure. 
She was at the Opera last night, dull and empty, and 
she felt quite ashamed of being era cheveux and smart. 
Miss Mitchell's ^ trousseau is the lion of the day, and 
Madame d'Osmond having chucked the Prince under 
the chin the great scandal. Poor Madame de Stael is 
in the most terrible state. Paralytic, dropsical, and- 
dying, she sees people and talks of it, which must 
be very painful. The Duchesse de Broglie is always 
with her, and very unhappy. Madame de Souza is 
discreet, and pretends to know nothing of her son's 
marriage. Poitier would be more amusing than Lady 
Hervey to-night, but I hope to see him soon. God bless 
you, my own G. 

To Lady G. Morpeth, 

Paris : May 1817. 

I could not write yesterday, my dearest sister. My 
darling Susan has been very unwell with a smart attack 
of fever, but Charles Ellis's Doctor Streeter is a treasure 
and has almost cured her. 

I have seen Mr. Nugent, who is very much reduced 
but well. He says Paris was never so much deserted 
by the French ; but Puysegur, that essence of France, 
was here yesterday, gay and very gracious and very 
young. He is ultra beyond measure. Lord Morley 

^ Daughter of Lady Hervey, wife of Mr. Ellis and mother of Lord 
Howard de Walden. 

' Married to Monsieur de Nadaillac. 



96 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

has been dining with Monsieur Decazes.^ He saj^s he is 
the image of Mr. Becket, with very Enghsh manners. 
His sister, Mme. Princeteau, does the honours of the 
house, and those who hke to laugh at the King say he 
is desperately in love with her. She goes by the name 
of la coquette bourgeoise or la coquette royale. She 
has neither beauty nor manner. Sir Charles Stuart 
is all graciousness. He was here yesterday and very 
entertaining, le mains mari que possible, afficheing the 
worst company and lowest connections, but I under- 
stand has des egards for Lady Elizabeth, with which 
she is perfectly satisfied. He lent us his box at the 
Opera, and as Susy was much better I went to see the 
ballet. Sir Charles and Lord F. Somerset were with us. 
It was the ' Carnaval de Venise,' very gay and pretty. 
Bigottini acts better than she dances. I do not think 
her very handsome ; her petticoats are about five inches 
long. I have as yet distracted myself with no shops 
and only one visit to Lady Morley. My little Susan is 
going on as well as possi])le, and she is an angel of 
goodness and patience. Mile. Eward's^ devouement to 
her is unwearied, and with such kindness and judgment 
that I think more highly of her than ever. 

Monday. — My little Susan continues very unwell, 
but I am assured I need not make myself the least 
uneasy about her. Doctor Streeter is really the only 
person I like much to see, and he has just been telling 
me, in his broad Scotch, that she will be well presently. 

I have seen no French people. I scarcely go out in 
the morning. Saturday I saw Mile. Mars act delight- 
fully in ' L'Heureuse Erreur,' a petite piece. 

' A distinguished French statesman. He was on very friendly terms 
with Louis XVIIL, but was opposed to the ultra-Royalists, who falsely 
imputed to him a complicity with the murder of the Due de Berri, and 
he was then sent by the King Ambassador to London, but was recalled a 
year after. He adhered to Louis Philippe, and from 1834 to 1848 was 
Grand Referendaire. He died in 1860. 

'' Her governess. 



1817 TO l^ADY G. MORPETH 97 

Lady Morley dined yesterday with Mme. de Stael. 
She met there Mme. Eecamier in great beauty and 
Mme. de Broglie.^ 

God bless you. A letter from you will be le bon- 
heur supreme. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : May 1817. 

My Susy is recovering rapidly, but how much less 
easy it is to practise than to preach ! I am still in a 
state of agitation I shall not attempt to describe, and 
the idea that she has not had calomel enough, and that 
a black rim under her eye is not languor, but fulness, 
works me day and night, quite as much as the fear 
of too much did you. I have a doctor who abhors 
physic. He laughs at me, and, having had Lady 
Morley here preaching calomel, I told him of it, and 
he only said, ' I wish you would talk to the ladies 
of Madame Mars and Monsieur Fleury.' Lady Morley 
is a great comfort to me. She came last night looking 
beautiful, in a white hat and feathers, with a Marie 
Stuart ruff. 

Granville dined yesterday with Monsieur Decazes, 
near St. Cloud. He found there a number of the 
Deputes. He says they were very unhke Frenchmen, 
and that it put him in mind of a dinner at Brompton : ^ 
great discussion, no talk of dress or women, though 
Madame Princeteau did the honours. He says these 
un-idtra men have neither the petit maitre or grand 
polished manner of vieiUe cour Frenchmen. Puysegur, 
who called here yesterday, with eyebrows and hair 
as black as jet, passes his life in the foyer of the 
Theatre Francjais, abhors Decazes, and mourns over the 
decadence of Frenchmen and galanterie. 'Aussi les 

' The daughter of Madame de Stael. 
'■* Mr. Canning's residence. 

VOL. I. II 



98 LETTEES OF HARKIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

pauvres femmes sont d'un ennui ! La galanterie n'existe 
plus. Les maris jouissent d'une s^curite. II faut aller 
en Angleterre pour cherclier un seducteur ! Mais voyez 
done ce Standish, forme par M. Montagu, il a une 
affaire Proctor. A present il doit se croire homme 
parfait, il est au pinnacle ! ' 

Granville went to a ball five nights ago. It was very- 
splendid, like an Engiisli one in dress and dancing. The 
two brides, Mile, de Gontaut, who was married the day 
before, and Mile de Rohan, were doing the honours. 

When Mile, de Gontaut was proposed as a wife to 
Monsieur de Chabot, brother to the Due de Eohan, he 
said, 'Fort bien,' and when he was asked which he 
would rather it should be, herself or her sister : ' Oh, 
cela m'est absolument egal.' 

Madame de Stael continues, I fear, in a dying state, 
but she gives dinners, and is as agissante as ever. She 
received me one morning last week very kindly. She 
sits in an arm-chair with the Duchesse de Broglie, very 

thin and pretty, Benjamin Constant, and a Miss . 

This Miss , whom Doctor Streeter with reason 

calls ' a most peculiar crater,' lives always with her, an 
immense, fierce-looking girl, with a head of straight 
black hair, all standing on end. Madame de Stael was 
very eloquent and touching on iUness and death, very 

absurd on amitU and Miss . ' Voici un trait 

frappant du pouvoir de I'amitie.' Miss 'me 

porte d'une chambre h. I'autre avec la meme facilite 
qu'on porter ait un enfant.' This trait analysed is 
that Miss is like a grenadier in petticoats, and poor 
Madame de Stael can hardly weigh an ounce. This 

Miss narrowly escaped being hanged for forgery. 

She was the daughter of a clergyman, and forged 
two bills to the amount of 500^. each. How she got 
acquainted with Madame de Stael I do not know. 
Lady Morley knew her, and was distressed what 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 99 

countenance to make, but as Miss was not, she got 
over it. Do not mention this. 

Lady Elizabeth Stuart called here to-day. I think 
her manners very pleasing, and she looks sensible. 
Mr. Nugent was here. He urges me to begin being a 
little dissipated. I suppose I must. Susy is quite 
delightfully. 

Eleven o'clock. — Madame de Broglie has just paid me 
an evening visit. She is grown excessively pretty, very 
clever, more of her mother's manner than she had. She 
is rather grand, but I can conceive her being excessively 
admired. I have just heard a droU speech of Talley- 
rand. He says : ' Le Eoi se sert de sa charte comme de , 
son parapluie : il ne I'etale que quand il fait mauvais 
temps, il le garde sous son bras quand il fait beau.' 

Madame de Souza came to-day, and interested me 
about her son and Miss Mercer. Good-night, my own 
sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

The dinner at Mr. Abercromby's ' must have been 
very pleasant, and I am sure of what you say, that a 
little dissipation to those who do not make it a trade is 
a good thing. I am all the better for having been to 
see ' Joconde ' and ' Le Nouveau Seigneur du Village ' 
last night. It is really beautiful, so gay, and Martin 
and Mme. Boulanger delightful. Puysegur and Mr. 
Nugent came to us. The former acts to the life 
the part of the d- devant jeune homme. He talks of 
nothing but beauty and intrigue, dresses like an incroy- 
ahle, and is very proud of having had an affaire with 
Mile. Goslin, a. figurante, though she jilted him for the 

' Third son of the celebrated Sir Ealph Abercromby. He was elected 
in 1835 Speaker of the House of Commons, in opposition to Mr. Manners 
Sutton, afterwards first Viscount Canterbury. In 1839 he resigned and 
was created Lord Dunfermline. 



100 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

first singer at the Opera. Mr. Nugent is in tolerable 
health, and as good-humoured and friendly as ever, and 
entertaining chiefly fi'om the repetition of some very 
good jokes of Mr. Luttrel, which come to him by 
every post. 

I called on Queen Beau ^ to-day. She is grown 
immense and ugly, curls her nose, and grasseyes more 
than ever. Mr. B. looks like a man of sixty. Peggy 
Hunloke rushed panting into the room yesterday — 
' But many are the difficulties of four unprotected 
females.' Four strapping ones, however : herself, Char- 
lotte, Lady Hunloke, and Miss Sydney. 

Granville drank Eussian tea last night with Mme. 
Bagration and a dame d'honneur. She talked to him 
of Sir Charles Stuart's unpopularity, of the Emperor's 
admiration of Lady Jersey and Mrs. Littleton. Lord 
William Eussell, with his demure look, is a gay deceiver. 
Emily Eumbold was taken from a ball the other night 
in despair upon the news being announced,^ and there is 
a French married woman in equal sorrow. 

Dearest G., I have said little of the anxiety I have 
gone through, but I must expatiate upon my happiness. 
I have been taking Susan round the garden. She is 
quite as much reduced as your Willy, as thin, but, like 
him, a good colour, and I never saw her look so pretty. 

We had a little neat Due de Eohan at Mr. Ellis's 
last night warbling about ruisseaux et les premieres 
amours. Horror of Mr. Montagu and Monsieur de 
Flahault and a very reasonable share of self-approba- 
tion seem his leading characteristics. 

Eemember to say everything that is kind from me 
to Caroline. Where will she be when I die of joy 
driving into London the beginning of September ? 

' Mrs. Beauclerk, the wife of a son of Topham Beauclerk, Dr. 
Johnson's friend. 

" Of his engagement to Miss Rawdon. 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 101 

Wednesday night.^ — I liave been dining at Pozzo di 
Borgo's, between Sir Charles Stuart and Monsieur De- 
cazes. The latter is as handsome as a very commun 
look admits of, fine-looking eyes, a rapidity of utterance 
that defies comprehension. His manner is brusque and 
short, and I got on but little with him. The Due de 
Eichelieu' is a fine, courteous-looking seigneur, with 
a grey frizzled head and eagle eyes. Ladies Hervey, 
Mansfield, Morley, E. Stewart, and Dalrymple Hamilton 
were there. Sir Charles talked of nothing, could think 
of nothing but the Farinis and Anatoles at the Opera 
House. Fernau Nunez looks low. His Spanish 
Duchess bullies him, and he regrets England, Mme. de 
Lieven and the Downshires, etc. Good night, dearest 
sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

Friday. — I was very dissipated last night at the 
Theatre Fran9ais to see Mile. Mars in ' Tartuffe ' and 
' Les Fausses Confidences ' and then to a ball at Mme. de 
Biron's. I think Frenchwomen are grown uglier and 
less than ever. I suppose the descent of the heads is 
against them. They wear little Mrs. Bunting-looking 
turbans and small round gauze-looking hats and feathers. 
The elegantes in little round heads with flo-uers upon 
their noses. 

Lord Ebrington may well look rayonnant, for if 
ever there was a perfect person in this world it is 
Susan. Lady Harrowby's long letter puts me at ease 
on every point. I do not think Susan desperately in 
love, but I am sure she must become quite enough so 
for happiness, and I think never marriage promised so 
brightly, they are both so delightful. I think it does 
Lord and Lady Harrowby so much honour to let money 

' Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1815 to 1818, and from 1820 to 
1822. 



102 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

and politics never cross minds iii tlie notion of happi- 
ness. Ce nest pas de ce monde and deserves a better. 
Lady Harrowby says you have been so kind, so vv-arm 
about it that you replaced me to her on the subject. 
How I wish I was amongst it all ! I will write when I 
have taken breath, but fetouffe. hv: » /Ce^J 

Lady Harrowby must be in a very agitated state of 
mind, for to part with such a daughter, however much 
she has sought the marriage, must leave une epine 
da7is la rose. Lady Morley has been here and talking 
with rapture of it, of Lord Ebrington, and the regularity 
and strong religious opinions and practices of his family, 
which will not be the least of Susan's happinesses. 
Lord Morley says he has no fault but being too young 
for her, that there ought always to be twenty years 
difference of age. 

Saturday. — Mme. de Coigny called upon me last 
night and was entertaining. She says Lord Gower ]\() 
is dying for the Princesse Pauline, that sEe is 
'jolie comme une petite princesse de conte de fee: 
mais elle est bete, mais bete. EUe vous demande si 
elle est aussi bien coiffee que le jour avant, ou si 
c'etait encore mieux un autre jour. Mais non, ce 
jour-la il y avait quelque chose de moins bien dans une 
naMe, dans un pli. Oh, mais cela plait aux jeunes gens, 
c'est si jeune tout cela.' 

I have been to the ' Exposition des Tableaux.' It 
is the ghost of what it was, but a ghost that has got 
sixteen Eaphaels, some of the best little Flemish 
pictures, ' Titian's Mistress,' all the Claudes and 
Poussins. 

The Duke of Wellington comes here to-day, and we 
are going to meet him at Sir Charles Stuart's. 

Sundaj'. — It was a dull little English rout. Eumbolds 
and Aldboroughs in abundance, one or two hideous 
Erencliwomen, and one or two stupid loyal subjects to 



1817 TO LADY G. MUEPETH 103 

Louis XVIII. Le roi has been painted in all ways at 
the Louvre, but the chef-d'oeuvre is a full-length of 
him en habit de voyage at the moment of his quitting 
the Tuileries at the return of Buonaparte. He looks 
like puss in boots. The subject is said to have been 
chosen by himself, but the factious say it is a malice of 
his ministers. I have been to Mme. de Coigny and 
out-Heroded Herod, for I screamed pour me /aire en- 
tendre, and am quite hoarse with my exertions. Lad)^ 
Hunloke called here yesterday. She looks very hand- 
some, and has a Marquis de la Garde very much in love 
with her, but she dislikes Paris and Frenchmen. We 
have but a fortnight more to spend here, and I shall be 
very content to go. I have seen Mile Mars in her best 
parts, and I hope next week to see Mile. Duchesnois act 
Phedre and Poitier ' Le SoUiciteur.' I am half ashamed 
of not liking Paris better ; it would give me no pain 
never to see it again. I am lazy about society and 
even about amusement, and in every other respect it is 
in my opinion deplorably inferior to England. The 
idea of a reunion at Chatsworth or Tixal is too much 
for my understanding. Madame de Souza is in a great 
agitation about the Brazils. Monsieur de Flahault has 
just sent in his demission de Lieutenant General. I 
met some more Ultras at dinner yesterday at Charles 
Elhs's. They are very violent and more ill-judged — 
so much hatred and abuse can never be of use. There 
is much jealousy and suspicion. I will give you an 
instance of it. Some Frenchwoman, not in tres bonne 
odeur, 1 forget who, has a beautiful child, and had him 
painted the other day with a basket of flowers, in which 
the painter introduced, full only of his tints, the little 
blue flower called Vergissmeinnicht. An alarm was 
instantly given that this was a portrait of the little King 
of Eome, and it was not till a deputation had been sent 
to examine the child, and pronounce that the picture 



104 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

expose was a striking resemblance of him, that any of 
the loyal could sleep in peace. 

Pray, my dearest sister, continue to write. Your 
letters make me so happy, that I must be exigeante 
about them. If I am not political enough, do ask me 
some questions. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

Tuesday. — Yesterday was a very busy day, dearest 
sister. 

I went to Court and was very graciously received. 
The King looks ridiculous in an arm-chair, and the 
Duchesse de Berri nearly as much so in another. She 
is ugly, not much bigger than your Harriet, and 
ungracious in her manner. 

I went from Court to a small party at Madame de 
Chatenay's. A little room with scarcely any furniture 
but chairs. No English but myself and Lady Mansfield. 
Mme. de Broglie looking beautiful but making tirades 
dans le genre de sa mere, with a head pas assez forte 
for so much besogne. Pozzo di Borgo, Marmont,^ a 
black, treacherous-looking man, and about a dozen more 
people whom I did not know, all screaming at one 
another. The Brazils ^ and the denial of permission to 
Lucien Buonaparte to go to America are the great 
subjects of discussion. The people in power here seem 
much annoyed at the official notes concerning these 
matters having been published. They marvel about 
everything finding its way into the English newspapers. 
_Sir Charles Stuart is furious at the Duke of Wellington's 
name being put among the signatures ; but the fact is 
that he seems to be to all intents and purposes ara- 

' The famous Marshal who in 1814 brought about the abdication of 
the Emperor. 

^ The Brazilian army had just invaded Uruguay, and taken posses- 
sion of Montevideo. The province of Pernambuco revolted. 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 105 

bassador here. Sir Charles must resign himself to play 
second fiddle. 

Wednesday. — We went to see 'Bagatelle' after I 
had written. The day was delicious, and it is a pretty 
little quinquet-looking cMteau dans le genre du Petit 
Trianon — a garden all full of little surprises. Bridges, 
rocks, turrets, cottages, souterrains, and pinnacles every 
minute. There is a beautiful Marie Louise octagon 
salon, and little, fringed, or moulu bedrooms that must 
have put Lord Sefton to the torture when the Due de 
Berri lent it to him, for the beds and heights of the 
rooms seem as if they had all been taken according to 
Son Altesse Eoyale's measure. 

We dined at Madame de Stael's. She was too ill 
to see us. Mme. de Broglie, Mme. de Grefuhle, and 
Mme. de Girardin did nothing but compliment each 
other, and die of laughing over their own little jokes 
and demi-mots, so that I felt fierement embarrassee. 
The men were partly occupied in a discussion whether 
a large wreath of natural bluets_piL Mme. de Broglie's (!<j 
head became her or not, and partly with criticisms upon 
plays and pamphlets I had neither seen nor read, the 
whole carried on in a scream. 

Thursday. — We went last night to Sir Charles 
Stuart's christening ^ and ball. Lady Mansfield stood 
for the Queen, and I never saw anything so ridiculous 
as her entry with two of her little boys in Highland 
costumes holding up her train. It was very grand 
and very dull. The Duchesse de Berri has a very 
sweet countenance, but she looks terribly insignificant. 
Mme. d'Aguesseau and Georgine were there, the former 
very touchy and provoking about my not having yet 
been to her, and Mrs. Lamb's having seen so little of 
them. Georgine tres embellie with a great deal of 

' Of Miss Louisa Sttiart, who married in 1842 the Marquis of 
Waterford. 



■Ml v'f 



306 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

rouge and looking happy. I am to go and see them 
to-day. The husband was at Versailles. 

God bless you, my dear G. This is a very shabby 
little letter, but I have had my time quite taken up 
these last three days. 

Will you tell Lady Harrowby that I have been to 
Mme. Hypolite, and that she has nothing to show ? She 
says her husband used to coiffer Miss Eawdon and she 
used to hahiller her, but that she was quite in the dark 
about her marriage and trousseau. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

I have been at two great dinners since I wrote, at 
Lady Mansfield's and Sir Charles Stuart's. The Duke 
of Wellington is here with one American branch, Mrs. 
Hervey, but he has neither love nor hatred to display, 
his wife being at Cambray, and his loves dispersed over 
the earth, so il se laisse admirer as a great hero with 
very simple, unaffected manners. Lady E. Stuart is 
very agreeable and amiable, and by dint of rouge and 
an auburn wig looks only not pretty, but nothing 
worse. Sir Charles praised her to me with enthusiasm, 
and, as she does not seem to mind his theatrical career, 
I am sure I do not know who should. Mme. d'Agues- 
seau and Georgine have recovered from their touchi- 
ness, and were very gracious. The latter is grown 
very handsome. 

I have seen to-day four pictures of Eaphael, those 
which belong to the King of Spain, and seem all the 
better for having swum about in the Mediterranean — 
you must have heard of them at the time — to which I 
could almost have knelt. Our Saviour bearing the 
Cross, a Holy Family which belonged to Charles I., the 
famous ' Madonna della Pesce ' and Elizabeth's salutation 
to the Virgin. I cannot describe them, but the first 
and last are almost divine. 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 107 

I liear from the Duchess of Beaufort that Susan 
is the happiest of human beings. She amuses me 
by teUing me that at the French play, where they 
went, not a man but James Macdonald went near 
them. The dandies kept aloof the whole night, and 
well they might, for to marry Lord Ebrington was a 
sort of satire upon the whole race. What do ' les 
Wig ' say, as they are called here ? Do they hope Susan 
will rat, or fear he will ? I am all for the woman going 
over, upon the same principle that made me take to 
green tea. 

Sunday. — I have been at church and am now come 
to rest in my pretty garden till four, when I set out for 
a great dinner at Monsieur Decazes', seven miles from 
Paris. Imagine me in a chip hat with white and red 
feathers and a tulle gown, flounced and ruffed, looking 
dragged and weary, making smiles and civilities to a 
number of little black starred and ordered Frenchmen. 

Ten o'clock. — Now see me dragged and weary, 
stripped of my finery, in a white bedgown, just returned 
from St. Cloud. The drive there and back was very 
pleasant. I went with Sir Charles and Lady Elizabeth, 
as Granville dined at the Due de Eichelieu's. They are 
both very agreeable, and, though there is no senti- 
mentality between them, they seem the best friends pos- 
sible, and I believe half his bad behaviour is put on, 
and that he is mauvais sujet par air more than any- 
thing else. Mme. Princeteau, Decazes's sister, is a little, 
gentle, dawdling woman with une tres petite sante, 
extremely civil, and doing, as Mr. Hill would say, 
her little possible to oblige and amuse. Madame la 
Marechale Moreau, Pozzo di Borgo's new love, was 
there in the most recherchee demie toilette, talking as if 
by clockwork without one distinct pause of a second. 
Lord Mansfield with his sleepy manners ; Lady Mansfield 
a viaitresse femme, talking of education and compara- 



108 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

tive views of the French and EngUsh characters ; their 
mathematical daughter, who puzzled the American 
boy. Lord Morley, she not being asked, which is, she 
declares, because he ajjiches being garqon at Paris as 
more convenient. The Duke of Wellington with a suite 
j^ of aide-de- camps, and Mrs. Hervey.-' I must tell you 
what amuses me. I have met his great Grace several 
times, and, with the weakness I have about great 
people, treated him du haut de ma grandeur. I 
suppose he was pleased with the rarete du fait, and 
to-day Mrs. Patterson ^ could not have seen him more 
devoted. He called me to sit by him and was quite 
a mes pieds, which made Fernan Nunez, who has 
been present at all our meetings, wink his eyes out and 
exclaim twenty times in a breath : ' Mais voilk ce que 
c'est que les femmes.' The fact is that I really believe 
the Duke finds so few women that do not kneel to him, 
that he must feel a sort of respect for any who do not 
make up to him. Granville, who has rather suffered 
at seeing us sit through two dinners dos-a-dos, will 
be rather pleased to hear of my successes, obtained 
d'aprh ma faqon, for an ugly good sort of woman 
to be attended to by a man into whose good graces 
beauties force themselves by dint of hassesse. Pray 
forgive my virtuous exultation. 

We are full of the paragraph in the 'Morning 
Chronicle ' about Mr. Canning and Mr. Peel. The latter 
has, we see, put himself into Mr. Perceval's shoes, and I 
think they will be good wear. He is, I believe, clever, 
and I know he is prudent, and I am inclined to think 
that prudence in politics is the one thing needful. He 
has a sort of plodding, successful look. 

The shades of political opinion here are infinite. 
The Ultras make themselves odious, I believe Puy- 

' She became in 1828 the wife of the seventh Duke of Leeds. 
^ She married his brother, Lord Wellesley. , 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 109 

segur would willingly act the part of Guy Faux. They 
quote many things against him : that after Ney's exe- 
cution he went with Monsieur to the play. There was 
some applause when he entered, upon which Puy. patted 
him on the back and said, ' Encore deux ou trois petits 
pendns de plus, et la France est a vos pieds.' When he 
was one day wishing for good old times, and somebody 
said he was afraid les abus would creep in along witli 
them, he exclaimed in an ecstasy, ' Et c'est surtout les 
abus.' I am glad my letters amuse you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris: June 1817. 

Now, my dearest, I shall proceed with my ' Mercure 
de Paris,' and tell you first that I went last night with 
Lady E. Stuart to see Poitier act ' Le SoUiciteur.' It is 
quite perfect. He contrives to make every limb and 
muscle act the part, and the way in which he insinu- 
ates himself into the inaccessible presence of a reluctant 
great man, with his thin body and anxious face, ought 
not to be attempted to be described. Sir Charles Stuart 
has no peace till he hears how Georges,^ as he calls 
her, is received in London. I have not yet seen Mile. 
Duchesnois, the only good tragic actress here. 

Thank Mrs. Lamb for writing, and Caroline William. 
The Duke of Wellington talked a great deal of the 
latter. I see she amuses him to the greatest degree, 
especially her accidents, which is the charitable term 
he gives to all her sorties. 

Saturday. — I have been -spending to-day with my 
children at Epinay, a campagne at about six miles 
from Paris, where Mr. Ellis has established himself. It 
is excessively pretty, clean, and cool. Eliza is much 
better ; she looked very handsome, and is amiable and 
engaging. The Due de Eolian was there. His vanity 

' The celebrated actress admired by Napoleon. 



110 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

is like a farce. Somebody was complimenting him one 
day on his having an expressive countenance. He said, 
' Oui, mais il faudrait me voir quand je prie.' He sang 
to us almost as well as he thinks he does, et c'est tout 
dire. 

We were surprised by Lord Gower's walking into 
the room this morning. He looks very well and very 
gay, and seems glad to return to England. He did not 
mention the Princesse Borghese, and I had not the face 
to do so. He says the Duchess, Cardinal Consalvi, and -^.'-v 
Souza are digging a qui mieux mieiix, and that they 
rout up great curiosities, that the Duchess is adored, as 
she protects all the artists, employs them and pays 
them magnificentlj^ and that all the way on the 
road the innkeepers ask, ' Connaissez-vous cette noble 
dame ? ' 

Lady Jersey is at Lyons and is to arrive at Paris 
on Monday, to remain a month. She stays at all the 
towns, dines with the Prefets, and enjoys the tumult. 
I think I begin to hear her. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris: 1817. 

My dearest G., — After waiting anxiously for the 
courier, he brought me no account of you, and I should 
not have known a word about you if those dear date- 
minding, accurate Cavendishes had not sent me word 
that Lord Morpeth on Friday had given a very good 
account of you. It is lucky for Mrs. Lamb that I have 
not time to write and scold her. 

I have been dining at Sir Hugh Hamilton's, with 
the Jerseys, Morleys, Stuarts, Charles Ellis, Pozzo, Dues 
de Gramont and Eohan, and Lord F. Somerset. Lady 
Jersey had been with me some time yesterday morning. 
She is very kind, cordial, and amiable, looks very hand- 
some, though she is tanned almost purple. Lord Jersey 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH HI 

looks old and careworn, and has evidently been making 
love to La Princesse Borghese. 'Pauline is Villiers' 
friend. He says she is clever and delightful, but I do 
not know her. He was a great deal with her, is very 
fond of her,' etc. She is a noble, innocent, unsuspecting 
creature, and I love her quite. Is it hke Mrs. Candour 
to add that she bores and fatigues me ? It is true, and 
to you only. But she gives life to society, and every- 
thing is more sprack, and we all are the better for her 
presence. It says up and be doing, she looks so re- 
viving with her black hair and coral beads. I long 
to leave Paris, and mean to consider Switzerland as in 
the way home, which will gild the mountainous pill. 
Never was there such a Bull as I am, except Lord 
Hinton,! who goes about like a caricature with a coat 
that sweeps the ground, complaining that he cannot 
pronounce their crack-teeth names. He complains of 
the universal cheating, and told Lady Morley that he 
could put her up to a wrinkle or two. He asked her 
what she paid for silk stockings, and when she told him 
so many francs, exclaimed, ' Then you are diddled.' 
Think of the effect of this slang upon incroyable ears ! 

Mme. de Stael has been much worse for these last 
few days. Mme. de Souza is in a great fuss, as it is 
reported here that her son's marriage is put off, that 
Monsieur de Flahault has written to Lord Keith that he 
never will force himself into any family. Lord Ebrino-- 
ton has written to Granville with enthusiasm about his 
happiness and Susan's perfections. I am happy to find 
that she is to go to Holland House. Lord E. wished 
it very much, from his affection for Lord Holland and 
the obligations he says he has to them both. 

I wish you joy of Lady E. Campbell's hoy.^ I hope 
grandpapa Caw. is amiable. 

' Son of Lord Powlett. 

^ Mr. Campbell, who was afterwards Lord Cawdor, married Lord 
Morpeth's sister. Their son married Lady E. Thynne. 



112 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

Yesterday's courier brought me lots of letters, but 
Anne Cavendish's the only one I cared for, as she talks 
to me of you. She tells me you are much better, 
dearest sister, and that j^ou want nothing but some 
bracing air to set you quite up again. Do not write 
yourself if it is a worry to you, but make one of your 
girls send me a bulletin by each opportunity. Harriet, 
by-the-bye, did write by the last post, but she only says 
' Mama is better,' and I want details. 

I am afraid, my dear G., that you ecoutez all your 
pains and feel too much, which is in itself a disease, 
and grows upon one like the hair on one's head. I 
wish you would force both your body and mind into 
some strong active exercise. Study, dissipation, any- 
thing but speculating upon blood and bile. For the 
last month I have found Latin exercises and great 
dinners drive away thick-coming fancies, which, since 
my Susy's illness, have been at my elbow at every gleam 
of heat, sour bread, or unripe strawberry ; but I have 
called to my aid every help from God and the world He 
has placed us in to rescue me from this malady of the 
mind. I have a right to preach, for many a tough 
battle have I fought with nervous terrors, and well I 
know what dominion they might have exercised over 
me. I believe exertion to be the secret of happiness, 
but I also know that it is of all others the habit of mind 
most difficult to acquire. These are of all sorts. 

And now let us talk of the indefatigable Silence.^ 
She is really wonderful, and how she can stand the life 
she leads still more so. She sees everybody in her own 
house, and calls on everybody in theirs. She is all 
over Paris and at all the campagnes within ten miles, in 

' Lady Jersey was so called by her friends. 



1817 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 113 

all petites soirees and great routs, and has already 
done more than I have since my arrival. We all 
dined at Saint Mande yesterday, and went to see 
the Chateaux de Vincennes by moonlight, two by two, 
with Lord Morley at our head. The weather was 
delicious, but Lord Jersey and Lady Hervey fell to my 
lot. I sat between them at dinner and walked with him 
in the evening. The bore of Lady Hervey, the languor 
of poor Lord Jersey, qui ne sait a quel saint se vouer, 
the heat, the order of battle, etc., made me so flat that 
I am really ashamed to think of it. I laboured in vain 
to be naive and to cut little jokes, and came back to my 
bed in quite a deplorable condition. You should have 
seen Lord Morley giving us this little rural treat, and 
when once we were fairly off for the expedition, ' J'ai 
tant fait que ces gens sont enfin dans la plaine,' he could 
not contain himself for joy, shouted, congratulated us. 

"We all set off for Epinay on Monday and for the 
Duchesse de Eaguse on Tuesday. I think these sort of 
things do so much better when there are a few lovers 
in the case. I mean when there must be a great deal 
of pairing off together. Now as things go, poor dear 
Lord Jersey will probably have to lead me about and 
sit by my side two whole hot days running, and how he 
will be able to bear it I do not know. He is shy of 
talking of Pauline, but not so Lady Jersey. ' Villiers 
says she is cold to Lord Gower, Villiers says her foot 
looks as if it had never had a shoe on.' 

I wish I had anything to teU you, but I do but little. 
The oppressive heat has made me give up all dissipation. 
The theatres are intolerable and the drums almost 
entirely composed of English with a wretched old ultra 
or two, such as the Due de Castries or Monsieur de 
Mesnard. My history almost every day is to sit in 
the garden till nine or ten. The nights are heavenly. 
Of course dinners I do, and I like them better than 

VOL. I. I 



114 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

anything. They are very short, at six, in cool rooms 
with open windows and coffee out of doors after them, 
as every Paris house has a garden. 

Saturday evening. — I went this morning to the 
Louvre, where I met Lord and Lady Jersey. Poor 
little Yilliers is suffering terribly with bad eyes. I 
have been dining with Sir Charles Stuart, where I met 
the usual pairs of English, and was very comfortable 
between Lord Morley and Mr. Nugent. I went from 
thence with Sir Charles to see ' Les Deux Precepteurs,' 
in which Poitier was excellent, and ' Les Anglaises pour 
rire,' which is too exaggerated to be very entertaining. 
Sir Charles stays almost always behind the scenes, and 
winks and nods are going on all the time between him 
and the actresses. Ladj^ Elizabeth is not more romantic 
than is to be wished, so that I do not think anybody 
has a right to object to anything but le genre of his 
infidelities, which I think deplorable. Lady Jersey goes 
on calling Lord Morley Boringdon,^ and it entertains me 
to see the half-affronted, half-simpering consciousness 
with which he endures this misprision. Lady Hunloke 
was at the play, looking very handsome. She is just as 
childish and harmless as ever. ' Now I say I don't like the 
French, now I can't help it. I always say what I think, 
Lady Harriet, now they are not well-bred. Now I am 
sure you laugh at me, but I can't help it.' I think Hart 
is quite as well without her, weighing women and wives. 

We had last night a thunderstorm, which burst on a 
church near here. It was very violent, and the last 
clap louder than I ever heard. I was alone and not at 
aU comfortable, and my children asleep in their little 
travelling beds, which are in metal frames. Granville 
was scandalised when he found me half an hour after it 
on my bed with my eyes shut, expecting a fresh storm. 

* He was created Earl Morley in 1815. His first wife, from wliotn he 
waB divorced, was Lady Jersey's sister. 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 115 

I have had a visit from Mr. Agar Ellis. He is a 
very nice man, gentlemanlike and sensible, and I think 
will marry your Caroline, as he will probably not 
object to you as he does to Lady Stafford. Lady 
Jersey told me she found her way in to Mrs. Hope. I 
never heard of such misery, her eyes streaming with 
tears, unable to resist in the slightest degree her grief. 
I heard of William Pointz from Lady Hervey. She 
meant to praise him to the highest degree when she 
said, 'Just the same odd, comical creature as ever.' 
She told me that he gives little balls, and waltzes him- 
self at them. Is it an exaggerated feeling that makes 
me look upon this with the greatest disgust ? ^ 

Do you know Lady Hervey disgusts me too ? She 
is everywhere, and full of dress and gossip, and never 
scarcely with Eliza, who at best is in a very delicate 
state of health. I think Charles Ellis is quite insen- 
sible to her demerits, and does not seem to mind her 
intense bore himself, or to feel for others under it. 

Good-night. I never mention to myself that there 
is such a place as England. 

Sunday evening. — I am just returned from a dinner 
at the Chateau, where Lady Jersey was much disgusted 
at being cut by the ladies and their knights. Cela ne 
vaut pas la peine, and if there had been a glass near, 
she might have consoled herself, for she looked like 
a sunflower amongst double daisies. Lady Elizabeth 
Stuart, Mme. de Coigny, and I sat about her, less lovely 
than her English ladies-in-waiting, but as assiduous; 
and Humboldt ^ rather made up to her for her slights, 
as he is homme celebre, and is a little like Sir James 
Mackintosh, enough to /aire illusion. 

Monday. — No, I am too happy, and how I shall 

^ Alluding to the loss of two sons, his only ones, who were drowned 
when boating wi& him at Bognor only two years before. 

' This is Baron Alexandre Humboldt, the German naturalist and 
philosopher. 

I 2 



116 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

behave myself at Epinay, where we are going to pass 
the day, I do not know. They all tell me you are 
BO well, and your nice long letter. 

We are reaUy broiling, but Susan is well. Little 
Villiers is worse, in a terribly nervous state, and his 
eyes very bad. I love Lord Jersey about him. He 
shows so much feeling. God bless you, my dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris: 1817. 

Dearest sister, — ^I have been dining at Mr. Ellis', 
where I met Lady Aldborough, who is la femme la 
plus respectable here, asked and admired beyond 
anybody ; Miss Eodney, a very pretty girl, but with 
rather too much rouge and naivete; Sir Hugh and 
Lady Hamilton and Humboldt. I was obliged to get 
up from dinner to go to the Duchesse d'Angouleme, 
who receives at eight. She was very gracious, and is 
much gayer than she used to be. 

Lord and Lady Morley have been here since. He 
is as rich as economy can make him, and the reports 
about Saltram are without foundation. They have 
taken another house at St. Mande, chiefly, I believe, 
because French and English think it the height of 
absurdity to do so. It is cheap, inconvenient, and 
unaccountable, trois choses assez de son gout. The 
Lansdownes arrived here to-day, and go at four to- 
morrow. Mrs. Hope is here, half-distracted by the loss 
of her boy. I pity her from the bottom of my heart. 
They say he was killed by seven Italian physicians. 
There is death in the very sound. To-day's post brought 
me a very entertaining letter from Mme. de Lieven. 
She tells me ' Les Anglaises pour rire ' has been acted 
with great success. ' On retrouve dans cette piece 
des rapprochements frappants avec Cleveland House. ^ 

' Then the residence of Lord and Lady Stafford. It is on the same 
site as the present Bridgewater House. 



1817 TO LADY G. MOKPETH 117 

Cela a beaucoup amus^ les connaisseurs.' I wonder how 
my relations liked it. 

Wednesday. — Yesterday we set out at two o'clock 
to go to the Duchesse de Eaguse. It is a beautiful 
little campagne, quite a I'Anglaise. We found there 
the Morleys, Aldborough, Mme. Augereau, now 
Duchesse de Castighone, a Eussian woman, and many 
men I did not know, the Due de Gramont and Mr. 
John King. 

The Duchesse de Eaguse, divorced a I'aimahle 
from her husband Marmont, is daughter to Perregaux, 
the banker, who left her all his property. She is a 
little, round, good-natured woman, in looks something 
between the Princess of Wales and Mrs. Liston, with a 
good character. She is a violent Buonapartiste, and 
fed all his troops at her gate when last they were at 
Fontainebleau. She thinks now of nothing but her 
place. She has the most beautiful farm, a dairy, and. 
basse cour kept by two Swiss people in the full costume 
of their country. Madame Augereau, a very young 
widow, going to be married to Monsieur de St. Alde- 
gonde, aide-de-camp to the Duke of Orleans, whom you 
may have seen dancing quadrilles in London, is almost 
the prettiest woman I ever saw, with immense black 
eyes and black hair, and the most beautiful expression 
in her mouth and smile, a countenance exactly like 
your Georgiana's, and a figure with a particular grace 
I never saw in anybody but Mme. Zamoyska.^ Her 
manner is as delightful. She is very naive, without 
the least appearance of folly or affectation, and she ip 
the kindest and most amiable person. The Zensingtoii 
family lodge in her hotel, and when Lady K. was ill. 
she made herself quite a slave to her. She is so gay 
that whenever the children have their dancing- master 
she comes and dances with them, and yet so very gentle 
and shy that it makes her look grave in society. To 

' A beautiful Pole. 



118 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

complete all this, she is very entertaining. Lady Morley 
and I are enchanted, but our husbands ! As she says, 
' If we do not look after these boys, there is no knowing 
what they may do.' Lady Aldborough was as coarse 
in her conversation as usual, and more ill-tempered. 
She evidently had a corn, which is not pleasant in a 
long romantic walk, and she limped up hill in a tight- 
laced boot and an ill-humour not to be described. The 
Due de Gramont ^ is the only one of his family not very 
ultra. He keeps his politics at dinner pitch, so that 
there is no society in which one has not the advantage 
of meeting him. I have been to-day seeing all the goods 
in Paris in my room, buying things for Susan Eyder. 
I am in an agony lest I should have chosen ill or ruined 
Lord Harrowby. God bless you, own dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

On Monday we had another violent storm, from 
three to six, which prevented our going to Epinay. I 
went in the evening to Mme. de Chataigneraie's. It was 
formal and very hot. Yesterday was the day of our 
dinner at Mme. de Eaguse's. The fifteen miles drive 
there was broiling, but once arrived it was delicious, 
as there is a great deal of shade-rooms kept as cool as 
cellars. In the evening from seven till ten we walked 
and sat out of doors, and came back to Paris in open 
carriages by moonlight. Lord Jersey is so gay, so like 
a bird who sees his cage door open, that we got on 
famously together. He looked radiant and beautiful, 
and I felt deep compassion for those ' lured by smiling 
eyes.' You would laugh to see us. 'Come, Lady 
Granville,' and off we go together, as playful and 
- X happy as possible. Sir Charles was wretched, vom to 
_-( the little fat Duchess, and Lady Elizabeth after him to 

^^ K , ' Father of Lady Ossulston. 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 119 

prompt civilities, which he performs like a pug-dog 
just going to snap. Lord and Lady Morley, ' economy's 
my plan' never being lost sight of, toiled there in a 
heavy chaise and pair, but he is not happy when he 
cannot be master of the ceremonies. 

We leave Paris this day week, and do you know we 
shall be in England in about ten weeks ? Is there any 
chance of your staying late enough at the sea to be in 
town on your way to the North, when we are there 
about the 10th of September ? My little girls are both 
well, and we mean to travel so slowly and cautiously 
that I do hope it will not heat them. Our plan is to 
go straight to Geneva, which will take us seven days, 
to leave them there, whilst we go to Chamouni ; to go 
from Geneva to Lausanne, when we shaU again leave 
them to stay there a week and the rest of the time at 
Neufchatel, whilst we make a tour of three weeks or a 
month to Milan and the Italian lakes. We shall then 
meet them at Basle, do the Ehine, stay two or three 
days at Brussels, and home. 

Wednesday. — My day has been very like yesterday. 
My varieties were Mme. de Coigny with a sick head- 
ache, a thunderstorm all dinner-time, and Mr. Agar EUis , 
whom I invited, carried there, and gallanted about. A 
sensible, very young man, with a careworn, expressive 
Spencer face,^ hating Lady Stafford con amore and 
admiring Elizabeth de meme. Lord Jersey goes to 
England to-morrow- Villiers is better. 

Thursday. — This is a day to which all the others 
have been cool. I shall stay at home all the morning, 
and this evening we are going a large party to the 
Tivoli Gardens. 

I went to Mme. Moreau the other day. She is not 
agreeable, but is very good and sensible. She knows 

' He was the son of Lord Clifden, who married Lady Caroline Spencer, 
a daughter of the fourth Duke of Marlborough. 



120 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

Madame de Lieven thoroughly, and puzzled me by 
asking me how it was possible that une si grande 
amitie could exist between two persons so different as 
Mme. de L. and myself, between whom there was not 
one common interest, one sympathy of opinions, whose 
principles and opinions, she was certain, differed as 
wide as day and night on every essential point. I 
talked of my reconnaissance for her affection, and 
admiration of her understanding. ' Eh bien, Miladi, 
nous dirons done que, Mme. de Lieven etant aimable, 
vous etes obligee de I'aimer. Si elle ne I'etait pas, vous 
y etiez condamnee.' The Marechale has certainly hit 
the right nail on the head. 

Do you know, I think we ought to establish it as a 
strong principle in our children's minds never to form 
intimacies where essential points of feeling and conduct 
are not clearly established. I know none that would 
guard them more from harm and misery. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

At two o'clock yesterday morning Lady Jersey 
called for me, and we never stopped to take breath till 
eleven o'clock at night, when she set me down here 
more dead than alive, she going to end her day with 
the Hollands. 

We began by a bonbon shop, where she spent much 
time and money. Then to a china shop, ditto. Then 
to St. Mande, where we found the Morleys in great 
spirits about Henry, and giving an account of him that 
does incline me to feel sanguine. Our next move was 
to the Cadran Bleu, where we found Granville and Lord 
Jersey waiting for us, and where we had an excellent 
dinner, which being swallowed, we ran across to the 
Theatre de la Gaite, saw ' Le Bouquet des Poissardes,' 
a gay sort of melodrame, and then got in time for the 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 121 

ballet at the Opera, and Lady Granville said, ' Can this 
be I?' 

I think Lord Jersey perfection in his temper; he 
makes no secret of his dislike of the life they lead. He 
undergoes a degree of ennui that is quite painful to 
think of. Their departure is delayed from day to day 
in spite of his entreaties and undisguised vexation at it, 
and yet he never betrays one feehng of impatience or 
ill-humour. 

We all dine to-day at Eoberts', with a few hints 
from Lady Holland as to fresh-water fish, etc. 

I have been interrupted by visits from Mrs. Eawdon, 
Lady William Eussell, Puysegur, and the Due de 
Eohan. The two former do nothing but sigh. This 
sounds brutal, but the fact is there is a great deal of 
aiFectation and selfishness in the sort of display of grief 
they never cease detaihng to one. Lady William's 
turns chiefly upon the dulness of Cambrai. 

The soirees at Lady Holland's are very agreeable. 
Do you see them ? Mr. Allen ^ getting furious behind 
his spectacles about members not being elected tiU they 
are forty, and turning to Granville and Lord Holland, 
' A man to be sent into this Assembly at the moment 
he becomes incapable of belonging to it,' and Lady 
Holland saying, ' Come, come, Mr. AUen, for the sake 
of a coarse epigram making the most brutal remark.' 

Sunday. — It is the day the ' Fete du Eoi ' is to be 
kept, and it is very fine and propitious. We dined yes- 
terday at Eoberts'. The Hollands, Jerseys, Madame 
de Coigny, Lord Morley — she never leaves the boy a 
moment — Charles Ellis, and a little, dark, old-looking 
Mr. Lambton. Lord Holland was adorable. When 
Lady HoUand, in the middle of dinner, got up,, and only 

' Dr. Allen, a .highly cultivated gentleman, was devoted to Lord 
and Lady Holland, with whom he resided for a great number of years. 
He survived Lord Holland, but continued to live with Lady Holland until 
his death in 1843. 



122 LETTERS OP HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

beckoned Mr. Allen away to go to the Theatre Frangais, 
he absolutely shouted for joy. He says now he has dined 
at Eoberts' he shall certainly stay a long time at Paris, 
and when she got up to go, he exclaimed in an absolute 
ecstasy, ' My aunt Ibby ^ shall dine here as sure as her 
name is Ibby.' There is something so very delightful 
in the artless, almost childish simplicity of his character, 
when united to an understanding and mind like his. 

The Jerseys go to-morrow. If I was handsome, 
and he not frivolous, we should certainly have a little 
afiair together. 'La sympathie, doux lien des ames,' 
would unite us, but as it is we flag amazingly when 
left to ourselves. He has a mind composed of ennui 
and jokes, to me the most wearying of all compositions. 
They both like me as much as they can the person in 
the whole world who suits them least, and I am sure 
we feel at moments equal remorse at finding our affec- 
tions towards each other so cold and dead in the 
midst of so many efforts and acts of kindness. I would 
risk my life for them rather than spend a week with 
them ; but this is only to you, and is compatible with 
regard, and even affection for her. She adores Lady 

, thinks her the most captivating, the cleverest of 

human beings, and, as her warm and generous heart 
in talking of her friends always takes the bull by the 
horns, the best wife. 

She has been with me, and I can truly say that I 
love her, she is so kind, affectionate, and so good. 

Good-night, my dearest love. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : June 1817. 

To-night our pleasures have been rather flat ; a 
party of about nine people at Lady Elizabeth Stuart's, 
the Tivoli Gardens in a storm, with the fireworks all 

' His cousin, Miss Vernon. 



1817 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 123 

blown different ways, and my escort, Lord Jersey, more 
bored with me than ever. He has put off his journey 
till to-morrow, and, having screwed up his courage to a 
given number of amusements, he found this httle extra 
fete quite too much for him." Silence, leaning on Sir' 
Charles' arm and shoulder, kept up her spirits and our 
own, and I really believe if it had not been for her we 
should have all fainted away. 

I am glad I like Mr. Agar Ellis, as we shall have a 
great deal of him ; he is going the same tour we are at 
the same time. He gains upon being known, and is 
very agreeable. 

I have been made happy by the post to-day, with a 
long letter from you. I delight in Charles' •' fidelity. 
Give him a kiss, and a promise of future toys to make 
it steady. 

The Morleys have quite disappeared from the 
world, and I en^ry them at St. Mande, out of every- 
body's reach. As I wrote ' reach,' in rushed Lady 
Jersey and Lady Hamilton. They have been, however, 
very agreeable, and poor Lady Jersey is a case of com- 
passion, for she finds it difficult to fill her days, as no- 
body has the courage to toil with her, in this heat, in 
the pursuit of pleasure, and she is obliged to make up her 
time in visits. She wanted me to go with her to the 
Salon and to the Theatre Frangais to-morrow, but I am 
going to lay my weary limbs at Epinay, where we are to 
take the children to take leave of Eliza. 

Saturday. — I am just come from a drum at Sir 
Charles Stuart's. Lady Jersey was there with a violent 
pain in her head and face, having taken laudanum. 
Anyone else would have been in bed. We carry Mme. 
de Coigny in turns in our carriages. I talked a great 
deal to Charles Gordon, a slow, reluctant, smiling 
brother of Lord Aberdeen, who on his road here, near 

' Lady Georgiana Morpeth's son, three years old. 



124 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

Nancy, had a musket presented at his chaise window, 
but it was in the dark, and my fears are scouted. I 
have made acquaintance with Lady Kenmare, who is 
one of the prettiest, most pleasing people I ever 
saw. 

Miss Berry is at Genoa. She has had a violent 
quarrel with William Hill. She complained of his rude- 
ness, and upon it being reported to him, he said, ' Lord 
bless the woman, what would she have ? I am sure I'm 
very ready to have her to dinner.' Upon hearing this, 
she stormed. ' Mr. William Hill have me to dinner, 
ready to have me ! ' The Genoese States rung with her 
larum. It is said here that Mr. John Grefuhle is to 
marry Emily Eumbold. He is immensely rich, good- 
looking and gentlemanlike, and quite English in his 
manner and language. I hope he will, for she is a good 
girl, I believe, and she has tried all Europe in vain for 
a husband. God bless you. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Liege : ^ August 10, 1817. 

We parted from the Morpeths yesterday morning at 
Brussels, dearest brother, and went to Antwerp. It is 
a very fine town. We drove all over it and went to 
the wet docks, a magnificent work of Buonaparte's and 
chmbed to the top of the cathedral, whence we saw all 
the world, I believe. On our way to Louvain we saw 
Lady Harrowby, very smart and shopping in the Grande 
Place of Mechlin. Lord Harrowby and Susan were on 
the top of the church steeple. 

To-night we have been walking on the banks of 
the Maas, upon which this town stands. It was like a 
pretty Flemish picture which you have somewhere. 

The GreviUes write word that Spa is very dull. 

' Lord and Lady Granville were there on their way back to Paris. 



1817 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 125 

They have taken a house at Brussels for a year, where 
they can educate their young absolutely for nothing. 
The expensive masters take half-a-crown. 

We dined at Lord Lynedoch's ^ on Monday. I sat by 
the young Prince of Orange, who seems very happy 
and charmed with Miss Capel, and indeed aU the 
English, to whom he is excessively gracious. 

We went to the play after dinner. 

The slow travelling and the indefatigable beggars 
would drive you wild. ' Votre charite, Madame,' or ' I 
say, you give me one sous,' to adapt themselves to the 
meanest capacity. 

We have only twenty-five miles to go to-morrow 
but that is six hours with six horses. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : August 25, 1817. 

Here we are, my dearest G., children and all. We 
iound them last night as well as possible in very 
delightful rooms at the top of the H6tel de Paris. The 
Hollands in those we had at the bottom. I have just 
been with her and found her enthroned in the corner 
of a green and gold room, looking very well, a little 
discomfited with the mistress of the inn, who will not 
let her own cook even look into the kitchen. Lord 
Holland, an angel, has been with us since, but was sent 
for "just as he had got quite comfortable, owning him- 
self delighted to warm himself over a fire on the coldest, 
dampest day I ever felt, the rain pouring without 
ceasing. 

Now let me tell you that I have had the happiness 
of receiving four long letters from you, two at Mann- 



1 



The celebrated commander in the Peninsular war, who as General 
Graham achieved the memorable victory of Barossa. He was created 
Lord Lynedoch in 1814. 



126 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

heim and two here. A thousand thanks for all your 
entertaining news. 

Lady Jersey is here, worn to the bone. She begins 
the day with a dancing-master at nine o'clock and 
never rests till night. 

"We hope to be in town, my own G., about the 10th. 
I rather dread the gaieties of London. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : August 1817. 

I must begin this evening, as I dread becoming lazy 
in the bustle of Paris life and in the delightful hope of 
seeing you so soon. Lord Morley .arrived here just 
after I had written. I never saw stronger traces of 
suffering in any countenance. He talked like a person 
endeavouring to persuade himself of what he dared not 
believe could be true. Everybody seems to think ill of 
poor little Henry ,^ and I do not know how Lord Morley 
will bear it. I hear she never leaves Henry for a 
moment. 

I saw also Mr. Vernon and Lady Elizabeth. She is 
skin and bone and her cheeks like parchment. He goes 
to England for six weeks to-morrow and returns to fetch 
her before the winter. The Hollands mean to be here 
till the middle of October, and his account of her is — 
' My lady is terrified in a carriage and will only go a few 
miles a day. She cannot stop at a bad inn, she cannot 
eat a bad dinner, and she is very fond of travelling.' 

Wednesday. — I lead a very pleasant life, but my 
impatience to be in England redoubles in spite of it. I 
have been twice to the plaj^ We have all been to see 
Talma and Mile. Duchesnois act in ' Andromaque.' I do 
not like him much, but I am delighted with her. Her 
acting is magnificent. 

Lady Holland dined the other day with the Stuarts, 

' He died on November 1. Lady Morley was his stepmother. 



1817 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 127 

and was very much pleased with Lady EUzabeth, but 
there was a very great man there who chose not to 
acknowledge her or Lord Holland. This has caused 
much discussion. The great man says they would not 
bow to him, and the welkin rings with the different 
versions of the story. 

Monsieur de Lafayette, Denon, Mme. de Coigny, 
the Jerseys, Eussells, Lord Auckland, some black- 
headed ultra-liberaux make the soirees here look exactly 
like Holland House. 

Lady William Eussell is very pretty, very pleasing ; 
Lord William looks quiet and pleased, but a little small 
between his accomplished bride and exigeante mother- 
in-law, who talks all the time as if Lady William was 
dead. ' From the time I lost my poor Bessy.' It is 
clear Lord William will not love Mrs. Eawdon. 

We shall set out on Thursday, the 4th. Au honheur 
de vous revoir, to talk over many things that interest me. 

To THE Duke op Devonshire. 

Trehtham : September 1817. 

I long to hear of you from Compton Place. Do you 
remember a description in ' Marmion ' of ' a life both 
dull and dignified ? ' I hope you will stay there as long 
as you can. It is good for your health, will repay 
them for the kindness they really have invariably shown 
to us all, and for the rest, I will only hope you will be 
able to say, as Madame de Sevigne does, when she is 
living with some tiresome people, 'Dieu me fait la 
gr^ce de ne pas les dcouter.' 

I enjoy being here to the greatest degree. Lady 
Stafford is as agreeable and entertaining as it is possible 
to be, without caprice or humeur. She professes great 
kindness to me, but would hear of my death to-morrow 
with the most perfect composure. When I do not care 
for a person, I prefer this, as it frees me from aU 



128 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

scruple and remorse in not returning very warm feelings 
for very warm words. The only thing she seems to 
'^love with enthusiasm is Lady Elizabeth, who is insup- 
, * portable, with quite beauty and cleverness enough to 
make a dozen pretty agreeable people ; but her persi- 
flage and pertness delight Lady Stafford, and entirely 
subdue poor Lady Charlotte, whom I found doing pro- 
' blems in Euclid instead of flirting with Lord Ilchester. 
Do you correspond with the Duchess,^ and have you 
carefully avoided pressing her to be much with you, or 
giving her any hold of that kind upon you ? My fears 
are on your part the difficulty of ever saying to her 
' No, you shall not,' and the conviction that short of 
that she will encounter anything. ' How I long for five 
months' quiet at dear Chatsworth ! ' is a speech in cha- 
racter for her, and difficult to be answered by anything 
but harshness, which does not belong to your nature. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Lilleshall : September 1817. 

I am delighted with this place and could pass months 
here with the greatest delight. The house is an en- 
larged farm with substantial airy rooms, large beds, and 
a commanding view, to talk like a tourist, of a very rich 
and fine country. Lord Stafford's maitre d'hotel nous 
comble de ses hie^ifaits and makes us live upon venison, 
game, and the produce of all the Trentham hot-houses 
Granville is, like any steward, all day at business and 
accounts, till I wish there was no such thing as coal or 
a sixpence in the world, and to-day he is gone out to 
shoot, which I bear with still less resignation. How- 
ever, ' Hermione y sera,' in a chariot and pair. I am 
going to set out for Lilleshall Hill to superintend 
the sport. You cannot think how strong and degna 
di te in these matters I am grown. Yesterday I got 

' Of Devonshire. 



1817 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 129 

up soon after eight, went to church, walked home, set 
out again at three, drove about ten miles in the curricle, 
walking occasionally through the most beautiful lanes, 
woods, and ruin of an abbey. You must fancy the ruin 
seen in all the glow of this delicious hot weather, with 
quantities of ivy shading all the arches and the Wrekin 
for a background. God bless you, my dearest G. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Badminton : September 22, 1817. 

I have this moment sent back to G. the last of your 
delightful letters, with an account of Moscow. I cannot 
say enough of the pleasure they have given me, with 
only one drawback. I find in them that you wished 
and expected me to write to you whilst I was abroad, 
whilst in the simplicity of my heart and all the lazy 
calm of a good conscience I had believed, what you 
certainly did tell me, that occasionally hearing of my 
being alive through G. was all you wished to have to 
do with me during your travels. I will not now make 
you wish I had sinned on, but will tell you, not of my 
lakes and mountains — they look so small by yours — but 
of your friends in difierent parts of the world. 

To begin with G., looking better and gayer than I 
have seen her for ages, in great beauty, very plump, 
very smart — Mrs. Lines has an eye to tournure — and 
intent upon panoramas and plays. We found ourselves, 
I do not know by what process, in your large box at 
Covent Garden. Silence was with us. She is a dear 
woman, and Italian and Parisian adulation leave her 
as free from vanity and pretension as they found her. 
As Lady Cowper had left London I did not see her. 
Madame de Lieven is going to Paris till the first of No- 
vember. The Hollands and Morleys are there. I saw 
something there of the Wilham Eussells. The mother 
is intolerable, too great a fool. 

VOL. I. K 



130 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

To THE Duke op Devonshire. 

LilleshaU : October 3, 1817. 

We are here, much elated at our good iron prospects. 
Trade is flourishing, and we expect to be very rich soon. 

"We shall be at Tixal to-morrow, and Lady Harrowby 
and Lord Gower are coming to us. Mary ^ and Harriet ^ 
are now des personnages and dine late. Mary is im- 
proved, has a distingueA.ookin.g figure and fine teeth. 
Susan's letters from Castle HiU. are full of delight and 
happiness. She doats upon Lady Fortescue, and I hear 
they are all charmed with her. She does nothing but 
lead ofi" balls and go out hunting. She is with child, 
and so is Lady Surrey, who is as happy in a difierent 
way, working embroidered stools and sitting in state 
in fine velvet rooms at Worksop. 

G. and I are at this moment in a grand quarrel. She 
wiU not sendmetwo new letters of yours since the Moscow 
one for fear of my carelessness. As if I could not be 
trusted for a day ! I think she will be touched at last. 

Mr. Loch, Lord Stafford's and Lord Keith's homme 
d'affaires, has been staying with Count Flahault. He 
says he seems perfectly happy, cutting down trees, 
planting, shooting, fishing, and only blamed for not 
drinking enough. He thinks she will be the first to be 
tired of retirement and Scotland. She has a great deal 
of honesty about her. She has shown it lately with 
many good qualities. I have not time for more. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon: 1817. 
We are aU very much interested for poor Princess 
Charlotte. I fear it is bad. Lord Gower writes word 
that there is a difference of opinion. They are uncer- 

' Lady Mary Ryder, married in 1828 to Admiral Saurin. 

^ Lady Harriet Ryder, married in 1839 to Lord Charles Hervey. 



1817 TO LADY G. MORPETH 131 

tain whether she has twins and whether she will have 
strength to go through the labour. 

Mr. Wilmot has been meeting Sarah Lyttelton at 
Bowood ; he thinks her perfection. I hear Mr. Eogers 
was the terror of a number of youths. He was wholly 
employed in abuse of them all. Mr. Wilmot says he 
bore it, but that Ealph Sneyd was nearly dying of it. 
To give you a specimen. Eogers enquired one day if 
they were coming to walk with him and Lord Lans- 
downe, and when he was answered no, was heard to 
mutter, ' There is a providence.' Good-night, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : November 8, 1817. 

My dearest G., — I feel quite unable to write upon 
any subject but one. We are all heart-sick at this 
terrible event. Poor Princess Charlotte. I have seen 
a letter from Lord Melville to Lord Harrowby. Some- 
thing in the position of the child was wrong I believe, 
but from some of the symptoms it is supposed an inflam- 
mation within must have taken place. She became 
restless and agitated. They gave her brandy. She 
then said, 'If you leave me alone I shall be well,' 
turned about two or three times, and died. 

Many thanks for dear Hart's letter. How shocked 
he will be ! 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

November 8, 1817. 

Dearest brother, — I have delayed writing from day 
to day, and now I can think or write of nothing but 
the two events that have just happened. You will, I 
know, be shocked and grieved to the greatest degree at 
the deaths both of Mrs. Henry Cavendish and Princess.!,', ^ . 
Charlotte. It is but a few hours since I have heard of "' 
the last. . The having seen them lately so happy, so 



132 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1817 

prosperous, and so attaclied to each other gives me a 
feeling about her that my slight acquaintance with her 
would otherwise prevent my having, and the recol- 
lection of poor Mrs. Henry at Chatsworth in all her 
pride of youth, beauty, and health is one that I most 
painfully dwell upon. A sudden fulness of blood at 
her heart is said to have occasioned her death. It is 
also said that her joy at hearing of the child being a 
boy, who is alive and doing well, was the cause. Poor 
Lady Orford Ms in a dreadful state. She has neither 
spoken or cried since. 

Of the Princess we have no details. I ought to 
apologise to you for this gloomy letter, but upon any 
strong feeling being excited in one the thought of those 
we love is present to us, in this case particularly, and 
I could not resist venting myself to you. 

What a world this is! Is it, my dearest brother, 
worth living for alone, and do not hopes and fears of a 
better rush to one's mind with such awful visitations as 
these ? God bless you ever and ever. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : November 16, 1817. 

Dearest G., — I have been hearing a great many very 
melancholy details of poor Princess Charlotte's death. 
She bore her whole labour with a patience and courage 
that were quite heroic. It is true that she never 
complained, but only held out her hand to him and 
pressed his when the suffering was great. It is said that 
there was no cause sufficient to account for her death, 
but that her whole constitution was in so bad a state 
that she could not possibly have lived long. 

At this moment I am listening to a violent argu- 
ment upon the probable wish of the Prince Eegent to 
bring forward the subject of a divorce. If he does, 

' Her sister. 



1817 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 1 33 

and I suppose he will move heaven and earth to do it, 
it will, to be sure, be the most tremendous piece of work 
that ever was made in a country. Good-night. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : November 1817. 

Dearest G., — ^We are very anxious to hear what you 
determine to do, and it is Granville's fear of a letter 
from you saying ' We will decide when we get to 
Chatsworth ' that makes me write to tease you again. 
Till we know we cannot answer Mr. Luttrel, who has 
written to propose himself. 

Everyone left us to-day. Ealph Sneyd is very en- 
tertaining. He has drawn me a head of Eogers upon 
the body of a wasp that is the best thing I ever saw. 
At Longleat they played at secretaire. He drew Lady 
Anne Vernon and wrote — 

For wedding King Eiehard my Lady Anne Neville 
'Tis generally thought will be sent to the devil ; 
If that be her fate, it does really concern one 
To think what they'll do with my Lady Anne Vernon. 

Lady Bath insisted that the wits should each bring 
down every morning to breakfast an epigram. She 
gave the subjects. Mr. Sneyd's one day was the Due 
de Berri's child ; he brought down : 

A pious throng by candle-light there went 

To good St. Louis' shrine one sunny day, 
By princely Berri's high commission sent 

For his young daughter's threat'ned life to pray. 
The sceptred saint thrice shook his rev'rend head 

When the petition of the crowd he heard — 
' You've two Miss Berrys as it is,' he said, 

' Nor heaven nor earth can tolerate a third.' 

Hart's journal is most entertaining and interesting. 
What an excellent understanding he has ! 



134 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVIIXE 1817 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : December 1817. 

I think the Derby ball will be a delight to you 
with your children, an interest greater than oneself is 
so necessary to one. 

I have had a long letter from Madame de Lieven. 
She is in town, full of the praises of Prince Leopold. 
She says nobody feels so strongly and bears so firmly. 
She is also very fond of Humboldt, and tells me if I do 
not like him, and teU her he is not agreeable, she shall 
neither believe nor mind me. 

My enthusiasm for Lord E. is dying for want of 
nourishment ; others are flat, but he is flatness. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : December 1817. 

I have returned to a most rigid strictness with 
regard to diet and exercise every day. I am convinced 
I require both. The former is rather difiicult with our 
new cook, who is delicious, to adopt Lord Morley's 
manner of expressing himself. The cook is a very 
fine gentleman, borrows French books, and it was not 
till he had talked some time of ces demoiselles this 
morning that I discovered them to be the kitchen and 
scullery maids. 

I suppose you have heard that Lord Olive is going 
to marry Lady Lucy Graham, one of those girls who 
look like our ancestors, with an old-fashioned face 
and a look of cut velvet and parrots on the finger 
about them. 



1818 TO LADY G. MORPETH 135 



1818 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Chataworth : August 12, 1818. 

We arrived here to dinner and found Hart in up- 
roarious spirits. I was in despair at first at finding the 
Leinsters and Tavistocks with a host of Derbyshire 
squires, but their harmless, good-humoured faces quite v^' " 
disarmed me. The yo ung Difc fe^^is "like LadyTavi- " ;/ 
stock, with, I should think, more sense and less beauty ; 
but she is a fine, good-natured, healthy thing, and looks 
very happy. He is pleasing and handsome, and seems 
as happy as she does. 

Wednesday. — We were up between seven and eight 
and had a capital breakfast. The Duke and Duchess 
sitting next each other, aux petits soins with the 
sugar, bread and butter ; Beaumont respectfully assi- 
duous aupres de Lady Tavistock, and I affable to 
Messrs. Hallowes and Halton. I am now come to my 
room to write, to learn 'Propria quse maribus,' and 
make bad translations from German with the alert feel 
of an early riser or a good child at her lessons. 

I am going to drive with the Duchess and Lady T. 
I have taken Hart's advice not to be the least sensible, 
but merry and good-humoured. I have taken the 
joking line with a good grace ; we light fires where fires 
should not be, and die with laughing when they blaze. 
They were aU shy of me at first, but begin to think I 
have some fun. 

Yesterday evening Granville, Hart, and I looked 



136 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1818 

over books. A beautiful edition of Camoens, given him 
by Monsieur de Souza, bound here in brown and gold, 
with D. and the coronet inlaid in diamonds. It is like 
a book in a fairy tale. The Duchess of Devonshire's 
editions of Horace's journey. The prints are from 
beautiful drawings, one by herself. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : 1818. 

I heard from Mr. Standish yesterday. He has been 
hunting with the Duke of Eutland, who told him he 
had seen a letter from Mr. Brummel announcing the 
immediate publication of his memoirs. He says he 
sets everything in it at defiance in revenge of his 
wrongs, that he discloses to the world every anecdote 
he has heard, everything that has come to his know- 
ledge in the intimacy of friendship, and that those 
who have thrown him off he shall treat with the utmost 
severity. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : November 11, 1818. 

I am so sorry to have lost a very interesting letter 
of Macdonald's. He tells me by all he hears the fatal 
moment^ might have been prevented, although he 
thinks from what he hears he was in a state Of body 
and mind that must have ended ill. The night of Lady 
Eomilly's death he wrote a codicil to his will, with 
directions in the event of his losing his faculties. 
Macdonald says that, owing to the incapacity of poor 
Doctor Eoget, even the most common means were ne- 
glected. When Babington was called in, he desired 
that he might instantly be shaved, have ice applied to 
his head, be bled and blistered. AU this was unac- 
countably delayed till the evening, and in the interval 

■ Suicide of Sir Samuel Romilly. 



1818 TO LADY G. MORPETH 137 

was the fatal act. The Hollands are all kindness to the 
children, who are with them. 

You have seen the ' Courier,' and as there may be 
nothing to-morrow, I will tell you what we know. 
Charles Greville is just arrived, having left London at 
twelve last night. No confidence has been reposed in 
him, but he says there is every appearance of something 
very wonderful. Lord Liverpool, Sidmouth, etc., walk 
about, whispering, gesticulating. But this is the pith. 
D'Osmond^ came to Lord Bathurst's ofiice yesterday 
evening. Charles was alone. Thinking him in the 
secret, d'Osmond said : ' Grand Dieu, quel ev^nement 
facheux ! Dieu salt comment il terminera.' Charles 
held his peace. D'Osmond continued : ' Et ce qui est 
le plus etonnant c'est que dans les dernieres lettres de 
M. [I forget the name], il dit qu'iP etait dans le jardin 
en uniforme, ou tout le monde pouvait le voir.' Here 
Charles' honour, or, as he candidly owns, his fear of 
detection, came across him, and he let d'Osmond know 
that he knew nothing. Now, my dear Q-., we conclude 
he is ofi'. What would there be surprising in his having 
been seen by everybody in uniform in the garden, if he 
was not now missing ? 

My boy Granville lives downstairs ; il fait les delices 
of aU beholders. He is a great love, not the least shy, 
and as he proclaimed to-day at breakfast, he ' loves aU 
the people,' which makes him very popular. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : November 18, 1818. 

Lady Stafford sent a most gracious invitation to us 
aU to adjourn to Trentham, but when this was broken 
to Mr. Luttrel, he walked about the room in an agony. 
' I cannot, upon my soul I do not think I can.' At last 

' The French Ambassador. 
'^ Napoleon at St. Helena. 



138 LETTERS OF HAREIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1818 

it was determined that I should write an answer, which 
Jeanie Deans would not have written. 

Charles showed us a letter from an official corre- 
spondent, who says that ' there has without doubt been 
and there is stiU existing a plot in favour of Buonaparte, 
but the most profound mystery exists, not a word of it 
transpires.' God bless you, my ever dearest G. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 1818. 

I went on Saturday to Mrs. Lamb. Brougham was 
with her, looking like something just dug up. He says 
he has never recovered Sir Samuel's death and the 
shock of attending his funeral. 

I dined at Cavendish Square yesterday.-' It was 
rather a mournful ceremony ; hs convives were all 
tristes, the room looked funereal, and Eover howled 
and whined without intermission. 

A dinner the day before at Mr. Canning's was some- 
what more lugubre. She was ill and he was silent, and 
the people all thin, grave-looking men whom I had 
never seen before, with the exception of Lord Henry 
Howard, a fat hon vivant, an accumulation of many 
years' turtle and venison. Bless you, dearest G. 

' With Lord and Lady Bessborough. 



1819 TO LADY G. MORPETH 139 



1819 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Tixal : January 1, 1819. 

Many happy New Years. I am so happy here that 
I feel low at the thought of its being our last week of 
this place. 

I hear of an immense party at Althorp, savants and 
dandies of the respectable class. I hear also of the 
arrival of Lord Milton at Naples, stopping his equipage 
at the entrance of the town, and walking up and down 
it, saying to everybody, ' Ho bisogno d'una casa,' never 
having thought of securing himself a gite. 

They are telling a story that amuses me. Lord 
Kinnaird and Lord Alvanley were playing at whist, 
when the former scolded the latter in the most violent 
manner. Lord Alvanley got up, saying very quietly, 
' Not being blessed with your Lordship's angelic temper, 
I shall retire for fear of losing mine.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bruton Street : July 19, 1819. 

Dearest G., — I am longing to hear how you are and 
that your journey has done you good instead of harm. 
What delicious weather, and how I envy you, living 
out of doors, unlike your worn sister, hanging calico, 
and planing floors and seeing her lank, pale face re- 
flected in endless' mirrors which Mr. Orchard has the 
goodness to put up all over the house pour rien, in 



140 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1819 

the style of Madame Dessart, who has just sent me in a 
bill of 42Z. for a dress which is worth 20^. ! 

I have had few opportunities for collecting scandal 
for a friend in the country, but, such as it is, you shall 
have it. 

I dined with the Duchess of Beaufort on Saturday, 
with the Cannings and some wits, but malgre cela 
we were as dull as we were innocent. Mr. Ward looks 
at Mr. Ellis with a mixture of interest and amusement 
in his little intelligent phiz, and the other flourishes 
and squeaks most obligingly to enlighten him. But 
like Lady Bath I love Mr. Ellis, for this is but a 
weakness and he has a hundred good and attaching 
qualities to make up for it. I went from thence to 
Lady Charlotte Greville's. Lady Grantham was there, 
and displayed all the weakness that possesses her. She 
talked loud and long of men and love ; told me and 
several who were round me that she could hardly keep 
from crying ; that it was not ' leaving London, for she 
hated dissipation, it was a something she could not 
explain or account for ; that she believed she had a 
great deal of love in her nature, that she did not know 
what to do with its overflowings ; would I have any 
of it, or Lord Jersey, who was an old gentleman and 
the world would not talk,' at which the galled Earl 
winced. 

Yesterday I walked with Granville in Kensington 
Gardens, where I saw most of the little affairs, with no 
difference but sun and shade upon them. The Miss 
Eitzclarences all but astride upon the wall, with the 
young practitioners Sandon, Greville, and Villiers at 
their feet ; poor Lady Grantham, as green as the grass, 
with Seymour Bathurst; wretched girls pacing after 
their chaperons, and the dandies on horseback gazing 
at us. I don't know why, but follies are more glaring 
by daylight, and I felt like a clergyman or Miss 



1819 TO LADY G. MOKPETH 141 

Trimmer, and held tight to Granville and the unsenti- 
mental Punch, as if it was catching. I have not poured 
forth since my early youth such a tide of ill-nature, 
mais c'est toi qui as voulu. 

Mr. Chichester has fallen deeply in love with Lady 
Harriet Butler, and it is supposed will propose at my 
ball. Edward Montagu whips up a little love and 
despair upon the occasion, which wiU do none of them 
any harm. 

I think the same of the first canto of ' Don Juan.' 
There is a description of love by moonlight that 
beggars all praise. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : July 22, 1819. 

My ball was as pretty and successful as possible. 
My front room was as light as day and the back all 
pink muslin and flowers. The two large rooms below 
were filled with little round supper tables, and all the 
flirtations went down to back their sentiments with soup 
and entrees. They danced with spirit tiU six o'clock, 
when Colinet said he could play no more. 

I was so much obliged to you for your letter. 
Bowood must be very enjoyable, and your weather, to 
judge by ours, must be delightful. 

I think parts of 'Don Juan' more beautiful than 
anything he has written, some wit and a great deal of 
bad taste. 

I will write you an account of Leopold's ball 
to-morrow, Friday.' I believe Lady Sophia KeppeP is 
a delightful girl. I hope he is as happy as he says, 
which must depend upon the degree of affection he felt 
for the other whigginer. We went to Grosvenor Place 
yesterday. Lady Carlisle seemed much pleased at 
seeing us, but terribly low and desponding about him. 

1 She married Sir James Macdonald. 



142 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1819 

In the evening we went to Marlborough House. The 
Eegent was there, but in the midst of fat and thin 
women, and the heat was so great that I never went 
beyond the first two rooms. Prince Leopold was ex- 
tremely civil to everybody, and looked pleased at 
having so many people. 

Miss Berry is just arrived, and has written to me 
a ' good soul ' note to beg me to go to her Sunday 
evening. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bolton Abbey r August 17, 1819. 

We are very happy and comfortable here. The 
new drawing-room is a great comfort, with excellent 
couches and a good little pianoforte. 

To-day we all got up at six. The men are gone to 
the moors. The weather is delicious, and I walked 
yesterday to the Strid with Granville and Hart. ' Che- 
min faisant ' Hart called out to us, ' Get out of the 
way, I am afraid the dog is mad,' and en effet the 
sweet little creature began howling horribly, and foam- 
ing at the mouth. He darted round us in this state, 
and we were expecting a bite every minute. I under- 
went all the pleasures of imagination, dipping in the 
sea, bits of our flesh cut out, painful death. At last he 
shot off in a straight line to the house, and we followed. 
I expected to find Lord EusselP bitten, and shook so I 
could hardly get along. He had, however, retired to 
my brother's room, upon whom we have with difficulty, 
prevailed to let us forego the pleasure of his society. 
He is to be shut up whilst we are here. 

The Tavistocks are as quiet and good-humoured 
bodies as can be, and when we are left she goes to her 
room and I to mine, and we only meet to walk. 

F. Lamb is not yet arrived to d n us all ; but 

' Lord Tavistock's son. 



1819 TO LADY G. MORPETH 143 

we expect him every hour. Lord George Cavendish is 
to come after the Derby races. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bolton Abbey : August 28, 1819. 

The Tavistocks went early this morning. Hart talks 
of going to-morrow. F. Lamb stays with us till Tuesday. 

Hart bids me teU you that he would write if he 
could do anything but pull a trigger, but that he 
•shoots, and eats, and remains, when he does neither, 
in a state of torpor. He is in the most perplexing 
uncertainty about his plans. He cannot as yet find 
out what are those of the Grand Duke, upon which his 
must in great measure depend. Lord George has failed 
at the Derby races, and he writes to him that he cannot 
go to the Chesterfield ones, begging him to be there to 
prevent the county being exasperated. The Bedfords 
have sent him word that they are coming to Chats- 
worth on their way from Scotland. His whole heart is 
bent upon getting you there, and as he cannot believe 
in anything not happening as he wishes it, it is in vain 
for me to talk of what I imagine will be your difficul- 
ties in doing it. 

I admire F. Lamb perhaps more than I like him. 
I think him uncommonly agreeable and clever, but he 
sees hfe in the most degrading light, and he simplifies 
the thing by thinking all men rogues and all women 
. He looks old and world-beaten, but still hand- 
some. He seems to enjoy being here, and sport, food, 
and sleep fill up his time. At any spare moment he 
reads the ' Heart of Midlothian,' of which he says : 
' Why, if you wish for my opinion, I think it the worst 
novel I ever read.' 

They are just set out for Eylstone, and I am alone, 
save when Mr. Carr ^ bothers me with questions, and he 

' The clergyman at Bolton Abbey. 



144 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1819 

is in and out like a child and a dog, but submits to the 
same rebuffs. God bless you. Castle Howard is my 
terre promise. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bolton Abbey : August 31, 1819. 

We set out to-morrow, dearest G. We had a long 
and very pleasant evening yesterday. I think F. Lamb 
very agreeable. Living abroad and seeing a great variety 
of people, with the necessity of exertions, have given 
him a sort of rude polish which his brothers want. He 
is less like an animal, does not roll about and snore 
as they do. At meals the real Lamb breaks out, but 
at other times he is civil, gentlemanlike, and gentle. 
He likes Hart, though I dare say he does not spare 
him any more than his fellows. He says, 'He is an 
odd chap, and tells one what another would conceal ; 
but all those Cavendishes have at bottom a deal of 
sense about them.' What we have at the top, I con- 
clude, he reserves for less partial ears than Granville's. 

I have been so happy here that I should be sorry 
to go to any part of the earth but Castle Howard. As 
it is I count the minutes. 

The bull, G., the bull. I read it ten times over with 
a sort of shuddering horror. They have been tossing 
to the right and left, and even the cows, those disgraces 
to their sex, have taken to it. Promise me not to take 
me out of Eay Wood, not over the grass to that melan- 
choly building, not round the lake, not to any gills. I 
confine myself here to the kitchen garden, and the 
length of the house backwards and forwards. Mr. 
Carr urges romantic projects in vain. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Stanhope Street : September 1, 1819. 

We have just arrived, dearest G. Granville found 
a letter from Charles Ellis to say that Lady Hervey is 



1819 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 145 

dead, and that Eliza, after the very great shock it was 
to her, was better than he had hoped. 

The Lievens and Neumann ^ are to be at Trentham 
on the 12th. I suppose we shall set out on Saturday. 

Let me warn you of Alconbury Hill, that is, of a 
horse there who will not back. Off we pelted from 
the middle of a hill with a curl at the bottom, and 
could not stop for ages. In short, Granville owns that 
we were run away with. I never met with such a 
dreadful danger before. 

"We met Lord Petersham in something between a 
vis-a-vis and a sedan-chair. He put out his head like 
the flower called ' the devil in a bush,' and for a moment 
one might have taken him for a large monkey going 
to some fair. Good-night. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Badminton : September 3, 1819. 

I cannot let you forget me, and therefore, with but 
little to say, I must write. 

We are here with nothing but the family, nine 
women and four men. 

I thought you low at Middleton under the tree, my 
dearest brother, and feared you might mistake my 
silence for coldness. Believe me it is not indifferent 
to me to see you so, but you know I dare not venture 
upon subjects which might seem like a wish to extort 
the confidence which, very hkely most wisely, you have 
decided not to bestow. How far it is necessary or right 
you alone can know. Only be persuaded that affection, 
interest, sympathy, indulgence, all wait your bidding as 
far as I am concerned. How far in a world like this 
it is happiness or duty to exchange them for conceal- 
ments, conversations where the thoughts are not, is not 

' For many years Austrian Charge d' Affaires in London. He married 
in 1844 a daughter of the Duke of Beaufort. 

VOL. I. L 



146 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1819 

even a question in my mind, but may be conviction in 
others. The purport of all this is to let you know that 
I am attached to you, interested in you, anxious about 
you under a mask of indifference, worn under the belief 
that it is your wish it should be so. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Trentham : September 18, 1819. 

My dearest love, — ^Yesterday and this morning have 
been very severe. We set out at ten yesterday morning 
in a drizzling rain and draggled about the various 
potteries till past five. This morning we have been two 
hours walking in procession through the hot-houses, 
vaults, stables, offices, and during the little time I had 
the Marchioness sat with me in my own room. 

I received a letter from Hart yesterday desiring to 
know about the Grand Duke, and I have written to tell 
him that the Lievens are going to town to receive him 
before the 24th, and that he will only stay till the end 
of the month, when he is to hurry to his Imperial 
Mamma at Brussels. 

Lord Stafford is in a perpetual titter. We played at 
whist last night. Lord Stafford, Fagel, Madame de Lieven, 
and I, and we were so noisy and merry that the room 
rang with our little effusions. Elizabeth says that when 
alone with her her father sometimes says how pleasant 
it is when people are here, but never before Lady 
Stafford. 

Now I will tell you a great secret. Grandpapa ^ 
and Lord Stafford fell out here, and the consequence is 
that the latter declared he would never go to Castle 
Howard again. I cannot make out from Lady Stafford's 
account which she thought was to blame. She did say 
grandpapa was very sneering and provoking, but she 

' Lord Carlisle. 



1819 TO LADY G. MORPETH 147 

seemed to think Lord StajBTord had also worked himself 
up into a great rage. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Sandon : November 2, 1819. 

We went this morning against my earnest entreaties 
to Tixal. I knew how it would be, but Granville and 
Lady Harrowby overruled me. I prefer Wherstead, 
but I spent seven of the happiest years of my life at 
Tixal and I was so terribly overcome that I could not 
command myself, and so ashamed, for the men seemed 
to think me crazy. 

I am come to my room to confess unto thee, who 
will understand me better than they do. 

GranviUe is going to the Lunatic Asylum to remind 
himself of his old pursuits, though not like me to weep 
over them. Good-night. 



t 2 



148 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 



1820 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 19, 1820. 

Nothing could do better than our Grandeurs. The 
Duke ^ appears very happy and they had an excellent 
chasse yesterday. Madame de Lieven plays beautifully, 
^and Pahlen^ and Neumann sing. The Duchess of Bed- 
*ford is outree at their aU coming here. She was so indig- 
nant at the Duke leaving Woburn, that she wrote him 
the following characteristic letter when he got to town. 
He had told her it was business in the Cabinet obliged 
him to go. ' Dear Duke, — For Cabinet read boudoir. 
Yours, G. B.' 

The Lievens go to-morrow, and the Duke on Thurs- 
dav. Clievassier se surpasse, and the house is even 
hot, so that I have no anxieties. 

Excuse my shabby, hurried letters. I have so 
much besogne. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1820. 

Dearest G., — The Duke and the Lievens being 
gone, I shall have more time to write. We are now 
only ten. Lady Harrowby, Messrs. Neumann, Montagu, 
Standish, EUis, Lord Gower, and Pahlen. Most of them 
go on Monday, and will be replaced by Messrs. Hus- 
kisson, Canning, Wilmot, and Hay. 

' OfWellington. 

' Count Nicholas Pahlen was a general favourite in the various capitals 
of Europe. He spent most of his life out of Russia, because he resented 
the murder of the Emperor Paul having been, as he thought, unjustly 
imputed to his father, who was at the time Governor of St. Petersburg. 



1820 TO LADY HARROWBY 149 

I quite love the Duke of Wellington. He is neither 
an agreeable man nor in my eyes a heros de roman, 
but lie is the most unpretending, perfectly natural 
and amiable person I ever met with. We had an old 
admiral from Ipswich to dinner yesterday, whom he had 
known very early in his military career, and you never 
saw anything like his kind and cordial manner to him. 
The shooting and the dinners have been as good as 
possible. The Duke and Madame de Lieven played at 
whist, so we had no want of occupation. 

How I long to see you, my beloved G. ! Granville 
says my going to Brighton wiU depend upon the length 
of time you stay there. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Wherstead : January 21, 1820. 

I only write now to tell you how happy I am that 
you are to be in town the end of February. We shall 
be there on Friday, and without the prospect of finding 
you or G. I have more regret than usual at leaving 
this place. Lady Morley wiU be in town, which is a 
great delight to me. 

Punch Greville left us yesterday, Mr. Hill and 
C. Ellis this morning, and we have Mr. Montagu and 
Augustus Ellis remaining. Mr. Hill has been a source 
of perpetual amusement. He is an odd specimen of 
his species with his faults and peculiarities. He is 
invariably amusing ; without them he would be simply 
a bore. 

Mr. Montagu is more improved than I ever thought 
it possible he would be in the points that required it. 
He has not been overpowering as to quality or quantity. 
He talks less and lower, and his whole manner is 
softened and respectful. I have a sort of second sight 
of him at forty, everything one could wish. 

I have heard twice from Govero since 'his .arrival at 



150 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

Vienna. He is evidently provoked with Pahlen. We 
have seen him in his happier hour, but I can conceive 
his being an enfant difficile a haptiser when all goes 
wrong with him, which seems to be the case at the pre- 
sent moment, and poor Govero talks of him as a discreet 
and painstaking tutor does of a spoilt child. He hates 
' the good Germans,' is bored to death at Vienna, is only 
kept there a few days longer by compulsion, though his 
next move is Eussia. 

He has sent a large packet of music to Lady Ebring- 
ton. To me he does not vouchsafe even a message, 
which I see grieves the civil Govero, who says in his 
letter from Munich : ' I have desired Pahlen to write a 
line to you, but he says he will some other time.' This 
time never arrives. I imagine that his last sentiment 
has gone so deep in him that it has embittered his 
whole existence, and one must allow for a situation 
where, when immediate enjoyment is taken away, there 
is nothing but hopelessness and Eiga left in prospect. 

Govero in his last letter had seen Lady Selina.' He 
says : ' One is struck with no beauty, but her manner 
is uncommonly good, posee and sensible.' The posee 
must go to his heart. He is in anxious expectation of 
Lord Olanwilliam's arrival. I wait for the denouement 
of this steady romance wilh no small share of curiosity 
and impatience. I will teU you what I expect, that it 
wiU be like the servants in the keeping company genre, 
that he wiU go every autumn to Germany to make a 
leg, but that it will end in an old Earl and an old maid. 
I am sceptical as to much love or any matrimony. 

I always see the Wherstead portion of my existence 
close with regret. I like society as some politicians do 
the Government short of the taxes it imposes, and the 
difference of it in London and the country turns exactly 
upon that point. 

' Lady Selina Meade, Lord Olanwilliam's sister. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 151 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 21, 1820. 

Think of waking this morning to look at piles of 
snow again upon everything ! I am glad it happens 
after the Duke's departure, as Mr. Montagu and Mr. 
Standish are both men who can stay at home, and I do 
not suppose it would have been possible for him. 

Mr. Canning comes Wednesday, and I hope he will 
be a degree less flat than he usually is, for, agreeable as 
he can be, he is much the most difficult person to get 
on with when he is not at his very best. 

I do not give up the hope of going to Brighton. I 
do not know exactly why, but I feel when you are in 
Yorkshire I can more easily reconcile myself to being a 
long time without seeing you than I can when I think 
of you at Brighton, and more so when as in a few days 
I shall be within so short a distance from you. 

1 do not think I have news of any sort to teU you. 

I do not send you a list of the slaughter because Mrs. 

Lamb and yourself are probably perfectly indifferent to it. 

If Lady Carlisle could know that I have not myself the 

remotest guess of it, her contempt of me would know 

no bounds. 

• 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

London : April 22, 1820. 

I have been confined to my room from the day I 
returned from Claremont. I regret it only because I 
have seen or heard nothing worth telling you. On my 
own account I am quite satisfied with my fate. My 
new room, in which I am now established, is so pretty, 
so comfortable, so quiet. I enjoy in it so much that I 
hke and avoid so much that I dislike that I feel no 
wish beyond it. It hangs out in the sun like a great 
green and gold cage. It is as full of or moulu and 



.62 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

jevres china as if it belonged to Lady Jersey, and I see 
all the dandy men and women redouble their regard 
for me when they find me in a room with four looking- 
glasses, clocks that sing and hreloques on the table. 

London always talks of one or two subjects at a 
time : the trial of the Cato Street people, which is going 
on prosperously, with full and strong evidence given, 
and Lord Francis Conyngham's appointment. 

How are you, my dearest brother ? Where are you ? 
Have you seen Poitier ? Have you heard ' Tancredi ' or 
' L'ltaliana ' ? 

Thistlewood was convicted to-day. 

Granville is to move the address in the House of 
Lords. If I had the same confidence in his nerves that 
I have in his understanding I should feel quite happy, 
but he feels very nervous about it, which makes me. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

London : May 10, 1820. 

Though you say Paris is gayer than ever, I envy 
you nothing but the perfect opera. G. is quite resigned 
about the gowns, vu the impossibility, however desir- 
able, of an Englishwoman looking like an eau-de-Cologne 
bottle. She has no regrets upon the subject. 

London is raging, but I am grown terribly lazy. I 
have been occupied since I last wrote with delight 
at Granville having spoken extremely well, horror at 
the accounts of the execution of the five wretched men 
at Newgate, and the pleasure of seeing and hearing 
Lady Morley again in higher spirits, and more enter- 
taining than ever. She falls upon the flatness and 
ennui of Loudon society like rain upon a parched field. 

G. is as well as possible. Lady Jersey not well but 
tout comme ; Lady Cowper thin, pale, nervous and 
bored ; Madame de Lieven furious at being obliged to 
amuse herself. The Duchess of Bedford in Devonshire, 



1820 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIEE 153 

Lady Grantham giving assemblies, but looking as if 
she wished to be hung at them. Lady Sandwich runs 
about at aU the things and contrives to have only the 
desagrements of youth and vivacity. 

The men of the world are in a bad way. Poor Mr. 
Nugent confined to his house with all sorts of ills, 
Mr. Montagu with an inflammation in his eyes. Lord 
Clanwilliam in love with nobody and feeling therefore 
like a servant out of place or a tradesman out of employ- 
ment. 

Your Prince de Lichtenstein is not arrived, but I 
believe I am to meet him at dinner the end of this 
week. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Bruton Street : July 30, 1820. 

I believe I am the only fashionable in London 
to-day, except Punch, who drove by in a gig and was 
amused at seeing me and my sons contemplating his 
namesake. The world is at Cray, where the Castle- 
reaghs have a breakfast. 

I have been nowhere but to Burlington House. 
You need not be jealous, for though it is magnificent 
and in very good taste, it is not to be compared with 
Devonshire House. Its fault is the great darkness, 
notwithstanding seventy-two candles which the pains- 
taking Lichtenstein counted for me in the large room, 
but vu the colour, or something or other, it looke(i/|^^/^/ 
very sombre. Aunt George was perfectly happy, an '?,^ , 
added or moulu border to the Polonaise, another roll 
to the turban and another erect black feather. As an 
assembly its merit was space, and its fault innumerable 
old maids running about and several families from the 
provinces, not such as Gell or Mundy, but curates, 
land-surveyor-looking people with wives hanging on 
their arms. 



]54 LETTEES OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

To-morrow, if I am better, I drive with Mr. Charles ' 
Elhs to his father's villa at Eoehampton. Thursday we 
all trundle to Wher stead. 

I am so hipped about the 17th and very much 
afraid of the mob.^ 

We had a tremendous storm yesterday. It came on 
at Holland House, where we dined. Gleor^^ arrived 
in the midst of it galled at the Duke of Gordon's 
marriage.^ 

The breakfast at Cray was brilliant, and a water- 
party yesterday finished the gaieties of London. We 
go to-morrow. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 16, 1820. 

Here we are, my dearest sister. I see it wiU be 
good for my nerves in one way. I shall live in a 
coffee-house, and not have time to think if I am ill 
or well. 

Lord Morley has seen Major Bowles, an officer of 
the Guards. He says nothing ever equalled the zeal 
and discipline of the troops, that the only fear is lest 
their anxiety to show their loyalty should make them 
act too much, if there is any occasion for it. 

Lady Bessborough, heaving with laughter, bids me 
tell you that no two people are in the same mind except 
as to the extreme peril we are all in, but if there 
is une idee dominante it is that the Queen will be 
carried through in triumph. Lady Spencer says there 
is an English sea-captain who can prove everything. 
Lord Westmorland says so also. There is an unhappy 
Madame Pignaletti, an aunt of Sir John Shelley, come 
to England and settled in Berkeley Square. They have 

^ The day on which Queen Caroline's trial commenced. 
'^ Duchess of Bedford. 
^ To Mrs. Christie. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 155 

put it about that she is a witness, and a weary life she 
will have of it. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 17, 1820. 

I have excellent accounts from Wherstead ; so far 
good. I walk about the room a good deal, draw very 
long breaths and sometimes say o\it loud, ' It don't sig- 
nify.' After I had written yesterday Mr. Greathead 
called, a wise old man and a Whig. He doubted the 
Guards, blamed Ministers, dreaded consequences, hipped 
me to death. Charlotte Greville, Harriet, and a little dog 
followed and rather altered the scene. She was intent 
upon having me at her drum this evening, but I would 
not be taken in. It is with the utmost difficulty that 
they have persuaded Lord Castlereagh to leave his 
house and sleep at his office. There is to be a cordon 
of military, preventing the mob penetrating beyond 
Charing Cross on one side and Abingdon Street on the 
other. If the Guards are steady, nothing can be safer. 
There has been a sad petitesse. They have forbidden 
her going in at the royal entrance to the House of 
Lords. Urged by me. Lords Granville and Morley and 
Hart mean to get up when she enters. Honi soit qui 
mal y pense. I breakfasted this morning at a quarter 
before eight with Granville and Mr. Wilmot and saw 
them off, armed with hard biscuits, and have this mo- 
ment seen William Hissey, who went with the carriage 
and says that nothing can be more peaceable than the 
mob. Darlings they are. I am considerably happier. 

One of the jokes is that the witnesses are to give 
their evidence en recitative and the Duke of Hamilton 
to interpret. 

I really -could not go last night. The thoughts of 
that sort of society require motive or habit. I like 
to see people here, but not to dress and dandy just 



156 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

when we turn upon an ' if,' which is the real state of 
the case. 

I have just had the following note from good- 
natured, tumultuous Lady Bessborough, all the happier 
for the barricade and the cock : ' They are all safe in. 
I saw Lord G. get out, the place quite clear, not a soul 
near. Some mob broke in with the Queen but not 
much, and the soldiers have cleared them from the door 
steadily and gently, so I hope all will be quiet. I have 
not slept a wink, for, though our habitation is perfec- 
tion, they chose to put up the barricade all night, and 
worse, un coq matineux has been crowing since three 
o'clock.' 

I am so glad I have to write, as all these early 
hours must necessarily be passed in solitude. I can- 
not help looking out of window and spying out for ill- 
looking men. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 18, 1820. 

If I had not fancied a large hot buttered roll at 
breakfast I should be happy. My fears are subsided 
and my health is good. London is as quiet as a mouse 
and the mob cut their jokes even upon the Queen. 
Yesterday her carriage was for a moment followed by 
a stage-coach and a dray-cart, and some one called out, 
' Mighty respectable carriages bring up the rear.' The 
Queen said to Sir Tommy ^ as he led her into the House, 
' I am sure you would have much greater pleasure in 
leading me to my coronation.' Archibald ^ sat by his 
sister Anne and insisted upon her repeating to him all 
that was going on, which put this amiable virgin into 
somewhat an awkward predicament. 

There have been gay doings at the cottage at 

' Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt. 

'^ Lord Archibald Hamilton and his sister Lady Ann Hamilton. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 157 

Windsor. His Majesty, Lady Conyngham, Princesse 
Esterhazy, and Lord Francis. This latter I hear makes 
a great fool of himself and is always showing off his 
favour with the King, displaying watches, snuff-boxes, 
and rings which he receives from him. The King is in 
outrageous spirits, discussing as we do. Amongst other 
subjects, they one day talked of the advantages and 
disadvantages of royalty, whether it was on the whole 
desirable. Another day they went upon the water. 
The King was in ecstasies until one of the subalterns, 
soit blunder, soit malice, said, ' One might almost fancy 
oneself upon the Lake of Como.' I long to hear from you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 19, 1820. 

The accounts of political proceedings are that the 
mob were as quiet as possible yesterda3^ The Queen 
as before quite tranquil and unmoved, retiring to sleep 
during a great part of the day, upon which Lord 
Holland has made a very good epigram. I did not 
hear it, but the point is that the nature of her crime is 
changed. Instead of sleeping with Bergami, she sleeps 
with the Lords. Lord Morpeth must forgive me, for 
impropriety is the order of the day. 

Mr. Wilmot came home, raving of Mr. Denman's 
speech. The sensation it has made amongst the 
country gentlemen is not to be described, and with 
the very bad replies yesterday decidedly went against 
the Government. 

To-day there is Lord King's motion ; ^ you will have 
the debate in the papers. Lord Grey and most of them 
will be with him, and if they have a majority. Ministers 
will I suppose go out. This seems the general im- 
pression. 

Adieu, my beloved sister. I am going to read 

' For the rejection of the Bill. 



158 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVII^LE 1820 

Hume. Nothing is safe in these days, not even one's 
ignorance. Love to Lord Morpeth. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 20, 1820. 

Lord Liverpool's speech was, I beheve, universally 
allowed to be excellent in itself and as to its effect. 
The Attorney-General made sad work of his opening. 
He will finish to-morrow, and they will begin examin- 
ing Mile. Dermont. She is a Swiss, and lives with 
Countess Munster, and was the Queen's maid. They 
say F. Lamb has obtained for them the strongest evi- 
dence, but also that his means of obtaining information 
wiU not much redound to his honour. 

Monday. — Mr. Ellis came to me after a pleasant 
dinner at Holland House. Lord Erskine excessively 
entertaining. He began abusing the bareness of the soil 
in Scotland, and said that some Ayrshire sheep coming 
to London were terrified at the sight of the trees when 
they arrived in England. Lord Archibald, who instead 
of sheep heard men, exclaimed, ' They were impostors, 
depend upon it they were impostors,' and irritated by 
the shouts of laughter, and never listening to Lord 
Erskine bawling out, ' Sheep, Lord Archibald, sheep.' 
Lord Holland's epigrams, — That the lords who upon 
this occasion are come to town will all be knocked up 
if they are not knocked down, and that nobody will 
profit by the call of the House but peers' eldest sons, 
law advisers, and grouse. The Duke of Wellington 
was again very much hissed yesterday by the mob, who 
in other respects are perfectly good-humoured. They 
were brutal to Lord FitzEoy Somerset.^ 'Well, you 
who have lost a wing, what do you say to it ? ' The 
Duke of Beaufort's pocket was picked of his spectacles 
and visiting-cards, the offence as harmless as the man. 

' He lost an arm at Waterloo. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 159 

How true is Mr. Luttrel's observation in his poem 
that no interest can long be kept up in London ! When 
I wrote nay first letter, everybody and every mind were 
on the full stretch, the servants brought one's notes 
quicker, even a bore was a godsend. Now the only 
danger is dulness. I ask the people who call on me, 
' "Well, what news is there ? ' ' Oh, nothing, what 
should there be ? ' ' No, but is all quiet ? ' ' Quiet, to 
be sure.' ' What is going on in the House ? ' ' I'm 
sure I don't know, it is so hot and so tedious, it is 
impossible to stay there.' 

Let me see if in writing I can make you enjoy a 
story of Lord Holland's that spoken and acted amused 
us extremely. It seems that the man employed in 
looking after the Italian witnesses is a dandy. He 
went to them after Denman's speech, and as he entered, 
selon I'usage des dandies, settled his cravat, pulling 
it up and running his fingers along the bottom of 
his chin between his throat and the top of the neck- 
handkerchief. The Italians, aware of summary proceed- 
ings but not of the niceties of dress, understood this as 
a significatif gesticulation to intimate to them that their 
throats were to be cut. They set up a horrid yell and 
plumped down on their knees, crying ' Misericordia ! ' 

Now I wiU try another story. It is said that Mr. 
Fazakerley is much in love with Pamela Fitzgerald, and 
Punch was all eagerness, hoping he would marry her. 
A discussion ensued, in which her cleverness, accom- 
panied with great freedom of speech, was canvassed. A 
story was told which illustrates both. Mr. de Eos, 
one of her admirers, is in the habit of making use of 
that demi-jurement, ' Ah, peste ! ' when anything strikes 
him. One night at Almack's he was looking at the 
dancine with Pamela, when their attention was attracted 
to an enormously fat woman in a bright blue gown, 
leaning against the rope that separates the dancers from 



160 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE ISL'O 

the lookers-on in a manner that, cutting her large 
person in two, made the most prominent part in front 
present itself to the view. Mr. de Eos as usual ex- 
claimed ' Ah, peste ! ' upon which Pamela immediately 
answered, imitating his voice and manner, ' Ventre 
bleu ! ' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 22, 1820. 

The witness examined to-day is a man who travelled 
all over Greece and Italy with her as courier, a very 
shrewd, intelligent man, perfectly undaunted, and giving 
his strong evidence without embarrassment or hesita- 
tion. It remains to be seen what discredit can be 
thrown upon him. I hear Sir WiUiam Gell says he 
was turned away for robbery, and that he perjured him- 
self to-day the third question he answered. Granville 
says that when he was brought in the Queen stood up, 
threw her head back, and put both her arms akimbo, and 
looked at him for some time with a countenance which 
those who saw it said was quite terrific. He returned 
the gaze with the most unmoved composure. She then 
exclaimed, ' Ah, Theodore,' ^ and trundled out of the 
House, some say surprised and thrown off her guard, 
others, astounded at his ingratitude afler the kindness 
she had shewn him. Alderman Wood told Mr. Ellis he 
supposed she was taken ill, for she could not be sur- 
prised, as she knew he was to appear against her, and 
in fact it was in the papers some days ago. 

Mr. Ellis begs to be most kindly remembered to 
you. He is charmed with London, opera buffas in the 
morning, and discussions chez moi in the evenings. He 
proposes having the Eoyal Family tried by turns, one 
every August. The maid from Carlsruhe is sent by 
F. Lamb. They say she is the most beautiful creature 
ever seen. 

^ According to some she exclaimed ' Traditore ! ' 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 161 

The mob have taken the turn of being angry with 
the Duke of Sussex. ' Shabby fellow, who won't vote 
either way. Why don't he come forward like the Duke 
of York, and do his duty ? ' The cry is Frederick the 
First and the Dowager Queen. 

Adieu, my dearest. Tell me if there is any point 
.on which I do not satisfy your curiosity. I am not 
used to be newsmonger and perhaps I leave out 
Hamlet. 

The Queen announced to Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt her 
intention of going down to-day. Mr. Hobhouse told 
somebody it was wonderful how much the public feeling 
for her had subsided. 

The interpreter is the man that delights them all. 
His name is Spinetto ; he is an Italian teacher at one of 
the Universities, as quick as lightning, all gesticulation, 
and so eager he often answers instead of the witness. 
Between them they act all the evidence, and at times 
they say this is so irresistibly comic that the noble 
lords forget all decorum and are in a roar of laughter. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 23, 1820. 

You will see that yesterday was entirely taken up 
with Theodore Majocchi's evidence and cross-examina- 
tion. There is but one opinion of Mr. Brougham, that 
he did it ill and in bad taste. I have collected opinions 
for you. Government people say that nothing can be 
more convincing and condemning than his evidence, 
that it has not left her a square foot of ground to stand 
on. Brooks's says that she is redeemed by it, that he 
broke down and exposed himself, that if there is nothing 
better to be produced against her, she must be acquitted. 
Others that, though sUghtly damaged as a witness, he 
is not essentially so, that though ' Non mi ricordo ' 
comes too often, and that it was rather suspicious his 

VOL. L M 



162 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

remembering the passages and doors of the Villa d'Este, 
and not remembering two large wings that were added 
to it and his forgetting whether he had asked to be 
readmitted to her service, yet that much is to be 
attributed to fatigue and over-caution not to commit 
himself. You may think what you please, Lady M. 

Verity gives a good account of Lady Ebrington, 
whom he has quite set up again. I hear old Charles' 
Greville,^ who had put himself under his care, says, ' He 
left me in perfect health, but without a farthing,' and that 
he thinks upon the whole he had better go on with a bar 
in his stomach with de quoi to provide for his family. 

Now listen to what happened yesterday to a nervous 
person ; but I must preface m}'' story by telling you that 
I was quitte pour la peur, and that the hero of my tale 
is doing perfectly well. As I was turning into Berkeley 
Square I met four soldiers carrying a litter covered 
with a sheet. I asked Samuel what it was. He said 
they were carrying a dead man home. I tried to avoid 
it, but the people got round me and I was obliged to 
stop whilst they passed quite close to me. I asked one 
of the crowd how it had happened and he said he had 
been squeezed by a mob in Pall Mall. A sort of ner- 
vous horror made me scarcely able to get on, when 
I saw Granville Somerset galloping up to me. He 
said, ' You must have seen Worcester.' ' No.' ' You 
must, they were taking him this way.' ' What do you 
mean ? ' ' They say he has had a dreadful accident, 
and I am going to my mother.' I leave you to imagine 
with what feehngs I almost ran to Brook Street. Here 
I found the lobby full of soldiers and servants, the men 
standing by the litter, and the Duke of Beaufort above, 
leaning his arms and head on the banisters. To end 
my story, they found him on examination only stunned, 
and severely bruised, but not dangerously hurt. I staid 

^ Father of the writer of the Journal. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 163 

whilst they shaved and probed the head. He had been 
bled on the spot eighteen ounces by a surgeon who 
fortunately passed at the time. My first account was 
incorrect. His horse took fright, ran away and threw 
him out of his gig against a door-post. Adieu, cheris- 
sime sceur. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 24, 1820. 
Lady Harrowby says truth lies nowhere, not even 
at the bottom of a well. I will give you an idea of the 
difficulty of forming opinions from what one hears. I 
sat at dinner between Lord Holland and Lord John 
Eussell. The former told me that the evidence of the 
new witness, Paturgo, has been most favourable to 
the Queen's interest, Lord John that it had made 
decidedly against her. The fact is that he disproved 
part of my jockey's (as the mob call him), my eye's (as 
the punsters call him) evidence, but at the same time 
gave such conclusive details of his own, with such a 
stamp of truth and with such perfect carelessness whether 
his testimony made for or against, that it is agreed he 
has established the case as far as familiarity goes. But 
it remains to be seen what effect his having disproved 
the former evidence in two or three cases may have. 
The dinner was pleasant, Lady Holland radiant. Lord 
Holland gayer and happier even than usual, Henry 
putting in his petit mot very well. Mr. Tierney a love, 
Lady Gwydir impressive. Monsieur de Coigny elegant, 
ugly and, it is said, a bore, Duke Johnny ^ and Lord 
Albemarle very sprack, Johnny Russell smiling be- 
cause he has made a little book, ' Sketches of Life and 
Manners by a Gentleman who has left his Lodgings.' 
They say it is good. After dinner there was a good 

' Duke of Bedford. 

M 2 



164 LETTERS OF PIAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

deal of talk, but small according to Lady Morley, and I 
do not remember a word of it. 

I went to Lady Worcester in the morning. He is 
going on well. I found Lady Jersey, her face all drawn 
into strong lines and fifteen years older. She takes on 
sadly about the Queen and cries real tears all the time 
she is talking. Her Majesty is not so low. They say 
that when she withdraws to the room prepared for her, 
she talks incessantly and bursts out into such intem- 
perate fits of laughter that the people with her are in 
an agony lest she should be heard in the House. 

The Duke of Wellington is at home to-night, but 
soirees would bring late hours and destroy what I 
really do enjoy — very early rising and breakfast and 
several uninterrupted hours for writing and reading. 
But the truth is I pine for Wherstead. 

To Lady G. Morpeth 

London : Aiigust 25, 1820. 

After I had written yesterday morning I walked to 
Lord Worcester's and found them quite easy about him, 
though still confined to his bed in a dark room. I 
then walked with GranviUe in the fashionable bit of 
Hyde Park. There I met Lady Carohne Macdonald and 
her sister walking, and the Earl shortly after, his very 
horse looking shy, prowHng about ; Lady Charlotte 
Greville, nervous and bilious, perched upon a war- 
horse, heading a detachment of girls with their respec- 
tive dandies and then a mixture of Tierney, Dowager 
Lansdowne, fye-fyes, and venerable peers. 

The morning's work has been an examination of the 
captain of the polacca, who confirmed the evidence of 
the mate and added some strong facts, and the beginning 
of the evidence of the cook, an assassin-looking man, 
whom they say they could not look at without shuddering. 
Their noble minds are much occupied with a magnificent 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 165 

luncheon Lord Gwydir gives every day in his room 
adjoining the House, and much of their discourse is of 
salmon pies and cucumber sandwiches. They all seem 
worn, as a blackguard of the mob seems to think, who, 
being found asleep under a lamp-post, said, ' Leave me 
alone, I'm tired — tired as a peer.' Denman went into 
the Queen the day he spoke with his wig in his hand, 
begging her to excuse him on account of the heat and 
fatigue. ' I do not know what to say, my good Mr. 
Denman. "Will it not be construed into improper fami- 
liarity ? ' 

I received •&. note from the Duke of Wellington, so 
kind and so pressing that I had nothing for it but to 
set off for Apsley House. I certainly never was at so 
dull an affair. The different Embassies in a circle, like 
a Court. Frank Eussell and Mr. Standish the only men 
I knew. Lady Lonsdale, with her eyes and mouth closed, 
stepping about like a somnambule, Frederick Bentinck 
and Lady Mary Lowther,^ the only thing to spy at. 

Mr. Wilmot leaves town to-morrow, and we shall 
miss his intarissahle gaiety and good-humour very much. 

I send you a list of new books. Chalmers' sermon, 
preached after the disturbances in Glasgow, very good. 

' Sketches of Life and Manners,' clever and enter- 
taining, supposed to be by Lord John. 

' Nouvelles Lettres de Madame de I'Espinasse.' 

' Mdlle. de Tournon, Eoman,' by Mme. de Souza. 

' Lettres a Monsieur Malthus par Jean Baptiste Say, 
sur differents sujets d'economie politique.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 26, 1820. 

The fashionables go about begging for soirees, hke 
beggars for bread. Hart is enthusiastically cheered by 
the mob twice a day on his way to and from Chiswick. 

' They were married on September 16. 



166 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

They ask Lord Holland for news, on account of his 
good-humoured communicative countenance I suppose. 
They hiss the Duke of Wellington, Lord Anglesey, who 
makes them speeches about his duty, and the Bishops. 

Lord Worcester is much better. I have but one 
anecdote for you. Granville asked Lord Clare who a 
young man was he saw in the House. He told him 
Lord Sondes, of whom all he knew was that when un- 
dergoing an examination in English history at Oxford 
he was asked who Jane Shore was, and he answered 
♦ The Maid of Orleans.' 

I called on Lady Mary Lowther. She was very 
agreeable, and her look of conceit and triumph quite 
vanished. It must be a painful check to high opinion 
of oneself to be going to marry Lord Frederick. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 27, 1820. 

To-day I have been at church with the Duchess, and 
in Kensington Gardens with GranviUe. I have seen 
no one else and heard nothing. 

The Queen said to Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt, ' I begin 
to believe your people as fickle as j^our climate,' and 
Mr. Standish heard three of the most blackguard- 
looking men in the mob say, ' Well, I think she is done 
for now.' On the other hand, I heard Granville say 
yesterday, ' I don't see our way out of this.' 

I have just come up from dining with the two very 
young Lords. I declare, dear Lady Morpeth, I think 
these thoughtless young creatures wish her to be ac- 
quitted. At least they say that if she is, there will be 
an illumination, that she wiU try to have a Court, fail 
and go abroad, and that it will be the deuce and aU if 
the bill is passed in the House of Lords and thrown out 
in the House of Commons, which is what Lord Grey 
says will happen. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 167 

Monday. — I went to Lady Harrowby after I had 
written and found there Lady Charlotte Greville, who 
told me a story which woke me en sursaut several 
times in the night, and which I afterwards "heard was 
true. An accoucheur who lives in Argyle Street was 
woke the night before last by a ringing at his door-beU. 
On opening the door he was stabbed in three places, 
his house plundered and then burnt ; there is nothing 
remaining but the wall. One man is taken and con- 
fesses to be one of a gang of fifteen who are going 
about amusing themselves in this manner. 

Lady Harrowby is violent against the Queen, certain 
of her being condemned — onta eterna, if she is not. 

Where do you think I am going ? To sit at Cleve- 
land House with the Duchesses of Kent and Gloucester, 
Princesses Augusta and Sophia. And this all because 
I cannot say no when confronted by the person who 
asks me. 

Somebody said yesterday that the proof of our safety 
is the dulness that is come over us all. Je mennuie, elle 
s'ennuie. Us s'ennuient, in short nous nous ennuyons. 

Life is fear in some shape or other, and despair of 
ever being easy should make one so. A mad dog went 
pleasuring up and down St. James's Street the other day ; 
a hornet flew into my window yesterday ; Granville 
went in a boat from the House of Lords to Child's, 
and was nearly upset by a man unable to guide his 
sailing vessel; Newhouse left a hot pan of coals last 
night in the dressing-room, which was luckily dis- 
covered after it had burnt a large hole in the floor, just 
as it was about to blaze ; Lady Louisa Thynne was 
thrown from her horse last week ; Mr. Quintin Dick has 
just been thrown out of his gig and nearly kiUed ; a 
large rat came just behind Lady Harrowby's ear as we 
were wrangling about the Queen last night. God bless 
you, dearest. 



168 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 29, 1820. 

I have been doing my duty, reading the debate. 
I suppose it would not be easy to find an act of that 
sort so devoid of pleasure. The Lords seem to me to 
flounder deeper and deeper, and never was there a 
marche so emhrouilUe, so unsatisfactory, so intermin- 
able. You will see that Copley attacked Brougham, 
whom he affects to despise as not being what they call 
a close lawyer. Brougham flew into a passion, was 
flippant and insolent, and uttered the most unjustifiable 
falsehoods as to the conduct of government. This 
gave Lord Liverpool an opportunity of stating on his 
honour flat contradictions to the assertions of the 
learned counsel. 

The mob direct all their violence against the Duke 
of Wellington. They tried yesterday to pull him ofl" 
his horse. The police interfered and some of the mob 
were knocked down, some hurt in the struggle. 

What an extraordinary man Brougham is ! How do 
you think he was occupied the greatest part of Sunday 
morning ? Playing at leap-frog with Duncannon's chil- 
dren at Eoehampton. They say the Queen looks cross 
and pale, is blooded every morning before she comes 
to town and scarcely returns the bows made to her as 
she passes. 

I am happy to tell you that the accoucheur is 
strongly supposed to have told a lie and burnt his own 
house ; one rogue is better than fifteen. 

I have almost forgot to talk of my royal morning. 
I spent two hours at Cleveland House with the Duchess 
of Gloucester, an amiable and good soul, who talks of 
Trimmer and Mr. Hodson ; the Duchess of Clarence, ugly 
with a good tournure and manner ; the Duchess of Kent, 
very pleasing indeed and raving of her baby. ' C'est 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 169 

mon bonheur, mes delices, mon existence. C'est 
I'image du feu roi.' Think of the baby. They say it 
is le Eoi George in petticoats, so fat it can scarcely 
waddle. Augusta, good-humoured and jolly, stuffing 
filets de sole and veal cutlets, and Sophia very clever 
and agreeable. I had to go with each of them the 
visual course. ' How many children has Lady Georgiana 
Morpeth ? ' ' Eleven, ma'am.' ' God bless my soul, you 
don't say so, it seems but yesterday,' etc. They all 
seem to doat on Lady Stafford, and I have no doubt 
think her the most exemplary of women. 

Lord Bathurst, when asked what course he thinks 
it will be best to pursue, rolls himself about and says, 
' Entirely a matter of taste.' I think this must have 
been made for him, as he and the Ministers I have seen 
look not at all in a jocose mood. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 30, 1820. 

Granville says that Lord Erskine's motion was more 
hostile to the Queen than Lord Liverpool's. The result is 
that Brougham may ask what he pleases and as he pleases. 

I went yesterday to Lady Cowper's, and found Lady 
Holland the only really undisputed monarchy in Europe, 
sitting in a corner, throne and footstool, courtiers 
and dames d'honneur, all dans les regies. Lady Jersey 
quite insane, a tear in either eye. I irritated her 
violently by an opinion, given incautiously I own. 
When the Queen's counsel walked into the room, I 
ventured to say that he looked ugly, incited perhaps by 
hearing MiUy Cowper exclaim, ' Dear me, what a fright ! ' 
' Good God, I think him at times quite beautiful ! ' She 
then, seconded by Lord Auckland, poured forth a voUey 
of nonsense. I kept my temper till Agar Ellis chimed in 
with them. I concentrated all my emotions in an attack 
upon him. He only laughed, but Silence got up and 



170 LETTEKS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVIIXE 1820 

walked off. Lady came into the room, looking 

more ridiculous than ever. She has grown enormous, 
with a red face, and has taken to make odd grimaces^ 
I said to Luttrel that it was a pity. She had improved 
in her look and manner, and now it was worse than ever. 
' Yes,' he said, ' with people in general it is reculer pour 
mieux sauter, with her sauter pour mieux reculer.' 

One end of the room was black with Whigs, Allen, 
Brougham, etc., quite distinct from the fashionables. 
The ottoman was occupied by Lady Harrowby, Messrs. 
Standish, Montagu, and Eussell. I took up a sort of 
middle position with Lad}^ King, Lord Cowper, Messrs. 
Luttrel and Ellis. 

I am glad that your opinion of Govero improves. 
He is all you say of him, and your one criticism, the 
justice of which I admit, does not balance his great 
merits. And after all, as his little pretensions are 
without boasting, envy, or any one bad feeling, it is 
but the sort of thing which makes Charles Howard, 
Granville, L. Gower, and a few more such distinguished 
characters, look conscious the first time they appear in 
breeches. 

Brougham told Granville during yesterday's debate 
that he did not care one farthing which way it was 
decided. That the whole thing was as if, when a house 
was afire. Lord Erskine was to step forward and civilly 
ask permission to pour one small bucket of oil upon it. 

Addio, carissima. Everybody says it cannot last a 
week longer, and then Wherstead, the chicks, and a 
portion of sea air. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : August 31, 1820. 

MUe. Demont is very smart and shrewd, but she 
is to have two more days' cross-examination and we 
shall know more about her. 



1820 ' TO LADY G. MORPETH 171 

We had yesterday an uncommonly pleasant dinner. 
Lady Harrowby and Messrs. Ward, Ellis, and Montagu. 
The first course was taken up with Lord ClanwiUiam, 
a dispute whether his having been seen yesterday 
morning, leaning out of his window without a neck- 
cloth and with his shirt open, was a proof of personal 
vanity or not. Mr. Montagu began the subject by 
saying that his sight was so good that he can see from 
one end of the House of Lords to another if the said 
Lord ClanwiUiam had shaved himself or not. Mr. 
Ward said this proved nothing, for one elegant watch- 
ing another would have his perceptions keener, that 
jalousie de metier would make each particular hair a 
study, and consequently more distinct to the naked 
eye. He then gave a droll description of himself as 
old and fairly yellowed out of the service. 

Granville is not sure whether he shall vote or not. 
Lord Auckland (George Barnwell as he is called, and he 
does look like a penitent apprentice) exasperates me 
with his violence. Somebody said the only reason he 
wished for a revolution was the hope of seeing Lord 
A. sweep- the streets. Sir Eobert Wilson would admire 
it. He says he can bear anything but those nothing- 
arians. The word is a good one. 

There is a line taken by some women in London 
which I hope is not necessary to our reputation. Lady 
Derby is at the head of it, as if there were no such 
things as Queens and newspapers. A sort of ' anon ' 
when they are asked how the business is going on. 
Mr. Wilmot writes me word that a distinguished female 
in Staffordshire says : ' For my part I know nothing 
about it. I am aware that there are such people as 
Bergami and Eicordo, and that is enough for me.' 



172 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE' 1820 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 1, 1820. 

Miss Trimmer was with me yesterday. I took her a 
royal and loyal junket, to leave my name with all the 
princesses. Do you not see her look of calm approba- 
tion during our anti-radical progress ? 

They say Mile. Demont has added less than was 
expected, but confirmed a great deal, that she is very 
sharp and shrewd and stands Brougham's cross-examin- 
ing countenance, which is on her all the time, without 
flinching. 

Granville laughs at me so much for all the things I 
tell you, yet, in spite of my knowing he will ask me, 
' Did you write that to G. ? ' and the ridicule that will 
ensue, I will tell you that Lord GlengalP asked Mr. 
Eaikes if he was going to a grand masquerade as 
Phoebus, ' Yes, if you will go as my lyre.' I think this 
comical enough. 

In the enthusiasm shewn by the mob for the Queen, 
they give amusing proofs of the refinement of their 
ideas and the measure of her popularity. They call 
after Billy Austin, 'God bless you and your mother,' 
and call fruit about St. James's Square, crying Bergami 
pears and Caroline apples. They say she is getting 
dreadfully bored, and dying to go to Eamsgate. 

Lady Conyngham is getting much abused, having 
been seen driving about in a carriage without arms 
and the royal undress livery. It is not true that she 
has been living aU this time at the cottage. The King 
is reported to be getting terribly nervous and irritable. 
Mr. Montagu told us at dinner the other day that his 
two brothers met the King as they were riding through 
the park at Windsor ; that the next day an order was 
issued forbidding any one to enter it. Mr. Ward de- 

^ Mr. Baiies was very ugly and Lord Glengall extremely inaccurate. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 173 

fended the King warmly, saying in a contemptuous 
tone that it would be very hard if he might not have 
one spot in his dominions from which he might exclude 
a Mr. Henry This and a Mr. John That. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 2, 1820. 

Mile. Demont was damaged by yesterday's exami- 
nation. Her candour in avowing that she left the 
Queen's service for having been detected in a falsehood 
is said to have disguised the fact of having robbed her. 
Lord Kenyon was held down from getting up to ask 
her if she thought the Queen mad ; but it is said he 
is to put his question to-day in a milder form — if she 
had ever any reason to doubt her being in the perfect 
possession' of her faculties. The Lords are all tired 
and suffocated, some ill, Lords Wellesley and Hard- 
wicke among the number. Lord Portsmouth takes to 
the late but desirable task of strengthening his mind. 
Granville, anxious to ascertain the nature of his studies, 
looked over his shoulder and saw he was deep in the 
list of fairs in the Eed Book. 

The Staffords, the Archbishop, and Lord Morley 
dined here. Upon Granville talking in a moderate 
strain and saying he had doubts as to the result. Lord 
Stafford flew into a fury. Such language was very 
well for the immoral school, but did not do for the 
moral one, that even Cobbett was deserting the Queen, 
that she would soon have no champion but Granville. 
He sat in the House of Lords as a judge, and judge he 
would. The Archbishop is much calmer ; he will not 
vote without a clause against divorce. They are all 
agreed that the Attorney-General has done incalculable 
mischief, that Brougham is the Queen's Attorney- 
General, but he is the Queen's man. 

To-day we dine at Chiswick, and you shall have 



174 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

an account of it, of a morning junket to hear Mr. 
Eeynell preach at Kensington Church and a dinner 
to-morrow at Cleveland House. The two last heads do 
not promise much amusement. 

I heard to-day from Mr. Wilmot, riding with the 
Master Wilmots, ' reading, pondering, and prospering.' 
He says he had just questioned an apothecary, whom he 
crossed on his round of death, as to the change, if any, 
produced on the StaiFordshire minds by the evidence, 
and that he says it has produced a salutary one, but he 
also says he heard one countryman say to another : 
' Now only listen to me. They wanted to give her fifty 
thousand pounds, and she would not take it. Does 
that not prove she is a vartuous woman ? ' ' Aye, God 
bless her, so it does.' They then shook hands, and 
drank porter upon the strength of it. 

Few birds and standing corn will be calming news 
for Granville. Bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 3, 1820. 

Mile. Demont turns out to be as clever and good- 
for-nothing as it is possible to be. She evades all 
attempts to make her commit herself. Facts are 
against her, but nothing that her own intelligence 
and presence of mind cannot save her from. 

I have been looking over Granville, who is writing 
to Mr. Canning, and there I spy, progress slow, result 
uncertain, not sufficient evidence to carry the bill 
through the House of Commons. The Bishops will 
insist upon the divorce clause being left out. This 
would reconcile the saints in the other House, but the 
majority would be for her, not on the ground of her 
popularity, but of his unpopularity. The answer to 
' Is she bad ? ' is, ' He is as bad ' in the mouths of the 
country gentlemen. The Crown lawyers have conducted 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 175 

the business infamously, letting Brougham, etc., go on 
without interruption when they were irregular and 
insolent in their proceedings, stopping and interfering 
with them when there was no occasion for it. 

These are the heads of his lordship's letter, and 
mine having no head at aU, I have ventured to avail 
myself of them. 

At Cleveland House, where I did not feel equal to 
go, there were only Lord Morley, the Archbishop and 
his son Henry, an evident Queenite. Lord Stafford, 
upon Lord Morley giving him some answer he did not 
approve of, said it was wonderful what arguments fools 
will make use of. 

You must not expect such long affairs, dearest Sis., 
when the trial is over. I shall return to note-paper 
and a list of the game. 

The Archbishop is happier than the happy. Lady 
Stafford drives him about in her barouche to air him 
after the House. He continues not to squabble with 
the Marquis, as he says he always rows ashore when 
he sees the storm gathering. A prudent plan in all 
cases, and I recommend the same course to Granville. 

Addio, carissima sorella. I have delightful accounts 
of the chicks. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 4, 1820. 

Hart came to see me on my return from a Dowager 
drive. He was charmed with his Chiswick, says Lady 
Jersey was very amiable when she forgot, as she fre- 
quently did, her despair about the Queen. Granville 
has been riding in the Park with the said Countess 
and Mr. Tierney. They met the Marylebone dames re- 
turning from their address, covered with feathers and 
white cockades, escorted by the mob. Silence made 
the welkin ring with her admiration of them. It was 



17G LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

refreshing and delightful to see such feelings in the 
country. Yes, Tierney said, one feels for the first time 
proud of being an Englishman ! She took it good- 
humouredly, only laughed and said nobody but herself 
thought properly on the subject. Tierney told Gran- 
ville afterwards that he was more and more convinced 
that the Queen is mad. It is said that to-day's evidence 
has been more against her than any other day. 

Madame de Lieven came to me at nine, and was 

very agreeable. Lord Clanwilliam and had 

been with her, she folle de lui, and he giving into 
it. ' Ma chere, elle est une coquine pire que votre 
Eeine.' 

Madame de Lieven gave me a very droll account of 
a trick they played Lord Clanwilliam at Camden Place, 
the whole company in the plot. He must be very good- 
natured to have borne being joue in his most weak 
point, et aux yeux de sa belle. When he arrived, 
Neumann took him aside. 'Mon cher, j'ai eu une aven- 
ture unique. Je viens de rencontrer une jeune per- 
sonne, seule sur le grand chemin, charmante, comme il 
faut, de la tournure la plus elegante, qui me dit qu'elle 
a une affaire de la plus grande importance h. me com- 
muniquer, et me donne rendez-vous pour demain matin 
k onze heures, a I'entree du petit bois k un quart 
d'heure de la maig'on.' Thereupon Lord C, all anxiety 
and eagerness, implores Neumann to let him go with 
him. He stoutly refuses, enjoins secrecy, and they 
return to la societe. The next morning, Neumann 
hastily swallows his breakfast and disappears. Lord C. 
sits upon thorns. Mme. de Lieven proposes a walk, 
they set out ; elle sachemine vers le petit hois. Lord C. 
tries to detourner her, complains of dust, heat, fatigue. 
At last they perceive at a distance une demoiselle avec 
son cavalier walking in one of the alleys. Madame de 
L. says she must see who they are. Lord C. urges her 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 177 

not; the rudeness, the indiscretion. She persists. LordC, 
pousse a bout, says, 'Eh bien, comme il vous semble, 
mais je vous avertis que c'est Neumann: une jeune dame 
lui a donne rendez-vous ici.' The Lievens aiFect 
astonishment, anger : ' II aurait pu mieux choisir son 
terrain,' and return home. Lord C, having landed 
them, flies to the petit hois, where he finds Neumann 
et sa belle, a thick veil down, beautiful dark eyes, 
tres piquante, large feet mal chausses, but on the 
whole very admirable. He lays himself out to fascinate 
her, comphments, exerts all the powers of his under- 
standing, ofiers to teach her German. She gives her 
direction, and the knights errant return home. The 
Lievens receive Neumann with the most chilhng cold- 
ness. Lord C. in an agony implores them not to resent 
what seems to him so innocent, speaks to the Comte 
apart, and at last goes to Neumann and says, ' J'ai fait 
la plus grande vilenie du monde : je vous ai trahi, les 
Lievens sont indignes ; je me livre k vous. Dites, que 
voulez-vous que je fasse pour reparer cette sottise ? ' 
Neumann, hurt but benignant, forgives him, and Lord C. 
goes into the drawing-room, and begins writing ('pour 
ne pas perdre son temps ') a note to la belle inconnue. 
The door opens, he is too busy to look round, some- 
body is at his elbow. He looks up, he sees la de- 
moiselle still veiled, leaning on Madame de Lieven's arm. 
She says his look was impayahle. He did not know 
whether he was to apologise, to laugh, to speak, or to 
run out of the room. At length the demoiselle modestly 
raises her veil, and Paul Lieven presents himself to the 
bewildered Earl. He took it in the best part, laughed 
at himself with the best grace, encouraged Neumann to 
describe the scene in the petit bois. 

I am not sure of the genre, but it must have been 
very amusing. God bless you, my dearest. 

VOL. I. X 



178 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUiSfTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 5, 1820. 

Yesterday's evidence was dull and neither one way 
or the other. The Lords say they never were so bored 
and consequently exhausted. It is true that Lady 
Harrowby is to be called. The object is to prove the 
King's having forbidden his Ministers to let their wives 
associate with her. Ministers are much charmed with 
the last two days, so much so that I heard the Duke 
of Wellington say to Madame de Lieven, complaining 
of his fatigue, ' Mais, vous savez, les grands succes 
fatiguent autant que les grands revers.' 

My visit to Brentford was bracing at ten o'clock in 
an open carriage. Miss Trimmer does not know where 
to shelter her morality, and her comments are for the 
most part groans. She told me, in answer to me as to 
my surprise at English people not being staggered by 
some of the facts that have come out, that their firm 
belief is that the King had sent a number of people for 
the purpose of assassinating her, and that Bergami was 
her only sure and tried protector, and that conse- 
quently if he had been half an hour absent from her, she 
would have been murdered. They are now keeping up 
the same impression by Alderman Wood and his sons 
actually walking up and down before Brandenburgh 
House armed with pistols and telling the people that 
without such precautions she would not be safe an 
hour. Miss Trimmer's brother had the curiosity to 
enquire of the scavenger of Paddington if- his wife had 
been up with an address. Yes, he said, he was against 
it, but she would go, and that she kissed the Queen's 
hand several times. Another woman on the top of a 
stage-coach, a better sort of housemaid, told him she 
had been, and that it was a very gay sight. She was 
not tired or faint, for plenty of gin and gingerbread 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH ]79 

was sold on the lawn. A man came out and read some- 
thing, she could not say exactly what it was, all she 
knew was that it was exceedingly improper. So much 
for the present Court of Her Majesty. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 6, 1820. 

You have been two days without writing. Lady 
Morpeth. I only mention the fact. 

Sardi, the courier, has stated the strongest facts of 
all, but Trimmer and the young lords say it is of no 
use what is stated when people are resolved not to 
believe the staters. Lord Morley says nothing will 
induce him to vote for the bill if it comes to a division 
now, and I see both he and G. are anxious to have the 
thing knocked up in the Upper House. They think 
that without the divorce clause the proceeding is 
nonsense, with it quite unallowable. Ministers hold a 
different language. ' What is to be proved if this i.s 
not ? What would you have more, no two witnesses 
contradicting each other ? The Queen, the disgrace of 
her sex. How can anyone pretending to morality, 
decency,' etc. The fallacy of all this is that what we 
want is not belief, but proof; witnesses, but credible ones 
— ten Englishmen instead of a hundred Italians. John 
Bull looks upon them as so many bugs and frogs, and 
there is a Lieutenant Flynne coming on her side, who 
will be their demi-god. The real grievance is its having 
become, as CA'^erything does so much in England, a 
violent party question. Granville says there is a Minis- 
terial mountain headed by Lord EUenborough, as well 
as an Opposition one, and that both have been, and are, 
absurd beyond measure. 

You will see we are coming to an end, though still 
unsatisfactory and tedious. Lord Holland says he is so 
tired of the subject that he shall go and live in Hatton 

>; -2 



180 LETTERS OF HAREIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

Garden with the witnesses, who, it appears, in their 
evidence do not talk of the Queen. They are debating 
to-day whether there may be a pause to give time for 
the arrival of the Lugano witnesses. I hear it certainly 
will not be granted, in which case we shall be off on 
Monday. 

William de Eos has just been here. He is very 
clever and agreeable and has great originality in his 
ideas. He found me spying at the eclipse, and amused 
me by saying he hates practical jokes, but most of all 
those played by the sun and moon, there is no knowing 
how they may turn out. 

I have had a letter from Mr. Wilmot. He says 
Mr. Parish is as well as the incubus of radicalism will 
allow him to be, and ' God bless the dragoons, I love 
them man and horse,' may be taken as one of those 
specimens of pure Tory benevolence in which he 
abounds. 

The judges say it is impossible to wait. The Soli- 
citor-General is summing up, and they say it wiU be 
over to-morrow. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : September 15, 1820. 

I cannot endure the thoughts of Monday fortnight. 
I am so happy here. My health also seems to profit 
by every mouthful of air, and the misfortune is that 
there is scarcely anything in London to weigh against 
all I enjoy here. Breakfast by candlelight in a fog, 
no interest strong enough to make society piquant, 
no time for air and exercise, away from my chicks. I 
declare, I believe the only advantage is the being able 
to write you letters that are unlike those I send from 
hence. 

Nos messieurs are very agreeable. I see nothing 
of them in the morning, in the evening they are very 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 181 

gay and conversable, and after tea and an hour's dis- 
cussion they play at whist. P. Byng's conversation is 
all in the style of a word to the wise : let him heed who 
hears, how it is better to buy tea at the India House in 
chests, silks to be had in the Eegent Circus as good as 
French ones for six shillings a yard, French silks stain, 
English ones do not. Mr. Montagu is quite another 
paire de manchettes. He makes us live assemblies over 
again. ' There is a peer who makes a great sensation, a 
Lord Duncan. He seemed to me to be making up to 
Lady Georgiana Bathurst, as also Lord EUenborough, 
who is evidently in search of a wife.' 

I have a letter from Neumann to-day. He says : 
'Le pauvre Pahnella,^ dont je viens de recevoir des 
nouvelles, se trouve dans une terrible position, c'est-k- 
dire entre son penchant pour les idees liberales et son 
devoir d'obeissance passive pour son roi ; le dernier a 
cependant prevalu, et il devait partir incessamment pour 
le Bresil afin d'ouvrir les yeux de son maitre.' 

We are all at ' The Abbot.' I have only read the first 
volume. I delight in even the faults of his novels, 
' Ivanhoe ' excepted. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : October 5, 1820. 

There never was anything like the admiration 
excited by Brougham's speech. Lord Harrowby, G. 
Somerset, Mr. Montagu, and Granville told me it was 
in eloquence, abiUty, and judicious management beyond 
almost anything they ever heard. The House seemed 
electrified. They bet high at Brooks's that the bill wiU 
be thrown out in the House of Lords. Granville fears 
not. He thinks it would be much the best thing for 

' A Portuguese statesman, who had lived some time in England. He 
was a Liberal, and contributed to the establishment of the throne of Dona 
Maria. He was twice President of the Council, a post he occupied at the 
time of his death in 1850. 



182 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

the country. Mr. Standisli told me he went into Lord 
Gwydir's room after Brougham's speech and found him 
looking quite exhausted, but talking and cutting his 
jokes just as if he had been the only person there 
who had not been exerting himself. Williams, they 
say, is clever and a good lawyer, but full of bad taste 
and law terms, sounding particularly ill coming after 
Brougham. 

I am happy to hear we shall see George. Tell him 
we can lodge and feed him. Let me know his day and 
his room shall be ready. 

I have had a long and entertaining letter from Mr. 
Sneyd. I am sorry that he says, ' Is this letter to your 
taste, weak and serious like Lord John Eussell's book.' 
He tells me, ' I met a masked procession in Newcastle- 
under-Lyme to-day. A mockery, as it appeared upon 
enquiry, after the manner of the Abbot of Unreason, 
of the election of a new Mayor, that recently chosen 
dignitary being a Wilmotite, and consequently highly 
unpopular. Upon the right hand of his travestied 
representative appeared a Cardinal in full canonicals. 
I asked the meaning. " Why, to be sure, Wilmot is a 
papist, and his Mayor must have a popish chaplain, you 
know." ' This taste for waggery was unknown to the 
worthy burgesses of Newcastle under the Trentham and 
BufTy dynasties. Poor Wilmot ! 

'Twas thine own genius gave the final blow 
And help'd to plant the wound that lay thee low. 

I am expecting Granville every moment with tidings 
of to-day's work. 

Only a moment. Lady Charlotte Lyndsay did it 
well. The Attorney-General very offensive in his 
manner to her. To-day for the Queen, as far as it 
goes. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 183 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : October 6, 1820. 

After I despatched my letter yesterday, I walked in 
Hyde Park with Granville. We met the Argylls, fat 
and lazy, and Mr. Ward, closely buttoned up in a long 
shabby redingote, mounted on a wretched pony, asking 
news as if he had been living in another world. I do 
not believe Brougham's success is ever music to his 
ears, and he left him quite out in his conversation upon 
the state of things. 

Madame de Lieven came at half-past nine, outree 
with England for refusing to take a part in this new 
dish of Continental troubles.^ Agar joined us, and I felt 
quite vexed at seeing him look so ill and suffering. 
Mrs. Lamb came to us, also in a poor way. It is won- 
derful, when one enquires into the stomachs of one's 
acquaintances, how little domestic happiness is to be 
found in any of them. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : October 7, 1820. 

Do you know the agony and bustle of a London 
morning ? In my bedgown, Mr. Wihnot having dropped 
in like a bomb into our early breakfast, on his knees 
for news till eleven, when young Scanner, sixty at least, 
arrived and kept me till twelve. Mrs. Wyatt tapping 
at the door with caps and bodies, Mrs. Villiers with all 
George Vilhers' letters from Eussia to read to me. 
And now see me, when my destined day is half done, 
stiU in my bedgown, with the carriage harnessing for 
Chiswick. 

Yesterday was even triumphant for the Queen. 

I Eevolutionary movements in Naples, Spain, and Portugal were going 
on, a state of insurrection in Turkey, and Greece the scene of outrages 
and butcheries. 



184 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

' Viva Eegina,' with accompaniment and a full band. 
Sir William and Keppel Craven, God help their souls, 
giving the most entire and cordial testimony in her 
favour, confuting much of the previous evidence 
against her. 

I dined at Cleveland House. Lord Stafford, like 
the noble Leonatus, outre, bursting with rage, for there 
is nothing else for it. The Archbishop sat on the 
other side of me. He looks upon the thing as over, 
and says that it is better the bill should be thrown out, 
with the moral conviction in the higher orders that she 
is guilty, than carried with the moral conviction in the 
lower orders that she is innocent. Very sensible, and 
my own view of the case. 

Mr. Wilmot is furious, and we suspect him of an 
early preparation to rat. Ministers are in a nice kettle 
of fish, to be sure. They have still hopes of Mile. 
Demont, her own maid, breaking down. Lady Jersey 
is in a phrenzy of delight. Lady Harrowby more 
moved than I ever before saw her. 

The Archbishop raves of your daughter Harriet. 
Think of his asking me in a loud voice, before Lord 
Morley, His Grace of Norfolk, Tom Grenville, and 
divers other venerable sparks, if the visit of the Exeter 
'Change elephant to the Chiswick one was one of friend- 
ship or of galanterie ! Tom told a leste story or two. 
In short, the morals and decency of the age are at a 
low pitch. 

Elizabeth looked beautiful, Charlotte good and 
amiable. The husbands seem cordially to despise each 
other. ^ — "^ ~ 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : October 8, 1820. 

I must begin by telling you that George dined here 
upon chicken and partridge, in perfect health and 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 185 

looking better than I ever saw Mm. He is more 
improved in manner and conversation than I can say, 
and, in short, he is a dear, dehghtful creature. 

Hart, Agar, Punch, and Lord Morley came in the 
evening. Our conversation was very sHghtly pohtical. 
Lord Grey's visit to the Queen is the only new event. 
He called, intending only to leave cards, with Mr. 
Lamb ton, Mr. Bennet, and Lady Louisa.^ Her Majesty 
begged them to come in. The men obeyed, leaving 
Lady Louisa in the carriage, a proof of the wish these 
noble Whigs have that their wives and daughters should 
cultivate the acquaintance. 

Madame de Lieven's dinner last night was the great 
subject of discussion. Lady Elizabeth Vernon was 
there, looking beautiful. ' Princesse Esterhazy ^ faisant 
la pluie et le beau temps.' She is to be, Mr. Ellis 
assures us, ' the woman of the year.' Madame Frias,^ 
taking off her gloves, and shewing the company her 
hand and arm, as a man does his snuff-box, and then 
saying, ' Les Espagnoles ont aussi des jolis pieds,' and 
pulling up her petticoats and shewing hers. 

Hart is in a most amiable humour. We dine there 
on Thursday before the drum. You will sympathise 
with me as to a new acquisition he has made, a sweet 
little pet, called an ichneumon, the size of a large rat, 
with a nose like a weasel, so tame flfiart it, springs up 
into one's face, gets into one's plate at "dinner and 
when one drinks tea, runs rapidly up one's back, over 
one's shoulder, and puts its nose into one's cup. Its 
peculiarity is, I believe, a delight in sucking human 
blood. 

The only news I know is that Mrs. Lines is in the 
third heaven, having begun her course * at Devonshire 

' A daughter of Lord Grey and wife of Mr. Lambton, afterwards Lord 
Durham. ^ Austrian Ambassadress. 

' Spanish Ambassadress. * As housekeeper. 



186 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

House. Hart says he feels as if tie was giving orders 
to the Duchess of Gloucester. 

Tuesday. — To-day I perform alone upon a roast 
chicken, and mean to devour ' Kenilworth ' with it. 
There are different opinions. Charles Greville told me 
last night that he did not stir out or go to bed till five 
in the morning the day he begun it. God bless you, 
dearest G. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : October 9, 1820. 

I went to Chiswick. Granville and Hart arrived 
five minutes after me. They had not been doing much. 
The gentlemen's gentlemen and two impudent English- 
men had been examined, and poor Lady Charlotte ^ 
much tormented. To-day Doctor Holland and the 
naval heroes, Hownam and Flynne. I think I observe 
a change of language on both sides — Ministerial people 
less violent, and Lady Jersey and Co. bearing their 
honours meekly. It is said that there is much 
squabbling in the Cabinet. Five times a day I listen 
to the same discussion, whether or not Ministers should 
resign. 

Hart is improving Chiswick, opening and airing it ; 
a few kangaroos, who if affronted wiU rip up anyone 
as soon as look at him, elks, emus, and other pretty 
sportive death-dealers playing about near it. 

Have you seen the very severe, at least the very 
mortifying review of Mr. Luttrel, rather than his book 
in the ' Quarterly ' ? Sogers carries it about under his 
arm as other people do their cocked hats, ejaculating, 
' Poor Luttrel, it's all over with him, he never can look 
up again. He never can stand it, not being blest with 
a particularly good temper.' Mr. Luttrel, however, 
does look up, and is preparing another long poem for 

' Lady Charlotte Lindsay, the daughter of Lord North. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 187 

the press. I have not seen him, but hear he is not 
apparently distressed. They say the article is Gifford's. 
God bless you, my dearest sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : October 14, 1820. 

You do not know the pleasure it is to write to you, 
the happiness it gives me to believe that it is in my 
power to interest and amuse you. 

I cannot understand the state of the case, therefore 
you must excuse my making any comment upon it. 
Lord Holland was in a great passion, as you will see 
in the papers ; very personal in his language to Lord 
Liverpool, so much so that at the end of the day he 
said to two or three people that he regretted very much 
having been so, but was led away by the heat of the 
moment. 

Nobody knows what will happen to-day. The 
alternatives are, a division upon whether the Lords will 
proceed, Brougham's refusing positively to proceed, in 
which case he cannot be compelled. But there will be 
a Ministerial clamour that he is glad of a loophole and 
mistrusts his other witnesses. Of course, as to the 
question of Mr. PoweU having sent Eastelli away, with 
passports granted by Lord Clanwilliam or Mr. Planta, 
there is a decided difference of opinion. Some say it 
must have been a measure, vu the odd reason alleged 
for sending him ; others that it was really done de 
bonne foi, with an understanding that he was to be 
here again by October 2. At all events, it gives an 
impression to the public not to be got rid of, as, even 
if he returns now, they will say he returns prepared, 
which makes the whole difference. 

I do not think there is a person who now believes 
that it will pass the House of Lords. I suppose, how- 
ever, that we shall be at it for nearly ten days longer. 



188 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

What will happen if there is an acquittal Heaven only 
knows. But I think it will be safer than any other 
course. 

I called upon Lady Grantham yesterday. I do not 
think her in spirits, which makes her more pleasing, as 
she looks more interesting and talks much less. She 
told me, but begged me not to repeat it, so do not, that 
Lord Grantham ^ is decidedly against the bill passing 
in the House of Lords. 

They say that one of the Queen's habits, to be 
proved by ocular demonstration every evening, is that 
of excessive drinking. If you dislike to believe this, 
dearest Lady Morpeth, you need not. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 3, 1820. 

The town rings with Lord Lauderdale's speech. 
Great oratorical guns are to be fired to-day. Ministers 
expect, poor loves, a majority of fifty, but you shall 
have politics later in my envelope. Yesterday morning 
Lady Grantham brought me a beautiful ring, a turkey 
stone set in gold with her hair behind. There is no 
describing her kindness to me. She sits crying and 
kissing my hands. I love her for her merits, and 
almost for her faults. She was at home yesterday 
evening to Lady Bath, the sisters and some men. I 
preferred staying in my own den, and was surprised 
there in a state of deshabille, scarcely proper. Madame 
de Lieven, Neumann, Govero, and William Ponsonby. 
We mixed up our politics and were very eloquent and 
agreeable. 

The sun shines and I must go forth. I hope to 
have tidings for you, but Granville says the debate may 
be prolonged, in which case a demain. 

I know nothing of to-day but that the friends of the 

' He voted against the BiU. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 189 

bill are dissatisfied with the Chancellor. Lord Lauder- 
dale was heard to say, ' I wish the devil had him.' 
They thought him too short, and that he omitted so 
many important points of which he might have made 
great use. 

Lord Harewood stuif, Lord Grosvenor ^ a mourir 
de rire about setting suns and faded stars. Lord Grey 
sublime, Lord Liverpool tired. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 9, 1820. 

They are only debating to-day, to-morrow they 
divide. Early on Monday we set out for Wherstead. 
The night before last Mr. Ward came to my soiree 
and was very entertaining. They talked of Italian wit- 
nesses and the want of truth among the Neapolitans. 
He told us the story of one who, being examined as 
to his knowledge of persons concerned in some plot, 
always answered in the affirmative. ' Conoscete Paolo ? ' 
'Si.' ' Conoscete Pietro ? ' 'Si.' ' Conoscete il Concilio 
di Trenta ? ' 'Si, si — piccolo, piuttosto bruno.' 

Last night we went to see ' Twelfth Mght.' It 
is well acted and magnificently got up. Miss Tree 
sang beautifully and looked very pretty in her page's 
dress. Between the acts Lord Castlereagh, who was in 
the King's box, leant out of it to speak to somebody in 
the next. The audience began instantly hissing and 
groaning. He drew back and they were quiet, till the 
words ' To thy defence make what thou canst of it ' 
roused their noble natures again. 

Lady Jersey and the Duchess of Somerset went to- 
gether to Brandenburgh House yesterday. 

' Lord Grosvenor, created Marquis of Westminster in 1831. Grand- 
father of the Duke of Westminster. 



190 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 181'0 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 10, 1820. 

I am waiting most impatiently for news from the 
House. Some expect a majority of twenty, some of 
ten. Lord Clare and Charles Ellis have called here. 
It is delightful to see this last in such good spirits again, 
and if esteem is the measure of one's affection, there 
can be no bound to that he inspires. I think more 
highly of him than of anybody I know, and sometimes 
the cri de mon dme is to live with none but those I can 
respect as much as admire. 

Half-past three. — They divided, a majority of nine 
for the bill, upon which Lord Liverpool withdrew it. 
To-night we shall all stick lights in our windows and 
there will be an end for the moment. Lord Harrowby 
did not vote. His brother the only bishop that voted 
against it. Bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 11, 1820. 

Dearest G., — I can hardly believe in liberty, or that 
I shall really see my darling children on Monday. 

I had a soiree last night : Madame de Lieven, Lady 
Harrowby, Lady Grantham, who proposed herself. 
Lord Clare, Lord John Eussell, Messrs. Montagu and 
Standish. Of course we discussed but one subject. 
Lady Harrowby is aux anges ; she has been for a long 
time dying for them to throw out the bill. Opposition 
ditto, but with the hope that three parts of the ques- 
tion yet remain, and that upon the questions of Liturgy, 
establishment, and money they shall still pousser au 
bout, if not beyond. Lady Harrowby only calls it 
' settling her matters,' and does not allow it will be 
very difficult. The people who are outres are those 
whom Ministers have led on to support the different 
stages and then dragged them through the dirt (that is 



1820 TO LADY G. MOEPETII 191 

their phrase), with having the grace of giving up con- 
fined to themselves. This is awkward, as when Parha- 
ment meets they cannot weather their task without 
warmer and firmer support than ever. 

Lady Stafibrd came to me after it in a stew. Did I 
think Lord Stafford ^ had done right ? — a sort of ' Who's 
afraid ? ' question. She should have voted for, but in 
fact some people say to vote against it is most flatter- 
ing to Ministers, as most likely to keep them in their 
places. I was near crying, ' Bravo.' She is afraid of 
Lord Harrowby wanting to resign, ' some strange 
crotchet, as he is a man of honour and all that sort of 
thing.' She was really better than Farren or Liston. 
God bless you, own dearest Sis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 12, 1820. 

The Ministers found the King in a dreadfully 
nervous and irritable state, so much so that they had 
thought of sending the Archbishop of Canterbury to 
him to calm his mind. He shuts himself up, will 
see nobody, and is having new keys made to all the 
gates, to prevent the neighbourhood having access to 
the park and alentours. 

Madame de Lieven says that Lord Grey's ' fa^on 
de penser est tout k fait noble,' that Tierney has made 
up his mind but would not say another word about it, 
and that Brougham alone seemed all gaiety and ease, 
as if he had nothing to do or think about. Hart 
means to stay a week longer at Chiswick. He will not 
hear of Wherstead. Excuse this shabby letter. 

* He voted against the Bill. 



192 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 
To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : November 13, 1820. 

This is my last London day, and I celebrate it with 
the worst cold I ever had. 

On Saturday we drove down to Chiswick, where 
we found Hart, who will write to you about Hardwicke 
for the beginning of December. If it can be achieved 
what happiness it will be ! The lawn was beautifully 
variegated with an Indian bull and his spouse, and 
goats of all colours and dimensions. I own I think it 
a mercy that one of the kangaroos has just died in 
labour, vu that they hug one to death. 

I returned home and went to see the ' Confede- 
racy,' well acted at Covent Garden. From thence to 
Drury Lane, to the ' Maid and the Magpie. ' Miss Kelly 
was perfect ; but everj^ sentence was interrupted with 
political applications. The Baillie they called the Lord 
Chancellor ; but the activity was nearly confined to 
the galleries. Mrs. Brougham was in Hart's box, 
looking really very handsome. Lord Grey in another, 
recognised and applauded by the audience. We dined 
at Holland House in London. Lady Holland was good- 
humoured and agreeable. Lord Holland as merry as a 
grig, though begging in vain for one glass of Johannis- 
berg. Lord rascal Lauderdale, as he says half his 
letters are directed to him. Brougham next to him, 
whose nose, either from fatigue or triumph, twitches 
twenty times more than ever. He told us he had re- 
ceived an anonymous letter beginning, ' You two-faced 
and rascally Whig ; ' I felt quite distressed and did not 
know how to look. Lady Holland is really outree with 
you for returning to Castle Howard for Christmas, and 
uttered seditious speeches against your Government.^ 
They seem on the best possible terms with Lord Lau- 

' Lord Morpeth. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH . 193 

derdale. Is it the extreme of honesty or t'other thing that 
makes him always hold his ground on every question ? 
I have the following effusion from Silence to Gran- 
ville : 'You never saw anything like the universal joy 
of the country. All the way we came people of every 
rank cheering, and in the towns the most respectable 
persons came to shake hands with Lord Jersey and 
thank him for his vote. The Queen was in every one's 
mouth, in every one's hat, upon every cart, and in 
every house. They drew us through the towns, and 
there was not one person drunk.' Oh, what a journey 
for a Vig ! They propose themselves for the 20th. 
Addio, beloved sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : November 15, 1820. 

We arrived here at six yesterday, and, though I am 
confined to my room with a bad cold, what happiness 
it is ! They are aU as well as possible. Granville, an 
elance little man instead of a perfectly round ball, as I 
expected. The two girls have been with me for the 
last two hours. Georgy is as shrewd as she can stick 
together. Eward like a new shorn lamb, and all so 
happy to have me amongst them again. Then the 
rooms are so airy, the view from my window so pretty. 
And what a comfort it is, for my reasons are not all 
sublime, to have time for a doze, and not to be obliged 
to put one's hair into eighteen papiUotes ! 

The Jerseys come here on Monday. I believe she 
does not want anything but one or two patient listeners. 
They proposed themselves, and I am sure I shall be 
pleased with her when she arrives ; but I would have 
given a great deal to have spent these ten days quite 
alone. 

We go to town on Saturday, the 25th. Granville 
dines with Charles Ellis to meet Mr. Canning, I at 

VOL I. o 



194 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

Madame de Lieven's. On Sunday both of us at Hol- 
land House. On Monday we set out on our travels. 
Addio, carissima sorella. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : November 16, 1820. 

After walking alone through the foggy streets for 
six weeks, you cannot know what it is to me to walk 
here in weather like spring with the darling children. 
This place has certainly a power over my health that 
is quite magical, inasmuch as it acts upon it immedi- 
ately. It is not that I felt ill in London, but heavy, 
languid, and old, and here I grow young again. Gran- 
ville is shooting. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : November 23, 1820. 

It has been a bad day, and the shooters and ourselves 
have all suffered from it. Lady Jersey is good and 
amiable, with a great deal of quickness and intelli- 
gence, mnch more than I gave her credit for. But it 
is a perpetual taking the wrong sow by the ear, and 
at times a parler sans dire that gives me a feeling 
of weariness. To-day from twelve till near four she 
talked to me of the Queen. The room was hot, her 
eagerness and vehemence worthy a better cause, and I 
feel as they say actors do after a fatiguing part, though 
I scarcely spoke ten words. She was perfectly good- 
humoured, though these ten words were to declare my 
unshakeable conviction of the Queen's profligacy. When 
we talk upon morality in general, as desirable for 
subjects instead of Queens, she delights and does me 
good. Her abhorrence of coquetry, freedom from 
offensive vanity, and her singleness of heart, proved by 
her conduct, are all admirable. 

I have hardly any conversation with him. He 



1820 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 195 

seems in good spirits again, and fonder of her than I 
have ever seen him. 

The Queen has been to church and has had the 
Leinsters, Mrs. Darner, Lord Thanet, Duncannon, and a 
good many Italians to dinner. Lord Thanet writes to 
Lady Jersey word that she was in high spirits, very 
amusing, giving accounts of her journeys, which prove 
to him that it was not tender ground. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : December 2, 1820. 

I have kept this morning almost entirely in my room ; 
in the evening there is piquet and I crack jokes with 
Mr. Sneyd. Yesterday he got the print of a sort of 
monkey called the cagoi, with the features of its race, 
but enormous human-looking black eyes. His amuse- 
ment is to declare his conviction that if she had been 
sent over from some great foreign Court, very well 
dressed and called Madame la Comtesse de Cagoi, 
Govero and Lord Clanwilliam would have been a ses 
pattes. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Hardwicke : December 14, 1820. 

Dearest Lady H., — I shall go on writing to you from 
time to time, and remember I do not even wish to be 
payee en retour. It would be a cruel trick to entail 
upon you all the horrors of a correspondence, and if 
about once a fortnight you write me word that you both 
are weU I shall think myself richly repaid. I have 
been so happy here that I feel a degree of unreasonable 
sorrow at going the day after to-morrow. I have had 
the happiness of seeing G. in better healtl; and gayer 
than I almost ever remember her, and my brother has 
been as kind and amiable as possible. We have had 
weather like a fine spring. Granville some good shoot- 

o 2 



196 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

ing, Lord Morpetli some curious old books ; in short 
pleasures suited to all our capacities. Agar Ellis is 
here. He has the most unconquerable sweetness of 
temper, which gives him the power of rising above 
digestion, and to see mind surmounting body always 
gives me a pleasure and respect like what I feel when 
1 see a little dog get the better of a great one. 
My simile is not sublime, but it expresses what I 
mean. 

If anybody asks you why the Queen is like the Bill 
of Pains and Penalties, you must say because they are 
both abandoned. Having furnished you with this easy 
piece of wit, I bid you good-bye. 

' I have read this letter and am much flattered by 
seeing that my wife thinks shooting is the occupation 
alone adapted to my capacity. — Your poor brainless 
brother.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Woburn : December 19, 1820. 

The Duchess has not yet appeared. She has seen 
toutes ces dames, but not me. You know I am not 
touchy, therefore I take the goods the gods provide 
me and swallow the affront with a grateful heart. 

It is very comfortable here, no more nor less. I 
had yesterday mornitg entirely to myself ; at dinner I 
am well placed between Lord Jersey and Punch. In 
the evening the men play at whist or billiards, and 
we sit in the saloon all very well together, but Lady 
"William Eussell is the only one who really likes me. 
Lady Jersey is too absorbed to think who is for or who 
against. She sits netting and raving, and it sometimes 
comes across my mind that she will go out of hers. 
Her countenance is become so stern and political that 
it affects her beauty. She occasionally stands up and 
gesticulates with unfeminine vehemence. Yesterday she 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 197 

seized Lord William by both sides of his coat, I believe 
what is called collaring a man, exclaiming, ' Why should 
we have Germans to reign over us ? ' Jj , , 

This morning I am going with Tavv and the Duke /■( ' ,• 

° DO J-. _ • ft A'fi'.', 

to see a match at tennis between Granville and Lord' 
Jersey against Arthur Upton and F. Ponsonby. 

Addio, dearest loved sister. I think we shall go 
Sunday. Nothing can prevent my whooping and hallow- 
ing all the way to town. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Woburn : December 20, 1820. 

Dearest G.,— Will you tell Mr. Ellis that I do not 
write to him, because you will be able to tell him my 
Woburn news ? 

We are new dealt every day at dinner. Yesterday 
I sat between Lords Thanet and Worcester. The former 
is very agreeable, and we are becoming rather particular. 
Poor Lord Jersey is cut short in all his sports by gout. 
Monsieur de Flahault was the only new personage. His 
singing is enchanting and made yesterday evening more 
agreeable than the former ones. 

The Duchess appeared. She was to me just what I 
wish her to be, uncommonly cold and uncommonly civil. 
Lady Worcester is in great beauty and most amiable, 
Tavy walks a genius ; she has taken up a new role and 
would be an able premier to a female Whig administra- 
tion. Lady William I like better every time 1 see her. 
George Anson is prettily cut out in wood and whiskers, 
pleasing and unaffected in his manners. Punch very 
entertaining, treating the Duke of York as if he was his 
elem. ' Good God, sir, how can your Eoyal Highness 
say such a thing ? ' ' Ah, ah. Well, I'm sure I don't 
know. Well, Punch, well, I'm very sorry.' 

Do not teU Agar I am not very much charmed here. 
I declare I do not know why I am not more. I was 



198 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

very liappy at Teddesley and Blithfield, where I had 
not so much to amuse me. I think very few people as 
agreeable as Lady William. Lady Worcester is im- 
proved beyond anything. She gives herself no airs, 
looks beautiful, sings beautifully and has quite enough 
quickness to add agrement to society. The Duchess 
I do not see. Many of the men I like. I have a de- 
lightful room and find the day too short for all I have 
to do in it. The people I have named are all kinder to 
me, one more than another. Lady Jersey leaves me 
individually alone as to politics. Why, then, do I count 
the days till I can go ? Why do I feel that I shall not 
be able to refrain from screaming for joy when I drive 
off? It is no affront to Woburn. I do justice to its 
comforts, ease, splendour, and society. It is simply a 
strong, unconquerable wish to go, and I am inclined 
to say to everybody with the utmost sincerity, ' Yes, it 
is delightful, only can't I possibly get away ? ' Adieu, 
dearest G. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Bruton Street : December 21, 1820. 

My dearest Lady H., — It is with great regret that I 
find myself here without you, having once had the hope 
of finding you in this large, dark, and foggy town. 

We left Woburn yesterday, having spent there a 
week of as much pleasure as is compatible with seeing 
it end without any regret. The locale is itself a great 
source of enjoyment. There is so much space, so much 
comfort, such luxe and ease. The society generally 
speaking very good, much to amuse, and nothing to 
annoy. Yet at the summing up I said ' content.' I 
believe it was being obliged to dress very smart and 
sitting often at dinner between the Lords Tavistock and 
Worcester. These were my grievances ; my pleasures 
were Lady William's society, as much of Charles Greville 



1820 TO LADY HARROWBY 199 

as shooting and whist allowed, Monsieur de Elahault's 
singing. The Duchess herself is very unwell and 
appeared but four times, only once at dinner, and 
when she did very souffrante and out of spirits. Lady 
Tavistock did the honours with radiant good-humour 
in a succession of dresses that looked as if they came 
out of an old masquerade warehouse. Madame Ester- 
hazy edified us all with her spirits and facilite a vivre ; 
nothing comes amiss to her from a grande passion down 
to hunt the slipper, and be it man or slipper, she puts 
it on or takes it off with the same ease and pleasure. 
Lady Jersey's Queenism was in some degree overlaid 
by the presence of the' Duke of York. It is a pity to 
see what the delirium of party spirit will do in per- 
verting mind and feeling, and political madness is 
the most incurable of all. 

I found London full and busy. I dined yesterday 
at HoUand House with Whigs and lawyers, and to-day 
at Madame de Lieven's, with Decazes and Fagel. 
This morning my room was quite like yours, Nicholas 
rather lengthy about Ministers and rheumatism. Neu- 
mann telling a story of Lady Stuart having turned her 
back upon a Count Trauttmansdorf, whose face hap- 
pens to be as ugly as his name, telling him it was 
for fear her child should be like him, and her paying a 
sum of money the next morning to a woman of the 
name of Marie Branner, of great beauty and celebrity, 
the Harriet Wilson of Vienna, to come and be looked 
at by her for an hour. Granville Vernon talking loud 
and long. Lord ClanwiUiam complaining of the entire 
loss of his spirits, and in rather more buoyant ones 
than any person besides himself is blest with. His 
zest in society consists in perpetually going too near 
the wind, and the satisfaction that people in general 
find in wihhing the race is found by him in running 
out of the course. 



200 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1820 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : December 21, 1820. 

My dearest G., — I had begun a letter to-day, which 
I had not time to finish. The journey to town was 
very bleak, but my joy kept me warm. When I 
arrived I found I had just missed Lord Clanwilham, 
from whom an hour after I received a note, teUing me 
he had come from Cray ^ to see me, and was there again, 
half perished with his ride and quite out of humour. 
We went to dinner at Holland House. Lord Holland, 
in a black velvet cap, tied under his chin with a muslin 
handkerchief, looked a great grig and a great love. 
We had Sir WiUiam Scott, Sergeant Lens, and Mr. 
Warburton, a good-looking, scientific youth, and late 
in the evening Brougham, his hair and beard grown, 
looking like an orang-outang. Mr. Canning's resigna- 
tion has made little sensation, I suppose from its 
having been so much calculated upon. They say Mr. 
Peel has refused taking ofiice and Charles Wynne is 
talked of as the successor. 

This morning Lord ClanwiUiam announced him- 
self for about three. At a quarter before four the 
door opened, ' Mr. Granville Vernon.' Presently after 
Neumann. Loud and long did Mr. G. V. talk, till 
Granville, knowing I wished to be rid of Vernon, cut 
him ofi" by proposing to take a walk with him. The 
Baron sat on with us some time, but, as Lord C. kept 
his post, we had at last an opportunity of talking over 
our affairs. He is delighted to go, but seems to have 
little idea that it wiU end in matrimony. 

I have been dining with Madame de Lieven, the 
Decazes, Neumann, Pagel, and some attaches. It would 
have been too monstrously dull if Madame de Lieven's 
gaiety and cleverness had not outweighed all the weight 
of her convives. 

' Lord Castlereagh'B residence. 



1820 TO LADY G. MORPETH 201 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : December 22, 1820. 

I have little to tell you to-day. At three Lord 
ClanwiUiam had appointed to come and take leave of 
me. At a quarter before three the door opened, ' Mr. 
Granville Vernon.' You will think it is my yesterday's 
letter, but it is to-day, and, like other jokes, the worse 
for repetition. He did not stay above an hour. 

There is a new paper, which causes great sensation. 
Its object seems to be to frighten women from visiting 
the Queen. Its name is ' John Bull.' The first victim 
is the Duchess of Bedford, giving an account of her 
attachment to the first Duke, her marriage with this. 
Dady Jersey next, very abusive. Mrs. Brougham's 
seven months' child. Lady Ossulston a foreigner 
married to a weak little lord. It is an odious publica- 
tion both as to its motive and in its execution. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Chiswiok : December 26, 1820. 

Nothing can go on better than the play, which 
stands for Tuesday. Lady Normanby and Miss Fre- 
mantle are excellent. The theatre very pretty. The 
room for audience lamentably small, my brother ob- 
durate with regard to men. He says he shall ask 
those he meets, and as he has just driven to town, I 
hope my particular friends wiU be disporting them- 
selves on the Chiswick road. Of women. Ladies 
Holland, Elizabeth Grey, and yourself are aU I know 
of. The famous and unfortunate Mrs. Trot is to be 
expunged from the play. The Eev. Mr. Glenny, Lord 
Clare, is gone to town for his wig. Mrs. B. Danvers 
looks beautiful, but is so terrified that it is painful to 
see and impossible to hear her. Au reste, Chiswick 
is like a madhouse, hammering in one room, beds in 
almost all. There is young Phipps, who is as good 
as Emery. 



202 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 



182I 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1, 1821. 

Many happy years, my dearest sister. It is very 
unlucky that the snow is begun and will probably be 
confirmed by the time our people arrive. 

I am expecting Lady Harland. No words can say 
what a comfortable woman she is. Moreton Eden has 
heard from Bowood. The Decazes are there, and Lord 
Lansdowne acts charades with them with a zeal and 
application very amusing to see. 

I had no letter to-day and have one degree less to 
say than yesterday, when I had nothing. Moreton 
raves of George and says he is adored at Oxford. He 
has been at St. Giles, says Lady Harriet is beautiful. 
Lord Ashley very clever and reading very hard, and 
that Lord Shaftesbury is so severe that the girls do 
not dare speak when he is in the room. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead: January 1821. 

My day yesterday was so taken up that I had not 
time to write. To-day I have sent Lady Worcester and 
her Lord, Neumann and Agar to drive in an open 
carriage, and the men are shooting. The snow is gone 
and the weather hke spring. 

Yesterday evening we acted charades and you have 
no idea how amusing it is. I will give you an idea of 
it. The society divides itself into two parts. Granville, 



1821 TO LADY G. MORPETH 203 

Agar, myself and Mr. Montagu, as audience, had to 
guess the following, which we did. First they put a 
row of cushions to represent a river, over which Charles 
Greville handed Madame de Lieven, in a hat and pelisse, 
with great difficulty. Next came the Duke, happier 
than when he won his battles, with Lady Worcester ^ 
equipped like Madame de Lieven, in his arms to 
carry her across. Next hobbled Neumann and fell, 
Worcester then, rubbing him dry and wringing his 
clothes. 

This was gue. 

Next they come in dressed like Turks with turbans, 
and Neumann with a muff on his head, and they sit in 
a circle cross-legged. 

This is riz. 

Then Madame de Lieven, sick, in a bedgown, is led 
to one couch, Worcester with a swelled face in agonies 
with the toothache to another. Charles comes in, feels 
her pulse and gives her piUs and a draught. He then 
goes to Worcester and in the most masterly manner 
draws his tooth. They both jump up from the imme- 
diate effect of his remedies and dance about. 

Gueris. 
To Lady G. Morpeth. 

/Wherstead : January 1821. 

It is scarcely light and we all just setting off. My 
cold is still bad and we are going in the britschka, an 
act of rashness I would not perform were I not going 
to the land of Verity. 

The children were off at seven, I quite provoked 
with them for their rapture at going to London, little 
geese. 

Mr. Wilmot dines with us to-day and we shall have 

' She was the daughter of his sister, Lady Anne Fitzroy. 



204 LETTEES OF HARRIET COU?fTESS GRANVILLE 1821 

his version of things. I hear Lord Archibald's motion 
is to be simply an expression of disapprobation upon the 
omission of her in the Liturgy, the most embarrassing 
form for Government into which it can be put. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 1821. 

I have seen and heard a great deal, but everything 
is so mixed up in my head with a very bad cold that 
I doubt how much clear matter I can produce for your 
amusement. "We arrived in town at five and Mr. 
Wilmot dined with us. He went over the debates. 
You will see that the division on the Liturgy question 
has been better than was expected, and it is thought 
that the Ministers wiU do, as it is called. The poor 
dear Duke of Wellington has put his foot in it, and the 
joke is ' that the curtain will never be drawn over that 
farce.' The Whigs are supposed to have made two 
great mistakes, pressing the first division and bringing 
the Liturgy forward before the vote of censure. Their 
language is that Parliament and the nation are at issue 
and that revolution must follow, the House of Commons 
persisting in supporting the present Government. We 
expect a much larger majority on Lord Tavistock's 
motion to-morrow week. 

Lady Morley arrived last night in uproarious spirits, 
fresh from the West London Theatre, which Lord Morley 
protects, and where she told us she had seen the pink 
of Tottenham Court Eoad and some young ladies rather 
too flighty in their conduct. 

Hart is in good looks and good spirits, but, woe is 
me, he begins his Thursdays the very next that comes, 
and without music. Addio, dearest. 



1821 TO LADY G. MORPETH 205 



To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 6, 1821. 

Lord Tavistock did pretty well, and Mr. Lambton 
very well. Mr. Peel's speech was a useful one for the 
Government, but not in any way striking. Granville 
thought Mr. Whitmore's very good, a country gentleman, 
who had supported Ministers till the Queen's business. 
They have adjourned till to-morrow. 

I was at Madame de Lieven's on Sunday evening. 
Lady Morley and myself sat on a couch, she saying, 
' Now we have nothing to do but to look as fascinating 
as possible, and we shall be surrounded by all that is 
exquisite.' The result was the Countess herself, Messrs. 
Charles Ellis, Greville, Montagu, Wilmot, Luttrell, and 
Nugent. The reverse of the medal was less intellectual 
but more beautiful, a pendant group consisting of 
Madame Esterhazy, Ladies Worcester and Elizabeth 
Vernon, Messrs. William Eussell, Sydney Bathurst, 
Lords Worcester and Valletort. The rest of the room 
was darkness made visible. Swarms of small black 
diplomates, Bathursts in cherry-coloured velvet, Lady 
Castlereagh covered with diamonds and gold. Lady 
Davey, who is everywhere, and Lady Elizabeth Fielding, 
who ought to be nowhere. 

I went last night to the Olympic with the Morleys, 
he, as she terms it, ' the Jove of Olympus assumes the 
God, affects to nod.' Charles Greville, Mr. Montagu, 
and Hart joined us and the same party junket on Friday 
to Chiswick. We had the happiness to be introduced 
to the ichneumon. You will never stand it, dear Lady 
Morpeth. I believe it is harmless, but as rapid as 
lightning, here, there, and everywhere, over and into 
everything. Addio, dearest. 



206 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 



To Lady Harrowby. 

Bruton Street : February 8, 1821. 

Dearest Lady H., — I have been very comfortable 
since my arrival in town, almost constantly at bome of 
the evening to those I like best, and not having been 
obliged above two or three times to see those I don't 
like at all. Lady Morley fait mes delices, and after 
her departure I mean to end my soirees. Madame de 
Lieven, delightful as she is, comes too seldom and goes 
too early to make me reckon upon her, and my pleasure 
in them ceases if I have not some one's brains besides 
my own pour amuser mon monde. 

I give you joy of our being the most loyal nation in 
the world. You will have heard and seen in the papers 
how we doat upon the King. I witnessed his reception 
at Drury Lane and never saw anything like it, all that 
lungs, hats, hands, and handkerchiefs could do in short. 
This and the division of last night have made the 
Whigs look rather black. 

I like to give you lights about your understanding 
and the measure taken of it by an intelligent public. 
Granville Vernon told me yesterday, with his usual 
stentorian candour, that he had been present at a dis- 
cussion about you and myself, after the manner of 
Plutarch, I suppose, and in which Lord Clanwilliam 
warmly took up your cause. He said Lady G. is an 
agreeable woman, but Lady H. has exactly twice her 
cleverness. I can only add that I am not only content, 
but proud to be exactly one half of you, and being so 
still think myself double three parts of my acquaintance. 
Addio, my dearest Lady H. 



1821 TO LADY G. MORPETH 207 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 11, 1821. 

I must wait till Granville is up to give you an 
account of the debate. 

I heard the other day that the King is more in love 
with your friend Lady C. than ever, that she is at 
Brighton, and that he sits kissing her hand with a look 
of the most devoted submission. I suppose she per- 
suaded him to go to the play. It is very wise and 
answered perfectly. You would have felt for him 
as I did. He looked as white as a sheet, but did it 
uncommonly well. First of all, not hke a fine* lady be- 
hind the curtain of a cage grille, but with the Duke 
of York on one side and the Duke of Clarence on 
the other; Lord Cholmondeley, with a handkerchief 
to his eyes, sobbing con amove, other lords behind. 
Bloomfield, Sir Thomas Lawrence, and Lord Mount 
Charles yelling for joy like a young bull- dog, in 
the orchestra. Lady Holland opposite, tapping her 
longest, most Indian fan with energy on the outside of 
the box. The house was crowded in every part, and 
believe me, Lady Morpeth, the applause was stunning 
and thrilling. Hats and handkerchiefs in the air, and 
shouts almost the whole time. Twice a voice called 
out ' Queen,' and once, ' Where's your wife, Georgie ? ' 
But the hissing, ' Shame, shame,' ' Turn him out,' in- 
stantly stopped this. In short, John BuU was pleased 
and shewed it. It proves the King's folly in shutting 
himself up. He goes to Co vent Garden to-night. I 
saw him trundle down stairs, and I never saw anything 
look so happy. He applauded Miss Wilson extremely, 
and laughed heartily at the farce. 

The House lasted till seven. Majority for Ministers 
146. GranviUe was not there. Lord Kensington told 
him that Mr. W. Pole and Sir Francis Burdett spoke 
very ill. 



208 LETTEKS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : Febraary 11, 1821. 

Lady Morley came here for a moment on her way 
from Covent Garden, where the applause was as great 
as at Drury Lane. White silk flags waving from the 
gallery, with 'Long live George the Fourth' in gold 
letters upon them. She says His Majesty, though it 
was evidently painful to him on account of his stays, 
lay back on his chair in fits of laughing at Grimaldi's 
jokes, York roared again, Clarence was dull and did 
not twig them. 

Good-night, dearest ; my eyes draw straws, and 
having given you this sketch of Eoyalty, I go to 
Bye-bye. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 14, 1821. 

I think it prudent to begin my letter to-day, as 
to-morrow I am going early to the House of Lords to 
hear the debate on Continental matters, and may not 
have much time. 

Johnny has been here, and says the Duchess is 
much better. He dined yesterday with the Lambtons, 
Bennets, Mrs. Damer, and Lord Grey at Brandenburgh 
House. 

The Queen looked old and careworn. She asked 
him what he thought of the possibility of her name 
being restored to the Liturgy. He said, 'It ought 
to be,' 'Well, I will tell you, I am une espece de 
sorciere, and I know always all that shall happen. It 
will be restored in a very short time.' She says she 
shall not go to the theatres or any place of public 
amusement, that all that is befitting to her in her 
present situation is to have courage and patience, and 
that she thinks she has both. She complains very 



1821 TO LADY HARROWBY 209 

much of her health, and the injurious eifects of this 
climate upon it. 

Hart is full of his next Thursday, which is to begin 
with a dinner composed of toute la diplomatie de la 
terre, the Duke of Wellington, Lansdowne, and our- 
selves. The Due de Frias has written an apology for 
having come uninvited last Thursday, beginning, like 
the petitions, 'May it please your Grace.' Adieu, 
dearest G. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

London : February 26, 1821. 

I write you a few lines just to keep you au 
courant of London, dearest Lady Harrowby, though 
of the gay part of it I have seen but little. We go 
often in fur coats and snow boots to the play, where 
Punch, Moreton Eden and Lord Valletort are gene- 
rally our cavaliers. The latter returned from Paris, 
having lost his money at the Salon and his heart to 
Miss Fitzgerald, but, like his kind, perfectly happy 
without either. 

Madame de Lieven left me before ten o'clock this 
evening, having dined here with the Castlereaghs, 
Decazes, the Duke of WeUington, Govero, Lord 
Aberdeen, Mr. Ward, and Agar. They were all very 
agreeable. How much better I like chez moi society 
than any other ! Even when the people are not as 
bright as elsewhere, there is something in one's native 
climate that makes them go down better. Punch is 
aux cieux, being made manager of the Duke of 
York's stud, and he goes to Newmarket to-morrow 
with a sort of rapture that is not to be described, I 
am afraid we shall see less of him than ever, as he 
seems entirely engrossed. He was born for something 
better than a jockey, ;. 

The Queen is entirely forgotten, They have, got 

VOL, I. P 



210 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 

up a thing at Drury Lane all full of justice, innocence, 
spies, and servants bribed to ruin their masters, but 
not a single hint is taken or applied. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Bruton Street : 1821. 

My dearest Lady H., — You will have heard of the 
Queen's humble letter to Lord Liverpool. She is for- 
gotten to a degree that is really surprising, and every- 
body expects her departure very shortly. Madame de 
Lieven has been at Brighton, where she is in high 
favour. The King is in a state of perfect felicity and 
in love like a boy of fifteen. London is becoming very 
gay. The opera has begun with great eclat and I 
mean to go to-morrow. Almack's and the French play 
are, I hear, pitoyables, not above thirty people at each. 
The only evening I have encountered since I wrote last 
was after an enormous dinner at Devonshire House on 
Friday. We were thirty in the great hall, and it was a 
fine thing to see. People ought to have had tickets to 
walk round us, as they do when Kings are in question. 

Mr. Montagu promised me sc letter from Paris, but 
'he has forgotten it. His gaiety, cleverness, and friend- 
ship all leave a vacancy that is not easily filled up, but 
there is one thing I miss with pleasure. I have heard 
it lately remarked of him by most of those who know 
him, by his friends as well as his enemies, and I cer- 
tainly agree in the censure. I tell it you because I 
think your unbounded influence over him may do much 
towards correcting it. It is the way in which he propa- 
gates, almost creates, gossip and scandal. He makes 
it too much of a pursuit to watch whose eyes meet 
whose, who blushes at one moment, who whispers at 
another. It is like himself, done without fiel or false- 
hood, but it is mischievous and infectious, for I feel 
quite differently on the subject myself when I am in the 
habit of seeing much of him. -Even this time before he 



1821 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 211 

left town, I own, I was never a day without hearing of 
something qui est, qui fut, ou qui doit etre, and since 
he is gone I have not been told of one flirtation, and it 
seems as if scandal was extinct. I hope, if you agree 
with me, you will speak to him on the subject. I have 
no objection to being summoned as a witness and 
promise to back you with all my tongue. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

July 19, 1821. 

Dearest brother, — A tribute from your Tory sister 
may be acceptable. Messrs. Charles Ellis and Wilmot 
both tell me, one by the evidence of his senses, the 
other by report, that 3'ou performed your part admir- 
ably, and as to the Hollands, they are en ecstase. I 
care not a straw for politics, but a great deal for 
honour and glory, so I wish you joy with all mj heart. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 3, 1821. 

Give my kindest love to the Duchess,' and tell her 
my uneventful history. 

Granville met F. Kussell and Mr. Luttrel at dinner 
at George Vernon's yesterday. The former is just 
arrived from Ireland, where he says the people are 
absolutely mad with joy and loyalty. The streets of 
Dublin are so thronged as to be nearly impassable. 
You can hardly get a shopkeeper to stay in his shop or 
a labourer at his work. Lady Conyngham appears but 
little, but that little is high. She was in a box opposite 
to him at the play, and not content with making her 
des demonstrations all the time, he wrote to her in 
pencil and sent it round by Lord Mount-Charles. Mr. 
Luttrel, who detests the Irish, is quite beyond his 
patience on the subject. ' Eoyalty has generally some 
restraint, some shackle upon it ; but here is a new case, 

1 Of Beaufort. 

p 2 



212 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 

a thing unheard of, a King broke loose. There will be 
no catching him again.' He says the Irish reception of 
him is like nothing but the Indian worship of the idol 
Juggernaut, that they would be too happy to be crushed 
under his carriage wheels. 

I am uneasy lest you should not be pleased at Bad- 
minton. You must not expect society or much anima, 
but shall you not enjoy the bella cosa far niente 
which Gloucestershire ensures ? The Duchess you will 
admire more and more upon seeing more of her, and I 
wash my hands of Lord Morpeth in the large and good 
library. Bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : September 7, 1821. 

I have received your two letters from Badminton, 
and agree with you entirely. Though I know there is 
no disputing the grounds on which the Duchess acts,^ I 
would give anything I could to alter some of its effects. 
For the eight maiden Lady Somersets^ the most melan- 
choly. For herself, her genre de vie promotes her 
happiness now ; but for them it cannot be right. How 
innocent their pleasures might be though a little en- 
larged ! The worst of it is, it will not wear off, but 
only gain ground, and I should not be surprised were 
it to end in total seclusion from the world, or becoming 
unfit to mix with it. 

I think we must have the Duchess. Mrs. Lamb I 
shall be charmed to see. I do not know where we can 
hang Consalvi.^ 

' She had become what is called Evangelical and withdrew from 
general society. The Court balls she attended with her daughters from 
respect for her Sovereign, but they went to no others ; they never entered 
a theatre, and lived almost entirely with the Low Church party. 

^ The daughters, however, were all married well and happily to 
husbands who shared their religious views. 

" The Duchess of Devonshire carried about in her carriage a large 
portrait of the Cardinal. 



1821 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 213 

The King of France told the Duke of Wellington 
he should lodge our weU-beloved in the Elys^e Bourbon. 
Did I tell you his not going to Wynnstay is said to 
have been occasioned by Sir Watkin^ saying he should 
be happy to see him, but not Lady Conyngham ? Now 
list to Lucas's account of Chevassier's^ tour. 'He was 
sent from Dublin to help to make the proper prepara- 
tions at Slane Castle.^ When he arrived he thought 
he should have died, not a single morsel of victuals in 
the house. The cook laid it at the steward's door, the 
steward at the cook's. Monsieur Chevassier was obliged 
to procure all, to send a cart here, a cart there, to the 
butcher's, to the poulterer's. So I said to Monsieur 
Chevassier, " You had a pretty present I hope for your 
pains." Saj^s he, " Not a sixpence, ma'am, they said it 
was all the King's affair." ' No wonder Lord Conyngham 
hurrahs and wishes himself joy of such a position. 

Madame de Lieven will, I think, from her last letter 
to Neumann, meet the King somewhere and she will 
then probably finish his junket with him. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London: September 11, 1821. 

Your letter to-day amused me very much, and your 
account of Harriet. How odd it is, and how introuvables 
are the causes that determine difference of manner and 
character in those whom it would be natural to find 
so alike in both ! Is grandpapa ever jealous of her, 
grandmamma never puzzled ? I should have imagined 
these to have been the rocks. 

The King kept all four of his Ministry waiting from 
two till half-past five yesterday. Lord Harrowby says 
that he looks well. He has given up everything except 

' Sir Watkin Williams Wynn. 

^ Who had beeil their French cook. 

^ Lord Conyngham's country house. 



214 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 

Hanover, even Paris and his sister on the way, and 
intends to be here again in six weeks. It is conjectured 
that Lady Conyngham has got nervous as the time 
approaches, and, not having been able to procure an 
EngUshwoman's company, has given up the whole thing. 

You will see all that is known with regard to Sir 
Eobert Wilson^ in all the papers, the fact, and a pro- 
mise of speedy explanation of it. Lord Clanwilliam 
was here yesterday ; he goes with Lord Londonderry on 
Sunday. The King starts on Saturday. 

We go the day after to-morrow. It is odd that 
after so long a confinement I should feel neither weak 
nor languid. There are petitesses that grow upon one 
in retirement. I cannot bear the idea of a regular 
dinner or short-sleeved gowns. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : September 15, 1821. 

You will be glad to hear that my journey was not 
even a fatigue to me. The carriage was open, and 
after my shut-up existence it seemed to give me new life. 

I found my children in the rudest health. My girls 
look to me, as I tell them, terribly old. They are so 
clever, I must pufF a bit. I have seen nothing like 
their two minds for so long. 

Thanks, dearest G., for your letter. I wish I had 
any news for you. The King, you know, is to leave 
London Monday. They say now that he will perform the 
whole scheme in seven weeks. As his love is more ardent 
than ever, he is as jealous of her as a boy of fifteen 
would be, and pouts and sulks if she does not follow 
him from room to room. This does not look like any 
matrimonial project, especially as he is somehow com- 
mitted to a great deal of morality the next time. No- 

' He was dismissed the army for having taken part in the funeral 
procession of the Queen. 



1821 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 215 

body would hear of his being anything but the most 
exemplary of husbands. 

There is so strong a smell of the sea in the air to- 
day, such a fresh, enchanting, invigorating feel that I 
cannot bear not having you with me. What must the 
Berry think of you ? She told Lady Harrowby that I 
was not to be named on the same day as you in point 
of understanding and agreeableness. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

"Wherstead : September 23, 1821. 

Your letters are so sprack and full of news that 
mine must hide their diminished heads. Let us boast 
of our children, as we are always humble and say we 
don't know. I think my girls are certainly Minervas, 
and perhaps Venuses, but with a perfect resignation to 
being told every day, when I produce them, that they 
are jpeu de chose. 

Could you see me seated in a new chaise longue at 
my beautiful window, my darling children with their 
Papa on the grass. 

You will see the Duke of Wellington's plans by the 
enclosed. They say the King proposed to him to show 
him the field of Waterloo : very right of him, I think. 
He will end by being, as Lady Morley would say, a 
very sweet young man. Adieu, dearest. 

Tq Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : September 1821. 

Dearest G., — I did not do justice to our yesterday's 
expedition. The Orwell quite full, its pretty banks 
covered with people, carriages of all sorts, flags, a band 
of music and a heavenly day. Sweet Lady Harland, in a 
dove-coloured pelisse, supported by the little admiral and 
the proprietor of the ship, uttering in a nervous voice. 



216 LETTEES OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1821 

' Success to the good ship the Fairly,' and dashing a 
glass bottle full of wine against its stem. 

Charles and Augustus Ellis came yesterday. We 
expect Mr. Montagu to-day. Augustus rode a stage by 
the King. He was received everywhere but at Canter- 
bury with unbounded applause, but the contre-coup 
was there, tres prononce, with groans and hisses. 

My post to-day brought me a letter from Lady 
Morley, who, thinking me still tied by the leg, most 
kindly oiFers us Kent House, as more airj'' and cheer- 
ful. It made me clap my wings and crow to think ou 
j'en suis. 

How Sydney ' must enliven you with his boisterous 
mirth and funny jokes. 

I think for your children Castle Howard must be 
very gay. Govero wiU be very happy with you all, 
especially if you scatter a few books in his way, as one 
does grain for pheasants. Adieu, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : October 1821. 

The Cannings made themselves very agreeable. She 
is more talkative, and he is occasionally very brilliant 
and entertaining, and in better spirits than I have seen 
him for some time. The girl charms us all with being 
the reverse of what she looks. She is remarkably 
frank and open in her manner, without the slightest pre- 
tension, all good-humour and readiness to please. Her 
beauty is not to be denied, but it has singularly little 
charm, I think. She is clever, and though less brilliant 
than I expected, she is not pert or overpowering. She 
has a magnificent voice, and she and Nugent sing moi'n-, 
noon, and night. 

We have a most pressing invitation to Woburn, 
which we are to accept. 

* The Eev. Sydney Smith. 



1821 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 217 

Govero comes to-day to my inexpressible delight. 
I shall write you word of what he says of you all. 

' Psestum ' ^ was in the ' Times ' to-day. I have cut it 
out for Berry, who wished to see it. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : October 25, 1821. 

On Thursday the 1st, this day week, we shall be at 
Castle Howard. Our people leave us Sunday, and we 
wish for a whole day to ourselves. 

Govero is here, a great love. He talks with great 
approbation of you all, but is houcM completely on the 
subject of girls, and I dare not ask questions. He 
takes no more notice of Miss Canning than if she Was 
made of papier-mdche, and I believe has not even 
looked at her. 

We, including Mr. Canning, admire grandpapa's 
verses ^ extremely. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : November 1821. 

I never can describe my delight in being here again. 
My children are aU perfectly well, and we have for once 
the prospect of ten days by ourselves. 

How much of various kind has happened since I 
left it, and how strangely sunshine and storms are 
jumbled together in this has monde ! Here there is 
always more of the first than anywhere else in the 
world. When I look at Susan, lascio in preda ai venti 
ogni torbido pensier. 

My last day in London was a triste one. I went 

' A poem by George Howard, which gained the Newdigate prize at 
Oxford. 

^ Some spirited lines addressed to Lady Holland on a snuff-box left 
to her by Buonaparte. They are to be found in the Annual Register 
of the year 1821. 



218 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 3821 

with Miss Trimmer to Cavendish Square/ and saw there 
Carohne William, Duncannon, and William Ponsonby. 
There is something in the deep and settled melancholy 
of the latter, united to the most perfect command of 
himself, really heartrending. Duncannon much more 
nervous. Caroline, to whom I went with every early 
feeling of interest and kindness awakened, contrived 
somehow or other to deaden both. The rest of my 
morning was taken up by an expedition I had promised 
the Duchess of Beaufort to make, to hear Mr. Noel, an 
Evangelical preacher. Later in the day I went to 
Elizabeth Belgrave. She is in great beauty and spirits. 
I found there Erancis and Lady Grantham, but with 
Mr. Noel's words ringing in my ears, and William's look 
of misery before my eyes, I looked and listened to them 
as one does at the figures in a magic lantern. 

' Lady Bessborough died on November 14. 



1822 TO LADY G. MOKPETH 219 



1822 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1, 1822. 

George's letter, for which I beg you to thank him 
very much, makes me feel anxious for to-morrow's post. 
I am so sorry that Lord Morpeth should have suffered. 

TeU dear George that I think ' Cain ' ^ most wicked, 
but not without feeling or passion. Parts of it are mag- 
nificent, and the effect of Granville reading it out loud 
to me was that I roared till I could neither hear nor 
see. The scene, too, in ' Sardanapalus ' where Myrrha 
says, ' Oh, frown not on me,' and the speech, ' Why do 
I love this man ? ' I think beautiful and affecting. God 
bless you. 

To Lady G. JVIorpeth. 

Wherstead: January 1822. 

We were only five yesterday, and fell back upon our 
wits. I produced my jest book and added some to it. 
We then invented charades, being too few to act them, 
and afterwards names and sentences from initials, but 
this leads to so much iU-nature that we gave it up. 

Lord Worcester went this morning ; she stays till 
Saturday. If she had had an education as good as it 
has been bad, she might have been a dehghtful person. 
She has a great deal of quickness and intelligence and 
strong feelings, although ill-regulated. She is different 
here from what I have ever seen her, perfectly unpre-. 

' Lord Byron's poem. 



220 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1822 

tending, giving herself no airs, and only seeming 
anxious to please and be pleased. 

Yesterday evening we heard her sing, which is 
beautiful, and then there was a very animated dis- 
cussion till one o'clock. 



To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1822. 

The Duke and the Lievens stay till Sunday. The 
Duke is as merry as a grig. We were occupied all 
yesterday evening with conjuring tricks and patiences 
of every kind. 

Francis Leveson looks very large, upright, and 
handsome. He speaks but little, and I think the fault 
is que cela ne coule pas de source. Adieu, dearest. 

My best love to Hart. We are not touchy, but we 
think it, like grandmamma Carlisle, ' comical enough ' 
that he has never seen Wherstead. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1822. 

Charles Greville is the man for my money. Dearest 
Lady M., Granville thinks you are in love with 
Mr. EUis, but as you are a very good sort of woman 
we are not uneasy about it. 

Tell me what Hart says of Brighton. F. Lamb 
tells me the King was in ecstasies with Lady Morley 
and La Marquise very jealous, but this the Countess 
denies. 

Think of Eavensworth on the point of producing a 
sixteenth Liddell ! What a hideous old baby it will be ! 
I must prepare for church. Dearest sister, I hope you 
love me a great deal better than Agar. 



1822 TO LADY HAREOWBY 221 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Wherstead : January 19, 1822. 

The day before Mr. Montag u left us, I took one of 
my long walks with him, and entered" upon the subject 
we had determined I should some time allude to. I 
found him all we know him to be, tant bien que mal. 
In argument he never throws the shuttlecock back to 
one's battledore, therefore as far as convincing him the 
game is nul, but in devotion to his friends, in sincerity 
and truth he is sound at bottom, as from manner and 
a sort of clumsiness in perception he often appears 
strange and inconsistent. The details of our conversa- 
tion I will reserve till, we meet. 

We are now left by all but Lord Gower, who wiU 
remain nearly as long as we do. I never knew him in 
such spirits. He is charmed at being alone with us," 
and when to all that is estimable in him is added the 
sunshine of gaiety and animation he is a delightful 
companion. 

Madame de Lieven was for a whole week invariably 
gay and brilliantly agreeable, and with the bonhomie 
and adorable qualities of the Duke,' and the agrements 
of F. Lamb, Lord Clanwilliam, and Francis, the enjoy- 
ment of the last ten days, as far as society goes, has 
been very great. The fault Mr. Montagu found with 
us was at least a respectable one. The dulness of a 
society where nobody makes himself ridiculous, and I 
think, though he contributed almost the most, he was 
the pp.rson least pleased with his sejour. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1822. 

Lady Morley is quite charmed with Govero. We 
are both disgusted with the Poodle.^ Never was there 

' Duke of Wellington. 

'^ She thought better of him later in life, but he was occasionally very 
trying. 



222 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1822 

such a hard, selfish, ill-tempered, presumptuous animal. 
I have promised Govero never again to abuse anybody 
who has a single good quality, which reduces me to 
lay it on thick when I find such a fair two-legged 
piece of game as this. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 1822. 

You can have no idea how comfortable we are. 
Granville and Govero are as playful as two young 
kittens. The latter bargained for very little talk, 
but "we read German, write verses, play at chess and 
hazard, and sometimes sing for very joy. 

Go and see ' Mother Bunch,' which I hear is excel- 
lent, at least if you and the disengaged branches can 
do anything so frivolous. 

Granville and Susy are scouring the country this 
delicious day, and I must go to the lonely Earl, though 
he has a book in his hand and a finger on his nose and 
will not list to me. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 30, 1822. 

Wherstead is winding up with frightful rapidity, and 
I do not know what I should do if I did not see Park 
Street at the end of it. 

What an adorable woman Lady Morley is ! Never 
did any one person unite so much, pretend to so little, 
so bright, all the comfort of solidity and all the ease of 
Ugkrete. I esteem her, I love her, admire her, but it is 
impossible to praise her as she deserves. 

I hear Lady Westmorland has been putting all 
Eome into a flame with fresh feuds. She has written 
to Mr. Sneyd to inform him that he is not a gentleman. 
I hear his answer was excellent. 

Lady Julia Gore has married a Captain Lockwood. 



1822 TO LADY G. MORPETH 223 

Lady Abercorn^ went into furies, fits, hysterics, but 
ended by forgiving them. The love, the storm, calm 
and wedding all included in ten days. Adieu, dearest sis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Heythrop : February 2, 1822. 

We are just setting out, and I cannot resist writing 
one line, though with less than nothing to say. My 
body is going to Salt Hill, and my thoughts are always 
with you and your happiness, my dearest G. 

We have had a most pressing invitation from Lady 
Cowper, and I do not think we can help going to Pans- 
hanger for two nights on our way home. If that was 
not our way I should like it. 

The Duke, Mr. Napier, Henry and Plantagenet 
Somerset are breakfasting with us in over-alls. Their 
under-alls make Heythrop terribly dull. So home a 
set of minds I never met with ; all the elans are kept for 
the hedges and ditches. 

I love the Duchess better than ever, and her angelic 
mind lights up even such akntours as here. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Brighton : March 10, 1822. 

This is, dearest sister, infinitely better than I ex- 
pected. The society very agreeable and aU in the 
highest good-humour with one another. The King com- 
plains of his health and is rather low, but I never saw 
him so shm and active, and he scuds into dinner with 
Lieven on one arm and the Marchioness on the other. 

God bless you, dearest, I must get ready for church. 

The King doats on you and is dying to have you 
here next Saturday. He thought the day of the mar- 
riage undecided, so did not ask you before. You will 
of course hear more of this. 

' Lady Julia's elder sister. 



224 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1822 
To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London: 1822. 

Dearest G., — I have only a few moments to repeat 
to you my conversation with Lord Gower this morning, 
the only one I have ever had with him on the subject 
of your girls. 

Lord Gower. — My mother has been talking of the 
Howard girls. 

Me. — Oh ! what did she say ? 

Lord Gower. — Praised them and Lady Georgiana 
and said how wise it was of Ellis. 

Me.— What was her drift ? 

Lord Gower. — That it would be wise of other 
people too, I suppose. 

We then went on, and I find he admires both the 
second and third so much, that were it not for youth, 
he would think of one of them.^ I owned to him that 
I thought the reason a very insufficient one, that I 
wished it, and ended by saying, ' Now shall I exert 
myself to prove the reason a foolish one, or for ever 
after hold my peace ? ' He laughed and said, ' I don't 
know.' God bless you, my own dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : June 1822. 

Dearest G., — I trust you did not suffer from your 
water-party. The Duke of Wellington told somebody 
that it was quite delightful, no drawback but the white- 
bait being a httle muddy. 

Granville is quite afraid of my talking of Wherstead. 
He says I shall raise everybody's expectations, and you 
will all be disappointed. I will therefore only say that, 

1 The second daughter, Georgiana, married Mr. Agar Ellis in 1822 ; the 
eldest, Caroline, Mr. W. Lasoelles in 1823, and the third Lord Gower, who' 
became Duke of Sutherland in 1834. 



1822 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 225 

seen in the month of June, all hay and roses, it is very, 
very pretty and more enjoyable than I can say. I long 
to shew it you. If you could but come down for ten 
days in July. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Sprotborough : " November 16, 1822. 

I have a letter from Lord Gower saying you wish 
to hear from me. I write the more readily as I think 
it may amuse you to hear something of the Francis 
Leveson ^ menage from an eye-witness. It is very 
unlike any other, but very happy, and a sort of happi- 
ness likely to last. She is a very loveable person, with 
more attraction in looks, manner, and character than 
one can account for. He is improved, chiefly by her 
ease and straightforwardness, the two things he wants. 

Our life here is very comfortable. The men shoot 
all morning, and I take immense walks with Coppey ; ^ 
Lady Francis passes her time like what she is — a dear, 
happy child. Billiards with a powerful arm, shouts of 
laughter that make the house ring, ecarte of an evening, 
and anything for fun. 

We hear nothing from Verona.* There has been no 
courier since the 24th. Madame de Lieven is either 
too lazy or too discreet to write. If you are, as the 
newspapers state, on your way to Paris, you will pro- 
bably meet her, as she means to be there ten days with 
Paul ° on her way to England. 

' Sir Joseph Copley's place. 

' Lord Francis married in June Miss Greville, daughter of Mr. and 
Lady Charlotte GreviUe and sister of Mr. Charles Greville. Lady Francis 
was better known as Lady EUesmere. She, in connection with her 
husband when he succeeded to his Bridgewater property, greatly improved 
the condition of the workpeople connected with it. She invited Lord 
Ashley to "Worsley in order that he might see the miserable state of the 
women who worked in the mines, and he was in consequence induced to 
exert himself on their behalf in Parliament. 

^ Miss Copley. ^ The Congress of Verona. '■• Her son. 

VOL. I. Q 



226 LETTERS OP HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1822 

The King seems by all accounts to be very poorly. 
The lady is not at Brighton, and there seems to be no 
gaiety there. God bless you, dearest brother. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Worsley : November 20, 1822. 

Dearest Lady Harrowby, — ^I begin by telling you that 
I heard from Lord Clanwilliam the day before yester- 
day, his letter dated the 5th. He says ' the Duke of 
Wellington is much better, and there is no question or 
anxiety as to his recovery.' Of politics he says not a 
word. I hear, but not from him, that the friends and 
relations of Lord Londonderry are much shocked at the 
way in which his wife and self are giving things and 
disporting themselves at Verona. They say her head is 
quite turned with the Emperor's attentions. 

Our party at Sprotborough went off very well. Lady 
Francis is an excellent and amiable little person, in 
great beauty. I think them very happy. Charles was 
somewhat hard in mind and manner. Mr. Montagu 
a treasure for the all-work of society. Individually I 
think I see his faults more clearly or judge them more 
harshly, but only as an intimate friend, for as one of 
a large circle he is invaluable. He arrived here yes- 
terday, plunged into this new and rather formidable 
society, and splashes about in it, much to the improve- 
ment of our mutual ease and general vivacity. He 
scolded me yesterday with the voice and manner of a 
landlord to an hostler for having spoiled the whole of 
the Copley family, destroyed Sir Joseph's wit, Maria's ^ 
charm in society, and made them dull, like any other 
set of people. The fact is that, from her own good 
sense, and good advice from myself. Lady Caroline 
Wortley and others, she has altered almost all the 

• Miss Maria Copley, who in 1832 married the present Lord Grey. 



1822 TO LADY HAREOWBY 227 

faults of her manner, and the tone of the society is much 
less gossiping and pert, leaving Sir Joseph quite as 
entertaining, Maria twice as pleasing. But you know 
Mr. Montagu's way of riding this sort of argument, 
getting louder as he is getting less reasonable, and firing 
continually at the wrong mark. 

Lady Lovaine ^ is very agreeable indeed, and quite 
original. Mrs. Dundas amuses me, she is so joUy, and 
what the servants call free with one. 

Lady Caroline quite captivates me. There is a 
charm about her one can hardly account for, but it is, I 
believe, perfect nature, great refinement and no wish to 
be anything but what she is. She is entirely without 
the ungovernable wish to be un peu plus than one is, 
which spoils so many. 

' Mother of the present Duke of Northumberland. She and Mrs. 
Dundas were sisters of Lord Wharncliffe. 



«2 



228 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANYILLB 1823 



1823 

To Lady G. Morpeth 

Saltram : October 17, 1823. 

We arrived here last night, having dined at Exeter. 
This morning I have been walking with Lady Morley to 
the river, which was waving, and saw the sea, and 
inhaled it with delight. Nobody has hinted at a side- 
saddle or wheeled vehicle for me. Tout est Men, 
pourvu que cela dure. 

We dine at half-past five, as all but Lady Morley 
and myself are going to the play at Plymouth, to see 
Miss Brunton, whom they rave about. 

They are now all gone, frisking away upon kicking 
ponies and heavy war-horses. I am alone in the house, 
as I have persuaded Lady Morley to go to the play. 

Saturday. — Cela ne dure pas. How peculiar it is ! 
I tell them honestly I hate junketing and what follows. 
At half-past one Lady Morley is so obliging as to take 
me out in her whisky to some far-distant precipice. 
Some are ordered up Stratton Heights on pony-back, 
the men are gone out shooting. The happy Earl flings 
his reins upon the neck of his volonte, and does and goes 
where bon lui semble. 

My health is robust, my spirits low. Dear G., I 
mean to have a low little carriage to drive you down to 
the sea every day, but on a straight Dutch road, broad 
and unvolatile as the natives. I do not believe there 
is a single hill in all Holland. 

Lady Morley says : ' My lord is gone to join a com- 
mittee of Devonshire gentlemen. They are going to 
bore through a mountain upon a new principle advised 



1823 TO LADY G. MORPETH 229 

by me. The committee are to sit with their faces 
opposite to it, and talk. This, with a bill for bettering 
the condition of bodkins,^ occupies my lord entirely at 
this moment.' God bless you, dearest. 

I open my letter to tell you that I am enchanted. 
I have gigged round the new road, sans peur et sans 
reproche. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : October 1823. 

My dearest G., — ^We are not yet at hberty to talk 
of our plans, but all minor ones must yield to the 
necessity Mr. Canning says there is of our being off ^ 
before the meeting of Parliament. We shaU in con- 
sequence go from hence to town, but our stay here 
will be prolonged tiU the end of next week, as it is a 
great object to Granville to see as much as he can of 
Mr. Canning, who is unfortunately so unwell that he is 
now getting up for the first time since he has been here 
and will be probably unequal to society and talk for 
some days longer. All that we shaU be able to per- 
form — and that is dependent upon Lord Clancarty's 
arrival in London, whom G. must see — is one week in 
Staffordshire, where GranviUe will be able to transact 
his Shropshire business from Teddesley, and one at 
Chatsworth, where we do trust you wiU now consent 
to meet us. 

I cannot believe in my avenir. The hurry of it 
adds to a feeling it must be a dream. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : October 1823. 

Charles Ellis has, like me, knelt for a morning, and 
obtained it. The Earl is gone in his buggy to Ply- 

^ Any one sitting between two other people in a carriage was called 
a bodkin. 

' To the Hague, where Lord Granville had been appointed 
Ambassador, 



230 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1823 

mouth to attend what Lady Morley calls the boring 
committee. All the rest to Mount-Edgcumbe. Having 
seen it I could better spare this junket than any other. 
Do not expect to hear from me to-morrow, as we start 
at break of day for the Duke of Bedford's cottage, 
twenty-six miles off. 

I have been walking down to the full tide, turning 
my thoughts and tossing them as the haymakers do 
their hay, but I cannot define the different degrees of 
different feelings I have about the future. I would 
give all I possess to talk to you for one half-hour, there 
are so many little things which it is easier to say than 
to write. I am sure Granville likes it, which is more 
than half the battle, and I think I shall when I am 
once there. 

Mr. Canning is quite well again. Mrs. Canning has 
been very amiable and facile a vivre. 

We have neighbours every day, chiefly knavish and 
militious characters, as Lady Morley calls them. In 
the evening she heads a round game. You should have 
heard Mr. Canning and her bawling ' My sows pigged ' 
at one another. The sober-minded and elderly ecart, 
Granville reads his book. Lord Morley sleeps. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : October 1823. 

All I can say is that we are very sorry. What now 
remains is to wait patiently in the hope of some delay 
or some yet unimagined mode of meeting. 

When our plans are more regularly dated, we shall 
be able to see more daylight perhaps. Endsleigh is 
beautiful, and so was Mr. Canning's speech to the 
mayor and aldermen at Plymouth, but time is swal- 
lowed up by these proceedings, and to-day we dine at 
five to go to the ball. I really have hardly any time to 



1823 TO LADY G. MORPETH 231 

blow my nose, for the evening is all active service, every 
woman expected to do her duty. 

I sometimes think of going up England in a chay. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Saltram : October 1823. 

I have liked even the boating to the Breakwater 
and the Plymouth ball. Yet no words can describe 
the delight of the day I am in complete possession of, 
impassable, impossible, rain set in from the early dawn, 
no question of junketing, even Lord Morley's ukase at 
breakfast, ' To day you wiU read your books,' 

Yesterday we went to the ball. The two girls 
danced till past one, we of the middle ages played at 
^cart^. We were twice on the point of being overturned, 
once into the Lary, on our way home. Lamps out, 
blind horse, drunken postboy. Howard obliged to get 
out and lead the horses. But here we are safe and 
sound, nothing impending but Lord and Lady St. Ger- 
mans. Mr. Canning has a bad cold, owing to the quan- 
tity of Plymouth he was obliged to perform yesterday. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Cirencester : November 9, 1823. 

Dearest G., — Thank Govero very much for his ami- 
able little letter. We shall miss them, I fear, as we 
leave London on Wednesday week. The exact time of 
our going I cannot calculate upon. I wiU not think of 
means of seeing you till I know more. 

Mr. Canning says the 5th of January, but that is 
really impossible, and I hope when the time comes 
much more tether may be granted to us, but it is a 
bore that we must square ourselves as if it was really 
the earliest day. 

There is nobody here but William De Eos. He 
was quite charmed with Lord Clanwilliam's kindness 



232 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1823 

and attention to him and the other bulls/ praises him 
to the sky, says he is amazingly popular, lives so well, 
is so amiable to his attaches. 

This is a fine, comfortable, avenue-gravel-walk 
place. The house luxurious, and the people very merry 
and good-humoured. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Heythrop : November H, 1823. 

We set out at eight o'clock to-morrow, find our 
letters at Oxford and see the little Governor^ at 
Beaconsfield. I look forward to London as a week of 
rest from the labour of junketing. 

Tuesday, half-past seven. — A frosty morning. You 
know a journey is to me & fete. I like it as men, the 
harsher sex Lady Morley calls them, do hunting and 
shooting. 

Wednesday night : Bruton Street. — I found the 
little Governor delighted to see us, and the picture of 
health and happiness. He is grown the finest, stoutest 
boy possible. 

On Thursday week we set out from hence to Calton.^ 
We cannot yet know what day we return. It turns 
upon what delay Mr. Canning can allow us. Susy and 
Georgy are wild with joy. Susy writes : ' Joy has 
quite bewildered me. I write foolishly. I cannot 
collect my ideas together. They all dance about 
my head, and my tongue is their fiddle.' 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Calton : November 24, 1823. 

My dearest brother, — The Hague is on your way to 
England, and that it is so is one of the sides of the ques- 
tion I fix my thoughts upon. I am at this moment very 

1 At Berlin. 

^ Their eldest son was at school there with Dr. Bradford. 

^ Mr. Wilmot's country house. 



1823 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 233 

bewildered. The hurry of having to transport oneself 
before the end of January, the uncertainty of how and 
where I can see most of Lady Morpeth, all the dull 
necessary details of establishment, all this is upon me. 
Yet all this is swallowed up in the vexatious, disap- 
pointing, perplexing reality of the present moment. 
Yes, dearest brother, the 24th of November, 1823., 
Calton, near Lichfield. (A/-tud^ YwrvV^^'''/'^^ 

On Thursday we left London, intending to sleep 
here one night on our way to Chatsworth, where yes- 
terday we were to arrive. The Wortleys^ were on 
that day to be there, Sir Joseph Copley~from Sprof- 
borough,Mr. Wilmot from home, WiUiam Ponsonby from 
Worthing, Charles Ellis and Howard ^ from London, E. 
Bagot from Windsor on purpose, Mr. Huskisson from 
London. You may figure to yourself Granville's delight 
at the idea of marshalling these Tory battalions for the 
chase on Friday next. After having been perfectly 
well on the road here, he is seized with the severest fit 
of the gout he has ever had, unable to put his foot to ^ 
the ground. 

You may imagine our distress, putting aside aU 
selfish feelings of disappointment. 

There was but one thing to be done, send our 
excuses, and give them orders for two or three days' 
chasse. Messrs. Wihnot, Littleton,^ and Lord Palmer- 
ston have gone there. I have commanded them not 
to touch Hebe or misplace a single book. But think 
of poor Granville confined to his bed or couch the 



^ Mr. and Lady Caroline Wortley. He was created Lord "Whamcliffe 
in 1826. "■■ — ~~~' 

" His son, Lord Howard de Walden, who inherited the title through his 
mother. 

' Mr. Littleton was Irish Secretary under Lord Grey's Government, 
which post he resigned in 1834 in consequence of his having exceeded his 
authority in his negotiations with O'Connell respecting the renewal of the 
Coercion Bill. He was created Lord Hatherton in 1885. 



3 



234 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1823 

whole day, with the thought of all he misses ! It is one 
of those contretemps that make one feel half demented. 
I will not close my letter till I have something to add 
to it. 

25th. — Dearest brother, — An express arrived from 
Chatsworth to-day with the following statement : ' At 
the Birch Hills, 209 head. Palmerston 51, Littleton 
47, Wilmot 46, Ponsonby 42, Wortley and Copley 24.' 

They are all frantic with delight. Lady Caroline 
Wortley, naturally fond of Dukes and statues, is in the 
third heaven. Her Governor the same, and, though 
seized with the gout, shoots in a flannel shoe from the 
back of his horse. Mr. Wilmot writes : ' I have pro- 
posed to Ponsonby to return with us to Calton Wednes- 
day, but in consequence of communications from Messrs. 
Eidgeway ^ and Burgoyne ^ some hesitation is made 
with respect to the abandoning this glorious chass^ 
Mr. B. states that he told the Duke the cock pheasants 
and hares must be killed, and the Duke said that he 
would send a party of ten guns to shoot for a week, if 
that would do. Mr. B. replied that it would. Mr. 
Eidgeway takes the same line of argument, and in 
addition presses Hardwick on the enamoured field. 
This is coupled with an ardent desire on the part of the 
Wortleys and Sir J. Copley to stay. Our breaking up 
depends upon your answer.' To this we have consented, 
hoping you will approve. William writes : ' We have 
had a most brilliant day at Birch Hills. Burgoyne 
will, I believe, spend the night in fasting and prayer/ 
as he and Eidgeway are extremely anxious that the 
hares and pheasants' want of being killed should be 
attended to.' Mr. Littleton has sent to his distracted 
rib, who is expecting a party of Londoners to-morrow, 
simply that he cannot go home. I have been prolix, 

' The steward. 

^ The gamekeeper, who was a local preacher. 



1823 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 235 

but in a foreign land you will not object to these details. 
They are all in rapture with the beauty of the place. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Teddesley : November 30, 1823. 

We arrived here this morning, my dearest G. We 
find the Howes, Charles Percys, Mr. Huskisson, and 
Howard, all very agreeable people. Lady Howe has 
a brilliancy, life, and glowing animation, that youth 
ought always to have, but so seldom has. He is so 
gentlemanlike and unpretending. Mrs. Percy sings 
like a nightingale. Imagine how blessings are thrown 
away in this odd world. She is not at all glad to be 
with child, no more is he that she is. 

George Villiers has got a place of 800Z. a year, 
auditor of the excise. 

Good-night, my very dear G. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Blithfield : November 1823. 

Lord Harrowby tells me, my dearest Lady H., that 
you have not a soul in town, which makes me write 
with confidence, as letters become society when there 
is no other, and you may as weU look at my hand- 
writing as at your empty arm-chairs. 

We arrived here the day before yesterday. I think 
a view of us at dinner will be the best way of making 
you enter into our pleasures. Lord Bagot at the top, 
between Lady Dartmouth and myself. His conversa- 
tion dans ce genre. ' Ealph ! Ealph ! ' with a deep 
sigh and a look the nurses call pitiful. ' What do you 
think I have been about for the last five-and-twenty 
minutes? Dressing the salads. I thought I should 
have dropped, but I flatter myself there are not any 
in England half as good.' To this and much of the 

• Lord Bagot's country house. 



236 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1823 

same sort I, with Lord Dartmouth on the other side of 
me, seriously inchne. Five Lady Legges and one Mr. 
Legge, a Mr. Newdigate, whom one of them has mar- 
ried, for fun I think, as he is not above three feet high, 
sit without uttering down one side of the table. La(^ 
Fanny Talbot is the only animated and living thing 
amongst them. She appears clever, amiable, and quite 
unconscious of her calamity, for certainly her tremen- 
dous height is one, and when I go out of the room 
where she is, I feel as if I ought to give a shilling at 
the door. In short, take us all together, we must look 
as if we had turned out of those great blue carts 
which travel about to the fairs. To-morrow we go to 
Hardwicke, and I can hardly believe in the happiness of 
being again with G. 

Adieu, dearest Lady H. I will write to you from 
Woburn. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bruton Street : December 10, 1823. 

Granville is much the same, unable to move beyond 
the couch in my dressing-room, as patient as an angel, 
and bearing aU these repeated vexatious contretemps 
better than I do what follows. 

We are bidden to the Pavilion from the 24th of 
December to the 2nd of January. If you will just run 
over in your mind my boy's hohdays, the children who 
wiU have about three days of us, and those the high days 
of two Dukes, nine new gowns aU to be ordered now, 
when I have hardly a moment to spare, you may sum up 
what amount of desagrement you please. 

Adieu, dearest. I have a dozen letters to write, to all 
those coming to meet the Duke of York, who arrives 
on the 21st for one day's chasse. 



1823 TO LADY G. MORPETH , 237 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bruton Street : December 13, 1823. 

You are so kind in writing so constantly. I can 
make you no return. 

Lord Morley, Punch, and the Poodle came here yes- 
terday evening. The only thing we talked about is the 
following. We all agree in thinking it the only thing 
of the sort from which there is no unshackling oneself. 

Lady Morley asked Lady Georgiana Grey about the 
story in the papers of the head. Lady Georgiana told 
her it was perfectly true, attended with the following 
extraordinary circumstances. She was in bed, saw a 
head come into the room, terrified flew into Lady Grey's 
room, locked the door and remained with her all night. 
The scene took place in Hanover Square. The next 
morning Lady Georgiana told her story. Lady Grey 
said she saw how strong was the impression made on 
her mind. ' You are convinced of what you say you 
have seen, but you cannot convince anybody else, so 
promise me to repeat this to no human being, not even 
your father. You wiU be thought a fool.' They com- 
plied and obeyed with regard to Lord Grey. 

A fortnight after this occurred Lady Georgiana and 
her sister were sitting up late with their mother. Lord 
Grey came into the room, put down a candle, sat down 
and said : ' I have just seen the most extraordinary 
thing. As I came through the dining-room I heard 
something move, and on turning round to look, saw a 
head coming along the room to me.' 

Lady Georgiana told Lady Morley not to mention it 
to her father, for he could not bear to hear it mentioned. 
This happened in May. Pray tell George with my 
awful compliments. 

Wednesday. — ^Lady Georgiana's account taUies per- 
fectly with Lord Grey's, and, though he dislikes it, he 



\ 

238 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1823 

has told the story repeatedly. GranviUe says Lord 
Grey has not to our knowledge ever told the story. 
He leans, I see, to the embellishing powers. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Brighton : December 25, 1823. 

We arrived in very good time, my dearest G., 
though I had to walk in to the whole assembled world. 

The King is all gaiety, graciousness, and nimbleness. 
He led in to dinner the Duchess of Clarence, a small, 
well-bred, excellent little woman. York followed with 
the Marchioness, grown much fatter, with twice the 
number of bracelets and rings. Clarence and I fol- 
lowed. I sat between the Eoyal brothers, and shall till 

the 2nd. Lady and Hope ran in. The former 

is as ever absorbed and sighing. The young lord civil, 
but only to her. Hope ^ was dressed in solid gold, 
with rare birds flying in different directions out of her 
head. Lord Holland was the hero of the piece. They 
made up to him beyond measure, and he is a great love, 
half pleased and half ashamed. Bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Brighton : December 26, 1823. 

Yesterday's dinner as usual. In the evening Lord 
and Lady Cowper only. We had Handel and Cramer 
in the evening. 

Granville is gone out hawking. It is a divine day. 

The King will force me to eat and drink syllabubs, 
meringues, ice, etc., that I am as bilious as possible 
this morning. 

I am distressed to find I have nothing to say. The 
truth is — hush Lady M. and bolt the door — it never was 

' Mrs. Hope, widow of Thomas Hope of Deepdene and daughter of 
Lord Decies, Archbishop of Tuam. She married in 1832 Viscount 
Beresford. 



1823 TO LADY G. MORPETH 239 

anything like so dull. There is nothing to speculate 
upon, nothing to laugh at, for the couple are grown 
very decent, respectable sort of folks. The intense heat 
makes us all languid, we eat too much, and there is 
no variety of society and lots of Eoyalty. The Duke 

of Wellington goes to-morrow. Lady might be 

something to one, but what is a woman with a little 
afiair of the heart ? Ever yours, dearest of sisters. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Pavilion : December 28, 1823. 

Dearest sister, — I have been all the morning on the 
Chain Pier, which is delicious. Granville has been 
cantering with the prima donna. Last night we had 
music again in the Eed Eoom. Mrs. Hope came and 
engrossed the sparks, namely Henry and Charles Fox 
and Lord Dudley Stuart. Great enquiries about you 
and yours. The Duke of Wellington went to Althorp 
this morning, he of Montrose is to supply his place. 
To-day we are to have the Cowpers, Mr. Luttrel and 
Madame de Lieven at dinner. 

I have heard from Lady Howe, who comes to Wher- 
stead on the 12th. I do not think you will dislike to 
meet her ; she is such a charming person, and has so 
much tact and kindness that she will allow for our 
wishing to be in great measure independent of her. 
Her habits too are convenient : she rides all day, which 
will leave us entire liberty in the morning. 

The King's kindness is quite moving. He wanted 
me to send for my girls, and said he would lodge them 
in the Pavilion. It is not feasible, but I expressed my 
proper gratitude. 

The Duke of Clarence has a soupqon of gout in his 
knee, Lord St. Helens ditto, the King ditto, Granville 
occasional twinges. The Duchess of Clarence a des 
crampes, and fat Lady ErroU, who is a great dear, aches 



240 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1823 

all over. The rest of us have over-eaten ourselves. 
Verity, whom I led over the house, groans over the 
atmosphere. Yours ever and ever. 

The King told Lady Cowper and me that he cries 
for joy when he thinks how pleasant it is. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Pavilion : December 29, 1823. 

How you will pity us, my dearest G. ! It is too 
vexatious. Granville woke at three this morning in 
violent pain. He took some colchicurti and is easier, 
but in bed, and the foot all swelled and inflamed. We 
have two delightful rooms, and Sir Matthew Tierney, 
who, they say, understands gout better than any 
physician going. G. will have his boiled chicken, and 
go to bed at eleven, for his going downstairs is out -of 
the question. These are my consolations, but is it not 
vexatious ? 

We had Eossini last night. He must have been 
much pleased with his reception ; the King was quite 
enraptured at having him. The singing is delicious, 
such varied powers of expressing whatever he pleases. 
He is a fat, saUow squab of a man, but with large, lan- 
guishing eyes and des traits which justify his thinking 
himself, as they say he does, something very irresistible. 
We gave him in return lots of Handel, the Coronation 
Anthem, etc. 

To-night we are to have a great assembly. I must 
dine below, but mean to request leave of absence early 
in the evening. Adieu, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Pavilion : December 31, 1823. 

I am very happy this morning. Granville has had 
an excellent night, and Sir Matthew has managed him 
perfectly. He is to go down in the evening. 



1823 TO LADY G. MORPETH 241 

We dined in the large room yesterday. I was 
emancipated from my Dukes by the increased numbers 
and the departure of York, and had Mr. Luttrel by me. 
He adores Georgiana. He says he cannot find words 
for his feelings, that it is sufficient happiness for him to 
exist in the same room with her, that he never knew 
what perfection was before. 

In the evening we had all Brighton, des figures 
incroyahles. Lady Sandwich oppressively vivacious, 
Mrs. Hope rather touchy. Sir Hudson Lowe with the 
countenance of a devil, Lady George Seymour looking, 
as the King says, like an old soubrette in a play, Miss 
Seymour ^ laughing very heartily. 

I am now going to walk on the pier, the day is fine, 
and Granville well enough. Bless you, dearest. 

' She was married to Colonel Dawson Darner in 1825. 



VOL. I. E 



242 LETTEKS OE HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 



1824 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Pavilion : January 1, 1824. 

I wish you many of them, very happy ones, and 
chiefly spent either at Brussels or the Hague. G. has 
announced to me this morning a serious intention of 
coming to live with me when her young have multiplied. 

I think you may like ' Nine Days at Brighton, by 
Viscountess Granville.' So here goes. We arrived 
here on the 24th in time for dinner. The King received 
us more than graciously. I never saw him in such 
health and spirits. He scarcely ever sits down or is 
Btill for a moment, but allows us. No legs but royal 
ones could otherwise endure. The company assembled 
were the Duke of York, who adores us, breakfasts en 
trio with us every morning, says Wherstead is the 
best house in England, and my toilette the most perfect. 
Partiality could no further go. The Duke of Clarence, 
the Duchess, a very excellent, amiable, well-bred little 
woman, who comes in and out of the room a ravir, 
with nine new gowns (the most loyal of us not having 
been able to muster above six), moving a la Lieven, 
independent of her body. Lord and Lady ErroU with 
faces like angels, that look as if they ought to have 
wings under their chins. She is a domestic, lazy, fat 
woman, excedee with curtseying and backsliding. Lord 
and Lady Maryborough, a very agreeable woman, with 
a fine back -and very plausible ugliness. The usual 
Dukes and gentlemen-in-waiting. Lord Exeter, who 



1824 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 243 

pays no attention to Lady Exeter, who, nevertheless, is 
as handsome and as delightful as ever. I think her 
out of spirits, and the wonder would be were she not.^ 

On Christmas Day we processed into the chapel, 
where the service was really divine, but what with heat 
and em^otion very overpowering. 

I went after it to Lady Conyngham, and saw her 
Christmas gifts, which made my mouth water, and 
made me almost wish for a situation. A magnificent 
cross, seized from the expiring body of a murdered 
bishop in the island of Scio. An almanack, gold with 
flowers embossed on it of precious stones. A gold 
melon, which upon being touched by a spring falls into 
compartments like the quarters of an orange, each con- 
taining different perfumes. I returned like Aladdin 
after the cave, only empty-handed, which, I believe, he 
was not. 

Our evenings have since passed much the same. 
The King has almost given up cards. The Eed Eoom is 
always open and the band always playing. 

On Monday we had Eossini. The King all gracious- 
ness to him. He sang, which went to our musical 
hearts, 'OteUo' and 'Pigaro,' etc., but the courtiers and 
the rest of the society were indignant at his fami- 
liarity. Being fat and lazy, and consequently averse to 
standing, he took a chair and sat by the King, who, 
however, gave him the kindest reception, and, less petit 
than his suite, understood the man, and treated him 
as his enthusiasm for music disposed him to do. I 
hope to hear more of him, for it is an unspeakable 
pleasure. 

We have had one assembly, all Brighton. To-night 
there is a child's ball. Granville's gout returned and 
confined him to his room for two days. Nothing ever 

' She was a daughter of Mr. Poyntz and sister of the two youths who 
were drowned at Bognor. 

K 2 



244 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

equalled the King's kindness. You see I am quite 
touched. 

Now, my dearest brother, for our plans. The first 
of February probably, not a day later, Granville, I, 
Ealph Abercromby, and Mr. Jones, the private secre- 
tary, start for Calais. From thence we shall move 
leisurely to Brussels, stay there one day for Granville 
to see Lord Clancarty,^ and then go to the Hague to an 
hotel. The children will not join us till house, esta- 
blishment, etc., are all settled, which will save them the 
journey in the depth of winter. Adieu, dear, dearest 
brother. 

The King does nothing but regret you. He says 
you are the life and soul of the Pavilion. La Marquise 
raves of you. She told me she knew you better than 
anybody, and that you do not mean to marry Lady 
Elizabeth.^ The Duchess of Bedford comes with her 
children for the ball to-night, if the Duke is well. 
There is nothing like the zeal of a Whig lady. Lady 
Tankerville wrote a delightful letter to Lady Cowper. 
' Lady Jersey never writes to me. She writes every 
day to the Duke of York, and would give her eyes, the 
only good thing she has left, to write to the King.' 
True woman's parenthesis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The PavUion : January 1, 1824. 

Granville is quite well. He went down yesterday 
evening and I was accused of having rouged him. 

La regnante is not in spirits. I am sure she is in 
a state of anxiety about Lady Elizabeth. Lord Euston 
is here, but I never saw anything so marked as his 
having no intentions. 

I called upon Lady Elizabeth Vernon yesterday, a 

' The Ambassador, whom Lord Granville was about to replace at the 
Hague. 

-* Her daughter. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 245 

flourishing patient, but on a couch. The Cannings have 
not been asked owing to his gout. Bless you, dearest 
sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bruton Street : January 3, 1824. 

We landed here at half-past three yesterday, dined 
tete-a-tete without dressing upon partridge and rice 
pudding, read till ten, played at chess tiU near one. 
Balancez this with the Pavilion account etjugez. 

Our favour went crescendo to the last. He hopes to 
have another squint at me before I go, and if he is not 
W'ell enough to encounter the opening of Parliament, 
this I fear will be at Brighton again. 

The child's ball was beautiful. Near one hundred 
of them, perfect room to see them, neither crowd nor 
heat. 

The King was engrossed with the Bedford children. 
He saw one of her boys looking at his order of the 
Golden Fleece, and asked him what he thought that 
order was. ' Chinese, I suppose.' We did not look 
quite pleased. The youngest Bedford girl ^ beautiful, 
exactly hke what Lady Georgiana Gordon was. 

A little Drummond Burrell, shrewd, prudent, crepee. 
Emily Cowper absent and hlasee, but full of grace and 
finesse. Bless you, my dearest. I have little time. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : January 1824. 

My dearest G., — I am going to please you very much. 
I am quite delighted with Harriet." She is in every 
way, size, health, mind, and character, such a fine 
creature. I never, nonohstant, liked her thoroughly till 
now. She behaves so beautifully, so attentive to them,^ 

' Lady Louisa Eussell, who married Lord Abercorn in 1832 and is now 
the Dowager Duchess. 

^ Lady Gower. ' Lord and Lady Stafford. 



246 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

SO devoted to him, her manner to everyone so proper, 
and to crown all so infinitely more unpretending than 
she was before her pretensions were all so more than 
gratified. 

I found her a very handsome, blooming, somewhat 
matronly woman, whom I should have pronounced to 
be about twenty-five.^ 

As to his happiness, I never saw anything like it, 
and his mind and manner have expanded under her 
influence. Lady Stafford quite worships her ; she says 
she has not a shadow of a fault. 

We dine and sleep there again on Thursday; the 
Cannings are asked to meet us. Adieu, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : January 1824. 

Monsieur de Lieven called on me yesterday. Madame 
de Lieven writes to me that after having been em- 
poisonnee a Chdlons, noyee a Geneve, she had a narrow 
escape of an overturn, and arrived at Milan half dead 
with fright. There, however, she finds weather like 
July, a hot sun and my brother etahli comme a Londres, 
deux loges a la Scala, diners tons les jours, concerts 
tons les Vendredis. Lady Hunloke the head of the 
establishment, Lady Belfast premiere dame de com- 
pagnie. She says he is uncommonly well, in boisterous 
spirits, and all kindness and civility to her. 

Lord Harrowby and the two girls are arrived in 
town. They were very near wrecked, but people are 
never more than very near, which is comfortable. Lady 
H. and the Duchess are both coming to town, in short 
it is brimful. Bless you, dearest. 

' She was nineteen. 



1824 TO LADy G. MOEPETIi 247 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : January 1824. 

My dearest G., — I do not think out of spirits, 

but sh.e talked to me with great openness about her 
danger in society, and cross-examined me distressingly 
about the wonder and the reason that, just married and 
passionately fond of her husband, flirting with her 
should occur to others, and that, unlike other brides, 
everybody was speculating whether she would flirt or 
no. The answer to this is one that cannot be hinted 
at, that though she is in love with him, nobody believes 
it, and those who admire her never talk as if he was a 
safeguard, but only of her good principles. The only 
fear is that she is one of those, and they are generally 
the most attractive and attracting, who cannot be 
amused by the mere mechanical apparatus of society, 
light, dress, crowd, small talk. She is either interested 
or bored to death, but with such excellence, such free- 
dom from all wrong, her conduct never can err beyond 
a certain point, looking too much pleased and being 
accused of it. 

You will perhaps be surprised to hear that my 
interview with Mr. Abercromby affected me to a degree 
I could not command. You never knew anything like 
his happiness at Ealph's^ destination aupres de nous, 
and the warmth, almost entramement of his manner ; 
his ' I trust to you with perfect happiness and security 
all I care for in life ' almost choked me, and I was glad 
to run out of the room when Granville came into it. 
I have been ten times worse with Mrs. Abercromby. 
I cannot help being a great fool, they are so wrapped 
up in him. 

.^ His son, who was appointed attach^ at the Hague. He afterwards 
filled several high diplomatic appointments. He succeeded his father as 
second Lord Dunfermline in 1858. 



248 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

We dine at Gloucester Lodge ^ to-morrow to meet 
Jules,^ Vraiment,^ Messrs. Fagel * and Falbe.^ 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 9, 1824. 

Dearest G., — The joy of being here again with all 
my children ! 

Susy is ime femme charmante, Dody a great, warm- 
hearted, shrewd, clumsy girl. The boys very nice, 
satisfactory little men. It is too delightful to be with 
them all. They are quite wild with joy at the prospect 
of the Hague. 

I have heard from Pahlen at Eome. He intends to 
visit us in Holland, has made acquaintance with j^our 
George, whom he likes extremely. Who does not ? 

I am so pleased Mrs. Arbuthnot '' is coming. As I 
hear she plays at whist all night with the two Dukes 
and scolds violently, I have a slight hope that she goes 
out shooting. Bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 11, 1824. 

My dearest G., — Yesterday nos fiers chasseurs were 
kept at home all day by the badness of the weather. 

To-day we are expecting the two Dukes,'' the Arbuth- 
nots, Charles Greville, and Henry de Eos. 

Now, dearest, for plans. We mean to be here again 

' Mr. Canning's residence. 

° Jules was Prince Polignac, then Ambassador in London. 

' Vraiment was Prince Lieven's nickname. 

■* Dutch Ambassador. 

' Danish Minister. 

° 'On coming to town yesterday I heard of another death. Mrs. 
Arbuthnot, after a short iUness. The Duke of Wellington, with whom she 
had lived in the most intimate relations for many years, evinced a good 
deal of feeling, but he is accused of insensibility, because he had the good 
taste and sense to smooth his brow and go to the House of Lords with a 
cheerful aspect. She was not a clever woman, but she was neither dull 
nor deficient, and very prudent and silent.' — Greville's Memoirs. 

'■ York and Wellington. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 249 

the 9tli or lOtli of January till the 20th, and then in town 
till we go, which I hope will not be before the beginning 
of "February. Granville will have a partie de chasse 
here during that time, and we think it just possible you 
will be able to come. Our hope is that the Gowers 
may meet you part of the time. I hardly dare hope 
such happiness as having you, dearest. At all events, 
if this is impossible you must meet us in town. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Wherstead : January 12, 1824. 

We got over our soiree very well. His Eoyal High- 
ness is as happy as a King with his whist and his 
chasse. 

They started at half-past ten this morning. The 
da}'' has been quite beautiful. 

The dandies all behave perfectly. F. Lamb was 
flat tiU to-day. 

They are just come in, in raptures. Never was there 
such a chasse, 900 head. The Duke of York is really 
bursting with joy, as he has killed more than he ever 
did before, 128 head. 

"We set off early to-morrow for London. Bless you, 
my dearest G. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bruton Street : January 23, 1824. 

The Vernons have been staying three weeks at 
Panshanger. They all went to see the murderers. 
Thurtell ^ has a countenance expressive of crime to any 
amount. Probert very good-looking. There is a 
tradesman in London of the name of Carpenter, who 
told Mr. Byng that a nephew of his lived very much in 

' Thurtell, Hunt, and Probert were tried for the murder of a man of 
the name of Weare. The two first convicted, Thurtell alone executed. 
Probert, who turned King's evidence, was afterwards hanged for horse- 
stealing. 



250 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

the society of these men. Six weeks ago, to the great 
astonishment of his friends, he disappeared. No clue 
was to be found. They now, of course, suspect that he 
has been murdered. 

Friday morning. — I live in the hope of a delay, and 
shall probably soon know our chance of it, as Mr. 
Canning comes to town on Sunday. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : January 31, 1824. 

We went yesterday to the Duke of Wellington's, 
and then and there, sister mine, how I chuckled over 
my prospects ! Mrs. Lane Fox hoydenish and in roaring 
spirits. Lieven very sportive, tribes of Bathursts, 
ViUiers, etc. Punch, who is making up to Mrs. Lane 
Fox and utterly disdained by her. ' Oh, 'tis a pleasant 
sight to see ! ' 

I was shocked to hear last night of the poor Tanker- 
vUles having lost their second girl. Poor Corise, with 
all her faults, has a warm, affectionate heart and doats 
upon her children. 

I am going on Tuesday to the ventilator to hear the 
debate on the Spanish question. I imagine Mr. Canning 
wiU make one of his bursts. How it makes me wish 
for George, he is so exhilarated and exhilarating upon 
such occasions ! 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : 1824. 

' Yes, my beloved sister, though in looks I own I 
seem your trisdieule, the sympathies, of my heart are 
in Yorkshire, in vain does Bruton hold my frame. I 
possess a fond of feeling, a sympathetic soul, and 'tis 
all thine, my blossomina.' 

My dearest G., — I am just come from Eichmond, 
found Lady Duncannon, poor, pregnant, excellent 



1824 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 251 

creature, and I employed Frederick Foster to tell you 
why I did not write, and you see the result. 

I am now going to rest, and then a large dinner at 
Mr. Huskisson's. 

There is no sort of change, but people will not now 
believe we are not going to Paris, and tease me to death 
to discover my imagined secret. Adieu, dear, dearest 
G. Forgive this hurry. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 3, 1824. 

I have left Mr. Wilmot and Mr. Charles EUis fresh 
from the House and G. from the Lords to tell you what 
they say. Lord Somers made a good but rather ampli- 
fied speech. Lord Lorton a good one about Ireland. 
Lord Holland was a love, drinking oceans of water, but 
not making one of his best performances. Brougham 
very poor, a great deal of trumpery. Canning a 
sensible speech, but not so brilliant or fluent as usual. 
They say the House of Commons was never seen so 
empty on the first day. 

I have just had an entertaining letter from Madame 
de Lieveii. 

' Eome me transporte d'admiration ; il y a de quoi 
tout oublier au monde lorsqu'on se trouve au Forum 
Eomanum, ou bien k St. Pierre ; j'aime mieux le Forum 
cependant : je ne mef^che pas d'y voir pendre du linge, 
parce que j'espere que les Eomains portaient des che- 
mises, mais le frac de mon valet de chambre m'indigne. 

' 11 y a beaucoup d' Anglais ici. Je m'en vais vous 
dire qui a de I'esprit parmi eux. 

' Lord Kinnaird. Je ne me console pas de ce qu'il 
soit Eadical. Si je pouvais aimer ses principes autant 
que son esprit, il me semble que je I'aimerais trop. 

' Votre neveu Howard, c'est un charmant gar^on. II 
joue la comedie a merveille. Savez-vous que cette 



252 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

comedie Anglaise qu'on a montee ici est charmante et 
que c'est une veritable ressource. Je ne vous parle pas 
des Eomains : on ne les connait pas a Eome. Le corps 
Diplomatique roule sur Madame Appony, ambassadrice 
d'Autriche, qui soupire tout le jour. Elle est d'une 
sentimentalite qui me durcit le coeur. Et Monsieur 
Laval, ambassadeur de France, qui a un quart d'esprit et 
trois quarts de b^tise et de ridicule ; apres cela qui 
begaye et aussi est aveugle et sourd. 

'LaDuchesse de Devonshire est fort aimablepour moi. 
Votre frere parle de venir k Eome. Je n'en crois rien.' 

The extract is a long one, but I think worth the 
trouble. You will not quarrel with her fastidiousness, 
but it amuses me that in so large a society she can 
grant cleverness only to two. 

The Duke of Leeds takes our house for three years, and 
takes possession the 1st of March. Adieu, my dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 1824. 

We are almost at the end of our labours, but now 
comes the taking leave of everybody, answering letters 
of those who write and do not come to town. 

You will see by the papers that we were cut short 
of our sport on Tuesday. The Opposition would not 
make any play. 

I am half distraite in my shift, having had Lady 
Stafford, malgre the shift, for an hour, carriage at the 
door. Lady Harrowby waiting, three letters to write. 
Lady Holland just come. Plaignez-moi. Bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 11, 1824. 

I write in every spare moment, but they are but 
few, my dearest G. However, we have a reprieve till 
Saturday or possibly Monday week, owing to intelligence 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 253 

from Mr. Chad. The King of Holland is travelling incog., 
and will not be at the Hague till the 29th. 

We dined at Holland House the day before yesterday. 
Monsieur Falck dined there ; he is delightful, and as he 
is coming ambassador here, I hope you will make much 
of him. I am sure you will like him, he is so very 
natural and facile a vivre. Mr. Cranston was our lion, 
a fine, hale, old, intelligent face and very acute talk. 

Lady Grantham is very amiable. She is very sorry 
to lose me, not quite so hopelessly as she says and, I am 
sure, thinks. But she is very affectionate, and, unlike 
us, cultivates with care and waters with tears every sor- 
row that blows. Mr. Sneyd could not out-sentence this 
last paragraph. 

Granville did not go to the opera last night. We sat 
up till half-past one, up to our chins in manuscripts. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 13, 1824. 

Dearest G., — People pump me with the most dex- 
terous perseverance about Paris, and it is a secret 
which will want, when revealed, the zest of novelty. 
Monsieur Palck said to me, ' Je vous dirai un secret. 
Je serai plus longtemps a Londres que vous a la Haye.' 
Lady Holland's style is this : ' When you arrive at 
Paris, pray give my compliments,' etc. 

Susan came to me yesterday and said, 'Look, 
mama, I am drest at the Greeks, do you like it ? ' You 
have no idea how nice she looks with her hair in a 
large plait. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 1824. 

I never saw Granville as well as he is now, in such 
spirits, and looking so brisk and clear. We go on 
Thursday or Saturday. Our journey will be luxurious, 



254 I,ETTEES OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

and to the great happiness of the darling girls we 
take them with us. Mr. Jones and Ealph will go in 
the britschka every morning to air the inns for us. 
Granville and I in the chariot with Georgy bodkin, as 
she is sick, in a coach. Mile. Eward, Susy, and Marie 
in the landau, a housemaid and the children's-maid on 
the box. "We shall besides have a courier, one cook, 
Samuel and James, so that at the inns we shall feel at 
home. The girls and Eward are in such tearing spirits 
that it reflects light upon me. I see too what business 
and object are to my dearest GranviUe, and if it were 
not for you I should be enchanted. 

We dined yesterday at' Charles Ellis's, as he pro- 
mised to have nobody but Mr. Huskisson. Jamaica is 
the great object of interest just now. It is a most 
difficult and intricate question. A minor one is the 
arrest of Sir Eobert Wilson's two daughters, one six- 
teen, the other fifteen, at Calais by the French Govern- 
ment. Sir Eobert, waiting for them at Dover, has 
written in an agony to Mr. Canning, who will, I am 
sure, see the absurdity of hunting out these treason- 
ettes with such severity, and do all he can for him. 

Mr. Huskisson told us several droll stories. One of 
a man travelling through Holland, and, irritated at some- 
thing, writing upon some window, ' May man undam 
you, and G. d n you all.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : Eebruary 16, 1824. 

My dearest G., — I am in despair at having only a 
moment. If you could see me you would understand 
it. I never have time to put on a gown before dinner. 
I never can go out and see a soul but Lady Harrowby, 
whom I admit to my den, where I sit begrimed with 
dirt. 

The dinner at Agar's was pleasant. Lady Gower 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 255 

wins all hearts. Georgiana ought to have wings on, 
but ici has she is less efficient than her sister. Yes- 
terday a great dinner at Mr. Canning's. He in Agar's 
sort of spirits, and I felt, what I do not often, quite to 
love him. Mrs. C. benignant, and the girl handsome. 
Mr. Denison very polite to her. 

The journey will be health and repose to me. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 17, 1824. 

Lord Gower called here yesterday morning. She 
is coming to me at two to-day, when Cramer leaves her. 
I was at first tempted to advise against music, but 
why ? It is an innocent and evidently a great pleasure 
to her. She cannot follow up what will certainly not 
meet her half-way, but it will give her just enough 
talent to be a resource when she is alone. So I am not 
going to preach against flats and sharps. 

TheFrenchGovernmentreleased the little traitoresses, 
after having searched them from top to toe. Nothing 
was found of a suspicious nature. 

The great scandal of the day is a breach between 
the King and the Marchioness. Jealousy the cause. 
The heroes Knighton,^ Sumner ^ the tutor, or Pearson 
the evangelical, nobody knows which, but everybody is 
sure it is one of them. 

Think of Lady Cowper overhearing a conversation 
between Eogers and Luttrel, herself the theme. She 
had converted her dressing-room into a bedroom for 
the former. Eogers was saved by the weakness of his 

' Sir William Knighton acted as private secretary to George the 
Fotiith. 

^ Mr. Charles Sumner was tutor to Lord Mount Charles, and ac- 
companied his pupil to Switzerland, where the pupil fell in love with a 
Swiss lady. It was said Mr. Sumner reassured the alarmed parents by 
marrying her himself. He was rewarded by being appointed librarian at 
Windsor Castle, and in 1827 became Bishop of Winchester. 



256 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

lungs, Luttrel by the honesty of his friendship. She 
never- heard Eogers' attacks, but that they were such 
she knows by the rephes, all on the defensive. ' Upon 
my honour, I cannot judge her so harshly, she is so 
unafFected, so good-tempered.' ' Oh, come, come, women 
will have their beaux.' ' Well, I really don't know, but 
I have loved her from a child.' Adieu, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Bruton Street : February 19, 1824. 

I do not allow myself to think of your subsequent 
plans, as nothing can bring you here in time for me, 
and the pain of parting again is spared us. I am 
now secreted in the house, as the Duchess of Leeds is 
inspecting it. I think her a very lucky woman. 

I saw Lady Stafford and Mrs. Canning ; neither 
afforded me any new lights for my letter. 

I have arranged all my papers and we have sorted 
and separated the books. Verity has arranged me a 
medicine-chest, a sort of pocket edition of himself. 

I have found amongst other things a large packet 
of your letters to my grandmother, including the first 
you ever wrote. They may amuse your children. 

1 hear, though there was a little sparring, that 
Canning and Brougham were very polite to one another. 
Adieu, my dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

London : February 24, 1824. 

I was quite unhappy at not having a moment to 
write to you yesterday. We are just setting out, my 
beloved sister. I do not know how my nerves could 
have stood parting with you. 

I feel quite well and calm this morning, but the 
fatigue and worry of these last days have been very 
unstringing. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 257 

Lady Harrowby and Georgiana were des mauvais 
moments. I love the latter as if she were my child, and 
I think her one of the most perfect of human beings. 

I look forward to writing to, and hearing from, you 
as the great pleasure in store for me. G., as always, 
yours with the most devoted attention. 



To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Calais : February 26, 1824. 

Half-past two. — ^We breakfasted at Dover between 
six and seven, and here at eleven, dearest G. We 
had a passage of very little more than three hours, the 
sea very rough, and the wind very cold. Granville and 
I in high health on the deck, all the rest in the cabin 
as sick as dogs. 

We have since been walking over this pretty, gay, 
little town. I could not resist shopping, and send you 
the result — a fairing from Calais, price two francs. 

We are aU as well as possible, the sick all the better 
for it. 

Mr. Abercromby is a very amiable, quiet, gentle- 
manlike creature, with lots of tact, and a good deal of 
intelligent conversation. Mr. Jones a good-humoured, 
merry, useful, Uttle man, doing one's bidding aU day 
long, and doing it with alacrity and pleasure. 

We dine at five, go to the play, and do not set out 
tiU nine o'clock to-morrow, as the whole cargo takes 
physic to-night. God bless you, my dearest Sis. 

You would be disgusted if you were to see my prin- 
cipal amusement when my children are out of the way — 
a little dog of Mr. Jones, which I hope he will end by 
giving to me. I will place her in 2. pension when you 
come to the Hague. 

VOL. I. s 



258 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

St. Omer : February 27, 1824. 

We did not go to the play last night, we slept sound 
for nearly eleven hours. We arrived here at five, have 
had a dinner that enchants les messieurs, entrees and 
light wines, and now we are digesting and reposing. 
Both Calais and this place are peopled with English, 
slight sinners and heavy debtors, the needy and the 
greedy. Berkeley Craven, who is settled at Calais, 
walked with us this morning. He says Mr. Brummel 
is the happiest of men, lives chiefly with the natives, 
and enters into all the little gossip and tittle-tattle of 
the place with exactly the same zest as he was wont to 
do in England. 

Saturday morning, 8 o'clock. — You have no idea 
what a comfort and pleasure it is to me to have your 
copy of my little book upon prayer. I begin the 
morning with it, and the handwriting adds to its power 
of fixing my attention. The journey is an inexhaustible 
source of amusement to the children and myself. I am 
not the least biases about the cracking of the whips, the 
clamour of the beggars and les passants. My only 
anxiety is autour des lits, and Eward and I air all 
the belongings with our own hands. Our little facto- 
tum, Mr. Jones, is a jack of all trades, talks all languages, 
settles and pays everything, relates pleasing anecdotes 
of all the people and places we see, wraps us all up, 
keeps up the fire, and ever and anon hums sweet 
snatches of Italian airs. 

Lisle : 9 o'clock in the evening. — We are magni- 
ficently lodged here in the Hdtel de I'Europe, large, 
warm rooms, all new and clean. You have no idea of 
the difiierence of the whole face of the country from 
what it was when we last traversed it. Such a look of 
prosperity and cultivation, and strong, fine men doing 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 259 

all the hard work instead of women. We start to-mor- 
row at six, to reach Brussels by daylight. I wish the 
Clancarty day was over. 

Brussels : Sunday night. — Here we are, my dearest 
sister, all a little tired, but quite well, and delighted 
to be arrived ; but here is Granville, armed with a 
warming-pan, so good night. 

Monday morning. — You cannot know the delight 
of letters from England. I found this morning your 
little one, also one from Lady Harrowby, with good 
accounts of my boys, a small majority of twent3'^-four 
on Abercromby's motion, and an account of a soiree 
at Lady Grantham"s. Every breath of English manu- 
facture is delicious to us here. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Brussels : March 1, 1824. 

We had a dinner at five o'clock at Lord Clancarty's. 
He, a bustling, hard man, evidently galled at giving up J. ; 
the Embassy, but very civil to us. She, an excellent, '^^l- 
head-aching woman, with none of the representation or 
insolence of an Ambassadress. Two very ugly, obliging 
daughters, and a ditto son. Auguste d'Aremberg,^ a 
prosing, good-humoured, amiable man of seventy, and a 
nice little round-faced, bead-eyed, chattering Princesse 
de Schonbourg, his niece, seventeen, daughter of the 
Prince de Schwarzenberg,^ who was burnt at Paris. We 
went to the play, and saw ' CendriUon.' The theatre is 
pretty, and Benoni a better dancer than any but Albert. 
The house was chiefly filled with vulgar-looking English, 
with large French bonnets. As there are six thousand 
of them at Brussels, this is not wonderful. We were 
at home soon after ten, and I am going sleepy to bed. 

' The friend of Mirabeau. 

' His house was burnt down at a ball he gave at Paris in honour of the 
marriage of Napoleon and Marie Louise. 

s 2 



260 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

The children have been still happier than usual 
to-day, as it is the last day of the Carnival ; and 
masqued and grotesque figures, making strange faces 
and singing Flemish songs, are to be seen in spite of the 
weather, parading through the town. 

Antwerp : Tuesday evening. — Perhaps you will 
exult over us when you hear of a regular fall of snow. 
It has been on and off all day, and is now actually 
whitening over this beautiful town. I wish you could 
see us. We look so uncommonly comfortable in a 
large, high room, with a blazing wood fire. Granville 
looking very official with all the apparatus of business 
about him. Ealph deep in his book, and I writing 
askew upon the edge of a book. Mr. Jones and the 
children all tucked in bed, he with a bad cold, they 
with cheeks and spirits that would warm Siberia. Pray 
see Mrs. Abercromby, and tell her that we are quite 
delighted with her son. He has so much sense, and 
tact, and warmth of heart, that I feel we shall get more 
and more attached to him. 

We intend going to-morrow to see Eubens' picture, 
the ' Descent from the Cross,' to dearest Georgiana's 
famous shop, and to High Mass. After the girls have 
dined we go six pastes to Breda. 

Good night, my dearest. See my boys ; they are at 
Saxe's, in Conduit Street. Give my love to your count- 
less babies. Agar and Govero included, and when you 
see Lady Harrowby, tell her where and how we are. 

Breda, 6.30. — Here we are, having dressed in two 
large rooms like a company of strolling players, one in 
one corner and another in another. 

It was very Dutch to jog from Gooring to Gratzmo- 
dert in a deep fall of snow. We shall have ten hours' 
work to-day, a small passage in a steamboat, besides 
two small branches of the Maas to cross. 

The Hague. Thursday. — The hotel we are in is not 



1824 TO LADY G, MORPETH 261 

very comfortable, but it is a pied a terre pour le moment. 
We are all so weU. that nothing appears to me a grievance. 
Were it not for this, we should be somewhat discom- 
posed at finding so much etiquette and ceremony- 
expected from us immediately. Granville must go in a 
coach-and-six, with State liveries, to present his creden- 
tials. I am to receive the Hague world to-morrow, to 
sit like a queen, having them all presented to me. I 
hope we shall, after these two killing duties, be allowed 
to go our own ways for a time, as we have our house 
to prepare, and a hundred things which require leisure. 
I think this place must be very pretty indeed in summer. 
It is larger than I expected, more of a town, but I can- 
not yet judge of anything, with the ground covered with 
snow and a gite less good than most of the inns we have 
had upon the road. 

My dearest, — Seven out of the nine beautiful horses, 
embarked ages ago to come here, have perished on 
board from the severe weather, the other two in a most 
sickly state. I am so annoyed for dearest Granville. 
It is such a terribly vexatious thing. Susan's and his 
own favourite riding horses. He is quite adorable, for 
it is a trial of temper, patience, and cheerfulness, neither 
of which fail him for a moment. There is one comfort ; 
nothing can be expected from us. The representation 
of life cannot be required of people who really find it 
difficult to procure the necessaries. 

Friday. — We are all bent upon getting into our 
house as soon as possible, as this hotel is almost too bad 
to bear, as noisy as the 'White Hart' in Piccadilly. 
Bad dinners, worse beds. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : March 7, 1824. 

Everything begins to take a brighter aspect, my 
dearest sister, everything but being away from you, that 



262 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

lengthening chain. Your last letter by the Friday's 
courier was delightful to me, and I live in hopes of 
another to-morrow. 

We are more tolerably comfortable in our actual 
gtte, and the house we look forward to is a delightful 
one, splendid to an English eye as to space and height, 
delightfully situated upon a broad place like St. James's 
Park, with larger trees and frequent benches, far from 
the canals and bustle of the town ; like the country, only 
much gayer. I delight in the genre de vie. Till five 
o'clock, our dinner hour, my day is entirely my own — 
no visits, no interruptions. I dine in my morning gown 
with the attached, who are all merry, obliging, intelli- 
gent people. At six I dress, but no how at all, and 
return to the salon, where the darling girls, both in high 
health and spirits, stay with us till the door opens. 
Then come in what chez nous are morning visits. 

I have had a letter from dear little Granville, and a 
good account of my little boys from Mr. Byng. Pray 
thank him if you see him. We are writing like mad 
for the post. God bless you. Give my love to my 
friends. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : March 1824. 

This is a little -precis hiographique of the inhabi- 
tants of the Hague, which I beg you wiU read to dearest 
Lady Harrowby. I have not time to write a separate 
dispatch. You must figure them to yourself, aU drop- 
ping in between the hours of seven and ten. But that 
is at present all of my time that is not completely my 
own. 

The English society is soon disposed of. My com- 
ments are entirely between ourselves. Lady Francis 
Osborne, who has been more kind and useful to me than 
I have words to say. She knows everybody, every 
custom, every shop, every Eoyalty, and every drug. She 



1824 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 263 

seems excellent and amiable, bearing wretched health 
with exemplary patience ; but, fatal word and pray 
secret, she is tiresome, in a fever about trifles, and talk- 
ing incessantly about nothing. With great confusion 
in her own ideas, and always taking hold of mine by 
the wrong end. She has a clever daughter of about 
eighteen. 

Lady Gambler, a vulgar manner, but good-natured, 
quiet and obliging, of great use to me. 

Lady Ormonde, sister of Lady Clancarty, a quiet, 
gentle woman, who hates going out of her house. 

Mrs. Ollworthy, the clergyman's wife, beautiful, very 
like Miss Foote, but quite nulle in society. 

Mr. Chad, merry, intelligent, devoted, the idol of 
the Hague, and a great addition to our little dinner 
Diplomacy. 

French. — Mons. d'Agoult, a great puppy, despising 
his destiny and everything but the Bourbons. His wife 
in bed after afausse couche. I hear she is no loss. 

Prussian. — Mons. de Schlagan, a very agreeable, 
gentlemanlike man, about fifty, receiving us like the 
dew from Heaven, glad to talk, and talking very 
pleasantly. 

Eussian. — Two large carcases, with orders and taU 
daughters. Mdlle. Betsy, rather pretty. Mons. and 
Mme, Salviati, Eussian too I believe, fres comme il 
faut, she une gentille petite femme. A number of 
minor envoyes, who do nothing but bow and wear 
spectacles. 

Dutch. — The authorities of the town, and their 
wives. What shall I say of them ? Broad, respectable, 
matter-of-fact people, that can never offend or please 
one. Mons. Dedel, a very gentlemanhke man, talking 
English like us. His brother, Mr. Chad's butt and une 
vraie farce, dresses of a morning in a Japan silk bed- 
gown, makes tea, and asks Granville, with low bows, 



264 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

' When your Excellency has a sequence from a King, 
which do you play first ? ' 

Ladies of the Court: Lady Jemima Bentinck and 
Mile. Antoinette sa fille. The daughter like a cretin. . 
They ask ' How is Lady Stafford, how is dear Lady 
Essex ? ' Mme. d'Estorff and Mme, de Goltz, both agree- 
able, maidens d'un certain dge, drest like the Miss 
Berrys. Mons. Fagel, brother of the Greffier and just 
such another, is sixty. His wife much the prettiest 
and captivating woman I ever saw, like Mme. Zamoyska 
in her best days. They say she is remplie de talents 
et d' esprit ; her manners and her English are quite en- 
chanting, and she is, like Chad, the idol of the place. 
She has two sisters less beautiful, but I am told as 
charming as herself. 

Granville has been to Court. They were gracious 
in the extreme, but a degree of form ! He went in one 
coach-and-six, the attaches following in another, with 
an escort of cavalry. The whole, His Ex. excepted, 
looking very gingerbread. I go on Thursday, then 
come three days of grand representation. All Holland 
pouring in. Three more days devoted to returning all 
these visits in the evening, with a cap under my chin 
however. We may also say not at home of an evening, 
and for about three weeks there will be balls and little 
reunions to go to, and dinners. The latter at half-past 
four ending at seven, the former all over at half-past 
ten. This is coming ofi" cheap for a woman not fond of 
dissipation. 

Ten o'clock, Thursday evening. — I have had lots of 
them to-night, the Nuncio with his gold cross ; all the 
maids of honour. I am quite parched with talking, 
but I remember Lady Harrowby's advice and do not 
let myself go to any likes and dislikes, but, like the sun, 
rather a dim one by the way, I shine on all alike. 
Granville acquits himself a ravir, talks incessantly to 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 265 

the Dips., bows them in and out, looks uncommonly 
well. 

I wish you could have heard us at dinner to-day, 
how we chattered and laughed by the waters of Baby- 
lon ! Mr. Chad is really extremely amusing. Mr. 
Strangways is arrived. Adieu, for I am too sleepy to 
add another word. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : March 10, 1824. 

The sun shines, it is as mild as May. Mr. Chad 
has sent me two large Dutch dolls, representing the 
fishermen and women of Schevening. Mme. Pagel a 
basket of the most beautiful hyacinths and narcissi 
from Haarlem. Susan's new pelisse is come home, 
feuille morte, qui lui va a ravir; my Court gown has 
been tried on and fits, my new shoes ditto, and I am 
consequently in particularly good sorts — my only 
reason for writing after the volume I dispatched last 
night. I am going to have a most refreshing day. 
I shall go this morning for an hour to my house, and 
drive probably to the sea. How you wiU enjoy this 
place ! You have no idea how quiet and reviving 
it is. I will send you a sketch of my presentation 
to-morrow. 

Thursday night. — This morning I went all over dia- 
monds and black satin to Court. A little grand-cham- 
bellan leads me from the door to an ante-room, where 
four dames d'honneur receive me, till the folding doors 
open and I walk in alone to the Queen, standing in the 
middle of a very large and handsome salle d'audience. 
She is a shy, quiet, well-behaved woman, in miserable 
health and thinner than Mme. de Lieven. We talk of 
our Eoyal Family, of the loss of our horses, of the size 
of my house, and of the weather. A little back door 
opens and the King drops in. Five minutes more small 



266 LETTEKS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

Eoyal talk, and then I back out with a train five yards 
long, squiddle a little with the grand-maitre, and that 
is all that belongs to my duties vis-a-vis to the Court. 
To-night we have been to our box at the play. Lafont 
sung beautiful duets with his wife, and played enchant- 
ing variations of Eossini's music. 

To-morrow comes the English bag. I will finish 
my letter after I receive it. 

Friday. — I have had half the town. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : March 14, 1824. 

My dearest G., — The housemaid, with that sagacity 
peculiar to her kind, put my unfortunate letter in the 
tire. She found it on the floor, and said she supposed I 
wished to throw it away. 

I have been to the Princess of Orange.^ She re- 
ceived me most graciously, talked unceasingly. He 
joined us, and the interview went oiF very swimmingly. 
She is ugly, but with a good manner and splendid dress. 
She gets over that awkward stile wonderfully well. 
He talked of my brother and Lady Jersey, she of Mme. 
de Lieven. She was literally covered with jewels, 
crossing and dangling from her in every direction. 

Tuesday morning. — Your letter arrived, dearest of 
sisters, to refresh me after a dinner of twenty-three 
people, all the Ministers and Diplomates. 

I have had a most amiable entertaining letter from 
Mme. de Lieven. She says : ' Votre soeur a eu la 
bonte de venir me voir. EUe a maigri de tout ce que 
ses fiUes out engraissees. Lady Gower est charmante. 
II est impossible d'avoir des manieres plus distinguees, 
ni des choses plus aimables et spirituelles a dire.' 

' Was daughter of the Emperor Paul, and wife of the Prince of 
Orange who fought at Waterloo. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 267 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague ; March 21, 1824. 

No letter ever came so apropos as yours, my dearest 
sister. I have been suffering tortures with pain in my 
face, and was in bed the whole of yesterday, and after 
struggling with it a whole night and day, I was so ex- 
hausted by pain that I conquered my fear of taking 
laudanum, almost as bad as that of the toothache, and 
swallowed forty-five drops last night. It has subdued 
the enemy, and not had the bad effects it usually has 
upon me. I feel stupid and worn, but have neither 
headache nor sickness. Now in the middle of my 
writhing came Sukey, red with the pleasure she knew 
she was about to give : ' It's Aunt G., Mama.' Your 
entertaining long letter it was, and it soothed and com- 
forted me during my sharpest twinges. George's ex- 
tracts were worth their weight in gold. I am alarmed 
at Hart's new amusement, for beyond that I have no 
fears, but it is assez de son genre to squiddle with a 
princess, and he was sure to be taken with all those 
little clap-traps of embroidered cushions, satin slippers, 
dressing gowns of cachemire, morsels of Petrarch with 
which this one assails our nobility. I am only afraid 
of anything that keeps him from England and the 
Hague. Write me word if you hear more of it. I 

agree with you entirely with regard to Lady . As an 

example she would be tremendous, as a specimen she is 
only curious. The comfort for you is that she is too much 
of a character to be a likely object of imitation, and so 
sensible a person as your Harriet would see the absurdity 
of anybody but herself being her parallel. If I was to 
meet Lady Elizabeth Belgrave driving a curricle, I 
should immediately feel I hope Lady Gower will not. 
If I was to meet Lady riding astride, which would 



268 LETTERS OF PIARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

scarcely surprise me, it would never occur to me to 
make the same ejaculation. 

I own to you I do not think the other fear you 
might have as little founded. I can understand the 
love of and perseverance in outgoing where home is not 
a happy one, w^here coquetry is an object or children 
an inducement ; but why these two happy and devotedly 
attached beings, full of resources in themselves and 
delight in each other, should go a la piste of every 
drum that beats, feed all the population of London, and, 
with more of domestic feelings, have less domestic 
habits than any couple I know, is really enigmatical. 

Sunday night. — I am much better this evening, but 
I must be some few days before I recover from the 
effects of pain and laudanum. The weather is colder 
than anything ever was before, as it is just the moment 
of piercing north-east winds. My children continue 
without aches or ail. 

I have never told you that I like Lady F. Osborne 
very much indeed. She is very good, friendly, and 
amiable, she is not the least exigeante or oppressive. She 
is certainly not a clever or agreeable woman, and when 
she is nervous, as she was at my arrival and now is at 
being obliged to go to the ball at Amsterdam, she has 
a worried, fidgety, bewildered manner, which made me 
judge hardly of her at first, and quite subsides when her 
nerves become tranquil. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : March 25, 1824. 

I have been walking up and down the Voorhout with 
my chicks, and we are now going to the Eoyal Library, 
where I hear there are several very fine pictures. 

I am so glad to have seen an amusement for Lord 
Morpeth. We staid near an hour at the Mus^e, where 
I recognised some of my old Louvre friends. Paul 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 269 

Potter's famous bull, and a Gerard Dou, the most 
perfect thing of the kind I ever saw. It was given to 
Charles II. when he left HoUand ; on William III.'s first 
visit to his native land, after his accession to our 
throne, he brought it back here in his carriage, where 
it has remained ever since. The subject a woman at 
work, rocking her child in a cradle, the sun shining 
upon them through an open casement, a bird cage, 
Bible, washbasket, all the interior of a Dutch room, 
with a truth and life that beggars description. There 
are some beautiful Van de Yeldes ; the ' Battle of 
Pavia ' by Wouvermans, reckoned his best ; some small 
and excellent Dutch pictures, one by Van Huysum, 
a rose, carnation, convolvulus, a butterfly that is so 
beautiful that we stood before it ten minutes, yet 
the subject would have scarce asked for one. It is the 
exquisite painting, the thick leaf of the carnation, the 
positive flying away of the butterfly. 

Friday. — The melancholy fact is that what I do 
hate, what is my favourite aversion, is going out, as it is 
called. Last night I had Almack's feelings without its 
advantages. At the Casino I was perfectly happy, as I 
stayed there about an hour, but last night I thought it 
my duty to stay out Mme. Dedel's ball from nine till 
one. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hag:ue : March 28, 1824. 

My brother's letter, with an account of the poor 
Duchess's ^ death, arrived this morning. It has shocked 
us very much, she had so much enjoyment of life. It 
brings past times to one's mind, and many nervous and 
undefinable feelings. ' v 

I am expecting my boys every minute. I am sorry 

' Of Devonshhe. 



270 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

for the men who are coming, that this event will make 
us still less able to provide any amusement ; of course 
for some days we shall not stir out of the house, or see 
any one in it. 

I want you to ask Lady Harrowby and yourself 
about little Granville. He has a week's holiday at 
Easter, and I should be very happy to have him with 
either of you, who would be kind enough to harbour 
him for that time. I know your scarcity of room, and 
therefore it would be less inconvenient to her than to 
you. He is a very good little man, and will not, I 
think, be a plague. Addio. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 2, 1824. 

I received a second letter from you, my dear dearest 
G., on Sunday evening. Two in a day was a sort of 
suffocating pleasure. I have just had a letter from 
Lord Clanwilliam in which he says, ' Pray tell Lady 
Georgiana that it is a very sensible old woman that 
says, " Howard est ce qu'il y a de mieux parmi les jeunes 
gens a Eome." ' He quotes Mme. Lignowski, his aunt. 

Yesterday was a happy day. In the morning early 
I walked with my blooming daughters on the Vijjverberg, 
where we had the whole advantage of a bright sun and 
air soft as May. I then came home and received a 
cadeau of three plover's eggs in a little box, les 
premiers de notre printemps from old Stirums. At 
two we drove in the curricle (GranviUe having for fifty 
sovereigns bought two little grey horses), to the sea and 
walked on the sands. We came home to dinner, and 
took Susan bodkin in our little loge grilUe to see the 
innocent performances. Came home to tea, and to Mr. 
Jones' singing, which is beautiful.' He is equally at 
home in Eossini, French and German romances, with 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 271 

the best taste and most indefatigable good-humour. 
Mr. Chad sings also well. 

The Hague season is nearly over, and a ball on 
Thursday is almost the winding up. The incomparable 
Dutch are en retraite during Easter week and a fort- 
night before it. The first fortnight in May is again all 
frivolity. The fair in the Voorhout and balls every 
night. After that they all potter off to their campagnes, 
wear stuff gowns, and sleep three in a bed till the 
autumn. 

Mr. Canning's successes are most satisfactory. His 
West Indian speech seems beyond all praise. The fat 
woman and the helmet I do not fancy, but as you .all 
cheer him, mine the sorrow, mine the shame. ^ 

To Lady G: Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 4, 1824. 

Our dinner and soiree yesterday went off very 
swimmingly. Three Gamblers, three Osbornes, the 
attached, and Monsieur Dedel — a nice little man, who 
is quite domesticated chez nous, not a Mros de roman, 
but the most straightforward matter-of-fact of men, 
with all the simplicity of Parson Adams and an anglo- 
manie strong upon him. At half-past seven we all 
came out from dinner together, coffee, and then 
Granville and Lady Gambier, don't be uneasy, junketed 
to the play to see ' La Maison k Vendre.' Soon Mme. 

• ' In July last the heavy Falmouth coach contained two passengers, 
the one a fair lady of considerable dimensions, the other a gentleman who 
was on his way to succour the Spanish Patriots. There was besides a 
box which contained a full uniform of a Spanish general of cavalry, 
together with a helmet of the most curious workmanship. Though the 
idea of going to the relief of a fortress blockaded by sea and besieged by- 
land in a full suit of light horseman's equipmen*? was perhaps not strictly 
consonant to modem military operations, yet yhen the gentleman and 
his box made their appearance, the Cortes weif. no doubt overwhelmed 
y/ith joy.'— Extract from Mr. Canning's Speech. 



272 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

d'Hogueres, and her two daughters, the youngest a 
very pretty, merry girl,^ Mme. de Gohz, and Mile. 
Henriette d'Outremont, Dames d'Honneur, the latter 
handsome and clever. Mr. Fagel and Stirums dropped 
in. We sipped tea. Then till eleven — and I like that, 
the difference of age is so marked — I sat with the 
elderlies on, the couch near the fire, talking health and 
economy ; la jeunesse assembled round a large table, 
drew caricatures, wrote verses, and absolutely screamed 
with laughing. Now in England, you know, the girls 
chaperon their mothers to the routs, and unless they 
make love have no resource but de se morfondre. s\\JUAif 

■ We then certainly have great capabilities here. 
Miss Osborne — though I do not fancy her, as she is 
flippant and ill-natured — has all her father's fun and 
drollery, and is certainly very clever. Mr. Chad, 
though no chicken, leads la bande joysuse, but all 
this would be of no avail were it not for that possibility 
of doing here what we never do in England, having 
soirees exactly like an evening at Wherstead, some 
reading, some talking, some at their gambols, and all 
going in and out comme bon leur semble. Je me 
creicse la tete to find out the why, and fear it turns 
upon irremediable evils, the large scale of society in 
London, regular invitations, the trouble of which makes 
one shrink from having it habitually. But the subject 
upon which I am becoming Quixotic is morning visits. 
There is no saying what is gained by lopping them off. 
Time in bushels, repose ditto, coming quite fresh and 
alive into the gaiety of the evening, being spared the 
bore of tete-a-tete without intimacy which they all expose 
one to hourly. 

Now here Mme. reqoit, and in come more or less of 
our friends and acquaintances. If pleasant, you may 

' Well known in Paris as the Baronne de Meyendorff, and intimate at 
the Embassy. She had great merit as an amateur artist. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 273 

sit in. a corner and talk to tliem without the fear of Sir 
G. Eobinson or Lady Louisa Macdonald being let in to 
give one that well-known feel — ' are there not daggers, 
poisons, racks, and swords ? ' 

You acknowledge the new-comers, but they pass on, 
if they see you occupied, to the disengaged. If bores 
they are negatived by numbers. 

If I do not feel well in the evening, or inclined to 
society, I am not exposed to it. ' Madame ne re9oit 
pas ' said at the door affronts nobody. It is as much 
a custom as the other, and out of above two hundred 
visits I paid upon arriving en qualite d' Ambassadrice, I 
was let in only about seven times. There are other 
advantages. When you, Mrs. Lamb, or Lady Morley 
come here, instead of living, as we all do in London, 
with few secure half-hours, sometimes without one 
moment to talk of life and death together, we may have 
whole hours to ourselves without offending anyone. 

If you come over me with ' my husband and my 
children,' I say in London, you want to be shut up with 
them in the evening, because during the pelting, pitiless 
morning you have scarcely seen their faces ; here from 
nine tiU five you may live au sein de voire famille. 
Then there is another custom here. On Sundays the 
Dame de la maison recoit en famille — sisters, married 
daughters and their husbands, sons and their wives. 
Not one extra admitted, not Monsieur Chad, et cest 
tout dire. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 8, 1824. 

The best pictures are in the Museum at Amsterdam. 
Two landscapes with cattle and figures, by Jean and 
Andre Both— a Gerard Dou, I believe reckoned better 
but not half so pleasing as the one here, the subject 

VOL. I. T 



274 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

a schoolroom by- candle-light. The great merit, the 
different effects of the five different lights, the taUow- 
candles flaring, with the greasy, hebetes faces of the 
children, and the lanthorn lighting up with wonderful 
effect the details of the whole. Another by the same 
master — a grande dame in full costume, with her cava- 
lier standing by her, the background and a dog by 
Berghem. It is finished to a degree that makes it a 
study to examine it. Though the figures are small, I 
know the pattern of her lace and hold in my breath 
for fear of discomposing her feather fan. Now for a 
Hackaert, like ours, but prettier than that or anything 
else. A hot sunny day, which it would be too oppressive 
to bear were it not for the shade of the trees and the 
clearness of the water. A lady and her cavalier 
riding up an avenue of beech trees to their chateau, 
tired with hawking, the attendants and dogs panting 
with heat, by Adrian Van de Velde. 

A Van Huysum. Flowers, Lady Morpeth — an 
over-blown peony, dropping to pieces over a bird's nest, 
and three white roses all together, of the same size, 
shape, and hue, and yet as different, as distinct as your 
three daughters, upon a light ground which, as I and 
Lord Morpeth know, quadruples the merit and the 
price. 

Jan de Heem — and what though it be a lobster 
and a lemon, if the one looks just boiled and the other 
just cut ! 

A Paul Potter — ^hideous I think, but the connaisseurs 
extasient themselves over the cow and the ass and the 
goats and sheep climbing up a sandhill. 

Five or six Van de Veldes. You see them, rough 
seas and calm seas (don't you see too that I am bored 
to death with describing, but determined to soutenir 
la gageure ?), a man-of-war in the port of Amsterdam, 
fishing boats at sunset. One very curious, the ' Taking of 



1824 TO LADY G.MORPETH 275 

the " Eoyal Prince," ' a sliip commanded by Sir G. 
Askew, by de Euyter ; a vessel in front, in which Van de 
Velde went himself to take sketches of the engagement. 

Last, not least, for it occupies one whole side of a 
large room, a dinner given by Capitaine Wits to the 
bourgeoisie de la ville in commemoration of the peace 
of Munster. It is also in commemoration of the ugliness 
of the Dutch, aU alive, all hideous ; it is difficult to 
believe it is a picture. There is a portrait also by the 
same master, that one can only look at askance for fear 
of distressing the gentleman. 

Now just run over in your mind's eye. Dutch boors 
smoking their pipes and playing at cards upon a barrel, 
women like Lady Gordon, standing in an edifice hung 
with mackerel and herrings, or piled with cabbages 
and bunches of carrots, ladies in rich white satin 
gowns, loyers like Lord Nugent and Mr. Standish 
serenading them upon guitars, balustrades with a pea- 
cock and a monkey upon them and red and green 
parrots on the trees, dead hares with bleeding throats, 
dead pheasants with rufSed feathers, bunches of grapes 
and over-ripe melons — and then let your sons-in-law twit 
me with never looking at pictures if they dare. We 
finished Amsterdam with a French play. 

Yesterday we returned here, and found the girls 
looking like Van Huysum's peony. 

If you wish to know why the cannons are firing it 
is because the Princess of Orange was brought to bed 
of a daughter this morning, and if you wish to know 
why I am sorry for it, it is because I must leave ofi* 
writing to go and have my name written down at the 
Palace. 

Thursday night.— The town looks excessively gay 
and pretty to-night, all illuminated. We went to Count 
Stirum. I wish you could see Lady Christina de Eheede 
Ginkel. Figure to yourself the Duke of Sussex in 



276 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

■a "wrapping gown. The drum put me in mind of London, 
for it was as crowded, hot, and noisy as Silence's 
■soirees ; but we only stayed ten minutes. Lady Ormonde 
is a very nice woman ; but she has an uncle whom she 
brings about everywhere who is really a nuisance too 
■great to be borne, Colonel Staples, known in his family 
by the pet name of Scrain — why I know not unless 
Scrain is the L^ish word for idiot. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 15, 1824. 

We are in hopes of the bag to-day, and in enjoy- 
■ment of real fine weather at last. Yesterday Susy and 
I took a walk of four miles, and to-day we have been 
■with the Poodle to the Museum. He is in high good- 
humour, and as busy as a bee with inquiring into 
prices and making purchases. 

I am most anxious to hear of Mrs. Lamb. I am 
afraid there is no chance of my brother here at present.- 

Friday. — I am just come from Church. It is again 
to-day cold and bleak and no messenger yet, and I must 
wait for him for I have nothing to originate. 

Friday night. — The post is this moment arrived. I 
am very glad to hear that Mrs. Lamb bore the shock 
with tolerable composure. Why will she not come to 
us ? Of course I do not mean immediately ; but London 
is always melancholy for a person unhappy and living 
out of its pale. Eichmond terribly so to her, and here 
change of scene, no local recollections, and I able and 
most willing to devote myself to her. Say this to her 
when and as you can. I am glad the poor Duchess 
had friends about her. 

We have heard nothing positive of the little boys, 
and a,s the weather is bad I doubt their starting to- 
morrow. 



I 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 277 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : 1824. 

I have not prepared a letter for to-day's post, my 
dearest G., and you must therefore forgive a short and 
shabby one. 

puzzles me to death. I am tempted to 

pencher to the admiring side. Granville, who likes her 
exceedingly, has been arguing against her superiority 
of character. He says, and I three-quarters agree 
with him, that her conduct is regulated by an uncon- 
trollable determination to follow all her inclinations. 
That she is born with good ones is no merit of 
hers. He says in the present instance that, not having 
strong feelings, caractere would have been shown in 
hastening home to console her mother. As it is she 
does what she always does, follows her inclination, and 
she has nothing in her which prompts her irresistibly 
to fly to her. She is a person who dreads scenes, and 
had rather arrive when everything is a little subdued ; 
no consideration out of herself gives motives to her 
actions. Whilst we think her exceUent, good-tempered, 
attaching and free from all humbug, let us wait to see 
her sacrificing her own tastes to those of others, before 
we think her sublime. 

Now for an example. Granville gave it. I have 
no wish to be Ambassadress at Paris, am quite insen- 
sible to the eclat of the situation, had rather potter on 
here. WeU, this is not character, this is not merit. I 
am born so, my tastes are made that way. I may be 
all the* better and my friends may like me more for 
being so constituted, but it is no effort, no virtue in me. 
I consult my own happiness and set my wishes by it. 
Now supposing I go to Paris, overcome my regrets, 
combat my inclinations, perform all the duties of the 
situation with cheerfulness and good temper — that is 
character, that is merit, because it is making self give 



278 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

way and acting in that manner for the sake and Men 
etre of others. 

This is the way that en Men et en mal admiration 
and applause are dealt out with so little fairness or 
measure. Do you think me insensible to 's perfec- 
tions ? I esteem but I cannot quite admire her. Now 
supposing there was a question of visiting a divorced 
woman. If we went to see the black sheep, there 
would in such an act be more of kindness and 
dread of giving pain than a laxity of real moral prin- 
ciple. If Lady stayed away, there would be more 

of its being a bore to go and the not caring twopence if 
the woman was vexed or not than of real morality. 
Yet the world would set this down under the head 
of principle and chastity, and judge us accordingly. I 
could go on upon this theme for ever. I love George 
all the better for his enthusiasm about her and perfectly 
understand it, for she is made of such excellent 
stuff, that coldness given by nature and selfishness 
by education lead to no worse result than prevent- 
ing a very close examination of her character, magnify- 
ing her blameless life into a heroic one. When her 
husband went abroad she was as comfortable as an old 
shoe, yet how many people looked upon her as some- 
thing little less than an Indian widow burning on the 
pile ? 

We have a great many Grandees to dinner to-day, 
and to-morrow a ball at Court ; next week we shall live 
on the Voorhout, and then the Hague empties itself 
like a soda-water bottle. God bless you, dearest, 
dearest sis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 18, 1824. 

We feel great uncertainty as to the arrival of the 
boys to-morrow. There is very little wind, but the 
weather is cold and gloomy. 



1824 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 279 

Lady Harrowby talks to me of your beauty in a 
black hat and feather somewhere, and Lady Grantham 
of having seen you at Mrs. Hope's, I think, with your 
three daughters. You are certainly a miraculous 
woman vu that you are about to be a grandmother. 
How anxious I shall be for letters in about three weeks ! 
Tell me the reckonings of those mamans pour rire. 
The Poodle and I sat over the fire after dinner yester- 
day, and we are the only people here who sympathise 
entirely on the subject of the bag. We agreed that 
from the moment it was due we cannot feel pleasant in 
our little minds till it arrives. A mixture of impatience 
and nervousness and a great deal of wool-gathering 
about what it will bring. It is odd that in that hard 
and canine substance there should be this degree of 
weakness and tenderness, for it partakes of both. I 
think it must be instinct about his puppies ; but be that 
as it may, he was fidgety the whole of yesterday, and 
I felt quite obliged to him for it. 

Monday. — ^Yesterday I received the sacrament. I 
then drove to the column at Eyswick, and should have 
been enchanted with a long broad walk, the sides of it 
all covered with plants of violets and little goats jump- 
ing about, if an immense toad had not been taking its 
walk there too, which rifled all its sweetness. 

On my return I found Wortley ^ just arrived. He 
is such a love. He is as snug as if he had been settled 
here all his life and I see will enjoy himself. This 
morning we breakfasted at ten, and he aiid I have been 
sitting at the open window agreeing upon the charm 
of continental life. He is now going en caleche with the 
Poodle to Delft, and at two we are all going to Scheve- 
ning, where, being Easter Monday, all the population 
goes, swarming out on the sands in full costume. The 

' Eldest son of Lord Wharncliffe, whoin he succeeded in 1845. He 
tnarried in 1825 Lady Geovgiana Eyder, eldest daughter of Lord Harrowby. 



280 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

weather is- delicious, trees budding, birds singing and 
all the windows open. Eust and lust, dearest Lady 
Morpeth. It looks ill, but it is the Dutch for ease and 
pleasure, and written up on all the pleasure ground 
gates and summer-houses here. 

Tuesday. — The boys are arrived after a most ter- 
rible passage. Three nights on board tossing about 
and terribly sick ; yet I never saw them look so pros- 
perous, and it is such a delight to hear their dear little 
voices again. They are now in my room, playing at 
being Dutch housemaids. It is too fine, quite like 
summer. Luckily for the boys the Prince of Orange 
had been laying the first stone of the new barracks ; 
therefore the people were all about, the band playing 
and soldiers parading. Even Gearing ' says ' It is very 
cheerful.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 21, 1824. 

The Poodle and Wortley jouent de bonheur in 
having this delicious weather for their tour. I took a 
long drive with my girls in the open carriage this 
morning, and we have left off our pelisses and come out 
of them like the buds out of the trees. Lady Harrowby's 
letter came to comfort me for- not having one from you. 
My boys are recovering from their fatigues. I am glad 
to hear from Gearing that 'Master Frederick made 
himself very pleasant to Lady Morpeth.' It pleases me 
much to think of my dear little Governor in Park Street,^ 
and it is so kind of you to be burthened with him. 

Thursday. — The flowers at Haarlem are now in 
their perfection, and I received yesterday morning a 
basket of hyacinths, jonquils, and narcissus that beggar 
description. I wish you could see a shawl and three 

' The nurse. ^ Lord Morpeth's house in London. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 281 

turbans tliat George ^ has brought me from India, a set 
of chessmen for Granville, and shawls and fans for the 
girls. He looks ill but better than I expected. There 
never was so amiable and excellent a creature. When 
they were obliged to leave the ship to go in an open 
boat to Eamsgate in the middle of the night he, in his 
state of health, took off his coat, wrapped it round 
William, and carried him all the way up the side of the 
pier to the inn. The children quite doat upon him. 

Friday. — ^Your long letter delighted me, my dearest 
G. I must write to Lady Stafford to-day to thank her 
for their kindness to my boj^ I had a very kind letter 
from her. The Falcks, Salviatis, and some men dined 
here yesterday. Others came in the evening, and Mon- 
sieur Thiel, one of the Eussian diplomates, played like 
a thunderstorm upon our new pianoforte, but reallj^ 
wonderfully well. Mme. Falck is very anxious to be 
recommended to you. I am sure you will like her very 
much. Adieu, my dearest dear sister. I have lots of 
letters to write, lots of children to educate, and another 
great dinner to-day. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 22, 1824. 

Here is again the most delicious spring weather. I 
wish you could see us in my little boudoir, the window 
open, Granville reading the French papers in the green 
armchair you may remember in Bruton Street, and 
almost too strong a perfume of lilacs and lilies of the 
valley which I have just been gathering in our little 
garden. 

The few people remaining at the Hague come to us 
of an evening. We are generally about twenty. One 
whist table, and a very noisy ecarte one in an adjoining 

■ Mr. George Stewart, a great friend of the family and private secretary 
to Lord Granville in Paris, v;-.';. . >■ ■•, i »'' ', ! *«v • -. ■ ; 



282 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

room. There are three or four very pretty Dutch girls 
who join this department and lots of sparks, Dutch and 
English. Lady Francis and I sit on a couch with the 
mothers and Mr. Strangways. 

God bless you. I can talk but have not much to 
communicate. The uniformity of our life is one of its 
charms and above all its medicine. 

I quite approve of my brother attending the 
funeral.^ 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 24, 1824. 

We had the Fagels and some old gentlemen to 
dinner yesterday. She is certainly one of the prettiest 
women I ever saw, and very graceful and gentille. 
She seems, too, so good and weU-intentioned that it 
quite provokes me that our Chad will pursue her with 
such unrelenting assiduity, and the husband and I look 
very cross and unhappy at seeing her entirely engrossed, 
and hearing, for Heaven knows there is no mystery in 
it, the most/arfe and far-fetched compliments proclaimed 
in a loud voice from the moment she comes into a room 
till the moment she leaves it. Abercromby, who is 
an enthusiastic admirer, cannot get in a word. 

I hear there are bets already booked here that 
Mme. Falck will, in three weeks after her arrival, 
dethrone la regnante. It is winter again to-day, cold, 
raw ; and yesterday we had a thunderstorm. 

Sunday. — Summer again, dearest Lady Morpeth. 
Commend me to the variableness of Dutch climate. 
We have, however, given up meeting the sparks at 
Amsterdam, as Granville has business and it is an ugly 
opera on Monday. Also that Amsterdam stinks when 
the sun shines. We have made an appointment with 
them at Haarlem on Tuesday. 

' Of his stepmother. 



1824 TO LADY Q. MORPETH 283 

Monday morning. — We are rather busy just now. 
We have our first assembly on Wednesday and two or 
three dinners. The Fair, too, begins in six days and 
the Bapteme is on Tuesday week in the church. The 
men to go in dress coats. I am glad the Poodle and 
Wortley will have a little of this bustle after the very 
stiU life we gave them at first. 

I am so delighted you are pleased with my boy. 
He is, I do think, a very satisfactory little man. The 
little ones are quite recovered from their fatigue. We 
take the girls to-night to see ' Le Sourd,' and they go 
with us to-morrow to Haarlem. You may imagine 
their delight. Yesterday I took my little boys to the 
wood ; on Sunday it is as full as Kensington Gardens 
near the Palace. The band playing. We fed the 
swans and a variety of birds, and gathered a basketful 
of wood anemones, with which the whole wood is 
covered. Little Freddy shouted for joy, William took 
it more like a philosopher but with equal pleasure. 
Pray tell little G. these details. 

Tuesday night. — My dearest G., we have had a day 
of what dear Lady Morley calls ' uninterrupted felicity.' 
You shall judge. At ten o'clock we set forwards for 
Haarlem. The day heavenly. The attaches in a caleche. 
Eward and the girls in a chariot ; Granville, George 
and I in the landau. We landed at twelve in Van 
Eede's garden. The whole ground a carpet of flowers. 
We walked and smelt for half an hour and then 
through the pretty town to the church to hear the 
organ. I cannot describe to you the magnificence of 
this instrument. It is the finest thing I ever heard. 
The three or four first chords made me pipe. It is the 
very omnipotence of sound, and you will think I am fabu- 
lous when I tell you that ' L'Orage,' a composition of the 
organist's, gives you thunder which would afiect your 
nerves for a week, the pouring of rain and the singing 



284 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

of birds after the storm : all a s'y meprendre. At four 
we dined at tlie inn, my little women sitting by me in 
black silk blouses the very images of health and happi- 
ness. We then drank coffee, walked, and did not 
return here till near ten. The drive home, though last 
not least. I wish you could have seen the sun setting 
upon the beds of red tuHps with which the gardens are 
covered. 

Our sparks return here to-morrow. They announce 
themselves for our eight o'clock tea and will find us, 
every room open, lit up like a palace in a fairy tale 
with about three hundred Dutch fashionables. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : April 29, 1824. 

Yesterday morning we went our favourite expe- 
dition to the sands. I wish you could see the picture. 
The beautiful waves breaking upon our feet, the 
children filling their baskets with shells, Eward and I 
in ecstasies. ' Mais voyez done leurs mines, miledi.' 
The large fishing boats with their red sails, and the 
most picturesque of people, the inhabitants of Scheve- 
hing, sitting in groups, drying their nets. Then come 
the elegantes in French bonnets, caleches, cabriolets. 
The Queen in a chariot and four with outriders. Gran- 
ville and the attaches caracolant by the side of us. 

After dinner we went a round of visits. Now look 
at a large round table, in the middle of it a large tea 
urn, surrounded by tiny Japan cups. Mme. Six van 
Oterleek et Mesdemoiselles ses fiUes, muslin flounces, a 
friend or two, generally a pretender handing the cups 
about, and this is the picture of a Dutch visit. 

This morning I am in a rohe de chambre et papil- 
lotes to dress at half-past three for a great dimier at 
Comte Stirum, Gouverneur de la Ville, an excellent 
good-humoured old man, who absolutely doats upon 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 285 

me. These dinners, however, are the only grievances. 
They last nearly three hours and it is a case of grande 
parure. 

We did not get away from dinner till half-past seven, 
and all that time we were eating. I sat between the 
Gouverneur and Mons. de Heerdt, the two best-natured, 
vulgar old men I ever met with. We went from thence to 
visit, for a moment to the play, and then back to the 
Gouverneur's soiree, where Granville lost fifteen pence 
at whist. 

Mme. Fagel, the cream of Dutch ladies, scarcely ever 
. goes out, and when she does but for a minute. 
Forgive a little Dutch scandal. Our Chad is despe- 
rately in love with her ; her husband is all kindness to 
her, but very unhappy about it, as she, though dune 
reputation intacte, is unhappy about it, evidently strug- 
gUng with her own penchant for the dit Chad. So all 
we see of her is for a moment — the adorer on one side, 
the anxious spouse on the other. She looks embar- 
rassed and takes the earliest opportunity to depart. 
Our other beauties are Mme. Dedel, once beloved by 
Buonaparte and now by Bernadotte. She appears 
bored to death here and is going to Sweden in ten 
days. Mme. Sloet, just married and charmante. Mile. 
Grovestins ditto, Mile. Von Shableu and Mile. d'Autun. 
The men are deplorable, which accounts for Mr. Chad 
being lover general at the Hague. L'Abbe Crombie, 
as somebody directed to Ealph, bids fair to be a great 
favourite also. 

We go to the Casino to-night, the Hague Almack's. 
It is the last, for the season is closing. 

I have got two excellent masters for the girls ; 
Useden, an Englishman who teaches writing, arith- 
metic, and grammar, Butine, a music master and 
excellent musician who taught Aunt G. at Brussels and 
cries at Susan's resemblance to la bonne Duchesse. 



286 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

Adieu, my very dearest sister. My little boys have 
two nice large rooms at the end of the garden ; my 
girls' rooms are the prettiest and gayest you ever saw, 
looking on the Voorhout. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : May 2, 1824. 

This is the eventful month, and I begin already to 
count the messengers that will come backwards and 
forwards before the 15th. 

We went to see yesterday la maison du bois, built 
by Am^lie de Solms, wife of Frederic, Prince of Orange, 
and mother to the first Stadtholder. There is one room 
which is magnificent. The history of her husband, 
painted by some of the best Dutch masters of the day, 
entirely covers the walls upon which it is painted. His 
birth, education, pursuits, marriage and death. The 
dite Amelie herself in a small oval frame is represented 
at the very top of the ceiling in widow's weeds with a 
skull in her hand. The brilliant colouring of the 
painting, the large gilt lustres and Japan doors, make 
this room most striking. The rest of the house is pretty 
and its situation delightful ; but it is never inhabited 
by the Eoyal family. It was destined for this Prince of 
Orange and Princess Charlotte, and this is the supposed 
cause of his mortal aversion to it. 

Pray tell Lady Lansdowne that I waited till I 
became acquainted with Mr. Strangways ^ to send 
her any message about him. He gains upon being 
known ; he has such valuable and general information, 
is so entirely free from anything like pedantry or 
conceit, and appears so thoroughly amiable and good, 
that he rises every day in our estimation, and entre 
nous soit dit comes next to Abercromby in my aiFec- 

' Her brother. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 287 

tions. He is tlie reverse of the proverb ' all is not gold 
that glitters.' You may give her the whole of this, for 
she knows that her brother must be known to be appre- 
ciated and will think more of the sincerity of my praise 
from my acknowledgment that I am surprised at 
finding him all that he is, and am obliged to her for 
having warned me, as she did through Lady Morley, 
not to judge hastily of him. 

They are hammering at the booths and leaving a 
space before our windows, so that we shall live in a 
perpetual raree-show. Figure to yourself the delight 
of the Miss Levesons. 

God bless my best, my dearest sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : May 1824. 

I have been dawdling about all morning. The 
booths are beginning to be put up, and the children's 
delight rises in proportion. What an excellent woman 
I am ! I have just seen Eward and my four children 
set off in an open carriage for Schevening. The day is 
heavenly. Granville et les messieurs on horseback 
ditto, and I remain at home to see that four and twenty 
card tables are put all in a row, the number is historical 
not invented for the sake of the phrase, and to begin 
dressing in time for Mons. d'Agoult's dinner. I expect 
our drum to make a great splash. The house looks 
lovely, and there is a little boudoir full of armchairs 
and Haarlem hyacinths which quite charms Jones and 
me, who have been arranging it. The card- playing here 
is a great blessing. At the bottom of the cards ' On est 
prie d'arranger sa partie ' is printed, so that the male 
and female dowagers come ready paired and file off to 
their business, leaving room for the desoeuvres, and not 
giving the master or the mistress of the house the 
trouble of finding amusement for them. 



*^fc 



288 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

Friday. — Our assembly went off beautifully, but I 
must leave it to Wortley to puff us. 

Mr. Wilmot need not be affronted by the cheer- 
fulness of my letters, for I feel perhaps more fond of 
my friends than ever ; but I did not know myself what 
a London spring was to me. You have never had to 
encounter it in all its plenitude, and the unwearied 
dissipation and nightly sittings through it all. The 
little pleasure and the gnawing anxieties must be looked 
at afar to see them in their proper light. 

Dearest sister, when I see you in my mind's eye in 
all the variety of wholesome pleasures I shall provide 
for you, I feel a sort of apoplectic pleasure in my head. 

The Poodle and Wortley set out for London on 
Wednesday. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

The Hague : May 4, 1824. 

Dearest Lady H., — Wortley says he is very much 
pleased here and seems so, but it is in his quiet way, 
and not as I have often seen him chez vous or in 
the Morpeth family, when he is merry and enchanted. 
He sits for ages quite silent with his head upon his 
shoulder, looking comfortable, but like a bird at roost. 
What follows is entre nous. The Poodle came back 
from the Zuider Zee expedition, suffocating with rage. 
He said to me, ' Wortley is the most selfish, unamiable 
man I ever met with. I will not quarrel with him, but 
once returned home I will die before I move a single 
step to the right or left with him.' He then brought 
forward a whole list of grievances. That during the 
whole tour W. never once consulted his taste or opinion, 
always said ' I shall dine at such an hour, I shall start 
to-morrow,' kept him waiting without apologising, 
treated him like a servant. Now the Poodle and 
Wortley were never born to go in the same harness, and 



1824 TO LADY HARROWBY 289 

I do not think much of all this did I not fear from 
seeing more of W. that he is a selfish person, and for a 
young man wonderfully so. Yet I cannot make him 
quite out, for he is more ready to do everything, go 
anywhere than anybody. I think him to begin with 
uncommonly pleasing. He is so refined, has such an 
accomplished mind. There is such manliness and good 
sense, such a freedom from all the vanities and little- 
nesses of his kind. On the other hand, I never saw any- 
one make so little effort to surmount any little cloud of 
humeur, chagrin or ennui for the benefit of the society 
he is in, and he never puts his best leg foremost to 
promote the satisfaction or amusement of those he is 
with. To give you an instance of what I mean. We 
had our first assembly on Wednesday. It succeeded to 
admiration. It was not hot, there was a great deal of 
room; four ecarte tables joined together, where all the 
jeunesse played at different games, talked, laughed, 
almost shouted for joy. The elder gentlemen, some at 
whist, some sitting in little coteries ; I uncommonly 
efficient, here, there and everywhere, a sort of refuge 
for the destitute, now with a desceuvre husband, then 
with a neglected dowager. I never saw people look so 
happy and amused. What, then, sat heavy on my soul 
that night? Why Wortley, sitting alone, looking 
oppressively grave, refusing to play, not a look at the 
beauties, not a word to the sparks — a picture of isole- 
ment most gentlemanlike, most melancholy. Well, I 
concluded he was unhappy or iU, or perchance only 
bored. The crowd disperses and we are left en famille. 
Up comes Wortley in high good-humour and spirits, 
says he never saw so pretty a soiree, such nice people. 
He wished to Heaven he was going to stay, there was 
only an embarras of pleasures. Now is he not an odd 
fish, dear Lady H. ? It is, and I see it throughout, that 
he has never been taught to think of the claims of 
YOL. I. u 



290 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

others. If he is not in the vein there is no feeling of 
civiUty, good fellowship, or what is called helping a 
lame dog over a stile that will induce him to move 
a finger. 

Now if this man proposes to your Georgiana or 
my Susy (if you had just seen her in a black silk blouse, 
a large Leghorn hat a la Pamela, and heard him rave of 
her grace and the beauty of her figure you would not 
think the idea so extravagant), what are we to do ? 
What are you to do ? As a lover W. must be capti- 
vating, for zest immediately gives him the most de- 
lightful spirits, an appearance of unbounded enjoyment, 
sociability, unreserve — everything that is charming. 
But excitement is a short thing and marriage a long, 
and it is the unclouded ray that is wanted even in the 
happiest to gild inevitable hours of gloom, anxiety, 
and sickness. Yet to refuse Wortley, for mother or 
daughter, what a Herculean labour ! 

How I have talked, but why should not I ? When 
my subject seizes me I feel as if under the gripe of 
some beast with claws and must die if I do not free 
myself. I must add that he is always talking of you 
and yours, and his first question after a post is ' Have 
you heard from Lady Harrowby ? ' 

Monday morning. — I need not ask you not to let 
Wortley imagine I have thought him a little cloudy 
here. He has been charming these two last days, and I 
am moved by all he has said to GranviUe and myself of 
his delight and enjoyment. It convinces me that when 
his temperature is below fair weather he is totally uncon- 
scious of it. How delightful he can be when he pleases ! 

We go to-morrow en grande parure to the Dutch 
Church to see the Princess baptized, and Granville goes 
from thence to a dinner of seventy people at the Prince 
of Orange's, 

Tuesday. — I end by being quite in love with 



1824 TO LADY HARROWBY 291 

Wortley. Think what a dangerous spark he is ! He 
does admire and appreciate you so enthusiastically. 
Good-night. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

The Hague : May 1824. 

The Prince Galitzin and Monsieur de Meyendorf 
came here last night. The former is singularly nul, 
the latter singularly disagreeable. Yet it was delight- 
ful to hear voices from London. They are enraptured 
with their sejour there. Le Prince all humility and 
gratitude for the kindness shown him ; Monsieur de 
Meyendorf proud and elated by it, talking familiarly of 
you all and describing my native land to me as if he 
were enlightening a South Sea Islander. ' I avoid the 
routs, I look at Almack's, I call on the man of letter, 
the man of India, the great farmer, there is a chose, at 
Holkham, magnifique.' He raved of the beauty of 
English women. ' La petite Forester ravissante. Miss 
Canning peu de chose, les Eyders bien, surtout Marie.' 
What a prig he is ! But the amusing part of it is that 
when he left the Hague he was a remarkably quiet, 
unassuming man, scarcely ever opening his mouth. I 
am curious to know what his reception reaUy was. 
His brother, our Meyendorf, who is a most excellent, 
intelligent man, says, ' Jamais on n'a 6ie reiju comme 
mon frere,' and be it reality or imagination he is quite 
intoxicated with delight and tells me that foreigners 
are so a la mode in London that they have but to 
appear to be overwhelmed with attentions and em- 
pressements. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : May 1824. 

My own dearest G., — No words can describe the 
happiness I feel at this moment, strongly enhanced 

V 2 



292 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

by the nature of the beast, which has made me 
for the three last days suffer a degree of nervous 
anxiety that makes me feel at this moment -as if 
fetters and a hundred pound weight had been taken 
off my head and body. Till this blessed morning not a 
line have we received from England since the letters 
that announced Lord Morpeth's illness. Two bags 
were due yesterday and only arrived an hour ago. I 
have been going about aching at the sights, roaring at 
the play, and conjuring up every calamity under the 
sun. Think what I must feel now, a sheep shorn, 
a horse unharnessed, a dandy unlaced ! Lord help me, 
how I do love you and yours ! Your two long delightful 
letters, Abercromby having seen Lord Morpeth and 
giving him a good account of him to his son. 

What an odd marriage ^ William de Eos's is ! Such 
an odd match for the girl, matchmaking and manoeuvre 
in the days of her j'outh going off in romance at eight 
and twenty. 

We are rising fast into perfect retirement The 
Court starts at six to-morrow. Most of the fashionables 
have taken formal leave of me. The sights are all in 
their blue carts and the booths hammering down. If 
you can see Lady Ormonde, do. She is a very amiable 
excellent person, and has been all kindness to me. 
You will be delighted with Madame Falck. I add in 
case you don't know that Lord Byron is dead and 
C. Fox to marry Miss Fitzclarence. 

Granville is uncommonly well, my children blooming 
and not one jot the worse for the indefatigable dissipa- 
tion of the fair. Now do not repeat what follows 
even to Georgiana. Yesterday my two girls ^ told me 
they wished extremely to marry. Susy : ' I cannot 

1 He married Lady Georgiana Lennox, a daughter of the Duke of 
Richmond. He succeeded his brother in 1839. 

"^ The elder was thirteen and the younger eleven years old. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 293 

express myself in English : a girl who does not marry 
has before her un champ si vaste et si monotone.' 
' Georgy, tell me whom should you like to marry ? ' 
' Oh ! can there be a doubt ? Mr. Abercromby to 
be sure.' ' And you, Susy ? ' Susy colouring like 
fire : ' Oh ! certainly the same.' And so here are 
my two innocent, secluded young ladies, both having 
fixed their young eyes upon the only young thing of 
the male kind they have ever had an opportunity of 
speaking to. The truth is that great and small, old 
and young, masters and servants, English and Dutch, 
all doat upon Abercromby. He is second only to your 
George in the world, and I had rather see my girls 
Mrs. Abercromby, a prettier edition than the actual, 
than anything else in the world. 

Mr. Chad has received his leave of absence and goes 
to England in a fortnight, the time for his return not 
fixed. Mr. Edgcumbe is arrived, and we are no worse 
nor better. He is good-humoured and obliging, but 
has little in him, and I see him without reflecting upon 
him. 

I pity you for the rapidity of my thaw. I knew 
what it would be and seized upon foolscap. I could 
not "have written to you these last days if I had been 
paid lOZ. per line. I must add one little episode. 
When the bag arrived this morning Granville was out. 
Mr. Jones brought me half a dozen letters. I looked ; 
not one from you, but two, one from Lady Holland, 
and another from the Duchess of Beaufort which my 
imagination represented to me as from Lord Gower. 
For three minutes I believe I suffered more than I ever 
did before, for I concluded dearest Lord Morpeth must 
be much worse. I dared not open the letters, and 
walked up and down the room in an agony of mind. 
Now, Lady Morpeth, look on this. In trips the Vis- 
count with a brace of dispatches from you in his hand, 



294 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

which by some extraordinary chance had been left with 
his in the Chancellerie, furious at the state in which he 
found me, and indeed it was irrational. Holly ^ writes 
to recommend George Tierney - to our particular atten- 
tion, which pray assure her we shall not fail to give 
him. 

I hear Mr. Stanley has eaten up his former speech. 
Mr, Tierney raves of his cleverness and promise. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : May 1824. 

My dearest, best-loved sister, — How much you 
must have suffered ! What anxiety you must have felt, 
and how relieved you must now feel ! The last account 
both from you and Mrs. Lamb is so satisfactory that I 
hope by this time you have nothing but the delight of 
seeing him recover. You had by a former courier said 
you were anxious, but nothing that gave me any idea 
of Lord M. being serious unwell, for as to anxiety, 
dearest sister, we drink that cup to its dregs, and upon 
gout, well, as G. is, I never am without it. But then 
my case is different. If he has gout here, I must give 
the colchicum, I must be sole physician, for it is a 
medicine unknown in these parts ; and though he con- 
tinues quite well, there is scarcely a day in which he 
has not felt shght twinges and threatened me with 
a fit. 

When your letter arrived to-day it quite upset me, 
not upon dear Lord Morpeth's account, for I feel only 
the comfort that his illness is past, but the idea of what 
you had gone through, the impossibility of flying to 
you, the hopelessness of being a comfort to you, all 
came on me with overwhelming force. 

I have been quite callous to the pain of absence 
from you. I heard on all sides of your health, your 

' Lady Holland. ^ Son of the Kt. Hon, George Tierney. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 295 

happiness, your spirits. I have the hope of seeing 
you. It is but to-day that I feel what it is to me to be 
far away from you, my own dearest, dear sister. When 
Granville came to me he found me entreating him to 
let me embark with G. Stewart to-morrow. He 
brought me to reason and reality, and I now feel only 
that the day after to-morrow I may hope to hear from 
you again. Granville has done me most good by 
assuring me that your coming here is more certain 
than ever, for we both think it will be everything for 
Lord Morpeth's health — change of air, our early hours 
and regular life, and the health we all enjoy in conse- 
quence, makes us speak with confidence. I am certain 
that Granville would have had constant gout in 
England, as he certainly has for a long time gouty 
tendencies in his constitution, and we are both con- 
vinced that it is only our' genre de vie and the pre- 
cautions so easily attended to here that have warded 
it off. 

I shall count the days, hours, and minutes till the 
happiness arrives. I cannot urge it too strongly. It is 
not selfish ; were it to leave instead of joining me, I 
should say the same of what I think coming here 
woiild be to Lord Morpeth's health. 

We had a very brilliant ball at Court, and the fair 
is the prettiest, gayest thing imaginable. My girls are 
perfectly happy and well, but oh, what a marplot 
anxiety is — I keep it all to myself and am the only 
sufferer ! When we push through the crowd I fancy 
aU the children have caught the scarlet fever and the 
smaU-pox, that the heat wiU give them fevers when it 
is hot, the chiU agues when it is cold. Luckily I have 
just enough good sense to prevent my clouds lowering 
over anybody but myself, and at the close of the day I 
see sunshine in all their darling faces. 



296 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : May 1824. 

My dearest G., — The William Bentincks^ are arrived, 
and dined with us yesterday. I have seen her this 
morning, and she drops in this evening and is very 
welcome, for, though she knows nothing of you, she 
talks to me of England in general, of the Gowers and 
their felicity, of the Levesons, ' child of nature, child 
of nature, indeed she is.' What a good-natured, kind- 
hearted, potatoe-headed woman ^ she is, always in a 
bother, every second word a blunder ! She calls Mr. 
Strangways Mr. Stapleton, Mr. Tierney Mr. Burdett, 
and seems scarcely to know if her own head is on her 
shoulders or not. 

We go to-morrow to spend the day at Monsieur 
Gremaux's, sleep at Eotterdam, and on Sunday morning 
walk about the town and see the arrival of the steam- 
boat. 

Mons. de Schoschen is gone to Brussels on his way 
to Aix-la-Chapelle. He is a great loss. His little 
attache,, the Comte de Gallen, remains with us and is 
an acquisition, as he sings beautifully — about the size 
of your William, with rings on his forefinger — in short, 
un joli garqon in the full German acceptation of the 
word. 

I hear Chateaubriand's ^ demission was so sudden 
and unexpected by him that on the very day he re- 
ceived it he was to have the whole Corps Diplomatique 
to dinner, and put them off an hour before they were 
all to assemble chez lui. Jules de Polignac is going to 

' Lord and Lady William Bentinck. He was Captain-General of 
Sicily in 1812 and Governor-General of India from 1828 to 1835. He 
was a iirst cousin of Lady Granville. 

^ She was an Irisliwoman, a daughter of Lord Gosford. 

^ In consequence of his disagreement with Monsieur de Vill^le, in 
whose Government he was Minister of Foreign Affairs. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 297 

be married to Mme. de Choiseul, an Englishwoman.^ I 
do not know what her maiden name was. 

There are a great many English arrivals. We must 
have a bull dinner in a day or two. Lady William 
charms me with her rapturous admiration of Granville's 
good looks. She does nothing but compliment him, 
and he is really rajeuni and embelli de vingt ans. How 
much good we shall do Lord Morpeth, quando verra 
quel di. 

The Osbornes go to Spa in about ten days. Miss 
Osborne will be a loss, as she is very popular with the 
sparks. 

To Lady G. Morpeth, 

The Hague : June 1824. 

My very dearest sis., — ^Your letter and Lady Stafford's 
have given me the greatest possible pleasure, and I feel 
now delivered of all my anxieties, for I only allow 
myself to see Lord Morpeth's returns of gout as so 
many reasons for you to accelerate your journey. In 
three weeks I trust you will have the good sense to 
pack *ip. Dearest Lord Gower ! Give him my love 
and congratulations, and thank Lady Stafford for her 
letter. I can now think of nothing but the rapture of 
having you here. We walked yesterday, Granville and 
I, for three hours in the wood, and could do nothing 
but exclaim how Lord Morpeth would admire it. 
There are morsels of it like Eay Wood. 

You wiU have received my last letter from Mr. 
Chad. We miss his gay agreeable society very much. 

I am glad to hear of Susan Eliot's ^ marriage. 

My dearest G., settle your day, and above all dis- 
cuss it with me. 

' She was the daughter of the first Lord Eanoliffe. 

'^ A daughter of Lord St. Germans and a niece of Lord Granville. 
She married Colonel Lygon, who subsequently became Lord Beauohamp, 
and was the mother of the late earl, 



298 LETTERS OE HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 8, 1824. 

Mr. Chad sets out to-night. He is low at going, 
but of course happy at his promotion. Mr. Tierney 
is still here, quite blooming and very agreeable. 
GranviUe is gone to see Prince Frederic, who is just 
arrived, and from thence to a dinner at Mons. 
d'Agoult's. God bless you, dear, dearest. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

The Hague : June 15, 1824. 

My very dear brother, — How happy you are in the 
power of being such a blessing to those about you ! 
G. tells me you have been such a comfort to her, 
and everything to Mrs. Lamb. C. Ellis writes of the 
Duchess's ^ family being so penetrated with a sense of 
your kindness. 

And now 1 will plunge at once into my subject, but 
telling you that one word breathed by Mr. Abercromby 
or Mrs. Ijamb would be the ruin of me, and thus I 
throw myself upon your generosity. What is not known 
now must never be known — Mr. Canning's intention 
of removing GranviUe to Paris, probably this autumn, 
certainly next year. But it is of the utmost importance 
that this move should appear, when it happens, to be 
an unpremeditated one, and in fact we are here for 
the purpose of making it appear so. I know I may 
trust you and I think I shall please you ; the united 
strength of these convictions no woman was ever 
known to resist. 

Our only strong objection to a winter at Brussels is 
the trouble and expense of forming a new establish- 
ment there, and this, if possible, we are to be spared. 

For ray own feelings, they are selfishly fear of any 

' Of DevonBhire. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 299 

change of a place and life I like so much, dread of all 
the worries and duties of Paris, late hours, grande 
parure, visits, presentations, all my favourite aversions. 
Then comes the thinking Granville will prefer it, that 
my children wiU have better masters. 

Then mingled pleasures and pains. Eumbolds, 
Eawdon, Pasta and Poitier, Sir Charles Stuart's house 
and gardens, the laxative nature of the Seine' water, 
English physicians, French ladies of distinction. 

Summing up — sufl&cient for the day, che sara sara, 
and a most sagacious resolution to enjoy the present 
and resign myself to the future. 

God bless you, dearest brother. When you hear of 
the appointment you must act surprise to the life or I 
am undone. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 1824. 

What a pretty book Captain Hall's ' is, and what a 
fine speech Sir James ^ has warbled ! 

Tho' deep yet clear, tho' gentle yet not dull, 
Strong without rage, without o'erflowing fuU.^ 

I have not had the courage to encounter Eed- 
gauntlet. 

George's verses gave me the greatest pleasure. I 
prefer the first, which I think beautiful. The last are 
fuU of soul and subject ; but I think there is a little 
confusion dans la marche. 

sister of my own sort, Uver of the chicken to 
which I am gizzard ! How weU I understand you, 
that something in the turn of our minds and faces 
that made George Stewart, in answer to my enquiries 
about your looks and spirits, write me word you 
were very weU ; ' but never having seen Lady Morpeth 

' Captain Basil Hall's Journal in South America. 

' Sir James Mackintosh, speech on proceedings in Demerara, 

^ Denham's, 



300 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

before, I cannot very well say if she is low or not.' 
I certainly do rally quick, but the more shame for 
me when I sink, proving it is less constitutional. My 
only trial here is the listening to the Dutch people 
talking about health. They have a horror of physic 
and never take it. It is very odd that my Susy and 
Mile. Alexandrine d'Hoguerres were both taken ill at 
the same time ; feverish cold, violent headaches, pain 
in all the limbs. I gave two grains of calomel and a 
dose next morning. Mile. Alexandrine had a bag of 
dry herbs applied one day, and a bag of wet ones the 
next. The patients are both quite recovered. I often 
think what would become of me if my children were 
alarmingly ill, and it is ungrateful and odious to worry 
about them for every finger ache instead of being in 
perpetual delight at seeing them so well and flourishing. 
I hear Mme. Palck is in very bad looks, so I am 
not surprised at your not admiring her more. Besides, 
she is en prise with more beauty in London than she 
was here, and it may have been the triumph of le 
borgne. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 1824. 

Dearest Sis., — I received your letter yesterday. 
Granville had one from Lord Morley giving a very 
satisfactory opinion of Lord Morpeth's amendment. 
Miss Trimmer in one to me does the same, and I feel 
confident that Holland House, which I think in every 
way is so good for him, will quite set him up. Miss 
Trimmer, however, who always likes administering a 
little bitter into one's cup, tells me she thinks you will 
not come to the Hague, so far out of Verity's reach, this 
year. Now, my dearest G., the chief purport of my 
letter is to entreat you not to add to any worry you 
may have at the idea of my not being able to resign 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 301 

myself to this determination, if you make it. If Lord 
Morpeth now as the fine weather approaches entirely 
shakes off his complaints, and without any possibility 
of any return of gout, I feel, not as a question of my 
happiness but of the immense good it would do him, 
it is a duty in you to come. But on the other hand, 
if you are still in that state of anxiety about a return 
of gout, that well-known state when happiness is 
measured by the number of streets and miles between 
yourself and Verity, I cannot even wish for you. Tell 
me, for I forget, is Lord Morpeth sick at sea ? When 
I saw the steamboat arrive at Eotterdam the means of 
coming looked so easy and delicious. To those who 
do not suffer from sickness it is a water party and a 
short drive in our landau to come to the Hague. 
What a pity it is Verity cannot come over just to 
establish you here ! 

is well punished. The ridicule of it will be 

to him the worst part of the whole job. We are told 
that one of her intercepted letters is filled with bitter 
reproaches at his not seeming pleased to hear that the 
dear little babe has got a tooth. 

I am delighted to hear that Mme. Falck succeeds 
so well, she is such an excellent, amiable person. I 
think her manner is too much of a manner, but the 
self-satisfaction is only the radiance which good- 
humour and being easily and always pleased gives. 
Who is Durazzo ^ like ? 

Mr. Edgcumbe is very inoffensive. He is not 
handsome, he is not clever, he is not useful, but 
there is nothing below mediocre, and he is very 
obUging and good-natured. Mr. Tierney is still here, 
and we like him so much and he is such an addition 
that we look forward to his leaving us, which he 
intends doing next month, with real regret. 

' The Marquise Dvirazzo, a Genoese and aunt to Marie Lady Granville. 



302 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

I am doctor of the Embassy, and mix up doses for 
the attaches according to Verity's prescriptions with 
unparalleled success. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 1824. 

We left the Hague with aU our force, Mr. 
Strangways excepted. The drive through Delft and 
Eotterdam very pretty. About three miles beyond the 
latter we found the Gamblers and a ferry, left our 
carriages, crossed the Maas, and stepped into two 
vehicles of M. Groeninx's, one like ' a long coach with 
a white linen top to it. We found him upon the steps 
of his house waiting to hand me up into a large hand- 
some room aU carved and gilded, where we sat as at 
church on crimson benches and sipped chocolate. 
We then played about in a very pretty garden, ad- 
mired some beautiful black beech trees and immense 
acacias, sat in a little hermitage where I was urged in 
vain to take un petit verve de vin de Madere, and re- 
turned home at four to dinner. Very Dutch, cauli- 
flowers powdered with ham, salmon, hung beef for 
the piece de resistance. Granville, between Mesdames 
Groeninx and Grovestins, dowagers of the first water, 
with large folding doors at his back thrown open to 
the lawn on a day as cold as January, was as well as 
could be expected in his situation. At half -past six 
we walked to the river to see the boats pass, went to 
the potager, la petite ferme, etc., mounted the vehicles 
* again, got drenched in a violent shower of rain and 
drove to Eotterdam, where by the side of a blazing 
fire we played at ecarte and piquet. Now such is the 
excellence of our constitutions that we are none the 
worse for our junket, and such the bonhomie and kind- 
heartedness of the excellent Dutch that we were all 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 303 

pleased with our day, and in spite of wind and rain 
never regretted the junket. 

I have a delightful letter from Agar and a most 
amusing one from Mr. Sneyd. He describes Mme. de 
Lieven's departure as follows — 

She is gone, as the Herald announces, 

To latitudes wilder and colder ; 
She is gone with her pearls and her flounces. 

She is gone with the bows on her shoulder. 

If you see him before I have energy to write to 
him, tell him how happy we shall be to have him here. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 1824. 

My dearest sister, — I pity you for your long day of 
dissipation and grande toilette. We have had delicious 
weather since I wrote last, and have taken long drives 
in the curricle and open carriage after dinner. 

We are quite charmed at the thought of having the 
Huskissons, Wilmots, and Charles Ellis here early next 
month. A few English middle-aged people will be de- 
lightful to us. The Abercrombys will, I hope, pay us a 
visit. 

I do not think Mme. Falck at all prosy. I do not 
think her a very clever woman, but here at least she 
talked very agreeably and merrily, and had a flow of 
animal spirits and good-humour that tided off anything 
approaching to bore, if it was in her, which I never 
detected. Perhaps she is trying to adapt herself to 
the English nation, and if she gets into any profon^ 
deur of talk I do not answer that she will not 
flounder. 

I hear Lady Grantham's ball was splendid, and her^ 
self magnificent. 

We have a Mr. Drummond here, but he is no 
catch, being a bore to the bone, and large. Scotch bones 



304 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

they are ; but he is very inoffensive and does no harm 
grazing at the bottom of a long table. 
Adieu, dearest of sisters. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 23, 1824. 

My dearest G., — I do all I can not to allow myself 
to hope, but when you tell me Lord Morpeth is better 
and say perhaps, you may come, I put a strait-waistcoat 
upon my thoughts as the only way of keeping them 
within bounds. How delighted I am to think of your 
having George with you again, that homme medicinal ! 

The rain has prevented my visit, and I have been 
sitting upon thorns since dinner with the Minister of 
Justice and his wife. God bless you, my own very and 
ever dearest sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 1824. 

My dearest G., — I have been to-day sitting three 
hours between Prince Frederick and the old Nuncio at 
dinner. It was in its way a trial, my mind all full of 
my own concerns and none in common with my neigh- 
bours. 

I thought of you yesterday in a violent thunderstorm, 
unceasing lightning and one clap of thunder that seemed 
as it must crush one. It is now fine, and I am going 
out with the children. 

Friday. — My dearest of all dear sisters, I pray I 
may keep my little mind. I see nothing but you step- 
ping out of the steamer. It is such vast, such over- 
whelming delight to me, and you will find us all, I 
trust, poveri si, ma contenti. 

1 can write no more, think no more, my head is 
quite gone. Kiss Lord Morpeth for me. See how 
entirely demented I am ! 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 305 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : June 1824. 

Dearest sister, — ^Mr. Wilmot undertakes to give you 
an account of the steamboat and its accommodations. 
I think of your coming without being able to picture to 
myself so much happiness. 1 am only going to write 
you a few Unes. 

It wiU be very pleasant to see C. EUis, Mr. Montagu, 
and Hyde ViUiers on Saturday. What will it be to see 
you and yours and the little Governor on the 31st? 
George Stewart brings him here and they will probably 
cross with you. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : July 1824. 

My dear dearegt sister, — I am so happy. The idea 
of actually seeing you on Sunday drives me half wild. 
Lord Valletort assures me he has written you many 
useful suggestions for your voyage. I think the weather 
is going to be very fine, at least the Schevening fisher- 
men assure us of it. 

I believe this is the last day I can write. You will 
probably find me at Eotterdam. I wish you could see 
how all who come here thrive and bloom. 

I shall feel in a trepidation till I see you actually 
alight. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

The Hague : October 1824. 

Dearest Lady Harrowby, — GranviUe set out this 
morning. Mr. Canning wishes to see him and send 
him on a special mission to Paris to condole.^ He 
hopes to be here again on the 15th and we are stiU 
desired to say nothing of our ultimate destination, and 
I do not know myself the period of it, if immediately 

' On the death of Louis XVIII. 
TOE. I. X 



306 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

after his return or not. I cannot wish for a sejour at 
Brussels, necessarily unsettled and au jour la journee. 

When I think of Paris and the three hours' passage 
from Dover to Calais I have a hope amounting almost 
to a certainty of soon seeing. you there, and what 
happiness that will be, dear dearest Lady H. ! 

I feel to-day in a strange bewildered state. The 
sudden summons of Granville, the unreasonable degree 
of pain it gives me to be absent from him, the uncer- 
tainty of our future plans, give me a sort of indigestion 
of mind which quite disturbs its tranquillity — and 
coming after a Hfe of such indolent enjoyment it is like 
the waking of a dormouse, which I have always thought 
must be uncommonly distressing. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : October 11, 1824. 

I am living on au jour la journee, dearest G., 
anxiously expecting tidings of GranviUe. The last letter 
I received from him was written on Thursday, two hours 
before he left London. He had been dining at Windsor, 
sitting over ecarte and patience, with the King, Duke 
of Wellington, Mme. de Lieven, and La Marquise. On 
Wednesday morning he had been to Cartwright, who 
gave him a raging toothache, and he had to pay his 
visits, make his arrangements and prepare everything 
for his journey ' in five hours' torture,' as he himself 
expresses it. He dined at Planta's to meet the Can- 
nings, and half the dinner was over before the pain 
subsided. He had only a wearied uncomfortable feel 
when he began his journey on the Thursday, but it 
doubles my anxiety to hear from him, which if it 
occurred to him to write from Calais I may to-morrow. 
He reckoned to arrive at Paris on Sunday, hoped to 
have his audience of leave on Friday, and to be here on 
Tuesday, to-morrow week. 



1824 TO LADY G. MOKPETH 307 

He has written to Abercromby to desire him to send 
the horses on to Brussels immediately and to prepare 
everything for our journey there. We shall probably 
leave the Hague immediately after his return. 

Now, my dearest G., I am desired not to tell any- 
body what I am going to tell you, and however absurd 
the secrecy I enjoin may appear to you I must entreat 
you not to teU or write it to my brother or anybody, 
as Mr. Canning is particularly anxious that, however 
much expected, the fact of our immediate departure 
from Brussels should not be known in England from 
authority till Granville has communicated it to the 
King of the Netherlands. The fact is we are only to 
stay at Brussels long enough to take leave, and Mr. C. 
wishes us to take possession of our house at Paris on the 
1st of November. I do not myself think this possible, 
but we are to strain every nerve to accomplish it. Have 
the goodness to say that our plans after .Granville's 
return are not fixed, and only to write the fact of the 
special mission, and that he returns here on the 19th. 

This is a nervous dreary fortnight for me, and I look 
to its close with indescribable impatience and delight. 
All that he can do for me he has done. I had letters 
from him from Antwerp, Calais, Dover, the Clarendon 
Hotel upon his arrival in London and eight pages at 
the moment of leaving it, oppressed as he was with pain 
and business. I pass my mornings with the children. 
In the evening ' Madame ne re9oit pas.' I think and 
write myself to sleep. [ 

I have only had one passe-temps, old Preedy, who 
always turns up like Hassan's slippers. He tells me 
that Caroline Lamb is in a much calmer state at Brocket 
and under the surveillance of two women, that William 
is with her de temps en temps, but lives chiefly with Lord 
Melbourne at Whitehall. y 

Granville called on Mme. Falck and found her in 

X 2 



308 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

great beauty, what though en papillotes ! She was 
going to the play with Ladies Jersey and Cowper, 
which sounds well for her fashionable career. ' It is a 
great thing for a Lady in Town ' to be well with those 
Countesses. He thought Lord Holland uncommonly 
well. She was souffrante and not able to see him. 

I think of your Georgiana when my spirits want a 
fillip. Good-night again. My love to Lord Morpeth. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire: 

The Hague : October 14, 1824. 

My dearest brother, — I have just received your kind 
letter. Till Granville returns and has an interview with 
the King of the Netherlands, our final destination, though 
unavoidably suspected, is still kept by me as a profound 
secret. We shall hasten to Brussels only to take leave, 
and purpose being settled in our house at Paris early in 
November. 

I shall accept your arrival there, whenever it takes 
place, without any suspicion of locale having any in- 
fluence in its accomplishment. 

I am nervous when I think of the duties of my new 
destiny, but being, as Mr. Wilmot reminds me in a letter 
to-day, by nature a conformist, I do not despair. 

I hope you will find me a laboriously dressed woman, 
another Lieven in manner and representation. 

God bless you, dearest. Abercromby is to accom- 
pany us, to his great satisfaction and ours. 

I had a letter from Granville to-day, dated the 8th, 
from Paris. He was just arrived and going to dine 
with Monsieur de Villele.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : October 19, 1824. 

My dearest G.,— No words can describe my happi- 
ness at having Granville here again, perfectly well and 
ill excellent spirits. 

' President of the Council from 1822 to 1828. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 309 

I think I suffered more from nerves during the 
last fortnight than I ever did before in my Hfe. In the 
midst of to-day's excessive joy I have a shattered, worn 
feeling in consequence. He has been travelling with 
the greatest rapidity, is grown very thin, but looks clear 
and light, and wiU now have a little repose, though not 
so much as I could wish. 

I have been looking over the plans of our house at 
Paris. It seems an incomparable one. He has secured 
boxes for me at the French Opera, Italian Opera, and 
Th4&tre Tran^ais. Mme. de Gontaut ^ has promised me 
advice about all Court matters. I feel very happy 
in my little mind with regard to the future. The cre- 
dentials are arrived and, heaven be praised, the make- 
believe secrecy I have so long practised is no longer 
necessary. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

The Hague : October 25, 1824. 

My dearest G., — It does seem to me such an age to 
be without hearing from you, having had no letters by 
Thursday's mail, and our yesterday's letters being gone 
to Brussels, where we expected to have arrived yester- 
day. 

We go to Breda to-morrow, and to Brussels the next 
day ; and I have a cold, and feel a good deal worn with 
the worry of seeing him so poorly. But change of air 
and easy journeys will I hope set us both quite to 
rights, and the weather, which has been horrid, black 
and foggy, is to-day bright and clear. And it is Susy's 
birthday, and she looks radiant. She is fourteen ; and ' 
we are going where there are English doctors, and I 
certainly do consider that as a great compensation for 
any grievances my change of destiny may bring with it. 

The boys went to-day, and we follow to-morrow. 

' The governess of the' children of the Duchesse de Berri. She wrote 
an interesting account of her early days which has been recently pub- 
lished. 



310 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Brussels : November 1, 1824. 

My dearest dear brother, — I cannot thank you one 
half enough ; it is the most beautiful, delightful present. 
The bracelet in itself is all this, and then the picture, 
which is the most like I have ever seen of you and the 
most delightful hkeness. To have such a picture of 
you in a shagreen case would have been incalculable 
satisfaction. To have it as it is — in short, I go to a 
soiree to-night only because of my bracelet and having 
an insatiable wish to flaunt it to the Brussels world. 
The sleeve wiU not disgrace it. Gigot at top, un seul pli, 
and then innumerable httle furrows and ridges between 
it and the paw. You are not perhaps aware that a 
magnificent bracelet now is as necessary to the existence 
of a woman as the air she breathes. 

We are here since yesterday. 

We set off in about a week for Paris. The doctors 
are bound to cure me of something, for they have half 
killed me with applications. Hyde is I believe to be 
the man ; he is already in possession. Whom do you 
wish me to employ, tradespeople I mean ? Send me a 
list. 

Now, dearest brother, listen to my solemn deposition. 
Never to the best of my recollection did I arrive at any 
fashionable watering place, at any crowded inn, at any 
capital of any country without having immediately upon 
my arrival, ' The Dowager Marchioness of Downshire's 
compliments, just arrived from Paris, hopes Lady 
Granville is quite well.' My dear, she is in the next 
room. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Brussels : November, 1824. 

Yes, dear Lady Morpeth, I am delighted that you 
have received my letters and your parcels. How 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 311 

different Trentham ^ must be from what I have seen it, 
and how happy Govero must be ! 

You desire me to tell you my thoughts and feelings. 
I hardly know them myself, and I dwell less upon the 
change I am making than those do who only see it. 
I am a .very curious ooman, Lady M. ; I am always 
much more engrossed by some one intime feeling than 
by vague general speculations, and when 1 read Lady 
Gower's letter about my not being eblouie, I do not 
dare tell even you how entirely new that view of the 
subject seems to me. 

I was nervous at that time because Granville was 
still poorly and Susy ditto, and what do you think I 
did ? I said to myself, ' Well, let me try and eblouir 
myself,' and I tried to think of all that is what is called 
'gratifying.' I thought over Paris, which strange to 
say has hardly crossed my mind for the last fortnight. 
I patted myself on the back and said : ' It is a very fine 
thing to be ambassadress.' All this without the slightest 
effect, and I plunged back into 'what if the calomel 
should operate too much ' with redoubled intenseness. 
This is foolish, unaccountable, and I combat it, but so 
it is. 

Do not suppose that I pretend a naive ignorance of 
what it is to be eblouie by a situation in life. I forgive 
it in Lady Gower. I wonder at Lady Francis Leveson 
being free from it. If I was eighteen, beautiful, sure of 
commanding admiration by a glance of my eye — there 
is de quoi to turn a head. 

But, dearest sister, that you may not be low at 
thinking how little effect my prospects have upon me, 
there are things that wiU make me feel buoyant, elated. 
I delight to think of Granville, well-doing there, of the 
zest such a position brings with it to one in his position 
— of my children, and if Susy becomes what I think 

' Witli the newly married couple Lord and Lady Gower. 



3J2 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

she will be my tead will not stay on my shoulders, 
but, dear love, you see if en attendant they do not digest 
their victuals ! So I think more about stomachs than 
dignities. 

But now let me tell you that yesterday I was quite 
in a new line, so who knows ? We dined at the Prince 
d'Aremberg's, and met there the Guriefs, some Belgians 
and some Diplomates. I was dressed d'une elegance ! I 
have sent a sketch of my new shape to Hart. My face, 
as Mr. Hill once said, ' Lord help it ; ' but my mise was 
faultless. I am more convinced than ever that if manners 
make the man dress makes the manners, and strong in the 
ease of my new corsets, in the tidiness of my new silk 
gown, feet unentangled in my flounces, and hair crepe 
into the soHdity of a wig, I behaved to perfection, and 
returned home with a very comfortable self-approbation 
and a diminished dread of representation. 

I went on Saturday to the Petit Theatre au Pare, 
which is perfection. An actor called Boucher as good as 
Perlet, and several very pretty, amusing little farces, 
the genre I prefer. 

I did my duty at Mrs. Taylor's. We went at nine 
and stayed till half-past eleven. It was une partie tres 
fine, and would have reminded me of London if it had 
not been for the variety of occupations, which is certainly 
an improvement upon our drums. Granville went im- 
mediately to whist. I sat for some time upon a couch 
with Lady Downshire,Mme. d'Estorff, and Lady Charlotte 
Gould, a very grand fat fretful woman, a sister of Lord 
Kenmare's, who will only appear at Mrs. Taylor's. I 
have been much told by the ladies at Court of the 
excessive exquisiteness of a party where il riy avait 
positivement que les Goulds. I wish you could have seen 
them — a man like Don Quixote, a woman like Mrs. 
Lascelles' wet nurse, I mean the frail one — do you 
remember her ? — and la petite Gould, as she is called, a 



1824 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 313 

tall raw-boned girl with red hair. In the course of the 
evening we had some very pretty music, pianoforte, 
guitar, singing, and later Thiel the Eussian Dip. played 
waltzes and la jeunesse danced. 

The people here comblent us with civilities. We dine 
again at Prince Augustus on Thursday. To-morrow to 
Mme. Lalaing's soiree. I have not a moment more. 
God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Brussels : November 1824. 

I have been indefatigable in the performance of my 
civil duties. I went to Court the day before yesterday 
and was most graciously received and parted with. I 
went in the evening to a soiree at Lady Charlotte Gould's, 
and was entouree by my Dutch and Belgian friends, and 
my days have been swallowed up in paying and re- 
ceiving visits. Mme. Fagel and Mme. d'Estorff have been 
with us this evening, and both parted from us in tears. 

We sleep at Mons to-morrow night, at Peronne 
Tuesday, and at Paris on Wednesday. 

Dearest of all dear sisters, I detest the contrary 
winds, and you will not calculate upon them and will 
doubt my having written. Never doubt me any way 
vis-a-vis to you. My affection is steadier than the 
elements. I could no more let a mail go without a letter 
than I can make a packet sail when they prevent it. 

Monday morning. — ^We are just setting out, my 
dearest sis. We hear the house wiU admit us, but that 
it is in a terribly delabre state. Sir Charles has emptied 
the rooms to fiU innumerable large packing-cases, which 
are all standing about in the ante-rooms and passages. 
The dining-room is supported by props, having had a 
tumble. God bless you, dearest. I had better describe 
than prophesy, and you shall have a long dispatch 
from Paris. 



314 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

To Lady G. Morpeth and the Duke of 
Devonshire. 

Paris : November 20, 1824. 

How shall I begin, where shall I begin, dearest of 
sisters ? I am delighted, but then I have as yet plunged 
into nothing but a luxurious house, a delicious httle 
garden and the Theatre Fran^ais. I have not seen a 
soul, and pass my days with Granville and the children. 
Were you to see me in my new apartments you would 
not believe in me. We have a luxe of rooms, aU looking 
to the garden with the bright sun of L'Et^ de St. 
Martin shining upon them. If the repair was equal to 
the space and beauty of this palace it would be per- 
fection, but there are holes in the floor big enough to 
let me through, props to keep them up. All this must 
be set to rights in the spring. 

I will now attempt a sort of journal en arriere. We 
arrived to dinner the day before yesterday, and spent 
the evening in exploring and admiring. Yesterday 
morning I got up early and had an hour or two of 
unqualified bore, measuring and ordering. Heaven 
help my pocket ! — a complete trousseau. Mme. 
Herbault in one room, Mme. Guerise in another. The 
result is that I am already half an elegante, and my 
person is like those melodrames got up at Covent 
Garden — no merit in the piece but saved from being 
damned by the machinery. 

At twelve I went into the garden with my girls, who 
are in a state of enchantment. At two I took with 
Granville a delicious walk in the Champs Elysees, 
returned to dress, and went after dinner to be enchanted. 
' Le Mari a Bonnes Fortunes,' which is in itself excellent 
and outdone by the perfection of the acting. Mile. Le 
Verd and Michelot. Le Verd anything but green in 
age, as large as Lady Holland, in a muslin frock. This 



1824 TO LADY G. MOBPETH 315 

morning I tried on the articles and have been out ever 
since, walking and returning my visits. 

Our new men are Algernon Percy, a sickly, gentle- 
manlike man who understands dress and paints minia- 
tures, a young Bligh, good-natured and civil. My only 
fear is expense, and think what dress is alone. Lord 
Hardwicke gave Lady Elizabeth ^ 1,000^. a year, which 
she spent in bedecking herself ! ! ! 

Dear relations, I vary twenty times a day. Some- 
times in transport, sometimes in despair. 

In transport when, as last night, I sat in the dark 
corner of my box at the Italian Opera listening to 
Zuchelli, Cinti, and La Signora Mombelli, a little woman 
with a voice and articulation that charmed me. In 
despair when peeping out between the acts I beheld 
Hyde Parker and Onslow ogling the atmosphere, 
Aldborough and Bagration, like two old nettles in a 
box, dressed a I'enfance, Lady Mildmay in another, 
beautiful as ever but cut in brass. In transport when 
I walked with Sukey in the garden, looking out upon 
the Champs Elysees all alive with cabriolets, horse and 
foot passengers. In despair when I walked up the 
dining-room church ^ between regiments of Anglo- 
Francs, and so on. 

Lady Worcester^ came to me this morning. She 
touches me, for she looks careworn with her sunk eyes 
and thin projecting nose. 

I am to receive Paris three nights running after my 
presentation. I am then to be asked to a great dinner 
at Court and desired to name my company, which is 
to consist of twelve English of the highest rank. Lord 
Granville cannot go if I do not name him. 

I hear of Emily Eumbold as beautiful as ever and 

' The daughter of Lord Hardwicke and the wife of Sir Charles 
Stuart, afterwards Lord Stuart de Rothesay. 

" Service was then held in the dining-room of the Embassy. 
' The second wife of Lord Worcester, the late Duke of Beaufort. 



316 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

more languishing. But that, as young Wortley observes, 
is all my eye, a very fair joke for a cornet. God bless 
you, my dearest brother and sister. 

To Lady Harrowby. 

Paris : November, 1824. 

My dearest Lady Harrowby, — You can have no idea 
of anything more enjoyable than the life we are leading. 
I never go out, seldom beyond my garden. I am at 
home every evening, and my civilities are aU packed 
up into a great Friday dinner and a Saturday 
morning. 

Madame Appony is amiable and sensible, sings 
beautifully, tres facile a vivre, and a great addition to 
the corps. She is ready to break her heart at the in- 
sensibility of the French, whilst I really look upon it as 
a great simplifier to our role. Easily amused, easily 
satisfied, they may perhaps dissappoint their lovers, but 
seem to me born for their ambassadresses. She, how- 
ever, abounds in kind feeling and has been steeped in 
German sentiment, and I can well understand that all 
this with its real pour et contre is stroked the wrong way 
up the back twenty times a day. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 5, 1824. 

It amused me to open a new volume of Mme. 
Campan's journal at these words : ' Tu dois juger si je 
suis fatiguee, mais je m'^tais laissee un peu arrieree, et 
quand une fois les lettres s'amassent, il faut un jour de 
sainte colere pour deblayer les tiroirs de mon bureau.' 
It is so exactly the state of my case. I have written 
more than a dozen letters for to-morrow's courier, much 
to the relief of my secretaire and my conscience, which 
were both quite oppressed. I have been working 
double tides in the civil line. I have paid a number of 



1824 , TO LADY G. MORPETH 317 

English visits and begun receiving them three times a 
week, between two and half-past three. 

I saw Pasta again last night in ' Otello.' I do not 
admire her, Lady Morpeth, I adore her. There is 
something sublime about her. 

Jules ^ is a-coming, which makes people stare and 
conjecture, and some assert that he is to replace Damas, 
and Juste de Noailles to go to England, but if you wish 
to know better than they there is not a word of truth 
in this statement. Villele and Damas are on good terms, 
Jules returns to England in ten days, and Mme. Juste 
stays here to talk to me about my toilette, which she 
does con amove. 

Lady Caroline Wortley adores Paris and she is to 
me like a moonlight night after a hot day, refreshment 
and repose. She has all the charm of intelligence with- 
out the tax of esprit, is always ready to do everything, 
always satisfied to do nothing. We went last night 
to a drum at Eothschild's. I fancied myself in 
London. 

Granville is just returned from Damas. Pozzo was 
there, and gave the most horrid account of the deluge 
at Petersburg. They fear that fifteen thousand per- 
sons have perished — at one iron work, an Englishman 
at the head of it, his wife, children, and two hun- 
dred and fifty workmen. 

I went this morning to hear Lewis Way preach. 
His sermons are extemporary, he is evangeUcal, and 
very striking and impressive. The English flock there. 
If anybody whispers, he stops and says, ' When Lady 
such a one has done talking, I will proceed.' His 
sermon began to-day with a little warning to those 
delegated by their Sovereign to represent him to take 
heed of their conduct and conversation. 

I am so glad to hear a good account of Mrs. Lamb. 

' Prince de Polignac. 



318 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

Miss Crofton, whom I found stepping about like a 

pea-hen at Eothschild's, is bursting with, pride at sister 

Caulfield being at Chatsworth, and ' your Ladyship 

i having the condescension to remember me.' Eemember 

, thee, yes thou old girl, and so I remember Gould, Gent, 

and Wood, and many a slighted creature whom I warm 

• into life with a curtsey. 

Dearest G., I was delighted to hear from both you 
and Hart by last night's courier. I have such pleasure 
when you both approve of me and enjoy my letters. 
God bless you both. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 9, 1824. 

I feel harassed to-day, dearest sister, for the first 
time, but then it is because I have a little sore throat 
and a headache, because it is cold and rainy, and 
because, having promised Susy to take her to the Opera 
to-night to see ' La Gazza Ladra,' I am obliged to go 
instead first to a soiree at Mme. de Villele's and after 
it to a drum at Aldborough's. 

I went last night to two acts of ' Marie Stuart,' 
which Duchesnois acted to perfection, and then took 
Lady Caroline to Mme. de Gontaut, from whence we 
adjourned to a. partie fine chez~Ia"Duchesse de Guiche^ — 
somewhat too much of this. 

Private and most Confidential. 

My dear, French people are — what shall I say ? ^ — 

what I don't like, as most comprehensive. They now 

show themselves to me at their best, for they are 

, extremely civU and prevenants, but there is a fonds of 

■ ill-breeding, insolence, conceit, and pretension qui se 

' CoTint d'Orsay's sister. 

" These views of French Society were afterwards much modified, as 
may be gathered from many subsequent letters. Lady Granville grew to 
appreciate the good qualities of the Frenc^. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 319 

fait jour through all their countenances, manners, and 
attentions. They are one and all factitious, and were 
I young, desoeuvree, and seeking intimacy or enjoyment 
amongst them, je me perdrais. Luckily, je n'en ferai 
rien, for they run off me like rain upon oilskin, and the 
only grievance is to give up a portion of every day to a 
society in which I feel in every taste, feeling, and idea 
so wholly etrangere. I wrap myself up in civihty, but 
I do assure you that I turn to a Miss Eurnbold for a 
mouthful of fresh air. 

Now let me say that I believe the exquisite set 
into which it is my good fortune to be admitted is the 
worst specimen of the kind. It is the pendant to 
Ladies Jersey, Gwydyr, Tankerville, Mrs. Hope, &c. 
They begin by thinking themselves ce qu'il y a de mieux 
au monde. Their conversation is all upon dress, the 
Opera, Talma. There is not as much mind as would 
fill a pea-shell. I am told they are charmed with me. 
They ask me to their most intimate coteries. They — 
in a word they protect me, and I come from their 
egards humiliated by their kindness, oppressed by their 
hienveillance. 

Now let me try to m^ike you au fait about them. 

They are pedantic and frivolous, with the most 
outree consideration of rank. 

They will scarcely look at an English man or woman 
out of their own peculiar set, wiU not admit a French 
one who is not a la mode ; but whom does one find 
intimes, suivis et presque adores — Lady Aldborough, 
young Broadwood, and Sir Henry Mildmay ? 

I walk in and am put on -a couch. Up comes a 
jeune duchesse or an old marquise and gives me five 
minutes, such as I to my shame have sometimes 
giveii to a country "neighbour, or to some distant 
connection. 

Now for a few of les phrases d'usage, which from 



/ a 



;kA 



320 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

their tone and manner give me a wish to hurl the 
cushions of their couches at their crepe heads. 

' Vous aimez Paris.' ' Vous-vous plaisez parmi 
nous,' neither as doubt or question. ' Lady une telle 
est bien : on ne la soup^onnera pas d'etre une Anglaise.' 
' Vous avez des enfants : vous 6tes bien heureuse de 
pouvoir les former k Paris.' ' J'ai passe chez vous,' with 
a ' Think of that ' look, and a hundred such — nothing 
in the letter, all in the spirit.^ 

Now I will tell you why I think that there are 
more agreeable people and pleasanter society to be 
deterres in this immense city. I have just received a 
note from Mme. d<e Coigny, who is in the country, 
petillant_d esprit. I sat half an hour yesterday with the 
^H Princesse de Vaudemont. She is uncommonly agree- 
able, full of new thoughts and strong opinions, cordial 
and good-natured, and as natural as her monkey. I 
went also to the Duchesse de Eaguse, and found her 
the most comfortable, kind, merry, fat, little woman. 
She receives every Sunday quite a different set, and I 
promise myself to tdter de ce terrain on Sunday evening, 
after having been to the Orleans, who I hear are very 
delightful people. 

Mme. de Gontaut is delightful, but speU-bound by 
Courts and elegantes, afraid of every word she speaks 
and hears, and already says to me, ' Mais, ma chere, 
tournez-moi le dos, vous me compromettez.' 

But, O Lady Morpeth, it is the woman made by 

' ' It was rather amusing when Lady Granville first came to Paris to 
see some of the grcmdes dames of the Faubourg St. Germain feeling their 
way and trying whether they could not dictate to and domineer over the 
quiet-looking Enghsh lady, who had more wit, and fun, and humour, and 
cleverness than a dozen of them put together. These arbiters of fashion 
soon discovered that they had found more than their match in Lady 
Granville, and that she would have her own list of guests, choose her own 
cap and shawl and settle her armchairs and sofas in her own way, without 
taking the advice of a jury of noble matrons, who had hitherto considered 
themselves infallible.' — Gronow's Beminiscences. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETT-I 321 

Herbault, VIctorine and Alexandre, tlie woman who 
looks to safe if you have six curls or five on the side of 
your head, the woman who talks, dictates, condescends 
and sneers at me — quos ego. It is odd that their effect 
upon me is to crush me with the sense of my inferiority 
whilst I am absolutely gasping with the sense of my 
superiority. What a thing to write, but it is onty to 
you. But the truth is they have an aplomb, a 
language, a dress de convenance, which it is as im- 
possible for me to reach as it would be for one of them 
to think five minutes like a deep-thinking, deep-feeling. 
Englishwoman./''^^ ■■"^*''*^^v''- - •''■■^■-'-- ^■^'' -^>^ '■ "" ' ^ 

To you, dear Lady Morpeth, I dedicate this, writ- 
ten per sfogarmi. I have not time to put half my 
thoughts together, but wish you to know them. It 
has done me as much good to write them as it would 
have done to be blooded in a high fever. 

Let me wind up with stating that house, garden, 
my husband, my children, the clear, exhilarating 
climate, the animating gaiety of all out-of-doors 
spectacles, and the endless amusement and variety of 
the theatres — Pasta alone is a happiness — the sort of 
enjoyment it will be to have you often with me, are 
more than compensations for occasional vexation and 
weariness of spirit. Eemember, it is only to you that 
I shall ever unburthen myself. My best love to Lord 
Morpeth. To him my ebullitions are necessary evils, 
but his discretion is beyond even a caution. 

I will tell you what is comfortable here. To-day, 
and all post days in future, I send word to the outer gate 
that I am out. This is quite understood here. They 
think a great deal of expedier le courier, and I have had 
hours of solitude which have restored my health and 
temper. This house, too, is as quiet as the depth of 
country, not a sound to be heard. 

VOL. I. T 



322 LETTEES OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 12, 1824. 

There is one enjoyment which I earn with the sweat 
of my brow, and I am in full possession of it — ^bed-time. 

Lady Morpeth, — We are just returned home after a 
day of unwearied duties. I began with church, which 
was crowded and damp. Immediately after it I ordered 
my carriage and went to Lady Abercorn, who was 
dangerously ill the day before yesterday. I found her 
recovering, but in bed, very low and very helpless, and 
quite alone in this great beehive. From thence I pro- 
ceeded to pay eighteen visits in a foggy, rainy day, 
which procured me the advantage of almost general 
admission, and I did not land in my own house till it 
was within ten minutes of dressing myself out in my 
best to receive the Wortleys and General Eamsay to 
dinner. Which dinner was no sooner swallowed than 
I set out for ra^ appointed presentation to the Duke 
and Duchess of Orleans and Mademoiselle.-^ I sat 
squiddling with them for some time. They are the best 
and most amiable of Altesses, and as little royal as 
need be. The Duchess is a Lady Duncannon, children 
all about her. Mile, is a shrewd, intelligent-looking 
woman. My next move was to Mme. de Damas, she 
being wife to the Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres, and 
Sunday her night of great reception. 

Now, dearest sister, be not surprised that I feel worn, 
beat, but in heaven to be at the close of it. 

On Saturday we dined at a sumptuous feast at 
Eothschild's. He has married his niece, a pretty little 
Jewess, nee coiffee, a very good thing at Paris, for, just 
out of her nursery, she does the honours of her house 
as if she never had done anything else. 

' She was the sister of the Duke of Orleans, over -whom she had great 
influence. She was called Madame Adelaide after his accession to the 
throne. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 323 

Mrs. and Miss Canning come on tlie 20th, and Lady- 
Caroline is here abeady. They will be great comfort 
to me, for going about alone and unsupported is tre- 
mendous. When you come Paris won't hold me, and 
I look to May literally as the month of promise. You 
will soon get into dress — it, alas ! is essential — but there 
are invariable rules, which is a blessing ; never to mind 
the effect, but to sit still and have it done, as to a 
dentist. 

I must write to Lady Stafford ; Madame de Vaude- 
mont adores her memory. She says she never will 
forgive Agar for not having brought Georgiana to 
Paris. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 13, 1824. 

I have only odds and ends of time to give you, my 
dearest sister. I believe I have told you that the 
women Cannings and Lady Harrowby will be here 
before the end of the month. I delight in having Lady 
Harrowby, and prefer her coming now to her coming 
in the spring, when I had rather have you quite to 
myself. 

I have been going on as usual, innumerable soirees, 
all much alike, save that at Mme. de la Briche's last 
night. I met Mme. d'Aguesseau, verjr handsome — as 
we all are — in large curls and deep mourning, and 
Georgine, tres embeUie. I called yesterday, in obedience 
to the Duke of Wellington's entreaties, upon Mrs. Pater- 
son.^ She seems a verj'- charming person, very handsome, 
with I'air noble and not a shade of her mother-country. 
She shook all over when I went into the room, but if for 
grief at the loss of Mr. Paterson, sentiment at the recol- 

' An American lady, who married Lord Wellesley in 1825. One of 
her sisters married the seventh Duke of Leeds, the other Lord Stafford 
of Cossey Hall. Mr. Paterson's sister was the wife of Jerome Buonaparte. 

T 2 



324 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

lection of the Duke, or the coldness of the room she 
received me in, I do not presume to judge. 

To-day is a busy day. Dinner at the Duke of 
Orleans, soiree at Mme. Juste de JSToailles, and post to 
make up and visits to return. The weather is beau- 
tiful, and I have been romping with the children in the 
garden. 

The Government have agreed to repair us. I think 
they ought to furnish us also, but that nous verrons. 
Perhaps Mr. Canning may say, as Lord Westmorland 
did in a large society of French here, ' Je voudrais si 
je coudrais.' 

And now let me tell you, dearest, that your letter 
about Lady E. Stuart was as amusing to me as a new 
novel. I am sure, from what I hear, your account, 
tant en Men qu'en mal, is quite a correct one, but her 
faults were blessings in the post, and I could learn as a 
trade her defects. Save the wig, my success would be 
a la longue as unbounded as hers. I am so anxious to 
do well that I hope I shall, but some of my duties are 
difficult to me. To avoid intimacy of communication, 
to have a degree of repelhng civility of manner, to have 
no preferences and create none, all this will rub my 
back up the wrong way, but I think over my part so 
much that I must end by learning it. 

I believe Lady Elizabeth at the end of ten years 
was not told so often as I have been already that she 
was charmante, remplie de grdce et d'esprit. I have not 
time to mince the matter, but shall I at the same or 
half the period have everybody's good word as she has ? 
We shall see. God bless you. 

I am glad to hear so good an account of Mrs. Lamb's 
health. Give my very best and kindest love to her. 
I am tired, but nothing more or worse. The climate, 
the amusements, and little time to think are all, I 
perceive, good for the spirits. My Aunt William is^ 



1824 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 325 

come. She dines here to-morrow to meet Abercorns 
and Monk. The Wortleys Hve in my right pocket. You 
are much altered if it does not give you pleasure to 
hear that Mme. Magrini has just sent home my pre- 
sentation gown, chosen by Juste, and a model of all 
that is most elegant. I think I shall do, for my last 
gown has been asked for as a pattern, which at Paris is 
the sort of triumph that gaining a battle is to a general. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : December 14, 1824. 

I received your letter last night, my dearest brother. 
A thousand thanks for allowing my judgment with 

regard to Lady to calm yours. I do assure you I 

am right. I do not believe there is a single person in 
Paris, her mother excepted, who would have wished 

me to receive her. Juste and Mme. have never 

breathed her name to me, though I see them daity. 
Entre nous, the latter has much ado to keep herself 
afloat, but she is in all societies, is a gentle, amiable, 
unassuming creature, and not distracted with brains. 
I am her intime and show her every kindness. To keep 
up the sinking may save them, but to raise up one so 

utterly fallen as Lady would scarcely be mercy, 

as her best friends all agree in thinking her going from 
Paris the only chance of her story being forgot. 

I have been hving entirely with the French, as they 
open their houses to me, whilst the English, poor dears, 
must wait till I open mine. I am, however, going to 
receive them of a morning, and Lady Thomond is pro- 
bably now at the gate. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 18, 1824. 

We found the whole force of diplomacy at Villele's 
dinner. A very handsome, intelligent, picturesque-look- 



326 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

ing Nuncio, whom we are about to lose, as he is going 
to be made a Cardinal. Castelcicala ^ and his wife, 
a dear, dirty, kind-hearted pair. Pozzo talking on all 
subjects. He says Mme. de Lieven questions him, 
when she comes, de la lune jusqu'au Tartare. The 
well-known and not worth knowing Werthers, a number 
of small barons and baronesses from divers small 
Courts. 

Friday night. — I am just come home from a very 
pleasant small dinner at Comtesse Eumford's,^ who goes 
to sleep at the theatres, and is in consequence called 
Comtesse Eonflefort. L'Abbe Pradt,^ Cuvier the chemist, 
the Duke and Duchess de Dalberg * — she is very agree- 
able and natural — old Bourke, Monsieur Juste, and our 
old friend Monsieur de Lascours. 

I cannot for the life of me help feeling nervous 
about my presentation, because they all make such 
a rout about it. 

If I can but go on, but I know I shall. My only 
dread is that there is a sort of zest in novelty which 
makes exertion easier, and a sort of pleasure in success, 
which is not with me a very potent stimulus, but suffi- 
cient to keep off the mortal flatness of trouble, civility, 
dress, and unwearied exertion without it. The truth is 
there is such a strong tide in my favour just now, that 
if it turns I am worse than a puddle, and an acces 
of indolence or decouragement may do this any day. 
I hope in the character of the French. They are not 
exigeants — too full of themselves to depend upon an- 

' Neapolitan Ambassador. 

' The widow of Comte Eumford, the well-known philanthropist and 
politician. She had previously married Lavoisier, the celebrated chemist, 
who was executed in 1794. He in vain asked for a reprieve of a few days, 
that he might finish some experiments of importance to humanity. 

' An active pohtioian in the first Revolution, under Napoleon and 
during the restoration. He played many parts, and his sole object in life 
seems to have been to promote his own interests. 

* Their daughter was the first wife of the late Lord Granville. 



1824 TO LADY G, MORPETH 327 

other, too intent upon amusement to have leisure to 
bore their neighbours. I am like Princess Charlotte. If 
I were to die at the end of my first year I should be 
handed down to posterity as an exemplary ambassadress, 
but if I live, as I trust I shall, to give time to the natural 
faults of my character to come out, I tremble for my 
good name. My good sense, too, is in an alarming way. 
I find myself often influenced by little motives, worried 
by little cares. I found myself this morning feeling- 
annoyed at my Court dress being too short on the 
sides, and very much pleased when Fr^d^rique dressed 
me en cheveux to-day, as a rehearsal, to think it looked 
very well, and to hear Granville's compliments about it. 
Is this the woman who would not have cared if she 
had been seen in an old tattered garment with a 
masquerade red silk petticoat under it ? Then I 
comfort myself with thinking quil faut hurler avec les 
hups. Do not think en cheveux is my own idea. It 
is de rigueur for a presentation, and even old Madame 
receives me with her old grey careworn head bristled 
up by Fr^derique. 

There is another thing annoys me. The activity 
and energy of my proceedings, the unwearied loss of 
my time, leaves no one trace of usefulness or real good 
behind it. It is frivolous, eternally frivolous, and at 
fifty I shall at best be no wiser and better than I am 
now. At my age the head is not turned by incessant 
dissipation ; but the time is filled, the result much the 
same. 

However, I am not wholly discontented with myself. 
I never taught my children so much and so regularly 
as since I have been at Paris. I have made myself 
rules with regard to them which I do not allow myself 
to transgress. WiUiam is becoming a very good little 
Latin scholar. I have abridged the Enghsh History for 
my girls, of which, by-the-by, I enclose you a specimen 



328 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

I have copied out, to show you that I am not lost to 
everything but dress and dissipation. I am aWare that 
dress has been a grievance and occupation to me that 
it would not have been to another, save the Queen 
of the Sandwich Islands and Mrs. Poki. I saw the 
imperious necessity of it, and am learning it as a trade. 
The irksomeness of it is therefore daily diminishing. 
1 am also aware that dissipation is a duty, and there- 
fore the sting of it, as a fault, is taken out. 

Now, Lady Morpeth, for a few facts. Mr. and Miss 
Canning and little Governor arrive on Monday. We 
lodge the two former in two of our drawing-rooms 
below. 

I found such difficulties and impending storms at- 
tending my naming of English ladies to meet me at 
my traitement, that I was obliged to take the line of 
Peeresses. Lady Abercorn did not feel very equal to 
it, and had never been presented, which precludes it. 
Lady Newburgh, to whom I proposed it, wrote me 
unbounded thanks for the very great honour intended 
her, but not being able to keep up a conversation in 
French, was obliged to decline it. Lady Carohne was 
charmed with this ' dear woman, oh ! what a dear 
woman.' Lady Northland had never been presented, 
Lady Belfast ditto. Lady Granard too ill. My list, there- 
fore, consists of — Lady Thomond, Lady Waterford, 
Lady Ailesbury, Lady Worcester, Lady Aldborough, 
Lady Glenlyon, and Lady Strathallan, a daughter of 
the Duke of Athole. 

The Duchesse de Damas presides at the dinner at the 
Dauphine's table and enacts her, making me sit on her 
right hand, Granville on her left. I go from the pre- 
sentation at five to the dinner. I wish it was over to a 
ridiculous degree. I am to make a little phrase to the 
Dauphine about the honour, and her virtues, and my 
gratitude, twelve ladies standing behind her. 



1824 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 329 

Granville is to be presented to-morrow. The cere- 
mony more formidable in proportion as his speech 
must be longer. He is looking uncommonly well, and 
how beautiful amidst the little ugly cMtifs Frenchmen it 
is not for me to say. I always knew what he was, body 
and mind, but both shine forth here like lemon-juice 
before the lire. 

Monday morning. — You will be glad, my dearest 
sister, to hear that I feel well this morning. I shall be 
nervous till the ceremony is over. And now for my 
toilette. Diamonds are my weak point, and I have 
been obliged to borrow some from Mme. de Gontaut, 
as they tell me a quantity must be worn, and those who 
have not enough must and do borrow. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : December 19, 1824. 

Granville is just returned from his presentation, 
which went off very easily. I hope it is a good omen 
for mine. 

The Belfasts and Wortleys, Mr. Nugent and a Mr. 
Grant dined with us to-day. I asked Lady Hunloke, 
but she was engaged. She wrote me a very warm note 
of excuse. I see she is thawing rapidly. I see Jier 
faults, but she has great merits. Amongst them is 
a sincere good heart, fenced about like a fortified town, 
with a good share of pride, a very English dislike to 
yield in a hurry, and strong prejudices for and against. 
Zealous friends and bitter enemies are made of this 
stuff, and I respect it, though it often offends and 
repels. I have not time for another word. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 21, 1824. 

I have been and now am in such a bustle that I 
can write but one line. 



330 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1824 

My presentation is thought of such consequence. 
How I dress, how I behave, how I curtsey, so com- 
mented upon, so discussed, that I feel as if I was going 
to be hung, and all my reputation turning thereon. 

I have no news. Jules is come, and going back 
immediately. I am going to dine at a great dinner at 
Mons. de Villele's. 

You would have laughed if you had seen my Aunt 
William's astonishment at me. 'My dear Lady G., 
when I recollect you at the Hague dressed like a 
housekeeper. Forgive me — ^just like a housekeeper.' 

God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 23, 1824. 

My dearest Sis, — I think you will not be sorry to 
hear before the usual time that my labours are over, 
that my presentation traitement went off very smoothly. 
I was foolishly nervous and forgot my compliment, for 
which Madame ^ was waiting, but I am assured I did 
not disgrace myself, and the delight of having it over is 
beyond expression. 

The King is adorable, and looked as if he disliked 
ceremony as much as I did. Madame gene a force d'etre 
genee. The dinner was magnificent. 

I am just returned from the Tuileries. The King 
was received with great applause. He spoke his speech 
very well, and we all sat in rows listening. I never can 
describe ceremonies, but I hope you will be glad to hear 
that I never can think anything formidable again, and 
am, as Mrs. Brown, the wife of the American Minister, 
has just told me her husband is at getting rid of his 
rheumatism, ' in foine spirits and very hoppy.' God 
bless you. I have not time for another word. 

' The Duchesse d'Angouleme. 



1824 TO LADY G. MORPETH 331 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : December 28, 1824. 

Your two long letters, which arrived together, were 
delightful to me, my dearest sister. I see you all at 
Chatsworth, above all I see the Caulfields. 

I have been indefatigable in visits and soirees since 
I last wrote. 

Leopold is arrived. He dined here yesterday, sat 
till half-past nine. He remains a fortnight. Heavy work. 

Pleasures are clairsemes over the dissipated part of 
my hfe, but 1 look forward to one. I take the adorable 
little Governor to a child's ball at Lady Smith's ^ on 
the 8th. 

I am going to see Mme. de Coigny this morning. I 
met Mme. de Balby, a woman whom I remember 150 
years ago. She belongs to some past siecle, but trots 
about very merrily in this. 

I saw a droll sight at Mme. de Damas' soiree — 
Mme. de Talaru, who was Madame de Clermont Ton- 
nerre. She saw her first husband massacred before 
he* eyes during the Eevolution. She is near eighty, 
and has piqued herself upon always remaining in the 
costume of her youth. Well, my dear, she is now the 
model of the present fashion — crepee, an immense toque 
on her head, a stomacher waist, and a blonde ruff. 
How she must laugh in her large sleeve ! 

This is a scrap, but I am more than usually 
hurried. 

1 The wife of Sir Sidney Smith, the hero of Acre. ' 



LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 



1825 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : January 8, 1825. 

Shall I tell you, yes I will, that I passed one hour 
in great naisery yesterday. Lady Harrowby arrived 
late on Saturday. I was going to Court, a long inevi- 
table one, and could not see her till yesterday morning ; 
but Granville went to her, and when I got up yesterday 
told me she had brought a report of Frederic's ^ having 
been severely wounded. Most fortunately Mrs. Can- 
ning had by the Thursday's courier received a letter 
from Charles Ellis, telling her that upon hearing the 
report he had gone to make inquiries, and ascertained 
that it was totally without foundation. It had arisen 
from an officer of the same name of the Engineers 
having been dangerously wounded in the same war. 
Seeing I had not heard anything, she did not think it 
necessary to mention the subject to me, so that I had 
an hour of dreadful anxiety. I only dread your having 
also heard the report before the contradiction, and this 
makes me doubly impatient for your next letter, my own 
dearest of sisters. 

I had the delight of seeing a good deal of Lady 
Harrowby yesterday, delight most reviving in the midst 
of my work, which has been arduous for the last few 
days. 

On Saturday Court was much easier than I expected. 
The King and all of them gracious beyond measure. 
Very quick over. 

' Lady Carlisle's second son. He was killed by an accident in 1834. 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH 333 

Yesterday I went in my morning dress to Madame, 
who had desired to see the children. She was as merry 
as a grig with them, delighted with le petit bonhomme 
Granville, fiUed his hat with bonbons, and showed him 
and the girls her boudoir and every room in the 
house. 

Leopold dined with us, and before I could get to 
Lady H. I had to trundle off to the Jin fond of the Fau- 
bourg St. Germain. 

To-day at twelve I am expecting Lady H., and am 
going to shop and pay visits with her. We dine at 
Baron Damas', a great diplomatic affair. Thence to 
Mme. de Montalembert's to hear Mme. Davidoff and 
her daughter sing, drop in to Mme. Merlineu, a Diplo- 
matic Lady, and finish at Aldborough's. 

Here is Lady H. I will add a line later. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : January 9, 1825. 

My dearest sister, — The thick is over four le moment. 
I have had great drums to go to every day — about four 
or five soirees every night. Madame and the Palais 
Eoyal in the morning, my Jour de I' An visits to return, 
and in the midst of this I contrived to give myself a 
violent knock on my head one day, and to tumble up- 
stairs luckily on another, and bruised myself all over. 
I am now writing whilst Marie is lacing my stays, on 
my way to Mme. de Gontaut to see les enfants de France 
taking their lessons. 

Three o'clock. — I saw the darling Monseigneur ^ and 
Mademoiselle at their lessons, as naughty as possible 
and great loves. 

I have seen Lady Harrowby for an hour this morn- 
ing, a real luxury. The girls are thought de belles 

• The Duo de Bordeaux, who took the name of Comte de Chambord 
after 1830, and his sister, who became Duchess of Parma. . ' 



334 LETTERS OF HAREIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

personnes — Mary much more admired than Georgiana. 
They say, in short, that she is hke une Franqaise. 

Did I tell you that I took the little Governor on 
Friday to a child's ball at Mrs. Morier's ? He was deli- 
cious, danced like a little Frenchman, and behaved like 
a little ambassador. At ten he retired into a boudoir 
to dress, attended by about a dozen little boys. I 
asked him how he got acquainted. ' Oh, as you all do. 
They say, " This is Lord Granville's son," and then we 
shake hands.' I was amused by a conversation amongst 
them yesterday. When we came from Mile. I took 
the three boys to Lady Isabella Chabot's room, and as 
we were going in I heard Freddy say to Granville, 
' Brother, is this one a prince ? ' ' No, she's a common 
woman.' ' But what must we do to her ? ' ' Nothing, 
unless you like it.' 

There certainly never was anything like the kind- 
ness and hienveillance shewn me, and it is lucky for me, 
as it binds me to my duties, by the wish to mark my 
sense of it. 

I pine for Lent exactly in proportion as the elegantes 
dread it. The height of my earthly aspirations is to be 
allowed to abstain from pleasure. ' Je demande un 
jour de repos, comme on invoquerait les dons les plus 
merveilleux de 1' existence.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : January 10, 1825. 

The post to-day has brought me no letter from you, 
my dearest, but one from Mr. Loch to Granville gives a 
very prosperous account of you all. 

If I could in any way remedy it, I should be more 
annoyed at my conviction that Lady Harrowby cannot 
much like her sejour here. I told you she was uncom- 
fortably, smokingly lodged. My mornings are so much 
engrossed that I am some of them without seeing her 



1825 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 335 

at all, others for a moment en passant. We dine out 
literally every day. TiU to-morrow week we have not 
a single day disengaged. She goes three times a week 
to the Opera, where I never can join her, as I receive 
half the evening, and visit the other. But this is not 
all. The King's partiality for her and my relationship 
entail upon her duties which in London she has most 
comfortably shaken off. She has innumerable visits, 
which she is compelled to return, and she is asked to 
the duUest things there are, which are the Court soirees 
at aU the Dames d'Honneur. She is going to Court, 
and asked to one or two of the grand formal dinners, 
things she execrates. 

Never come to me in the winter, dearest. I would 
not buy even you, at the price of annoyance and fatigue 
to you, perpetual regret and privation to myself. 

The only time I have seen Lady Harrowby in com- 
fort was at Lady Smith's very pretty ball on Saturday. 
The girls were admired, and we sat on a bench together 
' very happy.' 

I have been worried and hurried to death about one 
of those small causes that produce mighty effects. 
Granville in the midst of one of the most hurried 
mornings received a note of invitation from Mons. de 
Cosse. We were engaged for that day. He either 
forgot to desire Mr. Jones to send an excuse, or Mr. 
Jones forgot to send it. They are at issue on that point. 
The result, Mons. de Cosse's dinner, concerted by the 
King, was composed of Prince Leopold, all the diplo- 
macy. They waited dinner for us till half-past seven ! ! ! 
Then comes the D — 1 to pay. Madame in a fury. The 
whole Court and Corps, Cobourg at the head, indignant. 
I did not even know of the invitation, and sallied forth, 
to bear the whole brunt of the storm at ViUele's soiree, 
with nothing but my ignorance to support me, which 
ignorance was the cream of the affront, as though this 



336 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

Kingly Feast was a thing not worth mentioning. Que 
/aire, que dire ?:—a great deal, for notes, visits, explana- 
tions have filled every moment of the last three days. 
It is all blown over, and I do believe it is my arduous 
civility that has brought us to shore. God bless you. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : January 17, 1825. 

I account for not having heard from you by to- 
day's post by supposing you on your journey, my 
dearest sister. It delights me to imagine you with 
your daughters. 

Lady Harrowby I have seen oftener and more com- 
fortably. Now amusing. Lady Morpeth, private, most 
confidential. My hrillante jeunesse afford me much 
entertainment. Mary Eyder is out and out the most 
admired generally. ' Johe comme un coeur, votre 
charmante petite niece.' There is a tall, good-looking, 
nimble dandy dying for love of her. Georgiana is 
much less admired en gros ; they think her hien, une 
belle personne, but she has two ardent lovers already, 
and the ambassadress laughs to see such sport. Le 
General de la Grange and Charles de Mornay, the 
George Anson of Paris, I'enfant gdte de la fortune, 
for whom the Duchesse and Dino are dying, with 
whom Mile. Mars is so desperately in love that she 
won't act — no, Lady Morpeth, she has been in bed 
for a month, because he has quarrelled with her. And 
for why ? He spied a chain given to him by Eaguse, 
by him to Mars, on the waistcoat of another and re- 
sented it. Now he, this fatal he, is so violently smitten 
with Georgiana, that he never leaves her door in the 
morning, her side at night. We hear that all the 
elegantes are up in arms, and to-day we dine at Soult's 
— the company, Harrowbys, Cannings, selves, Eaguse, 
Dino, and Charles de Mornay ! 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH 337 

Now let me come to the pith of my story. The 
Earl of Clanricarde is aux pieds de Miss Canning, and 
we are in daily expectation of the question. He is 
immensely rich, quite good-looking enough, clever and 
< very gentlemanlike. The girl is determined in his 
favour, but if you mention this to anybody, I am quite 
undone — that's all. 

The Caulfields are excessively liked and a la mode 
here, and their coming franked from His Grace to me 
doubles the weight. If Fanny and Abercromby flirt, do 
you think I ought to hatch the egg ? Ask Hart. 

Send me out girls. I begin to think I am as good 
as India. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : January 19, 1825. 

At Mme. de Noailles' last night about twenty 
women came in, out of mourning for a noce. I wish you 
had seen or heard them, all as gau.dy as peacocks, 
and screaming like them — red veh^et toques with pink 
feathers, cherry-coloured gowns covered with emeralds. 
But oh, the noise ! Lady Harrowby said each entry was 
like a strange bird, got by accident into the middle of a 
rookery, and the simile is complete in aU its points. 

Mrs. Canning's evening was more paisible. She 
went with Harriet ^ to the Italian Opera, where they had 
Lord Clanricarde all to themselves. He did not propose, 
but all but. He has, however, to our delighted know- 
ledge, bought a magnificent set of diamonds, and also a 
service of plate. De notre cote we have not been idle. 
Mrs. Canning has provided lace veils, gowns, etc., so the 
ornamental part of the concern is in great forwardness. 

I have just been enjoying myself in the garden with 
all my darling children. It is a dehcious day. 

We have heard of a delightful campagne near St. 

• Miss Canning. 
VOL. I. Z 



338 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

Cloud, and mean to go and look at it, which makes my 
heart beat. 

Thursday. — Dearest Sis, — You have no idea how 
tiring last night was. A ball at the other end of Paris, 
entirely full of English Catholic bulls, at Lady Constable's, 
of Tixal ^ obUgations. Before it I went to two soirees. 
"We dine with Mme. de Kaguse to meet Leopold, and 
there is a ball at Mrs. Mitchell's. 

Wishing you no dinner, no ball, and a good night's 
rest, I remain, beloved Lady Morpeth, etc. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris ; January 26, 1825. 

My days are so much alike that I can hardly hope 
at present to vary much in my accounts. It seems to 
me as natural to visit all morning and go to soirees 
every night, as if I had been a year at my post. 

I am glad I warned you not to betray my opinion of 
that society. They are all so kind, civil, and prevena^its, 
that I half repent of having given it so decidedly. To 
judge by their empressement, I am very popular amongst 
them. I have as yet done nothing for them. The 
delabre and unfinished state of the house does not admit 
of great receptions, and the fear of receiving the many 
keeps me from receiving the few. I go to two soirees 
a night upon the average. They begin and end early, 
and are all much the same — about fifty of the select, 
conversing en cercle. 

Last night I had a real pleasure. Granville, Sukey, 
and I went to see Mile. Mars in ' Valerie.' The acting 
beyond all praise. 

I am happy when I can go to Mme. de Gontaut, who 
is far from crabbed. She is all good-nature and en- 
tramement, with a Devonshire House sort of manner. 

1 Lord Granville rented Tixal of Sir Clifford Constable. 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH 339 

I like some old duchesses, Duras and d'Escars, better 
than any of the young ones. They are clever and 
pleasant, not without pretension, but only about being 
authoresses and eloquent, which is easier to bear than 
the insolent self-satisfaction of some of the younger ones. 
Mme. Juste is quite adored here. She is very good- 
natured, amiable, and egale, but not very wise, I should 
think, and addicted to dressing. She is, however, a very 
favourite fashionable. 

I must leave you to dress, and oh, non son gia quel 
che un tempo fui. I have a great mind to send you a 
picture of myself in French costume. Granville and 
the elegantes are edified. I say to Marie, ' Mais, Marie, 
c'est afFreux,' and she says, ' Oui, milady.' 

The fault of the most agreeable women here is the 
want of nature. They make phrases, they have a look 
of being after their thoughts. They have little mock 
wars of words. Elles se querellent amicalement — com- 
pliment ditto. One feels sure they settle one day what 
they shall say the next. In short, when they are being 
clever, I feel a sort of proud wish to be stupid. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : January 30, 1825. 

Dearest Sis, — You must not fear me. I am abso- 
lutely baked into civihty and perseverance. The 
Duchesse de Maille came to me yesterday evening, 
and said, ' Mme. I'Ambassadrice, vous 6tes une femme 
unique. Vous menez avec une grace parfaite la vie du 
monde que vous detestez le plus. A vous voifi, on ne 
s'en douterait pas, et on vous en salt doublement gr^.' 

They have twigged me. Lady Morpeth, but little 
they'll heed if they see me drum on, and witness three 
balls and about a dozen soirees since I last wrote, que 
je ne me decourage pas. 

To see a woman, not young, not handsome, without 

z 2 



340 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

any object in society beyond receiving and returning 
visits and curtsies. It must bear the stamp of duty 
upon it. And they are obliged to me for any varnish 
of pleasure that I spread upon it. 

I was at a really beautiful ball at Count Potocki's 
last night. He is — let me introduce you — an immensely 
fat, good-humoured, gay garqon, between forty and fifty, 
who has no pleasure but in giving it, in the shape of 
dejeuners, dinners, balls, fetes, and his fortune being as 
large as his person, he has the means to do it most 
splendidly. He is, then, one of those ultra-happy beings 
who have an utter insensibility to ridicule — a great 
lesson, it being the only way to disarm it- — dances 
quadrilles en masse and in spectacles, acts Cupidon in 
charades, and laughs louder than those who laugh at 
him, ergo they only laugh with him. 

Our romans go on well. The Eyders are happy at 
having every man in Paris at their feet, Miss Canning 
happier at having one Irishman at hers. He is devoted, 
and we all like him extremely, and our answer is ready 
to the question we daily expect. 

Fanny Caulfield looked very pretty at the ball, and 
her dancing is quite perfection. Lady Harrowby holds 
out ; ' a little tidy girl, with a hideous mouth.' Aber- 
cromby and I take the defensive, he, I suspect, con amore. 
Mama Caulfield is the most inoffensive fool I know. 
' What a fine day it has been, Mrs. Caulfield ! ' ' Dear 
Lady Granville, so many people called that I could not 
perceive the weather.' 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : February 1, 1825. 

I gave myself a holiday yesterday. After dinner I 
put the little Governor at Lady Hunloke's and came 
home to bed. 

Lady Harrowby and her girls went to the The^^tre 



1825 TO LADY G. MOEPETH 341 

Pran^ais. Punch seems to have quite given up his 
pursuit of Georgiana, and is evidently aided in his 
philosophy by the circumstance of her not being more 
admired here. 

To-night we all adjourn to Mme. Juste's, the best- 
natured, kindest, and most deservedly popular of her 
kind. Mme. Alfred is very clever and entertaining, and 
Pozzo, who wanted to marry her but was rejected, tells 
me that under all her evapore manner, which certainly 
gives one the idea of thoroughly French and skin-deep 
acquirements, she has Vesprit le plus solide et les con- 
naissances les plus profondes of any person he knows. 

Do you know the Stanleys ? Lady Mary is an in- 
telligent, sociable little woman. Ask George from 
me what Mr. Stanley is. I had just proclaimed him to 
Lady Harrowby as a bore. They dined with us and I 
had been sitting by him, when Granville came up and 
said, ' Do you know that Mr. Stanley is a very sensible 
man ? ' WeU, is he either, neither, or perhaps both ? He 
also praises Mr. Eobinson, Lady Helena's rib. If George 
can say a good word for him to me he will do a honne 
ceuvre, for I have such a mortal aversion to him that he 
is the only person here to whom I cannot behave with 
decent civility. If he can, tell him to tell me that he 
is kind to some old mother, charitable to the poor, 
something to soften my heart a little and make me 
behave myself. I am very glad to have put my con- 
science into George's hand. If there is any ray of light 
he will bring it out. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : February 7, 1825. 

Now, my dearest, for the great news of the year. 
Lord Clanricarde proposed and was accepted yester- 
day evening. I never saw any two people look so 
happy and radiant as they both did during the decisive 



342 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

conversation. I felt convinced, only from their coun- 
tenances, of the truth. His only flaw is said to be his 
fondness for low company, and this is in the power of 
the wife to correct. He is perfectly gentlemanlike him- 
self, and takes to high company in the most promising 
manner. 

I went to Court yesterday. The Duchesse de Berri 
had the gout and did not receive. The King and 
Madame were gracious and short — two good things. 

On Wednesday I attend the presentation and traite- 
ment of the Spanish Ambassadress. She is a very shy, 
small woman, with magnificent black eyes and hair, 
twenty-three, with seven children and ten mules. The 
latter dragged her into Paris. She does not speak or 
understand French. 

The Harrowbys remain a fortnight longer. The 
Cannings will probably go soon. I hope and trust the 
Morleys and Theresa ViUiers will come, and above all 
dearest Hart. 

We had a ball at Eothschild's on Saturday. A 
tremendous crowd of Jews, English and French. A 
line of carriages, in which the Seftons and many others 
spent two hours. We have ten days more of effreme 
dissipation, and then comes the Careme, during which 
I mean to give myself relache and sit at home every 
evening to receive visits. The French are dying to get 
their noses in, and there is one good thing. They are 
easily satisfied ; talk and a little syrup is aU they 
want. 

There is a very handsome woman who makes a 
great sensation here. La Comtesse Alexandre Potocka. 
She is only seventeen, married to an elderly man, cousin 
of Stanislas, of whom she is very fond. She is a little 
like Lady Emmeline Manners, and consequently charms 
Leopold, who is making the most persevering attack. 
I wish she had more merit in appearing bored by it. 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH 343 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : February 10, 1825. 

There are ebbs and flows in my tide, dearest. The 
last three days have been unusually severe. Yesterday 
I win detail. I began dressing soon after three to 
go to the Spanish Ambassadress's presentation. I wish 
you could see a diamond wreath Granville has given 
me. 

I pitied this poor little woman with connaissance de 
cause, but had a sort of delight at assisting instead of 
performing. At three we dined. The traitement is long 
and dull, and I came home at eight tired to death. 
Had to undress completely, lie down for a couple of 
hours and then rise again out of my ashes, to dress a 
second time for Lady Waterpark's ball. It was hot 
and full, but very crack, and this little spawn of our 
family in ecstasies. 

Lord Clanricarde and Miss Canning are the people 
I envy. They send excuses everywhere, and sit cooing 
in my drawing-room tant que le jour dure. I like him 
extremely, and so does she, which is more to the 
purpose. 

I had a letter from Lord Clanwilliam to-day. He 
says nothing of his plans, and seems better pleased 
where he is, with popularity and five pretty women. 

God bless you, my very dearest Sis. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : February 17, 1825. 

You must forgive me a very short letter to-day, my 
dearest G. Lady Harrowby goes on Tuesday, and I 
have been very anxious to see as much as possible 
of her, and I have had many letters of business to 
write. 

Mardi Gras I amused myself very much. I took 



344: LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

my children to all the sights, le hoeuf gras, the masks, 
etc. ; the day was fine, and it delighted them, and con- 
sequently me. 

I feel already the hundred comforts of the Carnival 
being at an end. I have had time already, to-day and 
yesterday, to read nearly a whole A'^olume of Segur's 
Life of Buonaparte during the war in Eussia. It is 
interesting and entrainant beyond measure. There is 
another book to be read, ' Souvenirs et Anecdotes,' by 
the old Segur. 

I saw Lady Abercorn yesterday morning. She is 
a zealous friend, and I do not let her be melancholy or 
touchy. I laugh at the first, and tell her the second is 
not le grand genre, and we both laugh to see how dolelul 
she is when she comes into my room, and how merry 
when she goes out of it. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : February 27, 1825. 

Yesterday morning Mme. de Broglie came to me. 
Hart must not hate her. She is really an angel. Think 
of a very beautiful, still young woman, quite as strict 
and good as the Duchess of Beaufort and Mrs. Money, 
without one shade of peculiarity, no cant, no humbug, 
passing her life in acts of charity and thoughts of piety, 
but living in the, world, going to theatres, admired and 
praised by everybody. She says to persons of her way 
of thinking seclusion from the world is delightful and 
above all self-indulgence ; but she thinks it, as I do, 
injudicious, ostentatious, cowardly. She says, and to 
see her in it is to believe her, that the flatness and 
ennui of the world to one, whose endeavour to combat 
vanity and to resist allurements of all kinds is sincere, 
is not to be described ; but that in the midst of society, 
in a box at the theatre, she often feels as completely 
abstracted as when alone, as in her own room, and then 



1825 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSPIIEE 345 

she has the comfort of feeling that she has disgusted 
and repelled no person, who thinks differently upon 
such subjects, that she has not the support of singu- 
larity or the applause of the exaltes, but that her religion 
is a practice and a question only in the recesses of her 
own heart. 

Now, dearest G., listen how the Paris people talk of 
her. They rave of her beauty, but of her character 
they never talk of the cause, only the effects. They 
tell you, ' C'est la meilleure mere, la meilleure epouse ; ' 
that her charity, her unwearied exertions to assist and 
relieve the poor are admirable, but it is but once or 
twice that I have heard, ' Je crois qu'elle est devenue 
bien serieuse, qu'elle s'occupe de la religion.' 

Now is not this admirable ? She has disarmed 
politicians. They lament her liberal ideas, but always 
say, ' Cette petite femme est si excellente qu'il faut lui 
pardonner ses opinions.' 

Will you and Hart ever forgive me for not sending 
3'ou etrennes this year ? It preys upon my spirits not, 
but my expense has at starting been so frightfully 
great, that I dare not add a drop to the ocean. 

One of my gowns cost me near six hundred francs 
and so on, and I have just had the care of three orphan 
English children, abandoned by their mother's seducer 
after her death and actually naked and starving. 

The Cannings were perfectly happy here. For those 
who can float upon all the tourbillon of Paris it is Yery ' 
well, but I am actually drowned in it. Ever, ever 
yours. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire, 

Paris : June 1825. 

Dearest brother, — I hope you are better and that 
this delicious hot weather has not a sting in it for you. 
We are now in the very kernel of the fetes, and I 






346 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

notch them off as a prisoner does the days of his cap- 
tivity. We have weathered the King's entry and the 
great affair at the Hotel de Ville. The last was very 
splendid. Thousands of people, an immense locale, 
brilliantly lighted. The whole Court en grande tenue. 
The Duchesse de Berri dancing quadrilles in a space 
squeezed out of the multitude, and asking people, 
' Fondez-vous comme beurre ? ' which she evidently did 
herself. Lady Morley and Theresa ^ went at four and 
could not get away till near two. Lady Morley bids 
me tell you that when the King made his speech she 
was in floods of tears. She wishes you to be aware of 
the extreme susceptibility of her heart. The Duchess 
of Northumberland ^ gives her first ball on the 15th. 
She is overwhelmed with applications, and I have hard 
work not only to get people invitations to her ball, but 
to all t\i.e fetes at Court. I think next year wiU appear 
to me a bed of roses after all the fatigue and worry of 
this. 

To-day I dine at a great dinner at the Hotel Gallifet. 
All the elegantes. I shall receive here in the evening. 
To-morrow we go to see the King at the Academic 
Eoyale. Saturday I have a dinner for some English, 
and instead of going to see the King at the play, I 
mean to give a little soiree to those who cannot get 
there, filling my box with Ladies Gower and Morley. 

Here is GranviUe come home, dubbed Knight of 
the Bath. The King wore the Garter at the Hotel de 
Yille. 

I am dying for to-night's post to hear of adorable 
Lady Morpeth actually in motion. I am sure she will 
be happy here. This house and garden is now delicious, 
and I pine for the moment when I shall spend my life 

' Lady Theresa Villiers, married first to Mr. Lister, and then to Sir 
G. Cornewall Lewis. 

' The Duke was sent out as special ambassador for the coronation. 



1826 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 347 

in it. I think it will be easy to get Lady Morpeth into 
decent summer clothing immediately. 

Lady Morley is une des plus belles tallies going. She 
thinks if there is a fault she is a trifle too slight. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : June 1825. 

Dearest brother, — I seize an idle moment, as a cat 
does a mouse. I was delighted to hear from you. I 
hope you will soon leave Brighton in perfect health. 

Lady Morpeth ! Oh, could you but see Lady 
Morpeth ! Corset by Vachey, gown by Duchoiselle, 
head dressed by Alexandre, at Berri's ball last night. She 
looked better than I ever saw her in a gold gown. I 
had hard work to prevail upon her to relinquish the 
bits pinned across and the shawl, but succeeded at 
last. She had my diamond chain, second-best earrings, 
the girandoles, and second-best necklace, and a fine 
woman she was, ' Granville's sister and Go-ver's mother.' 
The Eoyalties most polite. 

To-morrow we give a grandissime dinner. Here is 
how. The house all open, teeming with flowers. When 
we come out from dinner at eight we shall find chairs 
arranged on the terrace and steps, and the Due de 
Gramont's band, who play divinely, will strike up 
behind the orange-trees, all in full bloom. CoiFee at 
nine. The rooms all lit, and twelve globe lamps put 
amongst the orange-trees, with qiiinquets against the 
walls and at the entrance of each avenue. I have 
tried it once, and it is the prettiest illumination for a 
garden you can conceive. I am dreaming of a souper 
dansant in ten days, when Paris will be thinned. 



348 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : July 1825. 

Well, my dear, you can't come if you can't, and to 
be sure there are pours et contres. You would have 
enjoyed yourself with your sisters and nieces, and we 
should have been the happiest of the happy. In short, 
one must make up one's mind, and I look to the 
autumn. 

Have not I had another diner dansant on Friday, 
and was it not the purtiest thing, as Miss Eeynell says, 
in all Pa-a-ris ? Do you hear the Franco -Irish charmer 
uttering it ? 

I have now done with everything, but simply being 
at home on Mondays and Fridays. I shall endeavour 
to vary these soirees with my garden on hot nights, 
ecarte, whist, etc., on cold ones. Perhaps Pasta once, 
and perhaps a hop when Mrs. EUice comes. Lady 
Morpeth and Lord are as happy as the day is long. 

Elegantes and elegants are all at my feet, save 
perhaps Alfred, who butters me, but does not come as 
constantly or stay as late as the others, and Stanislas ! 
He is grown sulky and sad. We think him a little 
jealous, as he was the only person who used to do what 
I now do, and, a mesure, as my things take, his spirits 
appear to flag. Cradock is a great card in my game. 
There are about six of them in love with him. 

I take my pleasures very coolly and grandly. After 
I had settled my dinner and dance for last Friday, 
I heard that Esterhazy had asked for that day all 
the elegantes to dine and spend the evening at Eoisny. 
There were two things to be done, to put myself off, 
or to ask them to put him off. Do you think I did 
either ? I know them better. I asked all the Diplomacy 
to dinner, sent Guiche and Fimar^on WQrd that I was 
sorry I should not see them, as I knew they would 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH 349 

probably stay late, that it was not worth their while to 
hurry back, and bid Cradock tell them not to gener 
themselves, for I should not expect any of them. The 
result? They made Paul give up his dinner, and all 
rushed here at an early hour. It was a bold stroke, 
for the fact is I should have lost all my best dancers 
and prettiest women had I failed, but I trusted to my 
knowledge of them and was not disappointed. 

Monday morning. — ^I was delighted to receive your 
letter yesterday evening, dearest brother. We are 
beginning to lead a charming life. Yesterday I went 
with GranviUe to see Mile. Mars in the ' Jeu de 1' Amour 
et du Hasard.' She was perfect. 

I am in despair at losing George, and dying for 
Georgiana. I cannot do without G.'s chickens, les 
emigres du del, as d'Escars calls them. Lady Morpeth 
gets her due. When she went in to dinner yesterday 
with George, somebody said, ' C'est une autre soeur, 
n'est-ce pas ? ' God bless you, dearest brother. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : July 7, 1825. 

My last exploit was on Monday. I drove in the 
open carriage with Granville and Mr. Prere, who is 
grown out of his deafness, has left ofl drinking, and is 
quite delightful. On Tuesday I fell sick. 

I have been on my couch all to-day. To-morrow 
I have a dinner at Pozzo's, and my evening hanging 
over me. The latter I must have. I want to shirk the 
dinner. 

I have done none of the new things yet ; being nurse 
to Granville and my own last bout have prevented my 
shopping. 

My little Granville is the delighf of my life. God 
bless you. 



350 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 
To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : July 1825. 

My dearest G., — ^We have relapsed into dissipation 
by the arrival of the Duke of Wellington. Dinners 
here and at Mons. de ViUele's are the consequence. 

You have no idea of the happiness of adorable little 
Granville here. He has got a pony, he is learning to 
swim at the Ecole de Natation, we have junkets in the 
Bois de Boulogne, the four children on donkeys. Lord G. 
and I in curricle, Abercromby and Granville on horse- 
back. 

Lady Euston is a nice, unaffected, beautiful woman ; 
' Lady Hardy a shrewd one, who, like Holly, sends Sir 
Thomas for the carriage, in the same key and spirit. 

The Duke of Wellington is looking better than I 
have for ages seen him, thin, but so much more health 
and strength in his look and complexion. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : July 14, 1825. 

I went after aU to Lounois, with only Georgiana 
and Abercromby. Agar was not well, and stayed and 
dined with Granville. Our dinner at Vizy was pleasant. 
Eaguse and the Caulfields are so easy, that one felt as 
if on a journey one had met them all at dinner at an 
inn. The place is extremely pretty, the weather was 
delicious, the dinner ditto. Whilst the four women 
dressed, we walked to the farm, sat in a delightful 
conservatory, and at half-past six went on to Lounois, 
which answered perfectly in its way. Trois petites 
pieces and a much cooler evening. Mme. Alfred sings 
and acts very well, and Mme. de Maille was perfec . 

I have since Monday been leading a life of perfect 
repose. The EUises dine here every day, we go 
nowhere. He is afraid of the heat of the spectacles, 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH 351 

and we prefer staying in the garden with them to 
junketing. To be sure, Georgiana will return to 
London with little knowledge of Paris theatricals, but 
qiiest-ce que c'est, ma chere? I am all for people 
going their own way, and selfishly speaking it is after 
my own heart. 

The Berrys are come. Mary is really charming. 
She is couleur de rose and more agreeable than I ever 
knew her. They dined here yesterday, and Granville 
was pleased with the virgin. They sat in the moonlight 
till after past ten, like a pair of lovers. 

They admire Georgiana as much as she will let 
them. The Princesse de Leon, Prince d'Arenberg, Fagel, 
and Monsieur Tchann ^ all think her prettier than Lady 
Gower. But she is unusually and miserably pale. 
Though she gives me the idea of being happier, she is 
graver than she used to be, and, as to speaking to 
anybody, it is not what she ever dreams of. I think 
this a pity. Intelligent and full of mind, she has no 
excuse for her total abnegation de societe. I do not 
know what to attribute it to. Alone with me she is 
animated, but the moment she is not tete-a-tete she 
sits perfectly silent, very grave, and it is only by com- 
pulsion that a yes, or no, or smile is extorted. He 
is as amiable as possible, quite delightful. Do not 
tell Georgiana. I shall the first opportunity, and 
should hate to have appeared to speak to you behind 
her back, before I do to her. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady G. Morpbth. 

Paris : July 18, 1825. 

Here is the little Gov., red and conscious, reading ' a 
letter from my aunt.' He has produced his new writing- 
desk given him by George Villiers, is unfurling paper 
and looking very busy, ' going to write to my aunt.' 

' The Swiss Minister. 



352 LETTEKS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

I found "Werthers, the Berrys (and proud and happy 
girls they are), the Caulfields, and Mile. CMmentine in a 
little incipient flirtation with Mons. Charles de Mornay. 
The Major^ who, forbidden the house of Guiche, puts up 
with that tale of other days the Princesse Bagration.^ 
The Duke of Wellington very merry and jolly with me 
at dinner. Mons. de Leon, Gerard the painter, Tufiakin 
and LomonosofF. The Caulfields look ill and not very 
gay. Mrs. quite in a frenzy of folly. Harriet a little 
testy, Fanny always with unconquerable good-humour. 

I am disinterested enough to be sorry that Caroline ■'' 
is thinking of returning fra voi. She would not be 
beyond a mark troublesome to me, but to Lady Cowper, 
Mrs. Lamb, etc., she is a calamity. I had a few lines 
from her yesterday, ending, ' sometimes I think, like Mr. 
Brummel, I shall stay here for ever.' Why not ? 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : July 21, 1825. 

George Villiers * arrived the day before yesterday. 
He is uncommonly agreeable, and yesterday we had a 
most charming little dinner with him, Mr. Prere and 
the EUises. To-day we have the above-mentioned to 
dinner, with Eumford, Berry, Davy,^ Drummond, 
Dupin,^ Cuvier,^ Humboldt, Gerard,® Wilkie, and Lord 
Dunlo. 

Granville is a miracle of patience. We drive every 
day in the curricle. It is great enjoj^ment, and varies 
his day a little. 

' Major Cradock, who succeeded his father as Lord How den in 1853. 
"^ The widow of the Russian general. She married Lord Howden in 
1828. ' Lady Caroline Lamb. 

* The future Lord Clarendon. ^ Sir Humphry Davy. 

^ The distinguished politician. Was President of the Chamber of 
Deputies from 1832 to 1840. In 1848 he tried to obtain in the Chambers 
the Regency for the Duchess of Orleans. 

' The celebra^^ed naturalist. 

* The painter, much in vogue at that time in France. 



1825 TO LADY G. MORPETH . 353 

I hear the Duke of Wehington is coming here in 
less than a week with Lord Douro (who I am sorry to 
hear is a stick), Hume, and a Jones of his own. 

My letters are unavoidably dull just now. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : July 25, 1825. 

My dearest sister, — We are leading so quiet and 
one-day-like-another a life that I feel, as I used often 
to do at Wlierstead, a great laziness. When I am 
undone for a moment of leisure, I often write you a 
longer letter than when my whole day is at my com- 
mand. Yet I have, one always has, a great deal 
to say. 

The EUises come here every day, often in the morn- 
ing, almost always to dinner, save when Jarnac and 
Vaudemont snap them up. We go nowhere, but then 
it is that the garden of an evening is so cool and so 
sweet. His Excellency the great promoter of junkets 
is unable yet to go beyond it, Mr. Frere is so pleasant 
and so lazy, and the habit of going out gains on one 
more than any other. Mr. Frere lives nearly entirely 
with us. He is almost as fond of Georgiana as I am, 
and thinks her quite adorable. 

The Hardys, Lady Euston, the Duke of Buccleuch, 
and Mr. Blakeney, who is with him, dine here. Of the 
last I am in the same doubt as my son Granville. 
' Who's the old fellow, mama ? Is he a relation or a 
what-d'ye-call-it ? ' . 

The Duchesse de Guiche has broken a small blood- 
vessel, does not stir out. It is said that the Major has 
been all but forbidden the house, and certainly he never 
seems to go there from hence as he used with drums 
and flourish of trumpets when the clock struck ten. 
His own excellent taste and judgment have led him to 
select Princesse Bagration as his consolation. He came 

VOL. I. A A 



354 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

here this morning looking very ill and low, and has 
begged for leave of absence to go to Chantilly, ' ill, 
oppressed, vishing to be where there is nobody.' 

French people are now really and honestly gone 
into the country. If they do come to Paris, they do 
not appear. 

To Lady G, Morpeth. 

Paris : July 28, 1825. 

The EUises were, of course, very unhappy at missing 
you, but perfectly reasonable about it. They set off at 
ten this morning. She is really the most attaching, the 
most loveable, the most faultless of people, and he has 
many good and amiable qualities, and does and will 
improve every day. He is a very great addition to 
society, and we shall miss him very much in that respect. 
With all this he would be very much astonished if he 
knew that I think his understanding the weak part of 
him. He has a wonderful memory, a very cheerful 
and very busy mind, and his education has been, by 
himself chiefly, tres soigne ; but it is his judgment that 
fails, and the calibre of his mind is not above being 
actuated and governed by a hundred little motives. In 
short, make him a cleverer man, and he would be 
everything one could wish. At the same time I think 
him much better and more amiable in fact than in 
appearance, and an infinitely pleasanter and gayer com- 
panion than many cleverer men. He adores her, but 
his fault en menage is keeping her back in spirits, con- 
versation, and importance, not by any active measure, 
but by a habit of never having in society the least con- 
sideration, deference, or delicacy of feeling towards 
anybody. I think that is the great peche in his charac- 
ter, and it exasperates his enemies and depresses his 
friends. She has none of his faults, is very fond of 
him, and visits upon herself the effects of his maniere 



1835 TO LADY G. MORPETH 355 

d'et/i-e. She is quite adored, and I think most by Susy, 
Mr. Frere, and myself. 

To-day we dine early, and Granville and I go to see 
' Le Eoman,' a very good play of Delavigne's. 

The Duchess of Hamiltfliu came the other night. 
She looks thin, but always beautiful. Her manner I 
think very disagreeable, so forced in gaiety, making her 
so little available as a companion upon any subject. All 
my natural thoughts and movements abandon me when 
I am sitting with her, and I remain looking at her fine 
face, now all astonishment, and now all animation, and 
now all tenderness for the Duke, just as I sit looking at 
a diorama. . God bless you, dear, dearest sister. 

To Lady G. Morpeth. 

Paris : August 1, 1825. 

Dearest sister, — I did not hear from you last night, 
but I have not answered your letter of the courier 
before. It is odd that you should have made all the 
reflections which have been lately crowding into my 
mind, and that you should have begun occupying 
yourself more at the precise time I have. 

I have begun reading the Bible with notes regularly. 
I always hked what is called serious reading, to me so 
much more light in hand than much that is called lively. 

But the conviction that study of the Scriptures and 
prayer gives to one's feelings the warmth and life which 
we attribute the want of to very different causes is 
stronger in me every day ; and I think it a beautiful 
and most delightful confirmation of all that the Bible is, 
that it should be not only the most interesting, but the 
most awakening pursuit, so that all that is in the letter, 
when once read in the spirit, becomes the delight and 
comfort of one's life. I do not say one word yet as to 
myself. I am so far from what 1 ought to be ; but I 
am much better in intention, a little in practice. 



356 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

I ascribe to talking with your Georgiana and some 
books Agar lent me a much stronger wish to do right, 
a much greater conviction of having been wrong than I 
have felt for years. 

It is such a mistake thinking that religion is a 
damper of happiness, or relaxes one's performance of 
moral duties. T have not time to say half what I think 
now, but there is no danger of not having enough of me 
on the subject in the course of time. 

We are now living really in retirement, dining con- 
stantly alone, our evenings almost always at home. 

Last Friday was the best proof of the best part of 
society having left Paris. I was really, and for the first 
time, quite excedee with a long soiree, not enlivened by 
one agreeable addition, or at least the few such were 
quite overlaid by bores and tigers. 

To Lady Carlisle} 

Paris : September 1825. 

I own myself wholly selfish, my dearest sister. I arri 
quite engrossed with one idea. I cannot resist the 
hope that you will spend the winter here. Granville and 
Abercromby think it almost certain. You must not 
wonder, then, if a prospect of so much happiness, hap- 
piness that would hardly leave me a wish, quite fills 
my mind. Abercromby tells me the Hollands are at 
Calais, that my brother comes in October. Add us, 
and I think there are inducements enough in point of 
society. Then surely as a matter of prudence and 
arrangement your coming abroad must be almost indis- 
pensable. I am glad to hear that poor Lord Carlisle's 
death was so tranquil. I suppose you will go to 
Chatsworth in the first instance. 

I have been occupied all day with nursing my 

^ Lord Morpeth succeeded his father on September 4. 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 357 

darling little Granville. He has had a most feverish 
attack, which has obliged us to delay his journey for 
two or three days. 

Monday. — My dearest little Granville has been very 
unwell. He had, I believe, a little overdone riding, 
swimming, and all the pleasures of holidays at Paris. 
He has had violent headache and fever, but is much 
better to-day. God bless you. Granville's best love 
to you both. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1825. 

My dearest G., — The day that shortened my last 
turned out very well. We had a delightful drive to 
the Chateau du Marais, which is very pretty and real 
country. A short dinner, at which nobody teased me 
to eat, a beautiful walk by moonlight till nine. Then 
the ' Philosophe sans le Savoir ' and ' L'Heritiere,' both 
extremely well acted. Then supper, then les recitations 
by Madame Delphine Gay, which are quite beautiful. 
In short, I was landed at the Hdtel d'Eckmuhl at five 
o'clock in the morning and asleep about all the next 

day. i_ 

Lady Hertford,^ Lady Hampden,^ Pozzo, Eothschild, . 
and four or five men dined here. La Marquise seemed 
pleased, but very grand and abusing everything. Why 
did she come ? She says herself, ' I really don't know,' 
so who can ? 

Yesterday we dined at St. Germain. We found 
Mesdames de Duras et de Eauzan in a very large, vieille 
cour, delabree old house. Humboldt and Cuvier dined 
with us. In the evening we had a great deal of very 
agreeable talk, and at ten in ran St. Germain, that is, 
three Davidofis, Mme. de Fimar9on, Mr. and Miss Cun- 
ningham, Mme. de Nadaillac and whiskered men to 

• Widow of the second Marquis. 

' Widow of the last Lord Hampden, who died in 1824. 



358 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

correspond. They set to and I left them dancing at 
half-past eleven. 

This morning we have been to St. Cloud. Sir T. 
Lawrence's picture of the King and Dauphin promises 
perfection. It is really admirable. He has seized the 
King's countenance and given the Dauphin one. 

I think Lord Carlisle will like to know some tidings 
of the Hollands. I have been there two evenings 
running. He was very low the first with gout in 
both hands and one shoulder. She less so, but a very 
thin woman. She certainly looks older, but, as I tell 
her, I cannot regret her fat. Yesterday he was much 
better. 

The Duke of Cumberland is arrived. He sits here 
a good deal of the morning, drops into the Opera box, 
comes here this evening, dines here to-morrow, and 
again Friday, to meet, I believe, the Ambassadors and 
Ministers. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1825. 

Well, my dear beloved brother and sister. How 
are ye ? as the Mouchy says. I cannot get above the 
loss of the one and doubt of the other. I want to lodge 
an affection in the upper story. Cannot you and Lord 
Carlisle come for a month merely to economise ? 

Yesterday in the evening Mme. Appony and some 
others dropped in and were pleasant. 

Private and confidential. — ^Mme. Appony cried — real 
hot tears — says she hates it, wishes she could go, is in 
despair. ' EUe ne peut pas ouvrir son coeur ' to people 
who have not the least attraction for her. Now the 
truth is, she is disgusted with what they have, an 
impenetrable rudeness and coldness, tiU they see, like 
the children, that you mean to like, amuse, and please 
them. I could not resist telling her that she did open 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 359 

her heart to myriads of vulgar English. She says, 
' C'est que j'adore les Anglais.' But the truth is, 
they arrived at Kome to fall at her feet and worship 
her, which, comme de raison, makes the task much 
pleasanter. Her mania is to adore and be adored, 
which springs from her most amiable and aimante 
disposition, and she is absolutely heart-broken to find 
that the French do not love her, and that she cannot 
love them. The mistake is thinking that diplomacy 
is sentiment, and that the representative of a nation 
is to find Paris overflowing with sentiment, and rushing 
into its arms without bribe or reward. To be just 
to the nation, the cases she compares are different. To 
be sure the English, when they found her a puissance at 
Eome, with an unbounded house, to which she asked 
Jack, John, and Jill, idolised her ; but I should like 
to see them, if she had arrived a stranger in London, as 
she has here, lamenting over her fate, living entirely 
with Mme. de Polignac and foreigners, and regretting 
Paris aU day long ! I do not mean to disparage her in 
all this. She is a most pleasing, excellent, and, I am 
sure, attaching person, and her crotchets come from 
her merits. She is all kindness and warmth to me, 
and I like her better every time I see her. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris: October 1825. 

Dearest G., — We go on with our Cuinberland fillip. 
He joined Susy and me at the Opera last night, and we 
had also httle Prince Pred^rique, his son-in-law.' To- 
morrow we have a dinner of forty people for him, all the 
Dips and Ministers. 

Oh, that I had you with me now ! I enjoy myself 
so much. I never felt so well. The troubles, dissi- 

' Bather step -son. His mother, Princess Frederick of Prussia, married 
secondly the DiJte of Cumberland. 



360 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

pation, hot weather, all over. Early hours, regular 
habits, and long daily drives and expeditions in the 
curricle or caleche have braced me almost up to 
sprack point. Then my darling Susy is becoming every 
day more of an occupation, interest, and delight 
to me. 

Dearest, what an odd thing life is, and how it ups 
and downs, and ebbs and flows, rises and sinks for 
human beings in general, Mary Fox in particular ! You 
know in England she has short legs, looks a little 
gummy, is taken out as a good work, and Lansdowne 
and you find her rather a heavy shuttlecock. You are 
glad when sparks dance and speak. Here she is a 
Venus — she is ' la plus belle, la plus magnifique, la plus 
piquante : I'esprit brille dans ses yeux, son kme se 
voit dans sa charmante figure.' She debuted at a little 
soiree on Monday. Prince Frederick of Prussia did not 
admire, he immediately fell over head and ears in love- 
Abercromby, Lord Wriothesley Eussell, young Molyneux 
ditto, Cradock, Gore, complain of the unfair advantage 
these early acquaintances have over them, that they 
cannot approach the most beautiful creature they ever 
saw. Granville says that at the Princesse Bagration's 
she enquired anxiously if ' cette belle personne qui vient 
d'arriver ' was to be chez moi on Friday. In short, Mary 
is a sort of sky-rocket in Paris. I see her with my 
London eyes. I see her a bright, good, amiable little 
thing — rather too precise, but a perfectly amiable little 
soul. But do you know, the divinity she is considered 
here makes me laugh, and I think it extremely funny. 
Seriously, it is delightful, a most charming specimen of 
les compensations de la destinee. I think, (private and 
confidential) either Ealph Abercromby or Wrio Eussell 
would propose to-morrow, but I believe they would 
approve of neither. I think Mrs. Abercromby would 
like it of all things, she loves Mary so very muck 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 361 

Mrs. Fox is also very fond of her ; says she is the best 
little creature that ever was. 



To Lady Carlisle, 

Paris : October 1825. 

My dearest sister, — I have not left my room till this 
morning. You have therefore to represent to yourself 
myself in bed or on a couch, drinking gruel, and yester- 
day, very comfortable I must own, with Granville and 
the children about me, instead of going to a ball at 
Stanislas Potoski. 

Lady Holland would not let Mary go, though I had 
made Stanislas ask Charles and Mrs. Pox. I must 
be explicit with her about my impossibility of being 
chaperon. I delight in having her chez moi and taking 
her to the Opera, but more 1 cannot do. 

The Huskissons arrive on Saturday. We lodge them 
in your rooms and remain here till the 1 st of November. 
I am delighted at this, for I have a terror of a smell of 
paint. I believe I told you that Mr. Luttrel is arrived. 
Also Mr. and Miss Eogers. Sir T. Lawrence is still here. 
The Duke of Cumberland stayed two hours with me this 
morning, and I felt the old story of ' not tired, sir, but 
ill.' It was the first return I made to high life below 
stairs — I was dying for my gruel, and am, in short, in a 
very poor way. 

Imusttell you an instance of Prenchness, unparalleled, 
I think. You know that I went to the Marais. You 
don't know perhaps that the heroine of les deux pieces 
was Madame Mole — that she acted des roles de dix-sept 
ans, being nearer fifty than forty, acts them in despite 
of its being so offensive to her husband, that he leaves 
the house during the performance. Pive or six days 
ago this same Madame Mole sent to entreat me to lend 
her ' Mathilda,' that she was dying to read it. Yesterday 



362 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

Madame Mold's breast was cut off for a cancer. I can 
think of nothing else, and her figure in the role de 
VHeritiere is constantly before me. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1825. 

My dearest Sis, — The last days have been terribly 
busy. Court on Sunday, and yesterday a day of 
pleasure at Bagration's. We assembled at one. I 
sat through a two hours' dejeuner between Prussia and 
Cumberland. Mary Fox at my right hand, between 
Prince Augustus and the Duke of Brunswick. Dancing 
afterwards. The admiration of Mary is quite won- 
drous. All the Eoyalties were a ses trousses, but I tremble 
for the question of real business. Lord Wrio is gone 
to England, where, I hear, he is attached to Miss Eus- 
sell. Abercromby, with his usual prudence, has tire 
son epingle du jeu. The Major, admiring her enthusi- 
astically, pays her no attention, thinking her, I suppose, 
about thirty years too young. Lord Holland was at 
the breakfast as happy and sprack as possible. She is 
better, and Grantham having stuck to the premier, 
she is resigned and about to descend to the rez de 
chaussee. 

I had hoped that Mary's charms and success would 
have attracted numberless sparks to the Hotel Meurice, 
but what with the shades on the candles and the awful- 
ness-of the seance, it seems to me that nobody goes 
; there but the old affides, Luttrel, Eogers, etc., and a few 
old savants. 

To-day we have at dinner the Abercrombys, their 
last day, alas ! I like them both extremely. The little 
faults are all skin-deep, and she is excellent, devoted to 
her husband and Ealph. I do not mean to put forth 
that she is faithfully devoted to the elder as a merit, but 
she is attentive and unselfish, and that has nothing to 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 363 

do with an ugly or pretty face. My brother's eye will 
see upon her the last nuances of the fashion. 

Mme. de Guiche reappeared yesterday. The Major 
stayed away, which intrigued the world very much, 
Some think he has had a quarrel with Bagration, 
others that an encounter with the rival queens would 
have been too much for his nerves. 

Mme. Juste came forth also, just as civil, good- 
humoured, and gracious as when she went in, evidently 
having passed all the summer in saying ah-a-a-ah. 

We have not begun to dress yet, but are wearing 
out our old clothes. There is going to be another 
respite, the King being gone to-day till the 4th, when 
the Court returns from Compiegne. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : Kovember 1825. 

I was delighted to receive your letter last night, my 
very dear sister. I can fancy I see you all, and Sterky 
amongst you. A douceur to a governess always goes 
to my heart, and she does so richly deserve it. 

I did not write by the last courier, and for why ? I 
have been tormented with pain in my face, and its 
effect was so wearying and discouraging that I felt a 
letter would have been worse than none. I am better, 
but was awake almost all last night with it. The fact 
is, my dear, I must have a tooth out, which makes me 
frightened and like a naughty child, but it is the 
only real remedy. We live a great deal now en petit 
comite. Huskissons, Mr. Wilmot, Mr. Luttrel, Nugent, 
often Hollands. Lady HoUand has got a house in the 
Kue Grange Bateliere. Mary is still admired with 
enthusiasm at my soirees, but there is nothing like a 
prospect. I am sure Lady Holland would scorn the 
attaches, and her nianner has already warned them all 
off. Mary generally sits between Charles and Mrs. 



« 



64 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 



Fox — I conclude ordered to do so, and yesterday 
evening I called there and only found the two doctors, 
old Gallois and an author by way of sparks. The 
Sandons dined here yesterday. They go to-day. Shg. 
is perfectly beautiful when she does not speak, and only 
rather less so when she does. You can imagine nothing 
like the beauty of the profile and forehead, but it is the 
pure result of one's reasoning faculties, for she is with- 
out the usual little traps for one's imagination, sans 
curl, sans flounce, sans stays, sans everything but a 
few shifts, the upper one smarter than the others, tied 
round her with a string, and her hair dragged and tied 
■out of the way as if to prepare for bathing. She seems 
very pleasing, he is delightful. 

Is dearest Hart coming ? How enraptured he will 
be with our house ! We shall be settled there in a week. 
I will draw you a plan, and describe colours, furniture, 
etc., to enclose in my next. How happy I shall be to 
have him again ! 

To-night I have a tiny soiree for Prince Frederick of 
Prussia, who goes on Friday. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 1825. 

Dearest G., — Only a few lines to-day, my dearest, 
to tell you I have been suffering more or less from 
toothache ever since I last wrote. You will pity me 
when I tell you that I have not even time for tooth- 
drawing. 

I had the traitement yesterday, to-day a dinner at 
Villele's, to-morrow my soiree, Saturday and Sunday 
dinners at home. All this extra work in honour of Mr. 
Huskisson. Tuesday, je subirai I' operation — pity your 
cowardly sister. I do not spare you the details. It is 
my front tooth I must lose, but we part to meet again. 
My dentist tells me it will not be a very painful job, 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 365 

and embelUra ma bouche d'une maniere etonnante. It is 
now much longer than the others, discoloured, all 
shaking. He will extricate it with his finger and 
thumb, restore its hue, file it, and stick it in again, 
quite even with the others. Monsieur de Forges, 
a charming man, makes it quite pleasant. Nous 
' passeroiis la matinee ensemble, as I am to sit with a false 
tooth in my mouth till he has prepared my own. I 
am so worn with pain that I am reduced to long for 
Tuesday. 

I am beginning to return my visits, that I may not 
let them accumulate. I do not wear myself, and it is 
over for the year. I seldom, now I know their dear 
little habits and outings, find anybody at home. God 
bless you, dearest. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Hdtel d'Eckmuhl, Paris : November 1825. 

Yes, my dear. Here I am, free from pain, with a 
gap in my mouth as big as the middle arch of London 
Bridge. The tooth is out, and the sensation of room 
and purity and aisance in my mouth is so delicious, 
that I cannot bear the idea of having it replaced. 

I am shut up, and sent excuses to a dinner at 
Neuilly yesterday, one at Eothschild's to-morrow, 
Villele's to-day, Mr. Brown Saturday. 

About Thursday I shall reappear to the world, new 
toothed and new furnished. 

I hope Hart will not arrive till the gap is fiUed up. 
He would swoon at the sight. Everybody knows I am 
ill, and Mrs. Huskisson, who is extremely kind and 
zealous, goes about making a great case of me. I am 
one, but only to the eye at this moment. 

I have been this morning very busy, packing up all 
my goods, burning notes, sorting papers, sending back 
home borrowed books. 



366 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 1825. 

Dearest sister, — I am quite free from pain, but do not 
go out of an evening. We have very agreeable ones, en 
tres petit comite. 

Mr. Sneyd is delightful, for with all his faults he 
has a mind that reaches all subjects, and understands 
aU thoughts, and a real attachment and devotion to his 
friends. We had a two hours' talk yesterday, which 
brushed up my wits, and made me remember the time 
when I was intelligent. 

Here is Mr. Jones in an agitation about covers for 
chairs and some new couches, and I must heed him. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 1825. 

My dearest sister, — The comfort and delight of being 
chez nous in this delicious house, everything clean and 
warm, is not to be described, especially as the II6tel 
d'Eckmuhl had begun to look gloomy without, and to 
feel cold within. 

My mouth is so comfortable without its tooth that 
I cannot bear to have the new one stuck in. Yet, vu 
many considerations, to-morrow at twelve I go to the 
dentist. It is not to hurt at all, and I shall not be 
obliged to look demure, and pinch up my ideas and 
mouth as I did yesterday, when, in compliance with 
Granville's wish, I dined at home with Huskissons, Mr. 
Wilmot, Vesey Fitzgerald and attaches, gap and all. 
They seemed to observe nothing, and, unless I am very 
merry indeed, it is not very obvious. I have been out 
for the first time this morning, paying about fifteen 
visits. I only found two old ladies at home, both toothless 
themselves, so I hope not exigeantes on that score. 

Dearest sister, I must have done, as the post is 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 367 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 29, 1825. 

I hasten to make up by one line for my idleness. 
It will not outlive tlie Gowers, who, alas ! have fixed 
their departure for the 4th. She is a dear and delight- 
ful person, not Georgiana, but I love her very much. 
Elizabeth is a little heaven-born grande dame. 

Yesterday we went to a briUiant soiree at Mme. 
Appony's, on Friday I have another soiree dansante. 
What would the parlez-vous do without us ? We are both 
worried, as she invites, and the worry of it is tremendous, 
as my Fridays are reception to the French and I have the 
dread of numbers. I trust in my house, which I believe 
could hold five or six hundred, even when but half of 
it is open. But it is the devil of a question between 
prier et non prier. Madame Appony finds that many 
come without invitation, and the immense trouble of 
inviting for each separate day, besides affronts, for- 
gets, etc. • 

This made me determine to receive, and hitherto 
none but the best company have ventured ; but I am 
aware of the danger, though assured by many that 
none will come without knowing me well, an invitation 
de Vive voix, or some sort of encouragement. You may, 
however, enirevoir how these perplexities annoy at 
times ambassadresses, those poor drudges of society, 
and that are increased to me by the shoals of English, 
furious at not being always invited, and all the better 
sort of English and French disgusted if they are. The 
nuances to be observed make it a travail, wearing to 
my spirit and Madame Appony's flesh, of which, poor 
suffering saint, she is almost bereaved. Cattie ^ came to 
a partie fine the other day. I thought she would have 

' Lady Catherine, wife of Mr. Charles Cavendish, created in 1858i' 
Lord Chesham. 



368 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

died of it, and she sat squaring at them with a look of 
defiance. 

I sometimes wish the game was played, and then 
thoughts of selfishness, Granville, my comforts and 
enjoyments rush upon me. I get hot all over and am 
tempted to make a curtsey to the situation and say, 
' 1 beg you a thousand pardons. I am as happj^ as 
possible.' 

Pray understand me and keep all my secrets. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : December 5, 1825. 

(Dearest sister, — I had begun to the Duchess of 
Northumberland, repent and send it to you.) 

A thousand thanks, my dearest Duchess, for your 
kind letter. I always hear of you and from you with a 
mixture of two feelings, regret for myself that I have 
no chance of seeing you here, and disinterested satis- 
faction for you that you have no chance of coming. 
I think the mere remembrance of your last visit would 
take away from you all enjoyment. And yet if you 
could persuade yourself to leave England once more for 
France, and above all, if you were to date your visit 
any time between June and November, I think you 
would find it answer to you as pleasure, without 
obliging you to pay any tax for it. 

My life is now one of great comparative repose. I 
have stated days for my various duties, and many of 
complete leisure. I like some people better, and know 
how to keep off those I do not. Society is not the sort 
of puzzling maze it was to me at ra^ first arrival, and I 
often think of how mucn more use I could be to you 
when sitting in judgment over a visiting-list. I do not 
think intimacy is either sought or to be found here. 
Their object is to be amused and received. They are 



1825 TO THE. DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 369 

like children, clever, lively, troublesome children, without 
tact, without suite, noisy and rude — if you spoil them. 
If kept in order, gay and animated, easily pleased and 
rarely oiFended. I do not think them as a nation false 
or capricious, or that they are to be measured by the 
same rule as any other people on earth. Their impres- 
sions are all uncommonly vivid. Their expressions of 
affection, admiration, delight proportionately strong. 
You deceive yourself, if you reckon upon this, but it 
is your own fault. 

Dearest sister, I have little time and must write to 
the Duchess,^ but it occurs to me, prudent, diplomatic 
creature that I am, a quoi bon to put her in possession 
of my secret, my great secret, what I think of the 
parlez-vous. 

Dearest sister, we are much shocked to see in 
' Galignani ' an account of the poor Duchess's ^ death. 
No private letter had mentioned it. 

The following letter was addressed, unsigned, to the 
Duke of Devonshire, and it is here inserted, as giving 
an amusing account of society in Paris at this time : — 

Paris : December 14, 1825. 

The Duke of Hamilton is not Duke of Chatelleraut ' 
at last, which strikes me as comical. It is true the 
King said, ' Madame, vous voilk k votre place.' It is 
true that the Duke claimed the petiies entrees, was 
stopped, and the obstacle removed by the voice of the 
Due de Damas, which smote the ears of the astonished 
pages with, ' Laissez entrer Monsieur le Due de Cha- 
telleraut,' and yet it is equally true that this most high, 
puissant, and illustrious mountebank must for the pre- 

' Duchess of Northumberland. 

^ The Duchess of Rutland, Lord Carlisle's sister. ■ 

' The Duke of Abercorn claims this title as heir male of the first Duke, 

but Louis Napoleon granted it to the Duke of Hamilton, no doubt because 

he had married his cousin Princess Marie of Baden. 

VOL. I. B B 



370 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1825 

sent live on ham and bran.' That perfidious monarch, 
Charles X., entirely denies that he has admitted the claim 
or given any decision on the case, and when reminded of 
his speech to the Duchess, he said that any English 
duchess who asked for the tabouret should have it 
equally with those of France. This was the unkindest 
cut of all, since it robs the barren honour of the only 
distinction it conferred. 

There is an excellent batch of English. The Hollands 
have a good apartment and an excellent cook. Slie is 
very well and to me all smiles, but to her alentours 
rather more in the termagant line than common. To 
the awestruck world who frequent her house (the most 
strict, undivorced, and ultra-duchesses now go there) 
she appears encompassed by a solemnity and state of 
fan and elbow-chair and shaded light which make 
them suppose themselves in the presence of Maria 
Theresa at least. 

Lady Grantham goes forth into the haunts of men 
and women, and the men treat her with the sort of 
liomage one hears was shown to Lady Coventry in 
former times. The admiration she excites is quite 
curious and, when one sees her sail like a swan into 
a covey of old crows such as Lady Granville's salon 
usually exhibits, one must admit very just. 

The little Lady sits at the end of a long table, 

dressed like the Caliph Haroun Alraschid, doing the 
honours (you know) of the most costly banquets (you 
know) and getting as drunk as a fiddler (you know). 

Lady Granville is still the people's prayer, the glad 
diviner's theme, De Noailles' vision, Mrs. Mitchell's 
dream. Erom the most insolent of the Frenchwomen 
to the vulgarest of the English her popularity runs 
through all the compass of the notes. And what is 

' Hamilton and Brandon. 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 371 

Still more charming of her, she is exactly the same as 
she used to be. 

Old Vaud^mont, who is charming, received me with 
open arms. She had an audience of the King the other 
day, to return thanks for his condolences on the death 
of the Prince de Lambesc,^ and she could think of 
nothing more pressing than to give him a regular scold 
for the state of the road between Paris and Turenne. 
Unfortunately, she concluded her tirade with, ' Sire, on 
en parle, on dit des choses.' ' Qu'on dise ce qu'on veut, aj- / / 
madame, cela mest egal; je ne men soucie guere, ^, {if, 
interrupted the most Christian, who is at this moment 
particularly sore on the subject of on dits. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : December 18, 1825. 

I am ashamed of the shabby scrap 1 wrote last post, 
but I had so much to do, I did not know how to get 
through my work. 

Dearest sister, when I give my sweeping condemna- 
tion of the French, you must not only not quote me, 
but you must not believe me. 

What I mean is that when instances of individual 

.e/ri^iJ noirceur come out, I feel disgusted with the offender, 

- and irritated with them all for feeling nothing about 

anything, but as I go on I like some of them much 

better, and in my calmer moments I allow for them. 

The two things that have exasperated me of late 
have been their total insensibility to Mme. de Guiche's 
danger and dreadful sufferings, her dearest friends 
just as gay and dissipated at the moment she was 
supposed to be dying, and the little sensation made 

by Mme. de 's conduct and the duel. They treated it 

as a joke and a speculation, and now that she has 
weathered it, they will treat'her just as before. 

' Brother of the Prince de Vaudemont. 



372 LETTERS OF HARRIET C0UNTES8 GRANVILLE 1825 

What, liowever, is all this to me? I deaf and 
dumb it, and am going this evening to see all the 
actors chirping together like grasshoppers at Mme. 
Juste's. 

I have just had with me dear innocent Mrs. EUice, 
whom I love. Whenever there is troubled water she 
is sure to be a fish in it, but never from inchnation or 
malice, always dipped into it by some wily angler. 

Lady Grantham is very much admired and very 
much liked. The girl seems a fine, animated, intelligent 
creature, but they do not admire her looks, and will not 
believe she is not sceur ainee to Lady G. 

To Lady Casus lb. 

Paris : December 1825. 

Where are you, my own dearest sister ? If Hart is 
with you, tell him I implore him to send me Derbyshire 
productions. They asked me mints in a shop the other 
day for two hideous bits of the old purple spa, set as 
candlesticks. Ask him if he thinks I ought to send 
etrennes to my English here as well as my French, such 
as Lady Hunloke, Lady Bath, and Mrs. EUice, or if it 
will be considered as fishing for a return, and if to the 
French, he advises my sending them off in the first 
instance or waiting to return those I receive. WTiat 
am I to do to Eothschild, who gave my boy a magni- 
ficent itrenne last year? I implore him to write an 
essay upon the subject. It is as bad as the ' Sacre.' I 
have commissioned the Poodle to send me some English 
china, steel things, poplins, and any new sort of trinket. 
Also a model of the passage under the Thames — have 
you seen or heard of it ? Some of the French have 
seen one and rave of it, and dear Mrs. Juste said, ' Mon 
Dieu, comme j'aimerais en avoir un pour etrenne ! ' 
looking me lull in the face. 



1825 TO LADY CARLISLE 373 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : December 1825. 

have been paying visits till I am half dead, my 
dearest sister, and met at some of them poor dear Lady 
Grantham, wading away de son cdte, looking worn and 
exhausted^ at the laborious work. To me it is a mere 
joke compared with last year, and to you I may say 
that the sort of enthusiastic accueil I now receive must 
and does gild the pill. In one way I deserve it, for I 
go it like a dray-horse, and the reward is meeting civil 
and conciliated faces at every turn. 

I found Lady Bath having just heard of the Dowager 
Lady Bath's ^ death. She fell out of bed and broke her 
leg. The manner of it more than the event, which they 
had long expected, makes it a shock to them. 

Lady Grantham and her girl were at a ball at Lady 
Aldborough's last night. Miss Eobinson, dressed by 
Frederique and Yictorine, looked very handsome and 
was much admired. They rave of Lady Grantham's 
beauty, as well they may. She looks amongst them 
like a moon shining upon a common of furze bushes. 

Saturday.- — The Emperor of Eussia is dead. The 
news is this moment arrived. I heard it at the Duchesse 
de Duras' and have not yet seen Granville. It is a great 
event and makes a sensation, to judge by her salon, that 
private calamities never do at Paris. I do not under- 
stand the bearings of political events, but great effects 
seem to be expected, and the politicians seem aU to be 
in a tumult of emotion. I am very sorry for Pozzo. 
It is a shame even to think that I do not go to Court 
to-morrow, that a spectacle a la cour and two great 
balls at Pozzo's and Potoski's are taken off the load of 
this week. 

' She was ninety-one. 



374 LETTERS OF HARRIET GOUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 



1826 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : January 1826. 

Dearest of dear sisters, — I was so busy about my 
ball, that I had not one moment last courier. 

My invitations are all gone, and I have now only 
left the bore of answering fresh applications. 

My house, which was opened last night with a dinner 
of forty-four English, looks more brilliant and enormous 
than I can describe. I have asked eleven hundred and 
fifty, and as the Eussians and several great mournings 
in private families have brought me a number of excuses, 
I have no fear of crowd. We open the rez de chaussee 
— the serre with a carpet doubled of scarlet cloth, 
eighteen lustres with lamps and six divans, the same 
temperature as the rooms, with all the doors and 
windows taken off in the ball- and drawing-rooms. 
Three salons au premier, five whist-tables in the salon 
iiert, ecarte, newspapers and books of prints in the State 
couleur depaille bedroom. 

A buffet below in the first dining-room till supper. 
At one the large dining-room open with hot and cold 
supper. 

Eoyalty does not come. The King wishes Mme. de 
Berri not to go beyond the Tuileries. This is charming. 

My dearest, your letter about George ^ and his 
•address made me pipe. He is adorable in all he does. 

' Lady Granville was very fond of her nephew Lord Morpeth, and he 
was much attached to her. In his Journal, which has been privately 
printed, he wrote of her at the time of her death as follows : ' So pass a 
heart and mind seldom equalled singly, but in their union perhaps never.' 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 375 

I think everybody seems to think that for so young a 
man, and with such prospects of every kind, the giving 
up was right as to taste and pohcy. I hope whatever 
he does, whenever he does, he will always be perfectly 
independent, stand upon his own ground, act upon his 
own thoughts, because nobody has such sound ones, 
give his own vote, because it is sure to be the right one. 

AU this may be slip-slop, or nonsense, or treason. 
Je vous le jette en fassant. You need not pick it up if 
you do not fancy it. 

Here is a note. ' Que de grace ne mettez-vous pas 
a tout ce que vous faites, a tout ce que vous pensez, k 
tout ce que vous devinez meme ! ' I quote, because 
butter gives no pleasure, unless that of your knowing 
it is spread. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : January 1826. 

Dearest, — I have a worried feel to-day, and I ask 
why, and I say, — 

I tore open a letter directed to Mme. de Gontaut by 
mistake. 

I can't make my accounts come right. 

I have had a very cross letter from Lady Jersey, 
and though I can't abide her, I am sorry that her hats 
and pelisses don't fit her. I know the cap that does. 

I went last night to a soiree, and five little insolent 
elegantes gave themselves airs, and I felt angry, and am 
ashamed of the feeling. 

My Fridays worry me. On the last, numbers of 
French came without invitations, and I hear, do not 
repeat this, that in consequence of the novelty and 
success of my ball, they all intend coming every Friday 
in the year, and I hear of several people I scarcely know 
pretending they have received a general invitation to 
cover their proceedings. Now if I get out of this scrape 



376 LETTERS OF HARRIET GOUNTESS GRANVILLE 1836 

I make them furious. If I do not, my house will soon 
be like a bear-garden. Granville says never mind, and 
I am sorry I do. The English are angels, never come 
unasked and charmed when they are, and such dears. 

The middle windows of the white and gold drawing- 
room and the furthest of the two end rooms open to the 
conservatory, which is like a long gallery, full of flowers, 
divans, chairs, etc. Oh, could you see the flirtations ! 

From this, being so unlike anything else, j'ou can 
have no idea of the fuss made about it, and from this 
springs my woe. They all tell me I have spoilt them 
for anything else, and I hear people go about the balls 
saying : ' Ah, mon Dieu, il n'y a pas de serre ici.' I 
believe the truth, because of the misfortune. Had I an 
ugly house and nobody liking to come, I suppose I 
should fret about that. And these are the people who 
pretend not to go out during th-e Careme. Au reste, 
when their curiosity is satiated, and the daring have 
had a look, I suppose they will be ashamed of perse- 
vering, and as my rooms are large, I hope to weather 
the first rush, especially as I have sent out formal 
invitations for next Friday and tell all my friends to 
put it about that I do not receive, but invite. 

What little miseres these must seem to you, my 
dearest dear sis. But my hfe is brimful of them, and 
it is a pity that what is called success does not elate 
me, and that little contretemps disturb me. 

You are not in my debt, and Susy will not let you 
go astray in money matters, rest assured. She governs 
the whole house, our pockets and hearts. God bless 
you, ever dearest. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : February 1826. 

Dearest sister, — I have been worried, but easy again, 
invite, and it is now only the bore of having to do it, 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 377 

and the complaints and grievances of those who are 
omitted or forgotten. 

People talk of nothing but me and my soirees to me, 
but I never believe one word they say. I admire my 
house and not myself, so I am still less credulous about 
the latter than the former. How does Hart manage in 
London ? I do not think people ever grumble about 
not being asked, or come if they are not. 

Lady Grantham went with me last night to a little 
soiree. They admired her extremely, but it was hot, 
noisy, and ill-bred, and I came home with her, both 
agreeing that they do not understand society. 

At my ball I heard that when the French people 
came up to a quadrille, they turned from it with disgust 
if there were any English. ' Ah, mon Dieu, il y a des 
Anglaises.' The fact is that the butter is spread upon 
a fonds of hatred and jealousy towards nous autres, 
and then we meet it with an undue degree of hauteur 
and coldness. I do not mean me. They are really in 
general civil and so am I, but it is in spite of our 
teeth. 

I went to see the Duchess of Bedford yesterday 
morning. She is still on her couch, very entertaining 
and agreeable, and her franc-parler is a treasure here. 

Granville seems to have no thought of asking for 
leave this year. Will it bring you here? I have no 
philosophy for this faihng me. I look to it as to 
Heaven. God bless you. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : February 9, 1826. 

Dear, dearest sister, — I am so happy to hear of 
Caroline's ' confinement, and trust in your next letter 
you will be able to tell me that her recovery is without 
a drawback. 

' Lascelles. 



378' LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

We have the most heavenly weather, and I have 
been enjoying myself to the greatest degree in the 
Champs Elysees. It was rather too fashionable, and I 
am obliged to squiddle, and to link and loop home with 
Mons. Mole. This will change my hour. 

This evening I expect a very few people. I had 
nearly four hundred last Friday, but such is the delight 
of my conservatory that the only fault of my soiree 
was, with that number, not being quite full enough, 
such is the space for meandering and circulating. 

Conceive my rage, having thought myself particu- 
larly careful and select the Friday before last, in 
inviting but few people, with the addition of several 
who came uninvited, when Madame DavidofF said to 
me, ' Je vous avoue, ma chere, que je suis indignee de 
voir que plus de Fran^ais ne viennent chez vous,' and 
this in the simplicity of her heart, really thinking that 
the French honour me by coming, not I them by asking. 
This makes me see that I am quite right in having 
made my Fridays invited soirees instead of receptions. 
They will be much more valued and people will find 
that I am not at their mercy. 

This would not do if they were ugly, but as they 
really are very nice, and that the Chateau people are 
my affides, and come whenever my door is open, and 
also the Orleans people, quite a different set, I dare risk 
leaving out some. 

This is for you alone. I sometimes let out a bit of 
my mind, but they are all the better for beating. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : February 15, 1826. 

Much writing is out of the question this week, dear, 
dearest sister. You have no idea of the turmoil. I have 
just torn off my finery, having been all day at a child's 
ball given in the morning by the Duchesse de Berri. 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 379 

There are balls and soirees every night, everybody 
poking in their little efforts at the expiration of the 
Carnaval. I fear they will live to dance another day, 
and that the Careme is not the holiday it pretends to be. 

Everybody thinks Granville is going to be sent to 
Ireland, and Lord Wellesley to India, and the Duke of 
Bedford told him to-day it is given as the reason that 
Mr. Canning is afraid of his ruining himself if he re- 
mains here. 

Little Johnny Eussell ^ is here, white as a sheet and 
smelling of ether. I am afraid he must be in very bad 
health. 

The Duchesse de Guiclie ^ is worse again. Doratt 
has been called in, and I hear doubts the possibility of 
her recovery. The Duchesse de Financourt drags her 
Duke about to all the balls, making the most absurd 
and disgusting demonstrations of tenderness, sits by him 
at supper, all but kisses him. 

Lady Grantham is very happy and well-amused, and 
her girl is a fine, natural, well-disposed creature, but 
body and mind want pruning. 

My love to Lord Carhsle and George. When wiU 
he come to give me spirits and enjoyment, and my 
brother, whom the elegantes are yearning for ? 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : February 1826. 

The prospect of seeing dearest Hart is most delight- 
ful. It will be such real happiness, which few things 
are. Thank him for his letter and advice. 

My morning has been swallowed up by a long visit 
from Mme. de Broglie. You know what I think of her. 
She is the best person I know, and totally unhke a 
Frenchwoman. Perfectly true in manner and in mind, 

' He died in 1878, in his eighty-sixth year. 
' She lived to a very advanced age. 



380 LETTERS or HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

and lier beauty and attraction give a most peculiar 
charm to her simphcity and unworldhness. 

I have only two more Fridays after to-night— 
a fortnight's rest, and on the 31st a concert. Tell 
dearest Hart to be here. I have been arranging it with 
Eossini already — four hundred people in my great room 
and aU the best singers. 

I am so relieved and light in spirits. Write to me. 
It is such a joy to hear from you now. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : February 1826. 

I hear of nothing but the universal distress and 
poverty in England, but the breaking of the Malton 
bank is what really vexes me, as anything that annoys 
or worries you must always do. 

A lady I have not asked to-night has just sent me a 
note to beg me to allow her to bring her uncle. ^ It is 
too difficult and troublesome, but I must put everything 
on a better and severer footing. 

En attendant, the crack people flock to me, and 
when I see how rude they are to one another, I cannot 
be surprised at anything. 

The Due de Dalberg gave an assembly the other 
night. The entree and sortie were difficult and tedious, 
and the company very mixed. They complained and 
scolded, and the exquisites boasted of having told him 
they never would go near them again. I sometimes 
wish they would tell me so and keep their word, but as 
far as that goes one lady told me at Mme. de Dalberg's 
in her hearing, ' II n'y a que chez vous qu'on est bien. 
Ceci est insupportable.' They are born bears. 

' Lady Granville once said to a lady who came to a party unasked, 
' Toujours enchantee de vous voir, invitee ou pas invitee.' 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 381 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : March 10, 1826. 

Dearest sister, — ^Your account of Belvoir is just what 
I think we should have expected, but I think him, when 
he has ceased doing all he seems to do for her memory 
and his sense of her merits, from circumstances and 
feelings the most likely man in the world to marry again. 

Dearest Hart. You cannot conceive with all your 
powers of conception, I beg your pardon, what a 
delight it is to me to have him. He enters into aU my 
pleasures and worries — understands the last and doubles 
the former. He tells me he is pleased with a room 
near the sky, consequently airy, with a view of the gold 
dome of the Invalides, which has been backed by an 
Italian blue sky from the moment he arrived. He 
allows my little pretension of comparing my villa in 
the Faubourg St. Honors to Chiswick. And, dear sis, 
if you could see me at this moment ! I am writing in 
the end of the conservatory. Behind my soft comfort- 
able divan is a little grove of orange-trees and lilacs, a 
large basketful of moss and violets upon the table, 
and, all along the gallery I look down, every flower of 
the spring. My garden will double my enjoyment, 
but for the moment I shut it quite out, as the grass, 
newly sown, and the bare bones of the trees form only 
a contrast to the hot glowing summer within. I always 
come down after breakfast, and walk and talk and sit 
with Hart for about an hour. At two we went the 
well-known round — Northumberland, Dalberg, Juste, 
Alfred, Mme. Appony, Duchess of Bedford, and Lady 
Granard, where we found Lady Eancliffe. Hart was 
good-natured and I civil. 

"We have given Clifibrd a room in the house. He >C 
is such a good and amiable creature and fit to die of 
pleasure and laughter. -^^vx ^ -v. \ > .. . U. ■:>...^. - ,j 



382 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : March 1826. 

My dearest sister, — "We are very well and I have 
ten days' quiet before me. The procession to-day was 
beautiful. Hart, Mr. Sneyd, Bourke, Susy, Lady Charlotte 
Thynne and I squeezed into a balcony, in spite of the 
east wind. A bright sun and bright blue sky. Crowds of 
people, but a broad space found for the procession. 

First, myriads of priests, all in their full costume, 
walking in two rows and chaunting. Then the Cross, 
with the higher orders of the clergy. 

Then the Due de Chartres in uniform, a handsome 
boy, walking with his father and aides-de-camp. The 
Duke of Orleans looking like thunder. 

Then the Dauphin and suite, looking hustled, his 
eyes fixed on his book. 

Then the King, pale, old, adorable. 
, ; Then Madame, white hat and feather, and pelisse. 
( Then Berri, all over ermine. 

Then les Dames de la Cour, outrees, blown by the 
wind, overwhelmed by the crowd, fasting, perished, 
fatigued. 

It is the first time this has happened in France, and 
the sensation is extreme. Bourke furious. ' Oh ! quelle 
belle arlequinade, et moi je suis d — ee pour etre avec 
vous autres. Les dames iront demain au Pere-Lachaise.' 

I thought it a very imposing spectacle, but the 
folly of supposing it a virtue. God bless you. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : April 1826. 

I am so delighted with your letter. Do I like the 
situation of Grosvenor Place? Why, my dear, with 
your balcony and fields you may make it like a villa. 

We have been spending a delicious morning at 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE S83 

nursery gardens, and what do you think that dear, kind, 
magnificent brother has done ? Seeing that my garden 
is my hobby, and aware of what the beauty of the 
conservatory is to me, how it enhveiis the Saturday 
mornings and concerts to have elegantes overshadowed 
by cameUas, etc., he has spent an enormous sum, 
ordering me the finest plants you ever saw. The pivoine 
en arbre, double red camelias, two, three hundred francs 
each, and some more things, which people go to see as 
as a sight, will all be found flourishing in my serre. I 
am pleased beyond reason and diamonds. A minor 
but great satisfaction is that my grass is beginning 
to grow, and will be green for my breakfasts. When 
shall I see you, beloved sister, sitting in bowers ? 

The bother now is innumerable dinners and Court 
dress every fortnight for the dreadful jeux at the 
Tuileries. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : May 1826. 

Dearest sister, — ^I am just come from the Tuileries. 
Think of dressing at five, swallowing dinner like pills, 
rushing out on a winter night, and all to find I had 
mistaken the day, and have it all to do over again on 
Sunday next ! 

Yesterday morning I woke upon a storm of snow 
and hail, fine weather for a dejeuner methought. How- 
ever, nothing discouraged, I had, this is for Hart, the 
calorifers heated, fires lit in the green and yellow 
drawing-rooms, and luncheon prepared, expecting no- 
body. Well, as it happened, it was the most brilliant 
matinee I have had. All enchanted. They dread the 
air as cats do water, and the beauty and warmth of 
the serre — imagine it with the geraniums and roses all 
blown, and occasionally bright gleams of sun, with the 
o-arden looking through the windows like a diorama 



384 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

— prove to me that my house defies climate as it does 
crowd. They staid till half-past five and licked all the 
platters quite clean, and talked of the jardin d'hiver, 
et le palais d'Armide et la fie bienfaisante, till even 1 
was tired with my hobby. 

I ought to be at this moment at Mme. de Villele's 
and Lady Grantham's, but I thought I owed myself a 
dedommagement for my Tuileries mishap, so I came 
home, dragged off my diamonds and put on my bed- 
gown, et me void comme coq en pdte. 

Poor Mme. de Guiche is, I fear, dying. The 
accounts to-day are very bad. Not a soiree do her 
bosom friends forego, and Mme. Juste is at home to- 
morrow. 

Sydney Smith preached a most beautiful, eloquent 
sermon this morning to a crowded, alas ! dining-room. 
I like him better so than when in society. He is, as 
Mr. Sneyd says, something between Cato and Punch. 
You must allow that this describes his physique admi- 
rably. 

What I meant about Mary Fox is that by nature a 
little gummy, she is so tied by the leg, watched by the 
eye, so regulated, so tamed, so told not to say this, not 
to do that, not to go here, not to stay there, to cut thip 
man, to avoid that girl, that she has lost all effect in 
society but that of being gened herself and a gene to 
others. Her very beauty suffers from it. She has no 
spirits, no opinion, no expression, no conversation. 
Yet she is not low, she is not grave, she is not foolish. 
She sits by the side of our ladies, and answers very 
prettily when she is spoken to. I never saw so many 
natural advantages thrown away. Ibby has as much 
chance of a lover as she has. 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 385 

To Lady Carlisle. 

' Paris : July 1826. 

My dearest beloved sister, — I can only repeat that 
Paris win do you all the good and just the good you 
want. ■ 

I just now walked into Granville's room and 
there I found Lord Burghersh.^ I was not in a 
plight to squiddle, so I know nothing of him and 
his rib. 

We spent yesterday with the Vaudemonts. I took 
the Eosamoufskis there, and Granville followed us. 
Never did I see such a lovely place. The Seine, the 
roses, the verandah, the shade, all ravished me. Tell 
Agar we found her delicious salon as cool as a well, 
and full of vases of flowers, low sofas, fauteuils, on 
which sat and sprawled half a dozen one-eyed elderty 
ladies in more than deshabille. They look like ogresses. 
I wish they would eat the dogs. 

I find Lord Burgher §h is come alone. She is too ill 
to leave London. He is in high talk and spirits. It is 
rather hot for both. 

It is also too hot to think and write, or do anything 
but long to see you, and imagine the perfect happiness 
it will be. I can hardly wait with patience. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : July 2, 1826. 

Dearest of sisters, — ^I have this moment received 
your long letter, and the hope of seeing you drives me 
quite wild. I think of it, plan it, rejoice over it aU day 
long, and at a moment when earth, sea, and skies will 
aU be so propitious for enjoyment. 

Pray say a great deal from me to Lord ClanwiUiam. 
I can well understand his rapture at being in England 

' At that time Minister at Florence, and subsequently Ambassador at 
Vienna. Succeeded his father as Lord Westmorland in 1841. 

v^T, j_ CO 



o86 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

again, especially after Berlin. Lady Grantham is 
brimful of speculation, why this and not that and if the 
other. She is a dear good soul, and tell her I am sorry 
she is gone, and miss her, for both are true, and she is 
sometimes so trying, from want of tact and a sort of 
clumsiness of mind and conduct, that I am pleased and 
perhaps more surprised at it. As to Lady Caroline and 
Mr. Sneyd, I am undone without them. 

Is Paris in the way to Vienna ? That will be a real 
grievance. I shall die of it, and show the deperissement 
at each corner of my mouth. Tell her ^ that Herbault ^ 
is dead, that the Jesuits have forbidden women to talk, 
that I am grown beautiful, that there is not a Whig 
in Paris, and anything you can, to ward oif from us 
this calamity. Leopold, the Duke of Clarence, and 
all the unseated members we are threatened with are 
jokes to it. I had rather tuck George the Fourth 
up in the yellow bed, and have a sacre every fort- 
night. It would be less of weariness and vexation 
of spirit. 

I have nothing to add but that it is a delicious day, 
and that I have been settling which two chairs in the 
garden we should sit and talk upon, and what a talk, 
oh, Heavens ! 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : July 10, 1826. 

I am perfectly happy now about WiUiam. I have 
written to Mr. Bradford, and have now nothing but 
hope upon the subject of this dear child, who is, with 
all his infirmities and peculiarities, a great love. I hope 
he feels all the kindness that has been shown him, but, 
as children are odd things, we at all events must supply 
any deficiencies in that line. 

Well, we have got Leopold, and to-day I give him a 

1 Lady Jersey. * The fashionable milliner. 



1826 TO LADy CARLISLE 387 

little soiree, and to-morrow a matinee, and Sunday a 
dinner. The Baths and the Uptons are our only two 
pieces de resistance remaining en fait de society, but there 
are still here all the Noailles, Standishes, Girardins, 
Mailles, and many men, such as they are. My garden 
fait fureur, and i* is ravissant and the wind is westerly, 
and I hope for such a Saturday as never was to-morrow. 
It enables me to ravish the new and passing bulls with- 
out admitting them into my soirees, and with my boxes 
to satisfy them. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : July 13, 1826. 

' Dearest, — ^Yesterday brought me a great mixture of 
feelings, and so much to do that I can only write you a 
few lines. 

First, my darling boy very well and such a love. 
That is unmixed pleasure. Then comes a letter from 

. . She is coming immediately. I think this may 

e^l^t-^nDe a terrible corvee, but on the other hand I feel just 
now a little Quixotic about it, and as if it were possible 
to do her good. Also great compassion for her, which, 
however, she may very likely immediately destroy. 
Next, my dearest, I am in a fever about the black veil. 
Pray ask Lady Bathurst if Mr. Mitford told her he had 
left it with me. If he did, I must have sent it, for here 
it is not.. If she hears no more of it, I will send her 
one, as I am rich and know what sort of veil it was. 
Then, my dear, where are the white gloves, which I 
sealed up with my own paw ? And now last and big- 
gest. The Curzons. On the head of the facteur is 
the sin of not returning his card, but I cannot but 
regret not having been civil to friends of Hart. My 
excuse is that I deprecate people, unless very intimate, 
not bringing me letters from some one. Why did 
not Lady Hunloke mention them to me ? I see, for 

c c 2 



388 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

example, Major Curzon in my book. I cannot ask 
him to dinner at a venture. He may be anybody 
or nobody. 

Adieu, dearest. My three boys are at my elbow. 
Granville the great is quite well, but his foot does not 
gain ground. God bless you, ever dearest. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : July 17, 1826. 

My own dear sister, — I have made a resolution 
which I am sure will please you. It is never to let any 
day pass without doing something which I think par- 
ticularly disagreeable, such as paying a visit, sending a 
note, writing a letter, leaving a card, seeing somebody 
on business, being measured for something. I may do 
more, but will never aUow myself to do less. Yesterday 
my new rule took me to Lady Burghersh, to-day it made 
me take Miss Eumbold out in the open carriage and a 
visit to the Swedish Minister's wife. 

My dear, I resume my pen, having dictated to Dody ^ 
during the pleasure of the toilette. Here I am in a lilac 
neglige, waiting for my company, it being Friday again. 

My gossip is that Mile. Sontag quizzes Lord Clan- 
william and laughs at the reports about their intended 
marriage as the height of absurdity. 

Pasta gives us too much of ' Tancredi,' and Mile. 
Mars acts rarely ; the little theatres are too hot, and our 
evenings are chiefly spent in the green drawing-room. 

My children desire me to say that the Egyptian 
Gallery is most interesting and amusing. I took them 
there the day before yesterday. They spent this morn- 
ing at the Louvre. Susan was delighted. 

' Her daughter Georgiana. 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 389 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August SO, 1826. 

I have persevered in doing right things. To-day 
Madame de Vaudemont paid me a long visit. She 
charmed me with her strong sense and originaUty. I 
feel as if I could get very fond of her, were it not for 
the monkey, dogs, and Madame de Dino, but these 
habitues warn me off her manor. 

There is a great military fete to-morrow on the 
heights of Chaillot at eight o'clock in the evening. 
Eight thousand men are to enact the siege of Tro- 
cadero,' and we are to be in tents, fired at with blue 
lights and squibs and finally taken by storm. I have 
great thoughts of not standing the siege, which sounds 
alarming. 

My forty-first birthday was celebrated yesterday. 
Colin gave me a basket of flowers, surmounted by a 
picture of Freddy painted by Colin's sister. Susy a 
citron- wood box with a drawing of her own upon it. 
Granville ^ a very pretty hougeoir with a copy of verses 
beginning — 

To thee, my mother, kind and good, 
Who often in a cheerful mood, 
That made me happy more and more 
Than ever boy was made before. 

Georgy a basket of her own manufacture. William 
a little inkstand, and Freddy a smelling-bottle. They 
are adorable darlings. Good-night. 

Friday. — The prise du Trocadero was, I hear, beau- 
tiful. Both the Granvilles were delighted with it. 

' The fortress on the island of Leon, opposite Cadiz, was taken from 
the Spanish insiu'gents by the Duo d'Angouleme, which brought about 
the surrender of the town. 

^ He was eleven years old. 



390 LETTERS OF HAREIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 11, 1826. 

Lady Jersey is expected to-day. The Cannings will 
he here on Friday or Saturday, the Clanricardes on 
the 23rd. Jerseys and Cowpers are not exactly the 
people we should have selected to complete the society, 
but I have no doubt it will do very well, especially as 
there will be coming and returning about the same 
time. To-morrow we have a little repast here. Hayter 
and three recommended sparks, all unknown. 

God bless you, my dear. I wish dear Hart could 
come in time to soothe and loop and link the Countesses 
a little while. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 1826. 

Dearest sister, — ^Why can I only write a line ? I 
am nervous, worried. This is for you ajid the EUises 
3,lone. Conceive my astonishment to find that when I 
had done more by Lady Jersey than by any person 
who has been at Paris, thought her more than satisfied, 
I found she was in a positive fury. The grievances are, 
like herself, unique. She says she has always loved me 
with the greatest affection and that I returned it. That 
she came here under these impressions and was received 
with the utmost neglect and unkindness. Granville 
had a long interview. Lord Seaford another, but it is 
the winds and the waves. These are our attentions. 
Granville went to her the evening she came. We 
asked them to dinner the next day, appointed her to 
meet us at St, Cloud the next. I took her that evening 
to the Opera. I called upon her twice and found her 
at home both times, went with her to the Varietes, have 
lent her my boxes repeatedly. She dined with us again ; 
we asked her a third time, when she was engaged. 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 391 

These are her grievances. I did not offer" to bring 
her home from St. Cloud. She was there with Lord 
Jersey and her three sons. I was in the curricle 
with Granville, and Eward and all the children in the 
caleche. That I never asked what her illness had been 
at Munich. That I do not love her, that I desired her 
not to call on me. That I was so fond of her in England 
that I gave her a lock of my hair. 

I can give no better proof of what my reception of 
her was than by telling you that Granville was ex- 
tremely pleased with me for it. Mrs. Canning laughed 
at me for it, and said my attentions to her were a proof 
of how she could wind people round her little finger. 
Lady Hardy told her that she had not seen me so civil 
to anybody else. 

In short, dearest, we were all thunder-struck when 
the storm burst. For heaven's sake talk of it to nobody. 
It must be blown over soon. I saw a great friend of 
hers this morning, not Lady Cowper, but a man who 
came to remonstrate upon my receiving her so ill. I 
never saw anything like his astonishment when I told 
him what attentions we had shown her. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris: 1826. 

Dearest sister, — I was delighted to receive your 
letter last night. Pray do not in the first instance 
mention the storm, but if Mrs. Lamb states a false case, 
state a true one. 

I have seen Lady J. only twice since I wrote. What 
has made the foUowers-up of her extraordinary pro- 
ceedings more provoked with her has made no difierence 
in my feelings or opinions. She is quite come round 
and apparently very fond of me. They see in this an 
inefiectual attempt at first to get up a grand war about 
nothing, and upon a complete failure, a mean ;and 



392 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

absurd submission on her part. I only see Lady Jersey, 
a tiresome, quarrelsome woman, but having in her no 
rancour or bad feeling, and forgetting one minute what 
she has said, done, or thought the last. 

She stays till Monday, but I have been so entirely 
satisfied with my line towards her and so undeviating 
in it, that I hardly think of her enough to care whether 
she goes or not. 

Lord Ashley is arrived. My cold has prevented 
my seeing him, but he is coming this evening. 

To Lady Carlisle, 

Paris: 1826. 

Since I last wrote I have spent all my evenings at 
work with Mrs. Canning and the girls over the fire, as 
the men have had great Dip dinners. The weather has 
been so damp and cold that we gave up the spectacles. 

"We went for a little while on Wednesday to Madame 
Juste's, and found there & sprinkling of French, Madame 
Appony and the Ladies Jersey and Cowper. The former 
appears recovered from her late attack and dines here 
to-day. We have never mentioned the storm, but 
ingeniously gave each other to understand that we 
would meet but seldom, and only, as to-day at dinner 
here, all in a lump. Lady Cowper is enchanted with 
Paris. 

I am every day more convinced that any amalgama- 
tion of French and English in society is impossible. 
The only time when Lady Cowper was bored to death 
was at the partie fine at Madame de Noailles', and 
Mrs. Canning nearly died of it. The French show no 
prevenance', they keep apart and eye the intruders, and 
the English, not paid for it, hke me, will not make the 
quarter of a step towards an amelioration of this state 
of things. 

To-night I expect a great many people. The real 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 393 

improvement to our society is a number of Englishmen. 
Cradock is returned, Lord William Hervey, Lord John 
Eussell, Mr. Frere,Leveson Smith, Mr. Denison,^ Howard, 
young Labouchere,^ the Vice-Chancellor ! ! sparks for 
aU tastes and all ages. Lord Harrowby and Mary 
Eyder arrive on Monday. Adieu, my dear, dearest G. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 22, 1826. 

We go on very prosperously. Lady Jersey's time 
is aU filled up without my intervention. She goes 
everywhere, in and out of Paris every day and all day 
long. She is coming to-night with Madame Juste, who 
is here for a day. We have a dinner of forty-five, no 
women but Mrs. Canning, Lady Clanricarde, and myself. 
I have hardly seen Lady C, who arrived yesterday. 
The Cannings are both of them most amiable and seem 
delighted with their sojourn here. Her health is stiU. 
very uncomfortable at times ; yesterday she was con- 
fined with a bad headache. I took Mr. Canning to see 
Pasta for the first time in ' Otello.' He was very honest 
about it, which is all I can say ; she does not appear 
to him better than another. 

We are going to-morrow, Cannings, selves and the 
children, to Neuilly at two o'clock in large cJiar-a-hanc 
to see the place. The Duke ^ is very proud of it and 
delights in these sorts of expeditions. 

God bless you, dearest. Mr. Denison is coming 
immediately. 

^ Mr. Evelyn Denison, who became Speaker, and on his retirement in 
1872 was created Lord Ossington. 

^ The Eight Hon. Henry Labouohere, created Lord Taunton in 1859. 
He was married to Lady Carlisle's daughter in 1852. 

^ Its owner, the Duke of Orleans. 



394 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 30, 1826. 

For three hours last night did I suffer violent tooth- 
ache, whilst curtseying and grinning to the edification 
of all beholders. I am in heaven to-day, the pain 
being entirely gone. 

Lady Jersey arrived last night in high good-humour. 
I could amuse you a ses depens and think I will, for I 
am sure you are too much afraid of thunder and 
lightning to repeat, and will not suspect me of taking 
any pleasure in recounting but that of the sport itself. 
She has made herself more ridiculous, my story apart, 
than I have words to say. Perhaps it is only that being 
alone here and people unused to her ways, her absurdities 
appear more prominent. Her great objects have been 
the Bourbons and Villeles. She sent to be received, 
and said she had been sent fca- to St. Cloud. This 
immediately stirred the blood of Mrs. Canning, who 
rested not till she discovered that the move had been 
made by the Countess. Three or four days after came 
the spectacle at St. Cloud, and she was not invited. 
She then told everybody they had expected me to bring 
her and that I would not. She distressed Madame 
Appony next by insisting upon her calling with her 
on Madame de ViUele. Austria in vain remonstrated, 
asked if she knew her, told her that, Madame de ViUele 
having no day for reception at this time of the year, it 
was only les intimes who went to her. ' C'est egal, je 
veux la voir.' Even Madame de Eichemont, Monsieur 
de Villele's sister, told me last night that, having seen 
Lady Jersey about twelve years ago, she was really 
penetree by her goodness in having written a pressing 
note to beg to see her immediately. What makes this 
more farcical is that when she has made these demarches 
she goes about saying all these people have sent to beg 
to see her, which, as she is not here in an official 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 395 

capacity, causes universal astonisliment. Another of her 
ridicules is to talk long and loud, a qui veut V entendre, 
of her lonely and deserted situation here and her grief 
at being separated from son mari et ses enfans. ' Pour- 
quoi est-elle restee?' is repeatedly asked with perfect 
bonhomie on the part of the enquirers, and I on principle 
answer ' Je ne sais pas.' Another scene in her own genre 
which was enacted the other day caused much amuse- 
ment. She was going a junket with Madame de Bourke 
and Lord John Eussell. The Bourke at the moment 
of departure excused herself. Then comes great agita- 
tion, a positive declaration of the impossibility of going 
alone in a carriage with le cadet Roussel, and finally an 
entreaty to Alava to go as chaperon. All she got, as he 
told me himself with shouts of laughter. ' Diable, vous 
devez etre pen sure de vous, si vous craignez rester 
seule avec le petit, Lor' Jan.' She has delayed her 
departure till Monday, but as she is quite pacified I 
am in no hurry, 

Lady and Cradock have set up a regular 

flirtation. As he is extremely empresse, she can be 
dignified with perfect impunity, and only looks charnied 
and thinks Paris the most delightful place she ever was 
in, and wishes to stay and hopes to come back. Lord 
seems very easy about it. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 2, 1826. 

I am sorry you have been worried, my dearest 
sister. It is an unfortunate condition attached to exist- 
ence. I did not mean to make such a fine phrase, but 
you have my whole sympathy as well as my whole 
heart, for I feel at this moment worried to death. 
GranviUe has had a bad feverish cold, and he has an 
unusual amount of business on his hands. I live in 
dread of its bringing on gout, of which he had a 



-•* 



396 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

symptom two nights ago. I cannot bear the idea of 
your giving up your flower garden, and I hope it is 
only delay. It would be so ornamental, so interesting, 
so delightful, but here, too, come in the thorns. Colin 
has been misbehaving. The bills, independently of his 
own large wages, for furnishing the serre came in enor- 
mous and exorbitant. He is penitent and forgiven, and 
a more economical arrangement has been made with an 
old woman. Plants for a quarter the price, no sum for 
carriage, she agreeing to take back the old ones. I 
blow it over, but with a loud sigh and vexation that 
my hobby should have been a great additional expense. 

Then it is evident lo sposo has taken up the little 
affair I mentioned to you in my last letter. I like 
her so much and have had her so constantly here, that 
I cannot, vu all our positions, avoid what I think will 
get two such imprudent persons into scrapes, and one 
most respectable one into hot water and annoyance. 
My little dinners and soirees will all become distresses. 
In short, all my strings are too tight to-day. When I 
read your dear letter I fret over your worries and mine 
own, and wish we were both, like Lady Jersey, without 
a grain of feeling and with a quantity of imaginary 
grievances. We should cry a great deal, as she does, 
but never be the least out of spirits or subdued. 

This is not a cheerful letter, but I send myself in the 
mood of the moment, and would rather fret with you 
than chuckle with another. God bless you. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 9, 1826. 

The sejour of the Cannings here has been most 
prosperous in every way. The King's asking him to 
a dinner enfamille was as flattering as anything of that 
kind can be. People of all sorts have been civil and 
empresses beyond measure, and no bitterness on any side 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 397 

has been strong beyond suppression. He is in spirits 
that I had never seen, she in unequal health, but 
most kind, friendly, leaving me to go entirely my 
own way ; she is out or in her room all the morning. 
Often in bed by nine o'clock, but when I have society 
exerting herself and behaving very prettily. Lafiglia 
is apparently very happy. 

The Countess has written a letter to Granville. 
She is sure we shall be sorry when we reflect upon our 
unkindness to her. However, Lady Ehzabeth Fielding, 
who met her upon the road, arrived innocent of the 
whole story, and told Lady Hardy that Lady Jersey 
raved of Paris, said she never had been so happy, that 
she had been so fetee and well received by everybody, 
had the utmost difficulty in tearing herself away. 

It has been hard work to dine and soiree all the 
people that had a right to expect it during Mr. Can- 
ning's sejour. It has been at the rate of eighteen to 
twenty-five people almost every day. I had a large 
assembly on Friday last, with about one hundred bulls, 
a small soiree yesterday, entirely French, with the 
exception of Cowpers, Hardys, and Lord Ashley. I 
introduced him to the elegantes, who think him superbe, 
magnifique, and he is much pleased. ' Dear delicious 
women,' especially Madame de Dalberg and Madame 
Sobenska. Madame du Cayla was here with all the 
Crown jewels on. Her daughter Madame de Craon, 
whose child, four months old, sucks a goat because, 
' Valentine ne pouvait se resoudre k le c^der a d'autre 
rivale qu'une chevre.' Eumford and Bourke en negliges. 
Madame de Chatenay, a very agreeable woman. Ma- 
dame Appony, a dear, comfortable, suffering angel, for 
she does suffer when she has the toothache and when the 
French people do not love her. Madame de Courbonne 
and her daughter. Lady Gower's adorers. You see us 
in the yellow drawing-room. The conservatory, a demi- 



398 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

jour, no carpet yet, but all the plants within, oranges 
bending over the divans, is Mr. Canning's delight, and 
his walk with alternate Ministers and Dips. To-morrow 
Monsieur and Madame de YiUele ends the whole. God 
bless you. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1826. 

We are not annoyed at what you have done, my 
dearest G., but I must endeavour as strictly as possible 
to set Mr. Abercromby's mind right upon one point, 
which I think you must have forgot or you would have 
done it. Far from the conversation that took place 
on Gore's appointment being the beginning of any un- 
pleasant state of things between Ealph and ourselves, 
the impatience he displayed upon it appeared to be a 
key to the change we had for a long time lamented in 
him, and it was not his opening his mind to Granville 
upon his wishes, but the doing it with a want of temper 
and respect, that was observed by Granville and felt 
by me. I wish this to be understood, because it is a 
peculiar and beautiful part of Granville's character 
never to be influenced by irritation, and as a proof of 
this, when I, who boast no such equanimity, said, ' I 
regret all this, because it must make a change in your 
opinion of him which Mr. Canning will ask you for,' 
he answered, ' None in the least. Abercromby's conduct 
in the Chancellerie and his manner of doing business are 
just what they always were. My grievances with regard 
to him are aU personal, and therefore cannot do him any 
prejudice in the question of promotion.' What I felt 
upon this distinction is not to be described, or perhaps 
to be justified, having seen Granville treat him with 
more kindness and feel for him more regard than he 
scarcely ever did for any person out of his own family. 

It is an ungracious task to detail petty pflfences. I 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 399 

will therefore only say generally tliat for months 
past Abercromby's manner to us both has been cold, 
ungracious, and reserved. He has absented himself 
almost entirely from my evening society, the only mark 
of personal attention which in my genre de vie an attache 
can give me. Granville has in two instances expressed 
a wish to him as to his conduct to which he has paid 
no attention. He is completely changed as to all 
appearance of attachment and zeal in what regards us, 
so that we have often said, Can this be the man who 
was so devoted to us ? 

My only solution of the problem is this. Aber- 
cromby's wish to rise in his profession gets the better 
of every other feehng. He is restless, susceptible under 
the delay. It makes him act unbecomingly, and at the 
least mark of this being felt by those he lives with, 
throws him back into the natural reserve of his character, 
and shuts up every good feeling I believe him all the 
time to possess, under an appearance of distant and 
gloomy indifference. 

To all this I think there is no remedy. I am con- 
vinced he never will be happy till he is promoted, and 
that he will be so there is every reasonable prospect, 
if he betrays no impatience or bitterness when any 
grievance upon the subject appears to him to justify it. 

I loved him almost as a son, which perhaps makes 
me unreasonable. I now esteem him highly in many 
ways, and always shall feel the deepest interest in his 
welfare, but the disappointment with regard to him has 
been unbounded. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1826. 

My dearest, — I have only one moment. I must 
tell you that Granville has had a conversation with A. 
He has been amiable, and has been perfectly attentive 



400 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1826 

and apparently penitent since. Mr. Canning has been 
very kind to him. 

We parted with the Cannings with great regret 
Nothing- can have been more amiable and kind than 
they have been. I have already told you of his unique 
reception here. 

We had a pleasant little repast yesterday. Lord 
Ashley and Mr. Denison, who are behaving beautifully 
and go out every morning to sit with foreigners of dis- 
tinction. 

Everybody compliments me about Hart^ and his 
doings. God bless you, dearest. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : December 19, 1826. 

Mr. Canning's speech,^ stronger in the newspaper 
than in his mouth, has made a prodigious uproar here. 
Pray do not repeat one word I say. Methinks it is all 
the better to take a high tone and alarm and awe them, 
but that one or two sentences were imprudent. I am 
convinced, however, that no mischief is done by it 
beyond irritating them violently joowr le moment; but I 
felt nervous at walking last night into an assembly of 
all the most furious. However, they were gracious and 
civil to us, and a country may do what it pleases if its 
ambassador has des violons chez lui. Ultras and factious 
all come and foot it vis-a-vis to each other with la meil- 
leure grdce du monde. I dance next Friday and have 
no qualms. I am uncertain how many I shall have. 
Almost all the French demoiselles are not allowed to 
dance so near Christmas Day, but all the young married 
women do, an odd nuance. Amongst the latter, the 

' The Duke had gone to Moscow as special Ambassador for the coro- 
nation of Nicholas. 

^ The speech in which he said, ' I called the New World into existence 
to redress the balance of the old.' 



1826 TO LADY CARLISLE 401 

Duchesse de Dalberg and Madame d'Oudenarde told 
me last night they meant to profit amazingly by 
the absence of the unmarried, and Lord Aboyne ^ is 
indefatigable. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : December 22, 1826. 

There has been an immense sensation made by Mr. 
Canning's speech. It is now all explained, pretty 
generally understood, and Damas made a manly, 
judicious, friendly, and pacific speech in the Chambre. 
The fury of the Faubourg St. Germain is all turned 
against him. They say he is a, faux fr ere. 

' Afterwards Lord Huntly. He danced with Marie Antoinette, and 
was still dancing at the London balls in the early years of the present 
reign. 



VOL. L D D 



402 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 



1827 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris ; January 6, 1827. 

My dearest Sis, — We have this moment heard of the 
death of the Duke of York. I felt a great regard and 
liking for him when I saw him every day at breakfast 
at the Pavilion, and more so now when everybody 
agrees in the perfection of his conduct in the last trial 
of all. All the accounts received of his illness and the 
admirable patience and consideration for those about 
him add to the pity I feel for General Upton, C. Greville, 
and others of his friends, to whom his loss must be 
quite irreparable. 

We shaU now have a week or ten days of perfect 
rest a,nd quiet, as we do not mean to go out any more 
till after the funeral, and then I hope black gloves will 
be ;ain excuse for balls, etc. 

I have been twice at the Duchesse de Berri's this 
•week, at a concert and a children's ball, where Gran- 
■ville and Preddy were the happiest of the happy. 
They are going to-night to draw King and Queen at 
Mrs. Oadogan's. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : January 8, 1827. 

Beloved sister, — The poor Duke's death brings me 
great reprieves. I have been already saved from 
Pozzo's great drum, a concert at the Palais Eoyal, ditto 
at the Ministre de la Maison du Eoi, a party at Mme. de 



1827 TO LADY CAELISLE 403 

Noailles', a concert and drum to-morrow, a great official 
dinner ! ! ! on Monday. And all this is saved out of one 
horrid epoch here, the Carnaval, which ends the 28 th 
of February. 

We have not been told the length of the mourning, 
but as we are to put our household into mourning, it can- 
not be short, and whilst it continues dancing is out of 
the question, and when it is over Xent will be begun. 

I might have had a ball the Mi-Car erne, and had 
indeed promised it to Susy, but that little lynx, the 
Duchesse de Eaguse, has engaged Mons. Baudouin, 
and prepared all her matters, so 1 must put off all my 
projects of gaiety for this year. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : January 12, 1827. 

Dearest of sisters, — I have been so long at home 
that I hope it will give me courage to begin the tour- 
hillon again. Sunday I begin with a little soiree at Mrs. 
Standish's, and for the next week I shall not have one 
single evening without three things at least to go to. 
Till the 28th of February there will be no relache. I 
begin my Fridays again on the 1st. Three assemblies, 
"and then, if the mourning permits, a ball on the 23rd 
and des soirees dansantes till the Mi-Careme, at the last 
of which darling Susy is to prance about. If the 
mourning lasts three months, I shall not be able to 
dance this year. 

Our plans are all en Vair. I hope they will alight in 
Grosvenor Place, but I sometimes tremble when I see 
Granville up to his neck in despatches and business. 

I send some gossip for Hart, as I believe he knows 
all the parties. Jules de I'Aigle is desperately in love 
with Mme. Vatry, and so they say is le Prince de 
Talleyrand. She is a pretty precieuse, wife of an agent 
de change. 



404 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

Henri de I'Aigle is more in love than ever with 
Mme. Alfred and proposes twice a week. They say 
that, as she encourages him with all the pleasure that 
such an adorer gives to ladies of thirty-six, it is la 
crainte du ridicule alone that makes her refuse him 
twice a week. En attendant, there is a caricature of her 
as the colonne in the Place Vendome, les quatre aigles a 
ses pieds. 

There is a new hero just turned up. A Monsieur de 
Colbert, twenty- three. * II est bien de figure, chante 
comme un rossignol ; il vient de tuer son homme dans 
un duel, mais il s'est conduit comme un ange ; on le dit 
amoureux de moi on de ma scEur. Je crois que c'est 
Ida.' This was Mathilde de Finguerlin's account of him 
to Miss Hardy. Mrs. Strickland is Ida, helle et belle. 
They are Mr. Standish's sisters. 

Mons. Mole is desperate for Mme. Sobenska, which 
kills Mme. de Marmier, who is gone to ses terres to 
join her married daughter, Mme. de Fitzjames. Her 
only consolation is that le jeune Fitzjames, youngest 
brother to her son-in-law, has fallen desperately in love 
with her. He is about nineteen, she near fifty. We 
think it touchant, and her tres intiressante. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : January 1827. 

Dearest G., — I am just returned from a little round 
of visits, and a fine frosty day allowed me to pay them 
with impunity. 

I go out in the morning, but do not dine or stir out 
in the evening, and this piece taken out of the Carnaval 
is a reprieve and a delight not to be expressed. 

I am delighted with your letter and George's verses. 
I should like so much to read them to Mrs. Canning, 
but wait your leave. I had also a letter from Agar, 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 405 

with delightful accounts of Georgiana. How you do 
people the nation ? 

Numbers of people are shut up with colds, sore 
throats, etc. 

Mme. de Maille has an erysipele, Mr. Standish an 
influenza, dear Juste an enrouement, the pretty Mme. 
Sobenska a fever, which has confined her and Mons. 
Mole to her room for nearly two months. Mme. de 
Montjoie and Mme. de St. Aulaire both very ill. 

The 21st is the anniversary of Louis XVI.'s death, 
therefore I shall not go out again till the 22nd, and then 
no small comfort to go about in a black gown and have 
none of the bore of toilette. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : Januai;y 23, 1837. 

Dearest of sisters, — I can understand your dreading 
a long journey at this time of the year. We Parisians 
cannot imagine such a thing. We have a little snow 
here and the weather less cold in consequence, and I 
have begun to go out again. 

Politics are so interesting just now that they rouse 
even me. The brutal attack made upon Talleyrand 
has excited an enormous sensation. He is. better and 
has been, some say magnanimous, others cowardly, in 
not wishing to prosecute Maubreuil.'^ 

They say that the French are furious against 
England, but all I know is that they are just as civil to 
us as ever individually, and yesterday at Court Madame 
shook hands with me for the first time, and they were 
all as good-humoured as possible. 

' An adventurer, who had aeoused Talleyrand of offering him in 
1814 enormous bribes to assassinate Napoleon, and for this and other 
offences was several times imprisoned. To caU attention to what he 
considered his grievances he attacked Talleyrand in the church of 
St. Stephen and knocked him down. For this he was prosecuted by 
the Government and again imprisoned. 



406 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

Granville and Freddy are very popular. They 
soutiennent les hals, and are reckoned very pleasant 
young men. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris: 1827. 

:„. Dearest, — I am glad I have done Silence good. I 

\ i ' [think if her friends would be stout and leave off toady- 
ing her, and above all say to her the quarter of what 
they think of her, she might be a very decent old 
woman. 

How happy you must be at Chatsworth ! Thank 
dearest Hart for his letter, his kindness, and then tell 
him I begin to be afraid he will never come to the 
garret again. 

Give my love to dear Mrs. Lamb. How snug she 
would be in the garret, and how she would enjoy 
herself ! 

There is the devil to pay here about the Apponys 
having been desired by their Government to refuse the 
Marshals their titles. The irritation is such that they 
say amongst all the military men there is a cry for war 
against Austria. 

Soult and Oudinot, Due de Eeggio and Due de 
Dalmatie, have sent back their invitations, and many 
both ultra and liberals, fifty peers and all that belong 
to the army, have agreed that they will not go to the 
house. 

I think it is an enfantillage, a hetise, on the part 
of the Austrian Government, and most natural of the 
Marshals and their wives not to go to Appony's. The 
Duchesse de Massa, for example, as Madame Eegnier ; 
but it is odious of the French to visit it upon the 
Apponys, who have nothing to do with it, being obliged 
to follow Metternich's instructions. Monsieur Mol^ 
and many of the best sort agree with me entirely. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 407 

I do not know how much it annoys them. The 
Due de Eeggio was with the utmost difficulty prevented 
fighting Appony. The papers are all full of it. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : 1827. 

Dearest sister, — I have been for the last week en- 
tirely occupied with Mme. Appony and her difficulties 
and annoyances. The French, with the exception of the 
Ministers, who were ordered to go, and about seven 
peers, and a dozen very stout friends, staid away en 
masse from her ball. Fortunately for her, she is ac- 
quainted with almost as many English as I am, and she 
has acquaintances here of all nations, so that her ball 
was crowded, which was the essential, and she told me 
she thought it the gayest and pleasantest she had had. It 
is now a strange position for her. The people having 
declined to go to her house, she will not go to theirs. 

I am quite delighted to think that I am a comfort 
to her. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris: 1827. 

Dearest sister, — I think you will be glad to hear 
that my ball is over, that it was much admired, and 
that I am alive after the fatigue of receiving from nine 
and going to bed at six. Granville did likewise, but, 
as everybody seemed pleased, it was a reward for the 
exertion. 

To-night at seven I take my girls to a ball at the 
Palais Eoyal. Granville and Freddy are both confined 
to the house with bad colds, which is a drawback to 
the immense pleasure of taking Suky and Dody, in 
pink tulle gowns, fastened with one bunch of pink 
roses on one side of the flounce. I will sketch them 
by the next courier, dancing very prettily. Susy in 
perfect health and her very best looks, dressed a la 



408 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

Cleopdtre, wliich embellishes her to an incredible 
degree. This is pleasure and tells, even tired to death 
as I am. 

To Lady Cauuslu- 

Dover : May 21, 1827. 

We have had a delicious day for our journey, my 
own dearest sister. The country looking beautiful and 
smelling as sweet as Chiswick all the way. 

We dined at Sittingbourne, have been drinking tea 
here, and just going to bed, as we are to get up at half- 
past five to-morrow. 

Give my love to my dearest brother. Tell him that 
I am sorry to say it, but London with all its perfections 
is hot and heavy, and one feels at about the fifth mile- 
stone, whatever may be the spirits, that one's health 
improves, 

Dearest, dear sister, I have been so happy with you, 
that it is hard work to reconcile myself to a fresh 
separation. Good-night. God bless you. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

May 25, 1827. 

I feel, my very dearest sister, as if I had been absent 
from you more than half a year, I have done and felt 
so much in the last week. I found Susy ^ more adorable 
than ever and Georgy improved in health, look, and 
manner, and both of them so delightful, so pleasant, so 
affectionate and attaching, that to leave them yesterday 
was to both Granville and myself a pang not to be de- 
scribed. I shall take the boys with me there on Satur- 
day week, and stay with them, in the most delicious, 
enjoyable, elastic, renovating place I ever was in, for 
a week or ten days, but I shall have left Granville, and 
that will be worse than all, and back I shall come with 

' At Dieppe. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 409 

the liope of another little expedition there with him 
before the summer is over. My two darling little boys 
are delighted to have me, an old playfellow being better 
1-han none, and we have been gardening for the last 
two hours. In the middle of all this come recollections 
and regrets, an intense wish for Hart and you, both 
alive to my enjoyable existence here and more than 
doubhng it, and a longing for my girls, almost fancying 
I see them at every turn. 

And yet, dearest G., to whom I talk, it is my 
greatest comfort, and in a light-headed way there is 
much more of melancholy than bitterness in me to-day. 
It is not anxiety and careworn look and gnawing at 
my heart. I only lament over the absent, and cry a 
little and sigh a great deal. I am delighted to see 
Granville here again. It is his element. I like to go 
this evening with him, when the fatigues of his courier 
day are done, to the Academie, to hear ' Moise ' with a 
new act by Eossini. 

Tell me all the political news you can. Granville 
has just given me the debate of Monday to read. I am 
glad Lord Harrowby spoke well in the House of Lords. 
Poor Lord Londonderry has enough of the pension 
story. I am glad to see the Infanta is recovering. It 
is a great perplexity out of the way, and that Prince 
Borghese has been 'conveyed from the fiery packet 
to the beach,' une grande difficulU vaincue. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

May 28, 1827. 

Your letter, my own dearest G., arrived here from 
Dieppe this morning. I had a sad fear of the Chiswick 
to-day, for nothing could be more universal-looking 
than the horrid weather we had on Tuesday ; but Chis- 
wick in the rain is prettier than most places in the 
shine, and food and music pass through the dampest day. 



410 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

On Friday evening Granville, Mrs. Hamilton, and I 
went to see ' Moise.' It is very fine, and the French are 
beginning to sing in a rational manner. They have left 
off screaming, and with the help of Cinti the ensemble 
is very good. 

On Saturday I took Mme. Appony, the Johnstons, 
and Miss Vernon^ to the Italiens, and there we had 
Pisaroni, magnificent, wonderful, entrainante, electri- 
fying Pisaroni. Hideous, distorted, deformed, dwarfish 
Pisaroni. She has an immense head, a remarkably 
ugly face. When she smiles or sings her mouth is 
drawn up to her ear, with a look of a person con- 
vulsed with pain. She has two legs that stand out 
like sugar-tongs, one shorter than the other. Her 
stomach sticks out on one side of her body, and she 
has a hump on the other, not where stomachs or humps 
usually are, but sideways, like paniers. 

With all this, she had not sung ten minutes before 
a Paris audience was in ecstasies, forgot all its notions 
of tournure and grdce, and applauded beyond all hope. 
I cannot describe her singing, her recitation. Every 
word is felt, every sound is an expression. Zuchelli's 
singing with her and after her made one feel, ' What 
is he at ? what is he mumbling ? why don't he sing ? 
why don't he feel ? ' I came home quite enchanted. 
Mme. Appony never can sleep after she has heard her. 
This is perfectly conceivable, though I had a vulgar 
comfortable night's rest after it. 

People talk of nothing but English politics and 
Pisaroni. Lord Lansdowne is a great favourite on the 
Continent. 

It is delicious to talk to Mole. He knows every- 
thing, understands everything, talks it all over as if he 
had been there. 

' Lady Johnston and Miss Vernon were daughters of the Archbishop 
of York. 



1827 TO LADY CAELISLE 411 

I must say I feel excessively pleased at my reception 
here. There is the warmest and most natural accueil 
to us from all we hke the best, and they do seem to 
find themselves again in my salon with real pleasure. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : June 1, 1827. 

My dearest sister, — The 'Etoile ' gave us the numbers 
of the division ^ in the House of Lords. You may judge 
how much we are annoyed at the defeat. This morning 
I received Agar's letter and book. Pray thank him. I 
wUl send his packet in the course of the day. All are 
here but Mme. de Montjoie, who is gone into Auvergne 
with Mademoiselle. 

I long to hear your account of the cottage,^ to which 
Agar teUs me you were all going on Thursday. 

The Delmars dined here. She looks very handsome 
and excessively happy. He is an honest, ugly man, 
very sickly and occupied about his health, and goes 
home to bed at nine o'clock to prove that he is not 
jealous, what though he left Madame la Baronne here till 
eleven, and conversing with the Major. I think him quite 
right in his confidence, for I believe her, to be as good 
a soul as ever lived. Pozzo came in the evening and 
was amusing, a good many French, and pretty little 
Mme. Sobenska. 

The weather is heavenly now, not too hot, but 
enough to admit of walking in the garden and sitting 
in the conservatory after dinner, and dining with open 
windows, to the joy of aU but poor Baron Delmar, who 
looked as if he could have murdered me for it. 

There is a piece of news that makes a great sensa- 
tion here. Mile. Lafitte, the banker's daughter, pretty, 
and of boundless riches, is going to marry the son of 

1 Amendment of the Diike of Wellington on the Corn Bill, carried 
against the Ministry by a majority of four. 
^ At Virginia Water. 



412 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

Mare.clial Ney, Charles de Mornay and half the young 
Frenchmen going having proposed to her in vain. 
God bless you once more, dearest of sisters. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : June 1827. 

Your long and amusing letter delighted me, but 
your account of your eye annoyed me, though both 
Hart and you give me good tidings of it. Hold up, 
dearest Sis, as they say to the horses. 

I am much pleased with Mr. Huskisson's speech. 
The expose fortunately necessary, was necessarily for- 
tunate. I read Morpeth's speech with enthusiasm, 
and heard myself say aloud, ' Dear darling little boy.' 
Beg him to forgive the burst from an dieule. Mr. 
Canning in his letter to Granville says, ' Morpeth spoke 
in a way that added to his former credit.' 

My brother tells me of his ball and his steam hoy 
projects. I give him up to sea air with less of a pang, 
for I am used to that genre of sacrifice. 

I rejoice to hear that Parliament is likely to be 
prorogued on the 30th, as I hope it will bring Lord 
Seaford to Dieppe, and Granville if possible to join him 
there. At all events, I hope to go there for a week or ten 
days at that time. I also think it may bring us some 
friends from England, though, alas ! not the dearest. 

Mme. Appony gave us a very agreeable dinner on 
Tuesday, and I was glad to find John Grefuhle and 
Mons. Mole there, as a pleasant Frenchman is rare, 
and valuable to her. On Monday evening we went to 
Mme. du Cayla. Pisaroni is less admirable in a room, 
and a small room, which you may remember. It 
brings one too near to her powerful voice and still more 
powerful ugliness. Her face is distortion, and seeing 
her for the first time with a gown on and a coiffure of 
double daisies, revealed her person in a blaze of de- 
formity. Yet her talent is sublime. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 41 S 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : June 1827. 

Does it ever happen to you, dearest sister, to begin 
the day with the despairing conviction that it will be 
impossible to do one half of what you must do? I 
began this morning so, at half-past seven. First I 
wrote a very long letter to my adorable Susan, who 
lives upon the pleasure a long detailed and daily ac- 
count of all we do gives her. Then I had more than 
an hour's work sending out cards and invitations for 
three dinners this week. I then wrote a long letter to 
Verity, a shabby little scrap to my brother, and here I 
am at three o'clock with nothing but a visit from Mme. 
Appony and my letter to you to occupy me till dinner- 
time. Some time must be given to my garden. You 
do not know how enjoyable it is at this moment. It is 
perfect retirement, and as fresh and as fragrant as if it 
was fifty miles from a town. Eoses and orange-trees 
are all in bloom, and the grass, having had no heat 
great enough to blight its new-born greenness, is to 
French eyes what Herbault's caps are to English 
ones. 

Hart will tell you of my gaieties. They are all now 
in a quiet way, very unlike yours, my dearest. 

I have been interrupted by a very long visit from 
Mme. Appony. She is in better spirits, and enjoys, as 
I do, the tranquil life and out-of-doors amusements and 
freedom from a town mouse life which we now enjoy. 
I am very glad to see that I am a resource and an 
enlivenment to her, and she is to me never de trop and 
always pleasing. Many jokes and sayings are the joy 
of our lives. 

I shall like to hear of Windsor and any doings at 
Devonshire House. 

I do not feel happy about Lady Ebrington. 



414 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 
To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris: 1827. 

Having written to Lady Wharncliffe, Georgiana 
Wortley, and to Dieppe, I now, my beloved sister, write 
to tell you all I suffer. I must make you unhappy by 
telling you that I am so. I am miserable about Lady 
Harrowby. I look around in vain for consolation for 
her. Lady Ebrington is her idol and had deadened 
every other feeling in her. This blow comes upon her, 
when the world has lost all attraction, her life all 
interest. She is fond of Georgiana, but sees her en- 
grossed. Her sister has ceased to be a tie ; she is 
bereaved and desolate, more than anyone but myself 
knows, and she wiU. bear up and be calm, but it will 
be despair. My only hope is in Lord E. and the 
children. 

I have to-day heard from Dieppe that Freddy has 
had a very bad fall. He vomited in the night and had 
excruciating pain in his head — twelve leeches and a 
blister removed it. MUe. Eward writes : ' Freddy est 
mieux. Doctor Scott m' assure que tout danger est passe.' 
Yet, my dearest sister, you may judge with what anxiety 
I wait for to-morrow's post. 

Now I feel much calmer, and do not think me 
unmindful of my thousand blessings. Among them 
you, my own best, kindest, dearest sister, to whom I can 
relieve in unburthening my heart. Our affection and 
entire sympathy through all the trials of life is indeed a 
blessing. 

Give my love to adorable little Mary. Tell her that 
her nice little letter surprised and made me very glad. 

Lady Bath dines here to-day. Granville wished 
not to put her off, and I had rather see her than 
anybody to-day, as she is kind and attached to Lady 
Harrowby, and will talk upon the only subject I can. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 415 

My nervous fears for my little Freddy are only for you, 
and perhaps it is better for me to be forced to exert 
myself. 

I should like much to go to Dieppe now, but I 
cannot leave Granville, or else Hart would have pre- 
ferred it. Yet I would be unhappy away from dearest 
Granville, leaving him alone, without the resources of 
society. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : Jialy 22, 1827. 

Sunday. — I was in bed when dearest Hart arrived, 
and received him a la franqaise. I am sorry to tell 
you that the last day at Windsor, the rapid journey, a 
hot walk and unwholesome dinner at Dieppe, have 
made him feel very poorly. It is chiefly nervous, and 
when he talks and gets eager, he forgets it and looks 
quite well. We have been for the last two hours sitting 
in the shade in the garden. Politics, gossip, everything, 
you and dearest Mary, Kings, Ministers. There is no 
end of talking, and he is the most wonderful person 
for keeping up our spirits. 

Dearest sister, many, many thanks for your letter 
and most interesting accounts of poor Lady Ebrington. 
Yet, why do I say poor ? I cannot say what I think of 
such a death. 

Dearest Lady Harrowby will find more solace in 
being with Lord Ebrington from the feeling and devotion 
he has shown. 

I have had most excellent accounts from Dieppe. 
Freddy is recovering entirely from the effects of his 
fall. God bless you. I have some painful letters to 
write. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : July 1827. 

My dearest G.,— My brother sets out to-morrow 



416 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

evening. He is not quite so well, and is worried by a 
nervous cough, and would go broiling after the giraffe 
yesterday in the heat of the day. No asthma, however, 
or anything more unpleasant than malaise, as you may 
judge when I tell you that he is going to see Mile. Marie 
Taglioni, the new dancer, to-night. 

I am delighted to hear your good account of dearest 
little Guinea. II est tres repandu. I hear of him from 
Lady Wharncliffe also. How happy he must have been 
to get his nose into the Haymarket ! 

The accounts of Mr. Canning's health make me 
anxious. I hope Chiswick will be of use to him. 

I feel there is no hope of Lady Ebrington, yet it 
must be difficult for her poor, always sanguine mother, 
not to conceive a degree from the continuance of the 
same state, and then how much more terrible will be 
what I am convinced is inevitable ! 

The revival of London must be terrible. Is Lady 
Jersey endurable ? We are puzzled about Lord Clan- 
william, not his matrimony but his diplomacy. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August 10, 1827. 

I shall say nothing of what I feel, beloved sister. 
I received Granville's letter on Tuesday evening at 
Dieppe. Lord Seaford had left Paris, and I arrived 
here on Wednesday evening. I found GranviUe in 
deep sorrow, but still sanguine, still hoping, because not 
to hope was despair. Indeed, I only wonder for a long 
time past that we none of us had so little fear of its 
coming to this. Yesterday morning Villele sent the 
fatal_ intelligence. It is a calamity of so fearful a 
nature, the loss is so irreparable to his friends, to the 
world, it is impossible to look at its consequences or 
to define the change it may bring, the happiness it 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 417 

destroys, the miseries it may entail, that one feels be- 
wildered as well as grieved. In sorrow and suspense I 
look forward. I feel most anxious to hear of you all 
My brother and Lord Carlisle will have felt this blow, 
with all its private bitterness and anxious and perplexed 
agitation. I think the situation of the King is one of 
unparalleled difficulty. I feel confidence in the charac- 
ters of those who will be called upon to decide and 
act, and his loss has so deprived the political existence 
of his friends of its spirit and its charm, that to do 
right seems to me the only stimulus and object left. I 
cannot conceive any one who loved such a rnan and 
followed such a mind having any courage to make 
any effort but what duty absolutely commands. It is 
such a lesson to the worldly, such a warning to the 
ambitious, so crushing to the hopes and embittering 
to the feelings of all who lament his loss, that the 
weakness of human nature and all selfish considera- 
tions must, it seems to me, be subdued. No motive 
but to honour his memory and promote his views can 
rouse anyone to exertion. 

Write to me, my very dearest sister. We are most 
anxious to hear every detail of his last days. I fear 
the suffering was great and the trial to his family 
heartrending. I hope, yet scarcely, that party spirit 
will not exasperate minds that should be calm. 

I can write on no other subject, yet I have the 
comfort of leaving my children well and happy. Little 
Granville is a comfort to his papa. He is all that is 
exhilarating and buoyant in a child, with consideration 
and tact that makes him at such a moment a real 
blessing. I hope you are well, my dearest sister. Iri 
a world like this and with such reverses, - what un- 
speakable happiness it is to be spared some greateii 
trials ! 

VOL. I. E E 



418 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 
To THE Duke of Devonshire and Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August 12, 1827. 

I received your two last letters, my dearest brother 
and sister. I do not know any comfort like hearing 
from you both. We shall be anxious to learn what is 
decided upon. 

Last night, after little Granville, who is an un- 
speakable comfort, went to bed, we read over some of 
Mr. Canning's letters. We scarcely talk on any other 
subject, and when not so occupied I think dearest 
Granville's depression is greater. When the couriers 
return or go, there must be for a long time such a 
renewed feeling of the total change, and to-day, when 
he has no business to occupy him, nothing to force 
him to exertion, he is almost more low than I have yet 
seen him. It will be better when he is again obliged 
to occupy himself with political business or that the 
change in everything is complete. 

I hear from Lord Clanricarde that nothing roused 
Mrs. Canning but the thought of Carlo.^ I like to 
think that he will become a great object to her and all 
Mr. C.'s friends. 

As far as we can judge, the greatest sensation has 
been made here, and to us the greatest sympathy and 
kindness shewn. The only person I have seen since 
my return has been Lady Bath after church yesterday. 

To the Duke of Devonshire and Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August 20, 1827. 

This letter is to both of you, my dearest, kindest 
brother and sister. Before I answer your letters, I 
must tell you the little news I have. Granville had a 
letter from Mr. Huskisson to-day, dated Basle, much 

' Succeeded his mother as Viscount Canning in 1837. Was appointed 
Governor-General of India in 1855. Created Earl Canning in 1859. 



1827 TO DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE AND LADY CARLISLE 419 

fatigued by his journey. He says if the badness of the 
roads permits they will be here to-day and remain with 
us two days to recruit his strength. 

I am interrupted by their arrival. His deep manly 
grief is most affecting to see. He is quite exhausted 
with a rapid journey in the hope of being able to attend 
the funeral. Now that this is impossible, he will remain 
here till he receives the letters he has crossed on the 
road, and those he will receive from England. Eepose 
and quiet are absolutely necessary to him. He says if 
he had hurried on for the melancholy object he would 
have been half killed by it. I think him, however, so 
much stronger a man than he was, that my hope of his 
being able to meet what is required of him is much 
greater than it was before I had seen him. 

Dearest brother and sister, I hope your more im- 
mediate friends will feel that little drawbacks must be 
overlooked. The Whigs will either from some dis- 
appointed hopes throw everything into the hands of 
the Ultras, or they will, by going on now as things are 
arranged, secure hereafter a preponderance that must 
naturally, if not stipulated for now, be eventually theirs. 
It is not as it was. I cannot comprehend their policy 
not being now to gain all the strength they can to 
the Government, without weighing much the balance 
between the respective forces. There is no one, alas ! 
to alarm them now. If the Government stands, the 
Whigs must rise. K weakened by dissensions and petty 
grievances, all sink together. 

The Huskissons are gone to their rooms ; they dine 
alone and go to bed early. We have the greatest hope 
that quiet may bring him again to what he was at 
Innspruck, the day before the only letter he has re- 
ceived reached him, one from Granville telling him of 
the danger. He says he never felt anything like what 
he did when he came in sight of Paris. This followed 

E E 2 



420 LETTERS OF HAERIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

eight days' long journeys, shaken to pieces by the bad- 
ness of the roads and in suspense and sorrow. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : August 1827. 

My dearest brother,^! shall write more fully to- 
morrow ; only one line now by an extra messenger, I 
devoured your letter. There is every comfort in your 
all thinking together and your honne intelligence. 
There are obstacles without end, the King the principal 
one. When Mr. Huskisson is with you, all must be 
■decided. He arrived so grieved, so exhausted that he 
could think and speak of nothing but our loss. To-day 
he is himself again and much improved in health. He 
hopes to have Lord Goderich's courier, sent after hirri, 
some time ago, either to-day or to-morrow, but on 
Saturday he sets out and will be in London on Monday. 
You wiU be delighted with him. He will be of infinite 
use, if use is possible, which I begin to think it is not. 
At all events, his presence and advice will be invaluable. 
I never saw such simplicity, such total freedom from 
selfishness, such devotion as his to the memory of him 
we have lost. He wishes to express nothing till he is 
on the spot, and, except to you and the Carlisles, I 
would not even name him. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire and Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August 24, 1827. 

Dearest brother and sister, — \ have been writing all 
day, and therefore must only write a hue. Mr. Hus- 
kisson sets out to-morrow morning, and will be in 
London on Monday. He is after four days' rest, not- 
withstanding the depression of his spirits and the anxiety 
of the moment, so recovered in health, and is so strong 
in mind and so right in principle, that I have no doubt 
of his being able to do whatever ought to be done. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 421 

I am glad Capo d'Istria is coining here. I cannot 
help having hopes for Greece. Spain and Portugal are 
tremendous. 

Dearest of relations, one feels sick at heart some- 
times and a wish for retirement, but not in a cottage.* 
I think this new mischief comes from Sir W. Knighton. 
I am glad that Lord Goderich has behaved well, but his 
nerves were not made to be tried so high, and he is not 
good at a pinch. Do take care and have a coachman; 
in the gig. I think Mr. Grant would do best, though 
Mr. Huskisson likes and appreciates Lord Palmerston. 

I pity you all for the Windsor expedition. I can 
conceive nothing more disheartening. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August 1827. 

The post yesterday brought us all the pleasure that 
politically remains and the heartfelt delight of yours 
and my brother's kindness in giving us so much of your 
time and all your thoughts at a moment when we can 
only live on our accounts from England. His letter 
was more sanguine than yours, but I trust the inde- 
cision and dissatisfaction are over, and that no minor 
grievance, no secondary consideration will cloud the 
only hope for the world, the only consolation to Mr. 
Canning's friends. It is in this spirit that Lord Lans- 
downe has acted, and I cannot say enough of what I 
think of his pretentions waved, his self forgot for such 
an object as the saving of England from the calamity 
of such men as would have rejoiced and triumphed 
had he taken any other hne. I know I have no charity,^ 
but the last three months have given me such a strong 
feeling, personal as their hostihty, against the enemies 
of one whose memory is so mixed up with their mis- 

' The Koyal cottage,. 



422 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

conduct, that I cannot but add to my dread of measures 
my dislike of men. 

I regret many things, a paragraph in the ' Times,' 
a delay of a place, for I suppose it is only a delay, 
offered to Lord Holland, and the consequent want of 
cordiality that may exist in some quarters. But what 
are these to the object secured by the enlarged view 
taken by Lord Lansdowne? Did he act from policy 
alone I should think him wise, but I honour him as 
having better motives. 

I feel for my dearest brother, who has again been 
worried and perplexed, and as he says, ' without all 
that gave a charm and interest to what he was doing.' 
His letters written daily from Windsor, and as he alone 
writes, made us pass the day there with him. Gran- 
ville has no wish but to see Mr. Canning's memory 
honoured in the arrangements of the moment and his 
course pursued for the future. If Lord Dudley has 
nerve and energy enough to tread in his steps without 
the hand that first guided him in them, his abilities and 
his knowledge of what was wished and intended make 
him the fittest person for the arduous task. Mr. Hus- 
kisson, as leader of the House of Commons, leaves only 
the fearful consideration of whether his health will 
allow him to meet, or if it does to endure, aU that such 
a post will demand. Granville has had a most amiable 
letter from Lord Dudley, feeling, good sense, diffidence, 
firmness, but one cannot calculate upon what effect his 
trying situation may have on his mind. 

I am not surprised at Lord Harrowby giving up his 
office. He has long wished for it. I heard him say 
often how well he was when abroad and regret his 
inability to travel more. At his age he felt he had a 
right to consult both his health and enjoyment, and 
now that his strongest domestic tie is broken,^ I am 

' Alluding to Lady Ebrington's death 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 423 

convinced that he will live a great deal out of Eng- 
land. 

I hope all the young and promising men on our 
side will now come forward, and that we may see all 
that, hke your dearest George, were enthusiastically 
attached to Mr. Canning tending to fill up the void he 
has left. In so doing they may still work for his fame. 
I cannot at this moment see any other motive for 
ambition. For to attain to the height of all worldly 
greatness seems to me just now to be courting misery 
and death. Pray, dearest sister, show this letter to no 
one. I have thought aloud to you and am so hurried 
I hardly know what I say. It is not in human nature 
to separate oneself from all the littleness of worldly 
concerns. I feel to turn from them to higher aims and 
hopes is the only real happiness. Yet how miserably 
we cling and return to all that surrounds us here, feeling 
it nothingness, yet unable, almost unwilling, to burst 
the bonds ! When I think of Lady Ebrington, so pure, 
so holy, so resigned, so weaned from life, so fit to die, 
I can scarcely bear to look upon myself, seeing how 
little detached I am from all that she left without one 
pang. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : August 31, 1827. 

The letters of last night gave us a gleam of hope. 
The praise and approbation of Mr. Huskisson, the bit- 
terness against the Tories, D. at one ear, the Princesse at 
the other, with the kind-hearted Marchioness hatching 
you all under her jewelled wing seems to me the pour. 
The contre is in Lord Goderich incapable. Lord Lans- 
downe disgusted, Mr. Huskisson discouraged in the 
work of swallowing. 

Have you read Mr. Kennedy's speech in the Birming- 
ham paper ? It surprised as much as it deUghted us. 
I have faint hopes of things going on as they are, but 



424 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

I think the country will be with us to a degree I had 
not ventured to calculate upon, and be it in an English 
fog or under an Italian sun, this will be a consolation 
and a pleasure, perhaps not to have been bought by a 
prolonged struggle. Yet I do hope it will be made. 
The Whigs are tremendously fond of going out of town. 
The courier upon foreign business is just arrived. 
Mr. Huskisson not yet returned from Windsor the only 
domestic intelligence. Methinks all will do well. The 
King will be pleased with one who will in opinions and 
views remind him of Mr. Canning. Mr. Huskisson 
will suggest something that will allow him to come off 
gracefully on his knees. Mr. Huskisson goes, I know, 
with the strongest wish to succeed. He goes, I suppose, 
with as much latitude as the Whigs can consistently 
give him, with his conciliatory prudence, his unpre- 
tending sagacity, his easy small talk, and above all with 
a perfect knowledge of the ground he treads on, and a 
conviction that the King must be managed, and with 
the skill and ability to do it. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 3, 1827. 

I think it a melancholy consideration that a blunder 
on one hand and the eager grasp at obstacles and unreal 
shadows on the other should have precipitated matters 
to the state in which they now stand. Sturges Bourne ^ 
is beyond my patience. Do you hear ' the voice I 
cannot hear that says I must not stay ? ' That Mr. 
Herries, such as I believe him to be; should be the 
overturning principle is so vexatious that I cannot 
think of it. The evils that menace England are appal- 
ling, for I see them under Lord Eldon's wig and Lord 

' An active politician and a follower of Mr. Canning. He refused to 
be Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Mr. Herries was appointed, which 
nearly broke up the Government. 



1827 ♦TO LADY CARLISLE 425 

Bathurst's tail. The only stand Mr. Huskisson can or 
will make can but delay the more entire surrender of 
King and country into the hands of the Tories. What 
a fatal man the honest one has been to us ! I am told 
that nothing will induce him to remain with the Ultras, 
and I believe it, for of his integrity I am as certain as 
of his incapacity, and through aU his blunders and total 
mismanagement of men and measures I see nothing 
beyond that from which stronger nerves and a more 
commanding intellect might have saved us. You may 
imagine that Granville is annoyed. All that my brother 
crossed over in his letter had reached us the night 
before, and we felt pleased, sanguine, and looked forward 
to union, strength, and all that one little bilious, way- 
ward caprice of this least of men has crushed for ever. 
We have all laughed at hearing the fly boast of having 
brought the coach to the top of the hill. Who would 
have thought of having seen it actually overturn it at 
the summit ! 

I cannot in this realisation of all our fears turn one 
moment to selfish feelings, and more especially at a 
moment when any compensation I may find cannot be 
present to any one but myself. 

Granville has just been to Villele. From the 
' Courier ' of Saturday : ' Monsieur Herries est definitive- 
ment nomme Chancelier de I'Echiquier.' I just expect 
the ' Courier ' to-day with one spider's thread in my 
hand. Lord Lansdowne having obtained something. 
Mr. Denison writes to me, ' We stand upon a razor's 
edge.' There is no answer but that it is a sharp one. 
Heaven be praised, Mr. Huskisson is equally com- 
mitted vis-a-vis to the Ultras. If the King, continuing 
implacable to them, requires him to attempt so wild 
and hopeless an attempt as to steer alone, I shall 
feel for him a compassion and admiration due to the 
only motive that can induce him to undertake so 



426 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

terrible a task. It is impossible for anyone to look 
on at such a scene but with the feelings natural to 
those who stand on the shore to watch a drowning 
man. Nobody can fear, nobodj^ can envy him. Lord 
Goderich ! Lord Dudley ! Let me talk on, dearest 
relations. I think it is such a duty on the part of Mr. 
Canning's friends to stand by the King as long as he 
stands against the Ultras. I had not quite given up the 
hope of Lord Lansdowne till these last two papers. If by 
any miracle he remains,^ I shall dance a gavotte upon a 
pin's head. 

I now foresee the winter here and the Ultras in in 
March, nothing gained, nothing avoided. Here self 
comes poking in. Dearest brother and sister, I put 
down my thinks just as they spring. You must forgive 
whatever you find in them. 

I have no more to add. The expected courier is 
not arrived, but since I wrote, the impossibility of the 
present Government making any attempt, if the Whigs 
resign, appears to me much greater. Mr. Canning's 
friends, separated from the two great political parties, 
not only want strength but men to fiU up the vacant 
places. Good-night. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 6, 1827. 

There is no end to the couriers or to my scribbling. 
The calm after the storm has something of deadness in 
it, till letters from you aU bring us your details and 
opinions. But I have not been idle. I have con- 
verted Lady Keith and brought her to sympathise 
and rejoice with us, and only to wait anxiously 
with us to hear that the main body of the Whigs do 
likewise. I found her a Whig specimen ; I left her in 
admiration of Lord Lansdowne, and convinced that he 

' He did remain. 



TO LADY CARLISLE 427 

had not an inch of ground to stand out upon, thinking 
England saved, and allowing that Mr. Huskisson could 
not, even had it been possible or politic, have deserted the 
King, whilst his language and actions all turned upon 
the abiding by Mr. Canning's friends and principles. I 
made her look forward to all the objects gained, that 
would have been for ever lost by stickling prematurely 
for their accomplishment. We agreed that the only 
anxiety now was to know how far Lord Lansdowne will 
be supported by his friends ; the only fear, a rally round 
Lord Grey. 

The Whigs have now for the first time in their lives 
the game in their hands. WiU they play it ? If so, it 
is a glorious prospect. The four men entirely governed 
by the two, the Catholic question carried, all Mr. Can- 
ning's measures and hopes accomplished, the Ultras 
as if they were not. 

Flahault came to me in the evening emerveille at my 
work. 

We are going this evening to see the ' Eivals ' and 
'Fortune's Frolic' at the Odeon. Pozzo, Madame de 
Girardin and many others have taken boxes, and it 
makes a great sensation. 

I think of going with little Granville to Dieppe on 
Tuesday. I shall return to Granville as soon as possible. 
I hope Lord Seaford will be here before I set out. 

Mr. Jones is going with the courier sent to-night, 
and returns with Mrs. Jones, a young lady of fortune, 
who marries him in spite of her papa, with ten thousand 
pounds of her own. She is the only child of a rich 
man, who, if he relent, will leave her four or five thou- 
sand a year. So much for inefiable tenderness and 
general utility. 

Is it true that the Ultras are extremely angry with 
and have irritated the Duke of WeUington, all but the 
Beauforts, who are of course delighted, as Lord FitzEoy 



428 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

Somerset is every thing to the Duke ? Is it true that 
Lady Jersey says that nothing can save England but a 
Cabinet headed by the Duke of Wellington and her 
papa? 

Royalty is a study. I therefore repeat some gossip 
of Madame Eothschild, who came here last night just 
returned from Dieppe. The Duchesse de Berri ordered 
a vessel to be ready to take herself and suite and the 
Eothschilds upon a sailing expedition. The motive she 
confided to them. Eossini and Hertz were to be of 
the party, both immensely fat, both sick at sea, and it 
would be so droll to see the progress and denouement. 
A gale of wind came on, the captain told her he could 
not put out to sea. Madame, in a fury, stamped, raged,, 
said he would be punished. Le capitaine persisted,, 
could not risquer une vie si precieuse. She waited and 
the wind went down. The vessel sailed, the capitaine 
declaring he had his pistolet with him to shoot himself 
through the head at the crisis, for the weather still 
menaced. They ran ashore like Oliver. The captain, 
instead of suicide, accomplished with great risk getting' 
j ! off the sandbank. Madame tres grognon, because Eossini 
;n >lt-Tv_?and Hertz had been too much frightened to answer 
"^er expectations, fear of death having strengthened their 
stomachs. 

I have read your incomparable letter, brother dear,, 
and now with such glee. Do you like to have it back ? 
It is historical, logical, and four times farcical. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : September 7, 1827. 

If anything could add to my satisfaction, the appoint- 
ment we heard of last night would. Young Stanley, 
Sir James Mackintosh, Charles Grant,^ another Catholic 

' Created Lord Glenelg in 1835. He was in favour of Catholic 
Emancipation. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 429 

in the Cabinet. Mahault, Lady Keith, and I agreed 
last night that it is utterly impossible the Whigs should 
not support Lord Lansdowne now, all but the insup- 
portables. We are astonished at the joy here. Lady 
Keith had heard some Ultras lauding the present ar- 
rangement and talking liberal. My dearests, we shall 
convert the world. How do the poor, dear English 
Ultras do ? I am aU benevolence and mercy. Lady 
Jersey will be puzzled to death. I am longing to hear 
more, and how the Althorpites, Miltonites, and Eus- 
sellites talk. 

I envy you both together at Chatsworth. Give my 
love to Lady Cowper and Mrs. Lamb when you see 
them. Where is Morpeth ? What says he ? I want 
Sandon to have a place ; something is due to Lord 
Harrowby and to John Wortley, or gave the Wharn- 
clifFe jaw. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : September 10, 1827. 

You must by this time have received some of my 
volumes, my dearest Sissee. You will have left Chats- 
worth before the one containing our delight and satis- 
faction at the final arrangements. Every new appoint- 
ment and detail add to these feelings. I love three 
men, Lord Lansdowne, Mr. Huskisson, and the King, 
for he has behaved beautifully and stood by us at a 
pinch, which is not the fashion. I look forward to per- 
manence, strength, and, above all, a long pull, a strong 
pull, and a pull altogether. Flahault has written to 
Lord Lansdowne to express his admiration and that of 
people here. What I pine for is what I foresee, an 
amalgamation of the shades of party in the present 
-Government and influence over the King gained every 
day by Lord Lansdowne, Mr. Huskisson, and the honest 



430 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

man,^ respectable because nominal. I do not fear the 
Whigs ; I think they cannot make a shadow of a case 
against us. I am delighted with Mr. Stanley being 
with Huskisson and with Sir James' appointment. I 
happened to hear of Lord Holland praising Lord Lans- 
downe since the decision. I wish the ' Courier ' and the 
' Times ' would leave off squabbling. Who blows that 
little wind ? 

We are expecting Lord Seaford to dinner to-day. It 
will be a great comfort to me to leave him with Gran- 
ville. I only go to Dieppe on Wednesday and remain 
there a week or ten days. I had a letter from the 
Marchioness ; ^ she rejoices at the state of things. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Dieppe : September 16, 1827. 

I am here comparatively perfectly happy. Susan is 
in perfect health. 

It is indeed odd. I get to feel even intensely about 
politics and a wish to continue things, people, position 
in the same state. 

Yet on the other hand, what it would have been to 
me, wholly selfishly, to have been able to take my 
adorable child into Italy for two years is not to be de- 
scribed. But then I should have seen his annoyance. 

There is something in sea air that has a peculiar 
charm. It makes me forget, or at least enables me 
to put aside worries and cares. It is so buoyant, so 
refreshing, gives animal spirits. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1, 1827. 

Dearest of sisters, — I returned from Dieppe on 
Friday evening and received your letter from Sprot- 

' Lord Goderich, who had juBt formed his Ministry, composed chiefly 
of Canningites and some "Whigs, including Lord Carlisle. - 

» Lady Stafford. 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 431 

borough last night. I left my three boys about to em- 
bark with Verity on a fine calm day. Susy is going 
on weU. 

Francis Leveson ^ was ne discontented and uncer- 
tain, and no destiny, except to his honour his matri- 
monial one, can ever answer to him for more than 
two months. Last night we had a pleasant soiree. 
Flahault is a host, whist and talk, and every French- 
woman and a few Poles and Eussians in love with 
the said Comte, and all detesting poor Lady Keith, 
who hes on her couch and returns the compliment. 
I like her very much, but her strong good sense and 
good qualities are not appreciated here and I up- 
hold her with a strong arm. She says herself that 
Flahault is become English in his domestic habits, 
but that here aU. is caique upon a footing calculated to 
destroy them. He behaves perfectly to her, which 
makes all the little things indignant. They say it is the 
height of all absurdity, that he used to live with them, 
and now il est toujours chez lui. 

We are going this evening to hear un piccolo 
bambino do wonders on the fiddle at Bourke's, a triste 
ragout. 

Tell Hart that the English Theatre is une vraie 
manie. Appony and Girardin roar over Miss Smith- 
son's Ophelia, and strange to say so did I. Mile. Mars 
is jealous of her. She is very handsome and has deep 
feeling, with the vulgarest pronunciation and gesticu- 
lation. The Odeon is full every night to the roof. 
With all this ' Umlet ' puzzles them and they laugh 
when the Queen drinks and everybody dies. 

' He had become an adherent of the Duke of Wellington. 



432 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVIIXE 1827 
To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : October 5, 1827. 

My dearest brother, — Only one line ; you are so 
surrounded, so busy, so many pony-chaises at the door, 
so many to talk and listen, that I must four le moment 
be de trop. 

One word for the complainers. Nugent was here, 
when in deep affliction ^ we saw no human being. The 
only exception was in his favour a week before he went 
away, when he dined, came morning and evening, had 
all my boxes to meander in, and was, as I thought, flat- 
tered and charmed by this exception in his favour. Sir 
Charles Hamilton was here at the same time. Gran- 
ville called upon him en personne, which he only does 
to his friends. The first day we opened our house he 
was asked to dinner, but he was gone and he must have 
known why and how entirely we had been living alone 
before he left Paris. Montrond arrived many days 
after the departure of both these men from Paris. We 
have many pleasant people here now. 

Monsieur de la Ferronays, whom I sat by at dinner 
yesterday, is very agreeable and brilliant. Esprit, stars 
and rouge all reckoned in the account. 

The only fureur here now is the English Theatre. 
Madame de Montjoie has just told me that Miss Foote's 
success is pyramidale. The applause last night was 
unbounded. They think her lovely, and forgave one 
long feather hanging from her forehead just over her 
nose to her knee and a pink satin riding-habit. Mile. 
Mars and Miss Smithson went together to hear her, and 
every Frenchman's heart leapt from his waistcoat at 
seeing such a sight. I went with Granville and Frede- 
rick Lamb to the empty Favart to listen to the deserted 
Pisaroni. Give my love to Madame de Lieven and 

• On account of Mr. Canning's death, 



1827 TO LADY CARLISLE 433 

Lady Cowper. I hear from all quarters of Emily's 
charms. Let me know what Madame de Lieven made 
of Milton. It is the toughest bit of cabinet-work her 
tools have been employed upon. There is a dulness 
upon all political subjects just now. God knows how 
it will all be roused, on the Continent I mean. Little 
minds and great mischiefs are all crawling out of their 
holes, and Metternich is wagging his tail. God bless 
you. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 8, 1827. 

I will give your love to Miss Berry, who is as 
happy as the day is long, made much of by me, Harriet 
Davenport in the same hotel with them, and habitues 
dropping up three pairs of stairs to sit with her. The 
William Eussells are gone I believe to-day. I saw her 
here one morning, but she will not come out of an 
evening. She is prettier than ever, and as ever like 
the Tower of Babel, tall, unbending, and gifted with 
tongues. The Hardy s are arrived and a fonds of 
very agreeable society is thus assembled. To-morrow 
Gontaut, Jumilhac, Pozzo, the Hardys and the Due de 
Eichelieu^ dine here. The little duke is epris with 
Louisa Hardy, and Jumilhac his mama doats upon her, 
but I do not suppose it will come to anything. They 
all joke about it too much. 

Lady Keith's house is delightful. Talking, singing, 
whisting, and, as he is acquainted with all sorts of 
people, one meets the curious added to the pleasant, 
and his popularity makes people too happy to go. I 
think Lady Keith is more popular than she was, and 
she deserves to be so, for she is very civil and very 
sensible, and is always delighted to open her house ; but 
her manner is hard, and the French part of the society 

' A nephew of the Minister under Louis XVIII. 
VOL. I. F f 



434 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

evidently go to see Flahault and not her. Some of the 
pretty women treat her with a neglect that makes my 
blood boil. The other evening I went there to a small 
soiree of about a dozen people. One of these imperti- 
nent women came, shook hands with Flahault, came 
straight up to me with a profound curtsey and pretty 
speech, and then sat down with her back turned to 
Margaret. It was so marked that she had the good 
sense to burst into a loud laugh, which made the 
woman turn round and apologise, during which Mar- 
garet nodded to me as much as to say, ' You see now all 
I told you is true.' I think Madame Boni de Castellane 
felt ashamed of herself. Madame Sobenska, the pretty 
'Pole, fait fur eur, she has about fifteen lovers. 

Madame de Flahault has an engouement for her and 
they are seldom apart. The rdle Monsieur de Flahault 
plays here is most brilliant ; one should say he was a 
little too old for it, if his success in every way did not 
justify him. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : October 1827. 

St. Cloud is over, the only good thing I can say of 
it ; the heat was extreme, and I sat all night on the 
Diplomatic bench behind the royalties. We dine at 
Neuilly on Wednesday, the only flaw I am aware of 
this week. I am now expecting a visit from Lady 
WiUiam Bentinck. Our two young sparks create 
much sensation. ' Est-ce la des dandys ? ' George ^ is 
much admired. Sir Forester ^ much wondered at. The 
Duchesse de Eauzan came yesterday evening and 
shot all her darts at the former. ' I like your Benting ; 
he is a very good boy, dear ambassadress. I love 
you so much, I shall come again on Friday.' 

' Lord George Bentinck, who became the leader of the Protectionist 
party after the repeal of the Corn Laws. 
^ Lord Forester. 



182r TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 435 

I wish I could describe the court paid to 
Flahault. Margaret is still on her couch. He pays 
her the greatest attentions, and left many an anxious 
sufferer after dinner yesterday to go and sit two hours 
with her, and the sufferers waited for his return with 
the most patient devotion. He really is charming in 
society, gay, sociable, flirting, whist-playing, general, 
particular, monte sur tous les tons, but when he cuts 
in at whist there is an universal gloom. Lamb is, I 
think, a little sore and embittered. I know not why, 
perhaps only the remembrance of his horror of Madrid. 
Lady Sligo, Lord Clanricarde's sister, is a nice, merry, 
gentille little thing, dressed a ravir, very anxious to 
please ; she is getting on with the foreigners — a rare 
occurrence. The large husband talks very good glib 
French and is intelligent, but looks like a seal. Lady 
Bath is intime with all the French. The Duke and 
Duchess of Hamilton are arriving, she having had an 
ague and in a bad state of health. She has made 
herself talked of about Brownlow North. 'II n'en 
valait pas la peine.' Nobody thinks harm of it, but 
he is toad intime, shawl-bearer, music-stand, takes 
the child in and out of the spectacles and calls the 
carriage. All that makes Lady Bath say, 'I don't 
believe it, but ' — and Lady Westmorland, ' If she was 
anybody else.' 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : November 8, 1827. 

You are most kind and amiable, dearest, dear 
brother. Many thanks for your two letters. 

Lady Keith says the news of last night has made 
her ten years younger and the Government ten years 
older. I hope so. The Turks justify everything. 
Their renewed barbarity has been horrible and sanctifies 
our measures. Oradock's wound is very shght, only 



436 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

one laurel leaf to mix with the myrtle. Granville saw 
his letter to the Princesse.- He says when the balls 
whizzed about his head he thought only of her, and 
he writes to her when the splinter that had cut the 
muscle of his arm made his using it painful and hurtful. 
What infatuation ! 

I must try and amuse you. Charles de Mornay 
had the toothache. Mile. Mars went with him to the 
dentist, who advised extraction. He refused, she ani- 
mated him to the deed. The dentist attendri said : 
' Oh, je suis sur que le jeune Monsieur le fera pour 
plaire k sa bonne Maman.' 

We have here a young Pole, a protege of Flahault's, 
with whom all the elegantes are smitten. He is the son 
of Buonaparte and, they say, like him. His name is 
Walewski. He is received everywhere and made much 
of. 

Lady Charlemont is here. The mother comes, but 
leaves her pretty daughter at home. ' I like young 
friendships. She is sitting with Mile. Demidoff.' 

Little Downshire has the Delmar House. She lies 
in state in a small silk bed. I asked her to dinner last 
Tuesday to meet San Carlos and Castelcicala. She 
was in raptures, mingled with awe, pinched my arm 
and said, ' May I sit down ? ' 

Miss Smithson in ' Jane Shore ' draws houses crowded 
to the ventilator. I must own I roared, but then it is 
because she is natural and feels deeply, though vulgar 
and ungainly. When taxed with this, ' Mais vous 
pleurez, Madame I'Ambassadrice,' I said, ' Yes ; so I 
should if I saw my housemaid die,' and they said, ' Ah, 
que c'est joli.' But do not think I influence them. They 
are enchanted with themselves for having found out 
Pasta and Miss Smithson. ' EUes sont de notre creation. 
II faut venir a Paris.' 



1827 TO THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 437 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : November 1827. 

Walewski is a hon enfant, dull, civil, and looks only 
as if he was studying his laurels, not the least elated by 
them. You think, perhaps, he is a beauty ; no, my 
dear, a tall, pale, inanimate boy, but he is the fashion, 
et I'etoile de Cradock pdlit devant le sien. 

Things are in a strange state here. Eeste a voir if 
Villele will have the courage to face the storm,^ and 
if the Ministers can secure a majority in the Chamber. 
If there was anybody ready to replace, anybody to 
whom France said, 'When he jumps out you may 
jump in,' it would all be over with him, but this is 
not the case, and he will be saved by there being no 
remplaqant at hand. 

I went last night with Granville to see Pisaroni. 
She sang admirably, but the principal scene consists 
of her looking at herself and dressing herself at a 
long glass, praying — that is, singing — to Venus, madre 
dAmore, ' Eendimi piii bella.' I thought the audience 
would have joined in chorus at so reasonable and 
desirable a request. She sang it, however, like a 
sensible woman with all the confidence of youth and 
beauty, and respect for her wonderful gosier repressed 
• every expression of derision. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 23, 1827. 

I have heard from my brother. He seems weary of 
his friends, which is worse than any feelings one has 
towards one's enemies. 

When will Lord Stafford buy the world ? I would 
sell myself to-day for a trifle. Madame Alfred de 

' The Villele Ministry had gradually lost ground on account of its 
reactionary measures. 



438 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

Noailles is funny. Somebody said Madame Appony 
was like the giraffe, and tliat she and Madame de 
Lieven were animals of the same species, which she 
denied. ' Ce n'est pas la m^me classe : I'une manger a 
I'autre et n'aura qu'un mauvais repas.' One sees Lieven 
crunching the meek Appony 's bones. 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 26, 1827. 

So the Turks are determined, but heads are on, and 
I think we shaU soon finish the struggle with fresh 
laurels. It is a fearfully interesting moment. High tone, 
if you please, Lady Carlisle. Like the man in the play, 
' D e, who's afraid? ' and we shall out-Turk the Turks. 

My sensibilities are aU foreign and I am a Spartan 
politician. I fear Lord Goderich's are all foreign. 

Granville is surprised that I have not ' told G. ' the 
following little tale. Charlemont wishes to be very 
much the thing, tres elegante in her habits, very 
French, like Madame de Mortefontaine and her other 
friends. She imagines it is English de se fairs annoncer, 
and at one of my little soirees, when TAUemand asked 
her name, said ' IST'lmporte.' He insisted and she stuck 
to her n'importe. He threw open the door and bawled 
out, ' Madame n'importe.' 

To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : November 29, 1827. 

My dearest sister, — We have been living as one can 
do at Paris, indeed anywhere I believe if one really 
wished it, as if we were at Heidelberg. Lord Seaford 
drops in to tea to tell us what's what nella citta. One has 
time for everjj^thing one wishes to do : one reads up the 
latest books, sometimes a game of chess, sometimes a 
courier, Bella vita, belpiacer. 

I am nmch interested in politics. I am certain that 



TO LADY CARLISLE 439 

all desirable changes will be made, as I hear the King 
is more against the old set than ever, and that they 
have on their side done all to cherish his repugnance. 
Here there is as yet no change, but that there must be 
one is considered as inevitable. 

Mme. Appony has lost her father and is in great 
affliction. I was very sorry not to be able to go to see 
her, the more so as the day she received the news she 
sent to express her wish to see me, but it is some days 
before I can hope to leave the house. 



To Lady Carlisle. 

Paris : December 1827. 

My dearest, dear sister, — Do I know Brownrigg, and 
Nesbith ! — ' Do I know Mrs. Spencer ? ' as William said 
when my father asked him if he knew the Queen of 
Prussia. 

Don Miguel is expected daily. Everybody is specu- 
lating about French politics. Some say Polignac, some 
Talleyrand, nobody has an idea that poor little Villele 
can weather the storm. God bless you. Next week I 
shall be a better correspondent. 

To THE Duke of Devonshire. 

Paris : December 1827. 

My dearest brother, — The weather is detestable, a 
fog to-day that comes into one's room, nose and mouth. 
There have been at the Duchesse de Berri's a hot, formal 
bad concert for Miguel, who by the bye left Paris this 
morning, and various other soirees, that I am too happy 
to have escaped, and I have the delightful certainty 
of not being able to go on the 1st to wish the 
King joy. 

The two. little men, arrived on Friday night, are 



440 LETTERS OF HARRIET COUNTESS GRANVILLE 1827 

the delight of our lives, not to mention Flora,' of whom 
I am sorry to say, and break it with the utmost 
rnenagement to G., I am excessively fond. You know 
the peculiar weakness I always had for Spot. Well, 
this is her image. I recollect all her ways, the sleepy 
affected grande dame manner, a little giraffe, a graceful, 
clean, dignified, dainty thing. The two boys and Flora 
are with me all day long, and are let in to Granville's 
apartment occasionally. 

What can I say of politics? I think, whatever 
varieties there may be in England, there can be no 
return to the old people, and the necessity of some 
change in the new must work itself out in the course 
of time. 

We have just heard in the papers of De Eigny 
having burnt the Greek Fleet. We think this even- 
handed injustice, and that two unjust things make one 
just, so Lord Seaford, Granville, and I have been 
pleasanting about it. 

Lord G. looks over my shoulder, don't approve at 
all, says I must not send such nonsense. I say I must ; 
he says he doats upon Navarino, which I am sure you 
don't doubt. I say you never show or repeat such 
stuff as I put into my despatches, so after a hair-breadth 
escape my letter goes into the bag instead of the fire. 

Sontag sings for the first time on Friday. She has 
arrived, and this time brought with her a Baronne of 
the very first water as chaperon, who means never to 
leave her a minute nor allow a tete-a-tete ; no flirtation. 

' The daughter of Spot, an Italian greyhound, belonging to the Duke 
of Devonshire. Lady Carlisle disliked dogs. 

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



Sporiiswoodf d- Co, PrintPra, New-street Square, London, 



--- VOLUME II ---

LETTERS 

OP 

HARRIET    COUNTESS    GRANVILLE 

VOL.  II. 


,, 


OF 


1810—1845 


EDITED  BY  HEE  SON 


THE  HON.  F.  LEVESON-GOWEli 


CQ 


O 

H 

O 


OH  [i 

Rg^ 
o<2 

rn     U' 
2     Z 


2    U, 


U,    >H 

O  H 

8  3 


B 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES—  VOL.  II. 


LONDON 
LONGMANS,     GEEEN,     AND     CO. 

AND  NEW  YORK  :  15  EAST  16th  STREET 
1894 


AH    rights 


DR 
53k 


LBTTEES 

OF 

HARRIET    COUNTESS    GRANVILLE 


1828 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  7,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — I  know  not  what  to  think  of  poli- 
tics. Parliament  so  near  meeting.  Events  of  such 
importance  pending.  How  I  wish  there  was  another 
head  to  the  body ;  something  new,  respected  at  the 
head  I  Lord  Carlisle,  or,  if  he  would  not,  the  Duke  of 
Portland  ;  and  young  Stanley,  if  used  enough  to  busi- 
ness, Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  In  the  Govern- 
ment I  want  something  tcr  look  to,  to  be  admired  for 
the  present,  and  promising  for  the  future.  Whilst 
Goody  remains,  one  can  see  nothing  but  ridicule  justi- 
fied, and  failure  apprehended. 

I  do  not  fear  the  Ultras,  because  you  have  all  such 
an  opinion  of  the  King's  stoutness.  I  fear  nobody  but 
Goody,  and  do  not  understand  his  imbecility. 

Your  letters  are  most  amusing.  I  see  Windsor. 
What  for  Lady  Conyngham  out  of  spirits?  I  am 
curious  to  know.  I  am  quite  convinced  that  sense 
and  spirit  will  carry  us  through  this  new  I  don't  know 

what. 

God  bless  you,  my  very  dearest  sister. 

VOL.  II.  B 


6, 


2  LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  11,  1828. 

My  dearest  sister, — Let  me  first  say  that  we  have 
heard  of  Lord  Goderich  being  at  Windsor,  so  here  we 
are  again  all  curiosity  and  suspense.  I  wait  for  Sunday 
with  the  utmost  impatience  in  hopes  of  the  fog  clearing 
up.  I  hope  that  the  sun  that  will  shine  forth  will  not 
be  an  Ultra-Tory.  My  answer  is  that  the  nerves  of  any 
given  man  are  stronger  than  Goody's,  and  that,  as  you 
say,  in  some  cases  calmness  and  courage  come  with  the 
call  for  it,  and  that  in  every  other  respect  Lord  Carlisle 
is  so  entirely  fitted  for  the  situation,  so  uniting  under- 
standing, high  rank,  unequalled  integrity,  and  moral 
worth  and  universal  respect  and  consideration,  that  it 
is  impossible  a  wish  should  not  incline  that  way.  Not 
to  forget  that  the  first  is  not  the  most  arduous  or 
wearing  role.  But  this  will  probably  cease  to  be  a 
question  when  my  letter  reaches  you,  and  I  only  wish 
to  state  my  opinion  with  its  grounds.  There  is  one 
change  in  the  siecle,  remarkable  everywhere.  Greedi- 
ness for  place  seems  exchanged  for  a  dread  of  it,  and 
the  difficulty  everywhere  is  to  man  the  boat. 

Monsieur  de  la  Ferronnays,1  and  Madame  de  Mar- 
tignac,2  cry  all  day,  and  Ultras  partout  seem  to  be  the 
only  creatures  grasping  at  high  situations. 

I  cannot  say  how  anxious  I  am  to  hear  what  is 
decided,  and  my  dread  is  of  hearing  nothing  on  Sunday, 
but  that  the  King  was  not  well  enough  to  see  the  old 
lady. 

Miguel  must  have  been  better  amused  with  you 
than  with  us.  I  never  go  out,  my  cold  is  still  enough 

1  The  Comte  de  la  Ferronnays  became  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  in 
the  Martigny  Ministry,  which  had  just  been  formed. 

2  It  is  sad  to  think  that  Madame  de  Martignac,  the  widow  of  the  most 
deserving  Prime  Minister  during  the  Restoration,  was  reduced  to  accept 
in  1853  a  small  pension  kindly  granted  to  her  by  Louis  Napoleon. 


1828  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  3 

for  a  pretext,  and  the  Carnaval  slides  by  me  like  the 
Seine.  I  receive  visits  in  the  evening  which  amuse 
me,  and  the  conversation  of  such  men  as  Pozzo,  Mole, 
etc.,  is  historical,  and  gives  me  an  interest  in  French 
politics  which  I  never  had  before.  They  talk  here  of 
the  impossibility  of  going  on  without  added  strength, 
and  where  that  is  to  be  looked  for  is  a  speculation  as 
in  England. 

The  Normanbys  were  here  for  a  few  days.  She  is 
good,  amiable,  and,  above  all,  sweet-tempered  and  good- 
natured,  and  he  is  the  best  of  creatures ;  but  there  is 
something  wanting  in  both  to  give  dignity  to  their 
merits,  and  liking  them  both  as  much,  one  is  surprised 
at  not  admiring  them  more  ;  often  clever,  often  pretty, 
there  is  something  wanting — the  ensemble  is  not  com- 
plete, not  sufficiently  supported,  a  want  of  interest  in 
the  story. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  January  11,  1828. 

You  do  not  know  the  pleasure  it  gives  me  to  see 
your  handwriting.  I  thought  it  was  political,  and  was 
almost  relieved  to  see  Chatsworth  and  to  know  you  out 
of  the  way  of  the  present  worry  and  suspense. 

I  do  hope  that  something  decisive  will  now  be 
settled ;  anything  is  better  than  the  sort  of  suspended 
rickety  state  we  are  now  in.  It  is  the  same  here,  and 
when  all  over  the  world  questions  of  such  interest  are 
pending,  it  is  sad  that  Governments  should  all  be  put 
in  for  repairs. 

I  had  heard  nothing  of  poor  Baron  Delmar.  I 
hope,  if  the  report  is  true,  that  she  will  find  herself 
well  provided  for  ;  and  then  it  is  not  a  calamity,  for  he 
can  have  enjoyed  little  happiness,  and  her  attachment 
cannot  have  been  more  than  duty  and  gratitude.  I 
have  seen  Miss  Eumbold,1  very  nervous  but  very 

1  Madame  de  Deknar's  sister. 

B  2 


4  LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

happy.  She  has  caught  a  Chevalier  de  St.  Clair  of  a 
good  family,  de  quoi  vivre,  one  child  of  four  years  old, 
good-looking,  the  image  she  tells  me  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  fond  of  reading,  singing  well,  with  a  chateau 
in  the  south  of  France.  He  liked  her  twelve  years  ago, 
thought  she  liked  another,  married,  lost  his  wife,  down 
the  middle  and  back  again  to  her  feet.  They  only  wait 
for  Sir  William  Eumbold's  return,  to  marry.  I  have 
sent  her  your  letter,  and  asked  her  to  come  and  see  me 
that  I  may  sender  about  her  cachemire.  I  am  quite 
disgusted  with  the  ill-nature  of  French  and  English 
about  it.  Instead  of  a  most  natural  feeling  of  pleasure 
at  her  l>eing  extricated  from  a  miserable  situation, 
nothing  but  sneers.  All  the  old  stories  about  Septeuil 
raked  up,  her  age  exaggerated — in  short,  spite  and 
ill-nature  in  all  its  shapes  ;  and  this  the  more  odd, 
because  there  is  nothing  brilliant  enough  in  her  fate  to 
excite  envy.  It  makes  me  long  for  the  ceremony,  as, 
without  knowing  him,  I  have  fears  of  his  being  a  man 
to  be  influenced  by  somebody  or  something. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  18,  1828. 

No  courier  from  England.  This  is  really  a  little 
trial  of  patience,  coming  as  it  does  at  a  moment  of  such 
anxiety  and  suspense.  Granville  is  just  returned  from 
La  Ferronnays.  Their  mail  is  not  arrived.  The  weather 
has  been  delicious  and  perfectly  calm,  and  I  begin  to 
think  Governments,  posts,  all  the  regular  order  of  things, 
are  at  an  end.  It  is  impossible  to  do  anything  but 
watch  and  listen.  To-day  is  dark  and  rainy.  Nothing 
can  be  more  cheerless  than  the  aspect  of  things.  I  will, 
however,  try  to  write,  though  physically  and  morally  it 
is  difficult. 

The  Government  here  are  to  meet  the  Chambers  as 
they  are,  the  difficulties  of  deriving  strength  from  either 


1828  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  5 

• 

party  having  been  found  insurmountable.  I  will  keep 
my  letter  open  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  finish  it  with 
our  post  from  England  arrived.  I  am  sure  you  will  pity 
us  for  this  contretemps.  The  only  courier  that  has  failed 
since  we  first  arrived  on  the  Voorhout.  Every  moment 
it  seems  to  me  more  extraordinary  that  the  well-known 
rumble  of  the  courier's  caleche  ne  se  fait  pas  sentir, 

I  begin  to  think  there  is  to  be  no  administration, 
king,  lords,  or  ladies,  and  a  stop  to  all  foreign  relations. 
I  see  nobody  but  the  embassy  and  Lord  Seaford,  which 
is  a  comfort,  as  we  are  all  in  the  same  frame  of  mind. 

Three  o'clock. — Twenty- three  hours  in  the  fog  was 
the  wretched  courier  at  sea,  my  adored  sister.  It  is  a 
disappointment  to  know  nothing.  Mr.  Huskisson  says 
nothing  can  be  decided  till  next  courier.  He  only 
writes  a  note  to  this  effect,  being  unwell.  No  statement 
of  the  case,  no  detail  of  anything. 

How  kind  you  are  to  Sukey !  Her  heart  and  letters 
overflow  with  it. 

I  expect  to  hear  that  the  Ultras  are  in  on  Sunday. 
The  difficulties  in  any  other  arrangement  are  so  im- 
mense, the  mischief  ah1  in  that — yet  I  see  no  alternative. 

We  are  in  Huskey's 1  boat.  We  have  the  greatest 
reliance  on  his  integrity  and  honour. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  January  21,  1828. 

My  dearest  brother, — You  must  be  happy,  for  you  2 
have  acted  perfectly.  I  do  not  yet  know  enough  of 
the  case  to  pronounce  upon  it  in  any  other  quarter. 
Was  any  offence  given  to  Lord  Lansdowne  ?  Is  it  true 
that  he  excused  himself  from  meeting  Miguel  at  Windsor, 

1  Most  of  Mr.  Canning's  personal  friends  approved  of  Mr.  Huskisson 
retaining  office,  but  not  so  Lady  Canning. 

2  He  had  resigned  the  Lord  Chamberlainship. 


^  LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

i 

and  that  the  King  was  furious  ?  What  pledges  are 
given  that  Mr,  Canning's  policy  will  be  pursued  ? 

It  has  been  a  real  pleasure  to  me  to  drive  out  for 
the  first  time  with  Flora  opposite,  so  like  Spot  that  she 
reminds  me  all  day  of  you.  Pray  do  not  be  offended  at 
the  rapprochement. 

Be  as  lenient  as  you  can,  dearest  brother,  to  Mr. 
Huskisson.  If  he  were  an  aspiring,  healthy  man,  you 
might  suspect  him  of  many  motives.  Knowing  that  he 
is  neither  makes  one  believe  that  he  is  solely  prompted 
by  a  strong  sense  of  duty,  and  a  certainty  of  being  able 
to  carry  all  Mr.  Canning's  measures  into  effect. 

The  maiden  Eumbold  evidently  sighs  for  a  bracelet. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  25,  1828. 

My  dearest  G., — I  read  your  letter  with  a  great 
deal  of  pain,  though  its  contents  do  not  surprise  me. 
I  feel  every  sort  of  sympathy  with  your  feelings  about 
Lord  Lansdowne,  and  admiration  and  regret  must  be 
the  ruling  ones  with  regard  to  him.  I  cannot  enter 
into  the  case.  I  hate  the  separation,  but  I  cannot 
condemn  Mr.  Huskisson.1  I  believe  he  has  a  security 
upon  every  one  object  of  Mr.  Canning's  policy,  that 
left  him  no  alternative.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether 
promises  are  kept  and  pledges  sacred ;  as  long  as  they 
are,  I  think  it  is  his  duty  to  remain.  Will  you  read 
the  *  Observer  '  of  last  Sunday  ?  The  defence  of  Mr. 
Huskisson  in  it  is  so  exactly  my  opinion.  Here  it  is. 
'  The  propriety  of  Mr.  Huskisson  joining  the  Ultras  is  a 
question  which  at  this  moment  we  are  not  prepared  to 
discuss.  All  depends  on  the  conditions  he  has  made 
with  them.  .  .  .  He  may  not  be  disposed  to  give  up 
to  party  what  was  meant  for  mankind.  He  may  be 

1  Lord  Goderieh's  Government  being  dissolved,  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
formed  an  Administration  to  which  Mr.  Huskisson  adhered. 


1828  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  7 

honourably  anxious  not  to  leave  in  the  very  stage  of 
projection  the  great  processes  which  he  has  been 
superintending,  at  a  more  formidable  individual  re- 
sponsibility than  was  ever  before  incurred  by  any 
public  man  in  this  country.  Provided  he  has  the 
assurance  that  his  laboratory  will  be  undisturbed  and 
uncontrolled,  we  can  understand  the  powerful  motives 
that  fix  him  to  office,  even  in  conjunction  with  men 
whose  opinions  and  qualifications  he  cannot  but  in  his 
heart  despise.' 

Now,  dearest  sister,  we  must  see  his  task  will  be 
difficult.  He  must  be  a  Shylock,  and  weigh  their  con- 
cessions and  promises  with  a  severe,  uncompromising 
scale.  He  must  remain  to  effect,  and  not  a  moment 
after  the  doing  so  is  made  impossible. 

I  hear  Lady  Canning  is  very  violent.  Howard,1  I 
am  told,  disapproved,  till  made  acquainted  with  the 
terms.  As  to  the  former,  I  think  her  feelings  quite 
natural,  and  I  should  not  like  her  to  be  able  to  reason 
the  case  as  the  '  Examiner '  does. 

God  bless  you,  dearest  sister.  I  am  obliged  to 
answer  your  letter  politically,  but  it  is  a  painful  subject 
now,  especially  as  you  will  daily  see  and  hear  those 
who  will  increase  your  hostile  views. 

I  shall  on  the  contrary  think  it  right  to  work 
myself  up  in  a  contrary  direction.  No,  I  shall  keep  to 
my  present  opinion — right  if  he  can  maintain  liberal 
principles — if,  finding  he  cannot,  he  stays  an  hour,  I 
am  utterly  mistaken  in  him  as  a  man  and  a  politician. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  28,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — Politics  are  in  a  most  unpleasant 
state.  Whilst  I  think  it  the  duty  of  Mr.  Huskisson  to 
remain,  I  wonder  every  moment  he  does.  I  do  not 

1  De  Walden. 


8          LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

think  him  a  man  to  be  humbugged.  I  do  not  think 
him  greedy  for  place.  I  still,  therefore,  continue  to 
rely  and  expect ;  but  en  attendant  his  position  must  be 
a  most  comfortless  one.  But  at  the  end  I  think  he 
will  either  have  the  only  reward  anybody  seems  to  me 
ever  to  get  in  this  bas  monde,  that  of  having  done  right, 
although  in  vain,  or  he  will,  at  the  expense  of  health  and 
happiness,  stand  higher  as  a  practical,  useful  politician 
than  anybody  ever  yet  has  done.  I  long  to  have  Lord 
Seaford  back  again,  to  hear  him  argol-bargle  about 
it  all. 

We  live  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne,  where  less 
intrepid  people  do  not  venture. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  1,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — You  are  all  growing  so  calm  that  I 
am  enchanted.  Lord  Carlisle  and  Lord  Lansdowne  are 
adorable.  I  am  delighted  that  Mr.  Huskisson  is  at 
Eartham.  If  to  their  reluctance  to  accept  or  remain 
in  office  the  Whigs  add  uninfluenced  support  of  prin- 
ciples they  approve,  they  will  become  my  beau  ideal 
of  politicians.  I  ask  no  more,  for  I  mean  to  go  out 
myself,  if  Ultra-Toryism  carries  a  tittle. 

We  had  an  event  here  last  night  which  agitated 
me  very  much.  A  robber  got  into  the  garden,  rushed 
on  the  guard,  and  in  the  struggle  was  killed.  I  was 
alone,  and  heard  the  gun  and  the  cries  just  under  my 
window.  It  was  terrible  to  be  so  near  this  work  of 
death,  and  I  had  fears  of  the  guard  having  been  pre- 
cipitate, and  the  man  perhaps  coming  to  the  house  for 
other  purposes,  as  he  was  well-dressed,  with  books  and 
verses  signed  with  his  name,  and  a  letter  to  '  Caroline ' 
in  his  pocket,  unarmed  and  no  instruments  for  robbery. 
My  relief  was  consequently  great  in  finding  that  he  has 
been  recognised  as  a  notorious  robber  by  the  police, 


1828  TO   LADY   CARLISLE 

condamne  a  mort  four  months  ago,  and  searched  for  in 
vain  ever  since.     God  bless  you,  my  beloved  sis. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  4,  1828. 

I  have  no  news  to  tell  you.  The  present  Ministry 
here  are  going  on  as  they  are.  I  do  not  at  all  object 
to  the  word  '  shabby,'  I  approve.  You  know  my 
letters  to  you  at  the  time  of  the  victory 1  were  all  de- 
precating the  language  talked  and  view  taken  of  it  in 
England. 

Last  night  brought  us  a  much  better  account  of 
Mr.  Huskisson's  health  from  Mr.  Wilmot,  who  was 
staying  with  him  at  Eartham. 

I  have  just  had  a  Miss  Webster  with  me,  who 
brought  me  a  letter  about  Caroline  William 2  from 
W.  Ponsonby.  This  account  of  her  patience  and 
resignation  interested  me  very  much,  and  makes  me 
feel  how  much  to  education  and  subsequent  events  the 
errors  of  her  life  must  be  attributed. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  8,  1828. 

My  very  dearest  G., — Poor  Lord  Seaford !  I  pity 
him  from  my  heart,  for  never  was  so  true  a  friend,  so 
true  a  man,  and  it  is  in  these  points  he  is  attacked. 

I  do  not  wonder  at  your  feeling  delighted  and  proud. 
Lord  Carlisle  is  the  only  man  in  the  present  time  above 
suspicion  and  beyond  malice.  I  dread  Lady  Canning's 
violence  and  want  of  judgment  at  a  time  when  both 
would  be  so  entirely  out  of  place.  I  could  allow  for 
any  bitterness  of  feeling  but  not  the  demonstration 
of  it  by  production  of  letters.  Personal  abuse  and 
attack  would  destroy  my  sympathy — unfeminine,  un- 

1  Of  Navarino.  2  Lady  Caroline  Lamb. 


10        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

feeling,  unchristian.  There  is  something  too  sacred  in 
grief  to  make  me  understand  its  descending  to  the 
practical  hostility  of  shewing  up  letters  and  quoting 
conversations.  I  saw  Leopold  to-day,  but  had  little 
conversation  with  him.  Is  it  true  that  Mme.  de  Lieven 
and  Lady  Cowper  are  very  personally  bitter  and  angry 
with  the  Duke  ?  It  would  surprise  me  in  the  latter. 

Tell  me  if  my  dearest  brother  is  in  spirits.  He  has  a 
good  conscience  and  more  liberty — two  pleasant  things. 

Alava  is  here.  He  says  the  Duke  writes  in  good 
spirits,  but  Lord  Clanwilliam  told  me  that  he  had  said 
'  There  is  an  end  of  health  and  happiness  for  me.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  11,  1828. 

A  thousand  thanks,  my  very  dearest  sister,  for  your 
kind  and  most  interesting  letter. 

No — you  will  not  be  violent,  you  will  not  prepare 
such  a  pang  for  yourself. 

Are  you  aware  that  we  are  now  suffering  great 
anxiety  on  account  of  Mr.  Huskisson's  health?  We, 
Lord  Seaford,  all  Mr.  C.'s  friends,  are  convinced  of  two 
things — that  he  has  acted  upon  the  purest  principles, 
from  the  strongest  sense  of  duty,  and  that  personally 
the  sacrifice  he  makes  is  to  him  a  most  painful  one. 

When  I  tell  you  that  one  of  his  friends  writes  '  the 
sacrifice  of  his  health,  aye  of  his  life,'  you  will  dread  to 
add  by  one  drop  of  bitterness  or  hostility  to  the  agitation 
and  worry  of  his  present  arduous  career. 

The  Ultras  are  furious.  Is  this  no  argument  in  his 
favour  ? 

I  wish  I  was  at  liberty  to  quote  his  letters,  but  I 
trust  he  has  written  fully  to  Lord  Carlisle. 

Give  my  best  love  to  dearest  Hart.  I  hope  it  will 
not  annoy  him  to  have  my  girls  for  a  day  or  two  on 
their  way  here,  but  I  conclude  he  is  in  correspondence 


1828  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  11 

with  Sukey,  and  will  stop  her  if  it  does  not  suit 
him  to  have  them.  God  bless  you,  my  very  dearest, 
dear  sister. 

I  think  I  love  you  better  than  ever. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  15,  1828. 

My  own  dearest  sister, — It  was  very  true  that  I  was 
frightened,  but  not  in  hysterics,  when  the  wretched  man 
was  shot  in  the  garden.  I  could  have  no  fear  of  one 
sort,  for  we  have  three  guards  at  night.  My  fear  was 
that  the  man  ought  not  to  have  been  shot,  but  it  all 
turned  out  right — killing  no  murder. 

About  politics  I  feel  how  altered  everything  is ! 
Zest  and  pleasure  are  gone.  I  admire  Lord  Dudley's 
speeches  ;  they  have  in  them  spirit  and  self-protection, 
which  is  what  I  think  the  siecle  wants.  What  is  supposed 
to  have  put  papa  Wortley  into  such  a  rage  ?  They  say 
he  was  white  and  shaking  with  passion.  How  magnifi- 
cent Brougham's  speech,1  the  seven-hour-power  one  ! 

Granville  dines  out.  Eoast  turkey,  Irish  stew  and 
hungry  children  are  waiting  for  me.  I  had  a  delightful 
letter  from  Hart,  which  I  must  answer  in  the  course  of 
the  evening,  but  domestic  life  is  become  so  dissipated 
that  I  have  scarcely  a  moment  to  myself. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  18,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — Yesterday's  post  leaves  little  doubt 
how  it  will  end.  It  is  impossible  to  judge  how  far  a 
certainty  of  carrying  on  Mr.  Canning's  system  has  been 
secured  till  we  know  more.  I  am  grieved  at  the 
political  separation  between  Mr.  Huskisson  and  the 
Whigs  more  than  I  can  express.  Much  annoyed  at 

1  On  a  reform  of  the  Common  Law. 


12        LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

dearest  Hart's  conduct  and  natural  displeasure,  with  a 
feeling  of  gratitude  to  Lord  Carlisle  for  being  so  fair, 
so  kind.  This  is  no  cut  at  you,  D.  and  George.  I 
wonder  at  nothing,  but  accept  with  joy  anything  that 
makes  me  look  to  a  diminution  of  hostile  and  personal 
feeling.  Excuse  me  from  entering  into  the  political 
question.  There  is  so  much  of  personal  feeling  mixed 
up  in  it,  pulling  all  ways,  that  I  cannot. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  22,  1828. 

Dear,  darling  Mary,  the  only  thing  I  envy  in  the 
world.  My  girls  are  in  a  state  of  health  and  happiness 
not  to  be  described. 

I  have  not  read  the  debates.  Pray  forgive  me ;  I 
have  no  zest  at  all  in  politics  one  way  or  the  other, 
yet  I  do  read  all  the  papers,  all  the  speeches,  but  it  is 
upon  principle. 

The  Carnaval  is  over.  I  must  begin  being  at  home 
on  Fridays,  the  first  of  next  month,  but  I  am  so  happy 
I  want  a  little  grievance. 

Mrs.  Marcet1  and  her  daughter  dined  here  yes- 
terday. She  is  very  intelligent  and  the  image  of 
Pisaroni,  and  the  girl  good-looking.  Lord  Mahon  dined 
here.  He  looks  old,  like  Lady  Stanhope's  uncle.  Lord 
William  Hervey  is  here.  I  never  have  dared  touch 
upon  politics  with  him,  as  I  think  he  may  be  against 
Mr.  Huskisson. 

God  bless  you,  dearest.  I  dress  at  four,  dine  at  a 
quarter  before  six,  to  go  at  eight  to  a  lottery  at  the 
Duchesse  de  Berri's,  where  I  hope  to  win  six  pretty 
prizes,  and  probably  shall  return  with  six  blanks. 

1  The  author  of  Conversations  on  Political  Economy. 


1828  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  13 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  25,  1828. 

It  is  not  to  be  told,  my  own  very  dearest  sister, 
with  what  delight  I  think  of  yours  and  my  brother's 
visit  to  Brighton. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  a  favourable  account  of  Mr.  Hus- 
kisson's  health.  Lord  Lansdowne  is  not  quite  the 
person,  with  all  his  great  merits,  to  meet  Mme.  de 
Lieven's  piercing,  unbounded  understanding.  I  see  her 
longing  to  box  his  placid  ears. 

Lord  Dudley  is  a  treat,  and  deserves  his  cutlets  for 
the  admirable  despatch  he  wrote  the  other  day.  Do  not 
say  so,  for  I  believe  I  ought  not  to  talk  of  despatches. 

The  good,  that  is,  quiet  news  from  Constantinople 
confirms  every  hope  of  ultimate  good.  The  tone  of  all 
here — Government,  French,  and  English — about  the 
victory  has  been  uniformly  loudly  triumphant.  We 
shake  hands  with  joy  at  having  fought  and  conquered 
together.  I  say  to  my  intimes,  l  Avouez,  nous  sommes 
des  fine  creatures,  and  they  laugh  and  say,  t  Et  nous 
aussi;  s'il  vous  plait.' 

My  last  Friday  was  my  first  dancing  one.  It  began, 
my  house  open,  and  as  bright  as  candles  and  Baudouin's 
band  playing '  Cherry  Eipe,'  could  make  it,  by  my  sitting 
to  receive  at  eight  alone l  and  crying,  for  at  this  very 
time,  to  that  very  tune,  my  adorable  and  happy  child 
was  last  year  at  my  side.  People  came  flocking  in,  and 
they  said  it  was  gay  and  pretty.  Pauline  de  la  Ferron- 
nays,2  Mme.  Victor  de  Caraman,  Mme.  Sabouska,  Mile. 
Eozoumofski,  and  two  others  whom  I  forget,  with  half 
a  dozen  Poles  and  Eussians  (Walewski,  the  hero  of  the 
day,  Buonaparte's  little  one,  included)  danced  a  lovely 
mazourka.  Pray  show  this  to  Hart. 

1  Her  two  daughters  were  away  at  Brighton. 

2  Who  became  Mrs.  Craven,  the  accomplished  author  of  many  popular 
books.     She  wrote  the  life  of  Lady  Georgiana  Fullerton. 


14        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  March  3,  1828. 

Very  dearest  sister, — Lord  Seaford's  return  has  been 
most  interesting.  He  dined  here  alone  with  us  yester- 
day, and  talked  of  everything  and  everybody.  He  says 
that,  though  strong  in  opinion,  nothing  can  be  kinder 
or  fairer  than  you  are,  and  for  this  I  feel  delighted  and 
grateful  pleasure. 

Tell  me  what  Hart  does  about  his  soirees  ;  has  he 
asked  the  enemy  ?  I  can  hardly  understand  the  result 
of  the  debates.  I  am  with  Lord  John  upon  the  ques- 
tion.1 Angry  with  Lord  Milton  for  being,  one  must 
say,  so  provoking.  I  see  him,  hear  him,  and  could  fly 
at  him  and  pull  his  pink  locks.  I  am  quite  indifferent 
as  to  whether  Mr.  Peel  loses  his  temper  or  not. 

Why  did  Hart  tell  Lord  Seaford  he  would  have 
betted  anything  Granville  would  not  have  remained  ? 
I  own  it  made  me  feel,  only  for  a  minute,  very  angry, 
as  he  has  held  different  language  to  me,  independently 
of  my  thinking  anything  about  it  as  matter  of  opinion. 
Do  not  repeat  it.  Lord  Seaford  is  such  an  angel  of  a 
man  that  I  should  hate  to  give  Hart  any  little  feeling 
against  him  for  repeating,  and  still  more  because  my 
anger  entirely  subsided  when  I  recollected  that  dearest 
brother  must  have  been  angry,  and  could  not  resist 
saying  whatever  gave  force  to  his  conversation. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  3,  1828. 

My  dearest  sister, — We  have  a  dinner  to-day  before 
the  usual  Friday  soiree — Flahaults,  Dawsons,  Charles 
and  Catty.  Lord 2  and  Lady  George  and  Caroline  will 
not  stir,  because  they  have  got  Titchfield  here  on  his 
way  to  Nice,  and  till  he  goes  they  shut  up  with  him. 

1  On  the  Repeal  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Act. 

2  Lord  George  Cavendish,  created  Earl  of  Burlington  in  1831. 


1828  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  15 

Tell  Hart  that  aunt  and  uncle  and  niece  make  their 
debut  at  a  small  dinner  and  soiree  here  on  Tuesday. 
Lady  George  in  a  toque  with  marabouts,  copied  from 
one  of  mine  of  Herbault's.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that 
Caroline  looks  deplorably.  Yet  I  think  they  will  per- 
severe till  they  marry  Titch.1  Maigre  his  grief  and 
deuil  and  their  retraite  with  him,  they  went  to  see  '  La 
Muette  de  Portici '  one  night,  '  Don  Giovanni '  and  Mile. 
Sontag  yesterday.  I  lent  them  my  box,  which  holds 
five  with  difficulty ;  they  sat  it  out  seven.  Lord  George 
with  a  black  stock  was,  I  am  told,  taken  by  the  French 
for  a  great  naval  commander.  To-day  I  have  sent 
them  an  order  to  see  Soult's  pictures — a  sober  joy. 
Catty  a  very  great  love.  '  Lady  George  bought  her- 
self a  very  smart  cap  to  go  to  the  Opera.  When  we 
got  into  the  lobby  off  it  flew.  I  thought  the  people 
would  have  died  of  it.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  March  9,  1828. 

Dearest  of  all  dear  sisters, — I  cannot  describe  my 
happiness.  Here  they  are  every  day  all  day.  Susy  is 
as  well  as  possible.  We  have  begun  a  life  that  even 
the  uncompromising,  inflexible  Verity  smiles  upon. 
They  arrived  on  Thursday ;  on  Friday  and  Saturday 
she  took  long  rides  with  her  papa  in  the  Bois  de 
Boulogne  ;  to-day  we  walked  nearly  round  it.  There  is 
no  excitement,  but  great  delight.  She  is  in  buoyant 
spirits,  in  perpetual  sunshine.  Verity  leaves  us  with 
little  Granville  on  Thursday.  I  have  promised  that 
Susy  shall  go  to  Dieppe  as  soon  as  the  weather  is 
fine.  With  such  happiness  and  hope  we  can  submit 
with  good  grace  to  one  further  separation.  My  own 
health  and  spirits  have  returned  with  a  rebound, 

1  Lord  Titchfield  had  just  lost  his  sister,  Lady  Caroline  Bentinck. 


16        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

Georgy  is  a  dear  girl.  Eward  and  I  talk  and  cry, 
and  cry  and  talk.  Sister,  you  do  not  tell  me  that  you 
are  sixteen,  that  you  look  beautiful,  and  younger  and 
gayer  than  your  daughters. 

I  must  go  to  bed  to  rest  my  happiness  and  wonder- 
ful activity  during  the  day. 

Monday. — I  received  your  letter  this  morning, 
dearest  of  sisters.  I  think  you  very  amiable  and  candid, 
and  respect  your  lingering  feelings  of  hostility.  I  do 
think  you  must  be  proud,  elated  about  Lord  Carlisle, 
and  delighted  with  the  universal  admiration  and  respect 
felt  for  him  by  all  people,  by  all  parties.  It  was  your 
own  letter  that  had  given  me  the  impression  of  your 
having  worries,  and  I  am  glad  they  are  not  weightier 
ones.  Our  children  must  plague  in  proportion  as  they 
bless  one. 

A  snow-storm  prevents  the  ride  to-day,  and  walk- 
ing in  the  conservatory  or  dancing  is  to  be  the  sub- 
stitute. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1828. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Our  life  is  one  of  unbounded 
gaiety  without  excitement.  Our  expeditions  in  the 
morning  are  delicious.  To-day  the  girls  and  I  were  for 
three  hours  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne,  in  the  most 
romantic  green  paths,  with  a  smell  of  country  and  the 
cones  of  the  fir  trees,  gathering  violets  and  sweet-briar. 
Oh,  how  we  sigh  for  you  and  yours  !  As  you  own  to 
the  detrimental  effects  of  London,  will  you,  can  you  not 
just  come  and  refresh  yourselves  and  invigorate  your- 
selves for  six  weeks  of  spring  here?  What  hinders, 
what  keeps  you  at  that  time,  dearest  ?  All  the  babies 
will  be  born,  you  have  nobody  to  chaperon,  no  Cum- 
berland, no  Yorkshire.  Think  of  it,  dearest  sister. 

You  cannot  have  been  enamoured  of  young  Peel  at 


1828  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  17 

the  first  blush.  I  see  it  was  Spring  Eice  you  had  never 
seen — no  more  have  I.  I  pity  you  for  your  royal  ties, 
though  I  believe  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  is  charming, 
and  methinks  Sophy  the  pleasantest  girl  I  ever  met. 
But  it  is  always  more  or  less  accablant  to  be  with  them. 

Does  it  not  redeem  Lieven's  character  with  you  all 
to  see  her  so  stout  and  Whiggish  envers  et  contre — power 
and  place  ?  It  cannot  be  her  interest  to  hob-and-nob 
with  Lord  Fitzwilliam.  I  always  knew  her  to  be  a 
busy  but  an  honest  woman. 

I  see  your  soiree,  dearest,  and  you  don't  know  how 
your  letters  amuse  me.  Do  you  see  mine  last  night  ? — 
A  round  table.  Gontaut  very  absent,  drinking  eau  de 
veau,  which  has  cured  her  of  all  her  complaints.  She 
was  hypochondriac,  bilious,  languid.  She  is  now  gay, 
rosy,  and  as  strong  as  a  lion,  and  without  a  nerve. 
4  Une  tasse  de  the  ou  de  cafe  en  me  levant,  une  cin- 
quantaine  de  huitres  a  une  heure,  une  aile  de  poulet  a 
diner,  et  tout  le  jour  de  1'eau  de  veau.'  French  women 
en  deshabille,  some  making  tea,  all  bawling. 

I  believe  Harriet  Caulfield  is  going  to  be  married  to 
a  French  Marquis,  but  I  shall  know  more  about  it  when 
Mrs.  Caulfield  has  '  trespassed  her  ideas  upon  me,'  which 
she  wrote  me  a  note  to  beg  leave  to  do. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  March  21,  1828. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  kindness  about  my 
boys.  Granville's  holidays  last  a  week,  Freddy's  a 
fortnight.  Lodgings  is  all  I  ask  for  them,  as  they  need 
not  be  troublesome  to  you  in  the  day,  G.  having  pro- 
mised to  harbour  them.  I  have  been  writing  to  her  a 
sketch  of  our  plans.  We  begin  to  despair  of  you  here, 
but  Susy  thinks  you  will  come  to  Dieppe. 

The  Cavendishes  are  settled  at  Meurice's.  They  go 
to  the  spectacles  almost  every  evening.  On  Friday 

VOL.  ii.  c 


18        LETTEES  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

they  arrived  all  very  well  got  up.  Lady  George  wears 
modest  Herbaults — Catty  is  a  regular  French  beauty. 
Caroline  well  dressed,  but  I  suppose  it  is  an  unhappy 
passion  for  Titch  that  makes  her  look  thin,  wretched, 
and  the  colour  of  a  bruise.  Lord  George  is  a  dear. 
He  looks  as  I  remember  him  when  I  was  three.  He 
rides  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  with  his  own  set  out 
every  day — very  jocose,  and  a  little  smitten  with  Mme. 
Eothschild. 

Harriet  Caulfield's  marriage  is  off.  He  like  a 
prudent  spark  went  and  peeped  at  her  at  the  Opera, 
when  she  knew  nothing  about  it.  He  saw  her  with 
half  a  dozen  sparks,  very  happy.  Next  day  his  Mama 
came  to  say  that  there  must  be  no  more  of  Mme.  de 
Courval,  and  Mons.  de  Mornays  and  Mons.  de 
Chabots,  and  to  propose  matrimony  shorn  of  all  its 
beams.  A.  chateau,  a  few  of  his  friends,  economy. 
Harriet  was  of  course  alarmed,  and,  as  I  told  G.,  sent  in 
her  resignation. 

We  had  a  curious  dinner  at  Eothschilds'  the  other 
day.  Leopold,  Kent's  son  Leiningen,  old  Talleyrand, 
Mme,  de  Vaudemont,  Prince  de  Hohenlohe,  Juste  de 
Noailles,  Dalbergs,  De  Labordes,  Mme.  la  Baronne  de 
Lemurra  and  Mile.  Sontag,  Mme.  Merlin,  Mons.  et 
Mme.  Eossini — her  first  appearance  in  decent  company, 
I  believe. 

'  La  Muette  de  Portici '  is  beautiful,  a  barcarolle  sung 
by  Nourrit  fils  so  enchanting,  the  scenery  and  decora- 
tions so  beautiful,  that  it  would  answer  to  you  and  Lady 
Wharnclifie  to  come  over  together  on  a  Tuesday  to  see 
it  and  go  home  on  Thursday.  God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  AprU  4,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — You  have  no  idea  how  I  see  you  at 
Chiswick,  all  you  are,  all  you  do,  and  Freddy  in  the 
midst  of  you. 


1882  TO  LADY  CAKLISLE  19 

Lady  Londonderry  is  better  than  I  expected,  she  is 
quieter,  but  I  have  only  seen  her  once.  They  put 
out  their  airs  a  little,  I  am  told.  She  would  not  dine 
at  a  great  dinner  given  her  by  Talleyrand  yesterday, 
but  sent  word  she  was  tired  with  shopping.  They  go 
to  soirees  taking  Sir  Eoger  Gresley  with  them,  as 
Prince  Leopold  does  Sir  Henry  Seton. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  April  1828. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — The  banker !  was  an  honest  man, 
and  had  he  delayed  his  act  of  insanity  three  or  four 
hours  later,  a  letter  from  Turin  would  have  set  all  right. 
The  Dalbergs  have  left  Paris.  They  have  lost  immensely, 
but  it  is  said  that  what  made  them  most  unhappy  was 
a  letter  the  banker  wrote  to  the  Duke,  talking  of  the  hap- 
piness he  had  enjoyed  before  he  was  over-persuaded 
by  him  to  come  to  Paris,  that  he  had  urged  him  on 
to  persevere  and  carry  on  what  could  only  end  in  ruin 
and  desperation.  This  is  only  an  on  dit. 

Talleyrand's  loss  was  equal,  but  he  has  hobbled 
about  just  the  same  ever  since.  He  is  beyond  blows 
of  all  kind  !  An  upright  creature  \ 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  April  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — All  you  say  of  obstacles  are 
daggers,  but  I  understand  your  difficulties.  I  now 
pin  my  hopes  on  a  meeting  at  Dieppe,  arranged  when 
the  time  comes.  Methinks  nothing  would  be  easier 
than  to  meet  like  Henry  the  8th  and  Francis  the  1st  on 
the  edge  of  the  Continent,  suiting  our  time  to  our 
respective  duties. 

1  An  agent  of  the  Duke  de  Dalberg,  whom  he  defrauded,  and  who 
committed  suicide.  Many  years  afterwards  his  descendants  restored 
some  of  the  money  to  the  Duke's  family. 

c  2 


20        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

I  wish  I  knew  something  of  French  politics,  or 
understood  English.  Leopold  is,  I  think,  against  the 
Government,1  but  do  not  say  I  say  so,  for  perhaps 
he  is  not,  he  not  being  very  clear,  I  not  very  atten- 
tive ;  but  he  shakes  his  head  and  wags  his  tail  very 
significantly  whenever  he  mentions  Abercromby,  on 
whom  he  doats. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  1,  1828. 

I  have  a  thousand  things  to  say  to  you.  I  shall  be 
very  sorry  if  Mr.  Huskisson  goes  out  upon  such  a 
subject,2  a  mere  squabble,  or  pet.  Any  great  question 
would  have  been  more  creditable  to  him.  What  will  the 
others  do  ?  If  all  but  Ultra-Tories  leave  the  Govern- 
ment, how  will  the  Duke  ever  be  able  to  patch  up 
an  efficient  one  ?  for  Lord  Grey  I  think  will  never  do. 
By-the-by,  whilst  upon  politics  let  me  tell  you  that 
Lord  John  Eussell  delighted  me  about  Morpeth.  He 
says  he  never  speaks  without  rising  in  estimation,  that 
nothing  can  be  more  promising  than  his  progressive 
excellence  as  a  speaker. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris:  June  2,  1828. 

My  very  dearest,  kindest  brother, — Your  letter  last 
night  gave  me  the  greatest  satisfaction.  I  need  not  tell 
you  what  Granville's  intention  is,  but  I  beg  you  not 
10  mention  it  till  his  official  letters  upon  the  subject 
have  been  received.  Of  our  plans  we  have  of  course 
scarcely  had  time  to  think.  The  mappemonde  floats 
before  my  eyes.  Your  kindest  of  kind  offers  is  an  im- 
mense comfort  to  us,  as,  whatever  we  do,  the  possibility 

1  In  England. 

2  He  resigned  owing  to  a  misunderstanding  between  himself  and  the 
Duke  of  Wellington.    Lord  Palmerston  and  Mr.  Charles  Grant  went  out 
with  him. 


1828  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  21 

of  seeing  you  and  G.  for  a  moment  is  invaluable.  My 
girls  go  to  Dieppe  on  the  15th.  We  have  our  house  at 
Caudecote  till  October,  and  during  the  summer  no 
place  can  be  so  good  for  Susy. 

I  beseech  you  to  write  and  tell  me  what  is  thought 
and  said :  if  the  Whigs  and  Huskissonians  meditate 
strong  opposition,  and  how  opinion  in  general  inclines. 
There  is  an  Ultra-Tory  member  here,  indignant  because 
of  military  Government  barracks,  etc.  There  is  a 
letter  from  Lord  Jersey,  saying  he  cannot  see  how  such 
a  Government  is  to  last.  There  are  reports  of  Peel 
going  out.  Write,  pray  write. 

I  am  glad  that  the  moment  of  hurry  and  bustle  is 
one  of  reldche  as  to  fashionable  life,  that  Paris  is 
beginning  to  empty  and  will  soon  be  quite  deserted  by 
French  and  English.  We  meet  at  Flahault's,  Juste's, 
and  here  two  or  three  times  a  week,  and  that  is  all. 

I  am  glad  the  Hardy  girls 1  are  liked.  Louisa  is  a 
very  charming,  clever,  nice  girl,  and  they  are  both  quite 
free  from  coquetry.  It  is  their  spirits  make  them  familiar, 
like  birds  who  peck  rather  too  hard  when  quite  tame. 

I  am  sorry  for  your  opinion  of .  I  wish  we  were 

all  like  Madame  Appony,  who  thinks  every  son  and 
daughter  of  Eve  divine,  and  said  of  her  to  me,  '  Char- 
mante  !  Douce  et  angelique  nature.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  9,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — Lady  Keith  has  just  been  here  with 
numbers  of  letters  she  has  received.  Even  courtiers  and 
the  Duke's  friends  are  uneasy  and  alarmed,  and  others 
are  confident  that  this  Government  cannot  stand.  Not 
so  Granville  ;  confident  it  will.  I  am  meanly  glad  that 
it  is  not  a  finer  thing.  It  seems  to  me  cosa  da  ridere.  I 

1  The  daughters  of  Sir  Thomas  Hardy,  Nelson's  friend.    He  had  just 
been  made  a  Sea  Lord. 


22        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

cannot  say  how  glad  I  am  that,  as  Huskisson  gave  up, 
aU  did. 

I  cannot  write  longuement  or  pleasantly  to  myself  or 
you  to-day.  Of  course  you  know,  without  my  telling 
you,  what  Granville  does,  and  you  will  not  say,  like  little 
Jumilhac,  '  Mais  vous  ne  parlez  pas.  Ce  n'est  pas  stir, 
vous  n'avez  pas  re§u  votre  conge.'  Granville  is  anxious 
his  letters  should  be  received  before  his  friends  talk  of 
the  future. 

Here  is  Mr.  Sneyd,  very  agreeable,  thunderstruck  at 
the  news. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  12,  1828. 

My  very  dearest  sister, — Pray  thank  Blanche  and 
Agar  for  their  letters.  Tell  the  latter  I  will  untake  the 
apartments  I  had  taken  for  him  at  the  Hotel  Bristol, 
and  that  I  cannot  tell  him  what  our  plans  are. 

I  think,  upon  our  leaving  Paris,  our  first  move  will 
be  to  Dieppe  ;  but  whether  we  shall  spend  the  winter 
in  England  or  Italy  cannot  yet  be  decided.  I  am  happy 
the  decision  does  not  rest  with  me,  as  between  all  the 
pours  et  contres  I  should  go  distracted.  My  longing  wish 
to  be  with  you  would  combat  painfully  what  I  think 
most  desirable  for  Susy.  We  shall  know  by  the  next 
courier  the  probable  date  of  our  departure  from  hence. 
Nothing  ever  was  like  the  kindness  of  the  regrets  ex- 
pressed here,  and  I  shall  have  some,  but  there  are 
immense  compensations.  The  worry  and  packing  and 
settling  are  fearful,  and  I  long  to  be  wound  round  the 
card,  whatever  it  may  be. 

To-night's  post  brought  us  the  majority  of  106. 

I  have  begun  the  great  task  of  paying  bills,  burning 
and  settling  papers,  and  I  take  a  great  deal  of  exercise 
and  have  much  occupation  with  my  girls.  A  week  later 
they  will  set  out  for  Dieppe. 


1828  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  23 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  20,  1828. 

The  courier  brought  no  letter  to  Granville  from 
Lord  Aberdeen,  therefore  the  official  announcement  of 
Lord  Stuart's  appointment  has  not  yet  been  made. 
r^  How  can  you  ask  me  what  I  think  of  Francis  Leve- 
son's  conduct  ?  Can  there  be  two  opinions  ?  He  leaves 
a  worse  place  upon  principle  to  accept  a  better,  j  Our 
letters  were  all  read  beneath  the  conscious  moon,  the 
garden  bright  with  lamps,  sweet  with  orange  flowers. 
One  honourable  man  had  received  what  follows.  '  We  ' — 
that  is  Tories,  Whigs,  and  Eadicals,  the  writer  a  Whig — 
4  are  all  prostrate  at  the  feet  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.' 

Never  may  F.  L.  G.  know  what  in  that  garden  was 
thought  of  him.  We  say  that,  since  Cardinal  Wolsey, 
there  never  was  such  a  power  in  England.  But  I  have 
done  with  politics.  Mr.  Canning  is  forgotten,  and 
honest  men  must  look  on  with  everything  but  surprise 
at  anything  that  may  happen.  Is  it  true  that  Brougham 
is  coming  into  office  ?  I  was  told  last  night,  at  Mme.  de 
Flahault's,  that  my  brother  had  attached  himself  to  the 
Duke. 

We  cannot  remain  here  long,  but  until  the  official 
announcement  nothing  of  exact  time  or  place  can  be 
settled. 

We  dine  at  a  great  hot  dinner  at  Pozzo's,  and  return 
to  this  garden,  it  being  Friday,  where  we  shall  find 
lamps  in  the  trees  and  Baudouin's  band,  so  that  the 
little  dears  may  hop  if  they  like.  We  go  on,  as  is  the 
nature  of  the  beasts,  as  if  we  were  here  for  ever.  God 
bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  7,  1828. 

Granville  has  not  had  any  letter  from  Lord  Aberdeen 
announcing  Lord  Stuart's  appointment,  but  the  dili- 


24        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1828 

gent  young  Lord  has  written  himself  to  say  that  he 
shall  be  here  in  a  fortnight.  "We  are  therefore  as  busy 
as  bees.  We  shall  go  straight  to  Dieppe,  remain  there 
two  or  three  days  with  the  girls,  and  then,  my  own 
dearest  sister,  we  shall  go  to  London.  Hart  has  offered 
us  Devonshire  House.  After  a  few  days  there,  we  shall 
return  to  Caudecote,  but  our  plans  for  the  future  are 
quite  en  Pair. 

I  love  the  people  here  for  their  excessive  kindness, 
and  for  the  universal  and  strong  feeling  of  admiration 
and  esteem  felt  for  Granville.  I  have  the  delight  ol 
seeing  how  entirely  his  character  is  appreciated,  and 
his  departure  lamented. 

My  dearest,  we  shall  be  so  happy,  and  I  shall  see 
Mary! 

Pray  forgive  this  scrap.  I  am  now  going  to  write 
to  Mr.  Bradford,  as  we  have  determined  upon  sending 
Granville  to  Mr.  Chapman  at  Eton. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  11,  1828. 

Dearest  G., — Your  amusing  long  letter  gave  us 
great  pleasure.  Is  it  true  that  the  King  did  not  like 
the  Court,  and  the  stars  and  garters  upon  the  dandies  ? 

Our  day  of  departure  is  Wednesday.  Did  I  tell 
you  that  we  have  settled  to  return  for  six  weeks  to 
Dieppe  on  the  1st  of  August,  after  a  fortnight  in 
London?  I  pine  for  the  journey  and  sea  air,  as  the 
oppressive  heat  here  is  almost  unbearable. 

Granville  went  to  the  signing  the  contract  at  Prin- 
cesse  Bragration's  l  last  night.  The  trousseau  was  etale 
like  an  illuminated  bazaar.  Fireworks,  bands  of  music 
and  dancing !  Crowds  of  people. 

It  is  such  a  delight  to  think  I  shall  find  you  in 
London,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  subsiding  every  day. 

1  Princess  Bragration  married  Lord  Howden. 


3828  TO   LADY  CARLISLE  25 

I  am  now  going  to  have  two  hours  of  receiving  visits, 
at  four  to  pay  them,  but  then  come  home  to  a  quiet 
dinner,  the  garden  and  a  drive  after  sunset. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  14,  1828. 

Here  am  I,  writing  in  an  empty  drawing-room,  all 
my  packing  done  and  ready  to  go. 

Never  was  anything  like  the  fatigue  of  Wednesday. 
We  dined  at  St.  Cloud  with  Mme.  de  Gontaut  and 
Mademoiselle,  who  is  charming.  Walked  on  the 
terrace,  where  the  King  and  Dauphin  came.  Then  to 
Neuilly.  All  this  after  a  hot  day  of  visiting  duties. 

Eemember  that  somebody  said,  '  Whatever  you  do, 
do,'  which  is  just  what  I  think  wanting  to  the  siecle. 
Granville  is  very  sorry,  but  sorry  like  an  honest,  noble- 
minded  man — no  repining,  no  irritation.  He  stands  by 
his  own  conduct,  without  one  shade  of  bitterness  or 
unfairness.  In  short,  I  think  more  highly  of  him  than 
of  any  human  being — happiness  enough  for  any  woman, 
Lady  Carlisle. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Devonshire  House :  July  20,  1828. 

Comfortable  is  not  the  word ;  we  are  in  luxury  and 
delight  of  every  sort  and  kind. 

Whilo  is  no  bird,  so  thinks  Marie,  who,  upon  my 
desiring  that  he  might  not  come  to  pay  me  his  accus- 
tomed visit  yesterday  morning,  as  I  had  a  bad  head- 
ache, said  with  a  look  of  fear  and  awe :  '  Oh !  J'irai 
vite,  car  il  etait  au  moment  de  monter.'  He  has  said 
all  he  has  upon  his  little  heart.  He  sings  '  God  save 
great  George  our ' —  farther  he  cannot,  or  rather  will 
not,  go.  I  suspect  he  is  not  quite  satisfied  with  the 
present  state  of  things.  He  laughed  so  heartily  when 
he  saw  Mrs.  Graham  and  Lady  Charlotte  Thynne  come 


26        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

in  in  their  great  Herbaults  that  they  were  quite  put 
out.  He  says  to  me  whenever  I  go  about  the  room, 
'What  are  you  afraid  of?  '  which  shows  great  insight 
into  character. 

I  sit  in  the  delicious  drawing-room  and  my  friends 
pour  in.  On  Friday  we  dined  with  the  Carlisles  and 
ran  to  see  Mars  in  '  La  Suite  d'un  Bal  Masque  ; '  yester- 
day with  the  Staffords  and  then  to  the  '  Crociato,'  where 
Velluti  sang  hideously,  Sontag  divinely. 

Monday  Lord  Granville  is  bidden  to  Windsor,  be- 
tween one  and  two,  to  dine  and  sleep  there.  Great 
wishes  to  have  us  all  later  ;  we  think  he  is  waiting  for 
you. 

Morpeth  is  gone  into  Yorkshire.  Lord  Nbrmanby 
has  had  a  fall  from  his  horse  and  has  sprained  his  ankle, 
yet  hobbles  to  the  theatres.  Walewski  thinks  Lady 
Ellenborough  the  most  divinely  beautiful  creature  he 
ever  beheld,  but  sickens  at  her  dress.  God  bless  you, 
very  dearest,  kindest  of  brothers. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Devonshire  House  :  July  24,  1828. 

Granville  and  I  have  been  walking  up  and  down 
your  new  balcony.  C'est  une  promenade  ravissante. 
The  garden  looks  spacious  from  it,  and  to-day  fresh, 
green,  and  bright. 

We  were  disgusted  yesterday.  Granville  devoured 
dirt.  We  went  to  dine  with  Lord  Harrowby.  The 
servant  took  us  upstairs  :  '  Milady  is  gone  out  driving.' 
It  was  eight.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  passed.  Lord 
H.  appeared.  I  saw  in  Granville's  looks  that  he  had 
thoughts  of  burning  his  father,  but  a  basin  of  soup  and 
the  sound  of  Lady  H.'s  carriage  appeased  him.  We 
dined  at  nine.  Lady  Wharncliffe  came  at  twelve,  Mr. 
Sneyd  a  little  before  one.  The  consequence  of  these 
absurd  ways  is  the  heavy  headachy  accablement,  the 


1828  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  27 

growing  older  and  flatter  that  comes  with  a  London 
life. 

On  Friday  we  dine  at  Leopold's,  on  Saturday  we  go 
to  Beaconsfield  to  bring  Granville  to  town.  Madame  de 
Lieven  comes  to  me  every  day,  pleased  about  Eussia, 
of  course.  Lord  Palmerston  came  yesterday  and  told 
me  much  that  interested  me.  Everybody  thinks  that 
Parliament  must  meet  towards  the  end  of  October,  and 
we  have  given  up  Italy.  Ireland,  still  as  the  breeze 
but  dreadful  as  the  storm,  hangs  over  the  Government 
by  a  single  thread. 

I  am  going  with  Granville  to  West  Hill.  I  have  not 
another  moment. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE, 

London :  July  25,  1828. 

We  shall  be  at  Brighton  this  day  week.  Will  you 
secure  us  a  room  at  the  New  Albion  ? 

Your  offer  is  most  kind.  If  Leeds  will  not  move 
and  if  Parliament  meets  in  October,  as  it  is  now  confi- 
dently asserted  it  will,  we  shall  be  most  happy  to  avail 
ourselves  of  it. 

I  saw  the  world  at  Lady  Barbara's l  yesterday  even- 
ing, dropping  in  at  midnight  in  old  satin  hangings  and 
jewels,  and  caps  and  hats,  a  mixture  of  all  fashions,  and 
'something  that  makes  a  soiree  look  like  a  fancy  ball. 
I  could  not  see  Ellenborough,  Norton,  Foresters,  or 
Brudenells. 

Continuation  of  the  programme, 

Saturday. — Beaconsfield :  dinner  here,  to  which  we 
have  asked  Carlisles  and  Morleys. 

Sunday. — Chiswick. 

Monday  to  Wednesday. — Windsor. 

Thursday. — Dinner  at  Lord  Aberdeen's. 

1  Daughter  of  the  fifth  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  married  Mr.  William 
Ponsonby,  created  Lord  De  Mauley  in  1838. 


28        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

I  am  in  agitated  hope  of  the  Carlisles  being  asked 
to  Windsor,  and  obliged  to  put  off  their  journey.  It 
would  make  all  the  difference  to  me. 

I  expect  Lieven  every  minute ;  she  never  misses  a 
day  and  is  very  delightful.  She  has  a  little  flesh  on 
her  bones  in  consequence  of  late  events  and  vague 
hopes  for  the  future. 

God  bless  you,  very  dearest  D.  I  will  write  an 
account  of  Leopold  and  Aunt  George's  drum. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  July  1828. 

The  rain  it  raineth  every  day,  obstinate,  pelting 
rain.  The  Carlisles  are  not  bidden  to  Windsor.  The 
Lievens  are  not.  Granville  rejoices  at  the  bad  weather. 
He  has  one  engrossing  fear,  the  Virginia  Water,  com- 
prising boating,  fishing,  damp  tents,  and  all  the  joys  of 
an  English  summer !  Mine  is  being  driven  by  a  Lord  of 
the  Bedchamber. 

Granville  and  I  went  this  evening  to  the  Opera. 
Pasta,  still  unrivalled  Pasta,  in '  Semiramide.'  First  came 
Uncle  George,  complaining  of  London  and  rheumatic. 
Then  Leopold  very  gracious  and  very  happy,  for  he  is 
much  made  of  by  the  beauties  and  drinks  tea  with 
Mrs.  Fox.  Villa  Eeal  and  Brook  Greville.  The 
pleasant  people  are  almost  gone.  The  Worcesters  and 
Grevilles  are  going  to  Dieppe,  and  all  the  world  to 
Brighton.  I  love  my  liberty  better  every  day,  and 
after  being  so  long  en  place  delight  in  the  prospect  of 
junketing  about  and  seeing  the  world. 

Leopold  in  spite  of  all  resistance  dragged  me  out 
before  the  Countesses.  Glengall  cared  not  a  fig.  Not 
so  Aldborough,  who  was  frantic  ;  but  I  in  going  out 
from  dinner  stood  with  less  than  '  I  am  a  dog '  face,  and 
kept  everybody  standing  and  waiting  five  minutes  till 
the  Countesses  had  marched  en  avant  deux. 


1828  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  29 

Much  do  I  fear  that  I  am  the  only  woman  going  to- 
day, and  must  sit  by  H.  M. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Windsor :  July  29,  1828. 

I  think,  my  dearest  sister,  you  will  like  a  little  line  ; 
it  may  be  no  more,  as  I  have  desired  to  be  told  of  the 
first  conveyance.  The  drive  here  was  delicious.  I 
sniffed  up  country  air,  and  felt  better  and  better  every 
mile.  We  found  the  two  luxurious,  large  pink  rooms, 
with  blazing  fires,  a  pleasure  beyond  all  moral  ones, 
and  I  had  an  hour  and  a  half  before  dinner.  We  found 
here  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  the  Polignacs,1  and  Lord 
Amherst,  with  Strathavons,  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  etc. 
Nothing  ever  was  so  gracious  as  the  King  has  been  to 
us  both,  and  he  talked  to  me  with  such  affection  of  all 
those  I  best  love  that  I  was  charmed.  The  Duke  of 
Wellington  is  not  here  or  expected.  I  like  it  so  much 
as  it  is.  The  Polignacs  are  excellent  people,  and  she 
is  a  comfortable,  no-how,  little,  good-natured  thing. 
There  is  nobody  to  gener  or  awe  me. 

The  King  and  Lady  Conyngham  both  asked  if  you 
were  not  gone,  said  they  knew  you  only  waited  to  see 
us  and  therefore  had  supposed  you  had  left  London. 
The  King  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  Lord  Lansdowne, 
praised  Mr.  Huskisson  very  much.  William  Lamb  is 
also  a  great  favourite. 

We  are  going  to  the  Castle  and  the  Virginia  Water. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton :  August  3,  1828. 

Dearest  sister, — Here  we  are.  On  Friday  we  found 
Hart  looking  better  than  I  ever  saw  him.  Yesterday 
we  drove  in  flys,  walked  on  the  pier  and  all  over  the 

1  Prince  de  Polignac  was  Ambassador  in  London.  In  1824  he  married 
the  Marquise  de  Choiseul,  a  daughter  of  the  first  Lord  Rancliffe. 


30        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1828 

town.  After  dinner  we  went  to  tea  with  Lady  Hardy, 
where  we  found  little  Johnny  Eussell.  On  the  pier  in 
the  morning  we  saw  the  Grevilles  and  Sophy  embark 
for  Dieppe,  and  Cambridge,  Montrond,  Commissioner 
Irby,  Lord  and  Lady  Mount  Charles.1  She  looked  hand- 
some, like  the  genius  of  the  gale  which  blew  hard  upon 
the  poor  Grevilles. 

The  Worcesters  and  Walewski  arrived  here  last 
night.  We  dine  to-day  at  the  Pavilion. 

Bad  as  the  weather  is,  I  cannot  say  how  I  enjoy 
being  here.  My  brother  is  extremely  kind  to  little 
Granville,  which  doubles  my  pleasure.  He  is  such  a 
delightful  little  companion,  so  independent,  docile,  and 
all  full  of  natural  tact  and  instinctive  civility,  which 
prevents  his  ever  being  de  trop. 

We  hope  to  be  able  to  cross  over  to  Dieppe  on 
Tuesday,  but  at  this  moment  the  sea  is  impossible.  I 
hear  the  place  is  overflowing  with  French  and  English. 
Whist  every  evening  at  the  Due  de  Coigny's,  four 
shillings  stake. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton :  August  7,  1828. 

Now  this  time  we  are  really  going.  The  morning  is 
fine,  very  hot,  and  the  sea  only  swelling  with  the  effects 
of  the  two  last  days.  Leopold  and  suite  are  going  with 
us.  He  is  going  on  to  Berlin.  I  shall  be  a  very 
pleasant  companion  for  him,  able  to  talk  mild  Liberal 
politics  or  of  Mrs.  Norton's  charms,  as  he  likes  best. 
It  is  very  great  happiness  to  think  of  being  with  the 
adorable  children  again.  Hart  is  quite  well,  and  I 
think  he  has  enjoyed  having  us  with  him,  as  we  have  been 
with  him.  How  happy  I  was  to  hear  from  you ! 
How  ten  times  more  happy  to  be  at  Castle  Howard  ! 
I  think  it  will  be  soon,  Lady  Carlisle. 

1  A   daughter  of  Lord  Anglesea.      She  became  Lady  Conyngham 
in  1832. 


1828  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  31 

Now  for  the  walk  to  the  Chain  Pier.  Guinea  has 
just  been  to  tell  me  that  the  sea  is  getting  calmer  and 
calmer  every  minute,  and  it  looks  like  a  large  blue 
sheet  with  a  silver  veil  over  it. 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  September  16,  1828. 

There  is  not  a  woman  who  would  feel  more  deeply 
the  pangs  of  a  week  at  Doncaster.  I  hope  you  will 
have  the  bright,  sunshiny  weather  we  have  here  to-day 
to  gild  its  horrors. 

We  all  disperse  to-morrow.  Cock  and  hen  to 
roost  at  Dunchurch  to-morrow.  Chickens  to  Devon- 
shire Place,  Marine  Parade,  with  a  kitchen-maid  on 
their  dicky.  / 

I  hear  Mrs.  Norton  is  to  be  at  Chatsworth.  I  am 
sorry  we  are  to  have  an  original  amongst  us,  somebody 
impossible  to  like  and  ungracious  to  dislike.  I  am 
happy  to  think  that  Cradock  and  Walewski  are  to  be 
with  us — a  great  relief  to  the  sober  part  of  the 
community  to  have  such  game  for  her  to  point  at.  _j 

We  dined  at  Holland  House.  Lord  Holland  is  un- 
commonly well,  and  I  think  his  crutches  are  more  a 
habit  than  a  necessity.  So  thinks  my  lady.  '  Put 
away  your  nasty  crutches,  Lord  Holland ;  you  look  as 
if  you  were  in  prison.'  '  Oh,  dear  woman,  pray  let  me 
have  them  ;  I  like  to  have  them  near  me.'  '  Impossible. 
Mary,  take  away  your  papa's  crutches.'  She  is  in 
high  spirits  and,  as  you  see,  in  force. 

Falck,  the  Prince  de  Chimay  his  attache,  a  good- 
looking,  straggling  attache,  son  of  Madame  Tallien, 
and  desperately  in  love  with  Mary  Fox,  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  Doctor  Holland,1  Allen,  Charles.  It  was 
very  agreeable,  and  we  stayed  till  half-past  ten. 

1  Sir  Henry  Holland,  father  of  Lord  Knutsford. 


32       LETTERS   OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1828 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Chatsworth :  September  22,  1828. 

How  anybody  exists  anyhow,  anywhere,  without 
Morpeth  I  do  not  know.  From  the  moment  he 
arrived  all  has  been  gaiety  and  animation,  and  really 
to-day,  the  general  joy  has  been  so  exhilarating  that  if 
Susy  and  Blanche  were  here  I  think  I  should  die  of  it. 
We  have  already  had  charades  under  his  management, 
so  perfect,  so  beautiful  that  even  the  biases  and  fas- 
tidious Montrond  and  Punch  were  in  ecstasies.  What 
charms  me  is  that  your  modest,  unpretending  Caroline 
comes  out  like  a  glowworm  in  the  dark  and  outshines 
them  all.  Her  acting,  her  figure,  the  sweetness  of  her 
temper,  in  short  all  she  is,  is  the  theme  of  everybody. 

We  are  to  have  to-morrow  evening  three  charades. 
I  am  in  the  secret.  One  is  to  be  '  Shylock '  acted  and 
spoken.  First,  Lord  Morpeth  and  Maria  Copley — 
young  Marlow  and  Miss  Hardcastle — in  '  She  Stoops 
to  Conquer.'  Shy. 

Second,  Lord  Clements  and  Maria  Copley — the 
Count  and  Juliana  in  the  '  Honeymoon.'  Lock. 

Third,  the  trial  in  the  'Merchant  of  Venice.'  Mr. 
Sneyd,  Shylock ;  Caroline,  Portia ;  Miss  Wortley, 
Nerissa ;  Coppy,  Antonio  ;  Messrs.  Townshend,  Mor- 
peth and  Lascelles,  the  remaining  characters. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Castle  Howard :  November  6,  1828. 

We  shall  be  most  happy  to  be  a  day  at  Devonshire 
House  before  Panshanger  and  West  Hill,  where  we 
have  promised  to  go. 

The  Granthams  are  here.  Miss  Eobinson  is  one  of 
the  most  delightful  girls  I  ever  met  with,  a  fine,  open- 
hearted,  unaffected  creature,  very  clever  and  full  of 
talents.  Mary,  the  second,  is  a  sweet-tempered,  fat, 


1828  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  33 

soft-looking  thing,  without,  I  take  it,  much  in  her. 
Lady  Grantham  is  infinitely  more  lovely  a  Iheure  qiiil 
est  than  either  of  them.  Her  spirits  are  much  im- 
proved. They  leave  Castle  Howard  on  Saturday  and 
the  Wharncliffes  arrive,  also  Sir  Joseph  Copley  and 
Coppey ;  Maria  is  too  unwell  to  come,  and  they  leave 
her  at  Scarborough. 

We  are  much  calmed  about  Penenden  Heath.1  It 
cannot  have  much  influence  as  a  precedent,  or  I  think 
influence  the  minds  of  anyone ;  the  only  fear  is  its 
frightening  the  King. 

Varna  news  was  received  with  different  feelings. 
The  Granthams,  who  detest  the  Eussians,  groaned.  I 
thought  no  deeper  than  that  you  and  Lieven  would  be 
glad.  I  am  an  idiot  about  distant  politics.  A  battle 
in  Eay  Wood,  a  triumph  on  the  top  of  Meg's  Field,  any- 
thing near  fills  my  mind,  but  it  is  really  very  odd  how 
little  I  can  present  to  myself  what  happens  at  Varna. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Escrick :  November  11,  1828. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  felt  so  flat  on  my  way  here 
that  I  was  afraid  I  should  be  unable  to  exert  myself. 
T  had  a  headache  and  was  much  stupefied,  but  these 
people  are  so  good,  amiable,  and  obliging,  that  I  felt 
immediately  quite  at  my  ease. 

Mrs.  Thompson2  is  clever,  sensible,  and  excellent, 
and  I  am  happy  to  tell  you  that  I  don't  mind  the  fine 

1  A  meeting  was  held  there  to  protest  against  the  proposed  concession 
to  the  Catholics.     Two  thousand  people  were  said  to  be  present.     Lord 
"Winchilsea   and   Sir  E.   Knatchbull  supported    a  petition   against    the 
concession.     It  was  carried  by  a  large  majority,  although   opposed  by 
Lords  Camden,  Darnley,  and  Teynham. 

2  Mrs.  Beilby  Thompson  was  a  daughter  of  Lord  Braybrook.     She 
married  Mr.  Lawley,  who  took  the  name  of  Thompson,  and  she  lamented 
her  fate — to  be  born  a  Neville,  to  become  a  Lawley,  and  to  die  a  Thompson. 
She,  however,  became  Lady  Wenlock  in  1839,  when  her  husband  was 
raised  to  the  peerage. 

VOL.    II.  D 


34       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1828 

words  and  quotations  a  bit,  because  she  is  perfectly 
unaffected.  Her  manner  and  diction  is  a  laborious 
mistake  in  the  art  of  pleasing,  but  does  not  offend,  for 
nothing  is  put  on. 

I  have  been  walking  with  her,  looking  at  the  nicest 
village,  and  the  infant  school.  They  have  a  glorious 
day  for  shooting. 

The  place  is  ugly,  the  house  luxurious.  They  live 
in  the  most  comfortable  manner ;  very  nice  food  and  a 
most  comfortable  bed-room. 

God  bless  you,  beloved  sister  !  I  miss  you  not  every 
day,  but  every  moment.  I  have  not  yet  at  all  recovered 
leaving  you,  and  am  your  flattest,  most  affectionate  of 
sisters. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Escrick :  November  12,  1828. 

Your  letters  are  such  perfection  !  I  see  everything 
as  it  happens.  You  always  tell  whatever  one  wishes  to 
know,  and,  rare  and  blessed  art,  every  line  is  a  picture. 

There  is  one  little  trial  to  me  to-day.  Mr.  Thompson 
has  made  such  a  point  of  Granville  shooting  to-morrow 
that  we  found  it  impossible  to  refuse,  and  by  this  means 
I  shall  not  receive  any  letter  till  Wednesday.  I  must 
live  upon  my  yesterday's  delicious  packet,  and  have  the 
delight  of  two  bulletins  on  Wednesday.  Mrs.  Thompson 
is  a  very  excellent,  sensible  woman,  doing  a  great  deal 
of  good  in  the  village,  over  which  we  have  been  walking 
all  morning.  She  has  established  an  infant  school,  where 
there  are  children  of  even  eighteen  months  old.  All 
these  clean  happy  babies  are  well  clothed,  well  fed, 
kept  out  of  harm,  and  taught  obedience.  In  one 
cottage  we  found  a  pleasant,  conversible  old  woman, 
sitting  by  the  fire,  only  ninety-five  years  old.  Old  and 
young  seem  to  doat  on  Mrs.  Thompson. 

There  are  very  few  people  here — Sir  Joseph  and 


1828  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  35 

Miss  Copley,  Georgiana  Vernon,  and  her  brother.  The 
two  girls  have  been  prancing  all  over  the  country  upon 
two  fiery  white  steeds. 

We  are  all  very  anxious  about  the  King.  Some 
say  dropsy  to  the  most  dreadful  degree,  and  that  the 
Duchess  of  Gloucester  is  terribly  alarmed. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Trentham :  November  19,  1828. 

Lord  Stafford  is  better  than  I  have  seen  him  since 
his  illness — stouter  and  much  more  alert.  She  is  also  in 
robust  health  and  in  perfect  good-humour,  and  their 
reception  of  us  has  been  most  gracious. 

No  words  can  say  how  I  enjoy  the  beauty  of  the 
place,  the  charm  of  country  in  England.  They  were 
out  when  we  came  and  I  rushed  to  the  potager — you 
know  my  weakness — and  walked  up  and  down  between 
spinach  and  dahlias  in  ecstasy. 

This  is  in  many  ways  a  beautiful  place,  and  the 
tenue,  the  neatness,  the  training-up  of  flowers  and  fruit 
trees,  gates,  enclosures,  hedges,  are  what  in  no  other 
country  is  dreamt  of ;  and  then  there  is  a  repose,  a  laisser 
alter,  a  freedom,  and  a  security  in  a  vie  de  chdteau  that 
no  other  destiny  offers  one.  I  feel  when  I  set  out  to 
walk  as  if  alone  in  the  world — nothing  but  trees  and 
birds ;  but  then  comes  the  enormous  satisfaction  of 
always  finding  a  man  dressing  a  hedge,  or  a  woman  in 
a  gingham  and  a  black  bonnet  on  her  knees  picking 
up  weeds,  the  natural  gendarmerie  of  the  country,  and 
the  most  comfortable  well-organised  country.  Then  at 
home,  if  the  people  are  there  one  loves,  the  whole  day 
is  passing  from  one  enjoyment  to  another ;  if  not,  one 
escapes,  follows  one's  own  inventions. 

The  idea  of  being  at  Chatsworth  with  dearest  Hart 
is  transport  mixed  with  awe  and  timidity.  Norton1 
will  ask  me  who  I  am  and  suppose  I  cannot  love.  I. 

1  The  beautiful  Mrs.  Norton. 

D  2 


36       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1828 

mean  to  form  an  alliance  with  Lord  Cowper,  whose 
liveliness  will  not  overpower  me. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE, 

Trentham  :  November  22,  1828. 

Dearest  G., — Granville  has  the  gout,  but  he  feels  so 
well  in  health  to-day  that  I  hope  it  will  be  but  a  slight 
bout.  The  weather  is  delicious,  and  windows  open,  which 
gives  something  less  dismal  to  a  person  tied  by  the  leg. 

Elizabeth  is  in  the  greatest  beauty,  and  very  plea- 
sant and  amiable.  He  wins  me  by  his  good-nature  and 
devotion  to  her.  They  really  are  admirable  as  a  pair. 
But  his  thirst  for  knowledge  is  frightfully  minute,  and 
there  is  something  in  his  voice  and  manner  that  makes 
his  talk  appear  worse  than  it  is.  Lady  Stafford  seems, 
excessively  fond  of  her  and  tolerant  of  him.  I  never 
knew  anything  like  Lady  Belgrave's  praise  and  admi- 
ration of  Lady  Gower — thorough,  heartfelt  appreciation 
of  her,  and  justice  and  kindness  about  Lady  Francis. 
When  she  was  alone  with  me  and  serious,  I  thought 
her  delightful,  but  her  pleasanteries  set  my  teeth  on 
edge.  God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Trentham :  November  25,  1828. 

Dearest  sis, — Granville  had  more  gout  last  night, 
and  we  have  given  up  Sandon  and  Teddesley. 

Five  Sneyds  and  Tom  Grenville  replace  the  Bel- 
graves.  The  latter  only  arrives  to-day.  Walewski  is 
just  what  you  say.  I  like  him,  and  when  I  am  in  for 
it  I  go  on  contentedly  and  pleasantly ;  but  when  I  see 
him  set  out  to  walk  round  the  garden  at  Chatsworth  I 
shall  follow,  not  meet  him. 

So  Lord  Grey's  brother  has  not  St.  Botolph's.  It 
is  given  to  a  protege  of  Lady  Conyngham,  who,  Mr. 
Sneyd  says,  is  mother  of  Mother  Church. 


1828  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  37 

To  LADY  CARLISLE* 

Sandon  :  November  28,  1828. 

We  arrived  here  yesterday.  I  had  a  long  and  most 
affecting  conversation  with  dearest  Lady  Harrowby. 
Her  grief,  so  deep,  so  hopeless,  is  the  more  painful  to 
witness,  as  the  struggle  of  he.r  life  is  to  suppress  and 
command  it.  She  gave  me  the  most  minute,  heart- 
rending details.  She  is  very  fond  of  Georgiana  and 
interested  about  the  younger  ones,  but  nothing  does  or 
ever  can  fill  up  the  blank,  the  dreadful  blank. 

There  is  an  enormous  world  at  Ingestre l — old  Sarum,2 
the  intended,  and  all  the  sons  and  relations. 

Sidney  Smith  has  been  at  Teddesley,.  handicapping 
Dick  Bagot  and  Mr.  Littleton  far  a  day's  shooting,  the 
latter  to  carry  six  of  the  Dean's  discourses  to  make  up 
the  weight. 

We  shall  find  the  Wharncliffes  at  Chatsworthr  which 
charms  me. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE.. 

Westhill:3  Decembers,  1828. 

What  a  delicious  letter  yours  is,  dear,  adorable 
brother ! 

Westhill  is  dissipated.  We  found  here  the  Gowers, 
and  the  Poodle  running  tame  about  the  house.  This 
morning,  and  a  warm,  spring,  ravishing  morning  it  was, 
arrived  on  foot  Agar  and  Agress,  both  fat  and  healthy, 
and  he  in  raging  spirits,  bringing  us  a  good  piece  of 
news  that,  strange  to  say,  was  news  to  us — namely,  that 
our  goods  have  sold  at  Paris  at  an  enormous  value,  the 
pianoforte  at  double  its  original  price.  Lord  Ashley 

1  For   the    marriage    of    Lord  Ingestre   to    Lady    Sarah   Beresford, 
daughter  of  the  second  Marquis  of  Waterford. 

2  Lady  Salisbury,  widow  of  the  first  Marquis.    She  was  burnt  to  death 
at  Hatfield  in  1835. 

3  Lord  Stafford's  Villa  at  Wimbledon. 


38        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1828 

and  Mr.  Luttrel  came  with  the  Ellises,  and  soon  after 
Mme.  de  Lieven.  *  Bonjour,  ma  chere.  Ah !  quelle 
sante.  Je  suis  si  heureuse  d'avoir  une  amie  qui  a  de 
1'embonpoint ; '  and  this  upon  the  very  threshold  of  our 
meeting. 

They  say  Brougham  is  to  fire  off  for  an  eclair  cisse- 
ment  of  the  Duke's  intentions  immediately  after  the 
Address. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Westhill :  December  8,  1828. 

One  moment.  Lady  Stafford,  Granville,  and  Poodle 
are  finishing  their  breakfast.  Coach  and  four  at  the 
door  to  go  and  see  York  House  *  and  shop. 

We  go  to  Panshanger  to-morrow ;  we  shall  meet 
three  generations  from  Lord  Clifden  to  Bossy,2  and 
Lieven,  qui  me  lira  beaucoup  de  ehoses.  I  hope  I  shall  be 
intelligent,  not  etrangere  aux  affaires* 

All  here  are  charmed  with  George's  speeches ;  both 
excellent,  full  of  feeling  and  judgment,  and  so  exactly 
the  right  tone  and  measure. 

Nothing  ever  was  so  kind  as  the  Hollands  have 
been.  They  have  Freddy 3  to  dinner  constantly ;  he 
always  sits  next  to  Lord  Holland,  and  they  talk  with- 
out ceasing  all  dinner-time.  Susy  says  they  say  we  do 
not  appreciate  him  nor  think  him  the  charming  child 
he  is,  and  she,  Susy,  agreed  with  the  opinion. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Panshanger :  December  13,  1828. 

Dearest  brother, — All  our  possible  friends  and 
children  are  here  brought  together.  Yet  the  flatness 
is  infectious  and  our  tails  are  between  our  legs. 

1  Which  was  bought  by  Lord  Stafford  and  became  Stafford  House. 

2  His  grandson,  who  succeeded  him. 

3  I   was  nine  years  old  and  at  a  school  in  Brighton,  where   the 
Hollands  were  staying. 


1828  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  39 

I  will  give  your  message  to  Prince  Lieven.  Their 
arrival  last  night  was  an  immense  improvement.  She 
is  in  very  good  spirits,  making  herself  available  in  every 
way,  working  a  bag,  playing  a  rubber,  cajoling  Hus- 
kisson,  who,  by  the  way,  is  a  fat,  robust,  digesting  man. 
Mrs.  Huskisson,  a  pitiable  case  of  small  health  and  low 
spirits.  Sir  Frederick  Lamb  is  very  ungracious  and 
bitter  and  growling.  Lord  Melbourne  exactly  the  re- 
verse, exuberant  to  a  degree.  Madame  de  Lieven 
suddenly  gave  a  start  in  the  middle  of  a  deal.  Emily, 
three  rooms  off,  was  vociferating  '  Bethgelert : '  '  Ah !  ma 
chere,  le  voila,  cette  terrible  chanson.  Figurez-vous 
que  c'est  un  chien  qui  se  meurt  pendant  treize  couplets, 
et  je  1'ai  entendue  deux  fois  et  cela  fait  vingt-six.' 

To  give  you  an  idea  of  the  way  here.  I  am  at  near 
two  returned  to  my  room,  fire  out,  no  housemaid  hav- 
ing been  near  it,  not  a  single  morsel  of  writing-paper  in 
either  of  our  rooms,  one  bad  pen  and  a  drop  of  ink. 
This  is  a  galanterie  of  Agar's  ;  I  keep  the  other  half  for 
Susy,  after  little  GranviUe's  arrival. 

I  have  no  news.  Montr ond  comes  to-morrow ;  Lord 
Melbourne  is  going  to  shoot  at  Mr.  Baring's. 

How  happy  Freddy  will  be  at  the  ball,  to  be  sure  ! 
They  say  she  is — Madame  Michaud l — severe,  but  would 
make  the  Simplon  chasser  croiser  if  she  had  a  mind. 

1  The  dancing  mistress  who  gave  the  children's  ball. 


40       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1829 


1829 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  February  19,  1829. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  political  news.  I  think 
it  seems  tolerably  calm  and  secure  now.  How  amiable 
of  Lord  Clare  to  be  sorry,  if  he  is  !  I  should  be  so 
pleased  never  to  see  her  again.1 

We  have  all  been  out  all  day,  and  sitting  at  Lady 
Wharncliffe's  open  window  like  citizens  on  a  Sunday 
to  see  the  folks  pass. 

I  am  glad  you  are  in  London,  as  if  you  were  not  I 
could  not  be  got  there  by  force  or  persuasion. 

We  are  rather  angry  with  you  for  not  talking  a 
great  deal  of  the  opera  relatively  to  Blanche.2  We  are 
dying  to  know  if  she  liked  it,  if  she  felt  shy.  I  have 
been  questioned,  but  could  not  answer. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  May  6,  1829. 

I  am  just  returned  from  the  bridge  over  the  Ser- 
pentine. Even  London  is  delicious  to-day.  The  park 
was  as  fresh  and  green  as  ten  miles  out  of  London. 

Yesterday  I  went  to  the  '  Cenerentola.'  Sontag, 
thinner  than  anybody  I  ever  saw,  looking  as  if  she  had 
cried  her  eyes  out,  sang  beautifully  sometimes,  some- 
times false,  which  she  never  used.  There  is  more 

1  Lady  Clare  had  just  left  him. 

2  This  refers  to  the  courtship  of  Mr.  William  Cavendish,  who  became 
successively  Lord  Burlington  and  Duke  of  Devonshire,  and  was  the  father 
of  the  present  Duke.     He  married  Lady  Blanche  Howard  in  the  following 
August. 


1829  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIEE  41 

effort,  weaker  in  health.  She  has  had  a  baby,  but  she 
is  married  and  has  been  so  two  years.  She  has  told 
her  story  to  her  friends,  because  of  the  malice  of  her 
enemies.  She  had  sworn  to  conceal  it,  but  trod  upon 
a  peach-stone,  was  known  to  accoucher,  and  therefore 
now  is  obliged  to  confide  the  truth  to  a  few.  Madame 
Appony  has  received  her  since  with  the  highest  honour, 
the  French  ditto.  The  husband  she  will  not  name  be- 
cause of  her  oath,  but  nobody  doubts  its  being  Count 
Clam.1  The  mystery  necessary  because  old  Clam  has 
promised  to  shoot  himself  if  his  son  marries  her. 

I  think  William  looks  after  Blanket.2  The  widow  in 
your  box,  black  satin  hat  and  white  feather,  looked  a 
beauty ;  and  the  box,  what  with  sons  and  men  that 
looked  like  medical  ones  or  heads  of  colleges,  choke  full. 

You  never  saw  such  a  '  disette  of  the  men '  at 
Emma's.3  No  smart  ones,  and  none  of  the  fine  ladies, 
few  of  the  beauties,  no  Cowpers,  Brudenells,  Sheridans, 
or  Baileys.  No  dowager  dandies  or  young  lordlings, 
save  Villiers,4  who  hopped  about  like  a  bird  with  a 
broken  wing,  sandy-coloured  and  blear-eyed,  yet  a 
sweet  smile  and  amiable  expression. 

God  bless  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Bruton  Street :  June  22,  1829. 

I  had  not  a  moment  yesterday  ;  no  post  to-day,  but 
I  prepare  for  to-morrow. 

The  King  uncommonly  silent  and  low  the  two  first 
days,  in  high  spirits  the  last.  Very  gracious,  very 
well,  walks  much  better,  his  sight  very  bad.  He  was 
quite  pathetic  about  your  absence.  I  must  say,  to  him, 
to  us,  to  all,  it  was  irreparable. 

Ascot  was  a  beautiful  sight  on  the  Cup  Day.     The 

1  She  was  married  to  Count  Eossi.  2  Lady  Blanche  Howard. 

3  Lady  Brownlow.  *  Lord  Jersey's  eldest  son. 


42        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1829 

King  bore  his  loss  like  an  angel  and  was  very  gracious  to 
Lord  Chesterfield,  Zingonee's  l  new  papa.  The  dinners 
not  very  long  or  hot,  though  Leeds  sat  on  one  side  of 
me,  drunk  as  a  fish,  quite  incoherent.  '  I  don't  know 
if  you  will  quite  take  my  meaning,  see  my  view,  but  it 
has  always  struck  me  that  scarlet  strawberries  in 
private  conversation  are  very  agreeable  to  meet  with 
occasionally.'  Little  Dorset  very  pleasant  on  the  other 
side  of  me.  Our  girls  behaved  very  well  and  were 
enchanted.  All  the  men  more  or  less  in  love  with 
Emily  Cowper. 

What  events,  the  election  and  the  good  effect  of 
inhaling ! 

Monday  morning.  — I  should  feel  more  remorse  had 
I  been  really  capable  of  anything  but  getting  through 
Ascot.  I  never  got  up  but  for  the  race,  and  was 
obliged  to  repose  in  the  interval  before  dinner.  As  to 
your  health,  you  do  not  think  yourself  famous  enough. 
Clinton  sent  bulletins  to  .her  lord,  and  I  knew  of  the 
success  of  the  inhaler  in  the  Stand. 

I  think  everything  is  to  your  heart's  consent. 
Who  would  not  love  and  be  proud  of  William ! 2 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Tollbridge  Wells :  August  23,  1829. 

My  dearest  sis, — I  have  hardly  had  a  moment.  We 
have  lived  in  junkets;  yesterday  Penshurst,  Bayham 
Abbey  the  day  before. 

We  have  had  most  agreeable,  delicious  little  repasts 
at  the  Lievens.  The  first  day  Cowpers  and  Lord  Ashley. 
I  did  not  take  Susy,  as  I  thought  it  would  be  a  gene  to 
her  to  find  herself  with  the  amanti.  Emily  was  in  the 
most  captivating  beauty.  Lady  Cowper  very  much  in 
love  with  Lord  Ashley  and  I  too,  we  agreed,  much  more 
than  the  girl.  However,  I  think  her  pleased  with  him 

1  The  horse  that  won  the  cup.          2  The  late  Duke  of  Devonshke. 


1829  TO   LADY  CARLISLE  43 

and  that  she  will  like  and  marry  him.  He  is  quite 
willing  to  wait  and  hope  and  try  everything  to  gain 
her  affections.  His  manner  of  making  up  to  her  is 
so  exactly  what  we  all  like  and  admire  that  everybody 
was  in  astonishment  at  her  insouciance.  So  passione,  so 
devoted,  yet  so  manly,  si  noble,  nothing  of  the  common- 
place role  in  it.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  judge  of  her, 
she  has  been  so  perseveringly  spoilt,  but  she  is  natural, 
gay,  and  good-humoured.  Her  only  chance,  I  think,  is. 
to  marry  a  good  sort  of  man  whom  she  likes  very 
much. 

Yesterday  we  had  Lord  Aberdeen  and  Lord 
Abercorn.  The  day  before  only  the  Lievens.  Lord 
Aberdeen  very  great  friend  of  the  Princess's.  To-day 
the  Stratford  Cannings  perhaps. 

The  Lievens  are  of  course  much  in  raptures  at  the 
Eussian  successes,  all  but  everything.  Lord  Aberdeen 
says  there  is  nothing  to  oppose  them  now  between 
their  present  conquest  and  Constantinople,  a  distance 
of  only  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles.  He  tries  to 
look  up  about  it  all,  praises  Jules'  understanding  too, 
but  certainly  the  Government  here  is  not  at  its 
brightest  moment.  The  Duke  must  be  amazingly 
annoyed  at  the  debut  of  Monsieur  de  Polignac. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  August  27, 1829. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — I  received  a  letter  to-day  from 
Lady  Cowper,  begging  us  to  go  to  Panshanger,  which 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  do.  She  says  :  *  We  are  still  in 
a  great  state  of  irresolution  about  Lord  Ashley.  You 
cannot  think  how  much  anxiety  I  feel,  and  indeed  so 
does  she  from  the  difficulty  of  making  up  her  mind.' 
I  shall  really  break  my  heart  for  him  if  she  decides 
against,  yet  I  should  break  a  dozen,  if  I  had  them,  for 
him  if  she  marries  him  without  loving  him.  So  I  am 


44       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1829 

glad  to  have  no  voice  in  the  affair  and  to  have  always 
advised,  as  she  alwaj^s  consults,  leaving  the  girl  to  her 
own  decision. 

Mrs.  Hamilton  describes  all  that  we  read  in  the 
papers  of  the  dismay  of  the  French.  She  says  Lady 
Stuart  is  coming  to  England  immediately.  Lady 
Aldborough,  who  is  in  this  hotel,  gives  up  going  back 
to  Paris  and  says  the  English  will  probably  all  come 
away,  as  we  are  execrated  there. 

The  Eussian  details  are  most  interesting.  They  say 
the  Sultan  is  quite  mad  and  quite  resolved  not  to  give 
way.  His  fate  must  be  decided  now.  He  is  the  image 
of  Lord  Aberdeen,  with  a  violent,  nervous  twitch  in  his 
face,  lately  come.  Poor  man ! 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  AND  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Bruton  Street :  September  1,  1829. 

Dearest  brother  and  sister, — We  arrived  here  yes- 
terday. London  is  at  its  height  of  loneliness — one  end 
of  Bruton  Street  mending  and  blocked  up — so  that  there 
is  not  a  sound  or  a  creature  in  it.  Yet  I  have  seen 
Madame  de  Lieven  this  morning.  She  came  up  from 
Eichmond.  There  was  a  Cabinet  yesterday.  I  hear  the 
Duke  remains  in  town,  has  too  much  to  do  to  return  to 
Walmer. 

The  report  is  that  the  Eussians  were  at  the  gates  of 
Constantinople ;  Gordon  and  Gruilleminot l  gone  to  their 
quarters.  Madame  de  Lieven  talks  immensely  big, 
says  they  will  not  stay  in  Constantinople,  but  that  they 
will  enter  it,  and  then  and  there  show  their  moderation. 

The  post  bell !  I  must  leave  off  with  a  thousand 
things  to  say. 

Susy  is  perfect,  admirable — the  deepest  feeling  with 
such  simplicity,  such  reality.  Poor  Eward  terribly  low. 
It  is  a  most  severe  trial  to  her. 

1  The  English  and  French  Ambassadors. 


1829  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  45 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  September  2,  1829. 

We  dine  at  Holland  House  to-riiorrow,  which  just 
now  I  must  add  to  the  list  of  my  grievances.  The  two 
Granvilles  rode  there  yesterday.  In  Kensington  they 
met  Lord  Ashley  looking  blooming  and  radiant.  He  is 
coming  to  see  me  to-day. 

I  hear  Emily  says  she  is  not  in  love,  never  was,  and 
never  shall  be  ;  that  she  supposes  she  must  marry  some 
day,  and  hopes  when  she  does  she  shall  love  her  hus- 
band, because  it  is  right,  but  the  later  the  better.  Lord 
A.  knows  this,  and  Lady  Cowper  begged  him  to  con- 
sider how  much  his  love  and  grief  would  be  augmented 
by  coming  to  Panshanger,  but  he  persists.  He  does 
not  care  what  risks  he  runs  for  the  slightest  hope. 

The  girl,  I  know,  was  often  so  rude  and  reveche  that 
Lord  A.  was  wretched.  Then  Lady  Cowper,  in  an 
agony  of  pity,  scolds  and  tells  her  she  has  a  heart  of 
stone,  and  writes  a  kind  note  to  the  spark.  She  said  to 
me  that  Emily  said  to  her  one  day,  '  You  tease  me  so, 
you  talk  of  nothing  else.  Let  me  forget  it,  and  then, 
perhaps,  I  shall  like  him  better.' 

^ 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Chatsworth:  September  1829. 

Dearest  sister,  —  I  am  so  enraptured  at  being  here 
with  my  girls.  There  is  but  one  cloud,  but  it  will  pass, 
and  I  cannot  lament  it.  My  adorable  Susy  continues 
to  be  very  low.1  I  find,  with  all  her  calm  and  enjoy- 
ment, her  feelings  are  of  the  deepest  kind.  She  has 
the  most  melancholy  smile  that  cuts  my  heart  in  twain. 
My  dearest  brother  is  all  kindness,  but  it  is  a  sort  of 
disappointment  and  damper  to  him,  and  he  asks  when 
it  will  be  over,  as  one  does  at  a  dull  play.  Greorgy, 

1  At  parting  with  her  governess. 


46        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1829 

par  centre,  is — and  this  is  most  natural — quite  an  altered 
being.  She  thinks  she  is  very  sorry  and  felt  very 
properly  about  it ;  but  her  almost  wild  spirits,  her 
countenance,  and  her  good  looks  in  consequence  are 
perfectly  marvellous,  and  I  must  say  her  joy  and  Susy's 
grief  give  me  satisfaction.  They  would  not  be  as 
natural  or  loveable  if  either  were  put  on  or  put  off. 
Then  to  see  them  together  is  quite  beautiful,  and  very 
soon  the  only  drawback  will  wear  away. 

I  feel  quite  nervous  till  to-day's  post.  If  the  account 
of  her  is  tolerably  good,  we  shall  all  feel  much  relieved, 
though  I  cannot  believe  for  a  long  time  she  will  recover 
anything  like  cheerfulness  or  composure.  The  moment 
of  separation  was  harrowing.  There  is  no  other  word. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE.  \&. 

Chatsworth :  September  1829. 

Dearest  sister, — I  'saw  Blanche  set  off  yesterday  in 
high  health,  spirits,  and  beauty,  and  my  brother  not 
only  delighted  to  take  her  to  Derby  but  to  leave  us,  his 
charming  guests,  for  a  day. 

Morpeth's  arrival  yesterday  has  given  a  new  turn  to 
our  amusements,  and  the  young  are  all  practising  a 
charade  for  to-night  in  the  State  rooms.  He  looks  un- 
commonly well,,  the  family  somewhat  excited  by  his 
arrival.  Caroline  has  pined  for  it,  as,  now  John  is 
gone,  she  sighs  only  for  representations. 

I  have  invented  something  very  ingenious,  Lady 
Carlisle.  I  come  every  morning  to  the  music-room  to 
write  to  you.  It  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  soci- 
able and  pleasant  without  paying  the  tax.  If  you  could 
hear  the  many  well-known  voices  from  the  drawing- 
room  !  Lady  Cowper  loud  yet  languid,  Mme.  de  Lieven 
dry  and  conclusive,  Lady  Grantham's  purling  stream, 
Clanwilliam's  shout  of  scorn.  Then  it  is  so  amusing  to 
see  them  come  out  one  by  one,  full  of  their  last  impres- 


1829  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  47 

sions.  Dearest  Lady  Wharncliffe  sits  alongside  of  the 
torrent  always,  and  Lady  Newburgh  is  quiet  too,  always 
bursting  with  her  last  squabble.  Mrs.  Darner  has  been 
through,  dying  with  laughter.  The  Wiltons  and  Charles 
Greville  come  to-day,  and  the  Belfasts  and  Stanleys  have 
announced  themselves.  I  enjoy  myself  to  the  greatest 
degree  ;  it  is  so  noisy  that  it  is  easy  to  be  quiet,  so  gay 
that  it  is  comfortable  to  be  dull. 

Emily  loves  sport,  nothing  else.  Lord  Clan- 
william's  vanity  gives  way  to  his  fear  of  committing 
himself,  but  he  allows  himself  all  the  amusement  short 
of  that.  She  is  attractive  and  lovely,  but  I  am  a  little 
tired  of  seeing  her  colour  and  shy,  and  have  a  wish  for 
more  of  heart  and  opinion.  Blanche  is  universally  ad- 
mired and  approved  of.  H.  de  Eos  :  '  What  uncommonly 
pretty  women  your  two  nieces  are,  Lady  Granville  ! ' 

I  think  the  Lievens  will  scarcely  get  to  you.  If 
they  do,  it  will  be  the  end  of  next  week. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE.  n|r, 

Chatsworth  :  September  14,  1829. 

Lady  Gower  arrived  yesterday.  I  do  not  think 
Lord  Stafford  at  all  in  an  alarming  state,  and  I  think 
Lord  Gower  will  be  able  to  join  her  at  Doncaster  to-day. 
Granville  goes  with  her  to  Doncaster.  My  brother  and 
little  John,  Mr.  Shortbut l  as  Harney  Cavendish 2  calls 
him,  set  out  to-morrow.  Charles  and  Catty  are  gone  to 
Ossington  and  Mrs.  Arkwright  gone  home. 

It  seems  to  me  so  strange  to  be  left  here  in  pos- 
session of  this  kingdom  alone  with  my  two  girls,  for 
Guinea  went  to  Eton  to-day  with  Sir  Geoffrey  Wyatville 
straight  on  end.  To-morrow  we  three  go  to  Stoke  to 
stay  there  till  Friday.  I  delight  in  Mrs.  Arkwright,  and 
my  girls  are  delighted  to  go  to  quite  a  new  place.  Susy 
has  recovered  her  spirits,  and  I  never  saw  her  look  so 

1  Mr.  John  Talbot,  who  was  very  tall. 

2  Miss  Cavendish,   who  became  the   second  wife  of  the  late  Lord 
Stratford. 


48        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1829 

well.     We  have  most  affecting  but  comfortable  letters 
from  Mile.  Eward.     Her  health  is  perfectly  good. 

We  shall  all  meet  here  at  dinner  on  Friday.  We 
long  for  Blanche.  How  the  happiness  of  that  menage 
seems  to  double  my  brother's ! 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Newby  :  September  22,  1829. 

Yesterday  we  spent  a  delightful  day.  At  one  we 
set  out,  Catley,  Susy  and  myself,  in  a  britschka,  and 
Dody  and  Mary  in  a  chaise,  and  went  to  see  Fountains 
Abbey  and  all  the  places.  I  never  saw  anything  more 
beautiful.  We  returned  in  fur  cloaks  by  moonlight  to 
rest  in  our  rooms  till  dinner.  Granville,  Lord  Clan- 
william,  and  Charles  Cavendish  rode,  but  not  with  us. 
Catty  and  the  girls  are  the  picture  of  comfort,  drawing 
as  if  Page l  was  amongst  them. 

o  o 

Lord  Clanwilliam  is  very  agreeable  at  times,  at 
others  yawning  and  bored,  but  happier  here  than  I 
have  seen  him  elsewhere,  as  he  is  cock  of  the  walk. 
If  I  was  asked  what  he  was  and  not  knowing  names 
and  relations,  I  should  say  an  only  son,  idolized  and 
spoilt  by  his  doating  parents  and  devoted  sisters. 

Susy  and  Dody  like  it  very  well,  but  do  not  get  on 
with  the  young  and  are  a  little  too  much  patted  and 
stroked  by  the  old  ;  in  short,  they  are  very  happy  to  go 
to  Wortley  to-morrow. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Lilleshall:  November  20,  1829. 

My  dearest  sister, — We  have  been  this  morning 
driving  and  walking  to  the  Abbey  ;  the  day  has  been 
delicious.  Mr.  Sneyd  is  just  arrived.  He  looks  very 
pretty  and  manly  in  a  fur  coat  and  seems  uncommonly 
amiable.  Very  low  and  flat,  which  I  think  such  an 

Their  drawing  master. 


1829  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  49 

improvement  to  him,  as  he  has  quite  enough  in  him  to 
afford  to  be  below  par,  and  it  is  so  much  pleasanter 
than  when  he  is  all  becks  and  wanton  smiles. 

We  have  had  a  pleasant  little  dinner.  Mr.  Sneyd 
seems  become  a  regular  country  gentleman,  improving 
and  planting.  God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon :  November  22,  1829. 

We  arrived  here  before  five  yesterday,  found  Lord 
Harrowby  alone,  looking  as  if  he  was  surprised  we 
were  come  and  not  glad.  But  this  is  only  his  charming 
manner,  for  he  doats  upon  Granville  and  loves  company. 

Lady  Harrowby  came  to  us  in  a  minute,  kind 
beyond  measure,  in  wonderful  looks,  and  her  spirits 
quite  as  good  as  ever.  The  girls  are  in  ecstasies  to 
have  mine.  Dody  is  charmed  with  Louisa ; l  Susy  very 
well  pleased  with  Harriet,2  who  is  a  most  excellent, 
good-natured  creature. 

Ladies  Sandon,  Mary  Saurin,  Harriet  and  Louisa 
Eyder,  devouring  the  two  annuals  you  gave  my  girls. 
They  had  seen  none  and  are  enchanted,  twittering  like 
hedge-sparrows. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon :  November  24,  1829. 

Dearest  sis, — We  left  the  Gowers  with  the  very 
greatest  regret.  We  have  all  been  enchanted  with  her, 
and,  independently  of  all  she  is,  her  amiability  to  us  all 
was  more  attaching  than  I  can  say.  We  never  were 
more  snug  than  in  their  unfinished,  unfurnished  house  ; 
but  then  to  be  sure  they  gave  us  up  their  own  apart- 
ment, with  two  dressing-rooms.  I  had  no  idea  how 
clever  she  was,  as  well  as  excellent. 

1  She  married  Mr.  George  Fortescue. 

2  She  married  Lord  Charles  Hervey. 

VOL.    II.  E 


50        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1829 

Hart  goes  to  Brighton  to-morrow  to  see  if  his  house 
is  fit  to  live  in. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon  :  November  25,  1829. 

The  girls  are  very  happy.  Their  evenings  are 
spent  giving  letters  and  other  innocent  pastimes,  which 
Sandon  animates  and  leads  with  all  that  unselfish 
perfection  of  character  which  makes  him  enter  with 
pleasure  into  anything  which  gives  it.  The  Dowagers, 
Lord  Harrowby,  Mr.  Sneyd,  and  I,  play  steady  rubbers 
at  shilling  whist. 

I  have  picked  up  a  little  news  for  you  at  breakfast. 
Mr.  Fortescue  writes  from  Dropmore  that  Miss  Fanny 
has  been  rehearsing  '  Belvidera,'  and  that  the  scene- 
shifters  and  lamplighters  all  wept,  and  the  other  actors 
and  actresses  could  not  go  on  with  their  parts. 

Georgiana  Wortley  tells  Lady  Harrowby  that  Lord 
Ashley  talks  of  giving  up  his  office  and  going  to 
America,  and  that  Emily  advises  him  not  to  be  so  discom- 
posed, and  not  to  go.  What  an  odd  footing !  Georgiana 
adds  that  she  supposes  it  will  end  after  all  in  her 
marrying  him. 

The  Talbots  are  going  to  Hatfield  to  meet  Lady 
Cowley,1  who  is  arrived  from  Vienna.  They  come  here 
on  Monday  for  one  night,  on  their  way  with  Arthur  the 
clergyman,  very  inferior  to  little  John,  I  believe.  I 
hope  we  shall  none  of  us  fall  in  love  with  him. 

We  have  a  quantity  of  leisure  here,  and  go  on  in  a 
spirited  manner  with  Dante.  I  am  now  reading  a  book 
that  interests  and  enchants  me,  Sumner's  '  Eecords  of 
the  Creation.'  Ask  Morpeth  about  it.  God  bless  you. 

1  Sister  of  the  first  Marquis  of  Salisbury,  and  wife  of  the  Ambassador 
at  Paris. 


1829  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  51 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon :  November  28,  1829. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — We  expect  all  our  world  to- 
morrow, when  I  hope  to  be  more  entertaining.  We 
were  half  way  through  dinner  yesterday,  when  the  door- 
bell rang,  and  in  rushed  Mr.  Montagu,  with  an  orange 
comforter  round  his  neck,  loud,  fearless,  garrulous.  He 
talks  as  he  did,  but  I  am  less  used  to  it,  and  though 
often  amusing,  it  is  as  often  de  trop.  He  falls  into  a  little 
knot  of  women  not  to  his  taste — at  least  it  is  to  be 
hoped  so — as  Beckett,  Powlett,  and  even  Lady  Lonsdale 1 
are  his  heroines.  '  A  younger  woman  than  any  of  you, 
rides  to  cover,  plays  at  start-up,  and  none  of  us  can 
catch  her.'  Playful  seventy  ! 

Lady  Frances  Sandon  set  out  early  this  morning  to 
travel  by  slow  journeys  into  Devonshire.  Sandon  is  to 
join  her  there.  My  girls  adore  him,  and  it  is  every- 
thing to  them  to  have  him  stay.  He  puts  everything 
en  train.  They  conglomerated  yesterday  evening  again, 
with  shouts  of  merriment.  Mr.  Sneyd  is  very  amiable, 
his  spirits  raised,  and  all  his  little  airs  and  graces  gone. 

Mr.  Wilmot  writes  to  Lady  Harrowby  from  Paris. 
He  says  the  Liberals  are  perfectly  secure,  that  the 
Government  cannot  stand,  and  that  instead  of  gaining 
they  lose  by  having  got  rid  of  La  Bourdonnaie,2  as 
they  look  upon  it  as  a  proof  of  timidity,  have  redoubled 
their  confidence,  and  will  not  hear  of  any  compromise. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon  :  November  29,  1829. 

It  is  said  and  believed  that  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
has  bought  all  the  Tories  excepting  five.  This  proof  of 

1  Their  mother. 

2  An  active  politician  during  the  Restoration.    He  joined  the  Polignac 
Ministry  upon  its  formation,  but  three  months  later,  on  the  Prince  de 
Polignac  becoming  President   of  the   Council,  he  resigned.     He  said : 
'  Quand  je  joue  ma  tete,  j'aime  a  tenir  les  cartes.' 

E  2 


52        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1829 

where  lie  seeks  for  strength  will  drive  Lord  Grey  in 
strong  opposition. 

Mrs.  Siddons  is  very  much  pleased  with  Miss 
Fanny. 

Cradock  has  left  Brighton.  Lady  Jersey  adores  him. 
Lady  Lyndhurst  thinks  him  too  fat.  Lady  Conyngham 
is  recovering  very  slowly. 

Lady  Dacre  is  in  raptures  with  Miss  Fanny,  and  has 
written  two  plays  for  Lady  Frances.1  The  first  was 
supposed  to  be  too  sentimental,  so  she  has  translated  a 
French  thing  for  her,  '  Le  Premier  Amour.'  Lord  Pal- 
mer ston  is  going  to  Paris. 

Madame  de  Flahault  says  Monsieur  de  la  Bour- 
donnaie's  retirement  proceeded  entirely  from  his  refusal 
to  recall  the  Jesuits.  Great  treason  talked  in  the 
Liberal  salons,  amongst  those  even  nearest  the  Court. 

Monsieur  de  Talleyrand  still  in  an  unsatisfactory 
state  and  will  go  to  Bochecotte,  which  his  friends  think 
very  imprudent. 

Yesterday  was  charming.  The  Gowers  came,  to  our 
immense  delight,  and  Lord  Goderich,  whom  I  think 
charming,  as  a  private  character.  We  played  at  whist 
and  de  petits  jeiuic. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon  :  December  2,  1829. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  write  to  write,  for  I  have 
nothing  to  tell  you.  Lord  Talbot  and  his  son  are  gone 
to  Teddesley.  Lady  Cecil  is  just  returned  to  Ingestre. 
My  girls  are  very  much  enchanted  with  her.  They 
think  her  captivating  beyond  measure.  I  just  stop  short 
of  that.  I  think  her  excellent,  amiable,  unselfish,  un- 
pretending, gay.  I  hope  you  think  that  enough,  but  I 
should  be  surprised  if  I  saw  anybody  very  much  in  love 
with  her. 

1  Lady  F.  Leveson  had  private   theatricals  in  which   Miss  Fanny 
Kemble  appeared. 


1829  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  53 

To-day  being  our  first  morning  without  company, 
Lady  Harrowby  is  going  to  put  on  her  jacket  and  go 
labouring  ;  I  am  going  to  trudge  in  my  raw  laptiste 
with  Dody,  the  rest  are  going  to  ride.  Mr.  Lister 
comes  here  to-morrow.  I  saw  him  the  other  morning. 
He  is  uncommonly  pleasing  in  his  look  and  manner — 
such  a  pretty  smile  and  unpretending  quiet  way,  but 
his  health  appears  very  bad.  I  never  saw  such  uncon- 
querable languor,  so  evidently  constitutional. 

Poor  Lord  Harrowby  !  he  is  now  snapping  all  their 
noses  off,  one  after  another — never  Susy's — with  little 
sharp  scissors.  There  is  something  in  her  face  and 
Granville's  that  quite  prevents  his  ever  snubbing 
them. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Sandon  :  December  3,  1829. 

Dearest  sister, — They  are  all  talking  of  Lord  Howe's 
appointment,  some  saying  it  is  a  proof  that  the  Duke  is 
making  up  to  the  ultra-Tories ;  others  know  that  the 
King  and  Howe  have  always  been  great  friends. 

Granville  is  getting  impatient  to  be  in  town,  as  our 
relations,  the  Kutzlebens,  are  come.  It  is  insisted  upon 
that  I  should  crack  this  joke  by  Mr.  Sneyd  and  Lady 
Harrowby.  They  say  Lord  Carlisle  will  know  who 
they  are,  descendants  of  a  Miss  Wrottesley,  and  there 
is  an  advertisement  in  the  paper  that  they  are  arrived 
in  Gracechurch  Street,  Bishopsgate.  God  bless  you, 
dearest. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Bruton  Street :  December  7,  1829. 

Dearest  sister, — We  were  parted  with  at  Sandon 
with  kindness  and  regret  beyond  measure — Lady  Har- 
rowby with  her  warmth  d'autrefois,1  and  Lord  H.  was 

1  What  she  was  before  Lady  Elrington's  death. 


54       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1829 

quite  sentimental  with  Susy.  We  had  a  delicious  even- 
ing at  Stony  Stratford  and  arrived  here  at  four.  Gran- 
ville  went  to  White's,  where  he  met  Esterhazy,  who 
told  him  that  Polignac  and  the  Liberals  talk  equally  big, 
but  that  somebody  who  met  the  former  thought  his 
confidence  assumed. 

The  Emperor  of  Eussia  is  alarmingly  ill — a  fever. 
Madame  de  Lieven  said  to  D. :  '  JSTesselrode  me  rassure, 
mais  ne  me  tranquillise  pas.'  Duke  of  Wellington  very 
equal  in  his  attentions  to  both  sides  as  the  meeting 
approaches.  My  brother  very  civilly  disposed  towards 
him,  as  I  have  no  doubt  Lord  Winchilsea  is.  Is  he 
the  cleverest  of  us  all?  Lord  Stuart  disgusted  with 
Paris.  Lady  so  much  affronted  with  the  French  that 
she  all  but  cuts  them.  Lady  Jersey  and  my  brother 
acting  friendship.  It  seems  now  her  mar  die  to  be  con- 
ciliating. 

Aldborough  has  given  up  Paris  and  is  going  to  buy 
a  house  at  Brighton.  She  said  to  Lady  Holland,  '  Is 
the  Archbishop  of  York  straightlaced  ? '  Holly  an- 
swered, 'No,  not  at  all,  at  all,  but  he  is,'  pointing  to 
Allen,  sitting  in  a  corner. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Bruton  Street :  December  9,  1829. 

I  write  to-night  because  I  am  afraid  of  not  having 
much  time  to-morrow.  We  found  assembled  at  Madame 
de  Lieven's  D.,  the  Lambs,  Punch,  Mr.  Luttrel,  the  Due 
de  Laval,  Alfred  de  Vandreuil,  and  Montrond.  The 
Lievens  are  low  and  uneasy  about  the  Emperor.  Laval 
extremely  distressed  at  the. death  of  his  mother.  He 
will  be  very  popular,  as  he  is  civility  and  tenderness 
itself — at  the  foot  of  every  woman  and  the  button-hole  of 
every  man.  Susy  sat  between  Laval  and  Montrond. 
Dody  had  Punch  and  was  charmed  with  him.  He  wins 
my  heart  by  his  admiration  of  Susy.  '  Monstrous  hand- 


1829  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  55 

some  girl  she  is,  charming  girl,'  every  second  word. 
He  puts  forth  all  his  powers  of  amusing  when  he  talks 
to  her,  and  she  thinks  him  uncommonly  agreeable,  but 
her  head  is  not  one  that  turns  to  anything  but  Blanche's 
and  Nussey's 1  attentions,  and  Dody  admires  him  twice 
as  much  as  she  does. 

We  hear  from  little  Guinea  that  Miss  Kemble  was 
received  with  rapture  last  night.  Shouts  and  throwings 
up  of  handkerchiefs,  and  somebody  at  the  Travellers' 
said  it  was  infinitely  superior  to  her  Juliet.  So  to- 
morrow we  shall  see. 

1  Miss  Wortley. 


56        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1830 


1830 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  January  1830. 

I  have  seen  Lord  Carlisle,  full  of  Abercromby  Chief 
Baron  of  Scotland.1  Well  done,  beau  Wellington !  I 
have  seen  Mrs.  Huskisson,  thunderstruck  about  Wortley, 
delighted  about  Brougham.  So  am  I  doubly  since  this 
last  hit  of  the  Beau's,  which  will  make  Hart  awfully 
grateful.  Lord  Essex  carries  Lord  Carlisle  to  the 
House.  Granville  is  just  gone  to  hear  the  little  Duke. 
There  is  a  rumour  that  the  vacant  place  is  to  be  offered 
to  Mr.  Stanley,  Sandon,  or  Lord  Howick.  I  feel  sure 
that  neither  of  the  first  would  accept.  Granville  went 
to  Madame  de  Li  even's  ;  only  six  women  had  braved 
such  a  night.  The  Duke  was  there,  looking  old  and 
careworn,  very  well  in  health. 

Lady  Harrowby  is  arrived.  I  wonder  if  her  ener- 
gies will  carry  her  to  the  House. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Bruton  Street :  February  1830. 

Well,  dearest,  another  impossible  day.  I  saw  but 
violent  rain  and  unfathomable  dirt,  muddy  dirt,  but 
quiet. 

I   saw  yesterday  morning   Lord   Wharncliffe.     He 

1  This  office  should  have  been  bestowed  on  the  Lord  Advocate  of 
Scotland,  but  that  course  was  violated  in  order  to  conciliate  the  Duke  of 
Devonshire.  Mr.  Abercromby  was  his  man  of  business,  and  had  long  sat 
in  Parliament  for  one  of  his  boroughs. 


1830  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  57 

sat  with  me  an  hour,  tells  me  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
is  in  high  health  and  spirits. 

Great  indignation  at  Mr.  Herries's  appointment. 

How  can  I  have  written  so  long  without  saying 
anything  of  poor  Mr.  Tierney's  death!  It  seems  to 
have  been  sudden,  although  he  had  been  previously  ill. 
Granville  saw  the  Hollands  yesterday  and  dines  with 
them  to-day.  He  says  they  are  very  much  grieved,  and 
say  nothing  had  been  so  unexpected.  Mrs.  Tierney 
had  left  him  the  morning  of  the  day  and  had  called 
proposing  to  take  a  walk. 

The  Session  is  expected  by  everybody  to  be  stormy : 
violent  and  agitating  discussions.  I  suppose  the  Duke 
will  sit  cracking  these  nuts  and  leave  the  different 
parties  to  fight  it  out  with  each  other. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  February  8,  1830. 

I  have  been  shut  up  with  the  girls,  and  yesterday 
was  my  first  dissipation.  I  dined  at  the  Lievens. 
Greece  *  on  one  side,  so  low,  so  flat,  so  thin,  that  the 
log  was  a  better  King  than  that.  Nobody  knows 
what  is  to  be,  but  he  whispered  it  all  in  German  to 
the  Princess,  who  did  not  tell  us  anything  about  it.  I 
had  Morpeth  by  me  on  the  other  side,  and  he  paid  me 
as  much  attention  as  a  man  can  who  has  Emily  Cowper 
on  the  other,  beautiful  and  buoyant.  The  Wharncliflfes 
were  amongst  us  with  their  tails  between  their  legs. 
Huskissons,  F.  Lamb,  Lord  Palmerston,  everybody, 
says  the  Government  cannot  go  on  as  it  is.  We 
shall  see.  The  report  of  Lord  Ellenborough  going  out 
is  general.  The  effect  of  the  two  last  debates  in  the 
House  of  Commons  would  necessitate  a  change  under 
any  other  Premier,  but  I  feel  convinced  he  will 
weather  it  if  Peel  is  not  alarmed  and  does  not  refuse 

1  Prince  Leopold. 


58        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1830 

to  wade  through,  the  dirt  of  the  Session.  F.  Lamb  is 
bitter  beyond  measure  ;  angry  with  Lord  Holland  for 
being  lukewarm ;  says  we  have  dawdled  till  their 
moment  of  danger  has  passed ;  suspects  Brougham  ;  has 
got  a  story  of  his  pushing  back  the  Whigs  who  were 
following  him,  saying,  'For  God's  sake,  don't  come 
after  me,  you  will  leave  the  Government  in  a  minority.' 
Dearest  sister,  of  all  things  that  did  not  affect  those 
dear  and  near  to  me,  Lord  Graves'  death l  has  shocked 
me  the  most.  It  leaves  a  sort  of  horror  in  the  mind  at 
all  he  must  have  undergone  ;  what  she  must  now,  and 
those  poor  children.  I  had  heard  nothing  since  I  told 
you  that  Lady  Mount  Charles  said  the  whole  history 
was  a  lie.  I  knew  he  was  living  with  her  again  and 
had  asked  Lord  George  Seymour,  whom  he  met  in  the 
street,  to  call  upon  her. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  February  1830. 

There  is  every  sort  of  speculation  afloat  about 
politics,  and  I  feel  a  conviction  that  the  Duke  will  not 
throw  himself  upon  any  party,  but  fish  in  all.  Madame 
de  Lieven  has  asked  him  to  dinner  on  Sunday  to  meet 
us,  Lady  Cowper  and  Lady  Harrowby,  and  is  extremely 
amused  at  the  prospect. 

I  saw  yesterday  Lady  Canning,  very  much  softened, 
perhaps  partly  by  the  sorry  figure  her  enemies  cut  just 
now.  I  hear  the  Duke  floundered  out  his  vindication 
of  Lord  Ellenborough.  I  admired  George  Lamb's 
speech  very  much,  but  am  told  it  was  foolish  and  im- 
prudent and  gave  the  Government  an  opportunity  of 
saying  many  things  they  wish,  and  played  their  game 
in  short. 

I  am  convinced  of  poor  Lady  Graves'  innocence, 
and  believe  that  he  had  been  goaded  to  suspect  and 

1  He  committed  suicide. 


1830  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  59 

tax  her  with  what  is  certain  he  never  discovered, 
that  he  was  extremely  furious  and  violent,  and  that  his 
misery  has  been  the  having  by  his  accusations  ruined 
her  character.  Think  what  those  must  feel  who  were 
in  the  habit  of  exciting  his  mind  against  her  and 
sending  him  all  the  paragraphs  and  accusations ! 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  February  1830. 

My  beloved  sister, — I  have  nothing  new.  Johnny 
Eussell  has  just  been  here.  Lord  Ashley  behaved  most 
beautifully  last  night.  How  that  girl  can  help  liking 
him,  seeing  his  devotion  for  her,  with  something  so 
noble,  so  manly  in  his  whole  manner  and  conduct !  He 
danced  all  night  with  the  girls,  did  not  follow  her  at  all, 
and  his  spirits  appeared  good  without  being  forced, 
though  I,  who  know,  could  have  cried  over  him. 

Lady  Graves  has  not  had  a  moment  of  consciousness 
since  she  heard  ;  in  fainting  fits,  and  delirious  at  times. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  February  11,  1830. 

Dearest  sister, — Pretty  speeches  of  Husky  and  Grant, 
and  very  proper  butter  spread  upon  Abercromby  by 
the  former. 

I  have  been  walking  to  Lady  Harrowby,  who  is  in 
bed  with  a  severe  cold  and  can  scarcely  breathe  or 
speak,  but  in  despair  at  giving  up  going  to  the  House 
of  Commons  to-night.  The  Wharncliffes  came  and 
tea'd  with  us  last  night.  There  is  a  slight  gene  because 
we  never  mention  politics,  but  they  are  such  nice 
people  and  there  are  luckily  so  many  other  subjects  in 
the  world. 

I  see  Peel  is  very  touchy  about  Husky's  pleasant- 
ries. 

Lady  Graves  continues  in  the  same  state.      When 


60        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1830 

she  speaks,  it  is  to  ask  why  he  does  not  come  to  fetch 
her  to  some  place  where  they  were  to  have  gone 
together.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland  has  been  sent  to 
by  the  police  to  tell  him  that  they  cannot  answer  for 
his  life  if  he  goes  about.  I  must  pity  him.  There  is  a 

O  -L          !/ 

fatality  about  him,  and  I  hear  the  nervous  horror  of 
his  manner  is  dreadful.  It  is  now  made  a  crime  that 
he  called  at  Hampton  Court  to  inquire  how  Lady 
Graves  was. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  February  1830. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Morpeth  is  much  pleased  with 
Miss  Fanny,  though  he  sees  the  faults  I  see  and  is  not 
foolishly  enthusiastic.  How  glad  I  am  that  Brougham 
accepts  and  is  coming  in  for  Knaresborough  !  Some- 
body said,  J.  Wortley  between  Lords  Ashley  and 
Ellenborough  will  be  the  tame  elephant  between  the 
wild  ones.  Mr.  Luttrel  was  asked  whom  he  had  met 
at  the  Hollands.  '  The  quick  and  the  dead,'  Lord 
Clanwilliam  and  Mr.  Eogers.  Mr.  Montagu  was  full  of 
joy  at  the  people  at  Melton,  after  Lord  Clanwilliam  had 
been  over,  unshaved  and  very  grand,  holding  all  of 
them  as  cheap  as  dirt,  asking,  'Who's  that  heavy  swell?' 
The  name  is  a  good  one. 

I  am  poorly  and  don't  feel  jovial. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  February  18,  1830. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — I  have  seen  my  brother  in  such 
spirits,  so  happy  with  the  little  menage  at  Devonshire 
House,  disgusted  with  John  Wortley — indeed,  I  never 
saw  so  general  an  opinion  as  the  one  of  his  having  so 
lowered  himself ;  delighted  about  Abercromby,  satisfied 
with  himself  about  Brougham.  The  minority  last  night 
must  have  been  a  curious  sight — O'Connell  and  Sadler 
walking  out  side  by  side. 


1830  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  61 

Agar  has  just  been.  He  seems  to  think  Lord 
Ashley  and  Emily  will  certainly  be  ;  do  is  another  ques- 
tion. They  say  Frederick  Lamb  is  strong  for  it  now. 
God  bless  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OP  DEVONSHIRE. 

Saltram :  August  22,  1830. 

Many  thanks  for  your  letter,  dearest  brother.  We 
have  here  the  mildest,  prettiest  weather ;  nobody  but 
Theresa  and  Mr.  Lister,  engaged  and  seeming  perfectly 
happy. 

To-day  Lord  Graves l  and  his  French  wife,  some 
Frenchmen  and  sparks  quartered  at  Plymouth,  expected. 
I  had  forgot  the  Bulteels,  the  happiest  couple  I  ever 
saw,  devoted  to  each  other,  fond  of  all  the  same  things, 
their  children  and  place,  drawing  like  artists,  singing 
like  nightingales. 

Eward  has  reached  Paris  in  safety.  She  says  the 
French  look  extremely  happy,  with  a  sort  of  arrogance 
and  bravade  about  them.  Charles  the  Tenth  is  to  have 
Lulworth  Castle  for  the  present,  en  attendant. 

Lady  Morley  is  dying  for  Chatsworth  in  the  winter, 
but  cannot  tell  what  her  plans  are.  We,  dear  brother, 
are  combles ;  we  have  no  sort  of  engagement  but  the 
Carlisles  for  October.  A  winter  has  always  been  a  beau 
reve  of  ours. 

But,  private  and  confidential,  think  of  Guilleret,2 
who  says  we  shall  perhaps  go  to  Paris  to  see  the  new 
state  of  things. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Bruton  Street :  November  4,  1830. 

Dearest  brother, — Everybody  is  full  of  the  Beau's 
speech.  Some  think  it  a  proof  that  he  is  determined 
to  resign,  others  that  he  will  propose  an  enlarged  plan 
of  reform  in  the  course  of  the  next  six  weeks. 

1  Son  of  the  man  who  committed  suicide. 

2  Lord  Granville. 


62        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVJLLE    1830 

Morpeth  spoke  well  last  night ;  so  exactly  the 
moderate,  sound  view  to  be  taken  of  things  just  now. 
To-day  I  have  been  to  see  the  Staffords,  violent 
reformists.  Lady  Stafford  observed,  '  Mr.  Brougham 
made  a  very  good  speech.'  '  Francis  is  a  foolish,  pro- 
voking boy.  What  was  the  use  of  being  such  a  fool  ? 
And  when  he  knows  his  father  has  declared  himself  for 
reform.'  I  have  also  seen  Lad}^  Clanricarde  in  the  most 
brilliant  beauty,  to  be  sure. 

Lady  Aberdeen's  rout  was  immensely  full  and  hot. 
Granville  was  there,  and  Ministers,  Dips,  and  a  few 
extras.  I  heard  of  Madame  de  Lieven's  and  Lord 
Grey's  faces  expanded  with  delight. 

Billy  has  forty  people  to  dinner  to-day,  Lord 
Gower  among  them. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  November  5,  1830. 

I  begin  at  an  early  hour,  as  I  may  not  have  much 
time.  You  read  Lord  Winchilsea  wishing  to  see  Lord 
Grey  in.  I  begin  to  pity  the  poor  Beau. 

Granville  and  Dody1  dined  at  Holland  House. 
Holly  having  caught  a  young  bird,  they  were  tete-a-tete. 
after  dinner,  pumped  her  hard  upon  all  the  distressing 
subjects  she  could  think  of — religion,  the  Wortley 
marriage,2  etc. — but  Doddles  turned  round  and  round 
in  her  hands  like  a  ball  of  soap.  The  Duke  of  Bedford 
dined  there  ;  she  is  in  Scotland. 

Theresa  is  to  be  married  to-morrow  morning,  and 
we  are  to  breakfast  at  Lady  Clarendon's  at  two  o'clock. 

Saturday. — I  had  no  time  yesterday,  and  regret  it 
less,  as  G.  wrote.  Loch  votes  for  Eeform.  Lord  Staf- 
ford is  all  energy,  ratting  with  speed  yet  dignity,  as  his 
principles  do  not  allow,  etc.  I  saw  Lady  Canning, 
very  much  pleased  indeed. 

1  His  daughter  Georgiana. 

2  Mr.  Charles  Wortley  to  Lady  Emmeline  Manners. 


1830  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  63 

Granville  went  to  Lady  Lansdowne's  last  night. 
Lord  Grey  rayonnant.  He  and  the  host  most  affec- 
tionate together.  The  bets  were  that  the  Duke  would 
have  been  out  yesterday,  others  that  he  will  be  a 
Eeformer  before  Saturday. 

Susy  has  been  at  the  marriage  at  St.  George's. 
Theresa,  very  pretty  in  a  white  pelisse  and  white  hat 
and  feathers,  dreadfully  nervous,  shook  like  a  leaf.  I 
hope  it  has  given  Susy  a  horror  of  matrimony.  Mr. 
Lister  looked  very  happy. 

I  shall  wait  now  for  the  chance  of  news.  Mrs.  F. 
Frankland  Lewis  has  been,  but  communicated  nothing. 
Bathiany  has  been,  and  the  report  is  that  Ministers  are 
out,  but  I  cannot  vouch  for  it.  Lady  Cawdor  told 
Morpeth  that  Edwin  Lascelles  told  her  that  Mr. 
Algernon  Greville l  told  it  him. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  8,  1830. 

Granville  dined  at  the  Lord  Chancellor's  yesterday. 
The  Chancellor  came  in  after  they  were  all  seated  from 
a  Cabinet  that  had  lasted  five  hours,  returned  to  be  at  it 
again  till  two,  and  the  result  you  see  in  the  papers.  It 
may  have  been  necessary  to  put  off,2  but  what  indigna- 
tion it  will  create !  It  is  really  appalling,  and  I  fear  for 
the  Duke.  It  would  be  a  national  disgrace  if  any 
personal  harm  awaited  him,  and  it  is  impossible  not  to 
fear  it  from  the  exasperation  of  the  people.  The 
Government  must  have  received  information  of  the 
most  alarming  nature  to  justify  this  measure.  I  am 
terrified  for  the  first  time.  Cold  paws,  my  heart  in  a 
curb  rein,  and  my  ears  erect  and  listening — out  or  in, 
who,  when,  all,  seems  secondary  to  me  to-day. 

I  hear  Lady  Jersey  is  terribly  low.     Did  I  tell  you 

1  Duke  of  Wellington's  private  secretary. 
8  The  King's  visit  to  the  City. 


64       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1830 

that  Lord  Talbot  had  sent  to  the  Duke,  a  la  Stafford,  to 
declare  himself  for  Eeform  ?  Lord  Wharncliffe  came  to 
see  me  yesterday,  holding  up  his  hands  and  eyes  at 
the  Duke's  last  speech  and  declaration,1  saying  unto 
everybody  that  he  must  go  out,  and  extolling  Lord 
Grey's  most  sound  and  temperate  speech.  God  bless 
you.  Nobody  knows  what  determined  Ministers,  and 
of  course  all  judgments  upon  it  are  premature.  Some 
say  they  had  notice  of  a  house  taken  from  whence 
the  Duke  was  to  have  been  shot,  others  that  the  trades- 
men wished  it,  and  that  there  was  a  plot  to  detain 
the  King  as  a  hostage.  I  am  uneasy  about  the  House 
of  Lords,  where  Granville  has  just  gone,  as  they  say 
there  will  be  a  piece  of  work.  Abercromby  says  the 
report  was  that  twenty  thousand  men  were  coming  up 
to-morrow  from  Liverpool,  Manchester,  etc. 

Lady  Cowper  has  just  been,  making  me  brave. 
She  says  Lady  Wilton  is  in  despair  at  there  being  no 
Guildhall,  thinks  it  was  all  prepared  for  battle;  which  I 
therefore  conclude  she  would  have  liked.  I  feel  rather 
less  frightened. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  9,  1830. 

You  will  see  by  the  debate  that  the  insufficiency  of 
the  reason  for  putting  off  was  almost  unanimously 
felt.  Nevertheless,  I  am  sure  it  was  right ;  but  it  has 
given  the  final  blow,  if  one  had  been  wanted.  Lord 

O  ' 

Haddington  said  to  Granville  after  the  Duke  had 
ended :  '  If  I  had  not  thought  he  must  resign  before,  I 
should  be  convinced  of  it  now  ; '  and  even  his  own  people 
hold  the  language  that  the  sooner  he  goes  the  better. 
Everything  is  dropping  from  beneath  his  feet.  I  hear 
he  looked  extremely  low  and  annoyed.  I  am  dying  for 
him  to  go  for  his  own  sake,  for,  as  to  his  place,  who  can 

1  Against  all  Reform. 


1830  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  65 

wish  to  be  unfortunate  enough  to  get  it,  and  I  think  of 
Lord  Grey  with  profound  compassion.  Ainsi  ne  va  pas 
le  monde,  and  there  are  many  rayonnant  faces  about. 

Wilmot  Horton  is  at  breakfast  here,  having  turned 
up  like  small  fish  in  a  storm.  He  must  think  himself 
lucky  in  having  kept  aloof,  when  agace  by  the  present 
Government.  He  may  not  be  lucky  with  the  next,  but 
at  least  stands  fair  like  another. 

I  am  happier  about  danger,  as  I  am  laughed  at,  and 
nothing  has  happened  yet,  but  Mr.  Wilmot  met  just 
now  a  policeman.  '  Was  there  any  row  last  night  ?  ' 
'  No,  your  honour,  but  there  will  be.'  The  Queen  to 
the  last  was  dying  to  go.  Lady  Cowper  called  on  Lady 
Jersey  yesterday.  She  says  she  showed  her  feelings 
in  excessive  crossness.  I  go  on  Friday  to  dine  at 
Ludolf  s 1  to  meet  Berri,  on  Saturday  at  Lord  Stafford's 
to  meet  Talleyrand.  The  other  Berry  dines  and  sleeps 
at  Stafford  House  on  Saturday. 

Susy  went  with  Lady  Morley  to  hear  Lord  Burg- 
hersh's  opera.  They  thought  it  wretched.  Two  pretty 
things — one  out  of  the  '  Gazza,'  and  the  other  out  of 
'  Masaniello.'  Lady  Wharncliffe  is  charmed  with  Miss 
Fanny  in  Mrs.  Haller. 

Poor  Lord  Mayor !  The  City  have  turned  him  out, 
and  sent  into  the  country  for  Mr.  Copeland  to  be  the 
new  one.  It  is  tres  dur,  but  I  suppose  right,  as  to  have 
had  an  unpopular  one  in  the  City  just  at  this  moment 
would  have  been  the  deuce  to  pay. 

I  am  just  come  from  la  Princesse.  The  carriage 
was  at  the  door  to  take  her  to  Eichmond.  She  walked 
out  of  an  inner  room,  Le  Gris 2  following.  He  looked 
fair,  sweet,  like  a  spring  morning.  She  is  in  a  great 
state.  'Mais,  est-ce  vrai?  mais  que  faut-il  penser?' 
She  was  at  Billy's  last  night.  He  was  all  fondness  and 
civility  to  the  Beau,  and  drank  his  health  four  or  five 

1  Neapolitan  Ambassador.  3  Lord  Grey. 

VOL.    II.  F 


66        LETTERS   OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1830 

times.  He,  the  Beau,  holds  the  most  hautain,  prononce, 
confident  language.  He  says  Government  count  upon 
a  majority  of  a  hundred  on  Tuesday  next,  scoffs  at  the 
idea  of  danger  to  himself.  '  On  1'essayera,  mais  on  ne 
le  fera  pas.  Ce  n'est  pas  si  facile  de  tuer  un  homme.' 
On  the  other  hand,  she  says  that  he  does  look,  not  only 
ill,  but  low,  abattu,  downf alien. 

Lord  Grey  told  her  she  would  be  pelted,  and  she 
was  in  a  great  taking.  '  Mais,  donnez-mois  done  un 
nom.  Que  faut-il  dire  ?  qui  doit-on  nommer  ?  qui  est 
populaire  ?  Vous,  Milord — mais  que  sais-je  ?  Je  ne 
sais  pas  qu'on  vous  aime.  Qui  me  dira  la  verite  ? 

I  have  just  seen  Lord  Haddington.  He  thinks  they 
cannot  be  sanguine.  All  the  Government  people  talk 
the  most  desponding  language,  but  the  Duke  puts  on  a 

face  and  is  determined  to  fight  it  out  -to  the  last.     He 

\ 

looks  upon  Billy's  civility  as  conclusive  ;  says  he  never 
heard  of  its  being  otherwise  from  a  King  to  a  Premier 
at  the  last  gasp. 

Lord  Haddington  says  he  understands  all  the  Royal- 
ties were  at  Billy's  last  night,  talking  the  most  open, 
unguarded  defiance  and  dislike  of  the  Duke. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  11,  1830. 

Dearest  brother, — There  is  no  news.  The  girls 
went  with  their  papa  to  Lady  Aberdeen  last  night. 
The  Duke  talking  a  great  deal,  Lady  Jersey  ditto. 
The  brides  in  great  beauty.  Lady  Lilford,  red  gown 
and  white  hat  and  feather,  the  prettiest.  Lady  Gower 
and  the  Duchess  of  Buccleugh  dine  at  Court  to-day. 
G.  and  I,  both  in  the  last  stage  of  decrepitude,  rush 
there  at  eleven,  yet  I  think  she  rather  likes  the  thought, 
having  a  more  junketous  soul  than  me.  Hardys  just 
asked,  driving  about  distracted  for  feathers  and  flounces. 
Blanche  very  much  affronted.  Morleys  not  asked,  she 


1830  TO   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  67 

who  lodged  and  fed  them.  My  girls  enchanted.  Eight 
hundred  friends. 

The  report  is  that  the  Duke  offers  his  resignation 
incessantly.  Billy  will  not  hear  of  it.  The  mob  con- 
tinue peaceable,  in  spite  of  all  the  provocation.  Some 
say  the  rise  of  the  Funds  is  because  Ministers  are  out, 
others  because  there  is  a  conviction  of  their  going. 
Lord  Strathaven  votes  for  Eeform.  William  Banks  with 
Ministers.  Lord  Grey  and  Dolly  sat  together  the  whole 
of  yesterday  evening.  Lady  Jersey,  Talleyrand,  Lord 
Clanwilliam,  and  a  Minister  or  two  got  together  into  a 
little  room  and  made  a  great  noise. 

When  the  mob  cried  '  Liberty  or  Death  ! '  to  the 
soldiers,  one  of  them  said,  '  I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot 
give  you  liberty,  but  I  can  give  you  death,  if  you  like 
it,  this  very  moment.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  13,  1830. 

I  know  not  when  I  shall  get  to  Brighton ;  you  must 
know  how  much  I  wish  it. 

I  am  low  about  politics,  yet  I  know  nothing ;  but 
there  seems  to  me  a  reaction,  and  people  are  so  shabby 
that  I  think  the  King's  fondness  and  allegiance  to  the 
Beau  will  tell.  I  begin  to  think  there  is  no  chance  of 
beating  them  on  Tuesday. 

Well,  last  night  was  the  completest  failure.1  El- 
bowed by  the  navy,  numberless  queer  figures,  and  at 
eleven,  in  the  midst  of  a  dull  rout,  with  scarcely  any 
dancing-men,  an  impromptu  was  got  up,  and  two  re- 
luctant, serious  quadrilles  performed  to  one  or  two 
squeaking  instruments  taken  out  of  the  band  and 
playing  out  of  tune. 

Lady  Chesterfield  beautiful,  I  am  told.  I  did  not 
see  her. 

1  A  party  at  the  Palace. 

F  2 


68        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1830 

Lady  Seymour  beautiful,  I  thought,  but  people  say 
she  has  lost  her  good  looks  by  being  grown  one  of  the 
fattest  women  you  ever  saw. 

Lady  Ashley,  body  and  mind  too  much  out  of  curl. 
Lady  Clanwilliam,  a  fine  girl.  Her  husband  out  of  his 
wits  for  joy  and  all  devotion  to  her;  so  was  Lord 
Seymour  to  his  corpulent  lady. 

Talleyrand  crawled  past  me  last  night  like  a  lizard 
along  a  wall.  Dino  dined  there,  so  did  the  Lord 
Mayor  and  Mayoress  ;  good-natured  of  Billy. 

God  bless  you.  The  Queen  enquired  most  gra- 
ciously after  you — in  detail. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  November  14,  1830. 

Dinner l  was  solemn.  The  Chancellor  looked  black, 
the  Beau  bored,  Lieven  in  a  taking  ;  she  does  not  know 
what  to  make  of  it. 

I  have  just  been  told  that  the  Government  means, 
if  possible,  to  meet  Brougham's  motion  with  a  sort  of 
concession,  the  members  for  the  great  towns  perhaps. 
Nothing  ever  equalled  the  shabbiness  of  the  Duke,  and 
there  is  only  one  thing  all  agree  upon — that  he  will  stick 
on  as  long  as  it  is  possible.  I  can  form  no  guess  of 
what  will  happen  ;  there  is  no  calculating  with  such  a 
man  as  the  Duke.  Berri,  though  our  object,  looked 
amazingly  out  of  water  amongst  us  all,  with  Lieven  in 
velvet  and  diamonds  and  the  Beau  basking  by  her. 
Dolly 2  was  in  a  very  stormy  state  ;  looked  uncommonly 
handsome.  God  bless  you.  I  could  not  squeeze  out 
another  word,  if  to  be  hung. 

1  At  the  Ludolfs'.  2  Lady  Lyndhurst. 


1830  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  69 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  November  15,  1830. 

My  dearest  brother, — I  am  so  sorry  you  are  still 
unwell.  I  cannot  get  rid  of  my  hoarseness  and  general 
malaise. 

Why,  Orange  is  uglier  and  thinner  and  animaler,  and 
nobody  seems  to  think  about  him.  He  is  in  high  spirits, 
driving  in  a  cab  and  dining  with  Worcester,  and  I  dare 
say  will  fall  in  love  with  Fox  or  Beckett  and  be  a  very 
happy  particular. 

The  interest  is  immensely  strong.  Dating  from  to- 
day the  Opposition  are  very  sanguine.  The  Beau  has 
disgusted  so  many  of  his  friends,  and  the  officers,  by 
keeping  them  up  three  days  and  nights  in  readiness  for 
action.  They  now  call  it,  whatever  may  have  been  the 
truth,  a  nonsensical  panic.  Lady  WTiarnclifFe  was  here 
yesterday.  She  said  he  had  cut  his  own  throat,  that, 
even  if  he  has  a  majority  on  Tuesday,  it  will  only  be 
dragging  on  the  same  weak,  miserable  Government.  I 
saw  Punch,  frantic  against  him  if  he  turns  now  to  any 
modification  of  Eeform.  Old  Charles  Greville  says  :  '  I 
wish  to  God  they  would  go  out ;  they  make  themselves 
more  and  more  ridiculous  every  day.' 

Interrupted  by  the  Swedish  woman.  She  wonders 
at  Mrs.  Berri,  how  she  can  go  on  and  gobble  up  all  the 
Ludolf  property.  She  tells  me  Mme.  Esterhazy  is  very 
angry.  She  called  and  they  said  Mme.  la  Marquise  est 
chez  elle.  She  walked  up  the  narrow  stairs  and  there 
found  our  Berri,  standing  up  in  the  middle  of  the  room, 

Ludolf  and  Bouille  arranged  like  d d  honours 

behind  her.  She  bowed,  asked  after  the  Emperor's 
health,  never  offered  her  a  chair,  and  bowed  her  out 
again  before  her  carriage  had  had  time  to  turn 
round. 

Dolly  says  the  Beau  means  to  swallow  Eeform,  but  I 
cannot  believe  it,  and  most  of  his  friends  deny  it.  It 


70        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1830 

would  leave  him  too  contemptible,  and  he  has  not  now 
popularity  enough  to  shield  him. 

I  dined  at  Stafford  House  last  night.  Lady  Stafford 
has  a  sort  of  engouement  for  Dino.1  She  can  talk  of 
nothing  else,  and  her  manner  to  her  is  affectionate 
homage.  She  can  say  nothing  but  '  Is  she  not  beauti- 
ful ?  Is  she  not  interesting  ? ' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  21,  1830. 

I  am  better,  but  so  languid  and  flat,  in  spite  and  in 
the  midst  of  all  the  excitement,  and  that's  why  I  did  not 
write,  knowing  that  sister  G.  did. 

Everybody  seems  to  be  charmed.2  I  told  her  some 
little  changes,  which  I  saw  her  put  into  her  letter  to 
you. 

Lady  Grantham  has  just  been  here.  She  came  from 
Silence,  who  is  in  a  real  taking  and  says  she  has  been 
the  only  consistent  person,  reviled  Grantham,  who 
turned  upon  her.  Brougham  called  on  her  yesterday. 
She  would  not  speak  to  him,  only  grunted.  Granville 
is  gone  to  see  him  take  his  seat.  Miss  Berry  came  here 
yesterday,  had  dined  with  him  at  Lady  Charlotte  Lind- 
say's ;  never  saw  such  a  sweet  couleur  de  rose  lamb. 

I  have  not  seen  Mme.  de  Lieven.  Some  people 
think  she  had  travelled  so  far  and  fast  on  the  late 
road,  that  she  must  have  a  little  time,  like  a  ship  after 
a  storm,  to  settle  into  her  way  again. 

I  am  very  sorry  for  the  Lyndhursts,  all  the  more 
for  everything  that  makes  others  glad. 

All  the  minor  rats  are  running  in  upon  the  Go- 
vernment, which  must  be  troublesome.  God  bless  you. 

1  Daughter  of  the  late  last  Due  de  Courlande.     She  left  her  husband, 
the  Due  de  Dino,  in  order  to  preside  over  the  house  of  his  uncle,  the 
Prince  de  Talleyrand,  with  whom  she  remained  until  his  death. 

2  At  the  Dtike  of  Wellington's  resignation. 


1830  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  71 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  December  20,  1830.1 

My  dearest  brother, — You  are  most  kind  and  adora- 
ble, but  are  you  sure  this  time  there  are  not  objections 
you  may  feel  when  the  moment  comes,  some  grand 
affair  at  which  you  would  like  them 2  to  hang  on  Blanket, 
or  a  wish  to  show  them  to  the  future  Duchess  of  D.,  the 
morning  after  your  proposal  ?  A  Eevolution  and  a  wish 
to  sell  them.  Think  this  over  and  say  '  Send  them 
back ' — without  scruple,  if  my  logic  strikes  you. 

There  was  a  debate  last  night,  good  for  Government, 
I  am  told.  The  Beau  let  slip  the  words,  '  The  late 
misfortunes  in  France.'  Lord  Grey  spoke  extremely  well; 
much  talking  in  the  other  house,  Paris  and  Vienna 
not  to  be  cut  down.  I  have  had  letters  from  Madame 
de  Flahault,  and  some  parlez-vous,  most  flattering. 
Nothing  yesterday  from  Lord  Stuart,  but  Mrs.  Hamil- 
ton writes,  evidently,  I  think,  begged,  to  deprecate  our 
coming  soon,  yet  go  we  shall. 

I  must  answer  all  of  them  to-day,  so  a  longer  letter 
to-morrow. 

1  Lord  Granville  was  re- appointed  Ambassador  at  Paris  on  the  forma- 
tion of  the  Grey  Government. 

2  The  Duke  had  lent  his  sister  some  diamonds. 


72       LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1831 


1831 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dover :  January  1,  1831. 

We  have  had  a  most  prosperous  beginning,  dearest 
beloved  sister — a  day  like  October,  brighter  and  clearer 
than  any  we  have  had  since  Castle  Howard,  making 
everything  look  distinct  and  beautiful.  There  is  not  a 
breath  of  wind  and  the  sea  is  as  calm  as  a  pond.  We 
are  to  go  over  to-morrow  in  the  '  Duke  of  Wellington,' 
not  a  Government  packet,  but  a  good  large  one.  We 
are  promised  a  three  hours'  passage.  G.,  Stewart, 
Guinea,  and  Dody  are  all  in  the  agonies  of  looking  for- 
ward to  to-morrow,  and  sick  already  from  fright. 

We  met  on  the  road  somebody  we  took  for  Mons. 
Van  de  Weyer,1  and  a  number  of  caleches  coming  to 
London. 

Good  night,  my  dearest  sister.  I  never  let  myself 
look  at  this  as  a  long  separation.  I  really  could  not. 

Sunday  morning,  half-past  nine. — It  is  a  delicious 
day,  as  mild  as  spring,  with  very  little  wind — just 
enough,  I  am  told,  to  steady  the  vessel. 

The  girls  are  quite  well,  very  sorry ;  but  change  and 
bustle  and  their  own  adorable  sweet  buoyant  natures 
would  carry  them  through  everything. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Calais :  10  o'clock. 

We  had  a  passage  of  three  hours,  the  sea  very  rough, 
till  we  got  near  the  French  coast.  Granville  and  I 

1  The  Belgian  statesman,  who  was  prominent  in  the  movement  for  sepa- 
ration from  Holland.  He  was  a  long  time  Belgian  Minister  in  London. 


1831  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  73 

perfectly  well  on  the  deck  all  the  time.  Susy  well  in 
the  chariot,  Dody  in  bed  very  ill,  Stuart,  George,  and 
Guinea  the  same  on  deck. 

The  weather  was  fine,  very  cold  as  we  got  here. 
We  walked  about  the  town,  smelt  the  peat,  saw  the 
National  Guard  with  his  gun,  the  merry  noisy  people 
all  over  the  place,  in  this  cold  weather  on  round- 
abouts and  jeu  de  bagues,  the  women  in  caps  as  usual. 
Came  back  to  dinner  at  five  o'clock.  Our  rooms — not 
the  large  ones,  which  they  think  too  cold  and  are  shut 
up — are  very  comfortable. 

Going  abroad,  anyhow,  anywhere  is  such  a  lark ; 
not  more,  not  less,  but  a  lark.  Neither  comforts  nor 
grievances  are  as  substantial  as  in  England.  I  am  to- 
night in  the  humour  that  I  like  being  on  the  road  so 
much  more  than  being  arrived  in  Paris. 

We  shall  not  get  there  before  Thursday. 

We  have  the  two  latest  French  papers  here.  Nothing 
can,  I  think,  be  more  promising  than  the  state  of  Paris. 
Good  night. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  10,  1831. 

Your  letter  was,  as  always,  a  happiness.  Let  me 
now  try  to  settle  my  thoughts,  and  give  you  a 
sketch  of  my  four  days.  I  have  done  immensely  in 
them,  yet  I  tremble  when  I  think  how  much  remains ; 
but  this  is  our  May  and  June  in  London,  with  all  the 
labour  of  dress  and  visiting,  for  Paris,  malgre  the 
retraites,  the  absences,  the  bouderie,  les  resistances,  is  Paris 
still,  swarming  with  English,  and  the  French  rising  from 
their  ashes  every  day.  Balls  beginning,  dinners  con- 
stantly, every  Frenchwoman  at  home  three  days  in  the 
week,  ten  of  them,  I  am  told,  on  Saturday.  We  have 
thoughts  of  a  ball  in  about  a  fortnight,  before  Guinea 
leaves  us. 


74        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1831 

Yesterday  I  went  at  two  to  the  Palais  Eoyal,  desired 
de  me  faire  bien  belle.  I  find  to  my  despair  that  the 
great  wish  is  that  one  should  dress  a  great  deal  and 
very  fine  to  encourage  trade. 

I  found  the  Queen,  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  two  Prin- 
cesses, three  dames  and  one  man,  most  amiable,  most 
kind,  most  gracious.  They  talked  of  everything — the 
difficulties  of  the  times  and  surtout  .France.  I  think  their 
great  wish  is  to  pursue  the  late  firm  though  very 
moderate  course  the  King  has  taken  to  restore  the  tone 
of  society  by  degrees,  to  promote  a  return  to  amuse- 
ment, hats  and  flowers.  Les  boudeuses,  you  must  know, 
amongst  whom  predominate  Alfred,  Jumilhac,  Girar- 
din,  do  not  go  out  and  dress  like  beggars. 

The  Duke  of  Mortemart's  appointment  to  Peters- 
burgh  has  electrified  this  last  set.  He  is  high  in  every- 
thing— rank,  character,  high-mindedness,  connections 
— and  such  a  man,  chosen  and  accepting,  is  an  immense 
step  for  the  present  people. 

We  have  had  the  attaches  to  dinner.  They  are  all 
civil  and  good-humoured.  Ashburnham  rheumatic, 
languid,  and  upon  my  woord  I  doon't  kno-o-ow  genre, 
which  is  not  useful  or  efficient,  but  he  seems  sensible 
and  gentlemanlike.  Magennis  well-meaning,  good-tem- 
pered, would  be  a  puppy  if  he  knew  how,  rather  prosy. 
Waller  good-natured,  vulgar  little  man.  Lord  Harry 
Vane,1  good-natured,  inoffensive.  Cradock,  a  very  fine 
thing,  a  Eussian  prince  of  high  degree. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  1831. 

Granville  is  extremely  busy.  I  delight  to  see  how 
he  is  considered  and  valued  here ;  my  only  regret  is, 
entre  nous,  that  he  has  such  a  man  as  poor  Mr.  Hamilton, 

1  Third  son  of  the  first  Duke  of  Cleveland.    He  succeeded  to  the 
dukedom  hi  1864. 


1831  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  75 

who,  as  lie  grows  older  and  less  sanguine  about  his  own 
affairs,  is  left  with  the  outward  man  entirely  unstuffed, 
not  one  idea  or  qualite  of  understanding,  that  can  make 
him  of  the  slightest  use  or  relief  in  any  one  branch  of 
Diplomacy. 

We  like  Paris  better  every  day.  Though  it  is  the 
Carnaval,  there  is  not  an  oppressive  quality  of  gaiety, 
and  we  often  sit  at  home,  my  girls  at  a  round  table 
with  John  Ashley,  Guinea,  and  G.  Stewart — occasional 
attaches — every  now  and  then  a  Monsieur  or  Mademoi- 
selle presented  to  them.  They  are  daily  improving  in 
looks  and  dress,  and  their  countenances  and  manner — I 
must  say  perfection — make  them  so  popular  and  so 
much  liked  that  I  see  they  will  be  amused  and  happy. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  January  1831. 

I  must  begin  a  letter  fresh  from  the  mint.  We  are 
just  come  from  the  Palais  Eoyal — a  dinner  given  to  the 
English  Embassy.  Our  reception  was  beyond  measure 
gracious.  The  King  and  I  talked  without  ceasing. 
He  gave  me  a  detailed  account  of  all  the  terrible  days. 
The  Queen  was  tres  souffrante,  and  is  more  low  than  her 
relations.  Madame  Adelaide  very  sprack  and  delightful, 
sitting  by  the  King  and  Odillon  Barrot,  the  most  violent 
of  the  Eadical  party.  I  was  very  fine,  in  a  grey  satin 
gown,  my  diamonds,  which  make  my  fortune,  and  a 
Herbault  all  feathered  and  bowed — very  fat,  but 
squeezed  into  a  tournure.  My  sister  Dalmatia l  by  my 
side,  still  fatter  and  tighter.  The  girls  looked  un- 
commonly well.  Susy,  between  an  old  Marechal  and  a 
National  Guard,  chattered  away  and  emerveille'd  them 
with  her  French,  and  was  for  the  first  time  in  high 
spirits.  Dody,  very  nice  and  piquante,  made  her  play 
upon  a  pair  of  attaches. 

1  Wife  of  Marechal  Soult. 


76        LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1831 
To  THE  DUKE  OP  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  January  14,  1831. 

I  have  been  writing  a  volume  to  GK,  my  very  dearest 
brother.  I  am  expecting  Mme.  Appony  every  moment. 
This  is  only  detached  sentences. 

Pozzo  has  just  received  his  letters  of  credence. 
Princesse  Bragration  is  too  ill  to  move  off  her  couch, 
so  how  can  she  go  to  Eussia  ? 

The  housses  are  on ;  the  room,  the  green  beauty, 
looks  just  like  its  old  self,  with  the  sun  broiling 
upon  it. 

They  talk  of  balls  at  the  Palais  Koyal,  but  one  of  the 
Princesses  is  ill. 

Baronne  Delmar1  the  great  thing;  concerts  charm- 
ing. Mme.  de  Flahault  the  other  great  thing,  soirees, 
and  the  few  French  who  show. 

The  Poodle  is  worrying  the  Pug,2  but  good-humour- 
edly,  and  it  is  a  great  relief  to  have  him  here  to  do  the 
dirty  work.  He  says  it  is  not  to  be  told  the  good  you 
have  done  him.  He  is  really  worthy  of  it,  and  likes 
to  bark  and  wag  his  tail  about  it. 

Quiet  is  the  word  for  this  great  town,  dearest ;  one 
must  savourer  it,  for  it  cannot  last  long.  If  you  could 
know  how  like  a  dream  it  seems  to  me,  to  be  so  per- 
fectly settled  here,  as  I  now  feel ! 

Bourke  is  very  happy,  very  valiant,  very  fond  of 
Soult ; 3  likes  his  energy  and  promptitude.  To  be  dawd- 
ling in  these  times  is  making  bouillie  pour  les  chats,  says 
she. 

God  bless  you. 

1  A  great  beauty,  sister  of  Sir  William  Rumbold,  and  married  to  a  rich 
German  Jew. 

2  A  nickname  of  Mr.  Frederick  Howard. 

3  Marshal  Soult  formed  part  of  the  Lafitte  and  Perier  Administration. 
He  was  President  of  the  Council  from  1832  to  1834. 


1831  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  77 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  AND  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  17,  1831. 

Bourke  lias  promised  one  party,  and  Lent  falls  early  ; 
how  much  my  girls  will  like  it !  They  agreed,  even  last 
night,  for  the  first  time,  that  it  was  like  a  house  in  the 
country.  The  billiard  room,  in  which  they  spooned, 
and  two  or  three  people,  added  to  ourselves,  sitting  over 
the  fire. 

To-day  we  are  all  writing.  The  attaches  and  the 
Poodle  dine  here.  It  is  well  I  got  up  early,  as  that 
too  kind  woman,  Mme.  Appony,  has  sent  to  ask  if  I  will 
see  her,  out  of  all  rule  and  etiquette.  Mme.  Castelcicala 

would   see   me   d d   first.      Mme.    de   Flahault   is 

coming  by  appointment  at  three,  Bourke  at  half-past 
four.  I  hear  Lord  Stuart  is  in  force  and  good-humour  ; 
she  unwell  and  very  low,  being,  I  am  told,  in  despair 
at  staying  on  here,  but  he  insisted  upon  it. 

I  think  the  case  a  little  more  complicated  than  I 
did.     I  mean  as  to  society.     Appony,  I  see,  though  she 
loves  and  honours  the  Queen,  lives  on  tears  and  sighs, 
and  all  one  set  of  my  old  friends  weep  with   her— 
Noailles,  Girardin,  Jumilhac,  &c. 

Mme.  de  Flahault  sees  few  but  the  violent  Orleanists, 
the  Ministers,  and  some  of  Flahault's  greatest  friends 
from  all  parties. 

Poor  Lady  Ellenborough1  is  just  going  to  be  con- 
fined; Schwarzenberg  going  about  flirting  with  Mme. 
d'Oudenarde. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  21,  1831. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — I  hear  that  Talleyrand  found 
all  the  Ministers  junketing  when  he  went  up  for  the 
conferences.  The  Duke  of  Orleans  has  been  ill,  but  is 

1  She  was  divorced  in  1830.     Prince  Schwarzenberg  was  involved  in 

the  suit. 


78        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

better.      He  looks  a  little  delicate,  but  is  by  way  of 
being  quite  well  and  dances  all  night  at  the  balls. 

Mme.  de  Polignac  is  still  here,  wonderfully  calm. 
Lady  Stuart  has  seen  her,  and  so  had  Mme.  de  Davidoff. 
She  says  she  can  see  one  person  at  a  time — any  hurry 
overcomes  her.  I  am  going  to  make  the  attempt. 

What  have  I  done  since  I  saw  you?  Apponys' 
ball.  We  were  not  amused.  There  is  no  conversation. 
The  girls  are  led  out  by  unknown  parleys,  who  caper 
by  their  sides  and  then  give  them  back  to  my  care.  It 
has  given  them  a  disgust  of  balls,  but  what  they  do 
like  is  the  genre  de  vie  habituel — the  dinners  here,  and 
being  at  home  of  an  evening,  and  Mme.  de  Flahault's. 

The  Stuarts  and  Mintos  dined  here  on  Wednesday, 
and  yesterday  I  took  Betty  to  the  Opera  with  me.  She 
is  good,  sensible,  has  behaved  perfectly  well  in  a  difficult 
situation,  but  she  talks  too  much,  too  loud,  is  too  absent, 
too  busy — huffy,  with  notions  of  all  kinds  about  civilities 
and  ceremonies.  This  makes  the  pleasure  less  of  en- 
deavouring to  make  the  self-imposed  awkwardness  of 
situation  as  little  irksome  to  her  as  possible.  To  paint 
her  in  one  word.  Do  not  tell.  Mrs.  Hamilton  hinted 
to  me  that  what  would  console  her  most  would  be  being 
considered  as  a  cut  above  the  general  society  here, 
first  in  all  times  and  places.  So  I  see  it  is.  She  even 
likes  a  nod  and  a  smile  occasionally,  in  the  midst  of 
the  things,  and,  in  short,  would  like  to  enact  with  me 
ex-Queen  and  regnante.  So,  when  she  comes,  we  play 
at  Ladies,  and  all  is  as  smooth  as  possible.  Lord  Stuart 
and  I  are,  tout  autre,  as  happy  and  as  little  dignified  as 
need  be. 

My  only  grief  and  care  is  economy.  I  flatter  myself 
there  is  an  immense  difference,  but  it  is  the  eternal 
subject  of  lighting  that  vexes  me.  Granville  does  not 
care  a  straw  about  the  thing  looking  less  well  than 
formerly.  It  is  all  in  reasoning  perfectly  true,  but  I 


1831  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  79 

find  to  my  shame  that  I  have  not  a  mind  that  can  raise 
itself  above  dark  rooms  and  an  ill-lit  ball. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  January  24,  1831. 

Perhaps  the  Queen  may  like  you  to  read  to  her  the 
following  sketch  of  Paris  this  moment  with  regard  to 
society  and  the  Court.  Most  of  those  absent  from  Paris, 
who  have  quite  retired  into  the  country,  are  personal 
and  devoted  friends  to  the  ex-royal  family,  such  as 
d'Escars,  Chasteleux,  Damas,  Narbonne.  Here  there 
are  two  different  parties,  into  which,  though  there  are 
many  shades,  society  divides  itself.  Those  who  go  to 
the  Palais  Eoyal,  who  support  the  present  state  of 
things  chaudement,  who  were  all  ready  to  rush  to  Court 
in  the  first  stormy  days.  These  are  called  Les  Dames 
du  Mouvement —  Mme.  de  Vaudemont,  des  Boigne,  de 
Montmorency,  de  Valen9ay,  and  de  Laborde.  On  the 
other  hand  are  les  Dames  de  la  Resistance.  Amongst 
these  last  almost  all  the  Eaubourg  St.  Germain — Mme. 
de  Girardin,  violent ;  Mme.  de  Maille  and  others  almost 
ruined ;  Mme.  de  Jumilhac ;  the  Noailles ;  Mme.  Theo- 
dore de  Bauffremont,  daughter  of  the  Duchesse  de 
Montmorency.  These  last  are  expected.  '  Elles  por- 
tent le  deuil ;  cela  ne  durera  pas  ;  c'est  un  tres  petit 
deuil.' 

All  wish  for  peace.  All  the  sound-headed  and  right- 
minded  pine  for  order,  all  love  and  respect  the  present 
Eoyal  family,  all  condemn  Charles  X.  and  Polignac. 

There  is  a  third  class,  les  Dames  de  I'Attente.  They 
are  said  only  to  be  watching  the  weather. 

I  send  this  small  talk  in  case  it  may  be  of  use  to 
you,  but  you  must  be  discreet  and  consider  my  gossip 
as  private.  The  Queen  here  is  adorable  and  adored. 

We  have  done  little  :  sitting  at  home — Opera — nasty 
damp  weather.  Two  hours  trying  to  get  to  the  Grand 


80        LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1831 

National  Ball ;  obliged  to  come  back ;  cause  of  liberty. 
Messieurs  les  Gardes  Municipaux  said  they  would  not 
let  their  Roi  or  their  Pere  pass.  God  bless  you.  Our 
ball  is  on  the  second. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  27,  1831. 

The  Ball  at  the  Palais  Eoyal  was  splendid  and 
beautiful :  four  immense  rooms,  dancing  in  each.  The 
supper  magnifique.  We  sat  all  night,  the  Queen  and  I, 
with  our  girls  on  either  hand.  Mine  danced  with  French 
and  Italian  unknowns,  but  enjoyed  themselves  very 
much.  We  supped  in  State  also ;  I  between  Susy  and 
Madame  Adelaide,  Ad.  and  I  eating  poularde  au  gros  sel 
and  asparagus  and  very  jolly. 

I  forgot  to  say  that  Eedem  and  Daniskiold  are 
footing  it  in  these  parts,  both  disgusted  and  pining 
after  England ;  but  though  the  first  is  a  bore  and  the 
second  vulgar  and  familiar,  it  is  something  for  the  girls 
to  see  a  well-known  face,  which  can  talk  to  them  of 
their  English  friends  and  Almack's. 

Guinea  is  very  low  at  the  thoughts  of  going  to- 
morrow  with   the   courier  to   London.      We   decided 
•  upon  sending  him  once  more  to  Eton,  as  his  enjoyment 
here  was  much  too  great  to  allow  it  to  go  on.    Poor  boy  ! 

The  courier  has  just  brought  me  your  letter — most 
dear  sister — smelling,  as  usual,  of  sea  air.  The  Pavilion 
must  seem  to  you  '  home '  by  this  time.  I  approve 
extremely  of  the  King. 

My  girls  are  such  loves.  They  will  be  very  popular 
here,  I  see,  but  nothing  will  shake  their  fidelity  to 
England.  As  yet  they  are  not  even  much  pleased,  only 
sweet-tempered  and  contented. 

Do  you  see  me,  Lady  Carlisle,  in  my  dressing-room 
— hartshorn  and  oil  on  -the  chimney,  cloves  in  a  saucer, 
a  piece  of  flannel  airing  at  the  fire,  Michaud — do  you 


1831  TO    LADY   CARLISLE  81 

remember  him  ? — and  Eichard  arranging  paravents  in 
the  bedroom  to  keep  out  the  blustering  wind?  I 
think  things  seem  tolerably  quiet  here.  Belgium  is  the 
eternal  subject,  the  stubborn  knot.  '  Apres  tout,'  says 
Vaudemont,  '  c'est  le  hasard  seul  qui  pourra  decider 
la  question.' 

I  must  not  write  any  more,  for  I  have  got  all  sorts 
of  business  relative  to  my  ball,  which  is  to  be  this  day 
week.  It  was  very  different  autrefois,  when  I  had  only 
to  say  like  the  children — more,  more, — as  to  light, 
flowers,  etc.  Now,  most  laudable  it  is,  we  are  all  a  re- 
trenching and  vexatious  public  can  wish,  and  Kulbach 
and  I  are  expected  to  on  dansera  half  price  exactly  of 
what  it  was.  This  makes  me  foolishly  nervous  and 
anxious,  especially  as  I  must  say  the  Stuarts,  who 
saved  in  everyday  life,  gave  splendid  balls.  I  have, 
however,  obtained  dearest  Granville's  consent  to  light 
much  more,  and  have  dancing  in  two  rooms,  the  long 
and  the  middle  one.  Think  of  Betty's  spirit,  who 
had  three  double  lamps  in  the  conservatory,  seven  or 
eight  hundred  francs'  worth  of  flowers,  and  yet  called 
stingy  because  she  put  up  some  pretty  white  moreen 
instead  of  hideous  red  silk !  Ainsi  va  le  monde,  and 
who  would  fear  its  criticisms,  but  those  who  have 
taken  calomel  and  starved !  God  bless  you,  my 
dearest. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE  AND  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  February  8,  1831. 

Your  letter  last  night  amused  and  interested  us 
beyond  measure.  We  devoured  the  accounts  of 
dearest  Blanche's  presentation,  of  your  green  and  gold 
tail,  of  the  ball,  etc.  Of  politics  the  little  you  say  is 
reassuring,  as  I  had  heard  the  same  exaggerated  fears 
for  the  Ministry  as  you  hear  of  our  troubles.  What 
odd  reports  I  spy  in  '  Galignani '  about  Sir  Eobert  Peel ! 

VOL.    II.  G 


82        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

I  wish  he  was  with  us  or  against  us,  only  because  I 
hate  him  in  a  merciful  protecting  attitude. 

Dear  Duke,  who  is  la  Vicomtesse  d'Henin,  nee 
Dickson  or  Dixon,  who  says  if  you  were  here,  how  I 
should  love  her  ?  As  it  is,  I  have  sent  my  card,  because 
Lady  Codrington  loves  her.  I  took  the  Mitfords  to 
Madame  de  Flahault's  last  night,  and  an  irritated, 
discontented  flower  sat  she,  knowing  nobody,  the 
company  all  screaming  at  the  top  of  their  voices,  and 
Mercer,  dear,  honest  Mercer,  putting  her  best  leg  out 
to  her,  but  that  a  stiff,  unbending  one. 

We  hear  our  Charles  and  Emmeline  think  of 
coming  to  live  at  Paris,  and  we  are  also  told  that 
nobody  else  does,  and  that  Mrs.  Cavendish  and  Fanny 
are  derided  and  scoffed  at  for  having  such  a  mad 
project.  I  will  not  press  it,  because  I  will  not  be 
responsible,  but  it  will  be  a  great  disappointment  to 
the  girls  if  they  do  not.  I  see  here  how  very  English 
they  are  in  what  they  prefer  dans  tout  genre.  They 
love  Keith.  God  bless  you,  dearest,  dear  brother  and 
sister. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  1831. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — When  I  read  the  newspapers 
and  see  the  accounts  of  Paris,  I  tell  myself  I  have  been 
here  in  the  midst  of  cette  fievre.  But  so  perfect  is  the 
tranquillity  now,  and  so  daily  did  I  walk  round  the 
Tuileries  each  of  the  stormy  days,  that  it  is  difficult  to 
fancy  it  all.  Yet  these  accounts  I  believe  are  all 
accurate.  The  truth  is  that,  where  there  is  such  a 
bulwark  of  defence  in  the  National  Guards,  actually 
lining  and  paving  the  streets  at  a  moment's  warning, 
I  cannot  believe  in  danger  whilst  they  remain  true  and 
unwearied  ;  and  as  each  of  them  rests  upon  the  preserva- 
tion of  his  individual  property,  I  do  not  doubt  they  will. 


1831  TO   LADY  CARLISLE  83 

There  have  been  most  animated  debates.  For  a 
moment  the  present  Ministry  was  said  to  be  out.  I 
believe  now  that  even  Montalivet  remains.  The  dis- 
solution of  the  Chamber  is  to  be  almost  immediate.  It 
is  popular,  and  expected  by  most  people  to  be  returned 
much  as  it  is.  In  all  the  late  elections  the  Moderates 
have  been  chosen. 

I  went  to  the  Palais  Eoyal  on  Saturday.  I  thought 
them  all  terribly  low  and  accables.  The  zealous 
champion  Lady  Keith,  who  went  with  me,  said,  '  I  never 
saw  them  in  this  state,  but  don't  tell.' 

We  had  been  at  a  forty  dinner  at  Pozzo's — Diplomacy 
and  English — and  I  ended  my  evening  in  two  very 
different  salons — Broglie  and  Eanzau — but  both  equally 
dull.  Mme.  de  Broglie,  like  the  Queen,  quite  beat 
down  by  the  nature  of  the  late  disturbances,  and 
nothing  can  be  more  alarming  than  religious  feeling 

o  o  *—  o 

being  made  a  cover  or  a  but  for  such  proceedings. 

Our  great  dinner  is  on  Thursday.  Does  it  not 
seem  odd  to  you  that  Montalivet,  Dupin,  Lafayette,  and 
Odillon  Barrot  are  all  convives  at  it  ?  Je  crains  pour 
les  digestions. 

I  have  seen  Mme.  Delphine  Potocka.  She  is 
gracieuse,  pittoresque,  polonaise — en  un  mot,  regular 
features,  very  fair,  large  eyes.  She  is  just  like  a, 
martyr  on  a  wooden  screen.  She  seems  agreeable  arid 
certainly  very  pleasing.  The  take  off  of  her  beauty  is 
a  want  offrawheur  in  her  skin  and  teeth.  Sapeiya  was 
with  her,  a  large,  gentle,  merry,  natural,  handsome 
daughter  of  Madame  Zamoyska.  Mme.  Delamarre 
came  too.  She  looks  just  as  she  did,  but  is  grown 
civil  and  sociable,  and  is  a  nice  little  woman. 

I  have  had  a  long  letter  from  the  Duchess  of  Beau- 
fort, which  I  must  answer.  She  is  just  as  I  knew  she 
would  be,  almost  more  than  resigned.  She  says  she  * 

1  Her  daughter  Lady  Isabella  Kingscote,  who  died  on  February  4. 

G  2 


84       LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

turned  to  me  from  him  and  said,  her  countenance 
evincing  the  pleasure  she  felt,  '  Do  you  hear  what  he 
says,  that  he  would  not  keep  me  if  he  could  from  the 
happiness  into  which  I  am  about  to  enter  ? '  I  cannot 
talk  about  this,  as  it  gives  me  pain  to  feel  what  I  do 
about  it.  This,  however,  is  certain,  that  people  who 
feel  thus  are  beyond  the  reach  of  human  infirmity  and 
misery. 

God  bless  you,  dearest  dear  sister.  My  best  love  to 
D.,  Lord  C.,  and  Morpeth. 

Pray  tell  me  all  that  is  political. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

February  1C,  1831. 

I  find  it  is  thought  bold  of  Dody  and  me  to  have 
walked  round  the  Tuileries  to-day.  Nothing  could  be 
more  lovely  and  delicious.  Air  like  milk,  blue  sky  and 
bright  sun.  The  Chambre  des  Deputes  and  the  Tuileries 
guarded.  Live  toys  of  National  Guards,  some  on  horse- 
back, parading  on  the  quays  and  over  the  bridges. 
Little  knots  of  people  whispering,  everybody  excited. 

I  never  felt  so  safe  anywhere,  though  I  believe  there 
are  many  who  would  avail  themselves  of  the  folly  of 
the  Ultras  if  they  could.  Some  of  the  Faubourg  St. 
Germain  people  got  up  a  crowning  of  the  Due  de 
Bordeaux's  bust  at  the  church  of  St.  Germain  1'Aux- 
errois.  This  caused  irritation,  an  attack  upon  the 
archevcques  house,  an  attempt  to  throw  the  priest  who 
officiated  into  the  Seine.  The  National  Guard  restored 
order  and  are  now  everywhere  on  the  alert. 

I  had  Salvandy  in  the  evening.  '  Aujourd'hui  c'est 
le  mouvement  populaire,  demain  le  mouvement  poli- 
tique.'  His  talk  alarming  and  gloomy. 

Noailles  stept  in  ;  she,  the  Just,  had  been  at  church. 
Mafoi,  had  seen  nothing.  '  Oui,  j'ai  vu  une  dame  de 
ma  connaissance,  et  il  y  avait  un  jeune  homme,  et  puis — 


1831  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  85 

il  n'y  avait  rien,  et  j'y  etais  moi-meme — vous  voyez, 
done — mais  comment — voil£t  pourquoi — ah.' 

In  stept  Decazes,  grave,  solemn,  exaggerating  the 
horrors,  describing  the  poor  priest  over  the  parapet. 

Juste  was  amazingly  put  out,  in  horror  at  les  out- 
rages, ashamed  of  having  been  on  the   spot,    though 
before  the  confusion  anxious  to  vindicate  everybody— 
would  deny  the  Eevolution  if  she  could. 

I  have  had  a  rhapsody  from  Lady  Westmorland  at 
Lausanne,  which  she  is  to  follow  shortly  enpersonm — a 
request  that  I  will  be  kind  to  an  Englishwoman  here,  a 
widow  in  deep  affliction,  having  a  child  dangerously  ill, 
adding,  '  She  is  not  pretty,  indeed  I  never  thought  her 
so.'  She  then  writes  a  small  essay  on  Lady  Stuart  and 
myself,  '  an  odd  case.'  She  wishes  to  be  impartial. 
The  letter  ends  with  a  slight  memoir  of  Sir  Sidney 
Smith,  his  deserts,  his  grievances,  his  brilliant  exploits, 
his  expected  honours,  ungrateful  public,  injury,  and 
inadequate  recompense. 

The  whole  is  interspersed  with  eulogiums  on  Gran- 
ville's  beauty,  nature  and  prevalence  of  rheumatic 
fever,  view  of  English  country  gentlemen,  the  haystack, 
and  the  turbulent,  fashionable  habits,  calamitous  para- 
doxes, and  texts  from  Scripture.  She  is  on  her  way  to 
her  natural  protector,  and  will  pass  two  months  in 
England. 

What  is  all  this?  I  am  all  impatience  for  to- 
morrow. What  is  this  pas  en  avant  and  chasse  en 
arriere  of  Cousin  Jack's  ? x  Write,  I  beseech  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  17,  1831. 

My  dearest  dear  sis, — Paris  is  restored  to  tran- 
quillity, but  there  is  going  to  be  to-day  a  most  impor- 
tant debate,  one  that  many  think  may  turn  out  the 

1  Lord  Althorp. 


86       LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

present  Ministers,  I  think  all  parties  are  against  them, 
either  from  original  feeling,  or  most  of  the  Deputies,  at 
their  not  having  met  the  last  disturbances  with  more 
vigour.  Nous  verrons.  How  glad  I  am  to  see  that 
things  are  so  smooth  and  improved  in  England,  and 
that  Jack  is  rather  lauded  than  otherwise !  I  was 
frightened  to  death  when  I  read  the  debates  upon  the 
transfer  tax,  though  George's  healing  speech  soothed  me. 

I  am  just  returned  from  the  .Panorama  of  Navarin. 
Sir  E.  Codrington,  the  girls,  and  I  were  rolling  along 
the  Boulevards  at  ten  o'clock  this  morning — such  a 
bright  burnished  morning,  clear  as  crystal.  The  view 
of  the  battle  is  beautiful ;  you  see  it  from  an  exact 
representation  of  the  '  Sirene,'  De  Rigny's  frigate.  No- 
thing can  be  more  striking,  and  Sir  Edward's  descrip- 
tions were  extremely  interesting.  We  were  there  an 
hour  and  a  half. 

I  feel  so  all  you  say  of  the  comparative  pains  and 
pleasures  of  our  two  capitals.  I  should  enjoy  nothing 
more  than  Paris,  if  you  were  all  coming. 

We  went  to  a  little  soiree  at  Flahault's  last  night. 
Prodigious  excitement  about  politics.  This  is  the 
measure  of  all  we  are  doing  now.  Nothing  big  and  smart, 
but  constant  means  of  seeing  a  few  people,  and  talking 
of  all  that  is  interesting  before  our  eyes.  Reldche  for 
balls  till  the  Mi-Careme,  when  Montalivet,  if  still  in,  will 
give  a  great  one,  and  the  Flahaults  perhaps  a  small  one. 

My  girls  are  very  popular.  As  Granville  is  too 
busy  to  ride,  I  must  leave  you  to  walk  with  them  in 
the  Tuileries,  where  at  two  all  the  fashionable  parade ; 
but  we  shall  keep  out  of  the  line — la  terrasse  sur  le 
quai,  which  is  like  walking  in  Bayswater. 

I  sat  with  Mme.  Appony  yesterday.  She  has  been 
ill,  and  looks  deplorably,  and  is  miserable  at  all  la  pro- 
fanation and  le  scandale  of  the  last  days. 

D.  wrote  me  a  delicious  letter.     I  see  him  at  the 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  87 

pictures  with  Blanche,  and  you  with  her  at  the  very 
gav  drum.     I  don't  see  Ladv  Wharncliffe  at  Belvoir,  or 

O     v  v 

only  as  a  poor  little  fishing  smack  in  the  midst  of  all 
those  ships  of  the  line. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  19,  1831. 

Dearest  of  dear  sisters, — I  am  sorry  you  had  any 
worry  about  us  ;  we  are  safer  than  any  people,  I  believe, 
and  all  seems  to  me  in  a  political  way  going  on  smoothly. 
But  how  are  we  at  home  ?  You  and  Hart  do  not  alarm 
me  much,  but  others  do.  I  put  on  the  boldest  face  to 
Mole  and  others,  who  come  and  tell  me  of  letters  they 
receive.  Doubts  of  the  stability  of  the  present  Govern- 
ment in  England.  I  do  not  despond,  though  some  of 
my  friends  write  to  me  from  thence  :  '  Your  friends  get 
on  very  ill;  the  House  of  Commons  arid  people  begin  to 
talk  of  them  as  very  unsteady  in  their  places.  Lord 
Palmerston  was  a  complete  failure  last  night.  Peel 
excellent.'  And  then  that  odious  story,  which  you  and 
Hart  allude  to,  of  that  Joseph  Surface  Peel  allowing  us 
to  remain  in.  Write  dearest  of  Gs.,  and  give  me  cou- 
rage and  facts.  Miss  Mercer  is  in  a  spasmodic  anxiety 
about  it  all,  for  she  too  receives  desponding  letters,  and 
her  fears  are  all  doubled,  as  she  says,  '  If  your  Govern- 
ment falls,  ours  follows.' 

Sister,  the  reason  I  did  not  write  was  that  I  attended 
the  Chambers  all  day.  Odillon  Barrot  speaks  incom- 
parably well ;  he  has  a  fine  determined  countenance,  a 
fine  voice  and  subjuguant  manner  set  in  a  vulgar  frame. 
Benjamin  Delessert  looks  like  an  excellent  English 
farmer,  a  Frank  Lawley  grown  immensely  large ;  La  Fay- 
ette  has  par  excellence  the  manner,  tone,  and  voice  de  la 
bonne  compagnie,  leans  on  the  lord  and  speaks  to  the 
Deputies  as  we  should  say,  '  Were  you  at  the  Opera  last 
night,  Mr.  Such-a-one  ? '  Sebastiani  spoke  uncommonly 


88       LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVTLLE     1831 

well ;  his  voice  as  clear  as  a  bell,  and  the  solemnity  of 
his  manner  is  not  amiss  in  his  ministerial  attitude.  The 
compliment  to  England  was  most  warmly  and  strongly 
articulated.  The  Loi  Electorate  was  debated  with  all 
the  childish,  noisy,  petulant  vehemence  still  reigning  in 
their  debates.  They  run,  they  ring,  they  squabble, 
they  scold ;  and  if  such  a  thing  you  like  to  behold,  you 
must  come,  Lady  C.,  and,  like  Betty  and  me,  sit  up  in  a 
charming  tribune,  where  one  is  in  perfect  comfort,  like 
in  a  box  at  the  Opera. 

Our  great  drum  and  soiree  for  the  Queen  is  over. 
We  had  all  sorts  of  shades  and  colours.  Odillon  Barrot 
and  Casimir  Perier,  Castelcicala  and  Lafayette,  and  in 
the  evening  the  old  Duchesse  d'Escars  on  one  hand  and 
the  Duke  of  Orleans  on  the  other.  But  she  did  scamper 
when  she  spied  him  ! 

My  individual  and  immediate  prospects  are  bright. 
No  dinners  coming,  nothing  but  small  things,  and  Lady 
Georgiana  Mitford  come.  Elle  me  fait  I'effet  of  the  first 
swallow,  a  woman  of  the  right  sort  from  England. 
Come  upon  a  lark  too.  I  think  her  pretty  and  pleasing 
and  elegante,  a  nosegay  and  kerchief  in  her  hand,  a  boa 
twice  round  her  neck.  I  make  much  of  her,  that  she 
may  bring  other  birds. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  21,  1831. 

My  dearest  sister, — Your  letter  last  night  delighted, 
and  above  all,  touched  me.  You  are  a  kind  angel  and 
make  me  most  happy.  I  sometimes  feel  a  tight  pang 
come  across  me,  head  and  heart,  when  I  feel  that  1  am- 
away,  but  I  have  much  to  console,  to  please  me,  and 
next  year,  even  if  nothing  hastens  it,  we  must  meet. 

I  am  glad  that  things  look  so  well  in  England,  and 
that  the  two  last  debates  were  more  satisfactory  than, 
the  first. 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  89 

I  have  just  been  sending  out  notes  for  a  fatal  dinner 
on  the  24th,  the  Queen's  birthday.  Myself  and  forty- 
nine  sparks  of  high  degree.  Granville  will  not  let  the 
girls  dine.  In  the  evening  I  shall  have  a  stuffy  drum, 
but  that  they  like. 

I  cannot  let  my  thoughts  dwell  on  Betty.  She 
comes  in  and  out  whenever  she  likes,  and  is  like  Helena 
Eobinson  or  any  other  here.  I  shall  be  sorry  when 
she  goes ;  to  lose  a  very  pleased,  happy  person,  miss 
her  in  my  society,  she  being  a  most  efficient  talking, 
animated  member  of  society.  Always  glad  to  come 
early,  stay  late,  talk  without  ceasing.  Bon  jours  and 
how-d'ye-does  all  the  visitors  much  more  audibly  and 
busily  than  I  do  myself.  She  is  esteemed  and  popular, 
and  whatever  was  amiss  in  the  doing  here  was,  and  is 
known  to  have  been,  singly  and  wholly  his  work.  I  do 
not  feel  as  if  she  was  here,  never  think  of  her  but  when 
I  see  her.  Nobody  feels  the  least  gene  at  finding  her 
always  sitting  near  me,  and  all  her  toads  toad  on 
because  they  see  that  I  toad  her  too.  Mexborough l  is 
ravished,  and  sits  with  her  mouth  wide  open,  like  Paul 
the  dancer,  only  very  still,  not  comprehending  what  she 
sees  beyond  that  '  nothing  meets  her  eyes  but  sights  of 
bliss.'  ' 

Alava 2  bores  me  to  death,  but  I  am  very  good  to 
him,  from  a  sort  of  feel  as  if  he  was  the  best  of  men, 
and  an  old  uncle  or  relation.  Why,  I  wonder — a  pro- 
fligate old  Spaniard,  I  believe. 

Your  account  of  the  Duke's  and  the  ladies'  mode- 
ration is  very  satisfactory.  I  think  things  here  look 
tranquillizing.  I  have  no  fear  of  war  or  any  mischief 
but  what  comes  from  those  horrid  Belgians,  and  they, 
I  think,  must  soon  end  in  troubling  nobody  but  them- 
selves. 

1  Lady  Mexborough,  Lady  Stuart's  sister. 

2  A  Spanish  general  devoted  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington. 


90        LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

Cradock  is  gone,  and  going  to  you.  He  has  made 
himself  a  great  loss  to  both  Granville  and  myself,  so 
attentive,  so  anxious  to  please  us.  Never  was  there 
such  a  pleasant,  delicious  repast  as  ours,  chez  lui ;  but 
it  is  in  business  that  Granville,  and  in  society  to  my 
monde  that  I  find  him  really  not  to  be  replaced. 

Miss  LEVESON  COWER  TO  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  25,  1831. 

My  dear  aunt, — Mama  is  gone  to  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  and  has  people  to  dinner,  which  makes  her 
fear  she  may  not  perhaps  have  time  to  write  to-day. 
She  is  a  happy  woman,  having  got  over  her  long 
Diplomatic  dinner.  It  was  reckoned  very  handsome. 
We  had  a  grande  reception  in  the  evening.  I  did  not 
like  it  much,  chiefly  from  feeling  such  envy  in  thinking 
of  you  all  at  the  ball  at  Devonshire  House.  In  many 
ways  our  life  is  pleasant  here,  but  I  cannot  say  my 
wish  of  going  back  to  England  is  the  least  diminished. 
Independently  of  mama's  wish  to  see  you  all  again,  she 
certainly  does  enjoy  her  existence  here  extremely.  The 
way  of  living,  the  early  hours,  and  the  climate  do  all 
suit  her  better  ;  and  also  the  occupation  and  little  ex- 
citement of  her  position  she  does  not  dislike,  and  it 
must  be  a  pleasure  to  her  to  feel  how  well  she  does  it 
all  and  how  popular  she  is. 

I  rather  despair  of  Blanche's  coming ;  what  you  say 
of  her  seems  to  make  it  unlikely — a  great  disappoint- 
ment to  me.  You  have  no  notion  how  much  affection 
I  feel  for  her,  and  what  a  privation  it  is  to  be  away 
from  her.  I  am  afraid  the  disturbances  will  frighten 
people  from  coming.  Everything  is  quiet  again  and 
seems  to  promise  to  continue  so.  Lafayette  was  here 
all  night  and  seemed  in  good  spirits.  He  talked  away 
with  Pozzo  for  some  time  very  eagerly.  There  were 
numbers  of  pretty  women  last  night,  both  French  and 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE 

English.  A  good  many  quizzes  among  the  latter,  as 
the  house  was  open,  in  Adelaide's  honour,  to  every- 
body. Some  people  observed,  '  Quel  beau  birthday ! ' 
in  looking  at  the  brilliancy  of  the  house  and  mama's 
toilette,  which  was  dazzling. 

It  is  dreadful  to  send  so  stupid  a  letter  instead  of 
mama's  usual  one,  but  I  thought  it  was  better  than 
nothing. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  28,  1831. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Your  life  is  too  vivacious,  and 
you  are  more  dissipated  than  we  are.  My  own  throat 
is  gone.  Sister,  how  does  yours  do  ?  I  have  gained 
by  it  four  days  at  home,  but  to-night  we  start  again. 
A  second  ball  at  the  Palais  Eoyal,  another  on  Wednes- 
day, and  our  own  on  Friday.  '  Settimana,  che  piom- 
bami  sul  core.' 

Lady  Mexborough  is  arrived  with  a  pretty,  tiny 
daughter,  whom  my  girls  think  a  love.  I  pity  the 
Queen  the  day  before  her  ball. 

News  from  Belgium  is  still  what  one  thinks,  talks, 
hopes,  and  fears  most  about.  I  think  everything  in 
England — Ireland  included — looks  so  much  better  that 
it  is  quite  reviving.  Here,  I  also  think,  if  that  one 
source  of  endless  perplexity  and  wrong  was  set  at  rest, 
all  would  do  well  also. 

My  girls  go  on  reconciled,  satisfied,  merry,  some- 
times amused ;  but  oh  !  what  a  difference  ! 

I  like  Betty  much  better  as  we  go  on.  Her  faults 
of  manner,  or  at  least  the  impression  they  make,  wear 
off,  and  she  is  become  happy,  easy.  She  is  constantly 
here,  and  sometimes  very  droll,  always  shrewd  and 
clever.  People  have  left  off  looking  surprised  at 
seeing  her  here  in  the  evening,  when  they  drop  in  with 
their  best  speeches,  which  is  a  great  comfort  to  her 


92       LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

and   to  me.     He  comes  rarely,  prowls  about   among 
les  douairieres,  as  he  tells  me. 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  March  11,  1831. 

You  can  have  no  idea  of  the  state  of  excitement 
here.  The  Ministry  is  changing,  but  they  do  not  think 
more  of  that  than  of  our  affairs.  We  were  one  day 
convinced  that  a  majority  of  sixty-seven  had  beaten  us, 
a  story  got  up  for  stock-jobbing  purposes.  I  cannot 
help  feeling  very  sanguine  now.  My  own  small  wit  had 
told  me  how  injudicious  Lord  Howick's  speech  was. 
Robert  Grant  is  a  darling. 

You  will  see  that  the  mob  have  been  attacking 
Pozzo.  His  court  and  street  were  crowded  with 
soldiers  the  whole  of  yesterday,  and  he  was  advised 
not  to  go  out.  His  nerves  are  at  all  times  terribly 
shattered,  and  he  must  be  in  a  dreadful  state.  Pray 
tell  Mrs.  Cavendish  that  she  must  not  mind  reports. 
There  never  was  a  safer  place  than  this  for  the  English. 
The  little  emeutes  are,  as  somebody  said  the  other 
day,  '  commandes  comme  un  pate,'  and  never  was 
protection  so  immediate  and  efficient.  If  there  is  the 
slightest  alarm,  you  have  National  Guards  everywhere 
on  the  alert,  crossing  all  the  streets  and  standing  at  all 
the  corners,  and,  in  short,  for  the  time  in  full  command 
of  the  town. 

Andrew  Barnard  is  anti-Reform,  which  startled  me 
at  first  in  that  courtier,  but  they  tell  me  it  is  because 
he  is  the  bosom  friend  of  Croker.  Sir  Andrew  says 
that,  whatever  is  thought  of  the  measure,  there  is  but 
one  opinion  of  the  man,  that  Lord  Grey's  popularity 
and  the  respect  felt  for  him  are  general. 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  93 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  14,  1831. 

Dearest  sister, — The  change  of  Ministry  here  makes 
a  great  sensation.  The  Dips  are  all  pleased  that  Sebas- 
tiani  remains,  as  he  is  decidedly  pacific.  Casimir 
Perier  l  is  a  man  of  great  talent  and  energy,  and  will 
have  his  own  way,  which  in  the  situation  of  things  here 
is  essential.  The  idea  of  strength  anywhere  gives  hope 
and  confidence. 

All  is  as  quiet  as  possible.  It  is  so  much  the 
interest  of  many  to  exaggerate  and  alarm,  that  I  do  not 
wonder  at  alarm  being  felt ;  but  you  know  I  am  not 
brave,  yet  I  never  have  had  a  moment's  fear.  Even 
Pozzo,  though  pelted  and  obliged  to  barricade,  was  safe. 
A  man  was  heard  saying,  '  Yois-tu,  un  ambassadeur — 
sais-tu  ce  que  c'est  qu'un  ambassadeur  ?  C'est  comme 
un  parlementaire,  on  n'y  touche  pas  ' — a  pleasing  view 
of  the  subject. 

Paganini  is  the  idee  dominante  just  now.  They  say 
there  is  a  new  religion  called  Paganinism,  and  talk  non- 
sense, when  exaltes. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  March  19,  1831. 

Dearest  sister, — Fanny  spent  the  evening  here 
yesterday,  looking  very  nice  and  very  happy.  This 
morning  my  girls  take  Mrs.  Cav.  and  her  to  the  Louvre, 
and  they  dine  here. 

Lord  Normanby  and  I  are  just  setting  out  to  hear  a 
young  Murat,  a  very  handsome  Buonaparte-looking  man, 
propose  at  the  Chambers  the  taking  off  of  the  penal 
punishment  attached  to  the  family  of  Buonaparte's 
return  into  France.  We  hope  quil  y  aura  du  bruit. 

1  Lafitte  resigned  and  was  succeeded  by  Casimir  Perier. 


94       LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE      1831 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  21,  1831. 

Dearest  and  best  beloved  sister, — I  am  very  sorry 
indeed  for  poor  Lady  Cawdor's  accident.  How  strangely 
accidents  happen,  like  emeutes,  never  when  they  are  ex- 
pected or  with  apparently  sufficient  cause  !  Yesterday, 
the  threatened  day,  the  20th,  when  we  had  been  foretold 
a  crowning  of  Napoleon  the  Second's  statue  and  the 
breaking  out  of  a  civil  war,  was  more  than  quiet.  Susy 
and  I  walked  all  about  the  streets  alone,  and  were  only 
struck  by  the  total  absence  of  carriages,  why,  I  know 
not.  But  we  found  the  town  looking  like  a  large  village 
with  a  fair  in  it  from  the  swarms  of  people  walking. 

Mrs.  Cavendish  was  never  so  expected  and  hailed  in 
her  life.  I  look  forward  to  having  them  with  the 
greatest  pleasure.  Fanny  will  be  such  a  delight  to  the 
girls,  and  Mrs.  Cavendish  will  sit  among  the  flowers. 

We  shall  not  go  out  at  all  during  Passion  Week,  as 
Granville  is  to  be  confirmed.  I  do  not  think  the  Caven- 
dishes will  mind  being  quite  quiet  just  at  first,  as  we 
shall  tire  ourselves  and  them  in  the  morning  with  sight- 
seeing, drives,  and  walks.  In  Easter  week  je  les  ferai 
danser.  They  are  also,  I  believe,  seriously  enough  dis- 
posed to  prefer  not  having  gre'at  dissipation  just  at  this 
season. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  March  24,  1831. 

Now  hear  !  your  letter  arrived  by  the  post  and  we 
gave  up  the  Bill.  Yesterday  Waller  came  at  five  and 
said  Eothschild  had  received  a  despatch  by  telegraph. 
The  Government  beat  by  a  majority  of  sixty-seven. 
The  Funds  fell  enormously.  Bonfils  the  Jew  ruined  by 
it.  I  go  to  Appony's  drum,  in  an  attitude  of  decent 
composure  and  ignorance  of  probable  consequences. 
Granville  goes  to  Mr.  Louis  Philip,  who  asks  him  what 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  95 

can  make  the  Funds  fall  so.  '  The  news  from  England, 
perhaps,  sir.'  '  Why,  Lord  Granville,  there  is  no  news 
from  England  to-day.  Rothschild  has  just  been  here, 
and  has  not  had  a  word  of  news  to-day.' 

Well,  your  Grace,  this  comes  on  to  Appony's,  all 
the  world  in  a  hubbub,  the  Dip.  faces  lengthening 
again.  This  morning  we  get  up  ignorant,  helpless, 
uninformed.  No  courier  till  Thursday. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  25,  1831. 

I  know  you  will  forgive  me,  my  dear  sis,  for  only 
writing  a  line  to-day.  My  ball  is  to-night,  and  I  think 
you  will  pity  me  when  I  tell  you  that  I  and  my  girls 
have,  for  the  last  three  days,  done  nothing  but  receive 
and  write  notes,  and  1  with  so  bad  a  cold  and  sore 
throat  that  I  have  for  the  last  two  been  doing  nothing 
but  gargle,  and  the  night  before  last  was  obliged  to 
blister  my  throat.  But  your  sprack  sister,  being  well 
dosed  and  entirely  starved,  is  in  perfect  good  trim  for 
the  hop,  and  I  do  not  mind  appearing  in  a  neglige  of 
velvet  and  flannel. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  28,  1831. 

My  very  dearest  sister, — Lord  Normanby  is  loaded 
with  all  sorts  of  messages  to  you  both.  He  has  made 
himself  extremely  amiable  here,  and  I  regret  him  very 

•/  w 

much. 

Dearest  brother,  your  letter  and  speech  have  given 
me  the  greatest  delight  in  you.  George,  the  silent 
George,  burst  out  with  '  What  a  noble  speech ! '  and 
eloquent  too,  and  quite  worthy  of  you.  I  am  so  glad 
that  William  succeeded  so  well. 

Now  for  a  sketch  of  Glinfashy.  She  is  happy  and 
couleur  de  rose.  They  dined  here  yesterday,  and  this 


96       LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

morning  we  went  after  church  to  Passy  in  the  carriage, 
to  the  hole  in  the  wall  which  you,  your  Grace,  taught 
me,  and  walked  down  to  the  Champs  de  Mars,  she 
linking  and  looping  with  Mr.  Mitford,  and  there,  having 
hired  chairs  for  twopence  apiece,  we  stood  in  the  midst 
of  forty-five  thousand  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  twice 
the  number  of  populace,  as  quietly  and  securely  as  I 
sit  to  write  in  my  own  room.  The  King  was  received 
with  enthusiasm.  He  stood  bowing  to  the  shouting 
multitude,  and  all  their  language  around  us  was  good- 
humour,  applause,  and  delight.  '  Oh,  si  Charles  Dix 
voyait  ceci ! '  with  some  wishes  expressed,  '  a  present 
nous  aimerons  voir  les  Anglais  a  Calais.' 

I  am  just  come  from  Casimir  Perier's  reception. 
The  salon  was  crowded  and  many  Ultras  in  it,  as 
they  consider  his  being  Minister  as  a  triumph  over  the 
extreme  gauche  party,  of  which  Lafayette  and  Odillon 
Barrot  are  the  chiefs — '  L'odieux  Baron,'  as  les  dames 
de  la  resistance  call  him. 

Guinea  is  a  dear.  He  brought  us  a  great  deal  of 
London  gossip.  He  said  he  found  Fordwich  at  Lady 
Hardy's.  We  asked  him,  '  Does  he  seem  to  admire 
them  ?  '  He  said,  '  They  seem  to  admire  him  very  much.' 

Mme.  de  Flahault  is  becoming  happier  about  Eng- 
lish politics  in  consequence  of  a  cheerful  letter  from 
Lady  Grey.  She  is  not  so  much  so  about  the  stability 
of  the  Government  here,  and  frets  over  Casimir  Perier's 
health,  and  the  chance  of  war.  Yet  she  admits  that 
things  wear  a  much  better  aspect,  but  she  is  a  great 
croaker  and  alarmist. 

I  was  at  the  Palais  Eoyal  last  night,  and  thought  they 
all  looked  in  better  spirits  than  I  had  before  seen  them. 

I  must  seal  my  letter,  for  Mrs.  Opie1  is  coming  to 

1  The  widow  of  the  painter.  She  wrote  many  popular  works,  chiefly 
novels.  Late  in  life  she  became  a  Quakeress,  and  was  much  esteemed  for 
her  benevolence. 


1831  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  97 

play  with  me  at  two,  and  at  three  my  girls  and  boys 
have  a  little  reunion  in  the  conservatory.  Lady  Minto's 
twelve  children,  from  sixteen  downwards,  Lady  Stuart's 
two  girls,  and  Master  Murray,  Freddy's  bosom  friend, 
from  Wick.  Fanny,  Sneyd  and  Tchann  ;  all  ages  you 
see,  and  my  dear  Mme.  de  Chasteluse  to  sit  with  me, 
and  Mme.  Juste  to  say  '  Ah '  with  Mile.  Sabine. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  April  1831. 

I  am  a  little  frightened.  The  Bill,  my  dears  ?  and 
is  it  true  that  the  King  will  not  dissolve,  and  that  if 
beat,  Earl  Grey  bolts,  and  then  what,  where,  who  ?  and 
how  will  the  country  bear  it  ?  and  shall  you  all  soon 
come  swimming  over  in  a  long  boat  ?  Emigres  to  set 
off  with  us  to  take  lodgings  in  Pekin  ?  I  am  not  really 
afraid.  Don't  dine  with  Eeform  Bill,  as  I  hear  he  is 
called.  It  is  not  worth  a  risk,  and  you  had  better  do 
some  pleasanter  thing  for  your  debut  a  week  later. 
How  happy  I  am  to  hear  such  excellent  accounts  of 
you  de  toute  part  \ 

Yesterday  my  children  all  exclaimed,  '  How  kind 
and  amiable  Mrs.  C.  is  grown  ! ' 

You  can  have  no  idea  of  the  delight  and  feeling  she 
has  shewn  at  our  attentions  to  her  here.  She  melts 
like  jelly  before  all  the  little  kindnesses  and  civilities 
of  society. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  April  29,  1831. 

I  went  to  Flahault's  last  night,  and  must  own  I 
enjoy  having  my  good  news 1  to  tell  to  the  sceptical  and 
discontented.  Everybody,  however  (Lord  Stuart  and 
the  Chancellerie,  red-hot  Tories  to  a  man,excepted),  seem 
delighted  and  soothed  at  the  universality  of  wish  and 

1  Of  the  sudden  dissolution  of  Parliament. 
VOL.    II.  H 


98       LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE      1831 

opinion  in  England.  Les  bien  pensants  think  it  ought 
to  destroy  all  fear  of  unpleasant  results.  Ireland  too,  a 
little  lamb  ! 

It  is  quite  true  all  you  say  about  Mrs.  .  There 

is  no  pleasure  in  giving  her  pleasure,  but  there  is  the 
satisfaction  of  paying  a  debt,  doing  a  duty,  avoiding 
a  storm.  But  there  is  '  no  pleasure  in  her  song,  no 
summer  in  her  year.'  Then  I  think  of  all  she  has 
suffered,  and  scold  myself  instead  of  her. 

Mr.  Stuart  is  very  ugly,  very  intelligent,  uncom- 
monly agreeable,  and  we  all  are  fond  of  him. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

April  24,  1831. 

My  very  dearest  brother, — Your  letter  is  the  most 
interesting,  the  most  entertaining,  the  most  curious,  th,e 
most  eventful  that  ever  was  written.  I  have  read  and 
read  again  every  line  of  it.  The  King  is  beyond  all 
praise  for  the  manner  in  which  he  has  given  his  con- 
fidence— so  wholly,  so  frankly,  and  so  courageously ; 
but  the  pretty,  piquant,  delicious  part  of  the  business 
to  frivolous  me  is  Lord  Wharncliffe  in  his  closet !  His 
preposterous  intention,  his  stubborn  will,  his  proud 
anticipations,  mowed  and  squashed.  Humpty  Dumpty 
sat  on  a  wall. 

Write  again,  more,  more.  How  interesting  every- 
thing is,  and  will  be  !  Are  you  sanguine  about  the 
elections  ?  Are  you  easy  about  Ireland  ?  Our  domestic 
Tory,  Harry  Vane,  talks  of  a  reaction  in  the  country. 
The  interest  about  it  all  here  yesterday  was  intense 
amongst  English  and  French. 

On  Friday,  at  my  hop,  it  was  known  that  there  was 
a  majority  against  us.  I  had  an  out  feel,  and  the 
natural  antipathy  to  being  beat,  independently  of  larger 
and  finer  feelings,  but  I  talked  big  and  confident  of 
dissolution  to  Perier,  Pasquier,  etc.  My  spirits  rose 


1831  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  99 

upon  Lord  Stuart's  coming  in  as  cross  as  a  lapdog 
and  as  rude  as  a  bear.  I  thought  this  promised  well. 
Mme.  de  Flahault  sat  like  a  thunder-cloud,  and  her 
friends  declared  that  when  spoken  to  she  could  not  or 
would  not  answer.  I  understand  that  yesterday  she 
sat  at  home,  taking  joy  upon  the  rumour  of  certain 
dissolution  We  hope  that  during  this  falling  of  the 
sky  we  shall  catch  larks.  Susy  says,  '  Uncle  Duke  will 
certainly  come.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  April  29,  1831. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  most  interesting  letter, 
and  for  being  so  well,  but  not  for  going  to  dine  with 
the  King.  I  hope  and  trust  it  will  not  tire  you. 

How  it  delights  me  to  hear  that  Granville  is  so 
appreciated !  It  is  true  he  slaves,  and  slaves  alone. 
The  place  of  Secretary  of  Legation  is  filled,  but  not 
occupied.  Mr.  Hamilton,  harmless,  inoffensive  man,  can 
neither  comprehend  nor  reply  to  even  a  question  about 
etiquette  or  the  news  of  the  day.  '  What  sort  of 
weather  is  it  to-day,  Mr.  H.  ? '  *  God  bless  my  soul,  it 
never  occurred  to  me  to  make  an  observation.  It  seems 
to  me,  I  may  err,  I  would  not  pronounce  rashly,  but 
I'll  step  out  and  make  a  point  of  ascertaining  it ; '  a 
nervous,  bilious,  conscientious,  pauvre  sire. 

Lord  and  Lady  W.  Eussell  are  arrived.  She  is 
really  beautiful,  grown  into  a  very  large  woman, 
brighter  and  clearer  than  anything  I  ever  saw. 

The  poor  King  of  Sardinia's  death,  hourly  expected, 
is  dreaded  by  the  young  and  dancing  part  of  the 
community  to  a  degree  that  is  almost  shocking,  my 
young  a  la  tete. 

We  are  safe  for  to-night,  but  I    doubt  whether  I 

shall  be  able  to  have  a  fourth. 

f 

H   2 


100     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     ]831 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  May  2,  1831. 

What  you  call  your  election  gossip  is  read  like  a 
sentence  or  reprieve  by  your  devoted  relations.  We 
savourer  every  line,  and  when  we  have  done,  begin 
again.  Why,  sister  Carlisle,  what  times  ?  I  have  no 
doubt  of  the  elections  going  well.  I  should  not  like  a 
Eeign  of  Terror  over  the  elections.  In  any  other  case 
I  like  to  think  of  dearest  Morpeth  successful  and  trium- 
phant again. 

Granville  is  a  good  deal  better,  but  very  languid,  and 
unable  to  walk.  I  hear  him  now  laughing  with  Pozzo. 
You  know,  they  never  laugh  so  much  with  us,  Lady  C. 

The  King  of  Sardinia  is  dead,  and  Court  and  Court 
ball,  all  that  would  have  been  so  accablant  to  me,  over. 

Lord  Wallace  is  on  his  way  to  England.  Yesterday 
he  paid  Granville  a  long  visit,  and  gave  him  accounts 
of  the  Harrowbys.  They  were  driving  home  from  an 
expedition  in  an  open  caleche.  Lord  Harrowby  felt 
himself  collared  from  behind  by  a  man,  who  held  him 
back  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  held  a  stiletto 
to  his  breast.  Lady  H.  seized  that  hand.  They  told 
him  he  should  have  money,  watches,  etc.  He  departed 
with  them. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe  :  July  4,  1831. 

If  you  could  know  the  delight  of  having  Granville 
sitting  opposite  to  me  !  He  goes,  alas  !  to-morrow  with 
George  Stewart,  leaving  us  Guinea  and  the  caleche,  two 
great  improvements  in  our  circumstances.  Our  plans 
here  are  uncertain.  We  are  to  remain  here  till  he 
beckons  to  us,  and  I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  that  is  the 
whole  month  of  July,  unless  Lady  Harrowby  arrives  at 
Paris  towards  the  middle  of  it,  in  which  case  we  should 
go  there  to  meet  her. 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  101 

Good-night  and  God  bless  you,  my  very  dearest 
sister. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe :  July  12,  1831. 

I  have  just  received  your  letter,  my  very  dearest 
sister,  and  wish  you  joy  a  hundred  times  of  your  birth- 
day, and  of  its  being  a  year  less  than  I  thought,  and 
mine  also  in  consequence.  This  very  day  I  told  Guinea 
I  was  forty-six. 

I  have  no  fears  for  the  trois  jours,  as  they  say  the 
people  are  in  a  good  humour,  but  even  if  they  were 
not  every  precaution  has  been  taken. 

I  heard  from  Granville  to-day.  He  had  been  dining 
at  Sebastiani's,  where  he  met  Mme.  de  Flahault,  Lord 
Lynedoch,  Lord  William  Russell,  Belliard  and  Guizot. 

My  three  are  gone  to  the  play  to-night  with  Mme. 
St.  Glair. 

I  expect  Willy  and  Freddy  per  kettle  on  Saturday. 
I  am  waiting  to  know  from  Granville  if  we  are  to  set 
off  on  Sunday  or  Monday.  We  go  back  by  the  uglier 
shorter  road,  cutting  the  Seine  and  sleeping  at  Gourney. 

Friday. — Well,  here's  an  event,  je  ne  me  possede  pas 
dejoie.  Who  do  you  think  came  in  the  night,  is  now 
asleep  at  Clarke's,  fancying  himself  known  only  to  me  ? 
I  shall  not  tell  the  girls.  They  shall  have  all  the  surprise 
of  seeing  him  walk  into  my  room.  My  dear,  adorable 
brother  crossed  in  the  night  in  a  pelting  rain,  which 
still  continues.  I  will  not  direct  my  letter  till  I  have 
seen  him. 

Here  he  is,  looking  so  well.  I  have  not  a  moment. 
We  dine  with  him  to-night. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe  :  July  16,  1831. 

I  prepare  my  letter  for  the  first  occasion,  my  dearest 
sister.  We  have  had  the  most  delicious  weather  since 


102     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

I  last  wrote,  and  sat  by  the  sea  till  ten  o'clock  last 
night. 

Lady  Westmorland  is  arrived,  but  has  not  yet 
appeared,  and  I  have  prepared  a  willing  victim,  poor 
lonely  Mme.  St.  Clair,  to  be  her  souffre-douleur,  and  to 
represent  me  as  a  sad,  unsociable,  unprofitable  listener. 
Two  or  three  Frenchwomen  that  I  know  only  to  bow 
to,  and  the  Sardinian  Ambassador,  who  never  does  any- 
thing but  bow,  are  our  only  other  events. 

We  are  going  a  long  expedition  to-day  to  Arques, 
tell  Morpeth,  to  finish  the  steeple  and  draw  the  Castle, 
to  come  home  to  a  late  dinner  at  six.  All  this  is  very 
exciting  and  delightful  to  the  Leveson  family. 

Sunday  morning.  I  had  a  long  letter  from  Granville 
yesterday.  He  went  on  Thursday  evening  to  St.  Cloud, 
where  he  found  them  all  in  pretty  good  spirits.  He 
was  to  return  there  on  the  evening  he  wrote  to  present 
Lord  William  Eussell,  and  that  debutant  Lord  Lynedoch. 
The  elections  are  favourable  to  the  Government,  and 
there  is  a  decided  majority  of  Ministerialists. 

The  steamboat  came  very  empty  last  night,  only 
thirty  passengers  on  board.  My  brother  wrote  me  a 
line  by  it,  too  busy  to  cross.  He  says  :  '  London  news 
is  dull  and  flat — Eeform  stale  and  grippe  triumphant.' 
What  a  picture  !  Freddy  writes  :  '  As  to  politics,  I  don't 
care  a  pin  about  Prince  Leopold.  Eeform  is  my  principal 
aim,  and  I  am  afraid  it  will  not  be  carried  in  the  House 
of  Lords.'  He  is  rather  a  prig,  but  an  amazing  darling. 

I  was  dying  for  the  comment  on  the  debate,  having 
been  enraptured,  by  myself,  with  Mr.  Macaulay,  pleased 
with  G.  Vernon,  and  amused  with  Mr.  Lytton  Bulwer. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe  :  July  17,  1831. 

Dearest  sister, — I  hope  G.  Morpeth  has  been 
pleased  here  as  well  as  at  Paris.  He  is  now  in  a  warm 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  103 

bath.  So  are  my  girls.  They  go  into  the  sea  to-mor- 
row, Morpeth  on  it.  He  is  to  start  at  seven.  No 
words  can  say  how  I  shall  miss  him. 

I  support  all  my  privations,  however,  better  here 
than  elsewhere.  There  is  to  me  a  charm  about  this 
place,  its  perfect  quiet,  not  a  friend  to  be  had  for  love 
or  money,  the  air,  the  waves,  the  hours,  the  hunger, 
the  sleep,  that  keeps  up  my  spirits  against  my  sorrows, 
for  it  is  a  great  one  to  be  away  from  Granville  and  to 
part  with  George.  My  girls  are  too  dear  and  nice, 
just  as  gay  and  contented  here,  as  they  are  charmed 
with  such  a  different  existence  elsewhere. 

We  are  longing  for  letters  from  England.  This 
moment  is  so  interesting  and  curious,  and  to  know 
what  Granville's  plans  are  and  how  long  he  will  be 
there. 

Lady  Westmorland  was  very  reasonable  and  ami- 
able, very  eloquent,  very  droll,  and  only  seen  the  eve 
of  our  departure,  brought  no  bother  and  tax  upon 
one.  I  think  her  ten  thousand  times  superior  to  Lady 
Jersey  in  every  way.  We  miss  at  Paris,  my  dear  Lady 
Carlisle,  by  this  lark  of  ours  a  prolongation  of  the 
society  of  Lady  Westmorland,  Cheerful,1  ne  vous 
deplaise,  Lord  Burghersh,  Lord  and  Lady  Conyngham, 
Lord  Howard  of  Effingham. 

Poor  Lady  Emmeline  and  poor  Cornet.  She  is  ill, 
he  is  foolish.  He  talks  of  her  being  so  cross  and  in  her 
tantrums.  Only  to  Verity,  who  told  my  boys,  so  do 
not  betray.  Charles  said  to  him,  '  She  won't  see  you  ; 
I  can't  help  it,  I  don't  know  what's  to  be  done  next.' 
She  never  would  come  out,  and  would  not  see  me 
when  I  called,  but  wrote  me  a  very  grateful  note  next 
day. 

1  Nickname  of  the  Duke  of  Eutland. 


104     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  29,  1831. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — I  hope  the  gaieties  of  London 
are  indeed  ending,  and  that  if  we  are  so  blest  as  to 
go  there  for  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  we 
shall  find  society  and  no  fetes.  I  wish  it  more  and 
more,  but  as  yet  have  not  the  slightest  encouragement 
from  his  Excellency. 

On  Monday  evening  Lord  and  Lady  Harrowby, 
Grranville  and  I  went  to  the  Palais  Eoyal  to  the  work- 
table.  The  Queen  looked  gayer  than  usual. 

On  Tuesday  we  returned  there,  zealous,  loyal 
creatures  with  the  four  young  ladies  to  a  concert. 
There  we  found  the  Dom,1  the  Empress  and  French 
music  ;  very  hot,  but  amusing  from  the  circumstances, 
very  much  so  to  see  the  Emperor  and  Lafayette  in  a 
confab. 

Yesterday  we  went  to  Berci,  arid  there  we  saw  a 
joute,  pretty  from  the  gaiety  and  dress,  but  wretched 
as  a  water-work.  At  two  we  adjourned  in  the  broiling 
heat  to  the  mounds  by  the  Champs  de  Mars,  where 
we  found  a  miserable  spectacle,  two  wretched  jockeys 
racing,  courses  de  chevaux  libres,  but  myriads  of  people 
all  gay  and  enchanted.  In  the  evening  the  town 
illuminated,  every  tree  in  the  Champs  Elysees  lit 
up. 

Friday  morning,  balcon  of  the  Hotel  Bristol  chez 
Monsieur  Motteux.  A  beautiful  sight,  day  blue  and 
gold,  the  Place  cleared  of  the  populace,  but  every 
window  and  balcon  full.  The  King  on  a  white  horse 
with  his  sons.  Pedro  with  all  his  green  feathers  rode 
up  to  the  Queen's  balcon,  like  a  tourney,  Lady  Carlisle. 

1  Dom  Pedro  and  his  wife,  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of  Brazil. 


1831  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  105 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  July  30,  1831. 

The  troops  are  going  to  be  reviewed.  M.  Motteux 
has  taken  for  the  occasion  a  large  apartment  and 
ordered  us  a  feast.  In  one  window  Lord  William 
Eussell,  Susy,  F.  Howard,  Freddy  and  the  little  Eussell 
boy.1  Lady  William,  Motteux,  and  Mrs.  Eawdon  in 
the  next  one.  Dody,  Harriet  Kyder,  Guinea,  all  the 
others  too  late  and  are  lopped  off.  The  carriages 
cannot  get  back  for  them.  The  crowd  is  immense,  the 
cheering  very  well,  but  less  striking  than  the  perfect 
good-humour. 

I  am  writing  in  a  corner,  as  comfortable  as  if  I  was 
in  my  own  room.  We  have  a  soiree  this  evening, 
lamps  and  seats  in  the  garden,  the  roof  and  garrets 
for  those  who  like  to  see  the  fireworks. 

They  are  hurrahing  now.  It  is  so  beautiful,  and  all 
like  lambs  and  doves. 

There  is  a  report  of  a  great  victory  by  the  Poles. 
It  may  only  be  got  up  for  to-day. 

Lord  and  Lady  Harrowby  have  with  admirable 
dexterity  just  run  across  the  Place  through  the  soldiers' 
legs,  and  here  they  are. 

I  have  been  dining  on  cold  chicken.  Freddy  is  as 
drunk  as  a  piper  with  champagne. 

I  am  to  tell  you  that  Pedro  starts  at  eleven  to-night, 
in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  made  to  retain  him. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  August  3,  1831. 

Dearest  sister, — We  had  a  most  curious  repast  yes- 
terday at  the  Palais  Eoyal,  an  immense  affair  with  all 
the  diplomacy.  We  must  have  been  most  unwelcome. 

1  Who  succeeded  his  cousin  as  ninth  Duke  of  Bedford  in  1872. 


106     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

Perier's  resignation 1  occupies  everybody,  and  nothing 
is  as  yet  decided  as  to  his  successor. 

The  heat  has  been  perhaps  a  shade  less  oppressive. 
I  have,  however,  done  nothing  since  les  trois  jours,  the 
dinner  yesterday  the  only  exception.  Tell  Morpeth 
that  Madame  and  I  had  an  hour's  political  talk  after 
it.  I  liked  her  very  much,  thought  her  wise  and  feeling. 
The  Queen  looked  worn.  We  met  all  the  ex-Ministers 
coming  in  as  we  went  out. 

From  thence  to  Madame  de  Flahault's.  Found  all 
the  people  in  despair  at  Perier's  move — remove.  She 
dines  here  to-day,  and  Madame  Appony  and  Lady 
Conyngham  are  to  run  in  in  the  evening. 

We  are  threatened  with  a  ball  on  Tuesday  at  the 
Palais  Koyal  to  celebrate  the  King's  accession,  but  I 
hope  in  this  heat  there  will  be  none. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  August  10,  1831. 

What  interesting  times  !  I  have  juet  heard  of  the 
echec  in  Belgium,  General  Dame's  defeat.  I  feel  so 
much  interest  about  Leopold,  and  he  seems  to  meet  the 
crisis  so  manfully.  He  must  be  embarrassed  with  the 
novelty  and  difficulty  of  the  situation. 

Lord  Harrowby  sets  out  for  Beauvais  to-morrow 
and  Granville  dines  at  Appony's,  so  that  our  solitude 
will  appear  striking. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  August  13,  1831. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  am  charmed  with  Leopold's 
conduct,  and,  forgive  me,  with  the  idea  that  all  the 
vulgar  English  will  prefer  Brussels  to  Paris.  I  think 
Pedro  is  too  frisky  with  all  the  ladies. 

1  Casimir  Perier  withdrew  his  resignation  and  remained  in  power  till 
1832,  when  he  died  of  cholera. 


1831  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  107 

Lord  Harrowby  is  or  rather  has  been  very  poorly 
here,  which  he  always  is  when  his  mind  is  worried  and 
irritated  as  it  now  is  to  the  greatest  degree  by  politics, 
and  I  should  gather  from  all  I  see  and  hear  that  he  is 
goaded  on  by  his  friends  in  England,  yet  totally  unable 
to  make  up  his  mind.  Altogether,  he  is  in  a  pitiable 
state  of  mind  and  spirits. 

Lady  Harrowby  is  well,  but  thinner  than  anybody 
you  ever  saw.  The  girls  are  not  in  particularly  good 
looks,  though  I  think  Louisa  better  looking  than  she 
was.  But  they  are  all  vp-rv  amiable  and  happy  to 
be  here,  and  my  girls  return  the  compliment,  and  are 
delighted  to  have  them. 

I  conclude  from  what  I  hear  that  Lord  Spencer  is 
in  a  very  alarming  state.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  the 
disgust  inspired  by  the  conduct  of  the  Ultras  in  the 
House  of  Commons  has  done  us  good,  and  that  many 
of  the  Lords,  even  the  factious,  are  become  more 
moderate. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  August  16,  1831. 

My  dear,  dearest  sister, — Nothing  new.  The  two 
royal  Dukes  gone  to  join  the  army,  which  saves  us  from 
a  ball  at  the  Palais  Eoyal  on  Tuesday. 

All  our  old  friends,  Perier,  etc.,  remain  in  office. 
Everybody  wondering  and  speculating  about  Dutch 
land. 

The  Conynghams  and  Lord  Orford  dined  here 
yesterday,  and  we  had  quite' a  brilliant  soiree.  Madame 
Appony  sits  by  la  Marquise^  as  Lieven  used.  Her 
beauty  is  much  admired.  She  is  wonderful,  as-  fresh  as 
a  daisy,  bouche  comme  une  rose,  in  a  light  blue  gauze 
hat  with  white  feathers,  a  salmon-coloured  gown  made 
extremely  high,  with  long  sleeves  ;  she  looked  infinitely 
handsomer  than  when  in  a  satin  frock,  swaddled  in 


108     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1831 

jewels.  Lady  Maria  is  inoffensive  and  good-humoured. 
Lord  C.  begs  to  be  remembered  to  you  and  my  brother. 
He  is  grown  larger  and  meeker. 

Lady  Harrowby  goes  to  England  on  Thursday.  We 
shall  miss  them  very  much.  The  girls  are  extremely 
fond  of  Harriet.  They  think  her  in  every  way  improved 
by  her  travels.  Louisa  is  so  also.  Her  countenance 
is  uncommonly  intelligent,  and  she  is  so  to  a  remarkable 
degree. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  August  20,  1831. 

Lady  Conyngham  and  her  cubs  come  to-night.  She 
is  so  much  better  than  her  brood.  The  foreigners  are 
much  excited  about  her,  Madame  Conyngham,  and 
think  her,  as  she  is,  still  beautiful.  I  thought  Paul  of 
Wiirtemberg  would  have  screamed  with  curiosity  and 
excitement,  and  Madame  de  Vaudreuil  with  anxiety  to 
see  which  had  conserves  herself  best ;  not  having  met  for 
twenty  years,  the  result  must  have  been  mortifying. 

Lady  William  came  last  night.  She  has  interesting 
letters  from  him.  Great  praise  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  noble  and  temperate  when  he  had  a 
strong  temptation  to  take  advantage  of  his  position  and 
power  to  conquer.  As  to  Bob  Adair,  he  is  a  hero  and 
the  youngest  man  going. 

The  English  Press !  What  license,  what  a  ton ! 
Do  tell  me  what  you  think  of  the  progress  made,  and  if, 
as  Lord  Napier  says,  the  Lords  will  be  at  it  in  ten  days. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  August  1831. 

I  am  so  glad  to  hear  of  Lord  Carlisle  being  well 
enough  for  Windsor,  and  that  you  are  up  to  so  much 
of  various  sorts.  We  are  now  as  if  we  were  in  some 
chateau  every  evening.  The  conservatory  rings  with 
the  shouts  of  laughter  of  the  young  ones.  To-night  we 


1831  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  109 

old  ones  go  to  the  Palais  Royal,  to-morrow  to  Tivoli, 
but  life  is  as  quiet  and  enjoyable  as  possible. 

We  have  got  a  Mr.  Sneyd,  but  a  very  little  one, 
almost  imperceptible.  When  does  the  House  of  Lords 
go  into  Committee  ?  Guess,  suppose,  but  don't  say,  like 
Lord  Granville,  'Impossible  to  conjecture.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  17,  1831. 

How  grieved  I  am  for  poor  Lord  Durham.1  Is  it 
quite  hopeless  ? 

I  am  much  better ;  went  to  the  Opera  on  Tuesday, 
and  saw  '  Anna  Bolena.'  Rubini,  perfect,  enchanting. 
Pasta,  older,  thicker,  her  voice  as  well  as  figure,  but 
always  very  admirable.  Yesterday  had  a  longish 
soiree,  more  French  arriving.  Conynghams  go  to 
England  on  Monday,  to  some  place  they  have  near 
Dover.  She  longs  to  see  you,  and  is  an  amiable,  good- 
hearted  woman,  irrevocably  dull. 

The  new  peers  occupy  us.  Whom  will  my  brother 
bring  in  for  the  county?  We  wonder  at  Northland. 
He  lives  abroad,  and  we  say  why. 

The  Dips  came  from  the  Palais  Royal  yesterday 
evening.  They  had  left  the  little  Queen  2  at  play  with 
the  Princesses,  putting  bits  of  wood  in  mosaic  shape, 
tres  enfant  and  delighted. 

Madame  de  Dolomieu  and  her  daughter  are  nervous 
about  1'Heredite  question,  which  is  one  of  immense 
difficulty  for  this  Government.  The  discussions  are  to 
begin  on  Thursday  or  Friday  next. 

Madame  de  Flahault  is  in  her  new  house,  and  ill. 
She  was  at  home  on  Thursday.  Granville  went  and 
thought  there  was  a  strong  smell  of  paint,  which  may 
have  disagreed  with  her.  Our  Harry  Vane  stuck  his 

1  On  account  of  the  illness  of  his  eldest  son,  who  died  on  the  24th. 

2  Of  Portugal. 


110     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1831 

elbow  through   her  new  glass  door   and   smashed   it, 
rather  an  ominous  beginning  in  the  Eue  d'Angouleme. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  20,  1831. 

It  has  been  great  repose  both  to  body  and  mind 
having  those  dear  Talbots  here,  a  chaperon  for  every- 
thing, the  walks,  drives,  sights  in  the  morning,  operas 
and  plays,  and  last  night  a  hop  at  Lord  Granard's,  all 
without  my  having  anything  but  the  accounts,  which  I 
delight  in. 

I  believe  there  was  a  great  deal  of  disturbance  in 
Paris  yesterday.  The  cavalry,  impatient  and  goaded, 
were  very  violent.  I  heard  of  one  man  killed  and 
many  wounded.  The  slackness,  or  rather  coldness,  of 
the  National  Guard  is  a  bad  symptom.  I  can  hardly 
think  this  set  of  men  will  weather  it,  or  that  any  other 
will  be  found  to  undertake  it,  or  succeed  if  they  do. 

John  Talbot  is  just  come  in  from  the  Courts  of 
Law,  and  says  that  everything  seems  perfectly  quiet  in 
the  town  to-day. 

Charles  Canning  was  the  recommender  of  Mr. 
Shore.1  Mr.  Chapman  says  he  is  very  glad  he  was 
going  to  him.  We  saw  some  letters  to  Charles 
Canning,  which  we  liked.  I  blush  to  say  we  neither  of 
us  know  the  terms.  It  is  a  singularly  dull  place,  one 
of  its  great  advantages  in  our  eyes. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  23, 1831. 

Weather  hot  as  June.  The  Talbots  and  girls  gone 
to  Yincennes  and  Pere-Lachaise.  They  are  indefati- 
gable. I  went  after  dinner  to  the  Palais  Royal  and 

from  there  to  Madame  de  Flahault's.    I  found  the  Kino- 

& 

1  Young  Granville  was  with  him  till  he  went  to  Oxford. 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  111 

delighted  with  the  majority  of  eighty-five.  I  saw 
Monsieur  Thiers-  at  Madame  de  Flahault's.  He  says 
the  Chamber  is  not  so  ill-disposed  as  ignorant,  easily 
emporte,  but  ban  and  inclined  to  be  bienveillant.  The 
Ministers  are  in  spirits  again. 

I  could  hardly  believe  when  I  read  the  '  Times ' 

that  my  girls  had  dined  at  the  Palais  Eoyal  and  been 

.  to  the  Italian  Opera  on  the  night  of  the  disturbances 

and  mires  brisees.     There  is   nothing  like  being  in  the 

midst  of  anything  for  knowing  little  of  its  danger. 

My  plans  all  in  uncertainty,  but  I  feel  and  Verity 
says  that  I  ought  to  do  something  wholesome.  Aix  en 
Savoie  !  Granville  consented.  Verity  offered  to  go  too, 
but  I  gave  it  up.  I  am  morally  quite  unequal  to  a 
journey  of  six  days  without  Granville,  when  if  anything 
was  to  go  amiss  I  should  go  into  a  nervous  madness. 
St.  Germain  ?  Very  easy,  still  on  the  cards,  but  hardly 
enough,  as  I  want  bathing,  des  eaux  and  sea  air. 

Boulogne?  Sea  air,  sands,  the  journey  with  Gran- 
ville, to  wait  for  him  there  and  come  back  with  him. 
Very  tempting,  though  it  is  a  hideous  place.  What 
would  make  me  think  it  a  Paradise  would  be  if  you 
would  join  me  there.  One  day's  drive,  two  hours  and 
a  half  crossing,  excellent  for  your  health,  a  quiet  you 
never  enjoy.  I  could  give  you  a  room  in  the  excellent 
inn ;  we  would  drive  and  dawdle  all  day  long.  It  would 
be  too  delicious. 

You  will  perhaps  say,  Why  not  come  to  Brighton, 
Lady  Gran.  ?  I  will  tell  you,  dearest  sis,  it  would  alter 
the  whole  thing.  What  I  want  is  perfect  repose.  If 
I  went  there,  I  must  prepare  dress  for  self  and  girls, 
go  to  the  Pavilion,  struggle  against  dinner  and  balls. 
If  you  come  to  Boulogne,  a  gown,  cap  and  a  bundle 
will  suffice. 

I  have  seen  Verity.  He  will  not,  I  think,  say  any- 
thing to  you  unless  you  begin.  Do  you  think,  if  D. 


112     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1831 

knew  the  romantic  motive  of  the  wish,1  that  he  would  ? 
I  have  smashed  all  his  hopes.  He  is  unhappy  and  his 
manner  touched  me  much.  You  cannot,  just  as  I  can- 
not. I  shall  ask  Granville  to-day  to  let  me  write  to  Lord 
Grey,  but  I  am  sure  he  will  say  no.  Doctor  L'Affan 
was  made  a  Bart,  merely  after  being  with  Lord 
Anglesea  in  Ireland.  D.  asked  Verity  once,  I  believe 
in  Eussia,  if  he  would  like  it.  He  then,  having  no 
reason  to  wish  it,  said  he  did  not  care  a  farthing 
about  it. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  29,  1831. 

Granville  will  set  out  next  week,  perhaps  on  Mon- 
day. I  intend  to  go  with  the  girls  to  the  Hotel 
d'Angleterre  at  St.  Germain.  The  air  is  next  best  to 
sea,  and  the  nearness  a  great  object,  as  the  long 
journey  would,  perhaps,  have  been  rather  trying  to 
me.  You  will  see  that  I  have  made  volte-face  to  my 
Boulogne  plan  with  a  good  grace.  I  put  all  my  hopes 
in  the  month  of  April,  when  I  trust  Granville  will  have 
a  satisfactory  holiday. 

I  am  shocked  beyond  measure  at  poor  Charles 
Lambton's  death,  and  for  his  poor  father.  Frederick 
Howard  heard  from  his  mother.  He  is  very  low,  and 
I  find  had  no  idea  of  how  bad  or  near  it  was. 

We  were  in  despair  at  losing  the  Talbots.  I  met 
Prince  Koslowski  on  the  Boulevards  to-day,  fat  and 
timid.  '  Un  Eusse,  ose-t-il  se  montrer  ? ' 

I  saw  yesterday  morning,  at  Madame  de  Bourke's, 
La  Princesse  Belgiojoso,2  small,  distinguee,  sallow,  eyes 

1  Dr.  Verity  wished  to  be  a  baronet.     It  was  only  on  this  condition 
that  the  father  of  the  young  lady  he  was  anxious  to  rnarry  would  give  his 
consent. 

2  She  belonged  to  the  illustrious  Milanese  family  of  Trivulzio.     Her 
husband  deserted  her,  and  she  afterwards  led  an  adventurous  life.     She 
took  an  active  part  in  the  Italian  revolutionary  movement,  writing  articles 
and  reviews  in  support  of  it. 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  113 

like  saucers,  little,  tiny  hands,  grandes  et  gracieuses 
manieres,  full  of  everything :  '  De  1'esprit  comme  un 
demon.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  October  3,  1831. 

To-day  seems  to  me  like  a  dream.  Granville  is  just 
set  out  at  five  for  London,  where  he  expects  to  be  at 
the  division  on  Wednesday  night,  which  seems  like 
flying.  He  determined  last  night  to  go.  This  morn- 
ing, when  his  horses  were  at  the  door,  he  received  a 
letter  from  Lord  Palmerston  saying  he  need  not  start 
till  the  result  of  the  second  reading  was  known  ;  but  as 
he  was  one  foot  in  chaise,  had  dined  at  three,  bid  good- 
bye, told  the  King  at  one  at  Court  that  he  was  off,  he 
kept  to  his  first  resolution. 

I  am  dying  to  be  out  of  Paris,  my  girls  dying  to 
stay  in  it.  They  have  gained  to-morrow.  We  shall 
go  to  Montmorency  and  dine  there,  walk  about  the 
forest,  and  come  back  to  see  'Anna  Bolena'  in  our 
things. 

I  shall  be  too  anxious  for  letters  and  news.  What 
a  moment !  I  have  all  at  once  ceased  to  be  sanguine, 
and  feel  as  if  the  Lords  would  carry  their  wicked 
measure,  beat  us,  and  then  ?  Where  can  we  look,  and 
what  will  happen  ? 

Give  my  love  to  Lord  Granville,  tell  him  that  we 

have  walked,  since  he  went,  down  the  Boulevards,  by 

the  Eue  de  la  Paix.     No  adventure,  but  one  cross  old 

'woman,  who  called  us    ces  chiens  d' Anglais,  because 

Dody  trod  upon  her  toe. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  October  10,  1831. 

Dearest  sister, — It  seemed  so  odd  to  read  yesterday 
evening  yours  and  Granville's  letters,  having  known 

VOL.    II.  I 


114     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

the  tremendous  majority l  since  eleven  in  the  morning. 
Sebastiani  received  it  by  telegraph,  nobody  seems  to 
have  expected  it.  The  girls  and  I  sit  looking  at  one 
another.  We  cannot  go  back  to  St.  Germain  ;  and, 
indeed,  bad,  rainy  weather  would  be  reason  enough 
against  it.  We  hope  every  opening  door  will  bring  us 
some  intelligence. 

We  have  got  the  papers  and  the  debate.  I  doat 
upon  Lord  Grey.  I  am  sure  he  will  do  nobly.  Per- 
haps I  am  foolish  in  having  no  misgivings  about  public 
tranquillity,  but '  cela  ne  se  commande  pas,'  I  have  not. 
Yet  when  I  read  in  '  Le  Temps,'  '  ils  ont  fait  leur  25 
Juillet,'  it  gives  me  a  shudder. 

To-morrow  we  dine  at  the  Tuileries.  I  hear  they 
and  all  here  think  of  nothing  but  '  le  Bill.' 

I  have  seen  nobody  but  Madame  de  Bourke,  who 
always  believes  whatever  she  wishes. 

I  have  been  much  better,  came  back  like  a  young 
rose  from  St.  Germain. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  October  24,  1831. 

It  is  great  happiness  to  me  to  have  Granville  back 
again.  We  are  still  basking  in  a  summer  sun  and  all 
the  leaves  are  on  the  trees  and  our  windows  open.  We 
are  going  in  a  caleche  to  the  Jardin  des  Plantes  to  show 
Eward  the  giraffe.  You  never  saw  anything  like  her 
happiness  at  being  with  us  again.  She  looks  ten  years 
younger  than  she  did  when  last  I  saw  her. 

Apponys,  Werthers,  Pfeffels,  Schlegel,2  such  an  old 
flaxen  bore,  like  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  and  covered  with 
rings,  sentiments  and  souvenirs,  and  Humboldt  dine 
here. 

1  The  Lords  threw  out  the  Reform  Bill  by  a  majority  of  41. 

2  The  famous  German  critic.     He  was  a  great  friend  of  Madame  de 
Stael,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  education  of  her  children. 


1831  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  115 

The  concert  at  the  Tuileries  on  Friday  was  handsomer 
and  much  cooler  than  those  at  the  Palais  Eoyal.  The 
Duchesse  de  Braganza  looks  a  good,  dear,  patient  thing, 
fine  eyes,  ugly  mouth.  Toque  evidently  Devis,  which 
made  the  Appony  and  Werther  sick.  He  looks  fond 
of  her.  Madame  de  Louie,  his  sister,  is  peculiar-looking, 
but  handsome,  black  as  ink,  the  two  sides  of  her  face 
quite  different.  The  tournure  of  an  opera-dancer.  The 
Duke  of  Orleans  is  supposed  to  be  her  lover.  There 
were  rather  more  people  I  knew  than  I  have  seen 
before  at  Court. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  November  1831. 

If  Mr.  Landseer  had  sent  me  a  thousand  pounds  I 
should  not  have  been  half  so  much  obliged  to  him.  It 
is  the  only  picture  I  ever  thought  really  like  you.  I 
beg  your  pardon  for  being  so  enthusiastic  about  a  cari- 
cature. What  a  love  you  are  to  have  given  it  to  me, 
but  Eward  is  at  this  moment  exclaiming,  '  How  should 
he  dare  make  such  a  things  ? ' 

Nothing  ever  was  so  happy  as  that  dearest  old  soul, 
walking  between  them,  taken  bodkin  to  the  Opera,  and 
adoring  them  both. 

I  have  nothing  to  tell  you.  The  terror  of  the  Sun  • 
derland  cholera  knocked  me  down  yesterday  morning, 
but  our  last  accounts  reassured  us.  It  is,  however, 
awful. 

Paris  is  quiet,  and  there  is  as  yet  a  delicious  absence 
of  all  dissipation.  We  have  had  Pasta  at  the  Opera. 
She  is  gone  and  Malibran  makes  her  r entree  to-night. 
Lablache  and  Eubini  font  nos  delices. 

My  girls  delight  in  my  Fridays,  which  makes  me 
enjoy  them. 

I  wish  you  could  have  run  over  for  a  week,  before 
the  business  begins  again.  There  could  be  no  happi- 

i  2 


116     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1831 

ness  as  great  as  ours  to  see  you,  and  Mme.  de  Delmar's 
spirit  would  then  be  laid,  as  she  is  more  persevering 
than  ever  in  her  enquiries  if  you  are  coming. 

Mme.  de  Flahault  is  in  her  new  and  pretty  house 
and  he  is  here.  We  have  a  terrible  dearth  of  good 
English  society.  The  French  are  a  little  en  mouvement 
in  consequence  of  Pozzo  the  little  marrying  Mile, 
de  Crillon  the  day  after  to-morrow.  Yesterday  Gran- 
ville  and  I  went  to  the  soiree,  where  he  and  some  others 
ont  signe  le  contrat.  The  trousseau  was  all  over  three 
large  drawing-rooms.  Mme.  Appony  wept  bitterly 
over  my  incapacity  of  appreciating  its  beauties.  Pozzo 
oncle  has  given  the  most  magnificent  jewels.  The  bride 
is  the  prettiest  girl  here,  and  ran  about  like  a  little  mar- 
chande  amongst  the  goods.  '  C'est  le  seul  qu'ily  a  a  Paris. 
On  m'a  promis  de  ne  pas  faire  une  autre  garniture  dans 
ce  genre  avant  le  jour  de  1'an.  C'est  du  vrai  cache- 
mire.  Le  chalis  est  broche.'  Little  Pozzo  walks  about. 
"•J'aurais  mieux  aime  etre  gar9on,  mais  tout  ceci  est 
bien  beau  et  ma  promise  est  bien  belle.'  Mme.  Appony 
clasps  her  hands,  the  tears  flow  down  her  cheeks,  '  Ma 
chere,  il  ne  1'aime  pas  du  tout — mais  pas  le  moins  du 
monde.' 

Yet  they  are  all  in  their  way  as  happy  as  they  can 
stick,  and  really  the  bridegroom,  with  six  thousand  a 
year  settled  upon  him,  a  house  given,  the  prettiest 
wife  in  Paris,  of  the  plus  haut  parage,  is  not  a 
plaindre. 

Mme.  Appony  is  adorable  ;  her  unvarying  sweetness 
and  kindness  gild  my  existence  sociale  here.  Her  feel- 
ings may  not  be  deep,  but  they  are  always  there  for 
everything  that  is,  vexed,  disappointed,  or  in  any  shade 
of  sorrow.  No  humeur,  no  bitterness,  no  rivalite,  no 
exigeance,  like  those  beautiful  flowers,  that  the  fasti- 
dious can  only  criticise  as  being  too  sweet. 


1831  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  117 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  November  1831. 

Dearest  sister, — Lord  Durham  and  his  two  girls 
dined  here  to-day.  My  girls  are  enchanted  with  Miss 
Fanny,  the  eldest.  They  have  begged  me  to  ask  them 
again  on  Wednesday,  preferring  that  to  Meyerbeer's 
new  opera,  which,  by-the-by,  is,  I  believe,  a  doubtful 
piece  of  business  ;  at  least  they  talk  of  '  une  danse  de 
nonnes  en  chemise.' 

Lord  Durham  seems  pleased  with  the  letters  he  has 
received  from  Lord  Grey.  Mme.  de  Flahault  says  that 
Lord  Wharncliffe  and  Lord  Harrowby  are  become 
tractable.  Is  this  possible  ?  I  suppose  Parliament  will 
certainly  meet  chez  vous  the  beginning  of  next  month. 
I  have  no  idea  of  what  Granville  will  do  with  us,  take 
us  or  leave  us. 

Sir  Stratford  Canning,  with  three  men,  Colonel 
Barnett,  Mr.  Buchanan,  and  Mr.  Hammond,  at  his  heels, 
dines  here  to-day. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  November  1831. 

I  have  written  to  Lord  Brougham  to  ask  it  plump. 

My  Harry  *  is  the  least  sentimental  of  men,  likes  me 
better  than  the  girls  and  Cuvier  better  than  me,  and  so 
on.  Science  is  his  love.  He  is  the  best  of  men  and  I 
love  him,  but  such  a  spark,  and,  luckily  for  him,  seeming 
to  think  women  so  many  artichokes,  never  wasting  look 
or  word  on  them. 

I  will  talk  fast  enough  when  I  come,  dearest.  If 
they  would  send  something  efficient  here  in  poor 
Hamilton's  place,  I  think  we  certainly  should,  but  how 
can  Granville  leave  Paris  with  nobody  but  him  here  ? 

Lyons  is  subsiding.  Weather  cold  and  bracing, 
my  health  better  again. 

1  Lord  Harry  Vane. 


118     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1831 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  December  5,  1831. 

The  Tuileries  is  enchanted  at  the  entry  into  and 
reception  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  at  Lyons. 

The  wonder  is  that  after  all  the  alarm  and  searching 
so  little  cholera  can  be  found,  as  I  believe  at  this  time 
of  year  it  is  always  hovering  over  us. 

I  laugh  when  I  look  at  Harry.  It  is  as  if  Frederic 
Foster  in  our  young  days  had  been  talked  of  for  us, 
only  Harry  is  solemn,  not  facetious.  Susy  sat  between 
Lord  Eivers  and  George  Villiers  on  Friday  at  dinner, 
and  talked  most  to  the  latter,  whose  agreeable  ness  is. 
entramant  to  the  greatest  degree.  Lord  Eivers  seems 
amiable  and  pleasing,  but  he  pays  us  no  court.  She  is 
in  tearing  spirits,  the  most  adorable  darling  that  ever 
lived,  and  really  doated  upon  by  all  who  know  her. 
Dody  is  a  dear  girl  too.  It  is  not  the  same  cloudless, 
radiant  nature,  but  full  of  goodness  and  intelligence, 
and  she  will  be  a  very  delightful  person.  But  I  cannot 
talk  fully  or  clearly  about  them  till  we  meet,  my 
dearest  of  sisters. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  9,  1831. 

Here  we  are,  without  a  courier  from  England,  dearest 
of  sisters.  The  wind  has  been  blowing  tremendously 
for  the  last  three  days.  How  the  King's  speech  came 
over  I  do  not  know,  but  it  is  here.  We  like  it. 

The  Nugents  are  only  too  tender  for  a  hard  world. 
Unutterable  looks  across  the  table,  fond  murmurs. 
'  Excellent  sherry,  a  glass  of  it  to  Mrs.  Nugent,'  '  Any 
of  this  consomme  slightly  flavoured  with  essence  of,'  etc., 
and  she  sits  quite  passive,  quite  devoted. 

George  Villiers  will  be  popular  here  beyond  measure  : 
he  is  in  bad  health,  but  gay  and  more  agreeable  than 

O     «/  D 


1831  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  119 

anybody.  Very  much  charmed  with  Mme.  de  Caraman. 
Mme.  Alfred  came  out  for  a  wonder,  very  spirituelle 
and  improved  by  having  given  up  youth  and  beauty. 

On  Tuesday  wre  had  at  the  Opera  Eubini,  quite 
delightful  in  the  '  Italiana.'  Pedro  in  the  box,  which 
chases  away  meaner  and  better  birds. 

The  newspapers  are  just  come  with  Lord  Harrowby's 
moderate  speech. 


120     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1832 


I832 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  20,  1832. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — I  know  I  have  been  meagre  and 
unsatisfactory  in  my  letters  of  late,  but  I  shall  improve. 
I  also  live  in  the  hope  of  going  to  England  when 
Granville  does,  and  then  I  can  talk  of  a  hundred 
things  I  cannot  write. 

We  are  now  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  London  Xo- 
vember  fog.  We  went  yesterday  evening  to  Madame 
de  Flahault's,  and  the  girls  were  amused,  as  they 
found  Amelie  de  Grefuhle,  Auguste  de  Morny,1  a 
charming  spark,  ne  Hortense  and  domesticated  at 
Flahault's,  Guinea  and  Frederick  Howard,  and  formed 
a  little  establishment  of  their  own.  I  sat  distinguished 
in  Meg's  state  bedroom,  with  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 
Mesdames  d'Istrie,  Caraman  and  Delessert,  and  Count 
Walewski. 

Lord  Elphinstone  2  and  William  Cowper  left  Paris  on 
Wednesday.  They  are  an  immense  loss.  The  former 
the  most  amiable  loyal  person  I  ever  met  with.  They 
are  delightful  partners,  real  Englishmen,  and  we  have 
now  only  George  Yilliers,  who,  charming  as  he  is,  does" 

1  Better  known  as  Due  de  Morny.     He  became  the  intimate  adviser  of 
Louis  Napoleon,  and  was  the  chief  promoter  of  the  Coup  d'Etat.     He 
was  for  many  years  President  of  the  Corps  Legislatif  until  his  death  in 
1865. 

2  "Was  Governor  of  Madras  from  1837  to  1842,  returned  to  India  as 
Governor  of  Bombay  in   1853,  and   rendered  great  service  during  the 
Mutiny. 


1832  TO   LADY   CAELISLE  121 

not  dance  or  talk  to  any  one  but  married  ladies  of 
distinction,  and  therefore  is  no  lark  for  us. 

Lord  Yarmouth  has  taken  to  good  company  and 
appears  at  the  drums  and  balls.  He  is  the  greatest 
pity  that  ever  was.  Such  powers  of  being  delightful 
and  captivating,  grandes  manieres,  talents  of  all  kinds, 
finesse  d'esprit,  all  spent  in  small  base  coin.  He  walks 
amongst  us  like  a  fallen  angel,  higher  and  lower  than 
all  of  us  put  together. 

I  dread  a  ball  at  Casimir  Perier's  on  Monday.  An 
immense  temporary  room,  two  or  three  thousand  in- 
vited at  a  Minister's  in  these  times.  I  hear  the  roof  is  to 
be  covered  with  pompiers,  who  are  to  inundate  us  at  a 
moment's  warning,  and  that  there  are  eighteen  doors  to 
go  out  at,  and  this  is  my  comfort. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  12,  1832. 

We  do  not  appear  as  emus  on  the  spot  as  we  must 
at  a  distance.  We  were  at  one  of  the  small  balls  at  the 
Tuileries  on  Wednesday  till  two  o'clock.  It  was  very 
brilliant  and  pretty,  and  I  thought  they  all  looked  better 
satisfied  and  calmer  than  I  have  seen  them  for  some 
time.  Only  think  what  the  Queen  must  at  moments 
feel  when  she  fears  for  the  safety  of  all  she  so  devotedly 
loves,  and  without  one  taste  or  object  gratified  that  can 
bring  one  grain  into  the  balance.  She  has  more  dig- 
nity and  calmness  of  manner  than  anybody,  and  I  never 
saw  any  one  who  brought  such  conviction  to  one's 
mind  that t  her  help  is  from  above.' 

I  cannot  help  being  much  amused  and  pleased  with 
Lady  Harriet  Baring,1  but  I  am  sensible  it  is  an  opinion 
that  requires  a  dash  of  apology.  She  is  uncontrollably 

1  Daughter  of  the  fifth  Earl  of  Sandwich.     She  became  Lady  Ash- 
burton  in  1848.     Thomas  Carlyle  was  devoted  to  her. 


122     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1832 

clever  and  quite  natural,  which  is  very  refreshing  as 
matter  of  society. 

Tell  Lord  Morley  it  would  gratify  him  to  behold 
George  Yilliers  executing  admirable  steps  en  avant 
between  two  princesses,  of  whom  he  is  the  favourite 
partner.  Henry  Fox1  is  said  to  be  wholly  engrossed 
with  Mme.  Guiccioli,2  and  we  scarcely  ever  see  him. 
He  is  always  entertaining  when  he  does  appear,  but 
what  he  likes  is  to  be  the  talker  of  a  little  coterie. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  February  24,  1832. 

I  am  dying  to  be  off.  Granville  will  not  budge 
from  his  post  till  it  is  absolutely  required  of  him. 

We  are  killing  the  Carnival  as  soon  as  possible. 
Tuesday  week  ends  it.  To-night  your  uniforms  dance 
and  mine  walk,  as  the  parlez  cannot  endure  hopping 
amongst  the  drest  coats.  I  try  to  make  up  with 
flowers,  candles,  and  food  for  want  of  better  sport. 
Champagne  et  des  poulardes  truffees  versus  waltz  and 
quadrille.  I  have  asked  all  the  English  I  know  in 
Paris,  only  two  hundred  and  fifty  after  all.  The  Diplo- 
macy come  full  fig.,  all  their  swords  and  diamonds. 
French  as  they  please,  not  at  all,  in  uniform  or  not. 
But  oh  !  dearest,  the  numbers,  the  Carlists,  the  Liberaux, 
the  hideous,  the  anxious.  Well,  there  are  always  the 
Miss  Levesons.  Susy  in  a  blue  wreath  and  diamonds 
in  her  hair,  Dody  ditto  with  your  turquoise  branch  in 
hers.  Lady  G.  in  all  her  borrowed  splendour. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1832. 

Dearest  sister, — I  can  hardly  reckon  on  the  delight 
of  being  in  London  this  spring,  yet  Granville  for  the 

1  Son  of  Lord  Holland,  whom  he  succeeded  in  1840. 

2  Lord  Byron's  friend. 


1832  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  123 

first  time  admits  it  as  a  possibility.  This  is  such  happi- 
ness that  I  forget  the  only  two  drawbacks,  health  and 
money.  I  have  a  little  dread  of  being  unequal  to  a 
second  Carnival,  and  how  I  am  to  meet  the  expense  of 
it  I  know  not.  But  the  happiness  of  being  amongst 
you,  the  vision  of  Grosvenor  Place,  to  live  perhaps  a 

whole  month  with  D ,  the  rapture  of  the  girls,  and 

the  escape  from  a  good  deal  that  worries  and  bothers 
me,  such  as  shoals  of  inconceivable  English,  half  of  them 
in  a  perpetual  rage  at  what  some  call  '  taking  pleasure 
in  wantonly  mortifying  and  insulting ' — all  this,  although 
mixed  as  it  has  been  with  a  great  deal  of  exquisite 
pleasure  and  enjoyment  derived  from  my  adorable 
children,  makes  me  look  with  the  feelings  of  a  bird 
from  its  chain  unbound  to  England.  And  I  should  then 
return  to  what  is  delicious,  Dieppe  and  autumn  here. 

You  will  pity  me  to-day,  for  I  am  poorly,  yet 
obliged  to  go  to  Casimir  Perier's  to-night,  and  gay 
doings  every  night  of  this  week,  which  I  should  like  to 
spend  in  my  bed. 

You  will  have  heard  that  there  was  an  unpleasant 
breeze  at  Eothschild's  ball.  I  did  not  know  of  it  till 
two  days  ago,  but  the  result  is  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans 
—of  or  before  whom,  for  the  versions  are  various,  some 
impertinence  was  said,  a  nickname  I  believe — will  not 
come  any  more  to  the  Apponys,  here  or  into  any  mixed 
society. 

This  I  regret  very  much,  as  he  enjoyed  himself  ex- 
tremely, and  all  seemed  smoother,  quieter.  Now  this 
has  thrown  an  additional  bone  of  contention  into  society. 
Do  not  believe,  till  I  tell  it  you,  that  there  is  any  par- 
ticular feeling  against  my  soirees,  or  me  as  receiving 
my  old  Ultra  friends.  Up  to  this  moment,  the  greatest 
kindness,  most  flattering  expressions  have  been  used 
towards  me  by  the  Eoyal  Family,  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 
and  all  belonging  to  them.  God  bless  vou,  dearest. 

O        O  v  ' 


124    LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1832 

Harry  has  recovered  his  equanimity  and  presence 
of  mind.  I  like  him  extremely,  he  is  a  most  good  and 
amiable  man.  He  would  have  been  saved  much  ner- 
vous anxiety  if  he  could  have  brought  himself,  the  day 
of  the  fatal  paragraph,  to  propose  to  both  my  girls,  as 
his  mind  would  then  have  been  set  at  rest  for  ever. 
However,  without  this  security  he  now  shakes  hands 
again  with  them,  and  again  comes  and  talks  to  me.  It 
really  was  very  funny  to  see  his  panic. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton :  April  23,  1832. 

Thanks,  dearest  sister.  I  am  delighted  to  hear  that 
Lord  Carlisle  is  to  go  out.  What  this  place  would  be 
to  him  later  no  words  can  say.  Though  the  wind  is 
east  again  to-day,  it  is  delicious,  blue,  gold,  soft,  and 
we  have  been  since  church  basking  on  the  platform 
under  the  cliff. 

We  are  enchanted  again  with  Mr.  Anderson,  so 
much  so  that  with  much  I  have  heard  in  other  quarters 
my  great  wish  is  to  send  Freddy  to  him.  We  do  not 
mean  him  to  go  to  Eton,  and  if  he  is  too  young,  we 
have  heard  of  a  Mr.  Arnold  here,  with  whom  Lord 
Grey  has  a  son  and  to  whom  I  should  like  to  send  him 
en  attendant. 

I  saw  Lady  Grantham  alone  for  near  an  hour  yes- 
terday ;  she  really  was  perfect.  I  think  with  pleasure 
that  she  has  much  greater  interest  and  fondness  for  her 
daughters  than  I  had  any  idea  she  had.  She  talks  of 
nothing  but  Anne,  and  in  the  most  amiable  devoted 
manner.  The  Duchess  of  Bedford  is  not  well.  I  hear 
of  many  people  here,  but  do  not  see  them.  Kemp  is 
too  charming,  it  is  a  little  kingdom  of  one's  own.  How 
I  wish  you  could  persuade  Morpeth  to  come  here  from 
Wednesday  till  Saturday.  Tell  him  it  is  really  too 
delicious. 


1832  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  125 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dover  :  April  26,  1832. 

The  weather  as  fine  as  possible,  not  too  hot,  not  too 
anything.  Talleyrand  just  going  to  be  put  on  board  in 
his  carriage — no,  he  is  first  going  to  be  put  into  a  chair 
by  my  side  in  this  room,  so  I  shall  have  to  squiddle 
to  him  before.  I  have  settled  all  his  affairs,  what  he 
was  to  give  to  the  Guard  of  Honour,  everything  I  don't 
understand.  All  the  authorities  came  in  to  see  him. 
The  whole  bore,  with  none  of  the  pleasure  of  having 
dearest  Granville.  I  believe  I  have  made  him  give 
twice  more  money  than  he  ought.  Que  voulez-vous? 
You  would  have  laughed  to  see  me  interpreting  be- 
tween him  and  the  Captain. 

Dearest  dear  brother  and  sister,  I  have  no  words 
for  what  I  feel  at  having  left  you. 

I  shall  write  from  Paris.  Talleyrand  says  all  is 
perfectly  quiet.  The  cholera  very  much  in  the  pro- 
vinces, but  mains  que  rien  in  the  capital. 

I  must  write  a  line  to  Granville  by  Monsieur  de 
Talleyrand,  who  goes  on  without  stopping. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  1832. 

Yes,  Mrs.  —  -  is  delighted,  and  really  enjoys  herself 
and  is  very  happy,  but  let  me  laugh  a  little  only  to  you 
and  Hart.  She  cannot  be  light  in  hand  or  pleasant, 
though  essentially  I  think  better  of  her  than  I  ever  did 
before.  But  the  conducteur  at  the  Cimetiere  du  Pere- 
Lachaise  was  worn,  as  we  occasionally  are.  We  went 
there  yesterday.  The  day  divine  but  without  sun. 
She  was  enchanted,  but  asked  him  who  first  thought 
of  it.  That  was  well.  But  of  the  people,  all  the  buried, 
every  particular.  Were  they  poor,  were  they  rich? 
Did  their  relations  come  and  water  the  flowers,  who 


126     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1832 

should  ?  every  day,  who  could  ?  Did  clever  people 
come  and  water  Moliere's  flowers  ?  It  does  not  look 
written  as  it  sounded  said,  and  it  was  sans  reldche.  To 
me,  Should  I  like  to  be  buried  there  ?  Should  I  like  to 
have  mv  flowers  watered  ?  Did  I  mean  to  buv  ground  ? 

«/  «/     O 

Should  T  water  her  flowers  if  she  was  buried  there  ?  I 
almost  began  to  dig  the  hole.  But  now,  relations,  let 
me  tell  you  that  with  all  this,  I  have  a  great  regard  for 
her,  am  grateful  for  her  feelings  towards  me,  and  shall 
be  very  sorry  when  they  go. 

Our  little  impromptu  dancing  succeeded  particularly 
well,  and  the  delight  of  comparing  it  with  the  last  time 
and  seeing  the  girls  and  Fanny  wild  with  delight  and 
my  boys.  As  to  Freddy,  he  turns  all  heads,  and  his  own 
would  be  if  it  was  to  last  more  than  a  week  longer.  His 
dancing  fait  fureur.  All  the  pretty  and  crackest  girls 
are  charmed  to  dance  with  him,  and  he  gives  himself 
amazing  airs.  '  A  woman  stopped  me  and  asked  if  I 
was  engaged.  I  saw  she  had  an  ugly  wall-flower  by 
her  side,  so  I  hurried  on,  and  only  just  said,  "I  really 
believe  I  am."  '  You  should  have  seen  him  say  this.  I 
must  dress. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  25,  1832. 

The  novel  is  too  like  one,  and  an  unpleasant  view 
of  human  nature.  We  know  not  who,  but  this  is  what 
we  do  know,  though  you  must  promise  me  perfect 
secrecy.  I  am  not  the  least  alarmed,  because,  as  Susy 
says,  she  does  not  think  it  would  be  easy  to  kidnap  her. 
A  person  in  C.  Greville's  confidence  here  came  to  him 
and  told  him  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  tell  him  that  he 
had  had  a  Frenchman  with  him  who  came  alarmed  at 
the  probable  risk  attending  to  an  office  he  had  engaged 
in.  He  was  in  the  pay  of  an  Irlandais,  to  assist  him 
in  his  pursuit  of  Susy.  He  had  received  a  sum  of 


1832  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  127 

money  to  deliver  a  letter  to  her,  and  promised  a  much 
larger  sum  when  the  object  in  view  was  accomplished, 
that  of,  as  his  expression  was,  getting  her  to  the  coast, 
which  once  done,  he  could  easily  elude  all  pursuit  and 
discovery.  The  unpleasant  part  of  this  is  the  walks 
in  the  Tuileries,  all  walks  indeed  except  with  Mrs. 
Hamilton  or  me,  carnage  and  footmen  after  us,  being 
put  a  stop  to.  We  have  no  knowledge  of  who  it  can 
be.  Un  tres  bel  homme,  who  represents  himself  as 
having  reason  for  hope  and  encouragement  from  la 
gouvernante.  The  lawyer  consulted  frightened  the 
Frenchman,  told  him  he  might  be  sent  to  les  galeres,  as 
entering  into  a  conspiracy,  and  I  hope  this  may  put  a 
stop  to  the  thing. 

Nothing  was  ever  so  delicious  as  this  weather.  We 
live  out  of  doors. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  29,  1832. 

Dearest  sister, — I  went  to  St.  Cloud  the  night  before 
last.  The  drive  there  was  delicious  at  eight  o'clock. 
The  King  and  Madame  Adelaide  are  in  the  highest 
spirits.  The  Queen  looks  much  calmer,  very  much 
occupied  with  the  Princesse  Louise's  marriage,  and 
dying  for  Lord  and  Lady  Dover  to  be  appointed  to 
Brussels.  Talleyrand  was  to  dine  there  yesterday.  I 
believe  the  Ministerial  arrangements  are  still  in  abey- 
ance. 

Did  I  tell  you  Talleyrand  paid  me  a  long  visit  on 
Wednesday  morning  ?  I  never  knew  before  the,  as  Mr. 
Foster  says,  power  of  his  charms.  First  of  all  it  is 
difficult  and  painful  to  believe  that  he  is  not  the  very 
best  man  in  the  world,  so  gentle,  so  kind,  so  simple, 
and  so  grand.  One  forgets  the  past  life,  the  present 
look.  I  could  have  sat  hours  listening  to  him.  He 
raves  of  the  Queen  here,  and  she  is  admirable.  I  am 


128     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1832 

certain  nothing  will  persuade  him  to  remain  here,  or 
to  give  up  London,  and  indeed  what  a  position  to  quit, 
and  what  a  position  to  gain ! 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  31,  1832. 

You  are  an  angel,  dearest  G.  There  is  but  one 
certain  means  of  happiness.  I  have  the  greatest 
pleasure  in  reading  religious  books.  I  find  that  I 
understand  the  Bible  better  than  I  ever  did  before, 
that  I  know  much  better  what  1  am  not  and  what  I 
ought  to  be,  that  the  subject  interests  and  occupies 
me  deeply,  whilst  I  am  employed  on  it.  But  I  am 
dissatisfied  with  the  want  of  warmer,  stronger  feelings 
and  power  of  weaning  myself  from  the  clinging,  aching 
interests  of  this  world.  I  do  not  mean  as  the  question 
of  living  in  it  or  retiring  from  it.  If  my  idea  of  what 
we  ought  to  be  is  a  right  one,  the  whole  feeling  and 
character  would  be  so  changed  and  dedicated,  that  it 
would  be  indifferent  where,  how,  or  when.  And  it  is 
to  attain  this  that  appears  to  me  such  terrible  difficulty, 
because  the  chain  that  must  be  broken  is  the  one  that 
binds  and  fastens  one  down.  I  have  been  reading 
Fenn's  sermons  and  like  most  of  them  extremely  as 
explaining  and  directing.  Bradley 's  third  volume  is 
excellent.  Adams'  '  Private  Thoughts '  one  likes  better 
and  better.  There  are  parts  that  one  cannot,  but  these 
always  redeemed  by  something  so  true,  so  feeling,  so 
practical. 

I  went  to  St.  Cloud  on  Saturday  evening,  their  last 
day  there.  Princesse  Louise  did  not  appear.  Princesse 
Marie,  with  her  eyes  swelled  out  of  her  head  with  cry- 
ing. Leopold  will  be  at  Compiegne  to-day. 


1832  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  129 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  August  2,  1832. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  wish  I  could  go  into  the  rooms 
with  you.  How  beautiful  the  hall 1  must  look  ! 

We  are  all  quite  well.  The  weather  is  perfectly 
delicious,  very  hot  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  but 
delightful  early  and  late,  and  we  went  this  morning 
to  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  at  eight  o'clock,  and  walked 
there  in  the  fir  woods,  which  smell  like  England. 

Granville  has  had  a  summons  to  Compiegne  to  sleep 
there  to-night.  It  is  unlucky,  as  we  have  people  to 
dinner.  Five  Ellices,  tiny  Mr.  Sotheby,2  Ponsonbys, 
and  the  whist  boys  in  the  evening.  It  is  very  pro- 
voking, but  it  will  be  interesting  to  hear  what  the 
Kings  are  about. 

The  cholera  remains  in  its  diminished  state.  Only 
twenty-eight  deaths  yesterday ;  I  believe  I  am  the 
only  person  in  Paris  who  still  looks  regularly  at  the 
chiffre.  Yet  you  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  people 
here  are  still  so  prudent,  that  on  last  Friday  nobody 
touched  ice  or  fancy  waters,  nothing  but  tea,  sherry, 
and  seltzer-water,  and  everybody  is  temperate  and 
prudent.  We  have  never  at  dinner  iced  water,  salad, 
or  cucumber.  A  few  strawberries  with  wine  is  looked 
upon  as  a  sort  of  excess,  and  no  stone-fruit  tasted. 

Caradoc 3  goes  to  England  by  Brussels  to-morrow. 
You  will  soon  have  him  in  Yorkshire.  He  is  now 
standing  in  the  court,  to  see  Granville  go,  in  an  apricot- 
coloured  linen  jacket. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  August  7,  1832. 

Compiegne  lasted  till  Sunday.  On  the  Saturday 
they  went  a  long  and  beautiful  expedition.  Granville 

1  At  Castle  Howard.         2  The  translator  of  the  Georgics  and  the  Iliad. 
3  His  father  having  changed  his  name  from  Cradock  to  Caradoc,  some- 
one asked  him  at  dinner  for  a  slice  of  haraddock. 

VOL.    II.  K 


130     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1832 

was  charmed  with  the  Eoyal  Family,  seen  so,  so  inti- 
mate, so  perfectly  amiable  and  happy  together.  The 
parting  must  have  been  severe,  as  they  say  the  little 
Queen  is  quite  adored  b}7  all  around  her.  Granville 
does  not  think  her  at  all  pretty,  but  says  she  appears 
amiable,  and  that  Leopold  said  she  was  perfectly  so. 

D.  has  not  written  for  ages.  I  hope  he  will  when 
he  settles  at  Bolton,  though  the  life  there  will  not  be 
propitious — shooting,  eating,  sleeping. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  August  17,  1832. 

We  had  a  violent  storm  the  day  before  yesterday, 
which  has  brought  us  the  delight  of  cool  weather 
again.  I  went  in  all  the  freshness  and  wetness  of  the 
evening  after  it  to  St.  Cloud  with  Granville.  They  had 
heard  of  their  little  Queen,  whose  loss  seems  immense 
to  them.  The  poor  Queen  looked  harassed. 

I  enjoy  my  life  more  than  I  can  say.  My  walks 
before  breakfast,  a  new  work,  'Louis  XVIII.,'  which 
I  am  so  much  obliged  to  Lord  Carlisle  for  having  ad- 
vised me  to  read.  It  amuses  and  interests  me.  Then 
delicious  drives  in  the  evening  and,  confesso  il  mio 
rossore,  three  rubbers  of  whist. 

Talleyrand  is  better,  but  does  not  yet  leave  the 
house.  The  Flahaults  are  both  gone  to  England.  I 
think  there  will  be  a  great  row-de-dowing  amongst 
them  all.  Lady  Holland  disapproves  of  Lord  Grey 
going  to  Howick.  I  think  it  will  give  him  such  fresh 
energy  and  spirit  that  any  little  objection  ought  to  give 
way. 

We  are  all  in  despair  at  the  thoughts  of  Guinea's 
leaving  us. 


1832  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  131 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  1,  1832. 

The  Poodle  tells  me  that  Lord  Dover  is  better.  I 
like  to  think  of  you  and  my  brother  expecting  Morpeth 
and  Verity  on  guard. 

We  are  going  on  well  and  quietly,  with  but  little 
cholera  and  a  great  deal  of  prudence.  A  small  fonds 
of  society.  Ponsonby,  who  seems  to  enjoy  Paris 
extremely ;  Henry  Fox,  who  is  very  popular  among  a 
set  of  gossips,  Mrs.  Eawdon  and  Lady  Helena  Eobin- 
son,  and  likes  nothing  so  much  as  talking  scandal  with 
them.  I  like  him  a  degree  less  than  usual. 

Edward  Villiers  is  here  only  for  one  day.  He  is 
the  image  of  George,  only  handsomer  and  graver.  I 
think  him  uncommonly  pleas-ing. 

We  are  all  impatience  for  news  from  Pedro,  and 
what  a  moment  for  Belgium  1  Everybody  seems  to 
think  it  tout  simple.,  and  so  did  I,  till  I  reflected  that 
this  is  just  one  of  the  most  important  and  critical 
moments  we  have  had  to  steer  through.  I  comfort 
myself  with  Lord  Thurlow's  answer  when  he  was  asked 
how  he  got  through  all  his  business.  '  I  do  some,  a 
good  deal  does  itself,  the  rest  is  not  done  at  all.  Yet 
all  casts  up  much  the  same,  and  nothing  is  of  much 
importance.'  If  Lord  Granville,  sitting  there  with  a 
hillock  of  papers  before  him,  could  even  suspect  the 
nonsense  I  am  writing  ! 

Monsieur  de  Talleyrand  is  better,  well  enough  to  go 
out  to  Neuilly  to-day. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  8,  1832. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — It  is  most  kind  of  you  to  write 
at  all  on  Blanche's  last  day.  I  can  only  be  glad  that  a 
few  more  daughters  will  come  and  replace  her. 

K  2 


132     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1832 

I  wish,  you  could  see  us  now.  The  two  girls  oppo- 
site, drawing,  and  all  of  us  looking  as  if  there  were  no 
sparks  in  the  world,  which  I  sometimes  wish  was  the 
case. 

No  new  arrival  but  Tolstoy,  the  Eussian  Dip.  from 
London.  They  say  he  is  very  agreeable. 

I  hear  Lord  Yarmouth  is  fitting  up  his  house  and 
furnishing  it  in  London,  where  he  means  to  live. 
When  this  Lord  left  Paris  he  said  he  was  going  to  look 
for  a  wife,  to  Madame  de  Flahault  and  others.  He 
deprecated  violently  marrying  a  pretty  or  a  young 
thing,  says  what  he  wants  is  '  something  nearer  thirty, 
somebody  he  could  not  have  a  jealous  feeling  about.' 
Well,  one  is  also  told  that,  odd  as  it  is,  money  is  his 
great  object,  being  his  idol.  It  crossed  us  all  one  day  that 
he  would  be  likely  to  think  of  Anne  Eobinson.  Now, 
if  he  does,  do  you  think  it  possible  that,  with  their  ideas 
about  religion  and  morality,  they  would  for  a  moment 
think  of  it  ?  This  is  mere  talk,  for  I  have  not  heard 
their  names,  do  not  know  where  they  are,  or  if  they 
know  each  other.  I  cannot  think  Lady  Grantham 
would — a  man  whom  I,  less  strict,  would  not  even 
introduce  to  my  girls. 

Guinea  is  all  gratitude  to  Mrs.  Gibson,1  '  found  her 
airing  my  bed  with  one  hand,  and  holding  out  a  mut- 
ton chop  in  the  other.'  A  little  physic  also  she  has 
administered,  and  is  in  short  a  darling. 

I  never  saw  Susy  looking  as  pretty  as  she  does  now. 
My  head  is  turned  by  the  compliments  paid  me  about 
her.  Even  old  Tchann  is  quite  romantic.  '  Voila, 
miledi,  une  darling,'  he  said  to  me  last  night ;  '  mais 
se"rieusement  c'est  qu'elle  devient  plus  jolie,  plus  char- 
mante  tous  les  jours.' 

Dearest  sis,  what  a  twaddling  letter  this  is  ! 

1  Lady  Carlisle's  housekeeper,  who  had  been  nurse  to  all  her  children.'] 


1832  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  133 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  October  30,  1832. 

I  am  impatient  to  hear  more  of  your  winter  plans, 
though,  alas  !  I  shall  be  dancing  at  the  Tuileries  when 
you  will  be  basking  under  some  cliff. 

I  dined  on  Saturday  at  Madame  de  Broglie's.  She 
is  perfect,  and  exerts  herself  and  is  no  longer  absent. 
He  is  excellent  and  sensible,  but  his  manner  is  not 
prevenant.  A  few  black  unknowns  made  very  clever 
interesting  talk,  and  I  am  convinced  that  the  Doctri- 
naire society  is  the  pleasantest  in  France. 

The  Lansdownes  arrive  in  a  day  or  two  and  will  be 
in  their  element. 

Madame  de  Caraman  is  a  very  pretty  woman  here, 
but  would  not  be  thought  so  in  London.  Full  of  informa- 
tion, delightful  talents,  draws  and  paints  like  an  artist, 
sings  beautifully,  speaks  English  perfectly,  and  Italian, 
Spanish,  and  German  de  meme.  Detested  by  her  com- 
patriotes,  protected  by  Apponys,  Delmars  and  us. 
Her  fault  is  unbounded  love  of  admiration  and  un- 
wearied toil  to  obtain  it,  and  she  overshoots  the  mark. 
People  here  are  so  unjust  to  her  that  it  inclines  me  to 
an  excess  of  indulgence.  She  talked  to  me  of  S.,  but 
I  put  a  stop  to  it.  He  lives  a  great  deal  with  her,  has 
known  her  for  years,  she  paints  his  picture  over  and 
over  again,  sings  romances,  makes  eyes  at  him ;  but 
there  is  no  love  on  her  side,  though  to  every  one  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  coquetry.  He  is  very  fond  of  her. 
*  To  tell  you  the  truth  it  is  not  because  I  think  her 
such  a  very  nice  person,  but  because  she  loves  and  dotes 
upon  me  so.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  November  5,  1832. 

Dearest,  dear  sister, — Lady  Grey  has  sent  me  a 
letter  to  convey,  and  ends  her  note,  'I  hope  you  are 


134     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1832 

likely  to  come  to  England  soon  for  a  little  visit.' 
Keally  a  premiere  ought  not  to  permit  herself  such 
says.  I  sit  fancying  that  the  thing  is  possible  that 
Granville  may  be  wanted.  Not  really,  my  dear,  I  fear 
there  is  no  chance. 

I  like  Lady  Lansdowne  very  much.  She  has,  as 
you  know,  an  unattractive  manner,  but  she  is  most 
unaffected,  good-humoured,  excellent,  and  pleased  and 
sociale  to  the  greatest  degree. 

He,  who  is  not  my  beau  ideal,  is  now  revelling  in 
his  leisure.  Beauty,  music,  small  talk,  a  painstaking 
laissez  oiler  ^  a  most  laborious  frivolity.  The  girl  seems 
very  amiable.  To-day  we  all  dine  at  the  Tuileries, 
girls  and  all,  no  lark,  but  we  come  home  to  my  Monday 
here,  which  is  their  favourite  amusement. 

Edward  Villiers  is  my  love.  He  is  delightful, 
excellent,  and  interesting,  a  Villiers  without  any  of 
the  shades. 

The  Lansdownes  are  expecting  their  two  sons. 
Granville  seems  much  pleased  at  Oxford,  and  writes 
very  quiet,  steady  letters.  How  he  will  miss  the 
constant  society  of  your  Charles !  He  doats  upon  him. 


1833  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  135 


1833 
To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  February  23,  1833. 

Our  plans  are  still  en  Pair.  Granville  better,  but 
still  walking  with  a  stick  and  thrown  back  by  the  least 
fatigue  or  over-exertion.  I  suppose  his  presence  will 
be  required  as  soon  as  this  Irish  question  makes  way 
for  Church  reform, 

Chiswick  is  such  a  Paradise  to  those  two  darlings,1 
that  no  wonder  they  wish  to  remain  there.  Whenever 
they  go  to  you,  if  I  am  not  there,  let  me  say  one  little 
word  to  you,  but  promise  me  sacredly  secret  from  them 
and  dearest  G.  Do  not  fear  his  sauvagerie,  and  never 
encourage  a  London  going-out  life.  It  would  endanger 
that  happiness  for  which  I  would  gladly  pay  the  price 
of  my  own,  to  which  I  have  already  with  delight  sacri- 
ficed its  brightness.  To  live  at  Devonshire  House  with 
you  and  in  your  society,  spectacles,  all  that  line  is 
well ;  but  the  wearisome,  heartless  round  of  what  is 
called  going  out,  where  people  cannot  be  devoted  to 
each  other,  and  are  bored  into  being  devoted  for  the 
time  to  others,  would  expose  him  to  the  only  danger 
I  could  envisager  for  him.  He  is  so  much  the  creature 
of  entramement,  impulse  of  the  moment,  with  an  art- 
less, innocent  warmth  of  feeling  for  those  who  by 
kindness  or  by  design  get  about  him,  that  anything 
that  separated  him  from  her,  from  her  immense  and 
hourly  influence,  might  unconsciously  to  himself  lead 

1  Lord  and  Lady  Rivers  were  married  in  Paris  on  February  3.     They 
spent  their  honeymoon  at  Chiswick. 


136     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRA.NVILLE     1833 

him  into  mischief.  He  is  excellent  and  adores  her,  but 
that  has  nothing  to  do  with  what  I  mean.  If  I  did  not 
think  your  understanding  as  good  as  your  heart,  your 
finesse  and  tact  as  perfect  as  )^our  feelings,  I  could 
not  venture  to  say  this.  G.  would  think  I  meant  more. 
They  would  laugh  me  to  scorn,  but  I  give  it  you  with 
perfect  confidence.  You  will  measure  my  meaning  in 
its  true  sense  ;  and,  having  told  you  this,  I  care  not 
where  they  are,  so  that  you  are  looking  on.  You  have 
made  their  happiness  and  you  will  guard  it.  God  bless 
you,  most  dear. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  March  1,  1833. 

Thousands  of  thanks  for  all,  for  amusing,  twigging, 
and,  above  all,  for  telling  me  you  are  gradually  getting 
better. 

I  know  Monsieur  Walewski.  He  got  me  into  a 
mess  with  Meg  Keith,  and  I  have  never  said  anything 
to  him  but  '  Honey,  my  dear,'  since. 

I  am  a  bad  play  informer,  as  I  never  go  out,  never 
leave  Granville  but  for  an  unavoidable  misery,  such  as 
when  Meg  or  Appony  provoke  me.  But  I  hear. 

People  rave  of  '  Les  Malheurs  d'un  Amant  Heureux  ' 
and  '  Les  Yieux  Peches,'  which  last  even  to  read  kills 
one.  Mrs.  Hamilton  says  '  I  Puritani '  is  very  good. 
Of  '  Gustave  Trois  '  the  papers  rave.  Company  says  the 
scenery  and  decorations  are  beautiful,  and  that  people 
will  get  accustomed  to  the  music.  G.  Stewart  says 
the  parody  of  '  Lucrece  Borgia  '  is  good.  The  play  is 
horrible,  although,  as  always  in  what  he  l  writes,  with 
fine  bits  and  cleverness. 

The  pair  have  both  written  by  the  last  courier. 
Never  did  I  read  of  two  such  happy  beings,  and  in  his 
letter  such  gratitude  and  warmth  about  you.  Guinea 

1  Victor  Hugo. 


1833  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  137 

writes  of  them,  '  They  are  the  most  perfect  specimens 
of  happiness  I  ever  saw.' 

Meg's  ball  last  night  was  brilliant.  The  first  open- 
ing of  her  really  beautiful  house.  All  the  Apponys 
there  for  the  first  time. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1833. 

Berri l  is  to  be  let  loose  after  her  confinement 
The  Carlists  have  dropped  her  already.  '  Le  premier 
jour  ils  etaient  pulverises,  le  second  ils  ont  dit,  Mais 
voyons,  a  present  ils  disent :  C'est  mieux,  notre  cause 
est  a  present  claire,  cette  petite  femme  n'etait  apres  tout 
qu'un  embarras.'  This  cannot  prevent  their  regretting 
and  others  remembering  their  folly  in  having  made  her 
their  heroine  and  the  rallying-point  of  her  party.  The 
jokes  rain.  They  hope  the  child  will  be  called  '  Dieu- 
donne  le  second.'  Chateaubriand  said,  'Je  comptais 
parler  de  Marie-Therese,  je  ne  m'attendais  pas  a  me 
trouver  en  face  de  Marie  Gisbourg.'  A  young  Beau- 
mont, son  of  the  General,  Monsieur  de  Gisbourg,  son  of 
a  lawyer  at  Nantz,  and  the  Jew  who  betrayed  her,  are 
the  people  talked  of.  They  say  she  must  name  a  father 
in  the  extrait  de  bapteme. 

Mme.  Juste  says,  '  Ah !  Ah ! '  Madame  de  Chateluze 
and  Madame  de  Bauffremont  deny  it  flat,  a  forgery  they 
say ;  Jamilhac  laughs,  but  also  denies. 

God  bless  you,  dearest. 

1  Soon  after  the  Duchesse  de  Berri's  imprisonment  in  the  Chateau  de 
Blaye  a  letter  appeared  in  the  Moniteur  dated  from  her  prison  and 
bearing  her  signature,  in  which  she  wrote  that  the  serious  position  in 
which  she  found  herself  compelled  her  to  declare  that  she  had  contracted 
a  second  marriage.  She  was  about  to  become  a  mother,  and  the  public 
learnt  that  her  husband  was  the  son  of  a  Neapolitan  nobleman,  Prince  de 
Luchesi  Palli. 


138     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE     1833 
To  LADY  CARLISLE  AND  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  June  1833. 

Here  we  are,  dearest  sister  and  brother,  for  I  have 
not  time  or  means  for  a  double  shot. 

Our  journey  has  been  prosperous,  crossing  quick 
and  smooth,  weather  quite  delicious,  not  too  hot  and 
yet  warm  enough  for  comfort  and  security. 

Paris  is  enchantirigly  deserted.  Almost  all  the 
French  people  are  going  or  gone.  The  Court  at 
Neuilly. 

Madame  Palli,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  Henri  Cinq 
was  her  enfant  politique,  this  one  her  enfant  impolitique. 

I  never  knew  before  to-day  the  story.  Buffo, 
Castelcicala's  son,  was  proposed  to.  He  asked  two 
millions,  upon  which  Mme.  du  Cayla  said  she  could  get 
her  a  husband  cheaper,  and  bought  Palli  for  one  million 
and  a  half. 

Georgy  is  so  happy  and  Susy  coming.  I  only  want 
to  know  that  you  are  both  well. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  1833. 

I  sit  before  my  paper  with  a  great  doubt  whether  I 
can  find  anything  to  put  upon  it.  No  courier  because 
of  the  high  winds,  so  one  does  not  feel  wound  up. 

Granville  is  better.  He  has  been  to  the  Due  de 
Broglie  this  morning.  I  saw  Madame  de  Broglie 
yesterday.  She  is  pleased  at  the  admiration  excited  by 
his  last  speech,  wishes  he  could  be  more  so  himself. 
She  says  he  only  wants  to  be  more  proud  and  exhila- 
rated about  himself,  sa  modestie  accepts  all  that  is  less 
flattering,  and  his  spirits  are  never  much  raised  by 
what  is  more.  That  if  he  was  employed  to  planter  des 
carottes  entre  quatre  murs,  he  would  be  as  much  carried 
away  by  it  as  he  is  by  his  present  great  bidding,  that 
this  has  its  advantages,  but  also  prevents  his  putting 


1833  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  139 

out  all  the  energy  he  possesses  and  which  is  now  so 
much  wanted.  It  is  taken  advantage  of  by  the  envious 
and  inimical  to  keep  him  back  and  discourage  him. 

The  Due  d'Orleans  is  gone  to  Belgium  to  see  his 
sister.  There  is  a  report  of  her  coming  here  on  the 
10th,  which  I  trust  is  unfounded.  We  should  be 
obliged  de  nous  faire  vifs,  which  would  be  the  most 
painful  thing  that  could  happen  to  us. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

June  29,  1833. 

Most  dear  sister, — My  last  night's  post  made  me  so 
very  happy.  Lady  Harrowby  was  so  charmed  with 
you,  that,  with  a  kindness  I  shall  always  remember,  she 
wrote  me  a  letter  describing  the  immense  improvement 
in  you. 

Leveson  will  be  here  on  Wednesday.  I  hope  Mr. 
Fullerton  Monday  week. 

Mr.  Luttrel  and  Abercromby  dined  here  yesterday 
and  Lord  Harry  Vane.  It  was  very  pleasant,  Luttrel 
more  amusing  than  I  ever  knew  him. 

To-day  we  have  Sir  F.  Eobinson,  Mrs.  Hamilton's 
father ;  Mr.  Eobinson,  a  potentate  in  Edinburgh,  head 
of  some  college  ;  Doctor  Bowring 1  ('  La  France  Commer- 
ciale  connait  Monsieur  Bowring,'  vide  French  Press), 
and  the  Poodle. 

To-morrow  Flahaults,  Walewski,  Darners,  Tchann, 
Luttrel,  and  Abercromby. 

All  this  se  passe  easily  and  rurally  in  my  bonnet 
and  things,  and  it  gives  me  all  my  mornings  to  myself. 

Eugene  Anisson  tells  me  that  all  goes  well  for  the 

1  An  eminent  writer  and  political  economist,  at  one  time  editor  of  the 
Westminster  Review  and  for  some  years  in  Parliament.  He  was  sent 
to  Paris  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  commerce  between  the  two  countries. 
In  1854  he  was  knighted  and  became  Governor  of  Hong  Kong.  His  high- 
handed policy  there,  which  led  to  the  second  Chinese  war,  was  much 
attacked. 


140     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1833 

present  people.  He  travelled  through  the  south  of 
France  and  was  struck  everywhere  with  the  prosperity 
and  tranquillity.  You  know  he  lives  entirely  with  the 
Carlists  and  never  goes  to  Court.  He  says  there  is  an 
immense  difference  amongst  them.  They  scarcely  ever 
talk  politics  or  read  a  newspaper.  In  short,  since  the 
birth  of  Miss  P.,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  they  will  only 
wait  a  decent  time  to  come  gracefully  out,  and  Lord 
Harry  tells  me  that  their  language  is  altered.  '  Apres 
tout  il  faut  faire  danser  nos  jeunes  personnes.' 

We  hope  the  marriage  1  will  be  on  the  12th  or  13th. 
Our  house  will  be  ready  for  us  at  Aix  on  the  20th. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  July  13,  1833. 

Your  letter  is  just  arrived,  my  dearest  sister.  I 
can  think  of  little  but  your  dearest  Georgiana 2  at  this 
moment,  and  feel  how  much  it  must  engross  you  all. 

I  am  so  happy  to  hear  a  good  account  of  Granville, 
to  hope  for  him  back  and  to  hear  that  he  has  found 
politics  such  as  to  reassure  and  satisfy  him. 

I  never  saw  anything  happier  than  Dody,  and  I  am 
in  every  way  satisfied  and  pleased  at  her  prospects. 
Nothing  can  be  more  facile  a  vivre,  more  kind  and 
attentive  to  her,  more  perfectly  sweet-tempered  and 
well  conditioned  than  he  is.  He  is  extremely  fond  of 
her,  enchanted  with  Paris,  and  the  happiness  to  me  of 
having  her  with  me,  contented,  gay,  seeing  everything 
couleur  de  rose. 

Your  neighbour's  faults  are,  in  my  opinion,  all  in 
her  head — nothing  that  prevents  my  being  very  fond 
of  her.  Granville  is  right  about  her.  She  is  weak, 
governed  by  her  mother,  has  much  to  answer  for  in 
having  spoilt  her  children,  and  now  often  misunder- 

1  Of  her  daughter  Georgiana  to  Mr.  Fullerton. 

2  Lord  Dover  died  on  the  10th. 


1833  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  141 

standing  and  worrying  them ;  but  she  is  gentle,  affec- 
tionate, aimante,  and  forgiving,  and  she  flounders  more 
than  she  errs. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  July  26,  1833. 

My  own  dearest  sister, — How  happy  your  news  of 
last  night  made  me  !  Congratulate  William l  and  your 
dearest  Blanket  for  me.  I  know  she  wished  for  another 
boy.  I  shall  long  to  hear  how  they  are  going  on.  I 
suppose  from  Granville's  letter  that  the  Duke  of  Suther- 
land must  be  quite  given  over.  Granville  gives  me 
hopes  of  his  setting  out  from  London  on  Friday  and 
arriving  here  on  Sunday.  We  should  then  set  off  for 
Aix  on  Tuesday.  I  have  most  delightful  letters  from 
Eivers  and  Susy.  They  are  enchanted  with  Geneva, 
its  beauty  and  quiet  comfort,  and  mean  to  wait  for  us 
there  and  come  for  a  few  days  to  Aix.  He  has  promised 
to  take  the  two  boys  to  see  Chamouny,  during  which 
time  I  should  have  my  darling  Sukey  all  to  myself. 
We  have  settled  to  have  Eward's  visit  there. 

The  glorieuses  journees  begin  to-morrow.  The  Queen 
returns  from  her  accouchee  for  them  and  back  again  for 
the  christening.  The  little  Queen  was  only  ill  two 
hours,  and  had  little  pain. 

I  see  in  the  '  Globe  '  just  arrived  an  account  of  the 
Duke  of  Sutherland's  death.  Lord  Stafford  will  be 
so  glad  to  have  gone  there  and  to  be  with  his  mother 
now. 

We  all  dined  yesterday  at  Flahault's.  I  saw  a  letter 
of  Lady  Grey's,  very  enthusiastic  about  Lord  Grey  and 
the  effect  and  success  of  his  speech.  I  suppose  all  will 
go  smoothly  now — yet  those  Tories  ? 

-1  On  the  birth  of  his  second  son,  the  present  Duke  of  Devonshire. 


142     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1833 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Aix :  August  8,  1833. 

I  think  you  and  D.  will  like  to  hear  of  our  arrival 
here,  my  dearest  sister.  We  all  got  up  at  half-past  five 
yesterday  morning,  my  children  to  get  into  the  steam- 
boat for  Yevay,  we  to  come  here  in  a  little  more  than 
eight  hours.  The  day  was  fine  and  cool,  the  country 
beautiful.  The  view  of  the  valley  of  Savoy  and  the 
Mont  Blanc  from  one  height  almost  the  finest  I  ever 
saw.  The  approach  to  this  place  through  the  most 
luxuriant  country.  The  highest  and  most  picturesque 
Alps — all  I  love — vineyards  in  festoons  over  treillages 
and  round  down  about  every  cottage.  Plums,  apple, 
and  walnut  trees  of  uncommon  size  and  beauty  for 
hedges.  Light  yellow  cows  with  bells  round  their 
necks,  women  with  straw  hats  and  milk  pails,  goats 
that  look  as  if  they  were  blown  in  glass,  Indian  corn 
like  a  fairy  forest.  Tall  bridges  with  one  arch,  crosses 
and  fountains. 

We  found  our  apartments  here  quite  good  enough 
for  us,  though  not  smart  or  recherche. 

My  boys  will  join  us  here. 

Granville  is  well.  Sir  T.  Shelley  is  charmed  with 
the  whole  affair  here,  says  he  feels  one  and  twenty, 
showed  me  two  fingers  that  had  been  swelled  and 
stiffened  as  nimble  and  slight  as  a  conjuror's.  The  air 
is  delicious  and  the  environs  beautiful.  Granville  is 
now  taking  his  first  bath  in  the  house.  It  smells  like 
a  million  of  rotten  eggs.  What  Aix  would  be  good  for 
is  D.'s  knee  and  Lord  Carlisle's  legs.  Granville  is 
hardly  a  case  enough,  as,  though  stiff,  there  is  not 
swelling,  for  which  the  cure  is  certain.  God  bless  you, 
dearest  brother  and  sister.  I  will  report  progress. 


1833  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  143 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Aix  en  Savoie  :  August  27,  1833. 

I  cannot  tell  you  the  delight  it  gave  me  to  hear 
from  you,  most  dear  brother.  It  had  seemed  so  triste 
to  me  to  receive  last  week  your  cover  containing  my 
two  letters  from  Geneva,  without  a  word.  I  cried  a 
little,  and  so  I  did  when  I  got  your  kind,  delicious, 
witty  own  letter  yesterday.  '  Varia  e  mutabile.'  No, 
Grace,  because  it  was  all  the  same  feeling — two  springs, 
but  from  the  same  source.  Natural  image  here,  where 
everything  flows,  spouts,  showers,  shoots  upon  and  at 
the  devoted  victim. 

I  am  most  happy  at  this  place  having  been  so  useful 
to  Granville,  and  he  is  so  well,  and  we  are,  in  spite  of 
our  rude  habitation,  so  snug  and  comfortable,  that  I 
shall  leave  it  on  Friday  next  with  much  regret.  Our 
life  suits  me  so  perfectly — up  before  eight,  boating, 
walking,  driving  in  char-a-bancs,  the  Lake  smooth,  the 
boats  flat-bottomed,  without  sails,  like  Eobinson  Crusoe's 
rafts,  the  roads  good  or  impassable,  the  coachmen, 
peasants  en  blouse,  drag  the  horse  up  and  down  by  the 
mouth,  such  a  nice  safe  way,  all  cheek  by  jowl  together. 
Our  breakfasts  and  dinners  are  excellent ;  such  butter, 
mutton,  and  greengages  as  never  were  seen  before.  We 
all  play  at  whist,  the  boys  and  I  for  five  sous  the  stake, 
and  we  go  to  bed  after  ten.  We  have  had  delicious 
weather,  and  our  post  three  times  a  week  brings  me 
letters  from  my  girls  overflowing  with  their  happiness. 
Que  voulez-vous?  My  great  care  is  to  get  that  dear 
beloved  G.  well  and  braced.  As  to  you,  I  am  delighted 
to  hear  of  your  amendment,  your  enjoyment  of  Chats- 
worth,  your  being  able  to  go  about  in  so  many  different 
ways.  Your  life  till  the  company  comes  must  be  ecstatic. 
You  have  no  idea  how  much  more  worthy  I  shall  be  of 
sharing  it.  What  with  spectacles,  mineral  waters  and 
courage,  I  am  a  new  woman.  I  walked  the  other  day 


144     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1833 

four  miles  by  myself,  exploring  in  little,  unfrequented 
wild  paths  without  a  thought  of  danger,  fearing  nought 
that  cow  could  do. 

Lord  Hertford  is  much  better  and  saw  Granville 
yesterday.  He  sleeps  and  has  recovered  his  spirits, 
and  is  going  on  to  Naples.  Lady  Strachan  is  in  great 
beauty ;  she  has  the  bluest  eyes,  most  glossy  hair,  red 
and  white  skin,  lips  and  teeth ;  but  there  is  a  vulgar 
housemaid,  common  look  in  her  features  and  coun- 
tenance which  spoils  the  concern.  I  have  not  seen  her 
girls,  but  they  say  the  youngest  is  a  hundred  times 
more  beautiful  than  the  eloper.  The  ugly  one  is,  I 
hear,  the  cleverest.  She  has  unbounded  influence  over 
Lord  Hertford. 

Every  evening  we  have  a  little  woman  of  Colmar 
singing  on  our  balcony,  Monsieur,  as  she  calls  her  (I 
hope)  husband,  playing  on  the  guitar.  It  is  enchanting. 
I  must  send  you  two  of  her  songs. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  15,  1833. 

Dearest  sister, — I  write  to-day,  because  to-morrow 
we  set  out  at  eleven  for  Versailles.  The  Fullertons, 
Leveson,  and  I  to  dine  and  make  a  day  of  it.  Mr.  F. 
has  never  seen  it.  Granville  and  George  Yilliers  dine 
at  the  Due  de  Broglie's  at  Auteuil. 

To-day  Granville  dines  at  St.  Cloud,  and  I  have 
the  Flahaults,  Lord  Mahon,  John  Ashley,  Brooke 
Greville,  and  Mr.  Aston  to  charmer  mes  ennuis.  Lord 
Mahon  has  been  at  Milan  and  seen  Susy,  so  I  like  to 
see  him. 

I  went  to  St.  Cloud  yesterday  evening.  They  all 
look  so  happy  and  radiant,  having  been  delighted  with 
their  journey,  their  reception  everywhere,  and  the 
yachtes  surtout.  There  is  a  chance  of  Leopold  and  his 
Queen  the  beginning  of  next  month,  which  would  be 


1833  TO  THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  145 

calamitous,  but  as  I  hear  the  baby  can't  come,  I  live 
in  hopes  that  they  will  resolve  not  to  leave  it. 

Paris  is  perfectly  quiet,  a  few  people  occasionally  to 
dinner,  but  nothing  of  an  evening,  always  save  and 
except  Madame  de  Flahault  twice  a  week. 

We  are  anxious  for  news  from  Portugal.1  How 
delighted  those  Eoyal  women  must  be  at  our  Court's 
reception  of  them !  Henry  Fox  wished  Lady  Augusta 
to  go  to  Court.  I  asked  the  Queen  last  night  to  receive 
them,  and  we  are  all  going  in  a  body  on  Thursday. 
Meg,  who  loves  going  to  a  Court,  thinks  it  quite  a 
jollification,  and  will  go  too. 

Such  are  our  pleasures,  not  to  forget  the  evening 
concerts,  transferred  to  the  morning  from  three  to  six. 
Yesterday  I  sat  it  all  out  with  the  young  ones.  Beau- 
tiful music,  beautifully  played.  It  is  just  opposite  our 
gates.  Perfect  order  is  observed,  a  slight  paling  keeps 
out  the  people.  We  have  one  little  wooden  chair  and 
entrance  for  cavalier  et  sa  dame  for  one  franc.  We 
think  it  would  succeed  in  the  Grove.  Eighty-five  thou- 
sand francs  the  musicians  have  already  gained. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  September  23, 1833. 

Your  beautiful  and  magnificent  present  has  turned 
our  heads,  mine,  Body's,  and  Mile.  Therese  Trouchet, 
the  waiting-woman  to  the  possessor.  Dody  tells  me 
she  was  overcome  at  the  first  sight  of  it.  It  is  of  real 
use,  for  how  is  Lady  Georgiana  Fullerton  to  meet  the 
King  and  Queen  of  the  Belgians,  who  arrive  on  the  4th 
and  will  do  nothing  but  dance  and  drum,  without 
jewels  to  bedeck  her?  Is  not  the  white  satin  gown, 

1  '  The  Queen  of  Portugal  goes  to  Windsor  to-day.  The  King  was  at 
first  angry  at  her  coming  to  England,  but  when  he  found  that  Louis 
Philippe  had  treated  her  with  incivility,  he  changed  his  mind  and  re- 
solved to  receive  her  with  great  honours.'  See  Greville's  Memoirs,  1st 
series,  vol  iii.  p.  33. 

VOL.  II.  L 


146     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1833 

trimmed  with  blonde,  intended  for  the  first  great  occa- 
sion, with  your  gift  to  relever  it,  a  dainty  dress  to  set 
before  a  king  ? 

That  beauty,  Horace  Pitt,1  sleeps  at  the  Arabins'  and 
plays  about  and  dines  here,  and  drives  out  with  me 
every  morning  en  caleche.  He  is  as  good  and  happy 
as  the  day  is  long,  and,  as  he  says  himself,  quite 
gentlemanlike. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  December  3,  1833. 

How  happy  it  made  myself  and  friends  to  hear  of 
you  at  Lyons !  I  wrote  G.  word  of  your  arrival  there 
and  sent  your  account  of  the  road  to  Susy,  to  meet  her 
and  give  her  good  heart. 

The  Fullertons  go  to  England  on  the  10th,  and  the 
Eivers's  will  be  here,  I  hope,  on  the  16th. 

Dolly 2  has  not  been  visible  to  any  eyes  I  know  since 
you  went.  Yesterday  she  wrote  a  note  to  Granville  to 
beg  him  to  call  on  her,  for  she  was  ill,  lone  and  desolate. 
Not  so  Sarah  of  the  other  hotel.  The  Duke  of  Orleans 
calls  every  morning,  though  he  meets  Noailles,  the 
Duchesse  de  Guiche  and  Eichelieu.  The  blowens3  are 
all  angry  and  have  no  comfort  but  saying  she  writes  to 
him  to  come  and  asks  for  the  Royal  boxes.  She  has 
them,  all  a  commande,  which  is  what  she  cares  for.  She 
looks  wonderfully  well  and  is  not  the  least  oppressive  to 
me,  in  perfect  good-humour,  never  talking  politics, 
abuse  or  friendship,  no  care  or  bore  to  me.  She  has 
dined  here  once,  we  have  paid  little  civil  visits  to  each 
other,  we  go  to  Court  together  to-morrow,  and  she  sets 
out  for  Nice  on  Friday,  Lord  Jersey  having  arrived  last 
night.  'Sad  and  wearily  the  wayworn  traveller,'  I 
always  sing  when  I  reflect  on  him.  Mme.  de  Flahault 
is  furious  because  Silence  sent  a  parcel  from  old  Keith 

1  Lord  Kivers's  brother.  2  Lady  Lyndhurst. 

3  Slang  for  women. 


1833  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  147 

without  a  card,  because  when  she  called  in  answer  to 
this  no  card,  Silence  talked  to  Montrond,  her  back 
turned  to  her.  Mme.  Walewska  is  furious  because 
Silence  sent  to  her  to  bid  her  come,  because  she  had  not 
time  to  call  on  anybody.  Old  *  Fitz  is  put  out  because 
she  will  dine  with  her  at  her  hotel,  where  she  has  no 
cook.  Lady  Sandwich  fans  every  spark  she  can  find 
into  a  flame.  Darner 2  is  so  flustered  and  hysterical  with 
the  universal  hubbub  that  she  invited  a  party  to  Fitz 
two  days  ago.  Granville  amongst  the  number  went  and 
found  Fitz  was  gone  to  the  Opera  and  nobody  at  home. 
So  much  for  you  to-day.  I  shall  write  often  and  short. 
You  see  this  would  be  sheets  in  Dolly's  hand. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris:  December  12,  1833. 

I  am  glad  William  Cowper  is  still  with  you. 
Silence  means  to  bide  at  Nice  during  the  winter.  She 
continued  peaceable  and  harmless  to  the  last,  went  with 
me  to  the  Tuileries.  The  King  admired  her  beauty 
loud  enough  for  her  to  hear,  and  she  was,  as  she  always 
is,  avec  des  gens  en  place  extremely  happy. 

Here  is  Leveson  arrived.  Freddy  is  coming  with 
Scarlett  this  evening.  You  have  no  idea  of  the  satisfac- 
tion a  school  of  Oxonians  gives  me,  as  I  must  ere  long 
dance,  and  young  men  are  the  scarcest  possible  articles 
here.  A  young  Oswald,  Lord  Folkestone,  Lord  Suf- 
field's  son,  and  several  others. 

The  Wortleys 3  are  here,  the  Wharnelifles  in  London, 
thinking  of  coming  here,  but  Charles  and  Emmeline 
won't  wait,  and  talk  of  setting  off  immediately  for 
Naples  with  Hook's  new  novel,  '  Love  and  Pride,'  and 
the  l  Comic  Annual,'  directed  to  you. 

1  Mrs.  Fitzherbert. 

2  Mrs.  George  Darner,  nee  Seymour.     She  had  been  brought  up  by 
Mrs.  Fitzherbert.  3  Mr.  and  Lady  Georgiana  Wortley. 

L  -2 


148     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COCJNTESS  GRANVILLE    1833 

Saturday  morning.  I  have  little  to  add.  Dolly 
arrived,  looking  sulky,  ill  and  affronted,  not  with  any 
one  in  particular,  but  with  public  opinion  and  private 
feeling,  to  both  of  which  I  suppose  she  secretly  does 
justice  as  applied  to  her  own  case.  Le  Prefet  de  la 
Seine  is  very  attentive,  and  Lady  Sandwich  and  she  are 
inseparable,  a  homage  to  Toryism  I  conclude.  But  all 
this  does  not  seem  to  unruffle  Dolly's  plumes,  and  if  she 
could  make  a  noise  like  a  turkey  cock  she  would.  Our 
weather  is  still  bright  and  mild,  and  I  hope  Susy  will 
arrive  before  snow  or  real  desperate  weather  sets  in. 
The  Carnival  makes  me  sick,  and  I  want  her  as  a  pull 
against  the  disgust  of  giving  and  going.  I  do  hate 
society,  dearest  Grace,  more  than  ever,  as  a  friend 
told  me  last  night.  *  C'est  terrible  de  s'attacher  aussi 
fortement  a  sweet  ome,  milady.'  I  was  puzzled  at  first 
and  thought  he  said  sweet  wine. 

Dino  came  to  see  me ;  she  goes  to  England  to-mor- 
row and  Talleyrand  follows  in  a  day  or  two.  She  tells 
me  Mme.  de  Lieven  has  a  party  every  evening,  most 
select,  herself  and  half  a  dozen  whist-players.  She 
cannot  exist  without  her  rubber. 


1834  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  149 


1834 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  January  16,  1834. 

You  will  be  glad  to  have  parted  amicably  with  poor 
Lady  Lyndhurst.  After  ten  days  of  illness  she  died 
at  five  o'clock  yesterday.  Premature  labour,  Lord 
Lyndhurst  absent,  and  her  poor  little  girl  in  a  state  of 
misery.  We  immediately  sent  my  maid  with  the  car- 
riage to  bring  her  here,  but  Mr.  Greene,  the  nephew, 
said  it  was  impossible  to  persuade  her  to  leave  the 
house.  I  suppose  Lord  L.  will  come.  It  has  caused 
great  horror ;  she  was  at  a  ball  here,  well  and  brilliant, 
on  the  Friday  before  last,  and  the  violence  against  her 
makes  it  more  felt. 

I  will  write  more  longuement  the  day  after  to-mor- 
row. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  January  23,  1834. 

Lord  Lyndhurst  is  arrived.  The  burial  is  to  be  in 
England.  He  wrote  notes  of  the  most  grateful  thanks 
to  Granville  and  myself.  They  would  have  been 
deeply  affecting  from  anybody  else,  from  him  they  were 
proper,  and  I  have  no  doubt  he  felt  much  shocked  by 
the  rapidity  of  the  last  events.  Lady  Chesterfield  and 
Mrs.  Anson  pleased  me.  As  they  had  lived  entirely 
with  Lady  Lyndhurst,  dining  together  every  day,  and 
going  about  together  everywhere,  I  liked  them  for  the 
feeling  they  showed  in  entirely  shutting  up,  not  going 
to  the  Delmar  or  Appony  balls.  They  appeared  for 


150     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

the  first  time  at  Court  last  night.  Mrs.  Fitzherbert 
plays  about,  dined  here  last  Friday,  and  at  twelve 
was  still  to  be  seen  sitting  on  a  couch  between  Pozzo 
and  Sir  Sidney  Smith.  The  Carlists  are  all  coming 
out  again,  and  the  little  Duke1  and  everybody  are 
in  good-humour,  and  approve  and  like  to  look  at  each 
other. 

To-day  the  world  is  at  a  bazaar,  where  the  Miles. 
Labordes,  Madame  de  Massa,  Mesdames  Potocka  and 
Eothschild  sell  in  their  little  booths. 

Diplomacy  was  much  in  doubt. 

Madame  Werther :  '  II  faut  y  aller ;  c'est  indis- 
pensable ;  on  nous  a  ecrit.' 

Madame  Appony :  '  Chere  Lady  Granville,  que 
faire  ?  La  bonne  Werther !  Les  jolies  petites  bou- 
tiquieres  !  Irons-nous  deposer  notre  petite  offrande  de 
dix  francs  ? ' 

Lady  Granville  :  '  Je  n'irai  pas.' 

This  sounds  dreadful,  but  I  think  more  money 
without  the  pound  of  flesh  will  bring  matters  even 
versus  Mme.  Eothschild.  I  really  had  rather  be  hung 
than  go. 

The  French  do  not  admire  much  the  Ladies  Ailes- 
bury,  Chesterfield,  Anson.  What  they  do  are  the  two 
Miss  Ellices,  Miss  Seymour,  a  daughter  of  Sir  Michael's, 
very  fair,  with  long  ringlets,  and  Mrs.  E.  Jerningham. 
They  stand  round  those  ladies  in  admiration.  Bijou, 
figure  d'ange.,  etc.,  and  sneer  at  our  mature  fashionable 
beauties.  Que  voulez-vous  ?  Every  dog.  There  are 
many  pretty  Frenchwomen  of  all  colours.  Monsieur 
de  Delmar's  ball  was  almost  of  fabulous  beauty  and 
brilliancy.  The  worst  was  we  looked  like  the  servants 
come  to  see  the  apartments  before  the  fit  inhabitants 
appeared.  It  is  so  high,  so  broad,  so  light,  so  awful. 
Domes  above,  red  velvet  carpets  all  in  one  piece  to  step 

1  Of  Orleans. 


1834  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  151 

upon.     Madame  de  Delmar  alone  is  made  on  the  same 
scale,  and  looks  handsomer  and  fits  it  all. 

Here  is  Susy  in  a  purple  silk  gown  and  your  Eussian 
cadeau  on,  which,  being  cleaned,  comes  out  like  Peru. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  February  3834. 

I  have  not  been  inspired  by  you,  most  dear  sister, 
these  two  last  post  days,  so  I  write  flat,  but  1  see  with 
delight  that  your  journey  is  over  in  the  *  Morning 
Herald.'  We  are  going  on  quite  well.  Granville  free 
from  gout.  Susy  quite  wondrous.  She  goes  out  every 
now  and  then  to  an  opera,  or  for  a  little  while  to  Mme. 
de  Delmar's,  but  is  generally  in  bed  soon  after  ten. 

The  Carnival  is  raging,  and  all  full  of  squabbles  and 
petty  jealousies  and  tracasseries  owing  to  the  Carlists 
beginning  to  come  out,  and  the  eternal  questions  of 
who  meets  whom,  and  why  somebody  stays  at  one 
place  or  leaves  another 

In  the  midst  of  it  all  poor  Lady  Lyndhurst's  almost 
sudden  death,  though  she  had  been  ill  some  days, 
coming  just  after-  we  had  all  seen  her  at  a  ball  here 
radiant  and  covered  with  diamonds,  gave  one  of  those 
dark,  awful  impressions  that  such  calamities  bring 
with  them,  even  when  feelings  are  not  immediately 
interested. 

Lord  Lyndhurst  is  just  arrived  to  take  back  his 
little  girl. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  27,  1834. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  letter  and  kindness  and 
your  advice.  I  enclose  you  a  letter.  Will  you  frank 
it  to  Mrs.  Lamb  ? 

Would  it  not  be  good  for  you  and  soothing  to  her 
if  you  were  to  go  to  her  for  a  little  while  at  Compton 


152     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE     1834 

Place  ?     What  are  your  plans  ?     Not  only  London,  I 
liope.     The  sea,  the  sea,  the  deep  blue  sea. 

I  can  tell  you  little  more  about  Lady  Lyndhurst.  I 
think  Lord  L.  behaved  most  properly.  He  seemed  to 
feel  the  shock  very  strongly,  and  gratitude  to  those 
who  had  been  kind  to  her.  George  Anson  told  me 
yesterday  that  though  one  knew  the  sort  of  relation 
they  must  have  been  upon,  yet  his  manner  when  with 
her  was  that  of  kindness  and  even  fondness. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  21,  1834. 

I  am  happier  than  I  can  say,  own  dearest  sister. 
Susy  is  quite  wonderfully  well,1  my  little  grandson  is 
the  greatest  love,  like  an  immense  wax  doll,  but,  as 
Beck  says,  saucy. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  April  1834. 

Susan  is  going  on  perfectly  well,  but,  dearest  sister 
— I  talk  to  who  will  understand — you  know  when 
nerves  take  dominion,  the  misfortune  is,  and  I  reproach 
myself  in  vain  for  it,  that  one  rejects  relief  and  comfort, 
and  this  only  to  you,  when  calmed  upon  one  terror, 
another  fixes  its  hook  into  one. 

Here  is  that  darling  angel,  relieved  from  suffering, 
regaining  strength  rapidly,  happy  about  herself  and  her 
baby,  who  is  also  well.  Yet  here  am  I,  because  she  is 
going  out  for  the  first  time  to-day,  and  that  I  do  not 
think  the  weather  quite  fine  enough,  with  cold  hands,  a 
tight  head,  and  aching,  frightened  heart.  Just  strength 
of  mind  left  to  shut  myself  up  and  keep  out  of  the  way, 
not  to  damp  the  ecstasy  of  herself  and  her  husband  at 
this  first  lark,  this  proof  to  them  of  returning  health 
and  strength  and  promise  of  more.  The  anxiety  of  the 
last  two  months  has  given  me  an  impossibility  of  feeling 

1  She  was  confined  on  March  20. 


1834  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  153 

happy.  'I  have  a  new  fear,'  which  you  have  often 
written  to  me  is  the  constant  move  of  my  mind,  and 
I  have  for  the  time  broken  the  spring  that  used  to 
bring  me  rapidly  back  to  joy  in  proportion  to  anxiety. 
Then  I  make  to  myself  all  sorts  of  reproaches.  I  read 
in  a  little  book  I  like,  Mrs.  Fry's  last,  'Fear  is  not 
sorrow.' 

This  too  I  feel :  my  anxiety  for  what  I  love  so 
much  is  not  of  a  kind  that  interests  and  pleases  me 
with  myself — it  is  not  sensibility,  it  is  not  a  softened 
softening  feeling,  it  is  more  like  cramps  and  spasms  of 
the  mind,  it  paralyses  my  power  of  being  useful,  and  is 
to  the  objects  themselves  something  inexplicable. 

It  reduces  me  to  wish  them  away.  The  only  thing 
that  calms  my  nerves  is  sitting  at  an  open  window, 
reading  Mrs.  Fry  or  Adams' '  Private  Thoughts  ; '  but  my 
religion  is  like  my  feeling,  and  I  do  not  find  its  influence 
when  I  leave  the  immediate  occupation  of  it.  I  know 
why  no  single  act  of  feeling  or  practice  can  soothe, 
it  must  be  what  I  have  not,  entire  submission  and 
devotion. 

'  It  is  time  to  have  done  with  future  prospects,  or  a 
vain  imagination  that  we  shall  be  happy  or  more  at 
ease,  when  such  a  point  is  gained  or  such  an  impedi- 
ment removed,  whereas  nothing  is  more  certain  than 
that  every  period  of  life  and  every  day  will  bring  its 
own  burden  along  with  it,  and  that  there  is  no  possi- 
bility of  happiness  but  in  bearing  it  according  to  the 
will  of  God.' 

Dearest  sister,  I  did  myself  very  great  good  by 
pouring  myself  out  to  you  this  morning.  They  sent  for 
me  into  the  garden,  and  there  I  found  her,  delighted 
and  able  to  walk  round  it  without  fatigue,  and  I  have 
since  seen  her  upstairs  feeling  quite  well,  with  a  great 
appetite  for  roast  mutton  and  green  peas. 

I  have  also  had  a  long  visit  from  Mme.  Appony. 


154     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

I  like  and  love  her.  We  talked  much  on  serious 
subjects.  She  was  saying  that  she  thinks  that  it  is 
wrong  in  us  to  be  always  looking  forward,  fearing  evil, 
planning  good,  that  it  cannot  be  approved  that  we 
should  do  that  with  what  is  so  entirely  in  God's  will 
and  out  of  ours. 

4  Know  your  own  weakness,  trust  and  pray,'  '  Take 
no  heed  of  to-morrow,'  are  the  two  sentences  I  just 
now  cling  to.  God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Par-is :  May  20,  1834. 

Dearest  beloved  sister, — I  need  not  tell  you  all  I 
feel  for  you  and  yours,  or  how  anxiously  I  long  for  the 
next  account  of  your  darling  Blanche.1  What  a  trial 
this  must  be  to  her !  If  his  life  was  likely  to  have  been 
of  delicate  health  and  suffering,  she  may  have  been 
spared  much  misery.  The  time  will  come  when  what 
is  left  her  will  become  everything,  but  all  this  is  not 
now,  and  I  grieve  for  her,  for  poor  William,  for  you, 
my  dearest  G.,  more  than  I  can  express.  Thank  your 
dear  Elizabeth  for  her  kindness  in  writing. 

Susan  feels  deeply  for  Blanche.  She  is  herself 
improving  daily  in  strength,  and  I  think,  if  she  con- 
tinues as  well  as  she  promises,  will  be  in  London  in  less 
than  a  fortnight. 

Her  affection  for  Blanche  has  always  been  one  of 
her  strongest  feelings,  and  now  more  than  ever  does 
she  feel  for  her  and  with  her  at  a  moment  of  such  trial. 
God  bless  and  protect  you  all. 

I  have  nothing  to  say.  You  will  be  very  sorry  for 
poor  Leopold.  I  hear  the  loss  of  their  boy  has  been  a 
dreadful  blow  to  them.  They  come  to  Neuilly  the  end 
of  this  week. 

1  Lady  Burlington,  who  had  just  lost  her  eldest  boy. 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  31,  1834. 

Dearest  sister, — I  trust  in  Verity's  care  of  you,  and 
my  opinion  of  his  skill  and  judgment  is  such  that  I 
cannot  understand  your  inclining  your  ear  to  any  but 
him. 

I  have  seen  in  Susy's  case  within  these  last  few 
days  the  wonderful  effect  of  change  of  air.  I  long  to 
hear  of  you  from  her,  and  of  dearest  Blanche,  whose 
trials  have  been  so  severe ;  also  to  know  what  you 
think  of  my  adorable  child. 

I  feel  that  I  cannot  write  to-day,  because  our  igno- 
rance about  political  events  is  so  great,  having  only  got 
so  far  as  the  resignation  of  the  four  Ministers,1  that  it 
leaves  one  all  unhinged  and  suspended. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  3,  1834. 

Dearest  sister, — I  was  happy  to  hear  from  you 
yesterday,  and  all  your  thinks  at  this  interesting 
moment.  I  am  glad  Lord  Carlisle  has  the  Privy  Seal. 
It  takes  the  scrub  look  from  the  present  Cabinet,  and  is 
honour  to  whom  honour  is  due.  I  am  very  sorry  Mr. 
Stanley  is  gone,  hope  Lord  Mulgrave  is  not  affronted, 
dread  Lord  Durham  at  the  head  of  the  discontented 
and  dissenting  office,  and  I  am  afraid  of  our  Auckland 
amongst  the  rigging. 

Mme.  de  Flahault  says  Lord  Durham  would  kill 
Lord  Grey  if  in  the  Cabinet,  will  upset  him  if  out  of  it. 
Lord  Glengall,  ultra-Tory,  says,  '  I  hear  that  the  Duke 
of  Wellington  and  Mr.  Stanley  have  long  understood 
each  other,  and  that  the  Duke  says,  "  If  Stanley  and 

1  The  Duke  of  Kichmond,  Lord  Bipon,  Mr.  Stanley,  and  Sir  James 
Graham  left  the  Government  on  account  of  Mr.  Ward's  resolution 
respecting  the  Irish  Church. 


156     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE     1834 

Peel  will  unite,  I  will  act  with  them  as  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  if  they  like  it." ' 

Now,  my  dearest  G.,  I  cannot  say  how  glad  I  am 
that  the  exchange  of  situation  was  not  offered  to 
Granville.  He  not  only  likes  Paris  best,  but  would 
have  disliked  the  Admiralty  particularly — no  know- 
ledge of  Naval  affairs,  no  turn  for  scraping  and 
economising,  and  a  necessity  of  speaking.  Yet  it 
would  have  been  extremely  painful  to  him,  if  he  had 
been  asked  as  a  convenient  and  useful  thing  to  Lord 
Grey,  to  have  refused.  England  would  have  been 
purchased  at  a  price  that  I  should  have  been  grieved 
to  see  him  pay. 

I  cannot  say  all  my  shades  of  feeling  and  wishes 
— you  in  Grosvenor  Place,  Susy  at  Mistley,  Georgy 
coming  here,  and  no  other  pied  a  terre,  Granville's 
decided  preference  of  Paris  and  his  work  here  to  any- 
thing else. 

You  will  talk  to  me  of  Susy  and  her  boy,  and  of  D., 
who  has  dropped  me.  I  hope  and  trust  he  has  no 
return  of  suffering  in  his  knee.  Tell  him  that  I  cried 
when  I  read  of  Spot's1  death. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  1834. 

I  long  for  Georgy 's  arrival  and  expect  them  on 
Tuesday. 

About  your  plans,  my  beloved  sister.  I  can  let  no 
se'lfish  feeling  come  across  my  ardent  wish  that  you 
should  do  whatever  is  best  for  you.  I  wait  impatiently 
to  hear  what  is  decided,  and  what  dear  Lord  Carlisle 
and  Liz  do.  You  must  know  what  a  hope  of  seeing 
any  of  you  must  be  to  me — to  have  you  en  personne 
at  Aix  would  be  intoxicating,  but  if  the  quiet  of 
the  sea  within  a  short  journey  is  best  for  you,  I 

1  An  Italian  greyhound  belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 


1834  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  157 

wish  you  by  it.  I  should  have  thought  varied  change 
of  air  and  mouvement  better  for  you,  but  of  this  you 
and  Verity  are  the  best  judges. 

Of  politics — well — what  a  popular,  commanding, 
and,  one  must  add,  cunning  eloquence  is  our  Stanley's  ! 
What  a  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  Spring  Eice  would 
have  been ;  impossible  I  suppose !  Why  was  Aber- 
cromby  not  placed  somewhere  ? 

I  cannot  wonder  at  Lord  Carlisle,  but  it  don't  look 
as  well  without  him.  What  does  Lord  Morpeth  do  ? 
and  any  price  Lady  C.,  for  what  he  thinks.  Various 
reports  reach  us.  Great  intimacy  between  Lords 
Brougham  and  Lyndhurst  ?  Was  Lord  Mulgrave 
offended,  or  only  looking  to  Foreign  employment  ? 
Do  you  believe  there  will  be  change  or  not  ?  Be- 
tween ourselves,  Mme.  de  Flahault  received  yester- 
day morning  a  letter  from  Lady  Grey.  In  the  evening 
Flahault  said  to  me,  '  We  have  letters,  change  is  still 
to  be  expected,  and  we  know  it  from  those  who  would 
least  wish  it.' 

The  Berrys  are  happy,  and  so  is  Lady  Charlotte 
Lindsay,  under  a  tree  in  the  Champs  Elysees  sketching ; 
they  have  Saturdays  and  we  all  go,  and  the  tea-table 
and  the  girls  look  just  as  they  do  in  Curzon  Street,1  and 
Pozzo,  Granville  and  Butera,2  and  Mrs.  Darner  and  many 
others  sit  and  squiddle  in  the  first  room,  and  we  veilled 
there  till  a  late  hour. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  1884. 

Most  dear  sis, — Yesterday's  courier  made  me  the 
happiest  of  women.  Your  letter,  eight  rapturous  pages 
from  Susy  at  Mistley,  and  a  delicious  letter  from 
D.  at  Brighton.  This,  with  Georgy's  safe  arrival, 

1  Where  the  Miss  Berrys  resided. 
8  Neapolitan  Minister  at  Paris. 


158     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1834 

perfectly  well  and  happy,  set  me  up.  She  is  gayer 
than  I  have  ever  seen  her,  and  they  are  both  delighted 
to  be  here  again.  She  is  enchanted  with  Lizzy,1  whom 
Fuller  ton  thinks  very  handsome.  But  Dody  says  there 
never  was  a  more  amiable,  agreeable  girl,  which  is 
really  so  much  more  essential,  as  I  think  dress  is  half 
the  battle  when  looks  are  concerned,  and  everybody  can 
look  well  so  much  more  easily  than  they  can  be  liked 
and  likeable.  Vide  the  whole  French  nation.  There 
are  no  corsets  and  plaits  for  selfishness  and  ill-humour. 

Abercromby's  appointment  has  pacified  Miss  Berry 
and  the  '  Times.'  My  great  fear  now  is  that  Lord  Grey 
will  be  worn  and  tired  out  by  all  that  I  foresee  will  be 
Lord  Durham's  power  of  plaguing.  How  can  he  be 
pacified — Grand  Mogul  ? 

Dearest  sis,  I  must  have  done.  Darners,  Berry, 
Lords  Bruce  and  Elibank  dine  here,  and  I  must  adorn 
in  silk  and  flannel  with  an  aching  ear. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  1834. 

The  Poodle  is  arrived  and  has  seen  you  all.  He 
amused  and  interested  me  about  politics,  putting  many 
dots  upon  many  i's. 

Sister,  the  only  doubt  about  Lord  Carlisle  accepting 
or  not  was  his  own  convenience  ;  and  I  think  he  must 
be  glad  at  this  moment  to  make  a  sacrifice  to  Lord 
Grey,  who  seems  to  me  to  have  been  ill-used,  or,  rather, 
provokingly  used  by  many  of  his  friends.  To  his 
enemies — the  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Lord  London- 
derry— he  must  par  contre  feel  grateful.  Did  you  ever 
know  such  boobies  ? 

Miss  Berry  dines  here  to-day.  She  is  at  times 
excessively  disagreeable,  with  a  fond  of  some  good 
and  friendly  qualities  that  make  one  get  over  it.  But 

1  One  of  Lady  Carlisle's  daughters. 


1834  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  159 

one  thing  is  increased  with  age — no  civility  or  atten- 
tion does — it  is  always  complaint,  comparison,  and 
scolding.  I  was  obliged  to  give  it  her  before  Ag  and 
Lady  Charlotte,  and  the  joy  of  those  two  girls  showed 
how  they  had  smarted. 

I  went  to  see  her  on  her  jour.  '  How  d'ye  do,  Miss 
Berry  ? '  '  Ah,  ah  !  none  the  better  for  you.'  '  What 
do  you  mean  ?  '  *  I  might  have  died  yesterday  with  a 
wretched  cold,  for  anything  you  thought  of  the  matter.' 
I  appealed  to  the  young  ladies  present  if  it  would  not 
indeed  be  a  miraculous  degree  of  attachment  that 
would  have  made  me  guess  by  instinct  the  day  before 
that  Miss  Berry  had  caught  cold.  I  am  glad  the 
Poodle  is  come,  because  they  are  just  well  and  ill 
enough  together  to  turn  the  stream  of  wrangle  into 
a  new  channel.  Herself  is  become  so  exigeante,  that 
people  are  positively  angels  or  devils  as  they  call  on 
her  or  not.  I,  who  have  been  uncommonly  polite,  am 
just  let  off  with  sighs  and  groans.  '  Nothing  surprises 
me  here ;  no  attention  seems  wonderful  to  me,  remem- 
bering what  I  used  to  receive.'  To  give  you  an  idea  of 
it.  I  offered  her  a  very  pretty  cactus,  which  she  ad- 
mired excessively.  '  Ah,  ah  !  send  me  a  plant  indeed. 
I  used  to  have  as  many  and  more  than  I  wanted  with- 
out asking,  only  sending  to  the  conservatory  for  what- 
ever I  chose.'  '  You  did  not  marry  us,  Miss  Berry,' l 
another  rap  which  has  been  salutary  to  this  virgin. 

Bless  you  dearest,  dear  sis. 

*v%- 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Aix :  August  9,  1834. 

We  are  here  since  the  day  before  yesterday  and  all 
well.  Granville  uncommonly  so,  I  think.  He  took  a 
warm  bath  yesterday  and  a  slight  douche  this  morning. 
The  weather  yesterday  was  most  oppressively  hot.  We 

1  She  was  supposed  to  have  arranged  Lord  and  Lady  Stuart's  marriage. 


160     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

only  walked  after  six  and  could  hardly  crawl.  But 
how  beautiful  it  was  !  The  harvest  all  alive,  and  large, 
sweet  loads  of  hay,  picturesque  people,  and  the  moun- 
tains, woods,  and  vines  all  looking  their  very  best,  first 
under  a  setting  sun  and  then  under  a  small  slice  of 
moon.  In  the  night  a  violent  thunderstorm,  to-day  it 
is  extremely  fine  and  quite  cool. 

Aix  is  very  unlike  last  year.  I  like  it  better,  but 
am  afraid  it  will  be  terribly  dull  for  my  companions. 
There  is  no  society — a  few  Ultras  whom  we  just  know 
by  name,  and  a  French  dandy  or  two.  The  only 
person  Granville  has  seen  is  the  Duke  of  Manchester, 
who  is  here  with  a  Doctor  Stewart.  It  is  nice  to  have 
an  English  doctor  about. 

Leveson  has  been  to  two  soirees — weak  tea, 
Duchesse  San  Carlos  and  her  daughters,  Mme.  Sou- 
geous,  a  Greek  niece  of  Capo  d'Istria  with  a  beautiful 
daughter,  young  Maille,  and  a  spark  or  two.  He  dragged 
Mme.  Sougeous  round  the  room  waltzing  and  was  glad 
to  come  home,  the  only  advantage  I  see  in  going  out. 

Will  you  tell  dearest  D.  the  little  I  say,  as  I  have 
not  a  single  word  or  thought  to  make  a  second  letter 
by  to-day's  post  ?  I  hope  something  may  turn  up  be- 
fore the  next. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Marseilles :  September  4,  1834. 

I  am  so  happy  you  are  better.  We  are  very  well 
but  very  hot.  Since  Valence  we  have  had  much  enjoy- 
ment. The  steamboat  trajet  of  six  hours  on  the  broad 
Ehone  with  its  beautiful  banks.  Avignon,  the  most 
picturesque  of  towns,  Aix  l  a  very  pretty  one,  lovely 
seen  from  the  hill  above  it  just  at  sunset,  like  the  town 
in  '  Cherry  and  Fairstar,'  bathed  in  currant-juice,  and 
now  Marseilles. 

1  En  Provence. 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  161 

Walked  yesterday  by  the  still  blue  Mediterranean, 
its  little  waves  like  crystal,  and  we  are  just  come  in 
from  boating  out  of  the  harbour — which  is  gay,  busy, 
amusing — into  the  open  sea,  where  the  view  of  the  town, 
harbour,  and  forts  is  magnificent. 

Our  hotel  is  good,  but  smells  so  like  Amsterdam 
that  we  shall  be  glad  to  drive  in  the  cool  evening  after 
dinner  back  to  Aix — onry  twenty  miles — and  to-morrow 
to  Avignon  again. 

The  engineer  in  our  Valence  steamboat  comes  from 
a  place  close  to  Castle  Howard,  and  our  host  of  the  inn 
at  Avignon,  a  poet  and  a  very  gentlemanlike  man,  gave 
me  the  enclosed  translation.  Granville  read  us  the 
original  out  loud,  which  is  beautiful,  and  Monsieur 
Pierson  has  meant  better  than  executed. 

We  are  rather  languid,  dry,  and  parched  with  the 
very  intense  heat,  but  we  take  our  time.  '  Don't 
hurry,'  as  the  link-boys  say.  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
amusement,  interest,  and  enjoyment  spread  over  our 
journey,  with  tiny  drawbacks.  The  pill  or  not  the  pill, 
that  is  the  question — carriages  shaking,  wheels  burning, 
a  slanting  bed ;  but  to-day  we  are  all  wound  up  and 
going  right — no  insects  and  little  dust. 

Castle  Howard  will  set  you  quite  up,  and  you  will 
come  to  Paris,  I  know  you  will,  most  dear  Lady 
Carlisle. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Carcassonne  :  September  9,  1834. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Since  I  wrote  last  we  have  done 
a  great  deal.  Aix  and  Avignon  again,  Nismes  and 
Montpelier,  two  beautiful  towns.  We  slept  last  night 
at  a  miserable  inn  at  Narbonne,  but  found  Mons. 
Delessert l  there,  who  sent  off  his  servants  immediately 

1  Monsieur  Gabriel  Delessert  was  successively  Prefect  of  the  Aude 
and  the  Eure-et-Loir.     From  1841  to  1848  he  was  Prefect  of  Police  at 
Paris.     He  was  esteemed  by  all  parties,  and  his  wife  universally  popular. 
VOL.  II.  M 


162     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

to  his  wife,  who  is  alone  here  with  her  two  little 
children,  to  desire  her  to  feed  and  lodge  us  tant  que 
nous  sommes.  And  here  we  are,  more  comfortable, 
more  left  to  ourselves,  more  astonished  at  large  airy 
rooms,  fauteuils,  luxuries  of  all  kinds. 

She  is  a  most  captivating  little  woman.  Her  talents 
and  charms  all,  however,  cedent  le  pas  to-day  to  her 
delicious  way  of  receiving  us,  as  if  she  put  us  into  a 
house  of  our  own,  meaning  to  call  on  us  at  dinner  time. 

We  arrived  here  at  two.  She  is  going  to  take 
Granville  and  the  boys  to  see  the  old  town — very 
curious.  Advises  me  not  to  stir — what  a  charming 
little  woman  !  And  sister,  I  have  seen  the  amphitheatre 
at  Nismes,  the  Pont  du  Gard,  the  most  beautiful  and 
finest  remains  of  antiquity,  and  what  for  climb  up  to 
old  Carcassonne,  which  I  saw  very  plainly  when  I  drove 
into  the  town.  It  is  like  Windsor  Castle  and  Alnwick, 
and  the  only  perfect  specimen  of  a  Gothic  town. 

To-morrow  we  go  to  Toulouse.  Having  enjoyed 
our  steamboating  on  the  Ehone  so  much,  we  had  meant 
to  go  from  Agen  to  Bordeaux  in  the  same  way ;  but 
Mons.  Delessert  says  the  heat  has  dried  up  the  Garonne 
so  much  that  we  must  not  attempt  it,  and  we  shall  go 
from  Toulouse  by  land. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Bordeaux :  September  13,  1834. 

I  found  a  letter  from  you  at  Carcassonne,  my  own 
dearest  sister.  It  made  me  so  very  happy.  You  seem 
and  write  in  so  much  improved  zest  and  spirits.  Only 
your  delightful  accounts  of  Castle  Howard  made  me 
pipe,  gave  me  a  mat  du  pays  to  be  there,  to  help  you 
hang  up  the  prints,  to  walk  with  you  to  the  dairy,  see 
the  setting  sun,  and  rich  tints,  and  Henderson 1  on  his 

1  The  agent. 


1834  TO  LADY   CAELISLE  163 

grey  pony,  and  a  thousand  sights  I  have  never  seen  and 
loved  as  I  have  at  Castle  Howard.  And  then  the 
thinking  you  able  to  be  more  about  and  to  enjoy  is 
such  pleasure  ! 

We  are  here  in  this  beautiful,  magnificent  town,  in 
an  hotel  that  is  as  good  as  the  Embassy  at  Paris,  every 
comfort  and  luxury  about  us. 

To-morrow  we  shall  have  an  enjoyable  day,  but 
somewhat  trying.  We  go  by  steam,  thirty  miles  to 
Medoc  at  eight  in  the  morning.  There  we  dine  with 
the  Consul's  sister,  Mrs.  Barton,  and  see  the  whole 
process  of  the  vintage.  We  set  off  Monday  morning 
for  Angouleme. 

The  road  from  Agen  here  near  a  hundred  miles, 
which  we  accomplished  in  a  broiling  day,  was  beautiful. 
The  banks  of  the  Garonne  like  those  of  the  Seine  near 
Eouen,  but  more  rich,  swarming  with  campagnes,  vine- 
yards, etc. 

The  boys  are  like  trouts,  speckled  all  over  with 
gnat  bites.  Freddy  very  much  swelled  and  worried 
by  them.  Their  enjoyment  is,  notwithstanding,  im- 
mense. 

We  have  always  air,  no  serious  heat,  good  roads, 
almost  all  the  inns  excellent  as  to  food  and  beds.  The 
country  and  towns  beautiful.  How  often  I  think  of, 
and  wish  for,  Morpeth ! 

I,  too,  have  heard  from  Lieven — a  touching,  amiable 
letter — but  the  Imperial  child  will  set  her  up.1 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Bordeaux :  September  1834. 

Your  letter,  which  I  received  yesterday,  tells  me  of 
Verity's  sudden  departure,  most  dear  sister.  I  know 
how  sorry  one  is  at  the  moment,  but  I  cannot  help 

1  Prince  Lieven  was  recalled  from  London  and  appointed  Governor  to 
the  Czarewitch. 

M  2 


164     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

thinking  that  you  will  go  on  better  than  you  expect 
without  him. 

If  you  will  but  come  to  Paris,  I  engage  to  give  you 
a  thousand  and  one  ways  of  combating  fear.  You  can 
have  no  idea  how  I  have  trained  myself  to  overcome  it, 
but  it  is  quite  impossible  to  write  satisfactorily  upon 
it.  Fear  is  such  a  coward.  Face  it,  talk  to  it,  say 
'  What  are  you  ? '  and  you  will  find  what  large,  unreal 
shapes  it  takes  and  how  they  vanish  before  energy 
and  resolution.  I  have  felt  terror.  For  example,  I 
was  twenty  thousand  times  more  afraid  of  cholera 
than  you  were,  of  tooth-drawing,  cattle,  carriages,  etc., 
of  which  I  have  constantly,  especially  lately,  entirely 
conquered  my  terror  by  strong  determination. 

You  will  say  yours  is  more  a  matter  of  health.  I 
can  only  answer  to  this  by  reminding  you  of  Chats- 
worth,  and  urging  air,  society,  interests,  amusements, 
change  of  scene  occasionally.  St.  Leonards  with  poor 
Mrs.  Lamb,  a  glaring  sun  and  a  lodging  never  seemed 
to  me  a  lark  of  the  first  magnitude — Paris,  Lady 
Carlisle,  Paris. 

I  must  not  write  on.  We  are  setting  off  to  sleep 
to-night  at  Angouleme.  Our  two  days  here  have  been 
charming.  I  am  delighted  with  the  Scott  family.  We 
passed  the  whole  of  yesterday  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Barton,  one  of  the  daughters,  at  her  campagne.  Started 
at  eight  in  the  steam-packet,  had  a  sea  breeze  on  shore, 
the  banks  beautiful,  coasted  the  fortress  of  Blaye.  We 
there  saw  the  whole  process  of  vendangerie — scenes  like 
in  a  ballet.  The  men  tread  the  grapes  to  music,  but 
what  a  nasty  process,  all  hands  and  feet !  An  excellent 
dinner.  Eoyats  out  of  the  sea,  bec-figues  as  out  of  the 
air — not  that  I  tasted  either,  but  I  looked  at  my  family 
whilst  they  did,  and  with  horror  saw  Freddy  tasting 
the  different  vintages,  '  1821,  Mr.  Leveson.'  We  were 
seven  hours  coming  back  per  steam  and  moonlight,  and  I 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  165 

did  not  think  it  too  long,  which  is  tout  dire.  We  arrived 
here  towards  one  in  the  morning.  Yesterday  we  dined 
at  Mr.  Johnston's,  another  Scott  menage,  a  mile  and  a 
half  out  of  Bordeaux.  Such  luxe,  comfort,  verandahs, 
flowers — pretty,  young  women,  nice,  old,  intelligent  men. 

Afterwards  to  the  Grand  Theatre,  beautiful  in  and 
out.  The  '  Sylphide,'  danced  by  horrors,  presented  no 
attraction,  bed  did ;  so  we  finished  our  day  at  ten  o'clock. 

Here  I  am  getting  up  at  half-past  six  with  the  feel- 
ings of  eleven,  not  sleepy  or  surprised,  and  prepared 
for  a  long  day's  journey  with  Mrs.  Trollope's  '  Belgium ' 
and  a  batch  of  late  newspapers. 

I  shall  not,  perhaps,  write  again  till  Paris,  so  do  not 
wonder  at  the  gap.  We  shall  have  long  days  and  some 
chateaux  to  see. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  22,  1834. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — We  arrived  here  the  day  before 
yesterday,  and  I  have  the  delight  of  finding  your  long 
and  most  amusing  letter  of  the  17th.  Wish  dearest 
Lord  Carlisle  joy  for  me,1  if  it  will,  keep  till  my  letter 
arrives.  I  am  always  too  late,  and  don't  remember  my 
own  till  you  or  some  kind  friend  remind  me  of  it. 

Our  journey  after  Bordeaux  was  less  interesting, 
but  cooler;  in  consequence,  not  so  fatiguing.  One 
sight — a  Gothic  castle,  built  by  Le  Beau  Comte  and  in- 
habited by  the  Dunois,  at  Chateaudun — was  almost  more 
striking  than  any. 

You  are  a  darling  old  woman,  as  Lady  Morley  says 
to  me,  as  Mme.  de  Sevigne  was  so  angry  at  Mme.  de 
La  Fayette  saying  it  to  her,  and  you  are  so  well  and  so 
sprack,  and  so  certainly  intending  to  pay  us  a  visit. 
Eeceive  Lady  Cawdor,  spend  your  fine  autumn  where 
you  are,  then  come  five  in  number — Earl,  Countess, 

1  On  his  birthday. 


166     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1834 

lord  and  two  ladies — arid  give  yourself  a  little  quiet 
dissipation  and  amusement  in  La  Belle  France. 

I  found  here  Georgy  well  and  with  a  child  who,  I 
assure  her,  is  not  the  one  I  left.  He  is  a  fine,  stout, 
fat  baby,  without  speck  or  spot,  taking  notice,  laughing, 
as  prosperous  as  it  is  possible  to  be. 

My  boys  are  going  this  evening — a  sad  loss. 

God  bless  you,  most  dearest  sis.  Granville  is  very 
well  and  so  am  I,  but  the  heat  and  long  journey  was  a 
pull,  and  we  enjoy  the  repose  and  comforts,  a  clean, 
luxurious  life,  as  if  we  were  shipwrecked  mariners. 

The  King  was  very  gay  last  night.  We  are  to  go  to 
Fontainebleau  for  three  days  the  week  after  next,  and 
the  Fullertons  are  to  be  asked,  I  believe.  It  will  be  a 
great  comfort  to  me  to  have  her  there,  and  he  likes  it, 
so  she  tries  to  be  pleased  ;  but  her  dislike  and  horror  of 
world  and  company  are  beyond  even  mine.  We  both 
equally  shrink  from  it  in  perspective,  but  I  bear  it 
better  when  plunged  than  she  does.  I  now  make  it  a 
duty  and  an  endeavour  to  court  it  more,  and  not  to 
make  a  grievance  of  what  is  necessity  and  duty  as  long 
as  I  am  here,  and  that's  why,  good-bye, '  I  fly  to  the  hill 
where  the  Berry  girls  blow.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  September  29,  1834. 

I  thought  you  and  Susy  very  ignorant,  when  I  found 
two  couriers  back  that  you  had  only  got  as  far  as  Car- 
cassonne, and  I  cannot  recover  my  surprise  at  your  not 
having  got  me  out  of  Bordeaux  yet. 

I  am  glad  to  be  come  back.  Three  weeks'  constant 
travelling  in  intense  heat  is  a  trial. 

Then  I  am  a  fool,  and  never  can  be  so  entirely  at 
ease  when  I  do  not  hear  quite  as  constantly  from  Susy. 
She  is  so  perfect  about  writing,  and  therefore  it  is  such 
certainty  of  constant  letters  when  I  am  here. 


1834 


TO   LADY   CARLISLE  167 


I  think  travelling,  but  not  in  the  dog-days,  most 
excellent,  both  for  body  and  mind.  It  does  one  good 
after,  and  has  moments  of  most  excessive  enjoyment  and 
delight  whilst. 

We  find  many  English  here.  The  Berry s  run  up 
and  down.  To-day  they  dine  here.  Tuesday  they  go 
to  Fontainebleau  till  Thursday.  We  go  from  Friday 
till  Tuesday.  We  all  think  of  nothing  but  dress,  with 
different  shades  of  interest  and  emotion,  and  different 
results  to  our  thoughts.  You  will  judge  when  I  tell 
you  that  the  Fullertons  dined  at  Bellevue  on  Saturday, 
and  Mary  received  them  in  organdi  with  long  pink 
sash,  the  ends  floating  on  the  breeze.  Do  not  tell.  It 
is  an  extraordinary  but  harmless  weakness.  She  is  in 
very  good  looks,  subdued,  very  kind,  and  often  as  you 
know  friendly  and  true,  and  has  left  off  all  her  disagree- 
able ways  and  hootings  at  me. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  30,  1834. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — We  have  shoals  of  friends  from 
all  quarters.  Lansdownes,  Mintos,  Charles  and  Lady 
Mary  Fox  arrived  yesterday.  The  boys  Lansdowne 
and  Minto  came  to  dinner  without  their  poor  tired 
unworldly  wives.  Dear  Lady  Lansdowne  has  been  here 
this  morning,  in  a  very  shabby  old  bonnet,  begging  not 
to  come  smart  to  dinner  to-day. 

The  visit  of  Miss  Berry,  which  came  betwixt,  makes 
me  say  all  my  say  over  again.  She  has  made  herself  so 
pleasant  and  popular  here  that  her  going  will  be  very 
much  felt  and  regretted.  I  never  saw  anybody  upon 
whom  success  had  so  happy  and  softening  an  effect. 
All  her  bitterness  and  snapping-up  are  gone,  and  she  is 
more  good-tempered  and  easily  pleased  at  this  moment 
than  anybody  in  Paris. 


168     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  October  4,  1834. 

Dearest  of  dear  sissees, — We  are  just  setting  out 
for  Fontainebleau,  and  being  well — Granville  and  Dody 
both  so — fine,  brisk  weather,  Mme.  Appony  to  join  us 
to-morrow,  I  look  forward  to  it  with  some  pleasure  and 
less  of  dread  than  might  be  expected. 

Berry  has  been  at  breakfast  in  the  forest  and  sailing 
on  the  pond.  We  shall  meet  those  fortunate  girls 
screaming  their  way  back,  and  Naples,  Eussia,  and 
Prussia,  who  return  to-day.  Appony  is  classed  for 
this  time  with  Spain,  England,  and  Belgium. 

LADY  GRANVILLE  AND  LADY  G.  FULLER  TON 
TO  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Fontainebleau  :  October  7,  1834. 

Dearest  sis, — I  have  enjoyed  being  here  excessively. 
Granville  uncommonly  well,  Georgy  a  little  weak  and 
tired,  but  this  enabled  her  to  rest  and  recruit.  Weather 
quite  ideal.  The  finest  summer  without  excessive  heat, 
a  beauty  of  place  beyond  description  ;  chateau  with  its 
thousand  souvenirs,  and  being  restored  in  the  best  taste 
and  magnificence,  and  the  forest  more  than  delicious. 
My  own  dearest,  I  must  fly. 

Mama's  time  is  so  filled  up  by  all  the  things  she  is 
obliged  to  do  and  to  see  here,  dear  Lady  Carlisle,  that 
I  have  undertaken  to  give  you  some  account  of  our 
proceedings.  We  arrived  on  Friday  at  five  o'clock,  sat 
down  to  a  dinner  of  a  hundred  and  four  people,  and  in 
the  evening  there  was  a  very  pretty  concert.  Cinti  sang 
divinely.  The  next  day,  after  a  breakfast  as  substan- 
tial and  long  as  a  dinner,  we  went  over  all  the  castle,  a 
fatiguing  but  very  interesting  thing  to  do.  It  is  quite 
a  course  of  French  history,  and  will  soon  be  completely 
repaired  and  restored  by  the  King,  who  is  extremely 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  169 

anxious  to  make  it  as  magnificent  as  in  former  days. 
We  then  went  to  see  a  game  at  tennis,  played  by  Barre 
and  Louis,  who  are  reckoned  the  best  players  in  Europe. 
Then  there  came  a  drive  of  several  hours  in  this  most 
beautiful  forest,  which  Mama  would  have  much  enjoyed 
had  it  not  been  for  the  way  the  omnibus-and-six  in 
which  they  drove  dashed  down  the  rocky  precipices 
which  the  forest  is  full  of.  The  Queen  is,  fortunately 
for  her,  a  bit  of  a  coward  and  said  all  she  thought.  In 
the  evening  there  was  a  spectacle,  la  suite  dun  bal 
masque,  '  Le  Philtre,'  by  Auber  and  a  pas  de  deux  in  the 
interval.  The  theatre  is  pretty,  and  all  the  women 
being  very  smart  it  made  altogether  a  beautiful  coup 
dceil. 

Yesterday  the  day  was  passed  in  a  similar  manner. 
In  the  evening  the  '  Barbiere '  and  the  '  Prova  d'una 
opera  seria,'  in  which  Lablache,  Eubini,  Tamburini, 
IvanhofF,  and  Julie  Grisi  all  appeared. 

To-day  there  is  only  a  little  promenade  sur  I'eau, 
and  to-night  a  great  ball.  The  Galerie  de  Henri  II., 
which  has  been  completely  repaired  and  repainted  by 
the  King,  is  to  be  opened  on  this  occasion,  by  way  of  a 
surprise,  which  we  all  expect.  Nothing  can  exceed  the 
civility  and  kindness  of  the  Eoyal  Family  to  everyone, 
and  more  especially  to  papa  and  mama.  The  only  de- 
ficiency is  a  want  of  comfort  and  convenience  in  the 
private  arrangements  of  the  Palace.  These  fetes  are 
said  to  be  extremely  popular  with  the  lower  orders. 

The  party  consists  of  the  Apponys,  the  Triases,  the 
Lehons,  the  Ministers  and  Marechals  with  their  wives 
and  daughters,  and  some  French  people  besides  those 
immediately  about  the  Court. 

There  is  as  little  formality  as  a  Court  can  possibly 
have.  I  have  miserably  supplied  mama's  place  in 
writing.  Ever  most  affectionately  yours, 

GEOEGIANA  FULLEETON. 


170     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  October  10,  1834. 

Dearest  sister, — I  wrote  such  a  scrap  from  Fontaine- 
bleau  that  I  must  begin  to-day  to  -be  sure  of  a  less 
shabby  letter  for  to-morrow. 

Our  last  day,  Monday,  was  the  bouquet ;  in  the 
morning  a  delicious  walk  in  the  shady  large  jardin 
Anglais — a  junket  in  the  l^tang  de  Francois  I.  in  a  very 
large  sort  of  barge  boat,  with  circular  seats  and  an 
awning,  from  which  we  saw  the  chateau  as  if  it  grew 
out  of  the  water.  We  stepped  into  a  pavilion  in  the 
middle  of  that  etang  where  the  massacre  of  St.  Bar- 
tholomew was  finally  settled,  because,  Lady  Carlisle, 
what  is  whispered  on  the  water  cannot  be  heard  on  the 
land.  I  told  the  King  this,  and  he  was  much  edified 
and  surprised — very  glad  to  hear  it,  no  ways  doubting, 
only  had  never  happened  to  hear  of  it.  I  was  obliged 
to  cry  out  for  witnesses,  Mme.  de  Montjoie,  who  had 
told  me,  etc.,  and  I  came  out  with  credit,  but  such  are 
the  dangers  of  sight-hearing. 

The  ball  was  magnificent,  and  a  banquet  after  it, 
which  lasted  till  half-past  two,  the  whole  thing  grandiose, 
magnificent  and  luxurious,  and  I  liked  it  of  all  things. 

To  come  home  is  pleasant  too  in  its  way.  Paris  is  . 
just  now  very  agreeable.  Italian  opera  three  times  a 
week,  no  dinners  or  drums  begun,  delicious  mornings 
in  this  heavenly  weather,  in  what  is  real  country,  the 
Bois  de  Boulogne.  On  Sunday  the  third  we  think  we 
shall  run  into  the  Tuileries,  to  prove  our  gratitude  by 
boring  them  to  death. 

Lady  Sydney  fait  fureur  here ;  she  is  thought 
beautiful,  extremely  agreeable  and  distinguee.  Lady 
Clanricarde  is  not  so  much  admired.  Her  nose  is  a 
little  red,  and  she  is  grand  and  dry  in  her  manner  to 
them.  The  cleverness  they  do  not  get  at,  as  none  of  it 
is  spent  in  small  talk.  She  went  yesterday  to  Valenc.ay 


1834  TO   LADY   CAELISLE  171 

with  the  Darners  and  Henry  Greville.  I  hear  the 
Seftons  are  going  there  too,  and  then  coming  for  a 
week  to  Paris. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

October  14,  1834. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — I  did  not  hear  from  you,  but 
Berry  did,  and  she  told  me  all  you  say,  so  it  was  next 
best  to  hearing.  Happy  and  proud  was  she  of  knowing 
about  Wentworth,  and  that  Lord  Carlisle  is  uncom- 
monly well.  — , 

We  are  fond  of  Berry.  Since  I  have  reflected  upon 
her  age,  which  is  not  often  present,  vu  the  gaudy 
colours,  noise  and  constant  about-ishness,  I  think  she 
deserves  much  excuse  for  what  is  disagreeable,  much 
esteem  and  approbation  for  what  is  pleasant.  Sociable 
by  habit,  exigeante  by  situation  and  intimate  by  force. 
There  is  something  goes  against  one  in  the  process,  but 
the  result  is  great  delight  when  she  obtains  what  she 
must  naturally  consider  her  due  in  society,  and  an 
enjoyment  of  it,  that  neither  the  young  nor  the  happy 
can  come  up  to.  The  three  dined  here  yesterday  with  ; 
Mr.  Aston  and  Bulwer.  It  was  very  pleasant. 

We  went  after  dinner  to  St.  Cloud,  where  we  found 
Apponys,  and  Lehons.  The  abuse  and  attempt  at 
ridicule  in  some  papers,  amongst  the  Carlists,  are  as 
weak  and  manques  as  possible. 

Fontainebleau  was  perfect  in  its  way ;  the  Queen  is 
perfect  in  every  way,  and  the  King  is  much  wiser  than 
Solomon. 

God  bless  you,  iny  own  dearest  sister.  I  could 
write  much  more,  but  I  must  to  D.,  Susy  and  Leveson. 

My  husband  has  had  a  letter  from  Lady  Clanricarde 
at  Valencay.  She  says  it  is  spacious,  comfortable  and 
like  an  English  chateau.  '  A  pair  of  neighbours,  the 
Darners,  the  Duchesse  de  Valen9ay,  with  whom  she  is 


172     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

charmed  ;  Mme.  de  Montmorency,  shy  at  first,  but  who 
begins  to  amuse  her,  likes  her  and  gives  passages  of  her 
life  ;  a  drawing-master  ;  several  persons  more  or  less 
engaged  in  Mile.  Pauline's 1  education,  and  a  black 
gentleman,  whose  occupation  she  has  not  yet  been  able 
to  define.' 

Pouring  rain — winter  begun. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  October  1834. 

Only  one  line  to-day,  my  own  dearest  sis,  to  show 
you  that  I  am  not  touchy  or  nervous,  but  only  mindful 
that  I  have  not  heard  from  you  the  two  last  couriers. 

My  time  has  been  taken  up  with  a  sort  of  influenza 
going  about  here.  Dody  has  had  it  too  ;  and  we  have 
been  keeping  our  beds  all  day,  and  meeting  at  dinner 
in  our  night-caps — pleasant,  if  it  were  not  for  the  ach- 
ing and  sneezing  and  shivering.  And  all  this  must  put 
its  best  face  on  for  Charles  Kembles,  Mary  Berry,  Mrs. 
Morier,  and  Lord  and  Lady  Holmesdale,  who  dine  here. 

The  weather  is  changing,  still  warm,  but  no  sun, 
and  occasional  rain. 

Valen^ay  lasts  till  the  25th.     Fancy  Mr.  Motteux's 
corner  of  eye  and  mouth  when  he  dined  here  on  Mon 
day — '  Any  commands  for  Valen9ay,  Lady  Granville  ? ' 
Talleyrand's  friend.     What  a  finale  for  him  ! 

Mme.  de  Flahault  returns  the  end  of  this  month. 
I  took  her  eldest  girl 2  to  the  Opera  last  week.  She  is 
grown  very  pretty — seems  extremely  spirituelle — like 
Lady  Bagot  in  face. 

1  Daughter  of  the  Duchesse  de  Dino,  married  subsequently  to  Monsieur 
Henri  de  Castellane.     She  was  said  to  have  converted  Talleyrand  on  his 
deathbed. 

2  The  present  Dowager  Lady  Lansdowne,  the  mother  of  the  Viceroy 
of  India. 


1834  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  173 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  October  27,  1834. 

You  are  a  darling  woman,  Lady  Carlisle,  but  you 
do  not  talk  enough  of  coming  to  Paris.  Miss  Berry 
cannot  tear  herself  away.  Charlotte  is  a  little  tired  of 
it  and  goes  on  the  fifth ;  but  the  girls,  driven  out  of  their 
house,  take  rooms  in  an  hotel  for  ten  days  longer. 

There  is,  as  Bob  Curzon  said  of  his  house  in  the 
country  at  Christmas,  a  great  pressure  just  now,  but  it 
works  easily,  as  they  are  people  who  know  each  other 
and  very  pleasant  ones. 

My  favourites  are  Lady  Lansdowne,  two  Foxes,  and 
Lady  Sydney;  and  then,  pretty  and  agreeable  people 
and  no  gigs  or  bores. 

Lady  Clanricarde  is  still  at  Valen9ay.  Montrond 
came  back  saying,  '  Us  s'ennuient  a  mourir  !  c'est  pour 
soutenir  la  gageure.'  H.  Greville  says  he  is  happy,  but 
can  neither  speak  nor  eat.  They  dine  at  half-past  five, 
and  the  evenings  are  rumoured  to  be  laborious,  difficiles 
a  digerer,  after  exquisite  dinners. 

Lady  C.  says  Talleyrand  is  charming.  She  drives 
with  him,  and  is  fit  to  appreciate  his  cleverness  and 
give  him  as  good  as  he  brings.  Motteux  is  reported  to 
eat  of  sixteen  entrees  every  day.  Mrs.  Darner  has  got 
some  of  her  French  flirts  there. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  October  31,  1834. 

Most  dear  sister, — Oh,  that  you  could  come  here 
and  let  me  pour  into  your  ear  all  the  knowledge  I 
have  acquired  from  Appony  and  Berry  ! 

I  am  growing  dressy,  as  Miss  Keating  would  say, 
and  am  learning  how  to  unite  smartness  and  economy. 

Yesterday  the  Mintos  went  to  England,  Lord  Lynd- 
hurst  gone  too,  and  the  Lansdownes.  He,  that  boy 


174     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

the  Marquis,  in  high  spirits,  young,  frolicsome,  full  of 
beauty,  music.  More  striking,  as  she,  most  amiable, 
enduring,  and  endeavouring,  is  not  gay,  especially 
politically.  Hush,  but  she  portends  most  dismally, 
and  she  does  her  bidding  here  with  denouement,  but 
no  pleasure.  I  am  very  fond  of  her.  Lady  Minto  and 
I  agreed  last  night  that  she  is  the  best  woman  in  the 
world.  Henry  and  Lady  Augusta  Baring  are  here.  She 
very  English  and  waxen,  and  not  half  as  much  admired 
as  Lady  Sydney  with  her  pale  face  and  large  gazelle  eyes. 
Lady  Mary  Fox  and  Charles  are  a  delicious  pair.  He 
is  in  high  spirits,  which  I  mention  as  he  was  said  to 
be  low  last  year.  Vernon  Smith l  is  agreeable. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  November  7,  1834. 

Lady  Carlisle, — My  beauties  are  all  coming  thick 
upon  me  to  dinner  and  drum.  Butera  views  with  de- 
light Madame  Fairfax — une  si  grande  sentimentalite — 
and  she  really  looked  very  handsome  in  black  velvet 
with  her  long  fair  tresses  and  large  white  teeth,  and 
fortunate  am  I  that  her  night  was  one  on  which  her 
first  cousin  Nangle  was  invited,  and  happy  they  were 
playing  together. 

Lady  C.,  there  is  no  making  a  Government.  All 
try,  nobody  can.  The  statesmen  are  so  coy. 

Lord  C.  knows  how  true  this  is,  as  I  hope  you  have 
constant  correspondence  in  that  line. 

I  will  tell  you  how  Norton 2  behaves  in  my  next. 
~  The  French  are  sorry  Blackwood 3  goes  to  the  Opera  in  a 
skull-cap. 

1  Nephew  of  Sydney  Smith.    Was  President  of  the  Board  of  Control, 
and  created  Lord  Lyveden  in  1859. 

2  Mrs.  Norton. 

3  Her  sister  Mrs.  Blackwood,  afterwards  Lady  Dufferin. 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  175 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Pari   :  November  13,  1834. 

My  dearest  sis, — I  have  only  a  moment  to  tell  you 
that  we  received  yesterday  the  account  of  poor  Lord 
Spencer's  death.  We  have,  of  course  put  off  dinners, 
soirees,  etc.,  and  I  only  feel  that  I  wish  such  a  blessing 
as  repose  could  be  obtained  without  such  melancholy 
reasons  for  it. 

The  Ministry  here  is  all  en  lair.  Every  day  brings 
new  schemes,  and  all  echouent.  The  Bassano  Govern- 
ment 1  ended  last  night  and  nobody  yet  knows  what  is  to 
come  next. 

Talleyrand  has  not  been  ill.  Shocked  at  Princesse 
Tyshiawitz's  death,  determined,  it  is  said,  not  to  return 
to  England.  Says  he  has  lived  eighty  years  and  never 
met  with  so  clever  a  blowen  as  Clanricarde.  She 
praises  him  as  in  wit  and  courtesy  bound. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  November  1834. 

I  have  time  but  for  a  line,  my  very  dearest  sister. 

How  wonderful !  how  sudden  ! 2  My  reason  and  my 
wishes  for  him  make  me  very  sorry. 

But  the  thought  of  being  in  London  in  less  than 
three  weeks,  in  Bruton  Street,  expecting  you,  rushing 
to  see  the  people  at  Mistley  ! 

Write  to  D.  for  me.  Tell  him  I  have  received  his 
letter,  that  I  shall  answer  it  by  next  post. 

I  cannot  write,  and  that  is  the  long  and  short  of  it, 
my  own  dearest,  best  loved  sister.  I  can  scarcely  think, 
so  like  a  bomb  has  this  news  come  upon  us !  and  all 

1  The  Due  de  Bassano  succeeded  Marshal  Gerard  as  President  of  the 
Council,  but  his  Ministry  only  lasted  three  days.     The  King  then  turned 
to  the  Due  de  Trevise,  who  accepted  the  office  of  President. 

2  Lord  Melbourne's  Ministry  was  dissolved  and  Sir  Robert  Peel  was 
sent  for. 


176     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

opinions  vary.  The  soundest  think  it  will  float,  others 
say  it  will  sink  before  three  months  are  past.  The 
Tories  have  been  so  evidently  courting  popularity,  and 
paving  the  way,  that  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  of 
their  leaping  rapturously  into  the  ship,  and  then  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  will  hoist  the  most  liberal  sails,  eat 
back  all  his  words,  every  possible  measure,  Church  and 
State,  do  as  he  has  done  before. 

Of  my  own  feelings  I  do  not  speak.  First  comes 
Granville.  He  likes  being  here,  so  I  wish  it ;  but  then 
comes  the  overwhelming  thought  of  you  and  Susy,  my 
Carnival  spent  between  Mistley  and  Grosvenor  Place. 

Sir  Eobert  Peel  has  desired  his  letters  to  be  kept 
here,  not  sent  after  him.  It  looks  expecting. 

You  may  imagine  our  impatience  for  further  news. 

I  hear  neither  of  the  Clanricardes  seems  pleased,  or 
Tory-fied  at  the  news.  Vane  and  Ashburnham  unhappy, 
saying  it  is  impossible  and  mad  ;  but  Granville  thinks  it 
will  stand. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  November  1834. 

My  own  dearest  sis, — I  have  but  one  moment. 
Peel  not  yet  heard  of.  Brougham  arrived  in  tearing 
spirits.  I  have  not  yet  seen  him.  He  comes  this 
evening  to  our  last  Friday.  I  have  been  so  bothered 
with  notes  and  people  that  I  have  not  one  minute. 

People  are  kinder  than  anything  ever  was.  Nobody 
can  foresee  or  conjecture  the  result. 

Granville  must  be  gratified  at  the  feeling  about  him 
here.  He  is  really  adored.  The  Court  is  most  amiable, 
and  I  love  the  Queen  dearly. 

Next  Monday  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  more  of  our 
movements,  but  I  look  upon  to-day  as  our  cloture,  and 
shall  spend  a  very  pleasant  time  in  the  very  agreeable 
society  here  and  at  the  smaller  theatres. 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  177 

If  one  could  but  burke  Brougham,  who  is  in  a  state 
I  hear  of  the  greatest  excitement,  and  will  say  and  do 
everything  he  ought  not  during  his  sejour  here. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  5,  1834. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  am  sorry  to  have  missed  writ- 
ing by  the  last  courier,  but  I  was  hurried,  and  now  I 
wiJl  be  garrulous. 

Brougham  has  caused  an  immense  sensation  here. 
He  is  in  roaring  spirits,  not  the  least  ashamed  of  his  last 
extraordinary  step,  his  law  request.1  Talking  without 
ceasing,  gold,  copper,  but  as  all  is  stamped  the  same 
people  allow  for  the  nature  of  the  coin  and  fix  its  price, 
which  prevents  it  either  doing  the  good  or  harm  that 
might  be  expected.  He  goes  to  the  Chambers,  and  to 
all  the  institutions,  to  all  the  theatres,  to  all  the  din- 
ners, to  all  the  soirees.  He  sits  with  Lady  Clanricarde, 
the  Princesse  de  Belgiojoso,  Mrs.  Norton,  two  hours  at  a 
time  in  the  morning,  and  I  am  told  has,  since  his  arrival, 
written  as  much  as  he  has  talked.  He  is  a  sublime 
quack,  Lady  C. 

Mr.  Hudson 2  passed  the  day  before  yesterday,  and 
Sir  E.  Peel  will  probably,  he  says,  be  in  London  on  the 
tenth,  next  Wednesday. 

English  people  are  hastening  home,  members  to  look 
about  them.  We  have  ended  all  our  givings  here,  and 
go  to  little  farewell  dinners  every  day.  You  have  no  idea 
how  pleasant  society  here  is  now — next,  really,  to  having 
none.  Oh,  what  a  shame  ! 

Brougham,  Sir  F.  Lamb,  Mme.  de  Flahault  are  all 

1  To  be  made  Chief  Baron. 

2  Secretary  to  Queen   Adelaide.     He  was  sent  to  fetch  Sir  Eobert 
from  Rome  and  made  the  journey  so  rapidly  that  he  got  the  name  of 
hurried  Hudson.     He  became  Sir  James  Hudson  and  Minister  at  Turin, 
where  he  was  instrumental  in  promoting  Count  Cavour's  policy. 

VOL,    II.  N 


178     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

good-humoured  and  gay,  and  liking  to  be  all  in  a  fury 
together. 

What  busy  and  exciting  scenes  we  are  returning  to, 
most  dear  sister !  Lord  Melbourne  has  raised  himself  in 
all  opinions,  and  stands  higher  than  he  ever  has  done, 
methinks.  Bulwer's  letter,  some  of  it  bad  taste,  but 
very  clever.  God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  December  1834. 

No  appointments  yet  made,  so  Granville  has  received 
no  answer. 

I  am  rejoiced  at  Lord  Stanley's  refusal.  I  prefer 
their  going  the  whole  game  themselves,  and  think  it 
such  an  object  to  have  a  strong  party  of  Whigs  of 
different  shades,  that,  in  case  of  the  Tories  breaking  up, 
there  may  be  much  to  look  to  besides  the  Eadicals. 

I  am  glad  dear  Jack's  l  bullock  has  won  the  great 
prize.  I  hear  it  puts  him  in  ecstasies. 

I  am  afraid  it  must  now  be  quite  the  end  of  the 
month,  or  the  beginning  of  the  next,  before  we  arrive. 
If  we  have  our  letter  on  Thursday,  we  shall  have  got  to 
the  18th,  and  packing  and  travelling  will  take  us  a 
fortnight. 

Brougham  is  still  here.  The  letter  in  the  '  Courier  ' 
must  have  stuck  into  him.  I  saw  him  at  dinner  at 
Mme.  Eumford's  that  day.  He  was  half-way  through 
the  repast  grave,  perfectly  silent,  but  then  the  victuals 
and  drink !  Somebody  mentioning  the  press,  and  Mons. 
Arago  with  a  new  plaything,  put  him  in  high  spirits 
again,  and  he  talked  and  laughed  and  was  charming. 

Lady  Clanricarde  is  quite  a  little  puissance  here,  and 
much  admired  and  sought  after.  We  dine  at  Talley- 
rand's to-morrow.  I  have  not  yet  seen  them. 

1  Her  cousin,  Lord  Althorp. 


1834  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  179 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  12,  1834. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  can  only  write  t  How  are  ye  ?  ' 
as  Brougham  says. 

I  know  not  yet  our  date.  On  Monday  I  expect  to 
be  able  to  tell  you,  but  you  see  we  are  at  the  twelfth, 
so  to  arrive  in  London  before  a  fortnight  is  scarcely 
possible. 

As  to  politics.  This  is  what  I  see  with  my  little 
eye.  This  Government  will  do  very  well.  The  Dow- 
ager Countess's  nimbleness  in  ratting  will  be  imitated 
by  many  mice.  Then  I  think  the  Stanleyites  will  not 
come  in,  but  hold  by.  Then  I  think  the  Greyites  have 
all  been  lukewarm  since  he  left  the  Ministry,  and  all 
this  will  boil  in  the  great  mess  of  fear  of  the  Eadicals, 
and  that's  the  way  the  Duke  will  '  get  over  the  stile 
to-night.' 

Enter  into  argument  in  return,  Lady  Carlisle,  or 
wink  and  nod. 

The  Fullertons  are  going  to  spend  the  winter  at 
Nice.  They  dreaded  the  cold  of  Southampton  and 
London  in  the  winter,  and  finding  the  new  plan  both 
very  delightful  and  economical,  they  consulted  Verity. 
You  may  imagine  his  answer,  and  he  has  monte  their 
imaginations,  and  they  think  they  are  going  to  sit  fan- 
ning themselves  on  the  top  of  an  orange- tree. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  1834. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  long  for  your  next  letters.  We 
expect  Aston l  to-day,  so  I  hope  in  a  day  or  two  to  fix 
our  plans.  He  will  tell  us  who  is  to  come  here.  Lord 
Cowley  seems  to  be  thought  the  most  likely. 

I   liked  Peel's  talk.     I  always  do,  but  I  think  he 

1  Appointed  Charge  d' Affaires  at  Paris. 

K   2 


180     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1834 

has  no  idea  himself  how  hard  the  task  will  be.  All  are 
astonished  at  the  new  appointments,  and  look  upon  his 
Government  as  more  perilled  by  the  names  of  Eoden, 
Perceval,  etc.,  than  all  the  rest. 

I  think  these  will  not  stand,  nor  would  Lord  Mel- 
bourne again  just  now,  only  something  new.  Lord 
Grey  or  Spencer,  and,  I  suppose,  neither  will — Stanley 
cannot — Durham  must  not.  It's  a  pickle,  Lady  C. 

Talleyrand  is  very  ill,  irritable  and  desponding. 
He  insists  upon  going  to  Eochecotte  immediately,  much 
to  Mme.  de  Dino's  annoyance. 

D.  has  written  to  me  a  delicious  letter.  He  seems 
and  says  he  is  very  sorry. 

Lady  Clariricarde  I  think  much  improved  in  politics. 
An  education  carried  on  by  Mme.  de  Flahault,  Talley- 
rand, Brougham,  and  the  Due  de  Laval  is  sure  to  come 
out  a  fair  specimen  of  impartiality  and  reason.  I 
think  at  present  she  likes  Whigs  better  than  Tories, 
though  there  could  be  Tories  she  would  like  better 
than  Whigs.  We  all  agree  that  she  is,  unlike  the  general 
herd,  a  Whig  when  she  talks  to  a  Tory,  a  T.  when  to  a  W. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  December  29,  1834. 

Aston  arrived  and  brought  no  message  to  Granville, 
but  I  conclude  we  shall  hear  from  the  appointed  to-mor- 
row. I  shall  let  you  know  when  we  do.  Our  Geor- 
giana l  is,  I  suppose,  the  probable  one. 

I  am  astonished  at  the  new  names.  I  had  been 
quite  mollified  and,  like  the  country,  '  as  quiet  as  a 
mouse  ; '  but  I  begin  to  think  all  that  has  passed  can  do 
nothing  but  harm. 

We  are  shorn  of  almost  all  our  English  beams,  have 
only  left  us  Lady  Clanricarde,  a  sort  of  Queen  in  the 

1  Lady  Cowley. 


1834  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  181 

Hotel  Bristol.  Lady  Sydney  her  first  lady-in-waiting, 
Laval  and  Talleyrand  her  white-  and  gold-sticks. 

Poor  Talleyrand  has  grown  very  feeble  and  they 
say  irritable,  and  has  had  very  unpleasant  attacks  these 
last  two  days.  We  had  some  people  at  dinner,  and  I 
sent  to  inquire.  Gros  Jean  returned  and  in  loud  dis- 
tinct accents,  'Le  Prince  a  transpire  jusqu'k  quatre 
heures,  la  Duchesse  a  mal  k  1'estomac.' 

Sir  Adair  l  took  leave  of  us  last  night.  He  is  black 
by  nature  and  opinion. 

Monday. — Yesterday's  courier  brought  nothing ;  but 
there  is  nothing  vexatious  in  the  delay,  it  is  probably 
occasioned  by  Lady  Cowley's  illness. 

I  dine  with  Butera  to-night,  and,  if  I  can,  sing  at 
Cannizzaro  on  Wednesday.  What  I  refuse  myself  is 
the  Duke  of  Orleans'  ball  tc-night.  Dody  goes,  and 
now's  the  time  when  it  is  better  to  wear  a  necklace 
than  have  a  chariot  or  a  trunk. 

1  Sir  Eobert  Adair,  the  friend  of  Fox  and  well-known  diplomatist. 
He  was  the  son  of  a  famous  surgeon,  and  when  he  was  sent  to  Vienna, 
he  was  objected  to  as  not  being  of  a  sufficiently  good  family.  The  answer 
was,  '  Mais  c'est  le  fils  du  plus  grand  saigneur  de  1'Europe.' 


182     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1835 


1835 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  1835. 

Most  dear  sister, — We  think  of  setting  out  the  end 
of  next  week,  to  be  in  London  about  the  15th. 

You  may  guess  how  much  of  little  business  I  have 
to  do — visits,  appointments,  notes,  bills. 

We  are  all  very  well,  and  very  eager.  Upon 
arriving  I  shall  go  to  Mistley. 

Dearest  sis,  I  delight  in  the  thoughts  of  London. 
It  will  be  to  me  a  pleasant  city.  No  assemblies,  balls,  or 
operas,  but  dinners  and  reunions  at  my  friends.  Those 
who  receive  early,  not  smart — admit  of  cross-stitch  and 
sketching  lists  of  elections.  Walks,  drives  with  Lady 
C.  of  a  morning,  foldtrer  round  the  squares,  drive  as  far 
as  the  Colvilles.  Dissipation  is  the  sting  of  life,  and  for 
the  first  time  it  will  be  no  duty  for  me. 

Once  I  shall  go  with  you  to  Berry,  and  that's  all. 

Granville  says  Mr.  Lascelles  has  no  chance.  I 
grieve  at  the  trouble — more  if  there  is  expense — but  I 
feel  sanguine  as  to  the  success  of  all  good  men  and 
true. 

Lady  Haddington x  will  have  full  scope  and  verge 
for  her  passion  for  dress,  and  I  see  her,  like  a  fairy  in  a 
play,  one  entire  spangle. 

I  wonder  how  the  De  Greys  2  will  like  their  ship.  I 
think  she  is  the  woman  for  the  jolly  tars,  if  that  is 

1  Lord  Haddington  was  appointed  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland. 

2  He  was  appointed  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty. 


1835  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  183 

requisite,  and  that  he  is  just  in  his  element,  and  will  be 
so  wise  about  the  mechanical  part  and  the  rigging  of 
the  concern.  I  hope  the  First  Lord  has  really  to  do 
with  all  the  practical  part  for  his  sake. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Devonshire  House  :  February  6,  1835. 

It  is  a  great  comfort  to  us  to  know  that  you  are  not 
in  a  hurry  to  get  rid  of  us,  but  Mr.  Orchard  and  Kul- 
bach  are  one  present  and  the  other  expected,  and  if 
you  do  not  find  me  here,  you  will  on  the  sunny  side  of 
Berkeley  Square. 

Lord  Mulgrave  has  been  with  me  an  hour,  and 
interested  and  amused  me.  He  is,  I  see,  sanguine  as  to 
politics  in  general.  I  fear  nobody  is  as  to  the  Speaker- 
ship.  He  says  on  that  question  they  are  men  conscious 
of  a  disadvantage,  fighting  with  courage  an  inevitable 
battle.  Burdett  will  vote  for  Sutton 1  and  Ferguson,  my 
cousin  of  Eaith,  because  he  is  related  to  Mrs.  P.2  as 
was.  This,  however,  does  not  discourage  the  party. 
They  expect  the  Stanleys  to  be  decidedly  with  them, 
and  are  in  good  heart. 

Chatsworth  news  is  delicious.  If  Mrs.  Arkwright  for- 
gives me,  if  Abercromby  has  a  decent  show  of  hands,  if 
Brougham  is  well  managed  and  pacified — great  A,  little 
A,  and  bouncing  B — I  shall  be  a  contented  woman. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  February  12,  1835. 

I  have  been  constantly  with  G.,  who  is  now  deci- 
dedly better. 

Mrs.  Arkwright  is  the  best  and  kindest  of  women. 
I  am  so  glad  she  is  coming.  We  shall  not  meet  often  in 

1  The  Liberals  started  Abercromby  against  Manners  Sutton. 

2  Mr.    Manners   Sutton  married   a   Mrs.   Power,   a   sister  of  Lady 
Blessington. 


184     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1835 

the  world,  where  I  foresee  she  will  be  always  galivant- 
ing  with  Lady  Wharncliffe  and  Punch,  but  she  will 
like  to  take  a  walk,  look  into  the  shop-windows,  and 
every  now  and  then  to  a  sight. 

Bets  were  rather  improved  in  Abercromby's  favour, 
but  I  do  not,  nor  do  any  but  the  over-sanguine,  expect 
him  to  succeed.  It  seems  to  me  that  people  are  getting 
much  more  violent,  and  I  am  again  afraid  of  Radical 
force  being  too  much  brought  into  play.  Lord  Mel- 
bourne is  not  going  to  Goodwood,  as  he  intended.  Mr. 
Warburton  makes  a  leg  to  Brougham.  It  will  be 
anxious,  exciting,  but  I  feel  sure  that  nothing  immediate 
will  take  place  against  the  present  Government.  When 
the  King  read  the  paragraph  about  his  spouse,1  he  was 

heard  to  mutter  '  d d  stuff.'  Nobody  seems  to 

believe  it. 

Lady  de  Grey  and  Berry  sit  at  home  every  evening. 
Pozzo  is  arrived,  very  low,  and  cannot  conceal  his  juste 
courroux ;  for,  do  you  know,  Nicholas  sent  here  to  find 
out  if  the  enclosed  despatch,  which  was  the  appoint- 
ment, was  approved  of,  desiring  it  might  be  sent  on  to 
Pozzo  if  it  was.  Then  no  Madame  Graham,  and  the  fog 
and  the  cards  to  be  returned,  and  visits  paid  before  the 
lapse  of  four  days.  You  will  not  wonder  that  in  his 
confidential  moments  he  neither  minces  nor  measures 
in  his  talk. 

Leveson  is  at  Oxford,  had  been  to  Middleton,  found 
Silence  sick,  sanguine,  her  politics  all  heaped  on  one 
intense  delight,  joy  at  the  grand  conception  of  Addy's 
situation.  I  daresay  she  sees  herself  governess  to  the 
future. 

Lord  Clanricarde  has  been  scandalising  the  world  at 
Paris  by  riding  a  race  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  in  a 
yellow  and  white  striped  jacket,  and  cap  to  match. 

1  There  were  rumours  of  a  future  heir. 


1835  TO   THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  185 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  April  12,  1835. 

One  line  out  of  breath,  most  dear  D.1 

I  hear  Johnny  is  likely  to  be  Foreign  Affairs.  Unless 
something  unforeseen  and  imperious  occurs,  I  suppose 
Gilleret  will  be  the  man,  so  universal  and  flattering  an 
opinion  is  there  of  his  fitness.  I  shall  be  very  sorry 
for  Lord  Palmerston.  He  must  have  something,  and 
what  will  he  accept  ? 

Now,  my  dearest  brother,  look  at  this  picture  and 
on  that.  On  one  hand,  you  and  Paxton,  sitting  under 
a  red  rhododendron  at  Chatsworth,  under  the  shade 
of  palms  and  pines  in  your  magnificent  conservatory, 
with  Arkwright  and  Harrowby  in  the  evening,  but  no 
thought  of  your  country's  weal  and  woe. 

Now,  walking  up  and  down  a  terrace  in  the  Phoenix 
Park,  arm  in  arm  with  Morpeth,  your  secretary,  saving 
that  hapless  country,  adored  and  worshipped. 

Think  of  the  gratification  to  them,  of  the  power  to 
you  of  doing  good.  Damp  but  glorious. 

I  hear  they  want  you  to  go  to  Ireland.  I  cannot, 
intimate  as  I  am  with  your  intelligence,  guess  what  you 
are  thinking  at  this  moment. 

Che  sara  sara,  for  all  of  us. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  April  13,  1835. 

I  have  had  two  great  pleasures  this  morning,  a 
beautiful  nosegay  and  Mrs.  Arkwright  for  an  hour. 
She  was  quite  delightful,  and  so  I  saw  she  thought  me. 
I  give  you  my  word  of  honour,  I  do  not  think  I  spoke 
twenty  words  the  whole  time  she  was  here.  I  listened 
intensely  and  was  well  repaid,  for  I  do  not  think  I  ever 

1  Sir  Eobert  resigned  on  April  8.    Lord  Melbourne  was  commissioned 
to  form  a  Government. 


186     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1835 

heard  her  so  agreeeble.  She  told  me  many  droll  things. 
Among  others  of  a  poor  tenant  who  wrote  to  petition 
Mr.  Arkwright  for  something,  and  began,  '  May  it  please 
your  opulence.'  We  think  it  would  be  amusing  to 
docket  one's  friends  and  call  each  of  them  your  some- 
thing. 

Johnny  was  to  come  from  Woburn  this  morning  to 
Lord  Melbourne.  Of  course  you  know  that  Lord 
Melbourne  is  to  declare  himself  Premier  in  the  House 
to-day.  I  hear  Lord  Grey  has  been  as  kind  and  cordial 
as  possible,  giving  sanction  and  promising  support, 
advice. 

Mr.  Sneyd  is  busy  organising  Conservative  measures 
in  Staffordshire.  The  Tories  can  never  say  a  word 
more  against  political  meetings,  societies,  etc. 

Miss  Berry  has  been  agreeable,  but  I  had  the  satis- 
faction of  telling  her  that  she  was  not  a  Whig  at  heart 
and  that  I  always  saw  the  Tory  foot. 

Lord  Palmerston.  He  talked  most  openly,  told  me 
there  was  a  report  that  Johnny  was  to  be  at  the  Foreign 
Office.  He  looked  much  emu  when  he  said  it  and 
added,  '  this  I  cannot  believe.'  Then  he  muttered,  '  I 
suppose  I  shall  be  shortly  there  myself,'  and  then  loud, 
4  in  which  case  I  hope  you  will  instantly  prepare  and 
pack  up  for  Paris.' 

Lady  Lilford,  looking  lovely. 

Horace  Pitt :  '  Well,  all  up  with  us,  I  suppose.  No 
more  chance  for  the  Tories.  Any  chance  of  Paris — I 
shall  come.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  April  15,  1835. 

I  know  of  nothing  new  to-day,  but  am  told  every- 
thing is  going  on  well.  Foreign  Office  still  doubtful. 
Brougham  came  to  Grosvenor  Place  last  night,  very 
amiable,  but  I  thought  very  low.  It  is  a  moment  that 


1835  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  187 

makes  it  distressing  for  the  curious  and  concerned  to 
hear  only  of  holidays. 

Morpeth  went  yesterday  to  Eoehampton  to  Lady 
Dover,  the  Hollands  to  Holland  House.  Lord  Carlisle 
(private)  is  not  upon  rose  leaves,  at  least  they  are 
amazingly  doubled.  It  frets  him  to  see  in  the  '  Globe ' 
and  to  hear  everywhere  of  speculations  and  plans  about 
Morpeth,  and  not  to  have  received  one  word  of  commu- 
nication either  in  the  way  of  suggestion  or  consul- 
tation. 

To-morrow  we  go,  and  all  those  I  know  are  going 
also.  Morpeth  joins  us  at  Mistley  on  Saturday. 

I  am  now  going  to  Mrs.  Arkwright  to  hear  her  sing. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  April  16,  1835. 

Lord  Mulgrave  came  last  night  to  Grosvenor  Place. 
We  are  not  yet  got  to  appointments.  Billy  is  still  cor- 
responding and  conversing.  I  suppose  something  more 
will  be  known  to-night.  My  own  private  think  is  that 
he  will  execute  another  voluntary.  '  Well,  my  Lord, 
good  morning.  I  find  with  all  our  endeavours  we  are 
come  to  no  arrangement' — and  then  he  will  throw 
himself  on  his  late  advisers. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  May  29,  1835. 

One  line,  my  most  dear  sister,  to  tell  you  that  we 
arrived  after  a  most  prosperous  journey  at  four  to-day.1 

I  found  my  little  grandson  quite  well. 

We  have  had  the  attaches  to  dinner.  Poor  Henry 
Greville  straining  every  nerve  to  be  useful ;  laborious 
and  plodding,  and  making  himself  extremely  agreeable 
during  our  repast. 

It  looks  so  like  what  always  was;  visits  have  begun, 

1  Lord  Granville  returned  to  Paris  at  the  end  of  April. 


188     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1835 

and  in  the  course  of  five  hours  one  invitation  to  a  ball 
and  another  to  a  dinner.  Leveson  will  enjoy  the  hop, 
and  I  shall  like  the  dinner  at  Butera's  better  than  usual 
because  he  has  asked  my  friends  and  no  formal  com- 
pany. 

Madame  de  Flahault  is  very  agissante.  Mortal  strife 
between  her  and  Madame  de  Delmar.  Tell  D.  that 
Madame  Ferrari,1  Madame  Vallambrosa,  Caraman's 
sister,  and  Mme.  Meyendorf  are  going  to  London  im- 
mediately. I  believe  he  knows  them  all.  God  bless  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  June  1,  1835. 

Paris  is  awfully  hot  and  gay.  We  dined  at  Butera's 
yesterday.  Lady  Stanhope  is  here,  but  sick  and  flus- 
tered because  there  is  no  governess  to  govern  Lady 
Wilhelmina  and  no  duenna  to  guard  Miss  Gardner  and 
Harbord. 

To-night  I  go  to  the  Tuileries.  On  Friday  dine  at 
the  Broglie's  to  meet  Talleyrand  and  Madame  de  Dino. 

1  Better  known  as  the  Duchesse  de  Galliera.  She  was  the  daughter 
of  Count  Brignole,  a  Genoese  who  represented  Sardinia  for  some  years 
in  Paris.  She  was  the  last  of  her  name  and  a  first  cousin  to  the  late  Lord 
Granville's  first  wife.  She  was  clever  and  original,  fond  of  the  society 
of  politicians  and  literary  people,  and  received  at  the  Hotel  Monaco  the 
elite  of  French  Society.  Both  she  and  her  husband  had  enormous 
fortunes,  his  much  increased  by  railway  enterprises.  Their  only  son  is 
inclined  to  communistic  ideas,  and  would  only  accept  a  small  portion  of 
the  wealth  of  his  parents.  His  father  gave  800,OOOZ.  towards  the 
enlargement  of  the  harbour  of  Genoa.  When  someone  shorfly  before 
his  death  complimented  him  on  his  generosity,  he  said  :  '  Vous  voyez,  si 
je  pouvais  emporter  cet  argent  dans  1'autre  monde,  certainement  je  ne  le 
donnerais  pas ;  mais  comme  cela  ne  se  peut  pas,  et  que  Philippe  1  n'en  veut 
pas,  je  n'ai  rien  d'autre  a  faire.'  His  wife  conjointly  with  her  son  gave 
to  the  town  of  Genoa  their  palace  and  one  of  the  finest  private  collections 
of  pictures  in  Italy.  She  built  and  endowed  two  hospitals  in  the  environs 
of  Paris  and  another  one  near  Genoa.  She  gave  in  her  lifetime  an 
estate  in  Italy  to  a  member  of  the  Orleans  family,  she  left  her  hotel  at 
Paris  to  the  Austrian  Government  for  an  Embassy,  and  a  large  legacy  to 
the  Empress  Frederick,  for  whom  she  entertained  great  admiration. 
'  His  only  child. 


1835  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  189 

Whenever  anybody  who  hates  me  dines  anywhere,  I  am 
always  fetched  for  them,  poor  souls.  The  evenings  I 
decline,  as  in  London.  I  do  not  see  in  these  summer 
days  why  I  should  not.  • 

I  am  going  to  write  to  Aix  for  your  rooms. 

Henry  Greville  is  making  himself  most  popular, 
with  me  at  least,  and  nothing  can  be  more  amiable  and 
efficient.  I  hear  he  does  all  the  work  possible.  If  he 
could  but  become  a  Whig  and  hold  his  tongue,  he 
would  be  a  model. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  4,  1835. 

My  most  dear  sister, — Your  two  delightful  long 
letters  fully  repaid  me  for  the  disappointment  of  the 
first  courier  without  one.  How  well  I  understand  all 
you  tell  me  on  various  subjects,  and  all  you  tell  me  of 
you  and  yours  is  so  interesting.  The  Fifteenth  takes 
away  my  breath,  but  I  wish  I  was  as  sure  of  everybody 
and  everything  as  I  am  of  Morpeth  1  doing  whatever  he 
does  well.  As  to  enjoyment,  that  is  another  question. 
He  will  find  compensation  in  usefulness  and  success,  and 
he  will  like  his  pretty  house  and  garden,  as  I  do  mine. 

Granville  is  gone  a  round  of  Ministerial  visits.  \ 
Leveson  is  gone  to  dine  at  the  Cafe  de  Paris  and  a 
minor  theatre  with  Lady  Stanhope,  and  I  am  with  the 
window  open,  the  orange  flower  smelling  too  strong, 
the  nightingales  singing  too  loud,  and  this  in  the  middle 
of  a  city  is  very  delicious.  There  is  a  beautiful  passage 
in  Mrs.  Norton's  book  about  that,  the  gifts  so  impar- 
tially granted  to  all  and  what  ought  to  be  our  gratitude. 
How  excellent,  how  beautiful  I  think  some  of  her  writing ; 
but  somehow  or  other  she  does  not  fit  into  her  own 
frame,  she  is  not  in  keeping  with  her  own  opinions  and 
feelings,  and  it  is  impossible  to  bind  her  up  with  her 
own  stories. 

1  He  had  become  Irish  Secretary. 


190     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1835 

Paris  is  full  and  gay.  I  am  at  this  moment  re- 
morseful at  not  stepping  up  the  Elysian  Fields  to 
Meg.  We  dine  at  Court,  full  dress,  on  Saturday.  I 
went  the  other  evening  and  was  most  graciously  re- 
ceived, though  Dino  sat  to  see  us  with  her  gaslight- 
eyes,  but  we  all  did  as  if  she  was  not  there. 

The  Duke  of  Orleans  has  been  to  see  me  and  was 
very  amiable.  He  is  grown  very  handsome. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  11,  1835. 

It  was  Lady  Wharncliffe  who  wrote  to  me  of  the 
harmony  in  Yorkshire.  Lady  Jersey  saj^s  we  shall 
never  do  any  good  whilst  we  are  so  sentimental  on 
the  hustings,  which  makes  me  laugh  heartily.  The 
public,  she  says,  don't  understand  such  refinements, 
and  I  believe  she  is  right. 

Dearest  sister,  how  interesting  politics  have  become  ! 
How  Morpeth  puts  energy  into  our  feelings  !  I  am 
extremely  sanguine,  and  so  is  Miss  Fitzgerald,  about 
the  good  that  is  going  to  be  done  in  Ireland..  I  feel  so 
proud  of  and  confident  in  him,  that  he  will  be  ballast 
to  that  light,  squally  vessel  Lord.  Mulgrave.  I  am 
glad,  however,  to  hear  that  Lord  M.  is  so  popular,  and 
that  she  is  very  much  liked. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  1835. 

Most  dear  sis, — We  have  ordered  a  room  to  be  got 
ready  for  Charles.1  It  will  be  a  great  pleasure  to  have 
one  of  yours  and  Leveson  is  charmed. 

I  have  had  a  long  visit  from  Lord  Fitzwilliam,  who 
is  in  high  glee  and  good-humour,  but  he  won't  dine. 

1  A  son  of  Lady  Carlisle.  He  was  private  secretary  to  Lord  Melbourne 
and  for  many  years  member  for  Cumberland.  He  was  the  father  of  the 
present  Lord  Carlisle. 


1835  TO  THE  DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  191 

He  is  intent  upon  museums  and  proces,  Pere  la  Chaise, 
and  the  partition  of  land,  but  he  thinks  he  will  come 
and  dance  this  evening.  Luckily,  it  is  almost  a  cold 
day,  so  that  we  shall  not  expire. 

I  am  distressed  at  your  asking  me  to  be  political, 
as  I  really  don't  know  how.  I  know  nothing  of  French 
politics.  Madame  de  Montjoye  hopes  and  trusts  no 
mischief  will  happen  in  Spain,  and  says  they  are  all 
going  on  admirably  here.  De  Broglie  is  in  high  spirits 
and  doats  upon  Granville. 

God  bless  you,  our  dearest  sis. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  June  17,  1835. 

I  cannot  attempt  to  repay  you  for  your  letters.  I 
cannot  fill,  like  you  do,  whole  pages  of  everything  most 
interesting.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  perish  like  the  frog 
in  the  fable,  but  I  shall  write  constantly  scraps  of  grati- 
tude, and  whatever  I  see,  hear,  or  do.  What  is  to 
become  of  me  when  you  leave  off  writing  ?  which  you 
will  do  some  day — nobody  knows  why — all  at  once, 
a  propos  de  bottes.  This  is  written  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Viddy.1  What  will  she  say  of  George  ?  I  long  to  hear 
how  she  takes  it.2  I  think  it  a  very  nice,  fitting  union. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  poor  Mr.  Brummel.  There 
never  was  such  an  act  of  charity.  I  am  in  good  heart 
about  the  subscription. 

Tell  my  dearest,  darling  Lady  Carlisle  that  I  have 
no  time  to  write  to  her  to-day.  Lord  Fitzwilliam  has 
been  a  great  love.  He  chews  the  cud  of  conversation ; 
takes  no  notice  at  the  time,  but  two  days  after :  '  You 
said  so  and  so,'  not,  as  one  expects,  to  confute,  but 
merely  to  state  it  over  again  as  digested  and  approved. 

1  Mrs.  Cavendish. 

2  Her  son  George's  engagement  to  Lady  Louisa  Lascelles. 


192     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1835 

It  is,  at  the  moment,  discouraging,  like  Miss  Fanny,1 
when  the  audience  would  not  applaud  till  the  end. 

To-day  Broglie,  Guizot,  the  St.  Aulaires,  Freville, 
Madame  de  Praslin  2  without  her  husband,  Monsieur 
Decazes  without  his  wife,  Caramans,  Henry  Greville, 
Aston,  and  William  Ponsonby  dine  here.  Caradoc  and 
Howden  drink  tea  with  us ;  and  I  have  asked  that  poor 
lemon,  that  old  rag,  that  most  faded  and  death-like 
bride,  Bragration,  to  join  the  domestic  circle.  She  sent 
me  a  message  that  she  dreaded  the  numbers  and  heat 
of  Friday.  Mrs.  Lambton  drops  in  whenever  she  likes — 
pretty,  gay,  natural,  sociable,  brusque,  most  attractive 
little  woman. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  June  20,  1835. 

Lord  Fitzwilliam,  tell  G.,  and  five  offspring  came. 
He  will  not  dine,  but  could  not  resist  dancing.  Nice, 
unaffected  girls — dear  people.  Meg  took  them  under 
her  especial  care,  hurried  them  off  to  a  couch  in  the 
ball-room,  got  partners  for  the  girls,  offered  her  own 
two  pretty  little  things  up  to  the  boys.  But  the 
youngest,  Wentworth,  preferred  sitting  all  night  in 
the  drawing-room,  studying  the  comic  annual,  and, 
that  done,  beginning  '  Belford  Eegis.'  Meg  pinioned 
the  Earl  down  by  her  side.  I  felt  relieved  of  any 
anxiety  about  the  race. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  29,  1835. 

We  think  the  majority3  admirable,  and  what  repose 
to  Morpeth  to  have  done  with  it !  Tell  that  adorable 

1  Kemble. 

2  This  was  the  Madame  de  Praslin  who  was  murdered  by  her  husband 
in  1847. 

3  There  was  a  majority  of  thirty -seven  in  favour  of  the  Government 
Bill  respecting  the  Irish  Church. 


1835  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  193 

man  that  I  love  him  and  care  about  Irish  politics 
because  of  him,  and  wish  him  in  the  midst  of  trees  and 
flowers  in  his  beautiful  park.  But  I  have  done  being 
able  to  read  the  debates,  vu  that  I  cannot  understand 
so  practical  and  calculating  a  question.  Granville  tells 
me  that  Sheil  made  a  very  good  speech. 

When  will  Parliament  be  over  and  you  free  to  roam  ? 
I  resign  myself  to  staying  in  this  large  cool  house  during 
this  assommant  weather,  but  I  do  hope  that  in  about  a 
fortnight  we  shall  go  and  wash  in  the  deep  blue  sea. 

How  much  I  could  wish  you  could  know  how 
nervous  I  and  everybody  feel  sometimes,  and  about 
nothing  at  all,  or  rather  everything.  There  is  but  one 
real  calmant,  and  that  it  is  difficult  to  cling  to  in  this 
perturbed  world.  The  great  difficulty  is  to  rely  wholly, 
to  cast  ourselves.  We  will  be  planning,  hoping,  and 
fearing.  The  truth  is  told  us  in  the  Bible.  '  In  return- 
ing ye  shall  be  saved  and  rest ;  in  quietness  and  in  con- 
fidence shall  be  your  strength :  and  ye  would  not.' 

Mrs.  Fry  says :  '  Think  not  to  do  anything  or  be 
anything,  but  throw  yourself  helpless  into  the  arms  of 
redeeming  mercy.  If  we  did  this  in  temptation,  in 
pain,  in  terror,  we  should  have  rest.'  Mrs.  Fry  also 
says  :  '  We  consume  our  lives  with  anxiety  and  waste 
our  days  in  care,  our  hearts  are  continually  departing 
from  the  Lord.  Then  comes  what  must  come.  Instead 
of  calm  in  the  midst  of  danger  and  confidence  in  the 
midst  of  uncertainty  and  holy  composure  amid  sur- 
rounding or  impending  ills,  there  comes  anxiety  in 
the  midst  of  blessings,  fearfulness  and  carefulness  dry 
up  every  source  of  pleasure  and  wither  every  fresh  bud 
of  joy.' 


VOL.    II. 


194     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1835 
To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  July  29,  1835. 

Yesterday  was  a  horrible  day.  In  the  morning  an 
attempt  to  assassinate  the  King,  his  sons  and  whole 
entourage.  De  Broglie  had  a  button  and  his  nceud  de 
cravate  shot  off,  Flahault  his  horse's  ear.  The  Due  de 
Trevise  killed,  and  several  other  generals,  distinguished 
officers.  Five  men  are  taken. 

In  the  evening  we  went  to  the  Tuileries.  Nothing 
ever  so  perfect  and  adorable  as  the  Queen.  The 
enthusiasm  shown  for  the  King  beyond  anything. 
There  are  crowds  at  the  Palace,  and  many  who  had 
not  been  before. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  July 31, 1835. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  have  only  a  minute  to  tell  you 
how  much  your  last  letter  delighted  me.  The  reason  I 
cannot  write  much  is  that  I  have  so  much  to  do.  My 
brother  has  written  from  Havre  that  he  is  coming 
perhaps  to-morrow,  and  about  some  business  which  has 
given  me  de  quoi  to  bustle  about. 

I  have  had  to  write  to  Meg  at  Enghien,  and  to  Lady 
Mary  Stanley  to  tell  her  to  come  to  tea  this  evening, 
having  rudely  on  account  of  my  business  shut  the  door 
in  her  face  this  morning.  Ceia  ne  lui  cassera  pas  le 
nez.1  Nothing  came  out  yesterday,  excepting  that  the 
assassin  is  not  Gerard,  but  Fieschi,  a  Corsican  from 
Bastia,  that  he  has  been  before  tried  for  robberies  and 
been  engaged  in  all  sorts  of  mischief.  He  is  of  Her- 
culean strength,  sometimes  slightly  touched  but  gene- 
rally reckless,  beyond  anything  docile  to  his  physicians. 

The  great  event  seems  to  me  the  Archbishop  having 
been  yesterday  to  the  Tuileries  for  the  first  time,  and 
having  proposed  to  perform  the  services  of  Tuesday 
and  Wednesday  at  Les  Invalides  and  Notre-Dame. 

1  She  had  a  very  small  nose. 


1835  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  195 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  August  1,  1835. 

What  you  feel  for  the  family  is  generally  felt  here. 
Nobody  dares  show  or  express  anything  but  horror  and 
awe.  The  impression  does  not  fade,  and  at  Paris  this 
is  wonderful.  We  feel  more  tied  here.  The  Court 
remains,  Mme.  de  Broglie  gives  up  her  Swiss  journey, 
the  Deputies  are  all  back  again. 

Nothing  will  make  the  man  confess.  Decazes  and 
others  told  me  last  night  they  go  to  him,  try  every 
mode  of  getting  at  something.  He  says  he  repents, 
that  he  was  fanatise  par  les  journaux.  '  J'ai  fait  cela 
comme  un  enfant  qui  fait  sauter  un  petard.'  He  has 
once  said  that  he  will  tell  everything  half  an  hour 
before  his  execution.  He  was  a  soldier  under  Murat  ; 
it  is  an  eagle,  not  a  fleur  de  Us,  that  is  tattooed  on  his 
breast.  Crowds  flock  to  the  Tuileries.  I  begin  to 
think  it  may  have  a  good  effect. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  September  7,  1835. 

It  is  difficult  to  talk  about  politics,  and  I  don't 
wonder  that  Sir  Frederick  Lamb  would  not  bleat.  The 
Bill  is  all  afloat  again.  Sir  Eobert  Peel's  speech  at 
Tam worth  is  bitter  and  wincing.  Some  write  that  Lord 
Lyndhurst  is  perfectly  ready  to  form  a  Government  and 
confident  of  success.  The  poor  Beau l  is  much  hurried, 
being  considered  to  go  along  with  favours  and  cakes 
when  a  Tory  marries.  He  was  to  breakfast  with  Lord 
Stuart  and  to  dine  with  Lord  Verulam  on  Saturday,  and 
then  has  to  see- saw  between  Peel  and  the  Ultras. 

We  sleep  at  Mantes  to-morrow,  on  Wednesday  see 
Eosny 2  and  sleep  at  Eouen. 

1  The  Duke  of  Wellington. 

2  A  fine  chateau  where  Sully  was  born,  and  which  the  Duchess  of 
Berri  had  bought. 

o  2 


196      LETTERS   OF   HA.RRIET   COUNTESS   GKANVILLE    1835 

Balzac  is  a  fat,  red  man,  whose  locks  flow.  He  sits 
in  the  pit  at  the  Opera,  looks  about  him,  and  said  Lady 
Jersey  in  a  box  aloft  was  the  vrai  type  de  V aristocratic 
Anglaise.  '  Le  Pere  Goriot '  I  have  not  read  but 
will,  and  will  ask  with  a  fan  before  my  face  if  he  is 
historical  or  fabulous,  ancient  or  modern,  and  let  you 
know. 

I  long  to  have  G.  here.  Your  details  of  them  all, 
the  way  you  tell  me  all  I  wish  to  know  and  nothing  1 
don't,  the  pound  of  flesh,  no  parler  apres  avoir  dit,  the 
best  style  of  writing  with  no  manner  of  doing  it,  makes 
your  correspondence  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  in 
the  world. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Dieppe :  September  19,  1835. 

Le  Havre  was  as  you  said.  I  delight  in  it,  worth 
fifty  Dieppes.  The  parrots  all  talking  at  once,  the  pier, 
the  scarcity  of  Bulls,  all  colours,  all  nations,  all  curi- 
osities. 

George  is  just  seized  with  lumbago,  Fullerton  very 
well.  The  baby  most  glorious  and  victorious,  for  he 
rules  them  all  with  a  rod  of  iron. 

Oh,  how  Nemours'  visit  pleases  me!  He  will  be 
so  pleased,  and  so  will  that  dear  woman  the  Queen. 
He  will  tell  of  Chatsworth,  seen  in  the  sun's  broad  rays. 

We  go  to  Paris  to-morrow.  The  Carlisles  have  not 
announced  their  day. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  September  28,  1835. 

We  arrived  here  the  day  before  yesterday.  I  have 
tried  twice  to  see  Lieven ;  have  had  a  most  melancholy 
and  affectionate  note  from  her.  She  lives  cliez  elle, 
drives  all  morning  with  a  beautiful  niece  who  lives 
with  her,  receives  from  eight  till  ten,  avide  for  news. 


1835  TO   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  197 

*  Causez '  is  her  cry,  and  she  writes  to  me,  '  distrayez 
mon  esprit ! ' 

G.  is  arrived,  better  than  I  could  have  hoped  for 
after  a  tiring  journey.  Madame  de  Lieven  is  better 
also,  and  I  shall  find  a  comfort  in  being  of  use  to  her, 
although  I  am  very  stout  about  not  letting  her  be  more 
exigeante  than  suits  me. 

There  is  going  to  be  a  most  beautiful  Mass  per- 
formed on  Friday,  all  the  French  and  Italian  singers 
are  to  sing  at  St.  Eoch.  Poor  Bellini !  I  feel  how 
much  shocked  you  are,  and  they  say  he  might  have 
been  saved. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris:  October  23,  1835. 

The  Sutherlands  are  to  land  to-day  at  Hotel  Lobau. 
Talleyrand  and  Madame  de  Dino  are  come,  and  he  is  to 
spend  every  evening  at  Madame  de  Lieven's.  The  Due 
d'Orleans  is  going  to-day  to  Algiers.  Leopold  and 
Louise  are  here,  she  dried  up  into  her  mother  in  mini- 
ature. We  and  Lord  Carlisle  dine  at  the  Tuileries 
to-morrow.  Canterbury  and  the  lovely  Purvis l  walk 
in  to-night.  If  all  the  other  Bulls  run  out,  I  shall 
bear  it. 

Now  that  your  guests  are  dispersed  and  that  you 
get  stronger  than  ever,  are  you  not  inclined  to  come  to 
Paris  ?  The  Hotel  de  Duras,  exactly  opposite,  is  one  of 
the  best  hotels  I  know — immense  airy  rooms,  entre  cour 
etjardin.  Lieven  is  looking  for  sun  and  an  easy  ascent. 
She  is  now  putting  up  with  a  high  perch  in  the  Eue 
Castiglione,  where  the  sun  never  did  and  never  can 
come.  As  Talleyrand  is  now  her  great  object,  as  she 
says,  '  Je  vais  remplacer  toutes  ces  vieilles  femmes  qui 
sont  muettes,'  she  is  naturally  anxious  to  be  a  plein 
pied  to  make  constant  intercourse  with  him  easy. 

1  Lady  Canterbury's  daughter,  Miss  Purvis. 


198     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1835 

The  ambassador  Pahlen  is  a  very  handsome,  fine- 
looking  man,  something  brave  et  loyal,  talks  quick — not, 
I  should  think,  clever.  Picks  his  teeth  with  his  knife, 
scorns  sugar-tongs,  a  grand  specimen  of  a  Eussian 
soldier.  Nicholas  is  as  happy  as  the  day  is  long. 


1836  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  199 


I836 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  1836. 

My  own  dearest  sister,  your  dear  people  are  just 
arrived  from  Versailles.  It  is  everything  to  me,  her 
being  here. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  is  coming  this  evening.  I  dined 
yesterday  at  Prince  Talleyrand's.  Mme.  de  Dino  and  I 
are  as  smooth  as  glass.  She  comes  this  evening  to  play 
with  Lieven. '  Mr.  Ellice  is  the  little  pet  of  both  these 
ladies.  The  most  repandu  of  men.  He  is  thick  with  all 
the  new  Ministers,  and  we  can  scarcely  catch  him  for  a 
dinner,  so  devoured  is  he.  God  bless  you,  my  own 
dearest  sis. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  March  17,  1836. 

Your  letter,  my  most  dear  brother,  refreshed  me 
like  one  of  your  visits.  I  miss  you  everywhere,  but 
these  visits  are  what  nobody  and  nothing  can  replace. 

Your  life  at  Calais  must  be  delicious,  and  I  read  with 
envy ;  liberty,  sea  air,  the  excitement  of  uncertainty, 
and  the  certainty  of  repose.  But  I  pity  you  a  little, 
and  should  others  more,  for  nobody  but  me  like  their 
larks  to  be  without  wings  or  legs. 

You  are  universally  regretted  here.  I  have  not  seen 
Sugar  1  since,  and  Orloff  has  never  been  near  me,  morn- 
ing, evening,  or  Friday  since  she  dined.  But  Mouchy 2 

1  Countess  Schouvaloff.   Lady  Morley  called  her  Sugarloaf,  and  Prince 
Gortschakoff,  Got-such-a-cough.  2  Duchesse  de  Mouchy. 


200     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE    1836 

came,  all  over  violets  and  nosegays,  so  that  she  looked 
like  a  stick  in  the  midst  of  an  immense  one.  She  and 
Dody  linked  and  looped  about  in  sham  friendship. 
More  nauseous  than  an  emetic  is  Flysy  to  the  said 
Dody.  The  family  see  it,  but  try  and  keep  up  her 
spirits  about  it,  and  Antonin1  says  :  'Peut-etre  cela  ne 
va  pas  bien  au  commencement,  mais  vous  aimerez  ma 
belle-sceur.' 

To-day  there  is  a  treat  that  beats  all  that  ever  were 
projected  in  excess  of  suffering,  Pahlen's  meal.  Thirty 
convives.  Thiers  and  I  run  into  it  together.  They  say 
his  dinners  are  good,  his  plate  beautiful,  but  the  length  is 
great — till  nine  last  time,  sitting  down  at  half-past  six. 

Georges  d'Harcourt2  with  a  friend  went  for  the 
first  time  to  your  stalls.  He  was  perfectly  delighted 
with  the  'Huguenots,'  all  his  prejudices  were  up,  and 
he  came  back  enchanted.  But  what  do  you  think, 
dear  Grace,  of  what  is  beyond  all  whats  ?  Why,  on 
Sunday  last,  Thorn  had  an  amateur  singing  reunion, 
and  Mrs.  Jauncey  warbled.  Well,  nobody  but  Grisi 
ever  had  such  a  pipe,  and  a  perfection  as  to  taste 
and  skill  that  leaves  all  the  other  singing-birds  in 
Society  at  an  immeasurable  distance.  People  returned 
in  ecstasies. 

Friday. — Forty-eight  we  were  at  Pahlen's. 

Sugar  sends  you  the  most  tender  messages.  After 
I  went  to  Lieven  and  Meg,  and  now  I  go  to  the  bird- 
fancier,  Porte  St. -Martin. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  March  25,  1836. 

I  have  received  your  two  delicious  letters,  the  second 
from  Calais,  the  first  from  London,  and  the  Duchess 
read  me  your  ecstatic  account  of  the  Fancy  Ball. 

1  Due  de  Mouchj-'s  brother. 

8  Was  afterwards  Ambassador  in  London. 


1836  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  201 

I  have  been  shut  up  for  weeks,  as  Granville  has 
had  the  gout,  and  now  there  are  Easter  holidays. 

Guizot  has  made  a  most  magnificent  speech.  The 
sensation  it  made  in  the  Chambers  was  unparalleled — 
his  high  tone  and  commanding  manner. 

Only  think  of  the  Duke  of  Sutherland  having 
bought  the  '  Prodigal  Son  '  and  the  '  Abraham,'  two  of 
Soult's  finest  pictures. 

How  your  account  of  the  Eoyal  boys  amused  me. 
Is  the  second  to  marry  his  cousin  ? 

Lieven  is  uncommonly  well.  Will  not  hear  of  Mr. 
Ellice  marrying  Lady  Pembroke.  '  Je  mettrai  tout  mon 
savoir-faire  a  I'empecher.' 

I  brought  Madame  de  Noailles  and  Princesse  de 
Lieven  together  on  Monday.  The  French  Power  made  a 
mistake,  she  took  the  line  oifoldtre  gaiety,  incessant  talk- 
ing and  improper  tales.  Lieven  was — I  have  no  word — 
sickened.  'Ma  chere,  quel genre!  quel  bavardage !  quelle 
incroyable  personne  !  Une  femme  qui  vient  me  raconter 
au  milieu  de  cinq  ou  six  hommes  qu'elle  a  rencontre 
le  matin  une  femme  a  cheval,  ses  jupons  d'un  cote, 
sa  personne  de  1'autre.'  And  all  Lieven's  petticoats 
stiffened  round  her  at  the  recollected  recital. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1836. 

My  own  dearest  sister, — We  were  quite  delighted 
with  your  beautiful  verses.  What  power  of  descrip- 
tion to  the  very  life  you  have !  How  much  power 
of  painting  and  feeling  your  subject !  Poetry  in  short, 
rare  quality  amongst  poets. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1836. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  Granville  has  again  been  con- 
fined for  near  a  week  with  return  of  gout.  We  were 


202     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1836 

obliged  to  put  off  a  great  diplomatic  dinner  and  the 
evening  after  it  to-night,  and  now  we  have  a  fortnight's 
holiday. 

Guizot  has  been  making  a  magnificent  speech,  one 
that  caused  great  sensation  in  the  Chambers.  It 
renders  Thiers'  perplexing  situation  still  more  so. 

I  believe  Lord  William  Bentinck  and  perhaps  W. 
Ponsonby  start  for  England  to-night  to  be  in  time  for 
Monday's  division.  Mme.  de  Lieven  is  pining  for  the 
Bear,  and  frantic  with  the  report  of  his  marriage  with 
Lady  Pembroke. 

All  the  lions  and  lambs  in  society  are  going  to  lie 
down  together.  Mons.  de  Talleyrand  and  Mme.  de 
Dino  are  going  to  dine  at  Flahault's  house  some  day 
next  weak. 

I  didn't  enjoy  the  concert  at  Court,  leaving  Gran- 
ville  ill  at  home.  Heat  beyond  Calcutta,  the  worst 
possible  choice  of  music. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  April  22,  1836. 
r— 

My  own  dearest  sis, — We  are  all  excited  about 
Norton — that  is,  all  but  me  ;  the  Fullertons  extremely 
curious.  I  hear  the  great  thing  said  against  him  is 
that  he  swallows  the  lovers  or  not  according  to  their 
rank  and  position.  Lord  Melbourne  yes,  Captain 
|  Trelawny  no. 

On  Friday  last  we  had  a  very  numerous  soiree.  I 
asked  scarcely  any  English,  as  I  knew  the  foreigners 
would  come  and  digest  the  ball.  Tell  the  Duchess  that 
I  am  really  overwhelmed  with  inquiries  and  messages, 
and  real  regrets  and  speeches,  such  as  Caramania's, 
made  for  exportation.  But  she  really  is  lamented  here 
more  than  I  can  say.  The  Mondays  are  attended  by 
her  adorers,  male  and  female.  To-day  come  Lady 


1836  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  203 

Acton  and  Mme.  de  Praslin  and  Mme.  de  Coigny  to 
take  leave. 

Mme.  de  Souza  is  dead.  I  have  just  been  at  Mme. 
de  Flahault's  door. 

God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  April  26,  1836. 

My  most  dear  sister, — I  love  to  think  of  you  at 
Eoehampton,  seeing  all  the  green  buds  and  hearing 
the  birds  sing,  as  I  do  in  my  garden  at  this  moment. 
We  are  in  hourly  expectation  of  Edward.1  I  wish  he 
may  come  for  dinner  to-day.  It  is  the  Ministerial  one, 
put  off  on  account  of  Granville's  gout  before  Easter. 
There  are  mitigations  ;  we  were  to  have  been  about  fifty, 
and  we  are  only  thirty,  as  half  the  convives  dine  at  a 
great  repast  at  Pahlen's.  We  have  Talleyrand,  the 
Ministers,  Appony  and  Alava,  Eothschild,  Sir  Adair 
and  Caradoc,  those  two  wild  Lotharios. 

Paris  will  soon  be  perfect  repose.  The  jours  are 
diminishing,  the  Bulls  going,  the  Queen  gone,  and  the 
only  dinner  we  were  engaged  to  was  put  off  by  Lady 
William  Bentinck  letting  us  know  on  the  day  itself, 
having  heard  rumours  of  our  approach,  that  '  she  did 
not  expect  us,  indeed  she  did  not.'  This  with  my 
particular  compliments  to  the  Duke  of  Sutherland. 
How  I  and  the  world  miss  them  is  not  to  be  written. 
Poor  little  Schonbourg  cried  about  it,  and  Maurice2 
looks  like  a  pistachio  nut,  and  has  retreated  entirely 
into  his  eyes. 

I  must  now  have  done,  for  my  half-past  six  dinner 
is  after  me.  Perhaps  between  Thiers  and  Talleyrand. 
Mme.  de  Lieven  we  see  seldom,  or  Marie.  They  live  with 
the  Flahaults  and  Ellice.  I  conclude  the  latter  will  come 

1  Lord  Carlisle's  son,  created  Lord  Lanerton  in  1874. 

2  Count  Maurice  Esterhazy  became  eventually  Ambassador  at  Rome. 


204     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRAXVILLE    1836 

this  evening.  Mme.  de  Dino  is  always  with  Mme.  de 
Lieven.  It  is  supposed  that  she,  Dino,  has  been 
making  a  violent  and  successful  attack  on  the  heart  of 
the  Due  de  Noailles,  and  that  his  family  are  doubly 
frantic  at  the  infidelity  and  the  chance  of  her  per- 
suading him  to  attach  himself  to  the  present  Court.  A 
detachment  of  Carlists  have  left  Paris  to  form  a  Court 
in  Switzerland  for  Henri  V.  !  !  It  is  so  like  them,  so  very 
absurd,  and  so  sure  to  miscarry.  The  men  are  Messrs, 
du  Cosse,  Fitzjames,  A.  de  Jumilhac,  and  Monbreton. 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  April  29, 1836. 

Ten  thousand  thanks,  my  own  dearest  Gr.  Your 
letters  are  delicious.  We  see  your  dear  daughters. 
Did  I  ever  tell  you  how  delighted  we  were  with  your 
account  of  them  at  Court,  dearest  Liz  as  well  as  the 
best  of  them  ?  How  I  agree  about  Blanche,  who  must 
look  uncommonly  picturesque,  and  like  the  Lady  of  a 
Tournament,  in  the  present  ancient  style  of  dress. 

I  have  a  letter  from  D.  Everybody  raves  of  his 
ball,  and  I  am  so  pleased  that  he  should  see  his 
endeavours  to  please  answer.  I  agree  with  you  so 
entirely  in  all  you  say  about  him,  and  the  cleverness 
and  charm  which  make  frivolity,  and  sometimes  a 
degree  of  want  of  proper  consideration  of,  more  than 
of  feeling,  for  others,  more  attractive  than  the  sense  and 
savoir  of  others,  who  look  down,  and  with  reason,  upon 
dress  and  dissipation. 

Granville  fell  from  his  horse  on  Monday,  but  most 
happily  was  not  hurt,  though  he  felt  a  little  shaken  by 
it.  But  how  one  does  think,  upon  such  occasions,  of 
all  that  one  is  spared,  of  the  mercies  one  ceases  to 
dwell  upon.  The  terrors  one  magnifies  and  amplifies 
that  are  not  permitted  to  be  realised !  It  seems  to  me 


1836  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  205 

that  life  ought  to  be  spent  on  our  knees,  and  how  is  it  ? 
Carelessly,  ungratefully. 

Our  present  plan  is  to  set  out  for  England  the 
beginning  of  July,  to  stay  there  six  weeks,  then  return 
and  tour  about  the  Ehine,  douching  and  bathing  at  the 
different  places — not  a  course  of  it,  but  a  wholesome 
pastime. 

Tell  Miss  Berry  she  will  find  much  of  the  sort  of 
society  she  most  likes,  everybody  at  home  always  and 
out-of-doors  pleasures  abounding.  I  cannot  promise 
that  Miss  Ferguson  will  like  it  as  much  as  she  will. 
Mme.  Durazzo  is  now  taking  a  house  here.  She  is  a 
very  great  and  universal  favourite — she  is  here,  there, 
and  everywhere ;  abhors,  I  am  told,  Miss  Berry.  She 
has  never  mentioned  her  name  to  me.  I  am  afraid  her 
loud  and  ceaseless  notes  will  not  dispose  people  more 
favourably  towards,  what  had  always  a  sort  of  hitch  in 
it,  the  approval  of  the  three  virgins. 

Mesdames  Lieven  and  Schonbourg  are  all  rapture 
at  Sir  Frederick's  expected  arrival  to-day  ;  but  nothing 
will  keep  the  former  from  Valen9ay  after  the  fifteenth. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  May  6,  1836. 

Most  dear  sis, — Sir  F.  Lamb  arrived  two  days  ago, 
but  a  twinge  of  gout  prevented  his  appearing  till 
yesterday,  when  he  came  looking  very  well — much 
younger  than  he  has  done  for  some  years,  I  think. 
Great  was  the  clamour  for  him  in  Lieven's  house  till 
he  did  appear,  and  I  suppose  she  will  keep  him  till  she 
goes  to  Valen^ay. 

Can  you  see  us  ?  I  fear  you  will  not  quite  approve. 
The  green  room.  Granville  and  F.  Lamb  in  two 
fauteuils  opposite  the  fire.  Lady  Elgin  and  Dody  in 
a  theological  controversy  on  the  green  couch.  Lady 
Mary  Stanley  and  William  Lambton  together.  There  I 


206     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANV1LLE    1836 

ought  to  be.  Caradoc  and  young  Montalembert  in  the 
middle  of  the  room,  Mrs.  Lamb  ton  with  all  the  attaches 
about  her. 

The  Seine  is  overflowing,  the  weather  like  January, 
We  are  all  in  hopes  that  Mme.  Appony  will  put  off  her 
breakfast. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  May  13,  1836. 

Most  dear  sister, — F.  Lamb  looks  in  spirits  again. 
He  never  leaves  Princess  Schonbourg — such  an  old 
beau  I  never  saw. 

Yesterday  we  had  a  great  Kussian  dinner  at  Pahlen's. 
I  think,  next  to  Devonshire  House,  his  banquets  the 
most  beautiful  I  know,  though  far  inferior  in  real  solid 
splendour,  but  the  new  or  moulu  plateau,  the  servants, 
the  light,  the  room,  the  salt-cellars  made  of  two  dolphins  ! 

Eound  it  sat :  Lavals,  Schouvaloffs,  like  a  white 
heart  cherry  and  a  bud  just  dropped ;  Ambassador 
Pahlen,  supported  by  me  and  Mrs.  Werther ;  Duke  of 
Hamilton  'twixt  Mme.  de  Lieven  and  Kisseleff;  then 
Marie  Menzingen,  Paul  Lieven,  Meyendorfs,  Mme. 
Schoppung,  F.  Lamb,  and  Schonbourg  at  play. 

In  the  evening  we  made  Mme.  de  Flahault  happy. 
All  rushed,  and  there  I  saw  for  the  first  time  Nicholas 
and  his  love.  She  looks  desperately  smitten,  which 
really  is  a  sight  to  see.  He  pulls  a  long  face,  looks  like 
his  brother's  ancestor,  and  Vallombrosa  waits  upon 
them  with  a  sort  of  expression  of  '  bad  enough  but 
might  be  worse '  in  his  countenance. 

Yesterday  Durazzo,  Dody  and  I  in  the  garden  never 
took  our  eyes  off  the  eclipse  till  it  had  done  all  its 
operations. 

So  Miss  Berry  is  really  to  be  here  on  the  23rd.  It 
will  be  a  great  embarras  in  a  society  where  Durazzo 
walks  over  the  course. 


1836  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  207 

We  have  a  breakfast  for  the  King's  birthday  on 
the  29th.  At  three  meet,  at  six  eat,  dance  till  twelve, 
eat  a  morsel  more  and  then  to  bed.  It  will  be  really 
the  last  gaiety. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  June  7,  1836. 

My  own  dear  brother, — The  breakfast  went  off  very 
well,  people   seemed  pleased ;  but   yesterday  was  the 
curious    day.      Our   dinner :    Mr.    and   Mrs.    William 
Locke,  Lady  Wallscourt,  Mary  and  Agnes,  Fergusson,^ 
Knutzen,  Ladislas  Zamoyski,  and  Mr.  Angerstein.     As     \ 
soon  as  Mrs.  William  Locke  saw  our  Berry  she  went  into 
a  sort  of  hysterical  fit.    I  took  her  into  the  garden.     She 
cried  bitterly,  said  that  when  she  arrived  at  the  door 
she  said  to  Mr.  Locke,  '  Good  God,  what's  to  become  of 
me  ?     There's  Mary  Berry.'     She  had  not  seen  or  heard 
of  her  for  years,  had  resented  bitterly  her  not  writing  , 
at  the  time  of  her  son's  death.     Well,  I  led  her  back          / 
and  dinner  soon  set  her  up  again.     Antonin  de  Noailles      _j 
sat  by  her,  did  not  know  who  she  was,  but  with  that 
peculiar  fatality  which  attends  Lord  Eokeby,  George 
Harcourt  and  some  others,  seeking  to  enliven  his  neigh- 
bour with  something  of  narrative,  began  relating  to 
her  the  melancholy  fate  of  a  jeune  Anglais,  Mons.  Locke, 
drowned  in  the  Lake  of  Como.     This  time  the  stound 
away  was  remarkably  slight,  so  much  so  that  Pius  re- 
marked, '  J'ai  tout  lieu  d'esperer  que  Madame  ne  m'a 
pas  entendu.' 

We  came  out,  all  was  smoothed  down,  and  we  sat 
after  dinner  or  rather  sailed  upon  a  placid  lake.  At 
half-past  nine  in  walks  Durazzo.  In  ten  minutes  Dody 
was  led  out  into  the  conservatory.  ;  Oh  !  I  must  open 
my  heart  or  I  shall  die.  Lady  Georgiana,  connaissez- 
vous  cette  dame  ?  C'est  la  plus  grande  calamite  de  ma 
vie  d'etre  venu  ici  ce  soir.  Elle  a  dit  des  horreurs  de 


208     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1836 

moi.'  Durazzo  was  led  back.  I  soon  saw  Berry,  her, 
Brignole,  the  whole  kit,  Agnes  and  all,  talking,  bowing, 
smiling.  Berry  is  all  civility  and  came  boasting,  '  Did 
you  see  us  ? '  I  do  not  think  Genoa  will  be  friends,  but 
Berry  is  dying  to  be  well  with  them,  and  pursued  and 
was  more  gracious  than  I  ever  saw  her.  These  girls 
are  wonderful. 

It  was  the  gayest  soiree,  owing  to  Mary's  excessive 
zest  and  rapturous  accueil  of  one  after  another. 

We  are  struck  with  the  four  giraffes,  but  have  our- 
selves got  an  ourang-outang  who  receives  and  sits  at 
table  eating  his  dinner.  Bourke  has  sent  to  ask  what 
day  he  would  like  us  to  call. 

How  much  I  do  admire  Lady  Wilhelmina,1  I 
thought  her  the  prettiest  girl  I  had  ever  seen.  Who 
flirts  with  Miss  de  Eothesay  ? 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  June  11,  1836. 

My  dear  sister,  Miss  Berry  is  very  well  and 
amiably  disposed.  I  do  not  know  if  it  annoys  her,  but 
the  whole  Genoa  tribe  has  disappeared  from  the  face  of 
society ;  neither  Brignole,  Durazzo  nor  Ferrari  ever 
show  themselves.  She  just  remarked  it  to  me,  and  I 
said  so  it  seemed,  nothing  more. 

Give  Lord  Carlisle  my  best  love.  In  less  than  a 
month  I  hope  to  be  with  you  all. 

Paris  is  very  delightful  now,  the  garden  lovely. 

Madame  Vallombrosa  brought  her  boy  to  see  ours 
yesterday,  the  same  age.  We  beat  him  in  intellect,  but 
he  is  magnificent  and  beautiful,  taller  than  little 
Fullerton,  and  though  he  cannot  speak  yet  runs  and 
leaps  like  a  child  of  four  years  old.  He  is  not  his 
mother's  child  or  his  aunt's  nephew  for  nothing.  He 
flew  to  embrace  little  F.,  seized  one  hand,  and  with  the 

1  Stanhope. 


1836  TO    LADY   CARLISLE  209 

other  extracted  from  him  his  new  drum,  No  words  can 
describe  the  scene  that  ensued,  only  like  what  must 
have  been  that  when  Cesarine l  called  to  tell  her  sister 2 
that  an  Italian  Duke  was  no  Duke. 

Our  most  darling  baby  did  not  cry,  but  he  clenched 
his  fist  and  cried  out,  '  Allez,  dirty  boy ! '  and  then 
came  the  tug  of  war. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  1836. 

The  Fullertons  have  almost  settled  not  to  go  to 
England,  but  to  pass  the  time  we  are  away  in  Switzer- 
land and  return  to  us  for  the  winter.  The  homeopathic 
only  did  good  whilst  he  observed  the  rules  of  diet,  air, 
and  exercise,  and  I  am  now  convinced  that  there  is 
nothing  in  pill  or  powder.  Its  marvellous  reputation 
is  because  novelty  and  hope  give  the  patient  zest  to 
follow  rules  which  would  give  us  all  health  if  we 
could  bring  ourselves  to  follow  them  habitually. 

Let  me  now  congratulate  you  and  dearest  Lord 
Carlisle  on  Morpeth's  speech.  Granville  was  delighted 
with  it,  and  all  our  letters  praise  it. 

Miss  Berry  has  made  Miss  Ferguson  very  smart,  tres 
lien  mise,  herself  ditto.  They  go  about  everywhere  with 
the  support,  not  figurative,  of  Knutzen  the  Dane,  a  Mr. 
Crawford,  and  one  or  two  pendant  men.  She  joined 
us  at  Musard's  on  Saturday,  and  we  went  from  thence 
to  Mme.  Appony.  Not  a  Genoese  appeared  there,  or 
at  my  Friday.  I  really  believe  Durazzo  means  to 
encounter  her  no  more,  for  to  stir  out  of  one's  house  is 
to  see  Berry. 

I  have  letters  from  Mme.  de  Lieven.3  Pauline 4  has  a 
fever,  and  she  tells  me  on  est  inquiet.  Nobody  there  as 
yet.  To-morrow  the  Poix  and  Montrond  are  to  arrive. 

1  Madame  de  Caramar.  8  The  Duchesse  de  Vallombrosa. 

3  At  Valen^ay.  *  De  Talleyrand. 

VOL.    II.  P 


210     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1830 
To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  June  23,  1836. 

I  am  so  glad  you  are  going  on  pretty  well,  but  long 
for  July.  We  set  out  about  Monday  week. 

We  are  in  breathless  expectation  for  the  verdict.1 
Nothing  even  by  telegraph  this  morning.  So  afraid  of 
what  he  may  have  bleated  about  our  Gracious.  Who 
could  bear  to  have  their  letters  ripped  up  for  evi- 
dence ? 

We  are  told  that  Narvaez2  is  much  admired.  If 
ever  le  Comte  Duchatel  and  Monsieur  Duvergier  de  Hau- 
ranne  3  come  across  you,  please  remember  the  French. 

Paris  is  now  all  made  of  odds  and  ends.  Lady 
Kinnaird  and  Lady  Belfast  creep  out  and  bore  about 
you.  Duke  of  Hamilton  in  green  slippers  because  of 
gout,  and  a  cord  round  his  throat  like  a  huissier  de  la 
Chainbre,  nobody  knows  why. 

Three  things  impend.  A  dinner  at  Neuilly,  the 
Belgian  Court  being  arrived ;  then  to  help  to  marry 
Mdlle.  Sophie  de  Castellane  and  Monsieur  de  Contades 
at  a  distant  church  at  eleven  ;  and  on  Monday  morning 
a  whole  day  at  Madame  de  Boignes,  drive,  walk  and 
dinner — a  complete  treat. 

The  Flahaults  are  still  here.  They  are  trying  to  per- 
suade Madame  de  Lieven  to  go  to  England  instead  of  to 
Baden.  Madame  de  Lieven  all  on  one  leg  about  it.  'Mais 
voyez  done,  on  me  demande  pourquoi  je  vais  a  Bade  ;  je 
n'ai  rien  a  dire,  mais  c'est  un  vrai  serpent  du  Paradis 
que  votre  femme  ; '  to  Flahault,  '  je  ne  sais  plus  ou  j'en 
suis  ! '  She  sees  more  of  Kulbach  than  anyone  else,  as 

1  The  Norton  trial.  3  A  beautiful  Spanish  lady. 

3  A  conspicuous  politician  during  the  reign  of  Louis  Philippe,  whose 
Government  for  some  years  he  warmly  supported.  Eventually,  when  no 
concession  was  made  to  the  demand  for  reform  he  went  into  violent 
opposition,  and  was  a  promoter  of  the  banquet  the  suppression  of  which 
led  to  the  Revolution  of  1848. 


1836  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  211 

there  is  a  carriage  and  a  maitre  dhdtel  to  be  secured 
before  she  can  stir. 

The  Turkish  Ambassador  has  just  sent  me  two  beau- 
tiful echarpes  for  turbans — one  painted,  the  other 
embroidered  in  silk  and  gold — a  scented  purse,  a  neck- 
lace, a  bottle  of  otto  of  roses,  and  a  parcel  of  gilt  and 
brown  pastilles.  The  same  to  la  file  de  I'Ambassadrice. 
We  think  this  a  pretty  custom. 

We  are  still  in  suspense,  harmless  letters  and  awk- 
ward facts,  but  no  verdict  come  yet.  God  bless  you. 
I  have  not  another  moment. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  July  2,  1836. 

My  dearest  sister, — You  must  pay  for  a  letter  to- 
day, for  I  cannot  let  such  a  time  pass  without  writing 
and  I  let  yesterday's  courier  slip.  It  is  hotter  than  I 
have  felt  it  for  years,  and  this  and  the  thought  of  seeing 
you  all  so  soon  makes  me  terribly  lazy. 

The  Poodle  is  arrived,  and  we  set  out  sans  f ante  on 
Saturday,  this  day  week. 

Pozzo  is  come,  and  Mme.  de  Lieven  stays  till 
Monday.  I  believe  they  dine  here  to-day,  if  not  to- 
morrow. 

Berry  and  Durazzo  had  a  formal  reconciliation  here 
last  night,  made  up,  and  shook  hands  like  the  boxers. 

Georgy  is  still  confined  to  couch  or  chair  in  conse- 
quence of  the  sprain  she  gave  her  leg  last  week,  but 
she  is  much  better  and  was  downstairs  yesterday  evening 
with  Menzingen,  who  is  in  great  beauty,  but  I  think  is 
much  disappointed  at  there  being  now  no  chance  of 
England.  She  is  in  high  sprits,  more  at  her  ease  with 
Lieven  than  ever,  dying  to  remain  on  with  her.  So 
much  for  the  stories  current  about  severity  on  one  side 
and  terror  on  the  other. 

Mme.  Vallombrosa  is  gone  to  Boulogne.  N.  Pahlen 

p  2 


212     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1836 

told  Mine,  de  Schonbourg,  na'ivement,  that  lie  always  had 
a  great  curiosity  to  see  the  etablissements  de  bains  in 
France. 

We  dined  at  Neuilly  on  Sunday.  I  never  saw  any- 
thing so  melancholy.  They  were  all  terribly  cast  down, 
and  in  that  scene  of  perfect  repose,  everything  looking 
so  still,  smelling  so  sweet.  The  people  themselves  so 
united,  so  good,  and  amiable,  to  think  of  the  assassin's 
unceasing  aim  is  so  dreadful.  Leopold  looks  much  as 
ever.  La  Eeine  Louise  much  improved  and  an  admirable 
little  person. 

Dearest  sister,  what  happiness  it  is  to  go  to 
England  !  And  you  know  I  delight  in  all,  the  journey 
and  crossing. 


To  THE  DUKE  OP  DEVONSHIRE. 

Devonshire  House  :  August  14,  183G. 

Your  letter,  my  dear  brother,  found  me  here  yester- 
day. No  flower  arrived,  cruel  Paxton. 

I  had  a  note  yesterday  from  Mme.  Schouvaloff.  They 
are  odd  people.  Souffrante,  unable  to  move  or  she 
would  have  called.  I  wrote  I  would,  if  possible,  go  to 
her.  Luckily  I  was  prevented.  Granville  and  Leveson 
had  an  interview  with  her.  Where  do  you  think  ? 
Driving  round  the  ring. 

I  found  G.  very  well,  the  Lords  squabbling,  our 
hurrying  to  Paris  no  longer  considered  necessary.  We 
are  this  moment  setting  off  for  Mistley ;  Granville  and 
Leveson  go  to  Lilleshall.  On  Monday  the  22nd  we 
all  meet  here  again,  to  start  for  Paris  possibly,  but 
certainly  for  Wiesbaden  on  Wednesday.  We  dined 
Saturday  with  the  Hollands.  At  the  turnpike  we  met 
Landseer,  still  lame  from  his  accident.  He  has  painted 
the  most  perfect  little  picture  of  Lord  Melbourne. 
Rogers  was  looking  very  ill.  It  is  a  compliment  to 


]836  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  213 

him  to  say  so,  one  had  thought  he  could  have  gone 
no  farther. 

Lady  Dover  came  to  us  yesterday  evening  at 
Grosvenor  Place,  looking  lovely  and  in  very  fair  spirits. 
Afterwards  Punch,  large  and  grey,  very  agreeable. 

The  Peers  were  all  going  yesterday,  put  it  off  for  a 
week,  and  assembled  at  the  Duke  of  Wellington's.  We 
all  say,  What  for  ?  But  no  answer  yet. 

The  Speaker  and  his  Lady  dined  at  Holland  House. 
He  a  great  dear  au  bout  du  compte.  She,  in  green  satin, 
with  sleeves  ornamented  with  bows,  and  a  wreathed 
cap,  looked  at  my  blue  silk  bags  and  ribboned  cap  and 
said :  '  We  are  in  error,  I  see,  we  over-do  a  little  ;  we 
ought  to  adopt  on  these  occasions  demie-parure'  We 
complimented  her  much  on  the  Speaker's  looks,  but  she 
shook  her  head,  '  You  should  look  at  his  person,' 
slightly  designating  her  own  upper  leg. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Frankfort :  Sept.  13,  1836. 

We  arrived  here  yesterday,  and  have  a  charming 
apartment,  with  a  large  fire,  and  I  look  out  of  window 
upon  a  broad,  beautiful  street,  and  see  umbrellas  of  every 
colour.  I  arrived  here  with  the  remains  of  a  bad  cold, 
and  Granville  with  some  pain  in  his  face.  This  makes 
me  unable  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  Fair,  as  we 
have  left  all  the  pleasure  and  bustle  to  Freddy,  and  in 
consequence  are  much  better  this  morning.  We  go  to 
Darmstadt  this  afternoon  and  to  Heidelberg  to-morrow, 
and  by  that  time  hope  to  have  a  less  wintry  day  than 
this. 

Here  is  Freddy.  He  says  the  Fair  is  very  animated 
and  gay — not  very  pretty,  excepting  the  booths  on  the 
Quays.  We  are  going  to  start,  all  muffled  up,  having 
warmed  ourselves  well  at  the  tire,  and  by  treating  it 
like  the  month  of  November  are  very  comfortable ;  but 


214     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1836 

it  is  in  June  that  I  hope  we  shall  all  meet  at  Wiesbaden 
next  year.     You  will  now  direct  again  to  Paris. 

The  Duke  of  Eutland  writes  Sir  F.  Trench  word 
that  there  will  be  no  change .  of  men,  but  that  Lord 
Lyndhurst's  speech  is  making  an  immense  effect  in  the 
country — Lord  Granville  sneers  at  this.  Che  vi  par, 
my  dear  Lady  ? 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  1836. 

We  arrived  on  Tuesday,  my  own  dearest  sister,  and 
found  a  clean,  enjoyable  house,  and  your  dear  little 
letter. 

Georgy  arrived  an  hour  ago,  most  extremely  pulled 
and  weakened  by  her  illness.  If  she  is  well  enough 
they  will  set  out  for  England  to-morrow  week. 

Miss  Berry  has  been  very  rheumatic  and  souffrante, 
but  bears  up  with  excellent  courage  and  spirits.  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay  is  come.  Mme.  de  Lieven  paid 
them  a  long  visit  to-day,  which  surprised  me  as  much 
as  it  pleased  them. 

We  all,  the  girls  and  ourselves,  dine  at  Neuilly 
to-morrow,  where  we  found  them  last  night,  looking 
better  and  more  cheerful  than  when  we  left  them. 

Mine.  Appony  is  here,  very  happy  at  Appony's 
having  received  the  Order  of  the  Toison  d'Or,  some- 
thing like  our  blue  riband. 

The  '  Luxor '  is  to  be  put  upon  its  legs  to-morrow 
week.  The  Eoyal  Family  and  all  Paris  are  going  to 
look  at  it.  I  mean  to  imagine. 

Mons.  Mole  looks  very  thin  and  bilious.  Monsieur 
Guizot  in  high  spirits.  Lord  Clanricarde  and  Caradoc 
are  at  Compiegne  with  the  Duke  of  Orleans. 


1836  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  215 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  October  1836. 

I  have  but  a  moment,  my  own  dearest  sis,  because 
these  are  the  last  days  of  Georgy  and  Freddy  (they  set 
out  on  Tuesday),  because  the  house  requires  a  great  deal 
of  attention,  and  because  Mine,  de  Lieven  is  on  her 
couch  for  two  or  three  days,  and  because  neither  Mme. 
de  Dino  nor  Mme.  de  Flahault  nor  Lady  Cowper  are 
yet  arrived.  Put  this  all  together.  In  another  week  I 
shall  write  volumes. 

But  my  subject  to-day  is  my  despair  at  your  not 
having  received  a  long  letter  I  wrote  to  you  from  Frank- 
fort. How  strange  you  must  have  thought  it !  To 
tell  you  how  Granville  and  I  both  felt  Lord  Carlisle's 
kindness.1  But  till  I  hear  you  have  not  received  my 
letter  at  all,  I  still  think  you  may,  and  I  will  not  repeat 
all  its  contents.  Only  that  Grauville  had  begged  he 
might  know  if  there  was  likely  to  be  a  contest  that 
would  entail  great  expense,  as  that  he  should  be  quite 
unable  to  meet.  But  let  me  know,  indeed  I  shall  next 
post,  and  I  will  again  say  all  my  say. 

I  am  delighted  that  the  Fullertons  are  going  to  you, 
because  it  delights  them  and  I  know  will  be  a  pleasure 
to  you  and  yours. 

English  are  flocking  to  and  fro,  and  we  have  had 
large  dinners  almost  every  day. 

The  Eoyalties  return  from  Compiegne  to-night,  and 
the  Queen  is  to  see  the  'Luxor'  put  up  to-morrow. 
There  is  no  Fontainebleau  this  year,  and  nothing  in 
prospect  but  a  great  Eussian  dinner  at  Pahlen's  on 
Wednesday. 

We  have  a  Friday  this  evening  in  the  green  room, 
and  I  hope  a  very  small  one.  We  shall  be  able,  vu  the 
house,  to  rest  on  our  oars  for  a  long  time.  We  have 

1  In  offering  to  return  Lord  Leveson  for  Morpeth. 


216     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1836 

much  that  must  be  done,  but  all  of  dinner  sort  upstairs 
— Pendarves,  Wynnes,  and  such  like.  Sir  Eobert  Peel 
and  his  family  are  expected  to-day. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  November  7,  1836. 

My  dearest  sister, — Where,  oh  where,  are  our 
letters  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  we  do  nothing  but  write, 
and  you  do  anything  but  hear. 

Your  message  delighted  Georgy,  and  they  will  go 
to  you  the  end  of  November. 

We  have  had  one  Friday.  Do  you  see  Georgy 
sitting  with  Menzingen  and  Lady  Mary  Herbert,1 
reckoned  alike,  and  having  taken  kindly  to  each  other  ? 
Great  talk  of  which  is  the  handsomest.  All  the  sparks 
saying  Marie,  Georgy  and  I  Mary. 

I  like  Lady  Pembroke  and  Lady  Peel.  Sir  Eobert 
is  playful  and  prudent,  seems  perfectly  happy  doing 
lion  and  lark,  and  only  prims  when  Lieven  calls  him  to 
the  Bar. 

John  and  Mrs.  Talbot  arrived  on  Tuesday.  They 
are  great  dears  and  help  us  much  with  the  Tory  camp. 

Give  my  love  to  Leveson.  D.  writes  again  to  me, 
delighted  with  him.  We  all  dined  at  Neuilly  the  day 
before  yesterday.  Sir  Eobert  can  scarcely  speak  any 
French.  The  King  talked  English  to  him,  but  what  was 
distressing,  the  Queen,  under  a  natural  embrouillement 
that  being  deaf  to  the  language  was  the  same  as  being 
deaf  to  the  sound,  bawled  out  every  word  to  him  as  if 
he  was  stone  deaf,  loud  and  distinct.  '  J'es — pere  que 
vous — vous  plai — sez — a — Pa-ris.'  An  odd  effect,  and 
made  Sir  Eobert  fidget  on  his  perch  next  to  her  at 
dinner. 

1  She  married  Lord  Bruce  and  became  Lady  Ailesbury. 


1836  TO   THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  217 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  November  11,  1836. 

My  own  dearest  brother, — Think  of  my  leaving 
your  two  most  delicious  letters  unacknowledged.  I 
have  lived  with  you  and  have  never  told  you  the 
pleasure  it  gave  me. 

I  see  Eodolphe  l  with  you,  but  I  have  heard  from  him 
too.  He  wrote  me  a  letter  of  his  rapturous  gratitude 
and  unbounded  admiration,  and  all  Austria  thanks  me 
and  loves  me  the  better.  The  Zichys  are  here,  but  oh ! 
where  is  Ossuna  ? — not,  I  fear,  in  your  pocket. 

Now  what  are  the  things  to  dip  into  to-day  ?  Lady 
Harriet  Baring  is  most  uncommonly  agreeable,  and  with 
me  gentle,  amiable,  and  by  no  means  censoricus.  I 
think  the  dislike  of  her  is  mitigating,  and  it  is  only,  I 
am  more  and  more  sure,  that  the  world  is  upon  its 
guard,  gun  cocked,  to  be  in  the  proper  attitude  for 
receiving  the  shot  it  always  imagines  her  about  to  fire  ; 
and  then  it  is  such  a  shot  when  it  comes,  so  direct  and 
so  piercing.  She  goes  back  in  a  few  days,  which  I 
regret  exceedingly. 

1  Esmeralda '  comes  out  to-night,  opera  instead  of 
ballet,  Mile.  Falcon  singing  instead  of  Mile.  Taglioni 
dancing  it.  Words  Victor  Hugo  arranged  himself, 
music  by  Madame  Bertin,  niece  of  Bertin  de  Vaux, 
the  great  man  of  the  '  Journal  des  Debats.'  Mile. 
Schivoni,  the  new  Jane  Seymour,  beautiful,  a  fine 
voice  and  promise  of  excellence ;  Grisi  reconciled  to 
her  husband,  and  singing  and  acting  divinely. 

Eead  Picciola.  It  is  to  me  the  prettiest  thing  I 
know,  though  it  pretes  to  the  scorn  of  the  worldly  and 
unfeeling.  Eead  it  without  prejudice,  letting  yourself 
go  to  your  impressions  about  it. 

1  Appony,  nephew  of  the  Austrian  Ambassador. 


218      LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1836 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  November  20,  1836. 

Well,  I  went  to  the  '  Esmeralda ; '  the  finest  mise  en 
scene,  dresses  and  processions  beauteous  and  gorgeous. 
But  oh !  the  music !  The  tune  the  old  cow  died  of 
throughout,  grunts  and  groans  of  instruments  and 
voices  without  a  soupqon  of  harmony. 

Poney  l  sat,  her  eyes,  sometimes  filled  with  tears, 
fixed  on  my  face  instead  of  the  piece.  '  Oh !  ma 
chere,  1'horreur,  mais  fi  done  ! '  The  priest  in  love  all 
the  time,  the  constant  church  music  and  the  regular 
solemn  Mass  must  have  been  misery  to  her,  and  so 
shameful,  I  think. 

Now,  my  dearest  brother,  did  ever  anybody  give 
you  a  commission  ?  Andrews 2  annually  sends  us  the 
annuals,  but  don't  choose  well.  Will  you  or  direct 
somebod}^  of  taste  to  select  there  or  elsewhere  the  best, 
to  spread  upon  our  table  ?  Shall  you  say  like  Granville, 
when  I  ask  him  to  do  anything,  '  Oh  yes,  that's  the 
way,  Jack  of  all  Trades  ? '  to  which  he  adds  '  non- 
compliance.'  God  bless  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  December  29,  1836. 

My  dearest  brother, — I  can  only  find  this  morsel  of 
paper  to  thank  you  a  thousand  times  for  your  letter. 

Of  gaiety  there  is  none  in  its  usual  sense ;  it  is  like 
society  in  November  in  London.  People  run  about  to 
each  other's  little  soirees,  not  a  notion  of  dancing.  Mme. 
Ferrari  has  a  concert  this  evening  to  which  we  had  all 
promised  to  go,  but  influenza  prevents  me,  Dody  and 
my  boys,  as  it  is  no  joke  taking  one's  new-born  cold 
into  a  deep  snow  over  the  frozen  debordements  of  the 
Seine. 

1  Madame  Appony.  2  The  bookseller. 


1836  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  219 

Madame  de  Lieven's  little  salon  is  becoming  a  great 
resource  for  the  destitute. 

On  Friday  last  I  had  my  first  soiree.  On  that 
evening  sat  in  a  row,  gorgeously  attired,  Zavadowska, 
Simloff,  Wittgenstein,  and  Kisseleff.  They  make  a 
much  greater  display  as  to  dress  and  diamonds  than 
any  other  nation,  and  the  above  mentioned  are  all 
more  or  less  handsome.  Lieven  kotows  to  Simloff 
because  she  is  the  Empress's  bosom  friend  and  corre- 
spondent. She  has  just  been  here  and  bids  me  say  a 
thousand  things  to  you  from  her. 

How  glad  I  am  that  you  are  going  to  feed  the 
d'Harcourts.  I  am  so  fond  of  the  little  pair  here.  It 
inclines  me  to  work  at  having  the  d'Henins *  to  dinner 
one  of  these  days,  though,  dearest  of  Graces,  an  entree 
more  difficult  to  obtain  from  his  Excellency  I  cannot 
figure  to  myself.  I  never  yet  have  got  him  to  con- 
sent to  have  Eanfurly.  If  you  could  drop  over  and 
wished  it  in  person  instead  of  through  Dody,  it  might 
be  effected,  as  he  would  see  a  reason,  which  he  will  not 
see  now,  as  we  are  already  more  civil  to  them  than  to 
most ;  but  I  will  try. 

Great  excitement  about  the  opening  of  the  Cham 
bers.    Thiers  is  tres  monte,  a  great  gathering  about  him, 
pushing  him  on  to  extreme  opposition. 

The  Carnaval  of  five  weeks  will  be  very  flat.  For 
years  there  has  not  been  seen  here  such  snow  and 
slipperiness  and  such  a  hard  winter. 

Talleyrand  is  very  well.  Mme.  de  Dino  in  great 
beauty.  She  and  Meg  meet  and  dine  each  other,  but 
it  is  like  the  meetings  in  cock-  and  bull-fights.  The 

1  General,  Madame,  and  Mile.  d'Henin.  The  mother  a  Derbyshire 
lady,  an  old  friend  of  the  Duke's.  The  daughter  very  handsome,  much 
admired  by  the  Due  de  Nemours  and  Lord  Prudhoe  and  others,  but  she 
never  married.  After  the  death  of  her  parents,  she  settled  in  England 
and  became  a  great  friend  of  Bishop  Blomfield,  who  converted  her  to 
Protestantism.  She  was  a  general  favourite. 


220     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1836 

night  before  last  Dino  ran  into  Lieven's  salon,  saw  Meg 
and  shrieked,  '  Oui,  ma  chere,  c'etait  un  cri  epou- 
vantable.'  She  did  not  apologise  or  say  for  why. 
Explanations  have  been  asked.  Dino  says  it  was  a  '  cri 
de  surprise,'  Meg  says  it  was  a  '  cri  d'horreur,  et  voila 
oil  nous  en  sommes.' 

I  am  more  delighted  than  I  can  say  at  your  going 
to  hear  and  liking  to  hear  Mr.  Beamish.1  So  is  the 

O 

Duchess,2  who  has  written  me  a  letter  about  her  delight. 

Fullerton  is  looking  much  better,  but  still  very 
languid.  She  is  very  well  and  delighted  to  be  here 
again  with  her  boy,  and  we  more  than  delighted  to 
have  her.  Leveson  is  more  resigned  than  Freddy  to 
the  idea  of  a  very  dull  Carnaval. 

A  dinner  at  old  Bourke's  is  quite  a  thing  talked  of 
in  these  days.  I  thought  I  should  have  died  of  a  scene 
she  had  with  Tchann.  He  called  the  day  before 
yesterday,  was  led  through  numberless  rooms  till  he 
found  himself  au  pied  du  lit  de  la  belle,  her  head  buried 
under  the  clothes,  nothing  visible  but  a  sort  of  black 
toque  and  top  knot,  one  professor,  two  marchesas  and 
a  bel  fanciullo  grouped  round  le  dit  pied.  '  Approchez, 
mon  cher,  approchez.'  He  did.  '  Mais,  venez  done 
plus  pres.'  He  found  himself  with  his  head  buried 
under  the  oreiller.  '  Mon  cher,  vous  etes  ne  coiffe — ah, 
pardi,  vous  etes  ne  coiffe.'  He  was  in  suspense  and 
painfully  placed,  but  she  played  with  his  curiosity 
before  she  said,  '  Vous  dinerez  ici,  et  vous  aurez  la 
Duchesse  de  Sutherland  et  des  becasses  qui  sont  venues 
hier  de  la  Bretagne.' 

My  cold  saves  me  Ferrari's  to-night,  ouverture .  des 
Chambres  to-morrow  morning,  Mme.  Mole's  reception 
to-morrow  evening  and  perhaps  a  dinner  at  Monsieur 
Le  Hon's  3  on  Wednesday  and  Appony's  drum  after  it. 

1  A  popular  Evangelical  preacher.  2  Duchess  of  Beaufort. 

3  The  Belgian  Minister. 


1837  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  221 


1837 

To  LADY  CARLISLE, 

Paris :  January  1837. 

My  most  dear  sis, — There  is  compensation  in  all 
things.  The  street  is  mended,  the  carpets  and  hangings 
arriving,  the  smell  of  paint  going  off,  and  we  must 
begin  again  drumming  and  affronting. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  in  great  beauty  and  high  spirits. 
She  has  always  an  entourage ;  she  can  keep  off  bores, 
because  she  has  the  courage  to  ecraser  them.  The 
sublimities  sometimes  clash,  but  that  for  her  taste  is  a 
small  evil.  It  would  kill  me  to  have  Berry er  and  Mole 
tete  a  trois9  looking  daggers  at  each  other,  mais  elle  salt 
nager  and  gets  out  of  every  difficulty.  The  pleasantest 
women  here,  in  my  opinion,  go  constantly  to  her. 
Mme.  Appony,  Schonbourg,  Durazzo,  and  Marie,  who 
makes  tea  like  a  Goddess. 

This  scene  se  repete  here,  only  with  more  assistance, 
merrier  perhaps  but  less  genteel.  Here  fools  rush  in, 
there  angels  fear  to  tread.  You  will  observe  that  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  conceit  in  my  humility. 

Lady  Harriet  Baring  is  wind  and  wave  bound  at 
Calais,  and  yesterday  if  Walewski  did  not  hear  from 
her  he  was  to  take  an  apartment  for  her  at  Paris.  I 
believe  I  am  the  only  person  in  Paris  who  would  be 
glad  to  see  her  again.  I  cannot  understand  her 
extreme  unpopularity.  Pray  be  discreet,  as  I  wish  her 
to  get  rid  of  the  idea  of  its  extent,  which  only  exasper- 
ates her  and  sharpens  her  wit,  and  makes  the  matter 


222     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

twenty  times  worse — where  she  thinks  she  pleases  she 
is  as  amiable  as  she  is  agreeable.  She  ought  to  be 
managed  like  Beatrice,  whom  she  closely  resembles. 

Granville  has  fallen  in  love  with  Mrs.  Young,  nee 
Dalton,  which  makes  us  very  civil  to  them,  and  she 
and  Mrs.  Burro wes,  nee  Sitwell,  are  lovely,  and  had 
been  great  friends  as  girls,  and  not  met  for  years  till 
in  our  Opera  box  the  other  evening.  You  see  I  am 
very  Irish. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  January  20,  1837. 

I  have  been  really  very  unwell  with  this  influenza, 
and  it  has  left  me  so  pulled  that  I  can  scarcely  exert 
myself  to  do  anything.  Luckily  nothing  is  required. 
F.  Ponsonby's  death  has  closed  our  doors  for  the  rest 
of  the  month. 

Georgy  presents  the  Duchess  of  Eoxburgh,  Mrs. 
Cavendish  and  Fanny  at  the  Tuileries  to-morrow.  A 
ball  then  or  Wednesday  of  four  thousand  people,  two 
small  balls  later. 

Lord  Lyndhurst  left  Paris  yesterday,  Mr.  Ellice  goes 
Wednesday.  Lord  Pembroke  opens  his  house  next 
week — first  a  concert,  then  a  ball.  No  sparks  but  the 
very  youngest  here.  I  hope  Fanny  will  not  delude  any 
of  them.  I  am  afraid  they  are  not  of  an  age  to,  what 
is  called,  do,  which  is  a  serious  word. 

Charles  Greville  is  arrived.  Mme.  Sebastiani  blinked 
at  him  and  kept  sidling  up.  '  Ah  !  oh  dear  me  !  Je 
crois,  oui,  je  reconnais  le  mari  de  Lady  Charlotte 
Greville.' *  I  hope  he  did  not  hear,  but  I  did  and 
writhed.  Will  yon  send  this  to  G.,  when  read  ? 

1  His  mother. 


1837  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  223 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  1837. 

My  dearest  sister, — You  will  have  as  soon  or  before 
this  Charles  Greville,  who  to  our  immense  regret  sets 
out  at  six  to-day  for  England. 

I  believe  the  melancholy  death  of  Sir  Eichard  Acton 
added  to  the  general  indisposition  a  gloom  that  made 
everybody  appear  and  feel  worse.  What  I  really  think 
is  that  something  or  other  and  constant  melancholy 
events  have  for  once  given  everybody  a  distaste  for 
dissipation. 

The  sensation  at  the  non-mention  l  is  great.  Mme.  de 
Lieven  tells  me  Talleyrand  was  loud  and  vehement 
about  it  at  dinner  yesterday,  where  she  went  to  wish 
him  joy  of  his  83rd  birthday,  with  an  ancient  goblet, 
rich  and  rare — inkstand  rather—  to  present  to  him. 

Mole  is  in  bed  with  the  grippe.  The  Carnaval  ends 
on  Mardi  Gras  with  a  ball  at  Lord  Pembroke's.  God 
bless  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  February  11,  1837. 

Thanks  for  your  letter  and  the  delicious  account  of 
the  marriage.2  How  do  those,  not  fire,  Brands  look  ? — 
sleek  and  contented,  I  hope.  If  she  has  one  quarter  of 
the  simplicity,  ingenuousness,  unartificial  modesty  that 
Lady  Dacre  says  she  has,  it  will,  I  trust,  turn  out  very 
well. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE  FOR  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  February  17,  1837. 

My  very  dear,  dear  sis, — Here  we  are,  the  Suther- 
lands,  fattening  and  reviving  a  vue  d'ceil  in  the  south 
rooms  upstairs,  the  children  having  room  to  stretch  and 

1  Of  France  in  the  King's  Speech. 

3  Of  Mr.  Brand,  the  future  Speaker,  who  was  created  Lord  Harnpden 
in  1884,  to  the  daughter  of  General  Ellice. 


224     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1837 

spread  themselves  at  the  Hotel  Meurice.  This  evening 
the  dear  Pair  come  down  into  the  green  drawing-room, 
where  they  will  have  a  partie  fine  of  their  friends.  The 
ball  tempts  her  dreadfully,  but  I  have  arranged  this 
plan  above  in  hopes  of  keeping  her  out  of  it,  but  my 
real  hopes  rest  upon  her  being  obliged  to  muffle  up  to 
the  chin. 

What  happiness  it  would  be  to  all  if  the  Burlingtons 
would  but  come  immediately  to  Paris,  if  only  for  a  lark 
of  a  fortnight ! 

How  delighted  we  are  about  dearest  Leveson  and 
all  we  hear  and  his  speech  ! l  The  Chancellerie  is  emer- 
veillee,  and  I  think  he  will  be  chaired  in  the  court  when 
he  returns.  Will  he  return  ? 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  1837. 

I  believe  it  is  partly  Leveson's  eagerness  that  has  so 
inoculated  me,  but  I  feel  out  of  breath  about  politics. 
I  dread  the  next  majority,  as  I  hear  none  but  ill  omens 
about  it,  and  entre  nous,  dearest  sis,  I  think  matters 
look  as  ill  for  us  as  possible. 

Lord  Bruce  is  evidently  much  in  love  with  Lady 
Mary.  She  betrays  nothing.  Lady  Pembroke  looks 
anxious.  They  dine  here  to-day,  one  and  all.  Danis- 
kiold 2  is  a  sort  of  a  chaperon,  and  never  leaves  either 
Lady  Pembroke  or  Lord  Bruce.  The  green  room  is 
matrimonious. 

I  see  poor  Lady  Canning's  death  in  the  papers. 
Her  existence  had  less  of  bright  in  it  than  that  of  almost 
any  person  I  know.  I  hope  her  children  were  with  her. 

Letters  from  Rome  say  that  Miss  Stuart  is  going  to 
marry  Mr.  Tomline,  25,000/.  a  year,  handsome,  agree- 
able, young,  but  that  Lady  Betty  opposes.  It  is  the 

1  Lord  Leveson  spoke  for  the  first  time  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
a  A  Dane  who  married  a  sister  of  Lord  Bruce. 


1837  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  225 

girl's  doing,  but  la  madre  wants  rank,  especially  Lord 
Douro. 

We  are  all  very  busy  about  our  Charity  Ball, 
sketching  and  talking  costume. 

Schonbourgs  and  Maurice  Esterhazy  go  to  London  in 
the  spring,  as  also  Delphine  Potocka.  They  call  Sostegne 
de  la  Eochefoucauld  '  Le  futur  passe.' 

My  best  love  to  Leveson.  Tell  him  Baba  put  aside 
a  great  lump  of  compote  at  his  dinner  yesterday,  '  for 
Uncle  Leveson,  he  coming' — nobody  had  mentioned  him, 
so  it  is  touching. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  3,  1837. 

My  own  dearest  sister, — How  happy  I  am  to  think 
of  Edward's  relief !  1  The  ship  heaved  off  all  our  hearts. 
I  have  been  upstairs,  rejoicing  over  this  with  your  dear 
daughter. 

Dearest  of  Dukes.  Your  letter  delights  me.  I 
favoured  the  Duchess  with  select  passages  only. 

Do  I  know  the  Miss  Bennetts  ?  A  mushroom,  not  to 
say  a  toadstool,  and  a  jessamine. 

The  Schouvaloffs  have  never  appeared — still  very 
poorly,  I  believe.  Mme.  Zavadowska  came  to  both 
balls,  to  the  last  really  like  the  Queen  of  Golconda — a 
whole  diamond  and  sapphire  crown,  a  white  tissue 
floating  about  her  like  clouds,  looped  up  and  streamed 
upon  with  jewels. 

Give  my  love  and  my  thanks  to  Miss  Berry  for  a 
most  interesting  and  amusing  letter. 

We  had  a  dinner  yesterday,  most  successful  and 
useful.  Mr.  Munro  of  Novar,  Monsieur  de  Chabot  and 
General  Cass 2  and  his  wife.  The  Sutherlands  so  civil 
and  gracious,  the  convives  so  charmed ;  and  to-night,  as 

1  Lady  Carlisle's  son.     His  ship  had   stranded.     The  court-martial 
acquitted  him  of  all  blame. 

a  The  American  Minister  in  Paris. 
VOL.    II.  O 


226     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE     1837 

Georgy  will  not  appear,  think  what  it  is  to  me  to  have 
her  Grace  in  a  white  crape  pelisse,  buttoned  with 
diamonds. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  March  24,  1837. 

One  word,  dearest  Grace.  How  can  1  thank  you 
enough,  half  enough,  for  your  kindness  to  Eward  ?  She 
is  penetrated  to  her  soul,  the  happiest,  the  most  grate- 
ful, and  the  most  enviable  of  women. 

Lady  Pembroke  has  a  house  in  the  Champs  Elysees. 
Do  not  tell,  but  Georgy  did  see  in  the  middle  of  the 
populace,  linking  and  looping  and  gazing  at  the  Long- 
champites,  first,  Lord  Pembroke  and  Lady  Mary,  second, 
Lord  Bruce  and  Lady  Emma — more  conclusive  than 
romantic,  I  think. 

We  are  all  busy  as  bees  about  the  Charity  Costume 
Ball.  I  hope  it  will  be  a  beautiful  sight  and,  what's 
better,  profitable. 

Paris  rings  with  Lord  Pembroke's  magnificence,  who 
has  sent  us  a  donation  of  a  hundred  pounds.  We  have 
Mesdames  Flahault,  Menou,  Caraman,  Mole,  Sebastiani, 
Coigny  for  our  French  patronesses.  The  Duchess  of 
Sutherland  will  be  Night.  Oh,  what  a  glorious  night ! 
Her  diamonds  the  firmament,  and  poppies  as  the  Zodiac 
and  a  veil  with  crescents.  Dody,  a  patroness,  sits  over 
her  list  and  looks  wistfully  at  it.  She  has  but  one 
name,  but  that  is  a  thumper.  James  the  Eevd.  Ellice 
has  sent  her  300  francs  for  three  tickets,  but  not  another 
customer.  Meg  has  scraped  up  countless  numbers, 
and  I  have  a  respectable  catalogue  of  friends. 


1837  TO  LADY   CARLISLE  227 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1837. 

Everybody  seems  to  think  the  Duke  of  Orleans' 
marriage  settled.  They  say  the  bride  is  tall,  thin  and 
plain,  adorable  de  caractere,  and  perfectly  well  brought 
up.  Bad  teeth,  red  hair,  amiable  countenance. 

I  will  write  more  and  better  next  time. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  April  15,  1837. 

Most  dear  Grace, — I  am  very  poorly,  only  out  of 
bed  to  have  bed  made,  unable  to  speak,  hear,  or 
speculate. 

The  Mole  Ministere  remains  in ;  is  called  le  Petit 
Minister e. 

The  future  Duchesse  d'Orleans  must  be  prettier 
than  Mrs.  Berri  was.  Marechale  Lobau  is  to  be  La 
Grande  Maitresse. 

I  wonder  what  is  going  to  happen  chez  vous.  Peel, 
I  think. 

Caradoc  goes  to  town  to-morrow  to  wait  on  Victory 
for  a  month. 

Grandmamma  Mecklenburg  brings  Miss  all  the  way 
to  Fontainebleau  for  the  marriage.  Therefore  there  is  no 
marriage  by  procuration. 

God  bless  you.  Oh,  if  you  knew  how  poorly  I  feel ! 
Grippe  has  put  all  his  fangs  into  me — tooth,  ear,  nose, 
*  throat  and  head. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  April  1837. 

My  dearest,  dear  sister, — We  are  all  very  curious 
about  our  political  fate.  Eeport  and  surmises  are  so 
various.  Paris  is  becoming  pleasanter,  all  that  is  dis- 
agreeable in  society  is  over,  spring  approaching. 

Q  2 


228     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1837 

Now,  my  dearest,  business.  I  throw  myself  on  your 
mercy.  Will  you  obtain  a  few  names  and  pounds  for  a 
subscription  I  have  set  on  foot  here  ?  It  is  the  most 
interesting  family  I  ever  met  with — a  widow  with  eight 
young  children.  They  lived  here  when  the  father  was 
alive,  supposed  to  b^  immensely  rich.  Houses  at  Paris 
and  Auteuil,  the  prettiest  furniture,  equipages,  etc., 
everybody  going  to  their  house.  The  husband  died, 
and  left  them  to  starve.  I  never  saw  anything  so 
interesting  as  the  widow's  courage  and  resignation. 
She  brought  us  her  beautiful  children.  The  singing 
of  one  of  the  girls  twelve  years  old  is  delicious.  I 
cannot  resist  a  wish  to  serve  these  poor,  unhappy 
people,  but  I  have  quite  exhausted  my  own  means  and 
the  good  feelings  of  my  relations  and  entourage  here. 
I  have  tried  till  I  am  ashamed,  so  that  my  only  hope  is 
in  a  few  names  from  England,  that  may  induce  others 
of  themselves  to  contribute  to  it  here. 

I  would  like  to  do  what  Lady  Julia  Howard  wishes 
more  than  most  things,  but  will  you  tell  her  that  I  have  an 
invariable  rule,  French  by  the  French,  and  though  this 
lady  is  English  she  is  now  Madame  d'Auchamp,  and 
therefore  Lady  Julia  should  recommend  her  asking  some 
one  of  my  French  friends,  a  lady,  to  ask  to  present  her. 
This  is  my  only  way  of  drawing  a  line  in  French 
society. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  April  1837. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — A  thousand  thanks  for  the  kind- 
ness and  for  the  money.  You  have  no  idea  how  inte- 
resting a  family  it  is  that  you  have  all  been  so  good  to. 

We  are  very  curious  and  impatient  for  political 
news.  The  Archbishop  alarmed  me.  The  last  debate 
must,  I  think,  have  done  good,  and  Sir  Eobert  Peel  was 
evidently  much  ruffled,  which  I  think  he  deserved. 


1837  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  229 

I  am  delighted  to  think  that  dearest  Leveson  is  so 
much  interested  and  so  keen  about  political  business, 
and  also  to  hear  from  all  of  his  popularity.  He  is  be- 
come also  such  an  excellent  correspondent,  and  Gran- 
ville  delights  in  hearing  from  him  so  constantly. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  May  5,  1837. 

We  have  had  one  fine  hour  to-day  after  torrents  of 
rain  and  I  spent  it  walking  round  and  round  the  garden 
with  Madame  de  Lieven.  Madame  Appony  came  also 
to  bid  me  good-bye.  I  dread  the  coming  fetes,  and 
Madame  Appony 's  absence  is  a  great  additional  annoy- 
ance. Madame  de  Brignole  is  a  dear  comfortable 
woman  and  will  in  some  manner  compensate. 

I  know  not  what  the  Schonbourgs  do,  but  they  both 
talk  of  England.  So  does  Madame  de  Lieven ;  but  I  do 
not  think  myself  that  the  latter  will  go,  she  has  in  many 
ways  such  a  nervous  dread  of  it. 

The  effects  of  the  amnesty  and  the  expectation  of 
Mile.  Mecklenburg  are  the  reigning  subjects.  Lady 
Lincoln  is  much  the  same.  I  saw  the  poor  Duke l  yes- 
terday, looking  miserable. 

Madame  de  Lieven  was  much  affected  at  seeing 
Lord  Lyndhurst  to-day ;  she  says  his  grief  is  so  deep. 
He  sets  out  for  London  to-morrow. 

We  are  in  hourly  expectation  of  the  result  of  the 
Westminster  election. 

How  long  is  the  Court  mourning  for  the  Queen's 
mother 2  to  last  ? 

1  Her  father,  the  Duke  of  Hamilton. 

2  The  Duchess  of  Meiningen. 


230     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  1837. 

Dearest  sister, — Granville  has  continued  very  poorly. 
I  much  doubt  if  his  gout  will  leave  him  so  entirely 
as  to  enable  us  to  accept  an  invitation  we  are  to 
receive  '  de  faire  une  petite  visite  a  Fontainebleau.' 
I  went  to  the  Tuileries  yesterday  evening  and  found 
them  all  in  great  spirits.  The  King  really  in  ecstasies 
at  all  the  late  measures,  his  increased  popularity  and 
augmented  liberty.  The  Queen  happy,  but  wholly 
occupied  about  the  marriage.  She  says  it  makes  her 
terribly  nervous.  She  praised  the  Princess,  and  all  she 
heard  of  her  was  in  her  favour.  She  has  tried  on  one 
of  her  gowns,  and  though  the  dear  Queen  is  like  an 
asparagus  she  is  shorter  and  broader  than  her  belle 
fille. 

Lady  Stuart  and  her  girl  called  on  me  the  day 
before  yesterday.  I  think  the  latter  beautiful  and  ex- 
ceedingly improved. 

The  success  of  Evans  *  is  some  pull  up  against  our 
election  disasters.  Sister,  what  do  you  think  of  things 
in  general  ? 

Tell  me  if  my  dearest  Gink 2  has  any  flirtation  visible 
to  the  naked  eye  ? 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  1837. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  have  little  to  tell  you.  The 
King  went  to  the  Jardin  des  Plantes  yesterday,  with 
only  two  servants  behind  his  carriage.  He  was  much 
cheered  and  hurraed,  and  is  in  a  state  of  ecstasy  at 
having  recovered  so  much  liberty. 

1  Sir  de  Lacy  Evans  was  returned  for  Westminster. 

2  One  of  the  names  Lord  Leveson  was  known  by  in  the  family. 


1837  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  231 

The  Due  de  Broglie,  who  was  to  have  gone  to- 
morrow to  meet  the  Princess,  has  a,  fluxion  and  swelled 
face,  and  may  be  prevented,  which  will  be  unlucky. 

The  picture  has  come,  and  the  Duke  of  Orleans  has 
locked  it  up.  I  hear  '  c'est  atroce.'  Mons.  Bresson 
sends  word  that  it  is  a  very  unfavourable  likeness,  but 
that  she,  Miss  Meek,  insisted  upon  sending  it.  Wise,  I 
think. 

The  Due  de  Coigny  is  to  be  her  first  gentleman 
ecuyer — not  Mesnard,  I  hope. 

I  must  leave  you,  as  I  have  had  much  to  write 
to-day,  and  my  life  does  not  give  me  much  news  to 
relate. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  1837. 

My  own  dearest  sis, — The  presentations  to  the 
Duchess  of  Orleans  are  to  take  place  on  the  fifth  and 
sixth  of  June.  We  intend  going  on  the  fourth,  if  the 
diplomacy  is  received  apart ;  if  not,  on  the  fifth.  We 
take  apartments  at  Versailles,  one  week  before  the  fete 
pour  Monday  week.  We  shall  go  there  as  soon  as 
Granville  is  well  enough  to  move  for  the  benefit  of 
the  change  of  air,  his  first  ride  and  the  comfort  of 
being  on  the  tenth,  the  day  of  the  great  doings,  within 
a  stone's  throw  of  the  spectacle  at  night,  the  musee  in 
the  morning.  The  Fullertons  have  taken  the  apart- 
ment above  us. 

The  Due  de  Broglie  and  all  his  suite  write  enchanted 
with  Princesse  Helene.  They  say  she  has  perfect  self- 
possession,  the  best  manner,  never  the  least  put  out, 
knowing  what  to  do  and  say  on  all  occasions.  But  I 
shall  soon  have  satisfactory  intelligence,  as  Dody1  is 
to  write  volumes  from  Fontainebleau. 

1  Lady  Georgiana  Fullerton. 


232     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

5  ! ! !  I  was  glad  to  hear  that  the  Bear  rather  likes 
it l  than  otherwise. 

Lady  Stuart  came  to  see  me  to-day  with  her  daugh- 
ter, looking  less  well  than  usual  and  rather  stormy. 
Betty,  too,  in  a  fuss.  Lord  Stuart  won't  come.  They  both 
wish  to  stay  to  see  the  opening  at  Versailles.  Betty  is 
puzzled,  opens  her  mouth,  looks  like  a  very  hot  red  and 
white  spaniel. 

Then  came  Meg,  very  happy  and  merry,  enchanted 
at  the  coming  week  at  Fontainebleau,  at  the  past  month 
in  London.  Princesse  Helene  has  black  eye-lashes  and 
a  fine  complexion.  The  Due  de  Broglie  says  she  is 
tres  polie,  charmante,  et  distinguee.  All  the  young  men 
with  him  were  captivated.  Mons.  Bresson  says  she  is 
the  gentlest  and  most  determined  person  he  ever  met 
with,  that  never  out  of  France  was  such  a  manner  and 
tenue  seen.  Her  teeth  are  little  black  stumps,  the  foot 
very  big. 


To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  AND  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  4,  1837. 

My  dearest  brother  and  sister, — I  have  just  sent  off 
Georgy,Mlle.  Eward,  Baba  and  Hayes,2  Fullerton,  Boring- 
don,  Lady  and  Miss  Stuart  to  Meg's  house  and  garden, 
which  are  all  open  to  the  fashionable  public  to-day. 
Granville  was  offered  a  window  in  retirement  upstairs, 
but  though  he  is  much  better  he  thought  it  more 
prudent  to  decline. 

The  King  would  not  allow  the  Duchesse  to  come 
alone,  and  the  entree  into  Paris  will  be  a  great  affair. 
He  is  to  ride  in  before  the  caleche,  which  entre  nous  is 
much  sneered  at  and  ridiculed  by  his  foes  and  regretted 
by  his  friends.  '  II  se  fait  postilion.' 

1  Majority  for  Government  in  the  House  of  Commons. 

2  The  little  Fullerton  boy  and  his  nurse. 


1837  TO   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  233 

(Secret.)  The  Megs  are  returned  from  Fontainebleau, 
the  old  pair  in  a  most  hostile  humour.  They  join  in 
the  chorus  of  praise,  but  without  either  zest  or  satis- 
faction. Is  it  that  Meg  and  her  girl  were  put  into  one 
small  room,  their  gowns  hanging  round  them,  laundry 
like,  having  none  of  the  comforts  and  conveniences  of 
life  ?  Is  it  that  all  the  convives  at  the  chateau  were  at 
a  very  proper  distance,  no  preference  shown,  no  dis- 
tinction made  to  any  ? 

Emilie  is  in  great  beauty.  Boringdon  and  Leveson 
will  have  her  and  Miss  Stuart  to  themselves,  I  believe, 
as  we  hear  most  of  the  other  lordlings  fail.  Lady 
Stuart  has  just  been  with  me,  sitting  up  on  her  hind 
legs  in  great  distress.  The  fetes,  the  young  lords,  the 
Cannings  coming,  the  London  season  going. 

Monday. — I  am  just  come  very  tired  from  Court. 
Charmed  with  the  Duchesse  ;  not  pretty  perhaps,  but 
everything  else  and  equivalent.  Such  a  manner, 
tournure,  dignity,  grace,  no  sort  of  pretension,  modesty, 
parfaite  obligeance.  He  looks  the  happiest  of  men,  and 
Mme.  de  Montjoie  says  they  are  the  greatest  specimens 
of  true  love  that  ever  was  seen. 


To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  June  12,  1837. 

Dearest  D., — We  wait  with  anxious  expectation  for 
news  from  England,  so  much  seems  precarious. 

I  was  at  the  Eeservoir  Inn  at  Versailles  at  three- 
Count  Pahlen,  Nicolas,  Medem,  the  Brignoles,  the 
Schonbourgs,  Aston,  Heneage,  Emilie  de  Flahault, 
Fullertons,  myself  and  Leveson  dined  at  five.  At 
six  we  went  to  the  chateau.  At  near  three  in  the 
morning  we  drank  tea,  then  put  on  our  bonnets 
and  shawls  again,  and  I  and  Mrs.  Foster *  came 

1  Her  maid. 


234     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

back  to  Paris,  venire  a  terre,  and  arrived  at  half  past 
four. 

Versailles  was  as  beautiful  as  possible  within  and 
without.  I  hear  the  banquet,  1,500  at  dinner,  served 
with  ease  and  rapidity,  was  something  miraculous.  The 
Salle  de  Spectacle  is  beyond  description  or  imagination. 
Though  entirely  red  and  gold,  as  light  as  day.  The 
full  dress,  Duprez's  voice,  Miss  Ellsler's  legs,  Mile.  Mars' 
conversation — '  Spare  me  the  details,'  you  will  say,  '  as 
I  take  in  the  newspapers.' 

What  I  admire  most  is  Versailles,  the  thing  itself, 
human  beings  streaming  over  all  its  glories  and 
amongst  the  jets  d'eau,  clumps  of  roses,  and  under, 
thanks  to  the  late  season,  the  lilacs,  laburnums,  horse- 
chestnuts,  and  all  the  busy  delight  and  bustle — a  hum 
of  millions  of  people  looking  their  smartest. 

Nothing  ever  was  in  my  opinion  so  perfect  as  the 
Duchesse  d'Orleans'  manner,  so  calm,  so  quiet  and  still, 
yet  always  more  attentive,  more  gracious  and  more 
perfectly  up  to  it  all  than  any  of  those  around  her,  a 
sort  of  tenue  that  would  make  any  defects  of  manner  in 
others  (were  there  such)  remarkably  obvious. 

Things  not  in  the  papers.  Mmes.  Valen9ay,  Castellane, 
Vallombrosa,  Caraman  would  not  so  much  have  minded 
not  being  asked  at  all,  had  not  our  Menou  been  one  of 
the  invited.  They  did  not  see  her  superior  claims — 
officially,  physically  or  morally.  The  Diplomates  were 
much  pleased  with  their  box.  Mme.  de  Flahault  says 
we  were  degraded.  We  mean  to  inquire  how.  A 
reconciliation  between  her  and  Dino. 

The  foreigners  of  distinction  very  indignant  at  a 
great  gaucherie.  Stuarts,  Lady  Eendlesham,  Stafibrds, 
Marie  Menzingen,  Mmes.  Durazzo  and  Ferrari,  having 
been  all  asked  to  the  dinner,  the  day  before  received 
formal  printed  un-invitations,  desired  to  consider  their 
former  invites  as  nuls  et  non  avenus. 


1837  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  235 

Nobody  knows  why  the  Flahaults  are  stormy.  He 
has  not  the  Grand  Croix  of  the  Legion  d'Honneur  ; 
and  Emilie  spent  her  evening  alone  at  the  Eeservoir, 
being  asked  neither  to  dinner  with  her  mother  nor  fete. 
But  there  are  many  precedents  of  like  grievances. 
However,  it  makes  her  mother  take  up  all  our  different 
causes  of  humiliation  with  even  unwonted  energy,  but 
she  leaves  me  alone,  having  long  felt  in  scorn — '  Wretch, 
whom  no  sense  of  wrong  can  rouse  to  vengeance.' 

All  my  belongings  are  still  at  Versailles.  I  expect 
them  late  to-day. 

On  Wednesday  the  fete  populaire  here.  On  Thursday 
a  dinner  given  to  the  Eoyal  Family  at  the  Hotel  de 
Ville.  The  Due  de  Broglie  told  us  yesterday  evening 
that  immediately  after  the  repast  there  will  be  a 
Diorama.  '  Eambuteau,;1  avec  sa  galanterie  accoutumee, 
fera  passer  devant  les  yeux  de  la  Duchesse  le  Palais  de 
Ludwigslust,  oil  elle  a  ete  elevee.  Apres  cela  le  Eoi, 
a  ce  qu'on  dit,  fera  deux  fois  le  tour  de  Mme.  Kambu- 
teau 2  apres  le  bal.'  Eepeat  not  this  levity  of  our  dear 
little  doctrinaire.  He  is  in  tearing  spirits. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  June  23,  1837. 

I  hope  Granville  will  be  well  enough  to  pay  a  visit 
to  England,  and  he  much  wishes  it  himself;  but  he 
cannot  yet  walk,  and  it  must  be  some  time  before  he 
can  risk  making  any  exertion  or  undergoing  any  fatigue. 
We  therefore  remain  here  for  the  present,  avide  of 
news,  devouring  newspapers,  gasping  for  letters,  and 
marking  days  by  the  intelligence  received ;  for  it  is 
history,  fate,  romance,  all  in  one.3  Everything  new, 
nothing  to  be  calculated  upon.  Such  a  little  love  of  a 
Queen !  Lord  Melbourne  must  take  care  to  throw  a 

1  Prefet  de  la  Seine.  3  She  was  very  stout. 

3  The  Queen's  accession. 


236     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

something  paternal  into  his  manner.  We  pine  to  hear 
of  the  First  Lady.  All  point  at  that  other  Queen, 
Harriet  the  First.1 

I  alone  say  she  never  can  or  will  make  such  a  sacri- 
fice. Granville,  Georgy,  Aston,  all  say,  it  is  her  duty 
to  make  it. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  gasps  for  breath  and  cries  over  the 
young  speech,  which  she  and  we  admire  a  I'exces. 

All  the  fetes  here  are  at  an  end,  the  Louvre  concert 
put  off,  on  account  of  our  King's  death,  till  the  end  of 
July. 

God  bless  you.     If  you  have  any  pity,  write. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  30,  1837. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  congratulate  the  Government 
and  the  little  Queen  on  your  Duchess's  appointment. 
It  gives  such  immense  pleasure  to  them  as  a  party  and 
brilliancy  to  a  Court.  I  hope  she  has  secured  to  herself 
as  much  liberty  and  as  long  holidays  as  the  case 
admits  of. 

We  grieve  to  hear  of  a  contest  at  Morpeth,  but  I 
do  hope  it  will  be  but  a  slight  breeze  and  do  no  harm. 

I  need  not  say  how  glad  I  am  of  Harriet  Pitt's  ap- 
pointment.2 It  is  delicious. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  entreated  me  to  tell  the  Duchess 
that  she  had  not  a  moment  to  write,  but  that  she  sets 
out  to-morrow,  Saturday  morning,  and  hopes  to  arrive 
in  London  Monday  evening  or  Tuesday.  She  will  be 
much  missed  here,  as  she  is  really  more  liked  than  I 
think  it  is  easy  for  a  foreign  woman  to  be.  Nothing  can 
be  more  agreeable  and  amiable  than  she  has  been  to  us. 

1  Duchess  of  Sutherland. 

2  Lord  Rivers' s  sister,  appointed  a  Maid  of  Honour. 


1837  TO  LADY  CAKL1SLE  2o7 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  July  1837. 

My  dearest,  dear  Gr., — You  may  judge  of  the  deep 
interest  of  letters  from  England.  We  are  delighted  to 
hear  from  all  of  your  Duchess's  liking  the  little  Queen 
so  much,  and  of  Lord  Melbourne's  intimacy  and  favour. 
But  elections  are  the  great  point  de  mire  now,  and  as 
usual  everybody  seems  equally  sanguine. 

Tell  me  a  few  things.  What  is  the  real  state  of 
Sir  Robert  Peel's  health  ?  What  a  loss  I,  malgre  my 
thinking  him  pen  de  chose  as  a  consistent  politician  and  a 
bit  of  a  humbug,  think  he  would  be,  as  he  has  integrity, 
energy,  and  is  in  his  family  so  valued  and  beloved. 

Does  the  Duchess  think  the  Queen  cares  about 
politics,  and  is  she  a  Whig  or  a  Tory  in  her  innermost 
heart  ? 

Can  you  forgive  me  for  this  letter  ?  I  have  not  a 
single  thing  beyond  gratitude  and  curiosity  to  make 
a  letter  out  of. 

Paris  was  never  known  to  be  so  empty,  and  is 
becoming  dry  and  dusty.  Our  drive  in  the  Bois  de 
Boulogne  is  delicious  and  daily.  If  Granville  was  well 
he  would  not  endure  Paris  in  its  present  state,  but  as 
it  is  we  can  command  comfort  and  quiet.  Amusement 
must  be  looked  to  a  month  later. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

St.  Germain  :  July  14,  1837. 

Dearest  of  brothers, — I  was  just  going  to  write  to 
you  without  the  stimulus  of  your  delightful  letter  to 
tell  you  that  we  go  on  as  well  as  we  have  begun.  We 
think  of  being  in  England  for  a  fortnight  the  very 
beginning  of  August.  Dieppe  and  Brighton  on  our 
way. 

We  came  here  yesterday  evening.  The  weather  is 
divine,  the  air  pure  and  bracing  as  at  Kemp  Town. 


238     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1837 

Granville  lias  taken  his  first  walk  without  being  the 
worse  for  it  and  I  am  happier  than  I  can  say  or  sing. 

How  I  hope  I  shall  find  you  on  the  pier.  Is  the 
passage  out  of  steamer  on  to  pier  very  unpleasant  ?  I 
think  I  can  recollect  having  it  in  horror,  but  if  Mme. 
St.  Clair  has  achieved  it,  carrying  her  fears  and  legs 
featly  over  it,  I  will  give  my  alarm  to  the  winds. 

We  are  intent  upon  election  news.  Mme.  de  Lieven 
writes  me  the  most  perfect  letters. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  21,  1837. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  can  never  say  enough  of  the 
pleasure  your  letters  give  me. 

Mention,  my  dearest,  Lord  Gwydyr  and  Lady 
Willoughby.  You  will  be  surprised,  but  I  am  desired 
to  ask  about  them  and  their  politics  and  how  they 
stand  at  the  new  Court. 

There  is  nobody  I  pity  like  Lady  Lansdowne,  few 
that  I  admire  more.  Mme.  de  Lieven  dotes  upon  Lord 
Melbourne.  She  praises  him  to  the  greatest  degree,  and 
tells  me  of  his  excessive  favour  with  the  most  eager 
pleasure.  She  is  also  amazingly  struck  with  the  little 
Queen,  and  says  of  your  daughter,  '  La  Duchesse  de  S. 
est  admirable  dans  son  role,  si  belle,  si  tranquille,  si 
noble.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  August  4,  1837. 

We  have  been  in  a  state  of  great  excitement.  The 
elections  seem  to  be  going  on  favourably.  I  can  bear 
London  and  Planta,  and  in  another  direction  Eoebuck 
and  C.  Villiers.1 

Politics  in  general  have  a  much  stronger  interest 
now.  They  are  vivified  and  brought  home  to  one's 
feelings.  I  feel  so  much  interested  about  that  little 

1  The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Villiers,  then  looked  upon  as  an  advanced 
Radical. 


1837  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  239 

wonderful  Queen,  and  admire  all  I  hear  of  hers  and 
Lord  Melbourne's  relative  positions.  What  a  strong, 
anxious  tie  it  is  that  binds  him  to  her  service,  so  unlike 
anything  else  of  the  sort  one  ever  heard  or  read  of ! 

Mme.  de  Lieven  writes  always  in  admiration  of 
sovereign  and  subject,  and  the  most  grateful  expressions 
about  les  adorables  Sutherland's,  but  she  seems  low  and 
really  very  unwell.  Mme.  de  Schonbourg  has  written  to 
me  a  most  interesting  and  clever  letter.  She  says  of 
your  daughter,  'Si  je  pouvais  1'admirer  et  I'aimerplus 
ici  qu'k  Paris,  je  crois  que  je  le  ferais.  Je  trouve  qu'elle 
remplit  si  parfaitement  la  belle  place  et  position  que 
le  ciel  lui  a  donnee  ;  son  activite,  toujours  calme  et  reflec- 
tive, me  remplit  d'admiration.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  August  5,  1837. 

How  shall  I  ever  thank  you,  my  dearest  brother  ? 
You  have  painted  the  Queen  to  me  in  general  colours, 
but  nobody  had  sketched  Pitt,1  Tavy,1  and  Mama  l  to 
the  life  like  you. 

What  tact  the  little  woman  seems  to  possess ! 
What  determination !  And  how  much  security  there  is, 
I  think,  in  her  friendships,  engouements  and  entourage, 
making  her  go  on  blowing  in  the  right  quarter.  When 
I  hear  of  Lord  Melbourne  looking  very  ill  and  worn, 
and  see  how  neck-and-neck  the  election  runs,  I  feel  as 
if  our  great  dependence  was  in  her  grace  and  favour, 
and  I  hope,  as  you  say,  we  shall  do  uncommonly  well 
with  that. 

Monsieur  de  Bray — perhaps  you  remember  his  papa 
and  mama,  who  used  to  live  in  the  house  Colonel 
Thorn  has  now — is  a  very  gentlemanlike  young  man, 
known  to  the  Princess  Schonbourg,  etc.  Great  would  be 
my  renown  if  he  gets  his  nose  into  Chatsworth,  and  great 

1  Miss  Pitt,  Lady  Tavtstock,  and  the  Duchess  of  Kent. 


240     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1837 

will  be  the  wonders  lie  will  tell  of  it  to  his  love,  Madame 
de  la  Chataignerie,  when  he  returns. 

If  you  fret  at  not  having  got  the  copy  of  Pauline, 
you  may  order  four  large  sketches  or  eight  small  ones 
to  put  in  your  album.  Animals  in  water-colours,  with 
pencil  backgrounds.  The  large  ones  ten  francs,  the 
small  ones  five  francs.  They  are  done  by  a  man  whose 
great  amusements  were  field  sports  and  drawing.  He 
is  now  in  great  distress,  and  selling  these  sketches  for 
bread.  Dogs  of  all  sorts,  deer,  pheasants,  feeding  sheep, 
the  best  and  prettiest  of  all.  I  took  them  into  Gran- 
ville's  room  without  a  hope.  He  bought  instantly  four, 
and  Aston  six,  so  lovely  did  they  consider  them. 

He  is  now  making  me  a  sketch  of  women  washing 
in  the  Seine.  Do  not  let  the  remembrance  of  the  '  Vicar 
of  Wakefield '  make  you  scorn  the  sheep.  I  do  assure 
you,  two  hillocks  with  two  sheep  on  them  is  one  of  the 
prettiest  things  I  ever  saw. 

My  artist  is  young — about  thirty,  I  should  think — very 
dark,  and  Spanish  looking.  Suffield  Gunton  by  name 
— an  odd,  if  not  intentional  combination.  Extremely 
proud,  as  hard  as  a  stone,  till  moved  by  a  dry  cold 
statement  of  his  distress  I  said  something  kind,  and  then 
he  cried.  I  know  nothing  of  him.  He  wrote  with  his 
sketches,  and  nobody  had  mentioned  him  to  me. 

Caradoc  is  arrived,  looking  wretchedly  and  old  but 
very  domestic  as  he  drives  in  the  Champs  Elysees 
with  the  Princesse  Bagration  and  his  daughter,  a  fine 
well-grown  girl  of  sixteen,  mother  unknown — an  odd 
family  party  to  brave  the  public  eye. 

I  must  not  forget  that  Lieven  writes  delighted  with 
her  delicious  journee  at  Chiswick.  She  is  penetree  with 
your  kindness.  It  has  not  reached  me  from  her  if 
there  has  been  disappointment  in  other  quarters. 

And  now  good-bye,  or  you  will  say  '  I  hardly  can 
bear  it,'  as  Georgy's  boy  does  when  he  is  thwarted* 


1837  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  241 

He  is  the  greatest  love.  Georgy's  mild,  firm  rule  has 
ecarted  all  the  usual  signals  of  wrath,  roars  '  I  won't,' 
etc. ;  but  he  is  naturally  very  violent  and  particularly 
abusive,  and  when  outre  begins  as  above,  and  always, 
like  the  Irish,  far  wide  of  his  mark.  The  other  day 
at  dessert :  '  Grandpapa,  give  me  some  strawberries.' 
Georgy  in  a  great  hurry  :  '  Oh,  no,  not  to-day.  He 
must  not  have  anything  but  biscuit.'  Very  red,  after 
a  minute's  pause  :  '  I  hardly  can  bear  it.'  'Bear  what, 
my  darling ? '  'I  can  hardly  bear  big  people.'  '  Oh, 
that's  nonsense.'  Much  redder :  '  I  hardly  can  bear 
nasty,  dirty,  tiresome,  big  people,  who  won't  give  me 
strawberries  when  I  want  them.'  And  all  this  with- 
out a  tear  or  geste,  speaking  as  plain  as  we  do. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  August  7,  1837. 

The  Poodle  tells  me  Eivers  looks  like  a  fat  yeoman. 
I  hope  you  like  him  as  much  as  ever. 

We  remain  quietly  here ;  not  even  St.  Germain  at 
present.  The  weather  is  not  too  hot,  and  the  Bois  de 
Boulogne  and  our  garden  delightful. 

I  am  so  glad  you  have  been  to  Court.  How  uni- 
versal the  admiration  is  !  A  question  or  two  as  you 
approve. 

Is  it  true  that  the  Queen  likes  nothing  but  London, 
and  dislikes  the  thought  of  Windsor  or  Brighton  ? 

Who  are  Sir  Wetherall  and  Sir  Stovin,  the  two  new 
grooms  ? 

Who  is  Miss  Davies  ? 

Is  it  old  Miss  Lister  or  a  younger  one  ? 

Does  Lord  Melbourne  look  very  ill  indeed  ? 

Elections  do  not  elate,  but  I  hope  with  Scotland  and 
Ireland  they  may  do.  But  it  is  very  strange  that  it 
has  not  been  more  triumphant. 

VOL.    II.  B 


242     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1837 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

St.  Germain  :  August  13,  1837. 

We  only  came  here  this  evening,  my  dearest  sister, 
to  drink  tea  and  go  to  bed,  and  we  shall  drive  back 
early  to-morrow.  This  suits  us  better,  and  it  is  a  com- 
plete change  and  air  bath.  I  almost  hope  we  are  near 
complete  recovery. 

We  admired  George's  speech  at  Leeds  beyond  every- 
thing. Aston  was  in  raptures  over  it.  Huddersfield  ! 
I  have  not  words  to  express  my  rage.  Oh,  how  I  do 
wish  the  elections  were  over !  We  know  not  what  to 
think ;  some  croak  and  some  are  alarmingly  sanguine. 
I  cannot  believe  in  late  events  not  having  a  very  de- 
cided and  overpowering  effect. 

Paris. 

Aston  tells  me  that  he  met  Mole  and  Montalivet  at 
dinner  at  Flahault's  yesterday.  Montalivet  says  Berryer 
is  seriously  implicated,  but  everybody  else  doubts  it,  as 
he  was  prudent  and  avowed  his  Carlism  as  a  profession. 

And  now  God  bless  you,  my  own  dearest,  kindest 
sis.  We  shall  meet  at  the  meeting,  elect  who  will, 
elect  who  may,  and  that  will  be  happiness. 

Tell  me  all  you  hear  of  my  darling  Susan.  I  have 
delightful  letters  from  her.  I  hear  she  is  in  despair  at 
the  Queen's  accession,  being  a  desperate  Tory. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

St.  Germain  :  August  18,  1837. 

My  own  most  dear  sister, — You  gave  us  the  greatest 
pleasure  in  sending  Morpeth's  letter.  How  perfectly 
beautiful  his  speech  about  the  Queen  is  !  Thank 
Heaven  the  elections  are  over ! 

The  way  everybody  talks  of  Morpeth — all  in  the 
sense  of  '  greater  thou  shalt  be  ' — and  envisager  for 
him  a  situation  in  time,  which  I  never,  after  the  first 


1837  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  243 

gratified  hot  feel  of  pride,  can  much  wish  for  any  one  I 
love  as  much  love  as  I  love  him.  But  it  is  an  elating 
feeling  to  hear  people  talk  of  him. 

Is  it  true — entre  nous  most  secretly,  and  I  did  not 
hear  it  from  Mme.  de  Lieven — that  Lord  Grey's  great 
cause  of  soreness  and  plaintiveness  is  a  jealousy  of  him 
as  standing  in  consideration  and  prospective  so  much 
above  Lord  Ho  wick  ? 

Mme.  de  Lieven  is  more  interesting  and  amusing 
and  agreeable  than  I  can  say.  All  she  pours  forth 
of  all  those  I  am  fond  of  or  curious  about  makes 
Paris  alive  in  this  dead,  empty  season.  First,  really 
first,  affection,  admiration  and  gratitude  to  the  Suther- 
lands,  with  a  delightful  account  of  their  attitude  in 
their  new  position.  Then,  of  you,  such  a  delicious 
picture ;  and  of  politics,  lastly,  such  a  charming  view. 
She  don't  value  the  election  losses  one  farthing ;  and 
thinks,  what  I  have  felt  all  the  time,  the  impossi- 
bility to  others  and  the  certainty  to  us.  People  will 
come  over,  and  the  only  thing  that  might  have  made 
the  Whig  break-up — Lord  Melbourne's  weariness  and 
discouragement — no  longer  possible.  His  situation  is 
of  such  unexampled  interest  as  well  as  his  duty,  that 
he  will  never  give  up,  but  be  more  riveted  to  it.  Diffi- 
culties the  Tories  will  increase  to  him,  but  that  is  all, 
and  little  against  the  stimulus  of  added  zest  and  devoted 
attachment. 

We  are  enchanted  to  hear  that  Leveson  is  coming. 

o 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe :  August  24,  1837. 

Most  dear  sister, — Three  days  here  have  already 
braced  and  agreed  with  Granville  so  well  that  I  feel 
I  shall  soon  have  charming  bulletins  to  send  you.  We 
drive  two  hours  in  the  morning  in  the  intervals  of 
stormy  weather,  and  the  air  is  renovating  and  delicious. 

K  2 


244     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1837 

We  dine  at  a  quarter  before  five,  drive  an  hour  after- 
wards ;  in  bed  soon  after  eleven,  sleep  like  tops ;  break- 
fast at  nine. 

This  goes  to  you  by  Leveson,  who  trots  to  Boulogne, 
the  sea  being  outrageous,  with  Betsey  Meyendorf,  the 
Zavadowskis,  the  maman  of  this  last,  le petit,  legouvemeur, 
a  French  spark  and  various  other  trimmings. 

He  could  not  wait,  so  I  must  send  this  by  the 
steamer,  if  steamer  there  be,  that  will  encounter  such 
a  black  mass  of  sky  as  I  see  out  of  my  window.  He 
will  be  at  Morpeth  on  the  5th.  You  will  probably  hear 
from  him  as  soon  as  I  do. 

We  are  now  left  to  the  Doctor  and  Freddy,  and 
sometimes  Claremont,1  who  is  here  for  a  week,  to 
Freddy's  great  enchantment. 

The  Canterbury s  are  here,  Mme.  de  St.  Clair,  the 
Armstrongs,  and  a  few  foreigners.  It  is  easy  just  to 
fit  one's  hours  in,  so  as  to  avoid  them  all  in  a  lump. 
When  Granville  is  able  to  walk  with  ease,  we  shall 
begin  squiddling  at  the  Promenade  des  Bains. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe :  August  1837. 

Adorable  sis, — D.  gives  the  most  charming  accounts 
of  you,  tells  me  Lord  Carlisle  was  very  well  also  and 
Castle  Howard  delightful,  that  he  never  enjoyed  any- 
thing more.  You  are  most  kind  always  about  my 
dearest  Gink.2  I  never  knew  him  so  delightful,  amiable, 
and  gay  as  during  his  short  visit  to  us.  He  will  be 
very  sorry  to  miss  seeing  Bruce.3  I  thought  we  had 
got  his  papa  safe  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain.  Mme.  de 
Flahault  tells  me  Lady  Elgin  was  a  strange  character 
in  Scotland — never  out  of  a  riding  habit  (horses  being 
her  passion),  and  wearing  a  beard.  Shaved  and  in  chip 

General  Claremont,  for  many  years  Military  Attache  at  Paris. 

2  As  Lord  Leveson  was  sometimes  called  by  his  family. 

3  Frederick  Bruce,  son  of  Lord  Elgin. 


1837  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  245 

bonnets,  she  still  looks  marvellous.  But  I  think  her 
excellent,  interesting  from  her  zest,  energy,  and  simpli- 
city, and  more  agreeable  in  a  tete-a-tete  than  almost 
anybody. 

My  letters  from  Paris  are  full  of  Madame  de  Dino. 
She  has  had  a  paralytic  stroke.  Mme.  de  Lieven  says, 
'  Elle  se  remet.'  But  it  is  a  terrible  trial  to  her  in  all 
ways. 

The  Duchess  of  Orleans  is  with  child,  and  the 
Duke  has  given  up  going  to  Constantine — two  good 
things  for  the  family.  • 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dieppe  :  September  10,  1837. 

My  dearest  sister, — We  leave  this  place  to-morrow, 
Granville  in  much  improved  health,  but  still  lame. 
Though  the  weather  is  still  very  fine,  it  is  becoming 
cold,  and  I  am  not  sorry,  or  afraid  of  Paris  for  him. 

You  will  have  seen  that  there  have  been  most  ill- 
natured  and  shameful  attacks  upon  Mme.  de  Lieven  in 
the  French  newspapers.  She  is  much  annoyed,  and  I 
shall  be  glad  to  see  her  again  and  to  give  her  a  little 
advice.  Nothing  is  done  by  showing  annoyance,  and 
entering  into  discussions  means  newspaper  aggressions. 
She  must  be  quiet,  and  that  is  what  she  is  not  disposed 
to  be. 

Princesse  Bagration  went  this  morning.  She  tells 
me  that  Caradoc  is  now  at  Cherbourg,  having  been  at 
Havre,  that  he  travels  alone  and  on  foot  without  a 
servant,  his  clothes  in  a  knapsack  over  his  shoulder. 
She  wonders,  and  frets,  and  says  such  an  odd  plan  for 
a  malade  \  But  I  understand  his  doing  anything  or 
everything  for  effect.  When  he  fails  to  astonish  and 
dazzle  in  one  line,  to  try  it  in  another.  I  would  give 
anything  to  see  him  arrive  at  an  inn  and  hear  him 
talk. 


246     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  18,  1837. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  am  delighted  to  hear  that  you 
are  going  to  Chatsworth.  Tell  D.  I  never  can  be  grate- 
ful enough  to  him  for  his  '  mutton-broth  letter,'  which 
I  received  on  Susy's  birthday. 

I  have  little  to  tell  you.  Mme.  de  Lieven  is  in 
better  spirits  ;  she  did  the  honours  yesterday  at  a  grand 
dinner  at  Pahlen's.  He,  the  Ambassador,  adores  Mme. 
de  Shonbourg,  who  was  in  great  beauty  and  spirits. 
Mme.  de  Vallombrosa  ditto.  Nicholas  loves,  they  say, 
but  there  was  no  sign  of  it,  and  he  does  not  stick,  gaze, 
and  sigh  as  he  used  to  do. 

Mme.  de  Schonbourg  is  extremely  fond  of  a  swarm 
of  admirers.  As  such  she  encourages  Lord  Eokeby 
and  Mr.  Sneyd — open,  innocent,  and  very  safe  flirtations. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  October  2,  1837. 

My  dearest  brother, — I  was  beginning  to  be  in 
despair  when  I  received  your  beautiful  sketch  of 
Chatsworth.  I  see  them  all — all  as  plain  as  you  did. 
In  Paris,  Betsey  Meyendorf  used  to  be  in  the  Eue 
Montmartre  at  six  to  draw  the  anatomy  of  the  horse. 
I  think  she  must  look  more  feminine  on  the  ladder.  I 
like  her,  and  I  have  had  such  a  warm,  grateful  note 
about  you.  She  is  very  intelligent,  I  think,  and  so 
sociable  and  cordial.  My  opinion  is  rather  in  a  mess. 
Mix  it  and  take  it,  dearest  Grace,  and  let  me  implore 
you  not  to  let  the  next  pause  be  so  long. 

Granville  is  going  on  perfectly  well,  but  he  wants  a 
great  deal  of  strengthening  still.  We  are  able  to  lead 
the  most  quiet  and  regular  life  here.  The  weather  is 
delicious.  Society  made  up  of  Mesdames  Lieven, 
Schonbourg,  Brignole,  Durazzo,  Pozzo,  Pahlens, 


1837  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  247 

Tchann,  Sneyd,  Luttrel,  not  to  mention  attaches,  and 
Georgy  in  my  pocket,  very  pleasant.  The  Opera  begins 
on  Tuesday ;  we  are  promised  '  Beatrice  di  Tenda.' 
Granville  has  begun  a  course  of  sea-water  douches,, 
which  agree  perfectly.  The  eyes  of  Eichard  and 
Eobert  Verity  are  upon  us.  All  this  will  show  you 
why  I  am  not  longing  to  go  to  you  and  Susy  pour  le 
moment.  I  think  Paris  better  for  him. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  looks  very  thin  and  yellow ;  will 
remain  here  because  it  is  true  and  certain  that  her 
health  would  suffer  if  she  was  to  travel.  Everybody 
believes  it  at  last,  and  Chermside  has  written  it,  when 
it  will  force  '  Vraiment ' 1  out  of  her  incredulous  half. 
Perhaps  you  wish  to  know  the  truth  about  poor 
Madame  de  Dino.  The  Due  de  Noailles  received  the 
account  from  her,  and  told  it  to  everybody.  In  three 
or  four  days  she  wrote  to  Madame  de  Lieven,  to  Henry 
Greville,  to  all  she  knew  here  without  mentioning  it, 
and  to  everybody  who  made  or  wrote  enquiries  the 
thing  was  positively  denied.  What  is  certain  is  that 
she  must  now  be  very  well,  as  she  has  just  been  acting 
the  principal  character  in  a  spectacle  given  to  Monsieur 
de  Talleyrand  on  his  birthday.  It  is  certain  almost  that 
she  must  have  had  some  sort  of  seizure,  as  it  would  be 
a  strange  thing  for  Monsieur  de  Noailles  to  have  in- 
vented it  in  honour  of  her,  whose  devoted  admirer  he  is. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  November  6,  1837. 

Dearest  D., — We  accept  with  gratitude,  and  your 
troisieme  does  not  alarm  Granville.  Monday  next  (this 
day  week)  we  talk  of  setting  out.  What  happiness  it 
would  be  to  see  you  all  again,  Lord  and  Lady  Carlisle, 
Leveson,  and  Morpeth  ! 

Sir  Eobert  Peel  arrived  yesterday.     Called  to-day 

1  A  nickname  of  Prince  Lieven  from  his  frequently  using  the  word. 


248     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRAIN VILLE     1837 

when  we  were  out.  We  have  asked  them  to  an  early 
dinner  to-morrow  and  to  go  with  us  to  Madame 
Persiani's  debut.  Lady  Augusta  Fox  and  Henry  dined 
here  yesterday.  She  is  very  amusing. 

There  is  much  that  is  melancholy.  Lady  Lincoln 
has  again  had  severe  attacks.  Her  family  miserable. 
Poor  Mr.  Graham  has  had  a  fit,  not  apoplexy,  but 
something  very  near  it.  To-day  we  heard  of  Monsieur 
de  Caraman.  He  has  died  of  cholera  at  Constantine. 
He  was  a  good  man,  and  I  feel  much  shocked  at  it. 

If  I  was  not  coming  in  a  minute,  I  would  beg  pardon 
for  this  letter. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  20,  1837. 

Granville  has  this  morning  a  return  of  gout.  He  is 
well  in  health,  but  deeply  disappointed.  He  cannot 
go  to  the  House  or  out  of  this  one  to-day.  I  dine  alone 
at  Court ! 

My  dearest  boy  is  very  well.  I  think  he  will  do 
well. 

I  cannot  but  feel  it  a  mercy  that  Granville  has  not 
the  fatigue  and  exertion  of  to-day  to  encounter.  Now 
he  has  perfect  repose,  and  I  hope  none  but  pleasurable 
emotions. 

I  have  brought  you  Binet's l  egg,  but  when  it  was 
suspended  in  its  glass  bell  I  thought  it  so  pretty  that 
my  plans  changed  and  I  have  brought  it  to  you  as  a 
love  gift. 

My  benefit  will  be  great,  for  it  will  be  seen  on  your 
table  and  perhaps  obtain  me  orders,  and  you  shall 
repay  me  by  protecting  my  bazaar,  and,  if  you  ever 
want  a  blotting-paper  book,  a  comforter  or  such  like, 

1  An  ostrich  egg  painted  in  imitation  of  one  painted  by  Teniers  in  the 
possession  of  the  Duke. 


1837  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  249 

employing  me,  but  this  egg  I  am  bent  upon  giving 
you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  November  21,  1837. 

Dearest  brother, — Safely  delivered  and  perfectly 
happy.  Everybody  tells  me  that  dearest  Leveson  did 
well.1  Granville  is  very  much  delighted  and  almost 
well. 

I  found  G.  at  dinner  at  Court,  in  hat  and  feather 
and  diamonds,  gayest  of  the  gay  and  in  her  element. 
You  know  she  loves  in  Courts  to  shine.  My  darling 
Susy  as  thin  as  a  whipping-post,  arid  Eivers  as  fat  as  a 
partridge  ;  both  the  greatest  dears  I  have  seen  for  a  long 
time. 

I  find  Queen  Victoria  perfect  in  manner,  dignity, 
and  grace,  with  great  youthfulness  and  joyousness.  I 
find  a  dinner  at  Court  very  curious  to  see,  but  my  bad 
nature  prevailed,  and  I  got  so  impatient  towards  eleven 
that  I  hardly  could  bear  it. 

It  is  so  much  more  like  a  Court  than  any  I  have 
seen,  and  I  am  spoilt  by  bobbing  in  for  ten  minutes  to 
the  Queen's  back  and  cross-stitch  at  the  Tuileries. 

William2  says,  a  little  tipsy  and  in  his  impulsive 
manner  :  '  I've  seen  Mr.  Eidgeway,  and  he  can't  say 
anything  because  he  knows  nothing,  but  the  letters  isn't 
in  no  ways  stopped ;  all  as  usual,  so  I  suppose,'  and  then 
he  looked  wistfully  at  me  like  a  dog. 

We  sat  poor  Mary  Gloucester  and  I  on  either  side. 
The  Duchess  Suth,  G.,  Lady  Durham  in  a  row.  Three 
chairs  were  called  for  and  placed  for  Duke  Suth,  Lords 
Mulgrave  and  Durham.  We  looked  like  the  old  game 
from  chapel  to  church,  from  church  to  chapel.  She 
talked  almost  entirely  to  the  men,  but  very  graciously 

1  He  moved  the  Address. 

3  A  footman  of  the  Duke's  from  the  West  of  Scotland. 


250     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

and  kindly  to  us.  She  l  at  whist  looks  careworn,  but 
all  seems  smooth. 

Why,  here's  a  new  view  of  things.  Little  Johnny, 
say  some,  has  been  imprudent,  over-confident  of  strength, 
too  Conservative  in  short.  I  think  so  right,  and  if  we 
do  move  upon  it,  upon  what  noble  springs  !  I  think  it 
as  politic  as  right,  but  I  heard  of  someone  going  up  to 
one  of  us  and  uttering  '  You're  gone.' 

Dearest  brother,  in  reliance  upon  the  Hebrides  I 
don't  stop  my  letter,  but  hope  and  trust  it  will  cross 
you  on  the  road. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  November  22,  1837. 

I  have  seen  that  incomparable  man,  Mr.  Eidgeway. 
He  tells  me  you  will  not  be  here  to-day,  he  thinks, 
because  he  is  going  to  send  you  your  letters.  So  I 
write.  We  are  most  comfortable  here  ;  we  want  but  you. 

Johnny's  speech  has  had  different  effects,  and  so  has 
one  he  uttered  yesterday,  somewhat  softening  the 
matter.  Duke  Sutherland  and  I  liked  the  first,  and 
object  to  any  backing  out  of  it.  My  husband  thought 
the  first  imprudent,  and  sees  no  reason  for  having  pledged 
himself  to  so  much ;  it  has  necessitated  the  second,  and 
that's  just  the  pity.  I  think  a  grand  Whig  fault  is 
always,  like  poor  Mrs.  Bunting,  to  jump  over  the  saddle, 
instead  of  into  it,  and  then,  dear  Grace,  they  are  obliged 
to  go  a  little  into  the  dirt  to  get  up  afresh. 

Rivers  and  Susy  dined  at  Court  yesterday,  and  she 
is  going  to  take  her  baby  to  the  Queen.  They  were 
much  pleased  with  the  Queen  and  her  civility  to  them, 
and  Eivers  delighted  with  Lord  Melbourne. 

Leveson  met  Lord  Ashburton  at  Lady  Harriet 
Baring's.  She  immediately  said,  'Allow  me  to  intro- 
duce to  you  the  future  member  for  North  Staffordshire.' 

1  The  Duchess  of  Kent. 


1837  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  251 

Lord  Asliburton  looked  much  put  out,  so  it  answered 
to  her. 

Brother,  I  think  Lord  Durham  vulgar  and  familiar. 
I  wish  I  could  see  your  face.  Pray  burn  this  letter. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  1837. 

My  dearest  sister, — We  expect  Freddy  on  Sunday, 
and  are  leading  en  attendant  a  quiet  life,  though  yester- 
day I  dined  out  for  a  wonder,  at  Lord  Ailesbury's, 
where  she,  Lady  Kinnoul,  Lady  Glengall,  Lady  Aid- 
borough,  Madame  de  Caraman,  and  the  Princesse  Charles 
de  Beauveau,  nee  Komar,  appeared  gorgeous  in  velvets 
and  satins  of  various  bright  hues.  The  little  soiree 
afterwards  was  pleasant  till  the  ecstatic  moment  of 
release.  • 

Lady  Fanny  Bruce l  has  just  left  us  in  tears,  because 
the  carriage  came  sooner  than  was  expected.  She  has 
been  taking  her  dancing  lesson  with  Susy  Osborne. 
She  is  the  most  clever,  funny  little  thing,  the  image  of 
Bruce. 

Oswald  is  slow,  heavy,  and  sleepy,  but  there  is 
something  kind  and  worthy  about  him,  that  makes 
one  feel  as  one  does  when  the  dogs  grow  old.  I  hope 
he  will  brighten  up. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  25, 1837. 

My  own  dearest  sister, — After  I  have  wished  you  a 
merry  Christmas  I  must  tell  you  that  Granville  con- 
tinues well.  The  weather  is  like  spring,  as  mild  and 
warm.  We  have  resumed  our  early  drives. 

Give  my  love  and  thanks  to  your  Duchess.     Tell 

1  A  daughter   of  Lord  Elgin.     She  married  in  1855  Mr.  Baillie  of 
Dochfour. 


252     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1837 

her  I  will  take  care  that  her  box  is  delivered,  also  that 
the  feud  seems  much  composed  between  the  Princesses,1 
and  is  not  now  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  though  spec- 
tacles see  gene  and  coldness  that  did  not  exist  in  former 
times.  Also  that  I  gave  her  message  to  Guizot. 

We  are  all  charmed  with  Lady  Abercorn,  she  is  so 
unaffected,  gay,  and  graceful.  Marie  and  Dody  like 
Lady  Georgiana,  and  say  that  she  is  amusing  and  original. 
The  Duke 2  is  better,  calls  our  Harcourt  '  Dearest  Lizzy ' 
before  company,  which  causes  surprise. 

George  Harcourt  says :  '  Are  you  acquainted  with 
Baron  Hugel  ?  '  «  Yes.' 

4  He  is  a  most  delightful  person,  Elizabeth  knows 
him  well.'  '  Oh.' 

'  We  have  been  seeing  him  daily  since  you  left 
us.'  « Oh.' 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  29,  1837. 

My  dearest,  dear  sister, — We  are  expecting  the 
Sutherlands  to-day  or  to-morrow.  I  shall  give  you  a 
true  account  of  everything  we  do  and  that  she  does, 
knowing  how  interesting  is  all  that  concerns  them. 

I  think  Mine,  de  Shonbourg  a  good  deal  sobered, 
and  Paris  on  the  whole  is  quite  a  different  arena  from 
what  it  was  last  year.  No  gaiety  going  on  of  any  sort 
or  kind.  Mme.  de  Delmar,  confined  to  her  sick  room, 
will  not  open  her  house.  The  French  are  still  less 
coming  than  usual  for  various  reasons,  and  now  the 
very  annoying  melancholy  failure  at  Constantine.  The 
ridicule  thrown,  entre  nous,  not  without  reason,  upon  the 
very  ridiculous  telegraphic  account  of  it.  Alarm  at 
what  Thiers  may  do,  the  uncertainty  of  what  will  be 
when  the  Chambers  meet,  an  unusual  quantity  of 

1  Lieven  and  Schonbourg.  2  Of  Bedford. 


1837  TO   LADY  CARLISLE  253 

private  mournings.  Charles  the  Tenth l  only  just  begin- 
ning to  subside,  and  the  Due  d'Angouleme's  death 
expected,  not  to  mention  Naples  and  Austria.  All 
these  very  various  causes  have  given  the  greatest 
possible  flatness  to  soirees  ;  nothing  like  a  ball  has 
been  dreamt  of.  Tufiakin  had  promised  to  give  one 
on  the  28th,  but  the  Carlist  ladies  of  his  acquaintance 
prevented  him.  And  now  comes  the  extraordinary 
rise  of  the  Seine  to  keep  us  still  quieter.  This  side 
of  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain  is  almost  impassable, 
and  Mme.  Appony  has  put  off  an  immense  rout  which 
she  was  to  have  had  on  Monday.  She  writes  :  '  Une 
file  de  voiture  a  terre  est  bien  desagreable,  mais  une 
file  a  1'eau  serait  trop  fort.' 

1  He  died  on  November  6,  1836. 


254     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1838 


1833 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  1,  1838. 

My  own  dear  sister, — Many  happy  returns  to  you 
and  yours. 

Our  Bazaar  has  taken  its  elan  and  is  prospering 
wonderfully.  It  is  really  extremely  pretty.  Every 
day  brings  new  customers  to  purchase  and  to  place 
their  works,  which  they  are  delighted  to  do  for  their 
own  charitable  purposes,  allowing  Miss  Coppinger  the 
third  of  the  profit  of  each  article  sold.  She  has  for 
some  days  past  never  sold  for  less  than  twenty  francs, 
and  two  days  for  forty  and  fifty. 

Paris  is  going  to  be  insoutenable,  even  for  me,  as 
the  Tuileries  and  the  Duchess  of  Orleans  are  going  to 
put  forth  all  their  energies  two  or  three  times  a  week. 
All  the  pleasant  people  are  going  away.  The  Cawdors 
next  week,  the  Abercorns  this,  and  last  not  least  the 
boys  must  go  soon. 

Leveson  fond  of  going,  as  my  brother  observes, 
took  a  turn  last  night.  Dinner  at  Betty  Harcourt's ; 
to  parties  at  Lieven's  and  Flahault's,  then  to  the  Salon  to 
see  its  close,  and  lastly  to  Delmar's.  He  is  a  snug  dar- 
ling, always  ambulating,  his  wheels  making  no  noise, 
but  doing  their  work  well. 

God  bless  you,  my  dearest.  Mrs.  White  of  East 
Florida  comes  to  the  ball ;  Mrs.  White,  Lady  Harriet 
d'Orsay's  sister,  has  been  to  a  soiree,  and  is  coming 
to  the  ball — nice-looking,  like  her  sister,  without 


1838  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  255 

the  beauty.  Mrs.  Henry  White,  lovely,  appeared  last 
Friday  and  is  coming  to  the  ball ;  Madame  d'Auchamp, 
Lady  Julia's  protegee,  ditto. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  5,  1838. 

Most  dear  sister, — Susy  is  much  better  than  I  could 
have  hoped,  and  in  her  most  joyous  spirits.  She  and 
Georgy  are  in  such  enchantment  at  being  together. 
Baba  and  George  Pitt  are  bosom  friends,  and  have  not 
yet  quarrelled  once.  Miss  Pitt,1  an  immense  success  in 
society,  is  thought  beautiful,  is  most  gracious,  not  in 
the  least  shy,  but  is  at  present  somewhat  stormy  in 
domestic  life.  The  baby  is  thought  a  prodigy.  I  do 
not  admire  her  much.  There  never  was  such  delight 
as  having  them  all ! 

We  frequent  the  Opera.  On  Wednesday  all  went  to 
the  Delmar  concert,  and  yesterday  to  the  Locke  tableaux. 
The  sisters  ravished.  Eivers  in  despair  ;  but  then,  as 
Susy  says,  '  he  can  go  home,'  and  so  he  does. 

Lady  Wallscourt,  handsome  as  Eubens's  wife,  with 
H.  Greville  and  Mrs.  Locke's  little  girl.2  Miss  Eaikes 
beautiful,  they  all  declare,  as  Mme.  de  la  Valliere,  hair 
down,  eyes  up,  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  H.  Greville 
Louis  XIV.,  Mrs.  Locke  an  attendant  nun.  Antonin 
and  Mrs.  George  Eose  flashed  in  the  pan — that  is,  they 
did  not  look  quite  as  beautiful  as  they  were  expected. 
He,  as  Lord  Leicester,  not  distinguished  enough ;  she, 
as  Amy  Eobsart,  looked  on  the  ground  instead  of  at 
Antonin,  a  modesty  which  is  said  to  be  only  in  that 
excess  in  a  tableau,  where  alone  it  was  misplaced. 
But  the  perfection  came  last.  Mrs.  Locke,3  Lucy 
of  Lammermoor,  having  just  signed  her  contract, 
Douglas  as  Eavensworth  pointing  at  it.  H.  Greville  the 

1  Now  Mrs.  Oldfield.  2  Now  Lady  Walsingham. 

3  The  widow  of  Mr.  Locke,  who  was  drowned  in  the  Lake  of  Como. 


256     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1838 

other  man.  Miss  Eaikes,  Lady  Aston.  Eichelieu  was  aux 
anges,  like  the  malin  bossu.  Susy,  as  in  her  maiden 
days,  amused  and  delighted  with  him.  '  Comme  on  est 
froid  !  On  n'applaudit  pas.  Je  n'ai  entendu  que  Mme. 
de  Poix.  Quand  elle  a  vu  Miss  Eaikes,  elle  1'a  prise  pour 
Antonin,  et  elle  a  crie,  "  Ah,  il  est  charmant ;  mais 
comme  cela  change  :  je  ne  1'aurais  pas  reconnu."  : 
We  have  no  new  arrivals  but  the  Fitzharrises.1 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  January  1838. 

Most  dear  sister, — We  are  all  occupied  with  the  sad 
news  of  this  morning.  The  Italian  Opera  burnt  down 
last  night.  Severini,  Eobert's  partner,  in  an  access  of 
desespoir,  flung  himself  in  the  middle  of  the  flames  and 
perished.  The  fire  began  an  hour  after  the  house  was 
empty,  and  there  was  no  wind.  Otherwise  the  loss  of 
life  and  property  would  have  been  incalculable.  It  is 
supposed  to  have  arisen  from  a  beam  catching  fire  from 
over-heated  calorifers.  Kulbach  worked  till  five  this 
morning,  harnessed  to  a  rope,  handing  buckets.  Pray 
send  this  scrap  to  my  brother,  as  he  may  wish  to  know 
about  it. 

Freddy  starts  this  evening  for  Oxford,  and  leaves 
his  fortunate  parents  at  the  Duchess  of  Orleans'  first 
ball,  of  which  I  will  send  you  an  account  by  the  next 
courier. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  12,  1838. 

Most  dear  sister, — What  a  time  since  I  have  written ! 
I  have  not  been  ill,  but  exceedingly  unwell,  which 
during  the  time  and  since  made  me  feel  quite  inca- 
pable of  anything. 

All  our  English,  I  mean  of  one  sort,  will,  I  suppose, 

1  Lord  Fitzharris  succeeded  his  father  as  third  Earl  of  Malmesbury  in 
1841.     He  was  twice  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs. 


1838  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  257 

rush  for  the  meeting.  When  Lady  E.  Harcourt  goes, 
all  the  men  in  Paris  will  die,  'not  really,  my  dear.' 
The  Due  de  Bauffremont  and  Maurice  are  quite  victims, 
it  is  said.  Lady  Norreys  is  less  liked  than  her  mother. 
She  affronts  the  women,  and  men  are  first  elated,  then 
angry,  but  even  Antoninus  Pius  says,  '  C'est  une  honnete 
femme.'  Lady  Clanricarde's  departure  will  kill  only 
Mme.  de  Lieven  and  me.  She  has  been  perfect,  charm- 
ing, but  avoiding  the  great  world,  not  going  to  balls  or 
great  affairs,  but  it  is  a  loss  for  intimite,  talk,  and  con- 
stant sociability  not  be  described. 

I  went  yesterday  to  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans ;  a  tiny 
music.  The  King  and  Granville  sat  whispering  behind 
a  screen.  The  Due  d'Orleans  said  to  me,  '  A  subject 
for'H.  B.'  The  Duke  was  in  such  wild  spirits  that 
some  said  a  little  0.  was  in  prospect.  Some  that  at  his 
dinner  he  had  indulged  and  become  a  little  elated. 
Lady  Clanricarde,  '  It  is  only  that  he  likes  giggling  all 
night  with  Clanricarde.' 

We  are  all  emerveilles  and  enchanted  with  Lord 
Durham's  appointment l — so  clever,  so  skilful  to  make 
such  a  neat  hit  at  such  a  distant  mark,  and  then  (vide 
'  Examiner,'  the  clever  '  Examiner  '),  to  be  rewarded  and 
more  than  repaid  by  such  extravagant,  such  unbounded 
praise.  Nothing  can  be  more  edifying  and  entertaining. 
There  never  was  such  a  step,  I  think,  for  the  security 
of  the  present  Government. 

We  never  hear  the  Queen  talked  of — a  good  sign. 

Lord  Grey  writes  to  Mme.  de  Lieven  in  the  very 
blackest  humour.  Ellice  that  a  Garter  and  Dukedom 
will  be  nothing  of  a  reward  to  Lord  Durham. 

1  To  Canada. 


VOL.    II. 


258     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1838 
To  LORD  LEVESON  AND  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  1838. 

Dearest  Leveson, — We  regret  you  more  than  words 
can  say. 

We  have  done  little;  had  an  immense  Friday;  quan- 
tities of  Carlists. 

Wednesday  a  dinner.  Mr.  Kemble  and  Adelaide, 
two  Mrs.  Lockes,  Lady  Wallscourt,  Douglas,  Bruce, 
De  Candia,1  Poniatowski,  Belgiojoso,  Greville,  and  Nico- 
las Pahlen.  It  was  Belgiojoso's  generous  proposal  to 
improwser  a  little  concert  for  us.  We  then  asked  him 
to  dine.  Marras  is  to  come  and  Miss  Kemble  will  sing. 
Lady  Norreys  will  regret  having  left  us. 

Dearest  sister, — Forgive  economy ;  I  have  no  more 
stuff  in  me.  There  is  a  grand  war — Flahault  versus 
Baudrand.  Nobody  knows  if  the  former  will  remain  in 
the  Duke  of  Orleans'  household. 

Bruce  is  lower  than  low.  He  enjoys  nothing  and 
looks  wretchedly  ill.  In  vain  did  Lady  Harriet  Galway 
aim  all  her  charms  at  him. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  31,  1838. 

Dearest  sister, — Only  one  line  to  thank  you  for  all 
your  kindness  and  constant  letters. 

The  loss 2  is  irreparable.  There  were  few  as  much 
loved  as  she  was. 

Give  my  love  to  dearest  Leveson.  Tell  him  his 
dear  letter  came  from  Mistley  and  cheered  me,  and  that 
I  read  it  when  in  very  severe  pain.  You  will  be  glad 
to  hear  that  I  am  quite  relieved,  and  hope  to  be  quite 
well  in  a  few  days,  but  I  have  suffered  extremely. 

Friday. — My  dear,  dearest  sister.     I  felt  very  much 

1  The  celebrated  tenor,  who  took  the  name  of  Mario  when  he  went  on 
the  stage. 

2  Lady  Harrowby  died  on  May  18,  1838. 


1838  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  259 

affected  yesterday  by  a  letter  from  Georgiana  Wortley 
and  a  bracelet  with  dearest  Lady  Harrowby's  hair.  I 
think  every  day  gives  me  a  sadder  and  deeper  regret. 
I  have  trouble  in  struggling  against  nervous  feelings  of 
all  sorts. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  16,  1838. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Thank  your  dearest  Duchess  for 
her  kindness  about  Marras,  who  is  grateful  and  en- 
chanted. 

Soult1  is  to  have  a,large  following.  Dues  de  Valen^ay 
and  Yicense,  Messrs,  de  Champlatreux,  Bassano,  and 
Morny.  It  will  be  well  done.  His  character  is  to 
be  tres  avare,  tres  avide,  and  tres  magnifique.  So  he 
will  fleece  Louis  Philippe  and  then  flare  away. 

I  enclose  a  drawing  of  St.  Cloud  for  your  rente. 
The  trees  are  too  green,  but  we  think  the  building 
beautifully  done. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  June  19,  1838. 

My  dearest  sister, — What  can  I  tell  you  ?  Sir 
Eobert  and  Lady  Harland  dined  here  yesterday,  and  I 
was  delighted  to  see  her  again.  The  slow  low  voice 
and  occasionally  closing  her  eyes  had  its  old  effect  of 
calming  my  nerves.  We  talked  of  Wherstead  and 
Felixtowe,  and  remembrances  vivid  and  sad  came,  but 
not  in  a  painful  or  agitating  manner. 

We  are  just  setting  out,  Dody  Hayes,  Baby  and  I, 
for  Longchamps.2  At  two  Baba  and  I  dine  there,  upon 
mutton  chops  and  boiled  lettuce,  stewed  prunes  and 
strawberries.  The  day  is  enchanting.  Our  husbands 
ride  there  late.  Mme.  de  Lieven  never  misses,  whether 
we  are  there  or  not.  Georgy  and  I  have  two  or  three 

1  He  was  sent  as  Special  Ambassador  to  London  for  the  Coronation. 

2  Lady  Granville  had  hired  a  cottage  at  Longchamps. 


260     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1838 

uninterrupted  hours  for  the  '  Life  of  Wilberforce,'  which 
she  reads  while  I  stitch. 

Chalmers  preached  the  finest  sermon  that  ever  was 
heard  yesterday.  Georgy  and  Fullerton  were  there. 
I  did  not  dare  go.  It  was  an  immense  sacrifice,  but 
Georgy  says  I  could  not  have  stood  it.  The  crowd 
and  heat  were  beyond  anything.  But  more  beauti- 
ful, more  right  and  judicious — indulgent — energy  and 
ardour,  yet  nothing  overstrained  or  that  the  most 
worldly  could  cavil  at.  He  £roes  inimediatelv.  Mrs. 

*t  C  v 

Chalmers  says,  '  It  is  of  no  use  staying.  The  savants 
don't  understand  the  Doctor's  language,  and  he  don't 
understand  theirs.'  She  said  this  to  Georgy  at  a  most 
curious  collection  of  people  at  dear  Lady  Elgin's  the 
other  evening — the  Chalmers,  old  Mme.  de  Taudreuil 
douairiere,  Miss  Marlay,  Messrs.  Mignet,  Brogue,  and 
Guizot. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  26,  1838. 

My  dearest  sister, — We  shah1  be  most  happy  to 
receive  Harrv.1 

V 

I  have  been  spending  my  morning  at  Longchamps. 
The  Apponys  came  to  us  there,  Mine,  de  Lieven  and 
Marie  Menzingen,  Lady  Acton  and  her  beautiful  boy,- 
like  Lawrence's  picture  of  young  Lambton  and  the 
infant  John  in  some  '  Holy  Family.' 

AVe  walked,  ate  strawberries,  and  tried  to  cheer  up 
Mine,  de  Lieven — a  difficult  task,  as  she  dreads  the 
coming  months  when  all  her  friends  will  have  left  Paris, 
and  yet  can  make  no  plan  to  take  her  out  of  it. 

The  Due  de  Broglie  has  just  been  to  bid  us  good- 
bye. Everybody  is  going  or  gone. 

1  Lady  Carlisle's  youngest  son,  appointed  Attache  at  Paris. 

2  The  present  Lord  Acton. 


1838  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIKE  261 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  July  2,  1838. 

You  must  know  that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  make 
you  sensible  of  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you  this 
morning.  It  was  quite  delightful,  and  Lieven  was 
allowed  a  peep  at  the  sketch.  She  bids  me  tell  you  she 
adores  you,  and  that  you  are  the  only  person  capable 
of  giving  a  proper  notion  and  vivid  description  of  such 
things.1  For  where  is  Lieven's  heart  and  what  is  her 
absorbing  interest  ?  Why  Precedence,  my  dear,  who 
first,  who  last,  who  here,  who  there,  and  she  studied  the 
page  intensely.  '  Mais,  ma  chere,  oil  est  done  Pozzo  et 
les  Strogonoff?  Mais  votre  frere  est  un  homme  ado- 
rable. Yoila  Paul.2  Dites-lui  combien  je  suis  touche.' 

We  are  so  pleased  to  hear  from  all  how  magni- 
ficent, beautiful,  and  heart-stirring  it  was.  Little  Miss 
Schwarzenberg  over  the  way  sent  me  a  miniature  of 
her  belle-sceur,  and  very  like  John  Ponsonby  it  was.  My 
dearest  dear  D.,  what  a  happy  thought  was  the  gallery 
on  the  wall ! 3  All  the  French  papers  are  full  of  it. 

What  a  pleasant  thought  it  is  that  my  darling  Susy 
is  three  doors  from  you  at  Kemp  ! 

We  go  on  Tuesday,  the  10th.  A  new  road,  shorter, 
avoiding  Lyons  and  the  Jura,  dipping  perpendicularly 
down  la  Dent  du  Chat  into  hot  little  Aix  bason.  Oh, 
that  you  could  be  tempted !  God  bless  you. 

Let  me  just  say  that  two  little  books  you  gave  me 
were  the  greatest  pleasure  and  comfort  to  me  whilst  I 
was  sick.  I  am  quite  well  now,  only  rather  wishy- 
washy. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  9,  1838. 

My  dearest  sister, — A  thousand  thanks  for  your 
letter.  Your  son  is  most  amiable  and  a  great  addition. 

1  The  Queen's  Coronation.  2  Her  son. 

3  Of  Devonshire  House, 


262     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1838 

His  shyness  is  not  perceptible,  and  does  not  seem  to 
take  from  his  enjoyment  of  society.  Lord  Milton's  son 
is  arrived,  and  I  think  him  a  charming  boy.  He  and 
Harry  are  now  amusing  Granville,  Fullerton,  and  Henry 
Greville  with  the  latest  news  of  London  and  the  Corona- 
tion. We  are  told  that  Mr.  Ellice  is  to  be  here  some 
time.  I  believe  he  arrives  this  week — such  a  catch  for 
Mme.  de  Lieven  !  Mine,  de  Schb'nbourg,  too,  is  on  her 
little  legs  again,  quite  well.  Dined  at  Auteuil  yesterday. 

Monday. — We  are  still  in  suspense  about  our  day, 
because  Aston,  Leveson,  Freddy,  and  the  fourgon  are 
all  somewhere,  but  neither  here  nor  there,  and  we  must 
see  what's  what  before  we  decide. 

I  fear  that  the  journey  will  be  disagreeable  to 
dearest  Leveson,  and  I  am  brought  to  be  glad  that 
Mme.  de  Menou,  a  clever  old  favourite  of  his,  the  two 
beautiful  Spaniards,  Mesdames  Narvaez  and  Quintana, 
and  the  Ellices  are  all  going  to  wash  in  sulphur  with 
us.  I  have  no  doubt  of  Freddy's  enjoyment.  We 
shall  probably  start  on  Saturday. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  kindness  in  having 
Charles  depicted.  Tremendously  like  they  are,  your 
Duchess  and  all,  but  not  a  resemblance  that  gladdens 
the  posers. 

On  Saturday  we  took  Harry  to  Madame  Appony's 
reception  at  Auteuil  to  launch  him  in  a  French  house. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  14,  1838. 

Tall,  big  Freddy  is  arrived.  He  gives  delicious 
accounts  of  you  all. 

What  beautiful  things  Stafford  House  has  done ! 
The  Liliputian  christening  is  quite  ravishing.  It  is  a 
great  pleasure  to  hear  Aston.  He  took  bird's-eye  views 
of  all,  but,  like  me,  shuns  actual  practical  larking. 
Harry  seems  pleased  and  gets  on  very  well  in  soci^'y. 


1838  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  263 

To-day  he  has  to  stand  the  fire  of  Schb'nbourg  and  Cara- 
mania,  who  dine  here.  He  is  reckoned  uncommonly 
good-looking,  and  would  be  very  handsome  if  he  would 
not  stoop  in  a  way  that  inclines  me  to  take  a  whip. 
Liz  is  a  poker  in  comparison.  I  mean  when  I  return 
to  take  it  in  hand  with  your  permission. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  July  21,  1838. 

At  nine  this  morning  the  Fullertons  and  Baba  set 
out.  They  wait  one  day  at  Chambery,  so  as  to  arrive 
the  day  after  us  at  Aix. 

Our  weather  is  quite  delicious.  We  waited  long 
enough  to  have  all  the  newest  news  from  the  Bear,1  who 
dined  here  yesterday,  and  whose  arrival  saves  Mme.  de 
Lieven,  who  was  in  a  state  of  utter  discomfiture.  She 
now  hopes  with  him,  Aston,  and  Harry — Versailles 
occasionally  and  Longchamps  daily — to  get  through 
the  hot  months. 

I  really  believe  a  little  douching  and  bathing  is  the 
best  possible  thing,  where  no  mischief  is  apparent  and 
to  prevent  any  arising.  I  do  not  like  the  idea  of 
quaffing  the  hot  sulphur  myself,  but  Doctor  Eichard 
insists,  and  with  Doctor  Eobert  to  watch  I  mean  to 
begin  immediately. 

We  are  all  well.  Granville  uncommonly  so.  Ful- 
lerton,  as  he  always  is,  extremely  revived  and  exhila- 
rated by  a  plan  and  a  lark ;  he  and  Freddy  intending 
to  go  to  Milan,  Venice,  etc 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Aix-les- Bains :  July  24,  1838. 

We  arrived  here  at  nine  o'clock  yesterday  evening, 
after  a  vey  delightful  journey.  The  last  part  of  our 
journey  from  Bourg  to  Bellay,  crossing  the  Dent  du 

1  The  Eight  Hon.  Edward  Ellice. 


264     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRAKVTLLE     1838 

Chat — most  beautiful — all  that  river  and  rock  can  do 
from  Bellay  to  Yenne  ;  and  then  scenery  a  little  in  the 
style  of  the  Jura,  with  more  steep  and  winding  ascent 
and  descent.  At  the  very  top  of  the  mountain  a  view 
of  the  little  Lac  de  Bourget  below,  and  the  snow-moun- 
tains of  the  Dauphine  beyond.  Here  we  found  a 
charming  little  house,  taken  for  us  by  the  Ellices,  per- 
fectly clean,  quiet,  and  cool,  and  excellent  beds.  The 
Fullertons  are  at  Chambery ;  we  expect  them  to-day. 
They  have  apartments  in  this  house.  We  are  told  that 
the  town  is  full  of  Lyons  tradespeople  and  few  ac- 
quaintances. Freddy  is  just  come  back  from  the  Ellice 
family,  where  he  found  Marion,  the  eldest  girl,  with  her 
hair  curling  over  her  shoulders  and  a  large,  flat,  wide, 
straw  hat  like  a  parasol.  'More  beautiful  than  any 
girl  he  ever  saw.'  He  was  quite  emu  with  his  admira- 
tion. We  have  had  a  visit  from  our  Doctor  Vidal,  who 
is  now  undergoing  an  interview  with  Doctor  Robert, 
who  will  view  him  with  the  most  profound  contempt, 
as  he  is  the  best  but  most  twaddling  of  his  kind,  and 
will  not  be  up  to  any  one  long  word  or  ingenious 
speculation  offered  to  him. 

I  have  not  time  to  write  to  Brighton.  Will  you 
have  the  kindness  to  send  this  foolscap  edition  of  our 
journey  to  Susy ;  and  will  you,  my  dearest  child,  hand 
it  on  to  D.  on  the  neighbouring  balcony  ;  and  will  you, 
my  dearest  brother,  bring  me  the  answers  en  personne  ? 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Aix :  August  9,  1838. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — You  are  an  excellent  corre- 
spondent, but  you  must  allow  for  me.  We  are  arroses, 
eat  and  drink  a  quantity,  drive  in  a  very  rough 
char-a-bancs,  and  swim  upon  a  very  beautiful  lake  ;  occa- 
sionally meet  John  Grefulhe  looking  black  and  bilious, 
and  the  Ellice  girls,  who  bring  us  butterflies,  and 


1838  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  265 

butter  of  their  own  making.  Occasional  visits  to  and 
from  Mmes.  de  Menou  and  Navarres. 

We  never  hear  from  Leveson.  How  I  long  to  have 
him  at  Paris  !  Give  him  my  best  love  and  tell  him  that 
I  do  not  write,  as  I  can  only  return  fire  from  hence. 
The  essential  facts  and  occupations  here  he  will  know 
from  you,  that  the  douches  agree,  and  that  we  set  out 
for  Geneva  on  the  15th. 

You  never  mention  a  possibility  of  your  Paris  visit. 
If  you  wish  for  quiet,  you  can  always  command  it 
there.  If  you  wish  for  fetes  and  spectacles,  there  are 
to  be  many  on  the  occasion  of  the  christening  of 
the  child  that  is  hoped  for  on  the  15th.  Mme.  de 
Lieven  tells  me  to-day  he  is  to  be  called  Comte  de 
Paris,  and  that  his  marraine  is  to  be  la  Ville  de 
Paris.  She  adds  :  '  Kepresentee,  je  suppose,  par  Mme. 
de  Eambuteau.' 

I  never  knew  anything  like  the  rush  to  Italy,  and  I 
believe  we  shall  have  very  few  compatriots  of  those  we 
wish  for  or  those  we  dread  for  the  Carnaval. 

I  have  taken  on  Longchamps  till  the  1st  of 
November,  so  that  I  shall  have  much  rural  enjoyment 
even  at  Paris,  and  hope  to  show  it  to  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Berne  :  August  28,  1838. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Yesterday,  to  our  great  joy, 
D.  arrived  here  in  high  health  and  spirits.  He  goes  to 
Thun  and  does  the  Oberland  with  us,  and  leaves  us  at 
Neufchatel  to  hunt  Blanche. 

We  shall  be  in  Paris  on  the  12th.  Lord  Holland 
fears  that  no  movement  accelere  will  bring  them  there 
before  a  later  period  of  the  month.  The  pleasure  of 
seeing  him  is  a  very  great  one  to  us. 

All  Paris  is  en  emoi  at  its  little  Count.  I  am  so 
glad  of  a  joy  for  the  Queen  and  the  poor  accouchee 


266     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1838 

herself,  who  seems  to  have  suffered  much.     Excellent 
account  of  Susy  and  her  dauphin. 

D.  went  to  Thun  this  morning,  where  Master  Ful- 
lerton  will  receive  him. 


To  LADY  RIVERS  AND  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Berne  :  September  4,  1838. 

My  dearest  Susy, — I  have  so  little  time  that  I  must 
write  this  letter  to  you  and  your  aunt  G.  I  found  here 
a  letter  from  that  dearest  Yorkshire  lady,  giving  me 
the  delicious  account  she  had  just  received  from  you, 
and  telling  me  of  the  Naworth  1  company. 

My  news  is  for  you  both.  Our  days  in  Oberland 
have  been  enchanting.  Such  country  I  had  never 
dreamed  of,  the  finest  possible  weather  and  perfectly 
good  health.  I  wish  you  to  imagine  me  coming  down  a 
steep  rocky  path,  fit  only  for  goats,  in  a  chair  carried  by 
two  men,  quite  at  my  ease,  looking  at  a  glacier  or  a  snow 
mountain,  or  a  cascade,  or  a  chalet,  listening  to  three 
little  peasant  girls,  all  youdling  to  perfection  in  parts ; 
dining  in  clean,  excellent  inns,  looking  upon  all  these 
glories,  sunsets,  full  moon. 

So  enchanted  is  my  brother  that  at  nine  o'clock 
yesterday  morning  he  embarked  at  Thun  on  the  steam- 
boat to  go  back  to  Interlaken.  Himself  and  his 
doctor,  with  two  footmen  and  Boney,  in  blouses  and 
belts  and  straw  hats  and  knapsacks  on  their  backs, 
intend  to  walk  from  thence  to  Brienz,  Meiringen, 
etc.,  to  see  the  fall  of  the  Giessbach,  and  to  return  after 
this  romantic  episode  to  Thun.  We  go  to-day  to 
Morat,  to-morrow  to  Neufchatel,  and  then  by  very  slow 
journeys  reach  Paris  on  the  12th. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  writes  from  Paris  :  '  J'ai  appris  des 
details  sur  les  couches.  D'abord,  les  temoins  ont  vu 

1  Naworth  Castle,  Lord  Carlisle's  Border  castle  in  Cumberland. 


1838  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  267 

tout,  comme  aux  couches  de  la  Duchesse  de  Berri.  II 
n'y  a  pas  eu  moyen  de  douter.  Imaginez,  outre  la 
famille,  six  temoins.  Ensuite,  des  que  1'enfant  a  e"te 
ne,  tout  le  monde  est  alle  le  voir  laver,  habiller,  et 
personne,  personne  n'est  reste  avec  la  Princesse  que 
ses  deux  femmes  de  chambre.  Elle  a  voulu  changer 
de  lit,  et  Fa  fait  bien  bassiner.  En  consequence  de 
quoi,  elle  n'y  etait  pas  depuis  deux  minutes  qu'une 
horrible  hemorragie  est  survenue.  On  a  crie,  appele, 
on  1'a  couverte  de  glaces,  on  a  arrete  1'hemorragie ; 
apres  cela  est  survenue  une  atonie  complete,  et  pendant 
une  demi-heure  on  1'a  cru  morte.  On  dit  que  le 
Due  d'Orleans  etait  dans  une  angoisse  inexprimable. 
Maintenant  tout  est  bien.  Le  petit  prince,  que  la 
Eeine  appelait  hier  Louis-Philippe,  est  enorme,  par- 
faitement  constitue,  et  ressemblant,  a  ce  qu'elle  dit, 
tout-a-fait  a  la  mere.' 

Here  is  Mr.  Edgcumbe,  looking  very  like  the 
Hague.  We  have  met  no  acquaintance  on  our  route 
except  Mr.  Labouchere  and  his  wife.  Mme.  de 
Jumilhac  is  perched  upon  the  roof  of  this  hotel. 

Now,  my  dear  relations,  forgive  me  this  once  for  my 
double  shot. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Dijon :  September  9,  1838. 

My  most  dear  sister, — Here  we  are,  reposing  a  whole 
day,  waiting  for  Georgy,  Baba,  and  G.  Stewart,  who 
remained  a  day  after  us  at  Neufchatel. 

The  Hollands  intend  being  at  Paris  almost  as  soon 
as  we  are,  and  I  delight  in  the  thought  of  seeing  him. 
I  know  not  how  she  and  Princesse  Lieven  will  put  up 
their  horses  together,  but  I  hope  well,  and  Mme.  de 
Lieven  so  pines  for  society  and  politicians  to  talk  to 
that  I  think  it  ensures  keeping  the  peace,  especially  if 
the  trial  is  not  very  long. 


268     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1838 

Freddy  is  much  amused  and  pleased  at  Milan. 
Fullerton  rather  disappointed. 

It  is  amusing  to  look  out  of  the  inn  window  and  see 
the  comers  and  goers. 

A  most  extraordinary  looking  set-out — a  chariot,  the 
blinds  down  in  mid-day,  an  earl's  coronet,  followed  by 
an  open  carriage  with  two  men  and  two  women  in  it, 
the  oddest-looking  I  ever  saw.  Countess  of  Clare  ? 

A  very  dandy  courier,  chariot  and  four,  two  young 
gentlemen,  extremely  a  leur  aise,  Walewski  and  Auguste 
de  Morny. 

The  BeaufFremonts. 

A  woman  in  a  short  yellow  gown,  black  riband 
round  her  head,  running  rapidly  past  the  window,  call- 
ing out  '  Courage,  courage  ! '  to  a  girl  of  four  running 
by  her  side,  again  and  again.  '  Une  femme  qui  gagne 
son  pain.  Elle  court  six  fois  d'une  porte  de  la  ville  a 
1'autre.  Elle  parcourt  la  France  comme  £a.  II  y  a  trois 
mois  qu'elle  a  fait  cette  course;  elle  est  enceinte  et  tout 
prete  d'accoucher.'  In  spite  of  reason  and  the  doctor, 
we  gave  the  poor  exhausted  creature  some  money,  so 
did  others,  and  she  danced  across  the  street  as  nimbly 
as  possible.  She  was  extremely  ugly  and  ungraceful. 
If  a  beauty  was  to  run,  she  might  get  a  great  deal. 
The  poor  little  girl  was  much  fatigued. 

Then  all  the  Dijonites  in  their  Sunday  dresses,  but 
no  Georgy  as  yet. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Dijon :  September  9,  1838. 

I  do  not  know  where  to  begin,  having  so  many 
remarks  to  make.  They  must  come  promiscuous,  as 
Mrs.  Eidgway  used  to  say. 

From  Morat  to  Neufchatel  by  steam  was  immense 
enjoyment.  The  Lake  much  less  pretty,  the  boat  empty, 
but  the  gliding  along,  the  ease,  the  lights  and  shades 


1838  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  269 

on  water  and  view  of  Ewardtown l  made  it  very  en- 
chanting. 

She  mourned  over  you,  but  rejoiced  over  your  gift, 
and  is  more  happy,  grateful,  and  gratified  than  is  to  be 
said.  The  Alps  cheated  us  to  an  unheard-of  degree, 
but  en  revanche  the  dinner,  the  view,  the  cleanliness,  the 
quiet.  Yet  eighteen  francs  for  four  candles  is  un- 
common, and  the  rest  in  proportion. 

Granville  and  I  came  on  with  the  Doctor  the  next 
day,  your  paper  in  my  hand.  The  sun  shining,  the 
day  beautiful.  The  views  of  the  lake  in  ascending 
to  Eochefort  !  The  mountain  streams !  Chalets  in 
valleys  like  Derbyshire ! 

The  hill  at  Salines  !  so  truty  called  the  ill  by  our 
doctor.  Was  there  ever  such  a  one  ?  We  walked 
down  it,  and  my  knees  and  legs  ached,  and  I  really 
thought  I  should  have  cried.  But  Dole  made  up  for 
everything.  What  a  perfect  inn,  like  the  old  chateau 
of  a  friend,  and  a  dinner,  and  tea-things,  and  beds  all 
incomparable  ! 

Here  we  have  rested  at  a  good  inn,  only  rather 
dirty.  To-morrow  we  sleep  at  Montbard.  Dody  at 
Avallon,  and  we  meet  the  next  day  at  Sens. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  writes  from  Paris,  very  low  and 
unwell.  The  Ludolfs  are  coming  to  us,  and  the 
Buteras  are  going  to  London.  Madame  has  written  to 
press  Madame  de  Flahault  to  return. 

Fullerton  is  less  pleased  than  Freddy.  They  have 
much  company  ;  visits  and  routs  instead  of  pageants. 
The  Coronation  will,  I  hope,  make  up  to  him.  As  yet 
they  see  only  the  scaffoldings. 

Lord  Holland  wrote  on  the  4th :  '  We  start  to-morrow, 
an  expression  with  us  more  significative  of  fear  than 
ardour.' 

Toothachy  and  tired,  I  have  been  writing  this  letter 

1  Melle.  Eward  resided  at  Neufchatel. 


270     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1838 

to  you  against  the  stream,  that  you  may  be  induced  to 
send  me  one  of  your  delicious  letters,  even  if  you  have 
to  hark  back  from  the  Oberland. 

The  weather  is  all  dimmed  and  chilled  and  we  have 
fires  every  evening. 

Susy  writes  me  most  excellent  accounts  of  herself. 
She  is  expecting  Harriet  Pitt,  who  has  been  charmed 
with  her  sejour  at  Windsor. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Longchamps  :  Sept.  14,  1838. 

We  arrived  at  Paris  yesterday,  my  dearest  sister,  all 
in  excellent  health,  and  found  letters  from  all  parts  of 
the  world.  From  D.  at  Entlebuch,  going  to  cross  the 
St.  Gothard,  desiring  his  letters  to  be  directed  to  Geneva, 
where  I  suppose  he  intends  to  find  Blanche.  From 
Freddy,  having  enjoyed  much  with  some  disappoint- 
ment. Sir  F.  Lamb,  as  rude  as  a  bear,  occupies  much  of 
his  letter.  The  couronnement  very  superior  as  a  spectacle 
to  ours.  The  Emperor  less  cretin  than  he  is  in  general 
supposed  to  be.  I  begin  to  think  a  jewel  of  a  sovereign, 
magnifique,  grand  in  matters  of  representation,  liberal 
and  humane  in  acts  of  mercy.  The  amnesty  is  better 
than  most  things  done  by  his  semblables,  and  everybody 
admires,  though  many  grudge  him  the  admiration. 

The  first  person  I  saw  on  arriving  was  your  dear 
boy,  quite  well  again.  Granville  is  very  desirous  that 
I  should  tell  you  that  Aston  is  quite  delighted  with  him 
sous  tons  les  rapports — intelligent,  diligent,  attentive, 
besides  being  most  amiable. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  1838. 

Now  what  have  I  got  to  say?  Lord  Holland  is 
rather  low,  and  she  is  suffering  again,  confined  to  her 
couch  with  the  rubber  employed  again.  She  says  it  is 


1838  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  271 

the  fatigue  of  the  journey.  I  say  it  is  such  a  dinner  as 
I  never  saw  anybody  eat  before.  She  came  here  on 
Monday  evening.  Mme.  de  Schonbourg,  Lady  Sandwich, 
Theresa  were  very  civil  to  her.  Mole  tres  empresse 
meme. 

Madame  de  Lieven  and  she  are  great  friends.  '  Ma 
chere,  j'etais  chez  elle.  II  y  avait  Mme.  Durazzo,  Mole, 
Humboldt.  On  annonce  Pasquier.  Elle  a  1'air  tout 
charme,  tout  flatte.  Elle  me  dit :  "  Eestez,  je  vous  supplie ; 
causez  avec  le  Chancelier."  Je  resiste ;  elle  m'implore 
de  ne  pas  1'abandonner.  Je  cede.  Pas  plutot  assise  avec 
tout  cet  entourage  qui  nous  regarde,  qu'elle  laisse 
tomber  son  sac.  Elle  me  tape  sur  1'epaule :  "  Pick 
it  up,  my  dear  ;  pick  it  up  " — et  moi,  tout  etonnee  en 
bonne  bete,  me  plongeant  sur  le  tapis  pour  ramasser  ses 
chiffons.'  Is  not  this  a  true  and  incomparable  Holly-ism, 
taking  out  of  Lieven's  mouth  the  taste  of  the  little 
flutter  at  the  visits  and  besoin  of  her  support,  by  treating 
her  like  Antonio,  and  showing  off,  what  I  believe  never 
was  seen  before,  Mme.  de  Lieven  as  a  humble  companion? 

Yesterday  the  Schonbourgs,  Listers,  George  Villiers 
and  Mr.  Sneyd  dined  here,  and  sky-rockets  and  Catherine 
wheels  were  a  joke  to  us.  I  never  knew  anything  like 
the  animation  of  a  talk  between  the  two  prima  donnas. 
Sir  George  looks  thin  and  pale,  but  is  in  excellent 
spirits,  as  Lady  H.  Baring  joins  us  to-day. 

Lord  Holland  had  a  long  conversation  with  the 
King  at  the  Tuileries,  and  I  hear  he  intends  a  surprise  to 
go  to  meet  them  the  day  they  are  at  Versailles.  I  do  not 
think  the  to-be-astonished  are  pleased  in  proportion. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  September  25,  1838. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — We  were  much  shocked  yester- 
day at  hearing  of  the  melancholy  termination  of  poor 
Madame  de  Broglie's  illness.  The  account  of  her  death 


272     LETTERS    OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRAIS7VILLE    1838 

reached  Paris  yesterday,  and  her  loss  to  all  those  con- 
nected with  her,  to  her  husband  and  children  and  many 
attached  friends,  to  numbers  to  whom  she  was  a  constant 
dispenser  of  every  sort  of  charity  and  kindness,  is  not 
to  be  calculated.  She  really  was  an  angel  on  earth. 
She  had  the  same  constitution  as  her  brother,  and  had 
suffered  latterly  a  great  deal.  Poor  Mme.  d'Hausson- 
ville l  is  travelling  in  Italy  and  with  child. 

The  Listers  and  George  Villiers  are  very  gay  and 
agreeable,  and  Theresa  is  in  greater  beauty,  health, 
and  spirits  than  I  ever  saw  her.  Her  boy 2  is  perfectly 
beautiful,  and  seems  the  most  charming  child — wonder- 
ful abilities,  without  a  grain  of  pertness  or  prodigy-ism, 
and  a  tenderness  and  gentleness  of  manner  most  attrac- 
tive. But  he  looks  extremely  delicate,  and  I  should 
only  fear  his  mother  not  being  quite  aware  of  how 
much  care  is  required.  Perhaps  I  only  say  this 
because  she  is  not  nervous  or  foolish,  as  I  should  be. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  October  16,  1838. 

How  shall  I  begin  ?     First  my  thanks  for  your  two 

O  «/  v 

most  delightful  letters  and  for  the  gentian,  which  lies 
in  a  little  book  with  some  small  blue  relatives,  gathered 
in  the  Yal  de  Tr avers. 

Cliffords  remained  here  a  week,  and  are  gone  on  to 
Nice,  all  seeming  well  and  in  good  spirits.  Mme.  de 
Lieven  said  Bella  was  a  very  fine  girl,  which  I  repeated 
to  them  to  their  great  satisfaction. 

Mrs.  Cavendish  and  Richard  arrived  in  a  dreadful 
fuss,  to  go  or  not  to  go.  They  have  been  at  Versailles 
a  week,  returned  yesterday,  have  determined  upon 
remaining  here,  and  a  house  in  the  Allee  d'Antin  is 
taken  for  them,  Lord  Lismore,3  and  the  Howards. 

1  The  Duchesse  de  Broglie's  daughter. 

2  Now  Sir  Villiers  Lister. 

3  Mrs.  Cavendish's  brother. 


1838  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  273 

Five  o'clock. — Oh,  how  difficult  to  write  !  Look  at 
the  Green  Eoom. — Lieven  and  G.  whispering ;  Lord 
Bristol  rising  in  his  stirrups  and  clearing  his  throat 
before  them,  but  they  don't  seem  to  perceive  him ; 
Mme.  de  Stackelberg  and  I  in  each  other's  arms,  con- 
gratulating, the  Pope  having  sent  the  dispensation  for 
her  daughter's  marriage. 

The  Hollands  drop  in  to  dinner  or  tea  daily,  and 
sprinkled  with  Eogers,  Macaulay,  Lieven,  Schonbourg, 
Mole,  Pasquier,  and  Decazes,  we  contrive  to  get  up  a 
little  society  for  them.  God  bless  you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  November  1838. 

Yesterday  the  Burghershes  and  Buccleuchs,  who  all 
leave  Paris  to-morrow,  dined  here  with  the  Schonbourgs, 
Madame  de  Caraman,  and  Mcolas  Pahlen.  The  little 
Duchess  is  remarkably  pleasant,  as  merry  as  ever,  and 
as  round  as  a  ball,  with  a  charming  countenance,  and  I 
feel,  as  Tchann  says,  '  Elle  me  plait  extremement,  et  si 
vous  me  fachez,  je  dirai  qu'elle  est  jolie.'  The  Duke 
looked  emu  at  C.  C.'s  *  attentions,  and  at  last  I  heard 
him  pressing  her  to  visit  them  at  Dalkeith.  I  think 
some  Scotch  laird  may  take  a  fancy. 

All  Paris  is  going  to-morrow  to  see  the  procession 
of  poor  Marechal  Lobau's  funeral  pass  through  the 
Place  Vendome  and  the  Eue  de  Eivoli.  He  is  much 
regretted,  and  was  beloved  and  respected  by  all  who 
knew  him. 

Granville  has  received  by  post  a  letter  in  the  most 
animated  strain  against  Lord  Durham  from  Lord 
Brougham. 

1  Cesarine  de  Caraman. 


VOL.    II. 


274     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1838 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  November  18,  1838. 

Your  delightful  letter  came  all  alive  from  Venice. 
You  will  soon  be  followed  by  those l  whom  it  gave  me 
so  much  pleasure  to  have  for  a  few  happy,  very  happy, 
days  here.  I  cannot  say  what  it  was  to  me  to  see 
dearest  G.  so  strong  and  well,  with  more  alacrity  and 
zest  about  her  than  anybody,  for  everything  from  a  rout 
to  the  Corniche.  They  wrote  last  from  Nice,  well  and 
delighted.  They  were  to  remain  with  the  Sutherlands 
a  week  or  two  at  Florence.  They  will  talk  to  you 
of  what  we  are  all  most  anxious  about,  poor  Mme.  de 
Lieven.  I  will  not  bore  you  with  repeating  what  they 
will  tell  you  in  detail,  but  what  is  beyond  measure 
desirable  is  that  an  impression  in  her  favour  should  be 
made  upon  '  Vraiment,'  who  has  behaved  shamefully. 

Oh !  do  I  know  the  eyes  and  backbone  of  sight- 
seeing? and  am  I  not  going  a  round  of  ateliers  to-mor- 
row morning  with  Mons.  de  Vatry  ? 

Paris  is  quite  stagnant.  The  liveliest  thing  known 
for  a  long  time  in  it  is  now  beginning,  as  the  clock 
strikes  ten.  Mile.  Eachel,  a  very  ugly  girl,  reading 
speeches  out  of  Eacine  to  Monsieur  de  Delmar.  The 
loveliest  woman,  Mme.  de  Schwarzenberg,  sets  out  for 
Vienna  to-morrow.  Our  beauties  are  Lady  Harriet 
d'Orsay,  Mrs.  Henry  White,  a  very  pretty  daughter  of 
Edward  Bligh,  and  a  Miss  Dickinson,  not  forgetting 
Misses  McDonald,  Purvis,  Ellis. 

Eichard  Cavendish  does  not  make  up  to  anybody, 
but  tends  his  mother,  walks  the  streets,  and  buys  books 
with  Fullerton  at  the  stalls.  Lord  Castlereagh  sits  in 
the  orchestra  at  the  Opera,  and  appears  little  elsewhere. 
I  think  him  very  pleasing.  Last  night  at  the  Odeon,  old 
'  Don  Giovanni.'  Grisi,  Persiani,  Albertazzi,  Tamburini, 

1  Lord  and  Lady  Carlisle,  who  were  returning  from  Italy. 


1838  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  275 

Eubini,  Lablache  enchanted  me.  Lord  J.  Russell1  is 
at  Cassiobury  with  his  children  and  Miss  Lister,  but 
intends  resuming  his  duties  when  Parliament  meets. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  November  30,  1838. 

I  left  you  yesterday  in  a  hurry  because  Aston, 
Fullerton,  and  Marie  Menzingen  were  waiting  to  go  with 
me  to  see  the  bronze  gates  for  the  Madeleine,  beautiful 
beyond  description,  the  work  of  Monsieur  Triqueti, 
husband  of  Miss  Forster,  nee  Bankes — that  is,  her  mother 
was.  You  will  see  at  Florence  the  original  of  this  most 
perfect  imitation.  I  then  showed  Marie  the  giraffe,  le 
palais  des  singes,  the  '  Jardin  des  Plantes,'  which  this 
poor  maid  of  honour  had  never  seen.  She  and  Mme.  de 
Lie ven,  Lady  Burghersh,2  who  is  in  manner,  talk,  and  coun- 
tenance most  attractive,  dined  here.  Also  Lords  Jocelyn 
and  Castlereagh,  Georges  d'Harcourt  and  Castellane. 
If  Lord  Castlereagh  would  cut  off  his  long  hair,  and  take 
off  his  large  turquoise  ornaments,  fastened  with  long 
diamond  chains,  making  him  look  like  a  pane  of  a 
jeweller's  shop-window,  he  would  be  better  than  most 
others  in  conversation.  Lord  Jocelyn  is  merry  and 
good-humoured. 

I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  the  Duchess  3  at 
Chambery.  They  have  paid  a  long  visit  to  Monsieur  de 
Lamartine,  and  seem  to  have  been  mutually  much 
pleased.  Long  beards,  recitations  of  verses  ;  much  that 
would  have  made  me  prefer  the  highway.  But  I  am  a 
spoon,  though  I  would  go  a  great  way  to  hear  such  a 
poem  as  '  Saul  and  David '  read  by  Mr.  Milnes,  not 
written  by  him.  I  write  like  Miss  Bates.  We  went 
last  night  to  see  Rachel,  and  don't  feel  enthusiastic. 
I  think  some  things  very  good,  but  she  has  no  natural 
attraction,  no  beauty,  feeling,  nor  entramement. 

1  Had  just  lost  his  first  wife.     Miss  Lister  was  her  sister. 

2  Afterwards  Lady  Westmorland.  3  Of  Sutherland. 

x  2 


276     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1838 

Thursday. — I  am  just  come  from  an  immense  dinner 
at  the  Duke  of  Orleans — magnifique,  the  best  ordonne  in 
every  way,  and  plenty  of  kings  and  queens. 

After  dinner,  we  sat  listening  to  Persiani,  Cinti,  and 
Duprez.  The  O.'s  were  more  gracious  than  words  can 
say.  They  say  the  Duchess  is  jealous.  I  do  not  see  any 
sign.  I  think  it  is  that  all  the  women  hope  she  is. 
They  tell  that  one  day  he  was  spying  at  Madame  Le 
Hon,  and  that  the  Duchess  at  length,  unable  to  brook 
it,  put  a  little  hand  gently  upon  the  arm  that  held  the 
lorgnette,  and  said,  '  Mon  ami,  ce  n'est  ni  poli  pour  elle, 
ni  aimable  pour  moi.' 

Poor  Lady  John  Eussell's  death  is  very  melancholy. 
Spencer  Cowper  writes  to  Leveson  that  when  Lord 
John  was  told  only  of  danger  he  fell  down  as  if  dead. 
Madame  de  Lieven  is  in  a  most  melancholy  state.  She 
received  suddenly  the  account  of  her  son's  death  from 
her  banker.  Monsieur  de  Lieven  has  known  it  since 
the  sixth  of  July,  and  never  noticed  it  in  any  way. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  December  13,  1838. 

We  are  living  a  life  of  entire  repose,  bought  at  the 
price  of  anxiety  and  misery  to  numbers.  Mme.  de 
Mortemart  is  as  ill  as  possible.  The  news  of  the 
Duchesse  de  Wurtemberg  l  is  so  bad  that  the  King 
has  put  off  Granville,  who  was  to  have  presented  thirty 
Englishmen  this  evening.  Mme.  de  Delmar  better,  but 
still  in  a  very  weak  state. 

16th. — The  Due  de  Nemours  is  gone  to  Genoa.  It 
is  reported  here  that  the  Duchesse  de  Wurtemberg  is 
dead,  but  the  fact  not  yet  broken  to  the  Queen. 

I  will  try  to  send  you  something  beyond  a  sheet  of 
bulletins,  but  it  is  difficult  to  shake  off  the  atmosphere 
of  sickness  and  anxiety. 

1  Louis  Philippe's  daughter. 


1838  TO   LADY   CAKLISLE  277 

Under  the  present  circumstances  there  is  nothing  but 
dinner  society,  and  a  few  lists  will  tell  you  what  that  is 
composed  of.  On  Friday  we  had  Lord  Lyttelton,  Fitz- 
harding  Berkeley,  }^oung  Herries,  Mr.  Knox,  Lord 
Northland's  son,  Captain  Home  Purvis,  and  this  with 
Duff,  Freddy,  and  the  attachments,  gave  us  the 
appearance  of  a  school  or  college  reunion.  If  Lord 
Lyttelton  was  more  aware  of  what  he  is  about,  whom  he 
is  talking  to,  if  he  was  more  master  of  his  limbs  and 
tongue,  and  minded  his  stops,  we  should  be  able  to  get 
at  the  quantity  of  excellent  stuff  of  all  kinds  which  I 
am  sure  is  in  him.  He  has  dined  here  twice,  and  I  am 
anxious  to  see  as  much  of  him  as  possible. 

Le  Hon l  has  just  heard  from  Mole  that  the  Duchesse 
de  Wurtemberg  is  not  dead,  but  the  account  was  as  bad 
as  possible.  Poor  Mme.  Henri  de  Mortemart  died  the 
night  before  last. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  1838. 

My  beloved  sister, — Joy  to  you  for  dearest  Lord 
Carlisle's  progressive  amendment.  I  had  rather  stay  in 
a  good  house  with  a  good  doctor  than  see  all  the  ruins 
in  the  world. 

We  are  all  much  rejoiced  at  Anne  Konneritz  having 
been  proposed  to  at  our  ball  on  Friday  by  Monsieur 
de  Bernstorff.2  It  is  a  love  match  and  has  thrown  a 
romantic  glow  over  the  Diplomatic  Corps. 

Susan  is  extremely  well,  and  perfectly  happy,  at 
Brighton.  She  has  taken  her  children  to  the  Queen, 
who  gave  them  beautiful  presents — pins  and  brooches. 
She  prefers  Fanny,  who  they  say  is  the  image  of  me, 
a  hideous  wag. 

The  accounts  of  the  Duchesse  de  Wurtemberg  being 

1  Belgian  Minister  at  Paris. 

2  For  some  years  Ambassador  in  London. 


278     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1838 

more  favourable,  at  eight  this  evening  I  slide  or  skate 
to  the  Tuileries.  Neither  man  nor  horse  can  stand 
upon  the  verglas. 

Lord  and  Lady  Eoden  have  dined  with  us.  She  is 
the  most  beautiful  creature  now  at  forty-five,  and 
charming.  Granville  was  quite  smitten. 

Tell  the  Duke  and  Duchess  that  it  is  not  to  be  told 
how  we  feast  upon  pheasants  and  pineapples,  with  the 
greatest  reconnaissance  to  them  for  such  welcome 
gifts. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  1838. 

Leveson  is  with  us  in  excellent  spirits,  but  tired  of 
the  world,  surtout  dancing  in  it ;  spends  most  of  his 
evenings  at  home  and  flirts  with  nobody. 

Lord  Clarendon  has  settled  place,  money,  every- 
thing on  Lady  Clarendon,  and  on  her  death  to  Lady 
Maryborough — ruin  to  the  present  George  were  it  not 
that,  as  I  am  assured  by  Lord  Harry  Yane,  who  is 
just  arrived,  Lady  F.  Barham1  and  her  large  fortune 
are  to  be  his  ;  that  Mrs.  Villiers  had  arranged  it  all  with 
the  consent  of  both  parties. 

Comte  Mole  still  holds  on ;  some  say  he  cannot  long, 
but  I  am  inclined  to  think  he  will.  The  seances  at  the 
Chambers  are  all  but  blows. 

How  happy  Mme.  de  Lieven  has  been  made  by 
hearing  from  her  son  of  the  alteration  in  '  Yraiment's  ' 
language  and  intentions !  Pray  liez  yourself — not 
matrimonially,  my  dear — with  Alexandre  de  Lieven. 
I  think  him  a  most  pleasing  and  gentlemanlike  person, 
and  I  was  enchanted  with  his  behaviour  to  his  poor 
mother  at  the  time  of  his  brother's  death. 

1  Lord  Clarendon  married  Lady  F.  Barham  in  June  1839. 


1839  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  279 


1839 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  January  11,  1889. 

I  have  but  little  time,  and  I  must  write  a  great  deal. 
You  will  all  be  Happy  to  hear  of  the  deep  gratitude 
Mme.  de  Lieven  feels  for  the  kindness  of  your  letters, 
the  details  so  gratifying  to  her — nothing  to  add  to  her 
pain,  and  everything  to  soothe  it.1 

She  feels  it — naturally  deeply — just  as  you  knew 
her  to  be,  and  much  more  than  those  who  do  not  see 
her  in  these  moments,  when  all  is  laid  open,  would  ever 
believe  her  to  be  capable  of. 

Tenderness  for  whatever  called  for  it  in  the  past, 
forgetfulness  of  every  cloud,  on  her  knees  with  torrents 
of  tears,  hoping  that  she  had  not  often  given  pain, 
failed  in  kindness,  indulgence. 

Then  her  own  peculiarity  of  nature — no  thought  of 
les  apparences,  power  of  turning  soon  and  eagerly  to 
other  objects  of  interest  or  curiosity. 

All  this,  the  good  and  the  weak  side  of  which  no 
person  who  knows  her  but  little  can  measure.  That 
nobody  but  myself  should  see  it  was  my  great  object. 
I  have  brought  her  here ;  she  has  the  garden  to  walk 
in,  cheerful  rooms,  us  about  her.  Marie  Menzingen 
always  with  Georgy,  never  in  her  own  little  melancholy 
room. 

They  only  return  to  the  hotel  at  ten  at  night,  and 
I  mean  this  to  go  on  till  Paul  Lieven  arrives. 

1  Prince  Lieven  died  at  Home  on  January  10. 


280     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

She  will  see  people  by  degrees.  Mme.  Appony  and 
Pahlen  for  a  minute  yesterday,  Duchesse  de  Dino  to- 
day, and  so  on. 

She  is  avide  of  details  ;  more  gratified  and  grateful 
for  the  respect  shown  him.  Of  course,  dearest  brother, 
your  first  letter  was  only  seen  by  me  ;  the  second  she 
reads  over  and  over  again,  kisses  it,  cries  over  it.  She 
will  be  equally  pleased  with  the  one  I  have  just  received. 

She  knows  nothing  of  her  affairs.  She  longs  for 
her  sons.  I  wrote  myself  to  Paul  yesterday  to  urge 
him  to  come.  I  trust  when  he  leaves  her,  Alexandre 
will  come.  She  insisted  upon  sending  your  letter  to 
Paul,  and  writes  now  to  have  it  back  again  that  she 
may  never  part  with  it. 

Eichard l  goes  on  very  slowly,  but  there  is  nothing 
to  alarm  in  his  state.  Mme.  de  Schonbourg  is  infinitely 
better.  Leveson  and  Howards  leave  us  next  week. 

The  funeral2  is  at  Dreux  to-morrow,  and  all  the 
Eoyal  Family  go  there  to-day. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  3,  1839. 

For  some  days  my  time  was  quite  taken  up  by 
Madame  de  Lieven.  Then  came  Leveson's  last  days 
here.  He  set  out  this  morning  at  the  same  time  as 
Lord  Powerscourt  and  Lord  Norreys,  so  that  the  snow, 
which  is  now  fast  falling,  will  block  up  two  Tories  to 
one  Whig  ;  and  he  will  be  in  such  good  company, 
according  to  his  taste,  that  I  am  sure  he  will  make 
himself  as  snug  as  possible. 

The  death  of  the  Duchess-Countess  has  again  closed 
our  doors.  You  will  have  heard,  probably,  from  some 
one  on  the  spot  that  her  last  moments  were  tranquil 
and  free  from  suffering.  I  fear  the  Duke  of  Sutherland 
will  be  much  affected  by  this  event. 

1  Cavendish.  2  Of  the  Duchesse  de  Wurtemberg. 


1839  TO   LADY    CARLISLE  281 

The  wonderful  coup  of  the  portefeuilles  repris  and 
the  Chamber  dissolved  l  took  away  our  breath  at  first. 
They  say  little  Thiers  is  violent,  and  that  the  coalition 
is  all  feu  etflamme,  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the 
dread  of  disturbance  will  justify  this  hazardous  game, 
but  no  one  can  tell.  It  is  formidable  to  hear  of  the 
new  classing  of  parties,  '  le  Parti  Parlementaire  et  le 
Parti  de  la  Cour.'  Between  the  4th  and  10th  of  March 
will  be  the  tug,  when  the  elections  are  made  known. 

Let  me  talk  of  the  delight  of  your  letters  from 
Eome.  Your  sights  must  be  enchanting.  I  pine  to 
hear  that  Lord  Carlisle  is  able  to  enjoy  it  all.  Give 
them  all  my  best  love.  Shake  hands  with  Morpeth 
for  me. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  11,  1839. 

You  will  by  this  time  know  all  the  comfort  to  be 
derived  from  the  last  calm  and  tranquil  moments  of  the 
poor  Duchess-Countess.  Lady  William  Bentinck  sent 
me  a  letter  she  had  received  from  Lady  Surrey,  in 
which  every  detail  which  would  be  gratifying  to  the 
Duke  to  know  was  entered  into.  He  has  probably 
heard  from  her  himself. 

I  have  nothing  to  tell  you.  We  have  had  ten  days 
of  Italian  weather.  We  spend  all  our  mornings  in  the 
Bois  de  Boulogne,  dawdling  about,  as  in  spring. 

All  political  eyes  turn  to  March  4,  as  between  that 
and  the  12th  the  elections  and  Mole's  fate  will  be 
decided.  The  King  is  in  good  spirits  and  courage. 

The  world  is  to  dance  at  Thorn's  to-morrow,  Mardi 
Gras.  A  quadrille,  the  women  sylphides,  the  men 
beasts,  which  are  done  in  cartonnage  to  the  life.  Then 
comes  the  Careme,  but  all  is  quiet  to  us. 

1  Count  Mole  resigned  on  February  22,  but  resumed  office  on  Marshal 
Soult  failing  to  form  a  Government. 


282     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS    GRANVILLE    1839 

Have  I  told  you  that  Abercromby  and  his  wife  were 
here  for  ten  days,  the  happiest  of  pairs  ?  She  is  a  quiet, 
well-mannered  little  woman,  not  pretty,  but  very  well- 
looking  ;  he  is  in  delight  of  what  he  has  done  and  done 
with,  and  it  is  pleasant  to  hear  of  the  happiness  of 
Crust  and  Crumb  1  and  their  adoration  of  Lady  Mary. 

I  was  busy  last  night  putting  all  your  letters 
together,  that  if  you  are  lazy  about  a  journal  you 
may  find  your  delightful  tour  safe  in  red  tape  and 
docket. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  25,  1839. 

I  have  little  time  and  nothing  exciting  to  conquer 
my  laziness.  Yet,  Ministers  out  of  the  Government  and 
Guizot  out  of  the  question,  and  Thiers,  Soult,  Dupin, 
Odillon  Barrot  only  waiting  for  Humann's  2  arrival  and 
adhesion  to  be  Lords  Paramount,  is  just  worth  mention- 
ing. Mr.  Pear  3  is  more  low  and  utterly  beat  down  than 
can  be  said.  He  assents  and  yields  to  everything  relat- 
ing to  the  new  furniture.  Lieven  tells  me  that  Guizot 
is  miserable  and  in  vain  tries  to  bear  up.4  She,  I  sup- 
pose, will  soon  be  anxious  to  go  to  England  to  see  her 
son  and  friends,  and  there  is  nothing  to  make  her  wish 
to  remain. 

Lord  Clarendon  is  here  on  his  way  home.  He  is 
not  a  romantic  lover,  but  will,  I  have  no  doubt,  be  a 
very  good  husband. 

Paris  is  dull.  Madame  Zavadoska  is  returned, 
handsomer  than  ever.  She  raves  of  England  ;  says  she 
never  was  so  happy  in  her  life. 

1  A  nickname  for  their  son,  who  married  Lady  Mary  Elliot  in  1838. 

2  The  Minister  of  Finance. 

3  Louis  Philippe's  nickname,  from  the  shape  of  his  face. 

4  Monsieur  Guizot  had  coalesced  with  Monsieur  Thiers  to  turn  out 
the  Comte  Mole,  and  thereby  alienated  some  of  his  Conservative  friends. 


]839  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  283 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  28,  1839. 

Our  weather  is  finer  than  yours.  Yesterday  evening 
I  went  out,  for  the  first  time  this  year,  to  a  small  soiree 
at  Mme.  Alfred's  to  hear  Mile.  Garcia  sing.  She  has 
great  promise  and  power  ;  like  her  sister,1  knows  all 
languages  and  is  full  of  entramement,  but  there  is  one 
fatal  difference — an  ugliness  4  that  throws  its  dark  shade 
alike  o'er  her  eyes  and  her  nose,'  and  somebody  said  of 
her  with  truth,  *  Elle  frise  le  monstre.'  The  house  is  per- 
fectly beautiful  and  luxurious,  the  society  aristocratic 
and  frightful,  the  mistress  of  the  house  gracious  and 
agreeable,  Mme.  Appony  and  Pahlen  are  hardly  able 
to  bear  up,  because  of  a  majority  of  nine  against 
Ministers ;  the  consequences  will  probably  be  known 
to-day. 

Mons.  d'Arlincourt,2  whom  I  met  at  Mme.  Alfred's, 
entreated  me  to  interest  myself  for  a  Mile,  de  Casteras, 
the  last  of  a  very  noble  family,  ruined,  and  all  her 
hopes  resting  on  the  sale  of  some  of  her  possessions.  A 
set  of  furniture  that  belonged  to  Mme.  de  Pompadour, 
a  Titian,  an  old  clock  which  was  in  the  room  of  Louis 
XVI.,  a  cachemire,  an  old  picture  of  the  Tour  de  Nesle, 
and  various  other  objects  of  value.  She  has  started  a 
lottery,  the  tickets  ten  francs  each.  I  have  promised 
to  procure  some  names  from  Eome.  She  is  a  very 
striking  person — perfect  manners,  interesting  counte- 
nance. She  is  the  dear  friend  of  the  Princesse  Amelie 
de  Saxe,  whoever  she  may  be,  but  I  throw  it  in,  hoping 
that  it  may  touch  the  Duke  of  Sutherland  ;  and  now  I 
am  going  to  look  at  the  Titian,  which  Doctor  Eobert 
tells  me  is  '  very  pleasing  to  view.'  I  wish  you  would 
monter  Lady  Shrewsbury's  he'ad  about  it.  God  bless 
you. 

1  Madame  Malibran.  2  A  novelist  of  some  repute. 


284     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1839 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  April  5,  1839. 

I  must  crowd  everything  into  a  small  space.  Here 
the  Rooms  opened  yesterday.  A  great  number  of  people 
assembled,  quantities  of  workmen  out  of  place,  no  real 
disturbance,  though  a  little  noise.  They  hissed  Appony 
and  made  the  Turkish  Ambassador  cry  out,  '  Vive  la 
Charte.'  The  little  Provisional  Government  *  got  a 
majority ;  in  short,  all  seems  orderly  but  in  abeyance. 
The  Carlists  hope  in  Mr.  Third,'2  and  say  he  means  to 
reign  in  the  name  of  the  absent  boy.  Miss  Jenkinson,3 
Ministress  of  Strange  Affairs,  and  all  our  corps  calling 
on  her  first  yesterday.  Odd  world  ! 

The  Bear  is  supposed  to  be  doing,  saying,  and  mean- 
ing mischief.  I  do  not  think  so.  It  is  only  that  his 
inclination  to  ponder  and  his  love  of  putting  his  large 
paw  upon  every  object,  and  calling  and  complaining  is 
called  manoeuvre  and  ill-will.  The  Brush 4  is  his  bitter 
enemy,  gives  it  him  at  small  dinners  at  Mrs.  Graham's 
and  little  sittings  at  the  White  Bear's.5  '  If  he  thinks, 
if  he  imagines,  I'll  show  him  up,  I'll  degrade  him,'  etc. 

Mr.  Hume  and  Mr.  Leader  were  very  well,  thank 
you,  at  dinner  on  Monday ;  Lord  Lyndhurst  and  Lord 
Brougham  ditto  on  Wednesday.  Nobody  can  foresee. 
The  Tories  are  not  willing  to  seize  the  present  moment. 
In  a  week  all  shades  return  to  England  and  then  we 
shall  see.  I  know  nothing  of  what  Lord  Clarendon 
intends  to  do. 

Marie  Menzingen  is  to  return  to  Baden  the  first 
bonne  occasion.  Her  sister,  the  young  beautiful  one,  is 
about  to  make  an  excellent  marriage,  to  the  young 
Count  of  Freichstett,  le  premier  parti  du  Ducke  de  Bade. 

1  On  April  3  the  King  accepted  the  resignation  of  the  Mol£  Administra- 
tion, and  nominated  a  Provisional  Government. 

2  Monsieur  Thiers.  3  Duchesse  de  Montebello,  nee  Jenkinson. 
4  Brougham.                      5  Princess  Lieven. 


1839  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  285 

Marie  is  enchanted  at  this,  and  returns  to  be  present 
at  the  noce,  and,  as  she  says,  to  devote  herself  to  his 
three  children,  lovely  little  things  under  four  years  old, 
he  being  a  widower.  Mme.  de  Lieven  means  soon  to 
go  to  England.  I  am  glad  that  they  part  amicably.  I 
love  Marie  and  shall  miss  and  regret  her  much. 

What  shall  you  do  if  the  Tories  come  in  ?  Wait 
for  Morpeth  and  us  in  Italy,  Lady  Carlisle  ? 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  May  26,  1839. 

There  is  a  strong  Government,  I  believe.  I  cannot 
attempt  to  go  over  the  ground  uncertain  if  you  are  upon 
the  other  side  of  it,  but  for  the  present  the  Whigs  have 
better  prospects  than  they  have  had  for  some  time  past. 

The  country  has  a  cry  for  the  Queen.  The  story 
pregnant  of  mischief  is  forgotten.  The  Tories  are 
furious,  and  above  all  with  the  Baronet,  who  appears  to 
have  deliberately  cut  his  throat  in  the  tete-a-tete,  I  think 
on  purpose,  seeing  what  a  task  that  head  would  have  if 
it  remained  on. 

By-the-by  I  have  made  acquaintance  with  your 
little  friend  Miss  V.  de  Spot  since  I  wrote  last.  I  never 
met  with  anybody  who  had  so  much  determination  and 
caractere,  or  who  promises  to  her  family  and  friends 
such  uncompromising  and  unshaken  support.  I  should 
say  it  is  fortunate  for  a  person  who  is  seeking  a  situa- 
tion as  governess,  where  there  is  a  large  family  to 
educate,  that  she  does  not  appear  to  have  a  nerve  or 
feeling ;  but  this  can  only  be  known  when  we  have  ob- 
tained a  situation  for  her,  and  I  promise  to  recommend 
her  to  the  French  families  of  my  acquaintance. 

We  had  a  ball  here  in  honour  of  our  young  Queen 
yesterday,  which  was  much  approved  of.  It  was  a 
tour  deforce  to  obtain  of  all  my  acquaintance,  dowagers 
included,  to  come  dressed  in  pink  and  white,  but  it  was 


286     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

obtained ;  Mme.  Dosne  in  a  blue  turban,  the  Minister 
of  Marine's  wife  in  a  yellow  gown,  an  old  Portuguese 
lady  in  green,  and  a  Scotch  lady  and  Mme.  de  Stackel- 
berg,  par  raison  de  deuil,  in  light  grey  gowns  with 
natural  roses,  being  the  only  exceptions  amongst  about 
1,200  friends ! 

The  Duke  of  Sutherland  is  going  on  very  well,  I 
heard  yesterday  fromlnspruck;  but  she  writes,  like  you, 
ignorant  of  all  changes,  and  therefore  only  intent  upon 
delay  on  the  road  and  the  quietest  of  retreats,  the 
world  forgetting,  by  the  world  forgot,  at  Westhill — only 
occupied  about  the  perfect  recovery  of  his  health. 
Happy  dream !  At  least,  I  hope  his  health  may  not  re- 
quire its  realisation,  or  know  not  how  far  necessity  and 
a  sense  of  duty  may,  if  it  does  not,  induce  her  to  awake. 
The  letter  is  full  of  sense  and  feeling.  Princesse  Doria 
was  here  last  night,  apparently  enclosed  in  a  dia- 
mond. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  May  28,  1839. 

Here  we  are  as  to  politics  just  the  same.  A  minister e 
entirely  Thiers  announced  to  be  announced  to-day,  yet 
nobody  believes  in  anything  but  dawdle  and  protraction 
till  the  end  of  the  session.  This  is  a  very  perilous 
game. 

In  England  the  maidens  are  more  talked  of  than  the 
statesmen.  The  Queen  was  enchanted  with  her  dinner 
at  Lansdowne  House,  examining  everything,  lights, 
liveries,  plates,  knives,  merry  and  inquisitive,  uniting 
the  difficult  parts  of  a  girl  dining  for  the  first  time  from 
home  and  a  sovereign  dining  for  the  first  time  with  a 
subject.  I  long  for  the  Duchess  to  be  with  her. 

The  Binghams  are  here ;  she  seems  intelligent  and 
amiable.  Lady  Powerscourt  gone,  divine,  unbelievable 
beauty.  It  is  pleasant  having  so  many  friends  passing 


1839  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  287 

through  Paris.  The  Hortons,  to  our  great  regret,  leave 
us  on  Friday.  He  is  as  agreeable  as  ever,  and  she 
the  best  of  women.  Lady  Eavens worth  devotes  her- 
self to  making  the  Flora  case  quite  clear  to  Mme.  de 
Lieven,  '  Ith  all  talking  that  doth  the  mithchief ;  why 
will  people  talk,  my  dear  Printhethe  de  Lieven  ? ' 

Granville  has  just  told  me  that  Hume  and  Sir  Eobert 
mean  to  join  in  opposition  upon  the  Jamaica  question  ; 
so  Saturday  perhaps?  If  not,  I  shall  think  we  are 
really  screwed  into  our  saddles. 

There  is  a  report  here  that  Madame  de  Caraman  is 
to  marry  the  Due  de  Vicence.  He  is  handsome,  pleas- 
ing, fi  ve-and-twenty,  excellent  parti ;  but  in  memory  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien  l  no  aristocrat  here  will  accept  him 
for  his  daughter.  This  and  her  having  had  a  present 
of  300,000  francs  from  a  brother,  who  lives  out  of  the 
world,  tempts  me  to  believe  it. 

My  best  love  to  all  yours. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

June  5,  1839. 

Good  accounts  of  the  Duke  of  Sutherland  at 
Stuttgart. 

Lord  William  Bentinck  going  on.  The  sufferings 
less,  but  I  have  little  hope  of  ultimate  recovery. 

Our  Government  sits  at  home,  and  so  does  Soult's  * 
here. 

The  Grand  Duke  has  left  England  in  despair,  des- 
perately in  love  with  Lady  Fanny  Cowper. 

1  Caulaincourt,  Due  de  Vicence,  commanded  at  Strasburg  at  the  time  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien's  arrest.  The  Legitimists  persistently  accused  him  of 
being  a  party  to  it,  which  he  through  life  strenuously  denied,  saying  that 
the  order  was  carried  out  by  his  subordinate,  General  Ordener,  without  his 
knowledge,  and  in  his  will  are  to  be  found  the  following  words  :  '  A  man 
does  not  lie  to  God  in  the  presence  of  death.  I  swear  that  I  took  no  part 
in  the  arrest  of  the  Due  d'Enghien.' 

•  Soult  was  appointed  President  of  the  Council  and  Foreign  Minister 
on  May  12. 


288     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

Gink l  writes  :  '  The  Duke  of  Wellington's  speech  has 
driven  the  Tories  frantic,  has  quite  made  up  for  any 
harm  that  Brougham's  very  brilliant  speech  may  have 
occasioned.  It  is  said  that  the  silence  and  melancholy 
produced  by  the  Duke's  speech  upon  the  Tories  after 
their  vociferous  cheering  and  laughing  was  very 
striking  and  amusing. 

The  Queen  well  received  at  Ascot,  but  Agneau 2  says 
'  they  were  too  excited — not  the  calm  approbation  I 
like.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  June  21,  1839. 

I  am  delighted  to  hear  from  you,  my  dearest  brother. 

Poor  Lord  William's  body  is  to  go  to  England  this 
evening.  Lady  William  leaves  Paris  also.  She  is 
wonderfully  calm  and  able  to  exert  herself. 

Lady  Jersey  is  as  pleasant  a  vivre  as  she  used  to  be 
rugged.  Never  comes  near  me  but  when  I  propose  it, 
and  then  is  as  good-humoured  and  pleasable  as  it  is 
possible  to  be.  Mr.  O.3  gives  her  pineapples,  boxes, 
and  visits.  Mrs.  0.  takes  her  to  the  French  play. 
Upon  seeing  these  operations,  many  women,  many 
minds.  Madame  Appony  outree,  '  si  grossier  pour 
nous — pas  le  sens  commun,  inou'i — inconvenable  au 
dernier  degre.'  Mrs.  G.4  penetree  with  reconnaissance 
and  delight  that  such  penances  are  only  inflicted  upon 
the  silent. 

Some  say  that  Lord  Glenelg  asked  of  himself  to  go. 
H.  B.  makes  Lord  John  drive  him  out  of  town  in  a 
patent  safety  cab. 

Miss  Minna5 — I  alone  thought  her  pretty.  From 
manner,  countenance,  tournure,  something  uncommonly 
attractive  about  her.  But  spectators  in  general  were 

1  Lord  Leveson.  2  Mrs.  Lamb. 

3  Duke  of  Orleans.  *  Lady  Granville. 

5  The  Duchess  of  Norfolk.     She  was  a  daughter  of  Lord  Lyons. 


1839  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  289 

much  astonished.  As  we  already  possess  Lady  Harriet 
Galway,  there  was  no  use  in  having  Lady  Lyons,  there 
being  no  shade  of  difference  between  the  two. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  June  22,  1839. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  know  not  if  this  will  ever  get 
to  you,  as  we  hope  you  will  not  stay  long  at  Venice  in 
this  hot  and  stagnant  weather.  We  are  longing  to 
hear  something  of  your  plans,  but  have  been  obliged 
almost  to  fix  our  own.  We  think  of  going  to  Kissingen, 
near  Wtirtzburg,  not  extremely  far  from  Baden.  I 
have  written  to  my  brother,  who  is  in  a  state  of  delight 
at  Geneva.  Not  well,  but  he  says  it  is  the  best  place 
for  his  hay-fit.  Three  grottoes  of  rooms  close  to  the 
Lake.  I  have  written  to  him  our  plans  and  am  not 
without  hope  that  he  will  join  us. 

Poor  Lord  William's  death  was  very  sudden  at  last. 
The  body  was  to  leave  Paris  last  night,  and  his  family 
go  soon.  Lady  Charlotte  to  England,  I  believe.  I 
know  not  what  poor  Lady  William  will  do,  but  I  hear 
she  has  not  suffered  in  health. 

Lady  Jersey  is  in  .great  spirits  and  good-humour, 
doing  and  going  all  day.  Lady  Sarah  I  think  very 
pretty,  the  prettiest  of  the  three. 

Lord  Granby  leaves  Paris  on  the  28th,  and  Lady 
Chesterfield  and  Miss  Forrester  arrive  here  on  the  1st. 
I  like  him  and  his  brother  Lord  John  much. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  June  24,  1839. 

It  is  too  refreshing  to  find  you  sitting  by  my  plate 
these  hot  mornings  when  I  crawl  to  breakfast.  I  am 
dying  to  hear  what  you  will  determine  upon. 

The  Duke  of  Sutherland  writes   that  he  is   much 

VOL.    II.  U 


290     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

better,  tells  us  of  the  death  of  the  poor  little  baby, 
teething,  that  the  Duchess  had  borne  it  better  than  he 
had  hoped. 

I  have  heard  nothing  of  the  Burlingtons.  Charles l 
has  taken  delighted  though  nervous  possession  of  his 
post,  Harry  tells  me. 

The  story  that  occupies  everyone  is  whether  or  not 
the  Duchess  of  Montrose  kissed  the  Queen  at  Ascot, 
but  all  agree,  not  in  the  details,  that  the  audiences, 
affidavits,  lies,  contradictions,  and  I  fear  subsequent 
bitterness  and  mischief  have  been  parallel  to  those  upon 
the  Lady  Flora  question.  God  bless  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  June  29,  1839. 

Kissingen  does  not  look  up  this  morning.  We  are 
told  of  its  imperfections,  and  have  no  decided  opinion 
upon  its  unknown  sources.  Dody  and  I  have  just  been 
building  a  castle,  but  without  knowing  how  it  will  take. 
A  six  weeks'  tour  in  Normandy.  The  new  Port  St. 
Valery,  Dieppe,  Havre,  luxuriously  with  horses  and 
carriages.  Che  m  pare  ? 

Yesterday  the  nine  actual  Ministers  dined  here.  The 
five  ambassadors  (Pahlen  is  gone  to  Petersburg),  Eam- 
buteau  and  Pasquier.  In  the  evening  came  Mme.  Appony 
and  girl,  Brignoles  and  girl,  Mole  and  Guizot,  Helena 
Eobinson  and  girl,  Vallombrosa,  Meyendorf,  Prince  and 
Princess  de  Ligne,  Lady  Sandwich,  Mrs.  Locke,  Granby 
and  John,  Edward  Upton,  Beust,  Bernstorff,  Hatzfeldt, 
Eodolphe  Appony,  Vicence.  I  give  you  the  list  to  show 
you  the  sum  total  of  what  you  will  find  at  Paris.  Unless, 
indeed,  you  drop  in  at  dinner  on  Friday,  when  Sir  W. 
and  Lady  Beecher,2  Sir  Charles  Doyle  and  his  bride,  late 
Steer,  Mrs.  Evrington,  dressed  and  rouged  like  an  altar- 

1  Mr.   Charles   Howard  was   appointed    Lord    Melbourne's    private 
secretary.  2  The  actress  Miss  O'Neill. 


1839  TO   LADY   CAELISLE  291 

piece  but  still  beautiful,  Mrs.  Johnstone  and  her  still 
much-admired  daughter,  Lady  Canterbury  and  her 
girls. 

I  think  you  will  be  pleased  with  our  Turkish 
Ambassador.  I  think  him  a  love.  A  fine  head  like 
Eossini,  a  lazy,  amiable  smile  and  manner ;  loves  to  sit 
looking  at  Harriet  d'Orsay  or  Miss  Horsford.  Nice  dis- 
jointed talk.  '  Yous  montez  a  cheval;  je  crois  vous  avoir 
rencontre  ? '  '  Non,  cheval  grand,  moi  petit,  cela  ne  va 
pas.'  '  Nous  esperons  avoir  le  plaisir  de  voir  1'Ambas- 
sadrice  ici  bientot.'  She  is  seventeen,  beautiful  beyond 
measure.  '  Oui,  oui.'  *  Elle  sera  admiree  extremement 
a  Paris.'  '  A  moi  egal.'  I  beg  to  add  I  was  not  the 
questioner. 

I  forgot  to  say  that  Silence  came  in  last  night  at 
eleven,  hot,  breathless  from  a  dinner  at  Neuilly  and 
Opera  with  the  O.'s.  She  is  in  perfect  contentment. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  July  1,  1839. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — We  are  all  well.  Lady  Hardy 
wrote  me  an  account  of  Morpeth's  breakfast.1  Beau- 
tiful, four  hundred  people  dining  in  perfect  ease  and 
luxury,  fine  evening,  and  that  his  prevenant,  courteous 
manner  and  the  character  he  bears  and  the  love  he 
inspires  smoothed  even  such  thorns  as  belong  to  such 
roses,  as  anything  connected  with  politics  in  this  day. 

Mme.  de  Flahault  writes  that  O'Connell  is  the  most 
charming  man  with  the  most  pleasing  manner  that  she 
ever  met  with.  We  are  imagined  safe  till  next  Session. 

Aston  goes  to  Madrid,  Henry  Bulwer  comes  here. 

Leveson  is  in  high  spirits,  in  love  with  nobody. 

Very  intimate  again  with  Lady  ,  who  is  playing 

her  on  and  off  game  with  many  of  the  unwary,  but  he 
is,  I  think,  aware  and  safe. 

1  Given  in  honour  of  O'Connell.  The  principal  Tory  ladies  kept  away. 

TJ  2 


292     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  D.  He  writes  on 
the  28th  from  Geneva  that  if  well  he  will  be  here  on 
the  4th.  We  shall  remain  here  about  ten  days  after 
his  arrival,  and  having  given  up  Germany,  we  shall  go 
with  him  and  the  Fullertons  a  tour  about  the  coast  of 
Normandy. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  July  23,  1839. 

Your  delicious  letter  is  here,  so  extremely  interest- 
ing  to   us  in  all  ways.     Let   me   first   tell   you   how 
entirely  your  effort  in  going  to  Baden  answered,  as  far 
as  Madame  de  Lieven  was  concerned.     She  was  quite 
delighted,  and  so  am  I,  with  all  you  say  about  her. 
There  is  yet  peace,  even  for  her,  if  she  will  but  tread 
in  its  path.     Is  it  not  one  of  the  most  wonderful  things 
belonging  to  this  state  of  existence  that  she  can  still 
cling  to  and  lean  upon  this,  to  her,  miserable  earth  ?     I 
know  no  one  so  bereaved,  so  desolate.     I  write  this 
morning  without  having  a  guess  where  to  go.     I  have 
consulted  Granville,  and  he  says  he  has  not  a  guess 
where  I  am  to  direct.     He  and  Freddy  reproach  me  for 
my  folly  in  writing  when  I  do  not  know  what  to  put 
on  my  letter  ;  but  I,  with  my  little  eye,  see  that  Harry 
or  somebody  will  tell  me  all  at  once  when  and  how, 
and  I  like  to  be  ready  with   my  document  pour   la 
premiere  occasion. 

D.,  after  cold,  headache,  and  two  or  three  days' 
confinement  in  the  Hotel  Sinet,  is  in  the  most  tearing 
spirits  and  enjoyment  of  the  rare  quiet  and  emptiness  of 
Paris.  He  purchases  at  all  the  shops,  dines  at  cafes 
with  Fullerton,  walks  into  the  concerts,  and  yesterday 
evening  went  to  the  '  Huguenots.' 

Georgy  and  I  pass  our  mornings  at  Longchamps. 
They  set  out  to-morrow  for  Brighton,  where  they  are 
to  pass  some  time  with  his  family.  My  brother  stays 


1839  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  293 

here  about  ten  days  longer.  We  shall,  I  hope,  leave 
Paris  about  the  middle  of  August. 

Henry  Bulwer  is  arrived  and  is  extremely  agreeable 
and  efficient,  and  will,  I  think,  be  a  great  addition  in 
society  and  a  very  useful  one  in  business.  But  Aston 
is  not  to  be  replaced  in  our  affection. 

I  shall  see  you  somehow  or  other,  most  dear  sister, 
for  I  trust  we  shall  be  the  whole  month  of  September 
in  England. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Devonshire  House  :  August  31,  1839. 

My  dearest  sister, — You  saw  how  poorly  I  was  at 
your  house  after  the  Palace.  All  the  next  day  I  was 
in  my  bed.  Granville  dined  at  Stafford  House  and  was 
enchanted  with  the  Duchess  and  Lady  Clanricarde. 
He  returned  here  to  keep  me  company  with  a  like 
seizure  of  cold  and  diarrhoea.  Yesterday  I  recovered 
and  dined  with  D.  and  Leveson  with  Lord  Seaford. 
All  the  Hardys.  Lord  Melbourne  very  happy,  wide 
awake,  talking  a  great  deal  to  Louisa  Hardy. 

Everybody  moans  and  groans  over  the  changes.1 
Mr.  Wood  and  Lady  Mary  sat  with  me  during  my 
cholerine,  almost  in  tears,  in  despair  at  going  out, 
leaving  their  best  friends,  but  inevitable,  impossible  to 
avoid.  Mr.  Wood  is  most  grateful  to  Morpeth  for  a 
note,  loves  you  for  your  sorrow ;  Mary  became  like  a 
silver  fruit  knife  in  aspect,  and  said  she  must  leave 
the  room  if  we  said  a  word  more,  so  moved  was 
she. 

Well,  people  say  Lord  Clarendon's  tiff  is  absurd. 
Lord  Seaford  says  his  speeches  were  not  so  very  good, 
not  to  be  compared  with  Morpeth's  first  speeches  in 

1  Several  changes  took  place  in  the  Administration.  Sir  Charles 
"Wood  resigned  the  Secretaryship  of  the  Admiralty.  He  afterwards  filled 
many  important  posts,  and  was  created  Viscount  Halifax  in  1866. 


294     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

promise  of  anything  first-rate,  and  what  has  he  done  to 
warrant  immediate  eye  to  the  Cabinet  ? 

Sister,  you  see  how  this  is  to  be  burnt,  and  only  for 
you  and  the  Lords.  Lord  Howick  says  he  goes  because 
Mr.  Wood  is  affronted.  Mr.  Wood  won't  say  one  word 
of  why  he  does,  so  we  turn  it  upside  down. 

Mantalini1  says  he  is  now  just  what  he  has  all  along 
wished,  pined  for,  Home,  but  D.  says  he  is  in  deplor- 
able spirits. 

Lord  Seaford  says  that  it  is  the  best  thing  possible 
to  have  Johnny  Colonial,  but  laments  over  Powlettain2 
Boat  Song — most  ungracious,  unconciliating,  and  to 
the  Aristocratic  Americans,  descended  from  tallow. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Windsor :  October  10,  1839. 

It  is  delightful.  I  had  forgotten  the  beauty  of  the 
place,  inside  and  out.  The  weather  is  quite  heavenly — 
every  comfort  and  luxury.  Lady  Sandwich  and  Lady 
Clanricarde.  The  Princes  of  Coburg  arrived.  A  key 
to  go  all  day  long  into  the  garden.  No  driving 
required.  And  now,  my  dearest  Dody,  to  you  and 
your  husband  and  my  dearest  brother  a  bundle  of  my 
observations. 

Lady  Clanricarde  came  to  me,  which  kept  me  till 
within  ten  minutes  of  luncheon. 

I  have  been  taking  a  delicious  walk  on  the  Terrace 
into  an  embroidered  garden,  but  how  inferior !  Lord 
Palmerston  said  that  if  my  brother  could  but  come 
here  for  six  months  en  maitre,  Windsor  would  be 
the  most  magnificent  thing  on  earth,  and  it  is  quite 
true. 

The  Queen  looks  lovely,  much  more  delicate  with- 
out looking  ill.  Lord  Melbourne  appears  to  be  in  as 

1  Lord  Normanby. 

2  Mr.  Powlett  Thomson  was  appointed  Governor-General  of  Canada. 


1839  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  295 

great  favour  as  ever,  and  I  think  their  relative  manners 
in  a  difficult  position  perfect. 

We  sat  round  in  the  evening,  but  had  much  to  look 
at.  '  My  cousins  '  are  both  of  them  very  unaffected  and 
with  very  good  manners,  perfectly  at  their  ease  with 
her  without  gene  or  familiarity ;  and  Prince  Albert 
the  youngest  is  charming.  Ladies  Sandwich,  Clanri- 
carde  and  I  are  won.  It  remains  to  be  seen  who  else 
will  be. 

Eoast  beef  and  potatoes  with  the  Ministers  and 
maids.  Going  in  a  real  coach  and  horses  to  the 
Virginia  Water.  Lady  Sandwich  says  she  idolises  the 
Queen.  Lord  Normanby  imagines  that  there  is  nothing 
actually  en  train  as  to  marriage.  Lord  Melbourne  sat 
by  her  yesterday  evening  as  usual,  did  not  sleep  at  all 
or  talk  much.  Prince  Albert  played  at  chess  with 
Charles  Murray.  Lady  Clanricarde  said,  '  The  trial  is 
too  great ;  if  he  wins  he  has  a  master  mind.'  He  lost. 

H.  M.  asked  Lady  Clanricarde  '  Do  you  think  my 
cousin  like  me  ?  '  She  said  yes,  because  he  is,  though 
much  handsomer. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  October  25,  1839. 

My  dearest  sister, — You  will  have  been  like  us,  first 
shocked,  and  then  relieved  about  Lord  Brougham.1 

The  slightest  encouragement  to  F.  Grey 2  will  make 
what  I  believe  will  be  for  the  happiness  of  all  parties. 
As  to  the  other  branch  of  your  domestic  affairs,  con- 
ceive my  surprise  when  Baroness  Dimsdale  yesterday 
said  to  me :  '  I  am  so  delighted  to  hear  of  William 
Cowper's  marriage.'  '  To  whom  ? '  'To  one  of  Lord 
Carlisle's  daughters.'  Much  as  Dimsdale  regards  and 

1  A  false  report  of  his  death  appeared  in  the  Times. 

2  The  Rev.  Francis  Grey,  son  of  the  Prime  Minister,  who  married,  in 
1840,  Lady  Elizabeth  Howard. 


296     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1839 

values  me,  she  does  not  seem  aware  of  my  parentes.  I 
said,  obliged  to  boast,  I  was  quite  sure  my  sister  Lady 
Carlisle,  would  have  told  me.  '  Oh,  I  beg  your  pardon  ; 
I  only  read  it  in  the  newspaper.' 

Bruce  lives  entirely  with  his  family,  excepting 
walks  and  visits  to  Leveson,  who  is  delightful,  lives 
almost  entirely  with  us,  in  very  good  spirits  and  as 
amiable,  affectionate,  and  pleasant  as  it  is  possible 
to  be. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  wants  nothing  and  nobody  but  her 
tapissiers  and  Monsieur  Paggenpohl,  who  helps  her. 
She  thinks  of  nothing  but  tables  and  chairs.  The 
entresol  is  delicious ;  she  looks  out  upon  and  into  the 
Tuileries  gardens — it  is  like  living  in  a  kaleidoscope. 
She  don't  let  me  in,  she  don't  come  to  see  me,  but  dines 
and  talks  and  is  charming.  The  house  for  the  moment 
is  quite  sufficient,  and  she  wants  neither  Bull,  toad,  nor 
Bear.  Class  us  as  you  please. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  December  7,  1839. 

My  most  dear  sister, — Your  letter  of  yesterday  was 
most  interesting.  Lady  Cowper's  marriage,  the  early 
period  fixed  for  the  Queen's,  all  was  news.  The  happi- 
ness that  awaits  Liz  is  the  constant  object  of  Georgy's 
and  my  talk.  He  is  so  excellent ;  his  life  is  one  which 
would  have  been  so  completely  poisoned  by  a  wife  that 
did  not  suit  him  and  sympathise  with  him,  and  will  be 
such  a  blessed  and  blessing  one  with  your  perfect  Liz. 
He  will  be  of  such  use  to  us  all.  Georgy  read  me  a 
sermon  of  his  yesterday  morning  which  quite  charmed 
me  on  part  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  such  warmth  and 
feeling  and  eloquence. 

Lady  Cowper  has  courage  to  face  her  angry  chil- 
dren. I  cannot  say  how  much  I  blame  them  for  telling 
what  they  feel,  but  I  wonder  she  can  encounter  their 


1839  TO  LADY:  CARLISLE  297 

antipathy.  What  a  happy  mother  she  might  have  been 
and  what  an  unhappy  existence  will  she  have,  I  fear ! l 
Her  understanding  never  has  been  of  the  slightest  use 
to  her. 

Adieu !  God  bless  you  all.  Harry  is  in  high  force 
and  wiser,  though  smitten  with  two  or  three  beauties. 
A  very  pretty  daughter  of  Edward  Bligh's,  a  very  clever 
one  2  of  Charles  Gore's,  and  Madame  Villa  Garcia  are 
the  favourites  pour  le  moment. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  December  27,  1839. 

My  dearest  sister, — I  shall  long  to  hear  of  Francis's 
next  visit.  Harry  is  uncommonly  well  in  looks,  health 
and  spirits,  and  we  all  get  fonder  of  him  every  day. 
He  is  much  more  wary,  though  certainly  more  devoted 
to  woman  than  I  ever  saw  any  man. 

Madame  de  Lieven  has  had  a  letter  from  Lady 
Cowper  at  Broadlands.  She  seems  perfectly  happy  at 
the  decision  she  has  taken.  Says  she  was  a  sotte  not  to 
have  had  the  courage  to  do  it  long  ago.  Newmann 
and  Brunnow  were  going  down  there.  Foreign  Affairs 
will  be  more  come-at-able,  I  suspect,  than  they  have 
been  for  a  long  time.  Lord  Palmerston's  incivilities 
will  obtain  a  varnish. 

The  Clarendons  went  yesterday.  They  have  been 
very  amiable.  She  is  plain,  but  seems  the  best,  most 
sensible,  inoffensive  wife  that  can  be,  extremely  fond  of 
him,  and  he  looks  happier  and  healthier  than  I  ever 
saw  him. 

1  It  turned  out  a  very  happy  marriage  and  the  children  became  devoted 
to  Lord  Palmerston. 

2  Mrg.  Charles  Gore  wrote  some  clever  novels.     Her  daughter  was  a 
great  favourite  with  the  smart  young  men  of  the  day.     She   was   not 
pretty,  but  she  was  bright  and  clever,  danced  well  and  had  a  graceful 
figure.     Her  mother  was  very  stout,  and  they  were  called  '  plenty '  and 

waste.'     Miss  Gore  married  Lord  Edward  Thynne. 


298     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1839 

What  are  we  to  think  of  politics  ?  Peel  and 
Patience  ? 

Brougham  dined  here  yesterday,  extremely  gentle, 
subdued  and  in  low  spirits,  keeping  within  the  bounds 
of  decency  and  sobriety,  not  coming  to  balls  and  routs, 
but  to  dinners  and  vaudevilles.  Perhaps  I  am  a  gull, 
but  from  what  he  said  to  me  I  am  inclined  to  think  he 
did  not  kill  himself.1 

Give  my  love  to  your  dear  people — men,  women 
and  children. 

1  Many  believed  he  had  himself  originated  the  report  of  his  death,  to 
find  out  what  people  would  say  of  him. 


1840  TO  LAD¥  CARLISLE  299 


1840 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  January  1840. 

Freddy  leaves  us  on  Tuesday  and  will  give  you 
another  live  sketch  of  us.  Yesterday  I  suffered  the 
first  joy  of  the  Carnaval,  a  concert  at  the  Duke  of 
Orleans.  Excellent  music,  luxe  of  light,  intense  heat  in 
the  mild,  fusty  weather,  the  wearied,  excede  unmusical 
family  sitting  in  a  row  before  us.  But  I  enjoyed  part : 
Scheffer's  beautiful  picture  of  Mignon,  '  Eegrettant  le 
Ciel,'  out  of  one  eye,  and  the  magnificent  head  of  the 
widower,  the  Duke  of  Wurtemberg,  out  of  the  other, 
not  to  mention  Madame  de  Talleyrand,  that  sublime 
wreck  of  different  kinds  of  prosperity. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  February  1840. 

Nothing  can  express  the  delight  of  receiving  your 
letters,  my  dearest  sister.  Yesterday  no  papers  arrived, 
though  the  courier  did.  Lord  Holland  wrote  as  if  we 
had  the  papers.  Granville  brought  your  letter  in  to 
Dody  and  me.  '  Perhaps  your  sister  will  tell ' — and  you 
did,  dearest  of  ladies,  everything,  and  clearly,  amply, 
interestingly,  .as  you  always  do. 

I  think  five  was  too  much,  three  enough,  but  is  it 
npt  a  shake  ?  We  long  for  the  Friday  result. 

Dearest  Leveson.1  My  time  is  taken  up  with  answer- 
ing notes  of  congratulation,  and  to-night  I  expect  my 
throat  to  be  sore  with  explanations  and  thanks. 

1  He  was  appointed  Under- Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs. 


300     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1840 

Monsieur  Guizot's  appointment l  occupies  us  much. 
I  think  he  will  be  much  liked,  I  mean  socially,  at 
Holland  House  and  Lansdowne  House.  I  do  not  think 
Lord  Melbourne  will  talk  much  to  him. 

My  friend  feels  as  they  said  of  Eichelieu,  when  he 
died,  'II  laisse  plus  de  vide  qu'il  n'a  tenu  de  place.' 
She  is  what  I  always  think  her,  hard  but  true.  She 
says  she  has  epouse  Lord  Palmerston  and  only  wishes 
good  for  him  and  his,  that  she  has  ceased  to  care  about 
politics  but  as  suits  them  and  herself.  The  loss  of 
Guizot's  society  is  greater  to  her  as  habit  and  resource 
than  as  positive  pleasure.  Mole  charms  and  Thiers 
amuses  her  more.  Perhaps  because  with  all  her  clever- 
ness she  would  prefer  the  soil  less  rich  and  the  surface 
more  polished. 

What  are  we  to  think,  what  to  do?  People  are 
sending  every  minute  for  the  Tuesday's  papers,  which 
we  have  not.  Lord  Munster  entre  autres  very  huffy. 

Mr.  and  Miss  Raikes  dine  here  this  evening,  and 
Mme.  de  Lieven  comes  to  early  whist,  the  only  thing — 
how  odd  ! — I  have  ever  seen  really  amuse  her. 

Our  wonderful  mild  winter  enables  us  to  go  to  the 
Bois  de  Boulogne  en  caleche  every  day.  Georgy  has 
ridden  twice,  very  successfully,  in  all  but  Baba's  opinion. 
4  She's  not  clever  at  it,  she  looks  frightened,  she  goes 
zig-zag,'  and  then  he  puts  himself  exactly  in  the  shape 
she  sits,  which  Leveson  knows. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  .February  1840. 

I  wish  you  joy,  my  dearest  sister.  Twenty-one,2  and 
Morpeth's  excellent  speech.  Not  that  I  have  yet  read 
it,  but  Granville  tells  me  that  it  is  so,  and  the  end  of  Sir 
Robert's  also.  Lord  John  ?  I  mean  to  go  through  the 

1  Of  Ambassador  to  London. 

9  The  majority  against  Sir  T.  Buller's  motion  of  want  of  confidence. 


1840  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  301 

debate  when  they  are  all  at  the  Duke  of  Orleans'  ball. 
I  have  a  cold  and  a  rash  on  the  tip  of  my  nose,  which 
made  me  think  it  a  pretty  compliment  to  abstain  from 
ornamenting  the  gay  brilliant  little  fete  with  my  presence. 
All  our  men  go,  and  Dody,  very  smart  and  hoping  to 
get  in  a  rubber  of  whist  in  the  course  of  the  evening. 

How  different  a  session  I  suppose  this  will  be  from 
the  last !  Such  constant — though,  I  imagine,  fruitless 
— attempts  to  turn  us  out. 

You  can  have  no  idea  of  my  present  comfort  with 
a  cup  of  tea,  blazing  logs,  not  a  sound  or  wheel  to  be 
heard,  whilst  at  eight  o'clock  Harry,  Heneage,  the 
Fullertons  and  Granville  were  all  adorned  and  armed 
for  the  ball.  Now  the  truth  is  that  I  think  if  I  go 
to  the  great  bals  monstres,  I  shall  do  all  I  need.  They 
are  the  most  fatiguing  and  the  least  crack,  so  show 
most  good-will.  Georgy  was  in  a  blaze  of  jewelry. 
You  know  Alexandre.  When  she  proposed  adding  a 
little  branch  of  diamonds  to  her  coiffure,  he  said  :  '  Avec 
une  pareille  magnificence,  notre  pensee  doit  etre  la 
simplicite,'  and  rejected  her  plan.  Good  night,  dearest 
of  sisters. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  February  1840. 

My  own  dearest  sister, — Harry  and  I  went  to  a 
morning  concert  together  this  morning.  We  hope  he 
is  not  desperately  in  love  with  the  twin  Miss  Zamoras. 
They  are  lovely  to  behold,  but  do  not  come  here ;  only 
seen  at  Lady  Duff's.  There  are  four  good  families  at 
the  Havannah,  and  they  are  one. 

I  hear  the  Due  de  Broglie  is  very  gay,  Mme.  de 
Lieven  very  much  amused  and  animee,  and  has  Thiers 
at  her  house  this  evening,  which  must  make  her  very 
happy. 


302     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1840 
To  LADY  CARLISLE, 

Paris :  February  1840. 

My  dearest  sister, — We  are  again  in  all  the  suspense 
and  wonder  and  imbroglio  of  the  King  in  a  fury,  the 
Ministers  out,  Monsieur  de  Broglie  as  usual  refusing. 

Mons.  Guizot  sets  out  to-morrow,  and  I  have  just 
been  writing  out  for  Mme.  de  Lieven  a  list  of  whist- 
players,  and  we  advise  her  to  have  a  Wednesday 
entirely  devoted  to  the  game,  as  she  gets  like  a 
naughty  child  if  the  politicians  come  in  the  middle  of 
her  game. 

All  the  world  is  occupied  about  a  ball  on  Monday  at 
Colonel  Thorn's.  Costume,  it  is  to  be  beautiful.  Mme. 
Samoiloff,  d'Aspas,  Kisseleff,  and  Poldi  as — I  forget 
what,  but  something  very  beautiful.  I  have  had  such  a 
note  from  Mrs.  Thorn  that,  to  my  utter  disgust  and 
despair,  I  am  afraid  I  must  go.  The  Colonel  has 
shrewdly  said  that  all  women  above  thirty  may  be 
excused  coming  in  costume.  Oh,  cela  ira,  cela  ira !  I 
see  my  young  friends. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1840. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  hope  you  are  as  nearly  out  of 
your  grippe  as  1  am  out  of  mine,  but  it  leaves  one  much 
pulled,  like  a  thing  just  come  out  of  the  wash. 

Lord  William  Eussell  is  just  arrived,  which  will 
gladden  Mme.  de  Lieven's  heart. 

Nobody  seems  certain  of  the  denouement  of  events 
here.  Mole  and  his  friends  talk  confidently  of  over- 
turning Thiers,  but  Broglie  stands  by  the  latter,  and 
unless  he,  the  little  man,  is  brought  to  fling  himself  too 
entirely  on  the  gauche  I  think  he  may  stick  for  a  session 
at  least. 


1840  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  303 

The  King  stands  at  ease  upon  the  point  of  this  diffi- 
culty. 

The  Due  de  Noailles  says,  *  Soyez  tranquille,.  il  les 
trompera  tous.' 

Georgy's  translation  of  a  French  poem  1  is  in  the 
number  for  March  of  '  Bentley's  Miscellany.'  Pray  read 
it,  and  the  editor's  little  preface. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE, 

Paris:  1840. 

My  dearest  sister, — Your  letter  to-day  was  a  great 
pleasure.  Your  improved  account  of  Blanche  made  D. 
and  myself  very  happy.  He  is  arrived,  snug  in  the 
Hotel  Sinet. 

I  made  Mme.  de  Lieven  happy  with  your  daughter's 
most  kind  letter.  D.  tells  me  she  is  to  pay  him  a  long 
visit  at  Chatsworth. 

Give  my  love  to  dearest  Guinea.  Tell  him  that 
Lord  Clanwilliam  has  sent  me  a  message  which  pleased 
me  much,  telling  me  how  much  he  is  liked  and  approved 
of  in  the  office  by  all. 

I  have  nothing  more  to  tell  you,  and  the  first  fine 
hot  day  has  made  me  stupid  and  sleepy. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  April  1840. 

My  beloved  sister, — It  is  not  possible  for  me  to 
express  my  gratitude  for  your  letter.  Without  it  I 
never  could  have  poured  out  to  you  all  the  devoted 
feeling  of  affection,  of  sympathy,  that  I  have  longed  to 
write  to  you  and  dearest  Lord  Carlisle.  I  feel  what 
absence  is,  not  to  be  near  you  all  now.  What,  however, 
could 'I  be  that  you  are  not  to  each  other  in  the  midst 

1  L'Aveugle   de   Castel   GuilU,   by  Jacques  Jasmin,  the  Languedoc 
poet. 


304     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1840 

of  the  blessings  that  remain  and  duties  that  occupy 
you,  which  you  so  adorably  feel,  and  for  which  God  will 
give  you  strength  and  grace  ! 1 

I  feel  that  we  are  all  left  to  endeavour  to  follow  her 
in  all  that  may  await  us  in  this  life  of  trial.  I  only  hope 
to  be  like  you. 

Every  moment,  every  thought  is  with  you  all  and 
my  beloved  brother.  I  wish  much  to  hear  of  dearest 
Harry  being  with  you.  We  have  all  the  strongest 
affection  for  him.  I  will  tell  Susy  that  you  thought  of 
her. 

Dearest  sister,  if  it  was  possible  to  tell  you  how  I 
love,  how  I  hope  with  you,  for  you  ! 

That  last  look  seems  before  me  too. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  April  30,  1840. 

I  thank  you  more  than  I  can  say,  my  beloved 
brother.  It  would  have  given  me  intolerable  anxiety 
not  .to  have  heard  from  you,  and  in  that  letter,  in  the 
midst  of  anguish,  there  is  something  that  speaks  peace. 

I  feel  as  if.  in  that  angel's  departure,  there  was  a  sort 
of  mission  to  us  all  to  suffer,  resign  ourselves  and  hope. 
I  think  the  remembrance  of  that  last  expression  will 
come  in  all  these  dark  hours  of  trial  and  bitterness 
through  which  all  must  pass. 

Your  letter  will  always  be  by  me.  I  have  the 
greatest  gratitude  to  you  for  writing  it. 

I  am  so  glad  you  were  able  to  see  them  all.  I  have 
had  a  letter  from  my  sister  and  send  you  back  her 
letters,  letters  that  at  once  break  one's  heart  and  soothe 
it.  I  love  you,  my  dearest  brother.  I  never  knew  how 
much  I  loved  you.  You  are  never  for  a  moment  out  of 
my  thoughts.  I  cannot  night  or  day  forget  what  you 
said  to  me  on  the  overwhelming  subject,  but  I  hope 

1  Lady  Burlington  died  on  April  28. 


1840  TO   LADY  CARLISLE  305 

and   trust  you  are  well,  and  that  when  you  can  you 
will  let  me  hear  from  you. 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  1840. 

Most  dear  sister, — I  long  to  be  with  you,  to  talk  to 
you,  to  feel  with  you,  to  learn  of  you. 

I  think  it  is  a  long  time  before  we  practically 
believe  how  much  is  given,  how  little  asked.  I  do  not 
think  it  is  in  man  easily  to  understand  the  unbounded 
mercy  of  God.  Come  unto  me,  and  that  at  the  eleventh 
hour,  as  at  the  first.  This  the  only  peace  on  earth  we 
shrink  from  till  brought  to  it  by  fear  and  sorrow,  terror 
and  bereavement. 

God  bless  you,  my  angel  sister. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris:  1840. 

My  most  dear  sister, — I  am  so  grateful  for  the  letters 
I  have  received  from  my  brother  and  Morpeth,  so 
soothing  in  the  midst  of  grief,  telling  me  of  all  you 
have  been  strengthened  to  do,  of  all  that  has  been 
added  to  your  adorable  nature,  to  enable  you  to  bear 
your  trial,  perform  your  duty,  and  be  a  blessing  and 
example  to  all  around  you.  I  have  an  intense  wish  to 
see  you,  but  I  do  not  form  any  plan  or  look  forward. 
It  may  be  given  to  me,  like  other  blessings. 

Granville  better  after  a  sharp  attack  of  gout,  but 
I  know  not  what  he  thinks  of  doing  this  summer.  I 
trust  he  will  soon  be  able  to  walk,  which  at  this  moment 
he  is  not  allowed  to  do,  and  that  it  will  not  be  tedious 
and  weakening  as  the  last  attack. 

How  my  brother  does  love  you,  my  most  dear  sister  ! 
What  a  comfort  you  will  be  to  him  ! 

Lord   Carlisle   has   written   the    kindest    letter   to 

VOL.  H.  x 


306     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRAXVILLE     1840 

Granville.     I  wish  it  were  possible  for  me  to  tell  you 
what  I  feel  for  you  both. 

I  shall  not  write  more  to-day.  I  have  scarcely  left 
my  room  and  his,  and  now  I  am  going  to  breathe  a 
little  air.  I  will  only  tell  you  what  very  strong  affec- 
tion we  all  have  for  your  dearest  Harry,  and  the 
pleasure  it  is  to  us  to  think  of  seeing  him  again. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  May  1840. 

I  received  your  letter  yesterday,  my  own  beloved 
sister.  I  am  glad  you  did  not  go  to  Compton  Place, 
and  am  glad  that  Eichard  and  Caroline  were  with  him. 

It  is  all,  I  hope,  settled  as  the  Sutherlands  wish  with 
regard  to  Mme.  de  Lieven.  She  has  had  such  improved 
accounts  of  her  son  that  she  is  in  doubt  again  as  to  the 
time  of  her  departure.  I  have  made  her  feel  that  her 
being  at  Stafford  House  is  now  out  of  the  question, 
and  their  very  great  kindness  in  offering  her  to  be 
there  or  at  West  Hill  later  in  the  year.  I  conveyed  all 
the  Duke  had  written  to  me  to  her,  not  as  a  message 
sent  at  this  moment,  but  as  an  expression  of  their  kind- 
ness and  interest  about  her. 

I  have  seen  Mr.  Blunt's  letter,  most  dear  sister. 
Harry  sent  it  to  me.  I  find  every  day  words,  lines, 
thoughts  that  I  have  such  a  longing  to  show  to  you,  all 
impressive  of  what  he  dwells  so  much  on,  what  her 
perfection,  her  adorable  character  gives  even  to  the 
pangs  of  memory — such  certainty  for  her,  such  hope  for 
what  survives. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  May  1840. 

I  received  your  letter  with  the  enclosed,  which  I 
return  to  you.  I  felt,  my  most  dear  sister,  more  than 
I  can  express  for  the  disappointment  and  difference  to 


1840  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  307 

you  and  my  dearest  brother.  You  are  perfect  in  that, 
as  you  have  shown  yourself  throughout.  You  have, 
and  my  dear  brother,  only  said  and  done  all  that  must 
be  soothing  to  you  to  think  of.  I  feel  it  sure  that  a 
sense  of  duty  actuates  Lord  Burlington,1  and  I  hope 
gradually  time  will  bring  nearly  the  same  results.  Talk 
to  me  of  her  children.  I  feel  to  know  that  darling 
eldest  boy,  but  I  want  to  hear  of  the  others  and  of  the 
little  girl  that  must  be  so  precious  to  you  all.  Tell  Liz 
there  is  no  kindness  to  Harry.  He  has  made  himself 
dear  to  us  all.  I  love  him  and  respect  him,  for  he  has 
qualities  that  are  invaluable.  Such  truth  in  judging, 
feeling  and  acting — such  real  feeling  it  is  for  all 
subjects,  so  just  and  so  uncompromising. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  is  waiting  here,  expecting  her  son 
soon,  and  meaning  to  go  to  England  on  the  8th  of  June. 


To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Dover :  July  29,  1840. 

We  are  going  to  embark  on  a  calm  sea,  and  I  hope 
you  will  soon  step  into  your  steamer. 

I  do  not  think  I  have  thanked  you  half  enough  for 
all  your  kindness  to  the  Levesons,2  always  so  very  great 
to  him  and  now  to  her,  and  so  deeply  felt  by  both. 

I  was  pleased  with  her  for  asking  Freddy  in  secret 
if  he  could  find  the  nosegay  of  orange  flowers  that  you 
had  given  her  the  day  of  the  marriage  and  which  she 
had,  to  her  great  regret,  left  on  the  table,  having  wished, 
to  keep  it  for  ever.  The  mother-in-law,  having  a 
prudent  mind,  had  found  the  nosegay,  picked  off  all  the 
flowers,  put  them  in  a  sachet,  and  I  am  going  to  send 
them  to  her  in  a  very  pretty  one  from  Paris. 

1  In  his  refusal  to  live  with  the  Duke. 

2  Lord  Leveson  married  Lady  Acton  on  July  25. 

x  2 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  August  1840.  V 

My  dearest  sister, — It  was  great  happiness  to 
receive  your  letter. 

I  do  not  see  any  prospect  of  war,  and  Buonaparte's  1 
attempt  and  misfortune  seem  to  have  damaged  no  one 
but  himself.  It  is  almost  the  foolishest  thing  one  ever 
heard  of. 

Granville's  gout  is  almost  gone.  My  brother  is 
gone  to-day  to  St.  Germain  on  his  way  to  Havre, 
where  he  is  to  take  lodgings  for  the  Fullertons  and  us. 
I  long  to  breathe  sea  air. 

We  have  had  Granville  Vernon 2  and  his  daughter 
here.  He  talked  to  an  attentive  house.  We  had 
nothing  else  to  do,  and  he  is  sometimes  a  good  essay, 
enlivened  with  something .  as  good  as  a  farce.  The 
girl  is  extremely  pretty,  pleasing,  and  her  singing 
divine,  but  she  became  low  last  night  when  at  eleven, 
on  the  eve  of  a  journey,  she  saw  her  papa  in  his  fourth 
hour  of  conversation  without  a  hope  of  abatement. 

I  have  had  a  letter  from  Mme.  de  Lieven.  I  think 
she  seems  impatient  to  come  back.  Her  niece  Mme. 
Rodolphe  Appony 3  is  arrived.  I  hear  she  is  quite 
lovely  and  both  Appony  and  his  wife  are  enchanted 
with  her,  and  say  that  she  is  douce.,  gentille,  charmante. 

Will  you  tell  the  Duchess  when  you  write  that  I 
had  a  letter  from  Madame  de  Schonbourg  written  on  the 
llth  ?  She  was  perfectly  well,  and  to  embark  the  next 
day.  Lord  Eokeby  had  arrived  from  London  to 
remonter  the  Rhine  with  her,  and  I  think  he  will  do  as 
much  good  as  the  doctor. 

1  Louis  Napoleon's  escapade  to  Boulogne. 

3  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Granville  Vernon.  He  was  the  only  one  of  the  family 
who  did  not  take  the  name  of  Harcourt  when  his  father  the  Archbishop 
adopted  it  on  his  succeeding  to  the  Harcourt  property. 

3  She  became  Austrian  Ambassadress  in  London. 


1840  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  309 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  August  17,  1840. 

You  will  excuse  a  short  letter  to-day,  my  beloved 
sister.  We  are  all  in  the  bustle  of  setting  out.  The 
Fullertons  for  Mantes  and  we  for  St.  Germain,  to  meet 
at  Eouen  to-morrow,  hoping  to  arrive  at  Havre  on 
Wednesday.  We  shall  find  Bichard  Verity  there. 
Granville  is  very  well,  but  it  will  be  a  great  comfort 
to  me  to  have  that  valuable  creature  to  look  at  us. 

Mr.  Macaulay  dined  here  yesterday,  and  as  we  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  listen  he  was  very  welcome.  He 
told  us  all  about  everything,  and  is  I  think  prepared 
for  anything.  I  expect  nothing. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  rushed  back  from  Wrest  to  Stafford 
House  and  the  doctors,  as  she  says  she  is  bilious  and 
ill.  Lady  Clanricarde  is  become  entirely  political  and 
violent  against  the  Government  here.  Leopold  very 
busy  at  Windsor. 

Marie  has  sent  me  the  loveliest  present,  a  bracelet  with 
her  hair  and  Leveson's  and  the  date  of  their  marriage. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Havre :  August  30,  1840. 

My  dearest,  dear  sis, — Forgive  me  for  writing  so 
little.  You  know  what  a  life  a  seafaring  one  is,  all 
outing,  eating,  bathing,  and  sleeping,  for  I  live  in 
warm  sea  water.  It  is  oppressively  hot  and  we  are  all 
rather  languid.  The  doctor  says,  '  it  takes  away  one's 
power  of  speech,'  but  it  is  delicious  to  go  and  sit  on 
the  pier  from  nine  till  ten,  to  rest  by  day  and  take  long 
walks  at  night. 

Granville  was  astonished  when  he  saw  the  satisfac- 
tion I  had  given  you  all  by  my  declaration  of  peace  ! ! ! 
Yet  I  persist,  only  he  says  I  am  bold  in  such  daring 


310     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1840 

assertions  when  nobody  can  know.     Dearest  sister,  I 
am  sure  notwithstanding. 

Eichard  Verity  is  still  here,  longing  to  get  back  to 
his  wife  and  harvest.  But  I  do  not  suffer  such  an  image 
to  present  itself  to  his  mind  in  any  practical  shape,  it 
is  such  a  comfort  to  have  him. 


To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris  :  October  7.  1840. 

Most  dear  sister, — What  has  made  me  lazy  has 
been  knowing  that  from  others,  chiefly  Morpeth,  you 
know  all,  and  that  I  had  nothing  to  say,  and  that  in 
these  times  nobody  can  do  more  than  wait,  look  and 
listen  for  what  has  not  yet  happened — something  deci- 
sive of  the  one  great  question,  Peace  or  War. 

Thursday,  8th. — My  dearest,  this  will  go  to-night, 
and  I  have  just  received  your  dear,  anxious  letter.  It 
is  impossible  not  to  feel  so,  but  yet  I  trust,  if  events 
continue  to  be  such  as  to  frighten  Mehemet  Ali,  he 
may  be  led  to  give  Lord  P.  the  immense  triumph  and 
the  world  the  immense  blessing  of  peace. 

The  newspapers  do  their  most  and  worst  to  aggra- 
vate matters,  but  I  trust  the  mutual  interests  concerned 
will  prevent  any  beyond  paper  explosion. 

En  attendant  we  are  living  the  most  quiet,  pleasant 
life  apart  from  politics.  Granville,  though  most 
anxious  and  very  busy,  is  very  well.  He  rides  every 
day  with  Dody  and  Freddy,  and  we  keep  early  hours. 
The  Seafords  are  arrived.  They  are  inclined  to  remain 
here,  but  ask  if  it  is  wise.  I  have  almost  persuaded 
them  to  take  a  house  for  the  winter — sauf  la  guerre, 
an  agreement,  I  understand,  made  and  agreed  to  by  all 
who  do. 

Frederick  Bruce  arrived  the  day  they  did,  but  not 
de  concert,  as  he  came  to  take  care  of  his  mother,  his 
father  being  afraid  of  the  state  of  things. 


1840  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  311 

Mme.  de  Lieven  and  Mme.  de  Flahault  gasp  for 
news,  but  events,  though  showering  quick  upon  us,  are 
nothing  till  a  decision  is  taken  in  a  friendly  sense. 
Things  that  calm  one  place  irritate  in  another.  Yet 
still  I  think,  and  if  I  dared  I  would  say  I  am  sure,  it 
will  not  end  in  war. 

The  Bois  de  Boulogne  is  meconnaissable,  the  trees  all 
stripped  and  barked  where  the  line  of  fortification  is 
to  go. 

My  love  to  all  yours  and  to  Lady  Newburgh.  I 
envy  her  being  with  you,  because  of  you,  dearest 
people,  but  also  Castle  Howard — dear,  beautiful  Castle 
Howard.  Autumn  brings  it  so  to  my  mind.  There  is 
no  place  of  which  my  recollections  are  so  vivid.  At 
any  time  I  can  cry  over  its  walks,  its  beauties  and  its 
pleasures.  I  can  smell  it  and  see  it  with  almost  all  the 
ecstasy  of  reality,  for  ecstasy  there  is  in  all  the  enjoy- 
ments of  earth,  air  and  sky.  And  you,  my  own  dearest 
beloved  sister,  how  dearly  I  do  love  you ! 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  October  15,  1840. 

Have  I  not  seemed  ungrateful  for  your  most  delicious 
letter  ?  But  I  have  been  so  flat  and  low,  such  terror 
of  over-fatigue  to  Granville  and  return  of  gout ;  and 
what  could  I  say  that  you  did  not  know  ?  Tankervilles  ! 
Chatsworth !  The  different  views  of  your  political 
friends,  and  I  with  nothing  to  say  but  that  I  found  the 
Duchesse  de  Dalberg  here,  kind,  charming  and  recon- 
ciled j1  that  the  English  have  all  taken  to  fright  and  flight. 

But  I  have  to  tell  you  that  at  six  o'clock  to-  day  the 
King  was  shot  at  by  a  desperate  fanatic,  une  beteferoce, 
forty-three,  a  frotteur,  who  says,  '  Je  connais  1'histoire, 
j'ai  voulu  delivrer  la  France  du  plus  grand  tyran  qui 
ait  jamais  existe.' 

1  She  had  been  opposed  to  the  marriage  of  her  daughter  on  account 
of  the  difference  of  religion. 


312     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRANV1LLE     1840 

Eleven  o'clock. — We  are  just  returned  from  St. 
Cloud.  The  King  pale,  but  very  perfect  about  his 
danger  and  escape.  The  Queen  adorable,  quite  calm 
but  heart-broken.  The  little  Comte  de  Paris  is  dan- 
gerously ill,  and  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans  is  saisie  by  the 
accounts  of  the  poor  little  Queen  of  Portugal. 

The  assassin  had  so  overcharged  his  short  gun  that 
it  burst  in  his  hand.  He  was  in  tortures,  but  quite 
unsubdued,  walking  about  the  room,  his  voice  quite 
strong,  and  boasting  of  his  knowledge  of  history.  Two 
of  the  worst  books  of  the  day,  two  pistols  and  a  poi- 
gnard  were  found  on  him. 

Lady  Seaford  1  is  droll.  '  Knows  nothing,  because 
she  does  not  think  spectacles  look  well  on  a  bride.' 
Lord  Seaford  called  at  the  Luxembourg.  She  got  out 
to  walk  up  and  down  on  the  Place  full  of  emeutes.  She 
asked  the  laquais  de  place,  '  Vous  ne  croyez  pas  que  je 
coure  aucun  danger  d'etre  insultee.'  '  Oh  non,  madame, 
pas  a  votre  age.  Si  c'etait  une  des  demoiselles,  cela  se 
pourrait.'  She  hastened  to  explain  that  a  political 
assault  was  what  she  apprehended. 

To  Mxs.  HAMILTON  HAMILTON. 

Paris :  November  5,  1840. 

We  have  had  ten  days  of  most  mingled  feelings. 
The  loss  of  Lord  Holland  to  Granville's  feeling  a  most 
severe  blow,  to  his  existence  a  most  irreparable  pri- 
vation. There  never  was  a  more  devoted  friend  or 
agreeable  companion  than  Lord  Holland  had  been  to 
him  from  their  earliest  youth. 

We  have  had  the  great  happiness  of  seeing  Leveson 
and  his  wife.  I  never  saw  a  couple  so  well  suited  to 
each  other.  She  is  charming,  good,  gay,  pretty,  and  as 
a*  wife  the  happiest  mixture  of  spirit  and  submission. 

1  Lady  Hardy  had  lately  married  Lord  Seaford. 


1840  TO   THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  313 

Then  the  mother  has  been  all  satisfaction  and  gracious 
kindness,  which  she  must  have  great  credit  for,  as  there 
was  strong  feeling  excited  and  only  laid  by  amiable 
ones.  They  go  to-day.  It  is  terrible  to  lose  them,  but 
it  would  have  been  worse  to  be  glad. 

Granville  is  uncommonly  well,  and  the  quiet  life  we 
lead  by  the  side  of  the  storms  and  supposed  agitation 
of  the  siecle  is  good  for  us  all.  Good-bye. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  December  1840. 

At  half-past  eight  we  met  in  the  red  room — Apponys, 
Brignoles,  Mesdames  de  Gontaut,  Caraman,  Poix,  Sabine 
out  of  breath  with  ecstasy,  the  Beauvaus,  Guiches, 
Mouchy,  Eichelieu,  Eodolphe  I.,  Albert  Esterhazy, 
Madame  de  Flahault  and  her  girls,  Percys,  Eendleshams, 
Ailesburys,  Francis  Gordon,  Madame  Eazoumoflska, 
Arabin,  d'Orsay,  Murray,  and  St.  Clair.  Madame  de 
St.  Glair's  emotions  were  various.  '  How  sweet  it  would 
would  be  to  have  Mr.  Leveson  for  a  lover ! '  was  her 
gratifying  whisper.  At  another  time  Fullerton  says  he 
heard  something  like  the  heaving  of  an  elephant.  She 
had  seen  the  gun,  and  knew  it  was  to  be  fired. 

At  nine  we  were  all  in  the  ball-room,  the  prettiest 
little  theatre  you  ever  saw.  Henry  Greville  and  Miss 
Eaikes,  Grampus  and  Alice,  le  grand  genre.  Harry 
Howard,  looking  quite  beautiful  in  a  black  wig  like 
Louis  XIV.'s,  acted  the  villain  of  the  piece  perfectly. 
Freddy  as  Walter  Barnard  and  Marion  Ellice  as  Bella 
had  the  greatest  success.  Plunket,  an  excellent  comic 
actor  as  Jemmy  Starling.  Miss  Thelusson1  had  set 
beautifully  all  sorts  of  the  prettiest  bits  of  opera  music, 
and  played  them  with  a  band  of  Tolbecque. 

The  marriage  procession,  the  dance  of  the  girls  ; 

1  Was  a  daughter  of  the  third  Lord  Rendlesham,  and  was  married  to 
the  late  Lord  Walsingham  in  1847. 


314     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1840 

EmUie  de  Flahault  looked  lovely,  and  all  very  pretty. 
There  were  no  longueurs  or  mischances,  the  greatest 
possible  success,  immense  applause,  and  when  at  the 
close  Miss  Eaikes,  called  for,  led  on  the  modest,  reluctant 
Marion,  and  curtseying,  picked  up  wreath  and  nose- 
gay thrown  by  Mouchy,  no  words  can  describe  the 
contentment  of  all  parties.  To-morrow  the  play  is 
again  acted  to  an  entirely  new  audience.  No  duplicates 
but  the  mothers  of  the  figurantes.  Gramonts,  Mme. 
de  Lieven,  Albufera,  De  la  Eedorte,  Castellane,  Segur, 
Fezensac,  Decazes,  La  Ferte,  St.  Aulaire,  Marescalchi, 
Durazzo,  Chabots,  Haussonville,  Yallombrosa,  Grahams, 
Salvos,  Sebastiani,  Kisseleff,  F.  Barings,  the  Actons, 
Gallweys,  Eothschilds,  Boigne,  Mole,  Delessert,  Pigotts, 
Fitzwilliams,  Casteja,  N.  Pahlen,  Guizot,  men  diplo- 
mates,  Zamoyski,  Montalembert.  They  have  all  com- 
fortable seats  and  refreshments  to  keep  up  their  spirits 
and  soften  their  hearts.  Lord  Howden  looked  and 
acted  the  chief  pirate  beautifully. 

In  short,  dearest  brother,  it  is  thought  that  we 
have  done  it.  Landseer  never  saw  a  private  play  so 
well  got  up,  and  when  Harry  kneels  to  Marion  in  the 
last  act,  he  said,  '  Was  there  ever  a  more  beautiful  pic- 
ture than  that  ? ' 


1841  TO   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE 


1841 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris  :  February  10,  1841. 

Your  delicious  letter  came  this  morning.  The  pink 
poplin  will  be  more  than  ever  suitable.  She 1  dined  here 
last  week,  very  agreeable  and  gay,  but  a  trifle  too  young, 
as  I  see  people  now  know  what  is  coming  and  try  to 
ward  it  off.  '  Oh,  I  should  like,  I  should  like,  but  I 
must  not ;  vous  voyez^je  suis  trop  jeune  femme  pour  cela' 
Kisseleff,  whom  I  doat  upon,  is  fond  of  her,  but  sees  it 
all.  She  was  on  the  defensive  about  political  energy. 
'Les  Chambres !  Je  n'y  vais  pas,  je  ne  pense  pas 
m'occuper  de  ces  choses  serieuses — oh  !  non,  non.  Yous 
comprenez,  quand  on  me  parle,  qu'on  veut  m'expliquer 
les  fortifications  et  tout  cela — non,  non.  Fort  detache 
vous-meme.'  Dearest  brother,  if  you  had  seen  his  face  ! 

Don't  tell  ever  and  I  will  amuse  you.  Lady 
Ailesbury — a  dear,  natural,  good-humoured  woman,  but 
on  a  fever  to  distinguish  herself — projected  a  little  ball. 
We  all  approved ;  she  sent  her  list  to  Henry  Greville 
all  right,  but  in  an  evil  hour  she  sent  to  Eodolphe 
Appony  neveu  to  consult  about,  the  buffet.  She  says 
she  told  him  she  wished  to  know  what  to  order — 
'j'aimerai  souper.' 

'Ah!  ah!  au  nom  du  ciel,  je  vous  prie '  She  did 
not  see  why,  but  said,  '  mais  il  faut  avoir  quelque  chose.' 

'  Un  the  coiffe,  tout  au  plus,  un  the  coiffe.' 

She  was  very  much  puzzled.     Had  heard  of  many 

1  Madame  de  Meyendorf. 


,316     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRAXVILLE     1841 

fashionable  things,  but  not  of  that.  However,  to  tdter 
le  terrain  ventured  upon  cinquante  poulets.  '  Ah  !  ah ! 
1'horreur,  on  vous  ecorchera,  dix,  tout  au  plus.'  I  will 
tell  }'ou  I'historique  of  the  case  to-morrow. 

Saturday. — Mme.  de  Flahault  pronounced  Lady 
Ailesbury's  to  be  the  best  little  ball  that  had  ever  been 
given,  well  lit,  just  the  right  number  of  people,  cham- 
pagne, pate  de  foie  gras,  proving  Rodolphe  to  have  had 
no  finger  in  the  pie,  all  ages  prancing.  Georgy  relates 
with  a  look  of  rapture  and  emotion  how  she  heard 
'  Lady  Georgiana  Fullerton  coming  down  stairs ' — 
sounds  unknown  on  these  shores. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  is,  I  hear,  much  annoyed  at 
Alexandre  having  broken  off  his  match  with  Mdlle. 
Dackenhausen.  At  best  an  imbecile,  and  I  fear  much 
worse. 

What  a  moment !  '  Un  paquet  qui  vient  de  Londres.' 
Did  it  walk  ?  Muller  cuts  a  string  and  two  rouleaux 
appear.  The  blue  is  so  lovely  that  I  joy  in  its  being 
mine.  Both  well  adapted  to  the  wearers.  As  the  pink 
is  not  too  glaring,  a  sort  of  old  Aurora  will  she  look. 
And  the  blue  so  refined  and  chaste  that  an  Abbess  might 
wear  it  at  a  festival. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Paris :  March  12,  1841. 

My  dearest  brother, — I  write  because  I  am  so 
frightened  at  the  idea  of  your  punishing  me  by  a  long 
interval.  My  letter  will  be  triste;  we  can  think  of  little 
but  the  poor  unhappy  Flahaults.  Adele,  their  third 
daughter,  a  charming  girl,  is,  I  fear,  dying.  Eichard 
Verity  was  called  in,  but  when  the  case  had  become 
almost  desperate.  It  is  a  terrible  tragedy.  Flahault 
is  scarcely  in  his  senses,  refuses  all  comfort ;  and  she  is, 
as  in  all  things,  the  very  reverse  of  him,  wretched  and 
alarmed,  but  feeling,  what  is  true,  that  his  giving  way 


1841  TO  LADY  CARLISLE  SIT 

so  entirely  is  terrible  for  the  other  girls.  But  it  is 
impossible  not  to  feel  deeply  for  him,  for  them  all.  He 
never  goes  to  bed,  but  remains  at  the  outside  of  her 
door  all  night.  There  was  a  slight  amendment  last 
night,  but  Verity  does  not  seem  to  think  she  can  live. 

I  am  very  good  for  nothing  after  my  long  grippe, 
and  on  a  day  like  spring  am  not  to  go  out.  But  I  am 
sitting  with  lilacs  in  my  alabaster  basket  opposite  my 
great  cage.  If  I  was  left  out,  a  beautiful  tableau  de 
genre.  All  your  presents  and  my  original  ones  living 
in  harmony  together,  all  coming  under  the  glass,  where 
they  have  a  garden.  In  the  middle  a  monticule  of 
sand  from  Havre.  Branches  of  millet  in  a  dark  blue 
vase  and  bulbs  of  light  blue  Bohemian  glass.  The 
veuve  is  like  a  giraffe  and  domineers  without  op- 
pressing. 

Lord  Palmerston  writes  to  Mme.  de  Lieven  in  great 
spirits,  and  says  the  marriage l  is  approved  of  by  them 
all — twenty -five  years  old,  beauty,  talent,  has  loved  her 
for  near  three  years  (c'est  une  espece  de  roman}. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Paris :  March  1841. 

Dearest  sister, — Adele  de  Flahault  is  calm  and  free 
from  pain,  but  her  case  is  considered  hopeless ;  only  a 
question  of  time.  I  am  miserable  about  them,  and 
Eichard  Verity  comes  from  thence  quite  beat  down  by 
the  scenes  he  has  witnessed. 

Politics  I  never  know  how  to  write  about.  The 
Whigs  seem  to  me  strong  in  their  stirrups.  When  the 
Government  does  right  it  is  triumphant  and  admirable, 
when  wrong  lucky  and  undaunted,  so  I  have  ceased 
to  think  anything  can  overturn  them. 

I  hear  from  Vienna  that  Lord  Beauvale 2  was  seized 

1  Lord  Jocelyn  married  Lady  Fanny  Cowper  on  April  25. 

2  Lord  Beauvale's  marriage  to  a  daughter  of  Count  Maltzahn. 


318     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1641 

with  gout  during  the  ceremony  and  cried  out  to  the 
clergyman,  '  Depechez-vous.'  He  was  taken  ill  after 
the  ceremony  and  fainted  away.  The  next  day,  instead 
of  the  great  festin  de  noces  which  had  been  prepared,  she 
dined  at  a  little  round  table  by  his  bedside. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE^ 

La  Jonchere  :  June  1841. 

Dearest  of  sisters, — Has  a  rumour  reached  you,  not 
of  my  falling  between  two  stools  but  off  one  ?  I  suffered 
much  pain,  did  myself  no  injury,  and  now  am  only 
desired  to  keep  quiet  on  my  couch. 

This  place  is  delicious,  the  beauty  beyond  descrip- 
tion, an  excellent  house.  Granville  enjoys  it,  and  it 
agrees  with  him  admirably. 

Yesterday  Bulwer,  Greville  and  Heneage  dined  and 
slept  here.  Bulwer  most  agreeable  and  in  high  force. 
To-day  Charles  and  Mrs.  Percy  and  Plunket  dine  and 
sleep,  on  Friday  Greville  returns  with  Alava.  You  see 
our  genre  de  vie. 

Soult  menaced  resignation  upon  the  Duke  of  Orleans 
voting  against  him,  and  has  been  with  difficulty 
pacified,  principally  by  his  son  being  sent  for.  The 
offer  of  Vienna  is  to  be  made  to  him,  though  it  is  not 
easy  to  think  how  Metternich  will  swallow  and  arrange 
about  his  title.  My  friend  2  of  the  Eue  St.  Florentin 
writes,  '  Elle  3  deraisonne  ;  il  est  tres  aimable.' 

1  Lord  Granville  was  seized  with  a  paralytic  stroke  towards  the  end 
of  March,  from  which  he  gradually,  although  never  completely,  recovered. 
In  the  interval  between  this  illness  and  the  removal  to  La  Jonchere,  a 
place  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris  which  Lord  Granville  hired,  Lady 
Granville  only  wrote  short  notes,  and  those  chiefly  referred  to  her  hus- 
band's state  of  health. 

2  Madame  de  Lieven. 

3  Madame   de   Flahault,   whose   husband    had    been    promised    the 
Embassy  at  Vienna. 


TO   LADY  CARLISLE  319 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

La  Jonchere  :  June  15,  1841. 

The  weather  is  becoming  fine  again,  and  Granville 
and  Georgy  are  delighted  with  the  beauty  of  their 
drives. 

Mr.  Percy  was  here  yesterday.  He  tells  us  his 
friends  count  upon  a  majority  of  seventy  in  the  new 
Parliament.  He  is  in  despair  to  hear  that  ours  reckon 
upon  one  of  eight. 

We  have  been  much  excited  about  dearest  Leveson. 
I  do  hope  there  will  be  no  contest  in  South  Staffordshire. 
Bridgnorth  is  also  a  most  exciting  interest,  but  I  fear 
in  spite  of  zeal  and  Marie,  who  must  be  a  charming  can- 
vasser, that  there  is  a  formidable  power  against  them. 

I  pity  little  Lady  Sarah  Villiers  so  much,  as  I  think 
her  happiness  is  embarked  in  this  marriage.  I  am  told 
quit  riy  a  rien  desi  volage  as  this  youth,1  and  that  he  will 
not  commit  himself.  I  think  nothing  more  likely  than 
that  he  will  marry  somebody  else  when  they  get  him  to 
Vienna,  and  that  all  the  silence  in  the  world  will  not 
avail. 

The  Flahaults  are  much  annoyed  at  another  failure, 
and  this  after  the  long  wished  for  embassy  had  been 
given  and  accepted.2  I  think  they  will,  however,  behave 
quietly  and  understand  the  difficulty  that  seems  always 
imperative  when  there  is  a  question  of  touching  the  hero 
of  Manchester.3  We  heard  yesterday  that  his  son  is  to 
be  made  Due  de  St.  Amand.  I  should  like  to  be  called 
Duchesse  de  la  Jonchere. 

I  think  my  brother  will  approve  extremely  of  this 
place.  He  does  not  mind  a  drive,  and  from  the  Hotel 
Sinet  it  is  an  hour  and  a  half.  We  could  lodge  him,  but  I 
fear  he  would  not  like  it,  as  the  bedrooms,  though  very 
clean  and  nice,  are  extremely  small.  But  what  he  would 

1  Prince  Nicholas  Esterhazy,  who  married  Lady  Sarah  in  February  1842. 
a  He  eventually  was  appointed.  3  Marshal  Soult. 


320     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1841 

like  is  the  dry,  pure  air  and  high,  situation.  They  are 
making  hay,  but  there  is  no  sting  in  it.  I  have  not 
smelt  it.  It  is  damp  brings  out  its  sweetness,  and 
its  mischief  is  merged  in  this  large  atmosphere. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

La  Jonchere :  June  1841. 

The  day  before  yesterday  Madame  de  Flahault  came 
triumphant  with  the  election  news.  Yesterday  it  was 
not  so  cheering.  I  think  it  seems  doubtful  if  the 
majority  will  be  sufficient  to  enable  the  Tories  to  carry 
on  the  Government,  although  sufficient  to  make  it  im- 
possible for  the  Whigs  to  remain  in. 

Do  you  know,  most  dear  sister,  that  I  cannot  resign 
myself  to  the  idea  of  losing  Morpeth's  holiday  and  a 
chance  of  many  of  you  by  turns  ?  How  I  think  he  most 
especially  would  enjoy  this  place  !  The  day  before  yes- 
terday, at  a  stone's  throw  from  Paris,  we  drove,  through 
chestnut  woods  and  fields  of  waving  corn,  the  peasants 
in  their  bright  colours  cutting  wood,  and  making  their 
recolte  of  raspberries  perfuming  the  air,  to  les  Deux 
Moulins.  There,  from  one  of  those  grass  platforms  that 
look  as  if  the  fairies  had  made  them  to  dance  in  at 
night,  we  looked  down  upon  Versailles,  chateau  and 
town,  like  a  model.  I  pined  for  Morpeth.  And  again 
yesterday,  when  after  a  broiling  morning  we  drove  to 
the  broad  terrace  of  St.  Germain,  all  the  Sunday  people 
walking  with  their  children,  and  almost  sea  air  blowing 
upon  us.  Again  and  again  to  have  you  and  yours  here 
would  be  too  delightful. 

On  Saturday  we  came  home  to  other  pleasures.  The 
Flahaults  just  arrived  from  Paris,  agitated  and  aggrieved, 
but  reasonable.  She  goes  with  her  girls  to  Ems  to-mor- 
row ;  he  remains  here,  uncertain  what  awaits  him.  To 
dinner  came  Madame  de  Lieven,  Guizot,  Brogiie,  and 
Bulwer.  She  was  enchanted  with  the  place,  and  pro- 


1841  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  321 

voked  because  les  Franqais  riont  pas  I'organe  $  admirer 
ce  qui  est  beau.  The  fact  is  they  both  know  La 
Jonchere  intimately,  and  have  seen  the  Aqueduct  of 
Marly  and  the  Palais  de  St.  Germain,  and  that  she  was 
astonished  and  charmed  at  finding  herself  for  once 
devoted  to  the  beauties  of  nature,  sneering  at  politicians. 
They  all  stayed  till  nine,  and  were  very  agreeable. 
Guizot  anxious  to  do  well  for  Flahault,  but  not  prepared 
to  go  out  on  the  question,  curious  about  English  politics. 
De  Broglie  behaved  very  prettily,  though  not  naturally 
fond  of  the  Princesse. 

What  a  storm  we  had  last  night,  and  how  in  the 
midst  of  it  did  I  feel  at  this  height,  with  the  tops  of  the 
trees  bowing  all  round  us,  and  the  lightning  in  at  the 
countless  windows ! 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

La  Jonchere :  June  1841. 

My  own  beloved  sister, — Morpeth's  speech  is  quite 
beautiful,  quite  perfect.  I  cannot  bear  to  think  of  his 
being  beaten,  I  can  of  his  being  out.  Mr.  Eaikes  tells  us 
that  the  Duke  of  Wellington  writes  him  word  that  nobody 
can  foresee  what  will  be  the  result.  But  if  you  could 
imagine  to  yourself  what  a  beau  reve  it  is  to  me,  thinking 
of  having  Morpeth  here,  of  enjoying  with  him,  as  I  know 
he  would  do,  this  delicious  place,  you  would  understand 
my  being,  what  I  am  become,  terribly  selfish. 

All  you  tell  us  amuses  and  interests  us  so  much. 
Dear  Marie  is  a  most  zealous  friend.  Granville's 
interest  about  English  politics  is  extreme,  and 
nobody  can  know  more  of  election  movements  than 
we  do. 

We  have  constant  society,  but  it  has  never  been 
oppressive.  Miss  Eaikes  has  been  staying  with  us  two 
days.  She  is  very  agreeable  and  a  great  favourite. 
Her  father  brought  her  down  and  dined  the  first  dav. 

«/ 

VOL.  II.  Y 


322     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1841 

Plunket  came  with  them,  and  yesterday  Eaikes  returned 
and  Lord  Alvanley,  who  was  quite  charming.  Le 
meilleur  enfant,  which  does  not  mean  homme,  but  I 
cannot  persuade  myself  that  he  is  not  much  altered  and 
that  he  will  end  by  being  a  very  good  as  he  is  a  most 
captivating  person.  Such  cleverness,  si  fin,  si  simple, 
without  one  grain  of  effort.  What  a  receipt  for  being, 
as  he  is,  quite  charming !  I  am  a  little  in  love  with 
him.  Montrond  brought  him  here  but  returned  to 
Versailles.  He  is  coming  to  dine  here  some  day  next 
week. 

To-day  we  are  quite  alone.  Eobert  Verity  always 
comes  back  to  dinner  with  the  Paris  news,  and  Freddy, 
George  Stewart,  or  Fullerton  generally  go  there  in  the 
course  of  the  morning,  so  that  notes,  letters,  and  parcels 
are  always  arriving. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

La  Jonchere :  1841. 

I  cannot  quite  bear  the  anxiety  about  Morpeth's 
election.  I  cannot  bear  his  not  being  whatever  he 
wishes  to  be,  and  his  beautiful  speeches  and  perfection 
in  all  ways  deserve  success  wherever  and  whenever  he 
seeks  it. 

I  have  been  crying  because  he  is  lowest  on  the  first 
day's  poll.  Eecollect  I  am  in  a  poor  state  of  health, 
and  because  they  say  if  he  is  not  elected,  he  will  not, 
as  I  had  reckoned  upon,  be  able  to  come  here. 

I  do  abhor  politics,  elections.  This  lovely  place 
would  make  you  all  forget  them.  I  hear  Granville 
'  Globe '  in  hand  :  *  I  never  saw  a  worse  statement.' 
Freddy  :  '  Nothing  to  console  one.' 

Here  is  the  courier  and  Mary's  kind  letter.  I  had 
my  roar  out,  which  did  me  good.  I  feel  all  sorts  of 
wrong  thoughts.  I  never  could  bear  to  see  another 


1841  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  323 

Wortley  again  as  long  as  I  live.1  Then  I  hoped  the 
most  dreadful  mischief  would  happen  in  Ireland.  That 
I  repented  of  as  soon  as  I  thought  it.  Then  I  felt  that 
I  would  not  listen,  did  not  care  about  Charles's 2  success 
or  anybody's.  There,  now  you  have  it  all. 

There  is  a  sentence  in  Mary's  letter,  a  slight  distant 
hope  held  out  of  having  you  here.  She  says  truly, 
what  repose  and  enjoyment  awaits  that  adorable 
Morpeth,  and  to  become  anything  and  everything, 
when  those  poor  unfortunate  Tories  have  struggled 
through  their  weary  day. 

Granville  is  improving,  as  he  has  done  from  the 
first,  by  degrees,  not  perceptible  at  the  time.  He  now 
walks,  leaning  upon  an  arm,  and  his  general  health  is 
excellent. 

Yesterday  we  had  a  great  amusement.  '  Much  Ado 
about  Nothing,'  curtailed  into  what  might  have  been 
called,  '  Benedict,  the  Married  Man.' 

The  play  was  admirably  acted  by — Leonato, 
Georgy  in  an  under  cap  of  Granville's  with  tow 
whiskers,  beard,  side  curls  and  a  large  silk  dressing 
gown  ;  Don  Pedro,  Freddy  well  got  up  in  his  own 
shirt-sleeves,  my  scarfs,  and  a  long  feather  in  a  silk  hat  ; 
Claudio,  Heneage ;  Benedict,  Plunket,  both  in  short  silk 
mantles ;  Hero,  Georgy  again,  white  veil  and  natural 
flowers ;  Ursula,  Freddy  again,  perfectly  well  dressed,  the 
image  of  Georgiana  Wortley ;  Beatrice,  Miss  Eaikes, 
beautifully  dressed. 

They  had  arranged  a  bower  with  a  path  behind  it 
and  all  sorts  of  flowers  with  lamps. 

The  audience  sat  in  clover.  Granville  in  his  arm 
chair.  Doctor  Verity  and  I  in  perfect  ecstasies  on 
each  side.  Fullerton  perched  high  above  us.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Gene,  Mile.  Josephine,  Mr.  Muller,  Mrs. 

1  Lord  Morpeth  was  defeated  in  Yorkshire  by  Mr.  Wortley. 

2  Mr.  Charles  Howard  was  returned  for  Cumberland. 

T  2 


324     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1841 

Hayes1  forming  the  mass  of  the  audience.  Pray  re-read 
it  and  fancy  them. 

To-day  we  have  all  the  odious  papers  and  a  long 
letter  from  Leveson.  One  from  Marie,  who  will  not  be 
moderate  in  opposition. 

The  Fullertons  and  Freddy  are  gone  to  church  in 
Paris,  and  to  take  back  our  prima  donna,  who  to  our 
great  regret  is  going  to  Honfieur  to-morrow,  and  to 
England  afterwards.  I  hope  the  Tories  will  do  some- 
thing for  Mr.  Eaikes. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE,. 

La  Jonchere :  August  29,  1841. 

One  line  without  stopping  to  take  breath.  We 
hope  to  set  out  for  Nice  the  second  week  in  October. 
The  Fullertons  with  us.  Freddy  will  follow.  The 
Levesous  join  us  there.  We  shall  spend  the  early 
months  there  till  February,  and  then  we  hope  Eome. 
Naples  hi  April.  What  happiness  if  you  are  coming  ! 
But  all  turns  upon  one  thing,  of  course,  how  Granville 
is  at  the  time. 

The  Carlisles  are  in  great  enjoyment  here  and 
perfectly  weU.  To  picture  us,  Fheure  quil  est,  Lady 
Carlisle,  Mary  and  Harry  went  off  -at  twelve  to  church 
at  Versailles,  and  then  they  are  to  see  in  detail  les 
Grandes  Eaux  play. 

Lord  Carlisle,  Granville  and  I  are  stepping  into 
another  caleche  to  see  '  La  Fete  des  Loges '  at  St.  Ger- 
main. We  come  home  to  find  Mme.  de  Lieven,  Mole, 
and  the  Pahlens,  who  dine  here. 

Bolton  Abbey  has  been  ecstasy  to  Fullerton, 
Frederick  Howard  and,  I  believe,  Louis  de  Noailles, 
and  we  have  eaten  up  nineteen  grouse  from  there  already. 

1  The  servants. 


1841  TO  THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIEE  32-J 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

La  Jonchere  :  September  19,  1841. 

What  pleasure  it  was  to  receive  your  letter  to- 
day, my  dearest  brother,  and  to  know  that  you  have 
received  all  our  letters  and  know  all  about  us,  and  mean 
to  be  of  us,  first  and  greatest  of  all  pleasures ! 
Fullerton  says  he  has  written  to  you  a  full  account  of 
everything. 

Mme.  de  Salvo,  nee  Claxton,  about  eight  and  twenty, 
lovely,  refined,  full  of  talent,  sense  and  goodness. 
She  would  marry  Salvo.  Que  voulez-vous?  She  has 
drawn  his  picture  and  hung  it  up  in  her  room,  and 
under  it  she  has  written,  '  Mon  coeur  eprouve  ce  que 
ma  pensee  ne  peut  rendre.' 

Till 1  goes  to  Nice  by  Granville's  desire.  Kulbach 
leaves  behind  him  his  fat  lame  old  black  terrier,  and  gladly 
accepts  the  role  of  travelling  tutor  to  Til].  You  won't 
like  him ;  he  is  ill-tempered,  misanthropical,  wrapped  up 
in  self,  and  it  is  only  to  Granville  that  he  behaves 
decently. 

I  have  the  best  account  of  Granville  to  give.  He 
walks  about  the  house  and  verandah,  only  leaning  on 
his  stick.  I  believe  we  shall  go  to  Paris  on  October 
11  to  your  rooms  in  the  Hotel  Sinet  for  four  or  five 
days,  then  to  Versailles  or  Fontainebleau  for  two  or 
three  days,  whilst  Kulbach  gives  up  the  two  houses. 
He  then  joins  us.  We  take  Pater  (cook),  Charlemagne 
(chasseur),  and  Charles  (footman),  Francois  Eighi 
(courier).  We  mean  to  steam  part  of  the  way  and  to  go 
as  slowly  as  possible. 

We  have  the  Maison  Grilla,2  that  which  was  the 
Brownlows  and  Pembrokes.  Monsieur  La  Croix  has 
taken  it  for  us  and  is  slaving  for  us  at  Madame 
Graham's  instigation. 

1  A  dog,  a  present  of  the  Duke's.  2  At  Nice. 


326     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1841 

The  Demidoffs  :  are  at  Dieppe.  She  asked  Mme. 
Albufera  to  bring  her  here,  who  wrote  to  ask  me  if  she 
should.  Felix  Schwarzenberg  is  coming  here,  sent  by 
Metternich  to  be  chef  during  Appony's  absence.  Mme. 
de  Lieven  wrings  her  hands  and  says,  '  II  n'y  aura  que 
des  gargons.'  Lady  Cowley  is  very  ill  and  Lord  Fitz- 
gerald likely  to  come,  if  Peel  can  prevail  upon  him. 
Sir  Eobert  Gordon  to  Vienna,  Sir  Charles  Bagot  to 
Canada,  are,  I  believe,  certain.  Morpeth  has  made 
another  most  beautiful  speech.  Leveson  is  elected 
without  contest  for  Lichfield.  Marie  writes  from 
Herrnsheim,  bored  to  death  and  longing  to  get  back. 
They  are  going  to  Brighton  for  a  fortnight  to  drink 
mineral  waters  and  to  see  Susy.  They  join  us  in 
November. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

La  Jonchere  :  September  24,  1841. 

This  letter  is  entirely  on  business,  dear  Grace,  first 
to  give  an  excellent  account  of  Granville,  and  to  say 
that  we  intend  to  set  out  about  the  15th. 

I  am  assured  that  Leveson  has  done  his  election 
matters  well.  Morpeth's  retreat  is  beyond  all  praise. 
Lady  de  Grey  really  in  despair.  The  Beauforts  talked 
of  for  Vienna.  Paris  suspended  still.  A  report  that 
Peel  sent  to  offer  it  to  Lord  Beauvale.  The  Queen 
would  not  let  them  sit  at  her  round  table,  but  insisted 
on  whist.  Lord  Clarendon  says  '  she  might  as  well 
have  asked  some  of  them  to  play  on  the  German  flute.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

La  Jonchere  :  September  30,  1841. 

You  dearest  brother, — Letters  will  now  tumble  on 
you  like  the  river  at  Gastein.  Thanks  for  your  delicious 
acount  of  that  town. 

1  Count  Demidoff  married  in  1840  Princesse  Mathilde,  the  daughter  of 
Jerome  Bonaparte. 


1841  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  327 

I  am  made  very  happy  to-day.  Eobert  Verity  will 
travel  with  us  to  Nice,  and  leave  us  only  when  his 
uncle  Eichard  joins  us  there.  Eichard  and  his  wife 
will  follow  our  fortunes,  independent  of  us,  but  always 
in  the  same  town  and  on  the  same  road,  to  and  from. 
You  do  not  know  wrhat  a  comfort  this  is  to  me. 

The  Duchess l  writes  from  Windsor  to  her  mama. 
The  Queen  in  a  muslin  frock,  all  kindness,  with  her 
beautiful  baby — a  little  low,  but  very  proper  in  her 
conduct.2 

Morpeth  still  means  to  go  to  America.  He  says 
autumn  is  the  time  for  Niagara  and  the  forests. 

Lady  Sandwich  and  Walewski  are  just  come.  She 
says  Sir  Eobert  is  oppressed  with  claims.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh  says,  '  My  father  wishes  for  Paris,  and  he  must 
have  it ; '  Lady  Jersey,  '  Either  Paris  or  Vienna  will 
satisfy  us ; '  but  Lord  Cowley  told  Lord  Clarendon  he 
never  was  so  well  in  his  life,  so  it  will  be  his. 

Monsieur  Demidoff,  it  is  said,  is  sent  for  to  his  native 
country,  where,  Mme.  Appony  says,  she  will  be  admitted 
en  famille,  he  not  at  all.  How  cross  he  will  be !  and 
when  he  is,  they  say  he  beats.  She  is  a  very  fine  girl, 
I  think,  with  a  charming  countenance  and  frank 
manner. 

Flahault  dined  here  yesterday.  Mme.  de  F.  and 
the  girls  are  gone  to  England.  Flahault  told  me  that 
he  was  walking  round  Dessein's  garden  at  Calais.  At 
a  window  was  a  woman  playing  with  her  parrot.  '  I 
cannot  tell  how,  but  she  was  si  gentille,  si  gracieuse,' 
that  he  called  his  girls,  and  they  remained  en  cachette, 
quite  riveted  with  this  little  scene.  The  window  shut. 
They  had  the  curiosity  to  inquire.  Mile.  Dejazet.3 

1  Duchess  of  Sutherland.  2  To  her  new  Ministers. 

3  The  most  amusing  actress  of  her  day. 


328     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1841 

To  MRS.  HAMILTON  HAMILTON. 

Nice  :  November  28,  1841. 

Dearest  Mrs.  Hamilton,1 — We  left  La  Jonchere  with 
much  regret.  Our  journey  was  prosperous  as  far  as 
Lyons,  but  there  we  were  detained  nine  days,  and  in 
weather  that  made  us  all  feel  depressed — a  fog  like  a 
London  one,  and  the  vapours  arising  from  all  the  inun- 
dated ground.  The  river  and  road  from  it  alike  im- 
passable. When  we  embarked  at  last,  we  felt  as  if 
escaping  from  prison.  When  we  arrived  at  Valence, 
breathing  light  air  and  the  sun  shining,  I  cannot  tell 
you  what  was  the  renovating  feeling.  All  the  rest  was 
delight.  Avignon,  Frejus,  the  first  view  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean, the  beautiful  Estrelles,  two  days  of  repose  in 
Lord  Brougham's  excellent  house  at  Cannes,  arid  then 
a  beautiful  day's  drive  here. 

And  now,  dearest  Mrs.  Hamilton,  how  difficult  it 
is  to  write  to  one  to  whom  all  used  to  be  said  with 
such  pleasure  and  sympathy,  to  drop  out  what  used 
to  be  poured,  to  know  neither  where  to  begin  or  how 
to  stop. 

Of  politics,  on  Lord  Clarendon's  authority  in  a  letter 
just  received,  there  is  a  dead  lull.  The  Queen  and  her 
magnificent  baby  are  perfectly  well.  Sir  Eobert  has 
not  let  out  a  plan  or  intention. 

Nice  swarms  with  English,  but  we  know  scarcely 
any  of  them. 

1  Her  husband  was  Charge  d' Affaires  under  Lord  Granville  at  Paris  and 
had  been  transferred  to  Kio.  Lady  Granville  entertained  a  warm  friendship 
for  his  wife. 


1842  TO   MRS.    HAMILTON   HAMILTON  329 


1842 

To  MRS.  HAMILTON  HAMILTON. 

Nice  :  January  4,  1842. 

The  new  year,  dearest  Mrs.  Hamilton,  has  already 
made  me  two  presents.  Susy  has  a  fourth  girl,  and  is 
going  on  well.  Freddy  is  arrived  in  high  health  and 
spirits. 

The  calamity  of  the  poor  Grahams  has  been  generally 
felt.  She  was  driving  with  her  baby,  when  he  was 
seized  with  apoplectic  convulsions,  and  in  a  few  hours 
all  was  over.  Madame  de  Lieven  says :  '  On  ne  sait 
pas  de  quoi  se  rejouir  dans  la  vie.  L'arrivee  de  cet 
enfant  a  sans  doute  ete  le  plus  beau  jour  de  la  vie  de 
cette  femme ;  pendant  un  an  un  bonheur  inconnu,  in- 
comparable— et  puis  ! ' 

Douglas  was  at  Paris,  going  little  into  society, 
looking  fat  and  well.  Madame  de  Talleyrand  in  radiant 
beauty,  the  Castellanes,  Monsieur  de  Maistre,  Governor 
of  the  place,  Leon  de  Narishkin,  and  my  brother  dined 
here  yesterday.  Both  the  men  are  agreeable,  the 
Eussian  particularly. 

The  5th. — The  Carnaval  is  exerting  itself.  There 
was  a  fancy  ball  at  Madame  de  Talleyrand's  the  other 
night,  and  there  is  another  given  by  half  a  dozen  people 
the  day  after  to-morrow.  My  brother  has  been  entreat- 
ing Georgy  to  go  in  costume.  She  has  at  length  con- 
sented to  order  a  cap  and  apron,  and  he  means  to  say 
she  is  a  Derbyshire  peasant. 


330     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1842 

The  christening  l  is  the  great  topic  of  the  day  in 
England  en  attendant  the  meeting  of  Parliament.  The 
Duchess  of  Northumberland,  Lady  Lansdowne,  and  the 
Duchess  of  Sutherland  are  to  be  the  only  women  invited. 
The  blue  riband  vacant  by  Lord  Westmorland's  death  is 
not  yet  given.  The  Duke  of  Beaufort  is  much  annoyed 
at  its  .not  being  yet  offered  to  him ;  the  Duke  of  Buck- 
ingham's claim  being,  it  is  supposed,  in  the  way.  The 
Duke  of  Cleveland  is  so  ill  that  it  is  thought  they  are 
waiting  to  give  the  two  at  once.  Lord  Clarendon  writes 
me  word  :  '  Lady  Westmorland  is  at  the  Bedford  Hotel 
at  Brighton,  and  has  told  the  waiter  that  she  means  to 
be  a  disconsolate  widow,  and  is  determined  never  to  be 
happy  again.' 

The  English  are  getting  up  a  ball  given  in  honour 
of  the  christening.  George  Stewart  is  disputatious  and 
dictatorial  upon  the  questions  of  what  is  fitting  or  not. 
It  is  one  of  the  peculiar  attractions  he  has  in  society, 
to  be  both  without  any  shade  of  temper  or  malevolence. 
He  provokes  but  does  not  offend,  always  stirring  the 
cup  but  never  putting  any  bad  ingredient  in  it.  Freddy 
is  on  the  committee.  Eichard  Verity  has  just  made 
them  happy  by  his  adhesion,  and  a  deputation  is  now 
gone  to  my  brother.  The  resident  nobility  are  '  indeed 
truly  glad  to  see  this  loyal  spirit.'  It  is  hoped  Lord 
Adam  Loftus  will  be  sober,  and  that  the  authorities  of 
the  town  will  allow  the  theatre  to  be  floored. 

Paris,  we  are  told,  is  colder  than  ice ;  but  the 
Carnaval  tres  anime.  The  Duke  of  Orleans  extremely 
gay — dancing  and  concerts.  Madame  de  Montmorency 
has  given  a  ball  in  her  beautiful  new  house.  The  poor 
Cowleys  in  the  meantime  are  suffering  from  the  mean- 
ness of  the  English  Government,  inconceivable  in  Tories 
as  it  was  in  Whigs.  All  they  direct  to  be  done  is  the 
doing  up  the  rez  de  chaussee. 

1  Of  the  Prince  of  ^.Yales. 


1842  TO   THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  331 

January  29th. — I  will  wind  up  my  letter  with  news 
received  from  London  yesterday.  Lord  John  is  in  good 
heart  and  expects  much  fun  for  the  party,  and  perhaps 
some  little  benefit  to  the  country.  The  reports  about 
Sir  Eobert's  intentions  are  never  two  days  the  same. 
The  De  Greys  are  said  to  dislike  Ireland ;  he  the 
expense,  she  the  bore,  neither  having  the  sense  to  hold 
their  tongues.  I  hear  that  Esterhazy  has  again  put  off 
arriving,  and  that  Lady  Jersey  has  kept  fixing  the  day 
and  inviting  all  London, '  just  as  people  ring  the  bell  and 
order  the  dinner  to  make  the  guests  who  are  late  arrive/ 

God  bless  you,  dearest  Mrs.  Hamilton.  My  hus- 
band's best  remembrance  to  you  both. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Milan  :  May  31,  1842. 

My  dearest  brother, — You  cannot  know  the  pleasure 
hearing  from  you  gives.  I  certainly  know  no  pleasure 
greater  than  that  of  so  many  that  I  love  being  all 
assembled  in  one  place,  and  hearing  of  them  from  each 
other,  and  your  letters  are  epochs  in  my  life. 

Dogs. — Till  is  too  clever,  too  pleasant,  improves 
daily  in  comprehension,  and  from  the  cooks  and  laquais 
de  place  sitting  in  a  row,  when  he  gets  into  the  carriage, 
to  the  Seaford  family,  the  idol  of  everybody.  Lady 
Seaford  has  begged  me  to  ask  you  for  a  descendant  of 
Boney. 

Bulwer's  escape  was  like  Doctor  Beamish's.  He 
says  :  '  I  was  to  have  dined  at  the  Poix  at  half-past  six, 
did  not  reach  Paris  till  half-past  ten,  during  which 
time  they  must  have  fancied  me  one  of  those  curious 
calcined  creatures  which  Majendie  wishes  to  preserve.' 

Why,  did  not  I  at  Tixal  translate  the  '  Ideale,' *  and 
read  my  translation  to  Francis  Egerton,  by  that  means 
persuading  him  to  learn  the  tongue  ?  If  I  had  not  lost 

1  A  poem  of  Schiller's. 


332     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GEAXVILLE     1842 

the  copy,  would  not  I  send  my  poem  to  prove  my 
words  ?  It  is  a  proof  that  then,  as  now,  I  think  it  the 
most  beautiful  thing  I  ever  read  in  any  language. 

The  Seafords  set  out  for  Turin  at  six  this  morning, 
the  Fullertons  at  twelve,  for  an  early  dinner  at  Lecco, 
and  a  charming  evening  drive  to  Varenna. 

Yesterday  the  Confalonieris,  Abercromby,  Trecchi, 
arid  Felix  Schwarzenberg  came,  p.p.c. 

I  am  just  been  to  a  sort  of  Passage  Panorama,  and, 
being  generously  inclined,  bought  fairings  for  the 
family.  A  book  of  poems  for  Body,  Bulwer's  '  Zanoni ' 
for  George,  two  little  volumes,  Schiller's  '  Gedichte,'  for 
Freddy,  and  a  map  of  Hamburg,  all  the  poor  burnt 
part  blazing  in  bright  red,  for  my  husband.  And  here 
I  am,  very  hot  indeed.  At  five  we  have  a  roasted  goose 
and  beef  steaks  for  dinner,  and  at  six  we  hurry  to  the 
Corso.  It  is  beautiful  to  see.  Such  pretty  women  in 
such  smart  equipages,  and  the  Vice  Rois  carriage  and 
six,  with  liveries  that,  though  a  darker  yellow,  make  me 
think  of  yours.  Mme.  Terzi  took  Lady  Dalrymple  out 
to  drive,  engaging  her  to  dismiss  her  remise.  At  the 
entrance  of  the  Corso  the  axletree  refused  to  move,  and 
there  they  sat  tih1  a  friend  picked  them  up.  Mile.  Terzi 
is  in  great  beauty.  They  go  to  Paris  on  Saturday. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Stuttgard :  June  16,  1842. 

Think  of  us  in  this  clean,  broad,  tranquil  town, 
where  we  have  a  sort  of  a  palace,  Hotel  Margrath,  and 
where  we  rest  to-day.  We  send  Kulbach  on  to  have 
house  prepared  for  us  at  Wildbad,  where  the  Fullertons 
are  to  arrive  to-morrow,  the  Levesons  and  Eward  on 
the  20th.  I  am  all  fury  and  dread  at  the  idea  of  Lord 
Shelburne's  mastiff. 

Why,  to-morrow  is  the  17th,  and  on  the  same  day 
we  step  into  our  respective  baths.  Granville  is  ex- 


1842  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  333 

tremely  well.  Sometimes  I  think  if  ?  if  only  ?  you 
were  to  follow  your  fancy  and  with  three  days'  steaming 
come  and  look  at  the  juste  milieu  moyen  between  Buxton 
and  Gastein  ? 

Marie  writes  :  '  Lord  Shelburne  is  coming  with  an 
immense  retinue,  composed  of  bipeds  and  quadrupeds.' 
Oh,  the  vile  mastiff !  and  what  is  become  of  that  Jack 
the  house  built  proceeding  ?  Stephen  *  to  Castellane, 
Castellane  to  me,  I  to  Leveson,  Leveson  to  Shelburne 
warning  him  off  the  premises. 

We  shall,  I  hope,  stay  a  long  time  in  the  Wurtemberg 
dominion.  Yesterday  we  drove  after  an  early  and  ex- 
quisite repast  to  the  gardens  and  saw  much  sport. 
The  King  and  the  Princess  of  Orange  2  taking  a  com- 
fortable walk  together.  Then  Neuperg  the  gendre, 
married  to  the  second  daughter,  a  good-looking  man. 
Then  Count  Buhl  in  a  large  vehicle,  Sir  George  Shee 
in  a  phaeton,  and  Mr.  Wellesley,  walking  and  stalking 
up  and  down. 

This  morning  I  followed  a  most  distinguished-look- 
ing bio  wen,  such  a  maintien  and  walk,  like  Dino  and 
Orleans  in  her  go.  Wondered,  till  I  saw  the  sentinel 
salute  her,  then  I  started,  looked  at  her  face,  called 
'  Till,  venez  ici,  monsieur.'  She  turned  upon  me,  a  fat 
resemblance  of  the  docte  Helene?  nothing  pretty,  but  the 
perfection  of  grace  and  manner.  Orange  it  was  again, 
out  shopping,  in  a  green  veil  and  coloured  muslin  frock. 

God  bless  you.  My  love  to  every  stone  and  rivulet. 
All  the  Splugen  is  like  the  robbers'  stone  and  four 
mile  walk 4  on  a  gigantic  scale,  beautiful  beyond  measure. 

1  Stephanie,  Dowager  Duchesse  de  Bade.     She  was  a  Beauharnais. 
Napoleon  adopted  her  and  married  her  to  the  Grand  Duke. 

2  The  Princess  of  Orange  was  the   daughter   of  the  King  of  Wur- 
temberg. 

3  A  Princess  of  Wurtemberg  and  aunt  of  the  Princess  of  Orange. 
She   was  married   to  the   Grand   Duke   Michael,   youngest  son  of  the 
Emperor  Paul.  4  At  Chatsworth. 


334     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRAXVILLE     1842 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Wildbad  :  July  20,  1842. 

All  our  thoughts  have  been  at  Paris  for  the  last 
days.  Never  was  there  a  more  horrible  and  unlooked- 
for  event.1  '  L'affliction,  la  consternation  est  grande, 
le  regret  le  plus  sincere.  Une  grande  sympathie  pour 
les  pauvres  parents  et  une  grande  inquietude  pour 
1'avenir.  Les  Chambres  sont  convoquees  pour  le  26. 
On  y  portera  une  loi  pour  regler  la  regence.  Ce  sera, 
j 'imagine,  le  Due  de  Nemour-s.  II  y  aura  des  obseques 
solennelles  k  Notre-Dame,  et  puis  le  Roi  conduira  le 
corps  a  Dreux.  II  y  aura  des  receptions  chez  le  Roi  pour 
les  corps  constitues,  receptions  muettes.  On  le  saluera. 
Le  Roi  est  plus  affaisse  que  la  Reine.  L'exaltation  pieuse 
soutient  la  Reine,  mais  la  desolation  la,  partout,  est 
immense.  C'est  un  grand  moment  pour  ce  pays-ci. 
Tout  le  monde  sent  cela,  et  tout  le  monde  est  serieux. 
Qnel  sort !  Quel  inexplicable  decret  de  Dieu !  Un 
accident  si  simple  avoir  des  consequences  aussi  enormes  ! 
Car  regardez  le  gouffre  que  cela  laisse  a  cote  du  trone. 
Une  dynastie  qui  commence  se  trouver  a  la  veille  d'une 
regence ! ' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Herrnsheim  :  August  1842. 

In  a  small  but  very  pretty  luxurious  drawing-room, 
Marie,  dressed  at  three  o'clock,  with  long  curls  and  in  a 
light  blue  gown.  Why  ?  To  go  across  the  court  and 
small  flower  garden  to  an  orangerie,  where  sits,  in  a  light- 
coloured  smock  frock  and  black  tie  round  his  throat, 
Herr  Peters,  a  young  promising  artist — not  a  charity. 
Why?  To  make  a  drawing  of  the  said  Marie  at  her 
spinning  wheel,  where  she  spins,  like  a  real  Deutsche 
Hausfrau,  yards  of  linen  thread.  I  am  proud  of  the 

1  The  death  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  accidentally  killed  by  a  fall  from  his 
carriage.     The  following  account  was  received  from  the  Princesse  Lieven. 


1842  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  335 

way  with  which  she  has,  with  a  fairy's  wand,  that  is 
with  taste  and  skill,  made  herself,  of  an  unbuilt  house 
and  small  pavilion,  a  delicious  country  house,  where 
she  can  receive  whom  she  pleases.  This  orangerie  she 
has  converted  into  a  drawing-room,  and  I  had  no  rest 
till  the  Baron  von  Pfeiningen,  our  intime  and  constant 
guest,  a  great  friend  of  her  father's,  with  true  chivalry 
and  zeal  drove  off  and  fetched  from  Mannheim  some- 
body capable  of  making  me  a  drawing,  which  I  beg  you 
will  graciously  receive  when  Susy,  who  sets  out  for 
England  on  Saturday,  leaves  it  at  your  door. 

I  am  so  grateful  to  you  for  your  kindness  to  Freddy 
and  the  promised  week  at  Chatsworth. 

I  have  just  had  a  letter  from  Paris.  Guizot  seems 
on  his  legs  again,  after  a  violent  tremblement  de  terre,1  and 
will  go  on  for  some  time  longer.  '  Did  I  tell  you  I  saw 
Lady  Beauvale  ?  Elle  a  tout  ce  qu'il  faut  pour  etre 
belle,  and  there's  an  end  of  it ;  mais  elle  est  vraiment 
charmante,  douce,  modeste.  Elle  adore  son  mari,  ce 
qui  a  lair  un  pen  drole,  et  il  a  I'air  gracieux  et  bon 
pour  elle' 

llth. — The  Eivers's  and  Fullertons  returned  at 
nine  yesterday  evening,  the  latter  having  dined  with 
Stephen.  A  great  German  repast  of  black  entrees, 
hams,  sausages,  and  heavy  puddings  at  two  o'clock.  The 
Palace  beautiful  and  magnifique.  The  reception  of  them 
rapturous.  Stephen  in  tearing  spirits. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Herrnsheim :  August  1842. 

My  dearest  brother, — How  terrible  the  disturbances 
are  !  Derbyshire,  I  trust,  is  quiet. 

Lowndes  is  here,  and  I  have  the  happiness  of  seeing 

1  A  trial  of  strength  took  place  between  the  Ministry  and  Opposition 
on  the  question  of  the  election  of  a  President  for  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies,  when  Monsieur  Guizot  was  nearly  defeated. 


336     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANYILLE     1842 

that,  however  annoying  and  unsatisfactory  the  business 
may  be  that  occupies  Granville  for  hours,  his  health 
does  not  suffer,  and  he  bears  the  intense  heat,  that 
knocks  us  all  down,  better  than  any  of  us.  This  is 
doubly  delightful,  because  Eobert  Verity  has  left  us, 
and  a  German  doctor  at  Worms  would  be  our  only 
resource  if  he  was  unwell. 

How  hot !  but  how  delicious !  We  sat  out  of  doors 
till  ten  o'clock  yesterday  evening. 

Leveson  returned  from  the  Worms  station  at  that 
hour,  without  Douglas,  who  had  announced  himself  as 
coming  by  that  conveyance.  He  is  at  Baden. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Herrnsheim  :  August  27,  1842. 

We  were  out  yesterday  in  the  carnavalette  in  a  tour- 
mente.  The  coachman  could  scarcely  see  or  sit ;  the  dust 
hid  everything  a  yard  beyond  the  ground.  It  was  in- 
stantaneous and  impetuous.  We  knew  the  Levesons, 
Shelburne  and  Fullerton,  were  gone  to  take  a  row  in 
the  Lorelei.  The  half  hour  was  anything  but  pleasant. 
Nobody  the  worse.  The  boatman  warned  them  just  as 
they  were  stepping  in,  and  we  are  all  as  fresh  as  larks 
in  the  delicious  cooled  atmosphere. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Herrnsheim  :  August  29,  1842. 

It  was  a  great  delight  to  hear  from  you  again,  my 
dearest  brother,  and  I  long  to  know  that  you  have  not 
been  the  worse  for  your  exertions.  J  see  you  all  at 
Bolton  as  plain  as  if  I  had  been  there,  I  should  have 
liked  to  have  been  of  the  rubber. 

Scene  :  a  small  drawing-room.  Lord  Granville  in  a 
large  armchair  in  the  window,  reading  the  life  of  Sir 
Samuel  Eomilly.  Lady  Seaford  in  an  adjoining  one, 


1842  •    TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  337 

listening  attentively  to  Mme.  de  Flahault,  who  is 
relating  many  anecdotes  and  trials  not  yet  before  the 
public.  She  is  much  softened  in  manner,  very  much 
subdued  in  spirits,  very  agreeable,  and  a  handsome 
woman,  the  asperity  of  the  countenance  gone,  and  the 
finest  teeth  in  the  world.  Leveson  as  comfortable  as  if 
he  was  in  bed,  rolled  up  in  a  large  fauteuil  couch,  not 
listening  to  Emily  Hardy,  who  never  ceases  talking  to 
him  for  one  minute.  Miss  Hardy  and  Mile,  de  Flahault, 
who  is  much  prettier  than  ever,  walking  up  and  down 
a  large  sort  of  court  before  the  windows.  The  Fla- 
haults  go  to  Darmstadt  at  one. 

Herrnsheim  is  extremely  gay  ;  very  piquant. 

31st. — The  first  rainy  day  since  we  have  been  here. 
The  Flahaults  went  yesterday,  the  Seafords  to-day. 
The  Badens  returned  yesterday  from  Baden,  and  are 
again  settled  at  Mannheim  for  a  few  days. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Augsburg :  September  19,  1842. 

Here  we  are,  dearest  brother,  almost  at  the  end  of 
the  first  volume  of  our  journey,  and  most  successful 
has  it  been.  The  most  perfect  weather,  excellent  inns, 
and  Granville  extremely  well.  Heidelberg  to  Heilbronn 
and  Geissengen  are  almost  more  beautiful  than  any- 
thing. 

We  rail  to  Munich  to-morrow,  settle  ourselves  in  the 
Cour  de  Baviere,  and  wait  there  for  Levesons,  Fuller- 
tons,  and  O'Grady,  who  will  all,  I  hope,  be  arrived  so 
as  to  enable  us  to  set  off  for  Florence  about  the  1st  or 
2nd  of  October.  It  has  been  great  happiness  to  have 
Dody,  and  nothing  could  equal  my  surprise  at  the 
change  except  my  delight.  Fullerton  is  far  from  well, 
and  Italy  has  been  advised  by  doctors  and  friends,  by 
all  but  Georgy  and  myself,  for  we  thought  it  so  little 
possible  that  the  idea  had  never  crossed  us.  You  may 

VOL.    II.  Z 


338     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANYILLE     1842 

judge  of  the  reprieve  at  the  very  moment  of  parting. 
I  sometimes  think — yes,  upon  my  honour,  I  do — that 
you  will  come  when  you  have  done  Ireland. 

Granville  has  found  you  out  in  the  Fremdenbuch, 
and  all  our  friends  and  relations  by  turns. 

I  will  write  from  Munich.  Pray  read  two  tiny 
volumes,  '  Le  Ehin,  par  Victor  Hugo.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Verona :  October  14,  1842. 

I  hope  the  details  of  our  journey  have  reached  you, 
my  dearest  brother,  as  I  have  begged  my  sister  to  keep 
you  informed  of  them.  She  will,  I  trust,  have  told  you 
how  enchanted  Freddy  was  with  the  beauty  of  Chats- 
worth. 

Our  summer  here  is  delicious.  Yesterday  we  sat 
in  the  market-place — the  prettiest  I  ever  saw — and 
to-day  we  have  been  out  all  day  en  caleche,  acknow- 
ledging the  amphitheatre  (all  I  could  do),  enraptured 
with  the  six  portes,  and,  above  all,  the  Tombs  of  the 
Scaligers. 

To-morrow  we  go  to  Mantua,  the  next  day  to 
Modena,  and  so  on.  Our  next  halt  will  be  at  Bologna. 
The  Castellanes  rushed  into  our  rooms  this  morning  on 
their  way  to  Borne.  They  had  been  to  the  Villa  Melzi 
and  found  the  pair l  alone.  Her  manner  charming, 
doing  the  honours  of  her  house  a  ravir,  all  queerness 
gone  and  health  restored.  The  house  luxurious,  music 
on  the  lake,  the  little  Duke  charming.  Who  is  Gio- 
vanni, a  man  like  Lowndes,  whom  we  found  basking, 
not  beaming,  at  the  little  town  of  Levis  ?  He  enquired 
fondly  after  our  healths,  said  he  was  come  in  eight  days 
from  London  to  see  his  father,  but  that  he  could  not 
bear  it;  it  was  beyond  him  to  stay;  he  must  hurry  back. 

1  The  Due  and  Duchesse  de  Melzi.      She  was  nee  a  Brignole,  and  a 
cousin  of  Lady  Leveson. 


1842  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  339 

We  imagined  he  said  he  had  lived  with  the  Sutherlands 
and  was  now  at  the  head  of  the  Victoria  Station.  But 
he  talked  indistinctly  and  rapidly,  and  the  only  thing 
obvious  was  that  he  thought  Levis  dull  after  Stafford 
Souse  and  the  Brighton  Eailway. 

We  think  the  Levesons  must  be  wishing  the  Crown 
Prince  of  Bavaria  joy  of  his  marriage,  and  we  do  not 
much  expect  to  see  them  before  Eome.  Mme.  de  Dai- 
berg  is  waiting  impatiently  for  them  at  Bologna,  where 
the  hill  upon  which  she  and  her  sister  Marescalchi 
perch  has  been  inundated  at  its  base,  and  they  were  as 
if  blockaded  for  some  days.  How  wildly  they  must 
have  stared  at  one  another ! 

To  THE  DUKE  O<F  DEVONSHIRE. 

Eome :  November  2,  1842. 

We  arrived  at  five  o'clock  yesterday  after  four  long 
days.  Sienna,  Eadicofani,  arid  Viterbo.  We  are  in  an 
excellent  apartment  at  Czerny's  Hotel,  all  of  us  quite 
well.  The  weather  like  a  very  beautiful  2nd  of  June 
in  the  North. 

The  entrance  into  Eome  charmed  me.  I  felt  at 
once  I  should  like  it  as  much  as  I  disliked  Florence. 
The  brilliancy  of  the  weather  and  animation  of  the 
scene — All  Saints'  Day — added  their  influence.  This 
morning  Granville  and  I  have  been  sauntering  in  the 

O  <— » 

Place  d'Espagne,  looking  at  distant  bits  of  beauty, 
snubbing  friars  and  beggars,  admiring  on  the  broad 
stairs  the  most  picturesque  of  men,  selling  and  combing 
the  most  intelligent  poodles.  The  Fullertons,  George 
Stewart,  and  Kulbach  house-gazing.  Our  disappoint- 
ment is  that  the  Karolys'  took  the  Villa  Aldobrandini 
the  day  before  we  arrived.  There  are  objections  to 
almost  all  the  others.  In  short,  we  are  going  to  make  a 
grand  effort,  under  the  chaperonnage  of  Brook  Greville, 
to  see  if  Mr..  Mills  will  let  us  La  Villa  Spada,  on  the 

z  2 


340     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1842 

Mount  Palatine.  He  did  once,  ten  years  ago,  to 
the  Puseys.  If  not,  I  almost  think  we  shall  remain 
here. 

3rd. — Mr.  Mills  told  Brook  Greville  the  letting  his 
house  was  impossible.  We  have  one  more  to  look  at, 
which  was  the  Princesse  Pauline's,  but  I  expect  to  bide 
here. 

Drive  with  us  on  a  glorious  summer  day  down  the 
Corso,  by  the  ruins  of  the  Temple  of  Peace,  the  Coli- 
seum, Arch,  etc.,  to  Mr.  Mills's  garden,  all  full  of  roses, 
Cape  jessamines  and  heliotropes ;  himself  and  Lady 
Charlotte  Bury  driving  off  from  his  door  rather  dam- 
aging the  effect.  There  we  walked  and  sat,  and  home 
again,  going  on  our  way  to  the  Mount  Quirinal  and  to 
the  Pincio  to  see  the  sun  set. 


To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome :  November  15,  1842. 

My  dearest  brother, — Till  is  well,  but  detests  Rome. 
He  despises  the  people,  abhors  the  beggars.  He  has 
no  preserves,  no  small  woods  or  wide  meadows  to 
hunt  in. 

I  am  very  much  pleased  here.  We  have  space  and 
air  to  my  heart's  content,  less  sun  than  we  could  wish, 
but  excellent  fire-places,  and  the  house  perfectly  solid 
and  thick-walled.  A  fresh,  clean  atmosphere  like  a 
countr}r  house  in  England,  and  a  staircase  that  is  hardly 
ascent,  though  it  lands  one  at  its  top. 

My  fancies  are :  the  Villa  Mattei,  with  the  sun 
setting  over  the  wall  covered  with  roses  ;  Mr.  Mills's 
Villa,  where  we  are  going  this  afternoon,  has  rather  too 
much  brick  and  treillage,  though  his  view  beats  all. 

The  Mount  Janiculum,  with  a  drunken,  rickety, 
laquais  de  place,  who  points  out  the  domes  more  patiently 
than  the  sober  do. 


1842  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  341 

The  grass  before  the  San  Giovanni,  with  the  path  to 
the  convent  and  distant  aqueducts. 

The  Pincio  every  day  from  twelve  till  two.  There 
we  sit  and  look  at  St.  Angelo,  standing  black  out  of  the 
light  background,  and  St.  Peter  in  his  glory.  Lady  Susan 
Percy  and  her  white  Spitz,  and  Maurice  de  Noailles  and 
his  wife. 

I  was  glad  to  hear  a  good  account  of  Lord  Melbourne 
to-day.  Lord  Glenelg  had  heard  from  Lady  Holland. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Home  :  November  25,  1842. 

My  dearest  brother, — The  most  distant  hope  of 
seeing  you  is  delightful.  We  have  taken  this  charming 
house  for  five  months,  and  in  the  middle  of  May  we  talk 
of  going  to  Naples.  The  real  reason  for  being  delighted 
at  having  taken  it  is — do  I  live  to  utter  it  ? — the  climate. 
Oh  !  if  you  could  hear  Granville  !  He  declares  that  it 
is  inferior  to  a  winter  in  England,  greater  and  much 
more  sudden  changes  from  muggy  warmth  to  piercing 
cold,  and  sunless  excepting  for  one  bright  week  from 
the  twelfth  to  the  eighteenth,  when  it  was  heavenly  to 
live  and  breathe.  We  shall  see ;  it  may  improve. 

Our  young  liked  a  dinner  at  the  Dorias,  a  select 
blue  party  at  Lady  Davy's,  and  a  mob  at  Torlonia ;  all 
amusing  in  their  way.  You  know  by  sight  the  Eoman 
people,  the  Murillos  in  the  streets,  the  Bulls  in  the 
churches,  the  hideous  aristocracy  on  the  Corso,  the 
Cardinals  in  their  coaches.  If  you  wish  to  peep  be- 
hind my  spectacles  at  any  of  the  sights,  Lady  Carlisle 
possesses  my  '  Walk  through  Eome.'  There  are  moments 
when  I  sigh  for  you,  bits  that,  like  jokes,  we  both  take 
in  with  the  same  keen  enjoyment.  You  have  no  idea 
of  the  amusement  of  reading  De  Brosses  l  over  again 
here.  His  levity  is  atrocious,  his  want  of  principle 

1  Lettres  Historiques  et  Critiques  sur  Vltatie. 


542     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1842 

revolting,  and  yet  his  fun,  his  perfect  simplicity,  his 
good-natured  malice  and  joyous  recklessness,  make  him 
an  enchanting  companion. 

26th. — We  picked  the  Levesons  up  on  the  bridge  and 
have  found  them  a  lodging  just  over  the  way.  Douglas * 
has  written  to  Charles  Gore  that  he  is  the  happiest  of 
men  and  Princesse  Marie  the  most  perfect  of  her  sex. 
She  has  written  to  her  friends  that  she  discovers  new 
virtues  in  him  every  day.  Charteris  is  coming  im- 
mediately to  remain  here. 

Those  trifles  China  and  India  occupy  and  interest 
Granville  beyond  measure.  Leveson  was  all  on  fire 
when  he  heard  it,  and  so  rejoiced  for  Lord  Pam's  fame, 
though  he  has  not  the  pleasure  of  being  in  for  it.  But 
how  great  and  glorious  it  is ! 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome  :  December  9,  1842. 

Our  house  is  delightful,  though  with  little  sun. 
Granville's  end  of  the  long  room  has  it  all  the  morning 
from  nine  till  eleven.  It  is  a  great  object  to  us  to  be 
so  central,  and  society  is  thus  easy  and  pleasant.  To 
have  constant  early  visits  would  not  be  possible  on  a 
distant  hill. 

If  you  want  my  sights,  vide  Lady  Carlisle,  but 
accept  a  few  pencillings  by  the  way.  The  Ludovisi 
gardens  and  villa.  The  American  oak  and  that  par- 
ticular ilex  wood  that  makes  a  green  canopy  over- 
head and  the  old  twisted  supporters  underneath,  with 
old  vases,  seats,  and  sarcophagi.  The  retreat  the 
sickliest  spot  in  Eome  and  the  most  enchanting 
December  walk.  Then  do  you  know  one  figure  sitting 
in  the  ceiling  by  Guercino,  not  the  Aurora  ? 

Abdys  and  Mertcherskis  and  a  few  old  generals  play 

1  The  son  of  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  who  was  engaged  to  the  Princesse 
Marie  of  Bade. 


1842  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  343 

about  the  churches  and  ruins  and  give  a  faux  air  of 
Nice.  Spencer  Perceval  is  very  agreeable  and  gay,  but 
Mr.  Calcraft  tells  me  that  he  is  still  as  odd  as  ever  in 
opinion.  '  Goes  about  and  is  all  animation  and  spirits, 
but  he  is  an  angel  of  some  church  in  Southampton,  and 
goes  over  whenever  Henry  Drummond  says  he  is  wanted 
there.'  Did  you  see  Gibson's  '  Triumph  of  Psyche  ? ' 
Never  did  I  see  anything  so  lovely. 

The  Cadogans  are  coming  to  the  Palazzo  Chigi, 
immense  and  the  aspect  full  south,  but  comfortless  as 
to  want  of  fireplaces  and  degagements.  In  short,  the 
complaints  of  others  make  us  still  more  satisfied  with 
ourselves. 

But  here  comes  Frederick  Cadogan,  the  songster, 
and  Lady  Acton  l  with  Monsieur  Spada  in  her  hand, 
and  I  must  bid  you  good  night. 

10th. — Fullerton  and  I  are  going  to  hunt  for  ivy  with 
yellow  buds,  to  be  found  between  Cecilia  Metella's  tomb 
and  the  bridge  of  Nomentana,  supposed  to  have  been 
brought  from  Greece  by  Adrian.  The  only  representa- 
tion of  it  is  in  a  mosaic  at  the  Vatican,  the  pendant  of 
Pliny's  doves,  where  there  are  two  masks,  one  crowned 
with  ivy  with  yellow  buds.  A  pleasant  little  chasse. 
The  said  Mr.  Fullerton  is  on  the  point  of  yielding  to 
Lord  Cadogan's  earnest  solicitations  to  go  partners  with 
him  in  the  purchase  of  a  bit  of  land  at  Tarquinia  or 
Faleria,  where  they  are  to  dig  and  share  what  they 
find.  We  think  it  will  be  awful  when  the  moment 
comes  of  dividing  the  spoils — to  whom  the  jug,  to  whom 
the  arm. 

I  am  told  that  Miss  Lawley  is  engaged  to  Jem 
Wortley,  and  Lord  Coke  to  Miss  Whitbread. 

We  are  going  to  meet  the  Levesons  at  the  Baths  of 
Titus,  to  walk  from  thence  to  see  the  Moses  in  San  Pietro 
in  Vincoli. 

1  The  widow  of  Sir  John  Acton,  the  Neapolitan  Prime  Minister. 


344     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1843 


1843 
To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome  :  January  2,  1843. 

You  will  have  heard  from  my  sister  of  our  proceed- 
ings, my  dearest  brother.  You  will  have  seen  that, 
after  the  too  great  delight  of  seeing  Granville  to  all 
appearances  perfectly  well,  we  had  a  lesson,  for  which 
I  am  deeply  grateful.  He  is  now  going  on  quite  well, 
the  only  difference  being  that  he  feels  himself  rather 
less  strong  in  walking,  and  that  he  consents  to  give  up 
reading,  outing,  and  all  that  can  fatigue  or  excite. 

You  are  most  kind  about  Chiswick,  but  no.  My 
great  wish  is  our  house  in  London,  and  then  to  go  to  all 
your  Palazzi  and  abroad  again  if  necessary. 

Frederick  Cadogan  sings  like  an  angel.  The  girls, 
admirable  artists  and  good  girls,  seem  perfectly  happy. 
Potemkin  and  Lambruschini  called  to  say  that  the 
Duchesse  de  Leuchtenberg  l  was  extremely  anxious  to 
make  our  acquaintance.  The  lawless  distich  came 
into  my  head  :  '  The  devil  take  Hyde  and  the  Bishop 
beside,'  but  go  I  did,  to  make  Granville's  excuses,  robe 
montante  sans  ceremonie.  I  found  a  little  woman  with 
long  fair  curls  and  red  velvet  cloak,  trimmed  with 
magnificent  fur.  If  you  wish  to  see  her  plainer,  take 
Princesse  Theodore  de  Bauffremont  and  Mme.  de 
Courval,  mix  them  in  equal  proportions,  and  take  care 
not  to  drop  any  of  the  dignity  and  high  breeding  of  the 

1  Daughter  of  the  Emperor  Nicholas.     Her  husband  was  the  son  of 
Eugene  Beauharnais. 


1843  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  345 

one  or  the  brusque  familiar  garrulity  of  the  other. 
Very  civil  to  me,  taking  my  hand,  asking  after  you  and 
dying  to  go  to  England.  I  think  her  a  very  amusing, 
charming  little  autocrate.  Her  life  is  very  Eussian  ;  she 
sight- sees  from  the  dawn  of  day,  goes  to  bed  mean- 
whiles,  dresses  in  a  robe  de  chambre  for  dinner  and  goes 
to  bed  immediately  after.  She  has  three  maids,  who 
are  waited  upon  by  seven  housemaids.  When  Marie 
was  introduced  to  her,  she  said,  '  Who  are  you  ? ' 
Marie,  almost  choked  by  her  quarters,  did  not  answer, 
upon  which  she  reiterated,  '  But  what's  your  name  ?  ' 

The  joke  about  the  Torlonia  marriage  is  that  they 
have  put  the  old  capital  upon  a  new  column,  Princi- 
pessa  Alessandro  Torlonia,  nata  Colonna. 

We  have  a  new  great  pleasure.  Signor  Moroni, 
Marie's  singing  master,  plays  divinely,  and  her  lessons 
in  the  evening  are  little  concerts  and  make  variety 
without  ceremony. 

Hayes  is  charming  with  a  passing  curtsey — '  Very 
pleasant  on  the  Pinch  this  morning,  Milady.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Borne :  January  10,  1843. 

I  wish  I  could  help  writing  to  you  so  often,  my 
dearest  brother,  but  how  is  it  possible  ?  It  is  not 
merely  my  gratitude  for  your  letters,  my  avidity  for 
more ;  it  is  the  positive  delight  of  receiving  them, 
accompanied  with  a  longing  to  answer,  ask,  and  talk, 
which  it  is  the  peculiar  charm  of  your  letters  to  give. 

Scene :  The  long  drawing-room,  three  fire-places 
blazing,  which  made  Granville  and  myself,  sitting  by 
one  of  them  in  two  arm-chairs,  very  comfortable  in  spite 
of  the  intense  cold  of  the  weather.  Heyday  !  What  is 
this  ?  Clatter,  shake.  We  rush  to  the  window.  A 
violent  storm,  large  hail-stones,  thunder-claps  and  vivid 
flashes  of  lightning.  The  door  opens,  and  Kulbach,  with 


346     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

December  26  in  his  hand,  and  what  a  moment  for  it ! 
and  how  we  did  enjoy  it  back  in  our  arm-chairs !  I 
have  since  read  it  again  and  again  and  once  more  to 
Granville.  You  give  us  such  new  lights  and  objects. 
We  have  scarcely  seen  any  of  the  pictures  and  statues 
you  mention. 

Poor  Mme.  Zavadowska  !  She  has  just  lost  her  son, 
her  only  child  I  believe,  at  Naples.  I  have  only  heard 
the  sad  event ;  nothing  about  her  since  she  left  Eome 
many  weeks  ago. 

Think  what  a  comfort  it  is  to  have  our  quiet  and 
far  niente,  where  il  suffit  de  regarder  pour  s'instruire. 
The  Tasso  oak  is  utterly  destroyed,  the  Colonna  pine 
one  half  blown  down.  We  are  going  immediately  to 
Monte  Mario.  Oh,  the  Priorata  di  Malta  !  and  the  view 
of  St.  Peter  from  the  Pamfili !  Fullerton  is  going  with- 
out loss  of  time  to  the  palm  trees,  and  Granville  means 
to  walk  the  first  fine  day  in  the  cloisters  of  Santa  Maria 
degli  Angeli.  We  shall  turn  our  attention  that  way 
and  to  the  pictures  and  statues  by  degrees,  piano, 
pianino.  Fullerton  adores  St.  Pietro  di  Montorio. 
We  have  only  driven  to  the  green  before  it,  drinking 
in  its  glorious  universal  view.  We  have  been  to 
the  Villa  Albani,  not  within  it,  but  the  garden  is 
delightful. 

Charteris  dined  here  yesterday  for  the  last  time. 
We  shair  miss  him  very  much.  He  goes  to-day  to 
Naples. 

I  went  to  Stordogni  yesterday,  and  saw  the  lovely 
little  cast  of  Gibson's  '  Psyche.'  I  have  ordered  one  for 
you.  Gibson  has  made  six  of  the  last  groups,  and 
Torlonia  has  one  and  the  Grand  Duke  of  Eussia 
another.  The  novelties  here  are  now  things  made  from 
designs  by  Michel  A.ngelo  Gaetani,1  and'  said  to  be  equal 
to  Benvenuto  Cellini,  which  I  much  doubt.  There  are 

1  Brother  of  the  Duca  de  Sermoneta. 


1843  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  347 

leaf-openers,  one  an  angel,  another  a  devil.  Castellan! 
makes  them  in  silver  for  a  hundred  francs  each.  Being 
penurious,  I  am  going  to  present  myself  with  one  of 
each  in  bronze.  The  original  casts  are  at  a  German 
sculptor's,  whom  it  is  a  pleasure  to  employ.  He  had 
been  one  of  the  cleverest  and  most  famous  here,  but 
from  domestic  calamities  has  fallen  into  great  distress. 
And  who  should  he  be  but  the  very  Eohrich  you 
name  in  your  letter.  His  rulers,  merely  a  bas-relief, 
are  said  to  be  beautiful.  Fullerton  tears  his  hair — he 
ought  not,  for  it  is  growing  scarce — over  one  Lady 
Davy  had  bought.  Castellani  has  also  made  the  bell 
that  is  in  Eaphael's  picture  of  Leo  X.  Lord  Cadogan 
has  bought  one  of  Eohrich  in  gun  metal.  Then  there 
is  Ariosto's  inkstand,  which  Mr.  Fullerton  loves,  but 
some  say  it  is  not  a  very  pretty  one.  The  great  work 
of  modern  art  began  and  talked  of  is  ImhofTs  '  Agar.' 
Ask  Charteris  about  it  when  he  has  the  happiness  of 
seeing  you. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Borne  :  January  16,  1843. 

I  have  an  irresistible  wish  to  write  to  you,  dearest 
brother,  because  I  cannot  vent  myself  to  anybody  who 
quite  understands  me,  and  I  think  you  will.  Little  Till 
is  dead  after  two  days  of  very  great  suffering.  The 
servants  are  all  in  tears ;  everybody  was  fond  of  him. 
You  do  not  know  what  a  pleasure  is  gone  out  of  our 
days.  We  had  made  him  such  a  pet,  amusement  and 
companion,  that  we  shall  miss  him  more  than  I  can  say. 
They  are  all  sorry,  but  nobody  can  quite  enter  into  my 
feeling  about  it,  and  my  great  object  is  to  hide  it.  He 
is  linked  with  so  many  thoughts  and  moments,  and  I 
had  such  a  pleasure  in  seeing  what  a  very  great  amuse- 
ment he  was  to  Granville.  There  never  was  such  an 
little  creature. 


348     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

And  then  the  very  thing  of  not  being  able  to  make 
anyone  understand,  and  therefore  endeavouring  to  sup- 
press how  very  much  I  am  grieved  about  it,  makes  it 
worse.  Pray  do  not  answer  this ;  I  write  it  only  for 
my  own  comfort,  and  I  have  the  conviction  that  you 
will  entirely  understand  what  is  reason  and  what  is 
folly.  Believe  me. 

It  is  odd  that  writing  this  has  enabled  me  to  appear 
what  I  wish  to  be. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome  :  January  20,  1843. 

It  is  very  odd.  I  felt,  when  I  last  wrote,  ashamed 
of  being  so  sorry,  afraid  of  being  thought  to  have  been, 
which  I  was,  crying  all  day,  and  I  have  been  comforted 
by  the  excessive  kindness  and  sympathy  people  have 
shown. 

I  am  happy  to  tell  you  that  Granville  and  Georgy 
are  both  well,  and  that  to-day  we  have  a  day  that  can 
hardly  be  surpassed  by  any  day  in  the  year  anywhere — 
soft,  warm,  nothing  cold,  nothing  oppressive,  too 
delicious.  Monte  Mario  was  in  glorious  beauty,  seen 
by  Body,  Granville,  and  myself  for  the  first  time. 
Hayes,  a  fling,  pointed  out  a  snow  mountain.  '  Is  that 
in  Italy,  Milady  ? ' 

The  yellow-berried  ivy,  clustering  over  a  tall  tomb 
near  that  of  Cecilia  Metella,  is  beautiful.  Ask  Paxton 
what  is  the  Chysocarpia  he  mentions  in  his  dictionary 
as  Indian  under  the  head  of  '  Edera.'  This  is  said  to  be 
from  Greece.  Is  it  not  the  same  ? 

Charteris  writes  to  me  from  Naples  that  it  is  as 
odious  as  Eome  is  charming.  Twenty  degrees  warmer, 
but  very  relaxing.  The  town  Birmingham.  Storms 
raging  at  sea,  society  raging  on  land  in  all  its  gossip 
and  scandal.  Lord  Cantelupe  the  Apollo  of  the  place  ; 
four  ladies  so  in  love  that  he  cannot  tear  himself. 


1843  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  349 

away.      Mesdames    Palfi.    and    Hatzfeldt    among    the 
number. 

The  Levesons  heard  Clara  Novello  last  night  at 
the  Opera,  in  the  'Puritani.'  Nothing  ever  equalled 
the  furor  of  applause,  wreaths,  nosegays.  She  was 
dragged  home  in  a  car,  all  surrounded  by  people  with 
torches. 

And   this  is  all  I  can  think  of.     Tenderest  love  to 
Freddy. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE, 

Borne :  February  1843. 

Most  dear  brother, — Glorious  summer  almost  is 
come.  Granville  is  well.  The  Corso  in  full  force,  but 
I  have  taken  the  opportunity,  was  in  bed  all  yesterday, 
and  am  now  only  just  able  to  get  up. 

Monsignor  Spada,  a  great  friend  of  mine,  who  has 
got  us  orders  and  permissions  without  end,  would  expire 
of  joy  if  his  friend  the  sous-secretaire  could  obtain 
what  is  written  on  the  card.1  1  know  not  if  the  thing  is 
easy.  I  think  it  rather  an  audacious  demand,  but  the 
manner  made  it  suppliant. 

The  Grand  Duchess  is  come  back.  She  has  affronted 
the  Neapolitans  by  her  odd  sayings.  To  the  Duchess 
de  Montebello,  '  Is  your  father  an  Englishman  ?  is  he  a 
gentleman  ? '  This  last  shot  to  the  '  nata  Jenkinson,' 
doubly  primed.  Charteris  is  waiting  at  Lady  Anne 
Anson's  feet.  He  has  written  to  his  father  for  his 
consent.  They  say  such  love  was  never  seen.  The 
Normanbys  are  in  high  spirits  and  he  looks  quite 
well,  and  what  pleases  me  to  see,  they  appear 
extremely  fond  of  each  other.  They  dine  here  again 
to-day  and  go  to  Naples  to-morrow.  We  have  the 
Chesterfields,  Paul  Esterhazy  and  Alfred  Montgomery 
to  meet  them.  The  Carnaval  rages.  Georgy  is  the 

1  For  admission  and  entertainment  at  Chatswortk. 


350     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

most  Amazonian  of  women  ;  Lady  Chesterfield's  balcony 
is,  however,  desperate  also.  Lords  Chesterfield,  Cante- 
lupe,  Leveson,  Esterhazy,  Fullerton,  and  F.  Cadogan 
have  ordered  a  car,  and  there  are  to  be  great  doings  on 
Thursday. 

I  cannot  tell  you  how  much  I  rejoice  the  winter  is 
over.  I  have  not  talked  of  it,  but  I  cannot  say  how 
trying  I  have  thought  the  climate. 

Mme.  Potemkin's  fancy  ball  .for  the  Grand  Duchess 
on  Saturday  is  to  be  tres  anime.  Marie  goes  in  a 
Tyrolese  peasant's  dress,  given  her  by  her  mother. 
Lady  Chesterfield,  Georgy,  and  the  Cadogans  powdered, 
Louis  XIV.  Our  men  sup  at  the  Prince  of  Hesse's  this 
evening. 

I  have  a  small  oil  picture  of  Till  by  Buckner,  but  it 
makes  me  miserable  to  look  at  it.  It  was  painted  after 
his  death.  Leveson  had  agreed  to  have  him  done  as  a 
cadeau  to  us,  the  very  day  that  the  poor  little  dog's 
dead  body  was  carried  to  him,  and  do  you  know 
that  the  other  dogs  (Leveson's  and  Kulbach's)  who 
saw  the  helper  in  the  house  carry  out  the  body,  flew 
at  him  for  three  days  after  with  quite  alarming 
fury  ? 

Lord  Chesterfield's  hounds  have  arrived. 

-To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome :  March  3,  1843. 

What  can  I  say,  how  begin,  how  end  ?  I  wait,  best 
and  kindest  of  brothers,  to  tell  you  all  that  your  gift l 
bestows.  Granville's  delight  is  to  alarm  me,  to  tell 
me  that  it  is  still  uncertain,  that  the  Eeverend  may 
be  taken  ill  and  be  unable  to  start.  We  drove  yes- 
terday to  meet  the  hounds  on  the  Ponte  Motte,  and  we 
did  peep  into  the  carriages  and  wonder  over  return 
horses. 

1  The  Duke  made  them  a  present  of  another  dog. 


1843  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  351 

4th. — We  have  had  torrents  of  rain,  and  this 
morning  a  fall  of  snow.  We  see  in  the  papers  that 
between  Calais  and  Paris  there  has  been  forty  feet 
depth  of  snow.  Oh  !  brother,  brother,  E.  E.  E.  and  his 
precious  freight !  Everything  is  prepared.  Darling 
Till's  basket  new  lined,  and  a  new  red  collar,  which  he 
had  only  worn  half  a  dozen  times.  His  name  is  to  be 
Tiber.  Leveson  says  a  famous  breed  ought  to  carry  the 
first  letter  on. 

I  will  try  and  divert  my  thoughts.  Lady  Powers- 
court  is  still  pretty,  but  altered,  I  am  told,  the  resplen- 
dency gone.  They  dine  here  to-morrow.  Her  draw- 
back is  that  she  loves  to  sing  with  no  voice  at  all,  and 
without  the  slightest  knowledge  of  music,  but  the  piano- 
forte she  reluctantly  leaves.  Mrs.  Elliston  is  said  to  look 
wonderfully  young  and  well.  Kitty  Oranmore  is  the  best 
creature  going,  just  like  she  was,  only  a  most  luxuriant 
wig  of  innumerable  ringlets,  put  on  with  as  little  pre- 
tension as  a  bonnet,  fidgets  the  beholder.  Miss  Browne 
appears  to  be  a  very  agreeable,  clever  girl.  They  are 
miserable  just  now,  because  their  youngest  son  and 
brother  Henry,  a  beautiful  boy,  is  on  the  eve  of  engag- 
ing himself  to  a  young  lady,  who  is  very  handsome, 
older  than  him,  a  case  of  desperate  love  on  both  sides. 
They  say  she  is  perdue  de  reputation  ;  he  says  she  is  a 
wronged  angel.  Kitty  hopes  his  uncle  the  Bishop  of 
Tuam  will  carry  him  off  by  force.1 

I  wish  you  had  just  seen,  as  I  have  in  my  drive, 
the    mountains   round    the    Campagna   covered    with 
snow,  the  sun  gleaming  on  them.     '  But  where  is  Mr. 
Ehodes  ? ' 

7th. — The  Careme  has  brought  quiet;  our  people 
are  gone  to  drink  tea  with  Latour  Maubourg. 

I 1  th  — Great   news.     Backhouse  has  had  a  letter 
from  Mr.  E.  E.  on  the  road.     He  expects  him  to-day  or 

1  They  did  not  marry,  and  he  died  the  next  year. 


352     LETTERS   OF  HAERIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE     1843 

to  morrow,  and  desires  to  find  him  deux  lits  de  maitre. 
We  think  one  must  be  for  Tiber. 

Everything  is  prepared,  and  a  small  negress  to  wait 
upon  him  and  teach  him  all  Till's  tricks,  of  which  she 
is  perfectly  mistress.  This  negress,  born  at  Herrnsheim, 
by  name  Seppia,  is  a  half-sister  of  Yar's,  jet  black,  very 
small  and  short-haired.  A  German  would  say  of  her 
that  she  has  threads  in  her  hands,  sees  the  wind  go 
down  the  street  and  hears  the  flies  when  they  cough. 
I  quote  from  memory,  so  I  may  be  inaccurate.  Her 
voice,  manner,  and  shape  exactly  like  Till's.  We  are 
extremely  fond  of  her,  but  she  is  not  possible  as  a 
constant  companion,  as  a  drawing-room  favourite,  or 
ever  to  be  trusted  when  strangers  are  by.  She  is,  to 
begin  with,  like  a  little  hyena.  There  is  something  in- 
credibly vicious  and  malicious  in  the  way  she  turns  up 
her  nose  and  shows  her  teeth,  when  anybody  but 
Granville  or  myself  speaks  to  her,  and  she  is  then, 
alas !  so  incorrigibly  dirty  in  her  habits.  We  hope, 
that  as  Tiber's  maid,  she  may  learn  sweetness  and 
decorum. 

We  had  the  Oranmores  the  other  evening,  and  I 
never  saw  people  so  pleased,  especially  as  she  had 
with  her  the  youngest  son,  listening  attentively  to 
Marie,  while  Miss  C.  was  warbling  to  a  party  at  the 
Villa  Strozzi,  which  I  am  told  she  does  like  a  night- 
ingale. 

12th. — I  write  to-day  under  the  influence  of  con- 
tinual rain  dropping  on  my  spirits,  and  everything 
would  seem  dim  if  I  had  not  the  happiness  of  seeing 
my  dearest  Granville  continue  so  well  in  spite  of  it. 

I  heard  from  Eobert  Verity  yesterday  of  Lady 
William  Bentinck  '  having  been  struck  with  paralysis, 
her  case,  inflammation  of  the  head,  having  been  mis- 
taken for  nearly  two  months.  We  have  now  just  a 
faint  glimmering  of  hope.'  I  have  a  very  affectionate 


1843  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  353 

regard  for  her,  and  what  a  loss  her  unbounded  kind- 

c 

ness  will  be  to  hundreds ! 

Charteris  has  written  to  Paul  Esterhazy  to  desire 
him  to  contradict  the  report  of  his  marriage. 

We  went  yesterday  to  see  the  petit  St.  Andre  du 
Noviciat  de  Jesus,  eglise  qui  est  un  chef  d'ceuvre  de  minia- 
ture et  de  bon  gout,  except  some  sprawling  figures  of 
angels  and  saints,  white,  stuck  about  the  ceiling.  It  is 
one  of  the  tre  capi  d  opera  de  ce  pays-ci. 

Among  the  arrivals  at  Meurice's  Hotel  in  '  Gali- 
gnani's,'  the  Eev.  E.  Rhodes  and  H.  Gossip.  Dicky 
Gossip  is  the  man,  deny  it  if  you  can,  who  takes  care 
of  the  small  son  of  Boney.  Unless  the  charms  of  Paris 
are  irresistible,  they  must  be  here  in  a  minute. 

I  believe  Lady  Cowley's  unpopularity  to  be  chiefly 
with  those  who  are  offended  by  her  reforms  in  society, 
which  all  tell  me  have  been  very  great  improvements. 
She  is  a  hundred  times  a  better  ambassadress  than  I 
was,  perhaps  a  more  stormy  blowen. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Rome :  March  14,  1843. 

It  must  have  astonished  Mons  Sacer  to  see  the 
hunt — exactly  like  Epping,  I  am  told. 

21st. — A  long  pause,  during  which  I  have  received 
your  long  and  most  interesting  letter.  I  think  I  have 
little  to  record  beside  the  Duke  of  Manchester's  death 
on  Saturday.  He  suffered  severely  for  two  days,  but  I 
have  not  any  exact  idea  of  what  his  complaint  was. 

All  the  accounts  from  Trentham  interest  me,  but 
principally  the  general  opinion  of  the  Duke's  good 
health,  next  the  beauties  of  the  garden.  There  is  no 
saying  how  true  it  is,  '  How  much  more  I  shall  like 
everything  with  my  Eoman  eyes  ! '  I  feel  a  remem- 
brance of  many  things  in  England  vivid  and  enchant- 
ing, which  I  never  had  observed  till  I  saw  things  here. 

VOL.  II.  A  A 


354     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1843 

Your  political  news  is  devoured  by  Granville. 
Charteris  has  left  Naples  and  there  are  many  reports. 
He  will  be  in  London  before  this  letter,  so  Freddy  at 
least  will  know  all  about  it.  We  are  all  well,  inhaling 
spring,  and  Georgy  up  and  down  again,  to  the  tops  of 
steeples  and  galleries  and  bottoms  of  catacombs  and 
excavations.  We  have  been  to  see  the  beautiful  little 
church  of  Santa  Vittoria,  with  Bernini's  statue  of  Santa 
Teresa,  full  of  feeling  and  affectation.  Our  walks  and 
drives  are  now  enchanting.  Flowers  and  trees  all  think- 
ing of  bursting  out.  And  my  brother  has  sent  us  such 
a  live  plaything,  such  an  enchanting,  coaxing  little  dog. 
Leveson  and  George  started  at  seven  this  morning  for 
Naples.  On  the  28th  Marie  goes  from  hence  to  meet 
them  at  Civita  Vecchia,  and  Granville  and  I  meditate 
going  there  also  to  see  them  embark. 

Granville  says  we  shall  be  in  about  a  week  at 
Florence,  whither  next  I  know  not.  The  slow,  lingering, 
dawdling  journey,  in  delicious  weather,  a  doctor  with 
us,  Tiber  in  the  travelling  basket,  the  Fullertons  on 
and  about,  the  point  de  vue  home.  Nothing  can  be 
more  delightful  to  me  than  the  prospect. 

Everybody  we  know  well  gone  or  going — Mrs. 
Huskisson,  Morleys,  Normanbys,  Lord  Glenelg,  Mr. 
Hay,  Chesterfields,  Powerscourts,  Castellanes,  Odiers. 
We  have  little  beyond  Cadogans,  Lady  Davy  and  Mr. 
Bentinck,1  Lady  Frederick's  son,  who  dines  with  us 
to-morrow.  The  Italian  part  of  the  society  is  breaking 
up.  Those  we  know  best,  Dorias  and  Chigis,  are  over- 
whelmed with  the  sudden  death  of  Dona's  sister,  wife 
of  the  eldest  Chigi,  leaving  seven  children,  only  thirty, 
scarcely  supposed  to  be  ill. 

1  The  Bight  Hon.  George  Cavendish  Bentinck. 


1843  TO   THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  355 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome  :  March  24,  1843. 

Here  am  I  at  my  writing  table,  Marie  packing  up 
with  vehemence,  as  Leveson  is  gone  to  Naples  to  meet 
her  at  Civita  Vecchia  on  Wednesday,  where  they 
embark  for  Genoa  on  the  first  instance.  Georgy  and 
Mr.  G.  F.  Bentinck  talking  Church  architecture  over 
their  cups — of  tea ;  Granville  uncommonly  well,  dis- 
cussing the  affairs  of  the  Scotch  Church  with  Calcraft, 
and  Fullerton  by  the  fire,  and  in  a  large  basket,  new 
lined  with  a  handsome  chintz,  the  little  darling,  en- 
gaging delicate  Tiber,  who  is  the  greatest  love  that  \vas 
ever  seen. 

Direct  your  next  letter  to  Florence.  We  talk  of 
setting  out  on  the  10th  arid  remaining  some  days  there. 
What  paper  you  write  on  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to 
me.  When  thin  I  insinuate  a  sheet  between  your 
pages,  which  gives  immediate  solidity  to  the  hand  and 
facility  to  the  eye. 

The  whole  account  of  Nice  amused  us  beyond 
measure.  The  balance  is,  I  think,  decidedly  in  favour 
of  Nice  as  to  pleasure  and  enjoyment,  Eome  as  to 
attraction  and  moments  of  gasping  for  breath  delight. 
It  is  so  difficult.  Place  all  for  the  latter,  but  their 
accidental  circumstances  all  for  former.  Yourself  (were 
you  ever  called  an  accidental  circumstance  before  ?) 
living  in  the  country  instead  of .  in  the  middle  of  a 
town,  the  sea,  German  backgammon,  Freddy,  the 
novelty  of  Italian  scenery,  cactus  hedges,  olive  groves, 
flowers,  sun.  Here  the  sort  of  nameless  dreamy  charm, 
the  views  of  Eome  from  the  different  heights,  the  in- 
comparable fineness  of  fine  days,  the  populace,  the  bits 
and  corners,  le  mura  e  i  sassi,  your  letters,  Tiber's 
arrival.  Sum  up  and  throw  in  first  and  foremost 
Granville's  immeasurable  preference  for  Nice. 

A  A  a 


356     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

Seppia  is  Var,  beautifully  made,  swift  as  the  wind, 
and  her  habitual  attitude  debout.  Her  residence  is 
upon  Granville's  great  coat  and  cloak,  where  she  waits 
for  the  rapturous  hour  of  going  out,  when  she  runs 
after  the  carriage  all  the  way  ;  Tiber  only  getting  out 
with  us  when  we  walk,  or  by  the  great  King,1  when  we 
sit  and  look  on.  I  wish  you  could  hear  Granville, 
Body,  and  him  conversing  at  this  moment,  or  see  him 
when  he  calls  us  in  the  morning.  He  begins  to  know 
us  all  in  different  relations.  All  the  most  coaxing 
tender  ways  with  Granville ;  pert  to  Body ;  hates 
Kulbach  because  of  the  spoonful  of  castor  oil  the 
morning  after  his  journey. 

I  did  not  comment  on  Lady  Morley,  because  she  is 
the  one  least  to  admit  of  discussion.  She  seems  good 
and  sensible  and  has  an  excellent  manner  with  him. 

To  THE  DUKE  os  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome  :  March  31,  1843. 

My  dear  Grace, — Would  that  I  could  write  like 
you  or  Dickens !  How  either  of  you  would  do  justice 
to  yesterday,  the  most  dramatic  day  I  ever  passed ! 

At  half-past  eleven,  as  usual,  we  went  out,  and  our 
first  business  was  to  leave  two  invitations  for  Messrs. 
Ehodes  and  Gossip  to  dinner  on  Monday. 

From  thence  we  went  to  Gibson's  and  found  him  at 
home.  He  said  he  seldom  made  busts,  hating  to  do 
them,  but  that  he  wished  to  show  us  one  he  had  just 
finished  for  Lord  Kilmorey.  Grazia,  the  famous 
model,  a  Eoman  peasant.  We  climbed  up  a  narrow 
ladder  into  his  workroom,  and  beautiful  the  bust  is. 
On  turning  my  head,  I  saw  close  to  me  an  immense 
mass  of  terra  cotta.  I  felt  puzzled,  and  my  thoughts 
went  quick.  In  a  niche  near  the  summer  parlour  at 
Chiswick — Duke  of  Sussex — the  Emperor  .Yitellius. 

1  The  chasseur,  whose  name  was  Charlemagne. 


1843  TO   THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  357 

Lady  G. :  Mr.  Gibson,  who  is  this  ?  It  is  im- 
possible, but  if  it  was  not,  I  should  say  it  was  Mr.  - 

Mr.  Gibson :  Eeeston  Ehodes,  Lady  Granville.  It  is 
a  very  remarkable  head. 

Lady  G.  :  It  is  a  very  fine  bust,  only  I  could  never 
have  believed  when  I  saw. 

Gibson  :  No,  one  would  not.  He  is  a  very  remark- 
able man ;  he  comes  with  his  pockets  full  of  his  own 
poetry,  and  he  reads  aloud  to  me  while  I  work.  Some 
of  it  appears  good,  but  there  is  a  great  quantity  of  it. 

We  drove  to  the  Villa  Borghese.  As  we  turned 
out  of  the  Gate  del  Popolo,  our  coachman  drove  us 
rapidly  up,  contra  le  mura,  to  avoid  the  shock  of  the 
black  carriage  horses,  harness,  pole  and  all,  who  were 
coming  plunging  and  dashing  through  the  Borghese 
Gate. 

We  drove  on  anxious.  On  the  top  of  the  hill  a 
crowd  was  gathered,  increasing  every  moment.  We 
stopped.  The  beautiful  Mme.  Crisi,  as  pale  as  death, 

told  us  she  had  seen  a  terrible  accident — a  carriage 

~ 

overturned,  a  woman  she  believed  to  be  English  thrown 
out  and  dangerously  hurt. 

Soon  after  Prince  Borghese  and  Colonel  Caldwell 
came  to  us.  The  lady  was  supposed  to  be  dying,  her 
spine  hurt,  and  she  quite  senseless. 

At  this  moment  emerged  from  the  crowd,  some- 
thing Johnsonian,  pastoral,  something  I  felt  I  knew, 
but  could  not  immediately  put  a  name  to.  My  dear 
brother,  poor  Mr.  Reeston  Ehodes,  in  a  large  white 
straw  hat,  his  hands  bleeding  and  terribly  nervous. 
He  had  met  with  a  family  of  intimate  friends,  the 
Empsalls,  from  somewhere  near  Doncaster.  He  had 
asked  this  poor  lady  to  drive  with  him,  her  three 
daughters  following  in  her  carriage.  The  accident 
happened,  and  she  was  thrown  out  into  a  ditch,  and  he, 
with  his  immense  weight,  upon  her.  Doctor  Kipoch 


358     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

came ;  she  was  put  into  a  litter,  and  we  took  him 
home. 

To-day  the  poor  lady  is  pronounced  not  quite  out 
of  danger.  Mr.  Ehodes  has  had  leeches  applied,  and, 
although  shook,  is  not  in  any  way  damaged. 

He  showed  much  feeling  during  our  drive  home, 
did  not  know  how  ill  she  was,  yet  much  alarmed  about 
her,  mixed  with  much  oddity.  '  No  Torlonia  to-night. 
I  am  an  unfortunate  man.  I  tumbled  out  of  the 
rumble  the  day  before  I  reached  Florence.  Poor  Mrs. 
Empsall,  I  am  sure  it  is  nothing  serious.  I  have  made 
my  will  a  short  time  ago  and  have  left  your  brother  a 
diamond  snuff-box,  as  a  testimony  of  gratitude  and 
admiration  for  his  noble  character.  I  have  hurt  the 
muscle  of  my  thigh.' 

My  next  letter  will  contain  an  account  of  Monday's 
dinner. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Rome  :  April  15,  1843. 

My  dearest  brother, — I  sing  Tiber.  There  never  was 
such  a  darling.  Beautiful  I  think,  caressing,  soft,  help- 
less, and  yet  with  a  spice  of  the  family  temper,  which 
prevents  insipidity.  Desperate  volitions  exerted  with 
the  utmost  gentleness,  a  quiet  little  fury  now  and  then. 
Oh  !  there  never  was  such  a  love  of  a  dog.  You  know 
that,  from  our  peculiarity  of  our  never  letting  our  little 
Blenheims  out  of  our  sight  they  have  immense  advantages. 
We  do  not  attempt  education ;  all  our  care  goes  to  health, 
and  the  success  is  perfect.  He  is  plumping  up,  his  coat 
glossy,  his  paws  beginning  to  flounce  and  furbelow,  his 
cough  gone.  I  took  him  to  Gott,  who  said  as  Gibson 
had  done,  '  What  a  beautiful  little  dog,  exactly  like  one 
his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  had  here  ! '  'He  gave 
it  me.'  '  Do  I  see  Lady  Granville  ? ' 

Brother,  you  will  be  jealous,  you  must  expect  it ;  he 


1843  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  359 

beats  them  all  hollow — much  more  like  Boney l  than  Till. 
No  accomplishments,  it  is  true,  but  such  quickness  of 
comprehension,  and  when  he  walks  with  us,  such  '  let 
observation  with  extensive  view.'  And  then  his 
beauty  where  he  is  in  action,  when  he  sees  a  lizard  on 
the  wall,  or  a  crow  in  the  heavens. 

When  you  receive  my  bits  of  Tasso's  oak,  give  the 
one  you  like  least  to  Charles  Percy,  who  wrote  me  a 
lament  on  the  fall  of  that  tree. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Florence  :  April  25,  1843. 

The  severities  of  spring  after  a  summer  journey  are 
so  great  here  that  we  all  feel  them  in  different  degrees. 

27th. — Since  which  sentence  I  have  been  in  bed  with 
cold  and  sore  throat,  and  extinction  de  voix.  Still  in 
that  retreat,  but  almost  well. 

Ehodes  detested  Tiber,  who  howled  and  squeaked 
all  the  way,  and  whenever  he  did  was  violently  shaken 
in  his  basket  by  the  Colossus.  When  they  reached 
Meurice's  Hotel,  no  Tiber.  Then  came  mental  agitation 
of  the  severest  sort.  '  I  thought  I  should  have  died  of 
it,  but  Monsieur  Meurice,  a  most  excellent  man,  kindly 
soothed  me  by  sending  off  a  messenger  to  Beauvais,' 
and  back  flowed  the  Tiber  to  his  uneasy  bed,  having 
preferred  the  inn  at  that  town,  where  he  was  found  com- 
fortably settled.  My  love  to  Var.2  What  a  dear  she 
must  be !  And  I  long  to  introduce  the  different  members 
of  the  family  to  each  other.  If  I  were  you,  I  should  cer- 
tainly buy  Boney  a.  wife.  What  is  to  become  of  us  if 
the  breed  fails  ?  Think  what  a  charm  even  the  illegiti- 
mate grandchildren  possess  !  I  only  wish  one  thing,  that 
you  could  see  Tiber  with  the  flies.  They  terrify  him, 
but  his  ways  with  them,  and  his  plunge  under  the  car- 

1  A  Blenheim.    Landseer  inserted  his  portrait  in  his  picture  of  th« 
poodle  in  the  character  of  a  Judge. 

a  A  descendant  of  Boney,  but  not  thoroughbred. 


360     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

riage  seat,  his  peeping  out  to  see  if  the  enemy  is  gone ! 
What  a  gift  you  have  bestowed  ! 

The  Hollands  have  a  delicious  house,  luxuriously 
furnished,  like  an  Eastern  tale  ;  parroquets  nodding  and 
curling  their  pea-green  heads,  nightingales  singing  in 
their  recesses,  galleries,  verandahs,  all  the  possibilities 
of  a  hot  climate,  not  available  now.  He  is  better,  but 
has  been  very  seriously  ill.  She  poorly,  and  much  out 
of  spirits.  They  are  much  occupied  with  Lady  Orford, 
and  her  daughter  Lady  Dorothy,1  the  prettiest,  most  cap- 
tivating little  creature  I  ever  beheld.  '  Fun  in  her  eye, 
and  mischief  in  all  her  thoughts.'  The  only  day  I  was 
out,  she  rode  up  to  me  with  General  Ellice,  hung  over 
with  flowers,  a  large  straw  hat  with  a  red  riband  round 
it,  and  a  bunch  of  peacock's  feathers  on  the  side  of  it. 
Her  habit  quite  open,  and  little  gauntlets,  to  be,  as  she 
said,  like  the  Life  Guards.  We  were  all  enchanted  with 
her. 

Our  plans  are  unfixed,  but  Turin  will  be  our  next 
gite. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Florence :  April  29,  1843. 

I  have  no  thoughts  of  going  yet,  but  I  think  it  will 
amuse  you  to  note  down  what  I  shall  have  forgotten  by 
the  time  I  send  this  letter.  After  all  that  had  passed, 
Georgy  was  curious  to  see  Lady  Douglas,  arid  she  and 
Granville  called  at  the  Hotel  de  1'Europe.  When  they 
were  announced,  there  came  out  to  meet  them,  in  an  old 
purple  pelisse,  with  her  hair  about  her  ears,  a  shabby, 
miserable-looking  woman.  She  received  Georgy  with 
the  most  affectionate  cordiality,  and  began  talking  of 
her  journey.  Presently  Douglas  appeared,  thin  and 
sallow,  but  looking  gayer  and  happier  than  they  had 
ever  seen  him.  By  degrees  Lady  D.'s  spirits  "rose,  and 
she  became  talkative,  animated,  and  evidently  exces- 

1  Now  Lady  Dorothy  Nevill. 


1843  TO   THE   DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  361 

sively  in  love  with  him,  and  he  extremely  kind  in  his 
manner  to  her.  Every  symptom  or  suspicion  of  royalty 
is  dropped  ;  no  splash  or  finery  of  any  sort.  But  you 
must  prepare  London  for  her  personal  appearance. 

May  2nd. — Georgy  has  been  all  morning  with  the 
Douglases,  and  says  he  is  very  much  in  love,  and  that 
they  are  as  happy  as  it  is  possible  to  be.  He  says,  '  I 
am  her  slave,'  and  she,  '  Oui,  il  fait  tout  ce  que  je 
veux.' 

Tiber  likes  Florence  very  much  indeed.  Yesterday 
the  Douglases  came  with  Mora  and  Aspin,  their  two  large 
spaniels,  to  call  on  Tiber,  which  with  Seppia  makes  a 
cheerful  little  society  for  him. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Florence  :  May  7,  1843. 

Your  letters  are  like  Oberon's  horn.  I  cannot  help 
dancing.  Josephe  Potocki  came  last  night,  and  with 
Paul  Esterhazy  entreats  to  be  put  under  your  feet. 
We  have  engaged  Pacifico,  the  Genoese  voiturier,  by 
which  means  we  shall  dine  in  the  middle  of  each  day, 
and  go  small  journeys. 

Genoa,  15th. — There  have  been  moments  and  views 
and  enjoyments  beyond  description,  but  you  know 
them  all.  Massa  Carrara !  Spezia,  where  -  we  slept, 
the  most  beautiful  of  all.  Then  we  travel  so  luxuriously 
and  slowly.  At  four  every  morning  Pater,  Kulbach, 
Tiber,  and  Seppia  set  off  in  the  fourgon.  At  nine, 
Granville,  Tiber,  and  I  in  the  landau,  G.  Stewart  and 
Dody  en  caleche,  Pullerton  and  the  doctor  in  a  coupe, 
Hayes  and  Bumpy,1  with  petit  Jean  on  the  box,  in  a  little 
voiture  du  pays. 

G.  will  have  unfolded  the  new  plan  of  Arqui  within 
two  days  of  this,  and  one  and  a  half  from  Turin, 
a  pause  of  at  least  ten  days,  I  hope.  Here  we  have 

1  Young  Granville  Fullerton. 


362     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

passed  the  hot  morning  in  the  Doria  garden,  and  charm- 
ing it  was. 

I  have  nothing  to  add  but  a  sketch  or  two.  A 
beggar  was  teasing  Bumpy,  per  carita,  pulling  his 
blouse,  not  to  be  shaken  off,  when  the  Fullertons  heard 
petit  Jean  say  in  Italian,  '  Don't  tease  him,  il  poverino  ; 
he  is  going  to  school ;  leave  him  in  peace.'  The  beggar 
stopped  and  presently  joined  in  full  chorus,  '  Oh,  il 
poverino ;  going  to  school;  il  poverino ,'  and  walked  away. 
Is  not  this  a  good  specimen  of  two  Italian  classes  ? 

I  took  a  most  beautiful  walk  with  G.  Stewart  at 
Spezia,  where  there  is  the  berceau  of  the  small  rose  fes- 
toons and  draperies — do  you  remember  it  ? — and  white 
round-headed  acacias.  We  came  close  to  the  sea,  and, 
to  our  utter  astonishment  and  envy,  in  walked  Tiber, 
perfectly  happy,  the  greatest  love,  not  liking  the  waves, 
but  not  deterred,  patting  and  trying  to  put  them  down 
with  his  little  satin  paws. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Arqui :  May  23,  1843. 

You  can  have  no  idea  of  the  pleasure  it  gives  us  to 
accept  your  proposal  of  Devonshire  House.  Thank  you 
a  thousand  times  for  that,  as  for  so  many  acts  of  kind- 
ness that  gild  our  life.  But  our  arrival  is  delayed  by 
our  delight  in  this  place.  We  all  like  it  better  than 
anything  of  the  kind  we  have  ever  seen.  Granville  has 
taken  the  second  mineral  water  this  morning,  and  begins 
the  mud  bath  for  his  leg  and  arm  to-morrow.  He  is 
very  well,  but  as  yet  the  light  air  and  perfect  repose  are 
the  only  remedies  we  have  had  time  to  judge  of.  There 
is  no  saying  how  much  *people  would  dislike  Arqui  who 
look  for  any  sort  of  dissipation ;  a  visit  from  the  Direc- 
teur  des  Bains,  a  remarkably  rough  little  carriage,  and 
about  a  dozen  invalids  from  the  environs  being  all  they 
could  command. 


1843  TO  THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  363 

I  think  Chiswick  an  incomparable  place,  enjoyed  on 
a  bad  day.  What  will  the  enchantment  of  the  folks  be 
on  a  fine  one  ! 

We  are  so  jealous  of  Yar's  accomplishments,  and 
with  some  remorse,  because,  had  not  Tiber  entirely  put 
Seppia's  nose  out  of  joint,  I  do  declare  she  could  have 
done  it  all.  She  has  immense  talent.  The  manager  of 
any  theatre  would  be  proud  to  engage  her  for  any  sum 
she  would  ask.  But  que  voulez-vous  ?  Tiber  is  so  gentil, 
so  full  of  natural  grace  and  attraction,  that  he  mono- 
polises our  affection,  and  will  not  learn  anything.  He 
delights  in  Arqui,  leaps  over  the  high  grass  like  a  kan- 
garoo, and  rushes  into  the  Bormida  Eiver  twenty  times 
a  day,  but  he  will  not  go  out  of  his  depth,  and  Georgy 
and  I  are  going  to  buy  a  duck  to  teach  him  to  swim. 
He  is  at  this  moment  romping  on  the  terrace  with 
Granville. 

Georgy  and  I  have  been  drinking  this  morning. 
Fuller  ton  asked  Baba  where  his  mama  was.  '  Oh,  in 
some  valley  with  grandmama,  where  they  will  stay 
babbling  all  day.'  God  bless  you. 

Mme.  de  Lieven  writes  :  '  J'ai  vu  ici  Miss  Gurney, 
merveilleuse  beaute  ;  elle  est  superbe.  La  Duchesse  de 
Talleyrand  est  ici,  tellement  belle  et  jeune  que  c'est 
fabuleux.  Le  jeune  de  Broglie  va  passer  trois  mois  en 
Angleterre.  La  Princesse  Clementine  y  va  aussi.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Arqui :  June  12,  1843. 

We  have  a  delicious  summer,  but  no  heat.  To-day 
might  be  the  tenth  of  April.  Poor  Seppia  has  the 
raging  distemper,  and  I  live  in  dread  of  Tiber's  having 
it.  I  never  told  you  that  I  could  never  get  them  vac- 
cinated at  Rome,  and  when  I  said  this  to  Evanson,  he 
said, '  No  more  could  Mrs.  Abdy  or  Lady  Eosa  Greville 
get  their  babies.'  I  had  yesterday  a  long  letter  from 


364     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANV1LLE     1843 

Mme.  de  Lieven.  Marie  Appony's  marriage  is  declared, 
and  they  go  immediately  after  it  to  Madeira,  Malaga, 
or  Palermo.  '  Mais  enfin  voila  un  mariage  dont  on  ne 
sait  que  dire.  La  mere  a  Tair  malheureux,  le  pere 
s'etourdit,  le  monde  s'etonne.  Marie  est  transported 
d'amour  et  de  joie.  Madame  Kodolphe  Appony  se  croit 
grosse ;  toute  la  famille  passe  1'ete  a  Paris.  La  Prin- 
cesse  Clementine  est  ravie  de  son  mari ;  cela  a  fait  une 
noce  tres  gaie  pour  tout  1'interieur.  La  Duchesse  de 
Nemours  se  rend  tres  accorte  et  aimable.  Mme.  de 
Caiaman,  helas !  reste  Mme.  de  Caraman,  ni  plus  ni 
moins — just  the  same.  Marie  Menzingen  au  comble  de 
la  joie  est  nommee  Dame  d'Honneur  de  la  Duchesse 
de  Nassau.  Very  well  off.  Cela  1'enchante ! ' 

We  read  about  Ireland  with  great  interest,  Evansoii 
representing  that  country.  George  Stewart  gets  into  a 
state  of  excitement  awful  to  behold.  Georgy  reads  us 
Mr.  Sheil's  speech,  as  Mile.  Eachel  would  say  it. 

How  I  shall  like  to  find  Freddy  at  Devonshire 
House  !  Is  there  any  law  ?  Perhaps,  as  nobody  will 
answer  my  question  as  to  his  sentimentality,  somebody 
will  about  his  legality. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Bivoli :  June  20,  1843. 

We  have  spent  three  days  luxuriously  at  Turin  in 
the  best  hotel  I  ever  was  in — large  rooms,  a  long  balcony 
looking  upon  that  perpetual  spectacle  the  Place,  endless 
processions  with  a  Jesuitical  luxe  and  tenue ;  puppet 
shows,  saltimbanques,  improvvisatori,  royal  equipages. 
Our  beds  and  food  were  exquisite  and  our  carriage  like 
a  long,  low  pony  chaise.  To-day  fine  weather,  the 
snowy  Alps,  blue  sky  and  fresh  green  too  beautiful,  not 
the  least  hot,  yet  with  all  windows  down. 

Poor  Seppia  died  at  Arqui  of  the  worst  sort  of  dis- 
temper. 


1843  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  365 

St.  Ambrosio. — Bumpy  on  a  balcony,  the  Turin 
roiturier  baiting  whilst  he  dines.  The  invisible  parents 
are  gone  to  walk,  I  suppose.  Dody  in  that  stone- 
coloured  Joseph,  buttoned  with  mother  of  pearl,  of 
which  Hayes  said,  '  I'll  tell  you  what,  my  lady,  if  you 
don't  leave  the  gown  off,  the  gown  will  leave  you  off.' 

We  are  all  rather  spoilt  and  think  this  inn  very 
deplorable  after  1'Univers,  but  we  owe  you  the  Arch, 
to  which  I  first  went  alone,  and  then  we  en  masse  after 
dinner.  It  is  beautiful,  as  perfect  an  antiquity  as  any  in 
the  Eternal  City,  and  the  bits  of  snow  mountains  and 
wooded  ones  between  make  it  unique  in  its  kind.  The 
wind  has  got  up  amazingly  and  we  expect  to  be  blown 
across  the  Mont  Cenis  to-morrow. 

Landau :  21st. 

Oh,  how  beautiful !  Glorious  morning,  wind  gone 
down,  but  quantities  of  fresh  air,  blue  and  gold  !  You 
see  it  all.  En  avant  Charlemagne  and  Tiber,  next  Evan- 
son  and  Pierre  with  butterfly  nets.  No  new  flowers  yet, 
only  the  common  ones,  but  bigger  and  brighter  than 
any  I  ever  saw.  L'Hospice  curious  and  bleak ;  the 
fineness  of  the  day  gives  it  beauty,  the  lake  looks  so 
blue  and  glittering.  Tell  the  Levesons  I  mourned 
over  Medor1  at  the  fifth  Eicovero.  Fullerton  careful 
over  his  large  gentians  and  small  beasts.  Nothing  new 
but  Dody  in  goggles.  Granville  looks  beautiful.  Here 
come  the  trout  and  beef-steaks.  Sans-le-Bourg,  an  ex- 
cellent inn,  and  all  of  us  as  prosperous  as  possible. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Lausanne  :  July  1,  1843. 

Your  letter  of  the  12th  made  me  happy  at  Geneva. 
I  trust  I  shall  find  you  quite  recovered  from  influenza 
and  hay.  Your  '  new  light '  amused  me  beyond  mea- 

1  Their  favourite  poodle,  who  had  been  run  over  at  this  spot. 


366     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1843 

sure.  One  does  forget  that  one  is  not  fifteen  in  moments 
of  excitement,  and  after  being  become  older,  larger, 
more  infirm  and  apathetic  at  Eome  than  I  have  words 
to  describe,  the  sulphur  baths  and  drink  at  Arqui  have 
so  renovated  me  that  I  am  obliged  to  recollect  I  am 
not  a  mountain  nymph,  and  to  be  hauled  back  to  this 
hotel  last  nightjar  example,  by  Eward's  strong  unaltered 
arm.  And  where  would  not  the  view  from  the  Terrace 
lead  one  ?  Geneva  was  less  pleasant  than  our  usual 
halts — rainy,  cold  weather,  like  March  in  England. 
Then  in  your  delightful  rooms  at  the  Couronne  the  view 
was  rendered  mil  by  a  thick  mist  and  the  height  made 
us  feel  somewhat  imprisoned.  I  heard  that  Mrs.  Craven 
was  at  the  Hotel  des  Etrangers. 

Oh,  what  rooms  at  the  Hotel  Gibbon !  *  After  a 
delicious  night's  rest  we  woke  upon  the  whole  oppo- 
site view  with  its  curtain  drawn  up.  Open  windows, 
summer,  but  no  heat. 

Continue  to  let  me  know  how  you  are.  Change  of 
air  for  ten  days.  You  get  this  on  the  6th,  put  on  your 
things,  as  women  say,  step  over  to  Baden,  where  on  the 
12th  we  hope  to  be,  take  a  peep  at  Herrnsheim  and 
steam  back  all  together  to  our  native  land.  I  cannot 
see  one  objection  or  obstacle,  and  what  .happiness  and 
delight  to  us  !  Think  and  leap.  I  have  told  Granville. 
He  is  all  on  my  side  and  did  look  so  pleased.  Why, 
brother,  it  is  little  more  than  railing  up  and  down  to 
Mundy  and  Co.2 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Berne  :  July  5,  1843. 

This  is  only  a  signe  de  vie.  Your  inimitable  sketch 
of  your  duties  at  Derby  alarms  me,  but  I  cannot  give  up 
my  hope. 

1  At  Lausanne.  *  Derbyshire  neighbours. 


1843  TO  THE   DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  367 

Since  we  parted  we  have  had  two  nights  of  a  fairy 
tale  in  the  new  Trois  Couronnes  on  the  lake  at  Yevay, 
too  enchanting.  A  magnifique  chateau  with  every  luxury 
and  comfort,  a  large  terrace  balcony,  with  seats,  tables, 
and  orange  trees,  overlooks  the  parterre,  and  then  with 
parapets  upon  steps  down  to  the  lake. 

Clifford  can  talk,  for  his  name  is  in  the  book. 
Divine  weather  made  the  halt  too  enjoyable. 

Granville  is  so  well  that  my  only  fear  is  you  will 
none  of  you  be  able  to  think  how  essential  the  utmost 
precaution  and  regularity  of  life  are  to  him. 

Granville,  Fullerton,  and  George  Stewart  are  going 
off  in  the  next  room  like  fireworks,  so  excited  are  they 
by  a  new  plan.  Instead  of  returning  here  we  are  going 
to  take  a  new  road  to  Basle,  from  Thun  to  Lucerne, 
which  the  Fullertons  have  never  seen.  The  road  said 
to  be  beautiful  and  the  inns  good.  From  Lucerne  to 
Basle  by  Soleure. 

Will  you  let  my  sister  know  my  gratitude  for  her 
little  letter  found  here  ?  But  still  happier  was  I  to  hear 
from  Lord  Seaford.  '  I  am  happy  to  tell  you  that  I 
think  Carlisle  has  been  regularly  improving  ever  since 
his  return  to  town.' 

We  are  very  sorry  that  Lord  Grey  is  so  ill. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Devonshire  House  :  August  1843. 

Granville  is  extremely  well.  The  Fullertons  crossed 
in  an  unexampled  gale,  but  are  all  the  better  for  it. 

Let  me  quickly  note  down  remarkable  things.  I 
have  seen  Mrs.  Edward  l  and  Mrs.  Charles.2  The  former 
so  distinguee  and  amiable-looking  that  it  does  as  well  as 
beauty,  and  Edward  so  happy  and  simplified. 

1  Mr.  Edward  Howard  had  just  married  Miss  Ponsonby. 

2  Mr.  Charles  Howard,  Miss  Alice  Parke,  daughter  of  Baron  Parke, 
created  in  1856  Lord  Wensleydale. 


368     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1843 

Tiber  is  quite  recovered,  only  rather  languid  and 
self-occupied. 

Duncannon  called  to-day,  I  think,  more  to  see  the 
staircase  than  me.  He  could  not  penetrate,  but  was  so 
edified.  He  says  it  will  be  admirable,  that  the  effect  of 
the  entrance-hall  was  what  he  doubted,  but  that  it  really 
answers  perfectly.  I  did  not  understand  this  exactly, 
but  perhaps  you  do.  What  was  the  doubt  ? 

I  have  seen  Lord  Blantyre,1  and  approve — hand- 
some, and  a  stern,  calm  uridazzled  glance  around  and 
down  his  new  position. 

We  see  less  of  Susy  than  we  could  wish,  as  dearest 
Elvers  waits  at  Windsor  in  a  peculiar  manner — that  is, 
he  is  always  in  town.2 

Sunday. — Too  late  for  the  post  yesterday,  and 
now  I  must  write.  Oh !  Chiswick !  dearest  brother, 
Chiswick  !  What  shall  I  say  ?  Chatsworth,  be  jealous. 
Charles  Greville,  who  overtook  us  at  Hammersmith 
and  ambled  on,  was  in  ecstasies.  He  had  not  been 
at  one  of  your  breakfasts ;  it  was  an  utter  surprise. 
He  said  he  never  saw  anything  so  pretty.  Then 
your  room !  The  carpets !  The  improvements  in 
the  garden,  the  walk  through  the  open  room  to  the 
Horticultural,  the  flowers,  the  perfect  enamel  of  the 
parterre,  the  pink  passion-flower  !  Landseer's  picture, 
Lord  Alfred  Paget !  3  Charles  Greville  fell  from  astonish- 
ment to  astonishment.  He  had  not  seen  Landseer  or 
anything.  *  God  bless  my  soul !  Have  you  seen  any- 
thing abroad  to  compare  with  Chiswick  ? ' 


1  Engaged  to  Lady  Evelyn  Leveson  Gower. 

2  He  was  a  Lord-in-Waiting. 

3  His  portrait,  painted  by  Sir  Francis  Grant. 


1843  TO   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  369 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  September  5,  1843. 

Dearest  brother, — You  are  a  benediction  to  us  all. 
Here  we  are  again  in  gratitude  and  clover.  London 
contains  only  Morpeth.  Even  Lady  Holland  is  at 
Eichmond. 

The  Carlisles  wish  Freddy  te>  go  to  them ;  we  long 
to  see  him ;  so  when  you  have  done  with  him  send 
him  on. 

Charles  l  is  composed,  I  hear  ;  lives  with  the  Parkes, 
and  is  going  to  Ampthill  with  them. 

Can  you  imagine  the  scene  at  Eu  ? 2  Louis  Philippe  ; 
how  he  will  bow  ! — roll  over  perhaps. 

To  TffE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Aldenham  :  September  27,  1843. 

Your  dear  welcome  letter  came  this  morning  all 
redolent  with  Chats  worth. 

Could  a  pair  be  a  housekeeper  ?  Would  there  be- 
any chance  in  applying  for  the  place  ? 

This  place  is  very  enjoyable.  A  large,  old-fashioned, 
square  stone  house,  made  by  Marie's  baguette  into  an 
uncommonly  pretty  one.  The  court,  roofed  in  by  Sir 
Richard  and  furnished  by  her,  makes  a  charming 
drawing-room,  and  there  i&  besides  a  library,  a  very 
good  dining-room  and  a  billiard-room.  The  pleasure 
ground  very  pretty,  the  country  round  uncommonly  so. 

Willie,3  to  which  we  drove  yesterday,  is  beautiful. 
The  house  frightful  on  the  outside,  enchanting  within, 
where  we  found  Miss  Selina  4  and  Lord  John  Manners  ; 
she  picturesque  and  with  charming  manners,  he  very 

1  Mr.  Charles  Howard  died  on  August  26. 
3  The  Queen's  visit  to  Eu. 

3  Lord  Forester's  country  house. 

4  Miss  Selina  Forester,  now  Lady  Bradford. 

VOL.  II.  B  B 


370     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANYILLE     1843 

smart.  They  looked  like  a  page  out  of  Finden's 
'  Sketches  of  the  Aristocracy ' — too  many  curls  and 
gold  chains,  but  very  pretty  to  see. 

Luttrel  and  Sneyd  are  here.  The  Poodle,  Spencer 
Cowper,  and  F.  Cadogan  went  yesterday. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Aldenham  :  October  26,  1843. 

We  intend  to  be  at  Devonshire  House  on  Wednesday, 
and  at  Brighton  on  Saturday.  Imagine  my  happiness 
at  the  Eivers's  having  decided  upon  spending  the  winter 
in  Kemp  Town. 

How  I  do  long  to  see  you  !  I  have  such  quantities 
to  say,  unwritable  things. 

The  Poodle  surpassed  himself.  He  is  incroyable ; 
asked  Marie  before  everybody :  '  How  could  she  be  so 
foolish  as  to  marry  such  a  child  ? '  One  day  :  '  He  had 
hoped  for  a  leg  of  mutton  ; '  another  :  '  Your  housemaids 
are  all  so  Gothic  ;  they  should  not  do  so  and  so.'  She 
bore  it  all  with  calm,  but  oh  !  her  indignation,  and  I 
must  say  natural.  She  is  very  amiable,  occasionally 
captivating,  une  sirene. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Kemp  :  November  29,  1843. 

It  is  delightful  of  you  to  have  written,  and  such  a 
letter  !  No,  never.  The  pleasure  of  reading  it  to  my- 
self, and  then  seeing  Granville  read  it. 

Yesterday,  summer  here  ;  to-day,  south-west  wind, 
not  sunny,  glass  at  fair ;  your  letter  in  my  hand,  all 
imagination  and  repose. 

This  morning  brought  me  a  letter  from  Lord  Lans- 
downe,  begging  me  to  take  rooms  at  the  Bristol  for 
him  and  Lady  Lansdowne,  Brodie  having  ordered  him 
here  again  immediately  to  be  shampooed.  I  must  go 


1843  TO  THE    DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  371 

and  wash  ray  hands,  as  they  are  coming  to  dinner. 
They  will  find  only  ourselves,  the  Fullertons,  and  an 
excellent  dinner,  as  Mile.  Pater-aide l  turns  out  to  be  a 
most  able  artiste. 

How  can  I  be  so  intrusive  and  interruptive  ?  Only 
because  I  can  wait  with  the  doo;s  in  vour  lighted  room. 

O  »/  O 

I  know  you  cannot  write  again.  I  shall  read  over 
the  28th  every  day.  I  see  almost  all,  but  fret  at  not 
knowing  the  new  top  of  the  dancing  fountain. 

I  wonder  which  of  her  diadems  Mrs.  Thornhill  will 
put  on,  Ceres  or  Dante  ?  she  has  both.  Give  my  love 
to  my  progeny. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Kemp  Town  :  December  1843. 

Your  letters  are  sun  and  make  my  climate. 

Brighton  is  doing  its  pranks — pouring  rain  and  gales 
of  wind,  and  yet  we,  ensconced  in  your  charming  house, 
are  as  comfortable  as  it  is  possible  to  be,  and  before  I 
answer  your  letter  I  must  detail  its  advantages.  The 
gaiety  compared  with  other  places  from  the  wide 
expanse  of  light  and  broad  spaces ;  no  sopped  leaves 
and  wet  paths — a  trottoir  and  two  lamp-posts.  In  the 
bluster  no  smoking  chimneys. 

Yesterday  at  two  Lord  George  Seymour  paid  us  a 
visit,  and  a  charming  man  he  is.  At  three  we  went 
out  and  sat  with  Heneage,2  that  miracle  of  patience 
lying  on  his  back.  A  moment's  cessation  on  our 
return,  and  Granville,  Tiber,  and  I  had  a  pleasant  walk 
within  the  shelter  of  the  houses.  At  half -past  six  sat 
down  to  perdreaux  a  I'Espagnole,  emince  au  gratin,  and  a 
leg  of  mutton.  Dowager  Eivers,  the  pair  of  shoes,3  and 

1  Daughter  of  the  cook. 

2  Was  an  attach^  at  Paris.     Then  became  a  Roman   Catholic   and 
entered  the  priesthood.     For  many  years  an  invalid. 

3  Lady  Rivers  went  by  the  name  of  Shoes  in  the  family. 

B  B   2 


372     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS  GRAXVILLE     1843 

Captain  Pitt,  who  had  unexpectedly  come  down.  Beauti- 
ful he  was  to  look  at  and  droll  to  hear,  and  we  had  a 
most  merry  prima  sera,  the  family  departing  at  half- 
past  nine,  when  we  sat  down  to  backgammon. 

Now  where  can  hopeless  weather  boast  such  anti- 
dotes as  this  ? 

Oh,  my  dirty  paper  !  The  outside  sheet  of  a  bundle 
out  of  a  damp  box.  Alas  !  alas  ! 


1844  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  373 


1844 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton :  January  10,  1844. 

Harry's  letter  amused  us  extremely.  Tell  me  more 
about  Miss  Martineau's  book.1  I  am  afraid  of  it.  The 
old  tales,  which  I  have  been  re-reading,  have  such  an 
effect  upon  me  that  I  can  scarcely  read  them.  She 
writes  in  a  way  that  harrows  up  every  feeling.  It  is, 
I  think,  quite  a  strange  power,  perhaps  because  no 
writer  is  so  simple  and  so  'strong  upon  sorrows  that 
come  to  all.  Tell  me  some  more  of  the  new  book.  I 
must  finish  my  letter  to-morrow,  as  I  shall  be  too  late 
for  the  post. 

Never  was  anything  so  terrible,  as  all  Verity  used 
to  say  ; 2  no  chance  of  anything  like  recovery,  or  of  any 
sort  of  restoration  to  what  he  was  before  the  attack. 
In  short,  all  that  has  since,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  been 
proved  so  utterty  groundless. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  January  12,  1844. 

I  thought  Granville  had  a  little  cold  yesterday,  but- 
he  is  much  better  to-day  and  we  have  been  enjoying 
the  June  morning.  We  met  in  a  pony-chaise  and  four 
the  second  Duchess 3  and  the  first  Countess,4  perhaps 
the  two  foolishest  blowens  in  Europe ;  but  so  kind  and 
good-natured  is  the  former  that  I  beg  you  not  to  repeat 

1  Letters  on  Mesmerism. 

2  When  Lord  Granville  was  struck  down  by  paralysis. 

8  Duchess  of  Somerset,  the  second  wife  of  the  eleventh  Duke. 
4  Lady  Shrewsbury,  wife  of  the  sixteenth  Earl. 


374     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1844 

anything  1  say  of  her.  At  the  instigation  of  her  friend, 
she  persuaded  the  reluctant  Duke  to  flare  up  for  the 
Due  de  Bordeaux.  Now,  whatever  may  be  his  future 
destiny,  quiet  is  his  game,  and  I  hear  he  is  wise  enough 
to  have  appeared  much  annoyed  at  the  clumsy  folly  of 
making  him  draw  King  out  of  a  cake,  called  a  Bourbon, 
to  the  music  of  various  Jacobite  songs,  '  Charley  is  my 
darling,'  etc.  I  saw  the  Duchess  yesterday.  '  Only 
think,  dear  Lady  Granville,  what  an  odd  chance ! 
Nothing  prepared.  I  saw  him  put  it  quick  into  his 
pocket.'  Dearest  sister,  do  not  tell.  This  said  woman 
quetes  for  my  lottery,  asks  young  Fullerton  and  his 
sisters  to  dinner,  and  I  really  never  knew  so  kind- 
hearted  a  woman. 

My  lottery  is  prospering.  We  are  much  amused 
with  a  doll's  trousseau.  Mme.  Pater  and  Josephine 1 
have  made  her  out  of  odds  and  ends  the  loveliest 
modes.  A  black  velvet  bonnet,  with  pheasant's 
feathers,  made  Lady  Ailesbury  studious  for  five  minutes 
yesterday.  Never  was  there  such  a  doll,  from  stays 
and  garters  to  cloaks  and  surtouts,  and  she  has  a 
carpet  bag  which  beggars  description.  And  all  this 
for  no  pence,  excepting  the  bag  and  a  large  knitted 
manteau,  garters  and  a  comforter,  which  are  worked 
by  poor  people  here.  A  fan  and  a  boa  will  be  pre- 
sented to  her  gratis. 

What  a  good  speech  of  Guizot ! 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  January  22,  1844. 

I  am  in  your  debt,  my  dearest  sister.  Many  thanks 
for  what  you  tell  me  of  Miss  Martineau.  Did  you  read 
'  What's  to  be  Done  ?  '  or  some  such  name,  and  Melville's 
sermons,  preached  at  Cambridge  ? 

Mr.  Sneyd  is  gone  and  we  regret  him.     He  has  been 

1  The  cook's  wife  and  the  lady's  maid. 


1S44  TO   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE  375 

as  agreeable  and  amiable  as  possible.  He  dined  with 
us  every  day  but  one,  when  he  left  us  with  Eiverses 
and  the  Fullertons  to  dine  at  Lord  Ailesbury's,  leaving 
the  Duchess  of  Beaufort  to  dine  tete  a  trois  with  us, 
which  she  prefers. 

By-the-by,  it  amuses  me  to  hear  of  Mr.  Luttrel, 
exasperated  at  some  praise  of  Lady  Ailesbury's  figure, 
exclaiming,  '  Just  enough  to  keep  the  muslin  together.' 

On  Saturday  Lord  Jermyn,  Lord  Polwarth,  and  Sir 
William  Middleton  dined  with  us.  Lady  Katherine 
Jermyn  was  not  well  enough  ;  she  has  been  here  in  the 
morning,  walked  on  the  esplanade  with  us.  I  like 
what  I  have  seen  of  her  extremely.  Sir  William  is  a 
friend  of  Rivers.  Lord  Polwarth  is  extremely  agreeable. 

Mr.  Sneyd  gave  us  hopes  of  the  Sutherlands  coming 
to  Brighton.  Do  you  think  there  is  a  chance  ? 

Bumpy  goes  to  school  Thursday. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Brighton:  January  27,  1844. 

Brougham  has  been  sitting  with  us  on  the  esplanade 
for  an  hour.  A  little  low  for  Cannes.  '  Dpon  my  soul, 
this  is  not  credible,'  and  it  is  to-day  almost  the  finest 
day  we  have  had.  He  was  comparatively  tranquil  and 
exceedingly  droll.  He  says  the  Lansdownes  are  much 
pleased  with  Emilie.1  She  is  to  live  this  season  at 
Lansdowne  House.  Frantic  about  Anderson.2  '  He 
has  gone  and  given  them  a  treacle  discourse.' 

God  bless  you,  my  dearest  brother.  We  are  going 
to  luxuriate  along  the  cliff. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  January  28,  1844. 

We  are  going  on  prosperously  as  to  health  and 
weather.  Did  I  tell  you  of  Lord  Brougham's  coming 

1  Mdlle.  de  Flahault,  who  had  just  married  Lord  Shelburne. 

2  The  Rev.  James  Anderson. 


376     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1844 

on  Friday  morning,  hallooing  and  bawling  to  us  on  the 
esplanade?  He  was  very  droll,  stayed  an  hour,  and  is 
gone  back  to  London. 

A  more  agreeable  arrival  yesterday  was  Freddy 
from  Folkestone.  His  journey  to  Paris  has  answered 
perfectly.  He  was  received  most  graciously,  found 
everybody  and  everything  exactly  as  they  were,  the 
same  young  ladies  waltzing  and  unmarried.  He  was 
much  pleased  with  Lady  Cowley,  whom  he  thinks 
very  agreeable,  and  was  much  amused  at  the  balls  at 
the  Embassy.  He  was  delighted  to  be  with  Harry. 
We  had  a  very  amusing  dinner  yesterday — Lady  Ailes- 
bury,  so  intent  upon  every  word  that  fell  from  Frede- 
rick's lips,  the  George  Seymours,  and  Lord  Polwarth. 

We  are  all  much  occupied  with  Frederick  Bruce's 
appointment  to  China.  Eighteen  hundred  a  year.  He 
thinks  it  his  duty  to  go — he  has  not  a  farthing — but  I 
hear  he  is  dreadfully  low  about  it.  There  is  much  talk 
of  whether  he  will  propose  Hong  Kong  to  Emily  Hardy, 
and  if  she  will  accept  if  he  does.  I  trust  the  Suther- 
lands  are  coming. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Brighton  :  January  29,  1844. 

Quite  beat  down  with  summer,  I  sit  down,  no  fire 
and  the  windows  open,  to  say  a  word  or  two. 

On  Saturday  we  had  a  pleasant  little  repast.  In 
the  evening,  whist  and  music.  The  Moriers  came. 
Horatia l  has  a  beautiful  voice,  and  Lady  Belfast  brought 
Lord  Chichester,  a  great  exception  to  her  rule.  He 
sang  to  us  like  an  angel  and  is  a  charming  unaffected 
boy,  accompanied  beautifully  by  cousin  Verner. 

Dearest  Grace,  will  you  indulge  a  whim  of  mine  and 
do  me  an  immense  favour  ?  My  prizes  are  all  settled 

1  Miss  Horatia  Morier  married  in  1845  Lord  Algernon  Seymour,  the 
present  Duke  of  Somerset. 


1844  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  377 

and  I  have  more  than  enough,  but  I  want  an  extra- 
ordinary one  from  you.  Do  you  think  Mr.  Paxton1 
could  contrive  that  I  should  receive  on  the  6th  a 
covered  basket,  docketed,  with  fruit  and  flowers  from 
the  Chatsworth  Conservatory  ?  Oh,  what  a  catch  for 
a  Brightonian,  fond  of  names  and  who  never  sees  a 
flower  !  I  will  hope  that  in  the  natural  course  of  draw- 
ing that  prize  might  fall  on  a  resident,  and  if  not,  ex- 
change being  no  robbery,  I  could  manage  one  with 
some  winner  of  a  drawing  or  a  paper  knife.  Brother  ! 
Mr.  Paxton  !  I  do  not  breathe  my  request  to  any  one, 
only  if  you  can't  or  won't,  take  no  heed  of  it. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton :  February  1844. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  kindness  in  telling  us 
what  gave  us  so  much  pleasure  about  Leveson's  speech. 

They  are  in  Bruton  Street,  and  Marie  has  made,  I 
am  told,  their  rooms  below  quite  beautiful.2  London 
has  got  no  society  or  reunions.  I  hear  Lady  Holland 
is  in  a  very  teasing  humour,  and  tries  Lady  Palmers  ton 
with  constant  abuse  of  the  '  Morning  Chronicle,'  chiefly 
for  its  foreign  politics.  I  should  like  Miss  Martineau, 
if  somebody  would  translate  it.  I  have  only  read  a 

1  The  Duke  of  Devonshire  made  acquaintance  with  Sir  Joseph  Paxton 
in  the  Horticultural  Society's  garden  at  Chiswick,  where  he  was  an  under- 
gardener.     The  Duke  was  so  much  struck  with  his  intelligence  that  he 
appointed  him  head-gardener  at  Chatsworth,  where  he  built  the  great 
conservatory ;  and  in  imitation  of  it  he  designed  the  Exhibition  Building 
of  1851.     He  became  the  Duke's  confidential  adviser,  received  the  honour 
of  knighthood,  and  during  the  last  years  of  his  life  sat  in  the  House  of 
Commons  as  member  for  Coventry.     He  was  a  man  of  remarkable  energy. 
The  following  was  his  own  description  of  his  first  arrival  at  Chatsworth. 
He  arrived  there  at  half-past  five  in  the  morning.     He  explored  the  whole 
place  before  any  one  was  up.    He  set  the  men  to  work  by  six  o'clock.     He 
made  acquaintance  with  his  future  wife,  the  housekeeper's  niece,  fell  in 
love  with  her  and  she  with  him,  and  all  this  in  one  day. 

2  Lord  and  Lady  Granville  occupied  the  first  floor,  Lord  and  Lady 
Leveson  the  ground  floor. 


378     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRA.NVILLE     1844 

chapter,   which   I   cannot   understand.      Good    night, 
beloved  sister. 

I  went  this  morning  in  a  fly  by  myself  to  the  for- 
bidden fruit,  the  Huntingdon  chapel  (dissent,  but  the 
service  seemed  to  me  just  the  same  as  ours),  to  hear  Mr. 
Sortain.  Wonderful  eloquence,  energy,  ardour,  con- 
quering every  sort  of  natural  disadvantage.  In  person 
like  Thiers  and  Lord  Boscawen,  with  a  wire  of  a  voice 
and  bad  articulation.  But  how  new,  how  clever  !  What 
beautiful  language  and  a  conviction  that  rivets  one! 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  March  8,  1844. 

London,  oh  !  London.  But  yesterday  having  found 
beds  that  made  sleeping  impossible  was  not  a  fair  trial. 
I  was  quite  unwell  all  day  and  he  very  languid  and 
tired,  and  this  added  to  by  spring  in  coal  smoke  drest, 
always  trying  at  first. 

Georgy  is  in  ecstasies  with  London.  How  unlike  her 
mama !  '  Ellen  Middleton ' J  is  no  longer  a  secret  and  will 
be  out  in  three  weeks.  Moxon  publishes,  she  to  have 
half  the  profits.  Opinions  given  without  her  name  being 
known  have  been  more  than  gratifying,  and  Mrs.  Sartoris 
read  till  four  in  the  morning  with  intense  interest  that 
never  flagged  for  a  moment.  Charles  Greville  is  in 
raptures,  and  has  been  invaluable  and  indefatigable.2 

I  saw  yesterday  dearest  Lady  Morley  and  Corise. 
Henry  Greville  dined  with  us  ;  the  Poodle  came  in  the 
evening.  They  laughed  at  my  reception.  '  How  do  you 
do  ?  I  am  so  happy  to  see  you  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,' 
and  they  were  all  off  at  eleven. 

Marie  has  made  the  rez  de  chaussee  like  a  delicious 
country  house — chintzes,  birds,  flowers,  and  comfort.  I 
think  she  will  do  wonders  with  the  premier. 

1  Lady  G.  Fullerton'a  first  novel. 

2  He  helped  to  correct  the  proofs. 


1844  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  379 

I  cannot  tell  you  the  longing  I  have  to  be  at 
Brighton  again.  We  go  to-morrow,  but  alas !  alas ! 
Granville  threatens  returning  here  in  a  fortnight.  The 
rule  of  three.  If  two  days,  what  will  be  weeks. 
Georgy  says,  better  when  all  and  everybody  are  not 
crammed  into  so  short  a  space. 

The  delight  of  seeing  your  letter,  most  beloved 
sister.  I  have  met,  I  think,  all  your  questions.  Give 
our  most  affectionate  love  to  dearest  Lord  Carlisle.  I 
sometimes,  only  sometimes,  think,  Oh,  that  I  was  there 
with  them !  Castle  Howard  must  be  a  paradise  in  this 
season,  and  you  and  Morpeth  and  Lord  Carlisle's  ador- 
able smile.  When  shall  I  see  you  all  ?  But  the  gulph 
of  London  must  be  passed  first.  Marie  is  in  excellent 
spirits ;  she  hates  going  out  now.  Dody  delights  in  it. 
She  was  at  Lady  Lansdowne's.  Lady  Shelburne  seems 
very  happy.  I  will  write  constantly. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  April  4,  1844. 

I  send  you  the  enclosed  letter  from  Georgy. 

'Dearest  mama, — I  send  you  a  few  more  proof 
sheets.  Some  part  of  them  you  have  already  got ;  there 
has  been  a  change  of  type  which  has  caused  it.  Tell 
dearest  Sukey  that,  if  she  has  not  done  so  yet,  she  may 
certainly  read  them,  if  she  likes  it  better  in  that  way. 

'  I  am  rather  angry  with  Charles  Greville  for  having 
shown  the  proof  sheets  to  Lord  Clarendon,  and  I  regret 
for  my  own  sake  that  he  praises  it  so  extravagantly.  I 
think  it  is  like  when  a  new  beauty  appears.  Instead  of 
prepossessing  people  in  its  favour,  it  will  make  them 
find  fault  with  it.  He  told  Theresa  Lister  that  it  was 
the  most  remarkable  work  that  had  appeared  for  years 
and  George  Byng  the  cleverest  novel  he  knew.  This  is 
such  gross  exaggeration  that  I  am  sure  it  will  do  more 
harm  than  good.' 


380     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1844 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton :  April  16,  1844. 

Whilst  I  am  waiting  for  luncheon,  before  the  half- 
past  three  train,  I  write  a  word.  Susy  and  her  little 
girls  are  by  this  time  in  Bruton  Street,  where  Eivers 
and  Freddy  are  to  join  us  at  dinner.  I  am  glad  to  go 
to  Georgy,  now  that  she  and  her  boy  are  poorly,  and 
it  is  delightful  to  have  Susy  domiciliee,  and  I  hope  my 
brother  will  like  to  have  us,  and  this  is  a  pull  against 
London  and  Court.  You  have  no  idea  of  what  it  has 
been  this  morning,  sitting  on  a  bench  looking  on  the 
sea,  with  a  high  bank  behind  us  of  wallflowers,  the  real 
sweet  flowers  of  the  earth. 

I  have  had  a  note  from  Lady  Charlotte  Greville  with 
your  good  account  of  Lord  Carlisle,  and  her  lamenta- 
tions that  Henry  Greville,  universally  congratulated,  is 
not  appointed.1  He  receives  also  daily  joy  about  his 
marriage  to  Lady  Essex.  I  hope  when  he  is  placed  he 
will  propose.  I  am  very  fond  of  him. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  April  1844. 

Most  dear  sister, — My  grateful  thanks  to  Mary. 
The  book-openers  are  beautiful.  I  have  poured  out 
my  thanks  to  Francis  Grey.  I  cannot  say  what  I  felt. 
The  reception  of  the  beautiful  works  did  not  look  like 
pleasure,  and  half  an  hour  afterwards  I  gave  the 
same  sort  of  welcome  to  '  Ellen  Middleton,'  in  three 
volumes,  so  that  my  morning  was  one  of  delicious  but 
deep  emotion.  Would  that  I  could  hear  you  upon  this 
last  subject !  My  brother  is  delighted.  Brougham 
writes  me  a  note  as  follows  :  '  Hurrah  ! '  Not  a  word 
else.  Georgy  is  like  a  mouse. 

<_->•/ 

Granville  is  well,  but  there  is  not  the  same  hue  as 
at  Brighton.  Our  life  is  pleasant  and  almost  as  quiet, 

1  To  some  diplomatic  post. 


1844  TO   LADY   CARLISLE  381 

but  I  have  not  the  security.  To-day  he  is  going  at 
her  request  to  Lady  Jersey,  and  St.  Aulaire  says,  '  Oh, 
nous  le  soignerons  bien,'  etc. 

The  day  before  yesterday  evening  Clarendons, 
Wharncliffes,  Lords  Harrowby,  Sandon,  Charles  Gore, 
Jem  Howard.  Very  pleasant  but  hotter,  later  in  short, 
etc.  Do  not  say  anything  of  this  in  your  answer. 

To  exemplify  my  meaning,  we  have  been  this 
morning  paying  visits,  he  sitting  with  Lord  Clarendon 
and  Lord  St.  Germans,  and  he  has  just  announced  that 
he  shall  walk  to  Lady  Jersey's  and  back,  and  all  this 
preparatory  to  going  down  this  evening  to  a  little 
soiree  at  Marie's.  This  may  not  do  harm,  but  keeps 
me  in  a  fever. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  April  22,  1844. 

.  I  missed  the  post  on  Saturday  and  your  dear  letter 
is  just  arrived. 

I  see  I  have  not  said  enough  about  the  Drawing 
Eoom.  The  Queen  bowed  and  smiled  and  hoped  I 
was  well,  but  less  gracious  than  Prince  Albert,  who 
seemed  inclined  to  embrace  me.  Leopold  careworn, 
absent ;  Kent  civil.  Very  few  people.  Miss  Barring- 
ton  extremely  handsome.  Lady  Wharncliffe  entirely 
enclosed  in  a  gold  framework,  just  like  a  barley-sugar 
treillage  one  sometimes  sees  over  cream  and  straw- 
berries in  an  entremets,  a  great  love,  in  ecstasies  over 
the  darling  cream-coloured  horses.  Lady  Jersey  a  very 
good-natured  old  woman.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  in 
radiant  health  and  spirits.  Oufl  dearest  sissie,  it  bores 
me  almost  as  much  as  being  there  to  fight  it  over 
again . 

Granville  is  better,  and  I  am  very  happy,  as  I  find, 
though  he  has  not  told  me,  that  he  will  not  dine  or  go 
out.  We  drive  and  walk  at  twelve  every  morning  and 


382     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1844 

drive  again  from  half-past  three  till  six.  We  are  now 
going  to  the  garden  of  Eden.1  The  Francis  Egertons 
came  to  us  the  night  before  last.  She  was  in  excellent 
spirits,  and  as  active  and  useful  as  a  steam-engine. 
Lady  Morley  is  a  dear.  'Dody,  you  are  going  to 
Court,  presented  of  course  upon  the  coming  event.' 
*  Ellen '  comes  out  on  Saturday. 

I  went  yesterday  morning  to  St.  Paul's.2  I  never 
liked  anything  so  much  as  Mr.  Bennett's  sermon  ;  never 
disliked  anything  so  much  as  the  performance  of  the 
service,  a  sort  of  parody  of  what  I  do  not  like  at  Rome. 
The  clergyman  who  read  the  service  hummed  it  over 
in  a  monotonous  rapid  mutter,  the  new  way  I  am  told. 
The  music  constant,  troublesome,  lively,  inefficient,  so 
that  the  Litany  was  like  charity  school  children  divided 
by  London  cries.  But  then  came  Mr.  Bennett,  admi- 
rable, simple.  The  soundest  doctrine,  warmest  piety, 
and  most  practical  result.  So  here  were  all  the  pours  et 
centres  of  Tractarianism.  Excellence  in  fact,  with  why 
those  things  a  cote  ?  We  went  to  the  Temple  Church 
at  three.  Too  long,  nearly  two  hours,  beautiful  music 
and  a  very  bad  preacher. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  May  4,  1844. 

I  have  only  a  moment  to  thank  you  a  thousand 
times  and  Mary  for  your  dear  letters  to  Dody  and  me. 
The  third  volume  !  It  has  really  affected  and  agitated 
society  in  a  most  remarkable  manner.  At  St.  Aulaire's3 
ball  she  was  quite  overwhelmed  with  kindness  and 
praise.  How  I  long  to  talk  it  with  you,  and  it  seems 
to  me  that  summer  is  coming !  Though  I  am  happy 
here  and  cannot  wish  time  to  go  quick,  I  cannot  but 
pine  to  be  with  you  again. 

1  Lord  Auckland's  house  at  Kensington  Gore. 
2  Knightsbridge.  s  The  French  Ambassador. 


1844  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  383 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  May  26,  1844. 

Wintry  weather  ;  too  cold  for  the  open  carriage  or 
Chiswick. 

Last  night  Poodle  and  Charles  Gore  at  dinner ;  Lady 
Rivers,  Lords  Ebrington  and  Ponsonby,  Lady  Holland 
and  Mr.  Stanley1  (Ben)  in  the  evening. 

The  Levesons  are  to  dine  with  the  Shelburnes  at 
Richmond.  To-morrow  we  go  to  Hatchford 2  for  two 
nights,  and  I  dare  say,  as  we  are  hardy,  we  shall  enjoy 
driving  on  St.  George's  Hill. 

The  Stafford  House  concerns  going  on  much  the 
same,  the  Duke  still  poorly  at  Brighton. 

Monday. — Mr.  Sneyd  came  last  night.  He  pleased 
me  with  thinking  Lord  Lome's  conceit  worn  off;  says 
he  is  extremely  clever  and  decidedly  in  love  in  the 
right  quarter.  Had  not  he  dined  there  on  Saturday 
with  him  en  famille  ? 

We  are  setting  out  for  Hatchford.  '  Winter  armed 
with  terrors  yet  unknown.'  Never  was  anything  so 
east  and  sharp. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Hatchford  :  May  28,  1844. 

How  d'ye  do,  dearest  brother  ?  I  do  at  Hatchford 
exceedingly  well.  A  comfortable  house  in  a  most 
beautiful  country,  airy  rooms,  wholesome  victuals. 

Lady  Cowper  is  very  agreeable  and  droll.  Ladv 
Charlotte  Greville  very  poorly  with  rheumatism. 
Henry  will  come  down  and  tell  us  of  the  cloture  of  the 
Essex  theatricals.3 

1  On  the  death  of  his  father  in  1850,  he  became  Lord  Stanley  of 
Alderley.     He  was  for  some  time  Whip  of  the  Liberal  party  and  later 
President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  and  Postmaster-General.     He  was  noted 
for  his  amusing  conversation  and  brilliant  repartee. 

2  Lord  Ellesmere's  place  in  Surrey. 

3  At  the  Dowager  Lady  Essex's. 


384     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1844 

Lady  Cadogan  heard  some  one  say '  Ellen  Middleton ' 
was  too  sad.  '  Oh  dear,  no,  just  what  it  should  be 
to  succeed.'  No,  it  is  too  melancholy,  indeed  it  is. 
People  like  the  book  because  it  is  beautiful,  but  would 
all  the  more  for  a  little  more  light  and  shade.  '  You 
don't  understand  anything  about  it.  That's  just  what 
people  hate,  light  and  shade.  Bulwer  tried  it  and  it 
didn't  do,  nobody  could  bear  it.'  Georgy  says  she 
was  alluding  to  his  '  Night  and  Morning.' 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  June  1,  1844. 

Dearest  brother, — What  a  surprise  upon  the  world 
is  the  Emperor  Nicholas — expected  to-day  to  play  with 
Saxony,  to  bet  at  Ascot,  and  puzzle  the  ladies,  who  head 
the  Polish  Ball !  They  met  and  settled  to  have  it. 
Lord  Aberdeen  says  they  shan't. 

Yesterday  evening  came  the  Duke  of  Sutherland 
radiant,  the  Duchess  with  a  crown  of  black  roses  and 
diamonds,  going  to  the  Academy  Ball  with  Caroline1 
lovely,  Julia  Howard,  the  Dean  of  Lichfield's  daughter, 
very  handsome,  Georgy  Lascelles  very  pretty,  or  rather 
pleasing,  Elizabeth  in  a  cap  and  shawl  beaming  with 
happiness,  and  Lord  Lome,  with  whom  we  are  all  charmed. 
I  see  no  conceit  or  self-importance ;  devoted  to  her  and 
them,  ingenuous  and  earnest  in  manner,  and  a  brow  and 
eyes  that  make  one  feel  one's  understanding  growing 
clearer  as  one  looks  at  them.  The  company  that  came 
stared  at  the  family  party.  Punch,  Sneyd,  Dowager 
Lady  Cawdor  wept  for  joy  over  us ;  Mrs.  Cavendish 
blinked  in  utter  bewilderment.  Fanny  and  Frederick 
Howard  and  Lord  Lansdowne  quite  enchanted  at 
falling  upon  such  a  troop  of  nymphs  in  garlands. 

1  Her  daughter,  who  afterwards  married  Lord  Kildare  and  became 
Duchess  of  Leinster. 


1844  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE  385 

Then  the  Poodle  :  '  Some  say  Nicholas  is  come.  I  don't 
believe  it.  Brunnow1  slept  all  night  at  Greenwich  in  an 
agony  of  mind.  There  is  but  one  state  apartment 
ready  at  the  Palace,  and  the  Emperor  and  King  must 
sleep  in  one  bed.' 

There  was  a  farce  at  the  Polish  Committee.  In 
came  Ailesbury,  chairwoman  :  '  Must  be  put  off.' 

Clanricarde  :  '  No  such  thing.' 

Palmerston  :  '  Much  better  put  it  off.' 

Sutherland  :  '  Don't  see  why.'  Lord  Dudley  Stuart 2 
talked  incessantly.  Palmerston  gave  way.  And  now 
it  rests  with  the  Government  out  of  petticoats. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE* 

London  :  August  1,  1844. 

The  later  period,  most  dear  brother,  end  of  Septem- 
ber and  beginning  of  October.  What  bliss  it  will  be  ! 

The  dinner 3  at  Stafford  House  was  beautiful,  I 
hear,  and  perfectly  well  done.  The  Duchess  beautiful ; 
Lord  Lome  very  pretty  in  a  kilt.  The  flaws  odd  com- 
pany, instead  of  some  nearer  and  dearer.  Little  Lord 
Frederick 4  waiting  all  dinner-time  behind  the  Queen's 
chair.  At  ten  minutes  before  ten  a  little  enforced  danc- 
ing. The  going  away  was,  it  is  said,  quite  beautiful. 

We  spent  our  whole  day  at  Hampton  Court.  Nym- 
phenberg.  All  over  roses.  Groups  of  unknown  elegants 
and  elegantes,  and  military  music. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Brighton  :  October  30,  1844. 

Never  was  anything  like  it !  We  arrived  at  five 
and  walked  along  the  cliffj  W.  Baker  having  made  all 

1  Russian  Ambassador. 

3  A  son  of  the  first  Marquis  of  Bute.  He  married  a  daughter  of  Prince 
Lucien  Buonaparte.  He  warmly  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Poles,  and 
bored  people  about  them. 

3  In  honour  of  Lord  and  Lady  Lome's  wedding. 

4  Duke  of  Sutherland's  second  son,  died  in  the  Crimean  War. 
VOL.    II.  C  C 


386     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE     1844 

look  as  square  as  his  own  new  wig.  Mary  showing  me 
the  house.  '  My  lady,  look  how  beautiful  they  pull  up,' 
and  so  they  do,  the  new  blinds.  The  new  Bluebeard- 
looking  building  at  the  bottom  of  the  room  is  very 
ornamental  with  its  jars  above,  and  many  are  the  new 
kicks  in  every  corner.  Oh,  it  is  such  a  haven,  such 
repose,  such  freshness,  and  certainly  the  gayest-looking 
house  that  ever  was  !  Poor  souls  at  the  Hall ! l 

We  have  already  seen  Lord  George  Seymour  in  a 
caleche. 

Did  you  hear  that  Lord  Bessborough  has  had  a  very 
bad  fall  from  his  horse  ?  No  bone  broken,  but  a  severe 
contusion. 

There  is  Granville,  as  if  he  had  been  settled  here  a 
year,  cracking  his  sides  over  an  old  book  of  plays  he 
has  found. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Brighton :  November  16,  1844. 

I  think,  as  you  are  alone  at  Hardwick,  a  little 
writing  will  not  be  de  trop.  Your  dear  little  letter  is 
arrived — a  double  pleasure  to  know  you  safe  and  snug 
at  the  Hall.  How  happy  dear  G.  will  be !  And  then 
you  will  come  here  when  Brighton  has  shed  its  fashion- 
able vulgar. 

We  had  a  very  pleasant  dinner  yesterday.  Georgy 
not  silent  as  at  Holly's.  Lady  Cowper  most  extremely 
droll,  Mrs.  Ashburnham  very  agreeable,  Mr.  Ashburn- 
ham  intolerable,  Lord  Cowper  charming,  Lord  George 
Seymour  wonderful.  How  your  house  is  admired ! 

To-day  Corise  stepped  in,  come  to  pay  a  visit  to  the 
remaining  Miss  Mitchell.  I  called  upon  Silence  and 
found  her  looking  beautiful  with  her  two  nice  girls 
carpet-stitching  diligently  like  Marie. 

The  landslip  has  frightened  people.     Holly  quite. 

1  Hardwick. 


1844  TO   THE   DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  387 

Lady  Harriet  Drummond  came  down  in  terror.  Anne 
Loftus  sat  near  ten  minutes  in  a  tunnel,  not  knowing 
what  had  come  or  was  to  come  next. 

17th. — We  found  Holly  at  the '  Albion,'  Sheepwash  l 
en  action,  Sir  Henry  Webster  sitting  opposite  to  her, 
young  Loch  reading  and  the  doctor.  '  Very  kind  of 
you.  You  see  how  lonely  I  am.  A  horrid  little  room. 
I  could  ask  my  friends  to  come  and  eat  a  roast  chicken, 
but  I  have  no  other  to  go  into.'  She  dines  here  on 
Thursday.  We  have  asked  the  Cowpers,  James  Morier,2 
and  Mr.  Gladstone  to  meet  her,  already  furnished  with 
Shoes  and  Dodds. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Brighton  :  November  21,  1844. 

Your  letter  was  delightful  to  us.  Captain  Bruce 
was  caught  on  the  way  to  the  station  by  Charles 
Seymour  and  Mr.  de  Bathe,  and  these  persuaded  him 
to  give  up  his  journey  and  marriage. 

T  am  writing  very  weary.  You  know  what  a  July 
morning  is  when  it  falls  on  a  November  day.  We 
walked  and  sat  two  hours,  and  then  I  turned  home, 
leaving  Granville  and  Doddles  basking,  to  be  in  time. 
Lady  Charlotte  Greville  accepts  luncheon,  and  came 
with  her  lovely  niece,  and  so  did  the  Miss  Fullertons, 
and  we  had  an  hour's  social  enjoyment. 

Holly  comes  up  the  hill.  *  Georgy,  my  dear,  I  am 
dreadfully  nervous,  are  there  many  police  in  the  way  ? ' 

Yesterday,  General  Upton,  Susy  and  Dody,  Lady  Anne 
Loftus,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ashburnham  went  to  the 
amateurs.  First,  the  '  Follies  of  a  Night,'  very  amusingly 
and  well  acted.  Mr.  de  Bathe  extremely  handsome,  and 
a  little  foolish.  Mr.  Martyn  very  good ;  sings  extremely 
well.  Sister  Mordaunt,  good,  fine  eyes,  flashy  and 

1  Lady  Holland's  maid,  who  acted  as  rubber. 

2  Author  of  Hajji  Baba. 

c  c  2 


388     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1844 

somewhat  vulgar.  Miss  Angel,  a  small  part,  but  her 
beauty  something  surpassing.  Captain  Bruce,  good 
actor,  but  Mr.  de  Bathe  and  C.  Seymour  could  not  get 
over  the  different  passages  alluding  to  Gretna  Green, 
domestic  happiness  with  an  opera  dancer,  and  rolled 
over,  which  disturbed  the  gravity  of  the  action. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Brighton :  November  29,  1844. 

I  lament  for  G.  and  myself  not  to  see  you  together. 
When  will  that  happy  day  be  ?  But  it  is  delicious  to 
think  of  you  between  the  5th  and  the  12th. 

I  can  hardly  help  going  to  a  billiard  table  in  the 
town  to  see  the  great  performer 1  at  that  game,  of 
whose  play  Horace  Pitt,  who  dined  here  yesterday  fresh 
from  the  strokes,  raves.  Or  if  you  come  to  that,  to 
attend  to  the  placard,  great  in  its  simplicity,  '  The 
Mysterious  Lady.'  For  many  of  the  things  others  do 
may  be  prompted,  or  some  hidden  aider  or  nodder  or 
winker  may  explain.  But  how  she  could  tell  Lord 
Henry  Loftus,  Lord  something  Kerr,  and  three  other 
young  sparks,  what  fish  they  were  thinking  they  should 
like  to  have  for  dinner,  which  she  did  without  hesitation 
or  mistake — my  informant  Lord  Henry  himself- — passes 
my  comprehension.  Shoes  is  on  fire.  She  is  going  to 
think  of  whale,  and,  if  baffled  by  Miss  Mystery,  then 
she  will  think  of  alose,  a  French  fish  not  known  in 
England,  and  if  Miss  says,  '  A  fish  I  am  not  acquainted 
with,'  she  has  promised  to  baisser  pavilion  bare-footed 
before  her. 

A  great  lull  at  Brighton.  Body  writes  from  the 
fog,  going  to  dinner  with  Holly.  Eivers  wanted  to 
speak  to  Sukey,  so  up  she  railed  at  eleven  this  morning 
under  Horace's  wing ;  meets  him  at  Mrs.  Bruce's,2  and 
comes  back  early  to-morrow. 

1  Kentfield.  2  Their  sister. 


]844  TO  THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE 

Sir  Edward  Bulwer  is  young,  blooming,  and  no 
longer  deaf.  The  water-cure — Lord  de  Grey  is  almost 
persuaded  to  try  it.  JSTot  at  Gastein,  not  under  Doctor 
Wilson  at  Malvern,  but  under  the  physician  at  Sud- 
brooke,  close  to  Eichmond,  who  is  perfectly  safe,  and 
never  undertakes  a  doubtful  case.  Sir  Edward  is  con- 
vinced he  would  cure  Lord  de  Grey  in  a  fortnight. 

All  this  was  told  me  by  the  quite  altered  water- 
cured  man.  I  expect  to  hear  of  him  re-united  to  the 
wine-cured  Lady  B. 

At  this  same  repast  Lord  and  Lady  Ely  figured,  and, 
what  with  H.  Drummond,  '  Hajji  Baba,'  and  Sir  Edward, 
the  Marquis  was  quite  puzzled,  much  edified.  '  God 
bless  me,'  every  word  any  of  them  uttered. 


390     LETTERS  OF  HARRIET  COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1845 


1845 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Panshanger :  January  2,  1845. 

I  am  happy  to  tell  you  that  Lord  Melbourne  was 
quite  another  man  yesterday,  appeared  better  in  health, 
and  more  natural  in  spirits.  Granville  was  struck  with 
the  agrement  of  his  conversation  and  immense  stores 
of  knowledge.  They  are  just  gone,  and  so  is  Lord 
Aberdeen. 

Lady  Cowper  is  in  bed  with  a  severe  cold  and  sore 
throat ;  Lord  de  Grey  rather  souffrant,  and  Mr.  Sneyd 
has  a  cold  ;  so  that  a  quieter  party  will  be  a  comfort. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

Wrest  Park :  January  1845. 

You  know  Wrest,  so  I  need  not  describe.  Beauty, 
luxury,  and  comfort.  The  fog  has  kept  us  indoors 
almost  entirely,  some  walking  in  a  handsome  Nymphen- 
berg-looking  garden  excepted,  which  must  be  very 
enjoyable  in  summer  and  in  keeping  with  the  house. 
The  dining-room  and  library  are  beautiful,  the  drawing- 
room  not  finished.  The  tapestry  manque  in  design, 
execution,  and  colouring.  The  weather  is  unwhole- 
some. Granville  bilious,  Lady  Cowper  in  bed  with  a 
sore  throat,  Lord  de  Grey  very  ailing,  but  cheerful  and 
patient,  and  seeming  to  enjoy  himself.  Mr.  Sneyd  has 
a  cold  ;  the  Poodle  well  for  all,  opening  their  eyes  wide 
to  the  narrowness  of  their  vestibules  and  corridors. 
The  Beauvales  and  Lord  Melbourne  and  Lord  Aberdeen 


1845  TO   LADY   CAELISLE  391 

went  to-day,  and  we  expect  the  Parkes  and  Charles 
Howard  to  dinner. 

We  live  a  great  deal  in  our  rooms.  In  the  evening 
we  work  and  talk.  There  was  a  rubber  one  night,  but 
not  for  me,  and  yesterday  none.  We  go  to  bed  at 
eleven. 

Since  his  last  letter  the  Devonshire  people  call 
Bishop  Philpotts  '  Exeter  Change.' 

God  bless  you  and  my  dearest  son,  if  he  is  with 
you. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

Brighton  :  March  16,  1845. 

My  beloved  sister, — We  are  charmed  at  the  Baron 
taking  Freddy  as  his  marshal,  and  oh,  that  he  would 
take  me  !  They  are  going  to  try  Mr.  Tawell. 

Everybody  asks  why  Gladstone  is  out,  and  I  refer 
you  to  yesterday's  '  Times.'  Granville  says  no  one  can 
give  a  satisfactory  answer.  I  said  ten  thousand  reasons 
appear  to  me  to  explain  it.  What  difficulty  he  would 
have  had  with  regard  to  Church  questions  and  probably 
colonial  ones  !  Granville  advises  me  to  have  done,  and 
abide  by  the  late  Lord  Lansdowne's  advice,  '  When  you 
are  in  the  dark,  stand  still.'  '  Then  you  will  never  get 
into  the  light.'  '  I  beg  your  pardon,  the  fog  will  disperse.' 

Poor  Miss  Fox,1  perhaps  the  most  valued  and  beloved 
of  all  women !  I  never  heard  a  word  or  thought  or 
feeling  about  her  that  was  not  enthusiastic. 

I  cannot  tell  you  anything  of  French  politics  beyond 
what  you  know,  for  I  have  not  heard  for  some  time 
from  Madame  de  Lieven.  Guizot  seems  to  rely  on  a 
dissolution  of  the  Chambers,  but  French  Ministers  have 
very  often  been  disappointed  in  the  results. 

March  20,  1845. — Freddy  says  he  '  never  had  any 
doubt  of  Mr.  Tawell's  guilt.  That  it  was  interesting  to 

1  Lord  Holland's  sister. 


392     LETTERS   OF  HAER1ET   COUNTESS  GRANVILLE    1845 

watch  him  during  the  proceedings,  and  to  hear  the 
wonderful  but  useless  efforts  of  Kelly  to  save  him.  The 
prisoner  has  the  most  thorough  air  of  a  Quaker,  a 
small  face  with  small  eyes,  his  hair  thrown  back  off 
his  forehead,  looking  particularly  respectable,  a  bad 
countenance,  very  fidgety  the  first  day,  quieter  as  the 
trial  went  on,  very  pale,  constantly  compressing  very 
white  lips.  Not  a  muscle  of  his  face  moved  during 
the  sentence.' 

Mrs.  Taw  ell 1  had  sent  for  places  for  herself  and  five 
friends.  God  bless  you,  dearest. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  March  28,  1845. 

My  own  dear  sister, — We  drove  twice  round  the 
Eing  in  a  brougham  to-day.  It  was  very  reviving — a 
strong  gale  of  southerly  wind,  the  Serpentine  like  a 
rough  sea. 

I  send  you  Madame  de  Lieven.  I  have  not  another 
minute. 

Paris  :  le  24  Mars,  1845. 

'  Dearest  Lady, — Votre  lettre  de  Brighton  est  res  tee 
longtemps  sans  reponse,  parce  que  j'esperais  mesyeux  et 
vous  ecrire  moi-meme.  Us  ne  sont  pas  revenus,  mais 
ils  se  mettent  en  chemin  a  1'aide  de  Verity.  Je  creve 
d'orgueil  de  cette  guerison  prochaine,  car  quatre  mede- 
cins  avant  lui  y  avaient  perdu  leur  latin. 

1  Parlez-moi  de  la  jaunisse  de  Lord  Granville.  Elle 
ne  m'inquiete  pas,  mais  elle  m'ennuie.  L'hiver  a  etc 
abominable  ici.  Cela  veut  dire  un  veritable  hiver  et 
qui  ne  commence  a  disparaitre  depuis  deux  jours. 

'  Les  politics  ont  suivi  les  allures  du  temps,  avec  cette 
difference,  que  les  mauvaises  chances  n'ont  pas  disparu 
encore.  La  majorite  est  si  faible  que  le  moindre  acci- 
dent peut  faire  chavirer,  et  cela  serait  arrive  deja,  si 

1  She  was  convinced  of  his  innocence  and  acquittal. 


]845  TO   LADY   CAELISLE  393 

les  rempla9ants  n'etaient  pas  si  impossibles.  Mais  vrai- 
ment  Mole  est  au  fonds  de  1'eau,  et  Thiers  tres  difficile. 
Lui-meme  affirme  et  repete  qu'il  ne  veut  pas  et  qu'il  ne 
sera  Ministre  qu'a  la  Eegence.  Monsieur  Guizot  con- 
serve toute  sa  bonne  humeur  et  sa  fermete'  ordinaire.  He 
does  not  care  much,  about  staying  or  going.  I  wish  he 
was  out  to  refresh  himself  a  little.  Le  Eoi  crie  bien 
fort  et  bien  haut  qu'il  ne  peut  avoir  d'autre  Ministre 
que  Monsieur  Guizot,  et  qu'on  peut  aussi  bien  marcher 
avec  une  voix  de  majorite  qu'avec  soixante. 

'  Avez-vous  vu  "  1'Histoire  du  Consulat,"  par 
Thiers  ?  Ici  on  ne  parle  que  de  cela. 

'  La  semaine  passee  a  ete  toute  consacree  a  la  devo- 
tion. On  dit  que  le  nombre  de  communicants  a  ete 
enorme.  A  Notre-Dame  trois  mille  hommes  a  la  fois 
dans  la  matinee  de  Paques.  L'Abbe  Eavignan  1'objet 
de  1'adoration  de  tous. 

'  Madame  de  Contades  est  toujours  sur  bequilles,  mais 
aussi  jolie  et  charmante  que  jamais.  Je  ne  vois  plus 
Madame  de  Castellane.  De  toutes  mes  connaissances, 
c'est  la  seule  qui  ne  m'ait  pas  soignee  pendant  ma 
longue  reclusion.  Mole  non  plus  n'approche  pas.  Du 
reste,  ma  chambre  n'est  jamais  vide.  Thiers  y  vient. 
Monsieur  Guizot  1'a  trouve  chez  moi  1'autre  jour.  Us 
ne  s'etaient  pas  rencontres  depuis  quatre  ans  et  demi. 
II  y  a  eu  un  moment  de  stupefaction.  J'ai  eclate  de 
rire,  ils  ont  pris  le  parti  de  rire  avec  moi,  et  ils  sont 
restes  une  heure  et  demie  a  causer  ensemble  le  plus 
agreablement  du  monde,  abordant  tous  les  sujets,  situa- 
tion ministerielle,  situation  parlementaire,  le  present, 
1'avenir,  decidant  qu'il  n'y  a  plus  pour  la  France  que 
Thiers  ou  Guizot,  Guizot  ou  Thiers.  Tout  cela  se  di- 
sant  avec  une  independance  et  une  liberte  d'esprit  par- 
faites.  C'etait  evidemment  a  treat  pour  chacun  d'eux, 
et  moi  j'ai  ete  parfaitement  amusee.'  Nothing  more  to 
say,  my  dearest  Lady.' 


394     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET    COUNTESS   GRANVILLE    1845 
To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London :  April  4,  1845. 

Most  beloved  sister, — We  go  on  favourabty,  but 
very  slow.  Verity  threatens  departure.  Granville  has 
seen  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort  and  Lord  Clarendon.  The 
latter  was  on  his  way  to  the  House  of  Lords  to  make 
a  motion.  The  Due  de  Broglie  came  yesterday.  He 
quite  adores  Granville,  and  it  put  him  in  roaring  spirits, 
and  he  chattered  and  joked  as  I  never  before  heard  him 
and  stayed  near  an  hour.  Granville  was  not  the  worse 
for  the  visit,  but  I  was,  as  the  fear  of  fatigue  was  on 
me  all  the  time.  I  called  by  Granville's  desire  on 
Lady  Holland ;  she  was  much  pleased  and  inoffensive. 

I  hope  soon  to  write  you  more  interesting  letters, 
but  my  days  are  gasping  just  now — one  eye  on  the 
thermometer,  another  on  the  door,  so  afraid  of  visits. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  May  10,  1845. 

First,  flowers.  An  orange  orchid  in  full  bloom  sits 
in  the  middle  window,  the  wonder  of  all  beholders. 
You  are  much  too  amiable.  Then  the  delicious  7th, 
all  but  in  not  announcing  your  return.  The  glories  of 
your  reception,1  so  fete,  is  the  small  talk  of  London. 
Decazes'  dinner  would  have  been  published  as  an  essay 
by  Charles  Lamb.  I  have  a  mind  to  sell  it  at  the 
Eepository. 

Though  we  are  just  returned  from  sitting  in  an 
alcove  in  Kensington  Gardens  in  a  half  hour  of  radiant 
sunshine,  the  weather  here,  too,  is  atrocious.  Wind 
east  and  north,  west  for  moments  to  delude  one,  and 
then  back,  '  armed  with  terrors.'  But  Granville  is 
going  on  delightfully  well. 

1  At  Paris. 


1845  TO   THE  DUKE   OF  DEVONSHIRE  395 

Lady  Lome's  happiness  is  delightful  to  see,  she  is 
grown  so  natural  and  gay. 

The  Levesons  are  gone  to  Aldenham  for  the  holi- 
days. The  London  news  you  hear  from  all  and  I  don't 
know  it. 

Mrs.  Arkwright  adores  old  Smoky,  I  hear ;  lives  in 
it  as  at  Paris  or  Borne,  sees  sights  and  savants,  has  a 
few  chez  ette  in  the  evening,  or  goes  and  larks  at  Mrs. 
Sartoris's,  where  she  has  Mendelssohn  and  good  music. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  May  15,  1845. 

I  know  the  Viscountess's  perfect  repast — a  model,  I 
think.  The  only  flaw  when  I  dined  with  her  were  the 
minstrels  at  the  door,  all  in  some  full  national  costume, 
which  looked  too  Shrewsbury ish.1 

Jesse !  May  Tiber  marry  her  some  of  these  days. 
Mrs.  Spaniels  are  so  like  the  Princesse  de  Sagan. 

You  see  I  am  flat.  I  have  seen  Miss  McTavish,  and 
am  captivated  by  her.  I  think  her  lovely,  charming, 
gentle,  feminine,  neither  twang  nor  slang. 

The  fancy  ball  is  the  talk  of  the  moment.  The 
Ministers  have  made  a  respectful  appeal.  H.  M.  has 
written  to  them  a  la  ronde  to  say  she  cannot  let  them 
off,  nor  the  Corps  Diplomatique.  Van  de  Weyer  says 
there  is  an  epidemic  beginning  amongst  them. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  May  20,  1845. 

I  have  an  excellent  account  to  give  you  of  Granville. 
He  is  going  on  as  well  as  possible,  in  spite  of  the  dread- 
ful cold  weather.  I  love  the  dear  people  who  have  felt 
solicitude.  The  paragraph  in  the  '  Standard  '  was  quite 
incorrect,  but  still  the  attack  of  the  stomach  was  sharp 

1  At  Alton  Towers  a  harper  played  at  the  door  to  welcome  a  new 
arrival. 


o96     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1845 

enough  to  make  him  very  weak  and  languid  for  a  few 
days. 

Marie  says  the  ball  at  Court  was  dreadfully  hot  and 
crowded.  Step's  daughter,1  extremely  put  out,  stuck 
close  to  Lady  Canning,  resisted  messages  from  the 
Queen  to  go  and  sit,  dance  reels,  etc. — in  short,  rebellion 
to  the  dull  honours  offered  her. 

The  costume  ball  rages  in  all  senses.  Beauvale, 
Sandwich,  Norreys  not  asked,  whilst  Lady  Gertrude 
Sloane  Stanley  puts  out  her  nose  and,  with  her  whole 
brood,  is  invited. 

We  are  going  to  the  Eegent's  Park  and  have  been  to 
Covent  Garden,  which  is  too  fragrant  and  delicious. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  May  26,  1845. 

Only  one  line  to  thank  you  for  two  delightful  letters 
and  for  fruit  such  as  never  was  tasted — peaches  and 
grapes.  I  hope  McTavish,  who  dined  here  yesterday, 
takes  it  for  a  wedding  present.  Her  singing  is  beauti- 
ful, like  Mrs.  Jordan's.  Her  manner  perfect.  At  Mr. 
Bennett's  beautiful  church  it  will  be  a  very  pretty  sight 
on  Thursday. ^ 

This  morning  it3  was  not  pretty,  but  deeply  in- 
teresting to  see  those  bereaved  Drummonds  give  away 
the  comfort  and  delight  of  their  existence.  But  they 
wished  it,  ainsi  va  le  monde,  though  his  face  was  a  deep 
tragedy.  Lord  Lovaine  looked  very  happy  and  the 
Beverleys  are  delighted  with  the  marriage.  She,  Lady 
Lovaine,  is  an  incomparable  person.  But  again  I  say 
it  was  not  pretty  to  see  whole  herds  of  Percys  and 
Drummonds,  Ladies  Haddington,  Wharncliffe,  and  my- 
self the  ornamental  extras. 

1  Lady  Douglas. 

2  When  she  was  married  to  Mr.  Henry  Howard. 

3  The  wedding  of  Miss  Drummond,  married  to  Lord  Lovaine,  who 
succeeded  his  father  as  Duke  of  Northumberland  in  1867. 


1845  TO   LADY    CARLISLE 

Dress  rages.  Freddy  has  got  a  charming  suit l  lent 
him  by  Lord  Glengall,  as  the  unfortunate  household 
have  been  ordered  to  bedeck  themselves  in  new  suits 
and  this  is  one  Lord  Glengall  had  worn  last  year.  It  is 
remarkably  pretty,  white  with  scarlet  facings — V.  and 
A.  as  yet  secrets. 

To  LADY  CARLISLE. 

London  :  May  29,  1845. 

I  had  a  happy  day  yesterday,  taking  Eward  to 
Chiswick.  On  the  28th  of  May  some  few  years  ago  I 
took  her  there  with  Susy  on  her  lap  to  make  their  first 
acquaintance.  Always,  as  usual,  owing  to  your  kind- 
ness. I  never  saw  anything  so  happy  as  that  dear  old 
thing,  living  it  all  over  again,  and  I  heard  with  pleasure 
records  of  old  time,  that  never  ceased  from  one  door  to 
the  other. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London  :  May  30,  1845. 

Dearest  brother, — Scene  :  Freddy  in  an  armchair, 
very  poorly,  cold,  swelled  throat  and  headache.  I  in 
another,  very  ill,  got  out  of  bed  in  a  dressing-gown. 
In  the  back  court,  Levesons,  Sabine,2  and  half  a  dozen 
little  dogs,  some  shaggy,  some  smooth.  Leveson  is  to 
give  her  one.  Miss  Pea  is  very  grumpy.  Shoes  thought 
not  at  all  civil,  did  not  like  any  of  them.  Somehow 
or  other  London  has  not  answered  to  her,  yet  dinners, 
invitations,  civilities  are  showered  upon  her.  We  do 
not  know  what  lacks — lovers  and  husbands  perhaps. 

To-morrow  it  was  hoped  a  repast  at  Villa  d'Este,3 
Levesons,  Freddy,  Miss  Eaikes  to  meet  at  six  and  to  go 
and  see  Miss  Cushman,4  had  at  last  pleased  her,  but  this 
morning  she  was  grumpy  again  and  conjecture  more 

1  Copied  from  a  portrait  of  the  Pretender  Charles  Edward. 

2  Mile,  de  Noailles,  daughter  of  the  Due  de  Poix. 

3  Mr.  Fullerton's  house  in  South  Street,  previously  occupied  by  Mile. 
d'Este.  4  An  American  actress. 


398     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE     1845 

active  than  ever.  Nobody  admires  her  or  thinks  her 
good-looking,  which  may  go  for  something,  and  she 
does  look  and  dress  like  Mile.  Sterky.  Some  wonder  if 
she  is  disappointed  that  Henry  Greville  does  not  offer 
his  hand  and  Number  Two  Hobart  Place. 

The  Queen  is  going  again  to  Osborne  House.  Shoes 
dines  at  Court  to-dav. 

V 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  December  1,  1845. 

Good  bulletin.  We  drove  this  morning  to  Addison 
Lodge  and  saw  Charles  Fox  at  the  door.  He  was  much 
touched  by  Granville's  visit.  He  joins  Lady  Mary  at 
Paris  to-morrow. 

Lady  Portman  says  Prince  Albert  and  the  Queen 
are  very  busy  and  happy  at  Osborne  House,  planting, 
improving,  vie  de  campagnard. 

I  was  happy  to  see  the  Duke  of  Wellington  ride  up 
to  Lady  Jersey's  door  and  go  in  to-day.  A  little  pro- 
motion and  good  sense,  both  in  his  line,  may  dry  the 
torrents  and  bring  all  right. 

To  THE  DUKE  OF  DEVONSHIRE. 

London :  December  1845. 

Excellent  bulletin,  most  dear  brother. 

We  had  an  hour  and  a  quarter's  drive  in  Hyde 
Park.  He  said  he  never  enjoyed  anything  more.  He 
is  stronger  and  all  things  are  improved,  but  I  know  I 
must  not  feel  sanguine.  Yet  I  accept  with  gratitude 
and  adoration  all  that  is  sent  to  soothe  and  cheer. 

Soon  after  Lord  Granville  became  seriously  worse 
and  he  died  on  the  8th  of  January,  1846. 


INDEX 


'  ABBOT  OF  UNREASON,'  the,  at  New- 

castle-under-Lyme,  i.  182 
Abdy,  Lady,  i.  5 
Abdy,  Mrs.,  ii.  363 
Abercorn,   Lady,  i.   93,   822,   328, 

344,  ii.  252 

Abercorn,  Lord,  ii.  43 
Abercromby,  Mr.    (Speaker,  1885- 

39 ;  later,  Lord  Dunfermline),  i. 

99,  247,  ii.  66,  139,  183  sq. 
Abercromby,    Mr.    Ealph,    i.    247, 

257,  260,  282,  286,  293,  360,  362, 

398  sqq. 
Aberdeen,  Lady,  i.  87,  ii.   43,  62, 

66 

Aberdeen,  Lord,  i.  45,  ii.  23,  384 
Aboyne,    Lord     (afterwards     Lord 

Huntley),  i.  401 
Acton,   Lady  (widow  of  Sir  John 

Acton),  ii.  343 
Acton,     Lady    (afterwards     Lady 

Granville),  ii.  203,  260,  307 
Acton,  Sir  John  (now  Lord  Acton), 

ii.  260 

Acton,  Sir  Richard,  ii.  222 
Adair,  Sir  Eobert,  ii.  181,  203 
Adams'  '  Private  Thoughts,'  ii.  128, 

153 
Adelaide,  Madame,   i.   322,   ii.  75, 

80,  106,  127 

Adelaide,  Queen,  ii.  65,  68,  79,  184 
'  Agneau '  (  =  Mrs.  Lamb),  ii.  288 
Agoult,  M.  d',  i.  287 
Aguesseau,  Mme.  d',  i.  70,  105,  823 
Aigle,  M.  Henri  de  1',  i.  404 
Aigle,  M.  Jules  de  1',  i.  403 
Ailesbury,   Lady,   i.  328,    ii.    150, 

313,  315,  875 
Ailesbury,  Lord,  ii.  251 
Aix-les-Bains,  ii.  142  sq.,  159  sqq., 

263 
Aix  (Provence),  ii.  1GO 


Alava,  General,  ii.  89,  203 

Albemarle,  Lord,  i.  163 

Albert,   Prince   (afterwards  Prince 

Consort),  ii.  294  sq.,  881,  398 
Albertazzi  (singer),  ii.  274 
Albufera,  Mme.  d',  ii.  314,  826 
Alconbury  Hill,  i.  145 
Aldborough,  Lady,  i.  116,  118,  818 

sq.,  328,  ii.  28,  44,  54,  251 
Aldenham,  ii.  869 
Alexander  I.,  Emperor;  his  death 

(1825),  i.  878 
Allen,  Dr.,  i.  121 
Althorp,  Lord,  ii.  85  sq.,  178 
Alton  Towers,  manner  of  receiving 

a  guest  at,  ii.  395 
Alvanley,  Lord,  i.  87,  139,  ii.  322 
Amherst,  Lord,  ii.  29 
Amsterdam,  pictures  in  the  Museum 

at,  i.  273  sqq. 

Anderson,  Eev.  James,  ii.  124,  375 
Angerstein,  Mr.,  ii.  207 
Anglesea,  Lord,  ii.  112 
Angouleme,  Due  d',  i.  70,  ii.  253 
Angouleme,  Duchesse  d',  i.  54,  330, 

333 

Anisson,  M.  Eugene,  ii.  139 
Anson,  Lady,  i.  23 
Anson,  Lady  Anne,  ii.  849 
Anson,  Mr.  George,  i.  197,  ii.  151 
Anson,  Mrs.,  ii.  149  sq. 
Antwerp,  i.  260 
Appony,  Comte,  i.  406,  ii.  214 
Appony,  Comtesse,  i.  251,  316,  858, 

367,  394,  397,  407,  438  sq.,  ii.,  21 

77  sq.,86,  116,  150,  158,  227,  258 
Appony,  M.  Kodolphe,  ii.  217,  315 
Appony,  Mme.  Eodolphe,  ii.  308 
Apsley  House,  i.  165 
Apsley,  Lord,  i.  62 
Arago,  M.,  ii.  178 
Arbuthnot,  Mrs.,  i.  248 


400      LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Aremberg,  Prince  d',  i.  259,  312, 351 
Arkwright,  Mrs.  (nee  Kemble,  niece 

of  Mrs.    Siddons),  i.   32,  ii.  47, 

183,  185,  395 

Arlincourt,  M.  d'  (novelist),  ii.  283 
Arques,  ii.  102 
Arqui,  ii.  362  sq. 
Artois,  Cornte  d'  (afterward  Charles 

X.),  i.  21 

Ascot  Races  (1829),  ii.  41  sq. 
Ashburnham,  Mr.,  ii.  74,  386  sq. 
Ashburton,  Lord,  ii.  250 
Ashley,  Lady,  ii.  68 
Ashley,  Lady  Barbara  (married  Mr. 

William  Ponsonby),  ii.  27 
Ashley,  Lord  (1821),  i.  202, 392, 400, 

ii.  37,  42  sq.,  45,  50,  59 
Ashley,  Mr.  John,  ii.  74,  144 
Askew.  Sir  G.,  i.  275 
Aston,  Mr.,  ii.  144,   171,   179  sq., 

192,  262 
Auckland,  Lord  (nicknamed  '  George 

Barnewell '),  i.  127,  169,  171 
Augereau,  Mine.,  i.  117 
Austria,  Emperor  of  (Francis  II.), 

i.  65 
Avignon,  ii.  160  sq. 


BABINGTON,  Dr.,  i.  136 

Baden,  Dowager  Duchess  of  (Ste- 
phanie, nee  Beauharnais) ,  ii.  333, 
335 

Baden,  Princess  Marie  of  (married 
Douglas,  son  of  Duke  of  Hamil- 
ton), ii.  342,  360,  396 

Badminton,  i.  5  sqq.,  129 

'  Bagatelle  '  (Paris),  i.  105 

Bagot,  Lady,  i.  31,  ii.  172 

Bagot,  Lady  Harriet,  i.  40,  43 

Bagot,  Lord,  i.  235 

Bagot,  Mr.,  ii.  37 

Bagot,  Mrs.  i.  31 

Bagot,  Sir  Charles,  i.  29,  ii.  326 

Bagration,  Princesse  (married 
Lord  Howden),  i.  100,  352,  362, 
ii.  24,  76,  192,  240,  245 

Baillie,  Mr.,  of  Dochfour  (married 
Lady  Fanny  Bruce),  ii.  251 

Balby,  Mine,  de,  i.  331 

Balzac,  M.,  ii.  196 

Banks,  Mr.  William,  ii.  67 

Barham,  Lady  F.  (afterwards  Lady 
Clarendon),  ii.  278 

Baring,  Lady  Augusta,  ii.  174 

Baring,  Lady  Harriet  (later,  Lady 
Ashburton),  ii.  121,  217,  221,  250 


Baring,  Mr.,  ii.  39 
Barnard,  Sir  Andrew,  ii.  92 
Barrington,  Miss,  ii.  381 
Barrot,  M.  Odillon,  ii.  75,  83,  87,  96, 

282 

Bassano,  Due  de,  ii.  175,  259 
Bath,  Dowager   Lady,   her   death, 

(1825),  i.  373 

Bath,  Lady,  i.  133,  140,  414,  435 
Bathurst,  Lady  Georgiana,  i.  180 
Bathurst,  Lord,  i.  53,  55,  86,  137, 

169,  425 

Bauffremont,  Due  de,  ii.  257 
Bauffremont,    Mine.   Theodore,   ii. 

79,  137 

Bavaria,  Crown  Prince  of,  ii.  339 
Beamish,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  220 
Bear,  the  (  =  Mr.  Edward  Ellice), 

ii.  263 

'  Beau,  the  '  (  =  Duke   of  Welling- 
ton), ii.  56,  61 
Beauclerk,  Mrs.,  i.  100 
Beaufort,  Duchess  of,  i.  5,  32,  140 

212,  ii.  83,  220 

Beaufort,  Duke  of,  i.  158,  ii.  330 
Beauvale,  Lady,  ii.  335 
Beauvale,  Lord  (married  daughter 

of  Count  Maltzahn),  ii.  317,  326 
Beauveau,    Princesse    Charles    de 

(nee  Komar),  ii.  251 
Bedford,  Duchess  of,  i.  148,  196s?., 

201,  377,  ii.  124 

j    Bedford,  Duke  of,  i.  163,  ii.  62 
Be'doyere,  Colonel  de  la,  i.  72 
Beecher,  Lady  (Miss  O'Neill,  act- 
ress), ii.  290 
Beecher,  Sir  W.,  ii.  290 
Belfast,  Lady,  i.  246,  328,  ii.  210, 

376 
Belgians,  King  of  the  (Leopold),  ii. 

197,  212,  309,  381 
Belgians,  Queen  of  the  (Louise),  ii. 

127,  130,  141,  197,  212 
Belgiojoso,  Princesse,  ii.  112,  177, 

258 

Belgium,  ii.  81.  89,  91,  131 
Belgrave,   Lady   Elizabeth,  i.  267, 

ii.  36 

Bellay,  ii.  263 

Bellini,  Signer  (musician),  ii.  197 
Bennett,  Miss,  ii.  225 
Bennett,    Rev.     Mr.     (St.     Paul's, 

Knightsbridge1),  ii.  382 
Bentinck,  Lady  Frederick,  ii.  354 
Bentinck,  Ladv  Jemima,  i.  264 
Bentinck,  Lady  William,  i.  296  sq., 

ii.  203,  281,  352 


INDEX 


401 


Bentinck,  Lord  Frederick  (married 

Lady  Mary  Lowther),  i.  165  sq. 
Bentinck,  Lord  George,  i.  434 
Bentinck,   Lord  William,   ii.   201, 

287  sqq. 

Bentinck,  Miss  Antoinette,  i.  264 
Bentinck,   Mr.  George  Cavendish, 

ii.  354  sq. 
Beresford,    Lady    Sarah    (married 

Lord  Ingestre),  ii.  37 
Berne,  ii.  265  sq. 
Bernstorff,  M.  de,  ii.  277,  290 
Berri,  Due  de  (murdered  in  1820), 

i.  21 
Berri,  Duchesse  de,  i.  104  sq.,  342, 

346,   374,  379,  402,  428,    ii.  65, 

68,    (her    secret  marriage)    137, 

227 
Berry,  Miss,  i.  4,  53,  55,  124,  142, 

351,  433,  ii.  67,  70, 157  sqq.,  167, 

171,  182,  184,  186,  205,  207,  211 
Bertin,  Mme. :   her  opera   '  Esme- 

ralda,'  ii.  217 

Bertin  de  Vaux,  M.,  ii  217 
Bertrand,     Comte      (Buonaparte's 

secretary),  i.  75 
Berryer,  M.,  ii.  221,  242 
Bessborough,    Lady    (daughter    of 

first  Lord  Spencer),  i.  3,  40,  138, 

154,  156  ;  her  death,  218 
Bessborough,  Lord,  i.  3,  41,  ii.  386 
'  Bethgelert '  (song),  ii.  39 
Beust,  Count,  ii.  290 
Binning,  Lady,  i.  37 
Binning,    Lord    (afterwards    Lord 

Haddington),  i.  37 
Biron,  Mme.  de,  i.  101 
Blacas,  M.  de,  i.  54 
'  Blackberry  '     and     '  Gooseberry,' 

nicknames  of  the  two  Miss  Berry  s, 

i.  4  n. 
Blackwood,  Mrs.  (later,  Lady  Duf- 

ferin),  ii.  174 

*  Blanket '  (  =  Lady  Blanche  How- 

ard), ii.  41 

Blantyre,  Lord,  ii.  368 
Blaye,   Chateau   de,    Duchesse   de 

Berri  imprisoned  in,  ii.  137  n. 
Bligh,  Mr.  Edward,  ii.  274,  297 
Blithfield,  i.  31 
Blomfield,  Bishop,  ii.  219  n. 
Bliicher,  Marshal  (in  Paris,  1815), 

i.  72 
Blunt,  Mr.,  ii.  306 

*  Bodkins,'  meaning  of,  i.  229 
Boigne,  Mme.  de,  ii.  79,  210 
Bois  de  Boulogne,  ii.  170 

VOL.    II. 


Bolton  Abbey,  i.  142 

Boni  de  Castellane,  Mme.,  i.  434 

Bordeaux,  ii.  163  sq. 

Bordeaux,  Due  de  (Monseigneur : 
afterwards  Comte  de  Chambord), 
i.  333,  ii.  373 

Borghese,  Prince,  i.  409 

Borghese,  Princess,  i.  110  sq. 

Boringdon,  Lady,  i.  78,  80 

Boringdon,  Lord  ('  Borino  '  :  after- 
wards first  Earl  of  Morley),  i.  75 

Boringdon,  Lord  (1837),  ii.  233 

Boscawen,  Lord,  ii.  378 

Both,  Jean  and  Andre  (artists),  i. 
273 

Bouille,  M.,  ii.  69 

Bourdonnaie,  M.  de  la,  ii.  51  sq. 

Bourg,  ii.  263 

Bourke,  Mme.  de,  i.  382,  395,  ii. 
76,  112,  208;  220,  264 

Bourne,  Mr.  Sturges,  i.  424 

Bowles,  Major,  i.  154 

Bowring,  Dr.,  ii.  139 

Braganza,  Duchesse  de,  ii.  115 

Brand,  Mr.  (afterwards  Speaker; 
later,  Lord  Hampden) :  his  mar- 
riage, ii.  223 

Bray,  M.  de,  ii.  239 

Brazil,  Emperor  of  (Dom  Pedro), 
ii.  104,  106 

Breda,  i.  260 

Bresson,  M.,  ii.  231  sq. 

Briche,  Mme.  de  la,  i.  323 

Brignole,  Count,  ii.  188  n.,  208 

Brignole,  Mme.  de,  ii.  229 

Bristol,  Lord,  ii.  273 

Brodie,  Sir  B.,  ii.  370 

Broglie,  Due  de,  ii.  133,  194,  230, 
301,  394 

Broglie,  Duchesse  de,  i.  95,  98  sq., 
(her  manner  of  life)  344,  379,  ii. 
83,  133,  138,  (death)  271 

Brougham,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord 
Chancellor),  i.  85,  138,  161,  168, 
170,  173,  (speech  for  Queen  Caro- 
line) 181,  187,  192,  200,  251,  ii. 
11,  38,  56, 60,  62,  68,  (Chancellor) 
70,  117,  157,  177,  184,  186,  295, 
273,  298,  375 

Brougham,  Mrs.,  i.  192,  201 

Brownlow,  Lady,  ii.  41 

Bruce,  Lady  Fanny,  ii.  244 

Bruce,  Lord,  ii.  158,  224,  226 

Bruce,  Mr.  Frederick,  ii.  244 

Brummel,  Mr.,  i.  40,  136,  ii.  191 

'Brush,  the'  (  =  Lord  Brougham), 
ii.  284 

D  D 


402     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Brussels,  i.  124,  259,  310 
Buccleuch,  Duchess  of,  ii.  66 
Buccleuch,  Duke  of.  i.  353.  ii.  273 
Buchanan,  Mr.,  ii.  117 
Buckingham,  Duke  of,  ii.  330 
Buhl,  Count,  ii.  333 
Buller,  Sir  T.,  ii.  300 
Bulteel,  Mr.,  ii.  61 
Bulwer,   Mr.   Henry,  ii.  291,  293, 

318,  331 

Bulwer,  Sir  Edward,  ii.  389 
Buonaparte,  Emperor,  i.  58,  64,  78, 

137 

Buonaparte,  Prince  Lucien,  i.  104 
Burdett,  Sir  Francis,  i.  3,  207,   ii. 

183 

Burghersh,  Lady,  i.  388,  ii.  275 
Burghersh,  Lord  (later,  Lord  West- 
morland), i.  385,  ii.  65,  103 
Burlington  House,  i.  153 
Burlington,  Lady  (daughter  of  Lord 

Carlisle),  ii.  154,  304 
Burlington,  Lord,  ii.  307 
Burrell,     Mr.      (afterwards     Lord 

Willoughby  de  Eresby),  i.  55 
Bury,  Lady  Charlotte,  ii.  340 
Butera,  Prince,  ii.  157,  174 
Butine,  M.  (musician),  i.  285 
Butler,  Lady  Harriet,  i.  141 
Byng,  Mr.  F.,  i.  181,  221,  237,  262, 

276,  279,  288,  372,  ii.  37,  76,  131, 

158,  370 
Byron,  Lord,  i.  34,  141,  219,  292 


CADOGAN,  Mrs.,  i.  402 

Cadogan,  Lord,  ii.  343 

Calais,  i.  257 

Calthorpe,  Lord,  i.  27 

Calton,  i.  232 

Calcraft,  Mr.,  ii.  343 

Cambridge,  Duke  of,  ii.  30 

Campan,  Mme. :  extract  from  her 
journal,  i.  316 

Campbell,  Miss  Charlotte  (after- 
wards Lady  Uxbridge),  i.  88 

Campbell,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord 
Cawdor),  i.  Ill 

Canning,  Mr.,  i.  30,  34,  38,  44,  108, 
138,  216,  229,  231,  251,  271, 
307,  393,  396,  400,  (death)  416 
sq. 

Canning,  Mrs.  (afterwards  Lady 
Canning),  i.  29,  216,  230,  332, 
391,  393,  396,418,  ii.  7,  9,  (death) 
224 

Canning,   Mr.  C.  (afterwards  Vis- 


count, later  Earl,  Canning),  i.  418r 

ii.  110 
Canning,    Miss    (afterwards    Lady 

Clanricarde),  i.  216,  337,  341,  343 
Canning,  Sir  Stratford,  i.  44,  ii.  43, 

117 

Cantelupe,  Lord,  ii.  348,  350 
Canterbury,  Archbishop  of,  i.  173, 

175,  184" 

I    Canterbury,  Lady,  ii.  197,  291 
Caradoc.     See  Cradock 
Caraman,  M.  de,  ii.  192,  248 
Caraman,  Mme.  de,  ii.  13,  119,  133,. 

226,  251,  287 
Carcassonne,  ii.  162 
Carlisle,  Lady,  i.  48,  81,  141,  146 
!    Carlisle,  Lord  (fifth  Earl),  i.  3,  14, 

26,  48,  81,  (death)  356 
Carlisle,  Lord  (sixth  Earl),  ii.  1,  9, 

16,   53,   108,    124,    (Privy    Seal, 

1834)  155,  157,  187,  215,  277,  376 
Carlyle,  Mr.  T.,  ii.  121  n. 
Caroline,  Queen,  i.  154,  190,    204, 

208  sqq. 
Cass,  General  (American  Minister 

in  Paris),  ii.  225 
Castelcicala,   Prince,  i.  325,  ii.  88, 

138 

Castelcicala,  Princess,  ii.  77 
Castellane,  Mile.  Sophie  de,  ii.  210 
Castellane,  Mme.  de,  ii.  314,  393 
Castellani  (Roman  jeweller),  ii.  347 
Casteras,  Mile,  de,  ii.  283 
Castiglione,  Duchesse  de,  i.  117 
Castlereagh,  Lady,  i.  59,  62 
Castlereagh,  Lord  (afterwards  Lord 

Londonderry)    i.     64,     86,    155, 

189 
Castlereagh,  Lord  (son  of  the  above)  f 

ii.  274,  327 

Castries,  Due  de,  i.  113 
Cato  Street  conspiracy,  i.  152 
Caulfield,  Mrs.,  i.  340 
Caulfield,  Miss  Harriet,  ii.  17  sq. 
Cavendish,  Lady  Charles,  i.  367 
Cavendish,  Lady  George,  i.  23,  ii. 

15 
Cavendish,  Lord  George  (afterwards 

Earl  of  Burlington),  i.  143,  ii.  14, 

17 
Cavendish,    Mr.    George    (married 

Lady  Louisa  Lascelles),  ii.  191 
Cavendish,     Mr.     W.     (afterwards 

Lord  Chesham),  i.  41 
Cavendish,  Mr.  "William  (later,  Lord 

Burlington ;    afterwards   seventh 

Duke  of  Devonshire) ,  ii.  41  sq.,  46  • 


INDEX 


403 


birth  of  his  second  son,  the  present 
Duke  of  Devonshire,  ii.  141 
Cavendish,  Mrs.   (wife  of  General 

Cavendish),  i.  91 
Cavendish,  Mrs.,  ii.  82,  92, 191, 222, 

272 

Cavendish,  Mrs.  Henry,  i.  131 
Cavendish,  Miss  (afterwards  Lady 

Strafford),  ii.  47 

Cawdor,  Lady,  ii.  63,  94,  165,  384 
Cayla,  Mme.  du,  i.  397,  412 
Cecil,  Lady,  ii.  52 
'  Cenerentola '  (opera),  ii.  40 
Chabot,  Lady  Isabella,  i.  334 
Chabot,  M.  de,  i.  98,  ii.  18,  225 
Chad,    Mr.,  i.  253,   263,   265,  271, 

273,  282,  285,  293,  298 
Chalmers,  Eev.  Dr.,  ii.  260 
Champlatreux,  M.  de,  ii.  259 
Chantilly,  i.  94 

Chapman,  Mr.  (Eton),  ii.  24,  110 
Charade,  a,  i.  203 
Charity   Costume   Ball    (Paris),  ii. 

225  sq. 

Charlemont,  Lady,  i.  49,  436,  438 
Charles  X.  King  (France),  i.  330, 
335,  371,  (dethroned)  ii.  61,  79, 
(death)  253 
Charlotte,  Princess,  i.  93 ;  her  death, 

131  sq. 

Chartres,  Due  de,  i.  382 
Chataignerie,  Mme.  de  la,  i.  118,  ii. 

240 
Chateaubriand,  M.  de,  i.  54,  137, 

296 

Chateaudun,  ii.  165 
Chatelleraut,  Due  de,  i.  369 
Chatenay,  Mme.  de,  i.  104,  397 
Chatsworth :  beautiful  books  at,  i. 

136 
'  Cheerful '  ( =  Duke  of  Rutland),  ii. 

103 
Chesterfield,     Lady,     ii.    67,    149, 

289 

Chesterfield,  Lord,  ii.  42 
Chevassier  (Lord  Granville's  cook), 

i.  213 

Chichester,  Lord,  ii.  376 
Chichester,  Mr.,  i.  141 
Chigi,  Palazzo  (Rome),  ii.  343 
Chigi,  Princess,  death  of,  ii.  354 
Chimay,  Prince  de,  ii.  31 
Chinnery,  Mr.,  i.  4 
Choiseul,  Mme.  de,  i.  297 
Cholera  (1831)  ii.  115 ;  (1832)  125, 

129  ;  (1837)  ii.  248 
Cholmondeley,  Lord,  i.  207 


Christie,    Mrs.    (married   Duke    of 

Gordon),  i.  154 

Cinti  (singer),  i.  410,  ii.  168,  276 
Clam,  Count,  ii.  41 
Clancarty,  Lady,  i.  259 
Clancarty,  Lord,  i.  244,  259 
Clanricarde,  Lady,  ii.  62,  170  sq.r 

173,  177,  180,  309 
Clanricarde,  Lord,  i.  337,  341,  343, 

ii.  184 

Clanwilliam,  Lady,  ii.  68 
Clanwilliam,  Lord,  i.  153,  171,  176, 
200,  231,  270,  343,  385,  388,  ii. 
10,  47,  60 

Clare,  Lord,  i.  166,  189,  ii.  40 
Claremont,  General,  ii.  244 
Clarence,  Duchess  of,  i.  168,  238 
Clarence,  Duke  of,  i.  239,  242 
Clarendon,  Lady,  ii.  62,  278 
Clarendon,  Lord,  ii.  278,  293,  326, 

379 

Clements,  Lord,  ii.  32 
Cleveland,  Duke  of,  ii.  330 
Clifden,  Lord,  ii.  38 
Clive,  Lord,  i.  134 
Cobbett,  Mr.,  i.  173 
Codrington,  Lady,  ii.  82 
Codrington,  Sir  E.,  ii.  86 
Coigny,  Due  de,  i.  163,  ii.  30,  231 
Coigny,  Mme.  de,   i.   63,   69,    102, 

320,  ii.  30,  203,  226 
Coke,  Lord,  ii.  343 
Colbert,  M.  de,  i.  404 
Consalvi,  Cardinal,  i.  110,  212 
Constable,  Lady,  i.  338 
Constant,  M.  Benjamin,  i.  89 
Contades,  M.  de,  ii.  210 
Contades,  Mme.  de,  ii.  393 
Conundrum  on  Queen  Caroline,  i. 

196 

Conyngham,  Lady,  i.  172,  207,  211, 
214,  223,  238,  243,  255,  ii.  1,  29, 
36,  52,  106 

Conyngham,  Lord,  ii.  103 
Conyngham,  Lord   Francis    (after- 
wards Lord   Londesborough),   i. 
23  n.,  152,  157 
Copeland,  Alderman,  ii.  65 
Copley,  Miss,  i.  225  sq.,  ii.  32,  35 
Copley,  Sir  Joseph,  i.  226  sq.  233. 

ii.  33 

Coppinger,  Miss,  ii.  254 
Cosse,  M.  de,  i.  335,  ii.  204 
Cotes,  Mr.  i.  12 ;  anecdote  of,  13 
Courbonne,  Mme.  de,  i.  397 
Courlande,  Due  de,  ii.  70  n. 
Courval,  Mme.  de,  ii.  344 

D  D  2 


404     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANYILLE 


Coventry,  Lady,  i.  370 

Cowley,  Lady,  ii.  50,  180,  326,  353 

Cowley,  Lord,  ii.  179,  330 

Cowper,  Lady  (afterwards  married 
Lord  Palmer ston),  i.  77,  255, 
392,  ii.  10,  42,  46,  64,  296 

Cowper,  Lord,  ii.  36 

Cowper,  Lady  Emily,  ii.  42  sqq., 
50,  59 

Cowper,  Lady  Fanny  (married 
Lord  Jocelyn),  ii.  287,  317 

Cradock,  Major  (later,  Lord  How- 
den),  i.  348,  352,  362,  395,  435, 
ii.  31,  52,  74,  90,  (name  changed 
to  Caradoc)  129,  192,  203,  240, 
245 

Cramer  (musician),  i.  255 

Cranston,  Mr.,  i.  253 

Craon,  Mme.  de,  i.  397 

Craven,  Mr.  Berkeley,  i.  258 

Craven,  Mrs.,  ii.  366 

Crawford,  Mr.,  ii.  209 

Crillon,  Mile,  de  (married  Pozzo  di 
Borgo),  ii.  116 

Croker,  Mr.,  ii.  92 

Crombie,  the  Abbe,  i.  285 

'  Crust  and  Crumb,'  ii.  282 

Cumberland,  Duke  of,  i.  358  sq.,  361, 
ii.  29,  60 

Cumberland,  Duchess  of,  i.  75,  93 

Cunningham,  Mr.,  i.  357 

Curzon,  Major,  i.  388 

Curzon,  Mrs.  (nee  Bishop),  i.  31 

Cushman,  Miss  (actress),  ii.  397 

Cuvier,  M.  (naturalist),  i.  326,  352, 
357,  ii.  117 


DACRE,  Lady,  ii.  52,  223 

Daine,  General,  ii.  106 

Dalberg,  Due  de,  i.  326,  380,  ii.  18 

Dalberg,  Duchesse  de,  i.  326,  397, 

401,  ii.  811,  339 
Dalrymple,  Lady,  ii.  332 
Damas,  M.  de,  i.  317,  333,  369,  401 
Danias,    Mme.  de,    i.  322,  328,  ii. 

79 

Darner,  Mrs.,  ii.  47,  147,  157,  173 
'  Dames  de  1'Attente,  Les,'  ii.  79 
'  Dames  de  Mouvement,  Les,'  ii.  79 
'  Dames  de  la  Resistance,  Les,'  ii. 

79 

Daniskiold,  M.  ii.  80,  224 
Dartmouth,  Lord,  i.  31 
Davenport,  Harriet,  i.  433 
Davidoff,  Mme.,  i.  333,  378 
Davies,  Mrs.,  ii.  241 


Davy,  Lady,  ii.  341 

Davy,  Sir  Humphry,  i.  352 

De  Bathe,  Mr.,  ii.  387 

De  Brosses :  his  '  Lettres  His- 
toriques  et  Critiques  sur  1'Italie,' 
ii.  341 

De  Candia,  M.  (Mario,  the  tenor), 
ii.  258 

Decazes,  M.,  i.  95  sqq.,  101,  107, 
ii.  192 

Dedel,  M.,  i.  263,  271 

Dedel,  Mme.,  i.  285 

De  Grey,  Lord,  ii.  389 

De  Grey,  Lady,  ii.  182,  184,  326 

Dejazet,  Mile,  (actress),  ii.  327 

Delamarre,  Mme.,  ii.  83 

Delessert,  M.  ii.  87,  161 

Delessert,  Mme.,  ii.  120,  162 

Delmar,  Baron,  i.  411,  ii.  3,  133 

Delmar,  Baromie  (nee  Miss 
Rumbold),  i.  411,  ii.  76,  150,  188, 
252 

Deluge,  a  destructive  (St.  Peters- 
burg), i.  317 

Demont,  Mile.  (Queen  Caroline's 
maid),  i.  158,  170,  172  aq.,  174, 
184 

Demerara,  i.  299 

Demidoff,  Count  (married  Princesse 
Mathilde  Buonaparte),  ii.  326  sq. 

Denison,  Mr.  (afterwards  Speaker), 
i.  255,  393,  400,  425 

Denman,  Mr.,  i.  157,  155 

Dentistry,  French,  i.  364 

Derby,  (twelfth)  Earl  of,  i.  27 

Derby,  Countess  of  (Miss  Farren), 
i.  27,  171 

De  Ros,  Mr.  (married  Lady 
Georgiana  Lennox),  i.  159,  180, 
231,  292,  ii.  47 

De  Rothesay,  Miss,  ii.  208 

De  Ruyter  (artist),  i.  274 

Devonshire,  (Elizabeth)  Duchess 
of,  i.  3, 11, 127,  135 ;  death  (1824), 
269 

Devonshire,  (sixth)  Duke  of,  i.  55, 
(journey  to  Russia)  92,  145,  175, 
185,  192,  201,  211,  267,  298,  381, 
383,  (special  ambassador  at  coro- 
nation of  Emperor  Nicholas)  400, 
415,  422,  437,  ii.  5,  14,  54,  71,  81, 
86, 97, 101, 115, 145, 156, 185.  204, 
246,  261,  266,  279,  304,  315,  394 

Dick,  Mr.  Quintin,  i.  167 

Dieppe,  ii.  103 

Dijon,  ii.  268 

Dimsdale,  Baroness,  ii,  295 


INDEX 


405 


Dino,  Mme.  de,  i.  389,  ii.  70,  180, 

199,  204,  219,  245,  247 
Doctrinaire   society  in  France,   ii. 

133 
Dody,   Doddles  =  Lady   Granville's 

daughter  Georgiana 
Dogs :    Lady    Granville's  pets,  ii. 

358  sq,  363 
Dole,  ii.  269 

Dolly  ( =  Lady  Lyndhurst),  ii.  68 
Dolomieu,  Mme  de,  ii.  109 
D'Orsay,  Lady  Harriet,  ii.  254, 274, 

291,  331 

Dorset,  Duke  of,  ii.  29 
Doria,  Prince,  ii.  341,  354 
Doria,  Princess,  ii.  286 
Dosne,  Mme.,  ii.  286 
Dou,  Gerard  (artist),  i.  273 
Douglas,   Lady  (nee   Beckford),   i. 

24 

Douro,  Lord,  ii.  225,  353 
Dover,  Lady,  ii.  187,  212 
Dover,  Lord,  ii.  127,  131,  140 
Downshire,  Lady,  i.  60,  310 
Downman  (artist),  i.  9 
Doyle,  Lady  (nee  Steer),  ii.  290 
Doyle,  Sir  Charles,  ii.  290 
Duchesnois,  Mile,  (actress),  i.  103, 

126,  318 

Duckworth,  Sir  John,  i.  75 
Dudley  and  Ward,  Lord,  i.  28,  422, 

ii.  11,  13 

Duff,  Lady,  ii.  301 
Duncan,  Lord,  i.  180 
Dundas,  Mrs.,  i.  227 
Dunlo,  Lord,  i.  352 
Dupin,  M.,  i.  352,  ii.  83,  282 
Duprez  (singer),  ii.  276 
Duras,  Duchesse  de,  i.  339,  357 
Durazzo,  Marquise,  i.  301,  ii.  205, 

207,  211 
Durham,  Lord,  ii.   109,    117,   155, 

257,  273 

Drummond,  Lady  Harriet,  ii.  387 
Drummond,   Miss   (married    Lord 

Lovaine),  ii.  396 
Drummond,   Mr.,   i.   303,    ii.   343, 

389 
Duvergier     de    Hauranne,    M.,  ii. 

210 


EAST    India    Company's     Charter 

(1812),  i.  32 
Ebrington,   Lady,   i.   413   sq. ;  her 

death,  422  sq. 
Ebrington,  Lord,  i.  92,  101,  415 


Edgcumbe,  Mr.,  i.  293,  301,  ii.  267 
Edgcumbe,     Lady    Emma    (after- 
wards Countess  Brownlow),  i.  61 
Eden,  Moreton,  i.  209 
Edensor  Church,  i.  91 
Eldon,  Lord,  i.  424 
Elgin,  Lady,  ii.  205,  244 
Elks  at  Chiswick,  i.  186 
Elibank,  Lord,  ii.  158 
Eliot,  Lady  Georgiana,  i.  5 
Ellenborough,  Lady,  ii.  26,  77 
Ellenborough,  Lord,  i.  181,  ii.  57 
Ellesmere,  Lord,  ii.  383 
Ellice,  General,  ii.  223  n.,  360 
Ellice,  Miss,  ii.  150 
Ellice,  Mrs.,  i.  372 
Ellice,  Mr.  E.,   ii.    129,    199,    201, 

222,  231,  263,  284 
Ellice,  Rev.  James,  ii.  226 
Elliot,  Lady  Betty,  ii.  78 
Elliot,  Lady  Mary,  ii.  282  n. 
Elliot,  Mr.,  i.  30 
Ellis,  Lady  Georgiana,  i.  351 
Ellis,  Miss,  ii.  274 
Ellis,  Mr.  Agar,  i.  115,  119,   123, 

140,  169,  183,  196,  220,  350,  354, 

404 

Ellis,  Mr.  Augustus,  i.  149 
Ellis,  Mr.  Charles  (afterwards  Lord 

Seaford),  i.  29,  50,  94,  109,  115, 

149,  189,  254 
Elphinstone,  Lord,  ii.  120 
Ely,  Lord,  ii.  389 
Empsall,  Mrs.,  ii.  357 
Emus  at  Chiswick,  i.  186 
Endsleigh,  i.  230 
Enghien,  Due  d',  ii.  287 
Epigrams,  i.  133,  254,  303 
Errington,  Mrs.  ii.  290 
Erroll,  Lady,  i.  239,  242 
Erskine,  Mr.,  i.  158 
Escars,  Duchesse  d',  i.  339,  349,  ii. 

79,88 

Escrick,  ii.  33 

'  Esmeralda '  (opera),  ii.  217  sq. 
Essex,  Lady,  i.  33,  ii.  380,  383 
Essex,  Lord,  ii.  56 
Esterhazy,  Comte  Albert,  ii.  313 
Esterhazy,  Comte  Maurice,  ii.  203, 

225 
Esterhazy,   Prince  (married   Lady 

Sarah  Villiers),  i.  86, 348,  ii.  319  n. 
Esterhazy,  Princess,  i.  87,  185, 199, 

ii.  54 

Estorff,  Mme.  d',  i.  264,  312  sq. 
Etang  de    Francois   I.    (Fontaine- 

bleau),  ii.  170 


406     LETTERS   OF    HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Eu,  Queen  Victoria's  visit  to,  ii. 
369 

Euston,  Lady,  i.  350 

Euston,  Lord,  i.  244 

Evans,  Sir  De  Lacy,  ii.  230 

Eward,  Mile,  (governess  of  Lady 
Granville's  children),  i.  97,  414, 
ii.  16,  44,  48,  61,  114,  141,  226, 
269,  284,  287 

4  Exeter  Change  '  ( =  Bishop  Phil- 
potts),  ii.  391 

Exeter,  Lady,  i.  243 

Exeter,  Lord,  i.  242 

'  Exposition  des  Tableaux  '  (Paris, 
1817),  i.  102 


FAGEL,  M.,  i.  248 

Fagel,  Mme.,  i.  264,  282,  285,  313 

Fairfax,  Mine.,  ii.  174 

Falbe,    M.     (Danish     Minister    in 

London),  i.  248 
Falck,  M.,  i.  253 
Falck,  Mme.  i.  281,  292,  300,  303, 

307,  ii.  31 

Fazakerley,  Mr.,  i.  159 
Ferguson,  Miss,  ii.  205,  207,  209 
Ferrari,  Mme.  (Duchesse  de  Galli- 

era),  ii.  188,  208,  218,  234 
Ferronays,  Comte  de  la,  i.  432,  ii. 

2,  4 
Ferronays,     Mile.    Pauline    de    la 

(afterwards  Mrs.  Craven),  ii.  13 
Fezensac,  Mme.  de,  ii.  314 
Fielding.   Lady   Elizabeth,  i.  205, 

397 
Fieschi  (would-be  assassin  of  Louis 

Philippe),  ii.  194  sq. 
Financourt,  Duchesse  de,  i.  379 
Finarcon,  Mme.  de,  i.  357 
Finguerlin,  Mile.  Mathilde  de,  i.  404 
Fitzgerald,  Lord,  ii.  326 
Fitzgerald,  Miss,  i.  159,  209.  ii.  190 
Fitzgerald,  Mr.  Vesey,  i.  366 
Fitzharding  Berkley,  Mr.,  ii.  277 
Fitzharris,  Lord  (later,  third  Earl 

of  Malmesbury),  ii.  256 
Fitzherbert,  Mrs.,  ii.  114,  147,  150 
Fitzjames,  M.,  ii.  204 
Fitzjames,  Mme.  de,  i.  404 
Fitzroy  Somerset,  Lord  (afterwards 

Lord  Raglan),  i.  57 
Fitzroy  Somerset,  Lady,  i.  57 
Fitzwilliam,  Lord,  ii.  17,  190 
Flahault,   Comte    de,    i.    63,    103, 
130,  197,  427,  429,  431,  434,  ii. 
194,  319 


Flahault,  Mme.    de.      See    Keith, 

Lady 
Flahault,  M.  Charles  de,  i.  83  sq. 

87 

Flahault,  Mile.  Adele,  ii.  316 
Flahault,  Mile.   Ernilie  de  (married 

Lord  Shelburne ;   now  Dowager 

Lady  Lansdowne),  ii.    172,  233, 

235,  317,  375 
Florence,  ii.  359  sqq. 
Flynne,  Lieutenant,  i.  179,  186 
Foley,  Lady,  i.  55 
Folkestone,  Lord,  ii.  147 
Fontainebleau,  ii.  168 
Foote,  Miss  (actress),  i.  432 
Forester,  Lord,  i.  434 
Forester,  Miss  Selina,  ii.  369 
Forrester,  Miss,  ii.  289 
Forster,  Miss  (nee  Bankes),  ii.  275 
Fortescue,  Mr.  George,  ii.  49  n. 
Foster,  Mr.  Frederick,  i.  2,  17,  32, 

ii.  118,  127 
Fouche,  M.,  i.  53,  67 
Fountains  Abbey,  ii.  48 
Fox,  Lady  Augusta,  ii.  248 
Fox,  Miss  (sister  of  Lord  Holland), 

i.  122,  391 
Fox,  Miss  Mary,  i.  360  sqq.,  384, 

ii.  31,  69,  167,  174 
Fox,  Mr.  Charles,  i.  361,  363 
Fox,  Mr.  Henry  (afterwards  Lord 

Holland),  ii.  122,  131 
Fox,  Mrs.,  ii.  28 
Frankfort  :  the  Fair,  ii.  213 
Frederick  of  Prussia,  Prince,  i.  360 
Frederique,  Prince  (stepson  of  Duke 

of  Cumberland),  i.  359 
Freemantle,  Miss,  i.  201 
Freichstett,  Count  of,  ii.  284 
Frere,  Mr.,  i.  41,  349,  353 
Frias,  Due  de,  ii.  169 
Frias,  Duchesse  de,  i.  185 
Fry,  Mrs.,  ii.  153,  193 
Fullerton,      Mr.      (married     Lady 
Georgiana       Leveson      Gower), 
ii.  139  sq.,  166  sqq.,  179 
Fullerton,   Lady   Georgiana.      See 
Leveson  Gower,  Lady  Georgiana 


GAETANI,  Michel  Angelo,  ii.  347 
Galerie  de  Henri  II.,  the  (Fontaine- 
bleau), ii.  169 
Galitzin,  Prince,  i.  291 
Galitzin,  Princess,  i.  32 
Gallen,  Comte  de,  i.  296 
Galliera,  Due  de,  ii.  188  n. 


INDEX 


407 


Galliera,  Duchesse  de.  See  Ferrari, 
Mme. 

Gallway,  Lady  Harriet,  i.  258,  289 

Gambier,  Lady,  i.  263 

Garcia,  Mile,  (singer),  ii.  283 

Gardner,  Miss,  ii.  188 

Gay,  Mme.  Delphine,  i.  357 

Gell,  Sir  William  (1820),  i.  160 

Genoa,  ii.  188  «. 

Genlis,  Mme.  de  :  '  Les  Amours  de 
Moise,'  i.  33 

George  IV.,  King :  the  trial  of 
Queen  Caroline,  i.  157,  172;  after 
the  trial,  191 ;  enthusiastic  re- 
ception at  Drury  Lane,  206 ;  ad- 
miration for  Lady  Conyngham, 
207  ;  at  Covent  Garden,  208 ;  in 
Dublin,  211 ;  visit  to  the  Conti- 
nent, 214;  his  life  at  Brighton,  238 
sq.,  242 ;  mentioned,  ii.  29, 35,  41 

Gerard,  Marshal,  ii.  175  n. 

Gerard,  M.  (painter),  i.  352 

Gibson,  Mr.  (sculptor) :  his '  Triumph 
of  Psyche,'  ii.  343, 346;  his  studio, 
356 

Gifford,  Mr.,  i.  186 

Gink  =  Lord  Leveson 

Girardin,  Mme.  de,  i  105,  427,  ii. 
74,79 

Gisborne,  Mr.,  i.  27 

Gisbourg,  M.  de,  ii.  137 

Gladstone,  Mr.,  ii.  387,  391 

Glenelg,  Lord,  ii.  288 

Glengall,  Lady,  ii.  28,  251 

Glengall,  Lord,  i.  172,  ii.  155,  397 

Glenlyon,  Lady,  i.  328 

Gloucester,  Duchess  of,  i.  168,  ii. 
17,  35 

Goat,  a  child  suckled  by  a,  i.  397 

Goderich,  Lord  (successor  of  Can- 
ning as  Prune  Minister),  421, 
423,  ii.  1 

Goltz,  Mme.  de,  i,  264 

Gontaut,  Mme.  de,  i.  309,  320,  329, 
375,  ii.  17 

Gordon,  Duke  of,  i.  154 

Gordon,  Duchess  of,  i.  17 

Gordon,  Lady,  i.  275 

Gordon,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  326 

Gordon,  Mrs.,  i.  34 

Gore,  Lady  Julia  (married  Captain 
Lockwood),  i.  223 

Gore,  Miss  (married  Lord  Edward 
Thynne),  ii.  297 

Gore,  Mrs.  Charles,  ii.  297  n, 

Gortschakoff,  Prince,  ii.  199 

Gould,  Lady  Charlotte,  i.  312  sq. 


Gower,  Earl  (Govero  :  afterwards 
second  Duke  of  Sutherland),  i. 
39,  42,  110,  149,  170,  217,  221, 
311 

Gower,  Lady,  i.  245,  255,  311,  ii. 
36,  47,  49,  66 

Graham,  Lady  Lucy,  i.  134 

Graham,  Mr.,  ii.  248 

Graham,  Mme.,  ii.  184 

Graham,  Sir  James,  ii.  155  n. 

Graham,  Mrs.,  ii.  25,  284 

Gramont,  Due  de,  i.  117  sq. 

Gramont,  Mile.  Corisande  de  (mar- 
ried Lord  Ossulston),  i.  3  n.,  17,  21 

Granard,  Lady,  i.  328,  381 

Granard,  Lord,  ii.  110 

Granby,  Lord,  ii.  289 

Grange,  General  de  la,  i.  336 

Grant,  Mr.  Charles  (afterwards  Lord 
Glenelg),  i.  421,  428 

Grant,  Sir  Francis  (artist),  ii.  368 

Grantham,  Lady,  i.  140,  188,  253, 
279,  370,  372,  386,  ii.  46,  70,  124 

Granville,  Lord  (first  Earl  Gran- 
ville)  :  incidents  of  his  early  life, 
5  sqq. ;  portrait  of  him  as  a  boy, 
13;  his  first  child,  18;  Conti- 
nental tour  (1817),  93;  appointed 
Ambassador  to  the  Hague,  229  ; 
visit  to  George  IV.  at  Brighton, 
240  sqq. ;  life  at  the  Hague,  261 
sqq. ;  special  mission  to  France, 
305  sqq. ;  appointed  Ambassador 
to  France,  307 ;  resigns  the  em- 
bassy, ii.  22  sqq. ;  reappomted, 
71 ;  again  leaves  French  Em- 
bassy (1834),  178  sqq. ;  again  ap- 
pointed, 187  ;  question  of  peace 
or  war  between  England  and 
France  in  1840,  308 ;  seized  with 
paralysis,  318  n. ;  resigns  the 
embassy,  324 ;  his  death,  399 ; 
events  of  the  youth  of  his  chil- 
dren, i.  193,  214,  248,  280,  283, 
292,  300,  327,  334,  350,  407 

Graves,  Lady,  ii.  58  sq. 

Graves,  Lord,  ii.  58,  61 

Greene,  Mr.,  ii.  149 

Grefuhle,  Mr.  John,  i.  124,  412,  ii. 
264 

Grefuhle,  Mme.  de,  i.  105,  ii.  120 

Grenville,  Mr.  Thomas,  i.  42,  184 

Gresley,  Sir  Eoger,  ii.  19 

Greville,  Lady  Charlotte,  i.  164, 
167,  ii.  222,  380 

Greville,  Lady  Rosa,  ii.  363 

Greville,  Mr.  Algernon,  ii.  63 


408     LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Greville,  Mr.  Brook,  ii.  28,  144 
Greville,  Mr.  Charles,  senior,  i.  162, 

ii.  69 
Greville,  Mr.  Charles  ('  Punch  '),  i. 

61,  137,  149,  153.  186,  197,  203, 

209,  341,  402,  ii.  47,  54,  126,  213, 

222  378 
Greville,   Mr.  Henry,   ii.   171,  173, 

187,  189,  255,  380 
Grey,  Lady,  ii.  96,  133,  141 
Grey,  Lady  Elizabeth,  i.  201 
Grey,  Ladv  Georgiana,  i.  237 
Grey,  Lord,  i.    157,  185,  237,  427, 

ii.  52,  62,  64,  92,  155,  186,  243, 

367 
Grey,  Rev.  Francis  (married  Lady 

Elizabeth  Howard),  ii.  295 
Grippe  (Influenza),  ii.  102, 172,  218, 

222,  227,  317,  365 
Grisi,  Mme.  (singer),  ii.  169,  217, 

274 

Groeninx,  M.,  i.  302 
Gronow's  '  Reminiscences  ' :  sketch 

of  Lady  Granville,  i.  320  n. 
Grosvenor,  Lord  (later,  first  Mar- 
quis of  Westminster),  i.  189 
Grovestins,  Mile.,  i.  285 
Guiccioli,     Mme.     (Lord     Byron's 

friend),  ii.  122 
Guiche,  Duchesse  de,  i.  318,  353, 

363,  371,  379,  384,  ii.  146 
'  Guilleret  '  =  Lord  Granville 
'  Guinea  '( =  Lord  Granville),  ii.  47, 

55,  72,  75,  80,  96,  100,  132,  136, 

303 
Guizot,  M.,  ii.  101,  192,  201,  214, 

252,  260,  282,  300,  335,  391,  393 
Gurney,  Miss,  ii.  363 
Gwydir,  Lady,  i.  163 
Gwydir,  Lord,  i.  165,  ii.  238 


HAARLEM,  the  great  organ  at,  i.  283 
Hackaert  (Dutch  artist),  i.  274 
Haddington,  Lady,  ii.  182,  397 
Haddington,  Lord,  ii.  64,  66,  182  n. 
Hague,  The,  i.  260 ;  English  society 

at,  262 

Hall,  Captain  Basil,  i.  299 
Hamilton,  Duchess  of,  i.  355,  435 
Hamilton,  Duke  of,  i.  155,  369,  ii. 

206,  210,  229,  342  n. 
Hamilton,  Lady,  i.  33 
Hamilton,  Lady  Anne,  i.  156 
Hamilton  Lady  (Hugh),  i.  116,  123 
Hamilton,  Lord  Archibald,  i.  156, 

158 


Hamilton,  Mr.,  ii.  99,  117 
Hamilton,  Mrs.,  i.  410,  ii.  44,  71, 

74,  78,  136,  328 
Hamilton,  Sir  Charles,  i.  432 
Hamilton,  Sir  Hugh,  i.  110,  116 
Hammond,  Mr.,  ii.  117 
Hampden,  Lady,  i.  357 
Harcourt,  Lady  E.     See  Vernon. 
Harcourt,    M.  Georges  d',   ii.  200, 

219 
Hardy,    Lady,  i.  350,  391,    ii.   96, 

312 

Hardy,  Miss,  i.  404,  433,  ii.  21 
Hardy,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  350 
Harewood,  Lord,  i.  189 
Harland,  Lady,  i.  202,  215 
Harland,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  259 
Harper,  the,  at   Alton  Towers,   ii. 

395 
Harrowby,  Lady,  i.  1,  15,  21,  28  sq., 

37,  84,  92,  101, 167, 178, 190, 195, 

198,  206,  257,  264,  332  sq.,  340, 

414 ;  ii,  26,  37, 49,  53, 105,  (death) 

258 
Harrowby,    Lord,   i.    15,   45,    190, 

409,  422,  ii.  100,  117,  119 
Hartington,  Marquis  of  (1810),  i.  2, 

8,  20,  25  ;  succeeded  his  father  in 

1811,  29.     See  Devonshire,  Duke 

of. 

Haussonville,  Mme.  d',  ii.  272 
'  H.  B."  (caricaturist),  ii.  288 
Heem,  Jan  de  (artist),  i.  274 
Heerdt,  M.  de,  i.  285 
Heneage,  Mr.,  ii.  371 
Henin,  General  d',  ii.  219 
Henin,  Mile,  d',  ii.  218  n. 
Henin,  Vicomtesse  d',  ii.  82 
Henri  V.  (Comte  de  Chambord),  ii. 

204 
Herbert,   Lady   Mary    (afterwards 

Lady   Bruce ;  later,  Lady  Ailes- 

bury),  ii.  216 

Herries,  Mr.,  i.  424,  ii.  57 
Hertford,    Lady     (widow     of    the 

second  Marquis),  i.  357 
Hertford,  Lord,  ii.  144 
Hertz,  M.,  i.  428 
Hervey,    Mrs.     (later,   Duchess    of 

Leeds),  i.  106,  108 
Hervey,  Lady,  i.  95,  144 
Hervey,  Lady  Charles,  ii.  49 
Hervey,  Lord    William,  i.  393,    ii.. 

12 

Hesse,  Prince  of,  ii.  350 
HiU,  Mr.,  i.  124,  149 
Hinton,  Lord,  i.  Ill 


INDEX 


409 


Hobhouse,  Mr.,  i.  161 
Hogueres,  Mme.  d',  i.  272 
Hohenlohe,  Prince  de,  ii.  18 
Holland,  Queen  of,  i.  265,  284 
Holland,  Lady,  i.  58,  74,  84,    121, 

169,  207,  238,  358,  370,  ii.  54,  62, 

270 
Holland,  Lord,  i.  125,  157, 179, 1S7, 

200,  422,  ii.  31,  38,  312 
Holland,    Sir    Henry,    i.    186,    ii. 

31 

Holmesdale,  Lord,  ii.  172 
Homoeopathy,  ii.  209 
Hope,     Mrs.     (later,     Viscountess 

Beresford),     i.     115,     238,     241, 

279 

Horsford,  Miss,  ii.  291 
Hortense,  Queen,  i.  83 
Horton,  Mr.  "Wilmot,  ii.  65 
Howard  of    Efnngham,    Lord,   ii. 

103 
Howard   de  Walden,  Lord,  i.  233, 

ii.  7 
Howard,   Lady   Blanche    (married 

Mr.   "William   Cavendish,    after- 
wards sixth  Duke  of  Devonshire), 

ii.  40,  46,  71,  81,  87 
Howard,     Lady    Julia,    i.    48,    ii. 

227 

Howard,  Lord  Henry,  i.  138 
Howard,  Mr.  Charles  (married  Miss 

Alice  Parke),  ii.  367 ;  his  death, 

369 
Howard,  Mr.  Edward  (married  Miss 

Ponsonby),  ii.  367 
Howard,  Mr.  Henry  (married  Miss 

McTavish),  ii.  396 
Howden,  Lord,  ii.  314 
Howe,  Lady,  i.  235,  239 
Howe,  Lord,  ii.  53 
Howick,  Lord,  ii.  92,  243 
Hudson,  Mr.  (later,  Sir  James),  ii. 

177 

Hiigel,  Baron,  ii.  252 
Hughes,  Mr.  (apothecary),  i.  29 
Hugo,  Victor,  ii.  136,  217,  338 
Humann,  M.,  ii.  282 
Humboldt,  Baron  Alexandre,  i.  115, 

134,  ii.  114 

Hume,  Mr.,  ii.  284,  287 
Hunloke,  Lady,  i.  28,  32,  103,  114, 

246,  329,  357 
Huskisson,  Mr.,  i.  79,  254, 365,  412, 

418,  422,  ii.  5,  11,  20,  39,  59 
Huskisson,  Mrs.,  i.  82,   ii.  39,  56, 

354 
Huysum,  Van  (artist),  i.  274 


ICHNEUMON,  a  tame,  i.  185,  205 

Imhoff  s  '  Agar,'  ii.  347 

Inchbald,  Mrs.,  i.  12 

Ingestre,  Lord,  ii.  37 

Irby,  Commissioner,  ii.  30 

Irish  Church  question  (1834-5),  ii. 
155,  192 

Istrie,  Mme.  d',  ii.  120 

Italian  Opera,  Paris,  burnt  down, 
ii.  256 

Italian  witnesses  in  Queen  Caro- 
line's trial,  story  of,  i.  159 

Ivanhoff  (singer),  ii.  169 


JENKINSON,  Miss,  ii.  284 
Jermyn,  Lady  Katherine,  ii.  375 
Jermyn,  Lord,  ii.  375 
Jerningham,  Mrs.  E.,  ii.  150 
Jersey,  Lady,  i.  29,    77,   110,  112, 

121,  126,  129,  164,  169,  175,  189, 

193,  196,  375,  386,  390,  394,  428, 

ii.  52,  54,  63,  65,  146,  190,  196, 

288,  291,  327,  381,  398 
Jersey,  Lord,  i.  194,  197*,   391,   ii, 

21 

Jesuits  in  France,  ii.  52 
Jocelyn,  Lord,  ii.  275,  31.7 
'  John  Bull '  the   (newspaper)  :  it& 

first  appearance,  i.  201 
Johnston,  Lady,  i.  410 
Johnstone,  Mrs.,  ii.  291 
Jones,  Dr.,  i.  48 
Jones,  Mr.,  i.  257,  270,  335,  427 
Jordan,  Mrs.,  ii.  396 
'  Joute,'  a  (Berci,  1831),  ii.  104 
Jumilhac,  M.  A.  de,  ii.  204 
Jumilhac,  Mme.  de,  i.  433,  ii.  22,. 

74,  79,  137 


KANGAROOS  at  Chiswick,  i.  186,  192 

Kean,  Mr.  (actor),  i.  89 

Keating,  Miss,  ii.  173 

Keith,  Lady  (afterwards  Mme.  de 
Flahault),  i.  426,  429,  431,  433, 
ii.  21,  53,  71,  76,  82,  86,  96,  99, 
109,  136,  146,  157,  188,  192,  210, 
219,  226,  232 

Keith,  Lord,  i.  Ill 

Kelly,  Miss  (actress),  i.  192 

Kemble,  Miss  Fanny,  ii.  50,  52,  55, 
60,  65,  192 

Kemble,  Mr.,  ii.  258 

Kenmare,  Lady,  i.  124 

Kennedy,  Mr.,  i.  423 

Kensington,  Lord,  i.  207 


410     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Kent,  Duchess   of,  i,  168,   ii.  239, 

250,  381 
Kentfield,  Mr.  (billiard  player),  ii. 

388 

Kenyon,  Lord,  i.  173 
Keppel,  Lady  Sophia  (later,  wife  of 

Sir  James  Macdonald),  i.  141 
Kildare,   Lady    (later,  Duchess    of 

Leinster),  ii.  384 
Kilmorey,  Lord,  ii.  356 
King,  Lord,  i.  157 
Kingscote,  Lady  Isabella,  ii.  83 
Kinnaird,  Lady,  i.  68,  ii.  210 
Kinnaird,  Lord,  i.  87,  139,  251 
Kinnoul,  Lady,  ii.  251 
Kisseleff,  Mme.,  ii.  206,  218 
Knatchbull,  Sir  E.,  ii.  33  n. 
Knight,  Mr.  Payne,  i.  46 
Knighton,  Sir  William,  i.  255,  421 
Knox,  Mr.,  ii.  277 
Knutzen,  M.,  ii.  207,  209 
Konneritz,  Mile.  Anne,  ii.  277 
Koslowski,  Prince,  ii.  112 
Kulbach^M.,  ii.  183,  210,  256,  325 
Kutzlebens,  the  (a  joke),  ii.  53 


LABLACHE,  M.  (singer),  ii,  115,  169, 

275 

Laborde,  Mme.  de,  ii.  18,  79 
Laborde,  Mile.,  ii.  150 
Labouchere,  Mr.  (later,  Lord  Taun- 

ton),  i.  393,  ii.  267 
La  Fayette,  M.  de,  i.  127,  ii.  83,  87, 

96 

La  Fayette,  Mme.  de,  ii.  165 
L'Affan,  Dr.,  ii.  112 
Lafitte       and      Perier       Ministry 

(France),  ii.  76  n. 
Lafitte,  Mile.,  i.  411 
La  Ferte,  Mme.,  ii.  314 
La  Jonchere,  ii.  318 
Lamartine,  M.  de,  ii.  275 
Lamb,  Mrs.,  i.  276,  ii.  151 
Lamb,  Lady  Caroline,  i.  20,  74,  90, 

218,  307,  352,  ii.  9 
Lamb,  Mr.  Charles,  ii.  394 
Lamb,   Mr.  Frederick    (afterwards 

Lord  Beauvale  ;  later,  succeeded 

Lord  Melbourne),  i.  5,  65,  143, 

ii.  39,  57, 177,  195,  205,  270 
Lamb,  Mr.  G.,  i.  32 
Lamb,  Mr.  William,  i.  74,  ii.  29 
Lamb,  Mrs.  G.,  i.  10,  20,  32 
Lamb,  Mrs.  W.,  i.  74,  90,  109,  218, 

307 
Lambesc,  Prince  de,  i.  371 


Lambton,  Lady  Louisa,  i.  185 

Lambton,  Mr.,  i.  55,  121 

Lambton,  Mr.  Charles,  ii.  112 

Lambton,  Mr.  William,  ii.  205 

Lambton,  Mrs.,  ii.  192,  206 

Landseer,  Mr.  (artist),  ii.  115,  212 

Lane  Fox,  Mrs.,  i.  250 

Lansdowne,  Ladv,  i.  76,  ii.  63,  134, 
167,  174,  238,  330 

Lansdowne,  Lord,  i.  78,  410,  421, 
426,  ii.  13,  134,  167,  173,  391 

Lascelles,  Lady  Louisa,  ii.  191  n. 

LasceUes,  Mr.,  ii.  63,  182 

Lascours,  M.  de,  i.  69 

Lauderdale,  Lord,  i.  188,  193 

Laval,  Due  de,  i.  252,  ii.  54,  180, 
206 

Lawley,  Miss,  ii.  343 

Lawrence,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  207,  358 

Leader,  Mr.,  ii.  284 

Leeds,  Duke  of,  i.  252,  ii.  42 

Legge,  Mr.  Heneage,  i.  43 

Le  Havre,  ii.  196 

Lehon,  M.,  ii.  169,  171,  220,  277 

Leiningen,  Prince,  ii.  18 

Lemurra,  Baronne  de,  ii.  18 

Lens,  Sergeant,  i.  200 

Leon,  Princesse  de,  i.  351 

Leopold,  Prince,  i.  331,  386,  ii.  18, 
28,  30,  57,  102,  106,  (marriage) 
127,  130, 134, 142.  See  Belgians, 
King  of  the 

Leuchtenberg,  Duchesse  de,  ii.  344 

Le  Verd,  Mile,  (actress),  i.  314 

Leveson,  Lady,  ii.  333  sq.,  345,  354 
sq.,  369,  377 

Leveson,  Lord  (later,  second  Earl 
Granville) :  his  youth,  ii.  17,  24, 
30 ;  at  Oxford,  134  ;  first  speech 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  224  ; 
popularity,  229  ;  moved  the  Ad- 
dress in  1837,  249  ;  Under-Secre- 
tary  for  Foreign  Affairs  in  1840, 
299  ;  marries  Lady  Acton,  307, 
312  ;  M.P.  for  Lichfield,  326 

Leveson  Gower,  Lady  Evelyn,  ii. 
368 

Leveson  Gower,  Lady  Francis,  i. 
225,  ii.  36,  52 

Leveson  Gower,  Lady  Georgiana 
(married  Mr.  Fullerton),  ii.  16, 
45,  48,  62,  75,  80,  118,  122,  (mar- 
riage) 140,  205,  207,  211,  241, 
(translation  of  a  French  poem) 
303,  ('  Ellen  Middleton ')  378, 384 

Leveson  Gower,  Lady  Susan  (mar- 
ried Lord  Rivers),  ii.  15,  38,  44, 


INDEX 


411 


46,  54,  63,  65,  75,  90,  118,  122, 
126,  132,  (marriage)  135 
Leveson      Gower,    Lord     Francis, 
(afterwards  Earl  of  Ellesmere),  i. 
19,  220,  225,  ii.  23 
Leveson  Gower,  Mr.  Frederick,  ii. 
17,  38,  102,  124,  126,  213,  (at  Ox- 
ford) 256,  391,  395,  397 
Lewis,  Mrs.  F.  Frankland,  ii.  63 
Lichfield,  Dean  of  (1810),  i.  12 
Lichtenstein,  Prince  de,  i.  153 
Liege,  i.  124 

Lieven,  Prince,  ii.  39,  274,  279 

Lieven,  Prince  Alexandre  de,  ii.  278 

Lieven,  Prince  Paul,  i.  225,  ii.  206 

Lieven,  Princesse,  i.  55, 86, 116, 134, 
148,  176,  191,  221,  246,  266,  303, 
438,  ii.  10,  38,  57,  70,  148,  196, 
221,  236,  252,  292,  302,  364 

Ligne,  Prince  de,  ii.  290 

Lignowska,  Mme.,  i.  270 

Lilford,  Lady,  ii.  66,  186 

Lincoln,  Lady,  ii.  229,  248 

Lindsay,  Lady  Charlotte  (daughter 
of  Lord  North  ;  married  Lieut.- 
Col.  Lindsay),  i.  182,  186,  ii.  70, 
157 

Lismore,  Lord,  ii.  272 

Lisle,  i.  258 

Lister,  Lady  Theresa,  ii.  63 

Lister,  Miss,  ii.  241,  275 

Lister,  Mr.,  ii.  53,  61,  63 

Lister,  Sir  Villiers,  ii.  272  n. 

Listen,  Mr.  (actor),  i.  90 

Littleton,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord 
Hatherton),  i.  58,  233,  ii.  37 

Liverpool,  Lady,  i.  3 

Liverpool,  Lord,  i.  86,  158 

Lobau,  Marshal :  his  death,  ii.  273 

Lobau,  Mme.  la  Marechale,  ii. 
227 

Lock,  Mr.,  ii.  62 

Locke,  Miss  (later,  Lady  Walsing- 
ham),  ii.  255 

Locke,  Mrs.  William,  ii.  207,  255 

Lockwood,  Captain,  i.  222 

Loftus,  Lady  Anne,  ii.  387 

Loftus,  Lord  Adam,  ii.  330 

Loftus,  Lord  Henry,  ii.  388 

Londesborough  estate,  i.  23,  47 

London  ;  at  the  time  of  Queen  Caro- 
line's trial,  i.  154  sqq.,  167 

Londonderry,  Lady,  ii.  19 

Londonderry,  Lord,  i.  225,  409,  ii. 
158 

Long,  Miss  (married  Mr.  Wellesley, 
later  Lord  Mornington),  i.  1,  5 


Lonsdale,  Lady,  ii.  51 

Lome,  Lady,  ii.  395 

Lome,  Lord  (1844),  ii.  383  sq. ;  his 

marriage,  385 
Lorton,  Lord,  i.  251 
Louis  XVIIL,  i.  54,  66,  69,  (French 

jokes   about   him)  86,    (portrait) 

103,  (death)  305 
Louis  Philippe,  ii.  74,  94,  96,  104, 

127,   147,    166,    170,    (attempted 

assassination,  1835)  194,  216, 230, 

257,  302,  (shot  at   by  a  fanatic, 

1840)    311,    (death    of  Duke    of 

Orleans),  ii.  334 
Louise,  Princesse  (France),  ii.  127 

sq.,   130.      See   Belgians,  Queen 

of  the 

Louie,  Mme.  de,  ii.  115 
Lovaine,  Lady,  i.  227 
Lovaine,  Lord  (afterwards  Duke  of 

Northumberland),  ii.  396 
Lowe,  Sir  Hudson,  i.  241 
Lowther,  Lady  Mary,  i.  165  sq. 
Luchesi  Palli,  Prince  de,  ii.  137 
Ludolf,  Signer,  ii.  65,  69 
Luttrel,  Mr.,  i.  26,  41,  53,  137,  159, 

170,   186,  211,    241,  255,  ii.  54, 

60,  139,  375 
Lygon,  Colonel,  i.  297 
Lyndhurst,   Lady,   ii.  52,  68,    146, 

148 ;  her  death,  159,  141  sq. 
Lyndhurst,   Lord    (Chancellor),    ii. 

63,  68,   149,  151,  157,  195,  214, 

222,  229 

Lynedoch,  Lord,  i.  125,  ii.  101 
Lyons,  Lady,  ii.  289 
Lyons,  Lord,  ii.  288  n. 
Lyttleton,  Lord,  ii.  277 
Lytton  Bulwer,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir 

Edward),  ii.  102,  171,  178,  384 


MACAULAY,  Mr.,  ii.  102,  273,  308 
Macdonald,  Lady  Caroline,  i.  164 
Macdonald,  Lady  Louisa  (sister  of 

Lord  Granville),  i.  9,  273 
Macdonald,    Mr.    (afterwards     Sir 

James),  i.  10,  14,  36 
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  i.  39 
Mackintosh,  Sir  James,  i.  55,  299, 

428,  430,  ii.  31 
McTavish,  Miss,  ii.  395 
Madeleine,    the :    the  bronze  gates 

(1838),  ii.  275 
Magennis,  Mr.,  ii.  74 
Maille,   Duchesse   de,  i.   339,   350, 

404,  ii.  79 


412     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


'  Maison  du  Bois,  La  '  (the  Hague), 

i.  286 

Maistre,  M.  de,  ii.  329 
Mahon,  Lord,  ii.  12,  144 
Majocchi,    Theodore  (Queen  Caro- 
line's courier  :  '  Non  miricordo  '), 

i.  160  sq. 
Malibran,    Mine,    (singer),   ii.   115, 

283 
Malines,   Archbishop    of :    '  L'Am- 

bassade  de  Pologne,'  i.  82 
Malmesbury,  Lady,  i.  72 
Maltzahn,  Count,  ii.  317  n. 
Manchester,  Duke  of,  ii.  160,  353 
Manners,  Lady  Emmeline,  i.  342 
Manners,  Lord  John,  ii.  289,  369 
Mansfield,  Lady,  i.  105,  107 
Mansfield,  Lord.  i.  107 
'  Mantalini '  ( =  Lord  Normanbv),  ii. 

294 

Marcet,  Mrs.,  ii.  12 
Marescalchi,  Mme.  de,  ii.  314,  339 
Marie  Amelie,  Queen   (France),  ii. 

74,  79,  83, 104,  106, 121,  127, 171, 

194,  216,  230,  334 
Marie,  Princesse  (France),  ii.  128 
Mario,  Signor.     See  De  Candia 
Marmier,  Mme.  de,  i.  404 
Marmont,  Marshal,  i.  104 
Mars,  Mile,  (actress),  i.  69,  73,  96, 

336,  338,  349,  388,  431,  436 
Marseilles,  ii.  160 
Martignac,  Mme.  de,  ii.  2 
Martineau,  Miss  :  her  '  Letters  on 

Mesmerism,'  ii.  373 
Maryborough,  Lady,  i.  242,  278 
Massa,       Duchesse       de       (Mme. 

Kegnier),  i.  406,  ii.  150 
Massacre   of  St.   Bartholomew,  ii. 

170 
Mathilde,    Princesse    (daughter   of 

Jerome  Buonaparte),  ii.  326 
Maubreuil     (assailant     of     Prince 

Talleyrand),  i.  405 
Meade,  Lady  Selina,  i.  150 
Mecklenburg,  Princesse  Helene  de. 

See  Orleans,  Duchess  d' 
Mehemet  Ali,  ii.  310 
Meiningen,  Duchesse  de  (mother  of 

Queen  Adelaide),  ii.  229 
Melbourne,  Lord,  ii.  39,  174,  178, 

185,  202,  236  sq.,  239,  243,  390 
Melville,  Lord,  i.  131 
Melzi,  Duchesse  de  (nee  Brignole), 

ii.  338 

Mendelssohn  (musician),  ii.  395 
Menou,  Mme.  de,  ii.  226,  262,  265 


Menzingeii,   Mile.    Marie,   ii.    206, 

211,  216,  234 
Mercer,  Miss  (afterwards  Mme.  de 

Flahault),  i.  55,  99,  ii.  82,  87 
Merlin,  Mme.,  ii.  18 
Mesnard,  M.  de,  i.  65,  113 
Metternich,  Prince,  i.  65,  67,  407, 

ii.  318 

Mexborough,  Lady,  ii.  89,  91 
Meyendorf,  M.  de,  i.  291 
Meyendorf,    Mme.    de,    i.    272,   ii. 

188,  244,  246,  315 
Michaud,  Mme.  (dancing  mistress), 

ii.  39 

Middleton,  Sir  William,  ii,  375 
Mignet,  M.,  ii.  260 
Miguel,  Don,  i.  439 
Mildmay,  Lady,  i.  315 
Mildmay,  Miss,  i.  3 
Mildmay,  Sir  Henry,  i.  3,  319 
Mills,  Mr.,  ii.  339  sq. 
Milman,    Mr.    (afterwards   Dean)  : 

his  tragedy  '  Fazio,'  i.  82 
Milnes,  Mr.,  ii.  275 
Milton,  Lord,  i.  139,  ii.  14 
'  Minna,     Miss '      ( =  Duchess      of 

Norfolk),  ii.  288 
Minto,  Lady,  ii.  97,  174 
Minto,  Lord,  ii.  167 
Mitford,  Lady  Georgiana,  ii.  88 
Mitford,  Mr.,  ii.  96 
Mitford,  Mrs.,  ii.  82 
Mohammed  VI.,  Sultan  (1829),  ii. 

44 
Mole,  M.  de,  i.  378,  404,  410,  412, 

ii.  214,  281,  284,  393 
Mole,  Mme.,  i.  361,  ii.  87,  226 
Monbreton,  M.,  ii.  204 
Money,  Mrs.,  i.  344 
Montrose,  Duchess  of,  ii.  290 
Montague,    Mr.    (afterwards    Lord 

Eokeby),  i.  2,  141,  149,  153,  171, 

210,  221,  225,  ii.  51,  60 
Montalembert,   Comte  de,  ii.  206, 

314 

Montalembert,  Mme.  de,  i.  333 
Montalivet,  M.,  ii.  83 
Montebello,  Duchesse  de  (nee  Jen- 

kinson),  ii.  284,  349 
Montjoie,  Mme.  de,  i.  405,  411,  432, 

ii.  170,  191,  283 
Montmorencv,  Duchesse  de,  ii.  79, 

172,  330 
Montrond,  M.,  i.  432,  ii.  30, 54,  147, 

173 
Moreau,  Mme.  la  Marechale,  i.  107, 

119 


INDEX 


413 


Morier,  Mr.  James  (author  of  Hajji 
Baba),  ii.  387 

Morier,  Miss  Horatia  (married  Lord 
Algernon  Seymour),  ii.  376 

Morier,  Mrs.,  i.  334,  ii.  172 

Morley,  Lady  (wife  of  first  Earl), 
i.  95,  204,  222,  228,  346,  ii. 
61 

Morley,  Ladv  (wife  of  second  Earl), 
ii.  65,  356 

Morley,  (first)  Earl  of,  i.  57,  95,  114, 
116,  126,  175,  228 

Morley,  (second)  Earl  of,  ii.  66,  122 

Mornay,  M.  Auguste  de,  i.  336 

Mornay,  M.  Charles  de,  i.  352,  412, 
436 

Morny,  Due  de,  ii.  120,  259 

Moroni,  Signor  (musician),  ii.  354 

Morpeth,  Lord  (afterwards  sixth 
Earl  of  Carlisle),  i.  2,  48,  92,  292, 
356,  his  children,  i.  85,  224,  ii. 
190, 203.  See  Carlisle,  sixth  Earl 
of 

Morpeth,  Lord  (son  of  the  above), 
i.  11,  375,  379,  404,  412,  ii.  20,    i 
26,  32,  38,  46,  62,  86,  95, 100, 102,    i 
187,  (Irish  Secretary,  1835)  189,    | 
192,  242,  (breakfast  in  honour  of 
O'Connell)  291,  (defeated  in  gene- 
ral election,  1841),  323 

Morteinart,  Due  de,  ii.  74 

Mortemartj  Mme.  Henri  de,  ii.  277 

Motteux,  M.,  ii.  104,  173 

Mouchy,  Due  de,  ii.  199,  313 

Mount  Charles,  Lady  (afterwards, 
1832,  Lady  Conyngham),  ii.  30, 
58 

Mount  Charles,  Lord,  i.  207,  211, 
255  w.,  ii.  30 

Mount  Edgcumbe,  i.  77 

Mulgrave,  Lord,  ii.  155,  157,  183, 
187,  190 

Munro  of  Novar,  Mr.,  ii.  225 

Munster,  Count,  i.  86 

Munster,  Lord,  ii.  300 

Murat,  Prince,  ii.  93 

'  Mysterious,  Lady,  The,'  ii.  388 


NADAILLAC,  Mme.  de  (nee  'Miss 
Mitchell),!.  95,  857 

Napier,  Lord,  ii.  108 

Napoleon,  Prince  Louis  :  the  Bou- 
logne escapade,  ii.  308 

Narbonne,  ii.  161 

Narbonne,  Mme.  de,  ii.  79 

Narvaez,  Mme.  de,  ii.  210,  262,  265 


Narishkin,  M.  Leon  de,  ii.  329 
Nassau,  Duchesse  de,  ii.  364 
National  Guards,  the  (Paris,  1831), 

ii.  82,  84,  92,  110 
Navarino,  i.  435,  440,  ii.  9 
Naworth  Castle,  ii.  266 
Neapolitans  :  story  illustrating  their 

want  of  truth,  i.  189 
Nemours,  Due  de,  ii.  196,  219  n., 

276 

Neuchatel,  ii.  268  sq. 
Neuilly,  i.  393 
Neumann,  Baron,  i.  145,  148,  176, 

181,  200,  ii.  199 
Nevill,  Lady  Dorothy,  ii.  360 
Newburgh,  Lady,  i.  328,  ii.  47,  310 
Newcastle,  Duke  of,  ii.  158 
Newdigate,  Mr.,  i.  236 
Ney,  Marshal,  i.  72 
Ney,  M.  (son  of  the  Marshal),  i.  412 
Nice,  ii.  328  sqq. 
Nicholas,  Emperor,  ii.  184,  384 
Nismes,  ii.  162 
Noailles,  Due  de,  ii.  204,  247 
Noailles,  M.  Antonin  de,  ii.  207 
Noailles,  M.  Juste  de,  i.  317,  ii.  18 
Noailles,  Mme.  de,  i.  68,  337,  339, 

363,403  sq.,  ii.  74,  79,  84,  97, 119, 

137,  146,  201 
Noailles,  Mme.  Alfred  de,  i.    341, 

350,  404,  438,  ii.  74,  119,  283 
Noailles,  Mile.  Sabine  de,  ii.  97,  313, 

397 

Noel,  Rev.  Baptist,  i.  218 
Nomentana,  the  bridge  of,  ii.  343 
Normanby,  Lady,  i.  201,  ii.  3 
Normanby,  Lord,  ii.  26,  93,  95,  294 
Norreys,  Lady,  ii.  257  sq. 
Norreys,  Lord,  ii.  280 
North,  Mr.  Brownlow,  i.  435 
Northland,  Lady,  i.  328 
Northland,  Lord,  ii.  277 
Northumberland,    Duchess     of,    i. 

346,  ii.  330 
Norton,  Mr.,  ii.  202 
Norton,  Mrs.,  ii.  30,  35,   174,  177, 

189 
Novello,   Mme.   Clara    (singer),   ii. 

349 
Nugent,  Mr.,  i.  32,  53,  95,  99,  ii. 

118 
Nunez,  M.  Fernan,  i.  101 


OBERLAND,  the,  ii.  266  sqq. 
O'Connell,  Mr.  Daniel,  ii.  60,  291 
Odillon  Barrot,  M.     See  Barrot 


414     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Ollworthy,  Mrs.,  i.  263 

O'Neill,  Miss  (actress),   i.    79,   89, 

290  n. 

Opie,  Mrs.,  ii.  96 
Orange,   Prince  of,  i.   125,  266,  ii. 

69,  108 
Orange,  Princess  of,  i.  266,  275,  ii. 

333 

Orchard,  Mr.,  ii.  183 
Ordener,  General,  ii.  287  n. 
Orford,  Lady,  i.  132,  ii.  360 
Orford,  Lord,  ii.  107 
Orleans,  Due  d',  ii.  74,  77,  88,  115, 

118, 120, 123,  146, 150,  190,  (mar- 
riage) 227,  229,  257,  330,  (killed 

by  an  accident)  334 
Orleans,     Duchesse     d'    (1824),    i. 

322 
Orleans,  Duchesse  d'  (1837),  ii.  227, 

229,  245,  265,  276 
Orloff,  Mme.,  ii.  199 
Ormonde,  Lady,  i.  263,  276,  292 
Osborne  House,  ii.  398 
Osborne,  Lady  Francis,  i.  262,  268 
Osmond,  M.  d',  i.  137 
Ossulston,  Lady,  i.  201 
Ossulston,  Lord   (afterwards   Lord 

Tankerville),  i.  3,  17,  21 
Ossuna,  Due  d',  ii.  217 
Oswald,  Mr.,  ii.  147 
Oudenarde,  Mme.  d',  i.  401,  ii.  77 
Oudinot,    Marshal    (Due    de    Dal- 

matie),  i.  406 

Outremont,  Mile,  d',  i.  272 
Oxford,  Lady,  i.  4 


'  P^ESTUM  '  (poem  by  George  How- 
ard), i.  217 

Paganini  (violinist),  ii.  93 

Page,  Mr.,  ii.  48 

Paggenpohl,  M.,  ii.  296 

Paget,  Lord  Alfred,  ii.  368 

Pahlen,  Count  Nicholas,  i.  148,  150, 
248,  ii.  211,  233 

Pahlen,  Count  (Russian  Ambas- 
sador at  Paris),  ii.  198,  200,  206 

Palk,  Lady  Elizabeth,  i.  93 

Palli,  Mme.  (  =  Duchesse  de  Berri), 
ii.  138 

Palmella,  Senhor  (Portuguese 
statesman),  i.  181 

Palmerston,  Lord,  i.  233,  121,  ii. 
27,  53,  57,  87,  113,  185,  294, 
(marries  Lady  Cowper)  298,  310, 
342 

Panshanger,  ii.  38 


Paris  :  (in  1815),  i.  61 ;  (1817),  94  ; 
(1824),  314  ;  (1831),  ii.  73,  82, 110 

Paris,  Archbishop  of,  ii.  194 

Paris,  Comte  de  :  his  birth,  ii.  265 
sqq. 

Parish,  Mr.,  i.  180 

Parke,  Baron,  ii.  367 

'  Parti  Parlementaire,  Le,'  and  '  Le 
Parti  de  la  Cour'  (French  poli- 
tical parties  in  1839),  ii.  281 

Pasquier,  M.  ii.  98,  271,  273 

Pasta,  i.  317,  388,  393,  436,  ii.  28, 
109,  115 

Patterson,  Mrs.  (later,  Lady  Wel- 
lesley),  i.  108,  323 

Paturzo  (witness  in  Queen  Caro- 
line's trial),  i.  163 

Pavilion,  the  (Brighton)  :  visit  to 
George  IV.  at,  i.  238  sq. 

Paxton,  Mr.  (head-gardener  at 
Chatsworth ;  afterwards  Sir 
Joseph),  ii.  185,  212,  348,  377  n. 

Pear,  Mr.  (nickname  of  Louis  Phi- 
lippe), ii.  282 

Pedro,  Dom  (Emperor  of  Brazil), 
ii.  104,  106 

Peel,  Lady,  ii.  216 

Peel,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  Robert), 
i.  200,  205,  ii.  14,  57,  59,  81,  87, 
156,  175,  (first  Ministry,  1834) 
179,  (resignation)  185,  195,  216, 
227,  236,  247,  287,  (second  Minis- 
try, 1841)  327 

Pembroke,  Lady,  ii.  201,  216,  222, 
224,  226 

Penenden  Heath,  meeting  at, 
against  Catholic  Emancipation, 
ii.  33 

Perceval,  Mr.  Spencer,  ii.  343 

Percy,  Lady  Susan,  ii.  341 

Percy,  Mr.,  ii.  315,  319 

Percy,  Mr.  Charles,  ii.  359 

Percy,  Mrs.  Charles,  i.  235 

Pere-Lachaise,  Cimetiere  du,  ii. 
125 

Perier,  M.  Casimir,  ii.  88,  93,  96, 
106,  121 

Persian!  (singer),  ii.  248,  274,  276 

Peters,  Herr  (artist),  ii.  334 

PeterSham,  Lord,  i.  145 

Pfeiningen,  Baron  von,  ii.  335 

Phillips,  Mr.  (artist),  i.  9 

Philpotts,  Bishop  (Exeter),  ii.  391 

Phoanix  Park,  ii.  185,  193 

'  Picciola,'  ii.  217 

Pictures  at  the  Hague  Musee,  i. 
269 


INDEX 


415 


Pierrepoint,  Henry,  i.  70 

Pignaletti,  Mme.,  i.  154 

Pisaroni,  Signora  (singer),  i.  410, 
412,  437 

Pitt,  Captain,  ii.  146,  187,  372, 
388 

Pitt,  Miss  (later  Mrs.  Oldfield),  ii. 
255 

Pitt,  Miss  Harriet,  Maid  of  Honour 
to  Queen  Victoria,  ii.  236,  239, 
270 

Pitt,  Mr.  George,  ii.  255 

Planta,  Mr.,  i.  187 

Platow,  General,  i.  67 

Plunket,  Mr.,  ii.  313,  318 

Pointz,  Mr.  William,  i.  115 

Poitier,  M.  (actor),  i.  95,  103,  109, 
114 

Poix,  Due  de,  ii.  397 

Poix,  Mme.  de,  ii.  313 

Pole,  Mr.  W.,  i.  207 

Polignac,  Prince  de,  ii.  29,  54 

Polignac,  Prince  Jules,  i.  248,  296, 
317,  ii.  43 

Polignac,  Princesse  de  (daughter  of 
first  Lord  Rancliffe)  i.  359,  ii. 
29,78 

Polish  Committee,  London  (1844), 
ii.  384  sq. 

Politics,  English :  after  the  murder 
of  Mr.  Perceval  (1812),  i.  34 ;  Mr. 
Peel  '  in  Mr.  Perceval's  shoes ' 
(1817),  108 ;  the  trial  of  Queen 
Caroline,  154  sqq. ;  Mr.  Canning's 
resignation  (1820),  200;  West 
India  question  (1824),  271 ;  death 
of  Canning,  419 ;  Lord  Goderich's 
Ministry  (1827),  421;  Duke  of 
Wellington's,  ii.  7,  20,  56,  62; 
Lord  Grey's,  71;  Reform  Bill 
(1831),  94  ;  dissolution  of  Parlia- 
ment, 97 ;  fall  of  Melbourne's 
first  Ministry,  174 ;  Sir  R.  Peel's 
first  Ministry,  179  ;  Melbourne's 
second  Ministry,  185 ;  accession 
of  Queen  Victoria,  235  ;  Minis- 
terial changes  in  1839,  293; 
strained  relations  with  France 
(1840),  310;  general  election  of 
1841,  319 

Politios,  French,  i.  54,  103,  108: 
Martigny's  Ministry,  ii.  2 ;  Poli- 
gnac's,51w.;  CasimirPerier's,93; 
the  '  heredite '  question,  109 ; 
change  of  Ministry  hi  1834, 
175  ;  Mole  Ministry  (1837),  227  ; 
Ministerial  crisis  "  (1839),  281; 


Provisional  Government  of  April 
3,  284;  Soult's  Ministry,  287; 
Chateaubriand's  dismissal  from 
the  Villele  Ministry,  296 

Polwarth,  Lord,  ii.  375 

'  Poney '  ( =  Mme.  Appony),  ii.  217 

Poniatowski,  Prince,  ii.  258 

Ponsonby,  Lady,  i.  43 

Ponsonby,  Lord,  i.  43,  ii.  129,  131 

Ponsonby,  Mr.  William  (later,  first 
Lord  de  Mauley),  ii.  27  n.,  192, 
202 

Ponsonby,  Sir  Frederick,  i.  57, 
222 

Pont  du  Gard,  the,  ii.  162 

'  Poodle,  the  '  =  Mr.  F.  Byng 

Portland,  Duke  of,  ii.  1 

Portman,  Lady,  ii.  398 

Portugal,  Queen  of,  ii.  109,  145 

Potemkin,  M.,  ii.  344 

Potemkin,  Mme.,  ii.  350 

Pothier,  M.  (French  actor),  i.  74 

Potocka,  Comtesse  Alexandre,  i. 
342 

Potocka,  Mme.  Delphine,  ii.  83, 150 

Potocki,  Count,  i.  340 

Potocki,  M.  Joseph,  ii.  361 

Potter,  Paul  (artist),  i.  274 

Powell,  Mr.,  i.  187 

Power,  Mrs.  (married  Mr.  Manners 
Sutton),  ii.  183 

Powerscourt,  Lady,  ii.  286,  351 

Powerscourt,  Lord,  ii.  280 

'  Powlettain  '  ( =  Mr.  Powlett  Thom- 
son), ii.  294 

Powlett  Thomson,  Mr.,  Governor- 
General  of  Canada,  ii.  294 

Pozzo  di  Borgo,  Signer,  i.  39,  68, 
101,  317,  326,  341,  ii.  76,  93, 
(marriage)  116,  184 

Pradt,  M.  1'Abbe,  i.  326 

Praslin,  Mme.  de,  ii.  192,  203 

Prince    Regent,    the,    i.    93,    132, 

142 
]    Princeteau,  Mme.,  i.  96  sq.,  107 

Provisional  Government  (France) 
of  April  3,  1839,  ii.  284 

Prudhoe,  Lord,  ii.  219  n. 

Prussia,  King  of  (Frederick  William 
III.),  i.  65 

Prussians,  the,  in  Paris  (1815),  i. 
61 

'  Pug,  the  '  ( =  Mr.  Frederick 
Howard),  ii.  76 

'  Punch  '  =  Mr.  Charles  Greville 

Purvis,  Captain  Home,  ii.  277 

Purvis,  Miss,  ii.  197,  274 


416      LETTERS   OF  HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRAXVILLE 


Puyse'gur,  M.  de,  i.  21,  23,  27,  56, 
95,  97,  109 


QUINTANA,  Mme.,  ii.  262 


RACES  in  the   Champ  de  Mars,  ii. 

104 

Rachel,  Mile,  (actress),  ii.  274  sq. 
Raguse,  Duchesse   de,  i.  113,  117, 

320,  403 

Raikes,  Mr.,  i.  172 
Raikes,  Miss,  ii.  255,  313,  321 
Rambuteau,  M.,  ii.  235 
Rambuteau,  Mme.,  ii.  265 
Ramsay,  General,  i.  322 
Rancliffe,  Lady,  i.  381 
Randolph,  Dr.,  i.  2 
Ranfurly,  Lord,  ii.  219 
Raphael,  paintings  by,  i.  106 
Rastelli  (witness  in  Queen  Caroline's 

trial),  i.  187 

Rauzan,  Duchesse  de,  i.  357,  434 
Ravensworth,  Lady,  ii.  287 
Ravignan,  the  Abbe,  ii.  393 
Rawdon,  Miss,  i.  88,  106 
Rawdon,  Mrs.,  i.  127,  ii.  105,  131 
Ray  Wood  (Castle  Howard),  i.  8 
Razoumoffska,  Princesse,  ii.  313 
Razoumoffska,  Mile.,  ii.  13 
Recamier,  Mme.,  i.  96 
Redem,  M.,  ii.  80 
Redorte,  Mme.  de  la,  ii.  314 
Reform  question,  ii.  33,  67,  92,  94, 

102, 114 

Rendlesham,  Lady,  ii.  234,  313 
Revolutionary  movements  in  1820, 

i.  183 
Rheede  de  Ginkel,  Lady  Christina 

de,  i.  275 

Rhodes,  Rev.  R.,  ii.  353,  356 
Richelieu,  Cardinal,  ii.  300 
Richelieu,  Due  de,  i.  101,  433 
Richelieu,  Mme.  de,  ii.  146 
Richemont,  Mme.  de,  i.  394 
Richmond,  Duke  of,  ii.  155  n. 
Rigny,  General  de,  i.  440,  ii.  86 
Ripon,  Lord,  ii.  155  n. 
Rivers,  Lord,  ii.  118,  (marriage)  135, 

152,  241,  249,  368 
Rivoli,  ii.  364 

Robinson,  Lady  Helena,  ii.  131 
Robinson,  Miss,  i.  373,  ii.  32 
Robinson,  Mr.,  i.  341 
Robinson,  Sir  F.,  ii.  139 
Eobinson,  Sir  G.,  i.  273 


Rochefort,  ii.  269 

Rochefoucauld,  Sostegne  de    la,  ii. 

225 

Roden,  Lady,  ii.  278 
Rodney,  Miss,  i.  116 
Roebuck,  Mr.,  ii.  238 
Rogers,  Mr.,  i.  131,  255,  ii.  60,  212, 

273 

Roget,  Dr.,  i.  136 
Rohan,  Due  de,  i.  100,  109 
Rokeby,  Lord,  ii.  207,  308 
Rome,  i.  251,  ii.  339  sqq. 
Romilly,  Sir  Samuel,  i.  136 
Rose,  Mrs.  George,  ii.  255 
Rosny,  Chateau  de,  ii.  195 
Rossi,  Count  (married  Mme.  Son  tag), 

ii.  41  n. 
Rossini,  Signer   (composer),  i.  240, 

243,  380,  410, 428 
Rossini,  Mme.,  ii.  18 
Rothschild,  M.    (banker,  Paris),  i. 

322,  342,  372,  428,  ii.  94,  123,  203 
Rothschild,  Mme.,  i.  428,  ii.  150 
Rousseau's  '  Emile,'  i.  16 
Roxburgh,  Duchess  of,  ii.  222 
Rubini  (singer),  ii.  109, 115, 169,  275 
Rumbold,  Miss,  i.  388,  ii.  3 
Rumbold,  Sir  William,  ii.  4 
Rumford,  Comtesse,  i.  326,  ii.  178 
Russell,   Lady   Louisa  (now  Dow- 
ager Duchess  of  Abercorn),  i.  245 
Russell,  Lady  John,  her  death,  ii. 

275  sq. 
Russell,     Lord    (Lord    Tavistock's 

son),  i.  142 
Russell,  .   Lord    John,   i.  88,    (his 

'  Sketches  of  Life  and  Manners  ') 

163,  165,  379,  393,  395,  ii.  14,  20, 

185,  250,  275,  288 
Russell,  Lady   William   (nee  Miss 

Rawdon),  i.  127,  196,  433,  ii.  99, 

105 
Russell,  Lord  William,  i.  88,  100, 

ii.  101,  302 

Russell,  Lord  Wriothesley,  i.  360 
Russia,  Emperor  of:  Alexander,  i. 

65  ;  Nicholas,  ii.  54 
Russo-Turkish    war    (1829),   ii.   43 

222 
'  Rust   and  Lust,'    meaning  of,  in 

Holland,  i.  280 

Rutland,  Duchess  of,  i.  36,  369 
Rutland,   Duke   of,   i.  136,  ii.  103, 

214 
Ryder,   Lady    Georgiana   (married 

Mr.  Wortley),  i.  279 
Ryder,  Lady  Harriet  (later,  wife  of 


INDEX 


417 


Lord  Charles  Hervey),  i.  130,  ii. 

49,  105 

Ryder,  Lady  Louisa,  ii.  49 
Ryder,  Lady  Mary   (later,  wife  of 

Admiral  Saurin),  i.  130 
Ryder,  Lady  Susan  (married  Lord 

Elrington,  later  Lord  Fortescue, 

i.  16,  22 


SABOUSKA,  Mine.,  i.  397,  404,  411, 

434,  ii.  13 
Sadler,  Mr.,  ii.  60 
Sagan,  Duchesse  de,  i.  71 
Salamanca,  the  victory  at  (1812),  i. 

35  sqq. 

Salines,  ii.  269 
Salisbury,   Lady    (widow    of    first 

Marquis),  ii.  37 
Saltram,  i.  77,  228 
Salvandy,  M.,  ii.  84 
Salviati,  M.,  i.  263 
Salvo,  Mme.  de  (nee  Claxton),  ii.  325 
Samoiloff,  Mme.,  ii.  302 
San  Carlos,  Duchesse,  ii.  160 
Sandon,  i.  8,  10,  22,  27,  31 
Sandon,  Lady,  i.  364,  ii.  49 
Sandon,  Lady  Frances,  ii.  51 
Sandon,  Lord,  ii.  50,  56,  381 
Sandwich,  Lady,  i.  153,  241,  ii.  147 
Sapeiya,  Mme.,  ii.  83 
Sardi  (courier  of  Queen  Caroline),  i. 

179 

Sardinia,  King  of  (1831),  ii.  99  s q. 
Sartoris,  Mrs.,  ii.  378,  395 
'  Saul  and  David '  (poem),  ii.  275 
Saurin,  Lady  Mary,  ii.  49 
Saxe,  Princesse  Amelie  de,  ii.  283 
Scarsdale,  Lady,  i.  28 
Scheffer,  Ary  (artist),  ii.  299 
Schevening,  i.  284,  287 
Schiller's  '  Ideale,'  ii.  331 
Schlagan,  M.  de,  i.  263 
Schlegel   (the    German  critic),   ii. 

114 

Schivoni,  Mile,  (actress),  ii.  217 
Schonbourg,  Princesse  de,   i.   259, 

ii.  205,  221,  239,  246,  252,  308 
Schoppung,  Mme.,  ii.  206 
Schoschen,  M.  de,  i.  296 
Schouvaloff,  Countess,  ii.  199,  206, 

212 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  i.  181,  186 
Scott,  Sir  William,  i.  200 
Scrain  (  =  Colonel  Staples),  i.  276 
Scriptures,  Lady  Granville's  study 
of  the,  i.  355,  ii.  128,  193 

VOL.  II. 


Schwartzenberg,  M.  Felix,  ii.  325 
Schwartzenberg,   Prince   de,  i.  72, 

259,  ii.  77 

Schwartzenberg,  Mile.,  ii.  261 
Schwartzenberg,  Mme.,  ii.  274 
Seaford,  Lady,  ii.  336 
Seaford,  Lord,  i.  390,  430,  438,  ii. 

5,  10,  14,  293,  312 
Sebastiani,  M.,  ii.  87,  93, 101 
Sebastiani,  Mme.,  ii.  222,  226 
Sefton,  Lord,  i.  105 
Segur,  M.,  i.  70 ;  works  by,  344 
Segur,  Mme.,  ii.  314 
Sermoneta,  Duca  di,  ii.  347  n. 
Seton,  Sir  Henry,  ii.  19 
Severini,  M.,  ii.  256 
Sevigne,  Mme.  de,  i.  127,  ii.  165 
Seymour,  Lady,  ii.  68 
Seymour,  Lady  George,  i.  241 
Seymour,    Lord    Algernon    (later, 

Duke  of  Somerset),  ii.  376 
Seymour,  Lord  George,  ii.  58,  371, 

386 

Seymour,  Miss  (afterwards  wife  of 
Colonel  Dawson  Darner),  i.  241, 
ii.  150 

Seymour,  Sir  Michael,  ii.  150 
Shaftesbury,  Lord,  i.  202 
Shee,  Sir  George,  ii.  333 
Sheil,  Mr.,  ii.  364 
Shelburne,  Lady,  ii.  379 
Shelburne,  Lord,  ii.  333,  375 
Shelley,  Lady,  i.  43,  45,  67,  72 
Shelley,  Sir  John,  i.  62 
Shelley,  Sir  T.,  ii.  142 
Sheridan,  Mr.,  i.  5,  80 
'  Shoes '  =  Lady  Rivers 
Shore,  Mr.,  ii.  110 
Shrewsbury,  Lady,  ii.  283,  373 
Siddons,  Mrs.,  ii.  52 
'  Silence  '  =  Lady  Jersey 
Simloff,  Mme.  ii.  218 
Six  d'Osterlichen,  Mme.,  i.  284 
Sligo,  Lady,  i.  435 
Smith,  Lady  (wife  of  Sir  Sidney),  i. 

331,  335 

Smith,  Mr.  Leveson,  i.  393 
Smith,    Mr.    Vernon     (later,   Lord 

Lyveden),  ii.  174 
Smith,   Rev.  Sydney,  i.   216,    384, 

ii.  37 

Smith,  Sir  Sidney,  ii.  85,  150 
Smithson,  Miss  (actress),  i.  431, 436 
Sneyd,    Mr.,   i.   52,   131,  133,  182, 
195,  303,  366,  384,  386,  ii.  48,  51, 
97,  109,  186,  271,  375 
Society :  in  Holland  (1824),  i.  262 

E  E 


418     LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


sqq. ;  in  Paris  (1824),  318,  (speci- 
mens of  conversation)  320, 
(1825-26)  369,  375,  380,  392, 
(1831)  ii.  79,  (1837)  246  sqq., 
(1838)  274  sqq.,  (1840)  313 

Solms,  Amelie  de  (mother  of  the 
first  Stadtholder),  i.  286 

Somers,  Lord,  i.  251 

Somerset,  Duchess  of,  i.  189,  ii. 
373 

Somerset,  Lord  Fitzroy  (afterwards 
Lord  Raglan),  i.  96,  158,  427 

Sondes,  Lord,  i.  166 

Sontag,  Mile.,  i  388,  440,  ii.  15, 
18,  26,  (marriage)  40  sq. 

Sortain,  Rev.  Mr.  (Huntingdon 
Chapel,  Brighton),  ii  378 

Sotheby,  Mr.,  ii.  129 

Soult,  Marshal  (Due  de  Reggio),  i 
406,  ii.  76,  259,  281,  287,  318 

Soult,  Mine,  la  Marechale,  ii. 
75 

Souza,  Mme.  de,  i.  63,  70,  95,  203 

Spa,  i.  49 

Spada,  Monsignor,  ii.  349 

Spanish  question,  the  (1824),  i. 
250  sq. 

Spencer,  Dowager  Lady  (widow  of 
first  Earl  Speneer),  i.  6 

Spencer,  Lady,  i.  31 

Spencer,  Lord,  ii.  175 

Speneer,  Mr.  W.,  i.  4 

Spezia,  ii.  362 

Spinetto,  Signor  (interpreter  at 
Queen  Caroline's  trial),  i.  16-1 

Spliigen,  the,  ii.  333 

Spot,  Miss  V.  de,  ii.  285 

Spring  Rice,  Mr.,  ii.  17,  157 

St.  Aldegonde,  M.  de,  i.  117 

St.  Amand,  Due  de,  ii.  319 

St.  Aulaire,  M.  de,  ii.  192,  381 

St.  Aulaire,  Mme.  de,  i.  405,  ii. 
314 

St.  Ciair,  Chevalier  de,  ii.  4 

St.  Claii ,  Mine.,  ii.  101,  238,  313 

St.  Clond,  ii.  259 

St.  Germans,  Lord.  ii.  381 

St.  Helens,  Lord,  i.  239 

St.  Leu,  Mme.  de  (Queen  Hortense), 
i.  83 

St.  Omer,  i.  258 

St.  Valery,  Port,  ii.  290 

Stackelberg,  Mme.  de,  273,  286 

Stael,  Mme.  de,  i.  95,  98 

Stafford  House  (formerly  York 
House),  ii.  38 

Stafford,  Marchioness  of  (Countess 


of  Sutherland),  i.  3,  19,  93,  127, 

191,  246,  430,  ii.  36,  62,  70 
Stafford, 'Marquis  of,  i.  19,  39,  147, 

173,  175,  184,  191,  ii.  35,  47,  62, 

141 
Standish,    Mr.,    i.    136,   165,  275, 

403 

Stanhope,  Lady,  ii.  188  sq. 
Stanhope,     Lady    Wilhelrnina,    ii. 

188,208 
Stanley,  Lady  Gertrude  Sloane,  ii. 

396 
Stanley,   Lady  Mary,  ii.  194,  205, 

341 
Stanley,      Mr.     (afterwards     Lord 

Stanley;  later,  fourteenth  Earl  of 

Derby),  i.  294,  341,  428,  430,  ii. 

1,  47,  56,  155,  157,  178,  183 
Stanley,       Mr.     (afterwards     Lord 

Stanley  of  Alderley),  ii.  383 
Stewart,  Lord  (later,  third  Marquis 

of  Londonderry),  i.  63,  71 
Stewart,  Mr.  George,  i.  281,    299, 

ii.  72,  75,  100,  330,  364 
Stirums,  Count,  i.  275,  284 
Strachan,  Lady,  ii.  144 
Strangways,  Mr.,  i.  282,  286  sq. 
Strathallan,  Lady,  i.  328 
Strathaven,  Lord,  ii.  67 
Strickland,  Mrs.,  i.  404 
Stuart,  Lady  Elizabeth  (afterwards 

Lady  Stuart  de  Rothesay),  i.  99, 

108,' 315,  324,  ii.  44,  54,  77,  199, 

230,  232 

Stuart,  Lord  Dudley,  i.  239 
Stuart,    Miss   Louisa   (later,   Mar- 
chioness of  Waterford),  i.  105,  ii. 

224,  232 
Stuart,    Sir    Charles    (later,    Lord 

Stuart  de  Rothesay),  i.  64,  67,  96, 

104,  106,  ii.   23,   54,  71,  77,  98, 

195 

Suffield  Gunton,  Mr.  (artist),  ii.  240 
Suffield,  Lord,  ii.  147 
Sumner,  Rev.  Charles  (later,  Bishop 

of  Winchester),  i.  255 
Sumner's  'Records  of  the  Creation,' 

ii.  50 

Surrey,  Lady,  i.  52,  ii.  281 
Surrey,  Lord,  i.  52 
Sussex,  Duke  of,  i.  161 
Sutherland,   Duchess-Countess  of: 

her  death,  ii.  280  sq. 
Sutherland,  Duchess  of :  First  Lady 

to  Queen  Victoria,  ii.  226,  236, 

238,  275,  330 
Sutherland,  (first)  Duke  of,  ii.  141 


INDEX 


419 


Sutherland,    (second)    Duke   of,  ii. 

201,  203,  225,  286 
Sutton,    Mr.   Manners    (afterwards 

first  Viscount  of  Canterbury),  ii. 

183 
Sydney,  Lady,  ii.  170,  173,  181 


TABLEAUX  VIVANTS,'\\.  255 
Taglioni,   Mile.   Marie    (dancer),  i. 

416,  ii.  217 
Talaru,  Mme.  de   (formerly  Mme. 

de  Clermont  Tonnerre),  i.  331 
Talbot,  Lady,  i-  8,  31,  38,  84 
Talbot,  Lady  Fanny,  i.  236 
Talbot,  Lord,  i.  88,  ii.  52,  64,  110 
Talbot,  Mr.  John,  ii.  47,  110,  216 
Talleyrand,  Baronne  de,  i.  71 
Talleyrand,  Mile.  Pauline  de  (after- 
wards Mme.  Henri  de  Castellane), 

ii.  172 
Talleyrand,  Mme.  de,  ii.  299,  329, 

363 
Talleyrand,   Prince   de,   i.    54,   67, 

403,  405,  ii.  18,  52,  67,  70  n.,  77, 

125,  127,  130,  148,  172  n.,  173, 

175,  180,  219,  247 
TaUien,  Mme.,  ii.  31 
Talma,  M.  (actor),  i.  71,  73,  126 
Tamburini,  Signor  (singer),  ii.  169, 

274 

Tankerville,  Lady,  i.  244 
Tavistock,  Lady,  i.  135, 199,  ii.  239 
Tavistock,  Lord,  i.  135,  205 
Tawell,  Mr.  (the  murderer),  ii.  391 
Taylor,  Mr.,  i.  312 
Tchann,   M.    (Swiss    Minister    at 

Paris),   i.  351,    ii.   97,  132,  220, 

273 
Test  and  Corporation  Act,  repeal  ot, 

ii.  14 

Thanet,  Lord,  i.  194 
TJie  coiffe,  un,  ii.  315 
Thelusson,  Miss,  ii.  313 
Thiel,  M.,  i.  281 
Thierg,  M.,  ii.  Ill,  201,  219,  253, 

281  sq.,  286,  301 ;  '  L'Histoire  du 

Consulat,'  393 

1  Third,  Mr.'  (  =  M.  Thiers),  ii.  284 
Thistlewood,  conviction  of,  i.  152 
Thomond,  Lady,  i.  325,  328 
Thompson,  Mr.  Beilby  (afterwards 

Lord  Wenlock),  ii.  34 
Thorn,  Colonel,  ii.  239,  302 
Thought-reading,  ii.  388 
Thurlow,  Lord,  ii.  131 
Thurtell  (murderer),  i.  249 


Thynne,  Lady  Charlotte,  i.  382,  ii. 

25 

Thynne,  Lady  Louisa,  i.  167 
Tierney,   Mr.,    i.    2,    51,    176,    ii. 

57 
Tierney,  Mr.  George,  i.  294,  298, 

301 
Tierney,  Sir  Matthew  (physician), 

L240 

Titchfield,  Lord,  ii.  15  sq. 
Tivoli  Gardens  (Paris),  i.  122 
Tixal,  i.  24,  35,  37, 147 
Tomline,  Mr.,  ii.  224 
Tonbridge  Wells,  ii.  42 
Townshend,  Lord  John,  i.  4 
Torlonia,  Prince,  ii.  341,  345 
Tractarianism,  ii.  382 
Tree,  Miss  (actress),  i.  189 
Trauttmansdorf,  Count,  i.  199 
Trelawny,  Captain,  ii.  202 
Trench,  Sir  F.,  ii.  214 
Trentham,  i.  8,  19  sqq.,  ii.  35 
Trevise,  Due  de,  ii.  175  n,.,  194 
Trimmer,  Miss    (Lady   Granville's 

governess),   i.   11,    16,    172,  178, 

300 

Tripp,  Baron,  i.  70,  89 
Triqueti,  M.,  ii.  275 
Trocadero,  the  capture  of,  i.  389 
'  Trois  jours,'  the,  ii.  101 
Tuileries,  the,  ii.  82,  84 
Tyrconnel,  Lord,  i.  43 
Tyrwhitt,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  156,  161, 

166 


UPTON,  General,  i.  402,  ii.  387 
Upton,  Mr.  Edward,  ii.  290 
Useden,  Mr.,  i.  285 


VACCINATION,  ii,  363 
Valen^ay,  Duchesse  de,  ii.  79,  171 
Valletort,  Lord,  i.  209,  305 
Vallombrosa,  Duchesse  de,  ii.  188, 

206, 208 
Vane,  Lord  Harry,  ii.  74,  98.  109, 

117,  139,  278 
Vatry,  M.,  ii.  274 
Vatry,  Mme.,  i.  403 
Vaudemont,   Princesse '  de,   i.  320, 

323,  371,   385,   389,    ii.   18,   79, 

81 

Vaudreuil,  M.  Alfred  de,  ii.  54 
Vaudreuil,  Mme.  de,  ii.  108,  260 
Velde,   Adrian  Van   de   (artist),  i. 

274 


420      LETTERS   OF   HARRIET   COUNTESS   GRANVILLE 


Velluti  (singer),  ii.  26 

Vendangerie,  the  process  of,  ii. 
164 

Verity,  Dr.,  i.  162,  240,  256,  301, 
ii.  11],  155,  163,  327 

Vernon,  Archbishop  of  York  (mar- 
ried Lord  Graiiville's  sister),  i.  9, 
20 

Vernon,  Lady  Anne  (sister  of  Lord 
Granville),  i.  9,  133 

Vernon,  Lady  Elizabeth  (afterwards 
Harcourt),  i.  80,  126,  185,  244,  ii. 
257 

Vernon,  Miss,  i.  410 

Vernon,  Miss  Georgiana,  ii.  35 

Vernon,  Mr.  (afterwards  assumed 
name  of  Harconrt),  i.  20,  81 

Vernon,  Mrs.  George,  i.  40  sq. 

Vernon,  Mr.  Granville,  i.  200,  206, 
308 

Verona,  Congress  of,  i.  225 

Versailles,  ii.  233,  320 

Verulam,  Lord,  ii.  195 

Vicence,  Due  de  (Canlaincourt),  ii. 
287,  290 

Victoria,  Queen :  (as  Princess)  i. 
168,  (accession)  ii.  235,  249, 
(coronation)  259,  261,  277,  285, 
(at  Ascot)  288,  290,  294,  (mar- 
riage) 296,  (birth  of  Princess 
Royal)  327,  (Prince  of  Wales) 
328,  330,  (visit  to  Louis  Philippe 
at  Eu)  369,  381,  (ac  Osborne) 
398 

Vidal,  Dr.,  ii.  264 

Villa  Borghese,  Paris  (later,  the 
English  Embassy),  i.  62 

Villa  Garcia,  Mme.,  ii.  297 

Villele,  M.  de,  i.  308,  317,  325,  437, 
439 

Villiers,  Edward,  ii.  131,  134 

Villiers,  George  (later,  Lord  Claren- 
don), i.  235,  352,  ii.  118, 120,  122, 
271 

Villiers,  Lady  Sarah,  ii.  319 

Villiers,  Lady  Theresa  (later,  wife 
of  Sir  G.  Cornewall  Lewis),  i. 
346 

Villiers,  Lord  (eldest  son  of  Lord 
Jersey),  ii.  41 

Villiers,'  Mrs'.,  ii.  278 

Virginia  Water,  ii.  28 

Vizy,  i.  350 

'  Vraiment '  =  Prince  Lieven. 


WALEWSKA,  Mme.,  ii.  147 


Walewski,  Count,  i.  436,  ii.  13,  26, 
31,  36,  120,  136,  221 

Wallace,  Lord,  ii.  100 

Wallack,  Mr.  (actor),  i.  90 

Waller,  Mr.,  ii.  74 

Wallscourt,     Lady,     ii.  207,    255, 
258 

Walpole,  Horace,  i.  4  n. 

Walpole,  Lord,  i.  2 

Warburton,  Mr.,  i.  200,  ii.  184 

Ward,  Mr.  (afterwards  Viscount 
Ward ;  later,  Earl  Dudley),  i.  2, 
28,  32  sq.,  41,  80, 140,  171  sq.,  183, 
ii.  155 

Warwick,  Lady,  i.  2 

Water-cure,  the,  ii.  389 

Waterford,  Lady,  i.  328 

Waterloo,  battle  of,  i.  62,  64 

Waterpark,  Lady,  i.  343 

Weare,  Mr.,  the  murder  of,  i. 
249 

Webster,  Miss,  ii.  9 

Webster,  Sir  Henry,  ii.  387 

Wellesley,  Mr.,  ii.  333 
I  Wellington,  Duke  of :  (in  Paris, 
1835)  i.  66,  74,  104,  106, 108, 148, 
(insulted  by  London  mob,  1820) 
158,  164,  168,  203,  221,  224,  248, 
350,  352,  427,  (Prime  Minister, 
1828)  ii.  6,  10,  51,  53,  56,  (speech 
against  all  Reform)  64,  (fall  of  his 
Ministry)  65,  (the  Reform  crisis) 
66  sqq.,  155,  176,  195,  213,  288, 
381,  398 

Werther,  Mme.,  ii.  150,  206 

Westhill  (Wimbledon),  ii.  37 

Westmorland,  Lady,  i.  435,  ii. 
85,  102,  330 

Westmorland,  Lord,  i.  324,  ii. 
330 

Weyer,  M.  Van  de,  ii.  72,  395 

Wharncliffe,  Lady,  i.  414 ;  ii.  40, 
47,  184,  190,  381 

Wharncliffe,  Lord,  ii.  56,  59,  64,  98, 
117 

Wherstead,  i.  147,  194,  215,  224 

Whitbread,  Miss,  ii.  343 

Whitbread,  Mr.,  i.  50,  54 

'  White  Bear,  the  '  =  Princesse 
Lieven 

Whitmore,  Mr.,  i.  205 

Wilberforce,  Mr.,  i.  27 

Wilhelmine,  Princess  (sister  of 
Frederick  the  Great),  i.  38 

William  IV.,  King,  ii.  62  sq.,  65,  98, 
184,  (death)  235  sq. 

Willoughby,  Lady,  ii.  238 


INDEX 


421 


Wilmot,  Mr.,  i.  131,  171,  174,  180, 

182,  234,  288,  ii.  51,  65 
Wilson,   Sir    Bobert,  i.   171,    214, 

254 

Wilton,  Lady,  ii.  64 
Winchilsea,    Lord,   ii.   33    n.,    54, 

62 

Wits,  Capitaine,  i.  275 
Wittgenstein,  Mme.,  ii.  218 
Woburn,  i.  196 
Wood,  Alderman,  i.  160,  178 
Wood,  Sir  Charles  (later,  Viscount 

Halifax),  ii.  293  n. 
Woolmers  (estate),  i.  39 
Worcester,  Lady,  i.  198,  203,  219, 

315,  328 

Worcester,  Lord,  i.  162,  164 
Woronzow,  Comte  Simon,  i.  62 
Wortley,  Lady  Caroline,  i.  226,  233, 

317 

Wortley,  Lady  Georgiana,  ii.  147 
Wortley,  Miss,  ii.  32,  55 
Wortley,  Mr.  (later,  Lord  Wharn- 

cliffe  :  married  Lady  Georgiana 

Eyder),   i.  279,  288,  ii.  60,  147, 

323  n. 

Wortley,  Mr.  Charles,  ii.  62 
Wortley,  Mr.  James,  ii.  343 
Wray,  Rev.  Lewis,  i.  317 
Wrekin,  the,  i.  129 
Wrest  Park,  ii.  390 


Wrottesley,  Lady  Caroline,  i.  11 
Wrottesley,  Miss,  ii.  53 
Wurtemberg,    Diichess    of    (Louis 

Philippe's  daughter),  ii.  276  sq. ; 

death,  280 

Wurtemberg,  Duke  of,  ii.  299 
Wurtemberg,  King  of,  ii.  333  n, 
Wurtemberg,  Princesse  Helene  de 

(married  Grand  Duke  Michael), 

ii.  333 

Wyatville,  Sir  Geoffrey,  ii.  47 
Wynn,    Sir    Watkin    Williams,    i. 

213 
.Wynne,  Mr.  Charles,  i.  200 


YARMOUTH,  Lord,  ii.  120,  132 
Yenne,  ii.  264 
York,  Duke  of,  i.  197,  402 
York   House   (afterwards    Stafford 
House),  ii.  38 


ZAMOYSKA,  Mme.,   i.   117,   264,  ii. 

83,  314 

Zainoyski,  M.  Ladislas,  ii.  207 
Zavadowska,   Mme.,  ii.   218,    225, 

282,  346 

Zichy,  M.,  ii.  217 
Zingonee  (racehorse),  ii.  42 
Zuchelli,  Signer  (singer),  i.  410 


THE   END 
