■  /■  - 

■  , 

•.  >.. N*-,;rVr- i'?r'"V  .  .  ■ 

:■  ti  -  ■  •  '  '• 

i  .  5-  v  •  •  *  -  •  ••  •  v  -  >*k 


,,r  a  /,  ^  <u3> 

'  ■ .  -  -  '  •  .<  »  .  •  V—  ,  u 


■  ' '  ■ 

vv  v  ■  .  .  :  ■;  .  v  '  • 

I  .  •  w-^  •  '  *  >  ■'  I  *  •  •  A. 

'  '  •v.vVj  i-  lVi.  '•  8u»  W  >  *»  IdV  , 

-  jS-IM  0*  V 

»  •  -C-  s-‘m?  ‘f- *  d£.  y.';:  •  *\  *  V  •  > 

,  •  &#£•;.  -v  i.  £  >*■  \  * 

•  ■->  /  .  •  •'*  -•)  -V  v.  iv‘  '  *-•••  ',  ■  v  •  *'  •• 


North  Carolina  State  Library 


. 


MRS.  MONTAGU 

“OUEEN  OF  THE  BLUES” 

•'V/ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
State  Library  of  North  Carolina 


https://archive.org/details/mrsmontaguequeen01  mont 


Mr,  (S ibr^d l) c tJi  3io.it acf, i i 

&n  ijra  v  cc/  by  ^ b/l .  (S t  nJjrJi 
,^ro  nv  (  / 1  c  jxccuiytu y  by  c3  u-^  / \^s'/xa.cci  iro  Us 


Library 


St«te 


H<wth  Caro'm,  .  . 

iUlaign 


^TivaW"^  L 


fto'© 


\a  • 


A. 


MRS.  MONTAGU 

“QUEEN  OF  THE  BLUES” 


HER  LETTERS  AND  FRIENDSHIPS 
FROM  1762  TO  1800 


EDITED  BY 

REGINALD  BLUNT 


FROM  MATERIAL  LEFT  TO  HIM  BY  HER  GREAT-GREAT-NIECE 


EMILY  J.  CLIMENSON 
VOLUME  I 

1762-1776 


“Foin  d’Amphitryon  oil  Ton  ne  dine  pas  !  ” 

Les  Deux  Sosies, 

Jean  de  Rotrou,  1636. 


BOSTON  AND  NEW  YORK 
HOUGHTON  MIFFLIN  COMPANY 
PRINTED  IN  SCOTLAND 


VA 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


PREFACE 


It  was  with  some  little  surprise  and  a  good  deal  of 
hesitation  that  the  present  Editor  received,  on  the 
death  of  his  old  friend  Mrs.  Emily  Climenson  in  1921, 
an  intimation  that  she  had  bequeathed  to  him,  if  he 
chose  to  undertake  it,  the  completion  of  the  Memoir 
of  her  ancestress  Elizabeth  Montagu,  the  famous 
eighteenth  century  Blue  Stocking,  of  which  the  first 
two  volumes  had  been  published  for  her  by  John 
Murray  in  1906. 

Though  they  had  often  discussed  the  subject  and 
examined  together  some  of  the  mass  of  material  which 
had  been  sent  her  for  this  work,  he  had  no  reason  to 
expect,  nor  indeed  any  desire  to  receive,  such  an 
inheritance,  for  which  he  was  not  specially  qualified, 
and  which  would  obviously  entail  an  immense  amount 
of  manuscript  reading  and  a  good  deal  of  research. 

The  eighteenth  century  had  never  had  for  him 
quite  the  intriguing  interest  of  its  Stuart  predecessor, 
and  his  acquaintance  with  its  people  and  politics  was 
merely  that  of  an  idle  apprentice.  But  his  chats  with 
Mrs.  Climenson  about  her  blue-stocking  ancestress 
had  awakened  some  curiosities,  and  he  did  not  feel 
justified  in  declining  the  kindly  intentioned  bequest 
of  an  old  friend.  In  due  course,  therefore,  the  material 
arrived,  and  he  found  himself  faced  with  a  consign¬ 
ment  of  some  four  or  five  thousand  letters,  and  with 
numerous  bundles  of  memoranda,  note-books,  diaries, 
verses,  and  other  somewhat  inchoate  material.  The 
great  majority  of  the  letters  were  undated,  and  though 
Mrs.  Climenson  had  spent  a  great  deal  of  time  and 
patient  investigation  in  getting  them  into  chronological 

V 


5 


39 


VI 


PREFACE 


sequence  from  internal  evidence,  the  task  was  very 
far  from  completion,  and  much  indeed  still  remains 
to  be  done. 

The  letters  are  all  written  on  the  doubled  quarto 
(usually  gilt-edged)  paper  of  the  day,  treble  folded, 
sealed,  and  addressed  on  the  partially  or  wholly  blank 
fourth  page,  and  franked,  when  possible,  by  the 
signature  of  a  peer  or  Member  of  Parliament.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  handwriting  is  fortunately,  as  a  rule,  very 
legible  ;  her  sister’s  rather  less  so  ;  Dr.  Monsey’s 
barbarously  cramped  and  minute,  and  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
“  hieroglyphics  ”  sometimes  desperately  difficult.  Her 
nephew  and  heir,  afterwards  the  fourth  Lord  Rokeby, 
was  able  to  reclaim  his  aunt’s  letters  from  the 
descendants  of  most  of  her  principal  correspondents, 
including  those  to  Mrs.  Carter,  the  Duchess  of 
Portland,  Mrs.  Freind,  Lord  Bath,  Gilbert  West, 
Lord  Lyttelton,  her  sister  Mrs.  Scott,  Mrs.  Vesey, 
and  manv  other  friends  :  whilst  she  herself  had 

j  1 

preserved  her  husband’s  and  most  of  those  of  any 
importance  addressed  to  her,  except  Mrs.  Carter’s, 
which  were  returned  to  her  nephew  Mr.  Pennington, 
and  published  by  him  ;  and  the  collection  is  thus 
in  some  respects  unique  in  its  completeness,  though 
of  course  there  are  occasional  gaps. 

Mrs.  Montagu  died  in  1800,  in  her  eightieth  year, 
so  that  the  whole  correspondence,  beginning  with  her 
early  girlhood,  extends  from  1732  to  the  end  of  the 
century.  The  two  volumes  published  in  1906 
embodied  a  fair,  though  of  course  by  no  means 
exhaustive,  selection  of  her  letters,  and  of  those  of 
several  of  her  correspondents,  down  to  1761  ;  and 
those  which  were  published  by  her  nephew  Matthew 
in  1810  and  1813  ended  at  just  about  the  same  date. 

In  1873  Dr.  Doran  attempted,  in  A  Lady  of 
the  Last  Century ,  a  biography  of  Mrs.  Montagu, 
which,  though  pleasantly  written  and  full  of  interest, 
is  based,  as  regards  the  period  from  1761  onward, 


PREFACE 


vii 

almost  entirely  on  a  bundle  of  her  letters  to  her  sister- 
in-law  Mrs.  William  Robinson,  which  Bentley  the 
publisher  had  bought  at  a  sale  of  autographs  ;  and 
the  record  is  naturally  therefore  an  incomplete  and 
one-sided  one,  besides  being  incorrect  in  some 
particulars.  With  the  exception  of  these  letters  and 
of  a  certain  number  printed  in  the  Memoirs  of  Mrs. 
Carter,  Mr.  Burrows,  and  one  or  two  others  of  her 
friends,  the  correspondence  of  Elizabeth  Montagu 
during  the  last  forty  years  of  her  life  still,  therefore, 
remains  unpublished.  Utilising  the  abundant  material 
thus  placed  at  his  disposal,  the  present  writer  has  now 
endeavoured  to  carry  out  Mrs.  Climenson’s  bequest 
by  the  completion  of  her  ancestor’s  story. 

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  period  of  these 
yet  unedited  letters  covers  about  three-quarters  of  the 
reign  of  George  III.  ;  that  it  includes  the  various 
wars  with  Spain,  France,  Canada,  and  America,  the 
Chatham,  Grenville,  North,  Rockingham,  Shelburne, 
and  Pitt  administrations,  the  Letters  of  Junius,  the 
Wilkes  libels,  the  Gordon  Riots,  the  Warren  Hastings 
Trial,  Irish  Rebellion,  French  Revolution  and  Reign 
of  Terror  ;  and  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s  correspondents 
and  friends  included  Dr.  Johnson,  Laurence  Sterne 
and  his  wife  and  daughter,  the  Garricks,  Hannah 
More,  Elizabeth  Carter,  Mrs.  Vesey,  Mrs.  Delany, 
Mrs.  Chapone,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  and  his  sister, 
Gilbert  West,  James  Beattie,  Fanny  Burney,  Edmund 
Burke,  Lord  Chesterfield,  Lord  Hardwicke,  Lord 
Bath,  Lord  Lyttelton  and  his  son,  the  Duchess  of 
Portland,  the  Boscawens,  Sir  Nathaniel  Wraxall, 
Allan  Ramsay,  Benjamin  Stillingfleet,  Mrs.  Thrale, 
William  Wilberforce,  and  a  host  of  other  more  or 
less  notable  folk  of  her  day,  it  must  be  obvious  that 
here  was  a  mine  worthy  of  further  exploration,  and 
needing  time  and  research  for  its  satisfactory  develop¬ 
ment.  It  is  the  aim  of  the  following  pages  to  give 
a  selection  of  extracts  from  the  correspondence  of 


PREFACE 


viii 

these  forty  years,  chosen  rather  as  touching  a  wide 
variety  of  personalities,  interests,  and  events  than  as 
forming  such  a  continuous  personal  record  as  a 
“  Life  ”  should  endeavour  to  present. 

It  should  be  said  at  the  outset  that  it  is  for  the 
general  reader  rather  than  the  student  that  these 
pages  have  been  compiled,  and  that  it  has  therefore 
been  thought  desirable  to  introduce  by  way  of  com¬ 
mentary  just  enough  of  historical  and  explanatory 
mortar  to  set  the  epistolary  bricks  into  something  of 
a  coherent  edifice.  The  problem  of  footnotes  is  a 
difficult  one  ;  but  the  editor,  finding  that  his  personal 
dislike  of  them  in  a  book  of  this  sort  is  widely  shared, 
and  feeling  that  if  annotation  is  necessary  it  may  as 
well  be  read,  has  avoided  them  as  far  as  possible, 
placing  comment  in  the  text,  and  relegating  to  the 
Index  a  few  personal  references  which  did  not  seem 
to  call  for  immediate  or  general  identification. 

After  Mr.  Murray  had  published  Mrs.  Climenson’s 
first  two  volumes,  she  proceeded  steadily  with  the 
editing  of  the  later  letters  as  time  and  opportunity 
allowed  ;  and,  when  her  death  occurred  in  1921,  had 
assembled  and  annotated  the  material  as  far  as  the 
year  1784.  This  manuscript,  together  with  the  whole 
of  the  correspondence  and  various  other  papers, 
being  bequeathed  to  the  present  editor  for  interpola¬ 
tion  and  completion,  at  once  raised  a  question  of 
some  difficulty. 

Two  courses  were  open  to  him.  Mrs.  Climenson’s 
manuscript  (1762-1784)  could  have  been  completed 
by  the  addition  of  the  remaining  sixteen  years  on  the 
same  lines  ;  or  the  whole  of  the  material  for  the 
unpublished  period  (1762—1800)  could  be  re-read,  a 
fresh  selection  made,  and  the  work  recast  and  edited 
on  slightly  different  principles.  The  latter  alternative 
was  chosen,  though  it  entailed,  of  course,  an  immense 
amount  of  additional  work  ;  partly  because  it  ensured 
uniformity  of  treatment  for  the  present  new  volumes  ; 


PREFACE 


IX 


partly,  too,  because  the  Editor  felt  that  the  book  would 
gain  by  taking  a  rather  more  detached  view  of  its 
subject  and  her  surroundings  than  was  natural  to  the 
earlier  biographer,  who  was,  as  the  title-page  of  the 
first  two  volumes  set  forth,  her  “  great-great-niece,” 
and  who  laid,  perhaps,  rather  more  stress  upon  the 
family  relationships  and  associations  than  seemed 
called  for,  at  any  rate  in  the  later  years.  Such  detach¬ 
ment,  in  the  present  editor’s  view  at  least,  whilst  it 
certainly  must  not  be  hostile  or  unsympathetic,  if 
justice  is  to  be  done  to  its  subject,  is  primarily  required 
to. produce,  so  far  as  possible,  a  faithful  presentation 
and  a  life-like  portrait  ;  is  bound,  to  this  end,  to  show 
the  shadows  as  well  as  the  lights,  the  defects  as  well 
as  the  qualities  ;  and  must  be  free,  on  occasion,  not 
only  to  leave  a  blemish  unsuppressed,  but,  even  if 
need  be,  to  note  a  failing  or  laugh  good-humouredly 
over  a  foible. 

At  the  same  time  it  should  be  clearly  stated  that 
a  considerable  proportion  of  Mrs.  Climenson’s  selec¬ 
tions  and  annotations  has  been  utilised,  and  that 
the  assistance  of  her  prolonged  labours  in  grouping 
and  dating  the  correspondence  has  been  invaluable 
throughout. 

While  it  is  the  aim  of  these  volumes  to  let  Elizabeth 
Montagu’s  life  and  character  express  themselves  from 
her  own  words  and  doings,  by  means  of  a  typical 
selection  of  extracts  from  her  letters,  that  they  must, 
as  a  rule,  be  extracts  only  is  in  some  ways  a  regrettable 
necessity  ;  for  it  cannot  be  questioned  that  a  letter 
of  the  eighteenth  century  type  has  an  entity  which 
excision  must  always  mutilate  and  sometimes  destroy  ; 
a  quoted  passage  in  its  isolation  is  apt  to  assume 
something  of  the  studied  character  of  a  dictum,  to 
which,  embedded  in  its  original  context  of  easy  chat, 
it  laid  no  kind  of  claim.  The  duty  and  the  attitude 
of  an  editor  of  correspondence  are  problems  bristling 
with  difficulties,  if  the  letters  used  were  never  either 


X 


PREFACE 


meant  or  prepared  for  publication.  Mr.  Saintsbury, 
in  the  introduction  to  his  delightful  Letter  Book ,  has 
a  few  lines  of  counsel  on  this  hard  theme.  “  Some 
people,”  he  says,  “  of  course  do  read  over  their 
letters  before  sending  them  ;  but  it  must  be  very 
rarely  and  in  special,  not  to  say  dubious  cases  that  they 
do  this  with  a  view  to  the  thing  being  seen  by  any 
other  eyes  than  those  of  the  intended  recipient.  It 
is  therefore  to  the  last  degree  unfair  to  plump  letters 
on  the  market  unselected  and  uncastigated.  To  what 
length  the  castigation  should  proceed  is  of  course 
matter  for  individual  taste  and  judgment.  Nothing 
must  be  put  in — that  is  clear  ;  but  as  to  what  may  or 
should  be  left  out,  ‘  there’s  the  rub.’  Perhaps  the 
best  criterion,  though  it  may  be  admitted  to  be  not 
very  easy  of  application,  is  ‘  Would  the  author,  in 
publishing,  have  left  it  out  or  not  ?  ’  Sometimes  this 
will  pass  very  violent  expressions  of  opinion  and  even 
sentiments  of  doubtful  morality  or  wisdom.  But  that 
it  should  invariably  exclude  mere  trivialities,  faults  of 
taste,  slovenliness  of  expression,  etc.,  is  at  least  the 
opinion  of  the  present  writer.” 

To  this  last  sentence  only  the  editor  would  venture 
to  demur,  in  so  far  that,  if  letters  are  published  as 
part  of  a  memoir,  and  to  illustrate  a  personality,  the 
invariable  exclusion  of  faults  would  go  far  to  spoil 
the  truth  and  actuality  of  the  presentment.  It  is 
much  to  be  desired  that  some  authoritative  ruling  as 
to  the  editing,  spelling,  and  reproduction  of  old  letters 
should  be  formulated  for  general  adoption.  His  own 
feeling  has  been  that  as  little  alteration  and  correction 
should  be  made  as  seemed  consistent  with  their  sense 
being  easily  grasped  in  the  reading.  To  this  end 
he  has  added  a  minimum  of  necessary  stops  (Mrs. 
Montagu  is  rather  breathless,  Lord  Bath  very  short- 
winded,  in  this  respect)  ;  has  expanded  some  abbrevia¬ 
tions  ;  has  omitted  many  of  the  capitals  ;  has  inserted 
words  obviously  left  out  by  mistake,  and  corrected 


PREFACE 


xi 


some  few  careless  errors  of  spelling  or  grammar  ; 
but  has  otherwise  left  the  text  as  far  as  possible  alone, 
in  the  belief  that  occasional  variety  of  orthography 
and  inaccuracies  of  phraseology,  unless  they  seriously 
obscure  the  meaning,  help  to  preserve  personality  in 
the  letters,  and  should  not,  as  a  rule,  be  interfered 
with. 

If  we  are  to  adopt  Professor  Saintsbury’s  criterion, 
“  Would  the  author  in  publishing  have  left  it  out  or 
not  ?  ”  a  few  of  the  letters  might  probably  have  been 
excluded  ;  but  the  present  editor  would  submit 
(though  with  the  diffidence  of  a  novice)  that  if  the 
expression  of  character  aimed  at  is  to  be  lifelike  and 
vivacious,  such  a  test  of  selection  would  lead  to 
nugatory  results.  Since  Elizabeth  Montagu’s  char¬ 
acter  and  qualities  have  been  assailed  in  some  quarters, 
as  we  shall  see,  with  a  good  deal  of  abuse,  and  in  others 
with  scant  courtesy  and  some  ridicule, — treatment  for 
which  partial  justification  could  no  doubt  be  found, — 
it  should  be  the  aim  of  these  pages  to  demonstrate 
that  there  was  more  and  better  stuff  in  her  than  any 
such  estimate  would  admit.  If,  however,  that  is  to  be 
done,  any  sort  of  panegyric  must  be  equally  avoided  ; 
and  the  selection,  if  it  is  to  provide  material  for  a 
truer  portrait,  must  indicate  weaknesses  as  well  as 
strength.  A  good  likeness  will  not  be  achieved  by 
ignoring  a  wen,  or  turning  wrinkles  into  dimples. 
Some  attempt  at  an  ultimate  characterisation  has  been 
made  in  the  concluding  chapter  of  the  book. 

Dates  have  been  a  very  great  difficulty,  Mrs. 
Montagu  hardly  ever  dating  her  letters  in  full,  and 
usually  being  content  with  “  Tuesday  ”  or  “  ye  9th.” 
Internal  evidence  has,  of  course,  been  the  chief  guide, 
assisted  now  and  then  by  postmarks,  frank  endorse¬ 
ments,  or  notes  by  the  addressees  added  on  receipt. 
The  letters  being  grouped  annually,  the  year  heads 
every  page,  and  has  been  omitted  from  the  super¬ 
scriptions  ;  and  all  letters  are  either  to  ov  from  Mrs. 


PREFACE 


xii 

Montagu,  unless  otherwise  described  ;  omissions  are 
marked  by  dots  .  .  .  and  editorial  additions  enclosed 
in  square  brackets  [  ]. 

Nor  has  the  basis  of  selection  from  so  large  a  mass 
of  material,  of  which  a  mere  fraction  could  be  utilised, 
been  at  all  easy  to  fix  or  to  adhere  to.  Too  much, 
some  may  think,  has  been  included  ;  much,  it  is 
highly  probable,  that  would  have  been  more  interesting 
to  one  or  other  class  of  reader  has  been  missed.  But 
as  it  is  hoped  that  the  collection  as  a  whole  may 
eventually  find  its  way  to  the  manuscript  rooms  of 
the  British  Museum,  it  may  there  perhaps  provide  a 
happy  hunting-ground  for  other  explorers,  and  yield 
finds  which  the  inexpertness  or  the  occasional  languor 
of  the  present  writer  may  have  passed  unnoticed. 

So  far  as  it  could  be  ascertained  or  even  guessed 
at,  chronological  sequence  has  been  followed,  except 
in  the  case  of  the  chapters  on  the  Sternes,  the  Garricks, 
Dr.  Johnson,  the  Blue  Stockings,  Fanny  Burney,  and 
Mrs.  Thrale,  where  letters  relating  to  these  persons 
have  been  brought  together  to  form  a  rather  more 
coherent  narrative  ;  but  it  must  be  clearly  understood 
that  the  great  majority  of  the  dates  assigned  are 
conjectural  only. 

Assistance  and  counsel  on  various  points  is  grate¬ 
fully  acknowledged  from  Mr.  J.  Paul  de  Castro  ; 
Hon.  Mrs.  Hugh  Wyndham  ;  Sir  Montagu  Burrows  ; 
and  Mr.  John  Cook,  Curator  of  the  Wedgwood 
Museum,  Etruria. 

In  the  selection  of  illustrations,  preference  has 
been  given  to  the  less  well-known  portraits  and 
subjects  ;  and  thanks  are  due  to  Lord  Cobham  for 
the  Hagley  portraits  of  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton  and 
of  Joseph  Emin  ;  to  Lady  Courtney  of  Penwith  for 
the  loan  of  some  prints  from  the  collection  of  the  late 
Lord  Courtney  ;  and  to  the  Director  of  the  Carnavalet 
Museum  at  Paris  for  permission  to  reproduce  the 
fine  painting  of  Chaillot  by  Raguenet. 


CONTENTS 


VOLUME  I 


INTRODUCTORY 

PAGE 

Mrs.  Climenson’s  volumes.  Childhood,  girlhood,  and  marriage  of 
.  Elizabeth  Robinson.  Edward  Montagu.  Earlier  married  life. 
Friendships  and  correspondence.  Her  personality.  Contem¬ 
porary  animus.  Criticism  of  her  character  and  letters,  and  a 
reply.  The  present  interest  in  the  correspondence.  The  Blue 
Stockings  and  the  Salonists  .......  i 


I  762 

MRS.  MONTAGU  AND  LORD  BATH — WAR  WITH  SPAIN 

The  Cock  Lane  Ghost.  Sir  Joshua,  Tristram  Shandy,  and  Lord 
Bath.  The  Court.  Miss  Anne  Pitt.  The  Earl  of  Pembroke 
and  Miss  Hunter.  Political  changes.  War  with  Spain.  William 
Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath.  The  new  Ministry.  Sir  Francis 
Dashwood.  House  Party  at  Hagley.  The  Garter.  Lady  Mary 
Wortley  Montagu.  The  Cherokee  King.  Mr.  Hoare’s 
“  Pantheon.”  Longleat.  Edward  Wortley  Montagu.  Mrs. 
Chapone.  Dr.  Messenger  Monsey.  Lord  Granby.  Admiral 
Smith.  Mr.  Tom  Lyttelton.  Mr.  William  Robinson.  Garrick 
and  Love.  Lady  M.  W.  Montagu’s  death.  Due  de  Nivernois. 
Millenium  Hall.  Sampson  Gideon.  Quin  .  .  .  .12 

1763 

THE  VISIT  TO  SPA — THE  “  NORTH  BRITON,”  NO.  45 

Lord  Pulteney ’s  death.  Letter  from  Edmund  Burke.  Mr.  Burrell. 

Mr.  Lyttelton’s  engagement.  Lord  Sandwich.  The  Spa  visit. 

Lady  M..  W.  Montagu’s  letters.  Wilkes  and  General  Warrants. 
Dinner  at  Bath  House.  Calais.  Mrs.  Carter.  Spa.  Brussels. 
Society  at  the  Spa.  Diisseldorf.  Utrecht.  Holland.  Cologne. 
Dutch  women.  Mrs.  Sherlock.  Lord  Bath  at  Court.  Miss 
Bowes.  Lord  Bath’s  character.  Lord  Hardwicke.  The  Chevalier 
D’Eon.  John  Wilkes.  Matthew  Robinson.  Churchill.  Peg 
Wharton.  The  Cyder  Act.  Essay  on  Woman.  The  North 
Briton,  No.  45.  Cephalalgy.  Privilege  debate.  Quadrille. 
Christmas  at  Woburn.  A  Wedding  Garment 

xiii 


40 


XIV 


CONTENTS 


i764 

LORD  BATH’S  DEATH — THE  BRUNSWICK  WEDDING 

PAGE 

Lady  Hervey.  Hereditary  Prince  of  Brunswick.  George  Selwyn. 

No.  45.  The  Royal  Wedding.  Mr.  Finch  and  Lady  Charlotte. 
Prudery.  Queen’s  Birthday  Court.  Sir  James  Macdonald. 
General  Conway.  Lord  Bath’s  chair.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  verses. 

Lord  Bath  at  Shrewsbury.  His  return  to  London,  illness,  and 
death.  Condolence.  Winchester.  Voltaire.  Attacks  on  Lord 
Bath’s  character.  His  will.  Duchess  of  Beaufort.  Jemmy 
Twitcher.  General  Pulteney.  A  lecture  on  heads.  Churchill’s 
death.  The  Primate  of  Ireland.  Tom  Lyttelton’s  engagement  .  84 


j765 

BULSTRODE,  BADMINTON,  AND  SANDLEFORD — 

THE  ROCKINGHAM  MINISTRY 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  cousin  becomes  Primate  of  Ireland.  Denton  coal. 

The  Czarina  and  Voltaire.  Visit  to  Bulstrode.  A  weak  Ministry. 
James  Woodhouse.  Count  Bruhl.  A  Lyttelton  for  ever.  Lord 
Shelburne.  Country  visits.  Adam  at  Sandleford.  Death  of 
Duke  of  Cumberland.  Pitt  at  Burton  Pynsent.  General 
Pulteney’s  Dream.  The  Duke’s  papers.  The  Stamp  Act. 

Mr.  Bateman.  Mr.  Finch.  Mrs.  Anne  Pitt.  Mr.  Walpole. 

Mr.  Pitt  at  Bath.  Duke  of  Cumberland’s  Funeral.  Dr. 
Lowth  and  Bishop  Warburton  .  .  .  .  .  .122 


I766 

A  TOUR  IN  SCOTLAND — THE  STAMP  ACT 

The  political  situation.  Repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act.  Window  Tax. 
Champagne  by  the  hogshead.  The  trip  to  Scotland.  Alnwick. 
Edinburgh.  Holyrood.  Dalkeith.  Glasgow.  Loch  Lomond. 
Glencoe.  Inveraray.  Blair  Drummond.  Rousseau  and  Hume. 

Mrs.  Carter.  The  poet  Gray.  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  Return 
from  Denton  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .137 


1767 

INOCULATION — LORD  CHATHAM’S  ILLNESS 

The  new  dressing-room.  The  burletta.  Henry  Home.  Inoculation. 

Lord  Chatham’s  illness.  Political  congress.  Miss  Botham’s 
wedding.  Sarah  Fielding.  Death  of  Charles  Townshend.  The 
journey  north.  Hatfield.  Mrs.  Carter  of  Theakstone.  Bur- 
meston.  Mr.  Percy.  General  Pulteney’s  death.  DukeofYork. 

Lord  Chatham  re-purchases  Hayes.  Return  to  town.  December 
frost  and  gaiety  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  153 


CONTENTS 


xv 


1768 

MOIRA  MASQUE  AND  MONSEY — THE  WILKES  ELECTION 

PAGE 

Mr.  Lyttelton’s  election.  A  gazette  to  Mrs.  Vesey.  Wilkes  Riots. 
History  of  Hindostan.  Lady  Moira’s  Masque.  Alterations  at 
Stowe.  Lord  Chesterfield’s  wit.  Lord  Chatham.  Gray. 
Domeniceti.  Courayer.  Dr.  Monsey  and  the  King  of  Denmark. 

Lady  Hervey’s  illness  and  death.  Zinzendorf.  Miss  Chudleigh. 
Junius.  Death  of  Duke  of  Newcastle.  Royal  christening. 
Wilkes  in  prison.  Lord  Sandwich.  A  wonderful  clock  .  .  167 


THE  STERNES  AND  THEIR  “COSIN” 
MONTAGU 

The  Cousinship.  Mrs.  Sterne.  Laurence  Sterne  at  Bath.  His  wife  in 
France.  The  Sentimental  Journey.  His  letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu. 

His  last  illness.  His  death.  Young  Macdonald.  Mrs.  Montagu 
acts  for  the  family.  Correspondence  with  Archbishop  of  York. 
Sutton  dilapidations.  Her  character  of  Tristram  and  of  his  wife. 
Sterne’s  daughter  Lydia.  Johnny  Botham  burns  Sterne’s  papers. 
Subscription  at  York.  Mrs.  Sterne  uncompromising.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  help.  Letters  from  Lydia.  Her  character,  by 
herself.  Miss  Sterne  and  John  Wilkes.  Letter  from  Angouleme. 
Letters  from  Albi.  Mrs.  Sterne  nearly  murdered.  Lydia’s 
engagement.  Mrs.  Montagu  declines  her  consent.  The  marriage. 

Death  of  Mrs.  Sterne  and  M.  de  Medalle.  Lydia  returns  to 
England.  Publication  of  Sterne’s  Letters  and  Sermons  .  .  185 


l769 

THE  SHAKESPEARE  ESSAY — THE  JUNIUS  LETTERS 

Miss  Chudleigh.  The  Shakespeare  Essay.  Bulstrode.  The 
Americans.  James  Otis.  The  Duke  of  Grafton’s  marriage. 
Reception  of  the  Essay.  The  Stratford  Jubilee.  Voltaire’s 
annoyance.  General  Paoli.  The  Yorkshire  Petition.  The 
East  India  Company.  Emin’s  Journal.  The  Junius  Letters. 

The  Lord  Mayor’s  Banquet.  Lord  Northington  .  .  .215 


1 77° 

A  SUMMER  WITH  MRS.  CHAPONE — LORD  NORTH’S  MINISTRY 

Beattie’s  Essay  on  Truth.  Beckford’s  death.  Visit  to  Hagley  with 
Mrs.  Chapone.  Letter  from  young  John  Pitt.  Mr.  Jonas 
Hanway.  Second  visit  to  Scotland.  Crabs’  eyes  and  millipedes. 

Mrs.  Vesey  at  Lucan.  Letter  from  Bennet  Langton  .  .  233 


XVI 


CONTENTS 


1771 

THE  HAGLEY  PARTY — BURKE  AND  PAOLI 

PAGE 

Letters  from  John  and  Hester  Pitt.  Richard  Berenger.  Hayes. 
David  Garrick’s  verses.  Montem.  Junius’s  Letters.  Wilkes’s 
election  as  Sheriff.  Edmund  Burke.  Death  of  Thomas  Gray. 
Letter  from  Burke.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  History.  The  Hagley 
house  party.  Stowe.  Arley.  Paoli.  A  letter  from  Monsey. 
James  Beattie  at  Sandleford.  Mr.  Lyttelton’s  return.  Benjamin 
Stillingfleet’s  death.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  verses.  Charlotte  Gren¬ 
ville’s  engagement.  Mr.  Lyttelton’s  misdeeds.  The  Chelsea 
Patrole  ..........  241 


l772 

TUNBRIDGE,  HATCHLANDS,  AND  BULSTRODE — 

FORDYCE,  JUNIUS,  BEATTIE 

Richard  Cumberland.  The  Pantheon.  Miss  Gregory.  The  Duchess 
of  Portland’s  snuff-box.  Lord  Shelburne.  The  Banks.  Mr. 
Lyttelton’s  marriage.  Junius.  Mrs.  Vesey’s  Blue  Room.  Voltaire 
and  De  Choiseul.  Dr.  Beattie’s  advancement.  Visit  to  Hatch- 
lands.  Sir  John  Macpherson.  Mrs.  Anne  Ellis.  Visit  to 
Bulstrode.  Mrs.  Chapone  on  Beattie  .....  257 


l773 

LORD  LYTTELTON’S  DEATH — LORD  CHESTERFIELD 

Death  of  Dr.  Gregory.  Beattie  in  London.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  efforts 
in  his  behalf.  Mr.  Dilly.  Lord  Chesterfield’s  wit.  Beattie’s 
pension.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s  portrait.  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
illness  and  death.  Letter  from  Burke.  Mrs.  Vesey  and  Lord 
Lyttelton.  Bankes’s  Voyages.  The  second  Lord  Lyttelton. 
Garrick’s  spectacle.  Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters  .  .  .  270 


l77  4 

THE  CHESTERFIELD  LETTERS — PAMPHLETS  AND  ELECTIONS 

Madame  de  Sevigne.  Death  of  Louis  XV.  Lord  Chatham’s  gout. 

Lord  Chesterfield’s  Wit  and  Will.  Long  Sir  Thomas  Robinson. 

Lord  Temple’s  no.  Matthew  Robinson’s  Political  Pamphlets. 
Hester  Pitt’s  marriage.  The  Elections.  Cursory  remarks  on 
Shakespeare.  Lady  Hester  Pitt’s  and  Mr.  Grenville’s  engage¬ 
ments.  Lord  Valentia  .......  282 


CONTENTS 


XVII 


T775 

DEATH  OF  MR.  MONTAGU — AMERICAN  WAR  BEGINS 

PAGE 

Hermes  Harris.  Sir  Joshua’s  portrait  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  Her  studies. 
Courtney  Melmoth.  Illness  and  death  of  Mr.  Montagu.  Letter 
from  Mr.  Archdeacon.  Widowhood.  Legacies  and  bequests. 

Letter  from  William  Emerson.  Journey  north.  The  Yorkshire 
estates.  Entertaining  the  tenantry.  Lord  Dartrey  and  Mrs. 
Carter.  The  Beatties  at  Denton.  Plans  for  tour  to  France. 

The  tour  postponed.  The  Duchess  of  Kingston.  Le  Texier  .  29a 


1776 

THE  VISIT  TO  PARIS — AMERICA  AND  THE  HOWES 

Tassie’s  cameo.  Fourth  edition  of  the  Essay.  Leonard  Smelt. 
Hermes  Harris.  At  Denton.  Matthew’s  change  of  name. 
Preparations  for  journey  to  Paris.  The  crossing.  French  post¬ 
ing.  Calais.  Amiens.  Chantilly.  Arrival  in  Paris.  Chaillot. 
Furnishing.  Meudon.  French  Society.  Madame  du  Deffand. 
Buffon.  Geoffrin.  Le  Page  du  Boccage.  Notre  Dame.  Les 
Enfans  Trouves.  Luxury  and  dirt.  Servants.  Theatres. 
Voltaire’s  Letter.  Footmen.  Conversation.  The  Meeting  of 
the  Academy.  Translations  of  Homer.  Voltaire’s  invective. 
Mahomet  and  Le  Kain.  St.  Germains.  Return  to  England. 

The  Essay  in  French.  French  and  English  ladies.  Satan  and 
Voltaire.  Brantome.  Madame  du  Boccage ’s  Verses.  The 
Howes.  Letters  from  James  Hutton  and  Lord  Shelburne.  Lord 
Hardwicke  on  Chesterfield’s  characters.  American  news  .  .  308 


DAVID  GARRICK  AND  HIS  WIFE 

Garrick  on  the  stage  and  off.  Mrs.  Garrick’s  letters.  Letter  from 
David  Garrick.  The  Shakespeare  Jubilee  and  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
Essay.  Garrick’s  Ode.  “  Author  unknown.”  Letter  from 
Garrick  about  Bon  Ton.  The  Garricks  at  Hagley.  Garrick  and 
“  Minerva.”  Invitation  to  Hampton.  Garrick  on  fret  and 
hurry.  Announces  a  visit  to  Hill  Street.  Acknowledges  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  bounty.  Letter  on  separation  from  the  House  of 
Cumberland.  Letter  on  her  visit  to  Paris.  Voltaire’s  “  malevolent 
nonsense.”  Garrick’s  retirement.  The  final  performance. 
“  Aurora  ”  Ode.  His  death.  Mrs.  Garrick’s  pronunciation. 
Her  letters.  Lactilla.  Her  widowhood  and  Mrs.  Vesey’s. 
Garrick’s  grave  ......... 


349 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


VOLUME  I 


Elizabeth  Montagu  ......  Frontispiece 

From  a  mezzotint  engraving  by  J.  R.  Smith  from  the  portrait  by 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds. 


FACING  PAGE 

William  Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath  .  .  .  .  .16 

From  the  portrait  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery. 
Copyright. 


Edward  Wortley  Montagu  .  .  .  .  .  .28 

In  Arabian  dress ,  engraved  by  J.  R.  Smith  from  the  painting  by 
M.  IV.  Peters. 


Sandleford  Priory  .......  44 

From  a  photograph  by  John  FV.  Righton. 

Chevalier  D’Eon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .68 

From  an  engraving  by  J.  Condi  in  the  European  Magazine. 

John  Wilkes  ........  80 

From  an  engraving  by  J.  Miller. 

Mary  Lepell,  afterwards  Lady  Hervey  ....  90 

From  an  engraving  from  the  painting  by  Largilliere. 

John  Montagu,  4th  Earl  of  Sandwich  .  .  .  .118 

From  the  portrait  by  John  Zoffany  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery. 
Copyright ,  Emery  IV alker. 

William  Pitt,  Earl  of  Chatham  .  .  .  .  .138 

From  a  print  by  E.  Fisher  after  the  picture  ( from  life)  by  R.  Brompton. 

Mrs.  Carter  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .163 

From  an  engraving  by  Hopwood,  Junr. 

Laurence  Sterne  .  .  .  .  .  .  .185 

From  the  bust  done  by  Joseph  Nollekens  at  Rome ,  1765,  now  in  the 
National  Portrait  Gallery.  Copyright. 


XIX 


XX  ILLUSTRATIONS 

FACING  PAGE 

Joseph  Emin  ........  230 

From  the  portrait  at  Hagley  by  Benjamin  Wilson.  By  permission  of  Lord 
Cobham. 

Dr.  Messenger  Monsey  .  .  .  .  .  .250 

From  the  portrait  by  Mary  Black  in  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians. 
Reproduced  by  permission  of  the  Council. 

George  Lord  Lyttelton  .  .  .  .  .  .278 

From  the  portrait  at  Hagley  by  Sir  "Joshua  Reynolds.  By  permission 
of  Lord  Cobham. 

Horace  Walpole  .......  306 

From  a  pastel  drawing  by  Rosalba,  formerly  in  the  possession  of  the 
late  Lady  Dorothy  Nc’vill.  Copyright ,  Emery  Walker. 

Vue  du  quai  et  du  village  de  Chaillot,  1757  .  .  .  319 

From  the  oil  painting  by  Raguenet  in  the  Carnavalet  Museum ,  Paris. 

By  permission  of  the  Director. 

David  Garrick  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .349 

Engraved  by  William  Skelton  from  an  undoubtedly  original  picture  in  the 
possession  of  the  widow  of  the  late  George  Wilson,  painted  by 
Robert  Edge  Pine. 


Mr.  Cambridge.  And  what  does  Dr.  Johnson  call  her  ? 

Fanny  Burney.  “  Queen,”  to  be  sure.  “  Queen  of  the  Blues  !  ” 

Madame  D'Arblay  s  Diaries. 


INTRODUCTORY 


Mrs.  Climenson’s  volumes.  Childhood,  girlhood,  and  marriage  of 
E-lizabeth  Robinson.  Edward  Montagu.  Earlier  married  life. 
Friendships  and  correspondence.  Her  personality.  Contemporary 
animus.  Criticism  of  her  character  and  letters,  and  a  reply.  The 
present  interest  in  the  correspondence.  The  Blue  Stockings  and  the 
Salonists. 


The  family,  child  life,  girlhood,  marriage,  and  earlier 
correspondence  of  Mrs.  Montagu  have  been  dealt 
with  in  detail  in  Mrs.  Emily  Climenson’s  two  volumes 
mentioned  in  the  Preface,  to  which  the  present  work 
forms  the  sequel,  and  to  those  pages  readers  must  be 
referred  for  the  story  of  her  life  up  to  the  completion 
of  her  forty-first  year.  The  briefest  recapitulation  of 
a  few  salient  facts  here  will  suffice,  therefore,  to  enable 
the  reader  unacquainted  with  the  earlier  volumes  to 
visualise  the  lady  whose  life,  friendships,  and  writings, 
from  1762  to  her  death  in  1800,  are  the  subject  of 
the  present  work. 

Elizabeth  Robinson  was  born  on  October  2,  1720, 
and  was  the  fourth  child  and  eldest  daughter  of 
Matthew  Robinson,  Squire  of  Edgeley  and  West 
Layton  in  Yorkshire,  and  his  wife  Elizabeth,  a  de¬ 
scendant  of  the  Devon  Drakes,  and  heir  to  her  brother 
Morris  of  Mount  Morris  in  the  parish  of  Horton 
in  Kent.  The  Robinsons  claimed  descent  from  the 
Robertsons  of  Struan,  Perthshire,  and  the  Atholl 
Earls.  Matthew  was  a  very  well-known  gentleman 
in  the  fashionable  coffee-houses  of  his  day,  a  clever 


2 


GIRLHOOD  AND  MARRIAGE 


painter  and  a  witty  conversationalist.  The  Robinsons 
had  a  family  of  twelve,  of  whom  nine  survived  to 
mature  age.  When  Elizabeth  was  about  seven  years 
old  they  moved  from  Yorkshire  to  Mount  Morris 
near  Hythe,  which  her  mother  had  then  inherited, 
but  a  good  deal  of  her  early  girlhood  was  spent  with 
her  grandmother  at  Cambridge,  with  whose  second 
husband,  Dr.  Conyers  Middleton,  she  was  a  great 
favourite.  She  is  said  to  have  been  an  extraordinarily 
beautiful  child,  attracting  great  notice  in  the  univer¬ 
sity,  and  being  early  initiated  into  much  donnish  con¬ 
versation  ;  both  Middleton  and  her  father  delighting 
in  making  her  repeat  the  doctrine  of  the  pundits  and 
in  drawing  out  her  budding  wit. 

After  a  happy,  well -trained,  and  observant  girl¬ 
hood  spent  chiefly  in  Kent,  at  Bath,  or  in  London, 
and  enlivened  by  good  looks,  much  dancing,  and  a 
warm  friendship  and  long  correspondence  with  Lady 
Margaret  Cavendish  Harley,  afterwards  Duchess  of 
Portland,  Mrs.  Donnellan,  Robert  Freind,  and  Mrs. 
Pendarves,  Elizabeth  Robinson,  having  dismissed 
two  or  three  ardent  and  deeply  stricken  suitors,  was 
wooed  and  won  by  an  elderly  scholar  and  mathe¬ 
matician,  Edward  Montagu,  grandson  of  the  first 
Earl  of  Sandwich  and  M.P.  for  Huntingdon.  Mr. 
Montagu  was  nearly  thirty  years  older  than  his  bride 
of  two-and-twenty,  and  was  a  man  of  sound  judge¬ 
ment,  retiring,  sober,  and  rather  indolent  habit,  and 
of  ample  means,  derived  largely  from  collieries  and 
farms  near  Newcastle  and  in  Yorkshire.  They  were 
married  at  Horton  by  Mr.  Freind  on  August  5,  1742. 
Mrs.  Montagu  bore  him  a  son  in  1743,  who  died 
from  teething  convulsions  when  fifteen  months  old  ; 
and  they  had  no  other  children.  The  marriage 
can  scarcely  be  called  a  love  match — “  You  and  I,” 
she  wrote  in  later  life  to  Mrs.  Carter,  “  who  have  never 
been  in  love,” — but  it  proved  as  satisfactory  a  union 
of  tolerant  contentment  as  could  be  expected  ;  and 


HOMES  AND  FRIENDSHIPS 


3 


it  was  only  towards  the  close  of  his  life,  when  he  was 
over  eighty,  that  the  peevish  tantrums  of  an  invalid 
strained  wifely  devotion,  as  we  shall  see,  somewhat 
severely.  For  the  most  part  the  pair  pursued  their 
somewhat  divergent  paths — he  with  his  microscope 
and  his  instruments  in  studied  seclusion,  she  with 
her  coteries  of  literary  friends  and  her  periodic  visits 
to  Tunbridge  and  the  Bath — in  mutual  tranquillity 
and  esteem.  The  summer  and  autumn  were  passed 
chiefly  at  their  charming  Berkshire  home,  Sandleford 
Priory,  near  Newbury,  varied  by  visits  to  Bulstrode, 
Stowe,  Hagley,  and  other  big  country  houses  ;  the 
winter  and  spring  in  London,  where  they  lived  at 
first  in  Dover  Street  and,  after  1746,  in  a  newly 
built  house  in  Hill  Street,  Berkeley  Square.  Regular 
visits  had  also  to  be  made  to  the  Denton  collieries  in 
Northumberland,  where,  too,  Mr.  Montagu  was 
owner  of  a  fine  old  Tudor  Hall. 

These  next  fifteen  years  of  their  married  life, 
from  1747  to  1761,  were  a  happily  uneventful  time, 
enjoyed  amidst  a  large  and  growing  circle  of  interest¬ 
ing  friendships,  wide  reading,  and  plenty  of  social 
amusement.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  life,  indeed,  was  never 
personally  very  eventful  ;  it  is  in  its  conjunction  with 
other  lives  and  other  events  that  it  has  its  chief  inter¬ 
est.  It  is  not  till  the  two  or  three  years  immediately 
preceding  the  opening  date  of  this  volume  that  the 
first  correspondence  with  Mrs.  Carter,  Dr.  Johnson, 
Laurence  Sterne,  David  Garrick,  Edmund  Burke,  and 
Lord  Bath  begins. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  circle  of  acquaintances  and  friends 
was,  as  has  been  shown,  an  interesting  and  a  wide  one, 
and  she  was  throughout  her  life  a  fluent  and  energetic 
letter  -  writer.  At  the  end  of  1761,  where  Mrs. 
Climenson’s  memoir  breaks  off,  her  principal  corre¬ 
spondents,  apart  from  her  family,  were  Mrs.  (by 
courtesy)  Elizabeth  Carter,  the  learned  poetess,  trans¬ 
lator  of  Epictetus  and  friend  of  Dr.  Johnson,  who 


4 


PERSONALITY 


lived  at  Deal  ;  Mrs.  Vesey,  wife  of  Agmondesham 
Vesey,  and  known  as  “  the  Sylph,”  whose  home  was 
at  Lucan,  near  Dublin,  but  who  was  much  in  London, 
and  held  her  characteristic  literary  salons  in  Bolton 
Row  and  Clarges  Street  ;  Dr.  Messenger  Monsey, 
physician  to  Lord  Godolphin  and  later  to  Chelsea 
Hospital,  a  great  wag  and  a  very  eccentric  character  ; 
George,  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton,  Pope’s  friend,  and 
author  of  Dialogues  of  the  Dead ,  who  had  just  rebuilt 
Hagley  House,  his  Worcestershire  seat  ;  and  perhaps 
closest  and  most  intimate  of  all — William  Pulteney, 
Earl  of  Bath,  once  the  Patriot  of  the  Craftsman  and 
Walpole’s  ally,  afterwards  his  bitterest  opponent,  but 
now  long  retired  from  political  activity  and  enjoying 
an  extraordinarily  vigorous  old  age  amongst  his  friends 
and  great  estates. 

Making  due  allowance  for  the  formal  flatteries  of 
the  time,  there  can  be  no  doubt  the  Elizabeth  Montagu 
of  this  period  was  an  extremely  attractive  woman. 
As  a  girl  she  had  been  a  beauty,  and  her  sparkling 
vivacity  had  won  her  more  than  one  ardent  admirer. 
Slim,  petite,  and  rather  delicate  of  habit,  with  deep 
blue  eyes,  high-arched  brows,  and  dark-brown  hair, 
lively,  spirituef  and  witty  of  manner,  most  keenly 
sympathetic  in  the  fortunes  of  her  friends,  extremely 
sound  in  judgement,  critical  in  converse,  generous  in 
praise,  benevolent  with  her  purse  and  actively  helpful 
in  distress  or  misfortune,  we  can  understand  Lord 
Bath’s  roundly  protesting  he  did  not  believe  a  more 
perfect  human  being  was  ever  created,  Edmund 
Burke  endorsing  every  word  of  his  eulogy,  and  the 
scapegrace  Edward  Wortley  Montagu  declaring  her 
the  most  accomplished  lady  he  ever  saw. 

Apparently,  even  before  her  eyes  began  to  fail  her, 
after  years  of  close  study  and  endless  letter-writing, 
she  was  more  or  less  short-sighted  : 

I  think  you  are  well  enough  acquainted  with  my  defects 
of  sight  to  be  assured  I  would  not  distinguish  Mrs.  Peers  as 


CONTEMPORARY  CRITICS 


5 


she  passed  in  the  street.  I  might  perceive  some  person  bow’d, 
for  I  can  often  catch  the  salute  and  I  always  return  it.  I  have 
often  return’d  a  bow  to  Mr.  Montagu  as  we  have  passd  in 
our  carriages,  and  he  has  been  diverted  at  perceiving  I  did 
not  know  him.  I  have  sometimes  perceived  by  the  familiar 
nod  of  the  footmen  that  the  Person  who  passd  in  a  chariot 
was  Mr.  Montagu. 

But  the  defect  cannot  have  been  noticeable,  as  this 
is  the  only  reference  to  it  that  has  been  encountered. 

In  view  of  some  extant  criticisms  which  readers 
may  have  come  across,  and  by  which  their  opinion 
might  perhaps  have  been  prejudiced  at  the  outset,  it 
should  be  pointed  out  here  and  now  that  the  material 
for  a  considered  judgement  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  mature 
capabilities  and  character  has  not  hitherto  been  avail¬ 
able,  inasmuch  as  the  story  and  correspondence  of 
the  last  forty  years  of  her  life  are  (with  the  very  partial 
exception  of  Dr.  Doran’s  and  Monsieur  Huchon’s 
volumes  referred  to  in  the  Preface)  till  now  un¬ 
published. 

Of  a  certain  contemporary  animus  against  the 
“  Minerva  ”  of  the  Blues  there  can  indeed  be  no 
doubt,  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  disregard  it  here. 
Adverse  criticisms  of  this  or  that  point  in  her  character 
or  her  doings  will  be  duly  referred  to,  in  the  pages 
that  follow,  from  Dr.  Johnson  and  James  Boswell, 
from  Horace  Walpole,  Mrs.  Piozzi,  Mr.  Crisp, 
Richard  Cumberland,  and  one  or  two  other  acquaint¬ 
ances  of  smaller  eminence.  Biographers  of  some  of 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  feminine  contemporaries  such  as  Mrs. 
Delany,  Mrs.  Thrale,  Miss  Burney,  and  others  (and 
indeed  some  of  those  dear  ladies  themselves)  have 
sometimes  gone  a  little  out  of  their  way  to  fling  a 
jibe  at  the  “  Queen  of  the  Blue  Stockings,”  either 
about  her  great  house,  or  her  “  taste  for  magnificence,” 
her  Cupidon  room,  or  her  occasionally  resplendent 
attire,  her  big  dinners  or  “  great  and  vast  and  late 
and  dull  assemblies.”  We  shall  find  her  accused  of 


6  THE  QUARTERLY  REVIEW 

trying  for  effect,  of  efforts  to  flash  in  conversation, 
of  being  generous  through  vanity,  of  interminable 
loquacity,  of  haughty  patronage,  of  senile  absurdities 
in  jewellery  and  entertainment,  of  lack  of  wit,  and 
abundance  of  presumption. 

Sir  Walter  Scott  (if  I  am  right  in  attributing  to 
him  the  notice  in  the  Quarterly  Review  of  the  series 
of  her  early  Letters  published  by  Lord  Rokeby  in 
1810-13)  wrote  about  these  : 

Mrs.  Montagu  would  in  all  probability  have  written  much 
more  agreable  and  much  more  really  sensible  letters  if  she  had 
never  once  been  led  to  suspect  “  that  she  was  the  most  agreable 
correspondent  in  the  world  ”...  Mrs.  Montagu’s  letters’ 
merit  is  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  pains  she  takes  with  them. 
Those  to  her  husband  and  Gilbert  West  are  natural,  lively 
and  agreable,  to  Lord  Lyttelton,  vastly  more  laboured,  vastly 
less  pleasant.  Those  for  the  benefit  of  that  very  learned,  very 
excellent  and  very  tiresome  person  Mrs.  Carter,  once  very 
celebrated  and  now  almost  forgotten,  whom  she  seems  desirous 
to  dazzle  by  a  prodigious  display  of  wit,  knowledge,  taste, 
virtue  and  piety,  are  the  worst  of  all,  and  indeed  absolutely 
unreadable. 

It  requires  some  courage  to  quote  such  a  criticism 
from  such  an  authority  at  the  outset  of  a  work  which 
is  to  consist  largely  of  the  letters  of  a  person  thus 
scathingly  disposed  of  ;  but  it  seems  to  the  present 
editor  wiser  to  recognise  and  so  far  as  may  be  to 
refute  these  strictures  than  to  ignore  them.  The 
answer  is  threefold  ;  whether  it  is  adequate,  the 
reader  must  be  left  to  determine  later  on. 

In  the  first  place,  the  volumes  dealt  with  by  the 
Quarterly  reviewer  contained  a  not  very  judicious 
selection  of  correspondence  issued  almost  without 
comment  or  annotation,  inaccurate  in  sequence,  and 
often  of  most  inordinate  length  ;  though  John  Fyvie 
wrote  of  them  :  “  One  wonders  that  these  vivacious 
letters  have  never  been  reprinted ;  for  with  a  little 
judicious  pruning  they  would  form  a  moderate-sized 


THE  EARLIER  LETTERS 


7 


volume  of  exceptionally  good  reading.  They  show 
much  wit,  keen  observation,  and  not  a  little  wisdom  ; 
they  reveal  the  growth  of  a  piquant  as  well  as  admir¬ 
able  personality.” 

Secondly,  the  letters  in  this  Rokeby  collection 
were  all  of  the  earlier  half  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  life, 
and  dealt  with  the  period  from  1734  to  1761,  com¬ 
prising,  therefore,  none  of  the  years  from  which  the 
present  selections  are  taken.  Though  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  precocious  wit  and  extremely  shrewd 
and  amusing,  if  immature,  observation  in  many  of 
them,  they  are,  first,  the  effusions  of  a  vivacious  young 
beauty  in  her  dancing  teens,  and,  later,  the  corre¬ 
spondence  of  her  early  married  life  with  a  man  very 
greatly  her  senior,  and  a  few  good  friends,  but  before 
she  had  formed  the  most  interesting  associations  of 
her  life  or  had  established  the  social  position,  or  the 
particular  friendships,  or  the  literary  coteries  with 
which  her  name  is  generally  coupled. 

Lastly — and  this  is  the  really  cogent  argument — 
the  animosities  of  contemporaries  and  the  criticisms 
of  1813  are  alike  inapplicable  to  the  judgement  of 
to-day.  Her  nephew’s  volumes  were  avowedly  put 
forth  as  specimens  of  a  correspondence  which  had  been 
very  greatly  admired  ;  and  at  the  expressed  wish,  as 
he  himself  informs  us,  of  Dr.  Young,  Gilbert  West, 
Lord  Chatham,  David  Garrick,  Stillingfleet,  Beattie, 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Burke,  and  other  friends.  To 
them,  and  to  Sir  Walter  Scott,  there  was  no  question 
of  biographical  or  historical  interest  ;  they  were  simply 
“  admirable,”  or  “  unreadable,”  as  examples  of  a  style 
which  many  delighted  in  and  others  abhorred.  Our 
interest  to-day  is  based  on  quite  other  grounds.  In 
the  selections  extracted  from  an  immense  mass  of 
material  for  use  in  the  present  volumes,  the  epistolary 
fireworks,  the  sententious  reflections,  and  the  learned 
disquisitions,  though  they  could  not  be  entirely  ex¬ 
cluded,  have  been  remorselessly  blue-pencilled,  and 


8 


SOCIAL  DISTINCTION 


nine-tenths  of  the  fine  passages  which  evoked  the 
enthusiasm  of  her  correspondents  have  been  brutally 
excised.  It  is  as  a  contribution  to  the  annals  of 
English  society  in  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  and  a  record  of  the  life  and  friendships  of 
one  of  its  notable  leaders  that  these  volumes  have  been 
compiled  ;  and  the  aim  of  their  editor  has  been  to 
conserve  the  references  to  well-known  people  and 
stirring  events  rather  than  the  witticisms  and  reflec¬ 
tions  of  their  chronicler. 

There  is  enough  of  truth  in  these  depreciations 
to  make  it  incumbent  on  the  compiler  of  her  Memoir 
to  show,  if  he  can,  that  any  such  estimate  is  far  from 
comprehending  the  whole  truth  about  her  character  ; 
and  he  ventures  to  think  that  the  extracts  included 
in  the  following  pages — curtailed  and  incomplete 
though  they  necessarily  are — may  go  some  way  to¬ 
wards  achieving  that  end. 

Mrs.  Montagu  came  of  a  good  old  family,  and 
married  into  a  great  one  ;  and  it  was  no  fault  of  hers 
that  social  distinction  came  easily  to  her.  All  her 
life  she  had  a  horror  of  small  confined  rooms  and  a 
passion  for  air  and  space  about  her;  constant  references 
to  this  occur  in  her  letters  about  lodgings  at  Bath  or  at 
Tunbridge,  her  hotel  in  Paris,  or  her  inn  accommoda¬ 
tion  on  her  journeys.  The  roominess  of  the  house 
she  built  for  herself  in  Portman  Square,  and  of  the 
alterations  which  Wyatt  achieved  for  her  in  Sandle- 
ford  Priory,  were  a  real  boon  to  her  delicate  health 
and  a  source  of  enjoyment,  constantly  expressed. 
“  The  lodging  houses  at  Bath,”  she  writes,  “  and  the 
chill  journey,  made  me  feel  myself  wonderfully  com¬ 
fortable  in  this  good  and  substantial  mansion.  Ever 
since  I  first  inhabited  it  I  have  been  sensible  how  much 
a  good  habitation  softens  the  severity  and  enlivens 
the  gloom  of  winter.”  A  very  delicate  constitution, 
frequent  indisposition,  and  an  immense  business  and 
social  correspondence  necessitated  her  spending  a 


THE  HOSTESS  OF  MONTAGU  HOUSE  9 

great  deal  of  her  life  indoors  ;  and  only  in  large, 
well-lighted,  airy  rooms  could  she  find  comfort  and 
contentment. 

No  doubt  she  was  proud  of  her  great  Salon  at 
Montagu  House,  her  verd  -  antique  columns,  her 
extraordinary  Feather  Room,  and  her  ability  to  enter¬ 
tain  there  nobly  and  easily  a  very  large  circle  of 
friends.  Yet  even  the  fastidious  and  hypercritical 
Horace  Walpole  had  to  acknowledge  the  excellence 
and  simplicity  of  its  design. 

“  On  Tuesday,”  he  wrote  to  Mason  in  1782, 
“  with  the  Harcourts  at  Mrs.  Montagu’s  new  palace, 
and  was  much  surprised.  Instead  of  vagaries  it  is 
a  noble,  simple  edifice.  Magnificent,  yet  no  gilding. 
It  is  grand,  not  tawdry,  not  larded  and  embroidered 
and  pomponned  with  shreds  and  remnants,  and 
clinquant,  like  all  the  harlequinades  of  Adam,  which 
never  let  the  eye  repose  an  instant.” 

No  doubt,  too,  in  later  years,  she  grew  fond  of 
entertaining  on  a  big  scale.  Was  it  wonderful,  or 
reprehensible  ?  She  was  very  wealthy,  she  was 
extremely  hospitable,  she  had  hosts  of  acquaintance, 
and  a  house  wherein  they  could  be  accommodated 
easily  and  without  crowding  ;  and  she  was  a  staunch 
believer  in  the  duty  of  supporting  the  conventional 
usage  of  the  social  fabric.  If  her  assemblies  were 
sometimes  a  little  “  mixed,”  it  was  because  she  elected 
deliberately  to  welcome  lowly  talent  rather  than  titled 
sinners.  James  Beattie,  the  shopman’s  tuneful  son, 
was  a  more  honoured  guest  than  the  brilliant  drunkards 
of  Lady  Townshend’s  drawing-room,  or  the  dissolute 
heir  of  her  beloved  Lord  Lyttelton.  Little  grimy 
chimney-sweeps  breakfasted  joyously  on  her  lawn  every 
May  Day,  Woodhouse  the  cobbler  poet  dined  at 
Sandleford,  pitmen  and  their  wives  feasted  at  Denton  ; 
but  against  the  Chudleigh  and  her  ilk,  her  face  was 
as  adamant  ;  not  from  any  affectation  of  prudery,  of 
which  her  letters  certainly  acquit  her,  but  simply 


io  “POWERS  OF  RATIOCINATION” 

because  she  did  not  want  to  countenance  ostentatious 
vice. 

Foibles  and  faults  she  doubtless  had,  and  some  of 
them  may  have  acquired  prominence  in  her  old  age, 
but  that  Richard  Cumberland’s  spiteful  picture  of 
“  Vanessa  ”  is  a  fair  portrait  may  very  well  be  doubted, 
without  much  better  corroboration  than  is  available. 
I  prefer  to  recall  the  dicta  of  two  other  witnesses,  both 
of  whom  had  better  means  of  judging  at  different 
times,  and  greater  honesty  of  judgement.  Dr.  Johnson 
— reserving  for  her  some  of  the  choicest  Johnsonese 
— said  :  “  That  lady  exerts  more  mind  in  conversa¬ 
tion  than  any  person  I  ever  met  with.  Sir,  she  dis¬ 
plays  such  powers  of  ratiocination,  such  radiations  of 
intellectual  eminence,  as  are  amazing.”  And  Hannah 
More,  writing  some  years  after  her  death,  testifies 
in  simpler  but  convincing  words  :  “  With  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  faults  I  have  nothing  to  do.  Her  fine 
qualities  were  many.  From  my  first  entrance  into 
a  London  life  till  her  death,  I  ever  found  her  an 
affectionate,  zealous,  and  constant  friend,  as  well  as 
a  most  instructive  and  pleasant  companion.” 

That  she  had  all  the  courage  of  her  opinions  no 
one  who  reads  her  outspoken  criticisms  of  Johnson, 
of  Voltaire,  of  Chesterfield,  Sterne,  and  others  will 
be  prepared  to  deny,  though  some  may  choose  to 
give  the  quality  a  less  complimentary  name. 

But  if  her  strictures  were  sometimes  violent  or 
partial  and  her  moralities  invaded  provinces  beyond 
their  bounds,  it  will  be  admitted  that  she  could  gener¬ 
ally  back  her  view  by  reasoning,  and  that  her  own 
description  has  portrayed  her  as  “  in  body  a  saint, 
in  mind  a  great  sinner.” 

Elizabeth  Montagu’s  personality  is,  I  think,  suffi¬ 
ciently  interesting  to  make  this  fresh  material  worth 
exploration,  without  either  claiming  for  her  any  pre¬ 
eminent  place  in  the  literary  hierarchy  of  her  time, 
still  less  invoking  any  rivalry  with  the  much  cele- 


LONDON  AND  PARIS  SALONS  n 

brated  Parisian  salons  of  the  Marquise  du  Deffiand, 
Mesdames  Geoffrin  and  de  Tencin  or  Mdlle.  de 
L’Espinasse.  Mrs.  Montagu  was  as  essentially 
English  as  they  were  essentially  French  ;  their  tem¬ 
peraments  and  attraction  were  fundamentally  diverse  ; 
and  while  Mrs.  Montagu’s  learning  and  knowledge 
of  the  world  were  probably  more  than  equal  to  that 
of  her  Paris  contemporaries,  her  insight  and  capacity 
for  rapid  penetration  in  the  study  and  entertainment 
of  others  were  perhaps  inferior,  her  wit  less  spiritual. 
And  apart  from  individualities,  the  London  Blue 
Stockings  were  heavily  handicapped  as  against  their 
Paris  sisters  of  the  bas  bleu ,  first  by  the  tremendous 
gambling  mania  of  the  time,  which  not  only  swept 
into  its  vortex  men  like  Chesterfield,  Lord  Carlisle, 
Sheridan,  Selwyn,  and  Fox,  but  even  inveigled  a 
Pitt  and  a  Wilberforce  ;  and  also  by  the  fact  that 
London  was  never  the  almost  exclusive  home  of 
English  literary  folk  which  Paris  became  for  France  ; 
whilst  even  those  who  might  be  considered  Londoners 
were  scattered  from  Streatham  to  Strawberry  and 
from  Highgate  to  Flampton. 

The  gambling  clubs  of  eighteenth-century  Paris 
did  not — to  her  honour  or  good  fortune — vie,  either 
in  their  stakes  or  their  clientele ,  with  Almack’s  and 
White’s  and  Arthur’s  ;  and  Madame  Geoffrin  in 
the  Rue  St.  Honore  (who,  says  her  ten  years’  guest 
Marmontel,  was  without  any  tincture  either  of  letters 
or  the  arts,  and  in  her  life  had  never  studied  anything 
but  very  superficially,  yet  did  not  appear  ignorant 
in  the  society  either  of  artists  or  men  of  letters)  was 
free  of  a  rivalry  which  ever  beset  the  ladies  of  Hill 
Street  and  Bolton  Row.  Entertainment  of  this 
particular  kind  entails  rather  rare  qualifications  for 
its  continued  success  ;  and  its  finest  salt,  as  Mrs. 
Montagu  herself  declared  when  she  went  to  Paris 
in  1776,  is  naturally  Gallic. 


1762 


MRS.  MONTAGU  AND  LORD  BATH - WAR  WITH  SPAIN 


The  Cock  Lane  Ghost.  Sir  Joshua,  Tristram  Shandy,  and  Lord  Bath. 
The  Court.  Miss  Anne  Pitt.  The  Earl  of  Pembroke  and  Miss 
Hunter.  Political  changes.  War  with  Spain.  William  Pulteney, 
Earl  of  Bath.  The  new  Ministry.  Sir  Francis  Dashwood.  House 
Party  at  Hagley.  The  Garter.  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu. 
The  Cherokee  King.  Mr.  Hoare’s  “  Pantheon.”  Longleat.  Edward 
Wortley  Montagu.  Mrs.  Chapone.  Dr.  Messenger  Monsey.  Lord 
Granby.  Admiral  Smith.  Mr.  Tom  Lyttelton.  Mr.  William 
Robinson.  Garrick  and  Love.  Lady  M.  W.  Montagu’s  death. 
Due  de  Nivernois.  Millenium  Hall.  Sampson  Gideon.  Quin. 


The  year  1762  opened,  politically,  with  the  declara¬ 
tion  of  war  against  Spain,  the  war  which  Pitt  had 
foreseen  as  inevitable,  and  had  wished  to  precipitate 
before  his  fall,  a  few  weeks  previously.  After  the 
Family  Compact  of  August  1761,  England  found 
herself  confronted  in  Europe  not  only  by  France  and 
Spain  but  by  Russia,  Sweden,  Austria,  and  Naples. 
The  country  was  exhausted  by  six  years  of  war,  the 
National  Debt  was  doubled,  and  Pitt’s  fall  had  been 
chiefly  brought  about  by  his  advocacy  of  war  with 
Spain  ;  yet  Lord  Bute  and  the  King,  keenly  desirous 
of  peace  as  they  were,  had  been  forced  into  the  declara¬ 
tion  which  Pitt’s  rejected  counsel  would  have  fore¬ 
stalled. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  beyond  the  normal  interest  of 
an  intelligent  citizen,  and  a  staunch  attachment  to 
the  Court  party,  was  chiefly  a  politician  through,  and 
for,  her  political  friends,  whose  causes  she  warmly 

12 


THE  COCK  LANE  GHOST 


1762 


T3 


espoused,  though  they  were  sometimes  awkwardly 
divergent. 


To  her  Sister-in-law  Mrs.  William  Robinson  at  Rome 

Hill  Street,  Feb.  26. 

I  am  under  some  anxiety  least  our  rupture  with  Spain 
should  occasion  you  any  inconvenience.  In  the  house  of 
Commons  every  boy  who  can  articulate,  is  a  speaker,  to  the 
great  despatch  of  buisiness  and  solidity  of  counsels  ;  they  sit 
very  late  every  night  as  every  young  gentleman  who  has  a 
handsome  person,  a  fine  coat,  a  well  shaped  leg,  a  clear  voice, 
is  to  exhibit  these  advantages  ;  to  this  kind  of  Beau  oratory 
and  tea  table  talk,  the  ladies,  as  is  reasonable,  resorted  very 
constantly  ;  at  first  they  attended  in  such  numbers  as  to  fill 
the  body  of  the  House  on  great  political  questions.  .  .  .  Whether 
by  private  contrivance,  or  that  of  a  party,  who  are  inclined  to 
pacific  measures  I  do  not  know  ;  but  a  ghost  started  up  in 
a  dirty  obscure  alley  in  the  city,1  and  diverted  the  attention 
of  the  female  politicians  from  the  glory  of  their  country  to  an 
enquiry  Why  Miss  Fanny,  who  died  of  the  small  pox  two 
years  ago,  and  suffered  herself  to  be  buried,  does  now  appear 
in  the  shape  and  sound  of  a  hammer  and  rap  and  scratch  at 
the  head  of  Miss  Parsons’  bed,  the  daughter  of  a  parish  Clerk  ; 
as  I  suppose  you  read  the  Newspapers  you  will  see  mention 
of  the  ghost,  but  without  you  was  here  upon  the  spot  you 
could  never  conceive  that  the  most  bungling  performance  of 
the  silliest  imposture  could  take  up  the  attention  and  con¬ 
versation  of  all  the  fine  world.  ...  You  need  not  indeed 
regret  being  absent  while  this  farce  is  going  on,  there  will  be 
an  Elizabeth  Canning,  or  a  man  in  a  bottle,  or  some  other  folly 
for  the  amusement  of  this  frivolous  generation  at  all  times  ; 
but  you  have  some  reason  to  regret  having  miss’d  the  Coronation, 
perhaps  the  finest  spectacle  in  the  world.  .  .  . 

On  the  King’s  wedding  2  there  appeared  the  greatest  parade 
of  fine  cloathes  I  ever  saw.  This  winter  has  been  very  gay 
as  to  amusements  ;  never  did  we  see  less  light  from  the  sun 
or  a  greater  blaze  of  Wax  candles.  The  presence  of  the  Duke 
of  Mecklenburg,  the  Queen’s  youngest  brother,  has  given 
occasion  to  many  balls  and  assemblies.  The  Queen  has  not 
an  evening  drawingroom  ;  they  have  sometimes  balls  at  St. 

1  Cock  Lane. 

2  To  Princess  Charlotte  of  Mecklenburg-Strelitz,  Sept.  8,  1761. 


14 


LORD  BATH’S  PORTRAIT 


1762 


James,  but  in  general  their  majesties  spend  their  time  in  private, 
or  at  Leicester  House  where  the  Princess  Dowager  hardly 
keeps  up  the  air  of  a  Court.  The  Duke  of  York  makes 
himself  amends  for  want  of  princely  pastimes  by  very  familiarly 
frequenting  all  the  publick  diversions,  and  has  shared  in  the 
amusements  of  the  ghost  in  Cock  Lane.  .  .  . 

Lord  Bath  had  been  this  winter  sitting  to  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds  for  the  portrait  which  is  now  in  the 
National  Portrait  Gallery,  and  the  artist  evidently 
encouraged  cheerful  company  whilst  he  was  painting  : 

Will  my  dear  Mrs.  Vesey  go  with  me  tomorrow  at  half 
an  hour  after  one  to  Mr.  Reynolds,  where  my  Lord  Bath  is 
to  sit  for  his  picture  ?  Where  ye  facetious  author  of  Tristram 
Shandy  is  to  make  him  smile  ?  and  where  you  may  see  the 
historical  picture  in  which  the  Muse  of  Tragedy  and  Comedy 
are  disputing  for  Mr.  Garrick  ?  If  all  these  temptations 
cannot  allure  you,  what  more  can  I  offer  ?  Only  in  aid  of 
these  great  and  extraordinary  subjects  the  company  of  one, 
who  with  the  rest  of  the  World,  is  Mrs.  Veseys  admirer  and 
Hble  Servant. 


From  Lord  Bath 

On  Wenesday  about  one  of  the  clock,  I  will  most  certainly 
be,  at  Mr.  Reynolds’s,  to  mend  my  sickly  look,  and  to  sitt 
down  in  my  Chair,  as  I  should  do  ;  instead  of  being  half 
standing,  which  criticism  of  Mr.  Sternes,  I  think  perfectly 
right.  As  for  my  looks  I  fear,  they  will  not  be  much  mended, 
by  any  Physick  of  Mr.  Reynolds.  He  has  made  an  old  man, 
look  as  if  he  was  in  pain,  which  an  old  man  generally  is,  and 
so  far  he  is  right. 

To  her  Hush  and 

London,  Saturday  Night. 

I  imagine  there  is  not  the  least  chance  that  this  should 
find  you  at  Newcastle,  as  you  propose  to  be  in  Town  next  week, 
and  do  not  travel  at  the  rantipole  rate  of  our  modern  fine 
gentlemen,  who  not  being  of  the  least  use  in  any  place,  think 
it  a  noble  privilege  to  be  able  to  convey  themselves  wherever 
they  desire  at  as  rapid  a  rate  as  the  birds  of  the  air.  It  is  said 
Mr.  Wortley  Montagu  has  left  £800000  *n  money,  and 
£17000  Pr  ann  m  land,  mines  etc,  behind  him  ;  a  most 


1762 


A  PIECE  OF  GALLANTRY 


i5 


notable  sum,  and  I  wish  it  may  make  his  heirs  as  happy  and 
illustrious  as  the  getting  it  made  him  anxious  and  odious.  .  .  . 

Our  friend  Mrs.  A.  Pitt 1  whirls  about  the  political  and 
fashionable  World  like  a  comet  ;  I  was  a  little  disgusted  with 
her  at  the  Duchess  of  Portlands  on  Sunday  night  when  she 
told  her  Grace,  she  thought  high  birth  preferable  to  all  merit 
whatever.  I  could  not  help  saying,  tout  doucement,  that 
I  thought  the  more  personal  any  advantages  were  the  more 
they  seem’d  to  me  to  redound  to  the  honour  of  the  possessor, 
and  that  many  illustriously  descended  were  little  respected  ; 
that  high  birth  was  good  as  it  excited  to  good  and  right  behaviour, 
but  I  had  rather  be  dunghill  born  and  have  transcendant  merit 
than  be  an  ordinary  character  in  a  very  great  situation.  I  must 
own  when  I  was  young  I  would  not  have  parted  with  half 
an  eyebrow  for  the  pedigree  of  the  Bourbons,  nor  wd  I  now 
have  a  wrong  opinion  for  the  glory  of  the  Ottoman  race. 
Indeed  the  poor  woman  est  bien  mondaine  in  spite  of  years, 
ill  health,  mortifications,  etc.  She  is  fit  for  the  Worlds  great 
hospital  of  Vanitys  incurables  ;  I  wish  I  had  not  heard  this 
servile  nonsense  for  it  provoked  me  at  the  instant,  and  has 
disgusted  me  ever  since. 

To  Mrs.  TV.  Robinson  at  Naples 

February. 

The  town  is  now  in  a  great  uproar  from  an  outrageous 
piece  of  gallantry,  as  it  is  called,  of  the  young  Earl  of  Pembroke 
who  has  carried  off  Miss  Kitty  Hunter  as  it  is  said  to  Holland. 
He  wrote  a  letter  to  his  wife  2  one  of  the  best  and  most  beautiful 
women  in  the  world,  to  tell  her  that  he  had  quitted  her  for 
ever,  that  she  was  too  good  and  too  tender  for  him,  and  he 
had  such  a  violent  passion  for  Missy  he  could  not  help  doing 
as  he  did.  It  will  not  be  long  before  in  her  turn  the  maid 
“  will  weep  the  fury  of  his  love  decayed,”  his  affections  are 
as  uncertain  as  they  are  unlawful  and  ungenerous.  [Lord 
Pembroke  and  his  wife  were  reconciled  by  the  following 
March,  but  Miss  Kitty,  declining  to  give  up  her  child,  did 
not  return  to  her  father,  and  kept  his  Lordship’s  settlement.] 
Miss  Kitty  Hunter  was  a  great  lover  of  French  novels  and 
much  enamoured  of  M.  Rousseau’s  “Julie.”  how  much 
have  these  writers  to  answer  for  who  make  vice  into  a  regular 

1  Anne,  sister  of  Lord  Chatham. 

2  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Charles  Duke  of  Marlborough. 


RETIREMENT 


1762 


1 6 

system,  gild  it  with  specious  colours  and  deceive  the  mind 
into  guilt  it  would  have  startled  at,  without  the  fard  of  art 
and  cheat  of  sentiment.  .  .  . 

At  this  period  Mrs.  Montagu  received  a  letter 
from  Emin,  her  Armenian  friend,  who  was  at  St. 
Petersburg  under  the  protection  of  General  Keith. 
In  a  postscript  to  this  letter,  written  some  days  after 
the  first  part,  he  laments  the  death  of  Prince  Shamruz, 
whose  army  he  was  preparing  to  join  and  command, 
a  heavy  blow  to  his  hopes  for  the  welfare  of  his  nation. 

The  story  of  Emin,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Armenian 
adorer,  who  addressed  her  as  “  My  queen  of  Sheba,” 
the  “Most  learned  and  most  magnanimous,”  “The 
Wisdom  of  Europe,”  etc.,  is  too  long  to  enter  into 
here.  Readers  who  may  be  interested  are  referred 
to  Mrs.  Climenson’s  earlier  volumes,  and  to  the 
biographical  notice  by  his  great-great-granddaughter, 
Amy  Apcar,  published  at  Calcutta. 

On  May  1 8  Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

Lord  Halifax  is  returned  with  great  glory  from  his  Lord 
Lieutenancy  in  Ireland.  He  pleased  all  people,  he  united  all 
parties,  he  contented  those  he  was  sent  by,  and  those  he  was 
sent  to,  and  has  shown  it  is  possible  to  please  the  government 
here  and  be  popular  there. 

The  Duke  of  Newcastle  is  about  to  resign  his  office,  and 
retire  to  the  joys  of  private  life.  I  am  afraid  he  will  find 
that  the  mind  used  to  buisiness  does  not  find  quiet  in  idleness. 
There  is  hardly  a  greater  misfortune  than  to  have  the  mind 
much  accustomed  to  the  tracasseries  of  the  world.  A  country 
gentleman  can  amuse  himself  with  angling  in  a  trout  stream, 
or  venturing  his  neck  in  a  Foxchase.  A  studious  man  can 
enjoy  his  books  in  solitude  .  .  .  but  chiefs  out  of  war,  and 
Statesmen  out  of  place,  like  all  animals  out  of  their  proper 
element,  make  a  miserable  affair  of  rural  life.  .  .  .  The  King 
has  purchas’d  Buckingham  House  and  is  going  to  fit  it  up 
elegantly  for  his  retired  hours.  Her  Majesty  promises  to 
give  us  an  Heir  very  soon.  Princess  Amelia  has  purchased 
Gunnersbury  House.  .  .  .  Mr.  Harrison’s  watch  has  suc¬ 
ceeded  beyond  expectation  ;  navigation  will  be  improved  by 
it,  which  you,  who  have  the  spirit  of  travelling  shall  rejoice  at. 


WILLIAM  PULTENEY,  EARL  OF  BATH 
By  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 


North  Carolina  State  Library. 

ialaifh 

1762  WILLIAM  PULTENEY  17 

The  wives  of  some  of  our  General  Officers  are  gone  to 
Lisbon  with  their  husbands,  which  is  for  the  honour  of  the 
fair  sex. 

England  was  now  sending  troops  to  defend 
Portugal  from  invasion  by  Spain  and  France,  who 
had  combined  as  allies.  Lord  Pulteney,  the  only 
child  of  the  Earl  of  Bath,  went  out  with  his  regiment. 
His  father  felt  his  going  acutely,  and  a  letter  written 
by  him  to  Mrs.  Montagu  after  parting  with  his  son 
begs  her  not  to  allude  to  it  when  they  meet,  as  he  felt 
he  should  break  down. 

William  Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath,  the  Whig  states¬ 
man  whose  political  career,  as  Walpole’s  early  ally, 
and  later  as  his  great  opponent,  had  come  to  an  end 
in  1747  when,  after  accepting  a  peerage,  he  had 
failed  to  overthrow  Pelham  and  to  exclude  Pitt  from 
office,  was  in  1760  a  great  figure  in  the  society  of  the 
day  ;  a  rich  peer  and  a  great  landowner,  a  good 
horseman  and  a  keen  card-player,  and  a  man  whose 
cutting  wit  and  piercing  eye  were  still  held  in  very 
respectful  awe,  though  his  voice  was  only  occasionally 
heard  as  “  an  aged  raven  ”  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
and  the  tongue  which  Walpole  had  “  feared  more 
than  another  man’s  sword,”  was  seldom  uplifted  either 
as  “  Craftsman  ”  or  “  Patriot.” 

Pulteney’s  wife,  Anna  Maria  Gumley,  had  held 
celebrity  as  a  great  vixen  and  an  incorrigible  miser, 
and  is  supposed  to  have  infected  her  husband  with 
monetary  meanness  ;  but,  at  any  rate,  she  brought 
him  riches  and  vastly  increased  his  fortune  and  her 
own,  so  that  her  death  left  him  a  very  wealthy  widower. 

Pulteney’s  career  as  a  patriot  having  ended  rather 
ignobly  by  his  acceptance  of  a  peerage,  he  is  chiefly 
remembered  for  the  extraordinary  versatility  of  his 
wit,  and  what  Horace  Walpole  called  his  “  mis¬ 
cellaneousness  of  style.”  Lecky  ranks  him  as  “  the 
most  graceful  and  brilliant  speaker  in  the  House  of 
Commons  in  the  interval  between  the  withdrawal  of 


VOL.  1 


c 


1 8  VOLUMINOUS  CORRESPONDENCE  1762 


St.  John  and  the  appearance  of  Pitt.”  His  manner 
changed  like  the  wind,  from  grave  to  gay,  from 
pathos  to  wit  ;  but  the  spirit  of  faction  was  uncon¬ 
trolled  by  patriotic  sentiment,  and,  in  the  end,  “  he 
left  not  faction  but  of  it  was  left.”  The  subject  of 
endless  lampoons  and  the  originator  of  many,  “  Billy, 
of  all  Bob’s  foes,  The  wittiest  in  verse  and  prose,” 
left  but  a  transient  mark  on  the  politics  of  his  day. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had,  as  occasional  references  in 
her  correspondence  show,  met  Lord  Bath  in  society 
before  his  wife’s  death  in  1758,  but  it  was  in  1760 
at  Tunbridge  that  their  acquaintance  ripened  rapidly 
into  an  ardent  admiration  on  his  part  and  a  devoted 
attachment  on  hers,  which  continued  unbroken  till 
the  Earl’s  death  four  vears  later.  The  letters  in  this 
collection  between  Mrs.  Montagu  and  Lord  Bath 
number  over  four  hundred,  ranging  from  brief  notes 
inviting  to  an  airing  in  his  lordship’s  chaise,  or  sending 
anxious  enquiries  after  his  lordship’s  health,  to  lengthy 
budgets  of  eight  or  ten  closely  written  pages  of  the 
gilt  edged  quarto  of  the  day. 

It  seems,  indeed,  that  during  these  four  years  of 
their  intimacy,  except  when  they  were  within  calling 
distance  of  each  other,  either  in  London,  Tunbridge, 
Bath,  Sandleford,  Hagley,  or  at  Spa,  Lord  Bath  and 
Elizabeth  Montagu  wrote  to  each  other  almost  by 
every  available  post  ;  and  most  of  this  correspondence 
appears  to  have  been  preserved  on  both  sides. 

The  difficulties  confronting  the  selector  from  such 
a  collection  as  this,  however,  lie  not  merely  in  the 
judicious  choice  from  so  large  a  bulk  of  material 
more  or  less  interesting  and  valuable.  The  formal¬ 
ities  of  compliment  and  respect,  the  solicitude  of 
enquiries  as  to  health,  the  details  of  journeys,  indiges¬ 
tion,  headaches,  spasms,  colds,  over-fatigue,  raking, 
and  quadrille  ;  the  perils  of  highwaymen,  floods, 
bad  roads,  damp  beds,  coach  break-downs,  and  so  on, 
which  find  their  inevitable  place  in  almost  every  letter, 


1762 


A  CYPHER 


19 


become,  of  course,  in  the  cumulative  effect  of  a  long 
series,  intolerably  fatiguing  to  the  reader.  Mrs. 
Montagu,  for  all  her  wide  intelligence,  deep  reading, 
and  remarkable  common  sense,  is  often  exhaustingly 
long-winded,  and  sometimes  almost  “  nauseous  ”  (as 
her  noble  lover  was  once  constrained  to  protest)  in 
her  flattery  and  adulation  ;  whilst  Lord  Bath’s  accom¬ 
plished  gallantries,  dreadful  puns,  and  vivacious  devotion 
grow  equally  tiresome  when  a  string  of  letters  are 
read  together.  Yet  there  is  so  much  of  interesting 
political  reference  and  social  record  in  this  corre¬ 
spondence  that  it  is  difficult  to  discard,  as  one  needs 
must,  the  great  majority  of  it,  without  careful  scrutiny 
from  superscription  to  postscript  ;  so  that  the  editor’s 
task  is,  it  will  be  admitted,  a  difficult  one.  Obviously, 
however,  space  could  only  be  given  for  a  few  extracts 
from  this  fat  pile  of  correspondence,  chosen  here  and 
there,  either  as  being  of  interest  in  themselves  or  as 
giving  enlightening  glimpses  of  the  characters  of  their 
writers. 

As  letters  were  often  tampered  with  in  course  of 
post,  a  cypher  was  attempted  in  this  correspondence, 
but  seems  to  have  been  only  occasionally  used  and  to 
have  got  somewhat  muddled.  The  key,  so  far  as  I 
have  found  any,  is  given  here  from  Lord  Bath’s 
scribbled  memorandum: 


The  King 
Lord  Bute 
Mr.  Pitt 
Mr.  Grenville 
Lord  Sandwich 
Lord  Hallifax  . 
Lord  Hillsborough 
Lord  Egmont 
Newcastle 
Hardwicke 
Lyttelton 
Temple  . 

D.  of  Bedford 
Townsend 
Prince  of  Wales 
Buckingham  House 


Mr.  G.  B.  2000. 
Mr.  J.  000. 
Syphon. 

Atlas. 

Clodius. 

1000. 

500. 

too. 

300 . 50  Trifler. 

51  Justice. 

52  Cooke. 

64  Stiff  Dick. 
Lady  Di. 

41  Shuffler. 
Germanicus  56. 
57- 


20 


KISSING  HANDS 


1762 


St.  James 
Parliament 
H.  of  Commons 
H.  of  Lords 
Chancellor 
R.  Regina 
Mr.  R.  . 


60. 

Hogsty  61. 

Dirty  Lane  62. 
Whipt  Cream  63. 

67  Stumbler. 

Mrs.  Montagu. 
Ramsay  the  painter, 


To  Lord  Bath 

May  1762. 

.  .  .  There  is  a  violent  fermentation  in  the  political  world 
at  present  ;  I  heartily  wish  all  things  may  settle  at  last  to  our 
amiable  young  Monarch’s  content  and  happiness,  private  and 
publick.  There  were  strange  whispers  in  the  very  drawing 
room,  and  a  gentleman  whose  family  are  very  well  provided 
for  in  the  Court,  had  the  assurance  to  ask  me,  almost  in  the 
presence,  if  I  did  not  like  the  famous  “  Monitor.”  I  treated 
the  question  and  questioner  with  the  contempt  they  deserved  ; 
your  Lordship  knows  I  am  a  well  wisher  to  my  Lord  B(ute) 
and  I  hope  his  enemies  will  not  be  able  to  hurt  him.  It  is 
said  000  and  99  are  caballing  together.  Matters  are  pretty 
well  made  up  with  50  but  he  is  a  little  out  of  temper  still. 
Lord  Bute,  Mr.  Grenville,  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  and  Mr. 
Elliot  as  treasurer  of  the  chambers  are  all  to  kiss  hands  to¬ 
morrow.  Lord  Henley  is  not  about  to  resign  nor  would  the 
sober  ambition  of - be  easily  altered  to  take  his  place. 


To  Lord  Bath 

June  ye  3  d. 

I  know  any  friend  might  have  persuaded  me  to  take  a  dose 
of  arsenick  with  half  the  trouble  I  took  to  prevail  on  him 
[Lord  Lyttelton]  to  send  for  a  Physician  of  credit,  but  as  on  most 
occasions,  men  have  greater  strength  of  reason  than  women, 
so  on  others  they  have  a  double  portion  of  obstinacy.  Doctor 
Monsey  says  he  will  send  your  Lordship  an  account  of  the 
birthday  by  Saturdays  post  ;  I  believe  he  intends  to  send  you 
an  account  of  the  Ladys’  dress  and  the  new  fashions  ;  he 
would  make  an  admirable  secretary  for  the  Graces.  The 
D.  of  Devonshire  gives  a  dinner  tomorrow  for  the  D.  of 
Newcastle  and  the  D.  of  Newcastle’s  particular  friends.  Lord 
Bute  is  to  give  a  great  entertainment.  We  are  not  to  have 
any  more  Peers  created  this  summer.  I  hear  Mr.  C.  Townshend 
is  among  the  discontented,  and  says  we  have  a  lutestring 


1762 


SIR  FRANCIS  DASHWOOD 


21 


administration  which  will  serve  the  summer  season.  Sr 
Francis  Dashwood  called  here  on  Sunday  ;  he  seems  convinced 
of  the  necessity  of  economy  in  the  Treasury,  and  aware  of 
the  difficulties,  and  dangers  of  reformation  ;  I  should  have 
preferrd  being  treasurer  of  the  chambers,  to  the  handling  of 
this  two  edged  sword.  The  King  told  Sr  Francis,  when 
he  gave  him  the  seals,  that  he  had  a  very  good  opinion  of  him, 
and  was  glad  to  have  such  an  opportunity  of  shewing  it,  that 
he  had  always  heard  he  was  an  honest  man,  and  for  his  part, 
he  desired  to  employ  such,  and  an  honest  man  might  take  an 
employment  from  him,  as  he  should  never  have  any  views  but 
for  the  good  and  the  glory  of  this  Country.  I  have  great 
confidence  in  the  probity  of  the  King,  and  the  integrity  of 
his  minister,  but  it  is  a  wayward  world  for  honest  men  to 
govern.  Lord  Guilford  solicits  to  be  Lord  Chamberlain  to 
the  Queen,  Lord  Litchfield  it  is  said  has  refused  it.  I  hear 
Lord  Hallifax  was  most  graciously  received  and  is  much 
caress’d  ;  his  conduct  has  deserved  it.  I  am  to  sit  to  Mr. 
Ramsey  tomorrow  evening,  in  the  morning  he  is  to  be  at 
Court. 

One  imagines  that  Mrs.  Montagu  recounted  this 
fine  eulogy  of  Sir  Francis  Dashwood,  quondam 
founder  and  leading  spirit  of  the  Hell  Fire  Club  of 
Medmenham  “  monks,”  with  a  touch  of  irony.  But 
this  was  a  time  when  good  memories  would  have  been 
as  fatal  to  political  confidence  as  to  social  intercourse. 

Allan  Ramsay,  whom  Walpole  thought  a  better 
painter  of  women  than  Reynolds,  became  George 
III.’s  portrait  painter  a  few  years  later.  He  was  a 
great  friend  of  Dr.  Johnson’s,  who  admired  his  youth- 
fulness,  a  quality  which  the  Doctor  plumed  himself 
upon  in  his  own  conversation. 

In  her  next  letter  of  June  5  to  Lord  Bath  Mrs. 
Montagu  records  that  : 

At  Lord  Bute’s  levee  on  monday  there  were  five  Bishops 
and  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  ;  at  the  Duke  of  Newcastle’s 
there  was  but  one,  so  it  is  said  the  Bishops  have  forgotten 
their  maker.  .  .  .  The  King  presented  Prince  William  and 
Lord  Bute  with  very  fine  Georges.  The  installation  will  not 
be  till  the  Queen’s  recovery.  .  .  . 


22 


A  HAGLEY  PARTY 


1762 


On  the  9th  of  June,  writing  to  Lord  Bath,  Mrs. 
Montagu  says  : 

Lord  Lyttelton  is  much  better,  and  intends  to  go  to  Hagley 
very  soon,  and  I  flatter  myself  I  shall  meet  your  Lordship 
there,  for  Mr.  Montagu  seems  determined  upon  going  thither 
if  you  will  meet  us.  I  expect  great  pleasure  from  this  party. 
.  .  .  The  great  Monsey  in  his  great  manner,  loves,  hates, 
flatters,  abuses,  coaxes,  and  scolds  me  most  nobly  ;  he  goes 
out  of  town  tomorrow.  He  will  meet  us  at  Hagley.  .  .  . 

In  a  letter  of  June  13,  mention  is  again  made 
of  the  King’s  illness  : 

His  Majesty  was  blooded  yesterday  morning  the  seventh 
time  that  operation  has  been  performed  since  he  was  taken  ill. 
His  fever  has  gone  off  but  the  heat  and  inflammation  of  his 
breast  remains,  tho’  it  is  abated.  The  Queen  had  a  drawing 
room  on  Sunday  to  prevent  alarms  for  the  King’s  condition. 

The  circle  of  friends  who  met  at  Hagley  at  the 
end  of  June  consisted  of  the  Montagus,  Lord  Bath, 
Dr.  Messenger  Monsey,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Vesey,  and 
Dr.  Douglas,  the  hosts  being  Lord  Lyttelton,  his 
sister  Miss  Lyttelton,  his  daughter,  afterwards  Lady 
Valencia,  Mrs.  Hood,  nee  West,  and  Admiral  Smith, 
a  half-brother  of  Lord  Lyttelton’s. 

The  letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu  of  Dr.  Messenger 
Monsey  at  this  period  are  almost  as  numerous  as 
Lord  Bath’s.  The  Doctor  was  allowed  the  privileges 
of  a  licensed  buffoon,  and  took  full  advantage  of  them. 
They  are  written  in  the  minutest  of  hands,  and  with 
the  greatest  economy  of  paper,  and  are  packed  full 
of  extravagant  worship,  outrageous  abuse,  the  most 
outspoken  sarcasms  about  Lord  Bath’s  passion,  a 
medley  of  Latin  and  Greek  quotation,  stories  of  his 
patients  and  his  love  affairs,  his  polypus  and  his 
purgatives,  his  dreams,  his  religious  convictions,  his 
stockings  and  pea-blossom  coat,  all  jumbled  together 
in  the  most  absurd  confusion,  and  often  seasoned  with 
a  coarseness  and  indecency  of  expression  which,  to 


1762 


CHAPTER  OF  THE  GARTER 


23 


a  lady,  must  have  touched  the  limit  even  of  those 
outspoken  times,  and  would  be  quite  unprintable 
to-day. 


To  Lord  Bath 

Thursday  night. 

I  do  not  know  whether  this  letter  will  not  get  to  Shrewsbury 
some  hours  before  your  Lordship  arrives,  but  I  am  desirous 
to  send  you  the  news  of  the  changes  made  and  to  be  made. 
Mr.  Grenville  and  Sr  Frances  Dashwood  accept  congratulation 
the  first  as  secretary  of  state  the  other  as  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer.  It  is  said  Mr.  Elliot  is  to  be  Treasurer  of  the 
Chambers,  Lord  G:  Sackvile  a  Lord  of  the  treasury,  some  say 
Ld  Barrington  is  to  be  treasurer  of  the  Navy,  others  that  it 
will  be  Mr.  Rigby.  My  Lady  Westmorland  ask’d  me  to 
go  to  the  drawing  room  with  her  to  day,  but  much  more 
enamourd  of  the  nightingale  and  the  cuckow  I  endeavour’d 
to  excuse  myself.  However  as  I  found  it  would  be  more 
agreable  to  her  Ladyship  I  should  go,  I  resolved  to  get  the  better 
of  my  savage  disposition  and  I  had  the  amusement  of  seeing 
the  chapter  of  the  garter.  Lord  Temple  as  the  youngest 
Knight  led  Lord  Bute  ;  Lord  Temples  face  did  not  wear 
any  deceitfull  smiles,  he  look’d  his  heart.  After  the  ceremony 
when  the  Knights  bow  to  their  new  companions  the  D:  of 
Nle:  embraced  Lord  Bute  and  shook  him  by  the  hand  with 
most  cordial  affection,  unlike  the  cold  civility  of  the  rest  of 
the  noble  order  ;  indeed  it  is  very  pleasing  to  see  a  Minister 
so  friendly  and  affectionate  to  his  successor.  Lady  Westmorland 
dined  with  me  after  the  drawing  [room]  was  over,  she  went 
from  me  to  Leicester  House  where  she  was  surprized  to  find 
a  refusal. 

To  this  Lord  Bath,  who  was  a  very  old  hand  at 
political  amenities,  replied  : 

The  longer  I  live  the  more  I  dislike  the  World,  there  is 
so  much  artifice  falsity  and  Cunning  that  mixes  in  all  the 
affairs  of  it,  to  which  I  am,  was,  and  always  will  be  a  stranger, 
that  I  profess  myself  almost  tired  of  medling  with  any  thing 
but  my  own  private  affairs  ;  and  those  are  almost  too  much 
for  me,  to  get  thro’  wth  any  tolerable  degree  of  Quiet  and  ease. 

Your  description  of  the  tender  endearments,  and  kind 
embraces,  that  passd  between  000,  and  300,  at  the  Installation, 


24 


DR.  MESSENGER  MONSEY 


1762 


is  a  true  and  general  Picture  of  the  falsity  of  all  Mankind. 
Had  I  been  1000,  and  seen  it,  I  would  have  ordered  two  of 
my  Beef  Eaters,  to  have  gon  immediately,  and  kicked  them 
both  downstairs. 

Writing  from  Hagley  to  Mrs.  Carter,  Mrs.  Montagu 
describes  their  journey  there  via  Oxford,  where 

I  went  to  see  the  marbles  which  my  friend  Lady  Pomfret 1 
gave  to  the  university.  There  are  many  fine  pieces  of  sculpture, 
but  I  was  most  pleased  with  a  noble  statue  of  Cicero.  .  .  . 
He  seems  in  the  act  of  speaking  and  I  fancy’ d  him  thundering 
his  bold  philippicks  in  Anthony’s  ear.  At  a  little  distance 
there  is  a  fine  statue  of  Marius  in  which  ferocious  valour  is 
finely  express’d.  .  .  .  From  Oxford  we  went  to  Blenheim 
which  I  saw  with  great  pleasure  as  bearing  eternal  testimony 
to  the  valour  and  gratitude  of  the  English  nation. 

Alluding  to  Hagley,  she  says  : 

It  beggars  all  description.  The  Dryads  and  the  Naiads, 
Pan,  and  Sylvanus  met  in  Council  to  form  the  park  ;  they 
did  their  best,  and  down  came  the  higher  powers,  the  Nine 
Muses  and  the  seven  Sciences,  and  they  embellesh’d  it  ;  the 
three  Graces  fell  alaughing  and  said,  all  would  not  do  unless 
they  added  the  je  ne  scai  quoi ,  et  tout  en  hadinant  they  gave  the 
air  so  difficult  to  hit,  so  impossible  to  describe. 

Mrs.  Montagu  could  never  leave  the  dryads  and 
the  naiads  out  of  her  Hagley  letters,  but  henceforth 
they  must  be  taken  for  granted,  as  her  editor  has 
done  so.  Par  revanche ,  her  correspondents  kept  the 
Muses  very  much  at  Sandleford. 

The  Hagley  party  seems  to  have  been  greatly 
enjoyed  by  all  who  were  there.  When  it  broke  up 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Montagu  brought  Dr.  Monsey  back 
to  town  with  them  in  their  coach  ;  and  the  journey 
is  thus  described  to  Lord  Bath: 

.  .  .  Dr.  Monsey  was  in  high  spirits  and  good  humour 
the  whole  journey  from  Warwick  to  Hill  Street  he  told  a 
string  of  stories  which  it  would  take  more  time  to  reckon  the 

1  The  Pomfret  Marbles  given  in  1755  to  the  Bodleian  Museum. 


i762  LADY  MARY  WORTLEY  MONTAGU  25 

number  of,  than  of  the  barleycorns  that  would  reach  from 
hence  to  York.  .  .  .  Stories,  like  the  dropping  of  water  on 
the  head,  give  a  pleasant  refreshment  at  times,  but  continued 
for  many  hours  grow  a  torment.  .  .  .  Your  Lordship  cannot 
guess  how  a  weak  head  feels  after  hearing  a  jumble  of  stories 
for  12  hours  every  day  for  four  days  together.  I  believe  my 
letter  is  hardly  intelligible  for  my  poor  head  is  like  a  giblet  pye 
full  of  gizzards,  livers  pinions  and  all  confusion  of  materials. 

In  a  letter  of  thanks  to  Lord  Lyttelton  for  his 
hospitality,  written  on  July  10  from  Hill  Street, 
Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

Lady  Mary  Wortley  is  dying  of  a  cancer  ;  she  is  very 
placid  and  easy  tho’  she  sees  her  end  approach.  Strange  it 
will  be  if  her  last  hours  should  be  “  sweet  as  the  slumbers  of 
a  Saint  forgiven.”  .  .  .  Dr.  Monsey  has  been  blooded  this 
morning  to  let  out  the  rich  juices  with  which  he  fill’d  his  veins 
at  Hagley. 

One  cannot  but  regret  that  this  correspondence 
does  not  bring  us  more  into  touch  with  Lady  Mary 
Wortley  Montagu,  whose  husband  was  first  cousin 
of  Elizabeth  Montagu’s.  But,  except  in  the  marital 
relationship,  the  two  women  lived  in  different  worlds, 
and  the  mere  fact  that  Mr.  Montagu  befriended  and 
corresponded  with  that  eccentric  scapegrace,  that 
“  ungovernable  little  rake,”  her  son,  would  have  been 
sufficient  to  bar  intercourse  with  his  mother.  When 
she  was  only  twenty,  we  find  Elizabeth  Montagu 
writing  to  her  mother  : 

Lady  Shadwell  saw  Lady  Mary  Wortley  at  Venice  where 
she  now  resides,  and  asked  her  what  made  her  leave  England  ; 
she  told  them  the  reason  was  people  had  grown  so  stupid  she 
could  not  endure  their  company  ;  all  England  was  infected 
with  dullness  ;  by  the  bye  what  she  means  by  insupportable 
dullness  is  her  husband,  for  it  seems  she  never  intends  to  come 
back  while  he  lives.  A  husband  may  be  but  a  dull  creature 
to  one  of  Lady  Mary’s  sprightly  genius,  but  methinks  even 
her  vivacity  might  accommodate  itself  to  living  in  the  kingdom 
with  him  ;  she  is  a  woman  of  great  family  merit ;  she  has 


26 


THE  CHEROKEE  KING 


1762 


banished  her  children,  abandoned  her  husband.  I  suppose  as 
she  cannot  reach  Constantinople  she  will  limit  her  ambition 
to  an  intrigue  with  the  Pope  or  the  Doge  of  Venice. 

But  happily  for  posterity,  Lady  Mary  had  reached 
Constantinople,  and  her  letters  from  Turkey  have 
given  her  a  place  in  English  literature  comparable 
(it  is  herself  who  instituted  the  comparison!)  with 
those  of  Madame  de  Sevigne  in  France.  If  the 
French  woman’s  gossip  is  more  delicious,  if  her 
maternal  solicitude  is  (to  put  it  mildly)  more  intense, 
Lady  Mary’s  intellectual  development  and  reasoning 
faculty  are  unquestionably  higher,  and  her  wit  and 
felicity  at  least  as  great. 


To  Lord  Bath 

In  the  morning  yesterday  I  went  with  a  party  to  see  the 
Cherokee  King.  His  complexion  is  of  a  bright  copper  colour, 
his  eyelids  and  ears  are  painted  of  a  brick  dust  red,  his  cheeks 
and  chin  of  a  dark  blue,  and  he  is  painted  blue  between  the 
eye  brows,  he  wears  one  lock  of  hair  very  long  in  the  Chinese 
fashion,  the  rest  cut  short,  his  throat  is  painted  of  the  same 
colour  as  his  ears.  He  is  remarkably  strong  built,  and  he  steps 
like  Homer’s  Neptune,  he  would  measure  the  globe  at  three 
strides,  the  general  caste  of  his  physiognomy  is  not  amiss, 
nor  is  he  so  different  in  features  from  an  English  man,  as  our 
near  neighbours  the  french.  On  his  breast  he  had  an  orna¬ 
ment  of  silver  fasten’d  by  some  wampum,  and  he  had  silver 
bracelets  on  his  arms,  but  these  silver  ornaments  were  made 
here.  He  wears  the  Chinese  boot,  as  we  see  them  in  the 
pictures  ;  the  most  extraordinary  circumstances  in  these 
savages  is,  that  their  language  is  sweet  and  not  guttural,  and 
it  seems  he  laugh’d  heartily  at  the  speech  of  an  Irishman. 
He  has  a  look  of  sense  and  intrepidity,  and  the  people  he  brought 
with  him  are  not  amiss  in  their  faces  or  shape.  I  wish  their 
interpreter  was  arriv’d,  for  one  should  be  glad  to  hear  their 
observations  on  what  they  see  here.  All  civilized  people  have 
prejudices  in  favour  of  their  national  customs,  and  therefore 
do  not  judge  with  candour  of  those  of  other  countrys,  but  here 
we  should  hear  the  voice  of  nature.  .  .  . 


i762  THE  PANTHEON  27 

On  July  15  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  Lord 
Lyttelton  : 

I  have  the  pleasure  at  last  to  see  my  Friend  for  whom 
I  was  so  solicitous,  appointed  wet  nurse  to  the  royal  infant  ; 
the  Princess  of  Wales  is  charm’d  with  her  and  I  dare  say 
the  King  and  Queen  will  be  as  much  pleased  when  they  see 
her. 


This  was  Mrs.  Edward  Scott  of  Scot’s  Hall, 
Kent,  mentioned  previously.  The  royal  infant, 
afterwards  George  IV.,  was  not  born  till  August 
12.  Lord  Lyttelton  answered  this  letter  from 
Stourhead,  where  he  had  gone  to  stay  with  Mr. 
Hoare  : 

Since  I  came  hither  the  weather  has  been  fine  ;  soft  rains 
in  the  night  and  a  warm  sun  by  day  which  made  the  grotto 
and  lake  most  delightful.  The  Pantheon  is  finished,  and  is 
an  abode  worthy  of  all  the  Deities  of  Olympus.  Mr.  Hoare 
has  fill’d  it  with  those  whose  figures  are  most  beautiful  and 
their  beauty  is  so  improved  by  the  light  which  is  thrown  in 
from  the  top  of  the  dome  that  I  think  I  never  saw  the  Graces 
of  Sculpture,  and  all  the  power  of  that  divine  art  before  I  saw 
them  there.  .  .  .  Today  I  dined  at  Longleat  [seat  of  the 
Marquis  of  Bath]  which  I  think  has  more  grandeur  than  most 
places  I  have  seen.  The  house  which  was  built  in  the  time  of 
Elizabeth  is  in  a  better  style  of  architecture  than  Burleigh,  or 
Audley  End,  or  Lord  Salisbury’s  on  the  outside,  and  when  the 
design  of  its  present  Lord  is  compleate  it  will  be  one  of  the 
greatest  in  England.  ...  I  past  a  jolly  night  with  my  old 
friend  Quin  at  Bath  and  was  not  at  all  the  worse  for  it  in  the 
morning.  .  .  . 

After  Mr.  Wortley  Montagu  died  in  1761  he  left 
his  eccentric  son  ^1000  a  year  only  ;  he  had  been 
M.P.  for  Bossiney  from  1754  to  1762.  He  was 
desperately  in  debt,  and  the  return  to  England  of  his 
mother,  Lady  Mary,  with  whom,  as  we  have  seen, 
he  was  on  very  bad  terms,  drove  him  abroad  ;  on 
July  29,  1762,  he  writes  to  Mr.  Edward  Montagu, 
who  had  always  been  his  friend,  from  Rome  : 


2  0  EDWARD  WORTLEY  MONTAGU  1762 


From  E.  Worthy  Montagu  to  Mr.  Montagu 

Rome,  July  29. 

I  should  never  have  troubled  you  even  now,  if  I  had  not 
been  impatient  to  hear  from  you  and  Mrs.  Montagu  ;  and 
indeed  lest,  notwithstanding  your  great  goodness  which  I  have 
so  much  experienc’d,  you  might  attribute  my  not  taking  leave 
of  you,  and  my  very  long  silence  to  any  than  the  true  motives  ; 
I  own  I  perceiv’d  that  my  sentiments  for  you  would  have 
render’d  a  formal  adieu  very  disagreable  to  me,  as  I  could 
not  look  upon  this  as  likely  to  be  but  a  short  absence,  and  I 
did  not  think  the  Scene  would  be  very  pleasing  to  you  ;  I 
did  not  write  that  I  might  not  be  troublesome,  as  I  have  not 
had  either  news  or  anything  else  that  could  have  amused  you. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Robinson  are  here,  with  Mr.  Richardson, 
and  I  think  Mr.  Robinson  does  not  look  well  ;  we  do  not  see 
one  another  very  often,  nor  indeed  have  I  frequented  any  of 
my  Countrymen,  since  I  have  been  out  of  England,  for  as  my 
Situation  is  but  an  awkward  one,  I  find  it  much  best  to  intrench 
myself  in  my  Orientals,  Astronomy  and  Botany,  that  my 
journey  may  be  as  useful  as  my  Capacity  will  permitt,  and  by 
frequenting  the  learned  of  the  different  places  I  have  pass’d 
through,  I  have  not  only  met  with  all  the  assistance  I  could 
wish,  but  all  the  Honour  and  distinction  I  could  have  expected 
in  any  situation. 

I  cannot  end  this  without  recommending  my  poor  little 
beggars  to  your  Humanity  ;  I  beg  Mrs.  Montagu  will  receive 
my  Respects. 

Edward  Wortley  was  indeed  an  incorrigible  rogue 
and  vagabond,  about  whom — as  so  often  it  is — there 
must  have  been  something  attractive  beyond  his 
good  looks.  He  ran  away  from  school  and  tutors, 
he  was  a  great  dandy  and  a  reckless  gambler,  he  was 
imprisoned  in  Paris  (unjustly,  as  he  vigorously  main¬ 
tained)  for  cheating  a  Jew  at  faro  ;  he  eloped  with 
Miss  Ashe,  he  bigamously  married  Caroline  Dormer, 
and  deserted  her  for  a  Nubian  girl  ;  and  these  were 
but  a  tithe  of  his  wandering  amours  ;  he  became  a 
Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  and  contributed  various 
learned  papers  during  his  foreign  travels  ;  he  lived 


EDWARD  WORTLEY  MONTAGU 
After  Matthew  William  Peters 


1762 


A  STRANGE  CAREER 


29 


in  Egypt,  in  Jerusalem,  in  Leghorn,  Smyrna,  and 
Rosetta  ;  then  returned  to  Venice,  where  he  adopted 
the  costume  of  a  Turk  (and  some  of  his  habits), 
and  died  at  last  at  Padua  in  April  1776.  Much 
of  the  Memoirs  and  Autobiography  which  were  sub¬ 
sequently  published  is  far  from  authentic  ;  nor  were 
the  “  little  beggars  ”  whom  he  commended  to  Mr. 
Montagu’s  humanity  any  of  them  legitimate.  His 
father  allowed  him  a  beggarly  thousand  a  year,  which 
a  night’s  ill  -  luck  at  faro  easily  disposed  of ;  his 
mother  was  to  bequeath  him  one  guinea.  He  had  few 
friends,  and  perhaps  deserved  few  ;  but  one  or  two 
women,  not  altogether  bad,  loved  him.  Mrs.  Montagu 
summed  him  up  thus: 

He  is  too  much  of  a  sage  to  be  concerned  about  money,  I 
presume.  When  I  first  knew  him,  a  rake  and  a  beau,  I  did 
not  imagine  he  would  addict  himself  to  Rabbinical  learning, 
and  then  travel  all  over  the  East,  the  great  Itinerant  Savant  of 
the  World.  ...  I  believe  my  poor  cousin  in  his  pre-existent 
state,  having  broken  all  moral  laws,  has  been  sentenced  to 
suffer  in  all  the  various  characters  of  human  life.  He  has 
run  through  them  all  unsuccessfully  enough.  .  .  .  He  speaks  as 
decisively  as  if  he  had  been  bred  in  Pharaoh’s  court,  in  all  the 
learning  of  the  Egyptians.  He  has  certainly  very  uncommon 
parts,  but  too  much  of  the  rapidity  of  his  mother’s  genius. 

Elizabeth  Montagu  once  spoke  of  herself  as  in 
body  a  saint,  in  mind  a  great  sinner.  She  could 
indeed,  and  sometimes  did,  trounce  vice  as  unmerci¬ 
fully  as  any  of  Lady  Huntingdon’s  elect  ;  but  of 
some  of  the  scapegrace  sinners  of  her  day,  as  we  shall 
see — of  Tom  Lyttelton,  of  Laurence  Sterne,  and  of 
Edward  Wortley,  she  could  write — and  I  think  it 
is  a  saving  grace  in  her — with  a  sympathy  born  of 
understanding. 

On  July  30  Lord  Bath,  then  at  Tunbridge  Wells, 
mentions  in  his  letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu  : 

You  tell  me  that  Lady  Mary  Wortley  is  likely  to  recover 
of  her  cancer.  Pray  excuse  me  if  I  say,  I  cannot  believe  a 


30 


HESTER  CHAPONE 


1762 


word  of  [this],  no  more  than  I  do  any  news  from  Germany, 
or  Change  Alley  ;  the  Hemlock  may  have  made  her  stock 
rise  a  little  for  the  present,  but  down  it  will  go  again  soon 
and  then  there  will  be  an  end  of  her.  .  .  .  Doctor  Bartholomew 
has  lately  produced  two  very  stupid  and  very  long  poems,  one 
is  upon  Peg  Wharton,  the  other  on  Princess  Amelia.  I 
would  send  them  to  you  but  they  are  not  worth  it,  and  yet 
Lord  Lyttelton  and  your  humble  servant  are  both  of  us  made 
honourable  mention  of  in  it,  so  that  we  ought  to  speak  well 
of  it. 

Mrs.  Chapone,  nee  Hester  Mulso,  Richardson’s 
friend  and  the  authoress  of  Letters  on  the  Improvement 
of  the  Mind ,  had  recently  lost  her  husband,  whom  Mrs. 
Montagu  says  in  an  earlier  letter  she  loved  unique- 
ment  and  missed  irretrievably.  The  following  from 
her  may  be  of  this  summer  : 

Westhorp,  2 d  July. 

If  you  have  not  heard  from  me  all  this  While,  my  dear 
Friend,  it  is  not  that  I  have  not  thought  of  you,  far  otherwise. 
In  London  where  I  was  confin’d  a  Week  I  eat  of  the  Trout 
of  Sandleford,  and  surely  I  thought  of  my  Dear  Mistress  of 
Sandleford  ;  since  I  have  been  here,  I  talk  of  you  with  my 
Amiable  Hostess,  but  when  I  shou’d  have  wrote  to  you  I 
know  not,  because  I  scrupled  disturbing  the  Cheerfulness  of 
your  Spirit  by  the  Dejection  of  Mine  ;  however  there  is  no 
resisting  your  kind  Letter,  which  I  reced.  yesterday  &  must 
Thank  You  for  to  day,  concealing  if  I  can  every  other  Sensation 
of  my  Heart  but  Those  of  Friendship  &  Gratitude  towards 
Dear  Mrs.  Montagu.  I  am  not  surprised  at  the  account  You 
give  Me  of  our  Excellent  Friend  in  Ber:  Square;  I  saw  her 
twice  before  I  left  London  (for  whither  should  the  Afflicted  go 
but  to  the  House  of  Mourning).  The  Company  whom  You 
describe  to  have  met  at  Ly  Fras  are  certainly  not  (as  my  sweet 
Willm  says)  propre  a  la  Consolation.  Yet  to  poor  Mrs. 
Trevor  perhaps  anything  is  better  than  a  tete  a  tete. 

.  .  .  Never  did  my  lonely  Lodgings  appear  more  un¬ 
comfortable  than  at  present,  after  the  delightful  Society  I  have 
so  long  enjoy’d.  You  are  very  good,  my  dear  Madam  to 
give  me  the  best  comfort  I  can  have,  that  of  thinking  that  my 
true  esteem  and  Affection  for  you  are  not  wholly  unreturn’d. 
Nothing  but  the  strong  sense  of  my  own  defects  which  a 
comparison  with  you  naturally  produces,  could  ever  give  me 


1762 


DR.  AKENSIDE 


3 1 


a  doubt  on  this  head,  after  the  innumerable  proofs  of  kindness 
and  friendship  I  have  experienced  from  you,  all  which  are  laid 
up  in  my  heart,  where  they  produce  the  most  pleasing  of  all 
sensations,  that  of  Gratitude  accompanied  by  love. — I  am 
most  truly  rejoiced  to  hear  you  are  so  well  after  all  your  fatigues. 
I  was  a  little  worn  out  last  night,  however  I  made  shift  to 
write  a  few  lines  to  Mrs.  Ord. 

Your  man  will  be  tired  of  waiting  so  I  must  bid  you  Adieu  ! 
intreating  you  to  love  me  as  well  as  ever  you  can,  and  to  believe 
me  with  the  highest  esteem  and  Gratitude,  your  most  affce, 
and  obliged  H.  Chapone. 

Mrs.  Vesey  wrote  on  August  1 : 

It  is  now  said  the  poor  Czar  is  mad.  Lord  Melcombe 
has  left  a  personal  estate  of  about  £100,000  to  an  old  Mr. 
Wyndham,  he  has  left  £2000  to  Sir  W.  Britton,  and  a  gold 
snuff  box  to  Lord  Bute. 

Lord  Melcombe  was  the  notorious  George  Bubb 
Dodington,  elevated  to  the  Peerage,  April  1761.  He 
was  one  of  the  twelve  members  of  the  “  Hell  Fire 
Club.” 

Replying  to  Lord  Bath,  then  at  Tunbridge  Wells 
in  company  of  Dr.  Monsey  and  Mr.  Allan  Ramsay, 
the  portrait  painter,  Mrs.  Montagu  mentions  Dr. 
Akenside,  who  was  also  at  Tunbridge  : 

I  hope  Dr.  Akenside’s  verses  will  make  your  Lordship 
amends  for  my  prose  ;  so  write  poets  when  they  walk  with 
God  and  Nature,  when  they  walk  on  the  Pantiles  they  write 
obscenity  on  Peg  Wharton  and  a  conger  eele.  The  Doctor 
has  sanctified  one  line  of  his  Satire  by  your  Lordship’s  and 
Lord  Lyttelton’s  names. 

This  refers,  presumably,  to  “  The  Electrical  Eel, 
by  Adam  Strong,  Naturalist,”  and  its  several  suc¬ 
cessors,  which  undoubtedly — according  to  the  canons 
of  our  day — more  than  merit  Mrs.  Montagu’s  epithet. 
Yet  these  verses,  quite  unprintable  to-day,  not  only 
went  through  many  editions,  but  were  issued  by 
well-known  booksellers,  in  spacious  quarto,  and  with 
finely  engraved  frontispiece  illustration. 


3 2  BIRTH  OF  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES  1762 

On  August  14  Lord  Bath  writes  : 

We  had  by  an  express  last  night  to  the  Princess  Amelia 
the  joyful  news  of  the  birth  of  a  Prince  of  Wales  ; 1  that 
the  Queen  was  but  two  hours  only  in  pain  and  is  now  extreamly 
well  as  we  are  informed  by  a  second  express.  The  gentlemen 
immediately  subscribed  without  exception  half  a  guinea  apiece 
for  an  extempore  ball,  our  guns  fired,  the  walks  were  illu¬ 
minated,  the  men  many  of  them  got  drunk,  and  the  ladies 
danced  till  2  in  the  morning.  The  poor  Doctor  tho’  you 
know  he  is  very  loyal  could  not  partake  with  our  merriment 
for  he  was  by  his  own  account  within  half  an  hour  of  dying. 
He  wrote  a  note  to  his  daughter  telling  her  how  he  should 
never  see  her  more,  but  bid  her  mind  his  dying  words  which 
were  “  Take  care  that  I  am  cut  up,  before  I  am  buryed,  let 
four  trusty  fellows  carry  me  in  a  plain  coffin,  and  throw  me 
into  a  grave,  and  give  the  parson  half  a  guinea  for  performing 
the  funeral  service.  Do  not  grieve  for  me  nor  put  on  mourn¬ 
ing,  but  be  an  honest  girl,  fear  God,  say  your  prayers  constantly, 
and  so  adieu.”  Would  you  think  it  was  possible  a  man  could 
say  all  this  seriously  and  be  in  his  senses  ?  Nay  what  is  more, 
be  in  perfect  health,  and  yet  swallowing  asafoetida  every  3  or  4 
hours  ? 

By  the  end  of  the  letter  Dr.  Monsey  had  re¬ 
covered  his  spirits,  had  put  on  the  famous  pea- 
blossom  coat,  and  was  to  accompany  Lord  Bath  to  a 
second  ball  ! 

Lord  Lyttelton,  on  the  17th  August,  writes  : 

I  believe  I  may  wish  you  joy  of  the  near  prospect  of  a  peace, 
and  what  adds  to  my  pleasure  is  our  friend  Monsieur  de 
Nivernois  is  to  come  hither  Ambassador.  But  though  I  hope 
the  peace  is  sure  there  is  an  account  from  the  Hague  that 
Prince  Ferdinand  is  resolved  to  fight  a  battle  with  the  French 
and  that  the  attack  was  actually  begun  by  Lord  Granby  when 
the  post  came  away.  This  will  be  just  such  a  tournament  as 
the  battle  of  Seneff  which  the  Prince  of  Orange  fought  with 
the  preliminaries  of  a  Peace  agreed  to  in  his  pocket. 

Granby  was  a  great  fighter  and  commanded  the 
blues  at  Minden,  figuring  finely  in  many  subsequent 

1  Afterwards  George  IV.,  born  Aug.  12,  1762. 


1762 


TOM  LYTTELTON 


33 


battles.  Even  Junius,  of  whose  savage  attacks  he 
was  one  of  the  earliest  victims,  did  not  dispute  his 
courage. 

Whilst  at  Sandleford  in  September,  Lord  Lyttelton 
received  a  letter  informing  him  of  the  serious  illness 
of  Admiral  Smith,  his  half-brother,  who  lived  at  the 
edge  of  Hagley  Park  and  to  whom  Lord  Lyttelton 
sent  “  venison,  fruit,  wine  or  some  other  token  of 
kindness  nearly  every  day  ;  these  good  things  the 
bountiful  sailor  dispensed  at  his  hospitable  table  to  all 
the  old  parsons’  widows,  to  worn-out  sea  lieutenants, 
and  a  set  of  company  which  seemed  of  the  Gospel 
feast.  This  good  man  had  the  piety  of  a  saint  with 
the  jollity  of  a  sailor.”  Lord  Lyttelton  and  his  son 
hurried  from  Sandleford  to  Hagley,  but  too  late  to 
see  his  brother  alive.  In  a  letter  of  the  6th  September 
to  Mrs.  Montagu  Lord  Lyttelton  remarks  how  grateful 
his  son  was  to  Mr.  Montagu  for  having  given  him 
some  lessons  in  mathematics,  and  he  adds  that  Mr. 
Lyttelton  had  been  writing  to  his  tutor,  Mr.  Graham, 
at  Eton  ;  and  on  being  asked  if  there  were  secrets 
in  the  letter  by  his  father,  he  handed  it  to  him,  and 
Lord  Lyttelton  copied  the  following  paragraph  describ¬ 
ing  Mrs.  Montagu  : 

Though  you  have  not  the  happiness  of  being  personally 
known  to  that  lady,  I  doubt  not  but  that  the  voice  of  thousands 
has  made  you  acquainted  with  her  extraordinary  talents,  her 
genius,  her  wit,  and  her  admirable  erudition  ;  she  embellishes 
every  subject  she  speaks  or  writes  upon,  by  the  most  happy 
flow  of  eloquence  ;  and  by  the  exquisite  nicety  of  her  per¬ 
ceptions,  throws  a  new  light  and  new  grace,  on  the  most  common¬ 
place  topicks.  She  is  really  possest  of  the  true  Philosopher's 
Stone  for  under  her  touch  everything  becomes  gold. 

High  praise  this  from  a  young  Eton  lad,  and 
doubtless  penned  with  a  laudable  desire  to  impress 
the  tutor,  and  to  be  quoted  to  the  lady. 


VOL.  1 


D 


34 


THE  BABY  PRINCE 


1762 


From  Lord  Bath 

Sept.  1  ^th. 

Monsieur  Nivernois  the  french  Minister  is  arrived,  and 
got  without  insult,  as  he  came  in  the  dark,  to  his  house  in 
Albemarle  Street.  There  is  a  vast  spirit  of  Discontent  at 
present  in  the  City,  but  at  our  end  of  the  Town,  the  mob 
follow  the  Coach,  with  your  friend  Mrs.  Scot,  and  the  young 
Prince,  following  them  all  the  way  as  they  are  taking  the  air 
in  Hyde  Park,  crying  out  God  bless  him,  he  is  a  lusty,  Jolly, 
young  Dog  truly.  These  endearing  expressions,  are  with 
them  marks  of  affection,  just  in  the  same  way  as  the  Doctor’s 
are  to  you,  when  you  are  most  in  favour. 

Mr.  William  Robinson,  writing  from  Rome  on 
September  4  to  his  sister,  Mrs.  Montagu,  gives  this 
characteristic  account  of  young  Edward  Wortley 
Montagu : 

I  have  much  regretted  Lady  Mary  Wortley  leaving  Venice 
as  I  was  in  great  hopes  of  seeing  that  extraordinary  phenomenon, 
but  have  had  some  consolation  in  meeting  the  son,  who  is 
not  less  curious  in  his  way.  He  is  preparing  himself  for  his 
Eastern  Expedition  by  learning  Arabic  and  really  studies  very 
hard.  He  rises  before  daylight  and  has  let  grow  his  whiskers 
which  with  the  addition  of  a  turban,  which  he  wears  in  the 
house,  makes  him  a  very  odd  figure.  Nor  is  his  household 
less  oddly  formed  than  himself,  he  has  a  sister  in  law  with 
him  as  he  calls  her,  a  Miss  Cast,  you  will  say  a  good  name 

for  one  of  his  females.  He  has  too  a  young  girl  of  12  years 

old  whom  he  proposes  to  make  a  nun  of,  he  has  lodged  her  with 
a  priest  of  St.  Peters  with  the  view  of  instructing  her  in  the 
R.C.  Religion.  I  forgot  to  tell  you  she  is  his  daughter.  Upon 
being  told  that  he  could  not  make  her  a  nun  upon  the  account 
of  her  religion,  he  said  that  that  would  be  no  obstacle  and 
they  were  all  alike  to  him.  .  .  .  He  proposes  being  in  the 

East  8  or  10  years  which  is  a  considerable  time  for  a  man 

turned  fifty,  and  from  which  indeed  he  will  probably  never 
return.  ...  I  saw  him  the  other  day  when  he  was  very  busy 
in  drawing  up  a  letter  to  the  Royal  Society  in  regard  to  a 
discovery  you  must  have  heard  of,  of  the  similarity  between 
the  Chinese  and  Egyptian  characters. 

Lord  Bath  had  now  returned  from  Sandleford  to 


i762  DEATH  OF  LADY  M.  W.  MONTAGU  35 


London,  and  in  writing  to  Mrs.  Montagu  on  October  5 
to  thank  her  for  his  pleasant  visit  to  her,  adds  : 

October  5. 

Monr  Nivernois  was  at  dinner  at  Lord  Butes,  when  the 
news  was  brought  of  the  taking  the  Havannah  ;  the  table 
was  filled  with  foreign  Ministers,  and  my  Lord  threw  out 
the  news  among  them  ;  they  were  greatly  disconcerted,  and 
Monr  Nivernois  himself  with  all  his  parts  was  reduced  to  the 
awkward  necessity  of  picking  his  Teeth  ;  at  last  he  said  he 
could  not  but  be  glad  of  the  news,  since  it  would  certainly 
contribute  to  facilitate,  and  accelerate,  the  business  he  came 
about,  and  soon  end  in  a  Peace.  They  broke  up  a  little  after, 
and  he  went  home  to  order  very  prudently  his  House  to  be 
lighted  up,  all  over,  least  his  windows  should  be  broke,  by  an 
insulting  english  Mobb. 

I  have  been  twice  at  the  Play  ;  the  first  time  was  at  Harry  IV 
where  one  Love  play’d  Falstaff  and  did  it  tolerably  well  ;  his 
fault  was  being  too  servile  an  imitator  of  Quin  ;  when  a  man 
on  the  Stage  is  only  a  mimick  he  can  show  no  great  spirit  of 
his  own.  .  .  . 

I  went  last  night  to  see  Garrick  in  the  play  of  “  Every  man 
in  his  humour.'’’  He  does  his  part  so  incomparably  and  inimitably 
well,  that  I  cannot  help  thinking  jealousy  is  a  principal  in¬ 
gredient  in  his  own  composition,  and  that  Mrs.  Garrick 
sometimes  feels  the  effect  of  it. 

Early  in  October  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu 
died  of  cancer.  Writing  to  her  sister,  Mrs.  Scott, 
Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

The  papers  would  tell  you  the  famed  Lady  Mary  is  dead  ; 
one  use  the  world  may  make  of  her  life,  it  fully  exhibits  that 
parts,  riches,  birth,  and  beauty,  all  combined,  cannot  rescue 
a  character  from  contempt  unless  virtue  and  reason  direct  the 
use  of  them. 

To  her  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  William  Robinson, 
on  the  same  subject  she  writes  : 

Lady  Mary  W.  Montagu  returned  to  England  as  it  were 
to  finish  where  she  began.  I  wish  she  had  given  us  an  account 
of  the  events  that  filld  the  space  between.  She  had  a  terrible 
distemper,  the  most  virulent  cancer  I  ever  heard  of.  I  met 


MRS.  SCOTT 


1762 


36 

her  at  Lady  Bute’s  in  June  and  she  look’d  well  ;  in  3  weeks 
after  my  return  to  London  I  heard  she  was  given  over.  The 
Hemlock  kept  her  drowsy  and  free  from  pain.  She  left  her 
son  one  guinea.  He  is  too  much  of  a  sage  to  be  concerned 
about  money,  I  presume. 

On  October  9,  in  a  letter  of  Lord  Bath’s,  mention 
is  made  of  a  duel  between  Lord  Talbot  and  Mr. 
Wilkes. 

Mr.  Narbonne  Berkeley  was  second  to  my  Lord,  and  the 
adjutant  of  the  Buckinghamshire  Militia  was  the  second  to 
Lt.  Col.  of  the  same  regiment  ;  but  God  be  thanked  there 
was  no  harm  done  ;  they  each  fired  a  pistol,  but  as  far  distant 
as  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  desire  to  be  from  each  other. 

Lord  Bath  met  the  Due  de  Nivernois,  the  newly 
arrived  French  Ambassador,  at  dinner  at  Lady  Hervey’s, 
and  describes  him  as  “  certainly  a  very  polite  sensible 
man,  with  a  great  deal  of  good  breeding,  and  ’tis  said 
much  literature.  He  passes  his  time  very  ill  here 
in  a  bad  house,  a  worse  climate,  and  very  bad  and 
rude  company  following  his  coach  wherever  he  goes.” 

Mrs.  Scott,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  sister,  had  just  pub¬ 
lished  a  novel  entitled  A  Description  of  Millenium  Hall , 
by  a  gentleman  on  his  travels,  printed  by  J.  Newbery 
at  the  “  Bible  and  Sun  ”  in  St.  Paul’s  Churchyard. 
Mrs.  Scott  hid  her  real  authorship  for  a  long 
time,  and  as  the  novel  describes  more  or  less  her  life 
and  Lady  Bab  Montagu’s  at  Batheaston,  and  most 
probably  the  majority  of  the  stories  were  of  real  people 
they  were  acquainted  with,  perhaps  anonymity  was 
discreet. 


From  Lord  Lyttelton 

Hag  LEY  Park,  October  25. 

By  the  late  changes  in  great  employments  I  apprehend  that 
our  Ministry  are  in  a  very  unsettled  state,  turning  from  one 
side  to  another,  like  men  in  a  Fever,  and  finding  no  Rest. 
It  must  be  a  grievous  mortification  to  George  Grenville,  that 
Fox  is  to  take  the  lead  of  the  House  of  Commons  from  him, 


1762  “LUTESTRING  ADMINISTRATION”  37 

and  Ld  Hallifax  the  Seals.  I  think  the  Administration  will 
gain  some  strength  by  both  these  alterations  ;  but  Fox  coming 
forwards  will  render  it  more  odious  to  the  body  of  the  Nation, 
and  to  some  persons  of  efficiency  in  business,  which  may  in 
the  end  prove  fatal  to  it.  I  fear  the  pushing  the  D.  of  Newcastle 
out  of  the  Treasury,  by  the  Disgusts  given  to  him,  was  done 
in  concert  with  Fox,  and  was  preparatory  to  these  events. 

Replying  to  Lord  Lyttelton  from  Sandleford, 
October  29,  to  condole  with  him  over  a  sprained 
ankle,  Mrs.  Montagu  commented  dolefully  on  the 
political  situation  : 

Our  Ministers  live  du  jour  la  journee.  .  .  .  What  fruits 
can  we  expect  ?  .  .  .  I  believe  a  certain  Commoner’s  having 
the  lead  in  the  House  will  make  the  administration  very 
unpopular,  but  as  the  World  is  wicked  enough  to  respect 
knaves  more  than  fools,  I  think  it  was  wise  in  the  Ministry, 
to  take  themselves  out  of  contempt,  to  deliver  themselves  over 
to  hatred.  We  forbear  what  we  hate  longer  than  what  we 
despise,  and  these  gentlemen  may  lengthen  their  brief  authority 
a  whole  week  by  what  they  have  done.  I  must  own  I  was 
never  so  disgusted  with  any  administration  before.  I  love  our 
Sovereign  Lord  the  King,  and  if  I  could  not  serve  him,  I  wd 
not  let  him  serve  me,  if  I  was  a  great  Man.  He  should  not 
for  my  sake  pick  up  the  dirty  rags  of  every  party  to  make  a 
motley  ill  sorted  government.  .  .  . 

I  am  glad  your  Lordship  has  read  again  Mrs.  Carters 
introduction  to  Epictetus.  I  think  it  is  one  of  the  finest 
things  in  our  language.  How  unlike  the  flimsy  stuff  and 
feeble  phrase  of  our  modern  writers.  Most  our  Witts  write 
as  if  their  Pegasus  had  been  ham  strung.  The  fine  ode  is 
our  friend  Mrs.  Chapones,  but  she  does  not  own  it.  I  am 
afraid  my  works  will  make  a  poor  figure  beside  theirs.  I  shall 
desire  not  to  measure  my  sword  with  the  Amazons  ;  there 
are  some  Infantry  at  Cambridge  and  near  the  Inns  of  Court, 
with  whom  I  can  better  contend.  .  .  . 

The  letters  from  our  Army  in  Portugal  are  most  melancholy  ; 
neglected  by  people  at  home,  so  much  as  to  be  destitute  of 
every  necessary,  exposed  to  direfull  heats,  and  ill  used  and 
betrayd  by  the  wretched  nation  they  are  sent  to  save.  Poor 
Lord  Bath  suffers  a  good  deal  of  uneasiness  for  the  situation 
of  Lord  Pulteney,  who  has  much  to  go  through,  besides  the 


38 


SAMPSON  GIDEON 


1762 


dangers  of  war  ;  but  I  hope  a  little  time  will  give  peace  to 
the  harass’d  World,  and  tranquillity  to  our  noble  friend.  It  is 
now  said,  that  Mr.  Rigby  who  set  out  for  Paris  a  few  days 
ago,  carried  the  final  resolutions  in  which  his  Grace  of  Bedford 
might  sign  a  peace.  If  that  were  done,  your  Lordships  ancle 
quite  well,  and  Mrs.  Carter  stout  and  jolly,  one  might  have 
a  merry  Christmass. 


To  Lord  Bath 

Mrs.  Montagu  wrote  in  reply  to  a  letter  from 
him  telling  her  of  Sampson  Gideon’s  will : 

Oct.  ye  26. 

I  cannot  imagine  why  Mr.  Gideon  should  leave  the  reversion 
of  his  money  to  the  D.  of  D.  unless  he  was  of  opinion  his 
Grace  would  value  every  shilling  of  it  as  much  as  any  Jew 
of  his  own  tribe  could  do.  Sr  Sampson  and  Lady  Gaye  will 
be  very  unfortunate  if  they  do  not  bar  his  Graces  claim,  but 
such  entails  are  always  an  embarassment,  and  when  people 
are  so  happy  as  to  have  children  I  cannot  understand  why 
they  should  look  any  further.  Poor  Gideon  seems  to  have 
thought  one  might  get  to  heaven  by  paying  all  the  turnpikes. 
He  seems  willing  to  go  thither  through  the  Pentateuch  or  the 
Gospel,  which  either  shall  be  the  shortest  road  ;  as  he  could 
afford  it,  I  wonder  he  did  not  leave  a  little  legacy  to  Mahomet  ; 
there  would  have  been  no  harm  in  having  a  ticket  for  that 
lottery  ;  a  fine  garden  and  the  beautiful  Houris  were  worth 
buying  a  chance  for.  His  treatment  of  Mrs.  Gideon  is  really 
cruel  ;  as  he  has  left  her  in  doubt  whether  to  prefer  the  Jewish 
or  Christian  doctrine,  he  should  have  given  her  means  to  make 
herself  acquainted  with  both.  A  thousand  pounds  to  the 
Synagogue,  and  another  to  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel 
leaves  the  matter  quite  undecided.  The  poor  Woman  no 
doubt,  to  settle  her  conscience  would  be  glad  to  try  a  New 
Testament  Husband,  and  judge  of  the  tree  by  its  fruits,  but 
with  her  miserable  500/.  pr  an:  she  is  not  fit  for  a  Christian 
to  marry.  What  superstition  could  make  him  desire  to  be 
buried  in  any  particular  posture  ?  I  wish  he  may  light  on 
his  legs  at  the  resurrection,  but  how  could  a  Man  of  his  sense 
live  so  long  without  enquiring  who  had  the  words  of  eternal  life  ! 

Sampson  Gideon  was  the  Portuguese  Jew  financier 
who  had  raised  millions  for  the  Government  during 


ON  FALSTAFF 


1762 


39 


the  wars,  and  carried  out  the  consolidation  of  the 
National  Debt.  He  desired  to  be  buried  upright. 

To  her  husband  she  wrote  in  November  : 


I  am  preparing  to  carry  my  young  folks  to  the  play  with 
a  pleasing  assurance  that  they  will  be  well  entertained.  .  .  . 
Our  play  is  Henry  the  Fourth.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  expect  to  see  Falstaffe  acted  in  the  same  perfection 
I  have  seen  it  by  Quin,  who  was  naturaly  a  man  of  wit  and 
mirth,  a  lover  of  sack  and  la  bonne  chere,  and  of  a  character 
not  very  remote  from  that  which  he  was  to  personate.  There 
is  one  thing  which  I  never  heard  remarkd  by  the  criticks, 
but  which  I  think  makes  Falstaffes  the  most  pleasing  of  all 
comick  characters,  which  is,  that  his  wit  seems  to  arise  from 
the  mirthfullness  of  his  disposition,  and  therefore  more  readily 
excites  the  affection  from  whence  it  proceeds.  Wit  is  generally 
satyrical  and  severe,  and  oftener  the  cause  of  mirth  than  the 
original  effect  of  it.  To  laugh  with  Falstaffe  is  only  a  natural 
sympathy,  and  one  must  be  illnatured  as  well  as  dull  not  to  do  so. 


1763 

THE  VISIT  TO  SPA - THE  “  NORTH  BRITON,”  NO.  45 


Lord  Pulteney’s  death.  Letter  from  Edmund  Burke.  Mr.  Burrell.  Mr. 
Lyttelton’s  engagement.  Lord  Sandwich.  The  Spa  visit.  Lady 
M.  W.  Montagu’s  letters.  Wilkes  and  General  Warrants.  Dinner 
at  Bath  House.  Calais.  Mrs.  Carter.  Spa.  Brussels.  Society  at 
the  Spa.  Dusseldorf.  Utrecht.  Holland.  Cologne.  Dutchwomen. 
Mrs.  Sherlock.  Lord  Bath  at  Court.  Miss  Bowes.  Lord  Bath’s 
character.  Lord  Hardwicke.  The  Chevalier  D’Eon.  John  Wilkes. 
Matthew  Robinson.  Churchill.  Peg  Wharton.  The  Cyder  Act. 
Essay  on  Woman.  The  North  Briton,  No.  45.  Cephalalgy.  Privilege 
debate.  Quadrille.  Christmas  at  Woburn.  A  Wedding  Garment. 


The  visit  to  Spa  was  for  Mrs.  Montagu  the  out¬ 
standing  event  of  1763,  and  is  described  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  letters.  It  was  her  first  tour  abroad.  Lord 
Pulteney,  Lord  Bath’s  only  child,  died  of  fever  at 
Madrid  on  February  12.  He  left  ,£20,000  of  debts, 
which  his  father,  who  was  greatly  devoted  to  this 
gallant  young  officer,  and  bitterly  grieved  by  his  loss, 
immediately  paid  off.  Lord  Bath  was  by  no  means 
accounted  generous,  and  Mrs.  Montagu  rejoiced 
in  this  honourable  discharge,  which  was  not  an 
obligation  : 

“  I  had  more  joy,  I  can  truly  say  in  your  nobly 
discharging  Lord  P’s  debts  than  I  should  have  had  if 
I  had  got  a  mine  with  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  in 
rich  ore.”  Mrs.  William  Johnstone,  the  daughter  of 
Lord  Bath’s  cousin  Daniel  Pulteney,  was  now  enceinte, 
and  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  was  much  her  friend, 
hastened  to  inform  his  Lordship,  who  replied  : 

40 


1763 


LORD  PULTENEY’S  DEATH 


41 


I  am  truly  pleased  with  the  good  news  you  send  me.  It 
is  the  only  hope  I  have  of  the  continuance  of  my  own  family, 
and  it  would  give  me  great  joy  to  have  her  bring  forth  a  son. 
If  she  has  one  I  can  call  his  name  Pulteney. 

The  following  little  note  from  Lord  Bath  was 
evidently  written  in  hurry  and  great  distress  when  the 
news  of  Lord  Pulteney’s  death  reached  him : 

Madam — I  have  suffer’d  an  irreparable  loss,  and  am  most 
miserable  and  unhappy  ;  Pity  me,  and  pray  for  me. 

I  am  going  into  the  Country  with  my  Brother  for  a  few 
days  til  my  melancholy  mourning  is  got  ready  ;  til  then,  I  can 
consent  to  see  nobody  ;  forgive  therefore,  your  most  respectfull 
and  sincerely  Bath. 

Tuesday  morning. 

Mr.  Edmund  Burke  wrote  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  on 
Lord  Pulteney’s  death: 

Permit  me  Madam,  to  condole  with  you  on  the  very 
melancholy  account  which  for  the  first  time  I  heard  in  the 
evening  paper  of  last  night.  What  a  heart  like  yours  must 
feel  from  such  a  blow  to  such  a  friend  I  can  easily  conceive 
from  what  you  suffer  on  much  lighter  occasions.  However 
you  have  occasion  for  all  your  spirits  in  order  to  lighten  to  my 
Lord  the  sense  of  his  great  misfortune  ;  and  if  in  these  circum¬ 
stances  anything  can  be  called  happiness,  it  is  such  to  his  Lord- 
ship  to  have  a  friend  so  capable  of  sympathizing  with  his  sorrows 
and  of  relieving  them.  Be  so  good  to  let  me  know  whether 
I  may  with  propriety  send  or  wait  on  his  Lordship,  and  how 
soon.  I  am  really  very  much  concerned  ;  I  would  not  be 
deficient  in  an  attention  which  is  so  much  my  duty  ;  on  the 
other  hand  a  violation  of  propriety  on  these  occasions  is  of 
all  others  the  greatest  error. 

Edmund  Burke,  the  great  statesman  and  orator,  was 
amongst  Mrs.  Montagu’s  staunchest  admirers  and 
friends.  “  He  is,”  she  wrote,  “  in  conversation  and 
writing  an  ingenious  and  ingenuous  man,  modest  and 
delicate,  and  on  great  and  serious  subjects  full  of  that 
respect  and  veneration  which  a  good  mind  and  a  great 
one  is  sure  to  feel ;  he  is  as  good  and  worthy  as  he  is 


42  TOM  LYTTELTON’S  ENGAGEMENT  1763 


ingenious.”  Burke  vied  with  Lord  Bath  in  singing 
her  praises  and  in  veneration  of  her  talents. 


Monday  night  April  1763. 

It  is  certain  Lord  Sandwich  has  kiss’d  hands  for  the 
Admiralty  ;  Mr.  Townshend  had  given  a  promise  to  Mr. 
Burrell  to  bring  him  into  the  Admiralty  with  him  ;  the 
Ministers  offerd  Mr.  Burrell  to  put  him  into  some  good  place 
when  there  was  a  vacancy,  but  not  into  the  Admiralty  ;  he 
insisted  on  his  bond  upon  Townshend  with  as  much  pertina¬ 
ciousness  as  Shylock  the  Jew  in  the  play,  and  Mr.  Townshend 
therefore  thought  himself  obliged  to  decline  being  first  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty  ;  perhaps  if  Bassano’s  advocate  had  found 
a  clause  by  which  creditor  Burrell  was  forbidden  to  draw  blood 
the  bond  had  been  set  at  naught.  Mr.  Fox  has  his  Peerage 
[Henry,  1st  Baron  Holland]  and  his  place.  It  is  said  Count 
Vivi’s  son  is  to  have  a  pension  of  a  thousand  pound  a  year 
for  twenty  years  upon  Ireland.  A  certain  great  man  is  not 
going  to  Harrogate,  is  avowedly  by  his  friends  in  as  much 
power  as  ever.  They  affect  to  say  it  is  no  matter  by  whom 

the  places  are  fill’d,  it  is  sufficient  to  shew  that  the  K - can 

fill  them  with  whom  he  pleases  and  change  them  as  often  as 
he  pleases.  There  is  something  of  truth  in  this,  but  at  the 
same  time  one  trembles  to  think  of  the  consequences  of  this 
maxim  push’d  too  far  on  one  side,  or  too  violently  resisted  on 
another.  .  .  . 

Ld  Ligonier  is  made  an  english  Peer  to  soften  the  affront 
of  not  having  informed  him  his  place  was  destined  to  Ld  Granby 
till  he  saw  his  Lordship  kiss  hands  for  it.  Mr.  John  Pitt  was 
surprized  at  the  drawing  room  to  see  Sr  Edmund  Thomas 
kiss  hands,  asked  for  what  ?  and  was  told  it  was  for  his  own 
place,  that  he  had  not  given  the  least  offence.  Mr.  Montagu 
saw  Ld  Sandwich  this  morning  in  ye  hurry  and  embarassment 
of  changing  his  intended  embassy  to  his  present  home  station. 

Lord  Lyttelton’s  son  Tom  became  engaged  this 
year,  and  Mrs.  Montagu  reports  to  Mrs.  Carter  : 

.  .  .  Mr.  Lyttelton  is  much  in  love  and  Lord  Lyttelton 
by  a  letter  I  have  had  from  him  since  he  went  to  Hagley  seems 
greatly  charm’d  with  Miss  Warburton.  I  hope  the  match 
will  be  happy.  I  see  no  objection  but  the  youth  of  the 
parties. 


1763 


THE  EARL  OF  SANDWICH 


43 


Miss  Warburton  was  the  daughter  of  General 
Warburton,  and  Lord  Lyttelton,  writing  about  her, 
says  : 

The  young  lady  seems  to  be  of  a  most  sweet  and  gentle 
nature,  and  in  all  her  behaviour  shows  good  sense  ;  but  modesty 
casts  a  veil  over  the  other  charms  of  her  mind  when  she  is 
in  my  company,  which  I  am  better  pleased  with  than  if  she 
was  forward  to  display  them. 

To  Mrs.  Vesey  she  adds  more  dubiously  : 

By  Lord  Lytteltons  letters  I  judge  he  is  pleased  with  his 
daughter-in-law,  and  I  am  told  she  is  very  amiable.  I  admire 
her  courage.  The  Methodists  say  great  Sinners  make  the 
best  Saints,  Enthusiasts  in  Love  think  they  make  the  best 
Husbands. 


From  Lord  Bath 

I  was  told  a  severe  bon  mot  applied  to  Lord  Sandwich — 
the  King  read  this  verse  in  the  101  Psalm  “  Who  so  leadeth 
a  godly  life ,  he  shall  be  my  servant ,”  upon  which  his  majesty 
immediately  appointed  Lord  Sandwich  Secretary  of  state. 

Lord  Sandwich,  nicknamed  Jemmy  Twitcher,  had 
been  a  notorious  rake,  and  a  prominent  member  of  the 
Hell  Fire  Club. 

To  Mrs.  Carter,  in  June  : 

Mrs.  Boscawen  tells  me  the  birthday  was  very  thin.  Dis¬ 
content  will  soon  wear  its  sullen  brow  even  in  the  Royal 
presence,  if  better  means  to  gain  respect  are  not  used.  The 
keeping  Wilkes  in  prison  seems  a  very  imprudent  measure. 
The  mob  begin  to  say,  whenever  he  is  indisposed,  that  he  has 
been  poisoned.  He  need  only  to  take  a  dose  of  Ipecacuanha 
to  put  the  Town  in  an  uproar.  He  is  not  a  very  healthy  man, 
and  all  men  are  liable  to  sickness  and  to  sudden  death,  and  think 
what  might  be  the  consequences  of  such  an  accident  !  There 
is  a  certain  innocence  belonging  to  our  Court  which  keeps 
up  a  little  good  will,  or  at  least  prevents  it  being  odious.  .  .  . 

Writing  to  her  sister  on  “  May  ye  18,”  Mrs. 
Montagu  explains  the  genesis  of  the  expedition  to  Spa  : 


44 


THE  VISIT  TO  SPA 


1763 


Last  September  when  my  Lord  Bath  was  at  Sandleford 
I  started  ye  thought  of  going  to  Spa  instead  of  Tunbridge 
this  summer,  which  we  all  talk’d  of  some  time,  with  great 
alacrity,  except  Mr.  Montagu,  who  prudently  threw  in  ifs 
and  buts,  doubts  and  quandaries.  As  I  never  love  to  labour 
a  point  till  ye  time  comes  near,  I  said  no  more  of  it  ;  but  my 
Lord  Bath  askd  me  before  Xmas  if  I  had  prevaild  on  Mr. 
Montagu  to  go  to  Spa  ;  I  said  indeed  I  had  not  so  much  as 
endeavour’d  it,  the  thing  being  at  a  distance.  A  little  after 
Xmas  his  Lordship  in  a  laughing  manner  attack’d  Mr.  M: 
on  ye  propriety  or  indeed  necessity  of  my  going  to  Spa  for  my 
health,  and  less  dislike  was  expressd  than  I  expected,  so  now 
and  then,  tout  doucement  I  used  to  say,  my  dear,  if  we  go  to 
Spa — to  which  my  dear  answerd,  I  have  not  told  you  that 
we  shall  go  to  Spa — but  as  ye  spring  advancd  the  Earl  and  I 
chatted  much  about  the  said  Spa,  then  we  proposed  it  to  Mrs. 
Carter,  she  talk’d  of  crossing  ye  sea  as  formidable,  however 
if  I  desired  it,  and  her  Father  wd  consent,  she  would  go  ; 
still  ye  time  so  distant  I  thought  it  extreamly  probable  ye 
scheme  would  not  take  place  ;  when  the  misfortune  of  Lord 
Pulteneys  death  happen’d  I  thought  it  all  over  and  poor  Lord 
Baths  health  was  so  alter’d  I  was  afraid  of  ye  undertaking, 
but  as  soon  as  his  mind  was  a  little  settled  he  grew  very  desirous 
to  go  ;  his  friends  who  had  seen  him  recovered  from  a  deplor¬ 
able  state  of  health  several  years  ago  by  going  to  Spa  all 
persuaded  him  to  do  it,  and  once  lately  when  he  was  at  his 
House  near  Maidenhead  he  wrote  a  very  kind  and  obliging 
letter  to  me  expressing  his  wishes  that  we  wd  be  of  his  party  ; 
he  certainly  wd  have  gone  if  we  had  not,  but  in  the  state  of 
low  spirits  he  was  in,  the  more  friends  he  had  about  him  ye 
better,  and  I  was  very  glad  that  his  letter  obtain’d  a  full  consent 
from  Mr.  Montagu.  .  .  . 


To  her  Sister 

June. 

Our  journey  to  Spa  is  to  begin  sooner  than  I  expected  ; 
about  this  day  fortnight  we  are  to  set  out  from  London,  Lord 
Bath  in  his  Coach  with  two  friends  of  his,  Mr.  Montagu  and 
yr  humble  Servant  in  our  Coach  ;  Mrs.  Carter  is  to  meet  us. 
We  proceed  to  Dover,  then  we  are  to  wait  for  a  fair  wind, 
and  I  suppose  after  a  few  hours  sickness,  during  which  I  shall 
wish  myself  on  terra  firma,  we  shall  arrive  at  Calais.  Of  my 
arrival  there  and  subsequent  adventures  you  will  have  frequent 


SANDLEFORD  PRIORY 
From  a  Photograph 


1763 


“LADY  MARY’S  LETTERS” 


45 


account  ;  do  not  expect  the  history  of  an  enlevement  for  it 
is  an  accident  that  does  not  happen  to  Princesses  of  my  age, 
but  other  travelling  accidents  telle  quelle  I  will  write  you. 
I  hear  we  shall  have  the  K:  of  Prussia  at  Spa,  and  of  this 
illustrious  invalid  I  will  send  you  an  account.  We  hope  to 
hear  that  Houses  are  taken  for  us  ;  Lord  Bath  is  to  have  ye 
best  House  to  be  had  there,  and  we  have  sent  for  one  such 
as  the  place  can  afford  us  of  a  common  rate.  Lord  Bath 
carries  a  great  retinue  and  equipage.  We  are  to  dine  with 
him  always,  and  so  our  servants  will  be  at  board  wages,  which 
will  save  me  much  trouble.  We  are  to  make  short  and  easy 
journeys,  for  I  am  to  be  indulged  in  gaping  and  staring  about 
in  a  World  so  new  to  me.  At  Brussels  I  am  to  stay  two  or 
three  days.  .  .  . 


To  Lord  Bath 

June. 

What  a  delightful  party  shall  I  have  to  Spa  ?  When  I 
am  sick  and  low  your  Lordship  will  administer  the  balm  of 
gentle  pity,  and  that  will  do  me  a  great  deal  of  good,  and  when 
I  am  silly  you  will  laugh  at  me,  and  that  will  do  you  a  great 
deal  of  good.  I  am  now  reading  Lady  Marys  letters  after 
your  Lordship,  and  they  do  not  give  me  half  the  delight  they 
did  when  I  read  them  before  you,  because  then  I  thought  of 
that  they  would  give  you.  Your  Lordship  may  see  therefore 
that  enthusiasm  of  friendship  which  you  call  romantick  more 
than  doubles  ones  pleasures. 

“  Lady  Mary’s  letters  ”  doubtless  refers  to  the  sur¬ 
reptitious  edition  of  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu’s 
Letters  written  during  her  Travels  in  Europe ,  Asia,  and 
Africa ,  edited  by  Cleland  and  issued  this  year.  Lady 
Mary’s  husband  was,  it  will  be  remembered,  first  cousin 
to  our  Mrs.  Montagu’s  husband. 


To  her  Husband 

Thursday  the  16  [June\. 

The  House  of  Commons  sat  on  tuesday  till  8  o’clock  on 
Wednesday  morn,  a  longer  day  than  has  been  since  the  fatal 
year  45,  pray  God  we  may  not  see  such  consequences  follow. 
Mr.  Pitt  spoke  well,  and  was  well  answerd  by  Mr.  Grenville, 


46  A  DINNER  AT  BATH  HOUSE  1763 

but  in  the  management  of  the  affair  concerning  the  legality 
of  the  proceeding  the  Ministry  bungled  awkwardly.  Sr 
William  Meredith  moved  the  affair  and  Sr  George  Savile 
spoke  admirably  ;  they  both  shewd  ability,  and  the  Court 
had  only  a  majority  of  ten.  All  the  people  I  converse  with 
(except  some  placemen)  are  desirous  that  the  Secretarys  of 
State  should  be  declared  to  have  no  power  of  searching  Houses 
but  on  information  of  treason  ;  the  Court  wd  wish  the  thing 
to  remain  undecided  and  left  in  doubt,  but  I  rather  think  that 
tomorrow  they  will  yield,  for  contention  in  this  matter  only 
shews  their  weakness.  Lord  Charles  Spencer  Comptroller  of 
the  Household  was  with  the  Minority,  and  many  other  place 
men  were  so.  I  hear  the  D:  of  Marlbro  is  very  angry  with 
him  ;  one  is  sorry  so  many  divisions  are  made  in  familys  by 
party  .  .  .  however  in  my  poor  judgment  nothing  is  so  bad 
as  an  A — n  so  totally  without  the  confidence  of  the  Publick. 
I  have  not  given  you  any  account  of  the  entertainment  at 
Bath  House  which  was  indeed  very  noble  ;  how  many  dishes 
I  cannot  tell,  but  I  believe  near  200,  it  added  much  to  the 
magnificence  that  my  Lords  fine  Plate  was  produced,  and  on 
my  telling  his  Lordship  I  was  surprized  to  find  he  had  such 
an  immense  quantity  as  not  to  want  to  borrow  the  least  bit 
of  any  one,  he  told  me  he  had  twenty  thousand  pounds  Worth 
of  plate  of  his  at  dinner  and  in  the  desert  ;  this  you  may  imagine 
was  no  insubstantial  piece  of  magnificence.  The  apartments 
below  were  finely  illuminated  and  lookd  very  noble.  We 
were  in  the  grand  apartment  above  before  dinner.  The  order 
in  which  everything  was  served,  and  the  easy  politeness  of 
Lord  Bath,  made  everything  agreable  as  well  as  magnificient. 
Lord  Egmont  who  sat  by  me  at  dinner  enquired  respectfully 
after  you.  There  was  an  infinite  variety  of  wine,  and  indeed 
the  whole  was  noble  and  Princely,  and  his  Lordship  seemd 
to  be  the  proper  master  of  all  that  magnificence  and  not  out 
of  his  sphere,  but  so  much  pomp  wd  have  made  an  insignificant 
Peer  ridiculous.  .  .  . 


To  her  Sister 

Calais,  the  4  of  July. 

I  am  sure  my  dear  Sister  will  be  glad  to  hear  I  am  arrived 
at  Calais  safe  and  well  and  without  having  been  the  least 
disorderd  by  my  voyage.  On  thursday  we  set  out  from  London, 
dined  at  Rochester,  and  lay  at  Ostspringe  [a  little  west  of 
Faversham]  that  night,  where  we  were  pretty  well  accomodated, 


1763 


CROSSING  THE  CHANNEL 


47 


but  the  attendants  but  indifferently,  for  altogether  we  make 
27  Christians  souls,  and  horses  innumerable.  The  Earls 
Coach  and  six,  ours,  and  his  Lordships  chasse  marine  and 
six  horses,  and  a  regiment  of  Servants  on  horseback,  our  train 
is  tres  modique,  for  as  we  are  not  to  keep  a  table  we  have  only 
one  servant  out  of  livery  and  two  footmen  of  men  servants. 
On  friday  morning  we  stopd  at  Canterbury  to  refresh  the 
horses,  and  then  went  on  to  Dover,  where  in  the  worst  Inns 
worst  room  we  dined,  and  Mrs.  Carter  met  us  there.  Talbot, 
who  I  believe  I  told  you  had  got  a  very  good  establishment, 
insisted  on  seeing  me  over  the  sea,  as  she  has  passd  it  always 
without  being  sick,  and  procured  for  me  a  good  room  at  a  very 
genteel  fine  Ladys  house  at  Dover,  and  there  I  was  elegantly 
lodged  ;  but  at  two  o’clock  for  wind  and  tyde,  which  stays 
for  no  man,  I  was  calld  up  to  get  on  board,  at  four  we  embark’d, 
and  had  a  most  easy  passage  in  five  hours,  in  all  which  time 
I  was  not  in  the  least  sick  ;  poor  Mrs.  Carter  was  a  good  deal 
for  the  last  hour  and  half.  Mr.  Montagu  and  Dr.  Douglas 
eat  cold  ham  all  the  way.  My  Lord  Bath  was  in  gay  spirits, 
and  only  his  Valet  de  chambre,  Mr.  Montagu’s  footman,  and 
a  little  french  boy  in  Ld  Baths  retinue  at  all  disorderd.  We 
all  eat  a  hearty  breakfast  and  then  went  to  bed,  got  up  to  dinner, 
which  was  well  served  and  infinitely  better  in  all  respects  than 
in  any  Inn  in  England,  and  it  is  not  to  be  told  how  we  eat, 
Mrs.  Carter  who  had  been  ill  and  Mr.  Montagu  who  had  eat 
cold  ham  devoured  more  than  ever  I  saw  them  in  my  life. 
At  Dover  the  Commissioners  of  the  Customs  had  orderd 
Ld  Baths  baggage  to  be  treated  with  respect,  An  order  I  got 
from  the  D:  de  Nivernois  for  his  Lordships  plate  and  ours  has 
procured  us  the  same  civilities  here.  ...  As  yet  I  have  nothing 
to  tell  you,  for  except  that  passing  through  the  market  place 
we  observed  the  poor  Women  at  Stalls  with  a  basket  before 
them  had  des  pendants  d’oreilles,  the  people  look  little  different 
from  ours.  The  Drawer  here  has  des  manieres,  de  la  politesse, 
and  the  chamber  maid  is  gracieuse  ;  I  bought  some  ribband 
this  afternoon  of  a  very  well  bred  accomplishd  Lady,  and  in 
short  there  is  something  so  sprightly  and  so  complaisant  in 
everybody  as  is  realy  pleasing,  tho  being  new  one  cannot  help 
laughing  at  it.  I  hope  my  next  letter  will  be  more  entertaining, 
tho  I  know  this  will  be  as  welcome  as  any  I  can  write  as  it 
gives  you  such  an  account  of  my  health.  Mr.  M:  seems 
very  happy  and  the  change  of  air  has  eased  his  cough. 

Of  the  following  letter  Mrs.  Carter  wrote  to  Miss 


48 


THE  LANDING  AT  CALAIS 


1763 


Talbot  (who  with  her  mother  was  residing  with  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury) : 

If  my  power  of  amusing  you  was  equal  to  my  inclination 
you  would  receive  very  lively  pacquets  from  Spa,  but  what 
I  have  not  of  my  own  I  will  borrow  from  Mrs.  M.  though 
it  is  at  my  own  expence.  I  thought  it  so  impossible  for  you 
not  to  be  entertained  by  the  wicked  account  she  has  given  of 
me  to  Mrs.  Vesey  that  I  have  with  some  difficulty  prevailed 
on  her  to  suffer  me  to  let  you  see  it.  ...  I  am  very  sure  you 
will  not  communicate  it  to  anybody  but  his  Grace  and  Mrs. 
Talbot.  Mrs.  M.  says  I  have  drawn  her  into  a  pretty  scrape, 
for  that  the  Archbishop  will  certainly  think  her  absolutely 
mad — her  best  compliments  to  you  all.  I  am  sorry  to  confirm 
any  part  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  scandal  but  it  is  an  indeniable 
truth  that  I  am  going  to  dress  for  the  ball. 

To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Spa  ye  14  of  July. 

At  Calais  on  the  shore  we  were  met  by  certain  mermen 
crown’d  with  sea  weeds,  who  carried  Mesdames  Carter  and 
Montagu  on  their  backs  ;  as  the  petticoats  were  a  little  dis¬ 
composed  in  this  way  of  walking  on  other  mens  legs,  it  is 
better  not  to  be  too  minute  in  the  description  of  it  ;  all  I  shall 
say,  is  that  Phoebus  who  has  a  penetrating  eye,  told  his  nine 
prudes  of  Mrs.  Carters  want  of  decorum,  and  advised  them 
not  to  be  so  intimate  with  her  for  the  future.  They  redden’d, 
pull’d  up  their  heads,  and  mutterd  something  about  Daphne, 
which  you  may  imagine  the  God  of  Witt  and  parent  of  repartee 
answer’d  very  smartly.  ... 

From  Calais  we  went  to  St.  Omer,  where  we  saw  the 
jesuits  College  ;  we  ask’d  for  greek  manuscripts  for  the  amuse¬ 
ment  of  Mrs.  Carter,  to  the  great  amazement  of  the  Librarian, 
who  imagined  her  to  be  possess’d,  and  would  fain  have  exorcised 
her,  but  we  assured  him  her  learning  could  not  lye  more 
quietly  in  the  red  sea  than  it  did  in  her  head,  such  was  the 
depth  of  her  capacity.  We  were  charm’d  with  the  Town 
of  Lisle  which  was  our  next  stage,  and  here  behold  the  meta¬ 
morphosis  of  Mrs.  Carter.  She  now  began  to  consider  greek 
was  a  dead  language,  and  that  french  words,  and  a  little 
coquettry,  would  do  better  at  Spa  ;  so  with  the  same  facility 
with  which  she  translated  Epictetus  from  greek  into  english, 
she  translated  her  native  timidity  into  french  airs,  and  french 


1763 


MRS.  CARTER  ABROAD 


49 


modes  ;  bought  robes  trimmed  with  blonde  and  souci  denton, 
Colliers,  bouquets,  des  engageantes  and  all  the  most  labour’d 
ornaments  of  dress  ;  and  so  soon  as  she  was  equip’d,  wish’d 
for  a  walk  in  the  tuilleries  more  than  she  had  ever  done  for 
one  in  the  Portico.  Instead  of  translating  the  memorable 
things  of  Socrates  you  may  expect  a  lively  and  spirited  trans¬ 
lation  of  les  amours  and  amourettes  du  Marquis  de - ,  and 

instead  of  Plato’s  Republic  [?]  she  will  translate  les  egaremens 
du  cceur  et  d’esprit  of  Crebillon.  From  Lisle  we  went  to 
Brussels,  where  we  staid  three  days,  which  Mrs.  Carter  spent 
chiefly  in  purchasing  more  apparel.  We  visited  the  Nunnerys 
in  every  Town  ;  Mrs.  Carter  constantly  expressing  the 
greatest  abhorrence  of  their  strict  vows,  and  sequestered  life, 
with  an  air  of  libertinism  extreamly  suited  to  the  gayety  of 
her  dress  and  coquettry  of  her  manners.  However,  as  I  would 
not  do  my  friend  the  least  injustice,  I  must  assure  you  she  has 
not  yet  put  on  rouge,  nor  indeed  am  I  convinced  that  she 
intends  it.  .  .  . 

My  Lord  Bath  was  as  polite  and  as  gay  every  morning 
in  the  Coach  at  six  as  you  have  seen  him  in  an  evenings 
assembly  ;  his  health  improved  every  day,  and  he  is  now  the 
youngest  and  the  gayest  man  here,  and  the  universal  passion 
of  all  the  Foreigners,  from  the  Serenissimo’s  and  Serenissima’s 
to  the  Dutch  Bourgmestres  and  their  fat  wives. 

Edmund  Burke  had  promised  to  send  Mrs. 
Montagu  news  from  England  during  her  visit  to  Spa. 
His  letter,  when  at  length  he  achieved  it,  was  a  long 
one,  and  though  it  can  scarcely  be  considered  as  a 
budget  of  intelligence,  it  can  hardly  be  excluded  here. 

Wilkes,  it  may  be  noted  in  explanation  of  an  allusion 
in  the  letter,  having  established  a  printing-press  at  his 
house,  sold  copies  of  the  Proceedings  against  him  at  a 
guinea  a  piece  ;  a  very  characteristic  bit  of  humour. 

In  his  last  paragraph,  in  which  alone  sublunary 
topics  are  touched,  Burke  alludes  to  Lord  Bath’s 
generous  endeavours.  He  was  at  this  time  private 
secretary  to  “  Single- speech  ”  Hamilton  as  chief 
Secretary  for  Ireland,  who  this  year  obtained  for  Burke 
the  pension  of  ^300  a  year  on  the  Irish  Establish¬ 
ment,  by  which  he  hoped  to  bind  the  young  states- 
vol.  1  E 


5° 


A  LETTER  FROM  BURKE 


1763 


man  permanently  to  his  service,  a  claim  which  Burke 
indignantly  repudiated  a  year  or  so  later  ;  and  the 
above  allusion  seems  to  indicate  that  he  was  already 
endeavouring  to  find  means  of  freeing  himself  from 
fetters  which,  though  they  provided  a  modest  liveli¬ 
hood,  would  have  cast  him  into  bondage. 


From  Mr.  Edmund  Burke 

July  zyth. 

I  have  foreborn  writing  all  this  time  in  hopes  of  some  news 
which  might  entertain  you.  But  I  am  resolved  to  wait  for 
it  no  longer.  I  have  been  for  these  two  months  past  an  in¬ 
sufferable  companion  to  others,  in  order  to  qualify  myself  to 
be  an  agreable  correspondent  to  you.  My  whole  conversation 
turned  upon  nothing  but  what  might  lead  to  intelligence  ; 
However  I  have  succeeded  so  ill,  that  I  fear  my  eagerness 
may  have  frustrated  my  pursuit,  and  I  fancy  people  began  at 
length  to  take  me  for  a  spy  ;  a  character  in  which  (as  I  receive 
none  of  the  secret  service  money),  I  do  not  yet  chuse  to  appear. 
I  confess  that  until  this  moment  I  could  not  call  up  confidence 
enough  to  address  a  letter  to  you  without  the  passport  of  some 
sort  of  news  ;  but  as  I  see  the  Court  forsaken,  Westminster 
Hall  shut,  the  dinners  adjourned,  the  chiefs  of  the  opposition 
hanging  their  trophies  o’er  their  garden  gates,  the  Ministers 
employed  only  in  scraping  together  reversions,  and  Mr.  Wilkes 
only  scraping  together  a  guinea  subscription,  the  whole  political 
campain  reduced  to  a  petite  guerre  of  printers.  Devils,  and 
Diablotins,  and  that  the  very  best  of  our  paltry  but  furious 
animosities  afforded  nothing  that  was  worthy  of  Mrs.  Montagu, 
I  have  at  length  sat  down  to  write  because  in  duty  bound, 
without  the  least  hope  of  diverting  you  or  of  satisfying  myself, 
for  if  I  were  to  speak  from  what  I  feel  of  my  opinion  of  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  genius,  of  her  virtues,  and  of  my  innumerable 
obligations  to  her  friendship,  I  should  say  indeed  what  would 
be  very  sincere  and  very  true,  but  then  I  should  say,  what  to 
her  would  be  the  most  unentertaining  thing  in  the  world.  So 
that  the  only  subject  upon  which  I  can  speak  is  the  only  one 
which  it  is  improper  for  me  to  mention.  Besides  Madam  I 
observe  that  Panegyric,  even  when  applied  to  those  who  deserve 
it  most  or  like  it  best  is  sure  never  to  please  above  one,  and 
will  certainly  offend  fifty.  To  say  the  truth  Satyr  is  now  so 


1763 


A  DUTY  ON  WIT 


5i 


much  the  safer  and  (what  is  now  the  only  rule  of  right)  the 
more  popular  way,  that  I  am  resolved  to  stick  to  that,  especially 
if  I  can  have  the  good  fortune  to  get  elected  for  Aylesbury. 
The  old  rule  was  pictoribus  atque  poetis,  quid  libet  audendi 
semper  fuit  cequa  potestas,  this  shall  for  the  present  at  least 
be  limited  by  a  little  Scholiast’s  remark  in  the  margin  “  provided 
they  have  privilege  of  parliament,”  which  is  a  privilege  as 
extensive  as  ever  the  wildest  poet  in  his  wildest  reveries  could 
ever  figure  to  himself.  In  the  next  session  it  is  reported  that 
they  will  extend  this  privilege  to  us  all,  or  take  it  away  from 
themselves  ;  otherwise  there  will  be  no  fair  play  ;  the  report 
of  the  former  part  is  however  predominant.  All  our  law  de 
libellis  famosis  is  to  be  changed,  and  the  Pillory  is  only  to  be 
reserved  for  unsuccessful  flatterers.  Having  therefore  much 
regard  to  the  law,  more  to  the  fashion,  and  most  of  all  to  my 
ears,  I  think  to  try  my  hand  at  invective,  and  to  sketch  out  a 
North  Briton  which  shall  equal  the  spirit  of  the  celebrated 
and  indeed  golden  number ,  45.  The  subject  of  it  shall  be,  for 
we  scorn  blanks  and  dashes, — Mrs.  Montagu  herself.  After 
a  few  preceding  touches  upon  Scotchmen  and  Excise,  I  intend 
to  observe  on  the  scandalous  neglect  of  our  Board  of  Treasury, 
who  have  suffered  the  most  valuable  staple  products  of  the 
kingdom  to  be  carried  out  with  [out]  the  least  opposition.  I 
shall  show  that  France  has  of  late  discovered  that  she  wants 
our  wisdom  as  much  in  her  manufactories  of  policy  in  War, 
as  she  does  our  wool  in  her  clothes  and  stuffs  ;  and  yet  that  I 
could  prove  our  Ministry  suffered  to  be  shipped  for  Calais  in 
one  vessel  and  in  one  day  more  genius,  more  learning,  more 
wit,  more  Eloquence,  more  Policy,  more  Mathematics,  more 
Poetry,  more  Philosophy  and  Theology  than  France  could 
produce  in  a  century.  I  shall  point  out  that  Mrs.  Montagu 
who  has  long  been  a  clandestine  dealer  in  goods  of  this  sort, 
and  who  had  several  of  them  about  her  own  person  at  the 
very  time,  was  the  capital  smuggler  on  this  occasion  and  carried 
off  all  the  rest. 

Whilst  I  was  preparing  this  wonderful  piece  my  Lawyer 
whose  opinion  I  take  on  all  my  libels  and  who  points  out 
exactly  how  far  the  breach  of  the  law  may  be  separated  from 
its  penalties,  informed  me  that  this  time  my  satire  was  quite 
stingless.  That  no  exeat  regno  lay  for  wit  and  genius.  That 
we  might  freely  export  the  whole  sense  of  the  Kingdom.  (I 
don’t  mean  the  sense  of  the  Nation,  for  that’s  quite  another 
thing.)  He  thought  this  freedom  founded  upon  a  very  proper 
principle  that  it  operated  like  the  Bounty  upon  the  exportation 


52 


IMPORT  AND  EXPORT 


1763 


of  corn  which  only  made  it  cheaper  and  more  plentiful  at  home. 
This  theory  I  confess  had  something  specious  in  it,  but  as  I 
have  been  a  sort  of  dabbler  in  theories  myself,  I  was  no  way 
surprised  to  find  that  on  experiment  it  did  not  prove  worth  a 
farthing  ;  for  I  cannot  discover  that  anything  extraordinary 
has  started  up  to  supply  the  great  loss  we  have  had  ;  we  do  not 
grow  as  bodies  do  sometimes  a  bit  the  fatter  for  all  this  bleeding. 
As  the  Nation  had  so  great  a  loss  I  wanted  to  know  whether 
the  Revenue  had  any  great  benefit  by  this  extraordinary  Trade, 
on  examining  the  Custom  House  books  I  found  you  may 
imagine  to  my  astonishment  a  small  but  heavy  parcel,  marked 
with  a  capital  M  was  charged  but  at  one  penny  three  farthings 
duty.  The  officer  told  me  that  on  the  entry  he  claimed  more, 
and  would  have  had  twice  as  much  had  the  point  been  tried  by 
the  Excise  Laws,  but  that  he  was  obliged  to  try  it  by  a  jury 
misportico  or  as  our  lawyers  would  express  it  de  medietate  Linguae 
of  six  ladies  from  this  end  of  the  town,  and  six  of  Wapping, 
and  so  unanimously  brought  a  verdict  by  their  Forewoman 
that  no  higher  rate  than  25  per  cent  ad  valorem  should  be 
laid  on  such  goods,  so  that  they  valued  the  whole  parcel  just 
at  sevenpence  and  no  more.  I’m  informed  if  they  had  sum¬ 
moned  four  fifths  of  the  Ladies  of  the  Kingdom  they  would 
not  have  rated  it  a  penny  higher.  I  had  a  curiosity  to  look 
at  the  import  of  this  hand  and  the  state  of  the  Revenue  on 
this  Branch  was  flourishing,  it  consisted  for  that  day  of  three 
parcels  of  the  French  academy  manufacture,  the  xst  a  scheme 
for  opening  living  sculls  in  order  to  discover  the  seat  and  nature 
of  the  soul,  the  second  was  a  proposal  to  dig  to  the  centre  of 
the  earth  by  a  confederacy  of  Princes  in  order  to  settle  effectually 
the  balance  of  Power  ;  the  third  was  to  promote  the  happiness 
of  Mankind  and  the  prosperity  of  states  by  extirpating  religion 
and  virtue,  and  substituting  self  interest  in  their  place.  Thus 
stood  the  trade,  and  I  was  obliged  to  suppress  my  libels. 

Might  I  presume  to  flatter  myself  with  an  idea  of  hearing 
how  the  Spaw  has  agreed  with  you.  I  inquired  as  long  as  I 
could  find  anybody  to  inform  me.  Can  you  think  of  London, 
surrounded  by  Princes  and  Heroes  whilst  the  terrors  of  Europe 
are  prancing  about  on  poneys,  and  whilst  you  grow  familiar 
with  everything  we  admire.  Be  so  good  to  thank  Mr.  Montagu 
for  his  kind  remembrance  of  me  before  his  departure,  and 
present  mine  and  my  brother’s  humble  and  grateful  respects 
to  Lord  Bath  ;  we  are  infinitely  obliged  to  him  for  his  generous 
endeavours,  though  they  remain  just  as  they  were.  Be  so 
good  as  to  make  my  compliments  to  Miss  Carter,  and  to  Dr. 


1763 


LIEGE  AND  BRUSSELS 


53 


or  Colonel  Douglass,  be  so  kind  as  to  forgive  me  for  having 
wrote  so  tiresome  a  letter.  It  is  the  longest  I  ever  wrote 
in  my  life.  Believe  me  Madam  with  the  truest  respect,  and 
sincerest  gratitude,  your  most  obedient  and  obliged  humble 
servant  E.  Burke. 


To  Mr.  Benjamin  Stillingfleet 

Spa,  the  yth  of  Aug. 

I  should  have  thank’d  my  dear  Mr.  Stillingfleet  for  his 
letter  before  this  time  if  the  water  drinking  regimen  and  the 
Spa  mode  of  life  had  allowd  me  leisure  to  write  him  a  long 
letter,  for  I  could  not  prevail  on  myself  to  write  him  a  short 
one.  My  health  is  now  so  well  fortified  with  the  waters  I  can 
venture  to  transgress  rules,  so  I  am  set  down  to  chat  with  you 
for  an  hour  or  two.  I  do  not  intend  to  be  witty  or  wise,  I 
think  a  bon  mot  should  not  be  sent  further  than  one  can  shoot 
a  squib,  nor  a  sage  sentence  beyond  cannon  shot.  When 
friends  are  at  a  great  distance,  the  proper  subject  is,  where  they 
have  been,  where  they  are,  how  they  are  and  what  they  are 
doing.  You  see  the  three  heads  of  my  sermon,  but  I  expect 
to  be  indulged  beyond  the  twenty  minutes.  Our  journey  was 
very  agreable  in  all  respects,  and  as  every  object  was  new  to 
me  every  object  was  pleasing  to  a  certain  degree.  We  staid 
a  whole  day  at  Lisle,  the  first  fortified  Town  I  had  ever  seen  ; 
it  is  certainly  very  beautifull,  but  it  gives  ideas  of  War  and 
despotism.  We  staid  two  days  at  Brussels  ;  I  was  glad  to  see 
so  famous  a  City,  but  it  has  the  air  of  a  Town  of  Shopkeepers, 
and  the  Park,  of  which  I  had  heard  so  much  is  but  a  very 
ordinary  thing.  We  went  from  thence  to  Liege  ;  the  Town 
on  the  first  approach  has  a  very  singular  and  beautifull  appear¬ 
ance  ;  within  it,  appears  the  most  sordid  and  wretched  poverty, 
one  is  every  where  surrounded  by  beggars.  There  is  hardly 
any  government,  and  men  associated  in  Cities  without  laws 
are  the  most  terrible  and  wretched  of  all  animals.  We  pass’d 
a  day  there  while  our  machines  were  repaired  for  the  rough 
roads  to  Spa.  The  Country  between  Liege  and  Spa  is  Moun¬ 
tainous  and  rocky,  but  the  vallies  are  green,  and  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  wood,  tho  the  soil  is  so  poor  one  wonders  from 
whence  vegetation  has  its  supply.  The  prospects  are  noble 
and  sublime,  and  we  saw  them  to  advantage,  for  on  the  top  of 
a  mountain  we  were  in  a  violent  hurricane  accompanied  by 
the  deepest  thunder  I  ever  heard  ;  this  circumstance,  which 


54 


LIFE  AT  SPA 


1763 


wd  have  spoiled  the  amenity  of  a  little  scene,  added  dignity 
to  this  solemn  and  majestick  character.  The  Town  of  Spa 
is  situated  in  a  little  valley  surrounded  every  way  by  mountains, 
and  is  therefore  ill-placed  in  regard  to  exercise  in  a  voiture, 
and  wd  be  so  for  walking,  if  a  generous  spirited  englishman  had 
not  cut  walks  round  the  mountains,  by  which  you  are  carried 
to  the  summit  by  an  easy  ascent  ;  from  thence  you  look  down 
on  the  Town  of  Spa  which  is  so  rudely  and  irregularly  built 
one  might  imagine  it  had  been  raised  in  the  first  beginnings 
of  architecture  ;  all  the  Country  round  is  wild,  and  the  eye 
in  a  wide  circuit  perceives  no  vestiges  of  society  ;  no  plows 
are  going,  no  windmills  turning,  no  Cottage  chimney  smoaks 
nor  is  there  church  or  village  in  sight.  The  imagination 
suggests  from  various  appearances  that  the  family  of  Noah 
are  just  settled  at  Spa  after  the  flood,  while  the  rest  of  the  World 
is  desolate  and  in  ruins  ;  by  striking  into  other  paths  you  are 
led  round  another  mountain,  and  descend  into  the  promenade 
de  sept  heures  ;  there  you  find  ages  have  past  since  the  deluge, 
for  it  was  surely  many  ages  e’re  Heralds  rose  and  titles  were 
invented,  and  you  find  yourself  walking  with  son  altesse  Royal, 
son  altesse  Serenissime,  son  Excellence  Mr.  le  Comte,  and 
Monsieur  le  Marquis.  Here  you  meet  all  the  various  orders 
and  professions  in  which  mankind  are  classed  ;  The  Friar 
is  walking  with  the  soldier,  the  nun  with  the  Matron,  the 
Financier  with  a  Chanoinesse,  the  long  robe  with  the  staff 
officer.  All  professions  and  all  Nations  are  assembled  at  Spa 
in  the  summer  ;  in  a  few  months  we  all  disappear,  and  the 
Wolves  and  Bears  reassume  their  Dominions  from  the  Moun¬ 
tains.  We  have  been  very  unfortunate  in  our  weather,  and  I 
lament  it  the  more  as  the  Country  is  so  much  suited  to  my  taste 
and  contrasts  so  well  with  the  company  and  manner  of  life 
here.  ...  I  know  our  friend  Torri  [Samuel  Torriano]  thinks 
I  have  been  poring  my  eyes  out  for  many  years  for  very  little 
purpose,  and  is  afraid  I  shd  teach  my  Godson  more  than  the 
needful  love  of  the  pater  noster  and  the  ten  commandments, 
but  he  does  not  know  how  much  amusement  I  can  make  to 
myself  in  my  lonely  walks  from  memory  and  imagination.  I 
have  sometimes  fancy’d  a  lean  black  smith  at  his  forge  was  the 
miserable  personage  Care  painted  by  Spencer.  Thanks  to 
Mr.  Mason,  I  have  heard  the  Druids  sing  their  mystick  songs 
upon  these  mountains.  One  morning  as  Mrs.  Carter  and  I 
were  looking  down  from  them  upon  the  Town  of  Spa,  the 
Cordeliers  carried  the  host  in  procession,  their  solemn  step, 
lugubre  habit,  and  the  base  voice  of  their  chaunting  deepen’d 


1763  THE  PRINCE  OF  BRUNSWICK 


the  murmur  of  the  falling  floods,  and  shed  a  browner  horror 
on  the  woods.  The  dreary  desart,  the  woods,  the  rocks,  the 
cascades  and  all  the  objects  we  look’d  upon  borrow’d  from, 
and  lent  solemnity  to  this  religious  ceremony,  and  it  is  the 
only  instance  in  which  I  have  found  any  of  that  kind  of  awe 
from  the  rites  of  the  Romish  Church  ;  tho  I  have  been  at  the 
high  Mass,  the  Vespers,  and  all  their  ceremonies,  I  have  not 
seen  anything  that  could  raise  even  superstition  in  the  mind. 
The  long  sounding  Isles  and  intermingled  graves  in  our 
Cathedrals  strike  one  with  awe,  while  the  gaudy  trick’d  up 
altars  here  give  such  gayety  to  the  churches  one  should  rather 
think  they  were  adorn’d  for  a  ball  or  feast  than  prepared  for 
religious  worship.  The  Nuns  too  disappointed  me,  for  instead 
of  the 

Pensive  Nun  devout  and  pure, 

Sober  stedfast  and  demure, 

I  found  a  parcel  of  cloistered  boarding  school  Girls  who 
affected  a  gayety  that  suited  neither  their  years  nor  condition. 
Tho  I  had  heard  so  much  of  the  absurdity  of  worship  in  the 
Roman  Catholic  Countries  it  surpass’d  my  expectation.  I 
have  now  said  so  much  of  the  inanimate  objects  you  will  hardly 
have  patience  to  hear  an  account  of  the  living  World  here. 
We  are  made  up  of  Princes  and  Princesses  ;  in  the  first  place 
as  a  Sovereign  I  must  mention  the  Bishop  of  Augsbourg  of  the 
House  of  Hesse  Darmstadt,  a  very  good  natured  and  petite  man. 
We  have  dined  with  him  five  or  six  times.  The  Hereditary 
Prince  of  Brunswick  did  not  keep  a  table  here,  but  he  dined 
with  my  Lord  Bath,  and  so  I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing 
him  without  constraint.  Our  Princess  need  not  envy  any  in 
Europe,  as  he  seems  to  promise  to  make  a  greater  figure  by 
his  personal  qualities  than  any  one  of  his  rank,  and  I  think  she 
will  be  more  happy,  and  ought  to  be  more  proud  than  if  she 
was  allied  to  one  of  greater  extent  of  dominion  and  inferior 
talents.  Our  General  Duke  Ferdinand  and  his  Princess  were 
here  some  weeks,  the  Prince  seems  a  sensible  good  kind  of 
man.  We  had  also  for  a  few  days  Prince  Clement,  youngest 
son  of  the  K.  of  Poland,  who  was  a  candidate  for  the  Bishoprick 
of  Liege,  but  it  is  doubtfull  whether  he  will  be  confirmd,  for 
which  we  are  all  sorry  as  he  is  a  very  petite  agreable  young 
man.  We  have  a  distinguishd  Lady,  the  Princess  Esterhasi, 
a  french  woman  by  birth,  the  widow  of  an  Hungarian  Prince. 

I  am  much  charmd  with  her  as  the  most  polite  and  accomplished 
Person  I  have  seen  amongst  the  foreigners.  We  have  a  great 


LORD  BATH  AT  EIGHTY 


1763 


56 

many  of  the  english  nobility  here,  but  all  the  Princes  have 
greatly  distinguishd  my  Lord  Bath  by  their  regards  and 
attentions.  The  Bishop  of  Augsbourg  and  Princess  Esterhasi 
are  to  dine  with  him  tomorrow.  If  my  Lord  Bath  was  not 
very  well  able  to  maintain  himself  it  wd  be  worth  while  to 
send  him  abroad  at  the  publick  expence,  for  it  is  prodigious 
to  see  the  regard  all  the  people  of  all  ranks  and  nations  have 
for  him  ;  there  is  a  native  dignity  that  strikes  them  immediately. 
In  the  list  of  our  Princes  I  forgot  Count  Blanquenham  Mander- 
childe  and  the  Princess  of  Salm  his  wife,  and  Prince  Pulhowsski 
of  Poland.  Princess  Emilie  the  K.  of  Prussias  sister  is  to 
come  here  on  Wensday.  We  shall  leave  this  place  on  the 
17  th  ;  then  we  go  to  Aix  la  Chapelle,  where  we  are  to  pass 
one  day,  then  we  go  to  Bonn  and  Cologn  and  to  see  the  Elector 
of  Colognes  palace,  and  we  are  to  go  to  Amsterdam,  Rotterdam, 
and  the  Hague,  then  to  Antwerp,  and  so  return  to  Calais  ; 
we  intend  being  in  England  the  middle  of  September.  If  it 
pleases  God  to  continue  to  us  our  health  we  shall  have  pass’d 
our  time  very  agreably.  My  Lord  Bath  is  in  very  good  spirits, 
as  lively  and  as  healthy  as  at  25.  His  temper  is  perpetual 
sunshine  and  he  is  in  all  little  amiabilities  as  well  as  great 
qualities  the  most  perfect  character  I  ever  saw.  Mr.  Montagu 
has  been  always  chearfull  and  well  amused.  I  have  recovered 
my  health  entirely.  Mrs.  Carter  has  still  her  headach,  which 
grieves  me  much,  as  I  had  flattered  myself  she  wd  find  benefit 
from  the  waters.  I  send  this  letter  by  an  english  Gentleman 
who  is  returning  home.  .  .  . 

To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Dusseldorf,  the  23 d  [August]. 

Utrecht,  the  29th  [August]. 

My  Lord — On  wen’sday  the  1 7th  we  left  Spa,  carrying  with 
us  health  and  spirits.  Our  first  journey  was  to  Aix  la  Chapelle  ; 
we  pass’d  through  the  village  of  Limbourg,  and  as  we  dined 
there,  I  had  time  to  ascend  a  hill  calld  Mount  Calvary,  on 
which  there  are  seven  little  chappels,  where  the  history  of  the 
Passion  is  painted,  from  the  agony  in  the  garden,  to  the  suffering 
on  the  cross.  To  these  chapels  the  people  of  the  country 
resort  in  great  numbers  in  Lent,  and  on  good  friday  the  whole 
is  coverd  by  people  on  their  knees.  I  wish’d  to  have  seen 
this  extraordinary  place  in  such  circumstances,  but  was  obliged 
to  content  myself  with  the  prospect  of  the  Country,  which  is 


1763 


COLOGNE 


57 


most  romantick  and  beautifull.  Your  Lordship  will  not  doubt 
but  we  paid  our  devotions  at  the  Tomb  of  Charlemagne. 
One  day  sufficed  to  shew  us  everything  worth  seeing  at  Aix. 
Our  next  stage  was  to  Cologne,  a  very  ugly  ill  built  City. 
We  pass’d  the  first  day  in  seeing  some  churches  and  Convents, 
the  next  we  went  to  see  was  two  Palaces  of  the  Electors  at 
Bonn.  The  great  one  is  the  most  magnificently  furnish’d, 
and  with  good  taste  ;  but  carving  gilding  and  embroidery, 
tapestry  etc  make  but  an  indifferent  figure  in  black  and  white, 
so  I  will  reserve  what  I  have  to  say  on  the  subject  till  I  have 
the  happiness  of  seeing  your  Lordship  in  Hillstreet.  The 
late  elector  lived  rather  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Epicurus 
than  the  Cannons  of  the  Christian  Church.  He  loved  fine 
houses,  fine  Ladies,  fine  balls,  fine  operas  etc.  His  little 
Castle  has  an  air  of  asiatick  luxury,  it  is  contrived  for  the  summer 
residence,  his  salle  a  manger  was  cool’d  by  two  beautifull 
fountains,  and  in  his  bed  chamber  he  slept  with  a  fair  nymph 
by  his  side  to  the  musick  of  falling  waters.  This  luxurious 
and  magnificent  Prince  had  two  other  fine  Palaces,  but  bad 
weather  prevented  our  going  to  see  them.  We  made  our¬ 
selves  some  amends  in  the  evening  by  going  with  some 
Chanoinesses  who  were  sisters  of  two  of  that  order  with  whom 
we  were  intimate  at  Spa,  to  see  the  Cathedral,  which  is  the 
highest  style  of  Gothick  Grandeur,  but  unhappily  it  was  never 
entirely  finishd  ;  with  rich  reliques  it  abounds,  the  heads  of 
the  three  wise  men  who  worshipp’d  our  saviour  are  enclosed 
in  a  vast  gold  shrine  most  richly  adorn’d  with  diamonds,  pearls, 
colour’d  gems  and  fine  antique  Cameos.  St.  Peters  staff  and 
many  other  reliques  are  enclosed  in  gold  set  with  diamonds 
etc.  The  riches  of  this  church  are  prodigious.  You  may 
believe  Mrs.  Carter  did  not  neglect  her  respects  to  St.  Ursula 
and  her  11000  virgin  companions.  Our  Chanoiness  carried 
us  to  an  assembly  where  we  met  the  Popes  Nuncio.  .  .  .  This 
morning  we  cross’d  the  Rhine  in  a  Ferry  boat  and  arrived 
at  this  place.  We  went  to  the  Elector  Palatines  Palace  where 
we  saw  an  extream  fine  collection  of  Pictures.  It  grieves 
one  to  see  Princes  so  magnificent  and  luxurious  while  their 
subjects  are  so  poor  and  so  wretched.  The  people  in  the 
villages  we  pass’d  through  had  hardly  human  figures.  The 
Women  were  tottering  under  burthens  of  great  weight.  They 
have  none  of  those  beauties  and  agremens  which  would  enable 
them  to  subdue  the  strongs  so  they  are  the  slaves  of  the  men. 
Tomorrow  morning  we  are  to  get  into  Holland  ;  we  shall 
see  Rotterdam,  Amsterdam,  and  the  Hague,  and  then  to 


HOLLAND 


1763 


58 

Antwerp,  to  Brussels,  Dunkirk,  and  early  in  September  we 
shall  set  sail  for  England.  We  see  everywhere  the  marks  of 
war,  and  hear  sad  complaints  of  the  miseries  it  occasiond. 
I  hope  Mr.  Wilkes  will  pardon  me  if  I  rejoyce  in  the  Peace. 
The  K:  of  Prussias  sister  Princess  Emilie  came  to  Spa  just 
before  we  left  it.  She  has  a  very  amiable  character  and  was 
extreamly  polite  to  every  one,  but  particularly  to  my  Lord 
Bath.  When  she  took  leave  of  me  she  said  :  Veillez  sur 
les  jours  de  ce  digne  milord  qui  a  le  respect  et  l’admiration  de 
toute  l’Europe.  His  Lordship  is  in  such  health,  thank  God, 
he  does  not  want  a  great  deal  of  care,  but  when  ever  he  sits 
between  windows  and  doors  I  quote  royal  authority  to  take 
care  of  him.  I  have  given  your  Lordship  a  sort  of  journal 
of  my  travels,  as  I  know  you  interest  yourself  in  everything 
which  concerns  your  friends.  .  .  .  All  our  party  desire  their  most 
affectionate  and  respectfull  compts.  My  Lord  Bath  will  have 
the  happiness  of  visiting  your  Lordship,  when  I  alas  must 
repair  to  the  black  regions  of  the  North.  I  wrote  thus  much 
from  Dusseldorf  but  cd  not  get  time  to  finish  my  letter,  and 
our  journeys  have  since  been  too  long  to  allow  me  leisure  to 
write.  Yesterday  evening  we  arrived  at  Utrecht  after  a  long 
days  journey  through  all  the  platitudes  du  pais  de  Hollande. 
We  lay  the  night  before  at  Nimeguen  where  we  met  a  dutch 
Nobleman  who  with  great  civility  orderd  our  horses  at  Arnheim 
and  breakfasted  there  with  us  so  that  as  the  first  dutchman 
of  quality  I  saw  was  very  obliging  I  must  complain  only  of 
the  lower  people  who  are  the  most  brutal  of  any  I  ever  saw. 
The  Coachmen  and  postillions  belonging  to  our  four  equipages 
talk’d  incessantly  the  whole  way,  all  of  them  assembling  often 
round  the  carriage  that  went  first,  and  regarding  neither  the 
company  nor  the  voitures  they  were  to  guide.  The  Country 
we  passd  through  in  general  resembled  Bagshot  heath,  but 
such  is  the  vivifying  and  nourishing  spirit  of  liberty  that  even 
in  this  barren  land  no  poverty  or  distress  appeard,  the  houses 
were  tight,  the  people  clean,  whereas  in  the  rich  and  fruitfull 
domains  of  the  house  of  Austria  haggard  poverty  appeard 
everywhere.  If  one  wants  to  respect  liberty  one  shd  come 
into  Holland,  if  to  love  and  respect  it  too  one  must  go  into 
England.  The  Town  of  Utrecht  is  most  exceedingly  dull  but 
opulent.  The  people  seem  inexpressibly  stupid,  but  the  most 
loquacious  of  any  I  have  seen.  ...  I  have  only  learnt  dutch 
enough  to  say  to  them  when  they  speak  1  do  not  understand 
but  that  will  not  silence  them,  and  in  shewing  their  churches 
they  chatter  like  monkies,  and  it  is  impossible  to  silence  them. 


1763 


THE  HAGUE 


59 


One  of  the  states  Yachts  is  orderd  to  attend  my  Lord  Bath 
tomorrow,  so  we  go  by  water  to  Amsterdam,  where  we  shall 
stay  a  whole  day,  and  the  next  we  go  to  the  Hague  where 
I  hope  to  meet  a  letter  from  yr  Lordship.  I  am  anxious  to 
hear  of  yr  health.  I  was  very  sorry  to  meet  here  the  news 
of  Ld  Egremonts  death  ;  I  respected  him  in  the  quality  of 
your  friend.  I  do  not  know  what  consequences  this  accident 
may  have  in  the  political  world.  ...  I  admire  the  Patriots 
who  have  so  nobly  fought  and  died  for  this  detestable  country. 
Patriotism  is  indeed  a  virtue  here,  for  a  good  Country  some 
one  wd  even  dare  to  dye,  as  to  yr  Lordship  in  the  midst  of  Hagley 
Park  you  cannot  help  loving  your  Country,  but  these  dutch 
have  been  Patriots  et  point  de  raison,  quelle  grace  ! 


A  later  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey  completes  and  amplifies 
the  narrative  : 


Newcastle,  Nov.  ye  id. 

I  assure  you  I  have  had  less  respect  for  Riches  ever  since 
I  have  seen  the  wealthy  and  horrible  Town  of  Amsterdam  ; 
at  the  Hague,  opulence  appears  decent  at  least.  We  passed 
four  days  there  very  agreably.  We  were  nobly  entertain’d 
at  Sr  Joseph  Yorkes,  and  Count  Bentinck,  and  with  the  most 
splendid  magnificence  at  Prince  Lewis  of  Brunswicks.  We 
breakfasted  one  day  at  the  Greffier  Fugels,  who  shew’d  us  a 
noble  library.  I  imagined  the  Muses  alone  had  no  Magazine 
in  Holland,  and  I  was  charm’d  to  see  a  very  noble  collection 
of  books,  medals  and  drawings.  Coin  not  current,  and  riches 
that  carried  no  interest,  seem’d  to  me  most  wonderful  objects 
in  this  commercial  Country.  I  was  much  pleased  with  the 
old  Greffier  himself,  in  whom  the  Republican  character 
appear’d  amiable  and  respectable  ;  there  is  a  modest  dignity 
in  his  manners,  and  a  simplicity  in  his  magnificence  becoming 
the  Magistrate  of  a  great  Commonwealth.  He  bears  so  meekly 
and  wears  his  advantages  and  wealth  and  power  in  such  a 
manner  that  they  do  not  insult  that  rule  of  equality  which  is 
the  basis  of  a  Republick  ;  added  to  these  merits,  he  has  the 
additional  one  of  being  sexagenaire,  so  that  I  believe  I  should 
have  begun  a  coquetting  with  him,  if  we  had  intended  to  stay 
half  a  century  in  Holland  ;  in  less  time  than  that,  I  imagine 
one  could  not  warm  the  heart  of  a  dutch  man.  The  Greffier 
has  a  Son  who  is  a  very  pretty  gentleman,  of  fine  talents  well 
improved,  he  has  travell’d  all  over  Europe,  His  Father  finding 
old  Barnwells  simplicity  and  cloak  would  no  longer  be  the 


6o  THE  ELEVEN  THOUSAND  VIRGINS  1763 


uniform  of  the  Country  has  prudently  adapted  his  sons  education 
to  the  manners  of  the  age  ;  and  I  could  not  help  considering 
the  Old  and  young  man  as  the  representatives  of  Holland, 
one  for  the  last  age,  the  other  for  this.  Count  Bentinck  is 
in  his  manners  and  way  of  thinking  an  englishman  of  quality. 
His  House,  his  gardens  are  all  in  our  taste.  He  is  a  person 
of  great  worth  ;  he  fell  in  love  with  Mrs.  Carter,  and  I  beg 
that  in  your  next  letter  you  would  address  to  her  in  the  style 
of  Madame  de  Rhone.  Prince  Lewis  is  guardian  to  the  Prince 
of  Orange  whom  he  educates  with  paternal  care.  The  young 
Stadtholder  has  not  any  Court  yet,  but  he  is  brought  up  in  the 
private  state  of  an  Asiatick  Monarch,  a  strange  education  for 
the  first  Magistrate  of  a  free  people  !  but  such  are  the  orders 
of  the  States,  I  suppose  from  some  jealousies.  It  is  happy  for 
the  poor  boy  he  has  so  sensible  a  guardian  as  Prince  Lewis, 
and  who  applies  himself  so  much  to  his  improvement  and 
instruction.  My  Lord  Bath  and  Mr.  Montagu  waited  on 
him  ;  they  say  he  talk’d  very  sensibly  ;  he  is  bashfull,  and  not 
genteel  in  his  person,  or  easy  in  his  address.  Prince  Lewis 
has  the  most  easy  affability  of  any  great  person  I  ever  saw. 
You  have  been  in  Holland,  so  I  say  nothing  of  their  gardens 
where  the  croaking  of  frogs  is  in  place  of  nightingales,  nor  of 
the  watery  monsters  gilt  with  gold  which  in  little  basins  squirt 
stinking  water  from  the  head  or  tail  ;  nor  of  the  black  clammy 
earth  which  supplies  the  want  of  le  gazon  fleuri,  nor  of  their 
grottos  which  are  Calypso’s  grotto  travestied.  The  Hague 
is  a  beautiful  Town,  and  I  could  have  lik’d  to  have  pass’d 
there  some  time.  We  met  with  great  civilities  and  had 
invitations  from  all  the  persons  of  distinction,  but  could  not 
stay  to  avail  ourselves  of  them.  The  dutch  Ladies  visited 
me  at  the  Inn.  Sr  Joseph  Yorke  does  his  King  and  Country 
great  honour  in  every  respect.  I  wish  all  our  Ministers  abroad 
resembled  him.  We  went  from  Spa  to  Aix  la  Chapelle  ; 
I  am  sure  you  agree  with  me  in  admiring  the  environs  of 
Limbourg.  Mrs.  Carter,  who  loves  the  Goths,  tho’  she  is 
a  citizen  of  Athens,  paid  her  devoirs  to  the  Tomb  of  Charlemagne 
with  great  devotion.  Our  next  journey  was  to  Cologne, 
where  we  staid  three  days  ;  you  may  suppose  we  did  not  so 
neglect  the  strangest  legend  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  as  not 
to  visit  ye  eleven  thousand  virgins.  Peace  be  to  their  ashes  ! 
I  will  talk  no  scandal  about  them  tho  if  they  were  old  maids 
and  I  dare  say  they  had  utter’d  a  great  deal  about  other  people  ; 
a  malicious  person  might  suspect,  that  among  so  many  defence¬ 
less  damsels  travelling  through  wild  countries,  some  met  with 


1763  THE  ELECTOR’S  PALACE  6 1 

more  disasters  than  la  fiancee  du  Roi  de  Garbe.  The 
Cathedral  of  Cologne  is  one  of  the  finest  Gothick  buildings 
I  have  seen,  unhappily  it  was  never  finished,  but  some  part 
of  it  is  very  rich,  and  has  all  the  solemn  grandeur  one  could 
wish  in  a  church.  The  reliques  here  are  many,  and  the 
shrines  of  an  immense  value.  The  heads  of  the  three  wise 
men  are  drest,  as  the  heads  of  silly  women  wd  wish  to  be, 
they  are  coverd  with  gems,  and  one  of  them  has  a  fine  diamond 
aigrette.  The  Copes  here  are  the  richest  embroidery  I  ever 
saw,  and  the  mitres  are  coverd  with  fine  pearl  ;  these  are  the 
gift  of  the  late  Elector.  We  were  shewn  all  these  things  by 
some  chanoinesses  whose  sisters  were  at  Spa.  One  of  these 
Ladies  had  a  very  uncommon  share  of  parts  and  knowledge, 
with  a  great  deal  of  piety,  and  I  could  see  she  was  ashamed 
of  the  fopperies  of  her  religion,  and  indeed  I  was  in  pain  for 
her,  when  the  sexton  told  any  of  their  foolish  legends.  The 
Chanoine  too,  who  seemd  a  man  of  sense,  smil’d  and  said  these 
were  traditions.  We  went  to  Bonn  to  see  two  Palaces  of  the 
Elector  of  Cologne.  I  never  saw  anything  so  magnificient 
as  the  great  Palace.  The  late  Elector  by  whom  it  was  enlarged 
and  furnish’d  had  more  the  character  of  a  Disciple  of  Epicurus 
than  of  a  successor  of  the  Apostles.  They  shew’d  us  a  state 
bed  which  cost  him  six  thousand  pound,  it  was  prodigiously 
fine  and  beautiful.  In  this  bed  he  did  not  lye  churlishly  alone  ; 
no  indeed,  by  his  side  lay  our  Country  woman  the  famous 
Mrs.  Wymondsil  alias  Child.  It  is  not  possible  to  give  an 
account  of  the  procession  of  fine  things  of  all  sorts  in  this 
Palace,  but  tho  there  was  a  general  character  of  elegance  and 
magnificence,  as  there  was  not  any  noble  work  of  art,  a  minute 
description  would  tire  you.  The  lesser  Palace  in  the  wood 
seem’d  form’d  for  the  retired  hours  of  an  Asiatick  Monarch 
with  his  favourite  Sultana  ;  such  might  be  that,  where  the 
sapient  King  with  his  fair  spouse  held  dalliance  for  anything 
I  know.  Great  marble  saloons  cool’d  by  fountains  of  the 
finest  grotto  work,  couches  and  beds  where  murmuring  waters 
intic’d  the  dewy  featherd  sleep,  every  accomodation  for  indolent 
luxury  in  a  hot  day  were  here  ;  and  here,  in  the  lap  of  wanton 
ease  lay  the  mitred  head  of  the  Elector.  His  opera’s,  his 
balls,  his  entertainments  of  all  kinds  were  in  the  highest  taste  ; 
and  those  who  were  of  a  rank  to  partake  of  his  pleasures  loved 
him,  or  seem’d  to  love  him.  When  the  destinies  cut  the 
silken  thread  of  his  life  then  his  subjects  found  he  had  neglected 
the  affairs  of  government,  and  his  tradesmen  that  of  his  domestick 
economy  ;  and  murmurs  succeeded  to  the  soft  sounds  of 


6  2 


RETURN  TO  ENGLAND 


1763 


musick  and  flattery.  Indeed  the  poverty  apparent  at  Cologne 
shew’d  one  he  had  provided  ill  for  the  wants  of  his  people, 
tho  so  indulgent  to  his  own.  Yet  I  must  own  most  of  his 
fine  furniture  was  made  by  his  own  subjects,  and  was  of  his 
own  manufacture  at  Bonn,  so  that  perhaps  he  was  more  deficient 
in  policy  than  humanity.  We  crossed  the  Rhine  on  a  bridge 
of  boats  to  Dusseldorf,  where  we  saw  the  fine  collection  of 
pictures  in  the  Elector  Palatines  Palace.  From  Dusseldorf 
to  Wesel  we  travell’d  through  Forrests  where  one  rather 
expected  to  see  Wild  Beasts  than  men  ;  but  the  Nimrods  of 
War  as  well  as  of  the  Chace  had  been  here,  and  the  roads 
were  torn  up  by  the  Artillery,  and  the  whole  country  had  the 
scars  of  War  upon  it.  In  the  villages  we  saw  cottages  not 
fit  to  lodge  human  creatures,  and  indeed  creatures  that  inhabited 
them  not  worthy  to  be  calld  human.  The  Women  were 
employ’d  in  rubbing  our  horses  backs,  fetching  their  hay  etc., 
to  my  great  offence,  who  lived  in  a  country  where  we  had 
our  Deify’ d  Sacharissa’s,  Stellas,  etc.  Much  did  I  detest  the 
mean  taste  and  false  luxury  of  Princes  who  desire  to  have  their 
Palaces  fill’d  with  the  gracefull  figures  of  Guido  and  Raphael, 
and  can  see  their  dominions  inhabited  by  men  and  women 
whom  poverty  and  oppression  have  debased  below  the  human 
form  and  human  mind.  We  entered  Holland  by  Nimeguen, 
where  many  great  Politicians  acting  with  state  wisdom  and 
publick  zeal  concluded  a  Peace  ;  from  thence  went  to  Utrecht, 
where  minor  politicians  and  party  affections  made  another 
Peace.  I  believe  by  this  time  you  are  tired,  tho  I  know  you 
love  rambling.  I  brought  Mrs.  Carter  back  a  coquette,  and 
my  Lord  Bath  a  young  man.  As  for  myself  I  am  much  as 
I  was,  only  in  better  health.  I  had  indeed  a  decent  share  of 
blonde  and  coquetting  before,  but  if  my  Lord  Bath  grows  so 
young,  I  shall  be  forced  to  be  inconstant.  I  hate  even  the 
etourderie  of  threescore,  and  he  is  got  back  to  fifty,  is  it  my 
fault  when  I  leave  him. 

On  September  27  Lord  Bath  writes  he  had  seen 
the  King, 

who  received  me  with  his  usual  most  gracious  goodness, 
expressing  much  satisfaction  to  see  me  return’d  in  such  perfect 
health.  He  said  he  had  heard  much  of  our  happy  company 
who  travelled  so  agreably  together  in  perfect  harmony  and 
without  the  least  unhappy  accident  or  misfortune.  ...  I 
said  Mrs.  Montagu  intended  being  at  St.  James  on  Thursday 


1763 


MRS.  SHERLOCK 


63 


next  to  pay  her  duty  to  his  Majesty  and  to  the  Queen.  He 
said  he  should  be  extremely  pleased  to  see  you  and  hoped  we 
would  stand  near  one  another  that  he  might  have  an  opportunity 
of  asking  us  a  hundred  questions  which  curiosity  would  prompt 
him  to  do.  He  asked  after  Mr.  Montagu  likewise  hoping 
to  see  him.  I  told  him  that  he  was  no  great  courtier,  and  was 
going  to  his  corporation  [Huntingdon]  where  he  was  chosen 
Mayor  and  at  his  return  was  to  take  a  northern  journey. 

On  the  7th  of  October  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Montagu  set 
forth  on  their  journey  to  Denton  Hall,  sending  the 
coach  and  six  and  maid  the  day  before ;  they  followed 
their  coach  in  a  postchaise,  “  and  overtook  our  more 
stately  stepping  equipage  at  Bugden,  62  miles  from 
London  and  went  on  in  it  to  Stilton,  so  that  I  made  a 
journey  of  77  miles  that  day.” 

Thomas  Sherlock,  Bishop  of  London,  had  died 
in  1761,  leaving  an  inconsolable  widow,  to  whom 
Mrs.  Montagu  was  much  attached. 

Your  Lordship  knows  I  am  not  too  wise,  which  you  and 
Mrs.  Carter  attribute  to  my  not  understanding  greek.  How¬ 
ever  I  have  not  perverted  my  understanding  with  punning 
nor  puzzled  it  with  Hebrew,  but  wise  men  and  learned  Women 
are  apt  to  be  arrogant  and  despise  their  neighbours.  I  don’t 
name  any  names.  I  will  finish  my  letter,  my  spirits  are  so 
low  your  lordship  will  hate  ye  sight  of  my  hand.  The  poor 
spirits  have  been  tried  to  day.  I  made  a  visit  this  morning 
to  Mrs.  Sherlock,  and  doubt  if  I  shall  find  her  at  my  return 
to  Town  She  made  me  a  fine  present  of  china,  I  cannot 
imagine  why  ;  but  she  gave  me  6  fine  plates  which  Queen 
Elizabeth  used  at  her  breakfast,  and  two  fine  cups  that  had 
belonged  to  King  Charles  ;  I  should  have  had  pleasure  in 
this  mark  of  her  affection,  but  in  ye  way  she  is  in,  it  had  ye 
solemnity  of  a  farewell,  and  shocked  me  extreamly.  Poor 
Woman,  why  did  not  providence  release  her  ye  day  she  lost 
ye  Bishop  !  .  .  .  I  sold  her  one  of  ye  cobblers  [James  Wood- 
house]  books  for  3  shillings,  she  gave  me  3  guineas  to  day 
but  said  her  name  must  not  be  mention’d,  but  she  gave  it  to 
Daphne  to  make  her  sing  again,  so  I  shall  send  it  to  Mr. 
Dodsley  with  her  very  words.  I  do  not  wonder  that  people 
in  health  and  at  ease  should  delight  to  make  even  a  shoemakers 
wife  sing  ;  but  when  ones  own  song  is  ended,  to  think  of 


64 


MISS  BOWES 


1763 


others  singing  is  supream  virtue.  This  struck  me  more 
deeply  because  I  fear  if  accidents  were  to  happen  that  render’d 
me  unhappy  I  should  not  think  of  the  unhappiness  or  happiness 
of  others.  I  am  always  benevolent  in  the  same  degree  that 
I  am  happy,  so  if  ever  I  am  miserable  I  shall  be  worthless  ; 
a  dreadful  thought  which  often  haunts  me,  but  I  hope  he  who 
sees  my  weakness  will  strengthen  or  pardon  it.  I  know  most 
people  are  most  tender  in  adversity  ;  but  by  experience  I  am 
convinced  of  ye  contrary  in  myself.  However  I  will  treasure 
up  in  my  mind  this  generous  instance  of  Mrs.  Sherlocks  virtue. 
May  the  joyous  song  of  the  Coblers  Wife  be  a  prayer  for  her 
recovery,  for  she  is  a  most  valuable  Woman,  very  charitable 
and  very  rich  !  Her  heir  I  fear  is  only  ye  latter.  ...  You 
was  infinitely  good  in  writing  after  all  your  fatigue.  I  believe 
if  you  was  ill  you  wd  think  of  making  ye  Coblers  Wife  sing. 

Mr.  George  Bowes,  to  whose  daughter  the 
next  letter  refers,  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  Montagu’s 
and  a  northern  neighbour,  his  place  at  Gibside  near 
the  Derwent  being  about  six  miles  south-west  of 
Newcastle  and  Denton.  Here  in  the  midst  of  a  great 
wood  of  400  acres  he  had  laid  out  some  remarkable 
grounds,  with  a  column  140  feet  high,  a  great  Gothic 
Banqueting  Room  and  other  magnificent  delights.  He 
had  died  in  1760,  and  Mr.  Montagu  attended  his 
“  very  pompous  ”  funeral.  Lord  Lyttelton  wrote 
almost  prophetically  at  the  time  to  Mrs.  Montagu  : 

As  his  vanity  descends  with  his  estate  to  his  daughter  I 
don’t  wish  to  see  her  my  daughter-in-law,  though  she  would 
make  my  son  one  of  the  richest,  and  consequently,  in  our 
present  ideas  of  greatness,  one  of  the  great  peers  of  the  realm. 
But  she  will  probably  be  the  prize  of  some  needy  Duke  who 
will  want  her  estate  to  repair  the  disasters  of  Newmarket  and 
Arthur’s,  or  if  she  marries  for  love  of  some  ensign  in  the 
Guards. 

She  married  the  ninth  Earl  of  Strathmore  in  1767, 
and  on  his  death  in  1776  was  wedded  to  Lieutenant 
Andrew  Stoney,  from  whom  she  obtained  a  divorce 
in  1789,  after  years  of  brutal  ill-treatment  from  an 
unmitigated  blackguard.  The  poor  lady’s  life  indeed 


i763  AN  ATTEMPTED  ABDUCTION  65 


was  a  purgatory  of  violence.  Having  narrowly 
escaped  abduction  as  a  girl,  she  was  actually  and 
forcibly  abducted  by  her  husband,  from  whose  brutality 
she  had  taken  refuge  in  London,  and  carried  off  to 
Straithland  Castle  ;  only  to  be  rescued  by  friends  and 
abducted  back  to  town  again.  Her  only  peace  was 
when  Bowes  was  imprisoned  in  King’s  Bench. 


To  Lord  Bath 

Newcastle,  Sunday  the  16  [October]. 

Here  has  been  a  most  horrid  plot  to  run  away  with  Miss 
Bowes.  A  man  who  was  a  waiter  at  Arthurs  came  into  this 
country  and  visited  a  footman  of  Miss  Bowes,  and  then  wrote 
a  letter  offering  him  ten  thousand  pounds  if  he  wd  decoy  the 
girl  into  the  walk  at  a  good  distance  from  the  House.  The 
footman  gave  information  to  Mrs.  Bowes.  Sr  Thomas 
Clavering  has  sent  the  waiter  of  Arthurs  to  prison  ;  it  is  said 
he  will  not  confess  who  set  him  on  upon  this  business,  some 
say  it  was  a  member  of  Parliament  that  employd  him  and 
there  are  a  thousand  different  stories,  but  I  have  not  yet  heard 
any  authentick  account.  Mrs.  Bowes  sent  her  Steward  here 
yesterday  with  her  compts.  I  was  in  bed  and  did  not  see  him, 
and  Mr.  Montagu  would  not  ask  him  any  questions  about  this 
affair  out  of  discretion.  As  soon  as  I  can  have  a  true  account 
of  it  I  will  write  it  to  your  Lordship.  The  story  shocks  me 
extreamly,  the  wretch  who  could  lay  such  a  scheme  must  be 
the  worst  of  villains,  and  I  suppose  is  desperate  both  in  his 
mind  and  fortunes.  Several  letters  in  cypher  are  found  in  the 
fellows  pocket  who  is  in  prison.  If  Miss  Bowes  servant  had 
appeard  to  give  into  the  scheme  the  whole  perhaps  might  have 
been  discover’d,  as  it  is,  I  imagine  the  agent  in  this  affair  is 
well  instructed  how  to  bear  up  against  any  menaces. 

In  a  later  letter  she  adds  : 

The  affair  of  Miss  Bowes  is  too  true.  A  wretch  who  is 
a  member  of  Parliament  and  calls  himself  a  gentleman,  sent  a 
man  who  is  a  famous  pimp  at  the  Cardigan’s  Head  into  this 
country  to  ingratiate  himself  with  Miss  Bowe’s  footman, 
and  to  tell  him  he  should  have  a  reward  of  twenty  thousand 
pounds  if  he  would  help  to  carry  off  the  young  lady  ;  that  the 

VOL.  I  F 


66  LORD  BATH’S  RULING  PASSION  1763 


person  who  was  to  marry  her  was  a  member  of  Parliament, 
and  would  make  a  great  figure  in  the  H.  of  Commons  this 
sessions  ;  this  footman,  you  must  know,  is  lover  to  a  woman 
who  was  nurse  to  the  young  lady,  and  now  attends  her  as  a 
servant.  These  two  persons  pondered  on  this  proposal,  why 
they  did  so  I  can  not  tell,  but  however  five  days  after  it  had 
been  made  they  acquainted  Mrs.  Bowes  with  it.  She  in  a 
fright  told  her  steward,  her  steward  in  a  fright  seized  the  man 
of  the  Cardigan’s  Head,  and  in  a  fright  sent  him  to  the  justice, 
the  justice  in  a  fright  sent  him  to  the  house  of  correction,  which 
I  hope  may  tend  to  the  amendments  of  this  wicked  fellow’s 
morals,  but  cannot  serve  any  other  purpose  whatever,  for  he 
will  not  confess  who  sent  him  into  the  country  nor  what  he 
was  to  do  ;  had  the  footman  been  ordered  to  appear  to  acquiesce, 
the  whole  design  would  have  been  unfolded  now.  All  they 
learn  from  the  letters  in  his  pocket  is  that  Mr.  H.  ...  is  the 
person  who  sent  him  into  this  Country  and  the  errand  to  run 
away  with  Miss  Bowes  by  help  of  her  footman,  but  whether 
by  fraud  or  violence  is  not  clear,  and  all  that  is  certainly  known 
is  that  the  first  letter  of  the  member  of  Parliament’s  name 
is  H. 

It  seems  there  is  a  Gentleman  who  is  a  sort  of  an  adventurer 
who  has  been  seen  in  London  with  this  fellow  whose  name  so 
begins  and  is  also  a  member  of  Parliament.  It  is  imagined 
the  servants  were  to  carry  this  young  creature  off  by  force, 
and  that  the  adventurous  lover  would  have  so  married  her 
perhaps  abroad,  and  have  trusted  to  his  agremens  and  ways  of 
making  himself  agreable  for  her  submitting  to  be  his  wife, 
but  she  is  a  girl  of  sense  and  spirit,  and  I  think  he  would  probably 
have  been  hanged  for  his  pains.  Mrs.  Bowes  and  Miss  Bowes 
made  me  a  visit  since  I  came  hither,  she  is  realy  a  fine  girl, 
lively,  sensible,  and  very  civil  and  good  natured.  I  must  go 
to  Gibside  to  visit  them  if  there  is  any  mild  weather. 

Lord  Bath’s  own  passion  for  money  has  been 
generally,  if  perhaps  a  little  unfairly,  accepted  as  a 
ruling  trait  of  his  character,  though  strenuously 
denied,  or  generously  minimised,  by  more  than  one  of 
his  friends,  who  have  recorded  various  instances  of  his 
kindness  and  generosity.  Mrs.  Montagu  meets  a 
direct  challenge  from  his  lordship  adroitly,  if  a  little 
evasively. 


i763 


MAN  THE  HUNTER 


6  7 


To  Lord  Bath 

My  Lord — That  I  do  honour  and  esteem  my  Lord  Bath 
is  most  certain,  and  it  is  as  certain  I  do  not  think  him  covetous  ; 
at  the  same  time  I  may  think  he  does  not  take  as  much  care  of 
his  health  as  of  his  money.  That  a  Man  is  Wise,  that  he  is 
without  an  heir,  that  there  is  not  a  Man  in  Europe  who  so 
well  deserves  his  Money,  or  could  make  so  good  an  Use  of 
it  as  himself,  are  not  to  me  Arguments  that  prove  he  may 
like  to  spend  his  income,  because  how  many  instances  to  the 
contrary  does  history  furnish  ?  The  most  beautifull  persons 
are  liable  to  distempers,  and  the  finest  minds  are  liable  to  a  love 
of  Money,  which  too  is  a  distemper.  The  passions  do  not 
reason,,  and  the  love  of  Money  is  as  much  instinctive  as  any 
other  Affection.  Man  is  designed  by  providence  to  hunt 
honours,  and  distinctions,  and  Wealth,  as  surely  as  other  Animals 
are  designed  to  hunt  their  prey  ;  but  Nature  has  set  them  their 
stint,  Man  is  left  unlimited,  and  will  therefore  run  into 
extreams.  If  I  thought  your  Lordship  mean  and  covetous 
I  should  deplore  it  in  silence,  I  should  be  Ashamed  to  speak 
on  the  subject,  but  if  I  thought  your  nature  noble,  but  li 
costumi  too  economical  in  any  period  of  your  life,  I  might 
speak  with  the  frankness  of  a  friend,  especially  when  not  my 
observation  but  your  own  discourse  gave  occasion  to  it.  I 
have  always  asserted  that  I  never  saw  any  mark  of  your  loving 
Money,  and  I  said  it  with  pleasure,  as  it  is  the  only  thing 
envy  ever  objects  to  you.  Your  character  is  my  pride  and 
my  glory,  and  I  had  rather  the  Sun  were  eclipsed  than  the 
least  shade  was  cast  upon  it. 

The  Doctor  need  not  have  quoted  Horace  to  prove  he 
does  not  love  fine  furniture  or  fine  cloaths,  he  is  below 
moderation  in  point  of  foppery.  His  letter  is  a  good  one  tho 
Melancholly.  Erasmus  recommends  folly,  folly  recommends 
Monsey,  his  defects  have  their  negligent  grace,  and  I  have 
often  been  puzzled  to  determine  whether  I  loved  him  for  his 
perfections  or  imperfections  but  I  believe  it  is  for  the  Chequer 
of  both  in  his  character.  He  is  certainly  the  greatest  fool  of 
a  witt,  and  the  greatest  Witt  of  a  fool  in  the  World. 

To  Lord  Bath 

Newcastle,  25  Oct. 

I  was  shocked  to  see  in  the  news  yesterday  an  account  of 
Lord  Hardwickes  being  dangerously  ill.  I  shall  lament  him 


68 


LA  CHEVALIERE  D’EON 


1763 


for  Lord  Lytteltons  sake,  who  has  a  kind  of  filial  respect  and 
love  for  him,  and  he  will  certainly  be  a  publick  loss  ;  time  and 
experience  mature  good  sense  into  wisdom,  and  in  these  times 
of  distemper  the  State  wants  wary  physicians.  I  have  always 
admired  the  steady  star  of  Lord  Hardwicke,  and  I  hoped  it 
would  not  set  till  it  run  a  long  course.  There  wanted  nothing 
to  complete  his  felicity  but  to  attain  to  very  old  age.  ...  I 
rejoyce  for  Lady  Hardwicke,  for  whom  I  had  a  great  respect, 
that  her  eyes  closed  before  the  extinction  of  what  was  to  her 
the  light  of  this  world.  I  do  not  know  so  sad  and  pitiable  an 
object  as  the  widow  of  a  great  man.  A  woman  who  loses  a 
tender  and  faithfull  companion  and  a  prudent  Father  of  her 
children  is  very  unfortunate,  but  her  misfortune  does  not 
affect  the  beholder  in  the  same  manner,  as  that  of  these  unhappy 
relicts  of  superior  merit  ;  the  sight  of  them  shocks  one  like 
that  of  sacred  temples  laid  in  ruins  by  hostile  hands. 

The  following  letter  recalls  the  curious  history  of 
the  Chevalier  D’Eon  de  Beaumont,  whose  sex  was  the 
subject  of  many  bets  and  of  a  judicial  decision  by  Lord 
Mansfield,  which  declared  him  a  female  ! 

He  came  to  London  as  French  minister  pleni¬ 
potentiary  in  1762,  but  was  shortly  afterwards 
superseded  by  Count  Guerchy,  at  the  instigation 
(so  he  affirmed)  of  the  Pompadour.  D’Eon  accused 
Guerchy  of  attempting  to  poison  him,  and  the  latter 
retaliated  by  an  action  for  libel ;  both  suits  succeeded, 
but  Guerchy  escaped  trial  by  pleading  privilege,  and 
D’Eon  was  outlawed,  but  subsequently  permitted  to 
return  to  France  on  condition  of  his  giving  up  certain 
state  documents,  and  wearing  the  dress  of  a  female, 
with  which  stipulations  he  complied.  Twenty  years 
later  he  returned  to  London,  where  he  remained  till 
his  death  in  1810,  when  a  post-mortem  examination 
finally  established  his  sex.  He  was  an  expert  fencer, 
and  gave  various  public  exhibitions  during  his  term  of 
exile,  at  Ranelagh  and  elsewhere. 


CHEVALIER  D'EON  DE  BEAUMONT 
By  J.  Conch! 


i763  JOHN  WILKES  69 

From  Lord  Bath 

London,  Saturday,  Oct.  29th. 

I  have  heard  the  strangest  story,  of  a  Quarrel  between  the 
two  french  Ministers,  but  I  cannot  learn  the  whole  truth,  as 
yet.  They  were  at  dinner  at  Lord  Halifax’s  ;  I  suppose  at 
first  setting  out,  with  a  large  company,  but  was  reduced  at 
last,  to  the  two  Secretarys  of  State,  and  George  Grenville 
with  the  two  french  Ministers,  Monr  Guerchy,  and  Monr 
Y’on  the  Resident.  Words  arose,  and  it  ended  with  very 
abusive  language  on  both  sides,  between  the  french  Men  at 
last  swords  were  drawn,  but  they  were  with  difficulty  parted. 
A  Guard  of  soldiers  were  sent  for  to  St.  James’s  and  without 
putting  the  Embassador  into  Custody,  they  were  sent  home, 
and  all  farther  mischief  was  prevented.  Prudence  is  endeavour¬ 
ing  all  she  can  to  hush  up  this  matter,  but  it  is  of  such  a  nature 
that  it  must  be  enquired  into,  and  the  whole  laid  open,  to 
have  Justice  done,  by  the  Court  of  France,  on  the  Delinquents, 
for  surely  so  strange  an  affair,  never  happend  before  in  any 
time,  or  in  any  part  of  the  world. 

John  Wilkes  naturally  figures  largely  in  the  letters 
of  the  next  few  months.  The  rich  distiller’s  son, 
having  studied  at  Leyden  and  travelled  the  Continent, 
having  got  rid  of  an  ill-matched  wife,  and  plunged 
into  and  scrambled  out  of  all  the  bestial  orgies  of 
Medmenham  with  Lord  Sandwich  and  Sir  Francis 
Dashwood,  Thomas  Potter,  and  the  other  bright 
particular  stars  of  the  Hell  Fire  Club,  had  entered 
Parliament  as  a  devoted  follower  of  Pitt  in  1761,  and 
had,  in  conjunction  with  that  attractive  scapegrace 
Charles  Churchill,  established  the  North  Briton  in 
bitter  opposition  to  Bute  and  all  his  works.  When 
the  latter  resigned  on  April  8,  the  issue  of  the  paper 
was  suspended,  professedly  in  the  hope  that  a  change 
of  ministry  would  mean  a  change  of  method  ;  but  a 
talk  which  he  had  with  Temple  and  Pitt  at  the  house 
of  the  former,  where  he  was  shown  a  draft  of  the  King’s 
Speech,  convinced  Wilkes  that  there  was  no  warrant 
for  any  such  expectation,  and  that  the  gentle  shepherd 
George  Grenville  was  to  be  little  more  than  the  mouth- 


70  NORTH  BRITON  NO.  45  1763 

piece  of  the  old  policy ;  and  so  Wilkes  went  home  to 
write  his  attack  on  “  the  most  abandoned  instance  of 
ministerial  effrontery  ever  attempted  to  be  imposed  on 
mankind.”  The  North  Briton  No.  45  was  published 
on  April  23.  The  King  was  furious :  the  law 
officers  of  the  Crown  were  asked  their  opinion,  and 
gave  what  was  required  of  them.  Lord  Halifax  issued 
a  general  warrant  “  to  search  for  authors,  printers,  and 
publishers,”  and  a  few  days  later  Wilkes  was  lodged 
in  the  Tower  ;  only,  however,  to  be  released  a  week 
later  on  the  plea  of  privilege  as  a  member  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  and  to  turn  the  table  on  his  enemies  to  the  tune 
of  ,£100,000  costs  and  damages  awarded  against  the 
too  impetuous  promoters  of  the  general  warrant.  This 
was  the  position  of  affairs  when  Lord  Bath  and  the 
Montagus  returned  from  Spa  in  the  autumn. 

When  Wilkes  was  arrested,  Churchill  is  said  to 
have  escaped  by  a  clever  ruse  on  the  part  of  his  friend. 
Whilst  he  was  protesting  privilege  to  the  King’s 
messengers  who  had  found  him  at  his  house  in  Great 
George  Street,  Churchill  actually  walked  in  to  see  him. 
Wilkes  —  knowing  that  Churchill  was  certain  to  be 
wanted  and  could  not  plead  privilege — immediately 
hailed  him  as  Mr.  Thompson,  enquired  after  Mrs. 
Thompson,  and  asked  if  she  was  going  to  dine  in  the 
country.  Churchill,  with  equal  promptitude,  took  the 
hint,  declared  that  Mrs.  Thompson  was  that  moment 
waiting  for  him,  and  that  he  had  merely  called  to 
assure  himself  of  Mr.  Wilkes’s  health  ;  bowed  himself 
out,  hurried  home,  secured  his  incriminating  papers, 
and  vanished  into  the  country  before  the  King’s 
messengers,  ignorant  that  they  had  had  him  in  their 
hands,  reached  his  lodgings. 

From  Ford  Bath 

Tuesday  the  %th  Now. 

.  .  .  Your  Father  was  yesterday  most  extreamly  Witty, 
lively,  and  Gay,  and  we  are  all  mighty  cheerful  and  Joyous  ; 


1763 


THREE  OLD  MEN 


7i 


whilst  the  Desert  stood  upon  the  Table,  in  came  Monsey, 
and  finding  us  toasting  your  health,  calld  for  a  large  Beer 
Glass,  filled  it  up  to  the  Brim  with  Champagne,  then  drank  it 
off  to  your  health.  We  wished  you  with  us,  and  all  agreed 
that  if  you  did  not  come  to  us  soon,  the  Frost  would  overtake 
you,  and  then  you  would  be  a  lump  of  Ice,  just  like  that  Dish 
of  Cream,  that  stood  upon  the  Table.  I  hear  that  the  measure 
is  resolved  on,  for  everybody  to  quit  the  service,  who  pretends 
to  be  of  the  opposition.  Sr  Joseph  York  is  coming  from  the 
Hague,  upon  the  same  simple  Errant,  which  I  am  heartily 
sorry  for  ;  What  poor  creatures  we  men  are  !  a  little  pievish 
disappointmt  turns  the  Wisest  of  us  fools  all  at  once,  and  a  little 
time  (that  is  Age)  destroys  the  best  understanding. 

In  my  Airing  I  went  yesterday,  to  see  Sr  John  Barnard, 
and  found  that  good  and  great  Man,  almost  a  Child,  unable  to 
speak  much,  remember  anything,  or  help  himself.  I  came 
from  him  very  melancholy,  loving  the  man,  and  thinking  how 
near  I  was  to  his  condition,  for  I  am  within  a  few  months  as 
old  as  he  is.  Lord  Hardwicke  is  the  other  Instance  of  a  great 
Mans  losing  his  senses,  when  he  desires  to  have  all  his  family 
ruined,  rather  than  not  have  the  D.  of  Newcastle,  once  more 
at  the  head  of  this  Country,  and  the  Treasury,  and  yet  I  do 
not  find,  he  has  been  anywhere  at  School  since  to  learn  a  little 
more  arithmetick,  than  he  knew  before.  I  never  wrote  so 
long  a  letter  in  my  Life,  and  have  scarce  room  to  tell  you  how 
truly  I  am  yrs. 


From  Lord  Lyttelton 

Curzon  Street,  Nov.  8. 

Ld  Hardwicke  is  still  in  danger.  If  I  lose  him  I  shall 
lose  not  only  a  dear  and  honourd  Friend,  but  the  surest  Guide 
of  my  Steps  through  the  dark  paths  of  that  unpleasing  political 
Labyrinth  which  lies  before  me.  But  God  be  thankd  Ld 
Bath  is  well  and  jolly.  I  dined  with  him  yesterday  in  company 
with  your  Father,  and  it  is  hard  to  say  which  seem’d  youngest, 
except  that  his  Lordship  shewed  some  concern  at  the  perilous 
state  of  his  Country  ;  whereas  your  Father,  like  Prince  Hall 
in  Shakespear,  daffed  the  World  aside  and  bid  it  pass.  Nay, 
he  told  us  he  was  so  happy  that  he  could  not  make  use  of  any 
form  of  Prayer  except  thanksgivings,  having  nothing  to  pray 
for.  He  made  me  a  visit  this  morning,  which  I  shall  with 
great  pleasure  repay  tomorrow.  Besides  the  entertainment  of 
his  company,  it  delights  me  to  think,  that  coming  from  such 


72 


AN  INDOLENT  NIGHTCAP 


1763 


a  Father  you  have  an  hereditary  Right  to  juvenile  spirits  at 
threescore.  But  in  the  meanwhile  pray  take  care  that  the 
Cold  of  Northumberland  does  not  blast  them  in  their  Prime. 
Poor  Domville  !  I  grieve  for  him — He  loved  You  ;  he 
loved  Ld  Bath  ;  he  loved  Mankind — — 

Matthew  Robinson  was  a  great  coffee-house 
character  ;  a  gay  and  thoroughly  selfish  old  bon 
vivant ,  full  of  wit  and  tavern  camaraderie,  but  caring 
not  a  whit  for  the  misfortunes  of  others.  He  had 
long  deputed  all  family  cares  to  his  eldest  son,  and 
amused  himself  with  painting  and  club  life,  sedulously 
eschewing  every  thought  of  worry  or  discomfort. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  whose  devotion  to  Lord  Bath 
sometimes  got  the  better  of  her  judgement,  was 
moved  by  the  political  excitement  of  the  times  to 
urge  his  octogenarian  Lordship  to  re-enter  the  active 
arena,  in  a  long  appeal,  of  which  the  finale  may  be 
quoted  : 

oh  that  I  could  throw  papers  into  a  certain  window, 

Pulteney,  thou  sleep’ st,  awake  and  see  thyself ; 

Shall  Brittain  .  .  .  speak,  write,  redress. 

This  I  would  do,  not  to  seduce  him  into  conspiracy  but 
that  he  might  dash  conspiracy  ;  not  to  incite  to  treason  but 
to  prevent  rebellions  ;  not  to  invite  him  to  meetings  with  men 
of  such  purposes  that  they  must  hide  their  faces  even  from  darkness , 
but  to  disperse  and  defeat  seditious  cabals.  I  had  rather  the 
Duke  of  Marlborough’s  helmet  had  been  made  a  housewifes 
skillet  the  morning  of  the  battle  of  Blenheim,  than  a  certain 
person  should  stay  at  home  in  his  indolent  night  cap  the  first 

day  of  business  in  the  H  :  of  L - ,  and  if  he  is  there,  with 

such  powers  in  the  field,  to  stand  neuter  during  the  important 
contention  would  be  unpardonable.  ...  Far  happier  is  the 
task  of  defending  a  Peace  that  is  just,  honourable,  and  necessary, 
and  to  shew  you  that  my  Senator  is  not  quite  in  the  pitiable 
condition  of  Appius  Claudius,  I  must  transcribe  part  of  a 
letter  I  received  by  the  last  post,  from  an  old  and  intimate 
friend  of  mine,  who  had  the  honour  of  dining  at  the  Hotel 
of  a  great  man  in  Piccadilly.  “  I  never  saw  such  eyes  in  my 
life,  I  had  never  taken  such  notice  of  them  till  that  time,  owing 
to  the  situation  he  was  in,  being  placed  between  the  light  and 


1763 


INGLORIOUS  NEUTER 


73 


me,  and  I  never  saw  any  equal  them  in  vivacity,  and  what  is 
surprizing,  with  a  lustre  undiminished  by  age.  So  it  is  with 
his  mind  etc.”  I  leave  out  what  might  appear  compliment, 
but  I  will  transcribe  what  may  be  exhortation,  “  Surely  it  is 
in  his  power  to  be  a  Father  to  his  Country  ;  if  in  the  danger 
it  is  in,  he  does  not  exert  himself,  he  will  have  much  to  answer 
for.”  These  remarks  were  made  by  a  man  ;  your  Lordship 
knows  women  never  look  you  full  in  the  face.  Speak,  write, 
redress.  Pray  in  your  next,  answer  as  Brutus  does.  Am  I 
entreated  then  to  speak,  etc. 

Mr.  Chace  Pryses  salmon  was  a  tribute  worthy  to  be  offerd 
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant.  I  fancy  he  has  read  the  new  play 
of  le  droit  du  Seigneur,  and  has  a  mind  to  gather  the  quit  rents 
in  your  absence.  I  believe  it  would  be  a  stewardship  much  to 
his  taste.  [Line  obliterated.]  I  wonder  which  of  our  witts  is 
well  enough  read  in  the  Psalms  to  borrow  a  bon  mot  from  them. 
Among  the  serious  I  have  heard  the  lamentations  and  denuncia¬ 
tions  of  all  the  sad  and  woefull  Prophets  on  the  same  occasion. 

But  Lord  Bath  was  not  to  be  drawn,  and  begged, 
quite  unheroically  and  prosaically,  to  be  excused  : 

Fry  day  Noon,  No<vr.  11th. 

Wilks’s  affair  will  certainly  be  brought  on,  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  and  he  will  probably  be  expell’d  ;  Objections 
are  to  be  made  in  our  House,  to  passages  in  the  Kings  Speech, 
where  he  mentions  anything  of  Peace,  or  Publick  measures, 
and  these  two  points  may  very  possibly  keep  us  sitting  til  ten, 
or  eleven  at  night.  God  be  thanked  I  find  myself  as  well 
able,  as  the  strongest  of  them  to  resist  the  fatigue  of  such  an 
attendance,  but  as  I  do  not  like  anything  we  are  doing,  or 
likely  to  do  ;  I  shall  take  no  public  part,  blaming  in  my  heart, 

the  violence,  and  virulence  of  the  Opposition  to  our  good  K - 

and  not  hoping  for  much  good  from  the  Abilities  of  our  present 
set  of  Ministers.  I  own  it  is  shameful  to  appear  in  such  times 
as  these,  an  inglorious  Neuter,  but  at  my  time  of  day,  and 
where  there  is  so  little  probability  of  doing  any  good,  one 
may  be  excused  for  not  meddling,  and  for  ought  I  know  the 
Wisest  way,  may  be  to  sitt  stil,  and  see  what  time  and  events 
may  produce.  Nothing  can  save  this  Nation  from  sinking, 
but  Schemes  of  Economy,  and  finding  out  some  method  of 
putting  our  enormous  Debt,  into  a  way  of  being  gradually 
reduced.  This  is  a  point  no  one  thinks  of,  and  what  is  worse, 
I  fear,  no  one  understands. 


74 


THE  ESSAY  ON  WOMAN 


1763 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Denton,  Nov.  the  22. 

A  good  old  Clergyman  in  this  neighbourhood  brought  his 
Son,  lately  returned  from  the  Havannah,  to  see  me  this  after¬ 
noon  ;  who  upon  talking  of  Mr.  Wilkes,  told  me,  that  the 
blasphemy  he  had  heard  repeated  from  the  poem  read  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  was  a  translation  of  a  most  infamous  poem  he 
had  seen  in  France,  when  it  was  burnt  by  the  hands  of  the 
common  hangman.  What  was  said  concerning  the  cross  was 
borrow’d  from  the  French,  and  also  the  abuse  on  the  Virgin 
Mary.  There  are  some  few  copies  of  this  wretched  French 
piece  in  London.  What  must  a  man  be,  who  will  steal 
blasphemy  ?  How  poor  a  proportion  does  such  a  mans  witt 
bear  to  his  wickedness  when  he  is  forced  to  steal  his  trash  ! 
But  Mr.  Wilkes  is  far  from  being  the  worst  of  our  scribblers, 
some  of  his  associates  are  more  vile,  as  they  endeavour  to 
conceal  themselves,  some  of  our  newspaper  writers  were 
strongly  connected  with  him,  and  it  is  pleasant  to  see  how  they 
represent  the  proceedings  against  him.  A  paper  I  read  yester¬ 
day,  takes  no  notice  of  the  poem,  but  attributes  all  the  censure 
to  what  was  said  in  the  North  Britton.  Another  says,  a  poem 
was  read  in  the  House  of  Lords,  where  it  has  incurred  censure, 
as  it  abuses  the  fair  sex  in  a  manner  hardly  to  be  credited  to  a 
Nation  where  the  Ladies  are  so  amiable  and  so  universally 
beloved.  Both  these  papers  represent  the  duel  in  a  strange 
manner.  .  .  .  My  Lord  Bath  sent  me  a  charming  account 
of  what  pass’d  in  the  house  of  Lords  and  Commons,  in  his 
observations  there  is  always  the  wisdom  of  age,  but  in  his 
narrations  the  vivacity  of  youth.  What  compact  has  he  made 
with  time  that  he  brings  him  the  gifts  of  the  latter  season 
without  taking  away  those  of  the  earlier  ? 

Peg  Wharton,  to  whom  there  are  several  references 
in  these  letters,  eluded  the  editor’s  research  for  some 
time,  till  a  tiny  tract  at  the  British  Museum,  Three 
Wonderful  Yorkshire  Characters ,  by  W.  Grainge,  fur¬ 
nished  some  particulars  ;  from  which  it  appears  that 
this  eccentric  old  lady  was  one  of  the  Whartons  of 
Skelton  Castle  in  Cleveland,  who  lived  chiefly  at  York 
and  Scarborough,  and  latterly  at  Thirsk.  She  was 
short  and  stout,  had  a  fortune  of  £ 200,000 ,  was 


1763 


PEG  WHARTON 


75 


liberal  in  private  charities,  but  set  all  conventional 
usage  at  defiance.  From  her  habit  of  sending  out  for 
a  pennyworth  of  cream,  strawberries,  or  other  deli¬ 
cacies,  she  became  known  as  “  Peg  Pennyworth,” 
under  which  title  Foote  drew  her  character  in  a  farce, 
which  she  insisted  on  seeing,  and  declared,  laughing, 
that  they  had  done  her  justice.  Many  quaint  stories 
are  told  of  her  parsimony  and  eccentric  ways.  Having 
made  a  pie  which  her  footman  and  coachman  both 
demurred  to  carrying  to  the  bakehouse,  she  ordered 
them  to  bring  her  coach  round,  was  driven  there  in 
state  by  both,  handed  the  pie  to  the  pastrycook,  and 
then  sent  her  carriage  back  to  fetch  it  when  baked, 
congratulating  her  servants  on  having  “  kept  their 
places,  to  drive  and  to  wait.”  As  Mrs.  Montagu 
records  in  the  following  letter,  she  gave  her  nephew 
half  her  fortune,  and  went  to  reside  with  the  widow  of 
a  clergyman  at  Thirsk,  recompensing  the  poor  lady  by 
treating  her  daughters  to  an  occasional  drive  in  her 
carriage.  The  widow,  finding  that  Peg  showed  no 
signs  of  terminating  her  visit  or  supporting  her 
expenses,  appealed  to  the  nephew,  who  begged  her  to 
let  his  aunt  have  her  way,  and  he  would  pay  her  £200 
a  year  while  she  remained,  and  also  make  her  an 
annuity  for  life.  And  here  Mrs.  Wharton  remained 
for  the  rest  of  her  days,  dying  in  1791  at  the  age 
of  103. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

I  heard  an  anecdote  of  Peg  Wharton  the  other  day,  which 
differring  a  good  deal  from  those  generally  related  of  her, 
deserves  mentioning,  were  it  only  for  the  sake  of  variety,  but 
it  has  a  better  claim  to  be  preserved  from  obscurity.  I  thought 
her  dead,  but  find  she  is  still  pleine  de  vie.  Last  Autumn  her 
Nephew  made  her  a  visit,  which  he  seldom  did  ;  “Young 
man,  said  she,  I  have  not  seen  you  a  long  time,  I  should 
be  glad  to  see  you  oftener,  however  do  not  fail  coming  next 
new  years  day,  I  shall  have  something  to  say  to  you  !  ”  Not 
expecting  much  pleasure  from  anything  she  wou’d  say,  without 


PRIVILEGE 


1763 


76 

going  near  her  in  the  interim,  he,  however,  with  no  great 
gout  went  on  that  day  she  had  appointed,  when  to  his  infinite 
surprize  she  made  him  a  present  of  the  small  sum  of  an  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  that  is  she  made  over  to  him  that  sum  in 
stock.  I  apprehend  he  is  Son  to  her  Neice  Miss  Stevenson, 
who  you  may  perhaps  remember  with  her  at  Bath  in  the  year 
40.  His  Mother  I  believe  has  been  long  dead. 

From  Charles  Lyttelton,  Bishop  of  Carlisle 

Old  Burl.  Street,  No<vr. 

You  want  to  know  how  the  World  goes.  I  am  neither 
Cabinet  nor  Privy  Councillor,  so  can  only  tell  you  what  every 
Bystander  sees.  My  good  Friend  and  his  Collegues  have  a 
considerable  majority  in  Park  and  I  think  verily  will  stand 
firm  in  their  high  offices  this  Session,  this  day  the  great 
question  of  Parity  Privilege  is  debated  in  the  H.  of  Com. 
’tis  now  Ten  at  night,  and  whether  they  are  up  or  not  I  can’t 
be  certain.  The  Cyder  Act  is  to  be  alter’d,  and  not  repeal’d, 
and  I  find  the  moderate  People  of  the  Cyder  Compy®  in  Parlt, 
declare  themselves  satisfied  with  the  proposed  alterations. 

Our  House  has  address’d  the  King  to  order  a  prosecution 
agst  the  Author  or  Authors  of  that  most  blasphemous  obscene 
Tract,  wch  Wilkes  was  proved  the  Author  of  at  the  Bar  of 
the  House  the  first  day  of  the  Session.  We  only  wait  for  his 
coming  abroad  to  summon  him  before  us  (with  the  consent  of 
the  Commons  if  he  be  not  expell’d  their  House  first)  and  then 
to  proceed  agst  him  for  breach  of  Privilege  on  behalf  of  the 
B  of  Gloster.  .  .  . 

The  King  has  given  poor  Ld  Effinghams  fine  Regiment  to 
Ld  Cantelupe,  wch  everybody  approves  as  Cantelupe  is  the 
favourite  of  everybody  and  wants  such  an  addition  to  his 
Income - 


From  Lord  Bath 

Dec.  $th. 

The  Hereditary  Prince  when  he  sees  us  will  have  a  strange 
opinion  of  this  Nation,  which  he  now  thinks  so  well  of,  but 
he  is  not  to  stay  here  long.  He  is  to  be  in  England  the  first 
week  in  Jany  and  to  be  married  [to  the  King’s  sister,  Princess 
Augusta]  the  day  before  the  Queens  Birthday  which  is  the 
17th  of  Jany.  The  House  of  Lords  is  summond  this  day  to 
consider  what  measures  are  proper  to  take,  to  support  the 


1763  THE  BURNING  OF  NO.  45  77 

authority  and  dignity  of  Parlt,  and  to  suppress  such  insolencies, 
but  I  fear  a  Jury  in  Westminster  Hall  will  give  Wilkes’s  cause 
in  favour  of  him  and  the  Messengers,  and  perhaps  the  Damages 
he  demands,  which  is  5000/. 

The  public  burning  of  No.  4s  by  the  common 
hangman  in  Cheapside  was  ordered  for  December  4, 
but  resulted  in  a  riotous  fiasco,  the  condemned  paper 
being  rescued  from  the  Sheriff’s  officers,  and  a  boot 
and  petticoat — scandalously  emblematic  of  Lord  Bute 
and  the  Princess  Augusta — burnt  in  its  place.  Under¬ 
secretary  Robert  Wood  had  seized  Wilkes’s  papers 
under  Lord  Halifax’s  general  warrant,  and  was  fined 
for  trespass.  Philip  Carteret  Webb,  as  joint-solicitor 
to  the  Treasury,  had  led  the  prosecution  of  Wilkes. 

Lord  Bath  writes  jocularly  : 

This  day  Mr.  Wilkes’  paper  is  to  be  burnt  by  the  common 
hangman.  I  must  tell  a  bon  mot  of  the  hangman  who  ex¬ 
pressed  an  unwillingness  to  burn  the  paper.  He  said  he  had 
much  rather  hang  twenty  North  Britons  than  burn  one  ! 


From  Lord  Lyttelton 

Dec.  10. 

I  presume  you  have  heard  of  the  Riot  in  the  City  to  prevent 
the  burning  of  Wilkes’s  Papers,  in  which  the  Sheriff  Harley 
behaved  himself  with  as  much  intrepidity  as  the  Premier 
President  Mole ,  whom  Cardinal  de  Ritz  extolls  so  much.  He 
has  received  the  Thanks  of  the  House  of  Lords,  and  we  are 
endeavouring  to  discover  who  those  Gentlemen  were  that 
encouraged  and  excited  a  hired  Mob  to  this  Outrage  against 
the  authority  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  out  of  the  Balconies 
adjacent.  The  Cry  of  the  Mob  was  IVilkes  and  Liberty , 
and  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  Ld  Temple.  Mr.  Wood’s 
Trial  ended  in  a  Verdict  of  £1000  Damages  from  him  to 
Wilkes  ;  and  I  am  credibly  informed  that  by  a  subscription 
rais’d  for  Wilkes  his  Debts  are  paid,  and  he  will  have  about 
ten  thousand  pounds  in  his  Pocket.  Churchill  is  gone  to 
France,  but  has  left  behind  him  many  Satires,  and  will  be  also 
enrichd  by  his  Works.  Thus  do  these  Men  find  that  Ungodli¬ 
ness  is  great  Gain.  I  hear  Wilkes  says,  he  would  not  take 


78 


CHARLES  CHURCHILL 


1763 


£20000  for  the  Damages  he  shall  get  of  all  the  different 
persons  concernd  in  robbing  his  House.  To  say  the  truth, 
tho’  one  is  sorry  that  any  Reformation  of  a  Grievance  should 
turn  to  his  benefitt,  I  can’t  but  approve  of  the  check  given  to 
the  illegal  and  dangerous  Practise  of  violating  the  safety  of 
Men’s  Houses,  and  seizing  their  Papers,  for  Libels.  Such 
a  breach  of  the  fundamental  Laws  of  Society  can  only  be 
warranted  in  cases  of  High  Treason. 

The  Friend  of  mine  who  told  you,  that  1  was  nothing  in 
Faction  gave  a  true  character  of  me,  and  he  may  add,  if  he 
pleases,  that  I  am  nothing  in  a  Court.  What  therefore  have  I 
to  do  in  the  Political  World  ?  Certainly  nothing  ;  but,  like 
the  Chorus  in  the  Ancient  Tragedies,  give  sober  precepts  of 
morality,  which  none  of  the  Actors  regard.  However  if  You 
applaud  I  am  content. 

To  this  Mrs.  Montagu  replied  : 

I  never  could  read  twenty  lines  of  Churchill’s  poetry  at  a 
time  ;  it  is  all  patchwork.  There  is  hardly  a  complete 
sentence  in  his  works,  the  second  line  is  very  rarely  connected 
with  the  first.  He  has  taken  scraps  from  every  English  poet 
from  Robert  de  Langland  the  predecessors  of  Chaucer,  to  the 
present  times,  but  especially  from  the  poets  of  the  black  letter 
and  he  has  darkened,  hardened,  and  stiffened  his  own  com¬ 
positions  with  a  mixture  of  Persius  and  Juvenal.  His  admired 
picture  of  famine  is  stolen  from  Robert  Sackville  first  Earl  of 
Dorset,  in  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  ...  I  should  only 
detest  Churchill  the  more  if  I  thought  him  a  man  of  genius, 
but  true  genius  never  dwells  with  such  base  vices  as  he  was 
tainted  with.  I  take  Churchill  to  be  of  the  true  serpent 
kind,  and  I  do  not  wonder  he  stung  the  bosom  that  received 
and  cherished  him.  You  may  hear  a  pittman  swear  an  oath 
now  and  then,  but  blasphemy  sedition  and  obscenity  from 
members  of  Parliament  and  parsons  is  far  more  shocking.  I 
have  had  a  great  contempt  for  mankind  ever  since  the  encourage¬ 
ment  of  Tristram  Shandy. 

The  juvenile  Lord  Bath  continued  his  puns  and  fun : 

If  you  will  admit  me  to  your  Table,  I  can  dine  with  you  ; 
thus  shall  I  spend  the  whole  day  agreably  wth  you,  and  in  the 
Evening,  perhaps  I  may  take  a  Hart ,  or  who  can  tell  perhaps 
a  Hurt  some  other  way,  but  you  hate  a  pun  so  I  will  say  no 


1763 


CEPHALALGY 


79 


more  of  that.  But  I  must  tell  you  a  Comical  Story  happend, 
as  I  lay  abed  this  morning.  I  call’d  for  a  Footman,  to  send 
him  wth  a  message  to  Mrs.  Carteret,  to  know  how  her  Headach 
was,  and  by  way  of  Humour  I  was  at  least  six  minutes  teaching 
him  to  pronounce  the  word  Cephalalgy  (which  I  put  into 
English  Characters,  that  you  may  understand  it).  At  length 
he  learnt  it  pretty  well,  and  as  he  repeated  it,  I  found  he  smiled, 
which  made  me  fancy  he  imagined  there  was  some  roguish 
conceit,  concealed  under  that  naughty  word.  My  Discretion, 
therefore  prevented  my  Civility,  and  I  forbid  his  going,  saying 
I  should  meet  her  at  dinner,  and  then  I  should  know  how  her 
Headach  was  ;  and  so  for  fear  of  injuring  her  Character  I 
would  not  enquire  farther  after  her  Cephalalgy. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Dec.  \th. 

I  had  letters  this  morning  from  my  Ld  Bath  and  Ld  Lyttelton, 
informing  me  the  House  of  Lords  had  determined  privilege 
did  not  extend  to  seditious  libels,  Ld  Bath  tells  me  Ld  Lyttelton 
spoke  most  incomparably  well  and  with  great  applause,  he  made 
a  grave  and  noble  remonstrance  against  the  immorality  and 
licentiousness,  of  the  age.  I  hope  the  disgrace  Wilkes  will 
incur  for  his  blasphemy  and  this  last  instance  of  Churchills 
wickedness  in  running  away  with  the  daughter  of  his  bene¬ 
factor,  who  has  kept  him  from  starving,  will  discountenance 
the  ribbald  freedom  of  writing  and  conversation  for  a  time. 
Churchill  is  a  married  man,  the  poor  girl  is  under  15  years 
of  age  whom  he  debauch’d  ;  she  is  sent  home  to  her  unhappy 
father  Sr  Henry  Cheere.  Mr.  Kidgells  pamphlet  shows  one 
the  horrid  degree  of  blasphemy  in  the  several  forms  and  it 
intimates  the  obscene  purposes  to  which  it  was  applied.  Wilkes’s 
friends  say  he  has  done  harm  in  exposing  the  blasphemy. 
Miss  Blandy’s  trial  put  a  wicked  young  woman  on  poisoning 
her  aunt  with  arsenick,  but  must  wickedness  and  crime  be 
unpunished  because  it  is  dangerous  to  show  its  mode  of  acting  ? 
It  is  supposed  many  have  had  a  hand  in  these  infamous  poems. 
Mr.  Popes  universal  prayer  is  obscenely  applied,  and  also  the 
dying  Xtians  address  to  his  soul  and  the  sacred  solemn  words, 
Oh  death  where  is  thy  sting,  oh  grave  where  is  thy  victory  ! 
What  blasphemy  and  lewdness  !  I  rejoice  in  this  decision 
concerning  privilege,  the  reins  of  government  are  too  slack, 
and  if  sedition  and  blasphemy  had  had  their  assylums  what 


8o 


MOB  LAW 


1763 


had  become  of  publick  order  and  private  decency  ?  The 
majority  was  3  to  1.  Mr.  Yorke  has  made  a  noble  figure, 
shewn  the  deepest  knowledge  of  the  laws,  and  Lord  Mansfield 
the  same.  Happy  Lord  Hardwicke  who  by  living  to  this 
day  is  assured  he  leaves  a  son  to  defend  the  laws,  and  laws  to 
defend  his  son  !  there  is  now  a  fence  made  round  legal 
administration.  The  news  paper  still  have  Wilkes  for  their 
Hero  ;  and  also  his  ally  Churchill. 

Kidgell’s  Paper  was  “  A  Genuine  Narrative  of  a 
scandalous  libel  entitled  an  Essay  on  Woman.” 
Churchill  backed  the  cause  of  Wilkes  by  a  turgid 
flood  of  violent  satires  before  escaping  after  him  to 
Boulogne,  where  he  soon  afterwards  died  of  fever. 
Lord  Bath  reported  the  No.  45  episode  as  follows  : 

From  Ford  Bath 

Dec.  5. 

Yesterday  when  the  Sheriff  and  other  Officers  of  the  City, 
were  going  to  Burn  the  North  Briton,  in  pursuance  of  the 
directions  of  both  Houses  of  Park,  a  pretty  large  Mobb  arose, 
insulted  the  Magistrates,  threw  about  the  faggots  of  the  bon 
fire,  broke  the  Sheriffs  Coach  to  pieces,  wounded  him  in  the 
face,  and  told  him  they  cared  not  a  farthing  for  what  the 
Houses  ordered,  but  the  Paper  should  not  be  burnt.  What 
will  be  done  to  resent,  and  punish,  this  insolent  usage  of 
Parliament  I  know  not,  but  such  an  insult  on  Government 
never  was  heard  of  before.  It  is  little  less  than  an  act  of 
Park  the  mob  have  resisted,  for  there  was  an  unanimous  consent 
of  both  Houses,  to  burn  an  infamous  Paper,  but  our  superior 
the  Mobb,  would  not  suffer  it  to  be  done.  The  thing  ordered, 
in  my  opinion,  is  a  very  simple  ridiculous  thing  ;  for  the 
burning  publickly  of  any  Paper,  only  makes  it  more  sought 
after,  and  the  Par*  becomes  the  publishers,  of  the  thing  they 
mean  to  punish  and  suppress.  On  Tuesday  Wilkes’s  tryal 
with  the  Secretarys  of  State  and  Mr.  Wood,  and  Carteret 
Webb  comes  on,  when  I  suppose  a  vast  Mobb  will  attend 
likewise  in  Westminster  Hall,  and  an  endeavour  will  be  made 
to  get  him  acquitted  by  a  Jury.  What  all  these  riotous  pro¬ 
ceedings  may  end  in,  I  cannot  say,  but  I  fear  we  shall  soon 
have  many  bloody  noses,  and  great  disturbances  in  this 
Kingdom. 


JOHN  WILKES 
By  J.  Miller 


i763  MRS.  MONTAGU  PLAYS  QUADRILLE  8i 


From  Lord  Lyttelton 

London,  Dec.  io. 

Ld  Hardwicke  is  so  much  better,  that  there  is  hope  of  his 
Life.  If  he  recovers,  he  will  owe  it  to  a  Quack  Medicine. 
But  our  Body  Politick  has  been  almost  destroyd  by  Quacks, 
and  wants  a  regular  Physician  to  restore  it  to  Health,  which 
makes  his  Lordship’s  Recovery  of  great  importance  to  the 
Publick,  as  well  as  to  his  Friends.  It  seems  to  me  that  he  alone 
can  apply  the  proper  Remedies  to  our  present  Distempers  ; 
and  I  am  willing  to  hope  that  Providence  saves  him  for  that 
purpose. 

Mrs.  Montagu  returned  from  Denton  to  London 
in  the  middle  of  December,  leaving  her  husband  in 
the  north.  Lord  Bath  was  an  inveterate  card-player, 
though  not  a  heavy  gambler.  Mrs.  Montagu  had 
steadfastly  held  out  against  card  tables  at  her  coteries 
and  assemblies  ;  but  her  devotion  to  his  Lordship  was 
rapidly  demoralising  her,  and  it  is  evident  from  letters 
of  this  year  that  she  had  not  only  provided  him  with 
facilities  for  play,  but  had  been  learning  the  wicked 
pastime  herself,  upon  which  he  now  chaffs  her  thus  : 

Is  it  possible,  you  should  realy  have  playd  at  Quadrille 
for  twelve  pence  a  Fish  ?  consider  Madam  poor  Mr.  Montagu, 
is  labouring  to  encrease  his  Estate  in  the  North,  whilst  you 
are  squandering  it  away  in  Town,  and  at  Quadrille  for  a 
shilling  a  Fish  ;  why  at  your  rate  of  Play,  you  may  lose  an 
entire  Colliery  in  a  months  time  ;  a  good  Woman  ought  not 
to  be  always  amusing  herself  with  the  Devils  books,  and  a 
great  Genius  is  either  above,  or  below  gaming,  I  dont  know 
which  ;  so  that  I  am  sure,  you  ought  to  leave  it  off. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Mr.  Pitt  is  to  be  at  the  House  on  thursday  next,  and  then 
there  will  be  more  debating  about  Mr.  Wilkes.  I  do  not 
hear  who  Sr  Jacob  Downing  has  left  his  money  to.  I  am 
in  hopes  Mr.  Benjamin  Wright  is  now  provided  for.  Mr. 
Virette  who  you  saw  in  Holland  and  the  young  Duke  of 
Pecquigny  quarelld  in  the  Opera  House  the  other  night,  the 
VOL.  I  G 


82 


CHRISTMAS  AT  WOBURN 


1763 


Duke  not  caring  to  pay  Virette  the  money  he  had  lost  to  him 
at  play.  This  young  french  nobleman  is  son  to  the  Duke 
de  Chaulnes,  who  is  governor  of  Picardy,  he  is  not  a  young 
man  of  good  character  nor  very  brave.  However  they  were 
both  put  under  arrest  for  forms  sake.  I  believe  Ld  Cardigans 
cause  will  be  before  the  Council  this  day  sennight.  Lord 
Hardwicke  is  extreamly  well  again  so  there  will  not  immediately 
be  a  vacancy  of  the  treasurership.  The  mob  are  much  vexd 
at  the  departure  of  the  Prince  of  Brunswick  for  whom  they 
had  conceived  a  violent  liking,  and  if  he  shd  be  lost  they  will 
be  outrageous.  I  never  thought  I  shd  live  to  see  German 
Princes  the  favorites  of  the  Mob,  but  Mr.  Pitt  could  make 
the  Grand  Seigneur  or  Sophi  of  Persia  so. 

To  her  Husband 

Saturday  the  31  {Dec.  1767,  ?) 

The  holydays  give  a  kind  of  political  truce.  The  most 
intimate  friends  of  Mr.  W — kes  say  he  will  return  by  the 
14th,  and  Lord  Temple  shews  a  letter  from  him  to  that  purpose  ; 

but  as  Mr.  W - did  not  to  any  one  declare  his  purpose  of 

going  abroad,  and  caused  it  to  be  reported  he  was  gone  to  Mr. 
Humphrey  Coates  in  the  Country,  his  going  away  has  the 
air  of  a  flight.  Perhaps  he  thinks  it  safest  to  stay  abroad  unless 
his  party  here  would  promise  to  protect  him,  and  I  believe  Mr. 
Pitt  will  hardly  do  that  in  any  ouvert  manner,  as  he  has  spoken 
of  him  with  contempt.  It  was  imagined  there  was  a  sort 
of  schism  among  the  Ministers  on  the  subject  of  the  Cyder 
Act,  but  Mr.  Grenville,  Ld  Hallifax,  and  Ld  Sandwich,  are 
all  gone  amicably  to  Wooburn  to  spend,  not  a  merry,  but  a 
political  Christmas.  I  should  rather  wish  myself  of  a  party 
of  the  ancient  plumb  porridge  days,  when  Christmas  was 
celebrated  by  unmeaning  mirth  and  idle  gambols,  than  in  the 
refined  manner  of  these  times,  when  there  is  suspicion,  design, 
fear,  and  falsehood  of  the  company.  The  Town  is  very  empty, 
because  it  is  the  fashion  to  seem  to  be  of  too  much  importance 
in  the  political  world  to  be  out  of  Town  but  on  holydays. 
The  death  of  the  elector  of  Saxony  causes  speculations,  some 
think  his  brother  Prince  Xavier  may  be  nominated  by  the 
Empress  of  Russia  and  France  ;  he  has  been  in  the  french 
service  and  is  more  alert  and  military  than  the  late  elector  ; 
who  from  infirmity,  could  not  get  on  horse  back  ;  a  great 
defect  in  the  opinion  of  the  Poles,  who  love  martial  talents 


1763 


THE  WEDDING  GARMENT 


83 

better  then  civil.  The  news  papers  talk  of  changes  in  our 
administration,  but  I  do  not  hear  of  any  such  thing.  While 
they  can  carry  every  vote  by  a  great  majority  there  is  certainly 
no  necessity  for  the  Ministers  to  resign,  and  I  believe  you  do 
not  suspect  them  of  so  much  publick  spirit  as  to  do  it  because 
they  have  not  the  opinion  of  the  publick  ;  and  that  government 
suffers  in  every  part  and  limb  by  the  want  of  publick  confidence. 
The  funds  and  commerce  do  not  find  the  usual  effects  of  a 
Peace.  We  do  not  flourish  at  home,  we  do  not  command 
abroad,  in  the  manner  we  had  reason  to  hope  from  such 
brilliant  success  and  such  extensive  conquests.  .  .  . 


To  her  Husband 

1763. 

I  shall  not  be  at  the  wedding.  I  had  a  gown  embroidering 
at  a  cheap  rate.  The  Queen  wish’d  to  see  it,  I  thought  it 
ungenerous  to  make  the  workwoman  reserve  it  for  me  at  a 
small  price  if  she  cd  get  a  great  one  for  it,  so  the  Queen  fell 
in  love  with  it,  gives  an  130  guineas  for  it  ;  in  order  to  have 
it  cheap  I  let  the  person  have  the  advantage  of  working  at 
leisure  times,  and  it  has  been  3  years  doing  ;  it  was  the  most 
beautifull  thing  I  ever  saw,  and  wd  have  been  [remainder  of 
this  tragic  letter  is  missing]. 

Wilkes  slipped  quietly  off  to  Paris  before  Christ¬ 
mas  1763,  having  been  enabled  by  his  duel  with 
Martin  and  his  wound  to  postpone  appearance  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  to  which  he  was  cited  to  answer 
for  the  North  Briton  No.  45  as  a  seditious  libel. 

The  wedding  responsible  for  the  tragedy  of  the 
embroidered  gown  was  that  of  the  Princess  Augusta, 
the  King’s  sister,  to  Charles  William,  Hereditary  Prince 
of  Brunswick- Wolfenbiittel,  which  took  place  on 
January  17,  1764. 


1764 

LORD  BATH’S  DEATH - THE  BRUNSWICK  WEDDING 

Lady  Hervey.  Hereditary  Prince  of  Brunswick.  George  Selwyn.  No.  45. 
The  Royal  Wedding.  Mr.  Finch  and  Lady  Charlotte.  Prudery. 
Queen’s  Birthday  Court.  Sir  James  Macdonald.  General  Conway. 
Lord  Bath’s  chair.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  verses.  Lord  Bath  at  Shrews¬ 
bury.  His  return  to  London,  illness,  and  death.  Condolence. 
Winchester.  Voltaire.  Attacks  on  Lord  Bath’s  character.  His 
will.  Duchess  of  Beaufort.  Jemmy  Twitcher.  General  Pulteney. 
A  lecture  on  heads.  Churchill’s  death.  The  Primate  of  Ireland. 
Tom  Lyttelton’s  engagement. 


From  Ford  Bath 

Jany.  \th. 

I  shall  not  be  able  to  get  out,  this  fine  morning,  til  after 
one  a  clock  ;  then  I  will  call  on  you  (if  you  like  it)  in  my 
Chariot  to  take  the  Air  in  Hyde  Park,  and  bring  you  back  to 
dinner  at  my  House,  and  you  may  if  you  please  send  to  Lord 
Lyttelton  to  meet  you. 

I  sent  this  morning  my  excuses  to  Lady  Hervey,  for  having 
taken  no  notice  of  her  Message  ;  and  if  a  certain  Person  of 
my  acquaintance  saw  the  letter  her  Jealousy  would  wish  it 
burn’t  by  the  hands  of  the  Common  Hang  Man  ;  to  say 
truth  there  is  Fire  enough  in  it,  to  sett  it  all  in  a  Blaize,  without 
any  additional  Fagots  ;  I  tell  her  Ladyship  that  she  must 
excuse,  the  unusual  warmth  of  Love,  since  the  Waters  at 
Spa,  had  sett  me  all  on  fire,  and  instead  of  a  happy  New  year 
which  she  wished  me,  I  desired  but  one  happy  minute,  which 
she  had  it  in  her  power  to  give  me,  whenever  she  pleased. 

Mrs.  Montagu  responded  to  this  commatic  note  : 

I  could  almost  forgive  your  Lordship’s  disloyalty  for  the 
sake  of  your  witt.  I  see  if  you  were  to  write  North  Brittons 

84 


i764  MOLLY  LEPELL  85 

none  but  the  Goddess  of  dullness  could  deliver  them  to  jack 
Ketch.  I  thought  your  Lordship  in  a  scrape,  from  which 
you  could  not  get  out  with  all  your  wisdom  ;  but  your  witt 
has  deliver’d  you,  and  I  suppose  you  will  be  more  in  favour 
than  ever  with  Lady  Hervey.  In  the  whole  compass  of  human 
language  there  was  but  the  words  happy  minute  that  could 
have  brought  your  Lordship  off.  ...  I  was  very  happy 
yesterday,  I  shall  be  very  happy  to  day,  the  destinies  are  very 
good  humoured  and  are  certainly  spinning  silk  for  me.  I  am 
delighted  with  your  note  to  Lady  Hervey,  but  your  Lordship 
is  certainly  the  most  abominable  Coquette  upon  Earth. 

Lady  Hervey  rallied  Lord  Bath  gaily  on  his  love 
for  Mrs.  Montagu  : 

“  I  shall  meet  you  at  dinner,”  he  writes.  “  I  have  en¬ 
closed  Lady  Herveys  card  to  remind  me.  Is  it  resignation 
or  burning  Jealousy  that  has  dictated  the  note  ?  There  is  one 
cant  word  in  it  that  I  must  explain  —  Burlacne  is  another 
word  for  a  Lover  in  the  Dialect  of  the  late  queens  maids  of 
Honour.” 

This  letter  of  Lord  Bath’s,  written  in  his  eightieth 
year  to  a  lady-love  of  sixty-four,  stirs  many  old  memories. 
For  Mary  Lepell,  who  shared  the  honours  for  wit 
and  beauty  at  court  with  Edith  Bellenden  and  Mary 
Pierrepont,  afterwards  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu, 
was  an  early  admiration  and  a  very  constant  friend 
of  William  Pulteney’s,  though  her  husband  and  he 
had  fought  a  much-celebrated  duel  in  1731,  in  the 
Green  Park,  over  a  reply,  attributed  to  Hervey,  to 
Pulteney’s  Craftsman  attacks  on  Walpole.  Hervey 
has  written  many  harsh  things  of  Pulteney  in  the 
Memoirs ,  yet  he  admitted  his  powers,  and  wished  him 
better  success  than  he  did  to  any  other  man  who 
put  in  for  the  reversion  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole’s  power  ; 
and  he  adds  that  “  Lady  Hervey  wished  him  still 
better  than  her  lord,  and  with  whom,  whenever  they 
met  in  third  places,  he  used  to  talk  with  great  friend¬ 
ship,  familiarity  and  confidence.”  Lord  Hervey  died 
in  1743,  and  his  widow  remained  to  the  end  Lord 


86  THE  HEREDITARY  PRINCE  ARRIVES  1764 


Bath’s  attached  and  valued  old  friend ;  indeed,  she 
seems  to  have  been  beloved  by  every  one  who  knew 
her. 

On  January  13  the  Hereditary  Prince  of  Bruns¬ 
wick,  who  had  been  detained  by  contrary  winds, 
arrived  in  England.  Writing  to  her  husband  at 
Denton  on  the  14th,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

The  Hereditary  Prince  arrived  yesterday.  Lord  Bath  is 
gone  to  Somerset  House  today  to  pay  his  devoirs  to  him  ;  the 
King  keeps  a  table  for  his  serene  Highness,  but  as  our  nobility 
are  numerous  and  all  could  not  be  entertained  at  it,  to  avoid 
distinctions  none  are  invited  except  the  nobility  of  the  King’s 
Household,  except  Lord  Bath,  whom  the  King  desires  to  dine 
with  his  serene  Highness  every  day.  ...  I  imagine  there  will 
be  a  vast  drawingroom  tomorrow  as  people  have  a  great  desire 
to  see  this  young  hero.  .  .  .  The  bets  concerning  Wilkes’ 
return  grow  very  brisk,  some  imagine  he  went  away  on  purpose 
to  give  occasion  to  bets  that  he  would  not  return,  and  go  halves 
with  them  who  lay’d  on  the  side  that  he  would,  but  it  is  a  new 
kind  of  finesse  and  I  hardly  give  credit  to  it.  When  faction 
carries  such  a  man  on  its  shoulders  he  becomes  eminent  ; 
when  he  serves  their  purposes  no  longer  he  drops  into  his 
original  littleness  and  insignificance. 

In  the  next  letter  she  says  : 

It  is  supposed  Wilkes  will  pretend  his  wound  prevents  his 
return,  but  probably  he  will  be  expelled. 

On  January  17  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  her 
husband  : 

I  have  been  in  the  greatest  and  most  brilliant  crowd  today 
that  I  ever  saw.  The  Courtiers  were  there  for  the  King, 
the  war  kettle  in  honour  of  the  Prince  of  Brunswick,  the 
beauties  to  show  themselves,  and  the  rest  of  the  world  to  see 
what  was  to  be  seen.  I  never  beheld  such  a  drawingroom 
and  probably  may  never  again  see  such  another,  for  I  love  not 
these  crowds,  but  I  could  not  avoid  going  as  the  Prince  had 
made  the  kindest  enquiries  after  me. 

In  a  letter  of  Lord  Bath’s  at  this  period,  to  Mrs. 


1764  GEORGE  SELWYN  87 

Montagu,  is  mention  of  Mr.  George  Selwyn,  the 
famous  wit : 

When  I  got  home  last  night  I  found  a  card  from  Mr. 
Selwyn  to  let  me  know  that  he  would  dine  with  me  this  day. 
I  send  you  notice  of  it  that  you  may  have  it  in  your  option, 
to  come  or  not  ;  for  my  part  I  see  no  impropriety  in  it  ;  do 
what  you  chuse  only  let  me  say  it  will  be  a  great  honour  and 
pleasure  to  me  if  you  come,  and  you  will  likewise  be  greatly 
entertained  by  George  Selwyn  who  has  much  drollery  belonging 
to  him  which  I  think  may  be  better  defined  by  that  vulgar 
expression  Funn  rather  than  the  more  refined  one  of  Witt. 


To  Mr.  Montagu 

I  could  not  get  a  full  and  perfect  account  of  the  proceedings 
of  the  House  of  Commons  till  last  night.  As  the  House  sat 
till  near  3  o  clock  on  Thursday  night  neither  the  members 
of  the  House,  nor  those  who  went  to  hear  them,  were  visiting 
about  in  the  morning.  The  persons  who  exerted  themselves 
in  favour  of  Mr.  Wilkes  were  Mr.  Onslow,  Mr.  Fitzherbert, 
Serjeant  Hewitt,  Mr.  James  Grenvile,  and  three  or  four  other 
young  men  whose  names  were  unknown  to  me  and  I  have 
forgotten  them.  The  speaker  desired  to  know  if  he  shd  read 
the  letter  he  had  received  from  Wilkes,  and  the  certificates 
from  his  surgeons  at  Paris  ;  then  much  time  was  taken  up  in 
the  proofs  of  his  having  wrote  the  North  Britton  no  45,  Mr. 
Beckford  divided  the  House  every  minute  to  gain  time,  and 
said  he  wd  hinder  their  proceeding  by  that  means  ;  but  at 
last  Wilkes’s  party  grew  tired  or  ashamed  of  that  method, 
and  would  not  divide.  The  printers  produced  a  letter  from 
Wilkes  concerning  this  North  Britton,  ordering  it  to  be  printed 
on  two  whole  sheets  of  paper,  ordering  an  advertisement 
relative  to  a  disbanded  soldier  to  be  printed  in  it,  and  then  a 
letter  following  this  advertisement  ;  all  these  circumstances 
related,  and  could  relate  only  to  the  famous  no  45,  all  other 
North  Brittons  being  examined  in  the  House,  and  none  answer¬ 
ing  to  this  description  but  the  one  in  question  ;  besides  that 
the  compositor  shewd  where  he  had  corrected  it  with  his  own 
hand,  and  his  letter  says  to  the  printer,  he  thinks  he  has  fill’d 
it  with  combustibles  ;  the  expression  of  an  incendiary  rather 
than  a  patriot.  Other  letters  appear  in  which  he  presses  the 
publication  of  his  Essay  on  Woman.  In  one  of  his  letters  he 


88 


THE  NORTH  BRITON 


1764 


says  he  is  angry  with  Hogarth  for  having  ridiculed  his  friends 
Temple  and  Pitt.  All  the  House  of  Commons  except  Mr. 
Fitzherbert  were  convinced  of  the  North  Britton  45  being 
written  by  Wilkes,  so  did  not  divide  about  his  expulsion,  but 
Mr.  Fitzherbert  declared  he  was  not  convinced.  Lord  Temple 
stood  by,  prompting  him  the  whole  time,  and  making  him  ask 
certain  questions  :  this  was  thought  irregular  in  a  Peer,  but 
not  taken  notice  of.  On  Tuesday  the  House  of  Lords  is  to 
meet  on  the  affair  of  the  essay  on  Woman.  It  appeared  that 
Mr  Wilkes  reprinted  all  the  North  Britton,  on  the  verdict 
given  against  the  messengers,  so  his  printing  it  could  have  been 
proved  if  the  reprinting  had  not.  The  War  Kettle  people 
make  great  court  to  the  Prince  of  Brunswick,  and  he  seems 
rather  pleased  with  it,  and  so  does  his  Princess.  The  yatchts 
are  orderd  for  Wensday,  which  is  lucky,  for  this  noble  pair 
wd  be  involved  in  our  factions  if  they  staid  here.  I  cannot 
say  but  it  gave  me  a  double  concern  to  see  the  people  who  had 

set  on  this  Wilkes  to  abuse  the  K - all  making  their  court 

on  the  birthday  ;  these  wretches  have  a  servility  in  their 
nature  which  makes  them  officious  courtiers  ;  they  are  void 
of  that  regard  to  the  laws  and  constitution  of  their  country 
which  should  make  them  respect  the  King  as  the  first  magistrate 
of  a  great  and  a  free  state.  They  will  abuse  him  in  print,  and 
then  lick  the  dust  under  his  feet. 

To  Mrs.  Vesey 

January  28 tk. 

Just  before  Christmass  I  set  out  for  London,  and  thought 
I  would  write  to  you  on  the  road,  and  send  you  a  winters 
pastoral  in  imitation  of  the  great  German  genius  Mr.  Gesner. 
But  alas  the  Hawthorns  were  all  under  water  ;  the  newborn 
lamb  was  drown’d  ;  the  robin  red  breast  would  not  sing  his 
christmass  carrol  ;  all  nature  was  drooping  and  forlorn  ;  no 
isicles  glisten’d  on  the  trees,  no  christalized  lake  or  river 
reflected  the  sunbeams.  We  were  envelloped  in  misty  rain 
and  in  a  melancholly  coach  and  six,  with  only  my  own  maid  ; 
I  pass’d  eight  days  in  the  dreary  journey  :  the  roads  hardly 
practicable,  the  waters  hardly  passable.  Imagine  whether  at 
the  end  of  such  days  journeys,  the  sight  of  the  red  nosed  landlord, 
and  the  fat  landlady  at  the  Blue  Boar  or  Green  Dragon  could 
revive  my  spirits  enough  to  make  me  a  correspondent  worthy 
Mrs.  Vesey  !  When  I  return’d  to  London  after  so  long  an 
absence  my  friends  visited  me  with  assiduity,  my  acquaintance 


i764  THE  ROYAL  WEDDING  89 

with  curiosity,  they  wanted  to  see  whether  I  was  germanized 
at  Spa,  Dutchified  at  the  Hague,  or  frenchified  by  lodging  two 
nights  at  the  Lion  d’argent  at  Calais.  By  this  time  my  friends 
find  I  am  not  improved,  and  my  acquaintance  that  I  am  not 
metamorphosed,  and  there  is  not  any  great  demand  for  me, 
so  I  shall  have  it  in  my  power  to  write  often  to  you,  and  be 
assured  that  as  far  as  extent  of  paper  and  numbers  of  letters  can 
go  towards  it,  I  will  discharge  my  debt  very  soon.  I  suppose 
you  had  rather  have  an  account  of  the  health,  les  dits  et  gestes 
of  Mrs.  Carter,  Lord  Lyttelton,  and  our  other  friends  than  of 
the  fine  cloaths  at  the  Prince  of  Brunswicks  wedding.  Mrs. 
Carter  has  all  the  greek,  all  the  headach,  and  all  the  humility 
she  used  to  have.  .  .  .  Lord  Lyttelton  had  acquired  all  he 
wanted,  health,  and  a  surtout  of  flesh,  but  he  had  a  little  fever 
lately  which  has  for  the  present  impaired  his  health  and  worn 
his  surtout  a  little  threadbare.  His  speech  on  Privilege,  in 
the  House  of  Lords  two  months  ago,  did  him  great  honour, 
and  the  cause  of  virtue,  decency,  and  order,  great  service. 
Lord  Bath  at  these  nuptials  “  has  been  finest  at  every  fine 
shew  and  frolick’d  it  all  the  long  day.”  There  was  a  noble 
and  magnificent  table  kept  at  Sommerset  house  by  the  Green 
cloth  for  the  P.  of  Brunswick  before  he  was  married,  to  this 
only  the  Lords  of  the  Household  and  the  great  state  of  officers 
were  invited,  except  Lord  Bath,  whom  the  King  orderd  to  be 
put  on  the  list  as  having  known  and  entertaind  his  Highness 
abroad.  Great  dinners,  crowded  drawing  rooms,  and  a  very 
long  day  at  the  House  of  Lords  on  Tuesday,  after  Leicester 
House,  have  in  fine  given  his  Lordship  a  cold.  Mr.  Tho8 
Pitt  has  gain’d  great  reputation  by  two  speeches  in  the  House 
of  Commons.  To  morrow  Mrs.  Carter,  Ld  Lyttelton,  Sr 
James  Macdonald,  and  Mr.  Stillingfleet  are  to  dine  with  me, 
but  alas  !  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Vesey,  and  Mr.  Burke  will  not  dine 
with  me  !  .  .  .  How  often  do  we  all  lament  your  absence  !  It 
will  be  quite  unfashionable  not  to  say  something  of  our  Princely 
wedding.  All  the  world  was  fine,  the  courtiers  were  fine 
because  the  Kings  sister  was  married,  the  War  Kettle  because 
a  German  hero,  one  who  fought  in  our  wars  and  did  not 
negotiate  in  our  Peace  was  to  be  complimented.  He  made  a 
visit  to  Hayes  where  he  was  received  by  a  patriot  in  flannels. 
He  made  a  visit  at  Newcastle  House,  where  he  was  hugg’d 
and  kiss’d  by  an  old  courtier,  tout  paitri  of  courtesy.  This 
visit  was  indeed  owing  to  a  personal  acquaintance  with  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  of  Newcastle  when  they  were  in  Germany. 
However  it  was  thought  in  general  that  the  Prince  coquetted 


90 


1764 


SIR  JAMES  MACDONALD 

with  the  opposition  ;  that  party  wish’d  him  to  stay  longer  in 
hopes  of  getting  him  to  intrigue  with  them,  but  his  Highness 
wd  have  been  more  prudent,  for  the  brother  in  law  (besides 
being  the  most  amiable  man  in  the  World)  is  of  a  condition 
more  fix’d  and  settled  than  Ministers  or  favorites  of  the  people, 
who  are  the  gilded  insects  of  a  summers  day.  Lady  Harvey 
has  had  the  gout  severely.  .  .  .  Of  all  the  figures  in  the 
drawing  room  on  the  wedding,  the  most  conspicuous  was  our 
friend  Monsey  ;  he  was  unhouzel’d,  disappointed,  unaneal’d, 
he  look’d  like  a  felo  de  se  corpse  in  the  Highway  ;  there  was 
a  dispute  whether  he  got  his  wig  off  a  gibbet  or  took  it  from 
a  cherry  tree.  But  most  surely  he  was  neither  in  soft  raiment, 
purple,  fine  linnen  nor  in  such  apparel  as  men  in  kings  houses. 
The  post  bell  rings,  so  for  the  present  adieu  my  dear  Madam! 
at  the  feast  of  shells  the  musick  of  your  voice,  the  gentle 
vivacity  of  your  witt  will  be  wanted.  We  will  raise  the  song 
in  your  praise. 

Leicester  House,  which  stood  on  the  north  side 
of  Leicester  Square,  was  “  the  pouting  place  of  princes,” 
whither  George  II.  and  his  son  Frederick  both  went, 
when  Prince  of  Wales,  on  quarrelling  with  their  Sires. 
Frederick’s  widow  (the  Princess  Augusta’s  mother) 
was  at  this  time  resident  there. 

Mr.  Thomas  Pitt,  Chatham’s  nephew  and  opponent, 
M.P.  for  Old  Sarum,  and  Walpole’s  neighbour  at 
Twickenham,  afterwards  became  the  first  Lord  Camel- 
ford. 

Sir  James  Macdonald,  descendant  of  the  Lords 
of  the  Isles,  elder  brother  of  Sir  Archibald,  solicitor- 
general,  was  a  very  attractive  and  promising  youth 
and  a  favoured  protege  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s.  He  died 
at  Rome  in  the  prime  of  youth  after  travelling  thither 
with  Sterne,  a  few  years  later  on  ;  no  individual  since 
Edward  King,  Milton’s  Lycidas,  says  Wraxall,  more 
bewailed  by  men  of  genius  for  his  premature  end. 
Benjamin  Stillingfleet  was  the  botanist  and  author 
whose  unconventional  blue  stockings  are  supposed  to 
have  led  Admiral  Boscawen  to  give  their  title  to 
Mrs.  Boscawen’s  and  Mrs.  Vesey’s  assemblies.  The 


MARY  LEPELL,  LADY  HERVEY 

After  Largilliac 


1764 


LADY  HERVEY 


91 


“  patriot  in  flannels  ”  is,  of  course,  the  gouty  William 
Pitt  ;  Mrs.  Pitt,  his  sister  Ann.  Lady  Primrose, 
widow  of  the  third  Viscount,  was  an  old  friend  of 
Mrs.  Montagu’s.  Lady  Hervey  (widow  of  John, 
Lord  Hervey,  whom  Pope  satirised  as  Sporus,  and  who 
wrote  the  Memoirs  of  George  II.’s  reign)  has  already 
been  alluded  to.  She  was  one  of  Horace  Walpole’s 
best  correspondents,  and  the  lady  of  whom  Lord 
Chesterfield  wrote  so  high  a  commendation  to  his 
natural  son :  “  She  has  been  bred  all  her  life  at 
courts,  of  which  she  has  acquired  all  the  easy  good 
breeding  and  politeness  without  the  frivolousness. 
She  has  all  the  reading  that  a  woman  should  have, 
and  more  than  any  woman  need  have,  for  she  under¬ 
stands  Latin  perfectly  well,  though  she  wisely  con¬ 
ceals  it.  No  woman  ever  had  more  than  she  has 
le  ton  de  la  parfaitement  bonne  compagnie  les 
manieres  engageantes  et  le  je  ne  sais  quoi  qui  plait. 
Desire  her  to  reprove  and  correct  any  and  every  the 
least  error  and  inaccuracy  in  your  manners,  air, 
address,  &c.  No  woman  in  Europe  can  do  it  so  well  ; 
none  will  do  it  more  willingly  or  in  a  more  proper 
and  obliging  manner.”  James  Macpherson  had 
instituted  the  feast  of  shells  at  Mrs.  Montagu’s  house 
in  Hill  Street  in  1761,  when  they  drank  out  of  a 
nautilus  to  the  immortal  memory  of  Ossian,  whom 
“  Bard  Macpherson  ”  was  supposed  to  have  trans¬ 
lated,  but  whom  in  reality  he  had  very  largely  created. 
Though  their  faith  was  shaken,  the  has  bleus  con¬ 
tinued  the  pious  rite,  and  Mrs.  Montagu  was  active 
in  getting  Macpherson’s  book  subscribed,  declaring, 
when  the  Bishop  of  Ossory  told  her  that  he  was 
getting  an  j£ioo  per  annum  in  the  Highlands  for 
translating  the  poems,  “  If  he  is  writing  them,  he 
should  have  a  thousand  at  least.” 


92 


MR.  FINCH 


1764 


To  her  Husband 

Thursday  night. 

I  was  at  Court  this  morning  for  the  first  time  since  I  came 
to  Town.  The  Prince  of  Brunswick  askd  after  you  very 
obligingly.  .  .  . 

You  will  see  by  the  papers  our  Colonies  are  in  a  sort  of 
rebellion.  It  is  not  yet  known  when  Mr.  Pitt  will  be  in 
Town,  his  gout  not  being  quite  off.  The  drawing  room  was 
pretty  full  to  day.  Ld  Cardigan  was  there  and  glad  to  hear 
you  are  so  well.  .  .  . 

It  is  said  there  will  be  no  business  in  the  House  of  Commons 
till  the  Ministers  are  selected.  But  it  is  imagined  there  will 
be  some  warm  work  in  the  H  of  Lords  about  the  stamps  and 
resistance  of  the  Colonies. 

I  saw  a  very  odd  scene  at  the  Prince  of  Wales  drawing  room, 
Mr.  Finch,  partly  mad,  had  beat  his  Wife  Lady  Charlotte 
and  thrown  her  down  stairs,  upon  which  they  were  separated 
by  articles,  notwithstanding  this  he  was  talking  to  her  as  she 
sat  in  the  drawing  room  with  the  youngest  Prince  in  her  lap. 
All  people  were  afraid  he  shd  wait  till  the  room  was  empty 
to  do  her  a  mischief,  but  whether  he  insulted  her  or  not  I 
know  not,  but  she  must  be  extreamly  shocked  to  be  a  subject 
of  amazement  to  every  one  ;  he  is  certainly  the  first  man  who 
ever  talkd  in  publick  to  a  Wife  from  whom  he  was  separated. 
If  she  retains  any  love  for  him  she  must  be  extreamly  hurt. 
Ld  Winchelsea  askd  after  you,  he  looks  better  than  he  did 
25  years  ago. 

William  Finch,  brother  of  the  eighth  Earl  of  Win- 
chilsea,  had  married  (secondly)  Charlotte,  daughter 
of  the  Earl  of  Pomfret.  She  was  governess  to  the 
King’s  children.  Mr.  Finch  died  two  years  after  this; 
his  and  Lady  Charlotte’s  son  George  became  later 
the  ninth  Earl  of  Winchilsea. 

To  Lord  Bath 

Your  Lordship  had  the  vivacity  and  legerete  d’esprit  of  a 
rake,  you  kept  the  hours  of  a  rake,  and  there  was  a  rakish  kind 
of  sparkling  in  your  eyes  ;  these  are  strong  indications,  as  to 
your  conversation  it  was  extreamly  moral  and  decent,  I  must 
confess,  besides  a  great  deal  of  dignity  in  your  behaviour  more 


1764 


CONCERNING  PRUDERY 


93 


than  belongs  to  a  rake,  so  I  dont  absolutely  decide  that  you 
are  such,  but  I  think  you  could  be  a  very  agreable  one  if  you 
pleased.  I  will  bring  yr  little  Miss  with  me,  or  any  other  fair 
one  that  is  not  above  two  feet  high,  your  Lordship  cannot 
reasonably  expect  more  of  your  most  faithfull  Hble  Servt 

I  should  have  wish’d  to  have  gone  to 
Lady  Hervey  to  night,  I  don’t  know  that 
I  durst  have  done  it,  but  as  it  happens  Mr. 

Drumgold  is  to  be  with  me,  so  it  is  not  in 
my  power  to  commit  an  indiscretion,  and 
in  that  case  one  is  discreet. 


To  Lord  Bath 

Thursday  night. 

I  left,  out  of  prudence,  the  only  comfort  to  which  my 
mind  is  now  sensible,  but  that  I  would  not  purchase  at  ye 
price  of  a  moments  uneasiness  to  you.  As  to  prudery  it  had 
no  share  in  my  resolution.  I  should  pity  and  despise  the 
wretches,  if  such  there  could  be,  who  could  slander  the  friend¬ 
ship  which  it  is  the  greatest  honour  of  my  life  to  receive  and 
to  give.  I  am  ready  to  declare  to  the  whole  world  I  never 
saw  anything  in  it,  that  I  could  love,  esteem,  and  honour 
even  to  veneration  as  I  do  my  Lord  Bath  ;  if  they  can  prove 
it  to  be  sin  or  shame,  to  love  the  most  amiable  and  admire 
the  most  noble  virtues  and  talents  let  them  put  as  much  of 
sin  and  shame  to  my  account  as  they  please.  I  am  not  of  the 
number  of  those  intrepid  Ladies  who,  conscious  of  their 
innocence,  have  no  regard  to  appearances  ;  I  think  they  make 
a  part  of  female  virtue,  and  would  not  do  anything  that  rigid 
reason  and  scrupulous  delicacy  could  condemn.  My  actions 
should  always  be  open  and  with  the  approbation  of  the  person 
who  next  to  myself  is  most  interested,  but  I  should  no  more 
suppose  I  could  offend  the  Prudes  in  visiting  your  Lordship 
at  Ives  Place,  than  by  speaking  to  you  in  an  Assembly.  Mr. 
Montagu  begs  his  most  sincere,  and  if  you  permit  him  the 
familiarity  of  the  phrase  his  most  affectionate  respects  to  your 
Lordship,  he  expressed  himself  deeply  sensible  of  the  honour 
your  friendship  does  me,  which  indeed  has  long  among  many 
advantages  raised  me  in  his  opinion. 

This  “discreet”  flirtation  with  Lord  Bath  evidently 
proceeded  merrily  through  the  early  months  of  1764, 


94 


A  RIVAL 


1764 


and  indeed  right  up  to  the  sudden  end  which  the 
summer  was  to  bring. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  by  way,  as  he  suggests,  of  stimu¬ 
lating  his  ardour,  sent  him  a  long  and  affectionate 
letter  from  her  much  more  juvenile  admirer,  Sir  James 
Macdonald,  at  Paris.  Lord  Bath  protested  that  this 
was  keeping  up  his  passion  by  blisters,  and  that  he 
needed  no  Macdonalds  to  expatiate  on  her  perfections : 

"  Sr  James  at  length,”  he  goes  on,  “  for  the  Climax  of  his 
Commendation,  mentions  several  fine  witty  french  Ladys,  and 
then  compares  them  with  you,  and  shews  how  far  you  exceed 
them  all,  this  is  like  the  Artifice  of  a  Jew  Jeweller,  who  brings 
you  a  parcel  of  stones,  made  of  a  french  Paste  and  shews  them 
first,  to  sett  of  the  lustre,  of  the  finest  Brilliant  in  the  world 
and  of  the  first  water  which  wanted  no  foil  whatever.  But  I 
forgive  him,  and  so,  when  you  write,  to  him,  you  may  tell  him 
from  me,  and  that  if  he  had  not  so  much  worth  and  merit, 
I  believe  I  should  realy  love  him.  As  it  is,  I  send  him  my 
cold  compliments,  which  are  like  those  he  hears  daily,  from 
his  new  french  acquaintance,  very  polite,  but  not  very  sincere  ; 
for  how  is  it  possible  to  love  a  dangerous  Rival.” 

Though  no  one  can  read  the  almost  daily  letters 
which  passed  between  these  two  without  realising 
that  there  was  a  real  and  strong  attachment  on  both 
sides,  their  potent  sense  of  humour  saved  them — 
except  for  momentary  lapses — from  the  pitfalls  of  sen¬ 
timent  which  would  have  rendered  them  ridiculous. 
So  the  “  Nymph  ”  of  four-and-forty  replies  to  her 
swain  of  eighty: 

I  wish  you  had  more  love,  and  more  jealousy,  and  less  wit. 
I  was  in  great  hopes  of  making  your  Lordship  very  Uneasy 
and  instead  of  that  you  are  only  very  Witty.  If  I  was  as  young 
as  the  oldest  of  your  Rivals  I  would  make  your  heart  Ache, 
I  promise  you  ;  you  should  not  laugh  this  week,  nor  pun  this 
fortnight,  I  can  tell  you.  Pray  go  out  about  two,  and  stay 
out  till  about  four,  get  a  good  appetite  to  your  dinner,  and  come 
and  make  me  quite  well  in  the  evening,  for  I  am  but  indifferent 
well,  as  Mrs.  Carter’s  Kentish  friends  express  it.  .  .  .  Heroick 
verse  becomes  the  occasion  better  than  Witty  prose,  pray  go 


1764  THE  QUEEN’S  BIRTHDAY  COURT  95 

to  Mr.  Powell  and  learn  to  act  Othello.  I  am  not  like  the 
Gentle  Desdemona  ;  I  would  have  thee  jealous,  and  I  grieve 
that  the  Sun  when  you  was  born  drew  all  such  humours  from  you. 
I  have  lost  20  handkerchiefs,  some  mark’d  with  strawberries, 
and  you  have  not  raved  or  ranted.  I  have  recommended  and 
commended  whole  Regiments  of  Young  Men,  and  you  have 
not  cared  ;  You  have  equally  despised  the  heroick  verse  of 
rhyming  Peers,  and  the  wise  and  learn’d  dissertations  of  ragged 
philosophers,  and  so,  as  I  cannot  vex  you  I  will  try  if  I  can 
please  you,  and  will  receive  you  this  evening  with  most  thankful 
courtesy  tho’  your  Lordship  will  come  so  late  as  to  show  your 
reluctance  to  make  the  Visit,  and  go  so  early  as  will  prove  your 
impatience  to  finish  it.  However  I  have  Sr  James’s  letter, 
and  some  Antidotes  against  Mortification,  which  preserve  me 
from  the  sad  dejected  air  with  which  Ariadne  and  some  other 
sorrowful  dames  are  painted,  and  so  I  rest  neither  sick  nor 
well,  nor  vain  nor  humble  Your  Lordships  Neglected  but  not 
despairing  Nymph. 


To  her  Husband 

I  never  saw  anything  equal  to  the  Court  on  Wednesday 
the  Queens  birthday.  There  was  hardly  a  gentleman  or  gentle¬ 
woman  in  London  who  was  not  expiring  under  a  load  of  finery. 
Indeed  I  was  one  of  the  fools  myself,  and  so  had  less  cause  to 
laugh  than  if  I  had  not  been  of  the  party,  but  I  should  not 
have  been  of  it  if  accident  had  not  made  me  acquainted  with 
the  Prince  of  Brunswick,  and  the  civil  messages  he  sent  me 
made  it  impossible  for  me  to  avoid  going,  for  there  is  a  kind  of 
respect  they  have  a  sort  of  right  to,  but  there  were  some  hundreds 
there  who  had  not  the  same  inducement.  I  should  have  been 
quite  wrong  without  intending  it,  if  I  had  seen  the  Prince  so 
as  to  make  him  my  complimts  on  the  Tuesday,  for  then  I  did 
not  intend  going  on  the  Queens  birthday,  but  I  find  every 
living  creature  who  went  on  the  first  day  went  on  the  second, 
and  I  have  not  any  ambition  to  distinguish  myself,  so  I  am 
glad  I  did  like  the  rest.  I  wish  her  Majesty  many  happy 
birthdays,  but  I  shall  never  go  again  on  the  day  to  St.  James’s, 
for  such  a  croud,  heat  and  fatigue  is  too  great  a  burthen  for 
the  independant,  amongst  whom  Heaven  in  its  infinite  bounty 
has  placed  me.  I  am  far  from  thinking  happiness  and  content 
depend  on  degrees  of  wealth,  but  I  am  sure  independency  is 
a  great  blessing,  and  I  rejoyce  that  both  by  disposition  and 
fortune  you  are  in  that  situation. 


9  6 


MACDONALD  IN  PARIS 


1764 


From  Sir  James  Macdonald’s  long  letter  from 
France  some  portions  must  be  extracted  : 

Paris,  April  nth  1764. 

...  I  have  seen  several  very  agreable  and  very  sensible 
women  since  I  have  been  in  this  country  ;  but  as  they  seem 
not  to  know  what  diffidence  and  modesty  mean,  and  force 
from  everyone  such  a  torrent  of  praise  and  compliments  that 
they  leave  nothing  behind  to  think  upon  and  admire,  there 
are  few  of  them  who  have  appeared  to  me  very  amiable.  It 
is  certainly  a  mistake  to  think  they  can  have  real  admirers 
when  they  force  them  to  let  all  their  enthusiasm  evaporate  in 
quaint  speeches  and  idle  flattery.  There  is  no  time  for  a 
sentiment  of  approbation  to  warm  into  real  admiration,  when 
it  must  immediately  get  vent  in  the  form  of  a  witty  sentence. 
For  which  reason  I  am  apt  to  think  that  in  France  women 
are  more  flattered  and  less  esteemed  than  in  other  countries — 
For  I  cannot  think  that  a  man  who  converses  with  a  woman 
in  order  to  keep  his  wit  in  practise,  and  prevent  it  from  growing 
rusty,  has  always  the  same  admiration  for  her  that  it  is  necessary 
he  should  pretend  to  in  order  to  exercise  his  talents — The  most 
amiable  woman  I  have  met  with  in  Paris  is  Mde  de  Rochefort, 
a  friend  of  the  Due  de  Nivernois  :  she  has,  joined  to  many 
other  good  qualities,  the  singular  graces  of  simplicity,  elegance 
and  modesty  ;  I  like  her  house  because  I  am  sometimes  tempted 
when  I  am  there  to  think  I  am  in  Hillstreet,  which  is  saying 
enough  of  her  society. 

You  would  certainly  be  much  entertained  with  a  jaunt  to 
this  country — though  I  should  be  sorry  you  were  to  unlearn 
here  anything  you  have  learnt  at  home.  ...  You  would 
amuse  yourself — You  would  carry  much  useful  knowledge 
home  ;  but  you  would  unlearn  nothing,  leave  nothing  behind 
in  your  own  country,  nor  soften  in  the  least  degree  what  is 
already  the  perfection  of  Delicacy.  I  should  be  very  glad 
you  paid  a  visit  to  this  country,  not  to  correct  prejudices  but 
to  satisfy  a  rational  curiosity,  and  to  learn  to  think  better  of 
yourself  and  of  your  own  Country  than  perhaps  you  do  at 
present. 

You  desire  to  know  something  about  the  Philosophers  of 
this  country,  whom  you  have  severely  censured — I  do  not 
pretend  to  vindicate  them,  though  perhaps  I  do  not  think  so 
hardly  of  them.  If  President  Montesquieu  had  never  wrote, 
there  would  have  been  fewer  systems  and  more  sense  among 


i764  HELVETIUS,  DIDEROT  97 

the  philosophers  of  the  present  age.  It  is  necessary  to  analyse, 
and  extract  the  essence  of  everything,  in  order  to  make  a  system, 
and  perhaps  if  he  had  not  shewn  the  example,  men’s  thoughts 
would  have  taken  another  turn.  You  must  have  remarked 
that  one  man  who  greatly  excells  in  anything,  always  spoils 
a  thousand  who  attempt  to  rival  him.  You  may  see  at  present 
in  London  one  of  the  most  remarkable  writers  of  the  age 
M.  Helvetius  :  whom  I  recommend  it  to  you  to  see,  in  order 
to  be  convinced  how  different  a  man  may  be  from  what  his 
writing  announces  him.  He  is  a  man  of  great  simplicity,  void 
of  affectation,  very  respectable  in  private  life,  remarkably 
friendly  and  hospitable  ;  I  need  not  tell  you  what  judgment 
one  readily  forms  from  his  Book — Diderot  is  noisy  and  talkative, 
and  somewhat  fond  of  a  Dispute  ;  he  is  certainly  very  learned, 
and  very  conscious  of  his  own  knowledge — he  would  be  a 
better  philosopher  and  a  more  agreable  companion  if  he  did 
not  make  philosophy  a  matter  of  Party,  and  treat  subjects  of 
the  gravest  nature  and  which  require  a  cool  examination  too 
much  like  the  head  of  an  opposition — D’Alembert  is  dry  and 
decisive — very  quick  and  clever  ;  but  arrogant  and  self  con¬ 
ceited  :  His  merit  is  however  so  great,  that  people  easily  forget 
his  blemishes — Marmontel  (the  author  of  Contes  Moraux)  is 
one  of  the  most  agreable  of  the  whole  society — not  deep,  but 
at  the  same  time  not  ignorant — He  speaks  much  in  the  manner 
of  his  Book,  narrates  remarkably  well  :  and  has  nothing 
disagreable  but  an  appearance  of  gravity  and  severity  which 
I  believe  is  not  really  in  his  character.  I  have  not  seen  Buffon, 
who  is  universally  said  to  be  superior  to  them  all  ;  and  I  am 
affraid  I  shall  not  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  him,  as  he  is 
gone  to  the  country  for  some  months — I  am  acquainted  with 
several  others  who  have  considerable  literary  merit,  but  as  I 
believe  their  names  have  not  reached  our  country  I  shall  not 
trouble  you  with  any  account  of  them — I  am  perhaps  mistaken 
in  my  opinion  of  those  I  have  mentioned,  but  I  have  told  you 
fairly  how  they  appear  to  me — I  fancy  the  worst  of  them  is 
better  than  their  sceptered  leader. 

We  have  lately  had  a  new  Tragedy  of  Voltaire.  It  is  not 
indeed  absolutely  new,  but  it  had  never  been  represented  here — 
I  mean  Olympie.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  a  very  bad  play  ; 
founded  on  an  improbable  story,  full  of  inconsistencies,  without 
one  good  Character  ;  and  yet  it  was  so  well  acted  that  it  has 
had  a  remarkable  success  :  as  there  is  a  great  deal  of  shew  and 
several  stage  tricks,  this  has  compensated  with  the  audience, 
weak  verses,  uninteresting  characters,  and  an  absurd  story. 

VOL.  I  H 


98 


NEWMARKET 


1764 


They  have  two  actresses  Melle.  Clairon  and  Melle.  Dumenil 
who  are  greatly  superior  to  any  upon  any  stage — The  former 
the  perfection  of  art  ;  the  latter  very  unequal,  but  when  she 
is  good  the  very  mouth  of  nature — • 

The  people  of  this  great  City  are  greatly  interested  in  the 
question  about  the  Inoculation  of  the  Smallpox  :  It  is  at 
present  discussed  with  as  much  heat  as  if  the  practise  had  been 
yesterday  imported  from  Circassia — there  have  been  many 
violent  attacks  lately  made  on  one  Gatti,  an  Italian  physician 
who  has  practised  it  with  the  greatest  success — and  he  has 
replied  in  a  small  treatise  which  is  written  with  great  spirit 
in  answer  to  his  opponents,  great  pers[pi]cuity  in  explaining  the 
nature  of  the  disorder  as  far  as  it  can  be  known,  a  great  candour 
in  avowing  his  ignorance  where  it  cannot.  He  has  effectually 
removed  every  prejudice  against  the  practise,  and  yet  I  dare 
say  he  will  convince  not  one  physician  ;  as  it  is  long  ago  become 
a  party  matter,  and  consequently  put  out  of  the  reach  of  reason 
and  demonstration.  The  book  is  worth  reading  if  it  comes 
to  London. 

Stern’s  book  has  struck  everyone  with  the  utmost  astonish¬ 
ment  and  horror — I  have  not  yet  seen  it — I  never  believe 
anything  I  hear  quoted  out  of  a  book  till  I  see  it,  but  I  hope 
with  all  my  heart  for  the  sake  of  some  of  my  friends  that 
people  have  invented  the  things  I  hear  cited  from  their  letters. 
I  should  be  very  sorry  ingratitude  and  could  be  joined 

to  so  many  agreeable  qualities  :  But  I  believe  nothing  till  I 
see  it.  .  .  . 

To  her  Husband 

15  April. 

The  Town  is  at  present  very  empty,  all  the  World  is  at 
Newmarket.  The  French  and  Spanish  Ambassadors  are 
there.  Ld  Granby  entertains  them  at  his  house.  I  heard 
yesterday  that  there  was  an  account  from  Newmarket  that 
Mr.  Shafto  had  won  considerably.  These  riches  that  come 
on  the  rapid  wing  of  fortune  as  rapidly  fly  away,  and  I  shall 
not  be  sorry  to  hear  you  have  fixd  their  mercury  in  Mr. 
Hudsons  payment.  The  sum  Mr.  Shafto  is  said  to  have  won 
is  £2000.  Lord  Grosvenor  and  Sr  James  Lowther  have 
playd  very  deep.  It  is  said  there  is  ,£50,000  depending  in 
betts.  Madme  Pompadour  dyed  possessd  of  3  millions 
sterling,  of  which  50,000  Louis  d’ors  were  in  her  house, 
the  rest  consists  of  jewels  plate,  etc  etc.  The  King  of  France 


1 764 


GENERAL  CONWAY 


99 


has  owned  a  natural  Son  by  another  mistress.  Madme 
Pompadour  sent  to  ask  her  Husbands  pardon  and  the  Queens, 
and  then  received  that  her  confessor  offerd  her,  and  so  dyed 
contented.  It  is  thought  the  D:  of  Choiseul  and  the  D:  of 
Praslin  may  lose  their  power,  but  what  is  much  worse  the 
Jesuits  may  recover  theirs  as  they  were  driven  away  by  Mdme 
Pompadour.  I  believe  her  intrigue  with  the  King  was  her 
great  fault,  in  other  respects  she  was  not  of  a  bad  character, 
and  in  this  Country  where  such  crimes  are  less  countenanced, 
perhaps  had  remained  an  honest  Woman. 

Towards  the  end  of  April  in  a  letter  to  her  husband 
Mrs.  Montagu  comments  on  the  dismissal  of  General 
Conway  : 

They  have  just  turned  General  Conway  out  of  all  employ¬ 
ment  civil  and  military,  on  account  of  his  having  constantly 
voted  with  the  minority,  and  have  given  his  military  posts  to 
Lord  Pembroke  which  does  not  edify  the  lovers  of  decency. 

General  Conway  was  brother  of  the  first  Marquis  of 
Hertford,  who  was  then  Ambassador  in  France.  The 
dismissal  of  such  an  able  and  upright  man  as  the 
General  was  much  commented  on  at  the  time,  but 
within  little  more  than  a  year  he  became  Secretary  of 
State  and  leader  of  the  House  of  Commons.  His 
temporary  downfall  was  attributed  to  his  opposition 
to  the  taxation  of  colonies  and  his  objection  to  the 
legality  of  general  warrants. 

Garrick  sent  Lord  Bath  the  King’s  Stage  Box  at 
Drury  Lane. 


From  Ford  Bath 

Lady  Hervey  is  come  to  Town,  but  stays  in  it  but  one  day, 
I  fancy  she  is  going  to  Dicky  Batemans  for  a  fortnight.  Last 
night  I  went  to  the  play,  it  was  as  full  as  it  could  hold,  tho’ 
the  King  went  to  the  other  house  in  Covent  Garden,  the 
play,  was  an  old  one  of  Beaumont  and  Fletchers,  alterd  by 
Colman,  no  otherwise  than  by  leaving  out  several  Indecencys 
were  in  it,  and  which  the  present  age  will  not  suffer  on  the 
Stage,  and  by  writing  a  new  Prologue  and  bringing  on  a  new 
Actor,  who  playd  the  part  of  Philaster  exceedingly  well,  and 


IOO 


THE  GROWTH  OF  LONDON 


1764 


Mrs.  Yates  in  boys  cloaths  acted  the  Page,  both  looking,  and 
acting,  most  extreamly  well. 

I  went  yesterday  to  make  a  visit  to  Lord  Hardwicke  but 
could  not  see  him,  as  he  was  a  little  out  of  order  wth  his  journey. 

From  Lord  Bath 

There  was  last  night  a  crouded  assembly  at  Pandemonium 
of  Witches,  but  I  got  from  them  by  ten  a  clock,  and  with 
your  sweet  sour  Remedy,  and  a  few  roasted  Apples  with  some 
warm  punch  I  went  to  bed,  coughd  but  little,  slept  well,  and 
am  now  in  good  Spirits,  as  you  may  percieve  by  my  hand 
writing,  which  by  the  help  of  a  good  Pen,  seems  to  me  to  be 
much  better  than  usual. 

I  had  a  most  comical  accident  happen  to  me  last  night, 
in  going  from  Bath  House,  to  St.  James’s  Square,  the  Hasp, 
that  shuts  the  Door  of  my  Chair  was  frozen  so  hard,  that  when 
they  came  to  let  me  out,  none  of  the  Chairmen  or  Servants 
could  open  it,  I  satt  in  the  Hall  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour, 
freezing  like  a  quart  of  cream,  in  an  Ice  Pail,  til  they  brought 
a  Hammer  and  Chizell  to  knock  me  out,  and  all  the  Witches 
came  about  me,  and  lamented  me,  as  they  would  have  done 
at  the  Millenium  or  the  reception  of  a  new  Monster. 

To  her  Husband 

London,  May  the  10 th. 

The  enlargement  of  London  must  have  a  good  effect  on 
the  coal  trade,  I  know  not  what  it  will  have  on  the  Nation 
in  general.  The  demand  for  houses  is  astonishing.  Mrs. 
Stanleys  was  sold  in  less  than  a  week  after  her  death  ;  in  the 
same  period  after  Sr  Jacob  Downings,  Lady  Downing  sold  his 
for  ^8000,  and  it  is  not  by  any  means  so  good  as  ours  ;  she 
sold  it  unfurnished.  So  you  made  a  good  purchase  when  you 
bought  this.  There  is  a  great  square  and  a  vast  number  of 
streets  going  to  be  built  near  Lady  Foleys,  almost  another 
Great  City,  and  people  are  all  ready  to  buy  houses  there  too. 

About  the  middle  of  May,  our  Lady  went  down 
to  Sandleford,  her  husband  remaining  in  Hill  Street : 

All  the  powder  is  combed  out  of  my  hair,  all  the  vanities 
are  vanished  out  of  my  head.  I  am  meek  in  my  Manners 
and  humble  in  my  apparel  but  rather  more  clean  than  is  usual 
for  a  female  Philosopher. 


1764 


LORD  LYTTELTON 


101 


On  the  2 1  st  of  May  Lord  Lyttelton  addressed 
some  verses  to  her  Sandleford  solitude  : 

APOLLO  DISAPPOINTED 
A  Tale 

When  on  Olympus  it  was  known 
That  charming  Montagu  had  gone 
Into  the  Country  all  alone, 

Now  is  my  time  Apollo  said  ! 

With  greenest  Bays  he  decked  his  head 
His  face  he  washed  in  morning  Dew 
And  swift  to  Sandleford  he  flew 
Thinking  to  have  as  sure  as  fate 
With  this  fair  nymph  a  tete  a  tete. 

But  Gods  themselves  may  now  and  then 
Conceive  false  hopes,  like  mortal  men, 

For  not  alone  Dan  Phoebus  found  her, 

The  Dame  had  all  the  muses  round  her. 

Horace  Walpole,  whose  penful  of  gall  no  one  could 
escape,  contrived,  with  the  help  of  a  lackey,  a  laughable 
bit  of  scandal  about  these  two  : 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  postilion  of  sixteen,  he  reported 
as  declaring  :  “  I  am  not  such  a  child  but  I  can  guess 

something  ;  whenever  my  Lord  -  comes  to  my 

Lady  she  orders  her  porter  to  let  in  nobody  else, 
and  then  they  call  for  a  pen  and  ink  and  say  they  are 
going  to  write  history.” 

From  Lord  Lyttelton 

May  1764. 

.  .  .  The  evening  I  past  at  General  Conway’s  1  was  the 
finest  we  had  this  spring  and  he  has  made  his  place  most  delight¬ 
ful.  Charles  Townsend  was  of  the  party  and  added  much 
to  the  pleasure  of  it  by  all  the  charms  of  witt  and  eloquence, 
with  perfect  good  humour.  Mr.  Conway  is  much  graver 
and  Lady  Ailesbury  seems  to  think  that  after  the  glorious 
dangers  of  war  are  over,  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  a  regiment 
of  Horse  is  a  much  better  thing  than  such  grinning  honour  ! 

1  At  Park  Place  near  Henley-on-Thames. 


io2  LORD  BATH  AT  SHREWSBURY  1764 


From  Lord  Bath 

Shrewsbury,  25 th  of  May. 

I  am  plagued  with  regal  Honours,  ceremonious  Civilitys, 
and  most  profound  respect,  which  I  detest  most  sincerely  ; 
You  can  describe  better  than  anyone  the  pleasures  you  now 
enjoy,  nay  you  can  build  castles  on  earth,  or  in  the  Air,  without 
the  help  of  Stewart,  Adams  or  Brown,  and  be  happy  with  the 
contemplation  of  the  variety  of  benefits  you  have  conferrd  on 
numbers  of  your  own  Species. 

I  will  now  endeavour  to  give  you,  some  little  notion  of  the 
Life  I  lead,  through  an  ostentatious  Pomp  of  Grandeur,  and 
ridiculous  Ceremony,  I  got  up  yesterday  morning  before  seven 
a  Clock,  went  in  my  Coach  to  the  field  of  Battle,  where  the 
Army  was  drawn  up  to  recieve  me  ;  at  my  first  Entrance  into 
the  field,  I  was  saluted  with  the  fire  of  the  whole  Regiment, 
drawn  up  in  terrible  Array.  I  then  drove  before  their  Ranks, 
commending  the  Men,  and  approving  everything  I  saw  ; 
after  which  they  performd  their  exercise,  with  the  most  exact 
military  Discipline,  then  six  hundred  Men,  with  their 
Officers  at  the  head  of  them,  marched  by  me,  saluting  as  they 
went,  with  their  Colours,  and  Drums  beating,  Musick  playing, 
and  Pipes  whistling  with  exact  time,  to  the  kicking  up  of  the 
Soldiers  Heels.  This  lasted  til  2  a  clock,  I  got  a  mouthful 
of  dinner,  and  at  six  at  night,  went  through  a  much  worse 
fatigue  ;  In  the  morning  six  hundred  Men  saluted  me,  in 
the  Evening  I  was  forced  to  salute  two  hundred  Women, 
I  never  heard  that  Hercules  himself  went  farther  than  fifty, 
and  for  ought  I  know  it  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  all  his 
Labours  ;  if  so,  I  have  done  four  times  as  much  as  Hercules, 
and  am,  I  confess,  most  prodigiously  tired.  Remond  himself, 
who  is  just  recovered  from  a  Fever,  laughs  at  me,  and  tells 
me,  that  I  look  as  flimsy  as  an  old  Rag.  He  wishes  me  to 
pluck  up  a  little  Spirit  before  I  go,  or  I  shall  leave  a  woful 
character,  behind  me.  .  .  . 

I  have  just  recieved  a  Compliment  from  Mr.  Beauclerck 
and  Lady  Catherine,  Lord  Besboroughs  Daughters,  who  are 
both  at  present,  at  a  Seat  in  this  neighbourhood,  belonging 
to  that  good  Woman,  Lady  Betty  Germain.  I  shall  visit 
them  before  I  leave  this  place  ;  the  young  Lady  I  was  acquainted 
with  at  her  Fathers,  when  she  was  scarce  twelve  years  old, 
and  old  Lady  Betty,  I  knew  when  she  was  not  above  fiveteen, 
and  we  stil  have  many  disputes,  about  which  of  us,  is  the  Oldest. 


1764 


LADY  BETTY  GERMAIN 


103 


for  in  that  point,  complaisance  does  not  require  you  to  give  it 
up  even  to  a  Lady  and  I  was  not  seven  years  old  when  I  first 
knew  her.  [Lady  Betty  was  four  years  older  than  Lord  Bath.] 
We  came  yesterday,  God  knows  how  many  miles,  thro’ 
Avenues,  beautifully  planted  by  the  Duke  of  Montagu  ;  and 
wished  to  meet  one  of  the  family,  sauntering  in  those  woods. 
How  charming  such  a  Rencounter  would  have  been  !  you  must 
know  I  have  a  right,  by  the  means  of  Purlieu’s,  to  several 
Deer ,  from  his  forest.  I  would  have  given  them  all  up  to 
have  met  the  only  Dear  I  wished  to  see,  and  this  is  a  Pun  you 
may  likewise  communicate  to  Mrs.  Carter. 

Topham  Beauclerk,  Dr.  Johnson’s  devoted  friend, 
was  the  son  of  Lord  Sidney  Beauclerk,  a  great  fortune- 
hunter,  who  very  nearly  succeeded  in  marrying  Lady 
Betty  Germain  in  her  well -dowered  old  age.  Lady 
Catherine  Ponsonby,  the  daughter  of  the  second  Earl 
of  Bessborough,  afterwards  married  the  fifth  Duke  of 
St.  Albans. 

These  letters  of  Lord  Bath’s,  even  at  eighty,  are 
full  of  a  Falstaffian  jolliness  and  incorrigible  fun 
which  is  rather  engaging,  and  of  which  a  couple  of 
samples  must  be  found  room  for  here,  before  his  tales 
were  abruptly  closed  by  death. 

From  Lord  Bath 

For  my  part  I  have  made  but  two  Acquaintances  of  the 
female  Sex,  since  I  have  been  in  Shrewsbury,  the  first  is  an 
honest  Gardiners  wife,  of  about  75  years  old,  who  brings  me 
every  morning  a  fresh  nosegay,  with  a  round  head,  as  big  as  a 
new  Mopp.  Her  compliment  is  constantly  the  same,  that  my 
Honour  looks  as  fresh  as  a  Rose,  and  then  wishes  me  all  Health, 
and  Prosperation,  and  making  a  Curtesy  takes  her  leave.  The 
other  Lady  is  younger,  but  the  most  slovenly  dirty,  masculine 
Creature,  I  ever  saw.  She  came  to  me  with  a  long  Petition, 
begging  I  would  pardon  a  Man  in  my  Regt  who  was  condemnd 
by  a  Court  Martial  to  recieve  an  hundred  Lashes  ;  I  asked  her 
who  she  was,  and  she  told  me  that  she  was  the  Wife  of  the 
Ostler,  at  the  Inn  where  my  Horses  stood.  I  then  enquired, 
what  Kin  the  Man  was  to  her,  who  was  to  suffer;  she  smiled 
a  little,  and  cry’d  no  great  matter  of  Kin,  but  she  valued  him 


io4  LORD  BATH’S  STORIES  1764 

much;  I  then  asked  her  for  what,  and  she  fairly  said  there  was 
not  a  better  Man  in  the  Regiment,  and  that  she  had  tryd  most 
of  them.  Well  said  I,  for  your  sake,  I  will  mitigate  the 
Punishment;  Mitigate,  what  is  that,  said  She,  why  I  will  reduce 
it  from  an  hundred  lashes,  to  thirty,  and  as  he  is  tryd  for  a 
Robbery,  if  he  was  committed  to  Jayle,  to  be  tryed  by  the  Law, 
he  would  certainly  be  transported,  and  then  you  would  loose 
your  Lover,  for  good  and  all.  Well  says  she,  dropping  a 
Curtesy,  I  think  your  Honour,  it  is  better  staying  a  fortnight 
or  so,  til  his  back  is  well,  than  loosing  him  for  ever,  and  so 
good  bye  to  you;  the  frankness  of  the  Ladys  confession,  pleased 
me  greatly,  and  I  hope  will  not  displease  you. 


From  Lord  Bath 

I  got  to  my  Inn  time  enough  to  get  to  bed  in  good  time; 
when  poor  Remond  fell  sick,  being  seised  with  a  shivering  Fit. 
He  went  to  bed  in  the  same  room  I  lay  in,  which  was  so  small 
that  our  beds  lay  close  together  where  he  had  not  been  an  hour 
before  he  was  seised  with  a  violent  Fever,  and  a  head  Ach,  that 
made  him  groan,  and  roar,  all  night  long.  I  was  two  hours 
trying  to  persuade  him  to  send  for  an  Apothecary  or  a  Surgeon, 
and  take  away  a  little  blood,  but  he  was  so  obstinate  that  I 
could  not  prevail;  at  last  the  violence  of  the  pain  in  his  head 
engaged  him  to  consent,  so  at  two  a  clock  in  the  morning  I 
raised  the  whole  house,  and  would  have  got  a  person  to  bleed 
him,  but  the  People  of  the  House  told  me  that  there  was  no 
one  could  do  it,  but  a  Man  that  lived  three  miles  off,  who  was 
a  good  Physician  bled  every  Man,  and  Calf,  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood,  and  was  a  pretty  good  Surgeon,  for  he  had  been  originally 
a  Sowgelder.  I  sent  for  this  Man  who  came  to  us  a  little 
before  four  a  clock  in  the  morning.  When  He  came  to  our 
bedside,  he  desired  with  great  formality  to  feel  my  Pulse.  I 
told  him  I  was  not  his  Patient,  but  the  Gentleman  in  the  next 
bed.  I  cry  you  mercy  Sir  said  He,  my  Lord  I  mean,  pray  Sir 
favour  me  with  your  hand,  said  he  turning  to  Remond  and 
having  felt  his  Pulse  four  or  five  minutes,  He  cryd  out  to  me 
Sr  I  apprehend,  my  Lord  I  mean,  Phlebotomy  may  be  of  great 
service  to  the  gentleman  and  twelve  or  fourteen  ounces  may 
very  well  be  taken  from  him.  Upon  which  I  desired  him  to 
do  it  immediately,  for  neither  he  nor  I  could  sleep  a  wink  til 
it  was  done.  He  performed  the  operation  exceedingly  well, 
but  Remond  recieved  no  benefit  by  it,  nor  did  I  get  the  least 


1764 


MR.  BURKE’S  BOOK 


105 

rest  the  whole  night.  However  the  next  morning  Remond 
got  up,  and  tho’  in  excessive  torture  from  the  pain  in  his  Head, 
He  insisted  upon  going  on  his  Journey,  and  said  he  believed 
he  was  more  likely  to  sleep  in  the  Post  Chaise  than  in  his  Bed, 
so  we  lapp’d  him  up  in  Blanketts  and  swaddling  him  up  very 
warm,  put  the  Fat  Cooke  into  the  Chaise  wth  him  to  serve  him 
by  way  of  pillow,  to  lean  his  head  upon,  and  try  to  sleep.  He 
got  by  this  means  to  Shrewsbury,  and  is  now  rather  easyer, 
but  stil  groans  most  dreadfully;  Mrs.  Ann  has  now  the  Care 
of  him,  and  I  doubt  not  but  in  a  few  days  he  will  be  quite  well. 

Sir  James  Macdonald,  writing  again  from  Paris 
in  June,  says  : 

I  imagine  you  have  seen  Voltaire’s  New  volume  of  tales 
under  the  name  of  Guillaume  Vade  ;  in  which  you  will 
certainly  remark  the  abundance  of  his  imagination  at  his  great 
age  and  the  same  inequality  which  has  always  reigned  in  his 
productions  ;  there  are  however  some  excellent  things  in 
that  volume  and  His  treatise  on  toleration  has  not  yet  fallen 
into  my  hands.  I  hear  it  much  abused  in  this  Country. 
A  translation  of  Mr.  Bourks  Book  [Edmund  Burke’s  on 
The  Sublime  and  Beautiful ,  Pub.  1756  in  England]  will  very 
soon  appear  in  this  country.  I  have  seen  the  Manuscript 
and  have  rendered  him  the  service  of  correcting  some  egregious 
blunders  of  the  translator,  though  I  do  not  pretend  to  have 
rectified  all  his  mistakes. 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

Hill  Street,  June  the  i\th. 

By  some  strange  blunder  of  mine  or  of  the  weather,  I  passed 
almost  a  fortnight  in  the  Country  by  my  fireside  ;  I  am  now 
panting  with  heat  in  Hillstreet,  and  by  shutting  the  jalousies 
of  my  dressing  room  I  am  making  as  if  I  was  in  an  arbor.  The 
gales  waft  on  their  dusky  wings  the  smoak  of  sea  coal  and  the 
smell  of  Brick  kilns,  and  when  the  lark  in  spite  of  sorrow, 
should  at  my  window  bid  good  morrow,  comes  the  small  coal 
man  and  brick  dust  moll  ;  to  them  succeeds  the  cry  of  old 
cloaths,  and  this  is  the  life  of  people  of  taste,  while  the  awkward 
Rustick  we  despise,  is  breathing  fragrance,  hearing  musick, 
and  looking  on  the  gay  fresh  green  livery  of  the  fields.  Nature 
laughs  at  the  fools  of  artificial  pleasure,  and  says  we  shall  not 
be  happy,  nor  enjoy  real  delight,  without  her  assistance  and 


io6 


PRESCRIPTIONS 


1764 


assent.  The  evenings  have  made  me  amends  for  the  heat 
and  labour  of  the  day,  I  have  often  taken  airings  with  my  Lord 
Bath  to  Kew  and  Richmond,  we  have  saunterd  in  the  chaise 
by  the  River  side,  and  sometimes  stopp’d  to  hear  the  nightingale 
in  the  hedges.  His  Lordship  is  returnd  from  Shrewsbury 
looking  very  well,  and  Punning  with  the  utmost  energy  ;  he 
has  flown  as  high,  and  sunk  as  low,  as  the  Region  of  punning 
will  admit,  which  cannot  be  done,  without  health  and  genius 
are  in  their  vigour.  His  Lordship  often  laments  that  his 
greek  is  en  pure  perte  during  your  absence.  He  has  made  a 
thousand  kind  enquiries  after  you,  and  sends  many  a  greek 
invocation  in  the  manner  of  Hesiod,  Homer  and  other  bards, 
to  call  you,  his  muse  to  Tunbridge.  His  Lordship  has  got 
a  whole  piece  of  blue  ribbon  for  you  which  he  bought  at 
Coventry.  I  am  delighted  to  see  him  so  lively  and  well  after 
such  great  fatigues. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  like  many  invalidish  women,  had 
a  weakness  for  cosseting,  nursing,  and  prescribing  for 
friends  whom  she  thought  ailing.  If  Lord  Bath  had 
a  cold  or  a  bad  night,  he  was  inundated  with  pills  or 
draughts  or  admirable  advice  ;  if  he  hadn’t,  he  was 
enjoined  to  dumb-bell  exercise  and  early  airings.  Some¬ 
times  he  flatly  rebelled,  but  on  the  whole  he  was  (or 
professed  himself)  an  obedient,  if  reluctant  patient. 
“  You  are,”  he  says  in  one  of  his  letters,  “continually 
doing  me  good.  You  preserve  my  life  by  your  care 
and  your  Viper  salts.  By  your  Lavender  drops  you 
keep  me  from  dizziness  in  my  head  and  paralytick 
disorders.  By  your  Eye  water  you  preserve  my 
sight.”  .  .  .  “  Your  Physick  has  done  me  a  vast 
deal  of  good,  I  am  as  light  as  a  feather,  and  shall 
come  in  to  you  at  seven,  dancing  a  Minuet  step  to 
shew  my  activity  and  perhaps  be  inclined  to  Romp 
a  little  with  Mrs.  Carter.  I  have  sent  her  my  Coach, 
where  it  may  carry  her  God  knows  but  I  hope  not 
to  matrimony  without  our  leave  and  the  Bishops 
License.” 

At  the  end  of  a  long  letter  written  from  Wolver¬ 
hampton  early  in  June  1764,  Lord  Bath  had  said  : 


1764  LORD  BATH’S  ILLNESS  107 

You  may  perceive  by  this  little  sketch  of  my  affairs,  how 
much  trouble,  and  anxiety  of  mind,  I  must  have  had,  and  add 
to  all  this  my  military  operations,  and  my  Gallantrys  amg 
such  a  number  and  variety  of  Ladys,  and  how  many  Hogsheads 
of  Port  and  Barrels  of  strong  Beer  I  have  been  the  Cause  of 
emptying,  as  Falstaff  said  of  Wit,  by  other  Men,  and  then 
wonder  if  you  please  how  I  am  got  of  so  well,  for  I  am  at  this 
time  in  as  good  health  as  I  ever  was  in  my  Life,  can  walk  I 
think  better  than  I  could,  and  with  your  good  company,  and 
the  Tunbridge  Waters,  I  doubt  not  but  I  shall  grow  young 
again,  and  for  ought  I  know  continue  ten  years  longer. 

This,  however,  was  asking  rather  too  much  of  the 
Fates,  and  within  a  month  of  its  receipt  Lord  Bath 
was  dead.  He  had  returned  to  London  on  June  1 1 
and  Mrs.  Montagu  reached  Hill  Street  a  week  later  ; 
during  the  next  ten  days  they  spent  much  of  their 
time  together  going  for  drives  to  Kew  and  Richmond 
in  his  chaise,  and  enjoying  the  midsummer  beauty 
of  the  riverside.  Dining  at  Lord  Bessborough’s  house 
at  Roehampton  about  the  2  5th,  and  sitting  out  in  the 
gardens  afterwards,  Lord  Bath  caught  a  chill  with 
violent  fever.  He  was  brought  back  to  his  house  in 
Piccadilly,  “  blooded,  blistered  and  purged,”  and 
rallied  wonderfully  for  a  few  days  under  treatment 
by  Drs.  Hebberden,  Warren,  and  Crane.  Lord  Lyttel¬ 
ton,  alarmed  by  a  newspaper  report,  wrote  :  “  I  can 
take  pleasure  in  nothing  while  I  am  in  fear  for  Lord 
Bath.  I  should  if  he  were  to  die  be  as  much  afflicted 
at  your  loss  as  at  my  own.  God  preserve  him  and 
you  ”  ;  and  Lady  Hervey,  to  whom  Mrs.  Montagu 
was  sending  frequent  bulletins,  wrote  to  her,  after  the 
first  encouraging  rally,  to  chide  him  for  so  rash  an 
indiscretion  in  our  fickle  climate,  which  had  cost  the 
late  Duke  of  Richmond  his  life,  though  a  much 
younger  man.  But  the  exhaustion  following  the 
fever  was  too  great  even  for  so  fine  a  constitution  as 
Lord  Bath’s  ;  relapse  followed  within  a  week,  and 
he  died  on  July  7.  An  envelope  at  the  bottom  of 
this  bundle  of  correspondence  is  endorsed  by  Mrs. 


io8 


LORD  BATH’S  DEATH 


1764 


Montagu  :  “  This  note  written  by  the  great  and 

good  Earl  of  Bath  when  delirious  in  his  last  illness 
is  kept  sacred  to  sorrow,  and  eternal  regret  of  the 
best,  sincerest  and  most  amiable  of  friends.”  Within 
is  a  scrap  of  paper  scrawled  almost  illegibly  :  “  Madam, 
It  is  a  great  comfort  to  me  to  think  that  I  begin  to 
flatter  myself  of  dying  where  I  hope(d)  allways  to 
do  it.  .  .  .” 

So  ended  the  greatest  attachment  of  Elizabeth 
Montagu’s  life. 

Though  Dr.  Doran’s  statement  that  “  there  is  no 
letter  in  the  unpublished  collection  which  bears  any 
reference  to  Lord  Bath’s  death  ”  is  quite  incorrect, 
it  is  true  that  Mrs.  Montagu  did  not  write  much  at 
the  moment  on  the  subject.  His  final  illness  was 
only  of  a  few  days’  duration,  and  he  seems  to  have 
been  unconscious  almost  from  the  first.  The  illness 
of  her  friends  always  evoked  the  most  anxious  solici¬ 
tude  from  Mrs.  Montagu,  and  when  she  first  heard  of 
Lord  Bath’s,  lying  alone  among  strangers  and  de¬ 
pendents,  her  concern  had  been  great  indeed  : 

“  Can  anything,”  she  wrote  to  him,  “  be  so  cruel  as  your 
Lordships  carelessness  of  your  health  is  to  your  friends  ?  If 
you  will  not  send  to  Dr.  Hebberden,  let  Monsey  talk  nonsense 
and  physick  and  wit  about  your  cold,  but  for  God  sake  do  not 
neglect  your  illness  in  this  manner.  Perhaps  your  Lordship 
will  be  angry  with  me  for  teizing  you,  but  I  cannot  help  it. 
I  can  only  vex  you,  but  you  grieve  me.  Your  Lordship  is  not 
to  answer  this  ;  all  your  eloquence  cannot  charm  away  my 
apprehensions,  a  little  of  the  barbarous  Latin  of  Dr.  Hebberden 
would  soothe  them  better.  ...  I  will  not  be  your  nurse, 
for  we  should  quarrel  every  hour  about  the  care  to  be  taken 
of  the  patient.  Pray  God  bless  you  and  give  you  better 
health  !  Adieu  ! 

P.S. — All  nurses  order  sick  people  to  eat  broth  and  in  colds 
a  great  deal  of  warm  deluting  liquor,  and  not  to  swallow  any 
solid  meat. 

When  the  end  came,  Mrs.  Carter,  at  her  friend’s 
entreaty,  at  once  came  up  to  stay  with  her ;  together 


i764  “  FORLORN  AND  ANNIHILATED  ”  109 

they  went  for  a  few  days  to  Mrs.  Boscawen’s  at  Hatch- 
lands,  and  thence  a  little  later  to  Sandleford.  Lord 
Bath’s  body  was  embalmed,  and  on  July  18  was 
laid  with  those  of  his  wife  and  son  in  the  vault  he  had 
purchased  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Mr.  Montagu, 
who  had  been  engaged  at  Hill  Street  through  the 
summer  since  his  return  from  the  north  in  sorting 
colliery  documents,  remained  there  deeply — perhaps 
discreetly — immersed  in  his  papers.  His  wife  was 
well  in  health,  but  felt  “  forlorn  and  annihilated,  her 
joyous  spirits  fled  ”  ;  she  wrote  regularly  and  duti¬ 
fully  to  him,  hoping  he  would  be  free  to  join  her 
soon,- and  he  regularly  replied  that  he  was  still  engaged 
amongst  his  “  chaos  of  papers,”  and  added  a  little 
drily  :  “  Against  low  spirits  I  know  of  nothing  so 
efficacious  as  Diversions  or  intense  application  to 
difficult  Studys  or  business.” 

Mrs.  Carter  stayed  on  at  Sandleford  all  through 
August,  and  “  Diversions  ”  in  the  shape  of  expedi¬ 
tions  to  Lord  Portsmouth’s  and  to  Winchester  (her 
favourite  Cathedral)  were  duly  made.  Letters  of 
condolence  came  from  many  friends,  and  Lord  Lyttel¬ 
ton  pressed  her  to  go  to  Hagley  ;  but  she  could  not 
face  a  country  house  party.  His  own  grief  was  only 
less  deep  than  hers. 

“  You  know  that  I  have  scarce  another  friend  in 
the  world  whose  loss  would  grieve  me  so  much,” 
he  had  written  on  the  news  of  his  illness.  On  the 
7th — the  day  of  Lord  Bath’s  death — he  wrote  : 

Your  letter1  has  spoilt  all  my  pleasure  at  Hagley.  What  a 
loss  to  you  and  to  me  !  I  am  glad  you  have  sent  for  Mrs. 
Carter.  Such  a  friend  is  necessary  on  such  an  occasion.  Why 
am  I  not  in  London  ?  Let  me  hear  from  you  often,  for  I 
am  in  great  anxiety  about  your  health. 

And  on  the  14th: 

You  did  very  wisely  to  bleed  [the  universal  panacea  !] 
and  no  Cordial  is  so  good  for  you  as  Mrs.  Carter’s  company. 

1  Not  in  the  collection. 


I  IO 


THE  SETTING  DAY 


1:764 


My  health  has  not  been  hurt  by  this  shock,  though  I  have 
felt  it  very  painfully. 

A  month  earlier  Lord  Lyttelton  had  been  chaffing 
Mrs.  Montagu  about  an  uncommon  distemper  to 
which  (most  unjustly)  she  had  declared  herself  liable, 
the  Dread  of  Ink.  “  In  my  younger  days,”  he  went 
on,  “  I  had  the  talent  of  trifling  agreably  not  only 
with  the  Loves  but  also  with  the  Muses.  Grey  hairs 
and  grave  thoughts  have  almost  taken  it  from  me  ; 
but  you  who  have  revived  all  the  gayety  of  witt  that 
Mr.  Pulteney  possest  at  five  and  twenty  in  Ld.  Bath 
at  fourscore  may  well  be  able  to  awaken  in  my  imagina¬ 
tion  whatever  vivacity  remains  in  it  at  fifty  five.” 
Now  she  wrote  begging  him  to  come  and  see  her  at 
Sandleford,  as  soon  as  his  Hagley  guests  relieved  him. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Sandleford,  Aug.  the  8 th. 

I  am  much  better  than  I  was  when  I  first  came  down, 
but  I  cannot  make  all  the  use  I  ought  to  do  of  the  argument  of 
my  poor  friends  great  age.  The  vigour  and  vivacity  of  his 
mind,  the  sportive  gayety  of  his  witt,  the  energy  of  his  senti¬ 
ments,  the  bright  serene  of  his  temper,  made  me  hope,  however 
the  body  externally  appeard  hurt  by  time,  the  fine  springs  of 
life  were  yet  unimpaired.  I  thought  myself  in  no  danger  of 
losing  him  till  the  mind  began  to  droop,  and  spirits  to  decay. 
I  love  to  converse  with  an  extensive  genius  as  I  do  to  look 
at  an  extensive  prospect,  not  that  either  my  mental  or  corporal 
eye  can  take  in  a  great  horizon,  but  in  conversation  as  in  a 
landskip  I  desire  a  prospect  a  perte  de  vue.  However  it  is 
not  my  dear  Lord  Baths  great  understanding  and  genius  which 
I  regret,  but  that  sweet  composition  in  which  the  elements 
were  so  finely  mix’d.  In  his  society  I  found  the  delight  one 
has  in  a  summer  evening  ;  the  heat  and  light  of  his  meridian 
day  were  mitigated  but  not  obscured  ;  whatever  of  fervour 
was  lost,  was  made  up  by  sweetness  and  gentleness,  and  an 
animated  tranquillity.  The  setting  day  of  a  great  man  is 
indeed  like  that  of  the  summer  sun,  the  warmth  and  activity 
he  put  into  the  general  system  of  his  life  remains  in  a  degree 


i764  AT  WINCHESTER  CATHEDRAL  1 1 1 


when  the  busy  bustling  noon  tide  hour  is  declined,  and  the 
hemisphere  is  still  tinged  with  the  brightness  of  its  beams.  I 
have  the  misfortune  to  outlive  my  friends  ;  they  dye  to  me, 
but  I  am  not  dead  to  them.  I  feel  myself  now  as  tenderly 
concernd  for  my  Lord  Baths  fame  as  I  used  to  be  for  his  health  ; 
I  have  the  same  fear  of  malignant  blasts  for  the  one  as  I  had 
for  the  other  ;  and  the  greatest  pleasure  imaginable  would  it 
give  me,  to  see  that  Country,  in  which  he  long  kept  awake 
the  generous  love  of  liberty,  do  his  character  the  honour  it 
deserves  ;  but  it  is  the  disposition  of  the  present  age  rather  to 
blame  than  commend  ;  or  indeed,  indifferent  to  virtue  and  to 
vice.  Censure  or  praise  is  seldom  utterd  but  by  the  mouth  of 
faction  to  serve  a  party.  This  great  man  had  not  been  eight 
and  forty  hours  departed  before  he  was  abused  in  a  vile  epigram 
in  the  newspapers,  so  little  of  reverence  and  regard  was  there 
to  one  who  was  distinguished  by  all  the  talents,  and  adorn’d 
with  all  the  manners  that  could  grace  and  enoble  a  human 
being.  .  .  . 

Mrs.  Carter  has  a  great  reverence  for  Gothick  Architecture, 
so  I  carried  her  on  tuesday  to  see  Winchester  Cathedral,  which 
is  25  miles  of  bad  road  from  hence,  but  by  laying  my  own 
horses  at  proper  stages,  I  perform’d  the  journey  with  my  own 
postillions,  whom  I  could  better  trust  than  to  hired  ones.  We 
got  to  Winchester  before  twelve  o’clock,  paid  due  honours  at 
the  tombs  of  King  Lucius,  Canute  the  Great,  and  five  Saxon 
Kings,  We  visited  the  place  where  Emma  walk’d  over  the 
burning  plow  shares,  and  delighted  ourselves  with  many 
brittish  antiquities,  and  I  believe  amazed  the  Clerk  with  our 
learning,  as  we  read  all,  and  criticized  most  of  the  inscriptions. 
As  he  did  not  know  our  names,  we  were  very  ostentatious  of 
our  knowledge,  and  flatterd  ourselves  he  would  tell  the  Master 
of  Winchester  school  that  he  had  shewn  the  Church  to  two 
great  female  schollards.  We  gave  him  several  anecdotes  of 
his  Saxon  Kings  with  which  he  may  edify  the  next  persons 
to  whom  he  shews  the  Cathedral,  and  I  dare  say  he  will  not 
omit  to  do  so,  as  he  seemd  to  look  upon  us  with  great  reverence. 
The  perfect  simplicity  of  Winchester  Cathedral  always  pleases 
me  extreamly  :  it  is  the  most  pure  Gothick  Architecture 
that  I  know,  and  we  were  the  more  delighted  with  it,  as  last 
summer  we  had  visited  the  gaudy  churches  in  Flanders.  We 
got  home  early  in  the  evening  the  better  for  our  exercise  and 
amusement.  We  shall  make  some  excursion  every  fine  day. 
There  is  great  pleasure  in  travelling  about  with  a  friend  of 
Mrs.  Carters  learning  and  tast.  The  beautifull  scenes  of 


I  12 


LORD  BATH’S  CHARACTER 


1764 


nature  she  tastes  with  the  divine  enthusiasm  of  a  Poet,  and  the 
venerable  remains  of  antiquity  with  the  information  of  a 
scholar.  Has  your  Lordship  read  the  flippant  and  frippery 
works  of  Voltaire  under  the  title  of  Guillme  de  Vade  ?  He 
has  made  the  most  impertinent  criticism  on  Pope  that  ever  I 
saw.  He  translates  a  language  he  does  not  understand,  and 
then  criticises  his  own  wretched  translation.  As  our  English 
authors  are  in  such  reputation  that  all  nations  are  learning  our 
language,  he  has  a  mind  to  discredit  them,  and  wd  represent 
the  Brittish  Apollo  as  un  jacques  Rost  beef,  coarse  and  inelegant, 
and  whose  strains  are  fit  to  amuse  those  who  delight  in  a  Bear 
garden.  I  will  own  that  in  this  volume  there  are  some  pretty 
things  ;  but  his  criticisms  of  Shakespear,  Otway,  and  Pope  are 
miserable.  A  man  of  witt  will  always  pass  for  a  man  of 
judgment,  and  I  dare  say  he  will  hurt  the  reputation  of  our 
Muses  in  foreign  Lands  ;  he  has  so  apparently  betray’d  his 
ignorance  of  our  language  he  cannot  have  great  effect  here. 

No  sooner  was  Lord  Bath  interred  than  the  papers 
and  quondam  friends  united  in  an  outcry  about  his 
will.  Lord  Chesterfield  wrote  on  July  20  ( Letter 
344)  : 

The  whole  subject  of  conversation  at  present  is  the  Death 
and  Will  of  Lord  Bath  ;  he  has  left  above  twelve  hundred 
thousand  pounds  in  land  and  money,  four  hundred  thousand 
pounds  in  cash,  stocks  and  mortages  ;  his  own  estate  in  land 
was  improved  to  fifteen  thousand  pounds  a  year,  and  the  Bradford 
estate  ...  is  as  much  ;  both  which  at  only  five  and  twenty 
years  purchase  amount  to  eight  hundred  thousand  pounds  ; 
and  all  this  he  has  left  to  his  brother.  General  Pulteney,  and 
in  his  own  disposal,  though  he  never  loved  him.  The  legacies 
he  has  left  are  trifling,  for  in  truth  he  cared  for  nobody  ;  the 
words  give  and  bequeath  were  too  shocking  to  him  to  repeat, 
and  so  he  left  all,  in  one  word,  to  his  brother. 

This  gives  the  keynote  of  the  concerto  of  invective 
which  was  now  performed  on  the  deceased  peer’s 
passion  for  money  and  neglect  of  those  whom  he 
should  have  remembered.  Mrs.  Montagu  was  bitterly 
hurt,  and  said  all  she  could  of  many  acts  of  generosity 
from  her  friend,  of  which  she  had  personal  knowledge  ; 
but  she  could  not  gainsay  altogether  the  truth  of  the 


1764 


LORD  BATH’S  WILL 


113 

general  verdict  ;  and  whilst  to  Dr.  Stillingfleet  she 
did  what  she  could  to  defend  his  memory,  to  Lord 
Lyttelton  she  wrote  frankly  of  her  disappointment. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Sandlf.ford  25 th  of  Aug. 

Your  Lordship  will  not  find  me  dejected.  Spirits  naturally 
lively,  and  a  long  acquaintance  with  affliction  for  the  loss  of 
friends,  enable  me  to  support  myself  under  the  present  mis¬ 
fortune,  but  there  has  not  yet  pass’d  an  hour  in  which  I  have 
not  thought  of  my  poor  friend.  When  I  recollect  that  this 
great  man,  who  had  fill’d  so  important  a  place  in  the  system 
of  society,  lay  on  his  sick  bed  unattended  by  friends,  ill  attended 
by  Doctors,  more  obliged  to  a  faithfull  Valet  de  Chambre 
[RemondJ  than  to  all  the  rest  of  mankind,  my  mind  feels 
mortified  as  much  as  my  heart  is  grieved.  The  tears  of  friends 
are  the  extreme  unction  on  the  death  bed,  but  to  have  that 
kind  viaticum  one  must  have  friends  not  followers,  worthy 
companions  not  hungry  dependants.  One  must  be  more 
distinguish’d  for  liberality  than  wealth.  The  gifts  of  nature 
and  fortune,  the  lustre  of  an  important  reputation,  the  addition 
of  titles,  all  conspired  to  adorn  my  friend,  in  this  bright  orb 
of  so  many  collected  excellencies  there  was  one  spot,  too  great 
love  of  money.  The  Will  has  obscured  his  fame  ;  the  leaving 
such  an  unwieldy  mass  of  wealth  to  a  weak  old  man,  set  the 
world  in  an  uproar.  Some  of  it  should  have  been  sanctified 
to  publick  uses,  his  relations  should  all  have  been  remembered, 
such  of  his  friends  as  were  in  strait  or  unhappy  circumstances 
should  have  tasted  of  his  bounty.  Care  should  have  been 
taken  to  have  transmitted  his  Memoirs  into  honest  hands. 
What  I  say  to  your  Lordship  on  this  subject  I  would  not  say 
to  any  other  person,  but  I  am  truly  hurt  that  the  last  and 
solemn  act  was  not  such  as  was  worthy  of  him.  This  will 
compared  with  the  Wills  of  other  rich  Men  may  pass  without 
very  severe  censure,  but  one  should  suppose  so  great,  so  good, 
so  benevolent  a  mind  as  my  friends  would  have  exerted  itself 
in  acts  of  generosity  on  such  an  occasion.  It  is  the  duty  of 
the  rich  to  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  Man ,  by  imparting  to 
unendow’d  merit  some  of  their  abundance  ;  in  his  life  time 
he  did  generous  things,  but  the  objects  of  his  bounty  were  all 
forgot  in  the  final  settling  of  his  affairs.  The  Bishop  of 
VOL.  I  I 


DISAPPOINTMENTS 


1764 


114 

Bristol  should  have  had  his  papers  and  a  considerable  legacy ; 
as  Mrs.  Carter  was  so  much  in  his  Lordships  favour,  and  lived 
in  such  intimacy  with  him,  it  was  pity  for  him  as  well  as  for 
her  he  did  not  leave  her  an  annuity.  It  would  have  done 
him  honour,  as  she  is  so  distinguished  by  her  virtues  and  talents. 
I  believe  many  good  people  would  blame  my  anxiety  about  the 
fame  of  my  departed  friend,  but  good  fame  is  the  virtue  of 
the  dead  ;  by  that  they  are  still  usefull  to  the  World.  The 
Will  which  has  occasion’d  so  many  censures  was  made  just 
after  Lord  Pulteneys  death,  when  his  mind  was  disturbed,  and 
loth  certainly  to  dwell  on  subjects  that  recall’d  his  misfortune. 
Much  excuse  is  to  be  made  for  a  mind,  which  ill  at  ease  within 
itself  \  forgets  its  shews  of  love  to  other  Men. 

From  later  correspondence  with  Mrs.  Johnstone 
it  would  appear  that  Lord  Bath  had  left  certain  papers 
and  instructions  of  later  date  than  the  will,  but  these 
had  not  been  executed,  and  were,  it  seems,  destroyed 
by  General  Pulteney. 


From  Ford  Lyttelton 

Hagley,  Sept.  1. 

Your  Anxiety  for  the  Fame  of  our  departed  Friend  is  too 
well  founded.  I  was  afraid  to  touch  before  on  so  tender  a 
thing,  or  else  I  would  have  told  you,  that  of  the  numbers  of 
Visitants  I  have  seen  at  Hagley  since  his  Death  not  one  has 
spoke  of  his  Will  without  great  Reproach  to  his  Memory. 
They  say,  a  Man,  who  had  so  vast  a  Fortune  to  leave  wherever 
he  pleased  to  bestow  it,  must  have  been  wholly  void  of  all 
Feelings  of  Merit,  Friendship,  or  Humanity,  to  bequeath 
nothing  to  the  benefitt  of  any  of  these  after  the  death  of  his 
Brother.  There  is  a  particular  Indignation  at  his  leaving  no 
Legacy  to  Mrs.  Carter,  and  so  very  small  a  one  to  his  faithfull 
and  affectionate  Valet  de  Chambre.  The  only  Answer  I  could 
make,  either  to  them,  or  myself,  was  the  natural  Indolence 
of  his  Temper,  which  was  probably  encreas’d  by  a  kind  of 
sullen  Despair  on  the  death  of  his  only  Son  ;  but,  as  he  lived 
afterwards  long  enough  to  recover  from  that  Blow,  it  is  sur¬ 
prising  he  should  chuse  to  let  a  Brother  so  inferior  in  Under¬ 
standing  to  himself  dispose  of  all  the  Wealth  he  had  acquired 
or  saved,  and  be  sole  Judge  in  what  channels  his  Benevolence 
should  flow,  or  perhaps  entirely  stop  the  course  of  it,  according 


1764  MRS.  CARTER  ON  LORD  BATH  115 


to  his  own  humour.  That  he  had  Benevolence  in  his  Heart 
»You  and  I  can  hardly  doubt,  from  what  we  have  known  of 
his  Sentiments  and  Actions,  which  makes  it  the  more  wonderfull 
that  the  Fis  Inertiae  should  so  far  prevail  over  it  in  that  great 
Act,  which  might  have  diffused  it  more  extensively  than  any 
other  Man,  in  the  course  of  many  centuries,  may  have  power  to 
spread  the  streams  of  Bounty  without  reproach  from  near 
Relations.  When  one  thinks  of  this  one  can’t  help  exclaiming 
with  Pope,  “  O  Wealth  ill-fated,”  etc. 

Mrs.  Carter’s  opinion  of  Lord  Bath’s  character 
may  be  given  here  : 1 

None  of  his  friends  will  remember  him  longer  and  very 
few  with  equal  affection.  Indeed  there  was  something  in 
his  conversation  and  manners  more  engaging  than  can  be 
described.  With  all  those  talents  which  had  so  long  rendered 
him  the  object  of  popular  admiration,  he  had  not  the  least 
tincture  of  that  vanity  and  importance  which  is  too  often  the 
consequence  of  popular  applause.  He  never  took  the  lead  in 
conversation  nor  ever  assumed  that  superiority  to  which  he 
had  a  claim  and  while  he  was  blessed  with  an  exemption  from 
many  of  the  pains  and  infirmities  of  old  age  he  had  none  of 
its  defects.  For  so  many  months  as  I  passed  continually  in  his 
company  last  year  (1763)  I  do  not  recollect  a  single  instance 
of  peevishness  the  whole  time.  His  temper  always  appeared 
equal,  there  was  a  perpetual  flow  of  vivacity  and  good  humour 
in  his  conversation,  and  the  most  attentive  politeness  in  his 
behaviour.  Nor  was  this  the  constrained  effort  of  external 
and  partial  good  breeding,  but  the  natural  turn  of  his  mind 
operated  so  uniformly  on  all  occasions,  that  I  never  heard 
him  use  a  harsh  or  even  an  uncivil  expression  to  any  of  his 
servants. 


From  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort 

H  Park,  the  zyth  Sept. 

I  would  not  have  my  Dear  Friend  ever  have  any  Scruples 
about  Writing  to  me,  as  I  know  so  well  how  unapt  one  is  to 
write  even  when  leisure  is  favourable,  how  much  more  then 
when  Company  and  other  Avocations  make  it  really  difficult  ; 
I  love  to  hear  from  You,  that’s  certain  but  I  do  not  love  to 

1  From  Mrs.  Carter  s  Memoirs  of  her  Life,  by  the  Rev.  Montagu 
Pennington,  her  nephew. 


1 1 6  THE  DUCHESS  OF  BEAUFORT  1764 


torment  You  ;  therefore  I  am  willing  to  commit  my  Self 
entirely  to  yr  mercy.  I  do  wish  you  here  and  now  I  go  long 
Airings  I  long  for  you  to  make  Them  pleasanter,  for  pleasant 
they  are  to  me  after  so  long  a  Confinement  :  You  give  me 
no  hope  and  now  my  next  Wish  is  that  You  would  not  stay 
long  at  Sandleford.  Yr  spirits  are  alter’d,  do  not  let  them  be 
depress’d.  As  to  yr  Bath  journey,  les  beaux  Esprits  se  rencon- 
trent,  it  was  not  a  Week  before  I  had  yours  that  I  wrote  Mrs. 
Southwell  I  believ’d  I  shou’d  go  to  Bath  not  having  a  place 
to  set  my  foot  in  in  London  and  being  disqualify’d  for  my 
November  Employmt  here  wch  is  planting  and  without  which 
I  should  be  too  dreary,  after  so  long  a  sickness,  and  amidst  such 
painfull  Remembrances  :  Anniversarys  and  returning  Seasons 
the  Heart  never  parts  with. 

I  suppose  Bath  Waters  wou’d  do  me  good  but  those  I 
shou’d  not  rashly  venture  on  without  l’Avis  des  Docteurs  : 
but  if  I  am  able  to  take  such  a  Journey  I  think  it  will  be  better 
for  me  than  staying  here  till  December  or  going  into  Audley 
Street,  all  over  painted  and  whitewash’d  and  new  hung,  con¬ 
sequently  Abounding  in  many  Stinks,  All  unwholesome  as  well 
as  unpleasant  ;  but  whether  I  have  seen  my  Bath  Journey 
quite  in  so  favourable  a  light  till  since  I  reced  yr  kind  Letter, 
I  leave  You  to  guess  ;  certainly  you  fix’d  that  wch  was  before 
en  Fair  and  nam’d  only  to  Mrs.  Southwell  as  a  Scheme  wch 
I  thought  She  might  help  realise,  She  is  no  farther  off  than 
Ks  Weston.  I  cannot  engage  in  any  mix’d  Society  at  Bath, 
but  if  I  cou’d  have  That  of  a  Friend  doubtless  it  wou’d  do  me 
good,  I  have  liv’d  long  alone  car  la  Jeunesse  quoiqu’aimable 
n’est  pas  justement  le  Fait  d’une  Vieille,  d’une  Malade,  d’une 
Vapeureuse  (I  believe  the  french  have  no  Word  to  express 
low  Spirits).  I  have  not  Eyes  or  head  to  read  much,  My 
Girls  read  to  me,  and  if  You  were  to  hear  Bess  I  think  You 
wou’d  not  abate  of  that  Favour  You  always  had  towards  Her. 
Fanny  gets  hoarse  in  a  Minute  so  that  the  reading  devolves 
upon  her  Sister  who  acquits  herself  en  charme.  They  are  fine 
Girls  I  thank  God. 

I  like  yr  Friend  the  Bishop  and  his  Wife  exceedingly.  They 
are  very  good  to  Me  :  I  have  not  made  a  Visit  this  whole 
Year,  (not  once  to  Ld  Onslow  my  nearest  Neighbour)  so  they 
see  it  is  not  laziness,  and  they  have  been  so  good  to  come  and 
dine  with  me,  wch  I  hope  They  will  do  again.  Bess  charm’d 
the  Bishop  with  her  Musick,  nay  and  I  made  her  Sing  to  Him, 
chose,  que  sa  Modestie  ne  lui  permet  jamais  de  faire,  no,  not 
to  her  Bror  who  is  often  angry  with  her  upon  the  Subject. 


1764 


“AN  IDLE  CUR” 


117 

I  am  glad  You  have  seen  Ld  Lyttelton  again,  I  heard 
t’other  day  (and  the  Story  came  from  Bath)  that  the  Marriage 
between  Miss  War  :  and  Mr.  Lytt  :  was  by  the  latter  declar’d 
off.  I  don’t  believe  it,  knowing  how  many  lies  are  positively 
asserted  upon  Such  Subjects.  I  shou’d  be  excessively  sorry  for 
this,  because  I  think  it  wou’d  vex  My  Lord  extremely. 

Yr  Description  of  yr  little  Nephew  refreshes  ones  Imagina¬ 
tion,  what  a  pretty  Kid  !  My  Son  is  among  the  Goats  and  the 
Mountains  of  Wales  and  has  been  sailing  the  Salt  Seas  with 
Sr  Thos  Stepney  from  Llanelly  to  Minehead,  back  again  to 
Llanelly,  from  whence  by  Land  to  Milford  Haven,  whither 
Sr  Thos  Yacht  was  order’d  round  in  order  to  shew  him  that 
Harbour  in  perfection,  his  Friend  Mr.  Stepney  (an  oxonian 
of  Ch  Ch  :)  is  his  very  agreeable  Companion  in  this  Tour, 
but  staid  behind  at  home  during  the  Voyage  for  wch  he  has 
not  the  Appetite  My  Son  inherits. 

I  cou’d  almost  find  in  my  heart  to  send  You  a  long  Lettr 
of  yr  favourite  and  Admirer  my  William  giving  me  an  Acct 
of  a  Christening  where  He  and  his  Aunt  Falmouth  were 
Gossips  (at  Dulwich)  ;  tis  a  droll  dog  !  but  do  you  know  I 
have  complaints  that  his  Honour  don’t  mind  his  Mathematicks  ; 
tell  me  how  one  shall  contrive  de  fourrer  le  bon  homme  Euclid 
into  that  Volatile  pate  of  his.  an  idle  cur  believe  Me. 

Elizabeth,  widow  of  the  fourth  Duke  of  Beaufort, 
was  daughter  of  John  Berkeley  of  Stoke  Gifford 
and  sister  of  Lord  Bottetourt.  The  son  Henry  men¬ 
tioned  above  married  Elizabeth,  Admiral  Boscawen’s 
daughter,  and  became  fifth  Duke  in  17 56.  William 
Boscawen,  the  “  idle  cur,”  was  Elizabeth’s  cousin,  and 
nephew  of  the  second  Viscountess  Falmouth. 

When  the  Duchess  married  in  1740,  our  Miss 
Robinson  wrote  :  “  Everybody  is  content  except 

those  who  would  have  liked  the  gentleman  for  them¬ 
selves.” 


To  her  Husband 

7  Nov. 

A  chaise  was  robbed  in  Maidenhead  Thicket  yesterday  but 
I  passed  unmolested  ;  but  I  imagine  there  is  much  robbery, 
for  the  machines  have  four  men  to  guard  them  and  gentlemen’s 
equipages  have  often  a  great  number  armed  to  the  teeth.  It 


1 1 8  JEMMY  TWITCHER  x764 

makes  the  roads  look  military.  ...  I  suppose  you  know  poor 
Jemmy  Twitcher  is  sadly  twitch’d  at  Cambridge.  He  has  lost 
the  affair  of  the  Vice  Chanceller  and  so  I  suppose  his  Lordship 
will  be  expell’d  the  university.  I  arrived  at  Sandleford  just  as 
it  grew  dark. 

Maidenhead  Thicket  was  a  notorious  haunt  of 
highwaymen.  It  was  near  the  junction  of  the  Oxford 
and  Bath  roads  to  London,  two  miles  west  of  Maiden¬ 
head. 

Jemmy  Twitcher  was  the  nickname  given  to  John 
Montagu,  fourth  Earl  of  Sandwich,  taken  from 
Macheath’s  last  scene  in  The  Beggar's  Opera  :  “  That 
Jemmy  Twitcher  should  peach  me  I  own  surprised 
me,”  in  reference  to  Lord  Sandwich’s  too  energetic 
activities  in  suborning  some  of  Wilkes’s  people  to 
obtain  a  copy  of  the  notorious  Essay  on  Woman  for 
production  before  the  House  of  Lords  as  a  breach 
of  privilege,  it  being  addressed  to  him,  and  he  having 
been,  as  was  believed,  one  of  the  select  company  to 
whom  it  was  originally  given. 

From  Sandleford  Mrs.  Montagu  went  on  for  a 
visit  to  Bath  in  the  middle  of  November. 


Gay  Street,  Bath,  ye  i 6th  of  Nov. 

Mrs.  Boscawen  is  here  in  pretty  good  spirits  and  health,  I 
dined  with  her  to-day.  I  found  my  sister  quite  recoverd,  she 
and  Lady  Bab  are  full  of  the  kindest  attentions.  All  Ireland, 
but  Mrs.  Vesey,  oh  what  a  But  is  there  !  is  now  assembled 
at  Bath.  Nay  there  are  Veseys  too,  but  beware  of  counterfeits. 
However  for  our  consolation  Mrs.  Delany  writes  me  that  the 
Sylph  will  be  in  Town  this  winter. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

December. 

Mrs.  Johnstone  I  saw  this  morning,  the  waters  have  done 
her  great  service,  and  the  General  [Pulteney,  Lord  Bath’s 
brother]  seems  in  good  humour  with  her.  He  calld  on  me 
to  night  by  appointment,  behaved  with  great  regard  to  me, 
talk’d  of  his  Brothers  papers  and  whatever  might  affect  his 


JOHN  MONTAGU.  FOURTH  EARL  OF  SANDWICH 
By  John  Zoffany 


. 


1764 


GENERAL  PULTENEY 


1 19 

future  political  fame  with  prudence  and  tenderness.  He  tells 
me  he  is  vastly  delighted  with  my  letters,  but  will  give  them 
into  my  own  hands  as  soon  as  I  come  to  Town.  He  is  not 
so  happy  as  before  the  great  access  of  fortune.  He  says  he  is 
new  to  such  cases  ;  oh  that  he  wd  let  Bounty  shere  ye  superfluity 
away,  but  he  is  more  fond  of  money  than  ever.  In  many  things 
he  told  me  to  night  of  his  conduct  in  various  parts  of  life  he 
seems  to  have  acted  with  strict  honour,  therefore  I  am  inclined 
to  think  he  has  made  some  blunder  about  ye — and  has  not  yet 
look’d  into  it.  How  I  grieve  that  our  poor  friend  did  not  take 
care  his  last  act  shd  have  sanctified  and  dignified  all  the  rest  of 
his  life.  .  .  .  The  Gen1  told  me  he  never  was  one  moment 
sensible  after  he  was  taken  ill,  and  I  really  believe  it.  .  .  .  My 
mind  feels  a  thousand  pains  as  often  as  I  have  time  to  think  on 
this  subject.  As  you  observe  there  is  a  good  lesson  to  be  learnt 
from  it,  but  it  is  sad  to  learn  it  of  a  dear  friend. 

Later,  however,  she  adds  : 

The  noble  General  has  withdrawn  the  care  our  poor  Friend 
had  over  a  helpless  orphan  whom  Ld  P:  put  to  school,  and  he 
maintain’d  there.  He  has  made  a  most  hard  bargain  with  poor 
Remond  concerning  the  House  Mr.  Daniel  Pulteney  left  him. 
Remond  hoped  to  have  hired  it  at  an  j£ioo  a  year  on  lease, 
and  to  have  lett  it  again  at  advantage,  but  the  Genl  hoisted 
the  rent  ^20  pr  annum,  and  forced  some  old  furniture  upon 
him,  however  I  hope  we  shall  get  it  lett  in  such  a  manner  that 
Remond  will  not  be  a  loser.  Indeed  all  goes  ill  with  poor 
Lord  Baths  dependants,  and  to  his  memory  no  regard  is  shewn 
The  books  are  to  be  sold  by  auction  in  Jany.  I  will  own  to 
you  the  handsome  figure  which  our  friend  made  in  his  domestick 
economy,  the  kind  and  charitable  things  I  had  seen  him  do, 
the  great  professions  he  made  of  not  caring  for  money,  made 
me  not  imagine  Covetousness  was  so  predominant  as  I  find 
it  was  in  his  character,  or  I  would  have  begg’d  of  him  to  have 
left  his  charities  an  obligation  on  his  Heir,  and  as  to  poor 
Remond,  I  thought  him  secure  of  a  plentiful  provision,  and 
he  has  hardly  bread,  and  Mrs.  Remond  is  breeding.  I  accuse 
myself  of  too  timid  complaisance  in  not  having  pressed  these 
testamentory  duties  upon  him.  My  great  esteem  for  him 
cheated  me,  and  made  me  a  less  useful  friend  than  I  might 
have  been.  I  had  a  filial  affection  for  him  to  which  I  fear  I 
sacrificed  some  of  that  bold  and  frank  zeal  with  which  one 
should  set  the  duties  before  the  eyes  of  a  friend. 


120 


A  LECTURE  ON  HEADS 


1764 


To  her  Husband 

Dec.  the  $th. 

I  was  yesterday  morning  at  a  very  singular  entertainment 
calld  a  lecture  upon  heads.  I  found  all  people  had  been  much 
entertaind  with  it,  but  I  expected  little  better  than  a  drole 
kind  of  buffoonery  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  it  was  a  witty  well 
bred  satire.  The  man  who  exhibits  this  amusement  was  a 
player,  he  has  a  fine  voice  and  gracefull  elocution,  and  he  ran 
through  the  follies  of  some  professions  and  characters  with 
admirable  humour.  He  gave  us  a  law  pleading,  a  medical 
dissertation,  a  politicians  discourse,  a  presbyterian  sermon  with 
great  humour,  a  very  elegant  allegory  of  genius,  jests  on  fashions, 
and  in  short  an  hour  of  the  best  theatrical  entertainment  I  have 
seen.  He  is  infinitely  beyond  Mr.  Foote,  whose  excellence  is 
mere  personal  mimickry.  Poor  Lord  Granville  gives  the 
publick  much  amusement  ;  he  is  not  void  of  understanding 
so  much  as  absurd.  I  could  never  make  a  fool  or  madman 
my  sport,  so  his  prate  makes  me  melancholly  ;  tho  he  paints 
out  his  Sisters  with  some  humour  ;  he  has  quarelld  with  all 
of  them  but  Lady  Sophia  Carteret.  He  drinks  hard,  and  has 
a  swelld  leg,  and  looks  heated,  so  perhaps  he  may  not  long  be 
a  disgrace  to  a  very  noble  and  antient  family. 

In  a  letter  to  Lord  Lyttelton  of  November  25 
Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

I  find  by  the  death  of  Mr.  Churchill  there  is  one  scribbler 
less  than  there  was,  but  there  are  so  many  scribblers  and  so 
many  scoundrels  left  that  I  see  not  much  reason  why  virtue 
should  rejoice  or  malice  regret  the  disaster.  .  .  . 

Pray  when  you  see  Lady  Hervey  say  everything  for  me 
that  can  express  my  regard.  Lady  Frances  Coningsby  is  in 
Town.  Pray  tell  Lady  Hervey  that  I  believe  Lord  Chesterfield 
is  very  well,  for  he  utters  an  hundred  bons  mots  a  day,  which 
would  be  impossible,  even  for  him,  if  he  was  not  in  health  and 
spirits.  I  saw  him  once  in  the  rooms  and  he  look’d  well. 


To  her  Husband 

Thursday  the  20  Dec. 

The  Primate  of  Ireland  is  dead.  The  Church  will  lament 
him  less  than  the  Court  ;  he  had  every  vice  but  hypocrisy, 
took  every  shape  but  that  of  a  man  of  virtue  and  Religion. 


1764 


A  PRIMATE  OF  IRELAND 


121 


Polite,  insinuating,  generous,  the  pimp  of  pleasure  and  the  spy 
of  state,  a  slave  to  one  vice,  but  the  other  vices,  especially  the 
most  natural  one,  he  made  to  serve  his  purposes.  Had  he 
been  galant  he  could  have  obliged  but  one  Lady  at  a  time, 
but  from  his  own  Seraglio  he  obliged  many.  He  govern’d 
private  families  by  providing  the  Ladies  with  Lovers  of  his  own 
educating.  They  were  taught  by  his  Lordship  to  spell  the 
love  letters  they  wrote.  This  Prelate  was  much  such  a 
Successor  to  St  Patrick  as  Pope  Sixtus  to  St  Peter.  It  is  said 
Dr.  Newton  will  succeed  him  as  Primate,  but  I  know  not 
that  there  is  any  foundation  for  the  report.  The  Primate  for 
many  years  was  Viceroy  of  Ireland  in  fact  ;  what  will  happen 
in  that  Kingdom  now  it  is  difficult  to  guess.  Ministers  cast 
out  Devils  by  the  Prince  of  Devils,  such  a  Primate  is  therefore 
of  great  importance  to  them,  and  I  do  not  know  where  they 
will  find  a  head  and  heart  so  fit  for  all  the  black  art  of  Cabal 
as  the  late  Primates.  He  wd  have  been  one  of  the  first 
characters  in  Catherine  de  Medicis  Court,  but  in  ours  he  was 
a  prodigy,  and  wonderfully  esteemd  by  inferior  fourbes. 

Letters  from  Lord  Lyttelton  at  the  close  of  the 
year  reveal  his  anxiety  about  his  son’s  escapades  in 
Italy,  where  he  was  “  detained  by  the  Circes  and 
Syrens  of  the  coast  about  Genoa.”  Miss  Warburton 
had  broken  off  her  engagement  with  young  Lyttelton 
for  reasons  she  would  not  tell,  and  could  not  even  be 
persuaded  to  postpone  the  breach  till  the  prodigal’s 
return,  which  his  much-vexed  father  was  now  trying 
to  accelerate  by  stopping  his  credit  in  Italy. 

Miss  Warburton’s  reasons  were  doubtless  ample 
enough,  for  young  Lyttelton  was  sowing  his  wild  oats 
broadcast  abroad. 


1765 


BULSTRODE,  BADMINTON,  AND  SANDLEFORD - 

THE  ROCKINGHAM  MINISTRY 


Mrs.  Montagu’s  cousin  becomes  Primate  of  Ireland.  Denton  coal.  The 
Czarina  and  Voltaire.  Visit  to  Bulstrode.  A  weak  Ministry.  James 
Woodhouse.  Count  Bruhl.  A  Lyttelton  for  ever.  Lord  Shelburne. 
Country  visits.  Adam  at  Sandleford.  Death  of  Duke  of  Cumberland. 
Pitt  at  Burton  Pynsent.  General  Pulteney’s  Dream.  The  Duke’s 
papers.  The  Stamp  Act.  Mr.  Bateman.  Mr.  Finch.  Mrs.  Anne 
Pitt.  Mr.  Walpole.  Mr.  Pitt  at  Bath.  Duke  of  Cumberland’s 
Funeral.  Dr.  Lowth  and  Bishop  Warburton. 


The  beginning  of  the  year  1765  found  Mrs. 
Montagu  studying  Johnson’s  Shakespeare  and  work¬ 
ing  upon  her  own  Essay.  Early  letters  record 
General  Pulteney’s  gift  to  her  of  Sir  Godfrey  Kneller’s 
portrait  of  Lord  Bath  ;  Sir  William  Pynsent’s  bequest 
to  Mr.  Pitt,  valued  at  £ 60,000  ;  the  visit  of  her  cousin 
Laurence  Sterne  to  Bath  ;  and  the  elevation  of 
another  but  very  different  clerical  cousin,  Sir  Richard 
Robinson,  then  Bishop  of  Kildare,  to  the  Primacy  of 
Ireland.  Sir  Richard,  who  was,  like  his  brother,  “  long 
Sir  Thomas,”  immensely  tall,  portly,  and  handsome, 
was  a  great  favourite  in  the  family  and  particularly 
with  Mrs.  Montagu,  with  whom  he  kept  up  a  regular 
correspondence  till  his  death.  He  became  later  on 
the  first  Baron  Rokeby.  The  correspondence  from 
and  about  Sterne  will  be  given  later  as  a  separate 
paper.  In  June  a  fresh  edition  of  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
Dialogues  of  the  Dead  —  to  which  Mrs.  Montagu 
had  contributed  Nos.  26,  27,  and  28 — was  issued.  In 


122 


1765 


HOLLAND  HOUSE 


123 


this  month  Mrs.  Vesey,  with  whom  Sterne  had  been 
philandering  at  Bath,  left  London  for  Ireland,  carrying 
with  her  four  nightingales  which  she  hoped  to  acclima¬ 
tise  at  Lucan.  Mr.  Montagu  while  in  town  took  his 
walks  in  the  grounds  of  Holland  House,  of  which  his 
wife  writes  :  “  Mr.  Hamilton  of  Cobham,  who  has 
the  finest  taste  perhaps  of  any  man  in  gardens,  etc., 
laid  out  the  grounds  ;  wealth  inexhaustible  executed 
his  plans  with  rapidity,  and  it  is  become  within  a  short 
time  the  finest  villa  in  England.  There  is  an  air  of 
grandeur  in  it  beyond  what  the  extent  should  seem  to 
allow.”  At  the  end  of  the  month  the  first  shipload 
of  coal  from  the  Denton  collieries  arrived  in  the 
Thames,  and  Mr.  Montagu  feasted  the  Billingsgate 
crimps,  while  the  coals  underwent  a  fiery  trial  with 
great  satisfaction  to  all  concerned. 

Work  on  the  Shakespeare  Essay  led  to  study  of 
Voltaire’s  critical  writings,  against  which  his  attacks 
on  our  Bard  had  helped  to  predispose  her  judgement. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Sandleford,  June  10. 

I  brought,  in  my  post  chaise,  to  read  in  my  journey,  Mr. 
Voltaires  philosophie  de  l’histoire  ;  it  is  la  petite  piece  to  Ld 
Bolingbrokes  first  philosophy,  of  which  the  frenchman  has 
taken  pieces  to  make  him  a  Harlequin  Coat  ;  but  the  dazzling 
eloquence  of  Ld  Bolingbroke  gave  lustre  to  his  work,  which 
the  sparkling  witt  of  the  other  does  not  enoble,  tho  it  enlivens  ; 
and  like  a  players  dress,  there  is  nothing  to  recommend  it  but 
a  few  spangles.  I  was  much  provoked  at  his  flattery  of  the 
present  Empress  of  Russia,  which  he  concludes  :  et  enfin , 
on  a  vu  en  un  demi  siec/e  la  Cour  de  Scithie  plus  eclairee  qui 
ne  Pont  jamais  ete  la  Grece  et  Rome.  Why  this  affront  to 
Greece  and  Rome  ?  Peter  was  certainly  a  great  man,  and 
establishd  a  polishd  and  regulated,  in  the  room  of  an  ignorant 
and  barbarous  despotism.  Had  he  constituted  a  good  govern¬ 
ment,  I  should  have  had  a  better  opinion  of  his  talents,  as  well 
as  virtues  ;  but  for  want  of  this,  he  was  obliged  to  murder 
his  son,  knowing  all  his  regulations  depended  on  the  Will  of 


124 


EMPRESS  OF  RUSSIA 


1765 


the  Successor.  His  Empress  was  a  Woman  of  great  genius. 
Elizabeth  was  sunk  in  beastly  sensuality.  This  Empress  is 
a  Monster  with  talents.  Has  Russia  yet  produced  in  any  of 
its  subjects  a  statesman  ?  a  Warrior  ?  a  Poet  ?  an  Orator  ? 
a  philosopher  ?  This  State  la  plus  eclaire,  like  polyphemus, 
has  but  one  Eye  to  guide  its  vast  bulk,  and  that  is  in  the  head 
of  its  Despote.  I  should  have  had  a  much  higher  opinion 
of  the  Empress  if  she  had  sought  an  able  Politician  for  a 
Preceptor  for  her  Son  rather  than  a  Mathematician  ;  an 
Emperor  is  not  to  make  Almanacks.  But  the  choice  of  a 
French  Academician,  and  a  vast  present  to  Mr.  Voltaire, 
have  procured  a  compliment  which  dishonours  a  Man  of 
Genius. 

On  June  30  Lord  Lyttelton  writes  : 

No  ministry  is  yet  settled.  All  I  can  acquaint  you  with  is, 
that  in  consequence  of  two  conversations  with  the  King  Mr. 
Pitt  had  consented  to  be  Secretary  of  State  on  Condition  that 
Lord  Temple  would  accept  of  the  Treasury  ;  which  his 
Lordship  declined  and  went  last  night  to  Stowe.  Mr.  Pitt 
I  understand  is  going  to  Somersetshire,  and  I  shall  begin 
tomorrow  my  parties  of  pleasure  with  my  good  daughter  who 
is  very  glad  to  hear  you  are  to  be  of  that  with  the  Duchess  of 
Portland. 

Mrs.  Montagu  and  Mrs.  Carter  were  reading  Tacitus 
at  the  same  time  “  so  as  to  always  have  a  subject  to 
correspond  upon  she  writes  to  Lord  Lyttelton  : 

We  are  quarrelling  prodigiously  upon  the  subject  of  Augustus 
who  she  will  not  let  me  admire  because  he  was  not  a  good 
Christian  ;  but  neither  was  her  favourite  Plato,  yet  he  was 
a  good  Philosopher  in  his  time. 

To  Lord  Lyttelton 

July  the  4 th. 

I  assure  your  Lordship  the  coal  fires  which  Mr.  Montagu 
mention’d,  were  to  me,  feux  de  joye.  I  believe  we  have 
open’d  a  noble  source  of  future  plenty,  but  it  is  present  poverty. 
We  are  at  present  the  poorer  a  great  deal,  for  a  Mine  at  first 
opening  has  a  prodigious  swallow  ;  when  it  begins  to  disgorge 
it  makes  noble  amends.  Indeed  everything  is  very  encouraging 
to  the  coal  trade  ;  Wood  is  every  day  decreasing,  so  that  all 


1765 


BULSTRODE  REVISITED 


i25 


the  Counties  which  have  not  Inland  Coal  are  to  be  supplied 
from  the  North  ;  the  Increase  of  London  is  a  prodigious 
advantage  to  the  trade,  the  improvement  of  mechanicks  has 
made  our  business  more  easy  and  more  sure,  and  all  the  people 
of  fortune  who  have  worked  mines,  have  grown  rich  ;  witness 
the  Bower’s,  Ld  Ravensworth,  My  cousin  Wortley,  and  many 
others.  Some  who  have  begun  without  a  fund  have  by  the 
malice  of  their  fellow  traders  been  obliged  to  lay  aside  their 
project  before  the  time  that  the  profits  were  to  come  in,  but 
as  we  are  not  in  any  danger  of  bankruptcy,  we  can  hardly 
fail  of  being  very  great  gainers.  .  .  . 

I  expect  to  find  Bullstrode  much  embellish’d,  if  it  could 
see  me  how  different  would  be  its  reflection  on  the  effect  of 
time  !  However  I  can  look  back  without  regret,  as  the  years 
that  have  robb’d  me  of  what  might  give  me  a  sort  of  general 
admiration  have  paid  me  by  giving  me  sincere  and  faithfull 
friends,  whose  regard,  not  depending  on  the  transient  roses 
of  the  youthfull  season,  is  above  the  reach  of  sickness,  age, 
and  small  pox,  at  the  thought  of  which  I  used  to  tremble  in 
my  vain  Empire.  I  have  seen  tragical  descriptions  of  the 
fears  of  a  Tyrant  ;  I  am  sure  I  could  give  a  very  comical 
one  of  the  fears  of  a  beauty,  and  one  misery  is,  one  dare  not 
impart  either  the  joys  or  the  sorrows  that  belong  to  that  state. 
I  remember  one  day  to  amuse  my  eldest  Brother,  when  he 
was  not  well,  I  gave  him  the  inventory  of  my  felicities  and 
cares,  at  which  he  laugh’d  till  he  fairly  fell  off  his  chair.  If 
your  Lordship  should  see  me  fall  into  a  reverie  now  and  then 
at  Bullstrode  you  must  not  be  surprized  ;  the  remembrance  of 
youth  is  a  sigh ,  says  the  Oriental  proverb. 

From  Airs.  Hervey 

Old  Windsor,  the  8  th  of  July. 

Pray  Madam  what  say  you  to  all  the  extraordinary  events 
and  non-events  that  have  happen’d  of  late  ?  We  seem  neither 
to  have  administration  or  Government  at  present  ;  all  men  do 
what  seemeth  good  in  their  own  eyes  ;  can  any  people  wish 
for  more  ?  Popular  discontents  must  be  at  an  end,  they  being 
always  occasioned  by,  or  levell’d  at  the  one  or  the  other.  I  hear 
the  foreign  Ministers  are  greatly  at  a  loss  when  any  mails  come 
in,  not  knowing  in  the  least  who  to  address  themselves  to  for 
their  business.  A  friend  of  mine  being  told  the  other  day 
that  Monr  de  Guerchy  complained  “  Qu’il  ne  pouvoit  pas 


126 


LORD  FORTESCUE 


1765 


trouver  a  qui  parler,”  made  answer  “  Oue  si  Monr  Pitt  entroit 
il  trouveroit  bien  a  qui  parler.”  I  think  you  will  easily  guess 
that  this  answer  was  made  at  Blackheath. 

“  Mrs.”  Elizabeth  Hervey,  who  became  in  later 
years  a  frequent  correspondent  from  Lady  Ailesbury’s 
at  Park  Place,  was  a  grand-daughter  of  the  first  and  niece 
of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  Earls  of  Bristol.  Her 
letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu  are  charged  with  compliment 
and  adulation  ;  but  Fanny  Burney,  archly  malicious, 
quotes  Dr.  Johnson  as  saying  that  Mrs.  Hervey  told 
him  she  could  remember  Mrs.  Montagu  when  she 
was  “  trying  for  ”  the  air  and  manner  of  a  distinguished 
woman  of  great  parts. 

To  her  Husband. 

Bath. 

The  Duchess  of  Beaufort  will  carry  me  to  dine  there  on 
tuesday  then  I  shall  lye  that  night  at  Badminton  which  is  in 
the  way  to  Lady  Talbots,  where  I  intend  to  go  on  wensday 
and  return  to  Bath  on  Saturday.  Comte  Bruhl  had  been  at 
Hagley,  Ld  Lyttelton  carried  him  to  a  Seat  of  his  at  Arly, 
which  was  the  original  family  Seat,  in  the  way  to  it  they  pass’d 
through  Bewdley,  the  people  of  the  Town  hearing  his  Lordship 
was  coming  to  the  number  of  two  thousand  came  to  meet  him, 
crying  a  Lyttelton  for  ever,  which  I  think  seems  an  invitation 
to  his  Lordship  to  put  his  Son  up  as  a  Candidate  at  the  next 
election.  This  mob  was  an  extraordinary  sight  to  Comte 
Bruhl  and  much  pleased  him.  He  says  he  left  Ld  Lyttelton 
well  but  I  imagine  he  must  have  been  since  greatly  shockd 
about  Ld  F — cue  who  both  shot  and  stabbd  himself,  but  is 
still  living.1  It  is  said  jealousy  was  his  motive,  and  that  he 
first  attempted  to  murder  his  Wife.  He  has  been  always  a 
Man  of  violent  temper  and  a  bad  Husband  to  a  very  pretty 
engaging  Woman,  if  she  has  been  guilty  of  any  indiscretion 
I  am  sorry  for  it,  worse  than  indiscretion  I  think  she  is  incapable 
of.  but  she  must  be  very  miserable  if  the  least  levity  however 
innocent  has  given  occasion  to  such  a  tragedy.  They  have 
four  fine  boys  and  a  child  just  born,  all  these  are  involved  in 

1  Lord  Lyttelton’s  wife,  Lucy,  was  sister  of  the  second  Baron  Fortescue, 
who  was,  says  Lady  Sarah  Lennox,  stark  staring  mad,  and  had  attempted 
to  kill  his  wife  and  children  (August  23). 


1765 


BADMINTON 


127 


this  catastrophe.  The  Ladys  Parents  and  Brother  who  are 
worthy  people  are  much  to  be  pittied  for  this  disgrace  thrown 
on  them  all.  It  is  strange  a  Man  shd  use  a  Woman  so  ill 
whose  affections  were  so  necessary  to  his  happiness  that  on 
suspicion  he  had  lost  them  he  thought  it  best  to  shoot  himself. 
Ld  Berkely  of  Strattons  brother  in  this  County  drownd  himself 

a  few  months  ago  which  with  the  Duke  of  B - s  suicide  wd 

make  one  think  it  was  the  consequence  of  a  dry  season. 

The  Duchess  of  Beaufort  conveyed  Mrs.  Montagu 
whilst  with  her  at  Badminton  to  dine  with  Lord  and 
Lady  Shelburne,  with  whom  she  became  afterwards  so 
intimate  ;  writing  to  Mr.  Montagu,  she  says  : 

The  place  is  now  not  fine  but  between  Mr.  Adam  and 
Mr.  Browne  there  will  a  fair  creation  rise.  Mr.  Adam  has 
fitted  up  some  fine  chimney  pieces  and  cielings.  The  ceilings 
are  stucco  from  patterns  taken  from  Palmyra,  the  chimney 
pieces  of  fine  white  marble  are  highly  wrought  and  expensive. 
Lord  Shelburne  seems  a  young  man  of  excellent  parts,  great 
vivacity,  desirous  of  information  either  by  men  or  books,  and 
I  imagine  will  be  a  man  of  considerable  consequence.  .  .  . 
Lord  Botetour  writes  to  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort  that  he  had 
been  at  Mr.  Pitts,  he  found  him  confined  to  his  great  chair 
with  a  pretty  smart  fit  of  the  gout  but  in  very  good  spirits. 
He  sent  very  polite  compliments  to  the  Duchess  and  to  me. 
I  hear  he  has  built  two  fine  rooms  already  at  Burton  Pynsent. 

The  September  letters  from  Mrs.  Montagu  con¬ 
tain  long  accounts  of  these  visits  to  the  Duchess  of 
Beaufort  at  Badminton,  to  Lord  and  Lady  Shelburne, 
to  Lord  and  Lady  Talbot  at  Barrington,  and  to  Lord 
Bathurst  at  Oakley  Park,  Cirencester  ;  and  we  have 
the  inevitable  descriptions  of  vistas  ending  in  steeples, 
of  rivers  meandering  to  the  order  of  Capability 
Brown,  of  temples  and  buildings  of  fancy,  and  all  the 
other  artificialities  demanded  by  the  well-bred  taste  of 
the  time.  Mrs.  Montagu  paid  her  due  tributes  of 
admiration,  but  shows  symptoms  of  boredom. 

I  own  I  think  for  the  pleasure  of  living  a  few  large  rooms 
infinitely  preferable  to  passing  thro  a  dozen  doors  before  one 
is  to  sit  down.  .  .  .  These  fanciful  buildings  and  little  pert 


128  MR.  ADAM  AT  SANDLEFORD 


1765 


edifices  are  too  small  for  a  great  scene,  and  are  like  concetti 
in  an  Epic  poem  ;  imagination  is  not  affected  by  them,  they 
are  merely  objects  of  sight.  .  .  .  Lord  Cobham  made  his 
Gardens  [at  Stowe]  like  the  frontispieces  to  Ovid’s  meta¬ 
morphosis,  but  being  a  wit  and  a  patron  of  arts,  no  one  durst 
say  they  were  absurd. 

Pitt’s  140  ft.  memorial  column  to  his  benefactor  at 
Burton  Pynsent  and  its  inscription  are  satirically 
alluded  to,  and  the  “  collosial  greatness  of  ostentatious 
phraseology  ”  in  which  the  great  commoner  delighted. 

It  is  said  the  K —  of  Prussia  is  gone  mad.  Heroes  as  well 
as  witts  are  very  near  mad.  I  believe  it  will  be  a  benefit  to 
mankind  in  general  if  this  be  true.  I  hate  that  a  man  who 
has  been  the  destruction  of  above  an  100,000  of  his  own 
species  shd  call  himself  le  Philosophe  sans  soucis  ;  that  ease 
and  indifference  belongs  rather  to  indolence  and  innocence. 
The  butcher  who  has  killd  as  many  sheep  ought  to  feel  some 
compunction. 

Having  concluded  her  tour  with  a  visit  to  her  sister 
at  Bath,  Mrs.  Montagu  returned  at  the  end  of 
September  to  Sandleford.  Though  she  had  very 
sensibly  criticised  much  of  the  architectural  freaks  and 
the  perversions  of  natural  beauty  which  she  had  seen 
during  her  west  country  visits  of  this  summer,  she  had 
not,  it  seems,  entirely  escaped  infection  ;  for  shortly 
after  her  arrival  at  Sandleford  we  find  the  great  Mr. 
Adam  paying  her  a  visit  there,  and  forming  a  plan  for 
its  enlargement. 

Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  her  husband  : 

He  has  contrived  to  the  new  apartment  so  that  it  com¬ 
municates  with  the  others  as  well  as  if  it  had  been  one  original 
plan  in  the  new.  There  are  below  two  handsome  rooms 
and  a  dressing  room  for  you  [a  sop  to  Cerberus,  this]  ;  above 
stairs  two  good  bed  chambers  and  a  dressing  room.  The  Hall 
by  adding  pillars  at  each  end  and  making  it  oval  will  be  odd 
and  pretty. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Carter  about  the  alterations,  she 
says  : 


1765 


MRS.  CHAPONE 


129 


I  have  a  scheme  to  enlarge  the  river.  I  am  not  fond  of 
large  pieces  of  standing  water  but  nothing  adds  so  sweet  and 
so  placid  an  air  to  a  place  as  a  winding  river. 

The  kitchen  garden  and  outbuildings  were  to  be 
removed  to  another  part,  and  walls  and  hedges  taken 
away  to  enlarge  the  prospect. 

Lady  Frances  Conyngsby,  it  seems,  had  suggested 
to  Mrs.  Montagu  that  Mrs.  Chapone  might  consent 
to  go  as  companion  to  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort  and 
to  improve  Lady  Harriot  in  her  studies  ;  but  Mrs. 
Montagu  had  more  discernment : 

1765. 

Her  Graces  good  nature  politeness,  etc.  would  have  made 
a  state  of  dependance  as  easy  as  a  state  of  dependance  can  be, 
but  I  imagine  Mrs.  Chapone  would  not  accept  of  service  on 
any  terms  whatever.  Her  brother  who  is  very  fond  of  her 
is  in  very  good  business,  her  uncle  is  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
and  tho  she  has  a  very  small  income  of  her  own  yet  leisure 
and  liberty  are  of  infinite  value  to  such  a  person.  .  .  .  The 
Duchess  of  Beaufort  would  make  any  one  very  happy  who 
was  in  her  service  but  bad  health  and  a  certain  turn  of  mind 
unfits  a  person  for  a  condition,  in  which,  if  they  do  not  converse 
with  Ladies  women  (the  most  unlike  in  the  world  to  Mrs. 
Chapone  and  the  people  she  has  conversed  with)  they  would 
be  reckond  proud  and  impertinent.  The  dapper  butler,  the 
spruce  groom  of  the  chambers,  the  House  Steward  and  the 
friends  of  all  these  people  must  be  her  future  companions, 
and  one  had  rather  live  on  bread  and  water  than  in  the  tittle 
tattle  and  gossipry  of  that  set  of  people.  ...  I  must  own  I 
should  as  soon  keep  a  person  to  blow  my  nose  as  to  amuse  me  ; 
connections  of  friendship  are  different  things. 

Coming  up  to  Hill  Street  at  the  beginning  of 
November  before  her  husband,  Mrs.  Montagu  writes 
to  tell  him  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
the  King’s  uncle,  the  Butcher  of  Culloden: 

He  had  been  at  Court  in  the  morning  and  was  to  appearance 
quite  well  and  was  drinking  Coffee  in  company  when  in  one 
instant  he  was  struck  dead. 

In  the  next  letter  of  November  4  she  states  : 

VOL.  I 


K 


130  GENERAL  PULTENEY’S  DREAM  1765 

He  lived  three  hours  after  he  was  seized  with  his  giddiness, 
and  was  blooded  30  ounces,  but  not  being  relieved  by  it  as  he 
used  to  be  he  said  “  this  is  my  worst  fit  and  will  be  my  last."  The 
Duke  has  died  in  great  debt  to  his  tradespeople  ;  to  his  butcher 
it  is  said  he  owed  a  thousand  pounds.  It  is  said  he  died  without 
a  will.  He  is  greatly  lamented  at  Windsor  where  he  kept 
an  100  men  at  work  the  whole  winter  and  gave  them  their 
dinner  at  the  end  of  their  day’s  work. 

On  November  5  Mrs.  Montagu  went  to  Mrs. 
Boscawen’s  at  Hatchlands  on  a  visit  ;  writing  next 
day  she  says  : 

To  her  Husband. 

Hatchlands,  Tuesday  night 
the  6th  of  Nov. 

Mr.  Pitt  has  unfurnish’d  his  House  at  Hayes,  but  it  is 
not  yet  disposed  of ;  perhaps  the  great  event  that  has  happend 
lately  may  bring  him  from  Sommersetshire.  He  is  erecting 
an  Obelisk  to  the  memory  of  Sr  W:  Pinsent  ;  the  emblems 
are  to  be  a  Lupine  and  a  Pelican  ;  whether  they  are  in 
emblematical  language  significant  of  gratitude  is  more  than 
my  learning  informs  me.  Sr  W:  Pinsent  had  a  very  extra¬ 
ordinary  affection  for  his  offspring,  but  not  like  that  which 
is  attributed  to  the  Pelican.  I  saw  Mr.  Ramsay  in  Town, 
who  has  been  at  Geneva  and  made  a  visit  to  Voltaire  ;  he 
says  he  is  not  so  meagre  and  extenuated  as  he  expected.  He 
lives  nobly,  but  his  table  is  disgraced  by  Sycophants  who  are 
continually  offering  him  the  grossest  flattery  which  he  receives 
with  great  pleasure.  I  had  not  time  in  my  last  to  tell  you 
Dr.  Maty  is  very  desirous  of  being  Secretary  to  the  Royal 
Society. 

.  .  .  General  Pulteney  has  been  put  into  a  terrible  fright 
by  a  dream  in  which  Lord  Bath  appeared  to  him  and  repeated 
some  verses  importing  he  must  prepare  to  die  tomorrow. 
The  General  repeats  the  verses  and  says  they  cannot  be  his 
for  he  never  made  a  rhyme  in  his  life.  Mrs.  Johnstone  [nee 
Pulteney,  his  cousin  and  eventually  heiress]  repeated  three  of 
the  four  lines  and  I  think  they  are  rather  such  as  I  should 
have  expected  from  the  General  than  his  brother.  I  wish 
he  would  take  any  warning  to  do  good  before  “  the  night 
cometh  when  no  man  can  work.” 


1765  THE  DUKE  OF  CUMBERLAND  131 


To  her  Husband 

Nov.  the  14. 

The  Duke  it  is  said,  dyed  without  a  will,  so  his  lease  in 
Windsor  Forest,  which  was  for  his  own  life  and  that  of  Princess 
Amelia,  must  be  sold  for  the  benefit  of  his  Heirs,  and  the 
payment  of  debts  ;  it  is  imagined  the  King  will  buy  it.  His 
Majesty  did  a  generous  thing  as  a  man,  and  a  wise  one  as  a 
King  the  other  day,  when  Ld  Albemarle,  who  acts  as  Executor 
for  the  Duke,  brought  his  Majesty  a  casket  in  which  he  told 
him  were  the  most  secret  papers  of  his  Royal  Highness.  The 
King  said  if  they  were  so,  they  ought  to  be  seen  only  by  his 
most  near  and  intimate  friend,  and  desired  Ld  Albemarle  wd 
read  them,  burn  all  that  he  thought  the  Duke  wd  have  wishd 
destroyd,  and  if  he  found  any  that  cd  be  of  use  to  the  publick 

those  he  might  bring  to  him.  As  the  K - and  the  D - 

were  not  always  upon  good  terms,  it  is  probable  there  might  be 
in  these  papers  some  caballing,  and  the  parties  who  had  been 
engaged  therein  must  have  been  in  a  horrid  fright  ;  but  the 
King  was  in  the  right  not  to  pry  into  these  matters.  Pompey 
got  great  honour  by  burning  unread  the  papers  of  Sertorius 
and  not  informing  himself  who  had  been  leaguing  with 
Sertorius. 

Matthew  Maty — the  “  little  black  dog  ”  whom 
Johnson  wanted  to  throw  into  the  Thames — got  his 
Secretaryship  of  the  Royal  Society  this  year,  and  was 
afterwards  principal  Librarian  at  the  British  Museum. 
He  published  Lord  Chesterfield’s  Memoirs. 


To  her  Husband 

Nov.  16. 

The  affair  of  the  stamps  will  embarass  the  Ministry  because 
they  are  weak,  and  the  opposition  will  not  join  in  any  support 
of  the  interest  of  their  Country  with  men  whom  they  wish 
to  displace  ;  but  this  attempt  of  the  Colonies  to  assert  an 
independancy  on  the  Parliament  of  England  is  of  a  dangerous 
nature  ;  .  .  .  However  the  outs  will  do  anything  to  thrust 
themselves  in.  The  Ministers  think  they  are  sure  of  a  majority 
which  may  be  the  case  at  the  opening  of  the  Sessions,  but  I 
dare  say  they  will  be  very  hard  run  before  the  end  of  it  ;  if 
they  mean  well  they  have  not  credit  and  authority  to  do  any 


132 


A  BUDGET  OF  GOSSIP 


1765 


good.  The  discarded  Ministers  are  all  at  Bath,  Ld  Sandwich 
and  Ld  Hinchingbroke  are  there,  Mr.  Pitt  I  hear  is  going  to 
Bath.  The  opinion  people  have  of  him  makes  him  necessary 
at  this  time,  so  I  wish  he  was  in  power,  otherwise  I  should 
never  have  any  wish  of  that  kind,  for  I  know  not  who  of  all 
mankind  is  most  able  or  most  willing  to  serve  this  poor  Country 
at  this  very  critical  time  when  we  are  beggard  by  conquests 
and  know  not  how  to  reap  any  advantage  from  them  equal 
to  what  they  have  cost  us. 

Space  can  only  be  spared  here  for  a  few  extracts 
from  a  long  letter  of  gossip  to  Mrs.  Vesey  dated  from 
Hill  Street,  November  1 9  : 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing  the  night  before  last  of  Mr. 
Bateman,  that  day  arrived  from  Windsor,  that  Lady  Primrose 
is  extreamly  well.  She  had  been  a  little  indisposed,  but  was 
then  perfectly  recovered.  Now  my  dear  Madam  there  is  no 
man  whose  opinion  I  would  take  of  old  Women,  and  old  china, 
sooner  than  Mr.  Batemans.  The  toast  of  the  year,  and  the 
last  manufactory  at  Dresden,  Vincennes,  and  Chelsea,  may  be 
better  understood  by  some  of  your  young  gentlemen  lately 
return’d  from  their  travels,  but  you  must  allow  Mr.  Bateman 
has  attentively  surveyed  every  curious  cabinet  of  old  china, 
and  civily  visited  the  Ruelle  of  every  old  lady  of  note  for  these 
twenty  years  last  past,  so  that  he  is  a  perfect  connoisseur  in 
these  two  subjects.  .  .  . 

Mr.  Adam  and  Mr.  Brown  are  adorning  Beauwood,  and  in 
time  will  make  it  a  fine  place.  You  have  heard,  I  presume 
that  Lady  Charlotte  Finch  is  obliged  to  separate  in  form  from 
Mr.  Finch.  He  is  grown  by  age  something  between  mad 
and  foolish,  and  has,  it  is  said,  been  guilty  of  the  most  cruel 
outrages  to  Lady  Charlotte  and  his  daughters,  even  to  put 
them  in  fear  of  their  lives. 

.  .  .  Mrs.  Ann  Pitt  is  grown  plump,  and  is  in  great  health  ; 
she  has  been  fitting  up  a  little  place  at  Knightsbridge  as  a 
Country  seat,  she  cannot  bear  to  retire  to  those  desolate  places, 
“  Where  the  gilt  chariot  never  mark’d  the  way  ”  ;  she  loves 
the  track  of  ministerial  wheels.  Lady  Betty  Germain  is  in 
good  health,  but  has  lost  her  memory  ;  she  is  now  I  presume 
preserved  by  the  prayers  of  those  who  live  on  her  bounty. 
Lord  Foley  is  in  a  deplorable  way.  I  am  told  he  is  the  picture 
of  caducity  and  almost  blind.  Mr.  Pitt  is  at  his  newly  acquired 
seat  in  Sommersetshire  ;  .  .  . 


1765 


BURTON  PYNSENT 


133 


Mr.  Walpole  is  laid  up  with  the  gout  at  Paris,  and  is  in  an 
ill  state  of  health.  Whether  this  finds  you  in  sequester’d 
bower,  in  all  the  sublimity  of  poetick  melancholly,  or  in  the 
hurry  of  the  gay  city  at  Dublin,  may  it  find  you  well  and 
happy  ;  I  recommend  frequent  changes  from  society  to  solitude, 
and  from  solitude  to  society  ;  to  be  always  in  the  livery  of 
gayety  and  pleasure,  or  for  ever  “  O’er  laid  with  black  staid 
wisdoms  hue  ”  would  wear  one  set  of  ideas  thread  bare  ; 
“  Motley  is  the  only  wear,”  it  fits  the  human  mind,  let  the 
proud  and  the  vain  say  what  they  will. 

The  great  age  of  Lady  Dorothea  Primrose — whom 
Malone  declared  to  have  been  well  acquainted  with 
Steele,  and  to  have  confirmed  the  story  of  Addison’s 
loan  to  him,  “  reclaimed  by  an  execution  ” — is  denied 
by  Croker,  who  says  she  could  not  have  been  more 
than  sixty-five  at  her  death  ;  but  the  above  reference 
hardly  bears  this  out.  She  was  the  youngest  daughter 
of  the  first  Earl  of  Rosebery. 

On  November  21,  in  a  letter  to  her  husband, 
Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

I  can  tell  you  as  a  secret  and  as  a  certain  truth  the  Great 
Commoner  has  had  an  express  from  a  person  still  greater 
inviting  him  again  into  power  but  know  not  what  answer  he 
has  given,  but  I  believe  not  a  favourable  one.  The  news 
ridiculously  says  Mr.  Pitt’s  baggage  is  brought  to  his  house  in 
Jermyn  Street  where  by  the  bye  he  has  not  had  a  house  these 
two  years.  It  is  said  Mr.  Pitt  is  fallen  ill  of  the  gout  at  the 
Bath.  Lady  Chatham  and  the  children  are  at  Burton  Pynsent, 
for  they  could  not  get  a  house  large  enough  to  contain  them 
and  their  numerous  attendants.  He  has  made  the  place 
(Burton  Pynsent)  already  very  fine  ;  the  house  is  situated 
on  an  eminence  and  by  cuts  through  his  woods  he  has  taken 
in  a  vast  number  of  Steeples.  He  is  sorry  he  has  parted  with 
his  house  at  Bath  and  will  probably  build  another. 

To  her  Husband 

30 th  Nov. 

There  is  going  to  be  a  new  square  here  at  Marybone  larger 
than  Grosvenor  Square,  yet  it  does  not  diminish  the  price 
of  houses.  £18000  is  now  offerd  for  the  House  the  D. 


*34 


DR.  WARBURTON 


1765 


of  Cumberland  bought  of  the  D.  of  Beaufort  for  £12000. 
.  .  .  Sr  George  Rodney  succeeds  to  Adml  Townshend  at 
Greenwich,  he  obtaind  this  by  his  Brother  in  law  Ld  Egmont. 
I  told  you  in  my  last  that  I  delayd  going  to  Mr.  Kings  till  I 
could  be  assured  poor  Mr.  Isaacson  was  buried.  He  will  not 
give  his  bearers  the  same  trouble  the  D.  of  Cumberland 
did,  whose  weight  was  such  in  his  coffins,  that  the  six  and 
twenty  beefeaters  who  carried  him  were  in  danger  of  being 
crush’d  to  death.  His  R.  Highness  memory  is  so  popular  in 
the  City  that  the  mob  insult  all  the  people  who  appear  out 
of  mourning,  if  they  seem  of  a  decent  condition,  and  they 
calld  out  to  the  King  at  the  play  to  know  why  he  had  not 
weepers  on  his  coat,  tho  no  one  wears  them  for  an  Uncle. 
The  good  people  of  England  are  very  foolish  in  their  idolatry. 

Mr.  Montagu  writes  : 

When  Mr.  Botham  came  here  he  brought  Dr.  Lowth’s 
book  which  I  like  exceedingly,  the  Professor  is  very  moderate 
if  he  abstains  from  bringing  an  action  against  the  Bishop  for 
an  assault  and  battery.  This  Author  of  the  “  Divine  Legation  ” 
is  a  scandal  to  Episcopacy  and  ought  to  be  deprived  of  his 
orders  and  Bishoprick. 

To  this  Mrs.  Montagu  thoroughly  agreed,  and  in 
a  letter  of  December  10  says  : 

I  spent  Sunday  evening  at  the  Archbishop  of  York’s  where 
we  had  a  great  deal  of  mirth  about  Dr.  Lowth’s  book  and  I 
find  his  Grace  is  as  much  pleased  with  it  as  you  and  I  are.  I 
hear  Warburton  like  all  bullies  is  frightened  at  a  brisk  attack, 
and  the  menace  to  attack  the  divine  legation  has  made  him 
shrink  in  his  shell. 


To  her  Husband 

the  15th  of  Dec.  17 65. 

Warburton  is  like  a  library  which  contains  many  volumes, 
but  has  a  librarian  without  judgment,  and  without  taste,  who 
is  vain,  and  insolent,  arrogant,  and  obstinate,  in  the  possession 
of  so  many  books,  from  whence  he  can  quote  a  page  on  any 
subject,  but  never  yet  extracted  the  spirit  of  any  author.  Unless 
a  mans  mind  draws  a  sort  of  quintessence  from  what  he  reads, 
nicely  perceives  distinctions,  and  traces  analogies,  his  head 
grows  only  a  general  dictionary,  a  meer  encyclopedia,  which 
one  should  consult  only  to  give  one  the  names  of  things,  or 


i765  a  GAZETTE  FROM  BOSTON  135 

intimations  what  authors  have  written  on  the  subject  from 
whence  one  may  get  information.  Such  a  man  may,  as 
Prior  says 

display  great  learning 
at  least  to  men  of  small  discerning. 

but  will  always  appear  absurd  and  contemptible  to  those  who 
have  real  knowledge  and  a  judicious  mind.  In  more  formal 
times  two  divines  who  had  disputed  wd  have  playd  St.  Austin 
and  St.  Jerom  on  each  other,  but  it  is  comical  enough  to  see 
them  making  use  of  Rabelais  in  that  manner.  The  old  wag 
wd  be  delighted  if  he  could  know  he  helpd  to  roast  a  Bishop, 
and  realy  Dr.  Lowths  application  of  the  passage  of  Rabelais 
is  very  humorous. 

Bishop  Warburton’s  Divine  Legation  plunged  him 
into  a  sea  of  controversy,  which  lasted  for  nearly 
thirty  years.  In  the  sixth  volume  he  attacked  Robert 
Lowth,  Bishop  of  London  (after  a  previous  skirmish), 
and  Lowth  replied  by  a  Letter  to  the  Author  of  the 
Divine  Legation  by  a  late  Professor  of  Oxford.  To  add 
to  the  gaiety  of  nations  Dr.  John  Brown  must  needs 
butt  into  the  controversy,  and  get  properly  snubbed. 

Mr.  Wedderburn  and  Mr.  Burke  attackd  the  Ministry 
on  Tuesday  with  great  witt,  eloquence,  and  spirit,  these  darts 
of  opposition  were  all  recieved  by  that  broad  brazen  shield  the 
unblushing  face  of  Lord  Clare  without  making  any  impression. 
Yesterday  a  gazette  from  Boston  was  read  in  the  House, 
declared  by  the  Grenville  party  as  Rebellion,  but  therein  they 
were  not  seconded  by  the  Troops  of  Lord  Rockingham,  so 
the  opposition  will  be  most  weak  on  the  point  of  greatest 
importance.  The  Ministry  will  be  mightily  harassd  by  the 
Flying  Squadrons,  but  there  not  being  any  General  and  Com¬ 
mander  of  the  opposition  they  hope  not  [to]  be  vanquish’d 
tho  they  may  be  disgraced.  The  Duke  of  Bedford,  tho 
blind,  intends  like  old  Appius  Claudius  to  go  to  the  Senate 
upon  extraordinary  occasions.  I  hope  he  will  rather  imitate 
that  venerable  Consular  than  Sampson  bold  and  blind,  who 
pull’d  the  Assembly  down  about  his  ears. 

The  Stamp  Act  was  passed  on  March  22,  1765, 
and  the  Congress  of  delegates  from  the  colonial 


136  THE  STAMP  ACT  1765 

assemblies  in  America  met  in  October  to  protest  and 
demand  its  repeal.  The  Rockingham  Ministry  was 
inert  and  discredited,  and  the  seizure  at  Boston  of  the 
new  excise  stamps  at  once  called  Pitt  to  the  front  with 
a  passionate  disclaimer  of  all  responsibility  for  the 
obnoxious  act,  which  had  been  passed  during  his 
illness  and  absence  from  Westminster.  “  This  king¬ 
dom  has  no  right  to  lay  a  tax  upon  the  colonies.  Sir, 
I  rejoice  that  America  has  resisted.”  The  Act  was 
repealed  in  1766,  but  the  little  fire  had  been  kindled. 
Pelham  Holies,  Lord  Clare,  was  Privy  Seal  in  the 
Rockingham  Troop.  John  Russell,  Duke  of  Bedford, 
was  President  of  Council. 


1766 

A  TOUR  IN  SCOTLAND - THE  STAMP  ACT 


The  political  situation.  Repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act.  Window  tax. 
Champagne  by  the  hogshead.  The  trip  to  Scotland.  Alnwick. 
Edinburgh.  Holyrood.  Dalkeith.  Glasgow.  Loch  Lomond. 
Glencoe.  Inveraray.  Blair  Drummond.  Rousseau  and  Hume.  Mrs. 
Carter.  The  poet  Gray.  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  Return  from 
Denton. 


The  ill-advised  and  fatally  irritating  extension  of 
the  Stamp  Act  to  the  North  American  Colonies, 
which  had  been  so  lightheartedly  carried  through  by 
Grenville’s  Administration,  had  blown  the  spark  of 
disaffection  in  Boston,  Virginia,  and  other  assemblies 
into  a  blaze,  which  filled  ministers  at  home  with 
embarrassment.  The  King  sent  for  Pitt  and  Temple, 
but  their  negotiations  failed,  and  a  confederacy  of  the 
great  Whig  houses  was  formed  with  Lord  Rocking¬ 
ham,  best  known  as  a  great  landowner  with  a  passion 
for  horse-racing,  as  its  head.  Backed  to  some  extent 
by  Pitt,  this  Government  repealed  the  Stamp  Act,  at 
the  same  time  reasserting  the  supreme  power  of 
Parliament  over  the  colonies.  The  qualified  recanta¬ 
tion  came  too  late,  and  news  that  Congress  had 
resolved  on  resistance  awakened  the  country  to  some 
reality  of  danger  and  some  indignation  at  its  rulers, 
supported  by  the  feeling  that  Pitt  must  be  brought 
back  to  save  the  situation.  Pitt  was  willing  to  return 
to  power,  provided  he  had  freedom  ;  and  his  Ministry 
of  the  King’s  Friends  (and  his  own)  was  patched 

137 


138  AMERICAN  HURLEY  BURLEY  1766 

together  with  this  aim,  and  included  Conway  and 
Grafton,  Portland  and  Bessborough,  Camden  and 
Shelburne,  with  the  disastrous  addition  of  Charles 
Townshend  at  the  Exchequer.  Pitt’s  acceptance  of 
an  earldom  this  summer,  however,  went  far  to  extin¬ 
guish  the  popularity  of  the  Great  Commoner. 

A  letter  from  Mrs.  Montagu  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  dated 
February  3,  gives  a  humorous  view  of  the  political 
situation  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  : 

Before  the  meeting  of  parliament  news  came  of  a  terrible 
hurley  hurley  in  America  ;  our  young  Ministers,  qui  ne 
s’etoient  jamais  trouve  a  telle  fete,  were  allarmd,  they  were 
sensible  they  were  too  young  to  manage  things  so  difficult, 
our  Major  Ministers  apprehended  they  were  too  old  to  contend 
with  matters  so  violent.  Some  took  hartshorn,  some  assafetida, 
but  none  took  the  grand  specifick  in  such  maladies  a  firm 
resolution.  The  Parliament  met  ;  you  know  the  Kings 
speech,  which  was  not  decisive  but  prudently  equivoque,  and 
they  were  to  meet  again.  In  the  House  of  Lords  Lord  Temple 
and  Lord  Lyttelton  spoke  nobly  of  the  authority  of  Parlia¬ 
ments,  and  the  dignity  of  Government.  Then  they  all  went 
into  the  Country  to  eat  their  Christmas  pies,  some  for  the 
sake  of  present  ease  could  have  swallow’d  with  them  the 
affronts  from  America,  others  were  high  stomached  and  could 
not  digest  them.  Hollidays  past,  then  came  working  days 
indeed.  The  Kings  speech  was  firm,  it  pleased  the  hearts 
of  oak  and  they  praised  it,  and  thank’d  his  Majesty  for  it,  and 
expressed  a  desire  to  support  the  authority  of  Government. 
A  day  was  named  for  taking  this  great  affair  into  consideration  ; 
on  that  day  Mr.  Pitt  came  up  from  Bath,  He  talk’d  of  liberty, 
of  natural  liberty,  and  he  loved  liberty  and  liberty  loved  him 
and  I  know  not  what,  and  people  said  that  part  of  his  speech 
was  great,  but  they  did  not  well  understand  it  ;  Mr.  Grenville 
talk’d  of  laws,  and  quoted  the  statutes  in  support  of  the  legality 
of  the  stamp  act  ;  Mr.  Pitt  bid  him  not  tell  him  of  doggseared, 
doubled  down  acts  of  parliament,  he  was  for  natural  liberty, 
and  he  was  for  repealing  the  stamp  act,  it  appeared.  This 
did  not  please,  but  his  next  appearance  in  the  House  was  more 
violent  ;  he  said  we  had  broken  the  compact  between  England 
and  America,  and  they  were  independant,  or  something  of 
that  sort  ;  he  railed  at  Ministers  past  and  present,  and  was 


WILLIAM  PITT,  FIRST  EARL  OF  CHATHAM 
After  Richard  Brompton 


i766  REPEAL  OF  THE  STAMP  ACT  139 

violent  against  the  D:  of  Newcastle.  This  last  speech  has 
totally  ruined  him  in  the  City,  he  has  lost  his  popularity  here, 
but  will  find  it  rise  as  the  Sun  does  with  the  Antipodes  when  it 
sets  in  this  Hemisphere.  It  is  amazing  how  the  Tyde  has 
turn’d.  The  last  time  he  spoke  in  the  House  there  was 
violent  opposition  to  him,  no  applause  of  what  he  said,  and  when 

Sr  F - N - said  that  in  other  times  whoever  had  spoken 

such  a  language  would  have  been  sent  to  the  Tower,  no  one 
resented  it.  Mr.  C.  Townshend  has  as  yet  been  perfectly 
silent.  Mr.  Burke  spoke  extreamly  well.  The  Ministers 
in  the  House  of  Commons  were  not  at  unison  with  those  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  they  want  somebody  to  lead  the  Chorus. 
It  is  supposed  this  Ministry  will  not  last  long,  but  who  the 
next  will  be  composed  of  I  know  not.  We  do  not  look  on 
Ireland  as  a  Sister  to  America,  but  to  England  ;  America  is  our 
Child,  and  a  very  perverse  one. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Feb.  22. 

The  stamp  act  was  repeal’d  by  a  majority  of  one  hundred 
and  eight,  and  our  friend  Mr.  Burke  spoke  divinely,  yes 
divinely,  dont  misunderstand  me,  and  report  he  spoke  as  well 
as  mortal  man  could  do,  I  tell  you  he  spoke  better.  The 
great  Commoner  praised  him  highly  in  the  Senate,  and  all 
people  join  in  the  chorus.  Indeed  Mr.  Burke  has  every  day 
acquired  great  praise  but  yesterday  crown’d  all.  Mr.  Pitt  did 
not  speak  so  well  as  he  has  done.  He  described  the  American 
planter  sitting  in  his  native  innocence  in  his  native  woods, 
and  how  cruel  to  disturb  him  there  with  a  stamp  duty,  but  as 
this  duty  was  not  to  be  levied  on  men  who  under  the  shade  of 
melancholly  boughs  lose  and  neglect  the  creeping  hours  of 
time,  but  affects  the  litigious  man  who  goes  to  law,  or  the 
mercantile  man  who  sends  commodities  out  to  Sea,  the  pastoral 
part  of  the  speech,  though  adornd  with  quotations  from  the 
Georgies,  did  not  greatly  move  the  House.  In  the  House  of 
Lords  there  will  be  more  opposition  to  the  Ministry,  but  still 
the  act  will  be  repealed.  I  expect  Lady  Shelburne  every 
moment,  so  must  be  laconick.  Ld  Lyttelton  desires  Ld 
Orrerys  wretched  letters  on  the  English  history  may  not  be 
attributed  to  him,  neither  as  to  the  matter  or  the  manner.  I 
enclose  a  letter  Mr.  Walpole  wrote  to  Rousseau  in  the  name 
of  the  K.  of  Prussia. 


140 


DENTON  HALL 


1766 


On  April  21  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 

There  is  a  cruel  tax  going  to  be  lain  on  Cottagers  who  are 
to  pay  the  tax  if  they  have  seven  windows,  so  these  poor  wretches 
must  live  without  light  and  air  ;  all  this  to  please  America. 
To  please  North  America  the  duty  is  to  be  taken  off  Molasses 
and  a  heavier  duty  to  be  lain  on  wheels.  I  wish  our  ministers 
were  shipped  off  to  their  friends  in  America.  The  Country 
gentleman  is  to  pay  j£io  a  year  for  his  coach  and  is.  6d.  a 
window.  There  is  not  a  more  oppressed  creature  in  this 
nation  than  a  Country  gentleman,  obliged  to  keep  up  an  old 
mansion  and  an  old  name,  ashamed  to  appear  below  every 
upstart  in  his  parish.  I  grieve  for  the  gouty  Squires  and  their 
fat  wives  who  will  not  be  able  to  let  the  coach  and  old  Dobbin 
and  Whiteface  tug  them  to  church,  or  to  visit  a  neighbour, 
while  your  American  drives  his  gilded  Car  and  6  bays,  tho’ 
perhaps  his  Father  was  transported  for  felony. 

In  April  Mr.  Montagu  set  out  on  the  long  journey 
to  Newcastle,  whither  his  wife  was  to  follow  him 
later.  Arrangements  were  being  completed  for  their 
residence  at  Denton  Hall,  a  Tudor  mansion,  built  in 
1503  by  the  Widdringtons,  close  to  Hadrian’s  Wall, 
and  subsequently  in  the  occupation  of  the  Errington 
family,  whose  Jacobite  loyalty  cost  them  their  estates. 
These  passed  to  a  relative  of  the  Earl  of  Sandwich, 
and  on  his  death,  partly  by  inheritance  and  partly 
by  purchase,  became  the  property  of  Mr.  Montagu. 
The  fine  old  Hall,  now  in  the  possession  of  Mr. 
I ’Anson,  boasts  a  beneficent  ghost,  “  Old  Silky,”  who 
gives  warning  to  the  miners  of  coal  damp,  and  is 
celebrated  in  local  song.  The  Montagus  were  at  this 
time  furnishing  the  house  from  London. 

Replying  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  American  criticisms 
her  husband,  writing  from  Northumberland,  reminds 
her  of  Lord  Bolingbroke’s  prophecy  that  the  time 
would  come  when  six  or  seven  millions  of  people 
would  not  be  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  for 
two  hundred  thousand. 

Mrs.  Montagu  set  out  to  join  her  husband  on  the 


1766 


A  “PIECE”  OF  CHAMPAGNE 


141 

20th  of  May,  and  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter  from  Stilton 
to  extol  the  new  chaise  : 

Hermes  Trismegisthus  was  a  perfect  fool  and  coxcomb 
compared  to  Jethro  Tull,  Gent.,  the  inventor  of  post  chaises. 
Here  I  am  in  perfect  health  and  nothing  weary  at  the  end  of 
71  miles. 

The  lumbering  coach  with  six  horses  and  six 
servants  had  started  two  days  earlier. 

A  letter  from  Lady  Hervey,  dated  June  21, 
announces  the  purchase  for  the  Montagus  of  a 
hogshead  “  piece  ”  of  champagne  for  home  bottling. 
The  hogshead  cost  ^13  :  2  :  6,  duty  and  conveyance 
£16  :  19s.,  working  out  at  under  3s.  per  bottle. 

Some  accounts  of  the  working  of  the  colliery  and 
the  lives  of  the  miners  must  be  relegated  to  a  separate 
paper,  though  of  interest  as  showing  the  impressions 
of  a  woman  coming  fresh  to  a  new  type  of  industry 
and  a  new  class  of  workers,  and  their  gradual  effect  on 
her  attitude  and  conduct. 

From  Lord  Lyttelton 

Sunning  Hill,  July  18. 

Madam — Will  you  deign  to  receive  a  Letter  from  a  meer 
Country  Gentleman  at  a  Farmhouse  on  Sunning  Hill,  when 
the  News  Papers,  and  no  improbable  Reasonings  on  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  Things,  may  have  made  you  expect  one  from  the 
Ld  President  of  the  Council,  or  the  Ld  Privy  Seal  ?  The 
History  of  this  event  will  not  be  long.  The  King  sent  for 
Mr.  Pitt  last  Wenesday  was  sennight  to  form  a  Ministry  for 
him,  thinking  that  which  he  had  too  weak  and  inefficient. 
On  their  first  Conference  by  the  advice  of  Mr.  Pitt  he  sent 
for  Lord  Temple  with  an  Intention  to  putt  him  at  the  head 
of  his  Treasury  ;  but  it  not  having  pleas’d  Mr.  Pitt  that  any 
of  his  Lordship’s  and  his  Brother’s  Friends  should  be  of  the 
Cabinet,  not  excepting  even  me  ;  and  his  Lordship  not  chusing 
to  be  there  without  them,  the  Negociation  soon  ended  ;  Ld 
Temple  went  to  Stowe,  and  I  return’d  hither.  His  Lordship 
thought  that  he  made  no  small  Concession  in  setting  aside 
his  Brother,  and  taking  the  office  he  had  filled  with  so  much 


1 42  LORD  LYTTELTON  AND  OFFICE  1766 

reputation,  for  the  sake  of  accommodation  with  Mr.  Pitt, 
without  also  dishonouring  him,  and  making  him  quite  incapable 
of  assisting  the  government  out  of  office ,  by  leaving  out  all  his 
Friends,  and  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  a  Ministry  com¬ 
posed  only  of  those  who  had  distinguished  themselves  by  repeal¬ 
ing  a  Law,  in  which  his  Lordship  thought  the  Sovereignty  of 
the  Kingdom  concern’d.  He  therefore  proposed  Ld  Gower 
to  be  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  Pitt  naming  the  other  ;  but  the 
Great  Man  chose  to  name  both ,  and  gave  a  Negative  to  Ld 
Gower,  as  he  did  also  to  me  for  any  Cabinet  Office,  but  was 
so  gracious  as  to  admitt  that  I  might  have  some  lower  Place 
and  be  call'd  to  the  Cabinet ,  as  a  Supernumerary.  This 
Ld  Temple  rejected  without  having  seen  me,  declaring  it  was 
not  for  my  sake,  but  for  his  own  ;  that  I  was  his  right  arm  ; 
and  that  though  he  knew  I  would  wish  to  give  every  Facility 
to  any  Arrangement  between  them  two,  he  would  not  consult 
me  about  it,  but  insisted  on  my  having  a  Cabinet  Office.  Pitt 
not  agreeing  to  this  or  the  other  of  his  Lordship’s  Demands 
before-mention’d,  and  proposing  Conway  and  Grafton  for 
Secretaries  of  State  and  Ld  Shelburne  and  others  for  Cabinet 
Counsellors  in  other  great  Offices,  Ld  Temple  did  not  care 
(to  use  his  own  Expression)  to  be  a  Great  Cypher  at  the  head 
of  many  small  Cyphers,  under  the  sole  Direction  of  Mr.  Pitt. 
I  therefore  found  it  useless  to  propose  any  accommodation 
with  regard  to  myself,  as  I  could  not  possibly  blame  his  Lord¬ 
ship’s  determination  on  other  accounts.  But  I  think  it  astonish¬ 
ing  that  Mr.  Pitt  should  chuse  to  send  for  him  from  Stowe  in 
order  to  propose  to  him  what  he  must  be  morally  sure  he  could 
not  and  would  not  accept.  How  he  will  now  form  his 
Ministry  a  short  time  will  shew  ;  so  I  will  not  trouble  you 
with  any  Conjectures  about  it.  When  I  left  London  he  was 
at  Hampstead  a  good  deal  indisposed  with  a  Feverish  Disorder. 
It  behooves  him  to  be  well  both  now  and  hereafter,  considering 
what  he  has  done  and  what  he  has  to  do.  Probably  this 
Letter  will  be  read  before  it  comes  to  your  hands  ;  but  the 
curious  Inspector  is  welcome  to  all  the  Intelligence  it  contains. 
That  you  are  perfectly  well  is  the  best  News  I  can  hear,  and 
I  thank  you  for  giving  it  me  by  your  last  Letter.  My  Heart 
is  much  more  at  ease  about  my  Daughter,  and  I  think  my 
Son’s  necessities  will  soon  compell  him  to  a  Submission.  You 
shall  hear  more  from  me  soon  on  both  those  Points.  With 
your  Friendship  and  a  Consciousness  of  my  own  Integrity  to 
support  me  I  am  as  unconcern’d  at  all  these  Cross  Events  in 
the  Political  World,  as  a  Monk  in  his  Cloyster  or  a  Hermitt 


1766 


A  TRIP  TO  SCOTLAND 


H3 


in  his  Cell.  My  Domestick  Misfortunes  go  nearer  to  my 

Heart  ;  but  against  them  too  I  find  a  powerfull  Cordial  in 

your  sympathising  Goodness  and  most  prudent  Counsels. 

While  the  Love  of  Virtue  or  Sense  of  Gratitude  remain  in 

my  Heart  you  will  always  find  me  your  most  devoted  and  most 

faithfull  humble  Servant  T 

Lyttelton. 

My  best  complimts  to  Mr.  Montagu,  to  whom  I  would 
have  you  communicate  this  Letter. 

On  August  I  Dr.  Gregory  and  his  daughter 
Dorothea  who  had  been  paying  a  visit  to  the  Montagus 
at  Denton,  started  northward  with  Mrs.  Montagu  as 
her  “  knight  errant  and  escort  ”  round  Scotland.  On 
the  way  they  paid  a  visit  to  Alnwick,  where  the  first 
night  was  spent. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Carter,  Mrs.  Montagu  tells  her  : 

I  am  now  preparing  for  a  trip  to  Scotland  with  Dr.  Gregory 
and  his  daughter  who  are  with  us  here  at  present. 

On  their  way  north  they  interviewed  Lord  North¬ 
umberland  about  working  a  colliery  that  he  and 
Mr.  Montagu  had  an  interest  in. 

Writing  to  her  husband  on  August  5  from  Edin¬ 
burgh  Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

Lord  Northumberland  was  extremely  polite  and  obliging, 
he  showed  me  the  Castle  and  the  garden  himself  and  a  most 
noble  place  it  is.  The  flag  was  flying  on  the  top  of  the  Castle 
to  inform  the  country  round  it  was  a  public  day 

When  the  poor  fill  their  bellies, 

The  rich  receive  honour, 

So  good  and  so  great  is  the  Lord  of  the  Manor. 

I  must  own  this  noble  kind  of  hospitality  seems  to  be  suited 
to  the  rank  and  fortune  of  our  great  nobility,  who  must 
degenerate  from  the  figure  of  their  Ancestors  when  they  creep 
into  little  villas  near  London  and  entertain  only  2  or  3  He  or 
She  toad  eaters.  I  was  greatly  pressed  to  stay  dinner  both  by 
the  Lord  and  Lady  of  the  Castle  but  it  was  inconsistent  with 
my  journey.  There  is  something  in  Lord  Northumberland’s 
manner  very  striking,  dignity,  ease  and  freedom  and  perfect 
good  breeding.  Lord  Warkworth  came  and  sat  with  me,  he 


144 


AT  EDINBURGH 


1766 


is  very  obliging  and  sensible.  Alnwick  Castle  is  a  very  noble 
building,  Lord  N.  has  restored  the  parts  to  their  perfect  integrity 
on  the  outside  ;  the  inside  is  laid  out  in  most  princely  rooms, 
the  prospect  it  commands  is  not  very  rich  but  the  features  are 
such  as  suit  the  character  of  the  Castle  better  than  meer 
agriculture  would  do. 

To  Mrs.  Scott  her  sister  writes  : 

Lord  Northumberland  has  been  careful  to  employ  the 
same  stones,  so  that  the  outside  is  of  the  same  form  as  when  it 
was  in  the  revolution  of  the  Percy.  .  .  .  They  keep  2  public 
days  a  week. 

Resuming  Mrs.  Montagu’s  letter  to  her  husband 
she  says  : 

From  Alnwick  to  Tweedmouth  we  passed  through  a  well 
cultivated  Country  finely  planted.  We  had  all  the  way  a 
noble  prospect  of  the  sea.  .  .  .  There  are  vast  plantations 
about  all  the  gentlemen’s  seats.  At  the  Duke  of  Roxburgh’s 
there  are  fine  trees  quite  on  the  sea  shore.  It  was  just  dusk 
when  we  got  to  Edinburgh  ;  the  height  of  the  houses  to  the 
street  is  7  stories  to  the  fall  of  the  hill  some  are  9  or  10  stories 
high,  some  14,  it  is  said.  I  have  got  a  very  good  lodging  and 
perfectly  clean,  indeed  I  never  saw  a  neater  at  Bath  nor  better 
furnished.  I  look  to  the  Forth  and  have  a  charming  prospect. 
At  night  the  streets  are  in  a  filthy  pickle  but  as  I  shall  never 
go  out  on  foot  it  will  not  affect  me.  I  am  up  but  one  pair  of 
stairs  from  the  entrance  but  there  are  8  families  below  me  and 
4  above.  I  am  amazed  to  find  Scotland  as  beautiful  and  rich 
a  country  I  was  ever  in.  .  .  .  Your  goddaughter  is  very 
handsome,  the  little  boys  were  gone  to  bed  but  I  saw  the  two 
younger  girls,  they  are  lovely  children. 

Lord  Kaimes  author  of  the  Elements  of  Criticism  supped 
with  us  last  night.  I  am  invited  to  sup  at  Sir  Gilbert  Elliots 
tonight.  Tomorrow  Lord  Chief  Baron  Ord  and  his  family 
carry  me  to  see  Hopton  House. 

Every  one  in  Edinburgh  of  consequence  vied  in 
invitations  to  Mrs.  Montagu  to  breakfast,  dine,  or 
lodge.  She  was  magnificently  and  elegantly  enter¬ 
tained  to  dinner  by  Lord  Chief  Baron  Ord  and  taken 
to  a  concert  afterwards.  Dr.  Gregory  whose  wife, 


1766 


HOLYROOD 


*45 


now  dead,  was  a  daughter  of  Lord  Forbes,  was 
building  himself  a  house,  so  he  and  his  family  were  in 
what  Mrs.  Montagu  called  a  “  flatt,”  despite  of  which 
he  gave  excellent  suppers  with  all  the  literati  of 
Edinburgh  as  guests. 

In  a  letter  to  her  husband  of  August  9  she  says  : 

The  Castle  of  Edinburgh  is  a  most  romantic  thing  and  brings 
to  ones  mind  the  Castles  of  Tasso  and  Ariosto  in  which  giants 
are  lodged  and  captive  knights  imprisoned.  On  Wednesday 
I  walked  all  over  Holyrood  House  which  is  really  a  fine  regular 
palace  but  most  of  it  modern.  The  Chapel  is  extremely 
antique  and  a  very  fine  Gothic  building  ;  there  I  saw  well 
preserved  the  bodies  of  many  of  the  Scottish  Kings  and  Queens, 
and  among  them  the  Earl  of  Darnleys,  husband  to  the  un¬ 
fortunate  Mary.  He  was  the  handsomest  man  of  the  age 
and  of  an  uncommon  stature,  his  fatal  end  and  the  impressions 
death  makes  on  mortal  beauty  make  him  now  an  object  that 
preaches  more  forcibly  than  Solomon  on  the  vanity  of  human 
things.  I  was  in  the  little  room  where  David  Rizzio  was 
murdered  ;  I  could  not  help  sighing  for  the  beauteous  Mary, 
who  forced  from  the  gay  and  polite  Court  of  France  was 
obliged  to  live  in  the  Austerities  of  Presbytery  in  a  Kingdom 
at  that  time  uncouth,  and  among  subjects  disposed  to  rebel, 
and  Ministers  accustomed  to  control  their  Monarch.  I  find 
the  Society  here  very  agreeable,  the  gentlemen  are  learned  and 
the  ladies  more  so  than  with  us.  Dr.  Robertson  the  historian 
is  a  very  agreeable  lively  man.  The  Scotch  have  a  great  deal 
of  the  French  address  and  good  breeding.  .  .  .  Dr.  Gregory 
is  much  esteemed  and  beloved  by  every  one  here  and  indeed 
it  would  be  hard  if  he  was  not,  for  no  man  can  deserve  it  better. 
He  has  fine  parts  and  amiable  manners.  The  babes  are  lovely, 
your  god  daughter  is  a  charming  girl. 

In  the  next  letter  of  August  1 1  she  says  : 

On  Friday  I  arrived  at  Dalkeith  the  seat  of  the  Duke  of 
Buccleugh’s.  The  views  from  it  are  very  fine,  but  not  so 
striking  and  noble  as  those  from  Hopton  House.  I  was 
yesterday  at  the  Kirk  and  heard  an  admirable  sermon  from 
Dr.  Robertson.  The  extempore  manner  of  preaching  used 
by  a  man  of  genius  has  a  good  effect  but  would  not  please 
from  persons  who  were  not  masters  of  their  subject  and  the 
language. 

VOL.  I 


L 


146 


GLASGOW 


1766 


Mrs.  Montagu  attended  a  ball  whilst  in  Edin¬ 
burgh  where  she  “  saw  many  pretty  women  and  much 
good  dancing  and  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  were  so 
polite  as  to  dance  reels  on  my  account.”  .  .  .  She 
continues  : 

We  cary  Ossian’s  Poems  with  us  as  we  shall  see  some  of 
the  Classic  ground.  I  hear  poor  Sir  James  Macdonald  is 
dying  at  Rome.  What  a  pity  !  Never  was  a  parent  more 
to  be  pittied  than  his  mother.1  His  country  will  lose  its  first 
ornament  and  his  little  Island 2  relapse  into  the  barbarism 
and  poverty  from  whence  he  was  raising  it. 

From  Glasgow,  whither  Dr.  Gregory  and  Mrs. 
Montagu  now  proceeded,  she  writes  to  her  husband  : 

Your  vagrant  wife  is  at  present  in  the  town  of  Glasgow 
a  City  ill  suiting  with  Churchill’s  description  of  the  poverty 
of  Scotland.  The  access  to  it  is  beautiful  and  noble,  and  the 
town  more  regular  and  fine  than  any  in  England.  .  .  .  the 
streets  are  broad  and  open,  the  houses  which  are  stone  are 
regularly  arranged  ;  the  streets  open  cross  Streets  at  right 
angles.  I  am  now  going  to  Hamilton  about  8  miles  from 
hence,  I  shall  return  hither  to  dinner  and  then  visit  the  Cathedral 
and  the  painting  academy. 

From  Glasgow  the  travellers  went  to  Inveraray.  In 
a  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  is  this  passage  : 

I  have  been  in  Ossian’s  land.  A  gentleman  at  Inverary 
supped  with  us  who  had  from  his  youth  much  of  Fingal  by 
heart.  The  people  below  are  talking  Ersh,  there  was  a 
sermon  preached  in  that  language  at  Inverary  yesterday. 

Returned  to  Edinburgh  on  August  22,  Mrs. 
Montagu  writes  to  her  husband  : 

We  were  very  obligingly  entertaind  at  the  Lord  Provosts 
villa  near  Glasgow,  we  lay  there  on  Friday  night,  on  the 
Saturday  we  travelled  many  miles  on  the  side  of  Loch  Lomond, 
the  most  beautiful  lake  that  can  be  imagined,  it  is  adorned 
with  many  Islands  of  different  bulk  and  figure  .  .  .  the  lake 
is  pure  as  crystal  and  the  shore  of  white  pebbles  ;  the  banks 

1  Lady  Margaret  Macdonald,  daughter  of  ninth  Earl  of  Eglinton. 

2  The  Isle  of  Skye. 


1766 


INVERARAY 


i47 


are  all  steep  and  adorned  with  wood,  and  here  and  there  a 
mountain  lifts  its  head,  or  rocks  rise  on  the  side  of  the  lake. 
This  water  is  in  places  8  miles  broad  in  others  3  or  4.  We  lay 
on  Saturday  night  at  a  place  called  Luss,  the  next  day  about 
noon  we  entered  the  Highlands.  It  is  not  within  the  compass 
of  prose,  hardly  of  poetry,  to  describe  the  sublime  beauties 
that  here  opened  upon  us.  We  travelled  along  a  glen  [Glencoe] 
encompassd  by  vast  hoar  mountains  down  whose  wrinkled 
sides  rushed  impetuous  streams  which  ended  in  the  vale  below. 
In  a  sort  of  proportion  mountain  rose  above  mountain,  some 
from  the  steep  declivity  had  had  all  the  soil  washed  away  and 
the  rocks  like  the  bones  of  a  giant  exhibited  its  strength  without 
softness  or  mitigation,  and  made  imagination  tremble  through 
all  her-  powers.  In  this  glen  we  stopped  to  dine,  the  post- 
chaise  was  the  best  habitation  so  there  we  were  served  by  a 
bare  legged  highland  nymph  with  the  best  herrings  that  ever 
were  tasted,  and  it  is  a  fish  of  a  much  superior  excellence  to 
any  we  have.  The  sharp  air  gave  appetite,  the  day  was  warm, 
the  sun  can  never  pervade  the  glen  but  illuminates  some  parts 
of  the  mountains,  while  others  appear  deep  and  dark  ;  sheep 
and  goats  being  on  the  sides,  and  here  and  there  the  hand  of 
industry  has  reached  high  on  the  sides  of  the  mountains  and 
by  the  spade,  cultivated  spots  of  ground  so  that  every  kind  of 
corn  is  to  be  seen  in  parts.  .  .  .  Winding  through  these 
mountains  we  rise  to  Inverary  where  there  is  another  vast 
lake  of  salt  water  [Loch  Fyne]  ;  just  before  the  house  of  the 
Duke  of  Argyll  sometimes  sports  the  great  Leviathan  tho’  it 
is  60  miles  from  the  ocean  but  the  whales  come  in  search 
of  the  herrings.  His  grace’s  house  has  cost  a  great  deal  of 
money,  but  makes  little  figure,  being  surrounded  by  such 
immense  objects.  I  must  reserve  for  my  next  the  account 
of  what  we  saw  at  Glasgow  and  have  seen  since  at  Lord 
Kaimes  where  we  were  most  kindly  entertained. 

Another  long  letter  to  Mrs.  Scott  of  August  24 
gives  much  the  same  account,  but  adds  she  is  going  to 
hear  Mr.  Blair  preach,  and  “  Tomorrow  I  am  to  lye 
at  Sir  Gilbert  Elliots,  the  next  night  at  the  Bishop  of 
Carlisle’s  and  then  I  get  back  to  grovelling  cares  and 
filthy  lucre  and  dirty  coal.” 

Dr.  Gregory  and  his  two  daughters  accompanied 
Mrs.  Montagu  back  to  Denton,  and  she  persuaded 


148 


ROUSSEAU 


1766 


him  to  leave  the  two  girls  with  her  for  a  time  ;  the 
eldest,  afterwards  Mrs.  Alison,  was  then  eleven  ;  the 
second  was  Mr.  Montagu’s  godchild.  Both  were 
lovely  children. 

From  Bill  Hill,  Berks,  on  October  16,  Lady  Hervey 
writes  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
cheque  for  the  champagne  mentioned  before,  and 
alludes  to  the  quarrel  between  Hume  and  Jean  J. 
Rousseau  : 


From  Lady  Hervey 

Jean  Jaques  has  now  proved  himself  to  Mr.  Hume  what 
I  long  ago  knew  he  was  and  warned  that  honest  amiable  dupe 
that  he  would  find  him.  Rousseau  is  the  most  dangerous 
composition  that  can  be,  which  is  that  of  madness  grafted  on 
malignity.  I  never  in  my  life  knew  anyone  that  had  so  many 
singularities  about  them,  that  was  not  either  a  knave,  fool  or 
a  madman,  and  often  two  of  the  three  joined,  which  is  certainly 
Rousseau’s  case  notwithstanding  all  Mr.  Wedderburn  has  told 
you  Madam.  I  am  persuaded  you  will  be  surprised  and  shocked 
when  you  see  the  large  absurd  wicked  accusation  he  has  drawn 
up  in  18  folio  pages  against  his  greatest  benefactor  and  best 
friend,  amidst  which  there  are  strokes  of  great  genius  inter¬ 
mixed  and  it  ends  by  the  most  eloquent  and  pathetic  apostrophe 
to  Hume  entreating  him  to  justify  himself  and  prove  his 
innocence. 

Rousseau  had  been  lionised  in  London  this  year, 
alternately  grumbling  and  delighting  in  the  homage 
which  he  affected  to  dislike.  Hume  had  done  his 
utmost  to  secure  for  his  friend  the  comfortable  retreat 
which  he  professed  to  desire,  and  a  great  part  of  the 
Confessions  was  indeed  written  at  Wootton  in  Derby¬ 
shire,  where  he  had  secured  a  lovely  domicile  for  the 
sentimentalist  “  without  a  skin.”  Walpole’s  wicked 
letter  from  the  King  of  Prussia,  already  alluded  to, 
was  among  the  worst  of  many  spiteful  achievements  ; 
but  there  was  no  sane  excuse  for  the  vituperative  fury 
with  which  Rousseau  turned  upon  David  Hume,  who 
had  done  his  utmost  to  make  his  stay  in  England 


1766 


LADY  HERVEY 


149 


comfortable,  though  he  had  strangely  and  amusingly 
misjudged  the  character  of  the  “  modest,  mild,  well- 
bred,  gentle-spirited,  warm-hearted  man,”  whom  he 
compared  to  Socrates,  and  thought  he  could  spend  his 
life  with  in  mutual  friendship  and  esteem.  But  Jean 
Jacques  was  not  sane,  and  therein  lies  the  answer  to  it 
all,  as  Lady  Hervey  rightly  divined. 

Horace  Walpole  wrote  vixenishly :  “  I  suppose 
Mrs.  Montagu,  my  Lord  Lyttelton,  .  .  .  will  be  in 
raptures  with  Rousseau,  especially  as  conducted  by 
Mr.  Hume,”  but  he  was  greatly  mistaken,  as  later 
letters  show. 

A  long  letter  from  Lord  Lyttelton  in  September 
describes  an  extraordinary  boating  accident  in  the 
Severn,  in  which  he  and  a  party  of  eighteen  friends  were 
involved,  all  being  thrown  from  their  boat  into  one  of 
the  deepest  parts  of  the  river,  but  all  rescued,  though 
only  five  of  them  could  swim.  Other  letters  about 
this  time  lament  the  untimely  death,  at  Rome,  of 
young  Sir  James  Macdonald,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  special 
favourite  ;  and  also  of  Lord  Lyttelton’s  brother  Sir 
Richard  ;  and  there  are,  of  course,  references  to 
Anstey’s  New  Bath  Guide ,  which  had  just  made  its 
appearance  ;  Christopher  Anstey’s  sister  having  been 
a  great  friend  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s. 

From  Lady  Hervey 

October  the  z%th. 

I  must  make  my  acknowledgments  to  dear  Mrs.  Montagu 
for  her  kind  congratulations,  and  the  obliging  share  she  is  so 
kind  to  take  in  Lord  Bristol’s  new  Situation,  which  is  very 
agreable  to  him,  and  may  be  very  advantageous  to  his  brothers  : 
I  am  to  be  the  only  sufferer  by  it  :  his  three  years  residence 
cuts  off  all  hopes  from  me  of  seeing  him  again — three  years 
are  more  than  the  life  of  so  old  a  woman  as  myself  ;  but  I  may 
say  on  this  occasion,  as  Aggripina  did  of  a  very  different  Son 
from  mine,  lett  him  reign  tho ’  1  die.  If  your  travels  were  half 
so  agreable  to  you,  Madam,  as  you  make  them  to  others  in 
the  relation  of  them,  you  have  passed  your  time  most  delightfully 


150 


CLARISSA 


1766 


in  Scotland  ;  I  am  not  unacquainted  with  the  Hospitality, 
good  sence  and  good  breeding  of  the  Scotch,  but  their  good 
taste  alone  would  suffice  to  make  them  endeavour  to  please  you. 

Two  sentences  from  letters  of  this  period  throw 
fresh  light  on  Elizabeth  Carter’s  character  and  per¬ 
sonality.  In  the  first  Mrs.  Montagu  tells  her  : 

To  amuse  myself  I  began  to  read  Clarissa,  but  there  is 
such  a  resemblance  of  character  between  you  and  Clarissa 
I  believe  I  shall  not  be  able  to  go  on,  her  distresses  affect  me 
so  deeply.  I  am  sure  Mr.  Richardson  knew  you  when  you 
was  a  girl.  I  believe  at  thirteen  you  was  exactly  Clarissa 
Harlowe. 

Elizabeth  Carter  and  Hester  Mulso  (Mrs.  Chapone) 
were  the  two  literary  ladies  whom  Richardson  called 
his  adopted  daughters.  Their  attentions  and  affec¬ 
tionate  assiduities,  according  to  Miss  Reynolds,  made 
Dr.  Johnson  rather  jealous  and  envious  of  the  novelist, 
for  whom  he  considered  these  ladies  had  deserted  his 
own  paternal  affection. 

In  the  second,  writing  again  to  her  from  Denton, 
Mrs.  Montagu  is  a  little  bit  annoyed  with  her  good 
man,  whom  she  always  refers  to  as  “  his  honour  ” 
when  he  is  tiresome. 

If  you  want  cash  for  immediate  use  I  will  send  you  any 
sum  you  please  when  I  get  to  London.  I  wish  I  cd  tell  you 
when  that  will  be,  this  wet  place  sadly  plagues  my  poor  carcass, 
but  whenever  I  desire  to  depart  his  honour  frowns,  and  says 
it  is  all  whim,  and  I  am  only  tired  because  Mrs.  Carter  is  not 
here,  for  his  part  her  face  makes  him  melancholly.  I  told 
him  it  was  a  jolly  round  face,  and  if  he  found  any  melancholly 
it  was  of  his  own  bringing.  At  last  I  found  he  saw  the  sign 
of  the  cross  in  her  face,  her  Xtian  baptism  still  remains,  and 
what  zealous  bigots  are  these  freethinkers  !  With  all  their 
talk  of  toleration  they  wd  not  tolerate  any  religion  at  all  if 
they  cd  help  it.  However  I  hope  to  get  out  of  the  house  in 
a  few  days  notwithstanding  Mrs.  Carters  piety.  .  .  . 

Mr.  Temple,  in  writing  a  warm  eulogy  of  the  poet 
Gray,  was  constrained  to  say  that  the  defect  of  his 


1766 


THOMAS  GRAY 


I51 

character  was  “  an  affectation  of  delicacy,  or  rather 
effeminacy,  and  a  visible  fastidiousness  or  contempt 
and  disdain  of  his  inferiors  in  science  ;  ...  he  could 
not  bear  to  be  considered  merely  as  a  man  of  letters, 
his  desire  was  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  private  inde¬ 
pendent  gentleman,  who  read  for  his  amusement.” 
Horace  Walpole  and  others  have  referred  to  his  shy 
and  morose  manner,  and  the  following  from  Mrs. 
Montagu  to  the  wife  of  her  brother,  William  Robinson, 
who  was  amongst  Gray’s  intimates,  “  the  Reverend 
Billy,”  suggests  something  of  the  same  impression  : 

I  was  told  Mr.  Gray  was  rather  reserved,  when  in  Scotland, 
tho’  they  were  disposed  to  pay  him  great  respect.  I  agree 
perfectly  with  him  that  to  endeavour  to  shine  in  conversation 
and  to  lay  on  for  admiration  is  very  paltry  ;  at  the  same  time 
when  a  man  of  celebrated  talents  disdains  to  mix  in  common 
conversation  or  refuses  to  talk  on  ordinary  subjects  it  betrays 
a  latent  pride  ;  there  is  a  much  higher  character  than  that  of 
a  wit,  a  poet,  or  a  savant,  which  is  that  of  a  rational  sociable 
being,  willing  to  carry  on  the  commerce  of  life  with  all  the 
sweetness  and  condescension,  decency  and  virtue  will  permit. 
The  great  duty  of  conversation  is  to  follow  suit  as  you  do  at 
whist  ;  if  the  eldest  hand  plays  the  deuce  of  diamonds  let  not 
his  next  neighbour  cast  down  the  King  of  Hearts  because  his 
hand  is  full  of  honours.  I  do  not  love  to  see  a  man  of  wit 
win  all  the  tricks  in  conversation  nor  yet  to  see  him  sullenly 
pass.  I  speak  not  this  of  Mr.  Gray  in  particular  but  it  is  the 
common  failing  of  men  of  genius.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to 
see  Mr.  Gray  whenever  he  will  do  me  the  favour.  1  think 
he  is  the  first  poet  of  the  age,  but  if  he  comes  to  my  fireside, 
I  will  teach  him  not  to  speak  prose  but  to  talk  nonsense  if 
occasion  be.  I  would  not  have  the  poet  always  sit  on  the  proud 
summit  of  the  forked  hill.  I  have  a  great  admiration  as  well 
as  respect  for  Mr.  Gray. 

To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Denton,  the  18 th  [Nov.  ?]. 

I  have  lately  read  again  Mr.  Robertson’s  History  of  Mary, 
and  I  quite  Agree  with  you,  that  the  Myrtle  Wreath  was 
properer  for  her  brow  than  the  Imperial  Diadem.  She  was 


152 


ELIZABETH  AND  MARY 


1766 


Unfortunate  in  having  her  Education  in  Catherine  de  Medicis’s 
Court  and  afterwards  connections  with  our  Elizabeth  ;  Persons 
who  are  strictly  virtuous  and  honest,  if  they  have  common 
sense,  will  be  secure  against  all  the  attempts  of  the  deepest 
Politician,  but  if  they  quit  the  strait  road,  they  will  then  be 
circumvented  by  an  Antagonist  of  superior  cunning.  If 
Mary  had  not  murther’d  her  Husband,  and  married  the  Assassin, 
our  Virago  might  have  plagued  and  teized,  but  could  not  have 
beheaded  her.  Dr.  Robertson  has  managed  her  story  very 
well  ;  by  setting  her  beauty  and  Accomplishments  before  our 
Eyes,  we  are  interested  tenderly  for  her,  and  by  painting  her 
distresses  very  strongly  we  pity  her  till  our  Anger  is  disarm’d. 
It  is  a  very  just  observation  of  Tacitus  that  an  Unfair  trial 
and  the  too  rigourous  punishment  of  a  Criminal,  give  to  him 
an  Air  of  innocence.  I  am  shock’d  at  the  brutality  of  Elizabeth 
in  the  treatment  of  Mary  in  her  Captivity.  No  state  policy 
oblig’d  her  to  starve  her  prisoner  in  a  cold  Apartment  or  to 
treat  her  with  less  respect  than  became  her  rank.  In  this, 
there  was  more  of  the  envy  and  peevishness  of  a  Woman,  than 
the  Apprehensions  of  a  Politician.  I  cannot  pass  Elizabeth 
any  female  fault.  I  can  allow  her  much  male  mischief,  and 
masculine  errors  and  even  crimes.  I  had  rather  have  seen  her 
beat  Burleigh  or  Walsingham  than  ogle  Essex.  The  Tyrants 
or  Politicians  part  became  her. 

Owing  to  the  dismissal  of  their  steward  for  the 
Northern  properties  and  the  installation  of  his  suc¬ 
cessor,  and  the  other  delays  occasioned  by  a  very 
dilatory  husband,  the  return  from  Northumberland 
was  repeatedly  postponed,  and  was  only  accomplished 
in  a  bitterly  cold  journey  during  the  last  days  of 
December.  During  their  absence  Mr.  Adam  had 
been  carrying  out  some  improvements  at  Hill  Street, 
including  the  decoration  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  dressing- 
room,  which  was  known  as  the  Silver  Room,  and  for 
which  Cipriani  had  just  painted  the  panels  of  the 
doors.  Mrs.  Montagu  had  spent  part  of  her  enforced 
solitudes  at  Denton  in  completing  the  Essay  on 
Shakespeare,  which  had  been  warmly  commended  by 
Dr.  Gregory,  her  Edinburgh  friend,  to  whom  she  had 
sent  it  for  criticism. 


*767 

INOCULATION - LORD  CHATHAM’S  ILLNESS 


The  new  dressing-room.  The  burletta.  Henry  Home.  Inoculation. 
Lord  Chatham’s  illness.  Political  congress.  Miss  Botham’s  wedding. 
Sarah  Fielding.  Death  of  Charles  Townshend.  The  journey  north. 
Hatfield.  Mrs.  Carter  of  Theakstone.  Burmeston.  Mr.  Percy. 
General  Pulteney’s  death.  Duke  of  York.  Lord  Chatham  re¬ 
purchases  Hayes.  Return  to  town.  December  frost  and  gaiety. 


Returning  after  the  bitter  winter  journey  from 
Northumberland  Mrs.  Montagu  wrote  to  her  sister  : 

From  our  Palace  in  Hillstreet,  Jany.  the  8 th. 

My  dressing  room  is  really  wonderfully  pretty.  Mr.  Adam 
has  done  his  best,  he  has  exerted  much  genius  on  the  doors  in 
emulation  of  his  Rival  Stewart.  I  assure  you  the  dressing 
room  is  now  just  the  female  of  the  great  room,  for  sweet 
attractive  grace,  for  winning  softness,  for  delicacy,  for  le  je 
ne  scai  quoi  it  is  incomparable  ;  upon  the  whole  I  am  really 
well  lodged,  but  had  the  rooms  been  hung  with  mock  flock 
paper,  or  even  with  Herods  cruel  face  in  vile  tapestry  I  shd 
have  been  pleased  to  have  got  home  after  such  a  dismal  cold 
journey.  .  .  .  The  whole  Town  is  in  amazement  at  Lord  Barry 
[mojres  having  disappointed  the  fair  Lady  even  when  she  was 
dressd  for  the  Nuptials,  the  Parson  waiting,  friends  assembled, 
and  all  things  prepared  ;  the  expected  Bridegroom  sent  word 
he  was  ill,  refuses  to  admit  her  relations,  and  no  one  knows 
what  is  the  cause  of  this  sudden  change. 


From  her  Sister 

I  am  just  going  to  the  Burletta  ;  people  are  mad  after 
them  here.  I  believe  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Bedford 


i53 


*S  4 


LORD  KAMES 


1767 


came  to  enjoy  them  longer,  for  I  can  learn  no  other  motive  ; 
they  say  they  appear  to  much  greater  advantage  here  then  at 
Covent  Garden,  the  house  and  music  is  better  suited  to  their 
voices  ;  I  own  my  raptures  are  many  degrees  below  the 
fashion. 

Amongst  other  friendships  made  during  the  tour 
in  Scotland  was,  as  we  have  seen,  that  of  Henry 
Home,  Lord  Karnes,  the  Lord  of  Session  at  Edin¬ 
burgh,  whose  Essays  on  the  Principles  of  Morality 
had  involved  him  in  the  charge  of  heresy  in  earlier 
years,  and  who  now  became  a  rather  voluminous 
correspondent,  and  a  very  devoted  admirer  of  Mrs. 
Montagu.  Their  letters  are  many  and  lengthy,  and 
hardly  of  sufficient  interest  for  inclusion  here,  and  we 
must  be  content  to  chronicle  his  Lordship’s  anxious 
desire  that  Mrs.  Montagu  should  contribute  an  essay 
on  “  Ornament  ”  to  the  new  edition  of  his  Elements 
of  Criticism ,  an  application  which  is  gracefully  de¬ 
clined  in  twelve  closely  written  quarto  pages  dealing 
with  the  subject  at  length. 

Readers  of  the  earlier  story  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
life  will  remember  the  extraordinary  horror  of  small¬ 
pox  to  which  she  was  always  subject.  She  had  under¬ 
gone  inoculation  twenty  years  previously,  after  the 
birth  of  her  child,  without  effect  ;  but  on  her  house¬ 
keeper  at  Hill  Street  developing  the  disease  this  spring 
she  at  once  took  refuge  at  the  Bothams’  at  Ealing, 
and  began  preparations  for  re -inoculation  by  Mr. 
Sutton.  The  letters  covering  this  period  evince  an 
anxiety,  not  only  on  her  own  part  but  amongst  the 
large  circle  of  her  friends,  which  seems  to-day  incred¬ 
ible.  She  went  into  lodgings  at  Kensington,  where 
the  extremely  drastic  preparatory  measures  were 
put  in  hand,  including  a  week’s  abstinence  with 
mercurial  treatment,  etc.,  etc.  The  following  extract 
from  a  letter  to  her  husband  shows  that  though  the 
process  was  vastly  more  formidable  than  the  vaccina¬ 
tion  of  to-day,  she  was  not  inclined  to  be  burked  into 


INOCULATION 


1767 


155 


any  of  the  half  measures  which  the  old  gentleman 
had  suggested  : 

Her  friend  must  go  at  once  to  Kensington  where  she  will 
talk  to  Mr.  Sutton  and  settle  how  I  am  to  proceed.  If  she 
cannot  go  at  ten  to  Mr.  Suttons  she  must  go  at  five  in  the 
afternoon.  I  have  written  to  her  about  the  affair.  If  I  take 
Mr.  Sutton  to  inoculate  me  on  account  of  his  skill  and  ex¬ 
perience,  or  indeed  from  a  skill  arising  from  his  experience, 
it  wd  be  very  absurd  in  me  to  direct  him  or  to  vary  from  his 
method,  so  whatever  disagreableness  may  attend  his  preparation 
I  must  submit  to  it,  else  I  have  not  the  benefit  of  the  experience 
of  a  man  who  has  inoculated  21,000  persons,  but  am  following 
my  own  imagination.  Sutton  has  lost  Patients  by  the  small 
pox  but  never  one  by  the  preparation.  I  have  undoubtedly 
reason  to  apprehend  the  physick  will  make  me  very  sick  but 
if  I  was  to  take  but  half  his  pill  might  I  not  suffer  in  the  small 
pox  for  want  of  that  physick  and  that  diet  on  which  his  extra¬ 
ordinary  success  is  founded  ?  I  never  oppose  my  own  reasonings 
to  Experience  ;  when  it  is  a  battle  of  logick  I  fancy  I  can  reason 
as  well  as  another.  I  propose  to  set  out  on  Saturday  morning 
and  to  reach  Ealing  that  night  and  on  monday  night  to  go  to 
Kensington  where  I  wd  be  settled  a  day  before  I  take  the 
physick,  so  on  wensday  I  propose  to  swallow  the  formidable 
Pill. 

Mrs.  Carter  came  from  Deal  to  be  with  her  through 
the  critical  period;  Sir  John  Pringle,  M.D.,  consulted 
with  Mr.  Sutton  on  every  circumstance  of  her  con¬ 
stitution  ;  the  Duchess  of  Portland,  Mrs.  Boscawen, 
and  other  friends  came  up  specially  to  visit  her  ; 
Lord  Lyttelton,  Lord  Karnes,  Dr.  Monsey,  and  many 
others  wrote  letters  full  of  direst  solicitude  ;  her 
lawyer  brother  Morris  arranged  all  her  affairs  in  case 
of  her  decease,  and  was  at  length  constrained  by  this 
avalanche  of  anxiety  to  write  from  his  office  in  Chancery 
Lane  assuring  her  that  Mr.  Sutton  had  successfully 
inoculated  thousands  of  people,  and  that  the  opera¬ 
tion  was  no  more  terrible  than  ordinary  blood  letting. 
With  a  gasp  of  relief  we  surmount  this  appalling  packet 
of  letters  (all  strung  gloomily  together  by  some 
tremulous  hand),  and  find  that  all  has  gone  well,  that 


156  LORD  CHATHAM’S  ILLNESS  1767 

she  had  not  suffered  in  the  least,  and  that  the  inocula¬ 
tion  had  again  entirely  failed  to  “  take.”  Discarding 
this  agonized  bunch  of  correspondence,  we  find  the 
next  is  from  Sandleford,  and  breathe  again. 


To  her  Husband 

Sandleford,  the  nth  of  May. 

I  askd  at  an  Inn  where  Ld  Chatham  lay,  what  equipages 
he  had  ?  and  was  told  two  coaches,  and  three  post  chaises. 
I  wonder  what  he  will  do  with  all  this  if  he  is  to  maintain  it 
on  his  pension  and  Sr  William  Pynsents  estate,  which  I  am 
assured,  was  but  ^1200  pr  annum,  a  great  part  of  it  he  has 
already  squanderd.  Alas  that  such  a  man  should  be  set  to 
govern  a  nation  renown’d  for  sober  sense  !  Poor  man  I 
understand  he  is  now  as  mad  as  any  of  his  greatest  admirers. 
At  the  Inns  he  orderd  14  dishes  for  his  attendants  supper  before 
he  was  deemd  non  compos. 

The  extent  of  Lord  Chatham’s  “  incapacity  ” 
during  this  momentous  period  of  the  move  towards 
American  independence  has  been  greatly  canvassed. 
He  had  supported  the  embargo  on  corn  in  his  first 
speech  in  the  House  of  Lords,  after  the  bad  harvest 
of  last  autumn  and  the  dearth  which  followed  it,  and 
had  shortly  afterwards  been  withdrawn  from  public 
business  in  a  manner  surrounded  by  some  mystery  ; 
but  it  seems  probable  that  the  suppressed  gout  from 
which  he  suffered  so  severely  had  affected  his  brain, 
and  that,  as  several  references  in  these  letters  indicate, 
when  the  bodily  ailment  developed  acutely,  the  brain 
was  at  once  relieved  and  his  mental  faculties  restored. 


From  her  Husband 

London,  July  25 th. 

I  writ  you  in  my  last  that  the  Congress  ended  in  nothing. 
All  that  I  can  learn  about  it  is  that  the  Dukes  of  Bedford  and 
Newcastle,  Lord  Temple,  and  Granville  gave  up  all  their 
pretensions,  and  only  insisted  on  having  their  friends  consider’d, 


1767 


KITTY  BOTHAM’S  WEDDING 


I5  7 


but  that  Lord  Rockingham  insisted  upon  his  being  the  xst 
Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  having  Conway  Secretary  of  State. 
This  last  was  no  ways  agreable  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who 
still  was  not  against  his  promotion  in  the  army,  and  that 
according  to  the  highest  of  his  wishes,  and  so  there  was  an 
end  of  the  treaty.  If  they  could  have  agreed  upon  the  Nomina¬ 
tion  of  a  Ministry  as  the  King  was  to  approve  of  it  Ory  if  he 
would  have  come  into  one,  or  ever  will  without  the  liking  of 
the  Dowager  Princess  of  Wales  and  Ld  Bute,  and  if  so  how 
long  things  may  go  on  in  the  way  they  are  with  the  present 
Ministry. 

“  Things  went  on,”  indeed,  but  rather  in  the 
fashion  of  a  coach  whose  driver  has  fallen  off  his 
seat  in  a  fit,  the  various  occupants  of  the  box-seats 
plying  the  whip,  jamming  on  the  brake,  and  jerking 
the  reins  this  way  and  that.  Money  had  to  be  raised  ; 
and  the  landowners  having  defeated  Townshend’s 
four-shilling  land  tax,  allowed  the  brilliant  unballasted 
Chancellor  to  levy  a  customs  duty  at  American  ports 
on  six  articles,  of  which  the  last  and  only  important 
item  was  tea. 

In  August  the  wedding  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  cousin, 
Kitty  Botham,  to  Mr.  Stewart  took  place.  The 
bride’s  father  performed  the  ceremony  in  great  agita¬ 
tion,  and  as  the  groom  was  thought  desirous  of  making 
a  figure,  Mrs.  Montagu  accompanied  the  wedding 
procession  out  of  London  in  her  coach  and  six,  with 
three  outriders  all  decked  with  favours  in  their  hats. 
The  favours  were  afterwards  used  as  “  pretty  sleeve 
knots.” 

A  few  days  later  Mrs.  Montagu  again  set  out  on 
her  journey  north  to  Denton,  this  time  leaving  her 
husband  at  Sandleford  busy  over  their  departing 
agent’s  accounts,  previously  to  installing  James  Wood- 
house,  the  cobbler  poet,  in  his  stead.  She  broke  her 
northward  journey  at  Hatfield,  Stilton,  Doncaster, 
Burrough  Bridge,  and  Mr.  Smelt’s  house  at  Leases, 
from  which  she  visited  Mr.  Aislabie’s  seat  at  Hackfall, 
and  also  stayed  at  Burmeston  in  Yorkshire,  of  which 


SARAH  FIELDING 


1767 


158 

her  uncle,  the  Rev.  Matthew  Robinson,  had  been 
for  forty-three  years  Vicar,  and  had  founded  alms¬ 
houses  there,  to  which  she  made  pious  visitation 
and  suitable  largess.  At  Durham  she  was  met  by 
her  husband’s  cousin  and  agent,  Mr.  Archdeacon, 
and  with  an  escort  of  three  old  Denton  servants, 
mounted  on  the  colliery  horses,  reached  the  Hall  on 
August  29. 

At  this  date  comes  a  long  and  affectionate  letter 
from  Mrs.  Sarah  Fielding,  sister  of  the  novelist  and 
of  the  blind  Bow  Street  magistrate,  and  herself  the 
author  of  The  Adventures  of  David  Simple ,  and  other 
stories.  Mrs.  Montagu  helped  in  the  support  of 
Mrs.  Fielding  by  many  kindly  gifts  sent  through  her 
sister  Mrs.  Scott,  and  the  letter,  though  not  of  sufficient 
interest  for  quotation,  is  full  of  bashful  gratitude. 


To  her  Husband 

Stilton,  Saturday  night  the  zznd  {August). 

As  we  dined  at  Hatfield  I  walk’d  to  Lord  Salisburys  Seat. 
It  is  a  great  Gothick  structure  in  the  worst  style  of  that  kind 
of  architecture,  it  is  vast  without  being  great,  and  melancholly 
without  the  august  and  sublime,  the  fate  of  the  Cecil  family 
affects  one  as  disagreably  as  their  Seat,  one  feels  for  it  a  pity 
mixd  with  contempt  and  loathing.  To  see  the  Heir  of  that 
Burleigh  who  so  long  held  the  reins  of  government  now  proud 
to  drive  a  pair  of  coach  horses  is  horrible.  In  this  great  Seat 
there  are  only  two  or  three  inhabitants.  I  observed  a  guitar 
lying  in  a  window,  and  the  maid,  who  shews  the  house,  told 
me,  it  was  play’d  on  by  the  young  Lady  who  was  Housekeeper, 
and  I  observed  a  dumb  waiter  with  three  bottles  of  wine,  or 
gin  perhaps,  proposed  for  the  same  young  Ladys  dinner.  Horses 
and  Strumpets  are  the  noble  Earls  noble  delight.  The  Park 
is  the  only  spot  in  all  Hertfordshire  that  is  not  green,  it  betrays 
the  carelessness  and  poverty  of  the  owner.  Thus  alas  termin¬ 
ates  Burleighs  wisdom,  Elizabeths  power,  the  pilfering  of  the 
Treasury,  and  the  extortions  of  the  Star  Chamber.  Ld  Bacon, 
who  was  childless,  takes  notice  with  a  sort  of  exultation,  that 
the  most  distinguish’d  men  usually  have  left  no  posterity  ; 


1767 


HATFIELD 


lS9 


Fortune,  says  he,  not  suffering  them  to  be  disgraced  in  Lineal 
posterity.  His  Father  Sr  Nicholas,  who  was  also  a  wise  man, 
has  now  several  great  Grand-children  deprived  of  reason. 
Lord  Bacon  has  left  only  the  offspring  of  his  brain,  and  a  very 
honourable  posterity  it  has  proved.  There  are  many  fine 
pictures  at  Hatfield  of  eminent  persons.  The  celebrated  Laura 
appears  less  beautifull  in  her  portrait  than  in  Petrarchs  verse. 
Mary  Oueen  of  Scotts  portraits,  one  in  her  youth,  the  other 
when  a  Prisoner,  express  in  the  Countenance  the  difference  of 
prosperity  and  adversity.  Perhaps  she  was  partly  a  sacrifice 
at  iast  to  the  security  of  this  wretched  Race  of  Cecil.  Ld 
Burleighs  fear  of  her  vengeance  on  his  family  if  she  succeeded 
his  Mistress,  might  possibly  make  him  more  urgent  for  her 
death.  Long  schemes  and  distant  views  are  not  for  this  World, 
We  see  continually 

Madmen  buried  in  the  heaps  they  raise. 

There  is  a  Portrait  of  Queen  Elizabeth  in  every  room.  I 
wish  her  Ghost  walk’d  there,  for  I  am  sure  she  wd  box  the 
present  Lords  ears.  She  loved  Lord  Burleigh  and  protected 
him  as  Minerva  is  said  to  have  done  Ulysses  ;  he  was  the 
mortal  and  the  most  like  to  herself  that  she  could  find  upon 
Earth,  so  on  him  she  conferrd  the  assistance  of  those  attributes 
the  flattery  and  slavery  of  the  times  bestow’d  on  Regal  Majesty. 
There  is  a  great  look  of  wisdom  and  penetration  in  Burleighs 
portraits,  his  pointed  beard  gives  him  a  sager  air  than  he  wd 
have  in  the  modern  mode  of  dress.  I  could  not  help  comparing 
his  countenance  with  the  placidness  of  our  late,  and  the  juvenile 
look  of  our  present  Treasurer.  Our  present  Ministers  fall 
long  before  they  can  raise  a  great  Gothick  Edifice.  .  .  . 

It  is  said  in  Huntingdonshire,  that  Ld  C -  will  now 

decline  his  pretensions  there,  and  that  Ld  Charles  Montagu 
will  be  put  up  in  his  room.  The  furniture  at  Elton  was  sold 
yesterday,  it  was  first  seized  by  a  Butcher  at  London  for  a  debt 
of  only  ^219,  but  his  credit  has  been  so  bad  for  a  long  time 
that  the  Butcher  in  the  Country  wd  not  trust  him  for  a  joynt 
of  meat,  nor  bakers  for  a  loaf  of  bread.  All  this  has  been 
brought  upon  him  by  an  enormous  expence  in  kept  Women. 
He  used  to  have  one  always  within  a  few  miles  of  his  Country 
House.  His  Lady  is  much  pittied,  poor  Woman  she  was  far 

from  extravagant.  The  Son  is  a  fine  boy,  I  hope  Lady  C - 

will  not  be  so  kind  a  Wife  as  to  forget  she  is  a  Mother.  I 

was  one  of  the  persons  of  whom  Lady  Att -  enquired  of 

this  Gentlemans  character  before  she  gave  him  her  Daughter. 


160  INNS  ON  THE  NORTH  ROAD 


1767 


I  spoke  truly  what  I  had  heard  which  was  to  his  advantage. 

The  great  regard  which  Lady  C - has  always  shewn  to  me 

makes  me  still  more  concern’d  for  her.  I  remember  this  fine 
Gentleman  was  said  to  have  spent  £10000  upon  a  mistress 
some  years  ago.  She  went  mad  and  squandered  all  the  jewels 
and  fine  things  he  had  given  her.  Since  this  misfortune  of 

Ld  C -  Ld  Sandwich  has  taken  the  whole  expence  of  the 

County  upon  himself,  and  they  say  it  is  enormous. 

Elton  Hall  was  the  seat  of  Lord  Carysfort,  the 
Irish  Baron. 

To  her  sister  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  on  Pitt’s  new 
earldom  : 

What  do  you  say  of  the  Earl  of  Chatham  at  Bath  ?  I  am 
angry  that  a  comparison  is  made  between  him  and  my  old 
departed  friend.  Poor  Lord  Bath  did  not  forsake  his  friends 
but  was  forsaken  of  them,  they  ran  into  the  King’s  closet  and 
made  their  bargains  before  he  accepted  a  peerage. 

To  her  Husband 

Leases,  ye  28  th  of  Aug. 

The  night  I  got  to  Burrough  Bridge  I  was  so  tired,  I  never 
thought  of  enquiring  the  order  of  the  post,  or  I  shd  have 
written  from  thence.  The  night  I  lay  at  Doncaster  I  not 
only  cd  not  get  any  sleep,  but  had  not  any  rest.  I  was  devoured 
by  bugs,  and  the  coal  carts  clattering  by  ye  window  every 
moment  gave  me  such  a  night  that  I  rose  far  more  fatigued 
than  I  went  to  bed.  The  night  following  I  got  some  rest 
at  Burrough  Bridge,  but  not  much,  for  I  lay  in  a  room  that 
had  so  many  evil  odours,  the  collected  perspiration  I  suppose 
of  ten  thousand  travellers,  that  I  could  not  sleep  any  longer 
than  my  senses  were  subdued  by  fatigue.  However  the  neatness 
and  elegance  of  my  present  situation  have  made  me  amends 
for  all  ye  disgust  I  sufferd  on  the  road.  ...  I  was  amazed  to 
see  the  Town  of  Burmiston  so  improved,  and  most  of  all  was 
pleased  to  hear  of  ye  prosperity  of  the  people.  There  is  not 
one  person  in  all  the  parish  that  takes  alms,  except  on  some 
extraordinary  accident  ;  one  poor  woman  askd  for  some  firing 
for  ye  winter  ;  they  gave  her  as  much  as  came  to  eleven  shillings, 
and  Mrs.  Carter  says  that  is  all  that  has  been  askd  of  the  parish 
in  this  dear  time.  Your  Tenants,  even  at  this  time  of  year,  sell 
their  fresh  butter  at  8^  [pence]  a  pound.  I  shall  inform  Mr. 


1767 


BURMESTON 


161 


Black  of  these  circumstances.  This  part  of  Yorkshire  has  a 
most  happy  aspect,  no  appearance  of  wretchedness  in  the 
Cottages,  every  door  crouded  by  healthy  jolly  bairns,  farm¬ 
houses  tight  and  comfortable.  I  sent  a  guinea  to  my  Uncles 
Almshouse,  and  as  since  meat  has  been  dear  the  Feast  on  his 
Birthday  had  been  lain  aside,  and  ye  money  set  apart  for  it 
given  to  ye  poor  Alms  people,  I  ordered  Mrs.  Carter  to  get 
them  a  peice  of  beef,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  bread,  a  pint  of 
ale  for  each  person  at  my  expence,  and  that  ye  day  shd  be  kept 
as  usual.  My  Uncle  was  a  Benefactor  to  me  as  well  as  to  them, 
and  shall  not  be  forgotten  in  my  time  ;  indeed  one  may  say 
the  feast  on  his  Birthday  does  not  now  do  him  any  good, 
however  I  am  very  scrupulous  in  articles  of  this  kind,  for  if 
these  sort  of  things  make  ye  pleasure  of  the  Living,  it  is  an 
injury' to  Society  to  suffer  the  Will  of  the  Dead  to  be  neglected, 
since  all  will  fear  the  same  treatment  when  they  shall  be  dead. 
My  Uncles  fortune  furnished  means  for  ye  education  my 
Father  gave  us,  and  the  respectable  figure  in  which  he  lived, 
so  I  love  and  reverence  his  memory,  and  to  neglect  it  wd  be 
ingratitude,  and  I  am  sure  your  noble  mind  will  approve  my 
sentiments  on  this  subject.  If  I  was  in  the  neighbourhood  I 
wd  go  myself  to  the  Alms  house  in  honour  of  the  day  when 
it  was  kept. 

In  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  who  had  just  arrived  at 
Scarborough,  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  had  been  to  Alnwick 
on  mining  business  with  the  Duke  of  Northumber¬ 
land,  first  mentions  Mr.  Percy  : 

At  Alnwick  Castle  I  met  with  the  Mr.  Percy  who  published 
the  Reliques  of  ancient  poetry  ;  as  there  is  you  know  a  pre- 
established  harmony  between  me  and  all  poets,  he  showed  me 
great  attentions,  and  was  my  cicerone  in  visiting  an  old  abbey 
the  first  in  England  dedicated  to  the  Carmelite  Order.  Mr. 
Percy  is  a  very  agreeable  well  bred  man,  and  will  make  a  good 
addition  to  our  sect  of  blue  stocking  Philosophers. 

How  far  Mrs.  Montagu  knew  of  or  approved 
her  beloved  Sylph’s  flirtation  with  her  cousin  Sterne 
there  is  no  direct  evidence  to  indicate.  Their  acquaint¬ 
ance  had  begun  at  least  as  early  as  1761,  and  Sterne 
had  written  to  Mrs.  Montagu  :  “  Never  did  I  see 
anything  so  truly  graceful  as  she  is,  nor  had  I  an  idea 

VOL.  1  M 


1 62  MRS.  VESEY  &  LAURENCE  STERNE  1767 


until  I  saw  her  that  Grace  could  be  so  perfect  in  all 
its  parts.”  They  had  met  and  philandered  at  Bath, 
they  had  perambulated  together  a  deserted  Ranelagh, 
they  had  confabulated  in  her  “  warm  cabinet  ”  at 
Bolton  Row  ;  she  had  even  been  his  nurse  and  com¬ 
panion  through  a  long  night  of  illness  in  Bond  Street, 
brewing  his  barley  water  and  playing  picquet  so  that 
he  should  not  exert  himself  to  talk.  Now  while  she 
was  at  Scarborough  he  came  over  from  Coxwold  to 
see  her,  and  also  met  Lady  Anne  Dawson  there. 
Mrs.  Vesey,  writing  to  Mrs.  Montagu  on  August 
18  from  Scarborough,  says  no  word  of  Sterne,  but 
she  had  then  only  been  there  a  week.  She  tells  her 
how,  having  been  taken  out  in  a  “  machine  ”  to  bathe, 
she  had  ordered  her  driver  not  to  return  for  her  till 
she  signalled  him  ;  had  fallen  into  a  reverie  about 
Mrs.  Montagu  and  her  sister,  from  which  she  was 
aroused  by  the  unusual  motion  of  the  vessel,  now 
almost  afloat  on  the  incoming  tide  ;  “on  a  prodigious 
vacarme  my  conductor  at  last  returned  with  his  horses 
head  only  above  water  ;  another  second  and  your 
friend  might  have  dated  an  Elegy  from  the  Palace  of 
Neptune.”  After  describing  her  surroundings,  she 
adds  :  “  I  have  been  but  once  in  the  Rooms  and 
did  not  see  a  countenance  that  gave  me  any  curiosity 
to  enquire  further.  Ly  Ann  Dawson  is  my  next 
door  neighbour  and  the  only  society  I  have  had  any 
pleasure  in  yet.  What  the  delights  of  Scarborough 
are  I  shall  be  better  able  to  give  you  an  account  of 
a  week  hence.  I  have  hitherto  given  up  my  time  to 
riding  bathing  etc.  Mr.  Vesey  is  flirting  with 
Comptesses  at  Spa.  When  he  will  leave  his  plump 
German  ladies  to  take  up  a  lean  wife  I  don’t  know. 
How  I  love  you  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu.  Adieu.” 

Unfortunately  the  letter  of  “  a  week  hence  ”  is 
missing,  if  it  was  ever  written  ;  but  it  seems  clear  from 
Sterne’s  letters  that  (with  Eliza’s  miniature  in  his 
bosom,  and  a  wife  and  daughter  on  their  unwelcome 


ELIZABETH  CARTER 
By  James  Hopwood ,  Junior 


i767  OLD  WOODHOUSE  163 

way  back  to  the  home  he  was  rearranging  for  its 
future  Bramine)  he  could  not  resist  the  call  of  that 
“  system  of  harmonic  vibrations,”  the  Sylph  ;  and 
that  Mr.  Vesey’s  better  half  contrived  some  senti¬ 
mental  consolation  for  his  plump  German  ladies. 

The  good  lady  at  Deal  disapproved  severely  and 
did  not  hesitate  to  say  so. 

On  September  8,  writing  to  his  wife,  Mr. 
Montagu  says  : 

The  death  of  Mr.  C.  Townshend  is  a  very  sudden  and 
unexpected  event.  He  died  of  a  putrid  feavour.  He  was 
thought  to  be  upon  the  recovery,  but  relaps’d,  When  Dr.  James 
was  sent  for,  but  it  was  too  late.  With  all  his  great  abilities 
it  may  be  a  Problem  difficult  to  solve  whether  his  Country 
will  be  a  loser  or  gainer  by  his  Death.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  Present  Ministry  and  People  in  power  could  not  have  had 
a  greater  shock,  for  he  was  a  principal  Piller  and  a  Corner  stone 
of  that  Fabrick.  This  cannot  but  be  matter  of  joy  to  the 
Outs  who  want  to  have  the  pillaging  and  Plundering  of  the 
Country. 

Hillstreet,  Thursday. 

Woodhouse’s  Father  came  to  Sandleford  to  visit  him  two 
days  before  we  left  it,  I  prevaild  on  ye  Good  Man  to  promise 
me  to  stay  longer  than  he  intended  and  so  left  the  Butler  also 
there.  Old  Woodhouse  is  a  decent  sensible  plain  man,  was 
at  first  allarm’d  at  his  Sons  making  verses  when  he  shd  have 
set  a  heel-peice  on  an  old  shoe,  but  is  now  proud  of  him  in 
his  heart.  The  good  man  they  told  me  was  silent  and  with 
tears  of  joy  in  his  Eyes  for  an  hour  after  he  found  himself 
with  his  two  sons  and  his  four  grand  children,  and  his  daughter 
in  law,  who  I  believe  is  much  such  a  character  as  Rebecca 
the  daughter  of  Laban  ;  all  this  honest  heartfelt  happiness 
below  darted  many  rays  of  joy  up  into  my  dressing  room. 
There  is  something  so  angelick  in  Paternal  tenderness  and  filial 
piety  that  I  shared  inexpressible  delight  with  this  happy  assembly. 
I  left  them  all,  begging  old  Mr.  Woodhouse  to  stay  at  Sandleford 
to  ye  end  of  next  week  that  I  might  have  ye  pleasure  of  thinking 
they  were  all  happy.  I  have  call’d  the  Parent  of  ye  Wood- 
houses  old,  only  by  comparison,  he  is  only  60,  and  looks  quite 
fresh  and  young.  I  ask’d  him  if  he  was  a  Poet  in  his  youth,  he 
told  me  he  cd  not  boast  much  that  way,  but  his  Mother  wrote 


164 


A  THRIVING  COLLIERY 


1767 


many  verses  and  herself  made  his  Fathers  epitaph.  Tenderer 
relations  than  even  that  of  Son,  made  my  Poet  bear  with  sober 
joy  and  placid  content  ye  arrival  of  his  Father,  but  the  other 
Brother  seemd  quite  overcome,  and  said  with  tears  in  his  eyes, 
he  wishd  his  Mother  cd  have  been  with  them,  The  Reverence 
with  which  they  behaved  to  the  Father  was  really  fine. 

Mrs.  Montagu  worked  hard  through  these  autumn 
months  over  colliery  business  and  accounts,  and 
knocked  herself  up  to  such  an  extent  as  to  alarm  her 
really  affectionate  but  very  indolent  husband,  to  whom 
she  faithfully  reported  all  her  doings  with  every 
expression  of  wifely  devotion  and  obedience  ;  and 
under  her  very  capable  management  the  colliery  began 
to  thrive  exceedingly.  One  of  her  last  acts  before 
leaving  for  the  South  at  the  end  of  October  was 
“  to  arrange  with  a  schoolmaster  to  teach  50  boys 
to  read  and  write  next  year,  and,  please  God  I  live, 
I  will  get  a  dame  to  teach  as  many  girls  the  arts  and 
mysteries  of  knitting  and  spinning.” 

About  this  time  General  Pulteney,  Lord  Bath’s 
brother,  died,  leaving  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Johnstone  as 
his  heirs,  who  now  took  the  name  of  Pulteney,  and 
made  the  belated  settlement  of  £100  a  year  on  Mrs. 
Carter  which  Lord  Bath  was  believed  to  have  intended. 

Soon  after  reaching  London  again  Mrs.  Montagu 
went  down  to  her  husband  at  Sandleford,  where  “  Mr. 
Stewart  has  painted  me  some  of  the  sweetest  Zephyrs 
and  Zephirettes  in  my  bed  chamber  that  ever  I  beheld.” 

This  was  “  Athenian  ”  Stuart,  the  painter  and 
architect  who  later  built  her  Portman  Square  mansion. 
Unkind  people  declared  they  were  wanton  Cupids. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Hillstreet,  Tuesday  Nov.  the  2 d. 

The  Duke  of  York  is  to  be  buried  tomorrow,  not  only 
in  the  Vault  of  the  Abby,  but  in  the  dark  abyss  of  Oblivion, 
where  great  titles  without  great  characters  are  soon  swallow’d 


i767  THE  DUKE  OF  YORK’S  DEATH  165 

up.  I  imagine  by  next  week  he  will  be  as  much  forgot  as 
any  of  the  blood  royal  of  the  Heptarchy.  There  was  an  appear¬ 
ance  of  good  nature  and  humanity,  join’d  with  fortitude,  in 
his  behaviour  on  his  death  bed,  that  makes  one  wish  he  had 
lived  in  times  of  more  seriousness  and  dignity.  In  former 
days  the  Great,  by  certain  restraints  and  constraints,  acted  above 
themselves,  above  their  natural  character. 

Edward  Augustus,  Duke  of  York  and  Albany, 
the  King’s  eldest  brother,  had  died,  unmarried,  on 
September  17. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Nov. 

I  imagine  that  even  in  the  Elysian  Fields  at  Stowe  your 
Lordship  heard  a  great  deal  of  politicks.  Dr  Monseys  mackrel 
upon  a  gravel  walk  does  not  seem  to  me  more  improperly 
situated  than  an  ambitious  Politician  by  the  side  of  a  gentle 
murmuring  rill.  Charles  Townshends  death  seems  to  have 
done  Lord  Chathams  nerves  a  great  deal  of  good.  I  hear 
from  Bath  that  he  is  in  perfect  health.  He  has  sold  the  Pinsent 
estate  to  Sr  Fludyer  for  £20,000,  reserving  to  himself  the 
House  and  garden  and  some  little  ground.  I  hope  his  next 
legacy  will  be  in  America,  and  then  he  will  not  mortgage  or 
squander  it,  for  he  has  great  tenderness  for  American  property. 

Returned  from  Sandleford  to  Hill  Street  Mrs. 
Montagu  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Scott  says  : 

Lord  Chatham  has  bought  Hayes  again  ;  he  sold  it  for 
£16,000,  he  gives  £20,000,  Mr.  Walpole  having  laid  out  money 
upon  it. 

In  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  Mrs.  Montagu  mentions  : 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pulteney  will  soon  remove  to  Bath  House. 
Their  conduct  to  you  is  a  noble  pledge  to  the  public  that  they 
will  be  worthy  of  their  great  fortune. 

Mrs.  Montagu  doubtless  felt  that  her  wearisome 
autumn  at  Denton  had  entitled  her  to  a  bout  of  London 
gaiety,  and  December  letters  tell  of  visits  to  the  Opera, 
inspection  of  Mrs.  Wright’s  marvellously  embroidered 
royal  cradle,  assemblies  at  Northumberland  House, 


1 66 


WINTRY  WEATHER 


1767 


at  Egremont  House,  and  at  Almack’s,  and  a  great 
dinner  at  Bath  House  given  by  its  new  possessors. 
The  cold  this  winter  was  intense,  and  she  sends  her 
husband  at  Sandleford  elaborate  instructions  for  the 
making  and  supply  of  broth  for  relief  distribution  ; 
Christmas-tide  finds  her  settling  an  annuity  on  Sarah 
Fielding,  and  inviting  to  dinner  “  pour  chasser  l’ennui, 
savants  beaux  esprits  le  beau  monde  and  all  the  sorts 
and  kinds  of  things  that  make  up  society,”  whilst 
Mr.  Montagu  sticks  fast  to  Sandleford  and  gets  frozen 
up  there,  in  spite  of  huge  fires  and  extra  raiment. 


1768 


MOIRA  MASQUE  AND  MONSEY - THE  WILKES 

ELECTION 


Mr.  Lyttelton’s  election.  A  gazette  to  Mrs.  Vesey.  Wilkes  Riots. 
History  of  Hindostan.  Lady  Moira’s  Masque.  Alterations  at  Stowe. 
Lord  Chesterfield’s  wit.  Lord  Chatham.  Gray.  Domeniceti. 

Courayer.  Dr.  Monsey  and  the  King  of  Denmark.  Lady  Hervey’s 
illness  and  death.  Zinzendorf.  Miss  Chudleigh.  Junius.  Death 
of  Duke  of  Newcastle.  Royal  christening.  Wilkes  in  prison.  Lord 
Sandwich.  A  wonderful  clock. 


The  year  1768  opened  with  bitterly  cold  weather,  and 
Mr.  Montagu  writes  from  Sandleford  that  there  is  no 
keeping  warm  without  getting  burnt,  and  his  wife 
sends  him  a  fur-lined  leg-bag  to  help  matters.  Letters 
and  references  relating  to  the  illness  and  death  of  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  cousin  Laurence  Sterne  and  his  letters  of 
this  period  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  relating  to 
him.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  son  Tom  was  returned  member 
for  Bewdley  by  a  narrow  majority  after  a  lively  contest. 
“  The  extraordinary  expense  in  meat  ale  and  cockades 
for  our  troops  will  be  above  fifty  pounds,”  but  Tom’s 
conduct  was  at  the  moment  “  perfectly  good,”  and  his 
devoted  father  cheerfully  paid  for  the  “  brave  allies 
and  confederates  from  Kidderminster  and  Aveley  who 
made  us  quite  masters  of  the  field  ”  and  helped  to  win 
the  poll.  Ballots  and  Bribery  Acts  have  made  elec¬ 
tions  very  dull  and  insipid  affairs  nowadays. 

In  April  Mrs.  Montagu  visited  her  sister  in  her 
new  home  at  Hitcham,  towards  the  stocking  of  which 
she  had  sent  fowls,  pigs,  vegetables,  etc.,  from 

167 


1 68 


A  NEWS-LETTER 


1768 


Sandleford.  “  Mr.  Pulteney  tells  me  he  has  offered 
to  build  a  bridge  at  Bath  for  the  New  Square,”  but  the 
Corporation  had  not  accepted  his  offer  at  the  time  of 
writing.  Pulteney  Bridge  with  houses  on  either  side 
of  it  was  completed  about  1770. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Hillstreet,  Feb.  the  2 d. 

The  Duchess  of  Montagu  is  come  to  Town  much  mended 
by  the  Bath  waters.  The  Duchess  of  Buccleugh  has  the 
proper  sloping  kind  of  shape,  which  promises  great  joy  to  the 
noble  family,  and  in  a  short  time.  Lady  Primrose  is  much 
better  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  winter,  and  Mrs.  Carter, 
tho  she  had  a  bad  summer,  is  now  as  well  as  ever  I  saw  her  ; 
too  much  mauvaise  honte  and  too  much  headach  still,  in  all 
other  respects  as  one  could  wish.  Lady  Anne  Dawson  seems 
placid  and  to  wear  her  afflictions  with  angelick  patience.  I 
sent  your  letter  to  Brampton  where  she  lodges.  Yesterday 
Hymen  joind  the  hands  (Cupid  before  had  united  the  hearts) 
of  Sr  Geo.  Macartney  and  Lady  Jane  Stewart.  A  great  deal 
of  merit  on  both  sides  promises  mutual  happiness,  and  tho  he 
has  not  a  great  estate  his  talents  and  her  Friends  are  great 
enough  to  procure  whatever  they  can  wish.  Our  Friend 
Burke  speaks  better  and  better,  but  his  Patron  is  not  likely 
to  be  first  Minister.  Lord  Bute  is  in  a  very  bad  state  of  health, 
eats  only  vegetables.  Lord  Bristol  is  grown  a  perfect  Hercules, 
and  looks  as  if  he  had  lived  on  the  roast  beef  of  old  Eng¬ 
land.  Lady  Hervey  is  very  well.  Lord  Lyttelton  is 
extreamly  well,  and  seems  to  live  and  thrive,  but  his  History 
will  survive  him  many  Centurys  ;  the  little  opposition  envy 
made  to  the  history  at  first  is  subdued,  and  it  is  the  fashion  to 
admire  it  ;  many  admire  it  who  I  believe  cannot  give  any 
other  reason.  Mrs.  Dunbar  and  Mrs.  J.  Pitt  are  well.  Mrs. 
Anne  Pitt  is  going  to  leave  her  House  in  Berkely  Square  to 
live  at  Kensington.  Lady  Louisa  Clayton  is  very  happy  in 
her  new  state,  and  finds  more  felicity  in  retirement  than  she 
did  at  Court.  ...  I  am  glad  your  gentleness  was  able  to 
endure  the  rude  frost  we  had  this  Xmass,  it  was  horrible  here. 
The  Great  Earl,  erst  the  great  Commoner,  always  the  great 
Pensioner,  has  had  the  gout  in  his  foot,  but  it  had  not  the  good 
effect  on  his  spirits  that  was  hoped.  The  D:  of  Bedford  has 


1768 


WILKES  COMES  BACK 


169 

recovered  his  sight  (I  mean  his  corporeal  vision)  so  as  to  discern 
faces  ;  to  discern  minds  is  a  more  difficult  talent.  T  his 
Kingdom  is  all  in  bustle  and  confusion  about  Elections,  and 
everybody  will  be  leaving  London  early,  in  the  Spring.  The 
young  Duchess  of  Portland  is  likely  to  encrease  the  noble 
family.  The  Dowager  Duchess  is  very  well.  I  have  made 
my  letter  a  perfect  gazzette.  The  next  I  write,  and  I  hope 
to  write  soon,  shall  be  mes  pensees. 

Lady  Anne  Dawson,  daughter  of  the  first  Earl  of 
Pomfret  and  wife  of  Lord  Cremorne,  had  lost  both  her 
children  in  their  early  years.  Sir  George  Macartney, 
afterwards  Governor  at  Madras,  Pekin,  and  the  Cape, 
was'  this  year  Chief  Secretary  for  Ireland.  Lord 
Bristol  was  George  William,  Lady  Hervey’s  eldest  son 
and  the  second  Earl,  who  died  unmarried  six  years 
later,  when  the  title  devolved  upon  his  brother 
Augustus,  Elizabeth  Chudleigh’s  husband.  Lady 
Louisa  Clayton,  nee  Fermor,  was  the  sister  of  Lady 
Charlotte  Finch,  governess  of  the  King’s  children,  and 
often  referred  to  in  these  letters.  The  young  Duchess 
of  Portland  was  Dorothy,  the  Duke  of  Devonshire’s 
daughter,  whom  the  third  Duke  of  Portland,  eldest 
son  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  girl  friend  and  Prior’s  “  noble 
lovely  little  Peggy,”  had  married  two  or  three  years 
previously.  “  Our  friend  Burke’s  ”  patron  was  Lord 
Rockingham,  whose  private  secretary  he  became  in 

t765- 

The  following  relates  to  Wilkes’  return  from  Paris 
after  his  four  years  of  outlawry,  and  the  Brentford 
election  : 


To  her  Sister ,  Mrs.  Scott 

April  ifth. 

We  had  strange  doings  with  the  mob  on  monday  and  tuesday 
last,  they  call’d  us  up  at  2  in  the  morning  and  those  who  were 
not  nimble  enough  to  get  their  candles  lighted  had  their  windows 
broken  tho  they  humbly  supplicated  their  Majesties  the  Mob 
to  give  them  time  to  obey  them  and  they  wd  do  it.  At  Hyde 
Park  corner,  and  all  through  Piccadilly,  the  voters  from  Cook 


170  THE  BRENTFORD  ELECTION  1768 

and  Beauchamp  were  sadly  pelted,  their  carriages  broken. 
Mrs.  Holford  was  so  cut  as  to  lose  a  vast  deal  of  blood  ;  Mr. 
Townshends  arm  is  much  bruised.  My  brother  Morris’s 
chaise  was  broken  and  great  stones  thrown  into  the  chaise,  but 
he  received  no  harm.  Duke  of  Leeds  narrowly  missd  a  great 
stone  thrown  at  him,  whether  he  was  in  his  House  or  carriage 
I  know  not.  We  were  obliged  to  have  servants  sit  up  all 
night  on  tuesday  with  illuminations,  and  Mr.  Wilkes  was  very 
merciful  in  his  orders  or  it  had  been  worse. 

Wilkes  having  been  defeated  in  the  City  (owing, 
said  Burke,  to  the  open  voting)  put  up  for  Middlesex 
against  Mr.  George  Cooke,  the  present  Tory  member, 
and  Sir  W.  Beauchamp  Procter,  the  Whig  candidate. 
Horne,  the  Rector  of  Brentford,  where  the  election 
was  held,  energetically  supported  Wilkes,  for  whom 
Lord  Temple  had  supplied  the  necessary  freehold 
qualification  ;  and  he  was  triumphantly  returned  on 
March  28.  The  mob  made  a  great  night  of  it, 
having  it  all  their  own  way  till  the  police  got  back 
from  Brentford.  Lord  Bute’s  and  Lord  Egremont’s 
houses  were  besieged,  the  Duke  of  Northumberland 
had  to  toast  Wilkes  in  a  mug  of  ale,  and  the  Austrian 
Ambassador,  being  taken  for  a  Scotchman,  was  held 
upside  down  while  the  magic  “  45  ”  was  chalked  on 
his  boots. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  meanwhile,  was  reading  Alexander 
Dow’s  History  of  Hindostan.  Commenting  on  the 
proverbs  and  sayings  of  that  country  she  writes  : 

Since  I  have  read  it  I  have  abated  my  former  admiration 
for  Pythagoras.  If  I  was  not  afraid  of  offending  the  Bishop 
of  Carlisle  I  would  petition  his  majesty  to  offer  one  of  the 
wisest  of  the  Brahmins  the  Deanery  of  Durham  if  he  would 
come  to  England.  I  have  always  understood  that  there  is 
not  any  necessity  a  Dean  should  be  a  Christian,  he  has  no 
religious  duties  to  perform,  he  should  be  grave  indeed  and 
learned,  and  keep  an  elegant  table. 

The  Shakespeare  Essay  was  now  in  the  printer’s 
hands  and  Dr.  Stillingfleet  was  engaged  in  correcting 
the  proofs  for  its  anonymous  authoress. 


i768  LADY  MOIRA’S  BALL  17 1 

Here  occurs  a  long  letter  from  Mrs.  Vesey 
describing  Lady  Moira’s  masked  ball. 

Amongst  the  characters  mentioned  were  the  Duke 
of  Clarence,  Cardinal  Pole,  Mary  of  Medici,  the 
Spanish  Infanta,  and  Lady  Jane  Seymour  : 

Stiff  bodice  and  farthingale  with  silver  gauze  beads  and 
ermine  made  of  black  and  white  Persian,  their  robes  could  not 
have  been  better  dressed  from  the  Wardrobe.  Ossian’s  Harp 
was  hung  in  the  Music  Gallery.  The  Syren  Liffey  crowned 
with  sedge  her  robe  embroidered  with  water  plants,  an  urn 
upon  her  head,  a  Bachanal  wreathed  with  ivy  a  tigers  skin 
across  her  shoulders  a  Thyrsis  in  her  hand  danced  a  cottilon 
with’  Comus  and  a  witch.  The  witch  was  dressed  in  a  high 
Crowned  hat  a  night  rail  and  apron,  a  broom  and  a  pair  of 
Spectacles  fastened  in  her  girdle,  and  as  she  was  naturally  very 
deformed  one  could  not  help  believing  she  had  come  down 
the  chimney.  The  Demons  rewarded  her  good  humour  for 
as  her  shape  seemed  to  be  only  part  of  her  character  she  never 
pleased  or  looked  so  well  in  her  life.  Two  beautiful  children 
of  Lady  Moira’s  were  Cupid  and  Thisbe  [?  Psyche]  their 
wings  contrived  to  look  as  the  spotted  network  of  a  fly.  Mrs. 
Percy  was  a  charming  Queen  of  Scots  and  my  fair  haired 
niece  a  Priestess  of  the  Sun  .  .  .  there  was  a  mixed  crowd 
of  Roman  Soldiers  Roman  Matrons  Cleopatra  and  Maids 
from  the  Greek  Islands.  Mr.  Vesey  your  lover1  was  a 
Russian  Boyard  if  you  had  been  there  I  suppose  he  would 
rather  have  acted  the  Czar.  Even  the  Countess  of  Desmond 
was  allowed  to  be  in  the  bloom  of  a  hundred.  She  was  dressed 
from  the  figure  upon  her  tomb,  a  vest  and  petticoat  and  a  long 
Cloke  of  two  greens  trimmed  with  Old  point  and  Jane  Shore’s 
cap,  a  peaked  Hood  of  green  persian  a  ruff  and  crutch  upon 
which  hung  a  fan  with  a  looking  glass  inserted  in  plumes  of 
black  feather  fit  for  the  Castle  of  Otranto. — many  were  the 
ancient  tales  which  were  told  her  Ladyship  upon  this  occasion 
of  the  frolicks  of  her  youth,  that  she  was  accustomed  to  receive 
her  company  in  a  booth  strewed  with  rushes  dressed  in  a 
kerchief  in  which  there  was  30  yards  of  linnen  supposed  to 
be  for  the  accomodation  of  the  benighted  Stranger  upon  the 
said  hospitable  bed  of  rushes — that  when  she  had  dined  she 
threw  the  offal  to  two  wolf  Dogs  who  waited  behind  a  curtain 

1  There  was  a  great  admiration  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Vesey  for  Mrs. 
Montagu,  a  standing  joke  in  the  bas-bleu  circle. 


172  TOM  LYTTELTON’S  FIRST  SPEECH  1768 

— the  manuscripts  in  the  Cork  family  record  that  she  had 
outlived  the  99  years  settlement  of  her  jointure  and  went  to 
his  seat  to  prove  herself  alive,  the  carriage  or  wheelbarrow 
broke  down  and  she  walked  the  remaining  9  miles  :  but 
desired  they  would  send  for  the  child  who  proved  to  be  a 
decrepit  old  woman  ;  that  by  her  account  Richard  3rd  was 
the  handsomest  man  in  England  next  to  his  brother  and  called 
Crook  backed  from  an  embroidered  Cross  Upon  his  back  as 
he  had  been  dedicated  to  the  Holy  ghost,  but  when  her  Lady¬ 
ship  walked  to  breakfast  with  the  Earl  of  Strafford  and  rejoiced 
to  him  that  Charles  Brandon  had  been  erected  Duke  of  Suffolk 
I  suppose  either  she  or  her  historian  must  have  been  dosing 
or  hid  their  heads  in  the  rushes  so  many  years. 

The  Countess  of  Desmond,  second  wife  of  the 
twelfth  Earl  of  Desmond,  is  said  to  have  lived  140  years  ! 
Her  maiden  name  was  Catherine  Fitzgerald  and  she  is 
reputed  to  have  died  at  last  from  a  fall  from  a  cherry  tree. 
This  has  been  rashly  disputed,  as  well  as  her  age,  but 
the  Fitzmaurice  family  can  show  proof  that  it  was  so. 

Lady  Moira,  nee  Elizabeth  Hastings  and  daughter 
of  the  ninth  Earl  of  Huntingdon  and  the  great  Selina, 
was  a  lady  of  literary  tastes  and  a  leader  of  Dublin 
society.  Replying  to  this  account,  Mrs.  Montagu 
writes  to  her  Sylph  : 

Though  I  have  often  the  honour  of  meeting  Mr.  Walpole 
at  Lady  Hervey’s  I  will  not  suffer  him  to  infuse  into  my  mind 
any  historic  doubts  concerning  the  relation  you  give  of  Lady 
Moira’s  entertainment. 

She  goes  on  to  report  that  Tom  Lyttelton’s  maiden 
speech  in  the  Commons  had  been  highly  commended 
by  Mr.  Burke,  who  had  just  purchased  his  place  near 
Beaconsfield,  afterwards  known  as  Butler’s  Court. 

Lord  Lyttelton,  writing  from  Woodstock,  tells  of 
his  recent  visit  to  Stowe,  where  : 

I  found  Lord  Temple  employed  in  making  a  new  Helicon 
and  a  new  hill  for  the  Muses  at  the  verge  of  the  old  Elysian 
Fields.  The  passage  to  it  is  through  a  beautiful  Arch  dedicated 
to  Princess  Amelia  [spinster  aunt  of  George  III.]  who  was 


1768 


LORD  CHESTERFIELD 


i73 


expected  to  come  thither  a  few  days  after  we  left  the  place. 
The  Muses  and  Apollo  are  ranged  on  each  side  of  the  Arch 
upon  the  brow  of  the  hill.  In  the  Vale  beneath  it  is  a  fountain 
set  round  with  Bays. 

Replying  in  June  to  a  letter  from  Lord  Lyttelton, 
who  referred  to  some  “  Memoires  Litteraires  de  la 
Grande-Bretagne  ”  written  by  a  Frenchman  in  London, 
which  had  been  strongly  recommended  by  Lord 
Chesterfield,  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

June  the  zd. 

I  am  not  surprized  that  Ld  Chesterfield  should  admire  a 
french  Coxcomb  ;  his  Lordship  has  snipped  his  own  witt 
into  epigrams,  and  he  always  admires  everyone  who  writes 
a  kind  of  pert  jargon.  Some  years  ago,  at  the  Bath,  I  took  a 
particular  course  of  study  that  he  had  recommended  to  a  Lady  ; 
if  I  had  continued  it  for  six  months,  I  should  have  been  fit 
for  nothing  but  playing  at  pictures  and  mottoes  with  boarding 

school  Misses.  I  will  allow  that  Ld  C -  has  a  great  deal 

of  parts,  but  a  continual  aiming  at  bon  mots  will  ruin  any 
understanding.  The  french  admire  him  for  his  dexterity 
in  twisting  their  fashionable  jargon,  his  address  to  the 
Academy  of  Belles  Lettres  was  the  strongest  satire  upon  the 
Society  that  ever  I  read,  as  it  was  the  quintessence  of  their 
affectation  in  style.  The  illustrious  Academicians  of  Louis 
the  fourteenth  wd  have  expell’d  him  for  it.  I  imagine  the 
Author  of  Les  Memoires  Litteraires  etc  is  a  mere  parrot 
muse,  the  words,  nous  ne  prodiguerons  jamais  a  la  grandeur  la 
recompense  des  talens,  are  borrow’d  from  a  late  writer  on  a 
different  occasion,  and  I  dare  say  every  man  in  France  who  has 
wrote  a  petite  piece  has  been  calld  by  some  friend,  le  premier 
favori  de  Thalie.  Heaven  preserve  your  Lordship  from  ever 
writing  to  the  taste  of  these  animals.  My  letter  is  already 
so  long  I  will  not  enlarge  upon  the  entertainment  I  have  had 
from  the  Metaphysicians  and  philosophers  on  the  Ganges. 
I  wish  our  Sovereign  would  encourage  the  study  of  all  the 
Oriental  languages.  What  wars  and  devastations  do  we  make 
to  get  a  Country  that  produces  Indigo  Tobacco  and  such 
sort  of  trash  ?  All  Countries  have  in  some  ages  perhaps 
produced  wisdom,  but  I  should  be  most  desirous  to  recover 


174 


CHATHAM’S  WOOLSACK 


1768 


the  Philosophy  and  Laws  of  the  East,  from  whence  the  Grecian 
Sages  borrow’d  their  Legislation,  morals,  natural  philosophy, 
etc.  I  wd  give  all  my  french  and  Italian  for  the  Shanscritta 
Language.  Perhaps  the  earliest  writers  may  have  given  the 
original  Revelation  imparted  to  Adam,  but  Priests  for  gain, 
and  Poets  for  amusement,  are  for  ever  adulterating  truth 
by  allegory.  Since  Mr.  Dow  has  given  us  his  translations 
from  the  Bedang  I  have  abated  my  former  admiration  of  the 
genius  of  Pythagoras. 

The  Memoires  Litteraires  were  edited  by  Michel  de 
la  Roche,  a  French  Protestant  refugee  in  Amsterdam 
and  London.  Colonel  Alexander  Dow,  the  Anglo- 
Indian,  two  of  whose  tragedies  were  acted  about  this 
time  at  Drury  Lane,  translated  Ferishta’s  History  of 
Hindostan  in  1768. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sandleford,  June  8. 

Lord  Holland  is  come  over  in  high  health  and  spirits,  and 
some  say  to  seize  the  too  slacken’d  reins  of  Government,  but 
the  great  beast  will  kick  and  wince  under  a  Rider  who  it  thinks 
will  whip  and  spur  through  dirty  roads.  Now  you  want  to 
know  what  Ld  Chatham  will  do  ;  ask  not  me,  consult  some 
oracle  dark  and  ambiguous  as  himself,  or  perhaps  you  had 
better  still  consult  his  nurse,  or  his  apothecary.  Whether  his 
High  Mightiness  will  call  for  the  blood  of  Wilkes  or  for  a 
Mess  of  water  gruel  in  this  exigency  is  more  than  I  can  determine, 
I  know  it  will  be  one  or  the  other.  He  has  hitherto  turnd 
his  Woolsack  into  a  pillow,  and  I  believe  he  will  recline  upon 
it  while  there  are  such  storms  and  tempests  abroad.  He  has 
sold  greatest  part  of  the  Pynsent  estate,  but  I  hope  will  always 
keep  as  much  of  the  Land  as  will  serve  for  the  Basis  of  his 
Column  of  gratitude  to  his  Wise  and  virtuous  benefactor. 
Many  men  retain  the  gift  and  lose  the  gratitude,  his  great  Soul 
will  do  the  reverse. 

The  poet  Gray  spent  this  May  and  June  with  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  cleric  brother,  William  Robinson,  at 
Denton  Hall,  Kent  (not  to  be  confused  with  the 
Montagus’  Northumberland  residence).  Taciturn  and 
unsociable,  he  must  in  some  ways  have  resembled  his 


1768 


PERE  COURAYER 


r75 


friend  and  host,  who  (though  his  sister  Elizabeth  had 
no  partiality  for  him)  must  also  have  been  a  clever 
man,  and  was  blest  with  a  wife  whom  Gray  found 
“  very  good  humoured  and  cheerful,”  and  who  was 
further  endowed  with  ten  thousand  pounds. 

A  July  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  gives  us  a  glimpse  of 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  daily  vocations  : 

Between  attending  Mr.  Montagu  in  his  very  infirm  state, 
domestic  Orders  for  the  regulation  of  a  family  consisting  of 
about  thirty  persons,  letters  of  business,  and  my  authorlike 
duties,  I  have  sometimes  a  great  hurry,  and  I  have  also  some 
sick  patients,  for  whom  I  am  obliged  to  make  up  Medicines, 
that  being  in  some  cases  not  to  be  trusted  to  another  ;  poor 
Shakespear  is  last  served. 

Mrs.  Scott,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  sister,  was  almost  as 
great  a  sufferer  from  perpetual  headaches  as  Mrs. 
Carter,  and  was  this  August  staying  at  Hill  Street  in 
order  to  undergo  treatment  at  Chelsea  under  Dr. 
Domeniceti,  the  famous  quack  doctor  of  Cheyne  Walk 
and  Manor  Street,  of  whose  wonder-working  vapour 
baths  and  fumigatories  the  present  editor  has  given  a 
detailed  account  in  his  volume  In  Cheyne  Walk  and 
Thereabout.  On  her  way  up  to  town  to  visit  her 
sister,  Mrs.  Montagu  called  at  Gunnersbury  on  Pierre 
Francois  Courayer,  “  the  little  Pere  ”  whose  defence 
of  the  ordinances  of  the  English  Church  had  led  to 
his  censure  by  the  Pope  and  residence  in  England,  and 
who  was  an  old  friend  at  Sandleford.  She  did  not 
find  him  at  home,  and  left  word  with  his  landlord  that 
when  he  grew  old  she  should  expect  to  find  him  in, 
but  was  too  much  aware  of  the  dissipation  of  young 
men  of  this  age  to  be  surprised  he  was  jaunting  about  : 
“  all  this  friskiness  at  88  is  charming  .  .  .  our  little 
Courayer  walked  from  Mr.  Stewart’s  to  Mr.  Schultz 
and  back  that  night — not  much  less  than  8  miles,  and 
said  he  had  a  mind  to  see  whether  88  could  do  what 
87  had  done  the  summer  before.  Is  he  not  a  fine  old 
Buck  ?  ” 


176 


THE  ROYAL  DANE 


1768 


The  King  of  Denmark  was  at  this  time  on  a  visit 
to  England,  but  was  not  very  warmly  received  at 
Court,  owing  to  his  treatment  of  his  young  Queen 
Caroline,  who  was  the  younger  sister  of  George  III. 
Mrs.  Montagu  writes  on  August  27  that  he  had 
never  yet  dined  with  our  King  and  Queen,  and  that 
she  would  not  be  at  the  projected  party  at  Bowood  to 
meet  him,  nor  at  the  bal  masque  given  in  his  honour 
at  the  Opera  House  on  October  10,  for  which  Lady 
Egremont  had  sent  her  a  ticket.  Still  : 

I  am  charmed  with  the  Royal  Dane  ;  he  has  seen  every 
thing  that  Prince  Hamlet  could  have  seen,  except  a  ghost.  .  .  . 
I  am  afraid  the  reception  he  has  met  at  Court  will  confirm 
the  opinion  the  world  has  of  our  being  inhospitable  islanders. 

But  one  at  least  of  His  Danish  Majesty’s  hosts 
appears  to  have  erred  on  the  side  of  a  somewhat  too 
intimate  hospitality  on  this  occasion  : 

Dr.  Monsey  has  lately  done  a  thing  worthy  of  himself 
and  which  both  in  itself  and  from  the  greatness  of  the  Dramatis 
Personae  may  be  called  High  Comedy.  The  King  of  Denmark 
who  came  out  of  his  own  country  to  see  Cities  and  men,  has 
not  seen  such  another  man  or  such  another  sight  as  the  great 
Monsey  and  the  great  Monsey’s  bedchamber.  His  Danish 
Majesty  went  to  visit  Chelsea  College  and  the  Dr.  there 
explained  to  him  a  Mathematical  instrument  of  singular  con¬ 
struction  ;  but  afterwards,  I  know  not  how  or  why,  he 
carried  his  Majesty  and  his  train  into  his  own  bedchamber. 
The  condition  of  the  atmosphere  was  such  as  to  make  them 
all  look  about  them  ...  on  the  table  lay  an  old  periwig 
which  looked  as  if  it  had  been  the  scalp  of  Tisiphone.  on 
a  chair  with  the  bellows  for  its  companion,  a  rusty  black 
waiscoat,  dirty  stocks,  stray  stockings  ;  foul  handkerchiefs  in 
beautiful  negliegence  were  scattered  round  the  floor  ;  but  what 
was  worse  was  a  basin  of  water  in  which  the  Doctor,  to  fit 
himself  to  appear  before  his  guests,  had  washed  his  face  and 
hands  that  morning  .  .  .  for  till  that  fatal  day  since  he 
receiv’d  infant  baptism  never  had  his  face  known  the  touch  of 
water  !  .  .  . 

They  say  the  dowager  Lady  Hervey  is  dangerously  ill  for 
which  I  am  very  sorry.  She  is  one  of  the  most  agreeable 


1768 


LADY  HERVEY’S  DEATH 


177 


and  amiable  women  I  ever  knew  who  belonged  to  the  fine 
world.  She  has  shown  great  constancy  and  fidelity  in  her 
friendships  ;  as  many  of  the  friends  of  her  youth  as  are  now 
alive  still  live  in  great  union  with  her,  she  has  most  obliging 
and  kind  attentions  to  her  friends,  great  zeal  for  their  welfare, 
loves  to  praise  those  she  thinks  have  merits,  and  is  above  scandal, 
tittle  tattle  and  malice.  Her  House,  her  table,  her  manners 
are  all  elegant  .  .  .  there  is  not  a  house  in  London  where  I 
find  such  a  pleasing  turn  of  conversation  ;  I  really  love  Lady 
Harvey  and  should  be  very  ungrateful  if  I  did  not,  for  she 
behaves  with  a  sort  of  tenderness  to  me  which  shows  she  loves 
me,  and  tho  from  being  the  only  Women  who  have  circles  of 
beaux  esprits,  there  might  be  supposed  to  be  some  envy,  she 
takes  pleasure  in  commending  me  beyond  my  deserts  to  every¬ 
body.  If  she  has  a  party  that  she  thinks  may  be  peculiarly 
agreeable  for  any  reason  whatever  she  never  omits  asking  me. 
She  has  preserved  the  agremens  of  youth  to  old  age  and  is  even 
in  her  person  pleasing.  Her  gouty  complaints  hinder  her 
going  out  except  in  fine  weather,  in  the  evening  one  found 
her  reading  or  with  polite  and  agreeable  people,  and  she  had 
the  art  of  leading  the  concert. 

Lady  Hervey  died  on  September  2. 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

the  29  Sept. 

I  think  our  Nobility  have  nobly  entertaind  the  Royal 
Dane,  but  does  not  your  antient  Gout  for  the  Gothick  cere¬ 
monies  make  you  wish  for  Tilts  and  Tournaments  ?  I  wd 
have  the  two  Monarchs  only  break  a  Lance,  but  it  wd  be 
pretty  to  see  the  Ministry  and  the  opposition  tilting  h  tout 
outrance.  The  late  great  Commoner  and  a  certain  popular 
Gentleman  for  one  match  wd  do  admirably  well.  All  Arthurs 
and  the  Newmarket  Heroes  should  be  making  betts  the  while. 
I  hope  the  King  of  Denmark  will  spend  his  merry  Christmas 
with  us.  I  want  to  see  some  of  these  gallantee  shows  that  are 
made  for  his  amusement.  I  have  a  great  loss  in  Lady  Hervey. 
In  her  society  one  tasted  the  rare  pleasure  of  general  conversa¬ 
tion  ;  polite  and  ingenious  herself,  she  communicated  those 
qualities  to  her  company,  every  one  appeard  better  there  than 
in  any  other  place.  They  were  pleasing  because  they  seemd 
pleased,  and  that  reserve  which  makes  the  most  sensible  Nation 
in  the  World  perhaps  the  least  agreable  in  society  was  laid 

VOL.  I  N 


178 


COUNT  ZINZENDORF 


1768 


aside.  No  person  at  her  table  or  by  her  fireside  had  the  arrogant 
vanity  of  shining  alone,  nor  the  pitifull  pride  of  being  afraid 
to  speak,  least  they  should  not  shine.  They  forgot  whether 
they  were  or  were  not  accounted  witts  and  genius’s  and  re- 
memberd  only  they  were  her  Guests,  and  as  such  to  endeavour 
to  be  agreable  to  her  and  the  company. 

Lord  Chesterfield’s  eulogy  of  Lady  Hervey  will  be 
recalled.  “  No  woman,”  he  wrote  his  son,  “  ever  had, 
more  than  she  has,  le  ton  de  la  parfaitement  bonne 
compagnie,  les  manieres  engageantes,  et  le  je  ne  sais 
quoi  qui  plait.”  It  was  at  the  Court  Ball  given  in 
honour  of  the  King  of  Denmark  that  George  III., 
with  Lady  Mary  Lowther  for  partner,  danced  “  The 
Hempdresser  ”  for  two  hours. 

From  an  autumn  budget  of  gossip  to  Mrs.  Vesey 
we  gather  that  Mrs.  Montagu  had  spent  the  last  six 
months  almost  entirely  at  Sandleford,  nursing  her 
husband.  Lord  and  Lady  Anglesea  were  the  fondest 
of  Turtles,  which  made  Lord  Lyttelton,  her  father,  who 
remembered  his  own  happy  days  of  Turtleism,  very 
happy. 

I  am  truly  sorry  Count  Zinzendorffe  and  Mr.  Dungean 
did  not  see  you.  One  Canto  of  the  Sylphiad  would  have  been 
more  worth  than  their  whole  Epick  Poem.  I  am  sure  you 
grieved  at  the  death  of  Lady  Hervey  ;  no  one  ever  surely 
understood  the  difficult  art  de  vieillir  de  bonne  goute  so  well ; 
so  much  cheerfulness  without  levity  ;  always  in  society,  never 
in  a  crowd.  .  .  .  Pray  tell  Mr.  Vesey  not  to  be  jealous  of 
Count  Zinzendorffe  for  he  is  above  60  years  short  of  the 
seducing  age.  I  believe  it  will  be  40  years  before  even  his 
French  companion  grows  dangerous.  In  less  time  Mr.  Vesey 
and  I  may  bring  our  Romance  to  a  conclusion.  .  .  .  Pray  are 
not  you  rejoyced  that  Mr.  Gray  has  got  a  piece  of  prefer¬ 
ment  worth  ^400  pr.  ann  ? 

The  Moravians  had  bought  and  renovated  Lindsey 
House  in  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  and  Count  Zinzen- 
dorf,  their  chief,  had,  according  to  John  Wesley,  “  a 
palace  for  a  prince  ”  there.  He  was  co-executor  of 


1768 


ELIZABETH  CHUDLEIGH 


179 


Sir  Hans  Sloane’s  will  with  Horace  Walpole,  who 
irreverently  declared  his  belief  that  Sir  Hans  had 
intended  to  buy  Count  Henry  the  XXVIIIth’s 
skeleton  for  his  museum. 

To  Mrs.  Carter  she  wrote  about  the  Chudleigh 
case,  which  was  then  pending  : 

There  is  going  to  be  an  odd  process  for  a  divorce.  Miss 

C - h  is  to  attck  Mr.  H - y  in  Law  for  what  is  call’d 

jactatione  of  marriage,  he  is  to  support  the  audacious  boast  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  be  defeated.  I  suppose  the  damages  will 
be  small,  as  she  does  not  appear  to  have  lost  anything  by  his 
allegation.  Thus  those  who  never  were  bound  are  to  be  set 
free  each  to  marry  as  seems  good.  I  suppose  the  Ladys  noble 
Lover  will  marry  her,  and  she  will  gravely  tell  her  acquaintance 
it  is  lucky  for  an  old  maid  to  get  such  a  match.  I  am  afraid 
we  shall  adopt  the  Roman  fashion  of  divorces  ;  they  were  an 
abomination  in  the  Pagan  World,  but  they  are  horrible  among 
Christians. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  after  nursing  her  husband  into  a 
better  state  of  health  during  October  at  Sandleford, 
came  to  town  in  November.  On  the  23rd  she  writes 
to  Mr.  Montagu : 

I  hope  you  will  find  amusement  in  the  pamphlet  which 
Mr.  Burke  brought  me  this  morning  for  you  and  put  it 
into  covers  which  he  franked.  Almon  published  another 
pamphlet  today  which  I  will  send  by  the  next  basket  which 
returns  to  Sandleford. 

This  was  probably  one  of  the  first  of  the  Junius 
letters  dated  November  21,  1768,  in  Woodfall’s  Public 
Advertiser. 

After  telling  Mrs.  Carter  of  Lord  Temple’s  visit 
to  Lord  Chatham  at  Hayes,  and  deploring  the  etour- 
derie  of  the  administration  over  the  Wilkes  affair,  she 
adds  : 

A  certain  great  D - ke  will  not  be  able  to  get  a  divorce 

as  it  is  now  reported.  This  summer  on  the  marriage  of  some 
antiquated  Virgin,  Miss  Chudleigh  said  to  Mrs.  Anne  Pitt, 
“  Well,  Mrs.  Pitt,  I  think  now  we  old  maids  need  not  despair.” 


1 80  DEATH  OF  DUKE  OF  NEWCASTLE  1768 


Mrs.  Pitt  for  the  first  time  in  her  life  was  unprovided  with  a 
repartie  and  only  lookd  amazement.  Lord  Chatham  has  such 
a  gout  in  his  toe  as  is  to  make  his  head  capable  of  managing 
3  kingdoms,  as  his  friends  assure  us. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Nov.  17. 

The  Duke  of  Newcastle  this  morning  finished  his  course. 
I  believe  time  will  be  a  Friend  to  his  Fame,  and  future  Ministrys 
a  foil  to  his  administration,  which  if  not  glorious  was  not 
infamous  and  if  not  wise  was  however  discreet.  I  pity  the 
poor  Duchess  who  went  to  Bath  very  ill  on  condition  she  shd 
be  sent  for  if  the  Duke  grew  worse,  his  Grace  on  being  struck 
with  the  palsey  immediately  desired  her  by  a  short  letter  to 
come  to  Town  and  sent  an  express,  her  physician  Dr.  Charlton 
wd  not  suffer  it  to  be  deliver’d  ;  another  express  urging  her 
return,  she  was  acquainted  with  his  danger,  and  then,  but  too 
late,  set  out.  The  Duke  expressd  a  desire  to  see  her,  so  that 
the  Doctor  by  his  care  has  perhaps  made  the  poor  Woman 
unhappy  for  the  rest  of  her  life.  The  Duke  dyed  much 
resignd  ;  surely  an  old  Minister  of  State  must  quit  this  World 
with  little  regret,  for  treachery  and  ingratitude  must  have 
disgusted  him  ;  to  have  so  long  so  complicated  an  account  for 
another  World  is  perplexing  to  the  mind.  I  was  at  Court 
this  morning  and  I  dined  at  [Ly.]  Shelburne,  where  I  saw 
Mrs.  John  Pitt  fair  and  blooming  ;  Mr.  Pitt  and  they  are  to 
be  here  tomorrow  evening.  Miss  Finch  and  Miss  Fraine 
were  at  Lady  Shelburnes,  they  are  very  well.  Mr.  Cambridge 
inquired  after  you. 

Time  has  perhaps  on  the  whole  justified  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  prediction  about  the  fame  and  good  name 
of  Thomas  Pelham  -  Holies,  Duke  of  Newcastle. 
Horace  Walpole  had  said  of  his  administration : 
“  Mr.  Pitt  does  everything,  the  duke  gives  every¬ 
thing  ”  ;  but  credit  is  at  least  due  to  the  statesman 
who,  in  an  age  of  abounding  political  corruption,  of 
which  he  was  himself  a  master,  left  office  £300,000 
poorer  than  when  he  entered  it. 

On  December  7,  from  Hill  Street  to  Mrs.  Carter, 
Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 


1768 


WILKES’  MOB 


181 


The  Royal  Christening  was  performed  last  night  ;  it  was 
very  brilliant  ;  Lady  Shelburne  called  on  me  after  the  ceremony 
and  she  was  so  illuminated  with  jewels  and  radiant  with  gold 
and  silver  she  must  have  added  splendour  even  to  that  magnificent 
assembly.  ...  I  don’t  hear  that  your  sister  Chudleigh  has 
yet  perfectly  established  her  virginity,  it  is  odd  enough  that 
while  she  sues  Mr.  Augustus  Hervey  for  jactitatione  of  marriage 
Tom  Hervey  sues  his  wife  in  the  same  way,  and  tho’  it  is 
commonly  most  difficult  to  prove  a  negative  Miss  Chudleigh 
will  triumph  over  her  Hervey,  the  other  must  submit  to  be 
the  husband  of  the  Lady  who  claims  him  for  she  will  prove 
herself  his  wife  ;  she  has  not  had  so  many  children  as  Virgin 
C[hudleig]h  but  I  believe  has  had  3  or  four. 

Miss  Chudleigh  was  the  celebrated  Maid  of 
Honour  to  the  Princess  of  Wales,  who  had  contracted  a 
secret  marriage  with  the  Right  Honble.  Augustus  John 
Hervey,  afterwards  Earl  of  Bristol,  in  1 744,  and  who, 
twenty-five  years  afterwards,  married  publicly  Evelyn 
Pierrepont,  second  Duke  of  Kingston.  Rumours  of 
her  first  marriage  had  got  about,  and  she  said  one  day 
to  Lord  Chesterfield  that  she  had  been  credited  with 
having  given  birth  to  twins,  to  which  he  dryly  replied 
he  never  believed  more  than  one  half  of  a  report. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Thursday  the  2nd  [ June  ?]. 

I  got  safe  and  well  to  this  town,  which  has  been  in  a 
wonderfull  ferment,  and  I  find  is  not  likely  soon  to  settle  into 
good  order  and  tranquillity.  The  Judges  desired  time  to 
search  into  their  books  before  they  determined  on  Mr.  Wilkes’s 
affairs  so  it  will  be  undecided  till  next  term  ;  in  the  mean 
time  he  is  a  head  to  all  the  ill  humours  of  the  state,  and  great 
gathering  of  ill  humours  appears.  The  sailors  have  been 
very  violent,  two  of  them  were  admitted  to  the  Kings  presence  ; 
he  told  them  he  had  no  authority  to  interpose  as  to  their  affair, 
so  they  walkd  off  quietly,  but  he  cannot  answer  in  like  manner 
to  Mr.  Wilkes’s  mob,  for  it  is  in  his  power  to  pardon.  If 
the  outlawry  should  be  determined  good  and  legal  the  poor 
man  will  be  prisoner  for  life,  a  hard  sentence  upon  him,  and 


182 


FORTY-FIVES 


1768 


a  dangerous  one  to  the  Government.  The  Duke  of  G  .  .  .  n, 
once  his  Patron  and  abettor,  is  turnd  furiously  against  him, 
and  made  a  flaming  speech  on  the  subject  of  the  libels  in  the 
House  of  Lords  the  other  day.  The  mob  follow’d  Lord 
Spencers  coach  the  other  day,  crying,  a  Spencer  and  no  Hallifax. 
Lord  Weymouth  is  thought  to  urge  on  the  measures  against 
Wilkes,  to  make  himself  agreable  to  the  C.  .  .  .  The  temper 
of  a  Court  is  best  judged  of  by  the  sentiments  professd  by  such 
as  are  desirous  to  make  themselves  favourites.  Wilkes  has 
the  stranguary  in  a  terrible  manner  and  is  in  very  bad  health. 
It  is  said  that  Lord  Chatham,  being  ask’d  what  he  thought 
advisable  in  regard  to  Wilkes,  answerd  vigour  without  rigour  ; 
he  loves  the  darkness  of  oracular  sentences.  I  imagine  a 
certain  great  friend  of  Wilkes  will  struggle  hard  for  him  if  the 
sentence  should  be  severe.  Most  people  think  there  is  an 
intention  beyond  vigour  even  to  rigour,  but  all  this  is  but 
conjecture,  for  either  the  Ministry  is  very  secret  or  what  is 
more  probable,  they  are  undetermined. 

To  her  Sister 

Wensday  night,  10  o'clock. 

Dont  vex  yr  poor  heart  for  the  people  killd  at  Brentford 
etc,  not  an  animal  was  killd  on  the  occasion  but  such  as  are 
good  to  eat,  fatal  was  the  Election  to  many  a  goose,  turkey 
and  Capon,  but  of  the  two  leggd  animals  without  feathers, 
such  as  the  Philosopher  defines  Man  to  be,  not  one  was  slain, 
nor  any  notable  wound  given.  There  was  a  Riot  made  by 

Sr  W  :  B - ps  Mob  who  it  seems  were  to  have  been  on  the 

defensive  but  these  Commanders  not  being  Peace  officers  laid 
about  them.  I  hope  the  Knight  will  find  out  that  the  Heroes 
of  St  Giles’s  are  not  the  fittest  people  to  keep  peace  and  good 
order.  Mr.  Wilkes  is  to  keep  his  merry  Christmass  on  the 
Kings  bench,  he  will  have  45  minced  pyes  sent  him  on  Xmas 
day  and  45  plumb  cakes  on  12th  night,  and  if  he  cannot  find 
45  Kings  and  queens,  he  may  find  the  square  of  45,  of  sluts 
and  Varlets  at  his  own  lodgings.  The  Ministry  design  to 
keep  him  in  prison  till  the  meeting  of  Parliament  after  the 
holydays  that  they  may  make  45  blunders  at  the  moderate 
[rate]  of  one  per  diem,  so  his  business  is  not  to  come  on  till 
then.  Our  Ministry  are  more  and  more  absurd  and  flounder 
on  from  blunder  to  blunder.  The  Lords  and  Commons 
have  been  quareling,  and  I  believe  the  winds  scatter  dissension 
and  discontent. 


i768  WILKES  IN  PRISON  183 

The  chief  result  of  Lord  Weymouth’s  misguided 
zeal  had  been  to  increase  enormously  the  popularity  of 
Wilkes,  who  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  copy  of  his 
Lordship’s  letter  to  the  magistrates,  urging  them  to 
use  the  military  and  fire  on  the  people  in  case  of 
further  riot.  Wilkes  sent  the  letter  to  the  St.  James 
Chronicle  with  one  of  his  own,  accusing  the  Ministry  of 
planning  a  massacre.  Lord  Mansfield,  while  revers¬ 
ing  the  outlawry,  had  sentenced  Wilkes  to  fine  and 
imprisonment  on  the  original  charges  ;  and  he  was 
now  in  the  King’s  Bench  in  spite  of  his  admirers,  who 
had  rescued  him  on  the  way  thither  and  whom  he  had 
with  much  difficulty  escaped  in  order  to  surrender 
himself.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  forecast  of  his  Christmas 
presents  was  probably  more  than  realised  ;  for  King’s 
Bench  prison  became  a  place  of  devoted  pilgrimage. 
Crowds  waited  for  hours  to  get  a  glimpse  of  Wilkes’ 
face  at  his  window ;  gifts  were  showered  upon  him  ; 
the  prison  was  illuminated  and  echoed  with  rejoicings. 
Number  forty-five  became  the  popular  talisman, 
children  were  christened  by  his  name,  the  sailors 
carried  him  salmon,  and  on  one  Sunday  no  less  than 
200  coaches  were  said  to  have  brought  him  visitors. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

the  22  Dec. 

Mr.  Montagu  who  calld  on  Ld  Lyttelton  this  morning 
found  him  in  sorrow,  for  that  Lady  Anglesey  had  again  mis¬ 
carried.  There  seems  to  me  nothing  tight  about  that  Lady, 
I  shd  expect  her  ever  and  anon  to  drop  a  child  or  a  garter. 
There  are  people  who  have  no  tensities  or  tensions  or  tensiti- 
osities,  which  you  please,  and  all  moral  and  natural  matters 
hang  loose  about  them.  ...  I  have  not  time  to  describe  to 
you  a  clock  which  is  going  to  the  East  Indies,  it  exceeds  any¬ 
thing  in  the  arabian  tales  ;  take  with  you  this  circumstance, 
Dragons  flap  their  Emerald  wings  and  spit  pearls  every  second. 
But  of  what  use  is  such  a  clock  ?  ...  It  is  not  by  pearls  and 
diamonds  we  shd  measure  the  value  of  time.  [Prince  Henry] 
tells  Falstaffe,  that  if  hours  were  Capons  and  minutes  were 


1768 


1 84  LORD  SANDWICH’S  HEART 

Cups  of  sack,  they  wd  be  worth  his  Enquiry.  Nabobs  to  be 
sure  consider  hours  as  diamonds,  and  minutes  as  pearls,  that  is 
they  value  time  only  as  it  brings  Riches  on  its  Wings.  I  wish 
you  had  seen  this  piece  of  oriental  Wealth  set  off  by  english 
ingenuity  and  art,  it  was  indeed  a  wonderfull  piece,  Mr.  John 
Pitt  esteems  the  workmanship  at  £160,000  the  materials  are 
gold  pearl  gems  of  various  sorts  and  diamonds,  for  8  years  400 
men  were  employd. 

Lady  Anglesey  was  Lord  Lyttelton’s  daughter 
Lucy,  whose  husband,  Viscount  Valentia,  claimed, 
unsuccessfully,  the  English  Earldom  of  Anglesey,  and 
was  long  afterwards  created  Earl  of  Mountnorris. 

The  chronicle  of  the  year  may  be  closed  with  an 
extract  from  a  December  letter  to  her  husband  : 

There  were  some  good  speeches  in  the  House  of  Lords  on 
the  American  affair.  Mr.  Pitt  will  come  to  Town  when  the 
Park  meets  after  the  holydays.  I  made  my  Father  a  visit  to 
day  ;  he  is  very  well.  I  dont  wonder  you  desire  to  escape 
the  riot  of  the  Club.  Ld  S[andwich]  :  in  his  speech  in 
the  House  of  Lords  the  other  day  paid  some  complimt  to  the 
D  :  of  Grafton  who  returnd  by  saying  he  was  the  more  pleased 
with  it  because  he  knew  what  that  Lord  said,  always  came  from 
his  heart,  on  which  the  Peers,  forgetting  the  gravity  of  the  place, 
burst  into  a  horse  laugh  ;  however  I  do  not  find  that  it  dis¬ 
concerted  Yr  noble  Cousin  who  I  hear  spoke  better  than  he 
usualy  does. 


LAURENCE  STERNE 
By  Joseph  NoIIekens 


THE  STERNES  AND  THEIR  “COSIN” 
MONTAGU 


The  Cousinship.  Mrs.  Sterne.  Mr.  Sterne  at  Bath.  His  wife  in  France. 
The  Sentimental  Journey.  His  letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu.  His  last  illness. 
His  death.  Young  Macdonald.  Mrs.  Montagu  acts  for  the  family. 
Correspondence  with  Archbishop  of  York.  Sutton  dilapidations. 
Her  character  of  Tristram  and  of  his  wife.  Sterne’s  daughter  Lydia. 
Johnny  Botham  burns  Sterne’s  papers.  Subscription  at  York. 
Mrs.  Sterne  uncompromising.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  help.  Letters  from 
Lydia.  Her  character,  by  herself.  Miss  Sterne  and  John  Wilkes. 
Letter  from  Angouleme.  Letters  from  Albi.  Mrs.  Sterne  nearly 
murdered.  Lydia’s  engagement.  Mrs.  Montagu  declines  her  consent. 
The  marriage.  Death  of  Mrs.  Sterne  and  M.  de  Medalle.  Lydia 
returns  to  England.  Publication  of  Sterne’s  Letters  and  Sermons. 


It  is  very  curious  that  Mr.  Walter  Sichel  in  the 
Preface  to  his  delightful  study  of  Sterne  should  write 
in  1910:  “  It  is  striking  that  no  biographer  should 
have  realised  that  Mrs.  Sterne  was  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
cousin,”  and  should  have  repeated  the  remark  on  a 
subsequent  page  ;  for  Mrs.  Climenson  had  clearly 
and  repeatedly  called  attention  to  the  fact  in  her 
Montagu  memoir,  published  in  1906,  and  indeed 
Mr.  Sichel  actually  transcribes  her  pedigree,  showing 
the  relationship  ;  which,  however,  he  proceeds  to 
misread,  saying  that  “  Mrs.  Sterne’s  grandmother 
was  half-sister  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  grandfather  ”  ;  the 
fact  being  that  Mrs.  Sterne’s  mother ,  Lydia  Lumley, 
was  half-sister  to  Elizabeth  Montagu’s  father ,  Matthew 
Robinson,  both  having  had  Elizabeth  Clarke  for  their 
mother,  by  her  first  and  second  marriages. 

Writing  to  her  sister  about  Sterne’s  marriage  to 
her  cousin  in  1741,  Mrs.  Montagu  remarks  :  “  He 

185 


1 86 


MRS.  STERNE 


was  a  great  rake,  but  being  japanned  1  and  married, 
has  varnished  his  character.”  This,  it  must  be 
admitted,  was  optimistic  rather  than  prophetic  ;  but 
having  a  clear  insight  into  Mrs.  Sterne’s  idiosyn¬ 
crasies  and  her  “  arm  of  flesh,”  Mrs.  Montagu  was 
much  inclined  to  take  Tristram  Shandy’s  part,  so  far 
as  a  very  accurate  measure  of  his  failings  would  permit. 
Sterne,  for  his  part,  had  the  highest  conception  of 
his  “  Cosin’s  ”  goodness  of  heart,  and  when  he  went 
abroad  in  1762,  after  having  finished  the  fifth  and 
sixth  parts  of  Tristram ,  it  was  with  her  that  he  left 
his  tear-stained  “  Memorandums  of  wishes  and  be¬ 
quests,  in  case  I  should  die  abroad.”  The  pitiful 
document  is  printed  at  the  end  of  Mrs.  Climenson’s 
second  volume. 

An  extract  from  an  earlier  letter  of  Mrs.  Sterne’s 
to  Mrs.  Montagu  may  be  given  here  as  an  indication 
of  character.  The  Lydia  referred  to  here  is  her  sister, 
who  was  married  to  the  Rev.  “  Johnny  ”  Botham,  to 
whom  some  later  reference  will  be  found. 

I  spare  no  pains  to  improve  every  little  Accident  that  recalls 
you  to  my  Remembrance,  as  the  only  amends  which  can  be 
made  me  for  those  Unhappinesses  my  Situation  deprives  me  off. 
As  a  proof  of  this  I  must  inform  you,  that  about  three  weeks 
ago,  I  took  a  long  Ride  Thro’  very  bad  weather  and  worse 
Roads,  merely  for  the  Satisfaction  of  enjoying  a  Conversation 
with  a  Gentleman  who,  though  unknown  to  you,  had  con¬ 
ceived  ,the  highest  Opinion  of  you  from  the  perusal  of  several 
of  your  Letters,  for  which  he  was  Indebted  to  Mrs.  Clayton. 
Had  this  Gentleman  had  nothing  else  to  Recommend  him, 
it  Certainly  would  have  been  Sufficient  to  have  made  me 
desirous  of  his  Acquaintance,  But  he  is  both  a  Man  of  Style, 
and  Good  Breeding,  so  that  I  am  not  a  little  pleas’d  with  my 
new  Acquaintance.  .  .  .  Your  Supposition  of  my  Sister’s 
having  Boasted  to  me  of  her  Children,  is  doubtless  extreamly 
Natural,  I  wish  it  had  been  as  just  ;  But  I  can  in  three  words 
inform  you  of  all  I  know  about  ’em  ;  to  wit,  their  Number, 
and  their  Names,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Johnny.  Had 


1  Meaning,  ordained,  in  eighteenth-century  parlance. 


STERNE  GOES  TO  BATH 


187 


my  Lydia  been  so  obliging  as  to  have  made  them  the  Subject 
of  her  Letters,  I  shou’d  by  this  time  have  had  a  tolerable  Idea 
of  them  by  Considering  what  she  said  with  some  abatement  ; 
But  as  it  is,  I  no  more  know  whether  they  are  Black,  Brown, 
or  Fair  Wise  or  Otherwise,  Gentle  or  Froward,  than  the  Man 
in  the  Moon  :  Pray  is  this  strange  Silence  on  so  Interesting 
a  Subject  owing  to  her  profound  Wisdom,  or  her  abundant 
Politeness  ?  But  be  it  to  which  it  will,  as  soon  as  she  recovers 
her  Health,  I  shall  insist  on  all  the  satisfaction  she  can  give 
me  on  this  head. 

Laurence  Sterne’s  sojourn  in  the  South  of  France 
gave  him  a  further  respite  of  life,  and  he  was  back 
in  England,  and  published  two  further  parts  of 
Tristram  in  1765.  It  was  in  the  spring  of  this  year 
that  a  spa  was  prescribed  for  him,  and  it  would  seem 
from  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  of  Mrs. 
Montagu  to  her  sister,  who  was  living  there,  that  she 
had  some  hand  in  selecting  Bath. 

To  her  Sister ,  Mrs.  Scott 

April  1765. 

Not  knowing  what  temptations  the  town  of  Bath  may 
offer,  I  have  sent  you  the  deepest  Divine,  the  profoundest 
casuist,  the  most  serious  (on  paper)  the  reformed  Church  affords. 
I  suppose  from  the  description  you  will  guess  this  grave  and 
sage  ?  personage  can  be  no  other  than  the  Revd.  Mr.  Sterne. 
I  will  venture  to  say  for  him,  that  whatever  he  may  want  in 
seriousness  he  makes  up  in  good  nature.  He  is  full  of  the 
milk  of  human  kindness,  harmless  as  a  child,  but  often  a  naughty 
boy,  and  a  little  apt  to  dirty  his  frock.  On  the  whole  I  recom¬ 
mend  him  to  your  acquaintance,  and  he  has  talents  and  qualities 
that  will  recommend  him  to  your  friendship.  He  will  stay 
but  a  few  days  at  Bath,  but  I  hope  in  that  time  he  will  find  an 
opportunity  to  pass  some  hours  with  you.  He  will  give  you 
a  good  account  of  our  cousins  who  are  now  in  France.  I  sent 
yr  letter  immediately  to  our  sister.  She  leaves  town  on  tuesday. 
I  wish  that  for  news  I  could  tell  you  our  King  was  perfectly 
well  again. 

At  Bath  he  found  many  congenial  attractions, 
including  Mrs.  Vesey,  whom  he  had  always  immensely 


1 88 


TRISTRAM’S  LOVES 


admired,  and  at  least  two  other  ladies  with  whom  he 
philandered  as  usual,  “  playing  at  romance  and  calling 
it  love,  playing  at  love  and  calling  it  friendship.”  To 
the  number  of  these  inamorati,  if  we  are  to  judge 
from  the  following  letter  from  Mrs.  Montagu  to  Mrs. 
Scott,  one  other  name  must  be  added  in  the  person 
of  Mrs.  Cutts,  who  was  the  companion  of  the  latter 
lady  at  Batneaston. 


To  her  Sister 

the  20 th  [ April  1765  ?]. 

I  am  charmed  with  Mr.  Sterne  for  thinking  if  our  friend 
had  quitted  her  single  blessedness  it  would  have  been  for 
companionship  with  him.  I  always  thought  since  I  conversed 
with  him  that  there  was  something  good  in  him  and  I  am  now 
convinced  of  it.  Pray  tell  Mrs.  Cutts  she  has  given  me  an 
esteem  for  him.  When  Satan  saw  virtue  in  her  own  shape 
how  lovely  !  He  hated,  did  not  love  ;  so  my  Cousin  is  not 
Satanick.  I  am  in  hopes  Mrs.  Cutts  will  do  him  much  good 
by  her  conversation  ;  he  was  designed  for  virtue,  the  softness 
of  his  temper  and  the  levity  of  his  understanding  has  exposed 
him  to  follies. 


To  her  Sister 

April  nth. 

I  am  glad  Tristram  gave  you  some  entertainment  ;  I  can 
never  send  you  such  another.  The  extravagant  applause  that 
was  at  first  given  to  his  works  turn’d  his  head  with  vanity. 
He  was  received  abroad  with  great  distinction  which  made  him 
still  more  vain,  so  that  he  realy  believes  his  book  to  be  the 
finest  thing  the  age  has  produced.  The  age  has  graced  him, 
he  had  disgraced  the  age.  Nothing  gives  me  such  a  contempt 
for  my  cotemporaries  as  to  see  them  admire  ribbald  facts  and 
ribbald  witts,  it  speaks  a  bold  licentiousness  that  if  it  was  not 
softend  by  fribblism  might  break  out  very  dangerously.  I  like 
Tristram  better  than  his  book.  He  had  a  world  of  good 
nature,  he  never  hurt  any  one  with  his  witt,  he  treats  asses 
on  two  legs  as  well  and  gently  as  he  does  that  four  legged  one 
in  his  book.  A  man  of  witts,  and  such  he  certainly  is  with 
all  his  oddities,  that  never  makes  use  of  the  sharp  weapon  ever 
at  his  side  to  alarm  or  to  wound  his  neighbour,  deserves  much 


“  QUARRELS  AND  PRABBLES  ” 


189 


indulgence.  I  cannot  imagine  he  is  of  a  sort  to  make  a  good 
husband,  and  I  wish  his  wife  may  not  often  feel  the  want  of 
money  abroad.  She  is  certainly  very  ill  temperd.  I  have 
seen  many  letters  of  hers  from  York  to  him  and  she  was  always 
taking  frump  at  somebody  and  for  ever  in  quarrels  and 
prabbles.  .  .  .  In  the  South  of  France  she  met  Miss  Townshend 
and  Capt.  Orme,  and  instead  of  quietly  avoiding  them  she 
entered  into  violent  quarrels  till  she  cd  not  live  in  the  place. 
Mrs.  Carter  one  night  met  a  lady  who  from  thence  brought 
strange  stories  of  her  violence  and  turbulence  and  as  Tristram 
was  in  another  kingdom  this  scrape  must  be  her  own  seeking. 
One  should  hardly  think  a  woman,  unhappy  from  the  persecu¬ 
tion  of  her  husband  wd  be  eternally  entering  into  disputes  with 
strangers  ;  yet  this  had  been  her  case.  All  people  at  home 
and  abroad  say  she  is  as  rude  as  a  bear  to  those  she  does  not 
like,  and  indeed  it  was  always  her  manner,  at  the  same  time 
she  has  many  good  qualities,  but  neither  conscious  virtue  nor 
superior  parts  authorize  peoples  using  their  neighbours  with 
haughty  contempt  or  bitter  sarcasms.  She  is  very  absurd  if, 
having  a  domestick  enemy,  she  tries  to  have  as  many  out  of 
her  family  as  she  can  make,  but  her  father  was  of  the  same  sort. 
When  could  Tristram  have  grace  enough  to  be  in  love  with 
Mrs.  Cutts  ?  That  he  had  ever  such  a  moment  does  him 
great  honour.  .  .  . 

But  Mrs.  Montagu  was  honestly  shocked  with 
some  of  her  Cosin  Tristram’s  more  blatant  Shandyisms: 

“  I  have  not,”  she  writes  to  her  sister,  “  seen  the  great 
Tristram  since  his  return  except  at  the  Drawing  Room,  where 
he  told  me  he  left  you  pretty  well.  To  tell  you  truth 
I  was  ashamed  to  hold  long  converse  there  with  the  author 
of  a  tawdry  book.  He  has  since  called  at  my  door,  but  I  am 
obliged  to  reserve  many  mornings  for  business  or  quiet.” 

Sterne  returned  to  town  sufficiently  invigorated  by 
the  dear  ladies  of  Bath  to  embark  with  fresh  gusto 
upon  his  famous  love  attack  (from  the  Mount  Coffee 
House)  upon  Lord  Bute’s  daughter,  Lady  Percy  ; 
and  in  the  following  October,  worn  to  tatters  by  his 
romantic  escapades,  he  boarded  the  Calais  packet 
and  began  The  Sentimental  Journey ,  which  kept  him 
on  his  travels  in  France  and  Italy  till  June  1766, 


190 


NOTHING  ECCLESIASTICAL 


when  he  returned  to  London.  The  first  four  months 
of  1767  were  filled  with  the  infatuated  episode  of 
Eliza  Draper,  and  the  rather  mawkish  Journal  which 
followed  her  departure  in  April  to  her  husband  in 
India.  The  following  letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu  was 
probably  written  in  May  of  that  year,  just  before  his 
return  to  Coxwold  : 


From  Laurence  Sterne 

[ May  1767  ?] 

I  was  hurried  out  of  Town  on  Wednesday  to  stay  a  night 
or  two  with  Lord  Ligoniers,  otherwise  should  have  wearied 
Mrs.  Montague’s  knocker  (and  heaven  and  earth  too)  all 
thursday  to  have  found  admittance — &  this  morning — Helas  ! 
at  the  time  that  the  finest  Eyes  in  England  France  and  Ireland 
(tho’  I  merely  put  in  Ireland  pour  arrondir  le  Period)  are 
endeavouring  to  decypher  this  Legend,  must  the  writer  of  it 
be  50  miles  on  his  way  home — here  is  a  practical  proof  that 
Mrs.  Montague  is  a  Prophetesse — a  Goddesse  she  always  was, 
wch  half  implies  it — for  such  rapidity  of  motion  is  a  proof 
of  my  Leaness  at  least — and  as  Vivacity  is  often  miscall’d 
Wit — why  not  of  my  Spirituality  also — Mark  !  by  Spirituality 
I  mean  nothing  ecclesiastical  or  in  the  least  analogous  to  Church 
affairs,  I  use  the  word  in  your  own  good  natured  Sense — and 
heaven  forbid  I  should  look  further  ;  I  had  a  thousand  things 
to  have  said  to  you,  but  the  principle  (out  of  Civility)  would 
have  been  ab*  myself — and  of  that  vile  subject,  the  most  material, 
that  I  had  left  my  ill  health  upon  the  Pyrenean  Mountains,  & 
that  they  who  are  racked  and  torn  up  with  ambition — or  whose 
heads  are  aching  for  Mitres,  have  nothing  to  do  but  go,  &  there 
they  will  find  it - . 

See  my  Daughter  ! — Good  God  !  why  She  is  with  Mrs. 
Sterne  in  the  South  of  france,  &  is  now  figuring  there,  the 
finest  &  most  accomplished  Girl  in  the  Kingdome. — They 
are  happy  there  beyond  measure,  &  the  reasons  wch  determined 
their  stay  a  year  longer  you  will  see  in  a  Letter  I  take  the 
Liberty  to  inclose  to  you,  to  transmit  to  Miss  Botham — I  have 
recd  another  from  her,  as  hastily  scratch’d  as  this  of  her  father’s, 
but  tis  from  such  Loose  Letters  coming  hot  from  the  heart, 
that  the  true  Character  of  it,  is  known — I  send  it  you  to  read 
and  burn. 


THE  SENTIMENTAL  JOURNEY  191 

I  am  going  down  to  write  a  world  of  Nonsense — if  possible 
like  a  man  of  Sense — but  there  is  the  Rub.  Would  Apollo, 
or  the  fates,  or  any  body  else,  had  planted  me  within  a  League 
of  Mrs.  Montague  this  Summer,  I  could  have  taken  my  horse 
&  gone  &  fetched  Wit  &  Wisdome  as  I  wanted  them — as 
for  nonsense  I  am  pretty  well  provided  myself  both  by  nature 
&  Travel.  Unless  you  are  suffocated  wh  Insense,  Yr  Divinity- 
ship,  next  winter  will  you  be  so  merciful  as  to  recieve  a  Sample 
or  two  from  my  hands  on  Sundays  &  Saint  Days — in  the 
meantime  like  the  Publican,  I  must  be  content  to  worship 
afar  off — at  all  times  I  have  the  honour  to  be  (wch  is  a  proof  of 
my  breeding)  Yr  devoted  L.  Sterne. 

Mrs.  Sterne  and  the  beloved  Lydia  did  not,  how¬ 
ever,  remain  in  the  South  of  France,  but  returned — a 
little  to  his  discomfiture — to  Yorkshire  in  the  autumn, 
and  wintered  at  York,  while  he  was  working  feverishly 
at  The  Sentimental  Journey ,  and  negotiating  a  financial 
settlement  which  would  free  him  permanently  from 
their  further  support  and  permit  them  to  make  a 
settled  home  in  France. 

In  January  1768  he  came  up  to  complete  arrange¬ 
ments  for  the  publication  of  the  book,  which  was 
issued  on  February  27,  and  took  the  town  by  storm. 


From  Laurence  Sterne 

\ February  1768  ?] 

Upon  my  Soul,  I  know  not  whether  my  Cosin  Montague 
subscribed  to  my  Sentimental  Travels  or  no — if  she  did  not — 
she  ought — but  I  think  she  did — be  that  as  it  may — I  have 
been  able  to  procure  a  set  upon  Imp1  Paper  before  the  publica¬ 
tion,  I  mean  it  civilly,  to  lay  it  at  her  feet,  wch  I  shd  have 
done  in  person  had  not  it  been  too  late  in  the  day  before  I 
could  get  them  from  the  Press. 

Mr.  Sterne  presents  his  comp8  to  Mr.  Montague,  &  is 
with  a  just  sense  of  all  favours,  Dear  Madam  Yr  faithful 
&  obliged.  L.  Sterne. 

Yorick  was  feted  and  feasted  and  toasted  everywhere, 
but  the  final  effort  of  its  completion  had  exhausted 
his  frail  body,  at  last,  beyond  redemption,  and  it  was 


192 


STERNE’S  LAST  ILLNESS 


little  more  than  a  “  ghost  ”  that  took  part  in  these 
junketings.  Mrs.  Montagu,  tenderly  sympathetic  as 
she  ever  was  in  illness  and  distress,  sent  delicacies 
and  medicine  from  Hill  Street  to  the  Old  Bond  Street 
lodging  (No.  41  or  42),  and  it  seems  likely  that  the 
following  letter  was  written  within  a  few  weeks — 
possibly  even  less — of  the  tragic  end. 


From  Laurence  Sterne 

\March  1768  ?] 

The  seasonable  benignity  of  dear  Mrs.  Mountague’s  Billet, 
has  extorted,  what  neither  Sickness  or  Affliction  ever  had 
force  to  do,  from  me — need  I  tell  you, — that  this  was  a  couple 
of  tears,  which  I  found  necessary  to  wipe  away,  before  I  could 
see,  to  tell  her — I  am  more  thankful  &  have  deeper  sense 
of  it,  than  if  she  had  sent  me  a  conveyance  of  her  Estate — 
&  what  I  prize  more  than  that,  of  her  Wit  &  Talents  along 
with  it — a  kind  word  or  look,  in  my  situation  (or  indeed  in 
any)  conquers  me  (if  I  was  not  conquer’d  before)  forever — 
But  I  brave  evils. — et  quand  je  serai  mort,  on  mettra  mon 
nom  dans  le  liste  de  ces  Heros,  qui  sonts  morts  en  plaisantant. 

The  Account,  dear  Lady,  which  has  interested  You  so 
humanely,  is  a  point  I  cannot  contest  or  deny — tho’  I  ever 
make  a  mystery  of  these  evils — I  am  ill — very  ill — yet  I  feel 
my  Existence  strongly,  and  something  like  revelation  along 
with  it,  which  tells,  I  shall  not  dye — but  live — and  yet  any 

other  man  would  set  his  house  in  order - . 

O  !  I  envy  Scarron — tho’  I  lye  most  abominably — for 
when  yr  kind  Billet  came  in — I  was  writing  a  Romance,  in 
truth,  &  which,  as  it  is  most  comic — if  my  Sickness  continues 
but  7  days — I  shall  finish — tell  me  the  reason,  why  Cervantes 
could  write  so  fine  and  humourous  a  Satyre,  in  the  melancholy 
regions  of  a  damp  prison — or  why  Scarron  in  bodily  pain — 
or  why  the  Author  of  the  Moyen  de  parvenir  (a  vile, — but 
witty  book) — under  the  bondage  of  a  poor  Canonical 

— but  that  Word ,  girds  me  too  close — there  is  either  an 
obliquity  in  Nature  or  some  unknown  Spring  only  sufferd 
to  act  within  us,  when,  we  are  thus  in  the  house  of  Bondage. 

- excuse  a  weak  brain  for  all  this — and  to  strengthen 

this  poor  Machine,  send  me,  gently  Lady,  at  yr  Leisure  a  very 
few  Jellies — the  people  aN  me  oppress  me  but  with  their 


THE  FINAL  STRUGGLE 


i93 


attention — I  hope  in  2  or  3  days  to  say  my  Matins  to  you — 
&  believe  Madame,  there  is  no  worshiper  can  approach  yr 
Altar  with  a  more  unblemished  offering  than  Yr  most  obliged 
&  most  humble  Servant  L  Sterne. 

Both  these  letters  of  Sterne’s  are  undated  and 
without  address.  In  the  latter  part  of  this  last  one 
the  writing  has  become  shaky,  and  Tristram’s  habit 
of  erasing  a  miswritten  word  by  smudging  the  wet 
ink  with  his  finger  is  several  times  in  evidence.  He 
generally  gives  his  Cosin  the  final  e  to  her  surname, 
but  has  smudged  it  out  in  the  superscription  of  this 
second  letter. 

Ever  buoyant  with  hope  at  the  smallest  betterment 
of  his  condition,  he  sent  her  a  message  of  thanks 
for  “  this  bottle,  alone  enough  to  restore  to  me  what 
I  have  lost,”  that  he  felt  “  absolutely  this  morning 
free  from  every  bodily  distemper  that  is  to  be  read 
of  in  the  catalogue  of  human  infirmities,  and  know  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  delay  paying  you  my  thanks  in 
person  longer  than  till  to-morrow  noon,  if  you  are 
visible,  as  the  French  say.”  That,  however,  was 
not  to  be.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  was  making  a  final 
attempt  to  achieve  his  portrait,  and  he  had  sat  to  him 
for  the  last  time  on  March  1 — a  strain  which  may 
have  been  the  beginning  of  the  end.  According  to 
Northcote,  Sir  Joshua  had  a  dinner  party  at  this  time 
at  which  Mrs.  Carter,  who  was  present,  attacked 
Sterne  for  his  “  free  conversation  ”  with  such  severity 
that  he  never  recovered  the  sharp  reprimand  before 
company.  The  story  is  inherently  improbable,  though 
it  seems  that  the  good  lady  of  Deal  did  rebuke  Mrs. 
Vesey  for  her  intimacy  with  Sterne,  and  it  is  quite 
possible  that  in  his  then  depressed  state  of  health  any 
such  attack  might  have  hit  hard.  But  from  his  letter 
to  Lydia  (to  reassure  her  that  it  was  not  to  Eliza  Draper 
but  to  Mrs.  James  that  he  intended  to  bequeath  her) 
it  is  clear  that  he  had  had  influenza  early  in  March  ; 
pleurisy  supervened,  for  which  he  was  bled  three 

vol.  1  o 


i94 


“NOW  IT  IS  COME” 


times  and  blistered.  On  Tuesday  the  15th  the  last 
pitiful  and  touching  appeal  to  Mrs.  James  for  Lydia’s 
protection  was  with  difficulty  scrawled,  and  Sterne 
recognised  at  last  that  the  end  had  come.  In  the 
last  letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu  he  had  said  :  “  The  people 
about  me  oppress  me  but  with  their  attention,”  but 
the  final  scene  was  desolate  enough,  in  the  room  above 
the  bag-wig  maker’s  shop  in  Old  Bond  Street.  The 
manner  of  that  exit  is  thus  described  by  Mr.  Sichel : 

On  Friday  the  eighteenth  of  March,  a  number  of  Sterne’s 
friends  dined  together  in  Clifford  Street  with  John  Crawfurd 
of  Erroll,  his  old  companion.  There  were  the  Dukes  of 
Queensberry  and  Grafton  ;  there  were  the  Earls  of  March 
and  Upper  Ossory — the  latter  an  ally  of  standing  ;  there  was 
Garrick  to  whom  he  had  sent  his  first  books  ;  his  Paris 
acquaintance  Hume  ;  and  the  inseparable  James.  Almost 
every  period  of  his  life  was  represented.  The  talk  turned  on 
Yorick’s  illness  which  none  could  believe  fatal.  And  when 
the  truth  leaked  out  their  host  instantly  asked  John  Macdonald, 
a  cadet  of  Sir  James’  clan  then  in  his  service,  to  go  out  and 
enquire.  He  went.  The  mistress  opened  the  door  ;  she 
told  Macdonald  to  seek  the  nurse  in  the  sickroom.  He 
watched  him  die.  Ten  minutes  he  waited  ;  but  in  five, 
Sterne  gasped,  “  Now  it  is  come”  He  put  up  his  hand  as  if 
to  ward  a  blow,  and  expired. 

It  is  strange  indeed  that  the  man  who  watched 
Sterne  die  should  have  been  a  kinsman  of  that  much 
beloved  young  Sir  James  Macdonald,  for  whom  Mrs. 
Montagu  cherished  a  very  special  attachment  and 
who  had  been  Sterne’s  fellow  traveller  through  part 
of  the  Sentimental  Journey  in  the  spring  of  17 66. 
They  had  met  at  Turin,  and  made  immediate  friend¬ 
ship  ;  then  had  moved  on  together  to  Milan,  to 
Florence,  and  to  Rome  and  Naples,  where  Macdonald 
was  stricken  with  ague  ;  and  in  April  back  to  Rome. 
Had  Sterne  stayed  there  for  another  couple  of  months 
he  it  would  have  been  who  would  have  watched 
Macdonald  die. 

Sterne  was  buried  at  Bayswater,  and  the  gruesome 


STERNE’S  WIDOW 


*95 


sequel  (if  true  it  be)  of  the  body-snatching,  and  of 
the  recognition  of  his  features  by  the  dissectors  at 
Cambridge  to  whom  it  was  sold,  is  well  known. 
Curiously  enough,  I  do  not  find  any  reference  in  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  letters  to  his  death  ;  but  she  seems  to 
have  taken  immediate  steps  in  behalf  of  his  family, 
by  writing  about  their  financial  situation  to  the  Arch¬ 
bishop  of  York,  who  replied  as  follows  : 

From  the  Archbishop  of  York 

Dartmouth,  S.W.,  Mar.  26,  1768. 

Madam — I  have  just  recd  the  honor  of  your  letter  ;  and 
I  can  only  blame  you  for  making  any  apology  for  giving  me 
an  opportunity  to  obey  your  commands.  The  Widow  and 
daughter  of  Mr.  Sterne  are  most  distressed  objects,  and  have 
a  Scene  of  unhappiness  opened  to  them,  wch  it  will  be  difficult 
for  the  best-intentioned  to  prevent.  There  may  be  some 
application  for  a  small  pension  of  jf6  or  £8  for  the  Widow  fm 
the  Corporation  of  Clergymens  Widows  here  in  London.  But 
that  will  be  a  trifle.  What  seems  to  lye  heavy,  is  the  repair 
of  the  Parsonage  house  ;  ab*  wch  I  recd  a  letter  from  Miss 
Sterne.  I  have  properly  nothing  to  do  with  it  ;  but  the 
Successor  has  a  right  to  claim  it  to  be  done  by  Mr.  Sterne’s 
Executors.  I  hope  it  may  be  so  far  accommodated,  that  the 
expence,  wch  he  neglected  to  lay  out  upon  a  plan  wch  he 
mentioned  to  me,  may  be  lessoned  :  and  in  that  case  I  can 
advise  the  Successor  to  compromise  the  affair.  He  is  bound 
to  build  a  house  ;  and  I  am  bound  in  duty  to  call  upon  him 
and  oblige  its  being  done,  but  the  compassion  due  to  the 
Widow  and  orphan  will  probably  operate,  as  it  should.  .  .  . 

The  problem  of  the  future  of  Sterne’s  widow  and 
daughter  was  a  difficult  one,  and  was  not  rendered 
easier  by  Mrs.  Sterne’s  resentful  character,  and  Lydia’s 
somewhat  extravagant  ideas.  Writing  to  her  sister 
in  April,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

I  went  last  night  to  the  Archbishop  of  Yorks  to  whom  I 
wrote  in  behalf  of  Mr.  Sternes  family.  Mr.  Sternes  Parsonage 
was  burnt  down,  the  new  incumbent  has  a  right  to  require 
it  shd  be  new  built,  but  as  the  Archbishop  presents,  his  good 


196 


SUTTON  PARSONAGE 


interposition  wd  mitigate  the  expence,  he  answerd  my  letter 
in  the  most  obliging  and  friendly  manner,  enters  with  great 
humanity  into  thier  situation,  and  will  do  as  much  in  their 
favour  as  is  consistent  with  justice,  he  tailed  a  great  deal  on  the 
subject,  and  will  get  the  Widow  a  little  Pension  of  £8  a  year 
if  it  be  necessary. 

The  only  thing  for  these  people  would  be  to  board  in  a 
cheap  place,  but  my  good  cousin  is  si  tracassiere,  she  puts  every 
Town  into  a  combustion  in  a  month. 

She  and  her  brother  Morris,  however,  determined 
to  settle  small  annuities  upon  them,  and  other  methods 
of  assistance  were  canvassed.  In  a  letter  written 
later  in  the  year  from  Sandleford,  she  epitomises  her 
opinion  of  Tristram. 

Sutton  Parsonage,  handed  over  by  Sterne  to  a 
curate,  had  been  burnt  down  in  1764,  and  its  re¬ 
building  put  off  indefinitely.  Sterne  himself  had 
put  the  loss  at  close  on  four  hundred  pounds,  but  he 
had  managed  to  evade  all  admonishments  to  rebuild. 
His  successor,  Andrew  Cheap,  had  to  institute  a  suit 
for  dilapidations  against  Mrs.  Sterne,  and  at  length 
to  accept  a  composition  of  sixty  pounds.  The  suit 
and  the  rebuilding  cost  him  £$7 6  :  13  :  5,  as  an 
indignant  entry  in  the  Parish  Register,  quoted  by  Mr. 
Percy  Fitzgerald,  shows. 

Sandleford, 1768  ? 

Mrs.  Sterne  is  a  woman  of  great  integrity  and  has  many 
virtues,  but  they  stand  like  quills  upon  the  fretfull  porcupine, 
ready  to  go  forth  in  sharp  arrows  on  the  least  supposed  offence  ; 
she  would  not  do  a  wrong  thing,  but  she  does  right  things  in 
a  very  unpleasing  manner,  and  the  only  way  to  avoid  a  quarrel 
with  her  is  to  keep  a  due  distance.  I  have  not  seen  Mrs. 
Sterne  since  I  was  a  girl  in  hanging  sleeves,  but  I  know  her 
character  well.  Miss  Sterne  I  never  saw,  but  by  her  letters 
I  judge  she  is  very  sensible,  lively  and  clever  ;  if  these  qualities 
are  softened  with  virgin  modesty,  tinctured  with  that  maiden 
blush  of  the  mind  which  so  adorns,  so  sanctifies  female  excellence, 
she  must  be  a  charming  creature,  and  like  the  fairies  of  the 
Leases,  and  the  nymphs  of  Fenham.  Miss  Morrits  good 
opinion  and  regard  does  Miss  Sterne  great  honour. 


MRS.  MONTAGU  ON  HER  “COSIN”  197 

Poor  Tristram  Shandy  had  an  appearance  of  philanthropy 
that  pleased  one,  and  made  one  forgive  in  some  degree  his 
errors.  However,  as  I  think,  there  is  but  one  way  of  a  mans 
proving  his  philanthropy  to  be  real  and  genuine,  and  that  is 
by  making  every  part  of  his  conduct  of  good  example  to  mankind 
in  general  and  of  good  effect  towards  those  with  whom  he  is 
connected.  If  Tristram  gave  an  ill  example  to  the  Clergy, 
if  he  rendered  his  wife  and  daughter  unhappy,  we  must  mistake 
good  humour  for  good  nature.  By  many  humble  addresses, 
he  forced  me  to  take  some  kind  of  civil  notice  of  him  ;  I 
assure  you  his  witt  never  attoned  with  me  for  the  indecency 
of  his  writings,  nor  could  the  quintessence  of  all  the  witt 
extracted  from  all  the  most  celebrated  beaux  esprits  that  ever 
existed,  make  amends  for  one  obscure  period.  There  are  but 
two  kinds  of  people  that  I  think  myself  at  liberty  to  hate  and 
despise,  the  first  is  of  the  class  of  soi  disant  philosophers,  who 
by  sophistry  would  cheat  the  less  acute  out  of  their  principles 
of  religion,  the  only  firm  basis  of  moral  virtue  ;  the  second 
are  witts  who  ridicule  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever 
things  are  of  good  report.  The  lowest  animal  in  society  is 
a  Buffoon.  He  willingly  degrades  himself  in  the  rank  of 
rational  Being,  assumes  a  voluntary  inferiority  of  soul,  defaces 
the  Divine  image  in  his  mind  to  put  on  the  monkey  and  the 
ape,  and  is  guilty  of  spiritual  bestiality.  Poor  Tristrams  last 
performance  was  the  best,  his  sentimental  journey  would  not 
have  misbecome  a  young  Ensign.  I  cannot  say  it  was  suitable 
to  his  serious  profession.  I  used  to  talk  in  this  severe  manner 
to  him,  and  he  would  shed  penetent  tears,  which  seem’d  to 
shew  he  erred  from  levity,  not  malice,  and  the  great  who 
encourage  such  writings  are  most  to  blame,  for  they  seduce 
the  frail  witt  to  be  guilty  of  these  offences,  but  we  are  now  a 
Nation  of  Sybarites  who  promise  rewards  only  to  such  as  invent 
some  new  pleasure. 

This  picture  of  Mrs.  Montagu  lecturing  Cousin 
Laurence,  and  Tristram  shedding  tears  of  penitence, 
is  really  delicious. 

So  little  has  been  recorded  of  the  later  doings  of 
Lydia  Sterne,  the  daughter  to  whom  Tristram  was 
so  greatly  devoted,  his  little  Lyd,  the  amanuensis  of 
Shandy,  the  child  of  nature  and  the  darling  of  his 
heart,  that  it  seems  worth  while  to  include  here  a 


198  LYDIA  STERNE 

part  at  least  of  her  letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  was 
her  godmother. 

Mrs.  James  had  written  of  her,  “  she  is  supposed 
to  have  a  portion  of  each  parent’s  best  qualities,  the 
sensibility  and  frolicsome  vivacity  of  Yorick  most 
happily  blended  in  her  composition, — lively  by  nature 
youth  and  education  she  cannot  fail  to  please  every 
freak  of  the  captious  man.”  Others  were  less  com¬ 
plimentary  and  described  her  as  “  an  accomplished 
little  slut  ”  ;  and  one  recalls  her  father’s  peremptory 
“  I  will  have  no  rouge  put  on  in  England,”  almost 
the  only  touch  of  severity  in  any  of  his  letters  to  her. 

There  are  several  letters  from  Lydia  Sterne  in 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  correspondence — all  pertly  interest¬ 
ing  in  their  way — which  may  perhaps  best  follow 
here,  though  of  later  dates. 

The  first  refers  to  the  action  of  Mrs.  Sterne’s 
brother-in-law,  the  Rev.  John  Botham,  whose  deal¬ 
ings  with  the  effects  of  the  deceased  Yorick  were 
resented  by  his  widow,  largely,  one  may  imagine, 
because  she  herself  was  anxious  to  have  a  finger  in 
the  bookmaking  pie  which  was  so  rigorously  pur¬ 
sued  after  Sterne’s  death  ;  to  which  end  she  and 
her  daughter  returned  from  France  later  in  the  year. 
Hall-Stevenson,  Yorick’s  familiar  spirit  and  the  cynical 
roue  of  Crazy  Castle  and  the  Demoniacs,  had,  with 
other  admirers,  initiated  a  subscription  at  York  Races, 
at  which  ^800  was  raised  ;  and  Lydia’s  letters  show 
that  considerable  additions  to  this  were  subsequently 
received. 


From  Lydia  Sterne 

Tuesday  evening. 

Dear  Madam — I  did  myself  the  pleasure  to  write  to  you 
this  morning  :  but  I  wrote  in  such  a  hurry  that  I  omitted 
several  very  material  things  which  I  ought  to  have  mentioned, 
but  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  will  make  some  allowances  for  the 
circumstances  we  are  in  which  scarce  leave  us  time  to  think 
of  everything  we  have  to  say.  But  first  let  me  return  to  Mr. 


MR.  BOTHAM 


199 


Botham.  Mama  answer’d  the  letter  that  he  wrote  to  me,  in 
which  he  complains  that  I  write  in  a  dictating  manner  &c. 
I  am  sure  I  need  not  tell  Mrs.  Montagu  that  when  a  person 
writes  on  business  there  is  much  less  occasion  for  compts  than 
for  directions.  However  I  meant  not  to  offend  any-one  much 
less  my  uncle  whom  I  much  esteem — not  one  of  these  directions 
has  Mr.  Botham  follow’d.  They  were  first  to  sell  all  Mr. 
Sterne’s  wearing  apparel,  Sc  trinkets  to  the  best  advantage,  to 
present  Mr.  Hall  my  Father’s  Gold  snuff  box  which  he  desired 
to  purchase,  (indeed  many  of  his  friends  would  have  been  glad 
to  have  purchased  his  trinkets  at  even  more  than  their  value 
only  because  they  once  belonged  to  Mr.  Sterne)  to  send  down 
all  his  papers  &  give  us  an  account  for  what  he  sold  his  effects, 
for  instead  of  doing  this  he  has  read  every  paper  of  my  poor 
Father’s  and  has  burnt  what  he  did  not  think  proper  to  com¬ 
municate  to  us. — it  was  not  Mama’s  intention  that  anyone 
shou’d  read  my  Father’s  papers,  well  knowing  that  there  was 
some  amongst  them  which  ought  not  to  have  been  seen,  no  not 
even  by  his  daughter  nor  shd  I  have  wished  to  see  one  of  them. 
Mama  is  very  much  chagrin’d  at  this  for  notwithstanding  she 
can  perhaps  rely  on  Mr.  Botham’s  secrecy  yet  it  grieves  that 
even  he  should  be  so  well  acquainted  with  certain  anecdotes, 
but  to  burn  any  paper  was  very  wrong,  I  hope  he  will  cease 
so  doing  Sc  leave  that  care  to  Mama. — Mr.  Botham  refuses  to 
send  Mama  either  the  cash  he  has  sold  Mr.  Sterne’s  effects 
for  or  his  papers  unless  somebody  gives  a  sufficient  Bond  for 
the  value  of  the  effects  or  that  Mama  takes  administration. — 
now  as  Mama  finds  that  Mr.  Sterne’s  personal  estate  will  pay 
all  his  debts  (except  the  mortgage  to  which  her  estate  is  liable) 
she  risks  nothing  in  taking  it  and  it  would  be  a  great  satisfaction 
to  her  to  leave  no  debt  unpaid  ;  if  she  does  not  take  administra¬ 
tion  the  principal  creditor  will,  Sc  that  would  be  to  our  dis¬ 
advantage,  we  shall  have  £1500  secure  when  all  his  debts  are 
paid,  but  mama  desires  you  will  give  us  your  kind  advice  in 
this  as  well  as  in  every  other  matter. — I  spoke  to  you  my  dear 
Cousin  in  my  last  of  the  many  friends  it  has  pleased  God  to 
raise  us  up  in  this  part  of  the  world,  and  that  they  had  proposed 
a  Collection  for  us  in  the  race  week. — a  judicious  sensible 
gentleman,  &  one  of  our  sincerest  friends  has  made  that  col¬ 
lection  appear  to  us  in  a  very  different  light  from  what  it  did 
before.  But  this  is  only  a  supposition  that  such  a  thing  takes 
place. 

Begun  by  the  Marquiss  of  Rockingham  Sc  continued  by  the 


200 


THE  ARCHBISHOP’S  HELP 


principal  gentlemen  of  the  County  &  nothing  less  than  5 
Guineas  to  be  received  is  putting  it  upon  such  a  footing  that 
it  is  an  honour  to  Mr.  Sterne’s  memory,  &  no  small  one  to 
us,  &  cannot  lessen  us  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  would  to  God 
it  may  succeed,  if  you  approve  of  it.  and  in  case  you  do  my 
dear  Madam  may  we  hope  that  you  will  second  our  friends 
endeavours  in  the  south  as  they  will  do  yours  in  the  North  ? 

Do  my  dear  Cousin  give  us  yr  friendly  advice  for  we  can 
think  of  taking  no  step  without  it. 

I  am  somewhat  indisposed  &  therefore  must  conclude  ;  my 
mama  is  really  wore  down. — I  am  dear  Madam  Yr  obliged  & 
affectionate  God  Daughter 

Lydia  Sterne. 

Mama  joins  in  most  affectionate  compliments. 


One  cannot  help  sharing  Lydia’s  indignation  over 
the  Reverend  Johnny  Botham’s  pious  holocaust.  Did 
it  include  that  “  most  comic  Romance  ”  which  he 
was  just  finishing  when  the  last  letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu 
was  scrawled  ? 

The  Archbishop  of  York  was  prompt  in  doing 
what  he  could  in  response  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  appeal, 
and  arranged  a  compromise  as  regards  dilapidations  : 


Brodsworth,  June  6,  1768. 

As  I  had  not  the  good  fortune  to  see  you  before  I  came  out 
of  town,  I  shd  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  wd  let  me  know  whether 
Mrs.  Sterne  agrees  to  the  compromise  wth  Mr.  Cheap  for 
dilapidations  :  that  is  to  pay  him  one  hundred  Guineas  and 
be  quit  of  all  demands  from  him  as  Successor  to  Mr.  Sterne  at 
Sutton  upon  the  acct  of  dilapidations. 

I  was  at  Bishopthorpe  last  week  but  heard  nothing  particular 
of  the  mother  or  daughter  ;  and  I  go  there  for  the  summer  on 
the  1 2th  of  July.  I  may  probably  see  Mrs.  Sterne  and  Mr. 
Cheap  :  and  I  shd  wish  to  know  what  she  has  wrote  to  you, 
that  I  may  finish  the  affair,  if  possible. 

Mrs.  Sterne,  as  might  have  been  expected,  was 
intransigent,  and  was  so  reported  to  the  Archbishop 
by  Mrs.  Montagu  in  a  letter  to  which  he  replied  : 


DILAPIDATIONS  AND  COLLECTIONS  201 


From  the  Archbishop  of  York 

Brodsworth,  June  17,  1768. 

Madam — I  was  honoured  wth  your  letter  yesterday,  and 
am  not  surprised  at  the  absurdity  of  Mrs.  Sterne  wth  regard 
to  the  dilapidations  at  Sutton  ;  considering  the  different  bubbles 
of  Vanity  and  levity  wch  have  upheld  her  for  sometime,  and 
the  silly  cunning  of  that  crooked-headed  Attorney,  into  whose 
hands  she  hath  unluckily  fallen.  Perhaps  I  may  see  her  when 
I  go  to  Bishopthorpe,  but  the  plain  sincerity  of  real  friendship 
wch  1  wu  wish  to  shew  her,  will  be  of  no  account  wth  her.  I 
shall  at  present  let  Mr.  Cheap  know  her  answer,  and  he  will 
probably  enter  into  suit  directly  :  and  everything,  that  they 
have  mentioned  to  you  will  when  known  make  agst  them. 
The  Inclosure  was  no  merit  of  Sterne’s,  but  it  was  a  profit  to 
him  :  the  materials  were  much  hurt  by  the  fire,  but  they  were 
all  removed  and  used  upon  his  own  Estate  etc — However, 
after  all,  I  have  a  suspicion,  not  from  very  bad  authority,  for 
it  came  from  Ld  Fauconbridge’s  Steward,  that  there  will  be  a 
better  surplus  than  they  give  out  :  for  her  Estate  (wch,  by 
being  settled  after  marriage,  is  liable  to  Creditors)  will  pay  all 
the  debts  and  dilapidations.  There  is  generally  falsehood 
mixed  wth  little  cunning  ;  and  as  it  is  designed  to  have  a 
subscription  for  them  opened  at  York,  they  think  it  their 
interest  to  depreciate  their  estate. — I  think  they  depreciate 
themselves,  to  think  of  a  collection,  wthout  making  it  appear 
by  a  fair  account  how  far  they  may  want  it  :  and  I  am  sure, 
you  wd  rather  assist  them,  when  they  are  returned  to  a  sober 
sense  of  their  circumstances  and  their  character  ;  than  let 
your  name  be  mentioned  in  the  roll  of  ostensible  benefactors  ; 
wch  will  only  increase  their  vanity,  and  can  tend  to  no  good 
in  the  way  that  it  is  meant  to  carry  on  such  a  collection. — If 
your  name  is  mentioned  either  by  them  or  by  any  person,  I 
shall  very  plainly  declare,  that  you  are  desirous  to  shew  your 
friendship  to  them  but  without  ostentation  ;  at  a  proper  time, 
when  you  saw  upon  what  footing  their  affairs  were.  I  think 
I  may  venture  to  enter  so  far  into  your  Ideas,  as  to  answer 
for  you  in  that  way,  if  occasion  requires. 

In  a  later  letter  he  adds  : 

The  Family  is  at  present  dispersed  ;  but  we  shall  re-unite 
in  the  course  of  this  week  and  go  to  Bpthorpe  for  the  Summer. 
If  anything  occurs  ab1  Mrs.  Sterne,  I  will  communicate  it  to 


202 


MISS  MORRITT 


you,  and  I  shall  wish  to  be  of  service  to  them  in  the  most 
friendly  way,  wch  is  to  bring  them  down  from  those  flights 
of  pride  and  vanity  ;  that  will  certainly  expose  them  to  ridicule, 
if  not  to  worse  dangers. 

Writing  to  “  Mrs.  Scott  at  Dr.  Domeniceti  at 
Chelsea  ”  on  September  4,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

I  had  a  letter  from  Miss  A.  Moritt  of  Y ork  on  Sunday  telling 
me  she  had  collected  upwards  of  £700  for  Miss  Sterne,  that  she 
had  promised  the  Subscribers  it  should  be  converted  into  an 
annuity  for  the  girl  for  she  added  Mrs.  Sterne  was  so  little 
loved  or  esteemed  there  would  not  have  been  a  single  guinea 
given  if  that  condition  had  not  been  made.  I  had  heard  Miss 
Moritt  extremely  well  spoken  of,  and  by  her  manner  of  acting 
by  the  Sternes  and  from  her  letters  I  imagine  she  has  an  un¬ 
common  share  of  goodness  and  of  sense.  She  begs  of  me  to 
advise  Miss  Sterne  not  to  affect  witt,  a  desire  of  being  distin¬ 
guished  that  way  she  says  has  ruined  the  whole  family.  I 
shall  now  tell  Miss  Sterne  I  will  allow  her  £no  per  ann  ;  and 
I  hope  that  will  give  my  advice  more  weight  ;  she  writes 
with  the  highest  sense  of  the  blessing  of  this  collection  and  is 
now  grateful  to  God  and  her  benefactors,  but  how  far  the 
pride  of  her  mother’s  precepts  and  the  levities  of  her  Father 
may  have  rendered  her  incapable  of  deep  impression  on  that 
head  I  cannot  tell.  Lord  Rockingham  subscribed  50  guineas 
as  in  fact  did  Sir  G.  Saville  tho’  he  gave  fifteen  of  them  without 
his  name  because  he  would  not  seem  to  give  more  than  Lord 
Scarborough. 


From  Lydia  Sterne 

York,  Dec.  15th,  1768. 

My  dear  Cousin — I  beg  you  to  forgive  my  troubling  you 
so  often,  but  as  I  know  you  will  rejoice  with  us  when  you  have 
read  my  letter  I  will  make  no  further  apologies.  You  will 
see  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu  that  I  have  not  always  bad  news 
to  tell  you. — this  letter  we  receiv’d  from  Lady  Spencer.  I 
only  send  the  copy.  “  Madam  I  can  plead  no  other  merit  in 
the  following  transaction  than  that  it  occured  to  me,  that  I 
should  be  to  blame  if  I  did  not  tell  Mr.  Crawfurd  of  the  sub¬ 
scription  that  was  making  to  assist  you  while  I  was  at  York  as 
I  thought  from  the  sincere  regard  he  had  for  Mr.  Sterne  that 
it  would  give  him  pleasure  to  be  of  any  service  to  his  familly 


A  SUBSCRIPTION  LIST 


203 


for  his  sake. — he  has  accordingly  sent  me  the  money  mention’d 
in  the  following  list,  and  I  beg  I  may  have  your  directions 
what  to  do  with  it,  and  into  whose  hands  you  would  have  it 
paid.  I  am  Madam  Yr  faithful  humble  servant 

G.  Spencer. 

I  hope  you  receiv’d  a  trifle  from  Ld  Spencer  by  ye  hands 
of  Mr.  Croft.” 

Mr.  Crawfurd 
Mr.  Fox 
Ld  Ossory 
Duke  of  Roxburgh 
Ld  Shellburne 
Mr.  Somes 
Mr.  Meynell . 

Mr.  Crewe 
Mr.  Fitzpatrick 
Mr.  Boothby 
Mr.  Upton  . 

Mr.  Southwell 
Mr.  Hume  the  Historian 


£108  15  o  [sic] 


10  10  o 
10  10  o 
10  10  o 
10  10  o 
10  10  o 
10  10  o 
10  10  o 
5  5° 
5  5° 
5  5° 
5  5° 
c  c  o 


Judge  my  dearest  Cousin  what  pleasure  this  kind  letter, 
and  agreable  news  gave  us.  how  kind  is  providence  to  us  ! — 
we  thought  rather  improper  to  send  Becket  or  Mr.  Edmonds 
to  Lady  Spencer  and  could  by  no  means  desire  Mr.  Botham 
to  do  it  as  poor  soul  he  was  unfortunately  guilty  of  a  sad  mistake 
relating  to  Ld  Spencer  which  had  near  proved  very  unfortunate 
to  us  as  his  Lordship  was  extreamly  displeased  with  us  thinking 
us  the  authors  of  the  story  and  insisted  upon  seeing  the  letter 
which  we  were  forced  to  send  my  Lord  to  clear  ourselves,  but 
this  I  will  explain  when  I  have  the  happiness  to  see  you. — 
I  took  the  liberty  to  make  use  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  name  only 
saying  “  that  Mrs.  Montagu  would  I  am  sure  receive  the 
money. — so  I  dare  say  Lady  Spencer  will  pay  it  into  my  dear 
Cousin’s  hands,  who  I  doubt  not  will  receive  it  with  pleasure. — 
my  mother  since  my  last  has  been  much  indisposed.  I  have 
wrote  to  Mr.  Crawfurd  to  thank  him  for  his  great  goodness. — 
I  have  been  writing  since  seven  and  my  hand  is  cramped — 
my  Mother  joins  in  most  affectionate  compts  believe  me  my 
dear  Mrs.  Montagu  most  truly  most  affectionately  yours 

L.  S. 


204 


STERNE’S  DEBTS 


From  Lydia  Sterne 

York,  Wed. 

I  promised  to  give  my  dear  Cousin  an  account  of  the 
Collection  I  think  I  cannot  take  a  better  method  than  to  send 
her  a  list  of  the  Subscribers  which  I  do. — how  gracious,  how 
merciful  is  God  to  us  !  what  comfort  has  he  sent  us  what 
friends  has  he  raised  us  up  !  O  may  we  ever  retain  a  just 
sense  of  his  mercy,  and  the  most  grateful  remembrance  of  what 
we  owe  to  our  friends,  indeed  Madam  I  scarce  can  write 
for  Tears  when  I  think  how  peculiarly  kind  providence  has 
been  towards  us.  What  reason  had  we  to  expect  such  benefits 
as  these  none  indeed — but  I  hope  we  shall  never  be  undeserving 
of  the  kindness  that  has  been  shewn  us,  I  am  sure  we  can 
never  forget  it. — It  was  some  time  before  the  Arch-Bishop 
subscribed  his  Grace  thought  that  it  was  from  obstinacy  that 
my  Mother  refused  to  answer  for  the  Dilapidations.  Upon 
hearing  this  my  Mother  sent  by  a  friend  the  Recorder’s  opinion 
in  writing,  (after  having  ask’d  his  leave)  which  he  freely 
gave,  and  wrote  underneath  the  opinion  his  reasons  &c  &c — 
This  was  but  right,  and  his  Grace  seem’d  satisfied,  &  sub¬ 
scribed  ten  Guineas — the  Arch  Bishop  my  dear  Cousin  speaking 
of  you  said  you  was  unacquainted  with  our  affairs. — I  could  not 
tell  Mrs.  Montagu  ’till  we  knew  ourselves  but  my  Father’s 
debts,  the  Curates  included,  amounted  to  near  a  1000 /.  His 
personals  have  rais’d  very  little  after  his  funeral  &  debts  were 
paid  in  London  the  ballance  in  my  Mother’s  favour  was  but 
22/.  his  furniture  a  Cow,  &  some  hay  included  56/.  his  chaise, 
&  horses  60.  his  books  80.  —  my  Mother  has  paid  every 
farthing  she  has  recd  &  is  now  advertising  her  estate  to  be  sold 
as  soon  as  possible  to  pay  of  every  shilling.  &  lives  herself  upon 
borrow’d  money,  but  we  have  bad  hopes  of  the  sale  of  this 
estate  which  was  let  for  40/.  a  year  ’till  this  year  my  Father 
let  it  for  50  but  upon  account  of  some  tyths  which  he  let  the 
Tenant  have  too  cheap  but  the  rent  will  be  diminish’d  after 
this  year  as  the  Tyths  are  now  in  Mr.  Cheap’s  disposal.  But 
to  convince  you  how  hard  it  will  be  for  us  to  learn  all  Mr. 
Sterne’s  debts  I  must  tell  my  Cousin  that  notwithstanding  our 
advertising  (which  we  did  four  months  ago)  last  night  we 
received  a  Bill  from  a  person  in  York  for  wine  the  summ  25/ 
and  the  other  day  we  recd  a  Bill  for  Shoes  from  London. — 
We  went  up  into  a  Garret  this  race  week  in  order  to  let  our 
Landlord  have  the  benefit  of  the  races.  If  we  had  not  we 
must  have  paid  five  guineas  for  the  week  which  suited  not  our 


YORK  RACE  WEEK 


205 


present  circumstances  and  twenty  pounds  aYear  which  is  what 
we  pay  is  even  too  much  for  us. — My  Mother  purposes  to 
settle  this  Collection  money  upon  me  which  is  very  kind 
considering  the  many  debts  she  has  to  pay  out  of  her  estate. — 
We  hope  Mr.  Montagu  enjoys  a  better  state  of  health  and 
that  my  Cousin  is  as  well  as  we  wish  her.  We  are  both  very 
ill.  I  am  scarce  able  to  write  !  let  us  have  the  pleasure  of 
hearing  from  my  Cousin  You  do  not  know  with  what  pleasure 
I  communicate  this  success  to  you.  I  think  our  friends  have 
done  wonders. — There  is  scarce  any  subscribers  but  of  this 
County.  a  propos — the  anonymous  underneath  Sr  George 
Saville’s  name  is  himself  he  would  not  give  more  than  Ld 
Scarborough  but  sent  it  afterwards. — We  have  no  occasion 
for  the  List  I  send  you. — Adieu  my  dear  Cousin  believe  me 
your  most  affectionate  obedient  humble  servant  &  Cousin 

Lydia  Sterne. 

My  Mama  joins  in  most  affectionate  compts  &  wishes  for 
your  happiness. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  evidently  not  failed  to  convey 
to  Miss  Sterne  Miss  Morritt’s  advice  about  inherited 
wit : 


From  Lydia  Sterne 

York,  Saturday. 

Dear  Madam — I  waited  till  I  recd  your  second  letter 
before  I  would  answer  the  particulars  of  your  first,  after 
once  more  returning  my  dear  Cousin  our  best  our  most  grateful 
thanks  for  her  kindness  towards  us  I  will  proceed.  But  think 
not  that  we  over  value  your  generosity  no  my  dear  Mrs. 
Montagu  that  is  impossible  words  cannot  express  what  we 
feel  &  thanks  are  too  poor  upon  such  an  occasion. — the  manner 
of  doing  a  generous  action  is  even  more  than  the  thing  itself, 
&  my  Cousin  has  confer’d  this  obligation  in  the  most  engaging 
manner,  truly  great,  and  worthy  of  herself — Mrs.  Montagu’s 
praises  flatter  me  much  as  she  is  the  person  in  the  world  whose 
approbation  &  good  opinion  I  most  value — but  my  dear  Cousin 
over  rates  my  talents — I  have  had  more  advantages  than  fall 
to  most  peoples  share  particularly  that  of  seeing  good  company, 
but  what  I  esteem  one  of  the  greatest  is  that  of  having  spent 
my  days  with  my  Mother  who  has  taken  great  pains  to  form 
both  my  head,  &  heart,  the  latter  indeed  she  most  consider’d — 


206 


MY  FATHER’S  SERMONS 


the  few  accomplishments  I  am  mistress  of  I  owe  them  partly 
to  my  own  industry — for  my  Mother,  and  myself  have  calculated 
has  not  cost  eighteen  pounds — yet  I  look’d  upon  those  little 
accomplishments  as  rather  a  misfortune  than  otherwise,  at 
least  those  were  my  reflections  when  I  lost  my  Father  for  at 
that  time  I  had  a  very  melancholy  prospect  before  me. — as 
to  inheriting  my  Father’s  wit  I  have  not  the  least  grain  in  my 
composition  we  both  thought  it  an  unhappy  turn  in  my  father — 
I  look  upon  satire  with  detestation  and  I  must  own  when  we 
returned  from  France  we  were  much  hurt  with  the  satirical 
things  we  heard  in  every  company  we  went  into,  having  lived 
six  years  amongst  people  who  know  not  what  it  is  to  be  satirical 
— and  instead  of  attacking  any-body  endeavour  to  make  every 
one  in  the  company  happy  and  never  speak  ill  of  the  absent  I  am 
so  far  from  being  a  diseuse  de  bon  mots  I  think  I  never  was 
guilty  of  one  in  my  life.  I  am  when  in  company  extremely 
diffident  seldom  give  my  opinion  but  upon  the  most  trivial 
things — I  am  “  often  check’d  for  silence  but  never  tax’d  for 
speech  ” — I  have  always  follow’d  Polonius’s  advice  to  his  son 
in  this  for  I  give  everyone  my  ear  but  few  my  voice  excuse 
these  two  miserable  quotations  but  they  come  so  pat  to  my 
purpose  (as  Sancho  says)  that  I  could  not  let  them  pass. — Now 
my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu  may  safely  tell  anyone  who  speaks 
of  me  as  a  wit  that  I  am  no  such  thing — in  short  I  am  I  hope 
what  Mrs.  Montagu  will  ever  approve — but  no  babillarde  I 
return  my  Cousin  a  thousand  thanks  for  her  kind  advice  ’tis 
the  greatest  proof  of  her  regard,  &  be  assured  I  will  ever  follow 
it — Mrs.  Montagu  may  depend  upon  it  that  the  sermons  we 
shall  publish  are  my  Father's  own  &  the  gentlemen  who  have 
looked  them  over  say  that  they  are  very  good  ones — there  will 
be  three  vols  &  as  the  subscription  was  5s  for  the  two  vol8 
the  subscription  now  will  be  fixed  at  three  half  crowns — they 
will  come  out  when  the  ParP  meets — my  dear  Cousin  was  so 
kind  as  to  say  she  would  push  the  subscription  for  us — we 
cannot  push  it  ourselves  and  we  cannot  expect  any  subscribers 
here — we  thought  we  should  have  done  with  debts  no  such 
matter — a  Country  man  brought  a  note  of  bond  of  Mr.  Sterne’s 
&  told  us  of  one  we  should  hear  of  soon — I  must  tell  you  what 
the  honest  soul  said — I  would  not  have  made  the  demand  had 
not  I  heard  that  your  affairs  have  turn’d  out  better  for  had 
you  been  left  destitute  the  money  would  have  been  much  at 
your  service. — if  it  is  inconvenient  defer  the  payment — I  have 
that  dependance  on  you  Madam  that  if  you  do  not  pay  these 
two  years  I  shall  not  be  uneasy — he  would  take  no  interest. 


LYDIA  STERNE  AND  JOHN  WILKES  207 

We  are  glad  your  arm  is  got  better  we  wish  Mrs.  Montagu 
all  possible  happiness  and  Mr.  Montagu  a  better  state  of  health 
Mama  joins  in  most  affectionate  compts. — I  am  dear  Madam 
Your  ever  grateful  &  affectionate  God  Daughter 

Lydia  Sterne. 

An  odd  thing  about  this  letter  is  that  Mrs.  Sterne 
writes  the  end  in  her  large  handwriting,  viz. 

God  Daughter 

Lydia  Sterne. 

Lydia’s  hand  is  small  and  neat,  her  mother’s  large  and 
straggling.  Probably  she  read  the  letter  over  and 
then  indicated  her  approval  in  this  way,  Mrs.  Montagu 
knowing  her  calligraphy. 

Two  letters  in  the  British  Museum  (Add.  MSS. 
30877,  75-6)  show  that  Lydia  and  her  mother  pursued 
their  intercourse  with  Mrs.  Montagu  when  they 
came  back  to  London  from  Yorkshire.  The  first  is 
from  Lydia  to  John  Wilkes,  addressed  “  King’s  Bench 
Prison,”  and  written  from  “  Mr.  Williams,  Paper 
Merchant,  Gerrard  Street,  Soho,  Tuesday,”  begging 
him  to  get  his  friends  to  subscribe  for  the  three  volumes 
of  Sterne’s  sermons,  then  being  published.  Wilkes 
evidently  called  on  the  ladies  at  once  on  getting  this 
letter,  for  the  second  note,  written  apparently  the  same 
evening,  expresses  their  regret  at  having  missed  Mr. 
and  Miss  Wilkes,  they  having  been  “  engaged  this 
day  to  dine  with  Mrs.  Montagu  their  relation  :  they 
went  out  just  when  Miss  Sterne  despatched  the  note 
and  at  their  return  found  her  obliging  card,  which 
has  mortified  them  greatly.” 

Lydia  Sterne  and  her  mother  exhausted  their 
ingenuity  in  seeking  means  of  money-making  out  of 
such  of  Yorick’s  papers  as  had  escaped  the  Rev. 
Johnny’s  burning  zeal.  Publishers  were  put  in  com¬ 
petition,  letters  and  sermons  chaffered,  and  the  Journal 
to  Eliza,  apparently  in  the  care  of  Mrs.  James,  was 
all  but  published,  and  only  withdrawn  at  a  price.  In 


208  STERNE’S  LIFE  AND  LETTERS 


1769  the  mother  and  daughter  returned  to  France 
and  settled  in  the  Rue  des  Cordeliers,  Angouleme, 
on  the  Charente.  Both  Wilkes  and  Hall  Stevenson 
had  promised  them,  whilst  they  were  in  England, 
to  write  the  life  of  Sterne  and  edit  the  Letters,  and 
both  these  gentlemen — who,  it  must  be  admitted,  had 
each  of  them  some  special  qualifications  for  such  a 
task — not  only  failed  to  redeem  their  pledge  but  even 
to  answer  the  appeals,  now  pertly  flippant,  now 
piteously  humble,  which  Lydia  repeatedly  sent  them, 
begging  them  to  carry  out  the  work  upon  the  proceeds 
of  which  the  mother  and  daughter  were  counting  for 
a  livelihood. 

Her  next  letter  to  her  Godmother  indicates  some¬ 
thing  of  their  straits,  and  shows  that  Mrs.  James  was 
acting  as  intermediary  in  forwarding  remittances  : 

From  Lydia  Sterne 

AngoulEme,  March  zd,  1770. 

My  dear  Cousin — I  cannot  defer  writing  to  you  any 
longer,  but  I  will  not  be  so  negligent  as  not  to  give  Mrs. 
Montagu  a  direction  which  Mrs.  James  tells  me  I  omitted 
in  my  precedent  letters,  sufficiently  have  I  been  punish’d  by 
not  hearing  from  you.  a  thousand  anxieties  took  possession 
of  our  souls,  sometimes  we  fear’d  you  was  ill,  or  that  Mr. 
Montagu  was  so.  I  will  not  weary  my  Cousin  with  an  account 
of  every  disagreable  thought,  that  made  us  so  unhappy,  but 
beg  leave  to  assure  her  that  we  rejoice  to  hear  she  is  well, 
may  she  long  continue  so  !  suffer  me  to  thank  you  a  thousand 
times  for  the  notes  you  was  so  kind  as  to  give  Mrs.  James  for 
us.  the  money  came  very  seasonably  for  our  attorney  in 
York  has  neglected  sending  us  our  little  remittances,  and  we 
were  short  of  money. — believe  us  truly  grateful,  but  I  will 
not  hurt  my  dear  Cousin’s  delicacy  by  saying  any  more  on 
the  subject  ;  sufficiently  does  she  think  herself  paid  in  doing 
a  benevolent  action. — but  I  must  not  make  you  pay  postage 
for  a  mere  letter  of  thanks,  I  must  give  you  some  account  of 
the  place  we  are  in — the  Town  tho’  ill  built  is  situated  most 
agreably,  the  prospects  fine,  the  walks  beautiful. — but  as  to 
the  inhabitants  except  a  small  number. — n’en  disons  rien. — 


THE  MOVE  TO  ALBI 


209 


yet  thus  far  I  must  speak  in  their  praise,  they  understand  eating, 
and  play,  better  than  any  people  in  the  world. — the  former 
is  their  study,  their  delight,  a  Capon  stuff’d  with  trufles,  or  a 
Galantine  sont  des  sujets  inepuisables — every  day  there  is  a 
great  dinner,  and  every  evening  a  supper. — we  have  59  traiteurs 
in  this  little  town,  that  wear  laced  coats,  and  couteaux  de 
chasse,  and  but  one  Bookseller,  and  he  poor  man  is  in  want, 
and  looks  like  Shakespear’s  starved  apothecary. — this  gluttony 
renders  the  market  very  dear,  nothing  but  butcher’s  meat  is 
reasonable,  fish,  fowls  etc  are  extravagantly  dear. — therefore 
we  intend  going  a  little  further  south  where  we  may  live 
cheaper,  civil  as  the  people  are  to  us,  yet  if  we  gave  to  eat 
we  should  be  much  better  liked,  but  that  is  not  our  plan,  and 
suits  not  our  finances. — tho  often  invited  out  we  seldom  go 
because  we  do  not  chuse  to  return  the  compliment.  I  flatter 
myself  my  dear  Cousin  will  favour  me  with  a  line,  if  she  knew 
the  pleasure  it  would  give  us  both  she  certainly  would  write. — 
we  are  both  of  us  much  indisposed  particularly  myself.  I  haste 
to  Bed  as  I  have  been  bled  this  evening — Mrs.  James  thinks 
herself  highly  honour’d  with  the  civilities  Mrs.  Montagu 
shew’d  her. — and  speaks  of  Mrs.  Montagu  with  enthusiasm. — 
but  ’tis  but  a  just  tribute  (which  everyone  who  is  so  happy  as 
to  know  my  Cousin)  pays  her — we  hope  Mr.  Montagu  is  well, 
and  present  our  best  compts  to  him — my  mother  joins  in  most 
affectionate  compts  believe  me  dear  Madam  Yr  most  obliged 
affec  L.  Sterne. 

During  the  summer  of  1770  the  move  “  a  little 
further  south  ”  was  made,  and  mother  and  daughter 
took  up  their  residence  at  Albi  on  the  Tarn,  between 
Montauban  and  Castres  in  Languedoc,  a  few  miles 
north-east  of  Toulouse,  whence  the  following  letter 
was  written  : 


From  Lydia  Sterne 

Albi,  Sept.  26th,  1771. 

My  dear  Cousin — My  mother  and  myself  were  made 
happy  some  time  ago  by  your  kind  affectionate  letter  which 
believe  me  dear  Madam  was  a  cordial  to  our  souls,  much 
were  we  concern’d  to  find  that  illness  had  deprived  us  of  the 
pleasure  of  hearing  from  you.  but  hope  that  at  present  your 
health  is  as  good  as  we  wish  it.  Mrs.  James  has  inform’d  us 
VOL.  1  p 


2io  MRS.  STERNE  NEARLY  MURDERED 


that  you  have  been  so  kind  as  to  remit  her  thirty  pounds  a 
thousand  thanks  my  dear  Cousin.  I  wish  I  had  the  happiness 
to  pay  them  in  person,  but  I  believe  I  should  not  be  able 
to  express  all  the  gratitude  I  feel,  indeed  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu 
we  are  both  penetrated  with  a  just  sense  of  your  goodness  and 
both  beg  leave  to  thank  you  once  more. — to  avoid  unnecessary 
expence  we  employ  no  Banker  to  receive  our  remittances. 
Mrs.  James  receives  all  and  send  us  Bills  on  People  at  Paris. — 
the  situation  of  this  Village  is  pretty,  our  little  house  is  agreeable, 
but  there  is  little  society,  and  the  little  there  is,  is  scarce 
worth  the  trouble  of  searching  after. — both  my  mother  and 
myself  prefer  Books  to  stupid  conversation,  and  in  such  a 
little  provincial  Town  as  this  the  men  are  ignorant  the  women 
still  more  so  except  in  the  affair  of  the  Toilet,  but  in  general 
the  french  are  good  natured  and  sometimes  we  go  amongst 
them,  and  return  with  more  pleasure  to  our  Books — I  remember 
my  Father  complain’d  at  Toulouse  that  by  conversing  much 
with  the  French  his  understanding  diminish’d  every  day. — 
my  mother  has  had  two  narrow  escapes  from  Death,  about 
two  months  ago  she  was  awaken’d  in  the  night  by  the  barking 
of  a  turn-spit,  and  getting  up  she  perceiv’d  a  man  coming 
down  her  chimney  by  the  means  of  a  Rope,  she  allarm’d 
the  familly  and  the  Villain  ascended  the  Chimney,  there  was 
found  upon  the  Tiles  a  large  knife  which  was  open  and  the 
Rope  still  fasten’d  round  the  Chimney,  if  my  poor  mother 
had  not  had  a  light  in  her  room  she  would  not  have  seen  the 
Rope  and  in  all  probability  would  have  been  murther’d  what 
a  mercy  it  was  that  she  was  awaken’d  by  the  Barking  of  the 
Dog  !  we  have  got  all  the  Chimneys  grated,  so  that  no  one 
can  descend,  since  that  alas  she  has  had  an  Epileptick  fit 
and  has  continued  ill  ever  since,  may  God  restore  her  health, 
her  loss  would  be  irreparable  to  me.  I  have  ever  found  her 
a  most  affectionate  mother  a  tender  friend  and  her  conversation 
with  me  is  such  as  tends  to  form  both  my  heart  and  my  Head. 
I  hope  she  has  succeeded  in  the  one,  I  mean  as  to  my  Heart. 
— you  are  very  kind  to  tell  me  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu  that 
the  subject  of  my  health  is  interesting  to  you. — indeed  I  have 
very  bad  health  and  am  very  thin.  I  partake  too  much  of 
my  Father’s  constitution,  whenever  my  dear  Cousin  favours 
me  with  a  letter  my  direction  is  a  Albi  pres  de  Toulouse  en 
Languedoc,  my  mother  joins  with  me  in  most  affectionate 
compliments  and  in  prayers  and  wishes  for  your  health  and 
happiness — I  am  my  dear  Cousin  your  most  obliged  and  most 
affectionate  God  Daughter  Lydia  Sterne. 


LYDIA  STERNE’S  ENGAGEMENT  21 1 


The  story  of  the  marriage  and  later  life  of  Sterne’s 
daughter  has  never  been  clearly  unravelled,  and  the 
following  letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu  is  therefore  of 
special  interest  as  recording  her  version  of  the  facts 
of  her  engagement.  Jean  Baptiste  Alexander  Anne 
de  Medalle,  son  of  a  customs  officer  and  five  years 
her  junior,  was  a  Catholic,  and  it  appears  that  despite 
the  assurance  in  this  letter  that  she  would  be  free  to 
practise  her  own  religion,  she  had  actually  to  abjure 
Protestantism  in  the  Provost’s  private  chapel  before 
the  ceremony  took  place.  This  letter  has,  for  me 
at  least,  additional  interest  in  the  very  characteristic 
phraseology  in  which  Yorick’s  daughter  is  revealed — 
“  I  here  thrust  my  chair  from  me  and  wrote  upon 
my  knees,”  is  a  truly  Shandian  touch. 

From  Lydia  Sterne 

Albi,  March  23,  1772. 

Dear  Madam — permit  me  to  call  you  my  dearest  Cousin 
pardon  your  affectionate  God  Daughter  if  she  troubles  you 
with  a  letter,  it  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  me  and  will 
not  (to  a  heart  like  yours)  appear  the  contrary.  I  have  that 
confidence  in  your  goodness  that  I  fear  not  to  impart  to  you 
that  I  have  had  an  offer  here  of  marriage  which  tho’  not 
advantageous,  yet  was  far  from  disagreeable  to  me.  my  dear 
Mother  wish’d  me  rather  to  consider  that  an  easy  fortune  was 
preferable  to  inclination,  but  seeing  that  the  gentleman  was 
far  from  displeasing  to  me,  and  not  likely  to  render  me  unhappy, 
has  not  absolutely  opposed  what  I  trust  will  be  my  happiness, 
seeing  that  he  was  no  bigot  to  his  Religion  and  has  offer’d 
me  and  her  every  assurance  that  I  shall  be  at  full  liberty  to 
practice  my  own  Religion. — 

but  his  Father  has  insisted  upon  very  hard  terms,  namely 
that  my  Mother  should  give  up  her  estate  immediately,  what¬ 
ever  a  Woman  brings  in  marriage  in  France  ’tis  the  custom 
in  france  to  secure  her  her  fortune  and  no  more,  so  she 
neither  loses  nor  gains — my  mother  is  willing  almost  to  leave 
herself  without  bread  for  the  advantage  of  her  Lydia,  my 
heart  bleeds  to  think  she  should  be  under  the  necessity  of 
reducing  herself  to  so  small  a  pittance  :  therefore  my  dear 


212 


LYDIA  IS  MARRIED 


Mrs.  Montagu  permit  me  to  plead  for  her  to  you.  I  here 
thrust  my  chair  from  me  and  wrote  upon  my  knees,  consider 
her  and  her  alone  and  withdraw  not  your  bounty  from  her 
whilst  she  lives  !  I  ask  nothing  for  myself  but  shall  feel 
doubly  on  her  account  if  you  grant  my  humble  petition.  Oh 
my  dear  Cousin  she  deserves  your  friendship  by  her  virtues, 
by  her  goodness,  she  has  performed  every  duty  in  Life,  as  a 
Wife  how  has  she  conducted  herself  !  when  a  Widow  she 
acted  nobly  in  regard  to  my  Father’s  debts,  as  a  Mother  she 
has  acted  too  generously  ;  and  I  may  say  without  a  boast 
I  believe  her  One  of  the  best  of  Women,  I  am  sure  she  is  the 
best  of  parents. — join  dear  Madam  your  consent  to  hers,  but 
let  me  hope  that  what  I  so  earnestly  have  beg’d  will  be  granted. 
Merit  has  ever  a  claim  with  Mrs.  Montagu,  why  should  I 
doubt  or  fear  ?  I  do  not.  I  plead  for  a  parent  for  a  tender 
mother.  my  dear  Cousin’s  heart  is  susceptible  of  all  that’s 
great  and  good,  my  cause  is  gain’d  ! — may  I  flatter  myself 
that  you  will  favour  me  with  an  answer  sent  to  Mrs.  James, 
she  will  forward  it — my  mother  has  been  and  is  very  ill,  my 
health  very  indifferent.  I  inherit  my  father’s  constitution 
but  I  trust  I  inherit  a  part  of  my  mother’s  virtues,  she  joins 
with  me  in  most  affectionate  wishes  for  your  health,  and 
happiness,  she  honours  and  loves  you  ;  but  so  does  everyone 
who  has  the  happiness  to  be  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Montagu. — 
I  beg  you  to  believe  me  my  dear  Cousin  Your  most  obliged 
affectionate  God  Daughter  Lydia  Sterne. 

be  so  good  as  to  present  our  compts  to 
Mr.  Montagu  and  also  to  Mrs.  Scott. — a 
Albipres  de  Toulouse  en  Languedoc  France. 

The  marriage  took  place  (“  etait  force,  urgent  car 
alors  la  loi  autorisait  la  recherche  de  la  paternite  ”)  very 
shortly  after,  on  April  28,  but  not  by  any  means  with 
her  godmother’s  consent.  Amongst  the  very  few 
copies  or  drafts  of  letters  in  this  collection  is  part 
of  one  written  by  her  in  reply  to  the  foregoing  : 

Copy  of  a  Letter  to  Miss  Sterne 

I  cannot  hesitate  a  moment  to  transfer  entirely  to  your 
Mamma  during  her  life  the  little  sum  I  used  to  send  for  your 
mutual  service  so  that  the  article  of  your  letter  which  relates 
to  this  point  is  most  easily  answered,  and  with  as  much  pleasure 


MRS.  STERNE’S  DEATH 


213 


on  my  side  as  it  can  be  received  on  yours.  The  more 
momentous  affair  your  marriage  I  cannot  assent  to  with  the 
same  good  will.  What  I  shall  say  on  this  subject  is  not  meant 
to  offend  the  gentleman  Who  you  have  a  desire  to  marry. 
I  am  a  perfect  stranger  to  his  character,  his  fortune,  and  even 
his  name.  You  do  not  say  anything  of  them,  all  you  give 
your  friends  is  that  you  are  going  to  marry  a  man  of  a  different 
Religion,  and  to  reduce  your  Mother  to  almost  beggary,  both 
these  things  you  confess.  You  seem  at  the  same  time  to  declare 
steadfastness  in  Religion  and  Filial  piety  to  your  parent.  My 
dear  cousin  the  actions  not  the  words  are  what  shall  decide 
the  judgment  of  God  and  man.  If  your  husband  has  any 
zeal  or  regard  for  his  religion  he  will  be  earnest  to  make  you 
embrace  it  from  regard  to  you  and  reverence  to  God,  if  he  is 
void  of  religion  he  will  think  such  a  mark  of  your  complaisance 
a  trifle,  and  the  authority  of  the  husband  will  interpose  where 
faith  stands  Neuter.  Your  children  must  of  necessity  be - 

And  here  the  writing  ends  abruptly. 

Mr.  Fitzgerald  has  rightly  pointed  out  that  the 
words,  “  The  marriage  was  force,  urgent  ”  “  might  quite 
possibly  imply  no  more  than  that  Mrs.  Sterne’s 
serious  illness — she  was  too  ill  even  to  be  present — 
made  the  ceremony  pressing,  as  her  death  might  have 
rendered  the  then  necessary  recherche  de  la  paternite 
impossible  ”  ;  though  this  can  hardly  be  accepted 
as  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  words. 

Mrs.  Sterne  actually  died  at  Albi  in  January  1773  ; 
and  her  daughter’s  marriage  was  not  of  long  duration, 
Medalle  also  dying,  it  seems,  about  three  years  later. 
His  widow  revisited  England  in  1775  in  order  herself 
to  arrange  for  the  publication  of  the  Letters  and 
Memoir,  which  were  issued  by  Kearsly  this  year, 
and  did  very  effectually  what  remained  to  be  done  in 
the  elucidation  of  one  side  at  least  of  the  character 
of  that  father  against  whose  bust  she  figured  in  the 
frontispiece  so  affectionately  reclining. 

Mrs.  Scott  writes  to  her  sister  in  January  1776  : 

Have  you  read  Sternes  new  sermons  ?  Surely  such  stuff 
never  was  published.  His  Levite  and  his  Concubine  and  the 


2  14 


STERNE’S  SERMONS 


Prodigal  Son  are  the  quintessence  of  absurdity.  I  question 
whether  any  of  our  learned  Commentators  ever  thought  of 
the  youths  being  cheated  by  a  Ciceroni.  The  detail  of  articles 
in  which  he  supposes  his  extravagance  to  have  existed,  the 
adapting  it  to  present  times,  wou’d  have  the  merit  of  originality, 
were  it  not  for  Mr.  Montagu’s  friend’s  sermon,  on,  Remember 
Lots  wife.  He  has  the  most  cavalier  way  of  treating  the 
Patriarchs  that  ever  I  met  with,  and  his  discovery  that  Solomon 
was  guilty  of  the  same  foolish  greediness  with  children  when 
Nurses  tell  them  of  the  unconscionable  bigness  of  their  eye, 
in  no  very  delicate  phrase,  is  curious.  A  mightier  man  than 
Sterne  might  indeed  have  the  same  sense  of  that  wise  mans 
folly  in  the  article  of  women. 

Nothing  that  I  have  come  across  in  these  letters 
carries  the  story  further.  Lydia’s  only  son  died 
September  19,  1783,  at  the  Benedictine  School  at 
Soreze  ;  and  his  mother  is  believed  to  have  pre¬ 
deceased  him  ;  but  I  have  not  found  reference  to 
either  of  these  events.  Of  the  return  to  England  of 
Sterne’s  Eliza  some  notice  will  be  found  in  the  year 
1777. 


1769 


THE  SHAKESPEARE  ESSAY - THE  JUNIUS  LETTERS 


Miss  Chudleigh.  The  Shakespeare  Essay.  Bulstrode.  The  Americans. 
James  Otis.  The  Duke  of  Grafton’s  marriage.  Reception  of  the 
Essay.  The  Stratford  Jubilee.  Voltaire’s  annoyance.  General  Paoli. 
The  Yorkshire  Petition.  The  East  India  Company.  Emin’s  Journal. 
The  Junius  Letters.  The  Lord  Mayor’s  Banquet.  Lord  Northington. 


The  early  letters  of  1769  contain  further  references 
to  the  divorce  and  marriage  of  Elizabeth  Chudleigh, 
which  was  naturally  a  leading  topic  of  conversation. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  opinion  of  this  notable  lady  had 
already  been  forcibly  expressed  on  more  than  one 
occasion,  but  the  brazen  effrontery  of  this  public 
wedding  reduced  her  to  a  paralysis  of  mere  sarcasm. 

In  a  letter  to  Mr.  Smelt  of  Feb.  27  she  says,  “  Miss 
Chudleigh’s  nuptial  robes  are  making.  She  is  to  be 
married  in  a  gown  of  white  satin  embroidered  with 
pearls,  emblem  of  innocence  and  very  suitable.”  She 
was  married  to  the  Duke  of  Kingston  on  March  8, 
“  with  all  the  affected  pretences  to  virgin  modesty,” 
says  Walpole.  But  though  she  was  presented  at  Court 
as  Duchess  of  Kingston,  and  though  their  Majesties 
and  the  whole  Court  wore  her  wedding  favours  and 
even  Lord  Bristol  donned  one,  while  telling  everybody 
that  the  lady  had  herself  informed  him  she  was  his 
brother’s  wife,  the  ladies  of  London,  who  had  flocked 
to  her  balls  and  entertainments  while  she  was  the 
Duke’s  kept  mistress,  were  now  decently  constrained 
to  abandon  and  denounce  her. 


215 


21  6 


“THE  VIRGIN  CHUDLEIGH ” 


1769 


Much  has  been  written — including  two  stout  and 
entertaining  volumes  by  Mr.  Charles  Pearce — on  the 
extraordinary  career  of  Elizabeth  Chudleigh,  the 
“  Amazing  Duchess  ”  ;  and  eighteenth-century  memoirs 
are  fruitful  in  reference  to  one  or  other  of  her  remark¬ 
able  exploits.  She  has  been  trounced  with  all  the 
epithets  of  abuse,  pilloried  in  a  volume  of  “  Bad 
Women,”  and  bespattered  with  such  a  mud  bath  of 
vituperation  as  has  tempted  one  student  at  least  to  a 
recalcitrant  desire  to  attempt  a  coat  of  whitewash  for  a 
character  that  was  at  least  possessed  of  a  good  deal  of 
ability  and  of  humour. 

It  is  just  possible  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s  references 
to  “  the  virgin  Chudleigh  ”  were  acidulated  by  the 
knowledge  that  it  was  the  Earl  of  Bath — something 
of  an  amateur  of  pretty  women — who  first  discovered 
this  too  attractive  girl,  whom  he  met  by  chance  when 
out  shooting,  and  whose  mind  he  is  said  to  have  made 
diligent  personal  efforts  to  improve  by  a  suitable 
course  of  study.  This  charming  occupation  had  been 
interrupted  by  the  young  Duke  of  Hamilton’s  falling 
in  love  with  her  in  1743,  but  when  he  was  torn  from 
her  to  go  on  the  inevitable  grand  tour,  her  amiable 
duenna  saw  fit  to  intercept  all  his  love-letters  ;  and 
the  piqued  Elizabeth  dashed  into  a  secret  marriage 
with  young  Lieutenant  Hervey,  grandson  of  the  first 
Earl  of  Bristol.  Hervey  too  had  to  rejoin  his  ship 
and  sail  away  to  the  West  Indies,  but  he  returned  to 
England  and  Elizabeth  in  October  1746,  and  in  the 
following  summer,  during  a  retreat  to  Chelsea  (where 
Elizabeth’s  father  had  been  Lieutenant-Governor  of 
the  Royal  Hospital,  and  her  childhood  had  been  spent), 
a  child  was  born,  was  baptized  at  the  Old  Church, 
died,  and  was  buried  there. 

Hervey  being  heir  to  an  Earldom,  Elizabeth 
thought  it  prudent  to  make  a  secret  visit  to  Lainston 
in  Hampshire  and  to  establish  the  fact  of  her  quiet 
wedding,  which  had  not,  it  appears,  been  registered. 


1769 


DUCHESS  OF  KINGSTON 


217 


But  higher  game  was  in  sight,  and  after  carrying  on  a 
fine  flirtation  with  no  less  a  personage  than  George  II., 
she  became  mistress  en  titre  to  Evelyn  Pierrepont, 
second  Duke  of  Kingston,  in  which  position  “  Madame 
Chudleigh  ”  toured  the  continent.  But  when  Hervey 
— himself  having  other  matrimonial  aspirations — 
proposed  a  divorce,  his  Elizabeth  objected  strongly 
to  so  scandalous  a  suggestion,  denied  the  marriage  on 
oath,  and  preferred  a  suit  of  jactitation,  in  which  her 
husband — who  could  command  a  squadron,  but  was 
hardly  up  to  manoeuvring  a  Chudleigh — connived,  at 
a  price  ;  and  the  gallant  Elizabeth,  thus  legally 
established  as  a  spinster,  triumphantly  married  her 
Duke  of  Kingston  this  spring.  The  Duke  died  four 
years  later,  and  left  her  heiress  to  his  property,  but  his 
nephew,  who  had  got  wind  of  the  Lainston  ceremony, 
took  measures  to  prosecute  her  for  bigamy,  and  on  her 
return  to  England  in  July  1774  she  very  narrowly 
escaped  arrest.  Some  allusion  to  the  impending  trial 
will  be  found  in  the  last  letters  of  1775.  It  took 
place  April  15-22,  1776,  and  resulted  in  her  convic¬ 
tion,  upon  which  she  pleaded  privilege  as  a  peeress, 
which  was  allowed,  since  if  she  was  not  Duchess 
of  Kingston  she  was  Countess  of  Bristol,  Hervey 
having  succeeded  to  that  title  in  the  previous  year. 
Two  days  later  she  slipped  away  to  Calais,  escaping  by 
a  few  hours  the  writ  ne  exeat  regno  which  was  issued 
the  very  night  she  crossed.  Mrs.  Montagu  on  her 
way  to  Paris  two  months  later  passed  Her  Grace  at 
Calais  “  where  she  has  assemblies  twice  a  week  :  I 
call  her  Duchess  of  Kingston  but  she  gives  the  Harvey 
liveries  and  arranged  them  in  a  balcony  to  regale  Lord 
Bristol  as  he  passed  by.”  We  must  not  be  tempted 
to  go  further  in  the  extraordinary  story  of  this  remark¬ 
able  lady,  who  after  visiting  the  Czarina,  Rome,  and 
other  capitals,  died  at  Paris  in  1788. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius 
of  Shakespeare  was  published  anonymously  in  April  of 


218 


THE  SHAKESPEARE  ESSAY 


1769 


this  year,  and  is  naturally  the  subject  of  much  of  its 
correspondence.  It  is  a  little  difficult  in  these  days, 
when  women  writers  are  probably  in  the  majority,  to 
realise  the  strength  and  extent  of  the  prejudice  of  a 
hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  against  feminine  author¬ 
ship,  when  it  ventured,  tremulous  and  anonymous, 
into  print.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  established  social  posi¬ 
tion  no  doubt  helped  her  to  some  assurance,  but  it  is 
evident  from  her  letters  of  this  period,  and  notably 
from  the  carefully  reasoned  apologia  which  she  wrote 
to  her  father  when  the  work  was  published,  that 
she  felt  it  necessary  to  vindicate,  if  not  to  excuse, 
so  unfashionable  an  intrusion  into  the  world  of 
literature. 

Some  further  reference  to  the  evolution  and  recep¬ 
tion  of  the  Essay  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  her 
associations  with  Dr.  Johnson,  whose  own  Shakespeare 
Preface  appeared,  to  her  discomfiture,  just  when  she 
was  in  the  thick  of  her  Essay  work. 

The  mere  male,  incompetently  handling  a  lady’s 
memoir,  is  apt  to  underrate  the  importance  of  clothes  ; 
and  I  fear  that  almost  all  the  allusions  under  this  head 
have  hitherto  gone  by  the  board  : 

To  her  Sister 

I  was  at  the  Birthday  but  not  gorgeously  dress’d.  A  corded 
blue  tabby  handsomely  trimmed  with  Ermine,  which  with 
fine  lace  and  jewels  makes  a  respectable  figure,  and  as  I  had  the 
Ermine,  cost  me  little.  The  Town  is  much  fuller  than  I 
ever  knew.  I  did  not  get  from  St.  James’s  on  the  birthday 
till  J  after  six,  and  then  left  Servants  and  chaise  behind  me  for 
I  cd  not  get  them  so  soon.  Lady  Juliana  Penn  carried  me 
through  the  Royal  nursery  to  her  coach  and  brought  me  home. 
I  believe  an  100  Ladies  chairs  were  waiting  when  I  came 
away,  their  disconsolate  Mistresses  sitting  in  the  rooms  or 
standing  on  the  staircase.  Mr.  Montagu  waited  dinner  for 
me.  Lady  Bute  and  her  daughters  were  forced  to  dine  on 
bread  and  butter  at  Mrs.  Dashwoods  apartment,  the  poor  girls 
both  fainted  at  the  ball  at  night. 


1769  DASH,  PEN,  AND  FIDGET  219 

A  rather  sharp  attack  of  fever  kept  Mrs.  Montagu 
a  prisoner  at  Sandleford  through  May,  but  in  June 
she  had  sufficiently  recovered  to  make  a  little  tour  in 
Kent  for  change  of  air,  visiting  her  brother  Charles, 
the  Recorder  of  Canterbury,  and  her  clerical  brother 
William  at  Denton  Hall,  whence  she  proceeded  to  her 
eldest  brother  Matthew’s  home  (once  her  own)  at 
Horton,  and  finally  to  Mrs.  Carter  at  Deal  ;  after 
which  she  returned  to  take  the  waters  at  Sunning 
Wells,  near  Bagshot.  Meanwhile  the  Essay  was 
selling  well,  and  received  friendly  treatment  from  the 
reviewers,  with  the  qualified  exception  of  the  Monthly 
Review.  Its  authorship  was  already  beginning  to  get 
whispered  about  town,  and  as  the  work  of  a  woman 
she  hardly  expected  a  candid  reception. 

On  getting  back  to  Sandleford  in  the  autumn,  she 
writes  to  Mrs.  Vesey  : 

A  few  days  before  I  came  hither  I  galloped  over  to  Bullstrode 
to  breakfast  with  the  Duchess  of  Portland.  I  found  her 
tolerably  well  but  a  little  rheumatic,  Mrs.  Delany  with  her 
in  good  health  and  spirits.  Mrs.1  Dashwood  came  during 
the  short  time  I  staid,  so  if  we  had  had  the  same  faces  every¬ 
thing  would  have  had  the  same  face  it  had  30  years  ago.  .  .  . 
I  saw  our  friend  Burke  about  a  month  ago  when  I  was  in 
town  for  a  day  or  two.  He  was  going  to  Lord  Rockingham’s 
to  encourage  I  presume  the  Yorkshire  petition.  He  was 
vastly  agreable  and  cheerful  and  I  hope  is  not  such  a  loser  by 
India  Stock  as  is  supposed.  I  hate  to  think  that  such  a  brute 
and  barbarian  as  Hyder  Ally  should  demolish  the  fortune  of 
the  finest  and  most  accomplished  man  in  polite  Europe. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Feb. 

The  Kings  speech  seems  to  indicate  apprehensions  of  a 
War,  England  involved  deeply  in  debt,  and  France  under  the 
affliction  of  a  famine,  shd  not  be  in  such  wanton  pride  as 

1  Mrs.  Dashwood  was  Kitty,  the  poet  Hammond’s  “  Delia,”  for  love 
of  whom  he  is  said  to  have  died.  She  was  the  “  Dash  ”  of  the  early  days 
of  our  “  Fidget’s  ”  girlhood  at  Bulstrode,  when  Mrs.  Delany  was  “  Pen.” 


220 


WILKES  EXPELLED 


1769 


rashly  to  enter  into  hostilities.  The  Bostonians  have  sub¬ 
mitted  and  Master  Otis  and  some  other  firebrands  are  to  be 
sent  over  here  to  warm  the  Kings  bench  I  suppose.  I  never 
believed  that  any  of  our  Colonies  wd  resist  if  we  insisted  on 
our  points.  Men  who  fight  for  their  Churches  and  Chimneys 
fight  well,  but  seditious  men  who  fight  merely  for  their  money 
bags  are  mere  vapouring  Poltrons.  The  Americans  have 
destroyed  all  the  French  Troops  or  taken  them  Prisoners. 
Virtue,  poverty,  woods  and  mountains  make  a  noble  defence. 
On  monday,  the  great  Wilkes  affair  is  to  come  on,  what  issue 
it  will  have  I  know  not. 

James  Otis,  the  popular  lawyer  and  the  leading 
opponent  of  Hutchinson,  Governor  of  Massachusetts, 
was  not  sent  over  to  England,  but  he  was  savagely 
beaten  in  the  British  Coffee  House  at  Boston  by 
customs  and  army  officers  whom  he  had  attacked  in 
the  Boston  Gazette.  Wilkes  was  summoned  from  his 
prison  to  the  bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  on 
February  3  to  answer  for  his  letter  to  The  St.  James 
Chronicle  and  for  Number  45,  and,  though  championed 
by  Beckford  and  defended  by  Burke,  was  formally 
expelled — and  re-elected  for  Middlesex  within  a  fort¬ 
night. 

Mrs.  Montagu  writes  in  somewhat  sarcastic  humour 
to  Leonard  Smelt  on  March  26  : 

You  must  admire  the  Wisdom  the  decency  and  sobriety 
of  this  age  when  an  Outlaw,  a  Beggar,  a  Blasphemer,  had 
several  hundred  votes  among  the  Livery  men  of  the  greatest 
and  most  opulent  City  in  Europe  ;  he  is  now  a  Candidate  for 
Middlesex,  that  the  Echo  like  a  silly  Nymph  who  speaks 
without  thinking  may  join  together  Wilkes  and  Liberty.  It 
makes  a  great  noise  in  Town  that  the  Door  Keeper  of  the 
House  of  Lords  in  Ireland  has  confessed  to  the  Parliamt  there 
that  of  his  salary  and  fees  amounting  to  near  £1200  Pr  ann: 
he  received  only  one  hundred,  the  rest  he  gave  to  Ld  B — p 
eldest  son  to  Ld  H — d.  Their  Lordships  don’t  disown  the 
fact,  but  say  they  gave  the  money  to  the  money  of  the  Widows 
and  Children  of  poor  Officers.  One  must  be  edified  by  the 
pious  and  charitable  zeal  of  a  young  man  who  takes  a  low  man 
for  an  office,  then  leaves  him  just  enough  for  a  subsistence 


1769  THE  DUKE  OF  GRAFTON’S  BRIDE  221 


but  without  any  temptations  to  be  luxurious  and  extravagant, 
and  bestows  the  rest  of  the  salary  on  the  Widow  and  the  Orphan. 
The  Irish  are  a  blundering  people,  and  understood  what  one 
may  call  the  finesse  of  charity  so  little  they  were  near  expelling 
the  charitable  youth  out  of  the  H:  of  Commons,  and  had  done 
it  if  power  had  not  interposed.  There  is  so  little  of  the  refine¬ 
ment  of  charity  in  this  Country  that  we  dont  enter  at  all  into 
the  spirit  of  this  affair.  Diverse  other  meritorious  acts  of  this 
Family  are  now  beginning  to  appear.  Places  sold,  perquisites 
shared,  every  kind  of  trick  that  change  alley  could  teach. 

Wilkes  having  been  again  expelled,  and  again  re¬ 
elected  and  his  seat  declared  void,  was  now  standing, 
for  the  fourth  time,  against  Colonel  Luttrell,  the 
gallant  nominee  of  the  Ministry. 

The  following  from  Lord  Lyttelton,  dated  Hill 
Street,  Sunday,  noon,  is  presumably  of  this  June  : 

As  you  exprest  in  your  last  an  Appetite  for  News,  I  write 
this  to  inform  you,  that  a  Treaty  of  Marriage  is  concluded 
between  the  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Miss  Betty  Rochley 
[Wrottesley],  the  Dutchess  of  Bedford’s  neice,  by  which  her 
Grace  will  have  the  singular  Honour  and  Pleasure  of  being 
Aunt  to  two  living  Wives  of  one  and  the  same  living  Duke, 
namely  this  lady,  his  intended  Consort,  and  the  Countess  of 
Ossory,  his  late  Dutchess.  His  Grace  therefore  may  make 
merry  in  the  jovial  parties  at  Woburn  with  both  these  fair 
lasses  :  but  we  profound  Politicians  consider  this  Alliance  as 
a  cement  to  confirm  the  ministerial  confederacy  between  him 
and  the  Bedfords,  which  the  Union  between  the  Rockinghams 
and  the  Grenvilles  has  obliged  them  to  strengthen  for  their 
mutual  defence.  As  his  Grace  will  thus  become  (to  use  a 
popular  phrase)  one  of  the  Bloomsbury  Gang,  the  divisions  in 
the  Cabinet  will  henceforth  cease,  and  no  Attack  from  Ld 
Chatham  will  bring  him  to  capitulate,  nor  any  from  G  Grenville 
shake  the  constancy  of  his  near  and  dear  Allies.  The  Pledge 
of  this  Family-Compact  is  not  handsome,  but  they  say  she  has 
sense  ;  and,  as  her  Aunt  will  instruct  her  in  the  Art  of  govern¬ 
ing  a  Husband,  as  well  as  of  getting  one,  this  Match  will  in 
effect  putt  the  Bedfords  in  possession  of  the  whole  power  of 
the  state.  But  the  Girl  has  no  fortune — True,  Madam,  she 
has  not,  and  That,  to  be  sure,  is  a  fault  ;  yet  the  Treasury 
will  make  up  this  Defect  to  his  Grace,  and  his  continuance 


222  AUGUSTUS  HENRY  FITZROY  1769 


there  will  be  guaranteed  to  him  by  his  new  Relations,  if  Ld 
Bute,  who  I  hear  is  speedily  to  return,  can  be  brought  to 
accede  to  the  Treaty.  His  dispositions  are  said  to  be  un¬ 
favourable  to  it  ;  but  our  Coalition  dinner  may  drive  him 
that  way  against  his  own  inclinations.  Whether  Ld  Chatham 
will  ask  an  Audience  of  the  King  in  the  course  of  this  summer 
(supposing  he  is  able  to  come  to  Court)  is  not  at  present  deter¬ 
mined  ;  nor  what  part  he  would  wish  My  Lord  Chancellor 
to  take,  nor  how  far  his  Wishes  will  be  regarded. 

Augustus  Henry  Fitzroy,  third  Duke  of  Grafton — 
great-grandson  of  Charles  II.  and  the  Duchess  of 
Cleveland, — was  said  to  have  combined  the  character¬ 
istics  of  the  two  Charles  Stuarts,  sullen  and  severe 
without  religion,  and  profligate  without  gaiety  ;  and 
historians  have  been  inclined  to  award  him  “  a  primacy 
of  dishonour  and  a  palm  of  infamy  ”  in  an  age  by  no 
means  scanty  in  competitors.  His  first  wife,  whom 
he  left  for  Nancy  Parsons,  “  everybody’s  Mrs. 
Horton,”  married  John,  second  Earl  of  Upper 
Ossory  ;  his  second  was  a  daughter  of  Sir  Richard 
Wrottesley,  Dean  of  Worcester,  her  mother  being 
Lady  Mary  Leveson  Gower,  daughter  of  the  first  Earl 
Gower  and  sister  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford’s  second 
wife.  Amongst  the  ladies  who  were  played  as  pawns 
in  the  barter  of  political  chess  in  these  days  the  lot  of 
the  Dean’s  daughter  was  perhaps  as  unenviable  as  any, 
for  Grafton’s  infidelities  were  not  confined  to  politics  ; 
and  Walpole,  who  said  his  Lordship’s  view  was  that 

“  the  world  should  be  postponed  to  a  w - e  or  a 

horse-race,”  added  later  that  after  being  “  a  Prime 
Minister,  a  jockey,  a  missionary,  he  is  hedging  ofF  on 
religion  ”  ;  in  1788  he  wrote  The  Serious  Reflections  of 
a  Rational  Christian. 

One  thin  volume  must  now  be  glanced  at  :  the 
editor’s  copy  of  “An  Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius 
of  Shakespeare ,  compared  with  the  Greek  and  French 
Dramatic  Poets.  With  some  remarks  upon  the  mis¬ 
representations  of  Mons.  de  Voltaire.  The  sixth 


i769  MRS.  MONTAGU’S  “DIALOGUES”  223 

edition  corrected.  To  which  are  added,  three  Dialogues 
of  the  Dead.  By  Mrs.  Montagu.  1810.” 

This  comprises  all  that  Mrs.  Montagu  gave  to  the 
public,  and  in  these  prolific  days  it  appears  a  meagre 
contribution  from  Johnson’s  “  Queen  of  the  Blues,” 
and  a  woman  who  was  for  sixty  years  immersed  in 
literature  and  the  converse  of  the  learned.  The  three 
Dialogues  were  contributed  anonymously  “  by  another 
hand  ”  to  Lord  Lyttelton’s  volume  published  in 
1760,  and  the  Modern  Fine  Lady’s  exposition  to  Mr. 
Mercury  on  Bon  Ton  stirred  a  small  flutter  of  resent¬ 
ment  amongst  the  Mrs.  Modishes  of  the  day.  Here 
is  a  sample  of  its  quality  : 

Mrs.  M.  Oh,  Sir,  excuse  me  ;  it  is  one  of  the  privileges  of 
the  bon  ton  never  to  define  or  be  defined.  It  is  the  child  and 
parent  of  jargon.  It  is — I  can  never  tell  you  what  it  is  : 
but  I  will  try  to  tell  you  what  it  is  not.  In  conversation, 
it  is  not  wit,  in  manners  it  is  not  politeness  ;  in  behaviour 
it  is  not  address  :  but  it  is  a  little  like  them  all.  It  can  only 
belong  to  people  of  a  certain  rank,  who  live  in  a  certain  manner, 
with  certain  persons,  who  have  not  certain  virtues,  and  who 
have  certain  vices,  and  who  inhabit  a  certain  part  of  the  town. 
Like  a  place  by  courtesy,  it  gets  a  higher  rank  than  the  person 
can  claim  ;  but  those  who  have  a  legal  title  to  precedency  dare 
not  dispute  for  fear  of  being  thought  not  to  understand  the 
rules  of  politeness.  Now,  Sir,  I  have  told  you  as  much  as 
I  know  of  it  though  I  have  admired  and  aimed  at  it  all  my  life. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  whose  devotion  to,  and  admiration 
from,  Lord  Lyttelton  were  well  known,  enjoyed  for  a 
short  time  the  fun  of  parrying  enquiries  as  to  the 
authorship  of  the  Dialogues ,  but  was  soon  obliged  to 
admit  the  soft  impeachment. 

The  Essay  on  Shakespeare  was  written,  or  at  least 
begun,  as  we  have  seen,  in  1765,  and  published — also 
anonymously — in  1769.  It  is  really  a  series  of  papers 
on  Dramatic  Poetry,  the  Historical  Drama  and  the 
Preternatural  Beings  of  Shakespeare,  with  particular 
analyses  of  Henry  IV.,  Macbeth,  Julius  Caesar,  and 
the  Cinna  of  Corneille.  Reference  will  be  found  to 


224  GARRICK  AND  REYNOLDS  1769 

it  in  the  chapter  on  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Montagu, 
and  it  will  be  referred  to  again  in  connection  with  her 
visit  to  Paris.  The  Essay  was  received  with  much 
commendation,  both  from  friends  in  the  secret  of  its 
authorship  and  from  the  reviewers. 

Writing  to  her  husband  from  Hill  Street  in 
September  1769,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  : 

Mr.  Burke  calld  on  me  this  morning  ;  he  seems  in  health 
and  good  spirits.  He  tells  me  my  book  is  very  successfull. 
Reynolds  the  famous  Painter  laid  5  guineas  it  was  written  by 
Mr.  Warton  who  wrote  the  Essay  on  the  Genius  and  writings 
of  Pope,  but  said  at  the  same  time  the  essay  on  Shakespear  was 
written  with  more  imagination  and  fire.  Reynolds  has  paid 
him  his  five  guineas,  so  dangerous  it  is  to  guess  at  Authors 
when  they  dont  put  their  names  to  their  works. 

To  Lord  Lyttelton  she  writes  in  October  concern¬ 
ing  Garrick’s  Ode  to  Shakespeare ,  which  he  recited  at 
Stratford-on-Avon  at  the  close  of  the  Jubilee  celebra¬ 
tions  in  the  previous  month  : 

What  gave  occasion  to  what  your  Lordship  heard  must  be 
this  ;  in  the  prose  Oration  spoken,  not  printed,  by  him,  he 
said  many  things  in  praise  of  Shakespear  which  he  borrow’d 
partly  from  the  writers  on  that  great  Genius,  and  perhaps  he 
might  there  say  he  had  been  assisted.  I  was  told  the  other 
day  I  had  assisted  Mr.  Garrick  in  his  Ode.  He  has  made  the 
Author  of  the  Essay  a  very  handsome  compliment  in  his 
preface  to  his  Ode,  in  these  words.  “  As  some  news-paper 
writers  have  illiberally  endeavoured  to  shake  the  poetick 
character  of  our  immortal  Bard,  it  is  recommended  to  those 
who  are  not  sufficiently  established  in  their  dramatick  faith, 
to  peruse  a  work  lately  publish’d  call’d  an  Essay  on  the  writings, 
etc.,  by  which  they  will  with  much  satisfaction  be  convinced 
that  England  may  justly  boast  the  honour  of  producing  the 
greatest  dramatick  poet  in  the  World.”  As  Mr.  Garrick 
must  probably  suspect  who  is  the  Author  of  this  Essay,  it  was 
very  handsome  in  him,  as  we  have  not  been  always  the  best 
friends. 

Malone  acknowledged  himself  an  admirer  of  the 
Essay  : 


1769 


VOLTAIRE’S  “  FUMIER  ” 


225 


It  is  clearly  and  elegantly  expressed  and  has  done  effectually 
what  it  professed  to  do,  namely  vindicated  Shakespeare  from 
the  misrepresentation  of  Voltaire  ;  and  considering  how  many 
young  people  were  misled  by  his  witty  though  false  observations, 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  essay  was  of  service  to  Shakespeare  with  a 
certain  class  of  readers  and  is  therefore  entitled  to  praise. 
Johnson,  I  am  sure,  allowed  the  merit  I  have  stated. 

But  to  the  Doctor,  of  course,  disgruntled  over  the 
reception  of  his  own  belated  Shakespeare  editing,  it 
was  a  very  unnecessary  labour  :  “  you  may  as  well 
praise  a  schoolmaster  for  whipping  a  boy  who  has 
construed  ill,”  he  grumbled  ;  yet  though  it  reads 
to-day  rather  like  a  sermon  to  the  converted,  many 
who  accept  Shakespearian  supremacy  with  a  glib  nem. 
con.  might  still  find  some  fresh  thoughts  and  sound 
criticism  in  its  pages. 

Several  extracts  from  letters  explaining  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  views  in  writing  her  Essay  will  be  found 
in  the  chapter  on  her  associations  with  Dr.  Johnson. 

Voltaire  had  written :  “  C’est  moi  qui  autrefois 
parlai  le  premier  de  ce  Shakespeare.  C’est  moi  qui 
le  premier  montrai  aux  Franpais  quelques  perles  que 
j’avais  trouvais  dans  son  fumier  enorme.”  To  which 
Mrs.  Montagu  is  reputed  to  have  replied  :  “  C’est  un 
fumier  qui  a  fertilise  une  Terre  bien  ingrate  !  ” 

On  September  7  her  husband  wrote  congratulating 
her  on  the  good  reception  the  book  met  with,  though 
no  other  than  he  expected  ;  and  adds  that  it  could  not 
have  been  published  at  a  more  fortunate  time  than 
before  the  Jubilee.  To  her  father,  who  was  im¬ 
mensely  delighted  with  this  “  grandchild,”  she  wrote  a 
long  apologia  explaining  her  reasons  for  anonymous 
publication  : 

Mr.  Pope  our  great  Poet,  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester  our 
great  critick  and  Dr.  Johnson  our  great  Scholar  having  already 
given  their  criticisms  on  Shakespeare,  there  was  a  degree  of 
presumption  in  pretending  to  meddle  with  a  subject  they  had 
already  treated  ;  sure  to  incur  their  envy  if  I  succeeded 

VOL.  1  Q 


226  THE  ANONYMOUS  ESSAYIST 


1769 


tolerably  well,  their  contempt  if  I  did  not.  Then  for  a  weak 
and  unknown  champion  to  throw  down  the  gauntlet  of  defiance 
in  the  very  teeth  of  Voltaire  appeared  too  daring.  .  .  .  The 
booksellers,  who  hate  an  author  should  print  for  himself, 
would  hardly  advertise  my  book.  ...  It  was  with  great 
difficulty  I  got  it  advertised  the  day  before  it  was  published, 
and  in  spite  of  all  my  pains  it  hardly  appeared  in  the  papers 
till  the  week  after  the  King’s  birthday,  when  the  town  was 
empty,  so  that  all  these  disadvantages  considered  I  could  not 
flatter  myself  this  little  work  would  succeed  so  well  as  it  has 
done.  .  .  . 

Great  curiosity  was  evinced  as  to  the  authorship, 
but  the  secret  was  the  sooner  guessed,  as  the  printers 
had  divulged  that  Mr.  Stillingfleet  had  corrected  the 
proofs,  and  he  was  known  as  one  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
intimate  friends.  Thomas  Warton,  the  historian  of 
poetry  and  brother  of  Joseph  (whom  Reynolds  had 
guessed  as  the  author  of  the  Essay),  wrote  gallantly  of 
it  as  “  the  most  elegant  and  judicious  piece  of  criticism 
this  age  has  produced.” 

William  Emerson,  the  mathematician  of  Hur- 
worth,  who  was  a  great  friend  of  Mr.  Montagu’s,  but 
who  had  no  knowledge  of  the  authorship  of  the  Essay, 
wrote  to  him  after  having  read  it : 

The  author  of  the  Essay,  whoever  he  is,  has  certainly  set 
the  nature  and  use  of  dramatic  poetry  in  a  clear  light,  where 
he  tells  us,  that  it  depends  upon  such  a  just  imitation  of  any 
action  that  its  effect  on  the  Spectator  ought  to  excite  the  same 
passions  in  the  mind,  as  if  the  thing  represented  was  real. 
He  has  delivered  his  sentiments  with  great  strength  of  reasoning. 

.  .  But  what  I  am  most  pleased  with  is  what  he  delivers  in 
the  last  two  parts  where  he  exposes  the  ignorance  of  Voltaire 
for  presuming  to  criticize  on  the  language  of  our  English  poet 
when  he  understands  not  the  language  he  criticizes.  Here 
he  has  confuted  Voltaire  beyond  any  possibility  of  reply.  I 
believe  most  frenchmen  are  touched  with  this  sort  of  vanity 
and  Ambition.  Of  this  stamp  I  take  it  was  Mons.  Boileau 
in  the  last  century,  who  was  finely  ridiculed  by  the  inimitable 
Mr.  Prior. 

“  Hermes  ”  Harris,  enlightened  by  Lord  Lyttelton, 


1769  THE  SHAKESPEARE  JUBILEE  227 

wrote  in  high  praise,  and  owned  to  his  shame  that  in 
guessing  at  its  authorship  he  had  thought  on  none  but 
men.  Mrs.  Carter  is  informed  in  July  : 

It  has  yet  been  noticed  only  by  the  Critical  Memoirs  of 
the  times  and  the  Critical  Review,  and  both  have  spoken 
highly  of  it,  but  especially  the  latter.  I  beg  of  you  to  get 
the  Review  from  some  of  your  half  learned  acquaintance  if 
you  have  any  at  Deal  who  hold  the  Eel  of  Science  by  the  tail. 

Whilst  a  later  letter  to  her  sister  reports  : 

I  was  yesterday  at  a  gala  at  Mr.  Wilmot’s  on  account  of 
his  birthday.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Garrick  were  of  the  party. 
Mr.  Garrick  tells  me  Voltaire  is  most  prodigiously  out  of 
humour  with  the  Essay  and  has  ordered  that  no  English  person 
shall  ever  again  enter  his  doors  ;  he  says  he  is  used  very  ill  by 
the  author  of  the  Essay.  I  protest  I  think  I  used  him  very 
politely.  .  .  . 

Altogether  Mrs.  Montagu  had  every  reason  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  reception  of  her  one  and  only  literary 
adventure,  which  went  through  at  least  six  editions, 
and  was  translated  into  French  and  Italian. 

The  Shakespeare  Jubilee  Celebrations  organised  by 
David  Garrick  at  Stratford-on-Avon  this  summer  were 
much  quizzed  but  very  successful,  and  the  occasion 
served  for  an  advertisement  of  the  Essay,  which 
Garrick,  as  we  have  seen,  had  specially  referred  to  in 
his  preface  to  the  Jubilee  Ode.  The  performance  was 
transferred  to  Drury  Lane  Theatre  in  the  autumn, 
where  it  was  acted  no  less  than  a  hundred  times  ;  and 
Mrs.  Montagu  describes  it  as  “  the  prettiest  spectacle 
that  ever  was  seen.” 

In  December  she  met,  at  Court,  General  Paoli,  the 
great  Corsican  patriot  who  had  been  driven  out  of  the 
Island  by  the  French  and  had  taken  refuge  in  England 
this  summer  ;  and  she  thus  describes  him  to  her 
husband  : 

I  shd  have  thought  the  time  I  was  at  Court  more  tedious 
if  I  had  not  been  near  Genl  Paoli,  with  the  ease  and  frankness 


228 


PASCAL  PAOLI 


1769 


of  whose  manner  I  was  much  pleased  ;  nothing  so  much 
adorns  a  distinguished  character  as  a  noble  simplicity.  The 
General  is  about  your  size  and  stature,  of  a  very  fair  com¬ 
plexion,  and  when  silent  not  of  a  distinguishing  aspect,  but 
when  animated  there  is  a  great  deal  of  spirit  and  finesse  in  his 
physiognomy.  I  should  have  taken  him  for  a  scotch  man  by  his 
complexion,  the  mould  of  his  face,  and  general  air  of  countenance. 
I  could  not  help  pittying  such  a  man  obliged  to  sollicit  a  Court 
for  assistance  to  restore  that  liberty  to  his  Country  for  which 
they  are  not  very  anxious  even  for  their  own.  It  seems  the 
French  have  basely  and  cruelly  tortured  and  then  put  to  death 
four  of  Paolis  friends  lately,  for  a  firm  defence  of  their  Country. 
It  is  terrible  to  see  such  savage  fierceness  in  a  Nation  that 
pretends  to  the  greatest  politeness  ;  what  Barbarians  were  ever 
more  cruel  than  these  french  fops  ? 

Two  or  three  political  references  of  this  autumn 
may  be  cited  : 

There  does  not  seem  any  apprehension  of  a  change  of 
Ministry.  The  D:  of  Bedford  was  worse  used  in  his  Western 
progress  than  even  the  news  represented.  At  Honiton  the 
Bull  Dogs  were  set  upon  his  horse,  and  it  is  thought  the  intention 
was  that  if  his  Horse  threw  him  the  dogs  might  finish  the 
affair  ;  this  is  very  shocking  ;  as  for  a  little  wholesome  correc¬ 
tion  such  as  he  formerly  experienced  it  was  very  well. 

Sept.  20th. 

I  hear  Sr  George  Savile  is  rather  averse  to  a  petition  from 
Yorkshire,  but  Mr.  Burkes  going  at  this  time  to  Ld  Rockingham 
looks  as  if  a  Petition  was  intended  by  his  Lordship.  Mr. 
Burkes  eloquence  will  warm  the  County.  Mr.  Calcraft  in 
the  list  of  Patriots  at  Alyesbury  makes  one  smile.  I  find  the 
Courtiers  are  alarmed  at  the  Petitions.  It  was  said  in  Town 
that  the  Russians  wd  bombard  Constantinople.  Letters  are 
lately  come  from  our  Friend  Emin  whom  we  supposed  to  be 
dead.  He  sends  a  Journal  of  what  he  has  been  doing  since  we 
heard  last,  and  in  this  journal  there  is  the  harangue  he  made 
to  his  Soldiers,  it  is  a  fine  piece  of  Savage  eloquence. 

Mr.  Montagu’s  views  are  business-like  but  pessi¬ 
mistic  ;  and  one  can  derive  a  certain  sorry  comfort 
from  the  recurring  evidence  in  these  letters  that  the 


THE  E.I.C. 


1769 


229 


country  was  going  to  the  dogs  as  surely  in  1770  as  in 
1923. 

Nov.  2 6. 

I  am  very  sorry  for  the  bad  situation  of  this  poor  Country 
both  at  home  and  abroad  particularly  that  France  is  likely  to 
attack  us  wch  they  may  do  in  America  as  well  as  in  Ireland. 
If  they  should  fall  upon  Hanover  I  would  wish  we  would 
not  think  it  our  concern.  From  what  I  have  lately  heard  I 
much  dread  a  civil  war.  Those  that  now  govern  us  are  the 
most  profligate  and  wicked  and  unfit  that  ever  were  at  the 
Helm.  They  call  their  obstinacy  spirit  and  value  themselves 
for  acting  upon  it,  but  they  would  do  well  to  consider  that  the 
Assertors  of  Liberty  may  possibly  have  as  great  and  a  truer 
spirit  than  themselves.  It  has  been  twice  in  my  news  paper 
that  peace  is  made  with  Heyder  Alley  wch  I  believe  and  hope 
is  true,  for  tho  I  believe  the  E.I.  company  has  been  guilty  of 
the  worst  of  Crimes  to  obtain  what  has  been  and  probably  one 
day  may  be  taken  from  them,  still  as  many  of  our  peoples 
fortunes  are  vested  in  that  Company  and  it  seems  almost  the 
only  trade  we  have  left  it  cannot  [but]  be  of  the  greatest  con¬ 
sequence  to  this  nation. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Hillstreet. 

I  am  glad  we  shall  soon  have  a  new  edition  of  Leonidas.  .  .  . 
The  Lacedemonian  character  was  a  character  of  Institution. 
A  Spartan  was  not  a  creature  of  Gods  but  of  Lycurgus’s  making, 
and  not  of  flesh  and  blood,  but  hard,  cold,  and  stiff.  The 
Poet  who  draws  such  a  character  from  historical  representations 
is  in  the  condition  of  a  Painter  who  draws  a  Statue  by  lamp¬ 
light,  the  lines  are  plain,  and  the  light  is  steady,  but  every 
Connoisseur  will  perceive  the  work  to  be  an  imitation  of  an 
imitation.  I  had  rather  some  man  with  much  genius  and 
little  learning  wd  make  a  Poem  of  living  Paoli  and  live  Corsicans. 
No  picture  is  worth  much  that  is  not  taken  from  the  life.  By 
the  by  I  fell  in  love  with  Genl  Paoli  the  other  day  at  Court. 
I  heard  him  talk  a  great  while  ;  there  is  an  ease  in  his  con¬ 
versation  that  charms  one.  Some  Persons  said  the  Ladies  here 
often  meddled  in  politicks  ;  with  a  smile  of  cautious  finesse 
he  answerd,  that  it  was  pour  y  mettre  de  la  douceur.  I  felt  a 
great  deal  of  pity  for  this  noble  Patriot  reduced  to  beg  an  alms 
for  Liberty  of  those  who  think  Tyranny  a  greater  Goddess. 


230 


EMIN,  PAOLI,  JUNIUS 


1769 


From  Ford  Lyttelton 

Arley,  October  10. 

I  long  for  Emin’s  Journal  which  you  mention’d  in  your 
former  Letter,  and  had  rather  read  his  Oration  than  hear 
Ld  Chatham,  tho’  all  the  thunder  of  his  Eloquence  should 
revive  with  him.  Emin’s  is  the  Voice  of  Nature  :  his  Lord¬ 
ship’s  is  Playhouse  Thunder.  I  admire  the  Vision  with  which 
the  Armenian  Orator  enforced  his  Rhetorick,  when  he  found 
it  fail.  What  a  pity  it  is  we  do  not  believe  in  Visions  here  ! 
The  long  Trance  of  our  Great  Man  would  furnish  as  many  as 
Mahomed  had  in  all  his  fitts  of  the  falling  sickness.  It  would 
make  a  compleat  Koran,  and  give  a  new  Religion  to  a  People 
that  now  has  none.  I  am  proud,  as  an  Englishman,  that 
Paoli  has  made  England  the  Place  of  his  Retreat.  If  I  was 
Ld  Mayor  of  London  he  should  have  from  the  City  as  fine 
an  Entertainment  as  the  King  of  Denmark.  Exiled  Heroes 
are  more  illustrious  Guests  than  travelling  Kings.  But  as  he 
has  not  paid  his  Homage  to  Mr.  Wilkes  in  the  Fleet  or  Mrs. 
Macaulay  in  her  Closet,  he  will  not  be  acknowledged  for  a 
Hero  in  the  City,  or  for  a  Patriot  in  the  Country.  I  think 
his  coming  to  England  and  gracious  reception  at  Court  is  a 
strong  symptom  of  an  approaching  War  with  France. 


To  her  Husband 

I  suppose  you  read  the  last  Junius,  it  is  the  most  spirited 
paper  that  ever  was  written,  tho  I  do  not  suspect  the  D:  of 
Grafton  of  very  delicate  feelings,  I  cannot  suppose  him  so 
insensible  as  not  to  tremble  at  the  Pen  of  such  a  Satirist.  Junius 
is  a  Prose  Juvenal,  his  weapons  are  sharp,  and  he  wounds  very 
deeply.  People  are  still  in  doubt  who  Junius  may  be,  many 
suspect  Wilkes  to  be  the  man  ;  he  is  certainly  a  good  writer 
who  ever  he  may  be,  and  he  has  good  information.  The 
french  Ambassador  has  come  again,  which  looks  like  Peace. 
He  was  such  a  Coxcomb  as  to  let  his  Servant  fire  off  some 
little  Cannon  at  his  arrival  in  Town  at  12  o’clock  at  night. 
As  this  compt  has  not  been  paid  to  any  but  Royal  Persons  it 
has  given  disgust,  and  indeed  it  must  be  said  to  be  prodigiously 
impertinent. 


JOSEPH  EMIN  THE  ARMENIAN 
By  Benjamin  Wilson 


1769  THE  CORSICAN  PATRIOT  231 

To  her  Husband 

London,  Thursday  the  gth  (Nov.). 

I  was  at  Shelburne  House  last  night  ;  they  invited  me  to 
go  to  the  Ld  Mayors  dinner  with  them  to  day  and  I  told  them 
I  wd  but  as  I  have  not  been  quite  well  since  the  little  attack 
of  my  disorder  at  Sandleford  and  the  weather  is  bad  I  thought 
I  might  render  myself  unable  to  attend  business  and  Mr.  Black, 
so  I  excused  myself ;  otherwise  I  shd  have  liked  the  shew,  and 
Mr.  Beckford  wd  not  have  been  displeased  to  have  seen  Mr. 
Montagus  Wife  at  his  Entertainment.  The  great  Paoli  I  was 
told  this  morning  is  to  be  there,  and  I  shd  have  been  glad  of 
such  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with  him.  Lady  Shelburne 
will  certainly  be  introduced  to  him  and  being  with  her  I  shd 
have  had  the  same  privilege.  I  honour  Paoli  for  in  him  there 
is  real  Patriotism  and  true  and  genuine  love  of  liberty,  pure 
as  it  burnt  in  the  breasts  of  Ancient  Patriots,  whose  names 
will  ever  be  dear  to  all  who  love  laws,  justice,  order,  truth, 
honesty.  .  .  . 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  by  no  means  alone  in  keen 
admiration  of  General  Paoli,  who  was  most  warmly 
welcomed  in  London  and  became  intimate  with  Dr. 
Johnson  and  the  Club  fraternity.  The  Doctor  dined 
frequently  with  him,  and  Boswell  has  many  records  of 
their  meetings  ;  he  was  himself  a  still  older  acquaint¬ 
ance,  having  seen  much  of  the  patriot  General  during 
his  visit  to  Corsica  in  1765,  and  staying  in  his  house 
in  London  for  a  considerable  time.  It  was  at  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  dinner-table,  after  the  fracas  over  the 
Lyttelton  Life,  and  in  the  company  of  the  tall  and 
eloquent  Corsican,  that  the  Doctor  was  made  to  realise 
the  enormity  of  his  offence.  “  He  addressed  his 
hostess  two  or  three  times  after  dinner  with  a  view  to 
engage  her  in  conversation  ;  receiving  only  cold  and 
brief  answers,  he  said  in  a  low  voice  to  General  Paoli 
who  sat  next  him,  and  who  told  me  the  story,  ‘  You 
see,  Sir,  I  am  no  longer  the  man  for  Mrs.  Montagu.’  ” 

The  1 6th  of  Nov.  1769. 

I  never  saw  the  Town  so  dull  and  dead  as  at  present,  the 
Lord  Mayors  shew  enliven’d  it  for  a  day.  I  am  now  very 


232 


LORD  NORTHINGTON 


1769 


glad  I  was  not  at  the  feast,  for  the  Mob  were  very  indecently 
familiar  with  the  Ladies  in  the  Coaches,  they  meant  good 
humour  and  jocularity  but  their  jests  were  of  the  practical 
kind  and  not  so  fit  for  Ladies  to  suffer.  As  there  was  a  deficiency 
of  good  company  the  feast,  like  that  in  the  Gospel,  was  given 
to  those  who  from  the  high  ways  and  hedges  were  compelld 
to  come  in,  and  they  behaved  like  rabble,  making  a  riot  ;  they 
broke  30  dozen  of  bottles  and  made  such  a  riot  that  the  Ball 
could  not  proceed  and  the  Ladies  were  in  hystericks.  .  .  . 

I  have  a  very  strong  suspicion  that  Col:  Barre  is  the 
author  of  the  letter  subscribed  Junius.  Ld  Camden  and  Ld 
Northington  have  fallen  out  a  little  about  a  Prebendary,  which 
Northington  says  or  rather  swears  Ld  Camden  had  promised 
to  him  for  a  friend,  and  bestowed  on  another.  Ld  Northington 
often  says  I  am  in  safe  retreat  with  a  Pension  of  £4000  pr  ann: 
while  Camden  and  Mansfield  are  struggling  with  difficulties  ; 
then  with  many  a  round  oath  he  witness’s  his  preference  of  his 
own  lot.  To  speak  in  his  own  stile  there  never  was  so  jolly 
a  dog  of  a  Chancellor. 

Robert  Henley,  Lord  Northington,  “  the  swearing 
Chancellor,”  was  son  of  Anthony  Henley  of  the  Kit- 
Cats,  and  father  of  Lady  Bridget  Lane  Fox,  the  court 
jester  whose  jokes  so  delighted  George  III. 

It  was'  Lady  Northington  who  assured  his  Majesty 
that  their  country  house  was  built  by  Indigo  Jones,  to 
which  the  King  replied  that  he  thought  so  by  the 
style.  The  Chancellor  declared  he  could  not  tell 
whether  his  wife  or  his  Majesty  was  the  greater  fool. 


1770 


A  SUMMER  WITH  MRS.  CHAPONE - LORD  NORTH’S 

MINISTRY 


Beattie’s  Essay  on  Truth.  Beckford’s  death.  Visit  to  Hagley  with  Mrs. 
Chapone.  Letter  from  young  John  Pitt.  Mr.  Jonas  Hanway. 
Second  visit  to  Scotland.  Crabs’  eyes  and  millipedes.  Mrs.  Vesey 
at  Lucan.  Letter  from  Bennet  Langton. 


Amongst  the  earliest  letters  of  this  year  are  further 
eulogistic  ones  upon  the  Shakespeare  Essay  from 
James  “  Hermes  ”  Harris  of  the  Universal  Grammar, 
Dr.  Gregory,  the  Edinburgh  philosopher,  and  Richard 
Owen  Cambridge,  the  satirist.  Of  its  French  recep¬ 
tion  we  have  already  given  a  quotation  which  at  least 
evinced  Garrick’s  capabilities  in  the  way  of  subtle 
flattery.  After  recording  a  meeting  with  him  at  a 
gala  at  Mr.  Wilmot’s  she  adds  : 

I  find  many  people  intend  to  go  out  of  Town  the  day 
Wilkes  comes  out  of  Prison,  but  I  think  their  apprehensions 
are  without  cause.  I  imagine  he  will  not  make  a  riot.  I  hear 
Mr.  Beckford  piques  himself  upon  keeping  the  City  quiet. 

A  long  letter  from  Dr.  Gregory,  written  from 
Edinburgh  in  May,  recommends  the  Essay  on  Truth 
just  published  by  his  friend,  James  Beattie.  Of 
another  intimate  friend  of  his  the  letter  adds  : 

I  detest  Mr.  Hume’s  philosophy  as  destructive  of  every 
principle  interesting  to  mankind,  tho’  in  other  respects  one 
of  the  most  authentic,  entertaining  and  instructive  Historys 
I  have  ever  read  :  but  I  love  Mr.  Hume  personally  as  a  worthy 

233 


234 


WILLIAM  BECKFORD 


1770 


agreeable  man  in  private  life.  ...  I  made  Mr.  Boswell 
happy  beyond  what  you  can  conceive  by  reading  to  him  what 
you  say  of  Paoli.  I  think  Mr.  Burke’s  pamphlet  admirably 
well  wrote  and  full  of  very  disagreeable  truths.  He  surely 
is  not  Junius,  who  by  the  way  is  a  very  spirited  tho’  not  very 
decent  writer,  with  an  uncommon  command  of  excellent 
language. 


From  Lord  Lyttelton 

Hag  ley,  June  21. 

If  you  set  out  on  Friday  you  will  be  at  Hagley  on  Sunday 
Evening,  and  find  Lady  Edgecombe  still  there  :  for  she  and 
her  Lord  don’t  propose  to  leave  it  till  Monday.  They  came 
hither  in  a  most  infernal  storm  of  wind  and  rain  ;  but  it  has 
clear’d  up  this  Morning,  and  I  hope  the  Weather  will  be  fine 
for  Them  and  You  and  Mrs.  Chapone,  to  whom  I  long  to 
shew  my  Park,  as  her  old  acquaintance  and  friend,  and  as  she 
is  one  of  the  English  Muses,  to  whose  Divinities  it  is  con¬ 
secrated.  I  wish  your  Sister  and  Mrs.  Carter  could  be  also 
of  the  Party. 

Alas  !  poor  Beckford.  I  am  sorry  for  his  death,  but  will 
leave  his  funeral  Oration  to  Mrs.  Macaulay.  His  Spirit  was 
too  good-humoured  to  make  a  Devil,  and  too  turbulent  for 
an  Angel  ;  but  will  be  a  proper  companion  for  the  Ghosts 
that  Ossian  sings  of,  who  ride  in  the  Whirlwinds  and  direct 
the  storms. 

Lord  Mayor  William  Beckford  had  not  long 
survived  the  manly  and  famous  reply  he  had  made 
to  the  King’s  curt  answer  upon  an  address  complain¬ 
ing  of  a  false  return  at  the  Middlesex  election,  a  reply 
which  is  stoutly  immortalised  on  his  monument.  The 
author  of  V athek  and  builder  of  Fonthill  was  his  son. 

Mrs.  Catharine  Macaulay,  the  “  celebrated  female 
historian,”  was  a  red  republican,  and  is  often  men¬ 
tioned  with  gentle  satire  in  these  letters. 

Towards  the  end  of  June  Mrs.  Montagu  set  out 
with  her  friend,  Mrs.  Chapone,  to  pay  a  visit  to  Hagley. 
Hester  Mulso,  who  had  recently  lost  her  husband, 
an  attorney,  was  a  great  friend  of  Richardson  the 
novelist,  and  was  herself  a  poetess  and  essayist.  They 


i77o  MASTER  JOHN  PITT  235 

stayed  a  night  at  Stratford-on-Avon  en  route ,  where 
Mrs.  Montagu  expected  a  dream  visitation  from  a 
grateful  bard,  to  whose  tomb,  however,  they  were 
unable  to  make  pilgrimage.  After  the  Hagley  visit 
the  two  ladies  continued  their  journey  northward  by 
Matlock  Vale,  Derby,  Sheffield,  and  Doncaster  to 
Denton,  where  Mr.  Montagu  shortly  afterwards 
joined  them. 

As  a  horrid  example  of  youthful  precocity,  the 
following  letter  from  Lord  John  Pitt,  Lord  Chatham’s 
eldest  son,  then  aged  fourteen,  may  be  given  here. 
His  sister,  Lady  Hester,  who  was  a  year  older,  sends 
a  letter  of  still  more  portentous  solemnity  on  the  same 
date,  and  Lord  and  Lady  Chatham  add  a  parental 
postscript,  “  with  perhaps  a  little  of  Papa’s  and  Mama’s 
partiality,”  assuring  Mrs.  Montagu  that  the  children’s 
sentiments  “  such  as  they  are,  are  entirely  the  dictates 
of  their  own  judgment.”  The  absurdly  sententious 
periods  of  the  young  lady’s  effusion  seem  hardly  to 
predicate  the  future  mother  of  the  eccentric  and 
remarkable  Lady  Hester  Stanhope,  who  was  anything 
and  everything  but  a  prig. 


From  John  Pitt 

Hayes,  July  26 th. 

Madam — I  can  not  express  how  extremely  I  feel  myself 
obliged  to  you  for  your  great  goodness  in  sending  me  a  work, 
which  cou’d  not  fail  of  being  most  interesting  to  me,  as  it 
not  only  enumerates  the  victories  gained  under  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  my  Papa,  and  paints  in  the  most  lively  colours,  the 
striking  Characters  of  our  brave  Countrymen  (whose  example, 
in  my  opinion,  every  man  must  be  most  desirous  to  follow) 
but  as  it  allows  me  room  to  flatter  myself  that  I  have  some 
share  in  your  favour  and  remembrance.  I  applaud  extremely 
the  meritorious  intent  of  the  writer,  which  I  wish  with  all  my 
heart  had  succeeded  as  I  should  see  with  the  highest  pleasure 
every  possible  relief  given  to  the  distressed  relations  and  friends 
of  those  who  lost  their  lives  in  defence  of  their  Country. 
Approving  as  highly  as  I  do  the  work  in  general,  yet  I  can  not 


236  LORD  CHATHAM’S  RECOVERY  1770 

perfectly  agree  in  the  opinion  of  our  publick  faiths  having 
been  preserved,  which,  surely,  we  did  not  by  any  means  main¬ 
tain,  when  we  abandoned  our  Ally  the  King  of  Prussia,  and 
concluded  a  Peace  without  stipulating  the  restitution  of  his 
territories.  You  may  be  assured  that  all  those  to  whom  you 
have  permitted  me  to  shew  the  work  will  keep  it  a  profound 
secret.  I  will  take  care  that  no  body  else  shall  see  it,  and  shall 
be  happy  to  be  allowed  to  return  it  to  you  in  Person  as  soon 
as  you  come  to  London.  We  are  all  very  impatient  to  have 
the  pleasure  of  hearing  that  you  had  an  agreable  journey  into 
the  North  and  that  you  arrived  at  the  end  of  it  in  perfect  health. 

I  am  with  the  highest  Respect,  Madam,  Your  most  obliged 
and  Obedient  Humble  Servant,  Pitt. 

P.S. — Papa  has  thoughts  of  setting  out  tomorrow  for 
Somersetshire,  for  a  short  time,  and  is  so  good  as  to  intend  to 
take  me  with  him. 

“  Papa  ”  had  this  year  completely  recovered  his 
powers,  had  espoused  the  cause  of  Wilkes,  protesting 
the  illegality  of  giving  Luttrell  his  seat  for  Middlesex, 
and  had  hastened  the  dissolution  of  the  Ministry  of 
Grafton,  already  severely  shaken  by  the  attacks  of 
Junius.  Lord  North  became  Prime  Minister,  but  the 
King  practically  held  the  reins  and  dictated  the  policy 
of  a  very  tactful  and  easy-going  premier  for  the  next 
twelve  years.  Chatham  henceforth  belonged  defin¬ 
itely  to  the  opposition  and  the  Rockingham  Whigs. 
“  George,”  says  the  author  of  our  Short  History  very 
severely,  “  was  in  fact  sole  minister  during  the  eight 
years  which  followed  ;  and  the  shame  of  the  darkest 
hour  of  English  history  lies  wholly  at  his  door.” 

So  Lord  Chatham  went  to  Somersetshire  and  Mrs. 
Montagu  turned  her  energies  to  Mr.  Jonas  Hanway. 

It  was  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  Mrs.  Montagu 
would  escape  the  attention  of  Mr.  Jonas  Hanway, 
traveller  and  philanthropist,  whose  essay  on  Tea  had 
awakened  that  hardened  and  shameless  tea-drinker, 
Dr.  Johnson,  to  ribald  criticism.  Johnson  unkindly 
remarked  that  Mr.  Hanway  had  acquired  some 
reputation  by  travelling  abroad,  but  lost  it  all  by 


i77°  MR.  JONAS  HANWAY  237 

travelling  at  home.  This  was  very  far  from  Mr. 
Hanway’s  own  opinion,  and  indeed  he  was  so  much 
impressed  with  the  merits  of  his  new  book  that  he 
wrote  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  enclosing  for  her  approval 
a  letter  to  a  newspaper,  singing  its  praises  with  the 
utmost  candour. 


From  Jonas  Hanway 

Victualling  Office,  July  23. 

...  At  length  you  see  me  in  the  part  of  the  rational 
Pietist,  the  faithfull  domestic,  the  Husbandman,  the  Father 
and  the  Friend  ;  and  rather  disdaining  the  Rich,  than  dispising 
the  Poor,  yet  humbled  to  the  Dust  by  both,  for  even  the  Doors 
of  the  Cottager  seem  to  be  shut  against  me.  .  .  . 

If  I  should  find  People  sober  enough  to  buy,  borrow,  or 
accept  the  Copies  of  my  Labor  yet  on  hand,  I  intend  to  try 
another  Edition  in  one  Vol  8vo.  thinking  that  by  some 
Correction  Abrigement,  or  new  Arrangement,  I  may  give  the 
Book  a  Stability  as  a  System  of  Ethicks  and  divinity  adapted 
to  the  end  of  carrying  people,  of  certain  Stations,  in  this  world, 
to  Heaven.  Upon  this  foundation  I  wish  to  know,  if  you 
recommend  anything,  for  the  Improvement  of  it  :  A  rich 
old  Merchant  of  my  Acquaintance  ask’d  me  the  other  Day, 
if  I  could  get  my  Book  made  into  a  Novel  ?  The  Proposal 
at  first  view,  struck  me  as  Strange,  and  stranger  still,  that  it 
should  come  from  a  Man ,  and  it  was  yet  more  wonderful 
such  a  Thought  should  enter  the  heart  of  an  Old  Sensible 
Man,  and  a  solid  Merchant,  and  yet  it  was  founded  in  Reason 
and  sad  Experience 

This  was  a  little  too  much  even  for  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
kindly  ideas  of  log-rolling  proprieties,  and  she  writes 
to  her  sister  from  Tunbridge,  July  27  : 

I  had  a  letter  the  other  day  from  Mr.  Hanway  with 
enclosed  sketch  of  a  letter  for  the  Printer  of  a  news  paper  ; 
I  beg  you  to  read  the  sketch  and  also  my  letter  to  the  well 
meaning  Jonas  Hanway.  Poor  man,  he  never  knows  when 
to  have  done  when  he  is  talking  of  himself.  I  cd  not  answer 
it  to  my  conscience  to  let  him  expose  himself  by  making  a 
most  elaborate  panegyrick  on  his  book.  He  says  in  his  letter 
to  me  that  he  will  appear  very  vain  to  me  ;  alas,  he  wd  appear 


EDINBURGH  REVISITED 


1770 


238 

so  to  the  whole  world,  for  no  one  cd  imagine  the  panegyrick 
of  the  work  to  be  any  other  than  the  Identical  Jonas  Hanway 
the  author  of  it  ;  the  Book  is  a  well  meaning  honest  book 
and  may  be  very  usefull  ;  but  he  praises  the  style  for  its  elegance, 
and  says  many  unnecessary  things  in  its  commendation  by  which 
he  wd  incur  much  ridicule.  He  is  a  most  benevolent  worthy 
man,  and  I  could  not  bear  his  exposing  himself  to  the  scoffers. 
Pray  seal  the  letter  and  send  it  directly  to  the  post  ;  I  have 
saved  him  half  postage  by  sending  it  in  your  frank.  I  am  afraid 
my  letter  is  not  polite  enough,  but  realy  I  was  hurt  at  his 
letter  to  the  Printer.  Homer  cd  not  have  said  finer  things 
of  the  Odyssy.  Then  how  important  does  he  make  his  book  ! 
a  Good  Woman,  in  return  to  Heaven  for  making  her  happy 
in  her  children,  thinks  she  ought  to  recommend  a  certain  book 
call’d  virtue  in  humble  life. 

Mr.  Jonas  Hanway  was,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  little 
deficient  in  sense  of  humour,  or  the  old  merchant’s 
suggestion  would  surely  have  tickled  him  hugely. 
Though  he  denounced  tea  he  pioneered  umbrellas  ; 
and  his  monument  is  in  Westminster  Abbey. 

Early  in  September  Mr.  Montagu  went  to  visit 
his  estates  and  friends  in  Yorkshire,  whilst  his  wife 
and  Mrs.  Chapone  travelled  north  to  pay  her  old 
friend,  Dr.  Gregory,  a  visit  at  Edinburgh.  Here  they 
met  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Montagu  and  Lady 
Forbes,  who  was  Mrs.  Gregory’s  mother,  and  had 
lost  a  fortune  of  £20,000  in  the  South  Sea  Bubble  ; 
whilst  among  their  constant  companions  during  their 
stay  were  Dr.  William  Robertson,  the  fascinating 
historian  who  had  just  completed  his  Charles  the 
Fifth ,  and  his  friend  Hugh  Blair,  the  Regius  pro¬ 
fessor  and  divine.  From  Edinburgh  the  ladies 
visited  Lord  Bargeny,  Lord  Kinnoull’s  place  at 
Dupplin,  and  Lord  Breadalbane’s  at  Taymouth, 
where  the  “  vast  hanging  woods  of  noblest  oaks, 
beeches,  etc.,  huge  rocks,  mountains,  great  rivers, 
cascades  and  an  immense  lake,”  impressed  them 
suitably. 

Dr.  Gregory,  with  his  two  charming  daughters  and 


1770 


CRABS’  EYES 


239 


Mrs.  Chapone,  returned  with  Mrs.  Montagu  to 
Denton  at  the  end  of  September,  and  October  was 
spent  there  together,  the  two  ladies  travelling  back 
to  London  at  the  end  of  the  month.  It  may  perhaps 
be  recorded  that  whilst  in  Edinburgh  Mrs.  Montagu 
took  the  opportunity  of  consulting  Dr.  William  Cullen, 
the  famous  professor  of  chemistry  and  physic  and 
afterwards  president  of  the  College  of  Physicians. 
He  and  Dr.  Gregory  wrote  out  for  her  a  joint  series 
of  prescriptions  for  the  stomachic  spasms  from  which 
she  frequently  suffered,  of  which  one  item  only  may 
be  quoted  :  “  When  acidity  is  troublesome  some 

doses  of  crabs’  eyes  may  be  taken  especially  towards 
evening.  The  quantity  about  12  grains.” 

When  Sterne  was  prescribed  by  Dr.  Fizes  one 
crawfish  in  his  bouillon  at  Montpelier  he  was  gravely 
warned  that  it  must  be  a  male  one,  “  a  female  would 
do  me  more  hurt  than  good  ”  ;  but  Dr.  Cullen  did 
not  specify  the  sex  of  the  crabs’  eyes. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  doctors  provided  the  little  lady 
with  their  choicest  wares.  Dr.  Collet,  after  blooding 
her  “  through  a  large  orifice,”  prescribed  millipedes 
and  riding.  “  I  must  submit,”  she  writes  pathetically, 
“  to  James’  powders  at  last,  tho  I  dread  them  more 
than  gunpowder  ...  it  is  only  one  grain  but  it  is 
not  the  mild.  Dr.  Collet  has  mixd  it  with  castor  and 
columba  root.” 

Lady  Shelburne,  writing  to  Mrs.  Montagu  from 
Wycombe  on  October  2,  mentions  her  visit,  when 
lately  in  Ireland  with  Lord  Shelburne,  to  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
home  at  Lucan  : 

At  length  I  had  the  pleasure  ot  visiting  Mrs.  Vesey  in  her 
Castle,  surrounded  by  trees  as  venerable  as  the  mansion,  a 
very  rare  beauty  in  Ireland.  The  house  is  of  course  irregular, 
but  she  received  in  a  large  pleasant  room  lighted  on  both  sides, 
and  commanding  beautiful  views,  the  most  agreeable  is  over  a 
lawn  thro’  an  avenue  of  high  trees  which  form  an  Isle  by  the 
side  of  which  glides  the  Liffey.  .  .  .  then  we  proceeded  to 


240 


BENNET  LANGTON 


1770 


the  cottage,  a  true  picture  of  rural  simplicity,  the  prints  with 
which  it  is  furnished  being  fine  of  their  kind,  and  the  room 
itself  being  fitted  up  with  Indian  reeds,  the  situation  of  it  is 
perhaps  the  most  meritorious  part  of  it  as  it  is  placed  so  as  to 
catch  a  view  of  rocky  ground,  wood  and  waterfalls. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Denton. 

Your  Lordship  asks  why  I  don’t  write  verses.  Did  you 
ever  hear  of  a  Coal  owner  that  was  a  Poet  ?  Phoebus  to  his 
favorites  gives  golden  verses  ;  and  gold  mines,  Prose  and  coal 
mines  to  those  he  despises.  I  am  so  entangled  in  small  cases 
and  petty  attentions  here,  that  I  believe  I  shall  be  fit  for  nothing 
but  to  keep  a  Haberdashers  Shop  for  the  rest  of  my  life.  I  am 
perfectly  that  odious  thing  call’d  a  notable  Woman.  I  forgot 
to  tell  your  Lordship  I  begin  to  be  reconciled  to  the  Czarina. 
If  she  is  not  a  good  Woman  she  is  a  great  Prince,  and  the  Grand 
Signior  is  un  pauvre  Sire  compared  to  her  Majesty.  I  am 
delighted  that  a  Woman  should  thus  conquer  those  who  say 
Women  have  no  souls.  Shall  we  have  a  War  ? 


From  Bennet  Langton 

Mr.  Langton  presents  his  Compliments  to  Mrs.  Montagu 
with  the  Lines  from  Ariosto  which  he  has  applied  for  to  the 
Gentleman  who  first  told  him  of  them — as  they  are  wrote 
down  from  memory  and  not  from  the  Book  they  are  not  perhaps 
quite  exact — Mr.  L.  is  tempted  by  the  exquisite  Beauty  that 
appears  to  him  in  the  Verses  to  mark  or  observe  upon  some  of 
the  Words  and  expressions  that  seem  the  most  significant  ; 
but  thinks  it  better  to  remember  whom  he  is  writing  to,  and 
not  imitate  poor  Mr.  Huggins’s  Charming — and  divine — 

(Italian  verse  follows.) 

This,  from  Dr.  Johnson’s  dear  friend — the  only 
letter  of  his  I  have  come  across — shows  a  charming 
reserve,  of  which  his  correspondent  was  not  always 
capable.  Mr.  William  Huggins  had  too  profusely 
annotated  Croker’s  translation  of  Ariosto’s  Orlando 
Furioso. 


1771 


THE  HAGLEY  PARTY - BURKE  AND  PAOLI 


Letters  from  John  and  Hester  Pitt.  Richard  Berenger.  Hayes.  David 
Garrick’s  verses.  Montem.  Junius’  Letters.  Wilkes’  election  as 
Sheriff.  Edmund  Burke.  Death  of  Thomas  Gray.  Letter  from 
Burke.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  History.  The  Hagley  house  party. 
Stowe.  Arley.  Paoli.  A  letter  from  Monsey.  James  Beattie  at 
Sandleford.  Mr.  Lyttelton’s  return.  Benjamin  Stillingfleet’s  death. 
Lord  Lyttelton’s  verses.  Charlotte  Grenville’s  engagement.  Mr. 
Lyttelton’s  misdeeds.  The  Chelsea  Patrol. 


The  first  event  of  interest  recorded  in  the  letters  of 
1771  is  the  publication  of  Beattie’s  The  Minstrel ,  of 
which  Dr.  Gregory  writes  enthusiastically,  begging 
Mrs.  Montagu  to  send  for  it  at  once. 

Further  letters  from  Lord  Chatham’s  eldest  son 
and  daughter,  written  this  January,  mark  an  epistolary 
style  of  children  of  fifteen  and  sixteen  a  hundred  and 
fifty  years  ago,  from  which  twentieth-century  youth 
has  travelled  far  : 


From  John  Pitt 

Hayes,  January  16th. 

.  .  .  Give  me  leave  to  return  you  very  many  thanks  for 
your  extreme  goodness,  in  sending  me  General  Paoli’s  reply, 
with  which  I  am  extremely  delighted.  It  appears  full  of  dignity 
and  of  great  simplicity.  Whoever  reads  it  must  have  a  strong 
desire  to  know  the  man  who  made  it.  I  am  vain  to  find  that 
I  perfectly  agree  with  you,  Madam,  in  admiring  most,  that 
part  where  he  desires,  che  si  lasci  in  avvenire  di  tentare  all* 
onor  suo.  The  calmness  which  runs  through  General  Paoli’s 
spirited  reply,  is  the  best  mark  that  the  most  splendid  offers, 
VOL.  I  241  R 


242 


RICHARD  BERENGER 


1771 


could  not  dazzle  or  seduce  him,  and  that  his  virtue  thinks  no 
calamity  so  great  as  committing  a  base  and  perfidious  action.  .  .  . 

His  sister  Hester  writes  next  day  : 

I  am  order’d  by  Mama  to  begin  my  letter  with  saying,  that 
she  knows  Mrs.  Montagu’s  goodness  is  such,  that  she  will  have 
dispensed  with  the  liberty  taken  in  deferring  the  expressions 
of  acknowledgments  due  from  all  at  Hayes,  as  Papa’s  severe 
Gout,  and  the  bad  colds  of  Harriot  and  James,  have  engaged 
the  well  part  of  the  Family.  Attention  to  such  duties,  she  is 
sure,  will  always,  with  Mrs.  Montagu,  cover  a  multitude  of 
sins.  ...  By  what  you  say  of  the  Russian  Bishop’s  Sermon, 
I  long  to  read  it.  The  Czarina  indeed  is  too  great  for  panegyrick 
to  her  face,  and  the  Bishop  has  found  the  only  way  to  make  it 
pass  without  the  air  of  flattery.  ...  I  can  only  say  after  you, 
Madam,  Happy  had  so  great  a  name  escaped  the  cloud,  which 
darkens  its  lustre.  It  will  be  well  for  her  Imperial  Majesty’s 
glory,  if  the  splendours  of  the  Empress,  bury  in  oblivion  the 
want  of  innocence  of  the  Woman  ;  but  better  for  the  world, 
if  that  sad  defect  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance. 

From  Richard  Berenger 

My  dear  Madam  (for  I  must  call  you  so) — There  is  nothing 
serious  in  Mortality  ;  all  is  but  Joys  :  so  says  Macbeth,  and  so 
say  I.  I  was  this  day  for  a  considerable  time  alone  with  a 
certain  person — great  ease,  condescension,  and  good  humour, 
on  their  part — as  much  on  mine,  I  assure  you.  Various 
Topicks,  and  everything — but  to  the  purpose.  The  Denoue¬ 
ment  was  to  ask  me  when  my  book  would  be  published,  and  to 
tell  me  I  might  bring  it  to  one,  who  would  be  glad  to  receive 
it.  This  was  a  swinging  blow,  but  it  has  not  stunned  me,  for, 
like  Buckhorse,  by  habit,  I  can  bear  much  drubbing — I  add 
it  to  the  long  list  of  my  disappointment,  and  am,  as  I  should 
likewise  be  in  the  fullest  gale  of  prosperity,  your 

R.  Berenger. 

Silence  in  the  Court. 

For  a  further  letter  and  note  on  Berenger,  whom 
Dr.  Johnson  once  cited  as  “  the  standard  of  true 
elegance,”  see  March  1778.  The  above  letter  is 
undated,  and  is  merely  placed  here  because  The  History 


i77i 


LORD  CHATHAM  AT  HAYES  243 

of  the  Art  of  Horsemanship  in  2  vols.  4to  was  published 
this  year.  One  more  disappointing  Patron,  and  this 
time  a  Royal  one  ! 

Writing  on  May  16  to  Mr.  Stillingfleet,  Mrs. 
Montagu  informs  him  she  is  going  to  Tunbridge 
Wells  and  had  engaged  a  house  which  was  Dr. 
Morley’s  ;  she  adds  : 

I  dined  yesterday  at  Hayes  and  the  weather  being  fine  had 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  place  which  is  altered  and  so  astonish¬ 
ingly  improved  since  I  lived  there  that  I  could  almost  accuse 
Lord  Chatham  of  necromancy  ;  he  is  gran  mago  and  has  called 
forth  all  the  rural  beauties  from  a  spot  which  was  once  very 
unpromising.  I  wish  you  could  see  how  sweet  a  pastoral  scene 
he  has  made  around  him.  I  was  glad  to  see  his  Lordship  look 
well  in  the  face,  as  to  his  stooping  and  walking  lame  I  think 
it  gives  a  dignity  to  the  statesman,  and  his  flannels  like  ivy 
round  a  noble  tower  make  the  edifice  more  venerable. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  lent  her  house  at  Hayes  to 
Mr.  Pitt  in  1756,  and  he  had  been  so  delighted  with 
it  that  soon  after  her  tenancy  expired  he  bought  the 
place  himself  and  set  about  various  improvements. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  evidently  at  this  time  in  high 
favour  with  David  Garrick  and  his  charming  wife,  con¬ 
cerning  whom  her  letters  contain  constant  references. 
Garrick’s  poetic  afflatus  was  all  too  easily  stirred  into 
activity,  and  from  the  following  extract  from  a  letter 
of  hers  to  Mrs.  Vesey  it  is  evident  that  he  had  been 
celebrating  the  authoress  of  the  Shakespeare  Essay. 

May  the  19th  (1771  ?). 

I  have  sent  you  enclosed  a  copy  of  verses  made  by  Mr. 
Garrick  the  other  day,  Dr.  Cadogan  and  he  had  at  dinner  a 
warm  dispute  about  the  merits  of  Shakespear,  to  which  the 
Doctor  is  very  insensible.  You  must  not  say  you  had  the 
verses  from  me,  for  it  will  look  like  vanity  in  me  to  communicate 
them,  but  I  cannot  see  why  so  much  good  Witt  as  the  verses 
contain  shd  be  conceal’d  on  account  of  one  piece  of  wrong 
judgment.  The  Burkes  and  Garricks  are  to  dine  with  me  on 
Wensday,  Lady  Chatham  and  her  family  on  thursday.  Mr. 


244  THE  NAIAD  OF  TUNBRIDGE  WELL  1771 

and  Mrs.  Garrick  and  several  others  of  yr  friends  were  here 
last  night  but  we  all  feel  we  are  imperfect  without  our  Sylph. 

In  June,  Mrs.  Montagu  went  to  Tunbridge  Wells 
with  her  sister,  and  in  the  St.  James  Chronicle  at  the 
end  of  that  month  appeared  some  verses  addressed 
“  To  the  Naiad  of  Tunbridge  Well,”  which  Lord 
Lyttelton  in  a  letter  to  his  Madonna,  “  violently 
suspects  ”  were  also  put  up  by  Garrick. 

The  poet  (?)  while  admitting  that  the  capricious 
Naiad  has  sometimes  caused  “  fools  to  write  to  rhyme 
and  be  malicious,”  implores  her  : 

Yet  be  not  thou  like  Fortune,  blind 
Thy  former  freaks  give  o’er 
To  us  and  to  thyself  be  kind 
And  Montagu*  restore. 

Restore  her  to  us,  Nymph  divine 
And  great  will  be  thy  gain 
Castalia’s  spring  shall  yield  to  thine 
For  she  will  write  again. 

*  This  lady,  justly  celebrated  for  her  most  ingenious  and  manly  essay  on  the 
genius  and  writings  of  Shakespeare,  is  now  at  Tunbridge  for  her  health. 


Mr.  Montagu,  to  whom  the  verses  were  sent, 
didn’t  quite  approve  of  his  spouse  being  called  a 
Naiad  (which,  by  the  way,  she  wasn’t)  nor  did  he 
appreciate  the  “  manly  ”  epithet  ;  but  his  wife  was 
evidently  pleased. 

Writing  to  her  at  the  end  of  June  from  Hill  Street, 
he  says  : 

On  Saturday  next  the  Ceremony  of  the  Etonians  going  to 
Salt  Hill 1  is  to  be  perform’d,  when  yr  Brother  Morris  along 
with  Ld  Cambden  and  son  is  to  be  there,  and  little  Matt  will 
be  amongst  them,  I  make  no  Question  but  to  his  great  pleasure 
and  delight. 

Concerning  the  last  Junius,  it  is  extreamly  severe,  and 
seems  more  levell’d  at  a  certain  great  Personage  than  the  Duke 
of  Grafton  ;  whoever  is  the  author  he  has  a  manner  of  writing 

1  Eton  “  Montem  ”  is  at  Salt  Hill. 


i77I 


EDMUND  BURKE 


245 


peculiar  to  himself.  He  is  a  thousand  times  more  Satyrical 
than  Juvenal  or  any  other  Latynit,  and  to  tread  safely  upon 
such  slippery  ground  is  an  Art  wch  nobody  found  before  him. 
by  what  he  says  you  may  expect  more  Junius’s,  for  he  tells  you 
the  revival  of  them  is  owing  to  the  Duke  of  Graftons  coming 
again  into  place,  and  that  he  will  continue  them  till  the  Duke 
like  himself  retires  into  privacy. 

The  Election  of  the  Sheriffes  is  now  what  is  the  Object 
of  Peoples  attention  ;  yesterday  Wilkes  and  his  Partner,  if  the 
Papers  say  true  had  on  the  Poll  a  majority  wch  in  a  manner 
one  would  think  would  be  decisive,  but  it  is  said  that  majority 
will  not  continue,  that  it  is  composed  of  the  Lowest  kind  of 
people,  but  that  the  better  sort,  and  more  thinking  will  shew 
themselves  and  turn  the  ballance.  It  may  yet  last  5  or  6  days 
longer  before  it  is  decided,  but  it’s  allow’d  on  all  hands  that 
the  greatest  interest  is  imploy’d  against  Wilkes,  who  has  already 
cost  the  Administration  some  ^190,000  and  I  believe  will  cost 
them  some  more. 

“  The  greatest  interest  ” — and  the  King  himself 
had  pronounced  him  “  below  the  notice  of  the  House,” 
which  he  treated  with  the  utmost  contumacy — did  not 
avail  to  prevent  Wilkes’  election  as  Sheriff ;  nor 
indeed — though  every  obstacle  was  raised  and  he  was 
twice  passed  over  by  the  Aldermen,  although  at  the 
head  of  the  poll  —  could  it  ultimately  succeed  in 
preventing  his  final  triumphs  as  member  for  Middlesex 
and  Lord  Mayor  of  London. 

Edmund  Burke,  the  great  orator,  had  long  been, 
as  we  have  seen,  amongst  Mrs.  Montagu’s  foremost 
admirers  and  friends. 

In  1771  she  went  to  pay  the  Burkes  a  visit  at 
Beaconsfield,  where  she  found 

Mr.  Burke  an  industrious  farmer,  a  polite  husband,  a  kind 
master,  a  charitable  neighbour  and  a  most  excellent  companion. 
The  demons  of  ambition  and  party  who  hover  about  West¬ 
minster  do  not  extend  their  influences  as  far  as  the  villa.  .  .  . 
A  little  mind  is  for  ever  in  a  tracasserie  because  it  is  moved  by 
little  things.  I  have  always  found  that  nothing  is  so  gentle 
as  the  chief  out  of  war  nor  so  serene  and  simple  as  the  states¬ 
man  out  of  place.  ...  I  so  much  delight  in  these  working 


i?7i 


246  FARMER  BURKE’S  LETTER 

master-spirits  in  their  holiday  humour  that  I  had  rather  play 
at  teetotum  or  cross  and  pile  with  Julius  Caesar  than  with 
Sardanapalus. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Vesey  she  adds  : 

I  am  very  sorry  to  see,  by  the  papers,  that  poor  Mr.  Gray 
has  made  a  Pindarick  transition  from  this  World  to  the  next 
by  a  fit  of  the  Gout  in  his  stomach.  .  .  .  How  delightfully 
did  we  spend  our  hours  with  Farmer  |Burke  !  The  busy 
Statesman  is  all  placidness  and  tranquillity  in  retirement.  I 
daresay  Demosthenes  at  his  Villa  was  all  sweetness  and  gentle¬ 
ness  after  he  had  uttered  a  Philippick. 

“  Farmer  Burke,”  accordingly,  was  a  warm  favour¬ 
ite  at  Sandleford  ;  but  he  was  also  a  very  welcome 
addition  to  the  assemblies  of  the  Blue  Stockings  in 
Hill  Street  and  Bolton  Row,  at  which  he  was  a  fre¬ 
quent  guest. 

There  are  several  letters  of  his  to  Mrs.  Montagu  in 
this  collection,  including  a  fine  character  of  Lord 
Lyttelton,  written  to  her  on  his  death  in  1773,  which 
will  find  place  in  Mrs.  Wyndham’s  Lyttelton  book  ; 
here  I  may  insert  one  short  one,  as  a  specimen  of  his 
style,  and  of  the  eighteenth-century  manner  of  declin¬ 
ing  an  invitation  to  a  tea-party. 

Waller’s  epitaph  was  on  Lady  Sedley,  mother  of 
the  poet,  and  should  read  : 

May  here  her  monument  stand  so 
To  credit  this  rude  age  !  and  show 
To  future  times,  that  even  we 
Some  patterns  did  of  virtue  see. 


From  Edmund  Burke 

Roasting  is  the  natural  Death  of  the  Phoenix  ;  but  I 
suppose  that  this  operation  of  roasting ,  natural  as  it  may  be  to 
the  Noble  family  of  the  Phoenixes,  is  not  so  very  pleasant  as 
honourable.  The  Phoenix  indeed  has  this  comfort  in  his 
painful  preeminence,  that  he  has  a  Cook  of  no  less  dignity  than 
Phoebus  himself  for  his  Rotisseur  ;  and  that  he  is  carbonated 


I771 


PATRIOTS  AND  LIONS 


247 


by  the  same  Rays  that  inspire  the  Wit  of  Mrs.  Montagu  ; 
that  he  burns  in  odours  and  is  served  up  in  such  Gums  and 
spices  as  might  serve  to  sweeten  the  princely  Rotteness  of  the 
whole  Pharaoh  line  from  Generation  to  Generation.  Still, 
however  bespiced,  be-odourd,  and  beserved,  I  am  sure,  it  can 
hardly  be  pleasant  to  this  same  Sole-Bird  to  be  roasted.  I 
should  be  a  Phoenix  indeed,  singular  in  want  of  sense,  want 
of  Taste,  and  want  of  Gratitude,  if  I  did  not  prefer  the  Evening 
to  which  Mrs.  Veseys  goodness  has  invited  me  to  everything 
that  Town  or  Country  could  give.  But  the  question  is  not 
of  preference  but  of  Necessity.  I  have  wrote  to  my  Doer  in 
the  Country,  that  I  should  be  down  with  him  this  day.  He 
waits  for  some  directions  which  can  only  be  given  on  the  Spot. 
I  am  obliged  to  return  on  Monday  morning  in  order  to  go  to 
the  Tower — mark  that — but  not  to  visit  Lions  or  Patriots  or 
to  be  visited  as  a  Patriot  or  as  a  Lion — but  I  am  of  a  sort  of 
committee,  that  have  engaged  to  visit  our  Records  and  to  save 
them,  if  possible,  from  destruction.  We  are  obliged  to  prop 
up  these  mouldering  monuments  of  Laws,  Properties,  families. 
There  are  some,  who  with*  the  aid  of  Parliaments  or  Treasuries 
can  raise  monuments,  to  their  own  Memories,  and  to  other 
worthy  memories,  which  will  want  no  repairs,  when  the  Towers 
which  preserve  the  other  records,  will  fall  into  dust,  like  the 
Parchments  they  enclose.  Your  summer  will  I  hope  be 
employd,  as  some  other  of  your  summers  have  been,  in  that 
kind  of  Architecture.  Many  of  them  and  serene  may  you 
enjoy,  for  the  excellent  purposes  for  which  you  live  !  in  order 

To  credit  this  rude  age — and  shew,  that  we 
Some  Patterns  did  of  Virtue  see  ; 

And  one  sublime  example  had 
Of  good — among  so  many  bad  ! 

Look  at  the  beautiful  lines  in  Waller  as  an  Epitaph  on 
Lady — I  really  forget  her  name — but  the  verses  begin  thus 
“  here  Lies  the  Learned  Saviles  heir.” 

I  am  with  the  truest  respect  and  regard,  Dear  Madam, 
Your  most  obedt  and  obliged  humble  Servt., 

Ed.  W.  Burke. 

Saturday  morn 

Mrs.  Burke  desires  her  best  compliments. 


Lord  Lyttelton  was  this  summer  hard  at  work 


248 


A  HAGLEY  PARTY 


1771 


correcting  the  proofs  of  his  History.  Mrs.  Montagu 
writes  from  Tunbridge  : 

I  suppose,  the  great  Apollo  and  the  sacred  nine  have  as 
little  authority  over  Printers  Devils,  as  Kings  and  Cabinet 
Counsellors  have  over  the  Livery  men  of  the  City.  I  shall 
he  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  released  from  the  troublesome  task 
of  printing  your  book,  and  that  we  shall  enjoy  the  delightful 
amusement  of  reading  it.  I  have  strictly  adhered  to  the  idleness 
and  indolence  which  was  enjoynd  me  by  friends  and  physicians; 
indeed  I  think  I  have  improved  upon  it,  so  that,  if  I  should 
again  become  an  author,  it  will  be  of  a  practical  treatise  on 
sauntering.  Often  has  human  life  been  compared  to  a  dream, 
a  T unbridge  life  is  the  dream  of  a  dream.  I  wish  your  Lordship 
could  find  out  to  whom  I  am  obliged  for  the  very  pretty  verses 
to  the  Naiad  of  our  Well.  I  am  sure  the  Poet  was  not  inspired 
by  Tunbridge  water  ;  it  gives  not  le  docte  et  sainte  ivresse  of 
poetry. 

His  Lordship  was  also  planning  a  summer  party  at 
his  beautiful  home  at  Hagley,  and  writes  : 

I  see  by  your  letter  that  you  don’t  propose  to  bring  Mrs. 
Vesey  any  part  of  the  journey,  but  to  meet  her  at  Hagley, 
which  I  hope  and  beg  you  will  do  before  the  23rd  of  August, 
on  which  day  Garrick  will  leave  us.  He  is  to  be  there  on  the 
1 6th  or  17th  if  accidents  do  not  disconcert  our  purposes.  On 
the  26th  the  whole  Rout  is  to  arrive  from  Stowe,  viz.  Ld  and 
Lady  Temple,  Mrs.  Stapleton,  two  of  the  Miss  Grenvilles, 
two  Sons  of  Sr  [?]  James  Grenville,  and  General  Irwin.  The 
same  day  is  also  fixed  for  Belgiojoso,  Burzinsky,  and  your  Hero 
and  Admirer  Paoli. 

Mr.  Montagu’s  health  being  very  uncertain,  the 
possibility  of  his  wife’s  leaving  him  for  the  Hagley 
visit  remained  doubtful  till  the  last  moment.  In  the 
end  she  was  able  to  go,  but  had  to  curtail  her  visit,  on 
the  way,  to  the  Temples  at  Stowe,  where  Lady  Temple 
wrote  to  assure  her,  after  two  pages  of  rhapsody  about 
Minerva,  Juno,  Olympus,  and  Jupiter,  that 

My  Lord  is  very  impatient  to  gallant  you  round  the  garden 
in  his  chair  and  about  a  dozen  Nephews  are  ambitious  of  a 
place  behind  it.  I  am  sorry  Mrs.  Vesey  does  not  come,  I 


i77i 


ARLEY 


249 


only  know  her  personally  and  should  have  been  happy  to  have 
been  better  acquainted  ;  we  beg  to  know  if  you  design  to 
come  by  dinner  time  y4  we  may  make  the  hour  convenient. 

After  a  visit  with  Mrs.  Vesey  to  the  Burkes  at 
Gregories,  and  thence  to  Lord  and  Lady  Temple  at 
Stowe,  Mrs.  Montagu  travelled  on  to  Hagley,  where 
Lord  Lyttelton  was  entertaining  his  large  house  party, 
including  David  Garrick  and  his  wife,  Paoli  the 
Corsican  patriot,  and  the  Temples.  Garrick  was  in 
excellent  form,  and  some  references  to  this  much- 
enjoyed  visit  are  given  in  the  paper  which  follows  the 
year  177 6,  in  which  the  records  of  their  friendship 
have  been  brought  together. 

Amongst  other  outings,  the  Hagley  party  paid  a 
visit  to  Arley,  a  very  favourite  place  of  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
on  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  occupied  by  his  daughter 
and  son-in-law,  Lord  Valentia  ;  “the  old  family 
mansion  neither  mean  nor  noble  but  a  decent  gentle¬ 
man’s  house  in  the  old  style,”  amid  farms  and  cottages, 
richly  wooded  hills,  and  the  winding  valley  of  the 
river. 

“  I  hope,”  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  “  you 
received  my  laconick  epistle  from  Hagley.  I  was  then  much 
taken  up  in  coquetting  with  the  great  Paoli  ;  it  is  not  the 
least  of  his  Heroism  to  coquette  with  an  old  Woman,  so  I 
mention  this  circumstance  for  his  glory  as  much  as  my  own. 
You  will  long  to  know  what  Nymphs  and  Swains  frequented 
the  Shady  Bowers  of  Hagley  after  you  left  them.  A  few  hours 
after  you  went  away  arrived  Governor  Lyttelton,  the  next 
morning  came  Lord  and  Lady  Temple,  Miss  Stapylton,  Miss 
Grenvilles  and  Genl  Irwine  ;  in  the  evening  arrived  G1  Paoli 
and  Count  Borzinski,  three  or  four  days  after  Count  Beljoioso 
was  added  to  our  party,  but  my  Hero  was  gone  to  visit  his 
old  sweet  heart  the  Mountain  Nymph  sweet  Liberty  on  the 
Moors  of  Scotland,  where  she  has  still  found  a  retreat  secure 
from  the  Nimrods  of  the  plain.  You  knew  I  must  have 
a  Hero  or  a  Bard  within  call,  so  when  the  Destinies  took  away 
Paoli  they  sent  me  Spartan  Glover,  the  Author  of  Leonidas. 
Next  to  the  Hero,  the  author  of  an  Heroick  poem  is  my  choice, 
so  my  ambition  was  kept  in  tolerable  humour.” 


250 


MESSENGER  MONSEY 


1771 


To  her  Husband 

Hagley,  Aug.  the  11st. 

I  arrived  here  safe  and  well  last  night,  and  tho  we  are 
involved  in  the  gloom  of  December  as  to  the  appearance  of 
the  weather,  I  have  pass’d  every  hour  of  this  day,  not  only 
in  chearfulness,  but  gayety.  I  found  here  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Garrick,  Mrs.  Veseyand  Mrs.  Hancock,  Ldand  Lady  Valencia, 
and  two  Gentlemen  they  brought  with  them.  Mr.  Garrick 
is  in  the  highest  spirits,  and  he  has  the  greatest  share  of  vivacity 
I  ever  met  with  in  any  one,  and  having  a  great  deal  of  wit, 
that  vivacity  makes  the  most  pleasing  companion  imaginable. 
.  .  .  Ld  Temple  desired  me  to  make  his  most  respectful 
compts  to  you,  he  thinks  very  highly  of  you,  and  he  said  he 
rememberd  well  the  spirit  with  which  you  came  to  the  H.  of 
Commons  very  ill  in  the  time  of  the  great  opposition  and  that 
you  had  uniformly  acted  up  to  that  spirit  through  so  many 
Sessions.  Lord  Lyttelton  says  if  you  was  here  he  shd  think 
his  society  here  very  compleat,  Mr.  Garrick  joind  with  him 
in  regretting  yr  absence.  .  .  . 

An  extract  may  be  given  here  from  a  last  letter  to  a 
devoted  old  friend. 

To  Benjamin  Stillingfleet 

zist  Sept. 

From  the  Mighty  Monsey  I  had  the  other  day  an  excellent, 
(I  wont  say  letter  for  I  know  not  what  to  call  it)  but  in  short 
it  was  an  incomparable  peice.  Anger  was  his  Muse,  he  has 
got  a  Patient  whose  constitution  is  obstinate  to  physick,  and 
whose  purse  is  as  much  so  to  the  physician,  so  with  covetousness 
and  the  dropsy  the  Doctor  is  in  great  wrath.  His  letter  made 
me  laugh  for  an  hour  ;  I  never  knew  a  Man  who  cd  set  witt 
and  nonsense  to  play  at  backsword  till  he  caused  such  entertain¬ 
ment  ;  the  fight  is  violent,  and  it  is  always  a  drawn  battle, 
both  give  notable  strokes  and  neither  can  assume  the  pride 
of  the  victory.  If  the  Doctor  had  lived  in  times  of  allegory, 
he  wd  have  had  Apollo  for  his  Father,  and  Echo,  a  nymph  of 
words  without  meaning  for  his  Mother.  I  cannot  imagine 
what  sort  of  Mortals  his  parents  were,  but  certainly  they  were 
of  a  peculiar  sort,  each  of  them,  but  of  very  different  species. 
He  tells  me  he  is  in  high  health,  and  by  the  fulness  of  his  witty 
vein,  and  the  strong  pulse  of  his  folly,  I  am  sure  he  is  so. 


DR.  MESSENGER  MONSEY 
By  Mary  Black 


i77i  JAMES  BEATTIE  251 

When  General  Paoli  went  to  Scotland,  as  above 
recorded,  Mrs.  Montagu  gave  him  an  introduction  to 
Dr.  Gregory  at  Edinburgh,  who  thus  reports  on 
September  2 1  : 

I  think  General  Paoli  one  of  the  first  men  I  have  ever  seen, 
while  I  revere  him  as  a  hero  and  a  genuine  patriot.  .  .  .  Their 
stay  here  was  so  short  that  they  had  no  time  to  see  the  little 
we  have  to  show.  I  got  however,  besides  Mr.  Boswell  who 
took  charge  of  them  in  the  west,  David  Hume,  Dr.  Robertson, 
Dr.  Blair,  Mr.  Keith  and  General  Oughton,  who  were  all 
charmed  with  them. 

James  Beattie,  “  The  Minstrel,”  paid  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu  a  ten  days’  visit  at  Sandleford,  with  his  wife,  after 
her  return  from  Hagley,  and  thus  began  a  personal 
acquaintance  which  ripened  steadily  into  a  close  and 
enduring  friendship  that  was  to  last  for  the  rest  of  her 
life.  Some  may  have  doubted  the  impression  which 
“  the  personal  intercourse  with  the  lowly-born  Scots¬ 
man  would  make  on  this  talented  high  -  bred  lady 
accustomed  to  the  most  polished  and  distinguished 
society  in  England  ”  ;  but  not  those  who  knew  her 
best.  When  Boswell  must  needs  thank  Dr.  Johnson 
for  the  civilities  he  had  shown  to  Beattie,  his  reply 
was  :  “  Sir,  I  should  thank  you.  We  all  love  Beattie.” 
And  that  was  the  general  verdict.  Mrs.  Montagu 
gave  Lord  Lyttelton  so  charming  a  description  of  this 
first  Sandleford  visit  that  he  replies  :  “  I  wish  I  could 
have  seen  Dr.  Beattie  and  his  dear ;  nothing  delights 
me  more  than  the  spectacle  of  matrimonial  happiness  ;  ” 
and  Miss  Forbes  rightly  says  that  when  Lord  Lyttelton 
died  in  1773,  it  was  Beattie  who  filled  his  place  in 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  interest  and  friendship. 

By  the  end  of  October  she  had  returned  to  her 
town  quarters  in  Hill  Street,  and  November  letters 
refer  to  the  illness  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  and  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  (the  King’s  brother),  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland’s  marriage  to  Mrs.  Horton,  which,  like 
the  Chudleigh  wedding,  had  set  the  town  in  an  uproar, 


I77i 


252  BENJAMIN  STILLINGFLEET 

and  Lord  Lyttelton’s  increasing  worries  over  his 
scapegrace  son,  who  had  returned  to  England  “  to 
sign  and  seal  his  own  ruin  by  selling  the  reversion 
of  his  estate  upon  very  bad  terms.”  The  terrible 
“  Ripon  Flood  ”  of  this  November,  which  swept 
away  all  but  one  of  the  nine  Tyne  bridges,  and 
drowned  many  collieries  and  other  property,  did  not, 
fortunately,  destroy  the  Denton  mines,  though  much 
havoc  was  caused  to  their  Yorkshire  properties, 
particularly  about  Eryholme.  December  brought 
Mrs.  Montagu  a  further  loss  in  the  death  of  Benjamin 
Stillingfleet,  the  dear  old  blue-stocking  botanist  whose 
lonely  poverty  had  made  his  later  years  very  burden¬ 
some  and  dreary.  “  I  feel  the  loss  of  a  person  who 
sincerely  loved  me,”  she  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter,  “  and 
never  lost  an  opportunity  of  doing  me  any  service  or 
pleasure.”  Obeying  his  last  behest,  she  took  his 
young  footman  into  her  service. 

Writing  from  Hagley  on  October  1 6  Lord  Lyttel¬ 
ton  reports  Mrs.  Vesey  as  having  written  him  from 
Ireland  thus  : 

“  I  told  the  Prime  Serjeant  Hutchinson  that  Lord  Lyttelton, 
Mrs.  Montagu,  and  the  Garricks,  intended  us  a  visit.  He 
declared  he  would  himself  give  a  hundred  guineas  to  be  sure 
it  would  happen.  He  has  a  fine  Seat  upon  the  road  to  Kilarney, 
and  has  settled  a  variety  of  Amusements  and  desires  he  may  be 
honour’d  with  the  office  of  Conductor.”  I  sent  her  some 
Verses  which  I  made  a  little  Cupid,  who  came  out  from  behind 
the  laurels  at  the  Rock  in  Hagley  Park,  speak  to  Madme 
Pouskin.  They  are  as  follows 

Votre  Auguste  Maitresse  est  couronnee  de  Gloire  ; 

Le  superbe  Ottoman  par  ses  armes  est  dompte  ; 

A  Vous  1’Amour  accorde  une  egale  Victoire  ; 

Le  fier  Anglois  vous  voit,  et  perd  sa  Libertd. 

I  hope  you  will  like  them  as  well  as  you  did  those  to  Madme 
Czernichew.  I  am  charmed  with  Madme  Pouskin,  and  I 
believe  she  was  pleased  with  her  Entertainment  at  Hagley. 
Her  good  Husband  seems  as  much  in  love  with  her  now  as 
the  first  day  they  married,  and  she  seems  to  love  him.  I  wish 


I77I 


CHARLOTTE  GRENVILLE 


253 


indeed  Dr.  Beattie  had  a  more  affluent  fortune  ;  but  with  a 
good  Wife,  a  good  conscience,  and  such  a  fine  Imagination, 
he  must  be  happy.  When  we  meet  in  Town  we  will  consult 
together  how  it  may  be  possible  to  get  him  some  addition  to 
his  income  by  recommendations.  But  it  is  much  easier  to 
provide  for  an  English  than  a  Scotch  Divine. 

Mrs.  Grenville,  wife  of  George  Grenville,  the 
minister  of  the  Stamp  Act  and  “  the  Gentle  Shepherd  ” 
of  Pitt’s  sarcasm,  died  in  1769,  and  her  husband 
followed  her  within  a  year,  leaving  a  large  family  of 
growing  boys  and  girls,  of  whom  Charlotte,  the  eldest 
daughter,  was  now  eighteen,  and  according  to  Mrs. 
Montagu,  who  had  been  a  devoted  admirer  of  Mrs. 
Grenville,  resembled  her  mother.  Lord  Temple,  who 
was  George  Grenville’s  brother,  had  by  no  means 
always  seen  eye  to  eye  with  him  during  their  political 
careers,  and  the  following  breathless  letter  from  Lady 
Temple  announcing  Charlotte’s  engagement  to  Sir 
Watkin  Williams  Wynn,  a  widower  and  the  son  of  the 
“  Great  Sir  Watkin,”  is  more  amusing  than  enthusiastic 
about  her  niece’s  attractions.  Apart  from  Lord  Bath 
and  Lord  Lyttelton,  for  whom,  in  the  days  of  her 
intimacy  with  them  politics  had  more  or  less  ceased  to 
be  a  primary  interest,  George  Grenville  and  Edmund 
Burke  were  Mrs.  Montagu’s  greatest  personal  friends 
amongst  the  statesmen  of  her  day  ;  and  it  would  not 
be  easy  to  suggest  two  more  honourable  friendships. 
Mrs.  Montagu  had  evidently  foretold  and  abetted  this 
engagement.  Sir  Watkin  the  fourth  was  a  widower, 
his  first  wife,  Lady  Henrietta  Somerset,  having  died 
very  shortly  after  their  marriage.  He  was  a  member 
of  the  Dilettantes,  and  his  portrait  figures  in  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds’  famous  group  of  its  members. 

From  Lady  Temple 

Stowe,  Oct.  20 tk. 

Pray  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu  be  very  glad  but  hold — they 
say  one  should  be  as  cautious  in  telling  good  news  as  in  telling 


254 


SIR  WATKIN  WILLIAMS 


1771 


bad  why  then  to  break  the  matter — to  be  sure  Charlotte  is 
a  fine  girl  but  I  do  not  think  her  a  beauty,  however  last  friday 
the  man  came  puffing  and  blowing  and  insists  upon  taking  her 
for  better  for  worse,  so  e’en  let  him  have  her,  she  has  put  Wales 
into  a  blaze  the  best  thing  she  can  do  now,  is  to  warm  herself 
by  her  own  fire  ;  the  welch  people  are  all  in  love  with  her, 
they  talk  of  her  and  toast  her  in  every  corner  one  would  think 
she  was  made  of  Cheese.  Indeed  you  have  guess’d  the  very 
man,  it  is  Sr  Watkin  Williams  and  if  you  have  any  objection 
to  these  two  people  being  joined  in  holy  matrimony  speak  soon 
or  else  for  ever  hold  your  tongue. 

I  have  long  known  that  you  deal  in  charms  but  now  I  can 
fully  prove  you  to  be  a  Witch  therefore  as  I  have  you  in  my 
power  let  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu  take  care  not  to  disoblige 
her  most  humble  Servant  and  Affecte  friend, 

Anna  Temple. 

P.S.  my  Lord  desires  his  real  respects  mix’d  with  a  great 
deal  of  kindness  may  be  presented  to  you  Miss  Stapleton 
adds  her  friendly  compliments  and  would  have  writ  herself 
but  I  insisted  upon  doing  it. 

From  Lord  Lyttelton 

Hagley,  Now.  10. 

Knowing  that  Lady  Temple  had  sent  you  early  News  of 
Miss  Grenville’s  Match  (the  first  Idea  of  which  was  Yours) 
I  did  not  write  to  you  upon  that  occasion.  A  more  pleasing 
Event  could  not  happen  to  a  Family  which  has  always  been 
most  fortunate  !  Pour  surcroit  de  bonheur,  I  think  the  young 
Lady’s  Heart  is  touch’d.  And  indeed  the  Goodnature  and 
Frankness  of  Sr  Watkin  are  exceedingly  amiable,  nor  can  one 
desire  a  young  man  to  have  better  Principles  of  Honour  and 
Virtue.  You  are  therefore  the  best  Matchmaker  in  England, 
and  the  Soul  of  Your  Friend  Mr.  Grenville  will  look  out  of 
Paradise  and  smile  on  your  Work.  .  .  . 

I  read  your  last  Letter  to  all  our  Friends  at  Stowe,  and  they 
were  all  charm’d  with  it,  but  more  particularly  Mrs.  Stapleton 
and  Lady  Temple.  I  did  not  even  suppress  your  Reprimand 
to  me  for  prophaning  my  Lyre  in  praising  Madme  Pouskin, 
but  you  don’t  enough  consider  that  she  had  seen  my  Verses 
in  praise  of  Madme  de  Czernichew,  and  that  her  Rank  as  a 
Beauty  is  higher  than  that  Lady’s,  though  inferior  as  an 
Ambassadress,  and  consequently  that  Cupid  was  bound  in 


1771 


TOM  LYTTELTON 


255 


Duty  to  pay  more  Homage  to  her  when  she  came  into  his 
Kingdom.  Add  to  this,  that  his  compliment  was  paid  no  less 
to  her  Mistress,  the  Empress  of  Russia,  than  to  her.  However, 
I  am  proud  that  you  feel  so  much  Delicacy  for  the  Dignity 
of  my  Muse. 

When  these  garden  verses  had  to  be  thus  delicately 
adjusted  to  the  relative  beauties  and  ambassadorial 
rank  of  the  ladies  apostrophised,  they  must  have 
become  a  prodigious  bore. 

The  happy  house  party  at  Hagley  of  this  summer 
was  followed  for  Lord  Lyttelton  by  a  troubled  autumn, 
caused  by  rumours  of  his  son’s  misdoings,  thus 
reported  to  Mr.  Montagu  by  his  wife  : 

November  i\th. 

I  had  a  most  melancholy  letter  from  Ld  Lyttelton  last  post. 
He  has  reason  to  entertain  some  apprehensions  that  his  son 
has  sold  the  Reversion  of  the  Estate  and  as  he  says  sign’d  and 
seal’d  his  Ruin.  An  imprudent  wretch  like  this  courts  ruin 
in  every  shape  as  well  as  poverty,  indeed  in  a  worse  shape, 
that  of  disgrace  and  infamy.  Poor  Ld  Lyttelton  will  never 
again  take  pleasure  in  Hagley,  doom’d  and  destined  to  fall 
to  some  Usurer.  What  pity  he  built  his  fine  House  ! 

Tom  Lyttelton  appears  to  have  returned  from  his 
wanderings  this  year,  but  did  not  acquaint  his  family 
or  friends  of  his  presence  in  England  for  some  time, 
and  then  expressed  contrition  for  his  misdoings,  and 
asked  intercession  towards  a  reconciliation  with  his 
father  ;  to  whose  vanity  and  childish  infatuation, 
“  deserving  the  coral  that  amused  and  the  go-cart  that 
sustained  him  sixty  years  ago,”  he  elsewhere  pictures 
himself — if  the  authenticity  of  his  published  letters  is 
to  be  allowed — as  the  victim  and  the  sacrifice. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Carter  in  December,  her  friend 
begs  her  when  she  comes  to  town  to  enquire  of  Mr. 
Garrick  about  the  “  lixivium  of  Mr.  Blackery  ”  which 
he  has  taken  with  great  success  ;  mentions  Mr.  Still- 
ingfleet’s  dangerous  illness,  and  ends  :  “  I  expect 
my  sister  to  dine  here  to-day,  which  is  an  [unjusual 


THE  CHELSEA  PATROL 


1771 


256 

pleasure,  but  a  strong  party  is  to  come  from  Chelsea 
and  they  add  the  security  of  a  Patrole.” 

The  fields  between  Chelsea  and  town,  now  part  of 
Belgravia,  were  a  notorious  haunt  of  footpads  and 
highwaymen,  and  Patrols  were  regularly  provided  for 
the  safe  conduct  of  visitors  to  Ranelagh. 

Alexander  Blackrie,  the  apothecary,  wrote  a  treatise 
exposing  Dr.  Chittick’s  cure  for  gravel,  and  himself 
propounded  his  lixivium  to  that  end  ;  a  lixivium  being 
a  strong  caustic  alkaline  solution,  and  presumably  a 
potent  solvent.  It  appears,  however,  that  this  disease 
was  not  the  actual  cause  of  Garrick’s  death. 


1 7  7  2 

TUNBRIDGE,  HATCHLANDS,  AND  BULSTRODE - 

FORDYCE,  JUNIUS,  BEATTIE 


Richard  Cumberland.  The  Pantheon.  Miss  Gregory.  The  Duchess  of 
Portland’s  snuff-box.  Lord  Shelburne.  The  banks.  Mr.  Lyttelton’s 
marriage.  Junius.  Mrs.  Vesey’s  Blue  Room.  Voltaire  and  De 
Choiseul.  Dr.  Beattie’s  advancement.  Visit  to  Hatchlands.  Sir 

John  Macpherson.  Mrs.  Anne  Ellis.  Visit  to  Bulstrode.  Mrs. 

Chapone  on  Beattie. 


On  February  13  Mrs.  Montagu,  writing  to  Mrs. 
Vesey  from  Hill  Street,  says  : 

I  have  added  a  very  agreable  Bard  Mr.  Cumberland  to  my 
choir.  Mr.  Macpherson,  Mr.  Dow,  Mr.  Cumberland  and 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  dined  with  me  on  Tuesday.  The  feast 
of  shells  was  charming  and  they  stayed  the  evening  when  Lord 
Lyttelton  joined  the  party.  .  .  . 

The  Burkes  are  in  good  health,  their  son  is  going  abroad 
for  three  years.  He  has  inherited  his  Father’s  genius  and  at 
14  is  at  the  head  of  Westminster  so  he  is  to  pass  some  years 
in  the  provinces  of  France  to  get  the  French  language.  Lord 
Chesterfield  has  been  dangerously  ill  and  has  suffered  terribly. 
I  have  been  today  to  visit  the  famous  new  building  called  the 
Pantheon  ;  it  is  intended  for  an  assembly  room,  it  is  the  finest 
room  of  the  sort  in  Europe. 

The  very  agreeable  bard,  Richard  Cumberland,  was 
of  course  the  prolific  dramatist  whose  most  successful 
play,  The  JVest  Indian ,  was  in  the  previous  year  staged 
by  Garrick,  the  Major  O’Flaherty  being  received  with 
immense  favour.  Goethe  afterwards  acted  at  Weimar 
in  a  German  translation.  Cumberland  produced  over 

VOL.  1  257  s 


THE  PANTHEON 


1772 


258 

forty  plays,  chiefly  comedies  ;  and  though  he  never 
touched  the  brilliance  of  Sheridan,  he  was  a  thorough 
master  of  stagecraft  and  did  his  best  for  the  national 
drama.  He  has  been  described  as  an  amiable  egotist, 
but  the  satirical  description  of  an  assembly  at  Montagu 
House  and  his  hostess,  which  he  published  in  The 
Observer  in  1785,  can  scarcely  be  characterised  as 
entirely  amiable.  James  Macpherson  was  the  trans¬ 
lator-author  of  the  Ossianic  poems  “  Fingal  ”  and 
“  Temora,”  so  popular  with  the  blue-stocking  coteries. 
Alexander  Dow  has  already  been  referred  to,  and 
his  play,  Zingis ,  had  also  been  recently  staged  at 
Drury  Lane. 

Wyatt’s  Oxford  Street  Pantheon  was  opened  this 
January,  and  was  vastly  admired  ;  the  classic  splendour 
of  its  Rotunda  being  richly  enhanced  when  the 
architect  placed  statues  of  “  the  heathen  deities  ”  in 
the  niches  round  the  base  of  the  dome,  completing  his 
circle  and  giving  an  air  of  respectability  by  adding 
those  of  Britannia  and  the  King  and  Queen. 

In  May  Mrs.  Montagu  went  to  Tunbridge  Wells  to 
take  the  waters,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Gregory’s  eldest 
daughter  Dorothea,  whom  she  had  now  adopted  as  a 
permanent  companion.  Miss  Gregory  became  thence¬ 
forth  a  daughter  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  and  remained 
with  her  constantly  till  her  marriage  to  Mr.  Alison, 
which  caused  an  unfortunate  (and  quite  unnecessary) 
estrangement.  She  was  a  very  pretty  and  attractive 
girl,  with  good  brains  and  shrewd  observation,  and 
it  is  evident  from  the  subsequent  correspondence 
of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  friends  that  she  was  much  ad¬ 
mired  and  a  general  favourite  with  all  of  them. 

From  Tunbridge  Mrs.  Montagu  went  to  pay  a 
visit  to  Lord  and  Lady  George  Germaine  at  Stone- 
lands,  which  she  found  delightful,  and  “  suited  to  the 
old  nobility  when  field  sports  were  their  pastimes, 
before  their  maccaroniships  tripped  in  velvet  slippers 
through  the  shrubbery  to  a  flower  garden  to  gather  a 


A  MAGNIFICENT  FAIRING 


1772 


259 


bouquet,  and  then  retired  to  the  toilette  to  put  it  on 
with  taste.” 

At  the  end  of  June  her  old  friend  the  Duchess  of 
Portland  paid  her  a  visit  at  Tunbridge,  where  “  Her 
Grace  gave  me  a  most  magnificent  fairing,  the  finest 
gold  enamelled  snuff-box  I  ever  saw,  and  really  the 
prettiest.  By  what  presentiment  of  ducal  magnificence 
the  toyshop  woman  brought  it  to  Tunbridge  I  cannot 
tell,  but  the  price  of  it  was  enormous.”  In  it  came 
the  following  verses  ;  for  the  noble,  lovely  Peggy  was 
also  amongst  the  poets  : 

Dear  Madam,  Will  you  then  receive 
The  snuff-box  that  I  have  to  give  ? 

I  should  be  much  asham’d  to  give  it 
But  that  I  hope  (would  you  believe  it  ?) 

Soon  by  your  own,  the  best  example 
To  prove  the  present  very  ample ; 

Your  mind  like  this,  tho  smooth  and  clear 
Strong  and  compact  it  may  appear, 

Not  for  itself  is  so  much  prized 
But  as  a  snuff-box  well  devis’d 
Which  with  ideas  once  well  stord 
Proves  the  most  pungent  quickning  hoard 
From  whence,  as  oft  as  you  think  fit, 

You  give  your  Friends — a  pinch  of  Wit. 


The  letters  of  this  summer  have  many  references 
to  the  insecurity  of  some  of  the  banks  during  the 
anxious  period  following  the  Fordyce  smash  : 


To  her  Husband 

Wednesday ,  July  the  1st. 

The  reflections  you  make  on  the  confusion  occasiond  by 
Fordyces  failure  are  very  just.  Nothing  can  prove  more  the 
scarcity  of  specie  than  this  event.  The  paper  making  Bank 
must  exert  its  creative  powers  to  save  the  Bankers,  and  the 
publick  funds,  and  all  money  scriveners  might  answer  in  the 
Gospel  words,  Gold  and  silver  we  have  not,  but  such  as  we 
have  we  give  unto  you.  Publick  credit  is  in  a  Valetudinary 
state.  The  Dukes  of  Oueensberry  and  Buccleugh,  and  that 
Mr.  Douglas  whose  cause  made  such  a  noise,  have  engaged 


26o 


THE  FORDYCE  FAILURE 


1772 


the  whole  of  their  Fortunes  as  a  counter  security  to  the  Bank 
of  Aire  in  Scotland  and  Royal  Bank  of  Edinburgh.  These 
Gentlemans  estates  are  in  great  part  settled,  so  that  they  are 
only  Tenants  for  life,  they  cannot  sell  nor  mortgage  to  any 
great  extent,  so  they  are  selling  annuities  for  joint  lives,  which 
is  a  terrible  way  of  raising  money,  and  they  do  it  at  great  dis¬ 
advantage,  because,  as  it  is  not  known  to  what  degree  this 
Bank  will  fall  short,  the  security  is  not  such  as  will  satisfy  the 
timid.  I  cannot  imagine  how  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  of 
property  cd  enter  into  such  an  engagement,  and  I  am  heartily 
sorry  for  the  D  :  and  Duchess  of  Buccleugh,  and  the  concern 
the  D  :  and  Duchess  of  Montagu  will  feel  on  this  unhappy 
occasion.  It  seems  Election  Interest  and  popularity  were  the 
objects  of  these  Gentlemen  in  their  ventures  to  support  the 
Banks,  but  it  is  madness  to  engage  ones  whole  property  for 
election  interest  and  popularity,  two  very  insubstantial  things. 
I  believe  indeed  neither  the  noble  Personages,  nor  Mr.  Douglas 
understood  the  nature  of  their  Engagement  in  this  affair. 
Mr.  Pulteney  has  been  dabbling  with  Fordyce  in  Stockjobbing, 
and  in  short  he  is  said  to  be  gone  abroad  being  an  hundred 
thousand  deep,  having  also  engaged  with  the  Adams’s  ;  it  is 
pity  that  Mr.  Pulteney,  born  a  younger  Brother,  cd  not  think 
the  Bath  and  Bradford  estates  sufficient.  The  avarice  of  the 
age  exceeds  the  prodigality  of  the  age.  Mr.  Pulteney  has  not 
even  any  great  Life  estate,  his  Lady  has  a  great  deal  for  Life, 
so  I  suppose  she  will  extricate  him  from  his  difficulties,  and 
for  part  of  his  £100,000  he  has  a  security  on  the  new  Buildings 
calld  the  Adelphi.  I  am  quite  of  your  way  of  thinking  as  to 
the  Throckley  money,  and  have  desired  that  when  paid  it 
may  be  paid  into  Mr.  Childs  shop,  neither  he  nor  Hoare  have 
ever  stockjobbed  or  enter’d  into  any  projects.  As  to  a  Person 
you  mention  he  is  deep  with  the  Scotch  Bank.  I  am  afraid, 
if  the  Throckley  purchase  does  not  go  forward  soon,  we  may 
want  more,  for  I  have  desired  Edwd  Brown  not  to  receive 
Pelton  Colliery  rents,  for  I  know  not  where  the  money  can 
be  lodged  safe,  nor  do  I  care  to  have  any  money  to  London, 
for  either  the  Bank  of  Newcastle  or  the  private  bankers  may 
give  bills  on  some  correspondent  whose  house  may  fail  before 
the  bills  are  due  ;  it  is  very  dangerous  to  trust  ones  money 
from  Banker  to  Banker  at  this  time.  We  used  to  have  many 
bills  on  Glyn  and  Hallifax,  but  we  are  luckily  out  of  that 
scrape.  I  was  in  a  fright  for  the  Newcastle  Bank  as  their 
Correspondent  Glyn  and  Hallifax  faild,  but  in  to  days  paper, 
there  is  an  article,  that  a  Banker  in  Lombard  street  will  answer 


1772 


LORD  SHELBURNE 


261 


all  bills  for  the  Newcastle  Bank.  It  wd  be  very  embarrassing 
to  the  Coal  trade  if  the  Newcastle  Bank  shd  fail. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

I  agree  with  you  in  all  you  say  of  Lady  Charlotte  Finch. 
I  have  often  wishd,  for  the  sake  of  the  World,  that  Lady 
Pomfret  had  had  as  many  Daughters  as  the  Woman  shewn  at 
Mrs.  Salmons  Waxwork.  Lady  Charlotte  added  to  her  great 
virtues  has  very  fine  talents,  and  it  is  strange  as  true,  and  true 
as  strange,  that  there  is  not  a  House  in  England  where  her 
virtues  coud  be  so  well  placed  and  assorti  as  at  Buckingham 
House.  No  other  Court  wd  have  pleased  her,  nor  wd  she 
have  pleased  at  any  other  Court.  Was  not  Lord  Crosbys 
Mother  Daughter  to  a  Lord  Mornington  ?  Lady  Laura 
Waldegrave  is  very  beautifull,  and  if  she  is  to  be  married  to 
Ld  Shelburne  I  hope  she  is  good  as  she  is  fair.  The  first 
Lady  Shelburne  was  a  pattern  of  excellence,  and  to  do  justice 
to  Lord  Shelburne,  I  must  say,  I  never  saw  so  perfectly  kind 
and  good  a  Husband,  and  his  grief  for  the  loss  of  her  was  equal 
to  her  merit.  As  he  has  only  two  Sons,  he  ought  to  marry, 
and  besides  most  men  must  have  a  Wife  or  a  Mistress  ;  the 
first  is  the  least  evil  of  the  two,  both  in  regard  to  this  World 
and  the  next.  I  think  Marsh  the  Dentist  must  soon  get  an 
estate,  as  he  cures  the  pains  of  love  and  the  toothach.  I 
heartily  wish  Mr.  W  :  Burke  may  have  success  in  his  Voyage. 
.  .  .  I  dare  say  the  Water  party  was  livesome  enough  ;  even 
Anthony  and  Cleopatra  were  forced  to  amuse  themselves  with 
catching  gudgeons  as  they  row’d  down  the  Cydnus  in  fine 
weather,  and  even  with  that  assistance  if  her  Egyptian  Majesty 
had  not  thought  of  the  trick  of  putting  pickled  anchovies  on 
the  Line  the  whole  party  had  yawnd,  yet  I  believe  Anthony 
and  Cleopatras  tete  a  tete  was  peculiarly  interesting. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  stay  at  Tunbridge  this  summer 
lasted  nearly  two  months. 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Tunbridge,  July  the  \th. 

I  shall  leave  this  place  on  monday,  having,  thank  God, 
confirm’d  my  health  to  the  utmost  of  my  wishes.  ...  I  shall 


262  TOM  LYTTELTON’S  MARRIAGE 


1772 


pass  a  few  days  in  Town,  and  then  set  out  for  Sandleford  and 
sober  solitude,  which  after  so  much  dissipation  and  crouds 
will  be  very  agreable.  Not  that  I  wd  have  your  Lordship 
imagine  I  have  been  overlook’d  in  the  Croud  here  ;  I  assure 
you,  I  have  been  celebrated  in  latin  and  english  verse,  tho  the 
pretty  Misses  have  not  had  a  single  distich  in  their  praise. 
Oh  !  old  age  is  honourable. 

In  July  there  are  many  mutual  felicitations — 
destined  to  be  very  short-lived — over  the  marriage  of 
Lord  Lyttelton’s  son  Tom  to  Mrs.  Aphia  Peach,  the 
well-dowered  widow  of  a  former  governor  of  Calcutta. 
The  letters  relating  to  this  hazardous  experiment  must 
be  left  for  Mrs.  Wyndham’s  family  record  ;  but  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  real  opinion  of  the  match  comes  out  in  a 
letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  : 

I  had  a  very  polite  letter  from  Mr.  Lyttelton  yesterday  in 
answer  to  my  letter  of  congratulation  on  his  marriage.  .  .  . 
Mrs.  Peach  had  the  character  of  being  very  amiable,  but  surely 
she  must  be  indiscreet  even  to  madness  !  It  was  hazard 
enough  to  marry  Mr.  Lyttelton,  but  I  find  she  married  him 
before  the  settlements  were  made.  If  Mr.  L.  generously 
makes  the  settlements  now  the  lady  is  in  his  power  I  shall 
have  great  hopes  of  his  continuing  in  a  proper  course  of  life. 

A  long  letter  from  Lady  Chatham  dated  August  1, 
from  Burton  Pynsent,  describes  their  move  thither 
from  Hayes  three  weeks  previously  :  “  My  Lord  and 
I  performed  the  journey  hither  with  an  alacrity  that 
does  honor  to  both  ”  ;  and  recounts  the  doings  of 
their  children,  whom  Mrs.  Montagu  often  had  with 
her  for  plays  and  entertainment,  and  whose  letters 
have  already  been  quoted. 

Lord  Temple  was  staying  at  Hagley  this  August, 
and  Lord  Lyttelton  writes  that  at  breakfast  that 
morning,  when  it  was  stated  that  the  Junius  letters 
were  all  written  in  a  woman’s  hand,  Lord  Temple  had 
promptly  declared  there  could  be  but  one  woman 
capable  of  writing  the  letters,  or  keeping  the  secret, 
and  that  was  Mrs.  Montagu  ;  and  that  the  attacks  on 


1772 


A  STORY  OF  VOLTAIRE 


263 

the  King  could  only  be  attributed  to  her  paying  court 
to  the  spirit  of  oid  Whiggism  in  Mr.  Montagu’s 
breast  ;  a  piece  of  flattery  that  surely  delighted  its 
recipient.  Lord  Lyttelton  goes  on  to  mention  a  con¬ 
versation  he  had  recently  had  with  Lord  Chesterfield, 
“  much  of  which  I  keep  rather  for  your  ear  than  your 
eye.  I  doubt  much  whether  I  ever  shall  have  another 
with  him.  You  are  high  in  his  esteem.”  Chester¬ 
field  died  in  the  following  March. 

From  a  September  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey  may  be 
quoted  a  few  lines  giving  a  picture  of  her  characteristic 
coteries  : 

Come  to  England,  get  into  your  blue  room,  call  all  your 
friends  arround  you,  and  let  every  melancholy  remembrance 
be  chased  away.  I  often  dream  (with  my  eyes  open)  of  this 
blue  room.  I  see  Mr.  Garrick  in  one  corner  of  it,  Lord 
Lyttelton  sitting  close  to  the  fire,  Mr.  Burke  in  the  midst  of 
your  circle,  Mrs.  Carter  on  your  sopha  ;  the  door  opens,  in 
trips  a  maccaroni,  or  stalks  a  minister  of  state  or  perhaps  glides 
a  fine  lady  :  no  matter  who  or  what,  the  spirit  of  Vesey  is 
mighty  still,  my  dear  sylph  makes  her  company  form  a  round 
O,  and  she  sits  in  the  Center  and  like  the  sun  enlivens  and 
illuminates  the  whole. 

Aug.  the  25th. 

I  heard  an  admirable  story  the  other  day  of  Voltaire.  He 
had  always  been  flattering  the  D  :  de  Choiseul,  and  had  greatly 
panegyrized  him  in  print,  and  the  D  :  of  Choiseul,  at  his 
request,  had  conferred  many  favours,  and  the  last  thing  he  did, 
before  he  was  turnd  out,  was  providing  for  a  Friend  of  Voltaires 
on  his  recommendation  ;  No  sooner  was  the  Duke  disgraced, 
than  he  wrote  to  his  Successor,  congratulating  the  publick  on 
having  got  rid  of  so  bad  a  Minister  as  the  D  :  of  Choiseul  ; 
for  this  the  Duke  devised  an  odd  punishment,  and  has  in  some 
sort  contrived  to  hang  him  in  effigy  over  every  Chimney  in 
his  Chateau,  a  burlesque  busto  of  him  being  put  up  to  carry 
up  the  smoke.  Voltaire  is  greatly  chagrined  at  this  mode  of 
revenge  taken  on  him,  as  it  expresses  anger  less  than  contempt. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  this  year  been  bestirring  herself 
on  behalf  of  Beattie’s  interests,  and  had  written  to 
the  Archbishop  of  York  asking  him  to  further  the 


1772 


2 64  BEATTIE’S  ADVANCEMENT 

Minstrel’s  possible  candidature  for  Adam  Ferguson’s 
chair  at  Edinburgh,  which,  however,  Beattie  declined: 


From  the  Archbishop  of  York 

Brodsworth,  Sept.  19. 

Ld  K.  brought  me  a  letter  wrote  to  him  by  Dr.  Beattie 
Aug.  10,  wherein  he  explains  his  views.  Upon  which  I  gave 
him  my  thoughts,  wch  he  has  communicated  to  Dr.  Beattie 
in  a  letter  wrote  yesterday  :  and  Ld  K.  has  wrote  also  to  Ld 
Mansfield  upon  the  same  subject,  wth  ample  testimony  of  his 
regard  for  Dr.  Beattie’s  merit  and  endeavour  in  the  cause  of 
Truth — My  opinion  indeed  is,  upon  fair  consideration  of  all 
the  circumstances  and  the  openings  that  Dr.  Beattie  gives  in 
his  letter,  that  a  lay-place  or  a  pension  or  any  residence  in 
Scotland  will  not  suit  Beattie’s  talents  nor  inclination  so  well 
as  entring  into  the  Ministry  of  the  Church  of  England. — A 
Provision  in  it  is  to  be  considered  ;  and  still  more,  the  upright¬ 
ness  of  his  opinion  of  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  Ch. 
of  England. — Upon  this  subject  I  have  wrote  to  him  myself 
to  day. 

It  was  to  Mrs.  Montagu  also  that  Beattie  owed  his 
introduction  to  Lord  Kinnoull,  the  Archbishop’s 
brother,  who  warmly  backed  her  efforts  for  his 
advancement  this  autumn. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  a  good  and  loyal  wife  and — 
herself  very  far  from  robust — had  latterly  become 
more  and  more  both  the  business  brain  and  the  nurse 
of  the  somewhat  refractory  old  gentleman,  now  over 
eighty,  who  was  Mr.  Montagu.  She  was  his  highly 
efficient  helpmeet  in  all  the  management  of  the 
farms,  estates,  and  collieries,  deferring  always  to  his 
opinion  when  she  could  not  persuade  him  to  hers, 
consulting  him  in  every  step  she  took,  and  doing  what 
she  could  to  adapt  the  menage  of  Sandleford  and  Hill 
Street  to  his  whims  and  indolence.  She  honoured  and 
she  obeyed.  But  she  was  by  no  means  prepared  to 
sacrifice  either  her  health  or  her  liberty  to  his  whims 
and  caprice  without  a  struggle. 


i772  HIS  HONOUR  MR.  MONTAGU  2 65 

In  letters  to  her  sister  alone  she  very  occasionally 
abandons  her  natural  reserve,  and  “  lets  off”  in  a  few 
highly  characteristic  sentences,  which  (in  spite  of  Mr. 
Saintsbury’s  dictum  already  quoted)  her  biographer 
feels  it  would  be  uncandid  as  well  as  uncourageous 
to  suppress,  if  the  portrait  aimed  at  is  to  be  worth 
anything  as  a  veracious  character -study.  So,  though 
Elizabeth  might  very  probably  have  excised  them,  the 
following  extracts  must  take  their  chance  here,  and 
the  touch  of  nature  which  breaks  through  in  them  will 
haply  make  the  majority  of  readers  feel  her  a  little 
more  than  kin,  though  less  than  kind. 


To  her  Sister 

Sandleford,  the  25 th. 

On  Monday  next  I  am  to  go  to  London,  and  if  I  am  not 
fatigued  with  the  journey  shall  proceed  the  next  day  to  Hatch- 
lands.  Mr.  M.  said  yesterday  morning  I  had  rambled  enough 
this  summer,  and  I  shd  not  go,  so  I  told  him  I  was  sure  Mrs. 
Boscawen  wd  not  desire  me  to  come  against  his  inclination, 
and  his  refusal  was  an  excuse  for  me,  and  it  was  very  well 
and  I  wd  write  and  let  her  know  that  I  had  so  good  a  reason 
for  not  keeping  my  promise.  I  suppose  he  thought  such  an 
arbitrary  injunction  wd  hinder  his  getting  another  wife  if  I 
dyed  so  he  said  I  shd  go  for  three  days.  I  told  [him]  that 
wd  be  a  great  fatigue  to  me  and  no  pleasure  to  her,  and  that 
less  than  a  week  wd  be  nothing,  so  now  the  matter  stands 
for  a  week.  ...  I  was  determined  either  to  have  my  pleasure 
or  give  a  signal  mark  of  my  obedience  and  his  noble  exertion 
of  prerogative.  Do  not  you  admire  these  lovers  of  liberty  ! 
What  do  the  generality  of  men  mean  by  a  love  of  liberty  but 
the  liberty  to  be  saucy  to  their  superiors,  and  arrogant  to  their 
inferiors,  to  resist  the  power  of  others  over  them,  and  to  exert 
their  power  over  others.  I  am  not  sure  that  Cato  did  not 
kick  his  wife.  What  inconvenience  cd  be  to  his  honour  that 
I  shd  be  in  Hillstreet  in  the  County  of  Middlesex  rather  than 
at  Hatchlands  in  the  County  of  Surrey,  he  being  all  the  while 
in  Com  :  Berks  ?  and  the  pretence  of  my  keeping  order  in 
the  family  is  trifling,  as  I  shall  leave  all  the  servants  here  but 
my  own  maid  and  footmen.  But  these  Lords  of  the  Creation 


266 


1772 


SIR  JOHN  MACPHERSON 

must  be  lordly.  Thanks  to  termagantism  there  are  some 
ladies  of  the  creation  who  have  them  in  due  subjection. 

Apropos  the  previous  reference  to  the  Junius  letters 
from  Lord  Temple  (himself  at  one  time  improbably 
credited  with  their  authorship),  the  following  extract 
from  a  letter  written  by  Sir  John  Macpherson,  who 
was  now  writer  to  the  East  India  Company  at  Madras, 
and  afterwards  Governor-General  of  India,  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  in  October  of  this  year,  is  of  interest. 


From  Sir  John  Macpherson 

Madras,  October  15,  1772. 

How  much.  Madam,  have  I  been  obliged  to  the  Genius 
of  Shakespear  illustrated  by  thine  !  For  a  whole  year,  that  I 
spent  at  Sea  in  my  passage  to  this  place,  both  afforded  me  the 
highest  pleasure  I  could  enjoy  in  my  situation.  Neither  the 
Severity  of  contrary  Currents, — nor  the  rage  of  winds,  nor 
the  Inhospitability  of  the  Viceroy  of  Brazil  were  able  to 
deprive  me  of  the  elegant  Entertainment,  which  the  old  Bard 
and  the  fair  Genius  of  his  Fame  bestowed  upon  me. 

Without  any  attempt  at  Compliment  my  happiness  in  the 
passage  was  much  indebted  to  that  Entertainment.  For,  to 
my  shame  I  must  own,  that  before  then  I  never  attended  to 
Shakespear  but  through  Garrick. 

I  sincerely  hope  the  dark  gloom  of  politicks  which  deaden’d 
ingenious  and  Elegant  life  in  London  in  the  years  69  and  70 
has  vanished  before  now.  George  the  third  does  not  know 
how  much  he  is  indebted  to  the  chearful  and  Classic  Assemblies 
of  your  Chinese  Room.  You  gave  that  sweetness  and  refine¬ 
ment  to  the  thoughts  of  our  Statesmen  which  could  alone 
counteract  the  acid  and  gloom  of  their  Dispositions.  Even 

Lyt - n  would  have  been  more  violent,  had  he  not  been 

soothed  in  his  visits  with  you.  Lady  Shelburne  never  left 
you  without  being  more  pleased  with  the  World  ;  Her  friend 
received  the  good  Humour  she  brought  away — and  Malagrida 
relaxed.  Junius  himself,  or  his  supposed  representative  in  the 
House,  acquired  with  you  that  urbanity  which  sheathed  the 
venom  of  his  Shafts  ;  indeed,  Madam,  we  are  all  indebted 
to  you  ;  and  that  without  your  being  sensible  of  it. 


1772 


THE  WIFE  OF  OLD  VULCAN  267 

Later  this  autumn  Mrs.  Montagu  paid  a  visit  to 
the  Duchess  of  Portland  at  Bulstrode,  meeting  there 
Lady  Wallingford  and  Mrs.  Delany,  the  “  Wall  ”  and 
“  Pen  ”  of  her  girl  friendship  of  more  than  thirty  years. 
“  I  am  glad,”  she  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter,  “  to  see  Mrs. 
Delany’s  spirits  so  much  recovered.  The  friendship 
of  the  Duchess  of  Portland  has  been  the  greatest 
felicity  of  her  life  ;  her  Grace  has  been  most  faithfully 
attached  to  her  for  many  years,  and  the  great  cheerful¬ 
ness  and  sweetness  of  the  Duchess’s  temper  makes 
everything  around  her  happy.” 

Amongst  the  innocent  amusements  of  an  editor  of 
correspondence — and  surely  he  deserves  some  after 
reading  some  five  or  six  thousand  letters  ! — are  the 
little  sidelights  of  criticism  and  character  that  are  now 
and  then  revealed  in  contemporary  epistles  to  third 
parties.  Mrs.  Delany  had  a  very  genuine  regard  for 
Mrs.  Montagu.  They  were  old  friends,  quite  good 
friends.  “  Do  not  you  honour  Mrs.  Montagu,”  she 
wrote,  “  for  the  part  she  has  taken  to  introduce  this 
excellent  champion  of  Christianity  [Dr.  Beattie]  into 
the  notice  of  the  great  world,  and  to  obtain  for  him 
some  other  reward  than  that  of  barren  fame  ?  ”  And 
then,  referring  to  the  Room  of  Cupidons  at  Hill 
Street,  which  had  been  the  subject  of  some  malicious 
amusement  amongst  guests  entertained  there,  Mrs. 
Delany  exclaims  :  “  How  such  a  genius,  at  her  age, 
and  so  circumstanced  could  think  of  painting  the  walls 
of  her  dressing-room  with  bowers  of  roses  and  jessa¬ 
mine,  entirely  inhabited  by  little  Cupids  in  all  their 
wanton  ways,  is  astonishing  !  Unless  she  looks  upon 
herself  as  the  wife  of  old  Vulcan,  and  mother  of  all 
these  little  loves.” 

The  Cupidon  Room  was  a  redecoration  of  the 
great  Chinese  Dressing-Room  fitted  up  with  Gilbert 
West’s  assistance  in  1752,  and  capable  of  housing  a 
hundred  guests  without  the  least  crowding.  It  seems 
to  have  been  a  harmless  example  of  the  decorative 


268 


AT  BULSTRODE 


1772 


foibles  of  the  day  ;  and  the  suggestion  of  Mr. 
Montagu,  coal-owner  and  M.P.,  as  “  Old  Vulcan  ”  is 
charming.  He,  by  the  way,  was  just  now  at  Sandle- 
ford,  where,  in  November,  as  he  writes  to  his  wife, 

there  was  a  great  deal  of  company  at  the  Newbury  Assembly, 
and  on  thursday  Mr.  Herbert  and  Mr.  Poyntz  and  his 
lady  were  a  hunting  and  the  wind  was  so  high  that  it  actually 
blew  Mrs.  Poyntz  of  her  horse  but  without  any  hurt  as  I 
was  told  by  Mr.  John  Davis.  On  Sunday  my  curiosity  lead 
me  to  Cannon  Heath,  where  I  heard  the  Duke  of  Cumber¬ 
land  had  been  and  spent  most  part  of  a  week,  hunted  a  Stag, 
and  has  three  more  brought  there  for  the  same  purpose  and  is 
expected  to  be  there  again  very  soon.  This  place  is  well 
chose  for  the  purpose  of  a  Hunting  seat,  and  keeping  race 
horses,  looks  venerable  by  a  great  number  of  large  old  Oakes 
and  yews  and  are  the  more  to  be  admir’d  for  being  found  on 
a  large  extended  Down. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Bulstrode,  Oct.  15. 

I  got  hither  on  wensday,  and  found  the  Duchess  of  Portland 
in  good  health  and  spirits.  Mrs.  Delany  was  here  when  I 
arrived,  Lady  Wallingford  came  the  day  after.  We  live  very 
agreably,  and  without  the  least  formality  or  restraint.  Every 
one  breakfasts  at  his  own  hour,  and  in  his  own  apartment, 
which  is  a  noble  privilege.  In  the  evening  one  is  at  liberty 
to  retire  to  read  or  write  as  soon  as  tea  is  over.  Her  Grace 
lives  with  great  elegance  and  dignity,  but  without  ostentation, 
and  there  is  not  that  kind  of  formality  and  embaras  which  one 
usually  finds  in  great  Houses.  .  .  . 

I  have  been  infinitely  entertain’d  with  some  Dialogues  of 
Mr.  Priors  which  the  Duchess  lent  me.  There  is  one,  between 
Locke  and  Montaigne  that  wd  have  mortified  Mr.  Locke 
more  than  he  mortified  the  Bishop  of  Worcester.  I  must 
confess,  I  have  always  thought  Mr.  Locke  was  much  more 
admired  than  he  deserved  to  be,  but  as  I  have  not  got  a  frank 
I  must  not  enter  into  the  subject,  for  a  Vessel  of  paper  wd  not 
contain  a  discussion  of  it.  .  .  . 

The  City  Patriots  are  indeed  the  disgrace  of  the  times,  and 
the  times  are  the  disgrace  of  a  once  renowned  Nation.  How 
is  the  City  of  London  sunk  since  Sr  John  Bernard  was  its 


1772 


HESTER  CHAPONE 


269 

leader  ?  How  is  the  Country  party  dwindled  since  it  had 
Pulteney  and  a  Windham  at  its  head.  I  have  no  great  venera¬ 
tion  for  our  Ministers,  nor  high  opinion  of  their  Administration, 
but,  in  truth,  they  have  not  such  frothy  scoundrels  amongst 
them  as  compose  what  is  calld  the  Patriot  Party,  nor  do  they 
deal  out  such  vile  abuse  and  calumny  as  is  spit  abroad  by  the 
animals  in  the  opposition.  .  .  . 


From  Mrs.  H.  Chapone 

You  make  me  long  to  be  acquainted  with  Dr.  Beattie 
when  you  compare  him  to  Mrs.  Carter  ;  of  all  human  creatures 
I  believe  she  is  the  nearest  to  perfection,  but  how  sadly  does 
her  mortal  Frame  convince  me  she  is  not  yet  an  Angel  ! — - 
it  is  always  a  great  pleasure  to  me  to  find  those  sentiments 
really  existing  in  the  Authors  which  charm  one  so  much  in 
their  writings,  as  I  have  sometimes  been  much  disappointed  in 
“  the  Men  that  make  books  ”...  human  Nature  is  such  a 
strange  thing  and  sometimes  so  amazingly  inconsistent  that 
even  Dr.  Beattie  may  perhaps  be  absurd  on  some  one  subject 
or  another.  I  am  glad  he  has  an  amiable  Wife.  I  shd  be  in 
pain  about  his  income  if  I  did  not  remember  how  comfortably 
Dr.  Gregory  told  us  many  of  the  Scotch  Clergy  lived  on  forty 
pds  a  year. 


1 7  7  3 

lord  Lyttelton’s  death — lord  chesterfield 


Death  of  Dr.  Gregory.  Beattie  in  London.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  efforts  in 
his  behalf.  Mr.  Dilly.  Lord  Chesterfield’s  wit.  Beattie’s  pension. 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s  portrait.  Lord  Lyttelton’s  illness  and  death. 
Letter  from  Burke.  Mrs.  Vesey  and  Lord  Lyttelton.  Bankes’s 
Voyages.  The  second  Lord  Lyttelton.  Garrick’s  spectacle.  Lord 
Chesterfield’s  Letters. 


On  February  io,  1773,  Dr.  John  Gregory,  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  devoted  Edinburgh  friend  and  the  father 
of  her  delightful  companion  Dorothea,  was  found 
dead  in  his  bed.  Of  him  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 

“  The  hours  I  have  passed  in  his  company  were  amongst 
the  most  delightful  of  my  life.  He  was  instructive 
and  amusing,  but  he  was  much  more  ;  one  loved 
Dr.  Gregory  for  the  sake  of  virtue  and  virtue  (one 
might  almost  say)  for  the  sake  of  Dr.  Gregory.”  Mr. 
Boswell  writes  to  Beattie  :  “  Dr.  Gregory  has  been 
more  missed  than  any  body  that  I  can  recollect  ”  ; 
and  also  tells  him  that  he  and  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson 
intended  visiting  Scotland  that  year  :  “  He  (Johnson) 
talks  with  the  same  warmth  of  you  as  he  did  last 

yy 

year. 

Lord  Chesterfield  has  been  dangerously  ill,  and  has  sufFerd 
terribly,  his  complaint  was  an  inflammation  on  the  neck  of 
the  bladder.  He  endured  all  his  pain  with  great  patience 
and  unalterable  good  humour  ;  at  last,  to  the  joy  of  the  publick 
he  recover’d.  If  ten  thousand  Maccaronis  distilld  in  an  Alembic 
an  essence  that  wd  have  cured  him,  they  wd  have  been  well 
bestow’d.  It  is  said  that  one  of  the  Maccaronis  appeard  at 

270 


1773 


BEATTIE’S  PENSION 


271 


the  Pantheon  with  an  artificial  nosegay,  which  has  given  great 
offence  to  many  ;  for  my  part  I  think  it  is  a  proper  emblem, 
when  all  that  pretends  to  be  amiable  or  agreable  in  the  character 
is  artificial  and  ineffectual  ;  and  I  much  approve  the  arms 
and  device  of  Messieurs,  or  Mademoiselles,  les  Maccaronis, 
for  I  do  not  know  which  to  call  them. 

Lord  Chesterfield  died  on  March  24. 

Beattie  and  his  wife  arrived  in  London  early  in 
May,  and  immediately  set  out  on  a  visit  to  Mrs. 
Montagu’s,  where  they  sat  for  an  hour  or  more  ; 
and  during  the  next  four  months,  when  his  southern 
stay  was  concluded  by  a  visit  to  Sandleford,  his  Diary 
shows  that  he  was  constantly  in  her  company,  and 
that  it  was  very  largely  to  her  exertions,  in  combina¬ 
tion  with  those  of  Lady  Mayne  (afterwards  Lady 
Newhaven)  that  the  pension  of  £200  a  year  was  finally 
granted  him  by  the  King.  The  full  account  of  this 
visit  will  be  found  in  Miss  Margaret  Forbes’s  Beattie 
and  his  Friends ,  and  need  not,  therefore,  be  recapitu¬ 
lated  here. 

The  patronage,  so  called,  of  the  poor  and  humbly 
born  writer  by  the  rich  and  socially  distinguished  is 
amongst  the  most  difficult  and  delicate  of  imaginable 
tasks  ;  and  not  often,  to  her  great  and  lasting  credit, 
has  it  been  more  tactfully,  graciously,  and  success¬ 
fully  achieved  than  by  Elizabeth  Montagu  in  securing 
substantial  recognition  of  James  Beattie’s  work  and 
worth.  She  introduced  him  to  Dr.  Percy,  to  David 
Garrick,  to  General  Paoli,  Lord  Lyttelton,  Mrs. 
Carter,  the  Duchess  of  Portland,  and  to  all  the  blue¬ 
stocking  coterie.  She  took  him  to  Bulstrode,  where 
he  also  met  Mrs.  Delany  ;  she  sent  Lord  Chatham 
his  Minstrel  and  the  Essay  on  Truth  ;  she  urged  upon 
him  the  publication  of  the  quarto  subscription  volume, 
the  success  of  which  was  largely  attributable  to  the 
work  of  herself  and  her  friends  ;  and  she  even  ven¬ 
tured  to  inform  him,  “  in  very  explicit  though  delicate 
terms,”  that  if  the  Government  did  nothing  for  him, 


272 


LITTLE  DILLY 


1773 


it  was  her  intention  to  settle  on  him  an  annuity  for 
life.  But  all  this,  and  much  more,  was  done  with 
such  genuine  kindliness  and  obvious  friendship  that 
no  trace  of  mauvais  honte  was  ever  raised  or  felt  ; 
and  Beattie  returned  to  Aberdeen  to  write  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  that  he  thought  himself  rewarded  above 
his  deservings,  and  should  willingly  sit  down  contented 
to  cultivate  the  friendships  in  England  which  did  him 
so  much  honour.  Her  letters  all  through  this  summer 
are  full  of  accounts  of  the  slow  progress  of  all  the 
pension  negotiations,  and  of  the  reception  of  Dr. 
Beattie  by  the  King  and  Queen,  by  her  various  friends, 
and  by  the  University  of  Oxford,  where  he  received 
his  degree,  while  “  a  long  loud  and  continued  applause 
shook  the  theatre,  and  3000  spectators  testified  their 
approbation.” 

Whilst  Mrs.  Montagu  was  distressed  by  the 
apparently  interminable  delays  in  the  plans  on  foot 
for  promoting  Beattie,  she  was  delighted  with  the 
generous  conduct  of  Charles  Dilly,  the  famous  book¬ 
seller  in  the  Poultry,  at  whose  table,  with  his  brother 
Edward,  Boswell  so  artfully  contrived  to  bring  John¬ 
son  and  Wilkes  together. 

May  25th. 

Our  litde  Dilly  has  acted  very  handsomely  by  Dr.  Beattie  in 
an  affair  relative  to  a  future  publication,  which  I  will  explain 
to  you  when  I  see  you.  Master  Dilly  has  a  Soul  as  great  as 
the  hugest  and  tallest  of  Book  sellers.  Nothing  is  done  yet 
for  Dr.  Beattie  :  the  Ministers  wish  they  had  power  enough 
to  assist  so  good  a  Man,  the  King  no  doubt  wishes  he  had  money 
enough  to  reward  so  good  a  work  as  his,  and  the  Bishops  wish 
they  had  benefices  enough  to  be  able  to  bestow  one  on  so  great 
a  Champion  for  Charity  ;  it  will  not  be  treason  to  say  so  much, 
as  that  I  wish  little  Dilly  was  a  Minister  of  State,  or  a  Bishop  ; 
more  I  do  not  say,  nor  wd  be  thought  to  imagine.  Fye  on 
the  little  Souls  in  the  Great  places,  and  God  bless  Great 
Master  Dilly.  ...  For  Great  he  is  that  greatly  does. 

Lord  Chesterfield’s  scathing  criticism  of  Lord 
Bath’s  will  has  already  been  quoted.  Mrs.  Montagu, 


1773  LORD  CHESTERFIELD’S  WILL  273 

who  held  very  strong  views  about  testamentary 
obligations,  thought  Lord  Chesterfield’s  at  least  as 
reprehensible. 

July  the  19th. 

I  hardly  ever  knew  a  very  agreable  pleasant  companion 
in  my  life  whose  distinguishing  excellence  was  witt,  and  the 
worst  of  the  affair  is,  that  it  is  seldom  proper  but  when  the 
company  is  so  merry  as  not  to  want  it.  Ld  Chesterfield  in 
his  letters  advises  his  Godson  not  to  flash  it  in  peoples  faces. 
By  the  by,  tho  those  letters  are  far  from  being  faultless,  yet 
the  Person  who  takes  them  for  his  instruction  in  the  ordinary 
commerce  of  life  will  be  pleasant  in  Society.  It  is  for  want 
of  the  little  attentions  and  delicacies  he  recommends,  that  good 
people  are  often  unpleasant,  and  complaisance  is  so  far  from 
being  the  enemy  of  sincerity  that  it  is  its  friend,  by  increasing 
internal  benevolence.  I  must  own  I  think  the  letters  have 
more  merit  than  I  expected.  Ld  Chesterfield  had  neither  great 
talents,  nor  solid  virtues,  and  his  Will  has  disgraced  him.  It 
realy  makes  one  sick  to  see  him  Coquetting  with  the  World, 
and  acting  the  grimaces  and  minauderies  of  virtue  on  so  Solemn 
an  occasion.  He  says,  he  looks  on  a  Faithfull  servant  as  an 
unfortunate  friend,  then  leaves  40  pounds  to  the  unfortunate 
friend  that  had  lived  with  him  40  years.  A  humane  sentiment 
ushering  in  an  inhuman  action  is  not  to  be  endured.  His 
neglect  of  his  Friends  and  behaviour  to  his  Lady  in  this  Will 
convinces  one  he  wanted  principle.  He  deserves  some  praise 
for  never  having  made  a  pernicious  use  of  his  Witt.  His 
writings  are  moral,  and  I  believe  since  his  early  youth  his 
conversation  was  decent.  If  one  compares  him  with  the 
witts  of  Charles  the  seconds  days  he  appears  to  advantage. 

Writing  about  Dr.  Beattie  to  Mrs.  Vesey  : 

August  20. 

My  Doctor  was  too  poor  even  for  a  Philosopher  and  a 
Poet.  He  had  hardly  the  comforts  and  conveniences  of  life, 
when  a  Man  is  sick  he  wants  a  Nag  of  less  spirit  than  Pegasus, 
the  Doctor  may  now  keep  his  horse,  make  little  journeys  to 
visit  his  Friends,  and  now  and  then  spread  the  genial  board 
with  beef  and  pudding.  The  honours  he  received  at  Oxford 
will  make  fine  fringes  for  the  garments  of  prosperity.  I  do 
not  know  what  amends  the  Ministers  of  State  will  make  to 


VOL.  I 


T 


274 


REYNOLDS  AND  BEATTIE 


1773 


me  for  having  kept  my  bard  so  long  from  me.  I  have  lost 
six  weeks  in  which  I  had  hoped  to  enjoy  his  conversation  in 
this  quiet  situation  where  Philomel  and  he  might  have  sung 
their  alternate  notes,  without  having  their  harmony  disturbed 
by  the  noise  of  folly  and  din  of  the  busy  world.  As  to  his 
subscription  affair  no  measures  are  taken.  Lady  Gower  has 
affectionately  received  her  Daughter  in  law  and  presented  her 
with  a  fine  diamond  ring.  Some  young  Ladies  hearts  are  like 
glass  to  be  written  upon  only  by  diamonds,  but  that  is  not  the 
case  of  Mrs.  Levesons  ;  but  as  the  Gem  is  a  token  of  friendship 
it  will  make  a  deep  impression  on  hers.  I  do  not  know 
whether  you  have  heard  that  Ld  Exeter  has  given  the  great 
living  of  St.  Clements  to  Mr.  Burroughs.  Bad  as  the  World 
may  be,  there  is  still  often  favour  to  men  of  skill,  and  bread 
to  men  of  understanding.  Witness  Orations  at  Oxford, 
Pensions  at  Court,  and  Livings  in  the  City  to  the  Beatties 
and  Burroughs’s  honour  and  profit. 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

August  24. 

It  rejoyces  me  to  see  all  people  do  justice  to  the  merits 
of  my  friend  Dr.  Beattie.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  who  has  a 
great  affection  for  him,  has  planned  out  a  sort  of  allegorical 
picture,  representing  the  Triumph  of  Truth  over  scepticism 
and  infidelity.  In  the  foreground  at  one  corner  of  the  picture 
stands  the  Doctor  in  his  Doctor  of  Laws  Gown,  with  the 
Essay  on  truth  under  his  arm  ;  at  some  little  distance,  appears 
Truth,  as  an  angel,  with  a  sun  on  his  breast,  who  is  to  act 
in  such  a  manner  with  respect  to  the  Infidel  and  Sceptick,  as 
shall  show,  they  are  not  willing  to  see  the  light  though  offered 
to  them.  This  picture  well  appears  at  the  Exhibition,  and  it 
will  have  a  Print  taken  from  it. 

The  Beatties’  final  visit  to  Sandleford  was  shortened 
partly  by  Mrs.  Montagu’s  ill-health  and  partly  by 
that  of  Mrs.  Beattie,  knocked  up  by  the  unusual 
strain  of  their  anxious  months  in  London.  They  left 
for  the  journey  north  on  September  8.  Meanwhile 
Lord  Lyttelton  had  been  seriously  ill  of  “a  low 
billious  fever  ”  at  the  end  of  July ;  and  though  he 
made  a  partial  recovery  and  was  able  to  pay  visits  to 


1773 


THE  VAUXHALL  AFFRAY 


275 


Stowe  and  to  Lord  Scarsdale,  August  brought  a 
relapse.  His  son  Tom  seems  soon  to  have  tired  of 
his  bride,  and  left  her  for  escapades  in  London.  “  I 
suppose,”  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  “  you 
read  Mr.  Lyttelton’s  fine  exploit  in  the  newspaper. 
It  would  have  been  happy  for  Mrs.  Lyttelton  if  a 
year  and  a  half  ago  it  had  been  so  demonstrated  that 
one  sober  person  is  equivalent  to  three  Maccaronis.” 
From  “  The  Vauxhall  Affray,  or  Macaronies  De¬ 
feated  ”  it  appears  that  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Hartley, — the 
actress  whom  Reynolds  painted  in  three  of  her  char¬ 
acters, — being  in  the  company  of  the  Rev.  Henry 
Bate  and  Mr.  Cohen,  was  rudely  ogled  by  four  im¬ 
pertinent  puppies,  of  whom  Captain  Crofts  was  the 
leading  spirit,  backed  by  Tom  Lyttelton,  Captain 
Miles,  and  Mr.  G.  R.  Fitzgerald.  A  challenge 
followed,  Lyttelton  acting  as  Crofts’s  second,  and  a 
meeting  in  Richmond  Park  being  arranged.  Captain 
Miles,  however,  insisted  on  first  satisfaction  as  a 
boxer,  and  was  duly  made  a  jelly  of  by  the  pugnacious 
Bate,  after  which  the  affair  transferred  itself  to  the 
less  sanguinary  arena  of  the  Morning  Post  and  the 
Gazeteer ,  where  Bate  and  Fitzgerald  continued  the 
fight  with  desperate  energy  for  120  pages.  It  is 
abundantly  clear  from  his  father’s  last  letters  to  his 
beloved  “  Madonna  ”  that  Tom’s  misdoings  had 
gone  far  to  break  his  parent’s  heart,  and  that  family 
sorrows  and  disappointments  had  robbed  him  at  last 
of  the  will  to  live. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Montagu  on  the  afternoon  of 
August  23,  William  Weller  Pepys  gives  a  detailed 
description  of  Lord  Lyttelton’s  last  hours,  through 
which  he  was  devotedly  nursed  by  Lady  Valentia  and 
the  deserted  Mrs.  Lyttelton.  Almost  his  last  recorded 
words  were,  “  Write  to  Mrs.  Montagu  ”  ;  and  about 
half-past  seven  on  the  following  morning  he  died, 
“  not  only  without  pain  but  such  a  degree  of  com¬ 
posure  and  perfect  sense  of  his  danger  (which  however 


1773 


27  6  LORD  LYTTELTON’S  DEATH 

had  no  effect  on  his  spirits)  as  to  say  but  a  few  minutes 
before  his  death  that  he  desired  some  hock  and  water 
because  that  had  once  saved  the  life  of  his  brother.” 

Many  letters  of  sympathy  and  sorrow  came  to 
Mrs.  Montagu  on  the  death  of  her  greatly  attached 
friend,  including  a  finely  felt  one  from  Edmund  Burke, 
which  has  been  passed  to  Mrs.  Wyndham  for  tran¬ 
scription  in  full  in  her  Lyttelton  Memoirs.  The 
final  paragraph,  referring  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  friend¬ 
ship,  may,  however,  be  quoted  here  : 


From  Edmund  Burke 

Beaconsfield,  Sept.  4. 

While  Ld  Lyttelton  lived  I  am  sure  that  neither  Religion, 
nor  Reason,  nor  natural  good  Temper  could  have  supported 
him  without  the  Sympathy  of  a  mind  formed  like  his  own. 
And  surely  your  agreableness  of  conversation,  your  wisdom, 
your  Cheerfulness,  and  your  Counsels,  were  never  better 
exerted  than  in  rendering  the  last  years  of  a  learned  and  good 
man  tolerable,  when  nothing  could  make  them  happy.  It 
was  an  employment  natural  to  you  and  worthy  of  that  humanity, 
that  in  some  way  or  other  contributes,  according  to  the  quality 
of  their  wants,  to  the  consolation,  support,  and  satisfaction  of 
all  that  come  near  you.  You  will  continue  to  do  good  to  those 
that  remain,  and  to  enjoy  that  you  have  done  to  those  who 
have  no  further  occasion  for  it.  Mrs.  Burke,  and  all  here 
who  loved  Ld  Lyttelton  as  we  did,  sympathise  very  heartily 
with  you,  and  desire  their  best  compliments  to  you  and  Mr. 
Montagu.  I  wish  to  know  how  you  are  and  direct  to  you 
at  Sandleford,  as  I  think  I  have  the  best  chance  of  your  being 
there. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sandleford,  Oct :  the  24. 

You  may  be  of  great  service  in  being  a  Solicitor  for  Lord 
Valentia  and  endeavouring  to  bring  to  the  best  end  what  he 
and  his  Friends  have  begun.  I  hope  Ld  M:  would  act  with 
regard  to  the  memory  of  a  friend  whose  attachment  did  him 
honour,  but  I  do  not  think  he  wd  be  moved  (in  the  manner 
you  and  I  should  be)  with  an  address  from  his  Son  in  law. 


1773  MRS.  VESEY  &  LORD  LYTTELTON  277 

Men  (and  especially  men  of  business)  have  more  head  than 
heart  ;  Women,  have  more  heart  than  head  ;  They  have  the 
sense,  and  we  have  the  sensibility.  We  are  the  more  amiable 
after  all.  Men  love  their  living  friends  best,  we  our  dead  ones. 
Lord  Lyttelton  alone  join’d  to  the  wisdom  and  fortitude  of 
Man,  the  gentleness  and  sensibility  of  our  Sex.  Whatever 
makes  the  human  character  valuable,  useful,  or  amiable, 
united  in  him.  When  I  recollect  and  run  over  in  my  mind 
his  various  virtues  and  perfections,  I  begin  to  suspect  he  came 
from  some  happier  region,  some  planet  where  the  moral 
elements  are  finer  and  better  mix’d.  .  .  . 

You  say  you  are  not  convinced  that  we  shall  know  our 
friends  in  another  World,  and  indeed  it  would  have  been 
dangerous  to  have  reveald  it  to  us,  for  when  a  darling  child 
or  any  object  of  our  most  tender  affections  had  been  taken 
away,  to  avoid  so  grievous  a  separation  many  wd  have  quitted 
their  post  before  their  task  was  done.  But  I  have  a  great 
faith  in  the  general  notions  of  mankind  ;  I  consider  them  as 
intimations  and  notices  tho  not  revelations  from  Heaven. 
What  respect  do  all  people,  even  the  most  savage,  shew  to  the 
Sepulchres  of  their  families  and  friends  !  this  arises  from  an 
internal  sense  of  a  future  state,  and  that,  in  that  state,  affinity 
and  friendship  will  remain. 

Mrs.  Vesey,  whose  affection  for  Lord  Lyttelton 
was  as  true  as  her  friend’s,  though  not  so  tenderly 
returned,  wrote  : 

Dublin,  Oct.  14. 

There  is  nobody  I  love  to  hear  talk  of  him  but  you  and  that 
I  cou’d  listen  to  for  ever,  you  give  all  the  delicate  touches 
of  character  which  he  knew  so  well  how  to  describe  when  he 
talk’d  of  his  favourite  subject — how  he  loved  you.  I  never 
was  alone  with  him  that  he  did  not  talk  of  you  with  adoration  ; 
will  you  love  me  the  more  for  the  sake  of  our  common  friend 
— perhaps  I  shou’d  not  dwell  so  much  to  you  upon  this  subject 
but  I  imagine  you  feel  as  I  do,  and  when  we  talk  together  of 
him  it  seems  still  as  if  he  was  one  of  us,  at  least  there  is  some 
melancholly  delusion  that  sooths  for  a  while. 


From  Mrs.  Chap  one 

I  have  felt  the  greatest  concern  for  you,  my  dear  Madam, 
on  the  touching  loss  you  have  sustained,  but  as  I  heard  from 


278 


RECLAIMED  LETTERS 


1773 


Mrs.  Carter  that  your  health  was  not  hurt  by  it  and  that  you 
had  born  the  shock  with  the  fortitude  and  resignation  which 
belong  to  your  character,  I  would  not  trouble  you  with  an 
enquiry  which  might  have  put  you  upon  writing  at  a  time 
when  it  would  have  been  painful  to  you.  I  received  a  most 
affecting  and  edifying  account  of  the  last  scene  of  your  excellent 
Friend  from  Mr.  Pepys  who  says  he  hopes  to  be  the  better 
Man  as  long  as  he  lives  from  having  been  witness  to  it.  Great 
as  is  the  World’s  loss  in  Ld  Lyttelton,  one  cannot  but  take 
comfort  for  his  own  sake  in  the  reflection  that  had  his  life  been 
prolong’d,  it  might  probably  have  been  more  and  more 
embitter’d  by  his  Son’s  conduct.  That  he  is  gone  “  where 
the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  ”  and  where  his  heavenly 
temper  will  meet  with  suitable  gratifications,  must  be  your 
consolation,  who  have  indeed  lost  such  a  treasure  as  the  World 
is  too  poor  to  make  up  to  you. 

When  Lord  Lyttelton  died,  Mrs.  Montagu  wrote 
to  Mrs.  Vesey : 

He  will  remain  in  the  memory  of  this  generation  with  all 
the  love  and  veneration  so  amiable  a  character  cannot  fail  of 
obtaining.  I  never  heard  of  such  general  lamentation  for  the 
loss  of  any  man.  Every  paper  from  every  town  in  England 
is  filled  with  his  praises.  .  .  .  He  was  the  most  humble  and 
gentle  of  any  person  I  ever  knew.  He  was  my  instructor  and 
my  friend,  the  guide  of  my  studies,  the  corrector  of  the  result 
of  them.  He  made  my  house  a  school  of  virtue  to  young 
people  and  a  place  of  delight  to  the  learned.  I  provided  the 
dinner,  but  his  conversation  made  the  feast.  I  have  lost  my 
consequence  in  society  with  him;  but  you,  my  friend,  will 
love  me  still.  ...  I  will  get  your  letters  and  mine  from  them 
[the  executors]  when  I  go  to  London.  .  .  .  Whenever  I  have 
lost  any  intimate  friend  I  have  always  chosen  to  leave  my 
letters  for  some  time  with  the  family;  for  having  been  always 
fond  to  spread  friendships  and  to  cover  heats,  I  was  glad  that 
peoples  relations  might  see  that  I  never  widened  any  family 
breach  which  friends  are  sometimes  apt  to  do  out  of  mistaken 
zeal  for  the  person  to  whom  they  wish  well.  .  .  . 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  letters  were  accordingly  returned 
to  her,  and  together  with  Lord  Lyttelton’s,  his  brother 
the  Bishop’s,  his  son  Tom’s,  and  a  few  others,  they 
form  a  very  substantial  part  of  this  collection,  ranging 


GEORGE,  EIRST  LORD  LYTTELTON 
After  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 


1773 


HAWKESWORTH’S  VOYAGES  279 

over  nearly  twenty  years.  When  the  present  editor 
met  Mrs.  Hugh  Wyndham — herself  a  Lyttelton,  and 
sister  of  the  present  Lord  Cobham — and  learnt  that 
she  was  engaged  upon  an  eighteenth-century  family 
Memoir,  he  could  not  but  feel  that  this  correspondence, 
which  dealt  so  largely  with  the  family  affairs  of  the 
first  Lord  Lyttelton,  his  impulsive  daughter,  and  his 
scapegrace  son,  belonged  rather  to  Mrs.  Wyndham’s 
book  than  his  own ;  and  the  whole  packet  was  accord¬ 
ingly  placed  at  her  disposal,  the  few  excerpts  which 
have  been  included  here  dealing  chiefly  with  political 
and  general  rather  than  personal  matters.  Readers 
of  Mrs.  Wyndham’s  Memoirs  will  find  that  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  claim  that  her  letters  were  ever  “  fond  to 
spread  friendships  and  to  cover  heats  ”  was  finely 
justified ;  and  will  realise  to  how  great  an  extent 
Lord  Lyttelton  had  for  many  years  sought  and  relied 
upon  the  sound  counsel  of  his  beloved  “  Madonna.” 


To  her  Sister 

Sandleford,  the  20 th. 

The  bustle  about  guineas  seems  to  me  a  terrible  incon¬ 
venience  to  all  sorts  of  people.  I  shall  desire  Edwd  Brown 
to  take  our  Rents  at  Martinmass  by  weight  and  not  by  tale 
or  we  may  be  considerable  losers  for  the  guineas  in  Yorkshire 
are  the  lightest  I  ever  saw.  .  .  . 

I  daresay  you  have  been  well  entertaind  by  Bankes’s 
Voyage  etc,  tho  poor  Hawkesworth  is  so  abused  in  every 
paper.  I  do  not  approve  what  he  has  said  concerning  Providence 
in  his  Introduction,  but  I  cannot  enter  into  the  prudery  of 
the  Ladies,  who  are  afraid  to  own  they  have  read  the  Voyages, 
and  less  still  into  the  moral  delicacy  of  those  who  suppose  the 
effronterie  of  the  Demoiselles  of  Ottaheite  will  corrupt  our 
Misses  ;  if  the  girls  had  invented  a  surer  way  to  keep  intrigues 
secret,  it  might  have  been  dangerous,  but  their  publick  amours 
will  not  be  imitated. 

To  Mrs.  Carter  she  adds  : 

I  am  angry  with  Dr.  Hawkesworth  for  a  paragraph  about 
Providence  in  his  preface.  For  the  future  a  Sailor  wont  even 


28o 


BEATTIE’S  ESSAYS 


1773 


pray  to  God  (if  there  is  a  God)  to  save  his  soul,  if  he  has  a  soul, 
and  these  are  surely  des  grands  peutetres  which  deserve  a 
prayer.  The  hope  there  is  a  peculiar  Providence  is  surely 
the  only  rational  ground  of  courage  in  dangerous  situations. 

A  desart  Island  is  Desart  indeed  without  this  Confidence. 

John  Hawkesworth  died  this  November,  it  is 
said  by  an  overdose  of  opium  taken  in  the  depth  of 
dejection  over  the  attacks  made  upon  him  in  the 
papers  for  his  negation  of  a  particular  Providence, 
in  the  Introduction  to  his  Collection  of  Voyages. 

The  record  of  the  year  may  be  closed  with  a  few 
extracts  from  Mrs.  Montagu’s  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey, 
dated  December  27. 

...  I  will  however  only  allow  my  self  to  say  this  Town 
has  appeared  to  me  ever  since  I  returned  to  it  this  winter  sad 
and  dreary.  .  .  .  His  [Lord  Lyttelton’s]  son  continues  to 
behave  with  great  decency  and  propriety,  and  has  left  off  gaming. 
Lord  and  Lady  Valencia  are  to  spend  the  winter  in  his  house 
with  him  in  Town.  ...  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  has  painted 
a  charming  allegorical  picture  of  Dr.  Beattie,  his  figure  is  in 
the  foreground,  then  appears  Truth  as  an  Angel,  driving 
Error  and  Scepticism  into  the  dark  abyss  ;  she  is  treading  on 
a  head  very  like  to  Mr.  Voltaires.  Miss  Reynolds  has  painted  a 
very  good  Portrait  of  Dr.  Beattie.  Some  of  his  new  Essays 
which  will  come  out  in  the  work  subscribed  for  will  give  you 
great  pleasure.  I  read  them  in  Manuscript.  To  the  most 
acute  reasoning  he  has  the  finest  faculty  of  imagination,  which 
is  uncommon. 

Dr.  Warton  called  on  me  yesterday  ;  he  is  just  married, 
and  is  to  bring  his  Bride  to  dine  with  me  on  Sunday,  and  Sr. 
Joshua  Reynolds  and  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  are  to  meet  him. 
...  I  dont  believe  Lady  L.  carried  any  thing  from  Hagley 
she  did  not  bring  thither,  except  experience  of  the  consequence 
of  a  rash  choice,  and  that  experience  she  paid  for.  She  is  a 
good  kind  woman,  but  not  formed  for  working  miracles,  and 
the  greatest  of  miracles  is  the  reformation  of  a  rake.  She  is 
going  to  live  in  the  Country  ;  she  has  certainly  a  romantick 
turn,  a  Pastoral  without  a  Damon  is  but  insipid,  but  it  was  her 
scheme  when  she  bought  the  Leasowes.  .  .  .  Mr.  Garrick 
has  just  produced  a  fine  spectacle  on  the  stage.  As  Melpomone 
will  not  tread,  nor  trip  the  stage,  he  has  hired  certain  necro- 


1773 


GARRICK’S  SPECTACLE 


281 


mancers  who  sail  on  seas  of  milk  in  ships  of  amber  and  besiege 
castles  built  of  cards,  and  the  Town  stares,  and  Dr.  Young  says, 

Wonder  is  involuntary  praise. 

I  hear  the  show  is  very  pretty  ;  some  people  think  five  acts 
of  mere  spectacle  is  too  much.  I  am  sure  I  should  like  it 
better  than  most  modern  tragedies.  Lord  Chesterfields  letters 
to  his  son,  when  he  was  abroad  in  a  publick  character  are  to 
be  printed  for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  Stanhopes  Widow.  People 
are  so  disgusted  at  Lord  Chesterfield’s  witt  that  they  speak 
slightly  of  his  character,  of  which  indeed  he  scratched  the 
varnish  at  last  ;  which  is  a  pity,  for  it  was  the  best  papier  mache 
character  I  ever  knew,  and  with  good  management  might 
have  preserved  its  gloss  a  great  while. 


!774 


THE  CHESTERFIELD  LETTERS - PAMPHLETS  AND 

ELECTIONS 


Madame  de  Sevigne.  Death  of  Louis  XV.  Lord  Chatham’s  gout.  Lord 
Chesterfield’s  Letters.  Long  Sir  Thomas  Robinson.  Lord  Temple’s 
no.  Matthew  Robinson’s  political  pamphlets.  Hester  Pitt’s  mar¬ 
riage.  The  Elections.  Cursory  remarks  on  Shakespeare.  Lady 
Hester  Pitt’s  and  Mr.  Grenville’s  engagements.  Lord  Valentia. 


Amongst  the  early  letters  of  1774  is  a  long  one  from 
Thomas  Francklin,  the  translator  of  Sophocles,  enclos¬ 
ing  his  proposals  for  a  forthcoming  work,  and  soliciting 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  help  in  promoting  the  subscription 
list,  a  task  in  which  she  was  very  often  and  successfully 
occupied.  During  this  spring  the  feather  work  was 
in  full  progress,  and  a  screen  for  the  Duchess  of 
Portland  had  just  been  completed.  The  May  letters 
contain  various  accounts  of  the  illness  and  death  of 
Louis  XV.,  and  Mrs.  Vesey  is  sent  the  just-published 
volume  of  the  letters  of  Madame  de  Sevigne.  “  The 
booksellers  are  in  good  spirits.  If  they  ask  but  a 
moderate  term  for  copyright  they  will  obtain  it,  and 
Lord  Camden  will  not  oppose  them  in  the  House  of 
Lords.  Mr.  Burke  spoke  very  well  and  long  in  their 
favour.  Master  Dilly  in  his  joy  speaks  faster  than 
ever.  Charles  Fox  was  bitter  against  the  booksellers 
who  wanted  to  establish  copyright.” 

May. 

You  have  very  early  intelligence  at  Bromley,  for  Lord 
North  had  not  this  morning  received  any  certain  account  of 

282 


1774 


MADAME  DU  BARRY 


283 

the  French  Kings  death,  but  no  one  doubts  but  he  is  dead. 
The  crown  was  sent  for,  which  it  seems  is  always  placed  at 
the  feet  of  the  deceased  Monarch,  the  Mesdames  were  gone 
back  to  Fontainbleau,  but  his  death  was  not  declared.  When 
the  small  pox  appeard  Madme  Barre  askd  Madme  Adelaide 
if  she  shd  retire  or  attend  his  Majesty,  she  feard  her  retiring 
might  alarm  ;  Madme  Adelaide  thankd  her  for  the  attention 
and  said  she  thought  her  retiring  might  have  bad  consequences 
on  that  account,  and  desired  her  to  stay.  When  the  K  grew 
worse  the  Doctors  told  him  he  was  in  great  danger,  his  Majesty 
then  talk’d  to  Madme  Barre  about  her  affairs  and  settled 
everything  as  she  wishd  and  advised  her  to  depart.  Two  or 
three  days  after,  he  desired  Madme  Barre  might  be  calld  ; 
Madme  Adelaide  thought  he  was  light  headed,  and  said,  Sire, 
you  orderd  her  to  leave  Versailles  ;  I  know  it,  said  he,  mais 
elle  estoit  bien  pressee.  The  Dame  was  not  in  the  wrong 
to  make  the  best  of  her  way  with  her  cassette  ;  the  Successor 
might  have  searchd  her  baggage,  and  besides  it  is  usual  on 
such  occasions  to  shut  the  Lady  up  in  a  Convent  least  some 
Lover  shd  succeed  to  the  embraces  once  dedicated  to  the  Grand 
Monarque.  Our  Politicians  hope  that  the  Dauphins  dislike 
to  the  Dauphiness  will  prevent  his  uniting  himself  with  the 
Imperial  family.  The  Duke  de  Broglio  it  is  supposed  will 
be  first  Minister. 

It  was  not  wonderful  that  the  Du  Barry  should  be 
anxious  to  hasten  from  that  horrible  death  chamber,  if 
only  to  Rueil.  Adelaide,  Madame  de  France,  Louis’ 
eldest  daughter,  remained  to  the  end,  which  came 
on  May  10.  For  Dame  Du  Barry  a  worse  thing  than 
a  convent  was  in  store,  when,  in  1793,  she  was 
accused  of  assisting  the  emigrants.  La  Guillotine  ne 
va  pas  mal  ! 

Lord  Chatham’s  gout,  so  called,  continued  to 
torment  and  incapacitate  him  through  all  these  latter 
years,  though  the  mental  complications  had  passed. 


From  Lady  Chatham 

Hayes,  Sunday  morning. 

tho’  the  Gout  still  keeps  possession,  the  pains  begin  somewhat 
to  abate,  and  gives  leave  to  think  that  the  worst  is  over,  so 


284  CHESTERFIELD’S  LETTERS 


1774 


that  there  is  no  cause  to  prevent  my  having  the  honour  of 
seeing  Lord  and  Lady  Shelburne  and  Mrs.  Montagu  at  Hayes 
on  Tuesday  morning  to  breakfast.  The  mortifying  part  is 
to  my  Lord,  who  must  suffer  the  disappointment  of  not  sharing 
in  the  honour  and  pleasure  of  the  visit,  as  he  has  no  chance  of 
being  out  of  his  bed  for  some  days  longer.  This  unlucky 
Gout  puts  me  under  no  small  distress  with  regard  to  Mr. 
Garricks  very  obliging  complaisance  for  Thursday,  for,  I  am 
free  to  own,  it  wou’d  be  too  anxious  to  me  to  go  from  home 
while  my  Lord  is  ill  ;  but  I  trust  you  will  have  the  goodness 
to  enter  into  my  reasons  for  wishing  to  be  excused.  Our 
young  people  are  far  from  wishing  the  same  wish,  but  how. 
Madam,  shall  I  have  the  conscience  to  hope  that  you  shou’d 
admit  so  troublesome  an  encumbrance  upon  your  Box  ? 

June  and  July  were  spent  again  at  Tunbridge, 
where  Mrs.  Montagu  had  taken  Lady  Buchan’s  house, 
and  was  joined  by  her  sister  and  Miss  Gregory. 

I  breakfasted  at  Hayes.  Ld  Chatham  has  had  a  return  of 
the  Gout  but  is  better  again.  I  was  told  there  that  there  was 
a  rumour  that  the  Bostonians  had  humbly  submitted  to  General 
Gage.  I  wish  it  may  be  true,  they  will  save  themselves  and 
us  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  I  am  far  from  thinking  them  in¬ 
vincible,  but  I  am  not  so  sure  they  are  not  unpersuadable. 

The  publication  of  Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters  to  his 
Son  caused  a  considerable  flutter  in  the  dovecots  of  the 
coterie,  and  there  are  many  references  to  them  in  the 
correspondence  of  this  summer. 

Lady  - and  the  B[ishop]  have  sent  Lord  Chesterfields 

letters  to  their  Son.  Strange  pastoral  letters  surely  !  had 
Ld  Chesterfield  recommended  an  intrigue  instead  of  an  arrange¬ 
ment,  they  cd  not  have  done  so.  As  language  grows  delicate 
morals  grow  bad,  for  ugly  things  get  pretty  names. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Tunbridge,  July  18 th. 

As  to  Lord  Chesterfield  he  was  a  Witt  and  a  fine  Gentleman, 
and  a  Witt  while  he  is  talking,  and  a  fine  Gentleman  while 
he  is  bowing  and  making  compliments,  is  in  each  capacity  a 
very  pretty  mortal  ;  but  dead  it  is  come  to  nothing,  it  is  over, 


1774 


A  FINE  GENTLEMAN 


285 

it  is  gone,  and  like  the  sky  rocket  after  a  short  excursion  in  its 
brightness  drops  into  night.  .  .  .  Lord  Chesterfields  letters 
will  do  a  great  deal  of  harm  in  general,  at  the  same  time  parts 
of  his  instructions  might  be  useful  ;  all  he  says  on  the  importance 
and  value  of  time,  and  his  exhortations  to  indefatigable  and 
continual  application  are  excellent.  .  .  .  The  course  of  study 
he  points  out  and  the  objects  of  observation  he  recommends 
to  Persons  who  wish  to  serve  as  foreign  Ministers  deserve  the 
utmost  attention  from  all  who  would  fill  such  employments. 
But  when  he  recommends  adultery  under  the  soft  term  of 
gallant  arrangement,  when  he  recommends  the  selfish  system 
of  a  french  bel  esprit  in  morals,  and  the  trickishness  of  a 
chef  de  parti  in  politicks,  he  becomes  a  pernicious  Preceptor. 
The  letters  are  not  written  with  the  correctness  or  elegance 
one  expected  from  Lord  Chesterfield.  He  falls  in  all  respects 
below  the  character  of  an  accomplishd  Englishman,  but  he 
rises  rather  above  that  of  a  french  Courtier.  He  had  not  the 
sublimity  nor  the  energy  of  an  english  mind,  but  was  at  least 
equal  to  governing  the  mistress  of  le  grand  Monarque.  .  .  . 
I  will  not  say  when  I  think  of  him  poor  human  nature,  but 
rather  weak  artificial  helps  !  Nature  had  not  made  any  extra¬ 
ordinary  efforts  in  his  favour,  but  art  and  institution  had  gone 
great  lengths  to  carry  him  to  perfection  ;  but  as  Nature  had 
not  given  him  a  strong  mind,  or  an  honest  heart,  all  was  manque. 
I  believe  tho  many  admired,  no  one  ever  esteem’d  Lord  Chester¬ 
field.  I  have  said  however  more  than  I  love  to  say  about  one 
of  whom  I  cannot  speak  well.  So  far  from  liking  to  kick  a 
dead  Lyon,  I  dont  love  to  insult  even  a  dead  ape,  tho  I  despise 
their  tricks  and  simulations,  I  hate  to  censure  them  when 
they  can  no  longer  grin,  chatter,  and  bite,  and  as  many  things 
in  Lord  Chesterfield  were  well  and  in  his  letters  are  good,  I 
am  sorry  so  much  is  otherwise  that  one  cannot  let  them  pass 
unnoticed. 

Writing  from  Sandleford  in  August  to  her  sister, 
who  was  now  living  in  Chelsea,  Mrs.  Montagu  refers 
to  Lord  Chesterfield’s  friend,  and  her  cousin,  the 
“  Long  ”  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  who  had  to  a  large 
extent  made  the  Rokeby  of  which  Scott  wrote,  and 
then,  having  dissipated  a  fortune,  had  to  sell  it  in 
1769.  Sir  Thomas  lived  in  Prospect  Place,  adjoining 
the  Ranelagh  Gardens,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the 


286 


LONG  SIR  THOMAS 


1774 


principal  proprietors.  Though  very  ill  at  this  time, 
he  survived  till  1777,  verifying  Lord  Chesterfield’s 
remark  when  told  that  he  was  “  dying  by  inches,” 
that  it  would  be  some  time  before  he  was  dead  : 

By  your  account  Sir  Thomas  Robinson  will  not  last.  He 
will  expire  with  the  Ranelagh  season  but  the  round  room  will 
remain,  and  the  season.  Some  other  dissipated  man  of  a 
dissipated  fortune  will  probably  preside  over  the  dissipation 
of  the  place.  One  never  rejoices  but  at  the  death  of  a  miser 
or  tyrant.  .  .  .  Those  who  like  Sir  Thomas,  only  talk  harmless 
nonsense  at  their  own  fireside,  with  which  no  one  needs  to  be 
troubled  longer  than  a  little  common  civility  requires  are  as 
harmless  as  a  jackdaw  or  a  starling. 

One  can  forgive  a  touch  of  bitterness  in  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  reference  to  her  cousin,  as  Rokeby  had 
been  a  cherished  possession  of  her  family  since  1610. 
As  is  evident  from  the  extract  just  quoted,  Long  Sir 
Thomas  was  a  hospitable  old  bore,  whom  acquaint¬ 
ances  of  rank  and  in  office  took  elaborate  precautions 
to  evade.  Chesterfield’s  epigram  upon  him  began  : 

Unlike  my  subject  will  I  make  my  song, 

It  shall  be  witty  and  it  shan’t  be  long. 

Ranelagh  Rotunda  has  long  been  levelled  with  the 
dust,  but  Long  Sir  Thomas  is  immortalised  in  a 
cenotaph  in  Poets’  Corner,  Westminster  Abbey. 

Here  follows  a  specimen  of  Earl  Temple’s  method 
of  giving  a  polite  negative  to  an  awkward  request : 


Stowe,  July  26. 

Madam — Tears  flowing  down  the  cheeks  of  Distressed 
Beauty,  the  Eloquence  of  a  certain  Ladys  Style,  the  infinite 
Respect  I  have  for  her,  the  pleasure  I  should  receive  in  obeying 
her  commands,  are  each  in  their  separate  Capacities  abundantly 
powerful  and  need  not  be  collected  in  a  mass  to  secure  any 
success  in  my  Power.  What  difficulty  then  remains  ?  why 
truly  my  own  situation  with  Mr.  M.  is  materially  altered 
from  what  it  once  was,  and  does  not  admit  of  the  application 


1774  MR.  MONTAGU’S  FAILING  HEALTH  287 

from  me  ;  I  should  indeed  have  feared  in  any  state  of  it,  that, 
as  this  is  a  matter  of  a  private  nature,  in  which  his  Interests 
or  his  Passions  are  deeply  concerned,  the  expression  of  my 
sentiments  and  desires  would  not  have  overcome  a  Resolution 
against  which  so  many  powerful  arguments  must  have  been 
already  adduced  in  vain. 

With  the  gradual  failure  of  Mr.  Montagu’s  health, 
his  indolence  and  indecision  increased,  and  as  the 
summer  passed  into  autumn  his  inability  either  to 
undertake  or  to  abandon  the  projected  visit  to  their 
northern  properties  is  the  subject  of  some  drily 
humorous  comment. 

Mr.  Montagu,  she  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter  at  the 
end  of  August,  will  not  yet  determine  to  give  up  the 
northern  expedition  : 

...  I  say  nothing.  Time  steps  unperceived,  and  lo  we 
shall  soon  be  out  of  a  possibility  of  undertaking  the  journey. 
I  never  in  discourse  mention  Person  or  place  that  is  not  in  a 
latitude  south  of  Sandleford.  Some  days  hence  perhaps  Mr. 
Montagu  will  be  more  implicit,  in  the  mean  time  your  Friend 
is  one  of  those  good  creatures  that  has  not  a  Will  of  her  own. 
No  word,  no  phrase,  no  syllable  intimating  a  wish  escapes  her. 
As  our  Friend  Mr.  Harris  assumes,  that  every  sentence  will 
be  a  sentence  of  assertion  or  Volitions,  I  think  it  does  not 
become  the  humble  character  of  a  Wife  to  utter  any  sentence 
at  all  on  so  important  a  subject  as  a  journey  ;  and  now  my 
dear  Friend  I  hope  I  am  as  good  as  you  could  wish,  and  I  wish 
you  were  married,  and  had  a  Husband  who  wanted  to  go  into 
Northumberland  when  he  could  not  go  30  miles,  and  then  I 
shd  know  whether  you  were  the  same  sweet  passive,  quiet 
thing  as  I.  When  his  Honour  gives  a  distant  hint  of  a  journey, 

I  answer  only  with  my  head,  an  humble  bow,  no  assertions,  no 
volitions.  How  headstrong,  how  petulant  are  some  Women  ! 
How  they  reason,  how  they  argue,  and  lose  their  points  by 
the  force  and  acuteness  of  their  logick.  It  is  strange  that  so 
often  a  Woman  has  a  Will  of  her  own,  which  is  petty  treason, 
and  ought  to  be  capitally  punishd.  You  will  perceive  by 
my  nonsense  that  I  am  well  and  in  good  spirits. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  eldest  brother  Matthew  published 


288 


LADY  HESTER  STANHOPE 


1774 


this  autumn  the  first  of  a  series  of  political  pamphlets 
against  Lord  North’s  American  policy.  Matthew 
wore  his  hair  very  long  at  the  back,  and  also  indulged 
himself  in  a  huge  beard,  then  an  almost  unknown 
appendage.  Mrs.  Montagu  gives  sisterly  praise  to 
the  work,  adding  : 

Julius  Caesar  it  was  said  exerted  his  valour  in  early  youth, 
that  he  might  hide  the  defect  of  baldness  under  the  conqueror’s 
wreath.  I  think  Mr.  Robinson’s  hair  wants  an  honourable 
cover  as  much  as  any  baldness  can  do,  and  I  am  glad  he  has 
shaded  it  with  bays  :  There  is  no  man  in  the  world  to  whom 
such  a  proof  of  talents  will  be  more  important.  If  a  man 
shows  genius,  people  think  all  his  oddities  are  the  excrescences 
of  genius.  ...  I  have  sent  to  London  for  the  pamphlet. 

From  Lady  Chatham  at  Hayes  on  October  6  there 
is  a  long  letter  to  announce  the  engagement  of  her 
daughter  Hester  to  Earl  Stanhope’s  second  son,  Lord 
Mahon,  whose  “  generous  principles  and  amiable 
disposition  offer  the  fairest  promise  to  our  dear  child, 
and  will  bind  still  closer  and  by  more  endearing  knots 
the  friendship  which  has  long  mutually  subsisted 
between  Lord  and  Lady  Stanhope  and  ourselves,”  etc. 
etc.  The  marriage  took  place  in  December,  and 
their  eldest  daughter  became  in  later  years  that  very 
eccentric  and  remarkable  traveller,  astrologer,  and 
intriguer,  Lady  Hester  Lucy  Stanhope. 

Many  references  follow  in  the  letters  of  this 
autumn  to  the  Elections  : 

Mr.  Montagu  is  gone  to  Reading  today  to  a  Meeting  of 
the  Gentlemen  to  nominate  Mr.  Griffiths  for  the  county  in 
opposition  to  Mr.  Vansittart.  Mr.  M.  set  out  at  8  this 
morning  in  a  fine  new  suit  of  Cloathes,  new  laced  hat,  and 
laced  postillions  to  his  chaise,  and  two  smart  footmen  attending 
him  ;  you  would  have  thought  he  was  going  a  wooing  ;  he 
said  he  believed  he  should  return  at  night  but  I  hope  he  will 
not  hazard  such  a  fatigue.  Your  friend  Mr.  Moisey  is  chosen 
for  Bath  and  Mr.  Burke  for  Bristol.  .  .  .  Our  harvest  con¬ 
cluded  this  week  with  an  elegant  entertainment  and  a  ball. 


^  THE  LITERARY  AMAZON 
To  her  sister  she  writes  on  October  21  : 


289 


Our  County  election  was  begun  and  ended  yesterday.  As 
there  was  not  any  opposition  to  Mr.  Ellwys  and  Mr.  Griffith, 
they  desired  Mr.  Montagu  not  to  take  the  trouble  to  go  to 
Abingdon,  but  it  was  intimated  his  Carriage  carrying  Voters 
wd  be  honourable  and  usefull,  which  was  accordingly  sent, 
and  our  Servants  to  their  honour  came  home  sober,  tho  many 
a  Coachman,  Postillion  and  Footman  was  scatterd  in  the  road. 
My  Man  Jack  (who  you  know  is  a  favorite  of  the  Maids  for 
being  funny)  gave  me  a  good  description  of  the  hurry,  confusion, 
and  drunkeness,  of  the  occasion.  The  Cathedral  of  Newtown 
rang  a  peal  of  two  bells,  several  fowling  pieces  and  pistols  were 
discharged,  the  populace  burnt  a  faggot  in  the  Street,  and 
Captain  Derby  gave  a  Barrel  of  his  Beer. 

“  The  Critical  Review  ”  speaks  handsomely  of  our  brother’s 
Pamphlet  and  “  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine  ”  commends  it 
in  a  very  genteel  manner,  but  says  the  author  is  the  eldest 
brother  of  the  Celebrated  Mrs.  Montagu,  an' t  please  you  !  .  .  . 
The  Monthly  Reviewers  have  also  made  me  a  compliment 
this  month.  A  gentleman  last  Spring  published  a  Pamphlet 
he  very  justly  called  “  Cursory  remarks  on  Shakespear.”  The 
Reviewers  say  “  it  is  the  obvious  intention  of  this  writer  rather 
to  controvert  received  opinions  than  to  advance  new  observa¬ 
tion,  and  as  a  polemical  Critic  he  has  taken  the  field  against 
two  redoubted  adversaries  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Montagu 
on  their  respective  Strictures  on  Shakespear.  The  Doctor  in 
his  preface  has  certainly  laid  himself  extremely  open  to  criticism 
and  here  the  author  of  the  remarks  has  evidently  in  many 
places  the  advantage,  but  against  the  literary  Amazon  he  gains 
no  ground.”  Very  civil  of  Messieurs  the  Reviewers  to  stand 
by  the  Amazon. 

the  -2.0th  Dec.  1774. 

Lord  Mahon  was  yesterday  married  to  Lady  Hester  Pitt, 
from  that  event  we  may  hope  for  a  Race  of  Patriots.  She  is 
really  a  charming  young  Woman,  and  I  dare  say  will  go  through 
all  the  duties  of  life  with  honour.  Lord  Mahon  has  great 
gentleness  of  manner,  but  the  Demon  of  Party  possessed  him, 
and  as  happens  to  other  Demoniacks,  his  eyes  rolled,  his  limbs 
were  distorted,  and  his  voice  was  supernaturally  elevated  in 
the  Hustings  at  Westminster,  and  in  the  whole  of  that  affair 
he  has  raised  a  prejudice  against  him  which  it  will  require 
time  to  wear  off.  Lord  and  Lady  Mahon  are  to  live  with 
VOL.  I  U 


290 


LORD  MAHON 


1774 


Lord  and  Lady  Stanhope,  so  that  the  young  lady  will  not  be 
emancipated  from  Parental  authority.  Ld  Temple  has  con¬ 
cluded  a  treaty  of  marriage  for  his  Heir.  Ld  Clare  is  to  give 
him  Miss  Nugent  with  a  reversion  of  8000L.  a  year.  She  was 
sixteen  yesterday.  Ld  and  Lady  Temple  had  all  the  Nugents 
to  spend  the  day  with  them.  I  had  the  honour  to  be  askd  as 
a  particular  friend,  and  really  the  girl  is  very  pretty  and  modest, 
as  to  Mr.  Grenville  he  is  everything  that  the  fancy  of  a  young 
girl,  or  the  prudent  views  of  her  Friends  could  wish.  Lady 
Temple  put  on  her  fine  jewels  on  the  occasion,  that  the  young 
Lady  might  see  the  noble  present  intended  to  adorn  her  on 
her  nuptials.  Lord  Temple  makes  prodigious  settlements  ; 
never  was  a  Fatherless  and  Motherless  child  farther  from  a 
state  of  destitution  than  young  Mr.  Grenville.  Lord  Temple 
is  an  excellent  Uncle,  and  Lady  Temple  is  on  all  occasions 
extreamly  amiable.  I  was  the  other  day  at  the  Drawing  room, 
where  Mr.  Walsh  introduced  to  me  Lord  Clive,  who  is  come 
home  on  his  Fathers  death  ;  he  seems  a  modest  young  Man. 
Mr.  Walsh  and  his  Lordship  calld  at  my  door  this  evening 
but  I  had  given  a  general  order  to  be  denied.  Lady  Valentia 
was  with  me  this  morning,  she  leaves  London  tomorrow,  and 
will  go  back  to  Arly  in  good  spirits  ;  Dr.  Elliot  having  declined 
asking  damages  for  the  trespass,  indeed  I  think  such  characters 
as  Mrs.  Elliot  do  not  come  within  the  game  act. 

The  “  demon  of  Party  ”  was  to  carry  Lord  Mahon 
far  ;  for  as  the  third  Earl  Stanhope  he  was  to  become 
Chairman  of  the  English  Revolution  Society  of  1788, 
agent  for  the  Due  d’Orleans,  ally  of  Dr.  Price,  associate 
of  Danton,  the  correspondent  of  Richard  Sayer,  the 
Jacobin’s  Paris  tool,  and  the  intimate  of  England’s 
arch  enemy  Barere.  The  gentleness  of  manner 
which  Mrs.  Montagu  praised  was  combined  with  a 
virulence  of  democratic  fervour  that  was,  as  she  says, 
“  demoniac.”  Even  William  Miles,  once  of  the 
Jacobin  Club,  was  constrained  to  protest  to  his  Lord- 
ship  from  Paris  :  “  In  the  name  of  Heaven,  my  Lord, 
what  frenzy  is  this  that  stimulates  to  qualify  as  im¬ 
provement  what  has  proved  fatal  to  millions  ?  ” 

The  allusion  to  Lady  Valentia  at  the  end  of  the 
last  letter  is  explained  in  the  following  from  Mrs. 


1774 


LORD  VALENTIA 


291 


Montagu  to  her  sister,  referring  to  the  suit  against 
Lord  Valentia,  husband  of  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
daughter. 

Tuesday  the  31  st  [October  1775  ?]. 

As  to  news  and  politicks  I  shall  keep  them  till  I  call  on 
you  but  scandal  is  good  for  nothing  but  when  just  gatherd. 
Dr.  Elliot  married  a  pretty  girl.  Lady  Valentia  married  a 
handsome  Man.  There  is  an  ugly  unpleasant  place  in  this 
Town  calld  Doctors  Commons,  where  love  causes  are  tried 
en  dernier  resort,  and  not  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  Court 
of  Love  en  Provence  where  les  Docteurs  gave  mild  sentences. 

I  am  quite  vexd  to  think  how  Lady  V - will  be  mortified, 

how  her.  Lord  will  be  fined,  and  all  the  unpleasant  circumstances 
of  this  affair.  My  good  and  worthy  friend  was  taken  from 
the  evil  to  come.  This  affair  is  not  yet  publick,  but  will  soon 
speed  round  the  Country  and  through  Citties  on  paper  wings. 

Dr. — afterwards  Sir  John — Elliott’s  wife,  Grace 
Dalrymple,  after  repeated  intrigues,  eloped  in  1774 
with  Lord  Valentia  ;  upon  which  the  Doctor  divorced 
her,  obtaining  £12,000  damages.  The  Prince  of 
Wales,  Charles  Wyndham,  George  Selwyn,  and  Lord 
Cholmondeley  all  put  in  claims  to  the  paternity  of  the 
errant  lady’s  daughter  Georgiana,  who  subsequently 
married  Lord  Charles  Bentinck,  and  was  the  authoress 
of  the  Journal  of  My  Life  during  the  French  Revolution , 
sent  by  her  daughter  to  Bentley  in  1859  ;  a  work 
largely  of  “  imaginative  recollection,”  in  which  she 
claimed,  inter  alia ,  that  Bonaparte  had  offered  to 
marry  her. 


1 7  7  5 


DEATH  OF  MR.  MONTAGU - AMERICAN  WAR  BEGINS 


Hermes  Harris.  Sir  Joshua’s  portrait  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  Her  studies. 
Courtney  Melmoth.  Illness  and  death  of  Mr.  Montagu.  Letter 
from  Mr.  Archdeacon.  Widowhood.  Legacies  and  bequests. 
Letter  from  William  Emerson.  Journey  north.  The  Yorkshire 
estates.  Entertaining  the  tenantry.  Lord  Dartrey  and  Mrs.  Carter. 
The  Beatties  at  Denton.  Plans  for  tour  to  France.  The  tour  post¬ 
poned.  The  Duchess  of  Kingston.  Le  Texier. 


The  first  notable  letter  of  1775  is  a  long  one  from 
James  Harris,  now  Secretary  to  the  Queen,  and  well 
known  as  “  Hermes  Harris  ”  from  his  volume  entitled 
Hermes ,  or  a  Philosophical  Enquiry  concerning  Eanguage 
and  Universal  Grammar.  The  letter,  written  from 
Richard  Cambridge’s  house  at  Twickenham,  relates 
to  an  issue  of  Philosophical  Arrangements ,  of  which 
he  says  that  he  “  had  endeavoured  to  soften  the 
austerity  of  Greek  philosophic  doctrines  by  the 
charm  of  numbers  and  the  soothing  powers  of  melody, 
enriching  his  work  with  the  poetry  of  others  and 
those  the  most  admired  for  their  superior  genius.” 
Mr.  Harris,  though  bound  to  admit  that  he  didn’t 
apprehend  Shakespeare  ever  heard  a  syllable  of  the 
peripatetic  categories,  yet  considered  that  his  pure 
nature  and  their  generous  art  coincided  as  radii  of 
the  same  circle  of  which  the  centre  was  Truth,  and 
that  his  introduction  of  Shakespearian  quotation 
would  at  least  not  be  “  displeasing  to  his  respectable 
Patroness.”  And  so  on. 

Meanwhile  Shakespeare’s  respectable  Patroness  was 

292 


1775 


SIR  JOSHUA’S  PORTRAIT  293 

being  painted  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  and  writes 
in  May  to  her  sister,  now  at  Bath  :  “  The  Primate’s 
portrait  at  the  Exhibition  is  so  admired  I  am  jealous 
of  it.  I  think  some  of  the  ladies  will  steal  it.  Sir 
Joshua  has  proceeded  two  sittings  with  my  picture, 
and  all  people  think  it  very  like,  tho  there  is  a 
good  deal  of  flattery  in  the  likeness.”  The  Primate 
was  Mrs.  Montagu’s  first  cousin,  Richard  Robinson, 
made  Archbishop  of  Armagh  in  1765,  and  brother 
of  the  Long  Sir  Thomas  mentioned  previously.  He 
became  the  first  Baron  Rokeby  in  1777,  and  remained 
to  the  end  amongst  Mrs.  Montagu’s  most  devoted 
friends  and  regular  correspondents. 

Periodically  she  wrote  to  Mrs.  Carter  long  literary 
disquisitions  on  the  subjects  she  was  studying  at  the 
time,  and  these  letters,  though  it  would  be  quite 
impossible  to  include  them  here,  often  contain  much 
of  fresh  or  freshly  expressed  thought.  At  the  close 
of  a  lengthy  specimen  of  this  date  on  the  Memoirs 
of  Noailles  and  the  Hardwicke  State  Papers,  on  which 
she  was  bestowing  six  hours  a  day,  she  explains  why 
the  Tudors  were  always  for  her  so  much  more  interest¬ 
ing  than  the  Stuarts,  and  adds  : 

As  to  Elizabeth,  happy  wd  be  he  (if  his  talents  were  equal 
to  the  task)  who  should  write  her  general  History,  or  particular 
memoirs.  I  have  sometimes  had  a  thought  of  drawing  a 
contrast  between  her  and  Catherine  of  Medicis,  on  purpose 
to  shew  the  superiority  of  Prudence  above  cunning.  Elizabeth 
preserved  her  Kingdom  in  quiet,  tho  it  was  divided  into  various 
factions.  Catherine  raised  factions  to  get  a  little  brief  and 
precarious  authority.  Let  not  what  I  have  dropped  make 
you  raise  the  spectre  of  Plutarch  to  frighten  me.  Be  assured 
that  as  I  required  a  wise,  judicious  and  well  inform’d  man  to 
write  the  History  of  Henry  the  7th  I  shall  not  permit  a  silly 
injudicious,  uninform’d  Woman  to  undertake  that  of  his 
wiser,  greater,  and  much  more  magnanimous  Grand-daughter. 
So  pray  do  not  yawn  at  the  apprehension  of  my  History  of 
Elizabeth.  I  have  only  had  such  a  dream  after  supping  upon 
Litterary  Lambs  wool  when  some  of  you  Learned  and  ingenious 


TRIMMING  THE  PRELATES 


1775 


294 

Persons  had  flatterd  me.  The  moment  I  awoke  I  perceived 
my  incapacity,  inability  insufficiency  etc.  So  I  find  by  your 
letter,  that  the  Busy  Demons  of  all  factions  keep  Holiday 
now,  so  gracious  and  so  holy  is  the  time.  I  suppose  they  are 
all  playing  at  hazard  in  Satans  Great  Hall.  I  really  think  none 
of  them  seem  qualified  for  any  thing  but  games  of  chance, 
except  two  or  three  of  my  particular  friends.  Pray  tell  me  how 
Lord  Chatham  does  ;  he  can  play  at  skilfull  games,  and  once 
gave  check  mate  to  France. 

From  other  references  it  is  evident  that  our  Essayist 
did  for  a  long  time  coquette  with  the  idea  of  writing 
a  life  of  Elizabeth  and  studied  the  State  Papers  of 
her  reign  very  carefully. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Friday. 

I  hope  Vesey  will  give  you  an  account  of  the  Methodist 
Preacher  who  last  Sunday  pelted  the  Mitres  :  Bishop  of  Norwich 
and  ArchP  of  Canterbury  present.  Sr  Sydney  Smythe  pre- 
vaild  to  have  the  Pulpit  lent  to  this  Preacher  and  sat  with 
great  satisfaction  to  see  the  Prelates  trimmed.  Bp  of  Norwich 
sent  in  the  afternoon  to  know  if  the  same  Person  wd  preach, 
giving  for  reason,  that  if  it  were  to  be  so,  he  wd  not  attend. 
I  believe  the  head  of  the  Church  nodded,  for  it  did  not  give 
sign  of  disapprobation  in  like  manner.  Peg  Wharton  sat 
quiet  till  Preacher  was  severe  on  avarice,  then  she  roared  out 
he  was  a  foolish  fellow.  The  weaknesses  of  our  nature  sooner 
take  affront  than  the  dignities  of  our  situation. 

Lord  Chief  Baron  Smythe  was  the  senior  Judge 
interrogated  over  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill  of  1772. 
Peg  Wharton  has  already  been  alluded  to  in  1763. 


From  Courtney  Melmoth 

This  instance  of  your  delicacy  encourages  me  to  impart  a 
Circumstance  of  particular,  and  pathetic  Import — I  have 
engaged  this  Season  to  give  a  Course  of  Oratorical  and  Classical 
Lectures  in  Scotland  at  Edinburgh,  whither  my  Wife  is  gone 
to  perform  as  a  first  figure  at  the  Theatre.  A  most  heavy 
Chancery  Suit,  by  the  late  result  of  which,  I  have  lost  many 


1775 


LITERARY  PATRONAGE 


295 

thousand  Pounds,  and  the  costly  contingencies  resulting  from 
such  a  Misfortune,  have  exhausted  my  little  finances  ;  and 
anticipated  many  of  the  resources  I  derive  from  my  trifling 
literary  Efforts.  To  depend  too  much  on  the  Emoluments  of 
Science  is,  alas,  a  desperate  dependance — In  a  word  Madam, 
I  have  to  settle  a  few  small  Matters  here,  and  to  prepare  for 
my  Journey,  and  if  you  could  have  sufficient  confidence  in 
my  Integrity,  and  indeed  my  Sense  of  Honour,  as  to  accomodate 
me  with  about  £15  more — Indeed  Madam,  I  feel  myself 
blush — I  would  most  gratefully  return  it  in  the  Course  of 
Two  Months.  Allow,  I  beseech  you  Madam  for  my  visible 
embarrassment,  and  believe  me  to  be  incapable  of  abusing 
the  benevolence,  which  cannot  but  flow  from  the  purest,  and 
most  Christian  Principle. 

This  is  a  choice  example  of  a  kind  of  epistle  to 
which,  as  will  already  have  been  gathered,  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  letter-bag  was  no  stranger. 

Much  has  been  written  of  the  neglect  by  patrons 
of  their  proteges  before  and  since  Dr.  Johnson  penned 
that  terrible  letter  to  Lord  Chesterfield  : 

Is  not  a  patron,  my  lord,  one  who  looks  with  unconcern 
on  a  man  struggling  for  life  in  the  water,  and  when  he  has 
reached  ground  encumbers  him  with  help  ?  The  notice 
which  you  have  been  pleased  to  take  of  my  labours,  had  it 
been  early,  had  been  kind  ;  but  it  has  been  delayed  till  I  am 
indifferent  and  cannot  enjoy  it  ;  till  I  am  solitary  and  cannot 
impart  it  ;  till  I  am  known  and  do  not  want  it. 

But  after  all  it  was  the  whole  system  of  literary 
patronage  that  was  humiliating  and  ignominious  ; 
and  whilst  going  through  this  correspondence,  which 
naturally  includes  a  great  many  letters  from  im¬ 
poverished  writers,  one  is  sometimes  inclined  to  think 
some  commiseration  due  to  the  hapless  patron,  per¬ 
petually  pestered  with  every  absurdity  of  adulation, 
dedication,  and  solicitation,  and  condemned  either  to 
the  reluctant  support  of  mediocre  talent  or  the  acrimony 
and  invective  of  neglected  genius.  Samuel  Jackson 
Pratt,  better  known  as  “  Courtney  Melmoth,”  had 
already  figured  amongst  the  appellants,  and  now 


COURTNEY  MELMOTH 


1775 


296 

writes  in  querulous  mood  complaining  that  some 
suggestion  about  an  eyesight  remedy  had  not  been 
acknowledged  : 

Those  offers,  however,  have  not  been  replied  to,  and  you 
cannot  think  how  the  circumstance  has  hurt  me  Madam  ; 
not  upon  account  of  the  matter  itself  ;  (for  I  hope  you  are 
restored  fully  to  sight)  but  because  I  recollect  that  the  offer 
happend  to  follow  a  letter  I  sent  you  (previous  to  my  receipt 
of  your  first  favor)  wherein  I  observd  that  “  My  distress  at 
your  silence  did  not  arise  from  a  pecuniary  disappointment, 
tho  I  did  not  affect  to  be  above  the  comforts  of  literary  assist¬ 
ances — or  the  rewards  of  ingenuous  labours.”  On  a  former 
occasion,  “  many  a  year  elaps’d  ”  I  remember  Madam  your 
words,  attendant  on  a  very  amicable  action,  were  these  “  Fortune 
has  been  most  unkind  where  nature  has  been  most  bountiful.” 
Of  the  whole  human  race  I  believe  I  am  the  least  mercenary, 
and  revolt  at  the  idea  of  a  slight  that  seems  to  arise  from  a 
notion  that  I  have  written  to  you  for  money.  The  true  (and 
not  the  distorted)  history  of  my  life,  (which  one  day  the  world 
may  know)  would  easily  prove  how  incapable  I  am  of  such 
shabby  importunities,  and  how  often  I  have,  in  far  sorer  times 
than  I  have  now  to  combat  with,  maintaind  the  decent  pride 
of  character,  almost  to  starving,  rather  than  resort  to  methods 
of  relief  which  sullied  the  feeling  which  bore  me  thro  such 
clustering  difficulties. 

Adieu,  Madam,  I  have  only  to  beg  you  will  acquit  me  of  a 
despicable,  time-serving  principle.  I  inscribed  a  poem  to  you, 
because  I  admired  your  abilities  and  had  felt  your  delicate 
liberality  in  a  more  affecting  period  of  my  life.  I  tenderd 
offers  of  application  to  a  medical  friend  for  the  complaint  in 
your  eyes  because  I  grieved  at  your  indisposition  and  thought 
I  could  be  instrumental  in  your  recovery.  I  previously  said 
I  was  not  rich,  but  can  never  be  so  lamentably  poor  as  to 
forfeit,  justly,  by  an  ill  advised  appeal,  either  my  own  respecta¬ 
bility  or  merit  the  ill  opinion  of  others.- — I  am,  Madam,  your 
very  obed1-  serv*  S.  J.  Pratt. 

Pratt’s  works  occupy  three  columns  of  the  Dic¬ 
tionary  of  National  Biography ,  and  his  letters  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  are  many  and  long.  Elis  career  was  extra¬ 
ordinarily  diversified.  He  was  at  one  time  a  partner 
in  Godwin’s  library  at  Milsom  Street,  Bath  ;  he 


1775 


GARRICK’S  EPITAPH 


297 


played  Hamlet  at  Covent  Garden,  he  toured  the 
country  with  Mrs.  Melmoth  telling  fortunes  ;  he 
was  Marc  Antony  in  All  for  Love  ;  he  took 
orders  and  became  a  popular  preacher  ;  he  was,  at 
different  times,  reciter,  manager,  playwright,  editor, 
author  and  poet  ;  his  lines  inscribed  on  Garrick’s 
monument  were  selected  in  preference  to  Burke’s, 
and  described  by  Lamb  as  a  farrago  of  nonsense. 
They  end  : 

And  ’till  Eternity  with  power  sublime 
Shall  mark  the  mortal  hour  of  hoary  Time, 

Shakespeare  and  Garrick,  like  twin  stars  shall  shine, 

And  earth  irradiate  with  a  beam  divine. 

If  Burke  did  worse  than  that  it  was  prodigious. 

Always  somewhat  of  a  recluse,  and  interested  chiefly 
— apart  from  his  collieries  and  estates — in  mathematical 
and  astronomical  problems,  Mr.  Montagu,  now  in  his 
eighty-second  year,  had  become  latterly  a  complete 
invalid,  leaving  his  bed  only  for  three  or  four  hours 
of  the  day,  requiring  the  constant  and  close  attendance 
of  his  wife,  but  incapable  of  sharing  her  interests  or 
appreciating  the  damage  to  her  always  delicate  health 
which  this  prolonged  confinement  caused.  To  her 
beloved  sister,  Mrs.  Scott,  alone,  and  to  her,  I  think, 
in  only  one  letter,  Mrs.  Montagu  reveals  something 
of  what  these  last  trying  months  of  physical  decline 
implied  : 

His  intellects  seem  clear  and  his  memory  better  than  last 
summer.  His  temper  is  less  violent  than  in  health,  and  perfect 
churlishness  spreads  over  the  whole  character.  I  used  all  I 
could  to  oppose  the  spreading  of  this  kind  of  tetter  over  the 
mind,  and  often  endeavourd  to  set  things  and  persons  in  a 
favourable  light,  thinking  it  necessary  for  the  happiness  and 
virtue  of  the  person  himself,  while  he  was  to  act  in  any  sort 
of  concert  with  mankind  :  but  as  I  consider  him  now  as 
retired  to  his  inactive  chimney  corner  for  the  rest  of  his  life 
I  teach  myself  to  endure  to  hear  without  replying  to  it  what¬ 
ever  he  pleases  to  utter,  just  considering  it  as  the  hail  and  hoar 


1775 


298  MR.  MONTAGU’S  DECLINE 

frosts  engendered  by  unkindly  climates  which  fall  equally  on 
the  bountifull  field  the  beautifull  garden,  or  the  desert.  I 
have  endeavoured  to  awaken  an  apprehension  of  a  future 
state  and  to  touch  by  religion,  but  the  access  is  barred  to  every¬ 
thing  of  that  kind.  I  think  there  is  now,  as  Morris  observes, 
no  spirit  left  but  an  acid  spirit  ;  I  wonder  how  I  can  have 
the  scurvy  when  I  have  been  in  a  regimen  of  acids  many  a 
year  .  .  .  nature  seems  to  me  totally  worn  out  and  exhausted. 
You  are  very  kind  in  what  you  hint  at  ;  there  is  no  danger 
of  that  while  his  understanding  keeps  clear  ;  if  he  should 
grow  partly  childish  he  might  be  wavering  in  this  point,  but 
his  opinion  and  his  good  will  are  too  much  fixd  for  him  ever 
to  alter  them,  indeed  his  esteem  for  me  and  his  humour  seem 
to  be  well  matched  :  they  have  been  fighting  these  20  years, 
the  esteem  never  subdued  the  humour,  nor  the  humour  the 
esteem.  I  am  glad  illness  does  not  so  far  soften  his  temper  as 
to  make  him  speak  tenderly  to  me  ;  peevishness  hurts  my  ear, 
tenderness  from  a  departing  friend  wounds  the  heart.  I  own 
I  dread  the  scene  that  is  opening.  With  all  his  faults  of 
temper  he  has  good  qualities,  and  the  generosity  he  has 
shewn  to  me  is  very  engaging,  and  I  shall  be  very  unhappy  if 
he  suffers  much  in  his  decline.  He  has  great  fortitude,  but 
patience  is  better  in  little  evils  and  constant  sufferings  than 
fortitude.  Fortitude  makes  a  good  Martyr,  but  Patience  is 
the  only  Saint. 

Patience  and  fortitude  had  still  some  way  to  travel 
together  after  this  letter  was  written.  Indeed  Mr. 
Montagu  had  been  still  obstinately  determined  to 
attempt  another  journey  to  his  northern  estates,  and 
had  ordered  “  a  fine  suit  of  cloathes  and  laced  hat  ” 
for  his  pilgrimage.  His  faithful  valet  was  in  despair, 
being  certain  that  the  eight  days’  travelling  would  be 
more  than  he  could  survive  ;  but  some  early  frosts 
in  September  reinforced  his  wife’s  adroit  persuasions, 
and  the  journey  was  at  last  reluctantly  abandoned. 
He  lingered  on  through  the  winter  and  spring  of 
this  year,  but  in  May  a  fresh  feverish  attack  super¬ 
vened,  and  he  had  not  sufficient  strength  to  throw 
it  off.  His  weakness  and  incapacity  had  kept  his  wife 
in  unrelieved  attendance  at  Sandleford,  and  latterly 


1775 


DEATH  OF  MR.  MONTAGU 


299 


at  Hill  Street.  She  nursed  him  most  devotedly, 
though  her  own  health  was  far  from  robust,  and  the 
strain  was  steadily  exhausting  her.  The  end  came, 
after  a  brief  rally,  on  May  20 — -just  a  month  after 
Lexington  and  the  American  War  which  he  had  fore¬ 
seen  inevitable — he  being  “  quite  sensible  and  very 
patient  and  tractable  ”  at  the  last.  He  was  buried 
in  the  nave  of  Winchester  Cathedral,  where,  twenty- 
five  years  later,  his  widow  was  also  to  be  laid  to  rest, 
as  well  as  their  little  son  “  Punch,”  who  had  died  of 
teething  convulsions  in  1 744  when  not  much  more 
than  a  year  old. 

Many  letters  of  condolence  naturally  follow,  which 
need  not  be  quoted  here,  with  the  exception  of  an 
extract  from  one  by  his  cousin  at  Newcastle,  William 
Archdeacon,  which  is  refreshingly  matter-of-fact, 
amidst  the  usual  effusive  commonplace  of  such  an 
occasion  : 


From  William  Archdeacon 

Newcastle,  May  27 th. 

By  the  Account  I  received  of  Mr.  Montagu’s  health,  in 
your  last  favour,  I  did  not  Suppose  him  so  near  his  End,  neither 
could  I  imagine  that  at  his  frigid  time  of  life,  he  could  have 
been  attacked  with  a  fever  ;  Considering  how  he  has  been  held 
with  his  Asthmatick  Complaint  for  so  many  years  Past,  it  is 
Surprising  that  he  could  arrive  at  so  good  an  Old  Age. 

I  hope  you’l  receive  this  in  perfect  health,  and  Considering 
the  inequality  and  great  disparity  of  your  Ages,  and  the  many 
difficulties  that  you  must  undoubtedly  have  had,  to  Calm  and 
humour  the  Temper  of  so  Old  a  Gentleman  (which  must  be 
a  hard  Task)  that  he  has  in  return  made  you  an  ample  Amends 
in  his  Will,  wch  was  most  Certainly  highly  Incumbent  upon 
him  to  do,  and  was  all  he  Could  do  in  gratitude  for  the  long 
and  Tedious  Number  of  years  you  have  been  Obliged  to  Support 
his  Ill  State  of  health,  Age  and  Infirmities,  with  the  very 
extensive  trouble  you’ve  had  in  managing  his  Affairs  ; — what¬ 
ever  return  he  has  made  you  be  it  more  or  less, — I  do  most 
Sincerely  and  unfeignedly  wish  you  a  long  and  happy  series  of 
happiness  and  health  to  enjoy  the  same.  Mr.  Montagu  had 


300  SOLITUDE  AND  RETIREMENT  1775 

Certainly  a  great  Share  of  good  Sense,  and  penetration,  was  I 
realy  believe  a  Gentleman  of  the  Strictest  honour  and  Integrity, 
but  he  had  his  humours  to  a  degree  more  or  less  (as  who  is 
without  them)  and  you  had  the  Address  and  good  sense  to  put 
up  with  them,  and  bring  a  Serenity  over  them,  by  leaving  him 
to  himself  and  his  own  reflections,  with*  thwarting  him  and 
entering  into  disagreable  Arguments  which  to  a  person  of  any 
share  or  degree  of  Sense  or  reason,  must  be  the  most  Infallible 
means  to  bring  One  to  act  as  himself,  for  there  are  times  and 
seasons  to  suit  all  things  properly.  .  .  . 

Leaving  the  “  house  of  gloom  ”  in  Hill  Street 
after  the  funeral,  Mrs.  Montagu,  worn  out  with  the 
prolonged  spell  of  constant  nursing,  went  for  change 
to  her  sister’s  house  at  Chelsea  ;  but  though  “  you 
have  the  best  maid  Christy  that  ever  was  in  a  house, 
and  the  best  green  pease  that  ever  grew  in  a  garden,” 
sleep  would  not  come  ;  so  she  returned  to  Hill  Street, 
settled  her  will  with  her  lawyer  brother  Morris,  and 
then  drove  with  her  little  nephew  Matthew  and  Miss 
Gregory  to  Hadley,  “  to  settle  my  system  for  the 
year,”  and  thence  on  to  Sandleford  early  in  June. 

To  her  sister,  who  was  to  join  her  there,  she  writes  : 

My  health  is  much  better  than  it  was,  my  spirits  are  not 
the  dancing  spirits  they  used  to  be.  The  sad  the  solemn 
scene,  the  loss  of  a  very  affectionate  and  generous  friend,  all 
things  together  have  made  me  dead  spirited.  I  trust  to  my 
natural  temper  that  I  shall  again  be  what  I  used  to  be  ;  it  is 
strange  when  I  and  la  joie  n’est  plus  la  meme  chose,  your 
company  will  do  me  much  good,  Sandleford  is  in  great  beauty 
since  you  saw  it,  by  the  offices  and  Barns  which  obstructed 
the  prospect  being  removed  .  .  .  the  perfect  solitude  and 
retirement  here  will  always  tempt  me  to  pass  part  of  my 
summers  at  Sandleford  and  indeed  the  situation  is  lovely.  I 
am  at  present  under  the  mortification  of  being  deprived  of  my 
dressing  room  ;  it  is  a  very  pleasant  room,  is  above  30  feet 
long  but  very  [low]  and  I  have  lately  been  raising  the  roof. 

It  will  be  evident  from  the  above  account  of  her 
husband’s  illness  that  for  Mrs.  Montagu  the  stroke 
of  bereavement,  though  keenly  felt,  must  have  had 


1775 


A  RICH  WIDOW 


301 


elements  of  relief.  “  I  trust  to  my  natural  temper 
that  I  shall  again  be  what  I  used  to  be  ;  it  is  strange 
when  I  and  la  joie  n’est  plus  la  meme  chose.”  After 
completing  her  will  she  spent  a  month  at  Sandleford 
with  Miss  Gregory,  where  the  retirement  and  beauty 
of  her  surroundings  soon  began  to  revive  her.  “  Be¬ 
fore  I  came  hither,”  she  writes  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  “  I 
was  so  ill  and  spiritless  that  I  considered  myself  .  .  . 
as  a  mere  invalid  and  just  exactly  according  to  Dr. 
Garth’s  opinion  that  nothing  was  good  for  an  old 
woman  and  an  old  woman  was  good  for  nothing.” 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  fifty-four  ;  and  by  no  means 
really  considered  herself  an  old  woman.  After  super¬ 
intending  the  alterations  at  Sandleford,  and  arranging 
small  annuities  for  Elizabeth  Carter  and  for  Dr. 
Johnson’s  blind  friend,  Anna  Williams,  she  set  off 
at  the  end  of  June  for  her  Yorkshire  estates  and 
Northumberland  collieries,  determining,  after  she  had 
renewed  acquaintance  with  her  newly  acquired  pro¬ 
perties,  to  spend  the  winter  abroad. 

After  the  long  and  trying  period  of  uninterrupted 
nursing  and  close  confinement,  she  was  now  free, 
wealthy,  and  unfettered  ;  and  she  believed  she  had 
enough  of  life  and  energy  left  to  make  good  use  of 
her  means  and  her  liberty. 

By  the  death  of  Mr.  Montagu,  his  widow  became 
a  rich  woman  and  a  considerable  landed  proprietor, 
and  being  an  eminently  practical  person,  after  a  brief 
rest  amid  the  summer  beauties  of  Sandleford,  she 
proceeded  to  tackle  her  new  responsibilities  and 
“  settle  her  system  ”  in  good  earnest.  Mr.  Montagu 
had  left  a  legacy  of  ^3000  to  her  nephew,  young 
Matthew  Robinson,  the  second  son  of  her  brother 
Morris,  whose  education  she  now  undertook,  and 
whom  she  adopted  as  her  son  and  heir,  later  to  succeed 
to  the  Barony  of  Rokeby.  He  also  left  a  substantial 
bequest  to  his  old  friend  and  thirty  years’  corre¬ 
spondent,  the  mathematician  William  Emerson,  author 


302  MRS.  MONTAGU  IN  YORKSHIRE  1775 

of  Fluxions  and  The  Arithmetic  of  Infinities,  from  whom 
Mrs.  Montagu  received,  from  Hurworth,  a  long  letter 
of  gratitude  and  appreciation. 

“  Among  his  papers,”  he  writes,  “  you  will  find  heaps 
between  him  and  me  upon  mathematical,  philosophical  and  even 
theological  subjects  ;  and  some  of  them  not  very  orthodox,  but 
we  did  not  trouble  our  heads  about  that,  as  we  sought  nothing 
but  the  truth.  ...  A  little  time  before,  I  had  sent  him  my 
opinion  of  a  book  (Beattie  on  Truth)  which  pleased  him 
extremely,  and  he  told  me  in  the  very  last  letter  I  had  from 
him  that  he  intended  to  communicate  to  me  some  thoughts 
of  his  own  upon  that  subject.  But  he  did  not  live  to  do  that.” 

We  may  safely  surmise  that  Edward  Montagu’s 
opinion  of  Beattie’s  Essay  was  by  no  means  on  all 
fours  with  that  of  his  wife.  Beattie  himself,  indeed, 
had  been  prompted,  during  his  visit  to  the  Montagus, 
to  an  earnest  conversation  with  the  old  gentleman  on 
the  subject  of  his  lack  of  theological  conviction,  but 
without  any  substantial  or  positive  result. 

Having  also  made  some  further  monetary  pro¬ 
vision  for  her  sister,  Mrs.  Scott,  Mrs.  Montagu  now 
hastened  her  visit  to  the  Yorkshire  and  Northumber¬ 
land  properties,  so  that  she  might  be  free,  later  in 
the  year,  to  make  the  long  contemplated  tour  abroad. 

The  northern  pilgrimage  was  started  with  Miss 
Gregory  in  the  last  week  in  June,  the  journey  being 
broken  at  Burmeston,  “  opposite  the  Oak  Tree  in 
Leeming  Lane,”  her  estate  in  the  North  Riding  of 
Yorkshire. 

As  soon  as  I  had  swallowed  a  hasty  dinner  my  fair  companion 
and  I  got  into  the  chaise,  went  round  some  part  of  Burmeston 
Allerthorpe  and  Swainley,  called  on  as  many  of  the  tenants 
as  I  could,  and  sent  to  the  rest,  to  dine  with  me  the  next  day. 
I  called  at  my  Uncle’s  alms  houses,  gave  a  guinea  a  piece  to 
each  poor  person  and  to  the  school  master’s  wife,  and  made  a 
low  curtsey  to  my  uncle’s  picture.  .  .  .  The  next  day  we 
had  the  tenants  and  their  wives,  and  a  most  elegant  entertain¬ 
ment  ;  a  brood  of  fine  chickens,  at  the  top  a  great  sirloin  of 
beef,  at  the  bottom  a  loin  of  veal  on  one  side  and  leg  of  mutton 


1775  LORD  DARTREY  &  MRS.  CARTER  303 


on  the  other,  a  ham  and  pigeon  pye  in  the  middle,  with  ducks 
and  geese,  tarts  cheescakes,  pudding,  pease  &c.  to  fill  up  chinks. 

No  room  being  large  enough  for  the  whole  company, 
her  agent,  Mr.  Brown,  entertained  the  men,  Mrs. 
Montagu  being  hostess  to  the  women  and  bairns. 
In  the  evening  they  drove  on  to  Eryholme  on  the 
turnpike  road,  where  a  similar  feast  was  given  next 
day.  Here : 

My  tenant  has  five  pretty  daughters  who  are  notable  girls 
not  young  ladies,  tho’  the  Father  is  rich  and  his  Farm  is  between 
three  and  four  hundred  pounds  a  year,  when  I  called  first 
the  girls  were  weeding  in  the  field,  but  of  all  my  tenants  I 
was  most  pleased  with  an  old  man  of  75,  who  is  gay  and  alert 
as  a  youth  ;  he  would  not  get  on  horseback  but  ran  by  my 
chaise  for  some  miles  about  the  grounds.  The  gaiety  of  his 
spirits  quite  delighted  me.  .  .  .  Some  of  these  people  had 
been  60  years  tenants  of  Mr.  Montagu’s,  their  Sons  now 
manage  for  them  and  their  Grandchildren  are  playing  happily 
in  the  fields  their  Grandsires  ploughed.  I  passed  one  entire 
day  at  Eryholme  and  could  have  stayed  another  with  pleasure  ; 
the  place  is  beautiful,  and  the  people  industrious  and  happy. 

To  Mrs.Veseyshe  writes  from  Denton,  Wednesday, 
July  26,  an  amusing  comment  on  Lord  Dartrey’s 
philanthropic  energies  : 

If  by  Ld  D,  in  Stanhope  street,  and  Mrs.  C,  in  Clarges 
street,  you  mean  Ld  Dartrey  and  Mrs.  Carter,  I  think  their 
anecdotes  may  be  very  amusing  ;  that  they  run  into  strange  holes 
and  corners  is  very  certain.  Is  there  an  Alley  where  they 
have  not  made  an  Assignation  to  relieve  their  mutual  passion  ? 
their  passion  to  relieve  distress.  I  am  not  sure  that  it  has  not 
been  warm  enough  to  carry  them  to  the  hundreds  of  Drury. 
We  are  all  sure  they  once  had  a  correspondence  with  wicked 
Sr  Giles  !  It  is  almost  true  of  Ld  Dartrey  what  was  said  of 
Augustus,  that  he  was  the  Husband  of  every  Wife,  and  the 
Wife  of  every  Husband.  If  a  Bricklayer  breaks  his  neck 
from  the  top  of  a  House  his  Lordship  takes  to  the  Wife,  if  a 
Man  loses  his  Wife  while  she  is  suckling  her  child,  my  Lord 
finds  it  a  breast.  As  to  Mrs.  Carter,  she  has  children  in  every 
poor  Court  and  Alley,  all  spinster  as  she  is,  and  truely  I  believe 
her  the  Mother  of  above  an  hundred  illegitimate  infants. 


3o4  ENTERTAINING  THE  TENANTRY  1775 


To  her  Sister 

the  2 2d. 

I  was  sorry  to  hear  that  Lady  S - h  Bun - y  had  made 

an  elopement  with  Ld  W:  Go - n  since  I  had  left  Town. 

I  remember  her  a  pretty  innocent  looking  girl  and  it  is  pity 
crime  and  infamy  shd  be  written  in  the  fair  volume  of  that 

sweet  face,  but  our  married  Ladies  go  by  ad - y  to  marriage 

as  the  Misses  do  to  Edinburgh.  These  divines  must  be  stoppd 
or  the  World  will  run  wild. 

After  their  arrival  at  Denton,  further  celebrations 
marked  the  advent  of  the  new  proprietress  : 

I  had  the  gratification  of  seeing  150  of  my  black  friends 
eat  rice  pudding  and  boiled  beef  as  long  as  they  could  cram  ; 
two  nights  before  I  had  another  party  of  96,  another  60. 
My  friends  are  so  numerous  that  I  cannot  find  knives  and 
spoons  for  all  at  a  time,  but  take  them  in  parties  ;  I  shall 
invite  all  the  mothers  and  their  babes  that  belong  to  me  by 
turns.  At  one  table  last  night  I  had  70  boys  who  work  in 
the  pits.  We  made  30  quarts  of  miik  into  rice  puddings 
and  at  last  were  rather  short  in  that  article. 

The  collieries  were  working  prosperously,  and  their 
head  fitter,  Atkinson,  had  just  built  a  ship  costing 
some  thousand  pounds  and  given  it  as  a  portion  to 
his  youngest  son.  The  collier  was  christened  The 
Montagu  ;  she  carried  the  family  arms,  and  was 
now  despatched  on  her  maiden  voyage  with  Montagu 
Main  coal  to  the  Thames.  Another  excursion  was 
made  from  Newcastle  to  a  coast  farm  belonging  to 
her  at  Jarrow,  where,  at  the  Monastery,  they  were 
shown  the  veritable  chair  in  which  the  Venerable 
Bede  had  written  his  history.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Beattie 
joined  the  party  at  Denton  for  a  short  visit  at  the  end 
of  July  ;  and  apart  from  the  business  of  the  coal-mines 
and  the  farms,  Mrs.  Montagu  was  occupied  in  making 
preparations  for  her  projected  autumn  visits  to  Tun¬ 
bridge  Wells,  and  later  to  France,  where  she  intended 
taking  a  hotel  at  Montauban.  These  included  the 


1775 


MATTHEW’S  TUTOR 


3°5 


engagement  of  a  Swiss  travelling  tutor  for  her  nephew 
Matt,  to  be  found  in  all  expenses  and  a  salary  of  two 
hundred  a  year  ;  and  Mrs.  Montagu’s  views  about 
school  discipline  and  supervision  are  not  without 
interest  to-day  : 

I  thought  the  Swiss,  who  speaks  french  well,  wd  better 
carry  on  the  great  scheme  of  our  Tra veils,  making  him  a 
perfect  Master  of  the  French  language.  If  I  like  the  Swiss 
I  shall  continue  him  with  my  young  Man,  even  if  he  shd  go 
to  a  school,  for  I  think  it  is  of  infinite  consequence  that  a  young 
Person  shd  not  be  let  to  run  wild.  I  had  rather  my  Son  shd 
break  Priscians  head  than  his  footmans,  the  best  part  of  educa¬ 
tion  is  the  discipline  and  government  of  the  Passions,  and 
nothing  contributes  more  to  their  regulation  than  being  under 
proper  inspection.  Great  schools  are  much  less  dangerous  to 
young  Gentlemen  who  have  private  Tutors.  Boys  are 
naturally  inconsistent,  and  fix’d  principles  arise  from  discipline, 
and  from  a  habit  of  following  some  rules  less  variable  than 
inclination  and  the  caprice  of  the  minute.  The  Greeks  and 
Romans,  who  were  so  nice  in  the  education  of  Youth,  wd  be 
astonishd  if  they  cd  know  the  English  (now  the  first  people 
in  the  World)  send  their  Children  from  home,  from  all 
domestick  care  and  inspection,  merely  to  read  what  so  different 
an  education  inspired.  They  wd  not  wonder  at  our  Bucks, 
and  Bloods,  and  Maccaronies,  and  all  the  species  of  fine  youths 
that  bless  and  adorn  our  times.  In  these  Countries  Men 
were  form’d  by  institutions  ;  here,  they  are  left  to  run  wild, 
and  to  be  Monkeys  or  Tygers  as  disposition  inclines,  and  hence 
arises  the  number  of  humourists  for  which  England  is  remark¬ 
able. 

But  the  French  tour  was  destined  to  postponement. 
The  Montauban  Hotel  could  not  be  secured,  and 
when  other  arrangements  had  been  made,  her  large 
suite  of  servants  sent  on  to  Dover  with  the  coach  and 
baggage,  and  she  herself  was  actually  en  route  for 
Canterbury  to  join  them  for  the  crossing,  she  developed 
an  attack  of  fever  which  resulted  in  influenza  of  so 
severe  a  character  that  Dr.  Douglas  and  her  relations 
were  forced  to  forbid  her  going  further  ;  and  she  had 
reluctantly  to  give  up  the  expedition  for  another  year 

VOL.  1  x 


LE  TEXIER 


1775 


306 

and  return  to  Hill  Street.  Influenza  seems  to  have 
been  epidemic  this  autumn,  and  besides  several  of 
her  servants,  Mrs.  Vesey,  Mrs.  Hancock,  and  Mrs. 
Carter  were  all  attacked  at  the  same  time.  Writing 
to  the  latter  lady  from  London  in  December,  Mrs. 
Montagu  says  : 

The  Duchess  of  Kingston]  alias  the  Countess  of  B[ristol] 
is  a  great  comedian,  it  was  supposed  she  only  acted  a  fit  the 
other  day  at  Church,  however  it  is  certain  she  is  at  last  struck 
with  some  sense  of  her  situation.  .  .  .  Lord  Mansfield  sur¬ 
prised  every  one  by  treating  her  affair  with  great  levity,  was 
against  trying  her,  he  saying  that  the  penalty  forfeiting  her 

personal  estate  could  not  happen  because  as  Lord  B - asserted 

he  was  not  her  husband  he  could  not  claim  her  personal  estate. 

Horace  Walpole  mentions  her  fainting  at  church,  in 
a  letter  to  Lady  Ailesbury.  And  on  December  22 
Mrs.  Montagu  adds  : 

I  am  just  returnd  from  a  most  agreable  dinner  and  evening 
at  the  Garricks  ;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burke  were  of  the  party,  and 
a  french  Gentleman  who  is  famous  for  a  peculiar  talent  of 
representing  all  dramatick  characters,  but  as  he  is  first  to  have 
the  honour  to  entertain  the  King  and  Queen  he  cd  not  give 
us  any  specimen  of  his  art,  he  is  a  Gentleman  and  polite  and 

agreable.  The  Dss  of  King - n  is  in  better  health,  but 

some  little  spice  of  perjury  in  her  case  will  make  her  counterfeit 
illness.  Lady  M.  Sommerset  is  to  be  married  on  Tuesday. 

The  French  gentleman  was  the  famous  Le  Texier, 
“  Directeur  des  Fermes,”  whom  Madame  du  DefFand 
refers  to  in  a  letter  to  Horace  Walpole  as  reading 
eight  characters  and  acting  them  all  in  the  same  play. 
Further  reference  to  his  performances  will  be  found 
later. 

The  Dss  of  Kingstone,  alias  Hervey,  alias  Chudleigh,  will 
now  stand  forth  to  the  world  in  all  her  Horrors,  Impostor, 
Adultress,  Perjured,  a  forgerer,  all  the  peccadillos  of  these 
characters  will  be  proved  upon  her.  Perhaps  despair  and 
anger  will  make  her  add  self  murder  to  her  catalogue  of  crimes. 
One  cannot  think  of  her  without  shuddering.  A  certain 


HORACE  WALPOLE 
By  Kosalba  Camera 


1775 


THE  CHUDLEIGH  CASE 


307 


Gentleman  whose  connivance  was  necessary  for  the  completion 
of  her  great  scheme,  will  be  proved  to  have  received  14000L 
for  the  part  he  acted.  I  think  they  shd  be  sewn  up  in  a  sack, 
with  the  little  articles  that  accompanied  the  Parricides  execution, 
and  be  thrown  together  into  the  sea.  The  last  act  the  alias 
Dame  performd  in  England  was  cheating  a  set  of  Tenants 
to  whom  for  certain  sums  she  gave  beneficial  leases,  but  they 
are  void,  as  she  had  not  power,  being  the  wife  of  Mr.  [Hervey] 
to  give  leases  as  Dss  of  Kingston].  The  Hervey  family 
make  no  very  good  figure  on  this  occasion,  there  was  an 
acquiescence  on  the  part  of  Ld  B[ristol]  which  does  not  suit 
ordinary  morals  and  vulgar  moralists.  .  .  . 

But.  everybody  liked  Lady  Hervey,  and  she  justly 
claimed  never  to  have  lost  a  friend  save  by  death. 

The  Hervey  family  of  the  day  were,  indeed, 
sufficiently  peculiar  in  their  ways  to  justify  Lady 
Mary  Wortley  Montagu’s  classification  of  humanity 
as  “  men,  women,  and  Herveys.”  When  the  Duchess 
of  Kingston  was  presented  at  Court  after  her  marriage, 
Augustus  John  “  chose  to  be  there,  and  said  aloud 
that  he  came  to  take  one  look  at  his  widow.” 

Tom  Hervey,  uncle  of  the  Chudleigh’s  Earl,  was 
the  “  eccentric  ”  gentleman  who  eloped  with  Lady 
Hanmer  and  wrote  to  her  husband  about  “our  wife.” 


W76 


THE  VISIT  TO  PARIS - AMERICA  AND  THE  HOWES 


Tassie’s  cameo.  Fourth  edition  of  the  Essay.  Leonard  Smelt.  Hermes 
Harris.  At  Denton.  Matthew’s  change  of  name.  Preparations  for 
journey  to  Paris.  The  crossing.  French  posting.  Calais.  Amiens. 
Chantilly.  Arrival  in  Paris.  Chaillot.  Furnishing.  Meudon. 

French  Society.  Madame  du  DefFand.  Buffon.  Geoffrin.  Le 
Page  du  Boccage.  Notre  Dame.  Les  Enfans  Trouves.  Luxury 
and  dirt.  Servants.  Theatres.  Voltaire’s  Letter.  Footmen.  Con¬ 
versation.  The  Meeting  of  the  Academy.  Translations  of  Homer. 
Voltaire’s  invective.  Destouches.  Applause.  Diderot.  Versailles. 
Parisian  life.  Mahomet  and  Le  Kain.  St.  Germains.  Return  to 
England.  The  Essay  in  French.  French  and  English  ladies. 
Satan  and  Voltaire.  Brantome.  Madame  du  Boccage’s  Verses. 
The  Howes.  Letters  from  James  Hutton  and  Lord  Shelburne.  Lord 
Hardwicke  on  Chesterfield’s  Characters.  American  news. 


The  cameo  portrait  of  Mrs.  Montagu  done  by  James 
Tassie,  and  sent  by  her  to  some  of  her  friends,  reached 
Hermes  Harris  this  winter,  and  is  thus  acknowledged  : 

The  Cameo  has  been  greatly  admired,  not  only  on  its  own 
account  but  much  more  on  acct  of  the  person,  whom  it  repre¬ 
sents.  Beggars  when  gratified,  ought  not  still  to  be  importunate. 
If  ever  it  were  lawful  for  them  to  be  so,  Mr.  Harris  would 
venture  to  insinuate  how  acceptable,  he  might  add  how 
honourable,  such  a  memorial  would  be  esteemed  by  his  son 
at  Berlin. 

Piccadilly,  near  Air  Street,  5  Feb.  1776. 

James  Harris’s  son,  now  our  Minister  at  Berlin, 
was  afterwards  created  first  Earl  of  Malmesbury. 

Some  years  later  a  portrait  print  was  published 
from  the  cameo,  but  is  scarce  now. 

308 


1776  THE  WEDGWOOD  MEDALLION  309 

Tassie  modelled  his  portraits  in  wax,  from  which 
the  cameos  were  moulded  and  cast  in  paste  ;  and  many 
of  his  models — perhaps  including  Mrs.  Montagu’s — 
were  sent  to  Etruria  and  reproduced  by  Wedgwood. 

Joachim  Smith,  who  was  also  a  very  popular 
modeller  of  portraits  in  wax  residing  in  Berners 
Street,  appears  to  have  modelled  the  medallion  of  Mrs. 
Montagu  which  Wedgwood  and  Bentley  produced  in 
the  new  jasper  composition  in  1775.1  Mr.  John  Cook 
of  the  Etruria  Museum  has  kindly  sent  me  two  quaint 
extracts  from  letters  of  Josiah  Wedgwood  to  his  partner 
in  London,  Thomas  Bentley,  relating  to  this  portrait : 

July  3,  1775. — “  Mrs.  Montague  and  Mrs.  Bar- 
bault  are  not  modelled  for  a  pair  neither  in  size  nor 
character.” 

July  11,  1775. — “You  may  do  what  you  please 
with  Mrs.  Montague’s  neck  or  shoulders  but  we  dare 
not  touch  them.” 

Of  the  Tassie  portraits  she  herself  wrote  :  “  I  am 
glad  you  like  the  two  medallions.  When  you  call  at 
Mr.  Tassy’s  in  Leicester  Fields  you  will  see  the  heads 
of  many  of  your  acquaintance  finely  executed  and 
durable  too.” 

Wedgwood  had  recently  been  busily  experimenting 
with  the  Derbyshire  cawk  (sulphate  of  baryta),  which 
with  the  more  variable  carbonate  was  to  form  the  basis 
of  the  famous  jasper  ;  and  it  was  in  the  first  experi¬ 
ments  of  this  wonderful  new  white  material  that 
Joachim  Smith’s  much-admired  heads  of  Lady  Finch 
and  her  lovely  daughters  were  produced. 

The  importunacy  of  Hermes  Harris  evidently  led 
to  an  invitation  to  Flill  Street. 

From  Mr.  Harris 

Mr.  Harris  has  the  honour  to  present  his  Complemts  to 
Mrs.  Montagu,  and  to  express  his  great  concern,  that  the  Gout 
has  deprived  him  the  use  of  his  Feet. 

1  See  Frontispiece  to  Vol.  II. 


3TO 


LEONARD  SMELT 


1776 


It  is  the  only  Instance  of  his  Life,  when,  by  waiting  on  Mrs. 
Montagu,  he  thought  there  was  a  possibility  of  making  a  false 
Step. 

Piccadilly,  31  March  1776. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  Shakespeare  Essay  reached  a 
fourth  edition  this  spring,  the  Dialogues  she  had 
contributed  to  Lord  Lyttelton’s  book  being  now 
reprinted  with  it.  In  May  Madame  Necker,  wife  of 
the  Genoese  minister  at  Paris,  and  at  one  time  the 
fiancee  of  Gibbon,  came  to  see  Mrs.  Montagu  at  Hill 
Street  ;  and  Le  Texier  got  into  hot  water  at  Lady 
Spencer’s  by  reciting  Voltaire’s  “  Dimanche,”  Lord 
Spencer  vowing  he  should  never  enter  the  house 
again  ;  but  the  Frenchman  adroitly  contrived  to  re¬ 
establish  his  position.  Leonard  Smelt,  who  was 
dubbed  cousin  and  a  special  favourite  of  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu’s,  and  who  was  preceptor  to  the  Prince  of  Wales 
and  Prince  Frederick,  now  relinquished  his  appoint¬ 
ment,  and  declined  a  pension,  a  piece  of  unwonted  self- 
abnegation  which  his  “  cousin  ”  by  no  means  approved: 

While  he  is  so  watchfull  of  his  own  dignity  Pray  what  is 
to  become  of  his  Majestys.  Does  an  undischarged  obligation 
sit  better  on  a  King  than  a  reward  on  a  Subject  ?  Mr.  Smelt 
is  the  most  worthy  of  Men,  but  I  never  can  admire  anything 
that  transcends  the  bounds  of  common  sense.  If  I  were  a 
King,  such  a  Subject  wd  give  more  pain  than  a  Legion  of 
bawling,  bellowing,  Patriots,  questing  places. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  having  determined  to  carry  out  the 
postponed  visit  to  Paris  this  summer,  went  to  Denton 
in  May  to  attend  to  business  : 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

Denton,  31  st  of  May. 

I  am  well  situated  for  airing  being  on  the  edge  of  a  turnpike 
road,  and  the  said  road  commands  as  good  a  prospect  as  any  in 
this  part  of  the  country,  but  the  amenity  of  our  Southern 


1776 


MATTHEW  ROBINSON 


3i 1 

Countries  is  not  to  be  found  here.  The  people  here  are  little 
better  than  savages,  and  their  Countenances  bear  the  marks 
of  hard  labour  and  total  ignorance.  Our  Pittmen  are  literally 
as  black  as  a  coal  ;  they  earn  much  more  than  labourers, 
their  children  get  a  shilling  a  day  at  9  or  10  years  old,  but  they 
are  so  barbarous  and  uncultivated  they  know  no  use  of  money 
but  to  buy  much  meat  and  liquor  with  it.  They  eat  as  well 
as  the  substantial  tradesmen  in  great  Towns,  but  they  are 
ragged  and  dirty,  and  their  wives  are  idle  and  drunken,  so  that 
while  they  live  in  plenty  they  present  to  your  view  an  air  of 
misery  poverty,  and  oppression.  These  Pitmen  marry  and 
multiply  in  order  to  be  rich,  for  their  children  add  to  their 
prosperity.  They  are  useful  persons  to  the  general  common 
wealth,  but  considered  separately  a  strange  set  of  barbarians. 
As  the  Children  are  so  early  sent  into  the  mines  I  am  afraid 
it  will  be  impossible  ever  to  civilize  them,  but  if  I  lived  here 
I  should  attempt  it,  by  establishing  some  little  school  amongst 
them.  .  .  . 


To  her  Sister 

Friday,  31  it  May. 

I  wanted  to  inform  you  that  I  have  apply’d  for  the  King’s 
sign  manual  for  leave  for  my  nephew  Matt  to  change  his 
name  to  Montagu.  He  will  change  a  good  name  for  a  better, 
and  as  there  is  but  one  precedent  in  the  Montagu  family  of 
such  marriages  as  ours  has  produced,  and  my  poor  Cousin 
Wortley  was  only  14  years  of  age,  and  press’d  by  hunger  as 
well  as  another  ignoble  passion,  I  hope  my  nephew  Montagu 
will  not  make  such  an  alliance. 

Having  returned  to  Hill  Street  early  in  June, 
signed  a  new  will,  obtained  the  King’s  sign-manual  for 
her  nephew’s  change  of  name,  and  kissed  hands  at  a 
drawing-room,  though  “  I  dare  say  their  Majesties 
without  this  proof  of  loyalty  wd  not  have  been  afraid 
that  I  was  going  over  ye  water  to  Charley ,  nor  cd  I 
have  carried  him  any  assistance  but  some  Pittmen,” 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  preparations  for  the  deferred  visit 
to  Paris  were  complete  ;  and  she  set  forth  on  her 
journey  to  Rochester  on  June  21.  The  party 
included  her  nephew  Matthew,  her  godson  Montagu 
Pennington  who  was  Mrs.  Carter’s  nephew,  Mr. 


312 


THE  VISIT  TO  PARIS 


1776 


Blondel,  the  Swiss  tutor  for  the  two  boys,  Miss 
Gregory,  her  pretty  and  charming  companion,  her 
butler  and  maid  and  a  retinue  of  servants  and  footmen, 
with  the  great  coach,  horses,  and  much  baggage. 

Though  she  had  never  yet  stayed  in  Paris,  Mrs. 
Montagu  was  by  no  means  unknown  there  in  177 6. 
The  Duke  of  Richmond,  our  Ambassador  at  Paris, 
Lord  and  Lady  Hillsborough,  and  Lord  Lucan  were 
all  old  friends,  then  resident  in  the  French  capital, 
whilst  the  Due  de  Nivernais,  M.  Valmont  de  Bomare, 
and  M.  Necker  and  his  ambitious  wife  had  all  been 
her  guests  during  their  stay  in  England,  and  were 
ready  to  welcome  her  and  introduce  to  her  the  best 
French  society  of  the  day.  Her  book,  though  not 
yet  available  in  French,  was  well  known  in  literary 
circles,  and  even  her  coiffeuse  was  to  flatter  her  on  her 
authorship  while  she  curled  her  hair.  And  by  a 
strange  coincidence  it  was  to  happen  that  during  the 
very  time  of  her  visit,  Voltaire’s  anti-Shakespearian 
animus  exploded  with  full  violence  over  Letourneur’s 
two  volumes  of  translations  of  Othello ,  The  Tempest , 
and  Julius  Caesar ,  which  appeared — and  under  Royal 
patronage — in  the  spring  of  1776,  and  evoked  the  fierce 
denunciations  of  the  old  autocrat  at  Fernet  in  the 
letter  to  d’Argental  which  had  been  passed  round 
Paris  in  July,  a  few  days  after  her  arrival. 


Copie  Tune  lettre  attribute  a  M.  de  Voltaire 

J’apprends  que  Madame  de  St-Julien  arrive  dans  mon 
desert,  avec  le  Kain,  si  la  chose  est  vraie  je  suis  tout  etonne 
et  tout  joyeux  mais  il  faut  que  je  vous  dise  combien  je  suis 
fache  pour  l’honneur  du  trypot  contre  un  nomme  Le  Tourneur 
qu’on  dit  Secretaire  de  la  Librairie  et  qui  ne  me  savait  pas 
secretaire  du  bon  gout.  Auriez-vous  lu  deux  volumes  de  ce 
miserable  dans  lesquels  il  veut  nous  faire  regarder  Shakespear 
comme  le  seul  modele  de  la  veritable  Trajedie.  Il  l’appelle 
le  Dieu  du  Theatre,  il  sacrifie  tous  les  Franqais  a  son  Idole 
comme  on  sacrifiait  autrefois  des  cochons  a  Ceres.  Il  ne 


1776 


VOLTAIRE’S  LETTER 


3i3 


daigne  pas  meme  nommer  Corneille  et  Racine  ;  ces  deux  grands 
homines  sont  seulement  enveloppes  dans  la  proscription  generale 
sans  que  leurs  noms  soient  prononces  :  II  y  a  deja  deux  tomes 
imprimes  de  Shakespear  qu’on  prendrait  pour  des  pieces  de 
la  foire  faites  il  y  a  deux  cens  ans.  Le  maraud  a  trouve  le 
secret  de  faire  engager  le  Roi,  la  Reine,  et  toute  la  famille 
royale  k  souscrire  a  son  ouvrage.  Avez-vous  lu  son  abominable 
grimoire  dont  il  fera  encore  cinq  volumes  ?  Avez-vous  une 
haine  assez  vigoureuse  contre  cet  imprudent  imbecille  ? 
Souffrirez-vous  l’affront  qu’il  fait  a  la  France  ?  Vous  et  Mr. 
de  Thibouville  vous  etes  trop  doux  ;  il  n’y  a  pas  en  France 
assez  de  Camoufflets,  assez  de  bonets  d’ane,  assez  de  piloris 
pour  un  pareil  faquin,  le  sang  petille  dans  mes  vieilles  veines 
en  parlant  de  lui  ;  s’il  ne  vous  a  pas  mis  en  colere  je  vous 
tiens  pour  un  homme  impassible.  Ce  qu’il  y  a  d’affreux  c’est 
que  le  Monstre  a  un  parti  en  France,  et  pour  comble  de 
calamite  et  d’horreur,  c’est  moi  qui  montra  aux  Franqais 
quelques  perles  que  j’avais  trouvees  dans  son  enorme  fumier. 
Je  ne  m’attendais  pas  que  je  servirais  un  jour  a  fouler  aux 
pieds  les  couronnes  de  Corneille  et  de  Racine,  pour  en  orner 
le  front  d’un  Histrion  barbare.  Tachez,  je  vous  prie,  d’etre 
aussi  en  colere  que  moi  sans  quoi  je  me  sens  capable  de  faire 
un  mauvais  coup. 

Je  reviens  a  le  Kain,  on  dit  qu’il  jouera  six  pieces  pour  les 
Genevois,  ou  pour  moi,  j’aimerais  mieux  qu’il  eut  joue  Olimpie 
a  Paris  ;  mais  il  n’aime  point  a  figurer  dans  un  Acte  lorsqu’il 
n’erase  pas  tous  les  autres.  .  .  . 

The  stage  was  thus  admirably  set  for  a  petit  jeu 
d,'  esprit  which  should  reach  its  appropriate  denoue¬ 
ment  in  the  public  session  of  the  Academy  on 
August  25,  the  feast  of  St.  Louis. 

English  to  the  backbone  and  punctilious  to  the 
finger-tips,  Mrs.  Montagu  had  nothing  of  the 
Bohemian,  nothing  of  the  cosmopolitan  unconvention¬ 
ality  of  her  greater  literary  namesake,  Lady  Mary 
Wortley.  France,  to  all  her  upbringing  and  tradi¬ 
tion,  was  an  enemy  country,  of  which  and  all  its  ways 
it  was  but  natural  patriotism  to  think  critically  and 
judge  severely.  Its  late  revered  monarch  had  never 
been  Bien  Aime  for  her  ;  and  it  was  the  sanctuary  of 
her  bete  noire ,  Voltaire.  Prejudice  apart,  however, 


3H 


A  CHANNEL  CROSSING 


1776 


she  had  long  looked  forward  to  this  visit,  which  Mr. 
Montagu’s  age  and  infirmity  had  hitherto  made 
impracticable,  and  it  was  with  real  pleasure  and  high 
anticipation  that  she  now  embarked  on  what  was  still 
a  considerable  adventure.  The  letters  to  friends  at 
home  can  now,  with  a  few  annotations,  be  left  to  tell 
their  own  story. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Calais,  ye  23 rd  June. 

My  dear  Friend — I  know  you  are  just  one  of  those  who 
care  not  whether  a  Friend  is  hanged  or  drowned  ;  however 
I  will  just  tell  you  I  am  neither  one  nor  the  other,  but  that 
E:  Montagu  and  Co  are  safe  and  well  at  Calais.  This  morn: 
between  one  and  two  we  embarkd,  and  in  2  hours  and  ten 
minutes,  Wind  very  rapid,  and  waves  pretty  boisterous,  we 
were  wafted  hither,  and  what  delights  me,  as  it  will  greatly 
facilitate  my  future  voyage  to  Lucan,  I  was  not  in  ye  least 
sick.  I  sat  on  ye  deck  tho’  the  Waves  sometimes  washd  over 
my  head.  Little  Greg  was  once  a  little  faintish,  little  Nephew 
a  little  sickish,  all  ye  rest  of  my  folks  very  sick  indeed  except 
my  Butler.  We  were  all  wet  to  ye  skin  almost  who  were 
upon  deck,  my  bonnet  was  wet  through  and  la  Douane  an’t 
please  you  was  to  be  in  possession  of  mes  malles  for  some  time. 
I  seem’d  to  have  ye  odour  of  a  British  Herring,  so  I  got  off 
my  cloaths,  went  into  a  warm  bed  and  took  hartshorn,  ye  like 
regimen  I  prescribed  to  my  young  folks  ;  in  two  hours  and 
ten  minutes  we  rose  to  dinner,  all  very  well  and  gay,  and  I 
am  just  returnd  from  ye  other  side  of  ye  Hotel  from  visiting 
Madme  Castiglione,  who  with  Mr.  Castiglione  and  ye  Prince 
of  Salm  made  me  a  visit  from  their  Inn  last  night.  Our 
Ambassador  set  out  with  his  family  from  Calais  last  night 
or  rather  at  one  in  ye  morning  and  is  gone  forward,  which  as 
we  both  want  many  horses  is  lucky,  and  also  by  his  preceeding 
me  I  get  ye  best  apartment  bespoke  for  me  at  Desseins  [?  HesdinJ 
where  I  am  well  lodged.  If  any  English  pass  to  Calais  of 
yr  acquaintance  recommend  Mr.  Fectors  packets  and  Capt. 
Osborne,  the  civilest  best  conductor  of  Ladies  in  a  high  wind 
for  he  is  all  attentions  and  honestly  told  me  before  I  embarkd 
that  there  was  rather  too  fresh  a  gale,  but  as  ye  passage  is 
perfectly  safe  I  wd  not  loiter  at  Dover. 


1776  THE  JOURNEY  TO  PARIS  315 

This  was  a  remarkably  rapid  passage  with  a  fresh 
following  wind  ;  Mrs.  Carter  took  eighteen  hours  on 
her  return  crossing  a  few  years  later,  and  another 
correspondent  spent  twenty-six  hours  between  Dover 
and  Calais. 

The  first  letter  from  Paris  begins  somewhat  in  the 
Smollett  vein  : 


To  her  Sister 

Paris,  July  yefad. 

.  .  .  The  journey  very  unpleasant,  the  horses  are  so  bad, 
ye  postillions  so  awkward,  the  rope  harness  so  rotten,  the  Inns 
so  nasty,  that  I  think  no  one  wd  ever  travel  10  miles  in  this 
country  if  they  cd  help  it.  I  hope  our  Government  will  never 
take  ye  posts  into  its  hands,  it  is  too  small  an  object  for  kings. 
Would  you  believe  his  most  Christian  Majesty  made  a  poor 
widow  woman  pay  for  14  horses  tho  he  often  furnished  her  with 
only  12  instead  of  6  horses  in  ye  Coach  and  4  in  ye  chaise  and  4 
for  my  horse  men.  I  could  sometimes  only  get  4  for  ye  Coach 
and  2  for  my  Men  but  as  I  shd  have  had  them  if  they  had  been 
there,  I  paid  ye  same  ;  ye  same  weight  still,  say  they  is  to  be 
drawn  by  ye  Grand  Monarques  horses,  but  alas  not  with  ye 
same  speed.  By  getting  out  early  and  getting  in  late  we 
performd  our  journey,  and  for  my  part  I  never  slept  from  ye 
time  I  left  Hillstreet,  yet  I  did  not  suffer  much.  I  lost  half 
a  day  at  Calais  by  there  not  being  horses  for  me  and  my  Suite, 
which  occasiond  our  lying  in  wretched  Inns. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Paris,  July  id. 

I  know  you  did  not  mean  to  quit  me  at  Calais,  so  I  will 
carry  you  with  me  to  Paris,  shew  you  all  I  saw,  tell  you  all 
I  heard,  and  communicate  all  I  thought.  The  last  Article 
will  be  the  shortest,  for  one  thinks  but  little  when  one  is 
clattering  on  a  stone  causeway.  In  the  first  place,  however, 
I  insist  on  your  sympathizing  in  every  event,  for  without  the 
accompaniment  of  Sympathy  a  long  narrative  of  frivolous 
matters  is  the  most  tiresome  thing  in  the  world  ;  so  if  it  be 
only  for  your  own  amusement,  you  must  be  angry  that  I  was 
obliged  to  wait  so  long  for  my  complement  of  horses  at  Calais, 
and  to  pass  the  night  in  a  wretched  Inn  at  Boulogne  ;  turn 


AT  AMIENS 


1776 


316 

up  your  nose,  pinch  it  very  hard,  go  into  a  bad  bed.  dont  shut 
your  eyes  all  night,  but  rejoyce  when  the  dawning  blush  of 
Aurora  salutes  them.  Get  early  into  your  Chaise,  look  often 
behind  you,  to  see,  that  your  Coach  with  six  horses  does  not 
proceed  less  than  3  miles  an  hour.  You  are  to  stop  every 
six  Miles  (for  the  sake  of  expedition)  to  change  horses  ;  to 
Add  to  the  Advantage  of  this  continual  change,  the  most 
awkward  Animals  of  Postillions  are  to  tye  a  thousand  broken 
cords  together,  to  tye  their  Horses  to  the  Carriages,  and  these 
connexions,  not  being  formed  on  more  sound  and  firm  principles 
than  our  party  connexions,  are  very  apt  to  break  ;  the  un¬ 
connected  beast  has  no  power  over  the  great  Machine,  and 
things  do  not  tend  to  their  end  and  Object,  but  the  Postillions 
keep  cracking  their  Whips,  and  make  as  if  you  were  going  on 
at  a  prodigious  rate.  By  the  delay  at  Calais  our  journeys 
were  derange,  and  we  were  obliged  to  lye  the  second  night  at 
Abbeville.  The  next  day  you  go  with  me  to  Amiens  ;  we 
go  upstairs,  but  by  giddily  opening  a  door  on  the  right  hand 
you  get  into  a  Hogstye  :  all  our  own  fault,  for  the  poor  things 
gave  strong  indication  they  were  there,  before  Miss  Gregory 
open’d  the  door.  We  seldom  grow  wise  by  the  Misfortunes 
of  others  ;  by  as  unlucky  a  deviation  to  the  left,  I  got  into 
the  Poultry  Room,  alarm’d  the  tender  caution  of  a  Hen, 
incurred  the  resentment  of  a  Turkeycock,  and  suffer’d  the 
indignity  of  being  hissed  at  by  a  goose.  At  last  we  arrived 
where  we  should  have  gone  first,  and  there  a  Collation  was 
served  which  disappointed  our  appetites,  but  as  human  nature 
has  great  resources,  I  made  it  an  excuse  to  gratify  a  passion, 
and,  in  revenge  of  what  I  had  suffer’d  from  the  Hogs  and 
Poultry,  order’d  a  dish  of  Bacon  and  Eggs.  Remembering 
that  the  Cathedral  at  Amiens  was  built  by  the  English,  I  went 
to  see  it,  and  indeed  it  is  one  of  the  largest  richest  and  noblest 
Cathedrals  I  ever  saw.  Our  Ambassador  who  left  Calais  the 
day  before  me,  had  informed  the  people  at  the  Inn  at  Breteuil, 
that  a  Dame  Angloise  and  her  suite  would  lodge  with  them, 
and  all  things  were  prepared  very  comfortably,  but  in  order 
to  have  time  next  day  to  see  Chantilly  I  travell’d  by  the  light 
of  the  moon  to  Montreuil.  If  you  do  but  nod  while  I  stay 
there  I  protest  you  have  no  sympathy.  No,  No.  instead  of 
sleeping  you  are  scratching  your  left  arm,  and  driving  away 
the  Vermin  as  often  as  they  have  the  insolence  to  encamp 
on  your  forehead.  I  thank  you,  dear  friend  for  your  Sensibility, 
and  to  reward  it  will  now  excite  quite  another  Assortment 
of  Sympathies.  Get  ready  a  little  sublime  Melancholly  while 


l^^(3 


CHANTILLY 


3i7 


we  pass  by  a  noble  Castle  [CreilJ  mouldering  to  decay  ;  it 
was  the  residence  of  Charles  the  6th  during  his  insanity.  Here 
for  his  Amusement  Cards  were  invented  ;  who  would  have 
thought  they  would  have  endured  longer  than  the  Castle  ? 
and  continually  irritated  the  idle  rage  they  were  meant  to 
divert  ?  I  imagine  this  Castle  was  made  of  the  same  materials 
as  Pandora’s  box  !  It  was  so  far  out  of  the  road  I  could  not 
visit  the  noble  Edifice  ;  its  situation  is  very  fine,  it  stands  on 
a  Hill,  is  finely  shaded  by  Wood,  and  a  river  lyes  winding  at 
its  foot.  We  shall  soon  arrive  at  Chantilly,  which  you  will 
behold  with  reverence  as  it  was  built  by  the  Connetable  de 
Montmorency,  and  once  inhabited  by  the  great  Conde  !  As 
you  have  certainly  seen  the  place  I  will  chiefly  dwell  on  my 
Adventures  there.  After  having  wonder’d  at  the  greatness, 
admired  the  Magnificence,  and  approved  the  elegance  of  the 
Apartments  of  State,  I  was  carried  into  the  Cabinet  of  natural 
curiosities.  There  I  beheld  a  Philosopher  at  his  studies,  and 
therefore  stepp’d  back.  He  begged  me  to  come  in,  I  did  not 
recollect  his  face,  he  could  not  see  mine,  for  it  was  shaded  by 
a  great  bonnet  and  a  pair  of  Spectacles.  He  enquired  my  name, 
and  then  ran  to  me,  accusing  me  of  having  design’d  to  deprive 
him  of  an  Opportunity  to  express  his  grateful  remembrance 
of  the  civilities  I  had  shewn  him  in  London  ;  this  Philosopher 
was  no  less  than  the  celebrated  Mr.  de  Bomar.  He  threw 
down  his  book,  and  insisted  on  shewing  me  what  was  still 
unseen,  the  garden  called  in  the  English  taste,  etc.  Through 
Alleys,  and  round  trellis  work  Bowers,  he  led  me  to  see  a  sort 
of  hameau  Masque,  and  it  is  really  a  good  Mask,  a  water  mill, 
the  Miller’s  House  ;  a  Cottage  and  la  Maison  du  Greffier, 
which,  as  it  wears  a  rustick  appearance  does  not  lead  to  expect 
that  within  it  contains  the  most  splendid  room  for  a  Ball. 
Then  you  are  carried  to  see  L’isle  d’amour,  le  Pavilion  de 
Venus,  and  many  pretty  fancies.  I  mention  these  things  as 
I  believe  they  are  new.  ...  I  found  these  little  things  were 
what  the  present  owners  valued  themselves  upon,  and  delighted 
in  ;  so  heartily  wish’d  them,  a  merry  merry  vauxhall.  The 
Prince  of  Conde  [author  of  the  Life  of  Le  Grand  Conde] 
was  hunting  when  we  were  there,  when  he  return’d  he  chid 
Mr.  de  Bomar  for  not  getting  me  refreshments,  but  letting 
me  go  to  dine  at  a  bad  Inn.  I  was  so  tired  with  twisting  and 
winding  round  the  english  Garden,  that  I  desired  to  put  off 
seeing  the  Stables  till  after  dinner  ;  they  are  truly  Princely 
and  I  suppose  the  finest  in  the  World.  At  the  stables  the 
Marquis  de  Valence  came  to  me,  and  begg’d  if  I  return’d  to 


3 1 8 


A  PARISIAN  DAME 


1776 


see  the  rest  of  Chantilly  (for  you  may  suppose  of  so  vast  a  place 
I  could  in  one  morning  see  only  a  small  part)  he  might  have 
the  pleasure  of  showing  it.  .  .  . 

Jacques  Christophe  Valmont  de  Bomare  (1731- 
1807)  was  a  distinguished  naturalist,  and  author  of  a 
Mineralogie  and  a  Dictionary  of  Natural  History. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Paris,  the  1 5 th  July. 

...  I  am  quite  ashamed  of  all  the  civilities  and  goodness 
I  meet  here.  The  Societies  are  very  agreable.  There  is  a 
Comtesse  de  Rochefort  who  is  all  the  3  Graces.  I  was  told 
in  England  I  resembled  her  ;  alas  !  no  !  I  am  much  more 
like  Peg  Wharton  ;  I  think  indeed  the  best  can  be  said  for 
me  is  that  I  am  in  a  medium  between  them,  not  a  golden  but 
a  leaden  mean.  I  am  glad  you  do  not  know  her,  you  wd  never 
like  me  again.  She  is  not  to  be  described,  so  I  wont  attempt 
it.  Mr.  and  Madme  Neckar  have  been  very  good,  they  are 
with  justice  highly  esteemd  here.  Mr.  Walpoles  passion  Mdme 
de  DuFans  [DeffandJ  has  a  great  deal  of  Witt  and  is  very 
agreable. 

I  am  now  quite  a  Parisian  dame.  I  go  to  the  Comedie, 
then  to  suppers,  and  do  all  things  in  the  right  parisian  mode. 
I  have  seen  a  very  pretty  Comedie  and  the  Zaire  of  Voltaire 
by  celebrated  actors.  The  Comedie  pleased  me  extreamly, 
and  if  as  my  Friend  Dr.  Young  says.  Wonder  is  involuntary 
praise ,  why  I  praised  the  Tragedy.  How  shall  I  make  you 
conceive  it  ?  For  a  Heroine  take  a  Vixen  in  Hystericks,  for 
the  Hero,  the  most  angry  Bull  that  has  roared  at  a  Bull  baiting. 
Let  them  bellow  and  scream  till  they  amaze  you.  .  .  .  However 
all  these  tones  are  modulated  by  art,  all  the  gestures  regulated. 
When  the  despairing  Heroine  walks  off  the  stage  her  hands 
are  held  as  high  above  her  head  as  she  can  stretch  her  arms. 
All  this  custom  has  renderd  agreable,  so  what  cannot  custom 
do  ?  Madme  Neckar  and  Mr.  Neckar  to  whom  I  was  engaged 
to  supper  came  to  my  box  and  proposed  to  me  to  go  in  their 
Coach  to  their  Country  House  that  we  might  talk  over  the 
play  as  we  went.  I  was  discreet  and  did  not  express  above  a 
thousandth  part  of  my  sensations.  There  was  a  great  deal  of 
good  company  at  supper,  great  elegance  and  order  in  everything; 
the  Neckars  are  amiable  and  respectable  as  well  as  learned  and 


VIEW  OF  THE  QUAY  AND  VILLAGE  OF  CHAILLOT 
By  Raguenet 


1776 


CHAILLOT 


3:9 


ingenious.  There  was  of  the  party  a  Madme  de  dufens  [DeffandJ 
much  celebrated  for  her  witt,  she  had  desired  to  be  introduced 
to  me,  was  exceedingly  obliging,  and  I  was  charmed  with  her, 
and  the  more  as  she  is  4  score  years  of  age,  totally  blind,  and  is 
as  gay  and  lively  as  18.  She  eat  a  very  hearty  supper,  and  I 
left  her  behind  me  at  one  in  the  morning.  I  am  to  sup  with 
her  on  wensday. 

Chaillot,  where  Mrs.  Montagu  took  up  her  resid¬ 
ence  in  July,  was  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Seine,  just 
north  of  L’ile  Macquerelle  or  des  Cygnes,  and  a  little 
west  of  the  Champs  Elysees  and  Tuileries.  It  con¬ 
sisted  of  a  street  of  villas  running  north-east  and 
parallel  with  the  river,  with  gardens  on  either  side. 
Across  the  Seine  to  the  south  was  the  Plain  de  Grenelle 
and  its  chateau,  with  Vaugirard  beyond,  whilst  the 
Bois  de  Boulogne  stretched  westward  and  the  Plain  of 
St.  Denis  to  the  north.  Paris  has  now  absorbed  and 
surrounded  what  was  then  a  suburban  village,  where 
Therezia  Cabarrus  or  Madame  Tallien,  Her  Most 
Serene  Highness  of  the  Directory,  had  her  “  cottage,” 
whence  Barras  was  to  instal  her  as  Queen  of  the 
Luxembourg. 

When  in  Paris  recently  I  spent  an  hour  in  wander¬ 
ing  about  the  older  part  of  Passy  near  the  Seine,  which 
was  once  Chaillot,  and  which  in  its  river-side  position 
at  the  south-west  corner  of  the  capital  must  have 
corresponded  more  or  less  to  Chelsea.  The  Rue  de 
Chaillot  is  now  part  of  the  Avenue  Quantin  Bauchart, 
but  I  imagine  Mrs.  Montagu’s  house  was  somewhere 
adjoining  the  Rue  Raynouard,  which  winds  down  the 
hillside  parallel  with  the  river,  from  the  Trocadero 
Place  towards  Auteuil,  and  where  there  are  still  some 
eighteenth-century  residences,  though  there  is  nothing 
in  her  letters  which  would  enable  one  to  identify  the 
one  she  occupied. 


320  CRIMSON  DAMASK  AND  BUGS  1776 


To  her  Sister 

Chaillot, 24 th  July 

Did  you  ever  expect  to  receive  a  letter  from  me  from 
Chaillot.  Did  you  ever  expect  that  a  letter  of  mine  to  you 
wd  be  carried  to  ye  Post  by  mon  concierge.  I  do  not  think, 
tho  all  this  has  ye  air  of  a  Novel,  that  I  shall  have  any  adventures 
more  amusing  than  if  I  was  at  Kensington  Gravel  Pitts,  or 
Cheney  Row  at  Chelsea.  Miss  Gregory  indeed  who  looks 
divinely  in  her  pouffe  and  Baviere  may  have  some  adventure, 
but  as  to  me,  tho  really  I  think  my  Carracolle  and  Coqueluchon 
become  me,  yet  I  do  not  flatter  myself  with  the  hope  of  any, 
not  even  when  my  Bouffante  is  finish’d,  for  which  ye  Woman 
who  was  to  make  it  makes  me  wait  a  long  time.  Every  hour 
is  so  employd  that  I  can  only  write  very  short  letters,  but  I 
can  assure  you  I  am  prodigiously  well  :  I  believe  few  people 
wd  have  taken  a  Country  House  all  unfurnish’d,  sent  to  a 
Tapessier  and  have  got  it  furnishd  and  be  established  in  it  in 
ye  space  of  a  week.  The  air  has  done  me  wonderful  service, 
I  have  been  rather  more  infested  with  bugs  than  at  Paris,  but 
as  most  of  the  English  Ladies  here  tell  me  they  are  apt  to  bring 
lice  home  from  publick  places,  I  am  happy  I  have  not  sufferd 
such  an  indignity.  I  have  just  sent  back  my  bed  which  lookd 
like  a  state  bed  for  a  Prince,  being  canopied,  and  of  silk  crimson 
damask,  but  swarming  with  bugs.  I  spend  my  time  very 
agreably,  for  really  ye  Society  here  is  delightful!.  There  is 
such  ease,  politeness,  and  grace  in  ye  manners  of  ye  people  of 
fashion  as  we  see  rarely  with  us.  I  have  not  time  to  send 
you  a  particular  account  of  the  Persons  with  whom,  and  ye 
places  where  I  have  been,  for  I  have  been  in  a  continual  hurley 
burley  for  many  days. 

I  hope  the  articles  of  feminine  adornment  are 
correctly  deciphered.  Pouffe  =  headdress  ;  baviere  = 
beaver  hat  ;  caracal  =  lynx  fur  ;  coqueluchon  =  pos¬ 
sibly  a  sort  of  boa  tied  with  ribbon  ;  bouffante  =  a 
bustle  skirt. 

On  August  6,  to  Mrs.  Carter  she  says  : 

We  all  went  on  Friday  to  Meudon,  the  palace  is  in  a  manner 
ruinous.  La  Marechalle  de  Mirepoix  has  lodgings  in  the  new 
palace  and  she  was  walking  in  the  garden.  She  found  out  I 


1776 


SOCIETY  IN  PARIS 


321 


was  there  and  very  politely  desired  me  to  come  and  pass  a  day 
with  her,  as  she  walked  some  time  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
observing  a  lady  with  her  who  was  an  object  of  my  attention, 
being  the  Sister  of  the  celebrated  Madame  du  Barry.  I  dined 
on  Saturday  at  Madme  de  Guerchy’s,  and  on  Sunday  dined 
and  spent  the  evening  at  Madme  Neckars.  Monr  Buffon, 
Monr  Thomas  and  le  Chevalier  de  Chatelux  were  of  the  party. 
They  were  all  very  polite  to  me  and  to  our  Shakespeare. 
Voltaire  has  lately  written  a  most  outrageous  letter  of  abuse 
upon  le  Comte  de  Catuelan  and  Monr  le  Tourneur  on  account 
of  their  translation  of  Shakespear.  Voltaire  says  he  first  made 
the  French  accquainted  with  Shakespear  by  having  extracted 
some  pearls  de  son  immense  fumier.  He  sent  a  paper  to  the 
French  Academy  to  the  same  effect  but  in  more  measured 
terms.  I  am  to  have  a  copy  of  each. 


To  her  Sister 

Chaillot,  Aug. ye  nth. 

I  desire  you  to  follow  me  on  Sunday  to  Madme  Neckers, 
dine  there  with  Monsr  de  Bouffons  and  many  learned  Academi¬ 
cians,  and  take  a  gentle  walk  with  them  in  ye  evening  along 
ye  banks  of  ye  Seine,  which  is  the  most  discreet  of  all  rivers  ; 
somewhat  of  a  sloven  indeed  but  it  glides  very  temperately 
along.  On  Tuesday  you  shall  dine  with  us  at  Col  Drumgolds, 
and  hear  him  read  some  composition  of  his,  made  for  ye  Royal 
family  in  France  when  they  were  young.  The  delicacy  with 
which  he  conveyd  virtue  and  truth  into  things  so  tender  as 
young  minds,  and  royal  minds,  wd  please  you.  That  night 
you  shall  sup  at  la  Marquise  de  Defants  with  Russian  Princes, 
french  Princesses,  beaux  esprits  etc.  On  Wensday  you  shall 
dine  at  Madme  de  Guerchys,  on  thursday  at  le  Due  de  Nivernois, 
on  friday  at  le  Chateau  de  Meudon  with  Madme  la  Marechalle 
de  Mirepoix.  There  a  Comtesse  de  Cambysse  shall  sing  some 
charming  songs  made  by  le  Due  de  Nivernois.  After  dinner 
la  Marechalle  shall  carry  you  to  see  Belle  Vue,  a  place  made 
at  immense  expence  by  Madme  Pompadour,  and  really  very  fine, 
but  the  Castle  de  Meudon  has  a  still  finer  prospect.  The  D: 
and  Duchesse  de  Nivernois  and  Madme  Rochefort  were  of  ye 
party  at  Madme  de  Guerchys  ;  ye  Duke  and  Madme  de  Rochefort 
at  Madme  de  Mirepoix.  As  Belle  Vue  cannot  be  seen  but  by 
an  order  from  les  Mesdames  to  whom  it  now  belongs  I  had 
attempted  it  in  vain.  Madme  Mirepoix  having  heard  me  say 
VOL.  I  Y 


322 


DINNERS  AND  SUPPERS 


1776 


so,  politely  carried  me  thither  herself.  Yesterday  being 
Saturday  we  dined  at  le  Marquis  Caracioli’s  where  we  found 
the  representatives  of  all  the  Kings  and  states  in  Europe,  and 
Messieurs  Buffon  and  Dalembert,  and  ye  most  pleasing  of  all 
ye  beaux  esprits,  le  Chevalier  de  Chatlieu,  whose  manners  like 
his  birth  are  truly  noble.  In  the  evening  we  went  to  Madme 
Geoffrin  and  so  lost  ye  pleasure  of  seeing  le  Due  and  Duchesse 
de  Nivernois  who  came  to  Chaillot  to  make  us  a  visit,  as  did 
also  Madme  du  Boccage  and  a  very  agreable  Man  of  l’Academie 
des  Sciences.  Tonight  we  were  at  Madme  du  Rochefort  and 
Madme  du  Boccages.  By  your  preference  of  suppers  to  dinners 
I  find  plainly  you  are  my  younger  sister.  I  have  not  for 
many  years  loved  to  sup  or  be  supped  with.  It  is  intolerable 
in  London  on  account  of  ye  lateness  of  ye  hour;  I  do  not 
find  ye  french  less  gay  at  dinner  than  at  supper,  the  instant 
they  have  done  eating  they  rise  from  table  at  each  meal,  and 
after  supper  there  is  a  card  table  for  those  who  chuse  to  play. 
On  account  of  the  conversation  I  like  visiting  here  as  much 
as  I  abhor  it  in  London,  but  now  the  weather  is  not  hot  I  wd 
go  often  to  the  Comedies  if  I  cd  find  time.  We  have  lately 
had  many  showers  every  day,  but  there  is  a  vivacity  in  a  french 
shower  that  it  is  less  disagreable  than  ye  dripping  days  in  our 
climate. 

The  Marquise  du  Deffand — already  in  her  eightieth 
year — was,  of  course,  Madame  de  L’Espinasse’s  rival 
saloniere  and  Horace  Walpole’s  blind  devoted  friend 
and  correspondent. 

Jean  Dromgold  (1720-81)  came  to  England  in 
the  suite  of  the  Due  de  Nivernais  ;  formerly  com¬ 
mandant  of  the  Ecole  Militaire,  he  became  erudite 
and  eloquent,  a  student  of  belles-lettres.  There  are 
many  letters  from  him  to  Mrs.  Montagu  in  this 
collection. 

Madame  de  Guerchy  was  the  widow  of  the  brave 
General  Claude  Francois,  Comte  de  Guerchy,  whom 
Mrs.  Montagu  had  known  when  he  was  Ambassador 
in  London  and  the  Chevalier  D’Eon’s  rival  and 
would-be  destroyer. 

The  Chateau  of  Meudon,  long  a  Royal  residence, 
was  rebuilt  by  the  Dauphin,  and  destroyed  by  a  shell 


i7 76  DU  DEFFAND  AND  GEOFFRIN  323 

during  the  Prussian  bombardment  of  1871.  The 
Pompadour  Belle  Vue  commanded  wonderful  views 
across  the  Seine,  now  rather  obstructed  by  intervening 
villas. 

Comte  de  Buffon,  the  great  naturalist,  was  then 
publishing  his  monumental  volumes  on  birds  and 
minerals,  whilst  D’Alembert  was  busy  with  the 
Opuscules  mathematiques  and  his  endless  Eloges. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  spelling  of  French  names  is  any¬ 
thing  but  precise  ;  but  de  Chatlieu  must  be  meant  for 
the  famous  Francois  Marquis  de  Chastellux  who 
fought  in  the  American  War,  and  wrote  the  treatise, 
De  la  felicite  publique. 

Madame  Geoffrin,  then  also  nearly  eighty  years 
of  age,  and  who  died  a  year  after  this  visit,  ought  to 
have  been  a  particularly  interesting  acquaintance,  as 
she  might  perhaps  —  not  too  good-naturedly  —  be 
described  as  Mrs.  Montagu’s  “  opposite  number  ”  in 
Paris.  Both  were  social  and  literary  celebrities,  both 
were  beneficent  women,  both  were  the  friends  of  the 
encyclopedists,  philosophers,  and  literati  of  their  day. 
And  if  Mrs.  Montagu  was  to  be  the  victim  of  Cumber¬ 
land’s  sneers,  Marie  Therese  Geoffrin  had  survived 
the  Lettres  persanes  and  the  ridicule  of  Montesquieu. 

Marie  Anne  Le  Page  du  Boccage,  poetess  and 
beauty — “  forma  Venus,  arte  Minerva  ” — survives 
only  in  her  letters  to  Madame  Duperron.  She  also 
corresponded  with  Mrs.  Montagu  after  the  Paris 
visit,  and  published  Lettres  sur  1' Angleterre.  She  paid 
a  visit  to  Voltaire  at  Ferney,  where  her  homage  was 
rewarded  by  ridicule. 


To  her  Sister 

The  11th. 

I  am  to  dine  with  Madme  Duboccage  and  dinner  is  here 
at  2  o’clock.  I  have  had  a  dozen  people  here  this  morning 
and  a  Coiffeur  is  now  absolutely  dressing  me.  You  imagine 
the  rouge  mend  me,  and  indeed,  in  a  small  degree,  it  does  ; 


324 


CONCERNING  ROUGE 


1776 

but,  as  I  am  obliged  to  wear  it,  to  comply  with  the  fashion, 

I  look  as  if  I  had  a  scarlet  fever.  I  had  a  very  pleasant  party 
at  dinner  here  on  Monday.  I  am  to  have  another  tomorrow, 
and  on  friday  la  Marechlle  de  Mirepoix  and  several  french 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen  are  to  sup  with  me.  On  Saturday 
Monsieur  de  Buffons  and  several  of  the  Academy  are  to  dine 
with  me.  I  have  got  an  excellent  Cook.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond  sends  me  noble  presents  of  game  and  here  is  all 
kinds  of  good  fowl  in  the  markets  with  fruit,  and  every  good 
thing,  and  indeed  plenty  of  gibier. 

I  propose  to  go  and  gape  at  Versailles  on  Sunday,  and  see 
the  french  King  whom  I  have  not  yet  seen.  That  you  may 
not  suppose  we  are  overlooked  by  the  Poets,  I  sent  you  a  copy 
of  verses  made  to  our  honour  and  glory  by  le  Chevr  de  la 
Coliniere.  A  young  man  here  had  made  a  very  middling 
translation  of  my  Essay  ;  happily  it  was  not  gone  to  the  press, 
so  I  bought  it  of  him  rather  than  let  him  print  it.  [She  had 
to  pay  him  25  louis  d’or.]  While  Voltaire  lives  the  writers 
of  reputation  dare  not  translate  it,  and  I  dont  like  to  have  it 
ill  done.  The  fear  of  Voltaire  here  is  comical,  the  Witts  all 
tell  you  the  most  odious  stories  of  him,  but  make  Court  to  him. 

Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu,  writing  to  Lady 
Rich  from  Paris  in  1718,  says  : 

A  propos  of  countenances  I  must  tell  you  something  of 
the  French  ladies  ;  I  have  seen  all  the  beauties,  and  such — 
(I  can’t  help  making  use  of  the  coarse  word)  nauseous  creatures  ! 
so  fantastically  absurd  in  their  dress  !  so  monstrously  unnatural 
in  their  paints  !  their  hair  cut  short  and  curled  round  their 
faces,  and  so  loaded  with  powder  that  it  makes  it  look  like 
white  wool  !  and  on  their  cheeks  to  their  chins,  unmercifully 
laid  on,  a  shining  red  japan,  that  glistens  in  a  most  flaming 
manner  so  that  they  seem  to  have  no  resemblance  to  human 
faces.  I  am  apt  to  believe  that  they  took  the  first  hint  of 
their  dress,  from  a  fair  sheep,  newly  ruddled  !  Tis  with 
pleasure  I  recollect  my  dear  pretty  country  women. 

And  Smollett,  writing  in  1763,  says  : 

As  for  the  far  d  or  white  with  which  their  necks  and  shoulders 
are  plaistered,  it  may  be  in  some  measure  excusable  as  their 
skins  are  naturally  brown  or  sallow;  but  the  rouge,  which  is 
daubed  on  their  faces,  from  the  chin  up  to  the  eyes,  without 
the  least  art  or  dexterity,  not  only  destroys  all  distinction  of 


r776 


NOTRE  DAME  DE  PARIS 


3^5 


features,  but  renders  the  aspect  really  frightful  or  at  best  conveys 
nothing  but  ideas  of  disgust  and  aversion.  You  know  that 
without  this  horrible  masque  no  married  lady  is  admitted  at 
Court  or  in  any  polite  assembly,  and  that  it  is  a  mark  of  distinction 
which  no  bourgeoise  dare  assume. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  evidently  imbued  with  the 
notion  that  she  must  not  only  be  painted  to  the  full 
rigour  of  the  French  fashion,  but  must  support  the 
tradition  of  her  country  (and  possibly  also  the  reputa¬ 
tion  of  her  personality)  by  living  in  considerable  style 
in  Paris. 

“  I  have  more  books,”  she  writes  to  her  brother,  “  than  I  can 
read,  and  more  clothes  than  I  can  wear,  and  more  lace  than 
I  can  want.  It  is  surprizing  what  money  I  have  spent  out  of 
a  principle  of  economy  ;  because  they  are  cheap  I  have  bought 
more  shoes  than  a  millipede  could  wear  in  7  years.  By  my 
caps  you  would  think  I  had  more  heads  than  the  Hydra.  I 
have  3  footmen  and  a  coachman  in  new  liveries  with  gold 
shoulder  knots  on  each  shoulder,  fine  scarlet  and  gold  dress 
for  my  postillion  and  six  horses  in  my  coach  when  I  go  any 
distance.  I  went  yesterday  to  the  great  cathedral  of  Notre 
Dame  to  hear  and  see  the  Grande  Messe  on  her  assumption 
as  it  is  called.  The  service  was  very  sumptuous  and  the 
church  finely  adorned  with  pictures  and  tapestry,  and  as  a 
festival  suits  much  the  genius  of  the  people,  it  was  celebrated 
in  every  form  of  joy  and  jolity  through  the  town.  In  the 
evening  I  varied  the  amusement  by  going  to  see  the  Processions 
pass  through  the  streets  ;  as  Notre  Dame  is  the  tutelar  Saint 
of  Paris  several  magistrates  and  civil  as  well  as  religious  orders 
walk  in  the  Processions,  and  the  bells,  the  music  and  chanting 
make  it  altogether  well  worth  ones  attention.  But  the  place 
from  whence  we  were  to  see  it  was  also  extraordinary,  it  was 
from  a  window  of  the  Hospital  of  Les  Enfans  trouve.  An 
Abbe  was  to  conduct  thither  Lord  and  Lady  Hillsborough 
and  their  family  and  mine.  They  possess  now  the  very  apart¬ 
ment  a  L’ Hotel  du  Parlement  d’Angleterre  which  I  had.  I 
called  on  them  there.  Lady  Hillsborough  and  our  conductor 
got  into  my  coach  and  we  were  surprised  to  find  ourselves 
carried  into  a  very  long  room  perfectly  sweet  and  clean  (no 
common  thing  at  Paris)  in  the  middle  of  which  were  arranged 
two  rows  of  a  sort  of  white  baskets  covered  with  linen.  Women 


LES  ENFANS  TROUVES 


1776 


326 

in  a  religious  habit  on  a  sudden  snatched  off  the  whole  linen 
which  covered  the  baskets,  and  behold  in  each  lay  a  little  infant, 
none  above  7  or  8  days  old  ;  if  some  had  not  cried  I  should 
have  taken  them  for  dolls.  After  keeping  them  at  most  8 
days  they  are  sent  to  be  nursed  in  the  country.  I  suppose 
there  were  near  200  infants  in  their  little  beds.  The  parents 
may  reclaim  them  when  they  please.  I  believe  this  custom 
prevents  some  murders  and  other  evils,  but  the  number  of 
children  sent  thither  increases  so  much  every  year  that  I  fear 
in  time  few  of  the  poor  will  educate  their  infants,  which  will 
be  a  great  evil.  The  domestic  ties  and  charities  will  be  dis¬ 
solved  and  lost,  and  I  believe  few  would  make  good  citizens 
or  good  men.  The  house  where  the  children  are  received  is 
admirably  conducted,  but  God  knows  how  the  poor  babes  are 
treated  at  the  Peasants  habitations  and  places  to  which  they 
are  sent.  The  numbers  received  last  year  were  6505.  .  .  . 
We  are  going  tonight  to  sup  at  la  Marquise  du  Deffand’s, 
tomorrow  we  go  to  Marli 1  to  see  the  waters  play.  The  Queen 
gave  an  order  that  they  should  play  one  day  for  Lady  Lucan.” 

Mrs.  Montagu,  bristling  with  British  freedom, 
found  the  goddess  Tyranny  a  bad  farmer  in  France 
and  a  bad  architect  in  Paris.  Unkempt  fields  on  her 
journey  from  Calais  were  succeeded  by  “  streets 
narrow  dark  and  dirty,  and  Luxury  even  as  she  is,  a 
tawdry  slut  and  a  great  sloven.  My  apartment  was 
large  and  lofty,  well-gilt,  abounding  in  fine  looking 
glasses,  velvet  chairs  and  damask  beds  ;  but  the 
smells,  but  the  vermin.  .  .  .”  However, 

their  tables  are  very  well  served,  but  what  is  of  much  more 
importance  in  the  entertainment,  their  manners  are  easy  and 
polite  ;  knowledge  with  parts  render  their  conversation  very 
delightful.  The  women  in  grace  of  person  and  of  manner 
excell  us  ;  they  possess  in  the  highest  degree  whatever  can 
attract  admiration  ;  the  men  have  the  most  agreeable  way 
of  signifying  that  admiration,  the  style  and  manner  of  con¬ 
versation  is  extremely  agreeable.  I  am  often  in  society  with 
the  most  celebrated  beaux  esprits,  and  they  really  are  very 
captivating.  I  have  not  spent  a  dull  or  insipid  hour  in  company 

1  Le  Chateau  de  Marly,  built  by  Mansard  for  Louis  XIV.,  was  destroyed 
at  the  Revolution. 


1776 


THE  BEAUX  ESPRITS 


3^7 

since  I  came  to  Paris.  I  have  met  with  great  civilities,  and 
must  say  their  attention  to  strangers  is  very  amiable,  and  has 
a  generosity  and  nobleness  in  it  which  I  love  and  reverence. 

Paris  was  demoralising  our  Mrs.  Montagu  rather 
rapidly  ;  but  we  shall  see  later  on  that  in  the  cool 
seclusion  of  Sandleford  these  eulogies  were  qualified 
considerably. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  doubtless  read  Smollett’s 
Travels  through  France  and  Italy  published  ten  years 
previously,  and  it  is  interesting  to  compare  her  good- 
humoured  appreciation  of  French  social  converse  with 
the  disgruntled  tirade  of  poor  Tobias  upon  the  natural 
capacity  of  the  Frenchman,  written  from  Paris  to 
Mrs.  M - : 

October  1763. 

He  becomes  a  compleat  connoisseur  in  dressing  hair  and 
in  adorning  his  own  person  under  the  hands  and  instructions 
of  his  barber  and  valet  de  chambre.  If  he  learns  to  play  upon 
the  flute  or  fiddle,  he  is  altogether  irresistible.  But  he  piques 
himself  upon  being  polished  above  the  natives  of  any  other 
country  by  his  conversation  with  the  fair  sex.  .  .  .  He  learns 
like  a  parrot,  by  rote  the  whole  circle  of  French  compliments, 
which  you  know  are  a  set  of  phrases,  ridiculous  even  to  a 
proverb  ;  and  these  he  throws  out  indiscriminately,  to  all 
women,  without  distinction,  in  the  exercise  of  that  kind  of 
address  which  is  here  distinguished  by  the  name  of  gallantry  : 
it  is  no  more  than  his  making  love  to  every  woman  who  will 
give  him  the  hearing.  It  is  an  exercise,  by  the  repetition  of 
which  he  becomes  very  pert,  very  familiar  and  very  impertinent. 
Modesty,  or  diffidence,  I  have  already  said,  is  utterly  unknown 
among  them. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Vesey  on  August  28,  Mrs. 
Montagu  says  : 

I  would  not  miss  this  opportunity  to  send  you  a  letter 
Voltaire  wrote  in  his  wrath  against  M.  le  Tourneur  for  having 
translated  some  of  Shakespeares  plays.  As  the  French  are 
always  polite,  when  the  letter  was  produced  to  me  they  made 
many  excuses  for  Voltaire  having  called  our  Bards  works 
“  un  enorme  fumier.”  I  said  “  ce  malheureux  fumier  avoit 


328 


THE  DIRT  OF  PARIS 


1776 


engraisse  une  terre  ingrate,”  with  which  reply  they  were  much 
pleased,  as  they  know  Voltaire  has  got  many  of  his  fine  things 
from  Shakespear. 

To  her  sister  she  writes,  under  date  September  7  : 

My  vagrant  scheme  has  more  than  answered  my  expectation 
as  to  pleasure  ;  and  for  health,  except  a  few  days  last  week 
that  I  was  a  little  feverish,  it  has  been  very  well.  Tho  health 
is  always  a  matter  of  great  importance,  it  is  still  more  so  to  an 
English  person  in  France.  Miss  Gregory  in  her  room,  and 
your  humble  servant  in  hers,  have  no  way  to  escape  the  bugs 
but  by  lying  on  the  ground  without  bedstead  or  curtains  ;  the 
bed  of  sickness  must  be  more  delicately  made  ;  then  the  total 
want  of  female  servants  would  be  grievous  on  such  occasions, 
and  no  female  can  be  got  who  is  of  the  decent  and  cleanly  sort 
of  our  under-servants.  I  have  a  family  composed  of  English, 
french,  German,  Italian  and  flemish  persons  ;  all  this  does 
very  well  in  the  holyday  of  health  but  it  is  unlike  my  orderly 
domestick  system  in  England,  which  like  a  good  clock  seldom 
wants  to  be  new  regulated.  My  house  is  most  delightfully 
situated,  having  a  view  of  the  finest  publick  buildings  in  Paris, 
just  at  the  distance  one  would  place  them  to  form  a  picture  ; 
the  Seine,  which  is  of  the  colour  and  consistence  of  green  pease 
soup  at  Paris,  is  of  a  better  colour  here,  and  takes  up  no  more 
no  less  of  the  Landscape  than  the  eye  is  willing  to  afford  it. 
.  .  .  Miss  Gregory  and  I  are  not  yet  cured  at  our  astonishment 
at  the  nastiness,  the  stinks,  and  the  narrowness  of  the  street, 
the  wretched  appearance  of  the  common  people,  the  miserable 
air  of  the  shops,  and  the  mesquinerie  of  the  Theatres.  At 
the  Playhouses  some  dirty  Women  [lead]  you  through  dark 
horrid  passages  to  your  box.  The  stage  is  small  but  well 
enough  lighted,  the  actors  and  actresses  do  well  enough  in 
comedy  except  in  parts  of  passion,  and  then  they  are  terrible. 
What  pleasure  people  can  find  at  Paris  who  are  not  received 
into  french  company  I  cannot  imagine.  .  .  .  The  gentleman 
who  has  the  charge  of  all  the  King’s  pictures  made  me  a  visit 
the  other  day  to  say  he  would  at  any  time  be  ready  to  attend 
me  to  shew  them  ;  he  is  an  Academician,  he  made  many 
apologies  for  the  piece  which  had  been  read  against  Shakespear 
from  M.  de  Voltaire,  and  said  he  thought  it  unworthy  of  the 
Academy  as  well  as  unjust  to  Shakespeare.  Indeed  it  was 
I  believe  much  against  the  will  of  most  of  the  Academicians, 
who  many  of  them  shrugged  up  their  shoulders  and  gave  strong 


1776 


FRENCH  CONVERSATION 


329 


signs  of  disapprobation  ;  but  they  are  all  afraid  of  Voltaire, 
and  he  is  enraged  that  the  french  will  now  know  whence  he 
has  taken  many  of  his  brilliant  thoughts.  His  fear  of  being 
discovered  in  his  larcenies  went  so  far  that  when  one  La  Place 
had  translated  Shakespeare  he  prevailed  with  the  Minister  not 
to  let  him  have  an  imprimatur,  so  the  poor  mans  trouble  was 
thrown  away.  .  .  .  Here  is  no  conjugal  faith,  paternal  care, 
filial  affection,  brotherly  love,  except  among  a  few,  nor  is  there 
any  domestick  order.  Servants  in  general  have  little  regard 
for  the  family  they  live  in,  they  are  at  board  wages,  eat  at 
public  houses  and  are  gaming  all  day.  Every  anti-chamber 
is  a  gaming  hole,  for  indeed  the  anti-chambers,  except  in  great 
houses,  are  the  dirtiest  and  most  miserable  looking  places 
imaginable.  Our  footmen  are  allowed  to  carry  our  trains 
as  we  go  upstairs  ;  footmen  make  the  stairs  in  a  horrid  pickle 
and  with  the  general  sluttishness  here  a  staircase  is  very  disgust¬ 
ing  often  in  smell,  often  in  appearance.  I  used  to  dread 
going  up  and  downstairs  at  the  Hotel,  in  the  Luxembourg 
Palace  it  is  as  bad.  The  agreeableness  of  conversation  in  the 
Society  here  makes  part  of  the  day  pass  very  [well]  but  in 
sickness  and  bad  weather  an  English  person  would  suffer  much. 

To  Mr.  Burrows  she  concludes  an  eight-page  letter 
describing  all  sorts  of  Paris  doings  : 

I  am  much  pleased  with  the  conversation  one  finds  here  ; 
it  is  equally  free  from  pedantry  and  ignorance.  All  the  hours 
I  have  passed  in  mixed  company  I  have  spent  agreably.  The 
men  of  letters  are  well  bred  and  easy,  and  by  their  vivacity  and 
politeness  shew  they  have  been  used  to  converse  much  with 
women.  The  Ladies  by  being  well  informed  and  full  of  those 
graces  we  neglect  when  with  each  other  shew  they  have  been 
used  to  converse  with  men.  As  to  the  common  people  they 
seem  infinitely  inferior  to  ours. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sepr.  ith. 

I  believe  that  I  told  you,  in  my  last  letter  I  had  been  at 
P Academy  francoise  on  St.  Louis  day.  Descourses  are  read 
by  the  Academicians  relative  to  the  subject  on  which  the 
Poets  are  to  deliver  their  verses  to  be  judged  by  the 
Academy,  who  bestows  the  prize  on  him  whose  work  is  most 
approved.  . .  . 


33©  THE  MEETING  OF  THE  ACADEMIE  1776 

The  Academicians  were  seated  round  a  table,  behind  them 
rows  upon  rows,  sat,  or  stood,  the  Audience,  or  more  properly 
speaking  the  Spectators,  for  in  what  Country  are  there  not 
more  who  go  to  see  publick  Orations  than  to  hear  them  ?  Le 
Chevalier  de  Chastellux  (whose  name  I  have  before  mentioned 
to  you,  but,  guided  by  my  ear,  mispelt)  open’d  the  Session  in 
a  very  ingenious  and  elegant  manner.  Two  Rival  Bards 
presented  their  translations  of  the  parting  of  Hector  and 
Andromache  at  the  Scsean  Gate,  when  little  Astyanax  was 
affrighted  at  the  plumes  on  his  Fathers  Helmet.  .  .  .  What 
Modern  Miss  would  not  have  seiz’d  the  plumed  Helmet  and 
boldly  put  it  on.  Of  what  are  our  boys  afraid  or  Girls  Ashamed? 
Oh  !  it  is  wise  in  Parents  to  give  little  Misses  and  little  Masters 
Audacity.  But  to  proceed  to  the  translations  that  were  read  ; 
One  of  them  was  by  the  Audience  thought  greatly  superior 
to  the  other,  but  in  both  Hector  was  much  polish’d  by  his 
Travels  in  France  ;  He  did  not  send  his  Dame  home  to  mind 
her  Household  business,  and  mend  little  Stys  bibs  ;  As  to 
Madme  Andromache,  she  was  most  loquaciously  dolente,  like 
the  Widow  in  our  Grief  a  la  mode.  Then  for  Monsieur  son 
fils,  he  was  nothing  like  the  ignorant,  raw,  blubbering  boy  in 
Homer.  It  was  vastly  pretty  to  have  him  so  unnaturally 
natural,  so  very  simple  without  simplicity,  and  reason  about 
the  Helmet  because  he  could  not  reason.  If  a  man  was  to 
study  to  be  naive  for  an  hundred  years  he  could  not  hit  it  better, 
and  so  the  Audience  clapped  exceedingly,  and  divided  the 
prize  between  the  two  Poets.  Had  Homer  himself  been  there 
he  would  not  certainly  have  got  one  Sprig  of  Lawrel.  Old 
Shakespear  and  he  must  be  content  with  the  immortal  Garlands 
with  which  great  Nature  crowns  them.  .  .  .  After  the  Poets 
had  received  the  prize,  1’Abbe  Arnauld  [Franqois  Abbe  de 
Grandchamp,  litterateur  and  musician]  made  a  discourse  on 
the  Utility  of  Studying  and  imitating  the  Classiks,  and  said 
much  in  praise  of  original  genius,  but  gave  an  oblique  hint, 
that  genius  never  bloom’d  north  of  the  most  northern  part  of 
France,  and  that  men  of  genius  must  not  study  certain 
barbarians  ;  but  this  was  done  so  gently,  and  obliquely  that 
one  was  not  obliged  to  understand  it  ;  and  I  would  not  seem 
to  do  so. 

Then  rose  Monr  D’Alembert  to  read  a  most  blackguard 
abusive  invective  of  Monr  de  Voltaires  against  Shakespear, 
the  translation  of  whose  works  he  apprehended  would  spoil 
the  taste  of  the  french  Nation.  He  attributed  to  Shakespear 
many  things  he  never  said,  he  gather’d  together  many  things 


1776 


VOLTAIRE’S  INVECTIVE 


33i 


the  rudeness  of  the  Age  allow’d  him  to  say,  and  with  a  few 
mauvaises  plaisanteries  season’d  the  discourse  ;  with  as  much 
mauvaise  Joy  he  gave  an  Account  of  the  Tragedy  of  Gorbuc, 
and  represented  it  as  the  taste  of  the  Nation  in  Drama,  tho’ 
not  ten  people  have  for  these  hundred  years  read  Gorboduc. 
This  trash  of  Monsieur  Voltaires  answer’d  the  great  purpose 
of  his  life,  to  raise  a  momentary  laugh  at  things  that  are  good, 
and  a  transient  scorn  of  men  much  superior  to  himself ;  but 
I  must  do  that  justice  to  the  Academy  and  Audience,  they 
seem’d  in  general  displeased  at  the  paper  read.  I  was  ask’d 
by  an  Academician  if  I  would  answer  this  piece  of  Voltaires, 
and  [he]  did  not  doubt  but  I  could  do  it  very  well.  I  said 
Mr.  L’abbe  Arnauld  had  done  much  better  than  I  could,  in 
the  praises  he  had  given  to  original  genius,  and  the  benefits 
arising  from  the  study  of  them  ;  that  I  remembered  60  years 
ago  in  the  same  Academy  Old  Homer  had  met  with  the  same 
treatment  with  Shakespear  ;  that  they  now  did  justice  to 
Homer,  I  did  not  doubt  but  they  would  do  so  to  Shakespear  ; 
for  that  great  Genius’s  Survived  those  who  set  up  to  be  their 
Criticks  or  more  absurdly  to  be  their  Rivals.  Many  of  the 
Academicians  have  declared  their  dislike  of  what  was  done  ; 
that  it  was  not  only  unjust  to  Shakespear  but  unworthy  of  the 
Academy.  Mr.  D’Alembert  then  pronounced  an  eloge  of 
Destouches  whose  Comedies  are  reckon’d  next  to  Molieres. 
There  was  a  great  deal  of  spirit  and  ingenuity  in  the  eloge, 
and  some  Anecdotes  of  Destouches  that  were  interesting. 
Indeed  everything  but  the  paper  of  Voltaire  was  very  ingenious, 
and  such  as  did  honour  to  the  Speaker  and  the  Assembly.  The 
custom  of  Clapping  every  bon  mot  that  falls  from  the  Speaker, 
the  Pleader,  or  the  Preacher,  will  entirely  ruin  their  eloquence. 
I  was  surprized  to  hear  the  Pleaders  clapp’d  in  a  Civil  Cause, 
I  was  sorry  to  hear  the  Speakers  clapp’d  in  a  learned  Assembly, 
but  I  was  shock’d  to  hear  the  Preacher  clapp’d  in  the  Chapel 
of  St.  Louis.  The  good  man  divided  his  discourse  into  parts, 
as  soon  as  he  had  finished  the  first  part  the  Congregation 
clapp’d  more  than  we  do  at  the  Play  House.  At  the  con¬ 
clusion  they  dismissed  the  Preacher  with  what  is  thought 
here  the  greatest  of  all  blessings,  a  thunder  of  Applause.  I 
must  tell  you  at  the  same  time,  for  I  should  hate  to  misrepresent 
any  people,  especially  a  people  from  whom  I  have  received 
great  civilities,  and  for  whom  I  have  due  admiration,  I  was 
assured  that  the  Sermon  on  St.  Louis  was  clapp’d  as  being  a 
Political  affair.  However  the  place  was  consecrated,  le  Bon 
Dieu  was  on  the  Altar,  and  Mass  was  afterwards  performd. 


332  MRS.  MONTAGU’S  FRENCH  1776 

In  one  of  the  Churches  the  other  day  the  Te  Deum  being  well 
perform’d  was  exceedingly  clapp’d  as  I  was  assured.  .  .  . 

I  expect  Lord  and  Lady  Hillsborough  and  Lord  Eglintoune 
to  dinner  and  also  the  celebrated  Diderot.  I  dined  last  week 
at  Monsr  de  Buffons  and  he  has  promised  to  dine  with  me  next 
week  with  some  other  of  the  Academy,  and  also  Comtesse  de 
Marchais,  etc.,  all  very  agreable  people.  I  supp’d  with  her 
last  night,  to  night  shall  sup  at  Madme  Neckars.  Monsieur 
de  Buffons  is  very  communicative  and  agreable  and  I  have 
taken  a  great  liking  to  Monsr  Thomas  who  has  wrote  very 
well  on  a  delicate  subject,  Woman,  but  you  may  know  him 
better  by  his  eloges  on  many  celebrated  men. 

It  is  tantalising  to  read  the  bare  record  of  meetings 
with  so  many  interesting  people — Buffon,  du  Deffand, 
D’Alembert,  and  Diderot — whom  Saintsbury  has  placed 
amongst  the  most  fertile  thinkers  and  felicitous 
writers  of  France — and  to  hear  no  more  than  their 
names.  That  Mrs.  Montagu’s  knowledge  of  French 
was  by  no  means  superficial  is  proved  by  her  criticisms 
of  Voltaire’s  translations  of  Julius  Caesar  ;  but  she 
found  difficulty  in  fluent  converse,  and  Madame  du 
Deffand  wrote  to  Horace  Walpole  (who,  by  the  way, 
suffered  in  the  same  way  in  Paris)  that  her  not  always 
successful  efforts  to  express  herself  made  conversation 
“  penible.”  Nevertheless  the  letters  record  more 
than  one  bright  sally  which  must  have  pleased  her 
hosts.  When  one  of  the  Academicians,  after  the 
reading  of  Voltaire’s  violent  invective,  expressed  his 
concern  that  what  she  had  just  heard  might  have  dis¬ 
tressed  her,  “  Moi,  Monsieur  !  ”  she  replied,  “  point 
du  tout.  Je  ne  suis  pas  amie  de  Monsieur  Voltaire.” 


To  her  Brother ,  Morris  Robinson 

Sept.  \6tk. 

Mr.  Buffon,  a  very  celebrated  author  here,  dined  with  me 
with  many  persons  of  fashion  yesterday,  and  I  had  Montagu 
at  our  dinner,  and  they  assured  me  his  pronounciation  was  very 
good,  which  is  a  point  I  wishd  to  gain,  as  to  fluent  expression 
and  elegant  phrase,  they  will  be  gaind  at  any  time,  but  in  early 


1776  A  CRITICISM  OF  THE  FRENCH  333 

youth  the  true  pronounciation  must  be  acquired.  I  was  at 
Versailles  to  day  to  see  the  King  and  Queen  dine,  because  all 
strangers  go  to  Versailles  to  see  the  King  and  [Queen]  dine. 
Unluckily  the  Queen  having  been  ill  their  Majesties  dined  in 
private.  However  I  saw  the  K:  and  was  at  the  Queens  Mass, 
and  got  a  sight  of  all  the  royal  family.  I  breakfasted  with 
the  Abbe  Pedrini  at  Versailles.  .  .  .  From  Versailles  we  went 
to  Trianon  :  at  six  o’clock  I  got  back  to  Chaillot,  and  brought 
home  our  Cicisbeo’s  Ld  Eglinton  and  a  french  Gentleman  to 
dinner.  On  friday  the  Dss  of  Mirepoix,  some  french  Ladies 
and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  etc  suppd  with  me.  I  am  to 
dine  tomorrow  at  our  Ambassadors,  and  the  next  day  a  large 
party  is  to  dine  with  me.  On  Wensday  I  am  to  sup  at  the 
Marquise  de  Deffants,  a  Lady  much  celebrated  for  her  witt 
and  vivacity,  and  who  has  always  a  polite  and  agreable  Society 
about  her.  I  have  not  yet  had  time  to  see  half  the  Pictures 
and  other  things  that  are  to  be  seen  here,  but  shall  endeavour 
to  visit  them  before  I  leave  Paris.  My  great  object  has  been 
to  get  well  acquainted  with  the  french  character,  and  my  great 
amusement  the  french  Society.  I  shall  be  glad  I  have  been 
at  Paris  even  when  I  have  left  it.  I  find  a  greater  difference 
from  us  in  their  sentiments,  their  tastes,  their  modes  of  life, 
than  I  had  imagined.  The  only  object  (except  of  a  very  few 
of  the  very  great)  is  pleasure,  they  have  not  found  out  that 
perpetual  diversion  without  a  certain  mixture  of  business,  and 
duties,  and  intervals  of  retirement,  tires.  The  Ladies  pass 
from  the  toilette  to  the  spectacles,  and  from  thence  to  parties 
at  supper.  They  cultivate  with  great  care  all  the  little  graces, 
and  as  it  is  every  Womans  ambition  to  be  amiable,  there  is 
a  good  [deal]  of  jealousy  of  each  others  charms.  The  Men 
endeavour  to  be  agreable,  and  each  Sex  succeeds  very  well. 
But  the  first  object  should  be  to  gain  esteem.  An  English 
character  is  indeed  often  a  beauty  disgraced  to  a  certain  degree 
by  being  a  sloven  in  manners,  a  french  one  is  frequently  ugliness 
well  drest  and  adornd.  I  am  far  from  thinking  the  french 
Women  lead  happier  lives  than  we  do.  Domestick  tender¬ 
nesses,  and  even  domestick  cares,  are  suitable  to  our  Natures. 
The  change  we  make  in  our  amusements  and  mode  of  life  by 
spending  the  summer  in  the  Country  is  I  think  much  in  our 
favour.  You  are  a  very  indulgent  Confessor  in  finding  such 
good  arguments  in  favour  of  my  dissipation  of  my  money, 
but  indeed  the  notice  that  has  been  taken  of  me  here  made  it 
proper  for  me  to  live  in  a  different  style  from  those  English 
who  only  go  to  see  the  plays  and  operas  ;  I  have  passd  my  time 


334 


LE  KAIN 


1776 


very  agreably,  and  my  health  is  improved,  tho  I  undergo  a 
great  deal  of  fatigue,  having  scarcely  half  an  hour  free  from 
visits  or  notes. 

To  Mrs.  Carter  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  from 
Chaillot : 

Ye  2 6th  Sbre. 

I  will  leave  to  my  Godsons  pen  the  account  of  all  the 
magnificient  and  Courtly  objects,  and  will  only  tell  you,  what 
I  saw  with  most  surprize,  even  a  translation  of  ye  first  part 
of  Shakespears  Henry  ye  4th  written  by  the  royal  hand  of 
Madme  Adelaide.  She  certainly  understands  English  perfectly 
well.  The  mirth  of  Falstaffe,  ye  wrath  of  Hotspur,  and  ye 
grave  admonitions  of  Henry,  were  all  happily  translated. 
I  wish  ye  translation  was  printed  because  it  wd  vex  Voltaire. 
I  was  ye  other  night  at  ye  Theatre  to  see  his  Mahomet  acted 
by  ye  famous  actor  le  Kain.  I  am  so  fatigued  with  the  business 
of  ye  day  that  I  have  not  vivacity  enough  to  describe  ye 
monstrosity  of  ye  entertainment.  Voltaire  has  written  a 
prodigious  panegyrick,  on  himself,  which  he  calls  his  life  and 
anecdotes,  and  pretends  it  is  written  by  some  of  his  Friends, 
but  all  people  perceive  it  is  done  by  his  own  hand,  and  laugh 
at  him  prodigiously. 

Henri  Louis  Lekain,  whose  role  in  Le  Mauvais 
Riche  was  the  beginning  of  his  long  friendship  with 
Voltaire,  has  often,  though  not  very  intelligently,  been 
spoken  of  as  the  French  Garrick.  His  Memoirs , 
including  many  letters  from  Garrick  and  Voltaire, 
were  published  by  his  son. 

From  J.  Burrows  at  Hadley,  September  25,  to 
whom  she  had  sent  a  lengthy  account  of  the  Academic 
meeting,  she  received  a  long  letter  of  congratulation  : 

In  the  meantime,  as  I  am  an  Englishman,  I  am  glad  you 
are  an  Englishwoman,  not  only  for  the  great  advantage  of 
your  living  among  us,  but  because  you  do  not  travel  to  us, 
and  give  an  Account  of  us  to  your  Friend  at  Paris. — But  how 
astonishing  the  good  fortune,  for  you,  in  your  own  proper 
person  to  be  present  at  such  a  Dotage,  from  such  a  Man,  on 
such  a  Subject  !  there  wanted  nothing  to  compleat  the  scene, 
but  that  with  our  own  glorious  Elizabeth,  on  a  similar  occasion, 
you  had  on  the  Spot,  in  his  own  French,  before  his  own 


1776 


AT  ST.  GERMAINS 


335 


Academy,  repelled  the  futile  stroke  :  Legatum  expectavi, 
Heraldum  accepi  ;  you  know  the  story  ;  I  am  sure  at  the  end 
of  it  you  might  have  taken  up  her  Majesty’s  words,  Ods  Fish, 
my  Lords,  the  Ambassador  has  made  me  rub  up  my  old  Latin, 
but  I  think  my  Polish  Brother  will  send  me  no  more  such 
messages. 

On  the  last  day  of  September  Mrs.  Montagu  and 
Miss  Gregory  went  with  Lady  Margaret  Macdonald 
to  St.  Germains,  but  in  such  wet  weather  that  they 
could  not  walk  about. 

The  castle  is  old  without  being  venerable,  and  large  without 
being  great.  I  could  not  help  thinking  of  our  silly  James 
and  his  air  fed  courtiers  who  lived  on  hopes  never  realised. 

.  .  .  Lord  and  Lady  Lucan  and  Lord  Eglinton  dined  with  me 
today  ;  they  tell  me  there  was  yesterday  a  report  in  Paris 
that  we  had  had  a  terrible  defeat  in  America.  The  Emperor 
[Joseph  of  Germany]  is  expected  here  next  summer  ;  it  is 
supposed  he  comes  to  look  at  Madame  Elizabeth  [sister  of 
Louis  XVI.  ;  guillotined  1794].  She  is  very  pretty  and 
genteel,  and  I  hear  very  sensible  and  amiable.  .  .  .  The 
Marquis  de  Noailles  and  his  lady  did  me  the  honour  to  make 
me  a  visit  yesterday.  I  think  they  will  be  much  liked  in 
England. 

The  charming  little  Madame  Elizabeth  was  then 
only  twelve  ;  but  it  was  not  an  Imperial  crown  that  was 
in  store  for  her,  in  the  terrible  years  that  loomed  ahead. 
Hers  is  but  one  among  the  brave  pathetic  figures  that 
flit  through  the  dark  pages  of  the  Revolution,  where 
we  see  her  now  and  again,  holding  the  little  Dauphin’s 
hand,  evoking  protection  for  her  royal  brother,  offering 
her  breast  to  the  assassins  in  search  of  the  queen  ;  then, 
at  last,  hurried  out  to  Samson’s  knife,  condemned 
under  the  hideous  libel  of  depraver  of  public  morals. 

The  defeat  in  America  must  have  been  the  Parisian 
version  of  Lord  Howe’s  victory  at  Long  Island  on 
August  27. 

Mrs.  Montagu  and  her  retinue  returned  to  England 
on  October  1 5,  thus  concluding  an  exhausting  but 
greatly  enjoyed  visit  ;  and  after  a  night  or  two  at  Hill 


336 


THE  RETURN  JOURNEY  1776 

Street  she  went  down  to  rest  and  recuperate  at 
Sandleford. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Hillstreet,  Sunday,  October  18 tk. 

Arriving  last  night,  I  propose  to  quit  Hillstreet  on  Tuesday 
morning  and  go  and  meditate  in  the  quiet  of  Sandleford  on  the 
bustle  I  have  lived  in  for  some  months.  I  shall  take  a  sober 
walk  in  my  Groves  while  the  leaves  are  dropping  round  me, 
and  when  November  blasts  whistle  through  the  bare  branches 
I  will  return  to  town,  brush  up  my  social  virtues,  and  be 
earliest  or  latest  in  your  circle.  Mrs.  Carter  was  to  tell  you 
how  well  we  pass’d  the  sea  in  our  packet  boat,  I  staid  a  night 
at  Canterbury  and  yesterday  just  after  the  Sun  set  up  his  horses 
and  the  Highwaymen  mounted  theirs,  I  arrived  with  all  my 
young  folks  and  my  train  in  perfect  health  without  any  disaster, 
which  I  think  a  great  blessing.  I  cannot  tell  you  any  news 
but  that  the  Porpusses  had  a  fine  regatta  the  day  I  crossd  the 
sea.  Never  did  the  ocean  appear  more  charming,  on  the 
level  brine  sleek  Panope  with  all  her  sisters  playd.  The  sun¬ 
beams  trembled  on  the  waves,  and  in  less  than  6  hours  we 
arrived  as  near  Dover  as  the  ship  could  approach  at  low  water, 
we  were  then  obliged  to  get  into  a  little  boat  ;  it  was  dusk, 
and  the  Boatmen  brought  us  where  the  sluice  poured  in  upon 
us.  I  believe  we  were  in  danger,  but  certainly  we  were  in 
fear  of  our  lives.  Gentle  Greg,  no  match  for  wind  and  waves, 
fell  into  a  fit  ;  indeed  our  condition  was  unpleasant.  The 
Sailors  said  had  a  whole  hogshead  of  the  water  roll’d  in  upon 
us  we  should  not  have  sunk.  We  had  more  than  a  Kilderkin, 
and  I  think  that  was  coming  too  near  the  mark  ;  dire  was  the 
tossing,  deep  the  roaring  of  the  sea,  so  my  dear  friend,  never 
approach  the  running  of  a  sluice  if  you  can  help  it.  We  left 
Ld  and  Lady  Lucan  etc  at  Paris,  but  they  were  soon  to  go  to 
Fontainebleau.  The  Queen  of  France  has  taken  much  notice 
of  Lady  Lucan  on  account  of  her  painting  miniatures,  and 
Miss  Molesworth  is  much  admired  for  her  beauty,  and  what 
is  perhaps  more  rare  in  France,  her  great  modesty. 

So  end  our  selections  from  the  chronicle  of  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  visit  to  France.  Though  “  she  did  not 
design  after  being  a  fortnight  in  Paris  to  send  an 
account  of  the  manners  and  Government  of  the 


1776  PARIS  AND  MRS.  MONTAGU  337 

Country,”  she  certainly  contrived,  in  the  thick  of  the 
hurly-burly  of  her  days  and  nights  there,  to  post 
home  to  friends  in  England  a  good  many  hastily 
formed  judgements  of  men  and  things  ;  and  we  are 
able  to  see  pretty  clearly  what  she  thought  of  Paris 
and  its  life.  But  amongst  the  many  celebrated  and 
interesting  people  with  whom  she  came  in  contact, 
some  must  surely  have  put  on  record  what  they 
thought  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  We  have  not,  con¬ 
fessedly,  found  time  to  search  for  any  such  references, 
and  should  much  like  to  be  put  in  touch  with  some,  if 
any  have  survived.  Monsieur  de  Bomare,  for  instance, 
who  did  not  at  first  recognise  the  intruder  whose  face 
was  “  shaded  by  a  great  bonnet  and  a  pair  of  spec¬ 
tacles,”  but  who  proved  so  charming  a  cicerone  at 
Chantilly  ?  Or  the  Due  de  Nivernais,  who  so 
courteously  entertained  the  great  English  lady  who 
wore  her  boufFante  with  an  air,  and  was  rouged  to  a 
scarlet  fever  ?  Or  the  clever  Madame  Necker,  who 
was  once  engaged  to  the  great  Gibbon,  and  whom  Mrs. 
Montagu  spared  her  real  feelings  about  Voltaire’s 
Zaire  ?  Or  even,  perchance,  the  wicked  old  Squire 
of  Ferney  himself,  who  added  jibes  for  the  Academy 
to  his  larcenies  on  Shakespeare.  Our  little  story 
must  therefore  be  one-sided  and  incomplete.  It  is 
clear  that  Mrs.  Montagu  had  a  great  time  in  Paris, 
and  it  is  conceivable  that  Paris  had  a  great  time  with 
Mrs.  Montagu. 

A  year  after  her  return  to  England  her  Essay  on 
Shakespeare  was  published  in  French  and  in  Paris,  and 
very  politely  criticised,  except  by  Frederick  Grimm. 
Voltaire  himself,  when  in  Paris  for  the  last  time  in 
1778,  just  before  his  death,  addressed  to  the  Academy 
a  second  Letter,  in  which  he  referred  to  the  enthusiasm 
of  “  Mrs.  Montagu,  an  estimable  citizen  of  London,” 
who  “  has  been  inspired  with  a  pardonable  zeal  for 
the  fame  of  her  country,”  but  begged  “  her  and  the 
English  to  mind  their  own  dissensions  and  cease 
VOL.  1  z 


338  VOLTAIRE  AND  THE  ESSAY  1776 

finding  fault  with  the  great  men  of  France.”  But 
the  Essay  had  done  its  work.  The  estimable  citizen 
had,  as  Monsieur  Huchon  himself  concludes,  given  a 
courageous  and  effective  answer  to  Voltaire’s  imperti¬ 
nent  remarks,  and  materially  impaired  his  authority  as 
a  critic  of  English  literature. 

It  was  not  long  before  a  complete  French  transla¬ 
tion  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  enabled  Europe  to  form  its 
own  judgement.  Italy,  too,  sent  its  tribute  when  in 
1779  the  historian  poet  Lorenzo  Pignotti  addressed  to 
Mrs.  Montagu  from  Florence  some  graceful  and 
grateful  verses,  a  copy  of  the  Essay  having  been  given 
him  by  Lady  Elizabeth  Compton. 

It  would  of  course  be  outside  the  domain  of  these 
pages  to  embark  on  any  discussion  of  the  merits  of  the 
Shakespeare  Essay  or  the  Voltaire  attack,  which  have 
been  most  interestingly  and  ably  analysed  at  length  in 
the  second  chapter  of  M.  Huchon’s  admirable  little 
volume.  Though  its  value  has  been  depreciated  by 
modern  critics  such  as  Mr.  Saintsbury  and  Mr. 
Lounsbury,  the  impartial  student  who  cares  to  read  it 
to-day  will  probably  agree  with  M.  Huchon  in 
declaring  it,  of  its  time,  a  courageous — even  audacious 
— piece  of  pioneer  work  marked  by  much  sound  good 
sense,  clear  in  conception  and  plan,  logical  in  its  reply 
to  Voltaire,  and  a  well-reasoned  apology  of  our  English 
dramatist. 

Monsieur  Letourneur,  the  translator  of  Shakespeare 
so  violently  attacked  in  Voltaire’s  letter,  writes  to  Mrs. 
Montagu,  after  her  return,  that  he  had  hoped  to 
accompany  Le  Comte  de  Catuelan  in  paying  her  a 
visit  during  her  stay  in  Paris,  and  adds  : 

Vous  avez  du  retrouver  dans  les  questions  encyclopediques 
que  je  vous  ai  fait  les  lambeaux  done  M.  de  Voltaire  k  fabrique 
sa  dissertation  ;  j  ’ai  vu  Lord  Kilmer  qui  moi  a  rendu  compte, 
et  qui  n’y  a  rien  trouve  de  neuf ;  toutes  ses  petits  attaques 
rendront  service  a  Shakespeare  et  ne  feront  que  contribuer  a 
le  faire  lire  et  connoitre. 


1776 


REFLECTIONS  ON  PARIS 


339 


To  Leonard  Smelt 

Sandleford,  Oct. ye  28th. 

From  a  gay  Parisian  Dame  visiting  the  Beau  Monde,  and 
conversing  with  the  Beau  Esprits  of  the  Academies,  I  am  at 
once  metamorphosed  into  a  plain  Country  Farmeress.  I  have 
the  same  love  for  my  pigs,  pride  in  my  pottatoes,  solicitude  for 
my  Poultry,  care  of  my  wheat,  attention  to  my  barley,  and 
application  to  the  regulation  of  the  dairy  as  formerly.  My 
fable  is  that  of  Dame  Baucis  inverted.  I  believe  my  friends  at 
Paris  would  be  amazed  and  scandalized  at  the  joy  I  feel  in  this 
way  of  life,  for  they  have  not  any  taste  of  rural  pleasures.  A 
French  Lady  told  me,  she  thought  the  english  Women  not 
so  happy  as  the  french  ;  I  smiled,  and  said  I  was  not  sure  of 
that.  She  gave  it  as  one  reason,  that  they  were  obliged  to 
spend  part  of  the  year  in  the  Country.  I  combated  her  opinion, 
but  found  it  was  impossible  to  make  her  comprehend  the 
pleasures  of  a  morning  or  evening  walk,  the  delight  of  animating 
the  industry,  or  relieving  the  little  wants  of  a  district  ;  or  the 
dignity  of  that  independance  which  we  all  feel  in  retirement. 
The  business  of  the  toilette,  the  amusement  of  les  spectacles, 
and  the  pleasures  of  conversation  engross  their  whole  attention  ; 
in  the  first,  and  the  latter  of  these  they  shew  skill  and  taste  ; 
as  to  their  Spectacles  I  cannot  commend  them.  Their  Theatres, 
except  the  Opera,  are  mean,  dirty,  and  dark.  Their  bombast 
Tragedies  are  so  extravagantly  acted,  it  is  hardly  possible 
not  to  laugh,  but  Punch  is  as  like  to  a  grave  Magistrate  as 
their  Actors  to  a  real  Hero.  Moliere  is  out  of  fashion,  they 
have  pretty  comick  pieces  which  are  tolerably  acted.  The 
Dancers  and  scenery  at  the  Opera  are  fine,  but  the  musick 
bad,  and  the  singers  scream  most  insufferably.  As  the  french 
Ladies  dine  at  after  two  they  have  a  long  afternoon,  and  the 
spectacles  are  necessary  to  amuse  the  hours  between  dinner  and 
supper.  To  me  the  most  interesting  object  was  the  french 
themselves,  and  their  conversation  much  the  most  agreable 
thing  I  found  at  Paris,  so  that  I  went  seldom  to  the  Plays. 

I  am  glad  that  your  sentiments  so  perfectly  confirm  mine 
upon  Voltaires  letter.  Your  observation  on  his  translating  for 
the  use  of  the  Oueen  and  Mesdames  of  France  what  should 
not  have  been  translated  at  all  is  very  just.  Voltaire  views 
Shakespear  at  the  summit  of  Parnassus  with  the  same  malice 
with  which  Satan  beheld  Adam  in  the  midst  of  Paradise  ;  I 
dare  say  Monsr  Satan  was  very  witty  on  our  general  Parents 


340 


ON  MEMOIRS 


1776 


unsophisticated  state  and  unadorned  condition,  but  oh  Messieurs 
Satan  and  Voltaire  !  know  that  in  a  state  of  innocence  and 
simplicity,  nakedness  is  not  a  sign  of  impudence,  nor  either  the 
Child  or  the  Parent  of  wantoness.  It  is  the  evil  of  our 
disposition  that  renders  the  guard  of  caution  necessary. 

To  the  Duchess  of  Portland 

Mr.  Wraxall  has  collected  many  curious  anecdotes  from 
Brantome,  but  the  life  of  Francois  by  Gaillard,  and  the  Memoirs 
of  Montmorenci,  and  other  french  Historians  which  your 
Grace  has  read,  have  certainly  given  you  almost  all  of  them. 
I  have  always  been  deterred  from  reading  Brantome  by  his 
indecency  ;  one  is  ashamed  to  send  to  ones  bookseller  for  such 
a  work.  The  present  age  is  very  fond  of  private  anecdotes, 
and  indeed  they  are  interesting,  and  amusing,  and  very  useful, 
as  notes,  to  explain  the  great  text  of  History.  They  shew  the 
manners  and  sentiments  of  the  times,  and  sometimes  the  causes, 
sometimes  the  consequences  and  effects  of  great  Events.  It 
requires  much  knowledge,  great  talents,  infinite  research  to 
be  a  good  Historian  ;  all  these  things,  on  a  much  smaller  scale, 
will  serve  to  form  a  writer  of  Memoirs.  The  Muse  of  History 
is  a  mighty  Dame,  and  I  wd  have  the  Writer  of  Anecdotes 
attend  on  her  as  a  Page,  and  carry  her  hat  and  her  gloves  ;  if 
the  hat  is  worn  helmet  fashion,  and  the  gloves  are  Iron  gauntlets, 
it  lets  us  into  the  disposition  of  the  Prince  and  the  Times  ;  if 
the  hat  is  soft  beaver,  ornamented  with  a  white  feather  and  the 
gloves  are  fringed  with  silk  or  silver,  we  guess  the  fiddle 
summoned  to  the  Ball  oftener  than  the  Trumpet  calld  to  Battle, 
so  I  would  ever  encourage  the  dapper  Author  of  Memoirs  ; 
had  he  no  merit  but  his  brevity  it  would  recommend  him  to 
me,  idle  as  I  am. 

Her  editor  charitably  refrains  from  comment  on 
this  last  line. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sandleford,  Oct :  27 th. 

I  have  enclosed  a  copy  of  verses  which  Madame  du  Boccage 
sent  me  with  a  kind  letter  since  I  came  to  England.  I  had 
given  my  cameo  to  be  set  for  her,  and  it  was  not  finished  till 
the  day  I  came  away,  when  I  ordered  it  to  be  delivered  to  her. 
Do  you  know  that  you  may  buy  Mrs.  Barboult’s  head  and 


1776 


THE  HOWES 


34i 


mine  for  sixpence  if  you  send  for  the  Westminster  Magazine 
of  last  June.  Surely  our  heads  cannot  be  dear  at  that  price  ? 
I  ask  Mrs.  Barboult’s  head’s  pardon  for  valuing  them  in  the 
lump.  You  will  also  find  our  characters  with  our  heads  ; 
the  writer  has  done  her  justice  and  shewn  favour  to  your 
humble  servant. 


Lines  by  Madame  du  Boccage 

Montagu  dont  j’eus  l’avantage, 

De  connoitre  ici  L’esprit  Sage, 

Et  dans  toi,  le  plus  rare  objet 
que  vante  le  Breton  rivage, 
je  te  perds  et  dans  mon  regret, 

II  me  reste  la  seule  image, 
ce  bien,  rend  mon  coeur  indiscret ; 
Ah,  dis-je  dans  mon  vain  projet 
que  nai-je  1’adresse  en  partage 
de  voler  dans  ton  cabinet 
ou  de  te  rejoindre  a  la  nage  ! 
ce  n’est  point  assez  d’un  portrait. 

Coelum  ipsum  petimus  stultitia. 
a  Paris  ce  17th  8bre  1776. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Our  great  and  good  Mrs.  Howe  dined  with  me  yesterday  ; 
she  was  very  happy  in  the  rumours  of  her  Brother  having 
driven  the  Provincials  from  King’s  bridge  ;  it  is  said  they 
are  ordered  to  Connecticut  but  particulars  are  not  known, 
Ld  Howe’s  dispatches  not  being  yet  arrived.  All  people  seem 
to  agree  that  the  Howes  have  acted  with  great  wisdom  and  the 
Provincials  shine  with  great  cowardice.  There  is  also  a 
report  not  confirmed  but  much  credited  that  the  Provincials 
abandoned  their  Cannon  ;  in  short  it  is  supposed  that  unless 
France  makes  a  great  effort  in  their  favour,  which  Dr.  Franklyn 
is  now  at  Paris  soliciting,  these  independant  States  must  return 
to  their  duty.  I  wish  the  people  here  who  halload  the  Days 
of  War  were  at  Connecticut  enjoying  the  honour,  profit,  and 
benefit  of  their  Councils. 

The  least  Ld  Chatham  can  do  is  to  make  their  funeral 
Oration.  Ld  Camden  must  bring  an  action  of  trespass  against 
the  King’s  Troops,  Lord  Shelburne  should  give  some  of  them 


342 


SILAS  DEANE 


1776 


some  of  his  bogs  in  Ireland  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  their 
Morasses  and  Terres  encore  en  poche.  My  brother  shd 
publish  a  new  prophecy  in  their  favour,  and  Dr.  Price  revise 
his  pamphlets,  and  most  particularly,  in  his  Errata,  mark, 
instead  of  the  army  deserting  to  the  Provincials,  read  Pro¬ 
vincials  deserting  to  the  army.  I  hear  Howe  has  sent  for  8,000 
suits  of  cloathes  to  cloathe  those  who  had  deserted  war. 

Admiral  Lord  Howe  assisted  his  brother  and  the 
army  under  his  command  in  the  capture  of  New  York 
in  September  1776.  Mahan  characterised  the  admiral 
as  “  steady  as  a  rock  ;  like  a  rock  also  he  only  gave 
off  sparks  under  blows  that  would  have  broken  weaker 
men.”  But  Mrs.  Montagu’s  funeral  oration  was  a 
little  premature.  Instead  of  “  returning  to  their  duty,” 
these  wicked  provincials  had  passed  in  Congress  a 
certain  Declaration  framed  by  a  Virginian,  Thomas 
Jefferson  by  name,  and  “  Resolved :  that  these  united 
colonies  are  and  ought  to  be  free  and  independent 
states  ;  that  they  are  absolved  from  all  allegiance  to 
the  British  crown  ;  and  that  all  political  connexion 
between  them  and  the  state  of  Great  Britain  is  and 
ought  to  be  totally  dissolved.  Adopted ,  July  4th.” 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Oct.  10. 

My  news  papers  are  filled  with  the  victories  and  the  triumphs 
of  the  Howes,  yours  with  their  losses  and  defeats,  but  I  believe 
both  are  equally  false,  for  they  are  gone  to  Virginia  where  no 
action  is  likely  to  happen  immediately.  I  am  assured  that  the 
Americans  in  battle  take  aim  at  our  officers  which  makes  the 
service  very  dangerous.  I  cannot  imagine  why  the  wounded 
American  was  not  allowd  to  speak  to  his  Friend  ;  every  un¬ 
necessary  severity  disgraces  the  noble  english  character.  I 
shd  be  glad  if  Mr.  Silas  Deane  were  taken,  but  the  odiousness 
of  his  guilt  will  make  him  cautious  not  to  approach  our  shore. 

Silas  Deane  was  the  Congressional  Agent  sent  over 
to  Paris  to  secure  young  Frenchmen  of  distinguished 
family  as  officers  for  the  American  army. 


MRS.  HOGENTOT 


1776 


343 


From  James  Hutton,  the  geologist  and  author  of 
the  Theory  of  the  Earth  : 

Nov.  16. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  resist  your  Arguments  concerning 
Symbols.  You  have  retain’d  me  on  their  side,  so  that  except 
I  was  a  mere  Double-fee  I  can  not  plead.  .  .  . 

Their  Majesties  I  dare  say  are  pleased  to  hear  that  A  Bp 
of  York  is  better,  the  K.  told  me  a  fortnight  ago — one  of  your 
old  School  fellows  is  dead — pray  who,  Sir  ?  the  A  Bp  of  York, 
I  just  now  heard  it.  Sir,  He  was  a  very  clever  man — Yes, 
He  was.  the  K.  imputes  most  of  the  Illnesses  among  man¬ 
kind,  to  too  much  eating,  to  want  of  Diet,  because  he  finds 
Diet  in  his  own  case  so  excellent  a  Preservative,  and  with  an 
uncommon  Resolution,  he  has  reduced  his  own  weight  31^ 
and  finds  himself  lightsome  or  leste.  He  has  a  force  able  to 
resist  fat.  they  both  went  last  night  to  the  christening  of 
Lord  Derby’s  Daughter,  the  Q.  being  full  dress’d  with  her 
large  Hoop,  did  not  come  upstairs  into  her  Room  but  staid 
below  with  the  K.  or  I  probably  should  have  seen  them,  but 
I  sent  them  your  charming  account  of  the  ABp’s  almost 
recovery  :  She  read  it  aloud  to  the  K.  (your  Lr  to  me)  and  she 
sent  me  back  those  pieces  of  Voltaire — his  Lr  to  the  Academy 
about  Shakespeare  and  his  Memoires,  desiring  my  leave  how¬ 
ever  if  I  pleas’d  to  let  Mr.  Harris  see  Volt8  Lr  to  the  Academy. 
I  took  it  out  of  the  Bundle  therefore,  and  told  Mrs.  Hagedorne 
by  all  means,  and  the  Memoires  too  if  she  pleas’d,  I  suppose 
I  did  according  to  your  mind,  if  not  you  will  excuse  me. 

Mrs.  Haggerdorn  was  the  keeper  of  the  Robes 
whom  Miss  Frances  Burney  succeeded,  and  whom 
Prince  William  (afterwards  William  IV.)  used  to  call 
Mrs.  Hogentot. 

Lord  Shelburne,  being  at  the  moment  in  opposition 
and  retirement  and  not  content,  it  seems,  to  plough  his 
lonely  furrow,  had  been  dabbling  in  philanthropic 
ventures,  and  had  apparently  recommended  a  French 
lady  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  generosity,  whom  the  latter 
discovered  to  be  something  of  a  charlatan.  He 
writes  penitently  from  Bowood  Park,  December  21  : 


344  SHELBURNE  AS  PHILANTHROPIST  1776 


From  Lord  Shelburne 

You  say  you  are  accustomed  to  the  Species.  The  Truth  is  I 
am  not.  ...  It  occurrs  to  me,  that  there’s  a  French  Bookseller 
next  door  to  St.  James’s  Coffee  House,  who  knows  her,  and  if 
you  would  condescend  to  send  him  your  commands  He  might 
talk  to  her  in  both  our  Names  and  that  he  should  at  the  same 
time  advance  her  Five  or  Ten  Guineas  from  me,  with  some 
phrases  equally  decided  and  civil,  It  might  put  an  end  to  the 
whole  affair  ;  How  she  will  return  your  goodness  I  can’t  fore¬ 
see  ;  The  only  means  left  me  is  to  promise  never  to  lead  you 
into  such  another  Scrape. 

I  have  been  examining  myself  how  I  got  lately  into  this 
Vein  of  active  Charity,  and  can  find  no  other  cause,  except 
the  having  kept  a  good  deal  of  Company  with  Lord  and  Lady 
Dartrey  lately — I  recommended  indeed  to  them  another 
Subject,  and  I  expect  to  hear  every  post  I  have  been  equaly 
deceiv’d  in  regard  to  Him. 

Since  I  had  the  Honour  to  see  you,  I  have  been  passing  my 
Time  here  in  the  utmost  Retirement,  Reading,  ploughing  the 
Ground,  and  Educating  my  Children — Habit  not  only  re¬ 
conciles  me  to  these  Resources,  but  makes  them  delightfull. 
I  beg  however  to  assure  you  among  the  few  things,  which  I 
have  left,  and  to  which  I  have  any  wish  to  return  is  the  Honour 
of  your  Friendship.  I  know  its  value,  and  you  may  be  assur’d 
no  one  is  with  truer  Respect  and  Attachment,  Madam,  Yr 
Oblig’d  and  Faithfull  Sert.  Shelburne. 


From  the  Second  Lord  Hardwicke 

St.  James’s  Sqre.,  Deer,  the  20 th. 

We  were  talking  last  night  of  Ld  Chesterfield’s  Characters  ; 
Allow  Me  to  send  You  a  List  of  Them  ;  I  have  set  a  Mark 
to  Those  I  saw,  and  will  take  the  Liberty  to  add  a  few  Strictures. 
I  once  touched  him  on  the  Subject,  but  He  avoided  entring 
upon  It. 

*  George  the  1st 
—  Second 
*Q.  Caroline 
*Sir  R.  Walpole 
Lord  Townshend 
*Ld  Granville 


1776  CHESTERFIELD’S  CHARACTERS  345 

D :  of  Newcastle 
Mr.  Pelham 
*Ld  Hardwicke 
D :  of  Bedford 
*Ld  Bath 
*Ld  Holland 
*Mr.  Pitt 
Ld  Bolingbroke 
Pope 

Ld  Scarborough. 

Of  Those  I  read,  Sir  R.  Walpoles  and  Mr.  Pitts’  were 
incomparably  the  best,  Ld  Bath’s  is  an  unfair  and  severe  One, — 
O  :  Caroline’s  much  under-writ,  my  Father’s  very  imperfect, 
and  tho’  on  the  whole  an  Eloge,  dashed  with  some  unjust 
Strokes  of  Satire  in  wch  I  cd  shew  He  was  quite  mistaken. 
I  hope  they  will  not  be  published,  because  They  will  not  tell 
Us  much  more  Truth  than  We  Know  already,  and  will  give 
Offence. 

I  did  intend  to  have  taken  the  Liberty  to  have  asked  You, 
whether  yr  bon  Mot  abt  Voltaire  was  a  real  one.  I  read  it 
in  the  Papers,  but  without  Enquiry  there  is  no  believing  a 
Fact  on  their  Credit. 

The  first  Lord  Hardwicke  was  a  great  admirer  of 
Mrs.  Montagu,  and  her  portrait  occupied  a  place  of 
honour  at  Wimpole. 

“  It  is  easy,”  she  wrote,  “  to  be  foolishly  witty  but  it  belongs 
only  to  genius  to  be  wittily  foolish,  and  give  to  jest  and  sport 
the  excellence  that  are  usually  the  effect  of  study  and  labour. 

The  character  Ld  Chesterfield  has  drawn  of  the  late  Ld 
Hardwicke  renders  Mrs.  Montagu  more  than  ever  averse  to 
this  species  of  writing.  To  his  Lordships  great  qualities  he 
does  very  niggardly  justice  and  has  gratuitously  bestowd  the 
vice  of  covetousness  upon  him.  I  have  been  credibly  informed 
that  his  Lordship  though  in  possession  of  all  the  secrets  of  the 
Cabinet  never  made  one  shilling  by  stock  jobbing,  though  his 
ready  money  might  have  procured  him  infinite  sums  so  em- 
ployd.  Lord  Hardwicke’s  table,  his  whole  domestic  arrange¬ 
ment  was  much  [more]  noble  and  liberal  than  Lord  Chester¬ 
fields,  who  had  no  children,  and  Lord  Hardwicke’s  charity 
was  unbounded.” 


346 


ON  CHARACTER 


1776 


To  Lord  Hardwicke 

Dec.  the  21. 

I  return  your  Lordship  many  thanks  for  the  honour  of 
your  note,  and  the  information  you  had  the  goodness  to  com¬ 
municate  concerning  the  characters,  a  subject  in  which  I  am 
interested,  both  as  it  respects  a  particular  Friend,  and  the 
general  interests  of  humanity. 

It  has  long  been  usual  with  Historians,  after  relating  the 
actions  of  a  Mans  life,  to  draw  up  his  character  ;  even  in  that 
case,  there  is  room  for  partiality,  the  Writer  may  present  us 
with  a  flattering  resemblance,  or  a  Caracatura,  but  still  the 
Portrait  must  be  formed  on  the  features  of  the  original,  and 
something  of  the  result  of  the  whole  in  the  general  air  must 
be  renderd  ;  but  in  these  unconnected,  independent  Pieces 
there  may  be  the  most  unfair,  and  unjust,  and  unlike  representa¬ 
tion,  and  if  the  next  generation  should  be  as  much  more  idle 
and  lazy  than  the  present,  as  the  present  is  than  that  which 
preceded  it,  posterity  will  take  its  opinions  of  their  Predecessors 
chiefly  from  these  little  works.  Folio’s  follow’d  bottom  wigs, 
the  quarto  kept  its  ground  till  the  Tye  was  banish’d,  the  bag 
and  the  queue  seem  to  be  a  kind  of  allegorical  dress,  to  intimate 
how  confined  and  narrow  the  capacity  of  the  head  of  the 
Wearer.  But  to  be  serious,  upon  what  seems  to  me  the  most 
serious  things  in  human  life,  the  character  a  Man  enjoys  and 
the  example  he  transmitts.  I  look  upon  the  toleration,  and 
indeed  encouragement  given  to  Calumny  to  be  one  of  the 
worst  symptoms  of  the  declining  virtue  of  the  age.  When  I 
was  young  (it  is  a  great  while  ago)  character  was  considerd  as 
a  serious  thing  ;  to  attack  it  was  thought  the  greatest  outrage 
of  an  enemy  ;  to  receive  any  damage  in  it,  the  greatest  of 
injuries,  and  the  worst  of  misfortunes.  Now  no  one  seems 
interested  for  his  own  character  or  for  that  of  his  Friend,  and 
indeed  the  daily  libel  has  levelled  all  distinctions.  But  for 
want  of  attick  salt  the  Libel  of  monday,  is  become  too  stale 
for  tuesdays  use,  and  these  Calumniators,  like  the  flesh  fly, 
live  but  a  day,  and  they  have  only  tainted  what  they  have  prey’d 
upon.  Indeed  if  it  shall  become  a  fashion  for  Men  of  Witt 
and  of  distinguish’d  situations,  to  leave  behind  them  malicious 
libels  on  their  Contemporaries,  this  new  species  of  mischief  will 
be  more  serious  and  important. 

I  will  own  to  your  Lordship  that  it  gives  me  pain  to  think 
my  good  Friend  Lord  Bath  will  be  represented  to  the  World 


i776  CHESTERFIELD  ON  LORD  BATH  347 


with  every  disgrace  witty  malice  can  invent ;  a  malice  sharpen’d, 
not  by  injuries  he  had  done  to  but  received  from  Lord  Chester¬ 
field.  I  was  not  acquainted  with  Lord  Bath  till  his  very  old 

age.  In  the  brightness  of  his  meridian  day  he  would  have 

dazzled  my  mind,  in  his  lucid  evening  he  illuminated  and 
cheered  it.  His  Lordship  and  Mr.  Montagu  had  lived  many 
years  in  great  friendship  and  political  union,  which  Lord 
Baths  conduct  on  Ld  Oxfords  dismission  cooled  for  a  time,  but 
Mr.  Montagu  always  retained  an  affection  for  him,  and  love 
of  his  conversation,  and  when  the  resentment  subsided,  was 
glad  to  converse  again  with  one  whose  company  he  always 
thought  delightfull  ;  so  that  Lord  Bath  made  a  most  agreable 
addition  at  all  times  to  our  fireside,  and  Mr.  Montagu,  who  had 
every  friendly  attention  to  me,  was  flatterd  to  see  me  dis- 

tingu'ishd  by  a  Person  of  whose  judgment  he  had  so  high  an 

opinion.  It  is  quite  above  me  to  judge  of  Lord  Bath  in  his 
political  situation,  but  in  common  life  he  was  extreamly  amiable, 
and  a  zealous,  and  a  sincere  friend. 

I  am  convinced,  that  your  Father  Lord  Hardwickes 
character,  was  intirely  beyond  the  comprehension  of  Lord 
Chesterfield.  The  man  who  would  write  the  smartest  notes 
on  the  epigrams  of  Martial  would  not  be  the  most  fit  to  comment 
on  the  maxims  of  Solomon,  therefore  had  Lord  Chesterfield 
the  best  intentions  he  was  not  capable  to  do  justice  to  that 
truly  great  and  wise  man. 

As  I  never  in  my  life  said  any  [thing]  worth  repeating  I 
was  not  a  little  surprized,  to  find  in  a  news  paper  here,  what 
I  said  some  months  ago  at  Paris.  I  have  enclosed  a  copy  of 
the  very  letter,  on  which,  as  it  was  read  in  my  company,  I 
said  what  your  Lordship  met  in  the  papers.  This  letter  of 
Voltaires  to  Mr.  D’Argentalle  I  believe  has  not  been  printed. 
I  wish  Lord  Chesterfields  Executors  could  be  prevail’d  on  to 
burn  the  characters.  The  applause  that  will  be  given  to  a 
few  lively  strokes  of  witt  may  be  severely  paid  home  by  some 
of  the  posterity  of  those  he  injures  :  for  truth  makes  deeper 
impressions  than  phrase  however  pointed.  .  .  . 


To  Leonard  Smelt 

Hillstreet,  Dec.  z^th. 

I  have  waited  some  days  in  hopes  to  send  you  some  early 
intelligence  of  our  proceedings  in  America,  but  the  news 
papers  have  given  as  early  and  as  good  accounts  as  I  could 


348  SHEEP  IN  WOLVES’  CLOTHING  1776 

have  done.  Many  private  letters,  you  may  suppose  have 
been  received  from  different  Persons,  and  different  places  ; 
from  all  these  it  appears,  that  the  Provincials  want  not  only 
the  livery  of  Valour,  the  scarlet  Regimentals,  but  likewise  the 
Valour  itself  ;  unhappily  the  Captain  of  one  of  our  ships  will 
supply  them  with  the  first,  for  the  cloathing  of  many  of  our 
Regiments  is  fallen  into  their  hands  :  the  other  want  cannot 
be  supplied  in  the  like  manner,  so  that  the  Provincials  will  be 
Sheep  in  Wolves  Cloathing.  I  know  you  who  love  punning 
will  say  they  would  have  been  more  sheepish  if  they  had  not 
had  any  cloaths  at  all,  and  indeed  I  fear  it  will  prevent  the 
Winters  Campaign  cooling  their  courage  as  it  would  otherwise 
have  done,  so  that  the  event  is  unfortunate.  Dr  Franklin  is 
actually  at  Paris  electrifying  the  french  Ministry  ;  they  are 
not  electric  per  se,  what  effect  the  Doctors  political  phylosophy 
may  have  on  them  I  know  not 


DAVID  GARRICK 
After  Robert  Edge  Pine 


DAVID  GARRICK  AND  HIS  WIFE 


Garrick  on  the  stage  and  off.  Mrs.  Garrick’s  letters.  Letter  from  David 
Garrick.  The  Shakespeare  Jubilee  and  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay. 
Garrick’s  Ode.  “  Author  unknown.”  Letter  from  Garrick  about 
Bon  Ton.  The  Garricks  at  Hagley.  Garrick  and  “  Minerva.” 
Invitation  to  Hampton.  Garrick  on  fret  and  hurry.  Announces  a 
visit  to  Hill  Street.  Acknowledges  Mrs.  Montagu’s  bounty.  Letter 
on  separation  from  the  House  of  Cumberland.  Letter  on  her  visit 
to  Paris.  Voltaire’s  “  malevolent  nonsense.”  Garrick’s  retirement. 
The  final  performance.  “Aurora”  Ode.  His  death.  Mrs.  Garrick’s 
pronunciation.  Her  letters.  Lactilla.  Her  widowhood  and  Mrs. 
Vesey’s.  Garrick’s  grave. 


It  will  be  imagined  from  her  Essay  on  Shakespeare  that 
Mrs.  Montagu  was  a  keenly  critical  student  of  the 
Drama.  Her  delicate  health — though  she  took  many 
liberties  with  it — prevented  her  from  being  a  regular 
attendant  at  the  theatre,  where  the  atmosphere  was 
often  intolerably  hot  and  unpleasant.  But  for  the 
greater  lights  of  the  stage — Mrs.  Siddons  or  Mrs. 
Jordan,  for  example — she  would  risk  a  sleepless  night, 
or  her  particular  chill  of  the  stomach  ;  and  for  David 
Garrick  she  was  content  to  be  suffocated,  if  need  be. 
Her  personal  friendship  with  the  “  little  rascal,” 
whom  Johnson  would  allow  nobody  to  abuse  but 
himself  (and  it  must  be  admitted  he  did  a  good  deal 
of  it),  dates  back  at  least  to  1752,  when  she  mentions 
his  dining  with  her  at  Tunbridge  ;  and  Dr.  Monsey, 
who  was  a  mutual  friend,  refers  frequently  to  their 
acquaintance  in  his  letters.  She  had,  indeed,  seen 
Garrick  as  Richard  III.  at  Goodman’s  Fields  as  far 
back  as  1742,  his  second  year  on  the  stage. 

349 


35°  EVA  MARIA  VIOLETTE 

Here  is  early  testimony  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
partiality  : 

This  evening  I  met  with  a  news  paper  of  to-day,  by  which 
I  learn,  that  Mr.  Garrick  is  at  this  minute  acting  Kitely.  I 
regret  that  I  did  not  know  he  would  appear  upon  the  stage 
to  night,  for  I  would  not  have  lost  so  fine  an  entertainment, 
tho  I  agree  with  Mr.  Anstey,  that  he  is  still  best  in  his  own 
character.  Added  to  all  his  talents,  and  to  his  wonderful 
agremens,  he  has  un  fonds  of  honesty  and  integrity  that  makes 
one  esteem  as  much  as  one  admires  him. 

The  esteem  was  evidently  returned,  for  Monsey 
writes  in  1758  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  had  gone  north 
with  her  husband  : 

Mr.  Garrick  was  very  near  in  an  apoplectic  fit  when  he 
found  you  were  gone.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Garrick  also  abused  herself 
for  not  having  pressed  you  to  return  to  the  Temple  [at  the 
Garrick’s  house  at  Hampton,  on  the  river  lawn  beyond  the 
road  tunnel]  and  enjoy  another  half  hour. 

Mrs.  Garrick,  the  charming  “  Violette,”  who  was 
everybody’s  favourite  and  her  husband’s  devoted  ally, 
became  Mrs.  Montagu’s  greatly  attached  friend — a 
friendship  which  remained  unbroken  to  her  death. 
She  was  a  frequent  guest  at  Sandleford,  while  both 
she  and  David  joined  the  Montagus  in  more  than  one 
very  delightful  visit  to  Lord  Lyttelton  at  Hagley. 

It  was  Sterne  who  declared  :  “I  love  Garrick  on 
the  stage  better  than  anything  in  the  world,  except  Mrs. 
Garrick  off  it 

There  are  a  good  many  letters  from  her,  but  space 
cannot  be  found  here  for  all.  Like  her  husband’s 
dashing  scrawls,  they  are  seldom  dated,  and  must  take 
their  chance  of  place  and  order. 


From  Mrs.  Garrick 

The  Gentleman  came  last  night  to  receive  your  Bounty  ; 
for  which  he  expressed  so  much  gratitude  that  I  was  charmed 
with  him. 


OLD  LUSIGNAN 


35i 


I  feel  happy  beyond  measure  when  I  meet  with  a  being 
who  is  sensible  that  when  he  is  relieved  from  want,  it  was  not 
for  his  sweet  self  sake,  but  that  his  distresses  are  mitigated  by 
a  Benevolent  heart  such  as  my  dearest  Mrs.  Montagu  possesses 
in  the  highest  degree. 

Oh  why  did  I  come  to  that  sweet  spot  Sandleford,  and  why 
were  you  so  kind  to  me  !  I  who  possess  thank  God  not  a 
very  ungrateful  heart  was  the  misserablest  being  in  the  world 
when  I  found  myself  going  from  you,  I  could  do  nothing  but 
cry  for  what  I  left  behind  ;  and  was  not  able  to  send  my  thanks 
in  writing  from  Reading  by  the  return  of  your  servants  for 
your  goodness  towards  me. 

I  delivered  your  book  to  day  to  Mr.  Hoare  in  Fleet  Street  ; 
for  our  Poor  friend  Mr.  H.  Hoare  has  been  upon  the  point  of 
Death.  He  had  an  exceedingly  bad  cough  which  occasioned 
the  breaking  of  a  blood  vessel  near  his  lungs  ;  and  two  days 
passed  before  the  bleeding  could  be  stopped  ;  he  is  now  out 
of  all  Danger  ;  but  cannot  yet  see  any  body.  I  shall  therefore 
postpone  my  journey  to  Beckenham,  and  take  the  opportunity 
to  go  to  Mrs.  Wilmot  where  I  shall  meet  Mrs.  Kennicott 
and  intend  to  stay  a  few  days.  But  let  me  be  wherever  it 
is,  my  Dear  Mrs.  and  Mr.  Montagu  will  be  always  in  my 
heart.  .  .  . 

Believe  me  for  ever  to  remain  with  the  greatest  Respect 
your  most  devoted  Maria  Garrick. 

Adelphi  Monday  Aug1  the  16,  going  this  moment  out  of 
this  Hot  place. 

Here  is  a  note  from  David,  of  which  I  cannot  fix 
the  exact  date.  Zara  (from  Voltaire’s  Zaire )  was 
revived  in  1753,  and  often  thereafter,  but  this  repre¬ 
sentation,  where  old  Lusignan,  Zara’s  father,  was  to 
make  pretty  Miss  Gregory  cry,  must  have  been  about 
1767,  as  Mrs.  Montagu’s  charming  companion  did 
not  come  to  stay  with  her  till  late  in  the  sixties. 


From  David  Garrick 

Adelphi,  Fryday. 

My  best  and  most  amiable  Friend — When  you  called 
last  Night  my  foot  was  flanell’d  up  wth  ye  Gout,  and  a  Sight 


352  GARRICK’S  SHAKESPEARE  JUBILEE 

of  you,  and  ten  words  from  You,  would  have  been  a  Charm 
for  ye  foul  Fiend — but  I  was  order’d  to  see  Nobody,  &  did 
not  know  it  was  my  cure  till  it  was  gone — I  am  much  better, 
&  so  well,  that  I  shall  be  able  to  appear  in  Old  Lusignan  to¬ 
night,  &  in  a  better  Character  tomorrow  in  Hill  Street — in 
that  of  the  faithful  Friend,  &  admirer  of  Mrs.  Montagu — I 
was  reading,  or  rather  dozing  over  the  cold,  Northern  Critick 
when  you  were  at  the  door — notwithstanding  his  flattery  to 
me,  I  can’t  bear  the  unfeelingness  of  his  Soul.  Shakespear 
no  Tragic  Poet  ! — Shakespear  not  the  first  Tragick  Poet  ! — 
What  insensibility  ! — but  more  of  this  when  I  have  ye  honour 
of  seeing  you  tomorrow,  which  I  most  certainly  will  do,  tho 
I  am  carried  in  a  Litter  &  so  lay’d  at  yr  feet.  Dear  Madam, 
most  unalterably  &  faithfully  yrs,  D.  Garrick:. 

I  am  always  kissing  Miss  Gregory’s 
hand  &  will  make  her  cry  if  possible  to¬ 
night. 


On  September  7,  1769,  Garrick’s  Jubilee  to  the 
memory  of  Shakespeare  was  celebrated  at  Stratford- 
on-Avon,  the  performance  concluding  with  his  recita¬ 
tion  of  his  Ode  on  dedicating  a  Building  and  erecting 
a  Statue  to  Shakespeare  ;  and  it  is  this  Ode  (which  was 
afterwards  repeated  at  Drury  Lane  on  September  30) 
to  which  Mrs.  Montagu  refers  in  the  following  letter 
to  Mrs.  Carter.  The  Essay  is,  of  course,  hers  on 
the  genius  of  Shakespeare,  which  was  published 
also  in  this  year.  What  the  coolness  which  had 
arisen  between  her  and  Garrick  may  have  been  I 
do  not  know,  but  it  was  neither  serious  nor  lasting. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Sept.  zyth,  1769  ? 

Since  I  came  hither  I  met  with  Mr.  Garricks  Ode  printed 
with  his  apology  for  undertaking  the  arduous  task  of  writing 
an  ode  ;  the  modesty  of  his  apology  should  soften  the  asperity 
of  the  criticks,  if  criticks  asperity  could  be  softened,  but  of 
all  venemous  creeping  things  they  are  the  most  deaf  to  the 
voice  of  the  charmer.  In  this  preface  Mr.  Garrick  recom¬ 
mends  to  those  not  yet  established  in  their  dramatical  faith 


GARRICK  AND  BON  TON 


353 


to  read  the  essay,  of  which  he  speaks  very  honourably.  I 
suppose  this  gave  occasion  to  what  Mrs.  Vesey  said  concerning 
Mr.  Garricks  approbation  of  it.  I  take  this  kindly  of  him 
because  I  suppose  he  now  pretty  near  guesses  at  the  author, 
and  as  we  have  not  been  upon  very  good  terms  it  is  the  more 
obliging.  At  the  end  of  this  little  pamphlet  he  has  given  the 
testimonials  of  the  great  writers  of  former  times,  and  the  lively 
writers  of  former  times,  and  the  lively  writers  of  these  times 
to  the  merit  of  his  Shakespear,  and  the  names  of  each  author, 
except  when  he  quoted  the  Essay,  and  there  I  had  the  satis¬ 
faction  to  read,  author  unknown.  I  know  with  the  arch 
malice  of  a  round  face,  not  the  peevish  air  of  a  long  visage, 
you  will  say,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hood  could  have  told  the  author. 
I  sent  the  dear  folks  some  partridges  by  the  baggage  waggon 
to  stop  their  mouths. 


From  David  Garrick 

July  30 th,  1770. 

Dear  Madam — You  cannot  imagine  how  much  I  think 
myself  honour’d  by  your  most  flattering,  friendly  letter — the 
moment  I  received  it,  at  my  return  from  Hampshire  this  day, 
I  sit  down  to  answer  it — 

You  may  be  assured,  that  no  Care  shall  be  wanting  on  my 
part  to  do  Justice  to  ye  Author  of  the  Bon  Ton  :  I  shall  not 
read  it  in  ye  Common  way,  but  think  twice,  before  I  speak 
my  mind — if  I  can  see  a  Merit  in  it  proper  for  ye  Stage,  You 
may  depend  upon  it,  that  I  will  shew  my  regard  to  you,  by  my 
zeal  in  promoting  Its  success  :  Should  I  think  otherwise,  I 
should  pay  a  very  ill  compliment  to  your  friendship  &  my  own 
sense  of  it,  if  I  did  not  speak  to  you,  as  your  Shakespeare  phrases 
it,  as  to  my  thought s,  as  I  do  ruminate.  Sorry,  very  sorry  am 
I  to  hear,  both  for  ye  sake  of  ye  Author,  Stage  &  Manager, 
that  a  certain  Lady  has  not  had,  ev’n  ye  tip  of  her  Finger  in 
the  Dramatic  pye — if  she  had  I  would  have  underwritten  it 
unseen  and  unheard — 

You  have  had  such  wondrous  success  in  Smuggling,  I 
could  wish  that  you  would  try  another  Venture,  &  take  me 
into  partnership — but  what  a  parcel  of  stuff  I  am  writing,  & 
in  the  mid’st  of  much  Company,  without  fear  or  wit  ! — I 
must  tell  you,  that  Mrs.  Garrick  (who  begs  her  best  respects 
may  be  presented  to  you)  &  I  set  out  immediately  for  Lincoln¬ 
shire,  thence  to  Cambridgeshire,  &  shall  not  return  home 
VOL.  I  2  A 


354 


“  GARRICK  IN  HIS  OWN 


yy 


these  three  weeks  or  a  month — I  will  not  pretend  to  read  ye 
Play,  till  my  return,  &  then  it  shall  be  ye  first  thing  I  will  do 
— the  Author  should  know  that  we  are  at  this  moment  engaged 
to  more  plays  &  petites  pieces  than  we  can  do  for  the  two 
winters  to  come,  unless  any  of  the  Authors  of  them  should 
chuse  to  withdraw  their  performances. 

Pray,  dear  Madam,  accept  of  this  galloping  &,  I  am  afraid 
you’ll  say,  stumbling  epistle  as  ye  mere  overflowings  of  a  Warm 
heart,  highly  sensible  of  your  friendship,  &  favour — you  see, 
how  I  can  trust  your  feelings,  while  I  am  afraid  of  your  under¬ 
standing. — I  am  Mrs.  Montagu’s  most  faithfull  &  obliged 
humble  Servant  D.  Garrick. 

Upon  reading  over  my  hasty  letter,  I  find  I  have  im- 
pertinantly  offer’d  myself  as  a  partner  in  Smuggling — that  is 
— wishing  you  would  as  secretly  write  a  play,  as  you  did  a 
certain  essay,  &  that  I,  as  Manager,  might  partake  of  ye  plot 
&  ye  Profits. 

This  reference  to  the  play  of  Bon  Ton ,  which  had 
apparently  been  sent  for  Garrick’s  consideration 
through  Mrs.  Montagu  by  an  anonymous  author,  is 
somewhat  puzzling.  The  unfortunate  Burgoyne  had 
produced  a  play  of  that  name  in  1760,  which  was 
afterwards  brought  out  in  1775  by  Garrick  for  Thomas 
King’s  benefit  as  Bon  Ton ,  or  High  Life  above  Stairs , 
and  was  published  by  Garrick  in  the  following  year 
as  “  a  little  drama  which  had  been  thrown  aside  for 
many  years  and  was  brought  out  last  season  with  some 
alterations,  for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  King.” 

The  allusion  may  be  to  a  later  play  of  Burgoyne’s 
submitted  through  Mrs.  Montagu  for  Garrick’s  con¬ 
sideration. 

Before  going  to  visit  Lord  Lyttelton  at  Hagley 
in  1771,  Mrs.  Montagu  wrote  to  him  of  Garrick, 
who  was  also  to  be  there  : 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  Mr.  Garrick  has  made  one  of 
the  principal  ornaments  of  this  age.  On  the  stage  a  prodigy, 
talents  never  before  given  to  mortal  man  ;  and  still  I  say  with 
Mr.  Anstey  “  For  mimic  characters  alone,  let  others  shine 


GARRICK  AT  HAGLEY 


355 


but  Garrick  in  his  own,”  and  I  expect  to  find  as  much  delight 
from  him  at  Hagley  as  ever  I  did  woe  from  him  and  Shakespear 
combined  ;  and  yet  together  they  have  sometimes  nearly  broken 
my  heart. 

Of  this  visit  she  wrote  to  Mrs.  Vesey  from  Hagley  : 

Mr.  Garrick  is  in  the  highest  spirits,  and  he  has  the  greatest 
share  of  vivacity  I  ever  met  with  in  any  one,  and  having  a  good 
deal  of  wit,  that  vivacity  makes  the  most  pleasing  companion 
imaginable.  As  we  breakfast  in  the  library  we  have  oppor¬ 
tunities  of  putting  books  into  Mr.  Garrick’s  hands,  and  without 
too  much  appearance  of  design,  get  him  to  read  aloud  some 
distinguished  pieces  of  poetry.  I  fear  he  will  never  again 
appear  on  the  stage  [this  was  happily  falsified]  so  it  is  with  the 
greater  attention  and  pleasure  one  listens  to  him  while  he 
reads  ;  he  excels  other  people  in  reading  as  much  as  in  acting  ; 
the  soul  and  the  spirit  he  infuses  into  what  he  reads  is  prodigious. 

A  little  while  after  the  Hagley  party,  Lord  Lyttelton 
wrote  to  Mrs.  Montagu  : 

I  have  this  moment  received  a  letter  from  Garrick  in 
answer  to  an  enquiry  about  his  health,  which  tells  me  that 
for  many  days  he  has  produced  no  less  than  two  or  three  small 
stones  with  very  little  pain,  and  that  the  faculty  have  given 
him  Spirits  by  assuring  him  that  he  has  no  larger  and  shall 
get  rid  of  all  the  small  ones.  There  is  another  paragraph 
which  I  must  transcribe  for  you  and  your  Sylph.  “  Mrs. 
Vesey  is  a  most  agreable  Woman.  Mrs.  Montagu  is  herself 
alone.  Were  they  eighteen  and  I  an  Adonis  of  twenty  one 
I  should  love  one  and  adore  the  other.  I  would  kiss  the  hands 
of  the  Sylph,  but  fall  at  the  feet  of  Minerva.  Such  are  my 
feelings  about  them,  and  if  your  Lordship  can  work  up  a  little 
jealousy  out  of  this  declaration  I  beg  you  will  make  the  best 
of  it.”  Quere,  Are  you  satisfied  with  his  feelings  ? 


To  Lord  Lyttelton 

Sandleford,  Oct.  the  23 rd,  1771. 

I  rejoyce  to  hear,  that  Mr.  Garricks  Physicians  think  he 
will  not  suffer  again,  from  a  distemper,  which  is  grievous 
always  to  the  individual  afflicted  with  it,  but  is  injurious  to 
the  World,  when  it  attacks  Mr.  Garrick.  Your  Lordship 
VOL.  I  2  A  2 


356  THE  SYLPH  AND  MINERVA 

tells  me,  Mr.  Garrick  says,  if  he  was  an  Adonis  of  twenty  one, 
he  should  love  Mrs.  Vesey,  and  adore  me  ;  that  he  would 
kiss  the  hands  of  the  Sylph,  but  would  fall  at  the  feet  of  your 
humble  servant  ;  that  such  are  his  feelings,  and  then  ask,  if 
I  am  satisfied  with  his  feelings  ?  A  shrewd  question,  and  slily 
put.  I  will  not,  however,  imitate  the  Lacedemonians  quaint 
reply  to  an  Ambassador  who  began  his  ambiguous  embassy  in 
that  manner,  and  only  answer,  if.  I  will  be  explicit  and 
sincere,  as  if  Mr.  Garrick  was  charming  twenty  one,  and  I 
divine  eighteen.  Even  at  that  age,  I  prefer’d  adoration  to 
love,  not,  perhaps,  that  I  thought  it  the  sweeter  homage,  but 
I  was  told,  it  was  more  perseveringly  loyal  ;  that  the  hand 
kissing,  tho  the  most  holy  of  all  kissing  devotion,  was  trash. 

Twas  thine,  tis  hers,  and  has  been  slave  to  thousands. 

But  esteem  was  lasting,  and  respect  was  faithfull.  So  at 
these  I  aim’d.  Had  I  follow’d  other  maxims  in  my  Youth, 
I  should  now  be  an  old  Witch,  (Beauty  grows  old,  virtue  only 
antique)  with  other  such  Witches,  more  triste  and  discontented 
than  yellow  Admirals,  or  half  pay  officers,  celebrating  the 
infernal  orgies  of  Pam  at  the  Loo  table,  instead  of  being 
associated  with  Bards  and  Philosophers,  and  all  that  is  distin¬ 
guish’d  and  respectable  and  having  to  crown  all,  the  honour 
to  be  Lord  Lytteltons  most  affectionate  and  sincere  friend, 
Obedt  and  Obliged  Hble  Servt  and  no  witch,  but 

A  Sybil. 

Here  is  an  invitation  for  a  “  week-end  ”  at  Hampton : 


From  David  Garrick 

Hampton,  May  2nd. 

My  dear  Madam — You  had  much  better  stupify  yourself 
with  Adam  and  Eve  here,  &  breathe  the  fresh  air  of  May 
14  miles  from  London  than  racket  about  in  the  smoky  atmo¬ 
sphere  of  London — I  could  wish  that  your  Supream  Spirit 
in  ye  full  gallop  would  but  just  recollect,  that  It  has  a  body 
(alas  for  us  not  ye  stoutest)  to  drag  after  it — You  can  never 
die,  but  you  will  hurry  off  your  flesh  by  degrees,  upon  Earth, 
&  then  your  Spirit  having  shaken  off  encumbrances  will  mount 
to  Its  proper  Element  &  habitation,  &  repose  itself  to  all 
Eternity.  I  shall  miss  you  some  fine  morning,  &  upon 


357 


O  DAMN  IT  (SWORE  HE) 

Enquiring  after  you,  some  of  my  Astronomical  friends  will  tell 
me,  that  you  pass’d  over  Saint  Paul’s  about  a  quarter  after 
Eleven. — to  be  serious,  for  I  am  amaz’d  at  myself  that  I  can 
dare  to  write  ye  above  nonsense  to  you,  as  true  Christians  rest 
one  day  in  Seven,  you  who  are  better  than  they,  ought  to  rest 
two — &  as  I  know  those  days  would  be  the  most  terrible  to 
you  of  the  whole  week,  I  could  wish  you  to  have  a  few  failings, 
that  you  might  by  way  of  Pennance  be  oblig’d  to  pass  your 
black  letter  days  at  Hampton — if  I  run  on  tormenting  you  with 
this  ribaldry,  I  shall  not  have  room  for  business — Saturday 
Sen’night  &  Sunday  I  am  engaged — Don  Felix1  demands 
me  on  ye  first  &  on  ye  Second  I  am  engag’d  to  Lord  Shelburne 
&  my  french  friend — I  am  at  this  moment  a  most  miserable 
being,  Lady  Penny  .  .  .  (whom  I  don’t  know  nor  ever  will) 
will  riot  give  up  her  side  box,  &  unless  you  will  take  possession 
of  your  suspended  Handbasket  over  ye  Pit  for  ye  first  time, 
what  shall  I  do  for  you  ? — I  will  stir  Heaven  and  Earth, 
Drink  up  Eisel  .  .  .,  eat  a  Crocodile,  rather  than  you  shall  not 
have  your  will — but  perhaps  you’ll  think  better  of  it,  &  avoid 
the  Theatre  this  warm  weather — vain  as  I  am  of  your  presence 
when  I  enact,  I  had  much  rather  you  should  avoid  a  crowded 
hot  steamy  theatre  which  defies  All  the  powers  of  Ventilators 
— rest  rest  perturbed  Spirit  !  that  my  fidgetty  Soul  should  be 
preaching  and  giving  Advice  to  Wisdom  herself  is  surely  very 
ridiculous — it  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  sensible  neighbour  of 
mine — who  wth  ye  gravest  countenance,  beg’d  &  beseech’d  me, 
not  to  hurry  or  fret  myself  about  anything — I  heard  him, 
and  was  much  touch’d  with  his  manner,  &  affectionate 
expressions  of  friendp  &  concern  for  me — &  pray  Mr.  Rayner 
(said  I)  Do  you  never  fret,  &  hurry  yourself  ? — O  damn  it 
(swore  he)  that  I  do  from  morning  to  night,  &  for  that  reason 
I  am  the  best  able  to  give  you  my  advice — mutato  nomine 
de  Me. 

I  know  what  is  best  for  ye  same  reason,  &  therefore  can 
advise  it,  but  I  want  wisdom  for  practice — I  need  say  no  more, 
but  that  I  am  most  devotedly  Mrs.  Montagu’s 

D.  Garrick. 

P.S. — I  shall  stay  here  till  Monday 
My  Wife  presents  her  respects — 

I  have  scribbled  so  fast  I  can’t  read  it  myself — I  was  born 
to  torment  you. 

1  Character  in  The  Wonder,  A  Woman  keeps  a  Secret,  comedy  by 
Mrs.  Centlivre. 


358  GARRICK  AND  TOM  LYTTELTON 


From  David  Garrick 

Nov.  18  [1772  ?]. 

My  dearest  Madam — I  have  indeed  of  late  been  ballancing 
the  account  of  good  and  evil,  and  as  I  have  been  a  great  debtor 
for  the  real  pleasures  of  last  Summer  I  have  been  called  to  a 
severe  payment  by  a  fit  of  the  stone — I  am  at  present  in  Heaven, 
and  resolute  enough  to  fulfil  a  promise  I  made  the  Prince  of 
Hesse  Darmstadt  to  play  the  part  of  Lusignan  for  him  to  night 
as  he  must  leave  London  tomorrow. 

Mrs.  Garrick  (whose  admiration  of  you  exceeds  that  of 
women  and  not  in  the  least  lessend  by  her  knowing  that  you 
are  the  Goddess  of  my  Idolatry)  would  have  paid  her  respects, 
had  not  her  very  affectionate  attendance  and  care  of  me  for 
some  weeks  past  employed  her  liberty.  We  shall  go  to 
Hampton  tomorrow  as  ordered  by  the  Faculty,  and  at  our 
return  we  shall  certainly,  dead  or  alive,  as  an  Irish  Captain 
once  said  to  me,  pay  our  respects  in  Hill  Street. — Most  un¬ 
alterably  Your  faithful  and  devoted  David  Garrick. 

I  write  or  rather  scrawl  from  my  couch. 

As  will  be  found  from  an  interesting  letter  of 
Garrick’s  which  has  been  passed  to  Mrs.  Hugh 
Wyndham  for  use  in  her  family  Memoirs,  Tom 
Lyttelton  had,  about  this  time,  begun  abusing  Garrick’s 
meanness  at  a  dinner  at  Foote’s,  and  when  stopped 
by  a  friend  of  Garrick’s  had  defended  himself  by 
declaring  that  his  father,  who  knew  David  better  than 
he  did,  was  of  the  same  opinion.  Garrick,  greatly 
hurt,  wrote  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  begging  her  to  let  him 
know  if  there  were  the  slightest  truth  in  this  assertion. 
Her  letters  to  Garrick  are  not  in  this  collection  (many 
of  them  are  printed  in  the  volumes  of  his  correspond¬ 
ence),  but  the  reply  was  evidently  satisfactory  and 
consoling,  and  elicited  the  following  acknowledgement : 

From  David  Garrick 

Adelphi,  Dec.  6  [1772]. 

A  Thousand  thanks,  my  dear  Madam  for  your  very  bal¬ 
samic  letter,  I  am  this  moment  arriv’d  and  can  not  ev’n  take 


VARIETIES  OF  BOUNTY 


359 


my  Lixivium  till  I  have  shewn  my  gratitude.  I  am  much 
better  in  my  health  since  I  went  out  of  town  and  quite  recoverd 
in  Mind  since  I  rec’d  yr  wise,  feeling,  charming  friendly  ten- 
thousand-epithet  epistle.  I  must  shew  it  madam,  that  is 
pos:  Mrs.  Vezey  in  town  and  my  heart  have  no  additional 
flutter  ? 

I  believe  if  my  blood  shd  freeze  in  my  heart  this  very  cold 
weather,  that  it  would  liquify  like  St.  Jannarius’s  at  ye  sight  of 
yr  handwriting — indeed  my  good  Lady  you  have  made  me 
quite  easy — I  love  Lord  Lyttelton  and  would  not  lose  him 
for  Millions — When  I  can  know  that  our  attendance  will  not 
be  impertinent  we  shall  be  as  punctual  in  Hill  Street  as  the  first 
Lady  there  (or  in  any  street)  is  punctual  in  making  her  friends 
and  admirers  happy. — Most  devotedly  Yours, 

D.  Garrick. 

I  write  with  ye  Gout  in  my  fingers. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  considered  fair  game,  and  was 
always  being  dunned  by  her  friends  for  something 
or  somebody.  I  have  not  identified  the  particular 
occasion  to  which  this  letter  refers  : 


From  David  Garrick 

April ye  18  [1773  ?]. 

My  good  Madam — I  only  requested  the  gentle  Stream 
of  your  Bounty,  &  you  have  flow’d  upon  us  with  a  torrent 
— I  am  really  asham’d  of  being  ye  means  of  your  abundant 
kindness  to  us — I  have  a  set  of  friends,  whom  I  intended  to 
call  upon  Every  year  for  one  pound  one — as  I  cannot  return 
the  overplus,  I  have  set  it  down  in  my  Book  over  against  your 
never  to  be  forgotten  Name — par  avance  5  years — 5  :  5  :  o 
give  me  leave  to  let  you  into  a  little  Secret  history  of  this  Charity 
— a  Nobleman  in  your  Street  whom  I  visit  &  who  looks  like 
benevolence  itself — had  a  Ticket  from  me  at  ye  same  time, 
that  I  was  impertinent  enough  to  send  one  to  you — Your  two 
names  like  a  fat  and  lean  rabbit  in  a  poulterer’s  Shop — stand 
thus  together — 

Mrs.  Montagu  .  .  .  5  :  5  :  o — no  ticket. 

Rt  Honble  Lord  W.  de  B  .  0:5:  o — one  ticket. 

Mrs.  Garrick  presents  her  Respects,  w*  mine,  &  I  at  the 


360  GARRICK’S  NEW  FOOTMAN 

feet  of  Miss  Gregory  am  My  dear  Madam  most  devotedly 
yours  D.  Garrick. 

before  I  went  out  of  Town  I  sent  to  Hely  but  could  not  find 
him  then,  since  my  return  I  have  been  confin’d  w*  a  sore 
throat  &  hoarseness,  &  cannot  yet  stir  out — If  you,  have  any 
orders  of  any  kind  for  your  faithful  Servant,  you  may  depend 
upon  my  Executing  them  wth  care  &  fidelity. 


From  David  Garrick 

Adelphi,  March  27  [1775  ?]. 

Dear  Madam — A  new  Footman,  who  being  deaf,  is  not 
mov’d  with  the  concord  of  sweet  Sounds, — &  being  un¬ 
mercurial  in  his  heels  could  not  overtake  the  Coach,  prevented 
us  from  having  the  pleasure  we  devoutly  (being  Sunday)  wish’d 
for  last  night — I  could  have  brain’d  the  fellow — a  Son  of 
Dr.  Robertson  was  wth  us,  &  we  talked  of  Nothing  but  Mrs. 
Montagu,  &  Miss  Gregory — Mrs.  Garrick  was  indeed  just 
return’d  from  Hampton  &  my  Elder  Brother  was  screwing 
up  his  Features  to  a  parting  ditty,  which  he  sighed  forth,  & 
left  us  before  5  this  morns.  The  fool  was  so  deaf  he  could 
not  tell  us  where  you  order’d  yr  Coachman  to  drive,  so  that 
we  could  do  nothing  but  fret  and  scold.  I  had  two  great 
favours  to  ask  :  the  one  was  to  beseech  you  not  to  be  impress’d 
by  any  Acc*  of  a  late  Separation  from  the  house  of  Cumberland, 
till  you  have  heard  the  calm  truth  from  yr  humble  Servant — 
Such  ingratitude  !  but  I  won’t  say  any  more  at  present,  but 
be  assur’d  I  will  never  do  anything  to  any  one  Creature,  that 
shall  make  You  (&  that  is  my  only  concern)  think  less  favourably 
of  me. 

Suspend  your  'Justice  till  the  Cause  is  heard  :  Your  under¬ 
standing  naturally  does  this,  &  I  flatter  myself  that  your  heart 
will  not  easily  be  misled  to  condemn  me — 

Something  too  much  of  this, — the  next  favour  I  had  to 
solicit  was  Your  name,  which  1  more  Glory  in  than  if  Possessd 
&  to  be  added  to  ye  most  noble  list  I  have  got  for  a  very  ingenious 
man  who  has  undertaken  6  etchings  from  the  principal 
Characters  of  Shakespeare.  I  have  sent  you  a  Sample  of  the 
work,  which  I  must  beg  you  to  return  to  day  or  tomorrow 
— without  your  permission  I  have  plac’d  you  at  the  head  of 
my  List,  &  Everybody  agrees  to  the  propriety  of  having  such 
a  Leader — Should  you  meet  with  any  choice  Spirits,  whose 


VOLTAIRE’S  LETTER 


361 

names  may  be  easily  got,  they  will  not  discredit  themselves, 
&  do  great  Service  to  a  most  ingenious  Man. — I  am  Madam 
with  every  Sense  of  Esteem  &  affection  most  devotedly  Y ours, 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Garrick  presents  her  respects — I  would  send  more  than 
these  to  Miss  Gregory  were  I  not  afraid  of  Mrs.  Garrick’s 
Curiosity  wishing  to  read  over  this  letter.  I  have  had  a  little 
pain  &  worse  symptoms  this  morning. 

If  the  conjectural  date  of  this  letter  be  correct, 
the  reference  in  the  first  favour  asked  may  be  to  a 
phase  of  the  quarrel  with  Colman,  and  in  the  second 
to  the  “Shakespeare’s  Characters”  by  John  Mortimer, 
of  which  twelve  were  issued  in  folio  in  1775—6.  A 
long  subsequent  letter  from  Mrs.  Montagu  to  her 
nephew  asks  him  to  pay  her  subscription  and  get 
the  portraits,  which  she  had  never  received. 

The  next  letter  for  quotation  here  refers  to  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  visit  to  Paris  in  the  summer  of  1776,  from 
which  she  had  just  returned,  and  of  which  some 
account  from  her  correspondence  has  been  given 
under  that  date.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in 
August,  during  this  visit,  Mrs.  Montagu  was  taken 
to  a  meeting  of  the  Academy  at  which,  amongst  other 
performances,  “  a  most  blackguard  abusive  invective 
of  Monsr.  de  Voltaire’s  against  Shakespeare  ”  was 
read.  Mrs.  Montagu  was  asked  if  she  would  care  to 
make  any  reply,  but  very  courteously  and  discreetly 
answered  that  a  previous  orator  (l’Abbe  Arnauld)  had 
done  it  better  than  she  could  in  his  eulogy  of  original 
genius  and  the  benefits  arising  from  the  study  of  it  ; 
that  she  remembered  that  sixty  years  ago  in  the  same 
Academy  old  Homer  had  met  with  the  same  treatment; 
that  they  now  did  justice  to  Homer,  and  she  did  not 
doubt  they  would  do  the  same  to  Shakespeare,  since 
great  genius  survived  those  who  set  up  to  be  their 
critics  and  most  absurdly  to  be  their  rivals.  The 
Academy  showed  signs  of  displeasure  during  the 


362  GARRICK  ON  THE  PARIS  VISIT 

reading  of  Voltaire’s  attack,  which  was  applauded  by 
few  and  deprecated  by  many. 


From  David  Garrick 

Octr  2 6,  1776. 

Dear  Madam — I  congratulate  all  your  friends  &  myself 
among  that  honorable  happy  number  for  your  safe  return  to  us. 

Mrs.  Garrick  did  herself  the  honour  of  calling  upon  you 
to  return  her  thanks  in  Person  for  the  great  care  you  have 
taken,  &  the  trouble  you  have  had,  with  the  friendly  favour  of 
Mrs.  Necker  to  her.  I  heard  wh  pleasure  of  your  being  at 
the  french  Academy  when  Voltaire  exhibited  his  malevolent 
Nonsense  (for  which  too  among  other  Obligations  I  thank 
you)  upon  our  belovd  and  immortal  Shakespeare  :  could  any¬ 
thing  possibly  add  to  my  Admiration  of  Mrs.  Montagu  it  was 
the  expression  of  contempt  &  astonishm*  which  I  hear  you 
put  on,  at  hearing  the  weak  and  impotent  ravings  of  Age,  Envy, 
hatred  and  malice — it  rejoices  me  much  to  hear,  that  this 
unchristian  attack  upon  Genius  had  not  a  favourable  reception 
even  for  his  own  friends. 

I  doubt  not  but  you  have  converted  Numbers  to  the  faith, 
not  wth  sword  as  Mahomet  did,  but  by  those  emanations  of 
Genius,  which  you  have  caught  from  the  divinity  you  have  so 
powerfully  &  justly  protected  &  admir’d — this  attack  of 
Voltaire,  I  hope,  is  not  to  pass  unnotic’d.  If  the  Champions 
will  not  mount  with  the  regulars,  the  Light  horse  &  hussars 
must  begin  a  Skirmish — I  most  devoutly  wish  for  the  honour 
of  a  little  conversation,  which  I  should  immediately  have 
endeavour’d  to  enjoy  in  Hill  Street,  had  not  a  small  attack  of 
ye  Gout  obliged  me  to  stay  at  home  for  a  day  or  two  [torn  out] 
.  .  .  may  I  not  hope  for  that  [torn  out]  .  .  .  favour  as  soon 
as  the  more  important  matters  have  had  their  first  dues,  & 
with  our  little  demands  may  present  ourselves  with  all  Love, 
&  humility  ? — I  am  Dr  Madam  Yr  most  devoted  Ser* 

D.  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Garrick  presents  her  respects — 

I  would  send  my  best  wishes,  with  my 
Wife’s,  to  Miss  Gregory,  but  alas,  I  fear 
the  enchantments  of  french  Everything 
has  destroy’d  all  my  hopes. 

I  wd  not  have  sent  this  scrawl  could  I  have  written  better, 
but  ye  illbred  Gout  has  prevented  me. 


THE  FAREWELL  PERFORMANCE  363 

Just  before  she  went  to  Paris,  Mrs.  Montagu  had 
been  at  Garrick’s  farewell  performance  on  June  10, 
1776.  The  piece  chosen  was  Mrs.  Centlivre’s  The 
Wonder ,  and  it  was  announced  simply  as  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Theatrical  Fund.  But  every  one  knew 
what  the  occasion  meant,  and  Drury  Lane  Theatre 
was  packed  from  floor  to  ceiling.  The  evening  began 
with  “  An  Occasional  Prologue,”  which  Garrick  had 
written  as  an  appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Fund.  These 
were  its  opening  lines,  of  which  the  last  was  to  become 
almost  proverbial : 

A  veteran  see  !  whose  last  act  on  the  stage 
Intreats  your  smiles  for  sickness  and  for  age  ; 

Their  cause  I  plead  ;  plead  it  with  heart  and  mind, 

A  fellow  feeling  makes  one  wondrous  kind. 

He  played  Don  Felix  magnificently  ;  but  when  it 
came  to  the  final  farewell  his  emotion  well-nigh  over¬ 
came  him. 

“  With  a  countenance  that  plainly  spoke  what 
was  working  at  his  heart,”  says  Murphy,  “  he  stepped 
forward,  and  after  some  pause  addressed  the  audience  : 

“  ‘  It  has  been  customary  with  persons  under  my 
circumstances  to  address  you  in  a  farewell  epilogue. 
I  had  the  same  intention  and  turned  my  thoughts 
that  way  ;  but  I  found  myself  then  as  incapable  of 
writing  such  an  epilogue  as  I  would  be  now  of  speak- 
ing  it. 

“  £  The  jingle  of  rhyme  and  the  language  of  fiction 
would  but  ill  suit  my  present  feelings. 

“  ‘  This  is  to  me  a  very  awful  moment :  it  is  no 
less  than  parting  for  ever  with  those  from  whom  I 
have  received  the  greatest  kindness ;  and  upon  the 
spot  where  that  kindness  and  your  favours  were 
enjoyed.’  Here  his  voice  failed  him  ;  he  paused 
till  a  gush  of  tears  relieved  him,  and  then  concluded 
with  a  few  words  of  thanks  for  ‘  kindness  the  deepest 
impression  of  which  will  always  remain  here,  here 
in  my  heart,  fixed  and  unalterable.’  ” 


364 


“ AURORA ” 


“  Then,”  says  Sir  Theodore  Martin,  “  he  stopped 
as  though  reluctant  to  look  his  parting  farewell.  The 
enthusiasm  of  the  audience,  no  less  reluctant,  was 
broken  by  sobs  and  tears.  ‘  Farewell  !  farewell  !  ’ 
burst  from  a  thousand  voices.”  “  Again  and  again 
his  eyes,”  writes  one  of  his  biographers,  “  turned 
wistfully  to  that  sea  of  sympathetic  faces,  and  at  last, 
with  an  effort,  he  tore  himself  from  their  view.”  In 
a  letter  from  Mrs.  Montagu  to  the  Rev.  John  Burrows, 
which  I  quote  from  Mr.  Montagu  Burrows’  History 
of  the  Family ,  containing  several  good  letters  from  her, 
she  says  : 

I  was  last  night  at  the  play  to  hear  Mr.  Garrick  speak 
his  last  dying  speech  in  the  theatre.  There  was  not  a  dry 
eye  in  the  whole  house.  He  was  deeply  affected,  and  the 
sympathy  was  universal.  Lady  Spencer,  Mrs.  Vesey  and  your 
humble  servant  were  in  Mrs.  Garrick’s  box  :  we  went  after¬ 
wards  to  sup  with  Mr.  &  Mrs.  Garrick.  I  believe  if  all  the 
Kings  in  Europe  (excepting  the  King  of  England)  were  to 
abdicate,  there  would  not  be  so  much  or  so  universal  grief ; 
such  respect  and  renown  waits  only  on  those  who  act  their 
parts  to  the  highest  perfection. 

In  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Vesey’s  to  Mrs.  Montagu  in 
1777  are  the  following  lines  upon  the  Duchess  of 
Devonshire  : 


Garricks  Aurora 

A  noontide  Serenade  at  the  Porters  Lodge,  not  being  let 
in — Garrick  thrumming  his  Guitar — past  2  and  Cloudy 
morrow 

What  makes  thy  looks  so  fair  and  bright 
devine  Aurora  say  ! 
because  from  Slumbers  short  and  light 
I  rise  to  give  the  Day. 

O  hide  for  shame  thy  blushing  face 
’tis  all  poetick  fiction 
to  tales  like  these  see  Devon’s  Grace 
a  blooming  contradiction. 


RETIREMENT  AND  DEATH  365 

Wouldst  thou  fair  Dame  more  bright  appear 
old  fashion’d  customs  scorning 
rise  not  till  noon  throughout  the  year 
nor  go  to  Bed  till  morning. 

This  was  picked  out  of  Garricks  basket  last  night  by  Mr. 
Burke,  Lady  Clermont,  Lucan  and  Duchs  of  Marlborough — 
the  rest  of  my  Company  went  off  to  Vaux  Hall  in  this  North 
Wind,  not  all  the  Burke  and  Garrick  fire  could  detain  them 
the  Dutches  is  in  hopes  to  bring  the  Duke  into  such  Company 
next  Winter  in  hopes  to  make  him  speak  ;  that  will  fall  to 
your  lot,  at  least  you  will  make  him  listen,  which  is  the  best 
preparation  to  furnishing  a  part  of  conversation. — we  had  not 
any  Politicks  which  I  think  a  great  deliverance  as  there  is 
nothing  new  to  be  said.  .  .  . 

After  Garrick’s  retirement  from  the  stage  of  Drury 
Lane  in  1776,  a  few  scattered  references  in  the  letters 
serve  merely  to  show  that  the  old  friendship  was  kept 
up  by  visits  between  Hill  Street  and  the  Hampton 
villa,  to  which  he  had  become  greatly  attached,  and 
where  the  two  adepts  may  be  fitly  pictured  discoursing 
on  the  drama  and  presided  over  by  the  famous 
Roubiliac  bust  of  Shakespeare  in  the  sacred  little 
temple  beyond  the  road.  With  “  love,  honour,  and  a 
host  of  friends,”  it  was  an  enviable  retirement,  and, 
save  for  the  recurrent  attacks  of  his  old  enemy  the 
gout,  a  very  happy  one  ;  but  it  was  short-lived.  At 
Christmas  1778  he  ventured  to  go  down  for  his 
customary  visit  to  Lord  Spencer’s  at  Althorp,  where  a 
violent  attack  seized  him  ;  he  just  managed  to  get 
back  to  the  house  (No.  5)  in  the  Adelphi,  which  he 
still  retained,  and  died  there  after  severe  suffering  on 
January  20. 

Arthur  Murphy  says  “  a  more  magnificent  funeral 
was  never  seen  in  London  ”  than  when  Garrick’s 
remains  were  conveyed  from  the  Adelphi  to  West¬ 
minster  Abbey. 

Mrs.  Garrick  survived  her  husband  more  than 
forty  years,  and  was  found  dead  in  her  chair  at  the 


MRS.  GARRICK’S  ENGLISH 


366 

extreme  age  of  ninety-eight.  Their  marriage  was  a 
wonderfully  happy  one,  extraordinarily  so  in  the  annals 
of  their  profession.  “  He  never  was  a  husband  to 
me,”  she  said  in  old  age  to  a  friend;  “during  the 
thirty  years  of  our  marriage  he  was  always  my  lover.” 
Her  foreign  accent  (she  had  spent  her  childhood  in 
Vienna)  was  the  subject  of  gentle  chaff  amongst  her 
intimates.  Lord  Lyttelton  used  to  call  her  Pid-Pad, 
a  joke  on  her  pronunciation  of  Pit-a-pat  ;  Monsey 
vexed  her  seriously  once  by  his  chaff  of  her  English, 
and  Garrick  made  up  the  quarrel  by  himself  telling 
the  story  of  her  having  gone  to  a  sale  and  given  the 
auctioneer  the  name  of  Potty  Brice,  meaning  thereby 
her  maid  Betty  Price. 

Two  or  three  extracts  from  her  letters  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  may  be  added.  The  touch  of  a  foreign 
idiom  may  be  noticed  here  and  there  : 


From  Mrs.  Garrick 

1784. 

As  I  am  in  my  heart  a  very  good  protestant,  and  likewise 
a  great  enthusiast  to  keep  strict  to  the  laws  of  the  country 
wherever  I  live,  I  shall  not  set  out  till  Monday  to  keep  the 
Sunday  Holy.  But  as  it  is  too  far  for  my  horses  to  come  to 
Sandleford  in  one  day,  I  intend  to  lie  at  Reading.  It  is  28 
miles  from  me  and  on  Tuesday  morning  I  shall  be  ready  to 
wait  upon  you.  I  should  come  on  from  Reading  (as  I  intend 
to  be  there  by  six)  with  post  horses  ;  but  I  fear  my  old 
tumbril  of  a  chariot  will  not  bear  so  much  shaking  by  going 
too  fast  ;  for  as  my  new  one  is  not  yet  ready,  I  must  in 
the  meanwhile  make  shift  with  the  old,  and  use  it  as  gentle 
as  possible. 

My  staying  longer  at  Sandleford  than  the  13  :  will  not 
be  in  my  power,  as  I  expect  company  coming  to  me  that  very 
day.  As  there  will  not  be  time  between  this  and  Monday  to 
receive  a  note  in  case  the  Primate  should  not  have  left  you,  I 
shall  at  all  events  set  out  from  Hampton  ;  as  the  people  of  the 
Inn  will  inform  me  if  he  post  by  Reading  ;  and  according  I 
shall  act,  that  is,  to  stay  till  he  is  gone  at  the  inn.  If  good 
luck  will  have  it,  perhaps  may  I  be  happy  enough  to  see  you 


BLACK  GLOVES 


367 

Monday  evening  with  the  help  of  post  horses  and  my  old 
tumbril  befriending  me  and  not  Breaking  to  pieces  as  soon  as 
I  set  out. 

The  last  paragraph  of  the  following  letter  has  a 
quaintly  pathetic  interest,  indicating  as  it  does  the 
clouding  of  Mrs.  Vesey’s  reason  after  her  husband’s 
death. 


From  Mrs.  Garrick 

Hampton,  Sunday  June  the  19,  1785. 

And  for  no  other  reason  but  out  of  mear  kindness  did  we 
not  write  to  dear  Mrs.  Montagu,  thinking  she  would  have  so 
much  business  upon  her  hands  at  Sandleford,  that  the  sight 
of  a  letter  from  Idle  people  would  have  made  her  sick. 

Mr.  Montagu  did  me  the  honour  three  weeks  ago  to 
Breakfast  with  me  at  the  Adelphi,  when  Miss  More  gave  him 
a  thousand  commissions  to  be  transmitted  to  you  ;  but  I 
suppose  he  forgot  every  word  by  the  time  he  returned  to  love 
and  happiness.  Miss  More  is  now  at  Mrs.  Boscawen  where  I 
left  her  a  few  days  ago  ;  and  where  she  is  to  remain  till  next 
Wednesday.  I  will  shew  her  your  letter  and  she  will  be  better 
able  to  answer  you  concerning  Mrs.  Yearsley  than  I  could  :  and 
I  shall  now  come  to  a  point  in  your  letter  concerning  myself 
more  nearly  ;  it  is  of  having  the  honor  of  Your  Company  at 
Hampton  at  your  return  to  Town. 

But  when  you  wrote,  it  was  on  the  12  :  of  June,  and  I  did 
not  return  to  H  :  where  the  letter  lay,  till  yesterday  June  the 
18  :  so  that  by  this  time  you  may  be  perhaps  in  London  ;  and 
very  much  in  the  Dumps  with  your  Humble  Servant  for  having 
received  no  answer. 

And  what  is  worse,  I  must  return  to  Town  on  Wednesday 
to  stay  till  friday.  On  Saturday  I  shall  have  Ld  and  Ly  : 
Edgcumbe  Mrs.  Walsingham,  and  Mr.  Walpole  to  dine  with 
me  at  three  o’clock.  I  mention  my  company,  that  if  you 
should  like  the  party,  and  your  return  to  Town  should  be  on 
that  day,  I  am  sure  we  should  all  jump  for  joy  to  see  you  ; 
but  if  that  day  will  not  suit  you,  I  will  make  no  engagement 
from  Saturday  next,  till  I  know  your  will  and  pleasure. 

I  have  seen  poor  Mrs.  Vesey  ;  but  I  am  persuaded  she 
perfectly  forgot  for  what  reason  she  wears  black  gloves  ;  as 
the  rest  of  her  Mourning  can  put  her  in  mind  of  no  loss  what- 


A  LOST  CHILD 


36  8 

soever.  Mrs.  Hancock  is  determined  I  believe  to  wear  out 
her  green  silk  lutestring  gown  upon  this  joyful  occasion  ;  for 
she  looks  more  chearful  than  I  ever  saw  her.  I  cannot  re¬ 
concile  those  Things  with  my  feelings  ;  but  I  see  that  such 
may  be  done  :  so  even  let  everybody  do  things  their  own  way, 
as  mine  shall  be,  to  remain  my  Dear  Mrs.  Montagus  Devoted 

Servant  M  :  Garrick. 

Mrs.  Yearsley  was  “  Lactilla,”  the  poetical  milk¬ 
woman  of  Bristol  whose  effusions  Hannah  More  was 
instrumental  in  publishing.  Mrs.  Montagu  and  Miss 
More  were  co-trustees  of  the  trust-money  which 
resulted  from  the  book,  and  were  rewarded  by  a  most 
abusive  attack  from  the  poetess. 


From  Mrs .  Garrick 

My  Dear  and  best  friend  is  my  dear  Mrs.  Montagu  always 
to  me  !  She  can  bring  nothing  but  comfort  whenever  she 
Honours  anybody  with  her  friendship. 

I  should  have  come  to  you  had  it  been  in  my  Power  just 
now,  to  thank  you  for  your  kind  concern  for  my  very  great 
loss  indeed  of  one  of  the  sweetest  children  that  ever  came  to 
anybody’s  share. 

But  God  knows  best  for  what  reason  he  took  her  to  himself, 
and  we  must  submit  to  his  will.  If  I  should  be  in  spirits  once 
more  before  I  die,  between  this  time  and  Autumn  ;  I  will 
knock  at  your  door  at  Sandleford  that  moment  ;  but  at  present 
I  have  many  visits  to  make,  and  to  receive  ;  and  till  that  is 
over  I  cannot  leave  Hampton.  God  bless  you  for  ever  and 
believe  me  to  remain  Your  Faithful  jyp  Garrick. 

I  have  seen  Mr.  Boyle,  he  came  to  me  at  Hampton  from 
Lord  North  where  he  is  upon  a  visit.  He  looks  well,  but  very 
thin,  he  cannot  bear  the  name  of  his  Mother,  has  therefore  not 
seen  her  ;  but  I  hope  things  may  come  about. 

Adelphi,  July  the  4  :  1788. 


I  find  Matthew  Montagu  writing  to  his  aunt  in 
1793: 


North  Car®'”*  *** 


“  BEST  OF  WOMEN  AND  WIVES  ”  369 


From  Matthew  Montagu 

The  pleasure  we  yesterday  received  from  your  very  kind 
letter  was  shared  with  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Miss  Hervey,  who 
dined  here,  and  with  whom  we  passed  a  very  agreeable  day  : 
the  weather  was  uncommonly  propitious  and  the  Garrick  was 
in  her  holy  day  spirits  :  She  has  been  pilding  ;  (beware  you 
do  not  transpose  the  letters)  her  house  was  to  be  rebaired, 
and  it  tumpled  down  and  she  has  peen  opliged  to  eat  her  dinner 
first  in  one  corner  and  then  in  another,  and  at  last  the  prick- 
layer  and  his  bosse  are  likely  to  eat  her  out  of  house  and  home. 
What  is  more  material,  her  health  seems  to  be  repaired  and 
she  looks  better  than  usual,  and  her  spirits  have  their  accustom’d 
play.. 

Five  years  after  David  Garrick’s  death,  Samuel 
Johnson,  who  had  said  many  ungenerous  and  some 
stupid  things  about  him,  but  for  all  that  had  loved 
him  with  ungracious  tenderness,  was  laid  by  his  side 
at  the  foot  of  Shakespeare’s  monument  in  the  Abbey, 
where  Cumberland  tells  us  he  had  once  seen  him 
standing,  bathed  in  tears,  by  David’s  grave.  But  it 
was  not  till  forty-three  years  more  had  passed  that 
“  the  best  of  women  and  wives,”  the  woman  who  for 
the  nearly  thirty  years  of  their  married  life  had  never 
been  a  day  apart  from  him,  and  whom  he  had  loved 
faithfully  and  devotedly,  was  laid  to  rest  again  “  in 
her  wedding  sheets  ”  at  his  side. 


END  OF  VOL.  I 


BIO  B  M758 


v.  1 

Montagu,  Elizabeth  Robinson,  1720-1800. 
Mrs.  Montague,  Queen  of  the  blues ,  her 


3  3091  00140  1660 


DATE  DUE 


B 

M758 

v.l 


Montagu 

Mrs.  Montagu,  "Queen  of  the  blues" 


B 

M758 

v.l 


Montagu 

Mrs.  Montagu,  "Queen  of  the  blues" 


■1':-  '  :&’,$'■■  '•  v£o:V*‘:'  :  'v  -'.-'4' 

/■#> ■  O.S---  v-  '■>■  ^ -''..'A'  ■ 

••  '  ■  ; 

■?•*••  *i»  ;•«  >,  »-  •  •  .«  ’Vi*.  '•  ’ .  5.  v.  ,  iti  « 

'•  U  ’  >-■  ’  ijf  7;  ■  •  >  •  '(•■>.'  ■  O  !■  V;.; 

Mbttk  '  •  ,V  ;-.H" 

fe  "  , 2’.;  -"Vi-  ■  ■  ••  ;.  ••  'f  .  .  ***'i  . 

To  ■  1  •  ■;*■:•  ■  '  .  ■  ,  •: 


North  Carolina  State  Library 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2018  with  funding  from 
State  Library  of  North  Carolina 


https://archive.org/details/mrsmontaguequeen02mont 


MRS.  MONTAGU 

“QUEEN  OF  THE  BLUES” 


j^lorth  Carolina  Slftle  Librfcfry 
Raleigh 

MRS.  MONTAGU 

“QUEEN  OF  THE  BLUES” 

HER  LETTERS  AND  FRIENDSHIPS 
FROM  1762  TO  1800 

EDITED  BY 

REGINALD  BLUNT 

FROM  MATERIAL  LEFT  TO  HIM  BY  HER  GREAT-GREAT-NIECE 

EMILY  J.  CLIMENSON 
VOLUME  II 

i777-i8°° 


“  Foin  d’Amphitryon  oil  Ton  ne  dine  pas  !” 

Les  Deux  Sosies, 

Jean  de  Rotrou,  1636. 


BOSTON  AND  NEW  YORK 
HOUGHTON  MIFFLIN  COMPANY 
PRINTED  IN  SCOTLAND 


k 


/ 

I 


2 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


CONTENTS 


VOLUME  II 


THE  BLUE  STOCKINGS 


PAGF. 


Origin  of  the  name.  Stillingfleet  hose.  The  Bas  Bleu.  Mrs. 
Vesey’s  assemblies.  The  Blue  Room.  The  Lodge  and  the 
Society.  A  reported  dispute.  Mr.  Percy.  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
downy  wing.  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Hannah  More.  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
decline.  Richard  Cumberland.  The  move  from  Hill  Street 
to  Portman  Square.  The  Club.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  and 
Mr.  Vesey  .........  i 


!777 


MONTAGU  HOUSE  BEGUN — DODD,  WARTON,  DU  DEFFAND, 
WRAXALL 

Letters  from  Paris.  The  new  house  in  Portman  Square.  James 
Stuart.  Mr.  Keppel  at  Bath.  Letter  from  Madame  Necker. 
Return  to  Sandleford.  Lord  Chatham’s  speech.  Paying  for  the 
new  House.  Abbe  Raynal  and  Sterne’s  Eliza.  Mrs.  Montagu 
moralises.  The  Primate  and  Sir  T.  Robinson’s  papers.  Mr. 
Barrett.  The  Americans.  Dr.  Dodd  and  Dr.  Johnson.  The 
Huntingdon  connection.  David  Montagu  Erskine.  Smuggled 
tea.  Visit  to  Winchester  School.  The  Wartons  at  Sandleford. 

Visit  to  Nuneham.  The  model  village.  Lord  Harcourt  drowned. 
Death  of  Morris  Robinson.  Letter  from  Madame  du  Deffand. 

Letter  from  Nathaniel  Wraxall.  Mrs.  Howe.  The  Ministry  .  12 


BERENGER,  VOLTAIRE,  GLORIANA,  MRS.  VESEY — THE  DEATH  OF 
CHATHAM 

American  affairs.  Lord  Shelburne’s  engagement.  David  Garrick 
acts  at  Hill  Street.  Hannah  More’s  Percy.  Overtures  for 
peace.  Richard  Berenger’s  debts.  American  Commissioners. 


v 


58398 


VI 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Lord  Chatham’s  last  speech.  State  Papers.  Mr.  Le  Texier.  A 
performance  at  Newbury.  Death  of  Lord  Chatham.  His 
estate  and  creditors.  Death  of  Voltaire.  Journey  to  Denton. 
Leonard  Smelt  and  the  King.  Lord  Karnes  at  Denton.  Mr. 
Robinson’s  death.  James  Woodhouse.  Beauties  at  Tunbridge. 
Duchess  of  Devonshire.  Return  to  town.  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
assemblies.  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Thrale.  The  Crofts. 

The  new  house.  The  Court.  Keppel  and  Palliser.  Mrs. 
Macaulay.  Lady  Carmarthen  ......  42 


I779 


DEATHS  OF  GARRICK,  MARTHA  RAY,  AND  SECOND  LORD  LYTTELTON 
— WARS  AND  RUMOURS  OF  WARS 

Garrick’s  death.  At  Bath.  Harrow  speeches.  War  and  invasion. 

A  Sylph  assembly.  Robert  Potter  and  a  portrait.  Death  of 
Martha  Ray.  Lord  Temple’s  death.  Paul  Jones.  Invasion 
scares.  Treason  talked.  Christopher  Anstey.  Death  of  Second 
Lord  Lyttelton.  The  Vision.  His  letters  ....  67 


I  780 

THE  BUILDING  OF  MONTAGU  HOUSE — THE  GORDON  RIOTS 

Spring  visit  to  Bath.  Its  architecture  and  habitues.  James  Stuart. 

Her  dog.  Hardman’s  Rappee.  Sir  William  Jones.  Mrs. 
Thrale.  Rodney.  A  naval  amazon.  Lord  George  Gordon 
and  the  Riots.  London  ablaze.  Sheridan’s  prologue.  Gordon’s 
forebears.  Mr.  Anstey.  Letter  from  Mrs.  Vesey.  Riots  at 
Bath.  Lord  Henry  Clinton.  General  Oglethorpe.  Action  off 
Martinique.  Sir  George  Rodney.  Lord  Winchilsea.  Mr. 
Vesey.  Camp  in  St.  James’s  Park.  Madame  de  Vaucluze. 
North  Carolina.  The  rioting  over.  Active  youth.  Mr.  Pitt’s 
tutor.  A  character  study.  A  circular  tour.  Montagu  House. 

How  paid  for.  Mrs.  Montagu  at  sixty.  Autumn  visit  to  Bath. 

A  Newbury  Ball.  Wyatt’s  plans  for  Sandleford.  The  new 
house.  Mrs.  Scott.  The  second  Lord  Lyttelton’s  death.  His 
character.  Dr.  Fothergill  .......  80 


I78  I 

MOVING  INTO  MONTAGU  HOUSE — JOHNSON’S  LIVES, 
CHATTERTON,  WILKES 


Spring  visit  to  Bath.  Alterations  at  Sandleford.  The  Octagon 
Room.  Dr.  Johnson’s  Lives-,  Letter  from  Lord  Hardwicke. 


CONTENTS 


The  “  Emperor  of  Germany.”  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Hannah  More 
at  Bath.  The  Whisky.  Montagu  House,  Portman  Square, 
finished.  The  move  from  Hill  Street.  A  family  dinner. 
Workmen  and  fittings.  Rowley’s  Poems.  Disposing  of  the 
Hill  Street  house.  Miss  Pulteney  ......  108 


I782 

A  CAPABLE  WIDOW — BRITISH  PRESTIGE  RESTORED  BY  THE 
NAVY  AND  GIBRALTAR 

Gloomy  political  outlook.  The  Ministry  resign.  Lord  Rockingham 
returns.  Pitt  at  the  Exchequer.  Warton  on  Pope.  Fete  for 
Prince  of  Wales.  Texier’s  readings.  Mrs.  Garrick’s  grief. 
Influenza.  Sir  Richard  Jebb.  Delights  of  the  new  house. 
Cipriani’s  commode.  Second  marriages.  A  capable  widow. 

Lord  Rockingham’s  death.  Miss  Burney’s  Cecilia.  Hay¬ 
makers’  feast.  Lord  Shelburne  First  Lord.  Life  at  Sandleford. 
Lancelot  Brown.  Bad  harvest.  Mr.  Vesey.  Rousseau.  Miss 
Gregory  goes  to  Edinburgh.  Miss  Pulteney  sent  to  a  convent. 

Lord  Bath’s  estate.  Howe  and  Rodney.  Prince  of  Wales  at 
Lady  Lucan’s.  Gibraltar.  Potter’s  Euripides.  The  Cameo. 

Death  of  Lord  Karnes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .116 


!783 

DOROTHEA  GREGORY — HARDWICKE,  CONWAY,  SIDDONS,  KIPPIS 

Miss  Gregory  goes  north.  Her  engagement  to  Mr.  Alison.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  anger.  Johnson’s  Lives  and  Lord  Hardwicke. 
Haymaking  at  Sandleford.  General  Conway’s  present.  The 
drive  to  Denton.  Visits  en  route.  Busy  days  at  the  Collieries. 
Matthew  visits  Lord  Harrowby’s.  Lord  Spencer’s  illness  and 
death.  The  little  world.  Return  from  Denton.  Mrs.  Siddons 
in  Zara.  Dr.  Monsey  at  ninety.  Lord  Valentia’s  second 
marriage.  D’Alembert’s  death.  Sir  William  Hamilton’s  vase. 
Letter  from  Andrew  Kippis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .131 


DR.  JOHNSON,  MR.  SHAKESPEARE,  AND 
MRS.  MONTAGU 

Johnson  and  the  ladies.  First  meets  Mrs.  Montagu.  Anna  Williams. 
Queen  Elizabeth’s  plates.  Johnson’s  evening  at  Hill  Street. 
Lord  Bath  on  their  friendship.  The  Essay  on  Shakespeare. 
Mrs.  Montagu  on  Johnson’s  English.  Johnson’s  Shakespeare. 
She  criticises  his  Preface.  Disapproves  the  attacks  on  Johnson. 
Mrs.  Thrale’s  quotation.  Voltaire  and  Johnson.  Mrs.  Montagu 
goes  on  with  her  Essay.  Its  publication  in  1769.  Johnson’s 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Vlll 


opinion  of  it.  Other  critics.  Horace  Walpole  approves.  The 
Reviewers.  Letters  from  Dr.  Johnson.  Letter  from  Anna 
Williams.  Coll  in  the  Hebrides.  Johnson  at  Hill  Street.  He 
asks  help  for  Davies.  Begs  for  a  print  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  The 
Life  of  Lord  Lyttelton.  Dialogues  o  f  the  Dead.  Mrs.  Montagu 
“  drops  ”  Johnson.  An  explosion.  The  Pepys-Johnson  battle 
at  Streatham.  “  Queen  of  the  Blues.”  Reconciliation.  She 
stops  attacks  on  the  Doctor.  Letter  from  Dr.  Johnson  on  the 
death  of  Anna  Williams.  Letter  from  Lord  Hardwicke. 
Johnson’s  death.  His  opinion  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  Note  on  the 
Letters  ..........  140 


J78  4 


THE  ALISON  AND  PIOZ.ZI  MARRIAGES — FOX,  PITT, 
THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES 


William  Hoare’s  pictures.  A  bathing  dress.  The  Duchess  of 
Devonshire  canvassing  for  Fox.  Miss  Gregory’s  engagement. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  opposition.  The  marriage  takes  place.  Miss 
Keppel.  Mr.  Pitt’s  taxes.  Mrs.  Thrale’s  marriage.  The  Alison 
wedding  and  Mr.  Pulteney.  The  Primate  at  Sandleford.  Sir 
John  Burgoyne.  The  Duchess’s  tooth.  Lady  Strathmore. 
Candle  tax.  The  Prince  of  Wales.  Louis  Weltjie  at  Brighton. 

Mrs.  Vesey  at  Margate.  Dr.  Beattie  at  Sandleford.  Mrs. 
Arbuthnot.  Mr.  Vesey’s  illness.  The  Poetical  Milkwoman  .  168 


MARRIAGE  OF  MATTHEW  MONTAGU — MRS.  DELANY. 
GENERAL  OGLETHORPE,  WARREN  HASTINGS 


Letter  from  Mrs.  Alison.  Deaths  of  friends.  Matthew  Montagu’s 
engagement.  Settlements.  St.  Anthony’s  Fire.  Edward 
Jerningham.  Montagu’s  wedding.  The  drive  to  Sandleford. 

Death  of  Mr.  Vesey.  His  will.  Reconciliation  with  Mrs.  Alison. 

Death  of  Dowager  Duchess  of  Portland.  Her  character.  Mrs. 
Delany  unprovided  for.  The  King’s  bounty.  Death  of 
General  Oglethorpe.  Warren  Hastings.  Mr.  Hartley.  Lord 
George  Gordon  and  the  Archbishop.  His  later  years.  The 
Diamond  Necklace.  Mrs.  Montagu  at  sixty-five.  Death  of 
Sir  William  Robinson  ........  186 


I786 


A  QUIET  YEAR — MR.  BARWELL — MRS.  FIT7, HERBERT — BALLOONS 

Betty  Tull’s  feather  work.  Newbury  Sunday  schools,  and  its  Rector. 
The  Poyntz  family  troubles.  Nabob  Barwell.  Mrs.  Jordan  in 


CONTENTS 


IX 


PAGE 


Comedy.  Mrs.  Siddons  at  Sir  Joshua’s.  Sir  Charles  Wilkins’ 
translation  of  the  Bhagavad-gita.  Junius  Junior.  The  Mac¬ 
artney  duel.  Mr.  Fawkener’s  duel.  Journey  to  Denton.  The 
Prince  of  Wales  and  Mrs.  Fitzherbert.  A  feast  at  Denton. 
Lunardi’s  air  balloon  ........ 


201 


1787 


“THE  OLD  ABBESS” — SUNDAY  SCHOOLS — HANNAH  MORE — 

LOUIS  XVI 

Domestic  affairs.  Montagu’s  Commons  speech.  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
social  activities.  Sandleford.  School  treats.  Primate’s  visit. 

Mrs.  Vesey’s  illness.  Letter  from  Hannah  More.  Montagu 
goes  north.  The  French  King  and  Parliament.  Mr.  Mackreth. 

Mrs.  Vesey.  Lady  Clermont.  Calonne.  Wraxall  on  his  visit 
to  Paris.  Archives  of  the  Revolution.  Hayley’s  Dialogues. 
Christmas  and  New  Year  dinners.  Soame  Jenyns  and  Dr. 
Johnson.  Infectious  ridicule  ......  209 


I788 


THE  KING’S  ILLNESS — A  TALK  WITH  THE  QUEEN — HASTINGS’  TRIAL, 
AND  WESTMINSTER  ELECTIONS 

The  Matthew  Montagus  at  Shooter’s  Hill.  Primate  visits  Sandleford. 

The  King’s  illness.  Warren  Hastings’  trial.  A  visit  to  Windsor. 
Westminster  election.  Letter  from  William  Wilberforce.  Mrs. 
Montagu  meets  the  Queen.  The  King’s  condition  improved. 

Betty  Tull.  Mr.  Jerningham  .  .  .  .  .  .221 


WILBERFORCE  AND  MATTHEW  MONTAGU — THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 

Doings  in  France.  The  fishwomen  of  Paris.  French  refugees. 

Miss  Reynolds.  Wilberforce’s  projected  visit  to  Paris  with 
Montagu.  Matthew  Montagu’s  political  ambitions.  Wraxall 
on  his  aspirations.  Wilberforce  writes  to  Mrs.  Montagu.  A 
political  meeting  at  Hampstead.  The  Paris  tour  abandoned. 

M.  Necker.  Lord  Orford’s  pictures  .....  230 


I79° 


DECORATING  MONTAGU  HOUSE — “  CONSTITUTION  BUILDING  ” — 
BURKE’S  REFLECTIONS 

Advancing  age.  Decorating  the  Portman  Square  house.  Matthew 
Robinson  on  the  French  Revolution.  Letter  from  William 


X 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Locke.  Lord  Hardwicke’s  death.  Letter  from  Lord  Erskine. 

Birth  of  Marquis  of  Hartington.  Fete  of  July  14.  English 
Republicans.  A  launch  at  Deptford.  Burke’s  Reflections  on 
the  French  Revolution.  Lady  Anne  Lindsay.  Bruce’s  book  of 
Travel.  Tar-making.  L’Abbe  Foulon.  Due  de  Castries’ 
hotel.  Les  Poissardes  ........  241 


179I 

ROYALTIES  AT  MONTAGU  HOUSE — FANNY  BURNEY  FREE — 

THE  DUC  D’ORLEANS 

A  Storm.  Duchesse  de  Biron.  The  Nabob  and  the  Campbells. 
Fanny  Burney’s  release.  Her  tour  and  visit  to  Sandleford. 
Feather  Room  at  Portman  Square.  Visit  of  the  Queen.  Cowper 
on  the  Feather  Hangings.  The  French  King.  Countess  of 
Albany  and  Duke  of  Gloucester  at  Montagu  House.  July  14. 

The  Urn  of  John  Locke.  Mr.  Bowdler  in  France.  Fanny 
Burney  meets  Mrs.  Montagu  at  Mrs.  Ord’s.  The  Due  d’Orleans 
and  the  Gold  of  Pitt  ........  255 


FANNY  BURNEY  AND  MRS.  THRALE 

Dr.  Johnson,  Fanny  Burney,  and  Mrs.  Montagu.  Letters  to  and 
from  Miss  Burney.  Mrs.  Delany  and  Mrs.  Vesey.  “  Vanessa  ” 
and  Cecilia.  Mrs.  Montagu  on  Fanny  Burney.  Visit  to 
Streatham.  Woodhouse.  Johnson  and  the  Thrales.  Letter 
from  Mrs.  Thrale.  Fanny  Burney  and  Mrs.  Thrale  on  Mrs. 
Montagu.  Rivalries.  Mrs.  Montagu  on  Mrs.  Thrale.  The 
Piozzi  marriage.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  verdict.  Mrs.  Vesey’s  letter. 

The  Italian  tour.  The  Anecdotes  of  Dr.  Johnson.  Boswell 
stung.  The  Essay  and  the  Johnson-Boswell-Thrale-Montagu 
squabble.  Mrs.  Montagu  on  Mrs.  Piozzi’s  book  .  .  .  264 


r792 

CURSORY  REMARKS  ON  THE  JACOBINS — ENGLISH  VIEWS  ON 
FRENCH  EVENTS 

Letter  from  James  Beattie.  The  Dukes  of  Cumberland  and  Gloucester 
and  their  Duchesses.  William  Gilpin,  Paine,  and  Priestley. 
French  news.  Duchesse  de  Biron.  The  Sans-culottes.  Miss 
Pulteney.  Rumour  of  the  King’s  death.  Due  d’Orleans. 

The  Primate  of  Ireland  on  the  French  Revolution.  Visit  to 
Kew.  Trial  of  Louis.  Due  de  Fitz  James.  The  Houghton 
pictures  ..........  279 


CONTENTS 


xi 


1 793 

fanny  burney’s  marriage — war  with  France 

PAGE 

Rearranging  the  library.  James  Lackington.  Captain  Pellew. 

Duke  of  Clarence.  The  Primate  and  Rokeby.  Visits  to 
Dowager  Duchess  of  Beaufort  and  Miss  Hannah  More.  Miss 
Burney’s  marriage.  Lord  Howe.  St.  Domingo.  The  emigres  292 


*7  94 


DEATH  OF  THE  PRIMATE  OF  IRELAND — THE  ENGLISH  JACOBINS 

Failing  eyesight.  The  Prince  of  Wales.  Lady  Cremorne.  At 
Covent  Garden  Theatre,  etc.  Howe’s  Victory  of  First  of  June. 
Celebrations  in  town.  Montagu  goes  to  Denton.  Trouble  at 
the  collieries.  Mrs.  Montagu  at  Sandleford.  Arthur  Young. 

Letter  from  Dr.  Blagden.  Alarms  of  invasion.  General 
Pichegru.  Prince  of  Wales’  engagement.  Sir  Joseph  Banks. 

Lord  and  Lady  Plymouth  at  Naples.  Death  of  the  Primate. 

His  will.  Matthew  Robinson  becomes  Lord  Rokeby.  Morris 
Robinson  ..........  299 


1 795 


ADVANCING  AGE — THE  WAR  GOES  BADLY 

A  Drawing  Room.  Dr.  Beattie’s  health.  The  Prince’s  debts.  The 
Wilkes  family.  Hackwood.  A  party  at  Shooter’s  Hill.  Peace 
rumours.  Mrs.  E.  Montagu  at  the  opera.  Mrs.  Garrick  at 
seventy.  Hannah  More’s  Tracts.  Mrs.  Montagu  seventy-five. 
Count  Rumford.  Mrs.  Boscawen.  Taking  of  Cape  Town. 
Potato  bread  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  -  313 


J7  96 

WAR  AND  DEPRESSION — PEACE  OVERTURES,  BONAPARTE 

Depression  in  England.  Peace  overtures.  The  Princess  of  Wales  and 
Lady  Jersey.  Painting  at  Montagu  House.  Lord  Malmesbury 
goes  to  Paris.  Mrs.  Garrick.  A  general  levy.  Dr.  Blagden’s 
tour.  Defence  preparations  .  .  .  .  .  .  -323 


CONTENTS 


Xll 


*797 


APPROACHING  BLINDNESS — CAPE  ST.  VINCENT  AND  CAMPERDOWN 


PAGE 


Age  and  failing  sight.  Lord  Rokeby  at  eighty-five.  The  political 
outlook.  Nelson  at  Cape  St.  Vincent.  Mutinies  at  Spithead  and 
The  Nore.  Dr.  Blagden’s  letters.  Visit  from  Mr.  Anstey.  Samuel 
Thompson.  Second  Peace  negotiations  fail.  Miss  Bowdler  in 
Italy.  The  naval  victory  at  Camperdown.  De  Winter  and 
Duncan.  Ministers  at  Walmer.  Bonaparte  in  Italy  .  .  327 


INVASION  SCARES  AGAIN — IRELAND,  NELSON,  AND  BONAPARTE 

Ireland  in  rebellion.  French  invasion.  An  aquatic  expedition. 
Further  letters  from  Dr.  Blagden.  Cambridge.  Lowestoft. 
Yarmouth.  Lord  Duncan.  Burgh.  Richmond.  Mrs.  Jordan. 

Mr.  Grattan.  French  landing  in  Ireland.  The  Race  of  Castle¬ 
bar.  Count  Rumford.  Bonaparte  in  Egypt.  Nelson  pursues 
him.  The  Battle  of  the  Nile.  Letter  from  Mr.  Bowdler. 

The  Franklin  and  Admiral  Blanquet  .....  335 


I799-180O 


RETIREMENT,  ILLNESS,  AND  DEATH 


Quiet  retirement.  Blindness.  “  Disobedience.”  Return  from 
Sandleford.  Winter  in  Portman  Square.  An  evening  on  the 
Thames.  Last  illness  and  death.  The  chimney  sweeps.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  beneficence.  Condolences  from  Mrs.  Boscawen, 
the  Bishop  of  Durham,  James  Beattie,  and  Hannah  More. 
Burial  at  Winchester  Cathedral  ......  342 


ELIZABETH  MONTAGU  HERSELF 


Her  correspondence.  A  notable  woman.  Two  criticisms.  Adulation 
and  abuse.  The  grey  goose  quill.  Reflections  on  Temperament  ; 
Girlhood  ;  Matrimony  ;  Society  ;  Good  Company  ;  Servants  ; 

Old  Age.  An  ignoramus  in  love.  The  turnpike  road.  Wit 
and  chastity.  Humour  and  sympathy.  Benevolence.  Business 
abilities.  Environment.  Literary  work.  Attractive  facets  .  349 


Index 


369 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


VOLUME  II 

Mrs.  Montagu.  The  Wedgwood  Medallion  .  Frontispiece 

Taken  from  a  cast  from  the  original  mould  made  ( probably )  by  Joachim 
Smith  for  Messrs.  Wedgwood  Bentley  in  1775. 

FACING  PAGE 

Ranelagh  Gardens  and  Rotunda  .  .  .  .28 

Engraved  by  Nathaniel  Barr  after  Canaletto. 

Pascal  Paoli  .  .  .  .  .  .52 

From  an  engraving  by  B.  L.  Henriquez  after  the  painting  by  Drelling, 
done  in  Paris. 

Her  Most  Gracious  Majesty  Queen  Charlotte  .  .  63 

From  an  engraving  by  Thomson  after  the  original  faithful  sketch  drawn 
from  the  life  when  taking  the  waters  at  the  Pump  Room  at  Bath. 

Thomas,  Second  Lord  Lyttelton  .  .  .  .76 

From  an  engraving  by  Charles  Townley,  1781,  after  the  original  picture 
by  Richard  Cosway,  R.A.,  1780. 

Lord  George  Gordon  ....  .86 

From  an  engraving  after  a  drawing  from  the  life  by  R.  Bran. 

Montagu  House,  Portman  Square  .  .  .  .101 

From  the  drawing  by  T.  Hosmer  Shepherd  in  the  British  Museum,  1851. 

Sarah  Siddons  .  .  .  .  .  .138 

From  an  engraving  by  W.  Holl  after  the  painting  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds. 

Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  .  .  .  .  .162 

From  the  unfinished  sketch  by  James  Barry  in  the  National  Portrait 
Gallery.  Copyright,  Emery  Walker. 

His  Most  Gracious  Majesty  George  IV.  .  .  .181 

From  a  drawing  from  the  life  made  at  Ascot  Heath  by  Robert  J.  Stothard. 

xiii 


XIV 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


FACING  PAGE 


Dorothy  Jordan  ......  203 

From  an  engraving  by  James  Heath  after  the  painting  by  John  Russell, 

R.A. 

Hannah  More  .  .  .  .  .  .213 

Front  an  engraving  by  E.  Scriven  after  a  drawing  by  Josiah  Slater  taken 
at  Barley  W ood  in  November  1813. 

William  Wilberforce  .....  236 

From  an  engraving  by  J.  Vendramini  after  an  original  drawing  by 
Henry  Edridge. 

Louisa,  Countess  of  Albany  ....  259 

From  an  engraving  by  M.  Read  after  an  original  drawing  by  Ozias 
Humphry. 

Frances  Burney  ......  2 66 

From  the  painting  by  her  cousin  Edward  Burney.  Copyright,  Emery 
Walker. 

Hester  Lynch  Piozzi  .....  278 

From  the  engraving  by  T.  Holloway  after  the  original  painting.  Copy¬ 
right,  Emery  Walker. 

The  Right  Honourable  William  Pitt  .  .  .  322 


From  an  engraving  by  Anthony  Cardon  after  the  drawing  by  Henry 
Edridge. 


THE  BLUE  STOCKINGS 


Origin  of  the  name.  Stillingfleet  hose.  The  Bas  Bleu.  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
assemblies.  The  Blue  Room.  The  Lodge  and  the  Society.  A 
reported  dispute.  Mr.  Percy.  Mrs.  Vesey’s  downy  wing.  Mrs. 
Garrick  and  Hannah  More.  Mrs.  Vesey’s  decline.  Richard  Cumber¬ 
land.  The  move  from  Hill  Street  to  Portman  Square.  The  Club. 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  and  Mr.  Vesey. 


A  few  notes  and  extracts  referring  to  the  much-dis¬ 
cussed  subject  of  “  The  Blue  Stockings,”  about  which 
a  good  deal  of  speculative  derivation  has  been  written, 
will  probably  be  expected  in  these  pages.  The  sub¬ 
ject  has,  however,  been  dealt  with  individually  and  in 
detail  by  M.  Huchon,  Dr.  Doran,  Mr.  E.  R.  Wheeler, 
Mr.  Fyvie,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  many  other 
writers,  leaving  little  that  need  be  added  here,  save  a 
few  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  own  references  to  the  coterie, 
to  which,  of  course,  other  allusions  will  be  found 
scattered  through  her  letters  generally.  Though  there 
was  doubtless  a  Venetian  Societe  de  la  Calza  in  the 
fifteenth  century  whose  members,  when  assembled  for 
discussion,  amused  themselves  by  donning  fantastic 
stockings,  and  particularly  blue  ones ;  and  though 
Mr.  Pennington  in  his  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Carter  de¬ 
clares  that  the  appellation  was  not  conferred  on  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  and  Mrs.  Vesey’s  assemblies  till  after  Mr. 
Benjamin  Stillingfleet’s  death  in  1771,  it  seems  very 
probable  that  the  term,  in  its  eighteenth  -  century 
English  use,  did  originate  in  that  gentleman’s  appear¬ 
ance  at  these  parties  in  the  grey-blue  stockings  which 
he  was  wont  to  wear,  and  which  led  Admiral  Boscawen 
to  dub  the  gatherings  (of  which  his  wife  was  an  original 

VOL.  II  1  B 


2 


STILLINGFLEET’S  HOSE 


member)  as  the  “  Blue  Stocking  Society.”  As  early 
as  1757,  incieed,  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  Dr.  Monsey  : 
“  Our  friend  Mr.  Stillingfleet  is  more  attached  to  the 
lilies  of  the  field  than  the  lilies  of  the  town,  who  toil 
and  spin  as  little  as  the  others,  and  like  the  former  are 
better  arrayed  than  Solomon  in  all  his  glory.  I  assure 
you  our  philosopher  is  so  much  a  man  of  pleasure,  he 
has  left  off  his  old  friends  and  his  blue  stockings  and 
is  at  operas  and  other  gay  assemblies  every  night.” 
Though  Hannah  More’s  “  Bas  Bleu  ”  verses  were  not 
actually  published  till  1786  they  were  written  many 
years  earlier,  and  Mrs.  Montagu’s  letters  contain 
several  references  to  the  title  during  Stillingfleet’s  life. 

Hannah  More  and  Mrs.  Carter,  indeed,  appear  to 
have  agreed  that  the  Bas  Bleu  title  originated  in  a 
French  visitor,  who  had  been  invited  to  one  of  these 
parties,  being  informed  that  dress  was  so  unimportant 
that  he  might  go,  if  he  pleased,  in  blue  stockings. 
This  may  be  a  true  derivation  of  the  French  title 
which  Miss  More  gave  to  her  Poem,  addressed  to 
Mrs.  Vesey  and  her  sister  Blues  ;  but  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  English  synonym  was  in  use  long 
previously  to  denote  half  dress  ;  and  was  indeed 
applied  by  a  contemporary  chronicler  as  far  back  as 
1683  to  “  that  Blue  Stocking  Barebones  Parliament,  a 
company  of  fellows  called  together  by  Cromwell,” 
where  it  implies  puritanically  plain  or  mean  attire. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  have  not  found  that  the  French 
equivalent  was  used,  as  has  been  suggested,  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  Precieuses  of  the  Hotel  Rambouillet ; 
and  it  seems  to  me  more  probable  that  old  Admiral 
Boscawen  revived  the  earlier  English  epithet  in  allusion 
to  the  Stillingfleet  hose,  than  that  it  was  imported 
from  Paris  or  adopted  from  a  Frenchman’s  phrase. 

There  was  never  any  Blue  Stocking  “  Club,” 
though  the  title  has  frequently  been  used  ;  and  the 
name  was  merely  coined  to  describe  the  gatherings  at 
which  certain  well-known  ladies  presided  —  notably 


BAS  BLEU 


3 


Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Vesey,  Mrs.  Ord,  and  Mrs. 
Boscawen — where  cards  and  politics  were  tabooed  and 
informal  literary  conversation  was  encouraged.  Strict 
etiquette  in  dress  was  waived  (hence  the  Stillingfleet 
stockings)  and  refreshment  (if  any)  was  confined  to 
“  coffee,  chocolate,  biscuits,  cream,  butter,  toasts,  and 
exquisite  tea,”  as  Madame  du  Bocage  has  described. 

Mrs.  Montagu  herself  seems  to  have  been  puzzled 
over  the  origin  of  Hannah  More’s  Bas  Bleu .  “  I 

should  suppose  blue  stockings  were  meant,”  she  writes 
to  Mrs.  Carter,  “  but  what  connection  has  stockings 
with  conversation  ?  I  do  not  think  the  French  ever 
wear  blue  stockings.  .  .  .  Pray  explain  this  matter, 
for  I  perplexed  my  head  in  vain  about  it.” 

Mrs.  Elizabeth  Vesey,  one  of  the  leading  members 
of  the  blue-stocking  coterie,  was  the  daughter  of  the 
Bishop  of  Ossory  and  the  wife  of  Agmondesham 
Vesey,  M.P.  for  Harristown  and  Kinsale,  member  of 
Dr.  Johnson’s  Club  and  amateur  of  architecture — and 
pretty  women.  Mrs.  Vesey ’s  impulsive  spirit  and 
vivacity,  and  the  hatred  of  constraint  and  formalities 
which  earned  her  the  name  of  “  the  Sylph,”  are 
echoed  in  her  letters,  of  which  a  large  packet  to 
Mrs.  Montagu  survives  in  this  collection.  They  dart 
about,  unstopping  and  unstopped,  from  Lucan  to 
Sandleford,  from  Monsey  to  Montaigne,  from  English 
to  French,  from  absurdities  to  sublimities,  with  the 
quick,  delicate  grace  of  the  birds  she  loved.  And  her 
parties,  given  at  one  period  on  the  Tuesdays  of  the 
Club  dinners,  so  that  its  members  could  join  her 
circle  afterwards,  were  equally  various  and  discursive. 
Wraxall  says  that  simplicity  both  of  manner  and  dress 
and  a  sort  of  oblivious  inattention  to  things  passing 
under  her  very  sight  were  her  characteristic  features  ; 
and  that  her  lack  of  memory  and  absence  of  mind 
reached  the  point  of  forgetting  her  own  name,  and 
inveighing  against  second  marriages  to  a  twice-married 
lady  of  quality,  she  herself  being  in  the  same  situation. 


4 


THE  LODGE  AND  THE  COLLEGE 


Fanny  Burney  found  her  fear  of  ceremony  really 
troublesome  ;  “  her  eagerness  to  break  up  a  circle  is 
such  that  she  insists  upon  everybodys  sitting  with 
their  backs  to  one  another,  that  is  the  chairs  are  drawn 
into  little  parties  of  three  together,  in  a  confused 
manner,  all  over  the  room.” 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Hillstreet,  March  17  (1764  ?). 

I  receive  such  charming  letters  from  the  blue  stocking 
Lodge,  that  I  begin  to  be  jealous  for  the  Original  society. 
You  seem  to  imitate  the  Jesuits  of  Paraguay,  who  became 
infinitely  more  rich  and  great  than  the  Country  from  whence 
they  went  out  a  small  colony.  The  imitation  of  Dr.  Young 
is  admirable.  I  may  say  the  imitation  is  inimitable,  for  it  has 
all  possible  marks  of  resemblance  and  yet  is  not  mere  mimickry, 
and  that  is  hard  to  hit.  I  find  Mr.  O  Hara  reveres  as  he 
ought  the  blue  stockings  of  the  Peripatetick  philosophers  ; 
Mr.  Caulfield  the  blue  hose  which  encircles  the  nimble  and 
taper  leg  of  une  jolie  paisanne.  I  am  not  sure  therefore  that 
he  is  worthy  of  our  society,  however  as  he  may  be  only  an 
elegant  spectator  of  forms,  or  consider  blue  stockings  as  the 
least  deviation  from  the  simplicity  of  the  golden  age,  I  am  glad 
he  is  received  into  the  Lodge,  and  I  think  we  may  admit  him 
of  the  Colledge  in  time. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

December  15th. 

I  had  my  pen  in  my  hand  on  Saturday  many  times  with  an 
intention  to  write  to  my  dear  friend,  but  so  frequent,  and  so 
long,  were  the  interruptions  from  Persons  calling  on  me,  that 
it  was  absolutely  impossible.  The  accidents  between  the  pen 
and  the  paper,  are  so  much  more  common  than  between  the 
cup  and  the  lip,  that  whoever  considers  the  matter  soberly 
will  see  the  figurative  proverb  would  have  been  more  properly 
assumed  from  the  pen  than  the  cup. 

I  hope  you  have  met  with  an  absurd  paragraph  in  the 
morning  Herald,  which  says,  that  at  Mrs.  V — ys  the  other 
night,  there  happend  such  a  dispute  between  the  blue  stockings, 


THE  BLUES  AND  THE  CLUB 


5 


that  had  it  not  been  for  the  timely  interference  of  the  unletterd 
part  of  the  company  might  have  ended  very  fatally  ;  that  there 
are  now  2  parties  of  the  blue  stockings,  Mrs.  Mu  at  the  head 
of  the  seceders.  The  whole  of  this  fine  story  is  the  invention 
of  the  writer  of  the  paragraph,  and  I  do  not  find  any  of  the 
blue  stockings  from  the  Tuesdays  Club  had  been  [to  the] 
sylphs  this  winter,  except  Sr  Josh:  Reynolds,  who  is  not  quarrel¬ 
some,  and  had  he  been  so,  he  would  not  have  had  an  opportunity 
of  kicking  any  blue  stockings  but  his  own.  The  Club  has 
met  only  twice  since  our  dear  Veseys  came  to  Town,  I  was  not 
at  her  House  those  evenings,  having  been  hindered  one  time 
by  my  dining  Guests  staying  late  with  me,  another  time  by  a 
previous  engagement  at  the  Burrough’s,  so  my  Secession  was 
involuntary.  It  is  strange  that  these  news  writers  cannot 
put  a  little  witt  into  their  malice,  and  a  little  probability  into 
their  lyes.  Had  there  happend  to  have  been  a  little  dispute 
between  a  couple  of  savants  on  any  point  of  learning  I  do  not 
see  that  it  would  have  been  an  affair  at  all  interesting  to  the 
publick,  but  such  an  influence  has  the  Good  humour  and 
benevolent  nature  of  our  Vesey,  that  Persons  of  the  most 
contrary  dispositions,  are  harmonized  if  not  brought  to  unison 
in  her  Concerto’s  of  conversation.  Her  drawing  room  puts 
one  sometimes  in  mind  of  Paradise,  where  the  Lion  dandles 
the  Kid.  Even  Samuel  Johnson  was  seldom  brutally  rude  in 
her  society. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Hillstreet,  Feb.  2nd,  1768. 

Mr.  Montagu  passd  the  Xmass  at  Sandleford,  I  with  the 
blue  stocking  philosophers.  I  had  parties  of  them  to  dine 
with  me  continually,  and  had  my  Sylph  been  of  those  parties, 
nothing  had  been  wanting.  I  have  got  a  new  blue  stocking 
with  whom  I  am  much  pleased,  a  Mr.  Percy  who  publish’d 
the  Reliques  of  the  ancient  Poetry  ;  he  is  a  very  ingenious 
man,  has  many  anecdotes  of  ancient  days,  historical  as  well 
as  poetical.  Mr.  Walpoles  Historical  doubts  came  out 
yesterday.  I  have  read  about  half  the  book,  and  have  not 
yet  either  learnt  or  unlearnt  anything.  I  think  this  work 
appears  plainly  rather  of  the  growth  of  Strawberry  Hill  than 
of  the  Forked  Hill.  I  do  not  mean  that  the  work  is  not 
amusing  ;  by  the  Courtesy  of  modern  Parnassus  one  is  just 
soothd  and  pleased  without  being  delighted  or  instructed. 


6 


MRS.  VESEY’S  BLUE  ROOM 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

September  /^th,  1772. 

I  am  much  concern’d  for  the  tender  sympathies  of  our 
poor  Sylph.  Such  a  sad  accident  must  make  a  terrible  impres¬ 
sion  on  her  spirits,  but  I  hope  the  sight  of  our  shore,  as  she 
approaches  it  in  October,  will  revive  them.  I  delight  already 
in  the  prospect  of  the  blue  box  (alias  Drawing  room)  in  which 
our  Sylph  assembles  all  the  heterogenous  natures  in  the  World  ; 
and  indeed  in  many  respects  resembles  Paradise,  for  there  the 
Lion  sits  down  by  the  Lamb,  the  Tyger  dandles  the  Kid  ;  the 
sly  Scotchman  and  the  etourdi  Hibernian,  the  Hero  and 
Maccaroni,  the  Vestal  and  the  demi  rep,  the  Mungo  of  Ministry 
and  the  inflexible  partisans  of  incorruptible  Patriots,  Beaux 
esprits  and  fine  Gentlemen  all  gather  together  under  the 
downy  wing  of  the  Sylph,  and  are  soothed  into  good  humour  : 
were  she  to  withdraw  her  influence  a  moment,  discord  would 
reassume  her  reign,  and  we  should  hear  the  clashing  of  swords, 
the  angry  flirting  of  fans,  and  Sr  Andrew  and  Sr  Patrick  gabbling 
in  dire  confusion  the  different  dialects  of  the  Erse  language. 
Methinks  I  see  our  Sylph  moving  in  her  circle,  and  by  some 
unknown  attraction  keeping  the  whole  system  in  due  order. 
By  what  art  does  she  thus  satisfy  the  pride  of  Duchesses,  the 
conceit  of  Authors,  the  arrogance  of  Statesmen,  the  vanity 
of  beauties,  and  the  unquiet  spirits  of  Coquettes  ?  for  no  one 
leaves  her  assembly  till  the  Watchman  has  given  repeated 
warnings  to  withdraw  !  I  have  as  much  in  art  of  this  as  she , 
but  cannot  make  things  thus  ;  if  I  should  get  all  these  contraries 
and  contrarieties  into  my  House  every  evening,  five  or  six 
duels,  five  or  six  scoldings,  and  five  or  six  libels  would  be  the 
consequence  every  winter.  My  Sylph  effects  all  this  by  the 
je  ne  scai  quoi  ;  the  je  ne  scai  quoi  is  the  gift  of  the  Fairies, 
it  is  better  than  all  the  Muses  can  teach,  the  Graces  bestow, 
or  Venus  impart  ;  long  may  she  live  and  flourish  in  all  the 
powers  and  potencies  of  this  invincible  je  ne  scai  quoi. 

Later  adherents  included  Hannah  More,  whose 
verses  have  already  been  referred  to,  and  we  find  Mrs. 
Montagu  writing  to  Mrs.  Vesey  from  Sandleford  in 
July  1784  : 

Mrs.  Garrick  and  Miss  More  have  promised  to  bring  their 
two  pair  of  blue  stockings  which  will  do  me  more  honour 


HELICON  AND  TEA 


7 


and  I  am  sure  infinitely  more  pleasure  than  would  be  conferrd 
on  me  by  many  blue  garters  tho  accompanied  by  a  Star,  if  they 
came  to  Sandleford.  I  am  sorry  Lord  Rodney  has  had  the 
mortification  of  seeing  his  Daughter  elope  to  Gretna  Green, 
but  I  think  the  Women  are  all  bewitchd  this  summer. 

After  Mr.  Vesey’s  death  in  1785  his  widow 
abandoned  herself  to  grief  so  uncontrolled  that  it 
gradually  undermined  her  intellect.  Mrs.  Montagu 
did  all  that  was  possible  in  the  way  of  constant  friend¬ 
ship,  companionship,  and  good  counsel  to  stave  off 
this  catastrophe,  and  one  of  her  letters  to  this  end  may 
be  added  here  ;  interesting  also  in  its  reference  to  the 
after-dinner  visits  of  Johnson’s  Club  : 

To  Mrs.  Vesey 

These  and  many  more  arguments  may  be  urged  from 
“  Relever  La  Vieillesse  ”  in  general.  You  and  I  have  many 
peculiar  reasons  not  to  suffer  it  with  us  to  fall  into  dejection, 
or  even  languor.  The  Loves  and  the  Graces,  and  les  jeux 
and  les  ris,  have  indeed  forsaken  us,  but  do  not  the  Muses  keep 
a  kind  correspondence  with  us  by  means  of  all  their  favourite 
sons  ?  After  supping  Helicon  with  the  nine  do  they  not 
often  condescend  to  drink  tea  in  Bolton  Street  or  Hill  Street  ? 
We  have  lived  much  with  the  wisest,  the  best,  and  most 
celebrated  men  of  our  Times,  and  with  some  of  the  best,  most 
accomplished,  and  most  learned  Women  of  any  times.  These 
things  I  consider  not  merely  as  pleasures  transient,  but  as 
permanent  blessings  ;  by  such  Guides  and  Companions  we 
are  set  above  the  low  temptations  of  Vice  and  folly,  and  while 
they  were  the  instructors  of  our  minds  they  were  the  Guardians 
of  our  Virtue.  Still  beloved  by  many  valuable  Friends,  still 
desired  in  the  most  agreable  Society,  you  should  not  be  cast 
down.  It  is  with  minds  as  with  fruits,  such  only  are  good 
dry’d  in  the  winter,  as  had  no  sourness  or  bitterness  in  their 
summer  season.  The  Raisin,  in  the  jar  is  still  sweeter  than 
the  grape  on  the  green  bough,  and  the  fig  in  the  box,  has  a 
richer  sweetness  than  that  growing  on  the  tree.  We  may 
have  lost  some  of  our  piquancy,  my  dear  Friend,  but  while 
we  have  nothing  sharp  or  caustique,  rough  or  severe,  we  shall 
not  be  unpleasant  even  to  the  Young,  and  what  is  still  better, 


8  HILL  STREET  TO  MONTAGU  HOUSE 


not  unpleasant  to  ourselves.  For  my  part  I  will  own,  I  should 
find  it  difficult  to  say  in  what  season  of  life  I  have  enjoy’d 
most  happy  hours  in  the  day,  or  days  in  the  week.  In  my 
youth  my  glass  rose  more  degrees  above  content,  now  it  never 
falls  below  it  but  stands  at  settled  fair.  If  I  was  uncertain 
about  your  welfare  or  your  friendship  for  me  I  should  fall  to 
changeable  and  cloudy  weather,  so  let  me  hear  often  from  you. 

The  blue-stocking  coterie  continued  its  occasional 
assemblies  far  into  the  ’eighties  ;  but  with  the  com¬ 
pletion  of  Montagu  House,  Portman  Square,  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  parties  developed  greatly  in  size  and 
grandeur,  and  lost  proportionately  in  character  and 
interest.  Heavy  teas  were  served  at  long  tables  in 
the  great  drawing-room  ;  buttered  muffins  and  cold 
chicken  smothered  wit.  Cowper’s  verse  was  wasted 
on  the  glories  of  the  wonderful  Feather  Room,  whose 
hangings  had  busied  Mrs.  Montagu’s  friends  to 
collect  and  her  maids  to  fashion  for  years  of  misspent 
labour  ;  and  which  now  replaced  the  Cupidon  Room 
of  Hill  Street,  which  had  evoked  a  little  unkindly 
satire.  Richard  Cumberland,  the  dramatist  of  the 
West  Indian ,  was  added  to  the  circle  as  a  guest, 
welcomed  as  a  new  bard,  and  rewarded  his  hostess’s 
hospitality  by  a  couple  of  papers  in  The  Observer  in 
which  “  Vanessa  ”  is  held  up  to  a  not  always  good- 
humoured  ridicule,  which  contrasts  unpleasantly  with 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  kindly  references  to  him  in  her 
letters. 

But  the  keen,  vivacious  freshness  of  the  Hill  Street 
evenings  gradually  evaporated  ;  the  quarrel  with 
Johnson,  and  his  death  in  1784,  robbed  the  coterie  of 
its  most  stimulating  possibilities,  and  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
assemblies  grew  up  —  inevitably  perhaps  —  into  an 
ultimate  maturity  that  was  possibly  magnificent  but 
probably  rather  dull. 

There  are  several  gaps  in  this  collection  of  letters 
to  Mrs.  Montagu,  which  has  naturally  passed  through 
many  hands.  Particularly  it  is  noticeable  that  there 


VESEY  AND  THE  CLUB 


9 


are  none  from  Horace  Walpole,  from  whom  she  must 
certainly  have  received  some.  A  number  of  those  from 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  appear  to  have  been  destroyed 
with  other  papers  by  an  ignorant  housekeeper  at 
Denton  ;  and  the  only  one  which  I  have  come  upon 
from  him  may  be  given  here,  because  it  relates  to  the 
election  of  Mrs.  Vesey’s  husband  to  Johnson’s  Club, 
referred  to  above,  as  supping  Helicon  with  the  nine 
before  they  drank  tea  in  Bolton  Row  or  Hill  Street. 
The  Club  was  founded  in  1764  by  Sir  Joshua  and  Dr. 
Johnson,  and  its  original  members  included  Burke, 
Nugent,  Langton,  Beauclerk,  Goldsmith,  and  Hawkins. 
Agmondesham  Vesey  was  put  up  for  election  in  April 
1773.  Burke  proposed  him,  and  began  by  saying  he 
was  a  man  of  gentle  manners.  “  Sir,”  said  Johnson, 
who  had  doubtless  been  already  canvassed,  “  you  need 
say  no  more.  When  you  have  said  a  man  of  gentle 
manners  you  have  said  enough.”  Vesey  was  elected 
at  the  next  meeting  and  continued  a  member  till  his 
death  in  1785.  Garrick  had  been  elected  in  the 
previous  month,  and  Boswell  followed  Vesey.  The 
day  of  meeting  had  been  changed  from  Monday  to 
Friday  in  the  previous  year,  and  a  fortnightly  dinner 
instituted  at  the  Turk’s  Head  in  Gerrard  Street,  Soho, 
at  any  rate  while  Parliament  sat.  Hawkins  says  that 
a  lady  (who  was  probably  Mrs.  Montagu)  invited  the 
Club  for  two  successive  years  to  dine  at  her  house,  and 
that  it  was  she  who  first  entitled  it  The  Literary  Club. 
Johnson’s  interest  in  it,  which  was  very  keen  in  the 
earlier  years,  waned  as  its  membership  inevitably 
increased,  and  it  became  more  or  less  a  dinner  club 
merely.  He  had  great  ideas  of  its  exclusiveness,  and 
his  indignation  will  be  remembered  when  David 
Garrick  said  he  would  be  one  of  them,  and  seemed  to 
think  his  election  certain. 


IO 


HIS  AUNT’S  BLUE  STOCKINGS  ” 


<< 


From  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Madam — Mr.  Burke  spoke  of  Mr.  Vesey  when  he  pro¬ 
posed  him  last  Friday  in  the  same  manner  as  you  have  done, 
and  I  think  in  the  very  words,  that  he  was  good  humoured, 
sensible,  well  bred,  and  had  all  the  social  virtues  ;  it  was  left 
for  you  to  say  that  he  was  a  man  of  Tast  without  pretensions 
and  so  without  jealousy  and  envy.  I  have  too  good  an  opinion 
of  our  club  to  entertain  the  least  suspicion  that  such  a  man  will 
not  be  unanimously  elected. 

I  have  every  reason  to  wish  Mr.  Vesey  success  but  for 
none  more  than  your  interesting  yourself  in  his  favour,  and 
tho’  I  am  very  flattered  by  your  applying  to  me  in  this  affair, 
you  may  depend  on  my  religiously  observing  your  injunction. 

I  am  with  the  greatest  respect,  Madam,  Your  most  humble 
and  obliged  servant,  Joshua  Reynolds. 

P.S. — Mr.  Cumberland  is  not  a  member  of  the  Club. 

Some  writers  have  been  inclined  to  give  almost  a 
propagandist  cachet  to  the  “  Club  ”  of  the  blue-stocking 
ladies,  but  nothing  in  these  letters  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
suggests  any  such  conscious  effort  for  the  regeneration 
of  society.  She  cultivated  and  enjoyed  her  literary 
salon  because  she  was  naturally  bookish  and  fond  of 
conversation;  but  she  was  too  level-headed  and  had 
too  much  common  sense  for  any  great  enthusiasm 
about  the  conquest  of  cards  and  claret  by  the  tea-cups 
of  Hill  Street  and  Bolton  Row.  Though  an  unkindly 
critic  of  Matthew  Montagu  once  described  him  as 
“  only  fit  to  darn  his  aunt’s  blue  stockings,”  one  has 
ignominiously  to  confess  at  last  that  this  correspondence 
does  not  finally  solve  the  momentous  problem,  whether 
the  queen  of  the  Blue  Stockings  ever  wore  blue  stock¬ 
ings  at  all.  Dr.  Brewer  says  so,  but  he  is  merely  a 
man.  Lady  Crewe  is  said  (also  by  a  man)  to  have 
stated  that  she  and  all  the  members  of  the  Club  adopted 
blue  silk  stockings  from  Madame  de  Polignac,  they 
being  then  the  newest  Paris  fashion.  Mrs.  Montagu 
herself,  as  we  have  seen  above,  protested  that  she 


BUT  WERE  THEY  BLUE  ?  1 1 

found  Hannah  More’s  Bas  Bleu  unintelligible,  and 
declared  her  belief  that  the  French  never  wore  blue 
stockings.  These  things  remain  mysterious;  my  own 
belief  is  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s  stockings,  at  their  bluest, 
were  not  mazarine  or  cerulean  blue.  I  think  they 
were  shot  with  purple. 

But  whether  she  was  the  sapphire-hosed  “  Queen 
of  the  Blues  ”  or  not,  it  would  be  quite  a  mistake  to 
picture  our  good  lady  as  the  promoter  of  “  eternal 
conversation  parties,”  which  her  sister  stigmatised 
as  “  terrible  things,”  or  as  high  priestess  of  a  cult  of 
solemn  disquisition.  Hannah  More  has  told  us  that 
at  the  coteries  might  be  found  “  learning  without 
pedantry,  good  taste  without  affectation,  and  conversa¬ 
tion  without  calumny.”  Mrs.  Montagu  loved  good 
talk,  and  that  “  unreserved  interchange  of  thoughts 
with  a  few  intimate  friends  ”  to  which  Sir  William 
Forbes  has  referred.  She  could  thoroughly  enjoy 
such  a  “  contest  of  gallantry  an  hour  long  ”  as  Dr. 
Johnson  and  Mrs.  Buller  fought  one  night  at  Mrs. 
Ord’s,  to  the  infinite  diversion  of  the  company  ;  and 
the  following  extract  from  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey 
shows  a  spirit  far  enough  removed  from  the  pedantic 
solemnity  which  we  are  apt  to  associate  with  the 
blues  : 

I  am  peevish,  I  am  splenatick,  I  am  sad  ;  no  wonder  ! 
when  instead  of  my  Sylph  I  find  nothing  but  Gnomes.  Our 
Midsummer  nights  dream  in  the  fairy  land  of  Hagley  vanishd, 
where  so  merry  as  we  twa  have  been,  my  heart  it  does  well 
nigh  despair  when  I  think  of  the  days  we  have  seen.  Yet 
we  shall  meet,  I  hope,  before  another  November  comes.  .  .  . 
We  shall  be  older,  but  we  wont  be  wiser  ;  that  is  we  will  not 
wear  the  sable  weeds  of  black  staid  wisdoms  hue.  We  will 
laugh  with  Mr.  Garrick  ;  we  will  be  gay  with  Mr.  Burke  ; 
We  will  be  happy  with  Lord  Lyttelton  and  his  Hagley  ;  and 
even  in  this  Tourbillon  of  London  we  will  enjoy  the  tranquil 
pleasures  of  friendship,  when  there  is  not  a  bal  masque,  nor  a 
bal  pare  nor  a  gala  to  seduce  us  from  ourselves.  .  .  . 


1777 


MONTAGU  HOUSE  BEGUN - DODD,  WARTON, 

DU  DEFFAND,  WRAXALL 


Letters  from  Paris.  The  new  house  in  Portman  Square.  James  Stuart. 
Mr.  Keppel  at  Bath.  Letter  from  Madame  Necker.  Return  to 
Sandleford.  Lord  Chatham’s  speech.  Paying  for  the  new  House. 
Abbe  Reynal  and  Sterne’s  Eliza.  Mrs.  Montagu  moralises.  The 
Primate  and  Sir  T.  Robinson’s  papers.  Mr.  Barrett.  The  Americans. 
Dr.  Dodd  and  Dr.  Johnson.  The  Huntingdon  connection.  David 
Montagu  Erskine.  Smuggled  tea.  Visit  to  Winchester  School.  The 
Wartons  at  Sandleford.  Visit  to  Nuneham.  The  model  village. 
Lord  Harcourt  drowned.  Death  of  Morris  Robinson.  Letter  from 
Madame  du  Deffand.  Letter  from  Nathaniel  Wraxall.  Mrs.  Howe. 
The  Ministry. 


The  letters  of  the  early  months  of  1777  are  largely  an 
aftermath  of  the  Paris  visit.  Amongst  the  earliest  is 
one  from  the  Comte  de  Catuelan,  who  was  Letourneur’s 
collaborator  in  the  much  -  discussed  translation  of 
Shakespeare.  “  Je  desire  mais  n’ose  le  croire  que  la 
main  de  Versailles  qui  s’en  occupe  aujourdhui  rende 
quelque  justice  a  1’original.  Le  traducteur  aura  fait 
assez  pour  sa  gloire  et  beaucoup  pour  sa  nation.” 
A  further  letter  from  Letourneur  mentions  that 
“  Mr.  Benjamin  Franklin  is  here  much  speaking  of 
the  electricity.”  Franklin’s  discovery  that  lightning 
is  electricity  had  been  made  more  than  twenty  years 
before  this,  but  he  had  just  arrived  as  American  Com¬ 
missioner  in  Paris,  and  it  was  during  this  year  that  he, 
with  Lee  and  Silas  Deane,  were  to  achieve  the  recogni¬ 
tion  by  France  of  American  independence. 

“  Dressed,”  as  Lecky  describes  Franklin,  “  with 


12 


1777  THE  PORTMAN  SQUARE  HOUSE  13 

an  almost  Quaker  simplicity,  his  thin  grey  hair  not 
powdered  according  to  the  general  fashion  but  covered 
with  a  fur  cap,  he  formed  a  singular  and  striking 
figure  in  the  brilliant  and  artificial  society  of  the 
French  capital.  .  .  .  Turgot,  in  an  immortal  line, 
described  him  as  having  torn  the  lightning  from 
Heaven  and  the  sceptre  from  the  tyrant’s  hand.” 
Mrs.  Montagu  would  have  bettered  that  if  her  Paris 
visit  had  been  a  year  later. 

In  February  Colonel  Dromgold  writes  from  Paris 
that  the  Prince  de  Poix  was  going  to  London  charged 
with  three  packets  of  presents  from  her  friends  there  ; 
these  included  “  une  tasse  et  petite  benittiere  d’or  de 
la  porcelaine  de  Sevre  de  l’annee  on  apelle  cela  Verd 
d’Angleterre,”  and  a  pot  au  lait  from  Madame  de 
Rochefort  ;  and  Madame  Le  Page  du  Bocage  sends 
a  message  from  the  Prince  de  Gonzages,  who  hoped 
to  make  her  acquaintance  during  his  coming  stay  in 
England. 

It  was  in  this  spring  that  Mrs.  Montagu  purchased 
of  the  Portman  family  a  ninety-nine  years’  lease  of 
the  land  at  the  north-west  corner  of  Portman  Square 
on  which  her  great  house  (now  No.  22)  was  to  be 
built.  She  had  intended  that  Mr.  Robert  Adam 
should  be  her  architect,  but  the  great  man  kept  her 
waiting  an  hour  and  brought  a  regiment  of  talkative 
artificers,  and  after  some  negotiations  she  decided  to 
employ  James  Stuart,  whose  work  on  the  antiquities 
of  Athens  had  gained  for  him  the  name  of  “  Athenian 
Stuart  ”  ;  but  neither  deeds  nor  plans  are  in  this 
collection  of  papers,  and  this  is  the  only  letter  I  have 
come  across  from  her  architect  : 

Mr.  Stuart  presents  his  respects  to  Mrs.  Montagu  and  will 
do  himself  the  honour  of  waiting  on  her  next  Thursday  about 
noon  or  sooner,  if  his  surgeon  dismisses  him  sooner. 

It  looks  so  much  like  impudence  to  sollicit  any  indulgence 
at  this  time,  that  he  hardly  knows  how  to  request  the  honour 
of  seeing  her  before  any  other  artist  is  spoken  to.  how  could 


DEDICATIONS 


1777 


H 

he  hit  on  the  lamentable  secret  of  extracting  Shame  and  un¬ 
easiness  from  what  would  have  afforded  him  perhaps  some 
credit,  and  most  undoubtedly  the  highest  pleasure,  but  men  do 
sometimes  manage  their  affairs  so  as  to  distress  themselves  in 
a  most  unaccountable  manner,  and  so  as  to  deserve  much  blame 
and  more  pity - 

In  the  letters  of  May  there  are  references  to  dedi¬ 
cations  of  two  books  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  Desenfans’ 
Fenelon  and  Hannah  More’s  volume  of  Essays  ;  and 
though  Mrs.  Montagu  pretended  to  deprecate  dedica¬ 
tion — “  no  one  but  myself  believes  one  word  of  the 
fine  things  they  say  of  me  ” — she  admired  Desenfans’ 
defence  of  Fenelon  “  against  the  impertinence  and 
malice  of  Lord  Chesterfield,”  and  Miss  More’s 
chapter  on  “  Sentimental  Connexion.” 

Mrs.  Montagu  went  to  the  Crescent,  Bath,  in 
April,  where  : 

I  have  the  honour  to  lodge  in  the  House  where  Mr.  Keppel 
reposed  on  his  Portsmouth  Lawrels,  a  circumstance  for  which 
Mrs.  G:  Trevor  envies  me.  The  Ladies  after  every  possible 
honour  shewn  to  the  Adml  in  a  sumptuous  breakfast  made 
a  Pool  at  Commerce  for  him,  and  took  care  that  he  should 
win  the  Pool  ;  as  his  cards  were  perverse,  this  was  not  effected 
without  some  difficulty,  but  they  declared  that  it  wd  be  a  shame 
such  a  Conqueror  shd  be  beaten  even  at  cards. 

Whilst  Necker  was  swept  unwillingly  into  the 
vortex  of  French  enthusiasm  for  American  Inde¬ 
pendence  and  the  humiliation  of  despotic  Britain,  his 
wife  was  writing  to  Mrs.  Montagu  in  a  much  more 
charming  strain  : 

From  Madame  Necker 

a  Paris,  le  6  Janvier. 

Madame — Je  mettrai  toujours  un  grand  prix  a  la  place 
qu’occupe  Mr.  Necker  puisqu’elle  m’a  valu  de  votre  part 
Madame  un  honneur  auquel  je  suis  infiniment  sensible,  et  je 
ne  me  sens  point  une  indifference  philosophique  pour  le  genre 
de  distinctions,  il  ne  reste  plus  a  Mr.  Necker  qu’a  j ustifier  la 


1777 


MADAME  NECKER 


comparaison  ingenieuse  dont  vous  vous  servez  dans  votre  aimable 
lettre,  et  il  y  travaille  je  vous  assure  avec  un  Courage  infatigable  ; 
Ce  qui  ne  l’empeche  pas  de  penser  souvent  au  plaisir  que  nous 
avons  eu  en  recevant  en  France  la  muse  d’angleterre  ;  l’amitie 
qu’elle  nous  a  inspiree,  et  celle  que  nous  avons  ici  pour  plusieurs 
personnes  respectables  de  votre  nation,  nous  fait  desirer  la  paix 
par  sentiment,  tandis  que  le  devoir  de  l’humanite  nous  fait 
joindre  toute  la  force  de  la  raison  h  celle  de  notre  penchant  ; 
ainsi  Madame  j’espere  que  nous  garderons  votre  ambassadeur, 
et  que  vous  garderez  le  notre  ;  mon  attachment  pour  Mylord 
Stormont  me  feroit  trouver  s’il  nous  quittoit,  mon  malheur 
particulier,  dans  le  malheur  general. 

Mr.  de  Buffon  n’est  pas  encore  de  retour  a  Paris,  il  y  vient 
de  terns  en  terns  pour  joindre  aux  conceptions  de  son  genie 
antique,  le  leger  coloris  que  la  Societe  donne,  et  qui  Se  renouvelle 
tous  les  trois  mois,  c’est  la  ce  qui  fait  l’agrement  de  nos  con¬ 
versations,  auquel  vous  avez  paru  sensible  ;  on  y  parcourt 
rapidement  tous  les  objets,  on  les  presente  de  cote,  et  par 
petites  portions,  en  sorte  que  les  femmes  peuvent  les  mesurer 
de  l’oeil,  les  manier  avec  leurs  mains  debiles,  et  y  donner  une 
tournure  dont  elles  ont  seules  le  secret  ;  mais  en  angleterre 
vous  leur  presentez  les  affaires  en  grosse  masse,  et  de  front  ; 
et  c’est  ainsi  qu’elles  nous  effrayent. 

Nous  sommes  ici  trez  occuppes  par  1’arrivee  du  Celebre 
Piccini,  nous  imaginons  qu’il  va  nous  faire  trouver  un  Sixieme 
sens  ;  pour  moi  je  vois  avec  douleur  cette  passion  pour  la 
musique  ;  ce  langage  appartient  au  Stupide  comme  a  l’homme 
d’esprit  ;  chacun  l’interprete  suivant  les  pensees  qu’il  a  dans 
son  cerveau,  il  semble  que  c’est  une  mesure  Commune  qui 
s’elargit  ou  se  retrecit  selon  la  personne  qui  en  fait  usage,  et 
donne  toujours  en  apparence  le  meme  resultat  ;  notre  Theatre 
francois  languit,  et  moi  qui  ai  vu  Mr.  Garrick  je  ne  trouve 
plus  au  spectacle  qu’un  sentiment  unique  et  toujours  le  meme, 
celui  du  regret,  je  ferai  vos  Comitions  a  toutes  les  personnes 
qui  vous  interressent ;  agreez  l’hommage  de  Mr.  Necker  et 
le  mien  ;  j’ai  l’honneur  d’etre  tres-respectueusement  Madame, 
Votre  tres  humble  et  tres  obeissante  Servante,  C.  Necker. 

permettez  que  je  me  rappelle  au  Souvenir  de  Mile  Gregori. 

Nicola  Piccinni,  Gluck’s  famous  rival,  had  reached 
Paris  a  little  while  previously,  and  his  Roland  was 
produced  there  in  the  following  year. 


i6 


HOWE’S  INACTIVITY 


1777 


Thanking  her  sister  for  sending  the  good  news 
from  America,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  that 

Bath  reports,  like  Bath  head  dresses,  (tho  in  the  mode  of 
the  times)  are  a  little  exaggerated.  .  .  .  I  just  called  on  Lady 
Lucy  Stanhope  on  Sunday  on  my  way  to  Mr.  Ansteys  as  her 
Ladyship  and  Mrs.  T  had  made  kind  enquiries  after  me. 
The  prim  anglicisms  of  their  dress,  the  plaited  mob  pinned 
under  their  chin,  etc.,  cannot  be  paralleled  but  by  the  Christening 
trim  of  some  Sage  Femme  in  a  country  town  through  which 
there  is  not  a  turnpike  road. 

Toward  the  end  of  May,  after  a  few  days  in  London, 
Mrs.  Montagu  went  down  to  Sandleford  and  “  Tran¬ 
quillity,”  and  concludes  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  who 
was  in  town  : 

Adieu,  my  dear  Sylph  ;  you  see  I  think  of  my  sins  in  the 
country.  London  is  the  place  for  sinning,  the  country  for 
repentance — a  twofold  reason  why  fine  Ladies  prefer  Town  ; 

I  shall  have  strange  suspicions  if  you  don’t  come  to  Sandleford. 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

May  the  30. 

I  am  sorry  for  the  account  you  give  of  our  Custom  house 
duties  falling  short.  I  rather  hope  it  was  meant  only  of  the 
American  duties,  as  all  parties  own  we  have,  on  the  whole, 
as  much  Trade  as  before  this  unhappy  War.  Sr  Wm  Howe 
has  acquainted  our  Ministry  that  he  expects  soon  to  be  in 
possession  of  Philadelphia. 

Is  not  Lord  Chatham  in  everything  an  extraordinary  man  ? 
A  few  months  ago  he  had  not  spirits  and  force  of  mind  to 
converse  with  his  Children,  who  are  the  most  gentle,  respectful, 
and  dutiful  of  any  in  the  World,  and  now  he  can  tell  Great 
Brittain  what  she  shd  do  with  her  disobedient  and  refractory 
children  the  Americans. 

Howe’s  extraordinary  inactivity,  however  (which 
led  to  repeated  expressions  of  the  utmost  astonish¬ 
ment  in  the  letters  from  Washington  to  his  brother), 
continued  long  after  the  season  of  active  operations 
had  opened  ;  the  victory  of  Brandywine,  which  if 
it  had  been  vigorously  followed  up  would,  in  all 


Carolina  St«*te  LiDrany. 

1777  “  AN  OLD  LAME  SENATOR  ”  17 

likelihood,  have  meant  the  destruction  of  Washington’s 
army,  was  never  completed  ;  and  Philadelphia  was 
not  occupied  till  September.  This  belated  campaign 
ruined  the  whole  scheme  of  concerted  operations. 
Clinton’s  force  was  paralysed,  Howe  having  taken 
away  4000  of  his  troops.  Burgoyne  coming  south 
with  the  Canada  contingent  had  to  fight  his  way 
through  difficult  and  hostile  country,  was  trapped  at 
Saratoga,  and  had  there  to  surrender  his  entire  force 
on  October  17.  The  disaster  was  fatal,  if  not  final. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sandleford,  June  the  ist. 

My  sincere  thanks  for  the  account  you  and  your  Secretary 
gave  me  of  the  great  day  in  the  House  of  Lords.  If  one  is 
too  far  off  St  James’s  and  St  Stephens  to  catch  the  sympathies 
with  Ministers,  or  Patriots,  one  is  always  entertain’d  with  a 
great  day  in  the  House  of  Lords  ;  it  is  genteel  comedy,  a  species 
of  drama  very  agreable  to  all  people  of  elegant  taste.  I  hear 
that  Lord  Chatham  was  follow’d  by  applauding  Multitudes 
to  the  door  of  the  House  of  Lords,  which  I  am  glad  of.  He 
did  his  Country  great  service  in  the  last  War,  and  one  is  glad 
to  see  there  is  a  grateful  remembrance  of  it.  Historians  have 
praised  a  Roman  Senator  for  going,  when  old  and  blind,  to 
the  Senate,  to  exhort  to  War  ;  an  old  Lame  Senator  who 
councils  peace  seems  to  act  more  suitably  to  his  condition  and 
the  wary  wisdom  of  age.  Old  Appius  might  have  sounded 
the  Warlike  Trumpet  if  he  had  not  been  blind,  but  I  think 
it  required  a  little  gout,  and  a  great  deal  of  flannel,  to  dignify 
the  idea  of  humbly  sending  a  Herald  to  ask  pardon  of  the 
Americans  ;  the  proposal  has  a  sublime  in  it  that  would  not 
be  relish’d  by  the  World  in  general.  I  earnestly  recommend 
this  temper  to  the  Archbishop  who  says  he  cannot  govern 
his  passions.  One  is  ashamed  to  see  a  spirit  so  bearing,  and 
forbearing,  in  a  Politician,  and  one  so  impatient  in  a  Minister 
of  the  Gospel.  In  the  Country  Lambs  are  always  gentle, 
and  Wolves  are  fierce. 

Whilst  Mrs.  Montagu  was  spending  a  tranquil 
summer  at  Sandleford,  her  new  house  was  making 
VOL.  11  c 


FINANCING  THE  NEW  HOUSE  1777 


rapid  progress,  the  walls  being  well  above  ground 
in  June,  and  :  “  I  flatter  myself  it  will  be  covered  in 
before  Christmas.  There  is  a  well  of  fine  water 
found  which  will  be  a  great  convenience.”  From  a 
letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey  her  intentions  about  paying  for 
it  out  of  income  are  made  clear  : 

You  know  I  had  always  as  much  tenderness  for  Mr.  Vesey 
as  one  ought  to  have,  but  his  goodness  in  coming  to  Sandleford 
will  make  me  love  him  more  than  decorum  will  allow  me  to 
express.  Thank  him  for  me  a  thousand  times.  I  want  his 
advice  too  about  some  alterations  to  be  made.  I  had  intended 
to  begin  this  summer,  but  my  new  House  will  employ  all  my 
spare  money,  as  it  is  rearing.  I  mean  in  the  space  of  three 
years,  to  make  up  from  my  income,  the  difference  between 
that  House  and  what  my  Habitation  in  Hillstreet  will  sell  for, 
added  to  a  small  sum  I  have  in  India  Bonds.  I  confess  this 
is  not  necessary,  as  I  could  borrow  ;  but  writing  Eliz  Montagu 
to  bond  or  Mortgage  wd  appear  to  me  a  masculine  action, 
rather  like  swearing  such  an  oath  as  Ventre  blue,  or  odsbodikins  ; 
no  real  harm,  but  merely  an  indecorum  ;  however  as  this  is 
only  a  matter  of  punctilio,  if  Mr.  Stuart  outruns  the  Constable 
I  shall  not  feel  a  moments  real  concern  about  it.  I  am  uneasy 
least  this  wet  weather  should  retard  my  building.  .  .  . 

A  thousand  thanks  for  Mr.  Garricks  very  pretty  verses. 
I  was  glad  to  see  something  address’d  to  the  Dss  of  D:  of  which 
the  witt  and  good  nature  wd  make  her  amends  for  the  austerity 
and  dullness  of  some  things  in  prose  which  have  been  addressd 
to  her  Grace. 

Garrick’s  Aurora  verses  have  already  been  quoted. 

Mrs.  Vesey ’s  French  was  even  more  her  own 
than  Mrs.  Montagu’s  : 

From  Mrs.  Vesey 

.  .  .  the  Abbe  Reinel  tells  me  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayete 
has  made  his  escape  a  second  time  to  America,  that  the  Ladies 
there  admire  the  romantick  spirit  for  they  are  all  Americans 
c’est  a  dire  1’Amerique  est  leur  eventail  et  leur  chapeau  car 
on  ne  scait  pas  si  l’Amerique  est  a  la  Pole  ou  au  Midy,  cet 
Abbe  admire  1’Angleterre  surtout  M  et  Mdm  Montagu,  il 
dit  que  les  D  Francaises  sont  plus  amusante  pour  la  premiere 


i?77 


ABBE  RAYNAL 


i9 


heure  plus  de  vivacite  plus  des  Epigrams  mais  les  Angloises 
one  l’esprit  si  cultive  si  accompli  que  leur  sagesse  leur  con¬ 
versation  si  douce  si  instructive  qu’on  gagne  l’estime  et  le 
coeur.  he  is  very  well  acquainted  with  you  I  suppose,  and  is 
in  love  with  Sterns  Eliza — I  shall  tell  you  some  of  his  stories 
next  time. 

The  Abbe  Raynal  was  the  author  of  that  extra¬ 
ordinary  hotchpotch  in  six  volumes,  Histoire  .  .  .  des 
Europeens  dans  les  deux  Indes ,  which  was  published 
in  1772,  and  in  which  Diderot  is  supposed  to  have 
had  a  considerable  hand.  Horace  Walpole  said  it 
tells  one  everything  in  the  world  with  spirit,  wit,  and 
clearness,  and  all  is  so  mixed  you  learn  forty  new 
trades  and  fifty  new  histories  in  a  single  chapter.  But 
when  he  met  the  Abbe  at  d’Olbach’s  dinner-table  in 
Paris,  and  he  began  to  bombard  him  with  questions 
across  the  table  about  the  Colonies,  Horace — more 
shy  of  his  French  than  our  ladies — feigned  deafness, 
was  found  out  later,  and  never  forgiven.  Dr.  Johnson 
had  no  use  for  the  frivolous  Abbe  :  “  I  have  read  his 
book,  and  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  him.” 

Mrs.  Draper,  Sterne’s  Eliza,  had  made  the  acquaint¬ 
ance  of  Abbe  Raynal  whilst  she  was  in  England,  and 
he  had  fallen  an  ecstatic  victim — not  exactly  to  her 
charms,  for,  according  to  Sterne,  “  You  are  not  hand¬ 
some,  Eliza,  nor  is  yours  a  face  that  will  please  the 
tenth  part  of  your  beholders.  But  you  are  something 
more.  I  never  saw  so  intelligent,  so  animated,  so 
good  a  countenance.  A  something  in  your  voice  and 
eyes  you  possess  in  a  degree  more  persuasive  than  any 
woman  I  ever  saw,  read  or  heard  of ;  but  it  is  that 
bewitching  sort  of  nameless  excellence  that  men  of 
nice  sensibility  alone  can  be  touched  with.”  The  Abbe 
— himself  described  as  a  disorderly  cleric  though  not, 
as  Sterne  had  been,  as  “  an  irrecoverable  scoundrel  ” 
— avowed  that  no  woman  ever  owned  so  many  graces, 
and  that  even  her  own  sex  joined  in  her  praise.  She 
possessed,  he  declared,  “  that  almost  incompatible 


20 


ELIZA  DRAPER 


1777 


harmony  of  voluptuousness  and  decency  which  diffused 
itself  over  all  her  person  and  accompanied  all  her 
motions.”  This  paragon  among  women  after  her 
return  from  Sterne’s  idolatry  to  India  and  a  husband, 
eloped  with  the  captain  of  a  Navy  sloop,  then  came  to 
England,  published  Yorick’s  letters  to  her  (but  not 
her  own),  flirted  with  the  Abbe  and  with  Wilkes,  and 
died  in  177 8,  when  only  thirty-five.  “  Genius  and 
Benevolence,”  her  epitaph  in  Bristol  Cathedral  declares, 
“  were  united  in  her  ”  :  attributes  a  little  difficult  to 
reconcile  with  what  we  know  of  her  story  ;  but  it  is 
possible  that  it  was  her  infatuated  Abbe  who  erected 
this  shrine  to  her  memory  ;  and  if  the  “  Genius  ” 
has  to  be  somewhat  discounted,  the  balance  may  well 
be  adjusted  by  crediting  her  on  occasion  with  a  little 
too  much  “  Benevolence.” 

After  her  elopement  from  Madras,  and  a  year  or 
so  spent  with  her  extraordinary  uncle  John  Whitehill 
at  Masulipatam,  Mrs.  Draper  returned  to  England 
at  the  end  of  1774,  and  appears  to  have  spent  the 
last  years  of  her  short  life  in  Queen  Anne  Street, 
Cavendish  Square  ;  but  I  have  looked  in  vain  through 
the  correspondence  of  this  period  for  any  reference 
to  her  from  the  cousin  of  her  old  flame  Laurence 
Sterne,  though  Mrs.  Draper  had  expressed  her  high 
appreciation  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  literary  work,  and 
declared  “  she  would  rather  be  an  attendant  on  her 
person  than  the  first  Peeress  of  the  realm.”  To  what 
extent  she  was  received  in  the  society  of  the  day  there 
is  little  evidence  to  show,  but,  as  the  authors  of  the 
very  interesting  volume  Sterne's  Eliza  point  out,  the 
acceptance  by  the  dour  ascetic  Lord  Chancellor 
Apsley  of  the  dedication  of  her  Letters  from  Torick  to 
Eliza  in  1775  seems  to  indicate  the  establishment  of 
a  reputable  status.  Eliza’s  real  Letters  to  Yorick, 
of  which  she  had  with  such  difficulty  prevented  the 
publication  by  Mrs.  Sterne  (whom  she  declared 
Yorick  to  have  stigmatised  to  her  as  “a  Drinker  a 


1777 


COMPARISON  AND  CONTRAST  21 


Swearer  .  .  .  and  Unchaste,  though  in  point  of 
understanding  and  finished  address  supposed  to  be 
inferior  to  no  woman  in  Europe  ”),  would  have  been 
of  the  greatest  interest,  but  must  be  presumed  beyond 
recovery,  those  published  under  that  title  being 
apparently,  like  the  second  Lord  Lyttelton’s,  an 
impudent  concoction  of  William  Combe’s  or  some 
one  of  that  ilk. 

Contrasted  in  many  essentials  as  of  course  they 
were,  an  interesting  comparison  may  be  traced  in  the 
characters  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  much-loved  Sylph  and 
Sterne’s  dear  Eliza.  In  the  vivacity  and  light  dis¬ 
cursive  charm  of  their  letters  the  two  women  had 
much  in  common.  Both  were  naturally  sprightly, 
vivid  women  of  pretty  fancies  and  delicate  humour. 
Both  sought  for  and  basked  in  the  sunshine  of  social 
success  and  admiration.  Both  suffered  from  exacting 
and  faithless  husbands.  Both  came  under  the  spell, 
and  captured  the  admiration,  of  the  same  two  remark¬ 
able  literary  characters,  Laurence  Sterne  and  Abbe 
Raynal.  But — and  one  must  admit  it  is  a  crucial 
but — whilst  Mrs.  Draper  deliberately  left  her  husband 
for  Commodore  Sir  John  Clerke  and  freedom  on 
H.M.S  Prudent  and,  as  it  seems,  a  good  deal  of 
subsequent  happiness,  Mrs.  Vesey  clung  desperately 
to  her  attractive  but  selfish  “  Monster  ”  to  the  bitter 
end,  submitted  to  all  his  procrastinating  follies,  con¬ 
doned  his  mistresses,  forgave  his  extravagances,  and 
passed  from  unchecked  weeping  to  gradual  imbecility 
after  his  death.  The  contrast  is  as  interesting  as  the 
resemblances ;  but  the  moral  we  had  better  leave 
severely  alone. 

In  the  way  of  stone-throwing  from  glass  houses 
Mrs.  Draper’s  strictures  on  Mrs.  Sterne’s  morality 
discourage  emulation. 

A  letter  from  Mrs.  Vesey  of  about  this  date  may 
be  given  here,  both  as  an  example  of  her  discursive 
gossip  and  also  for  the  allusion  to  Abbe  Raynal,  of 


1777 


22  AT  THE  DENTIST’S 

whose  reception  by  Mrs.  Montagu  she  was  a  little 
dubious  : 

Wednesday  zZth  (May). 

I  received  your  letter  My  dear  Friend  last  night  too  late 
to  answer  it  as  I  dined  at  Kew.  Mrs.  Hatton  acting  Cleopatra 
saild  under  our  windows  to  the  sound  of  flutes  —  the  day 
incessant  rain,  but  had  every  nymph  her  Anthony  I  believe 
poor  Cupid  would  have  been  heartily  weary  of  being  boxed 
up  12  hours  where  the  company  labourd  under  the  call  of 
diverting  themselves  ;  as  there  was  no  such  demand  in  our 
little  causerie  I  was  very  sorry  when  the  Royal  summons 
struck  seven,  especially  as  we  talkd  a  great  deal  of  you.  .  .  . 
as  there  was  only  the  Family  I  think  I  liked  Lady  Cl.  more 
than  ever ;  nature  has  given  her  a  good  breeding  which  she 
has  not  embroiderd  because  she  did  not  want  it,  neither  has  she 
added  the  affected  caution  and  reserve  of  a  court ;  she  and  her 
Mistres  seem  to  confide  in  their  own  hearts  for  pleasing  without 
imprudence  or  torturing  the  heaven  born  gifts  of  unstudied 
attentive  civility,  that  looks  so  like  truth  and  good  nature. 
I  cannot  think  of  such  a  character  without  saying  something 
of  dear  charming  Gregory.  Do  you  know  I  envy  her  your 
letter  ?  she  would  have  it  back  again  and  it  was  not  without 
something — I  don’t  know  what — that  I  returned  it.  Perhaps 
it  was  however  that  you  wrote  so  well. — how  she  loves  you  ! 
and  how  pleasant  it  must  be  to  you  to  see  the  heart  you  have 
snatched  from  a  shipwreck  so  entirely  devoted  to  you  ;  it 
tells  so  much  for  both  ;  my  eyes  fill — so  I  will  proceed  to  my 
London  Gazette  which  disdains  a  subject  that  promises  so 
little  fun. 

All  the  bon  ton  Dames  and  Mess13  went  last  opera  night 
to  Bedlam,  from  thence  adjourned  to  the  Gallery  of  the  Opera 
in  their  Hats  and  half  Sacks  and  from  thence  to  sup  at  Vauxhall, 
and  a  night  of  dreadful  weather  it  was.  The  next  day  a  Lady 
askd  another  to  call  upon  her  at  Marshes  the  Dentists  to  carry 
her  to  breakfast  at  Miss  Floids  Kensington,  as  Husband  was 
going  out  of  town  and  she  had  no  carriage.  The  friend  calld 
at  the  appointed  hour  and  found  the  Lady  rushing  out  of 
Marshs  door  all  disheveld  followd  by  her  husband,  both  of 
them  went  into  the  friends  coach,  who  was  entreated  by  the 
husband  to  carry  him  and  his  lady  home  which  was  performed 
in  disconsolate  silence — It  is  said  the  husband  changed  his 
mind  about  going  out  of  town  and  coming  to  Marshes  found 
a  certain  Captain  who  had  also  occasion  for  the  dentist.  These 


1777 


WILLIAM  BURKE 


23 


are  not  acquaintance  of  yours  or  people  who  anybody  cares 
about  so  I  will  not  go  on  in  acting  the  Morning  Post  by  setting 
their  names,  least  the  gentlemen  of  the  office  may  be  curious. 
Dont  let  your  nightingales  hear  these  stories  ...  as  to  Messrs 
the  Cuckoo  and  Magpie  they  are  heartily  welcome  to  it. 
Abbe  Reynal  is  to  be  here  this  evening  with  3  of  his  friends 
who  go  off  Saturday  to  Oxford,  Bath  Bristol  Ireland,  but  I 
shall  not  give  them  the  least  hint  that  Sandleford  is  in  the 
way  or  I  am  sure  you  would  have  a  visit  and  I  am  not  sure 
you  would  like  it.  I  shall  also  see  Garrick  and  Burke ;  the 
first  I  shall  flatter  with  your  approbation  of  his  Serenade, 
for  the  latter  I  wish  I  could  find  some  enlivening  cordial. 
Mr.  William  Burke  went  off  last  week  to  India  overland  to 
join  a  person  at  Paris  who  is  going  about  the  Companies  service 
till  Mr.  Rumbold  arrives  who  goes  by  sea.  ...  I  admire 
the  spirit  of  the  man  who  at  once  seizes  the  resolution  (tho 
passd  the  meridian  of  life)  to  .  .  .  restore  the  drooping  fortunes 
of  his  friend  and  kinsman.  They  have  long  made  one  common 
purse.  Edmund  is  so  touchd  with  this  generous  act,  and 
the  loss  of  so  dear  a  friend  that  I  could  hardly  keep  from  tears 
when  I  saw  him. 

Lady  Clermont  (who  became  Viscountess  in  the 
preceding  year)  was  much  attached  to  the  Queen. 
The  charming  Miss  Gregory’s  “  shipwreck  ”  was,  as 
we  know,  only  postponed.  Bedlam,  save  the  mark, 
was  amongst  the  shows  of  London  at  a  penny  or 
twopence  a  head.  Garrick’s  Serenade  was  that  to 
the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  already  quoted.  William 
Burke,  Edmund’s  kinsman,  was  amongst  the  many 
to  whom  the  “  Letters  ”  of  Junius  were  attributed. 
He  did  not  return  from  India  till  1792. 

The  versatile  Abbe  Raynal  had  evidently  met 
Mrs.  Montagu,  and  had  called  at  her  house  in  Hill 
Street  before  starting  on  the  western  tour  referred  to 
in  the  above  letter  : 

From  Sandleford,  May  26,  she  wrote  : 

Have  you  seen  l’Abbe  Raynal  since  he  came  to  London  ? 
He  is  like  his  works,  which  all  authors  are  not.  You  will 
find  him  very  acute,  very  ingenious,  very  agreable.  My 
Porter  sent  his  name  in  the  list  of  those  who  have  calld  at  my 


24 


EPISTOLARY  MORALISING 


1777 


door  since  I  left  Town.  If  I  had  not  been  engaged  to  Madam 
Tranquillity  I  shd  have  regretted  being  absent. 

She  and  the  Abbe  had  made  acquaintance  during 
her  stay  in  Paris  in  1776;  and  Lord  Shelburne  invited 
her  to  Bowood  this  July  to  meet  him  again. 

The  tranquillity  of  Sandleford  gave  Mrs.  Montagu 
dangerous  facilities  for  epistolary  moralising,  a  habit 
which  her  correspondents  delighted  to  encourage  but 
which  would  certainly  be  found  intolerably  boring 
to-day.  Horace  Walpole  once  said  maliciously  of 
her  :  “  Aspasia  has  both  knowledge  and  wit,  with 
many  virtues  ;  but  mercy  on  us !  they  are  both 
indefatigably  for  ever  at  our  service.” 

Thus  she  begins  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  on  June  30  : 

I  have  heard  that  people  seldom  are  displeasing  when  they 
are  pleased.  I  wish  it  was  as  certain,  that  if,  in  a  retired 
situation,  one  is  not  ennuye  one  is  not  ennuyeuse.  I  have 
not  felt  a  moments  ennui  in  this  deep  retirement,  but  whether 
I  may  not  give  it  to  my  correspondents  is  not  so  certain. 

Despite  the  uncertainty,  however,  she  proceeds  to 
a  lengthy  disquisition  on  the  sublimity  of  the  ocean, 
that  liquid  element  which  (Mrs.  Carter  said)  excluded 
her  from  the  world  on  one  side  at  Deal  ;  and  having 
ploughed  the  deeps  for  two  pages,  she  goes  on  to 
deal  with  Mr.  Gibbon  and  Les  Philosophes  in  this 
style  : 

It  is  truly  ridiculous  that  while  the  present  race  of  Philo¬ 
sophers  inveigh  so  much  against  the  zeal  of  the  Christians, 
in  putting  some  Mexicans  to  death  on  account  of  religion, 
it  appears  by  authentic  accounts  that  about  2500  Human 
Victims  were  annually  sacrificed  in  Mexico.  Mr.  Gibbons 
talks  of  the  elegant  Greek  Mythology.  Jupiter  making  love 
in  the  shape  of  a  Bull  at  one  time,  running  away  with  a  pretty 
boy  in  his  beak  at  another,  and  Madam  Juno  scolding  him  for 
his  vagaries.  Bacchus  so  drunk  he  could  not  tell  what  they 
were  talking  of,  and  Venus  Cuckolding  her  good  Man,  appear 
strange  instances  of  elegance  in  divine  Persons.  Your  friends 
the  Greeks  were  often  very  cruel  in  War.  I  hope  you  will 


1777 


UNFORTUNATE  DR.  DODD 


25 

pardon  me,  that  I  could  never  be  quite  angry  at  Lysander  for 
putting  his  3000  Prisoners  to  death,  tho  it  gave  a  sad  shock 
to  yr  darling  Athens.  The  Athenians  were,  at  that  time, 
detestable  to  the  highest  degree.  .  .  . 

And  so  on  for  another  two  or  three  pages  of  amiable 
meandering. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  not  amongst  the  crowd  of 
sentimental  sympathisers  who  wept  over  the  un¬ 
fortunate  Dr.  Dodd,  the  fashionable  preacher  of  his 
day,  who  had,  unfortunately,  forged  Lord  Chester¬ 
field’s  name  for  £4000,  and  who,  after  an  extraordinary 
eruption  of  Thoughts  in  Prison,  Addresses,  Speeches, 
Declarations,  Observations,  Petitions,  and  a  Last 
Solemn  Account  and  Dying  Words,  was  unfortunately 
hanged  on  June  27  of  this  year.  The  writer  of  a 
very  interesting  leader  in  the  Times  Literary  Supple¬ 
ment  on  Dodd’s  Occasional  Papers  said  recently  of 
him  : 

The  Dictionary  of  National  Biography,  in  its  terse  way, 
describes  our  hero  as  “  Dodd,  William,  forger.”  The  verdict 
is  just.  If  Dodd  had  not  forged  a  bond  he  would  not  have 
gained  admittance  to  the  national  museum  ;  he  would  have 
survived  obscurely  as  the  editor  of  “  Beauties  of  Shakespeare.” 
But  it  is  true  also  that  if  he  had  not  been  a  consummate  hypocrite 
no  mere  forgery  could  have  saved  him.  As  it  was,  all  the 
materials  of  melodrama  were  present,  and  every  man  and 
woman  in  London  was  ready  with  pity  or  abuse.  Technicalities 
arose,  concerning  the  admissibility  of  evidence,  which  gave  a 
legal  interest  to  what  had  seemed  a  simple  case.  The  injured 
party,  Lord  Chesterfield,  and  the  Chief  Justice,  Lord  Mansfield, 
were  both  suspected  of  animus  against  the  criminal.  When 
the  verdict  and  sentence  were  no  longer  in  doubt,  the  greatest 
writer  in  England  gave  his  powerful  support  to  the  popular 
cry  for  mercy.  The  speech  which  Dodd  delivered  in  the 
Recorder’s  Court,  when  sentence  of  death  was  about  to  be 
pronounced,  was  written  by  Samuel  Johnson.  Johnson  wrote 
also  petitions  from  Dodd  to  the  King  and  from  his  wife  to  the 
Queen,  a  petition  from  the  City  of  London,  and  other  pieces. 
Finally  Earl  Percy  presented  a  national  petition  with  twenty 
thousand  signatures.  The  King  is  said  to  have  wavered,  but 


2 6  JOHNSON  AND  DODD  1777 

in  the  end  the  reprieve  was  refused.  Attempts  were  then 
made  to  effect  an  escape,  and  finally  to  secure,  by  the  con¬ 
nivance  of  the  executioner,  that  the  hanging  should  be  such 
as  to  admit  of  resuscitation.  This  was  actually  tried,  but 
failed.  He  died  on  June  27,  1 777. 

The  imaginative  sympathy  and  the  forensic  ability 
with  which  Samuel  Johnson  wrote  for  Dodd’s  cause 
and  worked  for  his  reprieve,  though  he  must  have 
known  him  to  be  a  canting  humbug,  forms  a  very 
interesting  study.  Writing  in  July,  Mrs.  Montagu 
says  : 

The  great  interest  made  for  poor  Dr.  Dodd  and  the  Perreans 
[two  brothers  hung  for  the  same  offence  previously  to  Dr.  DoddJ 
is  a  symptom  amongst  many,  that  we  are  rather  moved  by 
sentiment  than  governed  by  principle.  .  .  .  Did  you  see  Lady 
Huntingdon’s  absurd  letter  to  the  Dr.  ?  she  tells  him  if  he 
feels  an  assurance  of  being  saved  his  tribulation  will  become 
matter  of  glory  and  triumph.  The  tribulation  of  being  hanged 
for  a  great  Crime  is  a  strange  subject  to  convert  into  glory 
and  triumph. 

To  Mrs.  Carter  she  writes  : 

I  agree  with  you  that  Dr.  Dodds  last  speech  was  such  as 
gave  one  hope  he  was  a  sincere  penitent  and  though  a  very 
frail,  not  a  maliciously  wicked  man  ; 

and  to  her  sister  she  adds  : 

It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  Dod  hanged  or  unhanged 
will  disgrace  the  clergy  most,  but  I  rather  think,  as  the  punish¬ 
ment  cannot  farther  extend  the  knowledge  of  the  crime,  that 
cutting  off  this  rotten  branch  will  leave  the  body  more  entire. 
As  to  the  Man  himself,  worthless  as  he  is,  one  pitties  him. 
He  seems  so  little  able  to  endure  the  chastisement  his  crimes 
have  merited,  that  he  is  truly  not  worth  hanging,  a  phrase 
I  had  always  thought  before  too  severe  to  be  applied  to 
any  man.  I  think  it  will  be  decent  to  make  the  execution 
private. 

Apropos  to  the  above  reference  to  Lady  Hunting¬ 
don  the  following  undated  letter  may  be  introduced 


1777  THE  HUNTINGDON  CONNEXION  27 


here  as  giving  an  impression,  more  curious  than 
sympathetic,  of  the  management  of  her  Chapel  at 
Bath. 

From  her  Sister 

Lady  Huntingdon  has  procured  us  a  great  deal  of  room  at 
Church,  for  her  Chapel  takes  off  vast  numbers,  and  while  it  is 
excessively  crouded  enables  one  to  sit  much  at  ones  ease  in  all 
the  other  places  for  divine  service,  which  before  was  far  from 
the  case.  Maddan  has  preached  there  for  some  weeks,  but  is 
now  gone,  and  I  hope  in  his  absence  it  will  be  less  frequented. 
At  seven  o’clock  on  Sunday  mornings  there  is  a  service  designed 
only  for  the  Saints,  wherein  none  of  the  Church  Prayers  are 
used  ;  a  Sinner  or  two  have  gone  in  by  mistake,  and  been 
beheld  with  holy  horror,  and  pious  contempt  ;  if  you  do  not 
know  what  that  is  the  Methodists  can  teach  you.  At  eleven 
the  Liturgy  is  read  as  in  other  Churches,  and  their  own  Taber¬ 
nacle,  and  all  the  fine  people  go  ;  Lady  Ann  Erskine  Daughter 
to  Lord  Buchan  generally  seats  the  Company,  in  whose  tickets 
there  is  some  distinction.  At  six  in  the  Evening  on  Sundays, 
and  many  week  days,  but  no  fixed  ones, — it  being  given  out 
from  the  desk,  as  the  ensuing  plays  are  on  the  Stage, — the  same 
service  is  perform’d,  the  croud  then  of  common  people  is  not 
only  great  but  disorderly,  they  sometimes  not  only  quarrel  but 
fight  ;  yet  the  Preacher  in  their  own  phrase  speaks  with  so 
much  power  that  one  meets  the  Audience  in  their  way  home 
most  cordially  united,  hand  in  hand,  arm  in  arm,  or  still  more 
tenderly  ;  for  love  you  know  is  the  substance  of  their  doctrine. 
I  know  an  ordinary  Girl  who  was  little  less  than  picked  up  in 
the  very  Chapel  ;  such  of  the  common  people  as  are  not  inclined 
to  be  of  the  sect,  and  go  only  out  of  curiosity,  do  not  seem  to 
look  upon  it  as  a  Church,  for  they  would  not  behave  in  the 
same  manner  at  any  other.  The  Moravians  likewise  under 
Kitty  Edwin’s  auspices  have  opened  a  new  Chapel  just  by  me, 
but  are  less  fashionable,  tho’  I  should  think  mighty  comfortable. 
The  first  Sunday  they  had  at  a  proper  hour  a  publick  breakfast 
in  their  Church,  a  Tea  pot  as  big  as  a  Caldron,  and  great  plenty 
of  toast  and  butter,  and  proper  eatables,  and  all  performed  their 
parts  with  great  attention  and  alacrity.  At  eleven  they  had 
their  service,  and  in  the  afternoon  met  again  and  regaled  with 
Cake  and  Wine  ;  and  in  the  Evening  met  a  second  time  to 
Prayers  ;  a  fine  composition  this  !  a  layer  of  gluttony,  then  a 
layer  of  devotion  ;  and  so  through  the  day  ;  I  have  not  heard 


28 


ROBINSON  OF  RANELAGH 


1777 


whether  the  same  eating  ceremonies  are  performed  every 
Sunday,  or  whether  it  was  a  more  than  common  feast  to 
sanctify  the  new  Chapel  ;  but  really  it  is  very  sociable.  If 
Kate  has  not  interest  enough  to  be  made  a  Peeress,  I  think  her 
Chapel  will  do  less  harm  than  the  other,  as  it  attracts  few. 

Martin  Madan,  the  barrister  who  adopted  Method¬ 
ism  after  hearing  a  sermon  by  Wesley,  became  closely 
associated  with  Lady  Huntingdon.  He  was  chaplain 
of  the  Lock  Hospital  for  thirty  years,  and  was  the 
author  of  Thelyphthora ,  which  advocated  polygamy, 
and  shocked  Cowper. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  much-revered  cousin,  the  Primate, 
was  just  now  staying  at  Lord  Darlington’s  near 
Rokeby,  and  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  possession 
(at  a  price)  of  the  family  letters  and  papers  of  Sir 
Thomas  Robinson,  his  recently  deceased  brother, 
which  were  presumably  in  the  hands  of  the  solicitors 
of  Mr.  Morritt  to  whom  Rokeby  had  been  sold.  As 
Sir  Thomas  had  known  all  the  great  world  of  his 
time,  had  been  intimate  with  Lord  Chesterfield,  and 
almost  an  inmate  of  Ranelagh  for  many  years,  one 
cannot  help  regretting  the  destruction  of  these  papers  ; 
but  the  Primate  seems  to  have  convinced  himself  that 
it  would  not  do  to  risk  their  falling  into  indiscreet 
hands,  and  that,  against  this,  fire  was  the  safest  pre¬ 
servative. 

Thomas  Pitt,  Lord  Chatham’s  nephew  and  the 
member  for  Old  Sarum,  who  combined  dislike  of 
his  uncle  with  bitter  opposition  to  Lord  North  and 
the  coalition,  writes  from  Mount  Edgcumbe,  July  25  : 

Having  been  for  a  day  or  two  at  Mt.  Edgecumbe  I  have 
had  what  they  call,  an  inkling  of  your  intended  Western 
excursion,  which  the  last  post  confirms  by  Letter  from  Harrow. 
In  that  case  may  I  presume  to  hint  only  that  a  Turnpike  road 
of  five  and  twenty  miles  leads  from  Mt  Edgecumbe  to  Boconnoc, 
which  notwithstanding  hills  and  dales  may  bring  you  easily 
to  us  by  dinner.  Moreover  I  recommend  to  you  by  all  means 
to  come  and  shelter  yourself  in  the  gloom  and  repose  of  my 


RANELAGH  ROTUNDA  AND  GARDENS 
After  Canaletto 


1777  WALPOLE  AND  CHATTERTON  29 

woods  after  all  the  glare  and  glory  of  this  place,  it  will  serve 
you  as  Coffee  after  Champagne  and  make  you  fit  to  return 
soberly  to  the  Eastern  World.  Mrs.  Pitt  will  have  the  honour 
to  present  you  with  the  freshest  nosegay  of  her  Shrubbery  and 
think  herself  highly  flatter’d. 

The  following,  it  is  conjectured,  refers  to  Mr. 
William  Barrett,  the  Bristol  surgeon  and  antiquary 
who  accepted  the  Rowley  manuscripts  from  Chatterton : 


From  Lord  Nuneham 

Nuneham,  July  25th. 

Not  having  been  ever  more  than  once,  in  Mr.  Walpole’s 
company,  nor  having  ever  even  left  my  name  at  his  door,  it 
was  not  possible  for  me  to  obey  the  honour  of  your  commands 
in  giving  Mr.  Barret  a  letter  of  recommendation  to  him,  but 
I  have  spoke  to  my  Father,  who  will  write  to  him  by  the  next 
mail,  and  has  promised  that  he  will  mention  Mr.  Barret  in 
the  most  favourable  manner,  and  request  of  Mr.  Walpole  to 
shew  him  every  civility  and  mark  of  attention  in  his  power  ; 
so  that  this  recommendation  will  at  least  be  as  advantageous, 
nay  more  so,  than  a  formal  introductory  letter  from  me. 

For  fear  Mr.  Barret  might  have  waited  for  this  letter, 
I  have  written  to  him  by  the  last  post  to  inform  him  of  the 
reasons  which  prevented  my  obeying  the  orders  you  had  hon¬ 
oured  me  with,  and  of  my  father’s  intention  of  writing  to 
Mr.  Walpole.  .  .  . 

The  manuscript  collection  of  the  rather  credulous 
Bristol  antiquary,  with  various  Chatterton  contribu¬ 
tions,  was  published  in  the  form  of  a  History  of  Bristol 
in  1789.  Without  the  slightest  desire  to  take  up 
any  cudgel  on  behalf  of  Horace  Walpole,  one  must 
admit  that  he  was  rather  unfairly  loaded  with  responsi¬ 
bility  for  the  fate  of  that  unlucky  young  genius. 
Walpole  was  no  philanthropist.  His  interest  in  the 
poems  sent  him  was  primarily  antiquarian  ;  when 
Gray  and  Mason  pronounced  the  specimens  sent  them 
as  modern,  and  Chatterton  hinted  that  he  might  find 
him  some  more  congenial  work,  Walpole  promptly 


30 


THE  AMERICANS 


1777 


advised  him  to  stick  to  his  attorney  last  in  Lambert’s 
office  and  defer  the  manufacture  of  antiques  till  he 
had  made  a  fortune  :  advice  that  would  have  been 
echoed  by  the  vast  majority  of  the  men  who  consider 
themselves  “  practical.”  The  author  of  the  Castle  of 
Otranto  was  quite  capable  of  filling  any  demand  for 
literary  frauds  himself. 

Twentieth-century  Americans  will  be  grateful  for 
the  following  explanation  of  their  hereditary  limita¬ 
tions  : 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Aug.  the  10  th. 

You  will  think  me  perhaps  a  little  severe  in  what  I  have 
said  of  the  Americans,  I  speak  of  them  in  general  ;  there  are 
some  individuals  in  all  Countries  as  excellent  as  the  weakness 
of  human  nature  will  allow  :  But  where  there  has  not  subsisted 
a  good  form  of  government  and  a  regular  system  of  Laws  and 
mode  of  manners  the  people  in  general  never  are  of  a  good 
character.  Many  of  the  Americans  are  descended  from 
Ancestors  who  fled  from  settled  government  and  establishd 
religion  to  follow  their  wayward  fancies  ;  to  these  have  been 
added  a  motley  crew  of  Bankrupts,  of  offenders  of  all  kinds, 
of  schemers  and  visionary  adventurers,  or  desultery  wanderers. 
No  general  resemblance  of  character,  no  general  object  of 
pursuit,  no  traditional  opinions  or  habits,  if  I  may  be  allowd 
the  expression,  establishd  any  uniformity  of  conduct.  Many 
causes  of  adhesion  and  cohesion  were  wanting  in  the  Com¬ 
munity.  Considered  therefore  in  a  Social  view  they  were  not 
in  good  training.  That  some  virtues  will  thrive  in  such 
circumstances  I  will  allow,  but  not  the  best.  There  is  hardly 
any  vegetable  substance  that  has  not  enough  of  an  acid  quality 
and  fermenting  principle  to  make  Vinegar,  but  generous  Wine 
cannot  be  made  but  of  what  has  been  planted  with  judgment, 
nursed  with  care,  and  matured  by  a  succession  of  Seasons 
favourable  to  its  nature. 

Lord  Erskine’s  eldest  son,  afterwards  the  second 
Baron  Erskine,  was  born  this  summer,  and  Lord 
Erskine  wrote  asking  Mrs.  Montagu  to  be  his  god¬ 
mother.  He  was  christened  David  Montagu. 


1777 


SMUGGLED  TEA 


3i 


From  Lord  Erskine 

September  21. 

You  have  with  great  ingenuity  &  politeness  conferred  on 
me  a  very  particular  Honour  &  obligation,  under  the  modest 
form  of  a  request ;  which  I  was  too  much  flattered  by  to  trust 
the  fulfillment  of  to  the  future ;  when  the  present  offered  an 
opportunity.  Besides  I  have  too  much  Spirit  to  defraud  a 
Gentleman  of  an  Honour,  when  he  is  too  young,  and  too 
weak  to  resent  the  injury.  Lord  Buchan  is  (by  desire)  to  be 
his  God  Father,  His  Name  is  David,  &  I  beg  you  will  permitt 
me  to  join  with  it  the  Name  of  Montagu,  as  a  mark  of  the 
Honor  you  do  both  him,  &  his  Father.  As  I  have  already 
a  Daughter  named  Elizabeth,  I  do  not  regret  his  Sex  on  this 
occasion;  more  especially  as  you  possess  the  accomplishments 
of  both,  &  can  afford  equal  Instruction,  &  Example  to  either. 

The  Baptism  shall  be  tomorrow,  or  when  you  please,  by 
presence,  or  by  proxy,  as  shall  be  most  convenient  and  agreeable. 

The  ethics  of  contraband  are  difficult,  but  one  is 
wickedly  pleased  to  find  so  good  a  citizen  as  Mrs. 
Montagu  succumbing  to  its  temptation  ;  this  is  to 
her  sister  ; 

You  may  get  me  a  couple  of  pounds  of  good  smuggled  tea 
at  Margate  and  send  to  London  ;  when  I  have  paid  you  for 
it  I  shall  drink  it  with  a  safe  conscience.  I  dare  say  you  will 
be  delighted  with  walking  on  the  Sea  shore.  I  began  Mr. 
Cook’s  Voyage  the  other  day,  but  I  was  soon  surfeited  with 
his  sea  fowl ;  I  am  glad  to  find  they  disgusted  you.  I  hope 
the  2d  vol  is  more  entertaining. 

Captain  James  Cook’s  Second  Voyage  towards  the 
South  Pole  and  round  the  World ,  with  Furneaux’s  narra¬ 
tive  of  the  Adventure  after  she  had  separated  from  the 
Resolution ,  was  published  in  two  volumes  quarto  this 
year. 

It  will  be  noticed  that,  though  her  friend  Mrs. 
Carter  was  living  at  Deal  in  the  very  midst  of  a  lively 
contraband  trade  with  which  she  was  in  constant 
contact,  it  is  to  her  sister  at  Margate  that  she  writes 


32 


WINCHESTER  SCHOOL 


1777 


for  smuggled  tea.  No  doubt  our  naughty  little  lady 
knew  well  that  the  friendship  of  her  good  virgin  of 
Deal  would  have  been  strained  almost  to  breaking- 
point  by  such  a  request,  for  her  nephew  proudly 
records  :  “  She  never  smuggled  the  minutest  article 
either  directly  or  indirectly,  nor  would  ever  purchase 
anything  even  from  a  public  shop  which  she  had 
reason  to  believe  had  been  so  obtained.” 

I  went  to  Winchester  yesterday,  on  purpose  to  take  a 
survey  of  the  school ;  I  could  judge  only  how  it  was  calculated 
for  health  and  sobriety  and  I  am  much  pleased  with  it.  The 
school  room,  the  room  they  eat  in,  the  place  in  which  they 
play,  are  all  excellent  for  the  purpose,  but  what  pleases  me  most 
is,  that  Dr.  Warton  having  them  in  the  House  they  cannot 
go  to  the  Tavern  at  night  like  the  Etoners,  indeed  the  Winchester 
boys  look  as  Children  ought  to  do,  modest  bashfull  and  humbly 
apparelled.  Dr.  Warton  that  he  might  attend  on  me  gave 
the  boys  a  play,  which  is  an  extraordinary  compliment.  The 
great  Boys  are  all  readers  of  my  essay,  so  were  very  curious 
to  see  me,  and  I  dare  say,  now  I  have  got  them  a  play,  they 
will  like  the  book  much  better  than  before. 

.  .  .  When  you  write  to  Mrs.  Bowdler,  say  I  saw  a  copy 
of  Verses  at  Winchester  of  her  sons  which  wd  have  done  honour 
to  the  famous  Mr.  Gray.  Indeed  they  are  in  the  highest 
spirit  of  Poetry.  Dr.  Warton  is  to  send  me  a  copy  of 
them.  They  are  in  praise  of  Spenser,  Shakespear,  and 
Milton.  If  I  had  not  been  ill,  I  shd  have  desired  to  see 
the  Poet. 

Dr.  Warton  was  a  great  critic  but  a  very  bad  head¬ 
master,  and  Winchester  under  his  rule  has  been 
described  as  “  Slackness  tempered  by  rebellion.”  If 
this  letter  is  correctly  dated,  the  young  poet  who 
receives  such  extravagant  praise  cannot  have  been 
the  future  Bowdleriser  of  Shakespeare,  who  was 
then  beyond  school  days  ;  nor  can  Mr.  Hardy,  who 
kindly  searched  the  School  records  for  me,  identify 
the  boy. 

Later  on  the  headmaster  and  his  wife  paid  a  visit 
to  Sandleford. 


1777 


AT  NUNEHAM 


33 


From  Joseph  Warton 

I  beg  the  favour  of  you  to  do  me  the  Honour  of  accepting 
my  Essay  on  Pope;  a  new  Edition  of  which  is  just  now 
printed,  with  some  Corrections  and  some  Additions.  I  have 
also  taken  the  liberty  of  inclosing  two  Copies  of  my  Son’s 
Compositions,  one  in  Latin  the  other  in  English.  He  will 
I  am  sure  look  on  your  Approbation,  as  a  higher  Honour 
than  the  Prize  which  he  was  so  fortunate  as  lately  to  obtain. 
I  sincerely  hope  you  did  not  suffer  from  your  journey  to 
Winchester,  nor  from  the  long  and  too  fatiguing  a  Walk  which 
We  took  in  the  middle  of  the  day. 

My  Wife  begs  leave  to  join  with  me,  as  well  as  my  Brother, 
in  our  best  Compliments  to  yourself,  to  Mr.  Montagu  and  to 
Miss  Gregory. 

Mrs.  Montagu  adds,  in  recording  this  visit : 

I  believe  I  could  have  prevaild  with  them  to  have  staid 
longer  with  us  if  the  school  holydays  had  not  expired  yesterday. 
As  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,  it  should  be  more 
pleasant  to  teach  than  to  learn,  yet  I  could  not  help  pitying 
a  Man  of  the  Doctors  age  returning  to  his  laborious  task  as 
[much  as]  the  boys  who  are  returning  to  grammar  and  birch.  .  .  . 

The  first  half  of  September  was  spent  in  a  visit 
to  Lord  Harcourt  and  Lord  and  Lady  Nuneham  at 
Nuneham,  whose  generous  benevolence  and  tender 
attentions  to  their  tenantry  are  greatly  eulogised  : 

I  believe  I  wrote  you  word  that  my  visit  to  Nuneham 
commenced  a  few  weeks  sooner  than  it  would  otherwise  have 
done  on  account  of  the  Lords  and  Lady  of  the  Mansion  having 
been  so  good  as  to  ask  me  to  meet  the  french  Ambassador  and 
his  Lady  here.  They  were  engaged  to  come  on  Saturday 
but  the  Spanish  Ambassador  having  received  leave  from  his 
Court  to  go  to  Valencia,  to  try  the  effect  of  his  native  air, 
Mr.  de  Noailles  stays  in  Town  to  give  the  family  whatever 
assistance  friendship  can  supply  in  the  embaras  of  an  approach¬ 
ing  journey.  I  am  much  afraid  Monsr  de  Masseran  is  too 
far  gone  to  receive  benefit  from  change  of  air  and  climate. 


VOL.  II 


D 


34  DEPARTED  MADAM  BOUNTIFUL  1777 


Nuneham,  Sept,  the  13 th. 

I  have  enclosed  a  copy  of  verses  of  Lady  Nunehams  which 
she  hung  on  the  bust  of  Apollo  in  Lord  Nunehams  flower 
garden  on  my  arrival  at  Nuneham.  I  think  they  are  very 
pretty,  and  I  may  shew  them  without  vanity,  for  it  is  being 
able  to  make  such  verses,  not  being  the  subject  of  them,  which 
proves  a  Relation  to  Apollo.  Pray  shew  them  to  Montagu, 
but  I  dare  not  trust  his  discretion  with  a  copy,  as  he  might 
drop  them  out  of  his  pocket  ;  and  Lady  Nuneham  hides  her 
talents  for  poetry,  tho  she  has  written  many  things  which  wd 
do  her  great  honour  if  they  were  publishd. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  restful  summer  at  Sandleford  had 
evidently  done  much  to  recuperate  her  after  the 
exhausting  activities  of  the  previous  year,  and  the 
following  shows  her  in  such  excellent  fettle  as  even 
to  indulge  a  little  gentle  chaff  with  her  devoted  but 
sometimes  lugubrious  friend  at  Deal  : 

Monsr  and  Madme  de  Noailles  are  expected  here  on 
Saturday  ;  I  suppose  they  will  depart  on  monday.  I  propose 
to  call  at  our  amiable  Burkes  that  night  in  my  way  to  London 
where  I  shall  pass  a  few  days,  and  then  return  again  to  Sandle¬ 
ford,  and  there  I  shall  remain  till  the  frowns  of  rugged  November 
drive  me  to  take  refuge  in  the  deceitful  smiles  of  Society. 
Thus  do  we  divide  life  between  avoiding  real  evil  and  pursuing 
fallacious  good,  but  the  one  keeps  one  employd,  and  the  other 
amused,  and  there  is  not  a  happier  fool  in  this  foolish  World 
than  your  humble  Servant ;  yet  I  am  not  such  an  admirer 
of  our  mental  state,  as  to  grieve,  that  an  old  Woman  did  not 
through  eternity  make  ptisans  and  plaisters ;  as  yr  Ladyship 
seems  to  have  done,  when  you  wept  for  the  departed  Madam 
Bountiful.  I  trust  there  is  a  World  where  virtue  will  be 
more  bless’d,  and  benevolence  more  gratified,  than  it  is  in  this. 
As  Angels  never  break  their  shins,  I  suppose  you  thought  the 
good  Lady  wd  be  at  a  loss  how  to  employ  herself  in  Heaven. 
As  I  did  not  ever  enjoy  her  society,  and  so  cannot  miss  her 
here  below,  give  me  leave  to  rejoyce  she  is  now  better  and 
safer  than  even  if  she  was  laid  up  in  lavender. 

The  following  extracts  must  serve  to  complete 
the  record  of  the  Nuneham  visit : 


1777 


“  ADMIRAL  VESEY  ” 


35 


I  saunterd  all  the  morning  in  the  Garden  or  Park,  and  in 
the  evening  I  sat  down  to  Commerce,  merely,  as  you  may 
guess,  from  a  spirit  of  conformity,  for  I  think  the  game  has 
neither  the  dexterity  of  push  pin,  nor  the  vivacity  of  tossing 
up.  Sometimes  weary  of  a  tedious  life  in  a  long  pool,  I  was 
felo  de  se. 

On  Monday  we  went  with  Mr.  and  Madme  de  Noailles 
to  Oxford,  where  we  saw  the  Primates  new  Building,  which 
is  perfectly  noble,  elegant,  and  simple,  and  deserves  to  have 
his  name  inscribed  on  it.  On  Tuesday  afternoon,  according 
to  a  long  engagement  I  went  to  Mr.  Burkes,  lay  there,  and 
arrived  in  Town  on  Wednesday  afternoon.  I  dined  yesterday 
at  Mr.  de  Noailles,  and  did  not  return  home  till  late. 

Madame  de  Noailles  is  a  very  sensible  amiable  woman,  has 
the  finest  eyes  I  ever  saw,  and  the  most  agreeable  physionomy. 

The  Oxford  building  was  the  Canterbury  Quad¬ 
rangle,  which  Mrs.  Montagu’s  cousin  had  rebuilt  at 
a  cost  of  ^4000. 

Mrs.  Vesey  thank  God  got  well  to  Lucan,  and  with  the 
glory  of  having  saved  the  lives  of  Ld  Inchiquen  Mr.  Vesey 
Mrs.  Hancock  as  well  as  her  own  life  by  her  undaunted  courage 
and  presence  of  mind.  In  short,  impatient  to  land  they  got 
into  a  boat  at  low  water,  it  struck  on  an  Anchor,  Admiral 
Vesey  hoisted  the  White  flag  of  her  pocket  handkerchief, 
and  scream’d  drowning,  drowning  ;  these  signals  brought  a 
boat  to  their  assistance,  which  they  had  no  sooner  enterd  than 
their  own  sunk.  One  cannot  think  of  their  situation  without 
horror.  The  first  news  of  the  disaster  arrived  to  me  by  Mrs. 
Veseys  hand,  so  I  had  only  a  frightful  retrospect.  If  I  had 
known  of  their  danger  I  shd  not  have  thought  the  resource 
of  Mrs.  Veseys  courage  at  all  adequate  to  the  occasion. 

Nuneham  Courtney  was  evidently  an  early  example 
of  the  model  village  : 

Lord  Harcourt  built  a  very  pretty  Village  ;  the  Cottages 
are  comfortable  and  convenient  and  there  is  a  pretty  garden 
allotted  to  every  House.  Lord  and  Lady  Nuneham  are  the 
Tutelar  Angels  of  the  place.  I  think  I  never  saw  so  many 
happy  people  as  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Village  ;  there  is  neither 
poverty  nor  vice  there.  Ten  sheets  of  paper  wd  not  contain 
all  the  regulations  they  have  made  ;  amongst  others,  for  your 


LORD  HARCOURT’S  DEATH 


1777 


36 

hint,  every  Villager  puts  in  a  penny  pr  week  as  a  fund  for  time 
of  distress,  Lord  Nuneham  doubles  it,  and  there  is  now  a  large 
fund.  They  make  a  feast  every  summer,  and  bestow  prizes 
on  the  Persons  distinguishd  for  spinning  or  rural  labours. 
There  is  a  school  under  excellent  regulations.  The  Cottages 
are  so  neat,  have  such  store  of  excellent  bacon,  and  garden 
stuff  to  eat  with  it,  I  think  I  could  lodge  and  board  there  very 
comfortably. 

On  her  return  to  Hill  Street  Mrs.  Montagu  called 
on  her  vivacious  old  father,  whom  she  found  very 
well  and  very  good-humoured,  though  “  He  said  he 
was  afraid  he  had  the  Hyp  sometimes.  I  advised 
him  to  seek  out  amusements  and  to  get  some  company 
about  him.  I  shall  get  him  to  go  with  me  to  see 
Mr.  Lever’s  birds  one  day.”  Sir  Ashton  Lever’s 
great  museum  of  birds,  shells,  fossils,  savage  costumes, 
weapons,  etc.,  had  been  removed  to  London  three 
years  previously,  but  from  contemporary  descriptions 
it  seems  doubtful  whether  its  dubious  treasures  would 
have  done  much  to  cure  Mr.  Robinson’s  Hyp. 

On  September  18,  only  a  few  days  after  her  return 
from  Nuneham,  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  to  tell  Mrs. 
Carter  of  the  catastrophe  which  had  just  occurred 
there  : 

I  was  going  to  the  French  Ambassador  this  evening,  but 
the  ill  news  of  Ld  Harcourts  sad  disaster  prevented  me,  for 
I  had  not  spirits  to  stir.  His  Lordships  favorite  Dog  fell 
into  a  Well  in  the  yard  of  a  Brickmaker,  and  Lord  Harcourt 
endeavouring  to  save  the  Dog  fell  in  and  was  drowned.  It 
is  but  a  few,  very  few  days  since  I  thought  him  the  happiest 
Man  of  his  age  of  any  I  knew.  He  did  the  honours  of  his 
magnificent  and  beautiful  place  with  the  greatest  chearfulness 
and  politeness.  On  monday  Lady  Nuneham  wrote  to  me 
in  great  spirits  ;  on  tuesday  afternoon  all  was  dismay  and 
sadness.  I  sent  this  moment  to  Harcourt  House  ;  the  Servants 
were  in  such  grief  they  cd  hardly  speak.  Ld  and  Lady 
Nuneham  are  in  the  deepest  affliction.  I  never  saw  any 
Person  so  careful  not  to  give  any  trouble  or  embaras  ;  he  was 
a  most  kind  Master  and  I  believe  never  said  an  illnatured 
or  even  unpolite  thing  to  the  very  Grooms  in  his  Stable  ;  his 


1777 


MORRIS  ROBINSON 


37 


good  nature  extended  in  too  great  a  degree  to  the  brute  creation, 
he  had  a  most  prodigious  love  for  dogs,  and  especially  for  the 
little  favorite  for  whom  he  lost  his  life.  The  Well  was  made 
for  the  use  of  the  Brick  makers  when  he  built  his  House  ; 
it  was  almost  coverd  with  grass  and  weeds  and  it  is  supposed 
the  little  dog  had  got  into  one  supposing  he  cd  walk  over, 
and  that  his  Lordship  stooping  to  take  him  out  fell  head  long, 
for  he  had  pulld  off  his  right  glove  and  laid  down  his  hat  ; 
had  the  Well  been  full  of  water  only  he  had  probably  got  out, 
but  his  head  stuck  in  the  mud  at  bottom,  upon  which  there 
was  about  8  foot  of  water. 

Walpole  speaks  sneeringly  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
“  high  flown  panegyric  on  Lord  Harcourt,  who  had 
not  an  idea”  ;  but  there  is  nothing  of  the  sort  here. 

Mrs.  Montagu  lost  this  autumn  her  brother  Morris, 
who  died  whilst  on  a  visit  to  their  cousin  the  Arch¬ 
bishop,  and  was  buried  in  Armagh  Cathedral.  Morris 
had  managed  the  Duke  of  Montagu’s  estates,  and  his 
sister  applied  to  the  Duke  that  the  office  might  devolve 
on  her  brother  Charles,  the  Recorder  of  Canterbury. 
The  Duke’s  reply,  however,  explained  that  Morris 
had  left  a  letter  to  him  recommending  his  assistant 
agent  for  the  post,  which  he  proposed  to  confer  on 
him.  In  this  letter  the  Duke  speaks  very  warmly  of 
good  Mr.  Montagu,  whom  he  loved  and  honoured, 
and  through  whom  he  had  first  become  intimately 
acquainted  with  Morris. 


From  La  Marquise  du  Tdejjand 

Paris,  le  16  9 bre  1777. 

Pourrez  vous  croire,  madame,  que  la  charmante  lettre  que 
vous  avez  pris  la  peine  de  m’ecrire  dattee  du  10  de  may,  ne 
m’a  ete  rendue  qu’hier  15  9bre,  elle  m’a  ete  apporte  par 
Mr.  Boutin  qui  s’excusa  de  ce  long  retardement  par  des  Voyages 
continuels  qu’il  a  fait  depuis  son  retour  d’angleterre. 

Je  lus  votre  lettre  en  sa  presence,  il  fut  temoins  de  mon 
plaisir  et  de  ma  reconnoissance.  rien  ne  m’a  plus  surpris  que 
l’annonce  d’un  present.  Vous  en  voulez  faire  Un  langage, 


38 


MADAME  DU  DEFFAND 


1777 


mais  quelque  charmant  qu’il  puisse  etre,  on  preferera  toujours 
de  vous  entendre  et  de  vous  lire  a  tous  les  hyeroglifes  les  plus 
ingenieux  et  les  plus  admirables.  ce  n’est  pas  Seulement  par 
oui  dire,  Madame,  que  je  vous  parle  de  Votre  Eloquence, 
Votre  lettre  suffiroit  pour  me  la  faire  connoitre  ;  independament 
de  tout  ce  que  J’en  avois  oui  dire,  Je  viens  de  lire  Vos  trois 
dialogues  que  Mad.  de  Meyniere  a  traduit  et  qu’elle  m’a 
envoyee.  J’ay  lu  aussi  Votre  appologie  de  Shakespear, — Je 
ne  doute  pas  que  Voltaire  ne  reste  sans  replique  ;  Je  vous 
dirois  tout  ce  que  j’en  pense  si  mon  approbation  et  mes  louanges 
etoient  digne  de  Vous.  mais  Madame,  Vous  avez  dut  demeler 
bien  promptement  que  je  n’ay  ni  talent  ni  scavoir,  mais  Je  ne 
renonqe  pas  a  pretendre  k  avoir  quelque  gout,  Je  suis  trop 
touchee  de  Votre  merite  pour  avoir  cette  fausse  modestie. 

Ouand  j’auray  recu  ces  cassolettes  qui  seront  pour  moi  U11 
monument  tres  glorieux,  Vous  voudrez  bien  que  J’aye  l’honneur 
de  Vous  renouveller  mes  remerciemens  ;  elles  courent  le 
monde,  elles  sont  a  present  a  Ostende,  il  faut  qu’elles  arrivent 
a  Roiien,  et  que  de  la  elles  remontent  la  rivierre  jusqu’a  Paris, 
il  se  passera  peutetre  plus  d’un  mois  avant  qu’elles  y  arrivent, 
Je  les  attend  avec  l’impatience  qu’on  doit  necessairement  avoir 
pour  jouir  des  marques  de  bonte  d’une  personne  aussi  illustre 
que  vous. 

Daignez  recevoir  madame  les  assurances  de  tous  les 
Sentimens  avec  lesquels  Je  vous  suis  tres  respectueusement 
attache  et  avec  lesquels  J’ay  l’honneur  d’etre  Votre  tres  humble 
et  tres  obbeyssante  Servante 

La  M.  du  Deffand. 

This  letter  is  presumably  dictated  to  the  faithful 
Wiart,  who  must  be  held  responsible  for  its  paucity  of 
accentuation. 

The  allusion  to  the  Shakespeare  Essay  and  Voltaire 
is  deliciously  non-committal. 

Mr.,  afterwards  Sir  Nathaniel,  Wraxall  now  joined 
the  ranks  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  correspondents  with  a 
lengthy  journal  of  foreign  travel  sent  from  Vienna, 
from  which  a  few  extracts  follow.  His  Historical 
Memoirs  of  this  period  evoked  a  storm  of  criticism, 
but  are  full  of  interest.  He  devotes  several  pages  to 
an  account  of  Mrs.  Montagu, — whom  he  dubs  “  the 
Madame  du  Deffand  of  the  English  capital,” — Mrs. 


1777 


NATHANIEL  WRAXALL 


39 


Vesey,  Mrs.  Chapone,  Mrs.  Boscawen  and  others  of 
the  Blue  Stockings,  whose  coteries  he  thinks  lost  their 
mainstay  with  Johnson’s  death.  The  Doctor,  despite 
his  brutalities,  enjoyed  the  cult  of  the  ladies,  and  he 
recalls  the  lovely  Duchess  of  Devonshire  “  hanging  on 
the  sentences  that  fell  from  his  lips.” 


From  N.  Wraxall 

Vienna,  Wednesday,  the  io th  December. 

.  .  .  To  render  Description  interesting,  it  must  be  minute  ; 
and  I  have  seen  too  many  Objects  in  Flanders,  Holland,  the 
Empire,  Russia,  Saxony  and  Bohemia,  to  comprise  even  a 
faint  Outline  of  them  within  the  Bounds  my  Paper  prescribes 
to  me.  If  I  knew  where  to  fix,  or  what  particular  subject 
to  select  from  the  rest,  I  might  hope  to  fix  your  attention. 
Mine  has  been  chiefly  directed  towards  His  Prussian  Majesty, 
whom  I  had  some  little  Opportunity  of  seeing  and  studying 
during  about  Seven  Weeks  which  I  passed  in  Berlin  or  Potzdam. 
Tho’  declined  in  his  bodily  Powers,  his  unconquerable  Mind, 
and  astonishing  assemblage  of  Talents  render  him  the  first 
Object  of  political  Survey,  Admiration,  and  Terror  in  the 
European  World.  I  could  never  look  upon  him,  but  his 
whole  wonderful  Reign  rose  before  my  Imagination.  His 
amazing  Achievements,  and  unwearied  Policy  —  the  Battles 
he  has  fought — the  Enemies  against  whom  he  has  sustained 
Himself — the  Pitch  of  Glory  and  Aggrandizement  to  which 
He  has  raised  the  House  of  Brandenbourg — the  gloomy  Retire¬ 
ment  in  which  He  passes  his  Time  at  Potzdam  or  Sans  Souci 
and  from  which  He  awes  the  whole  North  of  Europe — All 
this  Combination  of  Circumstances  cannot  fail  to  impress  the 
Mind,  and  make  one  interest  oneself  in  his  minutest  actions. 
Some  Remarks  on  Dantzic  and  the  Polish  Partition  prevented 
me  from  having  the  Honour  of  being  presented  to  him — 
a  Circumstance  however  which  gave  me  little  Subject  of 
Regret,  as  the  Protection  and  Friendship  of  Prince  Frederic 
of  Brunswic  his  Nephew,  afforded  me  several  Opportunities 
of  seeing  him  still  more  minutely  than  I  should  have  done 
in  the  Drawing  Room. — 

When  I  mention  Brunswic,  Gratitude  does  not  permit  me 
to  omit  some  mention  of  the  Reigning  Duchess,  to  whose 
Graciousness  and  Politeness  I  shall  ever  be  under  the  deepest 


4o  THE  DUCHESS  OF  BRUNSWICK  1777 

Obligations.  I  think  you  would  have  admired  and  liked  her. 
I  passed  a  few  days  most  agreably  in  her  Court.  She  is  a 
Sister  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  and  inherits  all  the  Fire  and 
Spirit  which  so  eminently  distinguishes  the  Brandenbourg 
Family.  Her  Person  is  little,  her  Face  pale  and  meagre, 
without  the  least  remain  of  Beauty — yet  thro’  these  Dis¬ 
advantages  there  is  an  Air  of  Distinction,  which  appeared 
to  be  the  Result  I  thought,  rather  of  Dignity  of  Mind,  than 
Elevation  of  Station.  Her  Conversation  was  animated, 
spirituelle  and  interesting.  She  betrayed,  without  intending 
to  display,  an  Extent  and  Universality  of  Knowledge  which 
astonished  me.  She  did  me  the  honour  to  inform  me  of  several 
curious  and  concealed  Anecdotes  respecting  her  Ancestors, 
peculiarly  of  the  late  Queen  of  Russia  her  Mother  Daughter 
to  George  the  First,  and  of  Sophie  Charlotte  Wife  to  Frederic 
the  First  King  of  Prussia,  her  Grandmother,  who  was  likewise 
of  the  same  Family.  The  Duchess  piqued  Herself  on  being 
descended  from  the  English  Kings.  She  shewed  me  an 
invaluable  Miniature  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  which  had 
been  handed  down  from  the  Electress  Palatine,  Queen  of 
Bohemia,  and  had  been  presented  to  Her  by  her  Mother. 
It  was  done  in  France  when  She  was  the  Wife  of  Francis  the 
Second.  I  never  saw  so  beautiful  a  Head,  nor  any  which 
gave  me  so  high  an  Idea  of  Mary’s  charms.  .  .  . 

...  I  left  Dresden  the  24th  of  November,  and  crossed 
the  Mountains  which  divide  Saxony  from  Bohemia,  with  the 
greatest  Difficulty,  among  Precipices  which  overhang  the  Elbe, 
and  thro’  continual  Snows.  I  found  Lady  Wortley  Montagu’s 
Description,  tho’  written  60  Years  ago,  literally  verified. 
You  may  perhaps  recollect  her  Account  of  the  Rocks  along 
which  She  passed,  and  the  Danger  She  escaped.  We  arrived 
at  Prague  in  two  Days  from  Dresden,  but  on  account  of  the 
advanced  Season,  and  as  We  shall  visit  it  again  next  May,  We 
only  stayed  one  Day  in  that  City.  .  .  .  We  continued  our 
Route  thro’  Bohemia  over  Fields  of  Battle,  ’till  we  arrived 
at  Iglau  in  Moravia,  a  considerable  Town.  We  passed  thro’ 
all  Moravia  and  Lower  Austria  to  this  City,  at  the  Gates  of 
which  I  arrived  last  Sunday  Sennight,  not  a  little  fatigued 
with  fifty  eight  Hours  Travel,  thro’  very  bad  Roads,  and 
almost  continual  Snow. — I  have  been  here  too  short  a  Time 
to  give  you  any  Idea  of  Vienna.  I  presented  the  Letter  You 
was  so  obliging  as  to  honour  me  with  to  Sir  Robert  Keith, 
immediately  on  my  Arrival.  He  presented  me  last  Sunday 


1777  BURKE  THE  JOLLY  FARMER  41 

to  the  Emperor,  and  afterwards  to  the  Empress.  They  have 
distinct  and  separate  Courts.  The  Arch-Duke  and  Arch- 
Duchess  of  Milan  are  here  at  this  time  likewise,  and  We  expect 
a  gay  Carnival.  The  Winter  is  setting  in  very  severely,  and 
they  say  that  in  a  few  Days  the  Danube  will  be  froze  over  ; 
I  mean  the  Branches — for  the  Main  Stream  is  too  large  and 
rapid  to  yield  so  soon  to  the  Frost.  .  .  . 

The  year  may  be  closed  with  a  political  summary, 
dated  December  14,  to  Mrs.  Carter  : 

Mrs.  Howe  bears  about  her  all  the  solicitudes  and  anxieties 
a  great  mind  is  capable  of  ;  some  alarms  for  her  Brothers 
safety,  more  for  his  glory.  I  pittied  her,  but  threw  a  great 
deal  of  admiration  and  respect  into  my  pity,  else  it  wd  not  have 
been  worthy  of  her  acceptance.  She  is  impatient  to  hear  he 
has  taken  some  forts  and  an  Island,  and  wishes  an  opportunity 
wd  offer  that  he  might  be  at  Washington.  The  opposition 
is  desirous  one  should  believe  that  Ld  North  and  the  rest  of 
the  Ministers  will  resign.  I  am  strangely  perverse,  and  from 
their  intimations  that  they  will  do  so  am  rather  convinced 
they  will  not.  The  moment  the  Court  treats  with  them  they 
will  be  concealing  their  negotiations  there.  Politicians  declara¬ 
tions,  like  witches  prayers,  must  be  read  backwards,  That  is 
the  truth  which  they  do  not  tell.  Ld  Chathams  scalping 
knives  were  two  edged  weapons,  and  cut  deep  the  Orator 
who  flourishd  them.  His  account  of  the  Navy  was  refuted. 
He  is  gone  I  believe  to  Hayes  again  where  he  will  have  the 
gout  and  no  more  assist  his  Party,  if  Ld  Shelburne  and  Ld 
Camden  can  be  calld  a  party  ;  and  they  may  be  calld  so,  if 
weight  can  be  reckond  as  tale  in  these  matters.  My  Friend 
Burke,  who  lookd  like  a  jolly  Farmer  at  Beconsfield  in  harvest 
time  is  now  as  meager  as  possible. 

Burke’s  purchase  of  Gregories,  the  estate  near 
Beaconsfield,  has  furnished  his  detractors  with  a  handle 
for  much  suspicious  innuendo  as  to  how  he  obtained 
the  .£23,000  which  it  cost  him.  Part  came,  doubtless, 
from  William  and  Richard  Burke,  more  from  his 
patron  Lord  Rockingham,  and  the  remainder  from 
the  ultimate  sale  of  his  Irish  estate.  But  a  statesman 
of  such  passionate  convictions  as  Burke  could  not 
expect  to  preserve  an  unslandered  reputation. 


i778 


BERENGER,  VOLTAIRE,  GLORIANA,  MRS.  VESEY - 

THE  DEATH  OF  CHATHAM 


American  affairs.  Lord  Shelburne’s  engagement.  David  Garrick  acts 
at  Hill  Street.  Hannah  More’s  Percy.  Overtures  for  peace.  Richard 
Berenger’s  debts.  American  Commissioners.  Lord  Chatham’s  last 
speech.  State  Papers.  Mr.  Le  Texier.  A  performance  at  Newbury. 
Death  of  Lord  Chatham.  His  estate  and  creditors.  Death  of  Voltaire. 
Journey  to  Denton.  Leonard  Smelt  and  the  King.  Lord  Karnes 
at  Denton.  Mr.  Robinson’s  death.  James  Woodhouse.  Beauties  at 
Tunbridge.  Duchess  of  Devonshire.  Return  to  town.  Mrs. 
Vesey’s  assemblies.  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Thrale.  The  Crofts. 
The  new  house.  The  Court.  Keppel  and  Palliser.  Mrs.  Macaulay. 
Lady  Carmarthen. 

Some  extracts  from  Mrs.  Montagu’s  February  budgets 
to  Mrs.  Vesey  in  Ireland  will  best  record  her  early 
doings  and  hearings  of  this  year  : 

The  rumours  of  War  grow  more  faint  every  day.  It  is 
said  Genl  Howe  has  orders  to  offer  condition  of  reconciliation 
to  Washington,  and  that  our  Troops  are  orderd  to  return 
from  America.  It  is  now  supposed  that  neither  Lord  C: 
nor  Mr.  Edens  little  Son  will  go  to  the  Congress,  nor  yet 
Mrs.  Eden,  tho  she  had  orderd  many  fine  Sacks  and  high 
plumed  caps  for  the  occasion.  There  is  not  at  present  any 
talk  of  Ld  Chathams  Ld  Shelburnes  and  Ld  Camdens  coming 
into  power.  Our  present  Ministers  think  I  believe,  that  if 
we  make  Peace  with  the  Americans,  and  do  not  make  War 
with  the  French,  they  can  keep  their  places.  .  .  . 

Lord  and  Lady  Mahone,  Lady  Hester  Pitt,  Dr.  Robertson 
the  Garricks  and  Burkes  are  to  dine  with  me  on  thursday. 
Mr.  Garrick  is  in  great  health  this  winter.  You  will  be 
glad  our  friend  Mr.  Erskine  is  made  a  Commissioner  of 
Bankrupts. 


42 


1778  GARRICK  PLAYS  DAGGER  SCENE  43 

I  am  very  sorry  I  must  change  my  tone  since  my  last 
letter  ;  it  was  full  of  joy  and  congratulations  on  Ld  Shelburnes 
intended  nuptials,  the  silly  girl  after  having  seemd  much  pleased 
with  the  offer  of  his  heart  and  a  great  joynture  and  pin  money 
and  a  coronet  (for  the  Hymen  of  now  a  days  lights  his  torch 
at  various  fires)  all  of  a  sudden  wept  and  pouted,  and  desired 
to  be  excused.  The  levity  of  her  conduct  on  this  occasion 
is  surprising  to  every  one,  and  no  doubt  but  it  was  vexatious 
to  Lord  Shelburne,  however  there  are  ladies  as  young  and  as 
fair  who  will  readily  repair  the  loss.  I  wish  he  had  no  worse 
affliction,  but  his  youngest  son,  alas  !  was  very  suddenly 
attacked  by  a  disorder  in  his  bowels  which  ended  fatally. 

I  know  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  my  health  has  stood  firm 
in  all  changes  of  weather  ;  on  Saturday  last  the  French 
Ambassador  and  Ambassadress,  Ld  and  Lady  Spencer  and  the 
Garricks  dined  with  me,  and  Mr.  Garrick  was  so  good  as  to 
act  the  Dagger  scene  in  Macbeth,  and  King  Lear  on  his  knees 
uttering  maledictions  on  his  ungratefull  daughters.  I  need 
not  tell  you  how  much  he  surprized  and  delighted  their 
Excellencies  and  three  other  of  their  countrymen. 

Mrs.  Hannah  Mores  Tragedy  of  Percy  has  run  fifteen 
nights  and  is  still  going  on.  Mr.  Cumberlands  Battle  of 
Hastings  is  acted  with  great  applause.  Our  friend  Mrs. 
Carter  is  very  well.  The  town  was  very  empty  till  the 
birthday.  I  have  not  seen  the  Lucan  family  since  Miss 
Molesworths  change  of  sentiment.  No  one  pretends  to  guess 
the  reason  of  her  behaviour,  she  appeard  much  pleased  with 
the  offer.  My  little  man  is  at  Harrow  persuing  the  Muses. 
There  is  a  Translation  of  Aeschylus  by  Mr.  Potter  which 
the  learned  commend  very  much  as  a  just  translation,  I  think 
it  is  a  valuable  addition  to  english  litterature.  If  you  read  it 
you  will  see  how  much  Milton  owes  to  Aeschylus,  and  you 
will  find  a  great  resemblance  between  the  Prometheus  and 
Satan.  Mr.  Potter  in  his  preface  has  done  great  honour  to 
my  essay  on  Shakespear.  The  apprehensions  of  a  war  with 
France  seem  over,  and  there  is  hope  the  Americans  and  we 

may  be  reconciled.  I  am  to  dine  to-day  at  Mr.  Pepys  ; 

his  bride  and  he  seem  very  happy.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale 

and  Dr.  Johnson  dined  with  me  on  Thursday,  but  I  do  not 

relish  my  dinners  now  my  Vesey  is  not  a  guest. 

I  could  tell  you  a  story  of  imaginary  daggers,  but  tho  the 
daggers  were  sharp  my  style  will  be  blunt.  I  never  could 


44 


A  PRETTY  INSIPID  MISS 


1778 


be  poetical  in  this  Town,  if  my  imagination  was  preparing 
to  rise  on  the  wings  of  the  Eagle  in  that  moment  perhaps  a 
wretch  under  the  window  cryd  oysters,  and  I  have  been 
immediately  awakend  from  the  vision.  This  is  the  very  hour 
of  night  in  which  they  cry  bolognia  Sausages  about  the  streets  ; 
my  letter  shall  suit  the  times,  and  it  shall  be  stuffed  with  diverse 
common  vulgar  things  not  delicate,  nor  yet  unsavoured,  in 
short  such  as  shall  please  any  palate  not  too  nice  for  the  sauce- 
age  ;  Politicks  shall  season  the  one  as  allspice  the  other. 

Strange  things  have  happend  this  week,  The  Ministers 
are  gone  over  to  the  American  side  ;  oft  have  I  known  the 
Opposition  go  over  to  the  Ministry,  never  before  did  I  know 
the  Ministers  go  over  to  the  opposition.  ...  It  is  said  the 
Bedford  House  party  do  not  like  the  making  overtures  of  peace. 
The  Chancellor,  it  is  said  is  angry  that  he  was  not  let  into  the 
secret  of  this  peace  making  ;  it  is  thought  he  will  resign. 

Miss  M:  has  acted  very  strangely  in  regard  to  our  Friend  ; 
I  see  you  think  my  Lord  North  might  make  that  up  too, 
but  tho  I  suppose  his  Lordship  has  great  talents  for  conciliation, 
yet  I  think  it  wd  even  be  too  much  for  him,  so  we  must  consign 
the  Miss  to  some  newer  lover.  She  is  a  pretty  insipid  Miss, 
and  I  trust  our  Friend  will  not  break  his  heart,  as  there  are 
many  such  Misses  who  will  be  ready  to  repair  his  loss.  .  .  . 
Tomorrow  all  the  representatives  of  all  Kings  and  States 
are  to  dine  wth  me,  and  also  a  Count  Shullenberg  and  his 
Lady  ;  he  is  nephew  to  Lady  Chesterfield  ;  Ld  and  Lady 
Mahon,  Lord  Pitt,  Lady  Mary  Cooke  are  all  the  English 
that  I  have  askd. 

The  Duchess  of  Beaufort  calld  this  morn  :  Lady  Granby 
has  brought  a  fine  boy  ;  she  is  very  well.  Sr  W.  Howe  is 
coming  home.  I  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  the  amiable 
Lady  Louisa  Conolly  at  Mr.  de  Noailles  on  Wednesday,  we 
talkd  much  of  you  ;  yr  cheek  wd  burn,  and  you  wd  blame 
the  fire  and  call  for  a  screen.  Mr.  Burke  made  a  speech  the 
other  day  in  the  House  which  was  a  chef  d’ oeuvre.  I  hear 
it  will  be  printed.  He  was  to  have  dined  with  me  on  Saturday 
but  had  business  which  calld  him  to  Beconsfield.  Ld  Chatham 
has  the  gout  ;  whether  he  will  come  to  assist  the  Ministry 
in  making  a  peace  is  more  than  I  can  tell  you.  Mr.  Pulteney 
has  written  an  excellent  pamphlet  on  these  American  contests. 

Lord  Shelburne  consoled  himself,  as  anticipated, 
for  Miss  Molesworth’s  defection  by  marrying,  in  the 


1778 


RICHARD  BERENGER 


45 


following  summer,  Lady  Louisa  Fitzpatrick,  sister-in- 
law  of  Horace  Walpole’s  correspondent,  the  Countess 
of  Upper  Ossory. 

Richard  Berenger,  the  subject  of  the  next  letter,  and 
the  author  of  a  fine  book  on  Horsemanship,  and  of 
a  much-quoted  poem  on  Shakespeare’s  birthday,  was 
one  of  the  most  charming  and  popular  figures  in  the 
society  of  his  time.  Hannah  More  described  him  as 
“  everybody’s  favourite,  all  chivalry  and  blank  verse 
and  anecdote,”  and  Johnson  spoke  of  him  as  the 
“  standard  of  true  eloquence.”  But  Berenger  had 
latterly  fallen  upon  evil  days  and  straitened  circum¬ 
stances,  and  had  for  some  time  been  obliged  to  confine 
himself  to  his  official  residence  in  the  King’s  Mews  (he 
was  Gentleman  of  the  Horse  to  His  Majesty),  an 
abode  happily  privileged  against  bailiffs.  His  friends, 
who  were  many,  determined  to  make  an  effort  to 
release  him  from  his  obligations.  David  Garrick — 
whom  Johnson  and  others  stigmatised  with  the  brand 
of  meanness, — returned  securities  of  ,£500,  and  added 
his  own  donation  of  ^300.  Thomas  Pitt,  Lord 
Chatham’s  nephew,  came  forward  generously,  as  the 
following  letter  shows,  and  a  composition  with 
Berenger ’s  creditors  was  effected. 


From  Thos.  Pin 

Oxford  Street,  March  yth. 

I  dare  say  you  are  no  Stranger  to  the  Malady  which  has  so 
long  confined  our  poor  friend  Berenger  to  his  House  ;  and 
your  known  feeling  for  your  friends  will  not  suffer  me  to  let 
you  be  ignorant  that  an  effort  is  now  making  for  his  recovery. 
If  it  succeeds  he  may  yet  enjoy  the  remainder  of  his  Life  with 
some  degree  of  comfort  ;  if  not,  he  must  resign  himself  to 
his  Fate,  and  trust  to  be  released  in  a  short  time  by  the  best 
friend  to  the  afflicted.  I  have  reason  to  hope  that  his  nearest 
relations  will  not  fail  to  contribute  largely,  but  as  the  amount 
of  his  Debts  is  considerable,  not  less  than  £2600  (a  Sum  as 
much  beyond  his  abilities  as  the  Debt  of  the  Nation)  it  will 


46 


THE  THREAT  OF  INVASION  1778 


require  the  joint  assistance  of  all  who  wish  him  well  to  extricate 
him  from  his  Distress.  I  have  myself  subscribed  ^500  and 
have  the  satisfaction  to  find  several  persons  who  have  offer’d 
upon  this  occasion  their  £50  and  £100 — so  that  I  do  not 
despair  of  being  able  to  complete  the  Sum  with  the  aid  of  his 
Friends  and  Relations.  The  particulars  of  all  the  demands 
upon  him  have  been  deliver’d  in  to  Col  Cowper  who  has 
generously  undertaken  the  trouble  of  settling  his  affairs  with 
his  Creditors,  if  the  whole  of  the  money  can  be  raised  to  set 
him  free,  otherwise  he  will  return  the  several  Sums  to  the 
Subscribers,  as  it  would  answer  no  purpose  unless  the  business 
can  be  done  effectualy.  He  could  not  take  the  Liberty  of 
waiting  upon  you  without  your  permission,  but  if  you  will 
give  him  leave  he  will  explain  to  you  the  plan  we  have  adopted, 
and  the  prospect  we  have  of  Success  in  it. 

From  her  Sister 

Fitzpatrick  reports  that  when  the  notification  of  Com¬ 
missioners  being  intended,  to  set  out  for  America  with  con¬ 
ciliatory  proposals,  our  officers  there  were  exceedingly  enraged, 
tore  the  Cockades  out  of  their  hats,  etc.,  at  receiving  only 
paper  when  they  expected  Soldiers  to  arrive  to  reinforce  their 
diminished  Army.  I  have  no  faith  in  the  threatened  Invasions, 
an  attempt  woud  be  extreamly  dangerous  to  those  that  shoud 
undertake  it  ;  our  expectation  of  it  will  give  the  french  every 
advantage  they  can  wish.  Our  fleet  is  all  turnd  into  Guarda 
Costas.  Should  the  french  land,  the  K.  ...  is  to  put  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  troops,  it  would  indeed  be  strange  were  he 
not  to  do  it,  but  if  he  never  gets  on  horseback  till  then  I  fancy 
he  may  be  a  pedestrian  all  his  life.  It  is  lucky  this  is  not  the 
season  for  great  consumption  of  coals,  otherwise  the  embargo 
on  all  the  shipping,  and  the  prohibition  of  clearing  out  any 
coal  vessels  for  six  weeks  to  come  woud  have  a  chilly  sound. 

Very  practical  politics  for  a  coalowner  ! 

What  wd  have  been  said  by  the  said  farthing  post  to  Ld 
C  .  .  .  l’s  being  appointed  a  commissioner  to  treat  with  the 
Americans  I  do  not  know,  and  I  confess  it  is  a  measure  which 
strikes  me  dumb,  so  I  can  not  say  anything  upon  it.  His 
Lordship  finding  no  doubt  in  himself  those  qualities  which 
render  a  man  fit  to  strike  awe  into  stern  Republicans  went 


i7?8  COMMISSIONERS  FOR  AMERICA  47 

to  the  -  and  offerd  his  services,  which  were  accepted, 

a  Mr.  Storer  commonly  called  Bonton  Storer  was  appointed 
secretary.  However  it  is  said  that  the  Peer  finding  the 
publick  differing  so  widely  in  opinion  of  the  fitness  of  his 
Lordship  for  this  business  begins  to  shrink  from  it.  I  suspect 
he  was  accepted  only  to  keep  off  the  importunity  of  more 
stern  Candidates,  and  give  time  for  a  proper  nomination.  It 
is  thought  that  the  Bedfordians  are  ill  pleased  with  the  Ministers 
conciliatory  plan  but  most  aggrieved  are  the  gentlemen  in 
opposition,  and  indeed  I  do  think  it  is  very  hard  that  they 
should  get  the  measures,  which  they  cared  little  for,  and  lose 
the  dear  object,  the  places.  I  never  knew  such  a  trick  play’d 
before,  and  if  it  did  not  make  our  enemies  laugh  and  our 
friends  blush  one  could  be  diverted  at  this  legere  de  main,  but 
indeed  the  matter  is  too  important  for  a  jest.  There  are 
rumours  of  a  French  War  but  I  believe  it  will  not  be  declared 
before  next  Wednesday  as  I  am  that  day  to  dine  at  Mr.  de 
Noailles. 

Those  who  recall  certain  of  our  published  London 
Diaries  and  doings  during  critical  periods  of  1914-18 
will  not  be  surprised  at  the  levity  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
reference  to  her  dinner  with  the  French  Ambassador 
at  this  most  anxious  moment  of  Britain’s  danger  and 
isolation.  The  American  Commissioners  appointed 
were  Lord  Carlisle,  William  Eden,  and  George 
Johnstone,  formerly  Governor  of  Florida. 

Anthony  Morris  Storer,  collector  and  social  celeb¬ 
rity,  was  an  Eton  and  Cambridge  friend  of  Lord 
Carlisle’s  and  accompanied  him  to  America  as  Secretary 
on  this  fruitless  Commission. 

The  following  is  Mrs.  Montagu’s  report  to  Mrs. 
Vesey  of  Chatham’s  last  speech  : 

[. April  10th  ?]. 

I  must  give  you  an  account  of  Lord  Chathams  appearance 
at  the  House  of  Lords  on  tuesday,  and  his  indisposition.  His 
Lordship  was  recovering  from  a  fit  of  the  gout,  but  tho  the 
distemper  was  retiring,  strength  was  not  return’d  ;  however 
the  present  critical  state  of  things  would  not  allow  a  Statesman 
and  a  Patriot  to  slumber  on  his  Pillow.  It  was  declared  he 
wd  come  to  the  House  of  Lords.  He  appear’d  there.  The 


48  LORD  CHATHAM’S  LAST  SPEECH  1778 


Thunder  of  his  eloquence  was  abated,  the  lightening  of  his 
eye  was  dimmed,  but  experience  gave  weight  to  all  he  said, 
and  the  glory  of  his  days  of  administration  threw  a  lustre  around 
him.  Every  eye  was  fixd  on  him,  every  ear  attentive  to  him. 
The  D:  of  Richmond  had  made  a  motion,  that  the  Com¬ 
missioners  should  have  power  to  declare  America  independent, 
and  gave  for  reason,  the  sad  condition  of  this  Country.  Sub¬ 
mission  and  dejection  never  fashioned  the  counsels  of  the 
Great  Man.  The  energy  of  his  mind  imparted  force  enough 
to  his  body  to  enable  him  to  rise.  He  said,  he  rejoyced  that 
the  Grave  had  spared  him  to  this  time,  that  he  might  declare 
himself  against  the  granting  independence  to  America,  and  then 
he  went  on  reprobating  what  had  been  said  of  the  weakness 
and  inability  of  this  Country.  In  all  the  pomp  of  Oratory, 
with  all  the  lustre  of  eloquence  he  set  forth  the  former  triumphs 
of  our  arms,  and  the  past  glories  of  the  Brunswic  line  ;  the 
news  papers  will  give  you  the  speech  more  at  large.  The 
D:  of  Richmond  answerd  his  Lordship,  Lord  Chatham  rose 
to  reply,  the  Genius  of  Brittain  seemd  to  heave  in  his  bosom 
the  Senate  was  attentive  to  catch  its  Oracle  ;  but  the  senti¬ 
ments  were  too  great  for  utterance,  the  subject  too  important, 
too  august  for  words  ;  he  fell  into  a  convulsion  fit  ;  he  con¬ 
tinued  in  the  fit,  and  the  House  in  consternation,  for  half  an 
hour  ;  His  eldest  and  second  Son  and  Lord  Mahone  in  speech¬ 
less  agony  stood  by  him.  Ld  Lyttelton  with  great  presence 
of  mind  went  to  Dr.  Addington  immediately  on  the  accident ; 
he  used  every  means  to  recover  the  Patient,  and  he  brought 
him  back  from  the  immeasurable  distance  of  the  inanimate 
being  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham,  he  was  very  sick  at  the 
stomach  for  about  two  hours,  and  the  Doctor  did  not  think 
it  safe  to  carry  him  to  Lord  Mahones,  where  he  had  taken  up 
his  abode,  as  the  situation  was  remote,  but  removed  him  to 
Mr.  Strutts  house  adjacent.  This  morning  being  still  better 
he  is  gone  to  Downing  Street.  Humanly  speaking  (as  the 
phrase  is)  I  wish  and  hope  his  recovery,  but  how  great  !  how 
glorious  !  how  marvellous  !  or,  to  say  all  in  one,  how  Chatham 
wd  be  his  Exit  !  Then  might  be  applied  the  words  of  Pope 

Such  in  those  moments,  as  in  all  the  past, 

Oh  save  my  Country  Heav’n  wd  be  his  last. 

I  have  always  admired  the  close  of  this  great  Orators  Periods, 
but  surely  death  wd  be  the  most  emphatick  !  and  of  all  figures 
in  rhetorick  a  convulsion  at  such  a  time  seems  the  finest.  For 


1778 


THE  SYLPH’S  RHAPSODY 


49 


the  sake  of  the  publick  at  this  juncture  I  wish  him  to  recover, 
as  in  dire  necessities  I  wd  turn  the  Victors  wreath,  the  Con¬ 
querors  lawrel,  into  a  broom,  but  by  my  troth  tis  pity  :  If 
he  lives  he  may  sweep  away  some  of  our  dirt  and  disgrace, 
but  no  addition  will  be  made  to  his  glory,  for  we  are  become 
a  scoundrel  Nation,  worthy  to  be  scorned,  and  fit  to  be  cudgell’d. 

.  .  .  The  account  of  Ld  Chatham  I  had  from  his  family, 
so  you  may  depend  on  the  truth  of  it. 

Mrs.  Vesey,  who  had  been  hearing  Chatham’s  last 
speech  read  aloud  by  Colonel  Burton  just  before  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  letter  arrived,  burst  into  a  rhapsody  of 
eulogy  : 

I  believe  in  my  conscience  Ariel  slipt  the  pencil  of  Raphael 
into  your  hand  and  placed  your  feather  in  his  own  cap.  I  see 
the  expiring  Patriot  surrounded  by  speechless  children,  drooping 
friends,  the  consternation  of  an  assembly  once  the  most  august 
the  world  ever  saw.  Heaven  restore  it  to  its  former  lustre 
.  .  .  had  it  not  been  that  he  was  your  friend,  and  that  I  had 
been  in  love  with  him  myself  at  fifteen,  I  should  have  wishd 
the  Curtain  shoud  then  have  dropt  and  the  great  mind  rushd 
out  of  the  body  in  its  exertion  for  national  honour.  .  .  .  Shall 
we  see  the  resurrection  of  a  Chatham  again  ?  England  once 
rose  to  a  pitch  of  glory  when  all  the  world  desponded.  I  am 
afraid  the  pis  aller,  which  is  a  part  nobody  woud  take  if  they 
coud  help  it,  will  be  our  fate,  and  that  bright  Chatham  blaze 
was  only  a  meteor  from  an  imagination  of  fire.  I  have  adored 
England  with  such  an  enthusiasm  I  can  think  of  nothing  else, 
so  don’t  charge  me  with  romance  or  if  you  do  forgive  it. 

If  Mr.  Vesey  had  not  been  waiting  to  take  her  note 
to  post  on  his  way  to  a  Turk’s  Head  Society  dinner 
there  would  have  been  much  more  to  be  said.  Men 
are  so  impatient  of  enthusiasms  at  dinner-time. 

Part  of  a  letter  written  to  Mrs.  Vesey  on  April  29 
contains  references  to  some  minor  current  events. 

I  supposed  you  and  Mr.  Vesey  would  like  to  have  the 
State  papers  lately  publishd  by  Ld  Hardwicke,  so  I  orderd 
Mrs.  Denoyer  to  send  them  to  Mr.  Perry,  who  promised  to 
convey  them  to  you.  When  the  present  state  of  things  is 
unpleasing  it  is  desirable  to  avert  the  mind  from  it  to  the  tale 

VOL.  II  E 


50 


LE  TEXIER 


1778 


of  other  times.  There  is  a  very  fine  translation  of  the  Tragedies 
of  Eschylus  just  publishd,  but  I  did  not  know  whether  your 
delicacy  wd  not  be  hurt  with  the  snoring  of  the  Furies,  and 
the  very  antique  cast  of  the  Dramas.  Mr.  Warton  has  given 
a  second  Vol  of  the  Ancient  Poetry,  but  not  knowing  whether 
you  loved  the  old  Poets  and  old  language  I  did  not  order  it 
to  be  sent  ;  to  me,  it  is  very  entertaining.  .  .  .  Lady  Craven 
Lady  Granard  and  Mr.  le  Texier  calld  on  me  the  day  before 
yesterday  ;  they  talk  of  acting  a  translation  of  le  Sonambule 
at  the  Mansion  House  at  Newbury.  Le  Texier  is  to  be  the 
Dutch  Gardiner,  he  will  naturally  speak  broken  English. 
Lady  Craven  who  is  Poetical  is  to  write  a  prologue  and  epilogue. 
Lady  Corke  and  the  oriental  Mr.  Jones,  who  are  both  at 
Mr.  Poyntz’s  in  this  neighbourhood  made  me  a  visit  yesterday, 
they  were  just  come  from  London,  but  brought  no  news. 

Of  Mons,  Le  Texier,  who  is  mentioned  in  several 
letters  of  this  period,  information  seems  scanty.  He 
is  not  mentioned  in  Larousse  or  La  Grande  Encyclo¬ 
pedic  or  half-a-dozen  other  French  books  of  bio¬ 
graphical  reference,  but  from  some  notes  in  a  thin 
volume  of  French  plays  which  I  found  in  the  British 
Museum  I  gather  that,  after  immense  success  in  Paris 
as  a  dramatic  reader  and  reciter,  he  got  into  trouble 
from  various  imprudence,  and  was  expelled  from 
France.  Madame  du  Deffand  had  written  more  than 
one  enthusiastic  letter  to  Horace  Walpole  about  his 
recitals,  and  protested :  “  Soyez  sur  que  lui  tout  seul 
est  la  meilleure  troupe  que  nous  avons.”  Voltaire 
avowed  that  “  ses  petites  comedies  m’auraient  fait 
mourir  de  rire — -si  je  ne  mourais  pas  de  colique.” 
On  his  expulsion  he  came  to  London,  and  he  appears 
to  have  remained  in  England  till  about  1805,  when, 
after  a  tour  in  Germany  and  other  countries,  he  was 
finally  at  liberty  to  return  to  Paris  in  1814,  where  he 
died  at  an  advanced  age. 

During  his  stay  in  London,  Hookham  published 
for  him  eight  volumes  of  the  Pieces  de  Theatre  which 
were  his  favourite  recitals,  including  Rousseau’s 
“  Pygmalion,”  Mercier’s  “  L’Indigent,”  and  “  Le  Ton 


1778 


LORD  CHATHAM’S  DEATH 


51 

de  Paris  ”  which  the  Due  de  Biron  (Lauzun)  had 
written  and  presented  to  him,  and  which  met  with 
astonishing  success. 


To  her  Sister 

Sandleford,  May  17 th. 

We  went  to  the  play  on  monday  night.  Lady  Craven 
acted  very  well  and  we  had  a  prologue  and  epilogue  of  her 
writing  ;  they  were  lively  and  pretty,  but  the  best  of  our 
Entertainmt  was  an  Opera  Comique  acted  and  sung  by  her 
Ladyship,  Mr.  le  Texier,  and  a  french  man  he  brought  for 
the  purpose.  Lady  Craven  sings  and  acts  admirably,  and 
looks  so  pretty  and  has  so  much  french  vivacity  I  am  sure  all 
Paris  wd  be  mad  after  her,  if  instead  of  an  English  Peeress 
she  was  turnd  into  a  french  Opera  Girl.  I  was  so  disorderd 
by  the  heat  of  the  play  House  on  monday  night,  that  I  was 
obliged  to  stay  at  home  and  take  saline  draughts  on  tuesday. 
A  great  fat  Parson  who  sat  on  the  bench  behind  me  added 
to  the  heat  I  sufferd  ;  he  had  an  oaken  stick  in  his  hand  with 
which  he  now  and  then  gave  me  a  punch  on  the  shoulder, 
without  any  malice  ;  but  I  am  not  very  fond  of  these  mixd 
crouds  where  want  of  better  knowledge  makes  people  more 
troublesome  than  the  most  illnatured  well  bred  persons  are. 
On  Monday  night  all  the  Neighbouring  Ladies  were  at  the 
Play,  on  Tuesday  few  but  the  Newbury  people. 

The  illness  and  death  of  Lord  Chatham  naturally 
occupy  chief  space  in  the  letters  of  May  : 

His  death  at  this  time  is  a  misfortune  to  the  publick,  as  he 
was  feard  by  our  Enemies  who  seem  now  to  have  no  grounds 
of  fear,  if  our  fleet  is  to  continue  at  Portsmouth.  Some  say 
there  is  a  want  of  Beer.  Indeed  it  ill  becomes  the  first  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty  to  throw  cold  water  on  our  Naval  expeditions. 
As  to  our  ships  they  are  many,  and  never  Fleet  I  am  told  by 
some  of  the  opposition,  made  so  noble  an  appearance,  but  if 
they  are  not  perfectly  equipped  for  Service  that  will  avail  little. 
I  have  a  great  opinion  of  Lord  Sandwiches  abilities,  and  of 
his  alertness,  which  enclines  me  to  doubt  whether  the  fault  is 
in  him.  I  wish  our  young  Captains  may  resemble  Hawke, 
Brett  and  Saunders  and  Boscawen,  and  then  we  may  defy  the 
House  of  Bourbon. 


52 


WAR  DECLARED 


1778 


And  again  : 

I  am  glad  there  seems  a  disposition  in  the  Publick  to  shew 
respect  to  his  memory  and  family  but  when  I  read  in  the 
news  papers,  that  Mr.  Rigby  had  moved  for  erecting  a  monu¬ 
ment  to  him,  I  could  not  help  repeating  to  myself,  the  lines 
Corneille  makes  Cornelia  speak,  when  she  is  told  Caesar  wept 
at  the  news  of  Pompeys  death. 

Ah  qu’il  est  doux  de  plaindre 
un  illustre  enemie  quand  il  n’est  plus  a  craindre. 

Plutarch  says  all  the  acts  of  Timoleon  were  set  off  by  the 
Graces.  Those  Graces  which  captivate  opinion,  and  shed  a 
certain  dazzling  lustre,  certainly  attended  Ld  Chatham  to  the 
last.  The  acceptance  of  a  Pension  had  a  little  impaird  the 
gloss  of  his  popular  character  but  the  close  of  his  life,  dying 
thus  as  it  were  in  a  Patriot  act,  has  revived  all  the  colours  of 
popularity,  and  given  them  a  new  lustre. 

Within  a  few  days  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  dinner  at 
the  Noailles’,  the  ambassadors  were  recalled  from  Paris 
and  London  ;  England  and  France  were  at  war,  and 
the  whole  aspect  of  affairs  was  changed  fundamentally. 
Our  troops  were  locked  up  in  Philadelphia  and  New 
York,  or  imprisoned  at  Saratoga.  Our  navy  was  by 
no  means  prepared  for  immediate  action.  The  likeli¬ 
hood  of  Spain  joining  France  against  us  amounted 
almost  to  a  certainty.  We  had  not  an  ally  in  the 
world.  The  conciliation  proposals  of  our  Commis¬ 
sioners  were  flouted  by  the  Americans,  whom  nothing 
short  of  independence  would  now  satisfy,  whilst  the 
feeling  at  home  was  strong  that  the  severance  of  the 
colonies  meant  the  downfall  of  England.  In  this 
crisis  of  her  fate  the  country  had  turned  instinctively 
to  her  one  great  leader  for  guidance  and  a  trumpet 
call.  And  Chatham  had  spoken,  had  admitted  that 
America  could  never  be  overcome  by  force,  had 
repeated  with  passion  his  defiant  protest  against  the 
dismemberment  of  our  ancient  and  most  noble 
monarchy — and  then  had  been  carried  home  to  die. 


PASCAL  PAOLI 
After  Duelling 


1778 


LORD  CHATHAM’S  DEBTS 


53 


Without  a  glorious  War  is  succeeded  by  a  frugal  administra¬ 
tion  in  time  of  Peace,  no  lasting  benefit  will  accrue  from  it. 
By  taking  Canada  we  have  lost  America,  and  our  sad  situation 
with  the  Americans  and  our  vast  debt  make  the  French  insult 
us.  It  will  be  said  if  Ld  Chatham  had  been  Minister  they 
would  not  have  done  so,  and  I  heartily  wish  he  had  been 
Minister,  but  alas  !  is  a  Country  a  gainer  by  an  expensive 
War  which  has  done  no  service  but  that  of  establishing  the 
reputation  of  one  of  its  Citizens  ?  .  .  .  We  want  to  keep 
the  Americans  a  dependant  State.  Is  that  to  be  done  by  the 
eloquence  of  our  Commissioners  ?  or  by  our  Fleet  which  is 
to  watch  the  motions  of  the  French  ?  I  do  not  see  that  the 
means  we  take  ever  tend  to  the  end  we  desire.  .  .  . 

As  to  Lord  Chathams  spending  the  Pynsent  Estate  it  is 
more  excusable,  it  was  given  him  merely  out  of  regard  to  his 
personal  merit.  The  30000L  he  got  by  renewing  the  Com¬ 
missions  at  the  death  of  the  late  King  would  certainly  have  been 
better  saved  for  his  family,  but  it  was  his  own  acquiring,  not 
an  inheritance.  His  selling  the  annuity  settled  on  his  Wife 
and  Son  by  the  publick  I  cannot  defend.  However  when 
other  Men  who  aimed  at  Popularity  spent  great  sums,  the 
Roman  history  tells  us  they  did  it  to  debauch  the  people  ; 
of  this  Ld  Chatham  is  perfectly  free,  every  shilling  was  spent 
in  domestick  expence  and  personal  indulgence,  nothing  in 
publick  munificence,  nothing  to  private  followers  and  Creatures  ; 
it  was  in  Coaches  and  Servants,  a  splendid  train  and  a  great 
Household.  The  Publick  must  pay  the  first  grant  of  3000L 
a  year  and  now  a  second  of  4000,  for  his  creditors  will  receive 
the  first  during  Lady  Chathams  life,  so  in  the  whole  he  gets 
2000L  a  year  more  than  the  Duke  of  Marlbro’  had  for  his 
Victories,  and  indeed  the  Publick  has  given  his  son  more  than 
it  gave  to  him.  ...  I  never  cd  understand  why  Ld  Chathams 
Creditors  were  more  the  publick  concern  than  the  creditors 
of  other  Insolvent  debtors.  Ld  Chathams  Children  have  indeed 
a  claim  on  the  gratitude  of  the  publick.  It  seems  to  me  the 
World  is  run  mad.  I  am  quite  of  your  opinion  as  to  the 
danger  of  an  Invasion.  I  had  a  letter  from  Ed  Brown  last 
night,  in  which  he  tells  me,  we  make  a  most  martial  appearance 
in  the  North,  and  so  well  backd  by  jolly  Keelmen  and  Pittmen, 
he  seems  to  wish  to  have  a  brush  with  the  Mounseers.  He 
says  Labourers  are  scarce,  and  their  wages  rise  ;  at  the  last 
article  I  rejoyce  tho  I  am  so  great  a  Farmer,  meat  is  4^d 
at  Newcastle  but  he  has  killd  meat  for  my  Workmen  and 


54 


DEATH  OF  VOLTAIRE 


1778 


sold  at  4d  without  losing  by  it,  and  that  puts  my  poor  men  in 
good  humour.  I  am  in  hopes  there  will  be  one  good  con¬ 
sequence  in  so  many  fellows  being  taken  from  the  plough, 
that  those  who  remain  will  get  better  wages  ;  but  this  has 
not  yet  appeard  in  this  Country. 

Of  Voltaire’s  death,  which  occurred  on  May  30, 
Mrs.  Montagu  says  :  “  It  was  hard  to  die  an  un¬ 
timely  death  after  the  labour  of  living  to  85.  The 
Poets  and  diseurs  de  bons  mots  will  rejoice,  and  their 
tiny  wits  may  make  a  new  point  to  an  epigram.” 
Voltaire  had  been  bundled  up  to  Paris  by  his  exacting 
niece  Madame  Denis,  and  had  been  shaken  by  the 
death  of  Le  Kain  and  the  meeting  with  Suzanne  de 
Livry,  his  love  of  sixty  years  ago.  He  had  been 
present  at  the  performance  of  Irene ,  in  a  large  Louis 
XIV.  peruque,  black  and  unpowdered,  in  which  his 
emaciated  face  was  so  buried  that  only  his  eyes  could 
be  seen,  and  seemed  to  emit  sparks  of  fire.  His 
reception  was  an  extraordinary  popular  triumph,  but 
it  was  the  death  of  him.  Determined  to  summon 
strength  enough  to  carry  the  Academy  to  engage  in 
the  Great  Dictionary,  he  had  recourse  to  opium  to 
obtain  rest,  but  the  doses  which  thirty  years  before 
had  so  rejuvenated  him  now  proved  fatal. 

In  July  Mrs.  Montagu  set  out  for  Denton,  breaking 
her  long  journey  at  Bugden,  Newark-on-Trent,  and 
Weatherby,  and  spending  the  fourth  night  at  Mr. 
Smelt’s  charming  cottage,  near  North  Allerton. 

Through  my  whole  journey  I  perceived  every  mark  of 
increased  prosperity  ;  cottages,  villages,  towns,  all  improved 
since  I  passed  this  road  three  years  ago.  The  bridges  are 
converted  from  wood  to  stone,  the  fields  better  cultivated. 
In  my  whole  journey  only  one  beggar  attended  my  carriage, 
except  at  North  Allerton. 

Mr.  Smelt  was  not  destined  to  occupy  the  new 
house  which  he  had  just  been  showing  to  Mrs. 
Montagu.  Though  he  had  resigned  the  tutorship  of 


1778  A  VISIT  FROM  LORD  KAMES  55 

the  young  princes  and  declined  a  pension,  the  King 
and  Queen  did  not  feel  inclined  to  part  with  him. 

On  Aug.  7,  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter,  is  this  : 

Their  Majesties  have  sent  for  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Smelt  and 
have  told  them  they  mean  never  to  part  with  them,  they  have 
contrived  an  appartment  for  them  at  Windsor,  and  wherever 
the  King  is  he  will  have  Mr.  Smelt  established  near  him  ; 
all  this  done  in  the  most  generous  kind  manner.  Mr.  Smelt 
is  the  first  man  who  ever  endeared  himself  to  a  King  by  his 
sincerity  and  disinterestedness  ;  surely  this  does  honour  to  the 
King  !  Mr.  Smelt  informed  me  of  this  by  letter  about  a 
week  after  I  saw  him  at  his  Cottage.  His  daughter  Mrs. 
Goulton  and  her  husband  will  reside  at  the  charming  house 
he  has  built. 

Amongst  her  August  visitors  at  Denton  were  Dr. 
Gregory  and  Lord  Karnes,  the  Scottish  justice  and 
author,  whose  Essay  on  the  Principles  of  Morality , 
written  against  Hume,  had  involved  him  in  a  charge 
of  heresy. 

The  four  days  Lord  Kaimes  stayed  with  me  I  did  not  feel 
a  moment’s  ennui.  His  lordship  is  fourscore  and  three 
years  of  life,  of  age  25.  His  memory  now  is  equal  to  any 
one  I  ever  knew,  and  his  vivacity  superior.  Having  a  large 
property  and  being  also  a  trustee  for  the  improvement  of  the 
forfeited  estates  in  Scotland  he  has  employed  much  time  and 
pains  on  agriculture  and  manufactures  and  all  the  useful  arts. 

To  Mrs.  Carter  she  concludes  a  letter  from  Denton 
on  September  1 1  : 

But  I  will  not  enlarge  on  my  former  pleasures,  or  present 
occupations,  as  I  am  uncertain  whether  you  are  at  Tunbridge 
or  not,  and  therefore  whether  this  letter  will  ever  get  to  your 
hand  ;  I  hope  it  will,  for  tho  I  know  everything  I  have  written, 
or  shall  write,  will  probably  be  delivered  over  to  the  pastry 
Cook  when  it  has  been  once  read,  to  have  it,  unread,  deliverd 
to  him,  to  put  at  the  bottom  of  a  pye,  wd  really  be  very  mortify¬ 
ing.  Mr.  Boswell  himself  who  drunk  or  sober  is  not  too 
partial  to  the  productions  of  my  pen,  wd  not  condemn  them 
to  so  hard  a  fate  till  they  had  been  almost  half  read. 


56 


DEATH  OF  MR.  ROBINSON 


1778 


This  is  an  allusion,  presumably,  to  Dr.  Johnson’s 
adverse  criticism  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Shakespeare 
Essay,  which,  according  to  Boswell,  he  had  not  read. 
“  Reynolds  is  fond  of  her  book,  and  I  wonder  at  it; 
for  neither  I,  nor  Beauclerk,  nor  Mrs.  Thrale  could 
get  through  it.”  Though  the  Tour  to  the  Hebrides  was 
not  published  till  1785,  Boswell  himself  says  that 
“  the  unfavourable  opinion  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  book 
which  Dr.  Johnson  is  here  reported  to  have  given,  is 
known  to  have  been  that  which  he  uniformly  expressed, 
as  many  of  his  friends  well  remember.”  The  Journal 
written  in  1773,  had  been,  or  a  considerable  part  of 
it,  in  Mrs.  Thrale’s  possession  several  years  before  its 
publication. 

Mrs.  Montagu  came  south  again  in  the  middle  of 
September,  and  went  to  Tunbridge  Wells,  as  she  had 
been  suffering  latterly  from  an  internal  disorder 
epidemic  in  the  North.  In  the  first  week  of  October 
her  father,  whose  health  had  been  failing  for  some 
time  past,  died.  Old  Mr.  Robinson  had  been  in  his 
day  a  very  lively  wit  and  one  of  the  most  popular 
figures  of  London  coffee-house  life.  The  Mount 
Morris  estate  at  Horton,  Kent,  of  which  his  wife  had 
had  a  life  interest,  had  passed  to  her  eldest  son,  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  brother  Matthew,  who  gave  the  name  of 
Horton  Park  to  the  old  Priory  previously  known  as 
Monks  Horton  ;  but  Mr.  Robinson  had  saved  some 
money,  “  which  is  happy,  as  the  rank  of  his  eldest 
grandson  is  one  day  to  be  raised.” 

There  is  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery  a  con¬ 
versation  piece  painted  by  Gawen  Hamilton  in  1735 
of  an  Artists’  Club,  of  which  Matthew  Robinson, 
pencil  in  hand  and  pointing  to  a  drawing  held  by 
Dahl,  is  the  central  and  most  distinguished  figure; 
and  it  is  of  interest  to  note,  as  Mr.  Paul  de  Castro 
pointed  out  to  me,  that  old  Mr.  Robinson’s  figure, 
pose,  and  gesture  in  this  painting  are  exactly  identical 
with  those  of  the  painting  of  him  and  his  wife  which 


1778  THE  POETICAL  SHOEMAKER 


57 


is  at  Farnham  Royal,  and  is  attributed  to  “  W. 
Hamilton,”  but  more  probably  by  the  same  artist  who 
did  the  group  at  the  Tiptop  St.  Luke’s  Club,  and  of 
whom  Mrs.  Finberg  has  written  an  interesting  little 
monograph. 

Brayley  says  of  Mr.  Robinson  : 

He  was  a  gentleman  of  a  most  independent  spirit  and  very 
lively  parts,  though  from  a  disinclination  to  business  he  never 
engaged  to  any  great  degree  in  the  active  affairs  of  the  world, 
but  was  extremely  well  received  in  society.  ...  Mr.  R.  was 
extremely  fond  of  company  which  induced  him  to  spend  the 
latter  part  of  his  life  in  London,  where  his  morning  drive  and 
his  evening  club,  conducted  his  days  serenely  to  the  age  of 
eighty-four,  at  which  point  he  died  in  1778. 

James  Woodhouse,  “the  poetical  shoemaker,”  who 
had  been  for  several  years  the  Montagus’  bailiff 
at  Sandleford,  was  now  relegated  to  an  annuity  and 
a  small  farm.  He  was  a  better  poet  than  a  bailiff 
evidently,  and  that  without  crowning  his  brows  with 
any  laurels.  Indeed  his  own  opinion  of  his  worth 
and  works  was  clearly  much  higher  than  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu’s,  and  the  parting  was  not  entirely  amicable, 
though  he  continued  to  act  as  a  steward  later  on.  He 
had  a  genuine  love  of  literature,  and  his  own  contribu¬ 
tions  were  at  least  prolific. 

The  beauties  were  evidently  in  force  at  the  Wells 
this  autumn.  “  I  supped  with  Mrs.  Crewe  [who  was 
a  cousin  of  Mr.  Montagu’s]  on  Tuesday  ;  the  Thrales 
dined  with  me  yesterday,  and  the  Duchess  of  Devon¬ 
shire  and  Lady  Clermont  did  me  the  honour  to  sup 
with  me  last  night.  .  .  .” 


To  Mrs .  Vesey 

Tunbridge  Wells,  Oct.  23. 

I  have  conversed  a  great  deal  with  Lady  Clermont  and 
am  charm’d  with  her.  She  unites  two  things  rarely  united, 
the  gentlest,  most  polite  and  flexible  manners,  with  most  firm 


58  THE  DUCHESS  OF  DEVONSHIRE  1778 

and  steady  principles.  She  has  very  clear  and  nice  discernment, 
and  most  excellent  judgment.  Her  cap  and  her  Gown  will 
always  he  cut  according  to  the  fashion,  her  conduct  will  be 
directed  by  virtue,  and  her  conversation  never  deviate  from 
sincerity  and  truth.  She  has  been  here  these  three  months 
with  the  Dss  of  Devonshire,  to  whom  she  is  an  invaluable 
friend,  as  she  can  strew  the  paths  of  virtue  with  flowers.  I 
believe  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  one  of  the  most  amiable 
beings  in  the  World.  She  has  a  form  and  face  extreamly 
angelick,  her  temper  is  perfectly  sweet,  she  has  fine  parts, 
the  greatest  purity  of  heart  and  innocence  of  mind  possible, 
but  as  goodness  thinks  no  ill  where  no  ill  seems,  she  does  not 
keep  so  far  aloof  from  the  giddy  and  imprudent  part  of  the 
World  as  one  could  wish,  and  that  has  made  her  the  object 
of  illgrounded  censure  ;  however  all  her  worst  enemies  have 
born  testimony  to  the  innocence  of  her  actions,  and  that  beauty, 
youth,  and  innocence,  should  not  be  security  against  satire 
is  the  reproach  of  this  age.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale  have  been 
with  us  at  Tunbridge  this  fortnight,  but  leave  us  tomorrow.  .  .  . 
A  friend  of  Miss  Gregory’s  who  is  near  the  Camp  has  invited 
her  to  her  house,  and  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  has  asked 
her  to  dine  in  her  tent  the  day  the  King  and  Queen  review,  so 
she  will  see  all  to  advantage. 

Mrs.  Montagu  returned  to  Hill  Street  in  November, 
and  settled  down  for  the  winter  in  town  ;  she  writes 
to  Mrs.  Vesey  on  the  13th  : 

Indeed  my  dear  Friend  it  is  not  possible  to  tell  you  how 
happy  I  am  in  the  hope  of  a  most  delightful  winter  in  your 
Society,  and  in  that  blue  room  where  all  people  are  enchanted, 
tho  the  magic  figure  of  the  circle  is  vanished,  thence  ;  a 
Philosopher,  a  fine  Lady,  and  a  Gallant  Officer  form  a  triangle 
in  one  corner  ;  a  Maccaroni,  a  Poet,  a  Divine,  a  Beauty, 
and  an  Ottaheite  Savage,  a  wondrous  Pentagon  in  another  ; 
then  the  Coalition  of  Parties,  professions,  and  characters  which 
compose  the  group  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room  ;  the 
flying  squadrons  of  casual  visitants  that  are  ever  coming  in 
and  going  out  !  Great  Orators  play  a  solo  of  declamation  ; 
Witts  lett  off  epigrams  like  minute  guns  ;  the  Sage  speaks 
sentences,  every  one  does  his  best  to  please  the  Lady  of  the 
enchanting  room, 

for  all  contend 

to  win  her  grace  whom  all  commend. 


1778 


MRS.  VESEY’S  BLUE  ROOM 


59 


Mrs.  Vesey’s  determined  efforts  to  prevent  the 
formation  of  a  “  circle  ”  in  her  assemblies  was  the 
subject  of  gentle  chaff  amongst  her  friends. 

The  enjoyment  of  Mrs.  Vesey’s  Blue  Room  even¬ 
ings  must  really  have  been — prodigious  ;  and  how 
she  contrived  to  accommodate  such  large  parties  in 
her  house  in  Bolton  Row  (which  is  now  part  of  Curzon 
Street  connecting  the  northern  ends  of  Clarges  and 
Bolton  Streets)  it  is  difficult  to  imagine.  Mrs.  Carter 
said  she  managed  to  preserve  the  motley  crowd  of  her 
heterogeneous  assemblies  from  quarrelling  with  each 
other  by  contriving  to  put  them  in  perfect  good 
humour  with  themselves.  Without  a  grain  of  vanity 
or  personal  feeling  she  gave  her  whole  attention  to 
adapting  herself  to  the  feelings  of  others.  Sofas  and 
chairs,  according  to  Fanny  Burney,  were  pushed  pell- 
mell  about  the  apartments,  leaving  no  zigzag  path¬ 
way  free  from  impediment  ;  seats  were  placed  back  to 
back,  all  circles  were  broken  up,  and  the  gentle  hostess 
darted  about,  two  or  three  ear  trumpets  slung  on  her 
wrists  or  about  her  neck,  carrying  her  stool  and 
cushion  from  one  end  of  the  room  to  the  other,  and 
always  just  missing  the  gay  talk  she  had  seen  in 
progress,  and  crying  out  in  despair  :  “  I  can’t  con¬ 
ceive  why  nobody  talks  to-night.  I  can’t  catch  a 
word.”  But  she  was  everybody’s  pet  Sylph,  and  even 
Walpole  was  led  to  exclaim,  “  What  English  heart 
ever  excelled  hers  ?  ”  Laurence  Sterne,  who  preferred 
his  coteries  a  deux,  had  been  exquisitely  flattered  to 
find  her  “  contented  to  saunter  lackadaisically  with  me 
round  an  exhausted  Ranelagh,  and  give  me  your 
gentle  amiable  elegant  sentiments  in  a  tone  of  voice 
that  was  originally  intended  for  a  cherub.”  Still  he 
too  must  needs  “  becassock  myself  in  my  cloak  and 
be  charmed  to  your  warm  cabinet  ”  where,  in  spite  of 
a  cold,  he  hoped  for  voice  enough  to  assure  her  of  his 
admiration. 

But  Mrs.  Vesey’s  letters  already  began  to  show 


6o 


THE  CROFTS 


1778 


signs  of  that  despondent  attitude  which  gradually 
took  possession  of  her,  and  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  was 
most  tenderly  attached  to  her  “  Sylph,”  said  what  she 
could  to  cheer  and  enliven  her  : 

The  present  state  of  things  is  certainly,  to  a  certain  degree, 
unprosperous.  We  are  at  great  expences  in  Naval  armaments, 
but  it  is  very  idle  to  be  in  despair  and  dejection  at  any  thing 
that  yet  appears.  A  friend  of  Mr.  Burkes  just  come  from 
France  calld  on  me  yesterday,  he  says  he  was  astonished  at  not 
finding  in  the  french  towns  which  the  newspapers  had  reported 
full  of  troops  with  any  more  than  their  usual  complement. 
They  have  a  great  many  ships,  but  supposed  to  be  ill  manned, 
and  far  from  being  in  a  good  condition  in  any  respect.  I  find 
the  apprehensions  of  a  F rench  war  seem  rather  to  subside.  .  .  . 

Mr.  Thomas  Pitt  is  going  abroad  for  two  years  for  the 
recovery  of  his  health.  The  town  is  quite  empty.  I  was 
to  visit  Mrs.  Thrale  at  Streatham  the  other  day  ;  she  inquired 
much  after  you,  as  did,  with  peculiar  tenderness,  Dr.  Johnson. 
Mrs.  Thrale  has  very  lately  brought  forth  a  daughter,  to  whom 
I  am  Godmother. 

Mrs.  Montagu  “  never  visited  the  West  Indians  in 
the  neighbourhood  because  they  would  teach  my 
servants  to  drink  rum;  nor  the  Nabobs,  lest  they 
should  teach  them  to  want  to  eat  turtle  ”  ;  but  she 
called  on  the  new  tenants  at  Dunstan  : 


To  her  Sister 

Sept,  the  25,  Sandleford. 

Sr  Archer  and  Lady  Crofts  came  this  year  to  settle  at 
Dunstan  which  had  been  some  time  lett  to  a  Nabob.  They 
sold  their  Deer  out  of  the  Park,  put  everything  into  order 
and  strict  economy,  and  intended  to  live  here  in  that  decent 
dignity  which  a  large  Seat  and  surrounding  manors  give.  But 
alas  !  the  other  evening  they  had  some  squabble,  and  my  Lady 
set  out  alone,  and  on  foot,  towards  Newbury.  The  Newbury 
Machine  overtook  her,  she  desired  the  Coachman  to  stop, 
and  let  her  get  in,  he  did  not  know  her,  and  told  her  the  Coach 
was  full,  then  she  said  she  wd  ride  on  the  box,  a  Civil  man  in 
the  Coach  said  that  by  her  dress  and  appearance  she  could  not 


1778  GARDEN  OF  MONTAGU  HOUSE  61 


have  been  used  to  that  mode  of  travelling,  and  he  wd  give  her 
his  place  and  go  himself  on  the  box,  thus  they  arrived  at  the 
Pelican,  where  unknown  she  slept  that  night,  and  next  day 
went  to  Reading,  where  she  now  is  negotiating  a  separation. 
Thus  do  this  unhappy  pair  give  a  Comedy  to  the  Neighbourhood. 
I  think  her  Ladyship  must  be  un  peu  brusque,  to  go  away  in 
this  manner.  I  am  sorry  for  her  Daughters,  they  wd  have 
appeard  in  a  very  different  light  to  the  World  as  coheiresses 
of  Dunstan  from  what  they  will  do  at  Boarding  House  and 
boarding  school.  The  youngest  is  now  with  Mrs.  Thompson, 
and  I  hear  is  to  go  to  a  boarding  school  at  Thatcham  ;  the 
eldest  has  been  all  the  summer  at  Bromley,  I  presume  Sr  Archer 
thought  she  had  better  learn  to  smirk  of  Mrs.  Hawkesworth 
than  to  frown  of  her  Mother.  I  am  sure,  by  a  scornful  glance 
Lady  Crofts  gave  me,  when  I  spoke  of  Mrs.  Hawkesworth 
with  praise,  the  Girl  was  not  there  with  her  approbation, 
indeed  not  knowing  how  ill  this  unhappy  pair  lived  together 
I  wonderd  that  she  was  not  under  the  care  of  her  Mother. 

Throughout  this  year  Mrs.  Montagu’s  house 
building  at  Portman  Square  had  been  making  steady 
progress,  and  she  reports,  with  particular  pride,  that 
she  paid  its  costs  week  by  week  out  of  her  income. 
In  the  spring  she  had  recorded  : 

Many  people  have  offered  to  hire  my  [Hill  Street]  house, 
and  that  might  be  better  for  my  heirs,  and  not  so  well  for  me  ; 
between  Janfy.  1777  and  Dec  1777  I  paid  for  my  service 
of  plate,  and  my  house  [the  Portman  Square  house  then  building] 
together  £4,321  :  10s.  out  of  my  income  and  had  not  then 
a  bill  of  £20  on  my  tradesmen’s  books. 

And  now  in  the  late  autumn  she  writes  : 

I  am  now  very  busy  about  the  garden  at  my  new  house. 
Lord  Harcourt  has  made  a  very  pretty  plan  for  it.  I  believe 
it  will  not  be  stately  as  the  garden  of  Semiramis,  nor  perhaps 
as  that  where  the  “  Sapient  King  with  his  fair  spouse  held 
dalliance,”  but  for  these  puny  modern  times  it  will  be  pretty 
well,  and  it  will  grow  laurels  enough  to  crown  Lord  C.  .  . 
when  he  returns  from  his  American  expedition.  I  shall  giye 
you  a  merry  merry  Vauxhall  when  my  trees  and  shrubs  are 


1  Carlisle. 


6  2 


THE  IRISH  VOLUNTEERS 


1778 


in  order.  I  assure  you  it  will  be  a  very  pretty  demi  saison 
garden  ;  in  Winter  it  will  not  afford  such  shelter  from  storms 
as  a  forest  of  pines,  nor  in  summer  shade  like  the  Groves  of 
Oaks  of  our  Druids,  but  it  will  serve  as  umbrellas  and  fans 
for  Beaux  and  Belles. 

The  laurels  of  Montagu  House  were  the  only  ones 
awaiting  poor  Lord  Carlisle.  In  June,  Philadelphia, 
after  all  the  splendours  of  the  May  Mischianza 
festivities  given  in  honour  of  Sir  William  Howe,  was 
evacuated  by  Clinton  on  express  orders  from  home, 
and  to  the  dismay  of  its  inhabitants,  of  whom  3000 
retired  with  the  British  army  to  New  York.  In  July, 
D’Estaing,  the  French  naval  lieutenant-general,  arrived 
off  the  coast,  missed  Lord  Howe’s  fleet  in  the  Dela¬ 
ware,  followed  them  to  New  York  and  forced  his  way 
into  Newport  Sound,  only  to  be  dispersed  with  much 
damage  by  a  storm  ;  upon  which  D’Estaing  retired  to 
Boston,  and  Sullivan’s  troops,  weakened  by  desertion, 
with  difficulty  got  away  from  Rhode  Island.  It  was 
not  till  November  that  D’Estaing’s  fleet  left  Boston 
Harbour  for  the  West  Indies. 

The  Irish  Protestants  meanwhile  —  the  country 
being  denuded  of  troops  sent  to  America,  and  invasion 
by  France  threatening — had  raised  a  large  and  at 
present  loyalist  Volunteer  force. 

History  repeats  itself  ! 

I  hope  Mr.  Vesey  has  laid  aside  his  design  of  going  to 
Ireland  this  Autumn.  If  he  goes,  he  shd  enter  the  Corps  of 
Volunteers,  for  they  are  the  Governers  of  Ireland  ;  an  English 
Gentleman  who  had  money  on  an  Irish  Mortgage,  not  being 
able  to  get  the  interest  due  to  him  went  to  Ireland,  and  applied 
to  the  Lawyers  to  use  the  proper  means  to  procure  it,  but  by 
every  one  was  answered,  that  the  Mortgagee  being  one  of  the 
Volunteers  they  durst  not  use  any  compulsory  methods  to 
make  him  pay  his  debt. 

No<v.  19. 

Our  forces  are  still  in  Camp,  tho  the  season  of  the  year, 
and  the  state  of  the  weather,  make  such  service  very  irksome. 
The  apprehensions  for  Jamaica  are  at  end  for  the  present  ; 


HER  MOST  GRACIOUS  MAJESTY  QUEEN  CHARLOTTE 
From  a  Sketch  drawn  from  the  life  at  Bath 


1778 


KEPPEL  AND  PALLISER 


63 

D’Estaing  is  gone  to  America,  where  it  is  supposed  he  will 
be  able  to  do  less  harm  than  he  wd  elsewhere.  Byrons  leaving 
his  Station  to  convoy  some  of  our  Merchant  Ships,  and  by 
that  means  giving  D’Estaing  opportunity  to  get  out,  is  con- 
siderd  as  a  great  error,  but  errors  are  pardonable.  The  F rench 
and  Spaniards  seem  to  me  to  have  made  but  a  poor  Summers 
business,  and  the  Winter  season  seems  unfavourable  to  projects 
of  Invasion.  I  believe  the  Ministers  are  now  more  perplexd 
about  Ireland  than  terrified  at  the  power  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon.  If  the  said  Ministers  do  not  act  more  roundly  and 
boldly  with  the  Irish  than  they  have  done  in  other  matters 
we  shall  have  a  rebellion  there.  I  hope  we  shall  fairly  and 
fully  grant  the  free  trade  they  ask.  It  will  be  more  than  a 
Century,  I  imagine,  before  they  can  rival  us  in  Trade,  and 
many  events  will  fall  out  in  such  a  series  of  years.  A  Nation 
cannot  trade  beyond  its  capital  and  credit.  There  are  Gentle¬ 
men  of  great  Landed  property  in  Ireland,  but  no  rich  monied 
men,  nor  any  Bank  of  great  credit. 

On  December  11,  to  Mrs.  Carter  from  Hill 
Street,  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 

I  was  at  the  Drawing  room  yesterday.  Lady  Dartrey  was 
so  good  as  to  be  of  the  party.  Her  Majesty  seems  pretty  far 
advanced  to  a  13th.  The  King  looks  well  but  is  grown  thin. 
I  imagine  there  will  be  warm  work  about  Mr.  Keppel  ;  he 
is  to  be  tried  on  some  important  articles.  If  he  is  found 
guilty  he  will  be  very  popular,  if  innocent  very  easy,  so  I 
think  his  situation  is  as  good  as  any  man  can  be  concerning 
whom  there  are  doubts  and  disputes. 

Her  Majesty’s  “  13th  ”  was  Octavius,  who  was 
born  in  the  following  February,  and  died  in  1783. 
She  had  already  presented  the  kingdom  with  seven 
sons  and  five  daughters. 

Admiral  Keppel,  after  bitter  recrimination  with  the 
second  in  command  of  the  Channel  Fleet,  Sir  Hugh 
Palliser,  over  the  indecisive  engagements  with  the 
French  Fleet  in  July,  had  demanded  a  court-martial, 
and  though  fully  acquitted,  threw  up  his  command. 
Naval  and  public  opinion  were  very  strongly  in  his 
favour,  and  all  London  was  illuminated  on  his  acquittal, 
whilst  Palliser ’s  house  was  wrecked  by  the  mob. 


64  MRS.  MACAULAY’S  MARRIAGE  1778 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Dec.  11. 

.  .  .  Whatever  comes  with  a  character  of  novelty  awakens 
the  attention  of  our  Sylph  ;  the  love  of  novelty  however  does 
not  prevail  over  her  affection  for  her  old  friend,  and  I  believe 
she  was  much  more  delighted  on  Sunday  last,  when  she  dined 
here  with  the  Burkes  and  Garricks.  I  am  not  quite  sure 
that  one  does  not  pass  ones  time  more  agreably  either  with 
a  quite  new  acquaintance  or  a  very  old  friend  than  with  persons 
who  neither  excite  ones  curiosity  nor  delight  ones  heart.  .  .  . 
I  should  not  have  thought  it  strange  if  Mrs.  Macauley  had 
crossd  the  Atlantick  to  marry  some  arch  rebel  or  even  the 
descendant  of  a  Regicide,  but  to  unite  herself  with  a  boy  and 
a  Scotch  boy  is  quite  out  of  the  path  of  such  a  comet. 

The  honest  and  sober  people  I  meet  (they  are  but  few  and 
they  speak  low)  are  much  alarmd  and  shocked  at  the  want  of 
union  and  confidence  and  fidelity  between  all  sets  of  politicians 
in  and  out  of  power  .  .  .  and  indeed  the  debates  are  carried 
on  in  both  houses  in  that  species  of  oratory  in  which  Billingsgate 

used  to  claim  superiority.  .  .  .  Lady  D - was  denied  entrance 

to  her  house  at  her  return  from  the  opera,  so  she  went  to 

Duke  H - ns  where  she  remains.  It  is  said  the  D  of  D  will 

marry  her  ;  if  he  does  I  wish  him  joy  of  his  anticipated 
cuckoldom.  I  think  he  ought  to  add  horns  to  his  coat  of 
arms.  The  age  is  wicked  when  men  make  W— — s,  but  it  is 
shameless  when  they  marry  them  ;  from  infamy  to  virtue  there 
is  no  return. 


To  her  Sister 

?  December. 

.  .  .  Lady  Carmarthen  ran  away  yesterday  with  a  young 
officer  ;  if  he  is  wise  he  will  soon  desert  her.  I  am  glad  she 
has  rid  the  prettiest  young  man  in  England  of  the  most  vicious 
and  detestable  creature  that  ever  disgraced  the  Race  of  Woman¬ 
kind.  It  wd  make  you  laugh  if  you  cd  see  how  some  of  the 
Ladies,  sujet  a  caution,  have  bridled  their  chins,  and  look’d 
discreet  since  Lady  Derbys  and  Lady  Carmarthens  scamper ; 
as  who  shd  say,  we  are  not  of  the  bad  sort.  ...  I  sent  to  Mr. 
Hartley  this  day,  his  men  having  finished  on  monday  as  much 
of  the  fire  plating  as  will  be  done  for  some  time,  desiring  to 
pay  him  ;  he  made  me  a  very  obliging  visit,  but  apologized  for 
not  bringing  his  account,  because  he  had  been  entirely  engaged 


1778 


CAPTAIN  BYRON 


65 

in  writing  a  pamphlet,  which  he  gave  me,  instead  of  my  giving 
him  a  draft  on  Mr.  Hoare.  I  wish  all  my  Workmen  were 
politicians,  and  I  might  at  least  save  the  Interest  of  my  debt 
to  them.  I  heard  but  will  not  vouch  for  its  truth,  that  Mrs. 
Macaulay  drew  ^600  from  the  old  Doctors  Banker  just  before 
the  marriage  was  known  and  her  credit  withdrawn.  I  believe 
Dr.  Graham  is  a  sad  wretch  and  very  capable  of  all  that  he  is 
charged  with.  Mrs.  Ord  is  very  ill,  and  I  am  much  concerned 
for  her.  I  fear  she  will  not  last  long.  .  .  . 

I  think  I  saw  your  dear  Spousey  at  the  drawing  room  this 
day  sennight,  he  looks  old,  but  stout  and  well,  Montagu  is  gone 
to  the  Westminster  play  to  night.  .  .  . 

There  is  a  report  that  Carolina  will  return  to  its  allegiance. 
Neither  the  Ministry  nor  Minority  seem  to  approve  Adi 
Pallisers  bringing  a  Court  Marshal  to  sit  on  Keppel.  The 
World  goes  better  with  us  when  Admirals  fight  more  and 
scold  less. 

Lady  Carmarthen  was  Lord  Holderness’s  only 
daughter,  Amelia  D’Arcy.  The  young  officer  who 
carried  her  off  to  the  continent  was  John  Byron, 
father  of  the  poet,  who  married  her  on  Lord  Car¬ 
marthen’s  obtaining  his  divorce.  She  died  in  1784 
in  giving  birth  to  a  daughter,  Augusta  Mary  Byron, 
who,  in  1807,  married  her  cousin  Colonel  George 
Leigh.  Captain  Byron  married  Catherine  Gordon  of 
Gight  in  1785,  and  George  Gordon,  sixth  Lord  Byron, 
was  born  in  1788.  Readers  of  Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe 
and  of  Astarte  will  not  need  to  be  reminded  of  the 
tragic  association  of  the  half-brother  and  sister. 

David  Hartley,  the  younger,  who  was  to  be  in 
1783  co-signatory  with  Franklin  of  the  American 
Treaty,  was  the  inventor  of  a  plating  to  secure  build¬ 
ings  and  ships  against  fire,  of  which  Mrs.  Montagu 
made  use  in  her  new  house. 

Mrs.  Macaulay,  who  has  already  been  more  than 
once  referred  to,  was  the  republican  authoress  whose 
second  marriage  to  a  ship’s  doctor  of  two-and-twenty 
caused  much  amusement  amongst  the  ladies  of  a 
coterie  of  which  she  was  not  a  member.  William 


VOL.  11 


F 


66 


MRS.  SCOTT’S  HUSBAND 


1778 


Graham  was  brother  of  James,  the  quack  doctor,  in 
whose  Adelphi  “  Temple  of  Health  ”  Emma  Lyon, 
afterwards  Nelson’s  Lady  Hamilton,  is  said  to  have 
posed  as  the  Goddess  of  Health. 

Mrs.  Scott  had  separated  from  her  husband  in 
1752,  only  a  year  after  their  marriage,  somewhat 
mysteriously.  He  was  dismissed  from  the  tutorship 
of  Prince  George  on  the  dubious  ground  of  Jacobitism, 
but  there  were  evidently  other  reasons. 


1779 


DEATHS  OF  GARRICK,  MARTHA  RAY,  AND  SECOND  LORD 
LYTTELTON - WARS  AND  RUMOURS  OF  WARS 

Garrick’s  death.  At  Bath.  Harrow  speeches.  War  and  invasion. 
A  Sylph  assembly.  Robert  Potter  and  a  portrait.  Death  of  Martha 
Ray.  Lord  Temple’s  death.  Paul  Jones.  Invasion  scares.  Treason 
talked.  Christopher  Anstey.  Death  of  Second  Lord  Lyttelton. 
The  Vision.  His  letters. 


No  letters  of  the  early  months  of  1779  are  to  be 
found — owing  probably  to  most  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
friends  being,  like  herself,  in  London  ;  but  their 
absence  is  regrettable,  as  they  would  naturally  have 
contained  references  to  the  death  and  the  funeral  of 
Garrick,  who  had  been  attacked  by  his  old  enemies, 
gout  and  stone,  whilst  on  a  visit  at  Althorpe  at  Christ¬ 
mas,  was  brought  back  to  his  house,  No.  5  Adelphi 
Terrace,  on  January  15,  and  died  there  on  the  20th. 

Having  injured  her  knee  in  an  accident  in  April 
and  been  very  unwell,  Dr.  Fothergill  ordered  Mrs. 
Montagu  to  Bath,  where  she  secured  a  very  good 
house  in  the  Circus,  in  which  she  remained,  with 
great  benefit  to  her  health,  till  the  end  of  May. 

After  a  reference  to  the  death  of  Edward  Dilly,  her 
favourite  publisher,  she  writes  on  June  10  : 

The  air  of  London  does  not  well  agree  with  me  at  this 
season  of  the  year  and  I  shall  therefore  defer  going  to  town 
till  the  time  draws  near  for  my  nephew  to  make  his  speech 
at  Harrow.  It  is  now  the  fashion  at  the  great  schools  for  the 
boys  near  the  top  of  the  school  to  repeat  some  speech  from  the 
Classicks.  I  was  at  Bath  when  Montagu  made  his  first 

67 


68 


SUMMER  ASSEMBLIES 


1779 


appearance  in  this  way,  but  I  hear  he  acquitted  himself  pretty 
well,  and  Mr.  Heath,  imagining  I  should  have  some  pleasure 
in  hearing  him,  deferred  his  appointment  to  speak  again  till 
I  could  promise  to  attend,  which  I  could  not  do  till  the  third 
Speech  day  which  is  not  till  the  first  Thursday  in  July.  He 
is  then  to  appear  in  the  character  of  Medea.  I  have  desired 
him  to  do  her  all  the  justice  he  can  for  I  believe  she  has  been 
much  injured  by  the  Poets,  who  represent  her  as  a  wretch. 
I  imagine  she  was  only  a  learned  lady  when  learned  ladies 
were  not  so  usual  as  now  a  days,  and  that  like  Mrs.  Macauley 
she  had  the  misfortune  to  fall  in  love  with  a  handsome  stripling, 
and  that  she  made  off  with  some  of  her  Father’s  cash.  .  .  . 

The  perpetually  recurring  thunder-cloud  of  the 
war  loomed  black  again  this  summer.  In  a  letter  to 
Mr.  Weller  Pepys  we  read  : 

If  when  only  rumours  of  wars  were  stirring  gold  was  so 
scarce,  what  will  be  the  case  now  we  have  the  fatal  certainty 
of  a  war  with  France  and  Spain,  and  a  well  founded  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  an  invasion  of  Ireland.  ...  I  can  easily  imagine  the 
party  at  the  Thrales  must  have  been  very  agreeable  tho  in 
general  I  am  not  fond  of  the  society  of  a  large  Country  family. 

To  Mrs.  Carter  on  June  26  Mrs.  Montagu 
announces  her  leaving  Sandleford  for  Hill  Street  the 
next  day  : 

I  hope  to  see  our  dear  Sylph  ;  she  is  tonight  doing  the 
honours  of  the  blue  room  to  as  many  Duchesses  as  love  beaux 
esprits,  and  as  many  beaux  esprits  as  love  Duchesses.  She 
kindly  laments  that  I  am  not  of  the  party,  and  to  be  sure  I 
honour  great  ladies,  and  I  admire  great  wits,  but  I  am  of  the 
same  opinion  in  regard  to  assemblies  that  is  held  concerning 
oysters,  that  they  are  never  good  in  a  month  that  has  not  the 
letter  R  in  it. 

Robert  Potter,  the  Master  of  Seaming  School  and 
translator  of  Aeschylus,  Sophocles,  and  Euripides,  was 
amongst  Mrs.  Montagu’s  admirers  and  correspondents, 
and  the  following  letter  relates  to  the  portrait  of  her  by 
Richard  Doughty,  which  has  been  more  than  once 
engraved. 


1779 


DOUGHTY’S  PORTRAIT 


6  9 


From  R.  Potter 

Scarning,  28  June. 

Whilst  I  was  in  town  last  Summer,  my  chief  amusement 
was  to  ramble  from  Painter  to  Painter  ;  I  was  often  at  Sr 
Joshua’s,  and  one  day  in  his  gallery  from  behind  another 
picture  I  drew  out  yr  Portrait  ;  it  is  a  good  Copy,  taken  by 
a  very  pretty  young  man,  Doughty,  at  that  time  a  Pupil  of 
Sr  Joshua’s  ;  he  is  now  brushing  away  for  himself  in  Little 
Titchfield  Street  ;  it  is  his  Property  :  now,  Madam,  I  cannot 
forbear  confessing  to  you  the  naughtiness  of  my  heart  ;  it 
immediately  occurred  to  me,  This  Portrait  Stands  here  neglected 
and  concealed  ;  the  Copy  of  a  Goddess  would  not  be  regarded 
here  ;  if  it  were  in  my  Parlour,  it  would  be  an  Ornament 
to  my  house,  and  a  glory  to  me  :  this  led  me  to  treat  with 
Mr.  Doughty  for  it  ;  out  of  delicacy  he  consulted  Sr  Joshua, 
and  received  the  only  answer  that  could  be  given,  “  If  Mrs. 
Montagu  consents.”  I  would  have  filched,  purloined,  or 
been  guilty  of  any  clandestine  measure  to  have  made  myself 
master  of  such  a  treasure,  but  was  unable  to  execute  my  designs  ; 
and  as  I  am  unwilling  to  give  up  a  desirable  point,  I  have  no 
other  Method  to  obtain  it,  than  to  break  through  the  blush 
of  Modesty,  and  sollicit  the  favour  of  you  in  form  ;  if  you 
can  have  the  goodness  not  to  refuse  me,  a  line  from  you  to 
Mr.  Doughty  will  put  me  in  possession  of  what  I  shall  esteem 
a  most  valuable  acquisition  :  I  am  certain  I  shall  translate 
Euripides  with  more  Spirit,  if  I  have  this  picture  before  my 
Eyes.  This  work  goes  on  tolerably  well  ;  etc. 

The  scare  of  French  invasion  became  acute  in  July. 
Mrs.  Montagu  declares  :  “  Lord  Shelburne,  Mr. 

Dartrey,  Mr.  Burke  and  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph  have 
convinced  our  Sylph  that  the  French  and  the  Spaniards 

At  one  sup 
will  eat  us  up 

as  man  would  eat  an  apple.” 

Lady  Mount  Edgcumbe  had  left  Mount  Edgcumbe 
for  London,  in  fear  of  foreign  foes  landing,  and  Mrs. 
Carter  was  urged  to  leave  Deal  and  come  to  Sandle- 
ford  to  escape  capture.  The  Veseys  actually  came  to 
Sandleford,  but  “  are  going  to  Mr.  Burke  on  Thurs- 


7o 


MARTHA  RAY 


1779 


day.  I  have  endeavoured  to  quiet  the  busy  fears  of 
our  Sylph,  but  Mr.  Burke,  who  is  a  lover  of  the 
sublime,  and  says  it  never  exists  without  terror,  will 
bring  back  her  apprehensions  ;  and  indeed  they  are 
spectres  of  the  most  gigantic  sublime.” 

Mrs.  Vesey  was  full  of  anxieties  over  improbable 
“  dragons,”  but  apparently  failed  to  see  the  serious¬ 
ness  of  a  very  alarming  attack  with  which  her  husband 
was  seized  during  their  stay  at  Sandleford. 

Among  the  much-discussed  events  of  this  autumn 
was  the  death  of  Martha  Ray,  the  accomplished 
mistress  of  Lord  Sandwich.  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 

I  find  Ld  Sandwich  was  much  struck  with  the  death  of 
Miss  Ray,  he  persuaded  her  to  go  to  the  play  that  night,  as  she 
had  for  some  time  staid  much  at  home,  because  his  Lordship 
was  in  a  vexatious  situation,  and  she  thought  wanted  some 
Person  to  chatt  with  him  in  the  evening  when  business  was 
over.  She  has  left  4  Sons  and  a  Daughter.  Lady  Corke 
is  gone  to  live  with  him,  so  he  is  prudent  enough  not  to  intend 
to  bring  home  another  of  the  Ray  species,  indeed  he  is  rather 
too  old  for  a  new  amour. 

Martha  Ray  had  been  for  twenty  years  the  mistress 
of  the  fourth  Earl  of  Sandwich.  She  had  become 
indeed  much  more  than  a  mistress,  a  faithfully  devoted 
companion.  She  was  a  girl  of  unusual  elegance  and 
talents,  endowed  with  a  very  musical  voice.  Hack- 
man,  her  lover  and  her  murderer,  had  been  in  the 
army  and  had  afterwards  entered  the  Church  and 
been  ordained  deacon.  He  had  repeatedly  offered  her 
marriage,  which  she  steadfastly  refused.  Maddened 
by  the  hopelessness  of  his  passion  he  shot  her  through 
the  head  as  she  was  leaving  Covent  Garden  Theatre 
on  the  night  of  April  7,  after  witnessing  Bicker- 
staffe’s  Love  in  a  Village.  Hackman  had  taken  two 
pistols  (about  which  Dr.  Johnson  and  Beauclerk  had 
a  very  heated  argument),  but  failed  to  shoot  himself. 
Before  his  execution  he  craved  Lord  Sandwich’s  for¬ 
giveness,  which  the  Earl  did  not  refuse ;  saying  it 


1779 


LORD  TEMPLE’S  DEATH 


7i 


was  an  act  of  frenzy,  which  had  robbed  him  of  all 
comfort  in  this  world.  Miss  Ray,  before  being 
domiciled  with  him,  used  to  live  at  a  glover’s  shop, 
No.  4  Tavistock  Row. 

Dr.  Johnson,  it  will  be  remembered,  got  into  a 
great  rage  with  Topham  Beauclerk,  who  argued  that 
the  second  pistol  was  brought  for  suicide ;  and 
instanced  the  case  of  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  “  who  loved 
buttered  muffins  but  durst  not  eat  them  because  they 
disagreed  with  his  stomach,  resolved  to  shoot  himself, 
and  then  he  eat  three  buttered  muffins  for  breakfast 
before  shooting  himself,  knowing  that  he  should  not 
be  troubled  with  indigestion  :  he  had  two  charged 
pistols.” 

Lord  Temple,  who  was  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
cousin  and  an  old  friend  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s,  died  in 
September  of  this  year  ;  and  in  referring  to  his  death 
in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Vesey  she  writes  recalling  “  the 
magnificent  and  beautiful  drives  round  his  place  ;  he 
carried  me  many  miles  one  morning  in  his  phaeton  to 
show  me  the  grandeurs  of  Stowe  ”  : 

Of  the  Constellation  you  allude  to,  he  was  certainly  the 
least  bright  and  luminous,  but  his  Wealth,  like  Saturns  ring, 
made  him  appear  with  lustre  in  the  Firmament,  and  he  not 
only  inherited  the  Fortune  and  Title  of  his  Uncle  Cobham, 
but  also  a  kind  of  glory  that  belong’d  to  Stowe,  which  was 
looked  upon  for  some  years  as  the  retreat  of  Patriots,  and 
haunt  of  the  Muses.  It  was  frequented  by  chiefs  out  of  War , 
and  statesmen  out  of  place,  and  celebrated  by  Poets,  so  the  Mob 
supposed  it  was  the  favorite  and  chosen  place  of  Virtue  and 
Witt ;  alas !  the  Patriots  went  thither  because  they  were 
angry,  and  the  Witts  because  they  were  hungry,  and  the 
Master  administerd  abundantly  to  the  passions  of  the  one, 
and  the  appetites  of  the  other.  The  old  Lord  Cobhams 
Nephews,  from  their  talents  and  situations,  added  to  his 
importance,  and  both  his  Lordship  and  his  Successor  under¬ 
stood  how  to  avail  themselves  of  everything  that  would  serve 
their  purpose  of  being  of  importance  in  the  State.  Lord 
Temple  was  a  much  better  man  than  his  Uncle. 


72 


INVASION  SCARES 


1779 


Of  the  invasion  scares  which  were  periodic  during 
this  century,  that  of  this  autumn  was  particularly 
alarming,  and  a  few  extracts  may  be  given  which 
provide  at  least  the  feminine  aspect : 

I  believe  as  you  do,  that  Sr  C.  Hardy  has  orders  to  fight ; 
if  a  mere  Naval  defeat  was  the  worst  I  shd  approve  the  orders, 
but  as  an  Invasion  will  follow  I  think  we  ought  to  be  more 
discreet  than  valiant,  and  avoid  a  battle  if  possible.  Every 
time  we  hear  any  Portsmouth  Guns,  the  report  of  which  the 
wind  often  brings  to  us,  I  feel  a  kind  of  horror.  C’est  jouer 
gros  jeu,  and  I  have  no  love  for  games  of  hazard. 

During  the  hay  and  Corn  harvest  the  Workpeople  drank 
me  nine  Hogsheads  of  small  beer,  but  with  small  beer  there 
is  no  drunkeness  nor  intemperance ;  it  is  well  employed  in 
refreshing  the  thirsty  labourer.  Last  night  I  orderd  some 
Ale,  and  I  am  afraid  some  were  more  than  soberly  jolly.  .  .  . 

My  newspaper  I  met  with  yesterday  says  there  are  Privateers 
just  off  Tinmouth  and  they  are  afraid  of  a  descent ;  but  while 
the  whole  Kingdom  is  in  danger  I  cannot  put  myself  in  a  fright 
for  my  Cows  and  Oxen  at  Jarrow.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Vesey,  who 
easily  takes  alarm,  and  is  now  within  the  illboding  voice  of 
our  Patriots,  has  lamented  the  taking  of  Gibraltar,  besides 
many  internal  calamities  by  the  french  invasion.  She  wd  believe 
Mr.  Benjamin  if  he  told  her  the  french  were  in  Cornhill, 
and  indeed  how  shd  the  Ship  and  Royal  point  there,  tho  very 
famous,  be  a  match  for  the  united  fleets  of  France  and  Spain. 

Sir  Charles  Hardy  was  this  year  in  command  of 
the  Channel  Fleet,  and  the  naval  pundits  of  Whitehall 
and  Grub  Street  were  bravely  urging  him  to  fight. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

I  hope  Paul  Jones  will  be  taken  before  he  makes  a  visit 
to  Deal.  I  had  a  letter  from  Ed:  Brown  on  thursday  night, 
which  told  me  he  was  then  off  Tynemouth.  I  hope  he  will 
not  victual  his  Fleet  with  my  good  oxen  at  Jarrow.  It  will 
be  barbarous  to  rob  a  poor  Coal  owner  now  the  Coal  trade 
is  so  bad.  Wheat  sells  at  3s.  9d.  a  Bushel  at  Newcastle, 
20  stone  of  Pottatoes,  14  lbs.  to  the  stone  for  3d.  Meat  2d.  a 
pound.  However  if  the  rich  suffer  our  labouring  people  live 
well,  wages  being  high  and  provisions  low  in  price. 


1779 


PAUL  JONES 


73 


To  Airs.  Carter 

Oct.  3 rd . 

My  Sister  arrived  here  on  tuesday.  Miss  Wilkes  the  day 
before,  to  my  great  comfort  the  Wilkes  family  are  much 
happier  than  they  were.  Their  eldest  Son  has  a  good  employ¬ 
ment  under  one  of  our  Commissarys  in  America ;  he  has 
acquitted  himself  there  to  his  own  credit  and  the  satisfaction 
of  the  Person  who  employs  him,  but  severe  application  brought 
on  illness,  and  he  is  come  over  for  a  while ;  he  calld  here  the 
other  day  in  his  way  to  Bath.  I  askd  him  if  it  was  true,  that 
the  Americans  in  general  wishd  to  return  their  allegiance,  he 
said  he  believed  more  than  three  parts  in  four  wishd  it,  but 
were  withheld  by  the  severity  of  the  Leaders  of  the  Rebellion, 
who  exercise  the  most  horrid  cruelties  on  any  discovery  of 
disaffection  to  them.  One  silver  Dollar  is  now  equal  to  30  of 
paper.  A  state  of  violence  can  hardly  be  long  upheld,  nor 
can  people  carry  on  the  traffick  of  life  without  some  certainty 
in  the  Exchange.  The  paper  the  Congress  issue  has  been 
ever  in  decrease  of  value. 

You  ask  me  if  my  black  Regiment  under  ground  wd  not 
oppose  Invaders;  I  have  no  doubt  but  they  wd  make  as  stout 
resistance  as  any  unarmed  men.  They  desired  last  Summer 
that  I  wd  send  them  a  stand  of  Arms,  but  I  begged  to  be 
excused,  for  the  scepticks  in  History  now  deny  there  was  ever 
a  Nation  of  Amazons,  so  I  cd  not  find  a  Precedent  for  being 
a  General.  There  is  no  question  but  amongst  us  we  could 
furnish  a  number  of  very  fine  fellows,  stout  of  heart  and  limb 
for  defence  of  our  Coast ;  but  as  the  Coal  trader  will,  I  hope, 
long  outlive  the  War,  it  wd  be  dangerous  to  teach  them  the 
military  discipline,  and  have  arms  which  they  might  on  improper 
occasions  seize  upon. 

Paul  Jones,  the  plucky  naval  adventurer,  had,  after 
five  years  of  smuggling  and  the  slave  trade,  entered 
the  American  navy,  and  in  1778  and  1779  carried 
out,  first  in  the  Ranger ,  and  later  in  the  Bonhomme 
Richard ,  a  series  of  remarkable  raids  on  the  English 
and  Scottish  coasts.  In  September  1779  his  ships 
threatened  Edinburgh,  and  on  the  23rd,  engaged  and 
captured  H.M.S.  Serapis  while  on  convoy  duty  off 
the  Tyne. 


74 


THE  GIGANTIC  SUBLIME 


1779 


“  Flamborough  reapers,”  says  Carlyle,  “  home¬ 
going,  pause  on  the  hillside  :  for  what  sulphur-cloud 
is  that  that  defaces  the  sleek  sea ;  sulphur-cloud 
spitting  streaks  of  fire?  A  sea  cockfight  it  is,  and 
of  the  hottest ;  where  British  Serapis  and  French- 
American  Bon  Homme  Richard  do  lash  and  throttle 
each  other,  in  their  fashion  ;  and  lo,  the  desperate 
valour  has  suffocated  the  deliberate,  and  Paul  Jones 
too  is  of  the  Kings  of  the  Sea  !” 

Though  Gibraltar  held  out,  and  the  presence  of  the 
French  in  Cornhill  was  unconfirmed,  Mrs.  Vesey  was 
by  now  in  a  state  of  terror  “  of  the  most  Gigantic 
Sublime,”  and  Mr.  Burke,  as  Mrs.  Montagu  pre¬ 
dicted,  seems  to  have  taken  a  malicious  delight  in 
giving  wings  to  her  worst  apprehensions  : 

She  gives  to  the  Invaders  she  expects  des  bottes  de  sept  lieux, 
so  that  after  having  strided  from  Calais  to  Dover,  at  the  next 
step  they  will  be  at  the  royal  exchange  or  where  they  please. 
All  the  terrors,  all  the  horrors,  all  the  wounds,  and  all  the 
deaths,  that  have  happend  from  Invasion,  or  Siege,  from  the 
Argonautick  expedition,  and  siege  of  Troy,  to  this  day,  she 
supposes  the  french  will  act  for  our  benefit  as  soon  as  they  can 
effect  a  landing.  I  have  indeed  prevaild  upon  her  to  omit  some 
incidents  which  happend  at  the  Siege  of  Jerusalem,  because  the 
sin  for  which  the  Jews  were  punishd  was  far  beyond  all  other 
crime  ;  but  had  the  Synagogue  only  slain  the  1 2  apostles  I  do 
not  know  that  she  wd  have  made  a  very  essential  difference 
between  that  and  our  making  War  on  the  Congress  in  America. 
St.  Franklyn,  St.  Adams  etc.  are  very  sacred  characters  in  her 
opinion  ;  of  all  party  effronterie  surely  the  greatest  is  that  of 
applauding  Mr.  Keppel  for  having  avoided  an  Engagement 
with  only  3  or  4  ships  fewer  than  the  Enemy,  and  when  no  ill 
consequence  of  an  Invasion  was  to  follow ;  and  now  to  desire 
Hardy  may  fight,  because  he  must  assuredly  beat  a  Fleet  double 
in  number  to  his  own,  and  a  defeat  will  bring  on  an  Invasion. 
For  my  own  part  I  keep  my  mind  in  a  composed  state.  The 
Event  of  all  this  is  in  the  hands  of  him  who  never  punishes 
above  what  we  can  bear,  nor  more  than  is  good  for  us ;  the 
Invader  and  the  Invaded  are  his,  and  he  only  can  and  will 
make  the  Event  in  the  end  for  the  benefit  of  each.  I  pity  all 


1779  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  CROWN  75 

who  have  dear  objects  immediately  engaged  in  this  dire  con¬ 
tention;  their  trepidations  must  be  terrible. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  much  too  staunch  a  courtier  to 
see  what  the  country  at  large  was  slowly  realising,  that 
the  war  was  being  uselessly  prolonged  by  the  obstinate 
determination  of  the  King  to  force  his  personal  con¬ 
viction  against  his  ministers,  parliament,  and  the 
majority  of  the  nation.  Lord  North  had  repeatedly 
tendered  his  resignation,  and  had  repeatedly  made  it 
clear  that  he  disbelieved  in  the  policy  he  was  forced 
to  administer.  But  His  Majesty  was  unwaveringly 
resolute  to  steer  the  bark  ;  and  while  pledging  him¬ 
self  never  to  be  dictated  to  by  opposition,  considered 
that  his  ministers  should  continue  to  execute  his 
wishes  and  “  not  mind  being  now  and  then  in  a 
minority.” 

Had  the  war  gone  successfully,  the  acquiescence 
of  the  country  in  this  Royal  supremacy  might  have 
continued  ;  but  mismanagement  and  disaster  awakened 
audible  dissatisfaction,  and  the  time  was  near  when 
His  Majesty’s  faithful  Commons  were  to  pronounce 
that  “  the  influence  of  the  Crown  has  increased,  is 
increasing  and  ought  to  be  diminished.” 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  shocked  by  the  first  rumbling 
of  sedition  : 

Sept.  17. 

I  heartily  wish  our  present  Ministers  wd  resign  their  places, 
for  to  tell  you  the  truth  I  believe  the  present  intention  is  to 
raise  a  Civil  War.  It  is  now,  I  understand,  as  usual  with  the 
middling  sort  of  folks  to  talk  treason  as  to  hum  a  tune  or  whistle. 

Indeed  not  a  few  of  higher  rank  very  openly  speak  of  the  K - 

in  a  manner  in  which  the  first  Magistrate  of  any  Country 

never  was  treated.  Dr.  - whose  Uncle  the  K -  made 

B - of  W :  and  who  by  that  means  is  Dean  of  W :  daily  uses 

this  phrase,  that  his  Lsp.  has  the  worst  head  and  the  worst 
heart  of  any  man  in  his  Dominions.  Such  a  Lye  is  black 
enough  as  only  relating  to  the  Man,  but  when  that  Man  is  our 
Lawfull  Sovereign  treason  makes  it  a  Lye  in  grain  ;  ingratitude 
for  benefits,  which  wd  [be]  enough  to  stigmatize  the  speech 


76 


TREASON  TALKED 


1779 


and  the  speaker,  is  lost  in  the  deeper  crimes.  I  hear  it  is  the 
fashion  to  talk  treason  in  the  City,  however  it  is  less  shocking 
from  the  Gown  of  the  Common  Councilman,  than  from  the 
Sacerdotal  habit.  The  Licentious  spirit  of  the  times,  the 
aversion  to  all  law,  rule,  and  discipline,  makes  a  combined 
danger  more  alarming  to  me  than  the  united  fleets  of  France 
and  Spain.  .  .  . 

I  am  glad  that  the  burthen  of  this  War  falls  upon  the  Rich. 
Provisions  of  all  kinds  are  cheap,  and  labourers  wages  are  high, 
so  the  day  labourers  condition  is  mended  ;  they  were  the  only 
distress’d  people  in  this  Nation. 

Oct.  3. 

The  humour  of  the  people,  and  the  condition  of  the  times 
are  alarming.  The  moment  news  arrived  in  Town  that  Sr  C: 
Hardy  had  avoided  an  engagement  with  the  combined  Fleet 
Treason  was  talkd  in  every  Alehouse,  and  sung  in  every  street. 
It  growled  in  the  City,  roared  at  St.  Giles’s,  and  was  softly 
whisperd  at  the  West  end  of  the  Town.  A  substantial  trades¬ 
man  of  London,  who  calld  here  in  his  way  to  Bath,  astonished 
my  Servants  by  talking  Treason,  and  relating  what  passd  at  his 
Club  etc. 

In  the  late  autumn  Christopher  Anstey,  the  satirical 
poet  of  The  New  Bath  Guide ,  spent  some  days  at 
Sandleford,  and  is  thus  referred  to  : 

One  should  not  naturally  suppose  the  author  of  the  Bath 
Guide  to  be  the  most  careful  and  tender  of  Fathers  ;  but  such 
he  is,  and  his  paternal  Virtues  do  not  want  subjects,  for  he  has 
nine  children. 

The  death  of  “  Naughty  Tom,”  the  second  Lord 
Lyttelton,  which  occurred  under  circumstances  that 
were  the  subject  of  much  gossip  and  discussion  at  the 
time,  is  not,  apparently,  referred  to  in  any  of  the  letters 
of  this  winter.  The  story  of  the  vision  which,  flying 
in  at  his  window  at  Pitt  Place  or  Hill  Street,  took  the 
form  of  a  woman,  and  warned  his  Lordship  that  in 
three  days  he  would  die,  has  been  recounted  in  many 
forms  and  with  a  wealth  of  variations ;  the  facts 
appear  to  have  been  that  he  spoke  at  length  on  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Ireland  at  the  opening  of  Parliament 


T.tro.vuj  Loud  /,ytt /. r.'ro.\ 


THOMAS,  SECOND  LORD  LYTTELTON 

After  Richard  Cosivay 


1779  DEATH  OF  2ND  LORD  LYTTELTON  77 


on  Thursday,  November  25,  winning  high  encomiums 
from  both  sides  of  the  House  ;  got  to  bed  at  his  house 
in  Hill  Street  about  2  a.m.,  looking  ill,  and  went 
down  to  his  secluded  villa  near  Epsom  on  Friday  or 
Saturday,  where  the  party  consisted  of  Lord  Fortescue’s 
son,  Captain  Wolseley,  Mrs.  Flood,  and  the  three 
Misses  Amphlett.  On  the  Saturday  evening,  after  a 
substantial  dinner  and  some  music  and  merriment  he 
withdrew,  soon  after  eleven,  and  fell  back  dead  in  his 
bed  as  his  valet  was  removing  his  waistcoat ;  thus 
failing  to  “  bilk  the  ghost  ”  whose  three  days’  warning 
appears  to  have  been  given  on  the  previous  Wednesday. 

Though  this  collection  contributes  nothing  to  the 
pile  of  stories  which  the  event  produced,  part  of  a 
letter  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  to  the  Duchess  of  Portland 
which  was  printed  from  the  manuscripts  at  Longleat 
by  the  Historical  Manuscripts  Commission  in  1904, 
may  be  reproduced  here  : 


To  the  Duchess  of  Portland. 

Hill  Street,  December  i. 

Oh  Madam,  did  not  the  sudden  death  of  Lord  Lyttelton 
make  you  rejoice  that  his  good  father  did  not  live  to  see  an 
event  for  which  the  poor  young  man  was  so  little  prepared  ! 
My  servants  saw  him  pass  my  door  with  three  gay  females  at 
two  o’clock ;  these  girls  were  three  sisters  and  his  cousins ; 
by  eleven  o’clock  that  night  he  was  called  to  another  world  ! 
He  carried  these  Miss  Amfletts  in  his  coach  to  his  villa  near 
Epsom  ;  at  supper,  I  hear,  he  declared  himself  hungry ;  soon 
after  complained  of  pain  at  his  stomach,  and  expired. 

The  usual  tenor  of  his  life,  the  horrid  party  of  pleasure  he 
was,  at  the  time  of  his  death  engaged  in,  would  fill  one  with 
unspeakable  terrors,  if  one  had  not  some  reason  to  imagine 
there  was  a  tincture  of  madness  in  him.  I  have  heard  his 
father  say  with  tears  in  his  eyes  that  however  dreadful  it  was  to 
a  parent  to  think  their  children  mad,  his  son  was  such. 

He  was  glad  to  fly  to  it  as  a  refuge  from  apprehensions  more 
terrible ;  but  in  that  opinion  he  had  a  hope  the  young  man’s 
outrageously  bad  conduct  would  render  him  unhappy  only  in 


78 


“NAUGHTY  TOM” 


1779 


this  world.  It  is  said  he  has  left  £5 000  to  each  of  these  Miss 
Amfletts ;  poor  amend  for  their  loss  of  reputation,  if  that  be 
all  they  have  lost.  .  .  .  There  was  an  elaborate  encomium 
upon  him  in  my  newspaper  to-day.  It  is  the  fashion,  and  a 
very  pernicious  one,  to  make  a  man’s  parts  a  kind  of  apology 
for  his  wickedness,  but  surely  they  aggravate  guilt  in  a  greater 
degree  than  they  grace  virtue. 

If  Mrs.  Montagu’s  servants’  report  is  correct  it 
would  seem  that  Lord  Lyttelton  only  went  down  to 
Pitt  Place  on  the  Saturday  afternoon,  and  another 
variant  is  contributed  to  the  myth.  As  her  house  was 
but  a  few  doors  from  his,  they  are  hardly  likely  to  have 
been  mistaken. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  done  her  level  best  for  the 
graceless  son  of  her  devoted  friend  ;  but,  as  she  once 
wrote  to  Tom,  “  when  youth  and  age  hold  dialogue 
some  contradictions  will  pass.”  She  had  encouraged 
his  early  studies,  directed  his  travels,  praised  his 
talents,  tried  to  steer  his  passions  and  arouse  his 
ambition.  “  Consideration,”  she  had  written  to  him 
in  1765,  “  will  follow  profitable  talents,  shining  ones 
gain  only  admiration.  It  will  be  your  fault  if  you  are 
not  now  approved,  in  time  esteemed ;  and  then  I 
shall  see  you  attain  all  I  have  wished  for  you  and 
predicted  of  you.  As  I  have  already  the  wrinkles  of 
a  Sibyl  I  shall  be  extremely  mortified  not  to  have  the 
prophetick  skill.” 

That  he  had  more  than  ordinary  talent  may  be 
readily  admitted,  without  accepting  the  theory  of  the 
Quarterly  Review  of  December  1851,  which  attributed 
the  Letters  of  Junius  to  him,  as  the  product  of  the 
seven  years  of  shrouded  seclusion  previous  to  his 
father’s  death  ;  years  which  the  Reviewer  thought 
must  have  been  spent  in  intellectual  exercises,  but 
which  it  seems  were  largely  squandered  in  habits  of 
profligacy. 

William  Combe,  author  of  Doctor  Syntax ,  is  said  to 
have  confessed  circumstantially  to  Major  Cockburn 


1779 


THE  LYTTELTON  LETTERS 


79 


that  he  was  himself  the  author  of  the  Letters  of  the  late 
Lord  Lyttelton .  But  Combe’s  inordinate  vanity  may 
quite  possibly  have  led  him,  as  Thomas  Frost  asserts, 
to  claim  their  authorship  rather  than  merely  their 
editorship,  and  his  unsupported  statement  should  not, 
under  the  circumstances,  be  accepted  as  final.  Nichol 
and  the  author  of  the  Quarterly  Review  article  on 
Junius  believed  the  Letters  genuine.  And  Mrs. 
Climenson,  I  find,  took  care  to  record  the  same 
conviction.  Whoever  wrote  them  was  certainly  well 
acquainted  with,  or  had  access  to  private  information 
about,  young  Lyttelton  and  his  family  affairs. 


1780 


THE  BUILDING  OF  MONTAGU  HOUSE - 

THE  GORDON  RIOTS 


Spring  visit  to  Bath.  Its  architecture  and  habituds.  James  Stuart.  Her 
dog.  Hardman’s  Rappee.  Sir  William  Jones.  Mrs.  Thrale. 
Rodney.  A  naval  amazon.  Lord  George  Gordon  and  the  Riots. 
London  ablaze.  Sheridan’s  prologue.  Gordon’s  forebears.  Mr. 
Anstey.  Letter  from  Mrs.  Vesey.  Riots  at  Bath.  Lord  Henry 
Clinton.  General  Oglethorpe.  Action  off  Martinique.  Sir  George 
Rodney.  Lord  Winchilsea.  Mr.  Vesey.  Camp  in  St.  James’s  Park. 
Madame  de  Vaucluze.  North  Carolina.  The  rioting  over.  Active 
youth.  Mr.  Pitt’s  tutor.  A  character  study.  A  circular  tour. 
Montagu  House.  How  paid  for.  Mrs.  Montagu  at  60.  Autumn 
visit  to  Bath.  A  Newbury  Ball.  Wyatt’s  plans  for  Sandleford.  The 
new  house.  Mrs.  Scott.  The  second  Lord  Lyttelton’s  death.  His 
character.  Dr.  Fothergill. 


Mrs.  Montagu  and  most  of  her  friends  being  within 
calling  distance  in  London  through  the  early  months 
of  the  year,  there  are,  as  usual,  few  letters  till  April, 
when  she  went  to  Bath ;  where  she  found  Beilby 
Porteous  Bishop  of  Chester ;  Mr.  Thrale,  in  tolerable 
plight  (he  had  had  a  second  apoplectic  seizure  in 
February) ;  Lord  Spencer ;  Mrs.  Cholmeley,  and 
other  water  -  drinking  friends.  She  was  at  first 
crammed  into  a  small  house  which,  had  the  weather 
been  warm,  would  have  demolished  her  :  “A  small 
house,  tight  stays  and  strait  shoes  are  plagues  worthy 
to  be  put  in  the  Litany  of  Worldly  things  ”  ;  but 
after  a  week  or  two  she  moved  into  Lord  Milford’s 
more  spacious  abode  in  the  Circus  : 

I  can  now  give  my  dear  Friend  some  account  of  Bath, 
which  appeared  to  me  so  alterd  from  the  time  I  was  last  here  as 

80 


1780 


THE  BATH 


a  water  drinker  that  I  know  as  little  of  it  as  if  I  had  never  seen 
it  before.  As  to  the  Town  you  may  figure  it  to  yourself  by 
supposing  Cavendish  Square,  Portman  Square,  and  Portland 
Place,  communicating  with  each  other  by  intermediate  streets, 
and  forming  a  little  City ;  but  the  beautiful  situation  of  the 
Crescent  cannot  be  understood  by  any  comparison  with  any 
thing  in  any  Town  whatever.  Immediately  before  the  Houses 
there  is  a  large  space  paved  with  the  Bath  stone,  beyond  there  is 
a  beautiful  green  lawn  fenced  by  an  Iron  rail,  where  sheep  are 
feeding,  and  to  this  enclosure  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Crescent 
have  a  key,  so  that  it  serves  as  a  general  garden  for  walking. 
The  Lawn  is  bounded  on  the  other  side  by  high  Hills  coverd 
with  a  verdure  which  excells  any  verdure  I  ever  saw.  I  had 
intended  giving  you  a  long  account  of  every  thing  here,  but  Ld 
Stormont,  the  Primate  of  Ireland,  Mr.  Webb  whose  book  upon 
painting  perhaps  you  have  read,  and  diverse  others  have  been 
with  me  this  evening,  and  I  must  make  up  my  packet. 

In  spite  of  its  beauties,  she  found  Bath  less  attract¬ 
ive  than  ever.  Its  cosmopolitan  assemblage,  its 
mannish  misses,  its  lack  of  home -life  and  a  stable 
society  seemed  to  her  to  make  of  it  a  very  unsatisfactory 
abode ;  and  its  visitors,  away  from  their  domains  and 
dependents,  their  management  and  social  duties,  were 
neither  yeomen  nor  citizens,  but  excommunicate.  The 
smart  folk  had  un  ton  but  were  not  le  ton. 

To  judge  by  their  dress  their  manners  must  have  a  strong 
accent ;  the  misses  have  the  air  mien  and  habit  militaire.  The 
elderly  ladies  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  dressed.  They 
wear  on  their  heads  a  thing  they  call  a  caleche,  which  makes 
them  look  like  the  hooded  serpent  preserved  in  the  Museums. 
When  one  meets  an  unknown  face  in  other  places  one  asks. 
Who  is  that  ?  but  here  one  is  almost  tempted  to  enquire,  What 
is  that  ? 

The  dress  and  manners  of  the  Bath  visitors 
annoyed  her  greatly.  A  few  cuttings  from  letters  of 
various  dates  will  serve  to  convey  her  sentiments  : 

As  I  do  not  love  any  Town  but  our  Capital,  I  shd  think 
being  out  of  the  reach  of  the  Misses  who  strutt  about  in  a 
morning  in  Riding  dresses  and  uniforms  and  the  Maccaronies 
who  trip  in  pumps  and  with  Parasols  over  their  heads,  I  shd 
VOL.  II  G 


82  MISSES  AT  BATH  1780 

think  it  the  better,  but  in  bad  weather  the  situation  must  be 
much  exposed. 

If  the  sun  is  so  powerfull  as  to  be  dangerous  to  Misses 
beauty  she  does  not  retire  to  her  chamber  till  the  fervour  of  the 
noon  is  over,  but  takes  her  Umbrella ;  if  dripping  rains,  snow, 
or  hail  threaten  to  impair  the  gloss  of  her  apparel,  and  spoil  her 
shoes,  she  adds  a  pair  of  pattens  to  her  equipment,  and  if  the 
North  East  wind  rages  she  takes  shelter  in  a  Mans  surtout  coat. 
The  decent  Ladies  have  none  of  her  worship.  The  Goddess 
Trivia  has  all  the  devotion  of  her  heart,  and  whole  sacrifice  of 
her  time.  Alas  what  Wives,  Mothers,  and  Mistresses  of 
families  will  this  Academy  furnish  ! 

A  quiet  sober  woman  is  a  rarity  in  these  times.  How  the 
misses  waddle  and  straddle  and  strut  and  swagger  about  the 
streets  here,  one  arm  a  kimbo,  the  other  swinging ;  the  dear 
creatures  wear  short  great  coats  like  my  pitmens  wives  in 
Northd. 

I  never  saw  such  a  set  of  people  as  appear  in  the  publick 
rooms,  their  dress  is  most  elaborately  ugly.  A  frisseur  is 
employ’d  three  hours  in  a  morning  to  make  a  young  Lady  look 
like  a  Virgin  Hottentot  or  Squaw,  all  art  ends  in  giving  them 
the  ferocious  air  of  uncomb’d  savages.  I  met  a  young  man 
who  I  took  for  one  of  the  Cherokee  Kings  lately  arrived  but 
was  assured  he  was  an  Irish  beau  who  was  to  begin  the  Ball.  .  .  . 

Meanwhile  her  house  in  Portman  Square  was 
nearing  completion,  and  Leonard  Smelt  was  super¬ 
intending  the  work  during  her  absence.  One  or  two 
extracts  from  her  letters  to  him  will  show  how  things 
were  progressing. 

Her  architect,  unfortunately,  was  rather  a  source 
of  anxiety  : 

I  am  in  doubtfull  cases  often  as  uneasy  for  fear  my  suspicion 
should  be  false,  as  for  fear  it  should  be  true.  I  have  found  out 
that  in  dealing  with  Mr.  Stuart  great  caution  is  necessary.  I 
chose  him  for  my  architect  on  account  of  his  disinterestedness 
and  contempt  of  money ;  I  did  not  see  how  any  mischief  to 
my  pocket  could  arise  from  these  qualities,  or  indeed  with  these 
qualities,  but  Satan  is  more  cunning  than  I  am,  and  this  sly 
enemy  of  human  virtue  found  many  assailable  and  weak  places 
about  him,  and  the  said  Mr.  Satan  finding  at  some  peephole 
into  the  human  soul,  or  by  observation  on  external  action  that 


i78o  JAMES  STUART  83 

what  workmen  did  by  bribery  of  guineas  to  many  architects 
could  be  effected  on  him  by  pipes  and  tobacco  and  pots  of  porter 
in  ale  houses  and  night  cellars,  I  speak  it  not  on  suspicion  but 
certain  information,  that  since  he  began  my  house  he  has  been 
for  a  fortnight  together  in  the  most  drunken  condition  with 
these  fellows.  Sr  Sampson  Gideon  for  whom  he  was  building 
a  house  when  I  began  mine,  was  obliged  to  take  many  pre¬ 
cautions  to  prevent  being  imposed  on  by  the  workmen  whose 
bills  he  assented  to.  About  a  year  and  a  half  ago  Stuart  had 
by  a  long  uninterrupted  state  of  drunkenness  brought  himself 
into  such  a  condition  of  mind  and  body  as  I  feard  irrecoverable, 
to  this  I  attribute  the  many  falsehoods  of  which  I  gave  him 
proof  by  shewing  to  him  his  own  letters.  Tho  he  does  not 
mean  (I  believe)  to  tell  fibs,  it  is  impossible  to  rely  on  any  thing 
he  says.  It  wd  be  tedious  to  tell  you  how  often  I  have  been 
obliged  to  confront  him  with  the  workmen  whom  he  blamed 
for  not  having  executed  his  orders,  and  he  was  then  obliged  to 
confess  he  had  forgotten  to  deliver  the  designs.  Mr.  Gandon 
writes  me  by  this  days  post  that  Mr.  Stuart  has  put  the  design 
for  the  Chimney  piece  in  your  room  in  hand  ;  I  wish  this  may 
be  so,  but  as  he  told  you  he  would  send  the  design  to  me,  and 
has  not  done  it,  I  fear  he  may  not  have  deliverd  it  to  the  artists. 
In  business  the  strait  line  is  the  line  of  beauty,  but  Stuart  is  apt 
to  choose  the  waving  line. 

Love  me  love  my  Dog  is  a  venerable  proverb.  I  wd 
therefore  insinuate  that  when  you  visit  our  House  in  Portman 
Square  if  you  wd  charge  Valency  to  take  great  care  of  my 
newfoundland  dog  I  shd  be  infinitely  obliged  to  you.  Tho 
poor  Valency  alias  Valenensina  is  descended  from  a  Spanish 
Nobleman,  he  wd  be  ill  qualified  for  a  Bull  feast,  not  only  the 
Bull  to  be  baited,  but  the  Dogs  which  were  to  bait  the  Bull  wd 
have  been  objects  of  terror  to  him.  He  is  an  honest  poor 
Creature  but  misfortunes  have  quelld  his  spirit,  and  I  am 
afraid  that  he  shd  keep  the  poor  Dog  too  much  chained,  or  be 
wanting  in  some  of  those  attentions  due  on  my  part  to  an 
animal  who  vigilantly  guards  my  property,  caresses  my  friends, 
and  scares  away  those  he  thinks  my  enemies  ;  he  is  not  le  chien 
savant,  has  none  of  the  pedantries  of  art,  but  is  by  nature 
sagacious  and  faithfull,  and  full  of  moral  sentiment  and  native 
wisdom.  I  have  but  rarely  met  with  his  equal  on  two  legs. 
If  you  ask  how  my  favourite  Dog  does  and  if  he  lets  him  have 
due  liberty  (I  wd  not,  if  all  the  Dogs  in  the  Neighbourhood 
barked  petition,  grant  him  more)  it  will  have  good  effect. 


84  HARD  DRINKING  AND  RAPPEE  1780 


As  I  love  mischief  I  will  tell  you,  that  the  false  Gregory  has 
given  you  a  Rival,  she  is  a  little  in  love  with  the  Bishop  of 
Chester,  not  only  in  the  Pulpit,  but  even  when  he  sits  in  the 
circle  at  my  fire  side.  Indeed  he  is  one  of  the  most  amiable  as 
well  as  the  most  ingenious  Men  I  have  ever  met  with,  and  a 
divine  Preacher. 

Has  Sr  J:  Reynolds  convey’d  some  ray  of  her  Majestys 
Soul  into  her  Portrait  ?  I  was  told  he  had  succeeded  in  that 
important  article  in  doing  the  Kings. 

So  many  people  were  anxious  to  view  the  great 
house  that  she  was  obliged  to  ask  Mr.  Smelt  to  issue 
tickets  to  any  visitors  he  pleased,  but  to  instruct 
Valency  to  admit  none  without  tickets,  as  fresh  paint, 
etc.,  was  getting  damaged. 

The  hard  drinking  of  the  times  was  not  confined  to 
the  gentry,  and  even  so  excellent  a  mistress  as  Mrs. 
Montagu  could  not  be  sure  of  sober  servants.  Of 
one  who  had  died  just  before  she  went  to  Bath  she 
writes  : 

He  was  perfectly  well  on  Wednesday  morn,  but  as  was  his 
sad  practise,  drank  much  ale  and  drams,  and  complained  of 
being  indisposed  at  dinner  time,  went  to  bed  and  said  he  was 
better  and  pure  easy  at  1 2  o’clock,  at  5  he  expired.  He  was  a 
faithful,  honest,  affable  Servant,  and  therefore  I  valued  him, 
but  for  above  a  year  he  was  rarely  a  whole  day  sober. 

I  am  very  well  and  have  got  as  good  an  habitation  as  Bath 
will  afford,  and  when  you  come  I  shall  be  much  better  pleased 
with  the  place.  I  will  beg  of  you  if  you  stop  in  Town  to  get 
me  a  pound  of  Hardmans  Rappee  no  37,  it  is  the  only  snuff  I 
can  take  constantly. 

In  May  she  wrote  at  length  to  Mr.  Weller  Pepys 
begging  his  influence  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Jones,  candi¬ 
date  for  the  University  of  Oxford.  “  If  the  Muses 
were  the  Electors  he  would  carry  the  election  from 
every  candidate  that  could  offer.  He  possesses  the 
keys  of  all  their  treasures  and  can  deal  them  forth  for 
the  world.”  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  William)  Jones,  the 
great  orientalist  and  judge,  who  was  said  to  have 
acquired  a  knowledge  of  thirty-six  languages,  was  an 


i78o  RODNEY’S  SAILOR  HEROINE  85 

early  friend  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s.  She  speaks  of  her 
“  affection  ”  for  him ;  and  as  his  father  was  an 
eminent  mathematician,  he  was  probably  well  known 
to  Mr.  Montagu. 

She  saw  a  good  deal  of  the  Thrales  during  this 
Bath  visit,  though,  as  she  wrote  to  Mr.  W.  Pepys  : 

I  have  lamented  that  Mrs.  Thrale  was  at  as  great  a  distance 
almost  from  me  as  the  Magnitude  of  Bath  wd  allow,  but  how¬ 
ever  that  is  not  the  worst  circumstance ;  the  number  of 
acquaintance  I  have  here  leaves  me  little  time  at  my  own 
command.  She  is  to  set  out  for  London  the  day  after  to¬ 
morrow,  and  with  infinite  satisfaction  I  see  my  stay  at  this 
place  terminate  the  next  day.  I  hope  to  sleep  at  Sandleford 
on  Saturday  night,  and  what  is  better  to  awake  there  on  Sunday 
morning,  for  at  this  place  the  whole  of  life  is  a  mere  idle 
dream.  .  .  . 

I  know  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  Mr.  Thrale  is  certainly 
mended  in  his  health. 

Writing  to  express  his  regret  that  he  had  no 
University  vote  to  give  to  Mr.  Jones,  Pepys  adds,  on 
May  29  : 

Don’t  you  feel  the  utmost  Indignation  at  this  abominable 
Behaviour  of  Rodney’s  Captains  in  the  moment  of  Attack  ? 
One  wou’d  have  thought  that  such  Heroick  Valour  wou’d 
have  inspir’d  a  Coward  with  Feelings  of  Courage  ;  Certain  it 
is,  that  it  had  such  an  Effect  upon  a  Woman  (one  of  the  Sailors 
wives  who  (for  washing)  Rodney  suffer’d  to  be  on  board)  that 
during  all  the  heat  of  the  Engagement  She  never  ceas’d  to 
expose  herself  in  the  most  perilous  situations  in  supplying  the 
Men  with  incessant  Alacrity  with  powder  etc.  and  was  so 
distinguish’d  in  the  midst  of  that  dreadful  Scene,  that  when  the 
Engagement  was  over,  Sir  George  Rodney  call’d  Her  upon 
Deck,  and  in  the  hearing  of  all  his  Crew,  return’d  her  Thanks 
with  a  present  of  Ten  Guineas  for  her  Behaviour.  You 
know  with  how  much  pleasure  I  collect  every  thing  that  does 
honour  to  your  Sex,  and  will  not  therefore  wonder  if  I  cou’d 
not  resist  the  temptation  of  communicating  this  Anecdote  of 
female  Merit  tho’  it  be  a  little  eccentrick. 

The  incident  is  thus  tersely  related  in  Major- 
General  Mundy’s  Life  of  Lord  Rodney  : 


86 


LORD  GEORGE  GORDON 


1780 


When  a  woman  who  had,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the  navy, 
secreted  herself  in  her  husband’s  cabin,  and  fought  a  quarter¬ 
deck  gun  in  the  room  of  her  wounded  husband  who  was  down 
in  the  cockpit.  Lord  Rodney  severely  reprimanded  her  for 
breach  of  orders,  but  gave  her,  immediately  after,  ten  guineas 
for  so  valiantly  sustaining  the  post  of  her  wounded  husband. 

Mrs.  Montagu  returned  from  Bath  to  Sandleford 
in  May,  and  in  a  letter  of  the  1 3th  from  her  sister  we 
get  the  first  rumble  of  the  storm  that  was  to  burst  in 
riot  and  bloodshed  two  or  three  weeks  later  : 

Have  you  not  been  amused  with  Lord  George  Gordon’s 
speeches  and  motions  ?  I  want  to  know  whether  the  man 
really  ought  to  be  an  Inhabitant  of  Bedlam,  or  whether  out  of 
the  national  spirit  of  economy  he  wished  to  be  lodged  in  the 
Tower,  that  he  might  live  at  the  public  expence.  However 
one  must  allow  that  the  mouth  of  a  million  and  half  of  people 
may  naturally  enough  be  very  noisy. 

Charles  Dickens  has  immortalised  for  us  in 
Barnaby  Rudge  that  extraordinary  fanatic,  “  about  the 
middle  height  and  of  a  sallow  complexion  with  an 
aquiline  nose  and  long  hair  of  a  reddish  brown,  combed 
perfectly  straight  and  smooth  about  his  ears,  and 
slightly  powdered,”  who  at  the  age  of  thirty  made  a 
red  hell  of  London  during  the  first  week  of  June 
1780.  On  the  Tuesday  Newgate  was  stormed,  its 
prisoners  let  loose,  and  the  building  burnt  to  the 
ground,  and  Clerkenwell  shared  the  same  fate  ;  Sir 
John  Fielding’s,  Lord  Mansfield’s,  and  other  houses 
were  sacked  and  burnt.  The  Wednesday  was  even 
worse.  “  Let  those  who  were  not  spectators  of  it 
judge  what  the  inhabitants  felt  when  they  beheld  at 
the  same  time  the  flames  ascending  and  rolling  in 
clouds  from  the  King’s  Bench  and  Fleet  Prisons,  from 
New  Bridewell,  from  the  toll  gates  on  Blackfriars 
Bridge,  from  houses  in  every  quarter  of  the  town,  and 
particularly  from  the  bottom  and  middle  of  Holborn 
where  the  conflagration  was  horrible  beyond  descrip¬ 
tion.  .  .  .  Six-and-thirty  fires  all  blazing  at  one  time 


LORD  GEORGE  GORDON 
After  R.  Bran 


1780 


LONDON  A  RED  HELL 


87 


and  in  different  quarters  of  the  city  were  to  be  seen 
from  one  spot.  The  tremendous  roar  of  the  authors 
of  these  terrible  scenes  was  heard  at  one  instant,  and 
at  the  next  the  dreadful  report  of  soldiers’  musquets 
firing  in  platoons  and  from  different  quarters  ;  in 
short,  everything  served  to  impress  the  mind,  with 
ideas  of  universal  anarchy  and  approaching  desolation.” 
Fortunately,  both  the  attacks  on  the  Bank  of  England 
failed,  the  soldiers  holding  every  street  in  the  immediate 
vicinity.  But  the  great  distillery  of  Langdale,  a  rich 
Roman  Catholic,  was  successfully  captured  and  fired. 
“  Rivers  of  spirit  ran  in  all  the  conduits  and  blazed  as 
they  ran.  Men  drunk  with  liquor  and  maddened 
with  excitement  kneeled  to  drink,  and  drinking,  fell 
and  died  where  they  lay.”  The  death-roll  directly 
returned  was  285,  but  the  casualties  were  undoubtedly 
much  heavier  than  this.  Forty-one  of  the  captured 
ringleaders  were  condemned  to  death,  and  twenty- 
nine  were  actually  executed.  At  long  last  Lord 
George  Gordon  was  himself  arrested  on  the  9th,  and 
taken  to  the  Tower.  By  an  absurd  piece  of  folly 
he  was  tried  for  High  Treason,  ably  defended  by 
Erskine,  and  acquitted.  Later  he  fled  to  Holland, 
but  was  arrested  by  the  Dutch  on  a  charge  of  libelling 
the  French  queen,  for  which  he  was  committed  to 
Newgate,  where  this  pestilent  madman  died  of  jail 
fever  in  1 793. 

Fortunately  for  her  delicate  self,  unluckily  for  our 
chronicle,  Mrs.  Montagu  was  at  Sandleford  during  the 
riots,  and  was  dependent  on  Mrs.  Vesey’s  “  gigantic 
sublime  ”  and  a  few  travellers’  tales  for  news  of  the 
doings  of  its  imbecile  mob.  Her  letters  have  the 
cool  and  detached  temper  of  her  secluded  retreat,  and 
she  is  able  to  criticise  Sheridan’s  prologue  while 
London  is  ablaze  in  all  directions. 


88 


MOB  LAW 


1780 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sandleford,  June  the  %th. 

By  some  fatality  the  moment  a  Man  in  this  Country  becomes 
a  Minister  he  is  unlit  to  bear  a  part  in  Government,  if  a  Metro¬ 
politan  is  unfit  in  Ecclesiastical  matters  ;  happyly,  that  political 
wisdom  which  shd  be  in  Ministers  and  the  Doctrine  which  shd 
be  in  Metropolitans,  is  found  in  full  force  and  equal  to  all 
subjects  and  occasions  in  every  other  Man  in  the  Kingdom. 
If  20000  or  30000  men  second  these  mental  powers  with 
strong  arms,  weilding  axes,  bludgeons,  pickaxes,  the  administra¬ 
tion  will  be  as  excellent  as  the  councils  are  wise.  .  .  .  The 
first  news  I  heard  this  morning  was  that  a  Regiment  of  Dragons 
quartered  at  Newbury  were  sent  for  to  London  in  the  night. 
The  Framptons  have  left  my  House  in  Hillstreet,  but  perhaps 
I  give  myself  airs,  and  at  this  time  have  no  House  there.  God 
preserve  my  F riends,  as  to  all  other  things  we  who  are  now  the 
subjects  of  the  Mob  must  learn  to  be  indifferent.  You  alarm 
me  greatly  for  Mr.  Burke,  he  wd  be  a  loss,  his  Friends  could 
never  repair  from  his  virtues  and  amiabilities,  and  I  wish  the 
Mob  wd  consider  that  Nature  does  not  make  such  a  Man  once 
in  a  Century.  Pray  write  every  post  no  matter  for  franks. 
You  are  the  only  Person  of  all  our  Friends  who  has  had  any 
compassion  for  our  Solicitude  on  this  most  serious  occasion. 
I  often  admire  in  my  fellow  creatures  how  cautiously  they 
avoid  doing  any  kind  or  civil  thing  beyond  what  their  friends 
have  a  right  to  exact.  A  thousand  thanks  for  Mr.  Sheridans 
prologue  which  is  most  admirable.  I  have  not  any  fault  to 
find  with  the  Ode  but  that  it  made  me  recollect  most  of  the 
Odes  I  had  read  for  some  years  past.  Assembling  a  Mob  of 
Odes  causes  almost  as  much  confusion  in  the  head,  as  a  Mob 
of  rabble  does  in  the  streets. 

On  the  9th  Mrs.  Vesey  wrote  : 

I  am  ashamed  after  beating  drum  and  trumpet  and  having 
the  pleasure  of  astonishing  you  with  the  great  story  of  civil 
discord  burning  houses  and  Temples  forcing  the  strong  Bank  of 
[obliterated]  and  letting  all  the  stews  loose  that  I  am  now 
obliged  to  tell  you  the  curtain  is  dropd  over  all  these  great 
achievements  and  London  is  now  dull  and  I  believe  regrets  the 
theme  for  terror  and  conversation.  I  am  afraid  I  have  been 
one  of  those  Gulls  that  have  frightened  you,  tho  I  was  not 


i78o  BLUE  FLAGS  AND  NO  POPERY  89 

frightened  personally  myself,  having  neither  Person  or  [obliterated] 
as  the  lawyers  call  it  to  have  tempted  either  rape  or  murder. 
Mr.  Thrale  has,  as  I  hear,  escaped  plunder.  Ld  G.  G.  is  still 
in  town  :  whether  he  will  give  us  such  another  stage  play, 
or  act  one  himself,  is  doubtful.  Clermont  goes  to  Bath 

tomorrow,  from  thence  to  Ireland. 

And  on  the  10th  Mrs.  Montagu  wrote  for  further 
news  : 

Is  it  true  that  Lord  Mansfield’s  house  at  Caen  Wood  is 
burnt  down  ?  Is  it  true  the  Bank  was  intended  to  have  been 
plundered  by  the  Mob  ?  We  know  too  well  at  Newbury  that 
the  prisons  have  poured  forth  their  malefactors,  one  was  taken 
up  yesterday  for  picking  a  gentleman’s  pocket.  Mr.  Anstey 
who  had  called  on  me  a  few  days  ago  in  his  way  from  Bath  to 
London  calld  again  yesterday  on  his  return.  He  could  only 
stay  to  dine  with  us,  but  the  account  he  gave  of  the  Mob  on 
Monday  was  terrible  ;  he  had  since  that  time  been  at  Eaton 
from  whence  he  beheld  on  Wednesday  all  London  in  a  blaze. 

I  hope  much  of  that  light  was  illumination  in  which  art  the 
Mobs  of  Wilkes  and  [illegible]  have  made  us  perfect  ;  those 
risings  taught  the  mob  to  command,  and  we  their  subjects  to 
obey.  Is  Ld  George  Gordon  to  murder  as  many  men  and  burn 
as  many  houses  as  he  pleases  ?  I  dread  the  bad  consequences 
of  the  timidity  of  our  Ministers.  Flies  and  spiders  may  be 
swept  away  by  a  feather  broom,  but  when  scorpions  invade  our 
apartments  a  harder  brush  is  necessary.  I  shall  most  willingly 
allow  blue  flags  and  no  popery  to  be  put  on  my  houses.  I  have 
learnt  by  sad  experience  that  in  this  Land  of  Liberty  one  must 
illuminate  and  inscribe  and  wear  the  livery  imposed  not  by 
government  indeed  but  by  the  ungoverned.  I  saw  Mrs. 
Poyntz  yesterday,  she  was  under  uneasy  apprehensions  for  Ld. 
Sandwich,  but  indeed  every  man’s  life  is  in  danger  at  such 
times  ;  a  private  enemy  may  take  the  opportunity  to  do  him 
mischief. 

In  a  letter,  undated,  to  Mr.  Pepys  we  read  : 

General  Oglethorpe  in  the  restlessness  of  youth  determined 
to  go  down  to  Westminster  Hall  this  morning  and  engaged 
Montagu  to  go  with  him  in  apprehension  of  mob  and  violence, 
I  am  uneasy  at  this  expedition  and  wish  both  these  young 
gentlemen  safe  at  home. 


90 


GENERAL  OGLETHORPE 


1780 


General  James  Oglethorpe  was  born  in  1698, 
hence  was  now  82  ;  he  died  in  1785.  He  fought 
under  Marlborough  and  in  1733  founded  the  Ameri¬ 
can  colony  of  Georgia.  He  was  a  friend  of  Dr. 
Johnson  and  his  circle,  of  whom  Boswell  has  left  us 
many  characteristic  records.  It  was  to  Dr.  Johnson 
that  Oglethorpe  told  the  story  of  his  boyhood  when  as 
an  ensign  of  fifteen,  serving  under  Prince  Eugene,  he 
had  met  a  prince  of  Wiirtemberg  at  table  : 

“  The  Prince  took  up  a  glass  of  wine  and  by  a 
fillip  made  some  of  it  fly  in  Oglethorpe’s  face.  Here 
was  a  nice  dilemma.  .  .  .  To  have  challenged  him 
instantly  might  have  fixed  a  quarrelsome  character  on 
the  young  soldier  ;  to  have  taken  no  notice  of  it 
might  have  been  considered  as  cowardice.  Ogle¬ 
thorpe,  therefore,  keeping  his  eye  upon  the  Prince  and 
smiling  all  the  time,  as  if  he  took  what  his  highness 
had  done  in  jest,  said,  ‘  Mon  Prince  (I  forget  the 
French  words  he  used  .  .  .  the  purport  however 
was),  that’s  a  good  joke  ;  but  we  do  it  much  better  in 
England  ’  ;  and  threw  a  whole  glass  of  wine  in  the 
Prince’s  face.  An  old  General  who  sat  by  said,  ‘  II  a 
bien  fait,  mon  prince,  vous  1’avez  commence  ’  ;  and 
thus  all  ended  in  good  humour.” 

The  General  Oglethorpe  of  1780  had  evidently 
retained  much  of  his  boyish  pluck  and  spirits  of  1714, 
and  one  doesn’t  wonder  that  Dr.  Johnson,  who  loved 
healthy  impetuous  youth  at  any  age,  declared  his  wish 
to  write  his  memoirs. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Will  you  dine  with  me  to  day  or  tomorrow  ?  or  both  ? 
you  love  air,  half  my  windows  are  broken,  and  perhaps  to  night 
my  Lords  the  Mob  will  finish  the  rest.  If  this  goes  on  I  will 
go  and  live  under  the  Wing  of  Despotism  for  the  sake  of 
enjoying  Liberty.  If  the  Car  of  Victory  had  rattled  along  the 
streets  I  cd  have  excused  the  noise,  but  the  shouts  without  the 


THE  RIOTS  SUBSIDING 


1780 


9i 


triumph,  oh  they  make  my  head  and  heart  ache  !  I  hope  yr 
cold  is  better. 


The  insertion  here  of  the  last  two  extracts  is  dubious, 
as  there  is  no  evidence  that  Mrs.  Montagu  came  up 
from  Sandleford  to  town  before  the  latter  half  of  June. 


Sandleford,  June  15. 

I  much  apprehend  there  has  been  at  the  bottom  of  this  late 
affair  some  dark  and  deep  designs.  It  was  hinted  to  me,  some 
months  ago,  by  more  than  one  person,  that  perhaps  I  should 
see  a  Revolution  in  a  few  months.  A  gentleman  of  opposition 
principles  said  the  other  day  while  the  Mob  were  committing 
their  outrages,  that  he  was  shocked  at  the  mischiefs  done, 
and  then  in  a  low  voice  perhaps  it  will  end  in  a  Revolution. 
I  answer’d,  under  such  Leaders  we  must  expect  excellent 
measures,  and,  a  well  constituted  Government,  and  there  we 
stoppd. 

Mrs.  Carter  in  her  letter  which  I  received  yesterday  tells  me 
her  eldest  Bror,  who  is  at  Bath,  informs  her  that  2  Coaches 
loaded  with  Wretches  within  and  on  the  outside  the  Coaches 
arrived  there  from  the  London  Mob,  and  had  occasiond  the 
Riot  there.  However  if  London  imparts  some  of  its  Rogues 
to  the  Country,  from  the  Country  we  make  suitable  returns. 
A  fellow  near  Hungerford  who  has  often  been  imprisoned  for 
woodstealing  but  was  never  20  miles  from  home  in  his  life,  set 
out  for  London  on  the  first  news  of  the  riot  there,  with  hopes 
to  make  his  fortune  ;  he  may  I  hope  accomplish  his  destiny  by 
getting  hanged. 


To  her  Sister 

Sandleford,  June  1 6th. 

Tho  I  had  the  comfort  of  being  assured  that  the  riot  had 
subsided,  and  danger  seem’d  retreating,  both  by  Travellers  who 
pass’d  this  way  and  the  publick  papers,  one  can  give  so  little 
credit  to  them  in  their  particular  relations,  that  one  never 
considers  them  as  information.  .  .  .  Timidity  in  Governors 
will  ever  create  rebellion  in  subjects.  I  am  afraid,  indeed 
convinced,  they  will  not  care  to  lay  open  the  treachery  of 
Persons  of  consequence,  but  will  content  themselves  with 
hanging  a  few  low  Wretches  who  according  to  the  proverb  are 
hardly  worth  hanging.  I  am  very  impatient  to  see  what  is  the 


92 


A  LIGHTNING  CONDUCTOR 


1780 


fate  of  that  madly  wicked  Ld  G:  G.  I  wish  much  that  the 
Law  may  have  always  comprehended  such  acts  in  its  chapter 
of  high  Treason.  He  seems  an  undegenerate  descendant  from 
Adam  o’  Gordon  whose  noble  deeds  in  burning  a  Lady  and  her 
Children  in  their  Castle  are  recorded  in  an  old  ballad.  The 
Lady  was  of  the  Forbes  family,  so  I  congratulate  Miss  Gregory 
that  she  too  did  not  represent  her  Ancestor  in  the  catastrophe  of 
being  burnt,  as  the  other  does  in  the  burning  character. 

Your  remark  is  as  full  of  truth  as  Witt  in  regard  to  Mr. 
Ansteys  [of  the  New  Bath  Guide]  Muse,  and  by  his  amazed 
and  frighted  looks  when  he  was  here,  even  in  speaking  of  the 
past  riots  in  London,  I  can  guess  he  wd  not  be  much  at  his 
ease  while  the  like  sports  were  going  on  at  Bath.  It  is  really 
shocking  to  see  how  combustible  the  temper  of  the  people  is  at 
present  ;  the  Bath  riot  had  not  a  Ld  G:  G  to  foment  it,  and  I 
am  convinced  it  is  zeal  for  plunder  that  sets  the  Mob  to  work. 
As  to  the  design  to  do  mischief  at  Woolwich,  that  must  have 
had  Americans  and  french  for  its  author.  Lady  Clermont 
stopd  at  Newbury  on  her  way  to  Bath  to  take  leave  of  Lady 
Spencer  previous  to  her  going  to  Ireland  ;  at  Newbury  she 
heard  the  same  outrages  were  begun  at  Bath  which  she  thought 
herself  happy  to  have  escaped  from  in  London,  she  was  certainly 
in  the  circumstances  of  not  knowing  whether  to  go  back  or 
proceed  ;  however  after  some  hours  deliberation  she  went  on 
to  Bath,  and  I  suppose  the  flames  of  the  Buildings  and  the  fury 
of  the  Mob  were  dying  away  by  the  time  she  arrived. 

July  25. 

I  believe  Ld  G,  Gordon  has  prevented  infinitely  more 
mischief  than  he  has  done.  I  look  upon  him  as  a  Political 
conductor,  he  has  brought  down  the  electrical  matter  which 
threatend  our  whole  state,  and  buried  under  the  Gallows 
what  would  have  levelld  our  Palaces  and  Senate  Houses,  our 
publick  treasurys  and  Courts  of  Justice  and  thrown  them  open 
to  the  Mob,  has  only  broken  open  our  prisons,  and  demolished 
some  private  dwellings.  Thus  does  the  mercies  of  Providence 
confound  the  devices  of  the  Crafty.  The  Cabinet  Councils 
of  Princes  are  not  usually  composed  of  great  sages,  but  the 
Cabinet  Counsellors  of  his  Satanick  Majesty  are  much  more 
foolish.  Posterity  will  know  more  of  the  late  affair  than  we 
shall.  Some  Dalrymple  will  pull  of  the  patriotick  masks  and 
shew  villanous  faces. 

Clinton’s  successful  southern  campaign  of  this 


1780 


CONDITIONS  OF  PEACE 


93 


summer  put  new  hope  into  the  British  stalwarts. 
“  We  look  upon  America  as  at  our  feet,”  Walpole 
wrote  to  Mann  in  July. 


To  Mrs.  Scott 

Monday,  June  igth. 

Tho  I  rejoyced  in  the  publick  news,  I  lamented  the  cir¬ 
cumstance  under  which  you  wrote  it.  I  am  not  more  pleased 
with  the  valour  of  Ld  Henry  Clinton  in  taking  Charles  Town 
[May  1 2th]  than  with  his  humanity  in  not  taking  it  by  storm. 
I  am  in  great  hopes  he  will  put  our  affairs  in  America  into  such 
a  situation  that  the  Congress  will  no  longer  be  able  to  prevent 
their  Countrymen  from  accepting  the  liberal  conditions  on 
which  they  have  been  offered  peace.  I  suspect  our  Mob  was 
intended  in  some  measure  to  prevent  our  availing  ourselves  of 
the  advantages  it  was  expected  Ld  H.  Clinton  wd  obtain  for 
us,  and  that  we  must  have  been  constrained  to  submit  the 
conditions  of  peace  with  America  on  the  terms  offered  by  the 
Congress,  the  French  and  Spaniards  ;  the  indignation  this 
would  have  excited  must  have  removed  our  present  Ministers 
and  all  in  high  office.  I  do  not  imagine  that  a  twentieth  part 
of  the  Rioters  at  the  first  beginning  were  at  all  in  the  secret, 
and  latterly  very  few  of  them  had  any  object  but  plunder. 
Furious  Mobs,  like  fireships,  may  be  used,  for  purposes  of  which 
they  are  not  conscious  ;  they  are  mere  machines,  and  very 
terrible  ones. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Hillstreet,  the  27th  (June). 

I  have  been  taken  up  every  hour  this  day,  indeed  it  [has] 
been  not  only  filled  but  crammed  with  business,  Stewards, 
Lawyers,  etc  etc  so  that  I  am  really  quite  exhausted.  I  will 
only  just  tell  you  the  reports  of  the  day.  It  is  said  a  treason¬ 
able  correspondence  has  been  carried  on  wth  the  Americans 
and  french  by  Ld  G[eorge]  G[ordon]  by  means  of  one  Foster  or 
some  such  name,  that  many  have  been  guilty  of  doing  the  same. 
Adi  Rowley  engaged  the  whole  french  fleet,  the  wind  not 
allowing  Rodney  and  the  rest  to  come  to  his  assistance  ;  the 
noble  Rowley  has  not  suffered  more  than  our  Enemies,  who 
ran  away  as  soon  as  the  wind  allowd  Rodney  to  come  towards 


94 


RODNEY’S  VICTORY 


1780 


them  ;  they  did  not  get  to  Martinico,  and  Rodney  hopes 
another  brush  with  them. 

The  action  off-  Martinique  was  fought  on  April  17. 
Sir  Joshua  Rowley  commanded  the  rear  squadron  in 
the  Conqueror ,  and  was  in  the  van  on  the  subsequent 
engagement  May  15-19.  Rodney  had  given  orders 
for  the  whole  fleet  to  attack  the  French  rear  ships  ; 
but  some  confusion  arose  as  to  the  carrying  out  of 
the  order,  which  was,  of  course,  in  defiance  of  the 
Admiralty  “  van  to  van  ”  principle  of  attack,  and  two  of 
his  captains,  Carkett  and  Parker,  acting  on  the  official 
method,  spoilt  the  victory. 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

I  am  delighted  with  the  spirit  of  Sr  Geo  Rodney.  There 
are  many  future  victories  in  the  example  of  a  brave  attack.  A 
Nation  is  perhaps  less  disgraced,  even  by  a  defeat,  than  by  the 
timorous  fear  of  a  battle.  The  Race  is  not  always  to  the  swift, 
nor  the  battle  to  the  strong,  and  a  thousand  incidents  may  be 
urged  to  excuse  the  event  of  an  unlucky  moment  ;  but  cold 
and  timid  Councils  prevailing  thro  long  deliberations  certainly 
leave  a  lasting  depression  on  a  Fleet  or  army.  .  .  .  Besides  the 
damage  done  to  Mr.  de  Guichens  Fleet  the  spirit  thrown  into 
ours  will  be  of  great  service.  Sr  G:  Rodney  will  teach  our 
Sailors  not  to  count  noses,  and  weigh  metal.  To  be  exact  in 
weight  and  tale  is  very  useful  in  a  retail  tradesman,  but  are  not 
the  arts  by  which  Victory  and  glory  are  attain’d.  If  his 
Captains  did  not  support  him  they  will  deserve  all  the  punishmt 
the  Law  can  inflict.  I  honour  and  admire  Ld  Winchelsea  ; 
not  content  with  hereditary  honours  he  will  have  glory  of  his 
own,  and  transmitt  to  Posterity  more  lustre  than  he  has  received 
from  his  Ancestors.  How  much  is  he  superior  to  the  Mac- 
caroni  Crew  who  dangle  at  Ladies  toilettes  in  the  morning,  and 
flatter  at  the  Opera  at  night. 

“  The  young  Earl  of  Winchelsea,”  Walpole  wrote 
in  June  1776,  “  going  to  Portsmouth  to  take  leave  of 
Captain  Fielding,  his  brother-in-law,  embarked  with 
him  as  a  volunteer  for  America.”  This  was  George, 


1780 


MADAME  DE  VAUCLUZE 


95 


the  9th  Earl.  The  Finches  were  descendants  of  the 
Herberts,  and  amongst  the  staunchest  of  Stuart 
supporters. 

The  Veseys  had  gone  to  spend  the  summer  at 
Sunning  in  search  of  social  distraction,  haunted  by 
home  ennui. 

Mrs.  Vesey  is  more  dissipated  than  a  young  maccaroni. 
There  is  a  strange  vertigo  possesses  the  present  age.  It  is  ever 
agreeable  to  see  persons  in  advanced  years  mix  with  society, 
and  not  plead  the  privilege  of  age  to  avoid  performing  the  little 
social  duties  and  attentions,  but  surely  to  march  from  70  to 
four  score  in  the  train  of  les  jeux  et  les  ris  is  not  graceful  ;  it  is 
time  to  quit  the  dancing  measure  and  to  leave  those  to  trifle 
with  more  grace  and  ease 

Whom  folly  pleases, 

And  whose  follies  please. 

I  expect  Madame  de  Vaucluze  to  dine  here  today  ;  she  is  with 
a  Mrs.  Macreth  in  this  neighbourhood.  She  ran  from  London 
for  fear  of  being  attacked  as  a  Papist.  Lord  and  Lady  Bute 
received  50  letters  one  day  threatening  them  and  their  houses 
with  destruction. 

Madame  de  Vaucluze,  above  mentioned,  had  been 
forced  by  her  mother  to  take  the  veil  ;  on  her 
mother  and  sister  dying  of  cancer,  she  besought  an 
uncle  to  plead  her  cause  with  the  Pope,  who  allowed 
her  to  break  her  vows.  She  was  a  great  genius,  but 
had  no  common  sense.  She  satirised  Madame  de 
Pompadour  and  had  to  flee  to  England  to  avoid  the 
Bastille.  Mrs.  Montagu  introduced  her  to  Lady 
Craven,  afterwards  the  Margravine  of  Anspach,  and 
she  became  governess  to  her  daughters,  the  Misses 
Craven,  and  lived  in  a  farmhouse  near  Hampstead 
Marshall. 

There  are  a  number  of  her  letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu 
in  this  collection. 


96 


THE  CAMPS  IN  THE  PARKS 


1780 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Hillstreet,  July  the  6th. 

I  went  with  the  Sylph  last  night  into  St  James’s  Park  to  see 
the  warlike  tents,  and  hear  the  martial  musick.  The  sight 
was  fine,  the  musick  spirited,  but  the  reflection  that  this  array 
was  necessary  to  keep  our  fellow  citizens  from  outrage  and  riot 
damp’d  every  pleasure.  You  would  see  that  the  House  of 
Lords  has  thrown  out  Sr  G:  Saviles  amendments.  It  was 
certainly  wrong  to  comply  with  the  Mob  in  any  degree.  The 
Bill  shd  not  have  been  touch’d  upon  at  present,  but  our  Patriots 
are  always  making  motions.  The  Gazette  will  have  given 
you  an  acct  of  what  has  been  done  by  Rodney  and  Guichen. 
Sr  H:  Clintons  letter  of  what  has  pass’d  since  his  former  letters 
give  reason  to  hope  2  of  the  13  Colonies  will  soon  return  to 
their  Allegiance. 

Ld  G  Gs  fate  is  yet  unknown  to  us,  it  will  be  decided  it  is 
supposed  by  the  tenor  of  his  letters  ;  they  will  it  is  said  explain 
his  intentions  when  he  headed  the  Mob. 

Just  here  enters  dear  Sylph  with  the  submission  of  North 
Carolina,  which  she  pickd  up  from  Mr.  Rigby  at  Bedford 
House.  As  her  Grace  of  Bedford  is  of  the  opposition  he  did 
not  say  it  by  way  of  flattery  so  we  may  believe  it.  The  Sylph 
understood  he  had  the  news  from  his  Majesty. 

Richard  Rigby,  the  politician  and  paymaster  who 
contrived  to  amass  nearly  half  a  million  of  public 
money,  had  been  secretary  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford. 
Mrs.  Montagu  ought  to  have  known  Mr.  Rigby  too 
well  to  believe  anything  he  said,  and  the  less  so  if  it 
came  from  Bedford  House. 


To  Leonard  Smelt 

Sandleford,  Juty  24. 

If  plagues  and  earthquakes  break  not  Heavens  design, 

Why  then  a  Borgia  or  a  Cataline  ? 

or  even  a  Lord  George  Gordon  ?  I  begin  to  think  the  last  of 
these  illustres  Scelerats  has  done  more  service  to  his  Country 
than  ever  a  virtuous  Patriot  has  been  able  to  effect  by  Phleb¬ 
otomy,  scarification,  and  cautery,  his  Lordship  has  wonder- 


1780 


THE  KING’S  COURAGE 


97 


fully  purged  the  ill  humours  of  his  fellow  subjects,  and  I  hope 
in  a  great  degree  cured  the  epidemical  democratick  madness. 
The  word  petition  now  obtains  nowhere,  the  word  association 
cannot  assemble  a  dozen  people.  We  are  coming  to  our  right 
senses,  and  begin  to  understand  that  our  mild  government  is 
preferable  to  anarchy,  and  that  it  is  better  [to]  be  subject  to 
our  anointed  Sovereign  than  to  1 0,000  greasy  Tallow  chandlers. 
Butchers  etc.  I  consider  Lord  George  as  a  State  electric 
conductor  ;  the  gathering  storm  which  threatened  our  strongest, 
noblest,  and  most  Venerable  edifices,  has  by  him  been  brought 
down  and  sunk  into  the  earth  before  it  burst  on  our  heads,  he 
has  indeed  buried  it  under  the  Gallows  :  if  a  little  of  it  had 
fallen  on  Tower  Hill  perhaps  it  had  been  better,  for  it  would 
have  cleared  the  upper  regions  of  treasonable  matter  ;  how¬ 
ever  it  is  happy  that  the  atmosphere  has  been  purified. 

If  Mrs.  Montagu  could  have  been  brought  to 
admit  so  startling  a  juxtaposition,  one  other  name 
might  have  been  added  in  honourable  mention  to  the 
King’s.  John  Wilkes  entirely  disapproved  of  riots 
which  were  not  Wilkes’  riots,  and  took  an  active  and 
courageous  part  in  suppressing  Lord  George  Gordon’s, 
for  which  he  received  the  particular  thanks  of  the 
Privy  Council. 

Our  anointed  Sovereign’s  quiet  nerve  and  tenacious 
courage  certainly  shone  very  honourably  during  the 
terrible  week  of  the  riots.  He  it  was  who  insisted 
that  if  the  mob  were  committing  an  actual  felony  and 
could  no  other  way  be  stopped,  the  soldiers  must  be 
empowered  to  fire  on  them  at  once  without  waiting 
for  the  Riot  Act  to  be  read  and  the  lapse  of  a  vital 
hour  ;  and  when  the  Privy  Council  hesitated  to 
endorse  the  Attorney -General’s  approval,  declared 
that  if  difficulty  were  shown  he  would  lead  his  guards 
in  person. 

Part  of  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  refers  to  Madame 
de  Sevigne  : 

Sept,  the  12th. 

A  certain  Vicomte  de  Vibraye,  whom  the  Duke  de  Nivernois 
recommended  to  my  acquaintance  by  a  letter,  told  me  his 
VOL.  11  H 


98  MADAME  DE  SEVIGNE’S  GRAVE  1780 

Father  was  in  possession  of  le  Chateau  de  Grignan,  he  acquired 
it  by  purchase  for  he  was  not  related  to  the  family.  From  him 
I  learnt  that  Madme  de  Sevignes  grave  in  the  chapel  at  Grignan 
was  not  distinguish’d  by  any  mark  or  inscription  ;  but  her  own 
pen  has  written  her  character  on  every  mind  capable  of  recieving 
impressions  of  virtue,  and  of  witt.  She  was  surely  the  most 
amiable  of  Women.  I  read  her  letters  with  sympathy  as  well 
as  admiration.  I  am  interested  in  every  circumstance  that 
relates  to  her.  I  received  the  account  of  le  Chateau  de 
Grignans  being  pull’d  down  from  some  french  Persons  who 
pretended  to  be  well  inform’d.  I  am  glad  they  were  mis¬ 
taken,  if  the  Castle  was  demolishd,  I  shd  fear  the  sacred  Tomb 
in  the  Chapel  might  be  sufferd  to  perish.  I  am  surprized  that 
you  had  not  till  lately  seen  the  last  publication  of  Madme 
Sevignes  letters,  I  am  told  that  the  Grand  Daughter,  of  whose 
character  you  speak  with  just  contempt,  had  a  great  jealousy  of 
Madme  de  Sevigne’s  fame  as  a  letter  writer. 

Though  motor  cars  and  road  hogs  were  yet  a 
century  off,  the  young  folk  of  1780  seem  to  have  been 
active  enough,  if  we  are  to  judge  by  the  following 
from  one  who  was  herself  something  of  a  vagrant : 

The  present  fashion  is  to  be  running  about  the  streets  of 
London  all  the  winter,  and  scampering  thro’  the  turnpike  roads 
all  the  summer,  as  if  the  way  to  be  happy  was  never  to  be  at 
rest.  The  young  ladies  are  in  good  training  for  ballad  singers 
in  the  streets,  and  the  young  gentlemen  for  couriers  and  post¬ 
boys. 

From  a  long  letter  about  family  affairs  from  her 
sister-in-law  Mrs.  William  Robinson  (of  Denton 
Court,  Kent)  we  gather  that  her  brother  the  Recorder 
of  Canterbury  had  “  carried  his  election  in  a  very 
honourable  manner  with  no  expense  but  what  was 
perfectly  legal,  and  I  believe  not  much  of  that  neither 
Sir  Horace  Mann  and  Mr.  Oxenden  were  stewards  at 
the  races,  and  her  niece  was  said  to  dance  a  good 
minuet.  “  We  had  the  head  of  a  College  dined  with 
us  on  Thursday  who  set  out  that  evening  in  order  to 
reach  Cambridge  on  Saturday  to  give  his  interest  for 
Mr.  Pitt,  who  is  under  his  care  and  whom  he  speaks 


i78o  AN  ESSAY  THEME  99 

of  as  a  promising  young  gentleman.”  And  William 
Pitt  did  not  altogether  belie  his  tutor’s  forecast  ! 

The  following  extract  was  sent  to  Mrs.  Climenson 
by  a  friend  who  had  come  across  it  amongst  old 
family  papers,  and  may  be  introduced  here  as  illustrat¬ 
ing  one  contemporary  view  of  the  characters  of  Mrs. 
Montagu  and  her  learned  friend  at  Deal,  and  also  as 
showing  the  pabulum  on  which  the  younger  Pitt  was 
nurtured  as  a  boy  of  eleven,  ten  years  previously. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Doctor  Wilson  to  Mr.  Pitt  when 
1 1  years  old ,  Dr.  Wilson  was  tutor  to  Mr.  Pitt ,  and 
some  other  great  men. 

(After  praising  some  essay  of  Mr.  Pitt’s  writing  and  re¬ 
questing  him  to  continue  to  write,  he  goes  on  thus  :) 

What  think  you  of  bringing  Mrs.  Montagu  and  Mrs. 
Carter  on  this  charming  theatre  ?  The  similarity  of  those 
Ladies  Characters  in  some  points,  and  their  dissimilarity  in 
others,  would  be  finely  pourtrayed  by  your  pen  and  might  give 
you  an  opportunity  of  determining  the  just  merits  and  standard 
of  a  literary  female  :  The  One  is  an  highly  instructive  accom¬ 
plished  Woman  possessed  of  great  affluence,  who  endulges 
herself  in  a  chaste  display  of  fashionable  as  well  as  literary 
Elegance,  makes  her  Drawing  Room  the  Lyceum  of  the  day, 
maintains  a  luxurious  hospitality  for  the  Votaries  of  that  Science 
which  she  loves,  and  patronises  the  learning  which  She  has 
herself  adorned.  The  Other  in  a  state  of  Mediocrity  is 
humble  as  if  she  knew  nothing,  While  She  is  not  only  the  most 
learned  Woman  of  any  age  but  one  of  the  most  learned  Persons 
of  that  in  which  She  lives  :  The  pure  sublime  Genius  which 
never  swerves  from  Virtue,  accompanied  her  in  the  paths  of 
rigid  Discretion  and  is  contented  to  slumber  while  its  favorite 
Votary  is  employed  in  the  Daily  habitual  exercise  of  domestic 
Duties.  This  Colloquy  should  take  place  between  Justice, 
accompanied  by  Vanity,  enforcing  Reward,  and  merit  attended 
by  modesty,  who  will  scarce  suffer  an  acceptance.  They  may 
be  made  to  contend,  not  for  their  own,  but  each  other’s  Genius 
and  Virtues,  and  the  Scene  may  conclude  with  a  well  decorated 
Notice  of  that  handsome  Independance  which  the  former  has 
attached  to  the  Valuable  life  of  the  latter.  This,  in  your 


ioo  A  HOUSE  OF  PERICLES  17S0 

hands  will  form  a  most  entertaining,  instructive  and  exemplary 
Picture,  etc. 

In  a  letter  to  her  sister,  of  August  13,  is  the  record 
of  a  three  days’  circular  tour  from  Shooter’s  Hill : 

I  left  Shooters  Hill  as  soon  as  breakfast  was  over  on  monday, 
went  to  Portman  Square  to  see  how  things  were  going  on,  paid 
entirely  for  all  that  has  yet  been  done,  and  gave  drafts  of  credit 
on  my  Banker  for  a  great  deal  yet  unfinish’d,  so  that  some  of 
my  artists  are  my  Debtors,  none  my  creditors  ;  but  where  the 
materials  are  expensive,  or  the  work  tedious,  I  think  it  is 
reasonable  to  pay  in  part  before  the  things  are  compleat.  As 
soon  as  these  matters  were  dispatch’d  I  set  out  for  Mrs.  Bos- 
cawens  at  Richmond,  and  arrived  there  a  quarter  before  4 
o’clock.  The  evening  was  very  fine,  and  favoured  our  walk 
in  her  pretty  garden  and  grounds  ;  this  was  enjoy’d  again  on 
tuesday  morning,  in  the  evening  we  went  to  Lady  Juliana 
Penns,  where  we  met  Madme  de  Boufler,  Mr.  Walpole,  and 
many  persons  of  the  great  World.  On  Wednesday  morning  I 
breakfasted  with  my  Friend  old  Mrs.  Boscawen,  and  in  the 
evening  got  home.  To  begin  the  day  in  the  Society  of  a  good 
and  agreable  Friend,  and  conclude  it  at  a  pleasant  home,  makes 
a  happy  day. 

The  Portman  Square  house  was  now  practically 
completed,  and  “  Hermes  ”  Harris  (only  a  month  or 
so  before  his  death)  writes  with  truly  magnificent 
imagery  : 

I  am  to  inform  you  I  have  seen  an  Edifice,  which  for  the 
time  made  me  imagine  I  was  at  Athens,  in  a  House  of  Pericles, 
built  by  Phidias. 

Where  my  Reverie  ended,  I  felt  a  more  solid  satisfaction  of 
reflecting,  that,  in  my  own  Country,  the  Genius  of  Phidias, 
could  still  produce  an  Architect,  and  the  Genius  of  Pericles 
still  produce  a  Patroness. 

By  the  courtesy  of  the  late  Lord  Portman,  I  was 
shown  all  the  principal  rooms  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
building  last  year  ;  but  having  quoted  Mr.  James 
Harris’s  eulogy,  any  comment  I  could  add  must  be  in 
the  nature  of  bathos.  It  is  a  fine,  roomy,  substantial 


MONTAGU  HOUSE,  PORTMAN  SQUARE 
By  T.  Hosmer  Shepherd 


i?8o  PAYING  FOR  MONTAGU  HOUSE  ioi 


house  of  its  period,  well  contrived  for  the  entertain¬ 
ment  of  a  host  of  friends.  The  decorations  have  of 
course  been  long  since  altered  and  renewed,  but  the 
scagliola  pillars  and  the  painted  ceilings  and  door 
heads,  the  carved  marble  mantels  and  other  ornamenta¬ 
tion,  survive  ;  and,  whilst  deprecating  comparisons 
between  Stuart  and  Phidias — or  Mrs.  Montagu  and 
Pericles,  for  that  matter  ! — one  could  imagine  that 
the  great  Blue  Stocking  would  be  very  becomingly 
domiciled  there,  and  that  her  assemblies  would  gather 
bravely  in  its  spacious  reception  rooms. 

Of  its  cost  she  writes  again  this  autumn  to  Mrs. 
Carter  : 

I  believe  many  of  my  Friends  have  been  afraid  my  great 
House  shd  be  an  inconvenience  to  my  purse.  When  I  began 
it  we  had  not  a  French  and  Spanish  War,  and  money  was  not 
scarce,  and  I  had  great  reason  to  hope  to  sell  my  House  in  Hill 
Street  ;  the  money  it  was  to  bring  me  I  always  intended  shd 
go  towards  defraying  the  expence  of  the  new  House.  How¬ 
ever,  I  accomodated  my  expences  to  the  times,  and  such  are  the 
resourses  of  economy  that  from  the  first  of  JanV  1775  to  the 
Ist  of  Jan^  1780  I  had  only  exceeded  my  income,  taking  the 
5  years  together,  only  a  total  of  eight  hundred  pounds  one 
shilling  and  two  pence  and  my  House  was  then  paid  for  as  far 
as  it  was  advanced.  I  hope  from  the  year  80  to  81  I  shall  not 
be  above  £lOO  beyond  my  income  and  my  House  still  paid  for 
as  far  as  finished.  Mr.  Montagu’s  legacies,  funeral  expences, 
the  large  expence  of  Mourning,  which  a  Person  who  has  so 
many  House  Servants  and  dependants  as  yr  HbIe  Servant  I  do 
not  put  into  the  account,  they  are  a  just  charge  on  the  whole 
property,  neither  do  I  reckon  the  expence  of  Surveyers  and 
Lawyers  on  my  new  purchase  in  Northumberland  into  my 
personal  expences  ;  I  consider  them  as  part  of  the  purchase. 

I  have  also  bought  the  Leases  of  some  ground  for  my  garden 
in  Portman  Square  that  I  consider  also  as  no  debt  incurred,  the 
equivalent  remaining  to  my  Heirs.  Within  the  annual  income 
of  the  5  years  I  have  paid  all  my  Expences  of  every  kind,  paid 
the  Workmen  at  my  new  House  for  what  was  done  in  the  five 
years,  and  also  paid  for  a  service  of  plate  and  renewd  a  fine 
with  the  Bishop  of  Durham  for  certain  things  which  are  held 
of  him. 


102  MRS.  MONTAGU  AT  SIXTY  1780 

The  new  Northumberland  purchase  was  Kendal 
mines  and  property,  adjoining  Denton,  which  cost  her 
^30,000  ;  the  fine  to  the  Bishop  of  Durham  was 
rental  of  coal  mines  belonging  to  him  and  worked 
by  her. 

On  October  2,  Elizabeth  Montagu  reached  the 
age  of  sixty.  She  had  long,  though  quite  insincerely, 
been  referring  to  herself  as  an  old  woman,  and 
lecturing  Mrs.  Vesey  on  the  serenities  of  la  vieillesse  ; 
but  as  a  matter  of  fact  she  was  still  remarkably  active, 
physically  and  mentally.  Delicate  constitutionally  she 
had  always  been  ;  but  a  woman  who,  in  spite  of 
chronic  stomachic  troubles,  could  personally  ad¬ 
minister  large  houses  and  households  in  London,  at 
Sandleford  and  Denton,  farms  in  Yorkshire  and  Berk¬ 
shire,  and  collieries  in  Northumberland  ;  could 
regularly  travel  the  often  abominable  roads  between 
London,  Tunbridge,  Bath,  Sandleford,  and  Newcastle  ; 
could  entertain  largely  and  continuously  and  pay  a 
succession  of  visits  to  country  houses  ;  could  carry  on 
an  immense  correspondence  whilst  forced  to  write  in 
the  most  uncomfortable  position  ;  could  read  con¬ 
stantly,  make  many  calls,  attend  drawing-rooms,  and 
conduct  a  large  amount  of  business  and  accounts 
connected  with  her  mines,  estates,  and  building,  could 
hardly  as  yet  complain  seriously  of  the  inroads  of 
decrepitude.  Frail  in  looks  and  constitution  she  must 
have  been,  but  the  vivacity  and  spirit,  which  Conyers 
Middleton  had  done  so  much  to  develop  in  her  child¬ 
hood,  still  supported  her  natural  energy  of  charac¬ 
ter,  and  still  triumphed  over  physical  ailments  and 
advancing  years. 


To  Mr.  Pepys 

I  hear  that  Mr.  Moisey  gave  you  a  splendid  ball.  On 
friday  my  young  folks  went  to  a  Ball  at  the  Mansion  House  at 
Newbury  where  all  the  Misses  in  the  Town  display’d  the 
terrible  graces  of  the  Minouets.  A  tradesmans  daughter 


1780 


BLOUZALINDAS 


103 


call’d  for  le  minouet  de  la  Cour  ;  should  you  have  expected  to 
find  the  vanities  of  Versailles  in  a  shop  at  Newbury  ?  Then 
for  the  dresses  Mambrino’s  Helmet  was  a  mere  scullcap  com¬ 
pared  to  some  of  the  Misses  caps,  the  Gorgons  would  have  hid 
their  diminished  heads,  had  they  beheld  the  wondrous  edifices 
of  curled  hair  and  feathers  on  some  of  the  fair  blouzelindas. 
The  Taylors  Daughter  majestically  saild  her  minouet  in  a 
Sultana,  her  Mother  looking  with  ecstasy  on  her  Daughters 
air  and  shape,  she  herself  only  dress’d  in  a  Circassian  robe  and 
a  Queen’s  night  cap  on  her  head.  I  believe  there  was  as  much 
folly  in  the  World  in  the  last  century  as  now,  but  then  the 
follies  fitted  those  who  wore  them,  they  were  shaped  and 
fashion’d  to  each  degree  and  character.  Tho  formerly  for 
fools  it  was  thought  motley  was  the  only  wear ,  Vanity  has 
overuled  and  establish’d  an  uniform  for  all  ranks  ages  and 
characters,  and  with  distinctions  of  dress  many  moral  and 
civil  distinctions  are  lost.  The  Newbury  Misses  caps  and 
garments  have  led  me  into  reflections  too  serious  for  a  letter, 
but  levities  naturally  are  attended  with  great  consequences,  so 
I  lay  the  blame  on  the  nature  of  things,  and  take  it  off  from 
myself. 

“  Blouzalinda  ”  was  the  unromantic  milkmaid  of 
Gay’s  Shepherd's  Week.  Mr.  Webster  assures  me 
that  a  “  Sultane  ”  was  a  “  kind  of  gown  trimmed  with 
buttons  and  loops,”  which  I  fear  my  lady  readers  will 
consider  a  very  masculine  description.  “  Circassian  ” 
was  a  mixture  of  wool  and  cotton.  A  “  queen’s 
nightcap  ”  is  beyond  my  research. 

I  am  more  and  more  in  love  with  my  new  House.  When 
a  fog  obscures  Hillstreet  there  is  a  blue  sky  and  a  clear  atmo¬ 
sphere  in  Portman  Square,  and  then  for  my  dwelling  it  is  so 
convenient  and  cheerful  as  a  place  of  retirement,  so  ample  for 
the  devoirs  of  Society,  and  so  calculated  for  Assemblies  that  it 
will  suit  all  ones  humours,  and  adapt  itself  to  all  ones  purposes. 
I  congratulate  myself  every  hour  on  having  taken  the  trouble 
to  build  for  myself.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  news  paper 
mentioned  that  Montagu  carried  the  prize  the  other  day  for  an 
english  declamation  ;  as  he  has  been  so  short  a  time  at  the 
University,  and  had  many  young  Men  of  distinguished  char¬ 
acters  for  his  competitors,  you  may  imagine  I  am  not  a  little 
pleased  with  his  success. 


io4  GEORGE  LEWIS  SCOTT  1780 

But  Mrs.  Montagu’s  architectural  ambitions  were 
not  confined  to  Portman  Square  ;  and  we  find  her 
writing  to  Mr.  Pepys  this  October  from  Sandleford  : 

I  had  the  satisfaction  of  settling  with  Mr.  Wyatt  on  Friday 
last  the  plan  for  two  charming  rooms  he  is  to  make  me  here. 
The  largest  will  be  forty  feet  long  and  in  due  proportions  of 
heighth  and  breadth,  the  South  windows  will  command  a  very 
rich  and  gay  prospect,  and  will  give  me  all  the  splendours  of  a 
Summer  when  I  am  inclined  to  the  allegro  ;  when  I  am 
more  disposed  to  the  penseroso,  those  windows  may  be  shut 
against  the  garish  day  and  a  large  gothick  window  be  thrown 
open. 

Mr.  Pepys  had  just  moved  to  Bath,  and  was 
rejoicing  in  the  society  of  Mr.  Thomas  Bowdler  (of 
“  Family  Shakespeare  ”  fame)  and  his  family,  to  whom 
Mrs.  Montagu  had  introduced  him. 

Young  Matthew  Montagu  had  now  left  Harrow 
and  gone  up  to  Cambridge. 

In  October  she  went  from  Sandleford  for  the 
autumn  visit  to  Bath  which  Dr.  Moisey  had  exacted 
from  her  ;  and  the  presence  of  some  special  friends 
made  her  sojourn  there  much  more  enjoyable  than 
that  of  the  spring  had  been.  Amongst  these  were  her 
beloved  Primate  (the  Archbishop  of  Armagh)  and  his 
brother  Sir  William,  Mrs.  Carter  and  the  Penningtons, 
Mr.  Yorke  (Lord  Hardwicke’s  brother),  the  Bowdlers, 
and  Mr.  Sheridan.  Her  nephew  Matthew,  entered 
this  term  as  a  gentleman  commoner  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge,  greatly  pleased  his  aunt  by  dutiful  reports 
of  his  studies  and  establishment.  On  December  7 
George  Lewis  Scott,  her  sister’s  husband,  died.  Sarah 
Scott  and  he  had  long  been  separated,  and  gone  their 
several  ways,  but  these  letters  do  not  reveal  their 
story.  Mrs.  Scott  was,  intrinsically,  an  old  maid  ; 
afflicted  by  terrible  headaches,  clever  with  her  pen,  and 
somewhat  caustic  with  her  tongue.  Her  surviving 
letters  to  her  sister  are  many  of  them  admirable 
gossip,  and  besides  M-illenium  Hall  she  did  a  good 


1780 


TOM  LYTTELTON’S  VISION 


105 


deal  of  translation.  All  her  papers  were  destroyed  on 
her  death  at  Catton  near  Norwich  in  1795  ;  and  as 
she  had  a  large  circle  of  distinguished  acquaintance 
during  her  life  at  Bath-Easton  and  Catton,  and  was 
herself  by  no  means  devoid  of  wit  and  humour,  many 
useful  links  in  our  story  are  lost.  Scott  was  a  fine 
personable  man,  a  brilliant  mathematician  and  one  of 
the  preceptors  of  George  III.,  though  at  one  time 
suspect  of  Jacobinism.  Mrs.  Montagu,  it  will  be 
remembered,  reported  him  to  her  sister  at  some 
ceremony  in  1779  as  “  Your  Spousey  looking  fat  and 
well  ”  ;  and  it  seems  pretty  clear  that  the  marriage 
was  a  mistake,  and  the  separation  a  success,  for  both. 

The  following  letter  from  Dr.  James  Johnstone, 
the  old  friend  and  physician  of  the  Lyttelton  family, 
recalls  the  event  which  had  happened  in  the  previous 
November,  but  to  which  no  detailed  reference  has 
come  to  light  in  this  correspondence — namely,  the 
sudden  death  of  Tom,  the  “  wicked  ”  second  Lord 
Lyttelton.  So  tragic  a  happening  to  a  man  for  whom 
Mrs.  Montagu  retained  a  deep  and  melancholy  interest 
cannot  have  passed  without  much  comment,  and  there 
is  little  doubt  that  letters  referring  to  it  have  been 
removed  from  the  collection. 

Without  attempting  here  to  pursue  further  the 
story  of  the  convenient  and  secluded  Pitt  Place, 
Epsom  (which  Lord  Lyttelton  the  second  greatly 
preferred  to  Hagley,  where,  he  said,  “  I  might  die  of 
ennui  before  anything  like  the  necessary  remedy  could 
be  found  ”),  or  of  its  lady  guests,  whom  Horace 
Walpole  did  not  scruple  to  describe  (quite  in¬ 
accurately)  as  “  four  girls  picked  up  in  the  Strand,” 
Dr.  Johnstone’s  letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu  is  here  in 
part  transcribed  as  giving  the  considered  verdict 
of  one  who  knew  his  Lordship  and  his  history  very 
intimately. 


io  6 


ANOTHER  VILLIERS 


1780 


From  Dr.  J.  Johnstone 

?  6  June. 

I  was  indeed  exceedingly  shocked  by  Ld  Lyttelton’s  sudden 
death,  and  felt  particularly  on  that  occasion  that  I  loved  him 
more  than  I  was  before  aware  off.  He  certainly  began  to 
shew  some  signs  of  amendment,  some  regard  to  principle  before 
he  died  :  If  his  Lady  could  have  been  reconciled  to  have  lived 
with  him  again,  I  think  she  might  have  had  a  favourable 
influence  over  him  :  the  seeds  of  a  good  education,  too  much 
choaked,  began  to  shoot  up  to  some  strength.  I  remember 
often  to  have  talked  and  even  disputed  with  him  on  the  founda¬ 
tions  of  natural  religion,  and  along  with  his  ever  beloved  and 
revered  Father,  to  have  endeavoured  to  answer  the  objections 
he  made  to  the  existance  of  God — from  talking  in  this  strange 
manner  he  passed  afterwards  into  a  profession  of  Deism — to 
which  of  late  he  added  a  better  opinion  of  the  Christian  System 
— whatever  might  be  his  real  religious  persuasion,  he  certainly 
was  not  free  from  superstition.  His  dream  was  truly  extra¬ 
ordinary,  altho’  it  might  not  be  impossible  to  give  some  probable 
account  of  it  as  originating  from  what  he  feard  and  loved,  viz. 
Death  and  Women,  strangely  jumbled  in  his  sleep,  And,  tho’ 
his  death  (which  I  believe  was  occasioned  by  a  Spasm  in  the 
Glottis,  the  narrow  entrance  of  the  windpipe),  might  have 
been  hastened  by  his  apprehensions,  yet  I  think  the  whole, 
however  considered  and  accounted  for,  must  fairly  be  reckoned 
one  of  those  striking  warnings  which  sometimes  are  given  by 
that  great  Being  who  bestows  all  life,  and  withdraws  it  at  his 
pleasure.  .  .  .  The  shock  occasioned  in  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
feeble  nervous  worn  out  constitution  by  his  Vision  perhaps 
acted  as  a  cause  of  his  death.  I  think  it  is  probable  it  did  so.  .  .  . 
Your  faithful  most  obedient  and  obliged  Servant 

J.  Johnstone. 

Dr.  Johnstone  in  a  later  letter  speaks  of  the  late 
Lord  Lyttelton  as  “  infinitely  variable  ;  another  Villiers 
Duke  of  Buckingham,  everything  by  turns  and  nothing 
long,”  and  thinks  he  had  in  all  probability  some¬ 
thing  of  insanity  in  his  frame,  but  that  possibly  if 
his  deserted  wife  had  made  a  second  effort  to  live 
with  and  to  redeem  him  she  might  have  succeeded. 


i7so  MRS.  CARTER  ON  TOM  LYTTELTON  107 


In  this  Mrs.  Montagu  did  not  agree,  being  a  little 
sceptical  about  the  reformation  of  rakes. 

It  is  pleasantly  remarkable  that  it  should  be  from 
the  pious  and  estimable  Mrs.  Carter  that  we  have 
perhaps  the  shrewdest  and  truest  estimate  of  Lyttelton’s 
character : 

With  great  abilities,  generally  very  ill  applied  ;  with  a 
strong  sense  of  religion  which  he  never  suffered  to  influence 
his  conduct,  his  days  were  mostly  passed  in  “  splendid  misery,” 
and  in  the  painful  alternations  of  the  most  extravagant  gaiety, 
and  the  deepest  despair — The  delight  when  he  pleased  of  the 
first  and  most  select  society,  he  chose  to  pass  his  time  for  the 
chief  part  with  the  most  profligate  and  abandoned  of  both 
sexes.  Solitude  was  to  him  the  most  unsupportable  torment, 
and  to  banish  reflection  he  fled  to  company  he  despised  and 
ridiculed. 

The  year’s  letters  close  with  references  to  the  death 
of  Dr.  John  Fothergill,  the  Quaker  philanthropist, 
who  had  been  Mrs.  Montagu’s  friend  and  adviser  of 
many  years;  to  Mr.  Vesey,  who  “avails  himself  of 
the  sick  man’s  privilege  to  be  peevish,  while  she 
exceeds  the  wife’s  duty  to  be  officious  ”  ;  and  to 
Mr.  Thrale,  of  whom  the  accounts  encourage  neither 
great  hopes  nor  immediate  fears. 


1781 


MOVING  INTO  MONTAGU  HOUSE - 

Johnson’s  lifes,  chatterton,  wilkes 


Spring  visit  to  Bath.  Alterations  at  Sandleford.  The  Octagon  Room. 
Dr.  Johnson’s  Lives  ;  Letter  from  Lord  Hardwicke.  The  “  Emperor 
of  Germany.”  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Hannah  More  at  Bath.  The 
Whisky.  Montagu  House,  Portman  Square,  finished.  The  move 
from  Hill  Street.  A  family  dinner.  Workmen  and  fittings.  Rowley’s 
Poems.  Disposing  of  the  Hill  Street  house.  Miss  Pulteney. 


The  makers  of  books  continued  amongst  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  most  faithful  and  solicitous  correspondents. 

February  of  this  year  brought  another  letter  from 
Robert  Potter,  who  was  completing  his  translation  of 
Euripides  and  begged  for  her  interest  with  the  Primate 
as  a  patron  ;  and  in  March  came  one  from  Dr. 
Benjamin  Kennicott,  the  great  Hebraist  and  biblical 
scholar,  offering  his  edition  of  the  Hebrew  Bible. 

At  the  end  of  this  month  an  attack  of  her  “  spasms  ” 
drove  Mrs.  Montagu  again  to  Bath  ;  whence  a  pro¬ 
phetic  sentence  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  “  Mr.  Thrale  is  much 
recovered  but  indulges  so  much  in  the  luxuries  of  the 
table  he  will  bring  on  a  relapse,”  foretold  precisely 
what  happened  with  fatal  result  at  Streatham  in  the 
early  morning  of  April  4 — just  a  week  later. 

The  new  building  work  at  Sandleford,  mentioned 
last  autumn,  by  which  James  Wyatt  was  to  convert  the 
old  monk’s  chapel  of  the  Priory  into  a  spacious  dining- 
hall,  was  put  in  hand  this  spring,  and  finished  in  June  : 

On  the  Thursday  after  you  left  London  we  set  out  for 
Sandleford,  when  I  found  Mr.  Wyat  had  converted  the  gloomy 

108 


i7si  OCTAGON  ROOM  AT  SANDLEFORD  109 

Chapel  into  a  charming  room  and  with  such  expedition  that 
it  is  now  quite  compleat  and  fit  for  use.  The  Walls  of  the 
Octagon  room  are  erected  and  the  Roof  will  in  a  few  days  be  so 
far  compleated  as  to  defend  one  from  rain  as  one  passes  from 
the  House  to  the  new  eating  room.  Mr.  Brown  is  to  come 
to  me  the  middle  of  July  in  order  to  lead  the  View  from  the 
East  window  of  the  Eating  room 

Through  arched  roof  of  twilight  Groves, 

And  Shadows  brown  that  Sylvan  loves. 

The  new  dining-room  was  connected  with  the 
main  building  by  this  Octagon  Room,  an  extremely 
elegant  drawing-room  with  classical  adornment,  which 
still  remains  almost  exactly  as  Mrs.  Montagu  left  it. 
“  I  think,”  she  writes  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  “  my  reformed 
chapel — for  what  has  been  taken  from  the  owls,  the 
bats,  the  rats  and  mice,  to  be  dedicated  to  the  sober 
use  of  sober  society  and  a  temperate  dinner,  preceded 
and  concluded  by  a  grace,  may  rather  be  esteemed 
reformed  and  purified  than  polluted  and  debased — 
looks  cheerful  and  pleasant  from  the  windows, 
and  within  very  comfortable  from  a  large  fire.”  The 
blue  tiling  to  complete  the  Octagon  Room  was  long 
in  coming,  but 

Mr.  Wyat’s  delay  does  not  extend  to  the  eating  room  in 
which  we  have  dined  constantly  for  these  ten  days,  and  such 
are  its  charms,  that  a  leg  of  mutton  in  that  room  is  preferable 
to  a  Haunch  of  venison  in  any  other  almost  that  I  know  ; 
my  barn  door  fowl  eaten  there  is  more  delicate  than  le  coq 
de  Bruyere,  and  my  pigeons  are  preferable  to  ortolans,  and  I 
am  sure  all  my  geese  will  be  swans,  when  Mr.  Brown  has 
improved  the  little  river  which  divides  Admiral  Derby’s  territory 
and  mine.1 

The  following  letter  from  Lord  Hardwicke  heralds 
the  storm  which  swept  the  coterie  and  the  friends  of 
the  first  Lord  Lyttelton  on  the  publication  of  the  final 
series  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  Poets.  To  avoid 


1  Admiral  Darby  was  her  neighbour  at  Newtown. 


Iio  JOHNSON’S  LIFE  OF  LYTTELTON  1781 


the  disjointed  references  in  the  chronological  sequence 
of  the  Letters  the  whole  rather  laughable  story  of  this 
terrible  affray  has  been  brought  together  in  the  paper 
on  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Montagu,  which  precedes 
the  year  1784,  in  which  the  Doctor  died. 


From  Lord  Hardwicke 

St.  James’s  Square,  Feb.  zo th. 

I  beg  leave  to  send  you  the  unpublished  vol.  of  Dr.  Johnson 
which  contains  Lord  Lyttelton’s  life  ;  a  more  unfair  and 
uncandid  account  I  never  read,  and  he  (the  Dr.),  deserves  to 
be  severely  chastised  for  it.  I  have  perused  some  other  memoirs 
of  Akenside,  Dyer,  &c.,  all  in  the  same  style.  The  man’s 
head  is  turned  from  the  pay  of  booksellers,  and  the  puffs  of 
some  literary  circles. 

There  is  another  vol.  which  takes  in  the  lives  above  refered 
to  ;  Mallet  is  the  last  I  have  nothing  to  say  for  but  Ld  L — tons 
character  I  will  support  to  the  last. 

P.S. — Thompson  is  as  ill-treated  as  his  patron  Lord 
Lyttelton,  and  probably  on  his  account. 

From  her  Sister 

The  Man  who  keeps  the  Bear  Inn  at  Bath  received  last 
week  a  letter  (anonymous  I  suppose,  at  least  in  effect)  acquainting 
him  that  the  Emperor  of  Germany  arrived  at  Exeter  on  such 

a  day,  had  been  at  Ld  Courtenayes  and  Sr - Acklands,  and 

wou’d  on  such  a  day  be  at  Bath,  and  intended  to  take  up  his 
Lodging  at  his  house.  The  Man  informed  the  Corporation, 
they  consulted  together  on  the  proper  manner  of  receiving 
him,  clubbd  all  their  wisdom  in  the  composition  of  a  Speech 
proper  to  address  him,  brushd  up  their  Catskin’d  Gowns,  and 
kept  themselves  in  readiness  to  sally  forth  in  due  compliment 
as  soon  as  they  heard  of  his  approach  ;  the  Roads  and  streets 
which  were  in  the  road  from  Exeter  were  crouded  with  an 
expecting  multitude,  when  behold  he  arrived  in  the  shape  of 
a  Horse,  being  no  other  than  a  Racer  so  named,  whose  name 
had  given  opportunity  to  some  facetious  personage  to  hum  the 
Town  in  this  manner.  It  was  a  little  hard  on  the  Inn  Keeper 
who  I  suppose  must  have  collected  provisions  at  considerable 


THE  WHISKY 


1 1 1 


1781 

expence  and  labour  ;  as  for  the  expence  of  genius  to  which 
the  Corporation  had  been  put,  one  hopes  they  are  so  well 
stocked  as  not  to  miss  it  out  of  their  store,  Mayors  and  Aldermen 
being  generally  well  provided.  It  really  put  the  Town  into  a 
very  great  bustle,  but  no  harm  in  that,  for  it  is  now  a  very 
dull  time  there,  anything  that  cou’d  faire  sensation  was  a  benefit. 
He  is  such  a  Traveller  that  when  we  read  in  the  papers  that 
he  was  arrived  in  England  we  were  inclind  to  believe  it,  but 
spent  no  little  time  in  wondering  what  coud  induce  him  to 
land  on  the  Western  shore. 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

Bath,  June  27th. 

Mrs.  Garrick  and  Miss  More  dined  with  me  when  Mrs. 
Garrick  passd  thro  Bath  in  the  way  to  London.  Poor  Woman 
she  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears  at  coming  into  this  House  where 
she  had  often  enjoyd  the  company  of  Mr.  Garrick.  Miss 
More  kindly  went  with  her  as  far  as  Marlbro,  On  Saturday 
we  are  to  go  to  Bristol  to  spend  the  day  with  Miss  More. 

Sandleford,  July  \\th. 

Before  I  return’d  to  this  place  I  passed  a  most  agreable 
day  with  Miss  Hannah  More  and  her  three  sisters,  they  are  all 
Women  of  admirable  sense  and  unaffected  behaviour  and  I 
should  prefer  their  school  to  any  I  have  ever  seen  for  girls, 
whether  very  young  or  Misses  in  their  Teens.  Our  amiable 
Mrs.  Garrick  is  gone  back  to  Hampton. 

I  have  been  most  comfortably  well  all  this  summer.  I 
took  an  airing  of  about  17  miles  yesterday  morning  in  a  one 
horse  chair  of  the  construction  of  Sir  Richard  Jebb  who  had 
the  goodness  to  bespeak  it  for  me.  It  is  a  most  delightful 
machine  in  fair  weather. 

This  carriage  was  called  “  a  Whisky,”  quite  a  new 
vehicle  then,  and  Miss  Gregory  drove  Mrs.  Montagu 
daily  when  fine  over  the  commons  near  Newbury. 

Of  the  Portman  Square  house,  of  which  she  was 
preparing  to  take  possession  this  autumn,  she  writes 
the  following  apologia,  which  helps  to  illustrate  her 
later  character  : 

I  consider  my  new  House  as  a  Palais  de  la  veillesse,  I  have 
endeavourd  to  give  it  a  sort  of  splendid  comfortableness. 


I  12 


MOVING  IN 


1781 


which  should  render  it  pleasing  to  visitants  while  it  is  convenient 
to  the  inhabitant.  Young  people  delight,  and  are  delighted, 
everywhere  ;  I  am  arrived  at  an  age  at  which  it  is  no  easy 
matter  perhaps  to  avoid  the  contempt  of  the  World,  and  ones 
own  inward  dissatisfaction.  A  certain  dignity  of  appearance 
to  the  publick,  and  elegant  accomodations  for  ones  private 
enjoyment  may  in  some  degree  avert  these  evils  ;  and  while 
there  are  many  publick  buildings  dedicated  to  diversions  and 
pleasure,  many  private  Houses  where  every  species  of  luxury 
and  intemperance  spread  their  snares  and  offer  luscious  bates 
to  the  young  and  unwary,  it  is  right  that  Virtue,  prudence, 
and  Temperance,  should  sometimes  keep  open  House,  and 
shew  there  is  a  golden  mean  between  churlish  severity  of 
manners  and  lean  and  sallow  abstinence  in  diet  ;  and  indecent 
gayety  of  behaviour,  and  that  swinish  gluttony  which  n'er  looks 
to  Heav’n  midst  its  gorgeous  feast  hut  crams  and  blasphemes  its 
feeder. 

The  actual  move-in  from  Hill  Street  took  place  in 
December,  and  was  naturally  accompanied  by  a  con¬ 
siderable  upset  of  the  domestic  menage  : 

Tomorrow  I  am  to  go  into  the  city  to  choose  some  lamps 
for  my  hall.  I  hope  by  the  end  of  the  week  the  wishes  of  my 
housekeeper,  the  caprices  of  my  laundry  maid,  the  fancies  of 
my  housemaids,  the  demands  of  my  cook,  and  the  accomodations 
of  my  Butler,  will  all  be  fulfilled,  compleated,  and  answered, 
and  I  assure  you  they  make  a  total  of  no  small  significance.  A 
Betty  Tulls  working  apparatus  is  but  a  feather  on  the  camel’s 
back  yet  it  adds  to  the  load  ;  tho’  I  have  not  denied  requests 
I  have  endeavoured  to  stop  complaints,  for  I  find  if  I  did  not 
discourage  them  I  should  be  plagued  to  death,  for  servants  love 
to  give  significance  to  trifles. 

A  family  dinner  took  place  in  the  middle  of  the 
month  by  way  of  a  preliminary  house-warming  : 

“  The  mind  is  its  own  place,”  says  the  great  Milton  ;  the 
mind  is  its  own  place,  says  the  little  Elizabeth  Montagu  .  .  . 
I  know  not  whether  your  nurse  ever  told  you  a  long  story  of 
a  little  woman  who  lived  in  a  vinegar  bottle.  Mine  did.  I 
was  rather  disposed  to  feel  a  contempt  for  her,  but  I  have  done 
her  more  justice  since  Tuesday,  and  believe  I  may  think  as 


1781 


A  HOUSE-WARMING 


113 

highly  of  her  as  I  do  of  your  humble  servant  in  her  great 
house.  .  .  .  We  were  all  very  cheerful  and  well  pleased,  but 
I  did  not  observe  that  we  eat  more  venison  and  partridge  than 
we  used  to  do  in  a  room  of  more  moderate  dimensions,  nor 
did  the  wine  receive  any  peculiar  zest  because  the  sideboards 
were  placed  under  beautiful  scagliola  pillars  betwixt  which  hung 
the  most  beautiful  and  brilliant  lustres. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  evidently  discovered  —  as 
others  have  often  done — that  the  only  way  to  get 
workmen  out  of  your  new  house  is  to  take  possession 
of  it  yourself.  But  the  process  was  a  little  deafening. 
To  Mrs.  Carter  she  writes  on  Christmas  Eve  : 

You  are  more  le  ton  at  Bath  than  we  are  in  London.  We 
have  not  of  late  given  so  illustrious  examples  of  a  contempt 
of  the  5th  and  7th  commandment.  I  pity  Dr.  Woodcock 
more  than  Mr.  B;  conjugal  love  may  be  dissolved  in  every 
respect,  paternal  never.  Mrs.  Chapone  and  Mesdames  Burrows’s 
dined  with  me  yesterday.  Ld  and  Lady  Dartrey  and  Ld 
Shelburne  and  I  hope  Mrs.  Fielding  (but  have  not  yet  had  an 
answer  from  her  to  my  card)  are  to  dine  with  me  on  thursday. 
It  wd  be  most  inhuman  to  ask  anyone  to  breakfast  with  me, 
but  the  workmen  leave  off  as  soon  as  daylight  retires.  They 
and  I  shall  have  holydays  next  week.  The  drums  of  my  ears 
will  find  great  relief  in  silence.  The  Bishop  of  Durham  and 
Miss  Boughton  are  I  believe  really  going  to  be  married.  .  .  . 
I  think  you  will  read  with  great  pleasure  what  Mr.  Bryant 
has  written  on  the  subject  of  Rowleys  poems,  his  investigations 
shew  wonderful  sagacity,  but  what  does  him  most  honour  is 
the  generosity  with  which  he  has  acted  towards  Chattertons 
family,  on  whom  he  bestows  the  whole  profit  of  the  publica¬ 
tion.  ...  I  am  sure  you  were  rejoyced  that  Lady  Frances 
Coningesby  was  so  happily  released  from  her  sufferings.  Her 
death  was  sudden  and  without  agony.  Ld  Malden  inherits 
about  £8000  a  year  from  her.  Adr.  Walsingham  is  her 
Executrix  and  Residuary  Legatee,  and  it  is  thought  will  get 
about  £40,000.  Ld  Salisbury  is  embellishing  Hatfield  in  the 
most  noble  and  elegant  manner.  He  has  given  out  1000 
tickets  for  a  Ball  there  in  the  Xmas  week.  I  know  you  will 
be  glad  to  hear  my  health  is  not  impaired  by  all  the  fatigues 
I  have  undergone.  The  Duchess  of  Portland  and  Airs.  Delany 
are  come  to  Town  in  perfect  health,  they  arrived  on  friday. 

VOL.  II  I 


NEVER  A  WILKITE 


114 


1781 


It  was  now  eleven  years  since  Thomas  Chatterton 
— not  yet  eighteen — “  the  marvellous  boy,  the  sleep¬ 
less  soul  that  perish’d  in  his  pride,”  had  taken  leave 
of  a  world  that  did  not  care  to  keep  him,  in  his  lonely 
Holborn  attic  ;  yet  there  remained  many  “  wild 
adherents  ”  who  still  believed  him  merely  the  tran¬ 
scriber  of  old  Rowley.  Jacob  Bryant,  Fellow  of 
King’s  and  resident  at  Blenheim,  and  the  Dean  of 
Exeter  were  among  those  who  clung  staunchly  to  the 
antiquity  of  the  poems. 

Lord  Malden,  afterwards  fifth  Earl  of  Essex, 
assumed  the  name  of  Coningsby  on  inheriting  the 
estates  of  his  maternal  grandmother,  the  Countess  of 
Coningsby.  He  had,  according  to  Horace  Walpole’s 
journal  of  this  February,  been  first  favourite  with  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  to  whom  he  had  introduced  “  Perdita,” 
Mrs.  Robinson,  but  “  both  were  disgraced  on  pretence 
of  Lord  Malden’s  intriguing  with  her  himself,  which 
was  well  founded.” 

For  John  Wilkes,  of  the  shocking  fraternity  of 
Medmenham,  the  ally  of  Churchill,  the  writer  of  the 
North  Briton ,  the  butt  of  Hogarth’s  envenomed  pencil, 
the  printer  of  Thomas  Potter’s  outrageous  Essay  on 
Woman ,  it  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  Mrs.  Montagu 
would  have  anything  but  hard  words  ;  to  Wilkes  as 
Martin’s  duellist  and  the  people’s  idol,  imprisoned, 
wounded,  persecuted,  outlawed,  and  to  Wilkes  feted 
and  triumphant,  member  of  Parliament,  alderman 
sheriff  and  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  she  had  become 
serenely  indifferent.  But  the  later  Wilkes,  the  calm 
and  peaceful  democrat,  the  friend  of  liberty  who 
protested  he  was  “  never  a  Wilkite  ” ;  reconciled 
with  the  King,  tete-a-tete  with  Dr.  Johnson,  devoted  to 
the  worthy  editing  of  Catullus  and  Theophrastus, 
welcoming  young  Nelson  to  the  freedom  of  the  city — 
this  was  quite  another  matter.  The  whirligig  of  time 
brought  its  revenges,  and  amongst  them  Wilkes’s 
daughter  became  her  respected  friend,  and  John 


i78i  TEMPLES  OF  SATAN  115 

Wilkes  himself  was  an  invited  guest  to  the  first 
reception  at  Montagu  House. 

The  Hill  Street  house  had  not  yet  been  disposed 
of,  though  much  viewed  and  enquired  after,  and  its 
owner,  having  done  her  flitting,  and  settled  herself  in 
Montagu  House,  waxes  a  little  caustic  on  the  subject : 

Lady  Lothian  had  a  great  desire  to  purchase  my  House  ; 
as  they  did  not  want  it  till  May  I  was  very  desirous  they  shd, 
but  a  Gentleman  who  is  gone  abroad  with  another  Mans  Wife 
(having  left  his  own  in  the  Country)  offering  a  House  in 
St.  James  Square  ;  another  Lady  being  caught  in  adultery, 
the  establishment  of  her  family  therefore  broken  up,  that  is 
to  be  disposed  of  ;  and  Ld  Villiers  run  away  for  debt,  leaving 
a  fine  House  in  Grosvenor  Square  to  be  lett,  Ld  Lothian  seems 
inclined  to  one  of  these  Houses  ;  and  indeed  Lady  Lothian, 
who  is  the  best  of  Women,  is  a  proper  person  to  exorcise  them  ; 
so  my  House,  which  has  never  broken  any  of  the  ten  command¬ 
ments,  must  wait  till  these  Temples  of  Satan  are  disposed  of. 

The  proposal  to  place  the  rather  intractable 
daughter  of  the  Pulteneys  under  French  convent 
tutelage  did  not  at  all  appeal  to  Mrs.  Montagu  : 

I  heartily  wish  that  Miss  P  may  find  herself  more  disposed 
to  obey  a  stranger  than  to  obey  her  Parents,  for  undoubtedly 
the  Stranger  has  not  so  much  authority  and  power  as  the 
Parent.  It  was  told  me  that  she  wd  sometimes  go  out  in  the 
evening  in  the  Coach  against  her  Mothers  will.  Surely  Mrs. 
Pulteney  cd  make  her  Coachman  obedient  if  she  could  not 
make  her  Daughter  dutiful,  I  should  as  soon  let  a  girl  buy 
a  Cork  jacket,  to  swim  across  the  Thames,  as  let  her  order 
my  Coach  to  carry  her  out  at  an  improper  time,  or  to  an 
improper  place.  I  suppose  there  may  be  many  reasons,  which 
did  not  present  themselves  to  me,  to  try  extraordinary  measures 
to  counteract  the  sad  effects  of  such  indulgence  as  this  poor 
Child  has  been  treated  with.  I  heartily  wish  all  possible  success 
to  the  scheme,  but  I  own  I  have  more  confidence  in  Pulteneys 
good  sense  and  firmness  at  last  working  upon  the  young  Ladys 
little  caprices,  than  any  other  means  of  subduing  them. 


1782 


A  CAPABLE  WIDOW - BRITISH  PRESTIGE  RESTORED 

BY  THE  NAVY  AND  GIBRALTAR 


Gloomy  political  outlook.  The  Ministry  resign.  Lord  Rockingham 
returns.  Pitt  at  the  Exchequer.  Warton  on  Pope.  Fete  for  Prince 
of  Wales.  Texier’s  readings.  Mrs.  Garrick’s  grief.  Influenza.  Sir 
Richard  Jebb.  Delights  of  the  new  house.  Cipriani’s  commode. 
Second  marriages.  A  capable  widow.  Lord  Rockingham’s  death. 
Miss  Burney’s  Cecilia.  Haymakers’  feast.  Lord  Shelburne  First 
Lord.  Life  at  Sandleford.  Lancelot  Brown.  Bad  harvest.  Mr. 
Vesey.  Rousseau.  Miss  Gregory  goes  to  Edinburgh.  Miss  Pulteney 
sent  to  a  convent.  Lord  Bath’s  estate.  Howe  and  Rodney.  Prince 
of  Wales  at  Lady  Lucan’s.  Gibraltar.  Potter’s  Euripides.  The 
Cameo.  Death  of  Lord  Karnes. 


Politically,  the  year  1782  opened  gloomily  enough, 
and  it  was  not  now  Mrs.  Vesey  alone  who  began  to 
despair  of  the  country,  and  see  ruin  imminent.  The 
capitulation  of  Cornwallis  to  Washington  at  York 
Town  had  practically  ended  the  American  War.  The 
news  had  fallen  like  a  thunderbolt,  and  Lord  North, 
pacing  wildly  up  and  down  his  room,  threw  up  his 
arms,  exclaiming  “  It  is  all  over.”  Ireland  asserted 
her  independence.  Spain  demanded  the  surrender  of 
Gibraltar  as  the  price  of  peace.  France  proposed 
that  England  should  retain  Bengal  alone  of  her  Indian 
conquests.  De  Bouille  had  retaken  Rodney’s  cap¬ 
tured  St.  Eustatia  ;  Demerara,  Essequibo,  and  St. 
Kitts  were  lost  ;  our  attack  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope 
was  frustrated,  and  Minorca  surrendered. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was,  as  has  already  been  said,  very 
little  of  a  politician.  Her  interests  were  largely 

Il6 


1782 


“  WE  ARE  ALL  OUT  ” 


1 17 

personal,  and  she  numbered  amongst  her  friends 
prominent  people  on  both  sides  in  Parliament.  She 
was  very  comfortably  settled  in  her  great  new  house, 
and  was  entertaining  regularly  there  during  this 
winter  and  spring.  To  her  dear  Sylph  in  Ireland  she 
reports  that  Mrs.  Carter  and  Mrs.  Barbauld,  whose 
boys’  school  at  Palgrave  and  children’s  hymns  were 
already  famous  ;  Dr.  Warton,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
and  other  “  valuable  friends,  agreeable  and  polite 
people,  learned  men  and  ingenious  women,”  were 
dining  at  her  table  ;  and  on  March  20, 

between  the  time  of  the  dessert  and  the  coffee  one  of  my 
guests  had  a  note  from  a  considerable  person  in  the  H.  of 
Commons,  who  also  has  a  considerable  place  ;  it  was  this  : 
“  we  are  all  out.”  Lord  North  informed  the  house  that  his 
Majesty  had  resolved  on  forming  a  new  administration,  so  the 
house  adjourned  to  Monday  next.  It  is  generally  believed 
Lord  Shelbourne,  Lord  Gower  and  the  Duke  of  Grafton  are 
to  come  in. 

The  general  anticipation  as  to  the  new  ministry 
which  was  to  take  the  place  of  Lord  North’s  was  not, 
however,  to  be  immediately  verified.  The  King 
would  probably  have  chosen  Lord  Shelburne,  but  it 
was  felt  that  Shelburne  was  not,  whatever  his  virtues, 
a  heaven-born  leader,  and  that  Rockingham,  the 
repealer  of  the  Stamp  Act,  whom  George  had  snuffed 
out  of  office  sixteen  years  before,  was  the  likeliest  of 
the  Whigs — since  Whigs  it  must  be — to  command  a 
following  in  Parliament.  So  Rockingham  was  most 
unwillingly  sent  for.  Shelburne  and  Fox  became 
Secretaries  of  State,  Burke  Paymaster-General,  but 
without  a  seat  in  the  Cabinet,  and  Sheridan  an  under¬ 
secretary,  whilst  young  William  Pitt,  though  only 
twenty-three,  declined  the  offer  of  a  minor  post, — 
and  found  himself  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
within  four  or  five  months. 

As  I  am  not  consulted  upon  these  occasions  I  do  not  think 
it  necessary  to  declare  my  opinion.  I  shall  chatt  away  to  you 


1 1 8  A  MISTRESS  OF  THE  REVELS  1782 


on  matters  more  on  my  level.  Pray  have  you  read  Dr.  Wartons 
2d  vol  on  the  writings  etc  of  Mr.  Pope.  The  depth  of  judg¬ 
ment  and  learning,  t;he  candor  of  his  observations,  make  this 
work  the  most  perfect  contraste  of  Johnsons  criticisms  that  can 
be  imagined.  The  Muses  guided  the  pen  of  Dr.  Warton,  the 
furies  the  porcupine  quill  of  Johnson.  There  is  too,  just 
published,  a  most  ingenious  work  of  our  friend  Mr.  Soame 
Jenyns  entitled  disquisitions  on  several  subjects.  .  .  .  There  is 
a  grand  Fete  preparing  for  the  Prince  of  Wales  at  Devonshire 
House  for  next  thursday.  Mrs.  Hubbard  had  an  Assembly 
one  night  ;  the  cards  of  invitation  held  forth  the  following 
conditions,  no  husband  to  bring  his  Wife,  or  Wife  her  Husband, 
or  young  lady  her  Chaperon  ;  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  wished 
for,  hoped  for,  expected,  but  to  his  honour  did  not  come.  If 
there  was  such  a  place  for  a  Woman  as  Mistress  of  the  Revels 
in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  Mrs.  Hubbard  would  seem 
perfectly  qualified  for  it. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  dining  in  company  with  Ld  Bristol 
at  Miss  Herveys,  and  they  are  to  dine  with  me  on  Wednesday. 
Texier  read  one  night  at  Harcourt  House,  one  night  at  Mr. 
T:  Pitts,  another  night  here.  We  had  each  10  subscribers  on 
our  list  ;  the  26th.,  I  am  to  have  a  set  of  my  own  appointing 
30  in  number  for  3  readings,  one  in  a  week.  My  eating  room 
makes  a  delightful  Theatre.  Ld  and  Lady  Harcourt,  Mr. 
Walpole,  Lady  Clermont  and  many  of  your  friends  are  on 
my  list  of  subscribers  to  le  Texier.  I  expect  the  Burkes  to 
dine  with  me  on  Saturday.  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Miss  More 
dined  with  me  the  other  day  ;  poor  Mrs.  Garrick  struggles 
with  grief  but  cannot  subdue  it.  Have  you  read  Miss  Mores 
sacred  Dramas  and  her  poem  on  sensibility. 

Hannah  More  and  Mrs.  Garrick  were  the  closest 
of  friends,  and  the  description  by  the  former  of  her 
visit  to  the  widow  at  the  Adelphi  just  after  Garrick’s 
death  is  one  of  the  very  best  of  her  letters.  With  the 
summer  came  a  severe  epidemic  of  influenza,  which 
carried  off  Lord  Rockingham  on  July  1,  only  three 
months  after  his  appointment  as  Prime  Minister. 

“  I  was  last  night  at  Mrs.  Delany,”  she  writes  to  Mrs. 
Carter,  “  who  enquired  much  after  you.  I  am  to  have  Mrs. 
Ord  and  several  of  your  acquaintance  tomorrow  if  the  influenza 
does  not  interpose,  but  at  present  it  is  impossible  to  form  any 


1782 


SECOND  MARRIAGES 


1 19 

scheme  for  tomorrow  with  any  degree  of  confidence.  Every 
hour  some  person  in  a  family  falls  ill,  some  of  my  servants  are 
getting  well  of  the  disorder,  others  falling  ill  of  it  ;  thank  God 
it  is  not  a  dangerous  illness  but  the  most  universal  I  ever  knew.” 

Having  had  a  return  of  her  periodic  spasms,  she 
now  took  the  precaution  of  calling  in  Sir  Richard  Jebb. 

Sir  Richard  says  the  influenza  has  changed  its  character 
within  these  few  days  and  the  disorder  is  of  the  inflamatory 
kind.  Montagu  has  had  it,  and  it  has  been  very  bad  in  Cam¬ 
bridgeshire.  My  tenants  and  black  subjects  in  Northumberland 
are  very  sickly,  and  I  have  lost  several  horses  belonging  to  the 
colliery.  .  .  . 

Fresh  paint  at  Sandleford  kept  her  in  town  till 
July,  but  the  delights  of  Montagu  House  were  some 
compensation  : 

I  must  tell  you  this  is  no  unpleasant  habitation  even  in 
summer.  The  moon  shines  with  all  her  majesty  into  my 
eating  room  and  at  night  I  send  away  the  candles  to  take  a 
moonlight  walk  in  it.  As  to  the  fair  Gregory  she  delights  in 
seeing  the  setting  sun  play  on  the  grand  lustre  while  we  sit 
there  in  the  afternoon,  for  as  it  looks  upon  the  Hampstead 
hills  we  spend  a  great  deal  of  our  time  there.  .  .  .  Cipriani 
has  painted  four  muses  on  the  commode  in  my  dressing  room 
in  his  very  best  manner  tho’  he  has  given  the  mien  of  the 
graces  to  the  spirited  and  lively  physionomy  of  the  favourites 
of  the  God  of  wit. 

Of  the  second  marriage  of  a  mutual  friend  Mrs. 
Montagu  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter  with  a  touch  of  satire  : 

I  always  thought  her  the  perfection  of  the  female  character, 
formed  to  become  the  domestick  situation  and  disposed  to 
obedience.  She  could  not  stir  till  she  received  the  word  of 
command.  I  really  believe  she  was  just  like  Eve  before  she 
eat  the  apple,  at  least  she  answers  to  Milton’s  description  of 
her.  She  would  have  preferred  her  husband’s  discourse  to 
the  angels.  I  am  afraid  you  and  I  my  dear  friend  should  have 
entered  into  some  metaphysical  disquisitions  with  the  angel, 
we  are  not  so  perfectly  the  rib  of  man  as  woman  ought  to  be. 
We  can  think  for  ourselves,  and  also  act  for  ourselves.  When 
a  wife  I  was  obedient  because  it  was  my  duty,  and  being 


120 


LORD  ROCKINGHAM 


1782 


married  to  a  man  of  sense  and  integrity,  obedience  was  not 
painful  or  irksome,  in  early  youth  a  director  perhaps  is  necessary 
if  the  sphere  of  action  is  extensive  ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  a 
new  master  and  new  lessons  after  ones  opinions  and  habits 
were  formed  must  be  a  little  awkward,  and  with  all  due  respect 
to  the  superior  sex,  I  do  not  see  how  they  can  be  necessary  to 
a  woman  unless  she  were  to  defend  her  lands  and  tenements 
by  sword  or  gun. 

And  she  goes  on,  with  a  touch  of  pardonable  pride,  to 
recount  that  in  five  years,  with  the  aid  of  certain 
lawyers,  architects,  masons,  and  the  great  “  Capability 
Brown,”  she  has  laid  out  £36,000  in  the  purchase 
of  land,  has  built  a  good  house  in  Portman  Square, 
and  embellished  Sandleford  within  and  without,  “  as 
successfully  as  if  I  was  Esquire  instead  of  Madame  ; 
few  gentlemen  in  the  neighbourhood  have  done  more 
.  .  .  so  I  really  believe  we  shall  escape  the  matri¬ 
monial  influenza.  It  would  be  great  joy  to  some  of 
our  sex  if  we  were  to  be  guilty  of  matrimony.  The 
demi  rips  would  say, c  See  what  happens  to  the  prudes.’  ” 

Of  Lord  Rockingham’s  death  she  writes  from 
Sandleford  on  July  1 1  : 

I  join  with  you,  in  regret  for  the  death  of  Ld  R.  as  a  private 
man,  for  in  that  character  he  was  amiable,  and  his  talents  were 
equal  to  the  management  of  a  noble  fortune,  but  as  that  did  not 
content  him  and  he  aspired  to  govern  a  great  Empire,  without 
capacity  to  do  it,  I  am  convinced  it  was  happy  for  him,  and 
perhaps  lucky  for  great  Brittain,  that  he  was  calld  out  of  a 
World  where  good  intentions  and  fair  designs,  without  abilities 
to  effect  them,  are  of  little  avail.  His  Lordship  had  almost 
stirred  up  a  rebellion  in  his  County  in  order  to  get  the  late 
Ministers  out  of  the  places  he  and  his  Friends  were  impatient 
to  occupy.  I  could  hardly  have  pardond  such  vehement  desire 
of  power  in  the  most  able  Statesman,  but  it  was  quite  unpardon¬ 
able  in  a  Man  who  must  have  felt  his  incapacities  when  he  was 
before  a  Minister,  tho  in  times  of  less  difficulty.  I  hope  he 
has  allotted  a  sum  for  the  maintenance  and  repairs  of  the  Palace 

he  built  in  memory  of -  victory  on  the  glorious  27th  of 

July.  As  I  have  not  any  correspondent  in  Town  at  present, 
I  am  quite  uninformed  what  will  be  the  consequence  of  his 


1782 


CECILIA 


12 1 


death  in  regard  to  his  political  Collegues  ;  I  wish  Ld  Shelburnes 
party  may  prevail,  as  I  believe  his  experience  and  abilities,  as 
well  as  his  virtues,  to  be  superior  to  those  of  the  leaders  of  the 
other  party.  I  wish  Mr.  Burke  might  keep  his  place,  but  fear 

he  must  follow  Mr.  F - .  It  is  so  much  more  easy  to  do 

mischief  than  good,  I  believe  whoever  of  the  late  opposition 
gets  fixd  in  administration  will  find  it  difficult  to  repair  in  that 
situation  the  harm  they  did  in  the  other. 

From  tV.  tV.  Pepys 

Wimpole  Street,  22  July. 

I  hope  you  have  read  Cecilia,  and  that  You  are  as  much 
pleas’d  as  I  am  with  the  delineation  of  some  of  the  Characters  : 
Mrs.  Thrale  told  me  the  other  day  that  it  seem’d  to  her  like 
a  Camera  Obscura  in  a  Window  of  Piccadilly,  so  exactly  were 
the  Characters  represented  :  Sure  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harrel  (your 
Neighbours)  are  admirably  represented  !  Miss  Larolles  is  the 
Representative  of  a  very  large  Class,  and  the  mixture  of  dignity 
and  sweetness  in  Mrs.  Delville  is  finely  supported.  I  trust 
too  that  You  are  satisfied  with  Cecilia  ;  for  tho’  she  has  some¬ 
what  too  much  Coldness  and  Fortitude  for  me,  yet  as  I  know 
your  Ideas  of  Female  Excellence  require  a  very  high  degree 
of  Reserve  and  Delicacy,  I  am  in  hopes  She  will  meet  with 
your  approbation  :  Perhaps  you  and  Miss  Gregory  will  Both 
be  angry  with  me,  but  I  cannot  help  entertaining  some  Doubts 
whether  young  Ladies  persist  in  calling  their  Lovers  Sir ,  and 
Mr.  Delville ,  in  certain  Situations  and  after  certain  Confessions; 
however,  that  is  a  matter  of  which  Ladies  are  best  qualified 
to  judge  .  .  .  tho’  I  am  not  blind  to  the  exaggeration  of  some 
of  the  Characters  as  Briggs  and  Mr.  Delville  the  Father,  yet 
I  think  the  Work  in  general  does  Miss  Burney  very  great 
Credit  ...  I  long  to  know  what  you  think  of  it.  .  .  . 

To  her  Sister 

Sandleford,  July. 

I  have  invited  about  50  haymakers  with  their  little  families 
to  sup  here.  Last  Saturday  I  gave  a  supper  to  all  the  work¬ 
people  employed  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Brown  in  adorning 
and  embellishing  the  pleasure  ground.  The  appetite  with 
which  they  eat,  the  jollity  with  which  they  laughed  and  sung 
showed  me  I  had  not  ill  bestowed  my  meat  and  drink. 


122  A  DAY  AT  SANDLEFORD  1782 

In  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  of  about  the  same 
date  this  Saturday’s  supper  is  described,  and  Mrs. 
Montagu  mentions  : 

The  scene  is  extremely  animated;  20  men  at  work  in  the  wood 
and  grove,  and  the  fields  around  are  full  of  haymakers.  The 
persons  employed  in  the  woods  are  poor  weavers  who  by  the 
decay  of  our  manufacture  at  Newbury  are  void  of  employment 
and  not  having  been  trained  to  the  business  of  agriculture  are 
not  dexterous  at  the  rake  and  pitchfork,  but  the  plain  digging 
and  driving  wheel  barrows  they  can  perform  and  are  very  glad 
to  get  their  daily  subsistence. 

On  Lord  Rockingham’s  death,  George  III.  nomi¬ 
nated  Lord  Shelburne  as  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury, 
and  Mrs.  Montagu’s  feminine  partiality  for  her  old 
friend  is  thus  femininely  testified  : 

I  have  forbid  my  newsman  sending  me  the  “  Morning 
Chronicle  ”  because  it  abuses  Lord  Shelburne  which  shows  I 
have  a  tender  regard  for  his  Lordship. 

Another  extract  from  Sandleford  may  be  given  here 
to  illustrate  the  country  life  of  the  day: 

Our  party  consists  of  the  fair  Gregory,  my  nephew  Montagu, 
his  tutor,  and  your  humble  servant.  If  the  weather  is  fine 
the  young  men  take  a  ride  in  the  morning,  and  about  noon 
return  to  their  Studies.  Mademoiselle  Greg  drives  me  in  a 
whiskey  “  over  the  hills  and  far  away.”  We  return  before 
dinner  long  enough  for  the  business  of  the  toilette,  and  an 
hour  of  reading  for  the  young  lady,  and  the  domestic  regulations 
of  Madame,  and  supervising  the  workwomen  who  are  employed 
in  a  prodigious  undertaking  of  embroidery  in  feathers  ;  at  four 
o’clock  we  sit  down  together  to  dinner  with  the  good  appetite, 
good  spirits  and  good  humour  which  fresh  air,  moderate  exercise 
and  excursions  through  the  beautiful  scenes  of  nature  at  this 
fine  season  of  the  year  must  naturally  create  ;  to  this  succeeds 
our  pot  of  coffee,  not  laced  with  politicks,  then  tea  is  brought, 
but  with  it  comes  not  scandal,  tittle  tattle,  or  calumny  of  any 
sort.  We  saunter  together  till  within  an  hour  of  sunset,  then 
I  retire  to  my  dressing  room,  the  young  folks  still  walk  till 
nearly  nine  ;  they  repair  to  their  studies  till  10,  then  comes 
supper  mirth  and  laughter.  I  take  my  little  supper  in  my 


1782 


AGMONDESHAM  VESEY 


123 


dressing  room,  by  which  I  get  some  leisure  time,  and  leave 
my  young  people  to  indulge  that  innocent  gaiety  of  conversation 
so  becoming  their  time  of  life. 

Lancelot  Brown  spent  a  few  days  with  them  at 
Sandleford  while  the  gardens  and  wood  were  being 
transformed  under  his  magic  wand  into  “  sweet 
pastorals  and  gentle  elegiacs.  He  is  an  agreeable, 
pleasant  companion  as  well  as  a  great  genius  in  his 
profession.  I  consider  him  as  a  great  poet.” 

The  weather  of  the  late  summer  was  disastrously 
bad  :  “100  acres  of  turnips  on  my  farms  here  and  in 
the  north  are  now  devoured  by  a  black  worm,  my  hay 
is  rotting  in  the  fields,  and  some  of  my  wheat  will  be 
smutty.”  Virgil  is  invoked  for  a  georgical  elegy  in 
mournful  strains,  and  the  journey  to  Northumberland 
has  to  be  abandoned.  She  writes  impatiently  to  urge 
the  Veseys  to  set  out  on  their  visit  to  England,  and 
threatens  : 

If  you  delay  your  coming  any  longer  I  will  get  all  the  wits 
of  Mr.  Vesey’s  Club  to  write  lampoons  and  libels  upon  him. 
I  know  they  wish  impatiently  for  his  coming  and  their  chagrin 
if  he  disappoints  them,  will  set  a  keen  edge  on  their  satire. 

Mr.  Vesey  had  been  made  a  member  of  Johnson’s 
Literary  Club  in  1773. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  like  others  of  her  sex,  had  a  tender 
spot  for  even  an  unreformed  rake,  and  had  strongly 
disapproved  of  Mr.  Vesey’s  being  prevented  from 
joining  one  of  her  parties,  ostensibly  under  doctor’s 
orders  : 

I  wish  Monsey  was  hanged,  and  then  embowell’d  and 
stuff’d  with  rhubarb,  a  poor  doggrel  witt,  who  has  no  gout  for 
the  Epick,  is  determined  to  keep  away  the  son  of  the  song  from 
our  feast  of  shells  !  I  am  convinced  that  your  note  will  bring 
Ossian  himself,  and  he  will  play  upon  Eolus’s  harp  while  we 
are  at  dinner,  the  Vulgar  will  think  it  is  the  wind,  but  we  shall 
know  it  is  the  bard  of  Morven,  I  could  have  made  a  rhubarb 
tart  for  Mr.  Vesey,  and  have  put  a  good  custard  upon  it,  a 
better  preparation  than  Monseys,  who  in  the  bitterness  of  his 


124 


ROUSSEAU 


1782 


jealousy  has  given  this  untimely  dose.  I  depend  on  seeing  my 
Dear  Mrs.  Vesey,  and  I  hope  that  will  break  the  Doctors  heart. 

I  have  not  found  any  record  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
having  encountered  Rousseau  when  he  was  being 
lionised  in  London  in  17 66,  though  Mrs.  Vesey  wrote 
in  March  :  “  I  thank  you  for  the  letter  to  Rousseau. 
Has  he  been  presented  to  the  blue  stockings  ?  ”  Here 
is  her  view  of  the  Confessions  : 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

Sept,  the  30 th. 

Pray  my  dear  Friend  have  you  met  with  the  strangest  book 
that  ever  appeard,  les  confessions  de  Jean  Jaques  ?  I  think  a 
pure  Virgin,  like  you,  will  read  it  with  less  disgust  and  horror 
than  the  Matrons  can  do.  I  imagine  you  will  not  understand 
some  of  Jean  Jaques  strange  relations,  they  cannot  corrupt  yr 
mind,  so  may  be  safely  read,  but  not  without  disgust  ;  had  I 
expected  such  stuff  I  shd  not  have  meddled  with  the  book,  but 
as  it  gives  the  strangest  specimens  of  the  human  kind  that  ever 
was  shewn  I  am  glad  I  was  not  prevented  reading  it.  The 
virtuous  Jean  Jacques  is  a  great  Lyar  ;  the  delicate  Jean 
Jaques  (who  cd  not  accept  in  a  present  what  was  offerd  to  him) 
was  a  thief,  With  all  his  talents  he  had  such  imbecilities  he  had 
great  difficulty  to  earn  his  livelihood.  He  changed  his  religion 
when  very  young  for  motives  of  interest.  He  lived  in  a 
criminal  commerce  with  a  Madame  de  Warens,  tho  he  knew 
she  carryd  on  one  at  the  same  time  with  her  gardener.  He 
says  the  happiest  moments  of  his  life  were,  when  he,  the  said 
gardener  and  said  Lady,  in  fits  of  tenderness,  embraced  each 
other.  Quel  trio  d’amitie  !  the  Gardener  died  and  Jean 
Jaques  went  away  for  a  while  ;  when  he  returnd,  he  found  the 
Lady  had  an  intrigue  with  a  Friseur,  whom  she  had  taken  into 
her  family  ;  however,  being,  as  he  often  tells  you,  the  most 
chaste,  virtuous,  pious,  tender  hearted,  and  religious  Woman 
in  the  World,  she  was  incapable  of  any  cruelty  to  an  old  friend, 
and  offerd  the  same  favours  as  during  the  intrigue  with  the 
Gardener  ;  but  there  Jean  Jacques  shew’d  some  delicacy,  for 
he  declined  the  offer,  telling  her,  it  wd  degrade  her  ;  on  this 
she  grew  rather  cool,  for  as  she  was  chastity  itself,  did  not  grant 
her  favours  from  any  solicitations  of  constitution,  nor  had  any 
gratification  in  her  intercourse  with  the  Men,  therefore  she 


1782 


“TOO  LUSCIOUS” 


I25 


thought  it  a  mere  caprice  in  Jean  Jacques  to  alter  his  manner 
of  living  with  her,  for  such  a  bagatelle,  in  short  after  a  while 
he  left  her,  but  the  remembrance  of  the  extream  happiness  he 
enjoyd  in  the  years  he  lived  with  her  and  the  Gardener,  remains 
in  his  mind  superior  to  everything  he  has  found  in  this  World, 
and  [he]  ascribes  all  his  virtue  and  piety  to  the  conversation 
and  example  of  this  Madme  de  Warens.  He  concludes  his 
confessions  very  early,  what  were  the  sins  of  his  more  mature 
age  he  does  not  inform  us,  he  declares  he  sent  his  children  aux 
enfans  trouves,  and  yet,  puts  in  a  claim  to  the  merit  of  a  good 
father,  for  he  says  he  shd  have  been  a  very  tender  parent,  if  he 
had  kept  his  children  at  home.  I  know  it  will  be  a  comfort  to 
you  to  know  that  he  appears  to  have  been  mad  almost  from  his 
infancy,  after  all  the  bad  things  he  confesses,  one  is  glad  to 
think  he  is  not  rational.  He  supposes  all  the  present  generation 
to  be  combined  against  him,  and  that  he  has  always  spies  at  his 
heels.  I  suppose  that  from  Adam  to  the  infant  born  to  day, 
there  has  not  been  such  a  disposition,  for  all  that  is  strange  and 
different  from  others  characters  in  him  is  not  the  effect  of 
extraordinary  incidents  and  situations,  but  arises  entirely  from 
himself.  I  believe  indeed  his  early  reading  romance  gave  him 
an  affectation  of  great  sentiments.  Many  a  Girl  by  reading 
the  loves  of  Mandane  for  the  great  Cyrus,  or  some  Princess  for 
Alexander  the  Great,  has  been  so  infected  with  the  passion,  as 
to  marry  a  paltry  scoundrel,  thinking  she  was  acting  like  the 
enamourd  princess,  so  our  Jean  Jaques  fancies  he  is  acting 
according  to  the  dictates  of  romantick  magnanimity,  while 
he  is  telling  a  paltry  lye  or  committing  petty  larceny.  His 
imagination  is  all  that  is  delicate  and  high  about  him,  and  he 
derives  his  satisfaction  in  himself  from  his  sentiments,  not  from 
his  actions. 

Miss  Gregory  travelled  north  this  autumn  with  her 
brother  to  visit  her  family  in  Edinburgh,  and  her 
first  letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  missed  her  terribly, 
are  charmingly  written,  full  of  affection  and  not 
without  humour.  Of  her  brother’s  wife,  whom  she 
now  met  for  the  first  time,  she  writes  that  a  rather  too 
gushing  manner  reminded  her  of  Dr.  Johnson’s 
remark,  on  being  bored  by  Lady  Lucan’s  effusive 
style  :  “  Madam,  you  are  too  luscious  !  ” 

Mr.  Pulteney,  the  husband  of  Lord  Bath’s  niece, 


126 


FRENCH  CONVENTS 


1782 


who  was  already  a  widower,  now  actually  decided  to 
send  his  daughter  for  education  in  a  Paris  convent, 
and  asked  Mrs.  Carter  (to  whom  he  was  continuing 
the  annuity  first  given  by  Lord  Bath)  to  chaperon  her 
to  the  French  capital. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  greatly  shocked  by  this  pro¬ 
posal,  and  expressed  herself  very  strongly  to  Mrs. 
Carter  : 

I  cannot  help  feeling  a  good  deal  of  anxiety  at  your 
undertaking  a  journey  at  this  season  of  the  year,  and  the  purpose 
for  which  you  undertake  it,  to  place  a  great  heiress  in  a  french 
convent  thrills  me  with  horror  ...  in  this  particular  case 
everything  will  be  done  to  make  her  a  convert.  She  is  un- 
accquainted  with  the  world,  of  an  indolent  disposition  and  I 
believe  rather  obstinate,  so  if  she  should  be  led  to  think  well  of 
popery,  she  will  not  listen  to  any  argument  urged  by  her  friends 
against  it  ;  and  for  what  are  these  dangers  to  be  incurred  ? 
The  young  ladies  perhaps  in  the  convents  are  better  fashioned 
for  the  fine  world  than  in  our  trumpery  boarding  schools,  for 
there  are  in  these  convents  penitent  women  of  gallantery,  and 
some  ladies  reduced  to  poverty  by  dissipation,  the  manners  of 
these  ladies  may  be  more  polite  and  genteel  than  that  of  the 
mistresses  of  boarding  schools,  but  the  air  is  rendered  too 
impure  for  female  virtue  even  by  the  sighs  of  a  penitent  sinner. 
Madame  de  Crevecceur  of  the  house  of  Sully,  was  taken  from 
one  of  these  fine  convents  to  be  married  to  Monsieur  de 
Masserans  Son  and  by  the  bye,  I  never  saw  a  bride  at  the  Guild 
at  Newcastle  half  so  gauche.  Madame  de  Masserans  of  the 
house  of  Rohan  complained  to  me  at  the  birthday  drawing 
room  that  her  son  sueoit  comme  un  Cochon;  she  had  been  bred 
in  a  convent.  ...  I  will  own  that  French  women  who  have 
lived  in  the  world  have  all  the  graces  (but  the  grace  of  God)  in 
a  higher  degree  than  English  women,  their  whole  attention  is 
to  please,  every  flirt  of  their  fans  is  coquettry  ;  an  english 
woman  when  in  company  thinks  of  pleasing  herself,  a  french 
woman  of  pleasing  every  body  else.  .  .  .  Read  what  Madame 
de  Genlis  says  of  the  education  of  the  convent.  .  .  . 

Madame  de  Masseran  was  presumably  the  widow 
of  the  Prince  de  Masserano,  late  Spanish  Ambassador 
to  England.  Edward  Jerningham,  writing  in  1783, 


i782  PAPISTS  AND  PETTICOATS  127 

speaks  of  her  son  and  his  bride  as  “  the  ugliest  pair 
that  ever  were  seen.” 

The  letter  is  far  too  long  for  quotation,  but  a 
paragraph  at  the  end  is  too  delightful  for  omission  in 
its  quick  transition  from  subtle  popery  to  smuggled 
petticoats  : 

Foreign  education  had  before  seduced  a  god  daughter  of 
mine  to  popery  so  perhaps  my  fears  are  the  more  alarmed.  I 
beg  of  you  to  carry  a  flannel  gown  to  sleep  in  at  night  for  inns 
are  so  little  frequented  in  France  one  often  meets  with  damp 
beds.  I  know  you  are  not  by  trade  a  smuggler  but  as  at  Paris 
there  are  waddings  for  petticoats  and  cloaks,  only  a  few  shillings, 
if  you  could  get  as  much  as  would  line  a  cloak  and  quilted  petti¬ 
coat  it  would  be  of  a  great  service  to  me,  and  to  save  the  delicacy 
of  your  conscience  I  do  not  ask  for  the  silk  covering,  your 
maid  may  run  them  into  her  petticoat  over  the  lining.  The 
French  call  them  Wayetts,  I  suppose  spelt  Ouettes. 

The  allusion  to  a  goddaughter  seduced  to  popery 
must  refer  to  Lydia  Sterne.  It  was  too  bad  to  ask 
Mrs.  Carter  to  swallow  the  sophistry  of  the  silk 
lining. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  papist  alarms  turned  out  to  be 
largely  unjustified,  as  Miss  Pulteney’s  convent  was 
appropriated  to  education  and  did  not  receive  the  fine 
ladies  of  the  world,  and  her  father  had  taken  measures 
to  prevent  any  attempts  on  the  religion  of  the  young 
heiress;  but  “If  he  knew,”  she  writes,  “the  pains  I 
formerly  took  to  prevent  Lord  Bath  from  diverting 
the  family  estate  out  of  the  proper  line,  he  would  not 
wonder  I  should  be  interested  in  the  prosperity  of  the 
heiress.”  The  Earl  had  very  nearly  made  George 
Colman,  the  dramatist  and  his  wife’s  nephew,  his 
sole  heir. 

I  was  at  the  Drawing  room  yesterday.  ...  I  stood  near 
Lady  Howe,  who  made  me  very  happy  by  telling  me  Lord 
Howe  assured  her  Mr.  Fielding  had  much  recoverd  his  health. 
Many  fair  Brides  were  presented,  and  the  Drawing  room  was 
very  full.  Ld  Shelburne  seem’d  in  good  spirits,  but  it  is  the 


128  THE  SIEGE  OF  GIBRALTAR  1782 

business  of  a  Minister  to  seem  so.  I  am  afraid  he  will  have 
an  uncomfortable  life  when  the  Parlt  sits.  This  day  Sr  G 
Rodney  dined  in  the  City,  he  passed  through  huzzaing  crouds, 
a  pleasant  thing  when  a  Mans  conscience  joins  in  the  applause, 
as  his  may  justly  do.  I  am  not  afraid  of  having  my  windows 
broken  if  they  are  not  illuminated.  He  need  not  derive  his 
lustre  from  the  Tallow  Chandlers  shop. 

The  Town  has  since  the  meeting  of  Parliament  had  all  the 
perfections  and  faults  of  a  populous  city.  I  was  at  two  assemblies 
and  a  ball  last  week.  At  the  first  assembly  at  Lady  Lucan’s 
there  was  a  most  illustrious  guest,  nothing  less  than  the  Prince 
of  Wales.  I  remarked  to  his  Royal  Highness  honour  he  did 
not  make  any  sort  of  fracas,  bowed  as  civilly  whispered  as 
softly  addressed  himself  as  politely  as  any  man  in  the  room  and 
did  not  seem  conscious  that  he  was  the  heir  to  3  kingdoms,  and 
yet  there  was  not  any  levity  misbecoming  his  royal  rank. 

.  .  .  But  how  small  will  all  private  disasters  appear  com¬ 
pared  to  the  loss  of  Gibraltar,  if  the  news  papers  account  be 
verified  !  Lord  North,  and  Lord  Sandwich,  are  much  obliged 
to  Lord  Shelburne,  and  Lord  Keppel,  for  turning  them  out  of 
their  places  before  this  great  national  disgrace  and  misfortune 
happen’d.  Rats  are  much  wiser  animals  than  Politicians,  they 
quit  the  vessel  before  it  sinks,  these  rush  into  it.  May  this 
report  be  false,  or  alas  poor  England  !  .  .  . 

Have  you  read  Miss  Burneys  Cecilia  ?  I  hear  much 
commendation  of  it.  I  reserved  it  to  entertain  me  in  my 
Northern  journey,  and  now  I  keep  it,  as  an  interesting  amuse¬ 
ment,  if  I  should  be  indisposed,  and  confined  at  home.  I 
have  spent  so  much  of  my  time  in  my  Whiskey  I  am  ashamed 
to  give  the  hours  I  am  at  home  to  mere  amusement. 

The  canard  of  the  loss  of  Gibraltar  was  a  needlessly 
cruel  perversion  of  its  magnificent  and  successful 
defence  during  the  tremendous  attack  of  September 
9-14  by  the  whole  combined  fleets  of  France  and 
Spain,  a  land  force  of  40,000  men,  and  D’Arcon’s  ten 
specially  built  battering-ships  carrying  212  large  guns. 
But  the  resources  of  Sir  George  Eliott,  who  had  for 
more  than  three  years  baffled  all  the  efforts  of  the  two 
Powers,  were  by  no  means  exhausted  ;  his  newly 
fortified  lines  screened  a  cleverly  placed  little  squadron 
of  English  gunboats  which  darted  out  upon  the 


1782 


THE  CAMEO 


129 


battering  -  ships  during  the  night  of  the  13th  with 
disastrous  effects,  whilst  the  red-hot  cannon  balls, 
which  Sir  Robert  Boyd  had  suggested,  set  ship  after 
ship  on  fire,  till  the  whole  fleet  of  battering-ships 
was  destroyed,  2000  of  the  enemy  killed  or  prisoners, 
and  the  uncaptured  fortress,  which  had  only  lost  90 
men,  was  relieved  and  provisioned  a  month  later  by 
Lord  Howe,  and  so  remained  till,  in  the  following 
February,  the  Duke  de  Crillon  sent  General  Eliott 
news  that  the  peace  preliminaries  were  signed. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  news  of  the  capture  of  Gibraltar 
probably  came  from  Paris,  where  (as  Grafton’s  Auto¬ 
biography  records)  confidence  of  victory  was  so  assured 
that  the  fall  of  the  fortress  was  actually  exhibited  on 
the  stage,  and  the  favourite  street  toy  was  the  Gibraltar 
fan  with  a  picture  of  the  fort,  which,  on  being  turned 
over,  fell  into  a  heap  of  ruins. 

December  brought  another  letter  of  most  untoward 
length  from  Robert  Potter  about  his  translation  of 
Euripides  and  Mr.  Woodhull’s  jealous  rivalry,  invit¬ 
ing  Mrs.  Montagu  as  his  Delphian  oracle  to  decide 
whether  the  whole  story  should  be  added  as  a  post¬ 
script  to  his  work  or  proudly  ignored. 

Reporting  a  visit  to  Lord  Karnes  and  Mrs. 
Drummond,  Miss  Gregory  says  they  were  greatly 
amused  at  a  rumour  that  Mrs.  Montagu  was  growing 
fat,  and  Mrs.  Drummond  lamented  that  her  cameo 
would  lose  its  likeness.  This  cameo  was  presumably 
the  one  already  referred  to,  executed  by  James  Tassie 
the  modeller,  who,  with  Quin,  invented  the  white 
enamel  employed  for  these  medallions.  The  face  is 
in  profile,  the  hair  turned  back  over  a  cushion,  and 
curls  at  the  ears.  This  cameo  was  engraved  by 
Holloway,  but  whether  it  is  earlier  than  or  identical 
with  the  one  produced  by  Wedgwood  I  am  not 
certain. 

Lord  Kames,  who  had  sent  his  beloved  Mrs. 
Montagu  a  message  by  Miss  Gregory,  imploring  her 

VOL.  II  K 


130  DEATH  OF  LORD  KAMES  1782 

to  come  North  next  year  if  she  wished  to  see  him 
again,  did  not  survive,  and  indeed  was  too  ill  to 
receive  her  reply.  He  died  on  December  27,  “  going 
out  like  the  snuff  of  a  candle  ”  in  his  seventy-ninth 
year. 

It  was  one  more  of  life’s  lost  opportunities,  on 
which  she  was  fond  of  moralising: 

Life  is  so  short  it  is  a  pity  to  pass  any  part  of  it  with  more 
disagreable  circumstances  than  the  state  of  human  affairs 
necessarily  produce,  but  almost  every  day  of  our  lives  is  a  dupe 
to  the  morrow  which  never  comes,  and  in  order  to  enjoy  some¬ 
thing  in  prospect,  we  sacrifice  all  we  have  in  present.  And 
after  all  this  moralizing  upon  it,  I  shall  go  to  Northumberland 
next  autumn  and  pass  three  months  there  just  as  if  I  had  a 
lease  for  Methusalems  life,  for  tho  one  thinks  in  ones  own 
manner  one  acts  in  ye  way  of  ye  world,  and  leaves  behind  one 
an  example  as  foolish  as  that  one  has  follow’d,  and  the  World 
grows  older  without  growing  wiser.  Human  reason  is  a  mere 
rhetorician  ;  it  talks  well,  flourishes  finely,  and  never  per¬ 
suades  ;  it  seems  as  if  its  office  was  only  to  harangue. 


i783 


DOROTHEA  GREGORY - HARDWICKE,  CONWAY, 

SIDDONS,  KIPPIS 


Miss  Gregory  goes  North.  Her  engagement  to  Mr.  Alison.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  anger.  Johnson’s  Lives  and  Lord  Hardwicke.  Haymaking 
at  Sandleford.  General  Conway’s  present.  The  drive  to  Denton. 
Visits  en  route.  Busy  days  at  the  Collieries.  Matthew  visits  Lord 
Harrowby’s.  Lord  Spencer’s  illness  and  death.  The  little  world. 
Return  from  Denton.  Mrs.  Siddons  in  Zara.  Dr.  Monsey  at  ninety. 
Lord  Valencia’s  second  marriage.  D’Alembert’s  death.  Sir  William 
Hamilton’s  vase.  Letter  from  Andrew  Kippis. 


When  the  pretty  and  attractive  Miss  Gregory  went  to 
Scotland  in  the  autumn  of  1782,  the  prescient  Mrs. 
Montagu  expressed  a  foreboding  anxiety  lest  she 
should  fall  in  love  with  some  Scotch  laddie ;  and  the 
first  letter  of  1783  announces  her  engagement  to  the 
Rev.  Archibald  Alison,  who  was  afterwards  to  be  the 
author  of  an  Essay  on  Taste ,  and  who  certainly  evinced 
it  in  his  present  choice.  Miss  Greg’s  letter,  announ¬ 
cing  the  betrothal  to  her  protectress,  is  a  very  touching 
and  delightful  one,  but  as  it  fills  more  than  seven 
closely  written  pages,  it  could  not  be  found  space  for 
here. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  wrath  (which  her  adopted  daughter 
seems  in  some  degree  to  have  anticipated)  was  really 
beyond  all  reason,  from  so  reasonable  a  woman  ;  and 
one  can  only  imagine,  reading  between  the  lines  of  her 
furious  discomfiture,  that  she  had  secretly  anticipated 
that  her  nephew  and  heir  would  have  fallen  in  love 
with  Dorothea.  Herein  perhaps  she  evinced  a  lack  of 

131 


132 


AN  UNTOUCHED  HEART 


1783 


her  usually  bright  perception,  since  daily  intercourse 
under  the  same  roof  by  no  means  ordinarily  promotes 
the  affection  which  leads  to  marriage.  Elizabeth 
Montagu’s  own  temperament  had  always  lacked 
passion.  She  had  been  greatly  loved,  in  different 
degrees  and  ways  by  half-a-dozen  men  at  least,  all  her 
seniors  ;  but  the  adoration  of  Lord  Bath,  the  devotion 
of  Lord  Lyttelton,  the  mad  infatuation  of  Monsey,  the 
affection  of  Gilbert  West  and  Henry  Home  and 
Leonard  Smelt  had  never  awakened  in  her  that 
answering  warmth  which  in  many  women  such  homage 
might  have  aroused.  Young  Macdonald  perhaps, 
before  his  untimely  death  in  Rome,  had  come  nearer 
to  touching  her  heart  than  any  other  man,  but  that  is 
merely  the  conjecture  from  a  few  lines  of  their  letters, 
and  from  the  stray  references  of  friends.  This  in¬ 
capacity  of  passion  (if  incapacity  it  was,  and  not  merely 
that  the  chord  which  would  have  vibrated  never 
chanced  to  be  struck)  may  be  accounted  as  a  significant 
defect,  or  as  a  saving  grace  ;  but  it  must  not  be 
confounded  with  lack  of  affection  or  sympathy,  both 
of  which  qualities  are  abundantly  manifested  not  only 
in  her  intercourse  with  the  men  above  mentioned,  but 
especially  in  her  friendships  with  Mrs.  Yesey,  James 
Beattie,  Mrs.  Carter,  and  others.  From  this  incapacity, 
however,  and  from  the  anger  of  a  thwarted  purpose, 
Dorothea  Gregory  had  now  to  suffer  severely.  Alison 
had  no  living  and  no  fortune  ;  her  family  ought  to 
have  explained  to  her  all  the  disadvantages  of  such  a 
connection  ;  she  was  reminded  of  a  previous  un¬ 
fortunate  love  affair  of  six  years  back  ;  she  was 
bidden  to  recollect  that  the  prospect  of  a  family  must 
be  provided  for  ;  she  was  given  to  understand  that 
she  was  stepping  down  from  an  assured  position  to 
which  she  had  been  adopted  ;  she  was  enjoined  to 
absolute  secrecy  about  the  affair  to  young  Montagu, 
who,  his  aunt  feared,  might  find  such  an  unauthorised 
example  contagious  ;  in  short,  she  was  made  thoroughly 


i783  DOROTHEA  GREGORY  ENGAGED  133 

miserable,  without  her  resolution  being  shaken  in  the 
smallest  degree,  though  Alison  immediately  offered 
to  release  her.  She  returned,  very  shortly  after  this 
painful  correspondence,  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  who 
evidently,  but  most  mistakenly,  imagined  that  separa¬ 
tion  might  dissolve  the  engagement.  The  breach  was 
gradually  healed,  and  Mrs.  Montagu  recognised — 
grudgingly,  the  girl’s  candour  and  staunch  devotion  to 
the  man  of  her  choice  ;  but  the  whole  episode  is  a 
painful  one,  from  which  Dorothea  Gregory  emerges 
with  far  more  credit  than  her  patroness. 

Horace  Walpole,  who  had  a  great  esteem  for  Miss 
Gregory,  describes  her  conduct  throughout  as  noble 
and  reasonable  and  that  of  her  patroness — whom  he  did 
not  love — as  preposterous  at  least  ;  and  he  suggests 
that  Dorothea,  who  had  acquired  all  that  was  good  in 
her  learned  mistress  and  none  of  her  pretensions  and 
affectations,  was  perhaps  a  little  weary  of  the  tie, 
though  nobody  could  behave  with  more  respect  and 
gratitude  for  really  great  obligations.  It  was  alto¬ 
gether  rather  a  pitiful  business. 

Lancelot  Brown,  the  great  Landscape  Gardener, 
who,  as  we  saw  a  year  ago,  was  engaged  upon  the 
grounds  and  the  monks’  fish-ponds  of  Sandleford,  died 
somewhat  unexpectedly  on  February  6,  leaving  his 
work  there  unfinished;  but  it  is  still  perpetuated  under 
the  name  of  “  Brown’s  Pond.” 

A  letter  written  in  an  almost  undecipherable  hand 
by  Lord  Hardwicke  on  May  30  shows  how  deeply 
Johnson’s  criticism  of  “  poor  Lyttelton  ”  still  rankled 
among  the  Bas-bleu  fraternity. 

The  cult  of  fresh  air  was  still  in  its  infancy,  in  spite 
of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  “  whiskey,”  of  which  he  asks  for 
particulars  : 

Sir  R:  Jebb  recommended  Airings  in  an  open  Carriage  to 
Me,  but  I  have  none  at  present  fit  for  the  Purpose , — and  I  have 
not  accustomed  myself  to  be  so  Airy.  Sir  Richd  seems  a  sensible 
Man,  but  rather  Mysterious ,  and  to  expect  explicit  Faith. 


134  POTTER  ON  JOHNSON  1783 

To  Mrs.  Carter  ? 

Have  you  read  Mr.  Potter’s  admirable  inquiry  into  some 
passages  in  Dr.  Johnson’s  “  Lives  of  the  poets  ”  ?  His 
reprehensions  of  the  malignant  Biographer  and  wretched 
critick  are  decent  tho’  severe.  .  .  .  Mr.  Lapidge  who  is  to 
finish  Mr.  Brown’s  plan  here,  spent  some  days  here  and  left  us 
yesterday. 

From  Lord  Hardwicke 

London,  June  20 th. 

I  am  fit  for  a  correspondent  in  one  sense  that  I  sit  at  home, 
and  have  little  to  do,  am  qualified  in  another,  that  I  see  nobody 
and  am  quite  an  invalid.  I  was  beginning  to  recover  and  was 
setting  out  for  Richmond,  when  a  return  of  fever  prevented  me 
and  tho’  that  has  departed,  it  has  left  me  very  weak,  another 
page  or  two  from  Mr.  P [otter]  would  have  done  complete 
justice  to  our  departed  friend,  It  has  given  me  a  bad  opinion  of 
Dr.  Johnson’s  heart,  because  he  had  no  provocation  and  went 
out  of  his  way  to  vent  spleen  and  ill  nature. 

Potter’s  “  Inquiry  ”  is  primarily  a  defence  of  Gray 
against  the  Doctor’s  criticism.  Horace  Walpole, 
however — always  ready  to  have  a  dig  at  Mrs.  Montagu 
— says:  “  I  have  heard  that  the  true  object  was  to 
revenge  the  attack  on  Lord  Lyttelton  at  the  instiga¬ 
tion  of  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  has  her  full  share  of 
incense,  and  who  with  insipid  Bishop  Hurd  is  pro¬ 
nounced  the  two  best  critics  of  this  or  any  age.  Were 
I  Johnson,  I  had  rather  be  criticised  than  flattered  so 
fulsomely.”  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  is  not  a  tittle 
of  evidence  that  Mrs.  Montagu  in  any  way  instigated 
Mr.  Potter  to  this  Inquiry.  Indeed,  as  is  shown  in 
her  letter  to  Mr.  Pepys,  she  deprecated  the  attacks 
upon  the  Doctor  which  the  Lives  produced.  And 
whilst  Walpole  accuses  her  of  “  instigating  ”  poor 
Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Bettany  in  his  Edward  Jerningham 
and  his  Friends  pillories  her  for  “  neglecting  ”  him,  a 
charge  hardly  justified  by  a  petulant  line  in  one  of 
Potter’s  letters,  and  refuted  in  the  next  a  couple  of 


1783 


HAYMAKING 


l3S 


months  later,  and  in  a  dozen  other  kindly  and  grateful 
references.  Who  would  be  a  “  Minerva  ”  and  a 
“  Patroness  ”  ? 

June  was  spent  at  Sandleford  superintending  the 
hay  harvest  and  the  work  of  Mr.  Brown’s  successor 
in  carrying  out  his  designs  for  the  grounds,  and  in 
long  drives  with  Miss  Gregory  in  the  whiskey  by  way 
of  preparation  for  their  300-mile  drive  to  Denton 
a  little  later  on.  Apropos  of  haymaking,  Horace 
Walpole’s  friend,  General  Conway,  who  owned  Park 
Place,  and  who  had  recently  succumbed  to  verse- 
writing,  sent  her  some  lines  :  “  To  Mrs.  Montagu 
with  two  swords  to  be  used  as  scythes,”  of  which  : 

Here  may  they  harmless  skim  your  peaceful  mead 

And  smooth  the  paths  where  Virtue  loves  to  tread, 

may  be  a  sufficient  sample. 

In  July,  young  Montagu,  who  had  been  to  visit 
Mr.  Lyttelton,  Lord  Westcote’s  son,  brought  his 
friend  back  to  Sandleford,  where  the  future  Baron 
Lyttelton  gained  much  approval.  The  boys  had 
been  school  -  fellows  at  Harrow.  Letters  of  this 
month  praise  Dr.  Blair’s  Lectures  on  Rhetoric,  just 
published;  refer  to  Mr.  William  Clayton’s  death, 
who  had  broken  his  neck  riding,  and  had  not,  to  her 
sorrow,  left  the  beautiful  Harleyford  to  his  widow, 
Lady  Louisa,  for  life ;  and  report  the  Duchess  of 
Portland  and  Mrs.  Vesey  on  the  fashionable  sands  of 
Margate. 

In  August  she  and  Miss  Gregory  started  on  their 
drive  to  Denton  in  the  whiskey,  the  post-chaise  follow¬ 
ing  with  relay  horses,  for  inclement  weather.  They 
passed  through  Blenheim  Park,  varying  their  usual 
route,  and  admiring  Capability  Brown’s  water  scheme 
more  than  the  house,  “  which  is  not  a  good  piece  of 
architecture,  though  a  great  piece  of  magnificence.” 
After  seeing  Warwick  Castle  they  went  on  to  Coventry 
and  paid  a  visit  to  one  of  the  ribbon  factories  where 


1783 


136  THE  QUEEN  BEE 

“  this  flimsy  article  employed  an  infinite  number  of 
hands 

The  combined  wisdom  of  all  the  legislators  who  have 
endeavoured  to  increase  population  have  not  with  all  their 
efforts  occasioned  so  many  marriages  and  their  prolific  conse¬ 
quences  as  the  inventor  of  top  knots  !  ...  We  shall  sleep  at 
Derby,  in  the  evening  visit  the  china  manufactory  ;  we  shall 
then  enter  Yorkshire  at  Sheffield,  from  thence:  we  shall  see 
Leeds,  and  then  we  fall  into  our  common  track  of  travelling  to 
Denton. 

— where  they  arrived  on  the  21st. 

I  have  now  above  500  men  at  work  below  ground  in  the 
pits  and  above  sixty  in  a  wheatfield  reaping,  not  to  speak  of  the 
bricks,  tiles,  the  tar  manufactory,  &c.  going  on  at  the  water 
side.  My  late  purchased  colliery  is  now  working  very  success¬ 
fully.  I  thank  God  all  things  are  in  as  prosperous  a  state  as 
possible. 

I  imagine  that  the  fair  Gregory  has  given  you  a  full  account 
of  the  fine  places  we  saw  in  our  journey.  She  is  a  most  excellent 
Charioteer,  and  we  have  made  many  excursions  in  our  Whisky 
since  we  came  to  Denton.  The  fresh  air  and  fine  exercise  will 
I  hope  preserve  my  health  through  all  fatigues  of  business  ; 
here  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  finding  all  my  affairs  in  great 
order  and  prosperity,  and  I  enjoy  many  solid  and  substantial 
blessings,  but  for  the  pleasures  of  the  imagination  and  the 
delights  of  rural  life  I  cannot  enjoy  them  here.  I  live  in  a 
great  beehive,  and  tho’  as  the  queen  bee,  I  do  not  work  myself, 
yet  like  her  Majesty,  I  have  care  of  the  collected  treasures. 
My  Resident  Steward,  and  Mr.  Black  my  South  Country 
Steward,  are  now  very  busy  in  forming  new  leases  of  my 
Estates,  the  old  ones  being  to  expire  at  Mayday.  A  new 
purchased  estate  which  cost  me  £36,000  adjoining  to  Denton 
Estates  will,  now  as  belonging  to  the  same  proprietor,  be  as  it 
were  incorporated,  and  some  farms  will  be  enlarged,  and  many 
alterations  of  that  kind  present  themselves.  When  these  said 
Stewards  have  digested  their  scheme  it  will  be  laid  before  me, 
after  I  have  considered  it  and  got  all  the  information  I  can, 
the  chief  part  of  my  business  here  will  be  settled  and  I  shall 
then  know  when  I  may  leave  this  place.  I  imagine  I  shall  be 
at  liberty  in  less  than  3  weeks. 

Pray  did  you  see  the  Ball  of  fire  f  My  Servants  who  were 


i783  MATTHEW  FREE  FROM  TUTELAGE  137 

taking  the  things  out  of  the  Carriages  saw  it,  but  I  did  not, 
having  unluckily  got  into  the  Inn  before  its  descent.  I  want 
to  hear  what  the  Philosophers  say  of  this  extraordinary  appear¬ 
ance.  I  fear  this  Ball  of  Fire  has  done  great  mischief  in  some 
part  of  the  World. 

Montagu  is  to  set  out  for  Lord  Harrowby’s  on  Friday  ; 
tho’  I  am  sorry  to  lose  the  pleasure  of  his  company  I  feel  a 
compensation  in  reflecting  on  the  infinite  delight  with  which 
he  will  make  his  journey  ;  master  of  himself,  of  his  valet  and 
two  horses  he  will  feel  the  independant  greatness  of  his  situation. 
A  General  who  has  for  many  years  commanded  several  thousand 
men  does  not  feel  himself  so  considerable.  This  will  be  the 
first  excursion  he  has  made  without  a  tutor  and  tho’  there  is 
great  amity  between  him  and  Mr.  Gilbank  still  at  nineteen  it  is 
a  fine  thing  to  be  one’s  own  master. 

In  September  they  paid  visits  to  the  Ords  at 
Fenham  and  to  Sir  Thomas  Clavering’s  seat  at  Axwell 
Park.  The  condition  of  Lord  Spencer  (who  died  in 
the  following  month)  is  described  as  very  terrible. 
He  had  married  one  of  the  Poyntz  girls,  who  were 
amongst  Mrs.  Montagu’s  most  intimate  friends,  and 
had  given  to  the  world  the  vivaciously  beautiful 
Georgiana,  Duchess  of  Devonshire. 

Young  Montagu  was  making  himself  acquainted 
with  the  colliery  and  the  business  folk  of  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood,  much  to  his  aunt’s  satisfaction : 

I  always  pittied  a  certain  set  of  people  who  some  years  ago 
called  themselves  the  “little  world,”  it  is  much  better  to  be 
of  the  general  world.  I  would  not  have  a  man  to  confine 
his  regards  to  witts,  scholars,  philosophers,  politicians,  or  fine 
gentlemen  and  ladies,  but  be  able  to  converse  with  ease,  and 
hearken  with  intelligence  to  persons  of  every  rank,  degree  and 
occupation. — The  man  who  has  only  the  graces  of  the  drawing 
room,  and  the  tone  of  conversation  of  any  particular  set  of  men, 
is  little  superior  to  what  a  monkey  would  be  who  had  the 
articulate  talents  of  a  parrot. 

Business  at  Denton  being  very  successfully  and 
prosperously  accomplished,  the  two  ladies  returned 
south  in  October,  staying  en  route  with  the  Cholmeleys 


1 38 


DR.  MONSEY  AT  NINETY 


1783 


and  Smelts  at  Housham,  and  arriving  at  Portman 
Square  on  the  16th. 

The  town  was  very  empty  and  quiet,  giving  our 
lady  “  a  period  in  which  I  can  think  over  what  I  have 
been  doing  and  what  I  have  further  to  do”;  whilst 
the  Pitts  took  Miss  Gregory  to  see  Mrs.  Siddons  act 
Zara  in  The  Mourning  Bride ,  in  which  “  the  poet  has 
so  much  overstepped  the  modesty  of  nature  and 
decency  of  manner  in  the  character  of  Zara  I  do  not 
think  it  possible  for  Mrs.  Siddons  to  appear  in  it 
to  advantage.”  Visits  were  paid  to  the  Cambridges 
at  Twickenham  and  to  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Hannah 
More  at  Hampton,  and  in  November  she  renewed 
acquaintance  with  an  old  admirer  : 

I  expect  Dr.  Monsey  his  Daughter  and  Grand  Daughters 
to  dine  with  me  to  day.  He  told  me  with  great  gayety  that  he 
was  now  in  his  ninetieth  year.  I  congratulated  him  upon 
having  kept  all  his  Witt,  and  a  great  part  of  his  indiscretion. 
I  was  really  rejoyced  to  see  him  so  gay.  I  really  think,  when 
the  busy  bustling  season  of  life  is  over,  levity  and  frolicsome 
idleness  are  as  pardonable  as  in  infancy  before  it  begins,  provided 
the  frolics  are  not  of  a  kind  to  hurt  a  Man  in  that  World  to 
which  he  must  soon  be  transferred  ;  the  cares  of  this  World 
shd  cease  with  our  interest  in  it. 

Messenger  Monsey  could  no  longer  see  to  read, 
and  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Alexander,  had  to  keep  him 
amused  by  many  games  of  backgammon.  In  her 
volumes  of  the  earlier  life  of  Elizabeth  Montagu, 
Mrs.  Climenson  recorded  that  Mrs.  Alexander  had 
one  daughter,  who  became  the  mother  of  Baron 
Cranworth  the  well-known  lawyer  who  was  Lord 
Chancellor  in  1852.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  she  had 
ten  children,  of  whom  many  descendants  survive. 

The  engagement  of  Lord  Valentia  (the  first  Lord 
Lyttelton’s  son-in-law,  whose  first  wife  had  died 
early  this  year),  to  Sir  Henry  Cavendish’s  daughter, 
“  a  woman  of  fashion  and  character,”  is  chronicled  in 
November;  and  the  death  of  her  Paris  acquaintance, 


SARAH  SIDDONS 
A  fter  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 


1783  THE  HAMILTON  VASE  139 

the  celebrated  Academician  D’Alembert,  is  recorded 
with  devout  intolerance: 

He  had  the  stone  and  gravel  in  his  kidneys  and  no  cheering 
hope  in  his  heart  of  a  blessed  immortality,  so  he  gave  himself 
up  to  rage  and  despair,  was  an  object  of  horror  to  every  Christian 
and  of  contempt  to  the  Philosophers.  ...  I  want  much  to 
hear  your  defence  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  I  think  if  you 
can  clean  her  up  into  a  demi  rep,  she  will  be  much  obliged  to 
you.  I  have  always  considered  her  a  worthy  Eleve  of  Catherine 
de  Medicis,  who  was  taught  to  put  politicks  into  gallantry,  till 
together  the  most  horrible  mixture  was  composed. 

Ld  Grantham  and  Sr  Joseph  York  dined  here  to  day.  I 
was  very  happy  in  their  company,  but  would  have  been  more 
happy  to  have  had  them  in  the  Cabinet  Council,  their  Ladies 
dined  here  also.  Lady  York  is  neither  young  nor  handsome, 
but  seems  sensible  and  polite.  Sr  Wm  and  Miss  Hamilton 
were  of  the  party.  We  are  to  go  to  Sr  Willm  Hamiltons  to¬ 
morrow  to  see  a  fine  Vase  for  which  he  paid  1000L  sterling, 
he  intends  to  give  it  to  the  British  Museum  to  which  he  has 
already  been  a  great  benefactor. 

The  famous  vase  was,  however,  sold  by  Sir  William 
Hamilton  to  the  Duke  of  Portland  in  1787,  and  was 
not  deposited  in  the  British  Museum  till  1810.  It 
was  wantonly  smashed  by  a  lunatic  in  February  1845, 
but  pieced  together  subsequently.  Wedgwood  made 
a  remarkable  reproduction  from  the  original  vase. 

Lord  Grantham  was  Foreign  Secretary,  and  Sir 
Joseph  Yorke  brother  of  the  2nd  Earl  of  Hardwicke. 

Andrew  Kippis,  editor  of  the  Biographia  Britannica , 
wrote  on  December  27: 

With  respect  to  the  Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius  of 
Shakespeare,  the  Mention  of  it  fell  so  naturally  in  my  Way, 
that  I  could  not  have  omitted  it  without  being  reproached  both 
by  my  Understanding  and  my  Heart.  At  the  same  Time,  I 
said  the  least  that  could  possibly  be  said.  If  I  had  done  full 
Justice  to  my  real  Sentiments,  I  should  have  added,  that  the 
Work  is  the  best  Defence  of  Shakespeare  ever  written,  and  that 
it  is  one  of  the  most  complete  pieces  of  poetical  criticism  which 
any  Age  or  Country  has  produced. 

What  had  Mrs.  Montagu  done  to  deserve  this  ? 


DR.  JOHNSON,  MR.  SHAKESPEARE, 
AND  MRS.  MONTAGU 


Johnson  and  the  ladies.  First  meets  Mrs.  Montagu.  Anna  Williams. 
Queen  Elizabeth’s  plates.  Johnson’s  evening  at  Hill  Street.  Lord 
Bath  on  their  friendship.  The  Essay  on  Shakespeare.  Mrs.  Montagu 
on  Johnson’s  English.  Johnson’s  Shakespeare.  She  criticises  his 
Preface.  Disapproves  the  attacks  on  Johnson.  Mrs.  Thrale’s 
quotation.  Voltaire  and  Johnson.  Mrs.  Montagu  goes  on  with 
her  Essay.  Its  publication  in  1769.  Johnson’s  opinion  of  it. 
Other  critics.  Horace  Walpole  approves.  The  Reviewers.  Letters 
from  Dr.  Johnson.  Letter  from  Anna  Williams.  Coll  in  the 
Hebrides.  Johnson  at  Hill  Street.  He  asks  help  for  Davies.  Begs 
for  a  print  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  The  Life  of  Lord  Lyttelton.  Dialogues 
of  the  Dead.  Mrs.  Montagu  “  drops  ”  Johnson.  An  explosion. 
The  Pepys-Johnson  battle  at  Streatham.  “  Queen  of  the  Blues.” 
Reconciliation.  She  stops  attacks  on  the  Doctor.  Letter  from  Dr. 
Johnson  on  the  death  of  Anna  Williams.  Letter  from  Lord  Hardwicke. 
Johnson’s  death.  His  opinion  of  Mrs.  Montagu.  Note  on  the 
Letters. 


That  the  Great  Cham  of  Literature  and  the  Queen  of 
the  Blue  Stockings,  as  he  himself  christened  her, 
should  have  had  a  good  deal  to  say  to  and  of  each 
other  was  only  to  be  expected  ;  that  the  conjunction 
of  two  planets  superior  and  inferior  might  produce 
certain  electrical  disturbances  was  also  not  improbable. 

Madam,”  the  Doctor  once  said  to  a  very  talkative 
lady,  “  I  am  very  fond  of  the  company  of  ladies  ;  I 
like  their  beauty,  I  like  their  delicacy,  I  like  their 
vivacity,  and  I  like  their  silence .”  Boswell  more  than 
once  expatiated  on  Johnson’s  fondness  for  feminine 
society  and  his  desire  to  be  in  the  ladies’  good  books. 
But  his  ideas  of  social  converse  were  perhaps  a  little 
one-sided.  To  a  lady  who  observed  to  him  that 
women  surpassed  men  in  epistolary  correspondence, 

I4O 


ANNA  WILLIAMS 


141 

and  were  most  pleasing  when  in  conversation,  “  No, 
Madam,”  returned  he,  “  I  think  they  are  most  pleasing 
when  they  hold  their  tongues.”  Baretti  declared  that 
he  always  talked  his  best  to  the  ladies  ;  but  the  trouble 
was  that  some  of  them — and  Mrs.  Montagu,  one  may 
surmise,  was  of  the  number — thought  conversation 
should  be  more  than  monologue. 

The  Doctor  was  probably  introduced  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  about  1759,  by  Mrs.  Carter,  their  mutual 
friend,  to  whom  Johnson  declared  a  “  respect  which 
I  neither  owe  nor  pay  to  any  other.” 

Mrs.  Carter  was  at  that  time  helping  the  Doctor  to 
raise  a  fund  in  aid  of  his  blind  friend  Anna  Williams. 
Mrs.  Montagu  obtained  and  forwarded  a  number  of 
subscriptions,  for  which  Johnson  wrote  a  letter  of 
thanks  on  behalf  of  his  protegee  “  for  your  favour, 
which  was  conferred  with  all  the  grace  that  elegance 
can  add  to  beneficence.” 

Mrs.  Montagu  writes  from  Sandleford  on  the  8th 
August  1762  : 

My  Lord  Bath  without  my  applying,  having  heard  by 
another  hand  I  was  getting  subscriptions  for  Mrs.  Williams, 
gave  me  five  guineas  for  her,  which  I  carried  to  her.  I  am 
sure  you  rejoyce  in  Lord  Butes  manner  of  giving  Mr.  Johnson 
a  pension,  a  man  of  Mr.  Johnsons  merit  should  have  a  thing 
of  that  kind  offer’d  to  him  with  delicacy.  I  hope  this  instance 
of  regard  to  a  man  like  Mr.  Johnson  will  encourage  other 
men  of  genius  to  imitate  him  in  the  right  application  of  their 
talents  ;  his  were  all  employed  in  the  service  of  religion  and 
virtue. 

The  Doctor’s  estimate  of  the  measure  of  permissible 
flattery  was,  in  Mrs.  Montagu’s  case,  certainly  gener¬ 
ous.  When  she  showed  him  some  china  plates  which 
had  once  belonged  to  Queen  Elizabeth  he  assured  her 
that  they  had  suffered  little  diminution  of  dignity  in 
falling  to  her  ;  and  when  apologising  for  his  omission 
to  acknowledge  an  invitation  to  her  house,  she  was 
told  that  “  to  be  ignorant  of  your  eminence  is  not  easy 


1 42  JOHNSON  VISITS  MRS.  MONTAGU 

but  to  him  who  lives  out  of  the  reach  of  the  public 
voice.”  This  was  written  in  1774,  but  whether  the 
Doctor  had  previously  honoured  the  Blue  Stocking 
assemblies  I  am  not  certain. 

From  another  letter  to  Lord  Bath — written,  I  think, 
in  1762 — I  extract  the  following  account  of  what  was 
presumably  the  Doctor’s  first  visit  to  Hill  Street  and 
its  hostess  personally : 

On  Saturday  when  I  came  from  airing  I  found  a  card 
signifying  that  Mr.  Johnson  would  wait  on  me  that  evening, 
he  came  early  and  staid  late,  so  I  had  much  of  his  conversation. 
He  has  a  great  deal  of  Witt  and  humour,  but  the  pride  of 
knowledge  and  the  fastidiousness  of  witt  make  him  hard  to 
please  in  books,  so  that  he  seems  to  take  pleasure  in  few  authors, 
for  which  I  pity  him.  I  believe  he  is  not  hard  to  please  in 
conversation,  for  I  hear  he  expresses  himself  delighted  with 
the  evening  he  pass’d  here,  and  some  of  my  friends  tell  me 
that  since  Polyphemus  was  in  love  there  has  not  been  so  glorious 
a  conquest  as  I  have  made  over  Mr.  Johnson.  He  has  many 
virtues,  and  witt  and  learning  enough  to  make  a  dozen  agreable 
companions,  but  a  pride  of  talent  always  hurts  and  pains  me. 
I  do  not  love  to  see  people  use  what  God  has  given  them  as 
a  light  to  shew  them  the  imperfect  nature  and  defective  com¬ 
position  of  man,  employ’d  in  so  different  a  manner,  and  as  old 
Bishop  Parnell  says,  I  must  ever  respect  the  sublimity  of 
humble  minds. 

Lord  Bath,  referring  to  this  visit,  says  : 

I  am  told  it  was  difficult  for  any  one  to  get  him  away  even 
at  two  oclock  in  the  morning  after  having  made  a  visit  of  five 
or  six  hours. 

In  a  postscript  to  a  letter  of  Lord  Bath’s  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  written  in  May  1763,  after  saying  he  is  the 
next  night  to  dine  with  Miss  Chudleigh  and  play 
cards,  he  adds  jealously  : 

How  comes  Johnson  already  to  know  the  goodness  and 
tenderness  of  your  heart.  Your  wit  sparkles  at  first  sight 
and  your  good  sense,  judgment  and  knowledge  appear  in  half 
an  hours  conversation,  but  methinks  he  has  no  right  yet  to 


143 


JOHNSON  AS  CRITIC 

know  anything  of  the  tenderness  of  your  heart  ;  and  yet  he 
pretends  to  know  it  as  well  as  I  do,  who  have  known  you  so 
long  and  often  blamed  you  for  having  it  too  tender. 

From  this  it  seems  that  the  acquaintance  had 
already  passed  its  initial  stages  ;  during  the  next  two 
or  three  years  her  own  studies  led  Mrs.  Montagu  to  a 
close  examination  of  the  Doctor’s  critical  work,  and 
more  especially  of  the  lines  upon  which  Shakespearian 
criticism  might  most  profitably  be  conducted  ;  a 
study  which  was  preparatory  to  the  work  on  the 
writings  and  genius  of  Shakespeare  compared  with  the 
Greek  and  French  Dramatic  Poets  which  she  had  it 
in  her  mind  to  produce.  It  is  evident  also  from  the 
following  letters  that  she  was  analysing  the  Doctor’s 
style  with  much  care  but  by  no  means  with  complete 
approval. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

October  z^th,  1765. 

I  think  with  you  that  Mr.  Johnson  is  perfectly  right  as 
to  the  tragedy  of  Cato  ;  it  is  a  fine  thing,  but  by  no  means 
a  good  drama.  .  .  . 

Whatever  he  says  is  beau  dans  un  livre,  but  a  play  is  not 
a  book.  I  both  perfectly  understand  and  agree  to  what  you 
say  of  the  precision  necessary  in  criticism,  and  there  the  words 
must  certainly  be  weighd  with  scrupulous  exactness,  but  I  do 
not  think  they  should  astonish  by  their  novelty,  nor  glitter 
by  quaintness,  which  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  think  Mr.  Johnsons 
are  apt  to  do.  The  worst  fault  of  language  is  to  be  equivocal, 
the  next  fault  perhaps,  is  such  a  sort  of  novelty  from  new 
coin’d  words,  that  the  sense  is  not  yet  ascertain’d.  Books 
written  in  the  mother  tongue  should  if  possible  be  intelligible 
to  those  who  know  no  others.  However  a  criticism  on  Homer 
or  Virgil  may  be  adapted  chiefly  to  scholars,  because  such 
only  need  to  read  them.  We  have  no  word  in  our  language 
to  express  the  fault  I  have  to  find  with  Mr.  J — ns  style,  it  is 
trop  recherche.  I  should  not  at  present  have  the  courage  to 
write  on  subjects  of  the  solemn  and  important  nature  you 
allude  to  ;  I  must  have  more  practise  in  writing,  and  try  my 
talents  on  humbler  themes  first. 


i44  THE  SHAKESPEARE  PREFACE 


Extracts  from  letters  to  Mrs.  Carter  in  1766  show 
that  Dr.  Johnson  having  now,  after  interminable 
delays,  inconsiderately  published  his  Shakespeare 
edition  just  when  Mrs.  Montagu  had  been  lucubrating 
her  Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius  of  Shakespeare , 
the  good  lady  was  greatly  exercised  as  to  whether 
she  should  still  proceed  with  her  work  : 

.  .  .  So  you  went  to  dine  with  Mrs.  Fielding,  a  very 
pretty  fancy  !  you  might  as  well  have  dined  with  Duke 
Humphrey.  Did  she  luxuriously  feast  you  with  a  chapter  of 
Epictetus  ?  I  hope  her  maid  Sarah  considered  the  grosser 
appetite  of  hunger,  or  you  might  come  ill  off,  for  I  dare  say 
poor  Fielding  never  thinks  of  dinner  till  it  is  time  to  eat  it. 

.  .  .  I  have  sent  only  one  sheet  of  scrawl,  for  Mr.  Johnson 
having  just  published  his  Shakespear  I  must  see  that  I  do 
not  servilely  seem  to  imitate,  or  presumptuously  contradict 
him.  You  will  think  me  perhaps  conceited  to  go  on  with 
the  work  when  he  has  just  published  a  preface  on  Shakespear, 
and  perhaps  it  may  make  me  suppress  the  work,  but  having 
begun,  I  will  finish  it.  I  cannot  say  I  am  convinced  that 
Mr.  Johnsons  criticisms  are  just,  but  I  am  afraid  his  talents 
will  make  the  scale  preponderate,  as  I  cannot  put  into  mine 
the  weight  of  authority  or  that  prevailing  charm  of  writing 
which  he  can  throw  into  his.  The  method  I  have  persued 
is  quite  different  from  his  ;  I  thought  there  were  enough 
already  of  vague  panegyricks  and  general  criticisms  upon 
Shakespears  works,  so  have  taken  a  larger  view  of  the  dramatick 
art,  and  a  more  particular  consideration  of  his  merits  and  faults, 
excellencies  and  defects.  I  wish  you  would  send  for  Johnsons 
Shakespear  and  read  the  preface.  He  seems  to  me  to  judge 
amiss  when  he  says  this  author  has  greater  genius  for  comedy 
than  tragedy,  and  likewise  when  he  says  he  wants  the  pathetick 
powers.  Johnson  begins  his  preface  admirably,  but  I  think 
it  flags  ;  however  two  of  a  trade  .  .  . 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  criticisms  of  Johnson’s  Shakes¬ 
peare  in  private  letters  to  her  friends  have  been 
endorsed  by  weightier  judges.  Lord  Macaulay  said 
the  preface,  though  it  contained  some  good  passages, 
was  not  in  his  best  style,  and  went  on  to  condemn  the 
work  in  the  severest  terms  : 


THE  CRITIC  CRITICISED 


r45 

“  It  would  be  difficult  to  name  a  more  slovenly,  a 
more  worthless  edition  of  any  great  classic.  That 
his  knowledge  of  our  literature  was  extensive  is 
indisputable.  But  unfortunately  he  had  altogether 
neglected  that  very  part  of  our  literature  with  which  it 
is  especially  desirable  that  an  editor  of  Shakespeare 
should  be  conversant.  .  .  .  He  ventured  to  publish  an 
edition  of  Shakespeare  without  having  ever  in  his  life, 
as  far  as  can  be  discovered,  read  a  single  scene  of 
Massenger,  Ford,  Dekker,  Webster,  Marlowe,  Beau¬ 
mont,  or  Fletcher.  His  detractors  were  noisy  and 
scurrilous.  Those  who  most  loved  and  honoured  him 
had  little  to  say  in  praise  of  the  manner  in  which  he 
had  discharged  the  duty  of  a  commentator.” 

Johnson  indeed  had  been  lashed  by  Churchill’s 
embittered  “  Pomposo  ”  into  the  completion  of  a  task 
which  his  indolence  had  far  too  long  postponed  ; 
and  though  the  great  moralist  thus  extricated  himself 
from  the  charge  of  cheating  his  friends  (for  the  book 
had  been  liberally  subscribed  nine  years  before  it 
appeared),  the  belated  work  can  hardly  be  said  to  have 
added  to  his  fame. 

Sandleford,  iith,  [1766]. 

I  suppose  you  may  have  seen  some  extracts  of  Mr.  Johnsons 
preface  to  Shakespear,  I  have  got  the  whole  edition  down  here. 
It  will  appear  presumption  to  go  on  with  my  work  after  Mr. 
Johnson  has  given  his  preface  and  notes,  and  yet  having  taken 
a  quite  different  track  I  think  I  shall  proceed  for  my  amuse¬ 
ment  ;  but  there  will  be  many  reasons  against  my  ever  making 
my  performance  publick.  I  do  not  agree  with  this  critick 
in  some  of  his  opinions  of  Shakespear,  and  when  I  do  not, 
it  will  appear  presum11  to  oppose  a  name  of  such  authority  ; 
where  we  agree  he  will  have  express’d  this  opinion  with  so 
many  more  graces  of  manner  and  style  that  I  had  better  hold 
my  tongue.  Both  Mr.  Pope  and  Johnson  have  written  the 
prettiest  essays  imaginable  on  Shakespear,  but  I  think  they 
have  done  very  little  in  shewing  his  excellencies  in  particular 
circumstances,  and  either  general  encomium  or  invective,  is 
to  me  not  properly  criticism  ;  both  these  writers  aim  to  please 
rather  than  to  teach.  I  had  enterd  into  a  particular  critique 
VOL.  II  L 


146 


VELVET  PILE 


of  his  historical  plays,  and  a  very  full  one  of  his  Henry  the 
fourth.  I  have  shewn  Mr.  Voltaires  injustice,  and  compared 
our  Countryman  with  his  boasted  Corneille  in  many  places 
where  the  subjects  bore  any  relation,  and  also  shewn  the  defects 
of  the  french  Theater.  Mr.  Johnsons  remarks  at  the  end 
of  Henry  the  4th  are  very  short  and  by  no  means  such  as  one 
should  expect  from  a  critick.  When  I  have  put  Mr.  Popes 
and  Johnsons  essays  together  I  do  not  mean  to  represent  them 
as  perfectly  similar.  Mr.  Popes  is  by  far  I  think  the  best 
composition,  but  he  has  only  gatherd  the  finest  flowers  in  the 
Field,  Johnson  has  more  nearly  glean’d  it,  but  his  preface 
is  not  so  beautiful  as  the  other.  His  language  is  laboured, 
rather  too  fine  for  my  taste,  who  love  the  negligences  of  genius 
better  than  the  ornaments  of  study,  but  perhaps  I  judge  so  for 
want  of  refinement.  I  never  love  the  velvet  style,  an  equal 
pile  as  if  cut  by  an  engine,  however  in  these  effeminate  days 
perhaps  it  will  be  admired  for  the  very  thing  I  dislike. 

This  criticism  of  the  Johnsonian  manner  finds 
expression  in  another  letter,  probably  of  much  later 
date,  in  which  she  writes  : 

I  agree  with  you  in  abhorring  the  ribaldry  with  which 
Mr.  Johnson  has  been  treated,  and  have  loudly  signified  my 
disapprobation  of  it  ;  at  the  same  time  he  always  writes  as  if 
he  was  a  parnassian  beau,  his  language  is  wonderfully  dress’d 
and  finical,  and  I  own,  I  think  if  he  was  fashionable  enough 
to  be  copied,  he  would  ruin  the  english  language  for  which 
I  have  a  great  respect,  as  it  is  noble,  strong,  and  fit  for  a  free 
people. 

Against  these  strictures  we  have  Mrs.  Thrale’s 
declaration  :  “  Mrs.  Montagu  once  observed,  that 

were  an  angel  to  give  the  imprimatur ,  Dr.  Johnson’s 
works  were  among  those  very  few  which  would  not  be 
lessened  by  a  line.  That  such  praise,  from  such  a 
lady,  should  delight  him,  is  not  strange.” 

Beyond  remarking  that  Mrs.  Thrale’s  accuracy  of 
quotation  is  not  unimpeachable,  and  that  flattery  is 
flattery,  the  faithful  chronicler  need  not  venture  ;  we 
must  leave  it  at  that. 

Johnson,  in  alluding  to  Voltaire’s  remarks,  had 


THE  ATTACK  ON  VOLTAIRE  147 

merely  said,  “  These  are  the  petty  cavils  of  petty 
minds.” 

Voltaire  responded:  “Je  ne  veux  point  soup- 
9onner  le  sieur  Jonson  d’etre  un  mauvais  plaisant  et 
d’aimer  trop  de  vin  ;  mais  je  trouve  un  peu  singulier 
qu’il  compte  la  bouffonnerie  et  l’ivrognerie  parmi  les 
beautes  du  theatre  tragique.” 

Boswell  had  vainly  urged  “  the  superstitious  dog,” 
as  Voltaire  called  the  Doctor,  to  reply  to  the  French¬ 
man’s  strictures.  “  He  said  he  perhaps  might ;  but 
he  never  did.”  So  it  was  left  to  little  Mrs.  Montagu 
to  take  the  field. 

Montagu  Pennington  declares  (in  his  Life  of  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Carter )  that  Voltaire  had  made  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu’s  acquaintance  in  England,  and  that  after  the 
appearance  of  the  Essay  “  he  could  never  bear  to 
mention  her  name  but  to  ridicule  or  abuse  her  ”  ;  the 
latter  statement  may  be  true  enough,  but  the  present 
Editor  has  found  no  evidence  that  they  had  ever  met, 
either  in  England  or  Paris. 

In  a  further  letter  she  writes  : 

The  attack  I  shall  make  upon  Voltaire  as  a  Critick  is  not 
the  last  contest  I  intend  to  have  with  him.  He  has  ruined 
the  principles  of  half  our  young  people,  and  to  shew  him 
superficial  in  every  thing  would  be  of  great  use.  I  am  sorry 
Mr.  Johnson  has  pass’d  him  over  with  supercilious  contempt, 
it  is  true  that  he  deserves  to  be  used  so,  but  as  he  stands  high 
in  the  opinion  of  many,  I  wish  Mr.  Johnson  had  exposed  him. 
I  wish  you  could  get  the  whole  of  Johnson’s  preface,  it  teizes 
me  sadly  ;  if  he  had  said  more  upon  Shakespear  I  should  have 
dropt  my  undertaking,  if  he  had  said  less,  I  should  have  gone 
on  with  more  confidence  ;  the  more  I  read  this  preface  the 
better  I  like  it,  and  the  less  I  like  my  own.  I  have  enter’d 
more  into  the  subject  in  a  critical  way,  and  I  think  have  better 
exhibited  the  perfections  of  Shakespear,  as  I  have  more  minutely 
observed  on  them,  but  I  shall  entertain  and  please  less  perhaps, 
a  few  general  observations  will  satisfy  the  generality  of  readers. 
I  was  provoked  to  this  undertaking  by  the  flippancy  of  Voltaire 
in  a  great  measure,  and  also  by  thinking  we  had  erred  widely 
from  the  true  dramatick  art.  I  have  so  far  proceeded,  and 


148  the  last  commentator 

am  so  warm’d  by  the  subject,  that  I  hardly  care  to  drop  it, 
and  yet  I  dont  know  whether  after  Mr.  Johnson  people  will 
desire  any  more  criticisms  on  Shakespear.  I  understood  he 
was  only  to  write  notes  upon  him,  and  those  merely  to  rectify 
the  errors  of  the  copies,  but  alas  !  his  Preface  is  so  ingenious 
it  terrifys  me.  I  want  to  hear  what  people  say  of  it,  the  eyes 
of  jealousy  admire  a  rival  tho  the  tongue  does  not  always 
confess  his  merit  ;  however,  I  assure  you  I  have  no  wicked 
animosity  against  the  man,  tho  I  wish  he  had  not  written  this 
preface,  and  I  shall  do  it  all  possible  honour  in  my  way  of 
speaking  of  it  to  his  friends  and  his  foes  ;  and  indeed  I  am  so 
afraid  that  where  I  think  I  perceive  it  faulty,  that  opinion 
should  arise  from  the  jealousy  of  an  author,  I  shall  hardly 
trust  myself  to  speak  of  it,  but  with  general  commendation. 
If  I  find  people  think  he  has  thoroughly  disscuss’d  the  merits 
of  Shakespear,  my  work  instead  of  going  printed  under  pyes 
to  the  oven,  shall  go  in  manuscript  into  the  fire.  You  will 
hear  at  Bath  how  far  people  are  contented  with  this  work  of 
Johnsons.  I  hope  he  will  get  a  great  deal  of  money  by  it, 
for  he  is  a  most  worthy  charitable  man  as  well  as  a  genius. 

October  21,  1766. 

It  is  strange  that  Mr.  Johnson  should  so  superficially 
examine  the  merits  and  faults  of  his  authors  plays  ;  he  should 
have  said  more  or  have  said  nothing.  If  he  had  given  attention 
to  the  dramatic  genius  of  Shakespeare  he  might  have  done  him 
justice,  and  I  wonder  he  did  not  enter  with  pleasure  into  a  task 
that  seem’d  peculiarly  suited  to  him  ;  he  has  taste  and  learning, 
therefore  is  a  capable  critick,  he  wants  invention,  he  wants 
strength  and  vigour  of  genius  to  go  through  a  long  original 
work.  I  will  own  he  gives  smart  correction  to  former  com¬ 
mentators,  but  the  last  commentator  deserves  the  least  indulg¬ 
ence,  as  he  had  more  opportunity  of  seeing  the  futility  of  the 
thing.  .  .  . 

In  another  letter  there  is  a  phrase  which  is  amusing 
in  view  of  the  terrific  storm  which  was  to  arise  later 
over  “  poor  Lyttelton  ”  : 

I  agree  with  you  poor  Johnson  is  ill  used,  but  I  cannot  help 
sending  you  an  application  of  the  character  of  Holofernes  that 
has  been  made  to  him  ;  to  say  the  truth,  it  expresses  what  I 
have  always  felt  when  I  have  read  him.  Lord  Lyttelton  says 


“  WRITATION  ” 


149 


the  word  writation,  which  Lord  Cobham  invented  for  those 
works  which  had  a  certain  ostentation  of  phrase,  is  most  applica¬ 
tive  to  Johnson. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  devoted  a  long  period  of  study 
and  thought  to  the  elaboration  of  this  essay,  and  one 
sees,  by  the  way  in  which  she  returns  again  and  again 
to  the  subject  in  letters  to  her  intimate  friends,  how 
greatly  she  was  upset  by  the  appearance  of  Johnson’s 
work,  which,  while  itself  inadequate,  now  occupied 
the  stage  and  might  seem  to  give  her  efforts  an  air  of 
presumption. 

What  appears  to  me  deficient  is  his  examen  of  the  plays,  in 
which  he  neither  enters  into  the  conduct  of  the  drama  nor 
characters  of  the  persons  in  a  critical  manner,  and  sometimes 
ascribes  things  to  them  which  seem  to  me  totally  unjust. 

After  citing  instances  she  concludes  : 

however  I  say  this  only  to  you  for  I  am  far  from  thinking 
that  to  pull  down  another  person’s  work  would  set  up  mine,  so 
wherever  I  blame  him  I  shall  be  silent,  besides  tho’  I  hope  to  be 
unknown,  yet  I  would  not  say  any  thing  which  I  should  be 
ashamed  of  if  I  was  discovered,  and  it  would  appear  very 
flippant  in  me  to  censure  a  man  of  his  parts  and  learning.  All 
will  allow  authority  to  his  character  tbo’  they  may  disapprove 
of  this  work,  which  he  has  not  done  in  a  manner  worthy  of 
his  abilities. 

So  she  decided  jestinare  lente  with  her  own  work, 
and  to  let  it  take  its  chance  two  or  three  years  later. 

Whatever  the  merits  or  demerits  of  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu’s  Essay,  Dr.  Johnson’s  criticism  of  it  when  it 
appeared  in  1769  smacks  of  peevish  animus.  Cowper 
wrote  of  it :  “  The  learning,  the  good  sense,  the 

sound  judgment  and  the  wit  displayed  in  it  fully 
justify  not  only  my  compliment  but  all  compliments 
that  either  have  been  already  paid  to  her  talents  or 
shall  be  paid  hereafter.  Voltaire,  I  doubt  not, 
rejoiced  that  his  antagonist  wrote  in  English  and  that 
his  countrymen  could  not  possibly  be  judges  of  the 


150  PRAISE  FROM  HORACE  WALPOLE 

dispute.”  Johnson,  while  admitting  that  he  had  only 
read  the  end  of  the  book,  and  while  allowing  that 
“  ad  hominem  it  was  conclusive  against  Voltaire,”  and 
that  “  she  had  done,  Sir,  what  she  intended  to  do,” 
told  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  that  while  it  did  Mrs. 
Montagu  honour  it  would  do  nobody  else  honour,  and 
that  he  “  would  venture  to  say  there  is  not  one  sentence 
of  true  criticism  in  her  book.”  It  is  much  to  venture 
this  of  a  book  one  has  not  read  ;  and  Boswell  is  con¬ 
strained  to  protest  too  much  in  saying  that  it  was 
Johnson’s  “honest  opinion  unbiassed  by  any  prejudice 
or  any  proud  jealousy  of  a  woman  intruding  herself 
into  the  chair  of  criticism,”  thereby  putting  into 
words  the  very  suggestion  that  has  probably  occurred 
to  most  of  his  readers. 

Apart  from  Dr.  Johnson,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay 
had  many  admirers.  “  The  Critical  Review ,”  she 
writes  to  Mrs.  Carter  in  June,  “  has  praised  the  Essay 
far  beyond  not  only  its  deserts  but  my  conceit  of  its 
deserts.  I  hope,  therefore,  the  work  will  obtain  a  good 
character.”  Dr.  Hugh  Blair,  the  Scottish  Divine  and 
critic  of  Ossian,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  and  others  wrote 
and  spoke  strongly  in  its  praise,  and  the  following 
from  Lord  Lyttelton  conveys  a  cachet  of  approval 
from  one  from  the  malice  of  whose  impish  pen  Mrs. 
Montagu  did  not  always  escape. 


Hill  Street,  May  z^rd,  1769. 

I  wish  you  joy  of  Mr.  Walpole’s  admiring  your  Essay, 
which  I  hear  he  does  greatly,  and  has  given  the  Tone  upon  it 
to  all  his  Connexion.  This  is  very  good  news  ;  for  he  is  at 
present  the  Gentleman  Usher  on  Parnassus,  without  whose 
hand  a  female  Writer  can’t  be  decently  introduced  to  the  Court 
of  Apollo,  either  in  France  or  in  England.  Indeed  I  believe 
he  does  not  guess  your  Sex  :  but  it  is  possible  that  he  may.  I 
hear  I  have  still  the  honour  of  your  Book  in  many  Coffee 
houses  and  at  some  tea  tables.  That  is  very  flattering  to  me, 
but  depend  upon  it,  fair  Lady,  you  will  be  found  out  at  last, 
and  then  you  must  have  recourse  to  what  other  fair  Ladies  who 


PRODIGIOUS  COURTESY 


if 

are  found  out  have  recourse  to,  setting  a  good  face  upon  it, 
and  declaring  you  think  it  is  neither  Sin  nor  Shame. 

The  Female  Writer  was  herself  naturally  pleased  by 
this  reception.  She  had  written  very  candidly  in  1766: 

I  talk  as  vainly  as  a  Haberdasher  of  small  wares  would  do 
who  should  compare  himself  to  a  merchant  and  say  we  trades¬ 
men.  But  if  it  were  not  for  a  little  vanity,  could  one  set  down 
to  write  a  needless  thing  on  a  mans  works  who  has  been  dead 
so  many  years.  I  wish  Mr.  Johnson  had  publishd  a  year  ago 
or  had  kept  his  peice  ten  years,  giving  a  year  of  grace  beyond 
what  Horace  advises. 

Now  she  writes  : 

The  courtesy  of  the  Reviewers  is  prodigious  ;  after  many 
civil  things  they  add  that  in  its  kind  it  is  as  classical  a  perform¬ 
ance  as  any  this  age  has  produced.  The  word  classical  sticks 
in  my  throat  ;  alas  !  did  these  gentlemen  know  the  first  rudi¬ 
ments  of  the  authors  learning  were  working  a  Sampler,  what 
would  they  say  ?  I  was  afraid  these  Reviewers  would  have 
been  severe,  but  they  have  hurt  me  only  by  undeserved  com¬ 
mendation.  I  am  glad  to  find  they  do  not  guess  the  Author  ; 
they  talk  of  him  till  they  make  me  feel  whether  I  have  not  a 
beard  on  my  chin. 

Mrs.  Draper,  Sterne’s  Eliza,  by  the  way,  refers 
to  the  Essay  with  rapture  in  her  long  letter  to 
Mrs.  James,  written  from  India  in  April  1772. 

In  a  volume  of  Anderdon’s  Collectanea  “  Mr. 
Sheridan’s  compliment  ”  is  thus  transcribed  : 

Our  hearts  are  pledgd  to  Montagu’s  applause 
While  Shakespeare’s  spirit  seems  to  aid  her  cause, 

Well  pleasd  to  aid,  since  on  his  sacred  bier 
This  female  hand  did  ample  trophies  rear, 

And  gave  the  greatest  laurel  worshipd  there. 

Sir  Egerton  Brydges  also  wrote  enthusiastically, 
later  on  : 

Her  Essay  on  Shakespeare  is  a  very  eloquent  and  beautiful 
piece  of  criticism  which  none  but  an  author  of  great  genius 
could  have  produced. 


152  AN  ANNUITY  FOR  MRS.  WILLIAMS 

Except  for  a  few  casual  references,  there  is  a  long 
hiatus  in  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  association 
with  the  Doctor,  after  the  publication  of  the  Shake¬ 
speare  Essay  ;  and  the  next  letter  merely  refers,  in  the 
Great  Man’s  inimitable  style,  to  a  neglected  invitation 
to  a  dinner  at  Hill  Street: 


From  Samuel  Johnson 

Jan.  ii,  1774. 

Madam  —  Having  committed  one  fault  by  inadvertence, 
I  will  not  committ  another  by  Sullenness.  When  I  had  the 
honour  of  your  card,  I  could  not  comply  with  your  invitation, 
and  must  now  suffer  the  Shame  of  confessing  that  the  necessity 
of  an  answer  did  not  come  into  my  mind. 

This  omission,  Madam,  you  may  safely  excuse,  as  the  con- 
sciensness  of  your  own  character  must  secure  you  from  suspect¬ 
ing  that  the  favour  of  your  notice  can  ever  miss  a  suitable  return, 
but  from  ignorance  or  thoughtlessness,  and  to  be  ignorant  of 
your  eminence  is  not  easy  but  to  him  who  lives  out  of  the  reach 
of  the  publick  voice. — I  am  Madam,  Your  most  obedient  and 
most  humble  Servant  Sam:  Johnson. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  untiring  benevolence  and  tender¬ 
hearted  compassion  for  the  illnesses  and  misfortunes 
of  all  with  whom  she  came  in  contact  are  amongst  the 
pleasantest  features  of  her  character.  Her  immediate 
response  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  appeal  on  behalf  of  Mrs. 
Williams  has  already  been  mentioned.  On  coming 
into  Mr.  Montagu’s  possessions  at  his  death  in  May 
1775,  his  widow  at  once  made  provision  for  more 
than  one  necessitous  acquaintance,  including  Anna 
Williams,  for  whom  she  arranged  an  immediate  annuity, 
which  evoked  the  following  acknowledgement  : 

From  Mrs.  Williams 

Madam — Often  Have  I  heard  of  Generosity,  Benevolence 
&  Compassion,  but  never  have  I  known  or  experienc’d  the 
reality  of  those  virtues,  till  this  joyfull  morning  when  I  received 
the  honour  of  your  most  tender  &  Affectionate  Letter,  with  its 


“POOR  COLL” 


*53 


most  Wellcome  contents,  Madam  I  may  with  truth  say  I  have 
not  words  to  express  my  Gratitude  as  I  ought,  to  a  Lady  whose 
bounty  has  by  one  act  of  benevolence  doubled  my  Income,  & 
whose  tender  Compassionate  Assurances  has  removed  the  future 
anxiety  of  trusting  to  Chance,  the  terror  of  which  only  could 
have  prompted  me  to  stand  a  publick  Candidate  for  Mr. 
Hetherington’s  Bounty. 

May  my  sincere  &  gratefull  thanks  be  accepted  by  you,  & 
may  the  Author  of  all  good  bless  &  long  Continue  a  Life  whose 
shining  Virtues  are  so  Conspicuous  &  Exemplary,  is  the  most 
ardent  Prayer  of  her  who  is  with  the  greatest  respect,  Madam, 
Yr  most  Devoted  truly  Obliged  &  obedient  Humble  Servant, 

Anna  Williams. 

Johnson’s  Court,  June  26th,  1775. 

At  the  end  of  1775  Mrs.  Montagu  again  invited 
Dr.  Johnson  to  Hill  Street,  and  received  response  as 
follows  : 

From  Dr.  Johnson 

All  that  the  show  and  reverence  of  mankind  can  give  you 
has  been  long  in  your  possession,  but  the  little  that  I  can  add  to 
the  voice  of  nations  will  not  much  exalt  you  ;  of  that  little 
however  you  are,  I  hope  very  certain. 

I  wonder  Madam  if  you  remember  Coll  in  the  Hebrides’. 
The  brother  and  heir  of  poor  Coll  has  just  been  to  visit  me  and 
I  have  engaged  to  dine  with  him  on  Thursday.  I  do  not  know 
his  lodging  and  cannot  send  him  a  message,  and  must  therefore 
suspend  the  honour,  which  you  are  pleased  to  offer,  to  Madam, 
Your  most  Humble  Servant  Sam:  Johnson. 

December  17  th,  1775. 

Mrs.  Montagu  promptly  repeated  the  invitation, 
and  Johnson  replied  offering  himself  for  any  day  after 
the  following  Tuesday  : 

“  I  know  not,”  he  added,  “  when  any  letter  has  given  me  so 
much  pleasure  or  vexation  as  that  which  I  had  yesterday  the 
pleasure  of  receiving.  That  you,  Madam  should  wish  for  my 
company,  is  surely  a  sufficient  reason  for  being  pleased  ;  that 
I  should  delay  twice  what  I  had  so  little  right  to  expect  even 
once  has  so  bad  an  appearance  that  I  can  only  hope  to  have  it 
thought  that  I  am  ashamed.” 


*54 


VARIETY  IN  ONE 


It  is  evident  from  references  in  the  subsequent 
letters  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  frequently  among  the 
guests  at  Mrs.  Montagu’s  gatherings  in  Hill  Street, 
and  was  treated  with  a  reverential  respect,  which 
undoubtedly  pleased  him,  though  he  might  be  loth  to 
avow  it.  “  One  evening  at  Mrs.  Montagu’s,”  writes 
Dr.  Maxwell,  “  where  a  splendid  company  was 
assembled,  consisting  of  the  most  eminent  literary 
characters,  I  thought  he  seemed  highly  pleased  with 
the  respect  and  attention  that  were  shown  him,  and 
asked  him  on  our  return  home  if  he  was  not  highly 
gratified  by  his  visit :  ‘  No  Sir,  (said  he)  not  highly 
gratified  ;  yet  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  passed  many 
evenings  with  fewer  objections'  ”  “  Mrs.  Montagu,” 

he  told  Mrs.  Thrale,  “  is  far  pluribus.  Conversing 
with  her  you  may  find  variety  in  one,"  which  is  a  more 
complimentary  reference  than  Mrs.  Montagu’s,  who, 
writing  to  Mrs.  Vesey  on  February  i,  1778,  says: 
“  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale  and  Dr.  Johnson  dined  with 
me  on  Thursday  ;  but  I  do  not  relish  my  dinners  now 
my  Vesey  is  not  a  guest.” 

In  the  next  letter  which  occurs,  the  Doctor  is 
clearly  on  much  easier  terms  with  his  hostess,  and 
knows  enough,  of  her  generosity  at  least,  to  combine 
a  request  for  a  subscription  with  an  apology  for  a 
cough  : 


From  Dr.  Johnson 

Madam — And  so  you  are  alarmed,  naughty  Lady  ;  you 
might  know  that  I  was  ill  enough  when  Mr.  Thrale  brought 
you  my  excuse.  Could  you  think  that  I  missed  the  honour  of 
being  at  [your]  table  for  any  slight  reason  ?  But  you  [have] 
too  many  to  miss  any  one  of  us,  and  I  am  [proud]  to  be 
remembered  at  last. 

I  am  much  better.  A  little  cough  still  remains  which  will 
not  confine  me.  To  houses,  [like  yours]  of  great  delicacy  I 
am  not  willing  to  bring  it. 

Now,  dear  Madam,  we  must  talk  of  business.  Poor 
Davies,  the  bankrupt  Bookseller,  is  soliciting  his  Friends  to 


PUSHING  A  FACE 


*55 


collect  a  small  sum  for  the  repurchase  of  part  of  his  household 
stuff.  Several  of  them  give  him  five  guineas.  It  would  be  an 
honour  to  him,  to  owe  part  of  his  relief  to  Mrs.  Montague. 

Let  me  thank  you.  Madam,  once  more  for  your  enquiry  ; 
You  have  perhaps  among  your  numerous  train,  not  [one]  that 
values  a  kind  word  or  a  kind  look  more  than  Madam,  Your 
most  humble  Servant  Sam:  Johnson. 

March  5,  1778. 


[A  piece  of  this  letter  has  been  torn  away,  and  the 
words  in  brackets  inserted  in  a  contemporary  hand.] 

In  October  1778  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  to  Mrs. 
Thrale:  “There  is  a  print  of  Mrs.  Montagu  and  I  shall 
think  myself  very  ill  rewarded  for  my  love  and  admira¬ 
tion,  if  she  does  not  give  me  one  ;  she  will  give  it 
nobody  in  whom  it  will  excite  more  respectful  senti¬ 
ments.  But  I  never  could  get  anything  from  her 
but  by  pushing  a  face  ;  and  so,  if  you  please,  you  may 
tell  her.” 

There  was  an  engraved  portrait  of  Mrs.  Montagu 
by  Townley  after  the  picture  by  Miss  Reynolds,  and 
also  a  print  from  the  medallion  by  Wedgwood. 

In  April  1780  compliments  are  still  the  order 
of  the  day,  and  we  find  the  Doctor  addressing 
Mrs.  Thrale  thus  : 

Can  you  write  such  a  letter  as  this,  so  miscellaneous  with 
such  noble  disdain  of  a  regularity  like  Shakespeare’s  works  ? 
such  graceful  negligence  of  translation  like  the  ancient  en¬ 
thusiasts  ?  The  pure  voice  of  nature  and  of  friendship.  Now 
of  whom  shall  I  proceed  to  speak  ?  Of  whom  but  Mrs. 
Montagu  ?  Having  mentioned  Shakespeare  and  Nature,  does 
not  the  name  of  Montagu  force  itself  upon  me  ? 

That  the  Doctor’s  tongue  was  in  his  cheek  when  he 
wrote  this  it  would  be  rash  to  deny  ;  but  he  adds,  in  a 
letter  of  the  following  month  :  “  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
long  stay  ...  is  very  convenient.  You  would,  by 
your  own  confession,  want  a  companion,  and  she  is 
par  pluribus." 


156  DAGON  AND  ASHTAROTH 

To  all  this  pretty  compliment  and  adulation,  how¬ 
ever,  the  year  1781  brought  a  disastrous  interruption, 
with  the  publication  of  the  last  volume  of  Johnson’s 
Lives  of  the  Poets ,  containing  a  brief  biography  of  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  devoted  friend  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton, 
who  had  died  eight  years  previously.  Reading  this 
short  and  by  no  means  scathing  memoir  to-day,  one 
is  frankly  astonished  at  the  fury  of  indignation  and 
invective  which  its  publication  aroused  amongst  the 
bas  bleus  and  the  friends  of  that  estimable  Baron. 
The  most  incriminating  paragraph,  speaking  of  the 
Dialogues  of  the  Dead ,  says  : 

When  they  were  first  published  they  were  kindly  commended 
by  the  Critical  Reviewers ,  and  poor  Lyttelton  with  humble 
gratitude,  returned,  in  a  note  which  I  have  read,  acknowledg¬ 
ments  which  can  never  be  proper,  since  they  must  be  paid 
either  for  flattery  or  for  justice. 

No  doubt  the  accent  of  “compassionate  contempt’’ 
which  is  audible  in  this  and  one  or  two  other  passages 
rankled  deeply  with  those  who  had  lost  in  Lord 
Lyttelton  an  affectionate  friend  and  an  exemplary  host ; 
still  the  outcry  which  it  raised  seems  out  of  all  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  gravity  of  the  offence  in  a  judgement  which 
nowhere  exceeds  the  bounds  of  legitimate  criticism, 
and  is  interspersed  with  a  good  deal  of  unreserved  if 
slight  commendation.  Walpole,  of  course,  took  a 
malign  delight  in  aggravating  matters.  “  At  a  blue¬ 
stocking  meeting  held  by  Lady  Lucan,  Mrs.  Montagu 
and  Johnson  kept  at  different  ends  of  the  chamber  and 
set  up  altar  against  altar  there.  She  told  me  as  a  mark 
of  her  high  displeasure  that  she  would  not  ask  him  to 
dinner  again.  I  took  her  aside  and  fomented  the 
quarrel,  and  wished  I  could  have  made  Dagon  and 
Ashtaroth  scold  in  Coptic.” 

“  Mrs.  Montagu  has  dropped  me,”  said  Johnson. 
“  Now  sir,  there  are  people  whom  one  should  like  very 
well  to  drop,  but  would  not  wish  to  be  dropped  by.” 


AN  EXPLOSION 


157 


And  Boswell  adds,  “  He  certainly  was  vain  of  the  society 
of  ladies  and  could  make  himself  very  agreeable  to 
them,  when  he  chose  it.” 

In  the  forefront  of  this  teacup  fray  was  Mr.  Weller 
Pepys,  Master  in  Chancery,  and  a  devoted  ally  of  Mrs. 
Montagu’s.  Infected  by  Mr.  Walpole’s  malice,  I 
cannot  resist  quoting  part  of  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
to  Mr.  Pepys,  partly  at  least  because  it  gives  a  delicious 
example  of  feminine  fury  momentarily  explosive  and 
entirely  alien  to  the  dear  lady’s  normal  temperament : 


To  Mr.  Pepys 

Hillstreet,  Nov.  3 rd,  1781. 

What  I  have  said  of  my  boy  [Matthew,  her  nephew  and 
adopted  child]  may  seem  to  proceed  from  the  vanity  of  my 
heart,  but  as  I  know  how  kindly  and  generously  you  interest 
yourself  for  him,  I  would  have  you,  and  I,  believe  it  flow’d 
from  benevolence.  May  he  be  worthy  of  the  esteem  of  such 
as  Mr.  Pepys,  and  the  envy,  and  the  malice,  and  the  railing, 
of  such  wretches  as  Dr.  Johnson,  who  bear  in  their  hearts  the 
secret  hatred  of  hypocrites  to  genuine  virtue,  and  the  contempt 
of  Pedants  for  real  genius.  But  no  more  at  present  on  so 
odious  a  subject  as  the  Doctor  and  his  malicious  falsehoods. 
I  wish  his  figure  was  put  as  a  frontispiece  to  his  works,  his 
squinting  look  and  monstrous  form  would  well  explain  his 
character.  Those  disgraces  which  make  a  good  mind  humble 
and  complacent,  ever  render  a  bad  one  envious  and  ferocious. 
Lady  M:  Wortley  Montagu  says  of  a  deformd  Person  who 
had  satirized  her,  “Twas  in  the  uniformity  of  fate,  that  one  so 
hateful  should  be  born  to  hate.” 

This  was  really  very  naughty  of  our  good  lady ; 
and  Boswell,  “drunk  or  sober,”  shone  with  com¬ 
parative  benignity  when  he  wrote  to  the  Gazette 
deprecating  all  mention  of  the  Doctor’s  infirmities  of 
body  and  eccentricities  of  manner,  which  he  compared 
to  odious  wens  placed  upon  a  statue. 

Sir  Egerton  Brydges  is  probably  right  in  saying 
“  Mrs.  Montagu  was  too  fine  a  lady  really  to  reconcile 
herself  to  the  manners  of  Dr.  Johnson.” 


15B  JOHNSON’S  ECCENTRICITIES 

There  is  evidence  that  more  than  one  of  the  ladies 
who  entertained  Dr.  Johnson  suffered  a  good  deal 
from  the  eccentricities  of  his  person  and  manners. 
Miss  Hawkins  speaks  of  his  loose-hung  clothes,  his 
brown  hands,  his  deep  roar  when  he  meant  to  be  civil, 
his  rolling  head  and  bushy  wig  ;  Miss  Reynolds 
describes  his  extraordinary  gesticulations  and  antics, 
his  lack  of  delicacy  in  eating  and  the  displeasing  faces 
he  made  ;  “  his  corporeal  defects  also  contributed 
largely  to  the  singularity  of  his  manners  ;  and  a  little 
reflection  on  the  disqualifying  influence  of  blindness 
and  deafness  would  suggest  many  apologies  for  Dr. 
Johnson’s  want  of  politeness.” 

His  immense  limbs,  his  convulsionary  movements, 
his  hard  breathing,  huge  appetite  and  large  mouthfuls 
undoubtedly  made  him  “  not  appear  to  the  best 
advantage  at  the  hour  of  repast  ”  ;  and  a  woman  of 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  delicacy  had  doubtless  to  pay  severely 
for  the  honour  of  his  entertainment.  Even  Boswell 
admits  that  “  his  appetite  was  so  fierce,  and  indulged 
with  such  intenseness  that  while  in  the  act  of  eating 
the  veins  of  his  forehead  swelled  and  generally  a 
strong  perspiration  was  visible.”  A  man  who  ate 
lobster  sauce  with  plum  pudding  and  “  devoured  a 
plateful  of  stewed  carp  with  the  assistance  of  his 
fingers  only,”  must  occasionally  have  shocked  his 
hostesses.  Yet  the  dear  man  told  Boswell  that  “he 
had  never  been  hungry  but  once,”  and  whilst  he 
protested  to  Mrs.  Thrale  that  he  was  “  well-bred  to  a 
degree  of  needless  scrupulosity,”  she  declared  “  he  now 
devours  my  roast  beef  and  plum  pudden  too  dirtily 
for  endurance.” 

The  story  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  attack  on  Mr.  Weller 
Pepys  at  a  dinner-party  at  the  Thrales  in  June  1781 
has  been  told  at  length  by  Fanny  Burney  in  the  first 
volume  of  her  Diary,  and  Mr.  Pepys’  letter  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  describing  the  fray  has  also  been  printed, 
and  need  not  be  reproduced  here.  Miss  Burney 


THE  ROW  AT  STREATHAM 


1 59 


says  it  was  a  terrible  noisy  day,  and  that  never  before 
had  she  seen  Johnson  speak  with  such  passion.  “  Come 
forth,  man  !  ”  roared  Johnson,  purple  in  the  face, 
across  the  table.  “  If  you  have  anything  to  say,  let’s 
hear  it.  Come  forth,  man,  when  I  call  you  !  ”  He 
was,  Fanny  admits,  throughout,  the  aggressor,  and 
Pepys  tried  in  vain  to  get  off  the  painful  subject  ;  the 
latter  never  appeared  to  so  much  advantage,  pre¬ 
served  his  temper,  uttered  all  that  belonged  to  himself 
with  great  modesty  and  all  that  more  immediately 
related  to  Lord  Lyttelton  with  spirit  ;  and  indeed 
the  Doctor,  whom  Fanny  declares  to  have  been 
unreasonably  furious  and  grossly  severe,  broke  off  in 
the  very  thick  of  the  fray  to  compliment  his  anta¬ 
gonist  : 

“  Sir,  all  that  you  say,  while  you  are  vindicating 
one  who  cannot  thank  you,  makes  me  only  think  better 
of  you  than  I  ever  did  before.  Yet  still  I  think  you 
do  me  wrong,”  etc.,  etc.  Mrs.  Thrale,  after  the  battle 
had  lasted  through  dinner,  over  the  wine,  and  even 
when  the  men  were  summoned  to  tea,  at  last  put  a 
peremptory  stop  to  the  fight,  declaring  with  spirit  and 
dignity,  that  she  should  be  very  glad  to  hear  no  more 
of  it  ;  and  Mr.  Pepys  concludes  his  account  thus  : 
“  We  shook  hands  however  at  parting,  which  put  me 
in  mind  of  the  parting  between  Jaques  and  Orlando. 

‘  God  be  with  you,  let  us  meet  as  seldom  as  we  can  ! 
Fare  you  well,  I  hope  we  shall  be  better  strangers  !  ’ 
We  have  not  met  again  till  last  Tuesday,  and  then  I 
must  do  him  justice  to  say  that  he  did  all  in  his  power 
to  show  that  he  was  sorry  for  the  former  attack.” 
Fanny  Burney  adds,  “  This  dear  violent  Doctor  was 
conscious  he  had  been  wrong,  and  therefore  he  most 
candidly  bore  Mrs.  Thrale’s  reproof,”  for  “  she  read 
him  a  very  serious  lecture  upon  giving  way  to  such 
violence,  which  he  bore  with  a  patience  and  quietness 
that  even  more  than  made  his  peace  with  me.” 

It  should  be  understood,  in  chronicling  the  record 


160  JOHNSON  ATTACKED 

of  this  rather  ridiculous  dispute,  that  it  was  not  Mrs. 
Montagu,  but  some  other  friends  of  Lyttelton’s  who 
had  led  the  attack  on  Dr.  Johnson.  Indeed  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  letters  show  clearly  that,  deeply  as  she 
resented  what  she  conceived  to  be  the  Doctor’s  malice 
and  uncharitableness,  she  did  what  she  could  to 
mitigate  and  suppress  the  violence  of  the  resentment 
to  which  it  gave  rise.  Writing  on  August  14,  1781, 
to  Mr.  Pepys  from  Sandleford,  she  says  : 

I  am  very  glad  you  had  a  battle  with  Dr.  Johnson  ;  he  is 
too  vain  to  guess  the  odium  and  contempt  he  has  incurred  by 
his  character  of  Lord  Lyttelton  and  some  other  men  whose 
works  deserved  a  better  critic,  and  lives  a  more  candid  biographer. 
I  should  express  myself  more  fully  on  the  subject  but  that 
when  mankind  take  vengeance  for  a  misdemeanour  that 
vengeance  is  commonly  too  severe.  Some  friends  to  one  of 
the  poets  he  has  ill  treated  have  begun  such  a  satyrical  account 
of  Johnson’s  person  and  manner,  and  so  ridiculous  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  his  style,  etc.,  etc.,  as  will  make  him  run  mad  if  published. 
The  specimens  I  have  seen  are  very  clever,  but  tho  I  am  angry 
with  Dr.  Johnson  I  would  be  angry  and  sin  not,  and  I  have 
charitably  endeavoured  to  get  this  work  (which  by  the  bye  I 
understand  to  be  the  joint  labour  of  many)  delayed  till  his 
death  at  least.  I  am  sure  our  good  friend  Lord  Lyttelton 
would  not  have  approved  such  bitter  revenge  for  the  injurious 
treatment  his  memory  has  received  from  the  Doctor.  .  .  .  The 
persons  who  have  undertaken  the  chastisement  of  Johnson  are 
not  friends  of  Lord  Lyttelton  only,  more  than  every  man  who 
is  traduced,  but  their  wits  belong  to  a  set  of  more  satirical 
geniuses.  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  communicate  more  than  I 
have  hinted. 

Altogether  to  us  who  are  outside  the  ropes,  it  was 
an  amusing  and  characteristic  rubber,  revealing,  as 
a  good  fight  should,  the  best  and  the  worst  of  both 
sides  ;  and  if  some  think  the  final  score  showed 
honours  easy,  others  in  more  modern  parlance  may 
consider  it  as  a  round  of  no  trumps. 

A  subsequent  conversation  of  Fanny  Burney’s 
with  Mr.  Cambridge  gives  the  aftermath  : 


“  QUEEN  OF  THE  BLUES  ! 


161 


77 


“  It  was  behaving  ill  to  Mrs.  Thrale,”  said  Cam¬ 
bridge,  “certainly,  to  quarrel  in  her  house.” 

“  Yes,”  replied  Fanny  ;  “  but  he  never  repeated  it, 
though  he  wished  of  all  things  to  have  gone  through 
just  such  another  scene  with  Mrs.  Montagu,  and  to 
refrain  was  an  act  of  heroic  forbearance.” 

“  Why,  I  rather  wonder  he  did  not  ;  for  she  was 
the  head  of  the  set  of  Lytteltonians.” 

“  Oh,  he  knows  that ;  he  calls  Mr.  Pepys  only  her 
Prime  Minister.” 

“  And  what  does  he  call  her  ?  ” 

“  Queen  !  to  be  sure  !  ‘  Queen  of  the  Blues  !  ’ 

She  came  to  Streatham  one  morning,  and  I  saw  he  was 
dying  to  attack  her.  But  he  had  made  a  promise  to 
Mrs.  Thrale  to  have  no  more  quarrels  in  her  house, 
and  so  he  forced  himself  to  forbear.  Indeed  he  was 
very  much  concerned  when  it  was  over,  for  what  had 
passed,  and  very  candid  and  generous  in  acknowledging 
it.  He  is  too  noble  to  adhere  to  wrong.” 

“  And  how  did  Mrs.  Montagu  herself  behave  ?  ” 

“  Very  stately  indeed  at  first.  She  turned  from 
him  very  stiffly  and  with  a  most  distant  air,  and  without 
even  courtesying  to  him,  and  with  a  firm  intention  to 
keep  to  what  she  had  publicly  declared — that  she 
would  never  speak  to  him  more  !  However  he  went 
up  to  her  himself,  longing  to  begin  !  and  very  roughly 
said — ‘Well,  madam,  what’s  become  of  your  fine  new 
house  ?  I  hear  no  more  of  it  ?  ’  ” 

“  But  how  did  she  bear  this  ?  ” 

“  Why,  she  was  obliged  to  answer  him  ;  and  she 
soon  grew  so  frightened — as  everybody  does — that 
she  was  as  civil  as  ever.” 

Being  frightened  was  perhaps  more  in  pretty 
Fanny’s  way  than  Mrs.  Montagu’s,  amongst  whose 
failings  nervousness  was  never  conspicuous.  But  Dr. 
Johnson  undoubtedly  did  frighten  the  ladies  at  times. 
Mrs.  Thrale  says  :  “  His  eyes,  though  of  a  light  grey 
colour,  were  so  wild,  so  piercing  and  at  times  so 

VOL.  II  M 


1 62  THUNDERING  DECLAMATION 


fierce,  that  fear  was,  I  believe,  the  first  emotion  in 
the  hearts  of  all  his  beholders.”  And  indeed  he  is 
still,  for  many  of  us,  so  awe-inspiring  that  we  dare 
scarcely  say  so  when  we  feel  that  he  behaved  like  a 
brute  and  a  bully,  as  at  times  he  undoubtedly  did. 
Whom  he  loved  he  certainly  chastened  ;  and  one  might 
find  it  hard  to  forgive  much  that  he  said  and  did  about 
David  Garrick,  for  instance,  if  one  did  not  recall 
Cumberland’s  glimpse  of  him,  bathed  in  tears  by  the 
Abbey  graveside  where  his  “  little  David  ”  lay. 

And  so  the  reconciliation  began,  though  I  doubt  if 
it  was  ever  complete.  Dr.  Johnson  came  to  assemblies 
at  the  “  fine  new  house,”  of  which  Mrs.  Montagu 
took  possession  at  the  end  of  1781,  but  there  are  few 
further  references  of  any  particular  interest,  and  it  is 
evident  that  the  ladies  found  the  great  Doctor’s 
presence  at  their  coteries  a  little  overwhelming. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  at  the  end  of  a  long  letter  to  Mrs. 
Yesey  in  1782,  says  : 

.  .  .  The  same  disagreable  controul  have  I  felt  when  a 
circle  of  polite  and  gay  assembled  in  your  blue  room  and  have 
been  pleasantly  reciting  the  gaiety  of  a  ball  or  the  elegance 
of  an  entertainment,  and  the  great  Dr.  Johnson  has  thundered 
a  declamation  in  words  so  harsh  of  sound  and  obscure  in  sense 
as  would  have  better  suited  a  description  of  the  orgies  of  Erethro 
or  the  dire  incantations  of  Medea. 

Poor  Mr.  Pepys,  however,  could  not  get  over  his 
drubbing  just  yet : 


From  W.  Pepys 

Tunbridge  Wells,  October  $th,  1781. 

...  I  confess  to  you  that  I  felt  myself  check’d  in  my 
Resentment  against  Johnson,  as  by  the  Admonition  of  a 
superior  Power,  when  I  read  your  Application  of  the  Words 
“  Be  angry  and  sin  not  ”  and  cou’d  not  help  exclaiming  “  How 
admirable  is  it  to  see  the  Person  who  perhaps  is  most  angry,  and 
Who  has  certainly  the  most  reason  to  be  so,  the  Foremost  to 


DR.  SAMUEL  JOHNSON 
Unfinished  sketch  by  James  Barry 


“POOR  LYTTELTON”  163 

restrain,  not  only  Her  own  Emotions  but  those  of  Others,  within 
the  bounds  of  Justice  and  Humanity  ! 

But,  my  dear  Madam  ;  what  hurts  me  all  this  while,  is 
not  that  Johnson  shou’d  go  unpunish’d,  but  that  our  dear  and 
respectable  Friend  shou’d  go  down  to  Posterity  with  that  artful 
and  studied  Contempt  thrown  upon  his  Character  which  He 
so  little  deserv’d,  and  that  a  Man  Who  (notwithstanding  the 
little  Foibles  he  might  have)  was  in  my  Opinion  One  of  the 
most  exalted  Patterns  of  Virtue,  Liberality,  and  Benevolence, 
not  to  mention  the  high  Rank  which  He  held  in  Literature, 
shou’d  be  handed  down  to  succeeding  Generations  under  the 
Appelation  of  poor  Lyttelton  !  This,  I  must  own,  vexes  and 
disquiets  me  whenever  I  think  of  it,  and  had  I  the  command 
of  half  your  Powers,  temper’d  as  they  are  with  that  true 
Moderation  and  Justice,  He  shou’d  not  sleep  within  his  silent 
Grave,  I  do  not  say  unreveng’d  (because  that  is  not  what  I 
wish)  but  unvindicated,  and  unrescued  from  that  Contempt 
which  has  been  so  industriously  and  so  injuriously  thrown  upon 
Him.  But  enough  of  this  subject,  which  must  be  disagreable 
to  Us  Both. 

The  old  grievance  was  reawakened  by  Robert 
Potter’s  Inquiry  into  some  Passages  in  Johnson  s  Lives , 
which  appeared  in  1783  ;  and  its  echoes  are  heard  in 
several  letters  of  that  year,  including  one  from  Lord 
Hardwicke,  who  writes  in  June  :  “  It  has  given  me 
a  bad  opinion  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  heart,  because  he  had 
no  provocation  and  went  out  of  his  way  to  vent  spleen 
and  ill  nature.” 

In  another  letter  he  adds  : 

I  am  very  Glad  to  find  that  Mr.  Potter  has  taken  up  the 
Pen  for  our  Friend  Ld  Lyttelton  agst  Dr.  Johnson,  but  It  is 
not  half  enough,  for  He  only  exposes  a  ridiculous  Idea  abt  his 
envying  Mr.  Shenstones  Seasons. 

I  have  just  been  reading  a  more  severe  but  less  correct 
Pamphlet  in  wch  the  Drs  Injustice  to  Ld  L.  is  further  exposed 
— I  believe  It  writ  by  a  Scotchman.  It  is  entitled  Deformitys 
of  Dr.  S.  J.  and  they  come  to  a  2d  Edit. 

Dr.  Johnson’s  Lives  produced  a  number  of  “  Re¬ 
marks,”  “  Observations,”  and  “  Cursory  Examina¬ 
tions.”  The  “  Deformities,”  selected  from  his  works, 


1 64  THE  BILLINGSGATE  STYLE 


which  was  published  in  Edinburgh  in  1782,  is  attri¬ 
buted  to  Callender,  a  vicious  journalist,  one  of  whose 
pamphlets  led  to  a  prosecution. 

Mrs.  Montagu  has  been  so  unfairly  represented  by 
her  critics  as  the  instigator  and  the  ring-leader  of  the 
violent  attacks  on  Johnson  that  it  is  worth  while  to 
quote  here  a  passage  from  a  letter  of  hers  to  Mrs. 
William  Robinson,  written  in  June  1783  : 

Mr.  Potter  has  also  ably  vindicated  his  friend  Mr.  Gray’s 
Odes  ;  &c.,  from  cruel  and  unjust  criticism,  and  this  is  done 
with  great  wit,  taste  and  good  manners — ingredients  rarely  put 
into  the  bitters  of  criticism.  Modern  wits  and  modern  orators 
are  apt  to  fall  into  the  Billingsgate  style  ;  and  from  every  kind 
of  chastisement  made  more  severe  and  outrageous  than  the  fault 
it  should  correct,  one  takes  the  part  of  the  culprit  against  the 
harshness  of  the  corrector. 

To  Lord  Hardwicke  she  wrote  to  the  same  effect, 
admitting  that  she  had  been  much  entertained  by  the 
chastisement  from  the  Doctor’s  Scotch  adversary,  but 
preferred  Mr.  Potter’s  vindication,  who  “  has  used  the 
rod  so  mercifully  and  after  having  fully  proved  the 
Doctor  guilty  of  envy  and  ignorance,  that  the  reader 
takes  it  up  where  he  lays  it  down,  and  the  poor  Doctor 
will  have  a  lash  through  the  whole  ...  of  poets  at 
least”  (Addl.  MSS.  35620,  p.  239).  The  italics 
are  ours,  and  poor  Lyttelton  is  avenged. 

In  September  1783  Johnson’s  old  friend  and  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  annuitant,  Mrs.  Anna  Williams,  died,  and 
the  Doctor  wrote  as  follows  to  Mrs.  Montagu  : 


From  Dr.  Johnson 

Madam — That  respect  which  is  always  due  to  benevolence 
makes  it  fit  that  you  should  be  informed  otherwise  than  by 
the  papers  that  on  the  6th  of  this  month  died  your  pensioner 
Anna  Williams,  of  whom  it  may  truly  be  said  that  she  received 
your  bounty  with  gratitude  and  enjoyed  it  with  propriety. 
You  perhaps  have  still  her  prayers.  You  have  the  satisfaction 


DEATH  OF  MRS.  WILLIAMS  165 

of  having  alleviated  the  sufferings  of  a  woman  of  great  merit 
both  intellectual  and  moral.  Her  curiosity  was  universal,  her 
knowledge  was  very  extensive,  and  she  sustained  forty  years 
of  misery  with  steady  fortitude.  Thirty  years  and  more  she 
had  been  my  companion,  and  her  death  has  left  me  very 
desolate.  That  I  have  not  written  sooner  you  may  impute 
to  absence,  to  ill  health,  to  anything  rather  than  want  of  regard 
to  the  Benefactrice  of  my  departed  friend. — I  am,  Madam, 
Your  most  humble  Servant  Sam:  Johnson. 

Sept.  22,  1783. 


The  Doctor  said  he  had  “  a  very  kind  answer  from 
Mrs.  Montagu,  a  letter  not  only  civil  but  tender,  so 
I  hope  peace  is  proclaimed.  I  am  now  come  to  that 
time  when  I  wish  all  bitterness  and  animosity  to  be  at 
an  end.  I  have  never  done  her  any  serious  harm, 
nor  would  I  ; — though  I  could  give  her  a  bite  !  but 
she  must  provoke  me  much  first.  In  volatile  talk, 
indeed,  I  may  have  spoken  of  her  not  much  to  her 
mind  ;  for  in  the  tumult  of  conversation  malice  is  apt 
to  grow  sprightly;  and  there  I  hope  I  am  not  yet 
decrepid  !  ” 

Johnson  died  on  December  13th  of  the  following 
year,  and  I  have  not  found  any  noteworthy  references 
in  the  intervening  period,  and  indeed  only  one  allusion 
to  his  death,  which  shows  that  though  their  quarrel 
had  never  been  forgotten  or  its  cause  forgiven,  time 
had  somewhat  softened  the  asperity  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
rancour  against  the  critic  of  her  old  friend. 

Writing  from  Bath  on  December  20  she  says  : 

The  news  will  inform  you  that  Living  Poets  need  not  fear 
Dr.  Johnson  should  write  their  memoirs  after  they  are  no 
longer  able  to  refute  calumny.  I  hear  he  dyed  with  great 
piety  and  resignation  ;  and  indeed  he  had  many  virtues,  and 
perhaps,  ill  health  and  narrow  circumstances  gave  him  a  peevish 
censorious  turn.  I  am  afraid  Mrs.  Thrales  imprudent  marriage 
shortend  his  life.  Her  letters  to  her  Friends  from  abroad  were 
full  of  her  felicity,  it  is  said  accounts  are  now  come  that  she 
is  confined  in  a  convent  at  Milan.  Her  Husband  says  she  is 


1 66  JOHNSON’S  DEATH 

insane,  he  is  the  only  Person  in  the  World  who  can  say  it  with 
an  ill  grace. 

So  ends  the  story  of  Elizabeth  Montagu’s  inter¬ 
course  with  the  great  Lexicographer.  Nothing  that 
gives  us  any  fresh  bit  of  insight — however  small — 
into  that  wonderful  epitome  of  humanity  that  was 
Johnson,  can  be  uninteresting  ;  and  no  apology  is 
therefore  needed  for  having  sketched  this  episode 
(though  by  no  means  at  full  length)  in  greater  detail 
than  can  be  spared  to  others.  But  its  interest  is  not 
merely  that  of  a  forgotten  Essay  or  an  unnecessary 
feud.  It  goes  deeper  than  that  ;  for  it  illuminates 
the  characters  of  both  its  protagonists.  If  we  get  the 
overbearing  masterfulness  of  the  man,  reaching  very 
close  to  brutality,  we  have  also  his  generous  contrition, 
his  fine  because  so  difficult  restraint  ;  while  with  the 
lady’s  staunch  loyalty  and  genuine  benevolence  we 
have  glimpses  that  are  deliciously  feminine,  and  even 
occasionally  feline.  Let  the  last  word  for  once  be 
with  the  man,  for  it  is  a  noble  and  fitting  one.  In 
May  1784,  within  a  few  months  of  his  death,  Dr. 
Johnson,  who  “  was  in  fine  spirits,”  was  telling  Bos¬ 
well  of  his  dinner,  the  night  before,  with  three 
notable  ladies — Mrs.  Carter,  Miss  Hannah  More,  and 
Miss  Fanny  Burney.  Boswell  suggested  that  Mrs. 
Montagu  might  well  have  made  a  fourth.  Johnson  : 
“Sir,  Mrs.  Montagu  does  not  make  a  trade  of  her  wit ; 
but  Mrs.  Montagu  is  a  very  extraordinary  woman  ; 
she  has  a  constant  stream  of  conversation,  and  it  is 
always  impregnated  ;  it  has  always  meaning.” 

NOTE 

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the  letters  of  Dr.  Johnson  to 
Mrs.  Montagu  of  December  17,  1775,  March  5,  1778,  and  September 
22,  1783,  and  the  one  from  Mrs.  Williams  are  quoted  above  either 
from  the  originals  or  from  copies  in  Mrs.  Climenson’s  Montagu  MSS. 
collection.  They  were  lent  by  Lord  Rokeby  to  Mr.  Croker  for  his 
1831  edition  of  Boswell’s  Life,  in  which  they  were  interpolated  ;  but 


LETTERS  AND  SPELLING 


167 


as  they  were  not  very  accurately  transcribed,  and  as  they  pertain 
essentially  to  the  subject  of  this  paper,  it  seemed  proper  to  include 
them  here.  Johnson’s  handwriting  is  firm,  upright,  and  full  of 
character ;  he  used  a  rather  broad-pointed  quill,  employed  the  long 
“  S,”  and,  usually,  a  reversed  “  e,”  which  is  at  times  puzzling  ;  but 
his  letters  as  a  rule  are  very  clear,  well  spaced,  and  legible ;  the  sub¬ 
scription  and  signature  sometimes  occupy  a  whole  page,  and  the  date 
follows  at  the  bottom. 

In  these  days  of  meticulous  spelling  it  may  surprise  the  precisians 
and  comfort  some  who  are  prone  to  variety  in  this  particular  to  be 
assured  that  the  Doctor  in  his  letters  didn’t  always  conform  to  the 
orthography  of  Johnson’s  Dictionary. 

Probably  because  I  have  never  attained  to  it,  I  have  always  looked 
upon  orthodox  spelling  as  a  very  dull  and  mean  accomplishment ;  and 
have  rather  enjoyed  the  casual  variety  of  the  older  writers  who  would 
spell  the  same  word  three  different  ways  in  a  letter,  and  were  not 
too  sure  even  about  their  own  names.  Consequently  it  was  for  me  a 
real  satisfaction  to  know  that  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  “  pamflets  ”  and 
“ harrassed ”  and  “barels”  and  “acknowledgement”  and  “enervaiting” 
and  “  devide  ”  and  many  other  things  like  that ;  could  spell  John 
Nichols’  surname  at  least  four  different  ways,  when  he  wrote  to  him, 
and  never  allowed  even  Boswell  to  have  his  second  “  1.” 

I  do  not  know  who  penned  the  letter  from  poor,  blind,  peevish 
Anna  Williams.  Malone  and  others  have  testified  that  she  moved 
about  the  house,  searched  drawers,  found  books,  and  did  much  else 
unaided  ;  and  Boswell  retracted  the  story  that  when  pouring  out  tea 
she  put  her  finger  in  the  cup  to  feel  if  it  was  filled ;  she  knew  by  the 
warmth  of  the  outside.  Lady  Knight,  who  knew  her  well,  and  with 
whom  she  had  stayed  on  several  occasions,  says  that  she  possessed 
several  of  her  letters,  “  written  with  great  good  sense  and  simplicity, 
and  with  a  tenderness  and  affection  that  far  excel  all  that  is  called 
politeness  and  elegance.”  But  clever  as  she  was,  one  can  hardly 
suppose  that  she  was  able  to  write  letters  herself.  The  one  quoted 
is  written  in  a  clear  sloping  hand,  the  lines  evenly  spaced,  the  margins 
exact,  the  signature  by  the  same  hand,  the  “  t’s  ”  and  “  i’s  ”  accurately 
crossed  and  dotted. 

Mrs.  Desmoulins  did  not,  I  think,  become  an  inmate  of  Dr. 
Johnson’s  house  till  1778,  and  the  pugnacious  Poll  Carmichael  appears 
there  about  the  same  time.  Possibly  it  was  old  Robert  Levett  of  the 
“  corrugated  visage  ”  who  may  have  acted  as  Mrs.  Williams’s  scribe. 
We  know  that  latterly  he  rather  befriended  her — chiefly  because  they 
were  united  in  fierce  hostility  to  the  other  women  in  that  strange 
asylum  of  the  generous  old  Doctor. 


i7§+ 


THE  ALISON  AND  PIOZZI  MARRIAGES - FOX,  PITT, 

THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES 


William  Hoare’s  pictures.  A  bathing  dress.  The  Duchess  of  Devonshire 
canvassing  for  Fox.  Miss  Gregory’s  engagement.  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
opposition.  The  marriage  takes  place.  Miss  Keppel.  Mr.  Pitt’s 
taxes.  Mrs.  Thrale’s  marriage.  The  Alison  wedding  and  Mr. 
Pulteney.  The  Primate  at  Sandleford.  Sir  John  Burgoyne.  The 
Duchess’s  tooth.  Lady  Strathmore.  Candle  tax.  The  Prince  of 
Wales.  Louis  Weltjie  at  Brighton.  Mrs.  Vesey  at  Margate.  Dr. 
Beattie  at  Sandleford.  Mrs.  Arbuthnot.  Mr.  Vesey’s  illness.  The 
Poetical  Milkwoman. 


William  Hoare,  the  portrait  painter,  best  known  for 
his  crayon  drawings  of  celebrated  people,  who  was 
now  about  seventy-seven,  was  still,  it  seems,  actively 
at  work.  Sir  William  Robinson  writes  to  his  cousin 
from  Bath  in  February  1784: 

Mr.  Hoare  is  an  uncomon  genious  at  his  time  of  Life,  he 
has  finished  lately  2  capital  pictures  in  craons,  a  Venus  different 
from  all  other  painters,  also  a  Diana,  his  Venus  in  my  Eye 
beyond  Titians,  his  Diana,  with  the  Beauty  of  a  Venus  all  the 
chaste  delicasy  of  one  of  the  Graces.  I  have  been  so  taken 
with  it,  I  have  purchased  it  or  a  copy,  and  hope  some  day  or 
other,  it  may  rest  in  Montagu  house,  I  know  it  will  charm 
Montagu,  and  with  propriety  also. 

Your  picture  here,  is  still  better  altered,  than  Ld.  Hard¬ 
wicks  by  the  improvemts  he  has  made,  indeed  he  has  2  excellent 
judges  that  spirits  him  up  in  all  his  performances,  his  good 
Wife,  and  amiable  Daughter.  This  place  still  continues  very 
full,  and  the  Rooms  never  fail  filling,  in  spite  of  Frost,  Snow, 
and  cold,  or  want  of  money,  for  every  thing  you  take  a  fancy  to. 

168 


1784 


BATHING  DRESSES 


169 


The  portrait  of  Mrs.  Montagu  was  commissioned 
by  Lord  Hardwicke  and  hung  at  Wimpole  between 
Lord  Chesterfield  and  Dr.  Johnson.  The  lady  pro¬ 
fessed  herself  highly  flattered,  though  one  may  doubt 
if  the  position  exactly  suited  her. 

In  a  letter  from  Miss  Gregory,  who  had  gone 
north  in  a  hurry  in  April  to  the  deathbed  of  her  sister- 
in-law  at  Edinburgh,  occurs  a  quaint  little  passage 
which  reveals  an  amusing  example  of  eighteenth- 
century  prudery. 

May  I  beg  the  favour  of  you  to  desire  Sally  to  pack  up  my 
black  habit  and  all  the  black  things  I  told  her  of  along  with 
my  bathing  dress,  and  send  them  by  the  stage  coach  immediately 
for  it  is  not  in  nature  that  Mrs.  Gregory  can  be  alive  at  the 
time  you  read  this  letter  ;  and  I  find  there  is  a  cold  bath  in  the 
house.  Miss  Gordon  thinks  I  shall  do  well  to  make  use  of  it, 
but  as  I  was  not  aware  of  such  a  thing  being  in  the  house  I 
did  not  bring  my  bathing  dress  with  me. 

Forty  years  before,  Mrs.  Montagu  herself  as  a 
girl  had  with  great  difficulty  secured  a  bathing  tub 
which  could  be  made  to  hold  water  at  the  ducal  house 
of  Bulstrode,  and  wrote  :  “  My  bathing  tub  is  ready 
for  use,  so  to-morrow  I  shall  go  in.  Pray  look  for 
my  bathing  dress  ;  till  then  I  must  go  in  in  chemise 
and  jupon.”  One  knew  that  baths  were  very  scarce 
luxuries  even  in  the  abodes  of  duchesses,  but  one  had 
hardly  realised  that,  even  when  a  tub  was  attainable, 
too  intimate  an  association  between  soap  and  water 
and  the  skin  was  by  no  means  considered  comme  il faut. 

Of  the  coming  General  Election  and  of  the  favours 
dispensed  by  the  lovely  Duchess  there  is  this  note  : 

The  Duchess  of  Devonshire  has  been  canvassing  in  a  most 
masculine  manner  and  has  met  with  much  abuse.  I  hope  we 
shall  succeed  at  York  and  in  the  country.  I  have  done  my 
endeavours  where  I  had  the  smallest  interest  and  my  men  will 
all  be  Pittmen  ! 

The  “  Piccadilly  Beauty  canvassing  for  Fox  in 


170  THE  DUCHESS  OF  DEVONSHIRE  1784 


some  of  the  most  blackguard  houses  in  Long  Acre  ” 
made  excellent  copy  for  the  scribblers.  Seven  years 
previously  Mrs.  Montagu — who,  by  the  way,  was  not 
a  bad  gossip  herself  on  occasion — had  lamented  the 
growing  love  of  scandal.  “  It  is  now  got  from  the 
gossips’  teatable  to  the  press.  The  scribblers  weekly 
let  fly  their  popguns  at  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire’s 
feathers.  Her  grace  is  innocent,  good  humoured  and 
beautifull;  but  these  adders  are  blind  and  deaf  and 
cannot  be  charmed.” 

The  Duchess  and  Lady  Melbourne  had  been 
leading  spirits  in  1781  in  establishing  the  vogue  of 
the  Duchess  of  Cumberland’s  Thursday  drawing¬ 
rooms,  whereat  the  Opposition  and  the  Prince  of 
Wales,  backed  by  the  Luttrells  and  Mrs.  Armstead, 
set  up  a  more  or  less  open  defiance  of  the  King. 
Wraxall,  writing  of  the  Duchess  at  this  time,  says  : 
“  Her  personal  charms  constituted  her  smallest  pre¬ 
tension  to  universal  admiration,  nor  did  her  beauty 
consist  like  that  of  the  Gunnings  in  regularity  of 
features  and  faultless  formation  of  limbs  and  shape  ; 
it  lay  in  the  amenity  and  graces  of  her  deportment, 
in  her  irresistible  manners  and  the  seduction  of  her 
society.  Her  hair  was  not  without  a  tinge  of  red  ; 
and  her  face  though  pleasing  yet  had  it  not  been 
illuminated  by  her  mind  might  have  been  considered 
as  an  ordinary  countenance.”  He  says  that  she  suc¬ 
ceeded  Lady  Melbourne  in  the  attachment  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  “  but  of  what  nature  and  what 
limits  attached  by  the  Duchess  must  remain  matter 
of  conjecture.”  In  the  canvass  for  Fox’s  election, 
“  having  associated  to  the  execution  her  sister 
Viscountess  Duncannon  who  participated  the  duchess’s 
political  enthusiasm  ;  these  ladies  [their  hats  trimmed 
with  fox-brushes],  being  previously  furnished  with 
lists  of  outlying  voters  drove  to  their  respective 
dwellings.  Neither  entreaties  nor  promises  were 
spared.  In  some  instances  even  personal  caresses 


1784 


TRUE  BLUE 


171 

were  said  to  have  been  permitted  in  order  to  prevail 
on  the  surly  or  inflexible;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt 
of  common  mechanics  having  been  conveyed  to  the 
hustings  on  more  than  one  occasion  by  the  duchess, 
in  her  own  coach.” 

Such  seduction  was  irresistible  and  decisive.  Fox, 
who  had  fallen  a  hundred  votes  behind  Sir  Cecil, 
now  passed  him  by  an  equal  number,  and  though  the 
ministerial  party  put  up  Lady  Salisbury  as  a  rival 
canvasser,  youth  and  charm  won  the  day  handsomely. 
Fox’s  election  procession  carried  a  banner  “  Sacred  to 
Female  Patriotism  and  in  the  evening  entertain¬ 
ment  at  Lower  Grosvenor  Street,  where  all  were 
habited  in  blue  and  buff',  Mrs.  Crewe,  the  charming 
hostess,  who  had  exerted  herself  as  enthusiastically  as 
the  Duchess,  was  toasted  by  the  Prince  of  Wales, 
“  True  Blue  and  Mrs.  Crewe,”  to  which  she  immedi¬ 
ately  responded  with  another  equally  laconic  :  “  True 
Blue  and  all  of  you.” 

Miss  Gregory  being  in  Edinburgh,  Mr.  Alison 
vigorously  renewed  his  attentions,  which  were  entirely 
approved  by  her  relations  and  friends,  so  soon  as  any 
preferment  could  be  obtained  for  him.  This  Mr. 
Pulteney,  with  whom  he  was  well  acquainted,  promised 
to  the  extent  of  a  living  of  £ 150  a  year  and  a  house, 
but  expressed  great  anxiety  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
approbation  should  be  secured  ;  and  the  poor  girl 
now  indited  to  her  patroness  a  long  and  moving  appeal. 
Mr.  Smelt  also  wrote  to  convince  her  of  Alison’s 
high  character  and  implore  her  consent.  Our  good 
lady  was  evidently  very  greatly  perturbed  at  this 
recrudescence  of  an  affair  which  she  perhaps  hoped 
had  fallen  into  abeyance;  and  no  less  than  three 
first  copies  remain  (the  only  instance  I  have  found  of 
any,  except  to  Lydia  Sterne),  with  slight  alterations 
and  erasures,  of  the  letter  which  was,  after  some  delay, 
despatched.  In  it  she  frankly  admits  that  she  would 
have  made  no  objection  to  her  nephew  marrying  Miss 


172 


MISS  GREGORY  MARRIES 


1784 


Gregory,  but  again  rehearses  with  emphasis  all  the 
obstacles  she  saw  to  the  present  match,  and  can  only 
bring  herself  to  conclude :  “  My  consent  in  your 
case  is  not  necessary,  for  I  have  not  any  pretence  to 
legal  authority.  ...  I  have  only  to  add  that  I  heartily 
wish  you  happiness  and  rejoice  that  a  consent  I  could 
not  give  without  incurring  the  blame  and  reproach 
of  my  own  mind  and  hazard  of  the  welfare  of  others, 
is  unnecessary.  My  most  fervent  prayers  for  your 
happiness  you  will  ever  have.  .  .  .” 

To  many  it  will  doubtless  seem  that  since  Miss 
Gregory  was  plainly  determined  to  marry  Mr.  Alison 
and  no  one  else,  something  more  immediately  effectual 
than  fervent  prayers  might  have  been  generously 
forthcoming  from  the  rich  and  childless  widow,  who 
had  virtually  adopted  her  as  from  her  father’s  death. 
But  it  is  evident  that  Mrs.  Montagu  was  still  intensely 
annoyed  that  one  whom  she  had  thus  honoured  should 
have  deliberately  chosen  penury  with  the  man  she 
loved,  and  declined  affluence  with  the  much-adored 
nephew,  to  whom  she  remained  perversely  indifferent. 

On  June  19  Miss  Gregory  became  Mrs.  Alison, 
Mr.  Pulteney  going  to  Sudborough  (Northampton¬ 
shire)  to  “  give  her  away.”  Mrs.  Montagu  was 
made  quite  ill  and  sleepless  “  after  so  great  a  shock 
as  the  indiscretion  and  unkindness  of  a  young  person 
for  whom  I  had  hardly  less  than  maternal  care,”  and 
could  only  find  solace  in  looking  forward  to  an  ap¬ 
proaching  visit  from  her  beloved  Primate  from  Ireland; 
which  was  at  the  moment  a  very  good  country  to 
be  leaving,  as  his  brother  makes  clear  in  a  letter  from 
Bath  of  June  27 : 

At  present  he’s  clearly  of  opinion  this  Country  is  preferable 
to  Dublin  ;  the  day  he  left  Dublin,  the  good  folks  began 
tarring  and  feathering  a  Taylor — for  presuming  to  cut  an 
English  Cloth,  a  proclimation  is  this  day  sent  the  Primate  from 
Dublin  from  the  Lord  Lieutent  &  privy  Council  offering  a 
reward  of  500  to  discover  the  authors  ;  some  of  the  low  Irish 


1784 


MR.  PITT’S  TAXES 


i73 


here  remark  that  they  will  wager  ,£500  no  person  in  Ireland 
will  discover  any  of  the  Authors,  or  Abettors  ;  Im  afraid  this 
is  too  often  the  case  on  the  committing  many  crimes.  .  .  . 

Having  lost  her  “  charioteer,”  Mrs.  Montagu  was 
now  to  be  the  recipient  of  another  kind  of  “whiskey”: 

The  Primate  accquaints  me  he  has  lately  sent  me  to  London 
an  addition  of  right  usqubagh  ;  you  certainly  shall  have  a 
proportion  for  self,  or  friends  in  distress  of  the  gout  complaints. 

Meanwhile  Leonard  Smelt  and  his  wife  visited 
Sandleford,  and  were  taken  to  see  Chaucer’s  Castle, 
Lord  Porchester’s  [Donnington  Castle]  and  also  Lord 
Craven’s  Park  [Highclere]  before  leaving  for  the 
Dean  of  Christchurch  at  Oxford,  where  “  tho’  good 
Protestants  I  am  afraid  they  will  worship  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds’  Angels.” 

In  July  her  sister  wrote  to  her  from  town: 

I  understand  that  it  is  Lord  Southamptons  eldest  Son  who 
is  married  to  Miss  Keppel,  if  so,  surely  there  is  no  great  harm 
on  either  side,  as  she  may  expect  a  good  fortune  from  her 
Mother  ;  but  the  Parents  are  not  inclined  to  accomodate  them 
at  present.  The  P  of  W  lent  them  one  of  his  carriages  for  their 
expedition,  and  went  to  Mrs.  Keppel  in  order  to  bring  about  a 
reconciliation,  but  she  refused  to  receive  or  even  to  see  them, 
upon  which  his  R — 1  Hss  said  then  he  must,  and  shou’d  order 
an  apartment  to  be  prepared  for  them  in  Carleton  House  ;  a 
threat,  which  had  I  been  the  Brides  Mother  I  shou’d  have 
thought  most  tremendous  ;  perhaps  she  did  so,  for  it  appears 
that  they  were  at  their  return  remained  at  her  house.  .  .  . 

Mr.  Pitt  seems  to  go  on  triumphantly  ;  the  news  papers 
abuse  his  taxes,  but  in  company  one  hears  them  generally 
approved.  The  Window  tax  is  no  doubt  a  very  heavy  one, 
but  if  it  will  give  power  of  doing  anything  very  essential 
towards  the  stopping  of  smugling  I  imagine  it  will  be  a  very 
essential  benefit  to  the  nation.  Livery  tax  must  be  severely 
felt  by  some  Individuals,  yet  productive  taxes  must  be  laid. 
That  on  Ribbons  and  Gauzes  delights  me  much.  The  Papers 
have  told  you  the  P  of  W  has  been  ill.  The  cause  was  his 
contriving  when  on  horse  back  to  get  pinn’d  between  two 
Carriages  by  which  one  side  of  him  was  violently  bruisd,  and 


THE  DUTY  ON  TEA 


174 


1784 


a  fever  ensued,  and  he  was  extremely  ill.  I  suppose  he  was  at 
the  time  in  no  very  sober  state. 

George  Ferdinand,  2nd  Baron  Southampton,  was 
nephew  of  the  3rd  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  Groom  of 
the  Stole  to  the  Prince  of  Wales.  Laura  Keppel  was 
daughter  of  the  Bishop  of  Exeter  and  niece  of  the 
Admiral,  now  Viscount  Keppel. 

Young  Pitt,  now  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and 
determined  to  bring  order  into  the  chaotic  finance  of 
the  country,  was  suppressing  smuggling  with  a  strong 
hand;  but  recognising  that  the  excessive  duty  (119 
per  cent)  on  tea  was  at  the  bottom  of  much  of  the 
trouble,  he  reduced  this  to  I2-|  per  cent,  and  made 
up  part  of  the  loss  to  the  exchequer  by  increasing 
the  window  tax,  a  levy  more  difficult  to  evade.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  reply,  it  will  be  noted,  forecasts  our 
twentieth-century  Entertainment  Tax. 

I  find  the  Heir  apparent  is  getting  well  again,  but  I  think 
the  most  extortionary  Jew  could  not  ask  many  years  purchase 
for  an  annuity  for  his  life. 

I  am  glad  Mr.  Pitt  goes  on  so  well.  Taxes  are  always 
disagreable  tho’  necessary.  I  approve  much  of  the  gauze 
and  ribbon  tax,  and  the  putting  an  end  to  the  smuggling  may 
be  very  beneficial.  A  tax  on  candles  is  a  tax  on  industry.  .  .  . 
If  the  hard  ware  trade  at  Birmingham  and  the  Staffordshire 
ware  shd  be  hurt  by  the  tax  on  coals  it  wd  be  unfortunate,  and 
I  fear  this  tax  will  discourage  the  Vend  for  Coals  which  was 
opening  to  Paris.  The  Brick  tax  tho  it  affects  my  Ladyship 
who  was  a  Builder  yet  I  think  it  may  be  useful  if  it  rather 
checks  the  increase  of  the  Capital  of  the  Kingdom.  The 
Theatres  and  all  places  of  publick  Diversion  ought  to  be  con¬ 
siderably  tax’d,  and  a  higher  tax  on  Licenses  for  Alehouses 
wd  be  a  publick  benefit.  I  approve  much  the  Tax  on  Licenses 
to  kill  Game,  for  Partridges  and  pheasants  are  not  among  the 
necessarys  of  Life.  Having  gamekeepers  in  several  counties 
and  places  I  shall  pay  roundly  but  willingly  to  this  tax. 

Mrs.  Scott  was  now  the  town  mouse,  and  charged 
to  keep  her  Sandleford  sister  posted  in  the  doings  of 
the  world,  a  task  for  which  she  was  admirably  qualified. 


1784  GRETNA  GREEN— SUDBOROUGH  175 

Mrs.  Thrale’s  marriage  to  Piozzi  took  place  on  July  25, 
and  naturally  formed  a  prime  subject  of  comment  and 
gossip: 

I  have  just  heard  that  Miss  Rodney  is  gone  to  Scotland  with 
Capt  Chambers  Sr  Williams  Son,  and  Mr.  Rodney  with  Lady 

- Nugent,  Lady  Berkeleys  Daughter.  It  is  doubtful  whether 

the  Brother  and  Sister  knew  each  others  intentions,  if  not  they 
may  reconnoitre  each  other  with  some  surprize  at  Gretna- 
Green.  This  is  a  year  for  imprudent  marriages.  I  gave  you 
an  erroneous  account  of  Mrs.  Thrales.  Piozzi  it  seems  was 
in  holy  Orders.  She  gave  him  £4000  a  year  ago  with  which 
he  went  abroad,  it  is  supposed  to  purchase  a  Dispensation,  and 
is  but  lately  return’d.  She  came  up  to  London  and  sent  her 
Daughters  to  Brightelmstone.  She  was  married  last  week  at  a 
Roman  Catholic  Chapel  in  London,  is  gone  to  Bath  where 
they  are  to  have  the  ceremony  repeated  in  a  Protestant  Church. 
As  soon  as  the  friends  of  the  family  learnt  her  fix’d  purpose 
they  informed  her  the  Children  must  not  remain  with  her,  and 
fetched  them  from  Brighthelmstone,  where  they  were  under 
the  care  of  a  Person  little  older  than  Miss  Thrale.  I  suppose 
you  may  have  heard  the  same  account  of  Mrs.  Alisons  marriage 
that  I  have,  but  as  it  was  told  me  by  a  person  to  whom  Dr 
Gregory  (who  was  in  Town  last  week,  and  perhaps  is  still) 
related  it  you  shall  have  it  as  I  had.  Miss  Gregory  with  her 
Brother  or  Brothers,  Mrs.  Gordon,  and  I  believe  Mr.  Nairn, 
set  out  from  Scotland  to  be  married  at  Mr.  Alisons  Parish 
Church  in  Northamptonshire.  At  the  last  stage  before  they 
reachd  it  Mr.  Pulteney  met  them,  and  when  they  set  off  he 
took  Miss  Gregory  in  his  Chaise.  As  they  proceeded  he 
informd  her  he  had  fail’d  in  his  endeavours  to  procure  Mr. 
Alison  a  Living,  but  presented  her  with  a  draught  on  his 
Banker  for  £150  ar>d  with  a  settlement  of  the  same  sum  yearly, 
for  her  to  draw  on  the  same  Banker  for  till  he  could  get  him  a 
living.  To  this  he  added  notes  for  £150  for  her  wedding 
cloathes  ;  and  a  special  License,  with  which  they  were  married 
at  a  house  of  his  at  Sudborough,  where  they  are  to  dwell.  He 
had  written  to  them  not  to  think  of  furniture,  for  that  their 
Parsonage  house  was  furnish’d.  Tho’  this  proceeding  may  be 
very  generous  in  Mr.  Pulteney,  yet  I  cannot  forbear  pitying 
Mrs.  Alison,  as  one  would  wish  to  have  it  in  ones  choice 
whether  to  accept  an  obligation,  as  there  are  few  from  whom  it 
can  be  accepted  with  pleasure,  but  after  all  that  had  pass’d  she 


176  “A  DISGRACEFUL  PROCEEDING”  1784 


had  no  alternative.  I  own  it  appears  to  me  being  very  pain¬ 
fully  taken  in.  However  Dr  Gregory  speaks  of  it  with  joy 
and  gratitude,  and  for  the  sake  of  her  ease  of  mind  I  hope  she 
feels  the  same  ;  one  is  not  to  suppose  the  sensation  of  others 
must  be  the  same  as  ones  own. 

Captain  John  Rodney,  R.N.,  son  of  the  gallant 
admiral  by  his  second  wife,  married  Catherine  Nugent, 
only  daughter  of  the  6th  Earl  of  Westmeath,  on  July  4; 
and  on  the  same  day  his  sister  Jane  was  married  to 
George  Chambers,  son  of  the  architect  of  Somerset 
House. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  wrath  over  the  Gregory  marriage 
took  a  long  time  to  subside  ;  and,  as  the  following 
letter  shows,  “  poor  Mrs.  Alison  ”  rankled  as  bitterly 
as  Johnson’s  “  poor  Lyttelton  ”  had  a  few  years  back. 
But  when  Mr.  Alison’s  wife’s  guardian’s  sister’s 
husband’s  murder  is  dragged  in  to  attest  the  violence 
of  ladies’  love  passions,  one  feels  that  the  squabble 
has  almost  reached  the  ludicrous  stage.  This  is  to 
her  sister,  and  must  be  of  about  this  date  : 

I  am  afraid  that  great  part  of  Dr.  Gregorys  story  is  a  farce, 
I  have  too  much  reason  to  believe  all  the  parties  knew  Mr. 
Pulteney  had  not  any  living  to  give  before  they  set  out  for 
Sudborough,  and  that  all  that  was  advanced  on  the  subject  of 
the  living,  was  a  lye  to  draw  me  in  to  give  countenance  to  a 
disgraceful  proceeding.  I  abhor  the  doctrine  of  Jean  Jaques, 
that  a  Person  should  not  receive  any  pecuniary  mark  of  affection 
from  a  Friend  ;  whoever  is  of  that  opinion  has  a  base  and  vile 
preference  of  money  to  every  kind  of  sentiment  ;  but  to  be  the 
Pensioner  of  one  with  whom  one  has  neither  friendship  nor 
relation  is  surely  degrading  oneself.  I  do  not  believe  that  Mr. 
Pulteney  to  please  Mr.  Nairne  his  factotum  did  promise  to 
give  £150  a  year  till  he  got  a  living  for  Mr.  Alison.  Mr. 
Nairne  is  a  Lawyer,  and  I  believe  a  man  of  good  character,  and 
Mrs.  Alison  says  he  was  one  of  her  guardians,  and  on  her 
account  he  applyd  to  Mr.  Pulteney  for  a  Living.  Mr.  Nairnes 
Sister  wd  have  been  hanged  or  burnt  for  the  murder  of  her 
Husband  if  she  had  not  escaped  from  Prison,  and  as  she  was 
guilty  of  this  crime  in  order  to  marry  her  Gallant,  Mr.  Nairne 
may  have  a  great  opinion  of  the  violence  of  Ladies  love  passions. 


1784 


WYATT  AT  SANDLEFORD 


177 


The  whole  proceeding  of  poor  Mrs.  Alison  has  much  afflicted 
me,  being  so  unworthy  of  her  former  conduct,  but  I  beg  you 
not  to  mention  what  I  have  said,  as  I  shall  keep  distance  and 
silence,  but  the  attempt  to  draw  me  in  to  give  my  consent  to 
the  marriage  on  a  false  pretence  of  Alisons  having  a  Living  was 
abominable  in  the  Gregorys,  and  very  sly  in  Mr.  Pulteney. 
I  am  sorry  for  poor  Ld  Rodney.  Mrs.  Thrale  is  fallen  below 
pity.  I  think  the  Women  and  Girls  are  run  mad.  Heaven  be 
praised  I  have  no  Daughters. 

Better  knowledge  of  the  facts  has  brought  the 
conviction  that  the  Piozzi  marriage  was  very  far  from 
being  either  the  heinous  blunder  or  the  appalling  fiasco 
which  contemporary  comment  almost  unanimously 
considered  it.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  view,  which  one 
could  hardly  expect  to  be  approving,  will  be  found 
in  her  answer  to  her  sister’s  letter  in  the  pages  devoted 
to  the  Thrales,  later  on  (pp.  273-5). 

The  Primate  reached  Sandleford  in  July,  and  as 
James  Wyatt,  the  famous  architect,  who  was  at  the 
time  employed  on  the  Christchurch,  Oxford  Quad¬ 
rangle,  for  the  Primate,  as  well  as  in  completing  the 
alterations  to  Sandleford  Priory,  spent  a  couple  of 
days  there  during  his  stay,  “  we  had  very  interesting 
subjects  of  conversation,”  including  the  motto  for  the 
new  approach  gate,  which  it  was  decided  should  be  : 
“  The  fairest  way  about  is  the  nearest  way  home.” 
“  Do  not,”  she  adds,  “  attribute  to  me  the  ingenious 
correction  of  furthest  to  fairest ;  it  was  made  long  ago 
by  one  of  those  genius’s  who  come  into  the  world  for 
the  notable  purpose  of  correcting  a  word.” 

This  August  young  Montagu  was  bitten  by  a 
dog,  and  though  the  dog’s  illness  was  declared  not 
to  be  hydrophobia  but  merely  a  distemper,  he  was 
promptly  dispatched  for  sea-bathing,  which  was  then 
believed  to  be  the  cure  for  that  dire  malady. 

Continuing  her  gazette,  Mrs.  Scott  writes  to  her 
sister: 

Lady  Harcourt  has  kissed  hands  on  her  appointment,  and  I 

VOL.  11  N 


i78 


“  FONDEST  OF  TURTLES  ” 


1784 


am  told  made  a  most  graceful  appearance,  such  as  shoud  orna¬ 
ment  a  Court  ;  perhaps  her  Graces  were  not  less  conspicuous 
for  her  being  accompanied  by  Lady  Weymouth.  Mrs.  Thrale 
is  at  length  married  to  Piozzi.  Instead  of  living  at  Bath  I 
wou’d  have  her  take  a  House  adjacent  to  Lady  Mary  Duncan, 
they  might  spend  their  hours  in  alternate  praises  of  their  Caros, 
in  soft  Italics,  the  Sposo  indeed  can  only  be  added  by  the  former, 
but  the  panegyric  may  not  be  the  less  tender  for  the  omission. 
However  I  understand  that  it  cannot  be  said  of  Piozzi  that  he 
is  Vox  et  preterea  nihil.  Sr  John  Burgoyne  has  been  put 
under  arrest  by  Lord  Macartney,  and  I  hear  is  coming  home 
in  that  degraded  state  ;  but  I  have  not  learnt  the  nature  of  his 
offence.  Lady  Frances  is  in  dolefuls  upon  it  ;  but  as  she  has 
no  great  affection  for  him,  she  will  I  suppose  find  consolation 
in  reflecting  that  her  favorite  Son  is  now  possessed  of  above  an 
hundred  thousand  pounds  by  marrying  a  very  pretty  sweet 
temperd  Wife,  the  fondest  of  Turtles  ;  Ly  Frances  told  me 
lately  that  such  was  the  profits  of  his  marriage  since  the  death 
of  Mrs.  Burgoynes  only  Brother,  besides  Jewels,  plate,  and 
sundry  valuables.  When  fortune  has  been  so  lavish  to  one 
branch  of  a  family,  it  can  not  be  expected  she  shoud  bestow 
many  of  her  smiles  on  the  rest. 

To  her  Sister 

One  can  see  no  sufficient  temptation  to  induce  Lord  John 
Cavendish  to  give  up  the  liberty  he  has  so  long  enjoyed,  as 
must  endear  it  to  him,  or  Lady  Spencer  to  relinquish  hers  which 
is  so  lately  obtain’d,  that  the  charm  of  novelty  cannot  yet  be 
worn  off,  and  it  has  many  that  are  more  permanent.  Should 
they  really  marry  I  do  not  believe  they  will  long  think  they 
have  acted  wisely  ;  it  can  afford  them  no  additional  convenience, 
nor  give  them  any  delight  ;  tho’  probably  they  will  live  amicably 
together.  One  woud  not  put  on  fetters  without  some  good 
cause,  liberty  is  so  very  agreable. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  surmise  was  right,  and  Lord 
John  enjoyed  his  agreeable  liberty  to  the  end  of  his 
life  in  1796,  Lady  Spencer  (eldest  daughter  of  Stephen 
Poyntz  and  mother  of  Georgiana,  Duchess  of  Devon¬ 
shire)  surviving  him  by  eighteen  years. 

General  Sir  John  Burgoyne  (great-nephew  of  the 
Saratoga  commander)  was  eldest  son  of  Lady  Frances 


1784 


AN  APPROACHING  LOSS 


179 


Montagu.  His  brother  Montagu  married  the  daughter 
and  heiress  of  Eliab  Harvey  of  Claybury  Hall. 


From  her  Sister 

June  25. 

I  intend  going  to  Kensington  next  thursday  for  a  few  days. 
The  poor  Dss  of  B:  is  at  present  under  great  affliction  from  the 
apprehension  of  an  approaching  loss,  not  of  a  Child  or  friend, 
but  alas  !  of  a  tooth  ;  a  tooth  in  front  ;  dire  calamity  !  and 
so  unforeseen  and  unexpected  too  at  the  early  age  of  65.  She 
is  wonderfully  distressed  ;  but  as  she  is  a  religious  Woman  she 
calls  up  all  her  piety  to  her  aid,  and  endeavours  to  submit  to 
her  hard  trial  with  Christian  patience,  and  philosophic  fortitude, 
and  tho  hitherto  her  endeavours  have  not  been  crown’d  with 
much  success,  yet  perseverance  in  her  exertions,  with  the 
assistance  of  Spence,  a  person  in  this  case  more  consolatory 
than  all  the  Divines  of  the  Church  of  England  or  all  the  Priests 
of  the  catholic  Communion,  I  trust  will  enable  her  to  come  off 
conqueror.  She  ask’d  me  some  questions  about  a  Dentist,  but 
lookd  as  bashful  and  mortified  as  a  reputed  Virgin  wou’d  do 
on  consulting  an  accoucheur  on  a  miscarriage  or  pregnancy. 
I  recommended  Spence,  and  no  doubt  the  grand  event  is  over, 
as  the  poor  tooth  waggled  in  a  most  tell  tale  manner,  therefore 
required  speedy  expulsion. 

A  later  letter  adds  : 

General  Smith  has  been  discharging  most  of  his  Servants, 
and  probably  is  by  this  time  set  off  for  the  Continent.  It  is 
said  that  Bowes  and  Lady  Strathmore  are  really  in  extreme 
indigence.  The  old  adage  says  Riches  make  themselves  wings 
and  fly  away,  but  in  these  days  the  Possessors  do  not  wait  the 
slow  progress  of  that  natural  operation,  but  make  the  Wings 
themselves  in  such  profusion  that  they  out-fly  Mercury  himself, 
tho  armd  with  them  Cap  a  pied.  ...  You  perceive  the  tax 
on  Coals  is  given  up.  I  believe  lamps  are  used  instead  of 
Candles  in  many  Manufactures,  and  might  be  in  most  ;  as 
for  the  poor  who  are  not  Manufacturers  the  quantity  of  Candles 
they  use  is  so  very  small,  that  even  in  their  poverty  they  cannot 
feel  the  new  tax.  The  Industrious  are  too  much  tired  by  the 
end  of  the  day  to  do  anything  by  Candle  light  ;  and  the  idle 
will  not.  In  Sumer  they  go  to  bed  before  they  need  them, 


1 80  MRS.  CORNELYS  i7s4 

and  in  Winter  the  fire  gives  light  enough  for  most  of  their 
wants.  Mr.  Pitts  conduct  in  regard  to  the  loan  has  gain’d 
him  great  honour. 

I  imagine  the  Miss  Williams  who  accompanied  the  Dss  of 
Beaufort  is  natural  Daughter  to  Mrs.  Cornelly.  I  cannot  say 
that  I  remember  the  name  she  goes  by,  but  I  know  that  such 
a  person  passd  a  good  deal  of  time  last  year  with  the  Duchess 
at  Badminton,  and  that  she  is  said  to  sing  most  charmingly, 
and  plays  finely  on  some  particular  Instrument,  I  think  the 
Harp.  I  have  heard  she  is  very  accomplishd.  She  lived 
with  Lady  Cowper  some  years  before  she  died,  and  she  recom¬ 
mended  her  to  the  protection  of  the  Marchioness  of  Tweedale. 
I  forget  whether  by  Lady  Cowpers  bequest,  or  by  what  means, 
she  is  possessed  of  an  hundred  pounds  per  year.  Mrs.  Cornelly 
call’d  her  a  young  Lady  committed  to  her  care.  I  am  sorry 
her  Grace  of  Beaufort  has  been  ill,  when  she  left  London  she 
had  no  complaint  but  that  of  a  departed  tooth,  which  oppressd 
her  very  much,  especially  as  she  was  under  an  anxious  un¬ 
certainty  of  mind  whether  to  have  its  place  supplied,  to  which 
she  had  some  objections.  Pray  has  the  poor  tooth  got  a 
successor  or  not  ? 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  story  of 
Miss  Bowes,  who  after  the  death  of  her  first  husband, 
Lord  Strathmore,  fell  a  victim  to  “  an  Irish  heiress 
hunter,”  Andrew  Stoney,  who  took  the  name  of  Bowes 
and  achieved  something  like  a  record  in  matrimonial 
blackguardism,  his  lady  suffering  accordingly.  Mrs. 
Cornelys,  the  famous  proprietress  of  Carlisle  House, 
Soho  Square,  whose  concerts  and  society  nights  had 
been  so  fashionable  in  the  ’sixties,  had  been  ousted 
by  Almack’s  and  the  Pantheon,  and  the  enterprising 
cateress  was  reduced  to  providing  asses’  milk  and 
occasional  breakfasts  in  rural  Knightsbridge.  Readers 
of  William  Hickey’s  and  other  journals  of  the  day 
will  recall  many  references  to  her  assemblies,  mas¬ 
querades,  and  harmonic  meetings.  But  “  the  cold 
hands  of  merciless  creditors  ”  were  laid  chillingly 
upon  “  the  high  priestess  of  fashion  ”  in  her  later 
days,  and  in  the  kindly  shelter  of  the  Fleet  she  died. 

History  has  dealt  faithfully  with  the  earlier  career 


HI  S  MOST  GRACIOUS  MAJESTY 

IT. 

From  a  Dr  Jiwmg  m/idi?  \r.  Ascot  Mea.ih,  June  16**  lfl2  9. 


HIS  MOST  GRACIOUS  MAJESTY  GEORGE  IV 

Drawn  from  life  by  Robert  Stothard 


1784  THE  PRINCE  AND  WELTJIE  1 8 1 

of  the  First  Gentleman  of  Europe,  and  from  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  remark  that  at  Lady  Lucan’s  assembly 
“  to  his  Royal  Highness  honour  he  did  not  make 
any  sort  of  fracas,”  we  gather  the  estimation  in  which 
he  was  held.  At  Carlton  House  and  at  his  Pavilion 
at  Brighton,  the  Louis  Weltjie,  mentioned  in  the  next 
letter,  was  a  sort  of  Major  Domo  and  Clerk  of  the 
Kitchens.  The  little  German  was  excessively  ugly, 
and  managed  to  find  a  spouse  of  equally  potent  charms; 
with  whom,  after  quarrelling  with  his  Princely  patron, 
he  settled  later  on  at  Hammersmith,  where  a  street 
commemorates  his  name. 

“  Tho,”  says  Wraxall,  “  he  had  resided  some  years 
in  England,  he  spoke  no  language  except  a  barbarous 
Anglo-Westphalian  jargon,  which  generally  provoked 
laughter.  But  amidst  his  attention  to  the  tastes  of  his 
royal  highness,  Weltjee  had  not  been  oblivious  of  his 
own  personal  interests.” 

To  her  Sister 

The  P  of  W  has  been  at  Sr  Henry  Featherstones,  he  staid 
three  days,  during  which  they  had  Races  of  all  sorts, — fine 
horses — Poneys — Cart-horses — Women — and  Men  in  Sacks, 
with  various  other  Divertimenti  fit  for  Children  of  six  foot 
high.  I  hear  he  was  much  delighted,  and  said  that  Newmarket 
Races  were  dull  in  comparison.  They  were  within  three  or 
four  miles  of  us,  but  no  one  except  Servants  went  from  hence, 
nor  do  I  find  that  any  Ladies  of  fashion  in  the  Town  were 
at  them.  Poor  Lady  Featherstone,  Sr  Harrys  Mother,  fled 
from  the  riot  to  Mr.  Fremongers.  These  pretty  Sports 
attracted  a  great  Mob,  who  were  charm’d  with  a  P.  so  familiarly 
affable  to  them  all.  At  Brighthemstone  he  did  not  give  quite 
so  much  satisfaction  ;  to  see  him  come  drunk  to  the  Balls, 
walk  arm  in  arm  with  Weltjie,  and  sit  in  the  Gallery  at  the 
Play  with  a  Woman  of  the  Town  gave  no  great  delight  to  the 
Spectators.  It  is  however  allowd  that  when  he  is  so  drunk 
he  can  scarcely  stand  he  dances  better,  bating  a  fall  now  and 
then,  than  any  other  Man,  even  when  sober.  .  .  .  The  eldest 
Miss  Thrale  is  gone  or  going  to  a  Mr.  Cator’s,  one  of  her 
Guardians,  the  2d  and  3d  I  am  told  are  to  be  at  Mrs.  Murrays, 


1 82  SMUGGLING  AND  TEA-DRINKING  1784 


but  of  this  I  am  not  certain  as  I  have  not  had  it  from  herself, 
one  of  the  Cator  family  gave  me  the  information.  The 
youngest  remains  at  the  School  where  her  Mother  placed  her. 
Dr.  Johnson  says  he  did  not  think  there  had  been  so  abandoned 
a  Woman  in  the  World. 

John  Cator,  M.P.  for  Ipswich,  was,  with  Dr. 
Johnson,  one  of  Thrale’s  executors.  It  had  been  pro¬ 
posed  to  make  the  Misses  Thrale  wards  in  Chancery. 

Referring  to  Mrs.  Vesey’s  second  visit  to  Margate 
this  summer,  Mrs.  Montagu  says  that  she  had  become 
such  a  spiritual  being  as  to  subsist  on  conversation, 
and  where  that  is  not  to  be  found,  “  no  matter  how 
fine  the  turbot  or  how  excellent  the  soles  she  will 
pine  away.  Last  year  she  came  away  a  perfect 
skeleton,  and  said  the  air  was  too  sharp,  but  I  believe 
the  manners  and  conversation  were  too  blunt  for 
her.” 

Amongst  Sandleford  visitors  this  August  were 
Dr.  Beattie — greatly  aged  by  his  wife’s  distressing 
illness — and  his  too  studious  son  ;  Mrs.  Garrick  and 
Miss  More;  whilst  for  reading,  the  hostess  was  being 
greatly  entertained  by  William  Coxe’s  travels,  on  which 
and  his  anecdotes  of  dungeons,  daggers,  and  poisoned 
draughts  she  wrote  at  length  to  Mrs.  Carter.  She 
was  very  apprehensive  about  certain  items  of  Mr. 
Pitt’s  new  taxes;  smuggling  (of  silk  petticoats  ?) 
would  be  very  difficult  to  prevent,  whilst  “  the  render¬ 
ing  of  the  pernicious  habit  of  drinking  tea  more 
common  amongst  the  lower  order  of  people  is  a  great 
mischief,  as  it  spends  their  money  and  loses  their 
time,  and  does  not  afford  any  nourishment.”  It  will 
be  remembered  that  she  was  herself  quite  capable, 
on  occasion,  of  securing  a  few  pounds  of  smuggled 
tea. 

Whilst  Beattie  was  at  Sandleford  this  autumn  he 
had  mentioned  the  poverty  of  a  very  old  friend  of  his, 
Mrs.  Arbuthnot,  a  widow  who  contrived  to  live 
decently  on  £10  per  annum.  His  hostess  promptly 


1 784  MRS.  ARBUTHNOT  183 

arranged  to  settle  upon  the  old  lady  a  small  annuity, 
and  was 

pleased  to  find,  by  her  husband,  she  is  so  nearly  allied  to  my 
first  favourite  of  all  the  Beaux  Esprits,  Dr.  Arbuthnot.  He 
had  none  of  the  peevish  jealousies  of  Mr.  Pope,  nor  the  harshness 
and  pride  of  Dr.  Swift  ;  conscious  of  more  noble  endowment, 
he  was  not  anxious  to  obtain  the  character  of  a  wit.  There 
is  such  ease  and  so  natural  an  air  in  his  writings,  as  proves  him 
to  have  been  witty  without  effort  or  contrivance.  I  have  heard 
my  old  friend  Lord  Bath  speak  of  him  with  great  affection  as 
a  most  worthy  amiable  man,  and  as  a  companion  more  pleasant 
and  entertaining  than  either  Pope  or  Swift. 

Margaret  Forbes,  his  great-great-niece,  gives  a  full 
account  of  Mrs.  Arbuthnot  in  Beattie  and  his  Friends , 
from  which  the  above  lines  are  extracted.  Beattie 
gives  a  charming  description  in  his  letter  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  of  the  old  lady’s  reception  of  the  annuity 
proposal :  “  She  attempted  an  exclamation,  but  it 
was  inarticulate ;  the  tears  ran  down  her  furrowed 
cheeks,  and  she  could  only  say,  ‘  Oh  dear,  I  cannot 
speak  one  word!  ’  .  .  .  She  held  up  her  eyes  and 
hands,  sometimes  in  silent  adoration  of  providence, 
sometimes  with  expressions  of  deep  gratitude  to  her 
benefactress.” 

It  is  curious,  indeed,  that  when  Mr.  Vesey  had  had 
a  second  relapse  in  the  previous  December  Mrs. 
Montagu  had  very  precisely  foretold  what  was  actually 
to  happen  six  months  later,  as  the  following  extract 
will  show  : 

This  very  instant  I  have  a  message  from  Lady  Primrose 
that  Mr.  Vesey  has  had  another  relapse  and  waits  the  return 
of  the  Yacht  ;  he  is  at  present  better,  but  I  have  some  fears 
about  him,  so  many  relapses  are  alarming.  If  he  shd  dye,  our 
Sylph  will  not  only  grieve  as  she  should  do  for  her  espoused 
Mr.  Vesey,  but  according  to  the  most  approved  method  of 
woefull  Widows,  she  will  drink  his  ashes,  or  weep  all  day  over 
his  heart  in  a  crystal  case,  or  sit  mourning  on  his  monument. 
She  will  do  all  that  any  illustrious  Widow  has  done  except 
the  Ephesian  Matron,  who  tho  celebrated  is  not  a  Widow  du 


184 


MRS.  AND  MISTRESSES 


1784 


bon  ton.  What  a  task  will  Mrs.  Hancock  have  in  the  occasion  ? 
who  never  knew  the  value  of  a  husband,  nor  has  studied  the 
duty  of  Widows,  but  in  a  Dunstable  way  of  computation,  will 
reckon  the  grief  of  the  deprivation  to  be  merely  adequate  to 
the  felicity  of  the  possession,  and  this  unsentimental  creature 
will  give  part  of  our  friends  sorrow  to  the  Dairy  maid  he  woed, 
to  the  actresses  he  won,  to  the  kept  mistresses  he  maintain’d, 
till  in  short  there  will  be  only  an  ordinary  portion  of  sorrow 
left  to  our  Sylph.  After  all  I  have  said,  I  shall  realy  be  sorry 
for  Mr.  Vesey  as  an  amiable  man  in  Society,  and  on  the  whole, 
I  believe,  a  comfort  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  who  loves  the  companion 
and  esteems  the  friend,  and  forgives  the  infidelities  of  the 
Husband. 

Brief  notice  must  suffice  here  concerning  Lactilla, 
alias  the  Poetical  Milkwoman,  Mrs.  Yearslev  of  Bristol, 
though  the  correspondence  between  Hannah  More 
and  Mrs.  Montagu  concerning  her  is  rather  amusing. 
Miss  More  made  her  acquaintance  in  the  summer  of 
this  year,  and  was  so  greatly  impressed  by  her  poetic 
“  genius  ”  that  she  collected  funds  towards  her  sup¬ 
port,  hired  her  “  a  little  maid,”  provided  her  with 
books,  and  spent  a  whole  year  in  arranging  for  the 
publication  by  subscription  of  a  volume  of  her  verse. 
Mrs.  Montagu,  of  course,  was  asked  to  help  and 
head  the  list ;  she  contributed  twenty-two  guineas 
in  all,  but  it  is  evident  that  she  was,  throughout,  a 
little  cautious  and  uneasy  about  Hannah’s  wonderful 
find. 

Miss  More,  having  provided  the  Lactilla  with 
Ossian,  Dryden’s  Tales,  and  “  the  most  decent  of  the 
metamorphoses,”  wrote  “  above  a  thousand  pages  on 
her  subject.”  The  subscription,  run  by  two  such 
popular  and  energetic  ladies,  went  merrily,  and  over 
£$oo  was  collected,  and  the  volume  printed  ;  and, 
as  she  had  a  ne’er-do-weel  husband,  the  proceeds  of 
the  collection,  after  paying  for  the  printing  and  giving 
the  poetess  a  small  sum  for  clothing  and  furniture, 
were  invested  for  her  use  and  benefit  in  the  five  per 
cents  and  in  the  joint  names  of  the  two  ladies.  Which 


1784 


LACTILLA 


185 

having  been  faithfully  accomplished,  the  ungrateful 
Lactilla  turned  upon  poor  Hannah  in  a  fury,  demanded 
the  whole  of  the  money,  accused  her  of  fraud,  and — 
unkindest  touch  of  all — told  her  that  she  had  ruined 
her  verses  by  her  corrections  and  her  reputation  by 
her  Preface.  Meanwhile,  having  decked  herself  in 
“  very  fine  Gauze  bonnets,  long  lappets,  gold  pins, 
etc.,”  she  declared  her  intention  of  putting  Miss  More 
in  the  papers  and  petitioning  the  king  against  her  ; 
said  that  she  had  spoilt  her  poems  through  jealousy, 
and  that  she  would  reprint  them  herself  in  their 
original  beauty. 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  full  of  sympathy  for  her  out¬ 
raged  co-trustee,  and  never  even  whispered,  “  I  told 
you  so  but  her  risible  faculties  were  deeply  stirred, 
and  particularly  by  the  fact  that  Lord  Bristol  had 
not  only  given  the  milkwoman  ^50,  but  was  god¬ 
father  to  her  child  ;  which,  had  it  lived,  “  with  his 
Lordship’s  instructions  and  the  disposition  it  might 
inherit  from  its  mother,  it  possibly  might  have  risen 
to  some  great  station — in  botany  bay.” 

Things  being  as  they  were,  Mrs.  Montagu  strongly 
advised  Miss  More  to  get  rid  of  all  further  responsi¬ 
bility  as  soon  as  possible.  A  friend  of  Mrs.  Yearsley’s 
agreed  to  take  over  the  trust ;  the  invested  fund  was 
duly  transferred  and  all  accounts  closed.  “  What  a 
holiday  for  me,”  exclaims  indignant  and  exhausted 
Hannah,  “  when  I  have  done  with  her  and  her  business 
which  has  occupied  near  a  whole  year  of  my  Life  !  ” 


1785 

MARRIAGE  OF  MATTHEW  MONTAGU - MRS.  DELANY, 

GENERAL  OGLETHORPE,  WARREN  HASTINGS 


Letter  from  Mrs.  Alison.  Deaths  of  friends.  Matthew  Montagu’s 
engagement.  Settlements.  St.  Anthony’s  Fire.  Edward  Jerningham. 
Montagu’s  wedding.  The  drive  to  Sandleford.  Death  of  Mr.  Vesey. 
His  will.  Reconciliation  with  Mrs.  Alison.  Death  of  Dowager 
Duchess  of  Portland.  Her  character.  Mrs.  Delany  unprovided  for. 
The  King’s  bounty.  Death  of  General  Oglethorpe.  Warren 
Hastings.  Mr.  Hartley.  Lord  George  Gordon  and  the  Archbishop. 
His  later  years.  The  Diamond  Necklace.  Mrs.  Montagu  at  sixty-five. 
Death  of  Sir  William  Robinson. 

“  Poor  Mrs.  Alison  ”  was  still,  it  appears,  in  disgrace 
in  1785,  when  Montagu’s  engagement  to  Miss 
Charlton  was  announced  ;  but  the  young  lady  who 
had  so  egregiously  failed  to  be  his  fiancee  could  not 
withhold  her  felicitations: 


From  Mrs.  Alison 

Edin:  May  30 tk. 

As  you  declined  answering  my  former  letter,  I  need  make 
no  apology  for  not  having  written  to  you  of  late,  for  I  am  not 
even  entitled  to  the  liberty  I  now  take  of  once  more  addressing 
you  ;  but  in  the  pleasure  it  gives  me  to  hear  that  your  Nephew 
has  made  choice  of  a  Young  Lady  in  every  respect  so  much  to 
your  mind,  I  wish  to  forget  the  pain  it  is  natural  to  suppose  I 
must  have  felt  at  your  silence,  as  it  seem’d  to  indicate  my  being 
separated  from  your  regard — permit  me  therefore  to  offer  my 
sincerest  Congratulations  on  this  Joyful  occasion,  and  to  assure 
you  that  whatever  unpleasant  scenes  have  pass’d  between  us,  I 
shall  ever  pray  for  your  happiness,  and  rejoice  at  every  event 

186 


1785 


MISS  CHARLTON 


187 


that  contributes  to  it.  I  hope  Miss  Charlton  will  ever  continue 
to  deserve  the  approbation  you  have  given  her,  and  that  this 
marriage  will  prove  a  continual  source  of  comfort  and  satis¬ 
faction  to  you  ;  and  from  my  experience  of  the  state  into  which 
Mr.  Montagu  is  going  to  enter,  I  have  no  doubt  of  the  happi¬ 
ness  that  awaits  him,  nor  can  my  friendship  form  a  kinder  wish, 
than  that  he  may  find  his  ideas  of  it  as  fully  realized  as  I  have 
done. 

Were  it  not  for  authentic  examples  to  the  contrary, 
it  would  seem  barely  credible  that  a  woman  of  character 
and  intellect  could  be  moved,  after  many  years  of 
intimacy,  affection,  and  esteem,  at  a  stroke  to  suspicion, 
anger,  and  dislike,  over  a  very  honourable  if  injudicious 
engagement,  the  main  obstacle  to  which  it  was  in  her 
own  hands  to  remove ;  and  one  cannot  resist  the 
feeling  that  Mrs.  Montagu  was  intensely  piqued  that 
“  her  beloved  Greg  ”  should  deliberately  have  chosen 
poverty  with  Alison  and  rejected  her  Matthew  with 
a  fortune. 

As  the  years  went  on,  death  began  to  take  increas¬ 
ing  toll  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  associates  ;  and  1785  saw 
the  demise  of  her  girlhood’s  greatest  friend,  the 
Dowager  Duchess  of  Portland  ;  of  her  cousin,  Sir 
William  Robinson;  and  of  the  husband  of  her  dearest 
and  most  devoted  ally  and  correspondent,  Mrs.  Vesey. 
With  these  events,  and  with  the  marriage  of  her 
nephew  and  heir  to  Miss  Elizabeth  Charlton,  an 
orphan  and  a  ward  of  Chancery  of  Kentish  family 
who  lived  with  her  grandmother,  and  was,  “  though 
rather  little,  of  a  very  pleasing  countenance,  finely 
made  and  remarkably  genteel,”  and  who  added  to 
her  other  attractions  a  fortune  of  nearly  ,£50,000, 
the  letters  of  this  year  are  chiefly  occupied.  Mrs. 
Montagu  contributed  “  pretty  large  settlements  in 
land  both  present  and  future,”  and  though  “  my 
proposals  were  immediately  and  perfectly  approved 
both  by  the  Lord  Chancellor  and  Master  in  Chancery, 
the  mercenary  spirit  of  the  lawyers  employed  to  draw 


1 88 


ST.  ANTHONY’S  FIRE 


1785 


them  extended  the  voluminous  settlements  over  as 
many  acres  of  parchment  as,  converted  into  green 
land  would  make  a  pretty  little  farm,  and  for  which, 
I  suppose,  they  will  charge  as  much  as  would  purchase 
a  tolerably  good  one.” 

Of  her  clerical  brother  she  writes  to  her  sister, 
February  2  : 

William  is  just  now  reconciled  to  the  World.  Ld  Cardigan 
has  promised  us  a  Living  for  him,  and  his  Lordp  said  he  hoped 
speedily.  You  must  know  he  is  to  preach  a  fast  sermon  (I 
dont  mean  Ld  Cardigan,  as  grammer  wd  infer)  and  I  have  been 
toiling  for  him  all  this  morning.  I  don’t  believe  I  deserve  a 
good  beaver,  but  I  am  as  tired  as  possible  with  the  newness  of 
the  occupation,  and  I  am  engaged  to  Lady  Sophia  Egerton  to 
night  ;  I  shall  certainly  talk  of  Nineveh  and  of  Tyre  and 
Sidon  and  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  all  the  unhappy  cities  of 
old  whom  Wickedness  overthrew. 

In  March  Mrs.  Montagu  had  an  attack  of  erysipelas 
which  her  brother  enquired  after  under  the  name  of 
St.  Anthony’s  Fire,  as  it  was  curable  by  his  inter¬ 
cession,  which  in  this  instance,  if  invoked,  appears  to 
have  been  rapidly  efficacious.  In  May,  having  given 
her  jewels  to  Miss  Charlton  with  orders  for  their 
resetting,  Mrs.  Montagu  went  off  to  Sandleford  to 
await  the  lawyers’  completion  of  the  marriage  settle¬ 
ments,  to  which  the  wedding  was  immediately  to 
succeed. 

I  have  not  come  across  any  references  in  these 
letters  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  falling  on  the  stairs  at  a 
Drawing  Room,  concerning  which  Miss  Port  quotes 
some  lines  of  Mr.  Jerningham’s  to  the  Hebes  of  the 
day,  ending: 

Let  caution  be  your  guide  whene’er  you  sport 
Within  the  splendid  precincts  of  the  Court ; 

The  event  of  yesterday  for  prudence  calls 
’Tis  dangerous  treading  where  Minerva  falls  ! 

His  letters,  however,  are  quite  in  the  approved 
style  of  the  day. 


1785  MATTHEW  MONTAGU  MARRIED  189 

Madam  [he  writes  in  reference  to  the  subscription  for  the 
Cobbler  Poet’s  volume  of  verse] — As  Apollo  (to  pay  a  very 
great  compliment  to  the  Muses)  has  appointed  you  their  purse- 
bearer,  will  you  allow  me  to  show  at  least  my  good  wishes  to 
Mr.  Woodhouse  by  throwing  in  my  mite.  Since  you  are 
enter’d  upon  this  generous  office  I  now  perfectly  understand  a 
Line  I  have  somewhere  met  with,  That  the  Muses  are  fed  by 
the  Graces. — I  have  the  honor  to  be  with  great  respect,  Madam, 
Yr  most  obedient  humble  Servant,  Edw.  Jerningham. 

Town  was  very  gay,  and  Montagu  danced  till 
seven  in  the  morning  at  the  Duchess  of  Bolton’s. 
By  the  beginning  of  July  the  lawyers  had  finished 
their  “  matrimonial  negotiations,”  and  his  aunt  came 
up  to  town  for  the  wedding,  which  took  place  at 
Marybonne  Church  on  July  9,  in  the  presence  of  his 
mother,  his  uncle  the  Recorder,  Mr.  Raikes  who  gave 
the  bride  away,  and  one  or  two  other  members  of  the 
family  ;  Matthew’s  old  tutor,  Mr.  John  Burrows, 
performing  the  ceremony. 

It  may  possibly  have  been  imagined  by  the  brides 
and  bridegrooms  of  to-day  (if  any  should  read  these 
Memoirs),  that  the  wedding  would  have  been  made 
the  occasion  of  a  great  breakfast  and  reception  at 
Montagu  House,  and  that  the  happy  aunt  would 
make  a  particularly  brave  show  to  celebrate  the 
occasion ;  but  it  had  been  decided  that  the  young  couple 
should  go  to  Sandleford  for  their  honeymoon,  which 
necessitated  their  departure  direct  from  the  church, 
in  a  post-chaise  and  four  with  two  postillions,  their 
aunt  following  in  a  similar  equipage.  They  pulled 
up  at  Salt  Hill  for  lunch,  where  George  Selwyn  chanced 
to  be  looking  out  of  a  window  and  came  down  stairs 
to  hand  Mrs.  Montagu  out  of  her  carriage,  but  not 
knowing  about  the  wedding — if  it  had  been  an  execu¬ 
tion  he  would  certainly  have  been  there — had  no 
hon  mot  in  readiness.  Mr.  Marsh  the  old  landlord, 
being  informed  that  Montagu  was  now  a  bridegroom, 
hobbled  down  on  his  crutches  to  see  him,  “  for  he 


190 


DEATH  OF  MR.  VESEY 


1785 


told  White  it  was  but  a  little  while  ago  that  Mr. 
Montagu  had  brought  him  to  Maidenhead  Bridge  a 
little  boy,  and  at  night,  when  he  was  running  about 
in  his  shirt,  said  he  would  make  a  good  Bacchus  to 
put  on  his  sign.” 

Readers  of  William  Hickey’s  Memoirs  may  recall 
that  it  was  to  March’s,  the  Windmill  at  Salt  Hill,  that 
that  bright  spark,  and  “  twelve  or  fifteen  of  us,  at¬ 
tended  by  some  of  the  most  fashionable  women  of 
the  time  ”  used  to  go  down  from  town  from  Friday 
to  Tuesday,  “  where  we  spent  three  or  four  days 
together  in  all  sorts  of  frolic  and  fancy”;  thus  in¬ 
augurating  the  popular  “  Week  end.” 

At  Reading,  where  they  halted  for  tea,  Lord 
Lansdowne  (as  Lord  Shelburne  had  now  become) 
arrived  at  the  Inn  immediately  after  them,  on  his 
way  to  Bowood,  and  came  upstairs  to  make  his  compli¬ 
ments  to  the  blushing  pair.  Thence  they  drove  on 
to  Sandleford,  avoiding  Newbury,  where  the  bells  were 
jangling  on  the  happy  occasion,  but  where  a  town 
demonstration  was  not  to  the  taste  of  the  bashful 
couple,  who  were  glad  to  get  off  their  dusty  hats  at 
Sandleford  and  sit  down  to  soup  and  boiled  chickens 
and  general  congratulations.  “  I  never  felt  such 
delightful  moments  as  while  we  were  thus  joining  our 
prayers  and  embraces.” 

Mr.  Vesey,  who  had  had  two  or  three  apoplectic 
seizures  during  the  last  year,  died  in  this  June.  He 
had  had  an  income  of  £4000,  but  left  hardly  anything 
except  their  house  in  Clarges  Street  to  his  wife  ;  whilst 
“  his  Trollop  ”  received  a  legacy  of  ^1000.  The  will 
naturally  caused  the  greatest  indignation  amongst 
Mrs.  Vesey’s  many  friends  of  the  Blue  Stocking 
coterie,  but  she  herself  had  been  “  imbibing  the 
principles  of  Jean  Jacques  Rousseau,”  and  was  merely 
inconsolable,  to  the  intense  annoyance  of  Mrs.  Montagu, 
who  had  no  patience  with  the  defunct  “  monster,”  to 
whom  she  had  paid  so  many  paper  compliments. 


1785  RECONCILED  TO  DOROTHEA  191 

Mat’s  wedding  and  the  great  happiness  of  her 
young  pair  at  last  softened  their  aunt’s  heart  towards 
Dorothea  Alison.  More  than  one  of  her  corre¬ 
spondents  had  gently  urged  reconciliation,  and  Lady 
Harcourt  pleaded  eloquently  to  the  tune  that  it  was 
her  judgement  rather  than  her  heart  that  was  displeased, 
that  Cupid  was  more  powerful  than  Minerva,  and  much 
more  to  like  effect.  Horace  Walpole  was  a  warm 
supporter  of  Mrs.  Alison’s  cause,  declaring  the  whole 
story  redounded  to  her  honour,  and  that  in  his  opinion 
the  conduct  of  her  patroness  was  “  preposterous  at 
least.”  His  great  esteem  for  Dr.  Gregory’s  charming 
daughter  was  doubtless  heightened  by  his  abounding 
lack  of  respect  for  “  Mrs.  Montagu  of  Shakespeare- 
shire,”  whom  he  loved  to  call  Ashtaroth  and  Aspasia, 
and  concerning  whose  assemblies  he  made  obscure 
“  Coptic  ”  jokes  which  had  to  be  explained  in  sub¬ 
sequent  letters. 

Minerva  at  length,  now  that  her  precious  nephew 
was  safely  folded,  wrote  in  most  conciliating  terms, 
though  Dorothea  had  absolutely  declined  suggestions 
to  send  soft  messages  through  friends  which  might 
be  shown  to  Mrs.  Montagu  ;  and  it  is  evident  that 
her  letter  was  accompanied  by  a  substantial  token  of 
regard,  which  was  doubtless  most  acceptable  to  the 
charming  little  bride  who  was  shortly  to  become  a 
mother. 

July  brought  another  death  in  her  circle  of  friends 
and  another  deplorably  inadequate  will.  The  Duchess 
of  Portland’s  decease  was  followed  by  anxious  specula¬ 
tions  from  many  friends  of  Mrs.  Delany  as  to  what 
provision  had  been  made  for  that  constant  companion 
of  her  later  years.  The  following  extracts  show  that 
estimates  of  their  respective  characters  and  abilities 
varied  considerably. 

Mrs.  Montagu  writes: 

The  Duchess  of  Portland  lived  for  Mrs.  Delany,  one  may 
almost  say,  all  her  pursuits  were  directed  to  whatever  Mrs. 


192  DUCHESS  OF  PORTLAND’S  DEATH  1785 


Delany  pointed,  and  her  Grace  condemn’d  or  approved,  sought 
or  avoided,  loved  or  hated,  according  to  her  Friends  suggestion, 
which  was  the  more  endearing  as  certainly  the  Duchess  had 
considerable  superiority  of  parts  over  Mrs.  Delany.  ...  I 
hear  Mrs.  Delany  bears  the  loss  of  the  Duchess  of  Portland 
with  patient  resignation.  I  suppose  at  85  she  thinks  she  will 
not  stay  long  behind  her.  Her  Graces  attachment  to  Mrs. 
Delany  was  the  most  perfect  imaginable,  and  her  Grace  was 
not  covetous,  so  I  imagine  she  imparted  as  much  of  her  wealth 
as  her  friends  delicacy  wd  accept.  I  do  not  doubt  but  her 
Grace  has  largely  provided  for  her  now,  but  I  have  not  heard 
from  any  one  what  disposition  of  her  Fortune  she  has  made. 

Mrs.  Scott  writes  to  her  sister  on  July  23: 

I  see  by  the  papers  that  the  Dowager  Duchess  of  Portland 
is  no  more  ;  pray  has  she  done  any  thing  for  Mrs.  Delany 
that  may  add  ease  and  a  little  more  latitude  to  the  days  which 
cannot  now  be  many,  for  her  sand  must  be  nearly  run  out,  and 
I  think  she  must  feel  a  good  deal  on  the  loss  of  her  old  friend, 
who  has  been  most  constant  to  her,  tho’  perhaps  not  truly 
generous.  The  Duke  will  scarcely  be  inconsolable,  it  is  a  sort 
of  Gaol  delivery  to  him.  I  hear  the  Devonshire  Estate  is  put 
to  nurse,  and  that  family  reduced  to  the  small  pittance  of 
8,000/.  a  year,  it  will  really  be  poverty  to  them  who  cou’d  not 
keep  within  their  original  immense  income,  and  some  of  the 
hungry  opposition  must  feel  it  very  sensibly.  They  have  one 
comfort,  they  can  scarcely  have  run  out  so  violently  but  that 
so  great  an  income  must  soon  clear  it  ;  the  yearly  savings  will 
rise  to  a  pretty  sum,  and  form  a  quick  accumulation. 

To  Mrs .  Carter 

I  wishd  very  much  that  during  the  hot  weather  our  dear 
Vesey  would  have  avail’d  herself  of  Sr  Joshua  Reynolds  kind 
offer  to  go  to  his  House  on  Richmond  Hill  ;  the  freshness  of 
its  air,  the  gayety  of  its  prospects,  the  view  of  objects  continually 
in  motion  on  land  or  water,  have  a  happy  effect  on  the  animal 
spirits.  At  Richmond  our  dear  Sylph  wd  be  in  the  Neighbour¬ 
hood  of  Mr.  Walpole,  Mrs.  Walsingham,  Mrs.  Garrick,  and 
the  Cambridges.  I  am  rejoyced  that  Mr.  Veseys  vile  neglect 
of  her  will  not  cause  that  distress  to  which  it  was  at  first  appre¬ 
hended  it  might  expose  her.  Tho  not  opulence,  it  is  com¬ 
petency  ;  and  if  she  cd  forget  Mr.  Vesey,  she  would  be  happier 


1785 


MRS.  DELANY 


193 


than  she  has  been  since  we  knew  her.  It  is  very  kind  in  Mr. 
Dickenson  to  stay  in  Town  till  poor  Mrs.  Delany  had  her 
Nephew  to  comfort  her.  I  dare  say  the  Duchess  of  Portland 
has  amply  provided  every  comfort  for  her  which  money  can 
purchase. 

...  I  have  been  grieved  and  provoked  at  the  manner 
in  which  the  news  papers  have  spoke  of  the  death  of  a  Person 
who  during  her  life  made  many  happy.  They  prattle  about 
the  selling  her  Museum,  and  her  Fortune  being  usefull  to  her 
sons  Creditors.  What  disgrace  will  these  vile  news  papers 
throw  on  the  best  characters  of  this  age  in  the  opinion  of  those 
in  the  next,  who  shall  read  them  from  curiosity  after  the 
manners  of  their  Ancestors. 


The  vile  newspapers,  however,  were  not  entirely 
mistaken : 

Sep.  f)th. 

Mrs.  Poyntz,  who  has  been  in  London,  and  at  public 
places  of  resort  lately,  assures  me  that  the  Dss  of  Portland  left 
a  Will  in  which  Mrs.  Delany  is  not  mentioned,  and  that  her 
Grace  left  to  Lady  Weymouth,  Lady  Stamford,  and  Ld  Ed 
Bentinck,  £5000  a  piece  ;  this  appears  to  me  incredible,  for 
Mrs.  Delany  being  85,  surely  a  very  small  degree  of  affection 
might  have  made  her  Grace  charge  the  15000  with  an  annuity 
for  her  Life  ;  I  hear  the  Duke  of  Portland  told  Mrs.  Delany  he 
shd  always  be  happy  to  see  her  at  Bulstrode,  and  shd  consider 
her  as  his  Mother.  The  Kings  bounty  has  made  up  the 
pecuniary  loss  by  the  Dss’s  inattention,  but  nothing  I  shd 
think  cd  heal  the  wound  such  unkindness  must  give,  indeed  it 
is  not  only  unkind,  but  injurious  to  leave  a  Friend  destitute  of 
such  comforts  as  they  had  been  accustomed  to  receive,  and  I 
cannot  but  hope  some  Codicil  will  be  found.  I  understand 
this  Will  was  made  some  years  ago.  I  was  very  sorry  to  part 
with  my  old  Love  the  General,  and  heartily  pity  Mrs.  Ogle¬ 
thorpe.  After  having  loved  each  other  for  near  a  Century, 
sad  must  be  the  separation. 

Readers  of  Walpole’s  and  Fanny  Burney’s  letters 
will  remember  how  nobly  the  King  came  to  the  rescue 
of  Mrs.  Delany,  for  whom  he  provided  not  only  a 
house  at  Windsor  and  an  annuity  of  ^300,  but  com¬ 
plete  equipment  of  plate,  china,  linen,  wine,  sweet¬ 
meats,  even  pickles. 

VOL.  11 


o 


194 


GENERAL  OGLETHORPE 


1785 


General  Oglethorpe’s  splendid  defence  of  Frederica 
and  Georgia  in  1747  will  ever  be  remembered  for  its 
combination  of  pluck  and  bluff,  magnificent  handling 
of  a  handful  of  natives  and  cunning  strategy  in  con¬ 
triving  to  suggest  the  arrival  of  an  English  fleet  at 
the  critical  moment.  Whitefield  said  the  delivery  of 
Georgia  from  the  Spaniards  could  not  be  paralleled 
but  by  some  instances  out  of  the  Old  Testament.  This 
fine  old  soldier,  whose  personal  dignity  was  combined 
with  a  wonderfully  boyish  vivacity — we  have  already 
seen  him  and  young  Montagu  going  arm-in-arm  to 
Westminster  at  the  time  of  the  Gordon  Riots — and 
great  diversity  of  interests,  had  died  at  Cranham  on  the 
1st  of  July,  probably  at  the  age  of  eighty-nine,  though 
many  believed  him  much  older.  The  only  letter  from 
him  which  I  have  come  upon  is  endorsed  on  the  back 
by  Mrs.  Montagu  :  “  written  by  Gen’  Oglethorpe 
1782 ;  he  was  then  accounted  about  one  hundred  years 
of  age.”  It  is  written  in  a  very  clear  firm  hand: 

Madam — The  Tyrant  Queen  Fashion  has  established  in 
this  Town  what  you  justly  call,  The  Horred  custom  of  Mort¬ 
gaging  Time  as  well  as,  the  less  valuable  property  of  Estates, 
called  Goods  Chatles  etc. 

This  Lively  Skiping  Queen  Fashion,  has  put  her  livery 
servants  into  Dr.  M unroes  Strait  Waiscoates,  and  glued  up 
their  bodys,  and  minds,  into  such  whimsical  formes,  as  deprives 
them  of  the  free  use  of  both. 

Your  superior  Genius  hath  broke  through  the  magick 
Charm,  and  given  a  promissery  note,  but  how  shall  I  know  at 
what  Hour,  and  on  what  Day,  you  give  audience  to  your 
Devoted  Attendants,  That  I  may  not  omitt  paying  my  Court, 
and  call  for  acceptance  of  the  note.  After  the  custom  of 
Merchants. — With  the  greatest  Respect  I  am,  Madam,  Your 
most  obedient  Humble  Servant,  Jas.  Oglethorpe. 

Warren  Hastings  had  now  returned  from  India, 
and  seems  to  have  made  a  most  favourable  impression, 
on  the  ladies  at  any  rate.  Fanny  Burney  had  been 
“  extremely  pleased  with  the  extraordinary  plainness 


1785 


WARREN  HASTINGS 


i95 


and  simplicity  of  his  manners.”  Hannah  More  found 
him  “  a  man  of  remarkable  simplicity  of  manners, 
dress  and  deportment,  full  of  admirable  good  sense  ; 
nothing  of  the  nabob  about  him  and  Mrs.  Montagu 
had  formed  the  same  estimate  expressed  almost  in 
the  same  words : 


To  her  Sister 

The  great  Hastings  is  to  drink  tea  with  me  this  evening. 
I  am  charm’d  with  the  humility  and  simplicity  of  his  behaviour 
and  manners.  He  has  none  of  the  airs  of  a  Nabob,  nor  the 
pride  of  a  Hero. 

Have  your  Norwich  booksellers  got  a  Work  entitled  The 
Bhagvat  Gieta,  a  work  translated  by  Charles  Wilkins  from  the 
Sanskrit,  and  published  with  an  admirable  preface  by  Mr. 
Hastings,  it  is  a  very  curious  composition,  written  above  4,000 
years  ago. 

Later  she  writes: 

His  Grace  [of  Armagh]  promises  to  dine  with  me  to¬ 
morrow,  and  if  Mr.  Hastings  had  not  left  Town,  I  intended 
to  have  ask’d  him  to  have  been  of  the  party,  he  is  worthy  to 
converse  with  the  Primate  from  the  greatness  of  his  mind  and 
simplicity  of  manners.  He  wd  be  agreable  to  his  Grace  from 
his  Eastern  learning,  and  the  extensive  and  great  employments 
on  which  he  has  been  engaged.  His  letter  to  Mr.  Smith  on 
Mr.  Wilkins  translation  of  the  work  I  mention’d  to  you,  is 
written  with  classical  elegance  ;  the  title  of  the  work  is  the 
Bhagvat-Geeta  or  Dialogues  of  Kreeshna  and  Arjoon  in  eight 
lectures  with  notes,  translated  from  the  original  in  the  Sanskrit 
or  ancient  language  of  the  Brahmans,  sold  at  Nourses. 

Lord  Cornwallis’s  only  and  darling  daughter  took  a  trip  to 
Gretna  Green  the  other  day  with  a  young  Irish  officer,  2nd  son 
to  Mr.  Singleton,  an  Irish  Gentleman,  to  the  great  grief  of  her 
poor  father.  Mr.  Jerningham  who  dined  with  me  yesterday 
enquired  much  after  you,  as  did  also  Mrs.  Chapone. 

A  letter  to  Mrs.  Carter  of  November  19  contains 
one  or  two  interesting  references.  After  narrating 
the  family  woes  of  Mrs.  Hartley,  who  had  been  to 
spend  a  few  days  with  her,  she  adds,  “  I  have  now  a 


A  COMPLETE “ BOAR ” 


1785 


196 

prospect  of  getting  Mr.  Hartley  into  a  situation  which 
will  afford  them  a  decent  subsistence.”  This  was 
presumably  David  Hartley  the  younger,  whose  father 
the  philosopher,  Mrs.  Montagu  had  known  in  the 
’fifties,  and  who  was  himself  with  Franklin  one  of 
the  signatories  of  the  American  treaty  of  1783. 
Hartley  had  built  himself  a  house  on  Putney  Heath 
to  prove  the  value  of  his  invention  to  secure  buildings 
against  fire  by  placing  thin  iron  plates  under  the 
floors  and  ceilings,  and  this  was  doubtless  the  “  box  ” 
to  which  Mrs.  Montagu  refers  in  one  of  her  letters 
and  from  which  she  had  temporarily  rescued  his  wife. 
It  will  be  remembered  from  a  previous  reference  that 
she  had  used  his  iron  plating  in  building  her  Portman 
Square  House.  His  parliamentary  speeches  (though 
the  Gentleman  s  Magazine  was  loud  in  their  praise) 
were,  according  to  Wraxall,  so  intolerably  long  and 
dull  that  his  rising  always  operated  like  a  dinner 
bell;  whilst  George  Selwyn  declared  that  no  one 
could  have  a  complete  idea  of  a  “  boar  ”  who  had  not 
been  in  Parliament  and  heard  him  speak  for  two 
hours.  The  letter  goes  on: 

I  cannot  give  you  any  information  concerning  Lord  G. 
Gordon’s  affair  with  the  spiritual  court.  If  he  has  called  the 

Archbishop  of  Canterbury  the  W -  of  Babylon  it  is  very 

uncivil,  as  it  is  the  only  W - his  Lordship  dislikes.  I  wish 

he  would  have  taken  a  trip  to  Italy  with  the  Bishop  of  Derby 
[?  Derry]. 

Lord  George  Gordon’s  religious  fervour  had 
amazing  vicissitudes  after  the  midsummer  madness  of 
1780.  In  1784  he  appeared  as  protestant  champion  of 
the  Dutch  against  the  Emperor  Joseph,  and  cheerily  in¬ 
formed  Mr.  Pitt  that  he  had  recruited  a  large  number  of 
sailors  for  service  against  His  Catholic  Majesty.  After 
the  Pope  had  tried  in  vain  (or  so  his  friends  declared) 
to  have  him  poisoned,  he  had  a  flirtation  with  the 
Quakers.  Having  been  the  companion  of  a  dissenting 
parson  during  his  last  days,  his  evidence  was  required 


1785 


THE  DIAMOND  NECKLACE 


197 


by  an  Ecclesiastical  Court  at  Canterbury.  Lord  George 
declined  to  attend,  or  to  see  the  Archbishop,  and 
was  accordingly  and  solemnly  excommunicated  at  the 
church  of  St.  Mary  le  bonne  on  May  4,  1786,  remark¬ 
ing  that  “  To  expel  me  from  a  society  to  which  I  never 
belonged  is  an  absurdity  worthy  of  an  Archbishop.” 
It  was  doubtless  in  connection  with  this  solemn  epi¬ 
sode  that  His  Grace  received  the  biblical  but  uncom¬ 
plimentary  epithet  to  which  Mrs.  Montagu  alludes. 
Lord  George’s  personal  morals  were  indeed  described 
by  Horace  Walpole  as  loose,  and  by  Hannah  More 
as  very  debauched,  and  engravings  of  him  as  “  Lord 
Crop  ”  with  “  The  Meretricious  Fair  ”  were  popular 
at  the  time.  A  year  or  two  later,  it  will  be  remembered, 
he  became  a  Jew,  styled  hinself  “  Israel  Ben  Abraham 
George  Gordon,”  grew  a  mighty  beard,  and  indited 
inspiring  letters  to  fellow  Hebrews  from  “  The  Felon 
Side,  Newgate,”  to  which  he  was  finally  relegated. 
Had  he  lived  in  our  time,  as  Leslie  Stephen  remarks, 
it  would  have  certainly  been  to  an  asylum  rather  than 
a  prison  that  he  would  have  been  consigned. 

At  the  end  of  this  letter  Mrs.  Montagu  writes: 

“  Mr.  Jerningham  tells  me  it  is  thought  by  many 
that  the  Cardinal  is  innocent  of  the  theft,  but  perhaps 
guilty  of  too  much  intimacy  with  Madame  la  Motte, 
who  sold  the  necklace,”  recalling  the  strange  story 
of  Cardinal  de  Rohan,  the  Countess  of  the  piquant 
face,  and  Marie  Antoinette’s  Diamond  Necklace, 
which  Carlyle  has  told  in  pages  of  undying  beauty, 
though  his  historical  accuracy  has  been  impeached. 

Walpole  remarked  that  the  Cardinal  was  very 
gallant  but  out  of  luck.  “  He  might  not  have  been 
sent  to  Newgate  here  for  using  the  Queen’s  name  to 
get  diamonds  ” — Her  Majesty  having  accepted  some 
from  Warren  Hastings. 

With  the  marriage  of  her  nephew  and  heir  the 
active  life  of  Mrs.  Montagu  may  perhaps  be  regarded 
as  having  passed  its  apogee,  or  to  use  a  phrase  more 


CLIMACTERIC 


1785 


198 

appropriate  to  her  era,  its  grand  climacteric.  Of 
the  death  of  her  own  little  son  “  Punch  ”  she  did  not 
write  much  at  the  time  ;  but  she  confessed,  long 
afterwards,  to  Mrs.  Vesey  that  she  had  wept,  night 
after  night,  in  uncontrollable  sorrow;  had  then  very 
resolutely  set  herself  to  conquer  the  emotion,  and  had 
succeeded.  One  or  two  references  to  her  boy,  and 
to  other  little  children  in  these  letters,  though  very 
brief  and  restrained,  convey  a  touch  of  poignant 
emotion  nowhere  else  discernible.  When  it  was  clear 
that  she  was  herself  to  be  childless,  the  Montagus 
had  adopted  the  second  son  of  her  favourite  brother 
Morris,  though  she  frankly  detested  the  boy’s  mother; 
and  his  upbringing  was  very  thoughtfully  planned 
in  view  of  the  heritage  to  which  he  was  thus  destined. 
His  aunt  was  quite  awake  to  the  perils  of  school  life, 
and  at  Harrow,  in  Paris,  and  at  Cambridge  he  was 
looked  after  by  his  own  tutors.  He  was  encouraged 
to  acquaint  himself  with  the  working  of  the  farm  at 
Sandleford  and  the  collieries  at  Denton  ;  later  on  he 
was  given  horses  and  a  valet,  and  was  urged  to  travel, 
pay  visits,  and  play  his  part  in  society.  But  Mrs. 
Montagu  took  no  avoidable  chances,  and  the  young 
man  was  shepherded  out  of  reach  of  the  macaronies 
and  the  bloods.  The  product  of  all  this  watchful 
care  seems  to  have  been  a  fairly  studious  youth,  and 
a  good,  though  in  no  way  remarkable,  young  gentleman 
who  might  easily  have  developed  into  much  more  of 
a  prig  than  he  seems  to  have  been. 

This  is  not  to  imply  that  “  the  old  Prioress  ”  tried 
to  exercise  any  puritanical  discipline,  of  the  inefficacy 
of  which  she  had  had  plentiful  experience,  even  if 
her  inclinations  had  leaned  in  that  direction,  which 
was  far  from  being  the  case  ;  and  a  letter  of  this 
autumn  shows,  for  instance,  that  she  had  not  forgotten 
nor  repented  the  joys  of  her  own  dancing  days: 

My  young  Friends  love  dancing  and  as  it  is  a  wholesome 
exercise  I  encourage  it,  so  all  the  young  visitants,  the  young 


1785 


“  THE  OLD  PRIORESS  ” 


199 


Couple,  and  the  Men  Servants  out  of  Livery  and  several  of  my 
Maids  dance  in  the  Drawing  room  from  the  time  we  have 
drunk  our  tea  till  Supper,  so  I  am  obliged  to  have  a  tete  a  tete 
with  the  Mama  all  the  evening.  .  .  . 

Apart  from  this  establishment  of  her  heir,  she  had 
now  also  achieved  the  substantial  development  and 
sound  working  of  the  Newcastle  collieries  and  the 
Yorkshire  farms  ;  she  had,  with  the  help  of  Wyatt 
and  Capability  Brown,  greatly  enlarged  the  accommo¬ 
dation  and  beautified  the  surroundings  of  Sandleford 
Priory,  and  had  also,  with  the  assistance  of  the  gifted 
but  uncertain  Stuart,  completed  her  great  house  and 
garden  at  Portman  Square.  In  regions  social  and 
literary  she  had — as  Dr.  Johnson  himself  liberally 
admitted — achieved  a  position  of  considerable  emin¬ 
ence  and  influence,  and  had  used  it  for  the  assistance 
of  literary  labour,  the  encouragement  of  rational  con¬ 
verse,  and  the  discouragement  of  high  playing  and 
deep  drinking,  at  a  time  when  both  were,  to  an  extent 
scarcely  conceivable  to-day,  the  daily  and  nightly 
vocation  of  a  large  proportion  of  polite  and  distin¬ 
guished  society.  That  she  had  vindicated  Shake¬ 
speare  and  vanquished  Voltaire  she  was  constantly 
assured  in  the  screeds  of  fulsome  compliment  that 
were  the  epistolary  and  conversational  commonplace 
of  the  day;  but  it  does  not,  on  the  whole,  appear  that 
she  was  the  least  inclined  to  accept  these  absurd 
encomia  at  anything  like  their  face  value. 

Sir  William  Robinson,  the  Primate’s  brother  and 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  cousin,  who  had  been  ill  at  Bath 
through  the  summer,  died  there  in  September.  He 
and  she  had  kept  up  a  steady  correspondence  all 
through  the  period  of  his  illness,  she  sending  him 
various  invalid  delicacies  from  Sandleford,  and  he 
keeping  her  very  fully  informed  with  the  progress 
and  vicissitudes  of  his  ailment.  His  last  letter  to 
her  is  dated  September  15,  acknowledging  her  “  con¬ 
stant  supply  of  fresh  partridges,  and  sending  her  in 


200  DEATH  OF  SIR  W.  ROBINSON  1785 


return  “  three  cream  cheeses,  promising  excellent  this 
year.”  Sir  William  was,  like  all  the  brothers,  a 
colossal  man,  and  this  must  be  taken  into  due  con¬ 
sideration  in  judging  of  the  meagre  diet  to  which 
within  four  days  of  his  death  he  was  regretfully  reduced: 
“  Your  partridges  and  a  constant  supply  ready  of  the 
[meat]  juice  always  at  call,  with  mutton  occasionally 
and  new  laid  eggs,  is  now  my  whole  subsistence.” 
Sir  William  must  have  been  a  dear  old  boy,  and  his 
loss  was  a  very  severe  one  to  the  Primate,  for  whom 
his  absolute  devotion  went  the  length  of  taking 
exactly  the  same  size  of  shoes,  the  same  diet,  and  the 
same  physic. 


1786 


A  QUIET  YEAR - MR.  BARWELL - MRS.  FITZHERBERT - 

BALLOONS 


Betty  Tull’s  feather  work.  Newbury  Sunday  schools,  and  its  Rector. 
The  Poyntz  family  troubles.  Nabob  Barwell.  Mrs.  Jordan  in 
Comedy.  Mrs.  Siddons  at  Sir  Joshua’s.  Sir  Charles  Wilkins’ 
translation  of  the  Bhaga<vad-gitd.  Junius  Junior.  The  Macartney 
duel.  Mr.  Fawkener’s  duel.  Journey  to  Denton.  The  Prince  of 
Wales  and  Mrs.  Fitzherbert.  A  feast  at  Denton.  Lunardi’s  air 
balloon. 


After  the  domestic  excitements  of  the  previous  year, 
1786  seems  to  have  been  a  placid  and  uneventful  one. 
There  were  the  usual  visits  to  Bath  in  the  spring, 
to  Sandleford  in  the  summer,  and  to  Denton  later  on. 
Matthew  Montagu  entered  Parliament,  and  his  wife’s 
condition,  to  her  aunt’s  great  joy,  became  “  interesting.” 
The  Montagus  had  settled  in  Manchester  Square, 
where  they  were  near  neighbours  of  the  aunt  ;  and 
Lady  Grantham  presented  the  niece  at  the  Birthday, 
“  splendid  in  jewels  and  elegantly  apparelled ;  her 
dress  was  rich  but  not  gaudy  or  heavy,  and  she  be¬ 
came  it.”  Mr.  Wyatt  was  still  at  work  at  Sandleford, 
which  made  life  there  somewhat  airy  and  uncom¬ 
fortable. 

As  Mrs.  Tull’s  feathers  would  mount  on  the  wings  of  the 
wind  if  she  worked  in  her  usual  place,  or  any  where  in  the  body 
of  the  house  [now  partially  roofless]  the  grand  octagon  drawing 
room  must  be  dedicated  to  the  feather  manufactory,  and  as 
she  has  a  delicate  constitution  I  must  put  her  up  a  bed  there, 
for  cold  winds  and  damp  plaister  would  not  suit  a  valetudinarian. 

201 


202  A  COUNTRY  RECTOR  1786 

I  shall  write  to  Mr.  Raikes  as  soon  as  I  can  get  the  Corporation 
of  Newbury  to  settle  the  plan  of  our  Sunday  Schools. 

Betty  Tull  was  the  forewoman  of  the  feather  work 
which  was  being  extensively  executed  for  Montagu 
House  on  large  canvas  mounted  frames  ;  and  all 
friends  were  laid  under  contribution  of  material,  from 
peacock  tails  to  pheasant  plumes  and  grey  goose  quills. 
Robert  Raikes,  the  great  promoter  of  Sunday  schools, 
had  been  arranging  with  her  for  their  erection  at 
Newbury,  where  : 

I  do  not  expect  any  opposition  from  the  Rector,  for  he 
never  appears  there,  nor  concerns  himself  with  what  is  doing  ; 
if  indeed  the  children  should  read  a  chapter  of  the  Bible  to 
him  I  believe  it  would  displease  him  very  much.  I  hear  that 
at  his  church  at  Hiclear  [High  ClereJ  he  orders  any  Parson 
who  officiates  for  him  to  read  as  fast  as  he  can,  and  not  to 
preach  above  7  minutes. 

Mrs.  Poyntz’s  afflictions  over  the  death  of  her 
sister  Lady  Corke  and  Mrs.  Fawkener’s  “  catastrophe  ” 
occupy  much  space  in  the  Sandleford  letters  of  this 
summer,  but  can  hardly  be  found  space  for  here. 

We  were  all  at  Mr.  Poyntz  one  evening  last  week.  Lord 
Sandwich  was  just  arrived,  and  I  prevaild  on  his  Lordship, 
and  all  the  family  at  Midgeham,  to  dine  with  me  the  next 
day.  Mrs.  Poyntz  was  some  days  before  carried  to  St.  Albans 
by  Lady  Spencer  in  order  to  consult  Dr.  Warren,  indeed  I 
fear  neither  the  art  of  medicine  nor  all  the  tender  attentions 
of  her  Friends,  will  be  able  to  preserve  her  long.  She  has  a 
very  delicate  constitution  and  the  death  of  Lady  Corke  affected 
her  much,  but  the  conduct  of  Mrs.  Fawkener  has  I  fear  given 
her  le  coup  de  Grace.  She  will  be  a  great  loss  to  3  lovely 
Daughters,  and  her  youngest  boy,  who  is  the  finest  child  I 
ever  saw.  Her  eldest  son  a  charming  youth  is  less  dependant 
on  a  Mothers  care.  Mr.  Poyntz  continues  inconsolable. 

William  Augustus  Fawkener  was  the  eldest  son  of 
Sir  Everard  Fawkener,  merchant,  postmaster-general, 
friend  of  Voltaire,  and  supporter  (as  secretary  to  the 


DOROTHY  JORDAN 
After  John  Russell 


1786  MRS.  JORDAN  AND  MRS.  SIDDONS  203 

Duke  of  Cumberland)  of  the  Chelsea  China  Manu¬ 
factory.  He  had  married  in  1784  Georgiana  Anne, 
daughter  of  William  Poyntz  of  Midgham,  and  divorced 
her  this  year. 


To  her  Sister 

Jany  the  \th. 

Our  dear  young  Friends  calld  on  me  yesterday  morning  to 
invite  me  to  dine  with  them,  and  to  go  to  the  Play,  for  which 
they  had  just  procured  a  box  ;  a  matter  of  no  small  difficulty 
when  Mrs.  Jordan  is  to  act  ;  as  Heraclitus  and  Democritus 
had  each  their  different  Parties  of  Witts  and  Philosophes,  so 
have  Mrs.  Siddonsand  Mrs.  Jordan  amongst  the  fine  Gentlemen, 
and  fine  Ladies  ;  all  indeed  are  agreed  that  it  is  charming  to 
laugh,  or  weep,  but  some  greatly  prefer  the  first,  others  the 
latter.  As  I  think  Comedy  as  well  constituted  to  purge  ones 
mind  of  scorn  and  contempt,  as  Tragedy  of  pity  and  terror, 
I  was  very  desirous  to  see  Mrs.  Jordan  in  her  facetious  modes, 
and  had  told  my  young  folks  I  wd  be  of  their  party,  or  they 
shd  be  of  mine,  when  we  cd  get  a  box.  I  made  2  or  3  un¬ 
successful  attempts  during  the  mild  weather,  but  I  have  now 
determined  not  to  put  my  face  out  of  doors  till  the  frost  is 
gone,  least  St.  Anthony  should  seize  it,  so  I  excused  myself  as 
to  the  play,  and  prevailed  on  them  to  dine  with  me,  and  attend 
Mrs.  Jordan  in  the  afternoon.  Ld  Sandwich,  and  all  who  have 
much  frequented  the  Theatre,  speak  of  Mrs.  Jordan  as  the 
best  actress  in  parts  of  humour  that  ever  was  seen  on  any  stage. 
The  Romp  and  Country  Girl  are  her  characters,  and  I  should 
be  glad  to  see  anywhere,  in  these  days,  a  Miss  Hoyden  who 
has  no  boarding  school  airs  or  grimaces. 

But  an  opportunity  of  meeting  Mrs.  Siddons  at 
dinner  proved  irresistible  : 

Jan.  1 6tk. 

On  Sunday  I  am  to  dine  at  Sr  Joshua  Reynolds  where  I 
am  to  meet  Mrs.  Siddons,  whom  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  in  her 
own  character.  You  will  see  by  the  account  I  have  given 
of  myself,  that  I  am,  like  many  Persons,  superior  to  small,  but 
not  to  great  temptations,  tho  I  resist  an  invitation  to  a  common 
evening  party  I  run  the  hazard  of  catching  cold  when  a  great 
character  in  the  Drama  of  human  life,  or  poetick  fiction  is 
exhibited. 


204 


NABOB  BARWELL 


1786 


An  early  letter  of  1786,  if  it  be  correctly  placed 
here,  details  a  bit  of  scandal  of  which,  on  occasion, 
Mrs.  Montagu  was  by  no  means  incapable.  Richard 
(known  as  “  Nabob  ”)  Barwell  had  been  one  of  Warren 
Hastings’  lieutenants  on  the  Bengal  Council,  but  had 
resigned  when  the  latter  made  up  his  quarrel  with 
Francis.  Barwell’s  Indian  record  was  largely  one  of 
bribery  and  intrigue,  interspersed  with  other  mis¬ 
demeanours,  which  he  does  not  appear  to  have  left 
behind  him  when  he  returned  to  England  with  a  huge 
fortune,  and  bought  Stanstead  from  the  Earl  of  Halifax 
for  ,£102,500.  Bonomi,  Wyatt,  and  Lancelot  Brown 
spent  five  years  of  work  upon  the  house  and  park, 
where  it  would  appear  from  the  following  extract  that 
his  pleasures  were  not  purely  sylvan.  Dr.  John 
Monro  was  the  celebrated  mad  doctor  and  physician 
to  Bethlehem  Hospital,  whose  clutches  poor  old 
Alexander  Cruden  so  narrowly  escaped.  Mrs.  Bar- 
well,  who  had  been,  as  Miss  Sanderson,  the  reigning 
beauty  of  Calcutta,  died  in  1778. 

William  Hickey  tells  an  amusing  story  of  the  purse- 
proud  Nabob’s  humiliation  before  a  House  of  Com¬ 
mons  Committee  ;  and  says  that  when  he  went  to 
dine  with  him  at  Ormond  Street,  though  they  were 
only  six,  a  most  sumptuous  meal  was  served  on  plate 
by  two  men  out  of,  and  four  in,  livery,  covers  being 
laid  for  eighteen,  which  was  Mr.  Barwell’s  standing 
order,  in  case  of  friends  turning  up  at  short  notice. 


To  her  Sister 

Feb.  zd. 

I  suppose  you  may  before  this  time  have  had  fuller  in¬ 
formation  of  Miss  Barwells  affair  than  I  can  give  you,  as  I 
know  few  persons  acquainted  with  the  family,  but  I  have, 
since  I  mentiond  it  to  you,  been  told,  the  amourous  pair  were 
found  in  a  dirty  Inn  at  or  near  Dartford,  where  they  had  passd 
3  days,  and  I  presume  nights  together.  The  Gallant  most 
basely  charged  the  fair  one  with  having  from  the  first  made 


i786  NYMPH  OF  STANSFIELD  PARK  205 

the  advances,  and  urged  the  elopement  :  his  apologies  rather 
aggravate  than  extenuate  his  guilt,  for  it  is  easier  for  a  man  to 
resist  the  solicitations  of  anothers  passions  than  his  own.  I 
hear  he  is  a  great  fool,  and  I  am  sure  he  must  be  a  great 
scoundrel  ;  he  married  a  great  fortune,  or  at  least  a  Woman 
with  a  fortune  superior  to  his  own.  I  find  poor  Miss  Barwell 
was  suspected  to  have  an  amourous  disposition,  and  the  men 
now  say,  they  are  not  surprized  at  what  has  happen’d.  She 
had  a  little  while  before  this  exploit  settled  herself  at  a  Mrs. 
Gordons,  who  takes  young  Ladies  to  board  with  her.  Some 
say  Mr.  Barwell,  when  he  brought  her  back,  put  her  under 
the  care  of  Dr.  Monro,  in  which  I  think  he  did  very  wisely, 
for  bleeding  and  a  low  diet  wd  do  her  good  and  a  strait  waistcoat 
cd  do  her  no  harm.  I  hear  Mr.  Barwells  Wife  is  very  pretty, 
but  not  so  beautiful  as  the  Nymph  who  lived  in  his  Park,  on 
whom  he  is  said  to  have  settled  £3000  a  year  ;  which  indeed 
he  may  well  afford,  if  as  the  World  says,  he  brought  ^800000 
from  India. 

Mrs.  Montagu  has  already  attested  that  Lancelot 
Brown  was  a  poet  of  culture,  in  the  strictest  sense  of 
that  term  ;  yet  we  doubt  if  the  Nymph  of  Stansfield 
Park  was  of  his  providing. 

From  a  letter  of  the  Primate’s  of  about  this  period 
it  would  seem  that  an  enterprising  gentleman  styling 
himself  Junius  Junior  had  got  hold  of  some  of  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  letters,  and  was  inclined  either  to  print 
them  or  extort  a  price  for  their  suppression  : 

The  friendly  communication  of  Junius  Junior  is  attended 
with  some  awkward  circumstances.  You  seem  to  be  pretty 
much  in  the  situation  that  Pope  formerly  was  with  his  Dunces, 
but  in  your  case,  these  men  are  attracted  by  a  prospect  of 
getting  a  sum  of  money,  which  they  had  not  in  view  when  they 
attacked  Mr.  Pope.  Junius  Junior  is  certainly  acquainted  with 
your  discretion  to  suppress  a  Panegyrick,  and  expects  a  much 
more  considerable  reward  for  the  suppression  of  Calumny  and 
abuse.  The  worst  that  can  happen,  in  my  opinion  is  a  publica¬ 
tion  of  some  of  your  original  letters,  for  scandalous  anecdotes, 
such  as  are  alluded  to  by  Junius  Junior,  will  gain  no  credit, 
even  in  this  life,  which  is  disposed  to  level  all  characters.  Pope’s 
letters  were  published  by  Curl,  from  the  originals  that  had 
been  returned  to  him  by  the  Executors  of  his  Correspondents. 


206 


TWO  DUELS 


1786 


I  always  expected,  and  I  suppose  you  are  prepared  in  your  own 
mind  for  an  event  of  this  kind  ;  copies  of  your  letters  are  in 
the  hands  of  many  persons,  and  a  Bookseller,  as  such,  will 
print  any  thing  that  will  sell. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  good  lady  permitted 
herself  to  be  thus  victimised. 


From  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu  to  her  Aunt 

June  13th. 

It  is  currently  reported,  that  his  Majesty  has  interfered  to 
prevent  any  future  duel,  between  Lord  Macartney  and  Genl. 
Stewart  ;  The  Commands  must  be  extended  to  some  others, 
who  intend  to  challenge  him,  upon  grounds  of  personal  resent¬ 
ment. 

The  duel  between  George  Lord  Macartney,  late 
Governor  of  Fort  St.  George,  Madras,  and  General 
Stewart,  whom  he  had  had  arrested  and  sent  home 
from  India  for  mismanagement  of  the  Cuddalore 
expedition,  took  place  in  Hyde  Park  on  June  8, 
Stewart  having  addressed  him  in  terms  which  led  to  a 
challenge. 

Mr.  Poyntz  tells  me,  Mrs.  Poyntz  is  a  good  deal  better 
than  when  she  went  to  Town,  to  be  under  Dr.  Warrens  care. 
I  think  Mr.  Fawkener’s  having  been  drawn  into  a  duel  by 

Mr.  T - s  intrigue  with  his  Wife  should  rather  have  en- 

creased,  than  diminished  the  damages. 

In  another  letter  she  adds  : 

I  agree  with  you  that  Mr.  F  was  not  by  the  Law  of  honour 
obliged  to  fight  the  duel,  and  it  is  certainly  contrary  to  wiser 
better  and  more  merciful  Laws,  when  a  Man  can  keep  his 
station  in  Society  without  it,  for  if  he  is  esteemd  a  Coward 
he  is  no  longer  a  Husband,  a  Father,  a  Brother,  or  Member 
of  the  Community,  and  then  the  crime  lies  at  the  door  of  the 
wretch  who  renderd  the  combat  necessary. 

Of  the  two  combatants  she  writes  : 

I  hope  Ld  Maccartney  is  recovering  fast  ;  surely  some 
means  will  be  taken  to  prevent  mischief  from  the  blood  thirsty 


MRS.  FITZHERBERT 


1786 


207 


General.  He  will  otherwise  apply  for  a  patent  to  murder  all 
Governors  of  Madrass. 

The  journey  to  Denton  took  place  in  September,  a 
visit  being  paid  en  route  to  the  Dowager  Lady  Spencer 
at  St.  Albans,  who  took  her  to  see  Bacon’s  house  at 
Gorhambury  ;  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu 
joined  her  in  Northumberland  a  week  after  her  arrival. 

Denton  always  meant  business  rather  than  pleasure  ; 
the  “  naiads  were  dirty  with  the  coal  keels  and  the 
dryads’  tresses  torn  and  dishevelled  with  the  rough 
blasts  of  Boreas  ”  ;  but  though  her  lot  there  had  not 
fallen  on  a  fair  ground  she  was  bound  to  admit  “  it  was 
a  goodly  heritage,  and  made  a  decent  figure  when  it 
arrived  at  the  shop  of  Hoare  &  Co.  in  Fleet  Street.” 


To  Mrs.  Scott 

Denton,  Sept.  10. 

I  find  the  P.  of  W.  did  not  appear  much  at  Brighthelmston. 
Mrs.  Fitzherbert  was  there  in  an  humble  style  with  few 
Servants,  and  in  shabby  old  carriage,  and  had  not  any  great 
attentions  paid  to  her  by  the  company,  which  indeed  was  not 
numerous  ;  it  is  supposed  that  the  place  wd  have  been  more 
frequented  if  people  had  not  wish’d  to  avoid  an  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  lady  or  her  lover.  Her  brother  was 
with  her,  it  is  said  she  looks  melancholy.  Some  French  Esprit 
fort  said  on  his  deathbed,  he  was  going  in  search  of  un  grand 
peutetre.  This  lady  has  ventured  on  a  grand  peutetre. 

Poor  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  was  much  more  sinned 
against  than  sinning,  and  her  “  grand  peut-etre  ”  was 
at  least  inspired  by  an  affection — probably  the  only 
genuine  one  his  life  ever  achieved — for  her  worthless 
spouse.  Just  before  his  death,  George  IV.  earnestly 
requested  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  see  that  he  was 
buried  in  the  night-shirt  he  was  wearing.  After  his 
death,  the  Duke  noticed  a  red  silk  ribbon  about  his 
neck,  and  attached  to  it,  beneath  the  shirt,  was  found 
a  tiny  locket  containing  Mrs.  Fitzherbert’s  portrait. 
It  seems  possible  that  the  woman  he  had  most  deeply 


208  LUNARDFS  BALLOON  1786 

wronged  was,  after  all,  the  one  woman  he  had  really- 
cared  for. 

Denton. 

We  are  to-day  very  busy  in  preparing  a  dinner  for  500 
persons,  none  of  whom  will  I  believe  find  fault  with  our  meat 
or  our  cooking,  tho’  there  are  not  any  dainties  or  very  relishing 
sauces  ;  12  enormous  plumb  puddings  and  as  many  with  meat 
on  them,  and  pyes  innumerable,  a  sheep  and  more  than  the 
meat  of  one  ox  is  roasting  and  boiling  at  different  fires  with 
2  bushells  of  pottatoes  and  other  garden  things,  2  Hogsheads 
of  pure  ale  stand  ready  to  supply  the  Toasts  that  are  to  be  drunk 
after  dinner,  besides  a  notable  quantity  of  ale  and  beer  mixd, 
to  drink  with  their  dinner.  My  house  is  as  savoury  as  a  cooks 
shop,  tho’  the  great  oven  is  in  the  offices,  and  a  great  part  of 
the  victuals  dressed  there,  and  some  at  my  tenant’s  who  keeps 
a  publick  House.  Montagu  says  he  smelt  the  good  odour  of 
our  feast  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  hence  as  he  was  returning 
from  his  ride.  .  .  .  Mr.  Lunardi  announced  his  intention  of 
mounting  his  air  balloon  at  Newcastle  a  few  days  ago,  many 
thousands  spectators  assembled  to  see  it,  but  alas  !  a  young 
man,  who  was  in  a  great  degree  the  comfort  and  support  of 
his  Parents  and  family,  having  twisted  a  cord  that  held  the 
balloon  round  his  arm  was  snatched  up  by  it,  and  before  the 
faces  of  his  Father,  Mother  and  sisters  let  fall  from  the  height 
of  60  yards  and  killed  ;  the  balloon  sunk  soon  after.  As  I 
was  airing  in  the  Whiskey  I  saw  the  catastrophe  of  the  Balloon, 
but  happily  not  the  sad  tragedy  of  the  young  man.  I  am 
surprised  that  the  Corporation  of  Newcastle  will  permit  any 
one  to  play  these  tricks. 

A  later  letter  adds  : 

The  news  papers  did  not  represent  half  the  horrors  of  the 
disaster  of  the  Air  Balloon,  the  young  man  who  perish’d  was 
the  support  and  comfort  of  his  Parents  and  4  sisters,  before 
whose  faces  he  fell  ;  he  was  to  have  been  married  in  a  few 
days  to  a  young  woman  of  good  fortune  ;  she  was  informed 
of  the  disaster  by  the  voice  of  the  mob.  The  Corporation 
of  Newcastle  were  much  to  blame  in  having  permitted  Mr. 
Lunardi  to  play  his  tricks  here.  Many  thousand  hands  were 
by  this  means  taken  off  their  labour.  I  must  say  for  the  honour 
of  my  Pittmen  they  were  not  diverted  from  their  duty  either 
by  idle  curiosity,  or  bad  example. 


1787 


“the  OLD  abbess” - SUNDAY  SCHOOLS - HANNAH 

MORE - LOUIS  XVI 

Domestic  affairs.  Montagu’s  Commons  speech.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  social 
activities.  Sandleford.  School  treats.  Primate’s  visit.  Mrs.  Vesey’s 
illness.  Letter  from  Hannah  More.  Montagu  goes  north.  The 
French  King  and  Parliament.  Mr.  Mackreth.  Mrs.  Vesey.  Lady 
Clermont.  Calonne.  Wraxall  on  his  visit  to  Paris.  Archives  of 
the  Revolution.  Hayley’s  Dialogues.  Christmas  and  New  Year 
dinners.  Soame  Jenyns  and  Dr.  Johnson. 


After  Matthew  Montagu’s  marriage,  his  aunt’s 
correspondence  naturally  dealt  spaciously  in  domes¬ 
ticities.  Her  affection  for  her  daughter,  as  his  wife 
is  henceforth  called,  increased  with  further  acquaint¬ 
ance,  and  in  many  ways  this  epoch  of  the  nesting  of 
the  young  couple  seems  to  have  been  for  “  the  old 
Abbess  of  Sandleford,”  as  she  now  described  herself, 
amongst  the  happiest  periods  of  her  life.  Mrs. 
Montagu  junior  “  bred,”  in  the  phrase  of  the  day, 
with  praiseworthy  regularity  once  a  year,  and  her  aunt’s 
particular  friends  are  annually  and  punctually  informed 
of  all  the  details  of  maternity,  milk  supplies,  wet 
nurses,  and  so  on. 

In  February  1787  Matthew  Montagu  seconded 
the  Address  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  his  aunt 
was  overwhelmed  with  felicitations  : 

The  event  occasioned  so  many  congratulations,  notes  and 
visits  I  had  not  for  some  days  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  the 
morning  at  my  disposal  ;  almost  every  member  of  the  House 
of  Commons  of  my  acquaintance,  and  many  peers  calling  on 

VOL.  II  209  P 


2  10 


LADY  BOUNTIFUL 


1787 


me  on  the  occasion,  and  yesterday  at  the  Drawing  Room  I 
was  congratulated  upon  it  by  the  Queen,  the  Ld.  Chancellor 
and  the  ministers,  besides  the  Marquiss  of  Stafford  and  almost 
everybody  I  met  there.  ...  I  assure  you  I  had  not  the  least 
share  in  the  speech. 

The  “  old  abbess  ”  was,  however,  by  no  means 
inclined  to  be  laid  on  the  shelf  just  yet  : 

I  have  nobly  endured  all  changes  of  weather  and  all  the 
variety  of  amusements  of  this  town.  I  had  one  subscription 
concert  at  my  house  last  Friday.  I  was  at  a  great  assembly 
on  Wednesday  night,  at  the  Drawing  Room  yesterday,  shall 
be  at  our  Concert  tonight,  at  Lady  Amherst’s  tomorrow,  and 
on  Sunday  shall  have  a  large  party  to  dine  with  me.  I  have 
twice  dined  with  a  very  agreeable  party  at  Manchester  Square, 
I  have,  indeed,  declined  some  assemblies,  but  I  think  my 
Journal  on  the  whole  may  rival  that  of  the  fine  lady  in  the 
Spectator,  only  I  have  not  worked  a  tulip,  but  as  Betty  Tull 
has  done  it  for  me,  I  think  it  quite  as  well.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Delany 
has  been  very  ill  for  a  fortnight,  and  at  87  there  is  not  much 
hope  of  recovery. 

In  May  Mrs.  Montagu  went  for  the  summer  as 
usual  to  Sandleford,  and  on  the  Fourth  of  June,  the 
Royal  Birthday  : 

The  old  character  of  a  Lady  Bountiful  becomes  me  better 
than  the  glittering  court  robes,  so  I  celebrate  the  day  in  an 
antique  style  ;  an  150  boys  have  already  been  singing  God 
save  the  King  as  they  passed  the  lawn  to  the  Grove,  and  as 
soon  as  the  rest  arrive,  for  all  my  Guests  are  not  yet  come, 
Roast  and  boil’d  beef,  mutton  puddings  and  pyes  will  be  served 
up  to  them  on  long  tables  in  the  Grove  ;  their  masters  will 
also  have  a  table  for  them.  In  the  evening  my  work  people 
from  the  grounds  will  have  a  plentiful  supper. 


From  her  Sister 

Catton,  June  the  11th. 

I  think  none  of  the  Galas  celebrated  his  Majesty’s  birthday 
so  well  as  yours,  none  gave  equal  real  pleasure  to  the  same 
number,  and  no  evil  can  arise  from  it,  which  it  would  be 
difficult  to  assert  of  those  more  splendid  ;  and  I  dare  say 


1787  THE  PRINCES  AT  THE  GALA  21 1 


none  of  your  Guests  behaved  in  so  ungentlemanly  a  manner 
as  some  young  Personages  at  those  splendid  fetes.  Their 
conduct  is  shocking  beyond  all  example,  it  is  so  very  strange 
one  wou’d  almost  think  them  actuated  by  malice  as  well  as 
profligacy,  and  that  they  are  endeavouring  to  derange  again 
the  understanding  of  a  Parent  who  cannot  be  insensible  to  a 
conduct  so  infamous.  The  D.  of  C.  is  a  happy  addition  to 
the  Crew  ;  he  will  vulgarize  their  enormities  beyond  what 
cou’d  have  enterd  the  thoughts  of  any  but  a  Tar.  I  hear 
that  at  Boodles  fete  the  eldest  was  carried  off  dead  drunk  after 
having  cascaded  most  copiously  in  the  Room.  The  youngest 
was  not  less  freed  from  the  plague  of  human  reason,  but  capable 
of  walking  about  the  room  swearing  to  so  violent  a  degree 
that  he  terrified  many  of  the  company. 

From  Manchester  Square  her  niece  sent  a  long 
account  of  the  Ambassador’s  gala  ;  which  had 
narrowly  escaped  postponement  owing  to  a  false 
report  in  the  newspapers  from  France,  “  to  which  I 
gave  perfect  credit  and  repined  extreamly  that  the 
Dauphin  should  have  chosen  so  very  improper  a  day 
to  make  his  exit.” 

Later  in  July  she  writes  : 

This  morning  knowing  Mr.  Thompson  would  preach  at 
Thatcham,  I  went  thither  to  feed  on  spiritual  fare  with  which 
we  were  excellently  supplied.  ...  I  hear  poor  Lord  Macartney 
suffers  still  great  pain  from  his  wound.  I  suppose  Mr.  Hastings 
cannot  be  without  some  uneasiness  from  the  undecided  state 
of  his  affairs.  Our  late  Ministers  destroying  the  letters  which 
would  have  rendered  some  of  our  Traitors  liable  to  the  punish¬ 
ment  they  deserved  is  a  crime  too  black  for  any  man  but  a 
mock  patriot. 

The  Sunday  school  children  were  encouraged  to 
regular  attendance  in  orthodox  style  by  a  feast  in 
July: 

I  have  now  crammed  every  child  with  meat  plumb  pudding 
and  good  advice,  all  which  I  hope  will  be  well  digested  and 
turn  to  wholesome  nurture.  While  I  was  dealing  out  my 
food  and  counsel  Lord  and  Lady  Falmouth,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Crewe  and  some  friends  of  theirs  came  to  make  me  a  visit 


212 


1787 


THE  GREY  GOOSE  QUILL 

but  I  could  not  prevail  on  them  to  dine  with  me  so  I  have 
filld  the  hungry  with  good  things  and  the  rich  are  gone  empty 
away  ;  however  the  rich  have  consumed  my  time. 

The  children — having  been  clearly  informed  that 
school  truants  would  be  excluded  from  these  feasts — 
attended  their  lessons  most  regularly  ;  many  learned 
to  read  in  nine  months,  and  though  “  I  confess  they 
exalted  their  voices  when  they  read  to  me  to  a  degree 
that  was  rather  too  much  for  my  nerves,  the  thanks 
they  gave  me  for  their  entertainment  was  as  polite 
almost  as  you  could  have  expected  from  our  great 
schools.”  Thanks  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  pyes  and 
plumb  pudding  the  Newbury  Sunday  schools  at  any 
rate  were  a  gratifying  success,  and  the  heart  of  good 
Mr.  Raikes  rejoiced. 

The  Primate,  who  had  been  ill  this  summer  at  Bath 
and  Hot  Wells,  paid  a  brief  visit  to  Sandleford  at  the 
end  of  the  month,  but  was  unable  to  attend  the 
christening  of  her  “  grandson,”  to  whom  he  was 
godfather. 

Mrs.  Vesey’s  condition  since  the  death  of  her 
husband  had,  as  we  have  seen,  steadily  declined.  She 
was  still  perpetually  in  tears,  could  hardly  be  persuaded 
to  take  the  air,  would  not  go  to  Tunbridge  as  ordered, 
and  “  fretts  so  much  and  is  so  full  of  apprehensions, 
her  life  is  very  unhappy.”  Her  memory  had  gone, 
and  her  condition  was  a  source  of  despair  to  Mrs. 
Hancock  and  distress  to  all  her  many  friends. 

August  visitors  at  Sandleford  included  Dr.  Warton 
and  his  wife,  Dr.  Beattie  and  his  son,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Leonard  Smelt  ;  but  besides  these  invited  guests  there 
were  so  many  casual  callers,  even  in  the  mornings,  that 
“  though  some  of  them  obligingly  brought  me  fine 
feathers  they  hindered  the  further  flight  of  my  grey 
goose  quill  ” — a  disservice  for  which  her  biographer 
is  not  inclined  to  blame  them  too  severely. 

There  are  many  letters  from  Hannah  More  in  this 
collection,  and  room  may  be  found  for  part  of  one  here  : 


HANNAH  MORE 
From  a  drawing  by  Josiah  Slater 


1787 


MISS  HANNAH  MORE 


213 


Bristol,  24  August. 

My  dear  Madam, — I  am  not  quite  so  unworthy  of  your 
last  delightful  letter  as  I  appear  to  be  ;  for  Mrs.  Boscawen 
carried  it  with  her  to  Badmington  ;  and  when  it  did  arrive 
at  Bristol  I  was  not  here  to  receive,  and  be  thankful  for  it, 
and  answer  it. 

I  have  been  waiting  impatiently  for  a  letter  from  Mrs. 
Garrick  to  make  an  assignation  for  our  Sandleford  rencontre. 
I  have  not  heard  from  her  for  a  long  time.  ...  If  you  do  not 
forbid  me,  I  look  forward  to  the  middle  of  Septbr  (about  the 
15th)  as  the  pleasant  period  when  I  shall  hope  for  the  great 
honour  and  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you  for  a  week,  and  of 
enjoying  that  charming  conversation  which  has  made  up  some 
of  the  whitest  and  brightest  hours  of  my  life. 

I  rejoyce  with  exceeding  great  joy  in  the  addition  Mrs. 
M.  Montagu  has  made  to  your  blessings  ;  her  own  safe  recovery 
is  I  am  sure  not  the  least  of  them.  She  has  a  most  amiable 
and  rightly  turned  mind,  and  has  escaped  the  corruptions  of 
the  world  more  compleatly  than  most  young  ladies  of  her 
fortune  and  accomplishments  ever  did.  Mr.  Walpole  writes 
me  that  there  is  a  new  and  rich  mine  lately  dug  up,  of  Letters 
of  Made  de  Sevigne,  but  that  his  faith  in  their  authenticity 
is  not  quite  firm.  Indeed  in  this  age  of  literary  imposture, 
even  believers  grow  sceptical. 

I  know  you  will  think  it  a  very  pretty  circumstance  when 
I  tell  you  that  I  have  Dr.  Warton,  not  Thomas  of  Oxenford, 
but  Joseph  of  Winton  in  my  neighbourhood  ;  he  has  lost 
none  of  that  delightful  enthusiasm  which  makes  him  so 
singularly  pleasant.  He  has  been  gallanting  so  much  with 
the  Wood  Nymphs  of  this  picturesque  country,  of  whom  he 
is  passionately  enamoured  that  he  has  laid  himself  up  with  the 
gout  ;  &  is  consuming  the  remnant  of  his  too  short  holidays 
on  his  couch.  He  talks  of  Mrs.  Montagu  and  Sandleford 
with  the  old  raptures. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  talking  of  you  yesterday  with  Your 
friend  the  Duchess  Dowr  of  Beaufort,  with  whom  I  dined, 
and  who  I  think  grows  younger  every  time  I  see  her  ;  she 
charged  me  with  her  best  compliments  ;  Mrs.  Boscawen  has 
spread  the  fame  of  Sandleford  in  its  present  perfection  of  beauty 
far  and  near.  .  .  .  Y ours  ever,  my  dearest  Madam, 

H.  More. 

In  the  autumn,  Montagu  went  north  to  attend  to 


2  14 


ROBERT  MACKRETH 


1787 


his  aunt’s  colliery  affairs,  spending  some  time  to 
recruit  his  health  at  Harrogate  before  returning  to 
London,  to  which  his  aunt  had  now  come  back  from 
Berkshire. 

I  find  everybody  doing  justice  to  Mr.  Pitt’s  conduct,  and 
proud  of  the  figure  Great  Britain  makes  in  Europe.  Miss 
Cravens  assured  me  that  when  they  were  in  Paris  neither  the 
King  nor  Oueen  nor  le  Comte  d’ Artois  durst  come  to  Paris, 
they  are  so  odious  to  the  people.  .  .  .  We  abuse  Ministers, 
they  address  their  menaces  to  the  Sovereign  himself. 

Montagu  met  William  Wilberforce  at  Harrogate, 
who  offered  him  a  place  in  his  carriage  to  town,  and 
thus  began  a  lasting  and  influential  friendship. 

Mr.  Macrath  call’d  here  one  morning,  having  company 
at  home  he  could  not  stay  dinner.  We  determined  to  take 
advantage  of  the  first  fine  day  to  return  the  visit,  Mrs.  Matthew 
Montagu  and  I  went  in  my  Whiskey,  and  had  a  most  delightful 
jaunt.  Mr.  Macrath  was  not  at  home,  but  we  took  a  view 
of  the  place,  which  had  been  improved  by  Mr.  Browns  best 
eleve  Mr.  Richmond.  There  is  a  very  noble  piece  of  water 
and  a  great  deal  of  wood  ;  with  two  such  features  no  place 
can  be  ugly.  The  house  is  very  comfortable,  and  Mr.  Macrath, 
once  a  waiter  at  Arthurs,  is  now  a  senator  in  the  British 
Parliament,  and  an  opulent  Esquire.  He  is  a  pleasant  agreable 
man,  and  tho’  his  acquisitions  have  been  as  considerable,  and 
as  sudden  as  a  nabobs,  he  has  not  the  luxury  nor  the  languor 
which  generally  characterises  the  Asiatick  plunderers.  It  is 
said  Macrath  has  acquired  a  fortune  of  10,000^  a  year  ;  he 
got  40,000^  with  his  wife.  I  suppose  his  riches  have  not 
arisen  from  the  purest  sources,  but  he  lives  handsomely,  and 
is  charitable  and  generous.  I  presume  he  must  have  joined 
with  the  Jews  in  lending  money  to  gamblers.  .  .  . 

Mrs.  Montagu  was  much  perturbed  over  Mrs. 
Vesey’s  mental  condition.  The  excessive  grief  of 
widows  over  inconstant  spouses  is  not  an  uncommon 
phenomenon,  but  while  the  Sylph’s  tears  were  in¬ 
cessant,  her  brain  continuity  had  broken  down,  and 
her  memory  failed  her  more  and  more  : 


1787 


LADY  CLERMONT 


21 5 


Her  solitary  hours  are  passd  chiefly  in  weeping  ;  in  the 
Society  of  her  Friends  she  finds  some  degree  of  pleasure  ; 
but  when  she  attempts  to  enter  into  conversation,  her  memory 
is  so  gone  that  she  is  soon  obliged  to  stop.  .  .  .  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Cole,  Lady  Clermont,  Mr.  Walpole,  and  many  of  her  Friends 
often  call  on  her.  I  dined  with  her  yesterday,  and  have 
passd  two  whole  evenings  with  her,  and  shall  spend  much 
of  my  time  with  her,  till  the  Town  is  so  full  that  there  will 
not  be  any  danger  of  her  being  alone. 

.  .  .  Lady  Claremont  is  going  to  Paris  for  a  few  weeks, 
her  Royal  Friend  dares  not  enter  the  Gates  of  that  City.  The 
King  and  Queen  of  France,  and  Comte  d’ Artois,  are  so  hated 
by  the  Mob  they  cannot  venture  themselves  in  their  belle 
Ville  de  Paris.  Mr.  de  Calonne  is  much  caressd  here,  but 
I  wish  he  had  retired  to  some  other  Country,  for  he  is  giving 
great  attention  to  our  Manufactures,  and  will  steal  their  secrets 
if  he  can. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cole  were  probably  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough’s  chaplain  and  his  wife.  Lady  Cler¬ 
mont  was  the  popular  al  fresco  entertainer  who  invited 
“  three  hundred  dear  friends  ”  to  take  tea  and  walk  in 
St.  James’s  Park.  She  was  a  great  friend  of  Marie 
Antoinette,  and  it  was  she  who  at  a  card  party  at 
Gunnersbury  pushed  her  snuff-box  across  the  Princess 
Amelia  to  the  Duke  of  Portland,  who  was  “  dying  for  a 
pinch.”  “  Pray,  Madam,”  cried  her  Royal  Highness, 
“  where  did  you  learn  that  breeding  ?  Did  the  Queen 
of  France  teach  it  to  you  ?  ” 

Charles  de  Calonne  was  the  French  Controller- 
General  of  Finance,  who  was  soon,  as  the  outcome  of 
his  years  in  office,  to  address  to  its  king  these  preg¬ 
nant  sentences,  which  I  quote  from  Louis  Madelin’s 
French  Revolution  :  ‘  France  is  a  kingdom  composed  of 
separate  states  and  counties  with  mixed  administra¬ 
tions,  the  provinces  of  which  know  nothing  of  each 
other  .  .  .  where  the  richest  class  is  most  lightly 
taxed,  where  privilege  has  upset  all  equilibrium,  where 
it  is  impossible  to  have  any  constant  rule  or  common 
will  :  necessarily  it  is  a  most  imperfect  kingdom, 


2  1 6 


EVENTS  IN  PARIS 


1787 


very  full  of  abuses,  and  in  its  present  condition 

impossible  to  govern .” 

The  Comte  de  Calonne  had  not  visited  England 
for  nothing. 

The  French  war  cloud,  which  had  again  been 
threatening  invasion  this  year,  was  now  beginning  to 
lower  black  over  Paris  itself. 

November  30 th. 

Lady  Clermont  had  kiss’d  hands  at  Court,  intending  a 
week  ago  to  set  out  for  Paris  in  obedience  to  an  invitation  she 
had  received  from  the  Oueen  of  France,  through  Madame  de 
Polignac,  but  from  the  same  channel  she  has  since  had  intima¬ 
tion  that  from  discontents  and  confusions  now  subsisting  her 
situation  would  be  very  disagreable,  and  that  she  had  better 
not  come.  Last  Monday  sennight  Louis  seize  went  at  9  in 
the  morning  to  the  palais  and  made  the  following  propositions 
to  le  Parlement  ;  un  don  gratuit  of  120  millions  of  livres, 
a  restoration  of  the  original  edict  of  Nantes  and  universal 
toleration,  and  by  lettres  patentes  to  create  the  Archbishop 
of  Toulouse  premier  Ministre,  as  Cardinal  Fleury  was.  Le 
Parlement  desired  to  debate  on  these  propositions  and  did 
debate  them  till  1 1  at  night,  when  his  Majesty,  weary  and 
angry  and  seeing  no  probability  of  getting  them  registerd, 
returnd  to  Versailles.  He  has  since  sent  le  Due  dOrleans 
and  le  Due  de  Bourbon  into  exile.  These  disturbances  may 
arise  to  a  rebellion,  or  subside  in  a  vaudeville  on  le  pont,  where 
sometimes  the  publick  wrath  has  evaporated  in  rhymes. 

But  it  was  not  to  be  exactly  a  vaudeville  this  time ! 


To  Matthew  Montagu ,  M.P. 

the  20 th. 

I  met  Mr.  Wraxall  and  Major  Reynel  at  Sr  Lucas  Pepys 
Sunday  night  ;  you  may  imagine  the  Map  of  Nations  was 
unfur  Id.  Mr.  Wraxall,  who  left  Paris  but  a  few  days  ago, 
gives  such  an  account  of  the  situation  of  affairs,  and  the  temper 
of  the  people,  as  makes  one  imagine  there  will  be  some  great 
revolution  in  France.  The  french  King,  I  must  not  call 
him  his  most  Christian  Majesty,  is  continually  drunk,  in  this 
state  his  Queen,  and  le  Comte  d’ Artois,  and  other  favorites 
of  her  Majesty,  obtaind  orders  for  immense  sums  which  Mr. 


1787 


WRAXALL’S  MEMOIRS 


217 


de  Calonne  was  obliged  to  pay  to  them,  hence  proceeded  the 
enormous  deficiency,  and  from  the  sources  of  this  disorder  in 
the  Finances,  and  the  means  proposed  to  supply  that  deficiency, 
arose  the  publick  discontent,  and  indignation.  Monsieur, 
who  has  opposed  the  new  scheme  of  taxation,  and  has  not 
partaken  of  the  plunder  which  has  reduced  the  finances,  is 
the  Idol  of  the  Publick,  and  it  is  often  said  in  conversation,  that 
the  only  remedy  to  their  misfortunes  would  be  to  make  Monsieur 
Regent  on  account  of  the  Kings  imbecillity,  and  at  his  Majestys 
demise,  to  make  him  his  successor,  on  account  of  the  illegitimacy 
of  the  Dauphin  etc.  Some  reports  concerning  the  particular 
condition  of  his  Majestys  Person,  and  the  profligacy  of  the 
Queen,  make  the  affair  of  the  Childrens  legitimacy  very 
doubtfull,  and  therefore  a  Revolution  not  improbable.  Report 
assigns  to  each  Royal  Infant  a  different  Father,  but  if  her 
Majesty  is  as  bad  as  is  reported,  they  may  all  keep  to  their 
usual  title  les  enfans  de  France. 


This  account  from  Wraxall  of  the  state  of  things 
in  Paris  in  the  autumn  of  1787  is  interesting  chiefly 
as  illustrating — if  indeed  any  fresh  illustration  were 
necessary — the  extent  to  which  political  bias  manipu¬ 
lates  personal  character  and  distorts  the  actualities. 
Wraxall  in  the  Posthumous  Memoirs  merely  says  :  “  I 
passed  part  of  the  autumn  in  Paris,  where  the  utmost 
effervescence  not  unmixed  with  gloomy  apprehensions 
of  futurity  began  already  to  diffuse  their  influence 
over  society.”  But  when  he  comes  to  unfurl  the 
map  of  nations  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  the  lesson  in 
political  geography  consists  largely  in  aspersions 
on  the  King,  Queen,  and  Royal  family,  entirely 
unsupported  by  evidence  and  obviously  emanating 
from  purely  partisan  sources. 

Nowhere,  surely,  in  exploring  the  records  of  a 
great  national  movement,  has  the  student  to  thread 
his  way  so  warily  and  suspiciously  as  through  those  of 
this  next  decade  in  France.  Of  none,  perhaps,  is  the 
available  material  more  abundant ;  in  none  has  it  been 
utilised  to  more  divergent  conclusions. 


2 1 8  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR  1787 


To  her  Sister 

Dec.  the  31. 

You  do  me  unmerited  honour  in  suspecting  me  of  the 
dialogue  you  mention  between  Johnson  and  Ld  Chesterfield. 
They  are  well  contrasted  ;  the  one  endeavoured  by  pleasing 
manners  to  grace  Vice,  the  other  by  his  brutal  insolent  manners 
disgraced  Virtue,  and  by  his  low  superstition  and  bigotry  even 
renderd  piety  less  respected.  It  would  puzzle  one  to  determine 
whether  he  who  placed  the  Syrens  in  the  Temple  of  Vice, 
or  he  who  put  the  Gorgons  head  at  the  entrance  of  the  Temple 
of  Virtue  did  most  mischief.  I  wish  much  to  see  the  Dialogue, 
pray  let  me  know  where  it  is  to  be  got  ;  as  I  thought  a  weak 
hand  might  destroy  the  thin  spurious  plausibilities  of  Lord 
Chesterfields  system  I  once  intended  to  attack  it,  but  I  have 
been  too  idle  and  indolent  to  undertake  any  work.  Mr. 
Jenyns  is  much  regretted  by  all  who  knew  him,  or  read  his 
Works,  Poor  Mrs.  Jenyns  was  at  first  quite  stunned  with  her 
loss  ;  she  is  now  resignd,  and  patient,  happy  she  can  never  be 
in  this  World.  She  must  have  some  comfort  in  reflecting  that 
in  his  latter  days  he  left  the  Muses  for  the  Evangelists.  .  .  . 

The  Two  Dialogues,  containing  a  comparative  view 
of  the  Lives,  Characters  and  Writings  of  the  late  Earl  of 
Chesterfield  and  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  published  this 
year,  were  by  S.  Hayley.  The  young  couple  were 
recruiting  at  Southampton  at  Christmas  time,  and  in 
lieu  of  their  presence  contributed  crabs  and  prawns 
to  the  feast  at  Montagu  House,  where  “  the  Bishop 
of  Llandaffe,  Lord  and  Lady  Mulgrave,  Mr.  Smelt, 
Mr.  Cholmly,  Mr.  Langton  and  Lady  Rothes,  Mr. 
Jernegan,  Mr.  Ord  and  a  Doctor  Blagden,  a  most 
agreeable  and  universally  well-informed  man  whom 
I  met  at  Lord  Mulgrave’s,”  were  guests  ;  whilst  for 
New  Year’s  Day,  Mrs.  David  Garrick,  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  Hannah  More,  and  Horace  Walpole  were 
to  help  her  to  inaugurate  1788. 

An  earlier  December  letter  records  : 

Mr.  Soame  Jenyns  died  this  morning.  The  world  has 
lost  an  ingenious  author  and  his  friends  and  society  a  most 


i787  JERNINGHAM  AND  JENYNS  219 

amiable  man.  I  pity  his  widow  greatly  ;  they  were  always 
together  and  always  good  humoured  and  affectionate.  This 
world  will  be  a  Desart  to  her  ;  her  consolation  will  be  she  will 
not  have  long  probably  to  remain  in  it,  as  she  is  far  advanced 
in  years.  This  couple  one  wishd  like  Baucis  and  Philemon 
to  have  changed  at  the  same  moment. 

Lord  Mulgrave  above  mentioned  was  the  gallant 
sailor  who  had  commanded  the  Racehorse  in  the  polar 
expedition  in  which  Nelson  served  as  a  midshipman  ; 
Bennet  Langton  was  Dr.  Johnson’s  amiable  but 
sometimes  “  objurgated  ”  friend  ;  the  Countess  of 
Rothes  (Jane  Elizabeth  Leslie)  was  the  wife  of  Sir 
Lucas  Pepys,  brother  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  friend 
William  Weller  Pepys  ;  “  Jernegan  ”  was  the  older 
spelling  of  Jerningham  ;  and  Edward  Jerningham 
was  Lord  Chesterfield’s  poetical  correspondent,  and 
a  culprit  of  many  rhymes,  patron  of  many  needy 
clients,  philanderer  of  many  “  transitory  loves,”  whom 
Fanny  Burney  describes  as  “  a  mighty  delicate  gentle¬ 
man,  looks  to  be  painted,  and  is  all  daintification  in 
manner,  speech  and  dress,”  a  “  pink  and  white  poet  ” 
who  sang  to  his  own  accompaniment  on  the  harp,  and 
discoursed  on  the  mild  tenour  of  Christianity.  Ord 
was  the  Suffolk  antiquary  who  contributed  largely  to 
the  British  Museum  ;  Dr.  (afterwards  Sir  Charles) 
Blagden,  the  Edinburgh  physician  from  whom  there 
are  many  later  letters  of  interest.  Soame  Jenyns  is 
perhaps  chiefly  remembered  by  his  speculations  on 
what  Boswell  called  “  the  excruciating  question,  the 
origin  of  Evil,”  for  which  he  was  severely  castigated 
by  Dr.  Johnson.  On  the  death  of  the  latter,  Jenyns 
took  his  revenge  in  a  widely  circulated  epitaph  : 

Here  lies  poor  Johnson.  Reader  have  a  care 
Tread  lightly  lest  you  rouse  a  sleeping  bear  : 

Religious,  moral,  generous  and  humane 
He  was — but  self-sufficient,  rude  and  vain, 

Ill  bred  and  overbearing  in  dispute, 

A  scholar  and  a  Christian — yet  a  brute. 


220 


BOSWELL’S  EPITAPH 


1787 


To  which  the  zealous  Boswell  had  replied  in  an 
“  Epitaph  for  a  creature  not  quite  dead  yet  ”  : 

Here  lies  a  little  ugly  nauseous  elf 
Who  judging  only  from  its  wretched  self 
Feebly  attempted,  petulant  and  vain 
The  Origin  of  Evil  to  explain. 

Then  stunk  and  fretted  in  expiring  snuff 
And  blink’d  at  Johnson  with  its  last  poor  puff. 

Twentieth-century  literature  would  be  vastly  en¬ 
livened  by  some  of  these  paulo-post-mortem  amenities. 

Our  Mrs.  Carter,  who  had,  on  occasion,  a  touch  of 
mordant  wit,  wrote  : 

I  hear  at  the  fashionable  clubs  it  is  gold  to  silver,  since  the 
appearance  of  Mr.  Soame  Jenyn’s  book,  that  the  Christian 
Religion  is  true.  These,  alas,  are  not  the  people  to  whom  its 
being  true  will  convey  any  advantage. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  once  written  very  sagely  : 

It  is  the  misfortune  of  women  who  are  reputed  to  be  learned 
to  have  the  fools  of  both  sexes,  and  the  witlings  of  both  sexes 
for  their  enemies,  and  they  must  be  upon  their  guard  against 
ridicule,  which  envy  is  ever  endeavouring  to  throw  upon  them, 
and  from  this  circumstance  I  have  been  cautious  of  the  persons 
whom  I  admitted  into  my  familiarity  ;  ridicule  is  to  be  caught 
as  some  distempers  are,  either  by  contact  or  by  the  breath. 
One  catches  it  by  keeping  company  with  a  fool,  or  by  the 
indiscreet  conversation  and  reports  of  an  imprudent  friend. 


1788 

THE  KING’S  ILLNESS - A  TALK  WITH  THE  QUEEN - 

Hastings’  trial,  and  Westminster  elections 


The  Matthew  Montagus  at  Shooter’s  Hill.  Primate  visits  Sandleford. 
The  King’s  illness.  Warren  Hastings’  trial.  A  visit  to  Windsor. 
Westminster  election.  Letter  from  William  Wilberforce.  Mrs. 
Montagu  meets  the  Queen.  The  King’s  condition  improved.  Betty 
Tull.  Mr.  Jerningham. 


The  letters  of  this  year  are  again  chiefly  of  domestic 
interest.  Matthew  had  purchased  a  villa  at  Shooter’s 
Hill,  where  his  wife  was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  a 
third  olive  branch,  and  the  aunt  at  Sandleford  was  in 
charge  of  the  two  elder  boys,  to  her  great  delight. 
The  Primate  visited  her  there,  but  his  declining 
health  filled  her  with  anxieties,  which  were  further 
augmented  by  her  loyal  concern  upon  the  disorder 
of  the  King  in  the  autumn. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  loyalty  was  ever  unimpeachable, 
and  some  of  the  extracts  of  this  period  forcibly  recall 
passages  in  Fanny  Burney’s  diaries  of  her  years  at 
Court : 

I  am  sure  I  cannot  say  anything  which  will  give  you  so 
much  pleasure  as  a  good  account  of  his  Majestys  daily  progress 
towards  a  recovery  ;  which  from  the  best  authority  I  am 
enabled  to  do.  The  news  papers  will  have  informed  you  how 
boldly  faction  stepp’d  forward,  and  how  disgracefully  they  have 
been  obliged  to  retreat.  The  sad  circumstance  of  our  excellent 
Sovereigns  disorder,  in  our  hour  of  the  greatest  publick  pros¬ 
perity,  has  really  so  oppressed  my  mind  that  I  little  know  or 

221 


222 


THE  LONG  WALK 


1788 


care  what  is  going  forward  in  the  World.  I  have  visited  only 
my  most  intimate  Friends,  and  our  conversation  has  been  on  the 
calamity  of  our  Country,  and  the  afflictions  of  their  Majesties, 
and  the  Princesses.  I  have  heard  as  you  have  done,  such 
accounts  of  the  great  excellence  of  our  Sovereigns  heart,  laid 
open  in  his  late  condition,  as  endears  him  as  a  Man,  whose 
misfortunes  would  ill  support,  if  separated  from  the  publick 
interest. 

The  trial  of  Warren  Hastings  and  the  King’s 
illness  were  the  outstanding  public  events  in  London 
in  1788.  Mrs.  Montagu,  as  we  have  seen,  had 
already  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  impeached 
governor,  and  for  once  she  and  Edmund  Burke  held 
different  briefs: 

Westminster  Hall  is  to  be  fitted  up  for  the  tryal  of  Mr. 
Hastings  ;  Mr.  Burke  is  much  enraged  that  Mr.  Francis  was 
rejected  in  that  affair,  but  his  rancour  and  malice  to  Mr. 
Hastings  was  too  well  known  to  admitt  of  any  testimony  of  his. 

Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  Philip)  Francis  was  the  best 
reputed  “  Junius.”  He  had  quarrelled  with  and 
fought  Hastings  and  brought  a  great  fortune  back 
from  India.  Mrs.  Montagu  went  to  Sandleford  in 
May,  and  paid  visits  to  Lady  Ailesbury  at  Park  Place 
and  to  Windsor,  the  latter  evoking  a  characteristic 
comment: 

I  was  more  fortunate  in  respect  to  Weather  while  I  was  at 
Salt  Hill  ;  but  an  Inn  is  not  a  place  for  philosophical  reveries, 
so  I  visited  Windsor  Castle,  and  went  from  thence  to  see 
Cumberland  Lodge,  where  I  had  not  been  of  many  years.  I 
was  not  permitted  to  enter,  but  I  did  not  repent  of  my  scheme, 
as  it  carried  me  through  Oueen  Elizabeths  Walk,  now  call’d 
the  long  walk  ;  indeed  the  Walk  of  Wisdom  is  a  long,  and  a 
strait  walk  ;  and  the  modern  Statesmen,  and  modern  Browns, 
love  the  waving  line  ;  I  adhere  to  old  Bess  and  the  strait  line, 
where  every  step  leads  to  its  proper  end.  .  .  . 

I  took  the  Orphan  of  the  Castle  in  my  post  chaise,  and  she 
entertaind  and  interested  me  very  much.  The  fable  is 
admirable,  the  characters  have  not  those  distinguishing  features 


ELECTIONEERING 


1788 


223 


which  you  find  in  Miss  Burney,  Fielding,  and  Richardson’s 
works. 


A  letter  from  Matthew  to  his  aunt,  written  from 
Shooter’s  Hill  on  July  24,  gives  an  idea  of  eighteenth- 
century  electioneering,  the  poll  lasting  several  days  : 

On  Monday  I  went  to  town  to  canvass  my  tradesmen  for 
Lord  Hood  ;  The  opposite  party  are  busy  and  determin’d  in 
this  business  in  proportion  to  their  want  of  employment  in 
other  matters.  It  is  something  more  to  reduce  a  great  city 
than  a  simple  woman  ;  but  cities  are  frail  and  fickle  as  well  as 
the  fair.  Lord  John  Townshend  is  perhaps  the  best  canvasser 
in  England.  I  remember  to  have  seen  him  in  this  occupation 
at  Cambridge,  where  the  insinuating  address  of  his  manners 
made  a  grave  university  overlook  the  blemishes  of  his  character 
and  chuse  an  espiegle  debauche  to  represent  a  synod  of  Sages. 
If  old  men  in  cauliflower  wigs  are  led  astray,  why  should  we 
quarrel  with  the  Persephone  young  ladies  for  listening  to  the 
same  eloquence.  But  to  speak  seriously  it  does  not  speak 
much  for  the  morals  of  the  times,  that  such  a  man  should  be  a 
formidable  opponent  to  the  brave  defender  of  this  country,  and 
especially  at  a  time  so  free  from  public  discontent.  But  I  hope 
the  event  of  the  matter  will  prove  more  auspicious  to  decency  ; 
they  have  made  a  bold  push  at  the  onset  and  out  of  9000  voters 
it  is  no  wonder  they  should  gain  a  majority  on  the  first  day  or 
two,  while  sober  quiet  people  are  frightened  away  by  the 
boisterous  behaviour  of  bravoes. 


From  her  Sister 

I  shall  be  very  sorry  if  Ld  Hood  should  be  vanquish’d  by  an 
Antagonist  whose  character  ought  to  disqualify  him  for  opposing 
so  worthy  a  man.  I  hope  Lady  John  does  not  follow  her 
Gracious  Cousins  example  and  canvass  for  votes,  for  tho’  Lady 
Hoods  antient  graces  coud  not  contend  with  Lady  Johns 
powers,  yet  from  the  freedoms  of  speech  usual  on  such  occasions, 
she  might  be  frequently  reminded  of  events  she  wou’d  certainly 
wish  to  forget  ;  I  am  sorry  for  the  expence  which  must  accrue 
to  Lord  Hood,  and  which  I  think  he  coud  not  bear  if  he  had 
not  a  friend  in  Mr.  Barwell  whose  purse  is  ever  open  to  his 
friends  ;  but  it  is  a  melancholly  circumstance  to  his  Son  who 
has  a  family,  and  a  very  amiable  worthy  Wife. 


224  WESTMINSTER  ELECTIONS  1788 

Lord  John  Townshend  had  a  majority  of  over  800, 
a  figure  beyond  hope  of  extinction  by  a  scrutiny. 
His  success  was  celebrated  by  a  disgraceful  riot. 


To  Matthew  Montagu 

At  Ld  Porchester  on  Sunday  I  met  Mr.  Damer  and  one  of 
the  Wyndhams,  and  I  see  the  party  triumphs  much  on  what  has 
happend  at  the  Westminster  Election.  How  happend  it  that 
Mr.  Pitt  did  not  judge  better  of  his  Interest  there  ?  I  hear  the 
Influenza  begins  again  to  afflict  the  City  of  London  ;  pray  do 
not  venture  to  Town  if  it  is  much  infected,  for  tho  few  have 
dyed  of  it  those  years  it  has  been  in  England,  yet  it  is  a  tiresome 
disorder,  and  leaves  disagreeable  relicks. 

Alexander  Hood  was  defeated  for  Westminster  on 
being  made  Admiralty  Lord.  Lady  John  Townshend 
was  Georgiana,  daughter  of  William  Poyntz  of  Midg- 
ham,  Georgiana,  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  being  the 
daughter  of  Margaret,  Stephen  Poyntz’s  daughter. 
All  the  Poyntz  girls  were  lovely,  and  Susannah,  Lady 
Hood  (who  was  married  in  1749)  would  have  been 
heavily  handicapped  as  a  canvasser.  But  Lord  Hood 
regained  his  seat  two  years  later  ;  and  meanwhile 
Lady  Hood  had  the  satisfaction  of  remembering  that 
in  the  envenomed  Westminster  election  four  years 
previously,  though  the  irresistible  Georgiana  had 
helped  to  bring  Fox  in  second  on  the  poll,  Lord  Hood 
had  still  headed  it.  That  famous  election  had  lasted 
for  forty  days,  during  which  Covent  Garden  and  the 
whole  neighbourhood  of  the  hustings  was  a  pande¬ 
monium,  trade  was  suspended,  shops  closed,  doors 
and  windows  barricaded,  bands  and  banners  paraded 
the  streets,  and  mob  violence  and  drunken  revelry 
were  the  order  of  the  day  and  night.  In  these  sober 
days  of  the  ballot,  a  true  picture  of  the  Westminster 
election  of  1784,  if  reproduced  on  the  film,  would 
probably  be  hailed  by  the  generality  of  citizens  as  a 
wildly  exaggerated  and  improbable  caricature. 


1788 


WILBERFORCE  IN  PARIS 


225 


From  William  Wilberjorce 

Paris,  Aug.  16th. 

I  fancy  my  Character  as  a  Vagabond  is  so  well  established, 
that  you  will  not  be  surprised  at  seeing  this  letter  dated  Paris. 
Finding  myself  disengaged  for  the  Months  of  August  and 
September,  I  thought  I  could  not  do  better  than  visit  some 
parts  of  this  Kingdom  which  I  had  not  yet  seen.  I  embarked 
myself  and  my  Horses  at  Brighton  and  landed  at  Dieppe.  I 
travelled  through  Normandy  on  Horseback,  came  here  on  the 
6th,  shall  stay  about  a  fortnight  longer,  and  return  to  England 
by  a  different  road. 

What  shall  I  say  to  You  of  France  ?  I  hardly  dare  on  so 
slight  a  view  to  give  any  opinion  with  respect  to  publick  affairs. 
You  must  at  least  consider  it  as  nothing  more  than  the  result 
of  the  first  Coup  d’Oeil.  In  Normandy  all  was  anxiety  and 
distress,  but  all  was  quiet.  All  the  Members  of  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  de  Rouen  were  banished  to  their  Country  Houses,  no 
Person  being  allowed  to  sleep  out  of  his  own.  They  are  30 
in  number.  The  opposition  to  Government  is  I  believe  very 
universal.  An  Edict  appeared  a  few  days  ago  suspending  La 
Cour  Pleniare,  and  ordering  the  States  General  to  be  assembled 
on  the  1st  May  1789.  This  gives  great  satisfaction,  but  more 
is  still  wanted.  The  return  of  the  Parliament  it  is  hoped  will 
soon  follow.  Unless  it  does,  there  must  still  elapse  nine 
Months,  with  a  total  suspension  of  all  administration  of  Justice, 
for  at  present  there  is  none  in  Paris.  The  general  opinion  I 
believe  is,  that  the  Court  will  give  up  the  right  of  imposing  any 
Tax  without  the  consent  of  the  Nation,  another  point  which 
the  opposition  hope  to  carry,  is  the  appropriation  of  the 
Revenue,  a  third  is  the  Abolition  of  Lettres  de  Cachet.  Many 
Persons  are  also  of  opinion  that  the  States  General  once  assembled 
will  not  be  soon  dismissed.  I  find  Neckar  is  very  popular, 
Calonne  is  the  reverse.  I  am  taking  some  pains  to  find  out 
the  views  of  Persons  of  consequence  in  this  Country  about  the 
Slave  Trade.  Neckar  in  the  Publication  in  1785  started  an 
opinion  in  favour  of  the  abolition  of  it.  This  has  been  adopted 
by  many,  and  I  believe  the  business  would  by  this  time  have 
engaged  the  general  attention  to  a  high  degree,  if  that  attention 
had  not  been  more  deeply  engaged  on  subjects  of  still  greater 
consequence.  Those  subjects,  as  you  will  readily  believe, 
occupy  the  thoughts  and  conversation  of  every  Person  to  such 

VOL.  II  Q 


226  MRS.  MONTAGU  AND  THE  QUEEN  1788 

a  degree,  that  nothing  else  can  be  attended  to.  They  occupy 
my  thoughts  a  good  deal.  .  .  . 


To  Mrs.  Carter  (?) 

I  made  them  [the  Montagus  at  Shooter’s  Hill]  a  morning 
visit  last  week,  but  the  only  adventure  worth  describing  to  you 
happen’d  at  Kew.  I  went  down  to  take  leave  of  Mr.  Smelt 
and  Mrs.  Cholmly,  and  just  after  ringing  their  Gate  bell,  My 
Man  Wm  said  he  saw,  the  Queens  carriage  at  a  little  distance, 
and  he  supposed  she  was  at  Mr.  Smelts  so  I  ordered  my  chaise 
to  turn  back,  but  Mr.  Smelts  footman  ran  and  stoppd  it,  saying 
her  Majesty  on  hearing  the  Bell  had  given  orders  that  if  it  was 
Mrs.  Montagu  she  must  be  told  the  Queen  insisted  on  her 
coming  in,  then  came  another  Servant  repeating  the  same 
gracious  command,  so  I  obeyd,  and  after  staying  a  short  time, 
which  appeard  to  me  the  shorter  from  her  Majestys  obliging 
address,  I  attempted  to  retire  ;  but  the  Queen  told  me  I  shd 
not  leave  her,  and  I  enjoyd  her  very  sensible  and  pleasing 
conversation  near  two  hours.  The  Princess  Royal  came  in 
after  having  taken  a  walk  in  Kew  Garden,  and  sat  down  on 
the  Sopha  beside  me,  the  Pss  Augusta  and  the  D:  of  Clarence 
were  also  of  the  party,  and  I  was  pleased  to  see  the  Queen 
surrounded  by  such  a  Progeny.  You  may  suppose  the  great 
events  on  the  Continent  made  the  principal  subject  of  conversa¬ 
tion,  and  the  good  sense  and  propriety  with  which  her  Majesty 
express’d  herself  charmd  me,  the  more  as  I  was  convinced,  had 
France  had  such  a  King  and  Queen  as  ours  their  Revolution 
wd  not  have  happend.  I  wishd  time  and  opportunity  wd  have 
happend  to  have  conversed  with  the  Princess  Royal  on  the  events 
of  former  ages,  for  she  is  deeply  read  in  History.  On  thursday 
I  went  to  the  Drawing  Room.  The  Queen  expressd  as  the 
weather  was  wet  and  windy  a  concern  least  I  shd  catch  cold 
but  I  always  go  in  my  chair  to  St  James’s  and  I  did  not  get  any 
harm.  I  was  glad  to  see  the  King  looking  in  perfect  health 
and  seeming  very  chearfull. 

During  this  October,  however,  the  King’s  illness 
of  1765  recurred  in  a  much  aggravated  and  alarming 
form,  and  during  November  there  were  periods  of 
acute  delirium,  necessitating  absolute  restraint. 

Dr.  Willis,  a  clergyman  and  physician  who  had 


1788 


THE  KING’S  ILLNESS 


227 


kept  an  asylum  in  Lincolnshire  for  many  years  with 
most  successful  results,  first  saw  the  King  on  December 
5th,  and  at  once  obtained  ascendancy  over  his  patient, 
of  whose  prospects  of  recovery  he  formed  the  most 
encouraging  opinion,  asserting  it  to  be  almost  certain 
within  eighteen  months  at  longest.  At  Pitt’s  wise 
suggestion,  adopting  the  proposal  of  Fox  and  the 
Opposition,  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons 
(not  the  Lords,  as  Mrs.  Montagu  supposed)  was 
formed  on  the  8th  to  examine  the  physicians,  and  Dr. 
Willis  gave  his  evidence  before  them  on  the  following 
day;  on  the  10th  the  Committee  reported  to  the 
House,  and  therewith  began  the  long  and  embittered 
struggle  over  the  Regency  and  the  Prince  of  Wales, 
already,  indeed,  initiated  by  the  arch  apostasy  of 
Thurlow. 

Tuesday  the  <)tk  [December]. 

To  the  great  joy  of  all  our  Good  Kings  good  people,  his 
Majesty  is  much  better.  Dr.  Willis  prescriptions,  and  his 
mode  of  conducting  his  royal  Patient  have  had  the  happiest 
effect.  I  will  now  give  you  a  most  authentick  account  of 
what  passd  from  the  beginning  of  his  illness  to  this  time.  The 
first  warmth  and  vehemence  appeard  (in  a  moderate  degree)  to 
one  of  the  Princesses  as  they  were  taking  the  air  together  in 
the  morning.  At  4  or  5  o’clock,  when  the  P.  of  W.  came,  his 
M.  mentiond  with  great  warmth  mixd  wth  tenderness  what¬ 
ever  he  had  disapproved  in  the  young  gentlemans  behaviour,  on 
whom  it  made  such  an  impression  he  fainted,  and  his  amiable 
mother  fell  into  hystericks  ;  with  some  difficulty  this  afflicted 
parent  was  perswaded  to  go  to  bed,  there  he  lay  restless  and 
violent.  The  medical  people  were  calld  in,  found  the  pulse 
too  high,  but  when  it  was  reduced  the  vehemence  did  not 
proportionably  abate.  Constraint  and  contradiction  irritated 
more  the  irritated  nerves,  but  it  is  believed  that  had  all  that 
happend  been  in  the  case  of  a  private  person,  insanity  had  never 
been  mention’d  in  so  sudden  a  manner.  It  seems  that  some 
person  since  the  removal  to  Kew,  had  happily  named  this  Dr. 
Willis,  who  was  educated  at  Oxford  with  an  intention  of  follow¬ 
ing  the  physical  line,  but  being  offerd  a  living  of  £500  a  year 
took  orders  ;  however  having  studied  physick  he  applied 
himself  to  the  cure  of  persons  of  disorderd  intellects,  and  has 


228 


DR.  WILLIS 


1788 


had  most  wonderful  success,  and  consequent  reputation.  When 
he  was  presented  to  his  patient  he  received  him  with  apparent 
displeasure,  told  him  he  knew  he  was  a  mad  doctor,  and  why 
did  he  quit  his  sacred  function,  and  the  more  important  cure  of 
souls  to  follow  the  other  ?  The  Doctor  answerd,  because  he 
thought  he  cd  be  more  beneficial  to  mankind  in  it.  In  short 
the  patient  and  the  Doctor  grew  very  well  together,  and  he 
took  his  medicine  at  night,  was  much  better  next  morning,  and 
desired  the  Doctor  to  tell  the  Queen  so,  afterwards  askd  the 
Doctor  if  he  might  write  a  letter  to  her,  which  was  permitted 
and  the  letter  was  perfectly  rational  ;  complaind  he  had  not 
been  allowd  to  shave  himself,  this  the  Doctor  permitted  him  to 
do,  and  when  he  had  done  it  he  gave  the  razor  into  the  Doctors 
hands.  At  times  he  is  restless  and  violent,  but  in  general  his 
conversation  is  very  sensible.  There  seems  no  doubt  but  this 
derangement,  brought  on  by  too  much  exercise  and  a  diet 
unequal  to  supporting  it,  will  in  time  go  off,  and  there  does  not 
seem  any  intention  at  present  to  appoint  a  Regency.  Ld 
North  has  done  himself  honour,  asserting  that  it  wd  be  highly 
improper  and  mischievous  to  the  publick  to  make  any  change 
in  the  Ministry.  The  physicians  are  to  be  examined  before 
the  House  of  Lords  to  day.  How  his  Majesty  does  to  day  I 
have  not  heard,  but  Lady  Harcourt  who  calld  on  me  this 
morning,  promised  to  let  me  know  if  she  got  any  account  from 
Kew,  and  I  will  insert  it  if  it  comes  before  the  post  goes  out. 
My  accounts  are  such  as  have  been  given  of  this  important 
affair  from  several  persons  who  are  perfectly  informd.  I 
forgot  to  mention  that  it  is  thought  his  M.  had  hurt  himself 
by  too  frequently  taking  laudanum  ;  alas  !  Regal  and  paternal 
cares  often  want  an  anodyne. 

Dec.  17. 

Poor  Betty  Tull  is  I  fear  going  to  take  her  flight  to  another 
World.  As  a  Virgin  she  might  claim  the  White  plumes  of  the 
Ostrich  for  her  Hearse,  but  her  triumphs  over  the  whole 
featherd  Race  may  give  her  pretensions  to  every  feather,  of 
every  bird,  from  the  Eagle  to  the  Wren,  from  the  croaking 
Raven  to  the  chattering  Parrot.  Macaws  she  has  transformed 
into  Tulips,  Kingfishers  into  blue  bells  by  her  so  potent  art. 
But  alas  !  feathers  fall,  flowers  fade,  and  artists  dye  !  I  have 
put  Betty  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Farquhar,  but  he  does  not  give 
me  much  hope  of  her  recovery. 


1788 


INVITA  MINERVA 


229 


Mr.  Jerningham  to  Mr.  Smelt 

December  the  24 
from  my  Room  Parnassus  high. 

Mr.  Jerningham  presents  his  Compliments  to  Mr.  Smelt 
and  hopes  his  sending  him  the  enclosed  Lines  will  atone  for  his 
having  listened  to  a  Conversation  and  made  use  of  a  Hint  He 
picked  up,  but  being  very  Ambitious  to  keep  his  Situation  as 
Poet  Laureat  to  Minerva  and  knowing  how  difficult  it  is  for  a 
Poet  to  get  a  good  Dinner  Invita  Minerva  (not  invited  by 
Minerva)  He  was  afraid  that  the  thought  having  something 
New  in  it  might  fall  into  Meaner  Hands  at  this  Season  when, 
only,  so  many  Poets,  like  the  Glastonbury  Thorn,  produce 
their  Flowers.  Mr.  Smelt  will  observe  that  The  Numbers 
are  more  irregularly  neglected  than  the  Author’s  generally  are 
but  besides  the  avoiding  the  Inconvenience  hinted  at  by  his 
Predecessor  Pope  in  that  Line — and  every  Blockhead  knows 
me  by  my  style  ;  there  are  many  Reasons  like  those  of  Sappho 
in  her  Epistle  to  Phaon  for  adapting  the  Measure  to  the  Subject, 
and  this  is  Sermone  Propriore  Pedestri,  should  the  Author 
have  the  Honour  hereafter  of  conversing  with  Master  Langton 
his  Symposium  shall  be  in  the  Language  and  with  the  Poetical 
Flow  of  Plato. 

Mr.  Smelt  is  requested  upon  no  account  to  hint  at  the 
existence  of  this  trifle  lest  it  should  be  invidiously  imputed  to 
Coak-sing  the  Lady. 

Edward  Jerningham  has  already  been  mentioned 
as  a  guest  at  Montagu  House,  whither  he  was  con¬ 
stantly  charged  with  messages  and  reminders  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  from  his  good-humoured  but  rather  boring 
correspondent  the  Rev.  Robert  Potter,  whom  she  had 
introduced  to  Dr.  Johnson.  The  ceremony,  according 
to  Park,  was  not  encouraging.  Mrs.  Montagu,  after 
two  futile  attempts  to  obtain  the  Doctor’s  attention  : 
“  Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Potter,  the  translator  of  Aeschylus.” 

Dr.  Johnson:  “  Well,  madam,  and  what  then  ?  ” 

The  allusion  to  Coak-sing  the  Lady  is  obscure, 
but  may  possibly  be  a  naughty  reference  to  Lady 
Mary  Coke,  whom  her  father-in-law,  the  Earl  of 
Leicester,  spoke  of  as  “  Our  Virgin  Mary.” 


r789 


WILBERFORCE  AND  MATTHEW  MONTAGU - 

THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION 


Doings  in  France.  The  fishwomen  of  Paris.  French  refugees.  Miss 
Reynolds.  Wilberforce’s  projected  visit  to  Paris  with  Montagu. 
Matthew  Montagu’s  political  ambitions.  Wraxall  on  his  aspirations. 
Wilberforce  writes  to  Mrs.  Montagu.  A  political  meeting  at 
Hampstead.  The  Paris  tour  abandoned.  M.  Necker.  Lord  Orford’s 
pictures. 


French  affairs  of  course  figure  largely  in  the  corre¬ 
spondence  of  this  and  the  following  years  ;  and  though 
there  is  nothing  of  historical  importance,  the  touch 
of  reality  given  by  the  narrative  of  contemporary 
events  may  justify  a  few  extracts  here  and  there. 


Jany.  the  iyth. 

The  D:  of  Orleans  has  been  endeavoring  to  raise  money 
amongst  our  Rich  Citizens,  but  has  not  succeeded,  which  I 
am  glad  [of]  as  he  wd  certainly  make  a  mischievous  use  of  it. 
He  is  treated  here  wth  the  contempt  he  deserves  by  all  but  the 
P:  of  W:  and  his  set.  The  French  people  of  fashion  just 
speak  to  him,  but  with  apparent  coldness. 

To  her  Sister 

I  can  not  help  being  so  uncharitable  as  to  wish  those  who 
envy  the  present  exertions  of  the  French  to  feel  a  few  of  the 
comfortable  effects  of  them.  A  little  taste  of  such  a  situation 
I  fancy  would  make  them  very  loyal.  Did  I  tell  you  that 
Mr.  Yorke  and  Lady  Elizabeth  with  some  others  went  from 
Margate  to  Paris  to  see  the  humours  of  the  times  ?  I  have 
not  heard  whether  they  are  come  back  or  how  they  liked  it, 

230 


1789 


A  MOB  OF  FISHWOMEN 


231 


but  it  was  a  more  desperate  step  than  going  to  see  a  Riote  at 
Brentford.  Had  William  1  conceived  his  wise  wish  after  the 
power  had  got  into  the  hands  of  the  fish  women  at  Paris,  one 
cou’d  not  but  have  approv’d  it,  for  certainly  under  their  direction 
all  must  succeed  happily.  I  do  not  suppose  such  a  situation 
as  the  French  are  in  can  be  paralleled  in  history.  I  pity  the 
King  excessively.  But  I  know  not  how  a  french  man  can 
shew  his  face  after  seeing  how  they  have  all  been  frighted  and 
bullied  by  a  Mob  of  fish  women.  Had  the  Government  there 
undergone  a  Revolution  in  a  rational  and  expeditious  manner 
the  example  might  have  given  rise  to  great  disturbances  here, 
but  I  trust  what  they  have  suffer’d,  and  most  probably  have 
still  to  suffer,  will  serve  as  warning  rather  than  as  a  spur  to 
imitation.  .  .  .  The  sailors  at  Shields  and  Sunderland  will  not 
allow  any  collier  ships  to  sail  till  the  shipowners  promise  a 
permanent  increase  of  their  wages.  ...  I  hope  the  fish  women, 
who  seem  the  most  dangerous  rebels,  will  not  join  them. 

Quaintly  as  it  reads  in  the  light  of  later  events, 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  idea  of  a  “  rational  and  expeditious 
Revolution  ”  was  shared  by  many  in  England  at  this 
time. 

The  story  of  the  march  of  the  fishwomen  on 
Versailles  on  this  fifth  of  October,  to  which  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  letters  constantly  recur,  and  on  which 
indeed  we  were  all  brought  up,  is  now  amongst  the 
many  exploded  myths  of  the  Revolution.  The 
harridans  who  invaded  the  palace,  when  they  were 
not  men  in  petticoats,  were  recruited  by  the  Orleanist 
conspirators  rather  from  the  purlieus  of  the  Palais 
Royal  than  the  Halles  ;  and  the  genuine  “  Ladies  of 
the  Market,”  as  Mrs.  Webster  has  pointed  out, 
expressly  dissociated  themselves  from  the  “  horrible 
calumny  ”  by  petition  to  the  Commune  next  morning. 

Frances  Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua’s  sister  and  Fanny 
Burney’s  aversion,  who  is  accused  of  painting  pictures 
which  made  everybody  laugh  and  her  brother  cry, 
was  also,  it  seems,  among  the  novelists. 


1  Her  brother. 


232 


MISS  REYNOLDS’  BOOK 


1789 


From  Miss  Frances  Reynolds 

Kew,  Feby  /\th. 

Dear  Madam — You  must  have  wonderd  what  was  become 
of  the  Book  a  certain  Person  was  in  such  a  violent  hurry  to 
publish  two  months  ago  !  and  may  have  some  curiosity  to  hear. 

Soon  after  my  last  I  sent  the  whole  impression  to  Mr. 
Nurse  in  the  Strand,  with  an  anonymous  note  requesting  him 
to  publish  it  as  soon  as  it  was  convenient  and  to  advertise  it 
in  2  of  the  Papers  a  few  days  previous  to  its  publication.  The 
advertisement  which  I  enclosed  I  depended  would  ensure  the 
work  a  most  cordial  reception  from  the  Bookseller,  but  to  my 
great  surprise  after  waiting  near  a  fortnight  in  expectation  of 
seeing  it  advertised,  to  a  second  note  in  which  I  desired  he 
would  return  me  a  written  answer,  he  sent  me  a  verbal  one, 
in  these  words  “  That  he  did  not  understand  anything  of  the 
matter,  he  supposed  the  gentleman  meant  his  Brother,  but  he 
was  dead  ”  ;  this  my  servant  said  he  repeated  two  or  three 
times,  and  nothing  more,  but  this  was  sufficient  to  let  me  see 
that  he  declined  the  publishing  the  work,  and  this  I  attributed 
to  his  having  entertaind  a  suspicion  that  the  Anonymous  Author 
had  no  right  to  the  honour  of  the  name  mentiond  in  the 
Advertisement,  and  that  the  extraordinary  precaution  used  to 
conceal  him,  the  strange  distance  at  which  the  Printer  lived, 
the  date  85  etc  etc  strongly  corroborated  the  suspicion,  un¬ 
happily  too  the  person  I  was  obliged  to  employ  in  a  message, 
to  desire  an  explanation  of  his  incoherent  answer  carried  in  his 
appearance,  a  confirmation  as  strong  as  proofs  of  holy  Writ, 
that  Mr.  Anonymous,  whom  they  took  him  to  be,  was  an 
Impostor,  not  that  poor  Mr.  Northcote  has  any  bad  look, 
very  far  from  it,  but  he  looks  as  if  study  had  worn  him  to  the 
hones.  Mr.  Nurse  recommended  him  to  a  Mr.  Bladen  in 
Paternoster  Row.  I  was  shockd  with  the  proposal  from  Mr. 
Northcote,  it  seems  such  an  incongruity  that  your  name  should 
come  forth  from  such  a  row  I  imagine  of  inferior  Booksellers. 
I  desired  him  once  more  to  take  the  Book  under  his  protection 
(they  were  at  first  brought  to  him  from  the  printers)  till  I 
came  to  town,  which  I  was  in  hopes  I  should  have  done  before 
this,  but  a  severe  cold  attended  with  an  asthma  will  not  permit 
me  to  remove  for  some  time.  I  writ  to  Mr.  Northcote  about 
a  fortnight  since  to  desire  he  would  find  a  Bookseller  to  take 
the  Book  in  his  Neighbourhood,  and  a  Mr.  Faulder  in  new 
Bond  street  is  willing  to  dispose  of  them  at  i8d,  but  I  think 


i789  “  DISGRACEFUL  INCONGRUOUS  ”  233 

it  disgraceful  incongruous,  as  I  said,  with  the  honour  of  your 
name.  I  am  determined  not  to  sell  it  for  less  than  2/s  but 
Mr.  Northcote  is  to  do  nothing  more  in  the  affair  till  I  return 
to  town,  indeed  I  relinquish  all  thoughts  of  publishing  it  this 
season. 

I  hope  my  Dear  Madam  you  enjoy  your  health  and  I  remain 
with  the  greatest  Respect  Your  obliged  and  Obedient  Humble 
Servant  Frans  Reynolds. 

Miss  Reynolds  painted  portraits  of  Dr.  Johnson, 
Mrs.  Montagu,  Beattie,  and  other  friends. 

Janies  Northcote,  portrait  -  painter  and  author, 
worked  as  assistant  in  Sir  Joshua’s  studio  and  after¬ 
wards  published  a  Memoir  of  his  chief.  This  letter 
and  the  “disgraceful  incongruous”  of  selling  a  book 
dedicated  to  Mrs.  Montagu  for  i8d. — 2s.  being  her 
proper  value — gives  one  a  delightful  glimpse  of  the 
lady  who  was  Dr.  Johnson’s  “  dearest  dear,”  his 

“  Renny,”  his  “  love.”  She  had  written  in  1781  an 

Essay  on  Taste ,  which  was  privately  printed  but  never 
published,  and  which  the  Doctor  declared  to  have 
“  such  depth  of  penetration,  such  nicety  of  observa¬ 
tion  as  Locke  or  Pascal  might  be  proud  of  ”  ;  and 
had  apparently  sent  him  another  of  her  productions 
in  the  following  year,  which  the  naughty  old  flatterer 
pronounced  “  full  of  penetrating  meditation  and  very 
forcible  sentiments,”  but  “  the  mental  fabric  exceed¬ 
ingly  obscure.”  “  I  would  make  it  produce  some¬ 
thing  if  I  could,  but  I  have  indeed  no  hope.  If  a 

bookseller  would  buy  it  at  all  .  .  .  he  would  give 

nothing  for  it  worth  your  acceptance.”  The  Doctor’s 
prognostications  were  probably  truer  than  his  praise. 

In  June  William  Wilberforce,  whose  friendship 
with  Matthew  Montagu  has  already  been  referred 
to,  had  made  a  suggestion  that  he  should  join  him 
in  a  political  visit  to  Paris,  the  object  of  which  is 
explained  in  the  following  letter  of  the  latter  to  his 
aunt : 


234  WILBERFORCE  AND  ABOLITION  1789 


From  Matthew  Montagu 

July  1789. 

My  friend  Wilberforce  has  just  been  making  a  proposal, 
in  which  he  is  so  earnest  (threatening  to  write  to  you  if  I 
will  not)  that  I  cannot  give  him  a  refusal,  till  I  have  com¬ 
municated  it  to  you. 

You  shall  hear  the  state  of  the  case,  and  will  then  be  best 
able  to  judge  what  I  ought  to  determine.  The  principal 
argument  against  the  Abolition  of  the  Slave  Trade  is  the  danger 
of  throwing  into  the  hands  of  other  powers  what  you  are  about 
to  relinquish,  and  by  that  means  transferring  the  advantage 
without  destroying  the  practice.  Upon  this  head  Mr.  Pitt 
and  Wilberforce  you  may  remember  threw  out  with  some 
degree  of  confidence  that  they  had  reason  to  believe  that  the 
Abolition  might  be  extended  to  other  states.  In  olrder  to  affect 
this  purpose  Wilberforce  is  going  to  Paris,  to  negotiate  with 
the  french  Government  on  the  part  of  this  country.  The 
French  Minister  has  personally  pledged  himself  to  favor  the 
Abolition  ;  many  of  the  leading  persons  are  strongly  inclined 
to  it,  and  the  King  of  France  has  himself  expressed  a  favorable 
opinion  on  the  subject.  The  object  is  a  very  great  one  ;  I 
need  not  say  how  laudable,  or  with  what  comfort  any  person 
might  thro’  this  whole  life  look  back  to  having  been  instrumental 
in  it.  Wilberforce  is  very  little  conversant  with  the  French 
language  and  is  desirous  to  have  some  assistance  in  that  respect, 
and  is  otherwise  from  motives  of  inclination  and  friendship 
very  urgent  with  me  to  accompany  him  upon  this  occasion. 
You  will  immediately  see  how  far  the  entering  into  this  business 
in  such  a  manner  would  be  desirable,  as  engaging  me  more 
deeply  and  confidentially  in  the  subject  :  and  at  the  same 
time  giving  a  further  occasion  to  cement  that  friendship  which 
I  allready  consider  as  one  of  the  most  fortunate  circumstances 
of  a  very  fortunate  life.  .  .  .  He  proposes  to  go  as  soon  as  he 
can  be  released  from  the  House  of  Commons  and  to  settle  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  and  there  to  live  as  quietly  as  is 
consistent  with  the  great  business,  which  is  the  object  of  his 
most  constant  pursuit  at  present,  the  great  scheme  of  the 
Abolition,  which  if  it  could  be  extended  to  other  countries 
would  lose  its  principal  difficulties  at  home. 

Mrs.  Montagu  gladly,  though  not  enthusiastically, 
assented  to  the  Paris  scheme  and  offered  all  necessary 


1789 


MATTHEW  MONTAGU 


235 


drafts  on  Mr.  Hoare’s  shop,  though  Wilberforce’s 
letter  to  her  to  urge  the  proposition  was  evidently  by 
no  means  tactful : 

I  had  the  most  extraordinary  letter  from  Mr.  Wilberforce 
to  sollicit  my  assent  to  your  going  abroad.  He  addresses  me 
as  he  would  the  most  morose  selfish  tyrannical  being  that  ever 
existed.  Pray  has  he  any  cross  selfish  old  aunt  ?  Or  does  he 
draw  his  opinion  from  books  ?  He  intimates  that  you  have 
made  many  sacrifices  of  pleasure  and  improvement  to  oblige  me. 

Mrs.  Montagu  saw  no  reason  for  Abolition  of 
Slavery  propaganda  being  extended  to  the  inclusion 
of  adopted  nephews,  but  Wilberforce’s  tremendous 
sincerity  soon  atoned  for  this  shocking  gaucherie. 
Indeed,  he  spent  a  whole  long  day  in  her  company 
this  year,  and  recorded  his  admiration  of  her  many 
and  amiable  qualities. 

Matthew  Montagu  had  doubtless  some  political 
ambitions,  of  which  Wraxall  speaks  with  rather  acrid 
disparagement.  “  It  was  of  him  that  General  Montagu 
Mathew,  brother  to  the  Earl  of  LandafF,  said  in  the 
last  house  of  commons  (upon  some  mistakes  arising 
relative  to  their  identity)  ‘  I  wish  it  to  be  understood 
that  there  is  no  more  likeness  between  Montagu 
Mathew  and  Matthew  Montagu  than  between  a 
chestnut  horse  and  a  horse  chestnut.’  ...  At  the 
feet  of  his  aunt  the  celebrated  Mrs.  Montagu  who 
so  long  occupied  the  first  place  among  the  gens  de 
lettres  in  London,  he  was  brought  up  ;  a  school  more 
adapted  to  form  a  man  of  taste  and  improvement 
than  a  statesman  or  a  man  of  the  world.”  Wraxall 
goes  on  to  describe  his  delivery  of  a  panegyric  on 
the  resplendent  public  services  of  Pitt,  who  was 
sitting  just  below  him,  and  suggests  that  this  might 
have  formed  no  bad  foundation  for  an  English  peerage, 
but  that  these  efforts,  though  occasionally  repeated, 
failed  of  success.  Wraxall’s  Memoirs ,  valuable  as 
they  are,  were  notoriously  bitter  and  biassed.  Whether 
true  in  this  instance  or  not,  it  is  clear  from  the  letters 


236  YOUNG  MONTAGU  IN  POLITICS  1789 

of  this  period  that  the  young  man  was  taking  his 
politics  and  himself  very  seriously,  and  felt  it  in¬ 
judicious  to  leave  the  House  at  dinner  hour  for  more 
than  “  a  plate  of  soup,  and  a  woodcock  roasted  while 
he  supped  it,”  at  Montagu  House. 

With  sly  smiling  humour  his  aunt  wrote  to  him  : 

I  assure  you  I  was  not  at  all  offended,  tho  a  little  surprized, 
at  some  expressions  of  Mr.  Wilberforce’s  ;  I  know  he  can 
never  write  speak,  or  act,  but  from  good  suggestions,  and  I 
attributed  his  supposition,  that  you  had  often  sacrificed  oppor¬ 
tunities  of  improvement  and  pleasure  to  regard  to  me,  to  have 
arisen  from  having  seen  some  Maiden  Aunt  of  his  afraid  Miss 
Wilberforce  shd  go  to  a  ball  on  account  of  the  danger  she 
apprehended  from  the  behaviour  of  forward  Misses  and  impudent 
young  fellows  and  perhaps,  averse  to  her  going  to  Church  where 
the  Parson  was  suspected  of  having  had  an  intrigue  (when  a 
young  Curate)  with  the  Clerks  Daughter.  As  I  am  perfectly 
of  opinion  that  to  go  through  the  World  well  one  shd  be  both 
merry  and  wise,  I  was  equally  pleased  when  an  opportunity 
offerd  for  your  dancing  at  a  Ball,  or  attending  a  learned  lecture, 
a  disposition  to  innocent  pleasures  is  rather  to  be  indulged  than 
discouraged,  tho  the  Budge  Doctors  of  the  Stoick  Fur  may 
preach  a  contrary  doctrine. 

Here  is  a  further  extract,  dated  from  Manchester 
Square,  July  13  : 

From  Matthew  Montagu 

On  Saturday  evening  I  went  to  Mr.  Robert  Smith’s  at 
Hampstead  :  Mr.  Pitt  and  Mr.  Dundas,  the  Dutchess  of 
Gordon,  Lady  Charlotte  and  Col1,  Lenox  were  there.  We 
had  a  very  pleasant  evening,  in  which  a  little  dispute  concerning 
the  Douglas  cause  between  the  Dutchess  and  Dundas  (who 
had  been  the  Advocate  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Douglas  in  Scotland) 
some  little  Politics  and  a  great  deal  of  laughing  and  good 
humour  made  up  our  entertainment.  The  Dutchess,  Lady 
Charlotte  and  Mr.  Lenox  returned  to  Town  ;  Mr.  Pitt  and 
Mr.  Dundas  and  myself  slept  there.  Sunday  morning  Mr. 
Grenville  came  over,  and  to  dinner  Ld.  Mulgrave,  his  Brother, 
Ld  Mornington,  Bankes,  Ryder  Smith  of  Heath  and  John 
Villiers.  In  the  evening  the  greatest  number  of  us  returned 


WILLIAM  W1LBERFORCE 

A  fter  Henry  Edridge 


1789  THE  YOUNGER  GENERATION  237 

to  Town.  Our  conversation  had  not  much  of  Politics  in  it  ; 
after  dinner  we  amused  ourselves  with  reading  Poetry,  Johnson’s 
edition  of  the  Poets  affording  us  ample  scope.  Mr.  Pitt  and 
Mr.  Grenville  both  think  the  Revolution  in  France  is  in 
substance  decided,  and  that  the  King  has  lost  the  time  of 
making  resistance  :  Mr.  Pitt  read  a  letter  saying  that  Jefferson, 
the  ambassador  from  the  American  States,  has  been  principally 
consulted  by  the  leading  Men  of  the  Popular  Party.  A  very 
fair  and  remarkable  retribution  to  the  French  King  for  the 
absurdity  of  abetting  democratical  principles.  It  is  not  yet 
decided  whether  the  Tobacconists  will  detain  us  much  longer 
or  not  with  opposition  to  the  Excise  Bill,  there  is  another 
business,  the  loan  of  the  Est  In  Company,  which  will  raise 
some  debate  perhaps  before  the  end  of  this  eternal  Session. 
As  to  our  Journey  I  am  waiting  at  Wilberforces  in  expectation 
of  his  returning  from  Clapham,  to  converse  with  him  about 
it  :  I  fear  the  present  state  of  France  is  too  unsettled  to  do 
much  good  as  to  his  great  object. 

This  account  of  her  nephew’s  week-end  party  at 
Hampstead  must  have  evoked  something  of  a  sigh 
from  the  old  Abbess  of  Sandleford.  For  here  were 
the  younger  generation  knocking  loudly  at  the  door. 
Robert  Smith,  the  host,  was  the  banker’s  son,  Pitt’s 
staunch  ally  and  the  future  Lord  Carrington.  Henry 
Dundas,  now  member  for  Midlothian,  was  to  become 
the  first  Viscount  Melville.  Jane,  wife  of  the  fourth 
Duke  of  Gordon,  was  the  leading  Tory  salonist  of 
Pall  Mall,  who  managed  to  secure  three  dukes  and  a 
marquis  for  sons -in -law.  Colonel  Lennox,  Lady 
Charlotte’s  bridegroom,  who  was  to  be  one  of  them, 
had  two  months  previously  all  but  shot  the  Duke  of 
York  (the  bullet  grazed  his  curl)  in  a  duel  on  Wimble¬ 
don  Common  over  a  point  of  punctilio.  William 
Wyndham  Grenville  was  the  son  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
old  friend  the  Gentle  Shepherd,  and  was  also  to  be 
ennobled  in  the  following  year,  and  later  to  become 
leader  of  “  All  the  Talents  ”  ;  Lord  Mulgrave,  also 
a  staunch  supporter  of  Pitt,  and  also  on  his  way  to  a 
British  peerage,  was  the  commander  of  the  Racehorse , 
under  whom  Nelson  served  as  a  middy.  Lord  Morn- 


M.  NECKER 


1789 


238 

ington  was  the  Duke  of  Wellington’s  elder  brother; 
Sir  Joseph  Banks,  President  of  the  Royal  Society ; 
and  John  Villiers,  at  this  time  Member  for  Old  Sarum, 
became,  later,  third  Earl  of  Clarendon.  Young  Mon¬ 
tagu  was  establishing  himself  judiciously  in  the  heart 
of  the  Pitt  fraternity,  and  Wraxall’s  unkindly  sugges¬ 
tion  that  he,  too,  had  an  eye  to  the  possibilities  of  an 
English  peerage,  may  not  have  been  quite  without 
foundation. 

In  the — perhaps  a  little  belated  but  very  obvious — 
conclusion  of  the  above  letter  his  aunt  cordially  con¬ 
curred  : 

I  hope  future  opportunities  will  present  themselves  in  which 
Mr.  Wilberforce  and  you  may  indulge  your  benevolent  inten¬ 
tions,  and  enjoy  any  scheme  of  pleasure,  but  to  go  into  a  country 
to  partake  of  the  horrors  of  a  famine  or  mix  in  the  confusion 
of  civil  war  wa  be  very  unbecoming  your  prudence  ;  and  it 
is  impossible  that,  in  the  present  state  of  things  in  France, 
Mr.  Neckar  should  fix  his  attentions  on  the  coast  of  Africa. 
The  abolition  of  slavery  in  France  may  give  him  trouble  enough. 

These  young  men  must  not  really  be  allowed  to 
take  themselves  too  seriously  ! 

Sept  ye  $th. 

I  am  pleased  to  find  Mrs.  Siddons  behaviour  in  company 
made  exactly  the  same  impression  on  you  which  it  did  on  me. 
There  is  a  modest  dignity  in  her  manner  which  renders  her 
very  charming.  I  am  glad  she  will  have  made  her  talents  so 
profitable  this  summer. 

Letters  from  Paris  represent  all  things  there  still  in  a  state 
of  confusion,  indeed  I  have  not  received  any  since  Mr.  Neckar’s 
appointment.  I  think  he  will  be  in  the  wretched  case  described 
by  Mr.  Pope  :  Truth  wd  you  teach  to  save  a  sinking  land, 
all  fear,  none  aid  you  and  few  understand.  I  have  been  at 
many  agreable  dinners  and  suppers  with  him  and  Madame  at 
their  villa  near  Paris  before  he  was  a  Minister,  sometimes  the 
parties  were  Beaux  esprits,  sometimes  persons  of  great  rank  in 
France,  and  with  Ambassadors  and  Foreigners  of  the  first 
distinction.  I  may  truly  say, 

I  knew  him  in  his  happier  hour. 

Of  social  pleasure  ill  exchanged  for  power. 


1789  THE  FIRE  AT  HOUGHTON  239 

Poor  “  Adored  Minister  ”  Necker  would  probably 
have  endorsed  Mrs.  Montagu’s  apt  quotations  with 
a  sigh  from  the  heart. 

I  dined  on  monday  at  Baron  Nilkens,  where  a  French 
Count,  just  arrived,  gave  a  horrid  account  of  the  Patriot  Mob 
in  one  of  the  Provinces.  They  were  wth  great  difficulty 
restraind  from  murdering  the  Son  of  the  Duke  of  Fitzjames, 
having  taken  him  for  the  Son  of  one  of  their  opponents.  After 
several  hours  expectation  of  being  murther’d  he  was  released. 
Madme  de  Bouflers,  her  Daughter  and  the  French  Ambassador, 
are  to  dine  with  me  on  Sunday.  The  D:  and  Duchess  of 
Luxemburgh,  and  many  of  the  fine  french  people  are  gone  to 
Bath  for  the  Xmas  holydays.  .  .  . 

I  think  Lord  Orford’s  late  event  offers  the  best  consolation 
for  having  sold  part  of  his  inheritance.  I  should  never  purchase 
fine  pictures,  but  had  I  inherited  them  from  my  ancestors  with 
their  family  seat  I  would  sooner  have  sold  my  hair  to  the 
Peruke  Maker  and  my  teeth  to  a  Dentist.  I  think  all  one 
has  found  one  should  leave  behind  one,  or  its  equivalent. 

One  is  inclind  to  suppose  Lord  Orford  must  sometimes 
have  felt  emotions  of  regret  for  the  sale  of  the  very  fine 
collection  of  pictures  he  inherited,  but  if  he  did  they  must  now 
all  be  at  an  end,  for  part  of  Houghton  lately  burnt  down 
contain’d  the  Gallery  wherein  they  all  hung,  and  he  wou’d 
now  have  had  no  remains  of  them  but  a  heap  of  ashes  instead 
of  the  42000L  the  Empress  of  Russia  paid  him.  A  few  very 
fine  ones  remain’d  and  they  are  consumd,  but  the  consideration 
of  having  realised  the  worth  of  the  others  must  be  a  great 
consolation. 

It  is  thought  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  will  remain  at 
Lisle.  It  is  the  Duke  of  York  who  is  thought  to  be  enamoured 

of  the  Duchess  of  R -  but  it  is  believed  she  will  marry 

Col  St.  Leger,  for  which  I  am  very  sorry,  as  it  will  much 
afflict  her  mother.  The  Duke  of  Beaufort  is  a  very  attentive 
guardian  to  the  Duke  of  Rutland’s  children. 

Edouard,  Due  de  Fitzjames  (born  1776),  became  a 
bit  of  a  firebrand.  “  II  avait  un  eloquence  mordant 
et  un  penchant  irresistible  a  dire  tout  haut  les  verites 
les  plus  genantes.”  The  mad  third  Earl  of  Orford 
(Horace  Walpole’s  nephew)  sold  Sir  Robert  Walpole’s 
fine  collection  of  pictures  at  Houghton  in  1779  to 


240 


PICTURES  AT  PETERSBURG 


1789 


the  Empress  of  Russia  for  just  over  £40,000.  Horace 
Walpole  wrote  this  December,  reporting  the  fire  : 
“  As  the  gallery  is  burnt,  the  glorious  pictures  have 
escaped,  or  are  reserved  to  be  consumed  on  the  first 
revolution  at  Petersburgh.”  This  might  very  well 
have  been  prophetic. 

Well  do  I  remember  my  enjoyment  on  coming 
upon  that  wonderful  series  of  the  Houghton  Van 
Dycks  and  Wharton  portraits  in  the  Petersburg 
Ermitage  Gallery  in  1902. 

Charles,  fourth  Duke  of  Rutland,  had  died  during 
his  Irish  Lord-Lieutenancy  in  1787,  when  he  was 
only  thirty-three,  leaving  five  children,  of  whom  the 
eldest  was  only  eleven.  Their  mother  was  the  Duke 
of  Beaufort’s  youngest  daughter. 


I79° 


DECORATING  MONTAGU  HOUSE - “CONSTITUTION 

building” — burke’s  REFLECTIONS 


Advancing  age.  Decorating  the  Portman  Square  house.  Matthew 
Robinson  on  the  French  Revolution.  Letter  from  William  Locke. 
Lord  Hardwicke’s  death.  Letter  from  Lord  Erskine.  Birth  of 
Marquis  of  Hartington.  Fete  of  July  14.  English  Republicans.  A 
launch  at  Deptford.  Burke’s  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution. 
Lady  Anne  Lindsay.  Bruce’s  book  of  Travel.  Tar-making.  L’Abbe 
Foulon.  Due  de  Castries’  hotel.  Les  Poissardes. 


So  far  as  can  be  gathered  from  the  correspondence  of 
this  year,  Mrs.  Montagu  did  not  go  farther  from 
London  than  Sandleford,  after  her  return  to  Montagu 
House  from  Bath  in  the  previous  December.  She 
was  now  in  her  seventieth  year,  was  suffering  a  good 
deal  from  eye -strain,  and  was  somewhat  reluctantly 
facing  the  fact  that  “  she  had  arrived  at  an  age  when 
she  must  look  back  on  her  past  life  with  more  plea¬ 
sure  perhaps  than  to  future  expectations.”  Montagu 
undertook  the  business  visits  to  the  Northumberland 
collieries  and  the  management  of  the  farms  ;  and  his 
aunt  was  content  to  occupy  her  energies  with  the 
decoration  of  the  great  room  at  Portman  Square,  with 
its  celebrated  feather  tapestries,  its  great  verd-antique 
pillars,  its  Angelica  Kauffmann  ceiling,  its  Bonomi 
sculpture,  and  its  Rebecca  doorway- panellings  in 
chiaroscuro. 

Montagu  took  his  friend  Thomas  Ryder  to  inspect 
and  report : 

Mr.  Ryder  met  us  by  appointment  in  Portman  Square. 
As  I  have  much  experience  of  his  taste  I  thought  he  would  be 

VOL.  II  241  R 


242 


REBECCA 


1790 


a  good  counsellor  :  He  was  much  struck  with  the  whole 
of  the  ceiling  which  he  said  he  prefer’d  to  any  he  had  seen  ; 
and  with  us  could  not  cease  his  admiration  of  the  chiaro  oscuro 
pictures  of  Rebecca  :  They  are  indeed  exquisitely  done  and 
much  surpass  what  they  are  meant  to  imitate  :  I  afterwards 
called  on  Rebecca  and  saw  designs  for  the  pictures  over  the 
doors  :  They  also  are  beyond  my  expectation  both  in  com¬ 
position  and  effect.  He  is  a  wonderful  master  of  light  and 
shade,  and  draws  very  finely.  He  asks  eighty  guineas  for  the 
four  pictures  over  the  doors  ;  It  is  a  larger  price  in  proportion 
than  the  others,  but  as  they  approach  nearer  the  eye,  they  must 
be  finished  in  a  quite  different  manner  ;  He  promises  to  make 
them  resemble  basso  relievos  in  white  Marble. 

Biagio  Rebecca,  A.R.A.,  is  chiefly  remembered  for 
his  decorative  work.  Ryder  and  William  Blake  were 
both  pupils  of  James  Basire.  Mrs.  Montagu  was  also 
pleased,  but  impatient  : 

I  was  very  well  pleased  to  find  the  Pillars  of  my  great  room 
appear  in  just  proportion  to  the  dimensions  of  the  Room, 
before  they  were  placed  up  I  was  afraid  they  wd  have  been 
too  thick,  for  so  they  appeared  while  lying  on  a  table,  but  all 
people  who  have  seen  are  delighted  with  them.  As  things 
of  these  kinds  are  tedious  in  their  process,  my  House  is  full 
of  Carvers,  Gilders,  Carpenters  etc,  which  is  certainly  no 
very  agreable  circumstance,  and  I  fear  all  will  not  be  compleated 
before  the  middle  of  February.  As  I  pay  the  workmen  as 
fast  as  they  proceed,  one  should  think  they  wd  be  more 
expeditious.  I  flatter  myself  you  will  think  my  room  very 
elegant. 

From  her  brother  Matthew  Robinson,  who  was 
perhaps  a  little  imbued  with  Dr.  Price’s  benevolent 
altruism,  French  events  now  evoked  a  letter  : 

When  I  hear  of  the  murders  and  massacres  of  Paris,  my 
first  wish  is  ;  that  such  a  wonderful  revolution  and  tending 
in  all  appearance  so  much  to  the  happiness  of  our  species  could 
happen  without  bloodshed.  It  next  occurs  to  me  :  that  the 
number  of  people  destroy’d  on  the  occasion  does  truly  told 
perhaps  hardly  amount  to  two  hundred  ;  although  these  are 
much  too  many.  I  turn  then  my  thoughts  to  another  quarter 
of  the  World  ;  where  it  is  said,  that  there  are  by  land  and  sea 


1790  BROTHER  MATTHEW  ROBINSON  243 

a  million  of  men  in  arms  perishing  themselves  and  destroying 
one  another  by  thousands,  tens  of  thousands  or  perhaps  hundreds 
of  thousands,  and  laying  waste  withal  some  of  the  finest  parts 
of  our  globe  at  the  command  and  pleasure  of  four  people,  of 
one  living  at  Constantinople,  of  another  at  Petersburg,  of  a 
third  in  Sweden  and  a  fourth  at  Vienna  ;  the  object  of  which 
four  persons  in  making  all  this  mischief  is  to  acquire  more 
territory  and  dominions,  when  what  they  already  possess  nearly 
equals  in  extent  the  whole  of  Europe.  These  things  never 
the  less  seem  to  pass  with  some  persons,  as  matters  of  course 
and  less  heinous  than  the  affairs  of  France.  It  is  certainly 
very  savage  to  bear  about  for  four  or  five  hours  stuck  on  poles 
two  or  three  heads  after  being  cut  off  ;  but  I  remember  to 
have  seen  for  forty  or  fifty  years  together  the  same  sight  on 
Temple  Bar,  until  time,  tired  of  the  object  brought  them  down. 
It  seems  to  me  therefore  that  some  people  keep  and  use  very 
different  weights  and  measures  for  like  events  and  circum¬ 
stances.  I  believe  however,  that  you  begin  much  rather  to 
wish  that  I  would  finish  my  letter  than  to  trespass  upon  you 
any  further  with  such  perverse  and  cynical  reflections. 

Revolutions  notwithstanding,  William  Locke  the 
collector  was  still  greatly  exercised  about  the  uses  of 
ornament  and  the  confines  of  the  sublime  : 

Golden  Square  16  March. 

I  waited  on  you  on  Sunday  to  return  your  very  lively  and 
ingenious  letter,  &  talk  it  over  with  you.  I  now  send  it  because 
I  despair  of  finding,  for  some  days  to  come,  an  hour  to  return 
to  Portman  Sqre — Your  general  idea  of  ornament  appears  to 
me  just  ;  and  your  answer  to  his  Lordship’s  question  whether 
every  ornament  should  not  seem  to  be  of  some  use,  contains  a 
principle  which  I  hope  he  has  been  wise  enough  to  adopt. 
For  it  certainly  is  not  necessary  that  an  ornament  shou’d  seem 
to  be  of  any  use,  if  it  be  of  such  a  sort  as  brings  with  it  a  train 
of  ideas  superior  to  ordinary  convenience. — 

I  have  not  had  a  moment  to  look  into  Mr.  Alison’s  work 
to  see  whether  he  coincides  with  you  in  opinion  :  nor  to  read 
what  he  says  upon  sublime  objects,  the  subject  of  that  con¬ 
versation  which  led  to  the  communication  of  your  elegant 
letter — My  idea  of  them  is  contained  in  the  following  little 
extracts  from  one  of  Mr.  Gilpin  Tours,  into  which  he  did 
me  the  honour  of  transcribing  it  from  a  letter  of  mine  written 


244  LORD  HARDWICKE’S  DEATH  1790 

to  him  sometime  since  on  the  subject  of  Sublimity.  But  this 
compliment,  as  I  did  not  wish  my  name  to  appear,  I  beg  may 
remain  entre  nous — You  will  see  that  my  agreeing  with  you 
in  what  you  said  on  the  subject  was  not  the  effect  of  Civility.  .  .  . 

We  must  leave  Mr.  Gilpin  in  possession  of  the 
extracts. 


From  Matthew  Montagu 

Montagu  Farm,  May. 

The  late  Lord  H[ardwicke]  was  only  taken  ill  on  Friday 
Evening,  and  the  family  were  in  no  apprehension  of  his  danger 
till  the  Saturday  Morning,  when  he  seem’d  to  have  convulsive 
Motions,  owing  to  a  general  failure  of  circulation.  Mr.  John 
Yorke  called  upon  him  and  was  not  known  to  Lord  H.  ;  he 
asked  who  he  was,  and  upon  hearing  his  name  gave  no  signs 
of  recollection,  but  complained  of  his  being  deserted,  and 
expressed  his  surprize  and  indignation  that  no  person  wd  assist 
him.  Indeed  nothing  could  be  then  administer’d  to  his  relief. 
He  died  only  on  Sunday  Morning,  and  has  left  all  his  ready 
Money,  amounting  to  i6o,ooo£  to  his  Daughters  and  their 
Children.  The  Hardwicke  Estate  alone  devolves  to  Mrs. 
Yorke,  contrary  to  the  general  expectation,  as  it  was  thought 
that  a  large  Sum  of  Money  wd  go  to  the  name  of  Y orke.  The 
present  Earl  will  have  about  13,000  Pr  Ann  to  spend,  which 
is  much  more  than  is  necessary  for  happiness,  and  equal  to 
every  purpose  of  vanity. 

Philip  Yorke,  the  second  Earl  of  Hardwicke,  was, 
as  we  have  seen  and  as  his  father  had  been,  a  constant 
friend  and  correspondent  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s. 


From  Lord  Erskine 

May  ist. 

I  am  very  sorry  indeed  that  you  should  have  been  troubled 
at  all  upon  the  subject  of  Lever’s  action,  as  it  never  was 
my  intention  that  you  should  know  anything  about  it ;  His 
attorney  applied  to  me  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  prospect 
that  the  act  would  take  place,  &  as  the  Court  of  King’s  Bench 
seemed  to  throw  out  that  the  other  was  a  favourable  com¬ 
promise,  I  thought  that  the  action  brought  by  Lever  would 
be  well  quieted  on  the  same  terms.  His  right  to  recover 


1790 


LORD  ERSKINE 


245 


at  all  might  have  been  perhaps  questioned  ;  but  besides  that 
the  inclusion  of  various  transactions  in  one  declaration  for  the 
purpose  of  avoiding  many  penalties  by  one  composition  is  at 
all  times  hazardous  when  brought  into  the  view  of  a  Court, 
I  wished  to  avoid  if  possible  all  use  of  your  name  in  the  Courts 
on  the  subject,  for  tho  the  transaction  on  which  the  suit 
proceeded  was  perfectly  innocent  and  Honourable  on  your 
part,  yet  my  regard  for  you  &  the  high  esteem  in  which  I 
hold  your  name  and  character  made  me  wish  to  keep  you  at 
a  distance  from  all  public  controversy,  &  I  meant  that  you  should 
not  even  have  been  disturbed  with  thinking  again  about  West¬ 
minster  Hall  or  the  vagabonds  that  infest  it. 

I  assure  you  it  never  could  occur  to  me  to  consider  you  as 
an  ordinary  Client  but  as  a  friend,  &  indeed  I  always  reflect 
with  pleasure  that  the  person  who  is  to  represent  me  hereafter 
bears  a  name  which  is  a  badge  of  that  friendship. 

Lever’s  action  related  to  the  giving  of  premiums 
contrary  to  Act  of  Parliament  to  coal-buyers. 

Thomas,  first  Baron  Erskine,  the  famous  Chancellor, 
friend  of  Sheridan  and  Fox,  the  foe  of  Pitt,  the  defender 
of  Lord  George  Gordon,  of  Stockdale,  and  of  Thomas 
Paine,  was  at  this  time  Attorney-General  to  the  Prince 
of  Wales.  His  son,  David  Montagu,  was  our  lady’s 

William  Spencer,  afterwards  sixth  Duke  of  Devon¬ 
shire,  was  born  on  May  21. 

June  the  6tk. 

I  am  glad  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  has  brought  a  Marquiss 
of  Hartington  into  the  World,  as  it  will  be  great  joy  to  the 
Dowager  Lady  Spencer  ;  I  suppose  you  have  heard  that  it 
was  with  great  difficulty  her  Grace  was  allowd  to  stay  at 
Brussels  till  Lady  Spencer  arrived.  The  Duchess  was  put 
to  bed,  and  it  was  pretended  that  she  was  in  labour,  yet  even 
that  plea  was  but  just  able  to  suspend  the  search  of  the  House, 
and  turning  the  family  out  of  the  Town  ;  at  last  the  favour 
was  obtaind  to  allow  them  to  wait  till  Lady  Spencer  arrived, 
on  promise  they  wd  then  depart  immediately,  which  they  did. 
It  seems  some  letters  of  her  Graces  were  intercepted  in  which 
there  were  political  offences,  what  business  she  had  to  meddle 
in  the  affairs  of  the  Brabantines  I  cannot  imagine.  .  .  . 

Monsr  de  la  Fayette  seems  to  be  Dictator  of  France. 


2 46  THE  TOAST  OF  SPITALFIELDS  1790 

July. 

Montagu  was  at  the  Drawing  Room  yesterday  ;  their 
Majesties  thank  God  are  in  good  health,  and  their  Subjects 
I  hope  will  keep  in  true  loyalty,  in  spite  of  Ld  Stanhope, 
Alderman  Sawbridge,  and  Dr.  Price.  I  suppose  you  have 
read  the  account  of  their  speeches  the  14th  of  this  month. 
That  intoxication  might  not  excite  disorder  there  was  not  to 
be  anything  to  eat  or  drink  on  the  Champs  de  Mars  on  that 
day,  but  yet  I  do  not  envy  Mr.  Capel  late  D:  of  Orleans  the 
days  diversion.  Two  days  ago  we  met  Madme  de  Buffons 
in  a  Coach  and  6  with  3  Postillions  on  her  road  to  Dover. 

Your  hopes  of  my  being  the  toast  of  Spitalfields  I  think 
well  founded,  for  while  the  Misses  wear  nothing  but  muslin, 
the  old  Dowager,  who  dresses  her  rooms  in  silk,  ought  with 
them  to  be  esteemed  la  belle  des  Belles. 

Mrs.  Montagu  had  written  to  her  sister  :  “I  am 
going  to  the  City  end  of  the  town  this  morning  to 
bespeak  280  yards  of  white  Sattin  for  the  window 
curtains  of  my  great  house,  and  about  200  for  the 
hangings.  I  think  this  order  will  make  me  very 
popular  in  Spittal  Fields.  I  am  also  to  have  a  very 
large  quantity  of  white  lutestring  for  the  Octagon 
drawing  room  at  Sandleford.”  Lutestring  was  a  heavy 
lustrous  silk  material.  Madame  Buffon  was  the  Due 
d’Orleans’  mistress,  now  on  her  way  back  to  join  him 
in  Paris.  She  it  was  who,  with  some  Englishmen,  was 
seated  with  him  at  dinner  two  years  later  “  when 
savage  howls  of  triumph  attracted  his  attention. 
Walking  to  the  window  he  looked  out  calmly  on  the 
scene,  contemplated  with  a  perfectly  unmoved  counte¬ 
nance  the  dead  white  face,  the  fair  curls  fluttering 
round  the  pike  head  and  without  a  word  returned  to 
his  place  at  the  table.”  The  head  was  that  of  the 
heroic  Princesse  de  Lamballe,  who  had  just  been 
atrociously  murdered.  A  few  minutes  before  it  had 
been  paraded  before  the  window  of  the  imprisoned 
Marie  Antoinette. 

I  hope  you  will  consider  me  rather  as  a  busy  than  an  un- 
gratefull  Woman,  when  I  tell  you,  Messrs  Bonomi,  Bartoli, 


i79o  THE  REVOLUTION  SOCIETY  247 

Prichard,  Evans  and  Black  have  all  been  with  me  this  morning. 
No  Minister  has  a  greater  Levee  than  a  Builder  of  Houses  ; 
but  he  can  satisfy  them  all  with  sweet  words  and  fine  promises, 
and  on  this  they  will  obey  his  orders.  When  they  have 
executed  mine  I  must  pay  in  pounds  sterling.  However  as 
I  stand  well  in  Mr.  Hoare’s  good  books,  I  have  been  bespeaking 
Pillars  of  Scagliola  in  vert  antique,  and  pressing  forward  the 
compleating  my  great  Room.  Mr.  Jerningham  had  not  heard 
from  his  Brother,  but  a  Courier  from  the  D.  of  Devonshire 
this  morning  brings  word,  they  were  obliged  to  fly  from 
Brussels  to  Lisle,  and  from  thence  they  will  go  to  Calais,  and 
so  onto  their  native  Land  the  first  fair  wind.  Brussels  is 
certainly  under  the  dominion  of  The  Patriots,  but  it  is  thought 
the  Emperor,  in  the  Spring,  will  attack  all  his  Revolted  Countries 
with  his  whole  Army  so  he  will  then  behave  like  a  Turk  to 
the  Christians,  and  like  a  Christian  to  the  Turks.  The 
report  of  an  Insurrection  at  Paris  is  believed  to  be  false. 

Dr.  Price  had  already  made  his  extreme  demo¬ 
cratic  views  public  during  the  American  War.  Lord 
Stanhope  (who,  as  we  have  noted,  had  married  William 
Pitt’s  sister)  was  all  but  a  Republican,  and  Chairman 
of  the  Revolution  Society  in  London  ;  John  Sawbridge, 
who  had  been  Lord  Mayor  in  1775,  was  founder  of 
the  Bill  of  Rights  Society. 

The  Revolution  Society  met  at  the  London  Tavern 
on  November  9  and  sent  an  address  of  congratula¬ 
tion  to  the  French  National  Assembly  after  hear¬ 
ing  a  sermon  by  Dr.  Price  which  later  furnished 
Burke’s  text  for  his  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution. 
The  sermon  and  the  Society  having  achieved  wide 
notoriety,  they  celebrated  the  first  anniversary  of  the 
fall  of  the  Bastille  on  this  July  14  by  a  further  meeting, 
at  which  Price  apostrophised  the  French  Revolutionists 
as  “  Heavenly  Philanthropists.” 

But  the  movement,  thanks  partly  to  its  association 
with  the  Prince  of  Wales’s  party  and  the  opposition, 
but  much  more  to  the  innate  British  dislike  of  schemes 
of  class  hatred,  made  no  great  headway,  and  d’Orleans’s 
imported  seed  fell  on  stony  ground.  The  Due  in  fact 


248 


A  90-GUN  SHIP 


1790 


was  in  many  respects,  as  Mrs.  Webster  has  pointed 
out,  our  Prince  of  Wales’s  Paris  parallel.  Both  were 
prodigal  renegades  to  their  sovereigns,  both  were 
drunkards  and  libertines,  both  played  into  the  hands 
of,  and  were  backed  by,  the  extremists  of  opposition 
and  faction. 

July. 

Mr.  Montagu  having  dined  yesterday  with  Mr.  Secretary 
Grenville,  heard  a  full  account  of  the  Fete  on  les  Champs  de 
Mars,  which  happily  the  fierce  God  of  War  did  not  celebrate 
in  his  usual  bloody  character  ;  all  was  tranquill,  and  joyous. 
This  will  give  spirit  to  the  National  Assembly  but  ...  I 
should  rather  expect  well  from  the  French  in  ordering  a  Fete, 
than  modelling  a  Constitution  of  Government. 

I  suppose  the  quiet  celebrations  of  the  Fete  of  the  National 
Assembly  will  give  spirit  to  the  oratory  of  Lord  Stanhope, 
force  to  the  motions  of  Alderman  Sawbridge,  and  make  Dr. 
Price  more  fiercely  cock  his  National  Cockade. 

Sawbridge,  stern  Republican  in  principles,  and 
almost  hideous  in  his  aspect,  was  now  M.P.  for  the 
City.  Richard  Price  was  Franklin’s  intimate  friend. 

Shooters  Hill,  Aug.  2 d. 

On  Tuesday  My  young  Friends  carried  me  to  Deptford 
to  see  the  launch  of  a  90  Gun  Ship.  The  whole  of  the  spectacle 
was  magnificient,  and  sublime  ;  We  were  seated  on  the  shore 
of  the  River  in  Lord  Chatham’s  booth,  so  without  croud  or 
heat  we  contemplated  the  noble  scene  of  Commercial  Vessels 
continual  passing  and  this  mighty  Ship  coming  forth  as  their 
Protector  with  90  Guns  in  her  sides,  and  900  Men  in  her 
bowels.  Many  thousand  spectators  added  splendor  to  the 
Shew.  Lord  Belgrave,  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty 
came  home  and  dined  with  me.  .  .  . 

I  suppose  you  have  heard  of  the  violent  insurrections  at 
Lyons  ;  confusion  and  terror  reign  there,  and  no  works  but 
such  as  are  done  by  the  hand  of  rapine  and  violence  go  forward. 
The  silk  weavers  are  driven  from  their  Loom,  and  the  destinies 
only  weave  the  woof  and  weave  the  warp. 

Burke’s  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution ,  pub- 


BURKE  REDIVIVUS 


1790 


249 


lished  this  summer,  naturally  formed  a  leading  topic 
in  the  correspondence  of  the  time  : 

I  hope  before  this  time  you  are  in  full  possession  of  Mr. 
Burkes  admirable,  excellent,  incomparable  pamphlet.  I  think 
it  will  do  great  service  here  in  preventing  confusion  and  rebellion ; 
whether  it  can  cure  the  evil  already  done  in  France  it  is  difficult 
to  say,  for  shd  it  restore  the  Democrats  to  their  senses,  it  can¬ 
not  restore  life  to  the  murderd,  nor  property  to  the  plunderd, 
nor  treat  the  wounds  the  State  has  received.  It  gives  one  great 
delight  to  see  fine  talents  employd  to  good  and  great  purposes, 
and  my  pleasure  was  heightened  by  my  long  intimacy  and 
friendship  for  Mr.  Burke. 

If  to  his  share  some  party  frailties  fall, 

Read  but  his  book  and  you’ll  forget  them  all. 

Burke,  who  had  utterly  lost  his  head  over  the 
Regency  debates,  more  than  regained  his  reputation 
by  this  wonderful  tract. 

I  am  very  glad  to  find  my  opinion  of  Mr.  Burkes  pamphlet 
confirm’d  by  yours  ;  He  has  the  Fate  of  great  geniuses  to 
be  always  much  in  the  right,  or  much  in  the  wrong  ;  if  reason 
and  justice  directed  their  strong  energies  one  should  hardly 
be  able  to  forbear  envying  them,  as  things  are,  one  only  admires 
and  wonders.  I  really  hope,  and  indeed  believe,  his  work 
will  be  of  great  service  to  this  Country  by  preserving  us  from 
innovations  in  our  Government  ;  to  restore  the  French  to  any 
degree  of  order  is  now  perhaps  beyond  human  power.  After 
twice  reading  Mr.  Burkes  work  I  have  now  begun  Mr. 
Calonnes  ;  they  agree  in  many  points.  .  .  . 

I  was  much  pleased  to  find  people  of  all  parties,  of  all  ages, 
and  of  all  humours  here  united  in  approbation  and  praise  of 
Mr.  Burkes  work  ;  I  do  not  doubt  but  it  will  prevent  mischief 
in  England  ;  whether  it  can  remedy  what  is  already  done  in 
France  is  doubtfull,  but  if  a  good  translation  of  it  is  made  I 
think  it  will  have  great  effect  there.  Madame  de  Bouflers  is 
enchanted  with  it,  she  read  to  me  some  letters  she  had  just 
received  from  Paris,  one  of  them  mentions  that  a  laquais  of 
the  Dss  of  Boufler  was  murderd  just  under  her  window,  and 
many  disasters  of  the  like  kind  there  and  in  the  Provinces. 

Amelie,  daughter-in-law  of  the  Comtesse  de  Boufflers, 
had  been  one  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  hosts  in  Paris  in  1776. 


179° 


250  THE  LYNDSAY  LADIES 

To  Mrs.  Carter  she  adds,  in  November,  some  second 
thoughts  : 

I  agree  entirely  with  you  in  opinion  of  Mr.  Burke’s  work 
and  of  his  character  ;  the  errors  of  his  conduct  have  arisen 
from  the  impetuosity  of  his  passions,  not  from  want  of  good 
dispositions  or  from  malignant  intentions  ;  the  faults  of  his 
book  are  occasioned  by  a  genius  too  strong  to  be  restrained 
by  reason  and  an  eloquence  too  rapid  for  discretion.  .  .  . 

I  hear  our  King  is  much  pleased  with  Mr.  Burke’s  book. 

Fanny  Burney  wrote  to  Mrs.  Waddington  in 
November  : 

I  own  myself  entirely  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  opinion  about 
Mr.  Burke’s  book  ;  it  is  the  noblest  deepest  most  animated 
and  exalted  work  that  I  think  I  have  ever  read.  I  am  charmed 
to  hear  its  eloge  from  Mrs.  Montagu  ;  it  is  a  tribute  to  its 
excellence  which  reflects  high  honour  on  her  own  candour, 
as  she  was  one  of  those  the  most  vehemently  irritated  against 
its  author  but  a  short  time  since.  \Diary,  iv.  435. J 

I  hear  Lady  Ann  Lyndsay  is  going  to  be  married  to  Mr. 
Wyndham,  the  Member  for  Norwich,  the  excentric  Mr. 
Wyndham.  His  choice  suits  that  character.  Sr  Horace  Mann 
is  thought  to  have  been  long  attach’d  to  Margaret ;  as  she 
is  now  at  liberty  they  may  go  to  Hymens  Altar  together,  if 
the  Knight  is  so  disposed,  but  perhaps  he  likes  no  matches 
but  cricket  matches. 

These  were  bad  shots  of  the  gossipers.  Lady 
Anne,  having  achieved  immortality  by  one  homely 
ballad,  “Auld  Robin  Gray,”  and  refused  many  lovers, 
married  Andrew  Barnard,  who,  as  Macartney’s  colonial 
secretary,  carried  her  off  to  the  Cape.  It  was  not  till 
thirty  years  later  that  she  admitted  the  maternity  of 
Robin  Gray  to  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and  then  she  must 
needs  try  to  spoil  the  perfect  thing  by  a  “  continuation.” 
Her  sister  Margaret  had  married  Alexander  Fordyce, 
the  banking  plunger  whose  failure  for  over  ,£100,000 
had  caused  such  consternation  in  1772.  Walpole 
says  he  was  credited  with  having  made  £30,000  by 
stock  jobbing  over  the  false  report  of  Howe’s  victory 


1790 


SOURCE  OF  THE  NILE 


251 


over  Washington  in  1777.  He  died  in  1789,  and 
Lady  Margaret,  widow  of  the  “  infamous  rascal  who 
had  shook  the  mighty  credit  of  Great  Britain,”  received 
a  pension  from  its  King.  She  did  not,  however, 
marry  Sir  Horatio  Mann,  the  fond  nephew  of  Horace 
Walpole’s  old  Florence  correspondent,  and  the  staunch 
patron  of  the  Hambledon  cricketers,  he  preferring 
Lucy  Noel,  Lord  Gainsborough’s  daughter. 

James  Bruce’s  five  volumes  of  Travel  to  discover 
the  Sources  of  the  Nile  was  another  much -discussed 
publication  of  this  year  ;  but  Mrs.  Montagu  thought 
them  rather  a  prolix  account  of  a  rather  useless 
adventure : 

I  should  have  sympathised  more  with  Mr.  Bruce’s  distresses 
if  the  scheme  which  brought  him  into  them  had  had  some 
more  noble  view,  and  beneficient  object ;  but  of  what  use  is 
this  discovery  of  the  source  of  the  Nile  ?  I  have  a  due  respect 
for  this  River  of  old  and  long  establish’d  fame,  and  power, 
but  it  derives  little  of  its  consequence  from  its  source  ;  it  owes 
its  greatness  to  other  causes.  I  may  be  interested  to  know 
by  what  means  a  great  Man,  Son  of  a  mean  one,  acquired 
wealth  and  importance,  but  I  dont  wish  to  see  his  mean  Parents 
picture.  I  do  not  wonder  you  were  so  shockd  at  the  account 
you  had  heard  of  the  cruel  banquet  as  not  to  read  the  particulars, 
but  I  fear  that  the  dishes  seasond  with  sugar,  and  west  Indian 
spices,  served  at  our  tables,  cause  more  misery  to  men  than 
these  banquets  in  Abyssinia  to  the  Beasts. 

Wilberforce’s  day  with  Mrs.  Montagu  was  bearing 
fruit. 

To  Montagu  superintending  affairs  at  Denton  she 
writes  : 

Oct.  the  20 th. 

I  shall  be  much  obliged  if  you  will  at  some  convenient 
opportunity  give  for  me  to  old  Brown  2  guineas  for  his  un¬ 
fortunate  son  John.  Pray  enquire  how  the  Tar  Manufactory 
goes  on,  and  if  they  know  how  to  make  the  Sal  ammoniac  of 
the  liquor. 

Your  description  of  Rokeby  makes  me  more  than  ever 
hate  Sr  Thomas  Robinson  ;  if  I  shd  hereafter  meet  him  on 


LONG  SIR  THOMAS 


1790 


252 

the  banks  of  Styx  before  I  have  taken  a  draught  of  Lethe  I 
shall  give  him  a  bitter  reproof. 

“  Long  ”  Sir  Thomas  was  so  called  to  distinguish 
him  from  another  Sir  Thomas  who  was  short  and  fat, 
and  afterwards  became  Lord  Grantham  ;  Lady  Town- 
shend  said  there  was  little  difference  really,  for  one  was 
as  broad  as  the  other  was  long.  Our  Sir  Thomas  of 
Ranelagh  sold  Rokeby,  which  had  been  in  the  family 
for  160  years,  to  Saurey  Morritt,  father  of  Sir  Walter 
Scott’s  friend.  Hinc  illae  lachyrmae. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Dec.  20th. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burke,  who  dined  with  me  on  Saturday, 
brought  with  them  l’abbe  de  Foulon,  whose  Father’s  head 
was  hack’d  off  by  the  mob,  and  his  heart  carryd  in  a  bowl  of 
blood  through  the  streets  by  the  Bourgeoises  of  Paris,  who 
sang  le  refrain  of  an  old  french  Chanson  point  de  Fete  sans 
Cceur,  this  was  not  done  by  les  Poissardes,  but  by  the  Wives 
of  Shopkeepers.  What  a  wicked  strange  creature  is  the  human 
Animal  when  unrestrained  by  religion,  and  laws  !  You  may 
imagine  impressions  of  grief  and  terror  appear  strongly  in  the 
Countenance  of  l’abbe  de  Foulon.  He  has  brought  to  England 
with  him  the  Children  of  Mr.  Berthier  his  Brother  in  Law, 
who  was  murtherd  at  the  same  time  as  his  Father  was,  and 
much  in  the  same  manner.  A  Lady  has  lent  me  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  at  le  Chatelet  ;  my  eyes  will  not  allow  me  to  look 
far  into  them,  but  they  confirm  me  in  my  detestation  of  the 
Duke  of  Orleans,  and  Mirabeau,  and  do  not  reconcile  me 
to  Mr.  de  la  Fayette. 

A  gentleman  just  returned  from  Paris  told  me  this  morning, 
that  to  avail  themselves  to  the  utmost  of  the  liberty  of  the 
press,  they  are  printing  the  most  horrid  blasphemy,  and 
obscenity,  every  day. 

About  600  families  of  rank  have  left  Paris  since  the  House 
of  the  Due  de  Castries  was  destroy’d. 

Poor  old  Joseph  Francois  Foulon,  grown  grey  in 
the  service  of  his  country,  was  amongst  the  earliest 
victims  of  1789.  A  week  after  the  siege  of  the 


1790 


FOULON  AND  BERTHIER 


253 


Bastille  he  was  arrested  at  Viry,  dragged  to  Paris, 
tortured  with  the  vilest  ferocity  in  spite  of  Lafayette’s 
protests,  and  hanged  at  the  Lanterne.  When  his 
head  was  struck  off  it  was  paraded  on  a  pike,  the  mouth 
stuffed  with  hay,  it  having  been  put  about  that  when 
one  of  his  financial  schemes  was  objected  to  with  the 
question  “  What  will  the  people  do  ?  ”  he  had  replied 
that  if  they  had  no  bread  they  could  eat  hay.  The 
story  was  a  lie,  trumped  up  for  the  occasion  ;  but 
such  lies  stick  ;  and  Carlyle,  accepting  the  legend 
on  the  more  than  dubious  authority  of  the  Deux 
Amis ,  writes  him  down  as  a  scoundrel  of  unmeasured 
wealth,  extortioner,  plotter,  liar,  Old  Infamy,  and 
so  on. 

His  son-in-law  Berthier,  arrested  in  Compibgne  at 
the  same  time,  arrived  in  Paris  that  evening,  escorted 
by  a  mob  of  armed  brigands,  placards  brandished 
round  his  carriage  accusing  him  as  thief,  tyrant,  traitor. 
He  too  was  swept  away  from  the  Hotel  de  Ville  to  the 
Lanterne,  but  sabred  before  it  could  be  reached,  and 
his  body  hacked  to  pieces. 

The  Procedure  du  Chatelet  which  Mrs.  Montagu 
had  been  reading  was  a  volume  of  570  pages  recording 
the  evidence  given  at  the  great  inquiry  held  there  into 
the  events  of  October  5  and  6,  1789,  and  the  march  to 
Versailles.  A  very  large  number  of  witnesses  was 
examined,  and  the  evidence  of  an  instigating  Orleanist 
conspiracy  was  overwhelming,  whilst  the  actual  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  Due  amongst  the  mob  at  the  Palace  was 
testified  by  half-a-dozen  witnesses.  The  Chatelet 
magistrates  convicted  both  the  Due  d’Orleans  and 
Mirabeau  for  arrest,  but  the  latter  cowed  the  Assembly 
into  reversing  this  judgement. 

The  young  Due  de  Castries’  Hotel  in  the  Rue  de 
Varennes  was  pillaged  (Nov.  13,  1790)  and  its  whole 
contents  hurled  into  the  street,  because  he  had 
wounded  Charles  Lameth,  the  Jacobin  deputy,  in  a 
duel  to  which  the  latter  had  challenged  him.  He  had 


LES  POISSARDES 


1790 


254 

fought  in  the  American  War,  and  was  now,  as  an 
emigre ,  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Revolutionaries. 

To  her  Sister 

A  litde  while  ago  there  went  from  Paris  to  Lyons  Mesdames 
les  Poissardes,  their  Oueen  Royally  apparell’d,  they  were  met 
4  miles  from  the  City  by  the  Magistrates,  and  many  of  le 
Tiers  etat,  were  magnificently  feasted  in  a  publick  Hall,  and 
the  Town  was  at  night  most  splendidly  illuminated.  This 
account  was  sent  by  an  English  Lady  at  Lyons.  Perhaps 
you  do  not  wish  to  hear  of  the  Billingsgate  Ladies  being 
received  at  Norwich  in  like  manner.  The  Women  in  a  late 
Mob  at  Nimes  behaved  in  a  shocking  manner.  Amongst 
many  Persons  murderd  were  two  of  high  Rank,  the  bodies 
of  whom  the  Women  cut  into  slices. 

The  Poissardes  of  the  Halles  had  always  been 
privileged  to  go  to  Versailles  on  royal  occasions  and 
le  jour  de  Van ,  when  they  were  royally  feasted. 


*79* 


ROYALTIES  AT  MONTAGU  HOUSE - FANNY  BURNEY  FREE 

- THE  DUC  D’ORLEANS 


A  Storm.  Duchesse  de  Biron.  The  Nabob  and  the  Campbells.  Fanny 
Burney’s  release.  Her  tour  and  visit  to  Sandleford.  Feather  Room 
at  Portman  Square.  Visit  of  the  Queen.  Cowper  on  the  Feather 
Hangings.  The  French  King.  Countess  of  Albany  and  Duke  of 
Gloucester  at  Montagu  House.  July  14.  The  Urn  of  John  Locke. 
Mr.  Bowdler  in  France.  Fanny  Burney  meets  Mrs.  Montagu  at  Mrs. 
Ord’s.  The  Due  d’Orleans  and  the  Gold  of  Pitt. 


To  her  Sister 

Jany.  7th. 

The  storm,  of  which  the  news  papers  have  given  some 
account,  was  too  sublime  and  terrible  for  even  the  pen  of  a 
Poet  to  describe.  My  House  resisted  it  well  except  in  the  frail 
part  of  glass,  the  west  of  my  bow  window  in  my  bed  chamber 
had  4  panes  shatterd,  one  pane  was  so  struck  by  lightening  or 
wind,  that  the  glass  was  driven  through  the  division  of  the 
shutters  ;  some  fell  into  my  room,  and  the  House  maids,  who 
sleep  in  the  room  over  my  head,  had  a  large  shower  of  glass 
thrown  upon  them  as  they  lay  in  bed,  and  the  frame  of  one  of 
their  windows  was  shatterd  to  pieces  ;  the  tops  of  the  Lamps 
at  my  Western  gate  were  carried  to  a  great  distance.  My 
servants  were  many  of  them  much  frighten’d,  but  our  alarms 
were  nothing  compared  to  those  whose  chimneys  fell,  and  whose 
Houses  shook  with  the  wind. 

The  Duchess  of  Biron,  having  had  an  apple  thrown  at  her 
head  by  the  mob  at  the  Opera  at  Paris,  thought  it  best  to  return 
to  England  ;  she  and  Mdme  de  Cambise  dined  with  me  the 
day  before  yesterday. 

Walpole  wrote  :  “  A  song  applicable  to  the  Queen 
being  encored  as  a  compliment,  the  Duchesse  de  Biron 

255 


THE  NABOB  OF  ARCOT 


1791 


256 

applauding  with  her  fan  on  her  box,  a  shower  of  apples 
flew  at  her,  and  with  them  a  pen-knife  that  hardly- 
missed  her.  She  took  it  away  with  her  and  next 
morning  sent  it  to  Lafayette,  and  desired  he  would 
lay  it  on  the  altar  of  Liberty,  and  then  came  away.” 


Portman  Square,  Sat.  21  st  [ May  ?]. 

After  Sr  Archibald  and  Lady  Campbell  had  left  the  East 
Indies  the  old  Nabob  of  Arcott  thought  he  might  then  shew 
his  gratitude  to  them,  without  breaking  in  upon  their  engage¬ 
ment  not  to  accept  any  presents  ;  so  with  a  kind  letter  to  Lady 
Campbell  in  which  he  says,  as  he  used  to  look  upon  her  as  his 
Daughter,  and  call  her  such,  he  hoped  she  would  now  accept 
from  him  an  annuity  of  ^1500  a  year  for  her  life  and  had  given 
order  here  for  the  payment  of  the  first  year  immediately,  but 
tho  the  Campbells  were  pleased  with  this  testimony  of  the 
Nabobs  satisfaction  in  their  conduct  towards  him,  [they]  with 
many  expressions  of  gratitude  and  respect  declined  the  noble 
retribution,  as  appearing  to  them,  to  be  not  consistent  with 
their  engagements  to  the  India  Company.  I  love  the  old 
Nabob  for  his  gratitude,  I  reverence  and  admire  the  Campbells 
for  their  delicate  disinterestedness. 

Pray  who  is  the  supposed  Author  of  Hartley  House  ?  I 
cannot  imagine  how  my  name  travelld  to  Calcutta.  I  dare 
say  the  Author  is  very  goodnatured,  and  disposed  to  praise  even 
small  merit. 

Hartly  House ,  Calcutta — a  young  lady’s  letters  from 
India  to  her  confidante  at  home — was  published  anony¬ 
mously  in  Dublin,  1789  ;  but  I  failed  to  find  in  it  the 
allusion  which  evoked  Mrs.  Montagu’s  interest. 

General  Sir  Archibald  Campbell,  after  long  service 
in  America  and  India,  was  Governor  of  Madras  from 
1786  to  1789. 

The  completion  and  fixing  in  position  of  the 
feather  work  and  other  decoration  in  the  great  room 
at  Portman  Square  took  place  in  June,  and  made  the 
house  uninhabitable  for  a  little  while: 

On  Sunday  last,  as  soon  as  I  had  attended  the  morning 
service,  and  heard  a  most  excellent  Sermon  at  Portman  Square 


1791 


THE  FEATHER  HANGINGS 


257 


Chapel,  I  set  out  for  Shooters  Hill,  where  I  have  slept  every 
night  since,  but  in  the  morning  have  generally  gone  to  Portman 
Square  for  2  or  3  hours  to  attend  to  the  fixing  up  the  feather 
work  and  some  improvements  in  the  hanging  the  Curtains  in 
my  great  room  ;  much  dust  have  I  swallow’d,  much  heat  have 
I  suffered,  in  these  journeys. 

William  Cowper,  who  had  been  a  great  admirer 
of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay,  and  whose  Task  it  had 
been  to  sing  The  Sofa  at  the  behest  of  another  lady, 
now  dedicated  his  Muse  to  The  Feather  Hangings: 

The  Birds  put  off  their  ev’ry  hue 
To  dress  a  room  for  Montague, 

The  Peacock  sends  his  heav’nly  dyes, 

His  rainbows  and  his  starry  eyes ; 

The  Pheasant,  plumes  which  now  infold 
His  manding  neck  with  downy  gold  ; 

The  Cock  his  arch’d  tail’s  azure  show, 

And,  river  blanch’d,  the  Swan,  his  snow. 

All  tribes  beside  of  Indian  name, 

That  glossy  shine,  or  vivid  flame 
Where  rises  and  where  sets  the  day, 

Whate’er  they  boast  of  rich  and  gay, 

Contribute  to  the  gorgeous  plan, 

Proud  to  advance  it  all  they  can. 

Good  courtier  as  she  ever  was,  the  visit  of  the 
Queen  and  six  Princesses  to  her  great  house  this 
summer  must  have  been  felt  as  a  fitting  crown  to  its 
completion;  yet  the  following  letter  contains  the  only 
reference  to  the  royal  breakfast  in  this  collection. 
Others  may  very  likely  have  been  removed.  The 
visit  took  place  on  June  6.  Walpole  says  that  the 
King  was  also  there,  but  that,  I  think,  is  a  mistake. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

June. 

I  had  hoped  this  morning  to  have  had  leisure  to  send  you  a 
full  and  true  account  of  my  various  engagements,  but  I  have 
been  obliged  to  give  up  my  morning,  first  to  paying  my  trades¬ 
mens  bills,  then  to  doing  the  honours  of  my  feather  work  to 
VOL.  II  S 


258  THE  QUEEN  AT  MONTAGU  HOUSE  1791 

about  50  people.  The  news  paper  wd  tell  you  all  that  is  worth 
hearing  about  my  breakfast  on  monday,  The  honour  and  the 
delight  I  received  by  her  Majestys  and  the  Princesses  visit,  no 
pen  can  describe,  no  paper  contain.  All  that  a  great  mind, 
and  benevolent  heart  can  inspire  appears  in  every  word  the 
Oueen  speaks,  and  every  look  and  gesture  can  express.  The 
Princesses  are  beyond  all  description  charming.  The  joy  of 
the  day  I  have  lived  on  ever  since,  and  the  fatigue  etc.  of  the 
succeeding  days  have  not  subdued  my  health  and  spirits. 

The  following  extract  from  Fanny  Burney’s  diary 
of  the  ensuing  April  shows  that  her  artist  cousin, 
Edward  Burney,  had  assisted  in  the  Montagu  house 
decorations: 

“  Mrs.  Montagu  showed  me  her  new  room, 
which  was  a  double  gratification  to  me  from  the 
elegant  paintings  by  our  ingenious  Edward.  .  .  . 
’Tis  a  very  beautiful  house  indeed,  and  now  completely 
finished.”  She  adds  that  she  met  there  a  lady  who, 
though  “  she  liked  her  very  well,  was  but  a  commonish 
non  nothingish  sort  of  a  good  humoured  and  sensiblish 
woman.”  When  Mrs.  Montagu  was  entertaining 
seven  hundred  guests  at  breakfast  it  could  hardly  be 
demanded  that  all  her  visitors  should  be  celebrities. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Shooters  Hill,  27  June. 

....  This  year  the  finishing  and  furnishing  my  great 
room  has  both  magnified  and  multiplied  the  affair,  but  all  wd 
have  been  done  before  this  time  if  it  had  not  been  necessary 
to  cover  my  feather  room  with  a  paper  hanging  lined  with 
linnen  to  preserve  it  from  moth  and  the  summers  dust.  .  .  . 

I  am  sure  you  feel  much  pity,  and  great  apprehension,  for 
the  King  and  Oueen  of  France,  and  the  poor  Dauphin  ;  I  was 
delighted  when  I  heard  they  had  escaped  from  their  rebellious 
subjects,  but  my  joy  was  of  short  duration.  I  think  the  most 
sagacious  cannot  forsee  how  all  this  will  end.  Time  in  its 
course  leads  strange  circumstances  by  the  hand  ;  little  did  I 
imagine,  a  few  years  ago,  that  I  shd  place  the  Pretenders  widow 


LOUISA,  COUNTESS  OP'  ALBANY 
After  Ozias  Humphry 


1791 


THE  COUNTESS  OF  ALBANY  259 

beside  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  at  breakfast,  yet  this  I  did,  par 
politesse,  the  other  day,  and  they  conversed  very  graciously 
together.  You  will  wonder  perhaps,  as  I  never  went  to 
Gloucester  House,  how  I  obtained  the  honours  of  his  Royal 
Highness  visit,  I  assure  you  I  did  not  obtain  [it]  by  a  presump¬ 
tuous  invitation,  but  in  consequence  of  his  intimation  that  he 
wishd  to  come  to  my  breakfast.  His  Royal  Highness  behaved 
with  great  politeness  and  humour. 

The  Countess  of  Albany,  widow  of  the  Young 
Pretender,  visited  England  with  her  devoted  Alfieri 
in  May  1791.  She  went  to  Court  as  Princess  of 
Stolberg,  and  Walpole,  who  met  her  at  Lady  Ailes- 
bury’s,  describes  the  interview  of  “  the  two  queens.” 
Her  attempt  to  get  some  sort  of  pension  or  grant 
failing,  she  went  a  tour  of  the  country,  of  which  her 
Journal  records  her  depressing  impressions.  After 
three  months’  stay  the  pair  returned  to  Paris.  It  was 
at  Dover  Pier,  on  the  way  back,  that  Alfieri  re¬ 
encountered  the  Penelope  Pitt  for  whose  beaux  yeux 
he  had  fought  Lord  Ligonier  in  St.  James’s  Park 
twenty  years  before. 

It  will  be  remarked  in  the  foregoing  letter  that 
Mrs.  Montagu,  ever  staunchly  for  the  Court,  “  never 
went  to  Gloucester  House  ” ;  and  it  may  be  remembered 
that  the  secret  marriages  of  George  III.’s  two  brothers 
— the  Duke  of  Cumberland’s  to  Mrs.  Horton, 
daughter  of  Simon  Luttrell,  whom  Lady  Louisa 
Stuart  summarises  as  “  the  greatest  reprobate  in 
England,”  and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester’s  to  Maria, 
Countess  of  Waldegrave,  the  very  beautiful  illegiti¬ 
mate  daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  and  Horace 
Walpole’s  niece — had  caused  his  indignant  Majesty 
to  forbid  both  brothers  the  Court,  and  to  put  both 
Cumberland  and  Gloucester  House  under  the  ban 
of  his  condign  displeasure. 

The  menage  of  the  two  houses  was,  however,  very 
different;  for  whilst  Mrs.  Horton  and  her  sisters, 
“  noisy,  vulgar,  indelicate  and  intrepid,”  had  led 


i6o  GLOUCESTER  AND  CUMBERLAND  1791 


riotous  parties  at  Vauxhall  and  Ranelagh,  and  made 
Cumberland  House  the  happy  hunting-ground  of  the 
tag-rag  and  bobtail  of  the  Prince  of  Wales’s  set,  the 
Duchess  of  Gloucester  was  a  model  wife,  in  spite  of 
her  royal  husband’s  later  defection  to  her  lovely  and 
intriguing  lady-in-waiting,  Lady  Almeria  Carpenter; 
and  the  Duke’s  real  respect  and  affection  for  his 
brother  the  King  forbade  any  of  the  indecent  caballing 
and  satire  against  Buckingham  House  and  its  easily 
ridiculed  inmates  which  rejoiced  the  heart  of  Betty 
Luttrell  and  her  boon  companions. 

All  the  same,  it  is  conceivable  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
state  breakfast  to  Alfieri’s  mistress  and  to  the  royal 
protector  of  Lady  Almeria  may  have  made  a  certain 
lady  at  Deal  shake  her  maiden  curls  a  little  dubiously. 

I  did  not  doubt  but  our  prudent  Minister  wd  take  every 
possible  precaution  to  prevent  mischief  being  done  in  London 
on  the  14th,  but  as  there  are  so  many  rogues  in  a  great  City, 
and  not  a  few  Enthusiasts,  I  was  glad  when  it  was  past.  My 
Sister  tells  me  that  a  Methodist  Preacher  at  Norwich  took 
for  his  text  that  day,  they  shall  bind  their  King  in  Chains, 
and  their  Nobles  in  bonds  of  Iron  ;  but  the  people  did  not 
endeavour  to  fulfill  his  prophecy.  Dr.  Priestly  has  been 
amply  rewardd  for  his  endeavours  to  introduce  anarchy  and 
confusion. 

There  had  been  much  expectation  of  riots  on  the 
anniversary  of  July  14,  but  the  whole  scheme  of  the 
mischief-making  party  in  England  fizzled  out,  so  far 
as  London  was  concerned.  The  Revolutionary  Club 
were  refused  the  use  both  of  Ranelagh  and  of  the 
Opera  House,  and  had  finally  to  content  themselves 
with  a  meeting  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor  in  the  Strand, 
which  both  Fox  and  Sheridan  declined  to  attend.  A 
few  cockades  were  worn,  and  a  few  windows  broken, 
at  the  instigation,  as  Walpole  suggests,  of  the  glaziers 
and  tallow-chandlers. 

Hannah  More  writes  from  Cowslip  Green,  August 
14: 


1791 


FANNY  BURNEY’S  RELEASE 


261 


I  am  at  this  moment  looking  out  of  my  little  Cottage  window 
on  a  very  neat  and  elegant  Urn  with  this  simple  Inscription 

To  John  Locke 
(born  in  this  village) 

THIS  MEMORIAL  IS  ERECTED 

by  Mrs.  Montagu 

AND  PRESENTED  TO  HANNAH  MoRE. 

Judge,  dear  Madam,  of  my  surprise,  before  it  had  been  erected 
three  days,  to  see  an  Account  of  it,  in  the  Gentleman’s  Maga¬ 
zine.  I  imagine  that  somebody  who  saw  it  in  the  Artificer’s 
yard  at  Bath  gave  this  premature  publication.  To  make  the 
little  history  of  my  Urn  quite  compleat  your  friend  Mr.  Anstey 
happened  to  be  here  on  its  arrival,  and  his  taste  decided  on  the 
place  of  its  erection.  I  am  not  a  little  gratified  by  this  monu¬ 
ment  to  my  own — I  will  not  say  pride,  because  that  I  trust 
something  of  a  better  feeling  at  least  is  mixed  with  it  ;  but  it  is 
a  pleasure  to  me  to  look  on  an  object  that  records  the  most 
honourable  circumstance  of  my  life,  I  mean  the  friendship 
with  which  I  have  been  honoured  by  Mrs.  Montagu. 

Cowslip  Green,  near  Blagdon,  was  about  ten  miles 
on  the  Exeter  Road  from  Bristol.  Locke’s  birth¬ 
place  was  at  Wrington,  a  little  to  the  north-east.  The 
urn  was  subsequently  moved,  when  the  Mores  changed 
houses,  to  Barley  Wood,  just  opposite  the  actual 
birthplace  of  the  philosopher. 

Fanny  Burney,  released  at  last,  ill  and  exhausted 
from  her  five  years  of  penal  servitude  at  Windsor,  on 
July  7,  after  a  few  weeks’  rest  at  Chelsea  College 
had  set  out  on  a  westward  tour  with  Mrs.  Ord  at  the 
end  of  the  month,  visiting  Farnham,  Winchester, 
Southampton,  Stonehenge,  Milton  Abbey,  Dorchester, 
Bridport,  Sidmouth,  Exeter,  Glastonbury,  Wells,  and 
Bath,  where  they  remained  for  a  fortnight,  and  Fanny 
was  introduced  to  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire.  On 
their  return  journey  they  spent  Sunday  with  Mrs. 
Montagu  at  Sandleford.  “  She  lives,”  Miss  Burney’s 
Journal  records,  “  but  a  few  miles  from  Dunstan 
Park  [where  she  was  with  Mrs.  Waddington,  nee 


262 


AN  ENGLISH  DOG 


1791 


Marianne  Port,  Mrs.  Delany’s  great-niece]  and  sent 
over  to  invite  us.  We  found  no  company  but  Mrs. 
Matthew  [Montagu],  who  continues  as  much  a 
favourite  with  me  as  ever,  and  her  four  noble  little 
children,  all  born  since  my  Royal  abode.  We  had 
a  delightful  day  here,  and  here  we  left  Mrs.  Ord.” 
Their  hostess  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter  on  September  20: 

I  hastend  home  from  Nuneham  two  days  sooner  than  I  shd 
otherwise  have  done,  in  spite  of  the  kindest  and  most  urgent 
invitation  to  stay,  and  the  great  temptation  to  do  so,  in  expecta¬ 
tion  of  a  visit  from  Mrs.  Ord  whom  I  expected  at  Sandleford 
at  her  return  from  a  Tour  she  had  been  making  with  Miss 
Burney  ;  however  she  stoppd  two  days  with  her  [at]  Mrs. 
Waddingtons,  and  then  came  hither.  Mrs.  Waddington  and 
Miss  Burney,  who  seems  much  recovered,  gave  me  the  pleasure 
of  her  company  here  at  dinner  Sunday  was  sennight. 


Dec.  %th. 

The  Parliament  of  Paris  has  registered  the  Kings  Edicts,  so 
he  is  still  le  grand  Monarque  at  home,  but  he  appears  a  little 
Sovereign  in  Europe.  Our  Royal  Heir  apparent  will  for  some 
time  be  deprived  of  his  French  Master  in  Polissonneries,  for 
the  D:  of  Orleans  cannot  prevail  on  his  Master  to  restore  him 
to  the  Liberty  of  returning  to  Paris  ;  less  still  will  he  obtain 
leave  to  visit  England,  where  he  is  supposed  to  have  caught  the 
love  of  liberty.  The  French  King,  who  in  his  anger  makes 
use  of  vulgar  phrases  calld  the  D:  of  Orleans  an  english  Dog, 
to  which  he  replied,  an  english  Dog  had  more  liberty  than  a 
french  Prince.  .  .  . 

Mr.  Bowdler  [writing  from  Paris]  says  in  Normandy  all 
was  anxiety  and  distress,  but  all  was  quiet.  All  the  Members 
of  the  Parlt  of  Rouen  in  number  1 20  ordered  not  to  sleep  out 
of  their  own  Houses.  How  wd  our  Senators  endure  this  who 
cannot  rest  in  their  own  Houses  ?  The  return  of  the  Parlt  at 
Paris  is  impatiently  wishd  for,  in  the  meantime  a  total  suspension 
of  all  administration  of  justice.  The  general  opinion,  he  says, 
is  that  the  Court  will  give  up  the  right  of  imposing  any  Taxes 
with1  the  consent  of  the  Nation,  and  another  point  is  the 
appropriation  of  the  Revenue  ;  the  3d,  the  abolition  of  lettres 
de  Cachet.  If  all  this  should  be  brought  about  Louis  seize 
will  be  a  great  Sovereign,  but  no  longer  a  Grand  Monarque  ; 


1791 


THE  GOLD  OF  PITT 


263 


but  without  a  Civil  War  I  think  it  will  not  happen.  It  is  for 
our  interest  he  shd  keep  that  power  which  renders  him  very 
terrible  to  his  subjects,  and  little  so  to  his  Enemies. 

Fanny  Burney,  who  again  met  Mrs.  Montagu  at 
Mrs.  Ord’s  in  December,  found  her  “  in  good  spirits 
and  very  unaffectedly  agreeable.  No  one  was  there  to 
awaken  ostentation,  no  new  acquaintance  to  require  any 
surprise  from  her  powers.  She  was  therefore  natural 
and  easy,  as  well  as  informing  and  entertaining.” 

The  concluding  sentence  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  last- 
quoted  letter  is  of  interest  as  a  small  sidelight  on  the 
English  attitude  towards  the  French  Revolution, 
which  may  be  summarised  (apart,  of  course,  from  our 
own  anarchic  Jacobins)  as  one  of  complacent  relief. 
France  had  her  hands  full,  and  the  constantly  recurring 
fears  of  war  and  invasion  were  for  the  time  being  at 
rest.  “  It  must  be  long,”  wrote  Lord  Dorset,  “  before 
France  returns  to  any  state  of  existence  which  can 
make  her  a  subject  of  uneasiness  to  other  nations.” 
That  it  was  not  to  be  so  very  long  was  due  in  part  to 
the  steps  by  which  the  revolutionary  leaders  were 
forced  to  make  aggressive  use  of  the  army  and  manipu¬ 
late  the  patriotism  of  the  country.  But  the  phantasmal 
“  Or  de  Pitt  ”  that  was  constantly  being  heard  of 
in  Paris  as  supplying  the  backbone  of  mischief  was, 
it  seems  (except  for  such  contributions  as  may  have 
emanated  from  Pitt’s  republican  brother-in-law),  a 
pure  chimera.  The  Due  d’Orleans,  who  had  many 
interests  in  London,  not  all  of  them  reputable,  had 
large  sums  of  money  in  our  banks  from  which  the 
funds  of  the  Orleanist  leaders  were  in  great  measure 
provided  ;  while  the  liberty  of  an  English  dog  per¬ 
mitted  him  also  to  enjoy  and  employ  them  in  the 
gambling  and  debauchery  of  town  and  the  companion¬ 
ship  of  the  Prince,  of  Fox,  Sheridan,  and  their  deep¬ 
drinking  fraternity. 


FANNY  BURNEY  AND  MRS.  THRALE 


Dr.  Johnson,  Fanny  Burney,  and  Mrs.  Montagu.  Letters  to  and  from 
Miss  Burney.  Mrs.  Delany  and  Mrs.  Vesey.  “  Vanessa  ”  and 
Cecilia.  Mrs.  Montagu  on  Fanny  Burney.  Visit  to  Streatham. 
Woodhouse.  Johnson  and  the  Thrales.  Letter  from  Mrs.  Thrale. 
Fanny  Burney  and  Mrs.  Thrale  on  Mrs.  Montagu.  Rivalries.  Mrs. 
Montagu  on  Mrs.  Thrale.  The  Piozzi  marriage.  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
verdict.  Mrs.  Vesey ’s  letter.  The  Italian  tour.  The  Anecdotes  of 
Dr.  Johnson.  Boswell  stung.  The  Essay  and  the  Johnson-Boswell- 
Thrale-Montagu  squabble.  Mrs.  Montagu  on  Mrs.  Piozzi’s  book. 


There  is  a  great  deal  about  Mrs.  Montagu  in  Fanny 
Burney’s  Diary  and  Letters ,  beginning  with  the  delight¬ 
ful  account  of  their  first  introduction  at  Mrs.  Thrale’s 
in  1778,  when  Dr.  Johnson,  hearing  of  her  intended 
visit,  “  began  to  see-saw  with  a  countenance  strongly 
expressive  of  inward  fun,  and  after  enjoying  it  some 
time  in  silence,  he  suddenly  and  with  great  animation 
turned  to  me  and  cried  : 

“  Down  with  her,  Burney  !  down  with  her  ! — 
spare  her  not  ! — attack  her,  fight  her,  and  down  with 
her  at  once  !  You  are  a  rising  wit  and  she  is  at  the 
top  .  .  .  when  I  was  new,  to  vanquish  the  great 
ones  was  all  the  delight  of  my  poor  little  dear 
soul  !  So  at  her,  Burney — at  her  and  down  with 
her  !  ” 

But  Miss  Burney  did  not  down  Mrs.  Montagu  ; 
and  thereafter  they  met  constantly  for  a  while,  either 
at  Streatham  or  other  assemblies  of  mutual  friends. 
Mrs.  Montagu  was  duly  initiated  into  the  great  secret 
of  the  authorship  of  Evelina ,  and  told  Dr.  Johnson 
she  was  “  proud  that  a  work  so  commended  should  be 
a  woman’s.”  She  said  to  Mrs.  Thrale  that  “  she 

264 


EPISTOLARY  STYLES 


265 

was  amazed  that  so  delicate  a  girl  could  write  so 
boisterous  a  book,”  and  sent  her  love  “  to  the  truly 
lovely  Miss  Burney,”  by  which  Fanny  modestly 
presumes  she  meant  lovable. 

But,  as  we  shall  see  also  in  regard  to  Mrs.  Thrale, 
Fanny  Burney’s  admiration  for  Mrs.  Montagu  was 
qualified  by  various  reservations,  which  she  possibly 
imbibed  from  Mr.  Crisp  and  her  (at  that  time)  “  best 
loved  Mrs.  Thrale.”  “  Mrs.  Montagu,”  she  wrote 
with  considerable  insight  in  1781,  “as  we  have 
often  agreed,  is  a  character  rather  to  respect  than  to 
love,  for  she  has  not  that  don  d' aimer  by  which  alone 
love  can  be  made  fond  or  faithful.” 

In  December  1785  Mrs.  Montagu  wrote  Miss 
Burney  a  long  letter,  which  is,  one  must  allow,  by  no 
means  in  her  happiest  vein.  Miss  Barrett  includes 
it  in  her  edition  of  her  aunt’s  letters,  with  a  note  that 
it  is  “  preserved  merely  as  a  specimen  of  the  epistolary 
style  of  so  celebrated  a  person  as  the  writer.”  Mrs. 
Montagu,  referring  to  the  recent  death  of  that  naughty 
rake  Agmondesham  Vesey  (the  Sylph’s  husband, 
Burke’s  friend  and  Johnson’s  club-mate),  says  in  this 
effusion  : 

“  A  frippery  character,  like  a  gaudy  flower,  may 
please  while  it  is  in  bloom  ;  but  it  is  the  virtuous 
only  that,  like  the  aromatics,  preserve  their  sweet 
and  reviving  odour  when  withered.” 

This  is  rather  exalted,  and  particularly  when  one 
remembers  that  Mrs.  Montagu  and  Mr.  Vesey  could 
and  did  flirt  discreetly  on  occasion. 

But  if  Miss  Barrett  can  be  a  little  cattish,  we  are 
in  loyalty  bound  to  retaliate  by  giving  here  a  para¬ 
graph  from  Fanny  Burney’s  reply  to  the  above-quoted 
letter.  I  think  it  will  be  admitted  to  be  a  repast  as 
rich  and  elegant  at  least  as  Mrs.  Montagu’s,  and  in 
its  munificent  rise  and  tenderly  delicate  progress  an 
even  more  typical  specimen  of  the  later  epistolary 
style  of  the  author  of  Cecilia  and  Camilla. 


2  66 


VANESSA 


From  Miss  Fanny  Burney 

I  am  quite  at  a  loss  what  thanks  to  return  for  the  repast 
equally  rich  and  elegant  with  which  you  have  at  once  mentally 
and  substantially  entertained  us — us  permit  me  to  say,  for 
here  I  may  aspire  to  coupling  myself  with  Mrs.  Delany  since 
we  have  participated  in  both  the  entertainments  and  participate 
in  the  grateful  acknowledgements  we  entreat  you  to  accept. 
Are  you  angry  ?  No  dear  Madam  you  cannot  be  angry  that 
I  communicated  to  Mrs.  Delany  a  letter  that  could  not  but 
be  soothing  and  consolatory  to  her  ;  acute  as  her  sorrow  has 
been  and  deep  as  it  must  ever  remain,  she  bore  it  from  the 
first  with  patience  and  resignation,  and  she  now  diminishes 
it  all  she  can  by  receiving  in  good  part  such  comfort  and  relief 
as  her  surviving  friends  can  afford  her.  Could  I  knowing 
this  with-hold  from  her  such  a  solace  as  sympathising  kindness 
from  Mrs.  Montagu  ?  especially  as  it  cannot  be  said  to  open 
the  wound  afresh,  for  the  wound,  alas,  has  never  been  closed. 
That  the  sting  of  death  is  sin  is  most  truly  observed,  and  I 
had  the  pleasure  to  see  a  smile  of  satisfaction  brighten  her 
benignant  countenance  when  she  considered,  from  your  stating 
it  how  happily  it  was  applied  here.  I  am  sorry — I  had  almost 
said  surprised  at  dear  Mrs.  Vesey’s  continual  regret  :  but  a 
heart  so  much  framed  for  tenderness  weighs  not  always  the 
full  value  of  what  excites  it,  and  where  there  is  too  much 
kindness  for  discrimination,  the  scentless  “gaudy  flower,” 
or  the  permanent  “  reviving  aromatic,”  seem  to  have  an  equal 
claim  on  the  affections,  however  wide  the  difference  of  their 
desert.  The  beneficence  of  their  Majesties  and  its  happy 
effect  upon  their  venerable  Protegee,  would  almost  make 
Royalists  of  Rebels,  if  witnessed  in  its  munificent  rise,  and 
most  tenderly  delicate  progress. 

In  1786,  when  Richard  Cumberland  published 
through  Dilly  in  the  Observer  a  malicious  visit  to 
Vanessa,  caricaturing  Mrs.  Montagu,  Fanny  Burney 
valiantly  defended  her  to  Queen  Charlotte  (who  read 
the  article  aloud),  protesting  that  it  was  a  most 
illiberal  and  injurious  assault,  “  for  whatever  may 
be  Mrs.  Montagu’s  foibles,  she  is  free,  I  believe  from 
all  vice,  and  as  a  member  of  society  she  is  magnificently 


FRANCES  BURNEY 
After  E.  F.  Burney 


n 


CECILIA  267 

useful.  The  Queen  was  very  ready  to  hear  me,  and 
to  concur  in  thinking  such  usage  very  cruel.” 

True  to  her  novel-reading  habits,  Mrs.  Montagu 
— urged  by  Mr.  W.  Pepys’  commendation — perused 
Cecilia  on  her  coach  journeys.  Remembering  from 
her  own  vivid  descriptions  what  travel  in  a  coach-and- 
six  meant,  and  what  rough  weather  these  cumbrous 
vessels  made  in  the  mud  and  ruts  of  eighteenth-century 
roads  (remembering,  also,  my  own  dogged  but  futile 
attempt  to  read  Cecilia ,  in  five  volumes  i2mo),  one 
cannot  wonder  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s  eyesight  failed 
her  in  later  years  ;  but  Cecilia  was  read,  and  a  long 
letter  of  critical  approval  was  duly  despatched  to 
Mr.  Pepys. 

I  find  few  references  of  interest  concerning  Fanny 
in  the  later  Montagu  letters,  and  no  trace  of  the  chill 
reservations  which  recur  on  the  other  side.  Here 
are  two  : 

1786. 

I  hope  Mr.  Hastings  will  get  through  all  the  embarassment 
his  enemies  have  raised,  but  it  seems  his  lot,  as  it  has  been 
of  many,  to  have  warm  enemies,  and  cold  friends.  Cecilia 
Burney  is  the  Burney  the  Queen  has  appointed  to  attend  her 
as  Dresser.  Her  Majesty  spoke  of  her  to  me  last  spring  in 
a  manner  which  made  me  nothing  surprized  at  her  preferment, 
and  indeed  she  well  deserves  the  royal  protection. 

To  Mrs.  Carter 

1791. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a  good  account  of  Miss 
Burneys  health  by  my  pretty  amiable  Neighbor  Mrs.  Wadding- 
ton,  who  dined  with  me  the  day  before  yesterday.  Miss  Burney 
is  with  her  sister,  whose  House  is  about  half  a  mile  distant 
from  Mr.  Lockes,  and  they  meet  every  day,  and  must  form 
a  most  agreable  and  charming  society  ;  it  is  the  union  of 
virtue,  talents,  and  taste. 

One  feels,  however,  as  one  reads  Fanny  Burney’s 
Diary  entries  of  her  rencontres  with  Mrs.  Montagu 
that  the  younger  woman  was  always  on  her  guard, 


268 


MRS.  THRALE 


and  never  lowered  the  barrier  of  reserve  and  restraint 
which  Mr.  Crisp  and  Mrs.  Thrale  had  inculcated. 
Of  a  meeting  in  1791  she  writes,  “The  circle  was 
formalised  and  never  broken  into.  Mr.  Pepys  and 
Dr.  Blagden  were  of  the  party,  but  no  one  ventured 
to  break  the  ring.”  Earlier  she  had  confided  to  Mrs. 
Thrale  of  her  :  “  Many  as  are  the  causes  by  which 
respect  may  be  lessened,  there  are  very  few  by  which 
it  can  be  afterwards  restored  to  its  first  dignity.  But 
where  there  is  real  affection  the  case  is  exactly  reversed ; 
few  things  can  weaken,  and  every  trifle  can  revive  it.” 

Mrs.  Montagu  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  too,  were  very 
good  friends — up  to  a  point.  Mr.  Thrale,  indeed, 
was  a  great  favourite  with  her,  and  she  did  her  best 
to  look  after  him  and  his  unconscionable  appetite 
during  his  Bath  visits.  It  was  at  the  Thrales’  at 
Streatham  that  Fanny  Burney  was  introduced  to  Mrs. 
Montagu,  and  revealed  by  Mrs.  Thrale — to  the 
young  lady’s  pretended  confusion — as  the  author  of 
Evelina.  Fanny  writes  : 

We  see  Mrs.  Montagu  very  often  and  I  have  already 
spent  six  evenings  with  her  at  various  houses.  I  am  very  glad 
at  this  opportunity  of  seeing  so  much  of  her,  for  allowing  a 
little  for  parade  and  ostentation  which  her  power  in  wealth 
and  rank  in  literature,  offer  some  excuse  for,  her  conversation 
is  very  agreeable  ;  she  is  always  reasonable  and  sensible  and 
sometimes  instructive  and  entertaining  ;  and  I  think  of  our 
Mrs.  Thrale  we  may  say  the  reverse,  for  she  is  always  enter¬ 
taining  and  instructive  and  sometimes  reasonable  and  sensible  ; 
and  I  write  this  because  she  is  just  now  looking  over  me — not 
but  what  I  think  it  too  ! 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Vesey  in  August  1777,  Mrs. 
Montagu  reports  : 


To  Mrs.  Vesey 

Sandleford,  Aug.  izth,  1777. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dunbar  dined  with  me  the  day  after  you 
left  them,  we  talkd  of  you  with  more  tenderness  than  one 


MR.  THRALE,  AND  MR.  POPE  269 

ever  does  of  those  who  are  not  either  on  the  other  side  the  Sea 
that  girts  our  Island,  or  the  Styx  ;  without  such  seperation 
one  never  does  ample  justice  to  a  character. 

No  indeed  Mrs.  Vesey,  while  your  merits  were  in  Bolton 
Row  they  elbow’d  my  merits  in  Hillstreet,  and  I  never  fully 
expanded  them  in  talk  and  report.  .  .  . 

On  Wednesday  I  dined  at  Mr.  Thrales  at  Streatham,  where 
you  were  most  honourably  mention’d,  and  as  you  were  so  far 
off,  I  did  not  contradict  what  was  said  of  your  virtues,  your 
talents,  your  manners,  etc.  We  had  a  most  elegant  dinner 
at  Mr.  Thrales,  and  the  best  of  all  feasts,  sense,  and  witt, 
and  good  humour.  Mrs.  Thrale  is  a  Woman  of  very  superior 
understanding,  and  very  respectable  as  a  Wife,  a  Mother, 
a  Friend,  and  a  Mistress  of  a  Family.  Mr.  Thrale  has  a  fruit 
garden  and  Kitchen  Garden  that  may  vye  with  the  Hesperians 
gardens  for  fruit  and  flowers.  The  next  day  I  dined  at  Mr. 
Ellis’s,  walkd  where  Pope  had  walkd,  and  sat  where  he  had 
sat  ;  but  alas  !  I  came  back  as  prosaic  as  I  went,  nor  did  I 
feel  that  kind  of  enthusiasm  I  should  have  done  if  the  place 
had  once  belonged  to  Shakespear  or  Milton,  or  Spencer.  I 
admire  and  honour  Mr.  Pope,  he  is  a  charming  writer,  and 
has  every  perfection  a  satirist  and  moral  writer  can  have,  but 
that  something  which  makes  a  poet  divine,  that  lifts  him 
“  above  the  visible  diurnal  sphere,”  that  gives  him  visions  of 
worlds  unknown,  makes  him  sing  like  a  seraphim,  tune  his 
harp  to  the  musick  of  the  spheres,  and  raise  enchantments 
around  him,  was  not  in  the  said  Mr.  Pope  ;  so  tho  I  pay  him 
great  respect  I  keep  my  enthusiastick  adoration  for  the  great 
magicians  who  work  supernatural  wonders. 

It  is,  by  the  way,  worthy  of  passing  mention  that 
it  was  James  Woodhouse,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  cobbler- 
poet-bailiff  at  Sandleford,  who  first  brought  about 
Dr.  Johnson’s  acquaintance  with  the  Thrales.  This 
was  in  January  1765,  when  Murphy,  an  old  friend 
of  Thrale’s,  expressed  his  desire  to  bring  Dr.  Johnson 
to  visit  them  at  Southwark.  Mrs.  Thrale  says  : 

“  At  last  it  was  resolved  that  one  Woodhouse,  a 
shoemaker  who  had  written  some  verses,  and  been 
asked  to  some  tables,  should  likewise  be  asked  to 
ours,  and  made  a  temptation  to  Mr.  Johnson  to  meet 
him  ;  accordingly  he  came,  and  Mr.  Murphy  at  four 


270  THRALE’S  ELECTION  CONTEST 

o’clock  brought  Mr.  Johnson  to  dinner.  We  liked 
each  other  so  well  that  the  next  Thursday  was  ap¬ 
pointed  for  the  same  company  to  meet,  exclusive  of 
the  shoemaker,  and  since  then  Johnson  has  remained 
to  this  day  our  constant  acquaintance  visitor  com¬ 
panion  and  friend.”  Poor  Woodhouse,  having 
brought  about  that  momentous  acquaintance,  received 
short  shrift.  Johnson  recommended  him  to  study 
Addison  night  and  day  “  if  you  mean  either  to  be 
a  good  writer,  or  what  is  more  worth,  an  honest  man 
and  added  later  :  “  They  had  better  furnish  the  man 
with  good  implements  for  his  trade  than  raise  sub¬ 
scriptions  for  his  poems.” 

After  Mr.  Thrale’s  unsuccessful  stand  for  the 
borough  of  Southwark,  his  wife  wrote  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  : 

From  Mrs.  T hr  ale 

Streatham,  Saturday  Sept.  1 6th  [1780]. 

Dear  Madam — I  have  endured  a  great  deal,  but  your 
kindness  would  sooth  any  care,  and  your  Regard  make  amends 
for  almost  any  Disappointment.  Mr.  Thrale  is  once  more 
recovered  to  Life  Intellect  &  Limbs,  and  my  Gratitude  for 
the  Blessing  will  I  hope  drive  away  the  bitter  Remembrance 
of  what  is  past.  His  being  seiz’d  so  publickly  lost  the  Election, 
for  who  would  vote  for  a  Man  they  thought  actually  dead  ? 
so  that  though  he  appeared  on  the  Hustings  the  third  Day 
amidst  a  shouting  Populace,  no  Efforts  could  regain  a  Majority 
so  early  lost.  Sir  Richard  Jebb  is  really  a  Treasure  to  Society, 
and  in  contributing  to  your  recovery  has  conferr’d  a  Benefit 
on  the  public,  while  few  private  Families  I’m  sure  can  owe 
him  more  than  ours  for  the  restoration  of  Dear  Mr.  Thrale. 

Adieu  Madam,  and  accept  my  most  grateful  &  affectionate 
Thanks.  Was  I  less  languid  I  would  write  a  longer  letter 
in  defiance  of  double  Postage  :  but  this  last  Agony  has  a  little 
hurt  my  Health  &  lowered  my  Spirits — I  must  try  to  refit 
though,  lest  another  Storm  overtake  the  shattered  Bark  of 
your  ever  faithful  as  obliged  H.  L.  T. 

But  behind  these  mutual  compliments  there  lurked 
both  in  Mrs.  Thrale’s  and  Fanny  Burney’s  feelings 


FELINE  AMENITIES 


271 


a  certain  subacid  tincture  which  found  amusing  expres¬ 
sion  in  the  records  of  both.  Fanny’s  mentor,  Mr. 
Crisp,  had  taken  a  dislike  to  Mrs.  Montagu  (though 
he  did  not  know  her  personally),  and  did  not  scruple 
to  convey  his  opinion  to  his  Evelina  in  very  plain 
language  ;  and  her  “  Daddy’s  ”  estimate — based, 
apparently,  on  some  of  the  juvenile  letters  to  the 
Duchess  of  Portland — had  doubtless  its  effect ;  whilst 
Doctor  Johnson’s  admiration  for  Mrs.  Thrale  en¬ 
couraged  her  to  look  askance  at  other  “  Queens  ” 
who  might  bid  for  his  allegiance.  And  so  we 
get  delightful  little  feline  amenities  such  as  these 
from  Miss  Burney  on  making  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
acquaintance  : 

“  She  is  middlesized,  very  thin  and  looks  infirm  : 
She  has  a  sensible  and  penetrating  countenance  and 
the  air  and  manner  of  a  woman  accustomed  to  being 
distinguished  and  of  great  parts.  Dr.  Johnson,  who 
agrees  in  this,  told  us  that  Mrs.  Hervey  of  his  acquaint¬ 
ance,  says,  she  can  remember  Mrs.  Montagu  trying 
for  this  same  air  and  manner.” 

“  Mrs.  Montagu  was  very  flashy  and  talked  away 
all  the  evening.” 

“  As  to  Mrs.  Montagu  she  reasons  well  and 
harangues  well,  but  wit  she  has  none.  Mrs.  Thrale 
has  almost  too  much.” 

Mrs.  Thrale  herself  flatly  contradicts  Fanny’s  too 
sweeping  dictum.  In  a  manuscript  note  in  Forbes’ 
Life  of  Beattie  she  admitted  frankly  that  Mrs.  Montagu 
“  had  a  great  deal  of  ready  wit.”  Beattie  himself 
wrote  that  she  had  more  wit  than  any  one  he  had  ever 
known. 

“  The  Bishop  of  Chester  waited  for  Mrs.  Thrale 
to  speak.  Mrs.  Thrale  for  the  Bishop  ;  so  neither 
of  them  spoke  at  all  !  Mrs.  Montagu  cared  not  a 
fig,  as  long  as  she  spoke  herself,  and  so  she  harangued 
away.” 

Describing  a  visit  to  the  “  Blue  Palace  ”  (Montagu 


272  COLLOQUIAL  RIVALRY 

House)  in  May  1782,  she  says  that  Lord  Bristol  was 
the  star  of  the  evening,  the  only  spouter — Mrs.  M. 
excepted, — though  Lord  Westcote  tried  to  twinkle 
with  him. 

And  from  Mrs.  Thrale  we  find  notes  such  as  these: 

“  Mrs.  Montagu  was  brilliant  in  diamonds,  solid 
in  judgment,  critical  in  talk.”  (1780.) 

Mrs.  Montagu  has  been  here  ;  she  says  I  ought 
to  have  a  statue  erected  to  me  for  my  diligent  attend¬ 
ance  on  my  compting  house  duties  [at  the  Southwark 
brewery].  The  wits  and  the  blues  (as  it  is  the  fashion 
to  call  them)  will  be  happy  enough,  no  doubt,  to  have 
me  safe  at  the  brewery — out  of  their  way." 

Fanny  Burney,  indeed,  admits  the  rivalry  : 

“  More  bland  and  more  gleeful  than  that  of  either 
Mrs.  Vesey  or  Mrs.  Montagu  was  the  personal 
celebrity  of  Mrs.  Thrale.  Mrs.  Vesey,  indeed,  gentle 
and  diffident,  dreamed  not  of  any  competition,  but 
Mrs.  Montagu  and  Mrs.  Thrale  had  long  been  set 
up  as  rival  candidates  for  colloquial  eminence,  and 
each  of  them  thought  the  other  alone  worthy  to  be 
her  peer.  Openly  therefore  when  they  met  they 
combated  for  precedence  of  admiration,  with  placid 
though  high  strained  intellectual  exertion  on  the  one 
side,  and  exuberant  pleasantry  or  classical  allusion 
or  quotation  on  the  other  ;  without  the  smallest  malice 
in  either.” 

The  nuances  of  character  of  these  dear  ladies  are 
delightfully  revealed  in  their  mutual  chronicles.  The 
hints  and  reservations  of  the  Burney,  the  frank 
jealousy  of  Mrs.  Thrale,  give  an  amusing  tartness  to 
their  eulogies.  Mrs.  Montagu  could  fly  into  a 
petulant  passion  with  Johnson,  and  write  with  exagger¬ 
ated  bitterness  of  those  she  disliked,  but  these  little 
sugared  acid  drops  were  not,  as  a  rule,  in  her  critical 
dispensary. 

“  I  know,”  she  writes  to  Mr.  Pepys  from  Bath  in  May  1780, 
“  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  Mr.  Thrale  is  certainly  mended  in 


MRS.  THRALE  AND  PIOZZI 


273 


his  health,  but  the  great  felicity  of  his  life,  at  all  times  and 
on  all  occasions  is,  his  having  such  a  Wife.  If  her  uncommon 
talents  and  virtues  all  applied  in  his  service  did  not  preserve 
him  from  every  fatiguing  attention  he  would  soon  succombe. 
She  is  to  fly  to  London  tomorrow  on  election.  You  will 
certainly  see  her  before  she  returns  to  Mr.  Thrale  here.” 

And  referring  to  her  custom  of  keeping  novels  for 
travelling  companions  on  her  journeys  : 

Many  a  measured  mile  and  letterd  post  have  I  passd  in¬ 
sensibly,  and  unheeded,  by  being  engaged  in  some  frolick  with 
Tom  Jones,  or  absorbed  in  the  wonderful  adventures  of  Robinson 
Crusoe.  I  can  with  great  truth  assure  you,  I  shall  look  on  my 
long  journey  with  much  less  apprehension  by  having  Cecilia 
for  my  fellow  Traveller.  If  Cecilia  has  half  the  sense,  and 
half  the  amiability  of  Miss  Burney,  I  shall  find  improvement 
and  delight  in  her  company.  Perhaps  you  may  think  my 
considering  these  kind  of  works  chiefly  as  travelling  companions 
shews  a  degree  of  contempt  for  them,  but  it  arises  from  a  very 
different  principle,  a  persuasion  that  they  have  power  to  interest 
and  amuse,  and  that  nothing  can  hinder  sympathy  with  the 
circumstances  and  situations,  but  the  intrusions  of  business  or 
company.  Interruptions  and  intrusions  of  other  objects  are 
fatal  to  sympathy,  and  Fiction  fades  away  in  the  importunate 
solicitations  and  presence  of  Realities. 

It  is  a  little  difficult  to-day  to  realise  the  extra¬ 
ordinary  outburst  of  indignation  caused  amongst  her 
quondam  friends  by  Mrs.  Thrale’s  attachment  to 
an  Italian  gentleman  much  of  her  own  age  and  her 
former  husband’s  station,  and,  like  the  highly  respected 
Dr.  Burney,  a  teacher  of  music.  If  Johnson’s  friend 
thought  of  marrying  she  must  be  mad  ;  and  Fanny 
Burney  wrote  :  “  Dr.  Pepys  had  a  long  private  con¬ 
ference  with  me  concerning  Mrs.  Thrale,  with  whose 
real  state  of  health  he  is  better  acquainted  than  any¬ 
body,  and  sad  indeed  was  all  he  said.”  When  Mrs. 
Thrale  came  to  Harley  Street  in  January  1782  after 
her  husband’s  death,  Pepys  asked  her,  as  she  puts  it, 
“  to  dine  in  Wimpole  Street  to  meet  Mrs.  Montagu 
and  a  whole  army  of  blues”  but  the  poor  lady  declined, 

VOL.  II  T 


274 


MY  VERDICT,  LUNACY  ” 


a 


convinced  they  were  all  watching  her  husband¬ 
hunting,  and  that  the  Pepys  brothers  in  particular  were 
running  about  the  town  spying  and  enquiring  as  to  her 
doings  and  her  men  friends.  So  the  “  army  of  blues  ” 
thought  madness  a  charitable  hypothesis  for  an  im¬ 
possible  infatuation  with  a  vagabond  fortune-hunter. 

It  was  thwarted  passion  that  was  really  the  matter 
with  Hester  Thrale,  and  jealousy  that  was  to  a  large 
extent  at  the  bottom  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  anger ;  whilst 
Fanny  Burney,  schooled  by  her  father  in  the  strait 
sect  of  worldly  wisdom,  echoed  the  Doctor’s  views, 
and  the  rest  of  the  world  adopted  the  easiest  solution 
of  what  seemed  to  them  an  inexplicable  step. 

So  when  the  Piozzi  marriage  thunderbolt  finally 
fell  in  1 7 84,  Mrs.  Montagu  spoke  her  mind  very 
frankly  and  definitely  : 

15  July  1784. 

[The  marriage  actually  took  place  on  July  25.] 

Mrs.  Thrales  marriage  has  taken  such  horrible  possession 
of  my  mind  I  cannot  advert  to  any  other  subject.  I  am  sorry 
and  feel  the  worst  kind  of  sorrow,  that  which  is  blended  with 
shame.  Sorrow  lies  in  state  on  the  Tomb  of  the  Dead,  in 
the  regions  of  melancholly  it  preserves  a  certain  dignity  and 
fears  not  to  meet  the  eye  which  casts  a  look  of  pity  on  it,  but 
when  one  laments  and  weeps  over  the  disgrace  of  a  Friend, 
bitter  are  the  sensations,  and  as  the  cause  of  ones  grief  is  an 
object  of  contempt  and  scorn  one  cannot  disburthen  the  heart 
by  communicating  its  sufferings,  but  shuts  it  up  with  all  its 
poisonous  and  baleful  qualities.  I  am  myself  convinced  that 
the  poor  Woman  is  mad,  and  indeed  have  long  suspected  her 
mind  was  disorderd.  She  was  the  best  Mother,  the  best  Wife, 
the  best  friend,  the  most  amiable  member  of  Society.  She 
gave  the  most  prudent  attentions  to  her  Husbands  business 
during  his  long  state  of  imbecility  and  after  his  death,  till  she 
had  an  opportunity  of  disposing  well  of  the  great  Brewery. 

I  bring  in  my  verdict  lunacy  in  this  affair.  I  am  heartily 
grieved  for  Miss  Burney,  and  Dr.  Johnson  ;  female  delicacy, 
and  male  wisdom,  will  be  much  shocked,  and  they  have  both 
a  very  sincere  attachment  to  their  friends,  and  a  delicate  sense 
of  honour.  I  respected  Mrs.  Thrale,  and  was  proud  of  the 


THE  PIOZZI  MARRIAGE 


275 


honour  she  did  to  the  human  and  female  character  in  fulfilling 
all  the  domestick  duties  and  cultivating  her  mind  with  what¬ 
ever  might  adorn  it.  I  would  give  much  to  make  everyone 
think  of  her  as  mad,  the  best  and  wisest  are  liable  to  lunacy  ; 
if  she  is  not  considerd  in  that  light  she  must  throw  a  disgrace 
on  her  sex.  .  .  . 

Mrs.  Vesey  replies  : 

You  must  accept  Mrs.  Thrale’s  marriage  with  Piozzi. 
Her  daughter  has  told  her  she  can  never  acknowledge  such  a 
Father  and  she  and  her  three  sisters  have  taken  refuge  with 
their  guardian  at  Brighthelmstone.  She  has  cut  down  the 
trees  on  her  estate  in  Wales  and  would  have  carried  her  daughters 
abroad  if  the  trustees  would  have  allowed.  .  .  .  The  Bride¬ 
groom  very  black,  low  and  mean.  I  wish  Master  Hymen 
had  not  been  so  full  of  pranks  this  year.  She  has  wrote  to 
Doctor  Johnson  upon  this  occasion  and  desired  he  would  not 
censure  what  she  has  done.  He  burst  into  tears,  I  wish  we 
could  see  his  answer.  This  has  been  the  occasion  of  Miss 
Burney’s  illness. 

And  a  little  later  Mrs.  Montagu  writes  : 

Mrs.  Thrale  is  undoubtedly  married  to  Signr  Piozzi,  at 
which  I  am  still  more  grieved  than  astonish’d.  She  has  very 
uncommon  parts,  but  certainly  never  appeard  a  Person  of  sound 
understanding  ;  who  ever  possesses  that  blessing  never  is 
guilty  of  absurd  conduct,  or  does  anything  which  the  World 
calls  strange. 

Miss  Burney  and  Dr.  Johnson  have  been  much  afflicted 
on  account  of  Mrs.  Thrales  indiscretion,  and  indeed  I  pity 
them  both,  but  what  misery  may  in  time  await  the  poor  Woman 
herself  one  cannot  guess.  Piozzi  has  bought  an  estate  in 
Italy  with  her  money  ;  there  she  will  probably  weep  out  the 
rest  of  her  days,  for  bitter  must  be  her  reflections  when  her 
passions  subside  and  give  place  to  reason. 

Dr.  Johnson,  by  his  reply  of  July  2,  had  interpreted 
Mrs.  Thrale’s  letter  to  him  of  June  30  from  Bath  as 
almost  certainly  implying  that  she  was  already  married 
to  Piozzi,  and  Mrs.  Montagu,  who  had  doubtless 
seen  the  circular  enclosed  with  it,  probably  thought 
the  same  ;  but  the  Roman  Catholic  ceremony  took 


276 


THE  ANECDOTES 


place  at  the  Spanish  Embassy  on  July  23,  and  the 
Protestant  wedding  at  St.  James’,  Bath,  on  the  25th. 

Mrs.  Piozzi,  as  we  know,  was  very  far  from  weeping 
out  the  rest  of  her  days  in  Italy  ;  she  travelled  through 
France  to  Turin,  Milan,  Verona,  Venice,  Florence, 
Rome,  and  Naples,  spending  nearly  two  years  in  Italy, 
and  returning  to  England  by  Germany  and  Holland 
early  in  1787.  Whilst  abroad  she  wrote  the  Anecdotes 
of  Dr.  Johnson ,  which  was  finished  at  Florence,  revised 
by  Lucas  Pepys  and  Lysons,  and  published  by  Cadell 
in  1786  ;  and  her  travel  journal  appeared  three  years 
later  ;  in  the  preface  to  which  she  remarked  that  she 
had  not  thrown  her  thoughts  into  the  form  of  private 
letters.  “  My  old  acquaintance  rather  chose  to 
amuse  themselves  with  conjectures  than  to  flatter  me 
with  tender  enquiries  during  my  absence.”  She  had 
indeed  been  pursued  by  abuse  from  Baretti  and  by 
newspaper  recrimination  at  Johnson’s  death  ;  but  her 
Johnson  Anecdotes ,  though  damned  by  Walpole  and 
damnable  to  Boswell,  were  a  great  and  immediate 
success,  the  King  being  unable  to  obtain  a  copy  by 
the  evening  of  the  day  of  publication.  The  anecdotes, 
as  she  explained,  were  written  from  memory,  which 
might  excuse  some  inaccuracies  ;  but  “  a  trick,  which 
I  have  seen  played  on  common  occasions  of  sitting 
steadily  down  at  the  other  end  of  the  room  to  write 
at  the  moment  what  should  be  said  in  company  either 
by  Dr.  Johnson  or  to  him,  I  never  practised  myself 
nor  approved  of  in  another.  There  is  something  so 
ill-bred  and  so  inclining  to  treachery  in  this  conduct, 
that  were  it  commonly  adopted  all  confidence  would 
soon  be  exiled  from  society  and  a  conversation 
assembly  room  would  become  tremendous  as  a  court 
of  justice”;  a  verdict  in  which  most  of  us  would 
agree,  while  adding  a  mental  rider  that,  in  the  case 
referred  to,  the  end  justified  the  means. 

Boswell  was  stung  to  embittered  rejoinder,  and 
seized  upon  the  Montagu  Essay  disavowal,  which  was 


BOSWELL  AND  MRS.  PIOZZI  277 

repeated  in  the  Anecdotes ,  and  which  he  proceeded  to 
denounce  at  length  in  a  letter  to  the  Gazetteer. 

Boswell,  in  the  Hebrides  Tour,  had  reported 
Johnson  as  saying  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay  : 
“  Reynolds  is  fond  of  her  book,  and  I  wonder  at  it, 
for  neither  I  nor  Beauclerk  nor  Mrs.  Thrale  could 
get  through  it.”  Now  Boswell  and  Mrs.  Piozzi  did 
not  love  one  another,  and  the  latter  hastened  to  write 
from  Naples  :  “  I  do  not  delay  a  moment  to  declare 
that  on  the  contrary  I  have  always  commended  it 
myself,  and  heard  it  commended  by  every  one  else  ; 
and  few  things  would  give  me  more  concern  than  to 
be  thought  incapable  of  tasting  or  unwilling  to  testify 
my  opinion  of  its  excellence.”  Horace  Walpole  was, 
of  course,  delighted,  and  says  he  has  just  seen  (March 
1786)  “  a  very  clever  letter  from  Mrs.  Piozzi  to  Mrs. 
Montagu  to  disavow  a  jackanapes  who  has  lately 
made  a  noise  here,  one  Boswell  by  anecdotes  of  Dr. 
Johnson.  .  .  .  The  cock  biographer  has  fixed  a  direct 
lie  on  the  hen.  .  .  .  She  and  Boswell  and  their  hero 
are  the  joke  of  the  public  .  .  .  enough  of  these 
mountebanks.” 

Unfortunately  for  Mrs.  Piozzi,  Boswell  proceeded 
to  note  that  Mrs.  Thrale  had  herself  seen  and  read 
the  Journal  containing  this  very  passage  without 
remark  or  objection,  and  that,  though  he  had  struck 
out  her  name  when  the  sheets  were  printing,  he  had 
afterwards  reinstated  it,  thinking  “  he  had  no  right 
to  deprive  Mrs.  Thrale  of  the  high  honour  which 
Dr.  Johnson  had  done  her.”  Tantaene  animis 
coelestibus  irae  ? 

Walpole,  indeed,  accused  Boswell  of  betraying 
his  master’s  secrets  and  weaknesses  as  a  means  of 
hurting  his  own  enemies,  “  which  he  has  done  shame¬ 
fully,  particularly  against  Mrs.  Piozzi  and  Mrs. 
Montagu.”  Mrs.  Piozzi  wrote  and  published  a 
letter  to  Mrs.  Montagu  repudiating  Boswell’s  state¬ 
ment  about  the  Essay  ;  and  in  1786  she  wrote  to 


278 


FLASH  AND  FLATTERY 


Daniel  Lysons  from  Rome  :  “  Is  Mrs.  Montagu  con¬ 
vinced  of  my  respect  and  of  Mr.  Boswell’s  flippancy  ? 
I  hope  so.”  Altogether  the  public  got  a  good  deal 
of  harmless  amusement  out  of  this  quadrangular  and 
very  insignificant  duel. 

In  1789,  according  to  Mrs.  Piozzi,  Mrs.  Montagu 
tried  to  make  up  again,  but  she  was  not  to  be  taken 
and  left,  she  wanted  no  flash  or  flattery  ;  she  never 
had  had  more  of  either  than  now,  or  was  ever  half 
so  happy — and  so  on.  Her  still  embittered  spirit 
vented  itself  in  hard  sayings  from  which  scarce  one 
of  her  old  friends — not  even  “  the  insolent  saucy 
spirited  little  puss,”  Fanny  Burney — escaped  ;  and  it 
would  be  obviously  unfair  to  judge  her  from  the 
outpourings  of  a  very  facile  pen  at  a  time  of  much 
misunderstanding  and  of  conflicting  passions. 

To  her  sister  Mrs.  Montagu  wrote  : 

Sunday  the  6  (1789  ?). 

I  have  been  amused  by  Mrs.  Piozzis  letters,  tho  the  style 
is  sometimes  Vulgar,  sometimes  pedantick,  but  she  writes 
like  a  Woman  of  parts  ;  her  accounts  of  things  are  lively  and 
clever,  and  her  observations  often  very  ingenious  and  sensible. 

And,  after  all,  let  us  end  by  remembering  that 
Mrs.  Thrale  protested  volubly  that  Boswell  was 
wrong,  and  that  she  really  did  “  get  through  ”  the 
Essay  on  Shakespeare.  There  is  comfort  in  that. 


HESTER  LYNCH  PIOZZI 


niuuu 


1792 


CURSORY  REMARKS  ON  THE  JACOBINS - ENGLISH  VIEWS 

ON  FRENCH  EVENTS 


Letter  from  James  Beattie.  The  Dukes  of  Cumberland  and  Gloucester 
and  their  Duchesses.  William  Gilpin,  Paine,  and  Priestley.  French 
news.  Duchesse  de  Biron.  The  Sans-culottes.  Miss  Pulteney. 
Rumour  of  the  King’s  death.  Due  d’Orleans.  The  Primate  of 
Ireland  on  the  French  Revolution.  Visit  to  Kew.  Trial  of  Louis. 
Due  de  Fitz  James.  The  Houghton  pictures. 


The  year  1792  opens  with  a  very  long  letter  from 
James  Beattie,  from  which  a  few  extracts  only  can  be 
given.  It  is  dated  January  5. 

Though  I  have  not  of  late  had  time  to  express  my  gratitude 
for  the  honour  of  your  kind  letter,  my  heart  has  often  thanked 
you  in  silence  for  that  and  for  all  your  other  goodness  ;  the 
recollection  of  which  is  one  of  the  chief  comforts  of  my  life. 
Our  excellent  friend  Sir  William  Forbes,  who  lately  went  to 
London  with  his  daughter,  would  no  doubt  inform  you,  that  I 
have  for  these  ten  weeks  past  been  more  employed,  than  I  ever 
was  in  my  life  before.  Two  years  ago,  or  more,  I  came  under 
terms  with  a  bookseller  to  get  ready  for  the  press  the  second 
volume  of  Elements  of  Moral  Science  ;  but  my  son’s  long 
illness  prevented  that,  by  disqualifying  me  for  every  sort  of 
mental  application.  The  bookseller,  I  own,  was  not  a  hard 
taskmaster  ;  he  knew,  and  he  pitied,  my  condition  ;  nor  did 
he  even  urge  the  performance  of  my  engagement  :  which  made 
me  the  more  solicitous  to  perform  it,  as  soon  as  I  should  in  any 
degree  recover  the  use  of  my  faculties.  Accordingly  I  have 
laboured  prodigiously  this  great  while  ;  not  withstanding  the 
weakness  of  my  eyes  ;  a  fixed  rheumatism  in  my  right  arm 
which  sometimes  disables  my  right  hand  ;  and  my  business  in 
the  college,  which  employs  me  three  hours  a  day.  Unless 

279 


28o 


BEATTIE  ON  FRANCE 


1792 


something  unforseen  prevent  me,  I  hope  to  have  that  second 
volume  ready  for  the  press  before  the  end  of  March  :  it  will 
be  considerably  larger  than  the  first  volume,  and  comprehend 
Elements  of  Ethicks,  Economicks,  Politicks  etc.  In  the 
chapter  of  Economicks  I  had  occasion  to  consider,  among 
other  things,  the  relation  of  master  and  servant  ;  which  brought 
slavery  in  my  mind,  and  gave  rise  to  a  dissertation  of  the  lawful¬ 
ness  and  expediency  of  the  Slave-trade.  On  this  point,  I  am 
perhaps  more  particular  than  is  consistent  with  the  brevity  of 
an  elementary  book  ;  but  when  I  had  once  got  into  the  subject, 
I  found  it  not  very  easy  to  get  out  again  ;  and  I  could  not 
resist  that  opportunity  of  introducing  a  compliment  to  Mr. 
Montagu,  Mr.  Pitt,  Mr.  Wilberforce,  and  those  other  champions 
of  humanity  and  justice,  who  in  this  business  made  so  noble 
an  appearance  last  session  of  parliament.  I  hope  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Montagu  and  their  lovely  family  are  well  :  I  long  to 
hear  of  them,  and  sincerely  offer  them  my  most  respectful  and 
affectionate  compliments.  .  .  . 

France  seems  to  be  running  fast  into  “  Confusion  worse 
confounded.”  Their  national  assembly  puts  me  in  mind  of 
Barebone’s  parliament  ;  and  I  shall  be  very  much  surprised,  if 
it  does  not  come  to  the  same  ignominious  end.  The  best 
thing  for  France  would  be,  that  both  parties  should  unite,  and 
refer  themselves  to  the  arbitration  of  a  learned  and  venerable 
body  of  men,  chosen  for  the  purpose,  and  vested  with  authority 
to  reform  the  abuses  of  the  last  government,  and  establish  some 
decent  political  system  in  the  room  of  the  present  anarchy. 
But  how  can  this  be  the  case  while  the  power  remains  in  the 
hands  of  despicable  usurpers,  who  know  not  what  true  political 
liberty  is  ;  are  ignorant  of  the  very  first  principles  of  legisla¬ 
tion  ;  and  too  self-conceited,  either  to  take  lessons  from 
history,  or  to  profit  by  the  example  of  their  contemporaries 
and  neighbours. 

The  primrose  path  which  led  Beattie  from  “  Econ¬ 
omicks  ”  to  “  Mr.  Montagu  and  his  lovely  family  ”  is 
typical  of  a  good  deal  of  the  book-making  of  the  times. 


To  Matthew  Montagu 

I  met  passing  through  Newbury  3000  sheep  come  from 
Wayhill  Fair.  I  was  glad  they  were  going  on  to  the  Graziers 
and  not  the  Butchers.  I  stoppd  my  carriage  for  fear  it  might 


1792 


THE  PANTHEON  FIRE 


281 

do  harm  to  the  harmless.  I  should  not  feel  the  same  tender 
concern  for  the  Parisian  Women  who  the  newspapers  say  are 
as  boisterous  and  mischievous  as  the  Rougher  Sex.  At  all 
times  it  has  appeared  to  me  that  the  French  women  have  too 
much  of  the  male  character,  the  men  of  the  female. 

To  her  Sister 

Jan.  26. 

The  Duchess  of  York  is  much  liked  by  all  who  have 
conversed  with  her.  She  fainted  at  the  Drawing  Room  at  the 
birthday,  and  by  the  account  which  I  received  of  Mrs.  M. 
Montagu  of  the  croud  I  do  not  wonder  at  it.  Lord  Sandwich 
is  in  a  very  declining  state  of  health  which  I  am  sorry  for  as  he 
will  be  a  great  loss  to  Mrs.  Poyntz  and  her  children  and  he  has 
behaved  to  me  with  such  respect  and  attention  as  I  have  not 
found  from  some  of  my  near  relations  by  blood.  .  .  .  There 
are  suspicions  that  the  Pantheon  was  set  on  fire  by  design,  but 
those  suspicions  are  not  proved  on  any  one. 

Frederick,  Duke  of  York,  the  King’s  second  son, 
had  married  Frederica,  daughter  of  Frederick  the 
Great,  in  the  previous  September. 

The  Pantheon,  opened  in  1772  and  long  the  haunt 
of  the  macaronis,  had  latterly  been  transformed  into 
an  Opera  House.  It  was  burnt  down  this  January  14, 
and  rebuilt  for  masquerades  in  1795. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester  had,  it  will  be  remembered, 
clandestinely  married  Lady  Waldegrave  as  far  back 
as  1766,  and  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had 
married  Anne  Luttrell,  widow  of  Christopher  Horton, 
in  1771. 

The  Duchess  of  Cumberland’s  sister,  Lady  Eliza¬ 
beth  (Betsy)  Luttrell,  whom  Lady  Louisa  Stuart 
describes  as  precisely  a  roue  in  petticoats,  coarse, 
boisterous,  and  witty,  was  an  inveterate  gambler,  led 
the  gaming  tables,  and  was  loudest  in  ridicule  and 
mimicry  of  the  Court,  the  King’s  “  What  ?  What  ?  ” 
the  Queen’s  wide  mouth  and  bad  English,  the  ill- 
cut  clothes  and  pious  virtues  of  Buckingham  House. 
Mrs.  Matthew  writes  to  her  aunt : 


282 


WILLIAM  GILPIN 


1792 


The  publick  is  alarmd  very  much  at  a  report  that  we  are  to 
be  taxd  to  discharge  the  debts  two  young  Gentlemen  have 
incurred.  Our  new  Duchess  I  hear  has  modest  and  pleasing 
manners  ;  she  visits  at  Cumberland  House,  but  I  hope  will  not 
engage  at  Lady  E  Luttrels  Faro  table. 

A  few  extracts  from  summer  letters  of  this  year  to 
her  sister  and  to  Mrs.  Carter  will  indicate  how  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  days  and  thoughts  were  occupied. 

I  have  been  amused  by  Mr.  Gilpins  remarks  on  Forrest 
Scenes.  He  is  happy  in  his  descriptions,  and  his  taste  for  rural 
objects,  and  I  had  rather  wander  in  Forrests  with  such  an 
Author,  than  accompany  a  modern  novel  writers  adventures. 
I  am  sorry  to  hear  Mrs.  Charlotte  Smiths  Novel  is  so  wildly 
Democratical.  I  have  not  read  it,  but  find  it  offends  all  sober 
people.  I  am  more  mortified  at  this,  as  it  affects  her  character, 
than  if  it  related  merely  to  her  Genius. 

William  Gilpin  (brother  of  Sawrey,  the  animal 
painter)  had  published  several  volumes  describing  his 
summer  tours,  and  illustrated  by  aquatints.  Charlotte 
Smith,  whose  Emmeline  had  made  her  some  name  as 
a  novelist,  published  Celestina  and  Desmond  this  year, 
very  successful  in  their  day,  but  now  long  forgotten. 

I  sympathise  in  your  joy  that  Mr.  Pitt,  who  has  done  so 
much  for  his  Country,  has  at  last  got  something  for  himself, 
but  the  publick  will  ill  requite  its  obligations  to  him  if  he  does 
not  obtain  much  greater  Personal  benefit.  I  think  Ld  Gower, 
and  his  family,  must  have  rejoyced  at  landing  on  the  Brittish 
Shore.  I  do  not  pity  those  who  encouraged  the  French 
Rebellion,  for  now  being  the  Victims  of  the  Mob  they  made 
their  instruments.  The  accounts  of  murderd  bodies  thrown 
into  the  Seine,  where  they  lye  and  putrify,  make  me  dread  a 
Pestilence,  which  will  be  communicated  to  us  even  without 
the  endeavours  of  Paine  and  Priestly,  and  their  worthy  adherents. 

Pitt  had  just  received  from  the  King  the  lucrative 
office  of  Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  and  was  awaiting 
re-election.  Thomas  Paine,  who  had  recently  pub¬ 
lished  the  first  part  of  his  Rights  of  Man  in  reply  to 
Burke’s  Reflections  on  the  Revolution ,  was  compelled  this 


1792 


REVOLUTIONARIES 


283 


summer  to  fly  to  France,  and  became  a  French  citizen 
in  August.  The  bulk  of  the  country  was  in  no  mood 
to  stand  the  activities  of  the  revolutionary  party  over 
here,  and  Joseph  Priestley,  the  learned  advocate  of 
the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number,  propos¬ 
ing  to  be  present  at  a  dinner  of  the  Constitutional 
Society  of  Birmingham  to  commemorate  the  fall  of 
the  Bastille,  had  his  house  at  Fairhill  wrecked  and  most 
of  his  library  and  laboratory  destroyed  ;  he,  too,  found 
life  in  England  too  “  uncomfortable,”  and  emigrated 
to  America  two  years  later,  considering  New  York 
preferable  to  Carlyle’s  “  iron  Birmingham  shouting 
‘  Church  and  King,’  and  itself  knew  not  why,  bursting 
out  into  rage,  drunkenness,  and  fire.” 

A  scheme  had  been  laid  to  poison  the  K  of  Sardinia  of  which 
having  intimation  by  a  letter,  the  Palace  Gates  were  shut,  his 
Cooks  were  searchd,  and  on  two  french  Cooks  much  poison 
was  found.  A  French  Lady,  who  had  expended  vast  sums  to 
encourage  all  sorts  of  mischief,  had  at  the  same  time  despatchd 
a  Courier  to  Petersburg  with  letters  to  some  Person  there  to 
get  the  Czarina  poisond,  but  the  K  of  Sardinia  had  the  Courier 
stopp’d.  What  wicked  wretches  are  the  French  Democrates  ! 


From  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu 

Manchester  Square,  June. 

I  am  sure  you  must  have  read  with  horror,  all  the  news  from 
France  which  has  appeared  in  the  Papers.  It  is  perfectly 
authenticated  that  the  multitude,  carried  Cannon  up  to  the 
Apartment  of  his  Majesty,  and  forced  their  way  into  it,  by 
pick-axes.  They  threatened  destruction  on  the  Queen,  and 
said  that  if  the  King  did  not  give  up  his  veto,  they  wd  stain 
every  stone  in  Paris  with  her  blood.  She  remained  undaunted 
in  their  presence,  and  his  Majesty  appears  to  have  on  this 
occasion  retrieved  his  character  from  the  imputation  of 
Cowardice.  Nothing  could  surpass  his  resolution  in  refusing 
the  many  deputations  sent  to  him,  and  I  hope  his  firmness  may 
intimidate  the  rascally  and  murderous  Jacobins.  As  to  the 
“  Sans  culottes  ”  (by  which  you  must  understand  his  Poissardes) 
they  seem  more  qualified  to  inhabit  the  infernal  regions,  than 


284 


THE  MARSEILLAIS 


1792 


any  part  of  this  globe  ;  and  altho’  they  may  come  under  the 
denomination  of  “sans  culottes”  in  France,  In  England  we 
shd  think  “  they  wore  the  breeches .” 

Louis  had  courage  enough,  if  only,  as  Carlyle  says, 
of  the  passive  half,  and  his  behaviour  during  that 
memorable  afternoon  of  June  20  when  the  sans-culotte 
mob  surged  into  the  palace  and  battered  in  the  door  of 
his  chamber  was  pathetic  in  its  undaunted  calm.  The 
Queen,  with  her  sister  and  children,  sat  behind  the 
great  council  table  surrounded  by  four  of  her  ladies, 
protected  by  the  spell  of  her  serene  dignity  more  than 
by  the  bodyguard  of  grenadiers  before  the  table ; 
holding  in  her  arms  the  little  Dauphin,  who  wore  the 
Red  Cap  offered  her  by  one  of  the  crazy  straggling 
crowd  that  streamed  for  three  mortal  hours  through 
the  Tuileries  chambers. 

His  wife  writes  to  Matthew  at  Denton  : 


[?  late  in  July]. 

I  perfectly  agree  with  you  in  thinking  our  statues  will  be 
better  in  bronze.  Flaxman  thought  they  would  darken  the 
room,  and  said  that  he  made  most  of  them  of  a  pink  or  flesh 
colour  at  present . I  am  happy  to  find  that  the  annivers¬ 

ary  of  the  French  Revolution  passed  with  such  tranquillity  in 
England,  and  we  are  not  a  little  astonishd  that  it  was  un¬ 
disturbed  at  Paris.  Petion  is  reinstated  in  his  office  and  the 
Jacobin  party  are  certainly  preeminent.  There  are  to  be  8 
days  of  feasting  and  entertainment  at  the  expense  of  the  Jacobins, 
which  is  supposed  to  be  a  manoevre  of  that  Party  by  keeping 
the  minds  of  the  people  in  a  chearful  state  of  fermentation  till 
the  arrival  of  the  southern  insurgents,  when  they  will  burst  like 
a  torrent  upon  the  subdued  royalists. 

Petion,  virtuous  Patriot,  had  been  over  in  London 
during  the  last  summer,  toasting  revolution  in  Con¬ 
stitutional  Reform  clubs,  and  on  his  return  to  Paris  in 
the  autumn  had  been  made  mayor.  The  Marseillais, 
the  famous  five  hundred  and  seventeen  brethren  who 
knew  how  to  die,  arrived  at  Charenton  on  July  29,  and 


1792 


LA  DUCHESSE  DE  BIRON 


285 

entered  Paris  next  day,  to  partake  of  the  patriot  feast, 
after  being  embraced  by  Mayor  Petion  at  the  Town 
Hall,  and  having  an  appetising  brush  with  the  Filles- 
Saint-Thomas  Tuileries  Grenadiers,  whom  they  sent 
scuttling  back  over  the  quickly  hoisted  drawbridge 
before  sitting  down  to  their  frugal  dejeuner  in  the 
Champs  Elysees. 

Within  a  fortnight,  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu’s 
“  torrent  ”  had  burst  ;  the  Tuileries  were  sacked,  the 
new  Commune  had  taken  all  powers  to  itself,  the 
throne  had  fallen,  and  the  King  and  Queen  were  its 
prisoners  in  the  Temple. 


To  her  Sister 

I  entertain  little  hope  that  the  K  and  Queen  and  Dauphin 
will  escape  assassination.  Most  terrible  [tales]  are  brought 
daily  by  the  fugitive  Aristocrats  of  the  difficulties  they  had  to 
escape.  The  Duchess  of  Biron  finding  her  servants  intended 
to  betray  her,  was  obliged  to  take  her  flight  without  an  attendant. 
She  got  the  Master  of  a  Smuggling  Vessel  to  land  her  near 
Portsmouth,  but  from  the  apprehensions  she  had  sufferd  was 
incapable  of  taking  any  care  of  herself  ;  happily  one  of  the 
Conways  saw  her  on  the  shore  ;  he  gave  great  attention  and 
informd  the  Duke  of  Richmond  of  her  situation  ;  his  Grace 
carried  (her)  to  Goodwood  and  sent  for  Madme  de  Cambise, 
her  intimate  Friend  to  come  to  her, — which  she  did  immediately; 
but  the  Duchess  still  remaind  in  a  state  of  almost  insensibility. 
I  am  grieved  for  her,  she  is  a  Woman  of  unblemishd  character, 
and  pleasing  manners,  of  the  highest  birth,  and  vast  fortune  ; 
after  a  most  generous  present  to  her  unworthy  Husband  an 
income  of  £9000  a  year  remaind  to  her,  when  she  was  in 
England  two  years  ago,  and  out  of  which  she  was  very  bountifull 
to  her  distressd  Country  Women.  I  suppose  the  intention  of 
her  Servants  was  to  accuse  her  of  sending  money  to  the  Emigrant 
Princes,  which  wd  have  served  for  a  pretence  to  murder  her, 
and  plunder  her  fine  Hotel.  I  learn  from  Montagu  that 
there  were  many  French  Persons  of  condition  at  Newcastle, 
and  a  handsome  collection  was  made  for  them,  but  alas  ! 
this  will  soon  be  exhausted,  and  they  will  be  reduced  to  great 
distress. 


286  THE  SACK  OF  THE  TUILERIES 


1792 


Curiously  enough,  it  was  the  Duchesse  de  Biron 
and  Madame  de  Boufflers  who,  in  the  summer  of 
1790,  first  awakened  in  the  somnolent  breast  of  Dr. 
Burney  some  uneasiness  about  his  daughter’s  un¬ 
relieved  vassalage  at  Court.  “  Mais  Monsieur,  est- 
ce  possible  ?  Mademoiselle  votre  fille  n’a-t-elle  point 
de  vacance  ?  ”  The  remark  led  to  a  long  converse 
between  father  and  daughter  ;  in  which  her  resigna¬ 
tion  was  virtually  decided  on,  though  it  did  not  take 
effect  till  the  following  summer. 

The  Duchesse  was,  of  course,  the  wife  of  the 
Revolutionary  General  who  had  fought  with  Lafayette 
in  America,  and  who  was  now  the  boon  companion 
of  the  Due  d’Orleans.  But  in  the  First  Terror  he 
unluckily  incurred  the  dislike  of  the  diabolic  Fouquier, 
and  Samson’s  guillotine  made  the  Duchesse  a  widow. 

She  had,  as  we  have  seen,  been  in  England  pre¬ 
viously,  and  had  shown  her  courage  at  the  Paris  opera 
in  the  winter  of  1790—91.  This  precipitate  return 
was,  it  seems,  from  a  visit  to  Holland.  Both  she  and 
Madame  de  Cambis,  “  beautiful  as  a  Madonna,” 
became  great  friends  of  Horace  Walpole’s,  and  settled 
near  him. 


From  E.  and  M.  Montagu 

Aug.  \\th. 

The  Prince  and  Princess  de  Lion  were  embarqued  before 
we  left  Shooters  Hill  ;  their  ill  fortune  pursued  them,  as  they 
were  chased  on  their  passage  by  a  French  Man  of  War,  and 
narrowly  escaped  being  taken,  so  that  their  agonies  were  great 
and  her  situation  (big  with  child)  truly  distressing.  But  what 
can  equal  the  horrors  of  Saturdays  proceedings  in  France. 
The  unfortunate  Oueen  torn  to  pieces  by  that  merciless  race 
of  human  wolves  and  tygers.  I  have  not  heard  many  par¬ 
ticulars  of  the  dreadful  catastrophe  but  those  that  have  reached 
me  are  too  horrible  to  relate. 

Friday  and  Saturday,  August  10  and  11,  were  the 
days  of  the  sack  of  the  Tuileries  and  the  King’s  ordeal 
at  the  Manege,  and  London  evidently  believed  that 


1792 


EXCURSIONS  AND  ALARMS 


287 


Marie  Antoinette  had  actually  been  murdered  on  her 
way  from  the  Palace  to  the  Assembly.  Indeed,  on  that 
ghastly  day  of  massacre  it  is  marvellous  that,  mobbed, 
robbed,  curst,  insulted  as  she  was,  she  escaped  with 
her  life. 

The  papers  will  have  informd  you  that  Miss  Pulteney  is 
created  Baroness  of  Bath  ;  her  Father  wrote  me  a  polite  letter 
to  inform  me  of  the  promise  before  the  Patent  was  sign’d. 
This  title  looks  as  if  she  intended  to  marry  a  Commoner,  or  to 
live  and  dye  in  single  blessedness.  My  news  paper  of  to  day 
says  Mr.  Pulteney  has  laid  out  £100,000  on  speculation  in 
Pensylvania  ;  a  strong  proof  that  Riches  do  not  satisfy,  but 
methinks  the  sum  is  rather  too  large  to  be  laid  out  in  hopes 
and  uncertainties.  I  respect  more  Augustus  Caesars  maxim, 
not  to  fish  with  a  golden  hook. 

The  following  from  a  September  letter  dating  from 
Sandleford  to  Mrs.  Carter  illustrates  the  excursions 
and  alarms  to  which  the  country  was  subject  in 
days  of  much  slower  intelligence  and  means  of  com¬ 
munication  : 

I  write  to  you  in  much  better  spirits  to  day  than  I  should 
have  done  yesterday  morning,  when  an  idle  report  of  the  death 
of  our  good  King  was  brought  me  from  Newbury.  Some 
Person,  dressd  like  a  Gentleman  in  a  handsome  post  Chaise, 
had  at  Reading  said  at  the  Inn  on  Saturday  night  that  his  Majesty 
was  suddenly  dead  of  an  Apoplexy,  and  it  was  also  reported, 
that  the  sad  event  had  been  announced  by  expresses  to  two 
Gentlemen  in  Office  in  that  Neighbourhood.  Tho  we 
doubted  the  truth  of  this,  yet  in  a  matter  which  so  nearly  and 
dearly  concerns  this  Kingdom,  we  sufferd  no  light  trepidations. 
Mr.  Montagu  immediately  set  out  on  the  road  nearest  leading 
to  Weymouth,  Your  Humble  Servant  towards  Reading,  to 
meet  Carriages  coming  that  morning  from  London.  By  that 
time  I  had  got  half  way  to  Reading  I  was  assured  by  so  many 
Carriages  that  had  left  London  in  the  morning,  that  no  such 
sad  tydings  had  reachd  London  or  still  prevaild  at  Reading, 
that  my  mind  was  much  relieved.  Mr.  Montagu  also  returnd 
from  his  enquiries  far  less  unhappy  than  when  he  set  out, 
however  we  sent  again  at  night  to  get  intelligence,  from  those 
who  left  London  at  a  late  hour,  all  circumstances  concurred  to 


288  DUC  DE  LA  ROCHEFOUCAULD 


1792 


allay  our  fears,  but  on  a  subject  so  important,  we  were  not 
quite  at  ease  till  this  mornings  news  papers  and  letters  arrived, 
untinged  with  dark  reports.  .  .  . 

I  see  in  this  days  papers  that  the  Cardinal  de  Rochefoucault 
has  been  murderd.  I  hope  the  Duke  de  R.  has  escaped,  he 
had  the  best  character  imaginable,  and  he  seemd  to  me,  when 
he  visited  me  in  Hill  Street,  to  be  void  of  vanity,  frivolite,  and 
all  the  French  foibles.  The  last  accounts  from  Paris  are  still 
more  horrible  than  the  preceeding  ones.  The  Duke  of 
Brunswick  will  soon  give  them  chastisement,  but  this  World 
affords  none  equal  to  their  crimes. 

The  gods,  however,  had  not  willed  things  exactly 
so  ;  and  within  a  month  Brunswick’s  army,  or  what 
was  left  of  it  after  his  defeat  by  Dumouriez’s  second- 
in-command  Kellermann,  at  La  Lune  and  Valmy,  was 
staggering  back  in  full  retreat  through  the  mud  and 
mire  of  Champagne. 

The  much-honoured  Due  de  la  Rochefoucauld  did 
not  escape.  “  Journeying,”  says  Carlyle,  “  by  quick 
stages  with  his  mother  and  wife  towards  the  waters  of 
Forges  or  some  quieter  country  he  was  arrested  at 
Gisors  ;  conducted  along  the  streets  amid  effervescing 
multitudes,  and  killed  dead  ‘  by  the  stroke  of  a  paving- 
stone  hurled  through  the  coach  window.’  Killed  as 
a  once  Liberal,  now  Aristocrat  ;  Protector  of  Priests, 
Suspender  of  virtuous  Petions,  detestable  to  Patriotism. 
He  dies  lamented  of  Europe  ;  his  blood  spattering  the 
cheeks  of  his  old  mother,  ninety-three  years  old.” 

To  her  Sister 

I  sympathise  entirely  with  you  in  indignation  at  our  mal¬ 
contents,  for  never  had  any  nation  more  reason  to  be  satisfied 
with  their  condition  nor  greater  prospect  of  an  increasing 
prosperity.  I  am  much  afraid  our  good  King  and  Queen  will 
lose  their  amiable  dutiful  and  promising  son,  his  long  bad  state 
of  health  renders  his  pulmonary  complaints  very  alarming.  .  .  . 
I  should  have  eaten  my  breakfast  to  day  with  much  greater 
satisfaction  had  the  news  paper  which  accompanys  my  bread 
and  butter  given  certain  information  of  the  defeat  of  Du 


1792  BRUNSWICK  AND  DUMOURIEZ  289 

Mourier  and  his  Democratic  army,  however  I  entertain  great 
hopes  we  shall  receive  it  by  next  post. 

September. 

My  yesterdays  paper  gave  me  hopes  that  I  long  to  have 
reallized,  and  am  impatient  for  tomorrow  for  the  chance  of 
seeing  the  report  confirm’d,  I  mean  that  of  Du  Mauriers  army 
having  made  a  present  of  themselves  to  the  D  of  Brunswic  ; 
worthless  is  the  Gift,  and  such  an  excess  of  poltronerie  seems 
almost  incredible,  but  it  wou’d  be  a  most  blessed  event,  if  fact. 
Because  Liberty  inspires  Courage,  the  French  have  fancied  the 
very  name  of  it  wou’d  have  the  same  effect,  but  I  make  no 
doubt  experience  will  teach  them  that  tho’  the  Free  are  brave, 
the  Licentious  are  generally  cowardly ;  they  have  already  had 
many  proofs  of  it.  .  .  . 

We  must  indeed  be  the  maddest  of  all  people  to  aim  at 
innovations  ;  yet  there  are  numbers  who  are  extravagant  in 
their  praises  of  the  conduct  of  the  french  ;  some  even  Women, 
who  I  suppose  envy  the  glory  of  the  Poissardes.  They  make 
me  wicked,  for  I  wish  to  send  them  all  to  Paris,  tho’  I  think  it 
must  be  rather  a  worse  place  than  les  Enfers.  That  sounds 
less  offensive  to  polite  ears  than  the  english  name,  by  being  less 
familiar  to  us. 

Mrs.  Montagu — and  in  very  good  company — had 
made  the  fundamental  mistake  of  confounding  the 
licence  and  intrigue  of  the  Orleanist  and  Jacobin 
agitators  with  the  genuine  if  mistaken  faith  in  eman¬ 
cipation  and  liberty  which  had  been  awakened  in  1789, 
and  upon  which  the  leaders  had  adroitly  worked  to 
their  own  ends. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

28  [ September  1792]. 

It  is  presumption  in  such  a  wretch  as  the  D  of  Orleans 
to  talk  of  l’egalite,  not  even  all  his  titles,  all  his  wealth, 
could  ever  make  him  equal  to  an  honest  Cobler.  In  his 
Garden  of  la  Revolution  he  will  not  find  the  trees  of  life,  or 
knowledge,  .  .  . 

I  am  much  pleased  with  the  account  you  gave  me  of  the 
treatment  of  Tom  Paine  at  Dover.  I  hope  the  finishing 
stroke  will  be  given  by  the  D:  of  Brunswick  at  Paris. 

VOL.  11 


u 


290 


PITT’S  ORATORY 


1792 


After  the  appearance  of  the  second  part  of  his 
Rights  of  Man  Thomas  Paine  went  over  to  Paris  in 
September  with  several  other  English  Jacobins.  He 
was  jeered  and  hissed  at  Dover  and  very  nearly  stoned 
from  the  beach.  Carlyle’s  “  rebellious  staymaker  ” 
was  a  great  drunkard,  but  the  Girondins  took  him 
to  their  arms  and  made  him  a  member  of  the 
Convention. 

The  following  is  from  the  Primate  at  Clifton, 
October  29  : 

You  have  sent  me  a  speech  of  a  great  Orator  and  Statesman. 
The  art  of  misleading  an  audience  is  essential  to  those  two 
characters  ;  these  are  showy  qualities  that  rouse  attention  and 
collect  numbers.  Mr.  Fox  on  many  occasions  has  appeared 
great,  as  an  outspoken  statesman,  but  never  acted  wisely,  as  a 
Minister  or  in  private  life.  Mr.  Pitt  has  manifested  an 
accumulation  of  Talents,  that  have  never  appeared  together, 
in  any  one  man  in  my  time.  He  is  perfectly  sensible  that  his 
whole  plan  may  be  defeated  by  future  events  that  cannot  be 
foreseen,  and  very  judiciously  leaves  the  impression  of  this 
Truth  on  the  minds  of  his  audience,  as  a  preparative  for  a 
possible  failure  ;  and  yet  we  find  him,  as  if  he  had  forgot  the 
certain  fluctuation  which  happens  in  all  great  states,  delivering 
his  opinions  in  a  decisive  manner,  that,  unquestionably  there 
never  was  a  time  in  the  History  of  this  Country,  when,  from 
the  situation  of  Europe,  we  might  more  reasonably  expect 
fifteen  years  of  Peace,  than  we  may  at  the  present  moment. 
In  my  poor  conception,  the  Revolution  in  France  will  disturb 
the  Peace  of  Europe  and  of  all  nations.  The  Conductors  of 
it  are  dispersed  all  over  France,  but  united  by  the  means  of 
corresponding  Societies,  and  are  professed  Disciples  of  Rousseau 
and  Voltaire  ;  in  these  days,  the  great  apostles  of  infidelity. 
It  is  not  [unjusual  for  such  men  to  propagate  their  opinions  hy 
persecutions.  There  are  some  appearance  of  a  symmetrical 
persecution  of  Christianity. 

The  trial  of  Louis  XVI.  began  on  December  11, 
but  sentence  was  not  pronounced  till  January  18  and 
confirmed  on  the  20th. 

There  is  a  paper  from  Paris  to  day  which  brings  an  account 


1792 


TRIAL  OF  LOUIS  XVI. 


291 


of  their  Kings  appearance  on  his  tryal.  The  Assembly 
graciously  permitted  him  to  sit  down.  He  denyd  the  truth  of 
the  accusations  against  him  ;  and  spoke  with  great  calmness 
and  firmness.  Care  was  taken  to  prevent  mobs,  and  he  came 
and  returnd  safe  to  his  Prison,  and  was  to  be  tryd  again  the 
next  day.  What  will  then  be  the  decision  we  must  wait  to 
know. 


I793 


fanny  burney’s  marriage — war  with  France 


Rearranging  the  library.  James  Lackington.  Captain  Pellew.  Duke 
of  Clarence.  The  Primate  and  Rokeby.  Visits  to  Dowager  Duchess 
of  Beaufort  and  Miss  Hannah  More.  Miss  Burney’s  marriage.  Lord 
Howe.  St.  Domingo.  The  emigres. 


Mrs.  Montagu  spent  the  winter  and  spring  of  this 
year  at  Portman  Square,  and  then  went  for  a  short 
time  to  her  adopted  children  at  Shooter’s  Hill  in  May, 
proceeding  to  Sandleford  in  June.  Later  in  the 
summer  she  paid  a  visit  to  the  Primate  at  Clifton  and 
to  one  or  two  other  friends  in  the  country,  returning 
to  Sandleford  in  September  and  to  London  in  the  late 
autumn.  Montagu  and  his  wife  and  rapidly  increasing 
family  occupied  the  Portman  Square  and  Sandleford 
houses  for  some  time,  and  his  aunt,  contemplating  a 
prolific  succession  of  little  Montagus,  got  Mr.  Wyatt 
to  design  an  additional  couple  of  nurseries  there. 
Montagu  meanwhile  was  occupied  in  rearranging  the 
library  and  disposing  of  a  large  accumulation  of  old 
Mr.  Montagu’s  mathematical  books.  His  aunt  writes : 

I  believe  I  mention’d  to  our  dear  little  Friend  in  my  last 
letter  that  I  went  to  congratulate  Ld  and  Lady  Carnarvon  on 
their  new  Honours,  however  they  were  gone  to  London  in 
order  to  kiss  their  Majesties  hands  for  these  new  Honours. 
I  must  have  attaind  that  perfection  of  wisdom,  which  wonders 
at  nothing,  if  I  had  not  wonderd  at  this  event. 

If  you  take  the  trouble  to  have  intercourse  with  a  Bookseller 
in  exchange,  or  binding  books,  I  beg  it  may  be  with  old 
Lackington,  who  wrote  his  Memoirs  ;  I  think  he  lives  near 

292 


1793  THE  TEMPLE  OF  THE  MUSES  293 

Moorfields.  There  is  another  Bookseller  of  his  name  in  the 
City,  but  I  should  not  put  the  same  trust  in  him. 

Henry  Herbert,  Lord  Porchester  of  Highclere,  was 
made  Earl  of  Carnarvon  on  July  3. 

James  Lackington’s  great  book  emporium  at  the 
corner  of  Finsbury  Square  was  known  as  The  Temple 
of  the  Muses.  He  dealt  strictly  for  cash,  and  sold 
100,000  volumes  a  year  at  this  time.  The  ground 
floor  was  occupied  by  a  great  circular  counter  for  new 
books,  and  the  galleries  above,  beneath  the  dome, 
were  stored  with  older  and  second-hand  works,  growing 
shabbier  and  cheaper  as  you  ascended  from  floor  to 
floor.  From  personal  experience  of  the  disposal  of  old 
mathematical  books  it  is  surmised  that  Mr.  Montagu’s 
would  have  been  found  somewhere  near  the  top  ;  but 
it  seems  that  the  sum  offered  was  so  small  that  Mrs. 
Montagu  decided  to  keep  the  books  and  commissioned 
Lackington  to  have  them  re-bound. 

England  had  declared  war  with  France  in  Feb¬ 
ruary,  and  British  troops  joined  the  Austrians  in  the 
Netherlands  in  May.  Toulon  was  surrendered  by 
the  Royalists  to  Lord  Hood’s  squadron,  only  to  be 
recovered  by  the  Republic  later  on,  through  a  clever 
move  carried  out  by  a  young  artillery  officer  whose 
name  was  Napoleon  Buonaparte. 

There  is  no  publick  news,  but  the  capture  of  the  French 
Frigate  by  Captn  Pellew — It  has  been  a  very  gallant  action, 
attended  by  very  bloody  consequences,  as  the  lives  lost  on  both 
sides  have  been  very  considerable — It  is  an  earnest  of  future 
success,  and  much  is  to  be  expected  from  Lord  Hoods  squadron, 
which  is  sailed  to  the  Mediterranean.  The  Duke  of  Clarence 
in  all  probability  will  be  spared  the  hazard  of  any  marine 
exploit,  and  we  cannot  lament  his  absence,  as  he  seems  to  be 
so  democratically  inclined — It  is  said  he  actually  supped  with 
Dumourier  whilst  he  was  in  London,  and  heard  others  if  he 
did  not  join  in  the  songs  of  £a  Ira,  and  the  Marche  des  Mar- 
seillois — He  is  terribly  in  debt,  and  the  absolute  refusal  of  their 
payment  by  government,  is  supposed  to  be  the  immediate  cause 
of  his  opposition  to  all  its  measures. 


294 


THE  DUKE  OF  CLARENCE 


1793 


The  Duke  of  Clarence  (afterwards  William  IV., 
and  Queen  Victoria’s  uncle)  had  entered  the  Navy  in 
1780  and  served  at  Gibraltar,  St.  Vincent,  and  the 
West  Indies.  The  jovial  and  popular  sailor  had  hoped 
for  a  command  when  the  war  began,  but  this  was 
refused,  though  he  was  made  rear-admiral  of  the  red  ; 
and  his  disappointment  threw  him  into  the  arms  of  his 
brothers  in  opposition  to  the  King  ;  and  also,  paren¬ 
thetically,  into  those  of  Mrs.  Jordan.  The  King  had 
long  done  what  he  could  to  prevent  this  companionship 
with  the  Prince  of  Wales,  to  which  end  the  young 
Duke’s  naval  career  was  largely  due  ;  but  William 
Henry  was  of  a  liberal  and  democratic  turn  of  mind, 
and  when  George  III.  signed  his  patent  as  Duke  of 
Clarence  it  was  with  the  remark  :  “I  well  know  that 
it  is  another  vote  added  to  Opposition.” 

Captain  Edward  Pellew  (afterwards  Viscount  Ex¬ 
mouth)  had  already  distinguished  himself  both  in  the 
Carleton  and  later  in  the  Pelican ,  in  which  he  had  run 
three  French  privateers  ashore  on  the  island  of  Bass 
in  1782.  In  this  first  naval  engagement  of  the  war 
he  was  in  command  of  the  Nymphe ,  a  36-gun  frigate 
whose  crew  had  been  hastily  recruited  from  the 
Cornish  mines.  After  a  desperate  fight  he  captured 
the  larger  and  better-armed  French  frigate  Cleopdtre , 
and  received  the  honour  of  knighthood. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  devotion  to  her  “Primate”  was 
unfailing,  and  her  visit  to  him  at  Clifton  was,  in  spite 
of  his  illness  and  increasing  infirmity,  greatly  enjoyed 
by  both  of  them  : 

Of  all  objects  of  contemplation,  the  most  delightful  is,  to 
see  a  person  of  his  age  making  the  chief  pleasure  of  his  life 
arise  from  energies  which  will  obtain  felicity  in  the  next.  His 
Grace  shew’d  me  the  plans  of  Farm  Houses,  and  Cottages, 
he  had  erected  on  his  estate  near  Rokeby,  in  such  a  manner 
as  will  give  prosperity  to  his  Tenants,  and  comfort  and  sub¬ 
sistence  to  the  Cottagers  ;  to  all  these  he  has  restricted  the 
Rent,  that  the  avarice  of  a  future  Landlord,  and  the  extortions 


1793 


THE  PITMEN’S  SALMON 


295 


of  Stewards  may  not  encroach  on  his  benevolent  institutions. 
As  the  Irish  derive  a  great  part  of  their  subsistence  from  the 
linnen  manufacture  his  Grace  has  built  large  rooms  for  the 
purposes  of  spinning  and  weaving,  and  has  allotted  garden  and 
field  to  each  Cottage. 

From  Clifton  she  paid  a  four  days’  visit  to  the 
Dowager  Duchess  of  Beaufort  at  Stoke,  with  the 
beauties  of  which  she  was  greatly  struck.  She  also 
passed  a  day  with  Miss  H.  More  and  her  sisters  : 
“  I  need  not  say  I  passd  it  delightfully,  but  as  bitter 
is  mixd  with  the  sweet  in  the  cup  of  human  life  I  was 
grieved  to  find  she  had  lately  sufferd  much  from  her 
old  complaints,  and  is  still  very  unwell.” 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Aug.  18. 

I  am  surprised  that  you  have  not  read  Dr.  Beatties  last 
Work,  but  indeed  political  pamphlets,  and  novels  are  the  new 
publications  most  attended  to. 

I  suppose  you  have  heard  that  Miss  Burney  is  married  to 
a  Monsieur  d’Arblay  a  french  Emigrant.  They  now  “  Live 
in  a  cottage  on  love  ”  in  Mr.  Lock’s  park,  but  I  hope  Monsieur 
will  recover  whatever  property  he  formerly  possessd.  Mrs. 
Charlotte  Smiths  eldest  daughter  is  also  married  to  an  Emigrant. 
The  late  events  in  France  make  me  sorry  to  have  french  blood 
mixed  with  english. 

Fanny  Burney’s  marriage  took  place  at  Mickleham 
Church  on  July  28th. 

Matthew,  writing  to  his  aunt  to  let  Woodhouse 
attend  a  meeting  about  fishing  licenses,  says  : 

The  high  price  of  salmon  tends  to  raise  the  wages  of  pitmen 
and  other  labourers  in  as  much  as  it  increases  the  difficulty  of 
their  subsistance. 

Writing  in  December  from  Catton,  her  sister,  who 
had  long  been  in  declining  health,  says  : 

My  hopes  in  Lord  Howe  are  grown  very  dead.  Surely 
tho  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth  some  intelligence  might 


LORD  HOWE 


1793 


296 

have  been  conveyed  before  this  month.  Its  detaining  Lord 
Moira  so  long  from  the  place  of  his  destination  is  a  sad  thing 
as  very  good  effects  might  have  been  hoped  from  his  joining 
the  Royalists  in  Brittany,  and  delay  may  frustrate  their  plans. 

Dec.  16,  1793. 

Completely  has  Lord  Howe  disappointed  us  all  at  last.  It 
wears  a  strange  appearance,  I  want  much  to  hear  the  general 
opinion  that  is  formed  of  his  conduct,  my  total  ignorance  in 
such  affairs  force  me  to  suspend  forming  any  till  I  learn  what 
those  who  are  better  judges  think  of  it.  I  hope  we  shall  not 
soon  again  hear  of  him  in  command.  It  was  very  fortunate 
for  [the]  Ministry  that  the  account  of  his  unsuccessful  procedure 
was  accompanied  by  such  good  news  from  other  parts.  The 
Capture  of  St.  Domingo  and  the  Duke  of  Brunswic’s  great 
victory  will  put  people  in  good  humor,  wherein  they  wou’d 
probably  otherwise  have  been  rather  deficient,  as  public  prejudice 
was  not  in  his  favor  before  this  late  trial  of  his  abilities.  Miss 
Burneys  marriage  seems  one  of  the  most  romantic  I  ever  heard 
of,  a  man  who  has  neither  fortune  in  present  or  expectancy, 
no  means  of  livelihood,  nor  scarcely  a  Country  which  he  can 
call  his,  wanted  a  much  richer  wife  than  Miss  Burney,  who 
has  scarcely  an  independance  for  herself.  If  the  Lockes 
encouraged  the  union  they  are  still  more  to  be  wondered  at, 
as  they  cou’d  not  be  blinded  by  passion. 

Lord  Howe,  who  was  in  command  of  the  Channel 
Fleet,  had  spent  these  latter  months  dodging  in  and 
out  of  Torbay,  to  the  great  disappointment  of  the 
arm-chair  naval  critics.  He  had  reached  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  keeping  a  fleet  at  sea  to  watch  an  enemy 
in  port  was  a  mistake  ;  a  decision  that  has  been  greatly 
canvassed  since,  and  was  doubtless  re-argued  in  many 
a  gun-room  at  Scapa  and  Rosyth.  Lord  Howe’s 
caution,  ever  a  distinguishing  feature  of  his  character, 
brought  him  many  critics  ;  and  though  often  justified, 
could  not  be  illustrious.  He  was  now  nearly  seventy, 
but  was  to  achieve  one  more  signal  victory  before  his 
retirement. 

Fanny  Burney’s  marriage  at  this  moment  to  a 
French  officer  caused  a  considerable  flutter  among  her 


1793 


THE  D’ARBLAY  MARRIAGE 


297 


friends.  D’Arblay  had  quitted  France  with  Lafayette 
and  Narbonne,  and  was  intimately  associated  with 
Necker’s  daughter,  Madame  de  Stael.  Dr.  Burney 
greatly  disapproved  the  marriage,  and  feared  his 
daughter’s  royal  pension  might  be  discontinued,  which 
would  involve  them  in  absolute  penury.  M.  D’Arblay 
was  a  guest  at  Montagu  House  with  Matthew  and  his 
wife  shortly  before  the  wedding,  and  Fanny,  writing 
to  Mrs.  Waddington  to  tell  her  of  it,  adds  :  “  As  I  do 
not  correspond  with  Mrs.  Montagu  and  it  would  be 
awkward  to  begin  on  such  a  theme,  I  beg  that  when 
you  write  you  will  say  something  for  me.” 

It  is  tantalising  that  as  events  in  France  marched 
to  their  climax,  our  lady’s  letters,  owing  to  failing 
eyesight,  grow  fewer  and  briefer,  and  her  interests, 
as  age  advanced,  become  more  and  more  centred  in  her 
immediate  surroundings.  There  are  no  very  early 
letters  of  this  year,  and  consequently  no  reference  to 
the  execution  of  Louis  XVI.  on  January  21  ;  whilst 
to  that  of  Marie  Antoinette  in  October  she  merely 
refers  in  a  sentence  to  Mrs.  Carter  :  “  I  cannot  bear 
to  enter  into  the  cruel  manner  in  which  the  Parisians 
treated  their  poor  Queen  at  her  trial  and  execution.” 
Mrs.  Montagu  had  a  considerable  number  of  French 
friends,  emigres,  and  acquaintances  since  her  Paris 
visit  of  1776,  amongst  her  visitors  and  correspondents, 
but  the  capture  and  subsequent  evacuation  of  Toulon 
this  autumn,  in  which  they  were  so  particularly 
interested  and  involved,  does  not  seem  to  be  mentioned. 

Through  Mr.  Jerningham  she  had  invited  the 
French  colony  in  London  to  the  concert  she  gave  at 
Montagu  House  in  February,  but  a  letter  from  the 
Marquis  de  Duras  explains  their  absence  : 


No.  25  Upper  Grosvenor  Street. 

Le  Chever  Jerningham  est  prie  par  le  M‘i8  de  Duras  le 
Pce  de  Leon  et  toute  la  brillante  jeunesse  francoise  que  Madame 
Montagu  a  bien  voulu  permettre  d’assister  demain  a  son  concert 


2,98 


THE  EMIGRES 


1793 


de  lui  faire  agreer  leur  reconnoissance  et  en  meme  terns  leurs 
regrets  de  ne  pouvoir  profitter  de  cette  faveur  ;  ils  pensent  que 
l’epoque  du  malheureux  evenement  qui  les  met  en  doeuil  est 
encore  trop  recente  pour  pouvoir  se  permettre  une  aussi  agreable 
distraction.  .  .  . 

There  are  letters  from  the  Prince  and  Princesse 
de  Leon,  L’Archeveque  de  Narbonne,  and  others,  with 
similar  charming  apologies  and  compliments,  and  it 
seems  more  than  probable  that  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
sympathy  with  the  emigres  expressed  itself  in  very 
practical  terms,  through  her  nephew. 


1 794 

DEATH  OF  THE  PRIMATE  OF  IRELAND - 

THE  ENGLISH  JACOBINS 


Failing  eyesight.  The  Prince  of  Wales.  Lady  Cremorne.  At  Covent 
Garden  Theatre,  etc.  Howe’s  Victory  of  First  of  June.  Celebrations 
in  town.  Montagu  goes  to  Denton.  Trouble  at  the  collieries. 
Mrs.  Montagu  at  Sandleford.  Arthur  Young.  Letter  from  Dr. 
Blagden.  Alarms  of  invasion.  General  Pichegru.  Prince  of  Wales’ 
engagement.  Sir  Joseph  Banks.  Lord  and  Lady  Plymouth  at 
Naples.  Death  of  the  Primate.  His  will.  Matthew  Robinson 
becomes  Lord  Rokeby.  Morris  Robinson. 


The  failure  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  eyesight  had  now 
made  writing  a  difficult  and  often  an  impossible  task, 
and  her  letters  consequently  became  both  fewer  and 
briefer.  Outside  the  family,  Mrs.  Carter  was  still 
her  most  regular  correspondent ;  but  several  letters 
occur  this  year  from  Sir  Charles  Blagden,  the  Edin¬ 
burgh  physician,  whose  acquaintance  has  already  been 
referred  to.  When  she  went  to  Sandleford  as  usual 
for  the  summer  months  her  niece  kept  her  posted 
in  town  news  from  Manchester  Square  or  Shooter’s 
Hill.  She  writes  : 

June  2nd. 

Many  in  this  age,  endeavour  to  dance  out  of  it  ;  the  Princes 
illness  is  imputed  to  violent  exercise  in  the  morning,  and  the 
drinking  of  cold  lemonade  during  the  time  of  his  dancing  at 
a  Ball  at  the  Duchess  of  Gordons —  He  has  been  blooded  eight 
times,  and  yesterday  was  not  out  of  danger  ;  I  have  not  heard 
anything  of  him  to  day,  but  that  he  is  attended  by  four  Physicians, 
which  is  I  think  enough  to  kill  even  Hercules. 

299 


300 


CREMORNE  HOUSE 


1794 


To  Mrs.  Carter,  her  old  friend  reported  from 
Sandleford  in  June  : 

I  calld  on  Lady  Cremorne  the  day  before  I  left  London, 
and  found  her  looking  well,  and  you  know  she  is  always  doing 
good,  and  health  of  body  and  benevolence  of  mind  are  sweet 
and  important  blessings.  Her  Ladyship  had  the  goodness  to 
shew  me  the  place,  which  is  much  improved  since  I  saw  it 
last,  and  the  House  and  Grounds  are  very  delightfull,  and  I 
hope  they  will  long  enjoy  it. 

This  was  Cremorne  House  or  Farm,  at  the  western 
river-side  of  Chelsea,  built  some  half-century  back  by 
the  Earl  of  Huntingdon,  and  the  scene  of  Whitefield’s 
preaching  to  the  nobility,  at  which  Lords  Chesterfield 
and  Bolingbroke  both  “  behaved  quite  well.”  Lord 
Dartrey,  who  was  created  Viscount  Cremorne  in  1785, 
altered  and  enlarged  the  house  with  the  help  of  Wyatt. 
Queen  Charlotte  often  visited  Lady  Cremorne  here, 
and  it  was  here,  in  1791,  that  Mrs.  Carter  was  intro¬ 
duced  to  her  Majesty. 

Neither  failing  eyesight  nor  advancing  years 
sufficed  to  quench  the  old  prioress’s  love  of  entertain¬ 
ment.  Early  in  the  year  she  had  written  to  her 
sister  : 

I  did  not  suffer  from  my  amusement  at  Covent  Garden, 
and  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing  my  Friends  Drama  much 
applauded,  though  every  part  but  Mrs.  Popes  was  very  ill 
performd.  To  convince  you  that  my  health  is  not  impaired 
I  will  inform  you  that  the  next  day  I  did  the  honours  of  my 
table  to  a  large  party  composed  of  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  the  Bishop 
of  Landaff  and  all  our  distinguished  Philosophers  ;  on  Thursday 
last  I  was  at  a  crowded  Drawing  Room,  and  today  Lord  and 
Lady  Harrowby  and  several  of  their  and  my  acquaintance  are 
to  dine  with  me  ;  tomorrow  I  am  to  dine  with  Montagu, 
and  on  Monday  they  are  to  meet  a  large  party  at  dinner  here. 

Hannah  More,  the  Marshall  Conways,  and  Pettit 
Andrews,  the  antiquarian  magistrate,  were  amongst 
her  guests  a  little  later,  and  it  was  only  with  extreme 


1794  THE  RESOLUTIONS  OF  FORTY  301 

reluctance  that  she  decided  to  decline  an  autumn  visit 
to  Badminton. 

More  than  thirty  years  back,  in  one  of  her  early 
letters  to  Mrs.  Carter,  she  had  written  at  a  moment 
of  rare  despondency  : 

I  will  own  I  often  feel  myself  so  weary  of  my  journey 
through  this  world  as  to  wish  for  mere  rest,  a  quiet  sabbath 
after  my  working  days  ;  but  when  such  time  shall  come 
perhaps  some  painful  infirmity  may  find  my  virtue  employment  ; 
but  all  this  I  leave  to  him  who  knows  what  is  best  ...  if 
late  in  life  I  should  be  busy  from  mere  choice,  pray  chide  my 
ill-timed  activity,  and  send  me  to  my  easychair  by  the  fireside. 

But  the  resolutions  of  forty  do  not  often  become 
the  actualities  of  seventy-five. 

The  play  at  Covent  Garden  must,  I  imagine, 
have  been  Edward  Jerningham’s  Siege  of  Berwick , 
which  was  performed  there  for  five  nights  in  the 
previous  November ;  Mrs.  Pope,  Garrick’s  child 
actress  and  Kitty  Clive’s  successor,  taking  the  part  of 
Ethelberta,  and  Macready  taking  a  minor  character. 
It  was  not  a  success. 

June. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Lady  Charlotte  Wentworth 
yesterday  who  gave  me  the  earliest  information  of  the  good 
news  from  Lord  Howe  and  which  the  papers  this  day  confirm. 
His  capture  of  five  ships  of  the  line  and  a  Frigate  is  a  very 
important  event  at  this  time  to  the  Publick  and  will  give  great 
joy  to  his  Lady  and  our  friend  Mrs.  Howe. 

Howe’s  victory  of  the  Glorious  First  of  June  off 
Ushant  was  particularly  welcome  news  of  a  war  that 
was  going  none  too  brilliantly  for  the  allies ;  but 
great  as  was  the  achievement  of  the  old  admiral  of 
the  Channel  Fleet,  the  convoy  of  provision  ships  from 
America,  of  which  France  was  desperately  in  need, 
got  safely  to  port,  though  the  fleet  sent  out  for  their 
protection  was  practically  annihilated.  The  myth  of 
the  Vengeur ,  which  was  supposed  to  have  gone  to 


302  THE  GLORIOUS  FIRST  OF  JUNE  1794 

the  bottom  with  all  hands  rather  than  surrender,  was 
of  high  moral  value  to  the  French,  though,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  she  had  struck  her  flag  after  being  hopelessly 
crippled,  and  the  majority  of  her  crew  had  been  taken 
off  by  the  British,  who  had  her  in  tow. 

June  17  th. 

The  rejoycings  on  Lord  Howe’s  victory  robbed  all  London 
of  3  nights  sleep,  but  it  was  impossible  to  murmur  at  any 
inconvenience  occasioned  by  so  important  an  event.  La 
Stanhopes  windows  were  all  shatterd  to  pieces,  and  I  cannot 
but  own  I  was  glad  that  he  had  such  a  proof  of  the  violence 
of  a  Mob,  as  he  has  wishd  to  vest  all  power  in  such  assemblies. 
I  cannot  give  you  any  information  of  what  has  passd  in  the 
secret  Committee  but  what  you  will  have  received  from  the 
news  papers.  .  .  . 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  passing  last  Sunday  evening  with  Lady 
Charlotte  Finch  at  the  Dss  of  Beauforts.  I  rejoyce  that  Mrs. 
Fieldings  Son  received  no  hurt  in  the  fierce  engagement  with 
the  French  ;  many  of  our  brave  officers  have  been  wounded, 
and  not  a  few  killd,  but  great  is  the  glory  they  have  acquired, 
and  great  the  service  they  have  done  their  Country.  The 
King  wrote  a  charming  letter  of  Congratulation  to  Lady  Howe. 
The  loyalty  that  was  expressd  by  the  people  in  the  Theatre 
and  in  the  streets  gave  one  infinite  delight. 

Lord  Stanhope’s  revolutionary  activities  have 
already  been  referred  to.  The  First  of  June  regained 
for  “  Black  Dick  ”  much  of  his  waning  popularity, 
which  indeed  had  never  been  lost  in  the  Navy. 

Matthew  Montagu,  on  his  northward  journey 
with  his  two  little  boys  to  Denton,  reports  progress 
to  his  wife  from  Grantham  : 

June  17. 

We  slept  the  first  night  at  Hatfield  ;  in  the  evening  we 
walked  in  the  park  before  the  venerable  mansion,  and  while 
I  was  ruminating  on  the  statesmen  of  the  Cecil  family  and  the 
very  different  description  of  their  successors,  my  little  men 
were  delighted  with  creeping  into  the  hollow  remains  of  the 
perishing  trees,  which  exhibit  an  almost  equal  decay  with  their 
masters.  The  next  day  I  slept  at  Eaton,  and  on  Sunday  after 
going  to  Church  we  made  one  long  stage  to  Stilton.  .  .  , 


1794 


SIR  JOSEPH  BANKS  303 

A  great  dearth  of  newspapers  at  this  interesting  time  is  one 
of  the  greatest  complaints  I  have  to  make  of  our  journey. 
The  English  Chronicle  a  Jacobin  evening  paper  is  absolutely 
the  only  paper  I  have  found  at  the  Inns  on  this  road.  Illumina¬ 
tions  and  drunken  rejoicings  have  prevailed  everywhere.  At 
Hatfield  I  was  pleased  with  the  spirit  and  loyalty  of  some 
drafts  from  the  7th  Light  Dragoons  who  were  that  night 
to  embark  for  the  continent.  There  being  in  their  number 
some  few  more  than  were  required,  the  officer  seem’d  to  have 
much  difficulty  in  settling  whom  he  should  leave  behind, 
each  man  seeming  equally  ambitious  of  risquing  his  life  in  the 
service  of  his  country.  Emissaries  seem  however  to  have 
been  at  work  in  this  part  of  the  country  from  the  Jacobins  ; 
one  of  them  was  carried  up  while  we  were  at  Stilton,  under 
strict  custody. 

Matthew’s  horses  having  gone  lame  en  route ,  he 
was  forced  to  halt  and  give  them  a  rest  at  Matlock, 
where — 

This  morning  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  Sr  Joseph 
Banks,  who  came  yesterday  from  a  house  he  has  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  with  a  party  of  his  Lincolnshire  friends.  You  know 
I  have  long  wished  to  form  a  nearer  acquaintance  with  him. 
I  consider  this  as  a  favourable  rencontre.  I  have  been  walking 
with  him  and  Lady  Banks  with  my  little  boys,  the  greater 
part  of  the  morning  and  have  been  greatly  amused  with  the 
conversation  which  has  turned  on  the  mineralogy  of  the  country. 
He  has  promised  to  give  me  a  lesson  on  mining  in  a  neighbouring 
mine  belonging  to  himself.  As  I  am  under  a  necessity  of 
halting  I  am  happy  in  an  opportunity  of  laying  the  foundation 
of  an  intimacy  which  may  be  very  useful  to  me.  At  all 
events  I  shall  gather  some  knowledge  on  the  very  subjects 
which  have  lately  engaged  my  attention.  II  faut  tourner  ses 
malheurs  a  profit. 


From  her  Sister 

Catton,  July  15/A. 

Dr.  Windham  was  yesterday  re-chosen  for  Norwich  by 
a  Majority  of  about  450  votes,  but  not  without  a  great  bustle. 
The  Jacobin  party,  chieffly  composed  of  the  very  dregs  of  the 
people,  are  outragiously  exasperated  against  him,  tho’  formerly 
his  warmest  friends  ;  his  defence  of  the  War  is  their  greatest 


304 


WILLIAM  WINDHAM 


1794 


outcry,  and  his  present  friends  were  much  alarmed  for  his 
safety,  for  a  pig  of  lead  may  break  the  very  ablest  head  ;  and 
wherever  he  appear’d  a  shower  of  stones  followed  him,  and 
his  life  was  openly  threatened,  but  he  is  incapable  of  being 
intimidated,  tho’  so  irritable  that  if  his  constitution  is  not 
strong  the  anger  they  excited,  in  this  weather  too,  might 
occasion  a  fever,  especially  as  during  the  nights  he  passed  in 
Norwich  he  was  not  suffer’d  to  sleep  for  the  hissings  and  the 
yellings  under  his  chamber  window.  However  tho’  the 
bustle  was  great  and  the  visible  fury  of  the  Jacobins  beyond 
imagination  it  has  ended  with  less  damage  than  was  expected. 
When  Dr.  Wyndham  was  in  the  chair  he  was  saluted  with 
a  volley  of  stones,  he  jumped  out  of  his  chair  and  caught  one 
of  the  [most]  virulent  by  his  hair,  and  dragged  him  to  the 
Mayors,  at  some  streets  distance  by  the  hair  to  have  him 
committed,  thus  by  dint  of  spirit  got  from  them  and  did  not 
choose  to  proceed  in  being  chair’d  ;  but  it  is  said  that  ceremony 
is  to  be  performed  to-morrow.  A  loom  decorated  with  Crape 
and  inscribed  “  Perish  Commerce  ”  quoted  from  a  speech 
Mr.  W  made  in  Parliament  was  carried  about  by  his  oponents, 
and  a  Guillotine  by  his  Party  ;  both  were  soon  broken,  but 
the  most  curious  incident  was  a  young  woman  of  uncommon 
talents  of  about  25  years  of  age  made  a  long  speech  in  the  Town 
Hall  to  about  1,500  of  the  Jacobins  assembled  against  Mr. 
Wyndham,  and  two  daughters  of  a  late  Doctor  of  Divinity 
stood  one  on  each  side  of  her  to  encourage  her  in  her  pro¬ 
ceeding.  The  girl  herself  is  Daughter  to  a  phisician  of  Scotch 
creation  lately  an  Apothecary.  She  is  worthy  of  being  inlisted 
among  the  Poissardes,  and  I  should  like  to  send  her  to  them. 

This  was  the  Rt.  Hon.  William  Windham,  the 
Norfolk  Whig  M.P.,  who  this  year  obtained  a  seat 
in  the  Cabinet  under  Pitt.  He  was  a  great  friend 
of  Dr.  Johnson’s,  who  spoke  of  him  as,  in  the  regions 
of  literature,  inter  Stellas  Luna  minores.  He  was  with 
the  Doctor  during  his  last  illness,  of  which  he  left 
an  account.  The  Suffragettes  would  evidently  not 
have  recruited  Mrs.  Scott. 

Affairs  at  Denton  were  less  peacefully  prosperous 
than  usual,  and  the  spirit  of  discontent  which  had 
drifted  over  England  from  across  the  Channel  was 
manifesting  itself  rather  energetically  amongst  the 


1794  TROUBLE  WITH  THE  PITMEN  305 

Northumberland  pitmen.  As  Matthew  sententiously 
remarked  in  reporting  matters  to  his  wife  : 

High  and  low,  mankind  have  passed  in  review  before  me 
lately  in  much  variety  of  character  and  caricature.  Much 
to  laugh  at,  much  to  lament,  a  little  to  praise,  a  great  deal  to 
abhor  and  shudder  at,  make  a  strange  compound  of  recollections. 
After  all,  as  Shakespear  says,  this  is  a  worky  day  world.  And 
it  is  well  for  the  rich  if  it  does  not  prove  indeed  a  worky  day 
world  for  them.  The  fire  seems  preparing  for  the  essay,  it 
is  time  to  work  off  our  dross,  and  to  prove  ourselves  true  to 
the  touch,  and  of  a  genuine  quality.  The  same  persons 
whose  conduct  produces  discontents  are  slow  and  fearful  in 
repressing  the  tumults,  and  when  they  are  luckily  drawn  out 
of  the  scrape  by  the  exertions  of  others,  they  eat  and  drink 
and  are  supine,  without  the  care  to  provide  against  the  renewal 
of  similar  dangers. 

Matthew  wrote  feelingly,  as  the  following  reports 
to  his  aunt  reveal : 

The  Keelmen  renewd  their  endeavours  to  day  to  do  mischief 
to  Mr.  Brandlings  Staiths  and  ginns.  The  Military  had  been 
unwisely  withdrawn  by  the  Magistrates  from  the  posts  they 
had  occupied  on  each  side  of  the  water  below  bridge.  But 
they  were  again  called  out  before  any  material  damage  was 
done,  and  the  Keelmen  flying  in  all  directions  were  vigourously 
pursued  by  the  Horse  ;  but  without  their  being  able  to  lay 
hands  upon  any  of  them.  I  hope  this  will  operate  as  some 
check  upon  them.  It  is  now  however  ten  days  since  the  first 
day  on  which  they  committed  the  depredation  on  the  Collieries 
below  bridge  :  On  that  day  the  Magistrates  were  late  in 
calling  out  the  Military,  and  considerable  damage  was  done 
to  several  Collieries  below  bridge  ;  In  the  evening  however, 
before  the  Soldiers  came  up  to  them,  and  as  soon  as  they  heard 
of  their  march,  the  Km:  dispersed.  A  guard  was  afterwards 
placed  at  3  different  places  and  kept  there  during  the  week  : 
Last  night  they  were  withdrawn,  and  to-day  the  Km:  attempted 
to  renew  their  violence.  There  is  a  very  dangerous  spirit 
in  the  country,  and  it  has  been  much  apprehended  that  the 
other  bodies  might  join  the  Keelmen  :  The  Pitmen  at  one 
time  last  week  were  rising,  but  went  afterwards  pretty  generally 
to  work.  The  principal  difficulty  lies  in  a  want  of  spirit 
in  the  Magistrates  of  the  County,  who  might  have  quieted 

VOL.  II  X 


SPECIAL  CONSTABLES 


1794 


306 

this  tumult  the  first  day  with  the  greatest  ease  by  vigourous 
measures. 

The  Keelmen  are  gone  quietly  to  work  to  day.  The 
Magistrates  with  an  armed  force  were  ready  to  go  down  the 
river  in  the  Keels  to  protect  those  who  were  willing  to  work  ; 
but  the  Keelmen  declared  their  aversion  to  that  mode  of 
proceeding  and  beg’d  to  be  left  to  themselves,  when  they 
would  engage  quietly  to  resume  their  employment.  This 
tumult  at  one  time  had  the  most  alarming  appearance,  the 
Pitmen  of  some  Collieries  were  joining  the  Keelmen  ;  the 
Smallcoal  manufacturers  (in  number  one  thousand)  were 
wavering,  the  whole  country  seemd  on  the  eve  of  an  insur¬ 
rection  and  Laines  [?  Paine’s]  principles  sounded  in  all  quarters 
in  our  ears.  The  Magistrates  were  frighten’d,  the  military 
suspected,  the  whole  neighbourhood  dismay’d.  After  this 
state  of  things  We  have  reason  to  rejoice  that  it  is  finish’d 
without  bloodshed,  and  without  any  concession  made  during 
the  riots  to  the  Keelmen.  Some  small  indulgences  will 
probably  be  allowed  them,  when  they  have  settled  quietly. 
I  have  been  unwilling  to  write  the  particulars  of  our  trans¬ 
actions,  because  however  interesting  from  their  importance, 
the  narrative  could  not  fail  to  be  tedious  ;  and  because  I  was 
apprehensive  it  might  raise  fears  for  my  safety.  I  have  now 
no  longer  any  such  reason  to  conceal  anything,  and  lest  you 
should  hear  from  other  quarters  exaggerated  accounts,  I  think 
it  necessary  to  inform  you  that  from  the  want  of  spirit  and 
exertion  in  the  Magistrates  and  from  the  terror  that  prevailed 
with  all  persons,  I  was  induced  from  the  beginning  to  go  out 
Volunteer  with  the  troops  on  all  occasions  and  to  act  as 
constable  in  the  apprehending  the  rioters.  By  this  example 
I  had  the  good  fortune  to  infuse  such  spirit  into  the  minds  of 
the  Gentlemen,  Agents  etc.  that  a  vast  number  of  respectable 
people  enter’d  into  the  same  scheme  ;  and  the  duty  of  Con¬ 
stables  has  been  discharged  by  the  higher  ranks  with  great  zeal 
throughout  the  business  :  and  the  tumult  has  in  consequence 
had  a  happy  termination.  I  cannot  refuse  myself  the  pleasure 
to  say  that  I  have  received  the  handsomest  testimonies  to  my 
conduct  from  persons  of  all  ages  and  denominations.  At  the 
same  time  that  I  was  exerting  myself  to  the  utmost  to  suppress 
the  riots  I  took  means  to  secure  your  colliery  (which  was 
unprotected  from  the  state  of  the  military  force  employed  in 
other  quarters  in  as  large  numbers  as  they  could  spare).  I 
effected  this  by  relieving  the  wants  of  those  in  our  neighbour- 


J794 


ARTHUR  YOUNG 


3°7 


hood,  who  were  peaceable  in  their  demeanour,  by  which  I 
obtained  their  good  will  so  much  that  your  Colliery  has  worked 
almost  without  interruption,  notwithstanding  I  took  so  active 
a  part  myself  against  the  rioters  in  my  own  person. 

Whilst  the  dutiful  Matthew  was  thus  heroically 
defending  her  property,  his  aunt  was  taking  her  ease 
at  Sandleford  and  enjoying  a  variety  of  visitors.  To 
Mrs.  Boscawen  (Frances  Glanville),  the  accomplished 
widow  of  her  old  friend  the  Admiral,  she  wrote  in 
July: 

You  will  not  blame  me  for  preferring  therefore  the  reclining 
on  a  Bench  in  the  Grove,  to  sitting  on  the  Velvet  Sopha  in 
a  Drawing  room  in  London  where  I  heard  tales  of  Woe, 
rumours  of  Wars,  and  relations  of  the  horrid  proceedings  of 
the  National  Convention  at  Paris.  But  least  you  should 
think  me  quite  a  vulgar  Joan  I  will  inform  you  of  some  very 
elegant  pleasures  I  have  enjoyd.  The  Dowager  Duchess  of 
Beaufort  was  so  good  as  to  pass  four  days  with  me  last  week. 
You  will  be  sensible  that  I  had  great  pleasure  in  her  Graces 
conversation,  and  I  assure  you  it  was  greatly  enhanced  by  the 
esteem  and  affection  with  which  she  frequently  spoke  of  your 
Daughter,  the  amiable  Duchess  of  Beaufort. 

Miss  Chowne  indulged  me  with  her  Society  for  a  short 
time,  but  left  me  the  morning  the  Duchess  arrived  here.  The 
celebrated  Arthur  Young  bestowd  a  few  days  of  his  company 
upon  us,  which  he  renderd  very  agreable.  He  is  a  skilfull 
Farmer,  an  ingenious  philosopher,  and  a  judicious  Politician, 
as  you  will  have  perceived  if  you  have  read  his  book.  The 
example  of  France,  a  warning  to  England.  He  has  tra veil’d 
much,  seen  Cities  and  men,  as  well  as  attended  to  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  Land  and  produce  of  various  Soils. 

Elizabeth  Boscawen  married  the  fifth  Duke  of 
Beaufort.  Arthur  Young,  the  great  agriculturist  and 
democrat,  had  published  his  Travels  in  France  two 
years  previously  ;  but  the  progress  of  events  and  the 
murder  of  the  King  had  greatly  modified  his  views, 
and  this  later  work  is  to  some  extent  a  recantation. 


308  THE  DUKE  OF  YORK  IN  HOLLAND  i794 


From  Charles  Blagden 

Aug.  I2tk. 

Lady  Spencer  and  the  Besborough  Family  are  not  arrived. 
They  sailed  from  Helvoetsluis,  but  were  driven  back  by  the 
contrary  wind  and  storm  of  last  Thursday.  It  is  hoped  that 
they  are  now  come  over,  as  the  wind  was  tolerably  fair  yesterday. 
The  Devonshire  Family  are  at  Harwich  waiting  for  them, 
but  knew  nothing  further  when  the  post  came  away  last  night. 
With  the  convoy  appointed  for  Lady  Spencer,  the  Government 
packet-boat  sailed  ;  she  did  not  put  back  in  the  storm,  but 
arrived  safe  at  Harwich  the  following  day,  Friday,  since  which 
time  no  advices  have  been  received  from  the  continent.  The 
Duke  of  York  was  then  at  Oosterhout,  not  far  from  Breda  ; 
but  it  is  believed  that  he  has  now  retreated  further  into  Holland. 
Lord  Mulgrave  is  thought  to  be  going  to  Flushing,  in  order 
to  defend  the  place,  if  that  should  be  practicable,  and  if  not, 
to  assist  in  bringing  away  every  thing,  as  well  as  to  protect 
the  entrance  of  the  Scheldt. 

I  have  seen  Sir  Robert  Herries,  who  has  very  late  letters 
from  Italy.  Miss  Bowdler  stays  there  another  winter,  but 
Lady  Herries  returns  this  autumn,  having  received  no  material 
benefit.  Sir  Robert  is  rather  gloomy  in  his  politics,  and 
apprehends  that  if  his  Lady  does  not  come  away  now  there 
will  be  no  passage  open  for  her  next  summer. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

17th  [August]. 

I  flatter  myself  that  the  alarms  the  Duke  of  Richmond  has 
express’d  of  an  Invasion  are  rather  to  incite  people  to  make 
such  a  defence  as  will  make  it  impossible,  than  that  he  believes 
it  to  be  probable.  His  Grace  is  always  desirous  of  making 
fortifications  on  our  Coasts,  and  to  be  sure  against  so  daring, 
and  so  insidious  an  Enemy,  as  the  French  are  at  present,  one 
cannot  take  too  great  precaution.  I  rejoyce  with  you  that 
the  Duke  of  York  has  retired  to  Holland.  I  wish  his  Royal 
Highness  had  more  years  and  experience  and  less  bravery. 
Our  Allies  except  the  Dutch  are  little  to  be  depended  upon, 
and  they  will  make  no  exertions  but  as  stimulated  by  their 
interests,  and  that  interest  centers  entirely  in  their  Treasures.  .  .  . 

The  news  we  received  this  morning  of  the  death  of 
Robespierre  [July  28th],  and  some  of  his  Friends,  and  the 


1794 


THE  PRINCESS  CAROLINE 


309 


sending  the  General  Pichegru  in  chains  to  Paris,  may  a  little 
retard  the  progress  of  the  Democratic  army,  and  shd  there 
arise  from  these  circumstances  an  Insurrection  at  Paris  much 
advantage  may  accrue  to  us.  At  present  I  am  impatient  for 
more  accounts  from  France. 

The  Duke  of  York  was  in  command  of  our  un¬ 
successful  expedition  in  Flanders. 

General  Charles  Pichegru,  having  been  hailed  after 
his  Holland  victories  in  July  1794  as  saviour  of  his 
country,  embarked  later  on  Royalist  intrigues,  was 
caught  attempting  a  coup  d'Etat ,  and  was  finally 
deported  to  Guiana. 

From  C.  Blagden  to  Matthew  Montagu 

Our  friend  Mrs.  B.  lent  me  a  French  Song  yesterday  of 
which  I  send  you  a  copy  :  there  is  some  wit  in  the  clever 
application  of  the  terms  of  dancing  to  the  intended  invasion 
of  England.  I  am  told  that  they  circulate  at  Paris  a  list  of 
the  intended  English  Directory,  and  of  the  persons  they  mean 
to  appoint  to  some  of  the  principal  offices  of  the  State. 

[Sandleford,  Sept.  23.] 

By  all  reports  I  hear  there  is  little  doubt  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  being  to  marry  the  Daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  ; 
I  am  told  she  is  very  beautifull,  I  hope  she  is  also  discreet, 
for  she  will  otherwise  make  our  fine  Ladies  more  gallant  and 
dissipated  than  they  are  even  now.  I  must  own  I  do  not 
think  the  present  situation  of  this  Country  is  favourable  to 
gay  festivals  and  increased  expences. 

Poor  Caroline  Amelia  Elizabeth  of  Brunswick  had 
many  amiable  qualities,  but  discretion  perhaps  was 
not  amongst  them,  and  least  of  all,  if  she  had  any  say 
in  the  matter,  in  this  ill-starred  marriage. 

Writing  to  Montagu  on  September  2,  Charles 
Blagden  reported  : 

Probably  you  have  seen  our  Friend  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  as 
a  letter  came  from  him  franked  by  you  ;  and  perhaps  he 
mentioned  to  you  a  subject  which  has  excited  the  curiosity 


3io  WHIRLWINDS  AND  ERUPTIONS  1794 

of  people  both  here  and  in  Italy,  namely  a  shower  of  stones 
which  is  said  to  have  fallen  about  the  middle  of  last  June  in 
Tuscany.  I  have  already  communicated  some  of  the  circum¬ 
stances  to  the  Ladies  at  Sandleford  ;  but  two  letters  have 
since  been  received  from  Florence,  one  of  which  assigns  a 
whirlwind  attending  the  storm  as  the  force  which  lifted  the 
stones  into  the  air,  and  the  other  describes  the  stones  them¬ 
selves  in  the  following  terms  :  “  Les  pierres  tombees  sont 

comme  un  aggrege  tres  compacte  de  petit  grains  de  verre,  et 
remplies  de  pyrite  arsenicale,”  (a  term  with  which  I  suppose 
you  are  now  well  acquainted)  “  et  couvertes  d’une  croute  de 
pyrite  fondue  dans  toute  leur  surface,  qui  est  tres  irreguliere, 
et  avec  les  bords  arrondis.” 

.  .  .  Lord  and  Lady  Plymouth  have  had  something  of 
an  escape  at  Naples.  They  had  inhabited  a  house  near  the 
Vesuvius,  which  they  quitted  on  the  Eruption,  but  the  Spot 
at  length  appearing  safe  and  quiet,  they  had  determined  to 
return  thither  :  Early,  however,  on  the  very  morning  that 
they  were  to  go,  something  fell  from  the  mountain  on  the 
house,  destroyed  a  part  of  it,  and  particularly  that  part  which 
they  inhabit,  and  likewise  filled  the  whole  building  with  such  an 
intolerable  vapour,  that  no  person  could  go  into  it  for  a  great 
while  afterwards  ;  so  that  if  they  had  been  there  it  is  probable 
they  would  not  have  escaped.  The  Monks  of  the  Camaldoli, 
(a  convent  on  a  little  hill  above  and  to  one  side  of  Torre  del 
Greco)  have  again  quitted  their  convent,  on  hearing  distinctly 
under  them  the  noise  of  boiling  water.  That  they  had  so  soon 
returned  thither  after  the  late  devastation  close  by  them,  is  a 
striking  instance  how  readily  men  become  inured  to  danger. 

Two  further  letters  from  Blagden,  interesting  but 
too  long  for  quotation,  are  dated  September  15  and 
October  10,  the  first  giving  a  full  account  of  the  late 
Embassy  to  China  from  one  of  its  members  just 
returned  to  London,  and  the  second  detailing  Sir 
William  Hamilton’s  account,  accompanied  by  five 
drawings,  of  the  recent  eruption  of  Vesuvius. 

Richard  Robinson,  first  Baron  Rokeby,  Arch¬ 
bishop  of  Armagh,  Vice-Chancellor  of  Dublin  Univer¬ 
sity,  and  Mrs.  Montagu’s  much-loved  Primate,  died 
on  October  10  at  Clifton.  As  in  previous  cases 
already  referred  to,  it  would  seem  that  the  letters 


1794 


THE  NEW  LORD  ROKEBY 


3i  i 

directly  relating  to  this  event  were  removed  from  the 
collection,  probably  by  the  fourth  Lord  Rokeby  when 
making  his  early  selections  in  1810.  And  once  again 
it  is  evident  from  references  in  subsequent  letters  that 
the  Primate’s  will  had  given  grievous  disappointment 
at  Montagu  House,  whose  chatelaine  had  hoped  that 
her  cousin  would  have  provided  generously  for  Morris 
Robinson  (Matthew  Montagu’s  elder  brother),  who 
was  now  heir  presumptive  to  Rokeby ;  the  present 
Baron  being  her  eldest  brother  Matthew,  the  old 
bachelor  hermit  of  Horton,  now  eighty-one,  whom, 
with  the  quaint  precision  of  the  day,  she  henceforth 
addresses  as  “  your  Lordship  ”  in  every  second 
sentence  of  her  letters.  In  writing  from  Horton  to 
acknowledge  her  felicitations,  the  old  gentleman  says: 

You  know  I  was  born  a  democrat.  ...  It  has  for  a  few  weeks 
been  my  fortune  to  examine  that  matter  a  little  more  nearly, 
and  the  circumstance  hitherto  of  most  effect  with  me  in  favor 
of  a  different  sentiment  has  been  the  pleasure  which  I  have 
received  from  your  very  polite  and  obliging  letter  of  con¬ 
gratulation.  Y our  friends  as  well  as  yourself  have  great  reason 
to  regret  any  deficiency  of  your  sight  which  affects  your 
writing  letters.  It  is  dangerous  tampering  with  the  eyes. 
I  do  nevertheless  constantly  wash  mine  every  morning  with 
a  small  piece  of  spunge  dippd  in  salted  water,  which  seems  to 
assist  me.  I  can  read  perfectly  well  :  the  difficulty  I  find 
is  to  keep  from  reading,  which  I  believe  not  to  be  good  for 
an  old  man  .  .  .  you  hardly  expect  any  news  from  me  ; 
although  I  am  not  very  far  distant  from  the  present  scene  of 
action.  I  heartily  hope  however,  that  no  enemy  will  come 
to  break  my  windows  or  to  disturb  my  rest  at  Horton. 

A  French  landing  in  Kent  was  expected  and  being 
prepared  for  at  this  time. 

The  new  Baron  must  have  been  a  quaint  character. 
His  portrait  depicts  him  with  long  hair  and  beard, — 
appendages  which  shocked  his  sister  dreadfully, — and 
describes  him  as  “  of  singular  eccentricity.”  Mrs. 
Montagu  regarded  him  as  a  Diogenes,  and  better  in 


312 


THE  PRIMATE’S  WILL 


1794 


his  Horton  tub  than  in  polite  society.  She  once  wrote 
of  him  to  her  sister  : 

I  hope  the  Horton  Gentleman  will  not  change  his  journey  to 
Spa  for  a  visit  to  the  Bath.  I  shall  never  be  able  to  stand  the 
joke  of  a  Gentlemans  bathing  with  a  roast  loin  of  veal  floating 
at  his  elbow,  all  the  Belles  and  Beaux  of  the  Pump  room  looking 
on  and  admiring.  My  guide  who  did  not  know  our  relation 
said  to  be  sure  the  quality  did  make  a  great  wonderment  at  it, 
but  it  was  nice  veal  and  he  gave  what  he  did  not  eat  of  it  to  her 
and  some  others  ;  to  be  sure  he  was  the  most  partichalurst 
gentleman  as  ever  she  heard  of,  but  he  was  very  good  naturd. 

To  her  Sister 

I  find  by  further  enquiry  there  were  many  mistakes  in 
respect  to  the  information  Mr.  Oddie  gave  to  my  Brother 
Charles  concerning  the  Primates  Will.  .  .  .  Morris  made  the 
Primate  a  visit  in  January  94,  and  I  believe  from  some  particulars 
mentiond  by  Mrs.  R  (but  which  you  must  not  mention)  they 
had  some  disagreement  of  opinion  in  regard  to  Morris  voting 
in  Parliament,  for  his  Grace  is  a  staunch  Friend  to  Mr.  Pitt, 
and  Morris  sometimes  votes  on  the  other  side,  and  said  he  must 
continue  to  do  so.  The  Primate  also  wishd  him  to  go  to 
Whites  Coffee  House,  as  he  wd  there  meet  young  men  of 
fashion  ;  Morris  said  they  were  Cardplayers,  it  made  it  so 
dull  he  cd  not  do  it,  and  to  advice  to  pay  Mr.  Pitt  respect  by 
sometimes  visiting  him  he  was  equally  refractory.  These 
circumstances,  tho  they  may  lessen  ones  surprize,  do  not 
indeed  at  all  justify  the  Primates  cruel  Will.  One  is  to  do 
what  is  right  oneself ;  if  others  are  guilty  of  error  it  is  their 
business.  I  do  not  believe  the  Heir  of  Rokeby  will  get  much 
as  Residuary  Legatee,  for  the  Primate  has  left  many  thousand 
pounds  to  publick  uses  in  Ireland. 

One  after  the  other,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  friends  had 
failed  egregiously  to  make  wills  of  which  she  could 
approve,  and  one  after  the  other,  the  testamentary 
shortcomings  of  Lord  Bath,  of  Lord  Chesterfield,  of 
Mr.  Vesey,  of  the  Duchess  of  Portland,  and  now  of 
her  adored  Primate,  had  evoked  her  dire  displeasure. 
Such  lapses  from  grace  were  a  dispiriting  return  for 
unremitting  attentions  and  admirable  counsel. 


1 7  9  5 


ADVANCING  AGE - THE  WAR  GOES  BADLY 


A  Drawing  Room.  Dr.  Beattie’s  health.  The  Prince’s  debts.  The 
Wilkes  family.  Hackwood.  A  party  at  Shooter’s  Hill.  Peace 
rumours.  Mrs.  E.  Montagu  at  the  opera.  Mrs.  Garrick  at  seventy. 
Hannah  More’s  Tracts.  Mrs.  Montagu  seventy-five.  Count  Rum- 
ford.  Mrs.  Boscawen.  Taking  of  Cape  Town.  Potato  bread. 

March  20th. 

I  paid  my  devoirs  at  the  Drawing  Room  which  took  up 
much  of  my  morning,  for  even  grey  hairs  must  be  curled  on 
such  an  occasion.  The  severity  of  the  weather  had  long  kept 
me  from  performing  the  Drawing  Room  duties,  and  I  was  glad 
to  do  them  before  the  arrival  of  our  new  Princess  would  increase 
the  croud.  .  .  .  Dr.  Beattie  is  in  a  weak  state  of  health  ;  he 
has  often  such  dizziness  in  his  head  as  makes  him  afraid  to 
walk  in  the  streets.  .  .  .  We  are  still  in  doubt  whether  the 
Princess  of  Wales  will  be  here  till  the  end  of  this  month,  as  the 
roads  in  Germany  are  in  terrible  condition.  We  are  all  anxious 
for  the  return  of  our  Military  Forces  from  the  Continent,  but 
quite  uncertain  when  it  will  take  place.  There  was  for  some 
time  a  report  that  application  would  be  made  in  Parliament  for 
paying  the  debts  for  a  certain  Heir  apparent,  but  that  alarming 
report  dies  away.  He  does  not  grow  at  all  more  economical, 
and  one  should  think  the  whole  of  his  conduct  was  directed  by 
the  French  Democrates.  Our  King  has  kindly  granted  an 
apartment  in  Hampton  Court  to  Monr  and  Madame  Nazel  ; 
she  is  a  very  amiable  woman  and  they  are  now  in  distressed 
circumstances.  I  enquired  of  Miss  Wilkes  who  calld  this 
morning  if  she  had  heard  lately  from  the  Wilkes  family  in 
America.  She  believed  they  were  in  a  comfortable  situation. 

June  \th. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  is  going  to  hire  Hackwood,  the  former 
seat  of  the  Bolton  family  ;  it  will  cost  him  £10,000  to  put  into 

313 


3H 


LORD  BRIDPORT’S  VICTORY 


1795 


repair,  for  the  late  Duke,  as  it  was  to  descend  to  Mrs.  Ord,  let 
it  fall  almost  into  ruins  ;  but  his  R.  Highness  is  above  a  low 
attention  to  pecuniary  matters.  ...  I  am  sorry  to  learn  that 
the  D:  of  Richmond  is  laying  out  our  money  in  land  fortifica¬ 
tions.  I  consider  our  Navy  as  our  best  security. 

Excellent  Admiral  Montagu  ! 

June  17. 

Last  Sunday  I  went  from  Church  to  Shooters  Hill  to  meet 
a  very  agreable  party,  Lord  and  Lady  Hardwicke,  Lady  Louisa 
Macdonald,  the  chief  Baron,  Mr.  Ryder  and  Sir  Richard 
Ainslie,  but  though  my  bedroom  was  prepared  for  me  I  returnd 
to  my  warmer  lodging  in  Portman  Square.  .  .  .  Lady  Charlotte 
Finch,  the  Fieldings  and  the  Miss  Conyers  have  promised  to 
be  of  my  dinner  party  tomorrow. 

Lady  Louisa  was  daughter  of  the  1st  Marquess  of 
Stafford  and  wife  of  Sir  Archibald  Macdonald,  late 
Attorney-General  and  now  Lord  Chief  Baron.  The 
Sir  Richard  Ainslie  should  probably  be  Sir  Robert, 
the  great  oriental  numismatist,  lately  returned  from 
the  embassy  at  Constantinople. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

June  30  th. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  Mrs.  Chapones,  Captain  and  Mrs. 
Butlers  company  at  dinner  on  Saturday,  and  some  other  friends. 
We  were  all  in  good  spirits,  and  none  the  less  so  from  our  late 
naval  successes.  I  rejoyce  the  more  in  Ld  Bridports  gallant 
enterprise,  as  he  is  an  old  friend  of  mine,  and  a  man  of  great 
merit  in  every  respect. 

Lord  Bridport  was  Samuel  Hood’s  brother  Alex¬ 
ander,  who  had  defeated  Villaret-Joyeuse  and  captured 
three  French  ships  this  month. 

Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu  continued  with  unfailing 
regularity  to  present  her  husband  with  increase  of 
offspring,  now  amounting  to  six  or  seven.  The 
eldest  boy’s  “  inquisitive  turn  and  desire  of  definite 
ideas,  in  which  even  Locke  himself  was  not  more 


1795 


LET  US  HAVE  BUT  PEACE 


3U 


zealous,  has  made  him  a  little  uneasy  to  discover  the 
natural  history  of  child-bearing.  He  has  very  natur¬ 
ally  found  some  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a  perfect 
satisfaction  on  this  head.  We  have  been  obliged  to 
declare  that  children  are  the  gift  of  God,  and  as  such 
(in  a  letter  enclosed  and  indited  to  his  great  aunt)  you 
find  he  introduces  them.” 

On  August  4  Montagu  sends  his  aunt  news  of 

Peace  with  Spain  and  a  rumour  of  a  general  pacification.  There 
is  no  knowing  what  the  day  will  bring  forth.  The  cession  of 
S*  Domingo  will  be  a  great  accession  to  the  maritime  power  of 
France,  and  of  course  a  subject  of  jealousy  to  England.  The 
products  of  S.  Domingo  are  not  only  greater  in  quantity  but 
superior  in  quality  to  those  of  any  other  West  Indian  possession. 
But  the  greatest  of  all  possessions  are  industry,  skill  and  the 
already  acquired  momentum  of  capital.  Let  us  have  but  a 
secure  peace,  and  we  have  little  to  dread  in  the  commercial 
concurrence  of  any  nation  at  present  existing. 

But  peace  for  England  was  still  seven  years  off, 
and  even  that  was  to  prove  anything  but  secure  ;  and 
there  was  little  in  the  outlook  of  this  summer  to  justify 
Montagu’s  optimism.  With  Holland  overrun  by 
Pichegru,  the  French  Directory  triumphant  in  La 
Vendee  and  Brittany,  Prussia  giving  up  all  pretence  of 
continuance  in  the  war,  Spain  signing  a  treaty  with 
France,  and  Austria  merely  kept  in  the  field  by  Pitt’s 
enormous  subsidies,  and  defeated  in  North  Italy,  the 
forecast  hardly  promised  fair  weather  for  England. 


From  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu  to  her  Husband 

Sunday  evening. 

I  did  not  yesterday  dine  at  Mrs.  Southbys,  having  received  a 
Ticket  for  the  Opera  to  accompany  Mrs.  M.  Fordyce  and 
Lord  Hardwicke  in  a  box — I  was  glad  of  the  opportunity  of 
seeing  the  House  and  of  hearing  the  Banti  and  altho  my  sight 
and  my  ears  were  completely  gratified,  I  shd  be  extremely  un¬ 
happy  to  be  obliged  to  repeat  the  Entertainment  frequently — 
It  was  with  difficulty  we  could  drive  to  the  door,  the  house  was 


1795 


3 1 6  MRS.  GARRICK  AT  SEVENTY 

as  crowded  as  possible,  and  as  far  as  very  fine  and  well  dressed 
Ladies  could  make  it,  was  certainly  a  very  fine  spectacle  ;  But 
the  musick  occasion’d  in  me  my  usual  depression  of  Spirits, 
which  was  not  diminished  by  the  previous  state  of  my  mind, 
and  I  came  away,  determining  that  it  shd  be  my  last,  as  it  had 
been  my  first  appearance.  Lord  Hardwicke  was  so  good  as  to 
call  my  Servant  who  had  a  Chair  for  me  in  Market  Lane,  but 
it  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  service  of  danger,  which  he  performed 
with  great  chearfulness,  and  was  as  usual  very  droll  upon  the 
circumstance  of  John  Fraser’s  deafness.  .  .  . — News  arrived 
yesterday  Evening  from  the  Continent,  but  it  is  not  very 
reviving — The  Duke  of  York  cannot  venture  to  attack 
Pichegru,  who  therefore  remains  Master  of  West  Islanders. 
The  other  particulars  have  not  transpired — Mr.  Howe  it  is 
said  is  convicted  of  High  Treason,  and  is  to  go  to  Newgate — 
He  declares  that  he  has  only  been  the  channel  through  which 
other  Traitors  have  been  carrying  on  their  Treasons,  and  some 
think  he  may  turn  Kings  Evidence,  to  secure  his  pardon.  The 
witty  have  upon  this  occasion  used  Michael  Angelo  Taylor 
with  their  usual  Freedom.  He  received  an  anonymous  letter 
to  summon  him  before  the  Council,  and  I  understand  was 
rather  flattered  by  the  citation.  My  authorities  for  these 
things,  were  my  companions  at  the  opera,  so  that  you  may  more 
readily  give  credit  to  the  truth  of  them. 

Mrs.  Garrick  was  now  over  seventy,  but  still  full  of 
activity  and  charm.  She  was  an  universal  favourite, 
and  attained  that  delightful  stage  of  affection  when  she 
was  gently  chaffed  by  her  friends  over  her  pronuncia¬ 
tion  : 

Mrs.  Garrick  called  upon  us  yesterday  in  her  way  to  dinner 
at  her  Attorneys  who  has  entirely  finished  her  business,  and  to 
her  satisfaction — we  urged  her  to  visit  the  good  Prioress  of 
Sandleford,  and  she  wanted  little  encouragement  to  take  the 
journey,  but  was  unfortunately  hampered  with  visitants  at 
home,  who  are  not  likely  to  leave  her  this  month.  She  said 
she  had  had  the  Tickinsons  three  weeks,  and  was  very  diverting 
with  her  Ps  and  Bs.  She  has  been  honor’d  with  a  visit  from 
the  whole  House  of  Orange,  who  drank  tea  with  her  and  staid 
till  between  Ten  and  eleven  o’clock  at  night,  and  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Yorke  have  spent  2  Evenings  with  her,  with  great 
good  humour  and  delight,  expressing  themselves  much  pleased 
with  Mrs.  Garricks  reception  of  them  and  her  engaging 


1795  THE  PRINCESS  AND  LADY  JERSEY  317 

manners — Indeed  few  people  unite  dignity,  grace  and  respect 
in  their  manners  more. 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Mrs.  Garricks  various  engagements  prevented  her  indulging 
me  in  a  long  visit.  I  cd  not  learn  from  her  so  perfect  an 
account  of  Mrs.  Hannah  Mores  health  as  I  wishd,  she  sent  me 
her  last  admirable  ballard  of  which  I  have  collected  a  number, 
and  dispersed  them  amongst  my  country  neighbours,  who,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  are  much  disposed  to  rioting.  I  have  enclosed 
one  of  these  ballards,  that  in  case  you  have  not  already  seen  it, 
you  may  recommend  it  to  your  bookseller  at  Deal. 

These  were  the  Cheap  Repository  Tracts  of  which 
two  millions  were  sold  in  this  first  year  of  their  issue. 
Hannah’s  were  signed  Z,  and  the  monthly  issue  con¬ 
sisted  of  a  tale,  a  ballad,  and  a  tract,  head,  heart,  and 
soul  being  thus  regularly  nourished,  and  Bewick 
occasionally  garnishing  the  dishes. 


From  Mrs.  Scott 

Sep.  13. 

I  hear  (I  wish  it  maybe  true)  that  the  P[rincess]  of  W[ales] 
has  pluckd  up  spirit  enough  to  tell  her  husband  that  tho’  it 
be  not  in  her  power  to  dismiss  Ly  J  from  her  post  yet  it  is  in 
her  power  to  forbear  speaking  to  her,  and  that  if  she  follows 
them  to  Brighton  she  is  determined  to  take  no  notice  of  her. 
I  wonder  that  his  Father  and  Mother  do  not  exert  themselves 
to  prevent  such  glaring  impropriety  of  conduct,  as  is  his,  it 
is  cruel  to  suffer  a  young  Woman  so  situated  to  be  exposed 
to  such  treatment.  I  suppose  the  purchase  of  the  House 
for  Ly  J  is  the  first  fruits  of  his  economical  reform  of  expences. 
What  a  pitiful  fellow  Ld  J  must  be.  I  hope  his  H — ss  leaves 
his  slippers  at  her  Chamber  Door  on  proper  occasions. 

Lady  Jersey,  once  the  beautiful  Miss  Twisden,  now 
wife  of  the  fourth  earl,  and  a  very  attractive  grand¬ 
mother,  had  succumbed  to  the  Prince’s  fascinations 
before  his  marriage  with  the  unfortunate  Princess 
Caroline  had  been  forced  upon  him  by  his  father.  The 


3i  8 


A  DIFFICULT  AGE 


1795 


Princess  did  succeed  in  getting  the  Royal  parents  to 
dismiss  Lady  Jersey  from  attendance  at  Carlton  House  ; 
but  Caroline  was  soon  afterwards  deserted  herself  by 
her  incorrigible  husband.  Indeed  her  life  at  Carlton 
House,  and  the  constant  humiliation  of  the  Prince’s 
mistresses,  must  have  been  an  impossible  martyrdom 
from  the  first ;  and  the  sympathy  which  went  out  to 
her  from  the  English  people  in  all  the  later  tragedy  of 
her  ruined  life  is  intelligible  enough.  She  never  had 
a  chance. 

On  the  2nd  of  October  Elizabeth  Montagu  reached 
her  seventy-sixth  year.  Old  age  is  surely  amongst 
the  “  difficult  ”  ages,  even  if  its  trials  are  largely 
passive.  There  is  little,  as  a  rule,  to  compensate  for 
the  loss  of  friends,  the  decay  of  health,  the  failure 
of  eyesight,  the  weakening  of  capacity,  the  galling 
inability  to  accomplish  all  one  would  have  wished  to 
do,  save  family  devotion,  recollections  of  the  past, 
affection  for  the  inheritors.  So  far  as  one  is  able  to 
judge  from  these  letters,  she  had  these  consolations  in 
such  measure  as  could  be  expected  ;  but  youth  is 
youth  and  age  is  age,  nephews  and  nieces  are  not 
one’s  own  children,  however  tenderly  adopted  ;  Mon¬ 
tagu  was  more  and  more  engrossed  in  his  own  affairs 
and  ambitions,  and  the  “  grandchildren  ”  were  her 
chief  delight.  “  I  get  into  my  whiskey  about  eleven 
o’clock  and  drive  in  it  about  two  hours,  and  then  on 
foot  I  stroll  about  my  woods  and  meads  till  it  is  time  to 
dress  for  dinner,  for  now  my  eyes  can  only  read  the 
green  volume  of  nature.” 

It  sounds  rather  solitary,  after  all. 

There  was  a  growing  feeling  amongst  Englishmen 
that  the  burden  of  the  war  was  becoming  insupportable, 
and  that  an  effort  should  be  made  to  come  to  terms 
with  a  French  government  which  appeared  to  give 
signs  of  stability.  The  general  attitude  of  grave  and 
morose  discontent  found  expression  when  the  King 
drove  through  the  streets  to  open  Parliament  on 


THE  KING  ATTACKED 


1795 


319 


October  29,  surrounded  by  a  hooting  and  hostile 
mob. 


From  Mrs.  M.  Montagu 

Great  Cumberland  Place, 
Octb.  3  n/. 

I  am  sure  your  spirits  must  have  been  affected  at  the  account 
the  newspapers  will  have  conveyed  to  you  of  the  attack  on  his 
Majesty’s  life — He  has  had  a  very  narrow  escape,  but  he  bore 
the  trial  with  a  firm  and  undaunted  mind.  The  stone  which 
was  directed  at  his  Majesty’s  head  must  have  been  thrown  with 
great  force,  as  it  went  thro’  the  glass  that  was  drawn  up, 
traversed  the  coach  and  went  clear  out  of  the  other  window. 
His  Majesty  immediately  said  that  it  was  a  bullet  from  an  Air 
Gun,  and  upon  his  attendants  expressing  their  apprehensions  he 
added,  “  Do  not  be  alarmed  my  Lords,  there  is  a  Providence 
that  watches  over  us  all.”  He  afterwards  read  his  speech  in  a 
firm  and  unshaken  voice  ;  so  much  for  the  consciousness  of 
virtue  and  the  confidence  in  religious  opinions.  Many  people 
have  been  examined  and  one  young  man  I  find  has  been  com¬ 
mitted  to  Prison.  The  throng  of  people  assembled  in  the  Park 
and  in  the  streets  was  greater  than  could  be  thought  possible. 
I  sincerely  hope  we  shall  bring  some  of  the  offenders  to  punish¬ 
ment,  I  should  be  apt  to  think  like  the  Swiss  in  Monsieur  de 
Pourceaugnac,  a  petit  [illegible]  fort  choli  !  upon  such  an 
occasion.  I  am  happy  however  to  tell  you  that  Mr.  Pitt’s 
speech  made  a  very  great  and  good  impression  upon  his  hearers, 
that  he  divided  with  a  very  good  majority,  and  that  Mr.  Fox 
was  apparently  convinced  by  his  arguments  and  at  present  was 
inclined  to  withdraw  his  amendment. 

There  is  much  of  an  Autumnal  about  this,  too,  in 
rather  an  uncertain  hand,  to  her  old  friend  at  Deal : 


To  Mrs.  Carter 

Aug.  20. 

It  would  have  been  very  unlucky  for  the  world  if  men 
engaged  in  great  affairs,  or  travelling  through  unknown  country, 
had  not  had  eyes  to  enable  them  to  write  their  journals  ;  but 
my  days  pass  without  offering  any  worthy  to  be  recorded  or 
described,  so  no  one  but  myself  can  have  any  reason  to  regret 


32° 


COUNT  RUMFORD 


1795 


their  inability.  I  cannot  indeed  help  feeling  it  a  great  mortifica¬ 
tion  in  my  solitary  retirement  to  be  deprived  of  more  frequent 
correspondence  with  my  absent  friends  ;  but  I  enjoy  so  many 
more  blessings  than  I  deserve  that  I  ought  not  to  murmer  at 
some  disappointments.  ...  I  had  last  Thursday  a  fine  party 
of  Sunday  School  Girls  from  Newbury  to  dinner  in  my  grove, 
and  all  my  poor  neighbours  and  labourers  to  sup  there.  I  hope 
there  are  few  persons  who  do  not  assist  the  distressed  in  these 
miserable  times.  It  is  a  great  crime  not  to  do  it  ;  there  is  no 
merit  in  doing  it,  for  “  what  have  we  that  we  have  not 
received  ?  ”...  I  am  very  glad  Madme  D’Arblaye  will  have 
the  aid  of  a  subscription.  I  subscribed  ten  guineas  to  it 
before  I  left  London.  My  poor  eyes  will  only  allow  me 
to  assure  you  that  with  the]  most  sincere  and  tender  affection 
I  am  .  .  . 

This  was  the  subscription  for  Camilla  for  which, 
through  the  energy  of  her  many  friends,  Fanny 
received  £ 2000  within  a  month  of  publication. 

A  letter  from  Mrs.  Matthew  to  her  aunt,  written 
in  November  from  Great  Cumberland  Place,  where 
they  were  then  residing,  records  a  new  and  interesting 
acquaintance  : 

We  had  a  very  agreable  small  party  yesterday  evening  when 
Sir  Chs  Blagden  introduced  to  us  a  very  extra  ordinary  person 
by  name  Count  Rumford.  He  is  of  American  extraction,  but 
has  been  employed  in  our  Secretary  of  States  offices  formerly, 
and  for  the  last  twelve  years  of  his  life  has  been  the  favorite  and 
effective  Minister  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria.  He  has  formed 
many  establishments  at  Munich  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor, 
which  have  succeeded  so  well  as  to  be  spreading  all  over  the 
Palatinate.  He  has  some  schemes  of  the  same  sort  which  he 
thinks  might  be  established  in  England.  He  is  also  a  man  of 
deep  science  and  has  written  upon  light,  and  the  expansion  of 
gunpowder.  I  hope  you  will  soon  meet  him  here. 

Sir  Benjamin  Thompson,  Count  von  Rumford,  was 
a  man  of  many  schemes  and  reforms  for  the  promotion 
of  fireside  comfort,  improved  cookery,  economic  fuel, 
better  clothing,  and  other  delectable  articles  of  faith,  and 
must  have  been  a  very  desirable  acquisition  in  these 


1795 


DEATH  OF  MRS.  SCOTT 


321 


rather  depressing  times.  Mrs.  Montagu  promptly- 
engaged  his  help  to  improve  some  fireplaces  that  were 
failing  in  their  duty. 

Sarah  Scott,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  sister,  whose  health 
had  long  been  failing,  died  at  Catton,  near  Norwich, 
on  November  3  of  this  year.  She  was  three  years 
younger  than  Elizabeth,  with  whom  she  kept  up  a 
regular  correspondence  to  the  last.  Besides  Millenium 
Hall ,  to  which  reference  has  been  made,  she  wrote  a 
Life  of  d' Aubigne  and  some  other  works.  She  had 
no  children. 

Nov.  25. 

I  have  been  relieved  this  morning,  by  a  letter  from  Mrs. 
Boscawen,  of  the  anxiety  I  had  felt  for  her  on  account  of  three 
of  her  grandsons  having  been  exposed  to  the  dangers  of  the  storm 
which  dispersed  the  West  Indian  Fleet,  but  I  thank  God  these 
brave  young  men  are  all  safe.  ...  I  congratulate  you  on  our 
taking  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  I  wish  this  event  may  help 
to  dispell  the  gloomy  discontent  which  now  reigns  over  this 
country. 

Mr.  Scott  and  his  bride  the  quondam  Miss  Bruhl  are  gone 
to  pass  great  part  of  the  winter  in  Scotland  ...  it  will  be  a 
great  comfort  to  Lady  Di  Scott  to  have  so  amiable  a  daughter 
in  law.  .  .  . 

I  have  enclosed  a  receipt  for  Pottato  bread,  as  it  may  be 
useful  to  such  of  your  poor  neighbours  who  are  not  more  nice 
than  wise.  I  tried  the  receipt  here,  and  the  bread  was  so  good 
Mr.  Bowdler  desired  to  have  some  of  it  for  his  breakfast, 
instead  of  my  household  bread  or  the  finest  bread  from  the  best 
baker  in  Newbury. 

Mr.  Scott  was  Hugh,  afterwards  6th  Baron  Pol- 
warth,  and  only  son  of  Lady  Diana  Hume  Campbell, 
daughter  of  the  3rd  Earl  of  Marchmont  and  widow 
of  Walter  Scott  of  Harden.  Hugh  Scott  had  this 
September  married  Harriet  Bruhl,  daughter  of  Count 
Bruhl,  our  Minister  from  Saxony:  her  mother  being 
the  Countess  Dowager  of  Egremont.  Miss  Bruhl 
had  been  Maid  of  Honour  to  the  Princess  of  Wales 
at  her  luckless  wedding  this  spring. 

VOL.  11 


Y 


322 


A  HOPELESS  EFFORT 


1795 


Potato  bread  calls  up  more  recent  memories  of 
dark  war  days  in  England.  The  gloomy  discon¬ 
tent  of  1795  had  further  justification,  for  Holland 
had  renounced  the  coalition  and  become  a  Batavian 
Republic  under  the  French  aegis,  while  the  Tsarina 
had  accomplished  the  partition  of  Poland. 

The  times  were  out  of  joint.  The  naval  command 
had  grown  listless.  Opportunities  were  missed  in  the 
Channel,  lives  and  energy  frittered  away  in  the  West 
Indies.  Pitt  was  inevitably  piling  up  debt  and  taxa¬ 
tion  in  the  hopeless  effort  to  hold  a  rotten  Europe  in 
face  of  a  Revolution,  in  Lord  Rosebery’s  words, 
“  Superhuman,  immeasurable,  incalculable,”  and  a 
genius  also  incalculably  great. 


THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE  WILLIAM  PITT 

After  Henry  Edridge 


1 796 


WAR  AND  DEPRESSION - PEACE  OVERTURES,  BONAPARTE 


Depression  in  England.  Peace  overtures.  The  Princess  of  Wales  and 
Lady  Jersey.  Painting  at  Montagu  House.  Lord  Malmesbury  goes 
to  Paris.  Mrs.  Garrick.  A  general  levy.  Dr.  Blagden’s  tour. 
Defence  preparations. 

The  year  1796  brought  little  news  likely  to  diminish 
the  deepening  depression  at  home  with  which  the 
letters  of  last  autumn  were  tinged.  The  political 
effects  of  the  American  War  of  Independence  and  the 
French  Revolution  had  led  Ireland  step  by  step 
towards  a  position  which  left  Henry  Grattan’s  moderate 
policy  of  organised  liberty  for  the  more  extreme 
demands  of  Wolfe  Tone  and  the  United  Irishmen  ; 
and  Lord  Fitzwilliam’s  recall  after  his  advocacy  of 
immediate  Catholic  emancipation  precipitated  the 
intrigues  of  the  extremists  with  the  French,  and  pro¬ 
duced  the  retaliatory  cruelties  of  the  Orangemen. 
Abroad,  though  Pichegru  and  Jourdan  had  been 
pressed  back  across  the  Rhine  by  the  Austrians, 
Bonaparte’s  amazing  campaign  in  North  Italy  forced 
Sardinia  to  renounce  the  alliance  and  drove  the 
Austrians  out  of  the  country.  Our  Mediterranean 
Fleet,  in  the  command  of  which  Jervis  had  succeeded 
Hotham,  could  do  no  more  than  close  the  Italian  ports, 
and  when  Spain  concluded  an  alliance  with  France 
and  their  fleets  united,  ours  was  compelled  to  abandon 
Corsica  and  leave  the  Mediterranean.  The  exchequer 
was  depleted  by  the  huge  Austrian  subsidies  and  other 

323 


324  PEACE  NEGOTIATIONS  1796 

war  expenditure  ;  and  in  October  Pitt  at  last  sent 
Lord  Malmesbury  to  Paris  to  negotiate  a  peace, 
proposing  that  France  should  give  up  the  Austrian 
Netherlands  and  withdraw  from  Italy,  terms  which 
the  Directory  rejected  with  scorn. 

A  letter  from  Mrs.  Matthew  written  on  October  7 
amidst  important  items  concerning  the  painting  of 
Montagu  House  by  Mr.  Borguis  and  preparations 
for  her  aunt’s  return — “  your  bed  is  slept  in  and  I  saw 
the  mattrass  at  top  ” — mentions  that 

Doctor  and  Mrs.  Douglas  have  just  returned  from  Germany 
thro  the  heart  of  France.  They  passed  ten  days  at  Paris 
without  any  molestation.  Lord  Malmesbury  is  to  be  our 
negotiator  there  on  the  present  occasion.  ...  It  is  believed 
that  Moreau’s  army  is  completely  defeated  and  the  Archduke 
has  done  more  than  modern  wonders  with  Jourdans  army 
which  has  sustained  repeated  and  severe  defeats.  Gen1  Marceau 
is  mortally  wounded.  Buona  Partes  army  in  Italy  is  reduced 
to  28000  men.  The  roads  and  ditches  of  Italy  are  filled  with 
the  dead  bodies  of  the  French.  The  people  of  Rome  will 
part  with  their  money  but  not  with  their  virtu  :  I  am  afraid 
they  have  long  lost  the  last  letter  to  that  word. 

A  little  later  she  adds  : 

The  Duchess  of  Richmond  is  dying,  and  Mr.  Forster  is 
just  dead,  so  that  the  Duke  has  been  already  given  to  Lady 
Elizth  by  the  chattering  world.  Lady  Ailesbury  and  Mrs. 
Darner  are  at  Goodwood,  but  the  Duchess  is  too  ill  to  see 
them  for  above  a  few  minutes  at  a  time.  Mrs.  Garrick  called 
here  on  Saturday  and  left  me  a  dozen  of  her  fine  Bears  which 
were  very  acceptable.  She  looks  ill  and  is  almost  blind  with 
one  eye.  Lady  Jersey  was  at  Court  last  Thursday.  I  find 
no  lady  at  the  Drawing  Room  spoke  to  her  but  manifested  by 
their  behaviour  the  greatest  disapprobation  of  her  conduct.  .  .  . 

Oct.  20. 

Sir  Charles  Blagden  has  seen  Mrs.  Garrick  at  Twickenham 
and  gives  but  a  bad  account  of  one  of  her  eyes  ;  the  other 
however  may  be  a  piercer  and  like  Lady  Pantweazle  she  may 
“  call  up  a  look  ”  and  charm  her  numerous  admirers.  .  .  . 


1796 


BRIGHTHELMSTONE 


325 

There  is  a  terrible  scarcity  of  cash  in  the  country  and  it  is 
reported  that  a  large  sum  has  been  remitted  to  the  Emperor 
without  even  the  formality  of  a  loan  .  .  .  some  say  that 
Mr.  Pitt  is  to  propose  a  benevolence  or  a  loan  of  the  5th  of 
every  man’s  property  in  the  kingdom  ;  this  will  be  very  heavy 
and  very  severe,  on  more  accounts  than  one  ;  a  strong  tempta¬ 
tion  to  perjury  and,  if  not,  a  breaking  up  of  most  establishments. 
The  satirical  Pamphlet  which  was  sent  down  to  you  relative 
to  John  a  Gudgeon  &c.  upon  the  profession  of  the  law,  is 
written  by  young  Anstie. 

Mrs.  Matthew’s  information  about  Moreau,  Jourdan, 
and  Bonaparte  was  somewhat  “exaggerated.”  Jourdan 
was,  however,  forced  back  by  the  Archduke  Charles 
into  Alsace,  and  Moreau  carried  out  a  “superb  retreat” 
from  a  dangerous  position  and  passed  back  to  France, 
“  covered  with  glory.” 

Sir  Charles  Blagden,  who  had  been  making  a  tour 
from  Broadlands  with  Lord  Palmerston,  reached 
Brighthelmstone  (as  it  was  still  spelt)  in  September, 
and  reported  to  Montagu  : 

Brighthelmston  is  very  full,  so  that  I  find  it  extremely 
difficult  to  procure  accommodation.  The  Pr.  of  W.  is  or 
has  been  at  Bognor,  and  is  said  to  be  preparing  for  a  residence 
there  of  several  weeks.  The  aspect  of  politics  makes  many 
people  here  look  gloomy.  Sir  Chas.  Grey  is  appointed  to 
the  command  of  this  coast  in  the  room  of  the  D.  of  Richmond, 
now  Field  Marshall. 

Sept.  18. 

The  camps  here  break  up  on  Monday  sennight,  the  26th, 
and  Parliament,  as  Ld  Mornington,  who  is  here  says,  will 
meet  certainly  the  next  day.  The  late  news  from  Germany 
will  render  that  meeting  much  less  unpleasant.  Sir  Chas. 
Grey  is  arrived  here,  to  take  the  command.  He  had  been 
settled  just  a  week  in  Northumberland,  when  the  summons 
for  this  employment  came  to  him.  Ld  Thurlow  is  here  with 
two  daughters.  Mr.  Fox  was  expected,  but  only  Mrs. 
Armistead  came.  The  Duke  of  Leeds  and  Ld  Carmarthen 
staid  two  or  three  days,  just  for  his  Grace  to  see  the  E.  York 
Batallion  of  Militia,  as  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  Riding.  It 
is  said  that  Lady  Gertrude  V.  did  not  take  kindly  to  his  son. 


MRS.  ARMISTEAD 


1796 


326 

and  that  therefore  the  affair  does  not  proceed.  Mr.  La  Jarre 
is  here  with  the  Thorntons,  who  occupy  a  large  house  called 
Wyck,  about  a  mile  from  the  town.  He  told  me  that  Mr. 
Wilberforce  was  now  in  Yorkshire,  and  quite  recovered.  Here, 
as  well  as  among  your  friends,  La  Jarre  has  the  character  of 
an  uncommonly  eloquent  man. 

Sir  Charles,  afterwards  first  Earl  Grey,  who  had 
fought  with  Wolfe  at  Minden,  in  America,  and 
latterly  in  the  West  Indies,  became  a  general  and  privy 
councillor  in  1795.  Mrs.  Armistead,  once  among  the 
Prince  of  Wales’  amours,  had  legalised  her  association 
with  Fox  a  year  or  two  back,  and  was  now  his  happy 
wife.  Lord  Carmarthen,  the  Duke  of  Leeds’  eldest 
son,  married  in  the  following  year  Charlotte,  daughter 
of  the  Marquess  Townshend. 

Monsr.  La  Jard,  who  had  held  command  in  the 
National  Guard  under  Lafayette,  was  a  friend  of 
Monsr.  D’Arblay,  and  stayed  with  him  and  Fanny  at 
Westhamble. 


i797 


APPROACHING  BLINDNESS - CAPE  ST.  VINCENT  AND 

CAMPERDOWN 


Age  and  failing  sight.  Lord  Rokeby  at  85.  The  political  outlook. 
Nelson  at  Cape  St.  Vincent.  Mutinies  at  Spithead  and  The  Nore. 
Dr.  Blagden’s  letters.  Visit  from  Mr.  Anstey.  Samuel  Thompson. 
Second  Peace  negotiations  fail.  Miss  Bowdler  in  Italy.  The  naval 
victory  at  Camperdown.  De  Winter  and  Duncan.  Ministers  at 
Walmer.  Bonaparte  in  Italy. 


In  spite  of  increasing  blindness  and  the  loss  of  nearly 
all  her  intimate  friends  and  correspondents,  these  last 
two  or  three  years  of  our  little  old  lady’s  life  seem  to 
have  been  spent,  on  the  whole,  fairly  happily  amidst  the 
domesticities  which  her  young  couple  had  so  generously 
provided.  In  one  of  the  last  letters  to  Mrs.  Carter, 
written  from  Sandleford  on  September  i  of  this  year 
— the  handwriting  very  small  and  still  wonderfully 
legible — she  says: 

When  I  consider  the  great  blessings  I  enjoy  in  mv  domestick 
of  my  dear  Montagu,  his  wife  and  lovely  babes  I  blame  myself 
for  any  suppression  of  spirits  ;  but  sometimes  when  I  see 
the  dear  Family  all  gayly  sporting  before  my  windows,  terrors 
of  an  invasion  or  of  Civil  dissensions  seize  me  ;  and  this  I  am 
conscious  is  criminal  as  well  as  painfull,  for  the  mind  and  heart 
should  in  all  circumstances  only  say  Gods  Will  be  done. 

Her  old  brother,  Matthew  Lord  Rokeby,  “  now 
within  a  few  months  of  being  as  near  to  ninety  as  to 
eighty,”  wrote  still  hoping  that  he  might  get  her  to 
pay  a  visit  to  his  hermitage  during  the  remainder  of 
his  days,  and  sending  her  another  pamphlet  he  had 

327 


328  NELSON  AT  CAPE  ST.  VINCENT  1797 

written.  He  was  still  in  health,  though  he  admits 
he  had  been  “  suddenly  unexpectedly  and  violently 
seized  with  a  feaver  and  ague  which  had  made  him 
exceedingly  disorder’d  and  at  one  time  light-headed,” 
and  which  was  “  caught  by  lying  down  and  resting 
incautiously  on  some  damp  locks  of  wool  in  the  corner 
of  a  chamber  where  I  was  as  a  Grazier  seeing  my  wool 
weigh’d  to  the  Factor  who  had  bought  it.”  The  old 
hermit  lived  to  survive  his  sister  by  a  few  weeks  only, 
and  died  November  30,  1800. 

The  political  outlook,  indeed,  was  far  from  cheering; 
but  Mrs.  Montagu’s  life  had  reached  the  period  when 
public  events  begin  to  recede  from  the  foreground 
of  more  restricted  thought  and  feeling. 

“  Alas  !  ”  she  writes  to  Mrs.  Carter,  “  when  will  peace 
and  order  and  all  the  felicities  and  virtues  attendant  on  them 
be  restord  to  Nations  apostate  to  their  God  and  despisers  of 
Laws  !  Indeed  my  dear  Friend  the  present  condition  of  the 
world  is  a  melancholly  subject  of  contemplation  or  discourse, 
so  I  will  not  dwell  on  it  any  longer.  .  .  .  My  eyes  have  lately 
been  very  bad,  but  this  morning  finding  them  a  little  better 
I  ventured  to  employ  them  in  the  manner  most  pleasing  to 
me,  that  is  corresponding  with  you  ;  but  I  must  lay  down 
my  pen.” 

Nelson,  indeed,  had  come  to  the  rescue  of  a 
despondent  country  on  February  14,  in  Admiral 
Jervis’  glorious  victory  of  Cape  St.  Vincent,  when  the 
young  Horatio  on  the  Captain^  disregarding  his  chief’s 
signal,  had  broken  away  from  the  line  to  head  off  the 
ten  retiring  Spanish  ships,  engaged  them  with  Trou- 
bridge,  thrown  the  whole  fleet  of  the  Spaniards  into 
confusion,  and  captured  two  of  their  vessels.  Nelson’s 
independent  action  was  this  time  approved  and 
emphasised  by  his  being  gazetted  rear-admiral  at 
the  same  time  that  his  chief  became  Earl  St.  Vincent. 

But  April  and  May  brought  the  almost  justifiable 
naval  strike  of  Spithead,  and  the  much  less  pardonable 
Mutiny  of  the  Nore,  which,  however,  was  largely 


1797 


MUTINY  AT  THE  NORE 


329 


quelled  by  the  loyal  majority  of  the  sailors  ;  and  Mrs. 
Matthew  Montagu,  who  was  at  Portsmouth  a  fort¬ 
night  after  discipline  had  been  re-established,  writes 
to  her  aunt  on  July  2  :  “  This  place  is  quite  quiet. 
2  of  the  mutineers  were  hanged  last  week  and  the 
rest  have  been  pardoned.  I  find  the  riots  we  heard 
of  in  London  in  the  town  had  been  much  exaggerated.” 

For  reference  to  the  political  events  of  these  critical 
times  our  collection  is  again  dependent  on  the  letters  of 
Sir  Charles  Blagden,  the  very  observant  Edinburgh 
doctor  who  had  become  a  welcome  guest  at  Sandleford 
and  Portman  Square. 


To  Mrs .  Carter 

August  yth. 

My  old  acquaintance  Mr.  Anstey  was  so  kind  as  to  make 
me  a  visit  last  week  ;  his  bodily  health  is  impaired,  but  his 
mind  has  not  lost  its  vigour  nor  even  sportive  humour.  He 
presented  me  with  an  admirable  song,  Sailors  hunting,  and 
I  think  it  is  not  only  very  witty  but  may  be  very  useful  if  sung 
on  board  our  ships.  I  hope  it  is  in  the  booksellers  shops  at  Deal. 

From  Sir  Charles  Blagden  occurs  a  letter  in  which 
reference  is  made  to  Samuel  Thompson,  the  founder 
of  the  Freethinking  Christians,  to  whose  sermons  Mrs. 
Montagu  has  already  alluded  : 

I  slept  at  Chichester  that  night,  and  went  to  Bognor  next 
morning,  intending  to  hear  Mr.  Thompson  preach  at  the 
new  Chapel  ;  but  Sunday  forenoon  was  so  very  wet  that  I 
could  not  get  thither  from  the  Hotel,  the  distance  being  more 
than  half  a  mile.  Bognor  is  very  full  this  year,  and  many  of 
the  families  there,  are  of  high  rank.  I  dined  at  the  Dss.  of 
Devonshire’s,  along  with  the  Besborough  and  Melbourne 
families,  in  the  evening  the  D.  of  Bedford  arrived  from  London  : 
his  most  intimate  friend  at  present  seemed,  from  his  conversa¬ 
tion  to  be  Ld.  Lauderdale.  I  was  told  that  His  Grace  is  studying 
finance  under  the  noble  Lord’s  instructions.  On  monday  the 
party  with  whom  I  dined  were  going  to  the  D.  of  Richmond 
at  Goodwood.  I  staid  only  one  night  at  Bognor,  and  went 


33° 


“  THE  SWORD  IS  THE  LAW  ” 


1797 


next  day  to  Worthing,  where  I  found  the  Bp.  of  Rochester, 
and  a  family  with  whom  I  have  some  acquaintance  in  London. 

Lord  Lauderdale  was  perhaps  lucubrating  his 
Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Origin  of  Public  Wealth , 
published  in  1804.  One  wonders  what  particular 
branch  of  finance  the  Prince  of  Wales’  boon  com¬ 
panion,  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  was  studying. 

From  Sir  Charles  Blagden 

The  Prince  is  now  absent,  but  expect’d  to  return  to  the 
Master  of  the  Ceremonies  Ball,  which  is  to-morrow.  Here 
[we]  have  just  heard  from  tolerable  authority,  that  the  main 
object,  namely  concessions  to  be  made  by  England  and  France 
mutually,  is  settled  between  the  negotiators  at  Lisle  ;  and  that 
the  present  obstacle  is  one  of  inferior  moment  to  us,  being 
a  claim  made  by  the  French  to  the  exclusive  navigation  of 
the  lower  part  of  the  Rhine.  There  is  no  truth  in  the  report 
that  the  final  treaty  between  the  Emperor  and  the  French  has 
been  signed.  The  comet  I  find  has  been  a  tolerably  good  one, 
perfectly  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  Mr.  Hope  is  here,  and 
looks  in  better  health  than  when  I  last  saw  him  in  London. 
Ld.  Carrington  sets  out  to-day  on  a  tour  to  Ireland,  but  leaves 
his  Lady  and  family  here.  The  storm  last  Friday  morning 
was  pretty  violent  on  all  this  coast.  In  the  former  great 
storm,  glass  was  broken  in  Ld.  Egremont’s  house  at  Petworth 
to  the  value  of  fboo  ;  the  hail  also  did  a  great  deal  of  mischief 
at  Goodwood  and  Cowdray. 

Pitt’s  second  attempt  at  negotiation  with  France, 
which  took  place  at  Lille  in  August,  failed  almost  as 
signally  as  that  of  the  year  before,  the  previous 
September’s  coup  d'Etat  of  Fructidor  having  given 
ascendancy  to  Bonaparte.  “  The  sword,”  henceforth, 
“  is  the  law.” 

From  Sir  Charles  Blagden  to  M.  Montagu 

Sept.  30 th. 

Though  I  understand  you  intend  to  be  in  town  shortly, 
yet  I  wish  to  write  before  you  leave  Sandleford,  that  the 


1797 


THE  FRENCH  AT  BOLOGNA 


33i 


following  extract  from  a  letter  of  Miss  Bowdler’s  may  be 
communicated  to  Mrs.  Montagu,  because  I  think  it  will 
entertain  her,  as  well  as  appear  curious. 

( From  Bologna.) 

I  was  of  the  number  of  the  fugitives  from  Verona  on  the 
1st  of  June  ;  thanks  to  the  truly  Italian  poltronerie  of  the 
Proveditore,  who  at  three  hours  after  midnight  spread  the  alarm, 
that  Buonaparte  with  15,000  troops  would  enter  before  noon 
en  ennemi.  The  agitation  of  the  moment  was  unpleasant, 
and  a  voyage  from  Verona  to  Venice  in  a  very  small  boat 
inconvenient  ;  but  otherwise  this  alarm  was  of  little  moment 
to  me,  for  I  had  determined  on  leaving  Verona,  both  because 
convinced  that  the  French  would  soon  take  possession  of  it, 
and  also  because  I  found  its  climate  did  not  suit  my  lungs  ; 
and  I  should  already  have  been  gone,  had  not  all  the  post- 
horses  been  detained  for  the  service  of  the  State.  Four  days 
at  Venice  half  killed  me.  I  staid  about  twice  as  many  at 
Padua,  and  came  to  Bologna  on  the  15th,  intending  only  a 
short  visit  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hare  Naylor  in  my  way  back  to 
Tuscany  ;  but  the  very  circumstance,  which  had  driven  me 
from  Verona  detained  me  here.  The  entry  of  the  French 
on  the  19th  was  so  sudden  (so  unlooked  for,  except  by  those 
who  had  invited  them)  that  I  had  not  the  power  of  avoiding 
them.  .  .  .  The  revolution  here  was  the  work  of  a  single  day, 
or  rather  moment.  Bologna  was  first  disarmed  and  then 
declared  free  and  independent.  My  friends  and  I  applied  to 
both  the  liberated  and  liberators,  to  know  whether  we  might 
regard  ourselves  as  sharers  in  this  newly  bestowed  boon  :  we 
received  every  assurance  of  tranquility  and  protection.  I  hired 
a  casino  just  by  that  of  Mr.  Hare,  and  here  I  am  to  my  perfect 
satisfaction  in  every  respect  ;  and  as  I  possess  neither  gold, 
nor  silver  nor  horses,  nor  pictures,  and  consequently  have  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  contribution,  I  certainly  have  nothing 
but  good  to  say  of  the  French  ;  for  so  well  disciplined  or 
a  body  of  troops  I  suppose  scarcely  ever  had 
a  conquered  town. 

Francis  Hare  Naylor,  grandson  of  the  great  scholar 
bishop  of  Chichester  and  friend  and  cousin  by  marriage 
of  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  was  many  years  resident 
in  Bologna. 

Shortly  after  the  collapse  of  the  negotiations  at 
Lille,  the  Dutch  fleet  at  length  ventured  out  of  the 


unoffending 
possession  of 


332 


CAMPERDOWN 


1797 


Texel.  Admiral  Duncan,  who  was  refitting  at 
Yarmouth  Roads,  got  information  early  on  October  9 
that  De  Winter’s  fleet  was  at  sea,  and  instantly  hoisted 
the  signal  to  give  chase.  The  Dutch  fleet  of  four 
seventy-fours  and  fifteen  smaller  ships  was  sighted 
on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  about  nine  miles  from 
shore  between  Egmont  and  Camperdown,  and  the 
British  Fleet,  slightly  superior  in  strength,  went 
straight  into  them  without  waiting  to  form  line.  The 
engagement  began  at  noon,  and  resulted  in  our  taking 
eleven  of  the  enemy  vessels;  but  the  prizes  were  so 
battered  that  they  could  not  be  refitted  for  service, 
and  the  Delft  indeed  sank  on  her  way  to  England. 
This  stubbornly  fought  victory  ended  the  naval  crisis 
and  the  projected  invasion  of  Ireland. 

From  Sir  C.  Blagden  to  Matthew  Montagu 

Oct.  23. 

If  I  had  received  any  very  early  intelligence  respecting  the 
late  naval  victory  I  should  have  sent  it  to  you  ;  but  every 
thing  that  I  heard  at  first  appeared  as  soon  in  the  newspapers. 
I  have  since  been  told,  on  good  authority,  the  conversation 
of  Adm.  de  Winter  with  Adm.  Duncan,  after  the  capture 
of  the  former.  He  said  that  the  expedition  was  originally 
intended  against  the  north  of  Ireland,  in  concert  with  the 
mal-contents  of  that  country  ;  that  upwards  of  40,000  men 
were  to  have  embarked  on  it  in  Holland,  part  of  whom  were 
actually  on  board,  but  that  the  English  Fleet,  by  blocking  up 
the  Texel  so  completely,  had  defeated  the  plan.  That  lately, 
when  it  was  in  contemplation  to  order  him  out  to  sea,  he  had 
represented  to  the  States,  that  it  would  be  better  policy  for  him 
to  remain  in  port,  prepared,  and  so  oblige  the  English  to  waste 
and  cripple  their  fleet  in  watching  him,  especially  during  the 
bad  weather  of  winter  ;  that  in  time  perhaps  they  might  get 
remiss,  and  that  from  this,  or  some  other  cause,  possibly  toward 
spring  a  good  opportunity  might  present  itself  of  sailing  and 
carrying  into  execution  the  original  purposes  of  the  expedition. 
This  responsible  advice  was,  as  is  usual  when  party  runs  high, 
call’d  the  language  of  disaffection  ;  in  consequence  of  which 
he  assured  the  States,  that  if  they  sent  him  orders  to  go  out  and 


1797  BONAPARTE  AND  BERTHIER  333 

fight,  he  would  do  so  whatever  might  be  the  force  of  the  enemy, 
and  make  every  exertion  in  his  power  to  destroy  or  damage 
the  hostile  fleet.  The  event  shews  that  he  kept  his  word. 
The  Dutch  fought  perfectly  well,  and  with  great  steadiness, 
but  were  not  so  alert  as  our  people,  particularly  in  the  beginning 
of  the  action,  perhaps  because  their  guns  were  not  prepared 
for  fighting  on  that  side  of  their  ships,  to  which  Adm.  Duncan’s 
manoeuvre  brought  the  English  Fleet.  The  Dutch  pointed 
their  guns  remarkably  well,  and  lodged  a  great  number  of 
their  shot  in  the  hulls  of  our  ships,  many  below  the  water 
mark. 

Several  circumstances  lead  me  to  suspect  that  our  ministers 
have  not  yet  entirely  abandoned  all  hopes  of  peace.  They 
are  down  at  Walmer,  I  believe,  and  Mr.  Canning  with  them, 
so  that  whatever  despatches  came  by  the  late  Flag  of  Truce 
from  France  were  not  brought  to  London,  but  carried  to  them 
directly  on  the  sea  coast. 

George  Canning  was  at  this  time  Pitt’s  Under¬ 
secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs. 


From  Sir  C.  Blagden  to  Matthew  Montagu 

Bath,  Dec.  17. 

As  Bath  is  the  resort  of  curious  as  well  as  idle  people,  I 
have  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  here  one  of  my  old  Italian 
acquaintances,  Mr.  Hare  Naylor,  who  from  his  situation  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Bologna  had  more  opportunities  than 
most  Englishmen  of  observing  the  conduct  and  character  of 
Buonaparte.  In  all  respects  that  famous  General  appears  to 
be  a  very  great  man  ;  but  in  the  particular  skill  of  a  military 
commander  I  find  the  opinion  was,  that  Gen.  Berthier  excelled 
him  ;  and  that  a  considerable  part  of  Buonaparte’s  success 
depended  on  the  advice  given  by  Berthier,  which  the  former 
had  the  good  sense  to  follow.  It  was  also  a  prevailing  opinion 
in  Italy,  that  Buonaparte  had  more  talents  for  extricating 
himself  out  of  difficulties,  than  for  avoiding  to  get  into  them. 
Perhaps  you  have  seen  a  short  account  of  the  life  of  Buonaparte 
when  a  boy,  at  the  military  school  of  Brienne,  just  published 
by  a  young  man  who  was  his  school  fellow  :  it  shews  in  a 
striking  manner  how  very  early  that  unyielding  and  energetic 
character  of  the  general  displayed  itself,  and  on  that  account 
is  worth  the  perusal.  The  author  is  of  Jewish  extraction, 


334 


MR.  HARE  NAYLOR 


1797 


and  now  lives  with  Mr.  Douglas  (who  married  Mrs  Beauvoir, 
formerly  Miss  Sharpe)  at  St.  Alban’s  in  Kent.  Mr.  Hare 
Naylor,  being  furnished  with  passports  from  Buonaparte,  was 
allowed  to  travel  through  France,  in  his  way  to  England, 
and  met  with  no  difficulty  or  inconvenience.  He  arrived 
at  Lisle  the  very  day  on  which  the  French  negotiators  quitted 
it,  at  the  expiration  of  the  period  they  had  assigned  for  the 
return  of  our  minister  :  on  Mr.  H.  N.’s  entrance  into  Lisle 
the  report  was  spread,  that  the  English  had  sent  Lord  St. 
Helen’s  to  renew  the  negociation.  I  am  told  here  that  the 
French  have  now  suppressed  all  payments  on  the  public  funds, 
giving  assignments  for  the  value  on  lands  in  St.  Domingo, 
which  are  not  considered  as  absolutely  nugatory. 

Mr.  Spenser  Wilkinson,  the  Chichele  Professor  of 
Military  History  at  Oxford,  to  whom  this  letter  was 
read,  was  much  tickled,  though  entirely  sceptical,  over 
the  theory  of  Berthier’s  share  in  Bonaparte’s  successes. 
Napoleon  is  not  the  first  nor  the  only  genius  whose 
inspiration  has  been  attributed  to  his  secretary. 


i?98 


INVASION  SCARES  AGAIN - IRELAND,  NELSON, 

AND  BONAPARTE 


Ireland  in  rebellion.  French  invasion.  An  aquatic  expedition.  Further 
letters  from  Dr.  Blagden.  Cambridge.  Lowestoft.  Yarmouth. 
Lord  Duncan.  Burgh.  Richmond.  Mrs.  Jordan.  Mr.  Grattan. 
French  landing  in  Ireland.  The  Race  of  Castlebar.  Count  Rumford. 
Bonaparte  in  Egypt.  Nelson  pursues  him.  The  Battle  of  the  Nile. 
Letter  from  Mr.  Bowdler.  The  Franklin  and  Admiral  Blanquet. 


Though  the  naval  victory  at  Camperdown  had  gone 
far  to  render  the  threat  of  invasion  impracticable  of 
execution,  it  was  naturally  Bonaparte’s  aim  to  keep 
up  the  scare,  which  necessitated  defence  preparations 
in  Britain,  whilst  maturing  his  real  scheme  for  the 
invasion  of  Egypt.  Ireland  being,  in  March,  when 
Lord  Fitzgerald  and  the  leaders  of  the  United  Irish¬ 
men  were  arrested,  on  the  brink  of  organised  insur¬ 
rection,  the  moment  was  obviously  favourable  for  an 
invasion  in  force,  and  the  assemblage  of  a  vast  arma¬ 
ment  at  Boulogne  was  quite  sufficient  to  make  credible 
once  again  the  imminence  of  a  hostile  landing  on  our 
shores.  The  expedition  under  Hoche,  with  Wolfe 
Tone  on  board  as  a  French  officer,  which  had  got  to 
Bantry  Bay  in  the  previous  January,  was  driven  off 
by  wild  weather  and  not  by  any  British  effort.  Lady 
Moira  wrote  that  our  escape  had  been  miraculous, 
and  Tone  says:  “  Well,  England  has  not  had  such  an 
escape  since  the  Spanish  Armada,  and  that  expedition 
like  ours  was  defeated  by  the  weather.”  As  Lady 

335 


336  A  RIVER  EXPEDITION  1798 

Moira  foretold,  “  It  is  a  general  belief  amongst  all 
parties  that  the  French  will  revisit  Ireland.” 


From  her  Brother ,  Charles  Robinson 

Canterbury,  March  i. 

Whether  the  french  will  attempt  an  invasion  or  not  I  do 
not  know,  but  I  perceive  they  threaten  much,  however  as  we 
are  to  have  Prince  William  of  Gloucester  here  in  a  fortnight 
as  one  of  our  commanding  Generals  I  take  it  for  granted  they 
will  have  more  wit  than  to  come  on  this  coast.  Subscriptions 
I  perceive  go  on  pretty  brisk  so  that  I  take  it  for  granted  I 
shall  soon  see  you  as  in  duty  bound  subscribing  in  Defence 
of  your  Country. 

We  have  just  sent  off  five  people  to  London  this  morning, 
who  were  taken  up  sounding  and  taking  plans  upon  the  coast. 

From  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu 

Portman  Square,  August  3 d. 

A  most  agreable  aquatic  expedition  was  prepared  for  us 
yesterday,  but  the  heat  was  so  great  that  we  were  unable  to 
perform  the  half  of  it,  or  indeed  to  enjoy  it  completely  ;  as 
Lady  Belgrave  took  her  Son,  she  begged  to  have  our  daughters 
— They  therefore  took  an  early  dinner  here,  and  we  reached 
Millbank  at  2  o’clock,  where  we  found  Admiral  Calpoys  and 
his  Admiralty  Boat,  with  six  rowers,  and  an  Awning  ready  for 
us — We  set  forth  soon  after,  and  proceeded  to  Greenwich, 
where  our  dinner  was  order’d  for  five  o’clock  ;  we  then  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  Perry’s  Dock,  and  saw  the  places  preparing  for  the 
new  West  India  Docks — but  the  heat  was  so  great  in  walking 
that  Lady  Belgrave  was  perfectly  rendue ,  and  I  was  boil’d 
roasted  and  baked  —  We  returned  and  dined  at  Greenwich, 
and  it  was  intended  to  walk  in  the  park,  but  this  was  impractic¬ 
able  from  the  heat,  and  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  so  that  we  sat 
still  till  8  o’clock,  when  we  had  a  most  delightful  return  by 
water  ;  shot  through  the  3  Bridges  and  saw  the  setting  Sun, 
and  rising  Moon  to  perfection.  We  got  to  Millbank  about 
\  past  nine  and  returned  immediately.  Admiral  Calpoys 
seems  a  most  amiable  Man  and  his  good  humour  activity  and 
good  spirits  were  quite  delightful  to  contemplate — and  yet 
this  good  creature  has  had  his  severe  trials  and  mortifications— 


1798 


BLAGDEN  AT  YARMOUTH 


337 


for  ever  since  his  noble  resistance  of  the  Mutiny,  The  crews 
of  all  the  Ships  have  refused  to  sail  with  him,  so  that  his  services 
are  laid  up  at  a  time  when  personal  activity  and  45  years  service 
in  the  profession  would  have  render’d  them  useful  to  his 
country. 

Admiral  Colpoys,  who  was  on  board  the  London 
during  the  mutiny  at  Spithead  and  St.  Helen’s,  received 
orders  from  the  Admiralty  to  submit  to  the  mutineers. 


From  Sir  Charles  Blagden  to  Matthew  Montagu 

Upper  Berkeley  Street,  Aug.  29. 

Your  Friends  at  Cambridge  received  me  very  kindly,  and 
shewed  me  every  civility  and  attention  ;  so  that  I  saw  the 
University  as  well  as  was  possible  at  that  season.  Mr.  Hailstone 
arrived  the  day  I  went  away,  but  soon  enough  to  give  me  a 
sight  of  the  Woodwardian  Collection,  and  besides  brought  me 
the  welcome  news,  that  he  had  spent  a  very  agreable  evening 
at  your  house,  and  found  you  and  your  family  all  well.  From 
Cambridge  I  had  a  very  pleasant  tour  to  Lowestoft,  which 
is  advantageously  situated  on  a  dry  and  pleasant  coast,  with 
a  sufficient  elevation  to  make  it  chearful  ;  but  it  is  not  the 
kind  of  place  which  is  suited  to  a  man  in  my  situation  ;  and 
therefore  after  seeing  the  two  lakes  in  the  neighbourhood, 
those  of  Blundeston  and  Herring  fleet,  I  removed  to  Yarmouth, 
where  I  spent  near  a  fortnight  very  agreably.  Yarmouth 
unites  the  advantages  of  an  important  naval  station,  a  sea-port 
of  considerable  trade,  and  a  resort  of  company  for  sea-bathing  : 
there  is  a  very  good  room  on  the  sea-side,  where  the  news¬ 
papers  are  taken  in,  and  the  company  meet  :  and  the  people 
I  found  there  were  mostly  very  conversable,  some  of  them 
really  sensible.  When  I  arrived  Lord  Duncan  was  not  yet 
gone  to  sea,  and  I  had  the  pleasure  of  dining  with  him  twice, 
besides  conversing  with  him  on  several  other  occasions.  He 
is  really  an  interesting  man,  with  a  peculiar  naivete ,  which  in 
an  old  sea-officer,  and  one  who  has  distinguished  himself  so 
much,  is  remarkably  striking.  From  Yarmouth  I  went  to 
see  the  fine  ruin  of  the  old  Gothick  castle  of  the  Fastolfs  at 
Caister  ;  and  the  remains  of  the  Roman  station  at  Burgh, 
most  probably  the  Garianonum  of  their  authors.  The  latter 
is,  I  believe,  the  most  perfect  specimen  of  the  fortified  camps 
of  the  Romans  now  remaining  in  England,  and  shews  the 
VOL.  II  Z 


1798 


338  THE  RACE  OF  CASTLEBAR 

nature  of  the  walls,  the  manner  of  building  them,  and  of 
strengthening  them  afterwards  with  towers,  to  great  satisfaction. 

...  I  have  been  spending  two  or  three  days  at  Richmond 
very  agreably  and  last  Sunday  had  the  pleasure  of  visiting 
Mrs.  Boscawen  who  told  me  that  she  had  received  a  good 
account  of  Mrs.  Montagu  since  her  arrival  at  Sandleford. 
...  At  Richmond  I  saw  Mrs.  Jordan  in  the  same  character, 
as  with  you  last  year  in  Mr.  Garrick’s  Box,  namely  Lady 
Teazle,  and  found  her  prodigiously  improved  in  her  manner 
of  acting  it  ;  she  is  now  a  happy  mean  between  the  Romp 
and  the  fine  Lady.  The  Berrys  were  not  returned  from 
Cheltenham,  nor  expected  till  the  end  of  this  week  ;  but  I 
found  Lady  Ailesbury  and  Mrs.  Darner  at  home,  I  had  the 
opportunity  of  going  over  Strawberry  Hill  ;  which  is  indeed 
very  much  improved,  and  in  a  manner  that  shews  good  taste. 
On  Monday  I  dined  at  the  Indian  Sir  John  Day’s,  who  has 
a  house  at  Richmond,  in  company  with  Mr.  Gratton,  and  was 
glad  to  see  him  again  after  an  interval  of  many  years,  having 
dined  with  him  formerly  in  London,  soon  after  the  (so-called) 
Irish  emancipation.  Mr.  Gratton  is  now  more  cautious  and 
reserved  than  he  was  at  that  time,  and,  perhaps  in  consequence 
appears  to  have  less  readiness  and  enthusiasm  in  speaking. 
Irish  affairs  were  not  much  the  subject  of  conversation  ;  the 
little  said  upon  them  was  very  fair  and  moderate  :  he  dis¬ 
approved  of  the  bill  of  forfeiture.  Of  the  landing  of  the  French 
in  Ireland  I  know  nothing  more,  as  yet,  than  you  will  see  in 
the  newspapers. 

About  1 1 00  French  troops,  under  Humbert,  had 
landed  at  Killala,  and  with  some  assistance  from  Irish 
insurgents  had  forced  the  King’s  troops  to  retreat 
on  August  27  ;  but  were  compelled  to  surrender  to 
Lord  Cornwallis  at  Ballinamuck  on  September  8. 
This  running  engagement  was  known  as  the  Race 
of  Castlebar. 

Horace  Walpole  (Lord  Orford  since  1791)  had 
died  in  March  of  the  previous  year,  and  Strawberry 
Hill  had  passed  for  her  life  to  Mrs.  Darner,  General 
Conway’s  daughter ;  Walpole’s  “  twin  wives,”  the 
Misses  Berry,  inheriting  Little  Strawberry  and  £4000 
apiece.  Henry  Grattan  had  this  year  been  struck  off 
the  Privy  Council. 


1798  COUNT  RUMFORD  RETURNS  339 

Lord  Duncan  was,  of  course,  the  victor  of  Camper- 
down.  It  is  evident  that  though  Nelson’s  Battle  of  the 
Nile  had  been  fought  and  won  seven  weeks  before 
the  date  of  the  next  letter,  news  of  the  victory  had  not 
yet  reached  the  alert  Blagden. 


From  Sir  Charles  Blagden  to  Mrs.  Montagu 

Brighton,  Sept.  18 th. 

Lord  Lucan,  as  you  may  suppose,  felt  great  affliction  when 
he  heard  that  the  F rench  had  taken  possession  of  Castlebar ; 
much  mischief  is  done  there,  chiefly  by  the  people  of  the 
country,  many  of  them  his  own  tenants  ;  and  still  greater 
ravages  would  have  been  committed,  if  the  French  had  not 
restrained  these  people.  Such  is  the  return  these  savages 
make  for  the  benefits  of  which  Lord  Lucan  has  been  the 
occasion  to  their  country  !  Lord  and  Lady  Clermont  are 
here  still  :  his  Lordship  much  out  of  spirits  from  the  accident 
to  his  nephew,  Mr.  Fortescue,  who  received  a  severe  wound 
in  the  groin  at  Killala  or  Castlebar,  I  forget  which,  and  it  is 
feared  will  lose  his  life. 

A  few  days  ago  I  was  very  agreeably  surprised  by  a  letter 
from  Count  Rumford,  informing  me  that  he  had  that  day, 
Aug.  12.  kissed  hands,  on  being  appointed  the  Elector’s 
Minister  at  London  :  he  intended  to  leave  Munich  in  io  or 
12  days,  and  expected  to  be  in  England  towards  the  end  of 
September.  Count  Haslory,  who  was  here  when  the  news 
came,  told  me  that  Cf  Rumford  was  coming  exactly  in  his 
place,  and  that  he  was  going  away  :  but  I  could  not  learn 
from  him  how  this  arrangement  had  been  brought  about, 
nor  what  was  the  state  of  the  new  office  of  police  which  the 
Count  had  so  lately  accepted.  Under  these  circumstances  it 
was  lucky  that  I  did  not  make  a  visit  to  Munich  ;  as  merely 
to  have  spent  two  or  three  summer  months  there  would  not 
have  repaid  me  for  two  very  disagreeable  voyages. 

Before  this  letter  reaches  you  it  is  not  impossible  that 
something  more  may  have  arrived  about  Buonaparte  ;  at 
present  I  take  the  state  of  our  intelligance  to  be,  that  he  is 
arrived  at  Cairo,  and  has  taken  possession  of  that  great  city, 
though  with  very  considerable  loss  ;  particularly  that  on  the 
way  from  Alexandria  to  Rossetta  he  had  a  sharp  engagement 
with  the  people  of  the  country,  chiefly  Arabs,  in  which  the 


340 


BONAPARTE  IN  EGYPT 


1798 


latter  were  defeated,  though  not  before  they  had  killed  many 
of  the  French  :  the  Beys  seem  determined  to  oppose  their 
progress,  if  possible,  and  it  is  said  have  agreed  to  assemble  a 
large  army  for  that  purpose.  Nelson  sail’d  again  from  Syracuse 
on  the  26  of  July,  but  seems  not  to  have  been  then  sure  that 
the  French  were  gone  to  Alexandria. 

Bonaparte  had  slipped  away  undiscovered  from 
Toulon  whilst  Nelson’s  three  watching  ships  were 
disabled  by  a  storm,  had  taken  and  garrisoned  Malta, 
and  gone  on  by  a  devious  route  to  Egypt.  Nelson, 
guessing  his  destination  and  being  reinforced  by  Trou- 
bridge’s  squadron,  went  straight  to  Alexandria,  which 
was  reached  three  days  before  the  French;  whom,  not 
being  found  there,  he  proceeded  to  hunt  in  vain  for 
a  month,  returning  on  August  1  to  find  the  French 
war  fleet  lying  at  anchor  in  Aboukir  Bay.  The 
Battle  of  the  Nile  only  began  at  sundown;  at  10  o’clock 
the  Orient  blew  up;  before  midnight  the  French  van¬ 
guard  had  been  destroyed;  the  centre  was  crushed, 
and  by  morning  the  enemy  Mediterranean  fleet  had 
ceased  to  be ;  of  thirteen  sail,  nine  were  captured, 
two  blown  up  or  burnt.  The  victory  was  complete, 
Bonaparte  was  isolated,  and  the  Mediterranean  was 
ours. 

From  Thomas  Bowdler 

I  assure  you  that  my  English  Blood  was  not  a  little  moved 
when  I  saw  Admiral  Blenquets  Cabin,  when  I  sat  in  His 
broken  Chair,  and  held  in  my  Hands  twothirds  of  His  long 
Telescope,  one  third  having  been  carried  away  by  One  of 
Nelsons  Balls.  All  this  was  not  a  little  heightened  by  con¬ 
versing  at  the  same  moment  with  the  Officers  and  Seamen 
who  fought  on  that  Night,  being  shewn  everything  by  them, 
and  hearing  their  Descriptions  and  Anecdotes  of  the  Battle. 
I  do  confess  that  I  held  my  Manhood  cheap  when  any  spoke 
who  fought  with  Nelson  on  the  1st  of  August.  The  Officers 
all  agreed  that  P — ’s  Account  of  the  Engagement  as  given 
in  the  intercepted  Letters,  is  accuracy  itself,  and  may  be 
perfectly  depended  on.  I  did  not  go  on  board  the  other 
Ships,  for  my  Legs  were  not  equal  to  the  Task,  but  I  under- 


1798 


BATTLE  OF  THE  NILE 


34i 


stood  that  they  are  all  as  much  damaged  as  the  Franklin,  and 
till  they  have  been  taken  into  Dock  and  examined  by  the 
Ship  Wright,  no  body  can  say  whether  any  of  them  can  be 
rendered  fit  for  any  future  Service.  The  Franklin  was  quite 
a  New  Ship,  yet  they  all  agreed  that  if  they  had  met  with 
bad  Weather,  it  would  have  been  very  difficult  to  have  navigated 
Her,  or  any  of  the  Prizes,  from  Gibraltar  to  Plymouth. 

Admiral  Blanquet  du  Chaila  fought  the  Franklin 
at  the  Battle  of  the  Nile.  His  ship  took  the  combined 
fire  of  the  Swiftsure ,  Defence ,  Leander ,  and  Orion  in 
the  final  phase  of  the  battle,  and  was  severely  mauled 
before  she  struck  her  colours.  The  French,  whose 
casualties  were  four  times  the  number  of  ours,  fought 
like  heroes,  but  stood  no  chance  against  Nelson’s 
amazing  tactics,  and  the  magnificent  spirit  which  his 
leadership  inspired  in  all  ranks  through  that  triumphant 
night. 


i799_I8oo 


RETIREMENT,  ILLNESS,  AND  DEATH 


Quiet  retirement.  Blindness.  “  Disobedience.”  Return  from  Sandleford. 
Winter  in  Portman  Square.  An  evening  on  the  Thames.  Last 
illness  and  death.  The  chimney  sweeps.  Mrs.  Montagu’s  beneficence. 
Condolences  from  Mrs.  Boscawen,  the  Bishop  of  Durham,  James 
Beattie,  and  Hannah  More.  Burial  at  Winchester  Cathedral. 


The  year  1799  was  one  of  quiet  retirement,  at 
Sandleford  chiefly,  where  her  niece  and  family  (now 
numbering  ten)  kept  Mrs.  Montagu  company  during 
Matthew’s  absences  either  in  London  or  at  Denton. 
Though  her  eyesight  had  failed  rapidly  of  late  and 
was  now  almost  entirely  gone,  her  general  health 
remained  fairly  good,  and  she  was  able  to  entertain 
a  few  friends  from  time  to  time,  such  as  Miss  Hervey 
and  Mr.  Bowdler,  and  to  interest  herself  in  a  scheme 
for  enlarging  the  grounds  of  the  Priory.  Whatever 
may  have  been  her  failings  in  the  domain  of  the 
heart,  her  complete  devotion  to  the  interests  of  her 
adopted  family  during  these  latter  years  is  strikingly, 
and  indeed  quite  touchingly,  exhibited  in  all  her 
correspondence ;  and  though  the  letters  grew  shorter 
and  shorter,  the  laments  and  apologies  of  her  poor 
weak  eyes  more  and  more  frequent,  and  the  number 
of  her  correspondents  less  and  less,  it  is  evident  in 
all  that  it  was  more  and  more  for  them  and  in  them 
that  she  had  her  being,  and  spent  her  thoughts.  In¬ 
deed,  the  last  letter  of  all  that  I  have  found  in  her 
own  hand  is  a  brief  note  to  Matthew,  her  “  dearest 

342 


I'jgg-iSoo 


THE  LAST  LETTER 


343 


and  most  excellent  Friend,”  begging  that  he  would 
take  care  of  the  health  that  was  so  precious,  and  “  as 
my  dear  little  friend  [his  wife]  has  such  a  dull  retire¬ 
ment  here  and  has  sometimes  the  pain  in  her  head, 
I  think  it  would  be  best  for  you  to  come  to  Sandleford 
as  soon  as  will  be  convenient  to  you.” 

Some  extracts  from  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Matthew 
Montagu  to  her  husband,  written  from  Sandleford, 
October  3,  will  convey  a  sufficient  idea  of  the  family 
story  and  interests  of  this  autumn.  Her  husband 
was  in  town  attending  his  parliamentary  duties  and, 
incidentally,  taking  advantage  of  a  bachelor  existence 
in  his  aunt’s  house  at  Portman  Square  to  renew  and 
entertain  a  number  of  old  acquaintances  : 

I  do  not  like  the  news  from  Holland  and  believe  that  at 
the  end  of  this  year  you  will  be  as  far  removed  from  peace  as 
ever.  Why  would  Lord  Chatham  go  abroad  ?  I  tremble 
lest  we  should  read  his  name  amongst  the  slain  in  the  next 
Gazette.  .  .  .  Our  weather  is  severe  and  detestable,  apres  la 
pluie  vient  la  pluie,  and  not  le  beau  terns  according  to  the 
proverb.  ...  A  cargo  of  entertaining  books  would  be  a  boon 
if  you  could  procure  them  from  Hookham.  Your  aunt  is 
still  in  the  middle  of  Disobedience,  and  we  in  the  absurdity 
of  Cecilia’s  scruples,  remonstrances  and  insensible  conduct  to 
Delvile. 

Matthew  was  perhaps  more  profitably  engaged  : 

I  accompanied  Sir  Charles  Blagden  on  Thursday  to  the 
dinner  at  the  Royal  Society,  and  heard  a  paper  of  Dr.  Herschel’s 
read  to  a  numerous  and  respectable  audience,  among  whom 
I  found  Mr.  Tooke  the  author  of  the  life  of  Catherine  the 
Second,  together  with  a  Mr.  Hatchett  who  has  been  a  great 
traveller  through  Russia  and  Poland  and  other  parts. 

William  Tooke  was  the  Kronstadt  chaplain  who 
published  a  series  of  books  on  Russia.  Charles 
Hatchett,  F.R.S.,  the  chemist,  whose  works  and  collec¬ 
tions  are  described  by  Thomas  Faulkner,  lived  in  the 
charming  old  Belle  Vue  House  in  Cheyne  Walk,  which 
his  father  built. 


344  BLIND,  BUT  CHEERFUL  1799-1800 

At  the  end  of  October  Lord  Sandwich,  Miss 
Poyntz,  and  the  Hartleys  dined  at  Sandleford  ;  and 
in  November  the  whole  family  came  up  to  town  in 
two  detachments.  Mrs.  Carter  reported  her  old 
friend  as 

in  perfect  good  health  and  spirits,  though  she  has  totally- 
changed  her  mode  of  life  ;  she  never  goes  out  except  to  take 
the  air  of  a  morning  .  .  .  lets  in  nobody  in  the  evening,  which 
she  passes  in  hearing  her  servant  read,  as  alas  !  her  eyes  will 
not  suffer  her  to  read  herself.  I  flatter  myself  that  this  pause 
of  exertion  will  restore  her  to  us  .  .  .  and  that  a  taste  for  the 
comfort  of  living  quietly  will  for  the  future  prevent  her  from 
mixing  so  much  with  the  tumults  of  the  world  as  to  injure 
her  health. 

But  Hannah  More’s  insight  into  the  character  of 
their  mutual  friend  was  really  the  truer  one  :  “I 
had  rather  for  my  part  live  in  our  cottage  at  Cheddar. 
She  is  made  for  the  great  world,  and  is  an  ornament 
to  it.  It  is  an  element  she  was  born  to  breathe  in.” 

The  winter  was  spent  quietly  at  Portman  Square. 
Her  writing  had  now  entirely  ceased,  and  Dr.  Burney 
spoke  of  her  as  “  so  broke  down  as  not  to  go  out, 
almost  wholly  blind,  and  very  feeble  but  from  the 
letters  between  Matthew  and  his  wife,  when  one  or 
other  happened  to  be  absent,  it  is  clear  that  her  mental 
activities  were  far  from  being  yet  extinguished,  and 
she  was  helping  to  plan  rearrangements  of  the  dairy 
and  poultry  yard  at  Sandleford,  reminding  her  nephew 
about  insurance  renewals  and  so  on ;  and  though 
making  Montagu  liberal  allowances  for  all  expenditure, 
she  still  retained  control  of  the  purse.  Her  nephew 
went  down  to  Sandleford  in  March  1800  with  a 
contingent  of  his  boys,  leaving  his  wife  and  the  girls 
with  the  aunt  at  Portman  Square,  and  remained  there 
till  May  or  June.  In  April  and  May  Mrs.  Montagu 
junior  reports  : 


1799-1800  EVENING  ON  THE  THAMES  345 


From  Mrs.  Matthew  Montagu  to  her  Husband 

Portman  Square,  April  $th. 

Of  publick  news,  the  most  fatal  has  been  the  blowing  up 
of  the  Royal  Charlotte  near  Leghorn  no  gun  ship,  with  the 
loss  of  700  Souls.  Lord  Keith  was  on  shore,  and  some  of 
the  officers  with  150  of  the  men  were  saved.  A  Pope  has  been 
suddenly  chosen  at  Venice,  Cardinal  Chiaramonte  by  name 
who  was  formerly  Bishop  of  Tivoli  ;  rich  offerings  are  carrying 
to  the  Conclave.  The  King  of  Naples  is  preparing  to  enter 
into  his  own  Kingdom.  Malta  is  dayly  expected  to  surrender, 
and  Genoa  is  bombarded — The  French  Fleet  have  put  into 
Brest  again  upon  hearing  that  ours  was  out  ;  It  is  said  there 
are  20,000  Men  on  Board,  but  nobody  can  conjecture  their 
destination. 

Massena,  due  de  Rivoli,  was  starved  into  capitula¬ 
tion  at  Genoa,  but  the  Austrians  met  with  a  shattering 
defeat  from  Bonaparte  a  few  days  later  at  Marengo. 
Malta,  which  had  been  captured  by  him  on  his  way 
to  Egypt,  surrendered  to  the  British  in  September. 


May. 

Later  in  the  morning  Dudley  Ryder  called,  to  ask  us  to 
join  him  and  Lady  Susan  in  a  rowing  boat  on  the  river  in  the 
evening,  and  would  willingly  have  taken  any  number  of  our 
children — but  the  boys  were  engaged  to  cricket,  and  it  would 
have  been  too  late  for  the  girls,  so  that  I  went  Sola  at  |  past 
seven,  and  we  had  a  most  agreeable  evening  passing  between 
London  Bridge  and  from  thence  backwards  to  Chelsea  landing 
afterwards  at  Westminster  Bridge.  The  evening  was  made 
for  the  occasion  and  we  had  the  beauties  of  a  fine  setting  sun 
bringing  forth  the  grey  majesty  of  St.  Pauls  and  the  rising 
moon  over  the  centre  arch  of  Westminster  Bridge  on  our 
return,  which  with  the  lamps,  the  forges,  occasional  bursts 
of  wind  Instruments  and  [the]  stillness  of  the  night,  where 
not  a  breath  disturbed  the  deep  serene,  rendered  the  whole 
one  of  the  most  enjoyable  evenings  I  have  passed.  Ryder 
as  usual  amicable,  friendly  and  pleasant  and  Lady  Susan  well 
bred  and  agreeable. 


346  MRS.  MONTAGU’S  DEATH  1799-1800 

Your  aunt  is  going  to  take  a  long  airing.  She  leaves  her 
going  into  the  country  entirely  to  you.  .  .  .  She  is  very  well 
but  complains  of  the  heat. 

This  is  the  last  letter  I  have  been  able  to  find 
previous  to  Mrs.  Montagu’s  death,  which  took  place 
at  Montagu  House,  Portman  Square,  on  August  25. 
It  seems  evident,  as  has  already  been  intimated  (and 
Mrs.  Climenson  came  to  the  same  conclusion),  that 
certain  batches  of  the  letters  in  this  collection  relating 
to  specific  events,  such  as  the  deaths  of  the  Earl  of 
Bath,  of  Sterne,  of  the  Primate,  and  of  Mrs.  Montagu 
herself,  were  removed  by  her  nephew  for  some  reason 
or  other  when  he  was  editing  and  arranging  the 
correspondence  of  the  first  forty  years  of  her  life  in 
1810-13. 

From  such  few  references  as  survive  it  seems  that 
during  the  early  summer  she  had  suffered  a  good  deal 
from  cough,  and  that  her  constant  recourse  to  opium 
for  its  relief  had  led  to  internal  disorder,  but  the  final 
illness  cannot  have  been  of  more  than  two  months’ 
duration.  Probably  the  very  last  of  her  entertain¬ 
ments  at  Montagu  House  was  the  annual  May  Day 
feast  to  the  little  chimney-sweeps,  when  all  who  came 
to  her  gate  were  admitted  to  tables  in  the  garden, 
where  relays  of  beef,  mutton,  and  pudding  were  served 
from  one  o’clock  till  four.  “  Those  hapless  artificers 
who  perform  the  most  abject  offices  of  any  authorised 
calling  in  being  the  active  guardians  of  our  blazing 
hearths  ” — who  has  not  guessed  that  this  was 
D’Arblayesque  for  sweeps  ? — waxed  poetical  in  their 
“  Lamentation  for  the  loss  of  their  Friend  Mrs. 
Mountague  ” : 

Tho’  I’m  only  a  sweep, 

Yet  allow  me  to  weep 
And  with  sorrow  my  loss  to  deplore, 

While  the  shovel  and  brush 
Are  now  totally  hushd 
Since  the  Patron  of  Sweeps  is  no  more. 


i799-i8oo  LETTERS  OF  CONDOLENCE  347 

Apology  is  perhaps  due  for  giving  first  place  to 
this  artless  condolence  ;  but  it  may  be  pleaded  that 
the  chimney-sweeps  spoke  for  a  great  many  inarticulate 
and  homely  folk  to  whom  Elizabeth  Montagu  had 
been  a  real  friend.  Want  of  space  has  necessitated 
the  exclusion  of  so  large  a  part  of  this  correspondence 
that  it  may  be  necessary  to  say  here  that  it  contains 
reference  literally  to  scores  of  such  acts  of  benevolence, 
to  feasts  and  entertainments,  to  the  regular  supplies 
of  food  and  clothing  to  the  poor  of  Newbury  and  of 
Denton  ;  to  works  for  the  unemployed  on  her  estates  ; 
to  little  grants,  pensions,  and  annuities  to  a  very  con¬ 
siderable  number  of  more  or  less  indigent  folk,  whose 
cases  had  been  brought  to  her  notice. 

Of  the  many  letters  of  condolence  which  followed 
her  death  but  little  need  be  quoted.  Most  of  the 
greatest  friends  of  her  life  had  gone  before  her. 
Old  Mrs.  Boscawen  wrote  feelingly  of  her  “  friend 
of  fifty  years,  a  friendship  which  has  done  me 
much  honour  and  afforded  me  much  pleasure.” 
The  Bishop  of  Durham,  writing  to  Matthew  from 
Mongewell,  said,  “  God  had  entrusted  her  with  the 
two  most  difficult  talents  which  he  entrusted  to 
men,  the  powers  of  intellect  and  those  of  fortune. 
How  the  duties  which  the  trusts  imposed  were  dis¬ 
charged  I  need  not  state  to  you.”  Beattie,  who  had 
received  a  false  report  of  her  death  in  the  previous 
year,  wrote  : 

Ever  since  1771,  when  I  first  became  acquainted  with  her 
she  has  been  a  faithful  and  affectionate  friend,  especially  in 
seasons  of  distress  and  difficulty.  ...  I  need  not  tell  you 
what  an  excellent  writer  she  was  ;  you  must  have  seen  her 
book  on  Shakespeare.  ...  I  have  known  several  ladies 
eminent  in  literature,  but  she  excelled  them  all  ;  and  in  con¬ 
versation  she  had  more  wit  than  any  other  person  male  or 
female,  whom  I  have  known.  .  .  .  She  was  a  sincere  Christian 
both  in  faith  and  practice,  and  took  every  proper  opportunity 
to  show  it,  so  that  by  her  example  and  influence  she  did  much 
good. 


BURIAL 


1799-1800 


348 

Hannah  More  gave  her  verdict  some  years  later 
to  Dr.  Whalley: 

With  Mrs.  Montagu’s  faults  I  have  nothing  to  do.  From 
my  first  entrance  into  a  London  life  till  her  death  I  ever  found 
her  an  affectionate,  zealous  and  constant  friend  as  well  as  a 
most  instructive  and  pleasant  companion.  .  .  .  Her  youth 
and  beauty  were  gone  long  before  I  knew  her. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  body  was  taken  down  to 
Winchester,  where  she  was  buried  in  the  nave  of  her 
favourite  Cathedral  by  her  husband’s  side  ;  and  by 
her  will  and  special  desire  the  remains  of  the  little 
son  whom  she  had  loved  so  tenderly  were  afterwards 
brought  from  Burmeston  and  laid  in  his  parents’ 
grave. 


ELIZABETH  MONTAGU  HERSELF 


Her  correspondence.  A  notable  woman.  Two  criticisms.  Adulation  and 
abuse.  The  grey  goose  quill.  Reflections  on  Temperament  ;  Girl¬ 
hood  ;  Matrimony  ;  Society  ;  Good  Company  ;  Servants  ;  Old  Age. 
An  ignoramus  in  love.  The  turnpike  road.  Wit  and  chastity. 
Humour  and  sympathy.  Benevolence.  Business  abilities.  Environ¬ 
ment.  Literary  work.  Attractive  facets. 


On  the  death  of  any  of  her  particular  friends,  and  also 
of  the  great  folk  of  her  day,  such  as  Lord  Bath,  Lord 
Chatham,  Lady  Hervey,  Lord  Lyttelton,  Lord  Chester¬ 
field,  her  cousin  the  Primate,  and  many  others,  it  was, 
as  we  have  seen,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  custom  to  set  down 
in  her  letters  her  summary  view  of  their  characters,  as 
she  had  seen  them. 

If  her  precept  and  example  are  to  be  followed,  her 
own  turn  for  such  an  analysis  has  now  arrived.  When 
one  has  spent  many  months  in  reading  and  arranging 
the  letters  of  a  woman  who  for  half  a  century  main¬ 
tained  a  steady  correspondence,  into  which  she  put 
much  that  was  typical  of  her  character  and  thoughts 
and  interests,  one  expects,  yet  sometimes  fails,  to  reach 
an  acquaintance  that  is  almost  intimate,  and  to  visualise 
a  complete  personality  from  the  various  aspects  revealed 
to  different  correspondents.  To  her  sister,  Mrs.  Scott, 
Mrs.  Montagu  confided  all  sorts  of  personalities  and 
domesticities,  including  a  great  deal  about  her  health 
and  ailments,  and  some  delicious  little  explosions  about 
her  husband,  when  “  His  Honour  ”  was  particularly 
annoying  and  troublesome.  To  Mrs.  Carter  went 
most  of  her  literary  talk  ;  to  Mrs.  Vesey,  the  beloved 

349 


35° 


HER  CORRESPONDENCE 


“  Sylph,”  her  social  and  blue-stocking  chit-chat  ;  to 
Lord  Bath  her  affectionate  homage  and  concern  ;  to 
Lord  Lyttelton  her  critical  cogitations  ;  and  to  Dr. 
Monsey  her  wit  and  her  fun. 

The  amount  and  variety  of  her  correspondence 
must  have  been,  for  the  times,  “  prodigious.”  “  In 
the  course  of  two  posts,”  we  find  her  writing  to  Mr. 
Pepys,  “  I  had  letters  from  a  Polish  Prince,  a  great 
dealer  in  cattle,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  our 
litterati,  my  Northern  Steward,  a  great  Scotch  Philo¬ 
sopher,  my  head  carpenter  in  Portman  Square,  the 
sweet  Minstrel  Dr.  Beattie,  an  artist  at  Birmingham, 
my  Bailiff  at  Sandleford  and  many  characters  between 
these  extremes.” 

And  though  her  health  was  anything  but  robust, 
her  eyesight  gradually  weakening,  and  her  doctors 
perpetually  warning  her  that  the  stooping  attitude  at 
her  writing-table  was  particularly  bad  for  the  ailments 
which  so  often  afflicted  her,  every  letter  seems  to  have 
got  its  answer,  and  in  no  stinting  or  perfunctory 
measure. 

A  collection  of  letters  such  as  this  is  indeed  a 
severe,  perhaps  even  rather  an  unfair  test  of  personality. 
The  repetition  of  phrases  and  jeux  d'  esprit ,  which  is 
perfectly  legitimate  in  letters  addressed  to  different 
people,  becomes  tiresome  when  they  are  recollected  ; 
varying  descriptions  of  the  same  event  to  different 
people  may  arouse  criticism,  though  they  can  generally 
be  justified  ;  while  the  lengthy  formulae  of  compli¬ 
ment  and  condolence  which  were  an  inevitable  part 
of  the  convenance  of  the  times,  in  bulk  sometimes 
become  intolerably  irksome. 

Sententious  undoubtedly  these  letters  often  are, 
but  not,  I  think,  in  the  derogatory  implication,  when 
allowance  is  made  for  their  period.  I  am  convinced 
they  were  never  laboured  ;  neither  their  style  nor 
diction  has  any  smell  of  the  lamp  ;  they  flowed 
naturally  and  easily  from  a  well-stored  brain  and  a 


A  NOTABLE  WOMAN 


351 


well-used  goose  quill.  Readers  of  these  pages  must 
form  their  own  judgement  of  their  subject,  to  which 
the  few  following  extracts  may  in  some  respects  help 
them.  They  have  doubtless  smiled  over  occasional 
foibles  and  pedantries  ;  they  may  criticise  this  and 
disagree  with  that.  But  I  shall  be  surprised  if  they 
do  not  in  the  end  admit  that  here  was  a  very  notable 
woman  of  her  time  ;  a  woman  who  as  a  girl  accounted 
the  graceful  dancing  of  a  minuet  as  more  important 
than  the  knowledge  of  a  foreign  tongue,  yet  who  had 
both  accomplishments,  and  could  drive  a  dozen  miles 
to  a  ball,  dance  half  the  night,  get  upset  in  the  mud 
on  the  way  home,  laugh  hugely  at  the  joke  of  it  all, 
and  then  spend  a  day  in  reading  Horace  or  making  a 
Herbal  ;  who  could  conduct  a  Salon  in  Portman 
Square,  a  farm  in  Berkshire,  and  a  colliery  in  North¬ 
umberland  with  equal  success  ;  who  was  equally  at 
home  at  a  queen’s  drawing-room  or  a  pitman’s  dinner  ; 
who,  with  great  common  sense,  had  occasional  flashes 
of  that  inspired  unreason  that  transcends  common 
sense ;  who  enjoyed  her  wealth  because  she  knew 
how  to  use  it  well ;  who  realised  how  largely  virtue  is 
a  question  of  temperament,  and  with  all  her  sound 
morality  had  a  tender  consideration  for  human  frailties; 
who  did  “  all  things  with  a  grace  and  most  things  with 
ease  ”  ;  whose  tender  solicitude  in  the  ills  of  others 
gave  her  constant  hours  of  anxiety  and  distress  ;  and 
who  was  capable  of  enlarging  on  her  own  faults, 
laughing  at  her  foibles,  and  attributing  her  virtue  to 
lack  of  temptation. 

In  trying  to  sum  up  the  personality  of  Elizabeth 
Montagu,  it  is  a  little  difficult  to  hit  the  appropriate 
adjectives.  That  she  was  staunch  in  friendship,  widely 
beneficent  in  charity,  clear-headed  in  business,  and 
very  sound  as  a  rule  in  critical  judgement,  will  probably 
be  granted  readily  by  most  of  those  who  read  these 
pages.  That  hers  was  a  lovable  personality  would  be 
too  much  to  claim.  Individually  (but  this  is  merely 


352  JUPITER  CARLYLE 

a  first  personal  matter),  after  having  lived  with  her 
more  or  less  uninterruptedly  for  more  than  a  year,  I 
may  admit  that,  having  begun  my  task  with  a  feeling 
so  unsympathetic  that  I  doubted  whether  I  should  ever 
have  undertaken  the  bequest,  she  has  reduced  me  to 
a  half-reluctant  fondness  which  it  might  be  difficult  to 
justify.  She  had  neither  the  warmth  nor  the  emotions 
which  are  generally  implied  in  that  highest  tribute. 
Yet  the  woman  who  could  inspire  and  retain  the  strong 
affection  of  men  so  diverse  as  Beattie,  Gilbert  West, 
Dr.  Gregory,  Lord  Karnes,  Lord  Bath,  and  Lord 
Lyttelton,  and  of  women  as  different  as  Mrs.  Carter 
and  Mrs.  Vesey,  must  have  had  much,  beyond  in¬ 
tellect,  that  was  attractive.  It  is  a  pity  that  the  word 
“  respectable  ”  has  fallen  on  degenerate  days.  With 
Mrs.  Montagu  it  connoted  real  esteem,  and  was  re¬ 
served  for  the  friends  she  thought  most  highly  of  and 
the  personages  she  most  revered.  To  Johnson  the 
word  meant  venerable  and  worthy  of  regard  and  of 
honour  ;  and  in  that  best  sense  I  think  it  may  fairly 
be  used  about  herself. 

Two  clever  men,  indeed,  who  knew  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu  personally,  though  by  no  means  intimately,  have 
left  on  record  impressions  of  her,  the  one  in  terms  of 
embittered  animosity,  the  other  in  phrases  of  rather 
peevish  criticism. 

Alexander  Carlyle,  writing  of  her  visit  to  Edin¬ 
burgh,  says  that  she  did  not  take  there,  as  she  despised 
the  women  and  disgusted  the  men  with  her  affec¬ 
tation  ;  that  she  was  greedy  of  more  praise  than  she 
was  entitled  to  ;  that  she  was  remarkably  deficient 
in  genuine  feeling,  and  so  on.  Old  Edinburgh  was 
no  place  for  the  success  of  impostures.  .  .  .  “  In 
Newcastle,  where  there  was  no  audience  for  such  an 
actress  as  she  was,  her  natural  character  was  displayed, 
which  was  that  of  an  active  manager  of  her  affairs, 
a  crafty  chaperone  and  a  keen  pursuer  of  her  interest, 
not  to  be  outdone  by  the  sharpest  coal  dealer  on 


NATHANIEL  WRAXALL 


353 

Tyne  ;  but  in  this  capacity  she  was  not  displeasing, 
for  she  was  not  acting  a  part.” 

Sir  Nathaniel  Wraxall, — whilst  admitting  that  she 
had  great  natural  cheerfulness  and  a  flow  of  animal 
spirits,  loved  to  talk,  and  talked  well  on  almost  every 
subject, — makes  much  of  her  want  of  taste  in 
continuing  to  wear  her  diamonds  when  she  was  an 
old  woman,  says  that  her  manner  was  dictatorial 
and  sententious,  and  that  there  was  nothing  feminine 
about  her,  except  an  attention  to  dress  and  the  toilet 
unsuited  to  a  woman  professing  a  philosophic  mind. 

Whilst  contemporary  criticisms  such  as  these, 
which  have  undoubtedly  weighed  much  in  the 
biographical  verdict  on  Mrs.  Montagu’s  character, 
must  be  faced  rather  than  evaded,  their  answer  may 
now  be  left  to  the  readers  of  these  pages,  who  will 
recognise  the  germ  of  truth,  whilst  feeling  its  unfair 
exaggeration,  and  its  distance  from  the  whole  truth. 
Jupiter  Carlyle  only  saw  Mrs.  Montagu  when,  as  he 
says,  Dr.  Gregory  was  “showing  her  off”  to  the 
Edinburgh  literati ;  and  it  was  just  on  those  occasions, 
when  she  felt  she  must  “  flash,”  that  she  was  least 
attractive  and  most  unamiable,  if  she  could  only  have 
been  brought  to  believe  it.  Wraxall  knew  her  better, 
and  indeed  ends  by  admitting  “  it  would  be  ungrateful 
in  me  not  to  acknowledge  the  gratification  derived 
from  the  conversation  and  intercourse  of  such  a 
society  as  hers  ” ;  but  both  his  memoirs  and 
Carlyle’s  suffer  from  their  being  recollections  penned 
long  subsequently  to  the  events  referred  to,  and  tinged 
by  later  hearsay  and  comment.  He  speaks,  for 
example,  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  having  visited  Paris 
in  1763,  and  her  eagerness  to  recount  stories  of  her 
sumptuous  repasts  there,  and  the  astonishment  of 
the  French  literati  over  her  lavish  entertainments. 
But  Mrs.  Montagu  never  went  near  Paris  in  1763, 
or  till  thirteen  years  later.  And  if  an  old  lady  has 
fine  jewels,  is  it  so  very  heinous  a  crime  that  she 

VOL.  11  2  A 


354 


ADULATION  AND  ABUSE 


should  like  to  wear  them  ?  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
Mrs.  Montagu  gave  most  of  hers  to  Matthew’s 
bride  on  their  marriage  in  1785,  when  she  was  not 
an  old  woman,  and,  so  far  as  references  go,  before 
her  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Wraxall  began.  On  the 
other  hand,  men  like  Lord  Bath,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
Beattie,  Lord  Lyttelton,  and  others  who  knew  her 
much  more  intimately,  sang  her  praises,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  in  terms  that  must  seem  to  us  excessive. 
Such  extremes  of  adulation  and  abuse  from  con¬ 
temporaries  make  the  task  of  the  later  biographer 
a  little  puzzling.  There  seems  no  necessity  for 
either  superlative  ;  but  that  is  not  to  imply  that 
Elizabeth  Montagu  was  either  a  nonentity  or  a 
mediocrity  of  her  times.  On  the  contrary,  whilst 
it  was  her  masculine  self-assertion  that  annoyed  her 
detractors,  it  was  just  her  strength  of  character,  her 
bold  judgement,  her  unswerving  common  sense  that 
delighted  her  friends.  In  a  sense  it  may  perhaps  be 
said  that  it  was  a  varying  manifestation  of  the  same 
qualities  that  attracted  some  and  repelled  others. 

The  same  remark,  indeed,  may  be  applied  to  her 
personality,  of  which  one  finds  contemporary  records 
that  vary  greatly,  though  it  is  generally  agreed  that 
as  a  girl  she  was  beautiful  ;  and  the  portrait  by  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds,  reproduced  as  frontispiece  to  the 
first  volume,  shows  a  face  of  great  interest  and 
distinction.  Whilst  one  critic  notes  that  her  eyes,  as 
she  grew  old,  were  apt  to  take  on  a  look  of  severity 
and  sarcasm,  another  writes  :  “  Her  beauty  was 

most  admired  in  the  peculiar  animation  and  expression 
of  her  blue  eyes,  with  high -arched  dark  eyebrows, 
and  in  the  contrast  of  her  brilliant  complexion  with 
her  dark  brown  hair.  She  was  of  middle  stature, 
and  stooped  a  little,  which  gave  an  air  of  modesty 
to  her  countenance.” 

As  a  letter-writer,  though  Dr.  Young,  Gilbert  West, 
Lord  Chatham,  David  Garrick,  Beattie,  Sir  Joshua 


355 


THE  GREY  GOOSE  QUILL 

Reynolds,  Burke,  and  others  of  her  correspondents 
expressed  high  admiration  of  her  epistolary  gifts,  and 
Wraxall  spoke  of  her  as  the  Madame  du  Deffand  of 
the  English  capital,  it  is  quite  unnecessary,  and  would 
do  her  no  good  service  to-day,  to  place  her  in  competi¬ 
tion  with  the  great  names  of  her  time  in  this  category — 
with  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu,  or  Lord  Chester¬ 
field,  or  Horace  Walpole,  for  instance.  Her  “  grey 
goose  quill  ”  was  a  wonderful  traveller,  and  hard  worn 
enough  ;  but  it  was  plucked  from  a  Sandleford  farm¬ 
yard  bird,  sound,  sagacious,  capitoline,  but  pedestrian; 
incapable  of  winged  words  or  wild-fowl  flights.  Yet 
the  slower-paced  home-bred  style  has  its  compensa¬ 
tions.  Fascinating  as  Walpole’s  letters  are,  the  acrid 
cynicism  which  pervades  so  much  of  them  palls  at 
times,  and  the  reader  welcomes  with  a  sense  of  actual 
relief  some  rare  sentence  of  honest  praise  or  genuine 
feeling.  It  is  so  very  much  easier  to  scoff  than  to 
praise,  to  disparage  than  to  appreciate,  to  doubt  than 
to  believe.  Elizabeth  Montagu  held  on  bravely  to 
the  standard  of  her  beliefs,  the  demands  of  her  doctrine, 
and  the  faith  of  her  friendships.  If  the  grey  goose 
quill  ran  away  with  her  at  times,  it  never  really  imagined 
itself  the  eagle’s  pinion  that  her  friends  were  always 
protesting  it  to  be. 

By  way  of  helping  himself  to  visualise  a  personality 
which  he  has  found  by  no  means  so  simple  of  definition 
as  the  critics  who  have  been  content  to  dismiss  it  in 
a  few  petulant  and  ill-informed  sentences,  the  editor 
has  extracted  here  and  there  on  his  pilgrimage  through 
Mrs.  Montagu’s  letters  a  few  of  those  reflections  in 
which  they  sometimes  too  profusely  abound,  which 
may  well  be  gathered  here  and  may  serve  to  make  her 
write  part  at  least  of  her  own  character  and  way  of 
looking  at  life. 

Here,  then,  are  a  few  random  selections,  grouped 
under  typical  headings.  Each  paragraph  is  from  a 
separate  letter. 


356  TEMPERAMENT  AND  GIRLHOOD 

Temperament 

If  I  could  hope  that  any  part  of  my  life  was  such  as  I  could 
venture  to  present  before  the  great  Giver  it  would  make  me 
very  happy.  But,  alas  !  at  the  end  of  every  day  I  am  conscious, 
that  I  am  a  most  unprofitable  Servant.  The  relieving  distressed 
objects,  only  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  enjoying  all  reasonable 
indulgences  of  ones  inclination,  cannot  have  any  merit.  It  is 
merely  following  a  good  instinct.  The  discharge  of  painful 
duties  has  merit  ;  the  struggling  with  strong  passions  and 
subduing  them  is  also  meritorious,  resisting  temptations  and 
unlawful  pleasures  extreamly  so  ;  but  my  natural  disposition, 
and  the  turn  of  my  education  and  situation  in  life  have  made  all 
these  things  easy,  so  that  while  I  am  towards  the  World  calld 
a  virtuous  person,  I  am  void  of  merit  in  the  eye  of  him  who 
knows  me,  and  who  gave  me  a  temperament  so  little  liable  to 
violent  transgressions. 

I  know  nothing  bad  of  the  lady  you  ask  after  but  what  has 
arisen  originally  from  the  weakness  of  flesh  and  blood.  The 
sins  which  grow  on  the  animal  part  of  a  human  creature  are 
more  pardonable  than  those  which  spring  from  the  mind  ;  this 
is  a  virtuous  confession  for  me,  who  never  was  prone  to  any  but 
spiritual  sins  ;  and  am  in  body  a  Saint,  in  mind  a  great  Sinner. 

Girlhood 

She  is  a  fine  girl  ;  but  I  dont  love  girls,  especially  boarding 
school  misses,  who  are  all  over  affectation,  so  that  I  take  no  very 
great  delight  in  my  nieces  company.  It  grieves  me  to  see  the 
absurd  education  given  to  girls  at  boarding  schools,  they  are  to 
speak  and  move  by  art,  a  coxcomb  of  a  dancing  master,  and  a 
fool  of  a  governess  are  to  fashion  a  girl.  By  such  guides  Nature 
is  thrown  out  of  her  way,  and  grimaces  are  taught  which  would 
deform  a  monkey,  and  a  style  of  conversation  that  would  dis¬ 
grace  a  parrot,  and  for  such  teaching  parents  pay  a  great  price. 
The  simplicity  of  manners  natural  to  youth  is  a  charm  and 
never  to  be  parted  with  but  from  a  long  intercourse  with  the 
world,  which  while  it  destroys  one  kind  of  merit  establishes 
another,  and  substitutes  an  artificial  ease  in  lieu  of  the  original 
simplicity. 

Matrimony 

I  own  it  astonishes  me  when  I  hear  two  people  voluntarily, 
and  on  their  own  suggestion,  entering  into  a  bargain  for  perhaps 


MATRIMONY 


357 


fifty  years  cohabitation.  I  am  so  much  of  Solomons  mind  that 
the  end  of  a  feast  is  better  than  the  beginning  of  a  fray,  that  I 
weep  more  at  a  wedding  than  a  funeral  .  .  I  desire  my  con¬ 
gratulations  to  your  family  on  the  wedding.  Marriage  is 
honourable  in  all,  and  I  have  an  infinite  respect  for  it,  and  would 
by  no  means  be  thought  to  make  a  jest  of  so  serious  a  thing. 
It  is  a  civil  debt  which  all  people  ought  to  pay. 

I  have  told  our  friend  Black,  that  the  more  sickly  he  is,  the 
more  he  wants  a  tender  friend  to  nurse  him.  I  think  most 
Women  make  good  Nurses,  few  perhaps  very  eligible  Com¬ 
panions.  I  always  advise  as  many  of  my  female  friends  as  are 
indiscreet,  and  as  many  of  my  Male  friends  as  are  sickly,  to 
marry  ;  for  the  first  want  a  Master,  and  the  second  a  Nurse, 
and  these  are  characters  generally  to  be  found  in  the  holy  state 
of  Matrimony  ;  the  rest  is  precarious. 

My  Father  very  obligingly  and  kindly  sent  us  a  Haunch  of 
Venison  yesterday,  remembering  that  Mr.  Montagu  loved 
Venison  ;  with  the  haunch  he  wrote  a  very  droll  letter,  well 
describing  the  woefull  case  of  Mr.  William  in  Labour  of  a 
Law  suit.  I  have  enclosed  the  letter,  but  pray  dont  lose  it,  for 
I  will  keep  it  as  a  proof,  that  a  jolly  witty  Father  may  have  a 
very  simple  snivelling  kind  of  a  Son.  I  wrote  Mr.  William 
a  peppering  epistle  about  his  dolours,  but  without  effect.  Think 
of  a  great  lubberly  fellow  aged  36  or  some  such  matter,  and 
worth  about  ,£12000  in  money,  in  preferment  between  6  and 
700  a  year,  crying  and  blubbering  least  he  shd  not  get  five 
thousand  more  than  he  has  already.  I  pity  his  poor  Wife,  to  be 
obliged  to  love  honour  and  obey  such  a  dish  of  skimmed  milk. 
I  shd,  I  own,  less  dislike  your  tory,  rory,  buck,  blood,  and 
mohock  or  what  not  for  my  Lord  and  Master  than  such  a 
Gentleman-like  kind  of  man. 

By  her  neatness  of  apparel  and  decorum  of  conduct  I  per¬ 
ceive  she  is  predestinated  to  live  and  dye  in  single  blessedness, 
tho  I  think  she  too  is  of  opinion  that  earthlier  happier  is  the 
rose  distilled  than  that  which  withers  on  the  virgin  thorn.  I 
always  imagine  a  serious  formal  nymph  who  between  (30  and 
40  grows  a  little  precise,  intends  by  honorable  means  to  enter 
into  the  honorable  state  of  wedlock  :  they  no  longer  address 
to  the  passions  by  kind  glances  and  engaging  smiles,  but  pru¬ 
dently  apply  to  the  reason  by  showing  they  could  make  a 
sensible  man  a  good  wife  ;  now  and  then  it  succeeds,  and  a 
cautious  man  marries  a  prude  with  a  sang  froid  that  is  very 
respectable. 


SOCIETY 


358 

Your  Virgin  mind  does  Mr.  Vesey,  I  fear,  unmerited 
honour,  by  supposing  he  wishes  to  make  reparation  to  his  Wife, 
for  the  uneasiness  his  delay’d  return  has  given  her.  Husbands 
are  never  in  the  wrong.  I  have  heard  that  a  Confessor  com¬ 
forted  an  expiring  Monarch,  who  wish’d  he  could  make  repara¬ 
tion  for  injuries  he  had  done,  by  assuring  agonizing  Majesty 
that  as  he  had  absolute  power  over  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  his 
Subjects,  he  would  not  have  done  any  injustice,  and  so  could 
not  have  any  restitution  to  make  ;  tho’  absolute  Monarch  then 
felt  strongly  he  was  not  ague  proof,  he  accepted  the  consolation 
and  said,  c'est  vrai.  If  a  moment  of  penitence  should  happen 
to  Mr.  Vesey  ;  Mr.  P.  will  assure  him  Husbands  cannot  do 
wrong  and  he  will  say  “  ’ tis  true." 

Society 

I  am  going  to  night  to  a  great  Assembly  at  Northumbd  House. 
I  was  at  the  Opera  on  Saturday  night,  I  am  to  be  at  Egremont 
House  and  then  at  Almacks  on  thursday  night.  I  think  Miss 
Jenny  Wrongheads  account  of  her  week  was  not  better  than 
mine,  but  if  one  is  to  live  amidst  the  Townlys  and  the  Modishes 
they  are  best  in  a  blaze  of  waxlights  ;  there  is  no  enduring  the 
fine  World  but  in  its  own  fine  Way.  Tomorrow  evening  I 
shall  enjoy  a  sober  interval  with  a  book. 

I  am  loth  to  retire  entirely  from  the  World,  and  yet  I  am 
unable  to  endure  perpetual  society.  If  I  contract  my  circle, 
still  it  is  the  same  fatigue,  nor  is  it  pleasant  to  live  quietly  with 
those  who  are  in  a  bustle.  There  is  nothing  but  being  in  a 
whirl  that  can  make  one  take  pleasure  in  whirling  animals. 
If  one  was  quiet  and  stationary  one  should  give  a  fixed  attention 
which  would  never  be  repaid.  To  be  quiet  and  retired  in  this 
age,  would  be  as  bad  as  being  sober  in  drunken  company.  .  .  . 

To  speak  sincerely,  I  think  no  society  compleatly  agreable 
if  entirely  male  or  female.  The  masculinisms  of  men,  and  the 
feminalistics  of  the  women,  if  the  first  prevail  they  make  con¬ 
versation  too  rough,  and  austere,  if  the  latter,  too  soft  and  weak. 
Discourse  led  entirely  by  men  is  generally  pedantick  or  political. 

Good  Company 

I  am  sorry  my  Father  is  to  leave  Bath  so  soon,  as  I  think  the 
airings  must  be  of  service  to  your  health,  and  it  is  pleasant  to 
have  a  companion  who  enters  with  the  enthusiasm  of  taste  into 


“  MOTLEY  IS  THE  ONLY  WEAR  ”  359 


the  beauties  of  those  scenes  one  is  to  behold.  There  is  perhaps 
not  a  more  direct  way  to  please  than  that  of  appearing  pleased. 
Many  persons  are  insipid  from  insensibility,  others  make  them¬ 
selves  intolerable  by  a  kind  of  fastidious  delicacy  ;  it  is  in  the 
power  of  anyone  of  this  character  to  impart  discontent  to  a 
whole  company.  I  have  sometimes  been  diverted  to  see  a 
party  disconcerted  they  know  not  why,  by  one  person  in  it 
finding  little  faults  in  some  things,  vigourously  examining 
whatever  appeard  agreable,  reasoning  when  they  should  admire, 
and  criticizing  when  they  shd  commend.  The  good  precept 
of  nothing  too  much  is  necessary  in  conversation  as  well  as  in 
active  life,  for  too  much  taste,  too  much  knowledge,  too  much 
witt,  is  not  always  usefull  to  be  exerted.  Much  of  ones  pleasure 
in  seeing  a  fine  Country  depends  on  the  sympathy  of  ones 
companion,  and  nothing  is  so  provoking  as  a  gloom  or  mist 
thrown  over  a  fine  prospect  by  the  very  person  whom  one  has 
chosen  to  accompany  one  to  it.  My  Father  is  much  in  the 
right  to  keep  up  in  his  mind  a  desire  and  an  endeavour  to  be 
pleased.  Age  is  too  apt  to  cool  the  mind  as  to  all  distant  objects, 
and  it  is  not  unusual,  to  see  persons  of  his  time  of  life  so  con¬ 
center’d  in  themselves,  that  their  parlour  fire,  their  dinner,  their 
supper  makes  to  them  the  whole  of  the  World,  they  are  as 
anxious  about  these  little  matters  as  if  their  views  comprehended 
the  largest  system,  and  their  utmost  prosperity  cannot  afford 
much  content. 

Solitude  is  delightfull  when  one  has  been  wearied  with  too 
much  Society.  Society  in  its  turn  will  be  agreable  when  one 
is  tired  of  solitude.  Motley  is  the  only  wear,  for  all  the  fools 
in  this  World  who  design  to  be  merry  in  it.  If  I  did  not  know 
any  more  of  myself  than  what  I  have  experienced  since  I  came 
to  Sandleford  this  summer,  I  should  be  of  Mr.  Robinsons 
opinion  ;  but  I  know  the  leopard  does  not  change  its  spots, 
and  I  have  as  motly,  and  as  variegated  a  fancy  as  any  Creature 
whatever.  I  believe  by  November,  tho  all  the  stars  should 
be  twinkling  in  the  blue  Firmament,  I  shall  be  wishing  my 
great  Room  was  finished  and  the  Lustres  glittering  in  it,  and 
myself  sitting  in  the  Center,  Beaux  esprits  on  one  hand,  fine 
Gentlemen  and  fine  Ladies  (without  any  esprit  at  all)  on  the 
other,  feathered  nymphs,  and  great  buckle  Maccaronies  circu¬ 
lating  about.  I  still  abide  by  those  lines  of  Fontaine  which 
you  may  remember  I  was  fond  of  in  my  youth, 

Ville,  Campagne,  enfin  il  n’est  rien 
Qui  ne  m’est  souverain  bien. 


DOMESTIC  ECONOMY 


360 

I  rejoyce  to  find  that  I  do  not  fall  into  the  common  mis¬ 
fortune  of  growing  more  wise  and  less  happy  by  growing  older  ; 
I  think  my  spirits  were  not  so  gay  at  fifteen  as  they  have  been 
ever  since  I  came  to  Sandleford. 

Servants 

So  far  therefore  as  your  Servants  are  the  engines  and  machines 
of  your  domestick  economy,  you  will  soon  give  to  the  new  the 
same  movements,  and  teach  them  to  proceed  in  the  same 
direction  as  their  Predecessors,  but  as  every  humane  mind 
becomes  attach’d  to  a  fellow  creature  who  has  long  served, 
you  will  certainly  find  the  change  painful.  I  remember  when 
Susan  left  me,  to  go  with  her  Husband  to  the  establishment  in 
the  North  which  I  had  provided  for  her  I  sat  sullen  and  pouting 
by  the  fire  an  hour  beyond  my  usual  bedtime,  because  Susan 
was  not  present  to  unbuckle  my  shoes,  and  now  White  seems 
to  me  the  only  Person  in  the  World  worthy  to  perform  the 
office.  Servants  administer  so  much  to  the  convenience  and 
comforts  of  our  lives,  that  I  believe  they  have  a  considerable 
share  of  every  worthy  Masters  good  will  Wherever  it  is 
otherwise,  I  suspect  him  to  be  their  Dupe  or  their  Tyrant. 

Old  Age 

I  am  very  willing  to  adopt  your  opinions  of  the  comforts 
of  old  age,  to  those  who  have  not  arrived  at  that  period  in  the 
exercise  of  violent  passions,  or  frivolous  affections  ;  but  the  loss 
of  many  friends,  or  the  coldness  found  in  most  who  remain, 
throws  a  great  damp  upon  the  mind. 

The  intercourse  of  friendship  in  youth,  is  zealous,  warm, 
tender,  and  officious,  and  the  source  therefore  of  great  delight. 
Between  old  people  it  is  generally  carried  on  in  a  manner 
perfectly  the  reverse,  and  tho  it  is  still  a  treasure,  it  is  like  money 
in  a  bankers  hands,  you  may  draw  for  it  when  you  please,  but 
it  does  not  pay  constant  interest  ;  on  extraordinary  occasions 
it  is  a  sure  resource,  but  is  rather  a  consolation  in  time  of 
affliction  than  of  much  effect  on  ordinary  occasions. 

At  our  age  we  cannot  make  new  Friends,  and  at  our  age 
many  have  been  taken  from  us.  Tho  my  temper  is  naturally 
chearful,  yet  I  often  walk  about  as  if  this  World  was  one  great 
Churchyard,  at  every  step  I  strike  against  the  tombstone  of  a 
departed  friend  or  fear  to  stumble  into  a  grave  preparing  for  one 


OLD  AGE 


361 

yet  remaining.  It  spoils  the  harmony  of  a  Concert  that  I  often 
recollect,  that  some  Friend  with  whom  I  once  used  to  share 
in  this  amusement,  and  had  a  quiet  relish  for  it,  is  gone  for  ever 
from  me,  others  who  had  given  brilliancy  to  every  assembly 
appear  no  more  ;  even  in  rational  Society,  where  sensible  con¬ 
versation  prevails,  I  miss  some  voices  which  used  to  bear  the 
best,  the  sweetest,  and  the  wisest  part.  These  circumstances 
make  me  often  look  with  disgust  on  the  Cards  of  Invitation 
on  my  chimney  peice,  and  these  circumstances  make  me  fond 
of  the  Country,  where  Spring  restores  what  Winter  took  away  : 
and  here  too  I  have  another  advantage,  by  means  of  an  ample 
fortune  I  can  administer  to  the  comfort  and  happiness  of  many. 
Their  woes  and  wants  are  not  metaphysical,  a  little  money 
carefully  managed  and  skilfully  applied  will  do  a  great  deal 
towards  promoting  the  happiness  of  a  Country  Neighbourhood, 
it  is  well  if  it  does  not  do  as  much  harm  where  you  cannot 
personally  know  the  characters  and  situations  of  those  to  whom 
you  give. 

I  found  a  letter  in  Hill  street  from  Lady  Harriot  at  my 
return  to  England  which  gave  a  very  indifferent  account  of 
the  Archbishops  health.  My  first  acquaintance  with  him 
began  when  I  was  only  six  years  old,  and  it  has  pass’d  through 
various  seasons  of  life  with  the  degree  of  friendship  suitable 
to  them,  and  now  I  lose  my  friend  when  a  friend  is  most  valued  ; 
young  people  love  many  people,  very  old  people  love  no  one  ; 
in  the  midst  of  le  bruit  de  la  jeunesse,  or  the  dead  calm,  and 
silenced  affections  of  old  age,  the  loss  of  a  Friend  is  less  perceived. 
I  have  however  the  satisfaction  to  know  he  will  leave  a  good 
example,  and  a  good  name. 

I  look  upon  it  as  one  of  the  best  rewards  of  a  blameless  life, 
to  be  able  in  ones  old  age  to  give  Countenance  and  protection 
to  deserving  young  Persons  ;  the  good  one  imparts  to  them  is 
strongly  reflected  back  again.  Through  my  little  Nephew 
and  my  fair  Gregory,  I  enjoy  a  thousand  little  pleasures,  that 
I  could  no  longer  taste  in  my  own  Person.  As  one  has  a 
tenacious  love  of  this  present  life,  this  present  World,  it  seems 
to  me  as  politick  to  form  attachments  to  the  fate  and  fortunes 
of  young  Persons,  as  to  ensure  ones  ticket  in  a  Lottery.  While 
theirs  is  in  the  Wheel,  I  think  myself  interested,  tho  my  own 
should  be  a  blank.  I  know  it  is  a  common  opinion,  that  young 
Persons  are  never  affectionately  attach’d  to  old  ones,  but  I  am 
convinced  that  they  are  capable  of  a  tender  esteem  for  Persons 
in  years,  but  certainly  esteem  must  be  the  foundation  of  their 


362 


“  AN  IGNORAMUS  IN  LOVE  ” 


affection.  Caprice,  and  peevishness  and  austerity,  will  disgust 
them.  It  behoves  one  as  one  loses  ones  Agremens,  to  part  with 
those  caprices  which  the  amabilities  of  youth  render’d  tolerable 
and  its  inexperience  excusable.  It  has  often  provoked  me,  to 
see  an  old  Beldame  expect  the  young  people  about  her,  to  love 
her  in  spite  of  whims  and  humours,  one  could  not  have  endured 
in  the  beautiful  Lady  Coventry.  Old  folks  are  usually  a 
bundle  of  disagreable  humours,  without  any  mixture  of  what 
makes  the  various  compound  Man  a  tolerable  animal.  Why 
should  the  wrinkled  brow,  the  lack  lustre  eye,  the  grey  hairs 
assume  what  would  not  be  allowd  to  the  ivory  forehead,  love 
darting  eyes,  and  tresses  like  the  Morn  ?  But  I  have  moralized 
in  this  subject  as  if  the  garrulity  if  not  the  peevishness  of  old 
age  had  overtaken  me. 

These  pages  have  dealt  only  with  Elizabeth 
Montagu’s  years  of  maturity  and  advancing  age  ;  they 
form  the  sequel  to  the  story  of  her  girlhood  and 
earlier  married  life  in  Mrs.  Climenson’s  volumes. 
The  “  Fidget  ”  of  1740,  the  disdainful  young  beauty 
whose  impertinent  satire,  flippant  irony,  and  sportive 
vanity  were  so  severely  criticised  by  Fanny  Burney’s' 
“  Daddy  ”  Crisp,  had,  long  ere  the  date  of  their 
opening,  put  away  childish  things,  and  had  shown 
that  behind  and  beyond  them  she  possessed  qualities, 
steadfast  strength  of  will,  reasoned  deliberation,  potent 
common  sense,  which  were  not  marred  by  and  which 
ultimately  subdued  the  vanities  and  conceits  which  the 
friendships  of  her  youth  had  fostered.  The  greatest 
fault  in  her  character  was  neither  her  vanity  nor  her 
ostentatiousness  nor  her  affectations,  though  of  all 
these  she  was  and  could  be  justly  accused;  but,  as  the 
Burney  rightly  divined,  her  lack  of  that  don  d' aimer 
which  so  transfigures  life,  and  in  which  Fanny’s 
admired  Mrs.  Thrale  so  contrastingly  excelled.  Mrs. 
Montagu  was,  as  Hester  Chapone  remarked  to  Mrs. 
Carter,  “  an  ignoramus  in  love.”  From  a  few  guarded 
sentences  of  half-suppressed  yet  poignant  emotion,  one 
might  imagine  that,  had  her  little  son  lived,  the  lacking 
gift  might  have  been  evolved  and  the  void  filled 


THE  TURNPIKE  ROAD  363 

through  him.  But  that  was  not  to  be.  And  when 
the  news  of  the  death  of  the  charming  young  James 
Macdonald  came  from  Frascati,  Mrs.  Vesey — who 
perhaps  knew  Mrs.  Montagu  as  intimately  as  any  one 
— wrote  to  her  :  “  All  my  ideas  of  pleasure  are  sunk 
at  once  in  knowing  what  you  must  feel  in  losing  one 
who  was  such  an  ornament  to  your  society,  and  perhaps 
had  endeared  himself  to  your  friendship,  by  his  esteem, 
admiration,  and  his  confidence  in  you;  there  is  such  a 
charm  in  the  attachments  of  youth,  especially  when  it 
is  adorned  with  every  virtue  and  accomplishment.” 
That  attachment,  too,  was  nipped  by  an  untimely 
death  in  1766;  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  later 
warmth.  The  whole  incident  of  Dorothea  Alison’s 
marriage,  and  her  treatment  of  the  girl  whose  heart 
she  had  once  declared  “  one  perfect  chrysolite,  no 
flaw,  no  imperfection  in  it,”  seems  to  reveal  a  cold, 
matter-of-fact  logic  to  which  sentiment  or  passion 
were  repugnant  strangers.  Of  all  extremes,  indeed, 
whether  in  politics,  love,  or  philanthropy,  she  had  an 
inherent  distrust.  “  Virtue,”  she  once  wrote,  “  wis¬ 
dom,  honours,  prosperity,  happiness  are  all  to  be  found 
on  the  turnpike  road  or  not  to  be  found  at  all.”  And 
an  illuminating  sentence  in  her  criticism  of  Mrs. 
Thrale’s  second  marriage  will  be  recalled  :  “  Whoever 
possesses  the  blessing  of  sound  understanding  never 
is  guilty  of  absurd  conduct,  or  does  anything  which 
the  world  calls  strange.”  It  is  this  passionless  level 
of  unswerving  common  sense,  this  steadfastness  to  the 
middle  of  the  road,  this  subnormal  temperature  of 
mind  which  has  made  finer  characters  unsympathetic. 

Mrs.  Montagu  once  wrote  to  Mrs.  Donnellan  in 
her  earlier  years  :  “  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  generality 
of  women  who  have  excelled  in  wit  have  failed  in 
chastity.”  To  that  sweeping  dictum  she  was  herself 
a  conspicuous  exception  ;  but  behind  its  exaggeration 
lies  a  converse  truth  not  altogether  inapposite.  Putting 
wit  aside,  she  would  have  been  a  more  lovable  woman 


364  PROGRESS  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

if  she  had  not  set  so  stern  a  watch  upon  her  heart, 
and  lived  with  a  finger  on  her  pulse  ;  if  she  had  been 
less  self-possessed  and  more  unguarded. 

But  if  this  must  be  said,  it  must  also  be  said  that 
she  lived  and  learnt ;  that  one  finds  progress,  develop¬ 
ment,  advance  in  tolerance,  in  humanity,  in  self-per¬ 
ception,  in  sympathy,  as  her  life  went  on  ;  and  that 
when  her  adopted  Matthew  brought  a  wife  to  Sandle- 
ford,  and  children  filled  its  rooms  and  gardens  with 
life  and  laughter,  her  closing  years  were  warmed  by 
the  happiness  of  real  affection.  Of  her  instant  and 
anxious  sympathy  in  all  the  illness  and  distresses  of 
her  friends  the  letters  give  ample  testimony  ;  Sterne, 
Lord  Bath,  Beattie,  Lord  Lyttelton,  Woodhouse,  Mrs. 
Vesey,  and  a  host  of  others  bore  witness  to  her  tender 
solicitude  and  concern,  quick  in  activity  and  practical 
in  means.  Much  as  in  some  respects  she  was  her 
father’s  daughter,  in  this  aspect  they  were  worlds 
apart.  His  humour,  wit,  and  cool  comprehension  of 
his  world  she  largely  inherited ;  and  her  ability  to 
laugh  at  herself  and  her  own  foibles  and  failings  is 
refreshing  and  delightful.  Her  just  appreciation  of 
Falstaff’s  charm  ;  her  chaff  of  Mrs.  Carter  ;  her  laugh¬ 
ing  letters  from  Spa  ;  her  criticisms  of  the  pompous 
Gray,  the  infatuated  Hanway,  the  amazing  Chudleigh  ; 
her  love  of  Monsey’s  foolery ;  her  appreciation  of 
Tristram  and  of  his  fretful  spouse  ;  her  efforts  to  evoke 
the  best  out  of  Tom  Lyttelton  ;  her  love  of  the  adven¬ 
turous  Emin  ;  all  these  things  have  been  touched  on, 
and  are  good  to  remember.  Indeed  she  was  an 
admirable  friend,  as  her  intercourse  with  the  first  Lord 
Lyttelton  and  with  Beattie,  with  Mrs.  Carter  and  the 
Sylph,  and  Mrs.  Garrick  and  Hannah  More,  and 
many  others  abundantly  proves  ;  and  the  claim  that 
she  had  ever  been  “  fond  to  spread  friendships  and 
to  cover  heats  ”  is  largely  justified. 

Egerton  Brydges  wrote  of  her  :  “  She  was  good- 
natured,  generous,  candid  and  obliging  ;  no  one  knew 


BUSINESS  ABILITIES 


365 

characters  better ;  she  saw  a  foible  in  an  instant, 
but  she  generally  forbore  to  expose  it.  She  was 
acquainted  with  all  the  great  literary  men  of  her 
day,  and  her  house  was  open  to  them.  She  had  the 
talent  of  drawing  the  characters  of  those  whom  she 
knew.” 

Her  charities  and  acts  of  benevolence  have  been 
sufficiently  referred  to  in  the  body  of  this  work  ;  and 
there  can  be  no  question  that,  though  often  rigid  in 
her  justice,  she  was  generously  munificent  to  a  very 
large  number  of  people.  Boswell,  who,  “  drunk  or 
sober,”  had  no  love  for  her,  once  suggested  that  her 
generosity  was  mere  vanity  ;  but  Dr.  Johnson — who 
often  resented  the  abuse  by  others  of  those  whom  he 
occasionally  abused  himself — at  once  retorted,  “  I  have 
seen  no  beings  who  do  so  much  good  from  benevolence 
as  she  does  from  whatever  motive.” 

Of  her  business  ability  as  a  farmer  and  colliery 
owner,  lack  of  space  has  unfortunately  prevented  in¬ 
clusion  of  the  evidence  ;  and  this  is  the  more  regrettable 
because  M.  Huchon,  in  his  admirable  little  Essay,  has 
referred  rather  slightingly  to  her  condescending  patron¬ 
age  of  her  pitmen  and  workers.  Due  allowance  being 
made  for  the  developments  of  a  century  and  a  half  in 
the  attitude  of  capital  and  labour,  the  letters  in  this 
collection  do  not  warrant  any  such  estimate.  Mrs. 
Montagu’s  farm  and  colliery  methods  might  possibly 
shock  some  of  our  economic  pundits  and  trades  union 
enthusiasts  ;  but  according  to  her  generation  and  its 
lights  she  was  a  very  beneficent  as  well  as  successful 
proprietor  ;  she  had  less  trouble  with  her  men  than 
any  of  the  adjoining  owners,  and  indeed  there  were 
pilgrims  to  Denton  to  study  its  management.  She 
fatted  hogs  to  provide  bacon  for  her  poor  at  a  very 
low  price  ;  she  brewed  them  small  beer  in  large 
quantities,  because  “  water,  when  they  work  hard,  is 
poor  potation.”  She  laid  out  very  large  sums  in 
houses,  fencing,  drainage,  and  improvements ;  she 


366  EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY  LONDON 

employed  many  of  her  women  in  making  clothes  for 
the  more  needy  ;  she  grew  acres  of  potatoes  for  the 
benefit  of  her  tenantry  ;  she  established  boys’  schools, 
and  had  the  girls  taught  needlework.  If  she  occa¬ 
sionally  celebrated  a  coal  winning  or  an  anniversary 
with  largess  and  a  feast  that  did  not  end  quite  soberly, 
if  the  beer  was  not  always  “  small,”  and  Wear  the 
publican  was  sometimes  sent  as  Ganimede  with  vessels 
of  punch,  “  Madam  ”  at  any  rate  went  to  every  table 
of  the  feast  to  drink  their  healths  ;  and  then  established 
good  Mr.  Raikes’  Sunday  Schools  at  Newbury  to  teach 
the  rising  generation  a  better  way. 

By  way  of  hors-d’oeuvre,  before  the  substantial 
meal  of  an  eighteenth-century  memoir,  one  would  do 
well  to  read  Gay’s  Trivia ,  or  the  Art  of  Walking  the 
Streets.  Though  it  dates  back  to  1716,  its  picture 
of  London  held  good  in  most  respects  till  nearly  the 
end  of  the  century,  and  it  may  be  taken  as  laying  the 
scene  of  Mrs.  Montagu’s  married  life  in  town  very 
graphically  and  not  unfaithfully.  One  needs  to  try 
and  visualise  her  surroundings  if  one  is  to  do  her 
justice  ;  to  picture  the  narrow  streets  and  overhanging 
houses,  the  shop  fronts  bulging  over  the  narrow, 
cobbled,  post-guarded  footways,  with  creaking  sign¬ 
boards  overhead,  and  wares  of  all  kinds  hung  and 
strewn  outside ;  the  filthy  kennels,  deep  in  reeking 
mud  ;  the  rough  roadway  pitted  with  holes,  where 
shouting  hackney-coachmen,  jostling  chairmen,  and 
insolent  footmen  thrust  their  way  through,  scattering 
mud  and  dust  on  luckless  pedestrians  ;  the  miserable 
glimmer  of  dripping  oil  lamps  at  night,  when  thieves 
and  footpads  roamed  at  large  and  at  ease,  the  only 
protection  for  wayfaring  honest  folk  being  a  few 
decrepit  old  watchmen  encumbered  with  immense 
coats,  lanthorns,  rattles,  and  long  poles.  Refuse 
thrown  out  from  upper  windows,  waterspouts  from 
the  roof  fronts,  stenches  from  the  uncleansed  open 
sewers,  derelict  houses  where  lean  swine  and  scavenger 


LITERARY  WORK 


367 

dogs  forgathered,  till  they  fell  with  a  crash  on  ill- 
fated  passers-by  ; — these  were  but  a  tithe  of  the  perils 
of  the  Londoner  of  those  “  good  old  times.”  And 
within  doors,  too,  we  who  dwell  in  the  days  of  electric 
light  and  of  bathrooms,  of  lifts  and  water  supply,  of 
gas  cookery  and  telephones,  of  hourly  posts  and  evening 
papers,  have  much  to  divest  ourselves  of  before  we 
can  live  back  to  George  the  Third.  It  was  not  only 
a  hard-drinking,  hard-swearing,  hard-gambling  age  ; 
it  was  in  many  typical  aspects  a  hard-hearted,  an 
arrogant,  an  unsympathetic  age.  The  very  welcome 
that  was  given  to  The  Sentimental  Journey  but  serves 
to  show  on  what  parched  and  thirsty  ground  Sterne’s 
manna  fell.  These  things  must  in  all  fairness  be  held 
in  constant  memory  whilst  we  pass  judgement  on  a 
life  that,  being  pre-eminently  social,  was  proportionately 
trammelled  by  the  conditions  of  its  environment. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  literary  work  has  been  sufficiently 
dealt  with  in  the  record  of  the  publication  of  her 
Shakespeare  Essay ,  and  of  her  intercourse  with  Dr. 
Johnson.  Creditable  as  it  was,  it  is  of  course  rather 
upon  her  development  of  the  social  coterie  amongst  the 
lettered  leaders  of  her  time  than  upon  her  own  writings 
that  her  fame  in  this  direction  rests  ;  and  of  these,  and 
of  the  difficulties  and  counter-attractions  with  which 
they  were  faced,  enough  has  been  recorded  to  permit 
of  some  judgement  being  formed.  Whatever  their 
imperfections  and  shortcomings,  the  Blue  Stockings, 
of  whom  Mrs.  Montagu  was  the  acknowledged  head 
and  forefront,  did,  as  it  will  generally  be  conceded, 
provide  a  solution  of  what  was  a  real  need  of  their 
time.  They  brought  men  and  women  together  in 
rational  intellectual  intercourse ;  they  provided  an 
alternative  to  the  hard  drinking  and  deep  gambling 
of  the  Clubs  ;  and  they  established  the  claim  of  well- 
educated  women  to  a  share  of  scholarly  and  literary 
converse. 

In  taking  leave — as  we  must,  and  briefly  now — of 


368 


ATTRACTIVE  FACETS 


Elizabeth  Montagu,  perhaps  one  might  fairly  say  that 
the  more  attractive  facets  of  her  character  were  those 
which  flashed  most  rarely,  yet  which  one  felt  were 
there  ;  not  her  learning,  though  that  was  wide  and 
well  founded  ;  not  her  critical  faculty,  though  that  was 
often  shrewd  and  sometimes  admirable  ;  not  her  wit, 
though  that,  at  best,  was  pretty  enough  ;  but  rather, 
after  all,  her  tolerant  comprehension  of  human  frailties  ; 
her  frank  recognition  of  her  own  vanities  and  weak¬ 
nesses  ;  her  swift  and  active  sympathies  in  the  illness 
or  misfortune  of  those  she  cared  for  ;  her  devotion 
— never  forgotten  though  so  seldom  uttered — for 
the  little  one  she  had  loved  so  greatly  and  lost 
so  soon. 


INDEX 


Acland,  Sir  Thomas  :  ii.  no 
Adam,  Robert:  i.  9,  102,  127,  128, 
132,  152,  153  ;  ii.  13 
Addison,  Joseph  :  i.  133  ;  ii.  270 
Adelaide,  Madame  de  France,  daughter 
of  Louis  XIV.  :  i.  283,  334 
Ailesbury,  Lady  :  i.  101,  126,  306  ;  ii. 

222,  259,  324,  338 
Ainslie,  Sir  Robert  :  ii.  314 
Aislabie,  Mr.  :  i.  157 
Akenside,  Dr.  Mark  :  i.  31  ;  ii.  no 
Albany,  Countess  of,  alias  Princess  of 
Stolberg  :  ii.  258,  259,  260 
Albemarle,  George  Keppel,  3rd  Earl  of : 
i.  131 

Alembert,  J.  B.,  le  R.  D’  :  i.  97,  322, 

323'  33°"332  i  >>•  1 39 
Alexander,  Mrs.,  daughter  of  Messenger 
Monsey  :  ii.  138 

Alfieri,  Vittorio,  Count  :  ii.  259,  260 
Alison,  Mrs.  :  see  Gregory,  Dorothea 
Alison,  Rev.  Archibald:  ii.  131,  132, 
171,  172,  187,  243 
Almacks  Club  :  ii.  180,  358 
Almon,  John  :  i.  179 
Amelia,  Princess  (aunt  of  George  III.)  : 

i.  16,  30,  32,  172  ;  ii.  215 
Americans  :  ii.  30,  73 
Amherst,  Lady:  ii.  210 
Amphlett,  the  Misses  :  ii.  77,  78 
Anderdon,  W.  H.,  his  Collecteana  :  ii. 

ISI 

Andrews,  J.  Pettit  :  ii.  300 
Anecdotes  of  Dr.  fohnson,  by  Mrs. 

Piozzi  :  ii.  276,  277 
Anglesea,  Arthur  Annesley,  Earl  of : 
see  Valentia 

Anglesea,  Lady  :  see  Valentia 
Anstev,  Christopher  :  i.  149,  350-354; 

ii.  16,  76,  89,  92,  261,  329 
Apcar,  Amy  :  i.  16 

Apsley,  Henry,  Baron,  Lord  Chancellor  : 
ii.  20 

Arblay,  Madame  D’  :  see  Burney 

VOL.  II 


Arblay,  Mons.  D’  :  ii.  295,  297,  326 
Arbuthnot,  Dr.  :  ii.  183 
Arbuthnot,  Mrs.  :  ii.  182,  183 
Archdeacon,  William:  i.  158,  299 
Arcon,  Jean  le  Michaud  D’  :  ii.  128 
Arcott,  Mahommed  Ali,  Nabob  of :  ii. 
256 

Argental,  De  Ferriol,  Comte  D’ :  i.  312, 
347 

Argyll,  John,  4th  Duke  of  :  i.  147 
Armagh,  Archbishop  of :  see  Rokeby, 
Richard,  Lord 

Armistead,  Mrs.  (Armstead,  Armit- 
stead)  :  ii.  170,  325,  326 
Arnauld,  Francois,  Abbe  de  Grand- 
champ  :  i.  330,  331,  361 
Artois,  Charles  Philippe,  Comte  d’  :  ii. 

214,  215,  216 
Ashe,  Miss :  i.  28 

Atkinson,  Mr.  (fitter  at  Denton)  :  i. 
3°4 

Augsbourg,  Bishop  of:  i.  55,  56 
Augusta,  Princess,  sister  of  George  III.  : 

i.  55,  76,  83  ;  ii.  226 
Augusta,  Princess  Dowager,  widow  of 
Frederick  Prince  of  Wales  :  i.  14,  27, 
77,  90,  157,  251 
Auld  Robin  Gray  :  ii.  250 

Bacon,  Francis,  Lord  Verulam  :  i.  158, 
159  ;  ii.  207 

Banks,  Sir  Joseph  :  ii.  236,  238,  300, 
3°3>  3°9 

Banks,  Lady  :  ii.  303 
Barbauld,  Mrs.  :  i.  309,  340,  341  ;  ii. 
117 

Barere  de  Vieuzac,  Bertrand  :  i.  290 
Baretti,  Giuseppe  :  ii.  141,  276 
Bargeny,  Hamilton,  Lord  :  i.  238 
Barnard,  Andrew  :  ii.  250 
Barnard,  Lady  Anne,  ne'e  Lindsay  :  ii. 
25° 

Barnard,  Sir  John  :  i.  71,  268 
Barras,  Paul,  Comte  de  :  i.  319 

2  B 


369 


37° 


INDEX 


Barrd,  Isaac,  Colonel :  i.  232 
Barrett,  Miss  :  ii.  265 
Barrett,  William  :  ii.  29 
Barrington,  Lord  :  i.  23 
Barry,  Madame  Du  :  i.  283 
Barrymore,  James,  Lord  :  i.  153 
Bartholomew,  Dr.  :  i.  30 
Bartoli  :  ii.  246 
Barwell,  Miss :  ii.  204,  205 
Barwell,  Mrs.,  nee  Sanderson  :  ii.  204, 
205 

Barwell,  Richard  (“  Nabob  ”)  :  ii.  204, 
205,  223 

Bas  Bleu  :  see  Blue  Stockings 
Basire,  James  :  ii.  242 
Bate,  Rev.  Henry  :  i.  275 
Bateman,  Dicky  :  i.  99 
Bateman,  Mr.  :  i.  1  32 
Bath:  i.  ri6,  168;  ii.  14,  16,  67,  80- 
82,  92,  104,  108,  no,  hi,  333 
Bath,  William  Pulteney,  Earl  of :  i.  vi, 
x,4,  14,  17-19,  22,  23,  27,  29,  31,  32, 

34.  36.  37.  40-42.  44-47.  49.  S2,  55. 
56,  58-60,  62,  66,  67,  69-74,  77-81, 
84-86,  89,  92-94,  99,  roo,  102,  103, 
106;  death,  107-112,  114,  119,  122, 
130,  160,  164,  216,  253,  272,  345- 
347  ;  ii.  125,  126,  127,  132,  141,  142, 
183,312,  346,  349,  350,  352,  354,  364 
Bathurst,  Allen,  1st  Earl  :  i.  127 
Beattie,  James  :  i.  7,  9,  233,  241,  251, 
253,  263,  264,  267,  269-274,  280, 
304;  ii.  132,  182,  183,  212,  233, 
271,  279,  280,  295,  313,  347,  350, 
352,  354,  364 

Beattie,  Mrs.  :  i.  271,  274,  304 ;  ii.  182 
Beauclerk,  Lady  Catherine,  wife  of 
Aubrey,  afterwards  5th  Duke  of  St. 
Albans  :  i.  102 

Beauclerk,  Lord  Sidney  :  i.  103 
Beauclerk,  Topham  :  i.  102,  103  ;  ii. 
9,  56,  7°,  7 1 ,277 

Beaufort,  Elizabeth  Berkeley,  widow  of 
4th  Duke  of  :  i.  1 15,  126,  127,  129  ; 
ii.  179,  180,  213,  295,  307 
Beaufort,  Elizabeth  Boscawen,  wife  of 
5th  Duke  of :  ii.  44,  213,  302,  307 
Beaufort,  Henry  Somerset,  afterwards 
5th  Duke  of :  i.  117,  1 34  ;  ii.  239,  240 
Beaumont,  Chevalier  d’Eon  de :  see  Eon 
Beaumont,  Francis  :  ii.  145 
Becket,  Mr.  :  i.  203 
Beckford,  William  (Lord  Mayor  of 
London)  :  i.  87,  220,  231,  233,  234 
Bedford,  Francis,  5th  Duke  of  :  ii.  329, 
33° 

Bedford,  Gertrude,  Duchess  of  (2nd  wife 
of  4th  Duke)  :  i.  153,  222  ;  ii.  96 


Bedford,  John  Russell,  4th  Duke  of : 
cypher, i.  19,  38,  135,  136,  153,  156, 
157,  168,  228,  345  ;  ii.  96 
Bedlam  Hospital  :  ii.  22,  23 
Belgiojoso,  Count  :  i.  248,  249 
Belgrave,  Richard  Grosvenor,  Viscount  : 
ii.  248 

Belgrave,  Henrietta,  Viscountess  :  ii. 
336 

Bellenden,  Edith  :  i.  85 

Bentinck,  Lord  Edward  :  ii.  193 

Bentinck,  William,  Count  :  i.  59,  60 

Bentley,  Thomas  :  i.  309 

Berenger,  Richard  :  i.  242  ;  ii.  45 

Berkeley,  John  :  i.  117 

Berkeley,  Lady:  ii.  175 

Berkely,  of  Stratton,  Lord  :  i.  127 

Berry,  the  Misses  :  ii.  338 

Berthier,  Louis  (Prince  de  Wagram)  : 

ii.  252,  253,  333,  334 
Bessborough,  William,  2nd  Earl  of :  i. 

102,  103,  107,  138  ;  ii.  308,  329 
Bettany,  Lewis,  author  of  Edward  jern- 
ingham  and  his  Friends  :  ii.  134 
Bewick,  Thomas  :  ii.  317 
Bickerstaffe,  Isaac  :  ii.  70 
Biron,  Armand  Louis,  Due  de  :  ii.  51, 
286 

Biron,  Duchesse  de  :  ii.  255,  285,  286 
Black,  Mr.  :  i.  161,  231  ;  ii.  136,  247, 
357 

Blackrie,  Alexander  :  i.  255,  256 
Blagden,  Dr.,  afterwards  Sir  Charles  : 
ii.  218,  219,  268,  299,  308,  309,  310, 
320,  324,  325,  329,  330,  332,  333, 
337,  339,  343 

Blair,  Dr.  Hugh  :  i.  147,  238,  251  ;  ii. 
135,  15° 

Blake,  William  :  ii.  242 
Blandy,  Miss  :  i.  79 

Blanquet  du  Chaila,  Admiral  :  ii.  340, 
341 

Blondel,  Mons.,  Swiss  tutor  :  i.  312 
“  Bloomsbury  Gang,”  the  :  i.  221 
Blue  Stockings  :  i.  xii,  5,  1  r,  90,  91,  223, 
246,  263  ;  ii.  1,  2,  3,  4,  10,  11,  39, 
58,  101,  124,  140,  142,  156,  161, 
190,  367 

Boccage,  Marie  Anne  Le  Page  du  :  i. 

322,  323,  340,  341  >  3,  !3 

Boileau,  Nicolas  :  i.  226 
Bolingbroke,  Frederick,  2nd  Viscount: 
ii.  300 

Bolingbroke,  Henry  St.  John,  Viscount  : 

i.  18,  123,  140,  345 
Bolton,  Duchess  of  :  ii.  189 
Bolton,  Harry  Paulet,  6th  Duke  of :  ii. 
3H 


INDEX 


Bomar,  Jacques  Christophe  Valmont 
de  :  i.  312,  317,  337 
Bonaparte,  Napoleon  :  ii.  293,  323,  324, 
325,  330,  331,  333,  334,  335,  339, 
34°,.  345 

Bonomi,  Joseph,  A.R.A.  :  ii.  204,  241, 
246 

Boothby,  Mr.  :  i.  203 
Borguis,  Mr.  :  ii.  324 
Borzinski,  Count  :  i.  248,  249 
Boscawen,  Edward,  Admiral :  i.  90,  1 1 7  ; 
ii.  1,  2,  5 1 

Boscawen,  Mrs.  (widow  of  Admiral), 
nee  Frances  Glanville  :  i.  43,  90,  109, 
1 18,  130,  155,  265,  367  ;  ii.  1,  3,  39, 
100,  213,  307,  321,  338,  347 
Boscawen,  William  :  i.  117 
Boswell,  James:  i.  5,  231,  234,  251, 
270,  272  ;  ii.  9,  55,  56,  90,  140,  147, 
150,  157,  158,  166,  167  n.,  219,  220, 
276-278,  365 

Botetourt,  Norbonne  Berkeley,  Lord  : 

i.  36,  1 17,  127 
Botham,  Kitty  :  i.  1 57 

Botham,  Lydia  (Mrs.  “  Johnny  ”)  :  i. 
186,  187,  190 

Botham,  Rev.  John  :  i.  134,  154,  186, 
198,  199,  200,  203,  207 
Boufflers,  Comtesse  de  :  ii.  100,  239, 
249,  286 

Boughton,  Miss:  ii.  113 
Bouille',  Francois  De  :  ii.  1 1 6 
Bourbon,  Due  de  :  ii.  216 
Boutin,  Mons.  :  ii.  37 
Bowdler,  Miss  Harriet  :  ii.  308,  331 
Bowdler,  Mrs.  :  ii.  32 
Bowdler,  Thomas  :  ii.  104,  262,  321, 
340,  342 

Bower,  Archibald  :  i.  125 
Bowes,  Andrew  Stoney  :  i.  64  ;  ii.  179, 
180 

Bowes,  George  :  i.  64 
Bowes,  Mrs.  George  :  i.  65 
Bowes,  Mary  Eleanor,  Countess  of 
Strathmore  :  i.  65  ;  ii.  179,  180 
Boyd,  Sir  Robert  :  ii.  129 
Boyle,  Mr.  :  i.  368 
Brandling,  Mr.  :  ii.  305 
Brantome,  Pierre  Seigneur  de  :  i.  340 
Brayley,  Edward  Wedlake,  quoted  :  ii.  57 
Breadalbane,  John  Campbell,  3rd  Earl 
of :  i.  238 

Brett,  Admiral  Sir  Piercy  :  ii.  51 
Brewer,  Dr.  Ebenezer  :  ii.  10 
Bridport,  Alexander  Hood,  1st  Viscount: 

ii.  314 

Bristol,  Augustus  John,  3rd  Earl  of :  i. 
169,  1 8 1,  216,  306,  307 


371 

Bristol,  Elizabeth,  Countess  of :  see 
Chudleigh 

Bristol,  Frederick  Augustus,  4th  Earl  of : 
ii.  1 18,  185,  272 

Bristol,  George  William,  2nd  Earl  of : 

i.  149,  168,  169,  215 

Bristol,  History  of,  by  William  Barrett  : 

ii.  29 

Britton,  Sir  W.  :  i.  31 
Broglio,  Victor,  Due  de  :  i.  283 
Brown,  “  Capability  ”  Lancelot  :  i.  102, 
109,  120,  121,  123,  127,  132;  ii. 
I33-I35>  199.  204.  205,  214 
Brown,  Edward  (E.  M.’s  agent)  :  i.  260, 
279.  3°3  !  “•  53.  72,  251 
Brown,  Dr.  John  :  i.  135 
Bruce,  James  :  ii.  25 1 
Briihl,  Comte  de  :  i.  126 
Briihl,  Miss  :  ii.  321 
Brunswick  :  see  Caroline  Amelia  Eliza¬ 
beth  of 

Brunswick,  Charles  William  Ferdinand, 
Hereditary  Prince  of :  i.  32,  55,  82, 
86,  88-90,  92,  95  ;  ii.  39,  288,  289, 
296,324,325 

Brunswick,  Duchess  of  (sister  of 
Frederick  II.)  :  ii.  39-40 
Bryant,  Jacob  :  ii.  1 1  3,  1  14 
Brydges,  Sir  Egerton  :  ii.  1 5 1 ,  157,  364 
Buccleugh,  Henry,  3rd  Duke  of  :  i.  145, 
259,  260 

Buccleugh,  Elizabeth,  Duchess  of,  wife 
of  3rd  Duke  :  i.  168,  260 
Buchan,  David  Stewart,  Lord  :  ii.  31 
Buchan,  Lady  :  i.  284 
Buckingham,  George  Villiers,  Duke  of  : 
ii.  106 

Buckingham  House  :  cypher,  i.  19 
BufFon,  Comte  de  :  i.  97,  32 1,  323,  324, 
332  ;  ii.  15 

BufFon,  Madame  de  (wife  of  Georges, 
Comte  de)  :  ii.  246 

Bulstrode  :  i.  125,  219  ».,  267,  268, 
271  ;  ii.  193 

Bunbury,  Lady  Sarah  :  i.  304 
Buonaparte  :  see  Bonaparte 
Burghley,  William  Cecil,  Lord  :  i.  152, 
158-159 

Burgoyne,  General  Sir  John  :  ii.  178 
Burgoyne,  John,  dramatist  and  general  : 
i.  354  ;  ii.  1 7 

Burgoyne,  Montagu  :  ii.  178,  179 
Burke,  Edmund  :  i.  4,  7,  41,  42,  49,  30, 
89,  105,  135,  139,  168,  170,  172, 
179,  219,  224,  228,  234,  243,  245, 
246,  249,  253,  257,  261,  263,  276, 
282,  288,  297,  306,  365  ;  ii.  9,  10, 
23.  34.  35.  4i.  42,  44.  60,  64,  69,  70, 


372 


INDEX 


74,  88,  1 17,  1 18,  12 1,  222,  247-250, 
252,265,282,355 

Burke,  Mrs.  :  i.  247,  257,  276,  306  ; 

ii.  42,  64,  1 1 8,  252 
Burke,  Richard  :  ii.  41 
Burke,  William  :  ii.  23,  41 
Burney,  Dr.  Charles  :  ii.  273,  286,  297, 
344 

Burney,  Edward  :  ii.  258 
Burney,  Frances,  Madame  D’Arblay : 
i.  5,  126,  343  ;  ii.  4,  59,  121,  128, 
158,  159,  160,  161,  166,  193,  194, 
219,  221,  223,  231,  250,  258,  261, 
264-278,  295,  296,  297,  320,  326, 
362 

Burrell,  Sir  William  :  i.  42 
Burrows,  Mesdames  :  ii.  1 1  3 
Burrows,  Rev.  John  :  i.  vii,  274,  329, 
334,  364  ;  ii.  5,  189 
Burrows,  Sir  Montagu  :  i.  xii 
Burton,  Colonel  :  ii.  49 
Bute,  John  Stuart,  3rd  Earl  of :  i.  12, 
cypher,  19,  20,  21,  23,  31,  35,  69,  77, 
157,  168,  170,  189  ;  ii.  95,  141 
Bute,  Mary,  Countess  of  (wife  of  3rd 
Earl)  :  i.  36,  218  j  ii.  95 
Butler,  Captain:  ii.  314 
Butler,  Mrs.  :  ii.  3  14 
Byron,  Augusta  Mary  :  ii.  65 
Byron,  George  Gordon,  6th  Lord  :  ii. 
65 

Byron,  John  :  ii.  63,  65 

Cabarrus  Therezia  :  Madame  Tallien  : 

i.  319 

Cadell,  Thomas  :  ii.  276 
Cadogan,  Dr.  :  i.  243 
Calcraft,  John  :  i.  228 
Callender,  James  :  ii.  164 
Calonne,  Charles  de  :  ii.  216,  217,  225, 
249 

Cambridge,  Richard  Owen  :  i.  180,  233, 
292  ;  ii.  138,  160,  161,  192 
Cambysse,  Comtesse  de  :  i.  321  ;  ii. 
255,  285,  286 

Camden,  Charles  Pratt,  Earl  of:  i.  138, 
232,  244,  282,  341  ;  ii.  41,  42 
Campbell,  General  Sir  Archibald  :  ii.  256 
Canning,  George  :  ii.  333 
Cantelupe,  Lord  :  i.  76 
Canterbury,  Archbishops  of  :  see  Seeker, 
Cornwallis 

Caraccioli,  Marquis  Dominique  :  i.  322 
Cardigan,  George,  4th  Earl  of :  i.  82,  92  ; 

ii.  188 

Carkett,  Captain  Robert  :  ii.  94 
Carlisle,  Charles  Lyttelton,  Bishop  of  : 
i.  76,  147-170,  278 


Carlisle,  Frederick  Howard,  5  th  Earl  of  : 

i.  1 1  ;  ii.  46,  47,  61,  62 

Carlyle,  Alexander,  “  Jupiter  ”  :  ii.  352, 
353 

Carlyle,  Thomas  :  ii.  74,  197,  253,  284, 
288,  290 

Carmarthen,  George  Godolphin  Os¬ 
borne,  Lord  :  ii.  65,  325,  326 
Carmarthen,  Lady,  nee  Amelia  D’Arcy  : 

ii.  64,  65 

Carmichael,  Poll:  ii.  167 
Carnarvon,  Countess  :  ii.  292 
Carnarvon,  Henry  Herbert,  Earl,  Lord 
Porchester  :  ii.  173,  224,  292,  293 
Caroline,  queen  of  George  II.  :  i.  344, 
34S 

Caroline,  of  Denmark  (sister  of  George 
III.)  :  i.  176 

Caroline  Amelia  Elizabeth  of  Brunswick, 
wife  of  George,  Prince  of  Wales 
(George  IV.)  :  ii.  309,  313,  317,  318 
Carpenter,  Lady  Almeria  :  ii.  260 
Carrington,  Robert  Smith,  Lord  :  ii. 
33° 

Carter,  Elizabeth  :  i.  vi,  vii,  2,  3,  6,  37, 
38,  42,  44,  47-49,  52,  54,  56,  57,  60, 
62,  63,  79,  89,  94,  103,  106,  xo8, 
109,  hi,  114,  1 1 5,  124,  150,  155, 

160,  161,  163,  164,  168,  175,  189, 

193,  234,  263,  269,  271,  278,  301, 

303,  306,  3 1 1,  315,  336  ;  ii.  1,  2,  3, 

24>  3D  32>  34>  43>  59 >  69>  9D  99> 
104,  117,  126,  127,  132,  141,  166, 

182,  220,  260,  299,  300,  344,  349, 

352,  362,  364 

Carteret,  Lady  Sophia  :  i.  120 
Carysfort,  Sir  John  Proby,  Lord  :  i.  160 
Cast,  Miss  :  i.  34 
Castiglione,  Madame  :  i.  314 
Castiglione,  Monsieur:  i.  314 
Castries,  Due  de  :  ii.  252,  253 
Castro,  Mr.  Paul  de  :  i.  xii  ;  ii.  56 
Catherine  I.,  Empress  of  Russia  :  ii.  40 
Catherine  II.,  Empress  of  Russia  :  i. 

123,  25c  ;  ii.  23a,  240,  283,  321,  343 
Cator,  John,  M.P.  :  ii.  181,  182 
Catuelan,  !e  Comte  de  :  i.  321,  338  ; 
ii.  12 

Caulfield,  James  :  ii.  4 
Cavendish,  Sir  Henry  :  ii.  138 
Cavendish,  Lord  John  :  ii.  178 
Cecilia,  by  Frances  Burney  :  ii.  267,  273 
Centlivre,  Mrs.  Susannah  :  i.  357  n., 
363 

Cervantes,  Miguel  de  :  i.  192 
Chaillot  (Paris)  :  i.  319,  320 
Chambers,  Captain  George  :  ii.  175, 
176 


INDEX 


373 


Chambers,  William  :  architect:  ii.  175, 
176 

Chancellor  :  cypher,  i.  20 
Chapone,  Mrs.,  nee  Hester  Mulso  :  i. 
30,  31,  37,  129,  150,  234,  238,  239, 
269,  277  ;  ii.  39,  1 1 3,  195,  314,  362 
Charles  VI.  of  France  :  i.  317 
Charles,  Dauphin  of  France:  ii.  212, 
258,  284,  285 

Charles  William,  Hereditary  Prince  of 
Brunswick-Wolfenbiittel  :  i.  76,  83 
Charlotte  Sophia,  Queen  of  George  III.  : 
i.  13,  16,  21,  22,  27  ;  birth  of  Prince 
of  Wales,  32  ;  63,76,  83,  95,  176,  215, 
272,  306,  343  ;  ii.  22,  25,  55,  58, 
63,  84,  210,  222,  226,  227,  228,  246, 
257,  258,  266,  267,  281,  288,  300 
Charlton,  Dr.  :  i.  180 
Charlton,  Miss,  afterwards  Mrs. 
Matthew  Montagu  :  see  Montagu, 
Mrs.  Matthew 

Chastellux,  Francois,  Marquis  de  :  i. 
321,  322,  330 

Chatham,  Lady,  wife  of  1st  Earl  of :  i. 

1 3 3,  235,  243,  262,  283,  288;  ii.  S3 
Chatham,  William  Pitt,  Earl  of :  i.  7, 
1 1,  12,  17-19,  45,  69,  81,  82,  88,  90- 
92,  122,  124,  126-128,  1 30,  132,  133, 
136-139,  141,  142,  156,  160,  165, 
168,  174,  177,  179,  180,  182,  184, 
221,  222,  230,  235,  236,  243,  271, 
283,  284,  294,  341,  345  ;  ii.  16,  17, 

41,42,44,47-53,349-35+ 

Chatham,  John,  2nd  Earl  of :  see  Pitt, 
John 

Chatterton,  Thomas  :  ii.  29,  1 1  3,  114 
Chaucer,  Geoffrey  :  i.  78 
Chaulnes,  Due  de  :  i.  82 
Cheap,  Andrew  :  i.  196,  200,  201,  204 
Cheere,  Sir  Henry  :  i.  79 
Chelsea  College  :  i.  176,  216 
Cherokee  King  :  i.  26 
Chester,  Bishop  of :  see  Porteous, 
Beilby 

Chesterfield,  Philip  Stanhope,  4th  Earl 
of:  i.  10,  11,  91,  112,  120,  1 3  1,  173, 
178,  1 8 1 ,  257,  263,  270  ;  death,  271, 
272,  281,  284,  286,  295,  344,  345, 
347;  ii.  14,  25,  28,  169,  218,  219, 
300,  312,  349,  355 
Chesterfield,  Lady  :  ii.  44 
Chiaramonti,  Cardinal  :  ii.  345 
Chichester,  Sir  William  Ashburnham, 
Bishop  of  :  ii.  331 
Child,  Mr.  (banker)  :  i.  260 
Chittick,  Dr.  :  i.  256 
Choiseul,  Etienne,  Due  de  :  i.  99,  263 
Cholmeley,  Mrs.  :  ii.  80,  137,  226 


Cholmly,  Mr.  :  ii.  218 
Chcywne,  Miss  :  ii.  307 
Christchurch,  Dean  of  :  ii.  173 
Chudleigh,  Elizabeth,  afterwards  styled 
Duchess  of  Kingston  :  i.  9,  169,  179, 
1 8 1,  215-217,  251,  306,  307;  ii. 
142,364 

Chudleigh,  Thomas,  Governor  of  Chel¬ 
sea  Hospital  :  i.  216 
Churchill,  Charles  :  i.  69,  70,  77-80, 
120,  146  ;  ii.  1 14,  145 
Cipriani,  Giambattista  :  i.  152;  ii.  119 
Clairon,  Mdlle.  :  i.  98 
Clare,  Thomas  Pelham  Holies,  Earl  of : 
i.  135-136,  290 

Clarence,  Duke  of,  afterwards  William 
IV.  :  i.  171  ;  ii.  226,  293,  294 
Clarissa  Harlowe  (Samuel  Richardson)  : 
i.  150 

Clark,  Elizabeth  :  i.  185 

Clavering,  Sir  Thomas  :  i.  65  5  ii.  137 

Clayton,  Lady  Louisa,  nee  Eermor:  i. 

168,  169  ;  ii.  135 
Clayton,  Mr.  William  :  ii.  135 
Clayton,  Mrs.  :  i.  186 
Clement,  Prince  (son  of  King  of  Poland)  : 
i-  55 

Clerke,  Commodore  Sir  John  :  ii.  21 
Clermont,  Lady  :  i.  365  ;  ii.  22,  23,  57, 
89,  92,  1 18,  215,  216,  339 
Clermont,  Lord  :  ii.  339 
Climenson,  Mrs.  Emily  :  i.  v-ix,  1,  3, 
16,  185,  186;  ii.  79,  99,  138,  346, 
362 

Clinton,  Sir  Henry  :  ii.  17,  62,  92,  93, 
96 

Clive,  Kitty  :  ii.  301 

Clive,  2nd  Lord  :  i.  290 

Clubs  :  i.  1 1,  65  ;  ii.  7,  9,  180,  214,  220 

Coates,  Humphrey  :  i.  82 

Cobham,  John,  Viscount  :  i.  xii 

Cobham,  Thomas  Lyttelton,  Viscount  : 

i.  128  ;  ii.  71,  149 
Cockburn,  Major  :  ii.  78 
Cohen,  Mr.  :  i.  275 
Coke,  Lady  Mary  :  ii.  44,  229 
Cole,  Mr.,  Chaplain  to  Duke  of  Marl¬ 
borough  :  ii.  215 
Cole,  Mrs.  :  ii.  215 
Coliniere,  Chevalier  de  la  :  i.  324 
Coll,  Stewart  of  :  ii.  153 
Collet,  Dr.  :  i.  239 

Collieries,  the:  i.  81,  124,  14 1,  164, 
304,  3 1 1  j  ii.  136,  305-307 
Colman,  George  :  i.  361  ;  ii.  127 
Cologne,  Elector  of  :  i.  61 
Colpoys,  Admiral  :  ii.  336,  337 
Combe,  William  :  ii.  21,  78,  79 


374 


INDEX 


Compton,  Lady  Elizabeth  :  i.  338 
Condd,  Louis  Joseph,  Prince  de  :  i.  317 
Coningsby,  Countess  :  ii.  114 
Coningsby,  Lady  Frances:  i.  30,  120, 
129  ;  ii.  1 1 3 

Conoily,  Lady  Louisa  :  ii.  44 
Contraband  :  ii.  31-32,  127 
Convents  :  ii.  126 

Conway,  Henry  Seymour,  General  :  i. 
99,  10 1,  138,  142,  1 57  ;  ii.  135,  300, 
338 

Conyers,  Miss  :  ii.  314 
Cook,  Captain  James  :  ii.  31 
Cook,  Mr.  John  :  i.  xii,  309 
Cooke,  George  :  i.  170 
Corke,  Lady  :  ii.  50,  70,  202 
Corneille,  Pierre  :  i.  313  ;  ii.  52,  146 
Cornelys,  Mrs.  :  ii.  180 
Cornwallis,  Charles,  Marquis:  ii.  116, 
i95>  33s 

Cornwallis,  Frederick,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury  :  i.  48,  294 
Courayer,  Pierre  Franqois  :  i.  175 
Court,  the  :  i.  43,  83,  86,  92,  95,  181, 
218,  227,  290  ;  ii.  63,  127,  210,  313 
Courtenay,  William,  2nd  Viscount  :  ii. 
1 10 

Cowper,  Colonel  :  ii.  46 

Cowper,  Lady  :  ii.  180 

Cowper,  William  :  ii.  8,  28,  149,  237 

Coxe,  William  :  ii.  182 

Craftsman,  The  \  i.  4,  85 

Crane,  Dr.  :  i.  107 

Cranworth,  Robert  Monsey  Rolph, 
Baron  (Lord  Chancellor)  :  ii.  138 
Craven,  Lady,  afterwards  Margravine 
of  Anspach  :  ii.  50,  51,  95 
Craven,  Miss  :  ii.  214 
Craven,  William,  6th  Lord  :  ii.  173 
Crawfurd,  Mr.  :  i.  202,  203 
Crebillon,  Prosper  Jolyot  de  :  i.  49 
Cremorne,  Thomas  Dawson,  Viscount  : 

i.  169,  see  Dartrey 
Cremorne,  Lady  :  ii.  300 
Crevecaeur,  Mdme.  de  :  ii.  126 
Crewe,  Frances  Anne,  Lady  :  ii.  10 
Crewe,  Mr.  John  :  i.  203  ;  ii.  21 1 
Crewe,  Mrs.  :  ii.  57,  171,  211 
Crillon,  Due  de  :  ii.  129 
Crisp,  Samuel  :  i.  5  ;  ii.  265,  268,  271 
Croft,  Mr.  :  i.  203 
Crofts,  Sir  Archer  :  ii.  60,  61 
Crofts,  Captain  :  i.  275 
Crofts,  Lady  :  ii.  60,  61 
Croker,  John  Wilson  :  i.  133,  240  ;  ii. 
166  n. 

Crosby,  Lord  :  i.  261 
Cruden,  Alexander  :  ii.  204 


Cullen,  Dr.  William  :  i.  239 
Cumberland,  Duchess  of :  ii.  170,  281 
Cumberland,  Henry,  Duke  of :  i.  251, 
268  ;  ii.  203,  2ix,  259,  281 
Cumberland,  Richard  :  i.  5,  10,  257, 
323,  369  ;  ii.  8,  10,  43,  162,  266 
Cumberland,  William  Augustus,  Duke 
of :  i.  77  ;  death,  129-131,  134 
Curll,  Edmund  (publisher)  :  ii.  205 
Cutts,  Mrs.  :  i.  188,  189 
Cyder  Act,  the  :  i.  76 
Cypher,  Lord  Bath’s  :  i.  19,  20 
Czar,  Peter  III.  :  i.  3 1 
Czernichew,  Madame  :  i.  232,  234 

Dahl,  Michael,  painter  :  ii.  56 
Damer,  John  :  ii.  224 
Darner,  Mrs.  Anne  Seymour  :  ii.  324, 
338 

Danton,  Georges  :  i.  290 
D’Arblay,  Frances  :  see  Burney 
Darby,  Admiral  :  ii.  109 
Darlington,  2nd  Earl  of :  ii.  28 
Darnley,  Henry,  Earl  of  :  i.  143 
Dartrey,  Lord,  afterwards  Viscount 
Cremorne:  i.  303,  344;  ii.  113, 
300 

Dartrey,  Lady  (Philadelphia,  daughter  of 
William  Penn)  :  i.  344;  ii.  63,  113, 
3°o 

Dartrey,  Mr.  :  ii.  69 

Dashwood,  Sir  Francis  :  i.  20,  21,  23,  69 

Dashwood,  Mrs.  :  i.  218,  219  n. 

Davies,  William,  bookseller  :  ii.  154 
Davis,  John  :  i.  268 
Dawson,  Lady  Anne  (1st  wife  of  Thomas 
D.,  afterwards  Viscount  Cremorne)  : 
i.  162,  168,  169 
Day,  Sir  John  :  ii.  338 
Deane,  Silas  :  i.  342  ;  ii.  12 
DefFand,  Marquise  du  :  i.  11,  306,  318, 
319,  321,  326,  332-333  ;  ii.  37,  38, 
5°>  355 

Dekker,  Thomas  :  ii.  143 
Delany,  Mrs.,  nee  Granville  :  i.  2,  5, 
1 1 8,  219,  267,  268,  271  ;  ii.  1 1 3, 
118,  191,  192,  193,  210,  262,  266 
Denis,  Madame  :  ii.  54 
Denmark,  Christian  VII.,  King  of  :  i. 
176-178 

Denoyer,  Mrs.  :  ii.  49 
D’Eon  :  see  Eon 
Derby,  Captain  :  i.  289 
Derby,  Edward,  12th  Earl  of  :  i.  343 
Derby,  Lady  :  ii.  64 
Derry,  Bishop  of  (Frederick  Augustus 
Hervey)  :  ii.  196 
Desenfans  :  ii.  14 


INDEX 


375 


Desmond,  Countess  of,  nte  Catherine 
Fitzgerald  :  i.  17 1 
Desmoulins,  Mrs.  :  ii.  167 
Destouches,  Philippe:  i.  331 
Devonshire,  Georgians,  Duchess  of 
(wife  of  5th  Duke):  i.  364;  ii.  18, 
23>  39.  S7»  S8,  137-  169-171.  W8. 
224,  239,  245,  261,  329-331 
Devonshire,  William,  4th  Duke  of :  i. 
20,  169 

Devonshire,  William,  5  th  Duke  of :  ii. 
239.  247»  3°8 

Dialogues  of  the  Dead :  i.  4,  122,  223, 
310  ;  ii.  156 
Dickens,  Charles  :  ii.  86 
Dickenson,  William  :  ii.  193 
Diderot,  Denis  :  i.  97,  332  ;  ii.  19 
Dilettantes,  the  :  i.  253 
Dilly,  Charles  :  i.  272,  282  ;  ii.  67,  266 
Dilly,  Edward  :  i.  272 
Divine  Legation,  by  Bishop  Warburton: 
>•  134.  I3S 

Dodd,  Dr.  William  :  ii.  25,  26 
Dodington,  George  Bubb  :  see  Mel- 
combe 

Dodsley,  Robert  :  i.  63 
Domeniceti,  Dr.  :  i.  175,  202 
Domville,  Mr.  :  i.  72 
Donnellan,  Mrs.  :  i.  2  ;  ii.  363 
Doran,  Dr.  John  :  i.  vi,  5,  108  ;  ii.  1 
Dormer,  Caroline  :  i.  28 
Dorset,  John,  3rd  Duke  of  :  ii.  263 
Doughty,  Richard,  painter  :  ii.  68,  69 
Douglas,  Dr.  :  i.  22,  47,  53,  305  ;  ii. 
324 

Douglas,  Mrs.,  formerly  Mrs.  Beauvoir, 
nee  Sharp  :  ii.  334 

Douglas,  Mr.  :  i.  259,  260  ;  ii.  236,  334 
Douglas,  Mrs.  :  ii.  324 
Dow,  Alexander  :  i.  170,  174,  257,  258 
Downing,  Sir  Jacob  :  i.  81,  100 
Downing,  Lady  :  i.  100 
Drake,  Elizabeth  :  i.  1 
Draper,  Eliza  :  i.  162,  190,  193,  207, 
214  ;  ii.  19,  20,  21,  151 
Dress:  i.  83,  218,  320,  324;  ii.  103, 
201 

Dromgold,  Jean  :  i.  93,  321,  322  ;  ii.  13 

Drummond,  Mrs.  :  ii.  129 

Dryden,  John  :  ii.  184 

Duels  :  i.  36  ;  ii.  206 

Dumenil,  Mdlle.  :  i.  98 

Dumouriez,  Charles  Franpois,  General  : 

ii.  288,  289,  293 
Dunbar,  Mr.  :  ii.  268 
Dunbar,  Mrs.  :  i.  168  j  ii.  268 
Duncan,  Adam,  Viscount,  Admiral : 
"•  33z>  333-  337-  339 


Duncan,  Lady  Mary  :  ii.  178 
Duncannon,  Viscountess  :  ii.  170 
Dundas,  Henry,  afterwards  1st  Viscount 
Melville  :  ii.  236,  237 
Dungean,  Mr.  :  i.  178 
Dunk  :  see  Halifax 
Duperron,  Madame  :  i.  323 
Duras,  Marquis  de  :  ii.  297 
Durham,  Bishop  of  (John  Egert  on) 
ii.  10 1,  1 1 3,  347 
Dyer,  John  :  ii.  1 10 

Eden,  William  :  ii.  42,  47 
Eden,  Mrs.  :  ii.  42 
Edmonds,  Mr.  :  i.  203 
Edwin,  Kitty  :  ii.  27,  28 
Effingham,  Thomas,  2nd  Earl  of :  i.  76 
Egerton,  Lady  Sophia  :  ii.  188 
Eglinton,  Alexander,  9th  Earl  of :  i. 
146  n. 

Eglinton,  Archibald,  nth  Earl  of:  i. 
332-  333-  33S 

Egmont,  John,  2nd  Earl  of,  cypher  :  i.  19, 
46,  134 

Egremont,  Charles  Wyndham,  2nd  Earl 
of :  i.  59,  170  ;  ii.  330 
Egremont,  Lady  :  i.  176 
Elections  :  i.  126,  167,  169,  170,  182, 
245,  289  ;  ii.  169-171,  223,  304 
Electress  Palatine,  Queen  of  Bohemia  : 
ii.  40 

Eliott,  General  Sir  George:  ii.  128, 
I29 

Elizabeth,  Queen  of  England  :  i.  63,  152, 
158,  159,  293,  294,  33s;  ii.  141, 
222 

Elizabeth,  Empress  of  Russia  :  i.  124 
Elizabeth,  Madame  (sister  of  Louis 
XVI.)  :  i.  335 
Elliot,  Sir  Gilbert  :  i.  20,  23 
Elliot,  Sir  Gilbert,  3rd  Bart,  of  Minto  : 

i.  144,  147 

Elliott,  Dr.  (Sir  John)  :  i.  290,  291 
Elliott,  Mrs.  Grace  Dalrymple  :  i.  290, 
29 1 

Ellis,  Welbore,  afterwards  Baron  Men- 
dip  :  ii.  269 
Ellwys  :  see  Elwes 
Elwes,  John  :  i.  289 
Emerson,  William  :  i.  226,  301 
Emilie,  Princess  (King  of  Prussia’s 
sister)  :  i.  56,  58 

Emin,  Joseph:  i.  xii,  16,  228,  230; 

ii.  364 

Eon,  Charles,  Chevalier  d’ :  i.  68,  69,  322 
Erasmus,  Desiderius  :  i.  67 
Errol,  John  Crawfurd  of  :  i.  194 
Erskine,  Lady  Ann  :  ii.  27 


376 


INDEX 


Erskine,  David  Montagu,  2nd  Baron  : 
ii.  30,  245 

Erskine,  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  1st 
Baron  :  ii.  30 

Erskine,  Thomas,  1st  Baron  :  ii.  30,  31, 
4.2,  87,  244,  245 

Espinasse,  Mademoiselle  de  1’:  i.  11, 
322 

Essay  on  Shakespeare  :  see  Shakespeare 
Essay  on  Woman  :  i.  80,  87,  118;  ii. 

”4 

Essex,  Robert  Devereux,  Earl  of  :  i.  152 
Essex,  5th  Earl  of  :  ii.  1 1 3 
Estaing,  Charles,  Comte  D’  :  ii.  62,  63 
Esterhasi,  Princess  :  i.  55,  56 
Eugene,  Prince  Francois  :  ii.  90 
Evans,  Mr.  :  ii.  247 
Evelina,  by  Frances  Burney  :  ii.  264, 
268 

Exeter,  Brownlow,  9th  Earl  of  :  i.  274 
Exeter,  Dean  of  :  ii.  114 
Exmouth,  Edward  Pellew,  Viscount  : 
ii.  293,  294 

Falmouth,  George  Evelyn,  3rd  Viscount : 
ii.  21 1 

Falmouth,  Viscountess  (Elizabeth 
Crewe)  :  i.  1 17  ;  ii.  21 1 
Farquhar,  Sir  Walter  :  ii.  228 
Fastolf,  Sir  John,  of  Caister  :  ii.  337 
Fauconbridge,  Lord  :  i.  201 
Faulder,  bookseller  :  ii.  232 
Faulkner,  Thomas  :  ii.  343 
Fawkener,  Sir  Everard  :  ii.  202 
Fawkener,  Mrs.  Georgiana  Anne  :  ii. 
202,  203 

Fawkener,  William  Augustus  :  ii.  202, 
206 

Feather  work  :  i.  282  ;  ii.  202,  228, 
236-257 

Featherstone,  Sir  Henry  :  ii.  181 
Featherstone,  Lady:  ii.  181 
Fector,  Mr.  :  i.  3 14 
Ferdinand,  Charles  William  :  see  Bruns¬ 
wick 

Ferguson,  Adam  :  i.  264 
Ferishta,  Mohammed  :  i.  174 
Fermor  :  see  Clayton,  Lady  Louisa 
Fielding,  Captain  :  ii.  94,  127 
Fielding,  Henry  :  ii.  223 
Fielding,  Mrs.  Sarah  :  i.  158,  166  ;  ii. 

113,144,302 
Fielding,  Sir  John  :  ii.  86 
Finberg,  Mrs.  :  ii.  57 
Finch,  Lady  Charlotte  :  i.  92,  132,  169, 
261,  309  ;  ii.  302,  314 
Finch,  George,  afterwards  9th  Earl  of 
Winchilsea  :  i.  92  ;  ii.  94 


Finch,  Miss  :  i.  180 
Finch,  William  (son  of  7th  Earl  of  Win¬ 
chilsea)  :  i.  92,  132 
Fitzgerald,  G.  R.  :  i.  275 
Fitzgerald,  Lord  Edward  :  ii.  335 
Fitzgerald,  Percy  :  i.  196,  213 
Fitzherbert,  Mr.  :  ii.  71 
Fitzherbert,  Mrs.  :  ii.  207 
Fitzherbert,  William  :  i.  87,  88 
Fitzjames,  Edouard,  Due  de  :  ii.  239 
Fitzpatrick,  Lady  Louisa  :  ii.  45 
Fitzpatrick,  Mr.  :  i.  203  ;  ii.  46 
Fitzwilliam,  William  Wentworth,  2nd 
Earl  :  ii.  323 
Fizes,  Dr.  :  i.  239 
Flaxman,  John,  R.A.  :  ii.  284 
Fletcher,  John  :  ii.  145 
Fleury,  Cardinal  :  ii.  216 
Floids,  Miss  :  ii.  22 
Flood,  Mrs.  :  ii.  77 
Foley,  Lady  :  i.  100 
Foley,  Thomas,  2nd  Lord  :  i.  132 
Foote,  Samuel  :  i.  75,  120,  358 
Forbes,  Lady  :  i.  238 
Forbes,  Miss  Margaret,  author  of 
Beattie  and  his  Friends',  i.  251,  271  ; 
ii.  183 

Forbes,  Sir  William,  of  Pitsligo  :  ii.  279 
Forbes,  William,  14th  Lord  :  i.  145 
Ford,  John  :  ii.  145 
Fordyce,  Alexander  :  i.  259 
Fordyce,  Margaret,  nee  Lindsay  :  ii. 

230-231,  315 
Forster,  Mr.  :  ii.  324 
Fortescue,  Hugh  :  ii.  77 
Fortescue,  Matthew,  2nd  Baron  :  i. 
126  n. 

Fortescue,  Mr.  (nephew  of  Lord  Cler¬ 
mont)  :  ii.  339 
“  Foster  ”  :  ii.  93 
Fothergill,  Dr.  John  :  ii.  67,  107 
Foulon,  Joseph  Francois  :  ii.  252 
Fouquier-Tinville,  Antoine  Quentin  : 

11.  286 

Fox,  Charles  James  :  i.  203,  282  ;  ii. 
1 17,  169-171,  224,  227,  243,  260, 
263,  290,  319,  32 s,  326 
Fox,  Henry,  1st  Baron  Holland  :  i.  11, 
36,  37  ;  peerage,  42,  174,  343 
Fraine,  Miss  :  i.  180 
Framptons  :  ii.  88 

Francis  I.,  Emperor  of  Austria  :  ii.  325 
Francis  II.,  King  of  France  :  ii.  40 
Francis,  Sir  Philip  :  ii.  204,  222 
Francklin,  Thomas  :  i.  282 
Franklin,  Benjamin  :  i.  341,  348  ;  ii. 

12,  65,  196,  248 
Fraser,  John  :  ii.  316 


INDEX 


377 


Frederick  the  Great,  King  of  Prussia  : 

i.  43,  58,  128,  139,  148,  236  :  ii.  39, 
40,  1 10 

Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  son  of 
George  II.  :  i.  90,  92 
Frederick,  Prince,  2nd  son  of  George 
III. :  see  York,  Frederick,  Duke  of 
Freind,  Rev.  Robert  :  i.  2 
Fremonger,  Mr.  :  ii.  181 
French  Revolution,  Reflections  on,  Ed¬ 
mund  Burke’s  :  ii.  247,  248,  250  282 
French  travel  :  i.  314-318 
Frost,  Thomas  :  ii.  79 
Fugels,  Greffier  :  i.  59 
Furneaux,  Tobias  :  ii.  31 
Fyvie,  John  :  i.  6  ;  ii.  1 

Gage,  General  Thomas  :  i.  284 
Gaillard,  Gabriel  :  i.  340 
Gainsborough,  Baptist  Noel,  4th  Earl 
of :  ii.  251 

Gandon,  James  :  ii.  83 
Garrick,  David  :  i.  xii,  7,  14,  35,  99, 
194,  224,  227,  233,  243,  244,  248- 
250,  252,  255,  256,  263,  266,  271, 
280,  284,  297,  306,  334,  349-364, 

365,  366,  369  ;  ii.  9,  15,  18,  23,  42, 
43,  45,  64,  67,  hi,  118,  162,  301, 
33*’  35+ 

Garrick,  Mrs.  :  i.  227,  243,  244,  249, 
250,  252,  350,  35 1,  353,  362,  364- 

366,  368,  369  ;  ii.  6,  42,  43,  64,  1 1 1, 
1 1 8,  138,  182,  192,  213,  218,  316, 
317,  324,  364 

Garth,  Sir  Samuel  :  i.  301 
Gatti,  Signor  :  i.  98 
Gay,  John  :  ii.  103,  366 
Gaye,  Lady  :  i.  38 
Genlis,  Mdme.  de  :  ii.  126 
GeofFrin,  Marie  Therese,  Madame  :  i. 
II,  322,  323 

George  I.  :  i.  344  ;  ii.  40 
•  George  II.  :  i.  90,  91,  217,  344 ;  ii.  53 
George  III.:  i.  12,  13,  16;  cypher,  19; 
21,  22,  27,  37,  42,  43,  62,  70,  76,  86, 
88,  89,  92,  99,  124,  1 3 1,  134,  137, 
138,  141,  157,  176,  178,  181,  215, 

226,  232,  234,  236,  245,  263,  266, 

271,  306,  310,  -111,  343  ;  ii.  2 3,  46, 

55>  5*’  63-  75-  *4’  97>  *°5>  *  H>  1  *7’ 

122,  170,  193,  206,  210,  221,  222, 

226,  227,  228,  246,  251,  257,  259, 

260,  266,  276,  281,  282,  287,  288, 

294,  302,  313.  317,  318,  319,  367 
George,  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards 
George  IV.  :  i.  27,  32  n.,  34,  92  ; 

ii.  66,  114,  118,  128,  170,  1 7 1 ,  173, 
174,  1 8 1,  207,  227,  230,  245,  247, 


248,  260,  262,  263,  294,  299,  309, 

3«3’  3*4>  3*7’  31*’  325>  326’  33°  > 
for  Princess  of  Wales,  see  Caroline 
Amelia  Elizabeth  of  Brunswick 
Germain,  Lady  Betty  :  i.  102,  103, 
*32 

Germain,  Lord  George  Sackville  :  i.  23, 
258 

Germain,  Lady  George  :  i.  238 
Gesner,  Konrad  von  :  i.  88 
Gibbon,  Edward  :  i.  310,  337  ;  ii.  24 
Gibraltar  :  ii.  128-129 
Gideon,  Sampson  :  i.  38  ;  ii.  83 
Gideon,  Mrs.  Sampson  :  i.  38 
Gilbank,  Mr.  (tutor  to  Matthew  M.)  : 
1 37 

Gilpin,  Sawrey  :  ii.  282 
Gilpin,  William  :  ii.  282 
Gloucester,  Bishop  of :  see  Warburton, 
William 

Gloucester,  Maria,  Duchess  of  :  ii.  239, 
260, 281 

Gloucester,  William  Henry,  Duke  of, 
brother  of  George  III.  :  i.  21,  251  ; 
ii.  259,  281,  336 

Glover,  Richard,  “  Spartan  ”  :  i.  249 
Gluck,  Christopher  :  ii.  1  5 
Glyn  and  Hallifax,  bankers  :  i.  260 
Godolphin,  Francis,  2nd  Earl  :  i.  4 
Godwin’s  Library,  Bath  :  i.  296 
Goethe,  Johann  Wolfgang  :  i.  237 
Goldsmith,  Oliver  :  ii.  9 
Gonzages,  Prince  de  :  ii.  13 
Gordon,  4th  Duke  of  :  ii.  237 
Gordon,  Jane,  Duchess  of,  wife  of  4th 
Duke  :  ii.  236,  237,  299 
Gordon,  Lord  George  :  ii.  86,  89,  92, 

93’  96>  97>  *96’  *97’  245 
Gordon,  Miss  :  ii.  169 
Gordon,  Mrs.  :  ii.  175 
Gordon,  Mrs.  :  ii.  205 
Gordon  of  Gight,  Catherine,  married 
Captain  Byron  :  ii.  65 
Gordon  Riots  :  ii.  86-91,  194 
Goulton,  Mrs.  :  ii.  55 
Gower,  Granville  Leveson,  Earl  :  i. 

142  ;  ii.  1 17,  282 
Gower,  Lady  Leveson  :  i.  274 
Grafton,  Augustus  Henry,  3rd  Duke  of  : 
i.  138,  142,  1 8 1 ,  184,  194,  221,  222- 
230,  244,  245  ;  ii.  1 17,  174  ;  auto¬ 
biography,  129 
Graham,  James  :  ii.  66 
Graham,  Mr.  (Tom  Lyttelton’s  tutor)  : 
‘■33 

Graham,  William  :  ii.  65,  66 
Grainge,  W.  :  i.  74 
Granard,  Lady  :  ii.  50 


378 


INDEX 


Granby,  John  Manners,  Marquis  of  :  i. 
32,42,98 

Granby,  Lady  :  ii.  44 
Grantham,  Thomas,  2nd  Baron  :  ii.  139, 
252 

Grantham,  Lady  :  ii.  201 
Granville,  John  Carteret,  Earl  :  i.  120, 
344 

Grattan,  Henry:  ii.  323,  338 
Gray,  Thomas  :  i.  150,  151,  174,  175, 
178,  246  ;  ii.  29,  32,  134,  164,  364 
Gregory,  Dr.  John:  i.  143-147,  152, 
233,  238,  239,  241,  249,  2ji,  269  ; 
death,  270;  ii.  SS,  1 75“ 1 77»  I9r> 
3 S2>  353 

Gregory,  Dorothea,  afterwards  Mrs. 
Alison  :  i.  143,  148,  258,  270,  284, 
300-302,  312,  314,  316,  320,  328, 
335.  336>  35i.  352>  360-362  ;  ii.  15, 
22,  23,  33,  58,  84,  92,  hi,  11 9,  1 2 1, 
122,  125,  129,  131-132,  135,  136, 
138,  169,  171,  172,  175-177,  186, 
187,  191,  361,  363 
Gregory,  Mrs.  :  i.  144,  238 
Grenville,  George  :  cypher,  i.  19,  20,  23, 
36,  45,  69,  82,  137,  138,  156,  221, 
253,  254;  ii.  237 
Grenville,  James  :  i.  87 
Grenville,  Miss  Charlotte  :  i.  253,  254 
Grenville,  Mrs.  :  i.  233 
Grenville,  William  Wyndham  :  ii.  236, 
237,  248 

Grey,  Sir  Charles,  afterwards  1st  Earl  : 
ii.  325,  326 

Griffiths,  Mr.,  M.P.  :  i.  288,  289 
Grimm,  Frederick  :  i.  337 
Grosvenor,  Sir  Richard,  1st  Earl  :  i.  98 
Guerchy,  General  Claude  Franqois, 
Comte  de  :  i.  68,  69,  125 
Guerchy,  Madame  de  :  i.  321 
Guichens,  Mons.  de  :  ii.  94,  96 
Guilford,  Francis,  1st  Earl  of:  i.  21 
Gumley,  Anna  Maria  :  Countess  of 
Bath  :  i.  17 

Gunning,  the  Misses  :  ii.  170 

Hackman,  James  :  ii.  70 
Haggerdorn,  Mrs.  :  i.  343 
Hagley  :  i.  22-24,  234,  248,  250,  252, 
262 

Hailstone,  John  :  ii.  337 
Halifax,  George  Montagu  Dunk,  2nd 
Earl  of:  i.  16;  cypher,  19,  21,  37,  69, 
70,  77,  82,  182  ;  ii.  204 
Hall-Stevenson,  John  :  i.  198,  199,  208 
Hamilton,  Gawen,  painter  :  ii.  56 
Hamilton,  James,  6  th  Duke  of:  i.  216 
Hamilton,  Lady,  ne'e  Emma  Lyon  :  ii.  66 


Hamilton,  Miss  :  ii.  139 
Hamilton,  Mr.,  of  Cobham  :  i.  123 
Hamilton,  Sir  William  :  ii.  139,  310 
Hamilton,  William  Gerard,  “  Single¬ 
speech  ”  :  i.  49  ;  ii.  1 39 
Hamilton,  W.,  painter :  see  Hamilton, 
Gawen 

Hancock,  Mrs.  :  i.  250,  306,  368  ;  ii. 

35,  184,  212 
Hanmer,  Lady  :  i.  307 
Hanway,  Jonas  :  i.  236-238  ;  ii.  364 
Harcourt,  Simon,  1st  Earl  :  ii.  33,  35-3 7 
Harcourt,  George  Simon,  2nd  Earl  :  ii. 
61,  1 18 

Harcourt,  Lady:  ii.  118,  177,  191,  228 
Hardman’s  Rappee,  No.  37  :  ii.  84 
Hardwicke,  Philip  Yorke,  1st  Earl  of : 
cypher,  i.  19  ;  67,  68,  71,  80-82,  100, 
345>.347 

Hardwicke,  Philip,  2nd  Earl  of  :  i.  80, 

344  i  “.49,  io4>  io9>  II0>  i33>  r34» 
163,  164,  168,  169,  230,  244,  314- 
316 

Hardwicke,  Lady  (wife  of  1st  Earl)  :  i. 

68 

Hardwicke,  Lady  (wife  of  2nd  Earl)  :  ii. 
314 

Hardy,  Mr.  :  ii.  32, 

Hardy,  Sir  Charles  :  ii.  72,  74,  76 
Harley,  Margaret  Cavendish :  see  Port¬ 
land,  Duchess  of 
Harley,  Sheriff  Thomas  :  i.  77 
Harrel,  Mr.  :  ii.  121 
Harrel,  Mrs.  :  ii.  12 1 
Harris,  James,  “  Hermes  ”  :  i.  226,  233, 
287,  292,  308,  309,  343  ;  ii.  100 
Harrison,  John  (horologist)  :  i.  16 
Harrowby,  Dudley  Ryder,  1st  Earl  of  : 
ii.  137,  300 

Harrowby,  Lady  :  ii.  300 
Harrington,  Marquis  of :  see  Spencer, 
William,  afterwards  6th  Duke  of 
Devonshire 

Hartley,  David,  sen.  :  ii.  196 
Hartley,  David  :  ii.  64,  65,  196 
Hartley,  Mrs.  Elizabeth:  i.  275;  ii. 
195,  196 

Hartly  House ,  Calcutta  :  ii.  256 
Harvey,  Eliab  :  ii.  179 
Haslory,  Count  :  ii.  339 
Hastings,  Warren  :  ii.  194,  195,  197, 
204,  211,  222,  267 
Hatchett,  Charles  :  ii.  343 
Hattbn,  Mrs.  :  ii.  22 
Hawke,  Edward,  Lord  :  ii.  51 
Hawkesworth,  Dr.  John  :  i.  279,  280 
Hawkesworth,  Mrs.  :  ii.  61 
Hawkins,  Sir  John  :  ii.  9 


INDEX 


379 


Hawkins,  Miss  :  ii.  158 
Hayley,  S.  :  ii.  218 
Heath,  Mr.  :  ii.  68 
Heberden,  Dr.  William  :  i.  107,  108 
Hell  Fire  Club  :  i.  21,  31,  43,  69 
Helvetius,  Claude  Adrien  :  i.  97 
Henley,  Lord  :  i.  20 
Herbert,  Mr.  :  i.  268 
Herries,  Sir  Robert  :  ii.  308 
Herries,  Lady  :  ii.  308 
Herschel,  Sir  William  :  ii.  343 
Hertford,  Francis,  1st  Earl  of  :  i.  99 
Hervey,  John,  Lord  :  i.  85,  91 
Hervey,  Rt.  Hon.  Augustus  John  :  see 
Bristol,  3rd  Earl  of 

Hervey,  Lady  (widow  of  John  Hervey 
of  Ickworth)  :  i.  36,  84,  85,  90,  91, 
93,  99,  107,  120,  141,  148,  149,  168, 
169,  172,  176  ;  death,  177,  178  ; 
ii.  349 

Hervey,  Lieutenant  :  see  Bristol,  3rd 
Earl  of 

Hervey,  Miss  :  i.  369  ;  ii.  118,  342 
Hervey,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  :  i.  125,  126  ; 
ii.  271 

Hervey,  Thomas  :  i.  1 8  r ,  307 
Hesse  Darmstadt,  Prince  of  :  i.  358 
Hetherington’s  Bounty  :  ii.  153 
Hewitt,  James,  Sergeant  (afterwards 
Lord  Lifford)  :  i.  87 
Hickey,  William  :  ii.  180,  190,  204 
Hillsborough,  Wills  Hill,  Viscount  : 

cypher,  i.  19;  312,325,332 
Hillsborough,  Lady  :  i.  312,  325,  332 
Hinchingbroke,  John,  Lord  (afterwards 
5th  Earl  of  Sandwich)  :  i.  132 
Hoare,  Mr.  (banker)  :  i.  260,  351  ;  ii. 

65,  207,  235,  247 
Hoare,  William  :  i.  27  ;  ii.  168 
Hoche,  General  Lazare  :  ii.  334 
Hogarth,  William  :  i.  88  ;  ii.  114 
Holderness,  Robert  D’Arcy,  Earl  of : 
ii.  65 

Holford,  Mrs.  :  i.  170 
Holland,  Henry  Fox,  1st  Baron  :  see 
Fox,  Henry 

Holies,  Pelham  :  see  Clare 
Holloway,  Thomas  :  ii.  129 
Home,  Henry  :  see  Karnes 
Hood,  Mr.  :  i.  353 
Hood,  Mrs.,  nee  West  :  i.  22,  353 
Hood,  Samuel,  1st  Viscount  :  ii.  223, 
224,  293,  314 

Hood,  Susannah  Lady  :  ii.  223-224 
Hookham,  publisher  :  ii.  50 
Hope,  Mr.  :  ii.  330 

Horne,  Rev.  John,  Rector  of  Brentford 
(Horne  Tooke)  :  i.  170 


Horton,  Christopher:  ii.  281 
Horton,  Mrs.  (Nancy  Parsons,  Anne 
Luttrell)  :  i.  222,  2J1  ;  ii.  259,  281 
Hotham,  Sir  Henry  :  ii.  323 
House  of  Commons  :  cypher,  i.  20 
House  of  Lords  :  cypher,  i.  20 
Howe,  Mrs.  (sister  of  Lord  Howe)  :  i. 
341  ;  ii.  41,  301 

Howe,  Richard,  Admiral  Lord  :  i.  335, 
341,  342  ;  ii.  41,  42,  127,  129,  250, 
295,  296,  301,  302,  316 
Howe,  Lady:  ii.  127,  302 
Howe,  Sir  William  :  1.341,342;  ii.  16, 
17,  44,  62 

Hubbard,  Mrs.  :  ii.  1 1 8 
Huchon,  Monsieur  :  i.  J,  338  ;  ii.  1, 
36S 

Huggins,  William  :  i.  240 
Humbert,  General  Jean  Joseph  :  ii.  338 
Hume,  David  :  i.  148,  149,  194,  203, 
233.  2Si  i  “•  55 
Hunter,  Miss  Kitty:  i.  15 
Huntingdon,  Earl  of  :  ii.  300 
Huntingdon,  Selina,  Countess  of  :  i.  29  ; 
ii.  26,  27,  28 

Hurd,  Bishop  Richard  :  ii.  134 
Hutchinson,  John  Hely,  Prime  Ser¬ 
geant  :  i.  252 

Hutchinson,  Thomas  :  i.  220 
Hutton,  James  :  i.  343 
Hyder  Ali  :  i.  219,  229 

I’Anson,  Mr.  :  i.  140 

Inchiquin,  William,  4th  Earl  of  :  ii.  35 

Influenza  :  i.  193,  306  ;  ii.  118,  224 

Inoculation  :  i.  1 55 

Ireland:  ii.  62-63,  I72>  z94,  335,  338 

Irwin,  General  :  i.  248,  249 

Isaacson,  Mr.  :  i.  134 

James,  Dr.  Robert:  i.  163 
James,  Mrs.  (Sterne’s  friend)  :  i.  193, 
194,  198,  207-210,  212;  ii.  151 
Jebb,  Sir  Richard  :  ii.  1 1 1,  1 19,  133,  270 
Jefferson,  Thomas  :  i.  342  ;  ii.  237 
Jemmy  Twitcher  :  see  Sandwich,  4th 
Earl  of 

Jenyns,  Mrs.  :  ii.  218 
Jenyns,  Soame  :  ii.  1 18,  218,  219,  220 
Jerningham,  Edward  :  ii.  126,  188,  189, 
195)  r97>  218,  219,  229,  247,  297, 
301 

Jersey,  Lady  (wife  of  4th  Earl),  nee  Twis- 
den  :  ii.  317,  318,  324 
Jervis,  John  :  see  St.  Vincent 
Johnson,  Dr.  Samuel  :  i.  xii,  3,  5,  10, 
122,  126,  1 3 1,  ijo,  218,  225,  231, 
236,  240,  242,  251,  270,  272,  280, 


INDEX 


38° 

289,  295,  301,  349,  369  ;  ii.  3,  5,  7, 
8,  9,  19,  25,  26,  39,  43,  45,  56,  60, 
70,  71,  90,  109,  no,  1 14,  1 18,  123, 
125,  133,  134,  140  et  seq.,  169,  176, 
182,  199,  218,  219,  220,  229,  233, 
237,  264,  265,  269-277,  304,  3J2, 
36S>  367 

Johnstone,  George  :  ii.  47 
Johnstone,  Dr.  James  :  ii.  105,  106 
Johnstone,  Mrs.  William,  nee  Pulteney  : 

i.  40,  114,  1 1 8,  130,  164,  165;  ii. 
11 5 

Johnstone,  William,  afterwards  Pul¬ 
teney  (married  Frances,  4th  daughter 
of  Daniel  Pulteney,  Lord  Bath’s 
cousin)  :  i.  164,  165,  168,  260  ;  ii. 
125,  171,  172,  175,  176,  177 
Jones,  Inigo  :  i.  232 
Jones,  Mr.,  afterwards  Sir  William  : 

ii.  50,  84,  85 

Jones,  Paul  :  ii.  72,  73,  74 
Jordan,  Dorothy,  Mrs.  :  i.  349  ;  ii.  203, 
294>  338 

Joseph  II.  of  Austria  :  ii.  41,  196 
Jourdan,  Jean  Baptiste,  Comte  :  ii.  323, 
32+>  325 

Junius  (author  of  Letters  of)  :  i.  33,  179, 
230,  232,  234,  236,  244,  24 J,  262, 
266  ;  ii.  23,  78,  79,  222 
Junius  Junior  :  ii.  205 
Juvenal  :  i.  78,  230,  245 

Kames,  Henry  Home,  Lord  :  i.  144, 
i+7>  i55  5 55,  I29>  !32>  352 

KaufFmann,  Angelica  :  ii.  241 
Kearsly  (publisher)  :  i.  2 1 3 
Keith,  General  George  Keith  Elphin- 
stone,  1st  Viscount  :  i.  16  ;  ii.  345 
Keith,  Robert  :  i.  251  ;  ii.  40 
Kennicott,  Dr.  Benjamin  :  ii.  108 
Kennicott,  Mrs.  :  i.  351 
Keppel,  Augustus,  Admiral,  afterwards 
Viscount  :  ii.  14,  63,  65,  74,  128 
Keppel,  Miss  Laura  :  ii.  173 
Keppel,  Mrs.,  married  Bishop  of  Exeter: 
.iL  *73 

Kidgell,  John  :  i.  79,  80 
Kilmer,  Lord  :  i.  338 
King,  Edward  :  i.  90 
King,  Thomas  :  i.  354 
King’s  Bench  Prison  :  i.  183 
Kingston,  Duchess  of  :  see  Chudleigh 
Kingston,  Evelyn  Pierrepont,  2nd  Duke 
of  :  i.  181,  215,  217 
Kinnoull,  Thomas,  8th  Earl  of  :  i.  238, 
264 

Kippis,  Andrew  :  ii.  139 
Kit  Cat  Club  :  i.  232 


Kneller,  Sir  Godfrey  :  i.  122 
Knight,  Lady  :  ii.  167 

Lackington,  James  :  ii.  292,  293 
Lafayette,  Marquis  de  :  ii.  18,  245,  252, 
2 5 3,  256,  286,  297,  326 
Lainston  :  i.  216,  217 
La  Jard,  Mons.  :  ii.  326 
Lamb,  Charles  :  i.  297 
Lamballe,  Princesse  de  :  ii.  246 
Lambert,  Mr.  (attorney)  :  ii.  30 
Lameth,  Charles  :  ii.  253 
LandafF,  Earl  of  :  ii.  235 
Lane  Fox,  Lady  Bridget  :  i.  232 
Langdale’s  Distillery  :  ii.  87 
Langland,  Robert  de  :  i.  78 
Langton,  Bennet  :  i.  240;  ii.  9,  218, 
219,  229 

Lapidge,  Mr.  (L.  Brown’s  successor)  : 
ii.  134,  135 

Lauderdale,  James,  8th  Earl  of  :  ii.  329, 

33° 

Lecky,  William  Edward  Hartpole  :  i. 
17  ;  ii.  12 

Lee,  Richard  Henry  :  ii.  12 

Leeds,  Thomas  Osborne,  4th  Duke  of : 

i.  170  ;  ii.  325,  326 

Leicester,  Thomas  Coke,  Earl  of :  ii. 
229 

Leigh,  Colonel  George  :  ii.  65 
Lekain,  Henri  Louis  :  i.  312,  313,  334 ; 

ii.  54 

Lennox,  Colonel  :  ii.  236,  237 
Lennox,  Lady  Charlotte  :  ii.  236,  237 
Lennox,  Lady  Sarah  :  i.  126  n. 

Leon,  Prince  de  :  ii.  286,  297,  298 
Leon,  Princesse  de  :  ii.  286,  298 
Lepell,  Mary  :  see  Hervey,  Lady 
Letourneur,  Pierre  :  i.  312,  338  ;  ii.  12 
Letters  from  Torick  to  Eliza,  by  Sterne  : 
ii.  20 

Lever,  Sir  Ashton  :  ii.  36 
Lever’s  Action  :  ii.  244-24; 

Leveson,  Mrs.  :  i.  274 
Leveson  Gower,  Lady  Mary  :  i.  222 
Levett,  Robert  :  ii.  167 
Lewis,  Prince  of  Brunswick  :  i.  59,  60 
Ligonier,  John,  1st  Earl  :  i.  42,  190  ; 
ii.  259 

Lindsay,  Lady  Anne  :  see  Barnard,  Lady 
Anne 

Lindsay,  Margaret  :  see  Fordyce 
Lindsey  House  :  i.  178 
Litchfield,  George  Lee,  3rd  Earl  of  :  i. 
21 

Lives  of  the  Poets  (Johnson’s)  :  ii.  109, 
no,  134,  140  et  seq.,  156,  163 
Livry,  Suzanne  de  :  ii.  J4 


INDEX 


Llandaff,  Bishop  of  :  ii.  218,  300 
Locke,  John  :  i.  268  ;  ii.  233,  261, 
3H 

Locke,  William  :  ii.  243,  267,  295, 
296 

Lothian,  Elizabeth  Fortescue,  Marchion¬ 
ess  of  :  ii.  1 1 5 

Lothian,  William  John,  5th  Marquess 
of  :  ii.  1 15 

Louis  XIV.  of  France  :  i.  326  n. 

Louis  XV.  of  France  :  i.  98,  99,  282, 
z83>  333 

Louis  XVI.  of  France  :  i.  33;  ;  ii.  214, 
21 S,  216,  217,  231,  234,  237,  258, 
262,  283-286,  290,  291,  297,  307 
Lounsbury,  Mr.  Thomas  :  i.  338 
Love,  alias  George  Dance  :  i.  35 
Lowth,  Dr.  Robert,  Bishop  of  London  : 
i.  134,  135 

Lowther,  Sir  James  :  i.  98 

Lowther,  Lady  Mary  :  i.  178 

Lucan,  Charles  Bingham,  1st  Earl  of : 

>■  312.  335>  336  5  43>  339 

Lucan,  Lady  :  i.  326,  335,  365  ;  ii.  43, 
124,  128,  156,  181 
Lumley,  Lydia  :  i.  185 
Lunardi,  Vincenzo  :  ii.  208 
Luttrell,  Henry  Lawes  :  i.  221,  236 
Luttrell,  Lady  Elizabeth  (Betsy)  :  ii. 
260,  281,  282 

Luttrell,  Simon,  1st  Earl  of  Carhamp- 
ton  :  ii.  259 

Luxemburgh,  Due  de  :  ii.  239 
Luxemburgh,  Duchesse  de  :  ii.  239 
Lysons,  Daniel  :  ii.  276,  278 
Lyttelton,  Aphia,  Lady  (wife  of  2nd 
Lord)  :  i.  262,  275,  280  ;  ii.  106 
Lyttelton,  Charles  :  see  Carlisle,  Bishop 
of 

Lyttelton,  George,  1st  Lord  :  i.  vi,  4,  6, 
9,  cypher,  19  ;  20,  22,  25,  27,  30-33, 
36-38,  42,  43,  64,  68,  71,  77,  79,  84, 
89,  101,  107,  109,  no,  113,  114, 
117,  121,  122,  124,  126,  138,  139, 

141,  149,  155,  165,  168,  172,  178, 

183,  184,  223,  226,  230,  231,  234, 

244,  246,  247,  249-253,  255,  257, 

262,  263,  266,  271,  274  ;  death, 
276-279;  291,  310,  350,  354,  355, 
359,  366;  ii.  71,  109,  no,  132- 
134,  148,  150,  156,  159,  160,  163, 
164,  176,  349,  350,  352,  354,  364 
Lyttelton,  George  Fulke,  Lord  West- 
cote’s  son  :  ii.  1 35 

Lyttelton,  Lucy,  Lady  (first  wife  of  1st 
Lord)  :  i.  126  n. 

Lyttelton,  Miss  (1st  Lord  Lyttelton’s 
sister)  :  i.  22 


38I 

Lyttelton,  Sir  Richard  (brother  of  1st 
Lord)  :  i.  149 

Lyttelton,  Thomas,  2nd  Lord  :  i.  29, 
33,  42,  1 17,  1 2 1,  167,  172,  255,  262, 
275,  278-280,  358;  ii.  21,  76-78, 
105-10 7,  364 

Lyttelton,  Thomas  :  see  Cobham 
Lyttelton,  William  Henry,  Governor  of 
Jamaica  :  i.  249 

Macartney,  Sir  George:  i.  168,  169; 

ii.  178,  206,  211,  250 
Macaulay,  Lord  :  ii.  144 
Macaulay,  Mrs.  Catharine  :  i.  230,  234  ; 
ii.  64,  65,  68 

Macdonald,  Sir  Archibald,  Lord  Chief 
Baron  :  i.  90  ;  ii.  3 14 
Macdonald,  Sir  James  :  i.  89,  90,  94- 
96,  105,  146,  149,  194;  ii.  132, 
363 

Macdonald,  John  :  i.  194 
Macdonald,  Lady  Louisa  (wife  of  Sir 
Archibald)  :  ii.  314 

Macdonald,  Lady  Margaret  :  i.  146  «., 
335 

Mackreth,  Robert  :  ii.  214 
Mackreth,  Mrs.  :  ii.  95 
Macpherson,  James  :  i.  91,  257,  258 
Macpherson,  Sir  John  :  i.  266 
Macreadv,  William  Charles  :  ii.  301 
Madan,  Martin  :  ii.  27,  28 
Mahan,  Alfred  :  i.  342 
Mahon,  Lord  :  see  Stanhope,  3rd  Earl 
Malden,  Lord,  afterwards  5th  Earl  of 
Essex  :  see  Essex 
Mallet,  David  :  ii.  no 
Malmesbury,  James  Harris,  1st  Earl  of  : 
i.  308  ;  ii.  324 

Malone,  Edmund:  i.  133,  224;  ii. 
167 

Manderchilde,  Count  Blanqueham  :  i. 

56 

Mann,  Sir  Horatio  :  ii.  93,  98,  250,  251 
Manners  :  see  Granby 
Mansard,  Francois  :  i.  326  n. 

Mansfield,  William  Murray,  1st  Earl 
of :  i.  68,  80,  183,  264,  306  ;  ii.  25, 
86,  89 

Marceau,  General  Fran5ois  Severin 
Desgraviers  :  ii.  324 
March,  William  Douglas,  3rd  Earl  of : 

i.  194 

Marchais,  Comtesse  de  :  i.  332 
Maria  Therese,  Empress  of  Austria  :  ii. 
41 

Marie  Antoinette,  wife  of  Louis  XVI.  : 

ii.  87,  197,  214,  215,  216,  217,  246, 
255,  258,  283-287,  297 


INDEX 


382 


Marlborough,  Caroline,  Duchess  of : 
i-  36S 

Marlborough,  George,  4th  Duke  of  :  i. 
46  ;  ii.  215 

Marlborough,  John  Churchill,  Duke  of  : 
ii.  S3.  9° 

Marlowe,  Christopher  :  ii.  145 
Marmontel,  Jean  Franpois  :  i.  11,  97 
Marsh  (or  March),  landlord  at  Salt 
Hill :  ii.  1 89,  190 
Marsh,  Mr.  (dentist)  :  i.  261  ;  ii.  22 
Martin,  Samuel  :  i.  83  ;  ii.  114 
Martin,  Sir  Theodore  :  i.  364 
Mary,  Queen  of  Scots  :  i.  145,  151,  152, 
159  i  ii-  43.33? 

Mary  de  Medici  :  i.  171 
Mason,  William  :  i.  9,  54  ;  ii.  29 
Massena,  Andre,  Due  de  Rivoli  :  ii. 
345 

Masseran,  Mdme.  de  :  ii.  126 
Masserano,  Prince  de  :  ii.  33,  126 
Massinger,  Philip  :  ii.  145 
Mathew,  General  Montagu  :  ii.  235 
Maty,  Dr.  Matthew  :  i.  130,  131 
Maxwell,  Dr.  :  ii.  154 
Mayne,  Lady,  afterwards  Lady  New- 
haven  :  i.  27 1 

Mecklenburg,  Duke  of  :  i.  13 
Medalle,  Jean  Baptiste  de  :  i.  211,  213 
Medici,  Catherine  de  :  i.  152,  293  ;  ii. 
139 

Melbourne,  Viscountess  :  ii.  170 
Melcombe,  Lord  (George  Bubb  Doding- 
ton)  :  i.  31 

Melmoth,  Courtney  :  i.  294,  295,  296 
Melmoth,  Mrs.  :  i.  297 
Mendip  :  see  Ellis,  Welbore 
Meredith,  Sir  William  :  i.  46 
Meynell,  Mr.  :  i.  203 
Meyniere,  Mdme.  de  :  ii.  38 
Middleton,  Dr.  Conyers  :  i.  2  ;  ii.  102 
Milan,  Archduke  of  :  ii.  41 
Milan,  Archduchess  of  :  ii.  41 
Miles,  Captain  :  i.  275 
Miles,  William  :  i.  290 
Milford,  Richard,  Lord  :  ii.  80 
Milton,  John  :  ii.  32,  43,  112,  269 
Minstrel,  The,  by  James  Beattie  :  i. 
241,  271 

Mirabeau,  Honore,  Comte  de  :  ii.  252, 

?53  . 

Mirepoix,  Marechalle  de  :  i.  320,  321, 
324>  333 

Moira,  Lady,  n(e  Elizabeth  Hastings, 
daughter  of  9th  Earl  of  Huntingdon  : 
i.  171,  172  ;  ii.  335 
Moira,  Lord  :  ii.  296 
Moisey,  Dr.  :  i.  288  ;  ii.  102,  104 


Mole,  Premier  President  Matthieu  :  i. 
77 

Molesworth,  Miss  :  i.  336  ;  ii.  43,  44 
Moliere,  Jean  Baptiste  :  i.  339 
Monro,  Dr.  Alexander  :  ii.  194 
Monro,  Dr.  John  :  ii.  204,  205 
Monsey,  Dr.  Messenger  :  i.  vi,  4,  20, 
22,  24,  25,  31,  32,  34,  67,  71,  90, 
108,  155,  165,  176,  250,  349,  350, 
366;  ii.  2,  3,  123,  124,  132,  138, 
35°.  36i>  364 

Montagu,  Lady  Bab  :  i.  36,  118 
Montagu,  Lord  Charles  :  i.  159 
Montagu,  Duchess  of  :  i.  168,  238,  260 
Montagu,  Edward  (E.  M.’s  husband)  : 
i.  2,  3,  5,  22,  25,  27,  29,  33,  44,  47, 
56,  60,  63,  64,  65,  81,  93,  109,  123, 

124,  140,  143,  167,  179,  183,  205, 

207,  209,  212,  226,  228,  231,  235, 

238,  244,  248,  250,  263,  264,  265, 

268,  276,  287,  288,  297,  298  ; 
death,  299,  301,  302,  314,  347; 
ii-  5.  18,  33.  37.  85>  I0°.  19°.  292. 
z93>  348>  357 

Montagu,  Edward  Wortley,  senior  :  i. 

14  ;  death  and  will  :  27 
Montagu,  Edward  Wortley,  junior  :  i. 
4,  27,  28,  29,  34 

Montagu,  Elizabeth,  parentage  and 
birth  :  i.  1  ;  girlhood  and  marriage  : 

i.  2  ;  homes  :  i.  3  ;  friends  :  i.  3,  4 ; 
appearance:  i.  4,  5,  11,354;  adverse 
critics:  i.  5-10,  11,  352-354;  her 
letters  :  i.  xi,  6,  7,  279  ;  ii.  205,  349- 
350,  354-355  ;  her  house  :  i.  8,  9  ; 
charities:  i.  164;  ii.  152,  183,  210, 
347,  365  ;  entertainments  :  i.  9,  143, 
1 6 1 ,  302,  304,  322;  ii.  118,  128, 
210,  300,  320,  358-360  ;  compari¬ 
sons  :  i.  11  ;  politics  :  i.  12,  37,  42, 
46,  72,  76,  79,  135,  157,  229,  269  ; 

ii.  41,  47,  63,  64,  74,  75,  88,  1 16  ; 

friendship  with  Lord  Bath  :  i.  18-108, 
67,  72,  85,  93-95,  no,  347;  with 
Dr.  Monsey:  i.  22,  176,  250;  ii. 
138  ;  visits  Hagley  :  i.  24,  234,  249  ; 
on  Shakespeare  :  i.  39,  122,  170,  222, 
224-227,  266,  289,  310,  338  ; 

ii.  139,  14+-151,  347,  367;  visits 
Spa,  i.  43-62;  Calais,  48,  314; 
Lisle,  53  ;  Brussels,  53  ;  Aix, 
56  ;  Cologne,  57,  60  ;  Holland, 
58-59  ;  at  Denton  :  i.  63,  157,  164, 
303  ;  ii.  135-137,  208  ;  plays  cards  : 
i.  81,  1 5 1  ;  at  Court  :  i.  23,  86,  92, 
95  ;  ii.  127,  226,  259,  281,  313  ; 
at  Sandleford  :  i.  100,  109  ;  ii.  17, 
86,  108,  109,  122,  135,  177,  182 


INDEX 


383 


201,  2 1  I,  241,  292,  299,  342;  at 
Winchester:  i.  111;  ii.  32;  on 
taxes  :  i.  140  ;  on  wills  :  i.  1 1 3,  1 19, 
131;  ii.  192-193,  312;  on  large 
rooms  :  i.  8,  127  ;  ii.  87  ;  on  ser¬ 
vants:  i.  129,  175;  ii.  360  ;  on  Lord 
Chatham:  i.  128,  130,  132,  138, 
156,  174,  243;  ii.  16,  17,41-42,  47- 
49,  51,  53  ;  visits  Scotland  :  i.  143- 
147;  on  Burke:  i.  139,  245-246, 
257  ;  ii.  41,  250  ;  on  Mary  Queen  of 
Scots  :  i.  151  ;  ii.  139  ;  on  conversa¬ 
tion  :  i.  1  5 1  ;  on  Queen  Elizabeth: 

i.  152,  159,  293  ;  ii.  222  ;  inocula¬ 
tion  :  i.  154-156  ;  on  Lord  Chester¬ 
field  :  i.  173,  270,  273,  281,  284- 
285,  345-347  j  on  the  Duchess  of 
Kingston:  i.  179,  181,  215,  217, 
306  ;  on  Wilkes  :  i.  182,  220,  245  ; 

ii.  1 14;  and  the  Sternes  :  i.  185-214; 
on  Tristram  :  i.  187,  188,  189,  197  ; 
ii.  364  ;  Dialogues  of  the  Dead :  i. 
223  ;  on  Voltaire  :  i.  222,  225,  263, 

332>  339>  36'  i  “•  54.  ‘46-H7.  H9  > 
on  Paoli  :  i.  227,  229,  231,  248-249, 
251;  on  Hanway  :  i.  236-238; 
doctors  and  ailments  :  i.  106,  109, 
154,  219,  239;  ii.  67,  188,  270; 
verses  to  :  i.  101,  244,  259,  262,  341  ; 
ii.  151,  188,  257;  on  Beattie:  i. 
251,  271,  274;  married  life:  i.  3, 
264,  287,  297,  299,  300  ;  ii.  43, 
1 19,  178,  349,  356-358  ;  at  Tun¬ 
bridge  :  i.  244,  248,  258-262  ;  ii. 
56  ;  on  Lord  Lyttelton  :  i.  277-279  ; 
a  patroness:  i.  236,  271,  295;  ii. 
99,  108,  135  ;  her  cameo  :  i.  308- 
309  ;  visit  to  Paris,  i.  31 1-335  j  at 
Chaillot,  319;  Meudon,  320; 
Versailles,  324  ;  Notre  Dame,  325  ; 
Enfans  Trouvds,  326  ;  dirt,  328  ; 
Academy,  329-331  ;  on  French 
character,  333,  339  >  on  Americans  : 
i.  348  ;  ii.  30  ;  and  David  Garrick  : 

i.  349-369  ;  hand  kissing,  i.  356  ; 
Tom  Lyttelton,  i.  255,  358  ;  the 
farewell,  364;  ii.  76-78,  106;  as  a 
Blue-Stocking  :  i.  33,  91,  166,  173, 
177,  223,  257,  263,  266,  289,  293, 
332;  ii.  1  - 1 1 ,  367  ;  friendship  with 
Mrs.  Vesey  :  i.  4,  22,  88,  161,  169, 
178,244,  249,  263,277,  3 r  5  ;  ii.  3,4, 
5,  6,  7,  22,  35,  58-60,  64,  68,  72,  95, 
183-184,214-215;  Montagu  House, 
Portman  Square  :  ii.  1  3,  61,  65,  82-84, 
ioo-ioi,  103,  111-113,  119,  241, 
242,  246-247,  257-259  ;  at  Bath  : 

ii.  14,  67,  81,  104;  Horace  Walpole 


on:  ii.  24,  37,  133,  150,  156,  191, 
277  ;  on  Dr.  Dodd  :  ii.  26  ;  and  the 
Primate:  ii.  28,  294;  on  contraband  : 
ii.  31,  127,  182;  at  Nuneham  :  ii. 
33-36  ;  on  Duchess  of  Devonshire  : 
ii.  58,  169,  239,  245,  247  ;  as  farmer: 
ii.  53,  72,  102,  121,  123  ;  and  Bos¬ 
well  :  ii.  55,  56  ;  on  Mrs.  Thrale  : 
ii.  58,  85,  177,  268-278  ;  as  colliery 
owner  :  i.  304,  3 1 1  ;  ii.  73,  102,  1 30, 
136,  304-307;  on  Gordon  Riots: 
ii.  88-93,  96,  196  ;  on  mobs  :  i.  232  ; 
ii.  88,  90,  92,  96-97,  248,  302  ;  on 
Madame  de  Sevigne  :  ii.  97  ;  her 
whisky:  ii.  in,  122,  135,  214; 
Johnson’s  Life  of  Lyttelton  :  ii.  110, 
1 1 8,  134,  156-164;  on  Lord  Rock¬ 
ingham:  ii.  120;  on  Rousseau:  ii. 
1 24- 1 25;  on  convents:  ii.  126; 
Fanny  Burney:  ii.  128,  161,261-263, 
264-268,  271-272,  274,  295-297; 
friendship  with  Dr.  Johnson  :  ii.  140- 
166  ;  on  Johnson’s  style  :  ii.  143- 
146;  his  figure,  ii.  157-158,  218; 
and  Miss  Gregory  :  ii.  131-133,  171- 
172,  175-177,  186-187,  I9I>  36*' 
363;  and  Mrs.  Yearsley  :  ii.  184- 
185  ;  on  Warren  Hastings  :  ii.  195, 
222  ;  on  the  Prince  of  Wales  :  ii. 
181,211,288,309,313-314;  “the 
old  Prioress”:  ii.  197-199,  237  ;  on 
Mrs.  Jordan  and  Mrs.  Siddons  :  ii. 
203  ;  on  duels  :  ii.  206  ;  on  the 
King’s  illness  :  ii.  221,  226-228  ; 
on  Nabobs  :  ii.  60,  204,  256  ;  and 
Wilberforce  :  ii.  233-236,  238  ;  on 
French  Revolution:  ii.  215,  217, 
226,  231,  238,  246,  248-249,  252, 
254,  262,  281,  283,  285,  288,  291  ; 
the  feather  work  :  ii.  202,  228,  256- 
258  ;  on  balloons  :  ii.  208  ;  on 
William  Pitt:  ii.  173-174,  182,  282, 
319  ;  on  old  age  :  ii.  294,  301,  318, 
360-362  ;  failing  sight  :  i.  4  ;  ii. 
241,  297,  299,  31 1,  318,  320,  327, 
328,  344,  350  ;  retirement  :  ii.  344  ; 
illness  and  death  :  ii.  346  ;  tempera¬ 
ment  :  i.  34  ;  ii.  356  ;  “  ignoramus 
in  love”:  ii.  187,  362;  character¬ 
istics:  ii.  99,  1 19,  198,  364;  busi¬ 
ness  ability  :  ii.  351,  365  ;  portraits  : 
i.  293,  308-309,  340;  ii.  69,  129, 
155,  168 

Montagu,  Lady  Frances  :  ii.  178 

Montagu,  George  Bradwell,  Duke  of : 
i.  238,  260  ;  ii.  37 

Montagu,  John,  “  Punch  ”  (E.  M.’s 
son)  :  i.  2,  299  ;  ii.  198,  348,  362 


3^4 


INDEX 


Montagu,  Lady  Mary  Wortley  :  ill¬ 
ness  :  i.  25,  26,  27,  29,  34  ;  death, 

35  >  45'  324  5  4°'  15 7»  355 

Montagu,  Matthew  (E.  M.’s  nephew 
and  adopted  son)  :  i.  vi,  244,  300, 
3°i,  305,  311,  314,  367,  369  ;  ii.  10, 
43,  65,  67,  89,  103,  104,  1 19,  122, 
I31.  !32>  1 3 5->  1 37'  I57>  *7D  *77> 

186,  187,  189,  190,  191,  194,  197, 

201,  207,  208,  209,  213,  214, 

221,  223,  233-235,  238,  241,  246, 
248,  280,  285,  287,  292,  295,  297, 
30°,  302,  303,  305-307,  311,  315, 

327>  342-344>  36i>  364  .. 

Montagu,  Mrs.  Matthew  :  ii.  186,  187, 
188,  201,  206,  207,  209,  213,  214, 

221,  262,  281,  283,  284,  292,  299, 

314,  318,  319,  320,  324,  327,  329 

336>  342'344>  354 

Montagu,  Ralph,  1st  Duke  of  :  i.  103 
Montaigne,  Michel  de  :  i.  268  ;  ii.  3 
Montesquieu,  Baron  de  :  i.  96,  323 
Monthly  Review  :  i.  219 
Montmorency,  Connetable  de  :  i.  317, 
34° 

More,  Hannah  :  i.  10,  367,  368  ;  ii. 
2,  3,  6,  1 1,  14,  43,  45,  nr,  1 18,  138, 
166,  182,  184,  185,  195,  197,  212, 

213,  218,  260,  261,  295,  300,  317, 

344>  348'  364 

Moreau,  Jean  Victor,  General  :  ii.  324, 
325 

Morley,  Dr.  :  i.  243 
Mornington,  Garret  Wellesley,  1st  Earl 
of  :  i.  261 

Mornington,  Richard,  2nd  Earl  of :  ii. 
236,  238,  325 

Morritt,  Miss  :  i.  196,  202,  205 
Morritt,  Mr.  :  ii.  28,  252 
Mortimer,  John  :  i.  361 
Motte,  Mdme.  la  :  ii,  197 
Mount  Edgcumbe,  George,  1st  Earl  of  : 

i.  367 

Mount  Edgcumbe,  Lady,  wife  of  1st 
Earl  :  i.  234,  367  ;  ii.  69 
Mr.  R.,  cypher  :  i.  20 
Mulgrave,  Constantine  Phipps,  Lord  : 

ii.  218,  219,  236,  237,  308 
Mulgrave,  Lady:  ii.  218 
Mundy,  Major-General  :  ii.  85 
Murphy,  Arthur  :  i.  363,  365  ;  ii.  269 
Murray,  Mrs.  :  ii.  18  1 

Nairn,  Mr.  :  ii.  175,  176 
Narbonne,  Archeveque  :  ii.  297,  298 
Naylor,  Francis  Hare  :  ii.  331,  333,  334 
Naylor,  Mrs.  Hare  :  ii.  331 
Nazel,  Mons.  :  ii.  31 3 


Nazel,  Mdme.  :  ii.  313 
Necker,  Jacques:  i.  312,  318  ;  ii.  14, 
15,  225,  238,  239,  297 
Necker,  Madame  Susanne  :  i.  310,  312, 
3 1 8,  321,  332,  337,  362  ;  ii.  14,  15, 
238 

Nelson,  Horatio,  Viscount:  ii.  114, 

237>  328'  339'  34° 

Newbery,  John  (publisher)  :  i.  36 
Newcastle,  Duchess  of,  wife  of  1st 
Duke  :  i.  89,  180 

Newcastle,  Thomas  Pelham  Holies,  1st 
Duke  of:  i.  16,  cypher,  19;  20,  21, 

23'  37>  7D  89>  1 39>  IS6'  l8o>  345 
Newhaven,  Lady  :  see  Mayne 
Newmarket,  i.  98 
Newton,  Dr.  John  :  i.  121 
Nichols,  John  :  ii.  79,  167  n. 

Nilkens,  Baron  :  ii.  239 
Nivernois,  M.  le  Due  de  :  i.  32,  34,  35, 
36,  47,  96,  312,  321,  322,  337  ;  ii. 
97,  21 1,  239 

Nivernois,  Duchesse  de  :  i.  322 
Noailles,  Emmanuel  Marie  Louis,  Mar¬ 
quis  de  :  i.  335  ;  ii.  33-36,  43,  44, 
47'  52 

Noailles,  Marquise  de  :  i.  335  ;  ii.  33- 
35' 43 

Noel,  Lady  Lucy,  daughter  of  4th  Earl 
of  Gainsborough  :  ii.  251 
North,  Frederick,  Lord  (2nd  Earl  of 
Guilford)  :  i.  236,  282,  288,  368  ; 
ii.  28,  41,  44,  75,  1 16,  1 17,  128,  228 
North  Briton,  The  :  i.  69,  70,  74,  77, 
80,  83,  87,  88,  170,  182,  220;  ii. 
1 14 

Northcote,  James  :  t.  193  ;  ii.  232,  233 
Northington,  Robert  Henley,  Lord  :  i. 
232 

Northumberland,  Hugh  Smithson,  1st 
Duke  of  :  i.  143,  144,  161,  170 
Norwich,  Philip  Yonge,  Bishop  of  :  i. 
294 

Nourse  (bookseller)  :  ii.  195,  232 
Nugent,  Lady  Catherine  :  ii.  175,  176 
Nugent,  Christopher  :  ii.  9 
Nugent,  Mary  Elizabeth,  married  3rd 
Lord  Temple  :  i.  290 
Nuneham,  Lord  :  ii.  29,  33-36 
Nuneham,  Lady  :  ii.  33-36 

Octavius,  8th  son  of  George  III.  :  ii.  63 
Oddie,  Mr.  :  ii.  312 
Oglethorpe,  General  James  :  ii.  89,  90, 
193'  :94 

Oglethorpe,  Mrs.  :  ii.  193 
O’Hara,  Kane  :  ii.  4 
Olbach,  Mons.  d’  :  ii.  19 


INDEX 


Onslow,  George  (M.P.,  Guildford)  :  i. 
87 

Onslow,  George,  1st  Earl  of:  i.  116 
Orange,  Prince  of  :  i.  60 
Orange,  William,  Prince  of  :  i.  32 
Ord,  John  :  ii.  218,  219 
Ord,  Mrs.  :  i.  31  ;  ii.  3,  65,  118,  261- 
263,314 

Ord,  Robert,  Lord  Chief  Baron:  i.  144; 
>'•  t37 

Orford,  3rd  Earl  of  :  ii.  239 
Orleans,  Louis  Philippe  Joseph,  Due  d’  : 
i.  290  ;  ii.  216,  230,  246,  247,  252, 
253,  262,  263,  286,  289 
Orme,  Captain  :  i.  189 
Orrery,  John  Boyle,  5th  Earl  of  :  i.  139 
Osborne,  Captain  :  i.  314 
Ossory,  John,  Lord,  17th  Earl  of  Or¬ 
monde  :  i.  203 

Ossory,  Richard  Pococke,  Bishop  of :  i. 
91  ;  ii.  3 

Otis,  James  :  i.  220 
Otway,  Thomas  :  i.  112 
Oughton,  General  Sir  James  :  i.  251 
Oxenden,  Mr.  :  ii.  98 

Paine,  Thomas  :  ii.  245,  282,  289,  306 
Palliser,  Sir  Hugh  :  ii.  63,  65 
Palmerston,  Henry,  2nd  Viscount  :  ii. 
32S 

Pantheon  :  i.  258,  271 
Paoli,  Pascal,  General:  i.  227-231, 
234,  241,  248,  249,  251,  271 
Park,  Thomas  :  ii.  229 
Parker,  Captain  :  ii.  94 
Parliament,  cypher  :  i.  20 
Parnell,  Bishop  :  ii.  142 
Parsons,  Nancy  :  see  Horton 
Pascal,  Blaise  :  ii.  233 
Patronage  :  i.  271,  295 
Peach,  Mrs.  Aphia,  afterwards  Mrs. 
Tom  Lyttelton  :  see  Lyttelton,  Lady, 
wife  of  2nd  Lord 
Pearce,  Charles  :  i.  216 
Pecquigny,  Duke  of  :  i.  81,  82 
Pedrini,  Abbe  :  i.  333 
Pelham,  Henry  :  i.  345 
Pellew,  Captain  Edward  :  see  Exmouth 
Pembroke,  Elizabeth,  Countess  of :  i. 

1 S  ”• 

Pembroke,  Henry,  10th  Earl  of :  i.  15, 

99 

Pendarves,  Mrs.  :  see  Delany 
Penn,  Lady  Juliana  :  i.  218  ;  ii.  100 
Pennington,  Mrs.  :  ii.  104 
Pennington,  Rev.  Montagu  :  i.  vi, 
1 15  n.,  31 1  ;  ii.  1,  104,  147 
Pepys,  Sir  Lucas  :  ii.  216,  273,  276 

VOL.  II 


385 

Pepys,  William  Weller  :  i.  275,  278  ; 
ii.  43,  68,  84,  85,  89,  102,  104,  i2r, 
134,  157-162,  267,  268,  272,  350 
Percy,  Anne,  Lady  (3rd  Earl  of  Bute’s 
daughter)  :  i.  189 
Percy,  Earl  :  ii.  25 
Percy,  Mrs.  :  i.  171 

Percy,  Dr.  Thomas  :  i.  161,  271  ;  ii.  5 
Perry,  Mr.  :  ii.  49 
Persius  :  i.  78 

Peter  I.,  the  Great,  Czar  of  Russia  :  i. 

I23 

Petion  de  Villeneuve,  Jerome  :  ii.  284, 
285,  288 

Piccini,  Nicola  :  ii.  1 5 
Pichegru,  General  Charles  :  ii.  309,  315, 
_ 3 1 6,  323 

Pierrepont,  Mary  :  see  Montagu,  Lady 
Mary  Wortley 
Pignotti,  Lorenzo:  i.  338 
Piozzi,  Gabriel  :  ii.  175,  178,  275 
Piozzi,  Mrs.  :  see  Thrale 
Pitt,  Mrs.  Ann  :  i.  15  «.,  91,  132,  168, 

179,  180 

Pitt,  Hester,  daughter  of  1st  Lord 
Chatham,  married  Lord  Mahon  :  i. 
235,  242,  288,  289  ;  ii.  43 
Pitt,  Mrs.  J.  :  i.  168,  180 
Pitt,  John  :  i.  42,  180,  184 
Pitt,  John  (eldest  son  of  1st  Earl  of 
Chatham)  :  i.  235-236,  241  ;  ii.  48, 
.248,  3+3 

Pitt,  Penelope  :  ii.  259 
Pitt,  Thomas,  M.P.  (nephew  of  1st 
Earl  of  Chatham)  :  i.  89,  90  ;  ii.  28, 
45,  60,  1 18 

Pitt,  Mrs.  Thomas  :  ii.  29 
Pitt,  William,  2nd  son  of  1st  Lord 
Chatham:  ii.  98,  99,  117,  173,  174, 

180,  182,  196,  214,  224,  227,  234- 
238,  245,  263,  280,  282,  290,  304, 
3X2>  3XS>  3r9>  322>  32+>  325>  33°. 
333 

Pitt,  William,  1st  Earl  of  Chatham  :  se 
Chatham 

Place,  Pierre  Antoine  de  la  :  i.  329 
Plymouth,  Other  Hickman,  5th  Earl  of 
ii.  310 

Plymouth,  Lady:  ii.  310 
Poix,  Prince  de  :  ii.  13 
Poland,  Augustus,  King  of  :  i.  55 
Pole,  Reginald,  Cardinal  :  i.  171 
Polignac,  Mdme.  de  :  ii.  10,  216 
Pomfret,  1st  Earl  of  :  i.  169 
Pomfret,  Henrietta,  Countess  of: 
Marbles,  i.  24,  261 

Pompadour,  Jeanne,  Marquise  de  :  i. 
68,  98,  99,  321  ;  ii.  95 


2  C 


INDEX 


386 

Ponsonby,  Lady  Catherine  :  i.  103 
Pope,  Alexander:  i.  79,  91,  112,  224, 
225.  34S  i  'i-  33.  48»  i4S>  H6> 
183,  205,  229,  238,  269 
Pope,  Mrs.,  actress  :  ii.  300,  301 
Porchester,  Henry  Herbert,  Lord  :  see 
Carnarvon 
Port,  Miss  :  ii.  188 
Porteous,  Beilby  :  ii.  80,  84,  271 
Portland,  Dorothy,  Duchess  of  (daughter 
of  4th  Duke  of  Devonshire,  wife  of 
3rd  Duke)  :  i.  169 

Portland,  Margaret  Cavendish  Harley, 
Duchess  of  (wife  of  2nd  Duke)  :  i. 
vi,  2,  15,  124,  153,  169,  259,  267, 
268,  271  ;  ii.  77,  1 1  3,  135,  187,  19 1- 
I93>  271,  312 

Portland,  William  Henry  Cavendish, 
3rd  Duke  of:  i.  138,  169;  ii.  139, 
192,  193,  215 

Portman,  William  Henry,  Viscount  : 
ii.  100 

Portsmouth,  John,  2nd  Earl  of :  i. 
109 

Potter,  Robert  :  ii.  68,  69,  108,  129, 
163,  164,  229 

Potter,  Thomas:  i.  69;  ii.  43,  114, 
134 

Pouskin,  Madame  :  i.  252,  254 
Powell,  William  (actor)  :  i.  95 
Poyntz,  Margaret  :  ii.  224,  344 
Poyntz,  Mrs.  :  i.  268  ;  ii.  89,  193,  202, 
206,  281 

Poyntz,  Stephen  :  ii.  178,  224 
Poyntz,  William  :  i.  268  ;  ii.  50,  203, 
206,  224 

Praslin,  Due  de  :  i.  99 

Pratt,  Samuel  Jackson  :  see  Melmoth 

Price,  Dr.  Richard  :  i.  290,  342  ;  ii. 

242,  246,  247,  248 
Prichard,  Mr.  :  ii.  247 
Priestly,  Dr.  Joseph  :  ii.  260,  282,  283 
Primrose,  Lady  Dorothea  :  i.  91,  132, 
133,  168  ;  ii.  183 

Pringle,  Sir  John,  M.D.,  inoculation  : 
i.  155 

Prior,  Matthew  :  i.  169,  226,  268 
Procter,  Sir  W.  Beauchamp  :  i.  170 
Pryse,  Charles  :  i.  73 
Pulhowski,  Prince  of  Poland  :  i.  56 
Pulteney,  Daniel  :  i.  40 
Pulteney,  General  (brother  of  Lord 
Bath):  i.  112,  114,  118,  119,  122, 
1 30  ;  death,  164 

Pulteney,  Lord  (Lord  Bath’s  son)  :  i. 

17,  37  ;  death,  40,  41,  44,  114 
Pulteney,  Miss,  afterwards  Baroness 
Bath  :  ii.  115,  126,  127,  287 


Pulteney,  Mrs.  :  see  Johnstone 
Pulteney,  William  :  see  Johnstone 
Pynsent,  Sir  William  :  i.  122,  130,  156 

Queensberry,  Charles,  3rd  Duke  of :  i. 
r94,  259 

Quin,  James  :  i.  27,  35,  39  $  ii.  129 

Racine,  Jean  Baptiste  :  i.  313 
Raikes,  Robert  :  ii.  189,  202,  212,  366 
Ramsay,  Allan  :  i.  21,  31,  130 
Ranelagh  :  i.  256,  286  ;  ii.  28 
Ravensworth,  Henry  Liddell,  Lord  :  i. 
125 

Ray,  Martha  :  ii.  70,  71 
Raynal,  Abbe  :  ii.  18,  20,  21,  23,  24 
Rebecca,  Biagio,  A.R.A.  :  ii.  241,  242 
Remond  (Lord  Bath’s  valet)  :  i.  102, 
104,  105,  1 1 3,  114,  119 
Reynel,  Major  :  ii.  216 
Reynolds,  Frances  (sister  of  Sir  Joshua)  : 

i.  150  ;  ii.  155,  158,  231,  232,  233 
Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua  :  i.  7,  14,  21,  193, 

226,  253,  257,  274,  275,  280,  293  5 

ii.  5,  9,  10,  56,  69,  84,  1 17,  1 50,  173, 
192,  203,  218,  231,  233,  277,  354, 
3SS 

Rich,  Lady  :  i.  324 

Richardson,  Samuel:  i.  28,  30, 150,  234; 
ii.  223 

Richmond,  Charles,  2nd  Duke  of  :  i.  107 
Richmond,  Charles,  3rd  Duke  of :  1, 
312,  324,  333  ;  ii.  48,  285,  308,  314, 
324,  325,  329 

Richmond,  Duchess  of  :  ii.  324 
Richmond,  Mr.  :  ii.  214 
Rigby,  Richard  :  i.  23,  38,  52  ;  ii.  96 
R.  Regina,  cypher  :  i.  20 
Ritz,  Cardinal  de  :  i.  77 
Rizzio,  David  :  i.  145 
Robertson,  Dr.  William:  i.  145,  151, 
152,  238,  251  ;  ii.  43 
Robespierre,  Maximilien  Marie  Isidore  : 
ii.  308 

Robinson,  Charles  (E.  M.’s  brother, 
Recorder  of  Canterbury):  i.  219; 
ii.  37,  98,  189,  312,  336 
Robinson,  Elizabeth  (E.  M.’s  mother)  : 
i.  1,  56 

Robinson,  Matthew  (E.  M.’s  father)  : 
i.  1,  70,  71,  72,  184  ;  ii.  36,  56,  57, 
357'  358'  359 

Robinson,  Matthew  (E.  M.’s  eldest 
brother),  afterwards  Lord  Rokeby  : 
i.  287,  288;  ii.  56,  242,  311-312, 
327,  328 

Robinson,  Matthew  (E.  M.’s  nephew)  : 
see  Montagu,  Matthew 


INDEX 


Robinson,  Rev.  Matthew  (E.  M.’s  great- 
uncle)  :  ii.  158,  302 
Robinson,  Morris  (E.  M.’s  brother)  :  i. 
i55>  I7°>  !96>  2++>  300>  3°i  >  >>• 
37.  i98 

Robinson,  Morris  (Matthew  “  Mon¬ 
tagu’s  ”  brother)  :  ii.  31 1,  312 
Robinson,  Morris,  Mrs.  :  ii.  189,  198 
Robinson,  Richard  :  see  Rokeby 
Robinson,  Sir  Thomas  (E.  M.’s  cousin)  : 

i.  122,  285,  286  ;  ii.  28,  251,  252 
Robinson,  Sir  William  (E.  M.’s  cousin)  : 

ii.  104,  168,  187 

Robinson,  Mrs.  William  (E.  M.’s  sister- 
in-law)  :  i.  vii,  13,  28  ;  ii.  98 
Robinson,  William  (E.  M.’s  brother)  : 
i.  28,  34,  174,  219  ;  ii.  188,  199,  200, 
23D  357 

Robinson,  Mrs.,  “  Perdita  ”  :  ii.  114 
Roche,  Michel  de  la  :  i.  174 
Rochefort,  Madame  de  :  i.  96,  318,  321, 
322  5  i‘-  13 

Rochefoucauld,  Cardinal  de  la  :  ii.  288 
Rochefoucauld,  Due  de  la  :  ii.  288 
Rochester,  Bishop  of,  Samuel  Horsley  : 
ii-  33° 

Rockingham,  Charles  Watson  Went¬ 
worth,  2nd  Marquis  of  :  i.  135,  136, 
137,  157,  169,  199,  202,  219,  228, 
236;  ii.  41,  1 17,  1 18,  120,  122 
Rodney,  Sir  George  :  i.  134  ;  ii.  7,  85, 
86,  93,  94,  96,  1 16,  128,  1 77 
Rodney,  Capt.  John,  R.N.  :  ii.  175, 
176 

Rodney,  Miss  Jane  :  ii.  175,  176 
Rohan,  Cardinal  Louis  Rend  Edouard, 
Prince  de  :  ii.  197 

Rokeby,  Matthew,  4th  Baron  :  see 
Montagu,  Matthew 
Rokeby,  Richard  Robinson,  1st  Baron, 
Bishop  of  Kildare,  afterwards  Primate 
of  Ireland  (E.  M.’s  cousin)  :  i.  122, 
293,  366;  ii.  28,  35,  37,  81,  104, 
108,  172,  173,  177,  195,  200,  205, 
212,  221,  292,  294,  310,  312,  346, 
3+9 

Rosebery,  1st  Earl  of  :  i.  133 
Rosebery,  Archibald  Philip  Primrose, 
5th  Earl  of  :  ii.  322 

Rothes,  Lady,  nee  Jane  Elizabeth  Leslie  : 
ii.  218 

Roubiliac,  Louis  Francis  :  i.  365 
Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques  :  i.  15,  139, 
148,  149  ;  ii.  50,  124,  125,  176,  190, 
290 

Rowley,  Sir  Joshua  :  ii.  93,  94 
Rowley,  Thomas  (Chatterton)  :  ii.  29, 
113,  114 


387 

Roxburghe,  John,  3rd  Duke  of :  i.  144, 
203 

Rumbold,  Sir  Thomas  :  ii.  23 
Rumford,  Sir  Benjamin  Thompson, 
Count  von  :  ii.  320,  339 
Russia,  Empress  of  :  see  Catherine 
Rutland,  Charles,  4th  Duke  of :  ii.  239 
Rutland,  Duchess  of  :  ii.  239 
Ryder,  Dudley  :  ii.  345 
Ryder,  Lady  Susan  :  ii.  345 
Ryder,  Thomas  :  ii.  241,  242,  314 

Sackville,  Lord  George  :  see  Germain 
Sackville,  Robert,  1st  Earl  of  Dorset  : 

i.  78 

St.  Albans,  Aubrey  Beauclerk,  5th  Duke 
of :  i.  103 

St.  Asaph,  Bishop  of,  Jonathan  Shipley  : 

ii.  69 

St.  Helens,  Alleyne  Fitzherbert,  Lord  : 
>'•  334 

St.  James,  cypher  :  i.  20 

St.  John,  Henry,  Viscount  Bolingbroke  : 

see  Bolingbroke 
St.  Leger,  Colonel  :  ii.  239 
St.  Vincent,  John  Jervis,  Earl  :  ii.  323, 
328 

Saintsbury,  Mr.  George  E.  B.  :  i.  x, 
xi,  265,  332,  338 

Salisbury,  James,  6th  Earl  of :  i.  27, 
158  ;  ii.  1x3 
Salisbury,  Lady:  ii.  171 
Salm,  Princess  of :  i.  56 
Salm,  Prince  of  :  i.  314 
Salt  Hill  :  i.  244  n.  ;  ii.  189,  190,  222 
Samson  (guillotine)  ;  ii.  286 
Sandwich,  Edward  Montagu,  tst  Earl 
of  :  i.  2 

Sandwich,  John  Montagu,  4th  Earl  of : 

i.  cypher,  19 ;  42,  43,  69,  82,  1 1 8,  1 32, 
184;  ii.  51,  70,  89,  128,  202,  203, 
281,  344 

Sardinia,  King  of  :  ii.  283 

Saunders,  Sir  George  :  ii.  51 

Savile,  Sir  George  :  i.  46,  202,  205,  228; 

ii.  96 

Sawbridge,  John  Alderman  :  ii.  246, 
247,  248 

Saxony,  Elector  of  :  i.  82 

Sayer,  Richard  :  i.  290 

Scarborough,  Richard,  4th  Earl  of :  i. 

202,  205,  345 
Scarron,  Paul  :  i.  192 
Scarsdale,  Nathaniel  Curzon,  Lord  :  i. 
275 

Schulenberg,  Count  :  ii.  44 
Schulenberg,  Countess  :  ii.  44 
Schultz,  Mr.  :  i.  175 


388 


INDEX 


Scott,  Lady  Di  :  ii.  321 
Scott,  Mrs.  Edward  :  i.  27,  34 
Scott,  Mr.  :  ii.  321 

Scott,  Mrs.  Sarah  (E.  M.’s  sister)  :  i. 
vi,  36,  1 18,  158,  167,  175,  188,  212, 
213,  234,  265,  284,  297,  302;  ii. 
16,  27,  46,  65,  66,  73,  86,  104,  105, 
no,  173,  174,  1 77,  179,  192,  210- 
223,  295,  303,  304,  317,  321,  349 
Scott,  Mr.  :  ii.  65,  66,  104,  105 
Scott,  Sir  Walter  :  i.  6,  7,  285  ;  ii.  250, 
252 

Seeker,  Thomas,  Archbishop  of  Canter¬ 
bury  :  i.  21  48  ;  ii.  196,  197 
Sedley,  Lady  :  i.  246 
Selwyn,  George  :  i.  1 1,  87  ;  ii.  189,  196 
Serious  Reflections  of  a  Rational  Chris¬ 
tian  :  i.  222 

Servants  :  i.  129  ;  ii.  360 

Sevigne,  Marie,  Madame  de  :  i.  26,  282 ; 

ii.  97,  98,  213 
Seymour,  Lady  Jane  :  i.  171 
Shadwell,  Lady  :  i.  25 
Shafto,  Robert  :  i.  98 
Shakespeare,  William  :  i.  1 12,  266,  292, 
312,  313,  321,  327,  328-330,  331, 

334.  338,  339.  343.  35*.  353.  36°. 
369  ;  11.  12,  32,  45,  143,  145,  155. 
199,  269 

Shakespeare ,  Ode  to ,  Garrick’s  :  i.  224, 
352 

Shakespeare ,  Mrs.  Montagu’s  Essay  on  : 
i.  122,  123,  152,  170,  217,  218,  219, 
222-227,  233.  243.  244.  3 10.  337. 
338.  349.  353  i  "•  38,  43.  56.  1 39. 
i44.  i47.  I49'I52>  2 76-278.  347. 
367 

Shamruz,  Prince  :  i.  16 
Shelburne,  Lady  (wife  of  2nd  Earl)  :  i. 
127,  139,  180,  1 8 1,  231,  239,  261, 
266,  284 

Shelburne,  William  Petty,  2nd  Earl  of : 
afterwards  Lord  Lansdowne  :  i.  127, 
138,  142,  203,  239,  261,  284,  341, 

343.  344.  357  i  24>  41.  42'44.  69, 
1 1 3,  117,  121,  122,  127,  128,  190 
Shenstone,  William  :  ii.  163 
Sheridan,  Richard  Brinsley:  i.  11, 
258  ;  ii.  87,  88,  104,  117,  151,  245, 
260,  263 

Sherlock,  Mrs.  :  i.  63,  64 
Sherlock,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  London  : 
i.  63 

Sichel,  Mr.  Walter:  i.  185,  194 
Siddons,  Mrs.  Sarah:  i.  349  ;  ii.  138, 
203,  238 

Singleton,  Mr.  :  ii.  195 
Sloane,  Sir  Hans  :  i.  1 79 


Smelt,  Leonard  :  i.  157,  215,  310;  ii. 
54,  55,  82,  84,  132,  138,  17 1,  173, 
212,  218,  226,  229 
Smelt,  Mrs.  :  ii.  55,  138,  173,  212 
Smith,  Admiral  :  i.  22,  33 
Smith,  Charlotte,  author  of  Emmeline , 
etc.  :  ii.  282,  295 
Smith,  Joachim  :  i.  309 
Smith,  General  Joseph  :  ii.  179 
Smith,  Mr.  Robert,  afterwards  Lord 
Carrington  :  ii.  236,  237 
Smith,  Ryder  :  ii.  236 
Smollett,  Tobias  :  i.  324,  327 
Smythe,  Sir  Sydney,  Lord  Chief  Baron  : 
i.  294 

Snuff  :  i.  259  ;  ii.  84 
Somerset,  Lady  Henrietta  :  i.  253 
Somerset,  Lady  Mary  (Duchess  of  Rut¬ 
land)  :  i.  306 
Somes,  Mr.  :  i.  203 

Sophie  Charlotte,  wife  of  Frederick 
William,  xst  King  of  Prussia  :  ii.  40 
Southampton,  George  Ferdinand,  2nd 
Baron  :  ii.  173 
Southby,  Mrs.  :  ii.  315 
Southwell,  Mrs.  :  i.  116 
Southwell,  Mr.  :  i.  203 
Spence  (dentist)  :  ii.  179 
Spencer,  Lord  Charles,  son  of  3rd  Duke 
of  Marlborough  :  i.  46 
Spencer,  John,  1st  Earl:  i.  182,  203, 
310,  365  ;  ii.  43,  81,  137 
Spencer,  Margaret  Georgiana,  Countess 
of:  i.  202,  203,  310,  364;  ii.  43, 
92,  178,  202,  207,  245,  308 
Spencer,  William,  afterwards  6th  Duke 
of  Devonshire  :  ii.  245 
Spenser,  Edmund  :  ii.  32,  269 
Stael,  Madame  de  :  ii.  297 
Stafford,  Granville  Leveson  Gower, 
Marquis  of  :  ii.  210,  314 
Stamford,  Henrietta,  Countess  of :  ii. 
*93 

Stamp  Act,  The  :  i.  135,  137,  139  ;  ii. 
”7 

Stanhope,  Charles,  3rd  Earl  :  i.  288, 
290  :  ii.  44,  48,  246,  247,  248,  263, 
302 

Stanhope,  Grizel,  Countess  :  i.  288,  290 ; 
ii.  44 

Stanhope,  Lady  Hester  Lucy  :  i.  235, 
288  ;  ii.  16 
Stanley,  Mrs.  :  i.  100 
Stapleton,  Mrs.  :  i.  248,  254 
Stapylton,  Miss  :  i.  249,  254 
Steele,  Sir  Richard  :  i.  133 
Stephen,  Leslie  :  ii.  197 
Stepney,  Sir  Thomas  :  i.  117 


INDEX 


Sterne,  Laurence :  i.  xii,  to,  14,  29, 
98,  122,  123,  161,  162,  167,  185- 
214;  Sentimental  yourney,  189; 
illness,  192;  death,  194;  239,  350; 
ii.  19,  20,  21,  59,  346,  364,  367 
Sterne,  Lydia:  i.  191-214;  marriage, 
21 1  ;  death,  214  ;  ii.  127,  171 
Sterne,  Mrs.  (E.  M.’s  cousin),  wife  of 
Laurence  Sterne:  i.  185-213  ;  death, 
213  ;  ii.  20,  21 
Stevenson,  Miss  :  i.  76 
Stewart,  Mr.  :  i.  157,  175 
Stewart  (or  Stuart),  General  James  : 
ii.  206,  207 

Stewart,  Lady  Jane  :  i.  168 
Stillingfleet,  Benjamin  :  i.  7,  53,  89, 
90,  1 1 3,  170,  226,  243  j  death, 
252  i  25S  i  “•  I;  2,  3 
Stockdale,  John  :  ii.  245 
Stone,  George,  Archbishop  of  Armagh, 
Primate  of  Ireland  :  i.  120 
Stoney,  Lieutenant  Andrew  :  see  Bowes 
Storer,  Anthony  Morris  :  ii.  47 
Stormont,  David,  7th  Viscount :  ii.  15, 
81 

Stratford-on-Avon :  i.  224,  227,  235, 
352 

Stowe,  Mrs.  Beecher  :  ii.  65 
Stowe:  i.  172,  248,  254 
Strathmore,  John,  9th  Earl  of  :  i.  64 
Strong,  Adam  :  i.  31 
Strutt,  Mr.  (messenger,  Downing 
Street)  :  ii.  48 

Stuart,  Lady  Louisa  :  ii.  259,  281 
Stuart,  James  (architect)  :  i.  102,  153, 
164;  ii.  13,  18,  82,  83,  101,  199 
Sullivan,  General  John  :  ii.  62 
Sutton,  Dr.,  inoculation  :  i.  154,  155 
Swift,  Jonathan  :  ii.  183 

Talbot,  Mary,  Countess  :  i.  126,  127 
Talbot,  Mrs.  :  i.  48 
Talbot,  Miss  :  i.  47 
Talbot,  William,  Earl:  i.  36,  127 
Tallien,  Madame  :  see  Cabarrus 
Tassie,  James  (modeller)  :  i.  308,  309  ; 
ii.  129 

Taylor,  Michael  Angelo  :  ii.  316 
Temple,  Richard  Temple  Grenville, 
Earl  :  cypher,  i.  19  ;  23,  69,  77,  82, 
88,  124,  137,  138,  141,  142,  156, 
170,  172,  179,  248-250,  253,  254, 
262,  266,  286,  290  ;  ii.  71 
Temple,  Lady  :  i.  248,  249,  253-254, 
290 

Temple,  William  Johnstone  (essayist)  : 
i.  150 

Tencin,  Madame  de  :  i.  1 1 


389 

Texier,  Le,  Mr.:  i.  306,  310;  ii.  50- 
51,  1 1 8 

Theatres:  i.  35,  39,  75,  97,  120,  153, 
280,  318,  334,  350,  354,  357,  360- 
364;  ii.  43,  51,  70,  138,  203,  238, 
300 

Thibouville,  Mons.  de  :  i.  313 
Thomas,  Monsieur  :  i.  321,  332 
Thomas,  Sir  Edmund  :  i.  42 
Thompson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  :  ii.  1 
Thompson,  Mrs.  :  ii.  61 
Thompson,  Samuel  :  ii.  21 1,  329 
Thomson,  James  :  ii.  1 1  o 
Thrale,  Mrs.  Hester  Lynch  (afterwards 
Piozzi)  :  i.  5  ;  ii.  43,  56-58,  60,  68, 
85, 121,  146,  154,  155,  158,  159,  160, 
165,  175,  177,  178,  264,  265,  268- 
278,  362,  363 

Thrale,  Henry  :  ii.  43,  57,  58,  68,  80, 
85,  89,  107,  108,  154,  182,  268-270, 
272,  273 

Thrale,  Misses  :  ii.  175,  181,  182 
Thurlow,  Edward,  1st  Baron  :  ii.  227, 
325 

Tone,  Theobald  Wolfe  :  ii.  323,  335 
Tooke,  William  :  ii.  343 
Torriano,  Samuel  :  i.  54 
Toulouse,  Archbishop  of  :  ii.  216 
Tourneur,  Monsieur  le  :  i.  321,  327 
Townley,  Charles  :  ii.  155 
Townshend,  Charles,  son  of  3rd  Vis¬ 
count:  i.  19,20,  42,  101,  138,  139  J 
death  :  163,  165,  170 
Townshend,  Charles,  2nd  Viscount  :  i. 
344 

Townshend,  George,  1st  Marquess  : 
ii.  326 

Townshend,  George,  Admiral  :  i.  134 
Townshend,  Georgiana,  Lady  John  : 
ii.  223,  224,  252 

Townshend,  Lord  John  :  ii.  223,  224 
Townshend,  Miss  :  i.  189 
Trevor,  G.  :  ii.  14 
Trevor,  Mrs.  :  i.  30 
Troubridge,  Sir  Thomas  :  ii.  328,  340 
Truth ,  Essay  on,  Beattie’s  :  i.  233,  271, 
274,  302 

Tull,  Jethro  (agricultural  writer)  :  i.  141 
Tull,  Mrs.  Betty  :  ii.  201,  210,  228 
Tunbridge  :  i.  258  ;  ii.  56-58 
Turgot,  Anne  Robert  :  ii.  13 
Tweeddale,  Frances  Carteret,  Marchion¬ 
ess  of :  ii.  180 

LTpper  Ossory,  Earl  of :  i.  194,  222 
Upper  Ossory,  Countess  of:  i.  22 1  ;  ii. 
45 

I  Upton,  Mr.  :  i.  203 


39° 


INDEX 


Valence,  Marquis  de  :  i.  317 
Valency  (E.  M.’s  porter)  :  ii.  83,  84 
Valentia,  Arthur  Annesley,  8th  Vis¬ 
count,  afterwards  Earl  of  Mount- 
norris  :  i.  178,  184,  249,  250,  276, 
280,  291  ;  ii.  138 

Valentia,  Lucy,  Viscountess  (Lord 
Lyttelton’s  daughter) :  i.  22,  178, 183, 

249,  250,  273,  279,  280,  290,  291 
Vanessa  (R.  Cumberland’s)  :  i.  10  ;  ii. 

8,  266 

Vansittart,  Henry  :  i.  288 
Vathek  :  i.  234 
Vaucluze,  Mdme.  de  :  ii.  95 
Vauxhall  :  ii.  22 

Vesey,  Agmondesham  :  i.  vi,  4,  22,  89, 
162,  1 7 1 ,  178  ;  ii.  3,  7,  9,  10,  18,  21, 
35,  49,  62,  95,  107,  123,  183,  187, 
190,  192,  265,  312,  358 
Vesey,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  :  i.  vi,  4,  14,  22, 

48,  88-90,  118,  123,  161-163,  171, 
178,  187,  193,  239,  243,  244,  247- 

250,  252,  263,  277,  282,  294,  306, 

355>  3S6>  359>  364-  367  >  “•  D  2>  3> 
4,  5,  6,  7,  16,  18,  21,  22,  35,  39,  43, 

49,  58-60,  64,  68,  69,  70-72,  74,  87, 
88,  95,  96,  102,  107,  108,  116,  123, 
124,  132,  135,  154,  182-184,  187, 
190,  192,  198,  212,  214,  266,  269, 

272,  2 7 5’  349>  352>  363>  364 
Vibraye,  Vicomte  de  :  ii.  97 
Victoria,  Queen  of  England  :  ii.  294 
Villaret-Joyeuse,  Louis  Thomas  :  ii.  314 
Villiers,  John,  afterwards  3rd  Earl  of 
Clarendon  :  ii.  115,  236,  238 
Virette,  Mons.  :  i.  81,  82 
Vivi,  Count  :  i.  42 

Voltaire  (Francois  Arouet)  :  i.  10,  97, 
105,  1 12,  123,  124,  130,  222, 

225-227,  263,  310,  312,  313,  318, 
321,  323,  324,  327-329,  330-332, 

334.  337-339.  343.  345.  347.  35r> 
361,  362  ;  ii.  38,  50,  54,  146,  147, 
149,  150,  199,  202,  290 

Waddington,  Mrs.,  nit  Marianne  Port  : 

ii.  250,  261,  262,  267,  297 
Waldegrave,  Lady  Laura  :  i.  261 
Waldegrave,  Maria,  Countess  of  (widow 
of  2nd  Earl)  :  see  Gloucester,  Maria, 
Duchess  of 

Waller,  Edmund  :  i.  246,  247 
Wallingford,  Mary,  Lady  :  i.  267,  268 
Walpole,  Sir  Edward  :  ii.  259 
Walpole,  Horace  (4th  Earl  of  Orford)  : 

i-  5.  9.  r7>  2D  9r>  I0I>  1 3 3.  1 39.  H8. 
149,  1 5 1,  165,  172,  179,  180,  215, 
306,  318,  322,  332,  367  ;  ii.  5,  9,  19, 


24>  29>  37.  45.  5°.  59.  93.  10°.  i°5> 

114,  118,  133,  134,  135,  150,  156, 

r57>  191.  1 92>  x93>  r97>  2I3.  2I5. 

218,  239,  240,  250,  251,  255,  257, 

259,  260,  276,  277,  286,  338,  355 
Walpole,  Sir  Robert  (1st  Earl  of  Or¬ 
ford)  :  i.  4,  17,  85,  90,  344,  345  ;  ii. 
239 

Walsh,  John  :  i.  290 
Walsingham,  Hon.  Mrs.  Boyle  :  i.  367  ; 
ii.  192 

Walsingham,  Sir  Francis  :  i.  152 
Walsingham,  Mr.:  ii.  113 
Warburton,  Miss  :  i.  42,  43,  1 17,  121 
Warburton,  William,  Bishop  of  Glou¬ 
cester  :  i.  76,  134,  135,  225 
Warens,  Madame  de  :  ii.  124,  125 
Warkworth,  Hugh  Smithson,  Lord  (son 
of  1st  Duke  of  Northumberland)  :  i. 
r43 

Warren,  Dr.  Richard  :  i.  107  ;  ii.  202, 
206 

Warton,  Dr.  Joseph  :  i.  224,  280  ;  ii. 

32>  33.  5°.  1 17.  )x8>  2X2>  2I3 
Warton,  Thomas  :  i.  213 
Washington,  George  :  ii.  17,  41,  42 
Webb,  Mr.  :  ii.  81 
Webb,  Philip  Carteret  :  i.  77,  80 
Webster,  John  :  ii.  103,  145 
Webster,  Mrs.  :  ii.  231,  248 
Wedderburn,  Alexander  (afterwards 
Lord  Loughborough)  :  i.  135,  148 
Weddings  :  i.  157  ;  ii.  172,  175-176,  189 
Wedgwood,  Josiah  :  i.  309  ;  ii.  129, 
139.  x55 

Wellington,  Wellesley,  1st  Duke  of : 
ii.  207 

Weltjie,  Louis  :  ii.  181 
Wentworth,  Lady  Charlotte  :  ii.  301 
Wesley,  John  :  i.  178  ;  ii.  28 
West,  Gilbert  :  i.  vi,  6,  7,  267  ;  ii.  132, 


352.  354 

West  Indian ,  The,  by  Richard  Cumber¬ 
land  :  i.  257  ;  ii.  8 
Westcote,  Lord  :  ii.  135,  272 
Westmeath,  Thomas  Nugent,  6th  Earl 
of :  ii.  176 

Westmorland,  Mary,  Countess  of  :  i.  23 
Weymouth,  Thomas  Thynne,  3rd 
Viscount  :  i.  182 
Weymouth,  Lady  :  ii.  178,  193 
Whalley,  Dr.  Thomas  Sedgwick  :  ii.  348 
Wharton,  Mrs.,  “  Peg  ”  :  i.  30,  31,  74, 


75,294,318 
Wheeler,  E.  R.,  Mr.  :  ii.  1 
Whisky:  ii.  in,  133,  135 
Whitehill,  John  :  ii.  20 
Whitefield,  George  :  ii.  194,  300 


North  Caroline  State  Librwy 
gaieigh 


INDEX 


Wiart,  Madame  :  ii.  38 
Wilberforce,  Miss  :  ii.  236 
Wilberforce,  William:  i.  1 1  ;  ii.  214, 

225>  233>  2  34'  235>  236'  237>  238' 

251,  280,  326 

Wilkes,  John  :  i.  36,  43,  49,  50,  58,  69, 

7°.  73'  74>  76,  77.  79‘83'  86’88' 
118,  169,  170,  174,  179,  181-183, 
207,  208,  220,  221,  230,  233,  236, 
245,  272  ;  ii.  20,  89,  97,  1 14 
Wilkes,  Miss  :  i.  207  ;  ii.  73,  1 14,  3 1 3 
Wilkins,  Charles  :  ii.  195 
Wilkinson,  Mr.  Spencer  :  ii.  334 
William,  Prince,  afterwards  William 
IV.  :  i.  343 

Williams,  Anna  (Dr.  Johnson’s  friend)  : 
i.  301  ;  ii.  141,  152,  153,  164,  166 
167  n. 

Williams,  Mr.  :  i.  207 
Williams,  Miss  :  ii.  180 
Willis,  Dr.  Francis  :  ii.  226,  227,  228 
Wilmot,  Mr.  :  i.  227,  233 
Wilmot,  Mrs.  :  i.  351 
Wilson,  Dr.  Thomas  (tutor  to  Pitt)  :  ii. 
99 

Winchester,  John  Thomas,  Bishop  of  : 

i.  129 

Winchilsea,  Daniel,  8th  Earl  of  :  i.  92 
W’inchilsea,  George,  9th  Earl  :  see  Finch 
Windham,  Rt.  Hon.  William  :  ii.  250, 
3°3»  3°4 

Winter,  Ian  Willem  de  :  ii.  332 
Wolfe,  James  :  ii.  326 
Wolseley,  Captain  :  ii.  77 
Wood,  Robert  :  i.  77,  80 
Woodcock,  Dr.  :  ii.  1 1  3 
Woodfall,  Henry  Sampson  :  i.  1 79 
Woodhouse,  Daphne  (the  cobbler’s 
wife)  :  i.  63,  64 

Woodhouse,  James  :  i.  9,  63,  157,  163  ; 

ii.  57,  189,  269-270,  295,  364 
Woodhull,  Mr.  :  ii.  129 
Worcester,  Bishop  of  (Edward  Stilling- 

fleet)  :  i.  268 

Wraxall,  Sir  Nathaniel  :  i.  90,  340  ;  ii. 


391 

3,  38,  39,  170,  1 8 1,  196,  216,  217, 

23S>  238'  353'  354'  355 
Wray,  Sir  Cecil  :  ii.  171 
Wright,  Benjamin  :  i.  81 
Wright,  Mrs.  Phoebe  :  i.  165 
W rottesley, Betty  (daughter  of  Sir  Richard 
Wrottesley  7th  Bart.)  :  i.  221 
Wrottesley,  Sir  Richard,  Dean  of  Wor¬ 
cester  :  i.  222 

Wyatt,  James  :  i.  8,  258  ;  ii.  104,  108, 
109,  177,  199,  201,  204,  292,  300 
Wymondsil,  Mrs.,  alias  Child  :  i.  61 
Wyndham,  Hon.  Mrs.  Hugh  :  i.  xii ;  ii. 
358 

Wyndham,  Thomas  (of  Hammersmith)  : 

>•  31 

Wyndham,  Mr  :  see  Windham 
Wynn,  Sir  Watkin  Williams  :  i.  233, 
254 

Xavier,  Prince  :  i.  82 

Yates,  Mrs.  Mary  Ann  :  i.  100 
Yearsley,  Mrs.,  “  Lactilla  ”  :  i.  367, 
368  ;  ii.  184,  185 

York,  Archbishop  of,  Hon.  R.  Hay 
Drummond  :  i.  134,  195,  200,  201, 
204,  263,  264,  343 

York,  Edward  Augustus,  Duke  of  York 
and  Albany  :  i.  14,  164  ;  ii.  237,  239 
York,  Frederick,  Duke  of,  2nd  son  of 
George  III.:  i.  310;  ii.  281,  308, 
309,  316 

York,  Frederica,  Duchess  of:  ii.  281 
Yorke,  Lady  Elizabeth  :  ii.  139,  230 
Yorke,  Mr.  John  :  ii.  244 
Yorke,  Sir  Joseph,  afterwards  Lord 
Dover  :  i.  59,  60,  71  ;  ii.  139 
Yorke,  Philip  :  see  Hardwicke,  2nd 
Earl  of 

Young,  Arthur:  ii.  307 
Young,  Dr.  Edward  :  i.  7,  281,  318  ; 
ii.  4,  354 

ZinzendorfFe,  Count  :  i.  178 


Finis  coronat  opus 


MC 

MXXIII 


' 


V 


■ 


C  .  c  -  *  l  .  J  "  •  ,  .  «  •  /<•>  <  ■  ,1  '  • 

t  c  C  t  c  t  <  t  (  (  1  1  1  c  .  <  «  r  l  ,  .  '  '  ' 

t  i  i  <  .  <  i  ;  1 1  ■  ■  ,  v...  <-  .  <  ,  ?<•»•* 

«  »  *  C  *fc«  *«•*  *.  «  .  <  ‘  '  ,•  <  C  i  <  •  ‘  L  I 

‘«c‘?/c  A 

. 


,  ...... 


-  «<  ’ 


BIO  B  M758 


v.  2 

Montagu,  Elizabeth  Robinson,  1720-1800. 
Mrs.  Montague,  Queen  of  the  blues ,  her 


3  3091  00140  1678 


DATE  DUE 


B 

M758 


Montagu 

Mrs.  Montagu,  "Queen  of  the  blues" 


B 

M758 

v.2 


Montagu 

Mrs.  Montagu,  "Queen  of  the  blues" 


