DIARIES 



A LADY OF QUALITY- 



LONDON 

PBINTBD BY 8P0TTIS WOODS AWD 00. 

NEW-STBEET SQTJABE 



DIARIES 



OF 



A LADY OF QUALITY 



FKOM 1797 TO 1844. 



EDITED, WITH NOTES, 
BY 

A. HAYWAED, Esq., Q.C. 



LONDON: 

LONGMAN, GEEEN, LONGMAN, EGBERTS, & GREEN. 
1864. 



PEEFATORY NOTICE. 



The manuscript volumes (ten in number) from which 
this book has been compiled, differ materially from 
any of the same extent which have fallen under 
my observation. Although called diaries, they are 
none of them what is commonly understood or de- 
scribed by that name. They do not profess to be a 
record of the writer's daily life : they contain no details 
of a private or purely personal nature : no flights of 
egotism, no self-communings, nothing that can be 
called scandal. At the end of half a century the lives 
of princes and statesmen belong to history, and the 
only imfavourable impressions noted down by her relate 
exclusively to thein. Her very gossip is redeemed by 
the speakers and the subjects; and her sole object 
throughout appears to have been to submit her 



VI PREFATORY NOTICE. 

understanding to an improving exercise, and to store 
up for future reference the conversations and com- 
positions which attracted her attention in the course 
of her daily intercourse with the most cultivated 
people and her assiduous study of curious books and 
manuscripts. 

How many of us have regretted that we did not make 
a note at the time of what we heard fall from persons who 
had been prominent actors on the political or literary 
stage, or who had even been behind the scenes when 
a memorable performance was arranged or in progress ! 
How unlucky, have we thought, that we did not copy 
the striking passage in the now forgotten book, or the 
curious letter which we might easily have borrowed for 
the purpose ; or that we did not cut out and keep the 
clever newspaper article or quaint paragraph which so 
much struck everybody ! Then why, on finding that 
this has been judiciously done by another, should we 
not profit by his or her sagacity, industry, and taste ? 
Such were the questions that suggested themselves 
to me when I had gone over these diaries with 
the view of deciding whether a book, calculated to 
reflect credit on the collector, could be compiled from 
them. 



PREFATORY NOTICE. Vll 

Gray went a little too far when (as quoted by Horace 
Walpole) he laid down that ' if any man were to form a 
book of what he had seen and heard himself, it must, in 
whatever hands, prove a useful and entertaining one.' 
But when a woman of thought and feeling, of cultivation 
and discernment, has enjoyed such opportunities of seeing' 
and hearing as this lady of quality, a book so formed 
by her could hardly fall short of the degree of value 
and attraction anticipated by Gray. 

Miss Frances Williarns Wynn, the lady in question, was 
the daughter of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn (the fourth 
baronet) and Charlotte, daughter of George Grenville 
(First Lord of the Treasury, 1763-1765). The uncles 
to whom she frequently alludes, were the first Marquis of 
Buckingham, Lord Grenville, and the Eight Honourable 
Thomas Grenville : the brothers, the Eight Honour- 
able Charles Williams Wynn, and Sir Henry Williams 
Wynn (long English minister at Copenhagen). One of 
her sisters was married to the late Lord Delamere, and 
the other to Colonel Shipley, M.P., son of the celebrated 
Dean of St. Asaph, and grandson of Johnson's friend, 
the Bishop. Lord Braybrooke and Lord Nugent were 
her near relatives. She died in 1857, in her 77th 
or 78th year ; when her papers came into the possession 



viii PREFATORY NOTICE. 

of her niece, the Honourable Mrs. Eowley,* under 
whose sanction these selections from them are pub- 
lished. 

Simple and easy of execution as my editorial duties 
may appear, they have really involved no inconsiderable 
amount of embarrassing responsibility. In the case of 
each individual entry or transcript, I was obliged to 
decide on the novelty or originality, as well as on the 
inherent value or interest, of the narrative, description, 
or reflections comprised in it. Thackeray used to say 
that, when Punch was first established, there was a 
member of its staff who knew every joke that had 
been made since the beginning of all things. It 
would require an editor equally well versed in Ana, 
or anecdote literature, to declare where and when 
(if ever) each of the stories or traits of character 
preserved by Miss Wynn had been in print. All 
I could do was to refer to the likeliest repositories, 
and having done so, boldly to take for granted that 
what was still new to me would prove new to the 
majority of readers. As she professedly copied the 
details, or wrote them down from memory, and did not 

* Daughter of the late Colonel and Mrs. Shipley, and wife of 
Colonel tlie Honourable R. T. Rowley, M.P. 



PEEFATORT NOTICE. ix 

invent, it stands to reason that they were once as well 
known to others as to her ; but it does not follow that 
a striking incident should be kept back from the existing 
generation because it may have been familiar to the 
last. It is also obvious that a fresh and well authenti- 
cated version of a received anecdote may prove highly 
valuable to the biographer or historian. 

Besides endeavouring to supply as succinctly as pos- 
sible the information required to explain the allusions 
or show the bearings of the statements, I have done my 
best to remedy the frequent deficiency of dates. 

A. H. 

8 St. James Street: 
April 25, 1864. 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

The Dead AJive ...... 1—2 

The Wynyard Ghost Story .... 2—5 

The Innocent Convict ..... 5 — 10 

A Convent Tragedy ..... 10—13 

Mr. Burke's Ghost Story . .... 14—17 

Execution of Charles I. . . . . . 17—20 

Earthquake at Naples ..... 20 — 26 

The Emperor Alexander ..... 25—26 

Extracts from Letters from Germany . . . 26 — 30 
Last Moments of Louis XVI. — Escape of the Dues 

D'Angouleme and Berry .... 80 — 38 

Sir Walter Scott's Stories .... 39—40 

Buxton Letter ...... 41 — 43 

The Tyrone Ghost Story .... 43—54 

The Duke of Marlborough — Admiral Barrington — The 

Gunnings ...... 55 — 58 

Account by a Lady of a Visit to Princess Dashkow . 58 — 64 

Lord North 64-65 

Account of a Hurricane in Jamaica . . . 65 — 70 

Napoleon on Board the ' Northumberland ' . . 70 — 76 

Napoleon and his Brothers .... 76 — 78 

The Pretended Archduke .... 79—86 

Anecdotes of Denon ..... 87 — 89 
Early Impressions of Celebrated Men — Pitt, Fox, Lord 

Wellesley, and Windham .... 89-94 

Imperial and Royal Visitors in 1814 — Visit to Oxford . 94 — 99 

The Stage : Miss Farren, Mrs. Siddons, Miss O'NeU, ' 

Kemble, Talma 99—108 

Pistrucci, the Improvisatore . . • 108 — 110 



Xll 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

The Rev. Edward Irving . . . 110—120 
The Queen of Wiirteniberg, ' n^e Princess Royal of Eng- 
land' — Napoleon at Wiirtemberg — George the Third's 

Insanity ..... 120 — J23 

God Save the King, and Hyder AUy . . 123—124 

Improvisatori .... 124 — 127 

Literary Gains 127—129 

Napoleon at St. Helena .... 129—134 

Execution of the Rebel Lords in 1746 . . 134—137 

Dream of the Duchess de Berry . . . 137 — 138 

Cannibalism in Sumatra .... 139 — 145 

Spinetto on the Pastoral Drama . . . 145 — 147 

Balloons and Diving-Bells . . . 147 — 162 

Conversations with. General Alava . . 162 — 169 

Deaths of the Emperors Alexander and Paul . 159 — 166 

Duchesse D'Albany .... 167—169 

An Archbishop on False Pretences . . 170 — 171 

The Due de Berri .... 171—173 

Christophe, King of Hayti . . . 173—181 

Louis XVIII. and the Fortune-Teller . . 182—183 

Revenge ...... 183—186 

Queen Caroline ..... 186 — 188 

Extracts from the Works of Francis Egerton, Earl of 

Bridgewater ..... 188—193 

Letters from Bishop Heber . . . 193 — 201 

The Ricketts Ghost Story . . . 201 ^210 

Insanity of George III. — Sir Henry Halford and 

George IV. .... . 210—215 

Countess Macnamara. The Bourbons . . 216 219 

The Old Woman of Delamere Forest . . 220 233 

Madame D'Arblay .... 233 ^235 

Sir Walter Scott ..... 235 237 

Party Feeling in France .... 237 ^240 

Manuscripts of Tasso .... 240 243 

Duchesse de Berry .... 243 245 

Louis Philippe ..... 245—247 

Lfiontine Fay ..... 247 

Charles Kemble ..... 248 ^249 

Mr. Coesvelt's Pictures .... 249 ^250 



CONTENTS. 


XUl 




PAGE 


Balloons ...... 


250—261 


Mi. Davidson's Eastern Stories . 


251—266 


Kastern Magic ..... 


256-260 


Jerome, King of Westptalia 


261—262 


Dr. Playfair'svPatient .... 


262—263 


Baron Osten's Account of Hs Escape from the Jaws of 


the Lion in 1827 .... 


263—265 


Mexican Morals and Maimers 


265—267 


Authorship of Junius . 


267-272 


Good Sleepers : Mr. Pitt-The Duie of Wellingt 


on 272-279 


Death of WiUiam IV.— Accession of Queen Victoria 279—282 


Macready's Lear .... 


282-284 


Ohantrey's Studio .... 


285—287 


Macready's Coriolanus .... 


287-289 


From the Orders of Charles 11. for the Household 


289—290 


The Pretender at the Coronation . 


290—293 


Queen Anne ..... 


293—295 


Old-Fashioned Manners .... 


296—296 


Touching for the King's Evil 


296-299 


The Emperor Nicholas . 


299—300 


Catherine of Medicis 


300—303 


Impressions of Ireland in 1840 . 


303-307 


Lady Morgan • . . . 


307—309 


Anne of Austria .... 


309—311 


The Baron Geramb and La Trappe 


311—314 


Louis Philippe .... 


314 


Henry the Ninth of England 


315—316 


Kean ..... 


317-320 


Lady Hester Stanhope .... 


320-329 


Clairvoyance .... 


329—335 


Faustine . . . • ■ 


335—337 


Addendum to the First News of Waterloo, a 


ad the 


Meeting of Wellington and Blucher 


888—341 


Addendum to the ' The Tyrone Ghost ' . 


341—342 


Epitaphs, Epigrams, and Inscriptions 


343—359 



DIARIES 

&c. 



THE DEAD ALIVE. 

London: March \1th, 1803. — ^We passed the evening 
with the Grrimstones, talking about the Duke of Bridge- 
water, who, it was then thought, might very possibly be 
brought to life again, though he had been dead above 
a week. They told me the following extraordinary 
story: 

Many years ago, a Mrs. Killigrew was supposed to 
have been dead above a week ; when she was to be put 
into her coffin, her body was so swelled that it was found 
impossible to get her diamond hoop-ring off without 
cutting the finger ; this her husband would not consent 
to ; accordingly, she was buried with the ring. 

The sexton, who had observed this, determined to steal 
the ring that night. Having forced open the coffin, he ' 
proceeded to cut off the finger, but the first gash of the 
knife brought Mrs. Killigrew to life again. The sexton, 
frightened, ran away, leaving his lanthorn, which she 
immediately took, and walked to her own house. There 

B 



2 THE DEAD ALIVE— THE WTNTAED GHOST STOET. 

her appearance, of course, created great consternation 
among the servants ; no one would venture to open the 
door ; fortunately the rumour reached the ears of her 
disconsolate husband, who went directly to receive her. 
After this event she lived ten years, and in the course of 
that time had two children, A maid who belonged to 
Mrs. Killigrew, after her death lived with Mrs. Walters, 
grandmother to the Grrimstones : from her they had this 
story. 

THE WTNYARD GHOST-STOEY.* 

Buxton: Oct. 16iA,'1803. — I returned from Blithfield.f 
The night before my departure, the conversation hap- 



* No ghost story is more frequently mentioned in society than 
tHs, but tlie amount of accurate information concerning it may 
be estimated from Sir Walter Scott's version : ' The story of 
two highly respectable officers in the British army, who are 
supposed to have seen the spectre of the brother of one in a 
hut, or barrack, in America, is also one of those accredited ghost 
tales which attain a sort of brevet rank as true, from the mention 
of respectable names as the parties who witnessed the vision. 
But we are left without a glimpse when, how, and in what terms, 
this story obtained its currency ; as also by whom, and in what 
manner, it was first circulated ; and among the numbers by whom 
it has been quoted; although all agree in the general event, 
scarcely two, even of those who pretend to the best information, 
tell the story in the same way.' — Letters on Bemonology and 
Witchcraft, p. 349. 

The late Sir E. Peel had a fixed impression that he had seen 
and spoken with Lord Byron (then ill at Patras) in 1810, in the 
streets of London. — Moore's Memoirs, vol 6, p. 14. 

t The seat of Lord Bagot, in Staffordshire. 



THE ■WTNTARD GHOST STOUT. 3 

pening to turn on ghost stories, Lord Bagot mentioned 
the following, as being very curious from its uncommon 
authenticity. 

During the American war. Major Wynyard (who 
afterwards married Lady Matilda West), Gren. Ludlow, 
and Col. Clinton, were dining together in a mess-room 
at New York. In this room there were but two doors, 
one of which led to a staircase, and the other to a small 
closet, or rather press, without either door or window. 
A man entered at the door, when Gren. Ludlow, the 
only one of the gentlemen whose head was turned to 
the door, exclaimed, * Grood Grod, Harry ! what can 
have brought you here?' The figure only waved its 
hand and said nothing. At his friend's exclamation 
Major Wynyard turned round, and his astonishment at 
seeing a brother whom he had left in England was so 
great, that he was unable to speak. The figure stalked 
once round the table, and then disappeared through the 
closet door, pulling it after him, without fastening it. 
One of the gentlemen rose immediately to open the 
door, but the figure was already vanished, and no trace 
of any mode of egress was found in the closet. Col. 
Clinton, who had never seen Mr. H. Wynyard, and was 
less horrified than his friends, proposed that they should 
mark both the day and the hour on which they had 
seen this strange apparition, believing that they should 
never hear of it again, hut at the same time, thinking 
it might be a satisfaction to know the precise time of 

B 2 



EXECTJTION WAEKANTS. 



SO extraordinary an occurrence. The next mails which 
came from England brought news of the death of Mr. 
Henry Wynyard, which had taken place at the same 
hour, two days after that on which his brother had seen 
the figure. 

Some years after this, as Col. Clinton and Gren. 
Ludlow were walking together in London, Col. Clinton 
exclaimed : ' There is the figure which we saw in 
America.' G-en. Ludlow turned round, and saw a man 
(whose name Lord Bagot had forgot)so famous for being 
so like Mr. H. Wynyard, that he was perpetually mis- 
taken for him. This man never had been in America. 
All these facts were told to Lord Bagot by Col. Wynyard, 
in the presence of either one or both of the gentlemen 
who were with him at the time that this extraordinary 
adventure happened. 

Another curious fact I heard at Blithfield. The 
Bishop of Carlisle told Lord Bagot that, in examining 
the papers of the late Duke of Bridgewater, in the 
midst of some useless papers which they were burning, 
they found two original warrants signed by Queen 
EHzabeth, one for the execution of the Duke of Norfolk, 
the other for that of Essex. Both warrants bear exactly 
the same date. Norfolk's is signed in a fine strong 
hand; that of Essex in one so' trembling, that it is 
hardly legible. 



"05 
. * 



* In Park's edition- Of Walpole's 'Royal and Noble Authors ' 
(vol. 3), ,s a facsimile of the so-called original warrant in IL 



THE INNOCENT CONTICT. 5 

At Blithfield is preserved the cap which Charles I. 
wore on the day of his execution, and which he sent to 
Col. Salusbury, an ancestor of the Bagots. The cap is 
made of crimson satin, richly embroidered with gold and 
silver. I saw likewise a letter from Charles to Col. 
Salusbury. It is published by Pennant, but he does 
not mention where the original is to be found. 



THE INIS'OCENT CONVICT. 

Nov. \mh, 1803.— We left Buxton in the midst of a 
deep snow, and after a very cold and wretched journey 
arrived at Elton* the next day. During the time we were 
there, I heard the following story, which appeared to 
me very interesting : 

Some years ago some passengers in a vessel bound for 
Botany Bay, were very much struck by the appearance 
of a female convict who was on board. She was a very 
beautiful woman, and appeared to be only 18 or 19 : her 
elegant manners were as striking as the beauty of her 
person. To these charms, she added one still more 
powerful — great modesty and strict propriety of deport- 
ment. It was this quality, so extraordinary in this 
most abject situation, which first called forth the 

Stafford collection, and the signature is clear and firm. There are 
three flourishes which could not have been executed by a trem- 
bling hand. 

* Elton Hall, Oundle : the seat of the Earl of Carysfort. 



6 THE INNOCENT CONVICT. 

attention of her superiors. The captain of the vessel 
was requested to examine the register which was sent 
with every convict, detailing their offence and their 
sentence, and inform th^ passengers what had been the 
crime of a creature who appeared so lovely. He found 
that her name was Mary Green, and that she had been 
convicted on the clearest evidence of stealing a card of 
lace from a shop in Oxford Street. 

During a long passage her continued good conduct 
gained her so much respect that, a maid-servant be- 
longing to one of the officers having fallen sick on 
board, his wife took Mary Grreen to supply her place ; 
she found very soon that she had gained by the change : 
the more she saw of Mary the better she liked her. At 
last she tried to persuade herself that her favourite was 
innocent of the crime laid to her charge. She ques- 
tioned her as to her former situation, and as to the 
reasons which could have induced her to the commission 
of a crime which seemed so foreign to her nature. Mary 
replied, as she had to all her former enquiries, that no 
power upon earth could make her reveal any part of her 
story. She added that she was perfectly resigned to her 
fate, and determined to pass the rest of her days in New 
Holland, as she never could revisit her native land. 
Still, in spite of the mystery which hung about her, she 
rose every day in the good opinion of her mistress, who, 
after some time, placed her about her children ; then 
only she discovered that, in addition to all her amiable 



THE INNOCENT CONVICT. 7 

qualities, Mary possessed, in a superior degree, all the 
talents and accomplishments which belong to an exalted 
situation. She spoke several modern languages, and 
understood both painting and music. In short, she soon 
became the favourite companion of her mistress, who 
could no longer treat this superior being as a servant. 
StUl, however, Mary resisted her urgent entreaties to 
discover her former situation ; she owned that it had 
been superior to that rank in which she now found 
herself; confessed that her present name was assumed; 
added that she had been very unfortunate, but would 
never add to her other misfortunes that of thinking that 
her relations and friends were blushing for her. 

About three years after this time, the chaplain of the 
settlement was called upon to attend the death-bed of 
an old female convict who was lately arrived. Though 
an old offender who had grown up in the paths of 
vice, this woman felt in her last moments great con- 
trition, and made a full confession of all her crimes. 
She said that what laid the most heavy on her conscience 
was the recollection of her having laid one of her of- 
fences to the charge of an innocent young woman. She 
said, that having gone in one day to a shop in Oxford 
Street at the same time with a very young girl who 
appeared to be fresh from the country, she had spoken to 
her ; and after having stolen a card of lace she followed 
the young woman out of the shop. Soon after, hearing 
the cry of ' stop thief,' she made a pretence of her clog 



8 THE INNOCENT CONVICT. 

being untied to ask the assistance of the young woman, 
who was still close by her, and while she was stooping 
had contrived to slip the lace into her muff, and to 
escape herself before their pursuers reached them. She 
said she had afterwards heard that the poor girl had 
been convicted of an offence of which she knew her to 
be perfectly innocent. 

This account immediately brought to the chaplain's 
mind the Mary Green who had excited so much 
curiosity. He went immediately to her, asked for her 
story, and received from her the usual answer, re- 
fusing all intelligence on this subject. He, however, 
pressed her, told her that it might be of the utmost 
importance to her to confide in him, as some circum- 
stances had lately come to light which he hoped might 
lead to her exculpation if she would give him all the 
particulars of her case. She burst into tears, told him 
that she was the only daughter of a respectable mer- 
chant of Birmingham, but still refused to tell the name : 
she said that at eighteen years of age she had gone to 
London, for the first time, to an uncle who lived in 
Newman Street; that a day or two after her arrival she 
had, in the dusk of the evening, gone to a haberdasher's 
shop, to which she had been directed as being only a 
few steps from her uncle's house. On coming out of 
the shop she had heard a cry of ' stop thief and had 
hastened home to escape the mob, by whom she had 
been very much hustled. On the steps of her uncle's 



THE INNOCENT CONVICT. 9 

house sbe was arrested, the piece of lace was found 
upon her, and she was immediately carried into con- 
finement. She said that she thought that it was hardly- 
possible that any testimony of her character could avail 
against the positive evidence brought against her, more 
particularly as her only defence was that she knew not 
how the lace came in her muff. She therefore deter- 
mined to conceal her name and never apply to her 
family. This happened just before the time of sessions. 
Mary's trial and condemnation ensued so soon after, that 
her relations had not had time to make all the enquiries 
which they afterwards sent in vain all over the kingdom. 
These circumstances tallied so exactly with the old 
woman's confession that the chaplain ventured to tell 
Mary that he had no- doubt of her acquittal. He in- 
formed the Governor of the whole transaction, who 
promised to transmit this information by the first ship 
to the English Government, and said that her innocence 
appeared to him so clear that, without instructions, he 
would venture to say that she should no longer be con- 
sidered as a convict, but as a planter. In England the 
strictest enquiry was made, and every circumstance 
exactly tallied with Mary's deposition. The next ship 
brought her complete acquittal and conveyed her back 
to her disconsolate parents, who had not ceased to lament 
the unaccountable disappearance of their beloved child. 
Soon after her return she married extremely well to a 
young clergyman, who had a very good living. 



10 A CONTENT TRAGEDY. 

I was told that this story was perfectly true in every 
part ; and there can hardly be a stronger instance of vir- 
tue and innocence triumphing over the most unfortunate 
false appearances. It was the virtue and modesty of 
Mary's behaviour which were the first cause of bringing 
her innocence to light. Had she not been so distin- 
guished, the chaplain never would have thought of her, 
but an unjust accusation of theft naturally brought her 
to his mind. Perhaps it may be said that her beauty 
contributed in some degree to the celebrity which she 
obtained, and consequently to her acquittal. 



A COISrVENT TEAGEDY. 

Extract from a Letter from Mr. Southey to Charles W. Wynn, 
dated January 8, 1805.* 

Jane Power was placed in the Irish Nunnery at Belem, 
near Lisbon, when but a child ; she grew up there and 
took the vows. Shortly after there came over a young 
Irish woman (Louisa Bourke, by name), who went 
through the year of her probation resolutely, and took 
the veil. She had left her own country, and then aban- 
doned the world, in a fit of jealousy : her lover at length 
traced her, followed her, and spoke with her at the 
grate. A reconciliation ensued : they corresponded and 

* A great many letters to Mr. Charles Wynn from Southey have 
been printed hy his son and his son-in-law, but this particular letter 
is not amongst them. 



A CONTENT TEAaEDT. 11 

resolved to try to get her out by means of dispensation. 
The scheme was discovered; its success would have 
been a great misfortune to the convent, as the large 
fortune which Louisa had brought must ia that case 
have been refunded. It was said that she had died 
very soon after. At this time, Jane Power was ill ; after 
her recovery, being in a remote part of the convent 
which was not in use, she heard Louisa's voice, which 
seemed to proceed from within the wall ; she thought it 
was her spirit, and much alarmed, asked if she should 
order any services for her soul. Louisa replied she was 
still alive, and requested her friend to come to her, 
giving her at the same time directions to find an en- 
trance to her place of confinement. It was a small cell 
on a higher story, matted round, and so entirely remote 
from aU the inhabited part of the convent and from 
every ear, that she was even allowed a musical instru- 
ment there. She had that day got down by finding 
some means of slipping back a bolt or lock, and by the 
same means Jane was enabled to visit her, which she 
did regularly every night for some months. Once she 
stayed later than usual, because her friend appeared more 
depressed than she had ever seen her. In consequence 
of this delay, her lamp was exhausted and went out in 
the cloisters. She was afraid that in the dark she might 
mistake her cell and thus be discovered ; she therefore 
sat herself down to wait for daybreak. When the dawn 
came, she thought she would go back to tell Louisa 



12 A CONTENT TRAGEDY. 

how she had passed the night ; she knocked and received 
no answer ; after some time she pushed the door, but 
found something against it. Having at last succeeded 
in opening the door, she saw her wretched friend lying 
on the floor with her throat cut from ear to ear. Jane 
Power fainted, and in this state was found lying on the 
bleeding body of the unfortunate Louisa by the nun 
who brought food to the prisoner. She was carried 
before the abbess, who made her take the most solemn 
vow never to reveal what she had seen. 

She continued several years longer in the nunnery ; 
the horror which the scene she had witnessed had left 
upon her mind, made her situation dreadful. Her pros- 
pect brightened a little upon the arrival of our troops. 
Her sister's husband, whose name is either Heatley or 
Headley, had a civil appointment in our army there. 
During his stay, the frequent visits of her sister and of 
her English friends, made her life more cheerful than 
that of a nun usually is. When the troops were moving, 
she complained bitterly to her sister, and Headley de- 
termined to carry her off; he conveyed boy's clothes to 
her, and gave her his watch that she might know the 
hour at which to make her escape. In order to secure 
her from interruption from any of the male servants of 
the convent, he made them all drunk. When Jane, in 
her disguise, came to the door, the key creaked in the 
lock. She had resolution enough to return to the dor- 
mitory and dip it in a lamp. Still she was before the 



A CONVENT TRAGEDY. 13 

hour appointed ; for never having had a watch, she had 
not wound it up ; and when at last the time came, she 
flung the watch over the wall instead of a stone. How- 
ever, she effected her escape. 

Still there remained a difficulty ; the captain of the 
packet, after having promised to take her, repented 
and refused after she was out of the convent. She was 
got on board by the management of Col. Trent's wife, 
who went in the same packet ; and the captain of a 
frigate, who was acquainted with her story, convoyed 
the vessel out, declaring at the same time that if Todd 
(the master of the packet) would not take her, he would 
run all risks and carry her to England himself, rather 
than that she should be forced to return to the convent. 
There came on rough weather, and poor Jane whispered 
that perhaps it was sent because of her. However, she 
reached Falmouth in safety, and the last I heard of her 
was that her friends were endeavouring to procure from 
the Pope a dispensation of her vows. 

I give you this story as Mrs. Trent gave it me. Mrs. 
Trent is a very extraordinaiy woman. Her husband was 
among the persons stopped in France ; she went over, 
obtained his liberty, and smuggled home the son of 
Hoppner the painter. 

When Jane Power saw the mail coach, she said the 
king was coming; and the first thing she asked for, 
when she was safely housed, was a looking-glass ; for, 
since she was five years old, she had never seen her 
own face. 



14 MR. bueke's ghost stokt. 

ME. BTIEKE'S ghost STORT. 

December, 1804. — I became acquainted with Mrs. 
(wife of Colonel) Dixon, first at Acton, afterwards here. 
From her conversation I gained much amusement, and, 
I hope some instruction. One or two stories that she 
told us I am determined not to forget. 

At a meeting of the Literary Club, at which Dr. ' 
Johnson, Mr. Burke, and several other eminent charac- 
ters of the day were present, it was observed that an 
old gentleman, who had never missed one of the meet- 
ings of the society, was that day absent. His absence 
was considered as the more extraordinary because he' 
happened to be president that day. While the company 
were expressing their surprise at this circumstance, 
they saw their friend enter the room, wrapped in a long 
white gown, his countenance wan and very much fallen. 
He sat down in his place, and when his friends won- 
dered at his dress, he waved his hand, nodded to each 
separately, and disappeared from the room without 
speaking. The gentlemen, surprised at this circum- 
stance, and determined to investigate it, called for the 
waiter, and asked whether anybody had been seen upon 
the staircase which led to the room where they were 
sitting. They were answered that no person had been 
seen either to enter the house or to mount the stairs, 
and that both the staircase and the entrance had been 

* Acton Park, Wrexiam : the seat of Sir R. A. Cunliffe Bart. 



ME. BUEKE'S ghost STORY. 15 

constantly filled with comers and goers. Not satisfied 
with this, they sent to the house of the gentleman 
whom they had just seen, to enquire whether he had 
been out. His residence happened to be very near the 
cofifee-house where they were, and their messenger 
immediately returned with the following melancholy 
intelligence: their friend had died about ten minutes 
before, of a violent fever, which had confined him 
entirely to his bed for several days. 

Some of the most eminent men of the club gave 
themselves great pains to discover the imposition which 
some thought had been practised upon them; others 
firmly believed that their friend's ghost had actually 
appeared to them ; and the latter opinion was confirmed 
by the total failure of all enquiries. All their efforts 
proved vain to remove the veil of mystery which 
hung over this transaction. At last they determined to 
remove the club to another part of the town, entering 
at the same time into an engagement never to reveal 
the circumstance which had occasioned this change. 
They wisely thought that such a story, supported by the 
evidence of such men as Johnson, Burke, &c., might do 
much mischief while the causes remained imexplained. 

Many years afterwards, as Mr. Burke was sitting at 
dinner with some friends at his own house, he was told 
that a poor old woman, who was dying in an obscure 
garret in the midst of the greatest wretchedness, had 
just said that she could not die in peace imless she could 



16 MK. bueke's ghost stoet. 

reveal a most important secret to Mr. Bm-ke. This 
summons appeared so like a fraudulent means of ex- 
torting money, that Mr. Burke refused to go. In a 
short time, he received a second message still more 
pressing, and at the same time, such an account was 
given of the extreme poverty and misery of the poor 
expiring object, that his compassion was excited, and 
he determined to go, in spite of the earnest entreaties 
of his friends, who still feared for his safety. They 
accordingly watched in the little obscure alley, saw him 
ascend the staircase which led to the garret in which he 
was told that the poor woman was lying, and reminded 
him that succour was at hand. 

Mr. Burke soon returned. He told his friends that 
he had found everything as it had been represented; that 
the old woman had died after telling him a very extra- 
ordinary circumstance, which had given him great satis- 
faction ; he then related aU the former part of this story, 
and added that the dying woman had confessed that she 
had been guilty of a neglect which had cost an unfor- 
tunate man his life. She said that upon her death-bed, 
she was determined to make all the atonement in her 
power, confess her error, and had therefore requested 
his presence, knowing him to be the most intimate friend 
of the deceased. She said that some years before, she was 
nurse to a gentleman who was ill of a dangerous fever, 
and named Mr. Burke's friend. She said that on a par- 
ticular day — ^which she named — she was told by the 



ME. bueke's ghost stoet. 17 

physician that the crisis of the disease was that day to 
be expected, and that the ultimate issue of the malady 
would very much depend upon the patient's being kept 
perfectly quiet at that moment ; wliich could only be 
done by incessant watching, as the delirium would pro- 
bably run very high just before. In that case the 
physician directed that the patient should be forcibly 
detained in his bed, as the least cold would prove fatal. 
He therefore ordered the nurse not to leave the room 
upon any account the whole of the day. The nurse 
added that in the afternoon of that day a neighbour had 
called upon her; that, seeing the gentleman perfectly 
quiet, she had ventured to leave his room for ten 
minutes ; when she returned, she found her patient 
gone. In a few minutes he returned and expired 
immediately. When she heard the enquiries made, she 
was well aware what had given birth to them, but was 
at that time prevented by shame from confessing the 
truth ! * 



EXECUTION OF CHAKLES I. 

Jan. I8th, 1805. — I went to Llangollen; the ladies 
gave me a paper of which the following is the copy : — 



' If anything of tlie kind had occurred at the Literary Club, 
it could hardly have escaped BosweU. Sir Walter Scott relates 
a similar story, the scene of which is ' a club of persons connected 
with science and literature ' at Plymouth. 

C 



18 EXECUTIONEK OF CHARLES I. 

Copy of an old MS. found behind an ancient engraving of 
Charles I., in the Parsonage House at Inlcherghe, in the 
County of Worcester. 

' Dr. Ed. Smallbrooke, Bishop of St. David's, informed 
me that, when he was chaplain of Archbishop Tennison, 
y« Archbishop told him as follows concerning the person 
that executed King Charles.' 

' When the Archbishop was rector of St. Martin's, he 
was sent for to pray by a dying man in a poor house in 
Gardner's Lane, Westminster, He made haste, but 
found the man just expired. The people of the house 
told him that the man had been very anxious to see him, 
and to confess to him that he was the executioner of Bong 
Charles ; that he was a trooper of Oliver, and that, every 
man in the troop having refused to do that office, Oliver 
made them draw lots, and the lot falling upon him he 
did the work in a mask, and that he immediately mixed 
in the crowd, hiding the mask ; that he had never been 
easy in his mind since. He had lived some time in their 
house, was poor and melancholy, and much distressed 
for want of consolation from Dr. Tennison. Dr. Tennjison 
was in great esteem for his good offices about dying 
persons. Charles lay one night, Saturday, May 10th, 
1 645, at the Parsonage at Inkberghe.' * 

* Assuming this' story to have any foundation in truth, the 
penitent must have been William Hulet, who was tried on the 
15th Oct. 1660, for regicide. Evidence was given that he, and 
one Walker, were the two men who officiated in disguise on the 
scaffold ; hut which of them cut off the king's head, and which 



EXECUTION OF CHARLES I. 19 

Extract from a Gazette, entitled ' Every-day Journdll,^ col- 
lected by J. Walker Clerc, and published by a particular 
Order of Parliament. 

Feb. 1st, 1648. — The gazette begins with an account 
of King Charles' trial and condemnation, and after the 
sentence passed on him follows this paragraph :■ — ' If the 
King had been guiltless of the charge, who is so weake 
to think he would have suffered the sentence of death to 
have passed on him for want of pleading ? He pleaded 
the jurisdiction of the Court, wherein he strikes at the 
people's privileges to question tyrants.' 

Jan. 30th. — ' This morning a letter was brought from 
Prince Charles to the King, by one of the gentlemen 
belonging to the Dutch ambassador, delivered to the 
captain of the guard, who acquainted the King there- 
with, but the King refused to receive it, and desired 
that it might be returned back again.' 

Then follows the King's speech from the scaffold, as 
given in all the histories, ending with his requesting 



held it up, witli tlie exclamation, ' This is the head of a traitor,' 
was left in doubt. Hulet was found guilty, hut pardoned on the 
recommendation of the judges, who disapproved the verdict. 
Various other persons — Lord Stair, Colonel Joyce, &c., &c. — have 
been named; and the question, 'Who cut off Charles I.'s head?' 
has been as eagerly discussed as ' Who was the man in the Iron 
Mask ? ' or, ' Who wrote Junius ? ' The weight of evidence is 
in favour of Richard Brandon, the common hangman, who died 
in 1649. See the State Trials for 1660 ; Ellis's Original Letters, 
New Series, vol. iii. 340, and Notes and Queries, passim. The index 
to that valuable compilation makes all its treasures easily available. 

C 2 



20 EARTHQUAKE AT NAPLES. 

Colonel Hacker to ' take care they did not put him to 
paine.' The gazette then proceeds, — ' after some other 
circumstances, the executioner severed his head from 
his body.' 

' Those of the King's line that now are, or hereafter 
shall be, may sadly lay it to heart, and not aspire to 
monarchy, considering what sad successes their predeces- 
sors have had. King Charles is beheaded ; his brother 
was poisoned; his sister put to exile; his eldest son 
exiled, her eldest son drowned ; his father strongly sus- 
pected to be poisoned ; his grandfather murthered and 
hanged on a tree ; and his grandmother beheaded.' 

N.B. This gazette, was read by Lord Grrenville to the 
King and the Prince of Orange, a few days after the 
execution of the unfortunate Louis XVI., to prove to 
them that, even in committing a great crime, the Eng- 
lish preserved more of decency and humanity than the 
French. It was melancholy to read the last paragraph 
to the dethi-oned Prince of Orange, who, as well as 
George III., is the immediate descendant of Charles. 



EAETHQUAKE AT NAPLES. 

Extract of a Letter from Naples, giving an account of the 
Earthquake. 

Naples: July 2Qth, 1805, 12 o'Olock at night— We 
have had a most dreadful earthquake; it took place about 



EARTHQUAKE AT NAPLES. 21 

a quarter-past ten. I was at the theatre, where I found 
myself suddenly rolling about in my chair, and the 
whole house apparently falling : judge of the confusion 
it occasioned. Everybody rushed to the door, and I was 
fortunate enough to be one of the first ; several houses 
had been thrown down, and many lives lost. The front 
of the house next to Mr. Elliot fell down, and killed 
a man who was passing. On my return to my house I 
found the walls cracked, and in many places quite opened. 
As the mountain remains quiet, only throwing out flames 
occasionally, we are afraid of a second shock. Elliot 
and his whole family mean to pass the night in their 
carriages on the sea-shore : most of those who have 
carriages have followed his example; the squares are 
crowded with them. I am not determined what I shall do. 

2 d'Gloeh, a.m. — The streets are crowded with pro- 
cessions: nothing is heard but the howling of the laza- 
roni; everybody calling on St. Ann, for what reason 
I have not yet been able to learn. I believe the worst 
thing to do is to go to bed. 

July 21 th. — ^We have had no return of the earth- 
quake. I have been assured by several grave people that 
we are indebted to St. Ann's interposition for this, as 
she seems to be in the secret : a heretic may be pardon- 
ed in saying she might as well have prevented the 
first shock. Joking apart, we have had a very narrow 
escape. The shock was excessively severe, and lasted 
nearly a minute : had it continued with equal violence 



22 EARTHQUAKE AT NAPLES. 

a few seconds longer, we should have had a repetition of 
all the horrors of the Lisbon earthquake in 1 755. There 
is scarce a house that has not been damaged more or 
less. There was nothing in the heavens that indicated 
the approach of this commotion ; the day had been sultry, 
and was succeeded by one of those fine Italian nights 
unknown in the north ; there was not a cloud to be seen 
in the horizon, nor a breath of air stirring. During the 
shock, and for some time afterwards, partial eddies of 
wind brought with them immense clouds of dust, but 
they were soon dispersed; and the remainder of the 
night was as fine as the former part, nor is there a 
cloud to be seen this morning. 

July 28th. — The whole town passed last night in the 
squares and open places, as a return of the earthquake 
was expected. It was the most horrible sight I ever 
beheld. Notwithstanding the immense crowds, a perfect 
silence prevailed, interrupted only by the crying of 
women, and the singing of children, who paraded the 
streets in processions with flambeaux in honour of the 
Virgin. Not a smile was seen on any countenance ; the 
fierce looks of the lazaroni increased the horror of the 
scene. The havoc is infinitely greater than was at first 
imagined. The houses destroyed are estimated at five 
millions of piastres ; whole streets are in ruins. The 
shock was so strong that the crew of the 'Excellent,' 
anchored at two miles from the shore, supposed that the 
ship had struck against the earth, and all the officers 



EARTHQUAKE AT NAPLES. 23 

and men were upon deck en chemise. It is sup- 
posed that not more than ninety people have been 
crushed at Naples. 

Jvily 29iA. — All remains quiet, but we are daily re- 
ceiving reports from the environs that are truly 
distressing. Half of the town of Averca is destroyed. 
At Capua the barracks fell in, and killed or wounded 
seventy-three soldiers. The towns of Isernia (about 
sixty miles from hence) and Campo Basso are entirely 
destroyed. At Aventino they have lost eight hundred 
persons. At another town (the name of which I have 
forgot) the loss is upwards of one thousand. I will 
write again by the next post, that you may not be 
uneasy on my account. I am, however, in great hopes 
that all danger is over. 

Naples: August 6th, 1805. — We have fortunately 
had no return of the earthquake : the slightest, in the 
present ruined state of the town, would bring the whole 
about our ears. The shock has been suflEciently great ; 
'tis said twelve thousand persons haveperished, though the 
government allows but five thousand. Forty-two towns 
or villages have suffered more or less, some of which are 
entirely destroyed. The town of Boiardo has totally 
disappeared, and a lake has been formed in its place. A 
new volcano is said to have burst out in the chain of 
the Apennines which runs behind Isernia ; a fortunate 
event, which has, perhaps, saved us from the renewal of 
the earthquake by giving vent to the volcanic matter. 



24 EAETHQrAKB AT NAPLES. 

which from some secret cause had set in agitation the 
bowels of the earth. You may form some idea of the 
violence of the shock, from the circumstance of some 
persons being affected by it as by sea-sickness. The 
children of Sir Grenville Temple, who, from being igno- 
rant of the danger, cannot be supposed to have been 
influenced by fear, were affected in this manner in 
common with several grown people. I myself did not 
feel any sensation of this sort, perhaps from having been 
constantly in motion: the same cause prevented my 
feeling the second and third shocks, which took place at 
eleven and one o'clock the same night ; but if my imagi- 
nation does not deceive me, the earth has never ceased to 
tremble ever since the great shock. One wing of the house 
in which I live has been declared uninhabitable : my 
part has not suffered so much ; but it will be necessary 
that it should undergo a thorough repair, being cracked 
from top to bottom, and the walls open in several places. 
August IZth. — At seven o'clock last night we had a 
most furious eruption of Mount Vesuvius. The lava, a 
mile and a half in breadth, ran down to the sea a dis- 
tance of seven miles in three hours, destroying vine- 
yards, cattle, houses — in short, everything it met in its 
passage. The damage it has done is immense. The 
effect it produced when it came in contact with the 
sea was truly sublime ; for one hundred yards round 
you.might have boiled an egg in the water, so violent a 
heat did it communicate. Seven or eight old people only 



THE EMPEKOR ALEXANDER. 25 

have perished. Notwithstanding the destruction it has 
occasioned, I cannot but look upon it as a fortunate 
circumstance, as it has probably saved us from a repe- 
tition of the earthquake. 



THE BMPEEOB ALEXANDER. 

Wynnstay : Oct. 1806. — I heard a curious trait of the 
character of the Emperor Alexander. At one of the 
great national festivals of St. Petersburgh, where he 
was greeted by multitudes almost innumerable with the 
most violent applause, — every one seeming to vie with 
his neighbour in the mode of best expressing their 
enthusiastic fondness for their Emperor, — he turned to 
the Duke of Gr. who was standing near him, and said he 
could not look at that immense populace without shud- 
dering when he considered them as absolutely depen- 
dent upon the will of one man ; adding that he should 
never feel completely happy till he saw introduced into 
Eussia, a limited monarchical government similar to 
that of England * . . . The Duke of Gr. spoke much of 
the violent detestation expressed by all orders of men 
for the Archduke Constantine. It seems strange that such 
statements can be loudly professed with impunity under 
the government of a son of the Emperor Paul ; but one 



* Alexander is said to have replied to Madame de Stael, when 
she spoke of his beneficent rule, that he was only a happy accident. ■ 



26 LETTERS FROM GBHMANT. 

fact which the Duke of Gr. said was related to him by- 
Alexander, is much more so. The Emperor was one day 
reproving Count Pannin, his favourite, for expressing so 
freely his opinion of Constantine. He told him that he 
must consider it a want of respect to himself when his 
brother was treated in such a manner : besides, added 
he, consider what may be the probable consequences to 
yourself; remember that, if anything should happen to 
me, Constantine becomes your Sovereign.* Pannin re- 
plied that no one was more anxious than himself to 
avoid anything which might appear like disrespect to His 
Majesty, and therefore would for that reason avoid ex- 
pressing his opinions on this subject; adding that, as to 
the other argument, that had no weight with him, ' for 
Sire,' said he, ' if anything was to happen to you, I wish 
Archduke Constantine to know, and beg you will tell 
him from me, that he shall not reign twenty-fotir hours.' 



EXTRACTS FBOM LETTERS PROM GERMANY. 

August: 1800.— On the morning before Eatisbonne 
was taken, a grand and solemn ceremony was performed 
in the cathedral, of which the band and organ are 
reckoned the best in Germany. At one passage of the 



* Panniai might have remembered the reply of Charles 11., 
when the Duke of York (afterwards James n.) reproached him 
with not taking precautions against assassins : ' Depend upon it, 
James, no one will kill me to make you king.' 



LETTERS FROM GEEMAI^T. 27 

Latin service, the fears of the inhabitants of a siege and 
bombardment seemed to be expressed in the words, 
' Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou shalt be made desolate ! ' 
The prophecy was chanted by a shrill single voice, like 
one from the dead, at the further end of the long echo- 
ing cathedral. A dreadfully sublime pause succeeded, 
and then the whole thunder of the organ, drums, and 
trumpets, broke in. I never thought terrific music could 
have reached so high. Two hours after an alarm was 
given, and the Hungarian infantry were called out to sup- 
port their defeated countrymen. This music, though less 
sacred, was also perfect in its kind. Us effect was 
heightened by the sound of artillery coming nearer 
and nearer, and the flash of carbines from the neigh- 
bouring wood, where they were skirmishing in small 
parties. The sight of men and horses passing, gave a 
serious aspect to the scene, and convinced the spec- 
•tator that he was not hearing the drums of a holiday 
parade. 

Sept. 1st, 1802, — He gave me an account of the de- 
molition of the strong castle of Ehrenbreitstein, which 
human force had never conquered; but the destruction 
of which was a stipulated article in the Grerman Treaty of 
Peace. The task is not even yet fully accomplished. He 
was present at the springing of the principal mine. It 
must have been a sight terrible and magnificent in the 
extreme. 

The mighty structure, compacted and cemented by 



28 LETTEES FEOM GEEMANT. 

the skill of early ages, did not immediately separate, 
but rose at the explosion in one great mass, slowly and 
sullenly, to the distance of four feet from the ground ; 
for a moment it remained in the air in awful equipoise, 
visibly balancing from side to side, as if in doubt 
which way to deal devastation ; at last, with resistless 
impetuosity, and with a crash that rent the air, it forced 
its way down a shelving precipice of 800 feet into the 
valley beneath. Near the river's brink was an ancient seat 
of the Elector Palatine, which had long been desolate 
and upinhabited. Against this the bastion, still entire, 
rushed with all its augmented and accelerated force. 
Feeble was the resistance ; but feeble as it was, the 
sudden collision loosened all the component parts of the 
destructive engine, and the tower and the palace form 
one blended shapeless heap of indiscriminate ruin. 

Mentz: 1802. — This unfortunate city thrice changed 
its masters during the war. Custine first took it ; then, 
after a most severe bombardment, it fell into the hands 
of the Prussians ; and again it reverted to the French 
amid the tide of their splendid victories. 

Its public buildings are all ruined and destroyed ; its 
religious houses demolished ; the trees which formed a 
magnificent avenue on the ramparts are felled to the 
earth; the palace of the Elector and all the adjacent 
villas so entirely done away, that their place knoweth 
them no more; the stately cathedral, once the pride 
and glory of ecclesiastical sovereignty, presented to the 



LETTERS FROM GERMANY. 29 

view little more than a broken dilapidated mass of com- 
plicated destruction. 

Here my melancholy walk ended : the evening was 
far advanced, and there remained just enough light to 
relieve the dark shadows which the projections of tombs, 
chapels, and arches threw forward. Except a few 
wanton mutilations, the superb monuments all remain 
as in their pristine state : they chiefly consist of busts 
and statues of the successive Electors, in the purest 
white marble, from the fifteenth to the middle of the 
eighteenth century. Amid these splendid specimens of 
art, the traveller sees in the great aisle a shapeless heap 
of forage : near the pulpit, all glittering with coloured 
ornaments, a depot of straw in trusses ; in the choir, 
which neither war nor sacrilege could entirely deprive 
of its enrichments, two or three miserable cabriolets ; 
the western chapel, once embelUshed by all that wealth, 
ingenuity, or devotion could prompt or suggest, turned 
into an occasional stable. It was a second Babylon in 
ruins; full of doleful creatures, profaned, desecrated, 
devastated. The pavement, formerly in rich mosaic, 
exhibits evident proof of that furious zeal which ran- 
sacked the mansions of the dead in order to fabricate 
engines and weapons of death. The leaden cofiSns were 
too valuable objects of mihtary consideration to escape 
the hands of those whose hearts nothing could soften. 

As my dubious feet were feeling their way along, and 
it was only not totally dark, my guide, a savage-looking 



30 LAST MOMENTS OP LOUIS XVI. 

ruffian fellow, suddenly and violently seized my arm. 
I was straining my eyes to catch a glimpse of a gigantic 
iigure in marble elevated to a considerable height against 
one of the pillars. I had insensibly prolonged my stay, 
rapt in musing and meditations congenial to the scene; 
but when I met with this unexpected attack, and as I 
deemed assault, it took not a moment to bring me to 
myself. The man, in his rude jargon between German 
and French, soon explained to me his kindness and my 
own danger : at my feet was a hideous chasm through 
which in the siege a bomb had forced its way into a 
spacious vault that had ever since remained open ; one 
moment more, and it would have received another 
visitor.* 



LAST MOMEISTTS OF LOUIS XVL — ESCAPE OP THE 
DUGS D'ANGOULEME AND BEEEY. 

Stowe: January 9th, 1807.— This morning I have 
been very much interested by an account given us of some 
of the horrors of the Eevolution by the Duke de Sirent. 
He read to us a history of the last moments of Louis 
XVI., written by Abbe Edgeworth, at the request of the 
brothers of that unfortunate Monarch. In the history 
there was little that we did not know before from Clery's 



* I rather think that Sir R. Wilmot Horton was the writer of 
these remarkable letters. 



LAST MOMENTS OF LOTJIS XVI. 31 

and other publications : but every particular became 
doubly interesting — first, from being so authenticated, but 
still more from the extreme emotion of the reader. This 
was peculiarly striking when, in describing the anxiety 
expressed by the King respecting the fate of the clergy, 
the abbe says he informed him of the kind, hospitable 
reception they had met with in this country, upon 
which the King forcibly expressed his gratitude towards 
the English for the protection they had afforded to his 
unfortunate subjects. At these words the poor did man's 
voice faltered, and his eyes filled as he looked towards 
Lady B. 

The most striking circumstance mentioned by Edge- 
worth is a speech of the Deputy of the National As- 
sembly, who was ordered to accompany him in the fiacre 
which carried him from the National Assembly to the 
melancholy abode of the condemned Monarch. After 
very little communication on indifferent subjects, the 
man suddenly exclaimed, ' Man Dieu, quelle tache nous 
avons a remplir ! Quel homme ! quelle resignation ! 
quel courage ! 11 faut qu'il y ait la quelque chose cle 
surhumain.^* After this speech the abbe had the pru- 



* It was tlie Minister of Justice (Garat) who accompanied the 
abbs on hia way to the Temple, and his soliloquy is thus reported 
in the DemHres Heures, as printed ; — ' " Grand Dieu ! " s'6cria-t-il, 
aprSs avoir lev^ les glaces de sa voiture, " de quelle af&euse commis- 
sion je me vols chargS ! Quelle homme ! " ajouta-t-il en parlant du 
Roi, "quelle resignation! quel courage! Non, la nature toute 
seule ne saiu'ait donner tkit de forces ; il y a quelque chose de 
surhumain." 



32 LAST MOMENTS OF LOUIS XVI. 

dence to preserve perfect silence ; he thought that, though 
he might be able to work on the mind of this man, it 
was still more likely, considering the short time they 
had to pass together, that he might only exasperate him, 
and be denied the permission of seeing the imfortunate 
King. The behaviour of Louis in these last trying 
moments exhibits proofs not only of his uncommon 
piety, resignation, and meekness, but also of fortitude 
and resolution, which appear little to accord with the 
general Weakness and indecision of his character. In 
reading this melancholy history, it was singular to see 
that the duke appeared to be most affected by some 
trifling instances of degradation, which we might other- 
wise have overlooked. For instance, when Louis was 
described as receiving the sacrament sans prie-Dieu, 
sans coussin, in a small bed-room * without any furni- 
ture but trois mauvaises chaises en cuir, he was deeply 
affected, probably from the having so frequently been 
an eye-witness of all the splendour which used to attend 
this ceremony. 

Afterwards, the duke gave us the account of his escape 
from Paris with the sons of the Comte d'Artois, — the Due 
d'Angouleme and the Duke de Berri. These children 



" According to the printed copy of the narrative, it was the 
King's cabinet, 'oii il n'y avait ni tapisserie ni ornemens; un 
mauvais poele de faience lui tenoit lieu de cheminge, et Ton n'y 
voyait pour toute meuble qu' una table et trois chaises de cuir.' 
It was in the adjoining chamber, the King's, where 'le Eoi 
entendit la messe a genoux par terre, sans prie-Dieu ni coussins.' 



ESCAPE OF THE FRENCH PEINCES. 33 

were entrusted to him not only by their father, but by the 
King, who both seem on this occasion to have given evident 
proofs of indecision and weakness of mind. The Comte 
d'Artois (now Monsieur) having told the duke that he 
wished him to escape with his sons, whose governor he was, 
everything was prepared for their departure that night. 
The father seems to have little troubled himself with any 
arrangements, saying to the duke, ' Je Tn'en repose sur 
vous, ce sont vos enfantSy and refusing even to name 
the place or country to which he was to take them. At 
last, upon his representing that they were enfants de 
Vetat, he promised to get from Louis an order em- 
powering the duke to remove them. Very late at night, 
not having received this order. Monsieur de Sirent deter- 
mined to follow Monsieur to the queen's supper, where 
he knew him to be. He says he never can forget the 
appearance of deep dejection and consternation which he 
saw in the faces of all the royal family, assembled after 
supper in the state bedchamber of the queen. In a 
window stood the King and the Comte d'Artois, in 
earnest conversation. Monsieur de Sirent endeavoured 
once more to obtain further orders ; representing that 
from various political circumstances, of which he was 
ignorant, there must be reasons for preferring one 
country to another for the refuge of the royal children. 
After a pause, both brothers, nearly in the same words, 
assured him of their perfect confidence in him, and re- 
fused to give any further orders ; thus shifting all the 

D 



34 _ ESCAPE OF THE FRENCH PEINCES. 

weight of responsibility from their own shoulders upon 
his. They gave, however, one much stronger proof of 
pusillanimity ; when the duke repeated his request for 
a written order from the King, His Majesty said, 'a 
propos, il vous en faut un assurement,' and put into 
his hands a folded paper. His dismay must have been 
great when, on his return home, he found this to be 
only an order to furnish him with post-horses ; in short, 
a sort of safe conduct for himself, without any mention 
of the young princes. He had, therefore, to set out on 
his perilous enterprise with the additional horror of 
knowing that, if the princes were missed soon enough 
to be overtaken by the emissaries of the National As- 
sembly, he had no permission to show ; and, therefore, 
the whole blame would fall on his devoted head. Besides, 
it seemed but too probable that they might work on the 
mind of the weak monarch so far as to make him wish to 
recall the princes; in which case, he would never avow 
that he had permitted their departure. Neither of these 
fears were expressed by M. de Sirent, but from the cir- 
cumstances, it was easy to imagine what he must feel. 

At last, in the middle of the night, they set out; the 
duke, his two pupils, a surgeon, and a servant in one 
carriage, followed by one in which were the duchess and 
her daughters. The children had no idea where they 
were going ; they were told they were going to see the 
departure of a regiment of hussars which they had much 
admired. The hairbreadth escapes of this journey made 



ESCAPE OP THE FEENCH PKINCES. 35 

one's blood run cold. Monsieur de Sirent describes the 
villages as ne finissant point, particularly one near- Paris 
filled with laundresses, who poured upon them the most 
violent torrent of abuse. After some hours' travelling, 
it became necessary to give the children some breakfast, 
which he thought might be safely obtained at the seat of 
the Garde des Sceaux, M. de Massieu (I think). He was 
absent ; but from an old concierge, who knew Monsieur 
de Sirent to be an old friend of his master, they got 
breakfast. While the children were eating, the duke 
was examining the old concierge. Finding that he had 
lived 20 years with Monsieur de M., he ventured to [tell 
him that his visitors were the sons of the Comte d'Artois, 
asking him to procure them horses. In this he suc- 
ceeded, and for some time they travelled prosperously, 
the innkeepers too much occupied by passing events to 
trouble their heads about un simple particulier 
voyageant a Spa pour .sa sanU avec sa fem/me et 
ees enfans. 

At the town of Buonavite, where they intended to 
sleep and expected to find a bon gite, they found 
the streets full of populace, who collected round the 
carriage, calling them aristocrats, and by every other 
abusive term which seemed to follow of course. 
They were actually beginning to pull ofi" the papers 
which were stuck on to conceal the arms on the 
carriages, when the courier, to whom, fortunately, their 
intention of stopping had not been communicated, 

D 2 



36 ESCAPE OP THE FEENCH PRINCES. 

announced the horses to be put to, and they set off again 
not very sorry to lose sight of the good people of Buona 
vite. At the next stop they found only a wretched posi 
house, but the master promised to get them some eggi 
for supper, and the cushions of the carriages were taker 
out to make a sort of bed for the princes and the ladies, 
While they were resting, the duke sat himself down ir 
a corner of the kitchen chimney, trying to warm him- 
self; for, though worn out with anxiety, he found it 
impossible to sleep. The post-master sat down by him, 
and began to talk of the news of the day, of the 
wretched condition of the country, of the disturbances 
hourly expected in the next town of Peronne, &c. On 
these subjects his sentiments were such as the duke him- 
self might have expressed, and more effectually warmed 
his heart than the kitchen fire. At last, having agreed 
with his host in everything, he asked him how he might 
prosecute his journey to Spa with most safety and least 
disturbance. The man replied : Monsieur, il faut, 
enfin, que les coqui'hs dorment comiTie les honnetes gens, 
je vous donnerai six bons chevaux a chaque voiture, el 
vous serez loin d'ici avant quails ne soient eveilUs. 

They accordingly proceeded without obstacle through 
the deserted streets of Peronne, which by ten o'clock the 
next day was in a state of insurrection. During this 
day's journey they were overtaken by the Prince de 
Conde, and had the mortification of seeing the horses 
which had been put to their carriage taken off for his. 



ESCAPE OF THE PEENCH PRINCES. 37 

When he discovered them, he wished to prevent this, 
but the duke wisely thought that a little delay would be 
less dangerous than the suspicions excited by such a 
mark of respect. At last, on the third night of their 
departure from Paris, when they were within a few 
miles of Valenciennes, where the duke knew Monsieur 
would meet them, he informed his pupils of their real 
destination. Hitherto they had been kept in perfect 
ignorance. After the story of the hussar regiment, he 
had invented others to account for their travelling in- 
cognito. M. de Sirent took this opportunity to inform 
them fully, and in the most solemn manner, of the 
melancholy situation of their father, their King, and 
their country ; expressing at the same time his fears as 
to their future fate. He then told them that now they 
must depend upon themselves, they must become from 
that hour not only men but heroes. 

All this appears perfectly natural if the princes had 
been, as we thought when we heard all this, only eight 
or ten years of age ; but the fact is that these children, 
kept so perfectly in the dark, delighted with the idea of 
seeing a hussar regiment, and believing that such a 
journey was caused and all the apprehensions which 
they could not but see in M. de Sirent excited by some 
trivial occasion — these children (as he called them) were, 
one near sixteen and the other near fourteen. They 
stayed only a few days at Valenciennes, and then pro- 
ceeded to Spa; nor was M. de Sirent at ease about 



38 ESCAPE OF THE FKENCH PKINCES. 

them till two months and a half afterwards, when they 
reached Turin, and were placed under the care of their 
maternal grandfather. 

Madame de Sirent, who was dame d'atours to 
Madame Elizabeth, and had only left her, thinking 
that she should rather impede than assist her flight 
after the disaster of Varennes, determined to return to 
her post. Immediately on her return to Paris, she and 
her daughter were imprisoned, and were only released 
at the death of Eobespierre, fourteen months after. 
Her life was during this time preserved by singular 
means: one of the inferior agents of Eobespierre was 
highly bribed, and through his hands passed the awful 
orders of execution. They were given each decade on ten 
loose sheets of paper, one for each day ; whenever the 
name of Madame de Sirent appeared upon the paper, 
he slipped that sheet underneath, and proceeded to the 
next. Afterwards she attached herself to the unfortu- 
nate niece of Madame Elizabeth, and is now with her 
at Mittau, while her husband, from the same sense of 
duty, is here with Monsieur and the Due de Berri. 

N.B.— In 18141 saw Madame de Sirent, a little hump- 
backed old woman, a^ stray lady of the bedchamber to 
the Duchesse d'Angouleme, at the reception, or sad mock 
drawing-room, which she held in South Audley Street, 
in a small two-roomed house which the Comte d'Artois 
had hired. A few days after they departed for Paris. 



SIR WALTER SCOTT'S STORIES. 39 



SIK WALTER SCOTT S STORIES. 

April, 1807. Mr. Scott, the author of the ' Lay,' told 
us some curious border histories. "We were much 
pleased with the conclusion of the history of Wat Tynlin. 
When he was grown old and blind, one of the agents of 
the Lady of Branksome, in her absence, called upon him 
for the rent of a small tower which he inhabited ; part 
of which is standing to this day. Wat, incensed, replied 
he never had paid rent, nor would at that age. At last 
he delivered his bow to the steward, and said he would 
pay the rent to the man who could draw that bow ; the 
bow was certainly tried, but we will hope that the lady 
would never have obliged such a man to pay his rent. 
However, certain it is that some vain attempts were 
made to draw his bow, and that Wat never paid his rent. 

Mr. Scott spoke of one story which might make an 
excellent ballad, but he said he could not write it, as 
to do it justice much humour, a quality he never pos- 
sessed* waa required. Scott of Harden, one of his 

* (Note by Miss Wi/nn.) — When in 1815 Scott published Paul's 
' Letters to tis Kinsfolk,' in wHcli the attempts at humour so en- 
tirely failed, I lamented his having forgotten this declaration. Now, 
in 1824, when he is considered as the imdoubted, though unac- 
knowledged, author of so many admirable novels, eontaimng more 
humour than could probably be found in all the other authors of this 
century collected together, I wonder at his having made it. I see 
that when I tell this story nobody believes me, and I feel I should 
doubt my own recollection if the above had not been written on 
the very day that I saw Scott, in 1807. 



40 SIR WALTER SCOTT'S STOEIES. 

ancestors, was a famous border thief, and at one time, 
when he had either spoiled the neighbouring EngKsh of 
all their cattle or had frightened them all away, he 
began to fear that from disuse he might become less 
expert at the honourable trade he pursued ; and to keep 
his hand in, amused himself with driving the cattle of 
one of his own countrymen and neighbours, Murray of 
Elibank, an ancestor of the present Lady Elibank. 
Murray soon found means of revenging himself, and 
brought Scott, his followers, his cattle, &c., &c., all 
prisoners to Elibank Castle. On the walls was sitting 
his wife, who, perceiving the train that followed him, 
asked what he meant to do with Scott. ' Why, hang 
him, to be sure,' was the answer. The more prudent 
wife exclaimed, ' What ! hang such a winsome mannie 
as Harden, when we have three such sorry damsels at 
home ? ' Murray was persuaded by his wife, and sending 
for one of his daughters, whose ugly face and immense 
mouth had acquired her the name of Mag o' tnonth 
Murray, proposed to Scott to marry her, leaving him 
no other alternative but a halter. The unfortunate 
prisoner most ungallantly refused the lady; and .the tra- 
dition says that it was not till the rope was tied to the 
tree, and he began to feel it tighten, that he repented. 
He was married, and sorrowfully bent his steps home- 
wards, taking with him his ugly wife. 



BUXTON LETTER. 41 



BUXTON LETTER. 



Extract of a Letter from Dr. J n, at Buxton, to his friend, 

J s B II, Esq., in Scotland. {By Pepper Arden, 

afterwards Lord Alvanley.) 

Fortune often delights to exalt what nature has neg- 
lected, and that renown which cannot be claimed by 
intrinsic excellence is frequently derived from accident. 
The Eubicon was ennobled by the passage of Csesar, and 
the bubbling up of a stream in the middle of a lime 
quarry has given celebrity to Buxton. The waters in 
which it is agreed that no mineral properties reside, 
and which seem to have no better claim to superior 
heat than what is derived from comparing them with 
the almost Siberian atmosphere that surrounds them, 
are said, however, to possess a spirit which, though too 
volatile and unknown to receive a name from the 
chymists of graver ages, have, in this fanciful era, when 
Macaroni philosophers hold flirtation with science, talten 
the lead of all the other elements, and those whose 
nerves have not found any relief in change of sky and 
variety, seek for a refuge here in fixed air. 

It is, indeed, amazing to see the avidity with which 
mankind seek after that health which they have volun- 
tarily alienated, Uke Methodists who hope for salvation 
through faith withoutworks. Invalids come here in hopes 
of finding in the well the vigour which they have lost 
in the bowl, and of absorbing in the bath the moisture 



42 BUXTON LETTER. 

which evaporated in the ball or the masquerade. For 
this purpose they venture to this dreary spot, which 
contemplates with envy the Highlands of Scotland, sur- 
rounded by barren mountains, beaten by storms almost 
perpetual. Scarce an inhabitant is to be seen unless 
when the sun, whose appearance is justly considered as 
one of the wonders of the Peak, draws them out from a 
curiosity natural to man who wonders into what cavern 
the storm has retired. 

Yet this is summer ; and if the winter hold its natural 
proportion, the inhabitants of the hall — which is not 
thirty yards distant from the well — must pass months 
without any communication with it. Yet here, the same 
folly which created the disease for the cure of which 
so much is suffered, obstructs the operation of the 
remedy from which so much is hoped. Animated by 
the appetite, which even the diluent powers of common 
water, assisted by the vibrations of diurnal exercise 
and the collisive hilarity of reciprocal salutation, would 
give to a body obstructed by gluttony and rest — they 
devour with deleterious hunger a farinaceous sponge, 
the interstices of , which are inundated with butter, 
which might smile at the peristaltic exertions of an 
elephant, and of which the digestion would be no less 
an evil than the obstruction. If obstructed, it convulses 
the stomach with rancid exhalations ; and if by its gravity 
it finds its way to the bowels, it tumefies them with 
flatulent paroxysms by its detention : in both it becomes 



THE TTEONE GHOST STORY. 43 

acrimonious and mephitic, and while its fumes arise and 
salute the brain with palsy, its caput mortuum descends 
and lays the foundation of fistula. 

Very providentially, however, the evils of breakfast 
are not aggravated by dinner. Dinner is rather a cere- 
mony here than a repast, and those who are delicate 
and sick, -acquire popularity by disseminating among 
the multitude that food which nothing but rude health, 
both of body and mind, can digest. "When it is finished, 
however, the chaplain calls upon the company to be 
thankful for what they have received ; and the company, 
remembering they have breakfasted, join in the thanks- 
giving. 

The evils of the day are likewise happily alleviated 
by the early hour of retiring to bed ; and if sleep for- 
sakes the pillow, even fancy itself cannot charge it on 
the supper. There are, notwithstanding, here upwards 
of two hundred people, who, by talking continually of 
how much nature has left undone, and how little art 
has done for the place, increase the spleen they come 
to cure. 



THE TTEONE GHOST STOEY. 

Lord.Tyrone and Lady Beresford were born in Dublin. 

They were left orphans in their infancy to the care of 

the same person, who brought them up in the principles 

of Deism. Their guardian dying when they were about 



44 THE TYRONE GHOST STOET. 

fourteen, they fell into very different hands, and everj 
means was tried to convince them of the truth of re- 
vealed religion, but in vain. Though separated, theii 
mutual affection remained unalterable. After some 
years they made a solemn vow to each other, 
that whichever should die first, would (if permitted 
by the Almighty) appear to the other and declare 
what religion was most approved by God. Lady 
Beresford shortly after married Sir Martin Beresford. 
One morning she came down unusually pale with a 
black ribbon round her wrist. Sir Martin asked whether 
she was ill, and whether she had sprained her wrist: 
she replied she was well, and conjured him never to 
enquire the cause of her wearing the ribbon. She 
expressed anxiety for the arrival of the post. Sir Martin 
asked whether she expected letters. She said she ex- 
pected to hear that Lord Tyrone was dead ; that he died 
last Tuesday at 4 o'clock. Sir Martin tried to comfort 
her, and assured her she was deceived by some idle 
dream. The letter arrived conveying the intelligence 
of Lord Tyrone's death, which had happened at the 
precise time Lady Beresford had specified. 

She then informed Sir Martin that she had to announce 
to him that she should shortly give him a son, an event 
he had long and ardently desired. In some months Lady 
Beresford was delivered of a son ; she had before given 
birth to two daughters. Sir Martin survived this event 
but four years. After bis death Lady Beresford shut 



THE TTKONB GHOST STOET. 45 

herself very much up, she visited no family but that of 
the clergyman of the village. His family consisted of 
himself, his wife, and a son, who, at the time of Sir 
Martin's death, was quite a boy; to this son, however, 
she was in a few years married. He behaved to her in the 
most scandalous manner. After having given birth to two 
daughters, Lady Beresford insisted on a separation from 
her profligate husband. After a few years she was in- 
duced by his entreaties to pardon and once more live 
with him, and in time became the mother of another 
son. The day she had lain in a month, she sent for 
Lady Betty Cobb, her intimate friend, requesting her 
and a few friends to spend the day with her, as it was 
her birthday; among others, was the clergyman by whom 
she was baptized. Having observed that she was forty- 
eight that day, the clergyman assured her she was only 
forty-seven: telling her he had had frequent disputes 
with her mother on the subject, and had a few 
days before searched the register, which proved him 
to be right and her only forty-seven instead of 
forty-eight. ' You have signed my death warrant,' 
said she, and requested the company to leave her, as 
she had many things to settle before she died. She 
requested that Lady Betty Cobb and her son by Sir 
Martin (who was about twelve years old), would come 
to her, as she had something to communicate to them. 

When the attendants were withdrawn, she said, ' I 
have something to communicate to you both before I 



46 THE TTKONB GHOST STORY. 

die, a period which is not far distant. You, Lady Betfc 

are no stranger to the friendship which always subsiste 

between Lord Tyrone and myself; we were educate 

under the same roof, and in the same principles of Deisn 

When my friends afterwards tried to persuade us t 

embrace the revealed religion, their arguments, thoug 

insufScient to convince, had power to stagger our forme 

faith. In this perplexing state of doubt, we made a vo\ 

to each other that whichever died first should (if per 

mitted) appear to the other and declare what religion wa 

most acceptable to the Almighty. Accordingly, while Si: 

Martin and I were asleep, I woke suddenly and founc 

Lord Tyrone sitting by the bed-side. I screamed, and 

endeavoured to wake Sir Martin. « For Heaven's sake,'^ 

said I, " by what means, or for what purpose, came you 

here at this time of night?" "Have you forgot your 

promise ? " said he; " I died last Tuesday, at four o'clock, 

and have been permitted by the Supreme Being to appear 

to you to assure you that revealed religion is the only 

true faith and the only means by which we can be 

saved. I am further suffered to inform you that 

you are with child of a son who shall marry my 

daughter. Not many years after his birth. Sir Martin 

will die ; you will be married again to a man whose Ul 

conduct will make you miserable ; you will bring him 

two daughters and afterwards a son, in childbed of 

whom you will die in the forty-seventh year of your 

age." "Just Heaven," I exclaimed, " and cannot I pre- 



THE TYRONE GHOST STOET. 47 

vent this?" "Undoubtedly, you may," said he, "you are a 
free agent, and may prevent this by resisting every temp- 
tation to a second marriage ; but the passions are strong ; 
hitherto you have had no trials; you know not their 
power. More I am not permitted to say; but if, after 
this warning, you persist in your infidelity, your lot in 
another world would be miserable indeed." " May I not 
ask," said I, " if you are happy ?" " Had I been other- 
wise, I should not have been permitted to appear to 
you." " I may then infer that you are happy; when 
the morning comes, how shall I be convinced that your 
appearance has been real, and not the phantom of 
my imagination ? " — " Will not the news of my death 
be sufficient to convince you?" "No," returned I, 
"I might have had such a dream, and that dream 
by accident come to pass. I wish to have some 
stronger proof of its reality." " You shall," said he ; 
then waving his hand, the bed-curtains, which were 
of crimson velvet, were instantly drawn through a 
large hook of ivory, by which the tester of the bed, 
which was of an oval form, was suspended. " In 
that," said he, " you can't be mistaken ; no mortal arm 
could have done this." "But we are sleeping, and 
people have much greater strength then than when 
awake. I may fancy I have done it in my sleep. I shall 
still doubt." " You have a pocket-book, on the leaves of 
which I will write ; you know my handwriting." He 
wrote. "Still," said I, " I may in the morning have my 



48 THE TYRONE GHOST STOET. 

doubts; though waking I cannot mistake your hand 
writing ; sleeping I may." " You are hard of belief, j 
must not touch you ; it would injure you irreparably 
it is not for spirits to touch mortal flesh." " I do nol 
regard a slight blemish." " You are a woman of courage, 
hold out your hand." I did ; he touched my wrist : hif 
hand was cold as marble. In an instant the sinews 
shrank up, every nerve withdrew. "Now," said he, " while 
you live, let no mortal eye behold that wrist ; to see it 
would be sacrilege." He stopped: I turned to him 
again ; he was gone. During the time I conversed 
with him, my thoughts were perfectly calm and col- 
lected ; but the moment he was gone, I felt chilled 
with horror ; the bed trembled under me ; I en- 
deavoured to awake Sir Martin, but in vain. In this 
state of horror and agitation, I lay for some time; 
when, a shower of tears coming to my relief, I dropped 
asleep. 

' In the morning Sir Martin arose as usual without 
perceiving the situation in which the curtain re- 
mained. When I awoke, I found Sir Martin already 
gone. I went into the gallery adjoining our apartment, 
and took from thence a very large broom used for 
sweeping the cornices: by the help of this, though 
not without difficulty, I took down the curtain, aa I 
imagined this extraordinary appearance would excite 
enquiries among the servants which I wished to avoid. 
I then went to my bureau, locked up the pocket-book, 



THE TTEONE GHOST STOEY. 49 

and took out some black ribbon, which I bound round 
my wrist. When I came down, the agitation of my 
mind had left an impression on my countenance too 
strong to pass unnoticed by Sir Martin. He enquired 
the cause of my visible disorder. I told him I was 
well, but informed him that Lord Tyrone was no more ; 
at the same time entreated him to drop all enquiries 
about the black ribbon round my wrist. He kindly 
desisted from all importunity, nor did he ever after 
enquire the cause. Tou were born, my son^ as had 
been foretold, and four years after your ever-to-be- 
lamented father expired in my arms. 

'After this melancholy event, I determined, as the only 
means by which I might avoid the dreadful event of 
the prediction, for ever to abandon society, and pass the 
remainder of my days in solitude; but few can endure 
to exist long in a state of perfect sequestration. I com- 
menced an intercourse with one family only, nor could 
I foresee the fatal consequences that afterwards ensued. 
Little did I imagine that their son, their only son, was the 
person intended by fate for my undoing. In a few years 
I ceased to regard him with indifference ; I endeavoured 
by every means to conquer a passion the fatal conse- 
quences of which, if ever I should yield to its impulse, 
were too well known; and I fondly imagined I had over- 
come its influence, when the event of one fatal moment 
undermined my fortitude, and plunged me into that abyss 
I had so long determined to shun. 

E 



50 THE TTEONE GHOST STOBT. 

' He had frequently solicited his parents for leave to 
go into the army, and at length obtained their per- 
mission. He came to bid me farewell before his 
departure : the moment he entered the room he fell 
on his knees at my feet, told me he was miserable 
and that I alone was the cause. At that instant my 
fortitude forsook me. I gave myself up for lost, and 
considered my fate as inevitable; and without further 
hesitation consented to a union, the result of which I 
knew to be misery, and its end death. After a few years 
were passed, the conduct of my husband amply warranted 
my demand of a separation, and I hoped by this step to 
avoid the fatal accomplishment of the prophecy; but, 
won over by his strong entreaty, I was prevailed on to 
pardon and once more to reside with him, though not 
till after I had, as I imagined, passed my forty-seventh 
year, but I have this day heard from indisputable 
authority that I am but forty-seven this day. Of the 
jiear approach of my death I entertain not the least 
doubt, but I do not dread its arrival : armed with the 
prospects of Christianity, I can meet the King of Terrors 
without dismay, and without a tear bid adieu to the 
regions of mortality for ever. When I am dead, as 
the necessity of its concealment closes with my life, I 
could wish that you, Lady Betty Cobb, would unbind 
my wrist and take from thence the black ribbon, and 
let my son and yourself behold my arm.' 

Lady Beresford here paused for some time, but 



THE TYRONE GHOST STOKY. 51 

renewing the conversation she entreated her son 
to behave so as to merit the honour he would in 
future receive from a union with the daughter of Lord 
Tyrone. Lady Beresford then expressed a wish to lie 
down on the bed, and endeavour to compose herself to 
sleep. Lady Betty Cobb and her son called the attend- 
ants to watch their mistress, and, should they observe the 
slightest change in her, instantly to let them know. An 
hour passed ; all was silent : they listened at the door ; 
everything was still, but in about half-an-hour the bell 
rang violently. They flew to the apartment, but before 
they reached the door they heard the servant exclaim, 
' Oh she is dead, my mistress is dead.' Lady Betty sent 
the servants out of the room; she approached the bed 
of Lady Beresford with her son; he knelt by his mother's 
bedside. Lady Betty lifted up her hand, unbound the 
black ribbon exactly in the state Lady Beresford had 
described, — every sinew shrank up, and every nerve 
withered. 

N.B. Lady Beresford's son, as had been predicted, is 
married to the daughter of Lord Tyrone : the black 
ribbon and pocket-book are in the possession of Lady 
Betty Cobb in Ireland, or Marlborough Buildings, 
Bath : who, together with the Tyrone family, will assert 
its truth, and by whom the above narrative is stated, and 
was transcribed at Tallerig, on July 24th, 1794, by the 
Honourable Mrs. Maitland. {Co;py of a Copy taken in 
1801.) 

£ 2 



52 THE TYRONE GHOST STOUT. 

Real 'particulars of the preceding story dictated to 
ine by Lady E. Butler and Miss Ponsonby (the ladies 
of Llangollen), who had frequently heard them from 
many of Lady Beresford^s and of Mr. Gorges^ de- 
scendants, with some of whom they are intimately 
connected and related* 

Miss Hamilton, a rich and beautiful heiress, was early 
married to Sir Martin Beresford : it was supposed that 
both before and after her marriage she had been too 
intimately connected with Lord Tyrone. Some time 
after her marriage, in the year 1704, it was agreed 
that Lord Tyrone, Sir Martin and Lady Beresford, 
should pass one Christmas at Colonel Gorges' house, 
called Kilbrew, in the county of Meath. One night, 
after the family were all retired. Lady Beresford was 
surprised to see the door of her chamber open, and Lord 
Tyrone walked in, dressed in his robe de chambre. She 
exclaimed ' G"Ood Grod, what brings you here at this time 
of night ? ' He walked up to the bedside and replied, 
' I left Corraughmore with an intention of coming here. 
I was taken ill on the road, and have just expired. I 
am come to you for the ring which I gave you.' Lady 



* It is amusing to compare these two versions, each professing to 
rest on the same quality of information, and with equal pretensions 
to the title of ' real particulars.' The internal evidence, however, 
is in favour of that furnished by the ladies of Llangollen. The 
story is not mentioned by Dr. Ferrier, Dr. Hibbert, or Sir Walter 
Scott. Mrs. Crowe (' Nightside of Nature') merely alludes to it 
as well known and well authenticated. 



THE TTKONE GHOST STOEY. 53 

Beresfordj horror-struck, pushed Sir Martin to wake him. 
' He cannot wake while I am here,' said Lord Tyrone. 
' He will die ; you will marry the gentleman of this house ; 
you will die in childbed of your second son, but you 
shall see me again ; give me the ring.' 

Lady Beresford, extremely agitated, could not im- 
mediately get it off her finger; he seized her hand, 
and the ring appeared to her to roll off upon the 
floor. The next morning Lady Beresford tried to 
persuade herself that the whole of this scene was the 
effect of imagination, but on her wrist she found the 
mark of Lord Tyrone's hand ; each finger left a black 
mark as if it had been burnt. On a desk which 
stood near the bed, and on which Lord Tyrone had 
leant, the same trace of five fingers was found. That 
on Lady Beresford's wrist never was effaced, and to 
her dying day she wore a black ribbon bracelet to 
conceal it. The ring was likewise missing ; nor could it 
after the most diligent search be ever found, though 
every board of the floor was taken up the next day. In 
the course of time Sir Martin died, and Lady Beresford 
did marry Colonel Gorges. 

By Sir Martin she had one son, born in 1694 ; by 
Colonel Gorges, three daughters, one of whom married 
Lord Howth, and another Lord Desart. After these she 
had a son. Colonel Gorges, fearing that his birth might 
prey upon her mind, still strongly affected with the re- 
collection of the vision, persuaded her that her child was 



54 THE TYRONE GHOST STOET. 

a girl. She was got so well after her confinement, that 
the carriage was ordered for her to take the air. Mean- 
while, she unfortunately enquired of a housemaid who 
came into her room, how her child was ; the maid replied, 
' He is very well.' ' Se ! ' said Lady B. ; 'it is then a 
son,' and she burst into tears. Her husband and friend 
at length succeeded in persuading her that, after having 
been so long brought to bed, all danger must be over, 
and she proceeded to take the air as she had intended. 
As she was going down stairs, she exclaimed, ' There is 
Lord Tyrone ; I see him on the landiag-plaoe ! ' She 
fainted, was carried to her bed, and died a few days 
after. 

Some years after, in 1717, her son, Sir M. Beres- 
ford, married Lady C. de la Poer, the daiighter and 
heiress of Lord Tyrone, and was the grandfather of the 
present Lord Waterford.* 



* It is difficult to reconcile the names and dates as stated in 
Lodge's ' Irish Peerage ' witli either of the versions. According 
to this authority (confirmed by Burke), Sir Tristram (not Sir 
Martin) Beresford, third baronet, bom 1669, married, 1687, Nicola 
Sophia, youngest daughter and coheir of Hugh Hamilton, Baron 
of Glenawly ; and by her (who remarried with Lieut-General 
Richard Gorges, of Kilbre-w, county of Meath) had issue one son, 
Sir Marcus, created Earl of Tyrone in 1746, having in 1717 mar- 
ried the Lady Catherine Poer, daughter and heir to James Earl of 
Tyrone, who died in 1704. Sir Tristram died in 1701, three years 
before Lord Tyrone. 



THE DUKE OF MAELBOKOUaH. 55 

THE DUKE OF MAELBOBOUGH — 
ADMIEAL BAERINGTON — THE GUISWINGS. 

April 1810. — Looking at the fine full-length por- 
trait of John, Duke of Marlborough, Lord Braybrooke 
told us some interesting and curious anecdotes of him. 
When this great man, at a very advanced age, was 
called to attend a council on the best mode of defence 
from a threatened invasion, he gave his opinion with his 
usual firmness and penetration. Afterwards he said 
that for above fifty years he had served his country and 
should be happy to do so still, but that he was aware his 
faculties were impaired. At present, he added, he was 
fully conscious of his deficiency, but he feared the time 
might soon come when he should be no longer aware of 
it. He, therefore, made it his earnest request that he 
might never more be summoned to council, and that if 
elsewhere, on any occasion, he expressed an opinion, no 
importance should be attached or deference paid to it. 

It is melancholy to reflect how low became the de- 
gradation of that mind, whose decaying powers were equal 
to such an act of magnanimity. After having had every- 
thing to gratify— first, as the finest, gayest man in 
^ Europe, then as its greatest general, and afterwards as 
its greatest negotiator and statesman — after all this, in 
a state of complete imbecility, an absolute driveller, he 
was actually exhibited by his servants to all who chose 
to give an additional fee after having stared at all the 



o6 ADMIRAL BARKINGTON. 

magnificence of Blenheim. In this manner my grand- 
father {then a lad just entered at Oxford) beheld the 
wreck of this great man, and has often described the 
melancholy spectacle to Lord Brayhroohe.* 

A similar instance of conscious decay and of mag- 
nanimity, perhaps even superior to the Duke of Marl- 
borough, was at the same time mentioned. The late Ad- 
miral Barrington, being called upon by the Admiralty to 
take the command of the Channel fleet, refused it, saying 
that his mental powers were so weakened that he was no 
longer equal to a situation of such importance, but that 
he thought himself still very well able to act under an- 
other, though not to command ; he therefore requested 
to be second. In the course of the following year his 
weakness had so increased, that he quarrelled with the 
Admiralty for not placing him in that very situation 
for which he had himself told them he was unfit. 

Some anecdotes were mentioned a few days before of 
a person who, in a very different way, could boast of a 
superiority as prominent as the Duke of Marlborough's, 
I mean the celebrated Lady Coventry. From old 
Sheridan (the father of Kichard Brinsley) Lord Bray- 
brooke heard some curious anecdotes of her early life. 
Mrs. Gunning (her mother) consulted Sheridan as to 
what she should do with her two beautiful but penni- 
less daughters. He recommended that they should be 

* ' In life's last scene what prodigies surprise, 
Fears of tlie brave, and follies of the wise ! 
From Marlborough's eyes the streams of dotage flow.' 



THE GUNNINGS. 57 

presented at the Castle ; here a great difiBculty occurred: 
by what possible means were they to procure court 
dresses ? this Sheridan obviated : he was at that time 
manager of the Dublin Theatre, and ofifered them a 
loan of the stage dresses of Lady Macbeth and Juliet. 
In these they appeared most lovely ; and Sheridan, after 
having attended the toilet, claimed a salute from each 
as his reward. Very soon after this, a most diabolical 
scheme was formed by some unprincipled young men 
they invited Mrs. Grunning and her two daughters to 
dinner, and infused strong narcotics in the wine, intend- 
ing to take advantage of the intoxication which must 
ensue to carry off the two young women. Fortunately, 
Sheridan discovered their base designs, and arrived just 
in time to rescue the ladies. He lived to see one of these 
girls Duchess of Argyle, and the other Countess of 
Coventry ; and, it is melancholy to add, lived to see his 
application for admission to their parties rejected. 

Lady Coventry enjoyed one very singular triumph. 
Having one day casually mentioned to the king, that 
she could not walk in the Mall because the crowd who 
came to gaze at her pressed round her in a way that 
was quite alarming, his Majesty gallantly exclaimed 
that the finest woman in England should not be pre- 
vented from gracing' the Mall. He desired that when- 
ever she wished to walk she would send notice to the 
captain upon guard, and at the same time ordered that 
she should be attended by a sergeant's guard. She 
walked several times with this train: of course, the 



58 THE PRINCESS DASHKOW. 

crowd increased ; but they were prevented from pressing 
upon her, and her vanity, which was excessive, must 
have received the highest gratification in this singular 
distinction.* 



ACCOUNT BY A LADY OF A VISIT TO PRINCESS 
DASHKOW. ■ 

Since cold is the order of the day, you may make this 
passing remark, that habit has no power of Reconcil- 
ing one to the inclemency of the climate: at least my 
sister says that she felt the second winter like the 
evaporation of saltpetre on the skin compared to the first 
which she scarcely minded, and now she is covered with 
wadded cloaks, when I need no additional clothing and 
the Princess is utterly unconscious it is not a summer's 
day. . . . Eussia is yet barbarous enough to be distin- 
guished by her hospitality. She has many other nation- 
alities, no doubt, but my experience has not been able to 
distinguish any except among the lower orders of the 



* These stories of tlie Gmmings miglit be amply confirmed from 
contemporary accounts of them. Walpole states that they hor- 
rowed court dresses to attend a drawing-room at the Castle, 
Dublin, from Peg Woffington, and writes thus of them in 1751 : 
' There are two Irish girls of no fortune, who are declared the 
handsomest women alive. I think their being two ao handsome, 
and both such perfect figures, is their chief excellence, for, singly, 
I have seen much handsomer figures than either : however, they 
can't walk in the park, or go to Vauxhall, but such mobs follow 
them that they are therefore driven away.' 



THE PRINCESS DASHKOW. 59 

people : for, with respect to the higher, I am sorry to say 
they imitate the French in everything; and though the 
manners of the French are appropriate. to themselves, I 
cannot endure the singerie oi Bruin -when he frolics like 
the monkey on his back. Instead, therefore, of the digni- 
fied salutation of former days (namely, of bowing seriously 
to one another till their crowns met together), you are 
kissed on both the cheeks with an appearance of transport, 
and are told mechanically how enchanted they are to 
make your acquaintance, &c. The dress, too, is an imita- 
tion of the French, and they have universally adopted 
their language. ... In the midst of all this adoption of 
manners, customs, and language, there is something 
childishly silly in their reprobating Buonaparte, when 
they cannot eat their dinner without a French cook to 
dress it, when they cannot educate their children with- 
out an unprincipled adventuress from Paris to act as 
governess, when every house of consequence (that I 
have seen at least) has an outcast Frenchman to instruct 
the heir-apparent; in one word, when every association 
of fashion, luxury, elegance, and fascination is drawn 
from France, and, in the midst of this obliteration of 
themselves, a dying squeak against Buonaparte redeems 
them in their own eyes from this social and political 
suicide. . . 

How I abhor these general observations arising from 
circumscribed experience ; as mine, I don't know how, 
induces me to depart from the detail of gossip. Strange 



60 THE PRINCESS DASHKOW. 

to say, this same gossip would lead me to talk of Princess 
DashkoVs character (as I know more of her than of any- 
one else), which is diametrically opposite to all singerie; 
for if ever there was an original upon the face of the 
earth, it is herself. Though she uniformly behaves to us 
with the greatest kindness and attention, she exacts 
(from imperial habits, I suppose) a sort of deference, 
that surprised one excessively at first sight, from her own 
country people. For example, no man, though covered 
with stars, attempts to sit down in her presence without 
being desired, and not always even when requested^ I 
have seen a dozen Princes stand out a whole visit. Once 
I saw them bowed out of the room (when she got deadly 
tired of them) ; and after she had given them her hand 
to kiss, they departed.* It never enters into her head 
or heart to disguise any sentiment, and therefore you 
may guess what a privileged sort of being she is : and 
lucky it is that she has sensibility, and gentleness of 
nature ; otherwise she would be a pest or scourge. 
She is the first by right, rank, sense, and habit in 
every company, and prerogative becomes such a matter 



* The late Sir Robert Adair used to relate that, during his 
mission to St. Petersburgh, he and the French Ambassador were 
sitting with Potemkin when an aide-de-camp, a young nobleman, 
brought him a disagreeable note or missive of some sort. Potemkin 
started up, and actually kicked the inndbent messenger out of the 
room. The Princess Dashkofi' was once equally high in the 
Empress's favom-, and might have indulged her passions or caprices 
with eq^ual impunity. 



THE PRINCESS DASHKOW. 61 

of course that nothing appears extraordinary that she 
does.* . . . 

I believe I never mentioned a fine place the Princess 
has made herself, situated in the midst of sixteen vil- 
lages belonging to her. Three thousand peasants (' my 
subjects ' as she calls them) live most happily under her 
absolute power; and of all the blessed-hearted beings 
that ever existed, she is the most blessed, excepting 
Mrs. C. There are 200 servants (taking in all denomina- 
tions, inside and outside) belonging to the establishment ; 
more than 100 horses, 200 cows, and everything else in 
proportion. The house is enormous, and has wings' at 
either side which are only connected by balconies raised 
on iron railings to the second story. Twenty bearded men 



* She was the third daughter of Count Worowzow, and was 
married at sixteen under characteristic circumstances. The Prince 
Dashkow having made a compromising proposal to her, not pour le 
bon motif, she affected to treat it as a proposal of marriage, and 
communicated it as such to her family. The prince married her, 
as the only or best way of getting out of the scrape. He owned 
her first child, but demiurred to the second. She played a leading 
part in the intrigues and conspiracies which made Catherine the 
Second Autocrat of all the Eussias ; but the gratitude of her 
imperial friend and mistress did not keep pace with her expecta- 
tions, and a coolness grew up between them which estranged her 
from the court. The first reward she claimed was the- colonelcy 
of a crack regiment. This Catherine refused, but made her 
Director of the Academy, and she is said to have proved fully 
equal to the post. She was popularly supposed to have been 
intrusted with the momentous duty of subjecting the empress's 
male favourites to a kind of competitive examination or test; 
whence her name of Peprouveuse. 



62 THE PRINCESS DASHKOW. 

are now busily employed in making a temporary wooden 
passage, as in winter (strange to say) they had provided 
for no internal communication : so much was sacrificed 
to the beauty of the outside. There are a hundred 
whimsical and most ridiculous peculiarities of custom ; 
such as, letting you provide your own bedclothes in a 
palace even. We have our own sheets, blankets, and 
quilts ; and they would think one as extraordinary in 
expecting that the house was to provide for these things, 
as you would if, in your house, I laid myself up, and sent 
for your gown to use as a matter of right. In fact, this 
system of each person having a separate little establish- 
ment, is observed in more ways than that; for sauce- 
pans, candles, candlesticks, tea and coffee equipage, and 
a hundred etceteras, are regularly found in the care of 
the femmes de chambre. I might lock my castle door, 
or my sister's, or Anna's, and we have provisions to keep 
the citadel a week in flourishing health. The system 
of hoards is therefore without bounds, and presents 
appropriate to this comical system are perfectly the 
fashion. The Princess sent us a pair of silver candle- 
sticks and a store of wax candles on our arrival here. I 
expected a spit or a gridiron next ; but though not 
exactly so, we got presents of iron pans the following 
day. . . . 

In the midst of this immense establishment, and in 
the centre of riches and honour, I wish you could see 
the Princess go out to take a walk, or rather to look 



THE PRINCESS DASHKOW. 63 

over her 'subjects.' An old worn-out great-coat, and a 
silk pocket-handkerchief worn to rags about her neck, 
form her dress ; and well may it be in rags, for she has 
worn it eighteen years, and will continue to wear it as 
long as she lives, because it belonged to Mrs. Hamilton. 
Her originality, her appearance, her manner of speaking, 
her doing every description of thing, altogether give 
me the idea of her being a fairy; for she helps the 
masons to build walls, she assists with her own hands in 
making the roads, she feeds the cows, she composes 
music, she sings and plays, she writes for the press, she 
shells the corn, she talks out loud in church and cor- 
rects the preacher if he is not devout, she talks out 
loud at her little theatre here and puts in the per- 
formers if they are out in their parts. 

She is a doctor, an apothecary, a surgeon, a farrier, a 
carpenter, a magistrate, a lawyer ; in short, she hourly 
practises every sort of incongruity, corresponds with her 
brother who holds the first place in the empire on his 
trade, with authors, with philosophers, with Jews, with 
poets, with her son, with all her relations, and yet appears 
as if she had her time a burden on her hands. She is 
unconscious whether she speaks English, French, or 
Russ, and mingles them in every sentence. She 
speaks German and Italian equally well, but her pro- 
nunciation is not clear, which takes from the pleasure 
I should otherwise receive from her conversation. I have 
just finished reading Voltaire's, Diderot's, Garrick's, and 



64 THE PRINCESS DASHKOW — LORD NORTH. 

the Abbe Kaynal's letters to her. She has promised me 
the Empress Catherine's : and it is highly necessary to 
qualify oneself with the knowledge of public affairs and 
characters in Eussia since the time of Catherine, for she 
alludes to them perpetually ; and her mind wanders back 
so naturally to the court, study, toilette, and boudoir of 
Catherine, that I am beginning to fancy / recollect her 
habits of life and conversation, and that I was a party 
concerned in the; Eevolution. By-the-by, the principal 
reception-room at Troitska is ornamented with an 
immense picture of Catherine on horseback in uniform, 
taken the very day of her husband^s destruction, and 
(the Princess says) a perfect resemblance. Besides this, 
there are portraits of her in every room. . . . Don't 
irritate me by saying, you suppose I am beginning to 
speak the language. No, let that satisfy you for ever. 
I feel my powers of duncishness increase daily, my 
powers of idleness, and of helplessness in everything that 
is good. So adieu, &c. 

"W. WiLMOT. 
Troitska, Sept. 1805. 



LOED NORTH. 
Among the many anonymous letters which daily 
poured in upon the late Lord North, he received one an- 
nouncing to him the arrival of a box, which was exactly 



A HUEEICANE IN JAMAICA. 65 

described. He was warned not to open this box, as it 
was so contrived that, upon opening the lock, a loaded 
pistol which the box contained should be discharged. 
On the following day (which I forgot to say was the 
time specified) Lord North received a box exactly 
answering to the description. Without mentioning the 
circumstance, he took the portentous box, and, con- 
cealing it under his great-coat, went immediately and 
threw it unopened into the Thames.* 



ACCOUNT OF A HUEKICANE IN JAMAICA. 

Extract from a letter dated, ' Chester Coffee Estate, three quarter 
way up the Blue Mountains {Jamaica), from the side of a 
large wood fire; thermometer 58-g°, the mountain winds 
blowing almost a hurricane, and the rain descending in 
Equinoctial torrents. — 15iA October 1815, 10 a.m.' 

As soon as I was sufiBciently recovered from the effects 
of the yellow fever to bear the journey, I was brought 
to this invigorating climate, and wonderful its effects 
have been in eleven days. 

This is a higher situation than any I have yet visited, 
higher even than Mount Atlas. The house is superb, 
with fireplaces in every room, and the climate that of 
the south of France. There is a large and beautiful 



This story was related by Mr. T. Grenville. 



66 A HUEEICANE IN JAMAICA. 

garden, where grow side by side, in the utmost luxuriance 
and full of fruit, the mangan, cinnamon, and nutmeg 
trees of the East, the apple, pear, and nectarine of En- 
gland, and the pine-apple, orange, cocoa tree, guava, &c., 
of the West. In no other part of the world, perhaps, 
could you see assembled the productions of so many 
countries ; and this is from the unvarying temperature 
of the climate, being neither influenced by the seasons 
nor ever getting too warm for European plants or too 
cold for those of the tropics. 

Kingston, Nov. 5, 1815. — Little did I expect, when I 
sat down so comfortably at Chester Hill to write to you by 
my snug fireside, what danger and misery were awaiting 
me. It was then, as you may see by my date, blowing very 
strong, but we expected nothing further. I was interrupted 
at twelve o'clock by a summons to luncheon; in the 
midst of it we were suddenly alarmed by seeing the 
fine mangan tree in our garden torn up by the roots, 
whisked into the air, and carried out of sight; this 
made us apprehend what soon succeeded — a violent 
hurricane. After this first gust of wind, fresh ones 
attacked us, each with increased violence; not one of 
the beautiful trees was left standing; cedar, orange, 
apple, and all the large trees being torn up, and the 
cocoas, cabbages, &c., snapped in the middle. The wind 
continued raging with tremendous force ; and next, we 
were terrified beyond description by the whole wing of 
that part of the house we had just quitted, walls and 



A HUEKICASE IN JAMAICA. 67 

all, giving way, though a most substantial stone build- 
ing ; the roof entire, without loss of a shingle or beam, 
being carried up into the air, the walls falling in with a 
tremendous crash ; and the .beams, boards, &c., of the 
two floorings were seen flying with amazing velocity 
through the air, knocking down all that came in contact 
with them. It was with the utmost difficulty that, on 
hearing the walls shaking and cracking, we saved our- 
selves, and got into the farther end, or rather division, 
of a double house. Here, however, we had not been 
ten minutes before the wind getting under the remain- 
ing part of the roof (since the fall of the wing, totally 
unprotected) tore it up too, throwing down on us the 
ceilings and some of the beams, by one of which I was 
knocked down and hurt. 

However, we contrived to rush out, expecting that 
the walls, now unroofed, must follow ; and being 
unable to stand upright from the fear of being 
taken off our legs, we crawled into the kitchen, an 
outhouse which, being very low and nearly circular, 
we hoped might stand. We were disappointed; for 
after our seeing the coffee-store, coffee-works, overseer's 
house, all the negro houses, and every possible place of 
shelter, blown down ; not a tree standing ; beams, trees, 
branches, and wooden shingles with large nails in them 
flying about in every direction, with certain death to 
every living thing they encountered ; night coming on 
and the gale increasing — the kitchen gave way, injuring 

F 2 



68 A HDEEICANE IN JAMAICA. 

US all more or less, and, I fear, maiming one negro for 
life I only received another hard blow. 

As a last resource and almost forlorn hope, we betook 
ourselves to a cellar under the ruins of the house, trying 
to hope that, if the walls fell in (and we heard stones 
dropping from them every instant), they might not 
beat in the floor of the dining-room over our heads and 
crush ua with their fall. That they would fall, we had 
no doubt, and a very very slender hope that the flooring 
would withstand them, and no possibility of escape. 
This was about eight in the evening, when the night was 
j ust setting in. Our cellar was about nine feet square ; up 
to our knees in water from the torrents of rain falling 
through the unroofed ruin a,bove us, under a constant 
shower-bath in that cold climate that very cold night, 
in the instant expectation of being crushed to death or 
horribly mangled, we remained the whole of that 
dreadful night. 

Our party consisted, besides myself, of Mr. A., Dr. M., 
the overseer, the bookkeeper, four black men, and four 
black women with their six children. What I suffered 
from cold, and the bruises I had received, exceeded in 
mere bodily suffering anything I have ever felt or expect 
to feel — far worse than the surgeon's knife searching for 
the bullet ; and I certainly never felt the passion of 
fear before, at least nothing resembling my sensations 
that night. At about two in the morning one of the 
walls fell in, luckily so that the wind blew the stones 



A HrEEICANE IN JAMAICA. 69 

&c., from instead of on us ; still a great part fell over 
our heads on the flooring, of course on boards, with a 
tremendous crash. We conceived it was the whole 
house, and the screams of the poor women and children, 
the (as they supposed) dying prayer of the men, were 
horrible beyond anything I can conceive. I rose up 
from sitting on an empty barrel, hoping the beams 
might strike my head first, and end my sense of suffering 
for myself and my companions. For that the beams 
were falling, and that death seemed inevitable, was 
evident ; but after many alarms of this sort and constant 
dread, the gale abated at sunrise, after the longest night 
I ever passed. 

At 6 A.M. the rain and wind had entirely ceased, 
and we were able to walk out of our dungeon and 
witness the scene of destruction. Not a house, a 
tree, a negro hut or shed, left standing; large trees 
thrown down or torn away ; small snapped off close to 
the roots; all the beautiful garden destroyed ; one of 
the four walls of the house levelled, a wing entirely 
down, the remainder unroofed : and we had no means 
of communication with our neighbours, as every rivulet 
was swelled to an impassable river. At the end of three 
days, however, we got to the nearest neighbour's house, 
which had not suffered so much ; and a week after, the 
roads and rivers admitted of my return here safe and 
sound. Kingston has suffered much less than the 
mountains . . . The hurricane has cooled the air, and 



70 NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE ' NOKTHUMBEELAND.' 

now the temperature of Kingston is tolerable even after 
leaving the Blue Mountains. 



KAPOLEON ON BOAKD THE ' NOKTHUMBEELAND. 
Extracts from letters from an officer of Marines. 

H.M.S. NoETHUMBEELAND : Aug. 5, 1815. 

It is my guard, and I have to sit in the antechamber 
of Napoleon, to prevent communication between him 
and the ship's company, and also to be a check on his 
own domestics ; it is now one, and I must keep awake 

till six Napoleon gets very sulky if he is not 

treated with that deference and respect to which he is 
accustomed : his own followers treat him with the same 
respect as if he was still emperor. Beattie, my captain, 
was at Acre : Buonaparte learnt this in conversation ; 
seemed quite pleased, caught hold of his ear and gave 
it a good pinch (which is his custom when pleased), and 
seems to have taken a great liking to him. He is some- 
times very communicative : to-day he mentioned the 
project he had formed for invading England in 1805; 
declared it to have been his intention to lead the ex- 
pedition himself, and said it might have succeeded. 
The plan was this : he sent his fleet to the West Indies 
for the purpose of drawing our fleets there, which it did, 
Lord Nelson and Sir Eobert Calder both following 



NAPOLEON ON BOAED THE ' NOETHrMEEKLAND.' 71 

Villeneuve there ; he was to return immediately to the 
Chamiel, and Napoleon said he calculated that Ville- 
neuve would be in the Channel at least a fortnight 
before our fleets could get back. His army was em- 
barked (200,000 he says), but the plan was discon- 
certed by Villeneuve's going into Cadiz instead of 
coming to the Channel. His words were, 'He might 
as well have been in the East Indies as at Cadiz ; ' and 
he then declared that if Villeneuve had obeyed his 
orders he should certainly have invaded England, be the 
result what it might.* 

Bertrand is the only one that seems to feel his situa- 
ation ; he speaks of Napoleon often with tears, and is 
extremely agitated when conversing on the state of 
France. He says Napoleon did not calculate upon 
fighting the English and Prussians at Waterloo. The 
Prussians were beaten on the 16th, and it was not sup- 
posed they could have been up to take part in the 
battle of the 18th. He thinks the French would have 
been victorious if the Prussians had not come up ; but 
circumstances were not favourable. The French soldiers 
fought very well; the officers did not. I asked him 
what became of the French army after the battle, why 
they did not retreat in some sort of order ? He said, 
with a shrug, they were annihilated, there were none 

' His plan, as described by M. Thiers, was muob more com- 
plicated, and required a concurrence of events on which it was pre- 
posterous to rely. 



72 NAPOLEON ON BOAED THE ' NOETnUMBEELAND.' 

left ; yet, notwithstanding these admissions, they break 
out gasconading about their victories 

Napoleon's spirits are better ; he enters into conversa- 
tion very freely on different parts of his life. The other 
day he was speaking of Waterloo : he said he had not the 
least idea of fighting on the ISth : he did not suppose 
Wellington would have given him battle ; he so fully 
expected Wellington to retreat that he had not even 
made preparations for battle, and was a little taken by 
surprise ; ' but,' said he, ' I never was so pleased as 
when I saw he intended to fight. I had not a doubt of 
annihilating his army ; it was the only thing I could 
have wished. I expected him to abandon Flanders, 
and fall back on the Eussians ; but when I found he 
gave me battle singly, I was confident of his destruction. 
My soldiers behaved well ; my generals did not.' He 
says it was dusk when his army was thrown into con- 
fusion; that if he could have shown himself, they would 
have rallied and been victorious ; but that the rout was 
so great, he was carried away in the throng. He went 
to Paris to try to save the honour of France, but found 
he could not. 

He positively asserts that, previous to the battle of 
Waterloo and after his return to France, Austria pro- 
posed to him to abdicate in favour of Napoleon II., and 
promised to support him. His followers, too, have men- 
tioned so many particulars respecting this, that I do not 
doubt the fact. This proposition had nothing to do with 



HAPOLEON ON BOAED THE ' NOETHUMBERLAND.' 73 

the forged letter of the Duke of Bassano, which they 
also speak of as a falsehood : none such was shown to 
him by Murat. 

He has been talking this evening about his turning 
Mahometan : he said it was a long time before he could 
persuade them that he was a true Mussulman ; but ' at 
last I persuaded them that Mahomet was wrong in 
some things and I was right, and they acknowledged 
me to be the greater man.' He says that in his retreat 
from Acre he lost nearly half his army. 

Yesterday he remarked that Madame Bertrand was 
in much better spirits than when she attempted to 
drown herself, and added, ' a man of true courage will 
bear up against misfortunes, and finally surmount them, 
while common minds will sink under them.' He con- 
verses sometimes on the subject of his making away 
with himself, and calmly reprobates the idea of his 
being supposed capable of it.* 

I believe the object of the guard is to prevent com- 
munication with the crew. Napoleon told the admiral 
that he did not doubt he could get many to join him if 
he tried ; and indeed they are a set of as mutinous rascals 
as I ever heard of; though I don't think they would 
assist him to escape. What I am going to state must, 
for the credit of the country, be a secret : they mutinied, 
and refused to get anchor up at Portsmouth : the 

* He seems to have forgotten his own attempt to poison himself 
at Fontainebleau, clearly proved by M. Thiers. 



74 NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE ' NOETHUMBEKLAND,' 

Artillery company, the 53rd, and ourselves, were under 
arms for three hours — that is to say, till we had sailed. 
About twenty of the principal seamen were seized and 
confined, but sent away from the ship ; and the conduct 
and language of the sailors now is beyond everything ; 
they think nothing of striking the midshipmen.* . . . 

St. Helena. — We arrived at this barren horrid island 
yesterday, after a passage of ten weeks. In my former 
travels in these latitudes everything seemed animated ; 
the sea swarming with fish, water brilliant and phos- 
phoric, sky without a cloud. Now everything has been 
the reverse : since we left Madeira, the sun has been 
constantly obscured with clouds, the weather even on 
the equator as cold as you can have had it in England : 
scarcely a fish to be seen ; and what is still more extra- 
ordinary, the trade winds, which in the tropics are 
calculated upon as certain, have blown almost from the 
opposite quarter to what they were expected, and thereby 
opposed our progress. We crossed the equator on the 
23rd September, the same day as the sun ; the great- 
est height of the thermometer was then only 75°, with 
a vertical sun ; since it has been as low as 66° : to- 
day it is only 70°. Napoleon has been in pretty good 
health and spirits all the voyage, conversing on every 
subject without the least hesitation. [Here follows the 



* This state of things appears to have been carefully concealed 
from the public. 



NAPOLEON ON BOAED THE ' NOKTHUMBEELAND.' 75 

well-known justification of the poisoning of the sick at 
Jaffa ; execution of the Due d'Enghien, &c. &c.J 

I have dined three times with Napoleon. I cannot 
say I think his manners have much of that elegance 
which might have been expected from a person of his 
ci-devant rank. He has a particularly disagreeable 
grunt when he does not understand what you say, and 
desires a repetition. He converses freely, but not at 
table, with the Frenchmen ; and takes no more notice of 
the ladies than if they were a hundred miles off. I 
have not heard him speak once to Madame Bertrand at 
table, and seldom elsewhere. Napoleon landed on the 
17th of October; he appeared a good deal affected at 
leaving the ship, and spoke so. 

Did I tell you that the band, who used to play 
every day, struck up of their own accord, a few days 
after we left England, Vive Henri Quatre upon 
Buonaparte coming after dinner ? Thinking it might 
hurt his feelings, we stopped them immediately ; 
but he had heard enough to know what it was, and 
requested they would play that or any other French 
tune, as he liked it much ; and afterwards they played 
the loyal and revolutionary airs indiscriminately. Of 
the Due d'Enghien's business he said, not a fortnight ago 
(December 1815) — and you may rely upon he did say, 
though I did not hear it — it was in dictating to his 
secretary, Las Casas — that two days after the Due was 
executed, he received proofs of his innocence, and that 



76 NAPOLEON AND HIS BEOTHEES. 

the Due even solicited employment in his service, 
stating his poverty ; but that the application was not 
received till after his death. This Buonaparte certainly 
said ; for I do not think his secretary would say so if it 
was not true ; and he said he had it from Napoleon's 
mouth, as part of papers which he was dictating the 
day before I had it.* 



NAPOLEON AND HIS BEOTHEES. 

Lady H. has been telling us some of the conversation 
■which passed at Walcot f while Lucien Buonaparte was 
there. He was very communicative on the adven- 
tures of his own and his brother's life, and anecdotes so 
authenticated are worth remembering. 

When Lucien was living at his villa on the Lago 
Bracciano, near Eome, he was requested by his 
brother Joseph, then King of Naples, to come to 
him on business of great importance. Joseph told 
him he wished to consult him on a letter he had 
just received from Napoleon, offering him the crown 
of Spain, and desiring him to come and receive it 
at his hands. Joseph professed himself very much 
inclined to decline the new honours offered him. 
This resolution Lucien did his utmost to confirm ; he 



* Mr. Warren stated in his printed letters that he had seen a 
copy of the alleged letter from the Due d'Enghien in the possession 
of Las Casas. 

t Walcot, Salop ; a seat of the Earl of Fowls. 



NAPOLEON AND HIS BROTHEES. 77 

reminded Joseph of all the difficulties he had found in 
establishing himself on the throne of Naples. Those 
were overcome, and the Neapolitans were now perfectly 
tranquil under his government. In Spain, he would 
have the whole to go over again, and would probably 
find the Spaniards much more disinclined towards 
him. than the Neapolitans had ever been. Joseph ac- 
cordingly wrote to Napoleon, respectfully declining the 
crown offered him, and expressiug his gratitude for that 
he already possessed, and his perfect satisfaction. Un- 
fortunately for himself (much against the advice of 
Lucien) he added, that ' il se rendrait aux ordres de sa 
MajesU,'' and set out to meet Napoleon. He, to use the 
words of Lucien, "pripara un de ces grands coups qu'il 
aimait tant et qui lui ont si souvent reussi.' Bayonne 
was the appointed place of meeting, but Napoleon went 
farther, met Joseph on the road, and got out of his car- 
riage to be the first to congratulate the King of Spain. 
In one moment Joseph found himself surrounded by the 
numerous suite of his brother, and had received their 
homage almost before he knew where he was. This 
public ceremony having taken place, it was no longer 
possible to retract. 

In those days, when crowns were literally going a 
begging, Lucien (by his own account at least) seems to 
have shown great firmness in rejecting them, not only 
for himself but for his family. At one time. Napoleon 
sent for one of Lucien's daughters, offering to marry 
her to the Prince of Spain (Ferdinand) or to the Prince 



78 NAPOLEON AND HIS BEOTHEES. 

of "Wiitemberg (Paul). Lucien determined to refuse 
both: ' L'un,^ he said, 'etaitfou, I' autre etait fire que 
fou, mais il falloit oheir aux ordres supremes de mon 
frere; et fenvoyai Charlotte a Paris, suivie de ses 
femmes seulement et de Vahhe 5.' I have forgotten 
the name, but he was the nephew of Lucien's first wife, 
and was present when the story was told. When the 
poor victim arrived at St. Cloud, where the Emperor 
was, she was immediately presented to him ; and when 
she knelt to pay her obeisance, he said, ' Levez-vous, 
Princesse.^ She had the courage to reply, ' Non, Si/re, 
je ne suis pas Princesse; je ne suis que Charlotte 
Buonaparte: permettez-moi, Sire, de retourner chez 
mon phre.^ This permission was granted, and the ' 
intended Queen of Spain (afterwards Princess Grabriella) 
was, when this story was related, living with her 
parents at Ludlow. 

On the day of Napoleon's coronation, Grarnerin sent 
up a balloon to make the news fly. This balloon landed 
near Lucien's Roman villa, in twenty-six hours exactly 
from the period at which it was launched from Paris. 
Yet speedy as this communication appears, it might 
have been still more so ; for, at its first setting out, the 
balloon was impelled quite in another direction. How 
soon it took its south-eastern course cannot of course be 
known.* 

* In the journal of De las Casas this circumstance is mentioned 
as related by Napoleon, who speaks of the time as ' en pen d'heures.' 



THE PRETENDED ARCHDUKE. 79 



THE PRETENDED ARCHDUKE. 

I have heard this evening a strange wild romantic 
story from Mr. Bankes, almost too improbable for a 
novel, and yet the leading facts seem established beyond 
a doubt. 

A stranger, with one attendant only (I think), ar- 
rived some years ago at the house of a man of the 
name of Contessini, then British Consul at Jaffa, who 
was obliged, on seeing some passports and papers, to 
bestow a bed and a dinner. The latter was bad enough, 
but the stranger gave the servants of the consul a gra- 
tuity three or four times as large as any they had ever 
received before. Old Contessini, according to the cus- 
tom of the East, took this fee from his servants ; being 
an honest man, and being impressed with a strong idea 
that the liberality of the stranger bespoke a person of 
consequence, he very much improved his fare on the 
second day. On the third, the stranger began to open 
a little ; he asked Contessini whether he was not consul 
for Austria as well as England, and received a reply in 
the affirmative. ' Well,' says he, ' you need not hoist the 
Austrian flag, but I will confide to you a secret of the 
greatest importance, under the seal of the most invio- 
lable secrecy. I am travelling in the strictest incog., but 
I am the Archduke John, the brother of the Emperor 
of Austria.' The poor consul was overwhelmed with 



80 THE PRETENDED ARCHDUKE. 

confusion : lie got up from the dinner-table at which they 
were sitting, insisting upon serving behind the chair of 
his illustrious guest, who had great difficulty in per- 
suading him, partly by the force of arguments drawn 
from the necessity of concealment from the servants and 
partly by that of his arms, to resame his chair. 

In this state things remained some days : the old con- 
sul was delighted to see that the archduke took great 
notice of his son, a fine lad. One day the boy, coming 
into the stranger's room, found him occupied in taking 
some things out of a trunk in which were fine uniforms 
embroidered most richly and covered with stars and 
orders. The boy told his father of the fine things he had 
beheld, and not being under any promise of secrecy, re- 
peated his story to every person he met. Suspicions be- 
gan to be excited as to the rank of the stranger ; the old 
consul looked mysterious, and began to whisper his secret 
This made the residence of Jaffa very unpleasant to the 
prince: he talked of prosecuting his journey througli 
the Holy Land, and asked Contessini whether there was 
any person in Jaffa from whom he could procure money. 
' I fear,' replied the old man, ' there may not be a 
sum sufficient to supply the occasions of your Imperial 
Highness; but if such a sum (naming something about 
lOOi.) is sufficient, I can easily find it.' The money was 
produced : the archduke gave his note, disguised him- 
self as a monk, and proceeded on his journey to Nazareth, 
where there was a large convent ; and Contessini, after 



THE PRETENDED AKCHDUKE. 81 

much importunity, obtaiaed leave to acquaint the prior 
by letter of the real name and rank of the stranger. 

He took up his abode for some time in the convent : 
every respect was shown to him ; the prior kept the 
secret for some time; but much curiosity and many sus- 
picions were excited by the uncommon liberality of the 
stranger. He evinced this chiefly by giving at the 
mass, which he attended with the most exemplary 
regularity, a contribution for the wants of the convent, 
which, though it was nearly ten times as much as they 
were in the habit of receiving from the most liberal 
of their contributors, was in fact very small. By 
this and various other means he so established his 
character without betraying his rank, that the prior 
made not the smallest difficulty in advancing a large 
sum from the funds of the convent on his word only, 
and on his promise of obtaining various immunities 
and advantages for the convent from the Emperor of 
Austria. He returned to his old friend the consul at 
Jaffa ; expressed a wish to fit out a vessel to convey 
him to the coast of Italy, for the purpose of performing 
a pilgrimage to Loretto. The attendant or cameriere 
suggested to the consul that he was mad not to try to 
take advantage of the partiality which the archduke 
expressed for his son to try to obtain for him a situation 
in his household. The permission was given for young 
Contessinito attend the archduke, and many very vague 
promises of future protection were made. In return. 

G 



82 THE PEETENDED AECHDUKE. 

for this the consul could do no less than take upon him- 
self all the trouble of the purchase of the vessel, and of 
course he made himself responsible for all the expenses. 
He was also persuaded by the cameriere to embark 
several bales of cotton, which the young man, his son, 
would sell to great advantage.. 

One of the next adventures of this great personage 
was at one of the Turkish ports. He was lodged 
in the house of the Austrian consul, to whom he 
carried a letter from old Contessini declaring his 
rank, but still with injunctions of the greatest secrecy. 
A few days after his arrival the Turkish fleet, with the 
Captain Pasha (the third man in the empire) on hoard, 
anchored in the port. The consul with gi-eat difficulty 
obtained from his guest permission to declare his rank 
to this great personage ; an invitation ensued to visit 
the fleet ; every royal honour and observance were paid ; 
and very large presents of jewels, &c., offered, and of 
course accepted, by the prince. He then went (I forget 
where) to another Eastern convent, where he was received 
with still greater distinction by the archbishop. Here, 
however, his career seemed very near a close ; the notes 
or bills had all been protested, and a rumour of the 
fraud spread very soon after his arrival. He was the 
first to tell the story to the old archbishop, to inveigh 
against the tricks of swindlers, and at the ingenuity of 
one who, having discovered him to be travelling irioog. 
in the East, had ventured to personate him ; then 



THE PRETENDED AECHDUKE. 83 

followed a dozen stories of exactly similar personations, 
&c., but he ended in stating, that though loaded with 
passports, letters of credit, &c., from the emperor, 
which were all in his vessel, he should be very averse to 
the appearing publicly in his own character. He said 
his journey, or rather his pilgrimage, had been under- 
taken from motives of religion only, very much against 
the consent of the emperor, who would be still more 
incensed when he discovered the fraud which had ensued 
from the circumstance of his travelling incog. It 
became, therefore, his duty to guard his secret more 
strictly than ever. Upon this pretence he once more 
obtained a large sum to enable him to perform his 
pilgrimage to Loretto, and once more he resumed his 
travels. 

When he reached the Continent he professed himself 
surprised to find the emperor more incensed than 
ever: the cameriere was dismissed, and young Contessini, 
who was enthusiastically devoted to him, was persuaded 
that the life of his illustrious master depended upon his 
secrecy. After various adventures, hair-breadth escapes, 
daring frauds, &c., he reached Hamburgh. There he 
contrived by various forgeries to raise a sum of money, 
on credit, to charter a vessel for America. This was 
wrecked somewhere on the British coast. The adven- 
turer and his faithful Contessini arrived in London. 
The latter, from whom Mr. Bankes had the whole 
detail, described with the most beautiful simplicity, in 

a 2 



84 THE PRETENDED AECHDTJKE. 

his bad Italian, the effect produced in his mind by all 
that he saw, and especially by the grande bellissimo 
superbo hotel where they were lodged, and which, with 
some difficulty, he at last explained to be the Saracen's 
Head. Among its various merits, he did not enumerate 
that of its being a peaceful abode. Englishmen were 
not so easily to be taken in as consuls, pashas, and 
archbishops in the East. The various frauds and 
forgeries of the adventurer were soon brought to hght, 
and the bellissimo hotel full of officers of justice in 
pursuit of him. However, he contrived once more to 
escape them by getting out of a garret window upon the 
roofs of the neighbouring houses. Such was the extrar 
ordinary simplicity and cred\ility of his faithful attendant 
that even at this moment, after all that he had 
witnessed, he described himself as perfectly convinced 
that his master was going straight to St. James's, 
meaning at last to avow his rank and resume his native 
splendour. Judge, then, what must have been his 
dismay when he found himself safely lodged with the 
archduke in Newgate. 

From the extreme ignorance of the narrator it was 
impossible, Mr. Bankes said, to gain a clear idea of this 
part of his adventures. By some means they got out of 
Newgate, and very soon after were sent to a lock-up 
house. 

Here the story of the impostor closes, not, as 
might be expected, by his obtaining the due reward of 



THE PEETEKDED ARCHDUKE. 85 

all Ms iniquities, but by his seducing the wife of the 
keeper of the lock-up house, carrying off with her 
every valuable in the house, and contriving to elude 
every pursuit. Poor Contessini was now left alone to 
stand his trial, and Mr. Bankes said nothing could be 
more curious than his admiration, his simple grati- 
tude for his extraordinary good fortune in having been 
taken before the most upright, the most humane, the 
greatest of judges, the only one man in the whole 
world who would not have hanged him because he 
had been imposed upon by a rascal, never having 
had any share in the transactions which made him 
amenable to justice. A subscription was collected to 
enable this poor creature to return to his own country, 
which he did not reach without having been once more 
wrecked. 

When Mr. Bankes was at Jaffa, he heard repeatedly 
of the adventurer, who had imposed himself upon 
so many persons, and raised large sums of money, as 
the Archduke John. He was one day questioning the 
British Consul on the subject, who, from common 
report, related many of the leading particulars, especi- 
ally the reception by the Captain Pasha. He added, ' As 
you seem very curious, if you wish it, I will send for the 
son of my predecessor Contessini, who for some time 
followed the fortunes of this adventurer.' He came. 
Mr. Bankes was so pleased with his extraordinary story, 



86 THE PEETBNDED ARCHDUKE. 

and with his mode of relating it, that he took the man 
as his servant, though he had little else to recommend 
him.* 

* Mr. Baiikes's story is substantially confirmed by Sir William 
Gell, wbo says in his Memoirs, ' We had been told that one of the 
Austrian archdukes was passing through Greece at this time, and 
that he was now (1804) at Modon, giving out that he had quitted 
Vienna on account of some disagreement with the Austrian 
imperial family, and was travelling incog. . . . 

' A few months after, we heard of an unpleasant accident which 
happened quite unexpectedly to his Imperial Highness. After he 
had resided some time at the house of the poor consul, a Polish 
nobleman. Prince Sapieha, landed at Modon. As he was well 
acquainted with the Austrian imperial family, he flew to the house 
of the consul, as soon as he heard the archduke was there. He 
entered hastily the room where the consul and his guest were 
diping, eagerly enquiring for his friend the archduke. The consul, 
distressed at the arrival of a person whom he doubted not was 
despatched fi'om the court to reclaim the wandering prince, and 
hoping that the messenger was not personally acquainted with his 
imperial guest, thought it better to hesitate, and gave no answer 
till Prince Sapieha demanded with more eagerness to be shown to 
the room of the archduke. During this time, the adventui'er said 
not a word, and the consul was at length induced to confess that his 
Imperial Highness was present. Of course Prince Sapieha needed 
no further explanation, left the room, and soon quitted Modon, 
not without having had the charity to advise the owner of the 
house where he lodged to inform the Austrian consul that he was 
ruining himself for an impostor. The adventurer was not, how- 
ever, routed by the unfortunate visit of the prince, for he succeeded 
in persuading the consul, who was alarmed, and began to expostu- 
late, that he knew Sapieha well, but was so disgusted at the 
impertinence of his abrupt entrance during dinner, instead of 
sending in due form to know when his company would be agree- 
able, that he did not condescend to acknowledge him.' 



ANECDOTES OF D^NON. 87 



ANECDOTES OF DifiNON.* 



Mr, Bankes told me that, one morning while he was 
breakfasting tete-a-tete with Denon, a servant brought 
in a packet from the mint containing a medal just struck. 
Denon laid it flat on his hand, considered the reverse, 
then exclaimed, 'N'ous sommes seuls, mon ami: parlous 
a cceur ouvert; voilale comhlecle lafiatterie;' then he 
read, 'Mouse oum resta uratoum — et puis (turning the 
medal and showing the head of Louis XVIIL), voila cet 
homme qui a tout fait pour le detruire.' When one 
recollects what Denon and his old master had done for 
the Museum ; when one remembers how soon under 
the new regime he was turned out ; when, besides, one 
looks not only at the Louvre, which the fate of war 
has stripped of its finest ornaments, but at the various 
collections, at the Jardi/n des Plantes, which from 
neglect and want of encouragement have suffered 
nearly as much ; when, most of all, one looks at what 
was the Musee des Monumiens, now totally destroyed 
and dispersed by bigotry — when one thinks of all 
these circumstances, one wonders that, speaking a cosur 

* D^non was tlie most celebrated of the savans who accom- 
panied Napoleon in the Egyptian expedition, of which he published 
a scientific and illustrated account in 1802. He was Directeur 
Gto&-al des Musses under the Emperor, and was displaced on the 
Restoration. Lady Morgan speaks highly of his conversational 
powers in her "France." 



88 ANECDOTES OF D^NON. 

ouvert, Denon could express himself so moderately on 
the subject. 

One day Mr. Bankes said he expressed to Denon a 
strong wish to see Roustan, the Mameluke, who is now 
keeping a small shop. Denon's reply did him honour. 
' You will certainly do as you please, but you must 
allow me to say that, from the moment you condescend 
to seek such a wretch as that man, I shall consider our 
acquaintance as ended, and you must not wonder if my 
doors are closed against you.' Mr. Bankes said he cer- 
tainly would not incur such a penalty, but remonstrated, 
alleging that he was far from admiring the character of 
Roustan, very far from defending his ingratitude to- 
wards Napoleon, but that he should have much pleasure 
in learning from his mouth some of the lesser par- 
ticulars of the domestic life of his master, which have 
been so variously represented. Denon allowed the truth 
of all this, but said that if any Englishman of name 
was known to go to Roustan 's house, he would soon be 
followed by several of his countrymen; money would 
flow in, and the wretch would soon be raised from 
the state of well-deserved contempt and degradation 
which was the natural consequence of his ingratitude. 

It seems he was given to Napoleon by one of the 
pachas, as a thing of much less value than an English- 
man would consider a dog. Napoleon took a fancy 
to him, loaded him with favours, kept him always 
about his person, gave him the means of marrying, 



EAELT IMPRESSIONS OF CELEBEATED MEN. 89 

and in the most trying moments of his life, when he 
considered himself as going into the greatest dangers, 
his last thought always seems to have been that of making 
an additional provision for Eoustan. Even on the eve 
of leaving Paris in the campaign which terminated his 
career of glory, he thought of Eoustan. After having 
thus fattened on Napoleon's prosperity, after having so 
closely attended on him as always to sleep across the 
door of his tent or his room, he forsook him in adversity 
and refused to follow him to St. Helena. 



EARLY IMPEESSIONS 0¥ CELEBRATED MEN — PITT, 
FOX, LORD WELLESLEY, AND WINDHAM. 

I have often thought, in reading Lord Orford's 
' Eeminiscences,' that almost anybody might make, by 
writing down theirs, a book which would at least be 
sure of giving entertainment to the writer when the 
recollections it records becomes less vivid. Upon that 
hint I write, and first I mean to record those sights 
which are gone and past, and which never can greet my 
eyes again. Without ever having read Lavater or any 
one else who has written on physiognomy, I have, as 
most people probably have, delight in tracing character 
in countenance, and therefore there are few recollections 
I love better than those of the faces of the great men 
whom I have seen at various periods. I can now laugh 



90 PITT AND LORD WBLLESLET. 

at the recollection of my excessive disappointment in the 
first great man I remember seeing — in society at least. I 
was about sixteen or seventeen when, at Dropmore*— 
where I was with Lord and Lady Grenville only — Mr. Pitt 
arrived for a visit of two days. First, I was disappointed 
in that tumed-up nose, and in that countenance, in 
which it was so impossible to find any indication of the 
mind, and in that person which was so deficient in 
dignity that he had hardly the air of a gentleman. After 
this first disappointment my every faculty seemed to me 
to be absorbed in listening. If not tropes, I fully 
expected the dictums of wisdom each time that he 
opened his mouth. From what I then heard and saw, 
I should say that mouth was made for eating ; as to 
speaking, there was very little, and that little was totally 
uninteresting to me, and I believe would have been so 
to everybody. I was certainly not capable of a very 
accurate judgment, but I was as certainly in a mood 
very much to overrate instead of underrating what fell 
from the great man, and to be quite sure that what I 
did not understand must be mighty fine. 

On the second day arrived Lord Wellesley,* whom I 
thought very agreeable ; partly, I fancy, from his high- 
bred manners, and still more from his occasionally 

" It appears from Lord "Wellesley's Correspondence, that he 
spent some days at Dropmore in the spring of 1797, and this must 
have been the visit in question.. He left England for India in the 
November of that year, and did not return till January 1806, when 
Pitt was dying. 



PITT, LOED -WELLESLEY, AND FOX. 91 

saying a few words to me, and thus making me feel 
treated as a reasonable creature. After we had retired 
for the night, I heard from the library, which was under 
my room, the most extraordinary noises — barking, 
mewing, hissing, howling, interspersed with violent 
shouts of laughter. I settled that the servants had 
come into the room, and had got drunk and riotous ; 
and I turned to sleep when the noise had ceased. Never 
can I forget my dismay (it was more than astonishment) 
when next day at breakfast I heard that my wise uncle 
and his two wise guests, whom we had left talking, as I 
supposedj of the fate of Europe, had spyed in the room 
a little bird ; they did not wish it to be shut up there 
all night : therefore, after having opened every window, 
these great wise men tried every variety of noise they 
could make to frighten out the poor bird. 

At a later period, in the year 1805, 1 found myself for 
nearly a week at Stowe, with Mr. Fox ; but as there 
were above fifty others in the house, with the Prince 
-Sffgaui at their head, the whole thing was a formal 
crowd, and I could only gaze at the countenance of the 
one whom I should most have hked to hear talk. 
Certainly in this mixed society he hardly ever was 
heard to speak, but occasionally with some one indi- 
vidual one saw him entering into an animated whispered 
conversation, and it was curious to watch the sudden 
illumination of a countenance which, when silent, had 
to my fancy a heavy, sullen look. How far it might 



92 WINDHAM. 

even then have been altered by malady, I cannot judge; 
but I know that the next time I beheld Mr. Fox, not 
six months after, at Lord Melville's trial, I thought I 
never had seen the ravages of illness so strongly marked 
in any human countenance. All its animation had dis- 
appeared, the leaden eyes were almost lost under the 
heavy eyebrow, even that appeared to partake in the 
extraordinary change which all the colouring seemed to 
have undergone, the pallid or rather livid hue of the 
complexion deepened the sable line of the dark brow, 
and the whole countenance assumed a lethargic ex- 
pression. He lived scarcely three months after the time 
I mention.* 

In my recollection, no person appears to have 
possessed the power of making conversation delightful, 
as much as Mr. Windham. His peculiar charm seems 
to me to have been that sort of gay openness which I 
should call the very reverse of what the French term 
morgue. To all, this must be agreeable, and it is 
peculiarly delightful to a young person who is conscious 
of her own inferiority to the person who condescends * 
to put her perfectly at ease. During the party at 



* This account of Fox's appearance in Hs latter years is con- 
firmed by contemporaries. But, according to Sir William Napier, 
Pitt retained till -within a year and a half of his death a boyish love 
of frolic, and (in 1804) was once actually engaged in a struggle to 
prevent the blackening of his face ■with a cork, whilst two of his 
colleagues were kept waiting in the anteroom. — Bruce's lAft of 
Napier, vol. i. p. 31. 



WINDHAM, GIBBON, AND JUNIUS. 93 

Stowe to which I have alluded, I found myself em- 
harked for the morning's or rather day's amusement, 
in a carriage with Lady King, Lord Braybrooke, and 
Mr. Windham. My mother was in some other carriage, 
my two sisters in a third. When we all met in our own 
rooms, they with one accord voted they were a little 
tired and very much bored. I, though much more 
liable to both these complaints than any of the party, 
could only say I had been highly amused the whole day. 
The fact was, they had no Mr. Windham to listen to, 
and I had ; and yet, truth to say, when I was asked how 
he had contrived to amuse me so much, 1 had very little 
to tell even then ; and now after so many years that 
little has passed away. 

I do recollect, however, one singular circumstance. 
Junius happened to be mentioned, and on that old 
subject Mr. Windham ventured what was to me at least 
a quite new guess. Gibbon was the person he mentioned 
as the only man of high talents living at that period in 
obscurity which might effectually have concealed him. 
Soon afterwards I mentioned this conjecture to Charles 
(the late Eight Hon. Charles Wynn), whose accurate 
merhory immediately produced a proof of its fallacy. 
He said, ' I cannot help thinking that, at the period of 
the publication of Junius, Gribbon was not in England.'. 
Upon referring to the letters of Gibbon, it proved that 
he was in Switzerland during the greater part, if no^ the 
whole, of the appearance of Junius. It seems most 



94 IMPERIAL AND ROTAL VISITORS IN 1814. 

singular that Mr. Windham should even mention a 
conjecture which he had not brought to this obvious 
test.* 



IMPEEIAL AND ROYAL VISITOES IN 1814 — VISIT TO 
OXFOED.f 

Of the mob of kings, and princes, and foreign gene- 
rals, whom the events of 1814 brought to London, I 
believe I did not miss seeing one, nor had I ever any 
opportunity of doing more than staring at them. 
Upon the whole, though the appearance of the theatre 
at Oxford was most striking, still, the scene which 
made the deepest impression upon my mind, was the 
entrance of Louis XVIII. into London. We stood in 
Lord Dudley's balcony ; there were few there, and 
those few not inclined to talk : so one had time to muse 
over all the strange occurrences of the day, and over 

* Miss Wynn and lier brother must liave been under a mis- 
taken impression as to the period during which the Letters of 
Junius appeared. Tbe letters under that signature began in January 
1769, and ended in January 1772. Gibbon returned to England in 
1765, and did not leave it again to reside abroad till 1783 ; but 
his babits and turn of mind, as developed in bis autobiography, to 
say nothing of Ms political opinions or bis style, completely pre- 
clude tbe notion of his being tbe author of Junius. He had been 
often started as a candidate. 

t To bring togetber her reminiscences of bistoric, personages. 
Miss Wynn passes on at once to 1814, when London was crowded 
witb tbem. It will be remembered that tbe exiled royal family of 
France had frequently partaken of tbe splendid hospitality of 
Stowe, and that sbe went to Oxford in tbe suite of her uncle, 
Lord GrenviUe, the Lord Higb Chancellor of tbe University. 



IMPERIAL AND EOTAL VISITORS IN 18U. 95 

all the historical recollections it naturally suggested. I 
cannot say that I quite liked to see the British Guards 
decorated with the white cockade. I was amused at 
seeing the Prince Eegent sitting backwards in the 
landau. He had, of course, given the front seat to 
Louis and the Duchesse d'Angouleme. I wondered how 
a position so unusual would agree with him ; since the 
days of absolute childhood, when he might have gone 
with the king and queen, he never could have found 
himself in such a one, and I thought of the possibility 
of an interruption most undignified to the procession. 

The reception of James II. by Louis XIV. was cer- 
tainly far more splendid ; but I am inclined to doubt 
whether, to a feeling heart, the magnificence of St. 
Grermains — which, by-the-bye, I believe from what 
remains could have existed only in the imagination of 
Frenchmen — could be nearly as gratifying as the popu- 
lar feeling so powerfully excited and so freely expressed 
on this occasion. I was then, or rather soon after, very 
much astonished to hear from Lord Arthur Hill, who 
was in the balcony with us, and afterwards at Paris, how 
much more tranquil, more tame, had been the entrance 
of Louis into his own capital. I had then taught 
myself to believe the French a very demonstrative race, 
and did not know how much more difiicult it is to excite 
popular feeling among the mercurial Frenchmen than 
among the phlegmatic English.* 

* SDss Wynn appears to have forgotten that the popular feeling 
was far from favourable to the restored dynasty. 



96 IMPERIAL AND KOYAL VISITORS IN 1814. 

I was not well enongli to go to the drawing-room 
which Louis held at Grrillion's Hotel, but I went one 
evening to the Duchesse d'Angouleme's, in Monsieur's 
dark two-roomed house in South Audley Street,* It 
was literally hardly possible to see across the room, and 
the whole thing was, if one could have entertained 
such a feeling, a burlesque upon royalty. The sour, 
ill-tempered, vulgar countenance of the blear-eyed 
Duchess was a great damp to the interest one was pre- 
pared to feel in one whose fate had been more melan- 
choly than that of any heroine of romance. The little 
crumpled Duchess de Sirent might easily be fancied 
the good fairy whose wand had produced the wondrouB 
change ; but she had not, like the godmother of Cinder- 
ella, changed the dusty dirty abode into a palace, or 
even converted into cloth of gold the dingy brown dress 
of her protegee. 'Waverley' was not] yet published,! 
but when I re^d there the account of Charles Edward's 
drawing-room at Edinburgh, I could think of nothing 
but the dark rooms in South Audley Street. 

* No. 72. Madame d'Arblay gives a curious account of the 
confusion that prevailed both there and at Grillion's diuing the 
royal receptions. (Diary, vol. 7, pp. 22-39.) In a letter of July 
9th, 1814, Sir Walter Scott writes : ' The Duke of Buccleugh told 
me yesterday of a very good reply of Louis to some of his at- 
tendants, who proposed shutting the doors of his apartments to 
keep out the throng of people. "Open the door," he said, "to 
John Bull ; he has suffered a good deal in keeping the door open 
tome."' 

t Waverley was published in 1814. 



IMPERIAL AND EOYAL VISITOES IN 1814. 97 

At Oxford it seemed to me that there was a great 
want of dignity of manner among the assembled grandees. 
Even the dandy Alexander seemed to want it ; though 
he was much better than any of his compeers, excepting, 
perhaps, our own king when he happened to be in good 
humour, which was not always the case during his visit 
to Oxford. As to the King of Prussia, he looked as stupid 
and as vulgar as I believe he really is. \\Tien compli- 
mented, he never could look otherwise than embarrasse 
de sa pe7'sonne,hoied. to death, and could not even make 
a tolerably gentleman-like bow. His two sons looked 
fine animated boys ; the eldest was said to have accom- 
panied the army, and,it was added, had scarcely been pre- 
vented by those around him from exposing himself most 
gallantly. They seemed to look at everything with the 
genuine happy feelings of their age, and are said to have 
expressed great delight when the measles seemed likely 
to prove an impediment to their quitting this covmtry, 
but they got well much sooner than they wished. 

It did not at that time occur to me as possible that 
these sovereigns might not understand one syllable of 
the elegant classical orations made in compliment to 
them. I have since heard from Dr. Crichton — a 
Scotch physician belonging to the household of the 
Empress dowager, who accompanied one of her grand- 
sons, the brother of Alexander — that neither this 
young prince nor any one of a numerous suite, excepting 
one man, understood a word of Latin or Greek. 

H 



98 IMPERIAL AND EOTAL VISITORS IN 1814. 

I think the illumination of the High Street of Oxford 
was by far the finest sight of the kind I ever beheld. 
From the difficulty of getting a sufficient number of 
coloured lamps, they were obliged to put candles on 
every window and on every part of every building which 
would bear them. By this means, the light, instead of 
intersecting and twisting through all the ornamental 
part of the architecture, followed the fine broad lines, 
gave a magnificent contrast of light and shadow, and 
made that which is naturally so beautiful, much more so. 
One church was illuminated. It seems very difiicult to 
find an inscription short enough to be read in lamps ; if 
it is long, the beginning is burnt out before the end is 
lighted. The difficulty was much increased by the 
necessity of making this appropriate to a church. I 
never heard who had the merit of suggesting the beauti- 
fully simple 'Our prayers are heard,' 

The night was beautiful, uncommonly calm and warm. 
From my window, which looked down upon the High 
Street, it seemed as if one could really have walked 
upon the moving mass of heads. In one moment, 
almost without any previous notice, at least without any 
that could call the attention of the mob which was so 
fully occupied, a tremendous storm of thunder and rain 
came on. The effect was really more like the dissolving 
of the enchanted spell and the changes of scene in a 
pantomime, than anything I ever did see or ever expect 
to see again in real life. The High Street, which was 
one blaze of light, and one unceasing hum of happiness, 



THE STAGE. 99 

became in the course of five minutes quite dark and 
quite deserted : nothing was heard but the thunder and 
the torrents of rain. Where all the multitude could find 
shelter, I never discovered. I heard afterwards that 
many who had walked miles from their abodes to see 
the show, slept upon chairs and tables in the small 
houses in the suburbs of Oxford. Amidst that crowd 
in the High Street were, I am told, Alexander and the 
Grand Duchess,* who, as soon as they could get away 
from the great dinner in the Eadcliffe library went out 
to walk incog. This was on the 14th of June. It is 
curious to remember that the season was so backward 
that on this day there was the greatest difficulty in pro- 
curing one small dish of strawberries to deck the royal 
banquet, the forced strawberries being all over and the 
natural not ripe. 



THE STAGE: MISS FAEREN, MRS. SIDDONS, MISS 

O'NEIL, K.EMBLE, TALMA. 

The transition from princes and statesmen to actors and 
actresses, was natural enough in the first quarter of the 

* The Grand Duchess of Oldenburg, who attracted great at- 
tention by her showy person and dress. The Oldenburg bonnet 
speedily became the rage. It was remarkable for the length of 
the poke and the height of the crown. By way of caricaturing it in 
the pantomime, Grimaldi appeared with one of the old-fashioned 
coalscuttles on his head and a chimney-pot on the top. When 
the restored princes re-entered Paris m 1814, the Duchess of 
Augouleme gave offence by her quiet style of dress and flat bonnet, 
supposed to be a servile adoption of English fashions. 

H 2 



!*• GAERICK. 

century, whatever it may appear now. The stage was an 
important part of the intellectual life of the contemporaries 
of the Kembles, Kean, and Miss O'Neil. A striking illustra- 
tion is given by Dr. Doran, who states that, on one evening 
in 1804, when young Betty played Hamlet^ ' the House of 
Commons, on a motion by Pitt, adjourned and went down to 
the theatre to see him. Charles Fox read ' Zanga ' to the httle 
actor, and commented on Young's tragedy with such effect 
that the young gentleman (then in his 14th year) never 
imdertook the principal character.'* The stage divided the 
attention of the literary world with poetry and romance. The 
appearance of Joanna Baillie's ' De Montfort,' Milman's 'Fazio,' 
Maturin's ' Bertram,' or Shiel's ' Evadne,' was an event httle 
inferior in interest to the publication of ' Marmion ' or ' The 
Corsair.' In assigning so prominent a place to the acting 
drama, therefore, Miss Wynn simply reflects the opiaion of 
the time. 

Nothing appears to me more difiScult than even to 
preserve an idea of the pleasure one has derived from 
good acting. I am quite convinced no description 
can give the least idea of that which one has not seen. 
After having heard and read so much as I have of 
Garrick, I have often looked at the picture in St. 
James's Square,-]- and fancied I had some idea of him; but 
then, when I saw Mr. Angerstein's picture of Garrick 
between Tragedy and Comedy, I found it so different 
that all my ideas were overturned. 



* Their Majesty's Servants: Annals of the English Stage, vol. 
ii. p. 416. 
t No. 18, the to-sni house of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, 



MISS FAEEEN — MBS. SIDDONS. 101 

I certainly recollect Miss Farren on the stage, and 
remember very clearly her taking leave of it, but 
nothiag remains upon my mind which would lead me 
from my own knowledge to say that she was an excel- 
lent actress. I know I was told so ; but in the part of 
Lady Teazle, in which I saw her frequently, 1 could not 
point out one prominent part which has left on my 
mind an impression of excellence. Perhaps the absence 
of prominent parts may, to a certain degree, be con- 
sidered as the characteristic of that never-failing 
elegance and ease which marked her performance. 
Perhaps, too, it is just the sort of excellence which is 
the least likely to strike and captivate the imagination 
of a very young person. I recollect (not the admirable 
acting in the famous screen scene but) the circumstance 
of seeing Lord Derby leaving his private box to creep to 
her behind the scene ; and, of course, we all looked with 
impatience for the discovery, hoping the screen would 
fall a little too soon, and show to the audience Lord 
Derby as well as Lady Teazle.* 

Mrs. Siddons in her prime is certainly a bright recol- 
lection, but I did not feel for her acting quite the 



- Dr. Doran states that Miss Farren took herfinal leave of the stage 
in Lady Teazle on the 8th April, 1797, S,nd was married to Lord 
Derby on the May-day following, his countess having died on the 
14th of the preceding March. In allusion to the earl's attachment 
to the actress, Horace Walpole writes to Miss BeiTy in 1791 : 'I 
have had no letter from you these ten days, though the east wind 
has been as constant as Lord Derby.' 



102 MISS o'neil. 

enthusiasm that most people profess. It was too artificial 
for my taste : her attitudes were fine and graceful, but 
they always seemed to me the result of study : not like 
Miss O'Neil, who always was graceful merely because she 
could not help it, because it was impossible to throw 
those beautifully formed limbs, and especially that neck, 
into any position that was not beautiful. At the same 
time I must say, in Isabella, and in Jane Shore, Miss 
O'Neil struck me as very inferior indeed to Mrs. 
Siddons. She never excited that deep thrill of horror 
which made my blood tingle at my fingers' end. I was 
melancholy, and that was all. 

Miss O'Neil had sense enough to refuse the character 
of Lady Macbeth, conscious that her powers were inade- 
quate to it. I never saw Mrs. Siddons with a good 
Macbeth ; for Kemble I never reckoned tolerable ; nor 
did I feel I knew what the character was till I heard 
Mrs. Siddons read the play. Certainly, in that reading, 
some speeches of Macbeth's, and almost the whole of the 
witches', were the parts that struck me most. Probably 
Lady Macbeth, however excellent, had by frequent re- 
petition lost some of her power ; certainly (I felt) in 
that part Mrs. Siddons could no longer surprise me. Yes, 
she did though. I looked with impatience for the grand 
sleep-walking scene, and thought I would take advan- 
tage of my position, which was very near her, to watch 
the fine, fixed, glassy glare which she contrived to give 



MES. SIDDONS. 103 

to her eyes. Alas ! that was quite gone, whether the 
diminution of the natural fire of the eye presented this 
efifect, or whether the muscles were grown less flexible 
from age and want of constant practice, I know not, but 
I feel quite certain of the fact. It struck me when I 
saw her once more, in one of her frequent re-appear- 
ances, act Lady Macbeth on the opera stage. Then, my 
pleasure in seeing her was increased by my delight in 
watching the effect she produced on the very eloquent 
though plain countenance of Madame de Stael, who sate 
in the stage box, literally wrapped up in the per- 
formance. 

Mr. Grreathead, who had been in the habit of hearing 
Mrs. Siddons read Macbeth even (he said) from the 
period of her being his mother's maid,* before she 
had appeared on any stage up to the present moment, 
told me he was struck with a great difference in her 
manner of reading the witches' scenes after the appear- 
ance of ' Guy Mannering.'t He said it was quite clear 
to him that Meg Merrilees had explained to Mrs. 
Siddons, Shakespeare's idea in the witches. This he told 



* When Mrs. Siddons, then Sarah Kemble, was very young, she 
left her parents in a pet, because they would not let her marry 
Mr. Siddons, and entered the service of Mr. and Mrs. Great- 
head, of Guy's Cliff; whether as reader, nursery maid, or lady's 
maid, has been disputed, and matters little. Mr. Campbell says 
her principal employment was to read to Mrs. Greathead {life of 
Mrs. Siddons). 

t Guy Mannering was published in 1815. 



104 MKS. SIDDONS — MISS O'nEIL. 

me upon my observing with delight upon their totally 
altered appearance on Drury Lane Theatre, which I as- 
cribed to the same cause. I consider this as one of the 
most singular and at the same time the most glorious 
triumphs of the genius of the Great Unknown, as it is 
now the fashion to call him. I can hardly conceive any- 
thing finer than the expression which Mrs. Siddons gave 
to the simple reply, 'A deed without a name.'* It 
seemed full of all the guilty dread belonging to witch- 
craft ; and it is just this idea of guilt which seems to me 
so difficult to convey to our minds, which are so 
engrossed with the folly of the whole thing that we do 
not recollect it was a sin. 

My delight, my astonishment, when I first saw Kean 
in most of his great parts, I recorded at the time and 
therefore do not mention here. Miss O'Neil gave me 
great pleasure, but it was altogether a lighter sensation 
than that excited by Mrs. Siddons or Kean. There was 
none of that thrill which more exactly answers the idea 
of pleasing pain than anything I ever felt, and I can 
hardly attach any other meaning to the words. She 
was sometimes very affecting, always graceful, pleasing, 
but I think never great, and certainly never offensive. 
I am, upon recollection, inclined to doubt whether her 
scene with Lord Hastings in ' Jane Shore ' might not 

* Macb. How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags ! 
What is 't you do ? 
All. A deed without a name. 



MISS o'neil. 105 

deserve the epithet of great : in the last scene she fell 
very far short of Mrs. Siddons. I could imagine a 
person looking at those features, which, though hand- 
some, are certainly very deficient in expression, and 
asking how could that face succeed on the stage ? She 
must have painted her eyebrows, for how could there 
be any expression in a face so entirely without brow as 
hers ? I should be puzzled to answer these enquiries, 
but I believe both Miss O'Neil and Kean (in a lesser 
degree) may be adduced as instances of expression 
without features, and may show how much feeling may 
be betrayed by the human frame, independent of the 
face. 

Still there certainly was a powerful charm in the 
evanescent hue of Miss O'NeU's delicate complexion. 
I saw her once in Mrs. Haller give interest to the dull 
scene in which old Tobias pours forth his tedious grati- 
tude ', her rosy blushes showed how unmerited she felt 
every commendation bestowed on a creature so guilty. 
In the whole of this part she appeared to me absolute 
perfection ; one trait of nature enchanted me. In the 
last scene, after having been pleased by her appear- 
ance of deep contrition, her painful consciousness of 
degradation, I anticipated with pain the sort of disgust 
which I had always experienced at the return of the 
jewels. The whole incident seems to me too trifling, and 
becomes ludicrous when Mrs. Haller, looking to see 
whether they are all right, makes an oration on each 



106 TAIMA. 

article.* With these feelings what was my delight 
when Miss O'Neil, who had kept her eyes steadily fixed 
on the ground and appeared really sinking into it, in 
taking the box from the stranger looked at him for the 
first time, and by that look told us more than by words 
how he was altered, her fears, her love, &c. &c. In 
short, I looked at her face and quite forgot the jewels, 
which, even the first time the play was ever acted, 
nearly made me disgrace myself by laughing in the 
midst of the tears and screams which Mrs. Siddons 
called forth. 

Talma has extremely delighted me. I never go to a 
French tragedy expecting that close and sober imitation 
of nature which one looks for on the English stage: 
one might as well look for it in the midst of opera 
recitative as in the jingle of rhyme, fcjtill it is pleasure, 
and great pleasure too, though of a different nature. 
I think Talma superior to every performer I ever saw 
in the expression of bitter scorn, especially when it is 
mixed with irony. Still, I think he never gave me as 



* Strang. And now I may at least desire you to take back what 
is your own — your jewels. (Cfives her the casket.) 

Mrs. Sailer (opens it in violent agitation, and her tears burst upon 
it). How well I recollect the sweet evening wlien you gave me 
these ! That evening, my father — ;joined our hands ; and joyfully 
I pronounced the oath of eternal fidelity. It is broken. This 
locket you gave me on my birthday. This bracelet I received 
after William was born. No ! take them — take them ! I cannot 
keep these, imless you wish that the sight of them should be an 
uicessant reproach to my almost broken heart. (Gives them hack.) 



TALMA. 107 

much pleasure on the stage, as he did in Lady Charle- 
ville's drawing-room, where I heard him talk over 
English and French acting, express his wish to unite 
the merits of both, and deprecate the horrible accuracy 
with which the last mortal throes are often represented on 
our stage. He spoke of Kemble's Macbeth, wondered at 
his tameness — especially immediately after the commis- 
sion of the murder, and said that his whole frame ought 
to have spoken of the horrid deed. Thus far everybody 
must have agreed with him; but when the very natural 
question, Qu'auriez vous faitf was put to him, and he 
proceeded to act his feelings, I, for one, thought it most 
absurd, because then my ideas were screwed to the pitch 
of Macbeth and nature. Probably I might have admired 
if I had been screwed up to the pitch of Oreste and 
French rant. Much ought to be allowed for the super- 
abundance of action which the French bestow on the 
relation of the common events of life, and in ordinary 
conversation. 

What would I give to have been present at a scene 
related to me that evening by Sir J. B. Burgess. He 
had, a few days before, introduced Talma to Lady 
Charleville.* After a little commonplace. Talma was 

* Catherine, Countess of Charleville, wife of the first earl, a 
woman of many and vaiied accomplishments, and of masculine 
strength of understanding, ^he died at an advanced age in 1849. 
The translation of Voltaire's Pucelle, still fretiuently ascribed to 
her in book catalogues, was always indignantly denied by her. It 
was executed and printed for private circulation by her second 



108 FISTKUCCI. 

drawn on, as if electrified by finding in her a kindred 
admiration of his hero. Napoleon ; and related all that 
passed on the last memorable day of departure from 
Fontainebleau. He gave the speeches of Talleyrand, 
of Napoleon, of a physician who acted a conspicuous 
part, with such an accurate imitation of their several 
manners, that Sir James told me he felt as if he too 
had been present at the scene. 

This evening Talma recited to us Hamlet's soliloquy, 
in English ; he has been for so large a portion of his 
early life in England, that the thing was upon the whole 
much less absurd than might have been expected ; there 
was no very striking gallicism, excepting the word consu- 
mation. 



PISTEUCCI, THE IMPEOVISATOEE. 
Last night I heard Pistrucci, the improvisatore, for 
the third time, and my account of him will be far less 
favourable than if I had written it after the first or 
second time of hearing him. Even now I cannot 
believe that it is solely because the charm of novelty 
is past, and the edge of curiosity blunted, that my 
feelings are so changed. That this is partly the case 
I am aware, and feel also, that the more one hears 
him, the more one becomes aware of the very large 

husband, the Earl of Charleville, prior to their marriage, and TPaa 
not at all in her style. She delighted in refined wit and detested 
coarse humour. 



PiSTRtrcci. 109 

proportion of absolute commonplace which pervades his 
verses. Still, with all this allowance, I cannot but be- 
lieve that his performance last night was really inferior 
to what I had heard before. 

Last night I liked him best in the return of Corio- 
lanus to Rome : two attempts were downright failures ; 
the one was Sancho, in his government of Barataria, 
the other the destruction of Pompeii. The first proved 
to me that he does not possess one particle of humour ; 
but perhaps I maybe wrong, if the total ignorance of the 
story which he professed be genuine, and if he really took 
his cue only from the little related to him at the moment. 
No such excuse can be made for his failure in Pom- 
peii; the subjectwas necessarily well known to him, and 
had he succeeded I should not have given him much credit 
concerning it — one which must have been so frequently 
given before. As it was, I own I can even now hardly 
believe anyone could have been so very tame on a topic 
so inspiring. There was nothing in this evening's per- 
formance to convince one of the reality of his impromptu 
talent ; at his public performance, he seized so many of 
the circumstances arising at the moment, that the most 
incredulous could no longer doubt his power of versify- 
ing quite instantaneously ; but I should not say that 
he rises with his subject. Till I heard him fail in 
Pompeii, I was inclined to ascribe much of his failure 
to ignorance of the subject. On one occasion, he gave 
a new view of a threadbare theme, Waterloo : he took 



110 THE EEV. EDWAED lETING. 

the rising of the third sun on a field of blood, des- 
cribed finely the cannon obscuring his brightness, 
&c. &c. 



THE KEV. EDWARD IRVING. 

The familiar instance of the Eev. Mr. Spurgeon may help 
to convey a notion of the more extended popularity and more 
durable influence of the Eev. Edward Irving, the founder of 
a sect which is still in full vigour. His successful career as 
a London preacher commenced in 1822, and lasted tiU 1832, 
when he was displaced by the Presbytery for preaching 
doctrines which they reasonably enough deemed heterodox. 
In July 1823, Lord Eldon writes to Lady M. Bankes : 'All 
the world here is running on Sundays to the Caledonian 
Chapel in Hatton Garden, where they hear a Presbyterian 
orator from Scotland, preaching, as some ladies term it, 
charming matter, though downright nonsense. To the shame 
of the King's ministers be it said, many of them have gone 
to this schism-shop with itching ears. Lauderdale told me 

that when Lady is there the preacher never speaks 

of a heavenly mansion, but a heavenly Pavilion. For pther 
ears, mansion is sufficient. This is a sample.' * 

The reviewer of an excellent ' Life of Irving,' by Mrs. 
Oliphant, states that the little church of Hatton Garden was 
not only crowded, but fiUed, with the very audience after 
which he had longed, ' with imaginative men, and poHtical 
men, and legal men, and scientific men, who bear the world 

. 3 : 

* Twisa's Life of Eldon, vol, ii. p. 483. 



THE EET. EDWAKD lETING. Ill 

in hand. The Duke of York (continues the reviewer)' had 
been already interested in him at his first outset ; Wilkes 
soon found out and appreciated his powers ; Brougham is 
reported as one of his early auditors, and to have taken 
Mackintosh, who repeated to Canning an expression which he 
had heard Irving use in prayers, of a bereaved family being 
thrown on the fatherhood of God — an expression that so 
struck the statesman that he, too, was drawn to hear him, and 
to allude to his marvellous eloquence in the House of 
Commons.' * 

It was about this time that Miss Wynn heard him, and her 
description of his oratory gives a much better impression of 
it than could be collected from, his printed Orations, in 
which the imagery is chastened and the extravagance toned 
down. He was a very tall man, with impressive features, 
and he wore his hair long and parted in the middle, in 
obvious imitation of the pictures of Christ. Like Balfour 
of Burley, he ' skeUied fearfully with one eye,' if not with 
both, but lost no favour on that account. When WUkea's 
obliquity of vision was objected to him, an enthusiastic 
partisan vowed that he did not squint more than a gentleman 
ought to squint ; and the ' angels ' of the Irvingite creed seemed 
to think that a certain obliquity of vision was becoming in a 
saint. He died in 1834, in his thirty-ninth year. 

The contradictory opinions of the press gave rise to an 
amusing squib, entitled, ' The Trial of the Eev. Edward 
Irving;' in which the different editors and critics appeared 
as witnesses. 

June 29th, 1823. — I am just returned from hearing, 
for the first time, the celebrated Scotch preacher Irving, 

» minb. Rev. for Oct. 1862, p. 441. 



112 THE EET. EDWARD IRVING. 

and highly as my expectations were raised, they are 
more than satisfied. At first, I own I was very much 
disappointed : his first extempore prayer I did not at 
all like ; his reading of the 19th chapter of John (for he 
never gave to any of the Apostles the title of Saint) 
would have been very fine if its effect had not been 
frequently spoilt by extraordinary Scotch accents. He 
spoke of the high-sup, of being crucifeed, scorged, 
&c. &c. For twenty minutes, he went on talking of 
the enemies of our faith as if we had been living in 
the ages of persecution and of martyrdom, of himself 
as if he were our only teacher and guide, and of the 
good fight as though it were real instead of being 
metaphorical. Indeed, his action might almost have 
led one to suspect that he considered it a pugilistic 
contest. I thought all this part vulgarly enthusias- 
tic, self-sufficient, dogmatical. Disappointment is not 
a word strong enough to describe my feelings, which 
nearly amounted to disgust. Then he told us that 
the intention of the following discourse would be 
to show from the page of history what man had been 
through all ages, in all countries, without the light of 
revealed religion. My brother whispered me, 'We have 
been twenty-three minutes at it, and now the sermon is 
to begin.'' I felt exactly with him, and yet after this 
expression, I can fairly and truly say that the hour 
which followed appeared to me very short, though my 
attention was on the full stretch during the whole time. 



THE BET. EDWARD IRVING. 113 

Irving began with comparing the infancy of nations to 
the infancy of individuals ; told us that was generally 
supposed to be the season of their greatest innocence : 
took as examples the early ages of Persia, Greece, and 
Eome. He reprobated the false arguments of those who, 
in speaking of heathens, adduce such men as Solon, 
Socrates, &c., as general examples ; as well might we, 
said he, take the heaven-inspired Milton as the test of 
the republicans of his day ; the noble-minded Falkland 
as a specimen of the cavalier soldiers ; Fenelon as one of 
the Court of Louis XIV. ; D' Alembert as one of the wicked 
pernicious cotry (as he called it) whose aim was the sub- 
version of all order civil and religious ; or Carnot as the 
model of that hellish crew of republicans who destroyed 
all religion and deluged their country with blood. Then 
came a splendid burst of eloquence on the vices of the 
ancients. He appealed to their vases, especially to those 
intended for the sacred purpose of containing the ashes 
of the dead ; to the sculpture, still adorning the doors of 
their temples, as records of such vice as is not known in 
the most depraved of modern times. He asserted that 
if it were possible that social virtue, that self-govern- 
ment, could be attained without the aid of Christianity, 
Greece, which had discovered perfection in almost every 
branch of art, and had gone so far in science, would not 
have remained without these attainments. From them 
he proceeded to the Eastern nations, of whose vices he 

I 



114 THE RET. EDWAED IRYINO. 

gave a still more disgusting picture, and especially those 
of the inild Hindoo, as false sentiment and philosophy 
have termed them : their language does not even 
possess words to express many of the virtues most revered 
among us, chastity, temperance, and honesty.* 

Having stigmatised most of the heathen nations of 
ancient and modern times with the vices uniformly 
found to degrade all savages, he proceeded to speak of 
those who have been considered as the brightest examples, 
and first of the Stoics. In the diflBcult task of self- 
government, they seem to have made much progress; 
but in steeling the heart against some temptations of 
passion, &c., they also steeled it against every kindly 
affection, made its every feeling centre in self. If, he 
said, stoicism may be said to have enjoyed what he 
termed the mowihood of the soul, it had none of the 
womanhood, none of the feelings that adorn, comfort, 
or endear human nature. He .proceeded to draw a 
beautiful parallel between the state of the Stoic, and 
.that of Adam before it had pleased the Almighty 
to bestow on him a helpmate. He asserted that, in 
argument, in reasoning, the modern philosophers were 
very superior to the ancient, and added, that many very 
commonplace writers were, in this respect, very far 
superior to the most celebrated ancients, even to Cicero 



* This is a mistake. There are Hindoo words for each of these 
virtues, and chastity has been deified. The Hindoo name for the 
Goddess of Chastity is Arundadi, 



THE EET. EDWAED lEVING. 115 

himself.* This superiority, which by-the-bye I am 
a little inclined to doubt, he ascribed entirely to the 
influence of Christianity, and spoke of its effect, even 
on those who deny its truths and exert their talents to 
write against it. How, he said, can a man who has 
sucked with his mother's milk the Lord's Prayer and 
the Ten Commandments, whose mind has been nurtured 
with the sublime poem of Milton, with the Pilgrim's 
Progress, nay, even with the plays of Shakespeare — 
how can this man be said to be free from the effects 
which Christianity produces on the mind ? 

He told us he conceived the spirit of religion to be even 
yet quite in its infancy ; he trusted that we might see it 
make the greatest progress. If the rulers of the state 
would be governed by the plain rule of Christian duty, 
instead of the rules of worldly policy and expediency — 
if the more graceful part of the creation who govern 
the manners of this great city, would add the Christian 
graces to their other graces, would consider themselves 
as the spouses of Christ — if the critics who govern 
its literature would attend as much to the rules of 
Christianity as to those of human learning — what 
might not be the effects ? 

It was quite impossible to look at Lord Liverpool 
and Lord Jersey, placed immediately opposite to the 

* The modems, in tMs respect, have heen compared by an ad- 
mirer of the ancients to a dwarf standing on a giant's shoulders, 
and thus seeing farther than the giant. 

I 2 



116 THE EET. EDWAED lETING. 

preacher, and not fancy that the first and second of 
these appeals were addressed to them. As to the third, 
if Mr. Brougham and Sir James Mackintosh were not in 
the church, the preacher was likely to have prepared for 
them, as they have been there very frequently of late. 

After having written so much about this oratwii 
{sermon* I cannot call it), it is quite unnecessary to say 
that I admired it extremely, at least in parts. I am 
conscious that there were great faults, even n the latter 
part, in which were also transcendent beauties. Want of 
simplicity is the greatest ; even all Irving's energy could 
not give earnestness to such invariably figurative 
language. With this was occasionally mixed vulgarity 
bordering on coarseness in the images, excess of actioi^, 
and occasional repetitions. Still there is extraordinary 
power, power which m^es me feel I never knew what 
eloquence was till I had heard Irving, and at the same 
time leaves me with the most eager desire to hear him 
again on Sunday, in spite of all the impediments of 
crowd, heat, distance, and hour. 

His reading the lesson was very fine, but what de- 
lighted me most was the solemn, simple, energetic 
manner in which he gave the blessing. The prayers 
did not please me : he prayed for our own ancient 
simple painstaking Church ; then for the Established 

* Note hy Miss Wynn. — It is singular that I should chance to 
use the very word by which Irving himself called these oomposi- j 
tions, when they were published soon after (in 1823). 



THE EET. EDWARD IRVING. 117 

Church, that her dignitaries may be dignified, and 
may be enabled to take due care of the widely-ex- 
tended districts committed to their charge. The plain 
psalm-singing, in which the whole congregation joined, 
particularly delighted me ; parts of the version seem 
to me very fine ; but what I like most is the custom of 
reading the whole psalm first from the pulpit ; it' 
gives real devotion to a part of the service which, in 
our Liturgy, is generally the unintelligible squalling of 
a parcel of charity children, screaming that which nine- 
tenths of the congregation cannot follow, and of the 
other tenth a considerable part are disgusted by the 
absurdity of the version. 

July 6th. — I have once more heard Irving, and I 
know not whether it is because the novelty is over that 
the impression is weakened, but I feel much less dis- 
pleased, and at the same time much less pleased, than I 
was last Sunday. I am quite sure the arrogance, the 
self-sufficiency, the dictatorial spirit, though still but 
too evident, were much less striking than in the oration 
of last Sunday. The coarseness and vulgarity were also 
in great measure avoided, but the metaphors were still 
very superabundant, and also were generally pushed 
much too far. It appeared to me that this oration was 
deficient in clearness, but perhaps my understanding, as 
vrell as my hearing, was dulled by the various incon- 
veniences of the sitiiation in which I found myself; close 
to the door, far removed from the preacher, and separated 



lis THE KEY. EDWARD IRTING. 

only by the thin partition of the pew from a crowd 
who squeezed and made incessant noise. Even when 
one did not hear some voices crying for mercy and 
others for silence, the crowd pressed against the pew till 
they made every board creak, and kept one in continual 
apprehension that at last they would give way. During 
the last hour of the oration the people were more quiet ; 
some servants, who I believe came for the fun of pushing 
about, were turned out, and we heard better. 

The general outline of the subject was still to show how 
inefficacious was mere morality to constitute the happiness 
of man in this life. He said he had purposely omitted 
drawing any argument from the future state, as he was 
anxious to prove his facts from those truths which are 
admitted even by unbelievers, but he must address one 
observation to those who, believing in a future state, 
lived as if they thought of this world only. He said 
their conduct was like that of a mother who, in bringing 
up an infant, could fancy that it was always to remain 
in the same state, was always to be fed as a nursling, to 
be swathed, to be led like an infant. This simile, though 
a happy one, was spun out to a length which destroyed 
its effect. Soon after followed a beautiful hurst of 
eloquence on that power of Christianity which could 
bend the rebellious stubbornness of the heart, strengthen 
the tender heart, prop the weak, and enable it to tear 
itself from those affections which are dearer far than a 
right eye. Nature would teach a far different doctrine, 



THE EEV. EDWAKD lEYING. 119 

an eye for an eye ; nature and the world we live in are 
setting their adverse currents against the proper course 
of the human heart. Where, but in Christianity, is to 
be found the electric spark which is to repel them ? 
' Where, but in her, is to be found the mighty trident to 
stem these storms and currents ? 

One assertion of Irving's was not a little startling : 
he told us he considered Hume as one of the most 
powerful advocates of revealed religion who has ever 
appeared. That able metaphysician has, he said, proved 
the inefficacy of mere human reason, &c. &c. I own 
I could not help thinking while he made this strange 
assertion that it was not unlikely that some one of my 
neighbours in the aisle would, upon the recommenda- 
tion of their pastor, take the first opportunity of edify- 
ing themselves by a perusal of the works of this power- 
ful advocate of Christianity. I am sure that from his 
oration they could never have discovered that this was 
not a plain matter of fact. 

He gave us a beautiful illustration of Jacob's ladder, 
calling it emblematical of the Christian dispensation 
which had opened the communication between heaven 
and earth : the angels ascending he called the human 
affections drawn up to heaven, and those descending the 
divine Spirit shedding its consoling influence in return. 
An exhortation (which appeared to me very common- 
place) to those who were leaving the crowded city for 
the beautiful scenery of nature, concluded the oration. 



120 THE QUEEN OF WitKTEMBEE*}. 

The concluding prayer was the best I have heard from 
Irving, but it is in this part that the want of sim- 
plicity is most apparent, and totally destroys all the 
earnestness which he vainly tries to supply by vehement 
gesticulation. Some expressions (and those not the* 
best) were repeated from the prayer of last Sunday; 
we had again ' ennoble the nobles,' ' dignify the digni- 
taries,' to which he added, 'with the dignity of religion 
and virtue.' In the first prayer we had this strange ex- 
pression, 'Clear our souls from the obscuration of sin.' 



THE QUEEN OP WtJETEMBEEG, ' Nt^ PKINCESS EOTAL OP 
ENGLAND ' — NAPOLEON AT "WiJRTEMBERG — GEOK&B 
THE third's insanity. 

Stuttgard : Oct. 1823. — In the midst of the incessant 
gossip of the Queen Dowager, the subject of which is 
almost always herself and her family, some curious 
grains may be collected from a quantity of useless chaff. 
There is no topic on which she seems to me to show 
such. good sense as in speaking of Napoleon. I heard 
her say, ' It was of course very painful to me to receive 
him with civility, but I had no choice ; the least failure 
on my part might have been a sufficient pretence'for 
depriving my husband and children of this kingdom. 
It was one of the occasions on which it was absolutely 
necessary to f aire borme mine a mauvaisjeu. To me 



NAPOLEON AT WiJRTEMBERG. 121 

he was always perfectly civil.' I have since heard that 
he gave her facilities for correspondence with her own 
family at the time that the state of Europe would 
otherwise have made it nearly impossible. 

The Queen, who is always trying to puff off the con- 
jugal tenderness of her husband, told my mother that he 
left it to her option whether she would receive Napoleon. 
She said, ' I could not hesitate ; it was my duty.' I do 
not give her any credit for a determination so perfectly 
natural ; few women would, I think, have hesitated under 
the same circumstances, even if the option given her was 
not an order given in a more polite form. I do give her 
much credit for the honest candour with which she now 
speaks of the fallen conqueror, though perfectly aware 
that it is very disagreeable to most of the members of 
her own family, and especially to the King. The Queen 
of Bavaria was not as wise, and upon some occasion 
when Napoleon was incensed at some slight from her, 
he said she should remember what she was but for him, 
la fille cCun miserable petit Margrave (Baden), and 
imitate the conduct of the Queen of Wiirtfemberg, la 
fille du plus grand Roi de la Terre. 

The Queen said that the great preparations made in 
the palaces at Stuttgard Louisbourg for the reception 
of Napoleon, were not with her approbation, and that 
she said to the king, ' Mon ami, vous devriezfaire le 
pauvre au lieu d'etaler vos richesses, si vous ne voulez 
pas avoir des fortes contributions a payer.' It was 



122 GEOKGE THE THIED's INSANITY. 

ridiculous enough to hear her say how, when Napoleon 
admired the Lyons embroidery and said, ' I cannot have 
such at the Tuileries,' she told him it was her work, 
adding, ' Grod forgive me, that was a lie.' When he 
made the same observation on some other instance of 
magnificence, she told him it was all done by the ' Due, 
mon beauphre,'' and in relating this, added the same 
corrective. She said the manners of Napoleon were 
extremely brusque, even when he was making the civil. 
She had seen both Josephine and Marie Louise with 
him, and seems to have been less pleased with the 
manners of the former than most persons who saw 
her. 

Napoleon used to play at whist in the evening, but 
not for money, playing ill and inattentively. One 
evening when the Queen Dowager was playing with 
him against her husband and his daughter (the Queen 
of Westphalia, the wife of Jerome) the King stopped 
Napoleon, who was taking up a trick that belonged to 
them, saying, ' Sire, on ne joue pas id en conqui- 
ranV 

The Queen spoke much of her father, of his recovery 
from his first illness : mentioned the story one has often 
heard of his vrish to read ' King Lear,' which the doctors 
refused him, and which he got in spite of them, by 
asking for Colman's works, in which he knew he should 
find the play as altered by Colman for the stage. This I 
had often heard, but the affecting sequel was quite new 



GOD SATE THE KING, AND HTDER ALLY. 123 

to me ; and fatiguing as the visits to Louisbourg are, I 
wished I had been there to have heard it from the 
Queen's own mouth. When the three elder princesses 
went in to the King, he told them what he had been 
reading. He said, ' It is very beautiful, very affecting, 
and very awful,' adding, ' I am like poor Lear, but thank 
God, I have no Eegan, no Groneril, but three Cordelias.' 
The Queen wept in relating this ; and my mother says, 
she felt as if she could have done the same. 



GOD SAVE THE KING, AND HTDEE ALLT. 

June 1824. — I heard the other day from Miss Stables, 
a singular instance of the power of music, which I am 
anxious to remember because it is so well authenticated. 
When her father was a very young man, he followed his 
regiment to the East Indies. Upon some occasion (I 
forget what) this regiment gave a dinner to that savage 
tyrant, Hyder Ally, who a short time after returned the 
compliment by sending the greater part of those present 
to the far-famed Black Hole.* During dinner the regi- 
mental band played, and ended by playing God save the 
King. Hyder Ally appeared much struck, and fainted 
at last from emotion. Mr. Stables was one of those who 



* This is an obvious mistake. Miss Wynn was probably think- 
ing of the treatment experienced by the British officers and 
soldiers after the battle with Hyder AUy of Sept. 10, 1780. 



124 IMPEOVISATORI. 

assisted in removing him from the dining-room, and 
who, standing by when he recovered, heard him exclaim, 
'Is your King a God that you adore him with such 
music as that ? ' 



IMPROVISATOR!. 



June 1824. — I have heard another improvisatore, a 
man of the name of Eosetti, who, I am told, has pub- 
blished poems of great merit. His improvisazione I 
consider as decidedly inferior to almost all I have heard 
of Pistrucci's. I am inclined to believe that his lines 
were more harmonious ; but am not quite sure that I 
may not have been deceived and blinded, or rather 
deafened, to any harshness of rhythm by the beauty and 
musicalness of his tones. From what I heard this 
evening, I am more than ever convinced that with its 
surprising novelty the talent of improvisazione* has 
lost its principal charm for me. The numberless 
expletive expressions which occur so frequently, and 
seem to fill up each pause as regularly as the accom- 
panying music, become very fatiguing ; and Eosetti very 
rarely relieved their sameness by any passage of spirit. 
The subjects chosen I thought indifferent. The first 
was the treachery of Csesar Borgia, who invited five 

* This is a cumbrous, awkward word in English, hut I caimot, 
like a lady (I forget who, hut I heard her), say, ' He played an 
improvisatore on the piano.' 



IMPROVISATOKI. 125 

friends to sup with him and murdered them. Very little 
indeed was said or sung to reprobate the treachery, but 
much on the tame, commonplace, threadbare subject of 
the lamentations of the wives, children, &c. &c. of the 
deceased. 

The second subject I think much better, and was, 
therefore, more disappointed in the performance. It 
ought, however, in fairness, to be remembered that in 
this Eosetti was, by his own desire, fettered not only by 
a given measure, the ottavarima, but also by given 
rhymes for each stanza. The subject was Lorenzo de 
Medici going in person and alone, with an embassy 
from the Republic of Florence, to the treacherous 
Ferdinand King of Naples ; no other Florentine daring 
to trust himself in the power of this cruel traitor, who 
is represented as quite overcome by this instance of 
generous confidence. 

A short time ago I heard the Marchese Spinetti, in 
the course of his lectures on modern literature, treat 
the subject of improvisatores, and was amused at 
seeing how very much higher he rates the talent than 
Foscolo, whom I heard lecture upon it last year. I 
must say that when he enumerated the infinite variety 
of knowledge, of talent, of feelings, requisite to make a 
good improvisatore, I thought he required even more 
than Imlac, in his well-known definition of a poet, and 
longed to exclaim, like Easselas, 'Enough! thou hast con- 
vinced me that no human being can ever be an improvi- 



126 IMPEOVISATOEI. 

satore ! ' This Spinetti would have denied ; and if the 
wonders which he related of the celebrated improvisa- 
trice, Gorilla,* are well authenticated, her knowledge 
must have been fully equal to that of the Admirable 
Crichton. At one sitting she treated twelve different 
subjects ; these were repeated to us, and certainly 
— properly filled — would have comprised a vast fund 
of knowledge; yet I fancied when I thought them 
over, I could in most discover the loop-hole by 
which the improvisatore so often contrives to slip 
out of the given subject, and glide into the beaten 
track of commonplace. Spinetti told us he under- 
stands that Eosa Taddei, now living at Florence, is 
supposed to be nearly equal to Gorilla. 

Talking on the subject of improvisazione with Prati, 
to whom Italian is nearly as familiar as his own language 
(German), I said, 'After all, it is a talent peculiar to the 
Italians, and depending, in great measure, upon the 
facility of versification which their language affords.' 
He assured me, not only that he had frequently heard 
the thing done in German, but that want of voice for 
singing alone would prevent him from doing it himself. 
Spinetti, in his lecture, spoke of a French improvisatore, 
who, in his own language, versified impromptu, with all 
the fetters of a given subject, measure, &c. 

The Italians have been the most assiduous and successiul 
professors of this art, but they have by no means enjoyed a 

* Crowned in the capitol in 1776. 



LITEEAKT GAINS. 127 

monopoly of it. Spain and Portugal have produced many 
much admired improvisator! ; Germany, a few ; France and 
Holland, one or two each ; and England one, Theodore Hook 
of surprising and surpassing merit in his way. Sheridan listened 
with wondering admiration ; Coleridge, under the combined 
influence of wit and punch, placed him on a par with Dante • 
and Byron spoke of him as the only Englishman ever equal to 
the feat. His favourite mode of exhibition was a comic song, 
or mock opera, to which he played the accompaniment on the 
piano. It is worthy of remark that only one of the Itahans 
(Gianni) has submitted his extemporised effusions to the test 
of print with even moderate success; and that only one 
(Metastasio) has acquired an independent and permanent 
celebrity. 



LITEEART GAINS. 

. Dropmore: July 29th, 1823. — I heard to-day, from 
Mr. Eogers, that Constable, the bookseller, told him 
last May that he had paid the author of ' Waverley ' 
the sum of 110,000i. To that may now be added the 
produce of ' Kedgauntlet ' and ' St. Eonan's Well,' for 
I fancy ' Quentin Durward ' was at least printed, if not 
published. I asked whether the ' Tales of my Land- 
lord,' which do not bear the same name, were taken 
into calculation, and was told they were ; but of course 
the poems were not. 

All this has been done in twenty years: in 1803, an 
unknown Mr. Scott's name was found as the author of 
three very good ballads in Lewis's ' Tales of Wonder ; ' this 



128 LITERARY GAINS. 

was Kis first publication. Pope, who had till now been 
considered as the poet who had made the most by his 
works, died worth about 800^. a year. Johnson, for his 
last and best work, his ' Lives of the Poets,' published 
after the ' Eambler' and the Dictionary had established 
his fame, got two hundred guineas, to which was after- 
wards added one hundred more. 

' Waverley' having been published in 1814, the sum men- 
tioned by Constable was earned in nine years, by eleven novels 
in three volumes each, and three series of ' Tales of My Land- 
lord,' making nine volumes more ; eight novels (twenty-four 
volumes) being yet to come. Scott's first publication (' Trans- 
lations from the German') was in 1796, During the whole of 
his literary life, he was profitably engaged in miscellaneous 
writing and editing ; and whatever the expectations raised by 
his continuing popularity and great profits, they were sur- 
passed by the sale of the corrected and illustrated edition of 
the novels commenced under his own revision in 1829. Alto- 
gether, the aggregate amount gained by Scott in his life- 
time very far exceeds any sum hitherto named as accruing to 
any other man from authorship. 

Pope inherited a fortune, saved, and speculated ; and we 
must come at once to modern times to find plausible subjects 
of comparison. T. Moore's profits, spread over his life, yield 
but a moderate income. Byron's did not exceed 20,000i. 
Talfourd once showed me a calculation by which he made out 
that Dickens (soon after the commencement of 'Nicholas 
Nickleby ') ought to have been in the receipt of 10,000/. a 
year. Thackeray never got enough to live handsomely and 
lay by. Sir E. B. Lytton is said to have made altogether from' 
80,000i. to 100,000i. by his writings. We hear of sums of 



NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA, 129 

500,000 fr. (20,000Z.) having been given in France for histories 
— toM. M. Thiers and Lamartine, for example — ^but the largest 
single payment ever made to an author for a book was the 
cheque for 20,0002. on account, paid by Messrs. Longman to 
Lord Macaulay soon after the appearance of the third and 
fourth volumes of his history ; the terms being that he should 
receive three-fourths of the net profits. 



NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA. 

Hastings, January 1822. — By a singular chance I 
have met at two consecutive public balls, first, an officer 
just returned from St. Helena, who was there at the 
moment of Buonaparte's death ; and secondly, one who 
was on board the 'Northumberland' when he went 
to St. Helena. From the first I anticipated much 
amusement, and expected that the second could only 
have bored one by repeating a tale which one has so 
often heard, that one feels possessed of almost all that 
can be told. In both instances the event proved exactly 
the reverse of my expectations. The first had never seen 
Buonaparte, and either could not or would not say any- 
thing about him. He told me that when he arrived at 
St. Helena, three or four months before the death of 
Napoleon, the inhabitants seemed to have entirely for- 
gotten him ; and that the man who so few years ago was 
the one subject of interest, of curiosity, of conversation 

K 



130 NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA. 

through the globe, was never mentioned even within the 
narrow precincts of his insular prison. 

As to the other officer. Captain Sweeny of the 
Marines, he had for ten weeks passed some part of every 
day. with Napoleon, and was quite as ready to tell as I 
was to hear all that he knew about him. I first asked 
whether he had ever seen any instance of that violence 
of temper of which we have heard so much ; he said, 
'Never : ' adding that appearing there only as a guest and 
for a few hours in company, there could not occur any- 
thing to provoke his passions. Still, as the narrator went 
on, I thought that, if the ill-temper had been so very near 
at hand as we have been taught to believe, there must 
have been occasions more than sufficient to call it forth. 
From his own people Napoleon continued to exact all 
the outward tokens of respect which they had shown to 
the Emperor. One day he was sitting on deck in rain 
such as I am told can scarcely be conceived by those who 
have not felt tropical rains : Bertrand, Montholon, and 
Lascasas were all standing round him bareheaded. My 
informant spoke to them, and especially to Lascasas, 
who has very delicate health, telling them they would 
make themselves ill if they did not put on their hats : 
they did not answer, and Buonaparte gave him a very 
angry look, but said nothing. He then said, ' General, 
you had better send for a cloak : you'll be wetted to the 
skin : ' he very sternly replied, ' I am not made of sugar 
or salt.' 

Napoleon always spoke in the handsomest manner of 



NAPOLEON AND SIR S. SMITH. 131 

his great rival the Duke of Wellington, and did not, like 
almost al] of the officers who fought under his banner, 
attribute their defeat at Waterloo to chance, to a mis- 
take, &c. He expressed the greatest admiration for the 
British navy. 

It was one of the singular chances belonging to his 
extraordinary reverse of fortune that on board the 
SfitLjiitendi '- " ^ he found a nephew of Sir Sidney Smith, 
Napoleon one day in conversation with Captain Usher, 
after high commendation of his officers and of the 
treatment which he had met with from them, com- 
plained that there was one from whom he never could 
get anything but the shortest monosyllables in reply to 
all he could say to him. He added, ' I am the more 
provoked, as I hear Smith is a young man of great 
talents, who speaks French as easily as his own language, 
and yet I cannot draw him into any conversation.' Cap- 
tain Usher remonstrated with young Smith; spoke of 
the respect due to fallen greatness, of th? rank which 
Napoleon had so recently held. Smith replied that he 
hoped he should never be found deficient in proper 
respect, but he could not conceive it to be a part of his 
duty to enter into conversation with Napoleon; adding, 
that if he had enquired who he was, he thought he could 
not wonder at his declining any conversation with the 
person who had so much persecuted his uncle. When 



* The ship in which he was conveyed to Elba. 

K. 2 



132 NAPOLEON AND BEETKAND. 

Napoleon left the ' President ' lie gave a handsome 
snuff-box to Captain Usher, and rings to every one of 
his officers but young Smith, who would not accept 
any present, however trifling, from his hand. 

Both the officers with whom I have conversed agree 
in speaking of Bertrand in the highest terms. They 
say that the only thing they could say against him is 
that his devotion to his master was sometimes carried 
so far as to border on servility ; but that conduct which 
would have been contemptible in the servant of the Em- 
peror, became respectable in the follower of the exile. 
His fidelity was the more meritorious when one 
recollects how many feelings of affection as well as 
interest militated against it. The scene which Madame 
Bertrand made, and her attempt at throwing herself 
into the sea, are well known; but I always doubted 
whether her repugnance might not have been acted, or 
rather exaggerated, to increase the merit of the sacrifice 
which Bertrand was making. By Captain Sweeny's 
account it was very genuine, and she left no efforts or 
blandishments untried, by which she could hope to work 
on his feelings as a father or a husband, to induce 
Bertrand to relinquish his intention of following his 
master. That he persisted, we all know, but I did not 
give him credit for being a very fond husband and 
father. His son. Napoleon, is I hear now as fine a boy 
as it is possible to behold. 

Soon after they landed at St. Helena, Madame Bar- 



MADAME BEETEAND. 133 

trand incurred the displeasure of the fallen despot: it 
seems that one of the ships of the convoy was com- 
manded by a Captain Hamilton, who discovered a 
distant relationship to Madame Bertrand, a Dillon 
by birth. Of course he showed her more attention 
on this account, and she received this attention 
like a Frenchwoman, but with perfect innocence. 
However, Napoleon was angry, and said to Bertrand : 
' Your wife must no longer appear at my table ; she has 
chosen to receive all the English officers, and from 
Captain Hamilton these attentions have been most 
pointed.' To this Bertrand made no answer, and 
submitted to the being almost entirely separated from 
his wife, whom he could only see for a very short 
period. This continued sixteen days, at the end of 
which time Napoleon, without another word on the 
subject, said, ' Tell your wife to come to dinner next 
Sunday.' 

With all this he treated this devoted servant in a 
most ungracious manner, and said to him one day 
before all the English officers : ' As to your fidelity, I 
value it not ; I know that it is not for my sake that 
you follow me, but for the sake of the credit you will 
gain from posterity.' Latterly it is said that Montholon 
had supplanted Bertrand in his master's favour, and 
yet he is thought in every respect his inferior. Cap- 
tain Sweeny said that when, after a tedious voyage of 
ten weeks, the shores of St. Helena were discovered. 



134 EXECUTION OF THE EEBEL LORDS IN 1746. 

Napoleon seemed at first to feel the joy which animated 
every other person on board at the idea of leaving the 
ship ; but when on a nearer approach he discovered the 
barren rocks and desolate shore of his insulai- prison, 
the expression of despair, mingled with other feelings, 
on his countenance was most striking. Napoleon left 
the deck, went into his cabin, and for many hours would 
not land. Hopes of escape were not probably at any 
time entirely extinct, and enabled him to endure his 
wretched existence longer than could have been expected. 
While on board the ' Bellerophon ' he said, ' I suppose 
you, in England, expected me to prove a second Cato, 
and destroy myself after the battle of Waterloo ; but I 
was determined to show the world I would be a great 
man in adversity as well as prosperity.' 



EXECUTION OF THE EEBEL LORDS IN 1746. 

Letter describing the execution of the Rebel Lords, in 1746, 
copied from the original. 

'August 20th (1846). — Dear Sir, — As you and Mrs. 
Grrimstone attended the Lords' tryal, I thought it would 
not be disagreable to you to have an account of their exit 
or the last act of their tragedy, especially as I saw part 
of it, and heard the rest from one who was on the 
scaffold. The sheriffs came there between 9 and 10 to 



EXECUTION OF THE KEBEL LORDS IN 1746. 135 

see if everything was prepared. The scaffold was nine 
feet above the ground, with a rail and black bays hang- 
ing from it. On the floor (which was covered with saw- 
dust) was fixed the block 2ft. 2in. high and 3 inches 
broad : near it lay red bags to receive the heads, and 
two white sheets to wrap the bodies in, and on each 
side were the coffins with coronets and inscriptions, and 
on the ground two hearses. The executioner was in 
blew with gold buttons and a red waistcoat (the cloaths 
of Fletcher executed by him) : the ax that of a car- 
penter. 

' At 11 the Lords came : Kilmarnock attended by Fos- 
ter and a young clergyman. Balmerino was dressed in 
blew turned up with red (his uniform). Groing into the 
house prepared for them, a spectator asked which was 
Balmerino, to which he replied, " I am he at your ser- 
vice." Then turning to Kilmarnock he told him he 
was sorry he was not the only sacrifice, and asked the 
sheriffs if they were ready, for he longed to be at home, 
and said he was asham'd for some of his friends, who 
shed tears when Lord Kilmarnock came on the scaffold. 
The bays was turned up that all might see, and the 
executioner put on a white waistcoat. My Lord had 
a long discourse with Foster, who pressed him to own 
there what he had told him privately, — a detestation of 
the fact for which he suffered; which he did and which 
Foster has advertised. 

' The executioner was a great while fitting him for the 



136 EXECUTION OF THE REBEL LORDS IN 1746, 

block, my Lord rising several times ; and when down 
on his knees, it was six minutes before he gave the sign, 
when his head was nearly severed from his body by one 
blow : a slight cut iinished the execution, and the body 
fell on its back. . . . 

' The scaffold being cleared, and the executioner 
having put on a clean shirt, Lord Balmerino mounted 
the stage, and immediately walked to his coffin, and 
read the inscription, and then called up a warder, and 
gave him his tye wig, and put on a Scotch plaid 
cap, and then read a paper denying the Pretender's 
orders for no quarter, commending him very much: 
but, being interrupted, he desired (briskly) to go on, 
and said he should lay down his head with pleasure on 
that block, pointing to it, and desiring those between 
him and it to remove. He reflected very much upon 
General Williamson, but said he had received the 
Sacrament that morning, and was told it was not proper 
for a person in his condition to say more of him, hut 
referred for his character to Psalm 109, from verse 5th 
to 15th. He said the Pretender gave him leave to 
enter our service, but, as soon as he could be of service 
to him, he left us. He talked to the executioner, took 
the ax in his hand, and tried the block, and told and 
showed him where to strike (near his head), and gave 
him three guineas (all he had) ; kneeled down, and 
presently gave the sign. The first blow did not strike 
his head off, so that the assistants were forced to lift up 



DEEAM OF THE DUCHESS DE BEKBT. 137 

his body to receive a second, but the third finished 
him. 

' I own I was a great deal more moved when I called 
on my friend Mr. Gill in the afternoon, and found him 
in great pain and given over by his Doctor, than I was 
with what I saw in the morning. 

' The Guards attending were 1000, and I am sure the 
spectators were 100 to 1 of the Guards. 

' I am yours and Mr. and Mrs. Grimstons 

' Most obliged servant, 
'E. Graham.' 



DEEAM OF THE DUCHESS DE BEKRY. 

A few months after the death of the Duke, the Duchess 
had a dream, or vision as they called it, which made a 
great noise at the time. Lithographic engravings were 
made of the scene: verses were published before we 
arrived at Paris in the month of July. It was about 
this period that the Nuncio gave to M"^ (La Comtesse) 
Macnamara the paper, of which the following is a 
copy :— 

' Void le Eeve de Mad°. la Duchesse de Berry, tel 
qu'il a ete conte par cette Princesse a Mons'' I'Eveque 
d' Amiens, de qui je le tiens : 

' Vous connoissez le salon vert de I'Elysee Bourbon. 
J'y entrais. Je vis centre la cheminee qui est en face de 
la porte une grande figure blanche qui me fit peur. 



138 DEEAM OF THE DUCHESS DE'BEERT. 

quoiqu'elle n'eut rien de terrible. Elle etoit enve- 
loppee d'un roanteau parseme de fleurs de lys, et je 
connus que c'etoit St. Louis. Mad°. de Gontault etoit 
aupres de moi, tenant deux enfans qui etoient les miens: 
I'un etait ma fille agee de cinq ans, et I'autre etoit un 
fils un peu plus jeune que sa sceur. Mad", de Gontault 
les poussoit vers la figure blanche, et moi je faisais au 
contraire tout ce que je pouvois pour les retenir. Cepen- 
dant elle I'emporta surmoi, et mes enfans se trouv^rent 
tout aupres de St. Louis ; qui posa une couronne sur la 
tete de ma fille. Je pris cette couronne et la mis sur la 
tete de mon fils, disant que c'etoit lui qui derait etre 
couronne. St. Louis reprit cette couronne, et la mit 
sur la tete de ma fille, mais il en mit une seconde sur 
la tete de mon fils et je m'eveillai,' 

This dream produced so strong an effect upon the 
mind of the Duchess, that the royal family, who at 
first rejoiced in her deriving consolation from any cir- 
cumstance, began to grow uneasy at the confidence with 
which she spoke of all that she would do with her son, 
just as if he had been actually there.* Monsieur 
thought it his duty to speak to her most seriously on the 
subject, and to prepare her for the too probable disap- 
pointment of her high-raised expectations. The only 
reply he obtained from her was, ' Ah ! Pwpa, St. Louis 
en salt plus que vous.' 

* The Due de Berry was born in the September followinff. 



CANNIBALISM IN SUMATEA. 139 



CANNIBALISM IN SUMATKA, 

March 1825. — From Sir Stamford Eaffles, I have 
heard histories of the manners and customs of the 
Island of Sumatra, so very strange that from any per- 
son but one who, having been many years governor of 
the island, was an eye-witness of some of the scenes 
he described, and in all had opportunity to ascertain 
the truth, I could not have believed one word. The first 
undoubted fact which he told me is, that at this time 
there is in a part (the north-western part, I think) of that 
island a population of about a million who are canni- 
bals, and cannibals of a more horrible description than 
any I ever heard or read of, for they literally eat their 
victims aKve. This, it seems, is the punishment for three 
or four great offences : one of which is adultery. An 
execution for this crime was witnessed by one of the 
white resident merchants, a person, Sir Stamford says, 
' in whom he had perfect confidence,' and was thus 
described to him : 

The criminal being tied to a stake, the executioner, 
armed with a very large sharp knife, asked the injured 
husband, who on this occasion bad precedence over every 
person, what piece he chose : he selected the right ear ; 
which was immediately cat off. An assistant of the 
executioner placed it on a large silver salver, on which 
were previously arranged in heaps, salt, pepper of 



140 CANNIBALISM IN SUMATRA. 

various degrees of heat, lemons, &c. The salver was 
presented to the husband, who, after having seasoned 
the disgusting morsel to his taste, proceeded to eat it. 
The next in rank happened to select the nose: the 
ceremony was repeated ; and the executioner (being a 
merciful man), after two or three more slices, raD 
his sword through the body of the wretched victim, and 
then divided the body among the surrounding multitude, 
who crowded with savage ferocity to the feast. 

Sir Stamford told me that, finding that some few 
among the principal persons expressed disgust at this 
horrible custom, he exerted his influence to abolish it, 
but he was answered as if he intended to subvert the 
pu.blic morals. They made use of the same arguments 
to defend their practice, as were used in this country to 
defend one less barbarous, the interment of suicides in 
the highway.* They said death might happen to any 

* In 1813 the MU for omitting the embowelling; and quartering 
in the punishment of high treason, was thrown out in the House 
of Commons by 75 against 60 ; 'so that (wrote Bomilly) the 
ministers have the glory of having preserved the British law, by 
which it is ordained that the bowels of a man convicted of treason 
shall be torn out of his body whilst yet alive.' The judgment 
against Captain Walcot (concerned in the Eye House plot) was 
reversed, because it did not direct that the bowels of the prisoner 
should be taken out and burned in conspectu ejus et ipso viverde. 
Lord Russell was one of those who disputed the King's prerogative 
to remit the hanging and quartering in Lord Stafford's case ; and 
when his own turn came, the King (Charles 11.) said: 'My 
Lord Russell shall find that I am possessed of that prerogative 
which, in the case of Lord Stafford, he thought fit to deny me.' 



CAHNIBAIISM IN SUMATRA. 141 

man, and was not a sufficient punishment to deter from 
crime : circumstances to excite horror must be added ; 
and some of those who fed on human flesh seemed to 
consider themselves as performing a gainful duty. 

I asked about how many executions might occur in 
the course of the twelvemonth, and was answered forty or 
fifty. Among the different villages, besides this, they are 
in the habit of eating their parents when they become old 
and useless. These are willing victims. The ceremony 
begins with music, dancing, and complete intoxication ; 
and the poor old wretches are killed and roasted before 
they are eaten by their dutiful children. Latterly, 
however, some progress was made in civilisation : they 
began to feel some repugnance at eating their own 
parents ; and neighbouring villages agreed to exchange 
their old for food. I naturally asked Sir Stamford 
whether he did not feel the utmost dread and abhorrence 
of this savage people. He said, 'Decidedly not: in the 
other transactions of life, they are a mild, strictly honour- 
able people.' He gave me a proof of his opinion of them, 
telling me he had travelled through their district accom- 
panied by Lady Eaffles, and without any guards or means 
of defence. They had lodged in their huts, which are 
very large, and on account of the great moisture of the 
climate raised on large wooden piles. On one occasion, 
in one of these huts, above one hundred of these people 
slept in the same room with the Eaffles' party : but 
this seems to have been an extraordinary occurrence. 



142 CANNIBALISM IN SUMATRA, 

occasioned by a very stormy night which prevented 
many from seeking more distant habitations. 

After all this, nothing is to me so wonderful as the 
plain historical fact, that Sumatra was discovered by the 
Portuguese in the year 1 5 1 0, and since that period seems 
to have been continually the resort of eastward-hound 
European ships. I conclude that in this large island a 
remote part has been little visited by Europeans ; still, 
that little, one should think, must in the course of above 
300 years have produced some progress towards civi- 
lisation. ■ It seems strange, too, that a district large 
enough to contain a population of a million should be 
so cut off from all intercourse with the capital and 
that part of the island which has been so long inhabi- 
ted by European merchants of different countries. I 
was astonished to hear that so near the equator a 
climate so temperate should be found. Sir Stamford 
said there was hardly a day in the year in which the 
thermometer did not rise above 80°, and very few in 
which it was higher than 84°; then, in the night and 
early morning, it frequently falls to 70°, and this, partly 
from the extreme moisture and partly from the relax- 
ation of frame which the previous heat has produced, 
is felt as severe cold. 

Sir Stamford says the mermaid is frequently seen on 
the coasts of Sumatra ; but his report of her appearance 
is far different from, and much less poetic than, the 
fabulous histories I have been in the habit of hearing. 



MEEMAIDS. 143 

He describes her appearance as very like that of a 
cow, and says he cannot conceive how any resem- 
blance to a woman can have been fancied, excepting in 
the position of the breasts and in the manner of nursing 
her young. They have very strong affection for their 
young, and when these are removed, call them with a 
loud continual moan, very discordant, and this is the 
far-famed mermaid's song. This moan is sometimes ac- 
companied by tears, and a strange property is ascribed to 
those tears by a kind of poetic superstition. It is sup- 
posed that the tears which the mother sheds to recall 
her absent offspring, have the power of attracting towards 
the person possessing them the one most dear to that 
person. The precious drops are, therefore, eagerly 
purchased by lovers, as a kind of talisman to preserve 
and retain the affections of the beloved object. 

After writing the above, I looked over Marsden's 
' Sumatra ;' I there find the account given by Sir Stam- 
ford of the race of cannibals exactly confirmed.* The 

* ' Th^se (offenders) are tried by the people of the trihe where 
the offence was committed, hut cannot be executed until their 
own particular raja has been made acquainted with the sentence, 
who, when he acknowledges the justice of the intended punish- 
ment, sends a cloth to cover the head of the delinquent, along 
with a large dish of salt and lemons.' Amongst the many proofs 
addressed by Mr. Marsden to the incredulous, is the following : — 
' When Mr. Giles HoUoway was leaving Tappanuli, and settling 
his accounts with the natives, he expostulated with a Batta man 
who had been dilatory in his payments. " I would," said the 
man, " have been here sooner, but my pangula (superior officer) 
was detected in familiarity vrith my wife. He was condemned, 



144 MERMAIDS. 

part of the island in which they are found is on the 
N.E. coast, and is called Batta, and cannot be more 
than 200 miles from Achin — the northern point where 
an English factory was established early in the reign of 
James I. Marsden calls the fish which he says has 
given rise to the idea of there being mermaids in the 
tropical seas, the Dayong. He describes the head as 
covered with shaggy hair, and says the tusks are applied 
to the same purposes as those of the elephant and, being 
whiter, are more highly prized. 

I was conversing on the subject of Sumatra with Mr. 
Stanley, the Vicar of Alderley, who tells me that it is 
still more strange that, in this age of discovery, most of 
the islands in the Indian seas possess unexplored regions 
in the interior. He instanced Borneo, Ceylon, Mada- 
gascar (where there seems much reason to believe that 
there exists a diminutive race, a nation of dwarfs) and 
the Philippine Islands. As to the latter, he told me 
that he had the authority of a captain and of a lieutenant 
of a merchant vessel; who said that two young men mth 
tails had come to the coast from the interior of the 
country ; that they came on board their vessel, remained 
some time, and had even consented to come to England 
with them, but afterwards either repented and returned 

and I stayed to eat my share of Mm : tlie ceremony took us tliree 
days, and it was only last night that we finished him." Mr. 
Miller was present at this conversation, and the man spoke with 
perfect seriousness.' — History of Sumatra, p. 394. 



SPINETTO ON THE PASTORAL DRAMA. 145 

home or died (I forget whicli). Mr. Stanley told me he 
had taken a great deal of pains in examining these men, 
and never could find any wavering in their testimony, or 
discover any circumstance which led him to doubt their 
veracity.* 

SPINETTO ON THE PASTOEAL DRAMA, 

•May Wth. — I went yesterday to hear Spinetto's 
lecture at the institution, when I found that the pastoral 
drama was the subject. I expected to be much tired, an- 
ticipating only a discussion on the ' Aminta ' and ' Pastor 
Fido,' too long and much too full of national partiality 
for my patience or my estimation of their merits. I was 
agreeably surprised. Spiuetto is fully aware of the 
faults of these two dramas, and especially of their 
tremendous long windedness, and did not dwell upon 
them very long. He laughed at the attempts made in 
France at this species of composition, the absurdity of 
which must be felt by every person who has the least 
love of poetry or discrimination of character. The 
French ideas of shepherds and shepherdesses seem to 
me to be exactly adapted to the stiff, long-stayed, 

* The Rev. Dr. WolflF stated positively, in the last of his publi- 
cations, that a nohle English fiimily was distinguished hy the 
same appendage as these two young men ; and that one of them 
had the seat of his carriage adapted for the reception of his tail. 
His nether garments were probably made like Satan's — 
' Plis coat it was red, and his breeches were blue, 
And there was a hole for his tail to come through.' 

L 



146 SPINETTO ON THE PASTORAL DRAMA. 

hoop-petticoated, powdered, full-wigged caricatures of 
the human form which Watteau, Boucher, &c., call by 
these names. 

When Spinetto came to speak of the pastoral drama 
in England, he of course began by the 'Faithful Shep- 
herdess ' of Fletcher.* Praise of the occasional beauties 
of the poetry and emanations of genius throughout the 
performance, was nearly overbalanced by blame on occa- 
sional coarseness and immorality. He then proceeded to 
the ' Gentle Shepherd,' which he rated higher, adverted 
to the general diffusion of knowledge in Scotland, and 
digressing to the eternal never-ceasing topic of additional 
schools, wished them to prosper, neatly applying a quota- 
tion from Petrarch, ' Quando luce il sol, ed ovvunque 
luce.' We then came to ' Comus,' which I feared would 
scarcely be allowed to come under the denomination of 
a pastoral drama ; but the praise bestowed upon it fully 
satisfied my partial feelings. The morality of Spinetto, 
which I own myself apt to think puritanical and over- 
strained, was quite in its place when he admired the 
skill with which the sainted muse of Milton contrived 

* Can he have forgotten 77ie Passionate Shepherd of Marlow; 
' Come live with me and be my love.' 
The same incongruity may be observed as in the French pastoral : 
e. g. the damsel is to have — 

' Slippers lin'd choicely for the cold, 
With buckles of the purest gold ; 
A belt of straw, and ivy buds, 
With coral clasps and amber studs.' 



BALLOOJTS.AND DIVING-BELLS. 147 

to describe, or rather represent, the licentious couit of 
Comus without contaminating herself. 

Spinetto then startled his audience by telling them 
that we possessed a drama which might be denominated 
pastoral by a still greater poet. I was puzzled, and 
could anticipate only the 'Winter's Tale,' which, after 
all, I think should have been mentioned, though cer- 
tainly not quite equal to 'As you Like it,' which he 
terms the most perfect pastoral drama extant. I have 
often thought that this beautiful play is not generally 
rated as highly as it deserves, and was delighted at 
hearing a foreigner commend it so forcibly. At the 
same time, I cannot go quite as far as my friend 
Miss Stables, who places it second to ' Hamlet ' only, 
and above every other play. Now, in reading, I 
believe I prefer Othello, Lear, and Macbeth. Upon 
the stage, I am quite sure that the two plays from 
which I derive most pleasure are ' Macbeth ' and ' As 
you Like it.' 



BALLOON'S AND DIVING-BELLS. 

Stowe : August 1825. — ^Nugent (Lord Nugent) was 
talking to me on the subject of aerostation, and amused 
me very much. His sanguine mind still looks, after so 
many failures, to a degree of progress which may pr6- 
duce some useful result; and when I expressed utter 
incredulity,and said, ' Since the discovery of the science, 

L 2 



148 BALLOONS. 

SO little progress has been made, that I can anticipate 
very little from the future,' he only replied, 'If from 
the first discovery of navigation you were to take 
thirty-five years, you would probably find that, in 
that period, much less progress was made than has 
been made in aerostation in the thirty-five years 
which have elapsed since the discovery.' In the 
first place, an argument which necessarily rests on 
probability only, I think worth very little ; but, granting 
this position, I conceive that the state of science, of 
knowledge, &c., of that age, will bear so little compari- 
son with that of the present day, that the parallel must 
fall to the ground. Though he did not convince me, 
he surprised me, by telling me how much had been 
done latterly. By observations on the different currents 
of wind, with the power of ascending by increasing the 
quantity of gas, of descending by throwing out ballast, 
they have acquired some little power of directing the 
balloon. But the most important discovery is one made 
by Sadler, which enables them to measure with tolerable 
accuracy the rate of their flight. A long log-hne is 
thrown out, and by measuring with great accuracy, by 
means of a quadrant, the angle which this line makes, 
they can ascertain the velocity of their flight, and from 
observation of the compass may form a tolerable idea 
of their situation. 

Nugent tells me that a young friend of his ascended 
with Graham a little time ago ; it was one of the lovely 



BALLOONS. 149 

bright calm days which have been so frequent this sum- 
mer; still, in the elevated regions of the atmosphere, 
the cold was intense ; but no peculiar sensation accom- 
panied this cold. G-eorge (Lord N.) said he asked 
what was the appearance of the horizon of the earth : 
' Cloud,' was the answer ; ' the view was always caught 
through clouds, which formed an irregular fringe or 
frame to the picture.' The descent was very perilous : 
the young man — almost a boy — having asked Graham 
how high they were, and being told, I forget what, 
asked 'whether they could not ascend a little higher 
before they began their descent?' Graham said. Cer- 
tainly they could, but that he was averse to the idea of 
expending any more gas, because a small quantity in 
reserve might be essential to the safety of their descent. 
When once the ballast is all thrown out and the descent 
begun, the only means of avoiding any dangerous spot 
on which the balloon might chance to fall, is by admit- 
ting a little more of the inflammable gas, rising, and 
trusting to the wind to convey the machine out of the 
dangerous neighbourhood. The young man still pressed 
for a farther ascent; Graham weakly consented ; and the 
danger he had foreseen actually occurred. 

As soon as the earth became visible through their 
glasses, it was evident that they had their choice of dan- 
gers only : they were coming down between the river 
and some lime-kilns. The kilns were certain destruc- 
tion; the moment the balloon approached them the 



150 BALLOONS. 

inflammable gas must have ignited, and they must have 
been burnt to death. The only alternative was to rise and 
trust to the wind for conveying them out of this dan- 
gerous neighbourhood. They had no gas left, and the only 
means of lightening the balloon was by cutting away 
the car — without the power (as George observed) of 
saying 'heads below' — and trusting themselves to the 
ropes of the balloon itself, which of course rose, having 
a lighter weight, made still lighter by being close to it, 
instead of being attached at some distance. At last 
they fell into the river, and, being both good swimmers, 
escaped. 

I forgot to say that another of the modern contri- 
vances is a pulley, by means of which the aeronaut can 
draw the car farther from, or nearer to the balloon : by 
this means the ascent or descent may be checked, and 
more or less advantage may be taken of the current of 
wind in which they may happen to find themselves. 
London, he says, appeared wonderfully regular at this 
great elevation : every smaller distinction of height 
disappeared : every building appeared of equal height 
and of dazzling whiteness. 

This conversation naturally led us to the diving-bell. 
I found Greorge had been down in one, in Plymouth 
Sound. By his account, it must have been precisely 
similar to that which I saw at Bordeaux. He says, when 
under the water, you see in the diving-bell about as 
clearly as you would in a carriage, when the breath has 



DiyiNG-BELLS. 151 

been congealed on the glasses ; though you see very little 
without, withiu. you can see to read the smallest print. 
He says, the first thing his companion did, was to 
direct his attention to the code of signals attached 
to the side of the bell, and explain them, that 
George might know what to do in the improbable 
event of his companion's being seized with a fit. The 
signals are given by so many strokes of the ham- 
mer against the side of the bell; the first, and most 
important of all, which is ' Hold fast where you are,' 
is given by one stroke ; the second, which is, I 
shpuld have thought, still more so, is 'Draw up the 
bell;' the others direct it to be drawn N.j S., E., 
or W. His companion said, ' Now, you see that 
pointed rock, if we go on in our present course, the 
side of the bell must strike against it; it will be 
overset, and we shall inevitably be destroyed : but there 
is no hurry ; we will go nearer and examine it.' When 
they approached he gave the signal to be drawn up 
higher ; then directing the course so as to come imme- 
diately over the rock, he desired to be lowered again, 
and they found themselves with the point of the rock 
within the bell. 

George describes the painful sensation in the eais 
exactly as the man at Bordeaux did; a buzzing and 
sense of pressure like that arising from a drop of water 
in the drum of the ear, only stronger. Cotton to 
deaden this sensation would be a very dangerous 



152 CONVEESATIONS WITH GENERAL ALATA. 

experiment : the compressed air would drive it in so far, 
it would not be get out again without some instrument. 
He says, that altogether the sensation is so little dis- 
agreeable, that he conceives one might remain under 
water for any length of time. In returning to the air, 
there is a disagreeable sulphureous smell, for which it 
is not easy to account, but which is always observed. 
Greorge did not know whether this smell was experi- 
enced returning from fresh water as well as from sea 
water. 



CONVERSATIONS WITH QENEKAL ALAVA. 

(Cambronne. Fouch6. Spanish Legate and Aranda. The 
Popes. Prince de Ligne. The Empress Catherine. First 
news of Waterloo.) 

General Alava, for many years Spanish Minister at the 
Court of Great Britain, is best known as the friend and com- 
panion in arms of the Duke of Wellington ; who retained 
through life a warm esteem for him, although political 
differences may have caused an occasional coolness. Alava, 
on his part, never wavered in his attachment. After ex- 
pressing his approval of some measure of Lord Grey's Govern- 
ment, he suddenly turned round and exclaimed, ' But you 
must not think I can ever prefer this Government to the 
Duke of Wellington ; it is he whom I love.' Alava, says 
Lord Holland in his ' Foreign Reminiscences,' ' was impetuous 
in temper and heedless in conversation ; but yet so honest, 
so natural, so cheerful, and so affectionate, that the most 
reserved man cordd scarcely have given less offence than he, 



CONTEESATIONS WITH GENERAL ALATA. 153 

who commanded the respect of the many by his intrepid 
openness and sincerity.' 

Dr. Gleig, after relating the circumstances of the -wound or 
contusion received by the Duke at the battle of Orthes, adds : 
' He was on his feet, however, in a moment, and in a condition 
to laugh at the Spanish General, Alava, who had likewise been 
wounded almost at the same instant in that fleshy and very 
sensitive part of the body, any accident to which is apt to 
excite the mirth rather than the sympathy of the looker- 
on. * 

No one knew better how to interpret the slightest action of 
his Chief The night before one of the Duke's Peninsular 
victories, an officer came up to Alava and asked in niuch 
alarm, ' What will become of us ? We shall have a great 
battle to-morrow, and Lord Wellington is doing nothing but 
flirting with Madame de Quintana.' ' I am glad to hear it,' 
replied Alava, ' if we are to have a great battle to-morrow ; 
for it is quite certain that all his arrangements are made, if 
he is flirting with Madame Quintana.' Alava died in 1841. 

Aix-la-Chapelle : October 9th, 1825. — I am hearing 
from General Alava a great deal about all those of whom 
history will one day talk a great deal and tell much 
that he could contradict on personal knowledge. For 
instance, he was present when Cambronne was taken, and 
when he is said to have made the speech so often com- 
mented upon, 'La Oarde meurt, et ne se rend pas.' 
He did not say this or anything else, only screamed for 
a surgeon to dress his wound, having quietly surrendered.! 

* The Life of Arthur Duke of Wellington, &c. p. 272. 
t Sibome says that when the French Guards fell back, General 
Halkett, who had marked out Cambronne, dashed at him with 



154 CONYEESATIONS \yiTH GENERAL ALATA, 

Alava saw the famous correspondence which passed 
between Fouche and Carnot at the period of the Restor- 
ation, when the former, as minister of police, was 
sending all the proscribed into exile. Carnot wrote, 
Ou veux-tu que faille, traitre ? ' Fouche replied, ' Ou 
tu voudras, imbecille.^ 

I am still, after all I have heard in Majorca, asto- 
nished at the manner in which Madame de Coigny, 
a professed divote, Alava, and the Prince Pierre 
d'Aremberg, talk before us heretics of their bishops, 
cardinals, legates, and even their popes. Alava was 
telling us of the legate in Spain during the reign of 
Charles III. He had some discussion with Aranda, then 
minister, and refused some boon requested for Spain, 
detailing with great pomp his fears lest the interests of 
their holy faith might suffer by such concessions. 
Aranda, provoked, at last said, 'How can you bring 
forward such arguments to me who know that you are 
an atheist as well as myself? ' The pious legate quietly 
replied, ' E vero, ma questo non si dice.' 

Alava amused me in telling of the same man, the 



uplifted sword, and was on the point of cutting him down, when 
Cambronne cried out to him to hold his hand, and surrendered. 
Just afterwards Halkett's horse fell, and Cambronne made an 
attempt to escape, but was overtaken by the General, who pulled 
him back by the aiguillette, and delivered him over to a guard of 
Osnabruckers. Cambronne himself always denied the historic 
mot attributed to him, which, according to M. Fournier (L'JEspnt 
dans I'Histoire), was invented by M. Rougemont, the editor of 
the Independant, in which journal it originally appeared. 



THE POPES. 155 

manner in which he received the often-repeated question 
of that fool Charles IV., who made all around him 
observe the striking resemblance between his son Don 
Francisco de Paula and the Prince of Peace. The sneer 
with which the legate first looked at the Queen, then at 
Manuel, and replied, 'E vero, Sire,' was very weU 
described. 

They all speak of the present Pope (Leo XII.) as 
having been fier libertin, and are not shy of letting 
you see that they consider his present austerity as 
mere hypocrisy. Of the late "Pope (Pius VII.) they 
speak with the veneration which his character seems to 
demand from all, but which is certainly not felt by the 
bigoted Catholics, who cannot endure his liberal ideas. 
They were speaking of the time that he passed in con- 
finement at Fontainebleau. Napoleon wanted to force 
him to consent to measures which his conscience dis- 
approved, and one day, tired out, said to one of his 
ministers (Fouche,* I believe), 'Why do not you try 
what ill-treatment can do, short of torture ? I authorise 
you to employ every means.' The reply was, ' Mais, 
Sire, que voulez-vous que Von fasse d'un homme qui 
laisse geler I'eau dans son benitier sans se plaindre 
de rCavoir pas du feu dans sa chambre ? ' 

One evening we talked of that extraordinary per- 

* In his apocryphal M6m.oires, Fouche is made to say that 
Napoleon, Imowing his repugnance to violent measures against the 
Pope, never trusted him with the conduct of them. 



156 PRINCE DE LIGNE — CATHEEINE. 

sonage the Prince de Ligne, who for fourscore years 
had lived with every person of distinction in Europe, 
and who, to the last rnoment, preserved not only every 
useful facility, but wit and gaiety besides. He preserved 
also to the last a singular facility of versification, and 
was particularly fond of writing epitaphs on himself. 
They say that he must have written above 500, generally 
impromptus, and of course worthless.* 

Madame de Coigny told us an anecdote of that famous 
progress which Catherine la Grande made through the 
southern part of her empire, and which the Prince de 
Ligne has so well described. She was attended by the 
ministers of the three great European Powers. They 
arrived at Kiow. She iirst asked the Austrian, Cobentzel, 
what he thought of the town. He made a set speech on 
the ruins of the ancient town, contrasting them with the 
new buildings which she had made, and of course 
extracting from that part of the subject a long tirade of 
compliment, &c. &c. When this oration was ended 
Catherine turns to Segur, the French minister, ' Et 
vous, Monsieur, qu'en pensez-vous?' ^Madame, il 
trie semble que Kiow offre le souvenir d'un grand empire 
et Vespoir d'un autre.' f Catherine then says, ' A voire 

* He was always writing about Mmself in prose as well M 
in verse. Amongst the heads of chapters in his Mimoirei et 
Melanges, we find, 'De Moi pendant le jour,' 'De Moi pendant 
la nuit,' 'De Moi encore,' 'M^moire par mon coeur,' 'Mes Ecartu, 
ou Ma Tete en Lihert^.' 

t Kiow was the capital of the ancient empire of Muscovy. 



FIRST NEWS OF WATERLOO. 157 

tour, Monsieur Fitzherhert (afterwards Lord St. Helens), 
qu'en dites-vous ? ' ' Ma foi, Madame, je trouve que 
dest le plus vilain trow que nous ayons encore vu 
dans toute notre route.' Madame de Coigny says she 
has laughed at Lord St. Helens about this speech ; he 
replied that everything that was pretty, everything flat- 
tering had been said, so that nothing remained for him 
but the plain truth. She added, ' C'est si Anglais.' 

I did not know till I heard it from Alava the exact 
circumstances of the first arrival of the news of the 
battle of "Waterloo in London. It seems that one 
morning a partner of the house of Eothschild came to 
Lord Liverpool, informed him that he had a few hours 
before received the glorious news, or at least the bare 
outline; that, having made all the advantage which this 
exclusive knowledge could give him on the Stock 
Market, he now came to impart it to Government. He 
would not answer any enquiries as to the means by 
which he had acquired the intelligence, and could not 
give any particulars: he only repeated the assurances of 
truth of the information. Lord Liverpool thought it 
cruel on such vague foundations to raise hopes or fears. 

* S^gm's Tersion is : ' " Comment trouvez-vous la ville de 
Eaoff? " dit-elle au Comte de Cobentzel. " Madame," r^pliqua 
le comte avec le ton de I'enthousiasme, " c'est la plus belle, la 
plus imposante et la plus magnifique ville que j'aie vue." M. 
Fitzherbert riSpondit a la meme question : " En v6rite, c'est un 
triste lieu ; on n'y voit que des mines et des masures." Interrog(5 
a mon tour, je lui dis, " Madame, Kioff yous ofire le souvenir et 
I'espoLr d'une grande vUle," ' 



158 CONTEESATIONS WITH GENERAL ALATa. 

To one of his colleagues (Vansittart, I think), who 
happened to come in, he told the circumstance, and 
they agreed to conceal it from every other human heing 
till more was known. There was a cabinet dinner that 
day at Lord Harrowby's: not one word was said re- 
specting the news; and Lord Liverpool was returning 
home full of anxiety. In the street his carriage was 
stopped by an unknown, who, with some apology, said 
that he was just come from Downing Street ; that a 
carriage with six horses, dressed with laurels, French 
Eagles and colours hanging out of the windows, had 
arrived : that the glorious news was instantly spread ; 
and that the messenger was gone to Lord Harrowby's in 
pursuit of him, through another street from that in 
which he was met. This, I think, I heard at the time, hut 
certainly till now never heard the thing accounted for. 

It seems that the Duke of Wellington, after writing 
his despatch home, said to Pozzo di Borgo, ' Will you 
write to Louis XVIII. at Ghent ? tell him only that 
Napoleon is utterly defeated : that in less than a fort- 
night I shall be in possession of Paris, and hope very soon 
after to see him reinstated ; say that excessive fatigue 
prevents me from writing.'* A messenger was of course 
immediately sent off to Ghent : when he arrived, Louis 
and his little Court happened to be assembled at break- 

* The Duke himself wrote to this effect to Louis XVIII. on 
the morning of the 19th, but it is highly probable that a brief 
announcement of the victory was despatched at once. 



DEATH OF ALEXANDER. 159 

fast, in a room whose windows down to the ground 
were wide open. The embraces, the ejaculations, of 
course instantly apprised those under the windows of 
the arrival of good news. Among these was a spy 
from the house of Eothschild, who had many days 
been upon the watch: he no sooner heard the news 
than he rode post to Ostend : there, happening to find 
a small vessel just sailing, he embarked, and got one 
tide before the English messenger, who arrived shortly 
afterwards.* 



DEATHS OF THE BMPEKOES ALEXANDER AND PAUL. 

Florence: Dec. 24th, 1825.— We are all here full of 

speculations upon the subject of the death of Alexander, 

* The official intelligence of the victory of Sunday, the 18th, 
did not aiTive in London till late in the evening of Wednesday, the 
21st. The despatches were brought by the Honourable Major 
Percy, brother of the present Earl of Beverley, addressed to Earl 
Bathurst, and were first opened by Lord Liverpool, at Lord Hare- 
wood's house in Grosvenor Square. The result -was first announced 
by the newspapers on the 22nd, but there is a passage in the Times 
of that day which partially confirms the Rothschild agent story : 
' Those who attended to the operations of the Stock Exchange 
yesterday (21st) were persuaded that the news of the day before 
would be followed up by something still more brilliant and de- 
cisive. Omnium rose in the course of the day to six per cent. 
premium, and some houses, generally supposed to possess the best 
information, were among the purchasers.' The popular version of 
the story was that the agent did not stay to verify his conclusion, 
but started immediately after witnessing the signs of joy mani- 
fested by the royal party. 



160 DEATH OF PAUL. 

■which this day's post has announced. Many are incUned 
to believe that his death has been occasioned by the 
hereditary complaint which proved fatal to his three 
predecessors. We had much conversation on the subject, 
and I heard for the first time that it is now universally 
believed that Catherine was strangled. There is a 
species of poetical justice in this, which makes one more 
inclined to believe than one should otherwise be ; it is 
even added that Marcoff on his death-bed confessed 
that he was the agent employed on this occasion. Lord 
Dillon afterwards gave us the particulars of the death of 
Paul, derived from a Mrs. Browne and a Miss Kennedy, 
who were at that time in the nursery of the two younger 
princes, Nicholas and Michael. 

It seems that the day before some rumour of the 
conspiracy reached the ears of Paul: he sent for 
Count Pannin, who was at that time his minister, 
and bitterly reproached him for his want of vigi- 
lance. Pannin, undismayed, professed his perfect 
acquaintance with all the designs of the conspira- 
tors; acknowledged himself as one of them, alleging 
as his motive that all other means of defeating their 
purpose would have proved vain: and added that now 
he had all the clue, and had the means of arresting the 
conspirators as soon as any overt act could be proved 
against them, which at present was not the case. 

Paul burst into tears, embraced Pannin, called him 
his saviour, the guardian of his country, &c. &c. The 



DEATH OF PArL. 161 

Emperor continued oppressed and agitated all the even- 
ing, which he passed alone with the Empress; saw all 
his children, kissed and blessed them, and unable to 
shake off the agitation produced by the conversation 
with Pannin, retired at an earlier hour than usual. 
Soon after the conspirators rushed into the room: 
they were Beningsen (the distinguished general) ; Ou- 
warow (the man whose tremendous black murderous 
countenance made such an impression on me when 
he was in London, as aide-de-camp to Alexander); 
Subow, a Georgian prince: Pannin, who remained 
behind a screen.* Paul resisted stoutly, attempted to 
conceal himself, &c. ; and they seem to have hacked 
him most cruelly. At last Beningsen and Ouwarow 
took the sash of one of the sentinels on duty and closed 
the scene by strangling him, but not till he had received 
some tremendous blows on the head, and not till one of 
them (Beningsen, I think) had trampled upon him, and 
had with his sharp spurs inflicted two wounds in his 
stomach. 

Miss Kennedy with her young charge slept in the 
room immediately over that of the Emperor : she 
heard the violent uproar ('row,' Lord Dillon called 
it), trembled, quaked, got the infant out of its own bed 



* Ttere were in all thirty conspirators, including (Ijesides those 
named above) two named Subow, Prince Jaschwill, Covmt Pahlen, 
Tatischeff, &c. The circumstances are differently narrated in each 
of the best authenticated accounts. 

M 



162 DEATH OF PAUL. 

into hers, and ■with him in her arms lay expecting some 
horrible event. This dreadful interval lasted more than 
an hour, when Madame de Lieven (the mother of the 
Prince Lieven who was ambassador in England, and 
then grande maitresse of the Empress) rushed half 
dressed into the room, and desired Miss Kennedy to 
bring the Grand Duke to his mother instantly, if she 
wished to save his life and her own. 

By the time she reached the apartment of the 
Empress, all the children and their respective attend- 
ants were assembled there, half dressed and frightened 
out of their wits. Alexander and Con stan tine, who were 
both past twenty, were absent at Petersburg. The 
Empress, quite frantic, rushed out of the room, collecting 
her children round her ; and followed by the troop of 
terrified, half-dressed women, went to the Emperor's 
room. The sentinels, gained over or terrified by the con- 
spirators, at first refused her admittance ; but she, partly 
by her commanding manner, beauty and dignity, and 
partly by literal strength of arm, overawed them, drove 
them back, and obtained admission for herself and her 
terrified train. She threw herself on the mangled body ; 
would not for a long while believe that life was extinct; 
then poured forth the most bitter execrations against the 
murderers, and lamentations for her lost husband ; who 
(strange to say) brute as he was to everybody else, was 
kind and still very dear to her. At length, wearied out, 
she sank half exhausted and half chokiag: one of the 



DEATH OP PATTL, 163 

ladies got her a glass of water ; the rough sentinel who 
had opposed her entrance, and who probably, at the 
orders of the conspirators, would have killed her, stopped 
her from drinking, and said to the attendant, ' Woman, 
what have you brought ? I insist upon your drinking 
half the contents of that glass before the Empress 
touches it.' 

The feelings of the Empress were naturally most 
excited by her fears for her children, whom she ex- 
pected to see murdered before her eyes. In vain the 
conspirators assured her that she and they were safe : 
then, with unparalleled brutality, in that chamber, in 
the presence of her murdered husband, told her all was 
over, and shouted in her ears, ' Long live Alexander.' 
That he was privy to the murder there seems but too 
much reason to fear ; the apology made for him is that 
he was told by the conspirators that his father must be 
deposed ; that all resistance was vain : that if he and 
Constantine wished to avoid sharing his fate, they would 
remain perfectly quiet, and appear ignorant of what was 
going on. I should have said before that this scene 
passed at the summer palace, out of Petersburg; and 
that the first object of the Empress, when she in any 
degree recovered her senses, was to get her children 
into the winter palace at Petersburg, where she felt 
that in the multitude she should find safety and pro- 
tection. This was at first refused, but with the spirit 
of a heroine she rushed amongst the Guards, saying, 

M 2 



164 THE ARCHDUKE CONSTANTINE. 

' Who will dare to stop a mother protecting her infant 
children?' In short, she once more prevailed, and 
they allowed her to go : two carriages were hrought 
forward, but she would not hear of being separated 
from her children, and therefore waited till some old 
lumbering vehicle was found in which they could all go 
together. 

I had always understood that Constantino was a hor- 
rible brute, but had not an idea of the extent of his 
cruelty till this event brought his character so much 
into discussion. I am told that a servant of his said, 
' This has been a quieter journey than usual : we have 
killed only two postillions ; ' and declared that in the last 
journey Constantine had shot three with his own hand 
from the carriage. With this ferocity he unites great 
cowardice. An Englishman now here, a Mr. Aubyn, 
who has served with him, told me that he has seen him 
betray great personal fear in action. It was said by 
somebody that his character was softened, and that since 
he had been in Poland, where he is Viceroy, you did 
not hear of such horrid acts of barbarity; which was 
allowed. And yet, said some one, the following fact took 
place latterly in Poland : 

An officer married a young Jewess : he was punished, 
for this crime, and Constantine sent for her to receive 
the punishment of the knout. Her beauty produced 
such an effect upon him that he doomed her to the 
severer penance of becoming his mistress. The hus- 



ETJSSIAN BAEBAEISM. 165 

band was sent to Siberia: the wretched wife destroyed 
herself.* 

' People do not seem to rate the characters of the 
other brothers higher. Nicholas, they say, is more 
dangerous, inasmuch as he has the art to conceal his 
vices ; Michael seems to be considered as a mere brute. 
After all, horrible as all this is, it is impossible not to 
own that in the customs of that semi-barbarous nation, 
some little excuse is to be found. The person who 
from childhood has been accustomed to see, or at least 
hear, the knout administered for the most trivial faults, 
must in time become hardened in human suffering. I 
understand that the Eussians resident in this town have 
been obliged to adopt some other means of punishment 
for their wretched servants. It was not unusual, on 
entering a house, to hear the most dreadful screams, and 
to be told by the lady of the house not to mind : it 
was only her maid who, having dressed her ill, was 
receiving so many strokes of the knout.f Complaints 
were made: the police interfered, and the knout was 
strictly prohibited. The extremes of splendour and of 
misery seem to be their habitual modes of life. Demi- 
doff, who in a state of representation lives more magni- 
ficently than any person I ever saw, keeping a company 

* Revolting as this reads, the famous Mar^chal Saxe treated an 
actor and his wife much in the same fashion with the aid of a 
lettre de cachet. 

t Moat probahly of the whip. The knout is reserved for more 
serious occasions, which, I believe, are defined by law. 



166 RUSSIAN BAEBAEISM. 

of French actors at his own expense, filling his rooms 
with every magnificence which money can buy — from 
chairs and tables up to diamonds and pearls, which are 
exhibited in large cases lined with velvet, and covered 
with plate glass, exactly like those in Eundell's shop — 
is living himself in dirt and misery, greater than that 
of any English cottage. 

Lord Dillon gave an extraordinary instance of this 
mixture in Madame Grerebstoff, who passed many years 
in England. He had some business with her, and went 
one morning to her house in Harley Street at an hour 
rather earlier than that of visiting. The servant hesi- 
tated about letting him in ; he rather insisted on the 
plea of business, and was taken up to the drawing- 
room, where he found Madame de G. lying on the 
couch in a blue silk gown, her hair dishevelled, and 
a diamond tiara hanging down on one shoulder, the 
rouge on her cheeks streaked, her person and dress 
looking as dirty as possible. Seeing probably his 
amazement, she said: ' Ah ! mon cher,je suis rentr&e si 
tard hier, que je me suis couche a la Russe. Je vais 
prendre un bairn, et puis je Tn'habiUerai.' * 



* ' La superficie en tout ofirait Timage de la civilisation, inaifl 
sous cette 6corce l^gere, I'observation retrouvait encore facilement 
cette vieille Muscovie.' — Sec/ur. 



DUCHkssE d'albaut. 167 



DUCHBSSE D' ALBANY. 

Florence: January 14<A, 1826. — I have been dining 
with the Lawleys in the house formerly inhabited by 
the Duchesse d' Albany. The conversation turned much 
on the subject of the late possessor, who, if she be not 
much beHedj must have been a very odious woman. 
The only cause I can find for doubting the truth of 
what has been told me, is that it appears scarcely 
possible that such a creature as she is represented could 
be to Alfieri an object of such strong, such constant 
affection. It is, I am told, quite certain that her 
marked predilection for Fabre excited in the poor poet 
a fit of such violent jealous passion as to have produced 
gout in the stomach, of which he died suddenly. Some 
are uncharitable enough to suspect Fabre of having 
poisoned him ; but there is not the slightest evidence 
to warrant the suspicion of his having ever administered 
any poison but that of jealousy. 

It seems this Fabre was a French picture-dealer, a 
thorough blackguard, who was introduced to the 
Duchesse as a secretary by Alfieri himself, during the 
lifetime of Charles Edward. It was not long before he 
aspired to the affection of his mistress, and supplanted 
Alfieri in the position of what is here called il patito. 
That there must have been something peculiarly shame- 
less in the woman who chose to record her own shame 



168 DUCHESSB d' ALBANY. 

in marble is evident, and this is what the Duchesse has 
done by her monument to Alfieri.* 

That she must always have been ugly is (as I hear) 
also proved by a portrait painted by Fabre in 1793, 
and placed in the French saloon at the Gallery, which 
I have not yet taken the trouble of seeing. Her table 
is said to have been the object of her strongest affec- 
tion through life, and to have overcome her love of 
money. By a sort of poetical justice, not often seen 
in real life, the pangs which she had inflicted upon poor 
Alfieri were visited on her own head or heart. The 
latter years of her life were embittered by her excessive 
jealousy of the attentions paid by Fabre to the very 
handsome wife of a seal engraver, whose name I have 
forgotten. 

An eye-witness told Sir Robert Lawley that her death- 
bed (in 1824) afforded the strongest instance of the ruling 
passions strong in death. She blessed Grod for a long 
and happy life, and instanced three peculiar causes of 
thankfulness : first, that she had always had the best of 
wines ; secondly, that she had always had a good cook 
and an excellent dinner ; thirdly and principally, that 
she had not outlived the seal engraver, and thus had 

* Tlie monument is the simplest record of an attachment -whicli 
waa not condemned hy society : ' Victoria Alfierio Astensi Aloisia e 
Prindpihus Stolbergia Alhoniee Comitissa M.P. C. An. MDCCCX.' 
There is no ground for the supposition that Alfieri's death was 
hastened by jealousy, and Fahre was a French painter of unim- 
peachahle respectability. 



DUCHESSE d'AIBAMT. 169 

been spared the misery of seeipg Fabre married to her 
rival. Sir Eobert says that the Florentines, who could 
not forgive her treatment of Alfieri, had ceased to visit 
her after his death ;* and were very much astonished, 
when the peace of 1814 brought shoals of English, to- 
see some of our first ladies at the feet of this odious 
woman, and suffering themselves to be treated as subjects 
by this mock sovereign. The dirt of her house, when 
he took it, he says was quite incredible : that and every- 
thing else belonging to her, with the exception of a very 
small legacy to some starving Stolberg relations, she be- 
queathed to Fabre. He told Sir Robert that, it was very 
singular, within a couple of months of her death, she 
had been furnishing herself with various articles, as 
if she had expected to live a hundred years. She had 
ordered a new carpet to be made at Tournay, for one of 
her rooms. She had bought a dozen pair of cotton 
stockings, and a dozen petticoats ; the first article Sir 
Robert purchased, and was earnestly requested by Fabre 
to buy the others too.f 

* So far was this from being the case that Napoleon sent for her 
in 1S09, and hegan thus : ' I know your influence over the Society 
of Florence. I know also that you employ it in a sense adverse 
to my policy.' 

t See Die Griifm von Albany: Von Alfred von Reumont (2 vols.) 
Berlin, 1860 ; and the review of that book in the Edinhurgh 
Sevieto for July 1861. As I wrote that review, I may not be 
deemed wholly without predilections; but Miss Wynn's infor- 
mants strike me to have been in every way unjust towards the 
Duchesse and Fabre, and to have made no allowance for Alfieri's 
treatment of her. At the same time, it must be admitted that 



170 AN ARCHBISHOP ON FALSE PRETENCES. 



AN ARCHBISHOP ON FALSE PRETENCES. 

Rome: March 25th, 1826. — I have been waiting to 
write the account of a singular impostor, hoping always 
to pick up more particulars, but I fear in the midst of 
the wonders that surround me I may lose the recollec- 
tion of what I do know. 

Some time ago an Egyptian arrived at Eome bearing 
a letter from the pacha, in which he stated to the pope 
that, having in his dominions a very large Catholic 
population, he wished to have a bishop to be at the 
head of this Church, and sent the bearer, hoping that 
.he might be ordained. The request was most wilhngly 
granted. The Egyptian was clothed, fed, lodged, and 
taught : the teaching was rather a slow process, hut the 
ignorance of an African was not likely to excite sus- 
picion. In short, the Egyptian was named Archbishop 
of Memphis, and with this title returned to his own 
country. The pacha wrote an angry expostulation to 
the pope for interfering with his subjects, and it was 
not till then discovered that the first letter was a 
forgery and the Archbishop of Memphis a daring im- 
postor. He was sent here, and was sentenced to death, 
which has since been commuted to hard labour as a 



much of her conduct and character sadly militate against romance. 
Another very Mgh authority, Lord Broughton, has taken the un- 
favourahle side. 



THE DUG DE BERRI. 17 1 

galley slave for life. I have been told that all this 
while he is archbishop ; for that dignity once conferred 
cannot, according to the Catholic canon, be taken away. 
Others tell me he is degraded, and I cannot get at the 
truth. 



THE DUG DE BEEEI. 



Having heard and written down at the time all the ac- 
counts I heard of the assassination of the Due de Berri, 
and of the birth of his posthumous son, — aware that my 
informants were ultra-royalists, Iwas not a little amused 
in hearing yesterday from the E.s, the story of the 
liberals. In the royalist history, the variations are un- 
important; but our friends, I see, are very much inclined 
to believe that the Due de Bordeaux is not the child of 
the Duchess, but the offspring of one of his mistresses, of 
the mother of les petites anglaises mentioned in the 
letter of Madame de Goutault.* True it is that, among 
the known and undisputed facts, there are many sus- 
picious circumstances ; the extraordinary privacy of the 
birth, — the unaccountable delaissement of the Duchess 



* The Duke's English mistress, who attended his death-hed, as 
related by Madame de Goutault, in a letter (transcribed by Miss 
Wynn) nan-ating all the circumstances of the assassination and his 
death. The doubts relating to the birth of the Due de Bordeaux 
were not more plausible than those thrown on the birth of the 
Chevalier St. Georges, which are now rejected as preposterous. 



172 THE DEC DE BEEEI. 

though, all Paris knew that the accouchement was daily, 
nay hourly, expected — the wonderful strength of the 
Duchess, whom Henry saw at the window, within the 
first forty-eight hours, I think — her known partiality 
for Mademoiselle, and her indifference to the boy — the 
one, she says, 'esi mon enfant, V autre dest V enfant de la 
France ; ' the fact of her having escaped a miscarriage 
after such a shock and such exertions. Another singular 
circumstance — the extravagant liberality and attention 
displayed not by the Duchess only but by all the' royal 
family to les petites anglaises (now Comtesses d'lssou- 
dun) and to their mother, would be thus accounted for. 

The most suspicious part of the story is, that the 
proces-verbal giving the account of the birth of the 
child, which was proclaimed by authority, was altered : 
in the first copy, only half-an-hour was said to have 
elapsed between the time when the ladifes took leave of 
the Duchess and that when they were not only safe in 
their nests but so fast asleep that they could not hear 
her bell. In a second, this was made an hour. Still the 
certainty that the fable (if fable it be) must have been 
fabricated within the first twenty- four hours after the 
assassination of the father, and the coincidence with the 
circumstances which had been brought forward to shake 
the legitimacy of the young Napoleon, are in my mind 
strong evidence against this story. 

It is singular that, the day after, I heard a report 
which, admitting both stories to be true, would furnish a 



CHRISTOPHE OP HAYTI. ' * l73 

striking instance of poetical justice. This child, this 
pretender, is so little promising in body or mind, that 
Charles Dix considers himself under the necessity of 
marrying to provide another heir. It is impossible not 
to wish that the Due de Chartres, who has a good, 
quiet, unprincely education, and is said to do great 
credit to it, is not left to take his chance. 

They say that whilethe cannon were firing to announce 
the birth of the Due de Bordeaux, — after the twenty-four 
(I think) which mark the birth of a female, while every- 
body was listening for the twenty-fifth which was to 
announce an heir, the Due de Chartres said, ' Now we 
shall see whether I have a wife or a master.' 



CHRISTOPHE, KING OF HATTI. 
December, 1826. — In a MS. journal of Mr. Courte- 
nay's, I find some curious particulars respecting the 
family and government of that extraordinary man, 
Christophe. He says* Henry Christophe was bom a slave 
in the Island of St. Eustatia, the property of a Mr. 
Vittor. At a very early period he manifested a disposi- 
tion impatient of control, accompanied with strong 
natural abilities, which, however, were not improved by 
cultivation. When he was about seventeen years old, a 
Frenchman of St. Domingo having, in a casual visit to 

* Mr. Courtenay must te considered as speaking througliout. 



174 CHEISTOPHE OF HATTI. 

Mr. Vittor, discovered the talents of Christophe, and 
purchased him from a master who was very glad to get 
rid of such a troublesome lad, Henri was removed to 
Cape Frau9ois and apprenticed to a baker, with whom 
he remained till the French Eevolution emancipated the 
slaves. Soon after he became general of a brigade in 
the Colonial service. In the attempt made by the 
French to re-establish slavery, he distinguished himself 
as a patriot, fighting under the banner of Toussaint and 
Dessalines; and upon the death of the latter (1811) 
became King of Hayti; and there he now (18 18) reigns, 
probably the most despotic monarch on earth. At iirst 
he manifested a most sanguinary disposition; he has 
been often known to stab or shoot with his own hands 
persons in high situations about him, for imaginary 
offences. Since his authority has been more iirmly 
established, he has relaxed in his severity, and has given 
his subjects a good code of laws. 

Mr. Courtenay describes their arrival at Cape Henri, 
the capital of the Island of Saint Domingo and of the 
Haytian Empire, and speaks of the extreme civility 
with which Sir Home Popham (whom he accompanied) 
was received. A palace, a guard of honour, a stable of 
horses appropriated to his use, a splendid table, &c. &c. 
Cape Henri, when in possession of France, was considered 
the richest and most splendid city in the New World, 
The streets are formed by ranges of palaces, all of which, 
without exception,' were burnt or destroyed during the 



CHRISTOPHE OF HATTI. 175 

fervour of revolution. The square, in the centre of 
which is an enormous iron crown, was the scene of many 
horrible massacres by both parties during the struggle 
for independence. The French made a practice of nail- 
ing the epaulettes to the shoulders of the black officers 
who were taken prisoners. In this state, so cruelly 
incapacitated for further service, they were sent back to 
deter others from following their example. The private 
soldiers were despatched in various ways; the most 
common was to sew them up, six or eight together, in 
sacks, and throw them into the sea, or to boil them over 
slow fires. After so many inhumanities, their present 
antipathy to the French cannot be wondererf at; although 
at the conclusion of the Eevolution the Haytians had 
it in their power to revenge themselves most amply, 
they acted with considerable moderation, and permitted 
the remains of the French colony to embark on board 
a British squadron. 

Not a circumstance, let it be ever so triffing, es- 
capes the knowledge of the King; his spies are 
everywhere, and are only known to himself; his 
memory is so good, that it is said he is acquainted 
with every person in his army, by character as well as 
by name and person. In the space of ten years this 
extraordinary man has corrected all the abuses he found 
existing, abd has so completely organised his govern- 
ment that it might stand the test of comparison with 
any of those in Europe. Christophe has been very 



176 CHEISTOPHE OF HATTI. 

anxious to establish morality in his dominions ; and 
for that reason, has taken the most severe measures to 
enforce matrimony. In fact, he obliges every person to 
marry whom he discovers to be in a single state. All the 
young girls fly at his approach ; for whenever he me^ts 
one, he begins a string of interrogatories. If he finds 
her unmarried, he generally informs her he will send 
a husband next day. He probably sends a black from 
his regiment of Guards : the lady being as probably, 
in all but name, a white person. It is in vain to ex- 
postulate, even to plead a prior engagement, unless 
the marriage can be performed before the King's 
appointed tii^e. The punishment for adultery is death 
to both parties; but I understand there is not any 
instance known in which this law has been enforced to 
the letter. On a recent occasion, the Countess Eossiere 
was sentenced to ride in a state of perfect nudity on the 
back of a donkey through the streets of San Souci at 
noonday, and her paramour suffered a punishment still 
more severe.* 

All persons have the right of appeal to the King from 
the courts of law, whenever they conceive themselves 
aggrieved. In a recent case of this nature, three 
judges, who were strongly suspected of corruption, were 
sent to the citadel of Sans Souci to work as common 
labourers. Christophe is absolute in all things; and 

* He underwent the fate of Abelard. 



CHKISTOPHB OF HAYTI. 177 

although he has given his subjects a code of laws, he 
does not hesitate to break them himself, whenever it 
suits his convenience or his caprice to do so. He is the 
sole proprietor of land, the produce of which is sold for 
the benefit of the state ; no other person can be a free- 
holder; but tracts of land, at a nominal rent, are 
grant-ed by lease as a reward for services. Cattle and 
sheep are also a royal monopoly, and the revenue more 
thain trebles the expenditure of the country. The 
treasure collected in Sans Souci is said to amount to 
more than forty millions of dollars. 

With respect to Christophe's private character, I 
was assured he is a most excellent husband and 
father, and has spared no pains in giving his children 
a finished education. The princesses have had the 
advantage of English governesses, and the prince 
has been brought up by the jBaron de Vastey, a 
clever gentlemanly white man, educated in France, f 
I became acquainted with him and liked him much, 
though many of his countrymen assured m,e he was 
a perfect savage in disposition. The Queen is a 
well-disposed and very good woman, quite free from 
the affectation and presumption which generally 
accompany a rise so very extraordinary as hers. She 



* He was a mulatto, and one of the most remarkable of tlie 
race. He is the author of some creditable works; amongst 
others, of an Essay on the Hevolutions ^c. of Hayii, published 
in 1819. 



178 CHEISTOPHE OP HATTI. 

was once, like her husband, a slave ; she accompanied 
him during the whole progress of the revolution, with 
her children on her back, often without any other food 
but wild fruit, exposed to every change of weather, and 
often half-clothed. 

At ten o'clock Sir Home Popham and all our party 
repaired to the palace by appointment : we were received 
with every demonstration of respect; a guard of honour 
in state uniforms, each man more than six feet high. 
.... We were conducted through a hall, between two 
lines of officers, into a large and splendidly furnished 
room paved with marble and cooled by artificial means. 
In a few minutes the King and Prince Eoyal made their 
appearance ; the ease and elegance of the King's deport- 
ment not a little surprised me. His dress was a plain 
green coat, with the Order of St. Henri (his own), 
white satin pantaloons, and crimson morocco boots. 
He took his hat off on entering the room, and desired 
us to sit down. His wool is perfectly grey, his coun- 
tenance intelligent, and his whole person well propor- 
tioned ; his manners are pleasing and rather prepossess- 
ing. He congratulated the Admiral on his arrival, 
regretted his distance from Cape Henri had prevented 
his arriving to welcome us sooner, &c. &c. He paid 
many compliments to Sir Home Popham, saying he 
was no stranger to his reputation, and conversing upon 
the code of signals invented by Sir Home and used 
by the British navy. He concluded with a pressing 



CHKISTOPHE OF HATTI. 179 

invitation to his Palace of Sans Souci, which I much 
regret the admiral could not accept, being obliged to 

return to Jamaica 

The Prince Eoyal, only fifteen years old, is the fattest 
fellow I ever beheld, and I should not imagine him half 
as clever as his father. His dress was as splendid as 
gold, silver, and jewels could make it ; in his hat he 
wore a large plum of feathers and a diamond star. In 
about half an hour we retired and left the Admiral tete- 
a-tete with the King. Their conference lasted about an 

hour When they came back into the room 

where we were, the King began to quiz the Archbishop, 
and mentioned the stories constantly invented by the 
French about him ; amongst others that of his having, 
in a fit of rage, thrown the Prince out of a corridor 
at Sans Souci. The Archbishop laughingly observed 
that they gave him credit for more strength than he 
could boast, in supposing him capable of even lifting 
from the ground such a fat fellow. The King the same 
evening left Cape Henri, the heat of which disagrees 
with him : when he travels he goes at full gallop, and 
will keep it up the whole day to the great inconveni- 
ence of his attendants. 

Not two years after this account was written, the 
singular and glorious career of Christophe closed in 
misfortune.* The widow and daughters came over to 

* His troops mutinied, his deposition was proclaimed, and lie 
shotftimself witli a pistol. One proximate cause of Ms fall was 

N 2 



180 CHRISTOPHE OF HAYTI. 

England, having previously resided some time in Ame- 
rica in the vain hope that a second revolution would 
place the eldest daughter on the throne of the father. 
I heard of them passing the winter of 1822-23 at 
Hastings, and the following spring I saw the daughters 
frequently. They attended the lectures of Prati, 

which I also attended. From a Madame , 

whom I often met, I heard a great deal about them ; 
they were living very quietly in a small house at 
Islington, I think, but still preserving their chambel- 
lan and some little semblance of royalty. The eldest 
daughter was described as a woman of superior talents, 
who had taken great pains in cultivating her miod. 
She was said to have been the confidante and counsellor 
of her father during his latter years. She spoke French 
easily but not well, she had a good figure, and, as far 
as I could judge from under a close black bonnet, an 
intelligent eye. The other sister was a heavy, stuffy, 
short, fat person. They were in deep mourning and 
very plainly dressed. 



Ms incapacity, from palsy, to make the requisite exertions for the 
preservation of his authority. His sons were killed by the troops j 
his wife and daughters were saved by British protection. The 
wife was allowed to carry off her jewels, and a moderate income 
was secured to her. See 77ie Present State of Huyti, by James 
Franklin, 1828 ; and Brief Notices of Hayti, kc, by John Candler, 
1842. Christophe's authority only extended over half of the 
Island of St. Domingo ; and his subjects are computed at not more 
than 200,000. His principal revenue was derived from plantations 
cultivated by slaves or forced labour. # 



CHRISTOPHE OF HATTI. 181 

At one time I heard that Madame was thinking 

of writing a memoir of ,the life of Christophe, from the 
information she derived from his daughter. One day I 
asked her about it ; she told me that she had quite given 
up the plan from finding their ideas so different ; that 
many actions which the Haytian considered as glonous, 
she felt so disgraceful to the memory of Christophe, 
that she should have thought herself acting unfairly by 
his daughter in making thenj public on her authority ; 
more especially as she could not consistently with her 
own character mention them without reprobation. I 
proposed that the daughter should write the history 
herself, and only submit it to some person who would 
correct the language. My proposal seemed to take ; but 
very soon after that time the Haytians, only then begin- 
ning to give up hopes of restoration, left England. In 
the summer of 1824 I heard of them travelling in 
Germany : at this period the King of Bavaria purchased 
a part of a set of the ex-Queen's jewels (rubies I believe) 
for a wedding present to his daughter, who married the 
Prince Royal of Prussia. In 1826 I saw one of these 
Haytian Princesses walking in the street at Pisa. My 
laquais de place called her a Principessa della Morea, 
spoke of them as living very retired, but knew nothing 
of the mother, who, I conclude, is dead. 



182 LOUIS XTIII. AND THE FOKTUNE-TELLEK. 



LOUIS XVIII. Ain) THE FORTUNE-TELLBR. 

Wynnstay, 1827. — In the year 1791 Lady Malmes- 
bury heard at Coblentz, from Monsieur (afterwards 
Louis XVIII. ), the following story. He was once tempted 
to go in disguise to consult a famous fortune-teller at 
Paris : after having heard his own fortune told, he asked 
the woman whether it was true that she could prophesy of 
those whom she could nofsee, merely by a view of their 
portraits. She answered in the afiSrmative; and he 
produced a picture of Louis XVI. in a masquerade dress, 
without any of the insignia of royalty. She had scarcely 
seen the picture when she returned it, exclaiming, ' Ah 
Dieu, le malheureux ! il perira sur rechafaud.' 
Monsieur left the woman, laughing in his sleeve at the 
idea of having so completely deceived her and exposed 
her ignorance; but when he told the story to Lady 
Malmesbucy, he said, ' Depuis que tant Wevhnemens 
se sont passis en France, cela me donne beaucoup a 
penser.' At that period (1791) the King had just ac- 
cepted the Constitution ; his popularity was at the great- 
est height,* and no event appeared less likely than his 
execution. At the time when the prophecy was made, 



* He accepted the Constitution (Sept. 18, 1791) three months 
after the flight to Varennes, and he was under duress at the time. 
A somewhat similar story is told of Bernini, the sculptor, who 
was said to have prophesied the unhappy end of Charles I., on 
seeing his bust. 



REVENGE. 183 

several years before the Eevolution, the event would 
certainly have been deemed impossible ; and it is evi- 
dent that nothing could have induced the fortune-teller 
to allude to it if she had known that the picture repre- 
sented the monarch whose sway was then absolute. 
[^From Lady Hart, who wrote down the story immedi- 
ately after hearing it from Lady Malmesbury.] 



EEVENGE. 

January, 1828.^ — Mrs. Kemble told me that at the 
period of the first appearance of ' De Montfort,' * when 
everybody was decrying the possibility of the existence 
of hatred so diaboUcal, and were calling it quite beyond 
the bounds of nature, the subject was one day discussed 
at dinner at Lord Eosslyn's.f He replied that in real 
life he had known an instance of hatred still more in- 
veterate, and related the following story : — 

At a large school in the country a rebellion took 
place among the boys ; the master, very anxious to know 
the name of the ringleader, at length, either by- threats 
or bribes, or both, induced one of the boys to disclose 
the name of a boy named Davison. He was, of course, 
severely punished and expelled, carrying away with 



* Mias Joanna Baillie's tragedy to illustrate the passion of 
Hate. 

t The ei-Chancellor Lord Loughborough. 



184 EETENQE. 

him sentiments of deadly hate instead of the affection 
he had formerly felt for his schoolfellow. Many years 
intervened, during which they never had the least inter- 
course. The young man who had peached went to the 
East Indies. He returned, and landed on the coast of 
Devonshire. Stopping to dine at a small inn, he 
enquired of the waiter what gentlemen lived in the 
neighbourhood, and hearing that the squire of the parish 
was a Mr. Davison, the name struck him ; he thought 
he recollected that his former schoolfellow used to talk 
of his home in Devonshire, and while his dinner was 
getting ready, he determined to go to the squire's house. 
A maidservant opened the door, and he sent in his 
name, saying that if Mr. Davison had been educated at 
such a school, he would recollect it. He was introduced, 
and most cordially received by his schoolfellow whom 
he found laid up with a fit of the gout, and was pressed 
to dine with many apologies for bad fare, &c. &c. ; 
Mr. Davison having unfortunately given permission to 
all his servants to go to a neighbouring place, and 
having kept only the woman who was his nurse. 

Mr. Davison appeared so rejoiced in talking over old 
stories with his friend, and pressed him so strongly to be 
charitable enough to pass another day with him, that at 
last he consented. Next morning the imfortunate guest 
was found with his throat cut from ear to ear. Of 
course, the maidservant was taken up on suspicion'; 
indeed, as it seemed impossible from its nature that tbe 



KETENGE, 185 

wound should have been self-inflicted, and as she was 
the only creature in the house excepting her master 
who was unable to move, there did not seem a doubt. 
The trial came on : Mr. Davison appeared as prosecutor: 
Lord Eosslyn was his counsel. In spite of the poor 
girl's protestations of innocence, the case seemed nearly 
decided, when Mr. Davison sent a note to his counsel, 
desiring him to ask the girl whether she had heard any 
noise in the night. Lord Eosslyn objected; but his 
client insisted. This seems to have been one of those 
strange perversions of intellect by which guilt is 
ordained to betray itself when all the artifice which had 
accompanied it is lulled asleep. What could have been 
the object of this enquiry does not appear ; its effect 
was fatal. The girl replied that she recollected hearing 
a noise along the passage, which had awakened her ; 
but that, having been much fatigued during the day, she 
was too sleepy to get up to enquire the cause. More 
questions were asked, the noises and various other 
circumstances described; suspicions arose against Mr. 
Davison, and the business ended in his avowing himself 
the murderer. 

He said that, from the moment in which he first be- 
held the face of his old schoolfellow, he had determined 
upon revenging his ancient quarrel by the death of the 
offender. He had crawled on hands and knees from his 
own room to that of his unfortunate guest, and unable ■ 
to support himself without the use of his hands, had 



186 QUEEN CAHOLINB. 

found great difficulty in opening the door ; but helping 
himself by his teeth, had at last achieved it, reached 
the bed, and perpetrated the horrid deed ; he had then 
crawled back, and had contrived to free himself from all 
blood-stains before he got into his bed. It was the 
extraordinary noise made by his crawling which had 
disturbed the maidservant, and at last led to his 
detection. 



QUEEN CAROLDfE. 

We were talking one day of Queen Caroline ; a doubt 
was expressed whether some of the blame which 
attaches to her character may not be removed by 
attributing some of her extraordinary actions to in- 
sanity, by which alone they can be accounted for. 
Mrs. Kemble told me she had known, at Lausanne, a 
man, now a landsman or magistrate, formerly an officer 
in the Duke of Brunswick's Guards, who told her that 
it was the general opinion that in early youth the Prin- 
cess had shown strong symptoms of insanity, and he 
gave the following instance to prove his assertion : 

A great ball was given, to which the Duchess would 
not allow her daughter, then aged sixteen, to go. The 
ball was just begun, when a messenger came to the Duke 
and Duchess to inform them that Princess Caroline was 
taken violently ill. Of course, they returned imme- 
diately to the palace, all the court following them ; the 



QUEEN CAROLINE. 187 

landsman, then on guard,, being one among them. 
When they reached the antechamber of the apartment 
of the Princess, they found she was on a bed in the 
next room, screaming with agony ; they were told that 
she was black in the face, &c. &c. The doors were all 
open, when the Duke and Duchess went up to the bed 
and tenderly enquired what was the matter. The 
doctors were not yet arrived; the Princess said' any 
attempt at dissimulation would be useless and im- 
possible. 'I am in labour, and entreat you, madam, 
to send for an accoucheur immediately.' These words 
were spoken loud enough to be heard by all those who 
were waiting in the next room; their astonishment 
may be conceived. Soon after the accoucheur came : 
as soon as the Princess saw him, she jumped out of bed, 
wiped the livid colouring from her face, and with a loud 
laugh said to the Duchess, ' Now, madam, will you keep 
me another time from a ball ? ' At this period, when- 
ever she did go into public, there were persons 
appointed to watch that she did not give notes &c. &c. ; 
but it was supposed that she found means to elude their 
vigilance. 

The idea of the unsoundness of the mind of the 
unfortunate Caroline is strongly confirmed by the fol- 
lowing circumstances, related to me by Lord Eedes- 
dale in May 1828. Having been invited to dine 
with the Duchess of Brunswick at Blackheath, he 
and Lady Eedesdale, coming at the time specified, 



188 EXTRACTS FEOM THE WORKS OF 

found themselves long before the rest of the company. 
They passed half-an-hour en tiers with the Duchess, 
who, having known him from his earliest youth, began 
talking very confidentially and imprudently of the mis- 
conduct of her daughter, ending with saying, ' But hei 
excuse is, that, poor thing, she is not right here.' She 
struck her forehead, and burst into a violent flood of 
tears. By this time some guests were heard entering, 
and Lord and Lady Eedesdale were obliged to support 
the poor infirm old woman to her room, and make the 
best story they could. 

He told me also, and I forget how he knew it to he 
true, that when the Princess was at Baden and the 
Grand Duke made ajpartie de chasse for her, she appeared 
on horseback with a half-pumpkin on her head. Upon 
the Grand Duke's expressing astonishment, and recom- 
mending a coiffure rather less extraordinary, she only 
replied that the weather was hot, and nothing kept 
the head so cool and comfortable as a pumpkin. Surely 
nothing that was said by Brougham or Denman could 
plead so strongly in extenuation of the nudities of the 
Muse of History, &c. &c., as the pumpkin. 



EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKS OF FRANCIS EGERTON, 
EARL OF BRIDGEWATER. 
Birkenhead : January 23. — Mr. Nugent has just 
brought me a bundle of the publications on various 



FEANCIS EaEKTON, EAEL OF BKIDGEWATER. 189 

subjects by Lord Bridgewater ; all excepting one of 
addenda and corrigenda to an edition of Euripides ; 
and a letter from the Seigneurie de Florence au 
Pape Sixto 4", 1478 — relate to himself, his family or 
inland navigation. A Life of the Chancellor Egerton 
seems interesting from the variety of documents, relating 
more to contemporary history than to his hero, which 
are thrown into notes ; especially a letter from Essex 
to the Chancellor, who had tried to persuade him to 
return to the Court and sue for pardon to Elizabeth, 
after he had received the famous box on the ear. The 
most singular production is a single sheet beginning — 

A report has been generally circulated that I have an 
intention of wa-iting a life of F. E., third Duke of Bridge- 
water . . . consequently I am induced on my part to announce 
to the public that I will not write his life. It is true that for 
ten or eleven years before his death I and I only lived in the 
house with him . . . that I prepared materials with a view of 
writing his life. . . . When I reflected more and more con- 
tinually every day upon what I saw, first I faltered, and lastly 
I became assured that I could bring neither the faculties of 
my mind or body on to the accomplishment of this task. 
How could I bring my mind to the task, were I impressed 
with the persuasion that the general system of navigable 
canals and inland navigation ought to be carried forward 
upon the enlarged, comprehensive, and elevated view of bene- 
fiting the pubhc and the country ? How could I bring my 
mind to the task, should I have seen such~an object neglected 
or overlooked by one of the first and greatest subjects in 
Great Britain (most certainly in Europe), and aU things 



190 EXTEACTS rnOM THE WORKS OP 

appertaining to the navigation considered as in a merchant's 
counting-house, exclusively upon the strictest calculations of 
profit and loss and individual interest ? How could I bring 
my mind to the task ? how portray a domestic tyrant, solfish 
in all things, living for himself alone, regardless of those duties 
which attach to one who inherits immense estates from a long 
line of ancestry, unacquainted with even the persons of most 
of his own family, his own name, his own blood, giving 
nothing in charity, with no service at home and yet never 
attending any public worship ? . . . Under all these con- 
siderations, and many more, I confess I faltered; I cannot 
bring myself to the task. Briefly, therefore, &c. &c. [Here 
follows an account like that for the peerage.] 

London, 1809. F. II. E. 

Another singular paper is his petition to Louis XVIII. 
to be exempted from the Droit d'aubavn on the Hotel 
de Noailles, which he had purchased. The grounds on 
which he requests this exemption are singular : 

Que je suis rest^ plusieurs ann^es en France, et que pendant 
tout ce temps je n'ai pas voulu acheter aucune propriety 
quelconque. Qu'au commencement de 1815 j'ai change 
d'avis. . . . Que je n'ai pas voulu profiter des d^lais que la 
loi et I'usage m'accorderaient pour payer les droits d'enregistre- 
ment, mais que les circonstances critiques oil V. M. se trouvait 
alors m'ont determine a solder les droits le lendemain, 18 
mars 1815, la somme de 30,743 francs. Qu'il est impossible 
de ne pas reconnaitre dans ces paymens on&eux faits par 
anticipation le vif interet que m'inspirait alors la situation de 
V. M. Que je n'ai plus tarde a voir de quel oeil on regardait 
ma conduite ; car Buonaparte, sous pr^texte d'utilit^ publique 
qui exigeait que les bureaux du Secretariat du Gouvernement 
passent dans mon hotel, a mis sous le sequestre mon hotel, 



FKANCIS EGEETON, EAKL OF BKIDGEWATEE. 191 

mon mobilier, et m'a ordonne de sortir de mon hotel, 
sous peine d'expulsion forc^e. Que j'ai defendu mon droit 
centre Buonaparte, h, mon risque personnel et a mes frais 
personnels. J'ai defendu aussi les droits de tous les proprie- 
taires fran9ais. J'ai bamcad^ les portes et mis mon hotel 
en 6tat de siege. Je me suis tu forc^, pour la premiere fois de 
ma vie que j'ai su un proces, d'entamer un proems .... enfin 
je me suis vu forc6 de passer par mille tracasseries de toute 
espece que je crois devoir designer au Gouvemement r^para- 
teur de V. M. . . . Que les circonstances suivantes sont 
pleinement suffisantes pour empecher que la concession en 
question ne devienne un exemple general. Que je suis allie 
a la famille royale d'Angleterre. [Here follows a long descent 
from Henry VH. and from Eobert Comte d'Artois, frfere de 
St. Louis. J 

In the first instance I put away the addenda and 
corrigenda to his translation of Euripides, saying to 
myself, that must be totally uninteresting to me ; but 
one word caught my eye which made me look for others, 
and in the notes I found a mass of heterogeneous know- 
ledge ; some unintelligible to me, being herisse de Grec ; 
some uninteresting ; a long and severe criticism on the 
'Ph^dre' of Racine, much on Jewish customs, some 
music, some philosophy, some piety, an extract from 
his own will, &c. &c. In this confused mass I find a 
note on the original invention of arithmetical numerals 
in large characters, full of ideas which are quite new to 
me, and certainly very interesting. He sunnises that 
this mode of numeration was taken from the hand and 
same system of doubling ; he then produced this figure 



192 EXTEACTS FKOM WORKS OF FRANCIS EGERTON. 

fingers, and resulted naturally from the necessity under 
which the most ancient proprietors lay of counting the 
herds and flocks in which their wealth consisted. 

Holding up the palm of one of his hands before his 
eyes, the four fingers furnished him with a ready mark 
for each of four units ; he coarsely imitated them thus, 
■ III; at five, the mark which naturally suggested itself 
was that which was made by the forefinger and thumb, 
thus, V ; by adding his units to this he could count to 
ten ; at ten it naturally suggested itself to double the 
mark already made for five, and thus make twice five ; 
to his first vertical V he added another that was inverted 
A ; thus he was enabled to count as far as fifty : at 
fifty he had to seek another mark for the method by 
which he obtained the mode of numeration required, 
and enabled him to procure a new mark at each five; 
which number, when doubled, makes a decimal, and 
resulted out of the lines which gave him the figure of 
his body. .He rested the palm of one hand upon one 
side of the body on the lower ribs, and looking down 
to the figure presented by his arm, it formed a right 
angle and presented this figure L ; thus he was enabled 
to count on to one hundred. To obtain a new mark he 
observed the same method: he doubled the I— which 
represented fifty; leaving the first mark vertical, he in- 
verted the next, the second accessory figure, the up- 
right, serving for both ; the result is C : at five hundred 
he wanted another figure, and still proceeding on the 



LETTERS FROM BISHOP HEBER. 193 

same system of doubling ; he then produced this figure 
by adding another D. He had now obtained his unit, 
now softened in I ; his five, now V ; his ten, now X ; 
his fifty, L ; his hundred now softened into C ; his five 
hundred now softened and rounded into D : he then 
doubled the square for a thousand thus, CD ; which is 
now softened into M, or into the letters CIO ; by which 
last letters are denoted one hundred minus five hun- 
dred, or four hundred, and one hundred plus five hun- 
dred, giving ten hundred or a thousand. 

It remains to be observed that by this series of opera- 
tions is obtained the designation of positive and negative 
quantity ; for, upon whatever side shall be begun to be 
marked the units, whether right or left, the figures placed 
on the same side denote they are minus that figure, as 
V minus I is IV ; five minus two. III, &c. ; five minus O 
is V positive. Again, the figures marked on the other 
side of the V, or the decimal, denote that they are plus 
that figure; five plus one is VI, &c. &c.* 



LETTERS EEOM BISHOP HEBER. 

The first letter, and extract from second letter, from Reginald 
Heber to a female relative who had recently lost her husband 
at Hyeres. 

Jan. 2nd, 1821. — My dear Charlotte, — I have been 
for some time back desirous of writing to you, but have 

* This seeAia to be now the received origin of numerals. — Eney- 
clopeedia BrUannica, Art. Ai-ithmdic. 

O 



194 LETTERS FROM BISHOP HEBER. 

been deterred by the fear of intruding too soon on a 
grief which I was well aware must have its course, and 
which is necessarily proportionate to the love, strong as 
death and stronger than the most trying worldly mis- 
fortunes, which you have uniformly shown to your bus- 
band, and which, as was to be expected and as I have 
always seen reason to believe, was mutual. I could not 
help feeling, too, that your loss was too severe to admit 
of the ordinary topics of consolation : that the posses- 
sion of the love and confidence of a man like our poor 
William, could not in the natural course of things be 
surrendered without a very bitter pang, and that his 
abilities and his amiable temper and manners must be 
recollected by you with regret now that for a time you 
are separated from him. 

You have already been long tried in the furnace 
of affliction, and God has enabled you during many 
years to endure the bitterness of separation from loved 
objects, and in sickness and in banishment to find 
comfort in that divine religion which it is necessary 
to be a mourner to know the full value of. I trust 
and believe that He has not forsaken you now, and 
that from the same source of resignation to His will 
and confidence in His mercy, you have been supported 
and strengthened under this last and severest trial. 
I need not remind you you have still much to live 
for; that you are favoured beyond most mothers in 
the disposition and promising talents of your children, 



LETTERS FEOM BISHOP HEBEK. 195 

and that if, as I trust will be the case, your health ad- 
mits of your return to England, you will have more 
opportunity of watching over their education and pro- 
moting their best interests than, but for this heavy 
visitation, you were likely to have possessed. 

There are other considerations, too, which must have 
their force in encouraging and enabling you to bear 
your affliction. That affliction was sooner or later to 
one or other of you inevitable. You must have mourned 
for him, or he for you ; and if this last had been the 
case, recollect how lonely and forlorn his exile must have 
been, and that your death would have had the effect in 
a great measure of depriving your children of both their 
parents. Even in the circumstances of the fatal accident, 
there is much to alleviate its heaviness. An instan- 
taneous death without pain, and while engaged in 
innocent amusement, is what poor William himself 
would perhaps have chosen above most others. It would 
have been far more afflicting both to himself and to you 
if you had had to watch over a long and painful illness, 
to witness suffering which you, could not relieve, and 
to long for advice and assistance of a better kind 
than your place of residence could supply; above all, 
it may be a comfort to reflect that, before he was thus 
summoned to another state of existence, he had been 
purified, and that the chastisements of Heaven have 
thus been not only tempered but directed in mercy. 
There is one source of consolation more, which I 
o 2 



196 LETTERS FKOM BISHOP IIEBEK. 

cannot help mentioning, though from the difficult}' and 
perplexed nature of the disputes to which it has given 
rise, and the abuses which have been grounded on it, 
I mention it with great diffidence even to you, and 
have never ventured to recommend it generally. Few 
persons, I believe, have lost a beloved object, more 
particularly by sudden death, without feeling an 
earnest desire to recommend them in their prayers to 
God's mercy, and a sort of instinctive impression 
that such devotions might still be serviceable to them 
in that intermediate state which we are taught by 
Scripture precedes the final judgment. The Jloman 
Catholics, by their interested doctrines of hired masses 
for the dead, and by their unwarranted and melancholy 
notion of a purgatory to which even the good are 
liable, have prejudiced the greater number of Pro- 
testants against this opinion ; and it is, I confess, one 
which is not so clearly revealed or countenanced in 
Scripture, as to make the practice of praying for the 
dead obligatory on any Christian. Yet, having been 
led attentively to consider the question, my own 
opinion is on the whole favourable to the practice, 
which indeed is so natural and so comfortable, that 
this alone is a presumption that it is neither unpleas- 
ing to the Almighty nor unavailing with Him. 

The Jews, so far back as their opinions and practices 
can be traced since the time of our Saviour, have uni- 
formly recommended their deceased friends to meroy ; 



LETTEES FEOM BISHOP HEBEE. 197 

and from a passage in the Second Book of Maccabees, 
it appears that (from whatever source they derived it) 
they had the same custom before His time. But if this 
were the case the practice can hardly be unlawful, or 
either Christ or His Apostles would, one should think, 
have in some of their writings or discourses condemned 
it. On the same side it may be observed, that the 
Greek Church and all the Eastern Churches, though 
they do not believe in purgatory, pray for the dead ; 
and that we know the practice to have been universal, 
or nearly so, among the Christians little more than 150 
years after our Saviour. It is spoken of as the usual 
custom by Tertullian and Epiphanius. Augustine, in 
his Confessions, has given a beautiful prayer which he 
himself used for his deceased mother, Monica ; and 
among Protestants, Luther and Dr. Johnson are emi- 
nent instances of the same conduct. I have accordingly 
been myself in the habit for some years of recom- 
mending on some occasions, as after receiving the 
Sacrament, &c. &c., my lost friends by name to God's 
goodness and compassion through His Son, as what can 
do them no harm, and may, and I hope will, be of 
service to them. Only this caution I always endeavour 
to observe — that I beg His forgiveness at the same time 
for myself if unknowingly I am too presumptuous, and 
His grace lest I, who am thus solicitous for others, 
should neglect the appointed means of my own sal- 
vation. 



198 LETTERS FBOM BISHOP HEUER. 

But I intended to write a letter of consolation and 
am got into theological controversy, and I fear I may 
already have written too much in my small handwriting 
for your eyes. God bless, God comfort you, my deareft 
Charlotte! God make your children through their 
future lives a source of comfort to you in this world, 
and bring you and them to be with your William in 
one family in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord, 

.... I have long owed you my thanks for your 
letter, and the kindness with which you received my 
attempts at consolation under a loss which, alas I admits 
of little effectual comfort, except from the secret 
support and blessing of the same divine Being who 
only afflicts us for our good, and who, if we place our 
hopes in Him, will never lay more on us than He at the 
same time enables us to bear. But I felt myself at the 
same time bound to answer the very interesting and 
very difficult question which you had suggested to me 
concerning the state of the dead, and their acquaintance 
with what passes on earth, and I have really had no 
leisure to give to such a subject the attention which it 
deserves and requires, nor even to satisfy myself, much 
more another, with the conjectures (for they deserve 
no other name) which I have formed. That the inter- 
mediate state between death and judgment is not one 
of insensibility, or (as the Socinians fancy) a perfect 
suspension and interruption of existence, is plain I think 



LETTERS FROM BISHOP HEBKE. 199 

from very many passages of Scripture. Thus, when 
Christ uses the argument taken from the Almighty 
calling himself the Grod of Abraham &c., to prove the 
life after death, he uses it in a manner which implies 
that the life of which he speaks is uninterrupted, since 
to make it answer his purpose, Abraham must have 
been alive when God thus spoke, not merely destined 
to live again at the general resurrection. In like 
manner, St. Paul speaks of his desire to depart from 
the world, to be immediately with Christ, which he 
could not have been if after death he were to sleep 
perhaps 3,000 years till the day of judgment. But, 
above all, the penitent thief was promised by our 
Saviour, that he should that very day be with Him in 
Paradise, a passage which will not bear any other 
meaning than that generally assigned to it, and which 
in that meaning is conclusive. 

As to the condition of the dead, it has been always 
believed by the Christian world that the souls of men 
are in situations of happiness or misery — the one not 
so perfect, the other not so intense, as will be their 
doom at the day of judgment; and it has been even 
supposed, and seems likely from all which we know of 
our spiritual nature, that till that time their happiness 
or misery must rather consist in hope or fear and 
the approval or disapproval of conscience, than in 
any actual enjoyment or punishment ; and the early 
Christians most of them believed that, by the prayer 



200 LETTERS FROM BISHOP HEBBR. 

of surviving friends, the condition of such persons 
might be made better, and a milder sentence obtained 
for their errors and infirmities from their Almighty 
Judge, when the doom of all creatures shall be finally 
settled. 

This is, as you well know, a disputed point, but it is 
one which the wisest and most learned divines have 
always spoken of with doubt, without venturing to 
blame those who, with becoming humility, recommend 
the souls of those they have loved to mercy. But the 
notion of a purgatory fire which all, or almost all, 
Christians were to pass through as . a necessary prepa- 
ration for heaven, was never dreamt of in the Church till 
the ninth or tenth centuries ; and the Eastern Churches 
to this day have never received it. It is, in fact, a 
strange and dismal detraction from the efficacy of 
Christ's blood, since the Church of Eome does not 
admit those who die impenitent to any share in its 
advantages, but sends them to hell immediately ; so that 
it only throws a fresh obstacle in the way to heaven, in 
the case of those whose sins all sides suppose to be 
already washed out by the work of redemption. 

A more difficult question remains — Whether the 
dead know anything of what is passing among men. 
On this point I can arrive at no satisfactory conclusion, 
any further than that there are some passages in 
Scripture which seem very like it. As where St. Paul 
encourages us, in Heb. xii. 1, to run with 'patience 



THE BICKETTS GHOST STORY. 201 

ov/r race, from the consideration that we are encom- 
passed with so great a cloud of witnesses, which 
witnesses, you will see in the former chapter, are the 
good and great men of former times. But I must defer 
these deep discussions till I have the pleasure of seeing 
you. In the meantime accept of my best wishes, my 
sincere affection, and permit me to add, my prayers. 



THE EICKETTS GHOST STORY. 

November I5th, 1830. — Mrs. Hughes told me the 
other day that she was writing the particulars of the 
Kicketts ghost story, as she had heard it related in 
her infancy by Mrs. Grwyn,* who had been an eye, or 
rather ear, witness. The story was alluded to ; her aunt 
stopped the speaker, and begged she would wait till the 
child was gone to bed. She was not to be so put off, and 
when the orders for bed were issued she contrived to ■ 
conceal herself behind the curtain : there she remained 
undiscovered till the tale had advanced to the hoarse 
voice, when her terror was so highly excited that it 
totally overcame her dread of punishment, and she 
rushed from her place of concealment, falHng flat on her 
face. These circumstances of course strongly impressed 

* One of the beautiful Misses Horneck, Goldsmith's friends. 
She married Colonel Gwyn, and died at a veiy advanced age in 
1840. She was a strong-minded and clear-headed woman. 



202 THE KICKETTS GHOST STOKT, 

every circumstance on her ardent mind, and thus she 
related them to Sir "Walter Scott,* premising that Mr. 
Strong, who was chaplain to Shipley, Bishop of Saint 
Asaph, had, when at Twyford and in its neighbourhood, 
frequently heard the legend told in the same manner. 
She likewise says she has heard the story, exactly the- 
same, from the Duchess of Buckingham. The house 
alluded to is situated between Alton and Alresford. 

My story says f that Mr. L., related to Lord S., was a 
very atrocious libertine. He was aided and abetted in 
all his evil practices by an old butler named Eobin, who 
was distinguished by a remarkably deep-toned hoarse 
voice. Mrs. L. was known to be very unhappy and very 
ill-used, and was seldom seen by the neighbourhood, who 
were deterred from visiting at that house by the cha- 
racter of its master; but it became known that a 
younger sister of Mrs. L. came to visit her, and in 
process of time a criminal intercourse was suspected 
between her and her brother-in-law; a child was said 
to have been born and destroyed by the agency of the 
butler. I 

So far I am correct in my remembrances, but I 
am not clear as to the death and dispersion of the 
guilty trio. I think, however, that old Eobin came to 

* The story is slightingly mentioned as wanting evidence in 
Letters cm Bemonology and Witchcraft, p. 348. 

t The speaker is Mrs. Hughes throughout. 

X This imputation is not confirmed by the family annals. The 
lady apparently pointed at died in 1763. 



THE KICKETTS GHOST STORY. 203 

an untimely end, and that Mr. L. grew disgusted with 
the house and left it. Be that as it may, the house was to 
be let, and was hired by Captain Kicketts for the recep- 
tion of his family during his long absence from England, 
either on the East or West India Station. When he 
sailed, Mrs. Kicketts, with three young children and a 
very small establishment, removed to her new residence. 
I do not precisely remember how long it was before her 
quiet was disturbed ; but I think it was only a few days 
after her arrival that, sitting alone in the evening about 
nine o'clock, she was startled by the singular terror 
expressed by her cat; the animal started from her 
slumbers on the hearth, made a piteous cry, and after 
running about the room as if wishing to escape, darted 
to its mistress, and rolling itself up in the train of her 
gown, lay there panting and exhausted. 

Mrs. Eicketts was rising to summon a servant when 
her ear was struck by a tremendous noise in the room 
overhead ; it had the sound of tearing up the boards of 
the floor with the utmost violence, and throwing them 
about. In a moment the servants, alarmed, rushed into 
the room. Mrs. Kicketts, who was a woman of a resolute 
spirit, headed the party to explore the room from which 
the sound appeared to proceed, but on entering nothing 
was seen, and the operations seemed to have been shifted 
to another apartment. The whole house was searched 
without effect, and the noise continued a considerable 
time, varying its apparent station as it was approached. 



204 THE EICKETTS OHOST STOIiY. 

The next night the annoyance was renewed, and after 
the floor-breaking ceased, three voices were heard dis- 
tinctly — that of a female and two males ; one of these 
so remarkably hoarse and dissonant, that one of the 
servants, who was from the neighbourhood, exclaimed, 
' That is like the voice of wicked old Eobin.' The female 
seemed to plead in agony for some boon ; one of the men 
seemed to answer in a mournful grave tone, and the 
deep hoarse voice sounded angrily and positively. No 
distinct words could be made out, but now and then 
the voices seemed so close that, as old Mrs. Gwyn 
described it, ' you would have thought that by putting 
out your hand you would have touched the speakers ; ' 
to this succeeded a strain of soft aerial music, and the 
whole ended by a series of dreadful piercing shrieks, 
altogether not occupying less than half an hour. 

Next day the whole establishment gave warning, and 
were reluctantly dismissed by Mrs. Eicketts, who took 
the precaution of making them sign their names as 
witnesses to a short account which she noted in a book, 
in which she afterwards kept a regular journal of 
the transactions of each night, continuing the practice 
of making every servant she dismissed (and she seldom 
prevailed on one to remain long with her), as well as 
the few guests whom compassion for her forlorn state 
induced to come to her, sign their names for a testimony 
of what they heard — for nothing was ever seen. 

I am not sure whether these horrors were repeated 



THE EICKETTS GHOST STOET. 205 

every night, but certainly so frequently as to leave 
Mrs. Eicketts neither peace nor quiet, and to produce 
agitation which affected her health. She had been in 
this state more than a twelvemonth when Mrs. Grwyn 
, , came to pay her a visit. She was much shocked at the 
altered appearance of Mrs. Eicketts. She had flattered 
herself that the accounts which she had received from 
her friend were exaggerated. However, when the usual 
period arrived, the whole routine went on, and Mrs. 
Grywn was terrified to a degree which left her only in 
astonishment that Mrs. Eicketts could have endured so 
much and so long. I remember her saying that the 
first burst of noise was as loud as if three or four car- 
penters had been employed : the whispering conversa- 
tion often seemed to be close to her ear : and the soft 
music she compared to the tones produced by a then 
celebrated player on the musical glasses (Cartwright) ; 
the shrieks which closed the whole so sharp as to rend 
the ear. I remember the comparison the more dis- 
tinctly, because I had been taken a few days before 
to hear the performance of Cartwright on the musical 
glasses. Indeed every particular of Mrs. Grwyn's narra- 
tion is as vividly present to my imagination as if I had 
only heard it an hour ago ; and the frequent repetitions 
I have since heard of it from my two aunts, who were 
also her auditors, have engraved every iota on my 
mind. 

Mrs. Grwyn, though very sufficiently scared, would 



206 THE EICKETTS GHOST STOKT. 

have remained with her' friend the few days she had 
promised, if her maid, a valuable faithful servant, had 
not been made so ill by terror that she could not in 
common charity oblige her to remain after the second 
night, when a repetition ensued. She therefore pur- 
sued her journey, after having added her signature to 
the book, which she described as then containing many 
pages. I remember that my aunt asked her whether 
Mrs. Eicketts would publish this book, and she replied 
that, should her friend survive Sir John Jervis (after- 
wards Lord St. Vincent) and Colonel Luttrell (after- 
wards Lord Carhampton), she believed it was her 
intention to do so. Mrs. Eicketts died some years 
ago at a very advanced age. 

Mrs. Gwyn then went on to relate the substance of 
a correspondence which she kept up with Mrs. Eicketts, 
recording a circumstance which took place not long 
after she left her. The bedroom which Mrs. Eicketts 
occupied was separated from the nursery by a wide 
passage, the doors of the two rooms being exactly 
opposite. Mrs. Eicketts slept alone, and had a light 
burning on the hearth. One night, soon after she was 
in bed, she heard a heavy foot leap (as it seemed to her) 
from the window seat and walk slowly to the side of her 
bed, where it stopped. The curtain was drawn on that 
side, and she instantly threw herself out of the opposite 
side next the door, and standing in the doorway to 
prevent anyone from escaping, called for the nurse. The 



THE KICKETTS GHOST STOEY. 207 

alarm was instantly given. "While the nurse remained 
with her mistress upon guard, the nursery-maid sum- 
moned the rest of the servants ; a strict search was then 
made, but nothing could he found to account for the 
sound which had roused Mrs. Eicketts. 

Next, day an old carpenter of the neighbourhood de- 
sired to speak to her, and to mention a circumstance 
which had occurred during the residence of Mrs. L. 
He said he had been employed and well paid by old 
Eobin, the butler, for a job which was done in his 
presence and after every other person in the house was 
asleep. It was to take up a plank in one of the bed- 
rooms, and saw away a joist so as to give room for a 
small deal box about two feet long, which the old butler 
deposited under the floor, and then the carpenter re- 
stored the plank and joined it as well as he could. 
He said he had been sworn to secrecy, but as the 
parties were dead aad gone, he thought he might safely 
mention a circumstance which he could not help be- 
lieving might have some concern with the disturbances. 
Mrs. Eicketts made him lead the way, and he went to 
her apartment, and lifting up the carpet at the very 
spot where it appeared to her the heavy step paused, he 
showed her the joining of the plank : by her desire it 
was taken up, and the joist, according to his account, 
was found removed, and an empty space remained sufiS- 
cient to contain such a box as he had described. If 
it had been there, it had been removed ; no trace of 



208 THE RICKETTS GHOST STOKT. 

it remained. You may suppose what the box was sus- 
pected to contain. 

The only other event I recollect was the return of 
Sir J. Jervis to England, his visit to his sister Mrs. 
Eicketts, his grief at finding her in such a state of 
health and nerves, and his determination to remove her 
from a place where he was convinced there was some 
foul play. He took upon himself the risk of the dis- 
pleasure of Captain Ricketts, who had expended a large 
sum in settling his family, and whose apprehended 
censure had deterred his wife from quitting the resi- 
dence where he had placed her. Sir John would not 
even suffer his sister to sleep another night under 
the roof, but removed her and her children to a 
farm-house in the neighbourhood, with every servant 
belonging to them. He determined, with his friend 
Colonel Luttrell, to watch through the night, and de- 
tect the imposture which he was convinced had been 
carried on. 

The ground-floor consisted of a large hall and two 
parlours, one on either side: in these parlours the 
friends, well armed and lighted, established themselves, 
and at the usual hour the noises began. They both 
rushed into the hall, each angrily accusing the other of 
an attempt to play a foolish trick ; but as soon as they 
met they were aware the noise proceeded from other 
quarters; the plank-tearing, the whispering, the soft 
music, the shrieks went on in the usual succession, and 



THE EICKETTS GHOSX STORY, 209 

after an active search all over the house they were 
obliged to acknowledge themselves baffled. 

Mrs. Eicketts never returned to the house except for 
a few mornings, which were devoted to packing, &c. &c. 
One of these mornings she sat down to rest in the 
housekeeper's room; her brother sat with her, leaning 
against a large press which had just been emptied of its 
contents. They were both startled by a noise close to 
their ears, which she compared to that of dry bones 
rattling in a box. Sir John threw open the door of the 
press, exclaiming, ' The Devil is here, and we shall have 
him:' however, nothing appeared, and this forms the 
last link of my chain. 

A young friend, who saw much of Lord St. Vincent in 
his latter days, told me he was extremely angry when- 
ever the subject was alluded to ; and Mrs. Gwyn said 
Mrs. Eicketts was ever averse to the discussion, though 
she never refused to answer any question that was put 
to her. And now having told my tale, I must protest 
my utter disbelief of any supernatural agency. Had 
I written this during the first fifteen, nay, perhaps 
twenty, years of my life, I could not have made any 
such declaration ; for this story was the nightmare of 
my existence, from the age of eleven to that of discre- 
tion — if I ever have attained that happy period. I 
consider it as one of the best planned and executed 
deceptions I ever heard of, for whatever purpose it 
might have been wrought. I do not believe the plot 



210 INSANIir OF GEORGE III. 

has ever been discovered, though the general idea is, 
I think, that it was to further the purposes of a gang of 
smugglers. 

INSANITY OF GEORGE III SIR HENRY HALFOKD AND 

GEORGE IV. 
May 1832. — Sir Henry Halford gave us the other 
day some interesting particulars respecting the malady 
of George III. He says it is one of the characteristics 
of that species of insanity, that, about three months 
after the seizure, there is a great change for the better, 
which sometimes ends in recovery ; in other cases, in 
a more violent return of malady. He says we shall 
probably hear of that change in poor Lord Dudley in 
about two months ; whether it will be permanent or 
not, is more than any mortal can tell. In the case of 
the King, this change took place in the month of Feb- 
ruary ; it was not only that hopes were entertained, but 
many of the Council were of opinion that he was in 
full possession of his faculties. On one particular 
day they came out saying that he had spoken so 
collectedly — 1st, on the necessity of sending troops to 
America, of the persons to command, of the points to- 
which the troops were to be sent ; 2ndly, of the expe- 
diency of the appointment of a Vice-Chancellor, of 
the persons best fitted for the office,* &c. &c.— that they 

* Thia fixes the date. The first vice-chancellor was appointed 
early in 1813. 



SIR HKNKT HALFOED AND GEORGE IT. 211 

believed Mm quite restored and able to resume his 
power. Lord Ellenborough used the words of Pilate : 
'I find no fault at all in that just person.' 

Sir Henry said, this not being his own opinion, he 
felt his situation an extremely unpleasant one: well 
knowing the cunning of all mad persons, he was 
aware that nothing but extreme vigilance would enable 
them to detect the delusions if they still existed. One 
day when the King fancied himself surrounded by 
servants only, and when a medical attendant was watch- 
ing unseen, he took a glass of wine and water and drank 
it to the health conjugis mece dilectissiracB Mizabethce, 
meaning Lady Pembroke. Here was a delusion clearly 
established and noted down immediately : the use of 
Latin, which was not to be understood by those whom 
he supposed only to hear him, affording a singular 
proof of the odd cunning of insanity. 

A few days after, Sir Henry was walking with him 
on the terrace ; he began talking of the Lutheran 
religion, of its superiority to that of the Church of 
England, and ended with growing so vehement, that 
he really ranted forth its praises without mentioning 
that which Sir Henry believes to have been the real 
motive of this preference — the left-handed marriages 
allowed. He was very anxious to see whether traces 
of this delusion would appear again, and went to 
the Duke of York to ask for information as to the 
tenets, practices, &c, &c., of the Lutheran faith. The 
, P 2 



212 INSANITY OF GEOBGE III. 

Duke said, ' Watch him in Passion-week ; if he fancies 
himself a Lutheran, you will see an extraordinary 
degree of mortification and mourning,' &c. &c. When 
Sir Henry returned to the assembled physicians he 
wrote down the substance of this conversation, and 
without communicating it to anybody, requested those 
present to seal the paper and keep it in a chest 
where their notes and other papers of importance 
are kept, under locks of which each had a separate 
key. When the Monday in Passion-week arrived, and 
Sir Henry had nearly forgotten this conversation, he 
went into the King's dressing-room while he was at his 
toilet, and found the attendants in amazement at his 
having called for and put on black stockings, black 
waistcoat and breeches, and a grey coat with black 
buttons. 

It was curious to hear that his delusions assumed, like 
those of other madmen, the character of pride, and 
that a sovereign even fancied himself in a station more 
elevated than his o-vm. He would sometimes fancy 
himself possessed of supernatural power, and when 
angry with any of the keepers stamp his foot, and say 
he would send them down into hell. 

It is always evident to me, that among all these 
royalties, among the three kings whom he has attended. 
Sir Henry's partiality is to the one who seems to me to 
deserve it least, to George IV. He gave us the follow- 
ing account of his first introduction to his intimacy. 



SIE HENRY HALFORD AND GEORGE IV. 213 

He had never attended the Prince, and barely knew 
him when the last malady of George III. declared 
itself. Sir Henry was aware that he was surrounded 
by spies from the Prince ; that one whom ' we well 
knew and would little suspect,' was living at the 
Christopher, &c. &c. Anxious to stop this, Sir Henry 
went to the Prince and gave him the most detailed and 
most accurate statement of the situation of the King. 
The Prince expressed his gratitude, not unmixed with 
surprise at his candour. Sir Henry promised that 
henceforth he might depend upon always having from 
him the most accurate information, if he would only 
promise not to seek it from any other source. The 
Prince gave the promise and (wonderful to say) kept it. 
Sir Henry then went to the Queen, and told her what he 
had done. She, with a tremendous frown, expressed great 
astonishment. Sir Henry stated the obvious reasons for 
the step he had taken ; she paused, her brow cleared : 
' You are quite right, Sir ; it is proper that the Prince 
of Wales should be informed.' From that moment, 
as he says, confidence and intimacy were renewed 
between mother and son. 

At the period before mentioned, during the lucid 
intervals. Sir Henry describes himself as having had a 
very awkward subject to discuss with the King. The 
death of Princess Amelia was known to him.* Every 

• She died on November 3, 1810. Her illness was the proxi- 
mate cause of the return of the Mng'a malady. 



214 INSANITY OP OEORGtE III. 

day the attendants expected and dreaded questions as 
to her property, her will, &c.; the bequest of everything 
to Greneral Fitzroy was a subject so very delicate to 
touch upon. The Queen dared not: Perceval and 
the Chancellor successively undertook the disclosure 
and shrunk from it, imposing it on Sir Henry. Never, 
he says, can he forget the feelings with which, having 
requested some private conversation with the King 
after the other physicians were gone, he was called 
into a window with the light falling so full on bis 
countenance that even the poor nearly blind King 
could see it. He asked whether it would be agreeable 
to him to hear now how Princess Amelia had disposed 
of her little property. ' Certainly, certainly, I want to 
know,' with great eagerness. Sir Henry reminded him 
at the beginning of his illness he had appointed Fitzroy 
to ride with her; how he had left him with her at 
Weymouth ; how it was natural and proper that she 
should leave him some token for these services ; that 
excepting jewels she had nothing to leave, and had 
bequeathed them all to him ; that the Prince of Wales, 
thinking jewels a very inappropriate bequest for a man, 
had given Fitzroy a pecuniary compensation for them 
(his family, by-the-bye, always said it was very inade- 
quate), and had distributed slight tokens to all the 
attendants and friends of the Princess, giving the bulk 
of the jewels to Princess Mary, her most constant and 
kindest of nurses. Upon this the poor King exclaimed, 



SIR HENRY HALFORD AND GEORGE IT. 215 

* Quite right, just like the Prince of Wales ;' and no 
more was said. 

Sir Henry is apt to be the hero of his own stories, 
and to boast a degree of intimacy and confidence which 
I am sometimes inclined to doubt. The history of the 
change on the subject of the Catholic question is very 
curious, but I own I feel it rather difficult to believe 
that Sir Henry was admitted into a secret so closely 
kept. Be that as it may, his story is that, at the close 
of the session, the Duke of Wellington wrote to the 
King a letter which he showed to Sir Henry, stating 
that he felt the time to be now arrived when the boon 
of emancipation could no longer be refused to Ireland ; 
telling him that, if his objections remained insur- 
mountable, he must abandon the stronghold of his 
faith. The Coronation Oath, which had been proved 
not to hold water as an argument, must not be brought 
forward again. This letter, Sir Henry says, produced 
much and very painful cogitation, and agitation enough 
to have roused the King from his state of indolence to 
very deep thought. A second letter Sir Henry saw when 
the King was more inclined to concession, in which the 
Duke requested leave to impart his intentions to two 
cabinet ministers and to one or two of the bishops.* 

* It appears that letters substantially to this effect were written, 
by the Duke of Wellington to George IV. {Memoirs by the 
Eight Honourable Sir Robert Peel, Bart., M.P. &c., published by 
the trustees of his papers, Lord Mahon, now Earl Stanhope, and 
the Right Honourable Edward Cardwell, M.P., Partl,pp. 180, 201.) 



216 COUNTESS MACNAMAEA. THE BOURBONS. 



COUNTESS MACNAMAEA. THE BOUEBONS. 

Richmond: August 1832. — We have just had 
Countess Macnamara here : she is as usual full of her 
Bourbons, very literally ' plus Catholique que le Pape, 
plus Eoyaliste que le Roi ; ' for she complains of the 
relaxation of discipline in the former, and says that all 
the evils of France are to be ascribed to the republican 
spirit of its late sovereigns. Monsieur Dixhuit, she 
said to me with the peculiar emphasis which I thought 
reserved for Philippe — as Satan is not Monsieur — 
Monsieur Dixhuit was at heart a more thoi'ough repub- 
lican than any man in his dominions. All his measures 
tended that way, and when Charles X. came, poor good 
man, who never meant anything but what was right, 
he was too indolent to change the ministry or the 
measures of his brother. It would have almost ex- 
ceeded my belief to have been told that any English- 
woman could take up the cudgels for Miguel, but I 
heard her pitying him as an illused and calumniated 
man, maintaining to my brother Charles, who might 
have rather better means of information, that he was 
not privy to the murder, not cruel, &c. &c. All this 
is only curious as furnishing a singular page in the 
history of human nature, showing how entirely the 
wise ultra-Bourbon party, whose echo she is, can over- 
look even the radical sin of illegitimate authority when 



COUNTESS MACNAMAEA. THE BOURBONS. 217 

redeemed' by despotism and bigotry. In the midst of 
all this absurdity, she gave me a singular instance of 
devotion to her beloved Bourbons, which, being asserted 
on her personal knowledge, is I suppose in the main 
true. 

A Miss W., who some fifty years ago was an admired 
singer on the English stage, made a conquest of a Mr. 
A., a man of large property, who married her. Whether 
the lady's character was not immaculate, or whether, 
tlie march of intellect not having begun, actresses of the 
best character were not yet reckoned fit society for 
ladies, does not appear ; certain it is that, finding she 
could not get any society in England, the A.'s went to 
establish themselves at Versailles, where they took a 
fine house, gave fetes, &c. &c. His wealth gave 
splendour; her beauty, her singing, her dancing, 
gave charm. The Polignacs came to her fetes, and 
afterwards introduced ber to the little society, to 
the intimate reunions, of which Marie Antoinette 
was a constant member. When adversity befell this 
object of admiration, of almost idolatry, Mrs. A. de- 
voted herself, her talents and (better than all) her 
purse to her service. 

It was chiefly during the Queen's melancholy abode 
in the Temple that Mrs. A. most exerted herself. 
In bribes, in various means employed for the relief of 
the poor Queen, she expended between 30,000L and 
40,000i. sterling. This of course was taken under 



218 COUNTESS MACNAMARA. TEE BOTJKBONS. 

the name of a loan, and soon after the restoration Mrs. 
A. made a demand upon Louis XVIII. : every item of 
her account was discussed and most allowed, till they 
came to a very large bribe given to the minister of 
police, one to the gaoler, and bribes to various persons, 
to manage the escape of the Dauphin and the substitu- 
tion of a dying child in his place. Louis XVIII. would 
not agree to this article, and insisted upon its being 
erased from the account as the condition upon which 
he would order the gradual liquidation of the rest of 
the debt. To this condition Mrs. A. would not accede : 
Louis XVIII. died : the accounts were again brought 
forward. Charles X. was just going to give the order for 
paying the debt by instalments when the revolution 
came, and Mrs. A. seems now further than ever from 
obtaining any part of her money. 

It is to me very odd that Mac does not seem to 
feel that, admitting all her premises, her story tells 
very much against her beloved Bourbons. She always 
speaks of the reign of Charles as if it had lasted as 
many months as it did years, as if he had not had 
time to execute any of the good purposes that were 
in his heart. She concludes the history I have just 
written by saying, ' I had a message for Mrs. A. from 
HolyiooA, which I was desired to deliver in person. I 
had great difiBculty in tracing her ; at last I found her 
a week ago,' (she told me where, but I have forgotten). 
She represents her as preserving remains of beauty at 



CorNTESs macnAmara. the bourbons. 219 

about seventy, coiffie en cheveux, with a mask of paint. 
I gravely asked whether she was still an enthusiast in 
the cause ; to which she replied, ' No,' in what I fancied 
a hurried embarrassed manner, which impressed me 
with the idea that Mrs. A. is naturally enough rather 
exasperated at their conduct towards her. It seems 
that they are all convinced, and this Mrs. A. is ready to 
make any oath, that the Dauphin did not die as was 
supposed in the Temple. The Duchesse d'Angouleme 
has always said, ' I have no evidence of his death, and 
know that it did not take place in the Temple, but I 
have no evidence of his being alive at any subsequent 
period.' 

The rancour of Mac against Louis-Philippe sounds 
particularly ill here: she believes him capable of every 
crime. In this neighbourhood where he lived so many 
years, not only there is nothing alleged against him, 
but every body mentions him with respect. I hear 
he is now paying small pensions to some of the poor, 
whom he was in the habit of relieving. Miss Dundas 
spoke with tears in her eyes of his invariable kindness 
to her father, who attended his family as physician, 
and of the attention shown to her brother and her for 
his sake, when they were at Paris some years ago. 



220 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 

Vale Royal :* November 1832. — Since I have been 
here I have been collecting all the particulars respecting 
' The old Woman of the Forest.' Giving her credit for 
an inventive imagination, there is enough in the facts 
to interest one. In July 1815 a report had reached this 
house that a strange woman was come to live in the 
forest ; many fables, reporting her a heroine in disguise, 
were already afloat among the servants, when, on the 
I7th of July, the woman came to this house bringing 
the following letter : — 

'Most honorable and highborn Lady, 
My Lady Thumley, 
' As I have heard that I am at the present at your 
property, namely the Oakmere ; we are latly comen 
out of Germany ware I lost my husband ; as I cam into 
England I vind rents so high that I do not know to do 
for myself without charity, as the same way as most of 
the people live abroad, so I am gone about to seek 
some waste ground, for there I can live and provide for 
myself, for I have a little to make a small beginning, 
but halas I find that all the commons are forbid now I 
am at hand this place I am able to live if I may be 
there but I do not mean to make myself a Paris, for I 
never intend to submit to Paris ceping, for I belong to 

* Tlie seat of Lord Delamere in Cheshire. 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMEHE FOREST. 221 

a foring chappel in London, but I may yet do for 
myself if I am permitted, therefore I humbly beg my 
noble Lady you would not deny my this favour to stop 
here for a few weeks till I write up to London, for I 
cannot pay for lorging. I humbly beg that your 
honor may send some of your trusty servants to 
enquire and to see ware. We can we shall not trouble 
anybody for anything nor hurt nor destroy anything, 
rather protect the remanes of the Trees. 

'Most Noble Lady, I humbly beg deny my not a 
little rest at this peaceable place. 

' I your most obliging and humble stranger, 

' Mabia. Hollingswoeth. 

' Oakmere, July 17, 1815.' 

The poor woman stated that she was the daughter of 
a Lutheran clergyman, born at Leuwardin, in West 
Friesland, in 1765 ; her appearance bespoke great 
poverty ; but her rags did not conceal the faded remains 
of beauty, and her manners and language appeared 
very superior to her situation. She told her little tale 
with intelligence and simplicity. She said that she had 
married a British soldier : that she had followed his fate 
and shared his hardships through many campaigns, till 
he was killed at Bergen-op-zoom, leaving her with two 
infant children, a son and a daughter. She came over 
to England, and through some Hanoverian friends ob- 
tained a small pension from Queen Charlotte, and some 
inferior situation for her son in the Eoyal kitchen at St. 



222 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 

James's. The motives to which she alludes in her letter 
were more fully developed to account for her wild 
gcheme of settling on the forest. 

She told us how she had procured a small cart, 
which afforded shelter to herself and her daughter; 
a donkey to draw it, and two goats, from whose 
milk they derived a chief part of their nourish- 
ment. In many places they had attempted to make 
some stay, but had always been driven away as 
vagabonds by parish officers. Beginning to despair 
of obtaining in England the object of her desire, a soli- 
tary abode rent free, she had determined to go to 
Liverpool, and get a passage to America. Delamere 
Forest lay on her road ; it was at that time quite unen- 
closed ; a dreary waste without any habitation for miles. 
Here her hopes revived : she found a sheltered spot 
near the large pool called Oakmere, where she deter- 
mined to stop to wash her clothes. Making some en- 
quiries, she found the land adjoining to be extra-paro- 
chial, the property of Lord Delamere. Here the dreaded 
parish officer, dressed up in brief authority, could have 
no power if she once obtained the sanction of the pro- 
prietor. Lord Delamere allowed her to live there, and 
she soon set to work to make for herself a permanent 
abode. Upon a rising bank above the mere, sheltered 
by a few Scotch firs, stood two ribs of whales, which had 
been placed there by Philip Egerton, Esq., of Oulton, 
who had rented the land from the Cholmondeley 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMEEE FOREST. 223 

family. Between these ribs Mrs. H. formed a rude 
kind of dwelling, by turning up her cart and making a 
wall of sods and a roof of boughs. Thus barely sheltered 
from the storm, in a hut about eight feet by ten and 
little more than five feet high, did this poor woman and 
her daughter live many years. 

She became an object of great curiosity in the 
neighbourhood. The most absurd fables were told : it 
was even said that Napoleon was living in this strange 
disguise. Visitors began to be attracted by curiosity, 
and charity induced them all to contribute in some 
shape or other towards relieving the wants of the 
poor recluse. As her means increased, she gradually 
improved her little dwelling. She added to her walls, 
put in a door and a small casement ; and to make her 
roof a little more weather-proof, she extended over 
it the skin of her donkey, who had died, probably 
from starvation. She hired a labourer for a few days, 
made a fence, which enclosed her dwelling and a little 
bit of ground, in which she made a potato ground and 
a little garden, and a small shed to shelter her goats. 
From the produce of that bit of garden, cultivated by 
herself, and from that of a few fowls, which in course 
of time she procured, she and her daughter contrived to 
live ; the latter going occasionally to Tarporley market 
to sell eggs and vegetables. She added to her live- 
stock a dog, and provided further for her protection by 
the purchase of a pair of pistols. 



224 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMEBE FOKEST. 

One of her professed objects in wishing for a solitary 
abode was the leisure it would afiford her to devote herself 
to the education of her daughter, without the dread of 
bad society and example to counteract her precepts. 
The girl was taught to read and write English, French, 
and German. Thus passed some eventless years, during 
which the numbers of her visitors increased, and her 
means gradually improved ; occasional supplies came 
from those who had formerly known her. The first win- 
ter was cheered by a welcome present of warm clothing 
from Lady Bulkeley. In process of time,Delamere Forest 
was enclosed ; some two or three small cottages sprung 
up in the neighbourhood of Oakmere, at a distance from 
any town or village. Mrs. Hollingsworth finding that 
the children of these cottagers had neither the means or 
the opportunity of learning anything, offered to teach 
them to read gratuitously. Unfortunately differences 
arose, and at the end of three or four years she had 
quarrelled with all her neighbours. 

In the year 18 — she received a letter from her son, 
who had been bound as apprentice to a cabinet-maker 
at Hanover, informing her that he was on the point of 
embarking for Buenos Ayres. He added, that as the 
vessel by which he was going was to touch at Liverpool, 
he hoped to be able to see his mother before he left 
Europe. The mother was of course delighted with the 
thoughts of seeing her long-absent son, and continually 
watched from a neighbouring eminence every person 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 225 

who strayed towards her lonely dwelling. After many 
disappointments, one summer evening she saw a man 
with a satchel of carpenter's tools on his back coming 
across the forest, evidently seeking some dwelling, 
and as he drew nearer both mother and daughter felt 
convinced that they saw him whose arrival they had 
so anxiously expected. They saw the man stop at a 
neighbouring cottage, apparently to enquire the way, 
and dared not go there to meet him. The owner of 
the cottage into which the traveller had entered was 
unfortunately one with whom Mrs. Holliagsworth was 
at variance, one of whom she had a very bad opinion ; 
she had, therefore, the misery of thinking that her son 
was in the house of one who was her enemy, of one 
capable of any atrocious action. 

Night came on, the traveller did not appear again, and 
the poor woman returned to her hut, hoping she had 
been disappointed, and had again mistaken a stranger 
for her son. Anxiety prevented her from sleeping : in the 
dead of the night her watchful ear caught the sound of 
distant footsteps, which induced her to get up. Creeping 
along, concealed by the low fence of her little garden, she 
saw her neighbour and his son coming towards the mere, 
bearing between them a heavy sack; the moon was 
shining bright. She saw them; walk into the water, 
which was very shallow in this part: she heard a heavy 
splash. Still the men did not return : they seemed to 
consult, and fearing that there was not depth of water 

Q 



226 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 

suflBcient to conceal their dreadful burthen, they took it 
up again, and returned with it to their house. The 
mother, still more wretched, continued to watch ; she 
saw the two men bearing the sack as before, and having 
provided themselves with spades, come out and walk 
across the forest. She followed them at a distance, 
but her strength would not allow her to keep up with 
them, and she soon lost sight of them. Still she 
watched, and in about half an hour saw the father and 
son return to their cottage, carrying the sack empty. 

Now, firmly convinced that her murdered son had been 
buried, she returned to her hut to brood in silence over 
her misery ; she felt that her suspicions rested solely on 
what she alone had seen, and dreaded to make them 
known to anyone. However, she very soon saw that a 
cart was added to the stock of her neighbour, that he 
appeared in a good new suit of clothes, and thought 
these evident signs of wealth, which were not in any 
way accounted for, a strong confirmation of her sus- 
picions. She went by night and dug about that part of 
the forest where she had lost sight of the supposed 
murderers, but was always interrupted and prevented 
by other neighbours. She then went to Mr. Wilbra- 
ham,* who had before relieved her wants, and implored 
his assistance, as a magistrate, in her search for the 
body. 

* George Wilbratam Esq., of Delamere House. 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMEEE FOREST. 227 

Thus far the tale of the old woman, frequently 
repeated to my sister, goes. What follows is Mr. 
Wilbraham's account: 

The old woman said she had had a violent fever ; and 
had, in a vision, seen all that to my sister she after- 
wards described as an actual occurrence. Mr. Wil- 
braham, willing to humour her fancy, sent the over- 
seer with a labourer to dig wherever she directed. 
This search proved wholly fruitless; but soon after, Mrs. 
HoUingsworth having heard that the body of a man had 
been found in a pond at Marbury, near Whitchurch, she 
went there immediately, and asserted that she knew 
the corpse to be that of her son, which after having 
been buried in the forest had been removed and 
carried for greater security to this distant pond. She 
afterwards went to Liverpool, where she said she dis- 
covered that a young Grerman exactly answering the 
description of her son had landed from a Hamburgh 
ship, and had enquired his way to Delamere Forest, on 
the very day on which she saw the traveller in conver- 
sation with the supposed murderer. 

Mr. Wilbraham, hearing this, thought further in- 
vestigation necessary : he wrote to the chief of the 
police at Liverpool, stating the facts of the case, and 
requesting him to make every enquiry. In answer to 
this application, he heard that a young Grerman had 
certainly landed on the day specified, but that all the 
rest of the tale was a fabrication. Soon after, Mr. 

Q2 



228 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 

Wilbraham being in London called upon Mr. Grol- 
lermann, who had been employed as an Almoner 
to Queen Charlotte, to distribute her bounty to 
the distressed Germans in England. After having 
told the whole story, Mr. Wilbraham requested him to 
make some enquiry in Hanover about the young 
Hollingsworth. The result was, he was reported to be 
alive and well. Mr. Wilbraham, determined to leave 
nothing undone that would satisfy the mind of the 
mother and establish the innocence of him whom she 
had accused, wrote to the young man, strongly urging 
him to come over to tranquillise his mother. Some 
weeks afterwards, he and his sister came to Delamere 
House. She fully recognised him, so did the mother, 
but she did not seem happy ; she evidently could not 
bear that her story, which had made much noise, should 
be so totally disproved. Hollingsworth went to Man- 
chester, and got employed in his trade of carpenter. 

This is the substance of what Mr. Wilbraham wrote 
down for me. Strange to say, after all this, the old 
woman always persisted in saying to my sister and me, 
that, though appearances were so much against her that 
she could not maintain it, her own conviction must ever 
be that the young man was an impostor and no son of 
hers. The daughter more than joined in these assur- 
ances, and even went so far one day as to declare to us 
that the young man had made love to her and wanted 
to marry her. I understand the supposed murderer 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMEEE FOKEST. 229 

(whose name I have never heard) is now living at 
Tarporley respectably. In the strange tale of the old 
woman, I cannot help believing there was much of self- 
delusion, and that, when that was removed, she had 
recourse to falsehood to bolster up her fallen credit : but 
it seems to me quite impossible to say exactly where 
delusion ended and deception began. I see that my 
sister and I should not fix the boundary at the same 
place : she has more faith in the old liar than I can 
have. 

It was not till some time after this strange occurrence 
that I happened to see the woman for the first time : 
we went to her hut ; she was then (1827-8) living quite 
alone: her daughter's education being finished, she sent 
her to London to be confirmed and to seek a service. 
The mother's pride seemed highly gratified in reading 
to us a letter which she had received from her daughter. 
It was written partly in German, and partly in English; 
the former was translated to us, and very much was I 
astonished at the language, sentiments, and intelligence 
of the writer. She began by describing her wonder in 
first seeing London : a great deal of very proper feel- 
ing not unmixed with cant (as I thought), was ex- 
pressed as, with respect to her confirmation, she spoke 
of the kindness with which she had been received by 
their friends, and of a play at Covent Garden, to which 
they had taken her, which she seemed to bewail as a 
sin, and assured her mother it should never be repeated. 



230 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 

She then spoke of the family in whose service she 
had been placed by the clergyman of the Lutheran 
chapel. 

Mrs. Hollingsworth gave me the idea of a very shrewd 
woman, who in good language, though her pronuncia- 
tion was decidedly German, expressed strong religious 
feelings, mingled with such uncharitable opinions of all 
mankind, that I could not but term her religion cant. 
It was at this time that she gave my sister an MS. of 
about twenty folio sheets, containing a history of her 
life. I read it aloud, and can only recollect that it did 
not even reach the period of her marriage ; that, with 
much cant and more long-windedness, it afforded rather 
an interesting picture of primaeval manners and a long 
list of suitors whom she had refused. I felt that, with 
much curtailment, this might have made an interesting 
beginning to her strange story. I lament now that I 
did not write this at the time. At a subsequent visit 
she told us that she began to find her absolute solitude 
very dreary, and that as age and infirmities increased 
she felt it not safe. She added that by the interest of 
the Lutheran clergyman and of other friends, she had 
obtained an admission to the Dutch Almshouses in 
London. She had just been giving a leave-taking tea 
drink to two gossips, her neighbours, and had a letter 
from her daughter ; and it was then that, speaking of 
the man calling himself her son, and some of the evi- 
dence against her statement being brought forward, she 



THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 231 

said, 'I know that very well. I know what everybody says 
and believes, but if the whole world were to tell me that 
this piece of paper was black, I could not contradict them, 
but I never could be persuaded that it is not white.' 
Before she went away she gave my sister a German 
Prayer-book, for the use of the Lutheran chapel at St. 
James's. In the first page is ' A. M. Hollingsworth ein 
geschench van der Gravien van Mvmster, door middel 
van de goede vrow Goltermann. This book was given 
me by the Countess of Munster through the virtues of 
Mrs. Goltermann. I desire me Lady Delamere to take 
it in rememberance of me, Anna Maria Hollingsworth, 
July 11, 1829.' At the same time she sent to Vale Eoyal 
as a tribute of her gratitude, the last of her family of 
goats, \vith the following rude liues : — 

THE PERTITION OF A KIDD. 

A lonesome stranger creves a boon, 

To rove -within the shade, 
In your spacious park allone, 

An hopes your frindly ade. 

My friendly dame is going to leve, 

The place wai'e I did dwell, 
I humbly begg do me resieve 

An use a stranger well. 

Then I will in return agien, 

Cheer your lonesome walk ; 
In all my nature still remane, 

In innocence with you talk. 

In June 1832 we went to Bishopsgate Street, in 
search of the Dutch Almshouses, which are in a court 



232 THE OLD WOMAN OF DELAMERE FOREST. 

near there. A low arch with a gate opened into a paved 
passage or alley. At a little shop next door we 
enquired whether Mrs. Hollingsworth was still in the 
Almshouses, and whether she could come and speak to us 
at the carriage door ; a young woman told us that she was 
her daughter just come (from Pimlico, I think) to see 
her, and she would go in and fetch her if she was well 
enough. The poor soul came coughing and so weak she 
could hardly reach the carriage, but she seemed quite 
delighted when she saw my sister, whom her daughter 
had not recognised. We got out, found at the end of 
the alley seven or eight steps, down which we went to a 
court, round which were built about a dozen small 
hocuses. Our old woman had a room about twelve feet 
square, neat and tidy, full of old rude knick-knacks ; 
amongst others a sort of model of the hut in Delamere 
Forest. As far as one could judge during the short 
time we remained, the woman seemed contented, but 
sinking fast. The daughter, a decent-mannered person, 
with language very superior to her appearance, told us 
she was in service, and could seldom get leave to come 
and visit her mother. We enquired about the MS. we 
had seen, and asked whether she had ever concluded 
it, which we found she had not, and that she had given 
what we had seen to a bookseller at Manchester. Both 
mother and daughter vehemently repeated their asser- 
tions that the traveller was not their relative ; and at 
last the daughter asked how she could acknowledge or 



MADAME d'AEBLAT. 233 

consider as a brother a man who had attempted to 
seduce her and wanted to marry her. 



MADAME B AEBLAT. 

March 1833. — I have been reading the life of Dr. 
Burney by his daughter, and am more disappointed than 
I can express. We were well aware that her style, 
always affected, grew more so in each successive work; 
but that the authoress (the unaided authoress, I firmly 
believe her) of 'Evelina' could write such stuff as I 
have just read, I should hardly have thought possible. 
Her overweening admiration for that very insignificant 
personage, her father, I can forgive. I can believe it was 
quite equalled by Miss Edgeworth, so very much the 
superior of Madame d'Arblay in talent. But I cannot 
endure her excessive personal vanity, her nauseous re- 
petition of all the compliments made to her under the 
shallow pretence of telling the world how much pleasure 
the paternal heart of Dr. Burney derived from them. 
Then all this absurdity and arrogance is made more dis- 
gusting by her frequent allusions to her extreme 
modesty ! Look at the genuine modesty of great talent 
in Miss Edgeworth's memoirs of lier father ; admire the 
good taste with which she speaks of her works, the 
anxiety with which she allots a share in their pro- 
duction far larger than any reader is inclined to allow 



234 MADAME d'AEBLAT. 

to her father. How I wish she would fulfil her pro- 
mise, and let us see in her long-talked-of work what she 
can do without him. From what I heard last year from 
her 3gphew, I fear that a distrust of her own powers 
may chill their energy. He told me that she has not 
to anyone imparted the title, or even the subject, of the 
work in which she is engaged ; that the dread of pro- 
ducing something inferior to the fame which she has 
acquired seems to act as a bugbear upon her imagina- 
tion, and he fears may prove a decided check to it. 

After all. Miss Burney's book has been valuable to me, 
it has proved a hook by which I have caught some very 
interesting stories ; among others, one which strongly 
exemplifies the ignorance in which Napoleon kept 
France of everything which he did not wish to publish. 
Madame d'Arblay had been with her husband in France 
for some years, when the events of 1814 restored, with 
the Bourbons, the communication between England and 
France. Madame d'Arblay hastened over to see her 
family. Dr. C. Burney told my uncle that his sister 
was dining with him a day or two after her arrival. 
The china or earthenware which he used happened, with 
the word Trafalgar, to be ornamented with various 
emblems of that victory. Madame d'Arblay, pointing to 
her plate, said, ' What can this mean, brother ? ' 'I think 
if you look at the word, Trafalgar, you will not need any 
other explanation,' was the natural answer. ' But what 
can that mean ? ' rejoined she ; and in short it turned out 



SIR WALTER SCOTT. 235 

that it was the first time she had heard of the battle 
with which all Europe had seemed to us to ring. 

Madame d'Arblay in her book speaks of some verses 
by Canning, which were read to the Princess of Wales 
by Mrs. A. Hayman ; who tells me this is not true : 
they were promised, but Canning said he had burnt 
them upon reading 'De Montfort,' dismayed by the 
example of the Quizzer destroyed.* 



SIR WALTER SCOTT. 



My uncle gave me a curious account of the introduc- 
tion of Mr. Scott to the Princess. Mrs. Hayman, in send- 
ing the invitation to my uncle (Lord Grenville), added a 
personal request that he would come early to protect the 
poet (for as such only was he known), who she believed 
would not know any one other guest. Scott arrived late, 
was only presented to the Princess just before she went 
to dinner ; at table, his place was of course far removed 
from hers, and little if any conversation took place 
between them. Very soon after the gentlemen came 
up from dinner, the Princess said, ' Mr. Scott, I hear you 
have a great collection of stories which you tell remark- 
ably well : pray let us hear one.' Without any dis- 
claiming speeches, without hesitation, almost without 

* De Montfort'a hate had been exasperated by the ridicule and 
irony of his victim. 



236 SIR WALTER SCOTT. 

delay, Scott began, ' Madam, there was once,' &c. &c. 
The story was much applauded : another was called for 
and followed with equal facility. 

My uncle mentioned this as an extraordinary feat of 
self-possession and ready wit. I am certainly not inclined 
to doubt the extraordinary talents of Scott, but in this in- 
stance many circumstances appear to me to diminish the 
wonder. The trade of Scott in his character of London 
and Edinburgh lion was as decidedly at that period that 
of a teller of stories as it has since been that of a writer 
of novels. The tales had probably been told a hundred 
times, and on this occasion his friend Mrs. Hayman, I 
doubt not, gave him a previous hint of what would be 
asked from him.* 

To this I cannot help adding a story of the embarka- 
tion of poor Sir Walter Scott at Portsmouth, which I 
heard from Dr. Somerville last June. He was touring 

* Scott mentions this dinner in a letter to Mr. George Ellis, 
describing liia visit to London, dated April 7th, 1806: — 'I had 
also the honour of dining with a fair friend of yours at Blackheath, 
an honour which I shall long remember. She is an enchanting 
princess, who dwells in an enchanted palace, and I cannot help 
thinking her prince must lie under some malignant spell when he 
denies himself her society.' His popularity dates from the publi- 
cation of the Lay of the Last Minstrel, in 1805. At a later period 
and after a longer practice in being lionised, in 1809, he made 
extremely light of his own social accomplishments. ' All this is 
very flattering,' he would say to Mr. Morritt, ' and very civil. If 
people are amused with hearing me tell a parcel of old stories, or 
recite a pack of ballads to lovely young ^rls and gaping matrons, 
they are easily pleased, and a man would be very ill-natured who 
would not give pleasure so cheaply conferi'ed.' 



PARTY FEELING IN EEANCE. 237 

with his family in 1831, and learnt at his arrival at the 
hotel at Portsmouth, that Sir Walter was there waiting 
the pleasTire of the wind for embarkation. They went 
into his room, and with an exclamation of pleasure made 
the usual enquiries after his health. Sir Walter rose, 
and in advancing to meet them tottered, and would have 
fallen on his face if the strong arm of Dr. Somerville 
had not supported and borne him back to his chair. 
When he was a little recovered, he said, ' After what has 
just passed, it is quite needless to answer your question; 
you see how I am. It is all here,' added he, striking his 
forehead. ' Take warning from me, Mr. Somerville, and 
spare your head. I have brought this on myself by 
taking too much out of me.' Sir Walter sailed October 
27th, 1831.* 



PARTY PEELING IN FRANCE. 

July 1833. — I have just heard from Dr. Somerville a 
strange instance of the virulence of party feeling now 
raging in France. He had shown some civilities 

to a Monsieur and Madame de : they vowed 

eternal friendship in a few days. Some time after 
this, the Somervilles went to Paris : their dear 
friends, the de 's, were absent, and did not 



* Besides other reminiscences of Sir Walter Scott by Dr. Som- 
erville, these diaries contain a complete copy of Sir William Gell's; 
hut they have all been incorporated into the Life by Lockhaa-t. 



238 PAETY FEELING IN FRANCE. 

return till the Somervilles had been some time settled, 
indeed not till the Doctor had returned to England. 

Grreat was the joy of meeting, and that of the de 's 

did not evaporate in professions. Parties were imme- 
diately made to show those sights to which favour alone 
could gain admission, a dinner proposed, &c. &c. The 

day after their first meeting, Madame being in 

the carriage with Mrs. Somerville, asked her whether 
she had been to some party or sight past. 'No,' 
answered Mrs. Somerville, 'it was unfortunately at 
the time when I was at La Grange,' (the country seat of 
La Fayette). The genuine Frenchwoman expressed 
her surprise by a start, a bound from her seat which 
made Mrs. Somerville tremble for the springs of her 
carriage: then followed a string of ' Mon Dieul est 
il possible ! ' &c. &c., 'that you, such a woman as you, 
should visit such a man ? There is not a person 
belonging to the bonne societe who would speak to you 
if you were known to have been in such company.' 

Mrs. Somerville repeated that she had not only passed 
a week at La Grange, but considered it as one of the 
most agreeable she had spent in the whole course of her 
life, and that she hoped to repeat the visit. Her friend 
said that she felt under great obligations to Mrs. 
Somerville, had conceived for her an affection which 
nothing could shake, ' but I own to you,' she added, 
' had this been our first interview, after what has just 
passed, it should have been our last. However, I have 



PAKTT FEELING IN FRANCE. 239 

one favour to ask of your friendship, et je vous la de 
mande a genoux. You are to dine with me on such 
a day : au nom de Lieu, I entreat, do not mention the 
name of La Fayette, or in any way allude to this visit. 
Of the party invited to meet you there is not one indi- 
vidual who would not, after such an avowal, avoid you 
as if you came from a plague-house, or would ever 
speak to you.' Mrs. Somerville replied, that she would 
never wittingly speak on a topic unpleasant to the 
master of any house where she found herself a guest : 
at the same time, as she never did anything she was 
ashamed of, she would not shrink from her friendship 
for La Fayette, if, in the course of conversation, she 
was questioned on the subject. 

Dr. Somerville tells me that, even under Napoleon, the 
police never was so active, nor so expensively organised, 
as under the Citizen King, When the' Duchesse de 
Berry was wandering about, the strictness about pass- 
ports was most absurd. Dr. Somerville went with Mr. 
Hankey to the Passport Office, where every individual 
was then expected to appear, and all, even children and 
maids, were obliged to have their separate passports, 
describing person, age, &c. Dr. Somerville, having 
seen this ceremony performed on the four elder children, 
at last said to the official, ' I see you are a gentleman, 
and I am convinced that a secret entrusted to your 
honour will, in spite of everything, be in safe keep- 
ing. I will, therefore, in strict confidence, tell you an 



240 MANuscniPTS or tasso. 

important secret : you see there the Duchesse de Berry 
in disguise,' and he pointed to the youngest child, a 
girl of four years old, who, upon being looked at, hid 
herself under the table. The officer, laughing, said: 
' Que voulez-vous, monsieur ? Je sens comme voas tout 
le ridicule de ce que je fais ; mais les ordres nous 
viennent d'en haut; nous devons obeir a La lettre.' 

A few days after this. Dr. Somerville departed by the 
Malle Paste : being within a few miles of Montreuil, 
he missed his passport, and consulted the conducteur 
as to what he was to do ; he fully expected to have 
been lodged in a prison till he could in some way have 
been identified, and asked whether he had not better 
tell his tale and surrender himself at once. The con- 
ducteur, hearing that he was known to QuilUac, at 
Calais, promised, if he would only lean back in the 
cabriolet, he would pass him through the gates without 
any enquiry. However, he had not an opportunity of 
proving the total uselessness of the tiresome passport, 
for a few minutes afterwards it was found in the straw 
at the bottom of the carriage. 



MANUSCEIPTS OF TASSO. 



Rome : December 1833.- — I have just picked up a very 
interesting account of some late discovered books and 
manuscripts belonging to Tasso. I copy the memoran- 



MANUSCRIPTS OF TASSO. 241 

dum written for me by Mr. Horner, to whom these 
papers were shown by the Conte Albert! : 

' When Tasso was imprisoned, his manuscripts were 
all seized and put into the hands of Guarini, the author of 
the " Pastor Fido," and then minister of state of Alfonso, 
Duke of Ferrara. He was shortly afterwards sent on 
an embassy from Alfonso to the Court of Florence, and 
failing in the object of his mission, was subsequently 
dismissed. Still, either designedly or by accident, he 
retained the manuscripts which the death of Tasso had 
rendered comparatively unimportant to Alfonso, and on 
the death of Guarini they were inherited by his son Ales- 
sandro Guarini, from whom they passed into the hands 
of Carlo Tomaso Strozzi. They were purchased from him 
by a person of the name of Foppi or Foppo, and finally 
came into the possession of the Falconieri family at 
Eome. With their descendants the MSS. remained till 
the Conte Alberti, hearing that these books existed and 
were but lightly appreciated by their owner, became 
the purchaser of them, at a very small price. The 
Conte Alberti being in reduced circumstances, and 
finding the inconvenience under a despotic government 
of being the possessor of manuscripts, by which he had 
been already led into very unpleasant situations, he has 
offered these for sale to the Grand Duke of Tuscany. 
After having subjected them to the most rigid scrutiny, 
which has satisfied him as to the authenticity of these 
papers, Leopold has made the liberal offer of l,000i. ; 

K 



242 MANUSCRIPTS OF TASSO. 

the bargain, however, has not yet been closed, and I 
imagine that, were a larger sum offered from any other 
quarter, Conte Albert! is at liberty to take it. 

' I myself saw only three of the books ; one of them 
was a compilation of sonnets all written upon scraps of 
paper, backs of letters &c. &c. incorrect, but abounding 
in beauties, and interesting as portraying the progress of 
the poet's passion for Leonora, and also clearly establish- 
ing the fact of his only feigning madness in obedience 
to the commands of Alfonso, who wished thus to screen 
the reputation of his sister. There may be about 100 
sonnets. I also saw the " Laborinto d'Amore " given to 
the poet by Leonora, in a cover embroidered by her own 
hand in allegorical devices. It is in very good preser- 
vation, and in the first leaf is a sonnet written by Tasso, 
which alludes to this circumstance. The third was a 
Virgil, full of marginal notes written by him. I believe 
there are many other books rendered interesting by the 
annotations of Tasso, which are to be sold with the 
rest ; among them, I know, is a treatise by Aristotle on 
the " Art of War," from which the poet has evidently 
derived as much knowledge of military tactics as was 
necessary for the composition of his " Grerusalemme." 
There is also either a part or the whole of that poem 
in the author's handwriting as it was originally com- 
posed, not as he afterwards gave it to the public' 

Thus far Mr. Horner wrote for me to send to England, 
in hopes of procuring a better bargain, not only for 



DtJCHESSK DE BEEEY. 243 

Conte Alberti, but for the world. He told me that 
Leopold is supposed to be so jealous of the reputation 
of his predecessors, or more probably so deeply im- 
bued with the Austrian fear of giving publicity to 
invectives against princes, even when so many centuries 
have covered their ashes, that he has absolutely pro- 
hibited the publication of any of these books. Conte 
Alberti says he should be sorry that they should go out 
of Italy ; but he fears they may be as effectually buried 
in the 'private library of the Grrand Duke as they have 
been in that of the Falconieri, If he could but be 
assured that they will be deposited in the Lawrentian 
Library, where the public might have access to them, 
he woiild be satisfied,* 



DUCHESSE DE BEEET. 

Rrnne, Jem. 3rd, 1834. — I have picked up here 

" some more strange particulars about the extraordinary 

history of the ci-devant Duchesse de Berry. I had 



* Alberti's coUection eventually turned out to be composed of 
pome of the most curious literary forgeries on record. Only a part 
of the first volume which he brought out was genuine. All 
the rest have been declared by competent authority to be spurious. 
His pretended miniature of the Princess Leonora was discovered 
to be a copy of a miniature of a lady of the noble family of Trotti. * 
The complete detection took place in 1843, in the course of an 
action brought by a bookseller of Ancona to whom part of the 
MS. had been sold. 

B 2 



244 DUCHESSB DE BEKRY. 

been astonished, with many others, at the manner in 
which she was received here. I had heard that the Pope 
had deputed Cardinals to welcome her, had assigned 
her a guard, and had given a sanction to the sort of 
Court which she attempted to keep up. Yesterday, 

Mr. , the brother-in-law of Cardinal W , 

cleared up this mystery. It seems that the present 
Pope, then a Cardinal, was really the person who first 
introduced Deutz to her notice. He therefore consi- 
dered himself as the innocent cause of her ruin, and as 
bound in conscience to reach out a strong hand to save 
her from utterly sinking. It seems now the universally 
received opinion that Deutz is the father .of the child 
which is just dead. Whether Lucchesi Palli has any 
right to that which is to be born, seems very doubtful. 
The infatuation of the unhappy woman seems perfectly 
incredible ; she might in so many ways have averted 
the open disgrace of the catastrophe. There can be no 
doubt that the French Grovernment would have been too 
happy to allow her to escape quietly. One of her own 

near friends told Miss A (from whom I heard it) 

that the Queen of the French wrote to her frequently 
in the kindest manner and strongly urged her to 
escape. In one of the Queen's letters was the following 
striking expression — ' Dans tous vos7nalheurs,ra/ppelez- 
vous que vous Ti'avez pas a porter cette couronne 



Gregory XVI. 



LOUIS PHILIPPE. 245 

d^ifines qui me pese.' Any one of those ladies, so fondly, 
so firmly devoted to her cause, would have taken upon 
herself the child of disgrace : it was not the first nor 
the second even, and all had been quietly managed 
before. It seems perfectly clear that, if Deutz was not 
the father, it must have been a married man, or one 
who could not be passed off as her husband. Then 
when they were to buy one, one should think they 
might have found a better than Lucchesi Palli, who was 
known never to have left the Hague for twenty-four 
hours during the fourteen months which preceded the 
birth of the child. 



LOUIS PHILIPPE. 

Rome : Jan. 20th. — I dined yesterday with Sir Coutts 
Trotter : so happening to talk of Louis Philippe, he told 
me an anecdote strongly illustrating the more amiable 
parts of his character. Sir Coutts said he had never lived 
in intimacy with the Duke of Orleans, but the Duke had 
had many transactions of business with their house. He 
then went on to relate, that, passing through Paris a few 
months ago, he left his name at the Tuileries : the next 
day, to his great astonishment, he received a message to 
say that the King was very anxious to see him, and 
that he must dine with him in private that day. Sir 
Coutts of course obeyed, and found himself sitting at 
t^ble with the King, Queen, Duke of Orleans and one 



246 LOtriS PHILIPPE. 

of his brothers, and some of the Marechaux, without 
more form or ceremony than ' we have at this table,' 
said he. He was ordered to take the Queen into 
dinner, and of course to sit next to her. The conver- 
sation turned chiefly on England, on those whom they 
had known there. The Queen spoke of the wonderful 
change in her situation since they had met in England, 
and added, ' Mais fetais bien mieux,je me trouvais bien 
plus heureuse quand fetais de I'autre cdtS,' — meaning 
in the Palais Koyal. Here the King, who was sitting 
exactly opposite on the other side of the table, inter- 
rupted the conversation with 'Mais, Sir Goutts,je vous 
assure ce ti" est pas de ma faute si nous nous trouvons 
id.' He went on to say how often he had remonstrated 
with Charles X. on his measures : how he had foretold 
exactly that which did happen afterwards ; and all this 
was said in the presence of five or six other persons. 

I found that Sir Coutts, like myself, believed what they 
said to be true, — that Louis Philippe had not sought 
the painful pre-eminence in which he finds himself. 
There is one thing which must be allowed : of the very 
many English who were formerly thrown into contact 
with him, almost all speak highly of him. I have 
never heard of any one person who found that the Duke 
of Orleans at the Palais Eoyal, or Louis Philippe 
at the Tuileries, had forgotten the kindness or hospi- 
tality shown to the exiled son of Egalite. This is much 
more than can be said for those of the Branche ai/n,ie. 



l:^ontinb fat. 247 

who one and all ont tout oublie in this sense as well as 
in that in which it was originally said.* 



LfiONTINE FAY. 



Jan. 6th, 1835. — I have seen Leontine Fay, and think 
her nearer Mars than any actress I have ever seen. She is 
so quiet, so ladylike, in her manner ; her coquetry seems 
so genuine. Her husband Volnys is perhaps even supe- 
rior to her. In Le Quaker et la Danseuse he was perfect 
in everything but his dress. Is it not strange that, on 
the French stage, where accuracy of costume is in general 
so strictly studied, a Quaker should appear (and that in 
England) in a blue coat and white waistcoat ? Then 
it is an abuse du privilege qu'ont tous les frangais 
d'etre ignorans to call solemnly upon Ben Jonson as 
the founder of the sect to look down upon every 
breach of the strictest rule of morality: 'Ah, Ben 
Jonson, qu'aurais tu ditV and this not once but 
several times repeated; and the performers seemed 
quite unconscious of the cause of. the laughter of the 
audience, evidently wondering that this part of Volnys' 
acting should prove so entertaining. 

• Miss Wyirn was probably alluding to tlie mot attributed to 
TaUeyrand, but really -written of the emigrants by Le Chevalier 
de Panat to Mallet du Pan, from London, 1796 : Personne n'est 
c&rrigi : personne n'a su ni rien oublier ni rien apprendre. 



248 CHARLES KEMBLE. 



CHARLES KEMBLE. 



June Wth, 1835. — Saw last night C. Kemble as 
Hamlet: he is wondrous stiff and old. I had been 
reading in the morning his daughter's memoirs, in 
which there are occasionally passages of genius, of great 
discrimination, and good sense. I was struck with an 
observation on the disadvantage of representing tragedy 
in a small theatre which would be admirably fitted for 
comedy. It is not only the foil and tinsel which lose 
on nearer inspection: the expression of the stronger 
passions becomes coarse &c. &c. How I felt the truth 
of this last night, when I looked at Kemble's wrinkled 
face, at the coarser Mrs. Grlover (the Gertrude) : 
perhaps, too, the quality of Ophelia's voice might have 
been refined by distance ; her tone was harsh, but her 
acting not bad enough to shock one, which is more 
than I can say for most of the performers. 

The great error of Kemble seetns to me, that he substi- 
tutes sneering scorn for dignity, and, truth to say, gives 
great force to some passages of the part, the ' little more 
than kin and little less than kind,' for instance; the 
scene with Rosencrantz and Guilderstein ; the play scene ; 
but he made a very awkward job of lying at Ophelia's 
feet ; he sate in the midst of the little stage very stiff, 
and evidently rising with difficulty. The scene of the 
King at his devotions and Hamlet's speech are omitted, 
and I for one do not regret these expressions of dia- 



ME. coestblt's picttjkes. 249 

bolical revenge. I -was surprised at the scene with the 
Queen ; it was so much better, quieter, more son-like 
than I expected; there was also more of regret for 
Polonius than seemed to belong to the cold Kemble 
school. I never was so much aware of the fault of the 
bungHng catastrophe, especially of the absurdity of 
Hamlet's stabbing the king in the midst of his court, 
without one hand lifted to prevent the outrage. 



MH. COESVELTS PICTURES. 

June I8th. — Went to see Mr. Coesvelt's pictures, and 
return convinced that, for my own pleasure, I should 
prefer that to any collection I know in London ; perhaps 
one reason is that it is so entirely Italian ; another is 
that, among the pictures, there is not one of which the 
subject is disagreeable ; no disgusting nudity, no painful 
martyrdom, &c. &c. He has both increased and di- 
minished the collection since I saw it in Brook Street, 
four or five years ago. He has two or three very fine 
Eaphael's ; on6 that I am inclined to place higher than 
any one I know in England; that is from the Alva 
collection. There is an Infant St. John, whose look of 
pure intense adoration towards the Infant Christ is 
finer than almost anything I know. I should say that 
Parmegiano is here on his throne; that here I have 
learnt to value him more highly than I have ever done 
before. Still I do not like his large pictures as well as 



250 BALLOONS. 

the smaller ones; there is one large one recently added 
to the collection, which Mr. Coesvelt values very highly, 
but which I think a rather French and manier4 
Parmegiano. 

A few days afterwards I went to see the King's pictures, 
and felt that they lost much by comparison with Mr. 
Coesvelt's. Perhaps their inferiority in my eyes would 
be expressed in a very few wovds— their boast is Flemish, 
Mr. Coesvelt's pictures are all Italian, 



BALLOONS. 



July 1th. — Went yesterday to see the aerial ship 
as they call the new balloon. It is very interesting, 
though I cannot believe that it will actually perform 
the voyage from London to Paris, in about six weeks 
from the present time (if the wind is perfectly fair), in 
five hours. The form of a cylinder with conical ends, 
and the various contrivances for admitting or excluding 
the atmospheric air, seem to place it a little less at the 
mercy of the wind than former balloons. Still the 
directing power, or rather the stemming power, is quite 
wanting. They have the power of raising themselves 
into the higher regions of the atmosphere, where they 
may expect another current, or may go almost upon 
the sea, as the buoyancy of the whole machine would 
prevent it from sinking. Still it is owned, that if there 



ME. datidson's eastebn stoeies. 251 

is a wind against them, even such as would only carry 
them five miles an hour, they cannot go. Therefore it 
seems to me utterly impossible that the machine should 
ever be brought into use as a conveyance ; but I suppose 
that for scientific purposes it might be useful in inves- 
tigation, and perhaps were navigation still dependent 
on winds and tides and the power of steam undiscovered, 
it might have been of real use. The gallery in which 
the passengers are to go, seems to me perilously slight, 
and obviously unequal to the encoxmter with any severe 
weather. The ribs or joists of the floor are covered 
only with basket-work, which seems very insufficient 
for a number of persons (the crew alone is seventeen) 
to tread with safety.* 



MR. DAVIDSON'S EASTEEN" STOEIES. 

July \^th. — How I wish I could fix here one quarter 
of the amusement and information which I have derived 
from the conversation of Mr. Davidson, the eastern 
traveller ; he seems to me like a man walked out of the 
' Arabian Nights ' bodily. When, just after dinner, he 
began a story in which Oriental salutation formed a 
feature, he to our great surprise jumped from his 
chair, repeated a few Arabic words, which he translated, 

* It would seem from, this description, compared with that of 
the French monster balloon, that the art of aerial navigation has 
made little progress in the last thirty years. 



252 MR. Davidson's eastern stories. 

'I devote myself to you in thought' (he struck his 
forehead); 'in love' (striking his heart); 'in deed; 
(showing his hands); ' from the crown of my head to 
the sole of my foot ' — so saying, he prostrated his length 
(full six feet) on the floor at Charlotte's feet. Then, 
from under his neckcloth, he pulled a heard full twelve 
inches long, told us of a Frenchman very recently dead, 
whose beard showed the ointment flowing from Aaron's 
heard ' even to the hem of his garment ' to be no figure. 
This man's was so long as to sweep the ground when 
he sate down, coal black and very fine : it was regularly 
anoiuted and incensed, the fumigation passing between 
the throat and beard held out. 

'Little facts (he said) curiously illustrate the un- 
changeableness of the grandiloquent Eastern character. 
A very few years ago, a troop of Mamelukes, riding near 
Constantinople, stopped some shepherds, from whom one 
of the Mamelukes requested a draught of milk they had 
just drawn. Having drunk it, he refused the wretched 
remuneration required, telling the shepherd it was but 
tod' much honour for him to furnish milk to a 
Mameluke, and utterly despising the threats of the 
outraged shepherd, who declared he would have justice, 
if he applied to the Sultan himself. He actually made 
his corhplaint within the hour, and brought his adversary 
before the distributor of justice. The Mameluke utterly 
denied the whole transaction, declaring he had not 
drunk a drop of milk. The modem Solomon settled 



EASTERN JUSTICE. 253 

the difference between the conflicting testimonies by 
ordering the defendant to be opened, that it might be 
ascertained whether his stomach contained milk. Of 
course the milk was found, and the poor shepherd 
received some fraction of a farthing, being the lawful 
price of his commodity. 

' Strong murmurs began to rise among the troop of 
Mamelukes, who thought death rather a severe punish- 
ment for such an offence, and seemed a little inclined 
to avenge their companion. Upon this, the judge (I am 
not sure whether it was not the Sultan) assured them 
he should never have thought of putting to death a 
Mameluke for taking a little milk from a shepherd, 
who was, in fact, too highly honoured in furnishing him 
refreshment ; but that the soldier had been proved guilty 
of telling a lie, had disgraced the name of Mameluke, 
and deserved death for that offence. This explanation, 
of course, delighted the whole corps.'* 

I was asking one day about Lady Hester Stanhope. 
He did not see her, having arrived just after the death 
of her only English companion, who having begun as 
maid, ended as secretary, friend, &c. &c. He describes 
her, as others have done, turning night into day, and 
sleeping through the daylight, with very weak eyes and 
without any decided pursuit but astrology. He says 

* This story, so far as relates to opening the stomach of the 
soldier, is told by Gibbon of one of the barbarian monarchs who 
overran the Empire. 



254 LADY HESTER STANHOPE. 

she has lost much of her power, or rather, of her widely 
extended influence ; still possessing the most arbitrary 
authority over her own small district. This diminution 
of power may be ascribed partly to her increase of 
years, which prevents her from riding and showing 
herself among them, partly to the want of that novelty 
which dazzles, but chiefly from the want of money, 
from the weight of debt, which prevents her from 
spending among them the annual income which she 
derives from England. Upon this subject he gave us 
a story curiously illustrative of Oriental character. 

About two years ago, Lady Hester went into Persia, 
with a view of obtaining assistance and protection from 
the Shah. She provided a present of English goods, 
which was really very handsome. This was (according 
to etiquette) offered to the Shah by means of the inter- 
preter, through whom were also sent the thanks with 
all the grandiloquence of the East; his sense of the 
magnificence of the present : sun, moon, and stars were 
all eclipsed : gratitude was described in the same terms : 
their admiration for the spirit, liberality, greatness of 
mind, of the English aristocracy: of which he felt 
the influence so strongly, as to be aware that to the 
English the true way of showing the sense of favours 
received was to gratify their noble nature by asking 
more. Aware not only of this, but that his poor empire 
did not contain anything worthy of being offered to the 
great English lady, he would ask of her the favour of 



THE PTBAMIDS. 255 

a loan. Her project (which the Shah had discovered) 
was to borrow money from him which she never could 
have returned. 

July, 1835. — Another visit to Mr. Davidson, to me far 
more interesting than the last ; when the chief topic of 
discourse and object of investigation were his arms, 
though curious, beautiful, and even awful, when you 
come to arrows, of which the slightest scratch will 
infuse a poison producing inflammation and extensive 
discoloration, and to a lance which he does not remove 
from a scabbard, fearing the accidental ill-effects that 
might arise from handling a point which has been three 
years in the poison of the Upas-tree. Still all this was 
not in my way. Yesterday he showed us the model of 
the Pyramids, and instead of giving us a lecture upon 
the subject, entered into a sort of discussion with Mr. 
(Sir Gardner) Wilkinson, the traveller, and author of a 
very celebrated work on Thebes. Davidson has a theory 
of his own on the subject of the Pyramids. He consi- 
ders them as signs or monuments in commemoration of 
the Deluge, deriving the present name from Py (the) 
Aram (ancient). The most startling fact which he told 
us was, that in Mexico and on the coast of Coromandel 
there exist to this day pyramids of still greater mag- 
nitude than the Egyptian, but not as high. One of those 
in India is said to be a mile between each angle, but 
not as high as the Egyptian. All ai;e of antiquity far 
beyond any tradition ; all face the cardinal points ; a,ll 



256 EASTERN MAGIC. 

have the entrance to the north ; and this entrance is 
never in the centre of the side on which it is placed. 

These points of coincidence in buildings so very 
remote, in three different quarters of the globe, are cer- 
tainly very curious ; but I should find it very difficult to 
believe that, if these edifices had the distinction which 
Mr. Davidson assigns to them, they would never be 
mentioned in the Bible. By Mr. Wilkinson's book, I 
find their existence is proved by hieroglyphic inscrip- 
tions to have been as remote as the time of the Pharaoh 
of Joseph. The cause of the various measurements of 
the base of the great pyramid of Cheops is that, sand 
having accumulated round it, it is not easy to ascertain 
the height from which to measure ; of course the least 
difference makes a very great one in the circumference. 
The base is called 728 feet, the perpendicular height 
500 feet : it occupies eleven acres, and is equal in ex- 
tent to the whole of Lincoln's Inn Fields, from house to 
house. Humboldt's measurement of the great pyramid 
of Chobula in Mexico : height 172 feet, base 1,355 feet 
square.* 



EASTERN MAGIC. 
Heard from Mr. Wilkinson the other day a curious 
account of the juggler, fortune-teller, or more properly, 
seer (Qy. is this the origin of the name ?) who has long 

* In Ward's Mexico, the height is stated as 177 feet; base, 
1,778 feet square. 



EASTERN MAGIC. 257 

been established at Cairo. I heard the same report 

from Mr. Davidson of this trial; and that given by 

Mr. Yorke (now Lord Hardwicke) of another to Miss 

Walpole coincides in every material particular. A boy 

under ten years of age is taken out of the street, 

selected by the enqmrers ; he is placed in a circle, magic 

characters described, magic words repeated, a drop of 

ink is put into the palm of his hand ; he is asked what 

he sees there, and after a short time he says that he sees 

a monarch on his throne, attendants, &c., and seven 

standard-bearers, with flags of different colours. 

He is then, by permission obtained from the m.onarch 

(supposed to be the Devil), empowered to see any 

person who may be required. 

When this English party went, they got an English 
boy, speaking Arabic ; he was kept many days in their 
house, to prevent communication ; all the forms were 
gone through ; the boy was excessively frightened : Lord 
Prudhoe was called for by his English name, quite 
unknown by any person at Cairo ; the boy, puzzled, 
said, 'I see a Frank, but he is in a Turkish dress,' 
describing that always worn by Lord Prudhoe — his 
sandy whiskers and beard, a dagger or sword, with 
a silver scabbard; known to all the party, &c. &c. 
They tried experiments, too, with Cairo boys ; all 
began with exactly the same rigmarole about the 
sultan, the standard-bearers (Mr. Davidson lamented 
that he had not observed whether the seven colours 



258 EASTERN MAaiO. 

named were the primitive), and proceeded in the same 
way. One person evoked was Shakespeare, whose name, 
they say, could not have been known ; the boy described 
the pointed beard and ruff; in six trials, four descrip- 
tions were exact, the others absurdly the reverse. Mr. 
Wilkinson spoke very coolly ; said, ' Nobody could be 
more incredulous than I was ; indeed, I regret that I ex- 
pressed so much incredulity, because they were more 
cautious, and I had no opportunity of investigating the 
matter; but I could not discover any trick.' Lord 
Prudhoe has certainly received some disagreeable 
impression, and desires his friends not to question him 
on this subject; he said this to Miss Walpole. Lord 

H told her he feared that the English boy had 

never been in his right mind since the scene. 

Charlotte* writes (Dec. 1835): 'The only thing in 
which we have been disappointed is in the Cairo magi- 
cian. After some trouble we got the right man (Lord 
Prudhoe's), and picked out our own boy, who was to see 
the figures in his hand. We had three, who all at first 
saw the same things in their hands on the ink; it 
enlarged ; figures with different coloured flags appeared, 
and then a man with a cro^vn ; but to none of the boys 
did the figures we called for come up. How the first 
part was contrived, we cannot make out ; we had the 
man in our own room, and the boys certainly did not 
know anjrthing about the matter; one of them, an 

• Mrs. Rowley, then travelling in the East with her husband 
and brother. 



EASTERN MAGIC. 259 

Italian, was so frightened by the sight of the flag- 
bearers, that be burst into tears and would not go on. 
The magician really seemed astonished at his failure, 
and of course said that it was the first time,' &c. &c. 

Scott, in his ' Egypt and Candia,' gives a more parti- 
cular and more satisfactory account. He begins by 
providing his boy. The magician commenced his 
operations by writing some characters on a long slip of 
paper, &c. &c. ; then, after wiping the boy's forehead 
(from which fear already made the perspiration start), 
he stuck another piece of paper, covered like the former 
with hieroglyphics, under his skuU-cap, so as to throw 
a shadow upon his eyes, and prevent his looking up. 
Taking the boy's hand in his, the magician then de- 
scribed with ink a square figure in the palm, drawing 
divers figures in a very mysterious manner. Finally 
pouring a quantity of ink (quite a pool) into the boy's 
hand, he was desired to keep his eyes steadfastly fixed 
upon it, and his head was forced down to within a few 
inches of his hand. The magician began jnuttering 
some imintelligible jargon with great rapidity till he 
was nearly breathless. He sprinkled incense, coriander 
seeds, &c. into a charcoal fire, then consumed one of 
the sentences written on the long slip of paper, then 
asked the boy repeatedly if he saw anything; upon 
receiving a negative, observed, he feared the lad was 
very stupid. The boy, half frightened, was spurred into 
intelligence ; with some more efforts he saw a little boy. 

8 2 



260 EASTERN MAaiC. 

' Has he not something in his hand ? ' ' Is it not a flag ? ' 
' Yes, yes ; he has a flag.' In this way the boy was per- 
suaded that he saw seven flags, seven tents, the Sultan, 
and a large army — then comes the jugglery of the naming 
a person who is to appear to the boy, who is to describe 
him ; he failed most completely in every instance but one. 
' A lady of the party afterwards took the lad's part, 
and though fully convinced of the absurdity of the 
juggle, fancied she saw a flag and two stars. We 
tried to persuade her that it was the reflection of her 
own eyes, and of the slip of paper dangling from her 
forehead ; but she became so much excited, that her 
friends would not allow her to remain longer under the 
magic influence. The conjurer refused to try his art 
upon grown-up males. The delusion is evidently 
produced by gradually working upon feelings already 
predisposed by superstition or other causes to the 
necessary state of excitement ; as the diseased system 
of a dreamer makes the victim believe that he sees 
anything brought to his imagination. The fumes of the 
incense, the unearthly sounds, were enough to cause a 
wandering in the boy's ideas, and the constrained posture 
of the head, and the fixedness of his eyes upon the 
shining pool of ink which reflected ad infinitum his 
own black face and bright eyes, may easily be supposed 
to have completed his mystification.' * 

* Eotlien's trial of the Chief of the Magicians at Cairo is one 
of the most characteristic passages in the book. 



JEKOME, KING OF WESTPHALIA. 261 

JEKOME, XINa OF WESTPHALIA. 

Wynnstay, Sept. 1834.— We were talking of the 
characters of several members of the Buonaparte family. 
Mrs. Bowles * told us a curious anecdote of Jerome. At 
the period when he was King of Westphalia, Hyde de 
NeuTille — who, I think, was ostensibly French minister, 
and certainly French spy over him — represented to 
Napoleon that, in various instances, he was doing 
wrong ; for instance, that his army was ill-disciplined 
and ill-managed in every respect. Napoleon promised 
the minister that his representation should be attended 
to ; and that, by the next messenger, a strong remon- 
strance should be sent to Jerome. It so happened that 
the despatches were delivered to him at the table where 
Hyde de Neuville was dining with him. Of course 
he, anticipating their contents, watched their effect on 
the king ; he saw a frown gathering on his countenance 
but very speedily dispersed, and at the same time 
marked a tall grenadier, who had brought in the 
despatches, standing behind the chair of the king, and 
evidently reading over his shoulder. Hyde de Neuville 
could bear silence no longer. He hoped his Majesty 
had received good news from the Emperor, of his health, 
&c. &c. ' Excellent ! ' was the reply, ' and towards 
me his expressions are peculiarly kind and flattering.' 

He then read the letter. Compliments on the state 

* The Honourable Mrs. Bowles, sister of Lord Palmerston. 



262 DE. playfaie's patient. 

of the army, expressions of high approbation, of 
every point of conduct upon which he anticipated 
blame, struck Hyde de Neuville dumb -with astonish- 
ment. He soon after contrived to have a conversation 
with the tall grenadier on the subject of the Emperor's 
letter, cautiously expressing surprise at its gracious 
tenour. In reply, he owned to the having read the 
letter (this Neuville well knew) ; and said he never had 
been so astonished as at the readiness with which, in 
reading it aloud, the king turned all the strong censure 
which it contained into approbation. This story was 
told some years after by Hyde de Neuville to Lord 
Palmerston, from whom Mrs. Bowles had it. 



DE. PLATFAIES PATIENT. 

Dec. 30th, 1835.— H. C * told me that Dr. 

Playfair, the shrewd, plain, very straightforward Scotch 
physician who attended him at Florence, was talking to 
him of a consumptive patient (he was so diplomatic, 
he would not even tell the sex), who for some months 
had been as well aware as his physician that his 
state was quite desperate. The patient, who was in- 
clined to scepticism, had held many conversations 
and disputes with Dr. Playfair on the subject of a 
future state. The last hour was evidently come, 
but he did not seem aware that he was worse than 

* Hugh Cholmondeley, now Lord Delamere. 



BAKON OSTEN's ESCAPE FEOM THE LION. 263 

usual. Dr. Playfair sate by him (for I can feel no 
doubt of the sex), watching the ebbing breath, the 
voice becoming from debility hardly audible, when in 
a tone as strong, as clear as that of health, the dying 
man said, ' / know.' Dr. Playfair thought he alluded 
to some trifling thing respecting his medicines; 'Oh 
no, you don't : I know a great deal better than you.' 
His patient said, ' You are mistaken ; you do not under- 
stand me ; you do not know ; I did not know ; now / 

do know ; ' and so saying expired.* C was so 

struck with these singular words, that he asked Dr. 
Playfair's leave to write them down in his presence. 



BAEON OSTENS ACCOUNT OF HIS ESCAPE PEOM THE 

JAWS OF THE LION IN 1827. 

(Transcribed from his oivn MS. extract from his Journal.) 

May 20th, 1827. — We heard again of some bullocks 

having been killed in the same jungle where we had 

killed three lions on the 14th. On the strength of this 

information we set out immediately, and found a 

whole family of lions. We killed five, but I had a very 

narrow escape of being killed by one of them. After 

* ' They who watcli by him see not, hut he sees — 
Sees and exults. Were ever dreams like these ? 
Those who watch by him hear not, hut he hears ; 
And earth recedes, and heaven itself appears.' 

Mogers — Human Life. 



264 BARON osten's escape from the lion. 

having killed four, I had wounded a fifth, and Grant, 
with five pad-elephants, was beating towards me, when 
he roused the wounded lion, who immediately attacked 
and wounded one of the elephants. He then came 
straight at me. I bent a little forwards over the 
howdah to take a steady aim at him, when unfortu- 
nately the forepart of the howdah gave way, and I fell, 
with all my guns, right on the top of the Hon, who im- 
mediately seized hold of me. I broke my left arm in 
the fall, and got a severe blow from the lion on the 
head, which considerably stunned me. I felt and 
recollect, however, that he was tearing at my right 
arm, and I never can forget the horrible gnarling noise 
he made. Grant's and all the other elephants turned 
tail and ran away, so that I was left alone helpless in 
the jaws of the lion. 

How I got out of them alive is to me a miracle, 
and I cannot otherwise account for it than by giving 
credit to my mahout's statement. He says that his 
elephant backed about fifty yards, but that he suc- 
ceeded after some time in driving her up close to 
the lion, when she took hold of a young tree and 
bent it with great force over the lion's back, when 
he relinquished his prey, and was soon after killed by 
one of the chikarees (chasseurs on foot). When I 
came to my senses, I found my left arm broken, a severe 
contusion on my head, and eleven wounds from teeth 
and claws in my right arm. 



MEXICAN MANNEiJS. 267 

Another similar catastrophe occurred this day. A 
lioness was actually tearing one of the chikarees to 
pieces, when a fortunate shot of Grant's killed her, and 
saved the poor man's life; but he was desperately 
wounded, his blade quite laid bare, the blood stream- 
ing from his head and face. I underwent three times 
the painful operation of having my broken arm set, 
twice by natives in the jungle and a third time at 
Kummaal, where I was removed in the evening, and 
laid up for three weeks, when I was well enough to be 
carried to Meerut. Poor Grant accompanied me to his 
house at Kurnmaal, but after ten days he sallied forth 
again, as he said, to revenge my fate. He left me in 
the greatest spirits, and in better health than he had 
enjoyed for years. Four days after, he was brought 
back a corpse, having fallen a sacrifice to cholera- 
morbus. A more liberal, kind-hearted man, and a 
better or keener sportsman, I never met with. 



MEXICAN MOKALS AND MANNERS. 
Nov. 1836. — Eead yesterday a very entertaining 
letter from Mrs. Ashburnham, the wife of the newly 
appointed consul to Mexico. Her account of the 
manners, of the ignorance, profligacy, and devotion of 
the natives, strongly reminded me of Majorca; the 
(so-called) ladies living in their bed-rooms, or in their 
kitchens — every wife with one lover at least, who passes 



266 MEXICAN MANNERS. 

the life-long evening puffing his cigar at her feet — a 
lady receiving company with six dragoons sitting on 
the bed in which she was talking of nothing but house- 
hold affairs — every woman, even those of seventy, 
coiffee en cheveux, with one flower stuck perhaps in the 
grey locks, which do not hide the redness of the head ; 
children from their birth for some years with an edifice 
of satin, gold, &c. &c., erected on their wretched little 
heads. She says that they have an opera, much better 
than could have been expected in such a society ; that 
there the ladies are always dressed with a species of 
fire-fly in their hair : these fire-flies are certainly more 
brilliant than any diamonds, but they must be not only 
living, but lively and kept in a state of agitation to 
emit this light ; then they protrude their six ugly legs. 
What a horrid tickling, crawling sensation they must give ! 
The houses are described as built round a court, 
like all Spanish houses. Cages filled with the beauti- 
ful birds of that climate are suspended as lamps are 
in our rooms ;■ the court and galleries full of flowers, 
the galleries especially of one plant which the hum- 
ming-birds particularly affect; but they are described 
as so shy that they do not perch even for a minute. 
Mrs. Ashburnham speaks of her astonishment at receiv- 
ing from a lady she hardly knew, a message to say, that 
' she kissed my hands and begged to inform me that 
she had another devoted servant at my disposal, whom 
I was in all things to command and on all occasions.' 



AUTHORSHIP OF JUNIUS. 267 

This simply meant tliat she was brought to bed, and was 
as well as could be expected. These notices are sent 
every nine or ten months from every well-regulated 
family all over the town. 



AUTHOESHIP OF JUNIUS. 

Jan. 1837. — I have had a great deal of conversation 
with Lord Braybrooke on the old subject of Junius. 
I see he puts little faith in the promised revelation of 
the mystery by the Duke of Buckingham,* and I may 
as well, before I proceed, write all I remember of what 
the Duke told me some five or six years ago. He said 
that, examining some papers of our grandfather (George 
Grenville), he found a letter which entirely cleared the 
matter ; that he had immediately written this to Lord 
Grenville, and had offered to exchange his secret infor- 
mation for that which he had always understood was 
in my uncle's possession. No answer was returned, and 
the Duke said that, as it was evident that Lord 
Grenville did not wish for any communication on the 
subject, he thought it more delicate towards him not 
to make it to anyone as long as he lived. Four years 

* The first Duke. The chiefs of the Grenville family succeed 
each other thus : 1. Earl Temple, son of the Coimtess Temple ; 
2. Earl Temple, son of George GrenviUe, died 1779; 3. Earl 
Temple, created Marquis of Buckingham, died 1813 ; 4. Marquis 
of Buckingham, created Duke in 1822, .died 1839; 5. Second Duke, 
died 1861 ; 6. Third Duke, now living. 



268 AUTHORSHIP OF JUNIUS. 

have now elapsed since the death of Lord Grenville, 
and nothing is made known on the subject of Junius. 

Whether the Duke is still restrained by delicacy to- 
wards my dear surviving uncle,* whether subsequent dis- 
coveries have cast a doubt upon that which he considered 
so positive, I of course know not. At the time when 
he told the above to Lady Delamere and me, he was in 
a very communicative humour, allowed us to question, 
and promised to refuse to answer unless he could reply 
truly. He said that Junius was not any one of the 
persons to whom the Letters have been ascribed ; that, 
from the situation in which he found the paper in ques- 
tion, he had every reason to believe that his father had 
never read it. I know that very soon after my uncle's 
(Earl Temple's) death he told Charles that he had 
found a private letter from Junius to my grandfather. 
Nugent, I understand, was with him when the paper 
was found ; indeed, I believe was the first to open it, 
and of course, partakes in the secret. 

The impression left upon the mind of my sister by 
this conversation was, that Lord Temple was the man. 
If so, he must have had an amanuensis in the secret, 
for the hand of a Secretary of State must have been too 
well-known in all its manner not to have been 
discovered. 

The same objection has been made to the supposition 

* The Eight Honourable T. Grenville. 



ArTHOESHIP OF JUNIUS. 269 

of Lord Chatham, and has been removed by a conjecture 
that the letters were transcribed by Lady Chatham. 

From all that I have been used to hear of little Lady 
Temple — thought so very little by all the younger 
members of his family — I am inclined to think that the 
same conjecture could not apply to her ; that hers was 
not the pen of a ready writer, that in her orthography 
even, she was (according to the fashion of that day) 
very deficient.* 

Lord Braybrooke conceives the pretensions of Sir P. 
Francis as being better supported than those of any 
other of the candidates for the authorship. In support 
of this assertion, he told me a singular story. Giles, 
whom we all remember so well, told him that when his 
sister, Mrs. King, was a young Bath belle, she received 



* The facsimiles given "by Mr. W. J. Smith, in the third volume 
of his edition of T/ie Orenville Papers are in a good clear hand, 
betokening a ready penwoman. In that volume he has printed three 
private letters to Mr. George Grenville, supposed to be from 
Junius, prior to his adoption of that signature. These three throw 
little or no light on the disputed question of the authorship. I 
have heard the late (the second) Duke of Buolfingham make 
a statement similar to his father's, and leading to a conclusion 
that he, too, was in the secret. The strongest argument against 
Francis is, his obvious wish to enjoy at least the posthumous re- 
putation of the authorship, and his inability to leave any proof 
better than the copy of 'Junius Identified,' bequeathed to his 
wife. When that work was published, he saw and had some 
conversation with the publisher, whom he impressed with the 
conviction that he was by no means offended at the imputed 
identity. Mere similarity of style in compositions mhseguent to 
the publication of the Letters prqves little or nothing. 



270 AUTHOBSHIP OP JUNTOS. 

anonymously a copy of love verses ; that some years 
after Sir Philip Francis owned himself to be the author of 
these. It happened that the mystery long attached to 
these verses had induced her to preserve the original 
paper, and upon comparison with the autograijhs iu 
Woodfall's edition, it proves that the handwriting is the 
same as that which Junius feigned, and not his natural 
hand. Mr. Giles, to establish this curious fact, had 
Sir Philip's verses exactly copied in lithograph, and gave 
one of the copies to Lord Braybrooke. He has inserted 
it in his 'Junius,' and promised, but afterwards for- 
got, to show it me. 

Lord Braybrooke told me that there was a moment 
when he expected some very interesting information 
on this subject. The present king, William IV., 
gave him a message of apology to Lord Grenville 
for having driven, by a mistake of the coach- 
man, close to the house at Dropmore, began talk- 
ing about my uncle's supposed knowledge of the 
secret of Junius, and added, ' I will tell you what my 
father said one day to me upon this subject. He was, 
after every attempt to discover the secret, quite as 
much in the dark as any of his subjects ; but he added : 
' I wiU tell you, my son, now that you are grown up and 
can understand them, what are my conjectures upon 
the subject.' One can imagine the anxious curiosity 
of Lord Braybrooke at this preface, and his extreme 
disappointment at the conclusion, *I am convinced that 



AtTTHOKSHIP OF JTTNUJS. 271 

it cannot be the work of any one person, and that 
several were concerned.'* Now, setting aside the 
evidence of unity of style and purpose, which is strong 
against this supposition, it would make the mystery 
even more wonderful than it has appeared — indeed, 
one may say, impossible. 

Lord Braybrooke told the King an anecdote connected 
with this, though perhaps not much to the purpose. 
Lady Holland, in one of her imperious moods, made 
Eogers go to Sir P. Francis to pump him upon the 
question of authorship. Her unwilling angry am- 
bassador returned, and was of course very closely 
questioned ; he was sulky, and to the leading, ' Come, 
tell me what you have discovered ? ' replied, ' I have 
found out that Francis is Junius — Brutus.' Lord Bray- 
brooke said it was quite evident to him that the merit 
(such as it was) of the reply was quite lost upon King 
William, whose acquaintance with Junius Brutus, if it 
ever existed, was quite lost.f 

* This is hardly reconcilable with a statement attributed to 
George HL, soon after the cessation of the letters, that ' Junius 
had been provided for and would -write no more.' 

t The evidence touching the Junius Brutus story is curiously con- 
flicting. Lady Francis, in her letter to Lord Campbell, says : ' He 
(Sir Philip) afironted poor Sam Rogers, whom he liked so much, 
to avoid an ensnaring question.' Mr. Prescott writes from London : 
' Perhaps you have heard of a good thing of Rogers, which Lord 
Lansdowne told me the other day he heard him say. It was at 
Lord Holland's table, when Rogers asked Sir Philip Francis (the 
talk had some allusion to Junius) if he. Sir Philip, would allow him 
to ask a certain question. ' Do so at your peril,' was the amiable 



272 GOOD SLEEPEES. 

This forgetfulness, strange as it is, is perhaps less 
so than that of Lord Euston. A few days after the 
publication of Woodfall's 'Junius,' Nugent, seeing it 
on the table of the Duke of Grrafton, turned to Lord 
Euston and said, ' It is an odd coincidence to see this 
book for the first time in this house.' Lord Euston 
stared and asked, ' Why should it not be here ? ' 



GOOD SLEEPEES : ME. PITT — THE DUKE OF 
WELLINGTON. 

At the same time I heard an interesting story upon 
the authority of Mr. Grrenville. He told Lord Bray- 
brooke that at the time of the mutiny at the Nore, 
when, of course, the anxiety was intense upon the 
subj ect of the fidelity of the troops, a messenger arrived 
at a late hour of the night to Dundas with a letter from 



reply. If lie is Junius, said Rogers in an undertone to his neigh- 
bour, then he must be Junius Brutus ' ( Tichnor's Life of JPrescoU, 
p. 314). Moore relates the story with the addition that Lord 
Brougham was by (Memoirs, vol. vi. p. 66). But Rogers' own 
version (given in the Table JalK) is : ' I was conversing with Lady 
Holland in her dressing-room, when Sir Philip Francis was an- 
nounced. " Now," she said, " I will ask him if he is Junius." I 
was about to withdraw, but she insisted on my staying. Sir PhUip 
entered, and soon after he was seated, she put the question to him. 
His answer was, "Madam, do you mean to insult me ? " and he 
went on to say, that when he was a younger man people would 
not have ventured to charge him with being the author of these 
letters.' 



GOOD SLEEPERS. — PITT. 273 

General , who had the command at Sheerness, con- 
taining the melancholy tidings of the apostacy of the 
marines. It was stated that, to a man, they had joined 
the mutineers, and that there was every reason to appre- 
hend that the next day they would march iipon London. 
Dundas went immediately to Lord Grenville with the 
news, and together they went to Mr. Pitt. He was in 
hed and asleep. Of course they roused him, talked 
over this misfortune, consulted as to the precautionary 
measures to be taken, few and unavailing as they 
seemed. After a short time, Mr. Pitt said, 'I think 
we cannot do anything at this hour of night, and as 
far as possible, we have arranged everythiag for the 
morning. I am anxious to get some sleep to recruit 
before the arduous day which awaits us, and shall wish 
you good night.' 

The two others were far too anxious for sleep. 
I believe they remained together till, in the course 
of less than one hour, another messenger appeared 
bearing another letter from Sheerness. This was from 
the officer second in command, who, after many 
apologies for assuming an office that did not belong 
to him, said that, having heard that the commanding 
officer had just sent off a messenger with despatches, 
he felt it his painful duty to inform the Government 
that the fatigue, the excitation of that eventful day 
had proved too much for the General, and had pro- 
duced a sort of delirium; that probably, therefore, 

T 



274 GOOD SLEEPEES. 

he might not have stated very accurately the state of 
affairs. He had the satisfaction of being able to say 
that they wore a much better aspect : that the marines 
were all staunch ; so were the officers to a man ; and the 
evil spirit which had existed seemed to be in a great 
measure quelled, &c. &c. Lord Grenville and Dundas 
went once more to Pitt to communicate a change even 
more unexpected than it was favourable. He was, as 
they anticipated, in bed ; but great was their surprise 
when they found that, during the short anxious hour 
that had elapsed since their last visit, he had been fast 
asleep.* 

This is called a proof of greatness of mind. I 
am more inclined to believe that youth, health, and 
fatigue produce a sort of absolute necessity for sleep, 
which no mental excitation can remove, and I am 
confirmed in this opinion by hearing that, in his after 
days and especially in his last illness, poor Pitt never 



* Earl Stanhope {Life of PiU) tells the story thus : ' A strange 
instance of Pitt's calmness at a time when all around him shook, 
was wont to be related by the First Lord of the Admiralty at that 
period. On a suhsequeht night, there had come from the fleet 
tidings of especial urgency. Lord Spencer thought it requisite to 
go at once to Downing Street and consult the Prime Minister. 
Pitt being roused from his slumber, sat up in bed, heard the case, 
and gave instructions. Lord Spencer took leave and withdrew. 
But no sooner had he reached the end of the street than he 
remembered one more point which he had omitted to state. 
Accordingly he returned to Pitt's house, and desired to be shown 
up a second time to Pitt's chamber. There, after so brief an in- 
terval, he found Pitt, as before, buried in profound repose.' (Vol. 
iii. p. 39.) 



THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON. 275 

could sleep. The Duke of WeUington is always brought 
forward as the most extraordinary instance of a person 
who, under the most violent excitations of his eventful 
career, could always and at all hours of the day or 
night, get sleep during any repose, however short it 
might he, that circumstances allowed. Perhaps great 
bodily fatigue enabled him to find tired Nature's sweet 
restorer. I wonder whether he is a good sleeper now.* 
I hear, that not long ago, one of the many 
officers who have written memoirs of his campaigns 



* There is much good sense in this observation, but what enabled 
the Duke to sleep was his power of fixing on a course of conduct, 
doing or ordering to be done all that was necessary, and then dis- 
missing the subject from his mind till the time for action came. This 
is the point of Alava's remark (ante, p. 153). It is impossible to be 
agreat commander, or even a truly great man in any line, without this 
power ; for without it both mind and body will prove unequal to a 
strain. There are two instances of its display by the Duke n ot gene- 
rally known, and resting on the best authority. On arriving per- 
sonally before St. Sebastian, he was informed that the breaching 
batteries would not open for two hom's. ' Then,' said he, turning 
to his aide-de-camp, ' the best thing we can do, Burghersh, is to 
go to sleep.' He got off his horse, slipped into a trench, sate down 
with his back against one side, and was fast asleep in a moment. 
Lord Burghersh (the late Earl of Westmoreland) did the same. 

The other occasion was, when having endured great fatigue, the 
Duke had gone to sleep in his tent, after giving strict orders not to 
be disturbed. An officer came in from the rear-guard — the army 
was in retreat — to say that the enemy were close at hand. The aide- 
de-camp on duty thought the contemplated emergency had arrived, 
and woke the Duke. ' Send the man in.' He entered. ' You 
have been hotly pursued the whole day.' ' Yes, my lord.' ' Are the 
troops much tired ? ' ' Dead beat, my Lord.' ' Then the French 
must be dead beat, too — they won't attack to-night. That wiU do.' 

T 2 



276 THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON. 

wrote to beg permission to dedicate his book to the 
Duke. He declined the dedication in a civil kind 
manner, alleging as his reason the extreme difficulty of 
ascertaining the real facts in the midst of scenes of such 
confusion as great battles, and his reluctance to giving 
the sanction of his name to any inaccurate state- 
ment. He gave as an instance of his assertion, the 
story so frequently told, so universally believed as to 
have acquired the character of indisputable fact, that 
he met and conferred with Bliicher at La Belle Alliance ; 
the fact being, that they did not meet till some hours 
after, and at another place, the name of which I have 
forgotten, if I ever heard.* 



Before the officer and aide-de-camp were well out of tlie tent, he 
was fast asleep again. 

On the morning of one of his greatest battles, Napoleon had to be 
awakened by his staff. 

Lord Macaulay describes Frederick the Great as bearing up 
against a world in arms, with an ounce of poison in one pocket and 
a quire of bad verses in the other. Thus provided, he could sleep. 

The superhuman energy and activity of Lord Brougham are only 
explicable on this principle. He can abstract his thoughts from 
an exciting topic, and he can sleep. During the Queen's trial, he 
had dined and slept at Holland House. The next morning before 
breakfast his host found him writing in the libraiy. ' Are you 
polishing off your peroration ? ' ' No, I am drawing a clause 
of my Education Bill.' One day at Paris, he read a paper on 
Optics at the Institute, was busily occupied the whole forenoon 
with his colleagues of that distinguished body, and at seven was 
the chief and best talker at a dinner-party, comprising D'Orsay and 
Dumas. He told the acquaintance who was with him most of the 
time, that he had slept soundly for an hour after leaving the Institute 
and could do so at will during any interval of rest at any time. 
* The question, which was the real place of meeting, is one of 



THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON. 277 

Lord Braybrooke's stories do not abound in names or 
dates ; the following was quite without, but seems little 
to want that recommendation. The Duke finding him- 
self near some garrison town in England, received a 
visit from the commanding officer, who made a speech 
from the regiment on the subject of their anxiety to 
show him any possible respect, ending with their regret 
that their mess dinner could not produce anything worthy 
of being offered to him, and that it would be ridiculous 
to invite him to it. ' Why ? ' said he. The day was fixed 

interest and importance, artistically and historically; for on it 
depends, first, whetlier Mr. Maclise's celebrated fresco is a true 
record of a memorable event; and secondly, whetlier the English 
army had pushed on far enough to take that share in completing 
the victory which the Duke claimed for it. The seventh volume 
of M. de Bernardi's StaatengeschicMe contains a chapter on the 
battles of the 16th, 17th, and 18th, composed with admirable skill 
from Prussian authorities and the Prussian point of view. The 
main object is to prove that the flank attack of the Prussians decided 
the day ; that the final advance of the English line was a super- 
fluous movement dictated by political considerations ; and that, 
unless the English had halted at La Belle Alliance, they would 
have got mixed up with the Prussians. There, consequently, he 
fixes the place of meeting, and there (he insists) it was that the 
Duke gave up the pursuit to the Prussians, on the ground that the 
English were too exhausted to follow it up. 

On the other hand, the Duke says, ' I continued the pursuit till 
long after dark, and then discontinued it only on account of the 
fatigue of our troops, who bad been engaged during twelve hours, 
■ and because I found myself on the same road with Marshal Bliicher, 
who assured me of his intention to foUow the enemy throughout 
the night.' In a subsequent letter (1816) to Mi-. Mudford, he says : 
'It happens that the meeting took place after ten at night in the 
village of Genappe, and anybody who attempts to describe with 
truth the operations of the two aimies, will see that it could not 



278 GOOD SLEEPEBS. 

by him ; some of his old friends and companions were 
got to meet him. He came in high spirits and good- 
humour, and began talking over his campaigns and old 
stories with his comrades. Growing ploaH(xl with the 
deep attention with which the younger officers listened 
to him, he became more communicative, and at last 
said that, as nothing gratified him so much as a spirit 
of enquiry in young soldiers as to every subject con- 
nected with their profession, he begged that any one 
present would question him as to any point of his 
military history on which they wished for information, 
promising that, unless he felt it inconsistent with his 
duty, he would answer fully and fairly. Upon this, an 
officer present ventured to ask whether it was true that 
Napoleon had surprised him at Waterloo ? He said he 
was as far surprised as a man can be who knows he is 
to expect attack ; he knew that Napoleon would march 
towards Brussels; that Bliicher was coming to his 

be otherwise.' But the Frencli did not leave Genappe till after 
eleven, and the Prussians did not arrive there till after midnight, 
and there Bliicher and his staff halted for the ni;;ht. It is clear, 
therefore, that the Duke was mistaken in fixing the place of meet- 
ing at Genappe; and Mr. Gleigis probably right infixing it aiMaison 
Rouge, or Maism. du Moi, in which he is followed by the author 
of Mr. Murray's Handbook for Behjium and the Rhine. But M. 
de Bemardi wiU surely admit that the buke and the British army 
cannot be mistaken in believing that they continued the pursuit 
long after parsing ia Belle Alliance; whilst the supposition that 
our great commander, in the crisis of a great battle, was thinking 
of anything but the best way of winning it, is one which in England 
will simply excite a smile. M. de Bernardi's own statement, that 
the English generals near the Duke objected to the advance aa 
hazardous, is in itself a refutation of his theory. 



DEA.TH OF WILLIAM IT. — ACCESSION OF VICTOKIA. 279 

relief; he had a frontier of many hundred miles to 
defend ; he could not possibly foresee on what point the 
attack would be first made ; and certainly the speed of 
the advance of Napoleon exceeded what he could have 
expected or believed possible.* 



DEATH OF WILLIAM IV. — ACCESSION OF QUEEN 
VICTORIA. 

June, 1837. — The reign is not yet quite a week old, 
and yet how many strange occurrences and stranger 
feelings one wishes to recall, that all have passed before 
the eyes or in the mind in this short space. First, how 
strange it is that, in thinking of a departed sovereign, 
one can from the bottom of the heart pray, 'May my 
latter end be like his.'' Who that can look back some 
years — say to the period when we saw the Duke of 
Clarence at Stowe, where he was certainly endured only 
as an appendage of the Prince of Wales — who would 
have thought that he would have died more loved, 
more lamented, than either of his predecessors on the 
throne ? least of all, who could have thought he would 
have died the death of a good Christian, deriving 
comfort and hope from religion, and every allevia- 



* The question of the young officer has been frequently repeated ; 
and perhaps as good an answer, or rather retort, as any was that 
of the late Professor Wilson on some one asking whether the 
French did not surprise Wellington at Waterloo. ' Yes ; and didn't 
he astonish them ? ' 



280 DEATH OF WILLIAM IT. 

tion which the most devoted conjugal affection could 
shed over him. Even his sins seem to have poured 
from their foul source pure streams of comfort in the 
attentions and affection of his children. The Queen is 
said to have complained that in the last days, after he 
well knew his situation, she never was left alone with 
him. The public, edified by every detail which comes to 
light, canfeelbutoneregret, which is, that the Princess 
Victoria was not summoned to receive his blessing. 

It is very interesting to compare the appearance 
of the town now, with that which it wore after 
the death of Greorge IV. ; then few, very few, thought 
it necessary to assume the mask of grief; now one 
feeling seems to actuate the nation ; party is forgotten 
and all mourn, if not so deeply, quite as unanimously, 
as they did for Princess Charlotte. After a few days of 
short unsatisfactory bulletins, a prayer for the King 
was ordered, and sent with pitiful economy by the two- 
penny post, so that, though the prayer appeared in 
every newspaper of Saturday evening, it was received 
by hardly any of the London clergy in time for morning 
service on Sunday. In our chapel, prayers were desired 
for Our Sovereign Lord the King, lying dangerously 
ill ; and . these introduced in the Litany just as they 
would have been for the poorest of his subjects ! To 
me this simple ancient form was far more impressive 
than the fancy prayer, though it was a good one of its 
sort. 



ACCESSION OF QUEEN TICTORIA. 281 

On Mojiday we were listening all day for the tolling 
of the bells, watching whether the guests were going to 
the Waterloo dinner at Apsley House. On Tuesday, 
at 2^ A.M., the scene closed, and in a very short time 
the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Conyngham, 
the Chamberlain, set out to announce the event to their 
young sovereign. They reached Kensington palace at 
about five : they knocked, they rang, they thumped for a 
considerable tinae before they could rouse the porter at 
the gates ; they were again kept waiting in the court- 
yard, then turned into one of the lower rooms, where 
they .seemed forgotten by everybody. They rang the 
beU, desired that the attendant of the Princess Victoria 
might be sent to inform H.R.H. that they requested an 
audience on business of importance ; after another 
delay, and another ringing to enquire the cause, the 
attendant was summoned, who stated that the Princess 
was in such a sweet sleep she could not venture to 
disturb her. Then they said, ' We are come to the Queen 
on business of state, and even her sleep must give way 
to that.' It did ; and to prove that she did not keep 
them waiting, in a few minutes she came into the room 
in a loose white night-gown and shawl, her night-cap 
thrown off, and her hair falling upon her shoulders, 
her feet in slippers, tears in her eyes, but perfectly 
collected and dignified. 

The first act of the reign was of course the sum- 
moning the Council, and most of the summonses were 



282 macreadt's leak. 

not received till after the early hour fixed for its 
meeting. The Queen was, upon the opening of the 
doors, found sitting at the head of the table. She 
received first the homage of the Duke of Cumberland, 
who, I suppose, was not King of Hanover when he 
knelt to her : * the Duke of Sussex rose to perform the 
same ceremony, but the Queen, with admirable grace, 
stood up, and preventing him from kneeling, kissed 
him on the forehead. The crowd was so great, the 
arrangements were so ill made, that my brothers told 
me the scene of swearing allegiance to their young 
sovereign was more like that of the bidding at an 
auction than anything else. 



MACKEADT S LEAK. 



Feb. 10th, 1838. — I saw last night Macready in King 
Lear, and little expected, in the present degraded state 
of the stage, to see any performance that would give 
me such pleasure. First of all, it is Shakespeare's Lear : 
not a word is added to the text; the painfully fine 
catastrophe is acted ; and the play, in the regular theatre 
phrase, well got up, excepting in the female parts, which 
were almost as ill dressed as they were acted. I cannot 



* He became King of Hanover by the same event which made 
her Queen of England. 



MACHEADT's LEAH. 283 

conceive a better model for a painter of Lear than 
Macready exhibited in face, figure, dress, and apparent 
age. The latter seems to me the leading point of his 
representation of the character, in which he substitutes 
the imbecility of age for insanity, which I have hitherto 
considered as the leading feature of Lear, The more I 
think, the more I am inclined to believe that this was 
the iatention of the poet ; at the same time, I must own 
that it has, as far as dramatic effect is concerned, some 
objections. The curse, the appeal to the elements, 
which one has been used to dislike as a rant,* appeared 
tame and ineffective, partly, I believe, because so early 
in the play I had not entered fully into the conception 
of the actor ; but I still think upon retrospect, that both, 
especially the curse, might have been made to tell with 
singular effect if repeated in a tremulous and very 
solemn manner. I hope to judge of this ere long upon 
a second view. 

I felt almost as if I had never read, certainly never 
seen, that finest of all scenes, that on the Heath, so 
much was I delighted with the effect produced by the 
Fool (now reinstated for the first time for many years). 
The artless affection, shrewdness, archness displayed 
by Miss Horton, the sweetness of the snatches of song, 

* ' I tax not you, ye elements, with unkjndness. 
I never gave you kingdoma, call'd you children.' 
These lines have been cited as one of the most splendid efforts 
of Shakespeare's imagination. 



284 maceeadt's leak. 

seemed like the drop of comfort infused into the bitter 
cup of the poor old King. They made me feel that the 
commentators who assert that, when in the last sad 
scene he says, ' And my poor fool hanged ! ' he cannot 
mean to allude to the boy, had never seen it so acted. 
Much as I admire the strict adherence to the text, I 
must say that one omission quite new to me pleased ine 
very much. When poor blind Gloster, fancying lumself 
on the edge of the cliff, says, ' Now, fellow, fare thee 
well,' instead of falling down, he is interrupted by the 
arrival of Lear, and you are spared the absurdity of 
persuading a man whom you have seen falling from his 
own height, that he tumbled down a precipice. 

In the battle there was one novelty which I think from 
a greater distance than the box in which we were, 
might have a great effect. The scene was a distant 
view of a battle, or rather of heaps of slain ; when the 
challenge is given, a champ elds is immediately formed 
by a palisade of spears and battle-axes. The last scene, 
is aZmosi too painful ; I felt it would have been quite, if 
Cordelia had not been such a detestable snub-nosed 
creature. I suppose it would be high treason against 
Shakespeare to alter the catastrophe, and to give to it 
what niight be called a melodramatic Grerman charac- 
ter ; but I could not help wishing the representation to 
conclude when Lear says — 

' She lives ! if it be so, 

It is a chance that does redeem all sorrows 

That ever I have felt.' 



chanteey's studio. 285 

chantrey's studio. 

This morning I have been to Chantrey's to see the 
equestrian statue of Sir Thomas Muuro, which is to be 
packed up for Madras in a few days. I am much 
pleased with it, but cannot agree with those (my uncle 
is one) who call it the finest equestrian statue in the 
world. Without going so far as Eome to the unri- 
valled horse which Michael Angelo bade go on, I am 
not sure that, in my private opinion, a better may not 
be found at Charing Cross. I was at first struck with 
the thickness of the jowl and set-on of the head ; this I 
was told was modelled from a beautiful Arab which 
had been sent as a present to George IV. The man 
added that other parts had been copied from other 
horses, and then I found out what it was that was not 
pleasing to my eye. These separate beauties do not 
accord to form a beautiful whole ; the legs seem to me 
those of a powerful English hunter, quite out of keep- 
ing with the small Arab head and tail. Probably this 
effect is increased by the nearness of the legs to the 
eye of the spectator, and may, to a certain degree, be 
removed when the statue gets on its proper pedestal, 
which is to be very much higher than that on which it 
is pro tempore fixed. 

I was much interested in hearing from an intelligent 
workman some of the details of the foundry, and in 
seeing the wonderful effects produced by English 



286 chantkey's studio. 

machinery. After having seen at Munich every part 
of comparatively small statues cast separately, so that 
I suppose they are in about fifty pieces which are after- 
wards to be riveted together, it did seem very extraor- 
dinary that this immense mass was cast in four pieces 
only. I wanted to see more of the furnace, but there were 
so many people about that one could not question the 
workman comfortably; but he told me that he fre- 
quently went into it to see that all was right when the 
thermometer is at 370°. This seems almost incredible 
when one considers that this is much more than half as 
hot again as boiling water ; and into this they go with- 
out any of the previous preparation of increasing tem- 
perature, which in the Eastern baths enables a person 
to endure heat very far inferior to this, but which 
would not otherwise be endurable. Here the workman 
goes from the atmosphere of a cold room into this, or 
rather first into a sort of chamber : and there, as he 
told us, is the great suffering, the first shutting the 
outward door. In this furnace the metal remains many 
months, and I fancy always at the same temperature. 

Chantrey's Horse was, it seems, originally modelled for 
a statue of George IV., and he is to ride it. Flatter him 
as highly as possible, still the difference between his 
pasty-pudding features and the fine bold line of those 
of Sir Thomas Munro will be severely felt. Quiet 
seems to be the characteristic of Chantrey's sculpture, 
exactly the reverse of Canova, who always offends 



macready's coeiolanus. 287 

by a sort of flutter. I am not sure wM^her Chantrey 
is not in the contrary extreme : m- looking down his 
gallery a want of action struck me : perhaps the eternal 
monumental sculpture does in some degree lead to this, 
and I should have thought that he would have been 
glad to gallop away from it. Insteaaj.lpf that his 
horse stands still. I understand he piques himself 
upon having executed the first equestrian statue with a 
horse in repose, and his admirers tell you, ' You see he 
is just going to move.' I am perfectly aware of the 
absurdities that have been committed in the attempt 
to give motion and action to sculpture, but I own it 
seems to me that Chantrey has cut the Gordian knot 
which he was perhaps capable of untying. 



macready's CORIOLANUS. 

Afril 20th. — I went last night to see Macready in 
Coriolanus, feeling that I should not like him : that in 
this one part, and in no other, the greatness of Kemble 
was unapproachable. I am quite sure I was extremely 
interested to feel that I had gained a new view of the 
character, but cannot quite decide whether I like it 
better than the old one. I should say that Kemble was 
more Roman, more dignified, and Macready more true 
to universal nature. The first seemed to be impelled 
hy a feeling of withering contempt, bordering on mis- 
anthropy, to scorn the tribunes and the people as 



288 macready's coriolanus. 

creatures of an inferior nature; Macready seemed a 
man of quick, irritable feelings, whose pride was rather 
galled than wounded, and I suspect this is the Coriola- 
nus of Shakespeare and of nature. 

It hardly seemed in nature that Kemble's Coriolanus, 
so proud, so unbending, should have been led astray, 
should yield to the solicitations of his mother, though 
that mother was Mrs. Siddons.* In Macready it seemed 
impossible he should resist, though Volumnia was 
odiously vulgar, and gave me more the idea of a 
poissarde than of a Eoman matron. Nothing could 
be finer than his acting in this scene ; never did I feel 
so strongly the tenderness and beauty of his affection 
for VirgiUa. She has so little to say or do, that, being 
rather handsome and very well dressed, the actress 
(whose name I forgot) could not offend. 

I never saw a play so beautifully, so correctly got 
up. It was not only the costume, the scenery, the 
numberless accessories that were carefully attended to, 
but the far more difficult task of regulating the by- 
play of the inferior actors was also accomplished. The 
effect given by the number of the mob, by the variety 
of action which seemed to give Shakespearian indivi- 
duality to every member of it, is indescribable. The 

* The late Sir G. C. Lewis (iahis Credibility of the Early Roman 
History) treats the alleged compliance of Coriolanus with his 
mother's intercession as an incredible absurdity. How could he, 
with Tullus Aufidius by his side, have led back the Volscians ? 



ORDERS OF CHARLES 11. FOR THE HOUSEHOLD. 289 

cowed, degraded appearance of the Volscians in the 
Triumph was very striking ; Coriolanus sitting at the 
hearth of Aufidius as fine a picture as can be ima- 
gined. Still I was too near the stage to judge of the 
full effect, or even to see the whole of the fine scenes. 



PROM THE OEDEES OF CHAELES II. FOE THE 
HOUSEHOLD. 
(Transcribed from the Stowe MSS.) 

Chapel. — When wee are present, no man shall 
presume to putt on his hatt at Sermon, but those in 
the stalls on the left hand, which are noblemen or 
coimsellers, or the Deane of the Chapell, when wee are 
absent. As our expresse pleasure is that our Chappell 
be all the yeare through kept both morning and evening 
with solemne musick like a Collegiate Church, unlesse 
it be at such times in the summer, or other times when 
we are pleased to spare it, so wee will have all decent 
honom: and order kept, and therefore when any of the 
Lords of the Councill be below, our pleasure is so much 
respect be given to our CounciU (being our representa- 
tive body) as that no man presume to be covered untill 
they shall require tbem, and then only the sonnes of 
noblemen or such as serve us, or our dearest consort 
the Queene in eminent places. In all those places, 
both noblemen and others shall observe great distance. 

ir 



290 THE PRETENDER AT THE CORONATION. 

and respect to our person, and also civility one towards 
another. And those that are younge shall not offer to 
fill up the seates from those which are either elder or 
more infirme or counsellors, though perhaps below them 
in rank. 



THE PRETENDER AT THE CORONATION. 

Polnitz in his 'Memoirs' (vol. iii. p. 254) gives a 
contemporary account of the incident at the coronation 
of Greorge I., which Sir W. Scott has in ' Eed Gauntlet ' 
introduced as taking place at that of George III. ; and 
I remember to have read it also in some of the publica- 
tions of the former period thus : 

Immediately after the champion's challenge, a lady's 
glove was thrown from the gallery containing a written 
defiance, and an invitation to the ring in Hyde Park for 
the following day. At the appointed time a consider- 
able crowd was assembled. No champion appeared, 
but there was an old woman observed moving round 
different parts of the circle, supposed to be a noted 
swordsman in disguise. The following note is by my 
brother Charles. 

' My grandmother often repeated to me the account 
which she had herself received from Lady Primrose of 
Charles Edward's visit to London in 1750 (a letter 
from the historian Hume to Sir J. Pringle, published 
in " Gentleman's Magazine," May 1788, relating the 



THE PEETENDEB AT THE COEONATION. 291 

same incident, assigns to this visit the date 1753).* 
She described her consternation when Mr. Browne (the 
name under which he was to go) was announced to 
her in the midst of a card party, among whom were 
many who she felt might have seen him abroad and 
would very probably recognise him. Her cards almost 
dropped from her hands, but she recovered herself, and 
got him out of the room as quickly as she could. He 
slept at her house that night only, and afterwards went 
to that of a merchant in the city. The impression he 
left on the mind of Lady Primrose, a warm and attached 
partisan, was by no means favourable. I have read 
myself among the Stuart papers a minute of the heads 
of a manifesto in Charles Edward's own handwriting, 
among which appeared, " My having m the year 1750 
conformed to the Church of England in St. Jameses 
Church." Some idea may be formed of the extent of 
the panic felt at the time of his advance to Derby from 

* Hume speaks of a secbnd visit on the authority of Lord 
Holderness, and adds, 'You see this story is so near traced 
from the fountain-head as to wear a gi'eat trace of probahility. 
Query, what if the Pretender had taken up Dymook's gauntlet ? ' 
Miss Strickland, in her Life of Mary II., says, ' This incident has 
been told as a gossip's tale pertaining to every coronation of the 
last century which took place while an heir of James II. existed. 
If it ever took place, it must have been at the coronation of 
WiUiam and Mary. That there was a pause at this part of the 
ceremony of above two hours, and that when the champion 
appeared the gauntlet was heard to be thrown, but nothing that 
was done could be seen on account of the darkness of the evening, 
aU this rests upon the authority of Lamberty, the historian and 
diplomatist.' 

U 2 



292 THE PRETENDER AT THE CORONATION. 

the account given by an old workman at Wotton, of his 
having at that period assisted in burying by night all 
the family plate in the garden. — C. W. W. W.' 

The recantation here mentioned is a circumstance 
quite new to me/ and seems to remove the only one 
redeeming point among the many base ones which 
marked the character of Charles Edward. I always 
thought he had, like the rest of his unfortunate race, 
been a sincere bigot. His weakness and cowardice 
seemed to be proved beyond a doubt. In the letter 
above quoted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine,' Hume 
says that Helvetius assured him that, when Charles 
Edward embarked at Nantes for the Scotch expedition 
(1745), he took fright, and would not go on board; and 
his attendants, ' thinking the matter had gone too far, 
&c. &c., ' literally carried him into the ship by night 
pieds et poings His.' 

It is a singular proof of the forbearance of the 
reigning family, and also of the fidelity of the ad- 
herents of the fallen race, that even now the real 
character of Charles Edward is so little generally 
known. The veil thrown over the drunken dissolute 
close of his career seems never to have been fully with- 
drawn by any English writer ; and even Alfieri attached, 
probably married, to the woman who had certainly 
been unhappy and much illused by Charles while she 
was his wife, is unwilUng to speak of him or his brother, 
laudare non li potendo, ni li volendo biaaimare, but 



QUEEN ANNE. 293 

tells enough to prove him an odious and brutal monster. 
I do not understand how, among the many Italian tour- 
ists who have indulged us with so many histories of 
bad fare, hard beds thickly inhabited, there has not 
been one who has enriched his pages' with some of the 
many traditions still extant, still easily authenticated, 
at Florence and Eome, referring to the two last Stuarts. 
They were the last : therefore there could not now be any 
objection; and though the records could not be very 
interesting, they would probably sell.* 



QUEEN AXNE. 
Wynnstay: Dec. 1838. — I have been dipping into the 
'Political State of England' of the year 1714, at the 
account of the death of Queen Anne, in which several 
things have astonished me ; but none so much as the 
statement that, from the suddenness of her seizure, her 
state during the short time that she survived it &c. 
&c., she died without ' being able to receive the holy 
Viaticum ! ' In this publication, which seems evidently 
the parent of our ' Annual Eegister,' I am surprised to 
see how little appearance of regret was shown for a 
sovereign who, weak and foolish as she was, had a most 

* Since this was written, tlie most complete exposure has been 
made in a thin quarto, printed in 1843 for the Roxburgh Club by 
Earl Stanhope, entitled The Decline of the Last Stuarts ; Extracts 
from the Despatches of British Envoys to the Secretary of State. 



294 QUEEN ANNE. 

prosperous and even glorious reign — for a woman to 
whom all parties, I believe, have given the credit of 
good intentions. However, certain it is that the sure 
thermometer of British public feeling, the Funds, rose 
upon her first apoplectic seizure, fell the day when 
there seemed to be a rally and an expectation of 
prolonged existence, and rose again the following day 
when she died. A few months before she had written a 
very harsh letter to the Electress Sophia, which is said 
to have hastened the death of that princess, who died 
of apoplexy just three months before Queen Anne. 

The orders for the mourning are curious : for six 
months the order is for the deepest mourning (long 
cloaks excepted; query, were the women to wear the 
close cap of widows ?) — ' that no 'person whatsoever, 
for the first six months, use any escutcheons of armes 
or armes painted on their coaches, nor use any varnished 
or bullion nails to be seen on their coaches or chairs.' 
The anniversary of the landing of King William was of 
course then, as now, kept ; but much more is said of that 
(the 17th Nov.) of the happy inauguration of Queen 
Elizabeth's glorious memory ; houses illuminated, bon- 
fires in the streets, &c. ; which, by the bye, three months 
after the death of Queen Anne, when everybody was in 
this deepest mourning, must have had a queer effect. 
Queen Anne had a larger and more noble household 
than Queen Victoria. Groom of the Stole and Lady of 
the Eobes, Duchess of Somerset; Lady Privy Purse, 



OLD-FASHIONED MANNERS. 295 

Mrs. (Lady) Masham. Ten Ladies of the Bed-chamber 
— three of whom were ducheses, and five countesses.* 



OLD-PASHIONBD MANNERS , 
Sir William Williams, my great-grandfather, seems 
to have been addressed by his children and depen- 
dants with much more respect than we have lately 
seen evinced in writing to the Queen. The tutor of his 
sons always writes from Oxford of my grandfather as My 
Master, of his brother as Mr. Eobert, and addresses Sir 
William as 'Your Honour.' In 171-4 my grandfather 
writes for Sir J. Wynn, '^He has desired me to acquaint 
you that, if you approve of it, he would be highly glad if 
you could meet us at St. Albans to conduct us- into town, 
for he is the most apprehensive of danger b^wixt that 
place and London of any ; he is by no means for my 
staying in London any longer than the Mellins are 
delivered, and if possible, to return to Bamet or High- 
gate that night, but hope, sir, you will send him word 
that it is not practicable for me to return sooner than 
the Monday following, suppose we come in Friday or 
Saturday night. The noise of our going is spread all 
about the country, and somebody has told him that 
Prichard the Highwayman is gone abroad, which makes 

* It appears from Lady Cowper's IHm-y, that the situation of 
Lady of the Bedchamber to Caroline, Princess of Wales, was a 
prize eagerly contested by duchesses. 



296 TOUCHING FOK THE KING'S EVIL. 

him under ye greater concern, so would gladly have 
returns for some parte. 

' Dear Sir, 

' Your ever dutiful son, 

' Wat. Williams.' 

In a letter dated 'Duke Street, January 30, 1729,' 
he says — 

'Nothing spoken, of but ye great acconomy at St. 
James's, there are so many astonishing instances that 
it would be too tedious and something dangerous to 
mention them — the great man is in ye judgement of 
mankind in a very uneasy situatiorL Stocks fell very 
much upon ye publishing ye treaty of peace. Her 
Majesty is very uneasy at ye English ladies for going 
so fine ; she says they rivall even majesty itself. And, 
forsooth^if waiting women in this country go as fine as 
Grerman princesses, she would therefore have none but 
noblemen's ladies wear silk, and none Jewells, nor 
laces — stuffs full good enough for country gentlemen's 
wives, and every servant maid to wear a badge of her 
profession on her shoulder. The Queen wears calf-skin 
shoes, and the eldest princess scour'd deaths, and ye 
youngest patched coats. 



TOUCHING FOE THE KING's EVIL. 
Feb. 1839. — Found at Bodryddan* in the sermons 

* The seat of William Shipley Conway, Esq. (her nephew), 
near St. Asaph, 



TOrCHING FOR THE KING's EVIL. 297 

of Bishop Bull, who died 1710, one on St Paul's Thorn 
in the flesh ; and the following passage : — 

'The gift of miracles, and particularly the gift of 
curing diseases without natural medicine, was so given 
by Christ to His Apostles as not to be at their absolute 
disposal, but to be dispensed by them as the Griver 
should think fit. St. Paul, though as great a worker of 
miracles as any of the Apostles — though he even raised 
the dead to life, yet could not cure himself of that 
thorn in the flesh, that painful disease which Satan, by 
God's permission, had inflicted on him. Hereby it 
appears, that this gift of Grod was so bestowed on the 
Apostles that they could not exercise it arbitrarily and 
at their own pleasure, but only when, where, how, and 
on whom Grod pleased to direct them to use that power, 
that so the glory of all the wonderful cures wrought by 
them might at last redound to Grod the author, and 
not to man the instrument. And perhaps this is the 
best account that can be given of the relique and 
remnant of the primitive gift of healing for some 
hundreds of years past, visible in our nation, and 
annexed to the succession of our Christian kings. I mean 
the cure of that otherwise incurable disease, the King's 
Evil. That divers persons desperately labouring under 
it have been cured by the touch of the royal hand, 
assisted by the prayers of the priests of our Church 
attending, is unquestionable, unless the faith of all 
ancient writers and the consentient reports of hundreds 



298 TOUCHING FOR THE KINO'S EVIL. 

of the most credible persons in our own age, attesting 
the same, be questioned. And yet, they say, some of 
the persons return from that sovereign remedy re 
infecta. How comes that to pass? God hath not 
given this gift of healing so absolutely to our royal 
line, but that He still keeps the reins of it in His own 
hands, to let them loose or restrain them as He pleaseth.^ 

In Brady's Claris Calendaria, I find: — 

' Edward the Confessor was the first monarch of this 
country who possessed the privilege, alleged to have 
been continued to his successors, and to have been 
practised by them till the accession of the House of 
Brunswick, of curing that dreadful malady the King's 
Evil.' 

In another part of the same work, from the ' Mercurius 
Politicus ' of June 28, 1660, is quoted the account of the 
cerem^ony, concludiag in this manner : ' His Majesty 
(Charles I.) stroked above 600 ; and such was his princely 
patience and tenderness to the poor afflicted creatures, 
that though it took up a very long time. His Majesty, 
who is never wearied with well-doing, was pleased to 
enquire whether there were any more who had not yet 
been touched.' 

My brother Charles supposes that in those times it 
was of great importance to keep up every ceremony which 
could tend to establish the divine right of the reigning 
family. Thus he explains the unaccountable credulity of 
Bishop Bull, asserting the existence of the miracle instead 



THE EMPEROR NICHOLAS, 299 

of adopting the line of conduct now so universally 
practised by the mpre enlightened of the Eoman clergy, 
who walk in processions, send their mules to be blessed, 
nay, even crawl up the Scala Santa, professing that they 
do not believe in the efficacy of any of these mum- 
meries, but are afraid of shocking the weak consciences 
of the ignorant by omitting them. Upon the same 
principle Charles supposes that George I. was unwilling 
to subject his disputed title to the crown to a test so 
Ukely to fail. At the same time, I am inclined to 
believe that the angel of gold which the King tied 
round the neck of the patient must in many instances 
have proved a very efficacious remedy. 



THE EMPEEOR NICHOLAS. 

Extract from a letter to Miss Williams Wynn, dated 
' St. Peterslurg, Feb. 2, 1826.' 

We are here in the midst of most interesting events. 
The accounts given in the newspapers respecting the 
Empress mother heading the troops, or taking any 
steps to cover the '.pusillanimous ' Nicholas, are totally 
destitute of foundation. He showed himself worthy of 
his situation by the courage and presence of mind he 
displayed. At one moment, he was alone conversing 
with and explaining to the peasants the reasons for 
their being called on to take a new path, when his 
aide-de-camp said in his ear, ' Come away, you might be 



300 CATHERINE OP MEDICIS. 

surrounded by assassins ; some of the troops inarching 
up belong to the mutineers.' The Emperor immediately- 
mounted his horse, and in a loud voice called to his 
aide-de-camp in Eussian, to lead those troops (pointing 
to the mutineers) to the 'place du senat (the place to 
which he saw them marching) ; to place the Paulofsky 
here, the 2nd regiment there, the Dragoons here, &c. 
&c., and added in a low voice in French, 'Ne faites 
rien ; je ne sais pas encore sur lequel des regimens je 
dois compter.' It was a trying moment, and had the 
attack been made two hours later, we should probably 
not have seen the end of it so soon. 



CATHERINE OP MEDICIS. 

Eserick: Dec. 1839. — Heading an odd book entitled 
Vita di Gaterina de' Medici, di Eugenie Alberi, the 
object of which is to prove her the most innocent, the 
most virtuous of women, from MS. communications 
from the ambassadors, and from others in the archives 
of the 'Medici at Florence, I must confess that this 
piece of special pleading does not produce any effect 
upon my mind. It is evident that even if the am- 
bassadors had been allowed to peep behind the black 
mask of treachery, which to me seems very doubtful, it 
is not in their communications, it is not in any part of 
the papers preserved in the house of Medici, that you 
are to expect that any fact inculpating a member of 



CA.THEEINB OF MEDICIS. 301 

their family will be preserved, or at least allowed to be 

published. I cannot forget the jealousy supposed to 

exist in 1833 of the publication of those remains of 

Tasso which exposed the cold-hearted cruelty of the 

House of Este, though they were above 300 years old. 

Yet it is upon the silence of these narrators that the 

innocence of Catherine is rested, or rather inferred from 

their not alleging her privity to these dark deeds. 

The author evinces a degree of bigotry which I should 

scarcely have believed possible in 1838, the date of the 

publication. From such publications as the ' Grande 

Estoile apparue en 1572, le merveilleux desbordement 

du Rhone en 1570,' he quotes the descriptions of the 

fears and misery of the people, &c. &c., as proofs 

of the divine wrath ! 

Charles IX. is exculpated from the guilt of having 
fired upon the people by the following passage from 
Capefigue: 'Le fameux balcon du Louvre que I'on 
montre encore aujourd'hui comma etant celui d'oil 
Charles a tire sur le peuple, n'existait pas. Je m'en 
suis assure,' &c. &c. Granting this, I should like to ask 
the historian whether he would doubt any part in the 
Eoman history because it is proved from any evidence 
that it could not have taken place in the spot to which 
the traditions of antiquaries have assigned it. For 
instance, is the captivity of St. Paul doubted, or even 
the existence of the Mammertine prison, because many 
do not believe that the latter was the scene of the 



302 CATHEHINE OF MEDICIS. 

former, or that the spot now indicated was that of the 
prison ? * 

As to the St. Bartholomew, a letter from the Medi- 
cean Archives is quoted by this writer even as a ' Testi- 
monianza dell' incredibil gioja cagionata ai Cattolici 
da quel fatto. Che si desidera ora da questo Carlo 
veramente magno e della gloriossissima sua Madre,'' 
&c. &c. ' Sia laudato I'omnipotente Dio, che mi porge 
occasione di scrivervi sopra cosi celesti nuove, e sia 
benedetto il trionfante san Bartolomio, che nel giorno 
di sua festa si h degnato di prestare alii suoi divoti il 
suo taglientissi/mo coltdlo in cosi salutifero sagrifizio.' 
He mentions the commemorating picture still extant 
at the Vatican, but not the inscription which a few 
years ago made it so offensive ; the solemn thanksgiving 
in the church of San Luigi du Framesi by Gregory XIII. 
in person, the medal struck, the gift of 1000 scudi from 
the Cardinal of Lorraine to the bearer of the news. He 
never seems to advert to the contradiction which these 
facts oppose to his hypothesis of popular disturbance 
without the knowledge of the sovereign. Perhaps it 
is but charitable to suppose that, having given the 
impetus, the ball rolled and increased much beyond 
their expectations or intentions. 

* Capefigue may be right in saying that the balcony in the 
Louvre from whichCharleswaa traditionally said tohavefired on the 
Huguenots never existed; but another tradition, better accredited, 
marked out the Petit Bourhon, destroyed in 1758, as the scene of the 
exploit. The (question is fiiUy discussed in V Esprit dam VHistoire. 



IMPEESSIONS OF lEELAND IN 1840. 303 

Among other offences to my feelings, Alberi adds 
that of throwing doubts on the authenticity of a 
fact reconciling one to human nature so disgraced by 
these events ; I mean the celebrated letter of the 
Vicomte d'Orthez, Governor of Bayonne, who found in 
that garrison ' des bons citoyens et braves soldats et pas 
un bourreau.' The invention of this letter has been as- 
cribed to Voltaire, but it seems that it was published by 
Aubigne in 1618. The arguments against the authen- 
ticity are, 1st, its style, said to be much more ^modern 
than that of the siKteenth century ; 2ndly, the silence 
of contemporary writers, and the circumstance of the 
descendants of Orthez not having brought forth this 
claim upon the favour of Henri, &c. ; but I do not 
beHeve that he would have been anxious to encourage 
resistance to royal authority.* 



IMPEESSIONS OF IRELAND IN 1840. 

1841. — I regret that I did not in last December, 
immediately after my return from Ireland, record the 
impressions made by that entertaining trip. We em- 
barked at Talacre in the afternoon of November 16, and 
in two hours reached Liverpool, but either from the want 
of skill in the captain or of strength in the vessel, 

* M. Fournier (L' Esprit dans VHistoire) comes to the conclusion 
that the letter was the invention of d'Aubign^. 



304 IMPEESSIONS OF IRELAND IN 1840. 

which made him fear getting foul of the pier, we were 
kept beating about for two hours more, till the little 
packet from Birkenhead came alongside and landed the 
passengers. In the night the wind was so high that it 
would have been madness to embark early in the 
morning as we had intended. The wind abated towards 
midday, and in the evening we embarked ; and after a 
passage of twelve hours, made disagreeable by the swell, 
landed early on the morning of the 1 8th. 

Before we reached the handsome hotel in a street 
nearly as fine as any I know in any capital, the jaunting 
cars in which we were conveyed, and the beggars, 
seemed to give one a foretaste of Ireland. In the 
afternoon we drove through very dirty suburbs, the 
habitations and the population seeming every mile to 
get more and more poor and ugly ; the former never in 
one instance possessing unbroken casements, the absence 
of glass being supplied by some dirty rags, or by a wisp 
of hay. This, I was afterwards told, was owing to their 
practice of rearing fowls for the Dublin market in . 
their kitchens, to the warmth of which the fowls return 
with such eagerness that they break the glass to get 
in.* The inhabitants do not seem to have left off the 
practice of wearing the old clothes of the London 
beggars. Most of the women were smoking their pipes. 

I never went into any of their huts, and am quite 

* As an Irishman never thinks of timely repairs of any sort, the 
state of his casements is susceptible of a more obvious explanation. 



IMPRESSIONS OF IRELAND IN 1840. 305 

at a loss how needlework so perfectly neat, so clean, can 
come out of such habitations, and from such hands. 

Mr. Evans tells me that one cause of the miserable 
appearance of the villages is, that when a new house is 
built, they never give themselves the trouble of pulling 
down the old one which it is to replace ; that is left to 
fall when it can no longer stand. Nothing could be 
less pretty, or seem longer, than our road to Portrane, 
and it was quite dark when we got there. Next 
morning my eyes opened to the fine sea view bounded 
by such bold rocks, and separated from us by a pro- 
fusion of evergreens which at that time of year 
were delightful to behold, and gave to the scene a 
false air of summer very refreshing to one's eyes. On 
the 27th we returned to Dublin, and passed one day 
there. I ceased to wonder at the eagerness of the 
people for Eepeal when I saw the magnificent houses 
unoccupied by the nobles of the land, converted into 
hotels, warehouses, public offices, &c. &c. ; the fine 
streets looking deserted, grass growing in many of 
' them. I felt it not unnatural that the common people 
should imagine that, if their peers and commoners had 
a parliament of their own to attend instead of coming 
to London, their houses would be once more inhabited, 
streets would be filled, trade flourish, &c. &c. 

Now whether there, or almost anywhere else, the 
present generation would have the means of living 
with the profusion of their ancestors, I doubt ; but I feel 



306 IMPRESSIONS OF IKELAND IN 1840. 

quite sure that, unless steam and some other modern 
improvements of minor importance could be forgotten, 
the Irish would still leave their capital to seek ours. 
Having felt this, I was much amused with the sort of 
confirmation given to this idea by the account which 
Mr. Conolly gave me of the manner in which his uncle, 
the late possessor of his property, used to travel to 
London some four score years ago. He and his 
neighbour the Duke of Leinster, who had married two 
sisters, the daughters of the second Duke of Eichmond, 
used to contrive generally to travel together. Sending 
their servants, carriages, luggage, &c., by the Parkgate 
Packet, which in those days was often four or five nights 
out, and wishing to avoid this tedious passage, they 
used to embark for Holyhead. Between that port and 
Chester there was not at that time any carriage road, 
indeed nothing but a mountain path. These grandees 
used to bring over their saddle horses ; each lady got 
upon a pillion behind her husband ; a groom carried in 
saddle-bags the necessary changes of attire ; and thus 
they travelled to Chester, sleeping two or three nights 
on the road, and one of the sleeping-places was the 
Black Inn at Ehyddlan. Lord Mostyn told me that (at a 
period somewhat subsequent, I suppose) the innkeeper 
of Chester contrived to have relays of horses at some 
points of the road, and thus forwarded travellers. 

I expected much contrast between the two houses to 
which we were invited, but not so much as I found ; 



LADY MORGAN. 307 

not such a striking difference in the country -within a 
circle of ten miles from Dublin. Mr. Conolly's is called 
the finest house in Ireland; it possesses the nearly 
unique advantage of having some fine timber in its 
park ; but here, as in everything else, appears the odd 
want of keeping, of neatness, which is evident in every- 
thing Irish. Many of the fine old trees which were 
blown down in the fatal storm of January 1839, were 
still cumbering the ground and rotting. 

Eeturning, we took another road by the banks of the 
Liffey, where we drove for two or three miles on a sort 
of terrace between an overhanging bank of strawberries 
and one imderhanging to the river. The whole scene 
struck me as a comically well-proportioned miniature 
of some part of the road on the banks of the Rhine ; the 
strawberry plants bearing about the same proportion to 
the vine that the Lififey does to the Ehine ; and the 
same might be said of the road, the banks, &c. 

Soon after this we reached the Phoenix Park, and 
altogether thought our drive a very pretty one ; and the 
people we saw all looked tidy and comfortable in spite 
of broken windows, which, however, were not so general. 



LADY MOEGAN 
March 1841. — I was amused yesterday with hearing 
the history of Lady Morgan, from whose pretty little nut- 

X 2 



303 LADY MORGAN. 

shell (in Kildare Street) I was just come. Her father 
and mother were players in a strolling company : the 
father died, or ran away, I forget which, leaving his wife 
and two fine girls without a sixpence in the world, and in 
debt to everybody. Mrs. Evans tells me that she has 
heard from two different officers, whose regiment hap- 
pened to be quartered in the town, that they all sub- 
scribed to enable Mrs. Owenson and her daughters to get 
away. Soon after this Miss Owenson went into the family 
of a very respectable Mrs. Featherstone, as governess (a 
very young one she must have been) to her only daughter. 
This pupil, now Lady Chapman, has never ceased to 
evince great friendship towards her governess. At Mrs. 
Featherstone's she wrote her ■' Wild Irish Girl,' which 
made quite a sensation. Lady Abercorn, who wanted 
somebody to egayer her tete-a-tete with her old lord, and 
also to make talk and laugh for her guests, took Miss 
Owenson as a sort of dame de compagyiie. When 
Lord Abercorn chose to pass a season at Baron's Court, 
Lady Abercorn was venting her regrets upon a friend' 
asking what she could do to amuse herself. ' Why,' said 
the friend, ' you take your family physician, whom Lord 
Abercorn has just got knighted ; he and Miss Owenson 
have a mortal aversion for each other; make up a 
match between them; that will divert you.' This 
joking advice was literally followed, and I verily believe 
the consequence has been a very happy marriage; 
certainly yesterday she talked only of his unwearied 



ANNE OP ArSTEIA. 309 

care and affection during her late dangerous illness, of 
her fears for his health, &c. &c.* 

'O'Donnel ' was written to commemorate the expedi- 
tion to Baron's Court ; the fine lady, a very exact portrait 
of Lady Abercorn : the heroine, a highly flattered one of 
herself, &c. &c. We were lamenting that, aspiring 
higher, she had left off writing novels, in which she 
succeeded much better. Mrs. Evans told me that she 
had made this observation to Lady Morgan herself, who 
replied that in the days when she wrote novels she had 
not a place in society and cared not who she offended ; 
now the case was very different, and she should be in 
continual fear of having names given to her characters, 
which I believe were more or less portraits in almost 
every instance. 



ajstne of AUSTEIA. 

May 1841. — I have been reading Swinburne's 'Letters 
from the Courts of Paris, Naples,' &c. &c., very gossip- 
ing, therefore entertaining and (I suppose) apocryphal. 
The most interesting part is at the period of the P'rench 
Eevolution, and afterwards when Swinburne was nego- 



* This account is substantially confirmed by Lady Morgan's 
Memoirs, in which public attention is invited to every particular 
of her birth, education, family difficulties, &c. The general con- 
clusion is highly favourable to her. 



310 ANNE OF AtTSTEIA. 

tiating an exchange of prisoners in 1796. He brings 
forward as a discovery the now well known and most 
probable conjecture as to the Masque de Fer ; that he 
was an elder brother of Louis XIV. ; that from the 
estrangement of Louis XIII. at that period, Anne of 
Austria could not give a shadow of apparent legitimacy 
to his birth ; and that his father was Louis Bourbon, a 
bourgeois de Tours — this is the only part of the story 
which is new to me. We all know that, the birth of 
Louis XIV. being equally questionable as to legitimacy, 
the unfortunate elder born was put out of the way. 
Swinburne adds, ' Linquet says that a lady at Chartres, 
ninety years old, still aUve (1786 or 1787), and in her 
youth mistress to one of the ministers, was surprised this 
should not be known, as it was no secret when she lived 
in the world. Madame Campan tells me that her 
father-in-law actually occupies the same house at 
Choisy that was inhabited by the maitre d'hotel and 
his wife, the favourite feyrnne de chamhre of Anne of 
Austria.' That queen made a neuvaine * to St. Leonard, 
whose chapel near Choisy was much resorted to for 
procuring children to barren ladies. Every day during 
her pilgrimage the Queen retired after the ceremonies 
to this house at Choisy, and there is a tradition that 
some one came to visit her from Rael every evening by 
a private road which leads through the meadows to the 

* A nine days' pilgrimage. 



THE BAllOU GEEAMB AND LA TEAPPE. 311 

river, where tlie coimtry people say there was in the 
memory of man a ford, and the only one for miles on 
the Seine.* 



THE BARON GERAMB AND LA TRAPPE. 

July 1841. — I have been reading 'The Journey 
from La Trappe to Eome,' by the Eeverend Father, 
Baron G-eramb, Abbot and Procurator-Greneral of the 
Trappe. The author is the famous whiskered and tight- 
laced Baron who, I believe, was under the Alien Act 
sent out of England in 1812 : he was arrested at Hasum, 
a Danish post near Hamburgh, and cast into the dungeon 
of Vincennes. He professes himself ignorant of any 
cause of offence, nor was any ever assigned. As an Aus- 
trian subject he had attempted to raise a regiment to 
resist Bonaparte when he was approaching Vienna in 
1807. The entrance of the allied sovereigns into Paris 
in 1814 gave Greramb liberty, and he not ill describes 
his utter incredulity when the news first reached him, 
and his conviction that his informant was a lunatic. 
The book, very ill translated, contains, with much chaff, 
a few grains of curious development of human character, 
and some singular anecdotes, generally founded on 
extreme bigotry. From Paris he writes in 1837, 'I 

* A. Dumas, pere, has founded a novel on this theory of the 
Masque de Fer, treating Louis XIV. and his supposed brother as 
twins. But the question is stiU an open one. 



312 THE BAEON GEEAMB AND LA TRAPPE. 

passed to the Temple erected by Chatel, a dirty coach- 
house with tricolor standards. On the gate is inscribed 
Eglise Frangaise. At the entrance I saw the likeness of 
the pretended Primate of Gaul. There were books for 
the service of the new Church, and the following an- 
nouncement printed in large characters : " On Tuesday 
next the Primate Chatel will preach on the Dignity of 
Woman, and after the sermon will present each lady 
with a bouquet." ' 

I conclude that Geramb's prediction that the doc- 
trines of Chatel would not spread, has proved true, for 
in no other work have I read of them. Geramb is 
constantly eulogising the restored Jesuits, who, I 
fear, are creeping into their old authority. His 
personal vanity miKing with all this is very comi- 
cal. He travels in a common lay dress, resumes 
his monastic habit at Rome, where he resides in a 
monastery; goes from thence to the Sacro Speco on 
Mount Cassino, where St. Benedict, the founder of 
monastic life in the west, had resided, and which has 
been since the head seat of the Order. This was in the 
holy week, and he naturally attaches great ideas of 
sanctity to the expedition — pilgrimage, I suppose he 
would call it. In the midst of this two mischances are 
recorded. ' At Rome I had hired a tolerably decent 
carriage and three good horses to take me to Subiaco. 
. . . Scarcely had we been an hour on the road when 
the rain fell in torrents. I had fallen asleep, and on 



THE BAEON GEEAMB AND LA TEAPPE. 313 

waking I saw to my inexpressible annoyance that my 
habit, which was snow white when I got into the 
voiture, had a pretty deep tinge of green in some parts ; 
the rain had entered through the broken windows, and 
had run through the green curtains. The vetturino 
answered my complaints by the observation that a little 

washing would remedy the evil My habit was 

literally ruined, and I looked more like a dragoon than 
a Trappist. The superior of Santo Speco sent me the 
following day a mule, a guide, and a person to carry 
my trunk. My Trappist habit attracted great attention. 
. . . Soon after, on the edge of a precipice, the mule 
fell down ; to get out of my stirrups and fling myself on 
the other side, was the work of a moment.' The mule- 
teer laments only his mule, whose leg he believes to be 
broken. The labourers near, who assisted, cried out, 
' A miracle ! miracle ! you owe your life to St. Benedict, 

Father ; ' and I doubt not ' plenty of Bajochi to us ' 

was added. Afterwards a workman is sent for to execute 
a column to commemorate this escape. ' I dwelt on my 
miraculous preservation. "I do not," said the workman, 
" see any miracle in the matter. The mule was heavy, 
but you were still heavier than the mule ; it could not 
have happened otherwise." I laughed heartily at this 
drollery, but was, however, not a little annoyed at my 
embonpoint, which had procured for me the advantage 
of the comparison.' 

At Greramb's return to Kome, in 1838, he is made 



314 LOUIS PHILIPPE 

Abbot, &c. &c. of the Order, and was to exchange the ob- 
scurity of the cloister for a residence in the midst of Kome. 
There I will try to see the face of this strange animal, 
whom I cannot but believe more knave than fool. 



LOUIS PHILIPPE. 
Naples: March 1842. — Heard from the Due de 
Montebello an interesting story of Louis Philippe. 
When he was giving to him his last directions upon 
going as Ambassador to Switzerland, he desired him to 
enquire at such a town, street, &c. &c., for ' un nomme 
Muller, a qui fai ^obligation de m''avoir donni son 
passepori pour sortir du pays quand fetais proscrit' 
Louis Philippe then told them how with this passport, 
on foot, he set out for Sweden, and landed at some port 
there. He was dining at the table d'hote, and his anxious 
curiosity was excited by a face bronzed like his own, 
and very unlike the northern fair-complexioned men 
who surrounded them. He entered into conversation, 
asked the country of the dark man. ' Je suis Suisse, 
Monsieur.'' ' Et moi aussi ; de quel Canton etes-vous ? ' 
The King felt it of great importance to his personal 
safety to ascertain the truth of the assertions of this 
man, being well aware there were many spies interested 
in the discovery of his person. By dint of well-applied 
questions, he discovered this man to be a native of the 
village where he had been a schoolmaster. 



HENRY THE NINTH OF ENGLAND. 31o' 

HENKY THE NINTH OF ENGLAND. 

Bodrhyddan: August 1844. — From Angharad 
Lloyd * I have heard a story which is worth recording. 
Her sister, Helen Lloyd, was (through the interest of 
Lady Crewe, I believe) governess to the younger daugh- 
ters of the Duke of Clarence. He, as was his custom, 
lived with her on terms of familiar intimacy 
and friendship from the time of her first pre- 
sentation to the day of his death. He had ex- 
pressed a strong preference for his second nam^e of 
Henry, which he hked much better than that of 
William. The day after the death of George IV., Miss 
Helen Lloyd met the King at the house of Lady 
Sophia Sydney ; she asked him familiarly whether he 
was to be proclaimed as King William or as King 
Henry. 'Helen Lloyd,' he replied, 'that question 
has been discussed in the Privy Council, and it has 
been decided in favour of King William.' He added, 
that the decision had been mainly influenced by the 
idea of an old prophecy of which he had never 
heard before, nor had he any evidence that it had ever 
been made. The drift of the prophecy was, that as 
Henry VIII. ' had pulled down monks and cells, Henry 
IX. would pull down bishops and bells.' Helen 



* Of Ehyl, FlintsUre ; a Welsh lady celebrated for her know- 
ledge of the Welsh language and antiquities. 



316 HENRY THE NINTH OF ENGLAND. 

exclaimed, ' I have sefen that in an old book at home.' 
The King was astonished and pleased ; he desired her 
to send for the book as soon as possible. Diligent search 
was made for it, but unhappily it was not discovered till 
after the King's death. It was found by me. 

A. L. 
Thus far Angharad; she sent me the book to look at. 
A Briefe View of the State of the Church of England as it 
stood in Queen Elizabeth's and King James his Reigne, to 
the Yeare 1608. Being a Character and History of the 
Bishops of those Times, and may serve as an additional 
Supply to Dr. Goodwins Catalogue of Bishops. Written 
for the use of Prince Henry upon occasion of that Proverb — 
' Henry VIII. pulled down Monks and their Cells, 
Henry IX. should pull down Bishops and their Bells. ^ 
By Sir John Harrington of Kilston near Bath, Knight. 
London, printed for J. Keston, St. Paul's Churchyard, 1653. 

In the life of Dr. Underbill, in this book, I find, ' I 
should go from Eochester to St. David's in Wales, save 
I must bait a little out of my way at four new bishoprics 
erected by King Henry VIII., of famous memory, and 
therefore I hope not ordained to be dissolved of a 
Henry IX., of future and fortunate expectation.' 

Angharad said that King William wished to be 
King Henry IX., because, as the Cardinal of York had 
assumed that title on his medals, he wished to 
establish the lawful right to bear it, but this she did 
not write in the paper she sent to me.* 

* She told me the story, and showed me the book in 1862. 



KEAN. 317 



KEAN* 



April I4:th, 1814. — Saw Kean in lago, and was less 
struck than I had been by his performance of Shylock, 
perhaps because I expected more. The absence of all 
ranting is in itself a great merit, which in the present 
state of the stage, degraded as it is, appears even greater. 
The quiet colloquial tone in which Kean performs the 
greatest part of this character, gives an effect almost 
electric to those passages which he strongly (sometimes, 
I own, too strongly) points. His emphasis seems to me 
always well laid, proceeding always from a strong and 
often from a new view of the sense of the passage ; f not 
like Kemble's, falling sometimes on words where it is so 
falsely appUed that one should almost be tempted to 
believe that he does not give himself the trouble of 
understanding the common sense of what he is speak- 
ing. I once saw him in Lear, and heard the following 
passage thus accented : — 

I tax you not, you elements, ■with, unlrindness, 
I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children. 

Nothing can be more admirable than the strong 
expression of continual watchfulness which marks 
Kean's deep eye in lago, and I think I can never 



* It does not appear why this entry was postponedj 
t 'To see Kean act is like reading Shakspeare^y flashes of 
lightning' {Coleridge). 



318 KEAN. 

forget the look of deep villany, of dire diabolical 
revenge, with which, in leaving the stage, he directs 
the eye of the miserable Othello to his murdered 
Desdemona. 

May 27ih. — I have seen Kean in Othello, and found 
him in that magnificent part fully equal to my highly 
raised expectations ; the highest dramatic treat I ever 
experienced. One regret will intrude, the weakness of 
his voice, and still more the insignificance of his figure, 
make him a very unfit representation of the rough 
martial Othello. When he tells what that little 
arm, has done ; when he tells you that ' every puny 
whipster gets my sword '■ — it requires all his wonderful 
talent to blind one to the ridicule of such expressions 
applied to that form.* In all the earlier part of the 
play, Kean saves himself, and you get only transient 
gleams of his genius. In the first act, the passage 
which struck me most was the burst of tenderness, 
displaying the whole character of Othello in these few 
words, ' And I loved her that she did pity them.' 

The charm of Kean's Othello seems to me to lie mainly 
in the intense passion for Desdemona which he seems to 
be concealing, and which bursts forth as if involuntarily ; 
this seems to form the excuse for Othello, to give 
nature to the excess of jealousy. In the fine scene in 

* Before such merits all objections fly, 
Pritchard 's genteel, and Garrick 's six feet high. 

Churchill. 



KEAN. 319 

~ -which Othello first conceives suspicion, this was peculi- 
arly evident ; and when lago says, ' I see this hath a little 
dashed your spirits,' Kean electrified the house by the 
simple words, ' Not a jot.' The bitter look of deep hatred 
with which he said, ' I found not Cassio's kisses on her 
lips,' seems to prepare one for the catastrophe, and was 
finely contrasted with the heartfelt dark dejection Avith 
which the beautiful farewell to ' the glorious circum- 
stance of war ' was spoken. Nothing could be finer 
than the speech about the handkerchief, ' and could 
almost read the thoughts of people ' — his speaking 
eye seemed fully possessed of that power ; or more 
affecting than the speech, 'Had it pleased Heaven 
to try me with affliction,' excepting the last scene, the 
beauty of which is so fully displayed in the tender 
heart-broken tones of Kean. 

I believe it is quite an original idea, certainly 
one which crowns the effect and seems to give the 
full view of this magnificent character, when Othello, 
just before the last speech, after the innocence of 
Desdemona is established, returns to the bed, to give 
one last look, one kiss of reconciled love which seems 
to cast a gleam over his despair. Then, as if it were 
a thing no longer of the slightest importance, he 
carelessly says, '/ have done the state some service.' 
When at last he stabs himself, the gradual relaxation 
of the Umbs, and the last fall, were as fine as anything 
could be. 



320 LADY HESTEE STANHOPE. 

In seeing Othello performed a month ago by 
Pope, who stormed and mouthed and ranted the 
part, I felt quite enraged with the pit and gal- 
leries, who clapped him, while they rarely and coldly 
marked any applause of Kean in lago, which I 
consider as the most perfect piece of acting I ever 
witnessed. I could believe only that Pope had a powerful 
party in the house. Little did I then imagine that in 
these days it was Shakespeare himself, and his Othello, 
which had taken possession of the audience, and made 
them incapable of applauding his wicked tormentor. 
I felt it almost strange that those who could admire 
such acting did not hiss that of Kean. When he 
appeared in Othello, the applause was deafening, and 
Pope, who was less offensive to me in lago, was received 
in sullen silence ; which convinced me that it was the 
characters, and not the actors of them, who moved the 
multitude. 



LADY HESTER STANHOPE. 

Letters from Lady H. L. Sianhoiie to Sir H. Williams Wynn, 
from the Desert in 1813. 

The first letter speaks of all the conquests she has 
made of great Turks, young Beys, chiefs of Delhi-bachis, 
and lastly, of ' the great Emir Mahanna el Tadel, Chief 
of the Anasa Arabs : the troops under his command 
amount to 40,000 men, who are all ready to draw their 



LADT HESTER STiNHOPE. 321 

swords forme, and the Millichi is the subject of conver- 
sation all over the desert. You will say, How is it then 
you have not yet been to the seat of your empire, to 
Palmyra ? * For this reason .... I took the determi- 
nation to set off alone to Homs, or Hamar, and pay at 
least my promised visit to Mahanna el Tadel, should he 
yet be on the borders of the desert. I found he had 
waited for me twenty-four days. I sent for him, and 
spent a week with my people in their tents, and 
marched three days with them. I had previously dis- 
armed my servants, saying I put myself into the hands 
of God and the great Emir, which succeeded admirably, 
for I did not lose the value of a para, and was treated with 
the greatest kindness and respect. I was dressed as a 
Bedouin, and ate with my hands (not fingers), drank 
camel's milk, and rode surrounded by 100 lances. 
What a sight it is at night to see horses, mares, and 
camels repair to the tents ! No one can have an idea of 
it who has not seen it. This morning, 12,000 camels 
belonging to one tribe were taken to drink at once. 

After this experiment I think I can rely on Mahanna's 
word, which has once more determined Bruce f and 
myself to go to Palmyra under his protection. The 
reason I now find why Masoud Agar would have 1,000 

* This alludes to the prophecy of Brothers, who had foretold 
that she was to restore the empire of Jerusalem. 

t The late Michael Bruce, commonly called Lavalette Bruce 
from the gallant part he took in assisting Lavalette to escape. 

T 



322 LADY HESTEK STANHOPE. 

men to accompany me was, that Mahanna's son had 
vowed that, if he attempted to take me into the desert, 
the Bedouins would cut off his beard, strip his men 
all naked, and yet still not hurt one hair of my 
head ; but the honour of escorting their queen should 
be theirs. I have orderly Arabs at my command, 
receive despatches every two or three days, giving me 
an account of what is going forward in the desert, 
of what battles have been fought, and with what tribe, 
war has been declared. The Feadars, the power- 
ful enemies, are now driven to the neighbourhood 
of Bagdad; but parties still come this way, at least 
about Palmyra ; this is the danger of going with the 
Mahanna, yet please Grod I must go. 

' I have had nine horses given me, three bad and sis 
good ones, and yet I would not take any from the Arabs. 
The Mahanna offered me his own mare. I respect poverty 
and independence ; I am an example that it succeeds in 
some parts of the world ; for if your very self-important 
uncle was to come here, and snort to the right and the 
left, he would do nothing either with Turks or Arabs. 
To command is to be really great : to have talents is to 
talk sense without a book in one's hand ; and to have 
manners is to be able to accommodate oneself to the 
customs and tastes of others, and to make them either 

fear or love you. has done neither at home; a 

pretty business he has made of his politics, and a pretty 
scrape he has got you all into. ... It is quite what I 



LADT HESTEE STANHOPE. 323 

expected ; but yet, far from being pleased with my own 
penetration, I grieve when I reflect upon the state of 
things, for everyone is not made for an exile, like myself. 
.... If my red shalvers at Constantinople amused 
you, what would you say to my present dress ? It is 
that of the son of a chief, or young chief. A Bedouin 
handkerchief bound on with a sort of rope made of 
camel's hair; a curly sheepskin pelisse; a white 
aba with a little gold on the right shoulder, crim- 
son loop and button, and two crimson strings to 
fasten it. This is the true thing, with a lance with 
black feathers, mounted on a fine mare, but I as yet 
ride a horse. I ride quite at my ease, and shall dis- 
hke a side-saddle. I am sure the Arabs are delighted 
with my horsemanship, which is lucky for me. They, 
as well as the Turks, think people who cannot ride 
absolute fools. Nobody was ever so popular with 
priests and Franks, Greeks and Armenians, as old 
North ; but the Turks at Damascus considered him as 
quite contemptible because he could not ride at all, 

and walked fast 

Last June a battle was fought between the Anasees 
and the Feadars ; the former were victorious, and 
the new pacha took them into favour. I went over 
the field of battle with Mahanna ; it is near the ruins 
of Salonica. The encampment of the Anasees extended 
ten miles at least ; of this I am sure, as I saw the re- 
maius of their entrenchment. As to what travellers 

T 2 



324 LADY HESTER STANHOPE. 

hear from old priests, dragomans, and Frank doctors, it 
is all false ; they know nothing at all about the Arabs. I 
never saw any of these people, except Chabeauson a few 
times out of civility, but went my own way to work. All 
I know is pure, without the additions and absurdities 
mixed up with the histories of Arabs by people whom 
they despise. During my stay at Damascus the pacha 
received a letter from Mecca recommending him to be 
upon his guard, for that a strong party of Wahabees 
had set out upon dromedaries, and it was thought would 
make for Damascus. You know they have come that 
way before, and burnt all before them, and put every 
one to the sword in all the villages they passed through. 
A pretty fright everybody was in but me, and for this 
reason — I have even Wahabee friends, who dare not con- 
fess themselves such. Let the worst have come to the 
worst, I should have gone out to have met them, and put 
myself under the protection of the chief, and I know I 
should have been safe; and I had other options, to 
stay or run away when the pacha did, or to have been 
escorted by some of the rebel troops to the mountain, 
where I should have been safe with my friend the 
Emir Besheer. I don't say without some reason I could 
have been escorted by (the name illegible), for when 
they suddenly left Damascus to join the pacha of 
Aleppo, they sent to me to march with them, and said, 
if I was waiting at Damascus for the arrival of the 
caravan with money, there were twenty purses for my 



LADY HESTER STANHOPE. 325 

use, or I might take what troops I liked to escort me 
to Palmyra. In short, the Dillas and the Arabs are the 
only people to be feared in this part of the world, and 
I have them all under my thumb : but there is one 
thing I must make you aware of; to bungle with the 
Arabs is to be lost; for though they avoid shedding 
blood themselves, they have black slaves, who are devils, 
kept for the purpose when necessary, who are armed 
with a shocking crooked knife tied round their neck, 
to rip up people, and a hatchet under their pelisse to 
cut off heads. These people are much more difficult to 
manage than the Arabs themselves, as they are so 
interested and so bloody minded if they take a disKke 
to a person. . . . 

' It was to make an experiment, to try my influence. 
Groiag like a thief in the dark as you did, fearing the 
Bedouins at the right and left, is abominable. The 
thing is to look round one, free as the air of the deserts, 
to observe something like a flight of crows at a dis- 
tance — to look proudly that way, move your hand, and 
in one instant see fifty lances spring in your defence ; 
to see them return, exclaiming " Schab — Friends." ' 

' Latichia, June 30, 1813. 

' Without joke I have been crowned Queen of the 

Desert, under the triumphal arch at Palmyra. Nothing 

could succeed better than this journey, dangerous as it 

was, for upon our return we were pursued by 200 of 



326 LADY HESTER STANHOPE. 

the enemy's horse, but escaped from them. They 
were determined to have the head of the chief who 
accompanied us, yet sent me in secret an ambassador 
to say that I need not fear anything — that everything 
belonging to me should be respected : such were the 
orders given by this powerful tribe, by five of their 
chiefs assembled at Bagdad. . . . They all paid me 
homage. If I please, I can now go to Mecca alone — I 
have nothing to fear. I shall soon have as many 
names as Apollo. I am the Pearl, the Lion, the Sun, 
the Star, the Light from Heaven. ... I am quite wild 
about the people, and all Syria is in astonishment at 
my courage and success. 

'To have spent a month with some thousand of 
Bedouin Arabs, is no common thing. For three 
days they plagued me sadly, and all the party ex- 
cepting Bruce almost insisted upon returning. The 
servants were frightened out of their wits, their eyes 
always fixed on their arms, or upon me. The drago- 
man could not speak — he had quite lost his head. All 
the people immediately about me were chosen rascals ; 
and having primed a fellow, who was once with the 
French army in Egypt, I rode dash into the middle of 
them ; I made my speech — that is to say, I acted — and 
the man spoke. It so surprised and charmed them, 
that they all became as harmless as possible, and here 
ended all unpleasant scenes. . . . Nobody must ever 
give an opinion of the charms of the Desert, who has 



LADT HESTEK STANHOPE. 327 

not seen above 1,500 camels descend the mountains 
into an enchanting vale, and a tribe of Arabs pitch 
their tents upon beds of flowers of ten thousand hues, 
bringing with them hundreds of living creatures only a 
few days old — children, lambs, kids, foals, young 
camels, and puppies.' 

Extracts from Mrs. 's Letters. 

Alexandria, Dec. 3, 1835. 

We already begin to hear stories of Lady Hester. 
The consul here has seen the correspondence between 
her and Lady Georgina Wolff, each of them laying 
claim to the being the Messiah's Bride, whose coming 
they expect shortly, and in the meantime call each 
other by every bad name under the sun. Lady Hester 
has had a great fight with the Pacha, having taken it 
into her head to protect seventy-six rich Arab famiUes, 
and exempt them from the payment of taxes. After a 
long debate, the Pacha has given up the point, being 
unwilling to create a disturbance among his Syrian 
subjects, who consider Lady Hester as a mad woman, 
and therefore as holy. She is over head and ears in debt, 
and kept entirely by the Arabs. . . . 

I fear that my chance of seeing Lady Hester is very 
small : her last fancy is not to see any but French. At 
present the Duchesse de Plaisance and her daughter are 
living in her house : the Duchesse was pronounced quite 
mad in the lunatic asylum in which she was confined 



328 LADY HESTEK STANHOPE. 

some years. They are dressed in white trowsers worn 
under a gown of the same colour, with enormous sleeves, 
and wear white calico hats, which end in a high peaked 
crown. A Frenchman lives with Lady Hester, and he 
is, somehow or other, soon to be the Messiah. They 
are always fighting as to which is to be the greatest 
personage among them. One of these quarrels is said 
to have ended thus : — ' Vous, Madame ! vous la pre- 
miere ! Je vous ferai placer dans ma cuisine.' They 
are to be married in the New Jerusalem, but the 
gentleman is impatient and wishes the ceremony to 
take place now ; but Lady Hester will be the Messiah's 
Bride. . . . 

I have written a letter to Lady Hester Stanhope, 
but I fear have no chance of seeing her. Colonel 
Campbell has just written to Lord Stanhope to say 
that, unless her enormous debts are paid, she must 
leave the country, as he will otherwise apply to our 
Government to stop the payment of her pension, and 
apply the amount to the discharge of her debts. . . . 
A Frenchman whom we met the other day assured 
us that the following fact occurred while he was in 
Syria: 

A French colonel to whom Lady Hester had given a 
•protection was robbed and murdered by the Arabs two 
days after he had left her house. She sent to the 
nearest government of the Pacha, saying that she m/wst 
have the heads of the murderers in six days. The 



CLAIRTOTANCE. 329 

government promised to obey, but the seventh day 
came and no heads were produced. Lady Hester sent 
another messenger, signifying that, if the heads were not 
before her window in twenty-four hours, she would 
take her own vengeance on the governor. In twelve 
hours he came himself to say that he was very sorry he 
had not been able to discover the actual murderers, and 
therefore could not produce their heads. He had 
tracked them to their village, to which he had set fire, 
and had burnt women and children to the amount of 
300 souls ! Lady Hester's answer : ' It is a pity that 
300 should perish for the crime of four or five, but 
still this is better than that my vengeance shotdd be 
unsatisfied.' It is hardly possible to believe in a story 
of such atrocious cruelty. I can only say that, from 
another gentleman lately returned from Syria, I heard 
exactly the same story. 



CLAIRVOYANCE. 
Sept. 1 844. — I begin to think that if one can believe 
(and I am equally puzzled how to doubt or believe) the 
facts stated in the following letter, one may believe 
much that is recorded of witchcraft. That in the means 
employed, as well as the effects produced, there is 
much similarity, if not identity, I am firmly persuaded ; 
that many means of which I know nothing, exist, by 
which an extraordinary power is acquired over some 



330 CLAIRVOYANCE. 

minds, I telieve ; that in many instances the imagina- 
tion increases this tenfold, I am more firmly persuaded. 

Extract from a Letter from to Mrs. Bowleij, dated 

'Paris, September 13, 1844.' 

One of my principal friends here is Charles Ledru, 
the celebrated advocate. He is about to plead for one 
of the magnetisers, and is acquainted with all of them, 
besides being somewhat of a proficient. Two days ago 
I went with him to the Palais de Justice, and when his 
case was over, he asked me to call en passant at the 
house of one of his clients, a pretty woman of nineteen, 
who wants to get a separation from her husband. We 
were shown into a room where- she was with her sister, 
her father, and a Baron somebody. After hearing her 
case, Ledru proposed to magnetise her, having acciden- 
tally discovered that she is a good subject. He threw 
her into the desired state in a short time, and we then 
proceeded to try whether she was clairvoyante or no. 
At first there was a succession of failures : I was then 
told to take her hand, and think of some' one. ' Pensez 
a Madame N.' whispered Ledru, who knows Tier. I 
suspected collusion — assented, but thought of another 
person. I give the words of the clairvoyante as nearly 
as I can remember them. 

' Ah ! c'est une dame, loin, loin d'ici — vingt-cinq ans, 
ou comme pa — grande, c'est-a-dire plus grande que 
petite — mince, svelte, figure un peu alongee, bouche 



CLAIEVOTANCE. 331 

petite, et des yeux— Oh ! que ses yeux sont beaiix ! ' 
'Pour ses habitudes ? ' (said I) 'monte-elle a cheval ? ' 
'Oui, beaucoup.' 'Sa saute?' ^Elle est souffrante, 
et depuis quelque temps, mais pas tout a fait d'une 
maladie fixe.' 'Ou est-elle?' 'Dans un chateau 
au milieu d'un pare; il y a une grille, et une 
avenue avee des fosses de chaque cote, mais point d'eau.' 
' Avee qui ?' - Je vols une femme plus agee, des cheveux 
gris, un bonnet avee des rubans, et puis deux enfans — 
garpons je crois — I'un, avee des cheveux boucles— les 
jambes nues, beaucoup decoUetes, blonds, tout a fait 
blonds.' ' Y a-t-il des messieurs ? ' ' Oui. Je vois un 
monsieur blond, et puis encore un — passablement grand, 
maigre, et souffrant.' 'Est-ce qu'il porte des mous- 
taches ? ' ' Ah ! Je vois une barbe.' If you can guess 
the subjects of my thoughts, you will agree with me 
that these are strange coincidences.* 

I then thought of Lady Charleville, Mrs. M , my 

sisters, &c. ; but the power was gone, or at least had 
exhausted itself. 

Yesterday Ledru proposed a private trial of Alexis. 
Our party consisted of Sir William and Lady de Bathe, 

Mrs. M , and her son, Ker (one of the attaclies), and 

myself. Marcillet threw him into the trance. We then 
bandaged his eyes, covering them with wool and stuffing- 
all the crevices formed by the nose with wool, so that I 

* The description, as regards botli persons and locality, was in al- 
most every particular correct ; and what is most remarkable, the 



332 CLAIEVOTANCE. 

am quite sure he could not see ; but he played four games 
of ecarte with me, and frequently told me my cards before 
they were played or even taken up from the table, 
I asked him if he would play with cards of my bringing. 
' Volontiers.' I went out, enquired of the porter where 
I could get cards : he told me of a shop, and / went to 
another, got my cards, and found no difference whatever 
—he played and named them as before. 

We then produced our folded papers with writing 
within. He failed with mine — I hadwrittenLongueville 
— but succeeded with Lady de Bathe's and Ker's. He said 
I was malveillant et incredule, and had no sympathy 
with him, which made him powerless. This I con- 
sidered, in other words, as saying he could not get on 
without some sort of aid. In general, he first told the 
number of letters, then enquired if he was right. I 
maintained that the experiment was not satisfactory if 
any answer was given ; and everybody in the room cried 
out that I was too hard upon him, except Marcillet, 
who said that Monsieur's droiture d'esprit was the very 
thing he wished to encounter, and that he would satisfy 
me. I walked to the window with young M (an 

same persons (six in number), and no others, were on tliat same day 
at the oountiy house in question. They constituted the family. The 
day before, a party of visitors had left, and the day after, a fresh 
party arrived. The writer of the letter showed it to three English 
friends before putting it into the post, and as there was then no 
electric telegraph between London and Paris, collusion was im- 
possible. 



CLAIETOTANCB. 333 

Eton lad), made him write the word Auguste, folded the 
paper so that there were five folds between the writing 
and the light, doubled down the corners, and put it into 
Lady de Bathe's hands, who gave it to Alexis. I made 

M write and Lady de Bathe deUver it, to obviate 

the objection as to my want of sympathy. I sate down 
by him and kept my eye on the paper. He never 
atteimpted either to unfold or look through it, and he 
was in a dark part of the room, the opposite end from 
the window. Marcillet was not near him. He struggled, 
and at last named the number of letters. No answer. 
'Mais repondez done, Monsieur,' said Marcillet; 'au 
moins mentalement, prenez lid la main, et pensez tres 
distinctement a I'eoriture. I did so. Again a sort of 
paroxysm, and he exclaimed, ' Un crayon — vite, un 
crayon,' which was given him, and he wrote 'Auguste,' 
the paper being still folded. Fortune-tellers have hit on 
curious revelations, and H. Dobler puts explanation at 
defiance ; but undoubtedly such facts as these are well 
worth the attention of philosophy. 

Extract from a subsequent Letter hy the same Writer. 

As regards the lady's display of clairvoyance, the 
coincidences (for I beheve them to be nothing more) 
are certainly startling, but I have just met with 
others equally so. George Smythe [afterwards Lord 
Strangford] arrived in Paris just before I left, full 
of a rencontre, or adventure, or incipient bonne- 



334 CLAIRVOYANCE. 

fortune in its way, which had befallen him and his 
travelling companion in Germany. On the Rhine 
(I think) they made the acquaintance of two ladies, a 
mother and daughter of remarkable attractions and 
accomplishments, who turned out to be pianists on a 
professional tour. They had already visited Peters- 
burg, Moscow, Berlin, Dresden, and Vienna ; and after- 
wards performed at Frankfort, — by the token that 
Smythe and his friend made their servants attend to 
take money at the door, hand refreshments, &c., — a 
pretty strong proof of the height of their enthusiasm. 
The mother spoke three languages, French, German, 
and Italian ; the daughter English in addition to the 
other three. They were respectively about eighteen and 
thirty-six years of age. Their conduct and character 
were described as irreproachable. 

A few days after hearing Smythe's narrative, I left 
Paris for London. At Folkestone I found myself 
forming one of a trio in a railway carriage with two 
ladies, answering in nearly all respects to his descrip- 
tion. They were mother and daughter, about thirty-six 
and eighteen, both handsome, both lively and attrac- 
tive; the mother speaking the three languages, the 
daughter the four. Struck at iirst sight by the 
similarity, I led the conversation in such a manner as 
to discover that they had recently been at the great 
cities of the North as well as at Berlin, Vienna, and 
Frankfort, although I did not elicit in what capacity. 



FAtrSTINE. 335 

After I had interchanged a few sentences in English 
vrith the daughter, the mother laughingly interrupted 
me : ' Choisissez, Monsieur, entre les trois langues, 
mais je ne parte pas Anglais, et je Tie veuxpas vous 
menager une tete-a-tete avec ma fille.' 

They were going to Brighton, and we parted at 
Eedhill. I immediately wrote to Smythe to tell him 
where his beauties were to be found. He went to 
Brighton, tracked my ladies, and ascertained that they 
were not the originals although exact duplicates of his 
own. Now, the chances are just as great against find- 
ing actual duplicates as against the realisation by per- 
sons or events of a fancy group or foretold occurrence. 
The successful mesmerist or conjurer may be simply 
' le menteur veridique.' 

You remember the fulfilment of Poniatowski's 
strange fortune : ' Hwten Sie sich vor der Mster,' 
' Beware of the Magpie,' the name of the stream near 
Leipsic in which he was drowned. When at Leipsic 
in 1833, I satisfied myself that this warning had been 
really given him, and was duly recorded at the time. 



FAUSTINB. 

Extract from Mrs. ■ 's Letter to the Writer of the Article 

on the Countess Hahn Hahn's Novels in the '- Edinburgh 

Beview' for January 1844. 

What did this German countess do to bewitch you 



336 FAUSTINE. 

into admiring her book? Better the credulity of 
Miss Martineau (who believes in the mesmeric prophe- 
cies of Jane the housemaid, but not in the divinity of 
the Saviour) than yours who believe in Faustine. In the 
statistics of insanity there is a case of a lady who went 
mad from vanity and triumph in her child, whom she 
imagined to be a cherub singing in heaven. Faustine 
is simply a woman gone mad from exceeding selfish- 
ness, and indeed puts me in mind of nothing but the 

stories I have heard of . Also the cart is put 

before the horse — the cart being Mengen and the horse 
Andlau — for no woman loves the last man best even 
if he deserves it (which Mengen does not), because the 
first had the benefit of all illusion, which is to love as 
the halo round the saints' heads in pictures.* 

Also my English throat cannot swallow Mengen's 
marrying her, to reward her rapid inconstancy to the 

* A broad distinction, not generally recognised, is here drawn 
between man's and woman's love. Is it well founded ? Romeo 
loves Rosaline before Juliet ; Waverley, Flora M'lvor before Rose 
Bradwardine ; and Lord Nevil deserts the brilliant and illusion- 
creating Corinne for tbe tame and rather insipid Lucile. But no 
first-rate writer of fiction that I remember, out of Germany, has 
represented a woman the victim of more than one grand passion, 
or (as in Mrs. Haller) has pictured her returning, after a tem- 
porary aberration, with affections as good as new, to the first, real 
and rightful possessor of her heart. In England, we are apt to 
exclaim with Byron in his suppressed lines : 

' Then fare thee well, Fanny, thus doubly undone, 

Thou frail to the many, and false to the one. 

Thou art past aU recalling, e'en would I recall, 

For the woman so fallen for ever must fall.' 



FAFSTINE. 337 

man she had the power to throw off, or her accepting 
him under the circumstances. Still less can I stand the 
desertion of little BonaTentura,to go and compose hymns 
to the organ in a convent. In vain does Hahn Hahn 
give her heroine the benefit of every excuse, in vain 
defer her adultery till the husband's house is left, and 
make the lover a stabbed and slaughtered man. The 
want of compassion, the want of meek womanly affec- 
tion, the want of devotion, and, above all, the utter 
absence of any notion of self-sacrifice, or indeed of any 
notion except that of sacrificing everybody and every- 
thing to self, make Faustine odious and unnatural. 
.... The book has clever dialogues and great clever- 
ness of description in it, and Clement is a well-drawn 

• Ukeness of Lord , and did well to shoot 

himself; but as to Faustine herself being interesting or 
true to human nature, she is not. . . . Being married 
to a man you dislike does not incline you to love other 
men ; and being disappointed in the degree of affection 
you inspire, rather induces the feeling described in a 
much more natural story I once read,* where the lady 
having passionately loved a man called Greorges (who 
forsakes her), and being then passionately beloved by 
another, privately says to herself while this other is 
rapturously love-making, ' Ah ! comme fai du ennuyer 
ce pauvre Oeorges.' 

* Marianne, by Jules Sandeau. 
z 



338 riKST NEWS OF WATERLOO. 

ADDENDUM TO THE FIRST NEWS OP WATERLOO 
(an<«,p. 157), AND THE MEETING OF WELLINGTON 
AND BLtJCHER (ante, t^. 276). 
Communicated by a member of Major Percy's family. 

' A few hours after the battle was over. Major 
Percy started with the Duke's despatches and three 
captured eagles, travelling day and night. When he 
arrived in London, he went, I believe, first to the Horse 
Guards, where he found none of the authorities ; then 
to Lord Liverpool, who was, I believe, dining at Lord 
Bathurst's, where Major Percy followed him. "You 
must come immediately with me to the Eegent," said 
Lord Liverpool, and they got into the carriage of his 
Lordship. " But what is to be done with the eagles ? " 
" Let the footman carry them," said Lord Liverpool. 
Major Percy always told this with some disgust. They 
proceeded to Mrs. Boehm's house in St. James's Square, 
where the Eegent and the Duke of York were dining. 
Lord Liverpool took up Major Percy to the Prince, 
and said, "I have brought Major Percy, who comes with 
the news of a great victory for your Eoyal Highness." 
"Not Major Percy, but Lieut.-Colonel Percy," said the 
Prince. Major Percy knelt and kissed his hand. " We 
have not suffered much loss, I hope," he then said. 
"The loss has been very great indeed," was of course 
the reply, upon which the Eegent burst into tears. 



MEETING OF WELLINGTON AND BLiJCHEE. 339 

Major Percy afterwards went to his brother's house in 
Gloucester Place, and called him up to hear the good 
news, and then to Portman Square, where he undressed 
and went to bed for the first time since the battle. 

' I well remember the next Monday, when I was taken 
to see him. I remember the great dark stain on his 
uniform; the horror I felt, in the midst of all the 
triumph and joy of the moment, when he told me, va. 
answer to my questions, that it was the blood of an 
officer killed close to him. Still more when I heard 
him tell how, in taking off his sash as he undressed, 
he shook from the folds fragments of the brain which 
had lodged there. 

'I have often heard him describe the interAdew 
between the Duke and Bliicher, at which he was 
present; and the ride back to the English quarters 
over the field of battle covered with the dead and the 
dying. It was a bright moonlight night. The first 
soldiers they met greeted the Duke with loud cheers, 
which were taken up and sounded along the whole 
line of bivouacs ; the poor wounded men joined with 
their feeble voices, and Major Percy said he saw many 
try to rise as the Duke passed. As the first soldiers 
who recognised crowded round him, he said, " My poor 
fellows, you have had a hard day's work." There was 
a general cry in answer, " We don't mind it : all's right 
as you are safe." Those words were almost the only 

Z 2 



340 MEETINO OF WELLINGTON AND BLTJCHEB. 

expressions uttered by the Duke during that memorable 
ride. He was deeply affected, and even shed tears.' 

Mr. William Bathurst, son of Earl Bathurst, Secre- 
tary for the Colonies and War in 1815, states that the 
despatches were directed to his father, who was not at 
Lord Harrowby's where Lord Liverpool was dining ; and 
that Major Percy was with some difficulty persuaded 
(in Lord Bathurst's absence) to deliver them to Lord 
Liverpool, the Prime Minister. Mr. Bathurst was 
dining at Lord Jersey's, and, in company with Earl 
Grey, had gone to Lord Harrowby's on hearing of the 
arrival of the news. 

Major Percy's account of the ride back by moon- 
light after the meeting with Bliicher, proves that it 
could not have taken place at La Belle, Alliance, and 
confirms, if it needed confirmation, the Duke's state- 
ment, that he continued the pursuit till long after dark. 
Bliicher and his staff halted and passed the night at 
Grenappe. 'When Gneisenau,' says M. de Bernardi, 
'arrived at daybreak at the ETnperor public-house, some 
thousand paces the other side of Frasnes, two miles 
and a half (German) from the field of battle, he had 
only with him about fifty Uhlans of the Brandenburgh 
regiment, who also could go no farther for weariness. 
There ended the immediate pursuit.' In the ' People's 
Edition' of Gleig's 'Life of WelHngton' (just pub- 
lished), it is stated on the highest possible authority 
that ' the Duke reached his head-quarters at Waterloo 



THE TTEONE GHOST. 341 

about ten o'clock at night.' It is impossible, therefore, 
that he could have gone as far as Grenappe. Yet as 
he passed through Grenappe when falling back from 
Quatre Bras, and mentions it in his despatch of the 
19th, it is curious that he should have confounded it 
with Maison Rouge, which he afterwards specified as the 
real place of meeting to the best and most trusted of 
his biographers, the Chaplain Greneral. 

Extract from Major Percy's Journal. 

' Came up from Dover in a chaise and four with 
three eagles out of the window. They were too long 
to be shut in it. 

'Went first to the Prince Eegent (before he came 
home) at Mrs. Boehm's in St. James's Square. Prince 
much afiected. All London thrown into agitation — 
people quitting balls and assemblies as the news was 
conveyed of the wounds or deaths of relatives. Many 
ladies fainted. There was a rumour, before the news 
came, of a great battle and retreat, and even defeat. 
People were much depressed ; therefore the reaction 
was immense.' 



ADDENDUM TO THE 'THE TTEONE GHOST' («»<«, p. 43). 
Communicated hy a friend. 

' I first heard the story of the Beresford ghost from 
Mr, Cumberland. He told it finely. I was about 



342 THE TTEONE GHOST. 

twelve years old at the time , . . (this would be sixty 
years ago). Long afterwards I roet with the ghost in 
print, in a magazine which my father took in regu- 
larly. A discussion on tales of mystery produced a letter 
from one of the Beresford family, containing an account 
of the real circumstances of the story. The lady of the 
velvet bracelet, when about to be married for the 
second time, really had a dream warning her of the 
unhappiness likely to result from the contemplated 
union. It was well known to all the family of the in- 
tended bride that she had been subject to a disorder 
which had left a deep scar on her wrist — long before 
the visitation of the burning spirit ; and she had 
covered this scar with a velvet bracelet most carefully 
ever since it had been formed.' 



343 



EPITAPHS, 
EPIGEAMS, AND INSCEIPTIONS.* 



Audaciores sanfe sunt interdum Homines qnkvo. aut decet 
aut per religionem licet, dum Coeli gaudia taud dubia mortuis 
tribuunt, et pro spe humili, ac solatio, triumphum canunt. 
Bishop of Llandaff's Prwlectio, xxvii. 



nie quidem plenus annis abiit, plenus honoribus, iUis etiam 
qtios recusaYit. Nobis tamen quaerundus ac desiderandus est, 
ut Exemplar ^vi prioris, milii vero prsecipue, qui ilium non 
solum pubUce, sed etiam privatum quantum admirabar, tan- 
tum diligebam. 

Plinius de Virginio Rufo, Epist. lib. 2. ep. 1. 

This was transcribed by my brother, C. W. W. W., and 
intended for an inscription on a bust of Lord Grenville. 



INSCKIPTION ON THE COMMON PAiL USED AT FUNEEALS, 
AT FEIBOtTKG. 
Gras tibi Mors. 

* I have selected rather the least known, than the best, of those 
collected by Miss Wynn. 



344 EPITAPHS AMD INSCKIPXIONS. 



IN TACHBROOK CHURCH, NORTH WARWICKSHIRE. 

Gualterus Landor Roberto generoso pio integerrimo 
Patre natus 
Duas Uxores duxit, a prima Filiam unicam, 
Ab altera Filios iv. Filias iii. suscepit. 
Lepidus, doctus, liberalis, probus, amicis jucundiasimus. 
Anno ^tatis Ixxiii. decessit. 
Juxta prout vivens moriensque volnit 
Composita est Uxor ejus Elizabetba 

Filia Caroli Savage 

Conjux Mater Foemina pia optima. 

Vixit Annos Ixxxv. menses xi. 

Walter Savage Landor. 



INSCEIPTION ON THE POOR-HOUSE AT BERNE. 

Cbristo in Pauperibus. 



EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 345 

INSCEIPTION ON THBEE SIDES OF AN OBELISK IN THE 
CEMETERY AT ARNHEIM. 

Civibiis Exteris 

Summis infimis 

Quocunque Ritfi Deum colentibus 

Omnibus Vita functis 

Hanc placidse Quietis Sedem 

Communis Multorum Voluntas 

Destinavit. 

Tuti quiescant 
Lseti resurgant 
Quotquot Terra tegit. 

Terra quos rapuit 
Coelum restituit. 



IN THE CHTJECH OP SANTA MAKIA DEGLI ANSELI 
AT HOME. 

Vii-tute vixit 
Memoria vivit 
GloriS, vivet. 



Corpus humo tegitur 
Fama per ora volat 
Spiritus Astra tenet. 



346 EPITAiPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 

FROM AN ANCIENT MONUMENT, ST. SAVIOUR'S CHURCH, 
SOUTHWARK. 
Like to the Damask rose you see, 
Or like the blossom on the Tree, 
Or Uke the dainty Flower of May, 
Or like the Morning of the Day, 
Or like the Sun, or like the Shade, 
Or like the Gourd which Jonah made ; 
Ev'n so is Man, whose thread is spun, 
Drawn out, and cut, and so is done. 
The rose withers, the blossom blasteth. 
The flowers fade, the morning hasteth. 
The Sun sets, the Shadow flies, 
The Gourd consumes, and Man he dies.* 



ST. MARGARET S, WESTMINSTER. 

Within the walls of this Church 

was deposited 

The Body of the great 

Sir Walter Ealeigh, Knt. 

On the day he was beheaded in Old Palace Yard, 

Oct. 18, 1618. 

Reader, should you reflect on his error, 

Eemember his many virtues, and that he was mortal. 

* The first six lines resemble some in Burns's Tarn O'Shanter 
' But pleasures are like poppies spread, 
You seize the flower, its bloom is shed ; 
Or like the snow-fall in the river, 
A moment white — then melts for ever ; 
Or like the borealis race, 
Which flits e'er you can point the place ; 
Or like the rainbow's lovely form, 
Evanishing amid the storm.' 



EPITAPHS AND INSCEIPTIONS. 347 



:^PIGRAMME APEES LA BATAILLE DE EAMILLIES. 

C'est bien dommage, sur ma foi, 
Que Monseigneur de Villeroy 
Soit &ijk Marechal de France ; 
Car dans cette grande action 
On pent dire sans complaisance 
Qu'il a m&it6 le B&ton. 



INSCRIPTION UNDEE THE BUST OF ALFEED, AT UNITEESITT 
COLLEGE, BT SIE WILLIAM SCOTT. 

Quisquis es, 

Vel Libertatis amans, vel Literarum, 

Illius Viri Imaginem 

Piis suspice Ocnlis, 

Qui Patriam 

Peregrinis Hostibus afflictam, 

Domestica Morum Feritate 

Et turpissima simul Ignorantia 

Laborantem, 

Armis erexit, Legibus emollivit, 

Scientift exomavit. 

Si sis Britannus 

Possis etiam gloriari 

Militarem Eomtdi Virtutem 

Civilem Numse Scientiam 

PhilosopHicam Antonini Gravitatem 

Unice in se complecti 

Beitannici Alfeedi Nomen. 

W. S. 



348 EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 



ON A CALM AND CLEAR SPRING AT BLENHEIM, BY WARTON. 

Here quench your thirst and mark in me, 
An Emblem of true Charity, 
Who, •while my bounty I bestow, 
Am neither heard, nor seen to flow.* 



ARMAGH : ON A DIAL ERECTED OYER THE GRAVE OF 
EDWARD BOND, ESQ., 

Who ordered 1001. to be given to the Poor, instead of ■- pompous 
funeral, 1744. 

No marble Pomp, no monumental praise, 
My tomb this Dial, my Epitaph these lays. 
Pride and low mould'ring clay but ill agree, 
Death levels me to beggars : Kings to me. 
Alive, Instruction was my work each Day ; 
Dead, I persist Instruction to convey. 
Here, Eeader ! mark (perhaps now in thy Prime) 
The stealing steps of never-ending time : 
Thou'lt be what I am ; catch the present Hour, 
Employ that well, for that's within thy power. 



* The epigram on a bridge at Blenheim, erected by the first 
duke, is in an opposite strain : — 

' This lofty bridge his high ambition shows, 
The stream an emblem of his bounty flows.' 



EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 349 

DUNDAIK. 
Here lies the Body of Robert Moore, 
What signifies more Words ? 
Who kill'd himself by eating of Ctirds ; 
But if he had been ruFd by Sarah his Wife, 
He might have liv'd all the Days of his Life. 



JEPITAPHE DE EOBESPIBKEE^ 
Passant, ne pleure pas mon sort, 
Si je vivais, tu serais mort. 



EPITAPHS DE LOUIS XVI. 
Ci git Louis, ce pauvre Eoi. 
On dit qu'il fiit bon, mais k quoi ? 



ST. PAUL S CATHEDKAL ; ON SIR PHILIP SYDNEY, KNT. 

Who received his Death in a Battle near Zutphen, in G-elderland, 
Sept. 22, 1686. 

England, Netherland, the Heav'ns, and the Arts, 
The Souldiers and the World have made six parts 
Of noble Sydney ; for who will suppose. 
What a small heap of Stones can Sydney inclose ! 

England hath his Body, for she it fed ; 
Netherland his Blood, in her defence shed : 
The Heav'ns have his Soul, the Arts have his Fame, 
The Souldiers the Grief, the World his good Name. 



350 EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 



CHURCH OF THE CAPUCHINS, PIAZZA BAKBEEINI, ROME. 

Inscribed on a flat stone near the high Altar. 

Hie jacet Pulvis, Cinis, et nihil.* 



FIELD OF BLENHEIM : INSCRIPTION ON A COLUMN SENT 

AND ERECTED BY THE EMPEROR LEOPOLD. 

It was afterwards removed. 

Agnoscat tandem Ludovicus XIV. 

neminem ante obitum 

debere aut felicem aut magnum 



* This inscription is or was, in 1722, to be found in the Cathedral 
of Toledo on a flat stone covering the remains of Cardinal Porto 
Carrero : ' Suivant q^u'il I'ordonna express^ment, mais on a mis 
vis a vis ime magidfique Epitaphe en son Honneur.' — Memoires de 
St. Simon. 



EPITAPHS AHD INSCRIPTIONS. 351 



EPIGKAM. 

Lumine Aeon dextro, capta est Leonilla sinistro, 

Sed forma esse potest liic Deus, i]la Dea. 
Blande Puer, lumen quod habes concede Sorori (parentt), 

Sic tu caecus Amor, sic erit iUa Venus. 

Variante. 
Lumine Aeon dextro, capta est Leonilla sinistro, 

Et poterat forma vincere uterque Deos. 
Parve Puer, lumen quod habes concede Sorori, 

Sic tu CEecus Amor, sic erit iUa Venus. 

This Epigram is said to have been -written by Girolamo 
Amaltheo, who was bom in Italy, and lived in the 16th 
century ; he had two brothers, John Baptista and Cornelius. 
They were aU three Latin Poets. 



INSCRIPTIONS 

ON A STONE WHICH MARKS THE SPOT ON WHICH LORD 

CAMELFORB FELL IN A DUEL. 

Placed by Lord Holland, written by Ugo Foscolo. 

Hoc Diis Manibus 

voto 
deprecatione Irse. 



352 EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 

ON A MKDAL COMMEKOEATING THE DESTEUCTION OF THE 
INTINCIBLE AHMADA, 
And representing a Fleet baffled by Stotms. 
Afflavit Deus, et dissipati sunt. 



ON THE COFFIN OP L^TITIA BUONAPARTE. 

Mater Napoleonis. 
.^tat. 87. 



FOR A BASSO RELIETO REPRESENTING A CHILD BLOWING 
UPON AN EXTINGUISHED LAMP, 

Which decorates the Front of the Receiving House of the Humane 
Society, Hyde Park. 

Lateat ScintilliLla forsan. 



INSCRIPTION ON A BUST OF BRUTUS IN THE GALLERY AT 

FLORENCE, 

Which was left unfinished by Michael Angelo. 

Dum Brati efBgiem sculptor de marmore ducit, 

In mentem sceleris venit, et abstinuit. 



1 



ENGLISH TEESION. 

Impromptu hy D. Sandwich. 

Brutum effecisset sculptor, sed mente recursat 
Tanta viri virtus, sistit et obstupuit. 



EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 353 



CHURCH OF THE SANTI APOSTOLI, ROME : INSCRIPTION ON 
A MONUMENT TO THE PRfiCORDIA OF CLEMENTINA, QUEEN 
OF EN&LAND, 

Wliose body reposes in St. Peter's. A hearjr dropsical Cherubim 
carries her Heart, and with it her Crown. 



Hie Clementinse remanent 

Prsecordia, 

Nam Cor coeleste fecit, 

ne superesset Amor. 



PANTHEON : INSCRIPTION BY CARDINAL BEMBO ON THE 
TABLET TO THE MEMORY OF RAFAELLE. 

nie hie est Raphael, timuit quo sospite vinci 
Eerum magna Parens, et moriente mori. 



PASQUINADE ON THE POPES PIUS VI. AND PIUS VII., 

When the latter went to Paris and crowned Napoleon. 

Eomani, vi dir6 un bel qnadro 
D' un santo Padre ehi fu coronar im Ladro. 
Un Pio, per conservar la Fede laseia la Sede, 
Un altro, per conservar la Sede laseia la Fede. 



A A 



354 EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 



INSCRIPTION BT LEO XII. ON THE PAVEMENT UNDER THE 
ALTAR OP LEO THE GREAT, IN ST. PETEr's. 

Leoni magno Patrono coelesti 

Me supplex commendam, 

Hie apud sacros ejus cineres 

Locum SepulturEB elegi 

Leo XII. * humilis Cliens 

HsersB tanti nominis minimus. 

Vixit an. 63 &c. &c. 

Ob. 1828 &c. &c. 
Hie positus Dec. 1830. 



FROM THE WALLS OF A WELL-SCRAWLED PORTICO, 
TRENTON FALLS. 

Les Fenetres et les Murailles 
Sent le Papier des Canailles. 



* Leo Xn. was of tlie family deUa Genga, and was reported to 
liave been very dissipated in Ms youth. He reigned six years, and 
was succeeded by Pius VIH., who reigned only one year, and was 
succeeded by Gregory XVI. 



EPITAPHS AND INSCKIPTIONS. 355 

*•- CHTJECH OF WEDMOEE, SOMEESBTSHIEE. 

Sacred to the Memorie of Captain Thomas Hodges, of the 
County of Somerset, Esq., who at the Siege of Antwerpe, 
aboute 1583, with unconquered courage wonne two Ensignes 
from the Enemy, where receiving his last "Wound, he gave 
three Legacies, his Soule to his Lord Jesus, his Body to be 
lodged in Flemish Earth, his Heart to be sent to his dear Wife 
in England. 

Here lies his wounded Heart for whome 

One Kingdom was too small a Eoome, 

Two Kingdoms therefore have thought good to part 

So stout a Body and so brave a Heart. 



PEEE LA CHAISE : TO A MOTHEE. 

Passant, donne une larme a ma Mere en pensant k la tienne. 



ON A COLUMN AT NOEDLINGEN, 

On the spot where fell in battle General de Mercy, erected 
and inscribed by the young Enghien, afterwards the Grand 
Cond^, who had defeated this veteran. 

Sta, Viator, Heroem calcas.* 
164.5. 

* ' Pause, for thy tread is on a Nation's dust.' — £yron. 

A A 2 



356 EPITAPHS AND INSCEIPTIONS. 



TITEHTON CH0ECH. 

To the Memory of 
Edward Earl of Devonshire and his Wife. 

Ho ! ho ! who lies here 7 

'Tis I, the good Earl of Devonshire, 

With Kate my Wife to me ftdl dear. 

We lived together fifty-five year. 
That we spent we had, 
That we left we lost, 
That we gave we have. 



KOUEH. 

Inscribed on the tomb of Loiiis de Br^z6 by his Widow, Diane 
de Poitiers, a specimen of mendacity exceeding any. 

Indivulsa tibi quondam, etfidelissima conjux, 
Ut fuit in Thalamo, sic erit in Tumulo. 



PAU. 



On a statue erected by subscription, which was intended to 
have been that of Henri IV., but Louis XIV. by intrigue 
and cabal contrived to have one of himself substituted. 

Louis XrV. 

Roi de France et de Navarre, 

petit fils de notre 

grand Henri. 



EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 357 

ANCIENT INSCRIPTION REPEATED BY SIR WALTER SCOTT, AND 
SAID TO HATE BEEN FOUND IN THE RUINS OF MELROSE 
ABBEY. 

The Earth walks on the Earth glistening with Gold, 
The Earth goes to the Earth sooner than it was wold, 
The Earth builds on the Earth Temples and Towers, 
The Earth says to the Earth, All will be ours. 



ST. GERMAINS. 

On a Monument erected to the Memory of King James II. by 
King George IV. 

Kegio Cineri 
Pietas regie, 

Ferale quisquis hoc monumentum aspicis 
Eerum humanarum Vices meditare. 
Magnus in prosperis. 
In adversis major, 

Jacobus II. 

Anglormn Eex, insignes 

^rumnas — dolendaque 

Nimium Fata pio placidoque 

Obitii exsolvit 

in hac Urbe, 

Die 16 Septembris 1701, 

et nobUiores qusedam 

Corporis ejus partes hie 

Keconditse asservantur. 



358 EPITAPHS AND INSOKIPTIONS. 



Age like his is fall of pleasure instead of care ; not like 
winter, but like a fine summer evening, or like the light of a 
fine harvest moon, which sheds o'er all the sleeping scene a 
soft nocturnal day. — Montgomery. 

Applied to the Eight Hon. T. Grenville, aged 90 years. 

F. W. W. 



FEOM THE CIMETIEKE DU PEEE LA CHAISE. 

Ci-git Fournier (Pierre Victor) 

Inventeur brevete des Lampes dites sans fin ; 

Brfilant une centime d'huile k I'heure. 

II fut bon Pfere, bon Fils, bon Epoux : 

Sa Veuve inconsolable 

Continue son Commerce, Eue aux Ours, No. 19. 

Elle fait des Envois dans les d^partemens. 

N.B. — Ne pas confondre avec la Boutique en face, S.V.P. 

E. I. P. 

On entering the shop, a jolly rubicund tradesman accosted 
us. We intimated a wish to transact business with the widow, 
' la Veuve inconsolable.' ' Parbleu, c'est moi ! Je suis, moi, 
Pierre Fournier, inventeur, &o. La veuve n'est qu'un symbole, 
un my the.' 



EPITAPHS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 359 

INSCKIPTION ON THE FKONT OP THE HOSPITAL FOR DISABLED 
SOLDIBES AT BERLIN. 

Said to be hy Maupertuis. 

Lasso, sed invicto Militi. 

This is quoted in the Quarterly Bevieio as the very best of 
modem Latin inscriptions. 



