w -^ . 


fa^ 


^1' 


■i- 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

Research  Library,  The  Getty  Research  Institute 


http://www.archive.org/details/stateofprisonsinOOhowa 


^??/^^(^N. 


g) 


us  /  ■' 


x^^^ 


'  ^.v 


z' 


THE 


A 


E 


OF  THE 


PRISONS 


I     N 


ENGLAND  and  WALES, 


WITH 


PRELIMINARY    OBSERVATIONS, 


ND      AN      ACCOUNT      OF      SOME 


FOREIGN      PRISONS. 


By      JOHN      HOWARD,     F.R.  S. 


ah!    little  think    the  gay 

WHOM     PLEASURE,      POWER,     AND     AFFLUENCE    SURROUND  J 
HOW    MANY     PINE     IN     WANT,     AND     DUNGEON-GLOOMS. 

THOMSON. 


WARRINGTON, 

PRINTED     BY     WILLIAM     EYRES, 
MDCCLXXVH. 


T    O 


THE       HONOURABLE 

THE     HOUSE     OF     COMMONS, 

IN        GRATITUDE 
FOR       THE       ENCOURAGEMENT 
WHICH     THEY     HAVE     GIVEN 
TO     THE    DESIGN, 
AND 
FOR       THE       HONOUR 
THEY       HAVE       CONFERRED 
ON      THE      AUTHOR, 

THIS      BOOK 

IS      RESPECTFULLY     INSCRIBED 

BY        THEIR 

MOST  OBEDIENT  SERVANT, 


Cardington, 
Bedfordshibe, 
/ipril  c,lh,  1777- 


JOHN     HOWARD. 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE. 

Introduction  i- 

Sect.    I. 
General  View  (j/'Distress  in  Prisons  7. 

Sect.  II. 
Bad  Customs  in  Prisons  25. 

Sect.    III. 
Proposed  Improvements  z;^ //6^  Structure  and 
Management  <?/ Prisons  3^* 

Sect.  IV. 
An  Account  0/ Foreign  Prisons  78. 

Sect.  V. 
A  particular  Account  ^English  Prisons    147. 

Tables  relative  to  V-e.^s^  Numbers  o/" Criminals, 

&>€,  477- 

Conclusion  4^7* 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  diftrefs  of  prilbners,  of  which  there  are  few 
who  have  not  fome  imperfe(ft  idea,  came  more  im- 
mediately under  my  notice  when  I  was  Sheriff  of 
the  county  of  Bedford  * ;  and  the  circumflance  which  ex- 
cited me  to  adtivity  in  their  behalf  was,  the  feeing  fome, 
who  by  the  verdidl  of  juries  were  declared  not  guilty,  fome, 
on  whom  the  grand  j  ury  did  not  find  fuch  an  appearance  of 
guilt  as  fubjedted  them  to  trial;  and  fome,  whofe  profecutors 
did  not  appear  againft  them;  after  having  been  confined 
for  months,  dragged  back  to  gaol,  and  locked  up  again 
till  fhey  Ihould  pay  fundry  fees  to  the  gaoler,  the  clerk  of 
affize,  6cc. 

*  In  1773. 


INTRODUCTION. 

In  order  to  redrels  this  hardfliip,  I  applied  to  the  juflices 
of  the  county  for  a  falary  to  the  gaoler  in  lieu  of  his  fees. 
The  bench  were  properly  affedled  with  the  grievance,  and 
willing  to  grant  the  relief  defired  :  but  they  wanted  a  pre- 
cedent for  charging  the  county  with  the  expence.  I  there- 
fore rode  into  feveral  neighbouring  counties  in  fearch  of  a 
precedent  j  but  I  foon  learned  that  the  fame  injuftice  was 
pradlifed  in  them ;  and  looking  into  the  prifons,  I  beheld 
fcenes  of  calamity,  which  I  grew  daily  more  and  more  anxi- 
ous to  alleviate.  In  order  therefore  to  gain  a  more  perfe(fl 
knowledge  of  the  particulars  and  extent  of  it,  by  various  and 
accurate  obfervation,  I  viiited  moft  of  the  County-Gaols  in 
England. 

Seeing  in  two  or  three  of  them  fome  poor  creatures 
whofe  afpedt  was  Angularly  deplorable,  and  afking  the  caufe 
of  it,  I  was  anfwered,  "  they  were  lately  brought  from  the 
Bridewells."  This  ftarted  a  frefh  fubjedt  of  inquiry.  I  re- 
folved  to  infpedt  the  Bridewells  :  and  for  that  purpofe  I  tra- 
velled again  into  the  counties  where  I  had  been;  and,  indeed, 
into  all  the  reft ;  examining  Honfes  of  CorreBion,  City  and 
Town-Gaols.  I  beheld  in  many  of  them,  as  well  as  in  the 
County-Gaols,  a  complication  of  diflrefs  :  but  my  attention 
was  principally  fixed  by  the  gaol-fever,  and  ihtfmall-pox, 
which  I  faw  prevailing  to  the  deftrudlion  of  multitudes,  not 
only  oi  felons  in  their  dungeons,  but  oi  debtors  alfo. 

The 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  gaol-fever  is  no  new  fubjed  of  complaint.  I  remem- 
ber Stowe,  in  his  Survey  *,  fpeaking  of  the  King's-Bench 
Prifon,  fays,  that  in  the  fix  years  preceding  the  year  1 579, 
an  hundred  prifoners  died  there :  and  twelve  between  Mi- 
chaelmafs  and  March  of  the  laft-mentioned  year,  *'  through 
a  certain  contagion  called  the  Jicknefs  of  the  houfe  j"  and  I 
{hall  prefently  have  occafion,  among  the  fatal  effetis  of  this 
diftemper  propagated  from  prifons,  and  infefting  many  a- 
broad,  to  mention  an  ancient  inftance  of  that  fort  alfo. 
Thefe  effeds  are  now  fo  notorious,  that  what  terrifies  moft 
of  us  from  looking  into  prifons,  is  the  gaol-diftemper  fO 
frequent  in  them. 

Upon  this  fubjedl  I  was  examined  in  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons in  March  1774;  when  I  had  the  honour  of  their 
thanks.  Soon  after  that,  Mr.  Popham,  Member  for  Taun- 
ton, repeated  the  humane  attempt  which  had  mifcarried  a 
few  years  before ;  and  brought  in  a  bill  for  the  relief  of  pri- 
foners who  fliould  be  acquitted,  refpedling  their y^^j-;  and 
another  bill  for  preferving  the  health  of  prifoners,  and  pre- 
venting the  gaol-diftemper.  They  both  pafTed  that  feflions. 
By  thofe  adls,  the  tear  was  wiped  from  many  an  eye ;  and 
the  legiflature  had  for  them  **  the  blejjmg  of  matiy  that  were 
ready  to  perijh." 

*  Vol.  II.  p,  18. 

B  2  The 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  great  honour  done  me  by  the  Houfe  has  excited  the 
curiofity  of  ibme  to  inquire  what  fads  I  had  colleded.  This 
is  one  reafon  of  the  prefent  publication  :  but  it  is  not  the 
only,  nor  the  principal  one.  There  are  ftill  remaining 
many  diforders  that  ought  to  be  redtified :  prifoners  fuffer 
great  hardfliips,  from  which  I  am  defirous  to  fet  them  free : 
the  gaol-Jrccr  is  not,  as  I  am  perfuaded  it  may  be,  totally 
eradicated.  Thefe  are  my  motives  for  printing  this  book. 
I  think  it  will  fliew  plainly,  that  much  is  yet  to  be  done 
for  the  regulation  of  prifons ;  and  I  am  not  without  hope, 
that  the  prefent  Parliament  will  finifli  what  was  fo  laudably 
begun  by  the  laft. 

I  WAS  called  to  the  firft  part  of  my  ta/k  by  my  office. 
To  the  purfuit  of  it  I  was  prompted  by  the  forrows  of  the 
fufferers,  and  love  to  my  country.  The  work  grew  upon 
me  infenfibly.  I  could  not  enjoy  my  eafe  and  leifure  in  the 
neglect  of  an  opportunity  offered  me  by  Providence  of  at- 
tempting the  relief  of  the  miferable.  The  attention  of  Par- 
liament to  the  fubjedt,  led  me  to  conclude  that  fome  addi- 
tional labour  would  not  be  loft  ;  and  I  extended  my  plan. 
The  difficulty  I  found  in  fearching  out  evidence  of  fraud 
and  cruelty  in  various  articles,  together  with  other  fburces 
of  diftrefs,  obliged  me  to  repeat  my  vilits,  and  travel  over 
the  kingdom  more  than  oncej  and  after  all,  I  fufped:  that 
many  frauds  have  been  concealed  from  me ;  and  that  fome- 
times  the  intereft  of  my  informants  prevailed  over  their  ve- 
racity. 


INTRODUCTION. 

racity.  Befidesj  as  I  had  in  my  firfl  journeys  gathered,  from 
fads  and  experience,  proofs  of  the  mifchievous  efFefts  of  the 
want  of  cleanlinefs  and  frelh  air,  I  had  in  my  latter  vifits 
thefe  ftrong  arguments  to  enforce  my  perfuafions ;  and,  in 
confequence,  fome  gaolers  grew  at  laft  more  mindful  and 
complying,  for  the  fake  not  only  of  their  prifoners,  but  of 
themfelves  and  their  own  families. 

It  was  not,  I  own,  without  fome  apprehenfions  of  dan- 
ger, when  I  firfl  vifited  the  prifons ;  and  I  guarded  my- 
felf  by  fmelling  to  vinegar,  while  I  was  in  thofe  places, 
and  changing  my  apparel  afterwards.  This  I  did  conftantly 
and  carefully  when  I  began ;  but  by  degrees  I  grew  lefs 
cautious  :  not  only  becaufe  ufe  abated  the  force  of  noxious 
impreffions  upon  me,  but  alfo  on  account  of  the  alteration 
made  in  fome  gaols  by  the  adt  for  prejer'ving  the  health  of 
prifoners.  A  perfon  may  now  look  into  many  a  prifon  with- 
out gaining  an  idea  of  the  condition  it  was  in  a  few  years 
ago.  I  wifh  the  reformation  to  be  not  for  the  prefent  only, 
but  lafting.  If  the  motive  for  amendment  has  any  where 
been  merely  temporary,  there  is  no  doubt  but  the  efFe<3:  will 
ceafe  with  the  caufe  :  thofe  who  from  fuch  inducement  have 
obeyed,  will  in  future  follow  the  example  of  others  who 
have  difregarded  the  law ;  and  prifons  that  have  been  a- 
mended  will  relapfe  into  their  former  flatc 


As 


INTRODUCTION. 

As  to  what  is  flill  wrong,  I  fet  down  matter  of  fadt  with- 
out amplification ,-  which  would  in  the  end  rather  impede 
than  promote  the  objedl  of  my  wifhes ;  that  is,  the  correc- 
tion of  what  is  really  amifs. 

The  journies  were  not  undertaken  for  the  traveller's 
amufement ;  and  the  colledlions  are  not  publifhed  for  ge- 
neral entertainment  j  but  for  the  perufal  of  thofe  who  have 
it  in  their  power  to  give  redrefs  to  the  fufFerers. 

The  writer  begs  his  reader  to  excufe  the  frequent  ego- 
tifms  i  which  he  did  not  know  how  to  avoid,  without  ufing 
circumlocutions  that  might  have  been  more  difgufting. 


SECTION 


SECTION        I. 

GENERAL    VIEW    OF    DISTRESS 
IN     PRISONS. 


THERE  are  prifons,  into  which  whoever  looks 
will,  at  firfl  fight  of  the  people  confined  there,  be 
convinced,  that  there  is  fome  great  error  in  the 
management  of  them  :  the  fallow  meagre  countenances  de- 
clare, without  words,  that  they  are  very  miferable  :  many 
who  went  in  healthy,  are  in  a  few  months  changed  to  ema- 
ciated dejedted  obje<fls.'  Some  are  feen  pining  under  difeafes, 
^^  Jick  and  in  prifon ;  "  expiring  on  the  floors,  in  loathfome 
cells,  of  peftilential  fevers,  and  the  confluent  fmall-pox  : 
vi(5lims,  I  muft  not  fay  to  the  cruelty,  but  I  will  fay  to  the 
inattention,  of  flieriifs,  and  gentlemen  in  the  commiffion  of 
the  peace. 

The  caufe  of  this  diflrefs  is,  that  many  prifons  are 
fcantily  fupplied,  and  fome  almoft  totally  unprovided  with 
the  neceffaries  of  life. 

THERE 


GENERAL    VIEW    OF 

THERE  are  feveral  Bridewells  (to  begin  with  them)  in 
Food,  which  prifoners  have  no  allowance  of  food  at  all.  In 
fome,  the  keeper  farms  what  little  is  allowed  them  :  and 
where  he  engages  to  fupply  each  prifoner  with  one  or 
two  pennyworth  of  bread  a  day,  I  have  known  this  flirunk 
to  half,  fometimes  lefs  than  half  the  quantity,  cut  or 
broken  from  his  own  loaf. 

It  will  perhaps  be  afked,  does  not  their  work  maintain 
them  ?  for  every  one  knows  that  thofe  offenders  are  com- 
mitted to  hard  labour.  The  anfwer  to  that  queflion,  though 
true,  will  hardly  be  believed.  There  are  very  few  Bridewells 
in  which  any  work  is  done,  or  can  be  done.  The  prifoners 
have  neither  tools,  nor  materials  of  any  kind  ;  but  fpend 
their  time  in  lloth,  profanenefs  and  debauchery,  to  a  degree 
which,  in  fome  of  thofe  houfes  that  I  have  feen,  is  ex- 
tremely fliocking. 

Some  keepers  of  thefe  houfes,  who  have  reprefented  to 
the  magiftrates  the  wants  of  their  prifoners,  and  defired  for 
them  neceffary  food,  have  been  filenced  with  thefe  in- 
confiderate  words.  Let  them  work  or  Jlar've.  When  thofe 
gentlemen  know  the  former  is  impoffible,  do  they  not 
by  that  fentence,  inevitably  doom  poor  creatures  to  the 
latter  ? 

I  HAVE  afked  fome  keepers,  fmce  the  late  aft  for  preferv- 

ing 


Sect.  I.         DISTRESS   IN   PRISONS. 

ing  the  health  of  prifoners,  why  no  care  is  taken  of  their 
fick :  and  have  been  anfwered,  that  the  magiftrates  tell 
them  the  adi  does  not  extend  to  Bridewells  *. 

In  confequence  of  this,  at  the  quarter  feffions  you  fee 
prifoners,  covered  (hardly  covered)  with  rags ;  almoll:  fa- 
mifhed ;  and  fick  of  difeafes,  which  the  difcharged  fpread 
wherever  they  go,  and  with  which  thofe  who  are  fent  to 
the  County-Gaols  infed  thefe  prifons. 

The    fame   complaint,  ivant   of  food,  is  to  be  found  in 
many  county-gaols.     In  about  half  thefe,  debtors  have 
no  bread;  although   it  h  granted  to  the  highwayman,  the 
houfe-breaker,    and   the  murderer  j    and  medical  affiftance, 
which    is    provided   for   the   latter,   is    withheld   from  the 
former.     In  many  of  thefe  Gaols,  debtors  who  would  work 
are  not  permitted  to  have  any  tools,  left  they  fhould  furnilli 
felons  with  them  for  efcape  or  other  mifchief.     I  have  often 
feen  thofe  prifoners  eating  their  water-foup  (bread  boiled  in 
mere  water)  and  heard  them  fay,   "  We  are  locked  up   and 
almoft  ftarved  to  death." 

As  to  the  relief  provided  for  Debtors   by  the  benevolent 

*  If  the  late  aa  does  not  include  Bridewells,  it  is  required,  by  an  aft  -th  James 
I.  Cap.  IV.  that  "  the  Matters  and  Governors  of— Houfes  of  Correaion  fhall  have 
"  fome  fit  allowance—for  the  relieving  of  fuch  as  fhall  happen  to  be  weak  and  fick 
"  in  their  cuftody." 

C  aft. 


^o  GENERAL    VIEW    OF 

adl,  32d  of  George  II.  (commonly  called  the  lords  adt,  be- 
caufe  it  originated  in  their  houfe)  I  did  not  find  in  all  Eng- 
land and  Wales  (except  the  counties  of  Middlefex  and  Surrey) 
TWELVE  DEBTORS  who  had  obtained  from  their  creditors 
the  four-pence  a  day,  to  which  they  had  a  right  by  that  adl : 
the  means  of  procuring  it  were  out  of  their  reach.  In  one 
of  my  journeys  I  found  near  fix  hundred  prifoners,  whofe 
debts  were  under  twenty  pounds  each  :  fome  of  them  did  not 
owe  above  three  or  four  pounds  :  and  the  expence  of  fueing 
for  the  aliment  is  in  many  places  equal  to  thofe  fmaller 
debts  ;  for  which  fome  of  thcfc  prifoners  had  been  confined 
feveral  months. 

At  Carlille  but  one  debtor  of  the  forty-nine  whom  I  faW 
there  had  obtained  his  groats  :  and  the  gaoler  told  me  that 
during  the  time  he  had  held  that  office,  which  was  fourteen 
years,  no  more  than  four  or  five  had  received  it ;  and  that 
they  were  foon  difcharged  by  their  creditors  negledling  to 
pay  it.  No  one  debtor  had  the  aliment  in  York  CalHe, 
Devon,  Chefliire,  Kent,  and  many  other  counties.  The 
truth  is,  fome  debtors  are  the  moft  pitiable  objedts  in  our 
gaols. 

To  their  wanting  necefl^iry  food,   I  muft  add  not  only  the 
demands  of  gaolers,  &c.  for  fees ;  but  alfo  the  extortion  of 
bailiffs.     Thefe  detain   in  their  houfes     (properly   enough 
denominated Jpunging-AouJesJ  at  an  enormous  expence,  pri- 
foners 


Sect.  I.  DISTRESS   IN  PRISONS.  :^ 

foners  who  have  money.  I  know  there  is  a  legal  provifion 
againfl  this  oppreffion  ;  but  the  mode  of  obtaining  redrefs 
(like  that  of  recovering  the  groats)  is  attended  with  diffi- 
culty :  and  the  abufe  continues.  The  rapine  of  thefe  extor- 
tioners needs  fome  more  effedtual  and  eafy  check :  no  bailiff 
(liould  be  fuffered  to  keep  a  public  houfe  * ;  the  mifchiefs 
occafioned  by  their  fo  doing,  are  complained  of  in  many 
parts  of  the  kingdom. 

Here  I  beg  leave  to  mention  the  hard  cafe  of  prifoners 
confined  on  exchequer  procefles;  and  thofe  from  the  ecclefi- 
aftlcal  courts  :  the  latter  are  excluded  from  the  privilege 
of  bail  3  and  the  former  from  the  benefit  of  infolvent  adts. 

Felons  have  in  fome  Gaols  two  pennyworth  of  bread  a 
day;  in  fome  three  halfpennyworth 3  in  fome  a  pennyworth; 
in  fome  a  (hilling  a  week  :  the  particulars  will  be  feen  here- 
after in  their  proper  places.  I  often  weighed  the  bread  in 
different  prifons,  and  found  the  penny  loaf  7-  to  8r  ounces, 
the  other  loaves  in  proportion.  It  is  probable  that  when 
this  allowance  was  fixed  by  its  value,  near  double  the  quan- 
tity that  the  money  will  now  purchafe,  might  be  bought  for 

*  By  the  ftatute  32d  George  II.  It  is.en^fted,  that  "  No  flieriff,  bailiff,  &c.— 
»  Jhall  convey  any  perfon  arrcfted-to  any  p.blic  viaualling  or  other  dri.king- 
-  houfe-wlthout  the  confent  of  the  perfon  fo  arrefled."  Now  if  the  bailiff  himfelf 
keeps  a  public  houfe,  this  feems  to  preclude  the  debtor's  choice  ;  he  muft  go  to 
3  public  houfe,  or  diredlly  to  gaol. 

C  2  Jt: 


fi  GENERAL   VIEW  OF 

it :  yet  the  allowance  continues  unaltered:  and  it  is  not  un- 
common to  fee  the  whole  purchafe,  efpecially  of  the  fmaller 
Turns,  eaten  at  breakfaft :  which  is  fometimes  the  cafe  when 
they  receive  their  pittance  but  once  in  two  days ;  and  then 
on  the  following  day  they  mull  faft. 

This  allowance  being  fo  far  fliort  of  the  cravings  of  na- 
ture, and  in  fome  prifons  leffened  by  farming  to  the  gaoler, 
many  criminals  are  half  ftarved  ;  fuch  of  them  as  at  their 
commitment  were  in  health,  come  out  almoft  famifhed, 
fcarce  able  to  move,  and  for  weeks  incapable  of  any  labour. 

Water.  Manv  prifons  have  no  water.      This   defedl   is  fre- 

quent in  Bridewells,  and  Town-Gaols.  In  the  felons  courts 
of  fome  County-Gaols  there  is  no  water  :  in  fome  places 
where  there  is  water,  prifoners  are  always  locked  up  within 
doors,  and  have  no  more  than  the  keeper  or  his  fervants 
think  fit  to  bring  them :  in  one  place  they  are  limited  to 
three  pints  a  day  each — a  fcanty  provifion  for  drink  and 
cleanlinefs ! 

Air.  And   as  to  air,  which  is  no  lefs  neceflary  than  either  of 

the  two  preceding  articles,  and  given  us  by  Providence  quite 
gratis,  without  any  care  or  labour  of  our  own  ;  yet,  as  if 
the  bounteous  goodnefs  of  Heaven  excited  our  envy,  me- 
thods are  contrived  to  rob  prifoners  of  this  genuine  cordial  of 
life,  as  Dr.  Hales  very  properly  calls  it:  I  mean  by  prevent- 
ing 


Sect.  I.  DISTRESS    IN    PRISONS.  13 

ing  that  circulation  and  change  of  the  falutiferous  fluid, 
without  which  animals  cannot  live  and  thrive.  It  is  well 
known  that  air  which  has  performed  its  office  in  the  lungs, 
is  feculent  and  noxious.  Writers  upon  the  fubjedl  fliew, 
that  a  hogfliead  of  it  will  laft  a  man  only  an  hour  :  but 
thofe  who  do  not  choofe  to  confult  philofophers,  may  judge 
from  a  notorious  fadt.  In  1756,  at  Calcutta  in  Bengal, 
out  of  170  perfons  who  were  confined  in  a  hole  there  one 
night,  154  were  taken  out  dead.  The  few  furvivors  afcri- 
bed  the  mortality  to  their  want  of  frefla  air,  and  called  the 
place,  from  what  they  fuifered  there,  Hell  in  miniature  ! 

Air  which  has  been  breathed,  is  made  poifonous  to  a 
more  intenfe  degree  by  the  effluvia  from  the  fick ;  and  what 
elfe  in  prifons  is  offenfive.  My  reader  will  judge  of  its 
malignity,  when  I  alTure  him,  that  my  cloaths  were  in  my 
firft  journeys  fo  oifenlive,  that  in  a  poft-chaife  I  could  not 
bear  the  windows  drawn  up :  and  was  therefore  often  obliged 
to  travel  on  horfeback.  The  leaves  of  my  memorandum- 
book  were  often  fo  tainted,  that  I  could  not  ufe  it  till  after 
fpreading  it  an  hour  or  two  before  the  fire :  and  even  my 
antidote,  a  vial  of  vinegar,  has  after  ufing  it  in  a  few  pri- 
fons, become  intolerably  difagreeable.  I  did  not  wonder 
that  in  thofe  journies  many  gaolers  made  excufes ;  and  did 

not  go  with  me  into  the  felons  wards  *. 

From 

*  1  LEARN  from  a  Letter  to  Sir  Robert  Ladbroke,  printed  in  1771,  page  11, 
that  "  Dr.  Hales,  Sir  John  Pringle,  and  others  have  obferved,  that  air,  corrupted 

"  and 


14  GENERAL   VIEW   OF 

From  hence  any  one  may  judge  of  the  probability  there 
is  againft  the  health  and  life  of  prifoncrs,  crowded  in  clofe 
rooms,  cells,  and  fubterraneous  dungeons,  for  fourteen  or 
fixteen  hours  out  of  the  four  and  twenty.  In  fome  of  thofe 
caverns  the  floor  is  very  damp :  in  others  there  is  fometimes 
an  inch  or  two  of  watery  and  the  ftraw,  or  bedding  is  laid 
on  fuch  floors,  feldom  on  barrack  bedfl:eads.  Where  pri- 
foners  are  not  kept  in  underground  cells,  they  are  often 
confined  to  their  rooms,  becaufe  there  is  no  court  *  belong- 
ing to  the  prifon,  which  is  the  cafe  in  moft  City  and  Town- 
Gaols  :  or  becaufe  the  walls  round  the  yard  are  ruinous,  or 
too  low  for  fafety  :  or  becaufe  the  gaoler  has  the  ground  for 
his  own  ufe.  Prifoners  confined  in  this  manner,  are  gene- 
. Sewers.  rally  unhealthy.  Some  Gaols  have  no  sewers  ^  and  in  thofe 
that  have,  if  they  be  not  properly  attended  to,  they  are,  even 
to  a  vifitant,  ofFenfive  beyond  exprelTion  :  how  noxious  then 
to  people  conftantly  confined  in  thofe  prifons  ! 

One   caufe   why  the  rooms  in  fome  prifons  are  fo  clofe, 

is 

"  and  putrified,  is  of  fuch  a  fubtil  and  powerful  nature,  as  to  rot  and  diflblve  heart 
"  of  oak;  and  that  the  walls  of  buildings  have  been  impregnated  with  this  poifon- 
"  ous  matter  for  years  together."  The  writer  quotes  for  his  authority  a  letter  of 
Sir  Stephen  Theodore  Janflen,  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  procure. 

•  An  aft  made  in  Ireland  the  3d  year  of  his  prefent  Majeily,  "  for  better  pre- 
venting the  feverities,  &c."  has  the  following  claufe :  "  Whereas  many  inft-iflious 
"  diforders  are  daily  produced  by  the  confinement  of  numbers  in  clofe  prifons, 
"  whereunto  there  is  no  back-yard  adjoining,  and  the  lives  of  his  Majefty's  fubjefts 
"  are  endangered  by  the  bringing  of  prifoners  into  public  fcrects  for  air  ;  Be  it 

"  enafted— 


^5 


Sect.  I.  DISTRESS    IN    PRISONS. 

is  perhaps  the  window-tax,  which  the  gaolers  have  to  pay : 
this  tempts  them  to  flop  the  windows,  and  Itifle  their 
prifoners  *. 


In  many  Gaols,  and  in  moft  Bridewells,  there  is  no  al-  Bedding. 
lowance  of  straw  for  prifoners  to  deep  on;  and  if  by  any 
means  they  get  a  little,  it  is  not  changed  for  months  toge- 
ther, fo  that  it  is  almoft  worn  to  dull:.  Some  lie  upon  rags, 
others  upon  the  bare  floors.  When  I  have  complained  of 
this  to  the  keepers,  their  juftification  has  been,  "  The 
*'  county  allows  no  ftrayi' ;  the  prifoners  have  none  but  at 
"  my  coft." 

THE  evils  mentioned  hitherto  aftedt  the  health  and  life  of 
prifoners  :  I  have  now  to  complain   of  what  is  pernicious  to 
their  morals;  and  that  is,  the  confining  all  forts  of  pri-     Morals, 
foners  together  :  debtors  and  felons  ;  men  and  women  ;  the 
young  beginner  and  the  old  offender  :  and  with  all  thefe,  in 

"  enafted-— That  every  grand  jury  at  the  aflizes  or  quarter  feflions— may  be  enabled, 

"  and  they  are  hereby  required  and  direfted,  to  contraft  either  by  leafe,  or  to  pur- 

"  chafe  a  piece  of  ground  next  adjoining  the  Gaol,  or  as  near  as  conveniently  can 

"  be  had  thereto,  &c," 

•  This  is  alfo  the  cafe  in  many  work-houfes  and  farm-houfes,  where  the  poor 
and  the  labourer  are  lodged  in  rooms  that  have  no  light,  nor  frefh  air :  which  may 
be  a  caufe  of  our  peafants  not  having  the  healthy  ruddy  complexions  one  ufed  to  fee 
fo  common  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago.  The  difference  has  often  llruck  me  in  my 
various  journeys. 

fome 


i6  GENERAL   VIEW   OF 

fome  counties,  fuch  as  are  guilty  of  mifdemeanors  only  j 
who  lliould  have  been  committed  to  Bridewell,  to  be  cor- 
rected by  diligence  and  labour;  but  for  want  of  food,  and 
the  means  of  procuring  it  in  thofe  prifons,  are  in  pity  fent 
*to  fuch  County-Gaols  as  afford  thefe  offenders  prifon- 
allowance. 

Few  prifons  feparate  men  and  women  in  the  day-time. 
In  fome  counties  the  Gaol  is  alfo  the  Bridewell :  in  others 
thofe  prifons  are  contiguous,  and  the  yard  common.  There 
the  petty  offender  is  committed  for  inflrudlion  to  the  mofh 
profligate.  In  fome  Gaols  you  fee  (and  who  can  fee  it 
without  pain  ?)  boys  of  twelve  or  fourteen  eagerly  liftening 
to  the  flories  told  by  pradiifed  and  experienced  criminals,  of 
their  adventures,  fucceffes,  flratagems,  and  efcapes. 

I  MUST  here  add,  that  in  fome  few  Gaols  are  confined 
idiots  and  lunatics.  Thefe  ferve  for  fport  to  idle  vifitants 
at  affizes,  and  other  times  of  general  refort.  The  infane, 
where  they  are  not  kept  feparate,  difturb  and  terrify  other 
prifoners.  No  care  is  taken  of  them,  although  it  is  probable 
that  by  medicines,  and  proper  regimen,  fome  of  them  might 
be  reflored  to  their  fenfes,  and  to  ufefulnefs  in  life. 

I  AM  ready  to  think,  that  none  who  give  credit  to  what 
is  contained  in  the  foregoing  pages,  will  wonder  at  the  ha- 

Gaol- 

Ff.ver.      vock  made  by  the  gaol-fever,  Frommyownobfervations 

in 


Sect.  I.  DISTRESS   IN   PRISONS. 

in  1773  and  i774>  I  was  fully  convinced  that  many  more 
were  deftroyed  by  it,  than  were  put  to  death  by  all  the  pub- 
lic executions  in  the  kingdom  *.  This  frequent  effedt  of 
confinement  in  prifon  feems  generally  underftood,  and  fliews 
how  full  of  emphatical  meaning  is  the  curfe  of  a  fevere  cre- 
ditor, who  pronounces  his  debtor's  doom  to  rot  in  gaol. 
I  believe  I  have  learned  the  full  import  of  this  fentence, 
from  the  vaft  numbers  who  to  my  certain  knowledge,  fome 
of  them  before  my  eyes,  have  periihed  in  our  Gaols. 

But  the  mifchief  is  not  confined  to  prifons-.  Not  to 
mention  now  the  number  oi Jailors,  and  oifcvrniltes  in  Ame- 
rica, that  have  been  infedled  by  tranfports,  fince  this  mode 
of  punifhment  is  by  a  late  adl  fufpended.  Multitudes  catch 
the  diflemper  by  going  to  their  relatives  and  acquaintance 
in  the  Gaols  :  many  others  from  prifoners  difcharged :  and 
not  a  few  in  the  courts  of  judicature. 

In  Baker's  Chronicle,  page  353,  that  hiftorian  mention- 
ing the  Aflize  held  in  Oxford  Caftle  1577  (called  from  its 

fatal 

*  I  HAVE  a  Table  printed  from  a  large  copper-plate,  1772*  by  Sir  Stephen 
Theodore  JanfTen,  (hewing  the  number  of  malefadtors  executed  in  London  for 
the  twenty-three  preceding  years ;  and  the  crimes  for  which  they  fuflered.  I  will 
give  an  abridgement  of  it  in  two  tables  at  the  end  of  the  book.  In  them  it  will  be 
feen,  that  the  total  number  of  executions  in  London  for  thofe  twenty-three  years,, 
was  678  ;  the  annual  average  is  between  29  and  30.  I  leave  to  others  the  difcuflion 
of  the  queftion,  whether  thofe  executions  were  too  numerous,  whether  all  the  crimes 

D  for 


i8  GENERAL   VIEW   OF 

fatal  confequence  the  Black  AjJizeJ  informs  us,  that  '*  all 
*'  who  were  prefent  died  within  forty  hours  :  the  Lord 
"  Chief  Baron,  the  Sheriff",  and  about  three  hundred  more." 
Lord  Chancellor  Bacon  afcribes  this  to  a  difeafe  brought 
into  court  by  the  prifoners  j  and  Dr.  Mead  is  of  the  fame 
opinion. 

The  firfl  of  thefe  two  authors,  Lord  Bacon,  obferves, 
that  "  the  moff  pernicious  infection  next  the  plague,  is  the 
'*  fmell  of  the  jail ;  when  the  prifoners  have  been  long  and 
"  clofe  and  naftily  kept :  whereof  we  have  had,  in  our  timet 
"  experience  twice  or  thrice;  when  both  the  judges  that  fat 
"  upon  the  jail,  and  numbers  of  thofe  who  attended  the 
**  bufmefs,  or  were  prefent,  fickened  upon  it  and  died."  * 

At  the  Lent  Affize  in  Taunton,  1730,  fome  prifoners 
who  were  brought  thither  from  Ivelchefler  Gaol,  infefted 
the  court;  and  Lord  Chief  Baron  Pengelly;  Sir  James 
Sheppard,  Serjeant ;  John  Pigot,  Efq.  Sheriff",  and  fome 
hundreds  befides,  died  of  the  gaol-diftemper.  At  Axminfter, 

for  which  it  was  infliftcd  (many  of  which  will  be  diftinftly  fet  down)  were  deferving 
of  death.  And  it  may  be  left  to  any  one  to  judge,  whether,  including  debtors  and 
petty  offenders,  the  number  of  thofe  that  died  in  the  fcveral  London  prifons  of  the 
Gaol-Fever,  does  not  exceed  the  number  of  thofe  that  were  executed  anhually  during 
that  time. — 1  have  not  the  number  of  executions  in  all  the  counties,  but  am  well  af- 
fured  it  falls  flill  much  fliortcr  of  the  number  that  perifhcd  in  prifons. 

•  Naturalliillory,  Exp.  914. 

a  little 


Sect.  I.  DISTRESS   IN   PRISONS.  19 

a  little  town  in  Devonfliire,  a  "prifoner  difcharged  from 
Exeter  Gaol  in  1755,  infeded  his  family  with  that  difeafe  : 
of  which  two  of  them  died  j  and  many  others  in  that  town 
afterwards.  The  numbers  that  were  carried  oif  by  the  fame 
malady  in  London  in  1750,  two  judges,  the  lord  mayor, 
one  alderman,  and  many  of  inferior  rank,  are  too  well 
known  to  need  the  mentioning  further  particulars. 

Sir  John  Pringle  obferves,  that  "jails  have  often 
been  the  caufe  of  malignant  fevers  j  "  and  he  informs  us, 
that  in  the  late  rebellion  in  Scotland,  above  200  men  of  one 
regiment  were  infedled  with  the  jail-fever,  by  feme  deferters 
brought  from  prifons  in  England  *. 

Dr.  Lind,  Phyfician  to  the  Royal  Hofpital  at  Haflar, 
near  Portfmouth,  fliewed  me  in  one  of  the  wards  a  number 
of  failors  ill  of  the  gaol-fever ;  brought  •  on  board  their  (hip 
by  a  man  who  had  been  difcharged  fromaprifon  in  London. 
The  fhip  was  laid  up  on  the  occafion.  That  gentleman, 
in  his  Effay  on  the  Health  of  Seamen,  aflerts,  that  "  The 
*•  fource  of  infedtion  to  our  armies  and  fleets  are  undoubt- 
"  edly  the  jails  ;  we  can  often  trace  the  importers  of  it 
"  diredlly  from  them.  It  often  proves  fatal  in  impreffing 
"men    on    the   hafty  equipment   of  a   fleet -f.     The  firfl: 

*  Obfervations  on  the  Difeafes  of  the  Army,  p.  296,  and  47. 
t  Page  307. 

D  2  "  Englifh 


20  GENERAL   VIEW   OF 

"  Englilh  fleet  fent  laft  war  to  America,  loft  by  it  above 
"  2000  men."  In  another  place  he  aflures  us,  that  "  the 
*'  feeds  of  infedlion  were  carried  from  the  guard-fhips  into 
"  our  fquadrons — and  the  mortality,  thence  occafioned,  was 
"greater  than  by  all  other  difeafes  or  means  of  death  put 
"  together."  * 

It  were  eafy  to  multiply  inftances  of  this  mifchief  j  but 
thofe  which  have  been  mentioned  are,  I  prefume,  fufficient 
to  Hiew,  even  if  no  mercy  were  due  to  prifoners,  that  the 
Gaol-Diftemper  is  a  national  concern  of  no  fmall  impor- 
tance. 

Vicious  THE  general  prevalence  and  fpread  of  wickednefs  in  pri- 

EXAMTLES.  1111  T /-   1  1  T 

fons,  and  abroad  by  the  difcharged  prifoners,  will  now  be 
as  eafily  accounted  for,  as  the  propagation  of  difeafe.  It  is 
often  faid,  *'  A  prifon  pays  no  debts  j"  I  am  fure  it  may  be 
added,  that  a  prifon  mends  no  morals.  Sir  John  Fielding 
obferves,  that  "  a  criminal  difcharged — generally  by  the 
"  next  fefllons  after  the  execution  of  his  comrades,  becomes 
*'  the  head  of  a  gang  of  his  own  raifing."  Improved,  no 
doubt,  in  fkill  by  the  company  he  kept  in  gaol  :  and  petty 
offenders  who  are  committed  to  Bridewell  for  a  year  or  two, 
and  fpend  that  time,  not  in  hard  labour,  but  in  idlenefs  and 
wicked  company,  or  are  fent  for  that  time  to  County-Gaols, 

•  Page  5. 

generally 


Sect.  I,  DISTRESS   IN   PRISONS.  2i 

generally  grow  defperate,  and  come  out  fitted,  for  the  per- 
petration of  any  villainy.  How  diredtly  contrary  this  to 
the  intention  of  our  laws  with  regard  to  thefe  offenders ; 
which  certainly  is  to  corredt  and  reform  them  !  Inflead  of 
which,  their  confinement  doth  notorioufly  promote  and  in- 
creafe  the  very  vices  it  was  defigned  to  fupprefs.  Multi- 
tudes of  young  creatures,  committed  for  fome  trifling  offence, 
are  totally  ruined  tliere.  I  make  no  fcruple  to  affirm,  that 
if  it  were  the  wifh  and  aim  of  Magiflrates  to  effed:  the  de- 
ftrudtion  prefent  and  future  of  young  delinquents,  they 
could  not  devife  a  more  effedual  method,  than  to  confine 
them  fo  long  in  our  prifons,  thofe  feats  and  feminaries  (as 
they  have  been  very  properly  called)  of  idlenefs  and  every 
vice. 

Shall  thefe  irregularities,  the  fources  of  mifery,  difeafe, 
and  wickednefs,  be  endured  in  a  nation  celebrated  for  good 
fenfe  and  humanity  ;  and  who  from  thefe  principles,  do  t^eat 
one  fort  of  prifoners  with  tendernefs  and  generofity  ?  I  mean 
prifoners  of  war.  Thefe  have  provifion  in  plenty  j  fome  to 
fpare  and  fell  to  the  foldiers  on  guard  *  :  we  frequently  faw 

*  The  daily  allowance  to  fix  prifoners  was, 

9    pounds  of  bread, 

4I  pounds  of  beef, 

3     pints  of  peafe, 

6    quarts  of  beer, 

Water  plenty. 

On  Friday  they  had  not  the  beef;  but  a  pound  and  half  of  butter  inftead  of  it. 

On  board  the  men  of  war,  indeed,  they  were  upon  Ihort  allowance. 

their 


22  GENERAL   VIEW   OF 

their  ftated  allowance  hung  up  for  their  infpedlion.  Some 
prifons  had  large  areas  for  them  to  walk  in  ;  and  at  night 
every  man  had  a  hammock  to  himfelf.  It  is  the  fartheil 
thing  in  the  world  from  my  wifh  to  deprive  captives  of  any 
one  of  thefe  benefits — I  am  only  defirous  of  feeing  the  fame 
humanity  fhewn  to  our  own  countrymen  in  diftrefs;  fo  that 
a  confident  and  uniform  pradlice  may  prove  our  benevolence 
to  be  a  firm  and  fteady  principle  ^  and  that  thofe  who  are 
cenforious  may  find  no  occafion  for  afcribing  our  kind  ufage 
of  foreigners  to  a  lefs  amiable  motive. 

Here  it  will  be  faid,  prifoners  of  war  are  not  felons, 
nor  yet  debtors  ;  and  government  is  fometiines  at  the  end  of 
a  war,  reimburfed  the  expence  of  maintaining  them.  This 
latter  I  believe  is  fadl: ;  and  the  former  is  true  without  dif- 
pute  :  we  do  not  look  upon  foreign  enemies,  nor  they  upon 
us  *,  as. delinquents  :  we  cut  one  another  to  pieces  in  bat- 
tle, 

•  I  MUST  not  be  underftood  to  mean  here  a  compliment  to  the  French.  How 
they  treat  Engliih  prifoners  of  war,  I  knew  by  experience  in  1756;  when  a  Li/bon 
pacicet  (the  Hanover)  in  which  I  went  paffenger,  in  order  to  make  the  tour  of 
Portugal,  was  taken  by  a  French  privateer.  Before  wc  reached  Breft,  I  fufiered  the 
extremity  of  thirit,  not  having  for  above  forty  hours  one  drop  of  water;  nor  hardly 
a  morfel  of  food.  In  the  caftle  at  Breft,  I  lay  fix  nights  upon  ftraw  :  and  ob- 
ferving  how  cruelly  my  countrymen  were  ufed  there,  and  at  Morlaix,  whither  I 
was  carried  next ;  during  the  two  months  I  was  at  Carhaix  upon  parole,  I  cor- 
refpondcd  with  the  Engliih  prifoners  at  Breft,  Morlaix,  and  Dinnan  :  at  the  laft 
of  thofe  towns  were  feveral  of  our  fliip's  crew,  End  my  fervant.  I  had  fufficient  eyl- 
dence  of  their  being  treated  with  fuch  barbarity,  that  many  hundreds  had  perilhcd  ; 

and 


Sect.  I.  DISTRESS    IN    PRISONS. 

tie,  but  when  that  is  over  we  grow  cool  and  compaflionate. 
I  grant  there  is  a  material  difference  in  the  circumilances  of 
foreign,  and  domeftic  prifoners,  but  there  is  none  in  their 
nature  :  debtors  and  felons,  as  well  as  hoftile  foreigners, 
are  meUy  and  by  men  they  ought  to  be  treated  as  men. 

Those  gentlemen  who,  when  they  are  told  of  the  mifery 
which  our  prifoners  fuffer,  content  themfelves  with  faying. 
Let  them  take  care  to  keep  out,  prefaced  perhaps,  with  an 
angry  prayer,  feem  not  duly  fenfible  of  the  favour  of  Provi- 
dence which  diftinguifhes  them  from  the  fuiferers :  they 
do  not  remember  that  we  are  required  to  imitate  our  gra- 
cious Heavenly  Parent,  who  is  "  kind  to  the  mtthankful  and 
the  evil."  They  alio  forget  the  viciffitudes  of  human  affairs  ; 
the  unexpedled  changes  to  which  all  men  are  liable  ;  and 
that  thofe  whole  circumflances  are  affluent,  may  in  time  be 
reduced  to  indigence,  and  become  debtors  and  prifoners. 


and  that  thirty-fix  were  buried  in  a  hole  at  Dinnan  in  one  day.  When  1 
came  to  England,  ftill  on  parole,  I  made  known  to  the  Commiffioners  of  fick 
and  wounded  feamen,  the  iundry  particulars ;  which  gained  their  attention,  and 
thanks.  Remonltrance  was  made  to  the  French  court :  our  failors  had  redrcfs  : 
and  thofe  that  were  in  the  three  prifons  mentioned  above,  were  brought  home 
in  the  firft  cartel  fliips.  —  A  La:iy  from  Ireland,  who  married  in  France,  had 
bequeathed  in  trull  with  the  magillrates  of  St.  M  .lo's,  fundry  charities  ;  one  of 
which  was  a  penny  a  day  to  every  Englidi  prifoner  of  war  in  Dinnan.  This  was 
duly  paid  ;  and  faved  the  lives  of  many  brave  and  ufeful  men.  Perhaps  what  I  {q^- 
fered  on  this  occafion,  increafed  my  fyropathy  with  the  unhappy  people^  whofe  cafe 
is  the  fubjed  of  this  book. 

But 


^4  GENERAL   VIEW,    &c. 

But  it  may  be  faid,  enough  of  the  declamatory  kind  has 
been  written  by  others.  Much  it  is  true,  has  been  written  : 
yet  I  beg  leave  to  tranfcribe,  a  few  lines  from  a  celebrated 
author,  which  may  be  thought  to  come  under  that  defcrip- 
tion.  After  reprefenting  the  calamitous  cafe  of  prifoners, 
he  goes  on  to  this  purpofe,  "  The  mifery  of  Gaols  is  not 
*'  half  their  evil ;  they  are  filled  with  every  corruption 
*'  which  poverty  and  wickednefs  can  generate  between  themj 
"  with  all  the  fhamelefs  and  profligate  enormities  that  can 
'*  be  produced  by  the  impudence  of  ignominy,  the  rage  of 
"  want,  and  the  malignity  of  defpair.  In  a  prifon  the  awe 
"  of  the  public  eye  is  loft,  and  the  power  of  the  law  is 
**  fpent ;  there  are  few  fears,  there  are  no  blufhes.  The 
**  lewd  inflame  the  lewd,  the  audacious  harden  the  auda- 
"  cious.  Every  one  fortifies  himfelf  as  he  can  againft  his 
"  own  fenfibility,  endeavours  to  praftife  on  others  the  arts 
"  which  are  pradtifed  on  himfelf  j  and  gains  the  kindnefs  of 
"  his  aflbciates  by  fimilitude  of  manners."  * 

BESIDES  the  grievances  already  mentioned  ;  there  are 
feveral  i>ad  cujioms  in  Gaols,  and  relating  to  them,  which 
aggravate  the  diftrefs  of  prifoners.  I  Ihall  enumerate  thefe 
diftincHily,  yet  concifely. 

•  The  Idler,  No.  38. 


SECTION 


SECTION        II. 


BAD     CUSTOMS     IN     PRISONS. 


A  CRUEL  cuftom  obtains  in  moft  of  our  Gaols, 
which  is  that  of  the  prifoners  demanding  of  a 
new  comer  garnish,  footing,  or  (as  it  is  Garnish. 
called  in  fome  London  Gaols)  chummage.  "  Pay  or 
ftrip,"  are  the  fatal  words,  I  fay  fatal y  for  they  are  fo  to 
fome  J  who  having  no  money,  are  obliged  to  give  up  part 
of  their  fcanty  apparel  j  and  if  they  have  no  bedding  or  ftraw 
to  fleep  on,  contradl  difeafes,  which  I  have  known  to  prove 
mortal. 

In  many  Gaols,  to  the  Garnifh  paid  by  the  new  comer, 
thofe  who  were  there  before  make  an  addition  ;  and  great 
part  of  the  following  night  is  often  fpent  in  riot  and  drun- 
kennefs.  The  gaoler  or  tapfter  finding  his  account  in  this 
pradlice,  generally  anfwers  queflions  concerning  it  with  re- 
luctance.    Of  the  Garnifh  which  I  have  fet  down  to  fundry 

E  prifons. 


26  BADCUSTOMS. 

prifons,  I  often  had  my  information  from  prifoners  who 
paid  it.  But  I  am  aware  that  the  fum  is  fometimes  varied 
by  fets  of  fucceeding  prifoners,  and  the  different  circum- 
ftances  of  a  new  comer.  la  fome  Gaols,  if  a  Felon  can  pay 
the  Debtor's  Garnifli  (which  is  commonly  more  than  that 
of  the  Felons)  he  is  entitled  to  partake  of  the  Garnifh  paid 
afterwards  by  new-come  Debtors.  In  fome  places,  this 
demand  has  been  lately  waved :  in  others,  flridtly  prohibited 
by  the  Magiflrates. 

Gaming,  Gaming  in  various  fomis  is  very  frequent :  cards,  dice, 
fkittles,  Miflifippi  and  Porto-bello  tables,  billiards,  fives, 
tennis,  &c.  In  the  country  the  three  firll  are  moft  com- 
mon; and  efpecially  cards.  There  is  fcarce  a  County-Gaol 
but  is  furniflied  with  them  :  and  one  can  feldom  go  in 
without  feeing  prifoners  at  play.  In  London,  all  the  forts 
that  I  have  named  are  in  ufe.  I  am  not  an  enemy  to  divert- 
ing exercife :  yet  the  riot,  brawling,  and  profanenefs,  that 
are  the  ufual  confcquents  of  their  play ;  the  circumftances 
of  debtors  gaming  away  the  property  of  their  creditors,, 
which  I  know  they  have  done  in  fome  prifons  to  a  confi- 
derable  amount ;  accomplishing  themfelves  in  the  frauds  of 
gamblers,  who,  if  they  be  not  themfelves  prifoners,  are  fure 
to  haunt  where  gaming  is  praftifed ;  hindering  their  fellow- 
prifoners  who  do  not  play  from  walking  in  the  yards  while 
they  do,  of  which  inconvenience  I  have  heard  them 
complain ;  thefe  feem  to  me  cogent  rcafons  for  prohi- 
biting 


Sect.  II.  B  A  D     C  U  S  T  O  M  S.  17 

biting    all     kinds    of    gaming    within    the    walls     of    a 
prifon. 

Loading  prifoners  with  heavy  irons,  which  make  Irons^ 
their  walking,  and  even  lying  down  to  fleep,  difficult  and 
painful,  is  another  cuftom  which  I  cannot  but  condemn. 
In  fome  County-Gaols  the  women  do  not  efcape  this  feve- 
rity :  but  in  London  they  do  :  and  therefore  it  is  not  ne- 
cefTary  in  the  country.  'The  practice  muft  be  mere  tyranny; 
unlefs  it  proceed  from  avarice;  which  I  rather  fufpedt  ; 
becaufe  county-gaolers  do  fometimes  grant  difpenfations, 
and  indulge  their  prifoners,  men  as  well  as  women,  with  what 
they  call  "  the  choice  of  irons,"  if  they  will  pay  for  it. 

The  author  of  the  letter  to  Sir  Robert  Ladbroke  on  pri- 
fons  (particularly  on  Newgate,  which  was  then  to  be  re- 
built) cites   in  page  79,  the  opinion  of  Lord  Coke,  Horn's 
Mirrorofjiijlice,  &c.  againft  this  oppreffion  ;  and  adds  af- 
terwards,   "  The  learned  editor  of  Hale's  Hijiory  of  the  Pleas 
*'ofth€  Crown  likewife  declares,  that  fetters  ought  not  to 
"  be  ufed,  unlefs  there  is  juft  reafon  to  fear  an  efcape,  as 
•*  where  the  prifoner  is  unruly,  or  makes  an  attempt  to  that 
"  purpofe ;   otherwife,  notwithftanding  the  common  prac- 
"  tice  of  gaolers,    it  feems  altogether  unwarrantable,  and 
"  contrary  to  the  mildnefs   and  humanity  of  the  laws  of 
"  England,  by  which  gaolers  are  forbid  to  put  their  pri- 
"  foners  to  any  pain  or  torment." 

E  2  The 


2g  BADCUSTOMS. 

The  Gentlemen  of  the  Gaol-Committee,  who  dlftingulfli- 
ed  themfelves  by  an  accurate  and  zealous  inquiry  into  the 
abufes  praftifed  by  gaolers  * ;  in  their  Report  concerning 
the  Fleet  Prifon,  20th  March  1728,  after  mentioning  a  pe- 
tition prefented  to  the  Judges  by  one  who  had  been  put  in 
irons  by  the  Wardens,  inform  us,  that  the  Judges  repri- 
manded the  Wardens,  and  declared,  that  "  a  gaoler  could 
**  not  anfwer  the  ironing  of  a  man  before  he  was  found 
**  guilty  of  a  crime." — To  the  plea  which  gaolers  ufe  in 
defence  of  this  pradlice,  that  "  It  is  necelTary  for  fafe  cuf- 
tody,"  an  anfwer  may  be  given  in  the  words  of  Lord  Chief 
Juftice  King  (afterwards  Lord  Chancellor)  to  the  Wardens 
of  the  fame  prifon,  when  he  forbade  dungeons,  which  they 
had  made  ufe  of.  That  Judge  declared,  "  they  might  raife 
their  walls  higher,  &c."  See  the  Report  of  the  fame  Com- 
mittee. 


•  This  Committee  is  celebrated  by  Thomfon,   in  the  following  lines  of  his 
Winter,  340,  &c.  edit.  1738. 


Can  I  forget  the  generous  few. 


Who,  touch'd  with  human  woe,  redreffive  fought 
Into  the  horrors  of  the  gloomy  jail  ? 
Unpitied,  and  unheard,  where  mifery  moans  ; 
Where  ficknefs  pines  ;  — — ^^— ^— — — 

Hail  Patriot  Band  !  who,  fcorning  fecret  fcorn, 
When  Juftice,  and  when  Mercy  led  the  way, 
Dragg'd  the  detefted  monfters  into  light, 

Wrench'd 


Sect.  II.  B  A  D     C  U  S  T  O  M  S.  29 

mittee.  To  what  Lord  King  fuggefted  of  raijing  the  walls, 
one  might  prefume  to  add — The  number  of  turnkeys 
ihould  be  increafed  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  pri- 
foners  *. 

The  Marquis  Beccaria,  in  his  EJfay  on  Crimes  and  Pu- 
ni/Joments,  page  j^,  obferves  that  "  Imprifonment  being 
**  only  the  means  of  fecuring  the  perfon  of  the  accufed, 
"  until  he  be  tried — ought — to  be  attended  with  as  little 
**  feverity  as  poflible."  The  diilrefs  occalioned  by  chains  is 
increafed  by 

Varying  the  towns  where  Quarter  SefTions  and  Affizes     Varying 

Towns, 

are  held  :  fo  that  prifoners  have  to  walk  in  irons  ten  or 
fifteen  miles  to  their  trial :  and  fometimes  to  towns  that 
have  no  prifon  :  where  numbers  of  both  fexes  are  fhut  up 
together  for  many  days  and  nights  in  one  room.     This  oc- 

Wrencli'd  from  tlielr  hand  Oppreffion's  iron  rod. 


Much  Hill  untouch'd  remains 

Much  is  the  Patriot's  weeding  hand  requir'd. 

•  If  the  daring  charaiSler  of  our  felons  fliould  feem,  after  all,  to  make  it  ne- 
ceffary  to  confine  them  in  irons,  it  would  be  right,  at  leaft,  to  bring  them  into 
court  for  their  trial  without  irons.  When  I  was  in  Scotland,  I  was  informed 
that  every  prifoner  there  was  tried  out  of  irons,  and  when  acquitted,  difcharged  in 
open  court, 

calions 


so  BADCUSTOMS. 

cafions  fuch  confufion  and  dijlrefs,  and  fuch  fhrieks  and  out- 
cries, as  can  be  better  conceived  than  defcribed.  Surely 
prifoners  ought  to  be  conveyed  in  carts ;  or  elfe  committed 
at  firft  to  the  town  where  the  Sefiions  or  AlTizes  are  to  be 
held.     And  in  that  town  a  proper  prifon  ought  to  be  built. 

Gaol  Gaol  DELIVERY    is   in    fome   counties    but    once    a 

Delivery, 

YEAR.  What  reparation  can  be  made  to  a  poor  creature 
for  the  mifery  he  has  fuffered  by  confinement  in  a  prifon 
near  twelve  months  (fometimes  twice  as  long)  before  a 
trial,  in  which  perhaps  he  is  at  lafl  declared  by  his  country 
not  guilty  f 

The  judicious  Marquis  whom  I  quoted  but  now 
afferts,  that  "  Privation  of  liberty  being  a  punifliment, 
"  ought  not  to  be  inflidled  before  condemnation,  but  for  as 
**  flaort  a  time  as  poflible."  And  in  cafes  of  guilt,  his  doc- 
trine is,  "  The  more  immediately  after  the  commiiTion  of  a 
'  "  crime,  a  punifhment  is  inflidted,  the  more  jufl  and  ufeful 
**  it  will  be."  This  fentiment  is  illustrated  by  a  variety  of 
acute  remarks  in  the  chapter  of  the  Advantage  of  immediate 
Piinifimcnt. 

One  caufe  of  Gaol  Delivery  being  fo  feldom,  is  info?ue 
places  the  expence  of  entertaining  the  Judges  and  their  reti- 
jiue.     At  Hull    they  ufed  to  have  the  Affize  but  once  in 

{even 


Sect.  II.  BAD     CUSTOMS.  51 

feven  years.  Peacock  a  murderer  was  in  prifon  there  near 
three  years  :  before  his  trial  the  principal  witnefs  died  j  and 
the  criminal  was  acquitted.  They  now  have  it  once  in 
three  years. 

Although  acquitted  prifoners  are  by  the  late  ad  in 
their  favour*  cleared  of  Gaolers  Fees ;  they  are  ftill  fubjedl 
to    a   fimilar   demand   made   by    clerks   of    assize    and    Clerks  of 

Assize,  &c. 

clerks  of  the  peace -[•;  and  detained  in  prifon  feveral 
days  after  their  acquittal — at  Affize,  till  the  Judges — at 
Quarter  Seffions,  till  the  Juftices  of  Peace  leave  the  town; 
in  order  to  obtain  thofe  fees,  which  the  gentlemen  fay  arc 
not  cancelled  by  the  adt.  And  yet  the  exprefs  words  of  it 
are.  Acquitted  prifoners  "  fhall  be  immediately  fet  at  large 
in  open  court." 

Since  the  faid  adt  the  Clerks  of  Affize  in  fome  circuits 
have  ftarted  a  new  demand  upon  the  gaoler  for  the  Judges 

*  14th  George  III. 

t  See  the  Table  of  the  Fees  of  the  Clerk  of  Affize  at  the  end  of  the  book. 

The  Clerk  of  the  Peace  in  one  county  demands  as  follows ; 

For  larceny  and  acquitted,  £^\  :  7:0 

Petty  larceny,  i   :  8:4 

^VTlrpped  publicly,  i   :  3:4 

Baftardy,  o  :  17  :  4 

certificate 


2i  BADCUSTOMS. 

certificate  of  acquitment  J  viz.  fix  fliillings  and  eight-pence 
for  the  firfi:  prifoner  acquitted ;  and  a  fhilling  for  each  of 
(the  reft :  or  two  fhillings  for  every  one,  I  know  fome  of 
.thefe  gentlemen  do  not  make  any  fuch  demand.  Where  it 
is  made,  fome  gaolers  refufe  to  pay  it ;  others  fubmit  mur- 
muring. I  have  copies  of  two  receipts  given  by  the 
Clerk  of  the  Weftern  circuit  to  the  gaolers  of  Exeter  and 
Salilbury  *. 

I  WAS  informed  at  Durham,  that  Judge  Gould  at  the 
Afiize  1775  ^^^'^  ^fine  of  fifty  pounds  on  the  gaoler  for  dc' 
taming  fome  acquitted  prifoners,  for  the  fees  of  the  Clerk 
of  Affize.  But  upon  the  interceflion  of  the  Bifhop  (pro- 
prietor of  the  Gaol)  the  fine  was  remitted  ;  and  the  prifon- 
ers fet  at  large  :  the  Judge  ordering  the  Clerk  of  Affize  to 
explain  to  him  in  London  the  foundation  of  his  demand. 

One  pretence  for  detaining  acquitted  prifoners  is,  that 
^'  It  is  poffible  other  indictments   may  be  laid  againfl  them 

♦  One  of  them  is  as  follows, 

*<  RECEIVED  I  April  1775  of  Mr.  Sherry  gaoler  one  pound  eight  (hillings  and 
"  8  pence  for  his  certificate  entitling  him  to  his  gaol  fees  for  the  county  of  Devon 

"  per 

»    •••••• 

•"  Clerk  of  the  Affize. " 
"Th  e  gaoler  told  me  this  was  for  twenty-three  acquitted  prifoners. 

**  before 


Sect.  IL  BAD     CUSTOM  S.  33 

"  before  the  Judge  leaves  the  town."  I  call  it  a  pretence, 
becaufe  it  is  often  waved  upon  paying  the  fees.  Another  is, 
the  gaoler  tells  you,  "  He  takes  them  back  to  knock  off 
their  irons."  But  this  may  be  done  in  court :  in  London 
they  have  an  engine  or  block,  by  the  help  of  which  they 
take  off  the  irons  with  cafe  in  a  minute  or  two  ;  the  ma- 
chine is  brought  into  court,  and  the  acquitted  prifoner  is 
immediately  difcharged.  If,  according  to  what  I  formerly 
propofed,  prifoners  were  tried  out  of  irons,  this  pretext 
would  be  entirely  removed. 

Clerks  of  Affize,  and  of  the  Peace,  ought  moft  cer- 
tainly to  have  a  confideration  for  their  fervice  to  the  public  : 
and  I  do  not  wifli  to  leffen  many  other  emoluments  of  thofe 
gentlemen.  The  only  thing  I  complain  of  is,  what  I  am 
led  to  by  my  fubjed:,  the  demand  that  is  made  diredly  or 
indiredlly  upon  prifoners. 

Some   eaolers  live  distant  from  the  prifon,  in  houfes     Gaolers 

O  ■*  _  NON-RESI- 

that  do  not  belong  to  the  county.     Non-refidence  is  not       deki. 
confiftent  with  the  attention  that  is  requifite  for   fecuring 
the  prifoners  ;  and  preferving  good  order,  cleanlinefs,  &c. 

Debtors    crowd  the  Gaols  (efpecially  thofe  in  Lon-  Wh^^es^and 
don)  with  their  wives  and   children.     There  are  often 
by  this  means,  ten  or  twelve  people  in  a  middle-fized  room : 
increafmg  the  danger  of  infediony  and  corrupting  the  mo- 

F  ^^als 


34  BAD     C-U  S  T  O  M  S. 

rals  of  children.  This  point  ought  (no  doubt)  to  be  treated 
with  tendernefs.  Man  and  wife  fliould  not  be  totally  fepa- 
rated.  Yet  the  little  probability  there  is  of  an  induftrious 
woman  being  of  much  fervice  to  her  family  in  a  prifon  : 
the  number  of  men  in  the  fame  room  j  and  of  lewd  women 
admitted  under  the  name  of  wives  i  prove  that  this  affair 
needs  fome  regulation. 

Gaols  Some    Gaols    are    private    property  :    in    thefe   the 

Private 

PRorERTy.  keepers,  proteded  by  the  proprietor*,  and  not  fo  fubjedt  as 
other  gaolers  to  the  controul  of  magiflrates,  are  more  apt  to 
abufe  their  prifoners,  when  a  temptation  offers.  One  of 
thefe  Gaols  fome  years  ago  was  quite  out  of  repair,  and  un- 
fafe;  and  the  proprietor  not  chooling  to  repair  it,  the  gaoler 
to  confine  his  prifoners  took  a  method,  that  to  all  who  faw 
it  was  really  fliocking.  Some  years  before  that,  a  prifoner 
in  another  of  thefe  Gaols  was  tormented  with  thumb-fcrews. 
The  grand  jury  took  up  the  cafe,  and  remonflrated  to  the 
proprietor;  but  in  vain.  I  had  the  account  from  a  worthy 
friend  of  mine,  who  was  upon  that  very  jury. 

OF  the  complaints  which  I  have  hitherto  made  only  in 
general  terms,  I  fliall  give  inflances  in  the  account  of  par- 
ticular prifons.     To  that  account  I  refer,  for  evidence  and 


NUMBER 


Sect.  II. 


.Nj 


NUMBER      OF      PRISONERS, 


TN  the  Spring  1776,  I  fummed  up  carefully  the  total 
-"-  number  of  prifoners  in  the  fundry  prifons.  I  have  not 
altered  the  lift  lince  my  latter  vifits,  in  which  I  faw  the 
number  in  feveral  prifons  greatly  reduced  by  the  infolvent 
Ail.     My  lift  was  as  follows. 


1.  IN  Middlefex,  i.e.  London  and 

Weftminfter  ;   together  with 

three  prifons   in  Southwark, 

viz.   the  Kifigs-Bench,  Mar- 

jloalfea,  and  Borough-Compter, 

2.  In     the     other     thirty  -  nine 

counties   of  England, 

3.  In  the  twelve  counties  of  Wales, 

4.  In  City  and  Town-Gaols, 


Debtors. 

Felons, 
&c. 

Petty 
Oflfenders. 

Total, 

1274 

228 

194 

1696 

IS^ 

617 

459 

1828 

^7 

27 



94 

344 

122 

653 

466 

2437 

994 

4084 

Petty  Offenders  in  the  Welch  County-Goals,  blank  in 
the  third  column,  third  line,  are  included  in  the  preceding 
number  of  Felons  27  :  moft  of  the  Goals  in  thofe  counties 
being  alfo  the  County-Bridewells. 

F  2  Petty 


36  NUMBER  OF  PRISONERS. 

Petty  Offenders,  blank  in  third  column,  fourth  line, 
are  included  in  the  number  459  of  Petty  Offenders  in  the 
thirty-nine  County-Gaols  j  and  in  the  number  122,  fecond 
column  fourth  line. 

All  that  were  in  the  County-Gaols  befides  Debtors,  I 
have  reckoned  in  the  lift  of  Felons.  Although  many  were 
Petty  Offenders  and  Fines. 

In  the  third  column,  under  Petty  Offenders  are  included  a 
few  Felons  occalionally  committed  to  Bridewells. 

I  HAVE  found  by  carefully  examining  fundry  Gaols,  that 
upon  an  average  tii^o  dependants  (by  which  I  mean  wives 
and  children  only*)  may  be  alligned  to  each  man  in  prifon. 
My  computation  is  confirmed  by  the  account  which  we 
have  from  the  Benevolent  Society  at  the  Thatched  Houfe, 
Odlober  9th,   1776,  as  follows.     Since  their  inftitution  in 

1772, 

Difcharged  Debtors,.  3980 

Who  had  Wives,  2193 

And  Children,  6288 

Perfons  immediately  benefited,,  12461 


•  I  DO  not  include  P*?/-/*/.',  many  of  whom  I  have  fcen  forrowfulLy  attending  at 
prifons,  and  deeply  fharing  in  the  diftrefs  arifing  from  the  confinement  of  their 
children. 

And 


Sect.  II.         NUMBER  OF  PRISONERS. 

And  by  the  account  from  the  Brijiol  Society  -,  who  in  their 
lift  publifhed  May  31ft,   1775,  have 

Perfons  difcharged,  72 
Their  Wives,  45 
Children,                                        120 

Total,  238 

Each  of  thefe  totals  is  confiderably  larger  than  the  re- 
fpedlive  produfts  of  multiplication  by  my  rule:  the  firft 
exceeds  by  521,  the  latter  by  19.  There  is  indeed  com- 
monly a  furplus  among  Debtors ;  but  a  deficiency  among 
Felons,  &c.  reduces  the  average  of  Dependants  to  that 
which  I  ftated. 

If  then   to  the  total  number  in  England  and  Wales,. 

that  is,  4084 

You  add  twice  that  number  of  Dependants,        8168 

The  number  of  the  diftreffed  is,  12252- 


IT  appears  from  the  foregoing  Table  of  Prifoners,  that 
their  number  has  been  greatly  magnified  by  conjedlural 
computations ;  but  furely  the  real  number,  with  that  of 
thofe  partaking  their  diftrefs,  is  an  objed  well  worthy  the 
farther  attention  of  the  Legiflature. 


SECTION 


SECTION        III. 


PROPOSED       IMPROVEMENTS 

IN  THE  STRUCTURE  AND  MANAGEMENT 

OF     PRISONS, 


HOWEVER  fanguinary  the  wifh  of  an  angry  cre- 
ditor may  be  when  he  arrefls  and  imprifons  his 
debtor ;  there  is  no  doubt  but  every  one  who 
liftens,  not  to  his  paflions,  but  to  reafon,  mail:  know,  and 
will  own,  that  it  is  a  flagrant  crime  to  take  away  the  life  of 
a  man  for  debt :  and  as  to  felony,  a  Gaol  is  not  defigned 
for  the  final  punifhment  even  of  that ;  but  for  the  fafe  cuf~ 
tody  of  the  accufed  to  the  time  of  trial ;  and  of  convids  till 
a  legal  fentence  be  executed  upon  them.  The  laws  of 
England  do  not  fuffer  private  executions.  No  condemned 
malefador  may  be  fecretly  put  to  death  ;  nor  murdered  in  a 
prifon  direftly  or  indiredlly :  much  lefs  ought  thofe  to  be 
deftroyed  there  whofe  fentence  does  not  affedl  their  life. 
Their  deftrudtion  is  not  only  unjuft;  it  is  inconfiftent  with 

prudence 


Sect.  III.     PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  39 

prudence  and  found  policy.  They  might  no  doubt  be  ufe- 
ful  at  home  or  abroad  j  if  proper  care  were  taken  in  prifon, 
to  keep  them  healthy  and  fit  for  labour:  but  certain  it  is, 
that  many  of  thofe  who  furvive  their  long  confinement,  are 
by  it  rendered  incapable  of  working.  Some  of  them  are 
grtevoufly  affected  with  fcorbutic  diftempers  ;  others  have 
their  toes  mortified  *,  or  quite  rotted  from  their  feet;  many 
inftances  of  which  I  have  fecn. 

If  one  who  has  turned  King's  Evidence,  or  has  been 
barely  acquitted  upon  trial,  terrified  by  his  narrow  efcape, 
feeks  for  honeft  employment ;  he  is  commonly  fuch  a  fick- 
ly  milerable  objedl  that  no  one  will  fet  him  to  work.  That, 
I  believe,  is  the  principal  caufc  of  his  being  rejedted ;  for 
there  are  feveral  forts  of  labour  that  require  but  little  confi- 
dence :  yet  the  poor  acquitted  prifoner  fliall  go  from  door 
to  door  afking  for  work,  in  vain.  Is  it  not  to  be  lamented, 
that  every  fpark  of  good  intention,  inftead  of  being  cherilh- 
ed,  fhould  be  thus  exthiguiped,}  And  that  the  penitent 
fliould  by  an  almoft  irrefiitible  necefiity  be  driven  again, 
though  reludtant,  to  the  practice  which  foon   brings   him 

*  Mess".'  Stephenfon  and  Randolplvof  Briftol,  Contra£lors  for  Tranfport  Con- 
vifts,  complained  of  this  to  Mr.  Biggs,  gaoler  at  Salifbury,  in  their  letter  to  him 
Sept.  13,  1774.  "  Sore  feet  proved  very  fatal.  The  mortality  we  met  with  in  our 
"  kftfhip,  if  repeated  in  this,  will  fo  furfeit  us,  that  we  fhall  never  take  another. 
"  We  loll  an  imnienfe  fum  by  them  ;  and  our  Ihip  is  detained  to  this  moment  under 
*'  quarantine." 

back 


40  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

•back  to  his  former  manfion  ^  and  fliortens  a  wretched  life, 
that  might  have  been,  that  fain  would  have  been,  an  ufeful 
one  ? 


In  order  to  redrefs  thefe  various  evils,  the  firft  thing  to 
be  taken  into  confideration  is  the  Prifon  itfelf.  Many  Coun- 
ty-Gaols and  other  Prifons  are  fo  decayed  and  ruinous,  or, 
for  other  reafons,  fo  totally  unfit  for  the  purpofe,  that  new 
ones  mufl  be  built  in  their  {lead.  Others  are  very  incom- 
modious, but  may  be  improved  upon  the  ground  about 
them,  which  is  occupied  by  the  keeper,  or  not  ufed  at  all. 
Some  need  little  more  than  a  thorough  repair.  In  order  to 
give  what  little  afliflance  I  can  to  thofe  who  muft  build  a 
new  County-Gaol,  1  will  take  the  liberty  to  fuggefl  what 
hath  occurred  to  ms  upon  this  head,  in  hopes  that  fome 
more  ikilful  hand  will  undertake  the  generous  and  benevo- 
lent talk  of  carrying  to  perfedion  a  icheme  of  which  I  can 
only  draw  the  outlines.     I  fliall  firft  fay  fomething  of  the 


SITUATION. 


A  COUNTY-GAOL,  and  indeed  every  prifon,  fliould 
be  built  on  a  fpot  that  is  airy,  and  if  pofiible  near  a 
river,  or  brook.  I  have  commonly  found  prifons  fituated 
near  a  river t  thecleaneft  and  moft  healthy.     They  generally 

have 


Sect.  III.        PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  41 

have  not  (they  could  not  well  have)  fubterraneous  dun- 
geons, which  have  been  deftrudlive  to  thoufands  :  and  by 
their  nearnefs  to  running  water,  another  evil,  almoft  as 
noxious,  is  prevented,  that  is,  the  llench  of  fewers. 

I  SAID  a  Gaol  fliould  be  near  a  flream;  but  I  mufl  anneji 
this  caution ;  that  it  be  not  fo  near  as  that  either  the  houfe 
or  yard  fliall  be  within  the  reach  of  floods.  This  circum- 
fiance  was  fo  little  thought  of  at  Appleby  in  Weftmoreland, 
when  their  new  Gaol  was  built,  that  I  faw  the  walls  marked 
from  nine  inches  to  three  feet  high  by  floods. 

If  it  be  not  pradicable  to  build  near  a  ftream,  then  an 
eminence  fliould  be  chofen  :  for  as  the  walls  round  a  prifon- 
yard  mufl:  be  fo  high  as  greatly  to  obflrua:  a  free  circulation 
of  air }  this  inconvenience  fhould  be  leflened  by  a  rifino- 
ground :  and  the  prifon  fhould  not  be  furrounded  by  other 
buildings,  nor  built  in  the  middle  of  a  town  or  city. 


G  '  PLAN. 


42  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 


N, 


THE  annexed  engra,ving  reprefents  fuch  a  plan  for  a 
prifon  as,  according  to  my  ideas,  unites  the  greateft: 
advantages  with  regard  to  health,  order,  aad  fecurity.  By 
the  afliftance  of  the  references  it  will  explain  itfelf  better 
than  can  be  done  by  a  verbal  defcription.  I  fhall  only  fub- 
join  a  few  general  remarks  on  fome  particulars  in  the  ftruc- 
tare. 

THAT  part  of  the  building  which  is  detached  from  the 
walls,  and  contains  the  men-felons  ward,  may  be  fquare. 
Arcades,  or  recflangular,  raifed  on  arcades,^  that  it  may  be  more  airy, 
and  leave  under  it  a  dry  walk  in  wet  weather.  Wards  over 
arcades  are  alfo  beft  for  fafety,  for  I  have  found  that  efcapes 
have  been  moil  commonly  effected  by  undermining  cells  * 
and  dungeons.  If  the  felons  fhould  find  any  other  means 
to  break  out  of  this  raifed  ward,  they  will  flill  be  ftopt  by 
the  wall  of  the  yard. 

•  When  I  went  into  Horftiam  Gaol  with  the  keeper,  we  faw  a  heap  of  ftones 
and  rubbilh.  The  felons  had  been  two  or  three  days  undermining  the  founJation  of 
their  room,  and  a  general  efcape  was  int^ded  that  night.  We  were  but  juil  in  time 
to  prevent  it;  for  it  was  almoft  night  when  wc  went  in.  Our  lives  were  at  their 
Wfrcy  ;  but  (thank  God)  they  did  not  attempt  to  murder  us,  and  rulh  out. 

I  WISH 


Sect.  III.     PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  43 

I  WISH  to  have,  fo  many  fmall  rooms   or  cabins  in  this      Small 

■'  Rooms.    • 

ward,  that  each  criminal  may  fleep  alone*.  If  it  be  diffi- 
cult to  prevent  their  being  together  in  the  day-time,  they 
fhould  by  all  means  be  feparated  at  night.  Solitude  and  li- 
lence  are  favourable  to  refledlion ;  and  may  poffibly  lead 
them  to  repentance.  Privacy  and  hours  of  thoughtfulnefs 
are  neceflary  for  thofe  who  muft  foon  leave  the  world ;  and 
in  the  Old  Newgate  there  were  fifteen  cells  for  perfons  in 
this  iituation,  which  are  ftill  left  ftanding,  with  the  defign 
of  annexing  them  to  the  new  building.  The  like  provifion 
for  fuch  as  return  to  fociety,  cannot  be  lefs  needful.  One 
of  the  writers  cited  in  the  note,  Bifliop  Butler,  affirms  that 
it  is  much  more  fo,  **  fince  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  of 
"  greater  confequence  in  a  religious,  as  well  as  civil  refpeft, 
**  how  perfons  live  than  how  they  die." 

Tbe  feparation  I  am  pleading  for,  especially  at  night, 
would  prevent  efcapes,  or  make  them  very  difficult :  for 
that  is  the  time  in  which  they  are  generally  planned,  and 
effecfted.  Another  reafon  for  feparation  is,  that  it  would 
free  gaolers  from  a  difficulty  of  which  I  have  heard  them 
complain  :  they  hardly  know  where  to  keep  criminals  ad^ 

*  See  the  importance  of  this  Reparation  ftrongly  urged  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Robert 
Ladbroke,  printed  for  Oliver,  1771.  See  alfo  a  Spital  Sermon  of  Bifliop  Butler 
preached  before  the  Magiftrates  of  London,  April  14th,  1750,  particularly  page 
zoth,  &c.  And  Mr.  Hanway's  8th.  loth.  and  zzd  Letttrs  in  his  book  entitled  The 
Defers  of  Police  the  Caufe  of  Immorality,  Sec. 

G  2  mitted 


M 


PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 


King's       mitted  to  be  evidence  for  the  Kins:.     Thefe  would  be  mur- 

EVIDENCE. 

dered  by  their  accomplices  if  put  among  them  ;  and  in 
more  than  one  prifon,  I  have  feen  them,  for  that  reafon, 
put  in  the  women's  ward. 

Where  there  are  oppofite  windows  they  fhould  have 
ihutters  ;  but  thefe  fhould  be  open  all  day.  In  the  men- 
felons  ward  there  fhould  be  no  glafs  j  nor  fhould  the  pri- 
foners  be  allowed  to  flop  the  windows  with  ftraw,  &c. 

Women-  The  women-felous   fliould  be  quite  feparate    from  the 

men  *  :  and  young  criminals  from  old  and  hardened  of- 
fenders. Each  of  thefe  three  clafTes  fljould  alfo  have  their 
day-room  or  kitchen  j  and  their  court-yard  and  offices  all 
feparate. 

Every  court  fhould  be  paved  for  the  more  convenient 
wafhing  it ;  and  have  a  good  pump,  or  pipes  laid  in ;  both 
Tump.  if  pofiible  :  and  the  Pu//ip  anti  Pipes  fhould  be  repaired  as 
foon  as  they  need  it ;  otherwife  the  Gaols  will  foon  be  of- 
fenfive  and  unwholefome,  as  I  have  always  found  them  to 
be  in  fuch  cafes.     A  fmall  flream  conftantly  running  in  the 


•  By  art  Aft  made  in  Ireland,  3d  of  his  prefent  Majcfty,  it  is  enafleJ,  "  That  in 
•'  all  Gaols  hereafter  to  be  built,  there  may  be  dilHnft  apartments  for  the  men  and 
"  women;  and  that  all  Gaolers,  whofc  Gaols  will  at  prefent  admit  of  fuch  a  dif- 
"  tin£tion,  may  be  obliged  to  feparate  and  keep  apart  the  different  fexes." 

yard 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  45 

yard  is  very  defireable.  In  a  room  or  flied  near  the  pump  or 
pipe,  there  Ihould  be  a  Bath*  (as  there  is  in  County-  Bath. 
Hofpitals)  to  wafla  prifoners  that  come  in  dirty,  or  grow 
dirty  afterwards.  It  fliould  be  filled  every  morning,  and 
let  oft  in  the  evening  through  the  privies  into  the  drains. 
There  fliould  alfo  be  a  copper  in  the  ihed,  to  heat  a  quan- 
tity of  water  fufficient  to  warm  that  in  the  bath;  for  wafh- 
ing  thofe  that  are  fickly.  There  fliould  likewife  be  an 
Oven:  nothing  fo  effedlually  deflroys  vermin  in  cloaths  and  Oven. 
bedding,  nor  purifies  them  fo  thoroughly  when  tainted  with 
infedlion,  as  being  a  few  hours  in  an  oven  moderately 
heated  -f-. 

The  Infirmary  or  fick  wards  fhould  be  in  the  mofi:  airy  Infirmary. 
part  of  the  yard,  quite  detached  from  the  reft  of  the  Gaol, 
and  raifed  on  arcades.  In  the  middle  of  the  floor  of  each 
room  there  fliould  be  a  grate  of  twelve  or  eighteen  inches 
fquare,  for  a  current  of  air ;  covered  with  a  fliutter  or  hatch 
at  night.  The  fame  contrivance  might  alfo  be  convenient 
in  the  other  wards.  Befides  the  grate,  it  is  neceflary  to  have 
in  the  wards,  but  efpecially  in  thofe  of  the  infirmary.  Hand-  Venti- 
Ventilators  to  frefhen  them  every  day.  This  machine  is  of 
excellent  ufe  when  mofl  wanted,  and  when  the .  wind  or 
fail-ventilator  is  of  no  fervice,    that  is,   in  calm  weather^ 

*   14th  George  III.  Cap.  XLIII. 
\  See  Dr,  Llnd's  Eflay  on  the  Health  of  Seamen,  p.  320  and  336. 

Dodror 


LATORS, 


46  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

Do(5tor  Hales,  on  the  fubjedl,  page  12,  fliews   that  it  will 
fupply  fcventy-five  tons  of  air  in  a  minute. 

The  infirmary  and  fheds  will  not  render  the  yard  unfafe, 
provided  the  walls  have  parapets,  or  fmall  chevaux  defrifc: 


Separation 
ofDebtors 


Debtors  and  felons  rnould  have  wards  totally  feparate  : 
andFelons,  the  peace,  the  cleanlinefs,  the  health  and  morals  of  debtors 
cannot  be  fecured  otherwife.     The  Acft  22d  and, 23d  Charles 
II.    Chapter   20,    requires    this    feparation    at    night ;    that 
debtors   may  not  be  difturted  by  the  curfes  and  other  pro- 
fane language  of  felons  :    "  Be  it  enafted,—  That  they  Yliall 
*'  be  put,    kept,   and  lodged  feparate  and  apart   one   from 
"  another,  in  diftind:  rooms."     TJiefe  words  do  perhaps  in 
the  ftridl  conftrudtion  imply  no  more  than  no(5turnal  fepara- 
tion.     But  furely  it  is  a  far  greater  mifchief  for  debtors   to 
be  annoyed  and   corrupted   by   the  wicked  converfation  of 
felons  all  day  long,  than  to  be  difturbed  by  it  in  the  night- 
time.    I   am  not   deligning  to  infer  from  hence,   nor  yet 
from  -the  character   of  the  Gentlemen  who  compofed  that 
Parliament,  that  the  Adl  fliould  be  conftrued  according  to 
my  view  of  the  argument ;  or  to  what  I  conjedlure  was  their 
intention,     I  know  it  is   wrong   to  explain  laws  by  fuch  a 
vague  principle  as  the  fuppofed  fpirit  of  them.    But  it  feems 
to  me  neceflary  that  there  fhould  be  a  total  feparation.  Thefe 
different  forts  of  prifoners   are  indeed  generally  feparated  at 
night.     I  do  not  recoiled  more   than  two  or  three  Gaols 

where 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  LMPROVEMENTS.  47 

where  they  lodge  together,  viz.  Brecon,  Portfmouth,  the 
Borough-Compter,  aud  Clerkenwell  Bridewell.  I  mull 
now  add  TothillRelds  Bridewell,  where  petty  debtors  are 
confined,  becaufe  Weftminlter  Gatehoufe  is  taken  down. 
Conflant  feparation  is  defirable :  the  Gaol  will  by  that 
means  be  kept  cleaner  :  and  if  the  fmall-pox,  or  the  gaol- 
fever,  Ihould  infed:  one  ward,  the  other  at  a  diilance  may 
be  free  from  it.  This  would  alfo  remove  the  objedlion  that 
is  now  made  againfl:  permitting  debtors  to  work :  that  is, 
the  danger  of  their  furnifhing  felons  with  tools  for  mifchief, 
or  efcape. 

In  the  debtors  ward  there  fhould  be  a  day-room  or 
kitchen;  alfo  a  large  Work-Jloop  for  fuch  as  are  willing  to  Work-shop. 
work.  Some  few  Gaols  have  the  latter ;  and  in  them  I 
have  feen  chair-makers,  flioe-makers,  &c.  employed  in 
their  feveral  trades  -,  preferving  their  habit  of  induftry ; 
contributing  to  the  fupport  of  their  families  ;  and  lighten- 
ing the  burthen  that  by  their  imprifonment  falls  on  the  re- 
fpeflive  parifhes. 

Prisoners  indidled  for  felony  fhould  not  be  compelled 
to  work.  But  I  have  heard  many  of  them  wifhing  they 
might  be  permitted  to  earn  fomething  for  their  more  com- 
fortable fupport.  In  fome  few  Gaols  they  have  this  privi- 
lege, as  at  Exeter,  Norwich,  &c. 

Women- 


48  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 


Women- 
Debtors. 


Women-debtors  fliould  have  a  ward,  a  court,  a  pump, 
&c.  to  themfelves  :  and  no  communication  fliould  be  al- 
lowed between  the  two  fexes. 


Debtors  The   Word  for  Mcti-Debfors  fliould  alio  be  over  arcades, 

W  A  R  D  • 

and  placed  on  one  fide  of  the  gaoler's  houfe.  This  houfe 
fliould  be  in  or  near  the  middle  of  the  Gaol,  with  windows 
to  the  felons  and  the  debtors  court-yard. 

Chajel.  a  chapel  is  jieceflary  in  a  Gaol.     I  have  chofen  for  it 

what  feems  to  me  a  proper  fituation.  It  fliould  have  a  gal- 
lery for  debtors  or  women  ;  and  the  refl:  may  be  feparated 
below.  Bibles  and  prayer-books  fliould  be  chained  at  con- 
venient diftances  on  each  fide  :  thofe  who  tear  or  otherwife 
damage  them  fliould  be  puniflied. 


REGULA- 


.  y  7///m'f-/ '  ^/  r  //  v^  (fjf/'/:j 


A  FLAKjora  COrXTY  GAOZ 


Fro//M'Gno/e/sHonJeSc7)(f)for.f  JVmv/.  lyo/i/ o/Mf//  Fe/oj/s  H7frd. 


O/ifnr/ri  yi /  rr  f  ////. 


^j^, Y'//,^ avU.,M /A>/m,-f,„„ y'^/,, z;/*,.^,  /„ /.r,Ur„„',u,//,//Ly„„„,/:  i„w.ry'''yf;:„.,„;:,. 


m 


Sect.  IIL       PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  49 


REGULATIONS. 


WITHOUT  a  due  attention  to  the  oecononiy  and  go- 
vernment of  a  Prifon,  it  is  evident  that  no  contri- 
vance of  ftrudture  can  fecure  it  from  being  the  abode  of 
wickednefs,  difeafe,  and  mifery ;  I  fhall  therefore  offer  a 
few  hints  for  the  better  regulation  of  a  Gaol. 


THE  firfl  care  muft  be  to  find  a  good  man  for  a  Gaoler  j      Gaoler. 
one  that  Is  honeft,   adllve,   and  humane.     Such  was   Abel 
Dagge,  who  was  formerly  keeper  of  Briflol  Newgate.     I  re- 
gretted his  death,  and  revere  his  memory. 

This  officer  muft  be  fober  himfelf,  that  he  may,  by  ex- 
ample, as  well  as  authority,  reftrain  drunkennefs,  and  other 
vices  in  his  prifon.     To  remove  a  ftrong  temptatiQU  to  the 

H  contimy, 


5©  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

contrary,  it  is  highly  requifite  that  no  Gaoler,  Turnkey, 
or  other  fervant  be  fuffered  to  hold  the  Tap  ;  or  to  have  any 
connexion,  concern,  or  intereft  whatever  in  the  fale  of  li- 
quors of  any  kind.  Gaolers  who  hold,  orlet,  the  tap,  find 
their  account  in  not  only  conniving  at,  but  promoting 
drunkennefs  and  midnight  revels.  What  profligate  and  de- 
bauched company  of  both  fexes,  do  we  fee  let  into  our 
Gaols,  that  the  tap  may  be  kept  running!  Befidcs  this, 
the  Gaoler's  intereft  in  the  fale  of  liquors,  may  prompt 
him  to  be  partial  in  his  behaviour  to  his  prifoners ;  to  treat 
at  leaft  with  negledt,  thofe  who  are  poor  and  have  nothing 
to  fpend  i  which  is  the  cafe  of  far  the  greater  number : 
while  he  (hall  carefs  difhoneft  debtors,  who  take  fhelter  in 
a  prifon,  in  order  to  live  there  in  riot  upon  the  property  of 
their  creditors.. 

I  KNOW  that  by  the  ftatute  of  32d  George  11.  a  Debtor 
has  a  right  to  fend  out  of  the  Gaol  for  liquor  and  other  ne- 
ceffaries*.  This  is  a  very  judicious  provifion  ;  and  very  be- 
neficial to  prifoners  where  they  have  the  full  and  free  ufe  of 
it.  But  fome  Gaolers  there  are,  who  find  ways  to  reftrain 
this  privilege,  for  the  profits  of  their  tap  :  whereas  if  Gaol- 
ers were  prohibited  from  all  concern  in  the  fale  of  liquor, 
this  would  not  only  remove  that  check,  and  reftore  to  pri- 
foners the  free  enjoyment  of  the  liberty  they  are  entitled  to  -, 

*  "  At  his  free  will  and  picafure,  to  fend  for,  or  to  have  brought  to  him—-  at  fea- 
"  fonable  times  in  the  day  time,  any  beer,,  ale,  viiluals,  or  any  other  taeceflary  food." 

but 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

but  would  alfo  be  the  means  of  fuppreffing  much  Ititernpe- 
rance ;  and  perhaps  of  entirely  abolifliing  Gm'niJIj,  as  well 
as  Clubs  or  night  affociations. 

That  it  is  neceffary  to  deprive  Gaolers  of  all  profits 
arifing  from  the  Tcip,  I  am  convinced,  not  by  mere  fpecu- 
lation,  but  by  what  I  have  learned  from  converfation  with 
Gaolers  themfelves.  I  aiked  two  of  them,  whom  I  found 
candid  and  intelligent,  **  what  they  thought  would  be  the 
"  moft  likely  means  of  effedting  a  thorough  reformation  in 
"  Gaols."  The  anfwer  I  had  from  both,  was  to  this  pur- 
pofe,  "  Let  no  licences  be  granted  for  felling  beer  or  wine 
**  in  Gaols  :  let  it  be  made  fome  other  way  worth  our  while 
*'  to  keep  them." 

Gaolers  Ihould  have  falaries  proportioned  to  the  trufl 
and  trouble  j  fmce  no  office,  if  faithfully  and  humanely  ad- 
miniflered,  better  deferves  an  adequate  encouragement :  yet 
not  fo  much  as  to  raife  them  above  attention  to  their  duty, 
and  the  daily  infpedlion  of  their  Gaols, 

The  Gaol-Comi7iittee,  which  I  have  mentioned  before,  in 
their  Report  of  the  Marfhalfea  Prifon,  14  May  1729,  after 
enumerating  many  mifchiefs  which  they  found  had  been 
occafioned  by  the  Gaoler's  holding  or  letting  the  tap,  draw 
the  following  conclufion ;  *'  This  fhews  the  inconveniency 
"  of  the  Keepers  having  the  advantage  of  the  Tap-houfe, 
"  lince  to  advance  the  rent  thereof,  and  to  confume  the  li- 

H  2  "  quors 


52  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

"  quors  there  vended,  they  not  only  encourage  riot  and 
"  drunkennefs,  but  alfo  prevent  the  needy  prifoner  from 
*'  being  fupplied  by  his  friends  with  the  meer  neceflaries  of 
"  life,  in  order  to  encreafe  an  exorbitant  gain  to  their 
"  tenants." 

When  I  was  in  Ireland  (January  1775)  I  found,  not 
without  fome  furprife,  that  no  liquors  were  fold  in  any  of 
the  prifons  which  I  faw.  Upon  inquiry,  I  learned  that 
there  is  an  A6t  againft  it,  made  in  the  third  year  of  his  pre- 
fent  Majefty  *. 

No  Prifoner  fhould  be  a  Turnkey.  It  is  the 
Gaoler's  duty  to  infpe<5l  the  wards  himfelf  every  day, 
and  not  to  leave  this   to  fervants  -f.      The  Magijhates  of 


*  The  preamble  runs  thus,  "  Whereas  many  frauds  and  abufcs  ha\-e  been  com- 
"  mitted  by  Gaolers---brewing  of  drink,  and  baking  of  bread,  which  they  oblige 
"  their  prifoners  to  take  from  them  at  their  own  rates— Be  it  enafted— that  no 
"  Gaoler  or  any  perfon  in  truft  for  him,  fliall  brew  or  bake  in  the  Gaol— -or  in  any 
"  place— for  fale,  or  keep  any  ihop  for  the  felling  of  bread,  or  beer,  or  ale,  or 
"  other  liquors,  under  the  penalty  of  five  pounds  for  every  fuch  oiFence." 

•f-  In  my  firft  journeys  many  County-Gaolers  excufed  themfelves  from  going  with 
me  into  the  Felons  Ward.  In  one  County-Gaol  the  Felons  told  me  once  and  again 
that  the  Gaoler  had  not  been  in  their  ward  for  months.  I  would  not  have  quoted 
a  report  from  Felons,  if  the  Turnkey,  who  was  prcfent,  had  not  confirmed  their 
teftimony. 

Glafgow 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  53 

Glafgow  *  have  exprefsly  ordered  that  "  The  Gaoler  every 
"  morning  and  evenmg,  at  the  opening  of,  and  before  the 
*'  (hutting  up  the  prifon,  fliall  perfonally  vifit  every  room 
**  and  place  therein." 

He  mufl  encourage  and  promote  cleanlinefs.  For  this 
reafon  an  old  or  infirm  man  fliould  not  be  a  Gaoler  :  when 
that  is  the  cafe,  all  is  commonly  dirty.  He  fhould  be 
compaffionate  to  the  fick.  If  he  is  ordered  to  diflribute  the 
allowance,  he  muft  do  juftice  to  the  county  or  city,  and  to 
his  prifoners,  by  giving  to  the  latter  the  full  ftated  quantity. 

I  HAVE  faid  before,  a  Gaoler  (Tiould  not  live  at  a  diftance 
from  his  prifon  -f.  He  fliould  not  only  refide  on  the  fpot, 
but  be  conftantly  at  home.  Prifoners  generally  take  advan- 
tage from  his  abfence.  For  this  reafon,  no  Keeper  of  a 
Prifon  fhould  be  a  Sheriff's  Officer.  Such  are  very  often  Sheriff's 
abroad ;  and  fome  of  them  have  acknowledged  to  me,  that 


*  I  OUGHT  not  here  to  omit  my  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  politenefs  and 
civility  of  thefe  Gentlemen,  who,  on  my  vifit  to  the  place  in  January  1775,  did  me 
the  honour  of  prefenting  me  with  the  freedom  of  the  city,  in  a  manner  truly  hofpi- 
table  and  obliging. 

•|-  The  bad  confequences  of  a  contrary  police  I  have  often  feen  and  lamented; 
particularly  at  Dublin  Newgate, 


their 


54  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

their  bufinefs  as  Officers  was  incompatible  with  their  duty 
as  Gaolers. 


CiiAi'LAiN,  I  HAD  the  pleafure  to  find  a  Chaplain  appointed  to  moll 
of  the  County-Gaols  J  in  confequence  of  the  Ad:  made  13th 
of  his  prefent  Majefty.  When  this  office  is  vacant,  it  be- 
hoves Magiftrates  not  to  take  the  firll  Clergyman  who  of- 
fers his  fervice,  without  regarding  his  real  charader.  They 
fhould  choofe  one  who  is  in  principle  a  Chrijlian :  who 
will  not  content  himfelf  with  officiating  in  public  ;  but 
will  converfe  with  the  prifoners  ;  admonifli  the  profligate  j 
exhort  the  thoughtlefs  ;  comfort  the  fick ;  and  make  known 
to  the  condemned  that  Mercy  which  is  revealed  in  the 
GofpeL 

In  the  Life  of  Bernard  Gilpin,  page  173,  the  writer, 
fpeaking  of  his  labours,  informs  us,  that  "  where-ever  he 
**  came,  he  ufed  to  vifit  all  the  Jails  and  places  of  confine- 
*'  ment  -,  few  in  the  kingdom  having  at  that  time  *  any  ap- 
'*  pointed  Minifter."     And  by  his  affectionate  addrefs   "  he 


•  In  the  reign  of  Queen  Mary,  this  faithful  Minifter  if  the  Goffel  was  to  have 
been  a  facrifice  :  but  in  his  journey  from  Durham  to  London,  where  he  expefted  to 
fufFer,  his  leg  was  broken  by  a  fall  from  his  horfe  ;  and  by  that  circumflance  Provi- 
dence faved  him  from  the  fiery  trial :  for  the  bigotted  Queen  died  before  his  recovery. 
In  the  next  reign  he  was  promoted  to  the  rich  living  of  Houghton  in  Northumber- 
land :  and  it  was  there  he  laboured,  as  is  faid  above. 

*'is 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  55 

"  is  faid  to  have  reformed  many  very  abandoned  perfons  in 
**  thofe  places."^ 

In  fome  prifons  where  there  is  a  Chaplain  appointed,  no 
worfhip  is  fixed  for  Sunday  :  in  fome  where  that  day  is  fix- 
ed, the  Chaplain,  choofing  his  hours,  comes  fometimes  too 
foon  in  the  morning,  fometimes  between  morning  and  even- 
ino-  fervice,  at  the  prifoners  dinner-time :  in  fome  there  is 
no  fixed  day  at  all.  It  would  be  proper  to  have  fermon  and 
prayers  once  at  leafl  on  the  Lord's  Day  :  and  prayers  two 
fixed  days  in  the  week  befides.  And  if  a  Chapter  of  the 
New  Tejlament  were  read  daily  in  order  by  one  of  the  pri- 
foners to  the  reft,  or  by  the  Gaoler  *,  before  the  diftribu- 
tioa  of  prifon  allowance,  the  time  would  not  be  mifpent. 
The  reader,  if  a  prifoner,  might  be  allowed  a  fmall  weekly 
penfion.  The  Gaoler  fhould  not,  as  fome  do,  hinder  any 
prifoner  from  attending  divine  fervice.  He  ought  to  re- 
move every  hindrance  :  and,  on  Sunday  efpecially,  no  vi- 
fitants  fhould  be  admitted  during  that  time.  Vifitants  who 
are  there  before,  fliould  go  out  or  attend. 

Upon  afking  at  more  places  than  one,  "  why  there  were 
fo  few  prifoners  at  prayers,"  I  have  been  anfwered,  "  they 
are  drinking  with  their  friends."  The  Gaoler  fhould  be 
conllant  at  Chapel  with  his  prifoners  -,  and  fet  a  good  exam^ 

« 

•  See  Mr.  Smith's  Praaice  at  Tothillfields,  V/eftminfter. 

pie 


56  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

pie  for  them  to  follow.  The  Chaplain  who  officiates  in  the 
Gaol  may  alfo  be  employed  at  the  Bridewell,  where  the  dif- 
tance  will  allow  ;  and  preach  once  a  Sunday  in  each  prifon. 

It  perhaps  will  be  faid,  that  I  propofe  a  great  deal  of 
duty  to  thefe  gentlemen.  The  Adt  juft  recited  allows  a  fum 
tiot  exceeding  fifty  pounds  a  year  for  their  fervices.  Many 
counties  have  fixed  that  falary ;  but  I  fhould  hope  that 
Clergymen  might  be  found  who  would  adl  from  a  much 
nobler  motive,  a  regard  to  the  moft  important  interefts  of 
their  fellow-creatures. 

SuRCEOK.  THE  late  A(5t  for  preferring  the  health  of  prifoners  re- 
quires that  an  experienced  Surgeoi  or  Apothecary  be  appointed 
to  every  Gaol  :  a  man  of  repute  in  his  profelTion.  His  bu- 
finefs  is,  in  the  firft  place,  to  order  the  immediate  removal 
of  the  fick  to  the  Infirmary.  Their  irons  fhould  be  taken 
off;  and  they  fliould  have,  not  only  medicines,  but  alfo 
diet  fuitable  to  their  condition.  He  muft  diligently  and 
daily  vifit  them  himfelf;  not  leaving  them  to  journeymen 
and  apprentices.  He  fliould  conftantly  inculcate  the  necef- 
fity  of  cleanlinefs  and  frefh  air ;  and  the  danger  of  crowding 
prifoners  together.  I  need  not  add,  that  he  muft  report  to 
the  Juftices  at  each  Quarter  Seflions,  a  ftate  of  the  health 
of  the  prifoners  under  his  care. 

At  Newgate  there  are  commonly  about  two  hundred  pri- 
foners. 


Sect.  III.        PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  57 

foners.  Here  the  danger  to  them,  and  to  the  city  from 
them,  is  great.  To  this  capital  priibn  in  the  metropolis, 
the  Magiilirates  would,  in  my  humble  opinion,  do  well  to 
appoint  a  Pbyjician,  a  Siirgeoji,  and  Apothecary.  One  of 
the  two  latter  to  vifit  each  ward  in  the  prifon  every  day. 
The  two  Compters  are  near  enough  •  to  be  taken  care  of  by 
the  fame  gentlemen  ;  and  they  need  to  be  vifited  as  con- 
ilantly.  This  attention  would,  in  all  probability,  prevent 
the  fpread  of  any  infedlious  difeafe  in  thofe  Gaols ;  and  flop 
the  mouths  of  County-Gaolers,  who,  when  their  prifons 
are  infedled,  tell  you  (as  I  have  often  heard  them)  "  The 
*'  diftemper  was  brought  from  Newgate  by  prifoners  re- 
*'  moved  from  thence  by  hqpeas  corpus." 

NO  Prifoner  fhould  be  fubjedl  to  any  demand  of  Fees.  Fees. 
The  Gaoler  ihould  have  a  falary  in  lieu  of  them  -,  and  fo 
fhould  the  Turnkeys.  Their  wages  fhould  not  be  included 
in  the  Gaoler's  falary  :  and  not  only  their  pay,  but  the 
number  of  them  necefiary  for  each  prifon,  Ihould  be  deter- 
mined by  the  Magiftrates.  Neither  of  thofe  articles  fliould 
be  left  to  the  interefted  appointment  of  a  Gaoler.  If  fees 
be  not  aboliflied,  I  am  fure  they  ihould  be  reduced ;  and  fo 
fluould  the  Chamber  Rents  for  Mailer-fide  Debtors.  In  this 
matter  (of  the  Chambers)  another  regulation  is  alfo  need- 
ful ;  that  is,  no  middle-lized  room  iliould  have  more  beds 
than  two.  The  bedding  and  other  furniture  ihould  be  fpe- 
cified  as  to  articles  and  value. 

I  For 


58  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

Free  For   Cofiwion-Jide  Debtors  there  fhould  be  a  ward  entirely 

Ward. 

free  :  they  fliould  not  be  fubjed:  to  any  demand  of  rent  j  as 
in  many  prifons  they  are.  Thefe  prifoners  fliould  either  be 
alimented  by  their  creditors  without  expence  and  delay ;  or 
have  from  the  county  the  fame  allowance  of  every  kind  (at 
leafl)  as  felons  :  food,  bedding,  and  medicine. 


NESS. 


Cleanli-  in  order  to  cleanliness,  than  which  fcarce  any  thing 
in  the  whole  oeconomy  of  a  Gaol  is  of  more  importance, 
every  ward  and  room  fliould  be  well  fcraped  ;  and  then 
wafhed  with  lime  and  water  during  the  adl  of  effervefcence*, 
at  leafl  twice  a  year;  juil  after  the  Lent  and  Summer  Afiize. 
Each  ward  and  room  fhould  be  fwept,  and  waflied,  every 
day,  by  the  refpedlive  inhabitant;  and  fome  times  with  hot 
vinegar.  Idle  Gaolers  affedt  to  excufe  their  negligence  in 
this  refpedl,  by  pretending  that  daily  wafhing  would  make 
the  rooms  too  damp,  and  endanger  the  health  of  prifoners. 
This  is  mere  pretence  :  the  q^cQ.  is  diredlly  contrary. 
There  is  not  in  England  a  prifon  more  healthy,  confidering 
the  number  of  prifoners  of  the  loweft  fort,  than  Tothil/fields 
Brideivell ;  where  the  rooms  are  waflied  every  day.  The 
prifoners  do  the  work  by  turns  :  and  the  healthinefs  of  the 
prifon  is  a  demonftration,  that  no  inconvenience,  but  great 
benefit,  is  the  confequence.  In  Newgate,  the  prifoner  who 
fweeps  the   ward  has  a  double  allowance  of  bread.     Every 

•  This  is  called  Lime-white,  although  whiting  is  not  an  ingredient  in  it. 

prifoner 


Sect.  III.     PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  59 

prifoner  fliould  be  obliged  to  wafli  his  hands  and  face  before 
he  comes  for  his  daily  allowance  ;  and  to  keep  himfelf  as 
neat  as  circumftances  will  admit  *.  I  have  faid  before, 
there  Ihould  be  plenty  of  water  in  a  prifon  j  and  need  not 
add  now,  that  prifoners  fhould  conftantly  have  free  and  eafy 
accefs  to  it. 

Every  prifoner  who  comes  to  Gaol  dirty,  fliould  be 
wafhed  in  the  cold  or  warm  bath  j  and  his  cloaths  fliould 
be  put  into  the  oven,  in  a  lack,  on  a  pair  of  iron  dogs.  He 
Ihould  be  provided  with  coarfe  wafhing  cloaths  to  wear 
while  his  own  are  thus  purifying  :  wafliing  cloaths  fhould 
"be  kept  ready  in  the  Gaol  for  this  purpofe.  Each  prifoner 
fhould  have  a  clean  fhirt  once  a  week.  There  fhould  be  in 
each  ward  a  towel  on  a  roller  clean  every  day.     Pails,  mops. 


•  Sir  John  Pringle,  in  his  lad  Anniverfary  Dlfcourfe  at  the  Royal  Society, 
Oft  the  fubjeft  of  Captain  Cook's  fuccefsful  care  of  the  (hip's  crew  in  his  Voyage 
round  the  World  ;  and  the  medal  defervedly  adjudged  to  him  on  that  account,  has 
the  following  paffage  at  page  26.  "  It  is  well  known  how  much  Cleanlinefs  conduces 
"  to  health  ;  but  it  is  not  fo  obvious  how  much  it  alfo  tends  to  good  order  and  other 
"  virtues.  That  diligent  officer  was  perfuaded-~that  Aich  men  as  he  could  induce 
"  to  be  more  cleanly  than  they  were  difpofed  to  be  of  themfelves,  became  at  the 
"  fame  time  more  fober,  more  orderly,  and  more  attentive  to  their  duty,"  This 
remark  is  confirmed  by  an  obfervation  in  the  Speilator,  No.  631,  "  Several 
"  vices,  deftrudlive  both  to  mind  and  body,  are  inconfiftent  with  the  habit  of 
*'  Cleanlinefs." 

I  2  brooms. 


6o  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

brooms,  foap,  vinegar,  and  fuel  for  the  oven,  fhould  be 
fupplied  by  the  county  or  town :  otherw^ife  Gaols  will  never 
be  kept  clean  and  wholefome. 

No  ftable  or  dunghill  fhould  be  fuffered  in  the  yard  * ; 
nor  any  fowls  kept  there,  which  I  have  often  feen  not  only 
in  the  yards,  but  alfo  in  the  rooms  of  many  prifons.  Sweep- 
ings, afhes,  &c.  fliould  be  taken  away  every  week. 

Bedding.  IF  the  bedding  is  ftraw,  it  fhould  be  put  in  coarfe  can- 
vafs ;  if  it  is  not  fo  enclofed,  it  ought  to  be  changed  every 
week.     Each  bed  fhould  have  a  coarfe  coverlid  or  two. 

Prisoners  fliould  not  remain  in  the  day-time  in  the  lit- 
tle rooms  or  cabins  in  which  they  fleep  :  they  fhould  have  a 
common  ward,  day-room  or  kitchen. 

Pood.  THOSE  who  drink  only  water,  and  have  no  nutritious 


•  The  Afl  of  Parliament  in  Ireland,  which  I  mentioned  in  a  former  note, 
orders  that  "  No  Gaoler  or  any  perfon  employed  by  him,  ihall  prefume  on  any  ac- 
'•  count  to  keep  in  the  faid  Gaols,  or  the  yard,  or  the  houfes  adjoining  thereto,  and 
"  provided  for  the  ufe  of  fuch  prifoners,  any  hogs,  cows,  or  other  cattle,  under  the 
*'  penalty  of  forty  Ihillings  for  fuch  hog,  cow,  or  other  beaft  kept  in  the  faid  Gaol 
•«  or  Prifon." 

liquor, 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  6i 

liquor,  ought  to  have  at  leaft  a  pound  and  half  of  bread 
every  day.  The  bread  fliould  be  one  day  old,  and  then 
honeftly  weighed  to  them.  If  once  a  week  (fuppofe  on 
Sunday)  fome  of  the  coarfer  pieces  of  beef  were  boiled  in 
the  copper,  and  half  a  pound  of  the  meat  without  bone 
given  to  each  prifoner,  with  a  quart  of  the  broth,  and  then 
only  one  pound  of  bread,  this  Sunday  Dinner  might  be  made 
an  encouragement  to  peaceable  and  orderly  behaviour :  the 
turbulent  and  refradlory  fhould  not  have  it.  Such  an  al- 
lowance, might  help  to  remove  a  bad  cuftom  that  obtains 
too  generally,  the  pretence  of  refreftiing  prifoners  with  bet- 
ter food  and  drink  on  Sunday;  upon  which  many  are  ad- 
mitted into  the  Gaols,  and  keep  the  prifoners  from  Chapel. 

I  STATE  the  allowance  in  weight,  not  money,  becaufe 
of  the  variable  price.  Befides  that  quantity  of  bread,  each 
prifoner  fliould  have  a  penny  a  day  in  money  for  cheefe, 
butter,  potatoes,  peafe,  or  turnips  :  or  he  fliould  have  a 
pennyworth  of  one  of  thofe  articles. 

Here,  as  in  the  tap,  I  muft  infifl  upon  it  as  highly  ne- 
ceflary,  that  every  Gaoler,  Bridewell-Keeper,  Turnkey,  &c, 
be  excluded  from  all  concern  in  the  prifoners  allowance ; 
from  all  profit  arifing  direSlly  or  indiredlly  from  the  fale  of 
their  bread,  or  other  food.  Whoever  diflributes  it,  fhould 
be  free  from  all   temptation   to  fraud;  and  be  fubjed  to  a 

ftrong 


62  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

flrong  check*.     The  whole  allowance  of  prifoners  lliould 
never  be  given  them  in  money. 

The  Reader  will  plainly  fee,  that  I  am  not  an  advocate 
for  extravagant  and  profufe  allowance  to  prifoners.  I  plead 
only  for  neceffaries,  in  fuch  a  moderate  quantity,  as  may 
fupport  health  and  ftrength  for  labour.  The  law  allows 
the  poor  debtor  who  is  detained  in  prifon,  two  (hillings  and 
four-pence  per  week  -j-  (I  wifli  it  were  more  eafilj'  obtained) 
and  the  government  allowance  to  alTize  convidis  under  fen- 
tence  of  tranfportation  is  a  little  more,  viz.  two  fhillings 
and  fix-pence ;  which  the  Sheriff  charges  to  Government  in 
his  bill  of  cravings,  prefented  at  the  expiration  of  his  office. 
And  I  believe  upon  the  average  price  of  bread,  potatoes.  Sec. 
rfie  allowance  I  have  mentioned  does  not  exceed  thofe  funis. 
I  prefume  it  may  be  thought  rather  incongruous  to  allow 
prifoners  before  trial  (on  which  fome  of  them  may  be  found 
not  guilty)  lefs  than  is  given  to  thofe  that  are  convided. 


No  NO  FIGHTING  fhould  be  fufFered  in  a  Gaol :  no  quarrel- 

QUARRELS. 

mg,  or  abulive  language ;  nor  the  frequent  occafion  of  them. 


•  In  Ireland  the  MInifler  of  the  Parilh  where  the  Gaol  is,  orders  the  felons  bread; 
and  keeps  (fhould  keep)  the  account  of  it :  for  he  is  allowed  by  Aft  of  Parliament 
a  fum  not  exceeding  ten  pounds  a  year  for  the  trouble. 

t  32d  George  II. 

gaming. 


Sect.  III.       PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  6-^ 

gaming.  If  any  one  be  injured,  let  him  complain  to  the 
Keeper,  who  fhould  hear  both  parties  face  to  face,  decide 
the  matter,  and  punifh  the  aggrellbr  by  clofer  confinement. 
Faults  that  deferve  more  fevere  animadverfion,  fliould  be 
referved  for  the  cognizance  of  the  Magillrates,  or  an  infpec- 
tor  :  of  whom  prefently. 


MONEY  fent,  colledled,  or  bequeathed,  flioald  be  diftri-   Doi^ations 

AND 

buted  by  the  Magiftrates.     Some  of  it  might  be  laid  out  in    Legacies. 
tools,  &c.  for  fuch  debtors  as  will  work. 

The  mention  of  legacies  reminds  me  of  the  need  thers 
is  of  a  lift  of  them  painted  legibly  on  a  board  ;  which  fliould 
be  hung  up  fo  as  to  be  read  by  the  prifoners.  Very  few 
Gaols  have  fuch  a  table  :  and  for  want  of  it  many  Legacies 
have  been  entirely  lofl ;  and  the  charitable  intention  of  the 
Teftators  fruftrated.  Yet  care  of  legacies  is  exprefsly  required 
by  the  Adl  3  2d  George  II. 


In   the  like  confpicuous  manner   fliould  be  hung  up  in       Table 

O  F 

every  Gaol  an  authentic  table  of  fees,  till  they  are  abo-     Fees,  &c. 
liflied.      This   alfo    is   exprefsly   required   by  the  fame  Ad:. 
Yet  in   many  Gaols  it  is  totally  difregarded,  and  they  have 
no  fuch  tables. 

In    the  A(fl  24th  George  II.  which  prohibits  the  ufe  of 
fpirituous  liquors   in  Prifons  or  Workhoufes,  it  is  exprefsly 

required. 


64  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

required,  that  every  Gaoler,  Keeper,  Mafter,  &c.  fliall  pro- 
cure one  or  more  copies  of  the  three  claufes  *  which  contain 
the  feveral  articles  of  the  prohibition,  to  be  printed  or  fairly 
written,  and  hung  up  in  one  of  the  moft  public  places  of 
the  Prifon  or  Work-houfe,  and  renewed  as  occafion  re- 
quired, under  the  penalty  of  forty  lliillihgs  for  every  default. 

There  fhould  alfo  be  a  lift:  of  the  allowance  to  pri- 
foners  :  for  want  of  which  I  have  known  them  defrauded  of 
a  confiderable  part  of  their  food  :  the  whole  of  which  is  no 
where  more  than  fufficient.  The  fame  lift:  ihould  exhibit 
the  particulars  of  bedding,  or  ft:raw. 

The  Adl  for  prefer ving  the  health  of  prifoners  requires 
that  it  be  painted  on  a  board,  &c.  as  aforefaid :  not  merely 
written  or  printed  on  paper,  becaufe  that  is  more  perifliable, 

and 


•  In  the  prohibiting  claufes,  a  line  of  one  hundred  pounds  is  laid  upon  any 
Gaoler,  Keeper,  Mafter,  Sec,  who  ihall  fell,  ufe,  lend,  or  give  away  any  fuch 
liquors  ;  or  knowingly  permit  them  to  be  fold,  ufed,  &c.  in  the  Houfe ;  except 
they  be  prefcribed  by  a  regular  Phyfician,  Surgeon,  or  Ajaothccar)',  to  be  ufed  me- 
dicinally. And  a  fine  of  ten  pounds  to  twenty  pounds,  or  any  time  not  exceeding 
three  months  imprifonment,  for  any  perfon  who  fliall  bring  fuch  liquors  into  the 
'  Houfe.  One  moiety  of  thefe  fines,  as  well  as  of  that  mentioned  above,  to  the  in- 
former :  the  other  moiety  of  each  of  the  two  fmaller  fines  to  the  prifoners ;  or,  in 
the  Work-houfe,  to  the  poor. 


I  OQ 


Sect.  III.        PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  6j 

and  liable  to  be  torn*.  The  Rules  for  Cleanlinefs,  and  Or- 
ders againfl  Garnifh,  Gaming,  Drunkennefs,  Quarreling, 
Profanenefs  and  Obfcenity,  fhould  alfo  be  vifibly  exhibited ; 
with  the  penalties  for  each  of  thofe  crimes.  The  penalties 
jQiould  be  fixed  by  the  Magiflrates,  or  by  law.  The  table 
fhould  alfo  fhew  the  hours  of  opening  and  fliutting  the  feveral 
wards  j  and  of  attending  public  worfhip.  Befides  fetting 
down  thefe  hours  in  a  table,  notice  fhould  be  given  of  them 
by  a  bell,  as  in  the  dock-yards.  I  have  known  prifoners 
abfent  from  Chapel,  who  faid  they  would  have  been  there, 
but  did  not  know  the  fervice  was  performing. 

It  is  exprefsly  required  by  the  A<S  32d  George  II.  that 
Rules  and  Orders  made,  figned,  and  confirmed,  as  the 
Table  of  Fees,  be  drawn  up  for  every  Prifon  -f-,  and  hung 
up  confpicuoiijly  in  it  for  infpedtion    of  prifoners.     Yet   in 

many 


I  DO  not  remember  to  have  Teen  the  claufes  hung  up  in  any  Work-houfe.  I  fliall 
in  the  fequel  mark  the  numerous  prifons  that  have  the  fame  defeft :  I  could  alfo 
have  mentioned  prifons  in  which,  notwithftanding  the  A&,  fpirituous  liquors  are 
ufed  :  and  I  could  even  name  Gaolers  who  find  ways  to  evade  the  Aft ;  and  do 
themfelves  fell  fuch  liquors  to  thsir  prifoners. 

•  I  MENTION  this  circumllance,  that  may  feem  trifling,  as  I  know  the  difpofition 
cf  prifoners  to  deftroy  the  copies  of  the  claufes  againft  fpirituous  liquors. 

t  "Be  it  alfo  enafted— That  the  Judges  and  Juftices  of  Aflize— (hall,  at  all 
*'  Aflizes— make  inquiry  whether  fuch  Table  of  Fees,    and  Rules  and  Orders— 

K  "  are 


66  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

many  Prifons  neither  Fees  nor  Orders  are  to  be  feen :  the 
latter  in  very  few. 

Inspector.  FINALLY,  The  care  of  a  Prifon  is  too  important  to  be 
left  wholly  to  a  Gaoler  ;  paid  indeed  for  his  attendance, 
but  often  tempted  by  his  paflions,  or  intereft,  to  fail  in  his 
duty.  To  every  prifon  there  fhould  be  an  Infpedtor  ap- 
pointed ;  either  by  his  colleagues  in  the  magiflracy,  or  by 
Parliament  *.  Sheriffs  and  Magiftrates  have  indeed  this 
power  already  j  and  prifons  are  their  immediate  care.  But 
fome  Sheriffs  excufe  themfelves  from  attention  to  this  part 
of  their  duty,  on  account  of  the  fhort  duration,  expence, 
and  trouble  of  their  office  :  and  thofe  Gentlemen,  as  well 
as  Gentlemen  in  the  CommifTion  of  the  Peace,  have  no 
doubt  been  fearful  of  the  confequence  of  looking  into  pri- 
fons.    But  the  danger  from  fuch  infpe<S;ion  is  in  great  mea- 


"  are  hung  up  and  remain  publick-— and  (hall  inform  themfelves  — and  fupply 
*'  and  redrefs  —  and  fliall  exprefsly  give  in  charge  to  every  Grand  Jury 
"  impanelled  and  fworn  before  them  refpeftively,  to  make  inquiries  concerning 
*'  the  fame." 

•  The  Vagrant  A£l  17th  George  II.  requires  that  Two  Juftices  villt  the  Houfes 
of  Correftion  "  twice,  or  oftener  if  need  be,  in  every  year;  and  to  examine  into 
"  the  ertate  and  management  thereof,  and  to  report,  &;c."  And  that  the  Juftices  at 
Quarter  Scflions  inipofe  fines  and  penalties  on  the  Governors  or  Maftcrs  who  do  not 
keep  their  prifoners  to  hard  labour,  and  punilh  and  corrcft  them  according  to  the 
direftions  of  the  warrants,  &c, 

fure 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  67 

fure  removed  :  and  it  may  be  expe6ted  that  SherifFs  will 
now  engage  in  this  bufmefs  j  and  that  among  Juftices,  and 
Town-Magiflrates,  there  may  always  be  found  one  man 
generous  enough  to  undertake  this  important  ferviee.  Or 
if  the  conflant  trouble  be  thought  too  much  for  one  perfon, 
it  may  proceed  by  annual,  quarterly,  or  monthly  rotation. 
The  Infpedlor  fhould  make  his  vifit  once  in  a  week,  or  at 
moft  in  a  fortnight ;  changing  his  days.  He  fhould  take 
with  him  a  memorandum  of  all  the  rules,  and  inquire  into 
the  obfervance  or  negledl  of  them.  He  fhould  (as  is  done 
in  fome  of  our  Hofpitals)  look  into  every  room,  to  fee  if  it 
be  clean,  &c.  He  fhould  fpeak  with  every  prifoner;  hear 
all  complaints  ;  and  immediately  correct  what  he  finds  ma- 
nifeflly  wrong  :  what  he  doubts  of,  he  may  refer  to  his 
brethren  in  ofiice,  at  their  next  meeting.  A  good  Gaoler 
will  be  pleafed  with  this  fcrutiny :  it  will  do  him  honour, 
and  confirm  him  in  his  flation.  In  cafe  of  a  lefs  worthy 
Gaoler,  the  examination  is  more  needful,  in  order  to  his 
being  reprimanded ;  and,  if  he  be  incorrigible,  to  his  being 
difcharged.  This  Honourable  Delegate  fhould  have  no  Ja- 
lary :  he  fhould  engage  from  the  noble  motive  of  doing 
juflice  to  prifoners,  and  ferviee  to  his  country. 

I  HAVE  often  inquired  of  Gaolers  whether  the  SherifFs, 
Juftices,  or  Town-Magiflrates  infpedled  their  Gaols.  Many 
of  the  oldefl  have  anfwered,  "  None  of  thofe  Gentlemen 
**  ever  looked  into  the  dungeons,  or  even  the  wards  of  my 

K  2  "  Gaol." 


68  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

'*  Gaol."  Others  have  faid,  "  Thofe  Gentlemen  think 
"  that  if  they  came  into  my  Gaol,  they  fhould  foon  be  in 
"  their  graves."  Others,  "  The  Juftices  think  the  infide 
"  of  my  Houfe  too  clofe  for  them  -,  they  fatisfy  themfelves 
*'  with  viewing  the  outfide."  Now  if  Magiflrates  continue 
thus  negligent  of  their  duty,  a  general  thorough  reformation 
of  our  Prifons  muft  be  defpaired  of:  what  has  been  already 
obtained  will  foon  be  loft,  and  all  will  fink  again  into  the. 
former  dreadful  condition  *o 


BRIDEWELLS. 


IF  our  Bridewells  be  not  more  properly  conduced,  fend- 
ing prifoners  from  them  to  County-Gaols  will  defeat  all 
the  care  of  the  moft  attentive  Gaolers,  and  the  whole  inten- 
tion of  the  Adl  for  preferving  the  health  of  prifoners  -,  and 
difcharged  offenders  will  fpread  difeafe  and  vice  where-ever 

•  The  author  of  Telemachus  elegantly  remarks,  "  The  profperoas  turn  away 
'*  their  eyes  from  the  miferable,  not  through  infeafibility,  but  becaufe  the  fight  is 
"  an  interruption  of  their  gaiety." 

they 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  691 

they  go  j  and  inflead   of  being  amended,  become  an  aggra- 
vated evil  to  fociety. 

It  is  a  Ihocking  thing  to  deftroy  in  prifon  the  morals, 
the  health,  and  (as  is  often  done)  the  lives  of  thofe  whonx 
the  law  configns  only  to  ha7-d  labour  and  correBion.  One  is 
charged  with  baftardy :  another  is  abufive  in  a  drunken 
quarrel :  a  young  creature,  who  perhaps  was  never  taught 
a  moral  lefTon,  is  guilty  of  fome  petty  theft :  fend  them  to 
Bridewell  for  a  year,  or  two,  which  they  muft  confume  in 
idlenefs,  hunger,  dirt,  with  companions  much  improved 
by  fuch  education  —  If  that  prifon  be  not  fecure,  fend  them 
into  ftill  worfe  company,  that  of  abandoned  felons  in  the 
County-Gaol  —  What  is  this  but  devoting  them  to  de- 
ftrudiion  ? 

Every  county  and  town  that  has  a  Bridewell  fhould  be 
eareful  to  fee,  firfl  of  all,  that  it  be  fuitable  to  the  purpofe. 
In  many  places  the  County-Gaol  is  alfo  a  Bridewell.  But 
this  prifon  ought  to  be  quite  feparate  from  the  Gaol ;  at 
leaft  not  within  the  fame  walls :  nor  fliould  even  the  court- 
yard be  common  to  both.  The  building  muft  be  propor- 
tioned to  the  general  number  of  delinquents.  None  of  the 
rooms  for  confinement  fhould  be  lower  than  the  ground- 
floor  :  rather  a  ftory  above  it.  Each  work-room  fhould  have 
a  thorough-fare  for  air :  but  the  oppofite  windows  need  not 
be  equal ;  the  back  windows  half  the  fize  of  thofe  in  front, 

and 


JO  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

and  fix  feet  from  the  floor.  Few  or  none  of  the  windows 
fhoiild  have  glafs  ;  only  fhutters ;  and  thefe  fliould  be  open 
feveral  hours  in  the  day.  In  the  court-yard  (for  fuch  is 
neceffary  in  every  prifon  *)  there  fliould  be  a  pump,  or 
fome  other  provifion  for  water  in  plenty.  And  prifoners 
fliould  be  permitted  to  walk  about,  when  they  have  done 
working. 

For  in  work  they  ought,  mofl  certainly,  to  be  employed. 
This  is  indifpenfibly  requifite.  Not  one  who  is  not  fick 
fliould  be  idle.  Where  the  prifoners  are  numerous, 
there  fhould  be  feveral  work-rooms ;  and  but  few  pri- 
foners in  one  room.  Thofe  who  work  by  compulfion  are 
more  likely  to  be  feduced  to  idlenefs  in  large  compa- 
nies, than  when  they  are  more  by  themfelves.  The 
Keeper  fhould  be  a  mafler  of  fome  manufadlure  -f-  3  a  man 

of 

•  By  an  Aft  7th  James  I.  Cap.  IV.  it  is  required  that  there  be  in  every  county 
"  One  or  more  fit  and  convenient  Houfe  or  Houfes  of  Correftion,  with  convenient 

"  Backfide   thereunto  adjoining Every  Juftice  of  Peace  v/ithin  every  county— 

"  where  fuch  Houfe  and  Backfide  fhall  not  be  erefted  or  provided,"  (within  about 
two  years)  "  ftiall  forfeit  for  his  faid  negleft,  five  pounds  of  lawful  Englifli  money  ;" 
one  moiety  to  the  informer,  the  other  towards  erefting,  building,  &c.  the  faid 
Houfe  and  Backfide. 

And  an  Aft  made  in  Ireland  the  loth  and  nth  of  Charles  I.  requires  the  fame, 
tinder  the  like  penalty  for  negleft. 

t  The  Afts  cited  in  the  preceding  note  require  that  Houfes  of  Correftion  have 
"  Mills,  Turns,  Cards,  and  fuch-like  neceffary  implementc,  to  fet  rogues  or  other 
"  idle  perfons  on  work,"     And  the  Aft   17th  George  II,  quoted  in  a  former  note, 

requires 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  71 

of  adlivity  *,  prudence,  and  temper.  And  he  fliould 
keep  his  prifoners  at  work  ten  hours  a  day;  meal-times 
included. 

For  women,  efpecially  thofe  that  have  children  with 
them,  and  fometimes  at  the  breaft,  there  fliould  be  a  chim- 
ney in  one  or  two  rooms  :  and  in  winter  firing  fhould  be 
allowed.  I  have  known  infants  ftarved  to  death  for  want  of 
this.  In  fome  prifons  the  fmoke  has  no  vent  but  at  the  doors 
and  windows.  In  fome  Bridewells  there  fliould  be  a  feparate 
little  room  or  two  for  faulty  apprentices,  as  at  Tothilljields, 
and  Clcrkenivell.  In  all,  two  airy  wards  for  the  fick,  with  me- 
dical relief.  Men  and  women  fliould  have  work-fliops,  as 
well  as  night-rooms,  feparate-f-.  There  fliould  be  baths,  and  an 
oven,  for  the  fime  purpofes  as  in  the  Gaols.  In  fome  Coun- 
ty-Bridewells there  are  from  twenty  to  thirty  prifoners,  and 

requires  that  the  Juflices  at  their  Quarter  Seffions  "  take  eiFeftual  care  that  the 
"  Houfes  of  Corre£lion-~be  duly  fitted  up,  furniflied,  and  fupplied  witli  fufficient 
"  implements,  materials,  and  furniture,  for  keeping,  relieving,  fetting  to  work, 
"  employing,  and  correfting  all  idle  and  difbrderly  perfons,  rogues,  vagabonds,  &c." 

*  It  was  remarked  that  a  Gaoler  fliould  not  be  an  old  or  infirm  perfon  ;  the  fame 
caution  is  requifite  with  regard  to  the  Keeper  of  a  Brideivell;  fince  fuch  an  one  would 
neither  be  able  to  keep  the  prifoners  properly  at  work,  nor  to  prevent  their  making 
their  efcape  at  the  time  of  locking  up,  as  I  knew  to  happen  at  Prellon  in  Lancafhire, 
and  other  places. 

t  In  all  Prifons,  it  would  be  an  excellent  improvement  to  have  little  crib  bedllcads 
for  each  perfon  to  lie  upon  feparately.  Thefe  have  been  introduced  at  the  county 
Gaol  of  SuiFolk,  to  my  account  of  which  I  refer  for  a  more  particular  defcription  of 
them. 

in 


72  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS, 

in  Tothlllfields  and  Clerkenwell  many  more.  Great  care 
fliould  be  taken  to  prevent  infedlion  j  to  keep  the  Houfe 
clean,  and  well  aired ;  and  invariably  to  adhere  to  ftrid  rules 
of  fobriety  and  diligence,  in  order  to  corredl  the  faults  of 
prifoners,  and  make  them  for  the  future  ufeful  to  fociety. 
Gentle  difcipline  is  commonly  more  efficacious  than  feve- 
rity  J  which  fliould  not  be  exercifed  but  on  fuch  as  will  not 
be  amended  by  lenity.  Thefe  fliould  be  punifhed  by  foli- 
tary  confinement  on  bread  and  water,  for  a  time  propor- 
tioned to  their  fault.  The  Keeper  fhould,  by  all  means, 
refide  in  the  Houfe.  He  fliould  not  be  fufFered  to  farm  any 
part  of  the  allowance ;  nor  to  fell  liquor,  or  any  thing  elfe. 
The  whole  management  fhould  be  frequently  inquired  into, 
in  the  fame  manner  as  that  of  a  Gaol,  and  by  the  fame 
Infpedors. 

I  KNOW  not  any  reafon  why  a  Houfe  of  Corredlion  may 
not  be  condudled  with  as  much  regularity,  as  any  other 
houfe  where  the  family  is  equally  numerous.  Some  foreign 
Bridewells  are  fo  condudled.  Let  the  fober  and  diligent  be 
diftinguiflied  by  fome  preference  in  their  diet,  or  lodging  j 
or  by  fliortening  the  term  of  their  confinement;  and  giving 
them,  when  difcharged,  a  good  charafter.  This  laft  will 
be  a  flrong  incitement  to  good  behaviour.  The  common 
diet  fliould  be  al  leajl  as  good  and  as  much  as  that  of  felons 
in  a  Gaol.      The  hours  of  rifing,  of  reading  a  chapter  in 

the 


Sect.  III.      PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

the  bible,  or  prayers,  of  meals,  of  work,  &c.  Ihould  all  be 
fixed  by  the  magiftrates,  and  notice  of  them  given  by  a  bell. 

A  Bridewell  under  proper  regulation  would  contribute 
not  a  little  towards  its  own  maintenance.    An  exadt  account 
fhould  be  kept  of  the  profit  of  the  Avork  ;  and  all  of  it  ap- 
plied to  common  benefit;  not  left  to  the  difpofal  of  Keep- 
ers :  for  fome  of  them  in  the  few  Bridewells  where  work  is 
done,  keep  to  themfelves  a  fixth  part,  fome  half  and  fome 
the  whole  of  the  prifoners  earnings  ;  giving  them  only  the 
fliort  county-allowance,   and  fometimes   but  part  of  that. 
When  I  faid  all  the  earnings  Ihould  go  to  common  Hock,  I 
meant  it  of  the  ilated  hours  for  working.     Thofe  who  will 
employ  themfelves  in  extra-hours,  fliould  have -the  profit  to 
themfelves.     And  perhaps  it  might  be  an  encouragement  to 
diligence  in  the  fiated  hours,  to  give  them  fome  fmall  por- 
tion of  the  profit  of  thefe   alfo.     With  regular  oeconomy, 
Prifoners  would  be  better  nourifhed,   and  fitter  for  labour, 
than  they  now  are  ,  and  yet  the  county  not  burthened  with 
much,  if  any,    additional  expence.     But  a  building  fit  for 
the  intention  ought  firfl  to  be  provided. 

The  charge  of  this,  as  well  as  of  a  proper  Gaol,  will  no 
doubt,  be  complained  of.  But  if  that  be  weighed  againfl 
the  benefit  that  will  accrue  to  the  public,  it  will  be  found 
but  light.     Befides  that  ought  not  to  be  allowed  as  a  valid 

*-  objedion. 


73 


74  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  . 

objedlion,  the  occafion  of  which  fliould  have  been  removed 
long  ago.  Why  have  fome  Piifons  been  fuffered  to  become 
ruinous ;  fo  that  many  rooms  in  them  are  unfafe,  and  pri- 
foners  are  crowded  together  in  the  few  that  remain  ?  Why 
were  not  the  walls  of  the  yards  repaired  in  time,  that  prifon- 
ers  might  with  fafety  be  allowed  the  proper  ufe  of  them  ? 
Money,  to  the  amount  of  thoufands  is  not  witheld  when 
Sliire-halls  and  Town-halls  are  wanted.  Thefe  we  often  fee 
grand  and  elegant  Edifices.  Why  fhould  it  be  fpared  when 
the  morals  and  lives  of  multitudes  are  at  flake ;  and  when  it 
is  impofiible  the  defignofthe  Legiflature  fliould  be  anfwered 
without  it  ?  I  mean  amending  the  manners  of  Petty  Offen- 
ders ;  preventing  the  increafe  of  felonies,  and  the  fpread  of 
difeafes.  That  the  two  latter,  inftead  of  being  prevented,  are 
promoted  by  the  prefent  irregularity  of  Bridewells,  is  noto- 
rious *  .  Prefcription  founded  on  culpable  negligence 
fhould  not  be  admitted  in  bar  of  a  demand,  which  every 
principle  of  equity,  humanity,  and  utility  confpires  to 
enforce. 

I   HAVE  only  farther  to  add   under   this   head,  that  the 


*  The  Marquis  Beccaria  clofes  his  30th  chapter  with  this  maxim.  "  The  punifh- 
"  mcnt  of  a  crime  cannot  be  juft,  (that  is  neceffary)  if  the  Laws  have  not  endeavour- 
"■'  ed  to  prevent  that  crime  by  the  bell  means  which  times  and  circumftances  would 
"  allow." 

management 


Sect.  III.         PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS.  75^ 

management  of  Bridewells  is  now  a  matter  of  more 
than  ordinary  concern,  fmce  offenders  are  at  prefent 
committed  to  them  for  terms  fo  long  as  from  t&ree  to  ten 
years.  Moft  of  thefe  perfons  would  probably  have  been 
fentenced  to  tranfportatmi  when  that  mode  of  puniflmient 
was  in  ufe. 

I  HAD  taken  fome  pains  to  make  inquiries  concerning  the 
HvsA-^oi  trail/ports,  with  regard  to  whom  many  cruelties  and 
impofitions  were  commonly  pracflifed,  and  whofe  condition 
was  in  many  refpedts  equally  contrary  to  humanity  and  good 
policy  :  I  flattered  myfelf  that  I  had  difcovered  means  of 
remedying  thefe  evils  in  a  confiderable  degree,  and  of  dif- 
burthening  the  counties  of  a  heavy  expence  with  which 
they  were  charged ;  and  was  preparing  to  lay  them  before 
the  Public,  when  a  new  turn  was  given  to  the  matter  by 
Ad  of  Parliament  *. 


•  1 6th  of  George  III.  Cap.  XLIII.  An  Aft  to  authorife,  for  a  limited  Time, 
the  Punifhment  by  hard  Labour  of  Offenders  who,  for  certain  Crimes,  are  or  fhall 
become  liable  to  be  tranfported  to  any  of  his  Majefty's  Colonies  and  Plantations. 

I  WENT  one  Sunday  in  Oftober  laft  to  fee  the  Men-Convifts  on  board  the  Jujlitia 
near  Woolwich.  I  wiflied  to  have  found  them  more  healthy  ;  and  their  provifion 
good  of  the  fort ;  and  to  have  joined  with  them  in  divine  fervice.  But  as  the  fcheme 
is  newj  and  tenTporary,  I  am  not  willing  to  complain. 

L  2  Since 


^6  PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

Since  this  has  taken  place,  I  fupprefs  what  I  had  writ- 
ten J  and  fhall  only  give,  at  the  end  of  my  book,  a  lift  of 
the  numbers  delivered  from  Newgate  for  tranfportation  in 
the  courfe  of  three  years.  This  will  fhew,  in  a  very  alarm- 
ing light,  the  danger  there  may  be  in  future  of  crowding 
our  prifons,  fo  as  to  produce  the  moft  deftrudive  confe- 
quences. 


I  CANNOT  conclude  this  SeAion  without  attempting  to 
obviate  fome  objecftions  that  may  occur  to  the  improvements 
propofed  in  it.     It  may  be  faid,  that  from  the  many  conve- 
niences fuggefted  in  the  ftrudure  of  Gaols,  and  the  removal 
of  thofe  hardfliips  which  rendered    them  fo  terrible,    the 
dread  of  being  confined  in  them  will  in  great  meafure  be 
taken  off,  and  the  lower  clafles  of  people  will  find  them 
more  comfortable  places  of  refidence  than  their  own  houfes. 
But    let    it    be    confidered,    in    the    firft    place,    that    al- 
though I  have  indeed  recommended  fuch  attentions  in  the 
conftruftion  and  management  as  may  free  them  from  the 
difeafes  and  hardfiips  under  which  they  have  laboured,  I  have 
propofed  nothing  to  give  them  an  air  of  elegance,  or  pleafant- 
nefs.     On  the  contrary,  I  have  cenfured  the  plan  of  fome 
modern  Gaols  as  too  (hewy  and  fplendid  ;  and   nothing  a- 
broad  ftruck  me  more  with  regard  to  thefe  buildings,  -than 
the  perfed  plalnnefs  zn^fimplicity  of  their  appearance.    Then, 
with  refpedt  to  the  more  humane  treatment  of  the  prifoners 

in 


Sect.  III.     PROPOSED  IMPROVEMENTS. 

in  the  articles  of  food,  lodging,  and  the  like,  I  venture  to 
aflert,  that  if  to  it  be  joined  fuch  ftridt  regulations  in  pre- 
venting all  diffipation  and  riotous  amufement,  as  I  have  in- 
culcated, confinement  in  a  prifon,  though  it  may  ceafe  to 
be  deftrudlive  to  health  and  morals,  will  not  fail  to  be  fuf- 
ficiently  irkfome  and  difagreeable,  efpecially  to  the  idle  and 
profligate. 


77 


SECTION 


SECTION        IV. 

AN     ACCOUNT     OF     FOREIGN 
PRISONS. 


I  DESIGNED  to  publifli  the  Account  of  onr  Prifons 
in  the  Spring  1775,  after  I  returned  from  Scotland, 
and  Ireland.  But  conjecturing  that  fomething  ufeful 
to  my  purpofe,  might  be  colledled  abroad,  I  laid  afide  my 
papers,  and  travelled  into  France,  Flanders,  Holland,  and 
Germany.  I  flattered  myfelf  that  my  labour  was  not  quite 
fruitlefs  :  and  repeated  my  vifit  to  thefe  countries,  and  alfo 
to  Switzerland,  laft  fummer. 

I  SHALL  not  give  an  account  of  every  foreign  prifon  I 
faw,  whether  it  had  any  thing  peculiar  or  not  :  this  would 
be  tedious  and  uninftrudlive.  Nor  do  I  mention  the  frauds 
which  I  obferved,  or  from  the  evafive  anfwers  of  Keepers, 
had  reafon  to  fufpedt.  The  redrefs  and  invefligation  of  fo- 
reign abufes  was  not  my  objed. 

In 


Sect.  IV.    ,  FRANCE.  79 

In    my    relation  I  fhall  follow   the   order    of    my    laft. 
journey,   and  begin  with 


RANGE. 


I 


N  or  near  Paris  are  the  Conciergerie,  Grand  and  Petit      Par!s. 
Chdtelet,  Fort  I'Eveque,  the  Bice t re  ;  and  fome  others. 


My  firfl  queftion  at  each  prifon  commonly  was,  "  Whe- 
ther the  Gaoler  or  Keeper  refided  in  the  Houfe  ?  "  and  the 
anfwer  was  always  in  the  affirmative. 

Most  Prifons  in  the  city  have  three  or  fo«r  gates  -,  from 
4  to  41^  feet  high ;  feparated  from  each  other  by  a  little  area 
or  court.  Within  the  inner  gate  is,  in  fome  prifons,  a 
T'urnjille.  The  number  and  lownefs  of  the  gates  (at  each 
of  which  you  muft  Hoop)  and  the  turnfliles,  effedlually 
prevent  the  prifoners  rufliing  out. 

In  moft  of  the  prifons  there  are  five  or  fix  ^turnkeys ;  viz. 
two  or  three  at  the  gates :  one  walking  in  the  yard,  to  pre- 
vent conferring  and  plotting  (a  circumflance  to  which 
French  Gaolers  are  very  attentive) :  one  at  the  womens 
ward  :  and  every  day  one  of  them  is  abroad,  or  other  wife 

at 


FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

at  leilure.  This  liberty  they  have  in  rotation.  They  are 
flridtly  prohibited,  under  fevere  penalties,  from  receiving 
any  thing  of  the  prifoners,  directly  or  indiredtly,  on  any 
pretence  whatever.  The  Gaoler  is  obliged  to  board  them  ; 
and  to  pay  each  of  them  at  leaft  one  hundred  livres  a  year. 
It  muft  be  paid  quarterly,  in  prefence  of  the  Deputy  of  the 
Attorney-General. 

I  WAS  furprized  at  feeing  that  none  of  the  prifoners  were 
in  Irons.  No  Gaoler  (I  was  informed)  may  put  them  on  a 
prifoner,  without  an  exprefs  order  from  the  Judge.  And 
yet  in  fome  of  the  Prifons,  there  were  more  criminals  than 
in  any  of  our  London  Gaols.  When  I  was  firft  there,  the 
number  had  been  recently  increafed  by  an  infurredlion  on 
account  of  the  fcarcity  of  corn.  My  Reader  will  perhaps 
prefently  fee  reafon  to  conclude,  that  the  manner  in  which 
Prifons  are  conducted  makes  the  confinement  more  tole- 
rable, and  chains  lefs  needful.  Indeed  it  was  evident,  from 
the  very  appearance  of  the  prifoners  in  mofl  of  the  Gaols, 
that  humane  attention  was  paid  to  them. 

Most  of  the  courts  are  paved;  and  they  are  waflied  three 
or  four  times  a  day.  One  would  hardly  believe  how  this 
frefhens  the  air  in  the  upper  rooms.  I  felt  this  very  fenfibly 
once  and  again  when  I  was  in  the  chambers  :  and  an  Englifh- 
man,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  be  a  prifoner,  made  the  fame 
remark.  But  Ifeldomorever  found  in  any  French  Prifon  that 

ofFenfive 


Sect.  IV.  FRANCE.  Si 

offenfive  fmell  which  I  had  often  perceived  in  Englifh 
Gaols.  I  fometimes  thought  thefe  courts  were  the  cleaneft 
places  in  Paris.  One  circumftance  that  contributes  to  it, 
befides  the  number  of  Turnkeys,  is,  that  mofl  of  them  are 
near  the  river. 

Prisoners,  efpecially  criminals,  attend  Mafs  every  day, 
and  the  Gaoler  or  a  Turnkey  with  them  :  but  fuch  of  them 
as  are  Proteftants  are  excufed.  No  perfon  is  admitted  into 
any  Prifon  during  the  time  of  Divine  Service. 

As  condemned  criminals  generally  throw  off  all  referve, 
and  by  relating  their  various  adventures  and  fuccefs  prove 
pernicious  tutors  to  young  and  lefs  pradlifed  offenders  -,  care 
is  taken  to  prevent  this  mifchief,  by  fending  thofe  who  are 
fentenced  to  the  Gallies,  to  a  feparate  Prifon  at  the  Port 
de  St.  Bernard :  where  they  are  kept  till  there  is  a  proper 
number  of  them  to  be  carried  off.  Some  continue  there 
many  months ;  but  their  term  commences  two  days  after 
fentence,  I  heard  that  about  two  hundred  were  fent  from 
that  Prifon  to  Marfeilles  and  T'oidon,  a  week  or  two  before 
I  was  there. 

To  prevent  the  frequent  confequences  of  defperation,  no 
one  condemned  to  death  by  the  inferior  court,  is  without 
hopes  of  life,  till  the  Parliament,  to  which  he  commonly 
appeals,  confirms  or  reverfes  the  fentence :   and   they  never 

M  make 


§2  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

make  known  their  decifion,  till  the  morning  of  the  day  on 
■which  a  prifoner  is  to  fuffer.  Then  they  publiih  a  confir- 
mation of  the  former  fentence  j  and  it  is  fold  in  the  ftreet^. 

The  chambers  are  opened  at  feven  in  the  morning  from 
November  ift  to  Eafter  ;  at  fix  from  Eafter  to  November: 
and  Ihut  in  the  evening  at  fix  from  November  ift  to  Eafter; 
at  feven  from  Eafter  to  November.  But  debtors  have  an 
hour  more  at  night.  This  they  commonly  fpend  in  the 
court ;  as  they  do  not  choofe  to  be  there  in  the  day-time, 
among  felons.  Common-fide  prifoners  are  obliged  to  come 
out  of  their  night-rooms  at  the  fore- mentioned  morning- 
hours.  Experience  having  fliewn,  that  idlenefs  and  lying  in 
bed,  are  produdlive  of  the  Scurvy  and  other  diftempers. 
Women  are  kept  quite  feparate  from  men.  Where  there  is 
but  one  court-yard,  as  in  the  Condergefie,  they  have  the 
ufe  of  it  from  twelve  till  two  ;  and  the  men  are  fliut  up.  I 
happened  to  be  in  that  prifon  at  thofe  hours.  The  court  is 
fifty-five  yards  by  thirty-eight ;  and  has  a  fine  piazza  on 
three  fides;  on  one  fide  the  piazza  is  double.  This  was 
the  largeft  prifon  in  the  city  before  the  fire  in  January  1776: 
but  the  Graftd  Chdtelet  is  now  larger,  and  has  more  prifon- 
ers;  viz.  371.  In  this  prifon  (the  Conciergerie)  and  the 
Tetit  Chdtelety  I  obferved  the  Infirmaries  were  the  upper- 
moft  rooms  :  the  beft  fituation,  as  one  of  the  Gaolers  ob- 
ierved,  *'  both  for  air,  and  to  prevent  the  fpreading  of  any 

infeiSlious 


Sect.  IV.  FRANCE.  83 

infeftious  diftemper,"     Men  and  women  had  feparate  fick 

wards. 

Taking  GarniJIo,  or  Footing,  is  ftriaiy  prohibited.  If 
prifoners  demand  of  a  new  comer  any  thing  of  that  fort,  on 
whatever  pretence ;  if  in  order  to  obtain  it  they  diftrefs 
him  by  hiding  his  cloaths,  &c.  they  are  Hiut  up  for  a 
fortnight  in  a  dark  dungeon,  and  fufFer  other  punifhment. 
They  are  obnoxious  to  the  fame  chaftifement  for  hiding  one 
another's  cloaths,  or  being  otherwife  injurious. 

The  daily  allowance  to   criminals  is  a  pound  and  half 

of  good   bread,  and  fome  foup.     The    foup    is    not  made, 

nor   is   any   other  provifion   dreffed,  in  the  prifons.      They 

have  clean  linen  once  a  week,  from  a   Society,  which  was 

inftituted  about  the  year  1753.     The  occafion  of  it  was  the 

prevalence  of  a  contagious  difeafe    which  in  France  they 

call   Le  Scorbut,  the  Scurvy.     This  diftemper  was  found  to 

proceed  from  the  prifons ;  and  to  fpread  in  the  HStel  Dieu, 

whither  prifoners   that  had  it  were  removed.     The  caufe  of 

it  was  generally  thought  to  be  Want  of  Cleanlinefs  in  Prifons-, 

where  feveral  of  thofe  confined  had  worn   their  linen  for 

many  months,  and  infedted  the  moft  healthy  new-comers 

that  were  put  in  the  room  with  them.      Eight  hundred 

were  ill  of  it  at  once  in  the  Hofpital  of  St.  Louis,  to  which 

all  that  were  fick  of  it  in  the  Hotel  Dieu  had  been  carried. 

By  the  Abbe  Breton's  exerting  himfelf  on  this  occafion,  a 

M  2  f""^ 


84  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

fund  was  railed  to  fupport  Prilbners  in  the  Grand  Chatelet 
with  clean  linen  every  week.  This  put  an  effedlual  Hop  to 
the  malady  in  that  Prifon.  Numbers  afterwards  joined  the 
Society:  the  king  and  queen  honoured  it  with  their  con- 
tributions :  and  the  charity  extended  to  three  other  Prifons ; 
fo  that  at  laft  feven  hundred  prifoners  were  provided  for  in 
the  fame  manner,  and  a  flock  of  linen  requifite  for  that 
purpofe,  viz.  five  thoufand  iliirts,  was  completed.  The 
elder  prifoners  have  charge  of  the  linen  that  is  in  the  Pri- 
fon ;  they  receive  and  return  it,  and  are  gratified  by  the 
Society;  which  continues  to  the  prefent  time*.  Befides 
this,  there  is  fcarce  a  Prifon  in  the  city  that  has  not  a  Pa- 
tronefs  -f* ;  a  Lady  of  character,  who  voluntarily  takes  care 
that  thofe  in  the  infirmaries  be  properly  attended;  gives 
them  firing ;  fupplies  them  and  the  felons  in  dungeons  with 
linen  ;  does  many  kind  offices  to  the  prifoners  in  general  j 
and  by  foliciting  the  charity  of  others,  procures  not  only 
the  relief  and  comforts  mentioned  already,  but  foup  twice 
a  week,  and  meat  once  a  fortnight. 

'There  is  alfo  annually  at  each  Prifon  fomewhat  like  our 
Charity  Sermons  j  i.  e.  Public  Service  in  the  Chapel,  and  a 
Colledlion. 

"•  For  a  farther  account  of  this  moft  ufeful  mftitution,  fee  Code  di  la  Police. 
Paris,  1767.     Tom,  I.  p.  510,  &;c. 

f  Tre/hritrts  »u  Damn  de  charit4. 

Those 


Sect.  IV.  FRANCE.  85 

Those  who  fleep  on  ftraw,  pay  the  Gaoler  no  fee  at  en- 
trance, or  difcharge ;  but  they  pay  one  fou  or  halfpenny  a 
day ;  and  have  clean  flraw  once  a  month  :  thofe  in  the  dun- 
geons, once  a  fortnight.  Thefe  are  feldom  let  out ;  never 
in  the  yard. 

The  Chamber-Rents  are  all  regulated.  Thofe  wha 
fleep  on  beds  pay  ten  fous  entrance,  and  the  fame  when 
difcharged.  If  they  lie  alone,  they  pay  five  fous  a  day,  if 
two  in  a  bed,  three  fous  each.  The  Gaoler  finds  them 
clean  fheets  in  fummer  once  in  three  weeks ;  in  winter 
once  a  month.  Thofe  who  board  with  him,  and  have  a. 
bed,  not  a  room  to  themfelves,  pay  a  fum  not  exceeding 
three  livres  a  day  (2s.  jd.i) :  but  nothing  at  entrance  or 
difcharge.  Such  boarders  as  have  a  chamber  to  themfelves 
and  firing,  pay  twenty  fous  a  week  more  :  if  no  fire-place 
fifteen  fous.  Both  thefe  forts  have  clean  flieets  in  fummer 
once  a  fortnight ;  in  winter,  in  three  weeks.  The  Gaoler's 
fervants  attend  them.  There  are  alfo  half-boarders  ;  and 
fome  who  have  an  entire  chamber,  but  no  board*. 

All  the  Regulations  are  read  in  the  Chapel  to  Prifoners, 
the  firft  Sunday  of  every  month,  by  the  Chaplain  j  and  they 

hang 

*  I  HAD  the  curiofity  to  procure  .Lifts  of  thefe  different  forts  of  Prifoners  in  the 
fundry  Prifons.  One  of  them  I  will  here  tranfcribe  as  a  fpeciraen }  viz.  In  the 
Cottciergerie  there  were,  June  ift,  1776, 

On 


86  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

hang  up  in  the  Prifon  for  common  infpe<flion.  If  any  Pri- 
foner  tears,  or  otherwife  damages  them,  he  fufFers  corpo- 
ral punirtiment :  if  a  Regifter  or  Gaoler  does  fo,  he  is  fined 
twenty  livres :  if  a  Turnkey,  he  is  difcharged. 

The  difcipline  obferved  is  fo  exadl,  that  at  the  late  fire 
in  the  Conciergene,  the  numerous  prifoners  (as  I  was  in- 
formed) were  removed  without  any  confufion,  or  a  fingle 
efcape.  There  are  good  rules  for  preferving  peace ;  for 
fupprefling  profanenefs ;  for  prohibiting  Gaolers  or  Turn- 
keys abufing  prifoners  by  beating  them  or  otherwife  * ; 
forbidding  their  furnifhing  them  with  wine  or  fpirituous 


On  Straw, 

Men, 

99 

Women, 

22 

In  the  Infirmary, 

Men, 

13 

Women, 

H 

In  the  Dungeons, 

Men, 

25 

Boarders  and  Half-Boarders, 

13 

Such  as  boarded  themieh 

/es. 

16 

202 


SoARDERS  pay  in  this  Prifon  45   livres  a  month;    Half-Boarders  22I-  lirres : 
vhofe  who  board  themfelves    y",  livres.     There  were  fix  Turnkeys. 


•  Monsieur  Guy  du  Rtujfeaud  de  la  Comhe,  in  his  Traite  des  Matieres  Criminelles, 
Paris,  1769,  quarto,  6th  edition,  cites  at  page  339,  an  Arret  of  Parliament  in 
the  laft  century,  that  condemned  a  Gaoler  to  be  hanged,  becaufe  he  let  a  prifoner 
perilh  for  want  of  food, 

liquors. 


Sect.  IV.  FRANCE.  87 

liquors,  fo  as  to  eaufe  excefs,  drunkennefs,  &c.  Keepers 
are  punilhed  for  this  when  known  to  the  Magiflrates,  by  a 
fine  for  the  firft  offence ;  and  for  the  fecond  by  flripes. 

Thjiy  are  allowed  to  fell  fome  things  to  their  prifoners  : 
but  the  quality,  quantity  and  price  muft  be  fuch  as  the  or- 
dinances of  police  define  and  require. 

GAOLER5  and  Turnkeys  are  obliged  to  vifit  once  a  day 
at  leaft,  all  the  dungeons.  I  was  forry  to  find  the  humanity 
which  is  fo  confpicuous  in  the  'forementioned,  and  other 
excellent  rules,  fo  deficient  as  to  continue  the  ufe  of  thofe 
fubterraneous  abodes ;  which  are  totally  dark,  and  beyond 
imagination  horrid  and  dreadful.  Poor  creatures  are  con- 
fined in  them  night  and  day  for  weeks,  for  months  toge- 
ther. They  vifit  thefe,  I  fay,  daily  :  and  if  they  find  any 
prifoners  fick,  they  mufi:  acquaint  the  Phyfician  and  Surgeon; 
who  vifit  them  J  and  if  needful,  order  them  to  more 
wholefome  rooms  till  they  recover. 

Keepers  are  not  tempted  by  paying  for  their  places,  to 
opprefs  their  prifoners  :  to  remove  all  pretext  for  fo  doing,, 
rents  which  they  formerly  paid  to  the  Crown  are  remitted  ; 
and  the  leafes  given  up. 

As  far  debtors,  their  number  is  fmall.  Of  the  202 
Prifoners  in  the  Coficiergerie,    but   fix  were   Debtors.      In 

fome 


88  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

fome  other  Prifons  there  were  a  few  more.  This  perhaps  is 
■owing  to  the  following  good  laws.  Every  Bailiff  who  arrefts 
and  imprifons  a  Debtor,  muft  pay  to  the  Gaoler  in  advance 
a  month's  aliment  or  fubfiflence,  i.  e.  ten  livres  ten  fous, 
equal  to  nine  ihillings  Engliih  (provifions  being  at  Paris 
cheaper  in  general  than  at  London)  :  and  if  the  like  fum  be 
not  paid  within  fourteen  days  after  the  end  of  every  month, 
the  prifoner  is  fet  at  liberty.  Befides  this,  the  Debtor  pays 
no  cofls  of  arrefts,  &c.  The  whole  of  them  falls  on  the 
Creditor  :  and  fo  do  ail  expences  occafioned  by  his  ficknefs, 
or  death. 

As  the  beft  Regulations  are  liable  to  be  abufed,  prifoners 
are  not  thought  fufficiently  provided  for  by  enaBing  good 
Laws  :  the  execution  of  them  is  carefully  attended  to.  The 
Subftitutes  of  the  Attorney -General  vilit  the  Prifons  once  a 
week,  to  inquire  if  the  rules  be  obferved  ;  to  hear  complaints 
of  prifoners  -,  to  fee  if  the  fick  be  properly  attended ;  and  the 
like. — Befides  this,  the  Parliament  of  Paris  fends  to  all  the 
Prifons  five  times  a  year  two  or  three  Coimfellors  with  a 
Stibjlitute  of  the  Attorney-General,  and  two  Clerks.  They 
go  at  Chrijlmas,  Eajler,  Whitfuntide,  one  day  before  i  t^th 
Aiigujl,  Simon  and  Jude.  There  is  in  each  Prifon  (as  in 
other  Foreign  Gaols)  a  room  for  their  reception  called  the 
Council-Chamber.  It  is  occupied  at  other  times  by  the 
Head-Gaoler. 


The 


Sect.  IV.  FRANCE.  89 

The  arrival  of  this  deputation  is  announced  by  boys, 
who,  though  offenders,  are  allowed  to  do  little  errands  in 
the  Prifon  :  thefe  go  round  the  yard  and  into  every  room, 
giving  notice  of  it  aloud.  The  Deputies  go,  without  the 
Gaoler  or  Turnkeys,  into  every  room  and  dungeon,   and 

1.  They  alk  the  prifoners  one  by  one,  if  they  have  any 
complaint  to  make  of  the  Gaoler  or  his  fervants.  But  they 
never  meddle  with  thofe  who  are  confined  by  an  order  from 
the  KING. 

2.  They  receive  the  petitions  of  criminals  who  have 
been  detained  too  long  without  trial, 

3.  In  cafe  of  debts  not  exceeding  two  thoufand  llvres 
(about  ninety  pounds)  if  the  debtor  can  raife  a  third  part  of 
his  debt,  and  no  more,  they  receive  it  for  the  creditors. 
How  they  clear  him  of  the  remaining  two  thirds,  I  will 
fhew  prefently.  They  take  notes  of  thefe  matters  in  the 
Prifon :  and  give  an  account  of  all  to  the  Parliament^  at 
their  general  public  meeting  a  day  or  two  after. 

In  behalf  of  criminals  who  have  not  been  tried,  the  Par- 
liament commonly  orders  the  Attotney-General  to  write  in 
their  name  to  the  inferior  Judges,  inquiring  into  the  caufes 
of  delay,  or  ordering  expedition.  If  a  prifoner  be  acquit- 
ted, he  is  difcharged  within  twenty-four  hours. 

N  The 


9d  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

The  Laws  of  France  do  not  in  ordinary  cafes  admit  a 
Debtor  to  bail  without  the  confent  of  his  Creditor.  But  in 
the  cafe  mentioned  above,  the  Parliament  obliges  creditors 
to  accept  of  bail  for  the  remainder  of  debts  under  two  thou- 
fand  livres.  And  even  this  bail  feems  a  matter  of  mere 
form  J  for  they  fometimes  take  for  bail  men  that  are  in- 
folvent.  I  believe  there  is  no  ftanding  law  for  this  j  and 
that  it  is  rather  an  immemorial  cuftom :  becaufe  the  Par- 
liament enafts  a  particular  law  for  each  cafe  as  it  occurs. 
In  France  there  are  no  infolvent  Adls. 

The  Deputies  hear  no  complaints  of  the  Gaoler  againfl 
his  prifoners.  When  he  has  any  to  make,  he  applies  to 
the  Chief  yujiice,  by  whofe  order  the  prifoner  was  com- 
mitted. If  he  was  imprifoned  by  an  order  from  the  king, 
he  applies  to  the  Lientenant-General  of  the  Police  ;  if  with- 
out fuch  an  order,  to  the  Lieutenant-Criminal,  &c. 

Besides  the  Deputation  now  mentioned,  the  Parliament 
appoints  to  each  Prifon  one  of  their  own  body,  a  Counfeller. 
They  always  choofe  a  Gentleman  of  fortune  and  good  cha- 
racter :  he  is  called  Commijfaire  de  la  Prijbn.  His  bulinefs 
is  much  like  that  of  the  Deputation ;  and  his  office  perpe- 
tual. By  frequent  difcourfe  with  prifoners  I  learned,  that 
thefe  officers  are  very  humane  to  the  dillrefled.  They  can 
(as  the  Parliament)  oblige  creditors  to  accept  one  third  part 

of 


Sect.  IV,  F    R    A    N     C    E»  9 

of  debts  under  two  thoufand  livres :  but  they  ufe  this  power 
with  much  caution. 

THE  BicETRE  is  upon  a  fmall  eminence  about  two  Bicetre. 
miles  from  Paris ;  if  it  were  only  a  prifon,  I  fliould  call  it 
an  enormous  one.  But  this- for  men,  like  the  Hopital  gene- 
ral for  women,  is  indeed  a  kind  of  general  Hofpital.  Of 
about  four  thoufand  men  that  are  within  its  walls,  not  one 
half  are  prifoners.  The  majority  are  -,  The  Poor,  who  wear 
a  coarfe  brown  uniform,  and  feem  as  miferable  as  the  poor 
in  fome  of  our  country  work-houfes  :  the  InJ'ane :  and  men 
that  have  the  venereal  difeafe.  Each  fort  is  in  a  court  and 
apartments  totally  feparate  from  the  other,  and  from  Cri- 
minals.  Thefe  are  confined,  fome  in  little  rooms  about 
eight  feet  fquare,  window  31  by  2,  with  a  grate,  but  not 
many  glazed.  By  counting  the  windows,  on  one  fide  of  the 
Houfe,  I  reckoned  there  mufl  be  five  hundred  of  thofe 
rooms :  there  is  but  one  prifoner  in  each.  Thefe  pay  two 
hundred  livres  a  year  for  their  board.  There  are  others  in 
two  large  rooms  called  La  Force,  on  the  other  fide  of  the 
court-yard  La  Cour  Royale,  which  are  crowded  with  pri- 
foners. Over  thefe  two  rooms  is  a  general  Infirmary :  and 
over  that,  an  Infirmary  for  the  Scurvy ;  a  diftemper  very 
common,  and  fatal  among  them. 

In  the  middle  of  La  Cour  Royale  are  eight  dreadful  dun- 
geons down  fixteen  fteps  :  each  about  thirteen  feet  by  nine : 

N  2  with 


92  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

with  two  ftrong  doors ;  three  chains  faftencd  to  the  wall ; 
and  a  ftone  funnel  at  one  corner  of  each  cell,  for  air.  From 
the  fituation  of  thefe  dreary  caverns,  and  the  difficulty  I 
found  in  procuring  admittance,  I  conclude  hardly  any  other 
ftranger  ever  faw  them  :  that  is  my  reafon,  and  I  hope  will 
be  an  apology,  for  mentioning  the  particulars. 

Prisoners  make  ftraw-boxes,  tooth-picks,  &c.  and  fell 
them  to  vifitants.  I  viewed  the  men  with  fome  attention  ; 
and  obferved  in  the  looks  of  many  a  fettled  melancholy  : 
many  others  looked  very  fickly.  This  Prifon  feems  not  fo 
well  managed  as  thofe  in  the  city :  it  is  very  dirty  :  no  fire- 
jtlace  in  any  of  the  rooms  :  and  in  the  fevere  cold  laft  win- 
ter, feveral  hundreds  perifhed. 

Water  in  plenty  was  thought  of  fuch  importance  here, 
that  they  have  a  flone  well  which  is  a  curiofity.  It  was 
built  in  1735;  is  fifteen  feet  diameter,  and  near  feventy 
yards  deep.  The  two  Buckets  hold  each  about  three 
hogflieads  :  they  are  drawn  up  by  horfes,  and  empty  them- 
felves  into  zRefervoirf  fixty-four  feet  fquare,  and  nine  deep. 
A  bucket  is  drawn  up  in  five  minutes.  They  work  fixteen 
hours  every  day,  not  excepting  Sundays;  and  draw  daily 
about  five  hundred  hogfheads.  Three  horfes  work  at  a 
time,  and  twelve  are  kept  for  the  fervice. 


HoPlTAi 

QXNERAIi.. 


THE  HoPiTAL  GENERAE,  near  the  city,  is- for  women 

and 


Sect.  IV.  FRANC     E.  93 

and  girls.  The  latter  are  employed  on  the  fineft'  embroidery. 
Numbers  of  poor>  and  a  fifterhood  of  religious.  Many 
criminals,  quite  feparate  from  the  others,  and  not  feen  by 
ilrangers.  The  Houfe  was  cleaner,  and  feemed  better  coa- 
dudled  than  the  Biceire  upon  the  fame  foundation.. 

THE  B"ASTiLE  may  occur  to  fome  of  my  readers,  as  an  Bastilev 
objedl  concerning  which  fome  information  would  be  ac- 
ceptable. All  that  I  can  give  them  is,  that  I  knocked  hard 
at  the  outer  gate,  and  immediately  went  forward  through 
the  guard  to  the  draw-bridge  before  the  entrance  of  the 
Caftle.  I  was  fome  time  viewing  this  building,  which  is 
round,  and  furrounded  by  a  large  moat.  None  of  the  win- 
dows look  outwards,  but  only  towards  a  fmall  area  ;  and  if 
the  ilate  prifoners  are  ever  permitted  to  take  the  frefh  air,  it 
muil  be  on  the  leads,  which  have  high  parapets.  But 
whilft  I  was  contemplating  this  gloomy  manfion,  an  ofiicer 
came  out  of  the  Caftle  much  furprized ;  and  I  was  forced  to 
retreat  through  the  mute  guard,  and  thus  regained  that 
freedom,  which  for  one  locked  up  within  thofe  walls  it  is 
next  to  impofiible  to  obtain, 

MANY  of  my  readers,  acquainted  with  the  ftrid  police 
of  France,  would  have  fuppofed  that  the  other  Prifons 
would  have  been  as  inacceflible  to  a  vifitant  as  the  Bajlile. 
And  indeed  my  firft  application  for  admittance  at  the  Grand 
Chatelet  was   unfuccefsful.     But  fortunately  remarking  the 

tenth 


94.  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

tenth  Article*  of  the  Arret  17 17,  I  pleaded  it  before  the 
CommljJ'aire  de  la  Prifon  to  whom  I  was  referred,  and  by  its 
means  gained  admillion  as  well  into  that  Prifon,  as  thofe  of 
Petit  Chdtelet  and  Fort  rEveque,  and  had  an  opportunity  of 
feeing  almofl  every  individual  confined  in  them. 

Provinces.  IN  the  PROVINCIAL  GAOLS  I  faw  little  worth  noting 
to  imitate  or  avoid,  but  what  has  been  already  mentioned  at 
Paris.  Thefe  alfo  have  charitable  PatroneiTes,  or  Patrons, 
who  take  care  that  the  prifoners  be  not  defrauded  of  their 
allowance;  and  procure  them  farther  relief.  But  thefe 
Prifons  do  not  feem  to  be  fo  carefully  infpe(fled  as  thofe  in 
the  city ;  although  the  Ads  of  Parliament  for  regulation  of 
both  are  for  the  moft  part  fmiilar ;  and  were  made  in  the 
fame  year,  1717  -f.  They  are  drawn  up  with  found  judg- 
ment, and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  complex  fubjedt.  I 
found  many  articles  of  them  in  the  laws  of  other  nations ; 

but 


•  The  Article  is  as  follows. 

Les  Geoliers  conduiront  hs  perfonnes  qui  'vkndront  faire  da  charitex  dans  Us  lieux  de  la 
prifon  oil  elks  dejireront  les  dijiribuer,  ce  qu" elles  pourront  faire  elles-mefmes  fur  le  preau  ou 
dans  la  cour ;  mais  les  aumofnes  ne  pourront  eflre  dijirihuees  dans  les  cachots  noirs  que  par 
les  mains  du  Geolier,  en  prefence  des  perfonnes  qui  les  porteront. 


t  They  are  printed  in  quarto.     The  Aft  for  the  City  is  dated   iSthJune:  it 
contains  thirty-nine  Articles.     The  title  is  Arref}  de  la  Cour  de  Parlement,  pertant 

Reglement 


Sect.  IV.  FRANCE.  95 

but  cannot  fay  whether  the  French  Adts  were   compiled 
from  them,  or  followed  by  them. 

The  32d  Article  of  the  Adt  for  the  Provinces  requires 
that  Prifons  be  *'  au  raiz  de  chauj/'ee"* ;  level  with  thegroimd. 
Yet  at  Chalons,  and  fome  other  towns,  I  faw  many  prifoners 
in  dungeons  j  larger  indeed,  but  in  other  refpedts  not  much 
better  than  thofe  at  Paris.  In  the  four  horrid  ones  at  the 
Prifon  de  St.  Jofeph  (formerly  a  Convent)  at  Lyons,  June  Lyons, 
ijj6,  were  twenty-nine  criminals:  the  heat  fo  exceffive,- 
that  few  of  them  had  any  other  garment  on  than  merely 
their  fliirts.  Some  of  them  were  fick  :  none  of  them  looked 
healthy.  In  the  nine  other  rooms  of  that  Gaol  there  were 
one  hundred  and  twenty-eight  prifoners  ;  of  which  number 
twenty-two  were  women.  To  the  Pierrecize,  a  flate  prifon 
at  Lyotis,  you  afcend  by  more  than  two  hundred  fteps  : 
among  the  few  prifoners  in  it,  I  fat  talking  a  while  with 
one  who  faid  he  was  in  the  fiftieth  year  of  his  confinement. 


Reglement  general  pour  les  Prifons,  droits  ct  fonSlions  des  Greffiers  dis  Gecles,  Geoliers  et 
Guichetiers  des  dites  Prifons :  A-cec  le  Tarif  des  droits  atirihuez  aufdits  Geoliers. 
The  Aft  for  the  Provinces,  dated  ift  September,  has  the  fame  title,  except  tlie 
Tarif,     It  contains  thirty-three  Articles. 

•  The  foundation  of  this  was  probably  the  fi'-ft  Article  upon  Prifons  in  the 
excellent  Criminal  Ordonnance  of  Louis  XIV.  1670,  which  direfts  that  they  ftiall 
be  fo  difpofed  that  the  health  of  prifoners  Jhall  not  be  incommoded, 

I  dwell 


96  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

I  dwell  perhaps  too  long  on  France.  Yet  I  cannot  leave  it, 
without  flopping  a  minute  longer  at  Lyons  3  to  give  a  fliort 
account  of  an  Hofpital  there. 

HoTEi  THE  Hotel  DiEu   is  by  the  rivePs  fide  (the  Rhone). 

The  principal  building  is  in  the  form  of  a  crofs :  near  three 
hundred  feet  from  end  to  end  both  ways.  The  wards 
thirty-two  feet  wide,  and  twenty-five  feet  high :  with 
apertures  between  the  joifls  of  the  floor  above  ;  and  two 
tier  of  windows  :  in  many  of  them  two  cafements.  Three 
rows  of  iron  bedfleads  in  each  ward.  Under  a  dome  in  the 
centre  is  an  odlagon  altar,  in  view  from  every  part  of  the  crofs. 
Prayers,  which  are  read  there  twice  a  day,  can  be  heard 
through  the  wards.  This  part  of  the  Houfe  is  for  thofe  that 
have  Fevers.  There  are  other  wards  for  Lying-in  Women ;  for 
the  Wounded;  for  Foiuidlings ;  for  the  Infane :  all  feparate : 
and  a  room  for  chirurgical  operations.  The  crofs-wards  are 
fo  airy,  as  not  to  be  in  the  leaft  offenfive  :  and  yet  there  are,  in 
another  part  of  the  Houfe,  two  large  upper  rooms  flill  more 
airy  and  pleafant,  Chambres  de  Cojivalefcence :  to  thefe  they 
remove  patients  that  are  recovering :  and  thofe  whom  I  faw 
there  faid  they  were  very  refrefliing.  They  come  down 
from  them  at  meals  to  a  Refedory  or  Hall.  Thefe  rooms 
foon  complete  the  patients  recovery  ;  and  feem  an  excellent 
precaution  againfl  the  flow  heftic  fever,  of  which  our 
Hofpital -Phyficians    fo    frequently    complain  ^    and    it    is 

chiefly 


Sect.  IV.  GENEVA.  97. 

chiefly  on  account  of  thefe  that  I  mention  the  Houfe  *. 
The  whole  was  clean  and  quiet.  There  are  eight  Chap- 
lains j  nine  Phyficians  and  Surgeons;  and  twelve  Sifters. 
Thefe  are  ladies  of  a  religious  order,  drefled  in  a  neat  uni- 
form, who  make  up,  as  well  as  adminifter  all  the  medicines 
prefcribed ;  for  which  purpofe  there  is  an  Elaboratory  and 
Aporiiecary's  fhop,  confifting  of  five  or  fix  apartments,  the 
neateft  and  moft  elegantly  fitted  up  that  can  be  conceived. 


B 


EFORE   the  Cantons,  I  will  mention,   what  is  not 
indeed  any  part  of  Switzerland,  the  little  Republic  of 


NEVA. 


HERE  were  only  five  Criminals  -,  none  of  them  in  irons. 
Their  allowance  about  fix-pence  a  day :  for  which  they 
have  a  pound  of  good  bread,  fome  foup,  and  half  a  pint  of 

•  I  WAS  induced  to  take  fuch  particular  notice  of  this  Hofpital,  from  the  recol- 
leftion  of  fomething  fimilar  to  thefe  Chambers  of  Coniialefcence  propofed  by  my  inge- 
nious friend  Mr.  Aikin  of  Warrington,  in  his  Thoughts  on  Hofpitals,  I  had  not  the 
pamphlet  then  with  me,  but  have  fince  turned  to  the  paffage,  and  find  he  advifes 
that  "  all  patients  capable  of  fitting  up,  fliould  remain  through  the  day  in  large 
airy  halls." 

O  wine. 


98  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

wine.  They  looked  healthy.  Here,  as  in  the  Swifs- 
Cantons,  meil  and  women  are  kept  feparate.  For  the  laft 
year  or  two  no  capital  punilhment.  If  a  criminal  flies 
from  juftice,  they  call  him  in  form  three  days,  and  after 
trial,  execute  him  in  effigy. 

No  Debtors :  and  there  feldom  are  any.  A  creditor  muft 
allow  his  debtor  in  prifon  as  much  as  felons  have  from  the 
public :  upon  failure,  the  gaoler  gives  notice,  and  then 
difcharges  the  prifoner.  Befides,  there  are  fiimptuary  laws 
in  this  ftate.  And  though  the  government  is  in  general 
mild,  there  is  a  fevere  law  againfl  bankrupts,  and  in- 
folvents ;  which  renders  incapable  of  all  honours,  and 
deprives  of  freedom,  not  only  the  debtor  himfelf,  but  his 
children  after  him  :  except  fuch  of  them  as  pay  their  quota 
of  the  debts  *. 


IN  thofe  of  the  CANTONS  to  which  I  went.  Felons 
have  each  a  room  to  themfelves,  "  that  they  may  not," 
faid  the  Keepers,  **  tutor  one  another."  None  were  in  irons: 
they  are  kept  in  rooms  more  or  lefs  flrong  and  lightfome, 
according  to  the  crimes  they  are  charged  with.  But  the 
Prifons  are  in  general  very  ftrong.     The  rooms  are  num- 

•  See  Editi  de  la  RcpubU^ut  de  Geneve,  1735. 

bered. 


Sect.  IV.  SWITZERLAND.  99 

bered,  and  the  keys  marked  with  the  fame  numbers.  In 
moil  of  them  a  German  Stove.  The  common  allowance 
fix-pence  a  day.  In  fome  Cantons  there  were  no  prifoners 
of  this  fort.  The  principal  reafon  of  it  is,  the  great  care 
that  is  taken  to  give  children,  even  the  pooreft,  a  moral 
and  religious  education.,  Another  thing  which  contributes 
to  the  fame  intention,  is  the  laudable  police  of  fpeedy 
juftice.  A  criminal  has  notice  of  his  death,  not  the  manner 
of  it,  but  a  ihort  time  before  he  is  to  fuffer :  and  he  is  then 
indulged  with  his  choice  of  food,  wine,  &c.  Women  are 
not  hanged,  but  beheaded.  Every  new  executioner  has  a 
new  fword  ;  and  in  the  Arfenal  at  Berfz  I  faw  feveral  old 
ones  hung  up  in  order.  In  the  Houfes  of  Correcflion  many 
of  the  prifoners  were  women;  whom  I  faw  at  work. 

The  moft  numerous  prifoners  are  the  G alley- Slav e s ;  im- 
properly fo  called,  for  there  are  no  Galleys  belonging  to 
Switzerland, 

AT  Lausanne  I  vifited  a  Prifon,  in  which  Lausanne. 
there  were  at  that  time  no  prifoners.  There  were  dun- 
geons, but  on  entering  each  of  them  the  Keeper  ob- 
ferved  that  we  were  not  yet  upon  the  ground,  but  there 
were  cellars  underneath.  On  converfing  with  Dr.  T'iJJot, 
he  expreffed  his  furprize  at  our  Gaol-Diflemper ;  faid 
"  I  fhould  not  find  it  in  Switzerland :  "  and  added  that 
"  he    had   not    heard    of    it's    being    any   where    but    in 

O  2  England." 


Joo  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

England.  "  When  I  mentioned  the  late  Adl  of  Parlia- 
ment for  preferving  the  health  of  our  prifoners,  he  ap- 
proved of  it  highly,  efpecially  the  claufes  which  require 
ivhite-ivajhing  the  rooms  and  keeping  them  clean. — I  did  not 
(as  the  Dodlor  faid  I  fliould  not)  find  the  Gaol-Fever  In 
Switzerland  :  nor  did  I  find  it  any  where  elfe  abroad  *. 

Bern.  IN  Bern,  the  principal  Canton,  there  was  in  onePrifon  (the 

Schallenhaus)  one  hundred  and  twenty-four  Galley-Slaves. 
They  have  not  each  a  room  to  themfelves  j  but  there  is  fonie 
diftin(flion  of  the  more  and  lefs  criminal,  both  in  their  rooms 
and  work.  Moft  of  them  are  employed  in  cleaning  the 
flreets,  and  public  walks ;  removing  the  rubbifli  of  build- 
ing ;  and  the  fnow  and  ice  in  winter.  The  city  is  one  of  the 
cleaneft  I  have  feen.  Four  or  five  are  chained  to  a  fmall 
waggon  and  draw ;  others,  more  at  liberty,  fweep,  load,  &c. 
Thefe  are  known  by  an  Iron  Collar,  with  a  hook  projedting 
above  their  heads  :  weight  about  five  pounds  :  I  faw  one 
riveted  on  a  criminal  in  about  two  minutes.  They  work 
in  fummer  from  feven  to  eleven,  and  from  one  to  fix ;  in 
winter    from  eight  to  eleven,    and  from    one   to  four.     I 

aiked 

•  Sir  John  Pringle,  Prefident  of  the  Royal  Society,  in  his  Difcourfe  at  the 
Atiniverfary  Meeting,  30th  November  1776,  informs  us  at  page  16,  that  "  The 
"  late  Dr.  Mounfey,  F.  R.  S.  who  had  lived  long  in  RuJJia,  and  had  been  Archiater 

"  under  two  fucceffivc   Sovereigns happening  to  be  at  Mo/i  coy  when  he  perufed 

"  the  Ohferwatimn  en  the  Jail-Fe-ver-r—wi^  induced  to  compare  what  he  read  in  that 
"  Trcatife  with  what  he  fliould  fee  in  the  fever.nl  Prifons  of  that  large  city  :  but  to 
*'  his  furprize,  after  vifuing  them  all,  and  finding  them  full  of  malefaftors  (for 

•'  the 


Skct.  IV.  SWITZERLAND.  loi 

aflced  them,  "  Whether  they  would  choofe  to  work  fo,  or 
be  confined  within  doors  ?  "  "  Much  rather,'^  they  faid, 
'*  work  thus."  The  lefs  criminal  are  in  feparate  wards. 
They  work  within  doors,  fpinning,  &c.  in  a  large  room ; 
and  have  not  the  iron  collar.  The  Priibn  is  not  commo- 
dious, nor  kept  clean.  The  daily  allowance  two  pounds  of 
bread,  and  twice  a  day  a  pint  and  half  of  foup,  made  of 
barley,  beans,  &c.  they  fetch  it  from  the  City-Hofpital. 
In  their  leifure-hours  they  make  trifles  to  fell,  mend 
ilioes  &c.  and  deliver  them  as  they  pafs  on  at  work.  They 
are  not  fuffered  to  pradtife  Gaming  of  any  fort.  Indeed  this 
is  forbidden  to  all  the  common  people  j  as  playing  for  any 
conliderable  fum  is  to  thofe  of  higher  rank.  The  Keeper 
and  Turnkey  are  to  fee  that  the  prifoners  perforin  their  de- 
votions every  morning  and  evening.  The  Chaplains  pray 
with  them  and  inftru6t  them  on  Sunday  and  Thurfday. 
Once  a  month  other  Clergymen  fuperintend  the  fervice. 
No  vifitant  admitted  on  Sunday.  Great  care  taken  of  the 
fick.  No  futling  place  to  be  kept  in  this  Houfe  of  Cor- 
redion.  The  Keeper  is  flridrly  forbidden  to  fell  the  pri- 
foners  wine,  brandy,  or  other  provifions ;  and  required  en- 

"  the  late  Ernprefs  then  fuffered  none-— to  be  put  to   death)    he    could   dlfcover 
"  no  fever  among  them,  nor  learn   that  any  acute  diftemper  peculiar  to  Jails  had 

"  ever  been  known  there. Upon  his  return  to  St.  Pcterfiurg  he  made  the  fame 

"  inquiry  there,  and  with  the  fame  refult." 

I  SHALL  jull  remark  here  that  the  Sccrbut  in  the  French  Prifons  may  probably  be 
a  fpecies  of  the  Gaol-Diftemper  ;  but  I  did  not  fee  any  perfons  aftually  ill  of  it  while 
I  was  abroad  j  ctherwife  I  think  I  fliould  have  been  able  to  have  recognized  it. 

tirely 


I02  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

tirely  to  forego  any  fuch  emolument.  The  bedding  and 
cloathing  are  minutely  defcribed,  both  as  to  quality  and 
value.  I  have  a  copy  of  all  the  Orders,  twenty-feven  in 
number,  dated  March  14.  1741.  Thefe  which  I  have  men- 
tioned may  ferve  for  a  fpecimen.  Some  of  the  flaves  are 
women  :  their  ward  is  totally  feparate  from  that  of  the  men. 

In  La  Prifon  ordinaire  fome  rooms  are  planked  all  round. 
Eight  of  them  are  very  clofe  and  ftrong.  Doors  of  oak 
24.  inches  thick,  plated  with  iron  j  three  hinges,  a  lock 
and  two  padlocks.  In  a  clofet,  were  the  cloaths  of  a  per- 
fon  that  was  murdered,  kept  to  confront  the  guilty  when 
apprehended  :  and  fome  llolen  goods,  to  be  owned.  Here 
Avere  no  prifoners.  A  criminal  who  can  pay  is  allowed  to 
expend  7  batz  2  kreutzer,  about  a  ihilling  daily,  for  two 
meals  of  foup  and  good  bread.  To  one  that  is  poor,  the 
Government  allows  half  that  fum.  To  all  who  are  con- 
demned, they  allow  a  fliilling  a  day  for  eight  days  before 
they  fuffer.  Thefe  allowances  are  fpecified  on  a  paper 
hung  up  in  the  Gaol.  There  alfo  hangs  up  a  ferious  ex- 
hortation concerning  the  awful  nature  of  an  Oath;  and  the 
forms  of  fundry  oaths  to  be  taken.  I  procured  copies  of 
the  whole,  but  will  tranfcribe  only  one  oath,  as  follows  : 
—  "  Ma  depojition,  dont  leSture  tna  ete  faite  a  prefent,  je 
*'  /a  conjirnie  devant  la  face  du  Dieu  tout  puij] ant,  tout  J'a~ 
"  chant  et  'vray,  pour  contenir  la  verite,  ainfi  que  je  dejire 
*'  qu£  Dieu  T?iefoit  en  >aide fur  la  Jin  de  mes  jours.     Sans  dol  ni 

"fraudc." 


Sect.  IV.  SWITZERLAND.  103 

^'  fraude." — "  My  depofition,  which  has  now  been  read  to 
*'  me  I  confirm  before  the  face  of  God  omnipotent,  om- 
*'  nifcient  and  true,  to  contain  the  truth,  as  I  defirc  that 
"  God  may  be  my  help  at  the  end  of  my  days.  Without 
"  deceit  or  fraud."  Perjury,  I  was  told,  is  very  uncommon 
among  them  *. 

In  this  city  I  had  fome  difcourfe  with  the  celebrated 
Dr.  Haller.  He  afcribed  the  ficknefs  in  Englifh  Gaols  to 
their  being  over-crowded. 

AT  SoLOTHURN  the  Prilbn  (dated  in  front  1756)  is  built  Solothurn. 
of  a  fort  of  marble  from  a  quarry  near  the  town.  Many  of 
the  ftones  are  fix  feet  by  two  or  three,  and  above  a  foot 
thick.  The  Gaoler  faid,  "  He  always  took  off  the  irons 
from  criminals  that  came  to  him  chained  hands  and  feet." 
There  are  fifteen  rooms  about  nine  feet  fquare,  and  eight 
feet  high :  with  a  coach  roof.  The  partition  walls  are  all  of 
the  fame  fort  of  marble  :  the  window  is  in  the  upper  part  of 

*  In  Scotland  alfo  tliis  crime  is  not  frequent.  When  I  was  there  January  1775, 
there  were  no  trials  :  but  by  inquiring  of  Gentlemen  well-verfed  in  the  bufinefs  of 
their  Courts,  I  learned  that  the  oath  and  the  form  of  adminiftering  it,  are  very 
folemn.  The  Judge,  as  well  as  the  Witnefs  Handing,  holding  up  his  right  hand 
&c.  After  a  witnefs  has  given  his  evidence,  it  is  read  to  him,  that  he  may  correG 
or  explain  it ;  and  then  he  figns  it.  The  whole  procefs  is  carried  on  with  great 
deliberation.  Judges  on  the  Circuit  are  obliged  to  Hay  five  nights  at  every  town 
where  they  open  their  commiffion.     Acquitted  prifoners  are  immediately  difcharged. 

the 


104  F  O  R  E  I  G  N      P  R  I  S  O  N  S. 

the  wall,  two  feet  by  fix  inches  :  German  ftoves  In  mofl 
of  the  rooms.  For  thofe  guilty  of  lefs  heinous  crimes, 
there  are  rooms  not  quite  fo  flrong,  and  more  lightforae. 
Allowance  a  pound  of  bread,  and  twice  a  day  foup. 

The  Magiflrates  thought  a  conjlantjiipply  ofivater  within 
thePrifon-walls  fo  needful,  that  although  there  is  a  fountain 
in  the  ftreet  about  ten  yards  from  the  Prifon-door,  they 
have  placed  another  in  the  court-yard,  dated  1769. 

Basil.  AT  Basil   the  Gaol  for  felons  is  in  one  of  towers.     No 

prifoners ;  but  many  rooms  ready  with  clean  flraw  and 
blankets.  Each  prifoner  (they  faid)  has  a  room  to  him- 
felf,  in  which  he  is  conftantly  fhut  up,  except  when  con- 
dudted  to  the  Council-Chamber  for  examination.  One  of 
the  ftrongeft  rooms  by  the  great  clock  is  about  fix  feet 
high:  the  (trap)  door  is  in  the  flat  roof:  the  prifoner  goes 
down  by  a  ladder,  which  is  then  taken  up  :  his  victuals  are 
put  in  at  a  wicket  on  one  fide.  When  I  was  in  the  room, 
and  took  notice  of  the  uncommon  ftrength  of  it,  the  Gaoler 
told  me  a  prifoner  had  lately  made  his  efcape  from  it.  I 
could  not  devife  what  method  he  took,  but  heard  it  was 
tliis.  He  had  a  fpoon  for  foup,  which  he  fliarpened  to  cut 
out  a  piece  from  the  timber  of  his  room  :  then  by  pradlicc 
he  acquired  the  art  of  flriking  his  door,  jufl  when  the  great 
clock  ftruck,  to  drown  the  noife  :  and  in  fifteen  days  he 
forced  all  the  bolts,    &c.     But  attempting   to  let  himfelf 

down 


Sect.  IV.  GERMANY, 

down  from  the  vaft  height  by  a  rope  which  he  found,  the 
rope  failed  him ;  and  by  falling  he  broke  fo  many  of  his 
bones,  that  the  Surgeons  pronounced  his  recovery  impof- 
fible.  But  his  bones  were  fet;  and  with  proper  care  he  did 
recover,  and  was  pardoned. 


loS 


GERMANY. 


THE  Germans,  well  aware  of  the  neceility  oi  Cleanli" 
nefs  in  Prifons,  have  very  judicioufly  chofen  to  build 
them  in  fituations  moft  conducive  to  itj  that  is,  near 
Rivers  :  as  at  Hajiover,  Zell,  Hamburgh^  Bremen,  Cologne^ 
Mentz  and  many  other  places. 

In  the  Gaols  that  I  faw  there  were  but  few  prifoners, 
except  thofe  called,  improperly,  Galley-Slaves.  One  caufe 
of  this,  here  as  in  Switzerland,  is  a  fpeedy  trial  after  com- 
mitment. 

The  Galley-Slaves  have  every  where  a  Prifon  to  them- 
felves.  They  work  on  the  Roads,  the  Fortifications,  Chalk^ 
Hills,  and  other  public  fervicej  for  four,  feven,  ten,  iif- 

P  teen. 


io6  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

teen,  twenty  years,  according  to  their  crimes  :  and  arc 
cloathed,  as  well  as  fed,  by  the  Government.  At  Wcfel, 
which  belongs  to  the  king  oi  PriiJJia,  there  were  ninety- 
eight  of  thefe  Haves  :  they  have  two  pounds  of  bread  a  day, 
and  the  value  of  three  halfpence  Englifli  eyery  day  they 
work. 

I  SAW  no  under-ground  dungeons  in  any  of  the  new 
Prifons  in  Germany :  nor  indeed  in  any  new  Prifon  abroad. 
At  Lunenburg  the  dungeons  are  difufed :  and  inftead  of 
them  are  built  additional  rooms  up  flairs  :  one  for  each 
prifoner.  And  in  moft  of  the  Gaols  each  criminal  is  alone 
in  his  room ;  which  is  more  or  lefs  flrong,  lightfome, 
and  airy,  as  the  crime  he  is  charged  with  is  more  or  lefs 
atrocious. 

One  often  fees  the  doors  of  fundry  rooms  marked 
Ethiopia,  India,  Italy,  France,  England,  8cc.  In  thofe 
rooms,  parents,  by  the  authority  of  the  Magiftrates,  con- 
fine for  a  certain  term  diffolute  children  :  and  if  they  are 
inquired  after,  the  anfwer  is,  they  are  gone  to  Italy, 
England,   &c. 

I  DO  not  remember  any  Prifon  in  Germany  (nor  elfewhere 
abroad)  in  which  Felons  have  not,  either  from  the  public 
allowance,  or  from  charities,  fomewhat  more  to  live  on 
than   bread  and  water.     In  fome  places  a  perfon  goes  on 

market- 


Sect.  IV.  GERMANY. 

market-days  with  a  bafket  for  prifoners  :  and  I  have  feeii 
him  bring  them  a  comfortable  meal  of  frefh  vegetables. 
But  there  are  feparate  Prifons  in  which  confinement  for  a 
week  or  two  on  bread  and  water  is  all  the  punifliment  for 
feme  petty  offences.  Perhaps,  when  a  condemned  criminal 
is  only  to  live  a  day  or  two,  fuch  diet  may  be  more  pro- 
per than  the  indulgence  with  which  the  Germans  ti-eat  pri- 
foners, after  fentence  of  death,  which  is  commonly  exe- 
cuted within  forty-eight  hours.  The  malefador  has  then 
his  choice  of  food,  and  wine,  iii  a  commodious  room,  into 
which  his  friends  are  admitted  ;  and  a  Minifter  attends  him 
during  almoft  all  his  remaining  hours. 


'  AT  Strasburg  I  faw  in  one  of  the  five  towers  three  Stras- 
Liebtors :  they  informed  me  that  they  were  alimented  by 
their  creditors  ;  that  they  had  two  pounds  of  good  bread  a 
day,  and  foup  equally  good.  I  was  much  pleafed  to  find 
fo  much  of  a  liberal  fpirit  prevail  in  this  city,  that  in  the 
Hofpital  there  were  feparate  chambers  for  Lutherans,  in 
which  they  were  allowed  the  attendance  of  their  own 
Minifters. 

AT  Mentz,  La  Porte  de  Per,  which   is  for  Felons,  is      Mentz. 
five  flories  high  :  two  rooms  on  a  floor :  a  fpacious  landing- 
place  in  the  middle,  with  oppofite  windows,  for  circulation 
of  air.  The  rooms  are  double-floored  with  oak  pJank,  full  two 
inches   thick ;  and  each  room  has  a  double  door  only  three 

P  2  feet 


107 


io8  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

feet  nine  inches  high.  Thefe  two  circumflances  contribute 
much  to  fecurity.  On  one  fide  the  door  is  a  fmall  iron 
wicket,  to  put  in  the  daily  allowance :  which  is  two 
pounds  of  bread,  foup,  and  (except  in  Lent)  a  little 
meat.  Only  one  prifoner  is  confined  in  each  room,  who 
has  a  pair  of  blankets  -,  and  once  in  a  fortnight  clean  ftraw. 
This  Gaol  ftands  near  the  Rhine,  and  is  not  in  the  leaft 
oftenfive. 

In  the  Houfe  of  Corredion  all  was  neat,  and  fhewed  the 
attention  of  the  Regency.  On  my  taking  notice  to  the 
Keeper  how  clean  his  Prifon  was,  he  faid  "  How  can  it 
"  be  otherwife  when  we  have  fo  many  women  prifoners  .^ 
**  Surely  they  may  keep  the  Houfe  clean."  Mofl  of  thff 
flour  for  the  city  is  ground  at  a  mill  in  this  Prifon.  The 
delinquents  work  at  it  two  hours  in  the  morning,  and  two 
in  the  afternoon.  Over  the  door  is  carved  a  waggon  drawn 
by  two  Sfags,  two  Lions,  and  two  wild  Boars ;  with  an  in- 
fcription  explaining  the  device,  which  is,  that  if  wild  beafts 
can  be  tamed  to  the  yoke,  we  fhould  not  defpair  of  reclaim- 
ing irregular  men.  I  faw  the  fame  has  relief  at  one  or  two 
other  Houfes  of  Correction. 

There  is  a  feparate  Prifon  for  Debtors,  near  the  Fifh- 
Market :  Le  Port  du  PoiJJbii.  No  prifoners.  When  there 
are  any,  they  have  daily  at  the  creditor's  cofl  two  pounds 
of  bread,  and  about  four-pence  Englilh. 

Every 


Sect.  IV.  GERMANY. 

Every  Prifon  at  Mentz  has  ia  each  room  a  German 
ilove  J  which,  in  winter,  is  heated  two  or  three  times  a 
day.  .  Prifoners  have  clean  linen  once  a  week.  On  my  ob- 
serving to  the  Brigadier  of  the  Police  who  went  with  ftie, 
how  healthy  his  prifoners  looked,  he  told  me  that  "  Some 
"  years  ago,  they  were  unhealthy  3  and  the  Regency  re- 
**  moved  them  from  the  dungeons  under  ground :  upon 
**  which  they  recovered  j  and  had  been  remarkably  healthy 
**  ever  fince."     The  dungeons  are  now  totally  difufed. 

It  was  hardly  neceffary  to  inquire  if  the  Prifons  were 
infpecfted  by  proper  Officers.  The  Keepers  make  a  report 
every  day  to  an  attentive  Lieutenant  of  the  Police :  and  once 
in  a  fortnight  the  Confeiller  de  Regence,  the  Secretaire  and 
Confeiller  des  Finances  vifit  every  Prifon ;  hear  all  com- 
plaints ;  and  inquire  if  cloaths,  or  any  thing  neceffary  be 
wanting.  None  of  the  Keepers  fell  liquor ;  but  prifoners 
may  fend  o'ut  for  a  quart  of  beer  a  day.  They  are  not  al- 
lowed to  have  any  fpirituous  liquors. 

I  HAVE  related  more  particulars  here,  to  give  a  fpecimen 
of  the  deconomy  obferved  in  other  German  Prifons,  mofl  of 
them  being  governed  upon  the  fame  principles  j  though 
not  all  with  the  fame  attention. 

AT  Hanau  n&?ir  Hejfe  Cafel,  the  Galley-Slaves  (facalled)      Han^ 
are   diflinguiflied    into    Honnetes    and   Dejloonnetes.      The 

former 


109 


110  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

former  are  condemned  for  three,  four,  feven,  nine,  four- 
teen years  :  but  the  term  is  fometimes  fliortened  on  account 
of  good  behaviour.  Thefe  wear  a  brown  uniform  -,  and  a 
fmall  chain  from  the  girdle  to  one  leg.  The  latter  are  for 
the  moft  part  fuch  as  have  committed  capital  offences. 
Thefe  wear  a  white  coat  with  one  black  fleeve  j  and  have  a 
chain  from  the  girdle  to  each  leg  :  they  never  work  out  of 
the  town  j  and  are  put  to  the  moft  difagreeable  iervices  in 
it.  The  hours  of  work  for  both  forts  are  in  fummer  from 
five  to  eleven,  and  from  one  to  fix  :  in  winter  as  the  wea- 
ther and  length  of  days  permit.  Allowance,  from  ift  of 
April  to  Michaelmafs,  2|  pounds  of  bread  a  day:  from 
Michael mafs  to  April,  two  pounds  :  and  each  man  about 
two-pence  Englifli  a  day.  From  a  charity  they  have  half  a 
florin  (about  twelve-pence  halfpenny)  a  month.  They 
are  conftantly  vifited  by  a  Deputy  from  the  Regency,  who 
makes  his  report  to  the  Colonel  every  morning :  and  the 
Colonel  conveys  it  to  the  young  Prince,  when  he  refides  at 
Hanau.  Of  his  kindnefs  to  them,  the  prifoners  feemed 
duly  fenfible  -,  and  they  fpoke  with  grateful  refped:  of  the 
attention  fhewed  them  by  the  amiable  Prwcefs  his  deceafed 
mother,  whofe  memory  will  be  long  revered  in  that 
country. 

I  ASKED  one  and  another  of  the  Honnetes  who  were  at 
work  on  the  road,  *'  Whether  they  liked  to  be  thus  em- 
**  ployed,  or  would  rather  choofe  to  be  confined  in  idle- 

"  nefs  ?" 


Sect.  IV.  GERMANY.  iii 

"  nefs  ?  "  They  readily  anfwered,  "  Much  rather  be  thus 
abroad  at  work."  On  Saturday  afternoon,  thefe  fweep  the 
bridges,  the  entrances  to  the  town  &e.  They  have  a  Guard 
of  four  Soldiers  (bayonets  fixed),  a  Subaltern,  and  the 
Keeper.  This  is  the  guard,  be  the  number  of  ilaves  more 
or  lefs  :  when  I  faw  them  they  were  from  ten  to  twelve. 

At  fix  in  the  evening,  in  fummer-time,  they  bring  all 
their  tools  into  a  room  in  the  Prifon  ^  and  go  to  their 
chambers  :  the  DeJJjottnetes  on  the  ground  floor ;  the  Ho?!- 
netes  above.  But  in  this  Prifon  there  is  not  a  feparate  room 
for  each  man ;  as  in  thofe  to  which  they  were  at  firft  com- 
mitted. Each  criminal  has,  befides  the  cloaths  above-men- 
tioned, two  pair  of  ihoes ;  two  pair  of  ftockings ;  and  two 
Ihirts.  All  are  obliged  to  attend  Divine  Service  on  Sunday^ 
The  men  on  my  repeated  vifits  looked  always  healthy. 

The  Defionnetes  are  not  doomed  to  defpair  :  but  for 
good  behaviour  are  fometimes  promoted  to  the  rank  of 
Honnetes.  I  converfed  with  one  whom  I  found  very  chear- 
ful  for  a  late  advancement  of  that  kind :  in  confequence  of 
it  he  was  working  on  the  road. 

There  is  another  Prifon  at  Hanau,  La  'Tour  de  Mar- 
guereiia :  fo  called  from  the  firft  pejrfon  confined  in  it.  It 
has  four  rooms  on  each  of  the  two  floors  j  but  they  were 
all  empty. 

AT 


112 


FOREIGN      PRISONS. 


Cassel.  at   Cassel    there   is   alfo   a  Prifon  for  Galley-Slaves, 

under  fimilar  management,  but  not  fo  well  xonduded. 
One  circumftance  ftruck  me  as  worthy  of  remark.  In  a 
fine  new  Church  juft  built,  there  is  a  gallery  with  two  fe- 
parate  feats  for  the  Honnetes  and  Defjonneies ;  though  the 
whole  number,  when  I  was  there,  was  only  feventeen. 

Manheim.  at  Manheim  Monfieur  Bal>o,  Counfellor  to  the  Re- 
gency, very  politely  gave  orders  to  ihew  me  every  room  of 
La  Maifon  de  Force.  Prifoners  committed  to  this  Houfe 
are  commonly  received  in  form  Avith  what  is  called  the 
Btcn-Venu  (Welcome).  A  machine  is  brought  out  in 
which  are  faftened  their  neck,  hands,  and  feet.  Then  they 
are  ftripped  j  and  have,  according  as  the  Magiftrate  orders— 
the  Grand  Venn  of  twenty  to  thirty  ftripes  —  the  Demi 
Venn  of  eighteen  to  twenty — or  the  Petit  Venn  of  twelve 
to  fifteen  :  after  this  they  kifs  the  threfliold  and  go 
in.  Some  are  treated  with  the  fame  compliment  at  dif- 
charge.  The  like  ceremony  is  obferved  at  fome  other 
towns  in  Germany. 

The  Houfe  was  clean.  Fifty-two  men,  and  forty-nine 
women  in  feveral  rooms :  all  at  work  ;  either  at  their  own 
trades,  as  fhoemakers,  taylors,  weavers,  lapidaries ;  or  at 
one  of  the  manufadlures  of  the  Houfe  -,  which  are  coarfe 
cloth  and  cards.  Not  one  idle.  They  have  but  little  time 
to  earn  any  thing  for  themfelves :  yet  though  they  work 
.;  entirely 


Sect.  IV.  GERMANY.  113 

entirely  for  the  Houfe,  their  labour,  I  was  informed,  does 
not  maintain  it. 

The  Rules  and  Orders  are  good.  I  have  a  copy  of  them 
all.  The  two  laft  are  to  this  effedt.  nth.  As  it  is  of  the 
utmofl  importance  in  fuch  Houfes  as  this,  to  obferve  all 
poflible  cleanlinefs ;  it  is  required  of  all  perfons  to  watch 
moft  ftridily  againft  all  appearance  of  the  contrary.  Who- 
ever fees  the  leaft  offence  of  that  kind,  fliall  give  immediate 
notice  of  it  to  the  Infpedtor,  upon  pain  of  clofe  confine- 
ment on  bread  and  water,  and  the  moft  rigorous  chaftife- 
ment.  12th.  That  no  one  may  be  able  to  plead  ignorance 
of  the  Rules,  one  copy  of  them  fhall  be  given  to  every 
prifoner,  and  another  hung  up  in  his  room;  and  they  fhall 
be  read  publicly  every  Sunday  morning  after  Divine  Service. 
It  is  ordered  that  the  difobedient  be  punifhed ;  and  that 
encouragement  be  given  to  the  dutiful  and  diligent. 

The  doors  are  all  numbered  ;  and  the  keys  marked  with 
the  correfponding  number.  Allowance  to  moft  of  the  Men 
two  pounds  of  bread,  foup,  and  a  quart  of  good  beer  ;  and, 
except  in  Lent,  half  a  pound  of  meat.  Women  have  a 
pound  and  half  of  bread  :  other  articles  as  the  men.  The 
fick  are  indulged  with  white  bread,  veal,  6cc.  They  have 
all  of  them  clean  linen  once  a  week  :  it  is  waflied  by  the 
women  prifoners.     The  Keeper  makes  every  morning  a  re- 

Q.  port 


114  FORE  IGN      PRIS  ONS. 

port  to  Monfieur  Bah  of  the  ftate  of  his  Houfe  as  to  num- 
bers, health,  &;c. 

A  CAPUCHIN  fays  Mafs  in  the  Chapel  every  morning. 
A  gallery  for  men  :  another  for  women,  with  a  blind  before 
it :  another  for  Orphans,  of  whom  there  are  fixty-four  in  a 
fort  of  Hofpital  at  one  end  of  the  Prifon.  Proteflants  and 
Jews  are  ordered  to  their  private  devotions  :  the  latter  are 
excufed  from  working  on  their  Sabbath. 

Hanover.  THE  Prifon  at  Hanover  was  built  about  thirty  years 
ago.  It  is  fituated  on  the  river  heyna.  There  are  eleven 
ftrong  rooms,  about  ten  feet  fquare,  and  ten  and  a  half 
high  -y  with  a  bed  of  folid  ftone  in  each,  eleven  inches  from 
the  ground,  and  nine  inches  higher  at  the  head.  Over 
thefe  are  larger  apartments  for  debtors  &c.  The  rooms 
are  warmed  by  ftoves  in  winter.  Criminals  have  a  fmall 
chain  :  they  are  allowed  ftraw  to  lie  on,  and  two  coverlids. 
When  I  vifited  the  Prifon  there  were  feven  criminals  and 
one  debtor.  The  Keeper  fells  no  liquors,  but  has  a  falary. 
In  the  Council-Chamber  are  all  the  various  Edidls  in 
frames.  There  is  a  Torture-Chamber,  but  I  with  pleafure 
learned  that  the  two  cruel  engines  had  not  been  ufed  for 
four  years. 


BURG. 


LuNEN-         LUNENBURG.    I  found  the  criminals  here  employed  on 
a  different  work  from  any  I  had  before  feen  :  digging  flone 

from 


Sect.  IV^  GERMANY.  115 

from  a  large  chalk-hill  called  Kalck-Berg.  Others  were 
preparing  it  for  the  kiln,  grinding,  fifting,  packing  &c. 
in  the  warehoufes.  The  cafks  are  about  three  hundred 
weight.  It  is  fent  to  Hamburgh  and  other  diftant  places, 
as  it  makes  an  excellent  cement.  Many  other  men  were 
employed  -,  but  the  criminals,  of  whom  there  were  thirty- 
one,  had  a  chain  of  about  four  pounds.  Their  allowance 
was  a  pound  and  half  of  bread,  and  three  halfpence  in  mo- 
ney :  provifions  much  cheaper  than  in  England. 

AT  Hamburgh  Felons  in  the  Butteley  were  all  in  irons.  Hamburch. 
The  common  method  of  execution   is    decollation.     The 
Executioner,  who  is  Gaoler,  fliewed  me   the  fword  which, 
he  faid,  he  had  made  ufe  of  eight  times. 

Among  the  various  engines  of  torture,  or  the  queftion, 
which  I  have  feen  in  Frajice  and  other  places,  the  mofl  ex- 
cruciating is  kept  and  ufed  in  a  deep  cellar  of  this  Prifon^ 
It  ought  to  be  buried  ten  thoufand  fathom  deeper  *.  It  is 
faid  the  inventor  was  the  firft  who  fuffered  by  it :  the  laft 
was  a  woman,  not  two  years  ago. 

Here,  as  at  fome  other  towns,  is  a  Prifon  for  flight 
offences.  The  punifliment,  to  be  confined  from  a  week  to 
a  month,  and  live  on  bread  and  water  only.     To  prevent 

•  See  the  Marquis  Beccwia,  Chap.  XVI. 

0^2  the 


ii6  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

•  the  prifoners  having  any  thing  elfe,  what  money  they  bring 
with  them  is  taken,  and  fealed  up ;  but  it  is  returned  to 
them  when  difcharged. 

In  this  great  city,  fuppofed  to  contain  ninety  thoufand 
fouls,  there  were  but  three  Debtors :  and  in  the  neighbour- 
ing town  Altena,  which  belongs  to  the  king  of  den- 
mark,  but  two. 

IT  will  perhaps  be  expedled  that  I  fliould  fay  fomething 
of  the  Houfes  of  Corredtion  at  the  great  and  opulent  city  of 
Hamburg/}.  I  was  there  near  a  week,  and  vifited  all  the 
Prifons  with  every  advantage,  through  the  kindnefs  of  my 
friend.  Senator  Voght.  In  the  great  Houfe  of  Correction, 
which  is  a  fort  of  Work-houfe,  and  Jiot  reckoned  infamous, 
various  kinds  of  work  were  carrying  on;  as  knitting,  fpin- 
ning,  weaving  linen,  hair,  and  wool,  rafping  logwood  and 
hartfhorn.  A  regular  book  is  kept  of  the  earnings,  one 
fourth  of  which,  I  was  informed,  was  given  to  each,  as 
they  worked  more  or  lefs.  This  Houfe  is  governed  by 
eight  Diredlors,  who  muft  be  married  men.  Two  of  them 
vifit  it  every  Wednefday  and  Saturday ;  on  the  latter  day 
along  with  the  Ladies,  who  deliver  out  the  women's  work, 
and  have  a  room  for  the  purpofe.  Many  hundreds  are 
confined  here.  In  the  great  room  I  faw  about  three  hun- 
dred women  and  girls  all  bufily  employed  both  times  I  was 

there. 


Sect.  IV.  GERMANY.  117 

there.  Although  the  Houfe  is  fituated  near  the  Aljler,  and 
vifited  by  Ladies,  I  cannot  fay  much  in  favour  of  its  neat- 
nefs  or  cleanlinefs. 

In  the  Spin-Houfe,  which  is  accounted  infamous,  even  the 
men  were  not  obliged  to  rafp  logwood,  but  were  employed 
in  fpinning,  in  more  lightfome  rooms  than  thofe  of  the  other 
Houfe.     In  this  were  feventy-three  prifoners. 

AT  Bremen  the  Prifon  for  Debtors  has  four  rooms;  Bremen. 
but  the  Magiflrate  who  accompanied  me.  Dr.  Hornivinckely 
aflured  me  not  one  of  them  had  been  occupied  for  above 
thirty  years,  till  very  lately ;  when  one  was  fitted  up  for  a 
debtor,  who  was  confined  in  it  a  few  weeks.  Over  the 
door  of  this  Prifon  is  infcribed 

Hie  fraudum  terminus  ejlo. 

That  there  were  few  Debtors,  or  none  at  all,  in  fuch 
towns  as  Mentz,  Coblentz,  Manheim,  &c.  may  be  afcribed 
to  their  being  places  of  but  little  trade.  In  fuch  large 
trading  cities  as  Hamburgh,  and  Bretnen,  it  feems  ow- 
ing to  the  little  credit  that  is  given — the  expence  of  ali- 
ment &c.  falling  on  the  creditor — the  being  deprived  of 
every  kind  of  amufement  and  diverfion  while  in  Prifon — 
and  the  difgrace  of  being  there. 

Debtors 


ii8  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

Debtors  are  not  permitted  in  any  German  cities  that  I 
have  feen,  to  have  their  wives  and  children  living  with 
them  in  Prifon, 

The  Houfe  of  Corredlion  at  Bremen,  fituatcd  on  the 
JVefer,  is  indeed  a  Houfe  oflndujlry  j  yet  very  quiet.  There 
were  eleven  men,  and  twenty-eight  women,  all  at  work ; 
except  a  woman  who  had  broke  her  leg.  The  flronger  and 
lefs  docile  men  rafp  Logwood :  others  weave  a  fet  tafk  of 
Hair  Carpets,  &c.  The  Keeper  appoints  a  weaver  in  the 
Houfe  to  inftrudl  every  new  comer,  who  generally  teaches 
him  the  art  in  a  ihort  time.  The  women's  apartments 
were  very  clean :  their  work  is  fpinning,  knitting,  &c. 
The  Keeper  has  a  falary ;  and  fells  nothing. 

I  SAT  an  afternoon  with  Dr.  Diintze  of  Bremen,  who 
told  me  he  was  in  London  in.  1753  and  54  with  an  in- 
quifitive  friend,  a  German.  They  went  into  Newgate  to 
obferve  the  effedts  of  the  Ventilator ;  and  were  ftruck  with 
an  offenfive  fmell  in  one  of  the  x'ooms.  Next  day  they 
were  both  indifpofed.  The  Doctor's  complaint  turned  out 
a  kind  of  jaundice.  After  a  few  days  confinement  he  vifited 
his  friend,  and  found  him  excefllvely  low ;  and  in  a  fhort 
time  he  died  with  every  fy mp  torn  of  the  Gaol-Fever. 

Zell.  at  Zell  in  the  Eledlorate  oi Hanover,  is  a  large  Houfe 

of  Correction ;  and 

AT 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND.  119 

AT  Cassel  is  another,  with  a  work-room  one  hundred 
and  ten  feet  by  twenty-five,  and  twelve  feet  high.  It  was 
built  by  CHARLES,  grandfather  to  the  prefent  Landgrave. 
1  iliall  not,  however,  enter  into  a  minute  detail  of  the 
difcipline  in  thefe  two,  and  other  Houfes  of  the  fame 
fort  in  Germany.  Thofe  in  Holland  and  Flanders  are  bet- 
ter conduced :  and  my  account  of  them,  fliall  be  more 
particular. 


HOLLAND. 


PRISONS  in  the  United  Provinces  are  fo  quiet,  and 
moil  of  them  fo  clean,  that  a  viiitor  can  hardly  believe 
he  is  in  a  Gaol.  They  are  commonly  (except  the  Rafp- 
Houfes)  white-wafhed  once  or  twice  a  year  :  and  a  prifoner 
told  me  it  was  no  fmall  refreihment  to  go  into  their  rooms 
after  fuch  a  thorough  cleaning.  A  Phyiician  and  Surgeon 
is  appointed  to  every  Prifon  3  and  prifoners  are  in  general 
healthy. 

In  mofl  of  the  Prifons  for  Crthiinals  there  are  fo  many 
rooms  that  each  prifoner  is  kept  feparate.     They  never  go 

out 


,20  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

out  of  their  rooms :  each  has  a  bedftead,  ftraw,  and  cover- 
lid. But  there  are  few  criminals,  except  thofe  in  the  Rqfp- 
Hoiifes  and  Spin-Houfes.  In  all  the  feven  Provinces  feldom 
more  executions  in  a  year  than  from  four  to  fix  *.  One 
reafon  of  this,  I  believe,  is  the  awful  folemnity  of  execu- 
tions, which  are  performed  in  prefence  of  the  Magiflrates, 
with  great  order  and  ferioufnefs,  and  great  effedt  on  the 
fpeiftators,  I  did  not  fee  the  .procefs  in  Holland;  but  it 
was  particularly  defcribed  to  me,  and  was  fimilar  to  what  I 
had  been  witnefs  of  in  another  place  abroad. 

The  common  method  of  execution  is  decollation  by  a 
broad  fword.  For  the  more  atrocious  crimes,  fuch  as  pre- 
meditated murder  &c.  the  malefador  is  broken  on  the 
wheel ;  or  rather  on  a  crofs  laid  flat  upon  the  fcaffold.  But 
a  defcription  of  the  manner  of  this  execution,  which  is 
finiflied  by  a  Coup  de  Grace  on  the  breaft,  would  not  be 
agreeable  to  any  of  my  readers. 

Debtors  alfo  are  but  few.  The  Magiftrates  do  not  approve 
of  confining  in  idlenefs  any  that  may  be  ufefully  employed. 
And  when  one  is  imprifoned,  the  Creditor  muft  pay 
the  Gaoler  for  his  maintenance,  from  eight  to  eighteen 
ftivers  a  day,  according  to  the  Debtor's  former  condition  in 


•  I  WAS   told  in   Scotland   tliat    the    number  of  executions    there    is    nearly 
the  Ome. 

life. 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND.  121 

life.  The  aliment  mufl  be  paid  every  week:  in  default 
whereof,  the  Gaoler  gives  eight  days  notice  ;  and  if  within 
that  time,  the  money,  or  fecurity  for  it,  be  not  brought, 
the  debtor  is  difcharged. 

Another  reafon  is,  that  the  fituation  is  very  difgrace- 
ful.  But  perhaps  the  principal  caufe  that  debtors,  as  well 
as  capital  offenders,  are  few,  is  the  great  care  that  is  taken 
to  train  up  the  children  of  the  poor,  and  indeed  of  all 
others,  to  induftry.  No  debtors  have  their  wives  and 
children  living  with  them  in  Prifon  :  but  occafional  vifits 
in  the  day-time  are  not  forbidden.  You  do  not  hear  in  the 
ftreets  as  you  pafs  by  a  Prifon,  what  I  have  been  rallied  for 
abroad,  the  cry  oi  poor  hungry  Jlarving  Debtors. 

The  States  do  not  tranfport  criminals:  but  men  are  put 
to  labour  in  the  Rafp-Hotifes,  and  women  to  proper  work 
in  the  Spin-Houjes :  upon  this  profeffed  maxim.  Make  them 
diligent  and  they  iviU  be  honeft.  The  rafping  logwood, 
which  was  formerly  the  principal  work  done  by  the  men 
criminals,  is  now  in  many  places  performed  at  the  mills, 
much  cheaper  :  and  the  Dutch,  finding  woollen  manufac- 
tures more  profitable,  have  within  thefe  lafl  twelve  years, 
fet  up  feveral  of  them  in  thofe  Houfes  of  Corredion.  In 
fome,  the  work  does  not  only  maintain  the  prifoners ;  but 
they  have  a  little  extra-time  to  earn  fomewhat  for  their  bet"* 
ter  living  in  Prifon,  or  for  their  benefit  afterwards. 

R  Great 


J22  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

Great  care  is  taken  to  give  them  moral  and  religious 
inftruftion,  and  reform  their  manners,  for  their  own  and 
the  public  good.  The  Chaplain  (fuch  there  is  in  every 
Houfe  of  Corredlion)  does  not  only  perform  public  wor- 
fliip,  but  privately  inflruifts  the  prifoners,  catechifes  them 
every  week  &c.  and  I  am  well  informed  that  many  come 
out  fober  and  honeft*.  Some  have  even  chofen  to  continue 
and  work  in  the  Houfe  after  their  difcharge. 

Offenders  are  fentenced  to  thefe  Houfes,  according  to 
their  crimes,  for  feven,  ten,  fifteen,  twenty  years  and  up- 
wards :  but,  to  prevent  defpair,  feldom  for  life.  As  an 
encouragement  to  fobriety  and  induftry,  thofe  who  diftin- 
guilli  themfelves  by  fuch  behaviour,  are  difcharged  before 
the  expiration  of  their  term.  A  prifoner  who  gives  infor- 
mation of  an  intended  efcape  is  favoured  much  in  this  re- 
fpeft  :  his  term  is  confiderably  fliortened.  A  little  before 
the  eled:ion  of  new  Magiftrates,  thofe  who  are  in  office  in- 
fpedl  thefe  Prifons ;  and  inquire  of  the  Keeper  which  pri- 


•  I  HAVE  heard  in  England  that  a  countryman  of  ours,  who  wns"  a  prifoner 
in  the  Rafp-Houfe  at  Amjlcrdam  feveral  years,  was  permitted  to  work  at  his  own 
trade,  fhne-making  ;  and  by  being  conftantly  kept  employed,  was  quite  cured  of 
the  vices  which  brought  him  to  confinement.  My  informant  added,  that  the  pri- 
foner received  at  his  releafe  a  furplus  of  his  earnings,  which  enabled  him  to  fet  up 
in  London ;  where  he  lived  in  credit,  and  at  dinner  commonly  drant*  "  Health  to 
his  worthy  Mafters  at  the  Rafp-Houfe." 

foners, 


Sect.  IV,  HOLLAND. 

foners,  of  thofe  who  have  been  confined  a  few  years,  have 
been  diligent  and  orderly :  and  of  the  Minifter,  which  of 
them  have  been  moft  attentive  to  public  and  private  inflruc- 
tions.  According  to  the  accounts,  they  contract:  the  ap- 
pointed time  of  punifliment :  fo  that  fourteen  years  will 
fometimes  be  reduced  to  eight  or  ten  ;  and  twelve  years  to 
fix  or  feven.  This  praftice  of  abridging  the  time  ofpu- 
niiliment  upon  reformation  is  in  every  view  wife  and  bene- 
ficial. Indeed,  I  have  fome  reafon  to  think  that  criminals 
are  often  doomed  to  a  longer  term,  with  an  intention  to 
make  fuch  dedudions  upon  their  amendment. 

I  WAS  informed  that  the  work  done  in  fome  of  thefe 
Houfes  of  Corredlion  (efpecially  where  the  men  are  em- 
ployed in  rafping)  does  not  maintain  them  :  though  the 
men  that  are  robuft  earn  from  eight  to  ten  flivers  a  day  j 
and  healthy  women  by  fpinning  &c.  from  four  to  fix.  But 
fome  earn  lefs ;  thofe  who  are  infirm  very  little :  none 
however  are  quite  idle  but  the  fick.  This  is  furely  excel- 
lent policy}  for  befides  guarding  againft  the  pernicious 
eflfedls  of  idlenefs  in  a  Prifon,  and  breaking  criminals  to 
habits  of  induftry,  if  work  fo  conllant  does  not  fupport  the 
Houfes,  how  much  heavier  would  be  the  public  burden, 
maintaining  the  numerous  ofi:enders  in  thefe  Prifons,  if,  as 
in  many  of  our  Bridewells,  no  work  at  all  were  done  there  ? 

In  Holland,    as   well   as    in    Germany,    there  are  private 

R  2  rooms 


123 


0AM. 


124  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

rooms  in  moft  of  the  Houfes  of  Corredlion,  in  which  young 
perfons  of  a  vicious  and  profligate  turn  are  confined  on  the 
reprefentation  of  their  parents,  till  they  ihew  figns  of 
amendment. 

Amster.  at      Amsterdam      the     Prifon     is     under    the 

Stadt-Houfc.  Debtors  and  felons  quite  feparate.  No 
court-yard.  Vifitants  may  converfe  with  debtors  at  the 
lattices  of  their  rooms,  from  nine  to  twelve  in  the  forenoon. 
The  debtor  may  buy  an  anchor  of  wine  to  depofite  with  the 
Keeper  (who  fells  liquors) :  he  is  allowed  to  call  for  a  bot- 
tle of  it  a  day,  paying  the  Keeper  two  ftivers  a  bottle. 

In  this  city  they  compute  250,000  fouls*;  about  one 
third  of  thofe  in  London:  yet  in  1775  I  found  but  eighteen 
debtors,  in  1776  only  fifteen. 

The  rooms  for  criminals  are  down  fifteen  fleps  :  ten  feet 
by  nine  :  in  each,  one  prifoner  only  :  a  bedftead  &c.   door- 


•  In   the  Stadt-Houfe   there  is  hung  up   to  public  view,   a  board   fhewing  the 
mortality  for  the  lad  two  years,  and  for  the  laft  week,  viz. 

Deaths    in      i774>  —     —  6649 

•775.  —    —  7^95- 
Auguft  6th,   1776,  —    —     120  . 

The  year  1775  was  very  fickly. — Sir  William  Petty  in  his  TraSs,  page  186,  gives 
for  the  year  1685  the  number  of  Burials  in  Amfterdam  6245. 

way 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND, 

way  twenty-two  inches  wide  -,  door  four  inches  thick  :  the 
condemned  rooms  have  an  iron  door  belides.  In  the  latter  a 
criminal  is  never  left  alone  :  two  prifoners  from  the  Rafp- 
Houfe  are  always  with  him,  to  prevent  his  deftroying  him- 
felf.  They  rejoice  at  the  fervice ;  for  if  they  difcharge  it 
faithfully,  their  reward  is  an  abridgment  of  their  allotted 
term,  I  was  credibly  informed,  that  there  was  no  execu- 
tion here  for  the  laft  two  years  :  and  that  for  a  hundred 
years  paft  there  have  not  been,  commiinibus  ajinis,  more  than 
one  a  year.  It  is  generally  performed  within  forty-eight 
hours  after  fentence. 

In  the  Stadt-Hoiife  there  were  fix  delinquents.  Their 
allowance  is  nine  ftivers  a  day,  for  which  the  Keeper  gives 
them — in  the  morning,  four  good  Dices  of  bread  and  but- 
ter— at  dinner,  rice  foup,  and  two  flices  of  bread — at  f up- 
per, milk — befides  about  a  quart  of  beer  a  day;  and  on 
Sunday  three  quarters  of  a  pound  of  meat.  He  alfo  pays 
for  their  weekly  fliaving,  and  for  wafhing  their  linen.  In 
fome  other  Provinces  the  allowance  is  the  fame :  in  fome, 
more.  One  of  the  Magiflrates,  with  whom  I  was  con- 
verfing  upon  the  fubjedl  of  Englifli  Prifons,  faid  "  Nourifh 
**  your  prifoners  well,  and  keep  them  in  dry  rooms,  and 
"  they  will  be  healthy," 


At  the  rasp-house  over  the  gate  is.  In  bus  relief,  a  device      ,'^''''- 

o  '  J '  House. 


125 


fomewhat 


126  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

fomewliat  like  that  at  Mcntz.  At  the  inner  gate  is  (as  at 
other  Rafp-Houfes)  a  reprefentation  of  two  men  rafping 
Logwood:  which  is  here  their  principal  employment.  Yet 
regard  is  had  not  only  to  their  degree  of  guilt,  but  to  their 
flrength  :  for  I  faw  two  men  winding  filk  or  thread.  This 
lafl  fummer  there  were  fifty-four  prifoners.  In  fome  rooms, 
where  they  alfo  fleep,  were  ten  or  twelve  men  rafping  an 
appointed  taflc.  Others  were  in  the  warehoufes,  forting 
and  weighing;  others  bringing  the  wood  to  thofe  rooms. 
If  any  one  be  idle,  or  refra<n:ory  &c.  he  is  fhut  up  in  a  place 
of  clofer  confinement  under  ground.  I  faw  one  who  was 
fo  puniflied  for  burning  logwood :  he  told  me  his  fentence 
was  for  fix  weeks.  On  careful  inquiry,  I  learned,  that  what 
has  been  faid  of  a  cellar,  in  which  fuch  tranfgreflbrs  are  put 
to  pump  or  drown,  is  notfaSi.  Hours  of  work  from  fix  to 
twelve,  and  from  one  to  four.  In  extra-hours  they  make 
tobacco-boxes  &c.  which  they  fell  to  vifitants,  who  pay 
two  fiivers  to  go  in.  They  are  daily  vifited  by  the  Medical 
Faculty;  and  have  in  general  a  healthy  look.  I  wifhed  to 
know  more  particulars  of  this  famous  Prifon  ;  but  could 
fcarce  ever  get  from  the  cautious  old  Keeper  a  diredl  anfwer 
to  any  one  queft:ion  :  though  I  paid  him  five  vifits  with  that 
intent.  I  could  not  go  into  the  rooms  till  laft:  time  I  was 
there,  when  a  Magiftrate  accompanied  me.  The  Keeper 
was  fi:ill  as  much  upon  the  referve  as  before  :  but  without 
aiking  him,  I  faw  his  prifon  was  dirty. 

In 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND.  127 

In  the  spin-house   fSpin-huis)   you  fee   a   number   of       ^pin- 

•^  House. 

women  criminals  (there  were  thirty-two)  fome  of  whom 
had  been  the  mofl  abandoned  ^  fitting  in  prefence  of  the 
Mijlrefs,  quiet  and  orderly  at  their  different  forts  of  work ; 
fpinning,  plain  work  &c.  Of  the  latter  fort  much  is  fent 
in  from  the  city.  Hours  of  work  from  fix  to  twelve,  and 
from  one  to  eight.  I  faw  them  go  from  work  to  dinner  : 
the  Keeper  as  they  call  him  Father  prefided.  Firll:  they 
lang  a  Pfalm  :  then  they  went  in  order  down  to  a  neat 
dining-room ;  where  they  feated  themfelves  at  two  tables  j 
and  feveral  diihes  of  boiled  barley,  agreeably  fweetened, 
were  fet  before  them.  The  Father  ftruck  with  a  hammer : 
then  in  profound  filence  all  ftood  up ;  and  one  of  them  read 
with  propriety,  a  Prayer  about  four  or  five  minutes.  Then 
they  fat  down  chearful ;  and  each  filled  her  bowl,  from  a 
large  dilh  which  contained  enough  for  four  of  them. 
Then  one  brought  on  a  waiter  flices  of  bread  and  butter, 
and  ferved  each  prifoner. 

As  I  ftaid  longer  than  a  common  vifitant,  one  of  the 
prifoners  went  up  to  the  Miflrefs  with  the  timid  modefiy  of 
a  fuppliant,  and  afked  leave  to  ofi^er  me  the  plate.  The 
leave  was  granted.  The  Miftrefs  keeps  what  is  given,  till 
it  amounts  to  a  fum  fufficient  to  purchafe  a  little  T!ea  or 
Coffee,  for  all  to  partake. 

Here  (as  at  fome  other  towns  in  Holland  J  is  a  Prifon  or 

Work-houfe 


128  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

Work-houfe  for  {lighter  offences;  where  prifoners  are 
employed  in  Spinnings  laeaving  coarfe  Carpet Sy  picking 
Oakum  &c. 

DoL-  I  WILL  jufl  mention  the   dol-huis,  an  Hofpital  for  the 

hij'ane :  becaufe  it  would  (in  my  opinion)  be  a  good  plan 
for  a  Bridewell,  with  the  addition  of  working  rooms.  The 
ground  plot  is  reftangular  :  the  Keeper's  houfe  takes  up  one 
of  the  fliorter  fides :  the  other  three  fides  have,  on  the 
ground-floor,  rooms  in  the  recefs  of  a  walk  full  eight  feet 
wide,  under  arcades  ;  inclofed  from  the  area  or  garden  by  a 
wall  to  the  height  of  four  feet :  the  upper  part  to  the 
crown  of  the  arch,  open.  Each  perfon  has  a  feparate  room, 
with  two  doors ;  the  inner  door  is  latticed  ;  the  outer,  fre- 
quently ftands  open.  Over  the  doors  is  an  aperture  in  the 
wall,  about  a  foot  fquare.  Thefe  rooms  are  for  the  Pooj-. 
Above  are  larger  rooms  for  thofe  whofe  friends  can  pay  for 
them.  Common  vifitants  are  not  allowed  to  go  up  :  but, 
injudicioufly,  every  one  that  pays  four  ftivers  is  admitted 
below.  The  windows  all  round  open  to  the  court-yard, 
none  outwards. 

Hague.  AT  the  Hague  I  was  honoured  with    the   very  polite 

afliftance  of  Sir  Jofeph  Yorke.  A  Magiftrate  accompanied 
me  to  the  Prifon  ;  where  all  was  quiet  and  in  order.  The 
fame  Gentleman  prefented  me  with  a  copy  of  Inftrudtions  to 
the  Sheriff  of  the  Court;  a  copy  of  Rules  for  Officers  of 

the 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND.  129 

the  Attorney-General ;  and  with  a  M.  S.  copy  on  feveral 
fheets,  of  forty-four  Rules  for  the  Management  of  the 
Prifon.  The  Gaoler  is  never  fuffered  to  ileep  out  of  the 
Houfe,  but  with  the  exprefs  confent  of  the  Court,  or  the 
Advocate  &c.  and  when  that  leave  is,  on  any  fpecial  occa- 
iion  granted,  he  mull:  provide  a  Subftitute  approved  by  the 
Court  &c.  This  Subflitute  is  fworn  to  his  temporary  office. 
If  any  prifoner  efcapes,  whether  by  the  immediate  fault  of 
the  Keeper,  or  the  fault  of  his  fervants,  he  is  to  fufier  the 
punithment  that  was  due  to  the  prifoner.  He  may  not 
keep  a  tavern  or  alehoufe :  nor  play  at  cards  &c.  with  his 
prifoners  :  nor  accept  of  any  treat  or  gift  from  them,  di- 
rectly or  indirectly,  during  their  confinement  or  afterwards. 
He  muft  keep  the  Prilbn  neat  and  clean  :  furnilh  freih  ftraw 
once  a  week ;  and  in  winter  coverlids.  The  Attorney- 
General  or  his  Deputy  is  to  fee  that  all  this  be  duly  per- 
formed. The  Keeper  is  to  fupply  prifoners  with  good 
bread,  foup,  and  beer.  Thofe  who  {>ay  eighteen  flivers  a 
day  (or  what  other  fum  the  Magillrates  /hall  allow  them  to 
expend)  are  to  have  provilion  proportioned  to  that  price. 
Vifitants  are  not  permitted  to  be  in  the  Prifon  from  eleven 
in  the  morning,  till  two :  and  are  difrnifled  in  the  evening 
at  fix  in  fummer,  at  four  in  winter.  None  to  be  admitted 
on  Saturday :  nor  in  time  of  Divine  Ser\'ice  on  Sunday. 
Candles  to  be  taken  away  at  nine.  The  Keeper  to  guard 
againft  accidents  by  fire. 


The 


i;o  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 


The  Rules  for  Officers  of  the  Attorney-General,  and  of 
the  Sheriff  have  an  admirable  effe6t  in  preferving  peace, 
and  order.  There  are  thirty-two  of  them.  I  cannot  for- 
bear abllradling  a  few.  No  officer  to  ftir  out  of  town 
without  fpecial  leave :  and  while  in  town  each  muft  always 
give  notice  where  he  may  be  found.  In  cafe  of  fire  they 
muft  immediately  repair  to  the  Court-Gate  for  inftruftions. 
Arrefts  of  delinquents  muft  be  performed  quietly.  No 
officer  to  ferve  or  watch  inftead  of  another.  Negledl  of 
duty  through  drunkennefs  is  punifhed  with  living  in  Prifon 
on  bread  and  water  at  their  own  expence  for  three  days, 
eight  days,  and  at  laft,  with  difcharge.  They  may  not 
keep  company  with  any  perfons  in  public  houfes  &zc. 
Giving  ill  language  is  punilhed  by  a  fine :  quarrels,  at  dif- 
cretion  of  the  Magiftrates.  Not  giving  information  of  de- 
faulters is  punilhed  with  diicharge.  They  are  to  guard 
againft  being  guilty  of  ill  behaviour  of  any  fort,  that  no 
dishonour  may  be  caft  upon  the  Court  of  Judicature.  Each 
officer  to  have  a  copy  of  the  Rules,  and  keep  it  to  fhew  on 
demand,  on  pain  of  a  fine.  The  whole  to  be  read  to  them 
all  together  by  the  Sheriff  once  a  month. 

GioKiK-  AT  Gronixgen    the  Ra/p  and  Spin-Houfe  together,  has 

on  the  ground-floor  rooms  for  men.  In  the  floor  above  it 
are  four  apertures  two  feet  by  three  and  a  half  each  into 
the  wool  warehoufe  above.  Thefe  were  lately  made  by  the 
advice  of  a  judicious  Phyfician  (a  Profeflbr),  who  thought 

the 


GEN. 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND,  131 

the  men's  rooms  not  fufficiently  airy,  though  they  have  op- 
polite  windows ;  the  men  fleeping  as  well  as  working  in 
them :  on  which  account  they  are  flill  fomewhat  offenfive. 
Women  have  a  work-room,  and  a  lodging -room  quite 
feparate :  both  of  them  very  clean.  All  the  prifoners  are 
employed  on  a  woollen  manufad:ure, 

AT  Lewarden  the  Rajp-Houfe  had  in  It  thirty-four  Lewarden. 
men  :  a  few  of  them  rafping  Logwood,  with  an  inflrument 
compofed  of  ten  faws  united  :  others  combing  and  fpinning 
black  wool :  others  fpinning  twine ;  weaving  facks,  and 
coarfe  linen  cloth  &c.  At  their  leifure  they  make  flioe- 
pegs,  tobacco-floppers,  fugar-faucers  of  brafs  wire  &c.  and 
fell  them  to  vifitants.  In  the  Sphi-Hoiife  adjoining,  were 
thirty-fix  women  :  all  at  work,  preparing  thread  &c.  ex- 
cept one,  whom  the  Miflrefs,  going  up  with  me  from  her 
breakfaft,  found  idle  in  a  warehoufe;  and  not  only  rated 
her  for  it  fufficiently,  but  entertained  me  with  her  mur- 
murs upon  the  offence  a  good  while  after ;  from  whence  I 
concluded  the  fault  was  not  a  very  common  one. 

AT  Utrecht   no  prifoners  in   the  Stadt-Honfe.     The    Utrecht. 
Keeper  told  me  the  allowance   was   twelve  ilivers   a  day : 
"  for,  faid  he,  confinement  here  is  not  meant   as  punifli- 
**  ment;  but  only  as  fafe  cuflody  till  trial  *.     After  which, 

•  The  fame  obfervation  I  remember  was  made  to  me  by  the  Keeper  at  'Nimeguen, 
where  the  allowance  is  ten  ftivers.     Here  alfo  were  no  prifoners, 

S  2  **  fome 


132  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

'*  Ibme  who  are  to  be  puniflied  by  a  fliort  imprlfonment 
"  areient  to  another  Prifon,  where  they  live  on  bread  and 
*'  water  only."  He  faid  a  woman  who  had  been  his  pri- 
foner,  was  that  day  fentenced  to  be  fo  punifhed  for  a  fort- 
night :  but  he  added,  "  She  will  have  a  fufticient  quantity; 
and  if  file  be  ill,  her  food  will  be  altered." 

Delft.  ^x  Delft   there  were  near  ninety  in  the  Hoiifc  of  Cor- 

region :  men  and  women  quite  feparate  :  all  neat  and  clean, 
and  looked  healthy.  They  told  me  their  allowance  was  five 
ilivers  a  day  *.  All  employed  on  a  woollen  manufadlure — 
women  fpinning,  carding  6cc. — men  weaving  from  coarfe 
to  very  fine  Cloth  :  their  tafic,  to  earn  thirty-five  ftivers  a 
week.  Some  earn  a  fmall  furplus  ;  but  they  have  only  half 
of  it.  A  Burgomafter,  to  whom  I  mentioned  that  circum- 
ftance,  faid  it  was  the  truth.  They  do  not  put  more  than 
eight  or  ten  men  to  work  in  one  room  :  for  when  large 
numbers  are  together,  one  idle  perfon  corrupts  more;  and  there 
is  not  generally  fo  much  work  done.  Here  alfo,  if  a  pri- 
foner  has  behaved  well  for  a  few  years,  and  given  proofs  of 
amendment,  the  Magiftrates  begin  to  abridge  tlie  time  for 
which  he  was  fentenced.     One  whom  I  faw  very  cheerful, 


•    A    GUINEA     252  d.     is    =    II     guilders      11     ftivers    =    231     flivers' 
(for  20   ftivers   is   a  guilder)    therefore    flivers   are   to  pence    as   3-> }^   ~   j_i  ; 
i.  e.    II  ilivers  is  equal  to  a  ihilling. 


told 


Sect.  IV.  HOLLAND. 

told  me  the  caufc  of  hisjey  was  that  a  year  had  lately  been 
taken  from  his  term. 


AT   Rotterdam  in  the  Prifon  under  the  Stadt-Houfe     Rottcr- 

D  A.  M . 

were  neither  debtors  nor  felons.  In  the  Rcifp  and  Spin- 
Houfe  about  forty  men  and  a  hundred  women.  The  former, 
three  or  four  in  a  room,  making  FtJJnng-Nets,  carding 
Wool,  forting  Coffee  &c.  Women  moftly  employed  on  a 
manufadture  of  Worjled,  fpinning,  and  working  at  a  great' 
wheel  like  thofe  which  at  Derby  are  turned  by  water. 

THE   PEST-HOUSE   acrofs  the  Maes  oppofite  Kotterdanr       Pest- 

HOUSE. 

is  a  fpacious  building  in  a  fmall  ifle.  It  is  nearly  a  fquare 
of  one  hundred  and  thirty  feet :  has  four  fpacious  wards 
which  are  about  thirty  feet  wide  and  twenty  high.  I  men- 
tion this  edifice,  not  only  as  it  occurred  to  me  that  it.  would 
be  a  good  plan  for  a  Houfe  of  Corredlion,  being  airy,  and 
built  round  a  court  in  which  is  a  bafon  of  water  communi- 
cating with  the  Maes;  but  on  account  of  the  fentiments  of 
veneration  it  infpired,  when  I  trod  on  the  ground  under 
which  fuch  piles  of  my  brave  countrymen  lie  buried  j  it 
having  been  ufed  as  a  Military  Hofpital  after  the  fieg,e  o£ 
Ber gen-Op-Zoom  i 


133 


FLAN- 


'H 


FOREIGN      PRISONS. 


F      L      A      N      D      E      R 


THE  French  Provinces  here  and  in  the  Netherlands 
are  chiefly  governed  by  the  fame  Arret  de  Parlement 
as  their  Provinces  in  France.  I  will  therefore  mention 
only  one  circumftance  at  Arras  in  Artois  which  was  dif- 
ferent from  what  I  had  feen  in  France.  Of  one  hundred 
and  thirty-nine  prifoners  in  this  Gaol,  I  faw  two  in  the 
court-yard  who  had  irons.  But  upon  alking  one  of  them 
the  reafon  of  it,  he  told  me  **  it  was  for  attempting  an 
cfcape." 

IN  the  Austrian  Netherlands  I  found  the  Prifons 
in  general  clean  j  and  no  ficknefs  prevailing  in  any  one  of 
them  :  and  yet  few  of  the  Prifons  have  a  court-yard  :  in 
moil  of  them  every  prifoner  is  confined  to  his  room.  In 
fome  places,  as  at  Antwerp  &c.  the  allowance  to  Criminals 
is  fcanty ;  a  pound  of  bread  a  day,  and  a  pound  of  butter 
a  week :  but  the  deficiency  is  fully  made  up  by  fupplies 
from  the  Monafleries  &c.  Debtors  very  few:  alimented 
by  creditors. 

AT 


Sect.  IV.  FLANDERS.  i^c 


jj 


AT  Brussels  twenty-four  Felons:  daily  allowance  two  Brussels. 
pounds  of  bread  fpai?!  dc  munition)  and  fome  foup  :  on 
Sunday,  except  in  Lent,  a  pound  of  meat.  A  Keeper  of 
the  Houfe  of  Corredlion  was  lately  committed  to  this  Gaol 
for  abufe  of  his  truft.  Debtors  are  fent  to  another  Prifon  : 
the  creditor  is  obliged  to  advance  a  month's  aliment.  In  that 
Prifon  I  faw  an  Englilhman  who  had  his  wife  and  two  or 
three  children  with  him ;  but  they  were  not  permitted  to 
ftay  at  night. 

VILFORDE.  The  Houfe  of  Correftion  now  building  Vilforde. 
near  this  town  for  all  the  provinces  of  Aujtrian  Brabant,  is 
upon  the  largeft  fcale  of  any  flru6ture  of  the  kind  that  I 
have  feen.  It  is  fituated  upon  the  great  canal  leading  to 
Bnijels  i  and  is  almoft  furrounded  by  water.  The  ground 
plot,  a  plan  of  which  I  have  by  me,  is  rectangular,  except 
a  fweep  before  the  court  of  the  Governor's  houfe.  The 
longer  fides  are  about  two  hundred  and  ten  yards;  the 
fhorter  about  one  hundred  and  fixty-feven.  At  the  back  of 
one  of  the  longer  lides,  fronting  the  Weft,  I  counted  eighty 
windovvs  on  a  floor.  There  are  the  fame  number  oppofite, 
looking  inwards  towards  the  courts.  Each  of  thefe  belongs 
to  a  feparate  room  or  cell,  near  fix  feet  and  a  half  by  five 
and  a  half,  and  eight  feet  high ;  and  a  long  paiTage  eight 
feet  and  a  half  wide  runs  through  each  floor,  into  which  all 
the  oppofite  rooms  open.  Two  floors  of  this  fide  are 
finiflied,  making  three  hundred  and  twenty  rooms ;   there 

are 


136  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

are  two  more,  as  5'et  unliniflied,  of  the  lame  number  of 
rooms.  Each  of  the  two  fliorter  fides  has  one  hundred  and 
feventy-fix  rooms,  of  the  lame  fize  as  the  others,  and  on 
a-3  many  floors.  Part  of  thefe  fides  are  finiihed  ;  fo  that, 
including  fome  rooms  on  each  (ide  the  Governor's  houfe, 
about  five  hundred  are  now  ready  of  the  nine  hundred  and 
ninety-two.  On  fome  vacant  ground  at  the  Ihorter  fides 
more  rooms  will  be  built  if  wanted.  Of  fo  great  importance 
is  it  wifely  judged  by  thefe  Provinces  to  keep  every  prifoner 
at  night  by  himfelf,  that  this  vaft  number  of  rooms  is 
contrived  that  each  may  lodge  one  f  erf  on  only. 

On  each  fide  the  gate  of  the  court  before  the  Governor's 
houfe  is  a  Porter's  lodge.  Prifoners  will  pafs  this  way  to  their 
refpedlive  wards  behind  the  Houfe.  Thofe  committed  for 
lif«  will  be  quite  feparate  from  thofe  who  are  for  a  limited 
term  :  and  men  totally  fo  from  women  ;  not  only  in  their 
Wards f  Work-rooms,  and  RefeBories ;  but  alfo  in  two  dif- 
iin&.  Chapels.  Thefe  Chapels  are  odtagons  of  about  thirty- 
five  feet ;  and  on  each  floor  the  prifoners  will  have  a  room 
looking  into  them.  The  work-rooms  are  numerous ;  about 
forty  feet  by  twenty :  fome  up  ftairs,  others  under  ground 
for  weaving  fine  linen  :  but  no  prifoners  are  to  fleep  under 
ground.  Staircafes  all  flone,  fix  feet  wide  :  fome  dark  cells 
for  confining  the  refradlory.  A  Kitchen  forty-feven  feet  by 
thirty-four :  Bakehoufe,  and  Slaughtcrhoufe  large  in  pro-« 
portion,    and    commodious.       Convenient    apartments    for 

feveral 


Sect.  IV.  FLANDERS.  137 

feveral  Chaplains :  and  proper  rooms  for  a  military  guard. 
No  prifoners  as  yet :  and  two  fpacious  Infirmaries  defigned, 
are  not  begun. 

AT  Mechlin  one  of  the  befl  rooms  in  the  Prifon  is  for  Mechlik. 
Debtoj's :  but  none  in  it.  Three  criminals  up  flairs:  no 
dungeons.  Allowance,  two  fixpenny  loaves  and  a  pound  of 
butter  weekly :  on  Sunday  a  pound  of  meat,  and  fome 
foup  :  three  pints  of  fmall  beer  daily.  Straw,  and  two 
blankets.  Firing  from  the  ifl:  of  November  to  the  ift  of 
May.  Clean  linen  every  week  from  a  charity.  I  will  not 
defcribe  the  mode  of  Torture. 

AT  Bruges  there  is  to  the  Prifon  a  court-yard  for  Bruges, 
Criminals,  and  another  for  Debtors:  but  the  former  are 
never  let  out.  Each  fort  has  a  daily  allowance  in  money, 
about  three-pence  halfpenny  Englifh ;  provifions  rather 
cheaper  than  in  London  :  a  clean  fhirt  every  week.  Debtors 
have  the  allowance  from  their  Creditors -,  who  alfo  pay  the 
Keeper  a  fmall  fee  at  the  entrance  of  the  prifoner,  and  a 
penny  a  day  during  his  confinement.  No  under-ground 
dungeons.  Two  things  are  remarkable  in  this  Prifon,  and 
well  worth  imitating.  One  is  the  care  they  take  of  the 
Sick.  There  are  two  Medical  Books,  one  for  the  City,  the 
other  for  the  Seigneuries  or  Lordfliips  of  Pariflies,  which 
are  governed  by  different  Magiftrates,  but  the  Prifon  is 
common  to  both.     The  Phyfician   at  every  vifit  enters  his 

T  prefcription 


138  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

in  the  refpedllve  Book,  which  is  carried  to  the  Apothecary ; 
who  after  copying  the  Recipe,  fends  the  book  back  again  j 
and  it  is  kept  in  the  room  where  the  Magiftrates  meet  to 
hold  a  Court  of  Judicature,  infpeft  the  Prifon  &c.  I  fpent 
fome  hours  in  looking  over  them.  The  prefcriptions  are 
written  with  regularity  for  many  years  paft.  Bark  and 
Cordials  were  almoft  conftant  ingredients  in  the  Recipe.  They 
are  not  troubled  with  infedlious  diftempers ;  but  perhaps 
the  Phylicians  are  fomewhat  apprehenfive  of  them,  and 
order  thofe  preventives  with  fuccefs.  The  Phylician  or- 
ders a  Surgeon  to  attend  when  the  cafe  requires  one :  and 
at  his  order  alfo  the  Keeper  provides  for  the  fick.  Soup, 
white  Bread  &c.  the  Magiftrates  allowing  for  this  Fourteen- 
pence  a  day,  to  continue  till  countermanded  by  the  Phyfician. 
Some  fick  prifoners  have  been  many  weeks  thus  liberally 
provided  for» 

The  other  exemplary  practice  is  their  care  of  Legacies 
and  Donations.  In  the  Council-Chamber,  under  a  pidlure 
reprefenting  viliting  the  fick,  feeding  the  hungry,  and  re- 
leafing  the  prifoner,  there  is  in  a  frame  a  printed  Lift  of  all 
Charities  given  or  bequeathed  to  the  Prifoners  from  the 
year  131 5  to  1734;  with  the  names  and  intentions  of  the 
feveral  Donors :  and  in  another  fmall  frame  is  a  memorial 
of  the  time  at  which  each  bequeft  is  to  be  diftributed. 

Ghent.  AT  <Jhent  in  tbc  Prifon  at  the  fuperb  Mai/on  de  Ville 

each 


Sect.  IV.  FLANDERS.  139 

each  criminal  has  from  the  city  about  four-pence  halfpenny 
Englifli,  a  day :  and  proviiion  being  there  about  one  third 
cheaper  than  in  Lojidon,  fome  of  them  fave  a  little  out  of 
that  allowance  after  paying  for  the  weekly  wafliing  of  their 
linen. 

In  the  State  Prifon,  governed  by  other  Magiilrates,  cri- 
minals have  four-pence  a  day.  In  each  of  thofe  Prifons 
the  Keeper  has  from  the  Magiftrates  two-pence  a  day  for 
the  cuflody  of  every  prifoner.  In  the  two  Prifons,  four 
debtors. 

Here  is  a  Prifon  belonging  to  the  rich  Monaftefy  of 
Be7iediSitnes  in  the  Abbey  of  St.  Peter.  There  are  now 
thirty-five  of  the  fraternity :  who  have  many  Lordfliips, 
and  part  of  the  City  in  their  jurifdidlion.  The  Prifon  joins 
to  the  Abbot's  Court-Houfe.  Three  dreary  dungeons  down 
nineteen  fteps  :  a  little  window  in  each  :  no  prifoners.  I 
went  down;  but  my  noting  the  dimenfions  of  the  windows 
&c.  fo  enraged  the  Keeper,  that  he  would  not  indulge  my 
curiofity  any  farther. 

The  Hoiife  of  CorreSlion  for  the  City  of  Ghe7it  is  not  fo 
commodioufly  built,  nor  kept  fo  clean  as  fome  other 
Flemifh  Prifons :  but  there  are  very  good  Rules  of  Oeco- 
nomy,  of  which  I  have  a  copy.  Every  prifoner  is  exa- 
mined at  his  firfl  coming;  and  if  he  be  not  healthy,  he  is 

T  2  not 


J40  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

not  put  among  thofe  that  are  fo.  That  the  Keeper  may  not 
be  tempted  to  opprefs  his  prifoners,  he  is  exempted  from 
all  'Taxes.  The  prifoners  have  a  fet  tafk  of  different  forts  of 
work  :  the  profits  of  extra-work  their  own.  The  Ma- 
giflrates  meet  in  the  Prifon  once  a  week  to  infpecSt  it ;  and 
to  appoint  the  fort  and  quantity  of  provilion  for  every  day 
of  the  week  enfuing.  They  order  the  Phyfician  to  fee  that 
the  fick  have  broth,  and  other  nourilhment  proper  for 
them.  The  Keeper  provides  it  and  is  paid  by  the  Ma- 
giflrates.  I  happened  to  go  into  the  Prifon  while  they 
were  there,  and  faw  them  employed  as  above. 

I  BEG  leave  here,  on  account  of  the  humanity  of  its  in- 
ftitution,  to  digrefs  from  my  fubjedt  by  taking  notice  of  a 
Nunnery  in  this  place.  The  Hofpitable  Man/ion  is  not  inha- 
bited folely  by  Nuns  ;  it  is  deftined  to  the  reception  of  men 
who  are  infane,  and  fick  aged  women.  The  infane  have, 
when  requifite,  afliftance  from  their  own  fex  j  and  the  ten- 
dernefs  with  which  both  thefe  and  the  poor  women  are 
treated  by  the  fifters,  gave  me  no  little  pleafure. 

There  is  at  Ghent  a  new  Prifon  building  by  the  States 
of  Aujlrian  Flanders.  It  is  a  Houfe  of  Correction  for  all 
thofe  Provinces  (as  that  at  Vilforde  for  Aujlrian  Brabant)  and 
La  Maison  is  called  la  maison  de  force.  It  is  fituated  near  a  Canal. 
The  plan  is  an  OSlagon  :  only  four  fides  finished  :  in  one  of 
them  were  in  1775  one  hundred  and  fifty-nine  men  crimi- 
nals : 


at   GHEA^T. 


IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIBII 

iieiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiil 

illiiiiiiflj 


^ 


g 


§^ 


■5 


IP 


Pz^jsr   OF    X vi 


AISOJV    ^c  1^' 


a  E     rr/^    GHE2^T. 


Ill§ll 


llllllll 
lllllllll 


llllllllllllllllll 

iiiiililllllliilll 
llllllllllllllllll 

iiiiiiimiiiiiiii 


Part  oj'  //ji'  E/cr'a/foz/.s'    of  Sf//ufrv    Wa/r^x . 


\ 


Sect.  IV.  FLANDERS. 

nals :  this  year  one  hundred  and  ninety-one.  Another  of 
the  fides  is  for  women,  of  whom  there  were  fifty-nine.  In 
the  middle  of  this  court  is  a  bafon  of  running  water,  for 
wafhing  all  the  Linen  of  the  Houfe. 

On  each  of  the  four  floors  there  is  a  corridor,  or  arcade, 
fix  feet  nine  inches  wide,  quite  open  to  the  air  of  the  yard, 
which,  however,  is  not  attended  with  any  inconvenience, 
even  in  winter.  In  the  recefs  of  every  corridor,  except  the 
loweft,  is  a  range  of  bed-rooms,  fix  feet  nine  inches  by 
four  feet  ten,  and  eight  feet  eight  inches  high  :  the  door- 
way two  feet.  Thefe  are  uniformly  furniflied  with  a  bed- 
fi:ead,  fix  feet  and  a  half  by  two  and  a  half,  a  fi:raw  bed,  a 
mattrefs,  a  pillow,  a  pair  of  fheets,  two  blankets  in  winter 
and  one  in  fummer.  Each  room  has  a  little  bench,  and  a  fhutter 
to  the  lattice  window  (in  the  door),  which,  when  opened 
and  turned  down,  ferves  for  a  table.  In  the  wall  is  a  little 
cupboard,  two  feet  by  one,  and  ten  inches  deep.  All  the 
rooms  are  vaulted  to  prevent  fire  from  running  from  ftory 
to  fi:ory.  No  perfon  is  on  any  pretence  admitted  into  the 
bed-room  of  another.  They  have  a  clean  fhirt  once  a  week, 
and  clean  fheets  once  a  month.  The  women  have  not  fepa- 
rate  rooms.  Some  of  theirs  are  ten  feet  and  a  half  by  nine 
and  a  half. 

In   order  to   the  admiflion  of  a  prifoner,  previous  notice 
mufi:   be  given   by  the   City   or   Province  that  fends  him. 

When 


141 


,42  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

When  he  comes,  he  is  fhaved  and  waflied :  a  Surgeon  exa- 
mines him  ;  and  if  healthy,  he  is  cloathed  with  the  uniform 
of  the  Houfe,  which  is  marked  with  the  number  of  his 
room  }  to  it  he  is  conduded  by  one  of  the  moft  orderly  of 
the  prifoners ;  who  is  appointed  to  that  fervice,  and  who 
alfo  acquaints  him  with  the  Rules  of  the  Houfe.  Com- 
mitment from  one  year  to  twenty  or  more. 

A  BELL  is  rung  in  the  morning  to  fummon  the  prifoners 
into  the  dining-room  ;  in  the  fummer  at  five ;  in  winter 
the  hour  varies  with  the  length  of  the  days.  Half  an  hour 
after  the  bell  rings,  their  names  are  called  over  -,  and  they 
go  to  Prayers  in  a  Chapel.  They  are  then  allowed  half  an 
hour  to  breakfafl.  At  noon  they  have  two  hours,  for  din- 
ner ;  making  their  beds  (which  in  fair  weather  they  bring 
out  to  air)  ;  and  for  recreation.  I  was  prefent  during  the 
whole  time  the  men  criminals  were  at  dinner,  and  much 
admired  the  regularity,  decency,  and  order,  with  which  the 
whole  was  conducted.  Every  thing  was  done  at  a  word 
'  given  by  a  Diredtor  j  no  noife  or  confufion  appeared ;  and 

this  company  of  near  one  hundred  and  ninety  flout  criminals 
was  governed  with  as  much  apparent  eafe  as  the  moft  fober 
and  well-difpofed  aflembly  in  civil  fociety.  At  night  they 
have  an  hour  for  fupper  &c.  The  bell  gives  notice  of  all 
thefe  fucceflive  hours  :  it  is  rung  at  a  window  over  the 
gate-way  by  a  Centinel,  who  there  overlooks  the  whole 
yardj    aiid,  ihould  there  be  any  difturbance,  is  to  give  the 

alarm  to  a  company  who  keep  guard. 

On 


Sect.  IV.  FLANDERS. 

On  the  ground-floors  of  the  building  are  work-rooms. 
Thofe  for  the  men  are  too  fmall  for  the  looms  &c.  The 
women's  work-room  is  one  hundred  and  feventeen  feet  long^ 
twenty-fix  wide,  and  nine  to  the  fpringing  of  the  arch.  In 
this  many  were  fpinning  and  combing  wool ;  mending- 
linen,  &c.  Others  were  wafliing  in  places  proper  for  that 
purpofe. 

An  exad:  account  is  kept  of  every  circumftance  relating  to 
each  man's  work,  in  a  Book  that  has  fourteen  columns.    The 
ift  Column  contains  the  Names  of  Prifoners. 

2.  The  Sort  of  Stuff  on  which  each  Man  is  employed  j 

as  Shalloon,   Cloth,  Dimity  &c. 

3.  The  Number  that  is  marked  on  the  Piece. 

4.  The  Day  it  was  begun. 

5.  The  Day  it  was  finifhed. 

6.  Meafure  of  the  whole  Piece. 

7.  Number  of  Working-Days,  the  Prifoner  was  upon  it. 

8.  The  Tafk  due  per  Day. 

9.  Surplus  Work  upon  the  Piece  beyond  Tafk. 
ID.  Price  of  the  Piece  per  Ell. 

1 1 .  Obfervations,   or   Occafional   Circumflances  :    fuch  as 

Sick,  Lame,  difficult  Work,  firjl  Piece   &c. 

12.  Payment  to  Prifoners  for  Surplus  Work. 

13.  Deficiency  of  Tafk. 

14.  Punifhment  for  the  Default. 

This  lafl  column  is  written  by  the  Magiftrates  themfelves, 

\         I  faw 


143 


144  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

I  faw  in  It  —  often  excufe  —  fometimes  make  up  in  next 
piece  —  fometimes  to  work  alone  —  to  bread  and  njsater  — 
feldom  to  rajping  logwood.  The  daily  allowance  is  two 
pounds  of  bread;  fome  foup  of  beans,  peafe  &c.  with 
wheat-bread  in  it  j  and  except  Friday  and  Lent  half  a 
pound  of  cold  meat.  Each  prifoner  has  alfo  the  value  of 
our  farthing,  for  which  he  can  buy  near  two  pints  of  fmall 
beer ;  or  fomewhat  elfe  which  the  vidlualler  of  that  Prifon 
is  allowed  to  fell,  and  deliver  to  them  at  a  wicket  in  the 
wall.  Spirituous  liquors  are  exprefsly  prohibited :  and  fo 
is  wine,  unlefs  it  be  ordered  by  a  note  from  the  Phyfician. 
It  is  not  allowed  to  give  any  thing  diredtly  to  the  prifoners  : 
but  there  is  a  box  into  which  money  may  be  put ;  and  at 
flated  times  it  is  equally  diilributed  among  them.  Cards, 
Dice,  and  all  gaming  are  ftridlly  forbidden ;  and  there  are 
excellent  Rules  for  preventing  all  quarreling ;  for  mending 
their  morals ;  preferving  their  health  ;  and  making  them 
for  the  future  ufeful  in  Society.  To  tranfcribe  all  the  Rules 
would  to  moft  readers  be  difagreeable.  Such  as  wifh  to  fee 
them  will  find  them,  together  with  more  particulars  of  this 
noble  Inftitution,  in  two  Edidls  printed  in  folio  at  Ghent 
in  1773  and  75:  the  firft  in  French  and  Low  Dutch  ;  the 
latter  only  French  :  and  in  a  book  in  quarto  written  by 
Count  Vilain  XIV.  and  offered  to  the  Government  in  1775. 
The  title  of  it  is  Memoire  fur  les  Moyens  de  corriger  Ics  Mal- 
faiteurs  et  Faineans  a  leur  propre  Avantage  et  de  les  rendre 
Utiles  a  I'Etat.     A  Gand  Sec. 

I   SAID 


Sect.  IV.  FLANDERS. 

I  SAID  tranfcnbing  all  the  Rules  at  length,  would  be 
tedious;  for  this  reafon  I  have  only  given  extradls  from 
thefe,  and  from  thofe  made  for  other  Foreign  Prifons,  I 
have  compleat  copies  of  them,  and  of  others  which  I  have 
not  mentioned;  fome  printed,  others  M.S.  which  I  will 
readily  fliow  to  any  Gentleman  who  has  leifure  and  incli- 
nation to  iludy  the  fubjedl. 


WHEN  I  formerly  made  the  tour  of  Europe,  I  feldom 
had  occafion  to  envy  Foreigners  any  thing  I  faw  with  refped 
to  their  Situation,  their  ReligioJi,  Manners  or  Government. 
In  my  late  journeys  to  view  their  Prifons,  I  was  fometimes 
put  to  the  blufh  for  my  native  country.  The  Reader  will 
fcarcely  feel  from  my  narration  the  fame  emotions  of  fliame 
and  regret  as  the  comparifon  excited  in  me,  on  beholding 
the  difference  with  my  own  eyes.  But  from  the  account  I 
have  given  him  of  Foreign  Prifons,  he  may  judge  whether  a 
defign  of  reforming  our  own  be  merely  vifionary — whether 
Idleiiefs,  Debauchery,  Difeafe,  and  Famine  be  the  neceflary 
attendants  of  a  Prifon,  or  only  connedled  with  it  in  our 
ideas  for  want  of  more  perfed  knowledge,  and  more  en- 
larged views.  I  hope  too  he  will  do  me  the  juftice  to  think 
that  neither  an  indifcriminate  admiration  of  every  thing 
foreign,  nor  a  fondnefs  of  cenfuring  every  thing  at  home, 
has  influenced  me  to  adopt  the  language  of  a  Panegyrill  in 
this  part  of  my  work,  or  that  of  a  Complainant  in  the  reft. 

U  Where 


HJf 


146  FOREIGN      PRISONS. 

Where  I  have  commended  I  have  mentioned  my  reafons  for 
fo  doing ;  and  I  have  dwelt  perhaps  more  minutely  upon 
the  management  of  Foreign  Prifons,  becaufe  it  was  more 
agreeable  to  me  to  praife  than  to  condemn.  Another  mo- 
tive induced^  me  to  be  very  particular  in  my  accounts  of 
Foreign  Houfes  of  CorreSlion,  efpecially  thofe  of  the  freefl 
States.  It  was  to  counteradl  a  notion  prevailing  among  us 
that  compelling  prifoners  to  work,  efpecially  in  public, 
was  inconfiftent  with  the  principles  of  Englifti  Liberty;  at 
the  fame  time  that  taking  away  the  lives  of  fuch  numbers, 
either  by  executions,  or  the  difeafes  of  our  Prifons,  feems 
to  make  little  impreffion  upon  us.  Of  fuch  force  is  cuftom 
and  prejudice  in  filencing  the  voice  of  good  fenfe  and 
humanity  ! 

I  HAVE  only  to  add  that,  fully  fenfible  of  the  imperfec- 
tion which  muft  attend  the  curfory  furvey  of  a  traveller,  it 
was  my  fludy  to  remedy  that  defed:  by  a  conftant  attention 
to  the  one  objeft  of  my  purfuit  alone,  during  the  whole  of 
my  two  lafl:  journeys  abroad. 


SECTION 


SECTION         V. 

A     PARTICULAR     ACCOUNT     OF 
ENGLISH     PRISONS. 


AS    the  Tables  of  which    the  prefent  Sedion   will 
chiefly  confifl:,  contain   feveral  terms  which  can- 
not be  expecfted  to  be  familiar  to  the  generality  of 
my  Readers,  I  fhall  begin  with  an  explanation  of  them. 

IN  the  firft  page  of  every  County,  City,  &c.  the  fecond 
article  of  the  Gaoler  or  Keepers  emolument  is  Fees  -,  by 
which  are  meant  fuch  only  as  are  taken  by  him  and  his 
fervants  on  the  admiflion  or  difcharge  of  a  Prifoner.  The 
fums  fet  down  under  this  head  are  from  the  beft  information 
I  could  procure  in  my  repeated  journeys ;  but  they  differ 
fometimes  from  thofe  fpecified  in  the  Tables  of  Fees  where 
fuch  are  found. 

The  next  article  under  Gaoler  is  Transports.  The 
fum   fet  down  to  this,  is  what  (from  the  beft  intelligence  I 

U  2  could 


hS  ENGLISH     prisons. 

could  gain)  I  found  was  allowed  them  for  conveying  con- 
victs fentenced  to  tranfportation  to  the  refpedlive  fea-ports ; 
and  for  paying  the  Merchant  who  contracts  what  he  was 
fuppofed  to  demand  for  their  paflage  :  although  by  the  fta- 
tutes  4th  George  I.   and   8th  of  his  prefent  Majefty,  it  is 

enadted  that   "  The  perfon  or  perfons  fo  contracting 

"  fliall  have  a  Property  and  Interefl  in  the  fervice  of  the 
"  faid  offenders  for  fuch  Terms  of  years." 

Under  Prifoners  in  the  fame  page,  the  number  which  I 
found  in  the  refpedive  County-Gaol  on  my  different  vifits 
is  diflinguilTied  into  Debtors  and  Felons  &c.  The  &c.  is 
meant  to  include  two  kinds  of  Prifoners  chiefly  ;  viz.  Fines 
and  Petty  Offenders^  By  Fines  is  underftood  fuch  as  are 
confined  till  they  pay  a  fum  of  money,  2.  Fine: — fuch  as 
are  obliged  to  find  fecurity  for  good  behaviour  : — and  fuch 
as  are  committed  for  a  limited  term  to  mere  confinement, 
or  (which  is  much  the  fame)  to  hard  labour.  Of  thefe 
latter  moil  have  been  previoufly  whipped,  or  burnt  in  the 
band.  The  Petty  Offenders  are  fuch  as  are  fent  to  Gaols 
inltead  of  Bridewells,  for  reafons  mentioned  in  a  former 
Sedion.  Thefe  alfo  in  fome  Gaols  are  called  Fines.  Be- 
fides  thefe  there  are  fometinies  a  few  Deferters. 

Wherever  there  were  ^tables  of  Fees  I  thought  myfelf 
obliged  to  give  exaft  and  literal  copies  of  them :  I  am  not 
therefore  anfwerable  for  the  improprieties  of  exprefjlon   or 

defe<5ts 


Sect.  V.         ENGLISH     PRISONS.  149 

defedls  of  form  to  be  found  in  feme  of  them.  The  articles 
and  fums,  I  fay,  in  thefe  Tables  are  literally  copied ;  but  I 
have  taken  the  liberty,  in  order  to  prevent  tirefome  and 
ufelefs  repetitions,  to  abridge  the  formalities  of  preamble 
and  concluiion.  For  the  fame  reafon,  I  have  ufed  the  fame 
liberty,  with  regard  to  the  Rules  and  Orders  of  the  few 
Prifons  that  have  fuch  ;  2in6.  to  the  Lijis  of  BenefaSiions  and 
Legacies.  Where  no  mention  is  made  of  Rules  &c.  it  may 
be  concluded  that  there  are  none  hung  up  in  that  Prifon. 
Where  there  is  no  Table  of  Fees  I  commonly  note  the 
defed:  *. 

I  HAVE  defcribed  no  Prifon  but  from  my  own  exami- 
nation at  the  feveral  dates  fet  down  before  the  number  of 
Prifoners.  I  entered  every  room,  cell,  and  dungeon  with 
a  memorandum-book  in  my  hand,  in  which  I  noted  parti- 
culars upon  the  fpot.  My  defcriptions  will  to  fome  readers 
appear  too  minute ;  but  I  chofe  rather  to  relate  circum- 
ftances,  than  to  charadlerize  in  general  terms.  By  thefe, 
the  Legiflature  will  be  better  acquainted  with  the  real  ftate 
of  Gaols  j  and   Magiftrates  will   be  able  to  judge  whether 


*  It  ftould  be  obferved  that  by  the  ftatute  32d  George  II.  if  any  Gaoler,  or 
Keeper,  demand  Fees  not  fet  down  in  a  Table  figned  by  the  Juftices,  and  afterwards 
confirmed  by  the  Judge  or  Judges  of  Affize,  and  Juftices,  and  hung  up  confpi- 
cuous  in  the  Prifon  ;  fuch  demand  is  illegal,  and  the  OiFender  is  liable  to  a  penalty 
of  fifty  pounds  to  the  perfon  injured. 

the 


a50  ENGLISH      PRISONS. 

the  Prifons  over  which  they  prefide,  and  to  which  they 
commit  offenders,  be  fit  for  the  purpofes  they  are  defigned 
to  anfwer.  I  might  add,  that  a  variety  of  defcriptions  may 
pofiibly  fuggefl  fomething  ufeful  in  the  plans  of  fuch  Pri- 
fons as  may  hereafter  be  eredled  ;  fince  whatever  may  appear 
worth  copying  may  be  ^xtradled  from  any. 

I  HAVE  here  and  there  taken  the  liberty  of  pointing  out 
what  feemed  to  me,  as  I  viewed  a  Prifon,  an  obvious  re- 
medy of  fome  defedl  that  happened  to  ftrike  me.  But  I 
did  not  examine  with  the  accuracy  of  a  Surveyor ;  and  hope 
J  fhall  not  be  thought  to  diredt  in  the  flyle  of  a  Diftator. 


NEWGATE. 


N 


T 


B  Jof/ruj /p/ ■///(■  Duj-// A' rMj 
E    C  ic^j€^ 


Elevation    of  the    Front 


^ 


§r- 


.V 


# 


GuouKD     pi.a:?^. 


A  tlJne  ,//(rArr.j  (/irf^ 


rujr 


B 


D  ^wr-a^e  ^///^/e/'mr  r///7///'/ 
E    C  /chJ^ 

1   ry!'^^at7^  /o  //it'  f/r/.j^r>//.)  c//^//jf^ 


XT  ^^y 


r>j//J  /(}/■>  //n///f/M 


t>' 


rr^// 


LONDON.  151 

NEWGATE, 


GAO 

LER,     Richard  Akerman. 
Salary,     £100. 

Fees,     Debtors,         -        ;^o  : 

8  :   10 

Felons,         -             0  : 

18   :    10 

Mifdemeanours  7 
or  Fines,         y 

14  :   10 

Tranfports,         -         -         0  : 

14  :   lO 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance  to 

Debtors,  7 
Felons,^    ^P^"">^ 

loaf  a  day.    (SeeR 

Garnifh,    Debtors,      -       ^^o  ; 

:    5    :    6 

Felons  &c.     -      0  ; 

:    2    :    6 

Number  of     -         -     Debtors.         Felons  &c, 

1775,     March  5,         2Z 

-     -       190 

--76,     March  i,         38 

-     -       129 

May    17,         46 

-     -      212 

Dec.   26,         2;^ 

-     -       152 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  FilleUe. 

Duty  — Sunday  twice  j   every 

day  Prayers; 

once  a  month  Sacrament. 
Salary,     ^35,  &c.       (See  Remarks.) 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Olney. 

Salary,  ;^50,  for  all  Prifoners. 

THE  Builders  of  Old  Newgate  feem  to  have  regarded  in  their    Remarks. 
plan,  nothing  but  the  fingle  article  of  keeping  prifoners  in  fafe  cuf- 
tody.     The  rooms  and  cells  were  fo  clofe,  as  to  be  almoft  the  con- 

ftant 


152  LONDON. 

NEWGATE,  ftant  feats  of  difeafe,  and  fources  of  infeftion  ;  to  the  deftruftion  of 
multitudes,  not  only  in  the  Prifon,  but  abroad.  The  City  had  there- 
fore very  good  reafon  for  their  refolution  to  build  a  new  Gaol.  The 
Plate  will  give  a  better  idea  of  it  than  any  defcription.  I  give 
the  plan,  rather  to  gratify  the  curiofity  of  my  Readers,  than  as  a 
model  to  be  followed.  Many  inconveniences  of  the  old  Gaol  arc 
avoided  in  this  new  one  :  but  it  has  fome  manifefl  errors.  It  is  now 
too  late  to  point  out  particulars.  All  I  will  fay,  is,  that  without 
more  than  ordinary  care,  the  prifoners  in  it  will  be  in  great  danger  of 
the  Gaol-Fever. 

The  Cells  built  in  Old  Newgate  a  few  years  fince  for  condemned 
malefaftors,  are  intended  for  the  fame  ufe  at  prefent.  I  fhall  there- 
fore give  fome  account  of  them.  There  are  upon  each  of  the  three 
floors  five  cells :  all  vaulted,  near  nine  feet  high  to  the  crown. 
The  cells  on  the  ground-floor  meafure  full  nine  feet  by  near  fix; 
the  five  on  the  firft  ftory  are  a  little  larger,  on  account  of  the  fet-ofF 
in  the  wall ;  and  the  five  uppermoll,  ftill  a  little  larger  for  the  fame 
reafon.  In  the  upper  part  of  each  cell,  is  a  window  double  grated, 
near  three  feet  by  one  and  a  half.  The  doors  are  four  inches  thick. 
The  flrong  flone  wall  is  lined  all  round  each  cell  with  planks, 
ftudded  with  broad-headed  nails.  In  each  cell  is  a  barrack-bedftcad. 
I  was  told  by  thofe  who  attended  me,  that  criminals  who  had 
affefled  an  air  of  boldnefs  during  their  trial,  and  appeared  quite  un- 
concerned at  tlie  pronouncing  fentence  upon  them,  were  ftruck  with 
horror,  and  fhed  tears  when  brought  to  thefe  darkfome  folitary 
abodes. 

The  New  Chapel  is  plain  and  neat.  Below  are  three  or  four  pews 
for  men  felons  &c.  On  each  fide  is  a  gallery :  that  towards  the 
-women's  ward  is  for  them :  in  it  is  a  pew  for  the  Keeper,  whofe  pre- 

fence 


LONDON.  153 

fence  may  fet  a  good  example  and  be  otherwife  ufeful.     The  other    newgate. 
gallery  towards  the  debtors  ward  is  for  them.     The  flairs  to  each 
gallery  are  on  the  outfide  of  the  Chapel. 

I  WENT  once  to  Prayers  there.  Mr.  Villette  read  them  diflindly, 
and  with  propriety  :  the  few  prifoners  who  were  prefent,  feemed  at- 
tentive :  but  we  were  diflurbed  by  the  noife  in  the  yard.  Mr.  Villette 
told  me  "  that  was  always  the  cafe,  even  on  Sundays."  Surely  they 
who  will  not  go  to  Chapel,  who  are  by  far  the  greater  number, 
fhould  not  be  fuffered  to  hinder  the  edification  of  fuch  as  are  better 
difpofed. 

The  Chaplain  (or  Ordinary)  befides  his  falary,  has  a  Houfe  in 
Newgate-flreet,  clear  of  Land-Tax ;  two  Freedoms  yearly,  which 
commonly  fell  for  twenty-five  pounds  each  -,  Lady  Barnadiflon's 
Legacy,  fix  pounds  a  year ;  an  old  Legacy  paid  by  the  Governors 
of  St,  Bartholomew's  Hofpital,  ten  pounds  a  year :  the  City  generally 
prefents  him  once  in  fix  months  with  another  Freedom.  He  engages 
when  chofen  to  hold  no  other  living. 

Debtors  have  every  day  from  the  Chamber  of  London  fixteen 
flone  of  beef :  Fines  eight  flone :  and  fome  years  Felons  eight 
ftone.  Debtors  have  feveral  Legacies.  I  inquired  for  a  lift  of 
them,  and  Mr.  Akerman  told  me  "  The  Table  in  Maitland's 
Survey,  which  he  fhewed  me,  was  authentic. "  The  amount 
of  it  is  ^53  -.5:8  a  year.  He  faid  there  were  alfo  a  few 
more. 


TABLE 


154  LONDON. 

NEWGATE.  TABLE      OF      FEES. 


Londonfs.  \  Table  of  Fees  to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler  or 
xJL  Keeper  of  Newgate  within  the  faid  City  of  London 
for  any  Prifoner  or  Prifoners  committed  or  coming  into  Gaol  or 
Chamber-Rent  there  or  difcharge  from  thence  in  any  civil  ACTiOff 
fettled  and  efl-ablifhed  the  nineteenth  day  of  December  in  the  third 
year  of  the  reign  of  his  Majefty  King  George  the  Second  Annoque 
Domini  1729  purfuant  to  an  Aft  of  Parliament  lately  made  intituled 
An  Aft  for  the  Relief  of  DEBTORS  with  refpeft  to  the  Imprifonment 
of  their  Perfons. 


£.     S.       D. 

Every  Prifoner  on  the  mafter  fide  fliall  pay  to  the  Keeper  T 

for  his  entrance-fee  —  —  —     3 

Every  Prifoner  on  the  matter  fide  fhall  pay  for   chamber  "^ 

room  ufe  of  bed  bedding  and  flieets  to  the  Keeper  there  r   o  :   i  :     3 
being  two  in  a  bed  and  no  more  each  per  week        —     -' 
Every  Prifoner  on  the  faid  mafter  fide  who  at  his  own  defire ") 

fhall  have  a  bed  to  himfelf,  fhall  pay  to  the  Keeper  for  ^  o  :  2  :     6 

chamber  room  ufe  of  bed  bedding  and  flieets  per  week     -^ 

Every  Debtor  fhall  pay  to  the  Keeper  for  his  difcharging  fee       o  :  6  :   10 

'And  to  all  the  Turnkeys  two  (hillings  and  no  more        —       0:2:0 

No  other  Fee  for  the  ufe  of  chamber  bed  bedding  or  fheets  or  upon  the 

commitments  or  difcharge  of  any  Prifoner  on  any  civil  afUon. 


Edw"  Becher  roB^    RAYMOND 

Robt  Alsop  r.     eyre 

Ino  Barnard  tho=    PENGELLY 


Mr. 


LONDON.  1^^ 

Mr.  Akerman  fhewed  me  another  Table  of  Fees  which  was     newgate. 
given  him  for  his  direftion  when  he  commenced  Keeper.     It  is  as 
follows : 


Fees  to  be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  Newgate. 


For  every  Debtor's  difcharge  — 

For  every  Felon's  difcharge  — 

For  every  Mifdemeanour  •— 

Every  Debtor's  entrance  on  the  Mailer's  fide 
Every  Felon's  entrance  on  the  Mailer's  fide 
Every  Perfon  admitted  into  the  Prefs-yard 
For  every  Tranfport's  difcharge  — 

For  every  Bailable  Warrant  — 


£■ 

5. 

D. 

o  : 

8  : 

10 

o  : 

i8  : 

10 

o  : 

14  ; 

;   10 

0  : 

3   : 

0 

0  : 

10  : 

6 

3  : 

3   : 

0 

o  : 

14  : 

10 

3  : 

6  ; 

;     8 

X  2  HIS 


156  LONDON. 

HIS     MAJESTY'S     PRISON 
THE      FLEET,       for     debtors. 

WARDEN,     John  Eyles,  Efq. 

Deputy  Warden  and  Clerk  of  the  Papers, 

Daniel  Hopkins. 
Salary 
Fees,       £1   :  6  :  %         -     -      T    on  entrance,  per  account 

0:2:0     Turnkey,  5       from  the  Prifoners. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine  to  John  Cartwright,  who 
holds  of  the  Warden  on  leafe  the  Tap  &c. 
(See  Remarks.) 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  none. 
Garnifh,    0:2:0 

Number       -         -       In  the  Houfe.     In  the  Rules. 
1774,     April  26,         171       -       -       71 
--76,      2,         241       -       -       78 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Homer. 

Duty  — Sunday  twice  j  Wednefday  Prayers. 
Salary 

SURGEON,     None. 

Remarks.  TO  this  Prifon  were  committed  formerly  thofe  who  incurred  the 
difpleafure  of  the  Star-Chamber.  In  the  i6th  of  Charles  I.  when 
that  Court  was  abolilhed,  it  became  a  Prifon  for  Debtors  -,  and  for 

perfons 


LONDON.  157 

perfons  charged  with  contempts  of  the  Courts  of  Chancer)^,  Exche-       fleet. 
quer,  and  Common  Pleas. 

In  1728  many  abufes  praftifed  by  the  Warden  were  the  fubjedt  of 
parliamentary  inquiry. 

The  Prifon  was  rebuilt  a  few  years  fince.  At  the  front  is  a  narrow 
court-yard.  At  each  end  of  the  building,  there  is  a  fmall  projedion, 
or  wing.  There  are  four  floors,  they  call  them  Galleries,  befides  the 
cellar-floor,  called  Bartholomew -Fair.  Each  gallery  confifts  of  a 
pafl'age  in  the  middle,  the  whole  length  of  the  Prifon,  i.  e.  fixty-fix 
yards ;  and  rooms  on  each  fide  of  it  about  fourteen  feet  and  a  half 
by  twelve  and  a  half,  and  nine  and  a  half  high.  A  chimney  and 
window  in  every  room.  The  pafl!ages  are  narrow  (not  feven  ktt 
wide)  and  darkifh,  having  only  a  window  at  each  end. 

On  the  firft  floor,  the  Hall-Gallery,  to  which  you  afcend  eight 
fteps,  are,  a  Chapel,  a  Tap-room,  a  Coffee-room  (lately  made  out 
of  two  rooms  for  Debtors),  a  room  for  the  Turnkey,  another  for  the 
Watchman,  and  eighteen  rooms  for  Prifoners. 

Besides  the  Cofi'ee-room  and  Tap-room,  two  ofthofe  eighteen 
rooms,  and  all  the  cellar-floor,  except  a  lock-up  room  to  confine  the 
diforderly,  and  another  room  for  the  Turnkey,  are  held  by  the  Tap- 
fter,  John  Cartwright,  who  bought  the  remainder  of  the  leafe  at 
public  auftion  in  1775.  The  cellar- floor  is  fixteen  fleps  be- 
low the  hall-galler)'.  It  confifts  of  the  two  rooms  juft  now  men- 
tioned, the  Tapfter's  kitchen,  his  four  large  beer  and  wine  cellars, 
and  fifteen  rooms  for  Prifoners.  Thefe  fifteen,  and  the  two.  before- 
mentioned 


158  LONDON. 

FLEET.      mentioned  on  the  hall-gallery,  the  Tapfter  lets  to  Prilbners  for  four 
to  eight  (hillings  a  week.  *. 

On  the  frjl  Gallery  (that  next  above  the  hall-gallery)  are  twenty- 
five  rooms  for  Prifoners,  On  the/econd  Gallery  twenty-feven  rooms. 
One  of  them,  fronting  the  flaircafe,  is  their  Committee-room.  A 
room  at  one  end  is  an  Infirmary.  At  the  other  end  in  a  laige  room 
over  the  Chapel  is  a  dirty  Billiard-table ;  kept  by  the  Prifoner  wlio 
fleeps  in  that  room.  On  the  higheft  Ilory  are  twenty-feven  rooms. 
Some  of  thefe  upper  rooms,  viz.  thofe  in  the  wings,  are  larger  than 
the  reft  i  being  over  the  Chapel,  the  Tap-room,  &c. 

All  the  rooms  I  have  mentioned  are  for  Mafler's-fide  Debtors. 
The  weekly  rent  of  thofe  not  held  by  the  Tapfter  is  one  ftiilling  and 
three-pence  unRirniftied.  They  fall  to  the  Prifoners  in  fucceffion, 
thus  :  when  a  room  becomes  vacant,  the  firft  Prifoner  upon  the  lift 
of  fuch  as  have  paid  their  entrance-fees,  takes  pofTenion  of  it. 
When  the  Prifon  was  built,  the  Warden  gave  each  Prifoner  his 
choice  of  a  room  according  to  his  feniority  as  Prifoner.  If  all  the 
rooms  be  occupied,  a  new  comer  muft  hire  of  fome  tenant  a  part  of 
his  room  j  or  ftiift  as  he  can.  Prifoners  are  excluded  from  all  right 
of  fucceflion  to  the  rooms  held  by  the  Tapfter,  and  let  at  the  high 
rents  aforefaid. 

The  apartments  for  Common-fide  Debtors  are  only  part  of  the 
right  wing  of  the  Prifon.     Befides  the  cellar  (which  was  intended 

*  An  impofition  of  the  fame  kind  is  noted  in  the  Report  of  the  Gaol- 
Coramittee  1728. 

for 


LONDON. 


159 


for  their  kitchen,  but  is  occupied  with  lumber,  and  fliut  up)  there  fleet. 
are  four  floors.  On  each  floor  is  a  room  about  twenty-four  or 
twenty-five  feet  fquare,  with  a  fire-place ;  and  on  the  fides  feven 
clofets  or  cabins  to  fleep  in.  Such  of  thefe  Prifoners  as  fwear  in 
Court  or  before  a  Commiffioner  that  they  are  not  worth  five  pounds, 
and  cannot  fubfift  without  charity,  have  the  donations  which  are  fent 
to  the  Prifon,  and  the  begging-box,  and  grate.  Of  them  there 
were  at  my  lafl:  vifit  fixteen. 

I  HAVE  in  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons 
1728  a  Table  offome  Charities;  but  I  faw  no  fuch  Table  in  the 
Prifon. 

There  is  plenty  of  water  from  the  river  and  pumps:  and  a  ipa- 
cious  yard  behind  the  Prifon. 

r  MENTIONED  the  billiard-table.  They  alfo  play  in  the  yard  at 
flcittles,  miffifippi,  fives,  tennis,  &c.  And  not  only  the  Prifoners  : 
1  faw  among  them  feveral  butchers  and  others  from  the  market ; 
who  are  admitted  here  as  at  another  public  houfe.  The  fame  may  be 
feen  in  many  other  Prifons  where  the  Gaoler  keeps  or  lets  the  tap. 
Befides  the  inconvenience  of  this  to  Prifoners ;  the  frequenting  a 
Prifon  lefl'ens  the  dread  of  being  confined  in  one.  ^ 

On  Monday  night  there  is  a  Wine-Club  :  on  Thurfday  night  a 
Beer-Club :  each  lafting  ufually  till  one  or  two  in  the  morning.  I 
need  not  fay  how  much  riot  thefe  occafion ;  and  how  the  fober  Pri- 
foners are  annoyed  by  them. 

Seeing 


s«o 


LONDON. 


iBikeCc 


s  ftic  21J  Fn- 


I  vj&s  ^i|^^":iy.1  R>  ^  ia  das  Pd&a  a  TaUe  of  Fees  mrgjJ?^";^ 
if  ^at  <■  ife  Ocxks  oftfe  Fipos  ad  Iai|HitB:  «d  ^k  ike 
of  k  was  i~=7,  L  c  btSetc  tkc  Omwiih.  of  ife  Haa^  of 

?.  -     -.  -    tTt    r    's  Oak  of  tfe  Papas  far  a  hser 
::kkHe«DL     Ic  b  s  fiillovs. 


A  TA31--   re  i-EES  s)  be  skea  br  dae  Cjek  osuit  Papers 


GE, 


»ESOLUTIOS 


tA-TWc 


LONDON.  i6i 


7^  That  Aoeu  di?  zzi  cxgi:  to  be  :iid  r;  1!^?  Ctic.*  £.    S.     D. 
o(  tie  Pfipen   f.r  iii    C-nifii-    .:'  _-   ?r_:-er  .  I 
dlTdbarge  ddirered  to  tfe  Priibs^  V.-Vf-^lf  » izi/rz.:  >  z  :  2  :  6 
SBj  isgztd  to  dK  mmba  o£  caaiei  he  £ood  cssrged  I 
wiii  —  —  —  —     ■* 

Aad  fix-  ^  CerJicate  to  t&e  Wazda  of  iscfc-) 
(H&faarge  —  —  —     3 

€tk.  Tli2t  tbere  is  doe  ssd  o^^  «d  be  paid  0  die  Cksic^ 

of  tkelaqsiriesaa  ifeifiicfaiseef  £Pn&aer  brdker    0:2:6 
Crei&or  aad  aot  bjr  &mferje^e^        —  —     "^ 

14:^1.  Tlsx  zuezz  ii  s.  Fee  of  5&  4d  doe  is  tke  Ckzk  m  ijke.  Papes  Sz 
dK  aDowaaoe  of  every  Wiit  of  Bsieai  Cmfas  aad  4iK  &r  dK 
Return  of  die  izft  oaie  aad  zfk  Sac  enrj  acker  casie  a^ao 


THERE  is  in  the  Priiba  a  Table  ofRxnii  or  Oxcris.  Tbev 
were  made  at  Tery  diftant  times,  from  the  reign  of  Qoeen  Elizabeth, 
to  the  date  tfaey  bear ;  and  faaae  of  them  partly  axndde  with  odien : 
liaoSE  which  <io  £>  I  hare  put  together  ix>  avcMd  if^^a^tt^Mj  2nd  have 
prefomed  to  alxidge  the  wh<^ 

HILARY     3d    GEORGE    E.     1:19. 

I.  1.  3.  WARDEN"  or  Depoty  to  appoint  Turnkeys  &c.  with 
Anns :  to  &op  peCkms  brii^pmg  Arsis,  and  wazcH  if  an  escape  be 
in  ^jicatioii. 

J-     "WASDiX  to  difeibure  charitT-mooey.     He,  or  his  Agem,  to 

keep  0:^  key  of  tiie  box  :  aad  the  Priib-s^  aaocber. 


5- 


i62  LONDON. 

ftEET.  5.  6.  12,  If  a  Mafter-fide  Debtor  fhall  negled  for  three  months 
to  pay  his  chamber-rent ;  the  Warden  may,  not  lock  him  up, 
but,  remove  him  to  the  Common-fide;  delivering  to  him  his 
goods  by  a  witnefled  inventory.  After  difcharge,  if  legal  dues 
be  ftill  unpaid,  he  may  be  detained  in  the  Common-ward :  the 
door  of  which  is  never  to  be  Jfhut  but  at  night  (fummer  at  ten, 
winter  at  nine) :  and  then  a  Watchman  muft  attend  to  open  it 
for  thofe  who  muft  go  to  the  yard  &c. 

7.  Such  as  attempt  to  efcape,  or  greatly  miftjehave,  may  be  Ihut 
up  in  aclofe  room  or  dungeon. 

N.  B.  It  was  reported  to  the  four  Judges  whofe  names  are  here 
fubfcribed,  and  who  made  inquiry  concerning  it,  to  be  "  hoarded 
wholefome  and  dry." 

8.  18.  Warden  to  repair  the  whole  Houfe,  Chapel,  Drains  &c. 
and  keep  all  clean.  To  take  care  that  Divine  Service  be  duly 
performed,  and  the  Sacraments  adminiftred.    Prifoners  to  attend. 

9.  Against  clandeftine  Fleet-marriages. 

10.  Those  who  blafpheme,  curfe,  fwear,  or  are  diforderly,  to  be 
fet  in  the  ftocks. 

11.  13.  Warden  or  Deputy  to  difpofe  of  the  chambers,  and  tap: 
and  fee  that  good  order  be  obferved  in  the  public  rooms  &c. 

14.  Warden  to  take  effeftual  care  that  no  Prifoner  be  carried  to  a 
Spunging-houfe ;  and  that  no  garnish  be  demanded  from  a 
new  comer. 

15.  Warden  to  caufe  a  Table  of  Gifts  and  Bequejis^  written  in  a  fair 
and  legible  hand,  to  be  hung  up  in  the  Hall.  And  to  fee  that 
no  Prifoner  be  defrauded  of  his  (hare.  None  of  the  fervants  to 
partake  or  diftribute. 

16. 


LONDON.  163 

16.  Every  Prifoner  not  worth   five  pounds   &c.     (As  before  in      fleet. 
Remarks.) 

17,  Two  rooms  to  be  an  Infirmary  for  Common-fide  Debtors.  No 
Prifoner  obliged  to  fleep  with  one  that  is  difeafed. 

19.  Coroner's  Inqueft  upon  the  dead:  and  corps  to  be  delivered 
to  the  friends,  free  of  coft. 

20.  Warden  not  to  remove  a  Prifoner  to  the  King's  Bench  by 
Habeas  Corpus. 

11,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26.  Warden  to  keep  books,  and  regifter 
commitments,  courts  from  whence,  declarations,  difcharges, 
writs  o?  Habeas  Corpus.  TipftafFand  Judge's  Clerk  to  keep  each 
a  feparate  book  of  Prifoners  delivered  up  at  a  Judge's  Chamber, 

27.  All  thofe  books,  except  the  Tipftaff^'s,  to  be  kept  in  the  Pub- 
lic Office  of  the  Clerk  of  the  Papers ;  acceflible  to  all  perfons  for 
copying  &c. 

28.  No  Clerk,  Ofiicer,  or  Servant  of  any  Judge  to  take  a  Fee 
on  occafion  of  a  petition  or  complaint,  founded  upon  the  fore- 
going Orders,  or  any  mifgovernment. 

29.  That  the  Warden  and  his  Officers  do  treat  the  feveral  Prifoners 
in  his  cuftody  with  all  tendernefs  and  humanity :  and  that  fuch 
Prifoners  do  behave  themfelves  toward  the  Warden  with  that 
fubmilTion  and  regard  which  the  law  requires. 


R.    EYRE  -i  C  ALEX.    DENTON 

ROB"^    PRICE         5  C  J.    FORTESCUE    A 


Y2  THERE 


i64  LONDON. 

FLEET.  THERE  is,  moreover,  a  little  Code  of  Laws,  eighteen  in  num- 

ber, enafted  by  the  Mafter's-fide  Debtors,  and  printed  by  D.  Jones 
1774.  It  eftabliflies  a  Prefident,  a  Secretary,  and  a  Committee, 
which  is  to  be  chofen  every  month,  and  to  confift  of  three  mem- 
bers from  each  Gallery.  Thefe  are  to  meet  in  the  Committee- 
room  every  Thurfday :  and  at  other  times  when  fummoned  by  the 
Cryer,  at  command  of  the  Prefident,  or  of  a  majority  of  their  own 
number.  They  are  to  raife  contributions  by  affeffment :  to  hear 
complaints  :  determine  difputes  :  levy  fines ;  and  feize  goods  for 
payment.  Their  Senfe  to  be  deemed  the  fenfe  of  the  whole  Houfe. 
The  Prefident  or  Secretary  to  hold  the  cafli ;  the  Committee  to  dif- 
pofe  of  it.  Their  Scavenger  to  wafli  the  galleries  once  a  week ;  to 
water  and  fweep  them  every  morning  before  eight ;  to  fweep  the  yard 
twice  every  week  ;  and  to  light  the  lamps  all  over  the  Houfe.  No 
perfon  to  throw  out  water  &c.  any  where  but  at  the  finks  in  the  yard. 
The  Cryer  may  take  of  a  Stranger  a  penny  for  calling  a  Prifoner  to 
him ;  and  of  a  Complainant  two-pence  for  fummoning  a  Special 
Committee.  For  blafphemy,  fwearing,  riot,  drunkennefs,-  &c.  the 
Committee  to  fine  at  difcretion :  for  damaging  a  lamp,  fine  a  fhil- 
ling.  They  are  to  take  from  a  New  Comer,  cw  the  firft  Sunday, 
befides  the  two  fliillings  garnish  to  be  fpent  in  wine,  one  Ihilling 
and  fix-pence  to  be  appropriated  to  the  ufe  of  the  Houfe. 

Common-side  Prifoners  to  he  confined  to  their  own  apartments^ 
and  not  to  aflbciate  with  thefe  law-makers,  nor  to  ufe  the  fame 
conveniences. 


NEW 


L     O     N     D     O     N..  165 


NEW  L     U     D     G     A     T     E, 


IN       B  I  S  H  O  P  G  AT  E-S  T  R  E  E  T, 


THIS  Prifon  for  Debtors  who  are  free  of  the  City,  for  Clergy-      Remarks. 
men,  Proclors  and  Attorneys,  was  formerly  a  Bridewell  to 
the  London  Work-houfe  adjoining. 

On  the  ground-floor  are,  a  long-roofn,  a  tap-room,  and  a  kitchen. 
In  each  of  them  is  a  flaircafe;  leading  firft  to  eleven  rooms  for 
Mafler-fide  Debtors — viz.  over  the  long-room,  a  fizeable  chamber, 
and  a  room  on  each  of  the  two  floors  above :  over  the  tap-room, 
four  fmall  rooms,  which  have  iron  bars  at  the  windows,  and  a  larger 
room  above  them :  over  the  kitchen,  a  fizeable  chamber,  and  two 
rooms  above.  The  Common-fide  Debtors  are  in  two  large  garrets, 
the  Foreji  and  Dock. 

The  Prifon  is  out  of  repair.  No  regard  has  been  paid  to  the  Adt, 
which  enjoins  white-walhing  &c.  A  fmall  Court-yard,  with  a 
Ciftern  for  river-water.  No  Infirmar)'.  The  Chapel  is  common  to 
the  Prifon  and  Work-houfe* 

The  City  allowance  is  ten  ftone  of  beef  a  week :  to  which  has 
been  added  fince  the  9th  of  February  1776,  a  penny  loaf  a  day  for 
each  Prifoner.     The  Lord  Mayor  and  Sheriffs  fend  annually  coals  : 

and 


i66  LONDON. 

NEW         and  MefT"-  Calvert  and  Co.  fend  from  the  Peacock-brewhoufe  weekly 
LUDCATE.     ^  generous  donation  of  two  barrels  of  fmall  beer.     Keeper's  falar)', 
/70:   Fees,  fee  Table.     He  lives  diftant;  but  the  Deputy  is  con- 
ftant  and  careful  in  his  attendance,  and  refpefted  by  the  Prifoners. 

1774,  April  27,  Prifoners    29 

1776,  March  7,  -         -31 

May    15,  -         -      -9 

Dec.    26,  -        -      13 


A     TABLEOF     FEES 
To  be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  his  Majefly's  Prifon  of  Ludgate. 

£.    S.    D. 

Every  Prifoner  Ihall  pay  at  his  or  her  coming  in  —  0:1:0 

Every  Prifoner  ftiall  pay  for  chamber  room,  bed  bedding-^ 

and  (heets,  in  the  beft  fide  called  the  Maller-fide,  being  ^    0:1:3 
two  in  a  bed,  each  per  week  —  —     -^ 

Every  Prifoner  on  the  fecond  lodging  called  the  Common-  -\ 

fide,  fliall  pay  for  ufe  of  chamber-rent,  bed,  bedding,  >    0:0:   if 
and  flieets,  two  in  a  bed  and  no  more,  each  per  night   J 

Every  Prifoner  who  at  his  own  defire  fhall  have  a  bed  to  -\ 

himfelf  in  any  of  the  beft  rooms  called  the  Mafter-fide  >    0:2:6 
(hall  pay  for  bed  bedding  and  iheets  per  week        —     J 

Every  Prifoner  who  at  his  own  defire  has  a  bed  to  himfelf  T 

in  the  fecond  lodging  or  Common-fide,  fhall  pay  for  r    0:0:3 
chamber  room,  bed,  bedding,  and  flieets  per  night       '' 

Every 


LONDON.  167 

£.    S.    D. 


Every  Prifoner  in  the  meaneft  ward,  who  at  his  own  defire") 
hath  a  bed  to  himfelf  fhall  pay  for  the  ufe  of  bedding  ?■ 
&c,  per  night  —  —  —      J 

Every  Prifoner  in  the  meaneft  ward,  two  in  a  bed  and  noT 
more,  for  the  ufe  of  bed  bedding  &c.  per  night    —     j 

If  the  Prifoners  find  their  own  bedding  (which  the  Keeper") 
Ihall  in  no  wife  hinder)  then  they  fhall  pay  for  chamber-  > 
room  if  more  beds  than  one  in  a  room,  each  per  week  ^ 

If  the  Prifoner  hath  a  room  to  himfelf,  and  provide  himfelf 
with  bed  and  bedding,  which  the  Keeper  is  in  no  fort ' 
to  hinder  him  of,  then  he  Ihall  pay  for  chamber-room  ' 
per  week        —  —  —  — 

The  Prifoners  inability  to  find  a  couch  and  to  pay  per  week       0:0: 
The  forementioned  were   figned   Feby  23.  1729  by 


Aldermen  To  the  Keepers  "^ 

B„ „„  ^.,,,,--.»TT^  for  Hatch-Fee  > 

ECHER  RAYMOND  ,.^,  C 

at  difcharge     j 

Alsop  eyre 

_  To  the  Turnkey  7 

Barnard  PENGELLY  ^     ..  i 

for  ditto    -     3 


The  date  fliews  that  thefe  Fees  were  adapted  to  the  old  Prifon, 
and  its  fundry  wards. 


ORDERED 

WHOSOEVER  on  the  Sabbath-day  fhall  be  abfent  from  Chapel 
either  at  morning  or  evening  fervice  which  ever  may  happen, 

unlefs 


NEW 
LUDGATE. 


i68 


NEW 
LUDGATE. 


LONDON, 

unlefs  ficknefs,  lamenefs  or  fome  other  reafonable  excufe  be 
made  appear  fufficiently  fatisfaftory,  fhall  pay  a  fine  of  Four- 
pence  into  the  hands  of  the  Steward  for  the  time  being,  for 
every  fuch  omiflion :  and  in  failure  thereof  not  to  be  admitted 
to  any  fharc  of  the  allowance  or  tranfient  benefaftions,  which 
the  following  week  may  produce. 


Signed 


B.  Whoever  is  not  in  Chapel 
before  the  fecond  Leflbn  is 
ended,  is  forfeited  as  above. 


James  Esdale. 


LIST      OF      BENEFACTORS 


To    the     PRISON     of    LUDGATE. 


QIR  Thomas  Grefham 
•^  Sit  Roger  Martin     - 
Sir  John  Peachy 
Sir  Thomas  Kneefworth 
Mr.  James  Smith     - 
Mr.  John  Draper     - 
Sir  William  Home 
Mr.  Robert  Ferebrace     - 
Lady  Eliz.  Maurice 
Sir  William  Peacock  or  \ 
Seacock     -     -       -  ■' 
Mr.    Thomas    Cottle    a~| 
hind  quarter    of  beef,  [ 


£. 

lO 
2 
O 
I 

o 
o 
o 
o 
I 


and  a  peck  of  oatmeal  i 
value      ...      -J 


1- 


5. 
o 
o 

5 
o 

3 
>3 

5 
6 
o 

10 


o  :  o 


D. 

o 
o 
o 
o 

4 
4 
o 


Carritd over       -    £,i%  :     3:4 


Brought  ever 
Lady  Mary  North  in  bread 
Mr.  William  Reaper 
Mr.  Thomas  Dawfon 
Mrs.  Cooke,  Widow   cf-j 
David  Cooke     -      -  3 
Mrs.      Margaret     Dane, 

18   ftone  of  beef  and 

fome  bread  value 
Mr.  John  Heydon  Aid" 
Lady  Mary  Ramfey 
Mr.  Peter  Blundell 
Mr.  John  Ben  net      - 
Mrs.  Holligrave,  Widow 
Mr.  Robert  Rogers 

Carried  ever       -    jC^s 


£• 

S. 

D. 

18  : 

3 

■  4 

3   : 

0 

:  0 

I    : 

0 

:  0 

0  : 

9 

:   0 

1 


3 

2 

4 
I 

o 

I 


o 

10 

o 
o 

S 
o 


o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 


12  :  4 

Brought 


LONDON. 


169 


£.     S.     D. 

Brought  over       -  -  35   :    12   :  4 

Mr.  Hugh  Offley     -  -  0:5:0 

Mrs.  Joan  Sanbeck  -  1:0:0 

Mr.  John  Symmonds  -  o  :     4:0 

Mr.  John  Marfh       -  -  0:5:0 

Mr.  John  Wooler  -  1:0:0 

Mr.  William  Parker  -  i   :   10  :  o 

Mr.  Thomas  Chapman  o  :     6:0 

Mr.  Richard  Jacob  -  2:0:0 

Mr.  James  Hodgfon  -  o  :   10  :  o 

Mr.  John  Kendrick  -  i   :    10  :  o 

Carrie^/  o-ver         -         jf  44  :     2:4 


Broiight  over 
Lady  Mary  Carew    - 
Mr.  John  Jackfon     - 
Sir  Ralph  Freeman 
Dr.  Lancelot  Andrews 
Sir  Thomas  Cullum 
George  Humble,  Efq. 
Mr.  Merrydith 
Mr.  John  Corbett 
Lady  Rich 
John  Holby,  Efq. 

Total    - 


4+  : 

2  : 
I    : 

s  •• 

S    : 

3  : 

1  : 

2  : 

30  : 
22   : 


;nt.  "^ 


S. 

2 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 

2 
10 

o 
o 


D. 

4 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 


NEW 
LUDGATE. 


;Ci29  :  14  :  4 


12  :  6 


Mrs.  Margaret  Symcott  every  eighth  week  five  IhilJings  worth  of 

penny  loaves,  i.  e.  annually  .... 

This  is  called  Eleanor  Gwynn's  Bread. 
Mr.  Thomas  Stretchley  every  third  year  £,z.  and  ^^4  to  difcharge 

two  Prifoners  every  5  th  year 
Mrs.    Eliz.    Miflbn    the    yearly    produce    of  ^200     3    per   cent 

Annuitys   for  meat  bread   and  coals 
Chamber  of  London  yearly  -  .  _  - 

Worlhipfull  Compy  of  Mercers  the  yearly  intereft  of  ^^45  :  4  :  i 

old  S.  S.  annuities,     about  -  .  . 

Total         -      ^141   :   16  :  4 


2  :  6 

7    •■   O 


The   Sums   are   called   in   my   Copy,    Yearly  lie.   Gifts  of  the 
refpeftive  Donors.     I  underftand  it  to  mean  Bequefts  for  ever. 


Z 


POULTRY 


l']0 


LONDON. 


POULTRY 


COMPTER. 


KEEPER,     Chrijlopber  Hayes,  who  purchafed  of  the  City  for  life 

and  has  fometimes  let  it. 
Salary,    none.         (See  Remarks.) 
Fees,     Debtors,     -    /o  :   15  :  8 
Felons,       -       o  :   13  :  4 
Tranfports,  taken  from  the  Old  Bailey  by  Mr.  Akerman. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.     Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,   a  penny  loaf  a  day.   (See  Remarks.) 
Felons,      a  penny  loaf  a  day. 

Garnilli,         Debtors,  ^0:4:  8, 
Felons,       0:1:6 

Number  of     -         -,      Debtors. 
1774,     April    26,         77       - 
1776,     March  12,         72 

May      15,         90 

Dec.       3,         53      - 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Dr.  rrujler. 

Duty  — Every  other  Sunday  evening.     (See  Remarks.) 
^lary,     I20. 

SURGEON,    None. 


It  is  called  Ward-dues 
for  Candles  &c. 

Felons  &c. 

10 

6 

ir 

o 


Remarks.  FOR  Mafter's-fide  Debtors  there  are  about  fifteen  rooms  between 
the  inner  and  outer  gates.  For  Common-fide  Debtors,  fix  wards 
within  the  inner  gate,  two  of  them  on  the  ground-floor,  viz.  the 

King's 


LONDON.  171 

King's  Ward,  in  which  were  twenty-four  Debtors ;  and  the  Prince's     poultry 

Ward,  nine  Debtors.     In  each  of  thefe  wards,  fome  Prifoners  (for     compter. 

want  of  more  foonri)  fleep  on  a  broad  fhelf  or  cabin  over  thofe  on 

the  lower  beds.     Above  thofe  wards  are  the  Middle  Ward,   in  it 

were  twenty  Debtors ;  and  the  Women's  Ward,  two  Debtors.    Above 

them  are  the  U'ppr  Ward,  eleven  Debtors  j    and  the  Jews  Ward*, 

four  Jew  Debtors.     Near  the  middle  ward,  on  the  fame  floor,  is  a 

clofe  darkifh  room  for  the  fick.     In  each  ward,  a  fire-place.     The 

rooms  are  out  of  repair :  and  no  regard  has  been  paid  to  the  late  Aft 

for  white-wafliing  &c.     but  the  Debtors  keep  the  floors  very  clean. 

The  yard  is  fmall,    but  that  alfo  is  clean:    the   water   conftantly 

running. 

The  Tap-room  is  in  the  Court-yard.  Adjoining  to  it  is  the 
Felons  Day-room,  the  Bell.  Their  Night-rooms,  one  for  men,  an- 
other for  women,  are  up  flair*.  But  the  women's  room  was  once 
occupied  for  a  work-fhop  by  a  Prifoner,  a  cooper  j  and  the  women 
flept  in  the  Bell  below.     No  flraw  or  bedding. 

Gn  one  fide  of  the  Court-yard  is  a  Chapel ;  with  a  narrow  gallery 
all  round  for  Mafler's-fide  Debtors.  A  man  who  is  not  in  orders 
preaches  on  Sunday  mornings  j  and  gives  the  Prifoners  books,  or  a 
little  money :  they  fpoke  of  him  refpedlfully.  The  Chapel,  and  in- 
deed the  whole  of  this  Prifon,  is  quite  out  of  repair. 

At  the  roof  of  the  Prifon,  all  round,  are  fpacious  leads,  on  which 
the  Mafler's-fide  Debtors  are  fometimes  allowed  to  walk :  but  then 
the  Keeper  is  with  them :  for  the  leads  communicate  with  the  ad- 

•  It  were  to  b«  wifhed  that  in  other  Prifons,  thofe  people  had  the  generous  and 
juft  indulgence  of  being  kept  feparate. 

Z  2  joining 


172  LONDON. 

POULTRY     joining  houfes,  one  of  which  affords  a  ready  efcape  from  fo  clofe  % 
COMPTER.     Prifonincafeoffire. 

Besides  the  penny  loaf  a  day,  which  is  from  the  Chamber  of 
London,  there  are  fome  Legacies :  and  the  Prifoners  (the  Debtors) 
have  alfo  from  the  Peacock-brewhoufe  (Mefl""-  Calvert's  and  Co.) 
a  kind  donation  of  two  barrels  of  fmall  beer  a  week. 

In  this  Prifon  eight  men  had  with  them  their  wiv^s  and  nineteen 
children.  The  other  Prifoners,  I  learned,  had  forty-four  wives  and 
one  hundred  and  forty-four  children,  not  in  the  Gaolt 

The  Claufes  of  the  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  are  not  hungup. 

The  Keeper  pays  the  City  £2°  ^  y^^^j  r^^t,  which  is  refunded  to 
hiin  for  the  Fees  of  the  pooreft  Prifoners. 

POULTRY     COMPTER     viz. 

A  TABLE  of  FEES  taken  by  the  Warden,  Gaoler,  or  Keeper  of 
the  Poultry  Compter  within  the  City  of  London  for  any  Prifoner 
or  Prifoners  Commitment  or  coming  into  Gaol,  or  Chamber-Rent 
there,  or  Difcharge  from  thence,  in  any  civil  action  fettled  and 
eftablifhed  the  15th  January,  in  the  3d  year  of  the  reign  of  King 
George  IL  and  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1729  purfuant  to  an  Adt 
of  Parliament  lately  made,  entitled  "  An  Aft  for  the  Relief  of 
Debtors  with  refpeft  to  the  Imprifonment  of  their  Perfons." 

£■    S.      D. 
Every  Prifoner  who  .it  his  own  defire  fhall  go  into  the  bcft-\ 

ward  on  the  Mafter-fide  (hall  pay  to  the  Keeper  for  his  >    o  :  3   r    o 

Entrance  Fee  —  —  —  J 

To  the  Turnkeys  for  fach  entrance  —  0:1:0 

Every  Prifoner  in  the  bcft  ward  on  the  Mafter-fide  to  pay ") 

f    o  :  6  :   10 
to  the  Keeper  for  his  Difchargiiig  Fee  —  j 

To 


LONDON, 


173 


3 


10 

o 


£'     S.     D.  POULTRY 

To  the  Turnkeys  upon  fuch  difcharge  —  0:1:0  COMPTER» 

Every  fuch  Prifoner   in  the  beft  ward  on  the  Mafter-fide,i 

who  at  his  own  defire  fhall  have  a  bed  to  himfelf  to  pay  | 

for  chamber-room  ufe  of  bed  bedding  and  Iheets,    to  j 

pay  to  the  Keeper  per  week  —  — 

Iftwoinabed,  and  no  more — for  chamber  room,  ufe  of" 

bed  bedding  and  Iheets  to  pay  to  the  Keeper  each  per  ( 

week  —  —  — 

In  the  fecond  ward  on  the  Mafter-fide  to  the  Keeper  for " 

their  entrance  fee  to  pay         —  — 

To  the  Keeper  on  their  difcharge         —  —  o  u  6 

To  the  Turnkeys  on  fuch  difcharge  —  0:2: 

Every  fuch  Prifoner  at  his  own  defire  fhall  have  a  bed  to  him  -j 

orherfelf  to  pay  for  chamber,  ufe  of  bed  bedding  and  >    0:2: 

Iheets  to  the  Keeper  per  week       —  —  -J 

If  two  in  a  bed  and  no  more  to  pay  for  chamber  room  ufe 

of  bed  bedding  and  Iheets,  each  per  week     — 
In  the  third  ward  commonly  called  the  fifteenpenny  ward  "J 

entrance  nothing,  when  difcharged  to  the  Keeper  ^ 

To  the  Turnkeys  on  fuch  difcharge  — 

Every  fuch  Prifoner  fhall  have  at  his   own  defire  a  bed  to- 

him,  or  herfelf  to  pay  to  the  Keeper  for  chamber  room  | 

for  the  ufe  of  bed  bedding  and  fheets,  per  week 
If  two  in  a  bed  and  no  more,  to  pay  for  chamber  room  ufe' 

of  bed  bedding  and  iheets,  each  per  week       — 
In  the  fourth   or   common  wiard,  for  entrance  and  lodging 

nothing 
When  difcharged  to  the  Keeper  —  *-  0:6:0 

To  the  Turnkey  on  fuch  difcharge    —  —  0:3:0 


WOOD^ 


0:1 


o  :  6 


7t 


J74  L     O     N    D     O     N. 

WOOD-STREET      COMPTER. 

KEEPER,     John  Kerby. 

Salary,    none.  (See  Remarks.) 

Fees,       Debtors,      -    ;^o  :   15  :  8 
Felons,        -       0:11:6 
Tranfports,  taken  from  the  Old  Bailey  by  Mr.  Akerman. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.     Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  7  ^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  ^  ^^^^  ^^^^  Remarks.) 
Felons,     ^ 

Garnifh,     ^0:1:2 

Number  of    -        -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,     March  i,  91     -  -       3 

J776,      12,  71     -  -     36 

May    10,  69     -  -       3 

1777,     Jan.    lo,  85     -  -     25 

CHAPLAIN,  Rev.  Mr.  Naijh. 
Duty  —  Sunday  (conflant). 
Salary,     ^^30. 

SURGEON,     None.      f^ee  Remarks. J 

Remarks.  THIS  Prifon,  built,  as  appears  by  infcription  on  tlie  front,  in 
1670,  has  only  a  fmall  Court-yard  or  Paflage  for  all  Prifoners. 
Many  apartments :  yet  but  two  rooms  for  Common-fide  Debtors : 
that  for  the  men,  which  is  their  day-room,  night-room,  and  kitchen, 
■with   a   copper   &c.    is   darli    and  dirty  j   about  thirty-five  feet  by 

eighteen. 


STREET 
COMPTER. 


LONDON.  175 

eighteen,  and  iixreen  feet  high;   far  too  fmall  for  the  number  of      wood- 

Prifoners ;  many  of  whom  fleep  in  twenty-three  beds  which  are  on 

three  flories  of  galleries,  or  broad  llielves.     At  one  of  my  vifits  there 

were  in  this  room   thirty-nine  Debtors ;   feven  of  them  had  their 

wives  and  children.     The  room  fwarms  with  bugs.     The  day  and 

night-room  for  Women  Debtors  is  more  lightfome :  in  it  were  only 

two  Prifoners.     Beyond  it  is  a  room  ruinous,  and  fit  for  no  ufe. 

For  Men  Felons  there  are  two  rooms :  and  two  for  Women  :  one 
of  thefe  is  a  dark  cell.  No  bedding  or  ftraw.  Thofe  who  choofe  a 
bed  pay  a  fhilling  a  night :  or  elfe  ten  fhillings  and  fix-pence 
fioorage,  and  three  lliillings  and  fix-pence  a  week. 

Near  thofe  four  rooms  are  twenty-three  rooms  for  Mafler's-fidc 
Debtors. 

In  the  Court-yard  is  the  Chapel :  and  under  it  the  Tap-room, 
down  fixteen  fteps. 

All  the  rooms  aforefaid  are  within  the  inner  gate;  between  which 
and  the  outer  gate  (i.  e.  in  the  Keeper's  houfe)  are  more  rooms  for 
Mafter's-fide  Debtors. 

The  Prifon  is  greatly  out  of  repair :  the  main  wall  on  one  fide^ 
fhored  and  propped.     No  Infirmary. 

The  Keeper  pays  to  the  Chamber  of  London  ^30  a  year  rentj 
which  is  repaid  him  for  Fees  of  the  pooreft  Prifoners.  He  alfo  pays 
Window-tax  ^5:1:0. 

I  LEARNED  from  him  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1773  his 
Prifoners  were  fickly,  and  eleven  died.  Since  that  time  the  Go- 
vernors of  the  General  Difpenfary  have  fhewn  a  kind  attention  to 
thefe  poor  people ;    and  ordered  their  Ph^fician,    Dr.  Lettfom,  to 

vifit 


176  LONDON. 

WOOD-       vifit  them.     He  is  efteemed  by  the  Prifoners :  and  at  my  laft  vifits, 
s'^^^"      all  were  well 

COMPT£R. 

The  allowance  of  a  penny  loaf  Is  from  the  Chamber  of  London. 
Debtors  (fome  of  whom  are  from  the  Court  of  Confcience)  have 
from  the  Peacock-brewhoufe  (Mefl'"-  Calvert  and  Co.)  a  donation 
of  two  barrels  of  fmall  beer  a  week  :  and  from  the  Sheriffs  thirty-two 
pounds  of  beef  on  Saturday.  Mr.  Taylor,  formerly  a  baker,  has  for 
fome  years  fent  tliem  weekly  a  large  leg  and  fliin  of  beef 

There  are  many  Legacies  for  Common-fide  Debtors,  who  receive 
them  quarterly.     The  annual  amount  is  ;^59  -.2:11. 

Some  years  fince,  there  came  once  a  fortnight  to  Common-fide 
Debtors  in  this  Prifon,  nine  ftone  of  beef,  and  fourteen  quartern 
loaves :  and  the  like  relief  to  other  Prifons  alfo.  The  Charitable 
Hand  was  concealed  4  till,  the  Donation  failing  on  the  death  of  the 
amiable  Princefs  Caroline ;  it  was  fuppofed  that  her  Highnefs  had 
been  the  generous  Benefadtrefs.  And  .upon  reprefenting  to  the  Lady 
who  had  been  Almoner  to  the  Princefs,  the  diftrefs  of  the  Prifoners, 
fhe  obtained  from  the  King  a  Renewal  of  the  Charity ;  which  was 
continued  during  his  Majefty's  life. 


]  A  TABLE  of  the  FEES  to  be  paid  by  the  Prifoners   in 

Wood-street    Compter. 


5  :    o 


>C-     S.      D. 
For  every  Debtor  that  hath  a  room  on  the  Mafter-fide,  t 

for  his  or  her  entrance  or  floorage        -       -         -        j 

For  his  or  her  rent   per  week   provided  the  Keeper   findT 

bed,  bedding  and  iheets         -        -      -      ,      -       3 


If 


LONDON. 


If  two  ill  one  room,  to  pay  weekly  each  of  them    -    - 
If  Debtor  or  Debtors  provide  their  own  bed  bedding,  &c.  - 
to  pay  for  one  or  two  in  one  room,  weekly  for  the  j 
room         -         -         .._.-».. 


ch  Debtor  on  his  or  her  difcharge 
on  the  Mailer- Side  ... 


For  every  Debtor  in  the  ward  called  the  fifteen  penny 
ward — if  the  Keeper  provide  bed  bedding  and  one 
fheet  —  weekly  -  .        .       .       .       - 

For  every  Debtor  on  the  Keeper's-Side,  on  his  or  her  en- 
trance there,  to  pay     -  .        -       -       .       - 

For  each  room — to  pay  weekly      .        .       -       .       -  o 

All  Perfons  in  any  of  the  Charity  Wards  to  pay  no  entrance,  T 
or  rent  -  -  _.-.-j 

For  every  Prifoner  committed  for  felony,  mifdemeanouror") 
aflault  on  his  or  her  difcharge,  (except  by  proclama-  r  o 
tion  at  a  Gaol  delivery,  then  nothing)  -       -       -^ 

For  the  copy  of  commitment  -  -      .      _  o 


c  o  :  u 


12 


o 

lO 


8 
6 


177 


£• 

S. 

D. 

WOOD- 

0  : 

I 

•■  i 

STREET 
COMPTER 

A  a 


BRIDE- 


178  LONDON. 


BRIDEWELL 


IN       BLACK-FRYARS. 


Remarks.     /   ■"^HIS   building    was  formerly   a   Palace,    near   St.  Bridget's 
i      (St.  Bride's)  Well }  from  whence  it  had  the  name  j  which, 
after  it  became  a  Prifon,  was  applied  to  other  Prifons  of  the  fame 
fort*.     It  was  given  to  the  City  by  King  Edward  VI.  in  1552. 

That  part  of  Bridewell  which  relates  to  my  fubjeA  has  wards  for 
men  and  women  quite  feparate. — The  men's  ward  on  the  ground- 
floor  is  a  day-room  in  which  they  beat  hemp ;  and,  down  a  ftep, 
their  night-room.  One  of  the  upper  chambers  is  fitting  up  for  an 
Infirmary. — The  women's  ward  is  a  day-room  on  the  ground-floor 
in  which  they  beat  hemp  j  and  a  night-room  over  it.  I  was  told 
that  the  chamber  above  this  is  to  be  fitted  up  for  an  Infirmary.  The 
fick  have,  hitherto,  been  commonly  fent  to  St.  Bartholomew's 
Hofpital.     All  the  Prifoners  are  kept  within  doors. 

The  women's  rooms  are  large,  and  have  oppofite  windows,  for 
frefh  air.  Their  ward,  as  well  as  the  men's,  has  plenty  of  water: 
and  there  is  a  Hand-Ventilator  on  the  outfide,  with  a  tube  to  each 
room  of  the  women's  ward.  This  is  of  great  fervice,  when  the  rooms 
are  crowded  with  Prifoners,.  and  the  weather  is  warm. 

The  Prifoners  are  employed  by  a  Hemp-dreflTer,   who  has   the 

•  Johnfon's  Diftionary, 

profit 


> 


LONDON. 


179 


profit  of  their  labour,  an  apartment  in  the  Prifon,  and  a  falaiy  of  bride- 
j^i4.  I  generally  found  them  at  work:  they  are  provided  for,  fo  as  well. 
to  be  able  to  perform  it.  The  hours  of  work  are  in  winter  from 
eight  to  four;  in  fummer  from  fix  to  fix,  dedufling  meal-times. 
The  Steward  is  allowed  eight-pence  a  day  for  the  maintenance  of 
each  Prifoner ;  and  contracts  to  fupply  them  as  follows — On  Sunday, 
Monday,  Tuefday  and  Thurfday,  a  penny  loaf,  ten  ounces  of  drefled 
beef  without  bone,  broth,  and  three  pints  of  ten  lliilling  beer :  on 
Wednefday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  a  penny  loaf,  four  ounces  of 
cheefe  or  fome  butter,  a  pint  of  milk-pottage,  and  three  pints  of  ten 
fliilling  beer. 

The  Porter  or  Keeper  is  John  Brown.  Salary  j^8o ;  no  Fees. 
To  the  women's  ward  there  is  a  Matron,  Sarah  Lyon,  Salary  (JiO. 
She  takes  care  of  the  fick,  both  men  and  women ;  and  is  allowed  a 
fhilling  a  day  for  thofe  that  are  put  on  the  fick  diet. 

In  Bridewell  is  a  Public  Chapel :  the  Prifoners  go  thither  on 
Sunday  morning  (except  fuch  as  are,  in  a  manner,  deftitute  of  ap- 
parel) :  the  men  and  women  feparated  from  each  other,  and  from 
the  refl:  of  the  congregation. 

On  the  walls  of  the  Hall  and  Court-room  are  hung  up  many 
Tables  of  very  confiderable  Gifts  and  Legacies  to  this  Hofpital,  in 
common  with  others :  fufficient,  one  would  think,  to  have  made 
this  Prifon  more  commodious,  by  providing  feveral  work-rooms, 
and  lodging-rooms,  for  keeping  the  Prifoners  more  feparate. 

In  winter  they  have  fome  firing.  The  night-rooms  are  fupplied 
with  ftraw.  No  other  Prifon  in  London  has  any  fl;raw  or  other 
bedding. 

Aa  2  TO 


i8o  LONDON. 


3R  IDE- 

TO 

this   Prilbn 

were   c 

:ominittcd. 

WELL. 

In  the  year     - 

■     1772, 

- 

Prifoners 

1709 

I773> 

- 

- 

777 

I774> 

- 

- 

808 

i775> 

- 

- 

1084 

I  found  there  in  1776,  March  13,    Prifoners  -    20 

May        ij    -  -  7 

Dec.       3,   -  -         24 

At  my  laft  vifit  the  Infirmaries  were  finiftied. 


THE    Bridewell  Boys    are   upon  a  quite  different  Foundation, 
and  foreign  to  my  fubjed. 


NEW 


LONDON.  i8i 


NEW     PRISON     CLERKENWELL, 

GAOLER,     James  Elmore. 

Salary,     ^30.     (See  Remarks.) 

Fees,  -  ^0:7:0 

Tranfports,  the  Expence. 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.     The  Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     a  penny  loaf  a  day. 
Garnifh,     -    ^0:1:4. 

Number  of        -  -         Felons  &c. 

1774,     April  22,  -         87 

1776,     March  5,  -         37 

May    10,  -         83 

Nov.   13,  -         58 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Richards. 

Duty— Sunday  twice  j  Tuefday  and  Thurfday  Prayers. 
Salary,     £t^o. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Gibbes. 

Salary,    ^^60,     for  this  Prifon  and  the  Bridewell. 


THIS  PRISON,  built  in  1775,  is  much  more  commodious  than     Remarks. 
the  former  of  the  fame  name.     Over  the  gate-way  are  two  rooms, 
called    Night-Charges,    for  Prifoners  brought  in  the  night,    to  be 
examined  by  a  Magiftrate  next  day.     In  one  of  them  are  Keeper's 

beds. 


i82  L     O     N    D     O     N. 

NEW  PRISON'  beds.  From  that  outer  gate  you  pafs  on  to  the  gate  of  the  Men's 
Court-yard  on  the  right  hand,  and  of  the  Wonaen's  to  the  left.  To 
each  you  defcend  feven  fteps.  In  the  Men's  Court  is  a  large  open 
flied,  which  is  their  day-room.  The  roof  too  low  for  the  depth :  it 
has  a  chimney.  Their  night-ward,  into  which  they  are  not  per- 
mitted to  go  in  the  day-time,  that  the  air  in  it  may  be  cool  and 
frefli,  is  a  houfe  on  the  other  fide  of  the  yard,  divided  into  two 
parts.  Each  part  has  a  room  on  the  ground-floor,  a  chamber,  and 
an  upper  room.  In  one  part  each  of  thefe  rooms  is  thirty  feet  by 
thirty-one :  in  the  other  part,  thirty  by  twent\- :  near  ten  feet 
high :  well  planked  all  over :  no  chimneys.  For  the  purpofe  of 
tranfmitting  air,  every  room  has  in  front,  to  the  yard,  two  windows ; 
and  backwards  three,  with  iron  bars,  and  fhuttcrs ;  but,  very  pro- 
perly, no  glafs.  Barrack-beds  in  every  room ;  but  in  each  of  the 
two  chambers  and  in  one  of  the  lower  rooms  are  other  beds  for  thofe 
who  pay  three  fhillings  and  fix-pence  a  week  :  when  thefe  beds  are 
occupied,  no  Prifoners  fleep  on  the  barrack-beds  in  thofe  rooms. 
In  this  Court  is  a  lock-up  room  for  the  unruly.  All  the  ftairs  are 
ftone. 

On  one  fide  of  the  Women's  Court  is  their  -day-room ;  with  a 
fire-place.  Their  night-rooms  are — one  on  the  ground-floor  ranging 
with  the  day-room,  and  called  the  Low  Ik'aj-d  -,  twent)'-one  feet  by 
feventeen,  and  ten  feet  high — a  chamber  over  it  of  the  fame  fize — 
and  a  paflage  or  gallery  over  the  day-room  :  on  the  back  of  it  are 
five  cabins  or  cupboards,  each  ten  feet  by  five  feet  eight  inches, 
with  a  barrack-bed  for  two  prifoners,  Thefe  clofets  will  be  very 
unwholefome  ;  having  no  air  but  from  grates  over  the  doors  into  the 
gallery.     The  two  larger  night-rooms  have  windows  only  in  front. 

Iron 


LONDON.  183 

Iron  bars  and  fhutters :  no  glafs.     The  windows  of  both  the  Men's  new  prison 
and  Women's  Ward  are  (as  they  fhould  be)   too  high  for  them  to    clerken- 

,      ,  WELL. 

look  out. 

The  ground-floors,  and  the  Men's  Court-yard,  are  paved.  The 
Women's,  they  told  me,  is  to  be  paved  alfo. 

There  is  a  Pump  in  each  Court ;  and  the  New-River  water  is 
laid  in  :  but  not  diredlly  from  the  MaifTf  and  conftantly  on,  as  it  is 
at  tKe  neighbouring  Prifon. 

A  CHAPEL,  almofl  finifhed  5  which  is  to  be  common  to  this  Prifon 
and  the  Bridewell.  Men  of  the  two  different  prifons  to  be  on  oppofite 
fides  below  -,  and  women  in  oppofite  galleries.  There  is  a  room 
above  it  which  lowers  the  ceiling.  This  circumftance,  and  the  chapel 
not  being  large,  will  endanger  its  being  off^enfive. 

The  Tap-Room  is  near  the  outer  gate.  Prifoners  do  not  come  in- 
to it ;  but  take  their  liquor  at  a  wicket  made  for  that  purpofe  in  the 
wall,  that  feparates  ir  from  them.  No  infirmary :  no  bedding  or 
ftraw. 

A  MATRON  has  ,^5  falary  out  of  the  Gaoler's  £2^-  I"  J'^^y  '775 
the  Juftices  thought  fit  to  raife  his  fees  from  5  s.  6  d.   to  7  s. 

A  GENEROUS  Benefadtor  (a  falefman  in  Smithfield)  often  fends  the 
Prifoners  l^eef  and  bread.  They  have  occafionally  other  fmall  dona- 
tions. 

In  the  gate-way  is  a  board  on  which  is  painted  as  follows. 


MIDDLE- 


i84  L     O     N     D     O     N. 


NEW  PRISON 

CLERK.EN- 

W£LL. 


MIDDLESEX. 


A     TABLE      OF      FEES 


Taken  by  the  Keeper  of  New-Prison  Clerkenvvell. 


■£'   S.   D. 

For  keeping  and  difcharging  every  perfon   committed  by  7 

r  ■  f    o  :  6  :  o 

warrant  or  commitment  —  —  J 

For  turning  the  key  at  every  fuch  perfon's  difcharge         —  o  :    i   :  o 

For  going  with  any  perfon  before  a  juftice                         —  o  :    i   :  o 

For  a  copy  of  commitment            —                 ~              —  0:1:4 

Prifoners  brought  in  by  confiables  of  the  night,  and  carried -5 

before  J ullices  of  the  Peace  and  difcharged,  to  pay  two  >  0:2:0 

fliillings  for  his  or  her  difcharge  —  —  J 

No  fpirituous  liquors  allowed  to  be  brought  in  here. 


CLERKEN- 


LONDON. 


X85 


CLERKENWELL      BRIDEWELL, 

KEEPER,     Edward  HaU. 

Salary,    none.       (See  Remarks.) 

Fees,       -        -        £0  -.']•.  o 

Tranfports,  taken  from  Court  by  Mr.  Akerman, 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.     Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     a  penny  loaf  a  day. 
Garnifh,     -    ^0:1:4 


Number  of    -        -         -     Prifoners. 

1774,     April  22, 

87 

1776,     March  8, 

n 

May    10, 

113 

Nov.    13, 

136 

i777>     Jan.    10, 

108      (See  Remarks.) 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Richards. 

Duty — Thurfday. 

Salary 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Gibbes, 

Salary,     (See  Ne-w  Prifon.) 

OVER  the  Gate,  two  new  rooms  for  Night-Charges,  as  at  the    Remarks, 
New  Prifon.     In  the  Prifon  men  and  women  have  feparate  Court- 
yards and  Wards.     The  men  have  in  their  Court-yard  three  fheds  for 

B  b  day- 


iS6  L     O     N     D     O     N. 

CLERKtN-     day-rooms:  one  fix  feet  by  fixtecn,  the  other  nvo  fix  by  ten  each ; 
^^'•''        full  ciffht  feet  high.     Their  night-rooms  oppofitc  on  the  ground- 

BRIDEWELL.  .  T  ,        ^ft-      i 

floor,  one  for  1-ines,  and  one  for  other  Oftenders,  arc  about  twenty 
feet  by  fourteen  cacli  i  with  barrack-beds.  One  of  them  was  fo 
crowded,  that  fome  Prifoncrs  flept  in  hammocks  hung  to  the  ceiling. 
Over  thefc  night-rooms  arc  chambers  with  beds, for  ihole  who  pay 
three  fliillings  and  fix-pence  a  week.  In  another  part  of  the  )-ard  is 
a  Hemp-lhop  or  Work-lhop :  through  it  you  pafs  to  fix  little 
Work-fliops  for  f:\ulty  Apprentices  j  feven  feet  by  three  and  a  lulf 
each :  fronting  thefc  aix  their  l\\  night-rooms,  rather  larger  than  tlie 
fliops ;  all  on  the  ground-floor. 

1\  the  \V omen's  Court  are  three  flieds  or  day-rooms;  fame  fize  as 
thofe  of  the  men  j  with  a  hcmp-fliop  or  work-fliop.  Over  this,  and 
the  men's  work-lhop,  is  a  long  gallery  or  paflage ;  on  the  back  of 
which  are  twelve  dark  unwholfomc  night-rooms  for  wonien ;  nine 
feet  by  feven  each,  and  teji  aiid  a  half  high :  in  fome  of  them  arc 
beds  for  thofe  who  pay. 

The  Prifon  is.  out  of  repair.  It  has  not  been  To  much  as 
white-waflied  for  years:  but  in  November  1776  the  rooms  were 
clean,  and  but  one  perfon  fick ;  a  woman  who  lay  on  tlie  floor.  No 
rtraw.  No  Infinnar}'.  I  faw  but  few  at  work:  fometimcs  none  at 
all.     A  Matron  has  ^^5  a  year. 

The  Koeivr  pays  Window-tax j  and  ^^2  a  jtar  for  New-River 
water;  which  is  diretflly  from  the  Maixy  and  alwaA^s  ov.  Befides 
this  they  have  good  water  at  a  pump  in  each  court-yard. 

The  Keeper  had  a  Salary  of  ^50;  but  in  July  1775  the  Juftrices 
took  ofi'  the  Salary,  and  augmented  the  Fees  from  five  iliiUings  and 

fix- 


LONDON.  187 

fiz-pcncc  to  feven  (hilling*.     At  the  fame  time,  in  liaj  of  Fee*  from    ctzzr.zu' 
Acquitted  Prifoners,  which  were  cancelled  by  the  late  A£t,    thr/       ^'fc*''- 
paid  the  Keeper  at  the  rate  of /^  20  a  year  from  the  time  tr/hcn  that 
Act  took  place. 

To  this  Bridewell,  among  Criminals,  arc  committed  Dthtr,r% 
from  the  Court  of  Confcience :  they  are  difcharged  after  fcrtty  dayj. 
Of  thefe,  at  nrty  laft  vifit,  there  were  three. 

O?  the  one  hundred  and  eight  in  January  laft,  above  thirty  were 
Fines,  that  is.  Criminals  committed  for  a  term  of  year«,  to  ftve  or 
fix.  Some  of  thefe,  ar»d  of  the  others,  were  fjck.  They  complained 
to  me  of  fore  feet,  which  the  Turnkey  laid  were  quite  black.  The 
fick  were  for  the  moft  part  women  of  the  pooreft  (on  -,  act  able  to 
pay  for  beds.  There  v/tre,  in  the  whole,  near  as  many  wo 
pnibnertat  men. 

Or  late  they  have  made  the  men  and  women  change  wards  and 
couru;  thoie  in  which  the  women  were  be^e  being  thought 
"ftrongeft. 


MuUU/ex.      i%    T  the  General  Quarter  Seflions  of  the  Peace—— 
./jL  holden  in  and  for  iht  County  of  Middlesex  at 
Hick.%'s  Hail — (oy  Ai^oununent)- — 13th  of  July— —i^th  year-— 
of  GEORGE  m.  ace 


Bbi  A  TABLE 


i88 


LONDON. 


CLERKEN-        A  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  at  the  Houfe  of  Corredion 

WELL 
BRIDEWELL.  at    ClERKENWELL. 


For  keeping  and  difcharging  every  Prifoner  committed  by 

Warrant,  and  turning  the  key  at  every  fuch  Prifoner's  r     o 
difcharge  —  —  — 

Fpr  a  Copy  of  every  Commitment         —  —  o 

For  going  with  any  Prifoner  before  a  Juftice  —  o 

Prifoners  brought  in  by  Conftables  of  the  Night  and  carried ") 
before  a  Juftice        —  —  —     J 


£.    S.    D. 


7  :  o 

I  :  4 

I  :  o 

4  ••  0 


By  the  Court, 


Butler, 


WHITE 


LONDON.  289 


WHITE     CHAPEL      PRISON, 

FOR       DEBTORS. 

THIS  is  a  Prifon  for  the  Liberty  and  Manor  of  Stepney ;  and    Remarks 
Hackney.     The  fon"ner  includes,  by  a  printed  Lift  which  I 
have,    towns,  pariflies,  villages,  ftreets,  lanes,  &c.    to   the  number 
of  forty-fix  i    and   was   granted     by    King  Edward  VI,    to   Lord 
Wentworthj  and  his  Heirs  for  ever. 

In  it  are  confined  thofe  whofe  debts  are  above  ^2,  and  under  j^^. 
The  Mafter's-fide  Prifoners  have  four  fizeable  chambers,  fronting  the 
road ;  i.  e.  two  on  each  ftory.  They  pay  two  fliillings  and  fix-pence 
a  week  J  and  lie  two  in  a  bed  ;  two  beds  in  a  room.  The  Common- 
fide  Debtors  are  in  two  long  rooms  in  the  Court-yard,  near  the 
Tap-room.  Men  in  one  room,  women  in  the  other:  the  Court- 
yard in  common.  They  hang  out  a  begging-box  from  a  little  clofet 
in  the  front  of  the  Houfe ;  and  attend  it  in  turn.  It  brings  them 
only  a  few  pence  a  day :  and  of  this  pittance  none  partake  but  thofe 
who  at  Entrance  have  paid  the  Keeper  two  Ihil lings  and  fix-pence  ; 
and  treated  the  Prifoners  with  half  a  gallon  of  beer.  The  laft  rime  I 
was  there  no  more  than  three  had  purchafed  this  privilege. 

The  Prifon  is  out  of  repair.  The  Keeper,  George  Garred,  is  an 
Officer :  he  pays  Rent  £10  to  the  Lady  of  the  Manor ;  and  keeps 
the  Tap:  Window-tax  above  ^3.  Fees  ^To  :  8  :  i.  No  Table:  but 
in  November  laft  I  faw  a  paper  hung  up,  on  which  was  written  as 
follows : 

A  TABLE 


iga 


LONDON. 


WHITE         A  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  this  Prifon. 

CHAPEL. 

£.    S.     D. 
For  the  difcharge  of  ever)'  pt rfon  upon  any  civil  aftion, ")     o  •  8  •   i 


procefs  or  execution  — 

r-nde,9 


For  every  perfon  who  choofes  to  lay  on  the  Mafter-fide,  \     ^  . 


for  the  firit  night  —  — 

For  every  perfon  who  choofes  to  lie  on  the  Mafter-fide  ")     „  .   ,  .  /: 
after  the  firft  night  to  pay  every  week  —  j 

George  Garred  Keeper  loth  Auguft  1776. 

At  the  fame  time  I  faw  another  paper  intitled  Rules  atid  Orders  to 
be  cb/erved  in  this  Prifon.  It  is  dated  Aug.  6.  1776.  The  firft  Rule 
is  "  That  every  perfon  who  comes  into  this  Prifon  as  a  Prifoner, 
(hall  pay  for  his  GarnijJ)   two  fhillings   and  ten-pence  halfpenny." 

The  Claufes  of  the  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  are  hung  up. 

At  my  firft  vifit  there  were  on  the  Common-fide  two  Prifoners 
in  hammocks,  fick  and  very  poor. — No  Chaplain.  A  compaffionate 
Man,  who  is  not  a  regular  Clergyman,  fometimes  preaches  to  them 
on  Sunday ;  and  gives  them  fome  fmall  relief. 

Lady  Townsend  fends  a  Guinea  twice  a  year,  which  her  Servant 
diftributes  equally  among  the  Prifoners. 

As  Debtors  here  are  generally  very  poor,  I  was  furprized  to  fee 
once  ten  or  twelve  noify  men  at  fkittles ;  but  the  Turnkey  faid  they 
were  only  vifitants.  I  found  they  were  admitted  here  as  at  another 
public  houfe.     No  Prifoners  were  at  play  with  them. 

1774,     April  27,     Prifoners  25 

1776,  May      7,       -       -       23 
Nov.    13,       -       -       20 

1777,  Jan.       8,       -       -      27 

TOWER 


LONDON.  191 

TOWER      HAMLETS     GAOL, 

IN       WELL-CLOSE      S  QJJ  ARE. 

THIS  Prifon  is  at  a  Public-houle,  kept  by  an  honeft  Swede,  Remark?. 
who  is  Gaoler.  There  is  a  Court-room  in  the  Houfe  for  the 
Tower  Hamlets.  The  Prifon-yard  is  one  hundred  and  fixteen  feet 
by  eighteen,  latticed  over  head.  At  one  end,  are  two  large  rooms  ; 
of  which  little  ufe  has  been  made  fince  the  laft  war ;  when  French 
Prifoners  were  kept  in  them.  The  prefent  Prifon-rooms  are  towards 
the  other  end  of  the  yard :  on  the  ground-floor  is  a  day-room  or 
clofet  about  five  feet  and  a  half  by  three  and  a  half^  with  a  chimney. 
Up  ftairs  are  three  night-rooms.  The  Prifon  is  out  of  repair,  and 
not  fecure.  Keeper  no  falary.  Fees,  £0  :  ^  :  i.  No  Table.  Al'- 
lowance,  a  penny  a  day.     No  ftraw. 

1774,  April  29,  Prifoner  i 
1776,  March  9,  -  -  o 
May    17,       -       -       I 


St.     CATHARINE'S     PRISON, 

FOR       DEBTORS. 

THIS  Prifon,  rebuilt  about  {even  years  ago,  is  a  fmall  Houfe     Remarks 
of  two  ftoriesj  two  rooms  on  a  floor.     In  April  1774  there 
was  a  Keeper,  but  no  Prifoners.     I  have  fince  that  called  two  or 
three  times ;  and  always  fouad  the  Houfe  uninhabited. 

THE 


192 


WESTMINSTER. 


THE 


SAVOY. 


fiEMARKs.  /  I  "A  HIS  Pdlbn  for  Soldiers,  has  two  rooms  called  the  Guard 
1  Rooms;  becaufe  in  them  are  confined  Offenders  who  are 
of  the  King's  Guards.  The  remainder  of  the  building  near  the  gate 
is  the  Keeper's  Houfe.  On  the  oppofite  fide  of  the  yard,  is  a  large 
room  down  five  fleps,  the  Hall:  the  rooms  over  it  ufelefs.  On  the 
left-hand  fide  of  the  ^ard  is  another  hall,  not  fo  large :  at  each  end 
of  it  is  a  room  with  barrack  bedfteads  and  beds ;  both  rooms  very 
clofe  and  unhealthy.  Over  them  are  other  barrack-rooms,  fome- 
what  more  airy :  one  of  them.  No.  4,  is  tolerable,  and  has  oppofite 
windows.  There  is,  befides,  the  Black  Hole,  the  Condemned  Hold, 
the  Cock  Pit,  and  feveral  other  parts  of  this  irregular  building, 
which  I  pafs  over. 

March  15,  1776,  there  wtre  1 1 9  Prifoners  j  of  whom  49  were 
Tranfports.  I  faw  many  fick  and  dying.  The  Gaol  was  fo  infected 
by  them,  that  the  Diflemper  has  been  caught  there  by  many  fince : 
and  if  it  be  not  thoroughly  purified,  it  will  defl:roy  many  more. — 
The  whoLe  is  indeed  much  out  of  repair  i  hardly  any  part  of  it 
fecure. 

May  25,  Prifoners  37.  Many  of  them  fick  of  the  Gaol-Diftemper, 
in  the  rooms  where  I  faw  the  fick  and  dying  in  March. — Keeper, 
Captain  Jack/on:  Salary,  jTjo  :  no  Fees:  he  pays  Land-tax, 
Window-tax,  Water,  &c. 


TOTHILL- 


WESTMINSTER* 


TOT  HILL-FIELDS     BRIDEWELL. 

KEEPER,     George  Smith. 

Salary,  ;^50,  paying  the  Widow  of  the  former  Keeper  ^^20. 

Fees,       0:5:2. 

Tranfports,  taken  by  Mr.  Akerman, 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   a  penny  loaf,  and  a  penny  a  day  each. 
Garnifh,       ^^o  :   i  :  4. 


^n 


Number  of      - 

Prifoners. 

1774,     April  22, 

38 

1775,     March  4, 

109 

1776,     March  6, 

86 

May     3, 

75 

1777,     Jan.      8, 

1 10 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Glover. 

Salary,      ^lo. 

THIS  Prifon  has — For  men,  two  day-rooms  and  three  night-  Remarks. 
rooms — For  faulty  apprentices,  five  fmall  rooms — For  women,  a 
day-room,  and  four  night-rooms.  All  the  night-rooms  have  bar- 
rack-beds. They  are  conftantly  wafhed  every  dayj  and  are  quite 
wholefome.  The  Prifoners  wafh  their  hands  and  faces  every  morning 
before  they  come  for  their  allowance.     No  flraw.     No  Infirmary. 

Co  A  little 


194 


WESTMINSTER. 


TOTHiLL-    A  little  room  ufed  as  a  Surgery.     A  Chapel,  in  which  Mr.  Srhith 
FIELDS       reads  a  Chapter,  and  part  of  the  Prayer-Book  every  morning. 

BRIDEWELL. 

The  women  fhoiild  have  another  day-room :  and  one  of  the 
day-rooms  for  men  fhould  be  enlarged.  There  would  then  be  lefs 
quarreling  among  them :  and  Prifoners  who  are  now  idle  might 
be  employed.  The  Court-yards  adjacent  might  alfo  be  enlarged. 
All  the  rooms  for  women  and  their  court-yard,  and  the  men's 
night-rooms  would  be  more  airy  if  the  Garden  Pales  were  fet  far- 
ther off".  I  know  Mr.  Smith  would  with  pleafure  fee  part  of  his 
Garden  facrificed  to  thefe  Improvements.  He  pays  Window-tax 
^2:4:  o,  and  Water  £1.  Over  the  Gate  is  a  paper  with  this  in- 
fcription  :  "  No  perfon  admitted  into  this  Prifon  on  a  Sunday  after 
nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  five  in  the  evening." 

In  my  laft  vifit,  there  were  among  the  Felons,  two  Debtors  from 
the  Court  of  Confcience :  one  for  /^o  :  17  :  6,  the  other  for  ^^o  :  14 :  i. 

FEES  allowed  for  the  Governor  of  Tothill-fields-Bridewell, 
as  by  Order  of  Court  January  Seflions  1772. 

C-   S.    D. 

For  Commitment  and  Difcharge  of  a  Prifoner  by  Warrant         0:4:2 
For  the  Turnkey  —  ^  —         0:1:0 

Copy  of  Commitment  ^  —  —  0:1:4 

For  a  Night's  Charge  ^  —  —  0:1:0 


Signed  in  open  Court  by 


James  Fielding 
George  S.  Bradshaw 
George  Ried 
Aarok  Lamb 

WEST. 


WESTMINSTER.  .195 


WESTMINSTER     GATE-HOUSE. 

THIS  Prifon,  the  property  of  the  Dean  and  Chapter,  is  over  Remarks. 
two  gate-ways.  It  has  three  floors,  five  rooms  on  each ;  in 
which  have  been  fonnetimes  near  a  hundred  Prifoners  :  but  it  is 
now  fo  ruinous,  that  none  are  fent  to  it.  All  are  committed  to 
Tothill-fields  Bridewell,  which,  in  confequence,  is  overcrowded ; 
and  befides  (as  was  there  noted)  Debtors,  even  from  the  Court  of 
Confcience,  are  confined  at  night,  (as  well  as  in  the  day-time)  with 
Criminals  :  which  is  contrary  to  the  flatute  of  a2d  and  23d  Car.  II. 

I  HAVE  from  the  very  old  Keeper  the  particulars  of  Rent,  Fees 
&c.  but  as  the  Prifon  is  now  ufelefs,  I  will  not  tranfcribe  them. 


N.  B.  Since  writing  the  above  the  Gate-Houfe  is  taken  down. 


Cc2  THE 


196 


S   O    U   T   H   W  A   R   K. 


THE     KING'S    BENCH     PRISON, 

FOR       DEBTORS. 

MARSHAL,  Thomas  Thomas,  Efq. 

Deputv  Marshal,   Thomas  Marfon,   Efq. 

Salary 

Fees,     -     See  Table. 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.  The  Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  none. 
Garnifh,       ^^o  :  2  :  o. 

Number       -         -       In  the  Houfe.     In  the  Rules.. 
1774,    April  26,     -     324     -       -      100 
1776,     Jan.    28,     -     364     -       -        80 
May   --    (See  Remarks.) 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Evans. 

Duty  — Sunday  once  ;  the  Sacrament  once  a  month. 
Salary,  jTo  ;  2  :  o  on  every  Commitment. 

SURGEON,    None. 


Remarks.         THIS  PRISON  is  part  Old  Buildings,  part  New.. 

The  Old  Buildings  are — ACoffee-roomjuft  within  the  Gate: — and 
a  Street  called  Kirg-Jlrcct.  On  the  right  hand  is  the  Tap-houle ;  and 
four  houfes  for  Prifoncrs ;  each  confifting  of  a  ground-floor,  and  two 

floors 


S   O   U   T   H   W  A   R   K. 


197 


floors  of  chambers ;  four  rooms  on  each  floors  near  ten  feet  Iquare,  king's 
and  feven  high.  On  the  left  hand  fide  of  the  ftreet  is  the  Chapel  j  bench.. 
and  fix  houfes  for  Prifoners  J  of  equal  depth  with  the  former  houfes: 
but  the  back-rooms  have  not,  as  the  former  have,  communication 
with  the  fore-rooms.  At  the  hither  end  of  the  fore-rooms,  on  the 
ground-floor,  is  a  common  Kitchen,  much  too  fmall.  The  Cook, 
a  Prifoner,  has  the  room  over  it.  Thefe  houfes  alfo  have  ground- 
rooms,  and  two  floors  of  chambers.  All  the  rooms  fronting  King- 
ftreet,  and  the  whole  of  the  houfes  on  the  other  fide  the  way,  are  for 
Mafter-fide  Debtors  j  who  pay  for  each  room  unfurnilhed  a  fliilling 
a  week. 

The  back  part  of  the  left  hand  Row  is  the  Common-fide  r  the- 
doors  in  the  back  front.  The  firfl:  room  on  the  ground-floor  they 
call  their  Court-room.  The  twc  houfes  at  the  farther  end  have  fix 
rooms  each,  for  Crown-Debtors  and  Fines  j  and  are  called  Crown- 
Court.  The  reft  of  this  range  on  all  the  three  floors  is  for  Common- 
fide  Debtors. 

At  the  farther  end  of  King-ftreet,  in  a  fmall  Court  inclofed  from 
the  reft  of  the  yard,  is  a  building  called  the  State-house;  confift- 
ing  of  ground-floors,  and  two  floors  of  chambers;  four  fizeable 
rooms  on  each  floor ;  total  twelve.  A  Debtor  who  choofes  to  be 
here,  pays  the  Marflial  eight  to  ten  guineas  for  his  whole  time  >  be- 
fides  a  fliilling  a  week,  like  other  Mafter-fide  Debtors.. 

All  thefe  old  buildings  are  out  of  repair. 

The  New  Buildings  are— Firft,  a  houfe  at  the  gate  for  the  Turn- 
key. The  chambers  are  very  convenient ;  and  let  at  prefent  to  a 
Prifoner  who  pays  a  very  high  rent. — But  the  principal  new  building 
is  at  the  farther  end  of  the  yard.    The  two  parts  of  it  form  a  right 

angle. 


198  S  O   U  T   H  W  A  R  K. 

K I N  g's  angle.  One  part  is  four  houfes,  with  four  ground  rooms  to  each  ; 
•  BENCH.  jjjjj  jj^g  {lime  number  of  chambers  on  each  of  the  three  floors  above  : 
total  fixty-four.  The  rooms  are  about  thirteen  feet  by  eleven,  and 
about  eight  feet  high.  The  other  part,  (the  wing)  is  built  as  the 
Fleet  Prifon;  but  more  airy  and  commodious.  It  has  the  fame 
number  of  floors  as  the  other  part.  On  each  floor  is  a  paflage  feven 
feet  and  a  half  wide,  and  feventy-three  and  a  half  long :  rooms  on 
each  fide  the  pafl"age,  eleven  on  each  floor,  total  forty-four  j  each 
room  thirteen  feet  and  a  half  by  nine  and  a  half,  about  eight  feet 
high. 

The  Prifon  is  well  fupplied  with  water.  Among  the  late  im- 
provements, of  108  new  rooms,  and  a  fpacious  yard,  it  is  pity  they 
did  not  build  an  Infirmary.  The  Prifoners  are  numerous.  At  more 
than  one  of  my  vifits  (which  I  repeated  to  this  as  well  as  many  other 
Prifons  much  oftener  than  the  times  when  I  took  the  numbers)  fome 
had  the  Small-Pox.  It  was  fo  crowded  this  lafl:  fummer,  that  a 
Prifoner  paid  five  fliillings  a  week  for  half  a  bed,  and  many  lay  in 
the  Chapel.  In  May  1776  the  number  of  Prifoners  within  the  -vvalls 
was  395  J  and  by  an  accurate  lifl  which  I  procured,  their  wives  (in- 
cluding a  few  only  called  fo)  were  279,  children  725,  total  1004: 
about  two  thirds  of  thefe  were  in  the  Prifon. 

This  Prifon  is  vifited  at  Michaelmafs  term,  as  the  Aft  *  direfts  ; 
yet  at  my  firfl:  vifit  there  was  a  "Wine- Club,  and  a  Beer-Club  ;  and 
one  can  fcarcely  ever  enter  the  walls  without  feeing  parties  at  fkittles, 
miffifippi,  portobello,  tennis,  fives  &c. 

The  following  Tables  oi  Rules  and  Orders  for  the  government  of 
this  Prifon  are  hung  up  (as  required  by  the  Preamble)  for  common 
iiifpeftion.     I  prefume  to  give  an  abridgment  of  them. 

•32(1  George  II. 

RULES 


S   O   U   T   H   W  A   R  K.  199 

RULES  AND  ORDERS  for  the  bettfcr  Government  Sec.  king's 

BENCH. 

Made  and  Signed  the  25th  of  November  1729. 

1.  THE  flocks  to  be  kept  up  for  punilhment  of  blafphemers, 
fwearers,  riotous  &c. 

2.  Against  illegal  methods  of  confinement.  None  to  be  con- 
fined in  an  unufual  place  or  manner,  unlefs  for  attempting  to 
efcape.     And  fuch  may  appeal  to  the  Court,  or  a  Judge. 

3.  Marshal  not  to  remove  any  to  the  Fleet  by  writ  of Hal^eas  Corpus. 

4.  Marshal  not  to  remove  any  one  from  the  Common-fide  and  it's 
benefits  without  three  days  notice:  during  which  time,  the  Prifoner 
may  appeal  to  a  Judge. 

5.  Coroner's  Inqueft  upon  the  dead. 

6.  Against  Garnifli  and  partial  diftribution  of  Dividends. 

7.  Prisoners  to  fend  out  for  neceflaries  j  and  to  bring  in  their 
own  bedding  &c. 

8.  Table  of  Fees,  Thefe  Rules,  and  a  Lift  of  Charities  to  be 
hung  up  in  a  public  room. 

9.  Marshal  and  Servants  to  behave  with  the  utmoft  tendernefs. 
10.      Turnkey  always  to  attend  at  the  door. 

1  r.     No  Servants  to  partake  of,  or  even  diftribute  the  Charity. 

12.  Chapel  to  be  kept  in  repair.     Chaplain  duly  to  perform. 

13.  The  abufive  to  the  ftocks. 

14.  Dining-room  to  be  kept  in  repair  for  devotion,  or  conver- 
fation  :  with  a  fire.     Two  rooms  for  the  fick. 

15.  Those  who  make  oath  before  &c.   that  they  have  not  ^^5  &c, 
to  be  admitted  to  the  Charities,  Offices  in  the  Prifon  &c. 

16. 


200 


SOUTH   W  ARK. 


king's        i6.      No  Perfon  committed  for   any   criminal  matter  to  vote  for 
BENCH.  Steward  &c.  or  to  partake  of  any  chaiity  but  the  Bafl^ets. 

17.  Lodging  in  a  cabin  of  any  ward,  gratis. 

18.  Any  Prifoner  may  be  chofen  AlTiitant  and  enjoy  the  benefits 
of  that  ftation. 

19.  The  Seal  of  the  Common-fide  to  be  kept  by  the  Matter  of 
King's  Bench  Office  j  and  not  put  to  any  deed  without  the  appro- 
bation of  Marfiial,  Steward,  and  Alnftants. 

20.  One  fuperfedable  aftion  may  be  fuperfeded  with  Common-fide 
money :  more  than  one,  not  without  application  to  the  Court, 
or  a  Judge.     No  Judge's  Clerk  to  take  a  Fee  on  the  occafion. 

21.  The  fick  to  be  taken  care  of  by  the  Steward  and  Afiiflants : 
who  are  to  be  reimburfed  out  of  the  firft  County-money. 

22.  Debts  contrafted  by  the  Steward  and  Afiiitants  with  the 
Marflial's,  and  Mafter's  confent,  for  fupport  of  the  poor,  to  be 
paid  out  of  the  next  Dividend, 

23.  Steward  and  Afliftants  to  have  no  pay  for  common  bufinefs, 
or  adjufting  difi"erences. 

24.  Prisoners  entered  after  the  ift  day  of  Eafter-term,  to  have 
but  one  Quarter  of  the  Midfuiruner  Dividend. 

25.  All  money  brought  in  by  the  Bafket-men,  or  brought  in  at 
Chriftmas,  Eafter  and  Whitfuntide,  to  be  divided  immediately 
after  paying  the  Bafket-men  for  their  trouble. 

26.  If  the  Marflial  advance  money  for  a  Superjedeas-,  he  is  to  be 
reimburfed  out  of  the  next  County-money. 

27.  Common -SIDE  Prifoners  may  eledt  an  annual  Steward  -,  who  is 
not  to  be  depofed,  but  on  application  to  the  Court  or  a  Judge. 
No  Prifoner  in  the  Rules  may  vote. 

28.  The  Steward  to  enter  in  Books  the  Table  of  Fees,  thefe  Rules, 

and 


S   O   U   T   H   W  A   R  K.  201 


NO  Perfon  to  bring  any  Weapon. 

Those  on  the  Mafter's-fide  who  demand  Garnifli,  to  be  turned 
to  Commoa-fide  for  a  time,  not  longer  than  a  Month.     Thofe  on 

D  d  the 


BENCH. 


and  a  list  of  the  charities.     All,  together  with  his  accounts,       ^^^^g'^ 
for  infpeftion  of  the  Priibners. 

29.  A  PRISONER  wronged  by  the  Steward  and  Affiftants,  on  ap- 
plying to  the  Court  or  a  Judge,  fhail  be  paid  his  damages  out  of 
the  next  Dividend  of  the  Steward  and  AlTiftants  :  if  he  complain 
unjuflly,  he  fball  make  fatisfadtion  from  his  own  next  Dividend. 

30.  If  the  Steward  or  Affiftants  embezzle  the  money,  SucceiTors 
may  call  them  to  account,  and  ftop  their  Dividends  of  the  Grat&- 
money  &c.  for  reparation  of  the  injury. 

31.  These  Orders  to  be  read  publicly  every  third  Monday. 

32.  Marshal,  Servants,  and  Prifoners  to  obferve  thefe -Rules  un- 
der pain  of  the  utmoft  puniftiment  of  Law. 

23.  No  Clerk  or  Servant  of  a  Judge  to  take  any  Fee  on  occafion 
of  a  Petition  founded  on  thefe  Orders. 

R.     RAYMOND 
J  A.  REYNOLDS 
E.      PRGBYN. 


THE  preceding  Rules  fill  one  fide  of  a  large  flieet  of  paper,  on 
which  they  are  printed.     Another  Iheet  has  what  follows,  viz. 

FURTHER  RULES  and  ORDERS  for  the  Government  &c. 
Made  and  Signed  the  loth  day  of  May  1759. 


202  S   O  U    T   H   W  A   R   K. 

king's  the  Common-fide  are  for  the  like  offence  to  be  excluded,  not  lon- 

BENCH.  gj,j.  jj^^jj  a  fortnight,  from  all  profits  except  fhare  of  the  Bafkets. 

3.  Doors  of  the  great  Garden  to  be  fhut  at  dark:  doors  of  the 
Wards  at  nine. 

4.  The  Chambers  at  difpofal  of  the  Marllial  &c. 

5.  If  a  Mafter-fide  Prifoner  negledl  for  a  Month  to  pay  his  Cham- 
ber-Rent J  he  may  be  turned  over  to  the  Common-fide  till  he 
pays.  His  goods  to  be  delivered  to  him,  by  a  witnefTcd  inventory. 
If  difcharged  by  the  Plaintiff^,  he  may  yet  be  detained  for  Fees, 
and  a  Month's  Chamber-rent. 

6.  None  to  fell  in  the  Prifon  Viftuals  or  Drink  without  confent  of 
Marllial.  A  prifoner  thus  offending  may  be  turned  over  to  the 
Common-fide  for  a  Month.  Marfhal  to  take  care  that  thofe  who 
fell  keep  good  order  &c. 

7.  Confirms  the  14th  Rule  preceding  i.  e.  The  great  Room  for 
exercife  and  the  two  Rooms  for  the  fick. 

8.  Prisoners  turned  to  Common-fide  for  offending,  or  non-pay- 
ment, to  have  no  profit  but  Share  of  the  Balkets ;  to  bear  no 
office ;  nor  vote  for  Officers. 

9.  These  Rules  to  be  fixed  in  the  moft  public  Places,  for  infpec- 
tion. 

Signed,       MANSFIELD,   T.  DENNISON,    M.  FORSTER,   E.  WILMOT. 

A  further  RULE  and  ORDER  &c.  made  19th  May  1760. 

THOSE  who  attempt  or  affift  an  efcape — who  fell  or  promote  the 
fale  of  Vifluals  or  Liquors  without  leave  of  the  Marfhal — who  affault 
another — who  blafpheme  the  Name  of  God,  fwear  or  make  a  riot, 
may  be  fent  by  the  Marfhal  to  any  one  of  the  following  Prifons  in 
Southwark  viz  The  County-Gaol  for  Surry,  the  Bridewell  for  that 

County, 


S    O   U   T   H   W   A  R   K.  203 

Countyj  or  to  the  Marflialfea  :  and  there  confined  for  thefirft  Offence       king's 
not  exceeding  one  Month  J  for  a  fecond  Offence  not  exceeding  three       bench. 
Months.     This  Rule  to  be  hung  up. 

Signed,       MANSFIELD,  T.  DENNISON,  M.  FORSTER,  E.  WILMOT. 


On  the  fame  Sheet  is 

A  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by  the  Marfhal  of  the  King's 
Bench  Prifon,  in  the  County  of  Sunj,  for  any  Prifoner  or  Pri- 
foner's  Commitment,  or  coming  in  Gaol,  or  Chamber-Rent 
there,  or  difcharge  from  thence  in  any  civil  aftion.  Settled 
and  eft^blifhed  the  16th.  Day  o(  June  in  the  3'3d  Year  of  the 
Reign  of  his  Majefty  King  GEORGE  the  Second,  and  in  the 
Year  of  our  Lord  1760,  purfuant  to  an  A£l  for  the  Relief  of 
Debtors  with  reJpeSl  to  the  Imprifonment  of  their  Perfons,  viz. 


4 


C.     S.     D. 

Flrft,  To  the  Marflial  for  every  Prifoner  committed  on  any■^ 

civil  aftion  —  —  ""5 

2d.  To  the  Turnkey  on  the  Mafter's-fide  — ■  0:1:6 

3d.  To  the  Mai  fhal  on  the  difcharge  of  every  fuch  Prifoner         o  :     7:4 

4th,  To  the  Deputy  Marfhal  upon  the  difcharge  of  one  or-\ 

more  aftions,  executions,  or  other  charge,  and  no  >    o  :     4:0 

further  fee  though  there  be  never  fo  many  aftions      J 

tih.  To  the  Clerk  of  the  Papers  for  the  firft  aftion  upon") 

>    o  :     3  :  o 
the  difcharge  —  —  —  3 

6th.  To  the  Clerk  of  the  Papers  for  every  aftion,  execution,  "^ 

or  other  charge  to  be  paid  on  the  difcharge     —        j,        ' 

7th.  To  the  Deputy  Marfhal  upon  a  commitment  of  a  Pri-  -\ 

foner   in  court,  or  at  a  Judge's  chambers,  in  any  f    O  :      I    :  O 
civil  aftion,  if  carried  to  the  Ki^i/s  Bench  Prifon       ^ 

D  d  2  8th. 


204  S   O   U   T   H  W  A  R   K. 


£.     S.     D. 

o 


difo 


^^'^G^  8th.  To  the  Clerk  of  the  Papers  for  the  fame  —  o  :     i 

R  F  W  f^  H 

jith.  To  the  faid  Deputy  Marfhal  for  a  furrender  in  dif- 
charge  of  bail,  be  there  never  fomany  aftions 

loth.  To  the  Clerk  of  the  Papers  for  each  aflion  upon  fuch") 

furrender  —  ^  —  j        ' 

nth.  To  each  of  the  four  TipftafFs,  zs.  6d.  for  each  Prifoner's  -\ 

Commitment   by    the    Court,    and   carried  to  the>    o  :   lo 
King's  Bench  Prifon,  in  the  whole  —  J 

1 2th.  To  the  TipttafF that  carries  any  Prifoner  committed  at  "^  , 

a  Judge's  chambers  to  the  faid  Prifon  —  j 

J3th.  To  the  Marflial  for  the  ufe  of  chamber,  bed,  bedding 
and  fheets  for  each  Prifoner,  if  provided  by  the 
Gaoler  at  the  Prifoner's  requeft,  for  the  firft  night, 
in  the  Common-fide  of  the  faid  Prifon  — 


o  :  6 


o  :  6 


14th.  For  the  like  ufe  every  night  the  Prifoner  remains  in -j 
cuflody  after  the  firft  —  —         3 

13th.  And  if  tuo  lie  in  one  bed,   id  each  — 

16th.  For  the  like  ufe  of  every  Prifoner  that  goes  on  the' 

Mafter's-fide,  for  the  firft  night      —  — 

17th.  For  the  like  ufe  every  night  after  the  firft  —  0:0:3 

1 8th.  And  if  two  lie  in  a  bed,  2d  each  —  0:0:4 

19th.  And  if  the  Prifoner  finds  his  own  bed,  bedding  and~| 

fheets  (which  the  Marshal  is  in  no  fort  to  hinder  I 

him  of)  then  he  (hall  pay  for  chamber-rent  to  the  j 

MaHhal,  per  week  —  —        J 

No  ether  Fee  for  the  ufe  of  chamber.  Bed,  bedding  and Jheets,    or  upon  the 
commitment  or  difcbarge  of  «ny  Prifoner  on  any  civil  aSion. 


Thomas  Howard, 

.  „  .  MANSFIELD. 

Anthony  Thomas  ABoy, 

iLLiA.M  Hammond. 


MARSHAL- 


S   O   U   T   H  W   A  R   K.  205 

MARSHALSEA     PRISON. 

DEPUTY  MARSHAL,   "Thomas  Marfon,  Efq. 
Substitute,     'Thomas  Phillips. 
Salary, 

Feejs,     £0  :   10  :   10 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.     The  Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  none. 

Garnifli,  ^^o  :  3  :  6.     It  is  called  Ward-dues  for  Coals  &c. 

Number 

1774,  March  16,  Prifoners  167 

1775,  March    6,       -     r  175 

1776,  March  12,       -     -  194 
May     15,       -     -  234 

CHAPLAIN,   Rev.  Mr.  Cockane. 

Duty— Sunday 

Salary,  1 3.  from  each  Prifoner  on  difcharge.  See 

Table  of  Fees. 
SURGEONS,  MefT'-s.  Stapleton  and  Waljhman. 

Salar)',  i  s.  from  each  Prifoner  on  difcharge.  See 

Table  of  Fees. 

TO  this  Prifon  of  the  Court  of  the  Marfhalfea,  and  of  the  King's     Remarks. 
Palace-Court  of  Wefhminfter,  are  brought  Debtors   arrefted  for  the 
loweft  fums,  any  where  within  twelve  miles  of  the  Palace,  except  in 
the  city  of  London :  and  alfo  perfons  committed  for  piracy. 

The  Deputy  Marfhal,  under  whofe  particular  cuftody  this  Prifon 
is,  has  his  appointment  from  the  Knight  Marfhal  of  the  King's  houfe- 

hold 


2o6  S   O   U   T   H  W   A   R   K. 

MARSHAL-    Iiold  for  the  time  being.     The  great  abufes  praftifed  by  this  Officer 
5EA.         ^yere  reported  to  Parliament  by  the  Gaol  Committee  in  1729. 

This  Prifon  is  an  old  irregular  building  (rather  feveral  buildings) 
in  a  fpacious  yard.  There  are,  in  the  whole,  near  fixty  rooms ;  and  yet 
only  fix  of  them  now  left  for  Common-fide  Debtors.  Of  the  other  rooms, 
— Five  are  let  to  a  man  who  is  not  a  prifoner :  in  one  of  them  he 
keeps  a  chandler's  fliop  i  in  two  he  lives  with  his  family :  the  other 
two  he  lets  to  Prifoners.  Four  rooms,  the  Oaks,  are  for  women. 
They  are  too  few  for  the  number  ;  and  the  more  modeft  women 
complain  of  the  bad  company,  in  which  they  are  confined.  There 
-are  above  forty  rooms  for  men  on  the  Mafter's-fide,  in  which  are 
about  fixty  beds ;  yet  many  Prifoners  have  no  beds  nor  any  place  to 
fleep  in  but  the  Chapel,  and  the  Tap-room. 

The  Prifon  is  too  fmall  and  greatly  out  of  repair.  Little  regard 
is  fliewn  to  the  late  Aft  for  white-wafliing  and  cleaning  the  rooms. 
No  Infirmary.  The  yard  is  well  fupplied  with  water.  In  it  the  Pri- 
foners play  at  rackets,  mifiifippi  &c ;  and  in  a  little  back  court,  the 
Park,  at  fldttles. 

The  Tap  is  let  to  a  Prifoner  in  the  Rules  of  the  King's  Bench  Pri- 
fon :  this  Prifon  being  juft  within  thofe  Rules.  I  was  credibly  in- 
formed, that  one  funday  in  the  fummer  1775,  ''bout  600  pots  of  beer 
were  brought  in  from  a  public  houfe  in  the  neighbourhood,  (Ajhmore's) 
the  Prifoners  not  then  liking  the  Tapfter's  beer. 

In  March  1775,  when  the  number  of  Prifoners  was  175  ;  there 
were  with  them  in  this  incommodious  Prifon  wives  and  children  46. 

Mr.  Allnutt  who  was  many  years  fince  a  prifoner  here  j  had, 
during  his  confinement,  a  large  edate  bequeathed  to  him.  He  learn- 
ed fympathy  by  his  fufterings  :  and  left  ^^  100  a  year  to'  releafe  poor 
Debtors  from  hence.     Many  are  cleared  by  it  every  year. 

A  TABLE 


SOUTH  Vv^  ARK. 


207 


A  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler  or  Keeper  of  the    marshal- 


Marfhalfea  Prifon— -on   any  Civil  Adlion  —  fettled  — the   17th 
day  of  May  1765  Purfuant  to  an  Aft  for  relief  of  Debtors  &c. 

.  £■    S.    D. 

To  the  Knight  Marfhal  upon  the  difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  T 

charged  with  one  or  more  aftions  —  3 

To  the  Keeper  for  his  care  and  fafe  cuftody  of  every  Prifoner 

upon  the  difcharge  of  fuch  Prifoner  on  the  firft  aflion 
To  the  Keeper  upon  the  difcharge  of  fuch  Prifoner  charged 

with  one  or  more  aftions  —  — 

To  the   Surgeon  or  Apothecary  on  the  difcharge  of  every  "5 

Prifoner  charged  with  one  or  more  adlions  —     J 

To  the  Chaplain  on  the  like  difcharge        —  —  o  : 

To  the  Turnkey  upon  the  difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  on  1     <-,  •   •   •  6 

the  firft  a£lion  —  —  —      •' 

To  the  Turnkey    upon    the   difcharge    of    fuch    Prifoner "} 

charged  with  one  or  more  ailions  after  the  firft      —     i 
To  the  Clerk  for  entering  the  difcharge  of  a  Prifoner  on  7 

one  or  more  adlions  —  —  —     ^ 

To  the  Keeper  for  the  ufeof  bed,  bedding  and  flieets  for' 

eveiy  Prifoner  if  found  by  the  Gaoler  at  the  Prifoner's 

requeft,  for  the  firft  night  on  the  Mafter-fide  of  the 

faid  Prifon  —  —  — 

And  every  night  after  the  firft  night  —  —  o  :   o  :   j- 

And  if  two  lie  in  a  bed  2d.  each  —  —  0:0:4 


S£A. 


NO  other  Fees  for  the  ufe  of  chamber,  bed,  bedding,  or  upon  the 
difcharge  or  commitment  of  any  Prifoner  in  any  Civil  Aftion. 


W.  Richardson 
Elliot  Bishop 
Leon'^  Howard. 


MANSFIELD 
C.    PRATT 
T.     PARKER. 


BOROUGH 


2o8  S   O   U   T   H   W   A  R   K. 


BOROUGH         COMPTER. 

GAOLER,     Jeremiah  Beavis. 
Salary,  none. 

Fee%     Debtors,     -    ^^o  :     7:0 
Felons,       -       0:11:4 
Tranfports,  -       o  :   10  :  6     from  the  Contraftor. 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  7  j  u    /-o     n        i    » 

'  c  ^  penny  a  day  each.  (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     J 
Garnilh,       ^^o  :  2  :  8     Mafter's-fide. 
0:1:4     Common-fide. 

Number  of    -         -     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 


1774,     May        4, 

37     - 

-     4 

1776,     March  11, 

10     - 

-     3 

May        2, 

18     - 

-     2 

----       Nov.     13, 

15     - 

-     I 

CHAPLAIN,    None. 

SURGEON,       None. 

Remarks.  THIS  Prifon,  in  Tooley-ftreet,  for  the  Borough  of  Southwark, 
which  contains  four  parifhes  and  a  part  of  a  fifth,  has,  for  Mafler's- 
fide  Debtors — feven  rooms. — For  Common-fide  Debtors,  a  Room  on 
the  ground  floor,  in  which  Felons  &c.  are  with  them  rught  and  day  ; 
a  long  room  up  ftairs,  the  Rookery  -,  and  a  room  over  it,  ufelefs, 
becaufe  not  fecure. — The  Women  are  in  the  Stone  Kitchen,  now  di- 
vided 


SOUTH   W  ARK. 


209 


rided  into  two  rooms.     Three  of  the  Cominon-fide  rooms  have  bar-     eorougk 
rack  beds.     Among  the  Debtors  are  many  poor  creatures  from  the     compter. 
Court  of  Confcience  who  lie  there  till  their  debts  are  paid. — There  is 
a  fmall  court-yard ;  and  a  Chapel,  but  no  Chaplain  is  appointed. 

The  whole  Prifon  is  much  out  of  repair,  and  ruinous.  No  Infir- 
mary. No  bedding  or  ftraw.  The  Keeper,  an  officer,  pays  Window- 
tax  ,^2  :  15  :  o  and  Land-tax  ^2  :  10  :  o.  He  is  put  in  by  the 
High  Bailiff,  whofe  office  is  in  the  difpofal  of  the  Court  of  Aldermen. 
— i¥n  infcription  over  the  Gate  dated  1716  calls  it  the  Borough 
Court :  but  the  Courts  are  now  held  at  St.  Margaret's  Hill. 

The  Claufes  of  the  A61  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  are  hung  up. 

Debtors  have  fixty  penny  loaves,  once  in  eight  weeks,  from  a 
Legacy  of  Eleanor  Gwynn.     No  other  Bequeft. 


Southwark.  A  T  the  General  Quarter  Seffions  of  the  Peace  of  our 
xJl.  Sovereign  Lord  the  King  holden  for  the  Town 
and  Borough  of  Southwark  at  the  Court-Houfe  on  St.  Margaret's 
Hill  — on  Friday  the  8th  Day  of  January  in  tlie  2ift  Year  of  the 
Reign  of  our  Sovereign  Lord  GEORGE  the  Second  before  Sir 
Robert  Ladbroke  Kn«  .  Mayor— John  Stracey  Efq'' .  Recorder— and 
others,  &c.  &c. 


It  being  reprefented  to  this  Court  that  the  Fees  of  the  Gaoler 
or  Keeper  of  the  Borough-Compter  in  regard  to  the  Prifoners  charged 
therein  with  any  criminal  matter  remain  yet  unfettled,  for  want 
whereof  divers  impofitions  may  accrue  to  the  poor  Prifoners  therein, 

E  e  For 


2IO  S   O   U  T   H   W  A   R   K. 

EORouGH         For    fettling  and   eftablifliing   the   fame    It  is  ordered    that  the 
COMPTER.     Keeper  or   Gaoler  of  die  faid  Prifon   fliall  and  may  take  of  every 
Prifoner  fo  charged  as  aforefaid  the  following  Fees  and  no  more. 


That  is  to  fay 

lony  Trefpafs  Af- 1 


£.     S.     D. 
OS   II   :  4 


2  :  o 


For  the  admiflion  of  every  Prifoner  for  Felony  Trefpafs  Af- 

fault  or  other  Mifdemeanours 
For  every  night's  lodging  —  —  —  o  :     o  :  6 

To  the  Turnkey  for  the  difmiffion  of  every  fuch  Prifoner  o  :     i   :  o 

For  every  Prifoner  brought  by  a   Peace  Officer  for  fafe  0 

cuflody  untill  hearing  can  be  had  before  a  Magillrate  J 

By  the  Court 

Man. 


N.  B.  Two  other  Prifons  in  Southwark,  viz.  The  New  Gaol  in 
the  Borough,  and  the  Bridewell  in  St.  George's  Fields^  belong  to  the 
County  of  Surry. 


COUNTY 


Home  CiRCOiT.        H  E  RT  F  O  Pv  D  S  H  I  R  E.  •  21 1 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     HERTFORD. 


GAOLER,     Cornelias  Will/on. 

Salary,  none.      l2>9 '•  6  :  10   to  fupply  the   Felons   witK 
Fees,     Debtors,  7       .       .  ^read,  as  below. 


Felons,     ^  "  "  *-' 


•rs,  7 

Tranfports,     ^^  i  :  i  :  o  each  to  London. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,  apoundofbreadaday  farmed  by  the  Gaoler. 
Garnifli,        ^o  ;  4  :  6. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &:c. 

1773,  Dec.      9,       3     -  -     ,9 

1774,  Dec.  14,  2  -  -  14 
1776,  Feb.  14,  16  -  -  16 
Nov.  11,       6     -     -     12 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Scott.     Now  Rev.  Mr.  Moore. 
Duty— Sunday}  and  one  other  day  not  fixed. 
Salary,    ^40. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Cutler. 
Salary,     £10. 

THIS  Gaol  is  in  the  middle  of  the  town.     In  front  are  two  fmall     Remarks. 
day-rooms,  for  Felons,    in  which  they  are  always  locked  up  :  no 
fire-place. — Their  dungeons  or  night-rooms  are,  one  down  eighteen 

E  e  2  fteps. 


212  •  HERTFORDSHIRE.       Home  CiRcui-p. 

Heps,  the  other  nineteen.  Over  their  day-rooms,  is  a  large  lumber- 
room  ;  and  adjoining  to  it  a  lodging-room  for  Women-felons. 
Backward  is  a  fmall  Court -yard  for  Debtors,  and  Women- 
felons.  On  each  fide  of  it  are  two  rooms  on  the  ground-floor, 
and  two  chambers  for  Debtors.     No  Chapel.     No  Infirmary. 

In  the  interval  of  two  of  my  vifits  the  Gaol-Fever  prevailed,  and 
carried  offfeven  or  eight  Piifoners,  and  two  Turnkeys.  The  Felons 
were  on  that  occafion  removed  to  the  Bridewell.  At  my  laft  vifit 
four  were  fick. 

This  Gaol  could  not  have  been  made  healthy  and  convenient.. 
There  is  a  new  one  building  juft  out  of  the  town.  It  has  no  dun- 
geon ;  and  is  more  fpacious  and  convenient  than  the  old  one. 


Hertford/hire,  A  T  the  General  Quarter  Seffions  of  the  Peace  of 
to  wit.  2.  V.  our  Sovereign— holden  at---Hertford  on  Mon- 
day—the 1 2th  day  of  January  in  the  firfb  year  of— our  Sovereign 
Lord  George  III.  by  the  grace  of  God— and  in.  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1761  before  Sir  Richard  Chafe  Kn'-  Ralph  Freeman  Doftor  in  Di- 
vinity, Rich''  JVarreriy  James  Gordon^  W"  Janjfen  and  IV"*  Plumer  the 
younger,  Efq"'  and  others,  &c. 


A   TABLE   of  FEES    to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler — fettled — 
purfuant  to  an  Adt— made  in  the  3 2d  year  of— K.  George  II. 

C.      S.    D. 

For  the  chamber-rent,  bed  and  bedding  ef  each  Debtor") 

per  night  provided  that  no  more  than  two  be  put  into^    o  :     014 
one  bed  nor  more  than  two  beds  in  one  room       —     -^ 

Fot 


Home  Circuit.      HERTFORDSHIRE.  213 

£•      s.    D. 

For  the  chamber-rent,  bed  and  bedding  of  each  Prifoner'^ 
upon  criminal  procefs/f?-  iweei  provided  that  no  more  I 
than  two  be  put  into  one  bed  ;  nor  more  than  two  f   °  "     3   •  ° 
beds  in  the  fame  room  —  —     J 

For  the  Turnkey's  Fees  into  Gaol  —  —         o  :     i   :  o 

For  the  Turnkey's  Fees  out  of  Gaol  —  —         o  :     i   :  o 

For  the  Gaoler's  Fees  upon  each  Frifoner  difcharged     —         o  ;  13  ;  4 


COUNTY     BRIDEWELLS. 


HERTFORD.  This  is  alfo  the  Town  Gaol.  Two  fmall  rooms 
to  the  ftreet,  the  Compter  :  one  behind  them,  the  Middle  Ward : 
and  one  beyond  that,  the  Lower  Ward.  There  is  alfo  a  dun- 
geon for  men  down  feven  fleps :  a  yard,  and  pump ;  but 
Prifoners  are  always  locked  up  within  doors.  I  faw  none  at 
work.  The  County  Gaoler  is  Keeper,  and  has  ^^24  a  year  to 
fupply  each  Prifoner  daily  with  a  pound  of  bread.  Fees 
£0:4:6. 

i774y  Dec.  14,  Prifoners  4 
1776,  Feb.  14,  -  -  -  7 
Nov.  22,      -     -     -    4. 

HITCHIN.  A  ROOM  for  men;  and" over  it  two  rooms  for  womenj- 
who  go  up  to  them  by  a  ladder.  No  chimney  in  any  of  the 
rooms :  no  ftraw :  no  yard  :  no  water.  Keeper's  Salary  £24  t- 
No  Fees. 

1776,    Feb.  14,     Prilbners  2. 

BERK- 


214  HERTFORDSHIRE.       Home  Circuit. 

BERKHAMSTED.  A  work-room  for  men,  and  another  for 
women.  A  dungeon  down  nine  fteps,  earth -floor,  very 
damp,  no  window. — No  ftraw :  no  court-yard :  no  water. 
Keeper's  Salary  ;^2o:  no  Fees  :  he  has  the  profit  of  the  Pri- 
foners  work.     Allowance  a  pound  of  bread  a  day. 

1776,     Nov.  2,     No  Prifoners. 


At     St.     ALBAN'S     are. 


THE  BOROUGH  GAOL.  Debtors  have  the  ufe  of  the  Town 
Hall  in  the  day-time  :  their  lodging-room  joins  to  it.  Felons 
have  two  day-rooms,  and  two  clofe  ofFenfive  night-rooms. 
Their  allowance  a  pound  of  bread  a  day.  No  fbraw :  no 
court:  no  water.  The  Keeper's  Salary  ^3  :  Fees  ;^o  :  13  :  4, 
no  Table.  Licence  for  Beer.  Claufes  of  Ad  againfl:  Spiri- 
tuous Liquors  hung  up. 

1776,     March  1,     Prifoners,  none. 

Nov.     3,     Debtors  2.     Felons  &c.  2. 

LIBERTY  GAOL,  for  twenty-two  Parifhes,  is  the  property  of 
Lord  Salijbury.  For  Debtors^  two  fpacious  day-rooms,  and 
three  lodging-rooms. — For  Felons,  three  ftrong  rooms.  No 
court-yard :  no  water.  Keeper,  fame  as  of  the  Borough  Gaol : 
Salary;^  16  :  Fees  ^^o  :  13  :  4,  no  Table. 

1776,     March  I,     No  Prifoners. 

Nov.     3,     Debtor  i. 

THE 


Home  Circuit.       HERTFORDSHIRE.  315 

THE  BRIDEWELL  for  the  Liberty,  and  hv  tht  Borough,  joins 
to  the  Liberty  Gaol.  One  large  work-room  ;  and  two  lodging- 
rooms  :  all  up  flairs,  and  airy.  No  court :  no  water :  no  al- 
lowance :  no  ftraw.  Prifoners  have  their  earnings.  Keeper's 
Salary  for  the  Liberty  ^z^-,  for  the  Borough  ^^2  :  no  Fees. 

1776,     March  i,     Prifoners  2. 
Nov.     2,     -     -     -    None. 


COUNTY 


2i6  ESSEX.  Home  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    CHELMSFORD. 


GAOLER,     Sujama  Taylor. 
Salary,  none. 
Fees,     Debtors 


^o  :   15  :  4. 
Felons,     ^  ~ 


Tranfports,  to  London  or  Grave/end,  £1  ".  5  :  o  for  each, 
if  not  more  than  feven :  for  each  above  kven 
^1:1:  o. 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,")  a  pound  and  half  of  bread  a  day,  and  a 
Felons,     5     quart  of  fmall  beer.  (See Remarks.) 

Garnilh,        Debtors,    £0  :  4.  :  6. 
Felons,         0:3:0. 

Number  of      -        -       Debtors.       Felons  &c. 
1774,     Feb.     4,     -     30     -       -     30 
Dec.    6,     -     13     -       -     31 

1775,   oa.  19,   -    19   -     -    14 

1776,    Nov.  20,    -     II     -      -       7 

CHAPLAIN 

Duty— Sunday,  Monday,  Wednefday. 
Salary,  ;^40. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Griffinhooft. 

Salary,  £i^,  for  Felons,  and  the  Bridewell  Prifoners. 

CHELMS- 


Home  Circuit.  ESSEX,  21^- 

CHELMSFORD. 

A  CLOSE  Prifon,  frequently  infefted  with  the  Gaol-Diflemper.     Remarks. 
Inquiring  in  Odober  1775,  for  the  Head -Turnkey,   I   was  told  he 
died  of  it. 

In  the  Tap-room  there  hung  a  Paper  on  which,  among  other 
things,  was  written  "  Prifoners  to  pay  Garnifh  or  run  the  Gauntlet." 

Debtors  have  a  bufhel  of  coals  a  day  from  about  12th  November 
to  Lady  Day:  and  /[5:0:0a  year  by  a  legacy  oi Elizabeth  Her- 
ris  from  Lands  in  Brentwood,  paid  by  the  Re£tor  or  Minifter  of  the 
parifh  of  Chelmsford  on  the  24th  of  December.  By  a  Memorial  hung 
up  in  the  Tap-room  it  appears  the  Bequeft  was  acknowledged  by  the 
Teftatrix  14th  June  1746. — It  was  generous  in  the  Juftices  to  grant 
Debtors  the  fame  allowance  as  Felons  ;  and  very  judicious  to  fix  that 
allowance  to  a  certain  weight. 

It  gave  me  pain  to  be  informed,  that  there  had  been  no  Divine 
Service  for  above  a  year  paft,  except  to  condemned  Criminals. 

There  is  a  new  Gaol,  which  exceeds  the  old  one  in  ftrength  &c. 
almofl;  as  much  as  in  fplendor.  The  County,  to  their  honour,  have 
fpared  no  coll.  The  Magiftrates  cannot  but  know  the  plan.  The 
Prifon  is  nearly  finifhed.  It  can  therefore  be  of  no  ferr ice  to  offer 
any  remarks  upon  thisjiately  fabrick. 


F  f  TABLE 


9i8 


ESSEX. 


Home  Circuit, 


TABLE    OF    FEES. 


A 


Effex.     A     T    General  Quarter   Seflions    &c.  — a  Table  of  Fees 

fettled— -to  be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  his  Majefty's 

Gaol  — purfuant    to    an  Acft™ made   in  the  fecond   year    of— K. 
George  II.    viz. 


For  the  Chamber  Rent  bed  and  bedding  of  each  Debtor - 

provided  that  no  more  than  two  be  put  into  one  bed,  | 

nor  more  than  two  beds  in  the  fame  room        — 

Por  the  Chamber  Rent  bed  and  bedding  of  each  Prifoner. 

upon  criminal  process  per  lueek  provided  that  no  more  ( 

than  two  be  put  into  one  bed  nor  more  than  two  beds/ 

in  one  room  —  —  — 

For  the  Turnkey's  Fee  into  Gaol  — 

For  the  Turnkey's  Fee  out  of  Gaol  — 

For  the  Gaoler's  Fee  upon  each  Prifoner's  difcharga- 


5.      D. 


o 
o 
o 


I 

I 

'3 


o 
o 
4 


Reviewed  and  confirmed  by  us  the  Juftices 
of  Affize  this  19th  Day  of  July  1729 

R: EYRE 

LAW:    CARTER. 


Tho  Bramston 
Tho  Walford 
JohnCheveley. 


Signed   by  us  Juflicss  of  Peace  of  and  for  the  faid  County  tlijs. 
19th  day  of  July  Anno  Dom.  1729. 

RoB'^  Abdy 
Henry  Maynard 
Benj  Moyer. 


COUNTY 


Home  Circuit.  ESSEX.  219 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 


CHELMSFORD.  Built  1766.  On  the  ground-floor  a  large 
work-rooiTij  a  kitchen,  and  a  lodging-room  for  men  :  over 
them  rooms  of  the  fame  fize  for  women  ;  two  rooms  for  the 
fick.  Court-yard  fmall,  and  not  fecure :  Prifoners  always 
kept  within  doors,  and  the  rooms  offenfive,  although  the 
water  is  laid  in.  Mr.  Ford  (the  Keeper)  told  me  at  one  of 
my  vifits  that  many  had  been  ill  of  the  Gaol-Fever,  brought 
from  the  County  Gaol.  His  Salary  ^^30 :  Under  Keeper's 
j^i6  :  no  Fees.  Prifoners  allowance  three-pence  a  day;  for 
which  they  have  a  pound  and  half  of  bread,  and  a  quart  of 
fmall  beer ;  and  three  halfpence  a  day  further  allowance  to  each 
fick  Prifoner.     Coals  and  ftraw  ;^5  a  year  each. 

1774,  Dec.     6,      Prifoners    18, 

1775,  Oft.    19,      -     -     -      15, 

1776,  Nov.  20,      -     -     -      21. 

COLCHESTER.  The  Caftle  was  formerly  the  County  Gaol. 
That  part  of  it  which  is  now  the  Bridewell,  has — firft,  the  room 
for  women,  with  a  fire-place  :  on  one  fide  a  room  for  men, 
with  a  window :  on  another  fide  two  rooms  for  men,  at  a  right 
angle  with  the  former :  a  window  in  the  farthermoft.  The 
partitions  are  iron  grated  for  light  and  air,  from  the  window 

Ff  2  at 


220 


ESSEX.  Home  Circuit. 


BRIDE-  at  each  end  of  the  right  angle. —Court-yard  little  ufed  by 

WELLS.  Prifoners.      No  water:    no    employment:    allowance    three- 

pence a  day :  ftraw  {^^  a  year.     Keeper's  Salary  ^30 :  no  fees. 

1774,     Feb.    14,      Prifoner    i, 
1776,     Nov.  19,       -       -      3. 

At    COLCHESTER   is  alfo  the 

TOWN  GAOL  and  BRIDEWELL.      A   room    for 
Debtors.     A  ftrong  ward  for  men  :  another  for  women. 
,  Court-yard  not  fecure  :  no  water :   no  ftraw.     Allow- 

ance to  Criminals  three-pence  a  day.  Keeper's  Salary 
l^%  :  Fees  ^^o  :  2  :  6.  Claufes  of  Adt  againft  Spiri- 
tuous Liquors  not  hung  up. 

Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

.   1776,     Nov.  19,         2,        -       2. 

NEWPORT.  Built  in  1775.  The  front  is  elegant,  yet  plain: 
in  it  are  the  Keeper's  apartments ;  and  a  room  for  the  Juftices. 
Behind  is  the  men's  court ;  in  the  middle  of  which  is  a  pump. 
On  the  farther  fide,  a  large  work-room  on  the  ground-floor, 
and  a  fmaller  work-room  over  it :  fo  that  too  many  need  not 
work  together  :  a  fire-place  in  each  of  them.  There  is  a 
lodging-room  even  with  the  upper  work-room.  On  the  left 
fide  of  the  court  are  two  lodging-rooms  on  the  ground-floor, 
and  two  above.  In  all  thefe  lodging-rooms  are  boarded  bed- 
fteads.  The  Keeper  has  a  view  of  this  court  from  two  of  his 
back  windows. — Women  have  a  room  on  the  ground-floor, 
3ind  one  over  it.     No  fire-place.     Thefe,  though  they  join  to 

the 


Home  Circuit.  ESSEX.  221 

the  laft-mentioned  rooms  for  men,  have  no  communication  bride- 
with  them:  you  go  to  them  through  one  of  the  Keeper's  wells. 
rooms:  the  court-yard  quite  feparatej  and  the  windows  to- 
ward that. — No  allowance:  Prifoners  have  what  they  earn. 
Straw  _^2  a  year.  Firing  in  winter  two  guineas.  Keeper's 
Salary  £,2^:  no  Fees.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Li- 
quors not  hung  up. 

1776,     Dtc.  6,      Prifoners  3. 

HALS  TED.  Men  and  women  have  a  feparate  work-room,  and 
a  feparate  lodging-room.  There  is  a  room  for  the  fick.  All 
out  of  repair.  A  court-yard  which  men  ufe  one  part  of  the 
day,  women  another.  No  water.  Keeper's  Salary  ;^32  :  no 
Fees.  Allowance  a  pound  and  half  of  bread,  and  a  quart  of 
fmall  beer,  a  day. 

1776,     Nov.   19,      Prifoners  4. 

BARKING.  A  ROOM  for  men,  the  Fare-Gaol :  fifteen  feet  by  ten 
and  a  half i .  feven  feet  high ;  two  windows  to  the  ftreet.  An- 
other room,  the  Back-Gaol,  for  women ;  thirteen  feet  four 
inches  by  eleven  feet,  eight  feet  high  :  one  window  about  two 
feet  fquare.  They  are  planked  all  over :  no  chimneys :  and 
both  rooms  are  made  offenfive  by  fewers  in  them.  Court- 
yard not  fecure :  Prifoners  have  no  ufe  of  it ;  nor  any  accefs  to 
the  pump.  Allowance  three-pence  a  day.  Keeper's  Salary 
£ii:  no  Fees.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  noc 
hung  up. 

1776,     Nov.  28,     Prifoner  one 

* 

COUNTY 


222  KENT.  Home  Circuit. 


COUNTY   GAOL    at    MAIDSTONE. 

GAOLER,     Philip  Detillin. 

Salar)',  £60,  inftead  of  the  Tap, 
Fees,     Debtors,     £0  :   12  :  4. 
Felons,  o  :   15  :  4. 

Tranfports,       -       o  :   15  :  o  each,  and  the  Fees. 
Licence,    none.        See  Salary. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none.     (Jee  Remarks.) 

Felons,  a  loaf  once  in  two  days  (weight  lib.  /^oz. 
Feb.  1776)  and  every  day  a  quart  of 
fnrmll  beer.     (See  Remarks.) 

Garnifh,         Debtors,  £0  :  j  :  o. 
Felons,       0:1:6. 

Number  of    -       -     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     April  13,     21     -     -     31, 

i775>    J^iy  25,    17    -    -    26, 

1776,     Feb.    19,     22     -     -     38. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Hudfon. 

Duty— Sunday  and  Wednefday. 
Salary,  ^^30;  lately  augmented  tO^TfO. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Waller. 

Salar)',  ^^50,  for  the  Gaol  and  Bridewell. 

MAID- 


Home  Circuit.  KENT.  223 

MAIDSTONE. 

THE  Rooms  in  the  Felons  Wards  are  fizeable ;  but  the  air  is  Remarks-. 
obftrufted  by  broad  wooden  bars  at  the  windows  inftead  of  iron 
ones.  There  are  three  court-yards :  one  for  Debtors ;  one  for  Men- 
felons  ;  and  one  for  Women-felons.  The  two  laft  are  much  too 
fmall ;  but  may  be  commodioufly  enlarged,  by  adding  to  them  the 
adjacent  court  of  the  Old  Bridewell,  which  will  foon  be  .difufed. 
Then  alio  a  Chapel  might  be  built ;  and  fervice  no  longer  per- 
formed, as  it  now  is,  upon  the  ftairs. 

Felons  are  allowed  yearly  ten  chaldron  of  coals  :  they  have  bar- 
rack-beds *,  and  hop-bagging  with  ftraw ;  but  no  coverlids.  This 
County  has  for  years  paft  been  fo  confiderate  as  to  pay  the  Fees  of 
poor  Prifoners  acquitted  :  and  to  Tranfports  caft  at  Affizes,  who  are 
entitled  to  the  King's  allowance  of  two  fliillings  and  fix-pence  a  week, 
they  continue  the  allowance  which  they  had  before  trial.  They  alfo 
pay  the  Gaoler's  Fees  for  thofe  Convidts.  The  Felons  faid  they 
wiflied  for  more  bread ;  and  would,  if  that  were  increafed,  be  con- 
tent with  lefs  beer. 

The  Baker  who  ferves  the  Felons  fells  thirteen  loaves  to  the 
dozen  -,  and  Debtors  have  amongft  them  every  thirteenth  loaf. 

There  is  an  Alarm-Bell ;  and  a  Sail-Ventilator. 

On  examining  two  fick  Prifoners,  I  found  they  had  no  irons ;  and 
the  Surgeon  faid  the  Gaoler  was  always  ready  to  take  them  off  whea 
he  requefted  it^ 

•  These  are  low  ftages  of  boards ;  raifed  from  the  floor,  and  floping  from  the 
wall  towards  the  middle  of  the  room^ 

TABLE 


224 


K      EN      T.  Home  Circuit. 


TABLE    OF    FEES. 


Kent,  \  Table  of  Fees  to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler— at  Maidjione 
to  ivit.  x~\.  — fettled— at  the  General  QuarterSefrions— holden— 
on  ThurlHay  the  12th  day  of  July  in  tlie  24th  year  of— George  11 
— and  in  the  year— 1750  purfuant  10  the  direftion  of  the  Statute  in 
that  behalf  provided. 

£.    S.      D. 

For  the  difcharge  from  the  faid  Gaol  of  everjr  Prifoner-N 

committed  for  Treafon,  Felony  or  any  offence  againft^  o  :    13   :     4 

his  Majefty's  peice  to  the  Gaoler  or  Keeper       —       J 

To  Turnkey  on  commitment  of  every  fuch  Prifoner  o  :     i   :     c 

To  him  more  on  the  difcharge  of  every  fuch  Prifoner  o  :     1:0 

On  the  commitment  or  coming  into  Gaol  of  every  Prifoner  7 

"  ^0:3:0 

in  a  civil  aftion,  to  the  faid  Gaoler  or  Keeper     —     J 

On  the  difcharge  of  every  fuch  Prifoner  to  the  faid  Gaoler  T   ^ 

or  Keeper  —  ^  ^  J 

And  to  the  Turnkey  —  —  0:1:6 

For  the  ufe  of  bed  bedding  and  flicets  for  each  of  the  faid"] 

laft  mentioned  Prifoners  on  the  Mafter's-fide  of  the  l    ^  .     ^  .     g 

faid  Prifon  for  the  firft  night  to  tlie  faid  Gaoler  or  | 

Keeper  —  —  —  J 

And  for  every  night  after  the  firft  —  0:0:3 

And  if  two  fuch  Prifoners  lye  together  in  one  bed  then  o  :     O  :     2 

For  every  fuch  Prifoner  as  Ihall  chufe  to  be  on  the  Mafter's- "}    ^  .     ^  .     5 

fideforthe  ufe  of  the  bed,  beddingand  Iheets  the  firft  night  3 
For  every  night  after  the  firft  —  —  0:0:3 

But  if  two  fuch  Prifoners  lye  together  then  two-pence  each       0:0:4 


'o  :    7:10 


Thofe  figures  o  :  7  :   10  are  written  upon  a  rafure. 


1( 


Home  Circuit.  KENT. 

If  any  fuch  Prifoner  through  poverty  can  only  provide   a-^ 

couch,  then  to  the  faid  Gaoler  or  Keeper  for  Chamber  C    o  :  o  :    i 
Rent  pfr  week  —  __  —         j 

July  i:ith  1750  Seen  and  allowed  by  us 

W".  Turner  Herb^.  Palmer 

P.    BOTELER  Ja'   .    CaLDER 

Ed.  Austen  W.  Champness. 

A  True  Copy. 


COUNTY     BRIDEWELLS. 

MAIDSTONE.  A  new  Prifon :  feparate  wards,  areas,  work- 
(hops,  and  infirmaries  for  men  and  women  :  oppofite  windows 
to  tranfmit  frelli  air.  Keeper's  Salary  jT'zo.  No  Prifoners  here 
as  yet.     In  the  old  Bridewell, 

1776,     Feb.   j9j      Prifoners  2. 

CANTERBURY.  Men  and  women  feparate.  The  latter  have 
the  back  court  in  which  their  ward  is.  The  men  ha/e 
no  court-yard ;  but  they  have  a  hall  or  kitchen  to  the  ftreet ; 
and  three  wards  or  night-rooms  to  the  yard.  Out  of  the 
Keeper's  garden  or  yard  might  be  taken  a  court-yard  for  the 
men.  There  is  no  water  within  reach  of  the  men:  yet  I 
always  found  the  Prifon  remarkably  clean.  County  allowance, 
two  pennyworth  of  bread  a  day.  No  employment.  Laft 
Lady-Day  (or  April)  Seffions,  the  Jufticcs  abolilhed  Fees 
£0:  13  :  4j  and  raifed  the  Salary  from  ^25  t0j^4O.  Licence 
for  Beer. 

1774,     April  13,      Prifoners    8, 
1776,     Feb.     17,     -     _     -    ij, 

May    25,     -     -     -      6. 

G  g  At 


225, 


3.26  KENT.  Home  Circuit. 

At  canterbury  is  alfo  the 

CITY  GAOL,  over  the  Weft-gate.  One  large  day-room 
for  men  and  women :  and  in  each  of  the  two  Towers, 
a  fmall  night-room.  No  court-yard ;  and  Prifoners  are 
feldom  permitted  to  walk  on  the  leads.  Allowance 
three  pennyworth  of  bread  a  day.  Keeper's  Salary 
j^5.  Fees,  Debtors  £0:6:8,  Felons  £0  :  13:4:  no 
Table.  He  keeps  a  public  houfe  adjoining,  in  which 
is  a  room  or  two  for  Mafter  fide  Debtors. 

Debtors.     Felons  Sec. 
1774,     April  13.     3     -     -     6, 
1776,     Feb.    17,     3     -     -     2. 

DARTFORD.  This  County  Bridewell,  built  in  1720,  confilts  of 
two  rooms  :  one  for  men,  twenty-one  feet  by  feventeen  and  a 
half:  one  for  women,  fourteen  feet  fquare  :  both  ten  feet  high. 
No  chimneys  :  offenfive  fewers ;  and  the  rooms  dirty :  no 
water :  no  ftraw :  mats,  but  quite  worn  out.  No  yard ; 
though  the  Keeper  has  a  garden.  His  Salary  £20:  Fees 
£0  :  2  •  6  :  no  Table.  Allowance  to  thofe  committed  on 
fufpicion  of  Felony,  two-pence  a  day.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft 
Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

The  Keeper  told  me,  they  had  about  two  years  ago,  a  bad 

Fever ;    which  himfclf  and   family,    and   every   frelh  Prifoner 

caught.    Two  died  of  it.     The  Prifoners  are  now  well,  and  at 

■work,  upon  a  Manufafbure  of  Flax-drefTing  and  weaving  Sacks. 

Window-tax  £1   :   11   :  6  paid  by  the  County. 

1776,    April  24,     Prifoners  6. 

THERr 


Home  Circuit.  KENT. 

THERE    ARE    ALSO    IN    THIS    COUNTY, 

ROCHESTER  CITY  GAOL,  under  the  Court-Room.      One 

day-room  to  the  ftreet ;  and  two  inner  or  night-rooms :  not  clean. 

In  the  Keeper's  houfe  is  a  room  for  Debtors ;   and  another  in 

which  Women-felons  were  kept  when  the  Aflizes  were  held  here. 

No  Court-yard  :  no  water  acceffible  to  Prifoners.     Allowance 

two-pence    a   day.      Keeper    a   Sergeant  :    no   Salary  :    Fees 

^0:6:0:  no  Table. 

Debtor.     Felons. 
1774,     April  14,     I     -     None. 

1776,     May    25,     0-0. 

DOVER  CASTLE,  for  Debtors  in  the  Cinque-Ports,  i.e. 
Hafiings,  Hover i  Hyth,  Romney  and  Sandwich. 

The  Earl  of  Holdernefs  is  Bodar.  Three  rooms :  no  yard : 
no  water.  Entrance  Fee  £1  :  6  ;  8.  Keeper  is  Bailiff  for 
the  Cinque-Ports.  Salary  ^30.  His  Prifon  dirty  :  his  apo- 
logy for  it  was  that  "  he  had  been  abfent  fome  weeks  on  his 
bufinefs  as  an  Officer." 

1776,     Feb.  17,     Prifoners  4. 

DOVER  TOWN  GAOL.  One  room  of  it  is  the  Bridewell. 
The  Gaol  is  two  rooms  on  the  ground-floor,  and  two  above. 
No  fire-places.  All  clofe  and  offenfive.  The  court-yard  not 
fecure.  Allowance  four-pence  a  day.  Keeper,  no  Salary^ 
but  a  Chaldron  of  Coals :  Fees  ^^o':  8:2:  no  Table. 

Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
177 5>    My  25,     I       -       2, 
1776,     Feb.  17,     3       -       4, 
M^y  25,     2-3. 

G  g  2  COUNTY 


227 


228  SUSSEX.        Home  Circuit. 

COUNTY    GAOL     at    HORSHAM. 

GAOLER>     Charles  Coopet: 

Salary,  ;/^i2o  of  late;  inftead  of  the  Beer-Tap. 

Fees,     Debtors,  7   /•  ^ 

Felons,     i  '^ 
Tranfports,     -     -     2  ;  2  :  o    each. 
Licence,  for  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors^  none. 

Felons,     two   pennyworth     of    bread    a    day 
(weight  i8  OHtifes,  Sep.  1774). 

Garnifh,       £0:6:6. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Dec.    17,     II     -  -       7, 

1774,  Sept.  29,       5     -  -     i3> 
1776,  Feb.    22,     13     -  -       8. 

CHAPLAIN,  None.  But  the  Clergyman  who  attends  condemned 

Criminals  has  £^  a  year. 

SURGEON,     lately  dead. 

Salary,     £^  for  Felons. 

RcMARKs.         THE  Rooms  are  too  fmall,  except  the  Free-ward  for  Debtors. 
No  ftraw  :   no  yard ;  and  yet  ground  enough   for  one   behind  the 
Gaol.     Tranfports   convi6ted   at   Quarter  Seflions,    have,    as  thofe 
condemned  at  Aflize,  the  King's  allowance  of  two  fhillings  and  fix- 
pence 


Home  Circuit.         SUSSEX. 

pence  a  week.     Lent  Affize  at  Eaft-Grinftead  -,   where  there  is  no 
Prifon  :  Summer  Affize,  at  Lewes  and  Horjham  alternately. 

There  is  a  new  Gaol  building.  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  in 
concurrence  with  the  other  Gentlemen  of  the  County,  has  interefted 
himfelf  much  in  this  affair  :  the  Situation  is  judicioufly  chofenj  and 
the  Plan  is  fuch  as  appears  to  me  particularly  well  fuited  for  the 
purpofe. 

TABLE      OF      JPEES. 

Su£ex.      A  List  of  Fees  taken  by  the  Gaoler  of  the  faid  County. 

C.      S.    D. 

Upon  the  difcharge  of  every  Debtor  —  —  1:2:4 

The  Sheriff's  Fee  thereupon  —  —  o  :   1 1   ;  8 

Turnkey  thereupon  —  —  —  0:2:6 

For  every  peck  of  charcoal  — •  —  —  0:0:3 

For  every  fagot  —  —  —  0:0:2! 

For  every  quart  of  fmall  beer  —  —  o  :     o  :     i- 

For  lodgings  in  the  Gaoler's  beds  by  the  week  —  0:2:0 

Upon  the  difcharge  of  every  Felon,  to  the  Gaoler  —  1:2:4 

Allowed  and  fettled  at  the  General  Quarter  Seffions  held  at  Petworth 
the  3d  day  of  Odober  1737     By  us 

John  Butler 
R.  Mill 
J.  Jewkes 
W"  Gratwicke. 


229 


COUNTY 


230  SUSSEX.        Home  Circuit. 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 

HORSHAM.  OnTly  one  room;  about  ten 'feet  and  a  half  by  fix 
and  a  half,  not  fix  and  a  half  high.  In  it  "the  Prifoners  are 
always  locked  up.  Allowance  two  pennyworth  of  bread  a 
day :  no  employment.  Keeper,  a  Widov/,  whofe  Hufband 
died  of  the  Gaol-Fever:  Salary  ;^io:  Fees  ^^o  :  3  :  4:  no 
Table. 

1774,     Sept.  29,      Prifoners,  none. 

1776,     Feb.    22,      -      -     -     none. 

LEWES.  .Here  men  and  women  have  feparate  apartments, 
courts,  &c.  Keeper's  Salary  £;io.  Fees  jTo  :  6  :  8  :  no  Table. 
The  produce  of  the  Prifoners  work  for  three  years  part,  was 
not  twenty  fliillings  a  year;  although  there  were  in  the  re- 
fpeftive  years  committed  Prifoners  45 — 85 — 65. 

1776,     Feb.  21,      Prifoners  5. 

PETWORTH.  This  Bridewell  has  two  rooms  :  one  feventeen 
feet  by  ten,  full  fix  feet  high ;  the  other  eighteen  by  nine,  fix 
feet  high  :  too  fmall  for  the  general  number  of  Prifoners.  No 
chimney  :  no  yard  :  no  water :  no  employment.  Allowance  a 
penny  loaf  a  day.  This  I  once  found  to  weigh  /even  ounces  and 
a  half .  Keeper's  Salary  lately  augmented  from  ^{^  12  to  ^20. 
Fees  ;(^o  :  6  :  8  :    no  Table. 

TiiE  Keeper  told  me  (in  September  1774)  that  "  all   his 

"  Prifoners 


Home  Circuit.         S.    U     S     S     E     X.  231 

"  Prifoners  were,    upon  dlicharge,    much   weakened   by   the 
"  clofe  confinement,  and  fmall  allowance." 

Thomas  Draper  and  WiUiam  Godfrey  were  committed  the 
6  th  of  January  1776;  the  former  died  the  nth,  the  other  the 
26th  of  the  fame  month.  William  Cox,  committed  the  13th 
of  January,  died  the  23d.  None  of  them,  had  the  Gaol-Fever. 
I  do  not  affirm  that  thefe  men  were  famifhed  to  death  :  it  was 
extreme  cold  weather.  However,  fince  that  time,  the  allow- 
ance of  bread  is  doubled.  For  this  the  Prifoners  are  indebted- 
to  the  kind,  attention  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 

1774,     Sept.  28,      Prifoners  4^ 
1776,     Feb.    23,      -     -     -     8.,., 


CHICHESTER    CITY    GAaL, 

Over  the  Eaft-gate.  Has  two  or  three  rooms  j  and  a  court-yard^s 
but  no  water.  Allowance  to  Felons  &c.  two-pence  a  day.  Gaoler, 
a  Sergeant  at  Mace :  Salary  ^5  :  Fees,  Debtors  ;^o  :  6  :  8  :  no  Table, 

Number  of    -       -     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     Sept.  28,     I     -     -     o, 
1776,     Feb,    25,     2     -     -     I, 


COUNTY 


232 


SURRY.  Home  Circuit, 


COUNTY   GAOL   in    SOUTHWARK. 

GAOLER,     Betijamln  Hall. 
Salary,  none. 

Feesj     Debtors,    /o  :   ii  :  4. 
Felons,  o  :   15  :  4. 

Tranfports,      -     (See  Remarks.) 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine.     The  Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  \  three  halfpennyworth  of  bread  a  day 
Felons,    j  (weight     17    ounces,      Dec.    1776). 
Legacies.     (See  Remarks.) 

Garnifli,        Debtors,    ^(^0  :  4  :  6. 
Felons,         0:1:0. 

Number  of  -        -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 
1774,  Feb.     9>  -     30     -  -     60 
1776,  March  4,  -     19    -  -     59 
Dec.  25,  -     18     -  -      If 

CHAPLAIN,    Rev.  Mr.  Dyer.  ^  ^ 

Duty— Sunday, 
Salary,  ^50. 

SURGEON,     Meff".  Burt  and  Co. 

Salary,  ^^20  for  this  Gaol,  and  the  Bridewell  in  St.  George's 
Fields  J  and  £^  for  Travelling  Charges  to  report  at 
the  Quarter  Seffions,  the  State  of  the  Prifoners, 


SOUTH- 


Home  Circuit.        SURRY.  233 

SOUTHWARK. 

THE  NEW  GAOL,  befides  the  Gaoler's  Houfe,  and  the  Remarks. 
Tap -room  has  for — Mafter's-fide  Debtors  a  parlour,  and  four 
other  fizeable  rooms  3  and  for  Common-fide  Debtors,  four  good 
rooms.  Mr.  Hall  takes  care  to  prevent  thefe  being  crowded 
with  the  wives  and  children  of  the  Debtors.  For  thefe  Pri- 
foners,  there  is  a  court-yard :  into  which  Felons  are  not  admitted ; 
except  a  few,  whom  the  Gaoler  has  reafons  for  indulging  with  that 
diftindtion. 

The  ward  for  Men-felons  has  fix  rooms  on  three  floors :  in  thefe 
they  fleep.  There  is  a  yard  belonging  to  it. — The  ward  for  Women- 
felons  has  two  lower  rooms,  two  above  ;  and  a  court-yard  belonging 
to  it.  In  the  two  upper  rooms,  are  put  Malefa6tors  of  either  fex 
condemned  to  die. 

I  HAVE  here  noted  nineteen  rooms  :  yet  they  are  not  fufEcient  for 
the  number  of  Prifoners.  Mr.  Hall  is  fometimes  obliged  to  put 
Men-felons  into  fome  rooms  of  the  Women's  ward. 

In  fo  clofe  a  Prifon  fituated  in  a  populous  neighbourhood,  I  did 
not  wonder  to  fee  in  March  1776  feveral  Felons  fick  on  the  floors. 
No  bedding  nor  flraw  :  no  Infirmary  :  no  Chapel :  Divine  Service  is 
performed  in  the  Parlour ;  which  is  too  fmall  for  the  purpofe  j  about 
fixteen  feet  fquare.  The  Adl  for  preferving  the  health  of  Prifoners 
is  on  a  painted  board.  The  Claufes  of  the  Adl  againft  Spirituous 
Liquors  are  hung  up. 

If  the  County  do  not  build  a  new  Gaol,  more  roomy  and  airy, 
and  in  a  better  fituation,  it  would  at  leaft  be  advifeable   to  add  to 

H  h  this 


234 


S     U     R     R     Y.         Home  Circuit. 

this  an  Infirmary ;  which,  with  a  Chapel  under  it,  they  may  build  on 
the  vacant  ground  beyond  the  Women's  ward. 

Transports  have  not  the  King's  allowance  of  two  fhillings  and 
fix-pence  a  week.  For  thefe  Convidts  a  Merchant  contracHis  with 
the  County  to  take  them  at  the  Gaol :  the  Gaoler  fends  them  to 
the  fhip,  attended  by  his  fervants ;  and  receives  from  the  Merchant 
j^o  :  lo  :  6  for  each  Prifoner  fo  conduced. 

Lent  Affize  is  at  Kingjion:  Summer  A/Tize  at  Guildford  and 
Croydon  alternately.     At  this  lafl:  town  there  is  no  Prilbn. 

There  is  hung  up  in  the  Gaol  a  printed  Lift  of  fixteen  Legacies 
and  Donations.  The  dates  of  the  firft  fix  are  1555,  --7  t,  —76,  —84, 
—97,  —98.  Three  are  in  the  next  century,  viz.  1609,  —38,  —56. 
The  other  feven  are  not  dated :  and  one  of  them  noted  on  the  Lift, 
has  not  been  received  fince  1726.  There  are  alfo  other  articles 
which  feem  to  need  infpecftion.  Two  of  the  Charities  are  for 
Debtors  exprefsly :  the  others  are  not  fo  diftinguiftied ;  but  Debtors 
have  them  all.  In  the  title  of  the  paper  it  is  faid,  "  The  Gaol  was 
formerly  called  the  White  Lion  Prijon."  The  common  Seal  of  the 
Prifon  is  a  Lion  rampant. 

There  is  another  Legacy  bequeathed  by  Eleanor  Gw)^nn,  not, 
I  think,  in  the  Lift;  from  which  are  fent  to  this  Prifon  once  in  eight 
weeks,  fixty-four  penny  loaves.  Common-fide  Debtors  have  this 
as  well  as  the  preceding  Gifts. 


Surrey, 


Home  Circuit.         SURRY.  235 


Surreyy  A  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  tal<.en  by  the  Gaoler— 
to  wit.  xJL  of  the  common  Gaol  or  Prifon  in  Southwark  — for 
any  Prifoner  committed  —  Chamber  Rent  there  or  Difcharge  — 
purfuant  to  the  Statute— made — 12th — of  the  reign  of  our  Sovereign 
Lord  George  III  &c.  and  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1772. 


I.     S.     D, 

For  the  difcharge  from  the  faid  Gaol  of  every  Prifoner  T 

committed   for   Treafon,    or   Felony   or    any  offence  >  o  :   13  :     4 

againft  his  Majefty's  peace,  to  the  Gaoler  or  Keeper     J 

To  the  Turnkey  on  every  commitment  of  fuch  Prifoner  o  :      1:0 

To  the  Turnkey  on  the  difcharge  of  every  fuch  Prifoner  o  :     i   :     o 

On  the  commitment  or  coming  into  Gaol  of  every  Prifoner  1  2-0 

in  a  Civil  Adion,  to  the  faid  Gaoler  or  Keeper  ■* 

On  the  difcharge  of  every  fuch  Prifoner,  to  the  faid  Gaoler!        .     6  ■   10 

or  Keeper  —  —  —     J 

And  to  the  Turnkey  —  — 

For  the  ufe  of  bed   bedding  and  fheets  for  each  of  the  faid 
mentioned   Prifoners    on    the   Mafter  fide   of  the  faid 
Prifon,  for  the  firll  night,  to  the  faid  Gaoler  or  Keepe: 
And  for  every  night  after  the  firft  —  —  o  : 


id. 


But  if  two  fuch  Prifoners  lye  together  in  one  bed,  then  1 
one  penny  halfpenny  each  —  ^      ' 

To  the  Clerk  of  the  Papers  on  every  difcharge  of  any  Pri-  7 
foner  in  a  Civil  Aftion  —  —      J 

For  every  fuch  Prifoner  as  fliall  chufe  to  be  on  the  Mailer ' 
fide  for  the  ufe  of  bed  and  bedding  and  fheets  the  firft  night 

For  every  night  after  the  firft  —  —  0:0:3 

But  if  two  fuch  Prifoners  lye  together  in  one  bed,  then  two-  7 


1 

nt  J 


4 


pence  each  —  — 

H  h  2  If 


236  SURRY.         Home  Circuit. 

C     s.     D. 

If  any  fuch  Prifoner  through  poverty  can  only  provide  a ") 

couch,  then  to  the  faid  Gaoler  or  Keeper  for  chamber  >  o  :     o  ;     I 
rent  fer  'week  —  —  —     J 

Seen  and  allowed 
By  us 


A.  Onslow 
w"  joliffe 
Haymond. 


N.  Herdidge 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 

St.  GEORGE'S  FIELDS.  Built  1772.  Separate  wards  and 
court-yards  for  men  and  women.  In  the  men's  ward,  two 
rooms,  and  a  work-fhop,  which  is  about  twenty  feet  fquare, 
below ;  and  three  rooms  above :  in  one  of  thefe  are  beds  at 
two  ftiillings  and  fix-pence  a  week.  The  women's  ward  has, 
below,  one  room,  and  a  work-fhop,  which  is  about  twenty 
feet  fquare ;  and  three  rooms  above  :  in  one  of  them  beds  at 
two  {hillings  and  fix-pence  a  week.  There  is  a  feparate  room 
for  faulty  apprentices.  All  the  rooms  are  planked.  Window- 
Ihutters,  and  iron  bars :  no  glafs.  There  is  no  Infirmary. 
In  March  1776  I  faw  feveral  fick  on  the  floors  :  the  County 
allows  no  bedding  nor  ftraw.  In  April  only  one  fick,  on  a  bed 
whieh  he  paid  for.  In  December  a  woman  fick  on  the  floor. 
The  rooms  are  dirty :  in  two  or  three  of  them  were  fowls. 
Prifoners  allowance  three  halfpence  a  day  in  bread  (weight 
Dec.  1776,  17  ounces).  No  firing.  I  did  not  fee  any  at  work. 
Keeper   a  Sheriff's  Officer :    Salary  ^iy.    Licence  for  Beer. 

The 


Home  Circuit.         SURRY. 


237 


The   Claufes  of  the  A&  againft  Spirituous  Liquors,  and  the        bride- 
A<a  for  preferving  the  health  of  Prifoners,  are  both  hung  up.  wells. 

1776,     March  14,     Prifoners  25, 

April    20,     -     -     -    24, 

Dec.      25,     -     -     -    29. 

Of  the  twenty-nine  Prifoners  at  the  laft  date,  were,  four 
women  fentenced  for  ten  years,  one  woman  for  three  years, 
three  men  for  three  years,  four  men  for  two  years,  three  men 
for  one  year. 

In  the  men's  court  is  a  board,  on  which  is  painted  as 
follows  : 

FEES  to  be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  this  Prifon. 

£•    s.    D. 
On  every  Prifoner  for  Ward  Dues  o  •  o  ■   2 

On  the  difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  committed  —         0:4:2 

Prifoners  brought  in  by  a  Juftice's  Warrant  and  difcharged     0:2:6 

NO  Garnifh  to  be  taken  from  one  Prifoner  to  another  by  Order 
of  the  Keeper. 

N.  B.  This  Prohibition  is  difregarded. 

KINGSTON  UPON  Thames.  This  Bridewell,  built  in  1775, 
has  a  houfe  for  the  Keeper;  and  feparate  wards  (quite 
diftinft  buildings)  for  men  and  women :  with  feparate  courts, 
work-lhops,  pumps,  &c.  Each  ward  has  two  lower  rooms ; 
three  fteps  above  the  ground  j  and  two  chambers.  The  men's 
rooms  are  near  feventeen  feet  by  fourteen,  and  full  nine  high  : 
the  women's,  about  fifteen  feet  fquare,  and  nine  high.  Every 
room  planked  all  round  :  a  chimney  in  each ;  and  two  win- 
dows,   with  fhutters,    and  iron  bars;   no  glafs.— The  men's 

court- 


238  SURRY.         Home  Circuit. 

BRIDE-  court-yard  fifty-eight  feet  by  fifty  :  the  women's,  forty-five  by 

WELLS.  thirty-five.     Prifoners  pay  a  Ihilling   entrance   for  the  ufe  of 

them.     There  is  alfo  a  room  built  quite  feparate  for  faulty 

apprentices ;  about  eight  feet  by  eleven,  and  full  eight  high  j 

it  has  a  fire-place. 

It  is  pity  that  to  a  Prifon  in  other  relpefts  fo  commodious, 
the  Gentlemen  did  not  add  an  infirmary.  Ufing  any  of  the 
rooms  for  that  purpofe,  will  not  prevent  the  communication  of 
Small-Pox  &c. 

County  allowance  to  Prifoners  a  three  halfpenny  loaf  a  day 
(weight  14/0  15  ounces).  No  bedding.  They  were  at  work. 
The  Keeper  has  the  profit  of  it ;  a  Salary  of;^25;  and  Fees 
£0  :  2  '•  A'-  no  Table. — Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Li- 
quors not  hung  up. 

One  of  the  Prifoners  who  was  committed  for  baflardy, 
and  not  finding  fureties,  had  been  fent  back  hither,  from  the 
preceding  Quarter  Seffions  at  Ryegate ;  where  there  is  no 
Prifon.  I  had  heard  of  the  hardfhips  fuffered  by  Prifoners 
when  conveyed  for  trial  to  fuch  towns ;  and  inquired  of  this 
man,  what  was  his  fituation  at  Ryegate.  He  faid  that  "  he 
*'  and  fifteen  others  were  confined  there  two  or  three  days  in  a 
"  very  fmall  room  j  and  almoft  fuffocated."  The  Keeper  who 
was  prefent  confirmed  the  fadt. 

Quarter  sessions  are  held  Lady-Day  at  Ryegate,  Mid- 
fummer  at  Guildford,  Michaelmas  at  Kingjlon,  Chriftmas  at 
St.  Margaret's  Hill. 

1776,     April  26,     Prifoners  4. 


At 


Home  Circuit.         SURRY.  239 

At   KINGSTON   there  is  alfo  the 

TOWN  GAOL.  It  contains  two  lower  rooms,  and  three 
chambers ;  the  cielings  very  low.  A  court-yard ;  not 
fecure.     The  rooms  are  dirty ;  and  at  laft  Aflize  were 

full  of  Prifoners.     Gaoler  keeps  a  public  houfe 

No  Salary. — Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors 
not  hung  up. 

1776,     April  26,     Prifoners,  none. 

In  the  'Town  Hall  there  is  a  table  of  gaoler's 
FEES,  and  various  other  fees.  It  is  dated  lOth  Decem""- 
1603  ;  and  confirmed  by  the  High  Steward  of  the 
Town,  the  King's  Attorney  General  Steward  of  the 
Court,  the  two  Bailiffs,  the  Recorder  &c. 

£.    S.    D. 
For  every  one  arrefted  wanting  fureties  and  fent  to  I 

Gaol  —  —  _         J        ■       ■ 

For  every  one  fent  to  ward  upon  commandement  or  i  . 

arrefted  for  a  trifle  or  being  very  poor  not  above  J 
For  the  Fee  of  the  Irons  of  every  one  committed  for' 
Felony  or  fufpicion  of  Felony  or  for  any  other 
heinous  crime  —  — 


:l 


I  AM  tempted  to  tranfcribe  many  more  articles  of 

this  curious   ancient  Table  :   I  cannot  omit  the  two  or 

three  following. 

/.    S.    D. 

For  arrefting  any  Freeman  of  this  Town  Inhabitant  7  ^ 

S-   o  :  o  :   6 
within  the  Watch  —  J 

For  the  Attorney's  Fee   upon  evidence  delivering  to  7        _  , 

a  Jury,  when  there  is  no  other  Counfell     —      ^ 

Every  Counfeller's  Fee  in  this  Court  —  o  :  6  :  8 

GUILDFORD 


240  SURRY.        Home  Circuit. 

BRIDE-         GUILDFORD   BRIDEWELL   has   four  rooms,    befides   the 
^^'•^^'  Infirmary  (lately  a  ftable),  and  the  condemned  room.     Yet 

when  the  Affize  is  held  here,  and  Prifoners  are  brought  from 
Southivark,  it  is  much  crowded.  A  court-yard,  for  the  ufe  of 
which  every  Prifoner  pays  Entrance-money  one  fhilling.  No 
fewer.  Two  rooms  have  in  the  roof  an  iron-grated  lattice, 
about  five  feet  by  four,  and  an  open  turret  above;  very  ufeful 
for  frefliening  thofe  rooms.  Allowance  a  threepenny  loaf  every 
other  day  (weight  Feb.  1776,  two  founds ) .  No  bedding  nor 
ftraw. — I  did  not  fee  any  at  work. — Keeper's  Salary  ^^25 : 
Fees  ;^o  :  3  :  4  :  no  Table.  The  Claufes  of  the  Adl  againft 
Spirituous  Liquors  are  hung  up. 

1773,     Dec.  17,     Prifoners  6. 
1776,     Feb.  24,     -     -     -     6. 


COUNTY 


Norfolk  Circuit.     BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.  24* 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    AYLESBURY. 


GAOLER,    Thomas  Smith. 

Salary,  none.  (See  Remarks.) 
Fees,  Debtors,  ;^o  :  15  :  10. 
Felons,  o  :  18  :  4. 
Tranfports,  -  (See  Remarks.) 
Licenfe,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    (See   Remarks.) 
Garnifh,    Debtors,  ^To  :  8  :  o. 
Felons,        0:2:6. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.    27,     6     -  -       17, 

1774,  Nov.  12,  4  -  -  8, 
1776,  Jan.  3,  10  -  -  10. 
Nov.    2,     7     -  -       13, 

CHAPLAIN,    Rev.  Mr.  Hopkins. 
Duty— Sunday. 
Salary,  £^0. 

SURGEON,    Mr.  Ludgate. 

Salary,  ^^20  for  Debtors,  Felons,  and  the  Bridewell. 

ONE  Court-yard.    K\vdX\{ox  Debtors;  and  fundry   rooms  for  the     Remarks. 
Mafter's-fide  :  but  no  free  ward.     In  the  Felon's  day-room  is  an  oven 
for  purifying  the  cloaths.     A  feparate  room,    or  two  for  Women- 

I  i  Felons. 


242  BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.     Norfolk  Circuit. 

Felons.  Two  condemned  Rooms.  In  the  interval  of  my  firft  and 
fecond  vifit  fix  or  feven  died  of  the  Gaol-Diftemper.  At  my  laft 
vifits,  after  the  appointing  Mr.  Ludgate,  all  the  Prifoners  were 
well.  No  Infirmary.  No  Chapel :  Divine  Service  is  performed  in 
the  Shire-hall,  which  joins  to  the  Prifon.  No  Table  of  Fees. 
Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

Mr.  Smith  contracts  to  fupply  Debtors  and  Felons  with  a  pound 
of  bread  a  day,  and  two  hot  dinners  a  week  j  and  to  convey  Tranf- 
ports  to  London  J  for  ^70  a  year. 


COUNTY   BRIDEWELL  at  AYLESBURY. 

The  two  work  rooms,  and  the  lodging  rooms,  are  fmall :  one  of 
the  latter  only  5^  feet  by  4,  and  6  feet  high.  A  court  in  front  only 
8  feet  wide,  lately  enclofed  from  the  fpacious  Court-yard  of  the 
Keeper  behind  the  County  Gaol.  Mr.  Smith  (the  County  Gaoler)  is 
Keeper;  falary  ^^30.  He  puts  in  a  Deputy,  who  ferves  for  living 
rent  free.     Prifoners  allowance  one  pound  of  bread  a  day. 

1774,     Nov.  12,  Prifoners  2. 

1776,     Jan.      3.     -      -       3. 

Nov.     2,     -      -       I. 


COUNTY 


Norfolk  Circuit.      BEDFORDSHIRE.  24; 


COUNTY    GAOL     at    BEDFORD. 

GAOLER,     'Thomas  Howard. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,  7   r 

Felons,     5^°^  ^7  ••^' 
Tranfports,     If  only  one  £6  :    if  two,  ,^5  each :  ail  above 

two,  £^  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  two  quartern-loaves  a  week  each. 
Felons,    two  halfpeck-loaves  a  week  each. 
Garnilh,        Debtors,    ^^o  :  5  :  o. 

Number  of    -       -      Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
i773>     -      -       5  to  10,        6  to  9, 
1776,    Feb.  12,       8,    -    -      5. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Lloyd. 
Duty-— Sunday  and  Thurfday. 
Salary,    £20. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Gadjby. 

Salary,     ^12  for  the  Gaol  and  Bridewell. 

IN    this    Prifon    there    is  a  day-room   for  Debtors,    which    is     Remarks. 
ufed  as  a  Chapel,    and  three  or  four  lodging-rooms  :   for  Felons, 
two    day -rooms,    one    for   men,    the   other    for  women,    without 
fire-places  :     two    dungeons,     down     eleven     fleps,     and    often 

I  i  2  very 


244  BEDFORDSHIRE.      Norfolk  Circuit. 

very  damp.  The  ftraw,  for  which  the  County  allows  the  Gaoler 
£^  a  year,  is  not  on  the  floors,  but  on  frames  or  bedfteads.  On  ap- 
plication, the  Juftices  allow  in  winter  coals  both  to  Felons  and 
Debtors.  The  court-yard  is  common  to  both,  and  fmall.  No 
apartments  for  the  Gaoler. 

Clauses  of  the  Aft  againfl:  Spirituous  Liquors  are  not  hung  up. 
When  I  was  Sheriff,  I  was  culpably  ignorant  of  that  Aft.  No  In- 
firmarj'.  About  twenty  years  ago  the  Gaol-Fever  was  in  this  Prifon  : 
fome  died  there,  and  many  in  the  town ;  among  whom  was  Mr. 
Daniel  the  Surgeon,  who  attended  the  Prifoners.  His  SuccelTor, 
Mr.  Gadfly,  judicioufly  changed  the  medicines  from  Sudorifics  (ge- 
nerally ufed  before)  to  Bark  and  Cordials :  and  a  Sail-Ventilator 
being  foon  after  put  up,  the  Gaol  has  been  free  from  the  Fever 
almoft  ever  fince. 

FEES  on  a  printed  paper,  figned  by  the  late  Gaoler,  as  follows  : 

ALL  Perfons  that  come  to  this  place,  either  by  warrant,  commitment, 
or  verbally;  muft  pay  before  difcharg'd,  fifteen  fhillings  and  four 
pence,  to  the  Gaoler,  and  two  (hillings  to  the  Turnkey, 

T.  Richardson. 


COUNTY   BRIDEWELL    at    BEDFORD, 

Consists  of  three  rooms  on  the  ground-floor:  no  fire-place:  a 
fmall  court-yard :  no  water  acceflible  to  the  Prifoners.  —  Keeper's 
Salary  ^Tjo  :  no  Fees. 

1776,     Feb.  13,     Prifoners  3. 

COUNTY 


Norfolk  Circuit.     HUNTINGDONSHIRE.  245 


COUNTY   GAOL    at    HUNTINGDON. 

GAOLER,     Henry  Blane,  navf  Robert  Numu 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,     /^o  :   12  :     6. 
Felons,  o  :   15  :   10. 

Tranfports,     If  only   one   £iz;     if  more,    l^  each:    he 
paying  the  Clerk  of  Affize  a  guinea  for  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     four  halfquartern-loaves  a  week. 
Garnifh,         Debtors,  £0:1:6. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.     5,       7     -  -       4, 

J  774,  Jan.     29,       7     -  -       3> 

1775,  Nov.     9,       4     -  -       S> 

1776,  Sep.    27,       3     -  -       6. 

CHAPLAIN,  Ktv.yir.  Brock.  Now  no  Chaplain.  (See  Remarks.) 
SURGEON,     Mr.  Hunt. 
Salary,      lS-S-°- 

THIS  GAOL  is  alfo  the  county  bridewell  and  town  gaol.       Remarks. 

For  Debtors,  a  day-room  or  kitchen ;  and  over  it  a  large  lodging- 
room.     Near  it  is  a  day-room  for  Felons  :  and  down  nine  fteps  a 

dungeon 


J46  HUNTINGDONSHIRE.     Norfolk  Circuit. 

dungeon  for  Men-felons ;  in  which  is  a  fmall  condemned  room.  In 
another  place,  down  feven  Heps,  is  a  dungeon  for  Women-felons : 
the  floor  of  it  level  with  the  court-yard :  in  which  is  the  Bridewell. 
This  has  two  rooms  below  for  men  -,  and  two  above  for  women. 
The  Prifon  is  too  fmall  :  but  I  always  found  the  whole  of  it  re- 
markably clean.  Claufes  of  Aft  againfl  Spirituous  Liquors  not 
hung  up.  No  Infirmarj-.  Mr.  Nunn's  Salary  for  the  Bridewell  is 
;^24  :  i6  :  o,  for  the  Town  Gaol  £2- — Straw  ^^4  :  16  :  o  a  year. 

I  WAS  forry  to  hear  at  my  laft  vifit  that  Mr.  Brock,  the  late 
Chaplain,  who  officiated  very  conftantly  twice  a  week,  and  had  a 
Salary  of  /20,  was  difmifled.  He  would  have  continued  his  at- 
tendance, without  the  Salary  j  but  an  order  was  made  exprefsly  for- 
bidding it. 


TABLE      OF      FEES. 


Huntingdottjhire.  \  Table  of  the  ancient  accuftomed  Fees 
X~\.  demanded  taken  and  received  time  imme- 
morial by  the  Gaoler  for  the  time  being  of  his  Majefty's  Gaol  in  the 
Town  of  Huntingdon  and  for  the  County  of  Huntingdon  as  well  for 
Civil  Prifoners  as  Criminal  Prifoners. 

£.    S.     D. 
For  the  Difmiffion  Fee  for  each  Debtor  to  the  Keeper       —    0:10:0 
For  the  like  to  the  Turnkey  —  —  —    0:2:6 

For  Debtors  bed  per  iveei  —  —  —     o  :     2:4 

For  bed  per  iveei  if  two  Debtors  lye  together        —  —0:3:6 

As 


Norfolk  Circuit.     HUNTINGDONSHIRE. 


247 


As   to   Criminal  Prilbners, 


For  the  Difmiffion  Fee  of  each  Criminal  Prifoner  difchargedT 
out  of  cuftody,  either  by  the  Magiftrates,  or  by  the  y-  o 
Courts  of  Affize  or  Seffions  —  —   J 

For  the  like  to  the  Turnkey  —  __       o 

For  bed  per  nueek  each  Fine  Trefpafs  or  Felon  —       o 

For  bed  fer  week  if  two  lye  together  —  _       © 


I.     S.     D. 


13 


6 
6 
8 


Robert  Nunn 

Keeper  of  the  County  Gaol  of 
Huntingdonfhire 

06t.  14.  1774. 


There  is  a  rafure,  which  cancels  the  name  of  the  former  Gaoler 
Hemy  Blane,  and  the  date  when  he  figned. 


COUNTY 


248  CAMBRIDGESHIRE.     Norfolk  Circuit. 


COUNTY  GAOL,     CAMBRIDGE  CASTLE. 

GAOLER,     Simeon  Saunders. 
Salary,     ^(^12  :   14  :  o. 
Fees,     Debtors,     ^o  :   14  :  8. 
Felons,         o  :  10  :  8. 
Tranfports,     £G  :  6  :  o    each :     he    paying    the    Clerk 

of  AfTize  ;^  I  :  I  :  o  for  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     two-pence  a  day. 
Garnifh,       ;^o  :   i   :  o. 

Number  of  -        -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.    4,  -       8     -  -       2, 

1774,  Dec.  13,  -  6  -  -  4, 
1776,  Feb.  9,  -  8  -  -  6, 
Sep.   27,  -     10     -  -       o. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,        Mr.  Prince. 

Salary,  nonej  he  makes  a  Bill. 

Rem.^rks.  the  prison  is  the  Gate  of  the  old  Caftle.  Below  are  two 
ftrong  rooms ;  one  for  Men-felons,  the  other  for  Women.  You  go 
up  twenty-two  ftone  fteps  outfide  to  the  Debtors  apartments.  On 
the  firft  floor  is  a  room  for  the  Turnkey ;    a   large  kitchen ;    and 

two 


Norfolk  Circuit.     CAMBRIDGESHIRE.  249 

two  or  three  other  rooms.  Above  them  are  three  rooms  and  a  con- 
demned room.  All  the  rooms  are  fizeable,  but  not  very  fecure  :  a 
Prifoner  efcaped  lately. — Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors 
hung  up,  by  a  written  Order  of  Thomas  Cotkran,  Efq.  Sheriff. — 
Straw  twenty  fhillings  a  year. — The  Caftle-yard  is  fpacious,  but  not 
fafe  ;  and  Prifoners  have  not  the  ufe  of  it.     In  it  is  the  Gallows. 

Debtors  have  fome  fmall  relief  from  a  Legacy,  paid  by  St,  John's 
and  Sidney  Colleges  :  and  twenty  fhillings  a  year,  deducting  Land- 
tax,  from  an  Eftate  at  Croxton  in  this  County.  No  Memorial  of 
either  in  the  Prifon. 


Cambridgejhire.  /    |   ^  HE  General  Quarter  SefTions  of  the  Peace — 
JL       held  at  the  Shire  Hall  in  Ca7nbridge — the  1 9th 
—-of  April  in  the  5th  year— of  Geo  III— 1765  Before  Edward  Leeds 
Hale  Wortham  and  W'"  Howell  Even  Efq"  Juftices  &c. 

A       TABLE       OF       FEES 

Settled — purfuant  to  a  late  Aft — pafled  in  the  ad — of  George  II 
Intituled,  An  Aft  for  the  Relief  of  Infolvent  Debtors  &c.— to  be 
hung  up  publickly  in  the  Prifon  of  the  Caftle  of  Cambridge. 


C    0:5:4 


£•     S.     D 

To  the  Gaoler  for  the  Commitment  Fee  to  be  paid  at  the 

time  of  Commitment,  only  —  — 

To  the  Gaoler  for  the  difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  to  be  paid 

at  the  time  of  his  difcharge,  only  — 

To  the  Sheriff  for  the  difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  to  be  paid 

on  fuch  difcharge  —  

To  be  paid  for  the  weekly  rent  of  an  entire  chamber,  with 


5  :  4 


V    t    2    !    O 

one  bed  only,  and  clean  linnen 

Kk  And 


250  CAMBRIDGESHIRE.      Norfolk  Circuit, 

jC.   s.    d. 

And  in  cafe  more  Prifoncrsareput  into  a  room,  h  that  there  • 
is  occafion  for  more  beds  in  the  fame  chamber,    Then 
there  fliall  be  paid  for  the  ufe  of  the  chamber,  and  of  ^  o  :   i 
every  bed  and  linnen  and  cloaths  belonging  to  it  the 
fum  of  —  __  — 

Edw  Leeds 
Hale  Wortham 

W"  H    EWEN. 


COUNTY  BRIDEWELL  at  CAMBRIDGE 

Is  in  the  Caftle-yard ;  and  joins  to  the  Gaoler's  houfe.  It  has  a 
large  work  room  (in  which  was  a  quantity  of  hemp)  and  a  dark  room 
adjoining.  Above,  is  a  room  with  three  cages  or  lodging  rooms. 
Mr.  Saunders  the  County  Gaoler  is  Keeper :    Salary  ^^2. 

1774,     Dec.  13,     Prifoners  4,  ■ 
1776,     Feb.     9,     -     -     -     6, 
Sep.   27,     -     -     -     I. 

There  are  alfo  at    CAMBRIDGE    the 

TOWN  GAOL. 

Below  is  a  room  for  criminals,  the  Hole  -,  about  twenty-one  feet 
by  feven.  The  Prifoner,  whom  I  faw  there  laft,  was  a  miferable  ob- 
ject :  he  had  been  confined  fcveral  weeks :  no  allowance. 

Above  are  feveral  rooms  for  Debtors  -,  and  one  for  Criminals,  the 
Cage.    No  Court-yard  :  no  water  acceffible  to  Prifoners.     Gaoler  no 

Salary : 


Norfolk  Circuit.     CAMBRIDGESHIRE.  251 

Salary:    Commitment  Fee  £0  :  6  :  8,  perTabls  dated    17th  Jan. 

1765.     Licence  for  Beer. 

Number  of    -       -     Debtors.     Felons  &c, 
1774,     Dec.    13,      2    -    -    3, 

1776,     Feb.     9,      2    -    -    o, 

Sep.    28,      I    -    -     I. 

TOWN      BRIDEWELL. 

On  the  ground-floor,  one  room  for  men,  twenty-one  feet  by  fix:         cam- 
and  two  lodging-rooms  for  women;  each  nine  feet  by  five.     In  thefe      bridge. 
are  lately  put  bedfteads  for  ftraw  or  coverlids :  fo  that  Prifoners  do 
not  now  fleep  on  the  ground. — Above  is  a  large  work-room  for 
women  :  no  fire-place. 

There  is  a  fmall  court-yard  ;  of  no  ufe  to  the  Prifoners,  becaufe 
not  fecure.     No  water :  no  fewer.     The  whole  Prifon  out  of  repair. 

College,  or  Vice-Chancellor  Prifoners,  have  four-pence  on 
Sunday,  to  prevent  the  neceffity  of  their  working  on  that  day  as 
formerly.  Thofe  of  them  that  are  ill  are  properly  attended,  and 
have  three-pence  a  day.  No  allowance  of  bread  for  Town  Prifoners. 
Keeper's  Salary  ^^30  :  no  Fees.     Straw  ^i  :  i  :  o  a  year. 

The  Bridewell  ftands  in  the  back  yard  of  the  Keeper's  houfej 
which  was  bought  and  endowed  for  the  encouragement  of  wool- 
combers  and  fpinners  of  this  town.  The  bafis  of  the  Inftitution  was 
a  Legacy  of  the  famous  Carrier  Thomas  Hobfon.  To  anfwer  the  in- 
tention, the  Keeper  appointed  is  a  Clothier :  he  employs  not  only 
feveral  hands  upon  the  Foundation  of  the  Charity,  but  many  others  -, 
among  them  his  Prifoners. 

1774,     Dec.  13,     Prifoners  3, 
1776,     Sep.  28,     -     -     -    7. 

K  k  2  ELY 


2^- 


CAMBRIDGESHIRE.     Norfolk  Circuit. 


ELY 


GAOL. 


GAOLER,     John  Mda^ 

Salary,  none.  ^ 

Fees,     Debtors,  ^o  :   15 
Felons,        o  :   13 
Tranfports,    ^^5  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 


.1 


2r 

4- 


PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  7 
Felons,     3 

none. 

Garnifli,       j(^o  :   i  :  4, 

Nuniber  of    -       -     Debtors. 

Felons  &c. 

1774,     Jan.  30, 

6     - 

-       0, 

Dec.  13, 

1     - 

1776,     Feb.     9, 

II     - 

3' 

Sep.  28, 

7     - 

L- 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,       None. 

JliMAREs.  THIS  GAOL,  the  property  of  the  Bifhop,  who  is  Lord  of  the 
Franchife  of  the  Ifle  of  Ely,  was  in  part  rebuilt  by  the  late  Bifhop 
about  ten  years  ago ;  upon  complaint  of  the  cruel  method  *  which, 
for  want  of  a  fafe  Gaol,  the  Keeper  took  to  fecure  his  Prilbners. 

For 


*  This  «'U  by  chaining  them  down  on  their  backs  npon  a  floor,  arrors  which 
were  feveral  iron  bar? ;  «ith  an  iron  collar  with  fpikes  about  their  necks,  and  a 

heavy 


<J* 


Norfolk  Circuit.     CAMBRIDGESHIRE.  253 

For  Mafler's-fide  Debtors  three  rooms  up  ftairs  :  a  room  on  the 
fame  floor  for  condemned  Felons.  Below  ftairs  is  the  Felons  day- 
room  j  and  their  cell  or  night-room,  with  a  window  about  a  foot 
fquare.  There  is  a  court-yard  for  Felons,  with  an  ofFenfive  fewer. 
No  water. — For  Debtors  a  court-yard  with  a  pump ;  but  no  free 
ward.  No  Infirmary.  No  ftraw.  Claufes  of  the  Aft  againft  Spi- 
rituous Liquors  not  hung  up.  Keeper  a  Sheriff's  Officer  for  the 
Ifle,  and  for  the  County  of  Cambridge.     No-Table  of  Fees. 

Assize   in  this    Ifle,    of  late,    twice    a  year,    viz.    Lent   at  Ely,,. 
Summer  at  Wijheach. 

BRIDEWELLS. 

ELY.  One  room  below  for  men ;  and  two  above  for  women.  The 
yard  not  fecure;  and  Prifoners  always  locked  up  within  doors. 
In  February  1776,  a  woman  fick  :  no  Apothecary. — No  al- 
lowance ;  but  twenty  fhillings  a  year  for  ftraw. — Keeper's 
Salary  ^10. 

1774,     Dec.    13,     Prifoners  2, 

1776,     Feb.      %     -     '     -    2, 

Sep.    28,     -     -     -    I, 

WISBEACH.  Two  or  three  rooms.  No  court-yard.  No  water. 
Allowance  a  penny  a  day  j  and  ftraw  twenty  fhillings  a  year. 
Keeper's  Salary  £,\(>  :  no  Fees. — This  Prifon  might  be  im- 
proved on  the  Keeper's  Garden. 

1776J     Feb.     3,     Prifoners  1, 

heavy  iron  bar  over  their  legs.  An  excellent  Magiftrate,  James  Collyer,  Efq.  pre- 
fented  an  account  of  the  cafe,  accompanied  with  a  drawing',  to  the  King  ;  with 
which  his  Majefiy  was  much  affefted,  and  gave  immediate  orders  for  a  proper  inquiry 
and  redrefs. 

COUNTY 


254  NORFOLK.         Norfolk  Circuit. 


COUNTY  GAOL,     NORWICH  CASTLE. 

GAOLER,     George  Gynne. 

Salary,  none:    he  pays   the  Under  Sheriff  ^^31  :  lo  :  o 

per  annum. 
Fees,     Debtors,    ^^o  :     7  :  8, 

Felons,  o  ;  13  :  4. 
Tranfports,  £s  '•  ^S  '•  ^  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  •>  a  two-penny  loaf  each  ^^r  day  ('«;«^i?/ 
Felons,    3  in  Dec.  1774,  20  ounces),  and  every 
week  in  common  a  ftone  of  cheefe ; 
in  winter    twelve  bufhels    of  coals, 
in  fummer  fix  bulhels. 
Garnifli,       Debtors,      jC°  •  5  •  o. 
Felons,  0:1:0. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.     I,     30     -  -     14, 

Dec.  10,     ]6     -  -     15, 

1776,  Feb.     5,     29     -  -     16, 
Nov.  17,     18     -  -     32. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  JVillins. 
Duty  — Friday. 
Salary,   ^30. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Palgrave. 

Salary,  none :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

NORWICH 


Norfolk  Circuit.         NORFOLK.  255 

NORWICH      CASTLE 

IS  SITUATED  on  the  fummit  of  a  hill.  That  part  which  is  called  Remarks. 
the  Upper  Gaol  has  ten  rooms  for  Maller's-fide  Debtors ;  and  Leads 
for  them  to  walk  on. — The  Low  Gaol  has  feveral  rooms  for  Debtors, 
Felons  &c. — A  fmall  area  in  the  middle  of  the  Gaol,  in  which  are 
lately  made  fome  improvements  j  fuch  as  a  pump,  a  convenient 
bath,  and  fome  rooms  over  it.  There  is  a  dungeon  down  a  ladder 
of  eight  fteps,  for  Men-felons ;  in  which  is  often  an  inch  or  two  of 
water :  and  a  fmall  room  for  Women-felons ;  which  keeps  them 
always  feparate  from  the  men,  except  when  delicacy  would  moft  of 
all  require  it.  There  are  two  airy  rooms  for  the  fick  :  fo  diftincft 
from  the  reft  of  the  Prifon,  that  there  is  no  danger  of  fpreading  any 
infection  from  thence.  The  Gaoler  is  humane,  and  refped;ed  by  his 
Prifoners.  Thefe,  Felons  as  well  as  Debtors,  fell  at  the  grates  of 
their  feparate  day- rooms,  laces,  purfes,  nets  &c.  of  their  own 
making. 

A  NURSE  or  Matron  to  attend  the  fick;  and  provide  for  them, 
when  the  Surgeon  orders  it,  broth,  gruel,  milk-pottage  and  extra- 
firing. — She  orders  the  ftraw,  which  is  not  farmed,  but  paid  for  per 
load  by  the  County. — It  is  alfo  her  bufinels  to  fee  that  the  Prifoners 
be  duly  ferved  with  their  allowance  of  bread,  which  is  remarkably 
good.  At  Lent  Aflize  Prifoners  are  moved  from  hence  to  Thetford; 
and  put  into  a  dungeon  which  is  defcribed  in  that  place. 

Mrs.  Frances  Kempe  formerly  bequeathed  certain  Charities  to 
the  Poor  of  Norwich  and  Heyden  ;  and  a  Stipend  for  preaching  three 
Sermons  a  year.  For  Payment,  ftie  bound  an  eftate  in  Heyden  left  her 
by  her  father  John  Mingay,  Efq. — Among  the  Charities  were  fome  to 
Prifoners  in  this  Caftle,  and  in  the  City  Gaol.     Thefe  have  for  many 

years 


2r^(i  NORFOLK.         Norfolk  Circuit. 

years  pafl  received  nothing  j  although  the  Legacies  are  paid  to  the 
other  Objefts. 

TABLE      OF      FEES. 

Norfolk.      \      Table  of  the  Rates  Fees  and  Allowances  to  be — 

JLJL  taken  by  every  Gaoler  or  Keeper    of  any  Gaol  or 

Prifon   within   the   faid  County— fettled — at    the   General   Quarter 

SefTion— holden  by  Adjournoient  at  the  Caftle  of  Norwich— 2 1  July 

— 3d  of  George  II — 1729— in  purfuance — of  a  late  Aft— for  Relief 

of  Debtors  &c. 

That  is  to  fay 

C.    S.    D. 
For  the  commitment  or  coming  into  Gaol  of  any  PrifonerT    ^  .  ^ 

for  Debt  —  —  —  5 

For  chamber  rent  where  the  Gaoler  finds  bedding  and  lin-'p 

nen,  and  a  Prifoner  hath   a  bed   to  him  or  herfeif,  r    o  :  z  :  o 

per  'week  —  —  -~- 

Where  there  arc  two  in  a  bed  not  exceeding  per  iveek    —        0:1:6 
Where  there  are  three  in  a  bed  not  exceeding  per  iveek  7    r,  ■  r,   ■  (. 

each  Prifoner  —  »—  ■—    j 

For  the  Difcharge  of  thofe  in  Execution  —  —         0:5:4 

For  the  Difcharge  of  thofe  upon  Outlaiury       —  —         0:5:4 

For  the  Difcharge  of  thofe  upon  Common  Procefs  —         0:2:8 

WE    his   MajefVy's  Juftices  of  the  Peace— have  hereunto  fet  our 

hands— the  day  and  year  above  written 
31  July  1729  Wr  Bacon 

Confirmed  by  us  Edm"  Bacon 

James  Reynolds  Tom.  Turner 

W"  Branthwavte  Miles  Branthwayte 

R.  Bacon 
Miles  Branthwayte 

NORWICH 


Norfolk  Circuit.         NORFOLK.  257 

NORWICH    CITY  AND  COUNTY    GAOL. 

GAOLER,     Benjamin  Fakenham. 

Salary,  none  :  he  pays  the  Under-SherifF  ^^40  a  year. 
Fees,     Debtors,     ^o  :     6:8, 
Felons,         o  :   13  :  4. 
Tranfports,    £,S  '-  S  '•  °   ^^^h- 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  ")    a    two -penny    loaf    each,    lately 

Felons,    3   reduced  to  a  penny  loaf. 
Garnifli,       ^^o  :   i  :  o. 

Number  of  -       -      Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.     I,      5a     -  -    .  7, 

Dec.  10,       17     -  -       5, 

1776,  Feb.     5,      31     -  -     17, 
Nov.  17,      II     -  -     10. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Buckle. 

Duty— -Prayers,  once  a  fortnight  j   Sermon  one  Tuefday 

in  a  month. 
Salary,     ^^20. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Matchett. 

Salary,     i,S  '•  ^  '•  ^  ^^''^  Debtors  and  Felons. 

ONLY  one  court-yard.     Many  rooms  for  Mafter's-fide  Debtors.     Remarks. 
One  room  for  Common-fide  Debtors,  who  are  Freemen.     There  is 
no  room  for  thofe  who  are  not  free,  but  the  Felons  day-room  ;  which 

LI  is 


258 


NORFOLK. 


Norfolk  Circuit. 


NORWICH,  is  under  the  other,  and  down  thirteen  fteps.  The  Felons'  dungeons, 
or  night-roorns,  are  down  eleven  fteps  :  one  of  them  quite  dark ; 
the  other  almoft  fo.  The  Women's  dungeon  down  ten  fteps,  has  a 
fire-place  :  but  at  my  two  laft  vifits  they  had  another  night-room, 
about  ten  feet  and  a  half  by  five  and  a  half,  and  but  five  feet  high. 
Straw  only  ;^  I  :  i  :  o  a  year. — The  Keeper's  ftable  adjoining  to  the 
laft  room,  would  make  the  women  a  good  feparate  day-room. 

Many  alterations  are  lately  made  for  the  better.  The  court  is 
now  paved :  and  fome  old  ftieds,  that  were  in  it,  are  taJcen  down. 
Three  night-rooms  or  cells  for  Felons,  about  three  feet  below  the 
ground,  eight  feet  fquare,  planked  all  over.  A  bath :  and  over  it 
two  rooms  for  Debtors.  Over  them  two  airy  rooms  for  the  fick ; 
each  twenty-two  feet  by  fixteen,  near  twelve  feet  high. 

Gaol-delivery  once  a  year. 


TABLE      OF      FEES. 


Ci/y  of  Norwich    and  7       /\    T   the  General    Quarter  Seffion— 


lA' 


County  0/  the  fame  City,  i  A  \,  holden  at  the  Guild  Hall— ^th 
Oftober  in  33d  year— of  George  II — and— adjourned  to  the  i6th— 
of  the  fame  Oftober— before  Nockold  Tompjon  Efq.  Mzyor— Edward 
Bacon  Efq.  Kecorder— Roller t  Marjh  Efq.  &c.  &c.— Juftices  of— the 
Peace— It  is  Ordered  by  this  Court  in  purfuance  of  an  Adt— for  Relief 
of  Debtors— That  the  feveral  Fees— hereunder  written,  and  no  other 
or  greater  fums — ftiall  be — taken  by  any  Gaoler  or  Keeper  of  any — 
Prifon  within  the — City  of  Norwich— 

(That  is  to  fay) 

Por 


Norfolk  Circuit.         NORFOLK. 


For  the  commitment  or  coming  into  Gaol  of  any  Prifoner  , 

for  debt  —  f 

For  chamber  rent    where  the    Gaoler   finds  bedding  and 

linnen  where  a  Prifoner  has  a  bed  to  himfelf  or  herfelf, 

by  the  week  —  —  _ 

Where  there  are  two  in  a  bed  not  exceeding  by  the  week  each 

Where  there  are  three  in  a  bed  not  exceeding  by  the  week  each 

For  the  difcharge  of  thofe  in  Execution  

For  the  difcharge  of  thofe  upon  Outlaivry  — . 

For  the  difcharge  of  thofe  upon  Common  Prece/s         — 


C 


] 


S.     D. 

3   :  4 

I  :  o 

o  :  9 
o  :  8 

S  :  4 
5  :  4 
3  :  4 


259 


We   his  Majefty's  Juftices  of  the   Peace— for  the   faid  City  of 
Norwich  have  hereunto — fet  our  hands- 


Confirmed  and  allowed  at  the 
Afllze  and  general  Gaol  Deli- 
very of  our  Lord  the  King 
held  in  and  for  the  City  of 
Norwich  and  County  of  the 
fame  City  The  twenty  ninth 
day  of  July  One  Thoufand 
Seven  Hundred  and  Sixty  By  us 

T:  PARKER 
T:  DENISON. 


NockoldTompson  Mayor 
Ed.  Bacon 
John  Nuthall 
J.  Spurrell 
Peter  Colombine 
Jerem  Ives. 


LI 


NORWICH 


26o  NORFOLK.         Norfolk  Circuit. 

NORWICH     CITY    BRIDEWELL. 

Apartments  convenient,  and  kept  clean.     A  yard  and  pump. 

1774,     Dec.  10,      Prifoners  3, 
1776,    Feb.    5,      -     -     -     5- 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 


SWAFFHAM.  Small  court-yard.  No  water.  OfFenfive  fewers. 
A  large  garden  or  field  for  the  Keeper,  Prifoners  always 
locked  up  :  one  lunatic.  Claufes  of  Adl  againfl:  Spirituous 
Liquors  hung  up. 

1774,     Dec.  II,      Prifoners  7, 
1776,     Feb.     3,     -     -     -     5. 

WYMUNDHAM.  A  large  day-room:  with  three  clofets  on 
one  fide  of  it,  for  night-rooms ;  about  fix  feet  by  four.  A 
Prifoner  complained  to  me  of  being  obliged  to  lie  in  one  of 
thefe  clofets,  with  two  boys  who  had  a  cutaneous  diforder. 
There  is  another  room  for  women,  and  a  dark  dungeon  down 
eight  fteps  with  the  (locks  in  it.  No  Prifoners  fleep  there. 
Neither  the  rooms  nor  the  fpacious  yard  fecure.  Prifoners  in 
this  Bridewell  are  not  only  confined  within  doors,  but  always 
in  irons.     Keeper's  Salary  ^i6  :  no  Fees.     Allowance  to  thofe 

fufpecSted 


Norfolk  Circuit.        NORFOLK.  261 

fufpecled  of  Felony,  four-pence  a  day.     Straw  ten  ftiillings  a 
year.     Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

1776,     Nov.  17,     Prifoners  5. 

THETFORD    TOWN    GAOL 

Is  alfo  the  Town  Bridewell.  The  ground-floor  for  the  Keeper. 
On  the  firft  ftory,  are  four  rooms  for  Debtors ;  and  two  for  Delin- 
quents. For  Felons  a  Dungeon  down  a  ladder  of  ten  fteps ;  eighteen 
feet  by  nine  and  a  half,  and  nine  feet  high :  a  window  about  eighteen 
inches  by  twelve :  another  window  about  two  feet  fquare,  lately 
opened  into  the  paflage. 

At  Affize  once  a  year  from  fixteen  to  twenty  Prifoners  brought  hither 
from  Norwich  Caftle  are  confined  in  this  dungeon,  men  and  women 
together,  four  or  five  nights.  Court-yard  not  fecure.  No  water. 
Keeper  no  Salary.     No  Fees :  only  the  Houfe  to  live  in. 

1774,     Dec.     9,     Prifoner    i, 
1776,    Nov.  18,     -    -    -    None. 

YARMOUTH 

TOWN  GAOL.  Besides  the  Gaoler's  houfe,  in  which  are  rooms 
for  Mafter's-fide  Debtors,  there  are  for  Felons,  a  day-room, 
and  court-yard,  both  too  clofe ;  and  two  lodging-rooms  for 
fuch  as  pay  for  them :  two  dungeons  or  night-rooms  down  a 
ladder  of  ten  fteps,  one  for  men,  the  other  for  women.  Al- 
lowance a  penny  loaf  a  day  (weight  in  Feb.  1776,  13  ounces): 
four  chaldron  of  coals  a  year.  They  fend  out  a  begging-bafket 
three  times  a  week.— Gaoler's  Salary  ^^15:   Fees  ^To  :  6  :  8  : 

no 


262  NORFOLK.        Norfolk  Circuit. 

no  Table.     Claufes   of  A£t   againft   Spirituous   Liquors   not 
hung  up. 

1776,    Feb.  6,    Debtors  6,    Felons  &c.  14. 


YARMOUTH 

TOWN  BRIDEWELL.  In  the  Work-houfe  Yard.  Four 
rooms  J  a  fire-place  in  one  of  them.  No  water.  Court  of 
Confcience  Debtors  confined  here,  and  difcharged  in  three 
months. 

1776,    Feb.  6,     Prifoners,  none. 


L  Y  N  N      R  E  G  I  s 

TOWN  GAOL.  The  rooms  are  convenient,  and  kept  clean. 
Straw  and  two  coverlids ;  court-yard  fmall.  Gaoler's  Salary 
;£  1 1 :  Fees,  Debtors  j^o  :  3  :  4,  Felons  £0  :  ^  :  o,  per  Table 
figned  by  the  Mayor  dated  1729. 

1774,    Dec.  II,     Debtor  i. 


COUNTY 


Norfolk  Circuit,         SUFFOLK.  263 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    IPSWICH. 


GAOLER,     Rowland  Baker,  novf  John  Ripjhaw, 

Salary,  none. 

Fees,    Debtors,  ?    /.  „ 

^  £0  :  10  :  8. 

Felons,    j 
Tranfports,    £6  :  6  '.  o  each ;  he  paying  Clerk  of  Affizc 

j^i  :  I  :  o  for  each. 
Licenfe,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRLSONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,,    two-pence    a  day   in    bread    (weight 
in  Dec.  1774,  1%  jounces), 

Garnilh,       Debtors,  ^0:2:6. 
Felons,       0:1:0. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.     3,      22     -     -     14, 

Dec.     7,      15     -     -       5, 

1776,  Feb,      7,      29     -     -     17, 
Nov.  18,      15     -     _       6. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Brome. 

Duty— Sunday  and  Friday.     (See  Remarks.) 
Salar)',  ^50. 

SURGEON 

Salary,  ^^40  for  Debtors  and  Felons, 

IPSWICH. 


264  SUFFOLK.         Norfolk  Circuit. 

IPSWICH. 

Remarks.  THIS  is  alfo  the  TOWN  GAOL :  yet  only  one  court  yard. — For 
Debtors,  a  kitchen,  or  day-room  j  and  feveral  chambers :  one  of 
thefe  is  lately  made  a  free  ward. — For  Felons  a  day-room :  and  for 
the  men  a  ftrong  night-room;  with  beds  excellently  contrived  for 
cleanlinefs  and  health.  Each  Prifoner  has  a  crib-bedftead,  ten  or 
twelve  inches  high  j  the  head  raifed  a  few  inches ;  ftrong  feet,  low 
fides.  Thefe  keep  as  diftinft  as  poflible  Prifoners  who  fleep  in  the 
fame  room ;  and  are  eafily  moved  when  the  ward  is  to  be  wafhed. 
The  County  allows  to  each  crib  a  ftraw  bed,  and  a  blanket. — The 
women  have  no  feparate  day-room  :  and  their  ward,  or  night-room, 
has  no  fire-place. — One  of  the  two  drinking-rooms  is  called  the 
Garnijh-room. — ^Two  rooms  for  the  fick ;  not  diftind  enough  from 
the  reft.  It  is  not  without  relufbance  that  I  add,  the  fick  in  February 
1776  complained  to  me  of  being  negleded  by  the  Surgeon.  At  my 
laft  vifit,  none  fick. — Debtors  fell  at  the  front  grate  garters,  purfes 
&c.  of  their  own  making. 

A  NEAT  Chapel  lately  built.  Mr.  Brome,  the  Chaplain,  does  not 
content  himfelf  with  the  regular  and  punflual  performance  of  his 
ftated  Duty ;  He  is  a  Friend  to  the  Prifoners  on  all  occafions. 

Assize  always  at  Bury :  no  allowance  for  conveying  Prifoners 
thither.     Keeper  a  Sheriff^'s  Officer. 

Debtors  have  on  Sunday  from  a  Legacy  of  Mr.  John  Pemherton, 
each  one  pound  and  a  half  of  beef  for  broth,  a  penny  loaf  and  a  pint 
of  ale.  From  another  Legacy  the  Town  fupplies  them  with  five 
chaldron  of  coals  yearly.     No  Memorial  in  the  Gaol. 

Suffolk, 


Norfolk  Circuit.         SUFFOLK.  265 


TABLE     OF      FEES. 

Suffolk,  \  T  the  General  Quarter  Seffions — holden  by  Adjourn- 
to  wit.  JL  1l  merit  at  Bury  St.  Edmunds— -2 ift— July— 1729,  A 
Table  of  Fees  fettled  by  the  Juftices  of  the  faid  Divifion — purfuant  to 
a  late  A(5t— for  the  Relief  of  Debtors  &c.  at  the  Aflize  for  the 
County  oi  Suffolk — at  Bury  St.  Edmunds  the  24th— of  July  1729. 

C.     S.     D. 
To  the  Gaoler  for  the  Commitment  Fee  and  difcharee  of  i 

f    o  :   12  :   8 
every  Pnfoner  —  —  —  3 

Out  of  which  is  to  be  paid  to  the  SheriiF  —  0:2:0 

To  the  Officer  —  —  —  0:2:0 

For  the  rent  of  every  chamber  weekly  — .  0:2:6 

Jasper  Cullum  Jermyn  Davers 

G.  GoLDiNG  M.  Shelton. 

I  HAVE  reviewed  this  Table  of  Fees  and  do  think  proper  to  mode- 
rate and  reduce  the  fame  to  *  lliillings  and  eight  pence  by  difal- 
lowing  the  two  fhillings  to  be  paid  to  the  Officer  and  deduding 
fix  pence  ^fr  week  out  of  the  Chamber  Rent 

THO.    PENGELLY. 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 

IPSWICH.  On  the  ground-floor  is  a  work-fliop  j  and  a  night- 
room  for  men  :  up  flairs  a  night-room  for  women.  None  of 
them,  nor  the  court-yard  fecure.  Claufes  of  Aft  againfl  Spiri- 
tuous Liquors  not  hung  up.     Keeper's  Salary  ;^i7.   No  Fees. 

*  Erafed. 

M  m  Prifoners, 


266  SUFFOLK.         Norfolk  Circuit. 

BRIDE-  Piifoners,   no   allowance  :  and  but  half  the   produce   of  their 

WELLS.  labour. 

1774,     Dec.      8,     Prifoners  r, 

1776,     Feb.  7,      -     -     -  3, 

Nov.  18,      -     -     -   2, 

WOODBRIGE.     Two  dirty  rooms.     No  chimney  in  that  of  the 

women.     No  ftraw :  no  water.     Yard  fmall  and  not  fafe :  may 

be  enlarged  out  of  the  Keeper's  Garden.      His  Salary  ;^i5. 

Prifoners  allowance  two-pence  a  day  :    I   faw  none  at  work. 

When  they  work  they  have  half  the  profit.     No  firing.     One 

fick  in  bed. — Claufes  of  A(5b  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not 

hung  up. 

1776,     Feb.  7,     Prifoners  9. 

BECCLES.  A  ROOM  on  the  ground-floor;  and  a  dungeon  feven 
fteps  under  ground.  Keeper's  Salary  ^11  :  10:0.  Fees  j^o :  6  :  8 : 
No  table.  Allowance  a  twopenny  loaf  a  day.  Thirty  Ihillings 
a  year  for  ftraw.  ^^5  a  year  for  coals.  When  Prifoners  work 
they  have  half  the  profit. 

1776,     Feb.  6,     Prifoners  3. 

LAVENHAM.  A  work-room  below  :  a  chamber  for  men,  ano- 
ther for  women  :  none  of  them  fecurc..  Prifoners  alwa)-s  kept 
within  doors,  and  a  padlock  on  each.  A  court-yard :  no  water. 
Keeper's  Salary  ;^ 1 5  :  14  :  8.  No  Fees.  The  Prifoners  were 
fpinning. 

1776,     Nov.   18,     Prifoners    2  Men.. 

CLARE.     A  WORK-ROOM.  Two  lodging-rooms  with  boarded  bed- 
fteads.     No  chimnies.     Windows  clofe  glazed  -,  and  the  work- 
room 


Norfolk  Circuit.         S  U  F  F  O  L  K.  267 

room  made  offenfive  by  a  clofet  in  it.  Court-yard  not  fecure ; 
and  Prifoners  have  no  accefs  to  the  well  of  fine  water.  The 
Prifon  walls  are  clay ;  and  the  whole  of  it  is  out  of  repair :  the 
Prifoner,  a  Woman,  at  work,  in  irons.  No  allowance. 
Keeper  a  Manufafturer  :  Salary  ,^13  :  5  :  4  :  no  Fees. 
Claufes  of  Adt  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 
1776,     Dec.    6j     Prifoner  i. 

BURY   St.  EDMUND'S   GAOL. 

This  Prifon  for  the  Franchife  or  hiherty  of  Bury  SL  Edmund's,  is 
the  property  of  Sir  Charles  Davers.  The  court-yard  is  fpacious,  but 
not  fecure  :  none  have  the  ufe  of  it  without  paying  a  fliilling  a  week. 
On  one  fide  of  it  are  feveral  rooms  for  Debtors :  one  of  them  is  a 
work-room  :  thofe  who  work  in  it  pay  a  fliilling  a  week. — On  the 
other  fide,  is  a  large  Dungeon  down  three  fteps  j  which  is  the  day 
and  night-room  for  Felons :  the  men  are  chained  to  ftaples  fixed  in 
the  barrack  bedfleads.  No  ftraw.  There  is  another  dungeon  down 
a  ftep  or  two ;  feldom  ufed.  The  late  Gaoler  told  me  that  in  the 
winter  1773  five  died  of  the  Small-Pox.  No  Apothecary  then  ;  but 
one  is  appointed  fince.  No  Infirmary. — A  Chaplain ;  and  Prayers 
twice  a  week. — Keeper,  no  Salary  :  Fees,  Debtors  ^To  :  8  :  8,  Felons 
j{o  :  6  :  8  :  no  Table  :  Licence  for  Beer  and  Wine. — Allowance, 
Debtors  none,  Felons  three-halfpennyworth  of  bread  a  day;  and 
from  the  5th  of  November  to  the  Saturday  before  Lady-day,  Felons 
have  two  bufhels  of  coals  a  week,  and  Debtors  four :  both  from  a 
Legacy  of  which  no  Memorial  in  the  Gaol. — In  a  Dejcription  of  Bury 
printed  177  i,  there  is  an  account  of  feveral  ancient  Donations  and 
Bequefts  to  Prifoners.  Whether  they  be  now  totally  funk,  or  tl\e 
coals  be  from  fome  of  them,  I  cannot  fay. 

M  m  a  At 


268  SUFFOLK.         Norfolk  Circuit. 

At  Aflize,  twice  a  year,  Prifoners  of  both  fexes   brought   from 
Ifjwich    are  confined    four    or   five  nights    in   the   Dungeon  here 

defcribed. 

Debtors.       Felons  &c. 

1774,     Dec.     9,       10     -     -     15, 

1776,     Feb.     8,       n     -     -     18, 

Nov.  18,         5     -     -       6. 


BURY      BRIDEWELL. 

This,  it  is  faid,  was  in  former  times  a  Jewifli  Synagogue.  It  has 
a  large  work-room :  a  room  for  men,  and  another  for  women :  all 
up  flairs.  No  court-yard :  no  water.  Keeper's  Salary  £6  :  and 
four-pence  for  each  Prifoner's  ftraw  :  Fees  j^o  :  r  :  o. 

1774,     Dec.     9,       Prifoners    2, 

1776,     Feb.     8,       -     -     -     I, 

Nov.  18,       -     -     -     I. 

SUDBURY     BOROUGH-GAOL 

Has  for  Debtors  a  day-room  with  a  fire-place ;  and  two  little 
rooms  for  them  to  lodge  in,  about  feven  feet  by  five  each. — A  room 
for  Men-felons  with  a  fire-place  and  a  loom  : — another  for  women  ; 
this  alfo  has  a  fire-place.  A  court-yard,  not  fecure ;  and  the  water 
not  acceffible  to  Prifoners.  They  have  no  allowance.  Keeper,  no 
Salarj' :  Fees  j^o  :  4  :  o  :  no  Table.  Claufes  of  A(5b  againft  Spiri- 
tuous Liquors  not  hung  up. 

1776,    Dec.  6,    No  Prifoners. 

COUNTY 


Midland  Circuit.       WARWICKSHIRE. 


269 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    WARWICK. 

GAOLER,     William  Roe  Jun"-- 

Salary,  none. 

Fees^     Debtors,    ;^o  :   14  :  6, 
Felons,  o  :   13  :  4. 

Tranfports,    ^^8:0:0  each,   he  paying  Clerk  of  Affize 

jTi  :   I   :  o  for  each. 
Licence  to  Turnkey  for  Beer.     Gaoler  brews  it. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,  a  Loaf  of  jlb.  every  other  day. 

Garnifh,       Debtors,  £0  :  2  '•  4- 

Felons,  o  :  a  :  6. 

Number  of  -       -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  22,  -     23     -  -       9, 

1774,  Nov.  10,  -  13  -  -  13, 
1776,  Jan.  6,  -  24  -  -  33, 
Oft.     30,  -     22     -  -       7, 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Mufan, 
Duty  — Sunday  and  Friday. 
Salar>',   £s°- 

SURGEON,     Mr.  ITeale. 

Salary,  ^20  for  Gaol  and  Bridewell. 


WARWICK, 


270  WARWICKSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

WARWICK. 

Remarks.  ONE  Court-yard  for  Debtors,  and  Men-felons.  Women-felons 
have  quite  feparate  Court,  day-room,  and  two  night-rooms.  They 
ufed  to  be  loaded  with  irons  j  now  they  have  none.  Men-felons  have 
a  day-room :  their  night-room  is  in  an  octagonal  Dungeon  about 
twenty-one  feet  diameter,  down  thirty-one  fteps ;  clofe,  damp,  and 
ofFenfive.  Two  cells,  in  another  dungeon  for  the  condemned. 
Prifoners  are  tried  in  the  county  cloathing.  I  faw  twelve  fuits  for 
men  and  fix  for  women.  * 

Debtors  common  day-room  is  the  Hall,  which  is  alfo  ufed  as  a 
Chapel.  For  Mafter's-fide,  ten  or  twelve  rooms,  fome  of  them  in  the 
Rooks  Neft,  where  alfo  is  the  free  ward. 

No  Infirmary.  The  late  Gaoler  Mr.  Roe  (uncle  to  the  prefent) 
died  in  1772  of  the  Gaol-Diftemper  j  and  fo  did  fome  of  his  Prifoners. 
No  water  then,  but  now  plenty. — The  Felons  allowance  of  bread  is 
judicioufly  fixed  by  weight,  not  variable  with  the  price. 

Debtors  have  in  common  from  a  Legacy  thirty  fliillings  a  year: 
and  from  another  Legacy  eight  three-penny  loaves  at  the  beginning, 
and  as  many  at  the  end,  of  every  month.  No  memorial  of  either  Le- 
gacy hung  up  in  the  Gaol. 

This  Prifon  might  be  improved  on  the  adjacent  ground  belonging 
to  the  county. 

•  See  a  better  practice  at  Reading  in  Berk(hire. 

A  TABLE 


Midland  Circuit.       WA R W  I  C  K S  H  I  R  E. 


271 


A    TABLE    OF    DEBTORS    FEES, 

As  fettled — by  his  Majefly's  Juftices  of  the  Peace — at  the  General 
Quarter  Seffions— held  at  IVarwick — the  loth  day  of  July  1759 
according  to  the  diredions  of  an  Adl — for  the  Relief  of  Debtors  &c. 


£.      S. 


ve  a  bed  ■> 


Every  Prifoner  that  lies  on  the  Keeper's  fide  if  he  has  a  -\ 

bed  to  himfelf,  pays  by  the  week  —  —  3 

Thofe   Prifoners   on    the   Keeper's  fide   and   have  a  bed 

between  two,  pay  each  by  the  week 
For  entering  every  adtion  againll  each  Prifoner 
For  difcharging  every  adlion  againft  each  Prifoner 
To  the  Under-Sheriff  for  every  difcharge        — 
For  receiving  and  entering  every  declaration 
For  a  copy  of  each  Warrant  againft  each  Prifoner  — 

For  every  Certificate  of  the  caufe  of  a  Prifoner's  being 
detained  in  Prifbn  in  order  for  being  difcharged 


ing  T 


3 
10 

4 
I 
I 


D. 

:  6 

:  6 

o 
6 
o 
o 
o 


We  the  Judges  of  AfTize  for  the  County 
of  Warwick  have  reviewed  and  do 
hereby  confirm  the  above  Table  of 
Fees.  Given  under  our  Hands  this 
24th  day  of  Auguft  1759 

T.      PARKER 
JA    HEWITT 

A  true  Copy. 


F  Stratford 
M  Wise 

W  HuDDESFORD 

J  Bird 
C  Bean 


IN 


2/2  WARWICKSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

IN  this  Gaol  is  hung  up  the  following 
ORDER. 

JFarwickJhire^     A    T— General  Quarter  Seffions— 12th  January— 
to  wit.       x~\.   13th   of  George   III— and   in   the  year  1773 
before  Jo/eph  Davie  Clerk,  John  Ingram,  Samuel  Aylworth  Efqrs. 

Ordered  and  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  Court— that  the  Gaol  be 
always  kept  clofe  fhut  up  and  no  perfons  admitted  therein,  or  per- 
mitted to  continue  there  after  nine  in  the  evening  between  Michael- 
mafs  and  Lady-day,  and  ten  in  the  evening  between  Lady-day  and 
Michaelmafs,  except  in  cafes  of  real  neceflity  or  bufincfs. 

J  T  Hewitt  Clerk  of  the  Peace. 

COUNTY  BRIDEWELL  at  WARWICK. 

This  Prifon,  the  only  County  Bridewell,  is  too  fmall. — For  men, 
a  work-room  and  two  lodging-rooms. — For  women,  two  rooms  in  a 
little  feparate  court. — No  water.  The  handle  of  the  pump  is  outfide 
of  the  wall. — The  whole  Prifon  clofe  and  ofFenfive :  might  be  en- 
larged on  the  ground  adjacent.  Allowance  one  pound  and  a  half  of 
bread  a  day  :  no  employment.  Keeper's  Salary  ^^30:  Fees  ^^o  :  4  :  8 : 
no  Table.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  hung  up. 
Mr.  Mujfan  (Chaplain  to  the  County  Gaol)  reads  Prayers  here  once 
a  week. 

Committed  in  the  year  1772,  Prifoners  85;    in  1773,    iii;  in 

1774,  Nov.  10,  Prifoners  i, 
1776,  Jan.  e,  -  -  -  ^, 
Oct.    30,     -     -     ~  12. 

COVENTRY 


Midland  Circuit.       WARWICKSHIRE.  273 


COVENTRY    CITY  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 


GAOLER,     Bafil  Goode. 

Salary,  /[12.     This  year,  taken  off. 

Fees,     Debtors,  ■)     ^ 

'.        '  [    £0  :   15  :  4. 
relons,    j 

Tranfports,     ^^8  each. 

Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     a  pennyworth  of  bread  a  day. 
Garnifli,       ^^o  :  3  :  o. 

Number  of    -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,     Nov.  20,       9     -  -       7, 

1776,     Jan.      7,     16     -  -     10, 

Oft.  30,       7     -  -       5- 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Harper. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

THIS  GAOL,  built  two  years  ago,  is  in  a  clofe  part  of  the    Remarks. 
City.     I  was  fliewn  a  fine  fpot  which  fome  Gentlemen  very  judi- 
cioufly  preferred.      It   has    eight   lodging-rooms   for   Mafter's-fide 
Debtors;  and  one  free  ward.     Women-felons   fleep    in   their   day- 
room.     The   Men   have   a  day-room.     To  their  Dungeons  you  go 

N  n  down 


274  WARWICKSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

down  twelve  fteps  to  a  paflage  only  four  feet  wide :  the  four  dun- 
geons are  about  nine  feet  by  fix :  at  the  upper  corner  of  each,  a  little 
window.  All  are  dirty,  offenfive  and  unhealthy:  we  went  down 
with  torches.  Only  one  court-yard  for  all  Prifoners.  No  ftraw. 
No  Infirmary.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not 
hung  up. 


COVENTRY    CITY    BRIDEWELL. 

Two  rooms  for  men  j  two  for  women ;  all  clofe  and  offenfive. 
No  court-yard  :  no  water  acceffible  to  Prifoners :  no  fewers :  no  em- 
ployment.    Keeper's  Salary  £^.     Fees  one  fhilling. 

The  old  Town-Hall  adjoining,  and  now  ufelefs,  might  be  added 
to  this  Prifon. 

1776,     Jan.     7,      Prifoners  6. 
— -     oa.  30,     -    -    -   3, 


BIRMINGHAM    TOWN    GAOL. 

The  gaol  for  this  large  populous  town  is  called  the  Dungeon. 
The  court-yard  is  only  about  tvvent>'-four  feet  fquare.  Keeper's 
houfe  in  front;  and  under  it  two  cells  down  eight  fi:eps  :  the  fl:raw  is 
on  bedfteads.  On  the  right  hand  of  the  court  two  fmall  night-rooms 
for  women ;  and  fome  rooms  over  them  : — on  the  left  hand  is  the 
Gaoler's  liable,  and  one  finall  day-room  for  men  and  women ;  no 

window : 


Midland  Circuit.       WARWICKSHIRE.  275 

window  : — above  is  a  free  ward  for  Court  of  Confcience  Debtors, 
who  are  cleared  in  forty  days :  this  is  a  fizeable  room,  but  has  only 
one  window  eighteen  inches  fquare.  Over  it  is  another  room,  or 
two. 

In  this  fmall  court-yard,  befides  the  litter  from  the  ftable,  I  faw 
a  ftagnant  puddle  near  the  fink,  for  the  Gaoler's  ducks.  Gaoler's 
poultry  is  a  very  common  nuifance ;  but  in  fo  fcanty  a  court  it  is 
intolerable. — The  whole  Prifon  is  very  offenfive. — At  fome  particular 
times  here  are  great  numbers  confined.  Once  in  the  winter  1775 
there  were  above  150,  who  by  the  care  of  the  Magiflrates  had  a 
fupply  of  proper  food,  broth  &c. — Licence  for  Beer :  Fees  £0:  2:0: 
no  Table.     Claufes  of  Ad:  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

Debtors.       Offenders. 
1774,     Nov.   10,         7     -     -       2, 
1776,      Sep.    II,         7     -     -       5- 


N  n  2  COUNTY 


2/6 


LEICESTERSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     LEICESTER, 


GAOLER,     Samuel  Jordan. 
Salary,  none. 
Fees,     Debtors,  7     /-     . 


15  :  4- 


Felons, 

Tranfports,     If  only  one  ;^8  ;  if  ntiore  than  one  £1  each. 
Licence,  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  '^  a    four -penny  loaf    every   other  day 
Felons,    j  (weight  once  lib.  8  oz.   once  3/^.  5  oz.). 

Garnifh,       Debtors,     ^^o  :  4:0, 
Felons,  0:3:0. 

Number  of    -      -       Debtors.        Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  16,       16     -     -       3, 

1774,  April   4,       16     -     -      II, 

»775>     Jan-      3.       15     -     -       7. 


Nov.  II,       17     -     - 

1776,   oa.  29,     17    -   - 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Pigot. 
Duty  — Sunday. 
Salary,  ^^30. 

SURGEON,      Mr.  Ma/on. 

Salary,  jT  1 5  for  Debtors  and  Felons. 


2, 
5- 


LEICESTER. 


Midland  Circuit.     LEICESTERSHIRE.  277 

LEICESTER. 

FOR  Mafter's-fide  Debtors  eight  or  nine  rooms.  Day-room  com-  Remarks. 
mon.  The  free  ward  the  Cellar  is  a  long  dungeon  *,  which  is  down 
feven  fteps  and  damp ;  two  windows  ;  the  largeft  about  a  foot  fquare. 
Felons  day  and  night  rooms  are  dungeons  from  five  to  feven  fteps 
under  ground.  They  fleep  on  thick  mats ;  which,  if  coverlids  were 
added,  would  be  better  than  ftraw.  The  whole  clofe  and  offenfive. 
Court-yard  fmall.  No  Chapel.  Two  rooms  lately  built  for  an  In- 
firmary :  but  the  fituation  of  the  Gaol  is  fo  confined,  that  it  cannot 
be  made  convenient  or  healthy.  In  1774  three  Debtors  and  a  Felon 
died  of  the  Small-Pox.  Of  that  difeafe  I  was  informed  few  ever  re- 
cover in  this  Gaol. 

Clauses  of  the  Aft  againft  the  ufe  of  Spirituous  Liquors  painted 
on  the  fame  board  as  the  Table  of  Fees. 

In  this  County  they  make  an  annual  collection  by  a  kind  of  Volun- 
tary Brief  The  Gentlemen  of  the  Grand- Jury  recommend  it  to  the 
Clergy :  moft  of  whom  promote  the  colleftion  in  their  refpeftive 
parifhes.  The  thanks  of  the  Grand  Jury  to  forty-eight  Clergymen  by 
name,  were  inferted  in  the  heicefter  Journal  of  Feb.  i6th  1775  ;  for 
the  fatisfaflion  of  thofe  Gentlemen  and  other  Contributors.  There  is 
a  table  of  the  fum  received  from  each  parilh ;  and  a  Lift  of  Debtors 

*  This  feems  to  be  the  lown  moifi  Dungcojz  that  was  complained  of  by  a  debtor  in 
this  Gaol,  in  his  Letter  13th  Nov.  1690  fent  to  Mofes  Pitt,  a  Prifoner  in  the  Fleet ; 
who  printed  it,  with  other  Letters  from  Prifoners,  in  his  Cry  of  the  Oppreffed  1691. 
By  this  and  one  or  two  more  of  the  Letters  in  that  little  Tradt,  it  appears  that  fome 
inconveniences  which  I  obferved  in  Gaols,  and  have  fet  down  in  my  Remarks,  are  of 
long  Handing. 

cloathed 


278  LEICESTERSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 

cloathed  or  difcharged  j  and  an  account  of  the  expenditure  of  the 
remainder  in  feeding  and  warming  all  the  Prifoners  in  the  inclement 
feafon.  The  colledlions  in  1774  amounted  to  ^74.  The  ac- 
counts are  kept,  and  the  application  of  the  money  is  chiefly  diredbed 
by  John  Smfjon,  Efq.  of  Leicefter.  I  wifh  every  County  would 
imitate  this  exemplary  benevolence :  and  I  wifli  every  County  that 
does  fo,  a  Steward  equally  faithful  and  affiduous. 

Leicejlerjhire. 

A   TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by  the  Keeper  of  this  Gaol. 

£.     S.    D. 

For  lodging  of  every  Prifoner/^'/- week  —  0:2:4 

For  Gaol-Fees  for  difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  —  o  :   13  :  4 

For  the  Turnkey  —  —  —  0:2:0 

A  Room  of  every  Prifoner  who  finds  his  own  hed.  per  week  o  :  1:0 
A  Room,  called  the  Cellar,  for  debtors  if  they  find  their  own  bed  o  :  0:0 
For  the  Copy  of  every  Warrant  or  Commitment  —  0:1:0 

For  figning  the  Certificate  in  order  to  obtain  a  Superfedeas  o  :     1  ;  o 

Thomas  a  Becket  Session.         July  10.   1759. 

"We  whofe  names  are  hereunto  fubfcribed  his  Majefty's  Juflices  of 
the  Peace  in  and  for  the  County  of  Leicefter  do  hereby  allow  of 
the  above  Fees  being  taken. 

We  the  Judges  of  Affize  for  the  County  W".  Wrighte 

of  Leicefter  have  reviewed  and  do  here-  Ch.  Hutchinson 

by  confirm  the  above  Table  of  Fees.  John  Danvers 

Given  under  our  Hands  this  17th  day  W.  Cant. 
of  Auguft  1759 

T.    PARKER  J  A.    HEWITT. 

The  above  is  a  Copy  of  the  Original. 

COUNTY 


Midland  Circuit.     LEICESTERSHIRE.  279 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 


Leicester.  Two  rooms  below  for  men:  two  above  for  wo- 
men ;  one  of  thefe  not  ufed,  becaufe  not  fecure.  No  chim- 
neys. Court-yard  not  fafe  for  Prifoners  to  be  allowed  the  ufe 
of  it.  The  Prifon  is  kept  clean.  Keeper's  Salary  ^21  :  he 
pays  Window-tax  ^o  :  14  :  o.  No  allowance.  I  faw  none 
at  work. 

1775,  Jan.     3,     Prifoners  3, 

1776,  Odl.  29,     -     -     -    2. 

MELTON-MOWBRAY.  Two  rooms  about  eleven  feet  by 
nine.  The  loft  above  is  a  malt  chamber,  let  by  the  Keeper 
for  10  s.  6d.  a  year.  Salary  ^4.  He  pays  twenty-five 
fliillings  a  year  for  the  cottage  he  now  lives  in.  The  County 
is  building  him  a  little  dwelling  of  two  rooms. — No  court-yard 
nor  any  room  for  one.     No  water. 

1776,     Sep.  25,     Prifoners  none. 

HINKLEY.  This  Prifon  has  a  work-room;  a  lodging-room  for 
men ;  another  for  women  ;  both  of  them  fmall.  Mats  upon 
bed-fteads.  Keeper's  Salary  ^^4  :  4  :  o.  Fees  £0  :  2:6: 
no  Table.  He  is  alfo  mailer  of  the  Work-houfe  adjoining;  in 
which  the  poor  looked  healthy,  were  cheerful,  clean,  and  at 
work. 

1776,     Oft.  30,     No  Prifoners. 

LEICESTER 


2So  LEICESTERSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


LEICESTER  BOROUGH  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 


GAOLER,     Henry  Couljon,  now  Samuel  Jordan. 
Salary,  none  :  he  pays  rent  ^^3. 
Fees,    Debtors, 


s,     3 


Felons, 
Tranfports,    £10  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  7    »  a      ^«^i   ;„  Kr»-,^ 

'  >   two-pence  a  day  each  in  bread. 

Felons,     j 

Garnifli,        Debtors,  ^0:4:  6. 
Felons,       0:2:6. 

Number  of  -       -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  April    4,        5     -  -       5» 

1775,  Jan.      3,         I     -  -       2, 
Nov.  II,        I     -  -       o, 

1776,  Oft.    29,        1     -  -       2. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,     Mr,  Maule. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 


LEICESTER 


Midland  Circuit.     LEICESTERSHIRE.  281 


LEICESTER    TOWN    GAOL. 

A   COMMON  Day-room   or   Kitchen:    two  rooms  above   for     Remarks. 
fuch  as  pay.     Down  five  fleps  a  Dungeon  for  Men-felons  5  another 
for  Women  ;  another  for  Common-fide  Debtors.     This  Town  Gaol 
has  a  Court-yard  with  plenty  of  water.     No  Table  of  Fees.     Claufes 
of  the  A&  againfl:  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 


TOWN     BRIDEWELL. 

Joins  to  the  Town  Gaol.     Two  fmall  rooms  for  men,  and  two 
for  women.     Keeper's  Salary  ^^i  :  13  :  4. 

1776,     061.  29,      No  Prifoners. 


Co  COUNTY 


282  DERBYSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

COUNTY    GAOL     at     DERBY. 

GAOLER,     Blyth  Simpjoyi. 
Salary,  ^^20. 
Fees,     Debtors, 


Felons, 


Tranfports,     ^^5  :   17  :  o  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  7  per  week,  each  two  ninepenny  loaves  j 

Felons,    j  and  in  common  two  Ccy/.  of  coals. 
Garnifh,       £0:2'  ^>   ^""^  £^  '•  ^  '■  '^  for  coals  &c. 
Number  of    -      -     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  18,       4     -     -       3> 

1774,  April  2,       8     -     -     10, 

1775,  Nov.  13,     12     -     -       8, 

1776,  OcT:.   29,     10     -     -       7. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev,  Mr.  Seal,  now  the  Rev.  Mr.  Henr}'^ 
Duty  — Tuefday,  Thurfday,  Saturday. 
Salary,    ^30. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Harrifon. 

Salar)',  /30  for  Debtors,  Felons,  and  the  Bridewell. 
Three  guineas  for  Travelling  Charges  to  Quarter 
Seffions,  to  report  the  Hate  of  the  health  of  the 
Prifoners. 

DERBY. 


Midland  Circuit.       DERBYSHIRE.  283 


DERBY. 

THIS  GAOL,  built  about  eighreen  years  ago,  is  in  an  airy  Remarks. 
healthy  fituation. — The  Debtors  Court-yard  and  Ward  very  properly 
feparate  from  thofe  for  Felons,  but  not  from  the  Bridewell.  The 
Debtors  floors  are  tarras,  not  eafily  wafhed.  The  windows  in  general 
too  fmall. — The  Bridewell,  in  the  Debtors  court,  has  a  large  work- 
room, a  lodging-room  for  men,  and  two  for  women.  Mr.  Simpfon 
is  Keeper:  Salary  ^^40,  dedudling  ;^i4  for  the  former  Keeper. — In 
the  Felons  Court  there  is  for  men  a  day-room,  and  down  threefteps 
a  dungeon  :  for  women  a  day-room,  and  two  fmall  night-rooms; 
the  latter  are  too  clofe. — A  neat  Chapel,  and  near  it  a  new  Bath : 
Prifoners  wafh  in  it  before  AiTize  and  Quarter  SeiTions  :  a  Copper 
juft  by  to  warm  the  water  in  winter, — Over  thofe  are  two  rooms 
for  an  Infirmar)\ — There  is  alfo  a  new  room  or  parlour  at  the 
Keeper's  houfe  with  windows  to  the  Felons  court :  this  circumftance 
keeps  them  quiet  and  orderly.  The  County  allows  eight  guineas 
a  year  for  Straw. 

Mr.  Simpson  obferved  to  me  veryjudicioufly,  that  "  Licences  in 
Gaols  occafion  much  diforder." 

A  PERSON  goes  round  the  County  about  Chriflmas  to  Gentlemen's 
houfes,  and  begs  for  the  Debtors.  He  carries  a  book,  in  which 
the  Giver  enters  his  name,  and  donation.  The  whole  amount  ge- 
nerally about  ;^  1 4. 


O  o  3  TABLE 


284  DERBYSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit, 

TABLE      OF      FEES. 


Derbyjhire,  A  T  the  General  Quarter  Sefllons— held  at  Bake-well 
to  wit.  xjL  —on  Tuefday  the  firft  week  after  the  tranflation  of 
St.  Thomas  the  Martyr  (to  wit)  the  lOth— July— 4th  year  of 
—George  III.— 1764,  before  the  Rev.  Sir  John  Every,  Bart,  the 
Rev.  John  Simp/on,  Clerk,  Philip  Cell,  John  Twigg,  Hewy  I'hornhill, 
and  Jojeph  Briggs,  Efquires,  Juftices  &c. 

Leonard  Fosbrooke,  Efq.  Sheriff. 

It  is  ordered — that  the  following— Fees — be  taken  by  the  Keeper 

— and  no  other. 

£■     S.    D. 

For  ths  lodging  of  every  Prifoner  in  his  hcufe  per  week  o  :     2:6 

For  the  difcharge  of  each  Prifoner  out  of  cuftody  —  o  :   13  :  4 

To  the  Turnkey  —  —  —  o  :     2  >  o 

For  the  copy  of  every  Warrant  —  —  0:1:0 

For  figning  a  Certificate,  in  order  to  obtain  a  Superfedetu  o  :     2:0 

For  regiftering  each  declaration  —  —  0:1:0 

For  attending  with  every  Prifoner  in  order  to  give  bail  or 


be  otherwife  difcharged 


bail  orT 


And  it  is  further  ordered,  that  the  Clerk  of  the  Peace  do  caufe  this 
Order  to  be  printed,  and  the  Keeper  of  the  Gaol  for  the  time 
being  do  obferve  the  fame  upon  pain  of  being  profecuted  accord- 


ing to  law. 


By  the  Court,      Heathcote  Clerk  of  the  Peace 


We  the  Judges  of  Allize  for  the  County  of  Derby  liave  reviewed  and 
do  hereby  confirm  the  above  written  Table  of  Fees.  Given  under  our 
hands  at  the  Affizcs  holden  at  Derby  the  i  ith  day  of  Auguft  1764. 

T.    PARKER 
E.    CLIVE. 

DERBY 


Midland  Circuit.       DERBYSHIRE.  285 


DERBY    TOWN    GAOL 

Is  alfo  the  Bridewell.  Two  rooms  for  Debtors  ;  one  for  Felons ; 
tliree  for  Petty  Ofrenders.  Prifoners  always  locked  up :  the  narrow 
court  or  paflage,  only  thirty-four  feet  by  feven,  not  being  fecure, 
is  of  little  ufe  but  for  the  Keeper's  fowls.  The  whole  dirty  and  of- 
fenfive.  Gaoler  has  a  garden  behind  the  Prifon.  No  Salary  as 
Gaoler:  as  Keeper  of  Bridewell  ^5.  Fees,  Debtors  6s.  8d, 
Felons  3  s.  6d.  No  Table.  Garnifh  3  s.  6d.  on  a  paper  in 
the  Debtors  kitchen.  Allowance  to  Felons  one  Ihilling  and  fix-pence 
weekly  in  bread.     Licence  for  Beer. 

1776,     Oft.  29,     Debtors  2,     Felons  &c.  2. 

Another  county  bridewell   at 

CHESTERFIELD.  This  Houfe,  given,  as  I  was  informed^  to 
the  County  for  a  Bridewell,  was  built  in  1614.  For  men,  a 
room  or  cellar  under  the  Keeper's  houfe  -,  down  eight  fteps ;. 
but  level  with  the  ground  behind  it :  provifion  generally  put 
through  a  hole  in  the  floor.  A  room  for  women  up  ftairs. 
No  court-yard  :  no  water  :  no  flraw.  Nothing  allowed  by  the 
County  for  Conveyance  to  Quarter  Seffions.  Keeper's  Salary 
£20.     No  fees  :  no  allowance  :  no  employment, 

1776,     Jan.  10,     Prifoners  2, 
Oft.  28,      -     -     -    I. 

CHESTER- 


286  DERBYSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 


CHESTERFIELD     GAOL, 


For  the  Hundred  of  Scar/dale,  is  the  property  of  the  Duke  of 
Portland  -,  to  whom,  or  to  his  Steward,  the  Gaoler  pays  ;^  1 8  :  1 2  :  o 
a  year. — Only  one  room  with  a  cellar  under  it ;  to  which  the  Prifon- 
ers  occafionally  defcend  through  a  hole  in  the  floor.  The  cellar  had 
not  been  cleaned  for  many  months.  The  Prifon-door  had  not  been 
opened  for  feveral  weeks,  when  I  was  there  firft.  There  were  four 
Prifoners,  who  told  me  they  were  almofl  ftarved :  one  of  them  faid, 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  "  he  had  not  eaten  a  morfel  that  day  j  "  it 
was  afternoon.  Their  meagre  fickly  countenances  confirmed  what 
they  faid.  They  had  borrowed  a  book  of  Dr.  Manion's;  one  of 
them  was  reading  it  to  the  reft.  Each  of  them  had  a  wife  j  and  they 
had  in  the  whole  thirteen  children,  caft  on  their  refpeftive  parifhes. 
Two  had  their  groats  from  the  Creditors  j  and  out  of  that  pittance 
they  relieved  the  other  t^vo.  No  allowance :  no  ftraw  :  no  firing  : 
water  a  halfpenny  for  about  three  gallons,  put  in  (as  other  things 
Are)  at  the  window. — Gaoler  lives  diftant. 

1776,     Jan.  10,     Debtors  4, 
Oa.  28,     -     -     -  I. 


COUNTY 


Midland  Circuit.     NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.  287 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    NOTTINGHAM. 

GAOLER,     Richard  Boningtan, 
Salary,  ^^20. 
Fees,     Debtors, 
Felons, 
Tranfports,    £7  •  17  •  6  each. 
Licence  for  Beer. 


]  £0  :   14  :  8. 


PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  of  late  three- halfpennyworth  of  bread 

a  day. 
Felons,     three-halfpennyworth    of    bread    and 

a   halfpenny    in    money    every     day 

(weight  of  threepenny  Loaf  in  Jan.  1775, 

lib,   1 44-02. J. 
Garnifh,       lately  prohibited. 

Number  of  -       -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  17,  -       4     -  -     12, 

1774,  April    3,  -     12     -  _       2, 

1775,  Jan.      4,  -     10     -  -       I, 
Nov.  12,  -       4     -  -     II, 

1776,  Sep.    25,  -       4     -  -     10. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Anderfon. 
Duty  — Sunday  and  Wednefday,, 
Salary,   £c^o. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Bettefon. 

Salary,  ^^20  for  Debtors  and  Felons. 

NOTTING- 


288  NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


NOTTINGHAM. 

Remarks.  THE  GAOL  is  on  the  fide  of  a  hill.  For  Mafter's  fide  Debtors 
three  rooms,  Down  about  twenty-five  fl:eps,  are  three  rooms  for 
Criminals  who  can  pay.  Down  twelve  fl:eps  more  are  deep  dun- 
geons, cut  in  the  fandy  rock,  very  damp  :  only  one  of  them  is  ufed  -, 
it  is  twenty-one  feet  by  thirteen,  and  feven  feet  high  :  the  ftraw  on 
barrack-beds. 

For  Bathing  here  is  (not,  as  in  moft  other  County  Gaols,  an  in- 
convenient and  almofl:  ufelefs  Tub — but)  a  large  and  very  commo- 
dious Bath,  fupplied  with  river  water  j  and  a  Copper  jufl:  by,  to 
warm  it  when  necefl^ary.  This  Bath  is  a  late  improvement ;  and  fo 
is  the  Infirmary,  near  it,  which  has  two  rooms.  The  A£t  for  pre- 
ferving  the  Health  of  Prifoners  is  neatly  painted  over  the  Keeper's 
door. 

The  Jufl:ices  have  allowed  the  Gaoler  to  fupply  the  fick  with 
better  nourifliment  &c.  to  the  amount  of  feven  Ihillings  a  week. 
Gentlemen  fo  remarkably  confiderate  and  humane  will,  I  hope, 
abolifii  the  unwholefome  Dungeon. 

No  Chapel.  Service  is  performed  in  a  parlour,  which  is  too 
fmall. 

Transports  condemned  at  AlTizes  have,  with  the  King's  allow- 
ance of  two  ftiillings  and  fix-pence  a  week,  the  County-bread. 

Here  (as  at  Derby)  a  man  goes  round  the  County  about  Chrifl:- 
jiias,  and  begs  at  Gentlemen's  houfes  for  the  Debtors.  He  carries 
a  book,  and  Gentlemen  write  in  it  their  names  and  donations. 
Amount,  the  two  laft  years  ;^62.     Charge  of  colleding  ^^iS. 

Prisoners 


Midland  Circuit.     NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.  289 

Prisoners  are  tried  in  cloaths  provided  for  that  purpofe  by  the 
County. 

In  the  account  lately  fent  up  to  London  of  Tranfports  in  this  Gaol, 
was  one  William  Berks.  This  man  obtained  his  Majefty's  pardon. 
Mr.  Francis  Waters,  Clerk  of  Affize,  in  his  letter  fent  with  the  par- 
don, charges 

State  Office  Fees  £1  :  j  :  6, 
My  Fees        -         1:7:8. 

For  thefe  and  the  Gaol  Fees  the  pardoned  Criminal  was  detained 
at  my  laft  vifit. 


TABLE     OF      FEES. 

Nottingham/hire. 
AT  the  Quarter  Seffions  held  at  the  Shire-Hall  14th  January  1760. 

For  lodging  and  board  of  each  Prifoner  per  week  —         o 

For  each  Prifoner  when  he  hath  a  room  and  bed  of  the  Gaoler  -\ 

C    o 
and  diets  himfelf,  by  the  week  —  5 

For  each  Prifoner  when  he  finds  his  own  bed  and  diet  per  week     o 

For  the  difcharge  of  each  Prifoner  —  —  o 

And  to  the  Turnkey  for  the  fame  —  —  o 

The  Gaoler  is  to  take  notice  if  he  takes  more  than  the  above  Sums 
he  is  liable  to  forfeit  to  the  party  aggrieved  for  each  offence  the 
fum  of  FIFTY  POUNDS  exclufive  of  the  penalties  infiided  by  for- 
mer Afts. 

P  p  We 


s. 

D. 

7 

:  o 

2 

:  Q 

0 

:  5 

•3 

:  4 

I 

■  4 

zgo  NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 

We  direft  the  Deputy  Clerk  of  the  Peace  betwixt  now  and  the  next 
SefTions  to  put  Copies  of  this  Table  in  the  rcfpeftive  Courts 
within  this  County  where  the  General  Quarter  Seffions  are  held, 
and  alfo  in  fome  confpicuous  open  place  v/ithin  the  faid  Gaol  in 
order  that  the  fame  may  be  infpefted  as  occafions  may  require  to 
be  reforted  to  at  all  feafonable  times  in  the  day  time  without 
paying  any  thing  for  the  fame 

M.  Musters  J  White 

W.    BiLBIE  W".    KiRKE 

H.  Sherbrooke  Geo.  Mason. 

Having  reviewed  the  above  Table  of  Fees  I  do  hereby  confirm 
the  fame.     Witnefs  my  hand  the  26th  day  of  March  1760 

H.    BATHURST. 
John  Hurst  Deputy  Clerk  of  the  Peace. 


Nottinghamjhire.  A  Table  of  the  fevcral  gifts  legacies  and 
X~\.  bequestst— for  the  benefit— of  poor  Prifoners 
in  the  common  Gaol  of  this  County  as  fettled  by  us  his  Majefly's 
Juftices  of  the  Peace— this  i8th  day  of  Jan.  1760.  Purfuant  to  the 
late  A(5t  of  Parliament  and  according  to  the  beft  information  we  can 
get,  as  follows. 


Jy  John  Sherivin  Efq.  of  Nottingham,  the  yearly  Sum  of  Four  Pounds,  paid 
quarterly  out  of  an  Ertate  iXBramfcote,  in  this  County,  purchafed  by  Mr.  Sker- 
ivitt's  Father  of  fome  of  ine  Defcendants  of  Henry  HandUy  Efq.  who  left  this 
Charity. 

By 


Midland  Circuit.     NOTTINGHAMSHIRE. 

By  Abel  Smith  Efq.  of  Nottingham,  purfuant  to  the  direftions  of  the  Will  of  Mr. 
Abel  Ceilings  deceafed,  four  fhillings  monthly  for  Coals  for  the  Prifoners. 

We  are  informed  that  forty  flullings  a  year,  was  formerly  left  by  fome  of  the  fa- 
mily of fla/<-/&/V»/o«  Efquire.     But  that  the  Prifoners  have  not  received 

the  fame  thefe  twenty  years  paft. 

We  do  not  know  of  any  other  Gifts,  Legacies,  or  Bequefls,  except  the  General 
Colleftion  made  in  the  County  for  the  Prifoners  every  Chrillmas. 

We  order  this  Table  to  be  tranfmitted  to  the  Deputy  Clerk  of  the  Peace  for 
this  County,  to  be  entered  among  the  Rolls  of  the  Seffions,  and  Copies 
thereof  to  be  made  and  hung  up  by  him  in  the  refpeftive  Courts,  where 
the  General  Quarter  Seffions  are  held — there  to  remain  and  be  infpefted.  -— 
And  alfo  to  caufe  another  Copyr— to  be  traftfrnitted  to  the  Keeper  of  the  faid 
Gaol  to  be  forthwith  hung  up  by  him  there,  in  fome  public  place,  and  in  a 
confpicuous  manner, —  fo  as  the  Prifoners  may  have  free  refort  thereto,  at 
all  feafonable  times  in  the  day  time,  without  paying  any  thing  for 
the  fame. 


191 


M.  Musters 

W.    BiLBIE 

H.  Sherbrooke 
A.  C.  Stanhope 


J.  White 

W".    KiRKE 

Geo.  Mason. 


A  true  Copy  examined  with 
the  Original  by  me 

John  Hurst. 


P  p  2 


NOTTING- 


292  NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


NOTTINGHAM  TOWN  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 


GAOLER,     Richard  Bonington,  the  County  Gaoler. 
Salary,  ^^8. 
Fees,     Debtors,     ;^o  :     8:0    if  under  ^^  10. 

o  :   14  :  8   if  from  any  Court  in  Z,fl«^o«. 
Felons,         o  :   14  :  8. 
Tranfports,     li   :   17   :  6    each. 
Licence,  fee  County  Gaol. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtor9,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     three-halfpence  in  bread,  a  day. 
Garnifh,        lately  prohibited. 

Number  of    -       -      Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1773,     Nov.  17,        5     -     -       2, 

I775>     Jan-     4.        3     "     "       C)> 

Nov.  12,        5     -     -       a> 

1776,     Sep.  25,        o     -     -       o. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,       None  ftated.      The   Mayor  orders    one   when 
wanted. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  has  been  lately  repaired  and  much  improved. 
Three  roonas  on  the  ground-floor,  two  chambers,  and  two  garrets : 
a  back-court  well  fupplied  with  water.     Debtors  have  from  a  Legacy 

one 


Midland  Circuit.     NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.  29.3 

one  fhilling  a  week  for  coals.     Collefted  in  the  Town  for  Prifoners 
the  laft  two  years  ;^8. 

NOTTINGHAM    TOWN  BRIDEWELL. 

Two  rooms :  no  fire-place :  a  dungeon  down  nine  fteps.  No 
court-yard,  although  there  is  ground  before  and  behind  the  houfe. 
No  fewer.  Water  in  a  kitchen,  where  there  is  a  bed  for  Prifoners 
who  can  pay  two-pence  a  night.     Keeper's  Salary  ^8. 

1776,     Sep.  25,     Prifoners  none. 

COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at  SOUTHWELL. 

This  is  alfo  ufed  as  a  Prifon  for  thofe  Manors  in  this  County 
which  belong  to  the  Archbifliop  of  Tork. 

In  front  is  a  room  on  the  ground-floor,  in  which  were  two  men : 
one  of  them  fentenced  for  three  years,  the  other  for  feven  : — and  a 
dungeon  about  fourteen  feet  fquare,  down  ten  fteps.  The  date  on 
this  part  is  1656. — In  the  back-coutt  is  a  new  building  with  two 
rooms  on  the  ground-floor,  and  two  above :  one  of  the  latter  is  an 
Infirmary.  No  pump  in  this  court:  no  fewer:  Claufes  of  Aft  againft 
Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. — Apothecary  Mr.  Richard/on ;  he 
makes  a  bill. — Allowance  three-halfpennyworth  of  bread.  A  three- 
penny loaf  weighed  ilb.  5^oz.  at  my  firft  vifit;  at  my  laft  2  lb. — 
No  employment. — Keeper's  Salary  ^^45  :    Fees    3  s.    6d.    no   Table. 

He  informed  me  that  a  few  years  ago,  feven  died  here  of  the 
Gaol-Fever  within  two  years. 

^77 5'     J^ri-     4>      Prifoners  9, 
1776,     Sep.  24,       -       -     13. 

NEWARK 


294  NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


NEWARK   UPON  Tren^t    TOWN   GAOL. 

Two  rooms ;  the  largeft,  up  ftairs,  twelve  feet  by  eleven.  No 
court-yard :  no  water :  no  fewer.  Keeper  lives  at  a  little  diftance  : 
no  Salary :  Fees  four  fhillings :  no  Table.  Allowance  three-half- 
pence a  day :  no  ftraw.  Among  the  various  Improvements  that  are 
making  in  this  Town,  I  hope  the  Corporation  will  think  of  a  better 
Prifon. 

1776,     Sep.  23,     Prifoners  2. 


BASFORD    PRISON,     for  debtors. 

This  is  his  Majefly's  Gaol  or  Prifon  of  the  Court  of  Record  of  his 
Honour  oi  Peverel  and  additional  Limits  of  the  fame  in  the  Counties 
of  Nottingham  and  Derby.  One  room  with  three  beds.  The  Keeper 
faid  he  had  another  little  room  for  Women-prifoners  j  but  that, 
having  now  none  of  that  fex,  he  made  ufe  of  it  for  his  fervants. 
The  Houfe  is  his  Freehold,  Fees  13s.  4d.  by  a  Court-roll. — 
The  Debts  from  forty  fliillings  to  fifty  pounds. 

1776,     Sep.  24,     Prifoners  3. 


COUNTY 


Midland  Circuit.       LINCOLNSHIRE.  295 

COUNTY  GAOL,     LINCOLN  CASTLE. 

GAOLER,     JJaac  Wood. 

Salary,  none.     But  j^  154  a  year  to  fupply  Prifoners  as  below  j 

and  to  pay  Land-tax  &c.     (See  Remarks.) 
Fees,     Debtors, 


IS,       J 


Felons, 
Tranfports,  j^8  :  8  :  o  for  each:  and  12  s.  ^.d.  fee  TaMe  of  Fees, 

He  pays  the  Clerk  of  AfTize  a  guinea  for  each. 
Licence  for  Beer :  which  the  Gaoler  brews.    He  lets  the  Tap, 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  if  certified  as  in  Remarks,  fame  as  Felons. 
Felons,  each  weekly  81b.  bread,  and  2d.  for  beef: 
in  common  yearly  £2,  for  coals :  ;^2> 
ftraw :  and  £2,  oatmeal. 

Garnifh,       ^^o  :  2:6. 

Number  of    -       -     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
i774>     Jan.  27,       22     -     -     11, 

—     oa.  29,     14   -   -     9, 

1776,     Jan.  31,       23     -     -     18, 
Sep.  23,       12     -     -       3. 

CHAPLAINS,     Rev.    Mr.    Simp/on;    and  Dr.  fFaldgrave  hy  his 
Curate  the  Rev.  Mr.  Welling. 
Duty — Mr.  Simp/on'^ tdntiday  andFridayj  Mr.  Welling  Sunday. 
Salary,  Mr.  Simpjon   £^    &c.  fee  Remarks;    Dr.   Waldgrave 
about  £2S  P^^  Legacy  of  Rebecca  HuJJey. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Parnall. 
Salary,  ;{2o. 

LINCOLN 


296  LINCOLNSHIRE.       Midland-Circuit. 

LINCOLN      CASTLE 

Remarks.  BELONGS  to  the  Duchy  oC Laac^Jler.  The  County  pays  ten 
lliillings  a  year.  The  Gaoler,  per  contract,  to  keep  it  in  repair. — 
A  fpacious  Area  of  fix  or  feven  acres.  On  the  ground-floor  are  the 
Gaoler's  apartments,  the  Tap-room  &c. 

For  Mafler's-fide  Debtors,  fix  fizeable  rooms  on  the  firfl:  (lory ; 
and  as  many  garrets.  The  floors  of  both  flories  are  tarras,  and  can- 
not be  kept  clean ;  the  paflages  only  fix  feet  wide,  with  windows 
clofe  glazed. 

The  free  ward  for  Debtors  is  only  a  room  at  the  end  of  the  build- 
ing, down  two  fl:eps.  It  is  paved  with  fmall  ftones,  and  is  a  thorough- 
fare to  fundry  places.  Firft,  by  a  trap-door  in  the  faid  pavement 
you  go  down  ten  fteps  to  two  vaulted  dungeons  for  Criminals,  eight 
feet  high;  one,  the  Pit,  fourteen  feet  by  twenty-one,  window  two 
feet  by  fourteen  inches ;  the  other,  within  it,  the  Condemned  Cell, 
fourteen  feet  by  eight  j  window  about  nine  inches  by  eighteen :  a 
little  fhort  fliraw  on  the  floors  :  both  dungeons  dirty  and  offenfive. — 
You  alfo  pafs  through  it  to  the  Women-felons  ward  which  joins  to 
it  and  is  eleven  feet  by  eight : — and  to  the  Felons  fmall  court-yard, 
and  their  fizeable  day-room,  fifteen  feet  by  nineteen  :  no  water  :  no 
fewer : — and  to  a  room  for  the  clofer  confinement  of  Debtors  who  do 
not  behave  well. 

There  are  two  rooms  with  beds  for  Felons  who  can  pay  for  them. 
To  thefe  you  go  another  way. 

No  Chapel :  Service  is  performed  in  the  Shire-Hall.  No  Infir- 
mary.— The  whole  Prifon  is  out  of  repair. — Perhaps  becaufe  the 
County  defigns  to  build  a  new  one. 

Mr. 


Midland  Circuit-.     LINCOLNSHIRE.  297 

Mr.  Wood,  befides  the  fore-mentioned  articles  of  his  contract, 
is  to  furnifh  his  Prifoners  with  pails,  and  other  utenfils,  to  amount' 
of  £2  a.  year ;    and  to  pay  yearly  to  Prifoners  in  the  King's  Bench 
and  Marjhaljea,  two  guineas  j  all  out  of  his  £  1 54. 

In  order  to  a  Debtor's  being  admitted  to  County  Allowance,  it  is 
required  that  he  produce  a  Certificate  of  his  poverty  figned  by  the 
Minifter,  Churchwardens  and  Overfeers  of  his  Parifh. 

Mr.  Simpson's  Salary  ^5  is  from  a  Legacy  of  'Thomas  Hazledine; 
and  for  attending  condemned  Criminals  he  has  five  guineas  from  the 
Sheriff. 

Rebecca  Hussey  by  her  Will,  proved  in  London  lOth  May 
17 15,  bequeathed  the  Intereft  of  ;^  1000  to  releafe  poor  Debtors  from 
this  Caftle  :  but  no  Debtors  have  received  the  benefit  for  many  years 
paft. — tho'inas  Hazledine  left  to  the  Prifoners  ^^j  a  year  payable  from 
the  Rent  of  a  Houfe  in  Lincoln. — There  is  not  in  the  Gaol  any 
Memorial  of  Bequefts. 

On  a  Tomb-flone  in  the  Cathedral,  is  an  Infcription,  noting  that 
Clement  Wood  interred  there,  was  thirty-three  years  Gaoler  of  the 
Caftle,  and  of  the  City  Gaol. 


A  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler  or  Keeper  of  the 
Gaol  for  the  County  oi  Lincoln — and  rules  for  government— 
fettled  purfuant  to  a  late  Aft  for  Relief  of  Debtors  &c. 

C-      S.    D. 
Every  Prifoner  fhall  pay  to  the  Gaoler  at  his  lirft  coming  "j)         -68 
into  Gaol  fix  fhillings  and  eight-pence  —       J 

Q^q  Every 


298  LINCOLNSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

L-     s.   zx 

Every  Prifoner  that  will  lodge  in  any  chamber  in  the  houfe  -j 

ftiall  pay  to  the  Gaoler  for  his  bed  weekly  —  5 

If  he  will  have  the  whole  bed  to  himfelf,  to  pay  weekly  o  :     2:6 

But  if  two  or  more  Debtors  lie  in  the  fame  bed  then  to  be  7    _        .  .  c 

^    o  :     2:0 

paid  amongft  them  weekly  —  —  j 

And  that  the  four  chambers  on  the  firft  floor  fhall  be  held 

and  kept  for  fuch  only  as  board  in  the  houfe. 

Every  Prifoner  for  Debt  to  pay  but  one  Fee  to  the  Gaoler* 

for  his  difcharge   out  of  the  Prifon   though   he  Hands  ( 

committed  in  feveral  aflions,  and  the  Fee  to  be  no  more  ( 

than  fix  (hillings  and  eight-pence  —  — 

To  the  Turnkey  on  the  faid  difcharge,  one  fhilling       — 

Every  Felon  to  pay  to  the  Gaoler  upon  his  Difcharge  out  of  7 

Prifon  thirteen  ihillings  and  four-pence  —         3 

To  the  Turnkey  on  the  faid  difcharge,  one  Ihilling       — 

The  Gaoler  having  the  care  of  the  Felons  condemned  for  • 

Tranfportation,  fometimes  three  months,  fometimes  fix 

months,  and  often  longer,  to  be  paid  for  each  Felon  ^0:13 

by  the  Treafurer  out  of  the  County-money  when  he  is 

taken  out  of  Gaol  thirteen  (hillings  and  four-pence 

Every  Prifoner  committed  from  the  Bar,  by  the  Judge  of-j 

A(rize  or  Selfions  to  pay  to  the  Gaoler  for  his  Difcharge  >    o  :   13  :  4 

thirteen  (hillings  and  four-pence  —  —       J 

Every  Prifoner  that  will  eat  at  the  firft  table  to  pay  five-v 

(hillings  a  week  to  the  Gaoler  for  his  lodging  and  diet  f'    o  :     S  •  ^ 

having  three  meals  a  day  —  —        J 

If  he  cats  at  the  fecond  table  then  he  (hall    pay  but  four) 

?o:4:o 
Ihillings  a  week  for  his  diet  and  lodging  —        J 

Every  Debtor  that  lies  in  the  common  Grate  may  provide  himfelf  with  a  bed, 
bedding  and  (heets  and  purfuant  to  the  Aft  have  nece(rarics  of  life  from 
any  place— between  fix  in  the  morning  and  fix  at  night  from  Lady-day  to 
Michaclmas---between  eight  and  four  from  Michaelmas  to  Lady-day--- 
no  more  than  one  quart  of  Ale  a  day — brought  in  to  one  Prifoner,  to  pre- 
vent dillurbance  &C.- 

Every 


Midland  Circuit.       LINCOLNSHIRE.  299 

Every  Debtor— whom  two  Juftices— adjudge  neceffitous*-— and  every  Felon 
Ihall  have  8  lb.  weight  of  wholefome  houfehold  bread,  and  f  i  lb.  weight 
of  beef  delivered  to  them  weekly. 

Every  Debtor  Ihall  quietly— go  to  his  chamber,  between  Lady-day  and  Mi- 
chaelmas at  nine  in  the  evening— and  between  Michaelmas  and  Lady-day  at 
eight  and  no  later  ;  whofoever  fhall  refnfe— (hall  on  proof  be  deprived  of 
his  beef  and  bread  by  a  Juftice  for  a  time  at  difcretion. 

If  any  Gaoler,  Turnkey  or  other  Officer,  oranyPrifoner-— require  any— -money 
from  a  new-come  Prifoner— either  for  garnifli  money,  chamber-money- -  cards 
— feeing  Lufey  Tower — or  any  other  account  whatfoever.  Shall— if  a  Pri- 
foner  lofe  his  allowance  for  a  time  at  the  difcretion  of  a  Juftice— if  the 
Gaoler  Sec.  be  punilhed  as  an  extortioner  according  to  Law. 

If  the  Gaoler  or  any  of  his  fub-officers  fliall  at  any  time  from  hence  think  it  fafe 
to  take  off  any  Felon's  Irons,  if  a  common  Felon  he  Ihall  pay  the  fum  of 
two  fhillings  and  fix-pence  a  week  and  no  more— If  a  Gentleman  or  better 
fort  of  Criminal  then  he  ihall  take  the  fum  of  five  fhillings  /fr  week  and 
no  more  J. 

Any  perfon  removed  by  Habeas  Corpus  to  pay  the  fame  Fees  'as  other  Prifoners 
when  difcliarged. 

A  Prifoner  making  water— fo  as  to  annoy— or  walhing  hands  in  the  bucket- 
to  lofe  his  allowance  for  a  time  &c. 


We  his  Majefty's  Juftlces  of  the  Peace  for  the  divifion  o?  Lindfey 
in  the  County  of  Lincoln.  Affembled— at  Sfiljby  have  examined 
the  above  Table  of  Fees  with  the  Rules  and  Orders— and  do 
allow  and  confirm  the  fame — the  12th  day  of  April  1768 

Ric  Wright 

W".  Massingberd 
W  Marshall 

H:  Best. 
Ed  Wills 


*  See  Remarks  preceding. 

•\  Inftead  of  this  they  have  two-pence. 

J  This  Order  being  fomewhat  fingular  I  have  tranfcribed  it  verbatim. 

Qjl  2  Wb 


300 


LINCOLNSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 


We  his  Majefly's  Jufticcs— -for  the  divifionof  A'^^i^d?;— aflembled 
—at  Sleaford—d.0  allow  and  confirm  the  fame — 13th  April 
1768 

John  Thorald  Ded  Jones 

RoE"^ .  BuRNE  Leo:  Brown. 


We  his  Majefty's  Juftices— -for  the  Divifion  of //o//fl«fi?— aflembled 
—at  Bojion—do  allow  and  confirm  the  fame— 14th  July  1768 


We  the  Judges  of  Aflize  for  the  County 

of  LitKoln  have  reviewed  the  above 

Table  of  Fees  with  the  Rules  and 

Orders   therein   contained,    and   do 

hereby  confirm  the  fame.      Witnefs 

our  hands    this   25  th  day   of   July 

1768 

T.    PARKER  • 

E.    CLIVE. 


Ri  Falkner 
H.  B.  Pacey 
Ri  Fydell 
J  Linton  Jutf 
J  Calthorp. 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 


GAINSBOROUGH.  Three  rooms:  a  fmall  yard:  no  water : 
no  flraw :  no  allowance  :  no  work.  Conveyance  to  Quarter 
SelTions  at  Keeper's  expence.  Flis  Salary  ^30.  No  Fees. — 
Might  be  improved  on  the  Keeper's  garden. 

1776,     Jan.  30,.     Priforiers  3. 

FOKINGHAM. 


Midland  Circuit.       LINCOLNSHIRE.  301 

FOKINGHAM.  Damp  rooms:  no  chimney :' fmall  yard:  no 
pump  :  no  fewer.  Yet  the  Keeper  faid  a  woman  with  a  child 
at  her  breaft  was  fent  hither  for  a  year  and  a  day:  the  child  died. 
Conveyance  to  Quarter  SelTions  at  Keeper's  expence. 

1774,     Oct.  28,     Prifoners  4. 

SPALDING.  This  Prifon,  lately  built,  has  feveral  fizeable  airy 
rooms  thirteen  feet  by  ten  :  chimneys  in  fome  of  them.  A 
work-room  twenty-eight  feet  by  nine  and  tliree-quarters.  The 
under-rooms  vaulted,  twelve  feet  and  a  half  by  nine  and  a  half 
No  yard :  no  water  acceffible  to  Prifoners.  When  they  work 
they  have  three-fourths  of  the  profit ;  Turnkey,  the  remainder. 
Claufes  of  Ail  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  hung  up  : — as  alfo  is 
the  late  Afl  for  preferving  the  Health  of  Prifoners;  neatly 
painted  on  a  fmall  board. — Keeper's  Salary  £2^:  Fees  5  s. 
no  Table. — He  told  me  that  in  the  laft  fix  years  he  had 
236  Prifoners. 

1776,     Feb.  2,      Prifoners  4. 

STAMFORD     TOWN    GAOL. 

The  Gate  which  was  the  old  Prifon  and  Town-Hall  is  taken 
down.  The  only  room  now  made  ufe  of  is  in  the  Gaoler's  houfe, 
which  joined  to  the  gate.— There  is  a  new  Prifon  building  behind 
the  new  Town-Hall.  The  part  of  it  that  is  finifhed  has— two  cells, 
about  twelve  feet  by  eight :  the  window  in  each  only  two  feet  by 
four  inches  and  a  half; — and  a  Bridewell-room  fixteen  feet  by  eight 
feet  three  inches  :  the  window  here  alfo  too  fmall,  two  feet   by   one 


foot  eight  inches. 


Allowance 


J02  LINCOLNSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

Allowance  to  Felons  two-pence  a  day.     Salary  as  Gaoler  £^ : 

as  Keeper  ^3:6:8:  Fees,  fee  'Table ;  which,  though  not  figned,  I 

tranfcribe  for  the  fingularity  of  an  article  or  two. 

Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1776,     Feb.  10,         o     -     -      1. 

----      Sep.  26,         o     -     -     2. 


The  Town  or  Boroughs  A  TABLE  of  FEES  fettled  &c. — 
of  Stamford  in  the  I  £\^  at  the  Quarter  Seffions  held  by 
County  of  Lincoln.  J   Adjournment  28th  Auguft  1729  &c. 

£.    s.    D. 

For  every  Arreft  upon  Bail  —  —        o  :   10  r  o 

For  waiting  for  Bail  one  Ihilling  per  hour 

Bail  Fees  to  the  Gaol  —  —  —        0:6:0 

For  diet  each  day,  if  not  find  themfelves         —  —         0:1:0 

For  lodging  each  night,  if  not  find  themfelves  —        0:0:4 

If  they  find  themfelves   bedding,    then    for   cleaning  the") 
room  each  week  —  —  —     J 


I   :  O 


For  Felons  &c.  that  lie  on  the  Common-fide, 

For  Gaoler's  Fees  for  the  Gaol                —                   —  o  :   i  o  :  o 

To  the  Smith  ironing  and  taking  ofi^        —           —  0:2:0 

Lodging  for  each  night            —             —            —  0:0:2 

To  the  perfon  who  executes  fentence  of  pillory,  burn- l  1   •  o 

ing  in  the  hand,  or  whipping  —  J 

To  the  Keeper  of  the  Houfe  of  Correftion  for  every  perfon  ?  n  •  6 
that  is  committed  for  the  firft  night                —            ■* 

Every  day  that  perfon  continues  in  cuilody  for  attendance  o  :     0:1 


LINCOLN 


Midland  Circuit.       LINCOLNSHIRE.  303 


LINCOLN    CITY  AND  COUNTY    GAOL. 


GAOLER,     Francis  Toyn. 
Salary,  £10. 


l-ees,     Debtors,  t     .     . 
Felons,     5 

6  :  8. 

Tranfports, 

j^io  each. 

Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance, 

Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     one  fhilling  2 

I  week. 

Garnifli, 

one  fhilling. 

Number  of 

-     Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1774, 

Jan.    27, 

3     -     - 

2, 

1776, 

Jan.   31, 

0     -     - 

I. 



Sep.  23, 

0     -     - 

2. 

CHAPLAIN, 

None. 

SURGEON, 

None. 

THIS  GAOL,   near  the  Gate,  has  one  large  room  for  Men-     Remarks, 
debtors,  one  fmaller  for  Women,  both  up  flairs  :  in  each  a  fire-place. 
The  rooms  for  Criminals  are  two  dungeons  down  three  fteps ;  with 
bedfteads  j  that  they  may  not  fleep  on  the  damp  earth-floor.     In  one 

of 


304  LINCOLNSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 

of  them  is  a  cage  for  clofer  confinement  when  neceflary.  Thefe 
Prlfoners  are  fometimes  taken  into  the  Keeper's  houfe.  No  court- 
yard :  no  water  acceflible  to  Prifoners.     No  ftraw. 


City  of  Lincoln  andl  q-  ^  ■,  A  Table  of— rates  and  fees 
County  of  the  fame  City, \  JTlL.  — fettled  by  the  Juftices— at 

a  General  Quarter  Seflions— held  at  the  Guild-Hall — within  the  firft 
whole  week  next  after  the  Tranflation  of  St.  Thomas  the  Martyr 
to  wit,  on  the  14th  day  of  July  in  the  33d — of  George  II — 1759 
purfuant  to — an  Aft  for  Relief  of  Debtors  &c. 


C     S.    D. 
Every  Debtor  that  lies  In  a  bed  belonging  to  the  Keeper  i 


is  to  pay  one  Ihilling  weekly  and  no  more 

Any  Debtor  that  finds  a  bed  and  places  it  in  the  Common  1 
Room'  is  to  pay  nothing  for  his  lodging  —     J 

Every  Prifoner  for  Debt  is  to  pay  one  Fee  to  the  Keeper~j 
for  his  Difcharge  out  of  Prifon  thgugh  he  (lands  com-  I 
mitted  in  feveral  Aftions  and  that  Fee  no  more  than  . 
fix  (hillings  and  eight-pence  —  —     J 

Every  Felon  is  to  pay  to  the  Gaoler  for  his  Difcharge  out  i 
of  Prifon  (ix  (hillings  and  eight-pence  and  no  more        J 

If  not  continued  in  Prifon  above  a  week  then  to  pay  only  7 


three  (hillings  and  four-pence 


3 


Every  Prifoner  that  will  cat  with  the  Gaoler  is  to  pay  for" 

his  lodging  and  diet  weekly  four  (hillings  and  fix-pence  }-  o  :  4  :  6 
having  three  meals  a  day  — 


ix-pence  > 


Every 


Midland  Circuit.       LINCOLNSHIRE. 


Every  Prifoner  committed  from  the  Bar  by  the  Judge  of" 
Aflize  or  Seffions  is  to  pay  the  Gaoler  for  hi: 
three  Ihillings  and  four  pence  and  no  more 


the  Judge  of] 
^isDifcharge  > 
:  —     J 


£.     S.    D. 


305 


Rob.  Obbinson  Mayor 
Jn°-  Hooton 
RoB^'  Thickston 
Jn"'  Davies 
Ger.  Gibson 

Ew"-  FOWLIR 


John  Wilson 
Edw°-  Letherland- 
RoB^-  Drewry 
John  Brown 
Brox"'  Brown 


We  the  Judges  of  Aflize  for  the  City  o^  Lincoln  and  County  of  the 
fame  City  have  reviewed  this  Table  of  Fees  and  do  hereby- 
confirm  the  fame,  Given  under  our  Hands  this  9th  day  of 
Auguft  1759 

T    PARKER 
JA  HEWITT 


Examined  by  Josr.  Peart 
Clerk  of  the  Peace 


Rr 


COUNTY 


3o6  RUTLANDSHIRE.       Midland  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     OAKHAM. 


GAOLER,     JFilUatn  Lumley,  now  Henry  Lumley, 
Salaiy,  none. 
Fees,    Debtors, 


.rs,  1   ^^ 
s,     3 


^   ^o  :   14  :   10. 
Felons, 

Tranfports,     ^{^lo  each. 

Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRLSONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  ?  ^       r  1  1 

'  '  V  two  fixpenny  loaves  a  week. 

Felons,    J 
Garnifh,        one  fhilling. 

Number  of  -      -      Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Jan.    23,        o     -  -       o, 

177  5>  '^ov.   10,     .  I     -  -       2, 

1776,  Sep.    26,        o     -  -       o. 

CHAPLAIN,    None. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Bullivant, 
Salary,    jC5  :  5  :  o. 


OAKHAM. 


Midland  Circuit.       RUTLANDSHIRE,  307 


OAKHAM. 

THIS  is  alfo  the  county  bridewell  and  the  town  gaol;  yet  I  Remarks, 
found  it  twice  empty.  On  the  ground-floor  is  a  day-room  or  kitchen 
for  Debtors : — a  day-room,  and  two  fmall  night-rooms  for  Felons  ; 
one  of  which  being  very  fmall  and  quite  clofe,  the  Gaoler  has  made 
apertures  in  the  door,  one  at  top,  the  other  at  bottom : — and  a  large 
work-room. 

Up  flairs  are  two  rooms  flrongly  planked  with  oak :  in  each  of 
them  are  two  beds. 

The  Felons  court-yard  is  lately  parted  off  with  ftrong  wooden 
palifades ;  which  intercepting  the  pump,  the  Juftices  have  been  fo 
Confiderate  as  to  put  down  another  pump  in  the  Felons  court.  They 
have  alfo  ordered  the  Gaoler  to  provide  fome  cloathing  for  the  moft 
deftitute  Prifoners.  His  Salary  as  Keeper  of  the  Bridewell  is  ;^20. 
No  Table  of  Fees. 

The  prefent  Gaoler's  Father,  Grandfather  and  Great  Grandfather 
held  the  fame  office. 


Rr2  COUNTY 


joS  NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    NORTHAMPTON. 


GAOLER,     John  Scofield, 

Salary,  none  :  he  pays  the  County  ^^40  a  year. 
Fees,      Debtors,  ?    /•     . 

Felons,    ^ 
Tranfports,     lit^o  {j  eachj  if  more  ^^6  :  16  :  6  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     two-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day  (weight 
Jan.i']i^y  lib.   i^oz.J. 
Garnifli,       Debtors,  ;^o  :  6  :  o. 

Felons,        0:2:6. 

Number  of  -       -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

177  J,  Nov.   15,  -       9     -  -       8, 

1774,  April    5,  -       6     -  -       4, 

1775,  Jan.      2,  -       8     -  -       7, 

1776,  Jan.      5,  -       7     -  -     12. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Miller. 

Duty — Sunday,  Tuefday,  Thurfday. 
Salary,  £^0. 

SURGEON,         Mr.  Kerr,    T     Salary,     none. 

APOTHECARY,  Mr.  Breton.  S    '^^^V  '^^^^  ^  ^'"• 

NORTHAMP- 


Midland  Circuit.     NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.  309 

NORTHAMPTON. 

THIS  GAOL  is  alfo  the  county  bridewell  j  but  Petty  Remarks. 
Offenders  are  kept  feparate  from  Felons.  Mr.  Scofield  has  a  Salary 
of  ^36  :  10  :  o  as  Keeper.  Two  court-yards ;  but  that  for  Felons  is 
too  clofe.  No  ftraw.  The  County  have  lately  built  feven  commo- 
dious rooms,  for  one  Felpn  each :  yet  there  is  ftill  a  dungeon  eleven 
fteps  under  ground,  which  might  have  been  dilufed  if  they  had 
doubled  the  number  of  the  new  rooms.  There  is  ground  enough 
in  the  Keeper's  yard  or  garden. 

The  Chapel  is  the  upper  room  in  the  Gaoler's  houfe. — It  is  pain- 
ful for  Prifoners  loaded  with  irons  to  go  up  and  down  the  flairs. 
No  Table  of  Fees. 


NORTHAMPTON    TOWN    GAOL. 

No  yard  :  no  water — So  the  Prifoners  told  me  at  the  large  grate, 
where  I  could  fee  the  room  j  into  which,  for  that  reafon,  I  happened 
not  to  go. — I  mention  this  circumftance  becaufe  it  occurred  no  where 
elfe. 

1776,     Jan.  5,     Prifoners  2. 

DAVENTRY      GAOL. 

Close    rooms.       No    yard:     no    water. 
1776,    Jan.  5,    No  Prifoners. 

PETER- 


310  NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.     Midland  Circuit. 


PETERBOROUGH    GAOL, 

For  the  Liberty  called  the  Soke,  which  contains  thirty-two  towns, 
is  the  property  of  Lord  Exeter.  It  is  now  alfo  the  Prifon  of  the 
Dean  and  Chapter  of  the  Cathedral  Church  of  the  Borough  of 
St.  Peter  otherwife  Peterborough. 

Two  rooms  for  Debtors,  and  down  three  fteps  a  room  called  the 
Gaol  J  in  which  is  the  condemned  room :  the  Court  having  power  of 
life  and  death.  A  jMalefaftor  was  executed  here  about  two  years 
ago.  No  allowance.  Keeper's  Salary  ^  1 2  :  Fees  7  s.  8  d.  the  Table 
neither  figned  nor  dated.     He  pays  Window-tax  j^i :  5  :  6. 

1774,     0(5t.  28,     Debtors  2, 

1776,     Sep.  26,      -      -      3>     Deferter  i. 


PETERBOROUGH    BRIDEWELL, 

For  the  Soke,  as  above,  has  on  the  ground-floor  a  large  work- 
fliop,  and  a  room  lately  divided  into  a.  part  for  men,  and  another  for 
women. — Up  flairs,  two  rooms  or  hemp-warchoufes  :  the  Keeper 
a  hemp-drefler.  A  very  fmall  court-yard  j  not  fecure :  Prifoners 
always  within  doors.  No  water.  Keeper's •  Salary  ^^ 8  :  Fees  js.  6d. 
no  Table. 

1774,     0(fl.  28,     Prilbner  j, 
1776,     Sep.  26,      -       -     1. 

COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.         BERKSHIRE.  .        311 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     READING. 

GAOLER,    The  Widow  Wifeman,  now  John  Hill 
Salary,  £10. 

Fees,     Debtors,    ^o  :  16  :  10, 
Felons,         o  :   14  :     4. 
Tranfports,     £2:1:0  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     three-pence  a  day  each. 
Garnifh,        Debtors,  jTo  :  5  :  6, 

Felons,       0:2:6. 

Number  of  -      -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1773,  Dec.  II,       II     -     -     II, 
I774>  July  29,       10     -     -       6, 
1776,  Jan.      I,         9     -     -     15, 
Nov.    I,         3.-8. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  B^ebfier. 
Duty  — Sunday  and  Wednefday. 
Salary,    ^^31  :  10  :  o. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  rylleard. 

Salary,   ^^lo  for  Gaol  and  Bridewell. 

DEBTORS  and  Felons  have  their  court-yards  feparated  by  iron     Remarks. 
rails. — The  former  have  a  kitchen :  and  for  the  Mafter's-fide  many 

rooms  i 


312  BERKSHIRE.         Oxford  Circuit. 

READING,  rooms;  but  no  free  ward. — Felons  have  a  day-room  for  men  and 
women.  The  night-room  for  men  is  a  large  dungeon  down  four  fteps : 
the  Prifoners  broke  out  lately.  A  feparate  night-room  for  women. — 
The  Turnkey  has  now  a  lodging-room,  over  the  Felons  dungeon, 
with  an  alarm  bell :  fo  that  an  efcape  will  be  more  difficult.  There 
is  lately  fitted  up  a  fmall  room  for  an  Infirmary ;  and  another  room 
or  two :  but  no  provifion  made  for  feparating  Men-felons  at  night ; 
nor  for  Common-fide  Debtors.  There  is  a  room  ufed  for  the  Gaoler's 
poultry. — Tranfports  have  not  the  King's  allowance  of  two  {hillings 
and  fix-pence  a  week.  No  Table  of  Fees.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft 
Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.     No  ftraw. 

About  fix  years  ago  a  Gentleman  fent  to  this  Gaol  for  the  Prifon- 
ers thirty-fix  rugs  or  coverlids  :  moft  of  them  now  worn  out. 

When  Felons  come  to  this  Prifon,  they  are  ftripped  and  waflied ; 
and  then  they  put  on  cloaths  provided  by  the  County.  The  men 
have  a  Ruflia-drab  coat  and  breeches,  a  flannel  waiftcoat,  two  check 
fhirts,  and  two  pair  of  yarn  hofe.  The  women,  a  Ijnfey  woolfey 
gown  and  petticoat,  a  flannel  petticoat,  two  dowlafs  fliifts,  two  pair 
of  yarn  hofe.  Their  own  cloaths  are  ticketed  and  hung  up  till  the 
Quarter  Sefllons  or  Aflizes;  when  they  put  them  on  again  to  appear  in 
on  trial.  Afterwards  the  County-cloaths  are  waflied,  mended,  and 
purified  in  an  oven,  for  the  ufe  of  future  Criminals.  The  cloathing 
aforefaid  for  twenty  men  and  five  women  cofl:  only  ^16  :  6  :  ^. 

The  following  Verfes  arc  written  over  the  Debtor's  grate  to  the 
ftreet : 

Oh  Ye  whofe  hours  exempt  from  Sorrow  flow. 
Behold  the  fent  of  Pain  and  Want  and  Woe  : 
Think,  while  your  h<inds  th'  entreated  alms  extend. 
That  what  to  Us  ye  give  to  cod  ye  lend. 

COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.         BERKSHIRE.  313 


COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 


READING.  This  is  alfo  the  town  bridewell.  It  was  formerly 
a  Church,  and  is  a  fpacious  room,  with  four  fmall  cabins  on 
one  fide  for  night-rooms.  No  court-yard :  no  water :  allow- 
ance three-pence  a  day.  Keeper's  Salary  £  1 8  from  the  County ; 
£2  from  the  town  :  Fees  4s.  4d.  no  Table :  Licence  for  Beer: 
half  the  profit  of  the  Prifoners  work  ••£23.  year  to  find  them 
ftraw. 

1776,     Jan.     I,     Prifoners  6, 
Nov.  I,       -      -       6. 


At     READING     is    alfo    the 

TOWN  GAOL  or  compter^  Three  rooms  in  a  public  houfe 
(the  Reading  Arms)  belonging  to  the  town.  The  eldeft 
Sergeant  has  generally  the  refufal  of  it.  No  court-yard : 
no  water.  Felons  allowance  three  pence  a  day.  Keeper 
no  Salary:    Fees   4s.  4d.    no  Table. 

1776,     Nov.  I,     Debtors  2. 

Sf  ABINGDON. 


3H 


BERKSHIRE.         Oxford  Circuit. 

ABINGDON.  A  day-room;  and  two  dark  offenfive  night-rooms: 
that  for  men  eight  feet  fquare  :  the  women's  nine  by  feven  and 
half:  no  chimney :  no  yard  :  no  water.  The  Petty  Offenders 
were  in  irons.  One  lately  died  of  the  Small-pox.  Allowance 
three-pence  a  day.  Keeper's  Salary  ^i8  :  F^es  4s.  4d.  No 
table.     Half  the  profit  of  the  Prifoners'  work. 

1776,     Jan.     2,      Prifoners  3. 

WINDSOR     CASTLE,     for    debtors. 

I  NEED  not  obferve  that  his  Majefly  is  Proprietor.  The  Duke  of 
Montague  is  Conftable :  he  appoints  a  Janitor  with  a  falary  :  the  Ja- 
nitor appoints  a  Deputy,  who  for  a  houfe  rent-free,  and  certain  per- 
quifites,  does  the  duty.     The  Prifon  out  of  repair. 

1776,     March  i,     Prifoners     2. 

WINDSOR     TOWN     GAOL. 

Two  rooms :  no  chimney  :  no  yard  :  no  water.  Keeper  a  Sergeant 
at  Mace  :  no  Salary  :  Fees  6  s.  8  d.  No  table.  Allowance  three- 
pence a  day. 

1776,     March   i,     Prifoners    3. 

WALLINGFORD     TOWN     GAOL. 

Two  rooms  :  one  of  them  is  called  the  Bailiff's  Ward.  Under 
them  is  a  large  Dungeon,  filled  with  market-benches,  flails  &c. 

1776,     Nov.  I,     Deferter    i. 

COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.       OXFORDSHIRE.  315 


COUNTY  GAOL,  OXFORD  CASTLE. 

GAOLER,     Solomon  Wijdom, 
Salary,  ^lo. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ;^o  :     9  :     2, 
Felons,  o  :   15  :   10. 

Tranfports,     He  makes  a  Bill  of  the  Expence. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,   none,     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     i6d.  each^ar  week  in  bread. 

Garnifli,       lately  cancelled. 

Number  of    -      -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773'     Nov.  26,       14     -  -     13, 

1774,     July     4,       II     -  -     17, 

1776,     Jan.      2,       13     -  -     10, 

Oft.  31,         7     -  -     14. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Swinton, 

Duty  —  Sunday,    Wednefday,  Friday;    the   Sacrament 

four  times  a  year. 
Salary,  ^50. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Rawlins. 
Salary,  ^^25  for  Felons. 

Sf2  OXFORD 


3i6  OXFORDSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit, 


OXFORD       CASTLE. 

Remarks.  FOR  the  Caftle  Gaol  the  County  pays  £4^0  a  year  to  Mr.  Etty, 
who  holds  it  of  Chriji  Church  College  on  Leafe.  — Debtors  apartments 
fmall ;  and  not  enough  of  them  for  the  general  number  of  Prifoners. 
No  free  ward  :  for  lodging  even  in  the  Tower  on  their  own  beds  they 
mufl:  pay  js.  6d.  a  vtctk:  fee  the 'Table.  Their  court-yard  is  too 
fmall. — Felons  day-room  for  men  and  women  down  five  fteps :  the 
men's  dungeon  down  five  more ;  only  a  fmall  window :  the  women's 
night-room  very  fmall;  no  window.  The  court-yard  common  to 
both ;  much  too  fmall.     The  Gaoler  has  a  fpacious  garden. 

This  Prifon  is  alfo  the  City  Gaol :  for  which  Mr.  Wifdom  has  ^^5 
a  year. — In  1773  eleven  died  of  the  Small-Pox.  In  1774  that 
diftemper  ftill  in  the  Gaol :  in  1775  one  Debtor  died  of  it  in  May; 
three  Debtors  and  a  Petty  Offender  in  June :  three  recovered.  No 
Infirmary  :  no  ftraw.    . 

Thomas  Horde,  who  was  confined  here  for  fome  offence  againft 
Government,  built  the  Chapel.  After  his  difcharge,  he  had  be- 
queathed j^i4  a  year  for  a  Chaplain  ;  and  as  much  to  the  Prifoners. 
But  finding  fome  difficulties  would  obflruft  the  execution  of  that 
Bcquefl: ;  he  altered  it,  Auguft  6th,  1709,  to  a  Legacy  of;r24a  year 
to  be  diftributed  among  Prifoners  of  both  forts,  at  f^-i  a  month.  For 
the  Payment,  he  bound  an  Eftate  in  Oxfordjhire :  and  to  make  up 
any  deficiency  of  that  Eftate,  he  bound  an  Eftate  in  Berk/hire.  Yet 
the  Prifoners  have  now  only  thirty-three  fhillings  a  month.  A 
Memorial  of  the  procefs  and  refult  of  Mr.  Horde's  benevolent 
intention  hangs  up  in  the  Gaol.  I  have  a  copy  of  it;  too  long  to 
tranfcribe. 

There 


Oxford  Circuit.       OXFORDSHIRE.  317 

There  is  another  Legacy  to  Pi  Ifoners  of  both  forts  j  8  s.  8d.  a 
year;  paid  quarterly  by  Mr.  Hart  of  Oxford. 

Debtors  have  in  comnaon  every  Saturday  two  fhillings  worth  of 
meat  j  fent  by  a  Gentleman  of  Chrift  Church  College.  From  two 
other  Colleges  they  have  in  bread  about  as.  4d.  a  week.  Chrifb 
Church  and  New  College  fend  them  broth  j  generally  three  times  in 
a  fortnight :  the  Prifoners  pay  four  pence  to  the  man  who  brings  it. 

Mr.  Wisdom  (the  Gaoler)  told  me  that  about  nine  years  ago, 
wanting  to  build  a  little  hovel,  and  digging  up  ftones  for  the  pur- 
pofe,  from  the  ruins  of  the  Court,  which  was  formerly  in  the  Caftle, 
he  found  under  them  a  complete  fkeleton  with  light  chains  on  the 
legs;  the  links  veiy  fmall.  Thefe  were,  probably,  the  bones  of  a 
Malefaftor  who  died  in  Court  of  the  Diftemper  at  the  Black  AJfize 
mentioned  page  17. 


Oxfordjhirey  (TOWER)  Michaelmas  Sessions  34th  George  II. — 

1760 

A  TABLE  OF  FEE  S — and  chamber  rent — fettled 
— in  purfuance  of  an  A6t  32d  of  his  prefent  Majefty— for  the 
Relief  of  Debtors  &c. 

C-      S.     D. 

To  the  Mafter-Keeper  for  every  Warrant  charged  upon  any' 


■}... 


Debtor  1^.6: 

To  the  Under-keeper  —  ^  0:2:6 

To  him  for  every  other  Warrant  —  0:1:0 


To 


2  :  6 


3i8  OXFORDSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 

C.      S.     D. 
To  the  Mailer-Keeper  for  every  Prifoner  committed  by  any^ 

Juftice  of  Peace  for  Treafon,    Felony,   or  any  other  >    o  :   13   :  4 

Mifdemeanour  j  or  committed  in  Court  —  -J 

To  the  Under-keeper  —  —  —  0:2:6 

To  the  Mafter-keeper  for  receiving  and  entering  every  De-f 

claration  againft  any  Debtor  —  —         j 

To  his  Certificate  that  no  Declaration  filed  —  0:1:0 

For  a  Copy  of  every  Sheriff's  Warrant  —  0:1:0 

For  a  Copy  of  every  other  Warrant  —  —  0:1:6 

Every  Prifoner  that  lyeth  in  the  great  Chamber  on  the  Gaol ") 

fide  in  the  Keeper's  Lodgings  pays  by  the  week  j 

Every  Prifoner  that  lyeth  in  any  other  Room  or  Chamber  in 
theKeeper'sLodgings  on  the  Gaol  fidepayeth  by  the  week 
Every  Prifoner  that  lyeth  in  the  Great  Room  in  the  Tower") 

upon  his  own  bed  payeth  by  the  week  —  j 

Every  Prifoner  that  lyeth  in  the  faid  Great  Room  on  the 

Keeper's  bed  payeth  by  the  week    —  — 


2  :  o 

2  :  6 

I  :  6 

I  :  8 


We— his  Majefty's  Juftices  of  the  Peace  of  the— County  of 
Oxford  (whereof  fome  of  us  are  of  the  Quorum)  have  perufed 
the  Fees  and  Chamber  Rent  above  mentioned  and  do— allow- 
thereof  and  direft  the  fame  to  be  hung  up  in  a  Table  in  fome 
open  and  public  room  or  place  in  the  faid  Caille  there  to  remain 
and  be  reforted  to  by  every  Prifoner  as  occafion  fliall  require. 


Thomas  Blackall 
Ed"-  Turner 
Tho'"   Pardo 
Anthony  Keck 


Theophilus  Leigh 
Tho^-    Hunt 
W"'  Lenthal. 


COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.       OXFORDSHIRE,  319 


COUNTY      BRIDEWELLS. 


THAME.  I  WAS  informed  that  this  Houfe,  built  in  1708,  was 
given  to  the  County  for  a  Bridewell :  but  the  greateft  part  of 
it  is  now  a  Parifli  Work-houfe.  For  the  Prifon  there  is  only 
left,  up  flairs,  a  common  day-room,  and  a  fmall  infecure 
lodging-room  :  and  down  eleven  fbeps  a  dungeon  in  which  are 
two  night-rooms,  the  Cul>s,  each  nine  feet  by  feven. — If  the 
Houfe  was  put  into  good  repair,  and  the  whole  ufed  as  a^ 
Bridewell,  it  would  be  a  comanodious  one.  Then  there  would 
be  no  need  of  fending  Petty  Offenders,  as  is  now  done,  to  the 
County  Gaol  :  nor  of  locking  up  all  day  long  within  doors 
thofe  few  that  are  committed  hither,  men  and  women  in  the 
fame  room  :  nor  of  confining  either  fex  at  night  in  the  Ctiis. 
No  allowance :  no  employment :  no  water  :  no  fewers.  Keep- 
er's Salaiy  ^16  :  Fees  4s.  6d.  no  Table. 

The  Keeper  now  farms  the  Work-hoirfe  and  the  refl  of  the 
poor  at  £4-80  a  year  for  the  whole  maintenance,  cloathing, 
medicines  &c. 

1776,     Jan.    3,     Prifoners  2, 
Nov.  2,     -     -     -    3- 

WITNEY.     One  day-room  about  feventeen  feet  by  fifteen  for  men 
and  women :  two  night-rooms  adjoining  about   nine  feet  by 

feven ; 


320  OXFORDSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 

WITNEY  feven ;  with  only  a  grate  of  about  nine  inches  fquare  in  each 

^    '    ^"  door.     The  Prifon  is  not  fecure.     No  allowance  but  to  the 

WELL. 

fick,  who  have  fix-pence  a  day  and  medicines.     No  ftraw : 
no  water.     Keeper's  Salary  ^^20  :  Fees  4s.  2d.  no  Table. 

The  Houfe  does  not  belong  to  the  County :  it  is  in  the 
court-yard  of  the  Keeper's  public  houfe,  for  which  he  pays 
jfij  :  7  :  o  a  year.  Prifoners  have  no  ufe  of  the  court-yard ; 
but  their  window  is  accefTible  to  paflengers.  I  faw  a  crowd  of 
men  talking  at  the  grate  with  the  Prifoners,  who  were  all  of 
them  women  j  and  was  informed  there  is  fometimes  riot  and 
confufion  on  fuch  occafions. 


To  this  Prifon  were  committed. 

In  the  year   1773,      Prifoners  49, 
i774>       -       -       44> 

i77S>      -      -      73. 
To  0£b.  31,   1776,       -       -       67. 

The  moft  at   any   one   time    i3. 
When  I  was  there  in  1776,  Oft.  31,  Prifoners  6. 


I 


COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.     WORCESTERSHIRE.  321 


COUNTY  GAOL,     WORCESTER  CASTLE. 


GAOLER,     William  Crane,  now  his  Widow. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^^o  :     9  :     2, 
Felons,  o  :   15   :   10. 

Tranfports,    No  Benefit  to  the  Gaoler.     Clerk  of  Peace 

contrafts  with  the  Merchants. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     three-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day,  each. 
Garnifh,         j^o  :  2  :  6. 

Number  of  -       -      Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  23,       15     -  -     17, 

1774,  July     2,      13     -  _     12, 

1775,  Dec.      I,      25     -  -     17, 

1776,  Sep.    10,         9     -  -     10. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  ^^j/or. 
Duty  —  Friday. 
Salary,  ;^ao. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Hallward. 

Salary,  none :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

Tt  WORCESTER 


322  WORCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 


WORCESTER. 

Remarks,  THE  CASTLE-YARD  is  fpacious :  County  Members  are 
chofen  in  it.  In  the  Gaoler's  houfe  are  many  good  lodging-rooms 
for  Mafter's-fide  Debtors ;  and  two  fmall  day-rooms  :  one  of  thefe 
is  ufed  as  a  Chapel. — The  free  ward,  or  night-room  for  Debtors,  is 
at  another  part  of  the  yard.  You  go  to  it  through  the  Women- 
felons  night-room.  The  day-room  for  Men  and  Women-felons  is 
in  the  middle  of  the  area  j  only  fourteen  feet  by  twelve.  Near  it  is  a 
Hand-Ventilator  for  airing  the  Men-felons  dungeon,  which  is  twenty- 
fix  fteps  under  ground,  and  circular,  about  feventeen  feet  diameter, 
with  barrack-bedfleads.  Over  it  is  an  aperture  in  the  yard,  with  an 
iron  grate.  The  Felons  work  the  Ventilator  cheerfully  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  before  they  go  down,  and  as  long  when  they 
come  up ;  for  it  frelliens  and  cools  the  dungeon  amazingly :  we 
could  hardly  keep  oih-  candle  burning  below  while  it  was  working. — 
Excellent  water  at  a  pump  in  the  yard.  Straw  £jf  a  year. — No 
Iniirmaiy.  Mr.  Haliward  the  Surgeon  caught  the  Gaol-Fever  Ibme 
years  ago,  and  has  ever  fince  been  fearful  of  going  into  the  dun- 
geon :  when  any  Felon  is  fick  there,  lie  orders  him  to  be  brought 
out. — The  Gaoler  pays  near  £^  Window-tax. — Claufes  of  Aft  agaioll 
Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

This  Prifon  may  be  made  commodious  by  feparate  wards, 
yards  &c.  There  is  round  it  much  ground  belonging  to  the 
Countv. 


County 


Oxford  Circuit.     WORCESTERSHIRE.  323 

County  of  Worcejler.     A      TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by  the 
XJL  Gaoler  of  the  faid  County  purfuant  to  a 
Statute   made   in  the   fecond   year   of  his   Majefly    King   George 
the  Second. 

For  the  difcharge  of  every  Debtor,  to  the  Gaoler  — 

To  the  Turnkey  —  —  — 

For  the  difcharge  of  every  Felon,  to  the  Gaoler  — 

To  the  Turnkey  —  —  — 

For  the  Difcharge  of  every  Deferter,  to  the  Gaoler  — 

To  the  Turnkey         —  —  — 

For  the  lodging  of  every  Prifoner  in  the  houfe/f/-  week 

For  figning  every  Certificate  —  — 

Allowed  according  to  the  faid  Statute  by  us 


£■ 

s. 

D. 

0 

:      6  : 

8 

0 

:      2  : 

6 

0 

:   13   : 

4 

0 

:      2   : 

6 

0 

:     6  : 

8 

0 

:     2   : 

6 

0 

:      2   ; 

:  6 

0 

:      I    : 

;  0 

J    SOLEY 

W  Bromley 

Fre 

Me^ 

'SEY, 

COUNTY    BRIDEWELL   at    WORCESTER. 

This  Prifon  joins  to  the  Caftle.  It  is  too  clofe  j  elpecially  the 
men's  night-room ;  which,  though  up  ftairs,  has  no  window.  Here 
are  work-rooms  j  and  I  faw  the  Prifoners  employed,  beating  hemp, 
fpinning  &c.  —  Two  fmall  Court-yards.  Thefe  and  the  Houfe 
might  be  enlarged  on  the  County  ground. — Keeper's  Salary  £io  : 
Fees  IS.  4d.     Straw  fifteen  Ihillings  a  quarter:  no  other  allowance. 

If  there  were  a  Chapel  in  the  County  Gaol  (the  Caftle),  thefe 
Prifoners  might  (as  thofe  in  Shrewfbury  Bridewell)  have  the  privi- 
lege of  Public  Worlhip. 

1775,  Dec.    I,     Prifoners    3, 

1776,  Sep.  10,     -     -     -    18. 

Tt2  WORCESTER 


324 


WORCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 


WORCESTER    CITY  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 


GAOLER,     Richard  George. 

Salary,  none. 

Fees,^    Debtors,    £o  :  ^  :  2, 
Felons,  0:5:0. 

Tranfports,     No  Benefit  to  the  Gaolen 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     three  pence  a  day  each. 

Garnifh,       £0:2:6. 

Number  of    -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,    Nov.  23,      4    -  -       5» 

1775,  Dec.     I,       5     -  -       o, 

1776,  Sep.   10,       4     -  -       o. 

CHAPLAIN,    None. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Hallward. 

Salary,  none :  he  makes  a  Bill. 


I 


WORCESTER 


Oxford  Circuit.     WORCESTRRSHIRE,  32; 


WORCESTER    CITY    GAOL. 

THIS  is  alfo  the  City  Bridewell.      The  Debtors  free  ward  is     Remarks. 
fpacious. — One  common  yard '.   another  might  be  taken  from  the 
Keeper's   large    garden.  —  He   pays    Window-tax;    which    he   faid 
brought  him  under  the  difagreeable  neceffity  of  flopping  up  fome 
windows.     Rate  £3  '■  S  '■  '^' 


City  of  Worcefter.     A       TABLE   of  FEES   to  be  taken   by  the 
XjL.   Gaoler  of  the  faid  City  purfuant  to  a  Statute 
made  in  the  thirty  fecond  year  of  the  reign  of  his  late  Majefty  King 
George  the  Second. 

For  the  Difcharge  of  every  Debtor  to  the  Gaoler  and  Turnkey  o 

The  like  of  every  Felon  —  —  —  o 

For  the  Lodging  of  every  Prifoner  in  the  Houfe  per  week  o 

For  the  Copy  of  every  Commitment  —  —  o 

On  the  Delivery  of  every  Declaration  —  —  o 

Allowed  according  to  the  faid  Statute  by  us 

Epiphany  Seffions  177 1  g^w  Willings   Mayor 

W  Haden 


s. 

D. 

9   : 

:   2 

5  • 

:   0 

2 

:  6 

I 

:   0 

I   : 

;   0 

Tho  Giles 
Tim''  Edwards 


At  the  Lent  Affize  1771 
Allowed  by  us 


E.    WILLES 

W;  H:  ASHURST. 


COUNTY 


.26  STAFFORDSHIRE,        Oxford  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     STAFFORD. 

GAOLER,     miliam  Scott. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^o  :   17  :     4, 
Felons,         o  :   15  :   10. 
Tranfports,     ^^6:0:0  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  1    each /«•  week   1 6  d.  bread,  and  8d. 
Felons,    5   cheefe  j  and  in  common  3  Civt.  of 
coals  a  week  from  Michaelmas  to 
May-day. 
Garnifh,        Debtors,       j^o  :  2  :   li. 

Felons,        cancelled  by  the  Gaoler. 

Number  of  -      -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  19,       39     -     -     2°» 

1774,  April    I,       44     -     -     17, 

1775,  Nov.  15,       40     -     -     18. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Unett. 

Duty  —  Sunday,  Wednefday,   Friday  j    a  Sermon  once  in 

about  two  months. 
Salary,    lately  augmented  from  ^^20  to  ^^30. 

SURGEON,     Mr.   J-Fard. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

STAFFORD. 


Oxford  Circuit.        STAFFORDSHIRE.  327 

STAFFORD. 

THIS  GAOL  is  much  too  fmall  for  the  number  of  Prifoners  :  Remarks. 
and  fo  is  the  Felons  Court-yard.  The  Dungeon  where  the  Men- 
felons  fleep  is  about  two  feet  lower  than  the  paflage.  No  fteps,  a 
Hoping  defcent.  It  is  too  clofe.  No  Infirmary.  An  Alarm-bell. 
It  is  pity  that  the  Stream  juft  on  the  outfide  of  the  Walls  is  not 
within  them.  I  was  pleafed  to  fee  plenty  of  dean  straw  in  the 
Dungeon ;  and  found  it  was  owing  to  the  generous  and  exemplary 
practice  of  not  farming  it,  but  allowing  the  Gaoler  to  order  it 
whenever  wanted,  and  the  County  paying  for  it  themselves. 


A  TABLE  OF  FEES— fettled  at  the  General  Quarter  Seffions- 
18th  day  of  April  1732. 


£.    S.    D. 

For  entering  the   A£lion   whereon   each   Prifoner  is   firfl. 


13 


brouglit  into  cuftody  e\lher  on  Proce/s  Capias  Latitatei 

Execution  or  Writ  of  Excom  ad  Cafiendum  and  difcharg-  j 

ing  each  Prifoner  by  Writ  of  Super/edeas  or  otherwife 

For  receiving   and   entering   every  Declaration   delivered ' 

againfl;  Prifoners   to   be  paid   by  the  Plaintiff  in  fuch 

Aaion  —  —  — 

For  a  Certificate  for  want  of  a  Declaration  in  order  to  fue -i 

/    o  :     3:6 

out  a  Writ  of  Super/edeas  —  J 

For  a  Copy  of  each  Warrant  againft  each.  Prifoner  o  :     i   :  6 

For  the  Under  Keeper  or  Turnkey  upon  every  Aftion  or  Writ  o  :     2:6 

For  the  Under  Keeper  or  Turnkey  upon  difcharging  of  each  i 

Prifoner  by  Super/edeas  or  otherwife  —         I 


I 


LODGINGS. 


328 


STAFFORDSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 


LODGINGS. 


] 


Every  Prifoiier  that  lies  in  the  Mafter's-fide  of  the  Gaol  in" 
a  bed  provided  by  the  Keeper  of  the  Gaol  fhall  pay 
per  week  if  a  bed  to  himfelf  —  — 

If  two  Prifoners   or   more  lye  together  in  one  bed   then  7 
between  them  all  —  —  —         •' 

Every  Prifoner  that  lies  in  the  upper  rooms  or  garret  in  a  T 
bed  and  bedding    found  by  the  Keeper  of  the  Gaol  >  o 
ihall  pay  per  week         —  —  —         J 

And  if  two  Prifoners  lie  together  then  —  o 

Evei-y  Prifoner  that  lies  in  the  fame  fide  and  finds  his  own  1 
linnen  and  bedfteads     —  —  —         J 

Every  Prifoner  that  lies  in  the  County  Chamber  Ihall  pay 

nothing.  —  —  —  o 


/.     S.    D. 


I   :  o 

I    :   6 
o  :  6 


I 


We  the  Judges  of  AJTize  and 
Gaol  Delivery  of  the  Oxford 
Circuit  have  perufed  and  do 
approve  of  the  above  written 
Table  of  Fees  this  2d  day  of 
Auguft  y/}if!o  Dom.   1732 


E  Littleton 
H  Wyrly 
Fish  Littleton 
R.  Rider 
Jn°'  Dolphin 


i 


E    PROBYN 
J     COMYNS 


COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.       STAFFORDSHIRE.  329 


COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 

STAFFORD.  The  Houfe  very  dirty.  Prifoners  always  fliut  up. 
Keeper's  Salary  ^^25  :  he  puts  in  a  Deputy  who  ferves  for  Rent, 
Allowance  fame  as  at  the  Gaol.     No  employment. 

177 5>     Nov.  15,     Prifoners  4. 

WOLVERHAMPTON.  Only  two  rooms  about  twelve  feet 
fquare,  viz.  a  common  day-room  on  the  ground-floor ;  and  a 
night-room  above,  for  men :  women  fleep  in  the  day-room. 
No  court-yard  :  no  water :  no  fewer :  no  employment.  Weekly 
allowance  in  bread,  fourteen  pence :  cheefe,  feven  pence : 
ftraw,  three  pence.  Keeper's  Salary  ^{25  :  Fees  one  fliilling. 
Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

The  Prifon  is  greatly  out  of  repair  j  and  fo  infecure  that 
Prifoners,  even  for  the  flighteft  offences,  are  kept  in  irons. 
The  County  may  redrefs  this ;  for  they  have  a  large  garden 
clofe  to  the  Prifon  which  they  let  with  an  old  houfe  on  the 
fpot. 

1776,     Sep.  II,     Prifoners,  4 'Men. 

LITCHFIELD     CITY    GAOL.  . 

The  rooms  too  fmall  and  clofe.  No  yard  :  no  water :  no  ftraw. 
Might  be  improved  upon  the  ground  behind  it.  Keeper's  Salary  ^1 : 
Fees  13s.  4d,  no  Table.     Allowance  is.  6d.  a  week. 

i773>     Nov.  20,     Prifoners  2, 
1776,     Jan.      8,     -     -     -    I. 

Uu  COUNTY 


330 


SHROPSHIRE.        Oxford  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     SHREWSBURY. 

GAOLER,     Samuel  Wilding. 

Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,    ^o  :     9:0, 
Felons,         o  :   14  "•  4- 
Tranfports,    ^6:6:0   each.  -    ■ 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 


PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  two  fix-penny  loaves  a  week  each. 
Felons,     is.  4d.4:.  in  bread  a  week  each. 
Garnifh,         lately  cancelled.     (See  Remarks.) 

Number  of  -       -        Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  March  31,       12     -  -     18, 

J775,  Nov.    27,      16     -  -     15, 

1776,  Sep.      12,      1 1     -  -     24.     (See  Remarks.) 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Humphreys,  now  Rev,  Mr.  Rowlands. 
Duty — Sunday  and  Tuefday.     (See  Remarks.) 
Salary,  £3$. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Cooper. 

Salary,  none :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

APOTHECARY,     Mr,  James  IVinall. 
Salary,  none :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

SHREWSBURY. 


i 


• 


Oxford  Circuit.         SHROPSHIRE.  331 


SHREWSBURY. 

SEPARATE  Court-yards  for  Debtors  and  Felons;  but  the  Remarks. 
latter  have  no  water.  For  this  reafon,  and  becaufe  their  day-room 
is  in  the  Debtors  Court,  both  Debtors  and  Felons  are  commonly 
together  in  that  Court. — Commodious  apartments  for  Mafter's-fide 
Debtors  :  and  a  large  free  ward  for  the  Common-fide. — For  Felons 
there  are  two  night-dungeons  down  eleven  fteps  :  that  for  men  was 
about  four  years  ago  made  more  airy  by  an  additional  window :  and 
it  is,  or  ftiould  be,  now  daily  frefhened  by  a  Hand  Ventilator  which 
is  in  the  room  above.  The  women's  dungeon  might  alfo  be  frefhened 
by  the  fame. — The  day-room  for  Felons  is  fmall  :  men  and  women 
together. — The  County  is  now  enclofing  a  Court-yard  for  the  Women  j 
and  will  probably  build  them  a  feparate  Day-room.  They  will  no 
doubt  provide  Water  in  this  Court  j  as  they  fhould  alfo  in  that  of 
the  Men-felons. 

An  Infirmary  fhould  be  added :  for  if  the  intended  improvements 
will  be  fome  protection  againft  the  Gaol-Fever,  which  of  late  years 
has  prevailed  here  more  than  once,  they  will  not  fecure  Prifoners  a- 
gainft  the  Small-Pox  and  other  difeafes. 

When  the  Apothecary  finds  that  a  fick  Prifoner  fhould  have  better 
diet,  he  orders  the  Gaoler  to  provide  it,  and  figns  his  bill  for  the 
amount ;  which  is  readily  allowed  by  the  Juftices  at  Quarter  SefTions. 

Of  the  twenty-four  Felons  in  September  lafl,  fourteen  were  Con- 
victs for  Tranfportation. — The  County  allows  Tranfports  convifted 
at  Quarter  SefTions  as  much  as  thofe  convifted  at  AlTize  have  from 
the  King's  allowance,  viz,  2s.  6d.  a  week. 

U  u  2  Mr.  Wood, 


;32 


SHROPSHIRE.         Oxford  Circuit. 


SHREWS-         Mr.  Wood  who,  before  the  appointing  of  a  Chaplain,  read  pray- 

BURY.       gj.g  three  times  a  week,  and  had  ^^5  a  year,  has  been  employed  in  the 

fame  fervice  ever  fince  i  and  has  received  of  the  Chaplains  the  fame 

falary. — I  believe  the  Magiftrates  made  the  Chaplain's  falary  ^^5  more, 

in  favour  of  Mr.  Wood. 

The  Juftices  of  this  County,  at  the  General  Quarter  Seflions 
11th  Jan.  1774,  were  fo  confiderate  and  humane,  as  to  prohibit  the 
demanding  from  Prifoners  at  their  entrance  into  this  Gaol,  or  into 
the  County  Bridewell,  any  money  for  drink,  by  the  name  of  Garnijh^ 
or  any  other  Name :  and  to  require  that  two  or  more  fair  copies  of 
their  faid  order  fhould  be  hung  up  in  the  moft  public  places  of  the 
Gaol,  for  the  infpeftion  of  Debtors,  as  well  as  Felons ;  that  the 
unfortunate  might  not  afterwards  be  Impofed  upon. 

A  TABLE  of  CHAMBER  RENT  and  FEES-— fettled  by  Juftices 
appointed  &c. — according  to— A(5t  of  Parliament— and  ap- 
proved—by the  Court  in  the  General  Quarter  Seffions  held  for 
the  County  of  Salop. 


To  the  Gaoler  for  lodging  and  furniture  on  the  Mafter's-fide 
each  perfon  having  a  bed  to  WimkM per  week 


The  CHAMBER  RENT  for  DEBTORS. 

£•       S.      D. 
>    o  :     2:0 

If  two  lodge  in  the  fame  bed  then  both  to  pay  per  week  o  :      3:0 

To  the  Gaoler  for  lodging  and  furniture  in  the  Garrets  each  7 

,  ^    o  :      1    :   o 

perlon  to  pay  per  week  —  -^  ■» 

No  perfon  Ihall  be  removed  out  of  the  room  wherein  he  is  placed  by  the  Gaoler, 
without  his  own  confcnt,  or  two  JuHices  of  the  Peace ;  except  in  non  pay- 
ment of  their  weekly  fum  for  chamber  rent. 

That  no  Debtor,  or  Debtors,  pay  any  rent  or  money  what- "J 

foever,  for  his  lodging  on  the  Common-fide  provided  >  o  :     0:0 

he  docs  not  ufe  the  Gaoler's  bed  and  furniture        -       J 

Fees 


Oxford  Circuit.         SHROPSHIRE.  333 

Fees  to  the  Gaoler  and  his  Servants  for  debtors. 

£.     S.    D. 

To  Gaoler  for  Commitment  and  difcharge  of  every  Debtor       o  :     7:6 

To  Gaoler's  Clerk  for  entering  in    Gaoler's  book  every  7 
charge  or  charges  upon  each  Debtor  —  ■' 

To  the  Turnkey  for  the  difcharge  on  every  adion  upon  fuch  >        _         _    . 
Debtor  —  —  —  j 

For  the  Copy  of  every  Sheriff's  Warrant  if  demanded  o  :     1:0 

But  the  Debtor  to  have  recourfe  to  fee  the  book  of  Commit- 
ments (if  defircd)  gratis  —  — 

To  the  Gaoler  for  every  Debtor  if  charged  with  more  aftions ' 
than  one,  to  pay  at  his  difcharge   (and  no  more) 


'S 


}° 


For  regiftcring  and  entering  every  declaration  again  ft  Prifoner 

in  cuftody  —  —  — 

For  figning  every  Certificate  in  order  to  obtain  a  Superfedeas,  "^        _  , 

or  a  rule  or  order  of  Court  —  —  5 

Fees  for  the  Gaoler  and  his  Servants  for  felons. 

To  the  Gaoler  for  difcharge  of  every  Felon  committed  to  be") 
tried  at  the  Aflizes  —  —         3 

To  Gaoler  for  difcharge  of  every  Felon  committed  to  be  "5 
tried  at  the  Seffions  -—  —  J 

To  the  Turnkey  for  the  difcharge  of  every  Felon      —  0:1:0 

For  a  Copy  of  every  Commitment  if  demanded  —  0:1:0 

For  every  Certificate  of  Commitment  in  order  to  fueouta" 
Habeas  Corpus  —  —  —  [ 

To  the  Gaoler  for  the  difcharge  of  every  perfon  committed  "^ 

for  want  of  furety  of  the  peace,  mifdemeanor,  or  any  r    o  :     6:8 
other  crime  not  being  Felony  —  —         -^ 

But  if  continued  in  Gaol  three  months  or  upwards  then  the"\ 

fame  Fees  to  be  paid  by  fuch  perfons  as  above  for  Fe-  f    o  :     8:0 
Ions  to  be  tried  at  Seffions  (njiaj         —  —  -' 

N.  B.     But  if  any  Prifoner  be  turned  over  to  the  Houfe  of  Correftion  :  then  to 
pay  the  Gaoler's  Fees  before  difcharged, 

COUNTY 


2  :  6 


334 


SHROPSHIRE.         Oxford  Circuit. 


COUNTY   BRIDEWELL   at   SHREWSBURY. 

Too  fmall :  only  one  day-room  for  men  and  women.  Two 
night-rooms  above  for  women.  In  one  of  them  I  faw  a  poor  young 
creature  too  ill  to  come  down  flairs  ;  fhe  was  languifhing  on  the 
floor  in  a  confumption.  The  night-room  for  men  is  a  dungeon 
down  ten  fleps.  There  is  a  fmall  court-yard  with  water. — By  means 
of  a  door  from  this  into  one  of  the  Gaol  Court-yards,  thefe  Prifoners 
have  a  privilege  (which  few  in  Bridewells  enjoy)  of  attending  Public 
Worfhip  in  the  Chapel  on  Sunday. 

Keeper's  Salary  ^^50.  Fees  at  Difcharge  of  a  Felon,  8  s.  of  one 
guilty  of  a  Mifdemeanor,  6  s.  8d.  of  a  Vagrant,  3  s.  6d.  as  ^^r  Table 
in  the  Prifon. — Allowance,  bread  as  Felons  in  the  Gaol.  Little  or 
no  employment :  Keeper  has  half  the  profit. 

The  Prohibition  of  Garnifh,  as  mentioned  in  the  County  Gaol, 
is  not  hung  up  in  this  Bridewell. 

1774,  March  31,     Prifoners  4, 

1775,  Nov.     27,       -      -       5, 

1776,  Sep.      12,       -      -     II. 

LUDLOW     TOWN    GAOL, 

Built  1764.  For  Felons  &c.  two  lower  rooms  vaulted,  with 
chimneys.     Two  rooms  above,  more  fpacious  and  airy,  for  Debtors. 

1774,     July  I,     Prifoners,  none. 

COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.       HEREFORDSHIRE.  335 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    HEREFORD. 

GAOLER,     'Thomas  Ireland. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,  1  ^^  :  i^  :  4. 

Felons,     J 
Tranfports,    ;^5  :  10  :  o  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     a  three-penny  loaf  each,  every  other  day^ 
Garnifh,       £0:2:  6. 

Number  of  -       -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb,    23,  -     14     -  -     29, 
Aug.     9,  -     II     -  -     I3> 

1775,  Dec.      2,  -     17     -  -       4, 

1776,  Sep.      9,  -       8     -  -       3. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Bay  lis;  now  Rev.  Mr.  Underwood. 
Duty  — Sunday,  Wednefday,  Friday,  and  Saints  days. 
Salary,  £^0.  Twenty  of  it  is  a  Legacy  of  William  Bridges,  Efij, 
of  'Tiverton  in  this  County. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  William  Cam, 
Salary,  ^15. 

HEREFORD. 


536  HEREFORDSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 

HEREFORD. 

Remarks.  APARTMENTS,  and  Court-yard  for  Mafter's-fide  Debtors 
fpacious :  but  no  free  ward.  Felons  night-ward  was  too  clofe,  but 
is  lately  made  airy  and  commodious  :  their  court  behind  the  Gaol, 
large.  The  Chapel  very  damp. — Claufes  of  the  Aft  againft  Spiri- 
tuous Liquors  not  hung  up. — Mr.  Ireland,  who  has  been  there  above 
forty  years,  faid  he  never  had  a  Debtor  who  obtained  the  groats. 

William  Bridges,  Efq.  bequeathed  ^^8  a  year  to  poor  Prifoners: 
and  on  St.  Thomas's  day  one  fliilling  is  given  to  each  Debtor  and 
fix  pence  to  each  Felon  by  Legacy  of  Sir  Thomas  White.  No  Table 
of  Bequefts.     The  Table  of  Fees  not  hung  up. 


TABLE      OF      FEES. 

AT  the  General  Quarter  SefTions— held— at  Hereford— \n  the 
firft  week  after  the  Feaft  of  St.  Thomas  the  Martyr  (to  wit) 
the  14th  of  July  in  the  4th— of— George  II— 1730 

Before  John  Stratford  Efq.  Edward  Goodere  Bar^-  Herbert 
Aubrey  Richard  Hopton  Efqrs.  &c.— purfuant  to  an  A61  for 
the  Relief  of  Debtors  &:c.— It  is  Ordered  that  the  feveral— 
Sums  herein  after  mentioned  and  no  more  may  be  taken.--- 

(That  is  to  fay) 

£.    S.     D. 

For  the  Entering  of  every  Aftion   or  Procefs  whereon  aT         .       .  ^ 

Prifoner  Ihall  or  may  be  charged         —  —     j 

To  the  Turnkey  or  Under  Keeper  on  each  Aftion       —  0:1:0 

For 


Oxford  Circuit.       HEREFORDSHIRE. 


337 


C- 


For  entering  of  the  Difcharge,  and  for  the  Difcharge  ofj 

every  Prifoner  —  — 

To  the  Turnkey  on  the  Difcharge  of  every  Prifoner 
For  the  receiving  and  entering  every  Declaration  delivered  - 

againll  the  Prifoners  in  cuftody  — 

To  the  Turnkey  upon  every  Declaration 
For  a  Certificate  for  want  of  a  Declaration  in  order  to  take" 

out  a  Writ  of  Superfedeas  — 

For  a  Copy  of  a  Warrant  or  Commitment  againft  each  -j 

Prifoner  —  —  —      5 

Every  Prifoner  that  lyes  in  the  Keeper's  lodgings  in  the  "j 

Sheriff's  Ward  in  a  fingle  bed  and  (heets,  by  the  week  5 
For  two  in  a  bed  with  fheets  by  the  week  — 

Every  Prifoner  that  lyes  in  his  own  lodgings  — 

For  two  perfons  or  more  in  their  own  lodgings  each 


ge  of^ 
ivered  •« 
D  take") 


S.     D. 

0:6:8 

o  :    I    :  o 
0:2:0 

0:0:6 
0:3:6 

0:2:6 


o  : 
O  : 


1  :  6 
1  :  6 
I   :  O 


J  Stratford 
Edw"-  Goodere 
H  Aubrey 


R  HoPTOii 
H  Thomas 
RoG"'  Hereford 


RO.    PRICE 
J.    COMYNS 


The  King's  Juftices 


Xx 


COUNTY 


33^  HEREFORDSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 


COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at    HEREFORD, 

On  the  Caflle-green,  is  quite  out  of  repair.  Indeed  it  is  not  only 
ruinous  but  dangerous :  a  crofs  wall  is  parted  a  great  way  from  the 
wall  againfl:  which  it  abutted.  In  the  day-room  there  was  a  large 
quantity  of  water  from  the  roof.  No  fire-place  :  ofFenfive  fewers  : 
no  yard  :  no  water  :  no  dated  allowance  :  no  employment. — 
Keeper's  Salary  j^io.  He  told  me  that  a  little  before  I  came,  a 
Prifoner  died  after  three  weeks  confinement.  Six  Prifoners,  whom 
I  faw  there  at  my  firfl:  vifit,  complained  of  being  almoll  famifhed. 
They  were  fent  hither  from  the  Affize  a  few  days  before  to  hard 
LABOUR  (as  the  fentence  ufually  runs)  for  fix  months.  The  Juftices 
had  ordered  the  Keeper  to  fupply  each  of  them  daily  with  a, two- 
penny loaf:  but  he  had  negledted  them.  They  broke  out  foon 
after. 

1774,  Aug.  9,     Prifoners  6, 

1775,  Dec.  3,     -     -     -    o, 

1776,  Sep.    9,     -     -     -     I. 

HEREFORD      CITY     GAOL 

Is  one  of  the  Gates.  The  Debtors  rooms  are  commodious  j  and 
they  have  a  little  court-yard.  The  room  for  Felons  too  clofe. 
Keeper  a  Widow  :  the  Gaol  clean. 

1776,    Sep.  9,     Debtors  3,    Felons  none. 

COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit.       MONMOUTHSHIRE.  339 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     MONMOUTH. 


GAOLER,     John  Daverely  now  James  Baker. 

Salary,  none.     j^20  a  year  to  fupply  Felons  as  below. 

Fees,    Debtors,  ?    ^ 

>  ;^i  :  o  :  10. 

Felons,     3 
Tranfports,     £^6  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     one-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day  each. 
Garnifh,       ^0:2:6. 

Number  of  -       -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.    23,      10     -  -     12, 
Aug.  10,        9     -  -     16, 

1775,  Dec.     4,        5     -  -       8, 

1776,  Sep.      5,        6     -  -       9. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Powel. 

Salary,  ;^io  :  10  :  o,  lately  augmented  t0;^i2  :  12:0. 


Xx2  MONMOUTH. 


340  MONMOUTHSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 

MONMOUTH. 

Remarks.  ONLY  one  Court-yard.  The  rooms  for  Debtors  fmall.  Felons 
night-room  at  top  of  the  houfe,  with  only  one  little  window.  Be- 
fides  the  difficulty  of  going  daily  up  and  down  in  irons ;  when  water 
is  to  be  carried  fo  high,  and  tl\e  ftaircafe,  like  this,  is  narrow  and 
inconvenient,  a  room  is  feldom  clean  and  healthy.  This  cannot  be 
fo  if  it  fliould  be  crowded.  At  my  firft  vifit  in  1774  they  had  the 
Gaol-Fever,  of  which  J.  Daverel  and  feveral  of  his  Prifoners,  and 
fome  of  their  friends  died. — No  Infirmary  :  there  is  room  to  build 
one  at  the  bottom  of  the  yard.  The  Brewhoufe  is  very  fit  for  a 
Felons  Day-room ;  which  is  much  wanted. 

After  the  mortality  mentioned  above,  all  the  Prifoners  were 
new  cloathed  by  the  Duke  of  Beaufort. 

John  Gabriel  a  Gardener  near  the  town  ufed  to  fend  each  Pri- 
foner  eveiy  Quarter-day  a  fix-penny  loaf :  and  at  his  deceafe  he  be- 
queathed the  fame  Donation.  Prifoners  do  at  prefcnt  receive  it;  but 
there  is  no  Memorial  of  the  Legacy  hung  up. 


A  TABLE  OF  DEBTORS  FEES  as  fettled  and  allowed  by 
the  feveral  Juftices  of  the  Peace  for  the  County  oi  Monmouth 
whofe  names  are  hereunto  written  the  loth  Augufl;  1751  : 
According  to  the  direftion  of  an  A(5l  of  Parliament  intituled  &c. 

£.     S.    D. 

Imprimis  for  entering  the  Aftion  whereon  each  Prifoner  is  ~) 

firll  brought  into  Cuftody  either  on  Procefs,  Capias  La-  f     0:18:4 
titat  ExKution  or  Writ  of  Excom  ad  Capiendum  •* 

For 


I 


Oxford  Circuit.       xMONxMOUTHSHIRE.  341 

£.     s.    D. 


For  entering  and  difcharging  every  fecond  and  other  Aftion  1 

f    o  :    13   :  4 

upon  Procefs  Capias  Latitat  or  Execution  —  J 

For  receiving  and  entering  every  declaration  agaiall  Prifoners  7 
in  cuftody  —  —  — 


1° 


For  the  Certificate  of  the  want  of  a  declaration  in  order  to  ', 

o  :     6:8 


order  to  1 


fue  out  a  writ  of  Superfedeas  — 

For  a  Copy  of  each  Warrarvt  againft  each  Prifoner     —  0:3:4 

For  receiving    and  entering    every    Warrant    againft   each  i 

defendant  in  cuftody  —  —  J 

For  the  Under  Keeper  or  Turnkey  upon  each  Aftion  and  Writ      o  :     2:6 

LODGINGS. 

Every  Prifoner  that  lies  in  the  Keeper's  Lodgings  in   the  7  .  , 

Sheriff's  Ward  pays /(?/■  week  —  —        J 

Every  Prifoner  that  lies  in  the  Sheriff's  Ward  in  his  own  7  . 

f    o  :      I   :   5 
lodgings  pays  per  week  —  —  A 


The  Names  of  the  Juftices  who  figned  and  allowed 
the  above  Fees^ 

Tho'-  Morgan  ^         , 

Cha^-  Van     Jun'- 

Capel  Hanbury  ,  „ 

JOHN  Chambre 

Ta=-  Tuder  Morgan  ^    t> 

•'  b.  Bradbury 

J.  Lewis 

Examined  and  allowed  by  the 

Hon'''=  Sir  Thomas  Dennison  Kn.* 

AND      THE 

Hon*''*  Mr.  Baron  Clive 

COUNTY 


342 


MONMOUTHSHIRE.       Oxford  Circuit. 


COUNTY    BRIDEWELL     at    USK. 


This  Prifon  was  formerly  a  Chaj>el.  On  the  ground-floor  is  a 
room  for  men,  and  another  for  women.  There  are  two  work-rooms 
at  top  of  the  houfe ;  but  I  faw  no  Prifoners  there.  — The  Keeper's 
wife  told  me  that  many  years  ago  the  Prifon  was  crowded  j  and  her- 
felf,  her  father,  who  was  then  Keeper,  and  many  others  of  the  family, 
had  the  Gaol-Fever:  three  of  them,  and  feveral  Prifoners  died  of  it. 
The  danger  of  fuch  a  calamity  for  the  future  would  be  much  leflened, 
if  an  additional  room  or  two  were  built  in  the  Garden.  There  is  a 
Court-yard,  with  a  Pump,  which  is  feldom  in  order. — Keeper's 
Salary  ;^20  :   Fees  5  s.  6d.   no  Table. 


1774,     Aug.  21,     Prifoners  2, 
1776,     Sep.      6,     -     -     -    3. 


COUNTY 


Oxford  Circuit,     GLOUCESTERSHIRE,  343 


COUNTY  GAOL,     GLOUCESTER  CASTLE. 


GAOLER,     miliam  fFilliams. 

Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors, 

;^i  :     0  :   10. 

Felons  at  AfTize, 

0  :    17   :      8, 

at  Quarter  Seffion. 

>,.  0  :   13  :     4. 

Tranfports,     £6  each. 

Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     each  a  fix- 

penny  loaf  in  two  days. 

Garnifh,        ^0:1:  6. 

Number  of    -      -       Debtors. 

Felons  &c. 

1773,     Nov.  24,       15     - 

-     17. 

1774,     Aug.    8,       20     - 

-     48, 

1775,     Dec.     5,       13     - 

-     24, 

1776,     Sep.     5,         8     - 

-     35> 

Dec.  15,       10     - 

-     41.       (See  Remarks.) 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Evans. 

Duty  — Sunday,  Wednefday,  Friday. 
Salary,  £^0. 

SURGEON,     None  :  but  on  applying  to  a  Juftice. 


GLOUCESTER 


H4  GLOUCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 

GLOUCESTER        CASTLE 

RtuARKs.  IS  alfo  one  of  the  County  Bridewells:  yet  only  one  Court-yard  for 
all  Prifoners ;  and  one  fmall  Day-room,  twelve  feet  by  ten,  for  Men 
and  Women-felons.  The  night-room  (the  Main)  for  Men-felons, 
,  though  up  many  ftone  fteps,  is  clofe  and  dark  -,  and  the  floor  is  fo 
ruinous,  that  it  cannot  be  waflied.  Adjoining  to  the  Main,  there 
are  other  night-rooms  for  Fines  &c.  men  and  women  feparate. 
Fines  have  alfo  their  feparate  day-room.  Many  Prifoners  died  here 
in  17735  and  always,  except  in  my  laft  vifit,  I  faw  fome  fick  in  this 
Gaol.  The  large  Dunghill  that  one  conftantly  fees  near  the  ftone 
fteps  may  be  one  caufe  of  it. — The  whole  Prifon  is  much  out  of 
repair.  Some  alterations  are  now  making  at  the  Gateway.  I  hope 
the  Gentlemen  will  confider  the  dreadful  condition  of  the  other 
Buildings. 

The  upper  rooms  of  the  Caftle  were  the  Bridewell  j  but  they  are 
not  now  ufed  except  occafionally  for  a  Prifoner  that  has  the  Small- 
Pox  &c.  there  being  no  Infirmary. 

Of  the  Felons  &c.  in  September  and  December  laft,  thirteen  were 
Tranfports:  moft  of  them  convidted  at  Lent  Aflize  1775.  About 
twenty  were  Fines ;  who  not  having  the  County  allowance,  nor  any 
employment,  were  in  September  very  pitiable  objedls  indeed  ;  half 
naked,  and  almoft  famiftied.  But  in  December  tiieir  appearance 
was  much  altered.  Mr.  Raikes  and  other  Gentlemen  took  pity  on 
them,  and  generoufly  contributed  toward  the  feeding  and  cloathing 
them. — Mr.  Williams  has  ^^  10  a  year  as  Bridewell  Keeper. 

In  this  Gaol  were  fome  Prifoners,  who  had  been  arrefted  by 
Exchequer  Writs i    in  which  an  Officer  is  commanded  "to  bring 

"  tlie 


Oxford  Circuit.     GLOUCESTERSHIRE.  345 

*'  the  body  before  the  Barons  of  the  Exchequer— at  Weftminfter— 
"  to  anfwer  our  Sovereign  Lord  the  King  concerning  divers  tref- 
"  pafles,  Gontempts,  and  offences  &c."  The  Prifoners  are  called 
Contempts.  In  different  parts  of  the  Kingdom,  there  are  many  Pri- 
foners detained  by  fuch  Writs,  which  are  indeed  numerous. 


A  TABLE  OF  DEBTORS  FEES  allowed  by  the— Juftices— 
for  the  County  of  Gloucefter  at  the  Booth-hall  15  July  1729. 
Approved— by  the  Judge  of  Affize— 19th  fame  month  according 
to— an  Aft  entitled  &c. 

To  wit 


] 


«3 


D. 


:   o 


Imprimis,  for  entering  the  Aftion  whereon  each  Prifoner  is 
firlt  brought  into  cuftody  either  on  Proce/s,  Capias,  La- 
titat, Execution  or  writ  oi  Excom  ad  Capiendum 

For  entering  and  difcharging  every  fecond  and  other  Adlion 

upon  Procefs,   Capias,   Latitat  or  Execution  — 

For  receiving  and  entering  every  declaration  againft  Prifoners  ■) 

n    1  C    o  :     2   :  o 

in  cuftody  —  —  _  ^ 

For  the  Certificate  of  the  want  of  a  declaration  in  order  to  ) 

<    o  :     6:8 
fue  out  a  writ  of  Superfedeas,  —  —  ^ 

For  a  Copy  of  each  Warrant  againft  each  Prifoner     —  0:3:4 

For  receiving  and  entering  every  Warrant  againft  each  defen-  7 

dant  in  cuftody  —  —  —  3 

For  the  Under  Keeper  or  Turnkey  upon  each  Aftion  or  Writ       o  :     2:6 

LODGING. 

Every    Prifoner    who    lies     in    the     Keeper's     Lodgings -\ 

in  the  Sherift"  's  Ward,  being  the  Caftle  j  pays  by  the  S-    o  :     2:6 

Every  Prifoner  who  lyes  in  the  Sherift''s  Ward  in  his  own  ~) 

'  '  i^    o  :     1   :  6 

Lodgings  pays  by  the  week  —  —         j 

Y  y  The 


2  :  6 


346 


GLOUCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 


GLOU- 

1 HE   names  or    me  juititcs  w 

IIU     llgin.^     ".—     ....w,.^ 

CESTER 
CASTLE. 

FEES  at  the  laft  Sejfions 

Will".  Hodges 

Nath'-  Lye 

J  Temple 

Fr  Willis 

Ed  Field 

Mavn"  Colchester 

J  Stephens 

Tho^  Hayward 

Tho  Cooke 
K  Delabere 
C  Hyatt 

Reg  Winniatt 
Tho  Syke. 

The  names  of  the  Juftices  and  Judge  of  Affize  who  allowed  and 
confirmed  the  above  fees-  at  the  laft  41fize 

Tho  C00K.E  Ed  Field 

J  Stephens  Tho  Hayward. 

1  HAVE  reviewed  and  exammed  the  above  Table  of  Fees  and  do 

confirm  the  fame 

ROB.    PRICE.. 

other 
COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 

LAWFORD's  GATE,  BRISTOL,  built  17 16,  has  four 
rooms,  eighteen  feet  by  fixteen :  in  two  of  them  are  beds  for 
thofe  who  pay.  There  is  a  fmall  room  in  which  Felons  fleep. 
No  chimneys.  Court-yard  twenty  two  feet  by  eighteen ; 
with  a  pump..  It  is  not  fecure  ;  and  Prifoners  are  always  con- 
fined 


Oxford  Circuit.     GLOUCESTERSHIRE.  347 

fined  in  their  rooms.  It  may  be  enlarged  from  the  Keeper's  bride- 
Garden  ;  and  fhould  be  made  fecure,  that  Prifoners  may  ufe  it,  wells. 
and  have  accefs  to  the  pump.  The  Keeper  readily  agreed  with 
me  in  that  opinion.  He  is  a  Sheriff's  Officer:  Salary  /lo  : 
Fees  6s.  8d.  no  Table.  Straw  ten  fliillings  a  quarter:  allow- 
ance, ifaPrifoner  be  very  poor,  2d.  a  day:  no  employment. 
Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.  By  a 
Regifter  kept  in  the  Prifon,  it  appears  that  in  eight  years  and 
a  half  to  September  1776  there  were  committed  to  it  572 
Prifoners. 

1774,  Aug.  23,  Prifoners  2, 
i775>  Dec.  8,  -  _  j, 
1776,     — -     16,     -         _     6. 

BERKELEY.  Quite  out  of  repair.  Only  one  room  for  men  and 
women:  no  chimney:  yard  not  fecure:  no  water:  no  ftraw. 
The  fenfible  old  Keeper  lamented  the  bad  effedls  of  clofe  con- 
finement in  idlenefs,  upon  the  health  of  even  young  llrong 
Prifoners.  Many  fuch,  he  faid,  he  had  known  quite  incapable 
of  working  for  fome  weeks  after  their  difcharge.  He  told  me, 
that  fome  years  ago  his  Prifoners  ufed  to  grind  malt  for  a  penny 
a  bufhel ;  and  the  Juftices  would  not  licence  any  Viftualler 
whofe  malt  was  not  ground  here:  but  that  of  late  years  they 
have  done  no  work  at  all.  No  allowance.  Keeper  Francis 
Norman  :  his  Salary  ^ao :  Fees  4s.  4d.  no  Table.  He  wrote 
me  a  Lift  of  his  Prifoners  for  four  years  paft  j  which  I  will 
tranfcribe. 

1774,     Aug.  22,     Prifoners  3,  two  Men,  one  Woman. 
i775>    Dec.     6,      -      -      None. 

Y  y  2  Account 


348  GLOUCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 

BRIDE-  Account  ofPRisoNERs  in  the  Bridewell  at  Berkeley. 

■WELLS. 

In  the  Year  177 1,  Committed  to  Labour  and  Correftion,  Prifoners  21, 

Nothing  expended. 
Nothing  earned. 

1772,  Ditto,         ---__-  20, 

Nothing  expended. 
Nothing  earned. 

1773,  Ditto,  ------  19, 

Nothing  expended. 
Nothing  earned. 

1774,  Ditto,         ------  15, 

Nothing  expended. 
Nothing  earned. 

1775,  Ditto  to  Midfummer  Seffions,         -         -  4> 

Nothing  expended. 
Nothing  earned. 

Francis  Norman. 

CIRENCESTER.  The  ground-floor  is  the  Keeper's  (hop  for 
garden  feeds ;  and  his  kitchen  &c.  On  the  firfl  ftory  is  a 
room  about  fixteen  feet  by  eleven  for  men  :  one  corner  of  it 
is  parted  off  for  a  bed-room,  called  the  Cub,  eight  feet  by 
five.  On  the  fecond  ftory  is  a  larger  room  for  women. — The 
whole  out  of  repair  j  and  the  yard  not  fecure  enough  to  let  the 
Prifoners  have  the  ufe  of  it. — No  allowance  to  any  but  Felons 
occafionally  committed  hither.  No  employment.  Keeper's 
Salary  £l2'-   he  pays  Rent  ^^ 1 2. 

1776,     Sep.  4,     Prifoners  3. 

WINCHCOMB. 


Oxford  Circuit.     GLOUCESTERSHIRE.  349 

WINCHCOMB.     In  this  Bridewell  Prifoners  were  formeriy  kept      bride- 

.  WELLS  &c, 

all  together  in  the  Cellar.  Now  they'  are  in  the  Garrets  :  men 
in  one,  women  in  another  j  each  about  fourteen  feet  fquare  : 
roof  and  floors  meet :  eight  feet  high  to  the  ridge  in  the  mid- 
dle. A  clofe  glazed  window  in  each  :  no  chimney.  Prifoners 
always  confined  to  their  rooms  :  court-yard  not  fecure.  The 
County  have  not  laid  out  any  thing  upon  the  Houfe  for  many 
years  ;  and  the  whole  is  quite  out  of  repair.  It  is  the  Keeper's 
Freehold  :  he  is  upwards  of  fourfcore  :  his  Salary  per  Receipts 
£i'2.  :  10  :  o,  in  fa£b^i2.  Fees  13s.  4d.  no  Table.  Licence 
for  Beer.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung 
up.  Allowance,  if  charged  with  Felony,  three-pennyworth 
of  bread  a  day.     No  ftraw. 

1776,  Dec.  14,     Prifoners,   i  Felon 

2  WomenDelinquents  fpinning. 


IN    THIS    COUNTY     IS    ALSO 

St.     BRIAVEL's     GAOL      for    debtors. 

The  Property  of  Lord  Berkeley.  It  is  in  the  Foreft  of  Dean.  One 
room  for  men,  greatly  out  of  repair  :  no  yard  :  no  water :  no  allow- 
ance :  no  firing.  One  of  the  two  fickly  objefts  I  found  there,  told 
me  he  had  been  confined  a  twelvemonth,  and  never  once  out  of  the 
difmal  room  :  the  other  almoft  as  long. — A  room  above  for  women  : 
none  there. — Keeper  no  Salary. 

1775,     D^'^-  4»     Prifoners  2, 

GLOUCESTER 


350 


GLOUCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 


GLOUCESTER    CITY  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 


GAOLER,     JVilliam  Jeynes. 

Salary,  none :  he  pays  ^4  :  4  :  o  a  year  to  the  Sheriffs. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^o  :     9  :     8, 
Felons,  o  :   12  :   10. 

Tranfports,     £6  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  three  fhillings  a  week.  (See  Remarks.) 
Felons,     three-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day  each. 
Garnifh,       £0  :  3  :  4. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Nov.  24,       3     -  -       4> 

1775,  Dec.     5,       7     -  -       7. 

1776,  Sep.     6,       2     -  -       2, 
Dec.  15,       2     -  -       6. 

CHAPLAIN,    None. 

SURGEON,       Noncj  but  on  applying  to  the  Mayor. 


Remarks.  THIS  GAOL,  the  North-gate,  is  too  fmall.  Debtors  Felons 
and  Petty  Offenders,  who  cannot  pay  for  beds,  all  together ;  but 
women  feparated  at  night.  No  Court-yard ;  but  Debtors  have  the 
privilege  of  Walking  upon  the  Leads. 

The 


Oxford  Circuit.     GLOUCESTERSHIRE.  351 

The  Gaoler  put  down  a  Pump  at  his  own  expence ;  and  for  reim- 
burfement  he  dedudts  three  pence  a  week  out  of  three  fhillings  a 
week  which  the  City  pays  Debtors  in  common.  On  the  13th  of 
December  Prifoners  have  ten  {hillings  worth  of  bread  from  an  Eftate 
in  Hemjhd  near  this  City.  It  is  fent  in  two-penny  loaves.  Na 
Memorial  of  it  in  the  Gaol. 

He  alfo  keeps  the  City  Bridewell  at  the  Eaft-gate  :  but  that  is  out 
of  repair;  and  Offenders  are  committed  to  this  Gaol. 


Ghucefter  City. 

A  TABLE  of  CHAMRER  RENT   and  FEES 

belonging  to  the  North-gate  Gaol  Sec. 

CHAMBER     RENTS. 

The  beft  room  for  each  man  three  fhillings  per  week. 

The  three  bed-rooms  for  each  man  two  fhillings  and  four  pence /fr  week. 

The  chamber  called  Daiu's-nejl  three  fliillings  per  week. 

The  little  chamber  called  Catt-hole  two  fhillings  and  four  pence  per  week. 

The  little  room  on  the  firft  floor  two  fhillings  and  four  pence /^r  week. 

FEES. 

£.      S.       D. 

Sheriff's   Warrants    of  Writs   out   of  King's  Bench   and ')  ^  .         .     o 

Common  Pleas,  Gaoler  is.  4d.  Turnkey  is.  4d.        j 

All  Execution-Warrants  the  fame                —  ■ —  0:9:8 

City  double  Aftion             —                —  —0:8:4 

City  fingle  Aftion               —                —  —  0:4:8 

Executions  out  of  Court  of  Confcience        —  —  0:2:6 

Mittimus's                             —                 —  —  o  :    12  :    10 

Civit 


352 


GLOUCESTERSHIRE.     Oxford  Circuit. 


CLOU-         Civit  Gloucfs  Ad  Generalem  ^artialem  SeJJionem  i£c.    5  Mar:- 

CESTER 

CITY.  4'"  Georgii  II— i'] 2,0 


Whereas  by  an  Aft  made  in  the  fecond  year  of  the  reign  of  his 
prefent  Majefty— for  the  Relief  &c.— no  Fees— -or  Chamber 
rent  to  be  taken— till  fettled  by  three  or  more  Juftices— at  the 
Quarter  Se(rions—and---figned  by  the  Judge  of  Aflize  with 
three  or  more  Juftices— And  whereas  upon  the  Examination 
of  the  Gaoler  of  the  Prifon  of  the  North-gate  of  this  City 
—it  appearing  to  us  tliat  the  above— are  the  ancient  and  ac- 
cuftomed  fees— we  having  reviewed  and  moderated  the  faid 
Table  of  Fees  in  fome  Articles  do  hereby  allow  and  confirm 
the  fame  as  they  are  now  fettled. 


Signed  by  us 


John  Small     Mayor 
CuTLi  Payne 
Tho  Carill 


COUNTY 


Western  Circuit.         HAMPSHIRE, 

OR    THE    COUNTY    OF     SOUTHAMPTON. 

COUNTY    GAOL     at     WINCHESTER. 

GAOLER,     John  White. 
Salaty,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,    ^^i  :  o  :  o. 
Felons,  1:7:4. 

Tranfports,     ;^5  :  5  :  o    each,    and  hire  of  waggon   or 

Other  carriage. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none  :  but  on  applying  to  the  Juftices. 

(See  Remarks.) 
Felons,     a  three-penny  loaf  each,  every  other  day 
(weight  in  Sep.  1774,  ilb.  \^oz.),  and 
the  College  allowance.  (See  Remarks.) 
Garnifli,        £0:1:6. 

Number  of  -      -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Dec.  16,       21     -  -     18, 

1774,  Sep.    24,       13     -  -     21, 

1775,  Dec.  28,       15     -  -     29, 

1776,  Feb.  27,       15     -  -     23. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  iVeftcomb. 

Duty  —  Sunday,  Tuefday,  Thurfday. 

Salary,    lately  augmented  from  ^^30  to  ^^50. 
SURGEON,     Mr.  Lifjcomb. 

Salary,    lately   augmented   from  ^^30   to  ^50   for   Felons, 
Bridewell,  and  Common-fide  Debtors. 

Zz  WINCHESTER. 


353 


354 


HAMPSHIRE.         WesterxV  Circuit. 


WINCHESTER. 


Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  is  kept- very  dean;  and  the  late  alterations  in  it  arc 
innprovennents.  The  prefent  Dungeon  is  down  but  five  fteps  :  it  is 
boarded  and  has  large  windows.  The  former  deftruftive  Dungeon 
was  darker,  and  down  eleven  fleps :  Mr.  Lipfcomb  informed  me 
that  more  than  twenty  Prifoners  had  died  in  it  of  the  Gaol  Fever  in 
one  year;  and  that  his  predecefTor  died  of  the  fame  diftemper.  The 
Felons  day  room  is  commodioufly  enlarged.  Their  ftraw  beds  and 
coverlids  are  brought  out  and  aired  when  the  weather  is  fine.  They 
have  every  day  a  clean  towel  hung  on  a  roller  :  the  prifoner  who  takes 
care  of  it  and  delivers  it  next  day  is  paid  a  penny.  If  a  little  court, 
which  is  now  Ihut  up  from  the  Gaol,  and  totally  ufelefs,  were 
cleared,  lowered,  and  opened  towards  the  Prifon,  it  would  be  very 
conducive  to  health  and  convenience. 

St.  Cross's  Hofpital  bread  (the  Dole)  is  about  a  penny  loaf  given 
to  each  of  the  Prifoners  fix  times  a  year  :  viz.  on  the  eve  of  the  fol- 
lowing days,  loth  Auguft,  31ft  Odober,  Chriftmas,  Eafter,  3d  of 
May,  and  Whitfunday. 

The  College  allowance  to  Felons  is,  once  a  week,  an  ox's  head,  four 
flieeps  heads  and  henges,  about  feventeen  pints  of  oatmeal,  three 
pints  of  fait,  twelve  loaves  the  fize  of  twopenny  ones,  about  twenty 
gallons  of  table  beer,  and  generally  three  times  a  week  the  broken 
vidtuals.     In  Lent  they  have  not  the  ox  head,  nor  the  other  meat. 

The  Gaoler  has  two  guirieas  a  year  for  keeping  a  bread  account, 
to  check  the  baker.  The  Juflices  alfo  take  care  of  this  matter ;  and, 
in  confequence,  the  quarterly  bills,  now  the  Prifoners  have  three 
halfpence  a  day,  amount  to  no  more  than  they  did  in  the  laft  Gaoler's 
and  Baker's  time  when  the  allowance  was  but  a  penny  a  day. 

Southton. 


Western  Circuit.         HAMPSHIRE.  355 

Southcon.  Js  Ad  Generalem  ^arterialem  SeJJionem—apud  Winton— 
ii"">-Jan'''"^"'GeorgiiII—i-j2i  coram  l£c. 

A  TABLE  of  FEE  S— fettled-purfuant  to  an  Ad— the  fecond 
year  of  his  prefent  Majefty— entitled  an  Aft  for  the  relief  of 
Debtors  &c. 


and") 


3   ••  o 


o  :     2:0 


4  :  o 


I.      S.     D. 
At  the  entrance  of  every  Felon  for  deanfing  the  Gaol  and 

finding  candles  and  all  other  common  neceffaries 
At  the  difcharge  of  every  Felon  to  the  Gaoler  —  1:5:4 

To  him  for  the  fecond  and  every  other  indiftment  > —  0:12:8 

At  the  difcharge  of  every  Felon  to  the  Turnkey  • —         0:2:0 

For  the  fecond  and  every  other  indidtment  to  him  —         0:1:0 

To  the  Gaoler  for  every  Felon  for  his  bed  on  the  Mailer's- " 

fide  weekly  —  —  — 

If  two  lye  in  the  fame  bed  he  may  take  of  each  for  lodging  "j 

in  fuch  bed  —  —  ^         . 

At  the  entrance  of  every  Debtor  for  cleanfing  the  Gaol  and  ' 

finding  candle  and  other  neceffaries  — 

Of  every  Debtor  for  each  week's  lodging  in  the  Gaoler's  ^  ^ 

bed  on  the  Mailer's  fide  —  —  ' 

For  each  Debtor  difcharged  to  the  Gaoler  —  i   :     o  :  o 

Of  him  for  the  fecond  and  every  other  Aftion         — ^  0:10:0 

To  the  Turnkey  at  the  difcharge  of  every  Debtor      —  0:2:0 

To  him  of  fuch  Debtor  for  the  fecond  and  every  other  Aftion       o  :     1:0 
At  the  difcharge  of  every  perfon   committed   for  Felony . 

and  whofe  bills  Ihall  be  brought  in   Ignoramus  and  at 

the  difcharge  of  every  perfon  committed  for  not  finding  I    o  :   13   :  4 

bail  or  for  other  mifdemeanors   under   the  degree  of  ] 

Felony  no  more  than 
For  Copy  of  every  Warrant  for  a  Debtor  —  0:1:0 

For  the  Copy  of  every  Commitment  of  a  Felon  —  o -:     i   :  o 

Z  z  2  And 


356  HAMPSHIRE.         Western  Circuit. 

And  it  is  ordered— that  the  Gaoler— -fhall  not — receive  direftly  or  indireftly— 
any  other  or  greater  Fees  &c.---And  for  the  better  information  of  Prifoners 
—-that  the  under-written  Claufe  in  the  faid  Aft  of  Parliament  be  fubfcribed 
at  the  bottom  of  the  Table  of  Fees  to  be  hung  up— -in  each  and  every 
room  &c. 

"  And  be  it  further  enafted--that  every  Sheriff,  Under  Sheriff,  Gaoler  &c. 
"  — -fhallpermit---him  or  her— -arretted  to  fend  for---any  beer  ale  and 
"  viftuals  or  other  neceffary  food  from  what  place  they  pleafe  and  alfo  to 
*'  have— fuch  bedding  linnen  &c.-— as  he  (he  or  they  ihall  think  lit  &c. 


Copy 


Ed  Stawell  ^^^,  g^^^^ 

John  Foyle  n  /-  /-       r^ 

•'  R.  C.  Chaloner  Cobb 

Ed  Hooker  _        ttt 

Benj  Woodroofe 

Rob  Pvke 

Tho'-  Durnford  Ric  New         John  Alwick 


At      WINCHESTER      rs 

A  PRISON  for  debtors,  the  Cheyney  Court  in  and  for  the 
Liberty  of  the  Soke :  Property  of  the  Bilhop.  Out  of  repair.  There  is 
a  Garden  into  which  fome  Prifoners  are  admitted.  The  Bounty  of 
the  Duke  of  Chandos  fupplies  this  Prifon  every  week  with  two  gallon 
loaves  and  about  twenty- pounds  of  beef.     Fees  i6s.  8d.  no  Table. 

1775,     Dec.  28,     Prifoners  6. 

COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 

WINCHESTER.     The  three  rooms  are  too  clofe,  and  the  yard 
too  fmall    for  the  Prifoners   wlio  are  commonly   numerous ; 

efpecially 


Western  Circuit.         HAMPSHIRE.  357 

efpecially  at  Quarter  Seffions,  when  they  are  brought  hither  bride- 
from  the  other  Bridewells.  This  Prifon  has  been  fatal  to  vaft  wells. 
numbers.  The  mifery  of  the  Prifoners  excited  the  compaflion 
of  the  Duke  of  Chandos ;  who  for  fome  years  paft  has  fent 
them  every  week  about  thirty  pounds  of  beef  and  two  gallon 
loaves.  A  pump  lately  funk :  no  flraw.  Claufes  of  Act 
againft  Spirituous  Liquors  hung  up.  Keeper's  Salary  ;^40: 
Fees  7  s.  8d.  no  Table.  Licence,  Beer  and  Wine.  Allow- 
ance, a  three-penny  loaf  in  two  days  :  no  employment. 

1774,  Sep.  24,     Prifoners  13, 

1775,  Dec.  28,     -     -     -    21. 

GOSPORT.  Apartments  convenient,  but  not  kept  clean.  The 
yard  airy.  An  oven  to  purify  the  cloaths,  but  no  fuel 
allowed  by  the  County.  No  ftraw.  .Keeper  a  Sheriff's  Officer : 
Salary  ^^40  :  Fees  6  s.  8  d.  no  Table.  Licence,  Beer  and  Wine. 
Allowance,  two-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day :  no  employment. 
Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  hung  up. 

1774,     Sep.  27,     Prifoners  2, 

1776,  Feb.  26,     -     -     -    5. 

ODIAM.  Three  rooms.  The  Keeper  takes  to  himfelf  for  a  brew- 
houfe,  dairy  &c.  the  middle  room,  which  is  far  the  largeft : 
the  other  two  are  twelve  feet  by  eleven  each.  Keeper  a 
Sheriff's  Officer:  Salary  £1^:  Fees  6s.  8d.  no  Table.  No 
Licence.  Allowance  about  a  pound  of  bread  a  day  :  no  ftraw : 
no  employment.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors 
not  hung  up. 

1776,     Feb.  28 J     Prifoners  8, 

NEWPORT 


358  HAMPSHIRE.         Western  Circuit. 

NEWPORT  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight.  This  is  the  Keeper's  property. 
Two  rooms ;  one  of  them  quite  dark  :  no  yard :  no  Avater. 
Keeper  told  me  his  Salary  was  £1^  •  1 5  :  o,  for  wliich  he  was 
to  fupply  each  Prifoner  daily  with  three-halfpennyworth  of 
•bread,  and  three  pints  of  water. 

1774,     Sep.  27,     Prifoners  none. 

HERE       IS       ALSO 

NEWPORT  GAOL.  No  yard:    no  water.     Allowance  three- 
halfpennyworth  of  bread :    three  pints    of  water.      Gaoler's 
Salary  ^3. 

1774,  Sep.  27,     Prifoners  none. 

IN  this    County   are  alfo  at 
SOUTHAMPTON, 

THE  BAR  GATE.  Sheriff's  Ward  for  Debtors.  Two  rooms: 
in  that  for  women,  no  chimney.  There  is  no  court-yard  :  no 
water.  Keeper,  the  oldeft  Sergeant  at  Mace  :  Salary  £^^  : 
Fees  13  s.  4d.  no  Table.  ClaufesofAdl  againft  Spirituous 
Liquors  hung  up. 

1774,     Sep.    24,     Debtors  a, 
1776,     Feb.   26,     -         -     2. 

GAOL  FOR  FELONS,  lowcF  end  of  the  town.  Two  clofe  rooms.  A 
court-yard:  no  water.  Gaoler's  Salary  ;^5.  Prifoners  allow- 
ance three-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day. 

1774,     Sep.  24,     Felons  none, 
1776,     Feb.  26,         Ditto. 

BRIDEWELL, 


Western  Circuit.         HAMPSHIRE.  359 

BRIDEWELL,  joins  to  the  Gaol.     Three  airy   rooms  up  ftairs :      south- 
no  yard  :  no  water :   no  ftraw  :   no  ennployment.     Keeper,  a    ^  m  p  t  o  , 
junior  Sergeant  at  Mace  :  Salary  ;^2  :  Fees  3  s.  4d.  no  Table. 
Prifoners    allowance    three-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day :    ten 
iliillings  a.  year  for  bedding. 

1774,     Sep.  24,     Prifoners  none. 
1776,     Feb.  26,     -     -     -       a. 

PORTSMOUTH 

TOWN  GAOL.  In  one  of  the  rooms,  which  is  large.  Debtors^ 
and  Felons  lodge  together.  The  upper  rooms  are  for  women  :  none 
in  them.  Gaoler  is  Sergeant  at  Mace ;  no  Salary  :  Licence  for  Beer 
and  Wine.  Prifoners  allowance,  Debtors  none ;  Felons  four  pence 
a  day.     No  bedding  nor  ftraw. 

I  HAVE  a  copy  of  the  Table  of  Fees  hung  up  in  this  Gaol  :  it  is 
figned  by  the  Town-Clerk  George  Huijh  30th  June  1738.  He  writes 
at  the  title  "  Fees  due  to  the  Sergeants  at  Mace  of  the  faid  Borough, 
"  which  I  have  known  to  be  paid  from  the  year  1693  and  have  been 
"  informed  were  antiently  paid." 

For  every  Commiunent  15s.  lod.  out  of  which  the  Town-Clerk  hath  33.  6<i. 

&c.  &c.  &c. 

Debtors.      Felons  &c. 
1774,     Sep.    24,         2         -         4, 

1776,     Feb.    26,  2-1. 

BASINGSTOKE 

PRISON,  FOR  DEBTORS  under ^^10,  is  one  convenient  room  ia 
the  Keeper's  Public-houfe.     He  has  no  Salary. 

1776,     Feb.  28,     Prifoners  none. 

COUNTY 


360  WILTSHIRE.        Western  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     SALISBURY. 

GAOLER,     Thomas  Biggs. 

Salary,   none.     But  j^8o  a  year   (lately   raifed    from  ;^5o) 
to  fupply  Felons  as  below.     (See  Remarks.) 
Fees,      Debtors,    ^^i  :   x  :  o. 
Felons,         1:6:4. 
Tranlports,     £^  :  4  :  o  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     a  penny  loaf  a  day  each   (weight   in 
Sep.  1774,  8  oz.)  :    now  2d.   a  day; 
i.  e.    i|d.    bread,     'd.   a  quart  fmall 
beer.     (See  Remarks.) 
Garnifli,       Debtors  Mafter's-fide,         -         ^0:8:8, 
Felons  and  Common-fide  Debtors,  0:4:4. 


Number  of 

- 

- 

Debtors. 

Felons  &c 

i773> 

Dec. 

13. 

-     14     - 

-       8, 

J774, 

Sep. 

^3> 

-     12     - 

-       9> 

I77S> 

Dec. 

27> 

-     21     - 

-     i5> 

1776, 

Sep. 

3> 

-       7     - 

-     12. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Vanderplank. 
Duty— Friday. 
Salary,  £^0;  of  which  ^^  20  is  a  Legacy.     (See  Remarks.) 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Cromptou. 

Salary,  ;^io  :  10  :  o  for  Felons  and  Common-fide  Debtors. 

SALISBURY. 


Western  Circuit.        WILTSHIRE.  361 

SALISBURY. 

THE  PRISON  in  this  City  called  Fijherton-Anger  Gaol  (from  Remarks. 
the  name  of  the  Parifli  in  which  it  ftands)  near  a  fine  ftream,  is  alfo 
one  of  the  COUNTY  BRIDEWELLS.  Only  one  yard.  No  day-room  for 
Common-fide  Debtors,  nor  Felons :  each  fort  have  their  fire  on  a 
brick  hearth  raifed  in  the  middle  of  their  relpedlive  lodging-rooms, 
without  chimney.  The  Debtors  room  over  the  Felons.  Women- 
felons  have  a  feparate  room,  more  commodious. 

Mr.  Biggs  has  (G  :  13  :  4  Salary  for  the  Bridewell;  and  ^^lO 
a  year  for  Fees  of  Prifoners  acquitted  at  Quarter  Seflions.  He  pays 
Window-tax  ;C3  •  ^5  •  °' 

The  laft  time  I  was  there,  I  faw  a  new  building  in  tJie  yard ;  a 
ftable,  cart-houfe,  and  brew-houfe ;  with  an  Infirmary  over  them  j 
one  room  for  men,  another  for  women.  I  could  not  help  wifhing 
that  the  lower  part  inftead  of  fi:able  &c.  had  been  two  day-rooms 
with  fire-places,  one  for  Common-fide  Debtors,  another  for  Felons. 

That  part  of  the  Prifon  which  was  the  Bridewell  is  not  fecure ; 
and  Petty  Offenders  are  confined  in  the  Gaol. 

Just  without  the  Prifon-gate  is  a  round  ftaple  fixed  in  the  wall : 
through  it  is  put  a  chain,  at  each  end  of  which  a  Common-fide 
Debtor  padlocked  by  the  leg,  ftands  ofi'ering  to  thofe  who  pafs  by, 
nets,  laces,  purfes  &c.  made  in  the  Prifon.  The  two  whom  I  faw 
there  laft  were  Crown  Debtors  not  cleared  by  the  late  Infolvent  Aft. 

I  HAVE  been  informed,  that  at  Chriftmas,  Felons  chained  together 
were  permitted  to  go  about ;  one  of  them  carrying  a  fack  or  bafket 
for  food,  another  a  box  for  money. 

A  a  a  Twenty 


362  WILTSHIRE.         Western  Circuit. 

Twenty  pounds  a  year  of  the  Chaplain's  Salary  is  paid  by  Lord 
Weymouth  by  a  Bequeft  of  "Thomas  fhyime,  Efq.  who  bound  for 
Payment  the  Manors  of  Weobly  and  Rojs  in  the  County  of  Hereford. 
The  Bequeft  was  recognized  by  Lord  Weymouth  in  a  Deed  of  Settle- 
ment dated  2d  November  1709, 

Lord  Pembroke  pays  a  Legacy  oi {^^  a  year;  part  to  the  Chap- 
lain himfelf,  viz.  a  guinea  for  a  hat ;  the  remainder  to  be  by  him 
diftributed  among  the  Prifoners.  Mr.  Smith  of  Salijhury  left  the 
Intereft  of  ^^50  to  be  divided  among  them.  No  Memorial  of  any 
Legacy  hung  up  in  the  Gaol. 


—  DzV  'Julii^  3"-  Georgii  II  Anno  Dom   1729 

A  TABLE  of  FEES  now  and  heretofore  ufually  demanded- 
and  alfo  for  chamber  rent  &c.— according  to  an  Aft- 
intituled  an  Aft  for  the  Relief  &c. 

£■     S.   D. 

For  entering  and  difcharging  every  ASion  or  Proce/s  Capias  \ 
or  Latitat  —  —  —  ■* 

Entering  and  difcharging  of  every  fecond  Aftion       —  o  :   10  :  o 

Entering  and  difcharging  every  Ca//fli  a//fg-<j/  —  o  :   10  :  o 

For  the  Under  Keeper  or  Turnkey  each  Aftion  and  Writ  o  ;     1:0 


FELONS. 


For  every  commitment  and  difcharge  by  a  Jufticeof  Peace  or  1 
in  Court  —  ■—  —         J 

For  every  commitment  for  not  finding  bail  for  goodT 
behaviour  — ?  —  —         —     5 


For 


Western  Circuit. 


WILTSHIRE. 


363 


£■ 

For  every  commitment  and  difcharge  of  baftardy  —  o 

For  every  Ignoramus  upon  Felony  —  —  o 

For  every  commitment  and  difcharge  on  the  Statute  oi Pramunire  1 
To  the  Under  Keeper  on  each  of  the  caufes  —  o 

LODGINGS. 

Every  Prifoner  that  lyes  in  the  Keeper's  lodging  in  the  Prized 
or  Sheriff's  Ward  pays  by  the  week  —       3 


s. 

D 

•3 

4 

'3 

+ 

S 

:   4 

I 

:  0 

2   :  6 


We  whofe  names  are  here  under  written— at  the  General  Quarter 
Seffions— held — at  fFarminJier— do  hereby— allow  the  fame 


H  COKER 

J  Montague 
Jn°-  Cooper 
Jn  "■  Eyles 


Thqs-  Phipps 
Edw"  Ashe 
Edw°  Younge. 


There   is   alio   at    SALISBURY    the 

CITY  GAOL:  the  Property  of  the  Biihop:  out  of  repair ., 
Two  rooms  for  Felons,  and  three  above  them  for  Debtors.  No 
Court-yard  :  no  water  :  no  flraw.  The  Gaoler  pays  £i  3.  year  to  a 
Domeftic  of  the  Biihop.  His  Lordfliip  fends  to  the  Prifoners  at 
Chriftmas  thirty  {hillings  worth  of  meat,  and  ten  Ihillings  worth  of 
bread.  Licence  for  Beer:  Fees  14s.  4d.  no  Table. — Allowance, 
Debtors  none :  Felons  three-halfpence  a  day. 

Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1775,  Dec.  27,        3     -     -     2, 

1776,  Sep.     J,        2     -     -     o,     -     2  Deferters. 


A  a  a  2 


OTHER 


364.  WILTSHIRE.        Western  Circuit. 


BRIDE-  OTHER 

W£LLS. 

COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 

DEVIZES,  This  is  alfo  the  Town  Gaol.  It  has  two  night- 
rooms  for  men,  and  two  for  women  :  but  the  day-room  and 
court-yard  with  water,  common. — A  fmall  work-fhop ;  I  faw 
no  body  in  it. — An  Infirmary  of  two  rooms. — Four  rooms  for 
Mafter's-fide  Debtors. — All  clean  at  my  laft  vifit  ;  lately 
white-wafhed  &c. 

Allowance  to  Offenders  three-halfpennyworth  of  bread 
a  day  (weight  in  Sep.  1776,  18  ounces),  and  a  pint  of  fmall 
beer.     Straw  a  guinea  a  year. 

There  was  a  Debtor  from  the  Court  of  Requefts,  he  had 
a  wife  and  four  fmall  children.  Twelve  weeks  confinement 
dears  fuch  Debtors. 

Two  or  three  years  ago  the  Gaol-Fever  carried  off  many : 
but  as  the  Infirmary  and  fome  of  the  other  rooms  mentioned 
above  have  been  built  fince  that  time,  there  is  now  little 
danger  of  that  diflemper ;  provided  care  be  taken  to  feparate 
Prifoners  in  the  apartments  built  for  that  purpofe.  Claufes  of 
A£t  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

The  Gaoler  has  a  Salary  of  ;^io,  and  keeps  a  public-houfe. 

Debtors.     Petty  Ofi^enders. 
1774,     Aug.  4,      3     -     -         17, 
1776,     Sep.   4,      I     -     -         13. 

MARL- 


Western  Circuit.         WILTSHIRE.  365 


MARLBOROUGH.  A  small  common  work-room  :  a  fizeable  bride- 
lodging-room  for  women:  another  for  men:  this  is  thirteen  wells. 
feet  and  a  half  by  nine  feet  eight  inches  j  window  eighteen 
inches  by  fifteen,  not  to  the  open  air,  but  to  the  work-room, 
which  has  but  one  window.  All  tiiefe  rooms  are  on  the 
ground-floor  j  and  by  a  fewer  within  doors,  they  are  made 
very  offenfive,  efpecially  the  men's  night-room ;  in  which, 
when  I  was  there  firft,  I  faw  one  dying  on  the  floor  of  the 
Gaol-Fever.  The  Keeper  told  me  that  jufl  before  one  had 
died  there,  and  another  foon  after  his  dilcharge.  Up  fl;airs  are 
three  rooms  for  thofe  who  pay.  No  court-yard :  no  water 
acceflible  to  Prifoners  :  no  ftraw.  Allowance  to  Petty  Offenders 
none ;  Felons  two-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day.  Keeper's  Salary 
lately  raifed  from  £10  to  ^50  in  lieu  of  Fees;  which,  in  a 
Table  dated  1671,  were  Felons  ^^i  :  6  :  4,  Petty  Offenders 
£0  :  14  :  4  &c.  Licence  for  Beer.  At  my  two  laft  vifits, 
fome  Prifoners  at  work. 

I  HEARD  the  Juflrices  had  viewed  the  outftde  of  this  Prifon. 

1774,  Aug.    5,     Prifoners  6, 

1775,  Dec.  30,     -     -     -     8, 

1776,  Dec.   17,     -     -     -  17. 


COUNTY 


366  DORSETSHIRE.        Western  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL    at    DORCHESTER. 


CAOLER,     James  Chafey. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,      -  -        C^  '■     3  '•  9t 

Felons    at  AfTize,       -  1:3:8, 

Quarter Seffions,  o  :   17  :  4. 
Tranfports,     £2  :   12  :  6    each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none  ;  but  on  applying  to  Juftices. 

Felons,     three-halfpennyworth  of  bread  a  day 
(weight  in  Sep.  1 774,   12^  oz.). 
Garnifh,         Debtors,  £0  :  1  :  -j. 

Felons,        o  :   i  :  3. 

Number  of  -       -        Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1773,  Dec.    14,       11     -  -       9, 

1774,  Sep.     21,        19     -  -       9, 

1775,  Dec.    26,        14     -  -       7. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Dohney. 

Duty — Friday;  altered  lately  to  Sunday  and  Wednefday. 
Salary,  raifed  lately  from  £2'^  '^  ;^50. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Kemu 

Salary,  ^30  for  Debtors  and  Felons. 

DORCHESTER. 


Western  Circuit.        DORSETSHIRE.  367 

DORCHESTER. 

THIS  GAOL  out  of  repair,  and   dirty.     Only  one  yard.      In     Remarks. 
September   1774,   two  Debtors  told  me  they  had  lived  five  or  fix 
weeks,  on  nothing  but  the  County  bread  and  water.     In  December 
1775,  the  Small-Pox  in  the  Gaol :  no  Infirmary.     Claules  of  A& 
againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

Mr.  John  Derby  left  twenty  fhillings  a  year  for  bread  to  be 
diftributed  among  the  Prifoners  on  the  four  Quarter-days  :  no  Me- 
morial of  this  hung  up. 

Mr.  Chaffey  has  been  Gaoler  above  forty-four  years,  I  copied 
a  paper  of  Rules  and  Orders  figned  by  him  ;  the  lafl:  article  requires 
Garnilh  of  a  New-comer. 

The  following  Table  in  the  Gaol  is  hardly  legible. 


A 


Dorjet.  j^  TABLE  of  FEES  to  be  taken  by — the  Gaoler  or 
Keeper  of  the  Sheriff's  Ward  at  Dorchefter—itv^t^— 
at  Shafton—it^t^a.  July— 34th  of  George  II— 1760  purfuant  to  an  Ad: 
—intituled  an  A6t  for  Relief  of  Debtors  &:c. 


C^     S.     D. 

Imprimis   for  the  Commitment  Fee  of  every  Prifoner  for  "J 

Debt  Damage  Contempt  or  otherwife  in  Civil  Suits  >  o  :   13  :  \ 
though  it  be  on  feveral  Aftions  —  —     J 

For  the  Chamber  rent  of  every  Prifoner  fo  committed  who~| 

Ihall  have  a  bed  to  himfelf  and  although  there  arc  more  I 

°  L   o  :     2  :  o 

beds  in  the  fame  room  and  who   finds  himfelf  bed  1 
bedding  and  fheets  weekly  and  eVery  week  —    J 


If 


368 


DORSETSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 


If  there  be  two  Prifoners  and  no  more  in  one  bed  finding  "J 

their  own  bed  bedding  and  Iheets  then  each  of  them  >  o  : 
to  pay  weekly  and  every  week  for  Chamber  rent  J 

Every  Prifoner  who  at  his  own  defire  has  a  bed  to  himfelf 
and  although  there  are  more  beds  than  one  in  each  room 
and  the  Keeper  judge  bedding  and 

flieeting  Ihall  pay  for  fuch  Chamber  rent  and  for  the 
ufe  of  each  bed  and  bedding  weekly  and  every  week 

Prifoners  in  one  bed  and  no  more  in  one  bed  and  the 
Keeper  finding  bed  bedding  and  (heets  then  every  ofi 
them  to  pay  weekly  and  every  week  for  the  ufe  of  fuch 
bed  bedding  and  Chamber  rent  — 

For  the  ufe  of  the  Common  room  the  Prifoner  finding  his 
bed  and  bedding  —  — 

But  if  the  Keeper  finds  bedding  then  — 

For  the  Liberate  and  Difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  out  of  the 
faid  Prifon  for  Debt  or  otherwife  in  Civil  Suits  or 
Adtions  —  —  — 

For  the  Turnkey  Fees  of  every  Prifoner  difcharged       — 


S.     D. 


ig  his  1 

of  the  "J 
its  or  > 


o  :  o 


o  : 


Ric  Brodrepp 
Jn°  Jennings 


R  RiGGS 

E  Okeden 


J  Hanham 
John  Freke 


The  above  written  Fees  have  been  perufed  by  Us  his  Majefly's 
Juftices  of  AlTize  for  the  Weftern  Circuit  at  the  Aflizes  held  at 
Dorchejier  in  and  for  the  faid  County  oi  Dorfet  the  24th  day  of 
July  1760  and  we  do  approve  the  fame 


E    WILMOT 


W    NOEL 


Examined  with  the  Original  by  John  Wall  is 
Clerk  of  the  Peace  of  the  County  of  Dor/et, 


COUNTY 


Western  Circuit.       DORSETSHIRE.  369 


COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at    SHERBORN. 


Too  fmallj  and  the  ceilings  low.  Keeper's  Salary  ;r40:  Fees 
13  s.  4d.  no  Table.  Allowance  a  three-penny  loaf  in  two  days, 
weight  in  Sep.  1774,  lib.  1502.  No  employment.  No  ftraw.  The 
Keeper  told  m.e  he  had  fpoken  in  behalf  of  his  fick  Prifoners  to  the 
Clerk  of  the  Peace,  who  faid  "  he  thought  the  late  Aft  did  not 
extend  to  Bridewells." 

The  Juftices  have  very  judicioufly  provided  for  the  relief  of 
Prifoners  going  to  different  Quarter  Seflions.  Their  Order  dated 
12th  April  1774  is  as  follows. 

Sherborn,  Dorfet.  THE  great  inhumanity  that  frequently  hap- 
pens unto  the  feveral  Prifoners— conveyed  to  the  different  Quarter 
SefTions  to  be  tryed— by  the  walking  loaded  with  heavy  irons — 
being  taken  into  confideration— it  is  the  Refolution  and  Order  of  this 
Court  that  for  the  future  the  Gaol-Keeper  and  Bridewell-Keeper 
fhall  provide  for  one  Prifoner  only  a  horfe,  for  two  or  more  a  con- 
venient cart  or  carriage  for  the  conveying  them  :  and  to  be  allowed 
the  fum  of  three  pence  per  mile  for  one  perfon  j  for  two  or  more  the 
fum  of  fix  pence  a  mile  &c. 

1774,     Sep.  22,     Prifoners  9. 

Bbb  POOL 


a7<» 


DORSETSHIRE.        Western  Circuit. 


POOL 

TOWN  GAOL.  Two  rooms,  down  three  fteps.  No  water. 
Keeper,  no  Salary:  Fees  13  s.  4d.  no  Table.  Allowance  to  Debtors 
and  Felons  2s.  3d.  a  week  each. 

Debtor.         Felons. 
1776,    Feb.  26,       I      -      None. 


BRIDEWELL,  in  the  Work-houfe  yard.  Three  fmall 
dirty  rooms.  Keeper  is  the  Mafter  of  the  Work-houfe,  which 
he  farms. 

1776,     Feb.  a5i    Prifoners  none  but  a  Lunatic. 


HIGH 


Western  Circuit.       DEVONSHIRE.  371 

HIGH     GAOL     AT     EXETER, 

FOR         FELONS. 

GAOLER,     Benjamin  Sherry. 

Salary,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Fees,     Felons,     ^^o  :   14  :  4. 

Tranfports,     ,^1  :   1  :  o    each.     (See  Remarks.) 

Licence,  none.     But  he  fells  finall  beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Felons,  twenty-two  ounces  of  bread  a  day  each. 
Garnifh,  lately  abolifhed. 

Number  of  -       -       -  -  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.    18,  -         20, 
Sep.    12,  -         14, 

1775,  Dec.    16,  -         25. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Stabhack. 

Duty  — Sunday  Sermon,  and  twice  a  week  Prayers. 
Salary,  l,\o. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Rule. 

Salary,  ^^42  for  Gaol  and  Bridewell.     (See  Remarks.) 

THIS  GAOL  h  the  VroYitvVf  o(  John  RoUe  Walter,  Efq.  whofe     Remarks. 
Family  had  a  Grant  of  it  from  the  Duchy  of  Cornwall :  the  Gaoler 
pays  him  Rent  ^22  per  annum.     The  houfe  and  yard  too  fmall :  no 
fewer.     The  three  night-dungeons  down  three  fteps  are  clofe  and 

B  b  b  2  unhealthy  : 


372  DEVONSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 

unhealthy :  the  windows  too  fmall.  An  Infirmary,  commodious 
enough,  is  lately  built ;  but  the  flairs  that  lead  up  to  it  are  intole- 
rably bad.  The  Priibners  make  cabbage-nets  for  two  pence  a  dozen ; 
and  purfes  of  different  forts  from  four  pence  to  feven  pence  a  dozen  : 
the  Turnkey  finds  the  twine  and  thread. — Two  Sailors  fined  a  fhil- 
ling  each,  had  ^^x  :  i  :  4  each  to  pay  the  Clerk  of  the  Peace,  befides 
the  Gaoler's  Fees,  Mr.  Rule  the  Surgeon  told  me  that  he  was  by 
contract  excufed  from  attending  in  the  Dungeons  any  Prifoners  that 
fliould  have  the  Gaol-Fever. 

There  is  no  Table  of  Fees.  But  by  the  clofe  of  the  Preamble  at 
the  Sheriff's  Ward,  the  Table  there  feems  to  have  included  ori- 
ginally the  Fees  of  this  Gaol  alfo. 

The  Gaoler  has  for  each  Tr an/port  two  guineas  from  the  Merchant, 
to  whom  the  County  pays/>d'r  contraft  £^. 

About  Chriftmas,  the  Gaoler  permits  his  Prifoners  to  folicit 
Charity  in  the  City.  When  I  was  laft  there  the  box  was  broke  open, 
fuppofed  by  the  perfon  who  conduced  them  and  abfconded.  If 
any  Gentleman  would  undertake  the  difpofal  of  the  Contributions, 
this  would  not  only  prevent  fuch  a  fraud,  but  the  money  laid  out  for 
meat,  firing  &c.  would  be  far  more  beneficial  than  their  fpending 
moft  of  it  in  liquor. 

It  was  commendable  and  exemplary  in  the  Juftices  of  this  County 
to  fix  tlie  Felons  allowance  by  a  certain  weight  of  good  bread,  not 
■variable  with  the  price. 


SHERIFF'S 


373 


Western  Circuit.       DEVONSHIRE. 

SHERIFF'S     WARD,       EXETER; 
THE    COUNTY    PRISON    for   debtors. 

KEEPER,     John  Jut/um. 
Salary,  none. 
Fees,     j^o  :   14  :  4. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  none. 
Garnilh,        £0:1:/^. 

Number  of  -      -       -  -  Debtors, 

1774,  Feb.   20,  -  43, 
Sep.    12,  -  24. 

1775,  Dec.  15,  -  34. 

CHAPLAIN,     None.     On  Sunday  a  Prifoner  reads  Prayers  and 

dines  with  the  Keeper. 
SURGEON,     None. 


THE  Sheriff's  Ward  or  Prifon  is  in  the  Parifh  of  <S'/.  Thomas  the     Remarks^ 
Apoftle,  in  the  County  of  Devon. 

The  rooms  are  large  and  convenient,  but  out  of  repair.  Court-yard 
fpacious.  Good  rules  of  oeconomy.  An  humane  Keeper.  He 
has  a  good  fire  for  Common-fide  Debtors — he  faid  he  would  glad- 
ly relinquifh  his  Fees  for  a  Salary  of  ^T 100 — and  told  me  that  during 
his  time,  about  twelve  years,  no  more  than  four  or  five  Debtors  had 
obtained  their  aliment,  the  Groats, 

1760 


374  DEVONSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 

1760  SHERIFF'S  WARD. 
Devon,  \  T  the  General  Quarter  SelTions  of  the  Peace  held  at 
to  wit.  x\.  the  Caftle  of  Exon  the  15th  Jan.  1760  before  Richard 
Beavis  Efq^  George  Tanner,  William  Clifford  Martin,  PVilliam  Kittjon, 
Efq" .  and  others  &c.  The  Court  having  confidered  the  report  of 
Sir  Richard  Warwick  Bamfylde  Bart.  Sir  George  7'ounge  Bart.  Henry 
Creives  Efq^  and  John  Snow  Clerk,  Juftices  of  &c.— appointed  to  en- 
quire into  Fees  taken  by  the  prefent  Keeper  and  Gaoler  of  this  Coun- 
ty, and  having  confidered  the  Table  of  Fees  heretofore  taken  by  the 
Keeper  of  the  Sheriff's  Ward,  and  the  Fees  taken  by  the  Keeper  of 
the  High  Gaol  and  Keeper  of  the  Bridewell  of  this  County  doth  in 
purfuance  of  an  Adt — entitled  &c. — fettle  and  eftablifh  the  following 
Table  of  Rates  and  Fees  of  the  Keepers  of  the  faid  feveral  Prifons  &c. 

A  TABLE  of  the  RATES  and  FEES  allowed  to  be  taken 
by  the  Keeper  of  the  Sheriff's  Ward  for  the  County  o(  Devon. 

For  the  commitment  fee  of  every  Prifoner  for  debt,  damages,  -\  £.      S.     D. 

and  contempts  though  it  be  on  feveral  aftions  or  pro-  >   o  :   1 3  :  4 

cefles  only  —  —  —  J 

To  the  Turnkey  —  -^  —  o  :      i   :  o 

For  every  liberate  —  —  —  0:2:0 

For  the  ufe  of  a  bed  in  a  fingle  room  for  one  perfon  by  the  week   o  :     3:0 

The  ufe  of  a  room  where  there  are  two  or  more  beds  and  two  ") 

>    o  :     1:3 
lodge  in  a  bed  each  perfon  by  the  week  —  j 

The  ufe  of  the  common  room  if  the  Keeper  £nds  bedding') 

each  perfon  by  the  week  —  —  j 

If  the  Prifoner  finds  bedding  —  —  nothing 

We  do  hereby  approve  and  ratify  the  Table  of  Fees  above  written 

purfuant  to  tlie  faid  Statute 

E   WILMOT 
R"  Warwick.  Bamfvlde  -yj^r^,    nqel 

NlCH=   NuTCOMBE   BlUETT 

Henry  Crewes.  RULES 


Western  Circuit.       DEVONSHIRE. 

RULES  AND  ORDERS  to  be  obferved  in  the  Sheriff's  Ward 
or  Prifon  for  the  County  o( Devon^  Cha^  Hayne,  Sheriff, 

NO  Prilbner  to  abufe  the  Turnkeys —  if  they  do — to  be  confined. 

If  Turnkeys  ufe  them  ill — to  complain  to  Under-SherifF  or  Keeper. 

Doors  of  lodging  rooms —  to  be  unlocked— in  winter— at  fun  rifing 
— in  fummer  at  fix.. 

Prisoners  to  be  called  over  within  the  fore-door — at  candle-Iightina 
—and  locked  up  in  their  feveral  rooms  at  nine  at  night. 

Fore-gate  to  be  locked  at  nine  at  night  in  fummer,  at  eight  in  winter. 

No  Prifoner — to  go  outfide  of  the  rails  towards  the  fore-gate. 

No  comber  or  weaver  to  work  in  lodging  rooms. 

No  Prifoner's  Family,  or  Wife,  to  lodge  in  the  Prifon  without  con- 
fent  of  Keeper. 

No  Prifoner  to  be  without  the  fore-door  of  the  Prifon-houfe  on  Sun- 
days in  time  of  Divine  Service. 

No  perfon  to  bring  any  Spirituous  Liquors  into  the  Prifon. 

After  the  door  is  fhut  at  night  no  large  jugs,  of  beer  to  be  brought, 
but  pints  or  quarts  may  be  put  in  at  the  window. 

No  Prifoner  to  throw  any  rubbilh  in  the  pump  yard. 

No  Prifoner  to  keep  any  dog. 

No    wood    to  be    cut  or    cleaved  in   the  chambers— it  Ipoils  the 
plaiftering. 

Keeper  to  place  any  Prifoner  where  he  thinks  proper  for  fafety. 

No  Prifoner  to  remove  his  bed  without  Keeper's  confent. 


COUNTY 


375 


376  DEVONSHIRE.      Western  Circuit. 


COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at    EXETER, 
IN     ST.     Thomas's. 


Spacious,  but  out  of  repair  :  the  windows  fmall  and  glazed  j  yet 
no  cafements.  An  Infirmary. — Keeper's  Salary  ^^60  :  no  Fees.  He 
is  a  Woollen  Manufadhirer,  and  employs  fome  of  his  Prifoners. 
Others  of  them  might  work  in  the  large  Garden  and  Yard  at  Rope- 
making,  Packthread-fpinning  &c.  His  number  of  Prifoners  for 
three  years  was  in  1772,  92;  in  1773,  163;  in  1774,  144.  When 
I  was  there  laft,  eight  or  ten  of  the  Prifoners  were  women ;  and  yet 
the  houfe  was  dirty.  Allowance  two-pennyworth  of  bread  a  day 
(weight  in  Sep.  1774,  i^):  ounces).  The  County  have  appointed  a 
Chaplain,  with  a  Salary  of  ^^30,  and  a  Houfe  joining  to  the  Prifon 
which  he  lets  for;{^6  a  year. 

1774,  Sep.  12,     Prifoners  22, 

1775,  Dec.  24,      -         -    34. 


EXETER 


Western  Circuit,       DEVONSHIRE.  377 


EXETER     C  I T  Y  AND  C  O  U  N  T  Y    G  A  O  L. 


GAOLER,     Sarah  Strong, 
Salary,  ;r20. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^o  :  16  :  4, 
Felons,  o  :    14  :  4. 

Tranfports,     the  Expenfe. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none.     ("See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     three-halfpennyworth  of  bread  aday  each. 
Garnifli,        Debtors,  ^^o  :  3  :  6. 

Number  of    -      -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.  20,       II     -     -       I, 

1775,  Dec.  15,         7     -     -       2. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,       None.     But  ordered  for  Felons  by  the  Chamber 

upon  occafion. 

THIS  GAOL,  called  the  South-gate  Prifon,  has  in  the  Keeper's    Remarks. 
houfe  convenient  apartments  for  Delators.     The  three  wards  on  the 
other  fide  of  the  gateway,  for  Felons,  are  very  clofe  and  ofFenfive : 
no  chimney :  no  court-yard :  no  water  ;  no  fewer. 

Here  are  fent  fifty-one  penny  loaves  every  week  to  the  Debtors ;  if 
only  one,  he  has  the  whole,  if  more,  they  are  equally  divided  amongft 

C  c  c  them  : 


378  DEVONSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 

EXETER      them:   from  what  Legacies  they  come  is  not  known  in  the  Gaol,  as 
*^''^^'*        no  other  Memorial  is  hung  up  than  two  painted  boards,  which  con- 
tain Memorials  of  fundry  Bequefts.     They  are  not  dated ;  one  of 
them  feems  ancient.      I   will    tranfcribe    the   Legacies   from  thefe 
after  the  Table  of  Fees. 


City  and  County  of  the  7    "T"^  EES  of  the  Gaoler  or  Keeper— of  the 

City  o^ Exon  (to  wit)  y    JL     Gaol— called  the  Cow/)/c'r— at  the  6'o«/^- 

G«/^— fettled— at  the  General  Quarter  SefTions— held  at  the  Guiid-Hall 

—  loth  April— nth  George  II — 1738— in  purfuance  of  an  Aft  for 

the  Relief  of  Infolvent  Debtors  &c. 

£.     S.    D. 
For    the    Commitment  Fee   of  every   Prifoner   for  Debt, 

Damages,  Contempt  or   otherwife  though   it   be  on  >  o  :   13  :  4 

feveral  Aftions  or  Proceffes  —  —     J 

To  the  Turnkey  —  —  —  0:1:0 

For  every  Liberate  —  —  —  0:2:0 

For  the  ufe  of  a  bed  in  a  fingle  room  for  one  perfon  per  week   o  :     3:0 

For  the  ufe  of  a  room  wherein  are  two  or  more  beds,  and  ■ 

two  lodge  in  each  bed,  then  for  each  bed 

For  the  ufe  of  the  Common  room  the  Prifoner  finding  the  bed  o  :     0:6 

But  the  Keeper  finding  the  bed  then /fr  week  —  0:1:0 


I,  and  1 


Arthur  Culme  Mayor 
Nath"-  Dewdney 
Tho*  Coppleston 

The  above  Table  of  Fees  hath  been  reviewed  and  confirmed  by  us 

his  Majefly's  Juftices  of  Affize  for  the   Wejlern  Summer  Circuit 

held  in  and  for  the  Cityof£.v<?«  and  County  of  the  fame  City. 

24th  July  1738. 

J     FORTESCUE 
Wm   THOMPSON 

LEGACIES. 


Western  Circuit.       DEVONSHIRE. 


379 


LEGACIES. 


EXETER 
CITY. 


A  MEMORIALL  of  certayne  Guyftes  to  the  yeerlie  value  of 
Twenty  Poundes  geeven  by  Laurence  Seldon,  and  Elizabeth,  his 
Wife,  to  be  diftributed  by  the  Maior  and  Bayliffes  of  the  Cittie 
of  Exon  for  ever  as  followith : 


In  Bread 
weeklie        \ 
to  the  Poore 


Prifoners  in  the  Kinges  Gaole « 
near  the  Caflell  of  Exon         j 


d 
6 


Prifoners  in  the  Sherives  Warde,  ~\  S 
Gaole,  and  Counter  of  the  ^2.6 
Cittie  of  Exon  -' 


ShllU 

yeerly 

26 


6  .  10  .  o 


The  other  articles  in  this  piece  of  antiquity,  fuch  as  2S.  6d. 
a  year  to  the  Mayor  of  the  City  &c.  I  muft  omit  as  foreign  to  my 
purpofe. 

The  memorial  on  the  other  board  is  as  follows  : 

Exon 
Southgate.      Mrs.   Hejler  Reed  gave  fixpence   a    week   for   ever,   to  this 
Prifon  to  be  paid  out  of  a  Tenement  called  Ven  in  the  Parifh  of 
Cukmton,  and  laid  out  in  middling  wheat  bread  and  diftributed  always 
to  the  Prifoners  in  the  She'w.  * 


*  The  Shew  or  Shos  is  the  Common  ward  for  poor  Debtors,  who  beg  by  letting  down  a  (hoe. 

Ccc2  PLYMOUTH 


380  DEVONSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 


PLYMOUTH     TOWN    GAOL. 


Two  rooms  for  Felons ;  and  a  large  room  above  for  Debtors. 
One  of  the  former,  the  Clinky  feventeen  feet  by  eight,  about  five  feet 
and  a  half  high,  with  a  wicket  in  the  door  feven  inches  by  five  to 
admit  .light  and  air.  To  this,  as  I  was  informed,  three  men  who 
were  confined  near  two  months  under  fentence  of  Tranfportation, 
came  by  turns  for  breath.  The  door  had  not  been  opened  for  five 
weeks  when  I  with  difficulty  entered  to  fee  a  pale  inhabitant.  He 
had  been  there  ten  weeks  under  fentence  of  Tranfportation,  and  faid 
he  had  much  rather  have  been  hanged  than  confined  in  that  noifome 
cell.  No  yard  :  no  water :  no  fewer.  The  Gaolers  live  diftant : 
they  are  three  Sergeants  at  Mace.  Fees  15  s.  lod.  no  Table. 
Allowance  to  Debtors,  none  but  on  application :  Felons  two- 
pennyworth  of  bread  a  day.     No  ftraw. 

Debtors.  Felon. 

1774,  Sep.    15,         3         -         I, 

1775,  Dec.  17,         0-0. 


COUNTY 


Western  Circuit.         CORNWALL.  3B1 


COUNTY  GAOLat  LAUNCESTON, 

FOR        FELONS. 

GAOLER,     John  Mules,  Deputy,  under  Co/j^iw;  Carpenter  Efq. 
Conftable  of  the  Caftle. 

Salary,  lately  augmented  by  the  County  from  ^{^ 8  to  _^i2. 

Fees,     Felons,     _^o  :   16  :  8. 
Tranfports,     4d.  a  mile  each. 
Licence,  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Felons,  a  three-penny  loaf  each  in  two  days ; 
white  or  brown  at  their  option  (weight 
in  Dec.  1775,  of  white  bread  ilh.  10  oz. 
brown  1  lb.  1  oz.). 

Number  of  -       -       -.     Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.    19,-11, 
Sep.     13,       -       8, 

1775,  Dec.    23,       -       6. 

CHAPLAIN,    Rev.  Mr.  Lethbridge. 
Duty— -Tuefday  and  Friday. 
Salary,    lately  reduced  from  ;^50  to  ^yzi, 

SURGEON,    Mr.  Bennet. 
Salary,    ^15. 

LAUNCESTON. 


382  CORNWALL.         Western  Circuit. 

LAUNCESTON. 

Remarks.         THIS  GAOL,  though  built  in  a  large  yard  belonging  to  the  old 
ruinous  Callle,  is  very  fmall ;  houfe  and  court  meafuring  only  fifty 
two  feet  by  forty  four  5  and  the  houfe  not  covering  half  that  ground. 
The  Prifon  is  a  room  or  paflage  twenty  three  feet  and  a  half  by  feven 
and  a  half,  with  only  one  window  two  feet  by  one  and  a  half: — and 
three  Dungeons  or  Cages  on  the  fide  oppofite  the  window  :  thefe  are 
about  fix  and  half  feet  deep ;  one  nine  feet  long  j  one  about  eight ; 
one  not  five  :  this  laft  for  women.     They  are  all  very  offenfive.     No 
chimney :  no  drains  :  no  water :   damp  earth  floors  :    no  Infirmary. 
The  yard  not  fecure  ;  and  Prifoners  feldom  permitted  to  go  out  to  it. 
Indeed  the  whole  Prifon  is  out  of  repair,  and  yet  the  Gaoler  lives 
diftant.    I  once  found  the  Prifoners  chained  two  or  three  together. 
Their  provifion  is  put  down  to  them  through  a  hole  in  the  floor  of  the 
room  above  (ufed  as  a  Chapel)  ;  and  thofe  who  ferve  them  there,  often 
catch  the  fatal  fever.   At  my  firfl:  vifit  I  found  the  Keeper,  his  Affiftiant, 
and  all  the  Prifoners  but  one,  fick  of  it :  and  heard  that  a  few  years 
before,  many  Prifoners  had  died  of  it  j  and  the  Keeper  and  his  wife 
in  one  night. 

I  LEARNED  that  a  woman  who  was  difcharged  jufl:  before  my  firfl: 
vifit  (by  the  Grand  Jury  making  a  colleftion  for  her  Fees)  had  been 
confined  three  years  by  the  Ecclefiafl:ical  Court ;  and  had  three  chil- 
dren in  the  Gaol.      There  is  no  Table  of  Fees. 

The  King,  of  his  Royal  Bounty,  has  oflrred  two  thousand  pounds 
towards  a  new  Gaol ;  but  nothing  is  done  by  the  County. 

I  WAS  edified  by  the  ferious  behaviour  of  the  Chaplain  at  Prayers. 

The 


Western  Circuit.         CORNWALL.  383 

The  Prifoners  refpeft  him,  and  were  very  attentive.     He  has  a  large 
family  :  I  was  forry  for  the  late  reduftion  of  his  Salarj'. 

The  Mayor  fends  the  Prifoners  weekly  one  fliilling's  worth  of 
bread  :  no  memorial  of  the  legacy  in  the  Gaol.  Tranfports  have  not 
the  King's  allowance  of  is.  6d.  a  week.  Claufes  of  A6t  againil 
Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 


COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at    BODMIN. 


The  County  pays  £0.0  a  year  for  this  Prifon.  It  is  much  out  of 
repair ;  and  the  walls  round  the  yard  not  fafe  enough  to  let  Prifoners 
ufe  it.  The  night  rooms  are  two  garrets,  with  fmall  fky-lights 
feventeen  inches  by  twelve,  clofe  glazed.  I  was  informed  that  a  few 
years  ago  the  Gaol-Fever  was  very  fatal,  not  only  in  the  Prifon,  but 
alfo  in  the  Town.  Keeper's  Salary  lately  raifed  from  £10  to  £1^. 
Fees  16s.  8d.  no  Table.  Allowance  a  three-penny  loaf  in  two  days  j 
(weight,  Dec.  1775,  31  oz.)  No  employment.  A  Surgeon  to  this 
Bridewell  i  his  Salary  ^^  20. 


1774,  Sep.    14,     Prifoners  19, 

1775,  Dec.  22,     -     -     -    29. 


sheriff's 


384  C  O  R  N  W  A  L  L.         Western  Circuit. 

SHERIFF'S     WARD     at    BODMIN, 
THE    COUNTY    PRISON    for    dibtors. 

KEEPER,     Jofeph  Gatty. 

Salary,   liS- 

Fees,      Debtors,      ^o  :   13  :  4, 

Befides    o  :     4  :   i    to  the  Sheriff. 
Licence,  of  late  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  none. 
Garnifh,       ;^o  :   2  :  o. 

Number  of      -       -       -         Debtors. 

1774,  Sep.    14,         -         19, 

1775,  Dec.  22,         -         18. 

CHAPLAIN,    None. 
SURGEON,       None. 

Remarks.  THIS  PRISON,  hx  which  the  Sheriff  pays  ^^"20  ayear,  is  out  of 
repair.  A  fpacious  back -yard ;  with  a  ftream  running  through  it.  The 
Keeper  pays  Window-tax  £3  ■  7  ■  o,  and  I  faw  fome  windows  were 
flopped  up. — He  faid  he  had  been  Keeper  above  twenty  years ;  and 
during  the  whole  time  had  but  four  Prifoners  who  obtained  from 
their  Creditors  the  allowance  commonly  called  the  Groats. 

FALMOUTH 


Western  Circuit.         CORNWALL.  385 

FALMOUTH    TOWN    GAOL. 

Two  rooms :  no  court-yard  :  no  water. 
1775,     ^^c.  19,     Prifoners  none. 

TRURO        TOWN       GAOL. 

Built  about  two  years  ago  upon  a  good  plan.  Two  houfes  in 
front,  for  the  two  Sergeants  at  Mace  who  are  the  Keepers.  Crofs 
the  yard  is  the  Prifon  j  which  confifts  of  four  convenient  roonas, 
two  of  them  vaulted  :  no  pump. 

1775,     ^^^'  ^^>     Prisoners  none. 

PENZANCE    TOWN    GAOL. 

Two    clofe   rooms:     no   court -yard:    no  water. 
1775,     Dec.  21,     Prifoners  none. 

A  T     P  E  N  Z  A  N  C  E     is   alfo 

A  PRISON  for  the  Hundred  and  Liberties  of  PEN  WITH, 

The  Property  of  Lord  Arundel.  Two  rooms  in  the  Keeper's 
ftable-yard ;  but  diftant  from  his  houfe,  and  quite  out  of  fight  and 
hearing.  The  room  for  men  is  full  eleven  feet  fquare,  and  fix  high  : 
window  eighteen  inches  fquare :  no  chimney.  Earth  floor ;  very 
damp.  The  door  had  not  been  opened  for  four  weeks  when  I  went 
in  i  and  then  the  Keeper  began  fhoveling  away  the  dirt. — There  was 
only  one  Debtor,  who  leemed  to  have  been  robuft,  but  was  grown 
pale  by  ten  weeks  clofe  confinement,  with  little  food,  which  he  had 
from  a  brother,  who  is  poor  and  has  a  family.  He  faid,  the  damp- 
nefs  of  the  Prifon,  with  but  little  ftraw,  had  obliged  him  (he  fpoke 
with  forrow)  to  fend  for  the  bed  on  which  fome  of  his  children  lay. 

D  d  d  He 


386  CORNWALL.         Western  Circuit. 

He  had  a  wife  and  ten  children,  two  of  whom  died  fince  he  came 
thither,  and  the  reft  were  ahnoft  fl-arving. — He  has  written  me  a 
letter  fince,  by  which  I  learn  that  his  diftrefs  was  not  mitigated, 
and  that  he  had  a  companion,  miferable  as  himfelf. — No  allowance. 
Keeper  no  Salary  :  Fees  8  s.  4d,  every  aflion,  no  Table. 

A  YEAR  or  two  ago  five  Prifoners,  I  was  informed,  grew  defperate 
by  what  they  fuffered  in  this  wretched  Prifon,  and  broke  out. 

1775,     ^^^-  2ij     Prifoner  i. 

LOSTWITHIEL     GAOL     roR    debtors. 

Is  the  Property  of  the  Duke  of  Cornwall,  Lord  of  the  Stannaries. 
It  was  lately  repaired  and  whitewalhed.  The  Rules  extend  over  the 
whole  Borough.  The  Keeper  told  me  that  he  lately  had  a  Prifoner 
who  was  arrefted  for  ^^6  :  the  man  had  a  large  family,  and  not  a  bad 
charafter  ;  yet  the  Plaintiff  paid  him  his  groats  for  two  years ;  and 
dying  then,  bound  his  Eftate  for  the  continual  Payment  of  them : 
but  the  Infolvent  Aft  freed  the  Prifoner  and  the  Ellate. — Keeper  no 
Salary  :  Fees  13  s.  4 d.  no  Table. 

1774,     Sep.   14,     Prifoners  4, 
•  1775,     Dec.  18,       -       -      2. 

PENRYN     GAOL     for  debtors. 

St.  Leonard's  Chapel :  the  Property  of  the  Earl  of  Goddphin. 
One  room  thirteen  feet  fquare,  fix  high :  window  about  two  feet  by 
one  foot  four  inches.  Keeper  (a  woman)  complained  of  paying 
Rent  ;^4,  and  of  the  Prifon  window  being  taxed  with  thole  in  her 
houfe. 

1775,     ^^^'  I9j     Prifoners  none. 

COUNTY 


I 


Western  Circuit.       SOMERSETSHIRE.  387 


COUNTY    GAOL    at   IVELCHESTER. 

GAOLER,     Edward  Scadding. 

Salary,  of  late,  ^25. 

Fees,     Debtors,     £0  :   14  :  4, 
Felons,  o  :     6:8. 

Tranfports,     £2  '•   12  :  o    each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     two  pence  a  day  each,  money  ;  lately 
altered  to  the  value  in  ftandard-bread. 
Garnifh,         ^^o  :  2  '•  ^' 

Number  of    -       -        Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.    21,        31     -  -     22, 
Aug.     2,        45     -  -     18, 

1775,  Dec.    14,        34     -  -     17- 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Burnett;  now  Rev.  Mr.  Pejler. 
Duty — Sunday,  Wednefday,  Friday. 
Salary,  ^^50. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Shorland. 
Salary,  ^^8. 


Ddd2  IVELCHESTER. 


388  SOMERSETSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 


IVELC  HESTER. 

Remarks,  THE  GAOL  is  near  the  river,  and  has  no  offenfive  fewers. 
The  apartments  roomy ;  but  the  court-yards  too  little.  They  might 
be  enlarged  eaftward.  Men-felons  have  no  day-rooni:  a  room, 
which  is  fit,  and  feems  to  have  been  defigned  for  that  ufe,  is  taken 
by  the  Gaoler  for  a  ftable.  Affizes  never  held  here.  Prifoners  are 
moved  for  trial  to  the  Bridewell  at  'Taunton  ;  or  to  Bridgewater  where 
the  Prifon  is  only  one  room ;  or  to  J-Fells  where  there  is  no  Prifon  at 
all :  and  yet,  at  Midfummer  Affize  1775  the  Prifoners  were  kept  in 
that  City  eight  days. 

Every  time  I  was  here  I  faw  one  Thomas  Hayes  who  was  com- 
mitted by  order  of  the  Ecclefiaftical  Court. 


Ivelchejier,  Somerjetjhire.     July  29  176 1 

A   True   Copy   of  the  RULES    and   FEES    &c.    belonging 
to  Ivelchejier  Gaol  figned  by  the  underwritten  Gentlemen. 

C.    S.     D. 

Firft  To  the  Fees  at  the  Difcharge  of  the  Debtor  —  0:13:4 

To  the  Turnkey  —  —  —  o 

For  every  Debtor's  lodging  fingly   weekly   including   the 

ufe  of  a  bed  and  bedding  — 

But  if  two  lodge  together  each  to  pay  weekly  —  o 

The  Gaoler  is  not  to  compel  any  Debtor  to  lodge  fingle. 


o 


g   the! 


If 


Western  Circuit.       SOMERSETSHIRE.  389 

£.      5.    D. 


V 


1    :  o 


If  a  Debtor  has  a  bed  and  bedding  of  his  own  then  to  pay 

If  he  lodges  in  the  Out-wards,  to  pay  per  week  —  0:0:6 

If  a  bed  of  his  own  —  —  —  o  -.    o  :  a 


EdW   Phelips     Efq. 

Rev.  Dr.  Camplin     Dodlor  of  Laws. 

Jn"   Brigdale, 

w«    rodbard, 

Giles  Strangeway, 

Juftices  of  the  Peace. 

These  Laws  were  approved  of  and  figned  by  the  under-written 

Judges  July  29.   176 1 

EARDLY   WILMOT 
Wm   NOEL 

Examined  by  John  Donne  Clerk  o£the  Peace 


COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 

TAUNTON.  Convenient  apartnaents,  court-yard,  pump  &c. 
If  the  vs'indows,  efpecially  that  in  the  fick  ward  (lately  added) 
were  enlarged,  and  the  Prifon  be  conftantly  kept  as  clean  as  it 
was  laft  time  I  faw  it,  they  would  have  little  to  apprehend 
from  the  Gaol-Fever ;  which,  fix  years  ago,  for  want  of  an 
Infirmaiy  and  feparation,  infeded  the  whole  Prifon,  fo  that  of 
nineteen  Prifoners  eight  died, — Allowance  two-pence  a  day  • 

no 


29"^ 


SOMERSETSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 


BRIDE-  no  employment.     Keeper's  Salary    £,i^'-    Fees   14s.  4d.    no 

^^^'"**  Table.     L-icence  for  Beer.     ClaufesofAcl  againft  Spirituous 

Liquors  not  hung  up. 

The  County  have  generoufly  gone  to  the  limit  of  the  Aft; 
and  appointed  to  the  Chaplain  of  this  Bridewell,  and  of  that 
at  Shepton-Mallet  (as  Well  as  to  the  Chaplain  of  the  County- 
Gaol)  a  Salary  of  ^50. 

1774,  Aug.    2,     Prifoners  7, 
Sep.    10,       -       -      5> 

1775,  Dec.   14,       -       -    16. 


SHEPTON-MALLET.  One  day-room  for  men  and  women. 
Men's  night-room  too  clofe ;  only  one  fmall  window.  The 
women's  night-room  too  little;  the  Keeper  has  taken  what 
feems  to  have  been  part  of  it,  to  make  his  malt-loft. — He  told 
me  his  Prifon  was  fome  years  ago  fo  unhealthy  that  he  buried 
three  or  four  a  week  :  no  Infirmaiy.  He  is  a  Sheriff's  Officer. 
Licence  for  Beer:  Salary  £^S  :  Fees  14s.  4d.  no  Table. 
Allowance  two  pence  a  day  :  no  employment.  Claufes  of  Adl 
againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.  Chaplain,  /ee 
"Taunton. 

1774,  Feb.  21,     Prifoners  44, 
Aug.    3,       -        -      10, 

1775,  Dec,  13,       -        -      29. 


BRISTOL 


I 


Western  Circuit.       SOMERSETSHIRE.  391 


BRISTOL     CITY  AND  COUNTY    GAOL. 

GAOLER,     Henry  Willi  am  s;  now  William  Driver. 

Salary,  none.     Gown-money  ^x  a.  year. 

Fees,     Debtors,    ;^o  :     6  :  8, 
Felons,         o  :   13  :  4. 
Tranfports,     ;^5  :  5  :  o  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none. 

Felons,  apennyworth  of  bread  a  day,  before  Trial  j 
two-pennyworth  of  bread  after  Conviftion. 
Garnifh,       ^o  ;  2:7. 

Number  of  -       -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Feb.    22,  -     58     -  -     38, 
Aug.   23,  -     j3     -  -     15, 

1775,  Dec.      7,  -     36     -  -     16, 

1776,  Dec.    16,     -     2S     -       ~     *S' 
CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Eafterbrook. 

Duty— Sunday,  Wednefday,  Friday.     (See  Remarks.) 
Salary,  i'^d. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Ahel  Dagge. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill, 

BRISTOL- 


392  SOMERSETSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 

BRISTOL -NEWGATE. 

Remarks.  THIS  NEWGATE  (as  that  in  the  Metropolis)  ftands  in  the 
midft  of  the  City.  It  is  too  fmall  for  the  general  number  of  Prifon- 
ers.  For  Debtors  there  are  about  fifteen  rooms ;  yet  no  free  ward. 
The  pooreft  pay  ten  pence  halfpenny  a  week :  others  two  fliillings 
and  fix-pence. — For  Women-felons,  a  day-room  and  feveral  night- 
rooms. — For  Men-felonSj  a  day-room,  with  a  court-yard  adjacent 
twenty  feet  by  twelve.  Their  dungeon,  the  Pit,  down  eighteen  fteps, 
is  about  eighteen  feet  by  feventeen,  and  nine  feet  high :  barrack- 
bedfl:eads :  no  bedding  nor  ftraw.  It  is  clofe  and  ofi^enfive  :  only  a  fmall 
window. — There  is  another  yard,  the  Tennis-Court,  larger  than  that 
of  the  Felons  :  Prifoners  are  admitted  into  it  by  turns. — A  room  or 
two  at  the  top  of  the  houfe  for  an  Infirmary. — There  are  many  nar- 
row pafiages :  the  utmoft  attention  is  requifite  to  keep  the  Prifon 
healthy.  I  found  it  clean ;  confidering  it  was  fo  crowded  and  fo 
clofe.  It  was  fcraped  and  lime-whited  once  a  year  before  the  late 
Aft  for  preferving  the  health  of  Prifoners.  That  Aft  is  neatly  painted 
on  a  board  hung  up  in  the  Chapel,  which  is  commodious  and  has  a 
gallery :  feveral  Texts  of  Scripture  are  painted  in  fundry  parts  of  it. — 
Claufes  of  the  Aft  againfl  Spirituous  Liquors  are  not  hung  up.  No 
Table  of  Gaoler's  Fees. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  James  Rouquet  has  been  unwearied  in  attention  to 
the  fpiritual  and  temporal  interefts  of  the  Prifoners ;  officiating  near 
twenty  years  without  a  Salary.   He  had  only  once  a  Gratuity  of  ^20*. 


•  This  was  written  before  November  1776,  when  Mr.  Rouquet  died  in  the  forty- 
feventh  year  of  his  age.  The  general  Sorrow,  and  tlie  Sermons  preached  and  printed 
on  that  Occafion,  do  more  than  juilify  what  1  have  faid  concerning  the  Zeal  of  this 
pious  Divine. 

Mr. 


Western  Circuit.       SOMERSETSHIRE.  393 

Mr.  Eafterbrook  lately  appointed.  Befides  the  Service  noted  in  its 
place,  there  are  thirteen  Sermons  a  year,  for  which  the  Preacher 
has  la,. 

John  Heydon  left  ^^  100  to  be  lent  to  two  Merchants,  each  pay- 
ing annually  to  the  Corporation  for  the  Prifoners  as  Intereft  of  his 
Moiety  ^i  :  13  :  4. — Mrs.  Aid/worth  left  about  ^^  a  year,  to  be 
paid  by  the  Parifh  of  All-Saints ;  two  thirds  of  it  to  Debtors,  who 
receive  the  money  ufually  on  Chriftmas-Eve ;  the  other  third  part  is 
generally  laid  out  in  coverlids  or  blankets  for  Felons.  No  Memorial 
in  the  Gaol  of  any  Legacy. 

A  TABLE  of  FEES  Town  Clerk  Bristol. 

£.     S.    D. 

Difcharge  of  Prifoners  from  the  higheft  Felony  to  the  loweft  ■ 
Mifdemeanor  —  —  — 


BRISTOL    CITY     BRIDEWELL. 

Part  of  it  is  in  the  Keeper's  houfe,  on  one  fide  of  a  common  foot  way  : 
and  part  on  the  other  fide.  In  the  Keeper's  houfe,  the  Mafter's-fide, 
are  three  rooms  :  one  a  day  room  ;  in  the  other  two  are  beds  at  fix 
pence  a  night. — The  Common-fide,  the  new  Bridewell,  crofs  the  way, 
confifts  of  two  parts  feparated  by  a  court-yard  of  about  fifty  feet  by 
feventeen.  Each  part  has  two  rooms  on  the  ground  floor,  and  two 
chambers.  Total  eight  rooms,  about  eighteen  feetfquarej  windows  to 
the  court-yard  ;  no  chimnies.  The  Court  being  quite  out  of  fight 
of  the  Keeper's  houfe,  he  does  not  fufFer  Prifoners  to  ufe  it;  nor 

E  e  e  the 


394  SOMERSETSHIRE.       Western  Circuit. 

the  pump  in  it.  They  have  no  water  but  what  is  handed  to  them  ; 
and  all  the  rooms  are  very  dirty.  Little  or  no  ftraw  :  no  employ- 
ment. Keeper's  Salary  lately  raifed  from  ^20  to  ^30.  He  receives 
the  money  for  bread  allowance,  two-pence  a  day  :  but  the  Prifoners 
afllired  me,  that  what  he  gave  them  from  his  own  loaf  was  far  fhort 
of  two  penny-worth.  In  Dec.  1775  there  was  an  acquitted  Woman 
Prifoner  detained  for  Fees  3s.  6d.  Thofe-  Fees  were  paid,  and  the 
Prifoner  was  releafed. — Claufes  of  the  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors 


igup. 

1774,     Aug.  23,     Prifoners    6, 

1775,     Dec.     8,     -     -     -      5, 

1776,     -—     16,     -     -     -      7. 

BATH     CITY    GAOL. 


The  afcent  to  this  Prifon,  lately  built  in  a  meadow  which  is  fome- 
times  overflowed,  is  by  a  fine  flight  of  Steps.  On  the  ground-floor 
is  the  Keeper's  kitchen  &c.  and  fome  rooms  for  Petty  Offenders. 
Above  are  three  ftories  ;  five  rooms  on  each  :  one  or  two  of  them 
ufed  by  the  Keeper  :  the  reft  for  Debtors ;  one  bed  in  a  room,  in 
which  if  two  Prifoners  fleep,  they  pay  two  fliillings  a  week  each ; 
if  one  has  it  to  himfelf  he  pays  two  fliillings  and  fix  pence  a  week. 
Two  rooms  on  the  fecond  ftory  are  a  free  ward  -,  on  tlie  upper  floor 
is  their  work-ftiop.  There  is  a  court-yard  with  ofFenfive  fewers  too 
near  thehoufe. — Keeper  a  Sheriff's  Officer  :  no  Salary  :  Fees,  if  from 
the  Court  of  Confcience  3s.  6d.  thefe  Debtors  are  cleared  in  thir- 
teen weeks  paying  thofe  Fees :   Debtors  for  large  fums  7s.  8d.    no 

Table. 


Western  Circuit.       SOMERSETSHIRE.  595 

Table.  Licence  for  beer.  Allowance,  to  Debtors,  none ;  to  Offenders 
1^.  a  day :  no  ftraw.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not 
hung  up. — The  City  will  perhaps  appoint  a  Chaplain  and  a  Surgeon. 


Debtors. 

Offenders. 

1774, 

Aug. 

6,         16     - 

-     2, 

i775> 

Dec. 

12,         14    - 

-     I, 

1776, 



16,         II     - 

-     0,     Delerters  3 

BRIDGEWATER    TOWN    GAOL. 


Only  one  middle  fized  room  :  and  one  of  the  two  windows  flopped 
up.  In  this  room  at  Midfummer  Quarter  Seffions  1774  were  fliut 
up  twenty  feven  Prifoners.  At  Summer  Affize  the  lame  year,  thirteen  ; 
two  of  them.  Women.  Afllze  generally  lafts  from  Monday  to  Sa- 
turday. The  Keeper's  mother  complained  to  me  of  the  confufion 
and  diftrefs  occafioned  by  confining  Prifoners  thus  for  fo  long  a  time. 
She  faid  there  were  but  few,  at  any  time,  who  could  pay  for  beds, 
and  feparate  rooms. 

1774,     Sep.   10,     Prifoners  none. 


Eee2  COUNTY 


396  YORKSHIRE.       Northern  Circuit. 


COUNTY  GAOL,   YORK  CASTLE. 

GAOLER,     I'homas  Wharton;  no'fi  William  Clayton. 
Salary,  none. 
Fees,     Debtors,       ^/^o  :  8  :  8, 

Felons,  0:9:6, 

AdmifTion,      0:3:4. 
Tranfports,     ^^lo  :   10  :  o    each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,certifiedbytheirParini,  7  a  fix-penny  loaf 
Felons,         -         -         -         -  j  each  on  Tuefday 
andFriday  (weight, Nov. i"]"] 4,  ^Ib*  loz.). 
Garnifh,       cancelled  in  1774. 

Number  of  -       -     Debtors.      Felons  &c. 

1774,  Jan.  25,     no       -       33, 

Nov.   3,       49       -       30, 

1776,  Jan.  26,       89       -       44, 
Sep.  21,       38       -       32. 

CHAPLAINS,     Rev.  Mr.  Peacock,  and  Rev.  Mr.  Bridges. 

Duty— Mr.  Peacock  Monday,  Tuefday,  Wednefday,  Thurfday; 

and    from     Lady -day      to     Michaelmas,       Sunday. 

Mr.  Bridges  a  Sermon  on  Friday. 
Salary,  Mr.  Peacock  £^0  from  the  County;  Mr.  Bridges  £1^ 

from  a  Legacy.     Not  in  the  Lift. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Stilingfleet. 

Salar)',  ^40  for  Debtors  and  Felons. 

YORK 


Northern  Circuit.        YORKSHIRE.  397 

YORK        CASTLE, 

IN  THE  SPACIOUS  AREA  is  a  noble  Prifon  for  Debtors,  which  Remarks. 
does  honour  to  the  County.  You  afcend  by  a  fine  flight  of  (lone  fteps 
to  a  floor  on  which  are  eleven  rooms,  full  fixteen  feet  fquare,  near 
twelve  feet  high.  Above  them  is  the  fame  number  of  rooms  :  one 
or  two  of  thefe,  for  Common-fide  Debtors.  The  rooms  are  airy  and 
healthy.     On  the  ground-floor  are  the  Gaoler's  apartments  &c. 

The  Felons  court-yard  is  down  five  fl:eps :  it  is  too  fmall,  and  has 
no  water :  the  pump  is  juft  on  the  outfide  of  the  palifades.  The 
day-room  for  men  is  only  twenty-fix  feet  by  eight :  in  it  are  three 
cells  :  in  another  place  nine  cells :  and  three  in  another.  The  cells 
are  in  general  about  feven  feet  and  a  half  by  fix  and  a  half,  and  eight 
and  a  half  high ;  clofe  and  dark  ;  having  only  either  a  hole  over  the 
door  about  four  inches  by  eight,  orfome  perforations  in  the  door  of 
about  an  inch  diameter :  not  any  of  them  to  the  open  air,  but  into 
paflages  or  entries.  In  moft  of  thefe  cells  three  Prifoners  are  locked 
up  at  night ;  in  winter  for  fourteen  to  fixteen  hours :  ftraw  on  the  ■ 
ftone  floors ;  no  b^dfl:eads.  There  are  four  condemned  rooms  about 
feven  feet  fquare. — A  fewer  in  one  of  the  paiTages  often  makes  thefe 
parts  of  the  Gaol  very  off"enfive ;  and  I  cannot  fay  they  are  clean. 
Indeed  a  clean  Prifon  is  fcarcely  ever  feen,  where  the  Water  is  to  be 
brought  in  by  the  Gaoler's  fervants.  The  next  houfe  to  the  Cafl:le- 
gate,  and  others  in  the  neighbourhood,  have  river-water  laid  in  at  a 
moderate  expenfe. 

Women-felons  are  kept  quite  feparate :  they  have  two  court- 
yards, but  no  water :  you  go  down  four  fl:eps  to  their  two  rooms,  a 
day  and  a  night  room.  Their  condemned  room  is  in  another  part  of 
the  Gaol :  near  it  is  a  room  to  confine  Debtors  who  do  not  behave 

well. 

The 


398  YORKSHIRE.        Northern  Circuit. 

•   YORK  The   Infirmary   near   the   gate   is  only  one   middle-fized   room. 

CASTLE.     When  Prifoners  of  one  fex  are  there,  thofe  of  the  other  are  excluded. 
A  fick  man  was  kept  out  for  that  reafon  when  I  was  there. 

At  Affize  fome  Prifoners  appear  in  Court  on  their  trial  in  the 
County-cloathing.* 

The  County  pays  one  John  Sherwood  ^lo  a  year  to  infpeft  and 
weigh  the  Bread,  and  deliver  it  to  the  Prifoners.  He  conflantly  at- 
tends for  this  purpofe  on  Tuefday  and  Friday. 

Transports  convifted  at  Quarter  Sefilons  have,  befides  the  bread 
allowance,  one  fhilling  a  week.  Thofe  caft  at  Affize  have  the  King's 
Allowance  of  2s.  6d.  a  week. 

There  is  a  grand  Shire-Hall  in  the  Caftle  yard  almoft  finifhed.  I 
hope  the  Gentlemen  of  this  great  County  will  not  ftop  there ;  but 
proceed  to  build  a  proper  Prifon  for  Felons  ;  in  which  Boys  may  be 
feparated  from  Old  Offenders,  and  the  other  Inconveniences  of  the 
prefent  Gaol  avoided. 


o 


Yorkflnre.  /^RDERS   and   FEES   fettled  by  the  Juftices  of 

the  Peace  of  the  feveral  Ridings  of  the  County  of 

York  and  confirmed  by  the  Juftices  of  Affize— which  are  to  be  ob- 

ferved    and  kept  by  the  Gaoler— and  all  Prifoners— until  the  fame 

fhall  be  Legally  altered. 

C.    S.     D. 

Firft  That  every  Knight  ihall  pay  for  his  weekly  Commons  T 

at  Table  if  he  eats  with  them  —  —      j        ■3-4 

For  his  Fee  if  committed  by  Warrant  on  a  Civil  Aftion  o  :    13   14 

Every  Efquire  for  his  Commons  at  table  weekly  if  he  eats  ~\ 

.  ,     ,  ^    o  :    10  :  4 

•     with  them  —  —  —       3 

For  his  Fee  if  committed  by  Warrant  on  a  Civil  Aftion  o  ;  10  :  4 


See  a  more  judicious  practice,  page  312. 


Every 


YORK 
CASTLE. 


Northern  Circuit.        YORKSHIRE.  399 

£.      S.     D. 
Every  Gentleman  for  his  Commons  at  table  weekly  if  he  T 

eats  with  them  —  —  —       ^        .         .  o 

For  his  Fee  if  committed  by  Warrant  on  a  Civil  Aftion  o  :     8:0 

Ei'cry   Yeoman,  Tradefman  or  Artificer    for   his   Weekly  i 

Commons  at  table  if  he  eats  with  them  —      J        ' 

For  his  Fee  if  committed  by  Warrant  on  a  Civil  Aftion  o  :     3:4 

And   it   is  further   ordered  that  every  Knight   fhall    pay  ) 

nightly  for  his  bed  —  —  —      j        '         ' 

Every  Efquire  for  the  fame  —  —  0:0:6 

Every  Gentleman  for  the  fame  —  —  0:0:4 

Every  Yeoman  Tradefman  or  Artificer  for  the  fame  o  :     0:2 

And  that  when  the  Gaoler  lodgeth  two  or  more  Prifoners 

in  one  bed  they  fhall  pay  for  their  lodgings  amongft 

them  after  the  rates  above 
^  And  every  Prifoner  who  provides  his  own  bed  and  bedding 

fhall   have   a  room   afligned   fuitable    to   his   or  their 

quality  and  Ihall  pay  nothing  for  the  fame 
And  that  upon  the  Difcharge  of  a  Debtor  if  there  be  feveral  T 

Adlions  againft  him   the   Gaoler   Ihall  take  no  more  f  o  :     6:8 

than  one  Fee  and  that  to  be  —  —      J 

And  upon  the  Difcharge  of  every  Debtor  to  the  Turnkeys  - 

and  no  more  —  —  —      >  o  .     2  .  o 

And  that  every  Prifoner  fhall  have  liberty  to  provide  and 

fend  for  viftuals  drink  and  other  neceffaries  from  any 

place  whatfoever  at  all  feafonable  times  for  their  own 

proper  ufe  only  and  not  to  fell  the  fame. 
And  every  Prifoner  committed  from  the  Bar  by  the  Judge"] 

or  Judges  of  Aflize  and  Gaol  Delivery  in  the  Aflize  >  o  :     2:0 

week  fhall  pay'for  their  Commitment  Fee  only  J 

And  every  Perfon  committed  to  the  Gaol  for  fufpicion"1 

of  Felony,  or  for  Mifdemeanor,  if  upon  his  or  her  j 

trial  he  or  (he  fhall  be  found  not  guilty  and  be  there-  }►  o  :     6:8 

upon    difcharged,    fhall    pay    to    the   Gaoler    for   his  | 

Difcharging  Fee  —  —  —     J 

And  to  the  Turnkeys  —  —  —  0:2:0 

And 


400  YORKSHIRE.        Northern  Circuit. 

£.    s.    D. 

YORK  And  that  every  Perfon  conviaed  or  attainted  of  Felony"] 

CASTLE.  or  found  guilty  of  a  Mifdemeanor  which   fliall  be  re-  I 

prieved  and  difcharged  by  Pardon   Ihall  pay  to  the  | 

Gaoler  for  his  Difcharging  Fee  —  —     J 

And  to  the  Turnkey  —  —  —         0:2:0 

And  every  Perfon  that  Ihall  appear  upon  Recognizance  for") 

fufpicion  of  Felony  and  is   thereupon   committed  to  I 

Gaol  and  fhall  not  be  indifted  but  acquitted  by  Pro-  1 

clamation,  fliall  be  difcharged  paying  to  the  Gaoler    J 

And  all  others  that  fliall  be  committed  to  Gaol  before  the"] 

Aflizes  or  Gaol-Delivery  and  fliall  not  be  indi£led  I 

tut  acquitted  by  Proclamation  be  difcharged  paying  1 

to  the  Gaoler  —  —  —    J 


Torkjhire,  to  wit.  At  the  Affizes — held  at  the  Caftle  of  York — 
14th  July  1735 — the  9th  of  George  11.  before  the  Honourable 
Alexander  Denton  Efquire  one  of  his  Majefty's  Juftices  of  the 
Court  of  Common  Pleas,  and  the  Honourable  William  Lee 
Efquire  one  of  his  Majefty's  Juftices  of  the  Court  of  King's 
Bench,— -Afllgned  to  deliver  the  faid  Gaol— thefe  Orders  and 
Fees,  were  allowed  and  approved  of  by  — 

alex   denton 
wm  lee 

2'orkjljire    Eaft   Riding 

John  Grimston 

•D  T>  North  Riding  of  Torkjhire 

Ramsden  Barnard  °  ■' 

Tho.  Grimston  John  Dodsworth 

John  Milbanke 


Weft  Riding  of  Torkfhire 
Geo  Nelthorpe 
N  Hawey 


John  Wastell 


An 


Northern  Circuit.        YORKSHIRE. 


An  account   of  the  charity  given  to  the  Prifoners 
in  his  Majefty's  Gaol  the  Cajile  of  York. 


f       S      D 

The  Lady  ia»j/fj,,  to  be  given  yearly  on  St,  Thomas's  da>0 

and  paid  by  the  Lord  Mayor  of  York  J    ^  '     7   =  ° 

The  Honourable  and  ancient  City  of  r«/-.f  weekly  in  bread  o:  2:6 
Mrs.  Frances  ThornhiJl  for  ftraw,  the  Lord  Mayor  of  I'ork  ■) 

•^35  j^30  in  his  hands  for  tliat  purpofe  f    l    :   10  :  o 

Dr.  Phineas  Hodgefion  paid  weekly  in  rolls  to  all   that  heari 

fermons  —  r   o  :     2  :  o 

Alderman  White'%  bread  by  the  name  of  Sivain^  bread,-) 

paid  out  of  a  clofe  belonging  to  John  Legg,  quarter-  ^    i   :     6  •   o 

ly  6i.  6d.  —  _  _       3  ' 

Mr.  5<ww  gave  twenty  Ihillings  to  be  paid  quarterly  in  bread  1:0:0 
Mrs.  Mary  Lanv/on  of  Micklegate  in  the  City  of  Tork  widow  by  will  dated  the 
22d  July  ,729  gave  ^100  for  the  difcharging  of  poor  Prifoners  for  debt 
out  of  the  county  Gaol  of  l^ork  whofe  debts  did  not  exceed  the  fum  cf  ^20 
--and  her  Executrixes-Mrs.  Catherine  Bo'iver-.^nd  Mrs.  J.„  Maxwell 
difcharged  with  faid  money  thirty  two  Prifoners 
The  Right  Honourable  Richard  Earl  oi Burlington  and  Sir  George  Savile^zrt. 
gave  each  of  them  ten  guineas  for  the  like  ufe-with  which  twenty  guineas 
the  Rev.  Mr  Kayley  ordinary  of  the  faid  Gaol  difcharged  eighteen  Prifon- 


ers. 


401 


YORK 

CASTLE. 


Fff  COUNTY 


4oa  YORKSHIRE.        Northern  Circuit. 


COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 


WEST-RIDING,  WAKEFIELD.  This  Ihowy  Prilbn  is  un- 
fortunately built  upon  low  ground  -,  fo  that  it  is  damp, 
and  expofed  to  floods.  Four  of  the  wards  are  fpacious  ;  but 
all  the  wards  are  made  very  ofi'enfive  by  fewers,  which  are 
dark  withal.  Prifon  and  Court-yard  cut  of  fight  from  the 
Keeper's  houfe,  though  adjoining ;  and  fome  Prifoners  have 
efcaped.  They  are  now  let  out  to  the  court  only  half  an 
hour  in  the  day.  The  wards  are  very  dirty  :  a  Prifon  on 
ground  fo  low  as  this,  requires  the  utmoft  attention  to 
cleanlinefs. — Keeper's  Salary  lately  raifed  from  ^^ 80  10^^105 
he  contrafting  to  fupply  ftraw  and  coals.  No  Fees.  No 
allowance  of  food,  but  by  order  of  a  Juflice  :  little  or  no 
employment.     Two  rooms  for  an  Infirmary  almofl  finifhed. 

1774,  Nov.  4,  Prifoners  27, 
1776,  Jan.  II,  -  -  -  32, 
-'--      Odl,    27,     -     -     -     19. 

NORTH-RIDING,  THIRSK.  The  County  has  ground  enough 
about  this  Prifon,  and  might  enlarge  it.  If  they  do,  they 
will  think  of  an  Infirmary.  The  Keeper  told  me  his  Pri- 
foners had  the  Gaol-Fever  not  long  ago.  His  Salary 
^26  :  10  :  o.     No  Fees.     No  ftraw  :  no  employment. 

1776*    Jan*  '3>    Prifoners  j. 

EAST 


Northern  Circuit.       YORKSHIRE. 

EAST-RIDING,  BEVERLEY.  On  the  ground-floor  three 
Cnall  night-rooms ;  and  a  new  work-room  with  a  chimney  : 
above,  four  rooms  for  thofe  that  pay.  In  the  court-yard  not 
only  a  pump,  but  a  ciftern  of  rain-water.  Coals  two  chaldron 
and  a  half  a  year.  No  ftraw  :  no  employment.  The  Keeper 
has  been  in  his  office  above  forty  years  :  Salary  ^^30  :  Fees  4s. 
no  Table. 

1774,     Nov.    2,     Prifoners  2, 

1776,     Jan.   28,       -       -       I, 

Sep.   21,       -       -       2. 

At     BEVERLEY     are   alfo   the 

TOWN  GAOL.  It  has  on  the  ground-floor  two  rooms  not 
fronting  the  ftreet,  for  Men-criminals :  and  above,  a  room  for 
Women ;  and  two  for  Debtors.  No  water :  no  ftraw.  Keeper's 
Salary  j^3  :  Fees  4s.  no  Table.     Licence  for  Beer. 

Debtors.     Criminals. 
1774,     Nov.    2,        I       -       None, 

1776,     Jan.    28,        2       -       None, 
Sep.    21,        I       -  I. 

HALL-GARTH  for  debtors,  in  the  Liberty  of  St.  John's  of 
Beverley:    Property  of  Charles  Anderjon  Pelham,   Efq.    built  a  few 
years  fince,  has  over  the  Hall  five  fizeable  rooms ;  two  of  them  have 
fire-places.     No  court-yard:    no  water.     Fees   4s.    2d.    no  Table. 
I  have  a  lifl:  of  113  Towns  or  Parts  of  Towns,  that  are  within  the 
Liberty  of  St.  John's  of  Beverley  or  Beverley-Hall-Garth. 
1774,     Nov.     2,     Prifoners     2, 
1776,     Jan.    28,       -       -      None, 
Sep.    21,       -       -      None. 

Fff2  YORK 


403 


404  YORKSHIRE.       Northern  Circuit. 


YORK     CITY  AND  COUNTY    GAOL. 

GAOLER,     ^lintiti  Ackam  j  now  Francis  Meggefon. 

Salary,  none:  he  pays  ;^io  :  lo  :  o  ayear  to  the  Under-SherifF. 
Fees,     Debtors,    ^0:6:4, 
Felons,         0:7:8. 
Tranfports,  probably  the  fame  as  at  the  Caftle. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none  but  Legacies.     (See  Remarks.) 
Felons,     of  late,  two  fix-penny  loaves  a  week 
each  (weight  in  Nov.  1774,  ^Ib.  zoz.). 
Garnifh,        ^^o  :  7  :  o. 

Number  of  -      -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  Jan.    25,       II     -  -       7, 

Nov.    3,         5     -  -       ,, 

1776,  Jan.  26,         9     -  -       3> 

Sep.  21,       10     -  -       2,     and  2  Deferters. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  JVallis,  occafionally. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  upon  Oufe-Bridgey  called  the  Kidcots,  has  on  one  fide 
of  the  bridge  four  convenient  chambers  for  Debtors,  about  eleven 
feet  fquare  :  for  thefe  they  pay  fix  pence  a  week.  Below  them  is  a 
free  ward  with  barrack-beds  j  and  a  room  to  the  ftrcet.  At  the  win- 
dow they  fell  nets,  purfes,  laces,  &c. 

The 


Northern  Circuit.        YORKSHIRE.  405 

The  Men-felons  Ward  on  the  other  fide  is  down  eleven  fleps :  that  york 
adjoining,  for  women,  down  ten.  The  two  night  rooms  for  Men  are  city, 
each  fix  feet  and  a  half  by  five.  The  night  room  for  Women  about 
fix  feet  fquare.  All  the  rooms  for  Felons,  are  clofe  and  ofFenfive :  no 
amendment  fince  the  late  Aft.  The  wooden  door  ftands  open  in  the 
day  time,  to  give  them  a  little  air.  At  the  inner  door,  which  is  of 
iron  grates,  I  have  feen  liquors  handed  to  thofe  who  feemed  to  have 
had  enough  before. — No  water,  but  when  there  is  too  much ;  that  is, 
in  a  very  high  flood  \  then  it  flows  into  the  rooms, — Gaoler  a  Sheriff's 
Officer  for  City  and  County. 

It  were  in  vain  to  offer  any  hints  of  improvement.  This  Gaol 
cannot  be  made  a  good  one. 

The  Corporation  pays  free-ward  Debtors  one  fhilling  and  two 
pence  three  farthings  a  week  by  a  Legacy  of  Mr.  Peacock.  No  me- 
morial of  this  in  the  Gaol.  But  there  is  a  memorandum  of  another 
Legacy,  viz.  oi  Elizabeth  'Taylor,  who  by  her  Will  dated  2ifl:  of 
Oftober  1580  left  3s.  4d.  to  be  divided  equally  among  the  Prifoners 
in  Oufe-Bridge  Gaol  on  Lady-day.  This  has  not  been  received  by 
them  for  fome  years. 


City  of  Tork.      \     T  the  General  Quarter  Seffions— -at  Guildhall — 

I    \    15th  July— 1737  before  the  Right  Honourable 

Sir  John  Lifter  Kaye  Bart.  Lord  Mayor — Thomas  Place  Efq^ .  Recorder 

—Charles  Slingby  Efq^  of  Counfel— Sir  Tancred  Robinjon  Bart— &c. 

GAOLER'S   FEES  fettled  and  ORDERS  made  &c. 

Z-     s.     D. 

■} 

And  for  the  Difcharge  of  every  other  Aftion  to  him     —       o  :     i    :  o 

To 


For  the  Difcharge  of  every  Debtor  for  the  firft  Aftion,  to" 

the  Gaoler  —  —  _        f  o  :     5   :  4 


4o6  YORKSHIRE.       Northern  Circuit. 

£.     s.    D. 

YORK  To  the  Porter  or  Turnkey  for  the  firft  Aftion  —      o  :     i   :  o 

CITY.  And  for  every  other  Aftion  to  him  —  —       0:0:6 

For  the  Difcharge  of  every  other  perfon  from  the  Affizes  or  1 

Seffions  to  the  Gaoler  —  —         i       '         ' 

And  to  the  Turnkey  —  —  0:1:0 

For  the  firft  weeks  diet  of  all  perfons  in  the  upper  Gaol  o  :     7:0 

And  for  all  further  time  as  the  Prifoner  and   Gaoler  can 
agree.      And   the  Gaoler  is  to  permit   Prifoners   to 
provide    their  own  diet  after  the    firft  week  if    the 
Prifoner  pleafes. 
For  Lodging  if  the  Gaoler  finds  bed  bedding  and  flieets  for-> 
the  firft  night  —  —  —        5 

And  for  every  other  night  —  —  0:0:3 

And  if  two  lie  in  one  bed  for  the  firft  night  each         —  0:0:4 

And  for  the  fecond  and  every  other  night  each  —  0:0:2 

For  lodging  in  the  upper  Gaol  if  the  Prifoner  finds  his  own  T 

bed,  bedding  and  fheets  for  every  week  —         3        '  ' 

If  two  in  a  bed  each  —  —  —  0:0:3 

And  every  Prifoner  (hall  have  liberty  of  finding  the  fame  if  he  thinks  proper. 
And  the  Gaoler  ftiall  have  liberty  if  he  fees  occafion  to  have  two  beds  in  each 

room  and  no  more. 
And  it  js  ordered  that  every  perfon  of  what  degree  or  condition  fo  ever — 
who  ftiall  ufe— fwearing,  curfing,  railing  or  other  indecent  behaviour— 
fhall— -pay  for  every  fuch  offence  twelve  pence  to  the  Gaoler  or  his  deputy 
on  demand;  and  on  refufal — to  be  levied  by  diftrefs  on  goods---or  flopped 
out  of  ftiare  of  box-money — or  ftand  in  charge  to  be  paid  before  releafe— 
the  Fines  to  be  diftributed  at  Gaokr's  difcretion  amongft  the  moft  needful 
in  the  Low  Gaol. 
Every  Prifoner  who  attempts— or  aflifts  an  efcape---to  be  ironed. 
Thofe  who  mutiny  on  Gaoler  or  Deputies — or  hinder  or  difturb  &c — to   be 

kept  in  clofe  confinement. 
On  default  of  weekly  payments  aforefaid— -after  demand  and  refufal---a  Prifoner 
may  be  moved  from  the  Maft^r's-fide— -to  the  Common  Room, 

J  L  Kave,  Mayor, 

T,  Place 

Sam,  Clarke, 

YORK 


Northern  Circuit.        YORKSHIRE.  407 

YORK       CITY     BRIDEWELL 

Has  a  day-room  for  Men,  and  another  for  Women  :  the  latter  is 
very  damp.  Down  four  fteps  are  five  night-rooms  for  Men ;  and  a 
large  one,  with  barrack-bedfteads,  for  Women.  The  whole  dirty 
and  offenfive.  No  regard  paid  to  the  late  Aft  for  preferving  Health. 
No  court-yard:  no  water:  no  fewer.  Keeper's  Salary  ^^20  :  Fees  2s. 
Straw  twenty  Ihillings  a  year :  no  bread  allowance :  little  or  no 
employment. 

1774,  Nov.  3,  Prifoners  3, 
1776,  Jan.  26,  -  -  I,. 
Sep.    20,       -       -      4.. 

St.      P  E  T  E  R's      gaol. 

For  the  Liberty  of  St.  Peter  of  Tork,  near  the  Minfter-gate,  is  the 
Property  of  the  Dean ;  who  holds  his  Courts  here.  He  has  lately 
purchafed  an  adjoining  Tenement  for  his  Gaoler  to  live  in  :  in  con- 
fequence  of  which,  the  two  rooms  in  which  he  lived  before  are  added 
to  the  Debtors  apartments,  and  they  have  now  four  rooms.  Under 
thofe  are  two  cells  for  Criminals.  All  out  of  repair,  dirty  and  ofFen- 
five  :  no  court-yard :  no  fewers.     No  allowance.. 

I  HAVE  a  printed  lift  of  Parifhes,  Towns,  and  Parts  of  Towns 
which  are  in  the  Liberty  of  St.  Peter. — Within  the  City  and  Ainsty 
nine  Places:  in  the  Eaft- Riding  fixty-two;  Weft- Riding  forty; 
North-Riding  fifty-one  :  and  there  is  one  Place  in  each  of  the  follow- 
ing Counties,  Devonfliire,  Gloucefterlhire,  Lancafliire,  Lincolnfhire,^ 
Northumberland,  Southampton  i.  e.  Hants.  In  Nottinghamlhire 
feven  Places. 

Gaoler 


4o8  YORKSHIRE.        Northern  Circuit. 

Gaoler  a  Bailiff:  no  Salary.     He  pays  Rent  ^^4 :  Fees  6s.  8d. 
no  Table. 

1776,     Jan.   27,     Debtor   i, 
Sep.  20,       -     -     I. 


RICHMOND       GAOL, 

For  the  very  extenfive  Liberty  of  i?/V^wi5K^  and  Richmondjhire,  is 
the  Property  of  Lord  Holdemejs.  It  is  alfo  the  Bridewell,  and  the 
Borough-Gaol.  For  Debtors  a  kitchen  and  bed-room>  clofe  glazed.  For 
Men-criminals  two  dungeons  down  five  fteps :  for  Women,  a  room 
above.  No  ftraw.  Claufes  of  Acl  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  hung 
up.  A  Court-yard,  and  a  Well. — Gaoler  no  Salary  for  the  Liberty  : 
for  the  Bridewell  £13  :  10  :  o:  for  the  Borough  £4.:  Fees,  Debtors 
6s.  8d.  at  Entrance,  and  6s.  8d.  at  Difcharge :  Criminals  i6s.  4d. 
Allowance  to  the  latter  four  pence  a  day. 

In  the  Table  of  Fees  dated  1671  and  figned  fF  Lylde  and 
5jy  Lyttleton,  the  1 2th  article  is,  "  Every  Perfon  or  Perfons  that  fliall 
*'  be  committed  upon  any  Warrant— upon  his  or  their  Commitment 
"  to  Gaol  fhall  pay  to  the  reft  of  the   Prifoners  2s.  4d.  for  their 

"  GARNISH." 

1776,     Oft.  26,     Debtors  6. 

RIPPON      LIBERTY-GAOL, 

Is  the  Property  of  the  Archbifliop,  by  a  Charter  from  King 
Edward  IV.  His  Court  adjoining,  is  called  the  Court  Military. 
The  Liberty  includes  twenty-four  Parifhes.    For  Debtors  four  or  five 

good 


Northern  Circuit.        YORKSHIRE. 

good  rooms  in  the  Keeper's  houfe :  but  no  free  ward.  For  Felons 
one  ftrong  room  quite  dark  j  another  with  a  little  window.  Keeper 
no  Salary  J  he  pays  Rent:  he  is  a  Bailiff.  Fees,  Debtors  15  s.  4d. 
no  Tabic :  Licence  for  Beer. 

1776,     0(5b,  26,     Debtors  2. 

RIPPON         GAOL, 

For  the  Canon-Fee  Court,  belongs  to  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of 
Rippon.  It  is  not  only  a  Gaol  for  that  Court,  but  a  Houfe  of  Cor- 
reftion  for  the  Liberty.  Good  rooms  for  Debtors,  but  no  free  ward. 
The  Bridewell  part,  two  dark  rooms,  about  eight  feet  fquare.  No 
Salary  as  Gaoler;  as  Keeper  of  Bridewell  j^io  :  10  :  o.  Fees, 
Debtors  13s.  4d.  no  Table:  Licence  for  Beer.     Keeper  a  Bailiff. 

1776,     Oft.  26,     No  Prifoners. 

KNARESBOROUGH    PRISON, 

For  debtors,  in  the  Honour  or  Foreft  of  Knarejborongh^  the 
Liberty  including  nineteen  Townftiips  &c.  is  the  Property  of  the 
Yixi^t  <:>{  Devonjhire,  LefTee  to  his  majesty.  It  is  almoft  the  only 
Remains  of  a  ruinous  Caftle  granted  by  King  Edward  III.  to  'John  of 
Gaunt  Duke  oi  Lancafter.  One  room  about  twelve  feet  fquare,  an- 
other within  it  about  eight :  in  the  latter  no  window. — No  fewer  : 
no  fire-place :  no  water.  Keeper  lately  dead ;  was  a  BailifFi  lived 
diftant. 

1776,     Od,  26,  .  No  Prifoners. 

G  g  g  KNARES- 


409 


4IO  YORKSHIRE.        Northern  Circuit. 

KNARESBOROUGH    PRISON, 

For  town  debtors,  is  under  the  Hall.  Of  difficult  accefs ;  the 
door  about  four  feet  from  the  ground.  Only  one  room,  about  four- 
teen feet  by  twelve.  Earth  floor  :  no  fire-place :  very  ofFenfive ;  a 
common  fewer  from  the  town  running  through  it  uncovered.  I  was 
informed  that  an  Officer,  confined  here  fome  years  fince,  for  only  a 
few  days,  took  in  with  him  a  dog  to  defend  him  from  vermin  ;  but 
the  dog  was  foon  deftroyed,  and  the  Prifoner's  face  much  disfigured 
by  them. 

1776,     Oft.  i6.     No  Prifoners. 

KNARESBOROUGH    TOWN    GAOL 

Is  under  the  landing-place  between  two  flights  of  ft:one  fteps,  that 
lead  on  the  right  and  left  hand  up  to  the  Hall.  Only  one  room 
about  eight  feet  by  five  :  two  windows  eighteen  inches  by  fix. — 
I  mention  this  fmall  Prifon,  becaufe  in  it  are  fometimes  confined  for 
one  night  or  two  at  Quarter  Seffions  fix  or  fcven  Prifoners,  men  and 


'to 

women 


1776,     Oft.  26,     No  Prifoners. 

DONC  ASTER      TOWN    GAOL. 

Four    good   rooms.     No  yard:    no  water:    no   fewer.      Keeper 
lives  dillant. 

177 5j     Jan.  5,     Prifoners  2. 

LEEDS 


Northern  Circuit.       YORKSHIRE.  411 

LEEDS      TOWN     GAOL. 

Four  good  rooms,  and  a  fmall  one.     No  court-yard :    no  water : 
no  fewer.     Keeper  lives  diftant. 


1774,     Nov.  4,7 
1776,     Jan.  12,5 


No  Prifoners. 


KINGSTON  UPON  HULL  TOWN  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 

The  Debtors  free  ward  is  a  large  room.  Over  it  one  as  large,  and 
over  that  another  fmaller,  both  for  Criminals.  The  ground-room  is 
a  damp  dungeon :  but  the  Gaoler,  who  has  a  charafter  for  humanity, 
afTured  me  that  no  one  had  been  confined  in  it  for  many  years.  In 
his  houfe  adjoining  is  a  room  or  two  with  beds,  for  thofe  who  pay. 
Leads  for  Debtors  to  walk  on :  no  court-yard  :  no  water  accelTible  to 
Prifoners :  no  fewer ;  and  the  Felons  rooms  are  offenfive.  Gaoler 
no  Salary :  Fees  8  s.  no  Table.  Allowance  to  Felons  three  pence  a 
day.     Gaol-Delivery  once  in  three  years  *. 

Debtors.       Felons  &c. 
1774,     Nov.    I,       5         -         o, 
1776,     Jan.   29,       6-3, 
Sep.  21,       4-5. 

KINGSTON   UPON  HULL    BRIDEWELL. 

Two   rooms  below,  and  two  up  flairs,  about  twelve  feet  fquare : 
very  offenfive :  no  fire-place.     Court-yard  only  twenty-two  feet  by 

*  See  page  31. 
G  g  g  2  ten  i 


412  YORKSHIRE.        Northern  Circuit. 

ten ;  not  fecure,  and  Prifoners  not  permitted  to  go  to  the  pump  :  no 
fewer  :  no  allowance  :  no  ftraw.  Not  white-walhcd  fince  it  was  built 
about  nine  years  ago.  Debtors  from  the  Court  of  Confcience  fent 
hither. 

The  Prifoners  pound  tile-fherds  to  mix  in  mortar  &c.  Keeper's 
Salary  ^^5  ;  a  chaldron  of  coals  ;  and  four  thoufand  turfs  :  Fees  as.  6d. 
00  Table. 

1774,     Nov.     I,     Prifoners  2,- 
1776,     Jan.     29,     -     -     -     5,  ■ 
Sep.    21,     -     -     -     o, . 


every  time  a  poor 
raving  Lunatic. 


SHEFFIELD     GAOL, 

For  the  Liberty  o(  Hallamjhire,  is  the  Property  of  the  Duke  of 
Norfolk.  The  two  lower  rooms  are  free  wards :  there  are  two  rooms 
over  them.  The  court-yard  is  only  about  ten  feet  fquare.  Both  this 
and  the  Prifon  might  be  enlarged  on  ground  adjacent  that  belongs  to 
his  Grace.  Keeper  no  Salary  :  he  rents  of' the  Duke  a  public-houife 
joining  to  the  Prifon. 

1776,     Jan.   lO,     Prifoners  6, 
Oft.  28,     -     -     -     4. 

SHEFFIELD     TOWN     GAOL. 

The  Lobbys  are  two  fmall  rooms,  the  Jargeft  only  about  eight  feet 
fquare,  and  fix  high.  When  Quarter  SefTions  for  the  IVeJi-Riding 
are  held  at  this  Town,  Offenders  are  locked  up  in  this  Prifon., 

1776,     Oft.  28,     Dcferter  i. 

ROTHWELL 


Northern  Circuit.       YORKSHIRE.  413 


ROTH    WELL      PRISON 

For  the  Manor  of  Wakefield  in  the  Liberty  of  the  Honour  of 
PoyitefraSl  in  the  Dutchy  Court  of  Lancafter,  is  out  of  repair.  A  new 
Prifon  is  lately  built  at 

BAT  LEY.  Behind  a  Houfe  for  the  Keeper  is  the  Prifon. 
Plan  rectangular  :  the  Front  is  tjie  wall  and  gate.  On  three 
fides  are  Lodging -rooms  for  Debtors;  five  or  fix  about  ten  feet 
Jquare ;  four  much  larger  for  two  beds  in  each.  Two  Day-rooms  j 
two  work-rooms  ;  and  a  dark  room  for  the  unruly.  There  are  in  a 
Jeparaie  Court  two  rooms  for  Women-debtors  :  a  provifion  very  kind 
and  prudent,  and,  I  believe,  peculiar  to  this  Prifon. — All  the  Prifon 
rooms  are  on  the  ground  floor. 

In  the  old  Prifon  at  Rothwell,  I  faw  both  times  I  was  there,  one 
William  Carr  a  weaver :  he  had  given  a  bad  name  to  a  woman  who 
was  faid  not  to  deferve  a  very  good  one  :  fiie  cited  him  to  the  Eccle- 
fiaftical  Court;  and  he  was  imprifoned  4th  of  May  1774.  He  had 
a  wife  and  three  children. — I  will  tranfcribe  a  line  or  two  of  the 
Warrant. — "  For  as  much  as  the  Royal  Power  ought  not  to  be  want- 
"  ing  to  the  Holy  Church  in  its  Complaints — attach  the  faid  W.  C. 
"  —until  he  fhall  have  made  fatisfaftion  to  the  Holy  Church  as  well 
"  for  the  Contempt  as  for  the  Injury  by  him  done  unto  it."  He  was 
difcharged  26th  July  laft  by  the  Infolvent  Aft^ 

The  Keeper  has  no  Salary.     Fees  fee  Table. 

Prifoners   25,,    „    ,      „. 
^   '   Rothwell. 


^IIA, 

Nov. 

4. 

1776, 

Jan. 

2i% 



oa. 

27> 

:;( 


-  22, 

4,      Bat  ley. 

I  WISH 


i3^  YORRSHIRE.       Northexx  CixcriT. 


I  «Tsa  oir  Reader  be  nos  di«d  «gtii  lb  wsucf  TjUcs  of  Fees  ^"vn 
fer  (Sk  CoaDties.  Tc<t  I  tiaak  I  mai:  mk  aaiax  the  Fees  wliidi  I  iiv 
xn  d^  psiraie  PitJbn  ae  Ra^kmeU:  becsaie  fome  of  tbem  xre  l^is  ^ 
and  X  H^MK  tSxT  are  dK  iamc  Tbc  T.^3Sc  is  ngoiszh-  %Qed, 
1  idi  JjB^  173:: :  but  I  eanvdr  onat  the  Fiosns. 


Even-  CxuAemam  Aal  fow  ftr  lis  adt  week"*  Ctmiiwii^  at  1 


-nUe  auL  {far  Iffi  CuMiAaatt  F^ 


noK  at| 


Emsv  TtMBBB  Ttedefaaa  ar  ftrntnrr  ibr  t^  ic:^  s«ek''s  ]. 


weef  si 


i  at  oUe  and  CaBanoMas  Fees 
And  for  0KST  fcSoBang  «eek  —  —  c  :     4      ; 


Aadkek&nSieradaeldna  ncTT  Geaxknaa  ikiS   vsw-t 


AmicfOTfT, 


c  :     o  ;  2 

lenwtH:  joidiia  JbszsiQ'-kBds 

jnaea  Pntcmgrs  ir  ■an:  hez.  JM-r  fcaH  ygy  juuwgB  iigii:  V    c: 


Aai£  1^^  Ikc  One  fte  9n3  k  ■rJ-m)  ^  ]^  fjnnlri  mt  aorr- 


in  ar  ker  arUd  I^  flaS  be         j 
And  a  <ii;  Tjaafccv  -^  —  —  o  :     I  :  o 

Far  torwairc  svstk  Saf^te^e;  a  er'snr  Arinr  —  c  ;     6  :  S 

Par  alkwii^  tvsrv  "^rJs.  ef  BjAus  Cmfae  hAies  CeadnS* 
sumrr  sbc}i&i£aii2afio«ie2aoaa9tfii]gtB  de  * 
frsni  OK  iaid  GaaS  ac  die  fSaoe  atboc  i^  b!i%  b 
ieraiiars£  —  — 


? 


^  c  :    6     , 


HALIFAX 


NoRTHERx  GiRcciT.        YORKSHIRE.  41 


HALIFAX    PRISON     foi    dzbtors. 

For  the  Manor  of  WakefuU,  dated  166;,  is  the  Prcperty-  of  the 
Duke  of  Leeds.  For  Maftefs-fide  Debiors,  rooms  in  the  Keeper's 
public-houfe.  Through  this  you  pals  to  a  court-yard  abour  fourteen 
yards  by  feven :  at  the  further  end  of  which  is  a  fizeable  room  on  the 
ground  floor  for  Common-fide  Debtors,  it  is  called  the  Lirzs  Gad: 
over  it  a  chamber  (the  Lq-jS  Gaol  Gcamier)  where  Priibners  pay  one 
fhUling  a  week. — The  whole  Prilbn  is  greatly  out  of  repair  :  it  rained 
m  upon  the  beds :  the  rooms  at  my  laft  viiit  were  clean. 

KzE?E3.  no  Salary :  he  pays  the  Duke  ^14  a  year  :  Fees  fee  Ratb- 
"0:111,  preceding  page. 

In-  this  Town  formerly  the  Barons  (as  in  many  other  places)  and 
after  them  various  Proprietors  had  power  ef  life  aad  death.  The 
method  of  execution  was  decollation  by  aa  axe  in  an  engine.  The 
axe  is  preferved  in  the  Gaol  to  this  day.  Two  men  in  1650  were  the 
laft  who  iliffered  by  it. 

1776,     Jan.  14,     Prifoaers  9, 
■ Sep.  16,     -     -     -    7. 


COUNTY 


4i6 


DURHAM. 


Northern  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     DURHAM. 

CAOLER,     Bavibridge   Wat/on,    by   Patent    from   the   Bifhop 
durante  Beneplacito. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,         -         -  ;^o  :   lo  :  o. 

Felons  at  Aflize,     -  o  :   i6  :  8, 

at  Quarter  Seflions,  o  :   13  :  4. 
Tranfports,  about  ;^  10  :  10  :  o  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none.     (See  Remarks.) 

Felons,     two  pence  a  day, 
Garnifli,       Debtors,  £0  :  ^  :  6, 

Felons,       0:1:0. 

Number  of  -       -  Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  March  20,  37     -  -     21, 

1775,  Jan.        6,  9     -  -     20, 

1776,  Jan.       14,  21     -  -     12, 
Oft.      1^  18     -  -       6. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Decent. 
Duty— Sunday  and  Thurfday. 
Salary,  £^0. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Bainbridge. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 


DURHAM. 


Northern  Circuit;         DURHAM.  417 


DURHAM. 

THE  HIGH  GAOL  is  the  Property  of  the  Bifliop.  By  Remarks. 
Patent  from  his  Lordflaip,  Sir  Hedworth  Williamjon  Bart,  is  perpetual 
Sheriflf. — The  Court-yard  for  Mafler's-fide  Debtors  is  only  twenty- 
four  feet  by  ten.  Common-fide  Debtors  have  none  at  all :  their 
free  wards,  the  Low  Gaol,  are  two  damp  unhealthy  rooms  by  the 
Gateway  :  they  are  never  fuffered  to  go  out  of  thefe,  unlefs  to  Chapel, 
which  is  the  Mafter-fide  Debtors  Hall ;  and  not  always  to  that :  for 
on  a  Sunday  when  I  was  there  and  miffed  them  at  Chapel,  they  told 
me  they  were  not  permitted  to  go  thither.  No  fewers :  at  more 
than  one  of  my  vifits,  I  learned  that  the  dirt,  afhes  &c.  had  lain 
there  many  months.  There  is  an  excellent  double-barreled  Pump, 
which  raifes  water  about  feventy  feet. 

Felons  have  no  Court-yard :  but  they  have  a  Day-room  and  two 
fmall  rooms  for  an  Infirmary.  The  Men  are  put  at  night  into  Dun- 
geons :  one  feven  feet  fquare  for  three  Prifoners  :  another,  the 
G7-eat  Hole,  has  only  a  little  window.  In  this  I  faw  fix  Prifoners, 
moft  of  them  "tranfforts,  chained  to  the  floor.  In  that  fituation  they 
had  been  many  weeks  j  and  were  very  fickly.  Their  ftraw  on  the 
ftone-floor  almofl:  worn  to  duft.  Long  confinement,  and  not  having 
the  King's  allowance  of  2s.  6d.  a  week,  had  urged  them  to  attempt 
an  Ej'cape:  after  which  the  Gaoler  chained  them  as  above. — There  is 
another  dungeon  middle-fizedj  and  for  Women-felons  a  feparate 
room  or  two. 

The  Common-fide  Debtors,  whom  I  faw  eating  boiled  bread  and 
water,  told  me,  that  this  was  the  only  nourilhment  fome  had  lived 
upon  for  near  a  twelvemonth.  They  have  from  a  Legacy  two  Ihillings 
a  week  in  winter,  and  one  fhilling  and  fix  pence  a  week  in  fummer 

H  h  h  for 


4i8  DURHAM.         Northern  Circuit. 

DURHAM,  for  coals.  No  memorandum  of  it  in  the  Gaol :  perhaps  this  may  in 
time  be  loft  ;  as  the  Gaoler  faid  two  others  were,  viz.  one  of  Bifliop 
Crewe,  and  another  of  Bifliop  IVood ;  from  which  Prifoners  had  re- 
ceived no  benefit  for  fome  years  paft.  The  claufes  of  Adl  againft 
Spirituous  Liquors  are  hung  up.     Gaol-Delivery  once  a  year. 

There  was  a  vacant  piece  of  ground  adjacent,  of  little  ufe  but  for 
the  Gaoler's  occafional  lumber.  It  extends  to  the  river,  and  mea- 
fures  about  twenty  two  yards  by  fixteen.  I  once  and  again  advifed 
the  inclofing  this  for  a  Court-yard :  but  when  I  was  there  in  January 
1776  I  had  the  mortification  to  hear  that  the  Surgeon,  who  is  Uncle 
to  the  Gaoler,  had  obtained  from  the  Bifliop  in  0<Elobcr  preceding 
a  Leafe  of  it  for  twenty  one -years  at  the  rent  of  one  fliilling  fsr 
annum.     He  had  built  a  little  ftable  on  it. 

TABLE     OF     FEES     &c. 

Rules  and  Orders  eftabliflied  by  the— Juftices  for  the  County 
Palatinate  of  Durham  and  Sadberge  at  their  General  Quarter 
SelTions— 16th  July  17  29-— and  Fees  allowed  to  be  taken  by 
the  Keeper  of  the  faid  Gaol  and  his  Officers  as  follows. 

£■      S.    D. 

Imprimis,'    For  every  Prifoner  Lodging  in  either  of  the 

Common-fides   commonly  called   the  Low  Gaol,    no 

Chamber  rent 
Item  for  an  entire  Chamber  without  a   bcd-fclIow   in  the ' 

High  Gaol  —  —  — 

For  lodging  with  a  bedfellow  in  any  other  chamber  except " 

the  Common  Chamber,  for  each  Prifoner  every  week 
For  lodjinc  with  a  bedfellow  in  the  Common  Chamber,-) 

of  each  Prifoner  every  week  —  —        3 

For  lodging  in  a  fingic  bed  in   that  Common  Chamber  ■>  - 

without  admitting  of  a  bedfellow  in  every  week  3 

Ont  of  which  Abatement  fhall  be  made. 

For 


■1 


Northern  Circuit.         DURHAM.  410 

£•     s.    D. 

ForeveiyPrifoner  that  findeth  his  own  bedding  bedcloaths  and  ) 

iheets  and  admitting  a  bedfellow  with  him  every  week  5        '         '  '^  u     HAM. 

For  DIET  of  Prifoners. 

Item  For  every  Knight  for  every  week  —  —         o  ;   lo  :  o  ' 

Of  every  Efquire  or  Gentleman   not  exceeding  for  -i 

°         f    o  :     7  :  6 
every  week  —  —  —       J 

Item  Of  every  Yeoman  Artificer  or  Labourer  not  exceeding  j 

weekly  —  —  —       j 

For  Wine  Ale  and  Brandy  at  the  common  rates  ufed  in  the  Town. 


For  LIBERATES  or  Final  Difcharges  of  Prifoncrs 

1- 


10 


Item  For  attendance  of  every  Prifoner  that  goeth  abroad  7 

into  the  Town  every  time  —  —        j 

For  every  Knight  Efquire  or  Gentleman  for  his  final  i 

Difcharge  and  Enlargement  only  —       j 

rer  for  fuch  Dif- ") 
-  -       i    ° 


For  every  Yeoman  Artificer  or  Labourer  for  fuch  Dif- 
charge only  — 


9 


Item  For  the  Difcharge  of  every  Prifoner  upon  procefs  or 
order  from  the  Court  of  Chancery 

For  the  firft  Liberate                   —                     —  o 
Item  For  every  Knight  Efquire  or  Gentleman  for  the  fecond  ■) 

Ditto                 —                  —                      _         3  ° 

For  every  one  more                  —                     —  0:1:6 

Item  For  every  Yeoman  Artificer  or  Labourer  for  the  firft  o  :     8:8 

For  the  fecond                —               —               —  o  •     3   :  O 

For  every  one  more                   —                       —  0:1:6 

FEES  to  the  Under  Keeper  and  Door  Keeper 


Tho  Burdus 

Jo^   MORLAND 

Mic  Brabin 

Hen''  Foster     Mayor 

XjiLEs  Rayne  : 

H  h  h  a  We 


420  DURHAM.         Northern  Circuit. 

DURHAM.  We  Sir  Francis  Page  Knight  one  of  the  Juflices  of  his  Majefty's 
Court  of  King's  Bench  and  Sir  Barn.  Hale  Knight  one  of  the 
Barons  of  his  Majefty's  Court  of  Exchequer  at  Weftminfter  now 
Juftices  of  Affize  for  the  Northern  Circuit  have  reviewed  the  above 
Table  of  Fees  and  have  thought  fit  to  moderate  the  Item  or  Article 
of  two  fliillings  a  week  for  Lodging  with  a  Bedfellow  in  any  other 
Chamber  except  the  Common  Chamber  to  be  paid  by  each  Pri- 
foner,  and  inftead  thereof  do  appoint  one  fhilling  and  fix  pence 
fer  week  to  be  paid  by  each  Prifoner  fo  lodging  with  a  Bedfellow 
which  faid  Table  with  fuch  alteration  is  hereby  Confirmed  by  us 


Dated  the  2d  day  of  Auguft  1729 


F    PAGE 
B    HALE 


COUNTY  BRIDEWELL  at  DURHAM. 

Several  fizeable  aiiy  rooms.  Men  and  women  feparate.  No 
employment :  no  water  :  no  fewer  :  no  court-yard  ;  but  the  Keeper 
Mr.  Watfon  has  a  Garden  which  he  lets  for  a  guinea  a  year.  His 
Salary  ;^30.  He  lives  at  the  High  Gaol  j  and  puts  in  a  Woman  to 
take  care  of  this  Prifon. 

I775>  J^'^-  6,  Prifoners  5, 
1776,  Jan.  14,  -  -  7, 
----       Oa.  25,       -       -       6. 


NEWCASTLE 


Northern  Circuit.     NEWCASTLE  upon  TYNE.  421 

NEWCASTLE  TOWN  and  COUNTY  GAOL. 

GAOLER,     John  Crofter;  novj 'Thomas  Harle, 
Salary,  ^^50,  and  ^2  Gown-money. 
Fees,     Debtors,       j{^o  :   10  :  8, 
Felons,  o  :   14  :  4. 

Tranfports,  only  Expenfe. 
Licence,  none  at  my  lad  vifit. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  two  pence  a  day,  on  petition. 

Felons,     two  pence  a  day. 
Garnifli,        lately  cancelled. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.      Felons  &c. 

1774,  March  21,        6-2, 

1775'  Jan.        8,       12       -         4, 

1776,  Jan.      15,       14       -         3. 

CHAPLAINS,     Rev.  Mr.  Br  union,  and  Rev.  Mr.  Brand. 

Duty  — On  Sunday  none;  but  on  two  other  days  Prayers: 
and  once  a  month  Sermon.  None  of  the  days 
fixed.  The  Chaplains  officiate  alternately  a  month 
each. 

Salary,  ^10  the  Corporation,  and  ^10  Sir  Walter  Blacket, 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Bacon. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

IN  THIS  NEWGATE,  which  is  the  Gate  at  the  upper  end  of    Remarks. 
the  Town,  all  the  rooms  except  the  condemned  room  are  up  flairs, 

and 


422  NEWCASTLE.        Northern  Circuit. 

N  E  v/-  and  airy :  I  always  found  them  remarkably  clean,  ftrewed  with  fand 
c^STLS.  ^j,_  'j-pjg  Corporation  allow  botli  Debtors  and  Felons  firing  and 
candles  in  plenty :  and  every  Prifoner  hath  a  chaff-bed,  two  blankets, 
and  a  coverlid :  Debtors  are  not  thus  accommodated  in  any  other 
Prifon  in  England.  They  alio  allow  brooms,  mops,  and  all  fuch 
neceffaries.  I  copied  the  fums  generoufly  allowed  for  thofe  articles ; 
the  whole  amount  is  ^45  :  i  :  4  per  annum.  This  is  one  of  the  very ' 
few  Gaols  that  have  what  is  called  in  London  the  rules.  Part  of 
two  Streets  near  the  Gaol  is  in  the  Prilbn-Liberty. 

'  There  is  no  yard  :  but  one  might  be  made  of  the  vacant  ground 
that  lies  Weft  of  the  Gaol.  A  Door  fliould  be  cut  in  the  wall  be- 
tween the  Felons  Ward  and  the  room  ufed  for  a  Chapel.  It  would 
not  then  be  neceiTary  for  them  to  come  out  and  crofs  the  ftreet,  as 
they  do  now. 

The  Debtors  Beds  are  in  Clofets,  which  ftiould  be  taken  down. 
Inftead  of  them  Iron  Bedfteads  fhould  be  placed  in  the  Wards,  as  in 
fome  Hofpitals. 

No  Prifoners  here  have  Fetters,  unlefs  they  be  riotous.  For  fome 
years  paft,  Prifoners  acquitted  have  been  difcharged  in  Court.  The 
Corporation  paid  the  Gaoler's  Fees  if  the  Prifoners  were  poor. — 
Gaol-Delivery  once  a  year. — Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors 
not  hung  up. 

I  WAS  concerned  when  I  heard  at  my  laft  vifit  that  the  humane 
Gaoler  Mr.  Crafter  was  dead.  But  his  SuccefTor  Mr.  Harle  is  equally 
worthy  of  the  Truft. 

Dr.  Rotheram,  a  Phyfician  in  this  Town,  vifits  the  Prifoners 
very  afliduoufly  without  Fee  or  Reward.  This  is  the  only  inftance 
of  the  kind  I  have  met  %vith. 

An 


Northern  Circuit.        NEWCASTLE.  423 


An  exaft  Copy  of  the  RATES  and  FEES  to  be  from  henceforth  new- 
Received  by— the  Gaoler  or  Keeper  of  his  Majefty's  Gaol—  castle. 
called  Newgate  within  this  Town  o{  Newcafile  iifon  Tyne—^tttltd. 
— at  the  General  Quarter  Seffions  held  at  Guild-hall  in  Newcaftle 
aforefaid,  on  the  15  of  July  Ann"- Dom"'  1730.  And  approved  of 
at  the  Affize  following  by  Francis  Page  and  John  Forte/cue  A 
two  of  his  faid  Majefty's  Judges  of  Affize  According  to  an  Ad 
of  Parliament  lately  made 

(viz) 


Every  Prifoner  upon  any  Civil  Aftion   fhall  pay  to  tke' 

Keeper  at  his  firft  coming  in  —  —     3    °  '     ^ 

Every  Prifoner  charged  by  Procefs  or  Proceffes  out  of  the") 
Court  of  Record  held  before  the  Mayor  and  Sheriff  of  j 
the  faid   Town   of  Ncjuca/fle  upon  Tyne   refpeftively  ^  o  :     6 
fhall  pay  to  the  faid  Keeper  upon  his  Difcharge  from  j 
the  faid  Procefs  or  Protefles  only  —     J 

Every  Prifoner  charged  upon  any  Execution  or  Executions') 
out  of  the  Court  of  Confcience  held   within  the  faid  I 
Town  Ihall  pay  to  the  faid  Keeper  upon  his  Difcharge  |    °  '     ^ 
from  the  faid  Elxecution  or  Executions  —     J 

Every  Prifoner  on   any    Criminal    Account   or   Accounts^ 

whatfoever  fliall  pay   unto   the  faid  Keeper  upon  his  >   o  :   13 
Difcharge  only  —  —  —J 

Every  Perfon  appearing  upon  a  Recognizance  at  the  Aflizes~| 
and  afterwards   tried   upon  any  Indiftment  or  Indiift-  I 
ments  whatfoever  and  Ihall  be  committed  thereon  Ihall 
pay  to  tie  faid  Keeper  upon  his  Difcharge  —    J 


}-o 


S.     D. 


Every 


^24  NEWCASTLE.        Northern  Circuit. 

£.     s.    D. 

uaoiT 

-   5°  = 


Every  Prifoner  fliall  pay  to  the  Turnkey  of  the  faid  Gaol 

•       T  ?■    o  :     1   :  o 

CASTLE.  or  Prifon  upon  his  Difcharge  — 


Confirmed  by  us 

Henry  Reay         Mayor 
John    Isaacson     Recorder 
Richard  Ridley        -i 
W"    Ellison  1 

Francis  Rudston        ^Aldermen 
Nathanael  Clayton 
Stephen  Coulson 

We  do  approve  of  this  Table  of  Fees  July  27.   1730 

FRANCIS    PAGE  ^ 

JOHN  FORTESCUE  A   \^"  ^' 


THERE  ARE  also  at  NEWCASTLE 

A  BRIDEWELL.     A  room  for  men  j  another  for  women.     No 
yard  :  no  water.     Prifoners  at  work. 

1775,  Jan.     8,     Prifoners    i, 

1776,  Jan.  15,       -       -       5. 

A    SMALL   GAOL,    consisting    of  three   clofe   dirty    rooms. 
No  court-yard  :  no  water. 

1775,  J'"''-    ^J     Prifoners    2,      . 

1776,  Jan.  15,       -       -       I. 

COUNTY 


Northern  Circuit.     NORTHUMBERLAND.  425 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     MORPETH. 


GAOLER,     John  Kent. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^^o  :   I2  :  6, 
Felons,         1:3:0. 
Tranfports,  only  Expenfes, 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none  but  on  applying  to  Juftices. 
Felons,     two  pence    a    day    each,     paid 
mce  a  month. 
Garnifh,        ^^o  :  i   :  4. 

Number  of  -      -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  March  22,       8     -  -       8, 

1775,  Jan.        9,       6     -  -       7, 

1776,  Jan,       16,       9     -  -     II. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Nichol/on. 

Duty— Sunday,  Tuefday,  Friday, 

Salary,  ;^io,  and  ^^5   for  condemned  Felons  i  lately  raifed 
to  £30- 
SURGEON,     Mr.  Leidman. 

Salary,  none:  he  makes  a  Bill, 


lii  MORPETH. 


426  NORTHUMBERLAND.     Northern  Circuit. 


MORPETH. 

Remarks.  ONLY  one  Court-yard,  which  is  for  Debtors.  Some  commo- 
dious rooms  have  been  lately  built  for  them;  the  old  ones  being 
out  of  repair. — Felons  are  always  locked  within  doors.  In  the 
Women's  room  I  faw  (Jan.  1776)  two ;  who,  the  Gaoler  faid,  were 
caft  for  Tranfportation ;  one  in  Sep.  1773,  the  other  in  Nov.  1774. 
The  term  of  their  punilliment  was  lengthened  by  all  this  Time. 

Of  the  other  two  rooms,  generally  appropriated  to  Men-felons, 
one  is  a  Day-room,  the  other  an  offenfive  Dungeon.  In  the  latter 
were  three  Tranfports,  who  upon/u/picion  o(  intending  an  Efcape  were 
chained  to  the  floor. — They  have  not  the  King's  allowance  of  2s.  6d. 
a  week. 

Gaol-delivery  once  a  year.  AfTize  held  at  Ne-Lvcaftle,  whither 
Prifoners  are  conveyed ;  and  men  and  women  confined  together, 
commonly  a  whole  week,  in  a  dirty  damp  Dungeon  down  fix  fteps  in 
the  Old  Caftle. 

The  County  has  for  fome  years  paid  the  Gaoler's  Fees  for  acquit- 
ted Prifoners,  if  poor :  and  cloathed  fuch  Tranfports  as  were  quite 
indigent. 

The  Debtors  Court-yard  fhould  be  allotted  to  Felons :  and  one 
for  Debtors  might  be  taken  from  the  Gaoler's  fpacious  Garden. 

Clauses  of  Ad  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.  The 
following  Table  of  Fees  is  hung  up  in  a  frame  and  glazed. 

TABLE 


Northern  Circuit.     NORTHUMBERLAND.  427 

TABLE    OF    FEES    &c.    Settled  and  Allowed   to  be  due     morpeth. 
to  the  Keeper  of  his  Majefty's  Gaol  at  Morpeth— hj  the  Juftices 
— at  the  Quarter  Seflions— held — at  Hexham      ITS9' 

Commitment  Fees. 
Every  Debtor  ;^o  :   i  :  4        Every  Felon  £0  :  z  :  i 

Chamber-Rents. 

£.      S.     D. 

To  the  room  called  the  Green  Room  with  one  bed  in  it  and  i 

if  only  one  perfon  will  have  it  to  himfelf,  to  pay  weekly  j   °  •     2  .  o 
If  two  Perfons  therein  to  pay  each  —  —         0:1:6 


To  the  room  called  Burton's  Room  having  two  beds,  and  "J 

the  Gaoler  finding  bedding  and  linnen,  each  perfon  to  >  o  : 
pay  weekly  —  —  —       J 

But  if  one  will  have  a  bed  is  to  pay        —  —  o  : 


To  the  little  Green  Room  having  one  bed  and  if  one  perfon  •, 

o  :     7:0 


perion  1 


will  have  it  to  himfelf  he  is  to  pay  weekly 
If  two  therein  only  to  pay  each  —  —  0:1:6 

The  Gaoler  finding  good  and  wholefome  bedding 

To  the  room  called  the  Fencing  Room  with  three  beds  and  ■> 

the  Gaoler  finding  wholefome  linen  each  perfon  to  pay  >   o  :     1:0 


o 


To  the  little  room  called  Mrs.  Carr's  Room  the  Gaoler  T 

t   °  • 

finding  beds  and  linen  each  perfon  is  to  pay  weekly      j 

If  the  Prifoner  finds  the  bedding  —  —  0:0:6 

To  a  room  called  Mr.  Johnfon's  Room;    being  on  the") 

fame  floor,  the  Gaoler  finding  bed  and   linen  each  r   o  :     1:0 
perfon  to  pay  —  —  —         -^ 

If  they  find  their  own  beddbg,  only  —  —  0:0:6 

I  i  i  2  There 


428  NORTHUMBERLAND.     Northern  Circuit. 

C    s.    D. 

ich) 

to:     0:0 


MORPETH.  There  is  a  large  room  that  Prifoners  pay  nothing  for,  which 

holds  a  great  many  beds,  called  the  Middle  Tower 


Every  Z)i'^/or  upon  his  Difcharge  to  pay  to  the  Gaoler    —        o  :  10  :  2 
To  the  Turnkey  —  —  —0:1:0 

Every  Felon  on  his  Difcharge  —  —  —        0:18:4. 

To  the  Turnkey  ~  —  —        0:2:0 

Jn° .  Orde 
Step.  Watson 
W".  Ward. 


COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at    MORPETH. 

The  three  Rooms  are  clofe  and  dirty.  Over  the  way  is  a  large 
room  which  is  a  warehoufe  and  work-fhop :  and  above  it  another 
work-fliop.  The  Keeper,  a  Clothier,  employs  his  Prifoners  ;  the 
Men  and  Boys  from  eight  o'Clock  to  four  at  two  ftiillings  a  week  : 
Women  from  eight  to  five  at  one  fliilling  and  fix  pence  a  week.  He 
gives  them  alfo  firing.  No  County  Allowance. — His  Salary  /30 : 
no  Fees. 

^775j     J^"-     9>     Prifoners  2, 
1776,     Jan.   16,     -     -     -     8. 


BERWICK. 


Northern  Circuit.     BERWICK  upon  TWEED.  429 

BERWICK*. 


GAOLER,     John  Richard/on. 
Salary,  ;^i6. 
Fees,     Debtors,     Freemen 


1 


none. 
Felons, 

Debtors,  not  free,    ^0:1:6. 

Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  Freemen,  four  pence  a  day. 

Ditto,      not  free,  1  ,    ,  ^  , 

S-  two  pence  halfpenny  a  day, 

Garnifli,       ^^0:1:0. 

Number  of      -       -         Debtors.         Felons  &c, 
1776,     Jan.       17,  5     -       -       2. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,       None;  but  on  application  to  the  Magiftrates. 

THIS  GAOL  is  part  of  the  grand  Town-Hall,  which  was  built  Remarks. 
in  1754,  and  has  a  fine  Steeple  :  the  only  one  in  the  Town.  The 
rooms  on  the  ground  floor  are  damp  and  Prifoners  are  not  put  into 
them,  but  over  the  Hall,  where  is  a  long  room,  or  gallery,  and 
feven  other  rooms,  fizeable,  but  dirty.  No  court-yard :  no  water. 
Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.  The  Gaoler 
keeps  a  Public-houfe,  diftant.  He  told  me  he  went  to  the  Gaol 
thrice  a  day  ;  at  nine,  one,  and  eight. 

*  This  place,  though  a  diftinft  }urifdiftion,  in  none  of  the  Circuits,  is  inferted 
here,  rather  than  at  the  end  of  the  Englilh  and  Welch  Counties,  becaufe  its  fituation 
gives  it  a  natural  conneftion  with  the  laft-mentioned  Countjr,  and  it  falls  in  here  in 
the  order  of  my  journey  through  the  northern  part  of  the  kingdom. 

COUNTY 


430  CUMBERLAND.     Northern  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at    CARLISLE. 

GAOLER,     Brathwaite  Atkinjon. 
Salar)',  ^fii. 
Fees,     Debtors, 


irs,7 


Felons,    •    '"^  " 
Tranfports,  {^  i  each  to  Whitehaven. 
Licence  for  Beer.     The  Tap  let. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  on  applying    to    the    Juftices    fome 

obtain    a    fhilling     a    week,    fome 
nine  pence. 
Felons,     nine  pence  a  week  before  conviftion  ; 
a  fhilling  after, 

Garnifli,         ^o  :   i  :  o. 

Number  of  -         -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 
1774,  March  23,         49     "  "       4> 
1776,  Jan.      20,         a9     -  -      7, 
Sep.       19,         15     -  -       2. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Parish. 

Duty — Sunday,  Wednefday,  Friday;    firfl:  Sunday   in   the 

Month,  Sermon. 
Salary,  ^^20. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Losh. 

Salary,    f^i  :  2:0    for  Attendance.      Medicines    paid    for 
by  Bill. 

CARLISLE. 


Northern  Circuit.     CUMBERLAND.  43^ 


CARLISLE. 

THE  COURT  fpacious,    eighty-five  yards  by  thirty-fixj    but    Remarks. 
common  to  all  Prifoners.     In  it  a  Chapel,  built,  by  the  date  upon 
it>   1734-     Five  rooms  for  Mafter's-fide  Debtors;  and  as  many  on 

t- 

the  Common-fide.  Mofl  of  the  latter  are  large,  but  have  windows 
to  the  ftreet.  As  there  are  fo  many  rooms,  the  not  feparating  men 
and  women  is  inexcufable. 

The  Wards  for  Felons  are  two  rooms  down  a  flep  or  two  :  dark 
and  dirty.  One  of  them,  the  Day-room,  has  a  window  to  the  ftreet ; 
through  which  Spirituous  Liquors  and  Tools  for  Mifchief  may  be 
eafily  conveyed  :  but  the  laft  time  I  faw  it,  there  was  a  fhutter  and 
padlock  to  it.  The  Night-room  is  only  eleven  feet  by  nine.  No 
Infirmary.  Tranfports  have  not  the  King's  allowance  of  is.  6d. 
a  week.  Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 
Gaol-Del  iveiy  once  a  year. 

The  Gaol-Fever,  which  forne  years  ago  carried  off  many  of  the 
Prifoners,  did  not  deter  Mr.  Farijh  from  vifiting  the  fick  every  day. 

Few  Gaols  have  fo  many  convenient  rooms  for  Common-fide 
Debtors.  It  is  the  more  remarkable  here,  becaufe  there  is  no  'Table 
figned  by  the  Magiftrates  to  particularize  the  Free  Wards.  Some 
Gaolers  avail  themfelves  of  fuch  a  Circumftance,  and  demand  rent  for 
rooms  which  were  undoubtedly  defigned  for  Common-fide  Prifoners. 


CARLISLE 


432  CUMBERLAND.     Northern  Circuit. 

CARLISLE      CITY     GAOL, 

Over  the  Scotch-Gate.  Only  one  ruinous  room  about  twenty- 
feet  fquare ;  with  a  window  four  feet  by  one  and  a  half.  No  allow- 
ance but  a  very  fmall  quantity  of  peat  taken  as  a  toll  upon  that  com- 
modity, and  water  brought  twice  a  day. 

I  WAS  told  that  many  a  poor  Traveller  from  the  North  who  by 
fome  Calamity  had  contrafted  an  unavoidable  debt  of  forty  (hillings, 
has  been  confined  at  a  diftance  from  his  Friends  in  this  Prilbn  where 
there  is  no  Provifion,  nor  any  means  of  procuring  it. 

1776,     Jan.  20,.    Debtors  3, 
Sep.  19,       -       -     I. 

COUNTY  BRIDEWELL  at  COCKERMOUTM 

Is  behind  the  Keeper's  Houfe,  and  part  of  it  his  Freehold.  A 
room  on  the  ground-floor,  the  Strong  Room.  Up  flairs  another 
room ;  and  a  clofet  called  the  Lunatic  Room.  All  out  of  repair,  and 
infecure :  and  fo  is  the  Court-yard.  No  allowance :  no  flraw :  no 
water.     Keeper's  Salary  or  Rent  ;^20 :  no  Fees. 

1776,     Sep.  18,     Prifoners  none. 

WHITEHAVEN    TOWN    GAOL 

Is  part  of  the  Work-houfe.  Two  Rooms  up  flairs  ;  and  a  Dun- 
geon in  which  they  ufed  to  confine  Tranfports  brought  hither  to  be 
fliipped.     All  dirty  and  offenfive, 

1776,    Sep.  18,    Prifoners  none. 

COUNTY 


Northern  Circuit.      WESTMORLAND.  433 


COUNTY    GAOL     at    APPLEBY. 


GAOLER,     Benjamin  Ainjley. 

Salary-,  ;^io.     (See  Remarks.) 
Fees,     Debtors, ' 


>rs,7 
s,    i   ^- 


telons, 

Tranfports,  a  Ihilling  a  mile  each  to  Whitehaven, 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     four  pence  a  day  each. 
Garnifh,  ;^o  :  i  :  o. 

Nunnber  of  -       -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 
1774,  March  24,       7     "  "       4> 
1776,  Jan.       22,       3     -  -       o> 
Sep.      i9>       3     -  -       3- 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 
SURGEON,       None. 

THIS  GAOL  was  built  by  the  County.     The  Earl  oUhdnet  is    Remarks. 
Hereditary  Sheriff,  and  pays  the  Gaoler  his  Salary.     Happily  for  the 
Prifoners  in  a  Gaol  fo  circumftanced,  the  prefent  Gaoler  is  a  man  of 
temper  and  humanity. 

At  page  41  I  complained  of  this  Prifon  being  within  reach  of 
Floods:  but  in  Jan.  1776  there  was  a  new  Building  on  the  higheft 
part  of  the  Yard.  It  confifts  of  four  vaulted  Wards  for  Felons,  fifteen 
feet  by  thirteen ;  a  window  in  each,  but  no  chimney :  and  over  them 
three  good  rooms  with  chimneys,  for  Debtors. 

Gaol-delivery  once  a  year. — No  Table  of  Fees. 

Kkk  COUNTY 


434  WESTMORLAND.       Northern  Circuit. 

COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 

APPLEBY.  Two  rooms :  each  has  a  fmall  window  into  a  flable  t 
fubjeft  to  floods, — No  allowance  but  ftraw.  Keeper's  Sala- 
ry ^8  :  no  Fees. 

1776.     Jan.  22,     No  Prifoners. 
Sep.  19,     No  Prifoners. 

KENDAL.  Only  one  roona  for  Men  and  Women  eighteen  feet 
by  twelve  and  a  half,  with  one  window  about  two  feet  fquare : 
no  chin:iney  :  no  yard :  no  water :  no  fewer.  The  Keeper 
has  a  garden  :  Salary  ^6:10:  no  Fees. — The  Town 
fometimes  commits  Prifoners  hither  and  allows  them  fix 
pence  a  day  5  the  County,  four  pence. 

1776,     Jan.    23,     Prifoners  3,  two  Men,  one  Woman.. 
Sept.  18,      _     -     -         I  Deferter. 

KENDAL      TOWN    GAOL. 

Only  two  Dungeons,  called  Black  Holes :  fourteen  fteps  under 
ground.  No  yard  :  no  water :  no  ftraw.  Allowance  fix  pence  a  day. 
The  two  Town  Sergeants  keep  the  Prifon  by  turns  ;  a  week  each. 

I  HAVE  not  cenfured  the  management  of  any  Work-houfes  (thougli 
highly  deferving  it)  becaufe  foreign  to  my  fubjeft.  But  I  will  take 
the  liberty  to  extol  the  oeconomy,  induftry  and  cleanlinefs  of  the 
Kendal  Work-houfe.  It  makes  fome  amends  for  the  inconvenience  of 
the  Town  Gaol,  which  occafions  the  fending  Town-Prifoners  to  the 
County  Bridewell  as  above. 

1776,  Jan.  23,    No  Prifoners. 

COUNTY 


Northern  Circuit.         LANCASHIRE.  435 

COUNTY  GAOL,     LANCASTER  CASTLE. 

GAOLER,     John  Dane. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,    ;^o  :     8  :  o. 
Felons,         o  :  13  :  4. 
Tranfports,    ;^5  each.     (See  Remarks.) 
Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  7   one  fliilling   each    on    Saturday 
Felons,   3    morning. 

Garnifh,         Debtors,     £0  :  y  :  1, 
Felons,  0:2:6. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 

1774,  March  25,       74       -       13, 

1775,  Nov.     20,       48       -       17, 

1776,  Sep.      17,       32       -       19. 

CHAPLAIN,  Rev.  Mr.  Spicer -,  now  Rev.  Mr.  Watjon. 
Duty  — -Sunday  twice j  Wednefday  and  Friday  once. 
Salary,  ^50.     (See  Remarks.) 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Dixon. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 

THE  CASTLE- YARD  is  fpacious.     Mafter's-fide  Debtors  have     Remarks. 
many  apartments.  One  of  them  which  they  call  the  Oven,  is  faid  to  have 
been  ufed  as  fuch  in  the  time  of  John  of  Gaunt  Duke  of  Lancafter  : 
the  diameter  twenty-four  feet,  the  height,  now,  that  of  an  ordinary 

K  k  k  2  room. 


436  LANCASHIRE.         Northern  Circuit. 

LAN-       room.     The  Free  Ward  for  Debtors   is  large  but  dark.     Thefe,  as 

CASTER.     ^yg,]j  ^g  thofe  of  the  Mafter's-fide,  are  allowed  to  walk  and  work 

(fpin,  knit  &c.)  in  the  Crown  and  Shire  Halls.     Over  the  Judge's 

Bench  in  the  latter  is  written  this  text  j  "  Let  Judgment  run  down  as 

waters,  and  Righteonjnejs  as  a  mighty  ftream." 

Petty  offenders  are  fomctimes  fent  hither,  becaufe  the  Bride- 
wells are  diftant.  There  is  a  large  Room  for  them  near  the  Gate  j 
and  they  are,  as  they  Ihould  be,  kept  feparate  from  Felons. 

Men  and  Women-felons  have  their  Day-rooms  apart,  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  Yard.  Women  fleep  in  tlieir  Day-room. — Men  have 
for  their  Night-rooms  two  vaulted  Cells.  One  of  tliem,  the  Low 
Dungeon,  is  ten  fteps  under  ground,  twenty-one  feet  by  nine,  ex- 
tremely clofe,  dark,  and  unwholefome  •■,  fo  very  hot  even  in  Winter, 
that  coming  from  it  in  the  morning  into  the  cold  air  muft  be  perni- 
cious. Their  other  Cell,  the  High  Dungeon,  is  larger  but  clofc  and 
offenfive,  though  not  under  ground. 

I  ONCE  faw  three  Felons  fick:  but  the  Recorder,  Mr.  Feutcn, 
gave  immediate  orders  for  their  relief  by  better  nourilliment 
&c.  and  they  foon  recovered.  No  Infirmary.  I'ranjports  have 
not  the  King's  allowance  of  2s.  6d.  a  week.  When  Prifoners  are 
convifted  at  Trefton  or  Manchejler,  and  from  thence  brought  hither, 
Mr.  Dane  has  a  Ihilling  a  mile  Conduft-Money  for  each. 

Part  of  the  Caftle-yard  is  an  inclofed  Bowling-Green. 

One  of  the  rooms  for  Debtors  is  called  the  ^inkers  Room  ;  becaufe> 
it  is  faid,  when  thofe  people  were  fo  cruelly  perfecuted  in  the  laft 
Century,  vaft  numbers  of  them  were  confined  in  it. 

If  the  large  Stable  which  is  not  much  ufed,  and  the  great  Room 
vmder  the  Sliire-Hall  (in  -which  I  faw  only  one  poor  Limatic  j  wha 

had 


Northern  Circuit.         LANCASHIRE.  437 

had  been  there  many  years,  and  is  fince  dead)  were  converted  into        l  a  n- 
Night-rooms  for  Felons,  one  fmall  room  for  eachi  and  an  Infirmary     caster. 
was  built,  this  would  be  a  good  Gaol.     From  Mr.  Fenton's  humanity, 
and  the  regard  that  is  juftly  paid  him,  I  cannot  but  hope  for  fome  of 
rhefe  Improvements. 

The  Chaplain's  Salary  ^^50  is — from  the  County  ^^36— from  the 
Dutchy  £4. — from  a  Charity  ^f  to. 

I  WILL  give  a  Copy  of  the  Table  of  Fees,  though  it  is  not  authen- 
tic :  and  of  a  Paper  in  the  Shire-Hall  containing  a  Lift  of  Donations  j 
though  imperfedt,  and  not  vouched  by  any  Authority. 


Fees  taken  by  the  Gaoler  oi Lancafter  Cafile. 
(viz) 

C.     S.    D 

For  every  Debtor's  Difcharge  when  by  a  Super/eJeas       —         o  :     S  :  o 
On  a   Common  Difcharge  8s.    and   2S.    &    6d.    for    the  •) 

Sheriff's  Certificate  —  —         j        '  ' 

When  a  Debtor  is  furrendered  in  Difcharge  of  his  Bail  o  :     2:4 

When  a  Debtor  is  charged  \yith  a  Declaration  2S.   &  4d  -\ 

with  the  Rule  to  take  the  Prifoner  to  the  Bar  and  ?•   o  :     4:8 
2S.  &  4d.  with  the  Remandato  —  —        J 

When  a  Debtor  takes  the  Benefit  of  the   Infolvent   Ad    is.-. 

and  2S.  &c  4d.  to  bring  the  Prifoner  to  the  Bar  by  rule  Co:     5:8 
and  2s.  &  4d.  for  the  Sheriff's  Certificate        —  J 

Fees  for  all  Crown  Prifoners  —  —  o  :    iS 


o 


Lately  altered  to  —  —  0:13:4 

John  Dane     Gaoler,. 

CHARITY 


438 


LANCASHIRE. 


Northern  Circuit. 


L  A  N- 
CASTER. 


CHARITY  LEGACIES  to  the  debtor  prisoners  in 
Lancafter  Caftle  1770 


From  Mrs.  Henrietta  Rigifs  Executors  to  twelve  of  the 
moil  neceflitous  and  well  behaved  Prifoners  five  (hillings 
each  paid  by  Doftor  Fenton  and  the  Mayor  of  Lancafter 
about  the  firft  day  of  March  every  year  — 

From  Mrs,  Langton  paid  by  Laicrence  Ra=wftborn  Efq.  eachT 
Affize  —  —  —  —       3 

From  Sir  Thomas  Gerrard  of  Gart/iuood  paid  by  Mr.  Starkie  j 
due  about  the  firft  of  Auguft  —  —        J 

Paid  under  a  Decree  of  the  Court  of  Chancery  of  this' 
County  out  of  an  Eilate  in  Skermi/dale  called  Sand  late 
belonging  to  Peter  Latham  deceafed  diftributed  at 
ever)'  Auguft  Affize,  by  the  Truftees  of  the  faid  Peter 
Latham  or  their  order  paid  by  Mr.  Ratcliffe  of  Ormf- 
kirk  Attorney  at  Law  —  — 

By  the  Will  of  William  Edmunfton  of  Outhtuaite  one  pound 
fifteen  fhillings  yearly  or  half  the  Rent  of  Land  in 
Scotforth  purchafed  by  the  money  left  for  fuch  purpofe 
by  the  faid  Will,  paid  by  the  Treafurer  of  the  County 
in  bread  —  —  — 

From  Mrs.  Abigail Rigby^  Executors  paid  by  DoSor  Fenton') 
and  the  Mayor  of  Lancafter  every  St.  Thomas's  Day     3 

[Q^y.  Jebfon's  Legacy.]         (So  the  Paper.) 


8  : 


[►6 


15 


COUNTY 


Northern  Circuit.        LANCASHIRE. 


439 


COUNTY       BRIDEWELLS. 


PRESTON.  This  Prifon  a  little  diftant  from  the  Town  was 
a  Friary.  On  the  ground-floor  is  a  large  Room,  in  which  are 
eleven  Clofets,  called  Boxes,  to  deep  in  -,  and  another  Room, 
the  Dungeofj.  Over  theie  are  a  large  Working-room  for  Men, 
and  a  lefs  for  Women.  All  the  rooms  are  dirty,  and  the 
Prifon  out  of  repair. — A  Court-yard  in  front  (the  Prifoners 
have  no  ufe  of  it)  and  a  Ipacious  Garden  backwards  for  the 
Keeper. 

These  Prifoners  have  the  other  Moiety  of  William 
Edmunfton\  Legacy  mentioned  in  the  Lift  at  Lancafter  Caftle. 
The  Keeper  receives  it  for  them.  No  water  acceffible  to 
Prifoners  :  no  allowance.  Keeper's  Salary  0iQ :  Fees,  from 
thofe  tried  at  Seffions  los.  6d.  from  others  7  s.  no  Table. 

1774,  March  26,     Prifoners   8, 

1775,  Nov.     18,       -       -     19, 

1776,  Sep.      16,       -       -     II. 


MANCHESTER.  Rebuilt  as  -per  date,  in  the  year  1774. 
Separate  Court-yards  and  Apartments  for  Men  and  Women, 
The  former  have  Work-rooms,  over  which  are  Chambers. 
Their  Night-rooms  or  Dungeons,  in  a  palTage  or  long  room 

forty- 


440  LANCASHIRE.         Northern  Circuit. 

BRIDE-  forty-five  feet  by  fix  are  clofe ;  eleven  feet  by  eight ;  eleven 

Wl-LLS  &c.  ,  ,  ,     ,    ■ 

fteps  below  the  yard ;  but  not  properly  under  ground,  being 

on  the  declivity  of  a  hill. — Women   have  three  rooms  on  the 

ground-floor,   and   three   chambers  :    here  is  alfo  a  dungeon, 

down  nine  fteps,  fourteen  feet  by  thirteen  ;  but  women  are  not 

put  there.     The  iron  grated  Door  into  each  Court  has  faften- 

ings    of  a   contrivance    fingularly   curious.      No    allowance. 

Keeper's  Salary  lately  raifed  from  £2^  to  /^6o  in  lieu  of  Fees. 

1774,  Nov.     5,     Prifoners  21, 

1775,  Nov.  16,       -       -        6, 

1776,  Sep.    15,       -       -       12. 


LIVERPOOL    BOROUGH-GAOL. 

Out  of  repair.  Apartments  clofe  and  dirty.  Seven  clofe  Dun- 
geons ten  fteps  under  ground  ;  each  fix  feet  and  a  half  by  five  feet 
nine  inches,  and  fix  feet  high.  Three  Prifoners  are  locked  up 
in  each  of  them  at  night.  There  is  another  Dungeon,  larger,  but 
not  fecure.  No  Infirmary.  The  Keeper  told  me  in  Nov.  1775, 
that  after  I  was  there  laft  year  and  faid  his  Prifoners  were  in  danger 
of  the  Gaol-Fever,  twenty-eight  of  them  had  been  ill  of  it  at  one 
time.  What  led  me  to  think  fo  was,  the  ofFenfivenefs  of  the  Dun- 
geons, and  the  number  of  Prifoners.  The  Prifon  is  furrounded  with 
other  buildings,  and  cannot  be  made  healthy  and  convenient. — 
Allowance  in  common  on  Sunday,  bread  4s.  beef  and  broth  about 
6  s.  Firing  from  Oftober  to  May.  Gaoler,  Rofendale  Allen, 
Sergeant  at  Mace,  pays  the  Widow  of  the  late  Gaoler  ^£20  a  year; 

and 


Northern  Circuit.         LANCASHIRE.  441 

and  puts  in  a  Deputy  who  pays  him  ^6^  a  year.  Fees,  Debtors  is. 
Felons  &c.  4s.  no  Table.  Chaplain,  Duty— Tuefday  and  Friday  : 
Salary  ^10. — Claufes  of  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

Felons   are  generally  lent  to  Lancajier  Cajile :  the  Prifoners  kept 
here  are  for  the  moft  part  Debtors. 

I  HEAR  the  Corporation  intend  to  build  a  new  Gaol. 

1774,  Nov.    7,     Prifoners  58, 

1775,  Nov.  23,       -       -      60. 


WARRINGTON    TOWN    BRIDEWELL. 


Two  rooms  in  the  Work-houfe  Yard  5  one  about  nine  feet  fquare, 
with  bedftead  and  ftraw ;  no  window  :  the  other  about  nine  feet  by 
five,  with  an  aperture  for  air  eighteen  inches  by  four.  No  employ- 
ment. Allowance  for  diet,  the  fame  as  the  Poor,  who,  by  their 
appearance,  feem  to  have  a  humane  attention  paid  to  them.  Keeper, 
no  Salary  for  the  Bridewell :  no  Fees :  is  Mafter  of  the  Work-houfe. 


1777,    March  20,    No  Prifoners. 


Lll  COUNTY 


442  CHESHIRE.  Chester  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL,     CHESTER    CASTLE. 

GAOLER,  Faithful  Thomas;  he  holds  it  of  the  Conftable 
George  Noffiter  the  King's  Patentee,  to  whom  he 
pays  Rent  £^o  a  year. 

Salary,  ;^i8  :  5  :  o  from  the  Exchequer. 

Fees,     Debtors,  7 

Felons,   3   ^-'     '  "  " 

Tranfports,  ^5  each,  and^i  for  Expenfes. 

Licence,  for  Beer  and  Wine. 


PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  7  a  twelve-penny  loaf  each  on  Friday 
Felons,    3  morning  (weight inFeb.i']'] ^,6-^lb.). 
Garnifh,        Debtors,     £0:2:6. 

Number  of      -       -     Debtors,  Felons  &c. 

1774,  March  29,      22  -       24, 
June    24,      23  -       12, 

1775,  Feb.       I,        9  -       15, 
Nov.    25,      11  -         6, 

1776,  Sep.      14,        7  -       12. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Bofwel. 

Duty  — Only  to  condemned  Felons. 
Salary,  ;C'°' 

On  Sunday  a  Debtor  reads  Prayers,  and,  commonly, 
a  Sermon,  for  which  the  County  allows  ^2  a  year. 

SURGEON,  Nonej  but  on  applying  to  a  Juftice. 

CHESTER 


Chester  Circuit.  CHESHIRE.  44^ 


CHESTER      CASTLE 

IS  the  Property  of  the  king.  The  firft  room  is  a  Hall  or  Chapel :  Remarks. 
there  are  two  ftaircafes  leading  up  from  it  to  four  rooms  for  Mafter's- 
fide  Debtors.  Down  eighteen  fteps  is  a  fmall  Court-yard,  which 
was  common  to  Debtors  and  Felons.  It  is  lately  divided,  but  the 
high  clofe  pales  which  feparate  the  two  Courts,  now  fo  very  fmall, 
deprive  both  Debtors  and  Felons  of  the  benefit  of  frefli  air.  The 
former  in  their  free  ward,  the  Popes  Kitchen ;  the  latter  in  their 
day-room,  the  King's  Kitchen.  Both  thefe  are  fix  fteps  below  the 
Yard :  each  of  them  about  thirty-five  feet  by  twenty-two.  Near  the 
former  is  the  Condemned  Room.  Under  the  King's  Kitchen  is  the 
King's. Cellar ;  quite  ufelefs.  Under  the  Pope's  Kitchen  is  a  dark 
Room  or  PafTage  twenty-four  feet  by  ten :  to  it  you  defcend  twenty- 
one  fteps  from  the  Yard.  On  one  fide  of  it  are  fix  Cells  (Stalls)^ 
each  about  feven  feet  and  a  half  by  three  and  a  half,  with  a  barrack- 
bedftead,  and  a  fmall  aperture  over  the  door.  In  each  of  thefe  are 
locked  up  at  night,  fometimes  three  or  four  Felons.  No  window : 
not  a  breath  of  frefli  air :  only  an  aperture  with  a  grate  in  the 
ceiling  of  the  PafTage,  into  the  Pope's  Kitchen  above.  They  pitch 
thefe  Dungeons  three  or  four  times  a  year  :  when  I  was  in  one  of 
them,  I  ordered  the  door  to  be  fhut;  and  my  fituation  brought  to 
mind  what  I  had  heard  of  the  Black  Hole  at  Calcutta. 

The  Felons  Day-room  is  not  fecure.  They  efcaped  in  1775 
by  breaking  through  the  flight  floor  into  the  King's  Cellar  below ; 
and  through  the  decayed  walls  of  that  they  made  their  way  down  the 
hill.     The  Keeper,  who  is  careful  and  humane,  was  not  blameahle. 

L  1 1  2  No 


444 


'CHESHIRE.  •        Chester  Circuit. 


CHESTER         No  Infinnary  :  no  ftraw:  Tranfports  have  not  the  King's  allow- 
CASTLE.     ^^(.Q  of  2s.  6d.  a  week.     Of  the  feven  Debtors  whom  I  faw  laft,  five 
were  imprifoned  by  Exchequer  Writs*. 

A      TABLE      OF       FEES 

To  be  taken  by  the  Conftable  of  the  Caftle — as  the  County  Gaol — 
fettled — in  the — Quarter  SefTjons— at  Namptwich-—! ^th  July 
1729  and  afterwards  confirmed— by  his  Majcfty's  Chief  Juftice 
of  Chefter  and  Judge  of  Aflize — and  Juftices  of  the  Peace— 
in  purfuance  of  a  late  A<fl— for  the  Relief  of  Debtors  &c. 

£.    S.     D. 

Commitment  Fee,  for  every  Prifoner  —  —  0:8:2 

Chamber  Rent,  Prifoner  finding  his  own  bedding /fr  week  0:1:0 

Bedding /f(- week  if  found  by  the  Conftable  —  0:1:0 

Difcharging  Fee  —  —  —  0:1:0 

To  the  Turnkey  on  Difcharge  —  —  0:0:6 

For  a  Copy  of  every  Commitment  —  —  0:1:0 

For  Attendance  into  Court  with  every  Prifoner    brought? 

there  by  Rule  of  Court  —  —    J        '       ■ 

For  the  Stone  Parlour,  Bed  and  Furniture  if  required /a- week  0:5:0 

For  every  Felon  committed  per  week  —  —  0:0:6 

Signed  by  eight  Juftices. 

Confirmed  by   J.  WILLES    Sep,  13.   1729. 

•  I  HAVE  in  two  of  my  vifits  feen  the  places  of  confinement  for  Deferters  in  this 

Caftle,  who  are  not  under  the  care  of  the  Gaoler,  but  of  the  Invalids  of  the  Garrifon. 

They  are  bad  unhealthy  Cells  ;  often  produAive  of  the  Gaol-Fever.     An   Olficer  at 

Worcefter  informed  me,  that  having  fent  a  Serjeant  and  two  Men  for  two  Deferters 

lodged  here,  three  of  them  died  a  few  days  after  they  came  to  their  quarters,  and  he 

had  them  buried  privately,  without  military  honour?,  to  the  furprize  of  the  Soldiers, 

who  knew  not  tlie  reafon. 

We 


Chester  Circuit.  CHESHIRE. 


445 


We  whofe  names  are  fubfcribed  his  Majefty's  Juftices  of  the  Peace     Chester 
do  approve  the  above  Table  of  Fees   and  the  additional  Fee  of    castle, 
fix  peace  per  week.     Witnefs  our  Hands  April  7.   1730. 
Signed  by  five  Juftices  *. 

A  LIST— of  all  GIFTS  legacies  &c.— upon  the  beft  Examination 
—  given  for  the  Benefit  — of  poor  Prifoners  — within  — the 
Caftle  of  Cbefier. 

lAr.JohnNorney — Citizen  and  Merchant-Taylor  of  London— 'h-^  hisWill 

loth  Oftober  1615  left— fix  ftiillings  and  eight  pence  to  be  diftributed 
on  Candlemas  yearly  for  ever  by  the  Mayor  &c.-— to  the  poor  Prifon- 
ers— in  Money  or  Bread. 

Va!e?iiine  Broughton-—of  Chejier  Alderman-— by  his  Will  i6th  jane  1603 
left— thirteen  fhillings  and  four  pence  to  be  diftributed  at  Michael- 
masand  Lady-day  yearly  for  ever  by  the  Mayor---to  the  Prifoners- in 
the  Caftle— -by  equal  portions,  or  twenty  days  after. 

The  above    written     Table    of   Fees— and   Lift— -of  Gifts— -are" 
true  Copies—  Tho  Tagg     CL  Pads. 

RULES  to  be  obferved  within  the  Gaol  of  the  Caftle  of  Chefter. 

ift.  ALL  Prifoners  to  behave — refpeftfuUy  to  Keeper— Whoever — 
ftrike  or  affault  any— to  be  punifned  by  a  Juftice  at  difcretion. 

2,  No    Curfing  or   Swearing— No  Gaming  in  the   Hall     nor   in 

private. 

3.  Prisoners  to  retire  to  their  refpe£i:ive  rooms— from  Lady-day 

to  Michaelmas  at  nine— from  Michaelmas  to  Lady-day  at 
eight— to  be  let  out  in_  morning— Lady-day  to  Michaelmas 
at  fix— Michaelmas  to-  Lady-day  at  eight. 

*  The  Table  having  hung  againft  a  damp  wall,  the  Juftices  Names  are  not  legible. 

4.  Friends 


446  CHESHIRE.  Chester  Circuit. 

■CHESTER     4.    Friends  or  Relations— to  bring  neceflariesj- —being— fearched 
CASTLE.  £-Qj.  inftruments  if  required — Not  to  flay  long — without  leave, 

except  in— ficknefs — nor  after  the  hours  of  locking  up. 

5.  Felons  &c.— to  be  in  the  Lower  Court — except  leave  &c. 

6.  Whereas  it  is  ufual  for  the  Prifoners  to  go  into  the  Caftle-yard 

an  hour  morning  and  afternoon  for  air  except  in  time  of  Affize 
Seflions  &c.— None  to  go  to  the  Caftle-gate  or  over  the  Pave- 
ment leading  &c.— nor  out  of  the  Limits— nor  intermix  with 
the  Soldiers  on  Guard. 

7.  No  Prifoner  to  remove— the  Keeper's  beds   &c.— nor  his  own 

bed— without  Gaoler's  confent. 

8.  Prisoners  may  bring  their  own  beds,  and  take  them  away.  If  they 

choofe  the  Keeper's  bed— pay  a  fliilling  at  the  end  of  every  week. 
Upon  Non-payment  the  Gaoler  may  take  the  bed,  and  put  the 
Prifoner  to  lie  in  the  Pope's  Kitchen  or  any  other  free  ward. 
c).    The  Public  Hall  to  be  fwept  and  cleaned  by  the  Prifoners  daily. 

AT  the  General  Quarter  SefTions  of  the  Peace  held  at  Namptwich — 
14th  July— 4th  George  II.   1730 

We  whofe  Names  are  fubfcribed  Juftices  of  the  Peace  alTembled 
in  open  Seflions  aforefaid  do  approve  of  the  faid  Rules  to  be 
obferved  in  the  Gaol  of  the  faid  Caftle  of  Chefter. 

Cha  Dukenfield  F  Poole  T  Cholmondeley 

Three  more  not  legible. 

We  do  approve  of  thefe  Rules 

J  WILLES  W  JESSOP 

COUNTY 


Chester  Circuit,  CHESHIRE.  447 


COUNTY  BRIDEWELL  at   MIDDLEWICH. 


This  Prifon  has  been  lately  much  improved  by  the  addition  of  a 
Work-room  ;  a  little  Room  at  the  end  of  it,  which  they  call  a  Shop  ; 
and  fome  Chambers  over  them.  At  one  fide  of  the  Work-room  is  a 
ftrong  brick  Bench  againft  the  wall,  long  enough  for  feveral  to  fit 
on :  and  fronting  the  fire-place  is  another  ftrong  brick  Seat,  almoft  a 
femicircle.  Two  of  the  old  Rooms  have  now  a  window  in  each: 
the  other  have  only  perforations  in  the  doors.  I  found  at  my  lalt 
vifit  all  the  Prifoners,  but  two,  employed  in  picking  Oakum ;  the 
other  two  were  Shoe-makers,  working  at  their  own  trade.  The 
Yard  is  enlarged  from  the  Keeper's  Garden,  and  flagged  with  broad 
Itones,  which  are  very  convenient,  not  only  for  cleanlinefs  &c.  but 
particularly  for  drying  the  Oakum.  The  Partition  between  this  and 
the  Garden,  is  a  brick  wall  about  one  third  of  the  height,  and  the 
reft  ftrong  palifades  with  tenter-hooks.  This  is  a  judicious  con- 
trivance for  keeping  the  Yard  and  Houfe  airy  and  healthy. 


1774,     Nov.    8,    Prifoners  3, 
1776,     Sep.    14,       -       -      9. 


CHESTER 


44S  CHESHIRE.  Chester  Circuit. 


CHESTER    CITY  AND  COUNTY   GAOL. 

GAOLER,     Samitel  Waterwoods. 
Salary,  jCio. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^o  :     8  :  8, 
Felons,         o  :     6:6, 
Tranfports,     ^6  :   10  :  o  each. 
Licence  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     a  penny  loaf  a  day.    (Little  more  than 
half  a  found  in  Feb.  1775.) 
Garnifli,         £0  :  2  '•  ^^ 

Number  of  -         -       Debtors.  Felons  &c. 

1774,  March    29,         8     -  -     10, 

1775,  Feb.  I,         6     -  -       2, 
Nov.       25,         8     -  -       2, 

1776,  Sep.        14,         I     -  -       2. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Duke.     (See  Remarks.) 
Duty 
Salary,  ^10. 

SURGEON,     (See  Remarks.) 
Salary, 


CHESTER 


Chester  Circuit.  CHESHIRE.  449 


CHESTERCITY. 

THIS  GAOL,  calkd  the  North-Gate  Prifofj,  has  many  convenient  Remarks. 
apartments  for  Debtors.  The  Felons  Day-room  is  fpacious  :  but 
to  their  Dungeon,  or  Night-room,  you  go  down  fourteen  fteps.  It 
i's  fourteen  feet  by  eight,  and  feven  high.  No  light  nor  any  commu- 
nication with  the  external  air,  but  at  the  door.  The  Prifoners  in 
March  1774  complained  of  exceflive  heat:  but  in  my  latter  vifits  I 
found  they  had  been  lodged  elfewhere.  No  bedding  nor  ftraw. 
The  Court-yard  is  common  to  Debtors  and  Felons  :  but  the  formef 
have  the  privilege  of  walking  in  the  Keeper's  Garden. 

Mr.  Duke  is  Chaplain  to  the  Blue-Coat  School ;  and  officiates  in 
little.  St.  John's  Chapel  belonging  to  the  School.  A  Navigation  parts 
that  from  the  Prifon-yard ;  and  a  foot  bridge,  made  for  the  purpofe, 
gives  thefe  Prifoners  an  opportunity  of  attending  Divine  Service  when 
it  is  performed ;  that  is  Prayers  twice  a  week,  and  Sermon  once  a 
month.     Few  Prifoners  in  City  or  Town  Gaols  have  fuch  a  privilege. 

In  November  1775  feveral  Prifoners  were  ill  in  bed  of  the  Cold 
which  then  generally  prevailed ;  yet  the  Surgeon  had  not,  for  three 
weeks,  either  feen  them  himfelf,  or  fent  his  man. 


M  m  m  TABLE 


450' 


CHESHIRE. 


Chester  Circuit. 


CHESTER 
CITY. 


TABLE   OF   FEES   and    RULES. 

Thb  Rules  for  this  Gaol  being  in  fubftance,  and  almoft  in  words, 
the  fame  as  the  firft  four  Rules  for  the  Caftle,  I  will  not  tranfcribe 
them  J  but  defire  my  Reader  to  refer  to  them. 


THE       GAOLER 


FEES. 


It  and'^ 
leanorT 


—  o 


Upon  any  Arreft  for  any  Pcrfon  that  fhall  be  brought  and 

committed  to  the  faid  Prifon  — 

For  every  Execution  charged  upon  the  Prifoner 
Upon  every  Commitment  by  the  Mayor  for  a  Mifdemeanor 

if  a  Freeman  —  — 

If  a  Foreigner  —  —  — 

For  the  Blue  Room  to  a  Gentleman  committed  Prifoner, 

per  week        —-____ 
For  Lodging  every  night  in  a  Feather  Bed  —  o 

In  a  Flock  or  Chaff  Bed         —  —  —  o 

Chamber  rent/fr  week  the  Prifoner  finding  his  own  bedding    o 
For  every  Felon  committed  to  Prifon  the  Keeper's  Fees  for  j 

Irons  and  Continuance  —  —     j 

If  any  Perfon  attached  by  Form  of  Attachment  out  of  the") 

Exchequer  at  Chcjier  be   brought  to  the  faid  Prifon  J.  o 

the  Keeper's  Fee  thereon  —  —     j 

If  any  Perfon  fhall  be  arrefted  by  Form  of  a  Writ  out  of 

any  of  the  Courts  at  Wcftminjier  and  be  brought  to  the 

faid  Prifon  the  Keeper's  Fee  — 

For  attending  the  Court  with  every  Prifoner 
For  every  Felon  committed /<'r  week  — 

For  a  Copy  of  every  Commitment  — 

To  the  Turnkey  on  Difcharge  — 


C-    s. 


lut  of) 
to  the  i- 


*  The  firft  figure  8  fcems  altered  from  6. 


4 

S 
o 
o 
I 


o  :   2 


D. 


10 


4 

2 
O 


o 
o 
o 
6 


CHESTER 


Chester  Circuit.  CHESHIRE.  451 


CHESTER    CITY    BRIDEWELL. 

Out  of  repair ;  and  not  fafe  :  no  yard  :  no  water  :  no  allowance : 
no  employment.  They  are  building  a  large  Work-lhop,  and  rooms 
over  it.  Below  are  two  new  Dungeons  about  nine  feet  under  ground, 
I  told  the  Keeper  that  I  wiflied  the  Contriver  of  thefe  might  be  the 
firft  who  lodged  in  them.  I  heard  they  intend  to  enclofe  a  Court- 
yard :  I  hope  they  will  not  forget  a  Pump. 

Here  were  feveral  leaden  weights  marked  30,  40,  60  pounds, 
with  a  ring  and  chains  to  each :  thefe  are  faftened,  as  the  Magifbrates 
order,  or  the  Keeper  finds  needful,  to  the  legs  of  refradlory  Prifoners, 
that  they  may  not  walk  without  carrying  the  weight.  The  Keeper 
faid  he  had  fome  Women  fo  turbulent  that  it  was  extremely  difficult 
to  make  them  behave  orderly,  while  they  were  kept  together. 

1775,  Feb.     I,     Prifoners    2, 
>• —       Nov.  25,       -       -       o, 

1776,  Sep.   14,       -       -     12. 


MACCLESFIELD     PRISON. 

This  Prifon  for  the  Liberty  of  the  Hundred,  Manor,  and  Foreft 
of  Macclesfield,  in  the  Pinfold  or  Pound  for  that  Hundred,  is  the 
Property  of  Lord  Derby.  It  has  four  Room,s ;  and  a  Dungeon  which 
is  down  feven  Iteps,  eleven  feet  by  nine.     The  windows  of  the  rooms 

M  m  m  2  glazed. 


452  CHESHIRE.  Chester  Circuit. 

glazed,  no  cafements.  The  Building  is  flight,  and  the  whole  of  it 
ruinous. — Keeper,  John  Haflehurft,  is  a  Bailiff  j  Iceeps  a  Public- 
houfej  and  has  a  Leafe  of  the  whole  for  fixty  years  at;^i3  clear  of 
Taxes.     No  Salary  :  Fees  ys.  6d.  no  Table. 

1776,     Sep.  15,     Debtors  2. 


MACCLESFIELD    TOWN    BRIDEWELL 

Is  a  ruinous  Room  behind  the  Keeper's  Houfe.  Only  one  window 
twelve  inches  by  fix.  The  Keeper  told  me  he  was  fometimes  obliged 
to  confine  men  and  women  together  in  it.  Salary  twenty  fiiillings  j 
Fees  one  fliilling. 

1776,     Sep.  15,     No  Prifoners. 


HAULTON     CASTLE     GAOL. 

I  SHOULD  fcarcely  have  mentioned*  this  Prifon,  fince  for  a  number 
of  years  paft  no  perfon  has  been  confined  in  it,  had  I  not  found  that 
in  an  Infcription  in  the  Court-room,  dated  1737,  it  is  ftill  called  a 
Gaol  with  a  Court-yard. 

The  Earl  of  Cholmondeley  is  Proprietor  under  the  Crown ;  and 
Quarterly  Courts  are  held  here  for  the  Manor.  Two  Cellars  in  the 
Building  appear  to  have  been  ufed  for  the  purpofe  of  confining 
Pi-ifoners, 

1777,     March  19,     No  Prifoners. 

COUNTY 


Chester  Circuit.        FLINTSHIRE-. 


453 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     FLINT, 


GAOLER,     John  IViUiams. 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,     ^^o  :  6  :  o, 
Felons,         0:3:  6. 
Tranfports,  the  Expenfe. 
Licence,  for  Beer, 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors, 7  each  weekly  is.  6d.  in  bread,  and 
Felons,    5  6d.  money. 

Garnifh,         ;ro  :   i  :  o. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     June      25,         4       -         I, 
1776,     Sep.       12,         I       -         o. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Bavies. 
Duty— -Wednefday  and  Friday. 
Salary,  ;^20. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Ingleby  at  Holy  well 
Salary,,  none  ;  he  makes  a  Bill. 


FLINT, 


454  FLINTSHIRE.        Chester  Circuit. 


N        T. 


Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  is  alfo  the  Bridewell. — On  the  ground-floor  are 
the  Gaoler's  apartments. — For  Debtors  there  are,  up  ftairs,  a  Com- 
mon Ward  J  and  two  other  Rooms. — They  have  alfo  a  Court-yard, 
backwards. — For  Felons  and  Petty  Offenders,  two  dark  Clofets,  the 
Black  Holes,  on  the  fame  floor  as  the  Debtors  rooms :  they  are  each 
five  feet  by  four  ;  and  were  the  only  receptacles  for  Crhninals  till  a 
few  years  ago,  when  a  Dungeon  in  the  Yard  was  added.  This  is 
down  eight  fteps :  rain  comes  through  the  roof  upon  the  barrack- 
beds.  A  Court  before  it  about  five  yards  fquare :  water  laid  in. 
When  Men  are  here.  Women  are  put  in  the  dark  Clofets. 

Great  sessions  at  Mold:  Conveyance  thither  at  tlie  Gaoler's 
Expenfe.     He  has  a  Salary  of  £2^  as  Keeper  o(  Bridewell. 

Near  twenty  years  ago,  here  was  a  Debtor  who  infilled  upon  not 
being  fubjeft  to  the  Gaoler,  nor  to  any  Orders  but  fuch  as  fhould  be 
enjoined  by  the  Magiftrates.  Upon  this  occafion,  the  Juftices-at 
the  Quarter  Seffions  held  at  Holywell  in  July  1759  made  fome  faluta- 
ry  Rules  for  the  government  of  this  Prifon,  refembling  thofe  for 
Chejler  Caftle,  which  are  hung  up  in  the  Gaol.  It  is  probable  the 
man  knew  he  had  a  Statute  to  fupport  his  claim,  namely,  the 
Aft  the  3  2d  of  George  the  Second. 


TABLE 


Chester  Circuit. 


FLINTSHIRE. 


455 


TABLE     OF     FEES. 


FLINT. 


Flintjhire,  A  T  the  Court  of  Great  Sefllon  held  at  Flint— on — 
to  wit.  XjL  22d  of  Auguft— 5th— of  our  Sovereign  Lord 
George  III— 1765  before  the  Hon'''^  Jc,^«  Afor/ow  Efq.  Chief  Juftice 
of— Chefter,  Flint,  Denbigh,  and  Montgomery}  and  Baylor  White 
Efq.  his  Majefty's  other  Juftice  there  affigned  &c.— It  is— Ordered 
that  the  Gaoler  for  the  time  being  do  take  no  more  than  the  Fees 
and  Allowances  hereafter  mentioned  which  the  Court  conceive  to  be 
fufficient  and  reafonable 

(That  is  to  fay) 

A  Table  of  Fees  to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler  of  this  County. 


the-^ 


For  the  Receipt  of  every  Prifoner  for  Debt 

For  the  Ufe  of  the  Bedftead  and  Chamber  by  the  week  the 

Prifoner  finding  his  own  Bedding  — 

If  the  Bedding  found  by  Gaoler /fr  week  then  — 

For  a  Copy  of  every  Commitment                  —  — 

Attending  every  Prifoner  brought  by  Rule  of  Court  — 

Fee  on  Prifoner's  Difcharge                            —  — 

Turnkey's  Fee  on  Prifoner's  Difcharge          —  — 


c 

S. 

D. 

0  : 

2 

:  6 

0  : 

I 

:  0 

0  : 

:    2 

:  0 

0  ; 

I 

:  0 

0  : 

;   1 

:  Q 

0  : 

;   2 

:  6 

0  ; 

;  I 

:  0 

The  above  Table  of  Fees  is  rati'fied  and  confirmed  by 

JOHN  MORTON 


COUNTY 


456  DENBIGHSHIRE.       Chester  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     RUTHIN. 

GAOLER,     'Jcje^h  Stoddard. 
Salan',  /lo. 

Fees,     Debtors,    ^0:6:0, 
Felons,         0:3:6. 
Tranfports,  (^  i  each  to  Cbefter. 
Licence,  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     is.  6d.  a  week. 

Garnifh,        Debtors,  ;^o  :  2  :  6, 
Felons,       0:1:0. 

Number  of      -      -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     June     25,       8     -     -       5, 
1776,     Sep.      ij,       2     -     -       I. 

CHAPLAIN,    Rev.  Mr.  Peine. 
Dut}'  —  Sunday. 
Salar)',  ^10. 

SURGEON,    Mr.  Nicbolls. 

Salary,  none  :  he  makes  a  Bill. 


Remarks.  THE  OLD  GAOL  was  alfo  a  County  Bridewell.  A  New  Gaol 
is  almoft  finiftied.  The  Front  is  for  the  Gaoler.  Backwards,  on  the 
ground-fioor,  a  large  Day-room  or  Kitchen  for  Debtors ;  and  another 

as 


Chester  CiRctriT,       DENBIGHSHIRE.  457 

as  large  for  Criminals:  and  for  the  latter,  four  Cells,  feven  fefet  and     ruth  in. 
a  half  by  fix  ; — two  on  each  fide  of  a  pafl'age  only  three  feet  wide. 
Above  are  nine  Rooms  and  a  neat  Chapel.     Separate  Court-yards  for 
Debtors   and   Criminals.     The   Gentlemen   will  fcarcely  forget  an 
Infirmary ;  and  feparating  Women  from  Men. 

Great  sessions,  of  late,  always  at  TFrexham;  and  Conveyance 
thither  at  the.  Gaoler's  Expenfe.  He  has  a  Salary  of  ^^ 20  as  Keeper 
of  Bridewell. 

The  Old  Gaol  may  be  made  a  convenient  Bridewell,  and  then 
Prifoners  might  be  more  properly  feparated.  A  way  might  alfo  be 
made  to  the  Chapel. 


TABLE     OF      FEES, 


Denbighpire,  A  T  the  General  Quarter  Seffions — at  Denbigh—^ 
to  wit.  XjL  on  the  16th  day  of  April  in  the  5;th — of  our  Sove- 
reign Lord  George  III — 1765  before  John  Edwards  Jun''-  and  John 
Conway  Efq''^-  and  others — Juftices— it  is — Ordered  that  the  Gaoler 
for  the  time  being  do  take  no  more  than  the  Fees  and  Allowance 
hereafter  mentioned  which   this  Court   conceive  to  be  fufficient  and 

reafonable 

(That  is  to  fay) 

A  Table  of  Fees  to  be  taken  by  the  Gaoler  of  this  County. 

£.    S.    D. 

Fees  on  the  Receipt  of  every  Prifoner  —  —  0:2:6 

For  the  ufe  of  the  Bedftead  and  Chamber  per  week  the  Pri-  \ 

foner  finding  his  own  Bedding  —  •  —     j    o  :   i   :  o 

Jf  Bedding  be  found  by  the  Gaoler  then /fr  week  —         0:2:0 

N  n  n  For 


45S  DENBIGHSHIRE.       Chester  Circuit. 

£.    S.    D. 
For  a  Copy  of  every  Commitment  —  —         o  :   i  :  o 

Attending  every  Prifoncr  brought  up  by  Rule  of  Court  o  :   i   :  a 

Fee  on  Prifoner's  Difcharge  —  —         0:2:6 

Turnkey's  Fee  on  Prifoner's  Difcharge  —  0:1:0 


The  above  Table  of  Fees  is  ratified  and  confirmed  by 

JOHN  MORTON 
By  the  Court 

J  K  0-  Ho^s  1 E  R  C  lerk  of  the  Peace 
ANOTHER 

COUNTY    BRIDEWELL    at    WREXHAM. 

This  is  only  Part  of  an  Houie,  the  whole  of  which  feems  to  have 

been  formerly  the  Bridewell ;  but  moft  of  it  is  now  the  Parifli-Poor- 

houfe.     The  Prifon  has — on  the  ground-floor  the  Keeper's  rooms 

and  liable  ;  and  for  Prifoners,  two  dark  offenfive  rooms,  without  any 

window :  a  wall  within  fix  feet  of  the  doors :'  Prifoners  have,  with 

juft  caufe,  complained  of  being  almofl:  fuffbcated  ;  and  begged  to  be 

let  out  for  Air  into  the  Keeper's  Garden,  on  the  other  fide  of  the 

Houfe. — Up  ftairs  are   three  rooms   for   thofe  who  can  pay.     All 

dirty  and  out  of  repair.     No  water.     Keeper   a  Sheriff's  Officer  : 

Salary  ^^8. 

3774,     March  30,     Prifoners  2, 

1776,     Sep.      12,       -       -      1. 

COUNTY 


Chester  Circuit.     MONTGOMERYSHIRE.  459 


COUNTY    GAOL     at    MONTGOMERY. 


GAOLER,    William  Davies. 

Salary,  ^f  12  :  12:0  from  the  Sheriff. 

Fees,     Debtors,  ^^o  :     8  :  o. 
Felons,       o  :   14  :  4. 
Tranfports,  about  ^^lo  :  10  :  o  each. 
Licence,  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  on  application,  the  fame  as  Felons. 

Felons,    two  i4d.  loaves  a  week. 
Garnifh,         £p  :  1  :  6. 

Number  of     -       -       Debtors.      Felons  &c. 

1774,  June     29,       3     -     -       4, 

1775,  Nov.    29,       2     -     -       o. 

CHAPLAIN,    Rev.  Mr.  Powell. 
Duty — Sunday. 
Salary,    ^^20. 

SURGEONS,    Three,  in  Quarterly  Rotation. 
Salary,  ^5  each. 


Nnn2  MONTGO- 


46o  MONTGOMERYSHIRE.     Chester  Circuit. 


MONTGOMERY. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  is  finely  fituated  on  a  rifing  ground.  Apart-- 
ment&  for  Debtors,  and  Wards  for  Felons,  convenient  and  kept 
clean.  Court-yard  common.  The  fine  Stream  of  Water  lately 
running  through  the  Yard  is  cut  off.  Great  Seflions  always  at 
TVelcb  Pool;  whither  Prifoners  are  conveyed  at  the  Gaoler's  Expenfe^ 

The  Table  of  Fees  not  legible. 


COUNTY  BRIDEWELL  at  MONTGOMERY. 

A  ROOM  or  two  in  a  Houfe  at  the  lower  end  of  the  Town  > 
out  of  repair. 

1775,     Nov.  29,     No  Prifoners. 


COUNTY 


North  Wales  Circuit.       ANGLESEY.  461 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     BEAUMARIS. 

GAOLER,     William  Thomas. 

Salary,  £^  from  the  Sheriff. 
Fees,     Debtors,  7 

Felons,    }  ^ 
Tranfports,  the  Expenfe. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,    a  fhilling  a  week. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
i774>    June    27,        a      -        o.. 
CHAPLAIN,    None. 
SURGEON,      None. 


THIS  GAOL  is  alfo  the  County  BridewelL     It  is  dirty.     The    Remarks. 
Felons  Room  convenient,    but  feldom  occupied.      Claufes  of  Adl 
againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.     The  Gaoler  has  £^  a  year 
as  Keeper  of  Bridewell.    No  Table  of  Fees, 


COUNTY 


46a  CARNARVONSHIRE.     North  Wales  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     CARNARVON. 

GAOLER,     Thomas. 

Salary,  £^  from  the  Sheriff. 

Fees,     Debtors,  ;^o  :  3  :  6  Entrance, 
0:2:6  Difcharge. 
Felons,     none. 
Tranfports,  the  Expenfe. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none. 

Felons,    2S.  6d..  a  Treek  each.     (See  Remarks.  J 
Garnifh,        a  {killing. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     Jxine     27,         2-1. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 
SURGEON,      None. 

Remasks.        this  gaol   16  alfo  the  Bridewell.     Rooms   incommodious 
and  dirty.     Claufes  of  Aft  againft  SpiritiKJus  Liquors  not  hung  up. 

Great  Seffions  st  Cowboy. Thomas  has  ^^5  a  year  as  Keeper  of 

Bridewell.  He  flops  from  each  Fckm's  allowance  fix  pence  a  Week 
for,  whai  he  call*,  his  Trouble  of  Weekly  Pa}Tnents.  No  Table  of 
Fees. 

I  HEAR  the  County  intend  to  build  a  new  Gaol. 

COUNTY 


NorthWales  Circuit.     MERIONETHSHIRE.  463 


COUNTY     GAOL     at     DOLGELLY. 


GAOLER,     Edward  Rees. 
Salary,  £^i. 


.rs,7 


Fees,     Debtors, " 

Felons,    *   ^     •  5  • 


Tranfports,  the  Expenfe. 
Licence,  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors, ' 


irs,7 
s,   S 


TT  1  I    none, 

l^elons. 

Number  of      -      -      Debtors.    Felons  &c. 
1774,     June  28,  I       -         I. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,       None. 


THIS  GAOL  was  built  five  or  fix  years  ago.     Windows  clofe     Remarks, 
glazed  :    rooms  dirty ;  although  fo  few  Prifoners.     I  was  informed 
that  there  had  been  only  two  Executions  for  fifty  years  paft.     Claufes 
of  Ad  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.    No  Table  of  Fees. 
Great  Seflions  at  Bala. 


COUNTY 


464  CARDIGANSHIRE.      Carmarthen  .Circuit. 


COUNTY     GAOL     at     CARDIGAN. 

GAOLER,     Charles  Thomas. 

Salary,  £  1 2,  but  not  fixed. 
Fees,     Debtors,  7 

Felons,    5  *     -^  '  ^ 

Tranfports,  the  Expenfe. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,    Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     two  fhillings  a  week. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.      Felons  &c. 
1774,     Auguft  13,       4         -         o- 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Davies. 
Duty  — Sunday. 
Salary,   liS. 

SURGEON, 

Salary,  ^^lO. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL,  which  is  to  be  the  Bridewell  alfo,  was  juft  finifhed 
when  I  was  there,  but  not  inhabited :  the  Prifoners  were  in  the 
Gaoler's  houfe.  The  Prifon-rooms  are  too  low;  and  clofe  glazed; 
no  cafements  :  no  water  in  the  Court-yard.  C.  Thomas  has  £1 
a  year  as  Bridewell-Keeper.     No  Table  of  Fees. 

COUNTY 


Carmarthen  Circuit.     PEMBROKESHIRE. 


465 


COUNTY   GAOL   at    HAVERFORDWEST. 

GAOLER,     Richard  Griffith. 
Salary,  none. 
Fees,     Debtors,  ^ 

Felons,    ^  >Co  :  13  :  4- 

Tranfports, 
Licence,  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  certified  from "] 

their  Parifh,   j-  a  penny  a  day. 

Felons,         -  -    J 

Number  of      -         -       Debtors.       Felons  &c. 
1774,     Aug.    14,  4     -       -       I. 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Jones. 

Duty — Wednefday  and  Friday. 
Salary,  £10. 

SURGEON,       None. 


THIS  GAOL   is   alfo  the   Bridewell.     Six  Rooms.     The  two    Remarks. 
loweft  are  very  damp  Dungeons  :  in  one  of  thefe,  as  I  was  informed, 
a  Prifoner  loft,  firft  the  ufe  of  his  limbs,  and  then  his  life :  fince  that 
time,  none  have  been  confined  in  either  of  them.     The  upper  rooms 
are  dirty  and  offenfive,  with  fmall  windows.     No  fewers  :  no  Court- 

O  o  o  yard  : 


466  PEMBROKESHIRE.     Carmarthen  Circuit. 

HAVER-      yard:  ClaufesofAdt  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up.     No 
roRDWEST.  ^^jjjg  Qf  pggg^      R    Griffith   has  £i   a  year   as  Bridewell-Keeper. 
The  County  are  applying  for  an  Adt,  in  order  to  build  a  new  Gaol. 


At  HAVERFORDWEST   is  alfo  the 


TOWN  AND  COUNTY  GAOL;  which  is  likewife  the 
Bridewell.  It  has  convenient  Rooms,  and  they  are  kept  dean.  No. 
Court :  no  water.     The  Work-lhop  ufed  by  a  Carpenter. 


1774,    Aug.  I4j    No  PriXoners. 


COUNTY 


Carmarthen  Circuit.    CARMARTHENSHIRE.  467 


COUNTY  GAOL,     CARMARTHEN  CASTLE. 


GAOLER,    John  Williams, 
Salary,  none. 

Fees,     Debtors,    {jo  :   13  :  4, 
Felons,         o  :     3:4. 
Tranfports,  ^^5  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,   Debtors,  none. 

Felons,     a  fhilling  a  week. 

Number  of      -      -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     Aug.  15,       16    .-     -     10, 
1776,     Sep.      8,         4    -     -       7.     (See  Remarks,) 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Bavies. 
Duty  — Sunday. 
Salary,  ^^12  :  12  :  o. 

SURGEON,     Mr.  Frice, 
Salary,  ^^20. 


Oool  CARMAR- 


468  CARMARTHENSHIRE.    Carmarthen  Circuit. 


CARMARTHEN      CASTLE. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  is  alfo  the  County  Bridewell.  The  old  apartments 
are  too  clofe  -,  and  fo  are  the  new  Cells  for  Criminals.  Thefe  are 
about  feven  feet  by  fix  :  apertures  in  the  doors  only  about  nine  inches 
fquare  :  earth-floors.  The  Day-room  is  ufed  as  a  Chapel.  Over  it 
is  a  free  ward :  and  over  that,  a  room  for  the  fick.  The  con- 
demned Dungeon  is  damp;  a  fmall  window.  One  Court-yard; 
but  it  is  Ipacious.  A  Houfe  for  the  Gaoler,  lately  built  in  the 
yard ;  but  he  ftill  lives  diftant,  as  before.  It  has  convenient  rooms 
for  Mafter's-fide  Debtors  ;  and  an  Alarm  Bell  at  top  :  by  ringing  it, 
a  Debtor  lately  prevented  an  efcape  of  the  Felons.  No  water :  the 
Well  is  ufelefs ;  and  the  Gaol  offenfive. — Houfes  in  the  neighbour- 
hood have  water  laid  in. — Tranfports  have  not  the  King's  allowance 
of  as.  6d.  a  week.  Claufcs  of  the  Aft  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not 
hung  up.  No  Table  of  Fees.  J.  Williams  has  ^^  1 2  :  1 2  :  o  a  year  as 
Keeper  of  Bridewell.  To  this  Prifon  there  are  Rules  or  Bounds, 
which  extend  near  a  mile  round. 

Two  of  the  Offenders,  whom  I  faw  laft  time,  were  for  Fines  which 
they  can  never  pay.  They  have  not  the  County-allowance,  and  were 
almoft  ftarved. 

The  Gaoler  was  defirous  o? farming  the  Allowance  :  but  the  abufe 
of  fuch  a  truft  by  the  Gaoler  at  Brecon  had  been  detetfted  ;  and  the 
requeft  of  this  Gaoler  was  not  granted. 


At 


Carmarthen  Circuit.    CARMARTHENSHIRE.  469 


At    CARMARTHEN    is  alfo  the 
COUNTY-BOROUGH-GAOL. 


To  the  four  rooms  of  this  Gaol  at  the  Gate,  you  afcend  by  ftone  fteps 
on  the  outfide.  No  yard  :  no  water.  Keeper,  one  of  the  Town- 
Sheriffs,  lives  diftant.— At  my  firft  vifit  a  young  creature  committed 
for  a  petty  Theft,  had  been  there  four  months,  and  was  fick  on  the 
floor.  At  my  laft,  a  Debtor  fick  in  bed.  Befides  the  four  Prifoners 
whom  I  faw,  the  Sheriff  told  me  he  had  one  in  the  Rules  which  are 
of  fmall  extent.— Food  &c.  for  the  Prifoners  is  put  through  an  aper- 
ture at  bottom  of  the  door  :  a  little  girl,  the  daughter  of  a  Prifoner, 
could  )uft  get  through  it  to  fetch  water  &c.. 

Debtors.      Felons  &c. 
1774,     Aug.  15,       o         -         I, 
1776,     Sep.      8,       3         -         I. 


COUNTY 


470  RADNORSHIRE.       South  Wales  Circuit. 


COUNTY    GAOL     at    PRESTEIGN. 

GAOLER,     John  Thomas. 

Salary,  ^^lo  from  the  Sheriff. 
Fees,     Debtors,  -s 
Felons,     3 
Tranfports,  the  Treafurer  has  £^  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,     Debtors,  none  but  on  application. 

Felons,     a  three-penny  loaf  for  two  days. 

Garnifh,         ,(^0:1:0. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     June     30,        4       -         3, 


1775,     Nov.     30,         3       -         I. 
CHAPLAIN,     None. 
SURGEON,      None. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL,  which  is  alfo  the  County  Bridewell,  is  out  of 
repair.  Only  one  Court-yard.  Felons  Night-room  down  three  fteps, 
and  not  fecure  :  earth-floor ;  no  ftraw.  Keeper's  Houfe  diftant ;  but 
his  Garden,  contiguous,  is  a  proper  fpot  on  which  to  enlarge  the 
Gaol.  Claufes  of  A61  againft  Spirituous  Liquors  not  hung  up  :  no 
Table  of  Fees.     J.  Thomas  has  ^^2  a  year  as  Bridewell-Keeper. 

COUNTY 


South  Wales  Circuit.     BRECONSHIRE.  471 


COUNTY     GAOL     at     BRECON. 

GAOLER,     Magdalen  Williams, 

Salary,  none :    but  ^31  :  10  :  o  a  year  tx)  fupply  Felons 
with  neceflary  Food» 

Fees,     Debtors,  7 

Felons,   3   ^     •  7  ' 
Tranfports,  ;^5  each. 
Licence,  for  Beer, 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none  but  on  applying  to  Juftices, 

Felons,    farmed  as  above. 
Garnifti,        £0:2:6. 

Number  of     -       -       Debtors.      Felons  &C, 
1774,     Aug.     n,       7     -     -       3, 
1776,     Sep,        9,       4     -     -       i> 

CHAPLAIN,     Rev.  Mr.  Hugh  Jones. 
Duty— Wednefday  or  Friday, 
Salary,    ;^io. 

SURGEON,     Mr,  miliams. 
Salary,   ^5. 


BRECON. 


472  BRECONSHIRE.      South  Wales  Circuit.. 

BRECON. 

Remarks.  THIS  GAOL  out  of  repair;  but  at  my  laft  vifit  not  dirty. 
Two  Courts  common  to  Debtors  and  Felons  :  they  alfo  lodge  toge- 
ther. Some  of  the  Rooms  clofc  glazed.  A  dark  Dungeon :  the 
door  of  it  repairing^  yet  the  Gaoler's  fon  told  me  it  was  never  ufed. 
At  my  firft  vifit  the  Prifoners  almoft  ftarved  by  the  Gaoler.  Two 
Gentlemen  of  the  County,  who  were  then  in  the  Gaol  with  me, 
feemed  to  refent  the  abufe. — No  ftraw. — No  Claufes  of  Ad;  againft 
Spirituous  Liquors :  no  Table  of  Fees.  Tranfports  have  not  the 
King's  allowance  of  2S.  6d.  a  week. 


COUNTY     BRIDEWELL    at    BRECON. 

One  Room  in  the  Keeper's  Houfe  for  Women  j  and  two  in  the 
Back-yard  for  Men :  the  whole  out  of  repair,  and  not  fecure.  No 
allowance :  no  water.  Keeper  no  Salary.  I  am  informed  the  County 
intend  building  a  new  Bridewell. 

1776,    Sep.  9,    No  Prifoners. 

BRECON      TOWN      GAOL, 

Over  the  Gate-way.  Out  of  repair :  no  Court-yard :  no  water : 
Gaoler  no  Salary  ;  he  fells  beer. 

1776,     Sep.  9,     No  Prifoners. 

COUNTY 


South  Wales  Circuit.     GLAMORGANSHIRE.  473 


COUNTY    GAOL     at     CARDIFF. 


GAOLER,     Thomas  Lewis-,  no'ff  William  Cobb. 

Salary,  none  :  but  he  farms  the  Allowance.    (See  Remarks.) 

Fees,     Debtors,  £,0  :   14  :  4, 
Felons,       o  :     7:8. 
Tranfporcs,  ^^5  each. 
Licence,  of  late  none. 

PRISONERS, 

Allowance,  Debtors,  none  but  on  application  to  the  Juftices. 

Felons,    ten  pence  halfpenny  each  on  Saturday. 
Garnilh,         ^o  :  2  :  6. 

Number  of      -       -       Debtors.     Felons  &c. 
1774,     Aug.  19,        14       -         a, 
1776,     Sep.     6,  2-2. 

CHAPLAIN,     None. 

SURGEON,       Mr.  IVilliams. 
Salary,   ^10. 


Ppp  CARDIFF, 


474  GLAMORGANSHIRE.    South  Wales  Circuit. 


CARDIFF. 

Remarks.  THE  NEW  GAOL,  noc  finifhed,  is  to  confiil  of  three  feparate 
Houfes,  with  Court-yards  between  them.  The  Old  Gaol  to  be 
taken  down  j  and  in  Front  (where  it  now  ftands)  is  to  be  the  Houfe 
for  Debtors  :  a  Court  behind  it — Then  the  Gaoler's  Houfe  :  this  is 
built ;  two  rooms  on  a  floor.  Behind  it,  the  Felons  Court-yard ; 
and  beyond  that,  their  Houfe  or  Wards ;  which  are  alfo  built :  on 
the  ground-floor,  a  fmall  room  for  the  Turnkey ;  and  three  vaulted 
rooms  :  above  them  thi-ee  chambers,  twelve  feet  and  a  half  by  ten. 

The  Gaoler's  houfe  being  in  the  middle,  he  will  have  both  Debtors 
and  Felons  in  view  :  but  his  paffing  to  the  flreet  through  the  Debtors 
houfe,  may  be  dangerous  to  him  when  they  prove  riotous. 

He  undertakes  for  £^o  a  year  to  pay  Felons  ten  pence  halfpenny 
a  week ;  and  find  them  flraw  :  and  to  pay  a  fliilling  a  week  to  fuch 
Debtors  as  the  Juilices  fliall  appoint.     No  Table  of  Fees. 

Great  sessions  always  at  Cowhridge. — The  late  Gaoler  informed 
me,  that  an  Exchequer  Debtor  confined  ten  years  for  feven  pounds 
died  in  the  Gaol  juft  before  I  was  there. 


COUNTY 


South  Wales  Circuit.    GLAMORGANSHIRE.  475 


COUNTY   BRIDEWELL  at   COWBRIDGE. 


Besides  the  Old  Room,  there  are  two  Rooms  lately  built  in  the 
Back-yard  ;  each  fifteen  feet  fquare.  In  them  provifion  is  made  for  the 
circulation  of  air ;  and  there  is  now  little  danger  of  the  Gaol-Fever ; 
of  which  the  Keeper  told  me,  at  my  firll  vifit,  many  had  died :  a 
man  and  woman  about  a  year  before ;  when  himfelf  and  his  daughter 
were  alfo  ill  of  it.  No  fewer  :  no  water  :  no  Court-yard ;  one  may 
be  eafily  enclofed  from  the  Ground  adjacent.  No  allowance. 
Keeper's  Salary   ^^25  :  12  :  o. 


No  Prifoners, 


1776,     Sep. 


64 


Ppp2  TABLES 


B 


E 


RELATIVE  TO 


FEES,    NUMBERS  OF  CRIMINALS,  &c. 


TABLE 


I. 


A  LIST  OF  FEES  due  to  the  Clerks  of  Assize  of  the  feveral 
Circuits  in  England,  and  their  Offices,  from  Prifoners  charged 
with  Felony — Burnt  'in  the  Hand — Whipped — Acquitted  — 
Difcharged  by  Proclamation  —  or  againft  whom  Bills  are  returned 
by  the  Grand-Jury  not  true  Bills. 


HOME  CIRCUIT, 

Burnt  in  the  Hand  — 

Whipped  —  — . 

Acquitted  —  — 

Difcharged  by  Proclamation  — 

According  every  Ignoramus  in  Felony 

NORFOLK   CIRCUIT, 

Acquitted  and  Order  of  Delivery  in  Murder 
The  like  in  all  other  Felons  — 

Order  on  Delivery  on  Proclamation 
Ditto  on  Ignoramus  Bill  — 


£■ 

i'. 

D. 

— 

4 

8 

— 

4 

8 

— 

8 

4 

— 

8 

4 

6 

4 

I 

8 

I 

I 

4 

— 

'5 

8 

— 

'3 

4 

MIDLAND 


478 


TABLES. 


MIDLAND   CIRCUIT, 

Acquitted  and  Difcharge  Fee  in  Murder 
The  like  in  other  Felons  — 

Difcharge  Fee  according  — 

Difcharge  Fee  or  Proclamation 


OXFORD   CIRCUIT, 

For  every  Prifoner  acquitted  of  Felony  on  one  Indiftment  ^ 
difcharged  —  —  — i 

For  every  Acquittal  after  the  firfb  —  — 

For  every  Prifoner  difcharged  by  Proclamation  — 

Guilty  Burnt  in  the  Hand  or  Whipped  and  Difcharged      — 


£■ 


s. 


'3 


D. 

8 
8 


8 
9 


WESTERN  CIRCUIT, 


Acquitted  including  Plea  and  Difcharge 
Ignoramus   ijs.   4d.  and  Difcharge  13  s.  4d. 
Difcharge  by  Proclamation  — 

Conviftion  in  Man-flaughter  — 


NORTHERN   CIRCUIT, 


Not  guilty  Difcharged 
Difcharged  by  Proclamation 


TABLE 


TABLES, 


479 


TABLE 


IL 


HOME 


CIRCUIT 


TOTAL  ACCOUNT  of  Prisoners  Burnt  in  the  Hand- 
Whipped  —  Acquitted  —  Difcharged  by  Proclamation  —  or 
againft  whom  Bills  have  been  returned  Not  found  —  in  the 
Counties  of  Hertford,  Essex,  Kent,  Sussex  and  Surry, 
for  feven  Years,   from  the  Year  1764  to  1770  Inclufive. 


Hertford     — 

Essex              — 
Kent               — 
Sussex            — 
Surry            — 

Total 

-a 
a 

_c 
c 

-0 

a, 

13 

'3 

<; 

>>  - 

0 
-0  'C 

^i!    0 

0=^ 

-a 
c 
3 

0 

c 

as 
0 

■ 
9 

12 

36 

47 

32 

136 

24 

35 

7' 

62 

3" 

223 

75 

20 

132 

9' 

34 

352 

1 1 

'5 

23 

j6 

4 

69 

40 

•4 

124 

77 

24 

279 

•59 

96 

386 

293 

125 

1059 

TABLE 


[     4Bo    ] 


\ 


T     A     B    ll 


An  account  of  the  Number  of  Prisoners  Tried  and  Acquitted — of  PriLn 
Sentenced     to    be    Whipped     and    Difcharged — and   of  Prifoners   Difchare 
the   feveral  Counties   and   Cities   within   the    OXFORD    CIRCUI'I 


B 

ERKSHIRE 

• 

Oxfordshire. 

VVoRCESTERSHIR  E. 

City 

ofWoRCESTER. 

'It- 

GLOUCESTERlft 

T3 

-d 

T^ 

-3 

-a 

0 

0 

0 

tJ3 

tJ3 

bO 

CJ) 

fco 

ri 

-a 

0 

al 

TD 

0 

-T3 

0 

-0 

0 

-a 

J= 

0 

-a 

J= 

(L> 

-C 

•a 

J= 

(U 

■a 

n 

to 

E 

E 

tuO 

I- 
a 

E 

rj 

to 

rt 

E 

0 
CO 

rt 

Q      ijjl  £ 

5 

-0 
c 

T3 

u 

0 

.1; 

c 

0 

(5 

-t3 

0 

T3 

C 

-a 

0 

0 

Ci 

0 

>, 

c 

>^ 

c 

>^ 

c 

c 

c           Ctfl' 

rt 

J3 

rt 

^ 

rt 

*3 

X 

T3 

-0 

'3 

X 

-13 

-a 

'3 

X 

-c 

-T3 

3 

ffi 

nd 

-T3 

'3 

s  41' " 

0 

-c 

M 

a 

0 

<u 

60 

0 

CO 

0 

.c 

(L) 

w 

0 

-c     91!  1 

^ 

*^ 

CIh 

rt 

^ 

Oh 

^ 

*-* 

Oh 

r3 

^ 

*~' 

ci. 

^ 

=■     '1  '■■  ' 

0 

= 

_C 

0 

C 

.c 

0 

c 

^ 

0 

^ 

-r; 

0 

;^ 

4-> 
C 

pa 

^ 

■^ 

c 

^ 

li 

c 
a 

^ 

ii 

£s 

2 

1765 

10 

2 

0 

3 

6 

0 

I 

3 

'4 

— 

-» 

S 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1  ■» 

0  'h 

1:  0 

J  766 

1 1 

I 

2 

9 

8 

0 

0 

5 

18 

0 

0 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

'7 

'          \:i 

1767 

10 

0 

I 

- 

16 

0 

2 

3 

M 

- 

3 

6 

-» 

0 

0 

0 

16 

°         ':. 

1768 

14 

0 

0 

7 

1 1 

0 

I 

6 

12 

I 

0 

~ 

1 

0 

0 

I 

20 

^         i: 

1769 

4 

2 

0 

I 

7 

0 

0 

5 

12 

0 

0 

10 

1 

0 

0 

I 

10 

'■  0 

1770 

3 

0 

0 

4 

5 

0 

0 

4 

7 

• 

0 

7 

I 

0 

0 

0 

10 

'         1. 

>77" 

9 

0 

0 

2 

3 

0 

0 

3 

8 

I 

■ 

7 

- 

0 

0 

0 

Z  1 

I          1 

:'  0 

I'otal 

61 

5 

3 

2S 

5*^ 

0 

4 

29 

«5 

/ 

0 

44 

9 

0 

0 

n 

0& 

■i-i 

I 


[     48i     ] 


cd    and  Sentenced  to  be  Burnt  in  the  Hand   and  Difcharged — of  Prisoners 
ir'iticn  —  at  the  feveral  Assizes   and  General  Gaol-deliveries  held  in  and  for 
ears  ending  at  Michaelmas    1771. 


I 


c 

DUCESTER 

Monmouthshire. 

Herefordshire. 

Shropshire. 

Staffordshire. 

-a 

-a 

-d 

T3 

c 

0 

<u 

u 

c 

c 

M 

. 

c 

i« 

. 

c 

bO 

. 

c 

fc^ 

, 

c 

r 

'a 

0 

ca 

-a 

0 

rt 

13 

0 

a 

-a 

0 

J. 

«j 

-a 

-c 

u 

-d 

^ 

f 

-a 

-c 

(U 

**J 

-0 

^ 

60 

s 

0 

n 

E 

to 

C3 

5 

rt 

CI 

E 

bo 

rt 

0:; 

s 

rt 

rt 
E 

rt 

0 
bo 

« 

y 

rt 

rt 

E 

rt 

c 

5 

u 
0 

J5 

-a 

c 

(5 

0 

J3 

5 

-a 
c 

(5 

0 
£ 

5 

-a 

c 

0 
0 

(1^ 

5 

c 
rt 

s 

X 

-c 

-a 

-0 

-a 

-« 

c 

^ 

:>, 

c 

C 

J3 

>s 

c 
n 

c 

J3 

>, 

C 
rt 

c 

J3 

>> 

ra 

c 

rt 

X 

"T3 

-0 

*3 

ffi 

-u 

'3 

X 

•T3 

-0 

•"s 

ffi 

TS 

7 

'3 

IT 

-T3 

-a 
0 

tb 

0 

0 

0 

Oh 

d 

bo 

0 

IX 

c 

a 

0 

4-» 
C 

J5 

0 

c 

rt 
J3 

0 

a. 

IS 

rt 

0 

c 

15 

rt 

4J 

^ 

'H 

2 

4_, 

^ 

^LJ 

^ 

4J 

^ 

0=: 

2 

4-> 

^ 

^ 

^ 

c 

^ 

fc 

0 

L. 

5fi 

Q 

Q 

S 

9 

a 

3 

3 

n 

M 

« 

n 

PQ 

0 

0 

7 

I 

0 

2 

'3 

0 

0 

6 

10 

S 

0 

14 

I  1 

' 

0 

6 

0 

2 

2 

0 

0 

I 

lO 

4 

0 

3 

16 

0 

0 

4 

22 

4 

0 

7 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

2 

9 

0 

0 

10 

11 

I 

0 

8 

20 

3 

3 

8 

0 

2 

6 

I 

0 

2 

/ 

0 

0 

5 

10 

3 

2 

3 

22 

0 

I 

7 

0 

0 

7 

I 

0 

3 

6 

0 

0 

2 

12 

1 

2 

4 

10 

I 

0 

8 

0 

3 

5 

0 

0 

4 

■5 

1 

0 

3 

14 

I 

3 

II 

-7 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

6 

8 

0 

0 

4 

4 

0 

0 

5 

20 

~ 

I 

6 

c 

0 

7 

35 

3 

0 

20 

1 
68 

J 

0 

3  3 

77 

1 1 

/ 

49 

1 1  2 

5 

45 

TotaL     Not  Guilty  Difchaiged     -     -     .     .  615 

Burnt  in  the  Hand  and  Difcharged  47 

Whipped  and  Difcharged      -     -     _  a3 

Difcharged  by  Proclamation     -     -  293 


1765 
1766 

1767 
1768 
1769 


TotKl 


Q.qq 


Great  Total 


TABLE 


482 


TABLES. 


TABLE 


IV. 


ABSTRACT    of  Sir  Stephen  Theodore  Janssen's    TABLE   of  Crimi 
Condemned  J  Executed;  and  Pardoned  :  at  the  Old  Bailey,  London. 


Condemned. 

Executed. 

Pardoned  &c. 

Peace 

>749 

61 

44- 

'7 

1750 

84 

56 

28 

I7S' 

85 

63 

22 

1752 

52 

47 

5 

'753 

57 

41 

16 

17S4 

SO 

34 

16 

Peace ") 

»75S 

39 
— —  428 

21 

——     306 

18 
'  122 

and  J 
War  ] 

■  1756 

30 

J3 

'7 

War 

1757 

37 

26 

II 

1758 

32 

20 

12 

1759 

»5 

6 

9 

1760 

H 

10 

4 

1-61 

22 

17 

5 

I762 

25 

>5 

10 

War  •; 

1 

and  ] 
Peace  ' 

'  '763 

61 

236 

3- 

'39 

29 
97 

Peace 

1764 

52 

3» 

21 

1765 

4« 

26 

"5 

1766 

39 

20 

'9 

1767 

49 

22 

27 

1768 

54 

27 

27 

1769 

7» 

24 

47 

1770 

91 

49 

42 

1771 

60 

34 

26 

457 

233 

224 

1121 

678 

443 

■ 

' 

T 

A     B 

L 

E     S. 

Oii20  Seflions'in  the  15  Years  of  Peace  (8  in  a  year)  only  one  was  Maiden  j  in  1749. 

Of  the  64  Seffions  in  the  8  Years  of  War,  nine  were  Maiden. 

Stenced  to  Death     - 

Mur- 
der. 

Houfe- 
breaking 

High, 
way. 

Horfe- 

ftealing. 

For- 
gery. 

Coin- 
ing. 

Return- 
ing from 
Tranf- 
port- 
ation. 

Defraud- 
ing 
Credi- 
tors. 

Shop- 
lifting 
Riot 
and  12 
other 
Crimes. 

Total. 

81 

208 

362 

90 

95 

1 1 

31 

3 

240 

II21 

Ecuted 

72 

118 

251 

22 

7' 

10 

22 

3 

109 

678 

P  ioned,  Tranfported,  -p 
01  died  in  Gaol     -   j 

9 

90 

III 

68 

24 

I 

9 

0 

131 

443 

H' 

R  Stephen  intending  a  Lift  only  of  thofe  who  were  condemned  to  die,  has  not 

in  is  Table  a  Column  for  Tranfport  Convidts.     But  at  the  bottom  of  the  Sheet  he 

no  i  that  there  were 

483 


Tranfported  for  feven  or  fourteen  Years 
To  which  Number  he  adds 


Tranfported  by   the   King's    Mercy 
after  receiving  Sentence  of  Death 

Total  Tranlports 


l\ 


5199 


401 


5600 


Tfi  fecond  Number  of  Tranfports   401   is,  doubtlefs,   part  of  the  Number   443, 
the  laft  of  the  three  Totals  above. 


Q.qq2 


TABLE 


[  484  ] 

TABLE         V. 
An  account  of  the  Number   of  Criminals  Condemned  to  Death; 

Executed,;  and  Sentenced  to  Tranfportation  :  with  their  refpcdive  Offences :    from  the  Year 
1750  to  1772  Inclufive;  within  the  feveral  Counties  &c.  in  the  NORFOLK  CIRCUIT. 


a 

> 

,0  C 

-0  ^ 

c 

■si 

(Ml 

C 

■i 
0 

0 

in 
J 

6 
0 

x 

CO 

0 

II 

c 
0 

u 

3 
(-» 

X 

>  0 

c 
0 

c 
0 

c 

to 

a 

c 
s- 

=  S 

1750 

2 

3 

8 

8 

-- 

-- 

-- 

2  1 

10 

8 

24 

3 

-- 

35 

I75I 

-- 

6 

4 

6 

-- 

-- 

-- 

16 

12 

12 

24 

-- 

-- 

36 

1752 

3 

3 

3 

'5 

I 

-- 

3 

2S 

1  I 

'3 

28 

2 

44 

'753 

2 

4 

2 

II 

-- 

-- 

2 

21 

6 

10 

18 

- 

29 

'754 

- 

9 

£ 

•7 

I 

-- 

4 

33 

'3 

20 

29 

4 

54 

•755 

-- 

2 

4 

7 

- 

-- 

I 

'4 

2 

9 

20 

I 

3' 

1756 

- 

2 

2 

7 

-- 

- 

6 

17 

I 

16 

18 

-- 

36 

'757 

I 

8 

5 

II 

- 

-- 

2 

27 

6 

12 

34 

-- 

I 

46 

1758 

-- 

2 

6 

'5 

-- 

-- 

I 

24 

5 

23 

3' 

I 

2 

57 

'759 

-- 

2 

3 

8 

-- 

-- 

-- 

'3 

3 

'5 

12 

2 

-- 

29 

1760 

-- 

S 

3 

3 

-- 

- 

-- 

II 

3 

II 

'5 

-- 

I 

27 

.76> 

• 

I 

2 

2 

-- 

-- 

2 

S 

2 

4 

'3 

-- 

I 

18 

.762 

I 

I 

I 

1 

2 

I 

I 

8 

2 

3 

10 

- 

-- 

'5 

1763 

3 

3 

I 

5 

-- 

-- 

• 

13 

5 

6 

'9 

1 

1 

27 

1764 

-- 

4 

2 

8 

-- 

3 

2 

'9 

3 

10 

16 

.  I 

4 

29 

1765 

-- 

4 

2 

14 

-- 

-- 

-- 

20 

I 

'9 

29 

1 

2 

52 

1766 

2 

S 

4 

'4 

-- 

- 

2 

30 

4 

17 

27 

-- 

I 

45 

.767 

2 

6 

2 

'4 

-- 

-- 

6 

30 

S 

38 

34 

- 

- 

72 

1768 

-- 

1 

1 

10 

-- 

4 

16 

5 

16 

35 

I 

2 

55 

1769 

2 

9 

I 

4 

-- 

I 

I 

18 

6 

1 1 

22 

-- 

2 

34 

1770 

-- 

5 

5 

I  ' 

-- 

1 

1 

24 

7 

1  7 

|S 

-- 

-- 

35 

'77' 

I 

4 

I 

6 

-- 

- 

4 

16 

S 

1 1 

30 

-- 

2 

43 

'77^ 

Total 

-- 

I 

I 

4 

-- 

-- 

I 

7 

-- 

7 

'7 

-- 

■ 

25 

874 

20 

93 

65 

202 

4 

6 

44 

+34 

■'7i 

308 

523 

'5 

28 

TABLE 


[    485     ] 
T     A     B     L     E         VI. 

An  account  of  the  Number  of  Criminals  Condemned  to  Death  j 
Executed  ;  and  Sentenced  to  Tranfportation  :  with  their  refpedive  Offences  :  from  the  Year 
1750  to  1772  Inclufive  ;   within  the  feveral  Counties  &c.  in  the  MIDLAND  CIRCUIT. 


.  to 
Pi 

c 

0 
,   0 

OS 

^  > 

0  c 

.SJ: 

'■^     ° 

a  -a 

0 

H 

n 

S 
E 

5 

0 

X 

0 
-0 

II 

0 

Si 

W 

Tranfported,  viz. 

Capital  Offences  reprieved, 

Offences  made 

tranfportable. 

Grand  and  Petty  Larceny. 

175c 

1 

-• 

6 

4 

3 

16 

- 

— 

2 

32 

5 

50 

i75' 

-- 

I 

4 

5 

-- 

'» 
J 

-- 

- 

-- 

'3 

3 

47 

1752 

■  -- 

I 

2 

-- 

I 

16 

-- 

-- 

3 

23 

3 

45 

'753 

-- 

-- 

8 

I 

I 

'7 

I 

-- 

I 

29 

I 

58 

»754 

-- 

I 

3 

I 

-- 

20 

-- 

-- 

4 

29 

4 

63 

'755 

-- 

2 

4 

2 

3 

10 

-- 

- 

4 

25 

6 

44 

1756 

2 

-- 

I 

4 

I 

•7 

1 

-- 

4 

30 

6 

44 

'757 

-- 

-- 

2 

3 

I 

'4 

-- 

2 

-- 

22 

4 

60 

1758 

-- 

I 

5 

5 

-- 

'9 

I 

-- 

4 

35 

6 

54 

'759 

-- 

4 

4 

- 

I 

16 

I 

2 

^ 
J 

31 

9 

43 

1760 

-- 

1 

I 

-- 

-- 

12 

-- 

-- 

I 

'5 

2 

32 

1761 

I 

2 

3 

I 

I 

6 

-- 

I 

15 

5 

28 

1762 

-- 

2 

-- 

-- 

-- 

8 

-- 

I 

-- 

II 

4 

23 

.763 

- 

I 

4 

I 

I 

9 

3 

I 

3 

23 

14 

45 

1764 

- 

3 

6 

I 

- 

'4 

-- 

-- 

I 

25 

II 

63 

1765 

-- 

i 

4 

5 

I 

9 

- 

- 

- 

22 

7 

62 

1766 

-- 

I 

4 

2 

4 

12 

-- 

" 

3 

26 

4 

63 

1767 

-- 

2 

4 

6 

-- 

1 1 

-- 

-- 

- 

23 

6 

45 

1768 

- 

-- 

- 

2 

1 

'7 

I 

-- 

- 

23 

f 

49 

1769 

- 

2 

5 

' 

- 

10 

-- 

-- 

5 

23 

6 

37 

177c 

-- 

2 

3 

-- 

I 

6 

- 

-- 

I 

'4 

4 

45 

'77' 

-- 

-- 

-- 

3 

- 

6 

-- 

-- 

I 

9 

2 

36 

1772 

- 

I 

5 

2 

" 

II 

-- 

- 

I 

20 

2 

21 

Total 

4 

30  I  80  1 

49 

20  j279 

8 

6 

42  I51S 

116 

1057 

TABLE 


[     486     ] 

TABLE         VII. 
FELONS  delivered   from  NEWGATE   to  be  transported. 


Sessions. 

Lon- 
don. 

Mid- 
dlefex. 

Hicks' 
Hall. 

minrter 

'1  Gwer  1 
Seffion. 

Capital 
R.efpites 

Total. 

1773.     January 

10 

«9 

3 

6 

..      ) 

-- 

38 

February 

8 

24 

9 

- 

-- 

-- 

4' 

April 

16 

24 

'9 

"4 

- 

20 

93 

May 

10 

29 

'4 

- 

-- 

-- 

53 

July 

14 

49 

6 

5 

-- 

-- 

74 

September 

1 1 

=4 

9 

- 

-- 

- 

44 

Oaober 

10 

»7 

S 

6 

- 

- 

4' 

December 

10 

'5 

9 

- 

-- 

'7 

5« 

89 

201 

77 

3' 

— 

37 

435 

1774.     January 

4 

18 

3 

— 

- 

- 

25 

February 

16 

33 

7 

3 

I 

-- 

60 

April 

15 

24 

17 

>3 

I 

-- 

70 

May 

6 

22 

2 

-- 

-- 

- 

30 

July 

H 

22 

12 

8 

4 

30 

90 

September 

22 

16 

10 

- 

2 

I 

5« 

Oaober 

8 

8 

6 

5 

I 

- 

2?. 

December 

•4 

22 
.65 

16 

73 

-- 

I 

13 

44 

66 

99 

-9 

10 

420 

1775.     January 

9 

29 

'4 

9 

— 

-- 

61 

February 

9 

20 

7 

" 

2 

-- 

38 

April 

»9 

•7 

12 

4 

- 

-- 

52 

May 

5 

9 

2 

- 

" 

- 

16 

July 

6 

II 

7 

5 

-- 

20 

49 

September 

H 

20 

6 

-- 

- 

-- 

40 

Oftober 

9 

lO 

7 

4 

2 

-- 

32 

December 

8 

9 

7 

-- 

I 

II 

36 

79 

'25 

62 

22 

? 

3' 

324 

Great  Total 


1 179 


CONCLUSION. 


IT  was  once  my  intention  to  have  publiflied  the  preceding 
account  of  Englifh  Prifons,  *  without  any  of  the  intro- 
dudlory  matter  which  compofes  the  former  part  of  this 
Volume.  But  thinking,  from  a  clofe  attention  to  the  fub- 
jeft,  that  it  was  in  my  power  in  fome  inftances  to  fuggeft 
remedies  to  the  evils  which  I  had  been  witnefs  of;  and 
aware  of  the  common  proverbial  objedlion  '*  that  it  is  eafier 
to  find  faults  than  to  mend  them;"  I  imagined  I  fhould  be 
culpable  in  fupprefling  any  thing  which  might  conduce  to 
improvement  in  a  matter  I  had  fo  much  at  heart. 

A  PERSON  of  more  ability,  with  my  knowledge  of  fadls, 
would  have  written  better :  but  my  ambition  was  not  the 


*  Mv  Readers  will  obferve  that  I  do  not  give  this  as  an  account  of  every  fingle  Prifon 
in  the  Kingdom.  Some,  doubtlefs,  have  efcaped  my  refearches ;  for  it  was  only  by 
afliduous  enquiries  in  my  frequent  journeys  that  I  was  able  to  difcover  all  thofel  have 
mentioned.  It  will  readily  be  conceived,  however,  that  thofe  I  have  mifledmuftbe 
of  very  fmall  confequence. 

fame 


N 


D 


E 


X. 


Page 


Ab 


IBINGDON  Bridewell         -    314. 

Acquitted  Prifoners,  detained  for 

Fees  -  -       31. 

— ^— feldom  employed    39, 

Aft  for  preferving  health  of  Prifon- 
ers, its  efFefts       -  -       3,  J. 

Afts  of  French  Parliament  refpeft- 

ing  Prifons  -  -       94. 

^Ethiopia,  India  &c.    written   on 

doors  in  Prifons         -         -     106. 

Aikin,  Mr.  his  Thoughts  on  Hof- 

pitals  referred  to  -       97. 

Air,  frefh,  theneceffity  of  in  Prifons  12. 

—   malignity  of  in  Gaols        -       13. 

Alarm  bell      -      223,  312,  327,  468. 

Aldfworth,  Mrs.  her  Legacy     -     393, 

Aliment  for  Debtors,  difficulty  in 

obtaining  -  -       10. 


Page 
Allnutt,  Mr,  his  Legacy  -     206. 

Allowance    to    Prifoners,    defefts 

refpefting  -  -       u. 

—— quantity  propofed       -       61. 

— — — —  Lifts  offhould  be  hung  up  64. 

farmed,  inftances  of  -  2ir, 

244,  295,  339,  360,  394,471. 
'  to    Felons    paid    only 


monthly 

-      4ZS- 

Amfterdam 

253. 
-     124. 

Anglesey 

-    461. 

Anfwerp,  allowance  at 

-     I3+- 

Appleby  County  Gaol 

-    433- 

reach 

41. 

of  floods 

Bridewell 

-      434- 

Apprentices,  faulty,  rooms 

for       186, 

193,    238. 

Arundel,  Lord,  Proprietor 

-       385- 

R 


Affizes, 


I      N      D 


X. 


Page 

Affizes,  held  too  feldom  in  fome 

places  -  -         30. 

where  no  Prifon  -       229, 

234,  388. 
Axmlnjler,  Gaol-Diftemper  brought 

there  -  -         18. 

Jylejbury  County  Gaol  -       241. 

■  Bridewell     -       242. 


B. 


Bacon,  Lord,   his  opinion  of  the 

Gaol-Diftemper  -         18. 

Bailiffs,  diforders  arifing  from  their 

keeping  public  boufes       -         10. 

— — —  extortion  of  -       'bid. 

•  Keepers  of  Prifons     189,  227, 

408,  409,  452. 

Bala,  Great  Seffions  there       -       463. 

Bankrupts   and  Infolvents,   fevere 

law  againft         -  -         98. 

Bark  and   Cordials   prefcribed  to 

Prifoners  -         138,  244. 

Barking  Bridewell        -  -       221. 

Barrack-beds,  what  -       223. 

BasforJ  -  -       294. 

Ba//  •  -        104. 

Bajlngftoke  -  -        359. 

Baj/ik  -  -  93. 

Batb  City  Gaol  -  -       394. 

Baths,  neceflary  in  a  Gaol  -  45. 
BatLy  -  -       413. 

Beaufort,  D.of,  deaths  Prifoners  340. 


Page 
Beaumaris  -  -       461. 

Beccaria,  Marquis  of,  his  opinion 

of  confinement  before  trial         29. 
— —  on  fpeedy  punifhment         30. 

-  on  prevention  of  crimes  74. 
Becclei  Bridewell  -  -  266. 
Bedding,  want  of,  in  Prifons  15. 
^— —  and  ftraw,  inftances  where 

none  in  Prifons  171,  175,  183, 
186,  193,  209,  213,  214,  215, 
233,  236,  238,  240,  253,  274, 
286,  294,  300,  304,  309,  312, 
316,   320,    329,   349,    357,   365, 

369*  39*»  395'  402.  403'  4iz» 
434'  444.   449.  470.   472- 

Bedfordshire 

Bedford  County  Gaol 

■  Bridewell 

Benediftines,  their  Prifon 

Berkeley 

•  Lord,  Proprietor 

Berkhamjled  Bridewell 

Berkshire 

Bern 

Bernvick 

Beverley  Bridewell 

Hall-Garth 

Town  Gaol 


243- 
ibid. 

244. 

139. 

347- 

349- 
214. 

31  ^• 

100. 
429. 
403. 
ibid, 
ibid. 
91. 


Bicctre 

Bien  venu  on  admiflion  to  a  Prifon  112. 
Birmingham  Town  Gaol  -       274. 

Black  Affize  at  Oxford  -         17. 

JS/ai-f-/";7a;  J  Bridewell  -       178. 

Blacketj  Sir  Walter,  hisbeuefacSlion  421. 

Bcdmin 


N      D 


Page 

Page 

Bodmin  Bridewell 

-       383- 

Bury  Gaol 

-        267. 

Sheriff's  Ward 

-       384- 

—    Bridewell 

-        268. 

Borough  Compter 

208. 

Butler,  Bp.  quoted 

43- 

Bowes,  Mr.  his  charity 

401. 

Bread,  Ihort  weight  of 

II. 

——  account,  fliould  be  kept  exaft  61, 
— —  Infpeftor  of        -  -       398. 

"—  and  water.  Diet,  defigned  as 

a  punifhment       -  -       iic. 


long  time  upon 

living   a 
-       367.  4>7- 

Breconshire 

-       47«- 

Brecon  County  Gaol 

-       ibid. 

•      472- 

Town  Gaol 

ibid. 

Bremen 

-       H7- 

Breton,  Abbe,  Founder  of  a  Cha- 

rity  for    fupplying 

Prifoners 

with  linen 

-         83. 

Bridewells,    defefls  and 

propofed 

improvements  in 

68. 

Bridges,  William,  his  legacy  335,  336. 

Bridge-xater  -  -  395, 

BriJIol  Newgate       -  -  391. 

I  Bridewell      -  -  393> 

Brome,  Mr.  Chaplain, commended  264. 

Broughton,  Valentine,  his  legacy  445. 

Bruges  -  -  137. 

Bruffeh  -  -  135. 

BuCltlNGHAMSHIRE  -  24 1. 

Burlington,  Earl  of,  his  charity  401. 


Calcutta,  fatal  for  want  of  ail'  ij. 

Calvert's  brewhoufe,  charity  from  167, 

17Z,   176. 
Cambridgeshire  -       248. 

Cambridge  Caflle         -  -       ibid, 

——^—  County  Bridewell  250. 

-^— —  Town  Gaol  -      ibid. 

Bridewell       -       251. 

Canterbury  Bridewell  -        225. 

City  Gaol  -       226. 

Cardiff  Connty  Gaol      -  -       473,. 

Cardiganshire  -  -       464. 

Cardigan  County  Gaol  -       ibid, 

Carlijle  County  Gaol  -      430. 

City  -  -       432- 

Carmarthenshire  -       467. 

Carmarthen  Caftle  -       ibid, 

•  Borough  Gaol       -      469. 

Carnarvonshire  -       462. 

Carnar-Don  County  Gaol  -       ibid. 

Caroline,  Princefs,  her  charity  176. 
Carr,   William,    committed   from 

Ecclefiaftical  Court  -       413. 

Cajfel,  Church  there  with  feats  for 

Criminals         -  -       113. 


Cattle, 


N       D 


X. 


Page 
Cattle,     Aft    in    Ireland    againft 

keeping  in  Prifons  -         60. 

Certificate  from  Parifli  for  Debtor's 

County  allowance  -  297,  396. 
Chamber  rents  and  furniture  to  be 

fixed  -  -         57. 

'  of  French  Prifons       85. 

Chandos,    Duke   of,     his   charity 

356.  357" 
Chapel,  neceflary  in  a  Gaol     -         48. 

improper  time  for  fervice  in  55. 

Chaplain,  his  Charafter  and  Duty   54, 

— — difcharged  -       246. 

■  Salary  reduced         -       383. 

Charity  box,  broke  open,  method 

to  prevent  it 
Charity  fervice  in  France 
Chelmsford  Coanly  Gaol 
•  Bridewell 

Cheney  Court,  for  the  Soke 
Cheshire 
Chejler  Caftle 

City  Gaol 

— —   Bridewell 
Chefterfield  Bridewell 
Gaol 


372- 
84. 

2l6. 

219. 

350. 
442. 
ibid. 
448. 
451. 

285. 

286. 

23>- 


Chichejler  City  Gaol 

Children,  profligate,  fenttoPrifon 

at  their  pare<its  requeft  106,  123. 
Cholmondeley,  Lord,  Proprietor  452. 
Cinque  Ports  -  -       227. 

Cirencejier  -  -       348. 


Circuit,  Home 

Norfolk 

Midland 

. Oxford 

■  Weftcrn 

Northern 

Chefter 

■  North  Wales 
— — —  Carmarthen 

■  South  Wales 


Page 
211. 
241. 

269. 

3"- 

353- 
396- 
442. 
461. 
464. 
470, 
266. 


Clare  Bridewell 

Claufes  of  A&.  againfl  Spirituous 

Liquors,  to  be  hung  up  64. 

-^— inftances  where 

nothungup  172,   220,   221,   226, 

238,   242,    244,   246,   253,   261, 
■  262,    266,   267,   268,   274,   275, 

281,   312,   322,   329,   336,   347, 

349.   357.   364.   367.   383.   390. 

392>   394>   395'   422'   426,   429, 

431,   441,   462,   463,   466,   468, 

470,   472. 
Claufes  of  Aft  that  Prifoners  may 

fend  out  for  neceffaries    350,  399. 
Cleanlinefs,  its  benefits  -         58. 

Chrkcn-ivcll'^TlAcwsW  -        i8j. 

Clerks  of  Affize,  Prifoners  detained 

for  their  Fees  -         31. 

■^— ^— — ^— —  their  new  demand 

for  Certificate  -       ibid. 

— — — ^-^  charge    made    by 

one,  on  a  pardoned  Tranfport  289. 


Clerks 


I      N       D 


X. 


Page 


Clerks  of  the    Peace,     Prifoners 

detained  for  their  Fees 
-^^— ^  Fees  demanded  by 


fome  of  them       -  -       ibid. 

•  their  demand    on 

Sailors  fined  a  (hilling  -  372. 
Cloaths,  tainted   by  fodl  air,  how 

to  be  purified       -  -         59. 

'  for  Prifoners  to  be  tried  in  270, 

289,  398. 
■  to  be  worn  in  Gaol      -       312. 

Clubs  in  Prifons,  an  abufe       -         51. 

one  for  Wine  and  Beer  159,  198. 

Coals  allowed  244,  254,  282,  326,422. 

432- 
219. 
220. 
100. 
29  J. 


Cockermouth 

CoUhefier  Bridewell 
Town  Gaol 

Collar,  iron,  on  Galley  flaves 

Colleftion  for  Town  Prifoners 

-^— through    the     County, 

annual  -         277,  283,  288. 

Colleges,  at  Oxford,  charitable      317. 

I  Winchefter,  donation  354. 

Collings,  Abel,  his  charity     -       291. 

Collyer,  James,  Efq.  his  complaint 

to  the  King  of  a  bad  Gaol       253. 

Commiflaire  de  la  Prifon  in  France    90. 

Common-fide  Debtors,  fhould  have 

allowance         -  -         58. 

Conciergerie  at  Paris  -         82. 

late  fire  there    86. 

Condemned  Prifoners,  liberal  al- 
lowance to,  abroad         102,  107. 

— -^ — — ^_____ —  not  left  alone  125. 


Page 
Condemned  Prifoners,     fent  to  a 

feparate  Prifon  in  France  81. 

Cells  for    in 

Newgate  -  -       152. 

Contempts,  Prifoners  fo  called        344. 
Conveyance  to  Aflize  at  Keeper's 

Expenfe         -         264,  454,  457. 

— — to     Quarter    Seffions 

ditto  -  285,  300, 

Co/iivay,  Great  SefEons  at        -       462, 
Cook,  Capt.   notes  the   efFeft   of 
cleanlinefs   on  the  behaviour 
of  his  (hip's  crew  -        59. 

Copper  and  Bath         -  -         45. 

Cornwall  -  -       381. 

Duke  of.  Proprietor    386. 

Court  military  of  Archbp.  of  York  408. 
Court  of  Confcience  Debtors,  con- 
fined with  Criminals       187,   194. 

cleared  at  different 

periods  -  187,  394. 

— — ^^—  fent    to   Bridewell 

187,   194, 
Coueniry  City  Gaol       -  -       273. 

Bridewell     -      -       274. 

Coivbridge  -  -        47?. 

— — — —  Great  Seflions  there        474. 
Crafter,     John,     a    late    Gaoler, 

commended         -  -       422. 

Crib  bedfteads  -  71,  264. 

Crowded  rooms,  bad  effefts  of   13,  14. 
Crown  Debtors,    not   cleared   by 

Infolvent  Afts         -  -         11, 

Croydon,  Aflize  there,  no  Prifon      234. 

Cumberland 


I       N       D 


X. 


Page 
Cumberland         -  -      430. 

Cutaneous  Diftemper  in  a  Prifon    260. 


D. 

Dagge,  Abel,  a  Gaoler,  commended  49. 

i)(j/{/ori/ Bridewell         -  -       226. 

Da-ventry  Town  Gaol  -      309. 

Davers,  Sir  Charles,  Proprietor     267. 

Dean  and  Chapter,  Proprietors      409. 

.  of     Borough 

St.  Peter,    their  Prifon  310. 

of  York,  Proprietor        -       407. 

Debtors,  why  not  permitted  to  work     9. 

■  ■   few  have  their  Groats  10. 

■  to  be  feparate  from  Felons 

by  Aft  Charles  II.  -         46. 

— — ^  few  in  Foreign  Countries, 

the  reafon  why  88,  117,  120. 
■  French,    how  cleared   by 

Parliament         -  -         90. 

-^— —  allowed  as  Felons     151,    170, 

174,   216,   232,   242,   254,   257, 

276,   280,   282,   306,   326,    435, 

442.  453- 

■  confined  with  Felons  194, 

208,  359. 
— — —  work  in  the    Crown  and 

Shire  Halls  -  -  436. 
refufing     to     fubmit      to 

Gaoler's  commands         -       454, 


Delfi 

-       13*- 

Denbighshire 

-       456- 

Derbyshire 

282. 

Derby  County  Gaol 

-      ibid. 

Town  Gaol 

.      28s. 

Derby,  John,  his  legacy 

-       367- 

—^     Lord,  Proprietor 

-      451- 

De-vizes 

-       364- 

Devonshire 

-      37>- 

Delays  of  trial  in  France,  correfted 

by  Parliament        -  -   •     89. 


——^ —  Duke  of,  Proprietor  409. 
Difcipline,  gentle  in  Bridewells  72. 
— ^-^-^  exadt  in  French  Gaols  86. 
Difpenfary,  General,  their  charity  175. 
Do/gel/y  .  -       463• 

Z)o/ //«jv  at  Amfterdam  -       128. 

Donations,  Lifts  of,  wanting  63. 

Doncajfer  -  -       410. 

Dorchejier  County  Gaol  -       366. 

Dorsetshire  -  -       ibid. 

Dowr  Caftle  -  -       227. 

—  Town  Gaol         -  -       ibid. 

Drunkennefs,  how  puniflied  in  a 

Sheriff's  Officer  -       130. 

Dublin  Gaoler  non-refident       -         53. 

Dungeons,  daily  vifited  in  France    87. 

'■  French,  horrid     87,  91,  95. 

.— in  nonewPrifonsabroad  io6. 

■  great  numbers  confined 

in  one  -  -       261. 

'  oflagonal,  very  deep     270. 

I  for  Debtors  -       277. 

— —  deep,  circular,  aired  by 

Hand  A'entilator  -       322. 

— — in  a  new  Bridewell         451. 

Dungeons, 


N       D 


X. 


Page 
Dungeons,  other  inftances   of   in 

Prifons  zii,  213,  214,  243, 
246,  255,  258,  267,  273,  274, 
281,  283,  288,  293,  296,  303, 
309,   J12,   314,   316,   319,   327, 

33I'  334.  354.  37'>  382.  39*. 
405,  407,   408,   417,  426,   436, 

440,   443,   449,   454,    47  z. 

Dunghills  &c.  to  be  removed  60. 

Duntze,  Dr.  and  his  Friend 
catch  the  Gaol-Diftemper  in 
London  -  -       iiB. 

Durham  -  -       416. 

— ^-^^—  County  Gaol  -      ibid. 

-^— — ^  Bridewell  -       420. 

Bilhop  of,  Proprietor     417. 

Dutch  and  Englifli  money  com- 
pared -  -       132. 


E, 


Ecclefiaftical  Court   Debtors,    no 

bail  for  -  -         11. 

— ^— — Warrant,  part 

of  the  form         -  -       413. 

Edraunfton,   William,   his  legacy 

438.  439- 
Edward   VI.    his   grant   to   Lord 

Wentworth  -  -  189. 

Ely  Gaol  -  -  252. 

—  Bilhop  of.  Proprietor  -  ibid. 

—  Bridewell  -  -  '  253. 


Page 

Employment,  none  In  Bridewells    194, 

213,   230,   236,   272,   274,   279, 

285,   293,   300,   319,   329,   338, 

347.   348.   3S7.   359.   369.   383. 
390,   394,   40Z,  403,  420,  451. 

Essex  -  .       216. 

Etty,  Mr.  LefTee,  lets  -       316. 

Exchequer  Debtors,  no  bail  for        11. 

■■  one  ten  years  in 

Gaol  -  -      474> 

Writs,     part    of    the 

form  of  -  -       345. 

—————— —   fufpicions   con- 
cerning -  -       ibid. 

Executions,  few  in  Holland     -       1 20. 
folemnity  of  abroad    ibid. 

-  371- 

-  373- 

-  376. 

-  377- 

-  3'°- 

-  '47' 


Exeter  High  Gaol 

Sheriff's  Ward      - 

■^—   Bridewell 

City  Gaol 

■  Lord,  Proprietor 

Explanation  of  Tables 
Extra-work,  Prifoners  fliould  have 

profit  of  -  -         7j 


F. 


Falmouth  -  -        385, 

Familhed,  almofl,    by  negleft   of 
.  Keeper,  three  Prifoners  231. 

— fix  Prifoners    338. 

Farming  Provifion,  acaufeofdiftrefs    12. 


S  f  f 


Farming 


I      N       D 


X. 


225. 

239- 
394- 


Page 
farming  Provifion,  refufcd  on  de- 

teftion  of  abufe  elfewhere  468. 
Farifti,  Mr,  Chaplain,  vifitedthofe 

fick  of  Gaol-Fever  -       431. 

Faftenings  of  curious  contrivance  440. 
Fees,  Ihould  be  abolifhed  -  57. 
i^-^  Tables  of  Ihould  be  hung  up     63. 

■  what  are  legal  -       149. 

lately  raifed  by  Juftices  186. 

— —  paid  by  County  -  223,  426. 
— —   aboliflied      in     Canterbury 

Bridewell 

■  a  Table  of  dated  1603 
— —  detention  for 
— —  lowered  by  Judges         265,  420. 
— ^  paid  by  Magiftrates         -       422. 

no  Table  of        214,   227,   230, 

231,  242,  253,  262,  267,  z68, 
275,  281,  285,  293,  301,  307, 
309,  310,  312,  313,  314,  319, 
320,   329,    342,   347,   349,   356, 

357.  358.  363.  369.  370>  372, 
380,  382,  383,  386,  390,  392, 
394,    403,   409,   4H,   431,  433, 

439'   44'.   452.   46«.   462.   463. 

464,   466,   46S,   4-0,  472,  474. 

Feet  of  Prifoners  fore  and  black      187. 

Felons,  their  allowance  fcanty  11. 

chained  at  night  to  bed- 
Heads  -  -       267. 

■— ^    lately  efcaped      -      312,  443. 

—^     beg     in     the     flrcets     at 
Chriftmas  -  361,  372. 

■     fick,  relieved  by  Recorder  436. 


Page 
Fenelon,  quotation  from  -        68. 

Fenton,  Mr.    Recorder,    his    hu- 
manity -  -       436. 
Fighting  in  Gaols  to  be  puniftied     62. 
Fines,  what  Prifoners  called  fo       148. 
— —    very  miferable      -      344,  468. 

no  County  allowance  to       344. 

Fire,  Sheriff's  Officer  to  attend  at  130, 
—^  efcape  from  on  the  Leads  171. 
Fire-place  neceffary  in  a  Bridewell  71. 
Firing     given      by     Gaoler      to 

Common-fide  Debtors     -       373. 

^—      and    candles    allowed    in 

plenty  -  -       422. 

Fijberton- Anger  Gaol  -       361. 

Fleet  Prifon  -  -        156. 

Flintshire  -  -       453.. 

Flint   County  Gaol  -       ihid. 

Fokingham  Bridewell  -       301. 

Food,  want  of  in  Bridewells  8. 

■^^— — ^—  in  County  Gaols         9, 

— —    regulation   of  -         60. 

Free  ward,  neceffary  for  Common- 
fide  Debtors         -  -        58. 

none      -     241,    312,     316, 

336,    409. 
— — —  a  thorough-fare  to  other 

rooms  -  -       296. 


Gabriel,  John,  his  donation  and 

legacy  -  -       340' 

Gjaifjtomugh 


N      D 


X. 


Page 
Cainjborough  Bridewell  -       300. 

Galley-flaves    in    France,      com- 
mencement of  their  term  81. 

— — in  Bern,  fo 'Called     loo. 

• Honnetes 

and  Denionnettea  -       109. 

Gaming,  a  bad  cuftom  in  Prifons     26. 

'  prohibited        -       4.45,  4.50. 

Gaol,  County,  propofed  plan  of      42. 

— —    profefledly  not  for  Punilh- 

ment  at  Utrecht  -       131. 

Gaol- Committee,  their  Report  of 
opinion  of  Judges  againft  Ironing    28. 

'         their  difappro- 

bation  of  Taps  in  a  Prifon         5 1 . 

their     Lift     of 

Charities  to  the  Fleet        -       159. 
Gaol-Delivery,  but  once  a  year       30, 
258,  418,  422,  426,  431,  433. 
■  once  in  3  years  411. 

Gaol-Diftemper,  Stowe's  account  of    2. 
-  deftroys  more  than 

are  executed         -  -         17. 


fpreads  beyond  the 


Prifon  -  -       ibiii. 

—  unknown  in  fome 

countries  abroad  -       100. 

—^^—  none  in  Ruffia  Hid. 
'  inftances    of     in 


Englifli  Gaols       175,    192,  212, 

217,   Z19,   223,   226,   230,  233, 

242,   244,   270,   293,   322,  331, 

340,   342,   344,  354,  357,  364, 

365,   382,   383,   389,   390,  402, 
431,  440,  444,  475. 


Page 

Gaoler,  non-relident,  a  grievance    33. 

— —   his  duty         -  -         49. 

-^-^—   French,  hanged  for  fuffer- 

ing  a  Prifoner  to  ftarve     -         86. 

«  ftrift     regulations     con- 

cerning -  -       129. 

of  two  Gaols  thirty-three 

years  -  -       297. 

'  four  fucceffions  of  in  the 

fame  family         -  -       307. 

— — —  forty-four  years  in  office, 
figns  Rules  and  Orders,  and 
requires  Garnifh  -       367. 

■  by  Patent  from  Bifhop      416. 

paid  by  Hereditary  Sheriff  433. 

Garnifh,  explained         -  -         25. 

— — —     forbidden  in  France  83. 

■^— ^—  a  paper  hung  up  demand- 
ing it  -         190,  217,  285. 

■  forbidden  by  Juftices  332. 
— required  by  a  Gaoler        367. 

■  required  in  an  old  Table 

of  Fees  -  -       408. 

Garnifh  room  -  -       264. 

Gate-houfe,  Wejlminfter  -        195. 

Gene'va         -  -  -  ^7. 

Gerrard,  Sir  Thomas,  his  charity  438. 
Ghent  -  -  -        138. 

Gilpin,  Bernard,  preaches  in  Prifons  54. 
Glamorganshire  -       473> 

Glafgoiv,  Gaoler  there  ordered  to 

fee  every  room  daily  -  53. 
— —     politenefs    of    the   Ma- 

giftrates  -  -      ihid. 


Sffz 


Glafs 


I       N       D 


Page 
Glafs  windows,  improper  in  Gaols  44. 
Gloucestershire  -       343. 

Cloucefter  Caftle         -  -       ibid. 

. City  Gaol  -       350. 

Godolphin,  Earl  of.  Proprietor      386. 

Go/fort  -  -       357- 

Gould,    Judge,     fines    a   Gaoler 
for  detaining  acquitted   Pri- 
foners  -  -         32. 

Grand  Chatelet  at  Paris  -         82. 

Grate  in  floors         -  -        45. 

Groats,  Debtors         -         -       10,  62. 

Groningen  -  -        1 30. 

Guildford  Bridewell         -  -       240. 

Gwynn,  Eleanor,  her  charity  209,234. 


H. 


Hague  -  -        12S. 

Halifax  -  -       415. 

HaUamjhire  -  ~       412. 

Haller,    Dr.    his   opinion  of  our 

Gaol-Fever  -  -       103. 

HalJIid  Bridewell         -  -       22*. 

Hamburgh  -  -        ijj. 

Hammocks  hung  to  the  ceiling       186. 

Hampshire  -  -       353. 

Hanau  ...        109. 

Hanover  -  -        1 1 4. 

Hanway,  Mr.  on  feparate  con- 
finement -  -         43. 

Harlc,  Thomas,  Gaoler,  com- 
mended -  -      422. 


Page 
Hafledine,  Thomas,  his  charities  297. 
Hajlar  Hofpital,  Gaol-Fever  there  19. 
Ha'verford Weft    County  Gaol  465. 

— — •   Town  Gaol  466. 

Haulton  Caftle  -  -       452. 

Hayes,    Thomas,    Prifoner    from 

Ecclefiaftical  Court 
Herefordshire 

Hereford  County  Gaol 

^— ^—   Bridewell 


City  Gaol 


Herris,  Elizabeth,  her  charity 
Hertfordshire 
Her  ford  County  Gaol 
Bridewell 


388. 

335- 
ibid. 

338- 
ibid. 

217. 

211. 

ibid. 

2'3- 
393- 
279. 

213. 
251. 
401. 
227. 


Heydon,  John,  his  legacy 

Hinkley  Bridewell 

Hitchin  Bridewell 

Hobfon,  Thomas,  his  charity 

Hodgcfion,  Dr.  his  charity 

Holdernefs,  Earl  of,  Bodar 

.— —^   Proprietor     408. 

Hopital  General  near  Paris        -         gz. 
Horde,  Thomas,   his  charity  not 

fully  paid         -  -       316. 

Horjham,  Felons  there  near  efcaping  42, 

Gaol  -  -       228. 

Bridewell  -         -       230. 

Huifh,  George,  Town  Clerk,  figns 

Table  of  Fees      -  -       359. 

Hull,    murderer   there  cleared    by 

delay  of  trial      -  .31. 

— ^  Gaol         -  -  -       411. 

— —  Bridewell  -  -      ibid. 

Huntingdon- 


N       D       E       X. 


Page 
Huntingdonshire  -       245. 

Huntingdon  Gaol  and  Bridewell        ibid. 
HufTey,  Rebecca,  her  charity  295,  297, 

Hutchinfon, Efq.  his  charity 

loft  -  -       291. 


Janitor  appointed  by  Conftable  ap- 
points a  deputy      -  -         314. 
Idiots  and  Lunatics  in  Gaols  16,412,436. 
Idlenefs,  ill  effedls  of  in  Prifons        20. 

not  permitted  in  Dutch 

Houfes  of  Correftion        -       123. 

——    lamented  by  a  Keeper      347. 

Idler,  quotation  from  -         24. 

Jews,  excufed  from   working   on 

their  Sabbath         -  -       114. 

■  ward,   Poultry  Compter  171. 

Ill  language  punifhed  in  Sheriff's 

Officers  -  -        130. 

Implements  and  Materials  required 
in  Bridewells  by  Aft  of  Par- 
liament -  -         70. 

Infirmaries,  neceflary  in  Gaols  45. 

in  French  Gaols  how 

fituated  -  -         82. 

Infirmary,  one  room,  inconve- 
nience of  it  -  -       398, 

Influenza  prevailing,  negledled  by 

Surgeon  -  -       449. 

Infpeilors  necelTary         -  -         66. 

— ^— •  at  Mentz         -         -       109, 


Page 
Inftrudion,    religious,     given    in 

Dutch  Houfes  of  Correftion     122. 
John    of    Gaunt's     grant     from 

Edward  III.         -  -       409. 

Ipfrxich  Gaol  -  -        263. 

'  Bridewell         -  -       265. 

Ireland,  no  Tap  in  Gaols  there   52. 
Irilh  Afts  concerning  Prifons     -       14, 
44,  52,  60,  62,  70. 
Irons,  ufed  by  fome  Gaolers  from 

avarice  -  -         27. 

— —  not  ufed  in  French  Gaols         80. 
^—  ufed  at  Hamburgh  -       115, 

I  on  French  Prifoners        -       134. 

— —  ufed  in  Bridewells         260,  267, 

314.  Z^9- 
on  a  woman  in  Bridewell       267. 

— —  on  women  difufed  -       270. 

■  ordered  to  be  taken  off  for  a 

weekly  payment  -       299. 

Juflice,  fpeedy,  good  effefts  of         99. 

Juftices,  bound  to  infpeft  Bridewells  66. 

— ^—  fineable  if  a  Bridewell 
with  a  Court-yard  be  not 
provided  -  -         70. 

Juftitia,  the  Convidls  on  board         75. 

I'velchejier  County  Gaol  -       387^ 


Keeper,  figns  Table  of  Fees    -      190, 
244,  246,  437. 

above  forty  years         -       336.. 

Keeper's 


I       N       D 


Page 

Keeper's    Freehold,    a    Bridewell 

349,  358,  43t. 

— — 's    Shop   in  a  Bridewell      348. 

Keinpe,  Frances,  her  charity  loft   255. 

Kendal  County  Bridewell  -       434. 

— —   Town  Gaol         -  -       ibid. 

Kent  -  -       222. 

Kidcots,  Gaol  fo  called  -       404. 

King,  Proprietor  294,  296,  314,  443. 

's  Bounty  offered  to  Cornwall  382. 

— — 's  Evidence  fliould  be  confined 

feparate  -  -         44. 

King,  Lord  Chancellor,  his  decla- 
ration againft  feverity        -  28. 

King's  Bench  Prifon  -  -        196. 

■  allowance   to 

from  Lincoln  Caftle  -       297. 

Kingfion  Bridewell         -  -       237. 

— ^^    Town  Gaol  -       239. 

King  ft  on  upon  Hull  (fee  Hull). 

Knarejborough  Honour  and  Foreft    409. 

— ^— — —   Town  Debtors  410. 

Town  Gaol         -       ibid. 

Knights,  Efquires,  Gentlemen, 
Yeomen,  different  rates  of 
board  and  lodging         39S,  419. 


Page 

Lancafter  Caftle         -  -       435. 

Land-tax  paid  by  Keeper  -  295. 
Langton,  Mrs.  her  charity  -  438. 
Latham,  Peter,  his  charity  -  438. 
Laimcefton  -  -       38 1. 

Lau/anne  -  -         99. 

Lavenham  Bridewell  -        266. 

Laiuford^ s-gatt,  Briftol  -        346. 

Laws  made  by  Prifoners  -        164. 

Lawfon,  Mrs.  her  charity  -  401. 
Leeds  (Torkjhire)  -  -       411. 

— —  Dnke  of.  Proprietor         -       415. 
Legacies,  lifts  of  neceflary        -         63. 
■  care  of  required   by  the 

Adl  3 2d  George  II.  -       ibid. 

care  of  at  Bruges      -       138. 

antient  table  of        -       379. 

loft       234,  255,  291,  297, 

405,  418. 

no  memorial  of      249,  264, 

267,    270,    297,    336,.   340,   351, 
362,    367,    383,    393,   405,  418. 

276. 
ibid. 
279. 
280. 
281. 
131. 
230. 


Leicestershire 
Leicefter  County  Gaol 
County  Bridewell 

■  Borough  Gaol 

■  Town  Bridewell 


Ladbroke,   Sir  Robert,    letter    to 

him  quoted  .  -         13. 

Lancashire  -  -      435. 


LciMarden 

Le-iues  Bridewell 

Licences  to  fell  Liquor,  pernicious 

effefts  of  in  Gaols  -         50. 

Lincolnshire  -  -       295. 

Lincoln  Caftle  -  -       itid. 


Lincoln 


N       D 


X. 


Page 

Lincoln  City  Gaol  -  -       303. 

Lind,  Dr.  on  fpread  of  Gaol-Fever 

in  the  navy  -  -         19. 

Linen,  charity  of  to  Prifoners  in 

Paris  -  -         84. 

clean,  weekly,  to  Prifoners 

abroad      -       84,   113,   137,  141. 

Litchfield          ...  329. 

Litter,  &c.  a  nuifance  in  Prifons  60. 

Liverpool          ...  440. 

London         .             -             -  151. 

Lofiiijithiel         ...  386. 

Ludgate,  new            -                 -  166. 

Ludlonu              -              _             .  334. 

Lumley,  Lady,  her  charity      -  401. 

Lunatic,  in  a  Bridewell         260,  412. 

many  years  in  a  Gaol  436. 

Lunenburg          -              -            -  1 1 4. 

Lynn  Regis          .              _            -  262. 

Lyons,  bad  dungeons  at             -  95. 

——  excellent  Hofpital  at     -  96. 


M. 


Macclesfield  Prifon 
-— Bridewell 


451. 

452. 


Maglftrates,  faulty  in  not  infpeding 

Prifons  .  -         67. 

• infpeft      weekly     at 

Ghent  -  -        140. 

Maidfione  Gaol         -  -       222. 

■  Bridewell         -  .       225. 

Mai/on  deforce,  at  Ghent         -       140. 


Malt  ground  in  a  Prifon 

Manchefler 

Manheim 

Marlborough 

Marfiialfea 

allowance  to  from  Lincoln 

Caftle  -  -       297 

Mailer  ofWorkhoufe,  Keeper  of  a 


Page 

347- 
439- 
112. 

365- 
205. 


Bridewell 


279,  319,  44i. 


Matron  at  Blackfryars  Bridewell      179. 

Clcrkennxiell  ditto  -        l86. 

tothefick         -  -       255. 

Mats  to  fleep  on  -         226,  277. 

on  Bedlleads         -  -       279, 

Mechlin  -  -  -        137. 

Medicines,    Cordial     better    than 

Sudorific  in  Gaol-Fever  244. 

Melton  Monubray  Bridewell        -       279. 
Mentz  _  _  1       107. 

Merionethshire         -        -       463. 
Middk--mch  ...        447. 

Miniller  of  Parifh    in   Ireland   to 

take  care  of  Allowance     .         62. 
Mold  Great  Sefllons,  conveyance  to 

at  Gaoler's  expenfe  -       454, 

Monmouthshire  -       339. 

Monmouth  County  Gaol  -       ibid, 

Montague,  Duke  of,  Conftable       314. 
Montgomeryshire  -       459. 

Montgomery  County  Gaol  -       ibid. 

— — — ^  City  Bridewell        .       460. 
Mops,  Brooms,  &c.    allowed  422. 

Morals,  vitiated  in  Prifons       -         15. 
Morpeth  County  Gaol  -       425, 

Morpeth 


I      N      D 


X. 


Page 
Morpeth  County  Bridewell        -       428. 
Mortality,  Bill  of  at  Amilerdam      124. 
Mounfey,    Dr.    found    no    Gaol- 
Fever  in  Ruflia         -         -       100. 


N. 

Neivark                 -                     -  294. 

,   Nezvcajlle  upon  Tyne  Newgate  42 1 . 

— ^^— — — —  Bridewell  424. 

fmall  Gaol  ibid, 

Ne-ixjgate                 -                   -  151. 

Ne-wport  Bridewell       (EJfex)  220. 

(IJlt  of  Wight)  358. 

Gaol                (ditto)  ibid. 

Neiu  Prifoti,  Clerkenivcll           -  181. 

Night  charges             -             181,  185. 

Nimeguen                   -                     -  131. 

Norfolk                -                -  254. 


— — —  Duke  of,  Proprietor  412. 

Norman,  Francis,  four  years  Lift 

of  his  Prifoners  -  348. 

Norney,  John,  his  legacy  -  445. 

Northamptonshire  -  308. 

Northampton  County  Gaol  -  ibid. 

I  ■    Town  Gaol  -  309. 

Northumberland  -  425. 

Nottinghamshire  -  287. 

Nottingham  County  Gaol  -  ibid. 

~^-—    Town  Gaol  -  292. 

Bridewell  -  293. 

^or<wich  Caftle           -  -  254. 

.                City  Gaol         -  -  257. 


Nortvich  City  Bridewell 
Number  of  Prifoners  in  England 
and  Wales 


Pag* 
260. 

35- 


150  lately  in 

a  Town  Gaol         -  -       275. 

^— —    236  fent  to  a 

Bridewell  in  fix  years       -       301. 

572  ditto  in 


eight  years  and  a  half      -       347. 
of    Petty    Offenders    in 


three  years      -       230,  320,  376, 
Nunnery,    infane  men   and   aged 

women  maintained  in  one        140, 


O. 


Oakham  County  Gaol 

306. 

Oath,  folemn  form  of 

102. 

Odiam 

-       357- 

Oftagonal  Houfe  of  Correftion       140. 

Officer  a  Keeper  (fee  Sheriff 

s  Officer). 

Oufe  Bridge  Gaol 

-       404- 

Oven,  neceflary  in  a  Gaol 

45- 

— —     room  called  fo 

-      435- 

Oxfordshire 

-      3'5- 

Oxford  Caftle 

-       ibid. 

City  Gaol 

-      316. 

Padlocks  on  Bridewell  Prifoners      266. 
Parliament,  French,  takes  care  of 

Prifons  -  -         88. 

Patroneft 


i      N      D 


X. 


Page 
Patronefs  to  French  Prifons  -  84. 
Peacock,     Mr.     his    legacy,     no 

memorial  -  -       405. 

Peat,  the  only  allowance  -       432. 

Pelham,  Charles  Anderfou,    Efq. 

Proprietor  -  -       403. 

Pemberton,  John,  his  charity  264. 
Pembrokeshire         -  -       465. 

Pembroke,  Lord,  pays  a  legacy  362. 
Penryn  -  -        386. 

Pf»z«««  Town  Gaol  -       385. 

— —  Prifon  for  Penwth  -  ibid. 
Perjury  uncommon  -  -  103. 
Peterborough  Gaol  -         -       310. 

— — Bridewell  -       ibid. 

Pett)',  Sir  William,  mentions  Bill 

of  Mortality  in  Amfterdam      124. 
Petty  Offenders  in  Gaols,  becaufe 

Bridewells  infecure  -         6g. 

Petiuorth  Bridewell         -  -       230. 

Pe-verel  Court  of  Record  -       294. 

Phyfician  for  Newgate  and  the  two 

Compters  propofed  -         57. 

Pitt,    Mofes,    his  "  Cry    of    the 

Oppreffed "  quoted  -        277. 

Plan  of  a  County  Gaol  -        42. 

Plymouth  -  -       380. 

Pontefrad,  Liberty  of  the  Honour  413. 
Pool  (DorfetJhireJ  Town  Gaol  370. 
I  Bridewell  ibid. 

—  ( Montgomery fiire )  Great  Seffions 

there.  Conveyance  at  Gaoler's 

expenfe  -  -       460. 

Pophara,  Mr.  his  two  Bills     -  3. 


Page 
Portland,  Duke  of.  Proprietor  286. 
Port  [mouth  -  -       350, 

Poultry  Compter         -  -       170, 

Preacher,  not  in  Orders  190,  332. 
Prejleigtt  -  -        470. 

Prefion  -  -  _       ^3^, 

Pringle,  Sir  John,  notes  the  fpread 

of  Gaol-Diftemper  -         19. 

Prifoners,   of  different   forts,    not 

feparated  -  -         16. 

■  weakened  by  confinement  39. 
checked   in   fending   out 

for  liquor  and  other  neceffaries  50. 
-^— —   almoft  ftarved  by  Gaoler's 

farming  allowance  -       472, 

— — —  of  war,  liberal  allowance  to  21. 

■  how  treated  by  the 
French,  laft  war  -         22. 

Prifon,  none  where  Affize       234,  388. 

Quarter Seffion  238. 

Prifons,  not  for  Punifhment  38. 

Private  Property  of  Gaols,  bad  34. 
Profit  of  Work  in  Bridewells,    to 

common  ftock      -  -        73. 

—^———^^    to    Keeper 

214,  238. 
— ^ — — —  to  Prifoners 

215,  221. 
■  half  to  ditto 


256,  266,  313,  314,   334, 
•^—~^— three  quar- 
ters to  ditto  -  -       301. 

— — ^— for   3  years 

not  20  fliillings  a  year      -       230. 
1 1  Proprietors 


N       D 


X. 


Page 

Proprietors  of  Gaols     189,    214,    252, 

267,   286,   294,   310,   314,   349, 

356.   363.    37'.   385.   386,  403. 
407,   408,   409,   412,   413,  415, 

4'7.  433.   43 •'   45-- 
Proteftants  excufed  from  Mafs  81. 

Provinces,  French,    Prifons  in         94. 
Public  houfes,  not  to  be  frequented 

by  Sheriff's  Officers  -       130. 

'     ■  one  room  of,  a  Prifon  359. 
Pump,  put  down  by  Gaoler,  how 

repaid  -  -       351. 


Quakers  room  -  -      436. 

Quarrels,  how  to  be  decided  63. 

Quarter   Seflions,     crowded    with 

Prifoners  -  -       238. 

■     ■        where  no  Prifon  itia'. 

Queftion,  (y'fi^  Torture). 


R. 

Radnorshire            -  -  470 
Raikes,  Mr.  relieves  didreflfd  Fines  344 

Ra/p-houfe  zt  AmficrJam  -  125 

Reading  County  Gaol  -  3-1 1 

Bridewell             -  -  313 

Town  Gaol  -  ibiJ. 

Reed,  Heller,  her  legacy  -  379 

Rent  paid  by  Keeper  -  348. 


Page 
Rent  paid  by  Keeper  and  refunded 

172.   175- 
Richmond  (Yorkfliire)  -       408. 
Duke  of,  aftive  in  build- 
ing a  new  Gaol                  -       229. 
— — — — ^^^   doubles  allowance 


at  a  Bridewell 
Rigby,  Abigail,  her  legacy 

Henrietta,  ditto 

Rippon 

——   Liberty 
Rivers,  German  Prifons  built  near  105. 
Rocheftcr  City  Gaol  -         -       227. 

Rotheram,   Dr.    Phyfician,    com- 


231. 

438. 
ibid. 
408. 
409. 


mended 
Rothwell 
Rotterdam 
-^-^—   Peft-houfe  there 


422. 
413. 

ibid. 

392. 
65. 


Rouquct,  Rev.  Mr.  commended 
Rules,  fhould  be  hung  up 

inFrcnchPrifons,howmade 

known  -  -         85. 

— —    hung  at  every  door  in   a 

Prifon  -  -  -       113. 

-  good  ones         -  -       ibid. 

or  Liberty  of . -I  Prifon   156,  196, 

386,  422,  463,  469. 
Rutlandshire         -  -       306. 

Ruthin  County  Gaol  -       456. 

Ryegaie,    no   Prifon,    yet  Quarter 

Seffion  there  -       238. 

S. 
St.  jilban's  Borough  Gaol         -       214, 
———^—   Liberty  Gaol  -      ibi.i. 

St.  Man'i 


I      N      D 


X. 


Page 
St.  J/iau' s  Bridewell  -  215. 
St.  Bria-vel's  Gaol  -  -  349, 
St.  Catharine's  Piifon  -  191. 
St.  Crofs's  Hofpital,  Dole  of  Bread  354. 
St.  George's  Fields  Bridewell  -  236. 
St.  Peter's  Gaol,  I'ori  -  407. 
Salary  raifed  for  aboliftied  fees  225. 
receipts    given    for    more 


than  received 
Siilijbury  County  Gaol 

City  Gaol 

Bifhop  of.  Proprietor 

Lord,  Proprietor 


349- 
360. 

363- 
ibid. 
214. 
401. 
192. 
286. 


Savil,  Sir  George,  his  charity 

Savoy 

Scar/dale  Hundred 

Scorbut,  a  difeafe  in  French  Prifons     83. 

Scotch  Prifoners,  hard  condition  of 

at  Carlijle  -  -       432. 

Seldon,     Laurence,     and     Wife, 

their   legacies         -  -       379. 

Separation   of   men   and    women 

neceffary  -  -       44. 

_ of  Debtors  and  Felons 

neceffary  -  -         46. 

Sewer,  want  of  in  Gaols  -         14. 

^—    uncovered  through  a  Gaol  410. 
Sheffield,  ior  Hallamjhire  -       4I2. 

Town  Gaol  •       ibid, 

Shepton  Mallet  -  -        390. 

Shsrborn  -  -  -        269. 

Sheriff  of  Town,  Keeper         -       469. 
Sheriff's   Officer,    Ihould    not   be 

Gaoler  -  -         53. 

Tt 


Page 
Sheriff's  Officer,  Keeper        236,  253, 

264.  357'  390>  394>  405'  458- 
Sherwin,  John  Efq.  his  charity  290. 
Shew,  part  of  a  Prifon  fo  called  379. 
Shreiujhitry  County  Gaol  -       330. 

Bridewell  -       334, 

Shropshire  -  -  ibid. 
Sick  Prifoners,  care  of  at  Bruges  1 37. 
— — ^— ^— —  irons  taken  off  from  223. 
neglefted  by  Sur- 
geon -  -  264,  449. 
■                            7  s.  a  week  allowed 

to  Gaoler  for  their  diet     -       288. 

— — 6d.  a  day  allowed 

them        -  -  -       320. 

■ proper  diet  allowed 

them         -  -  -        111-' 

—~———  in    Bridewells,    an 

Aft  for  their  relief  -  9. 

faid 

not  to  be  included  in  late  Aft  369. 
Situation  proper  for  a  Prifon     -         40. 
— —  a  good  one  rejefted  273. 

Skeleton  with  chains,  found  -  317. 
Small-Pox,  fatal  in  Gaols  267,  277,  316. 
Smith,   Mr.  his  legacy  -       362. 

Soie,  Liberty,  its  extent  -       310. 

Gaol  for  -  -       ibid. 

Solitude  beneficial  in  Prifons  43. 

Solitary     cells,     their     effeft     on 

malefaftors  -  -        152. 

Sokthurn         -  -  -        I 03. 

Somersetshire        t  -       3^7' 

Southampton  Bar-gate  -       358. 

t  2  Southampton 


I       N       D 


Southampton  Gaol 
Bridewell 


Page 
3S8 

359 
232 

293 

301 

59 

127 


Sottthivark,   Surry  Gaol 
Southivell  Bridewell 
Spalding  Bridewell 
Speftator,  Quotation  from 
Spin-hou/e  at  Amjierdam 
Spirituous   Liquors,    fine   for  pot 

hanging  up  Claufes  againft        64. 

inftances   of  Claufes 

againft  not  hung  up,  (T^e  Claufes). 

— ^  fine  on  Gaolers  who 

fell  them  -  -       'bid. 
onanywho  bring  them  ibid. 


Stable  Ihould  be  made  a  Day- room  258; 

361,  388 
Staffordshire 
Stafford  County  Gaol 
Bridewell 


326. 
ibid. 
329. 
301. 


Stamford 

Star-chamber   Prifoners,     whither 

fent  -  -       156. 

State  Houfe,  fo  called,  in  King's 

Bench  Prifon         -  -       197. 

Stepney  M.ZTMX,  its  extent  -  189. 
Stove  to  every  room  in  a  Prifon  99. 
Strajliurg,  Debtors  aliment  there  107. 
Straw,  want  of  in  Prifons        -         15. 

— — and  bedding,  ^jv  Bedding). 

— —   paid  for /I'r  load  by  County  255. 

— —   ordered  by  Matron       -       ibid. 

— —   plenty  becaufe  not  farmed  327. 

——   a  legacy  for  it  -     401. 

Stream  of  water,  beneficial  in  Gaols  41. 


race 
Sudbury  -  -        268. 

Suffolk  -  -       263. 

Sunday  dinner,  an  encouragement    61. 
■  no  vifitors  admitted  on        101. 

allowance  on,   to  prevent 

working  -  -       251. 

Surgeon,  his  duty         -  -         56. 

excufed  from    attending 

Gaol-Fever  in  Dungeons         372. 
Surry  -  -       232. 

Sussex  -  -       228, 

S-waffham  Bridewell  -       260. 


Tap,  (hould  not  be  held  by  Gaoler 

or  Turnkey         -  -         50. 

.         not  held  by  Gaolers        -         52. 
Tapfter  holds  rooms  which  he  lets 

to  Prifoners  -  -        157. 

Tarras  floors  -  283,  296. 

Talk,  weekly,  of  Weavers       -       143. 
Taunton  County  Bridewell        -       389, 

fatal  Aflize  there         -         18. 

Taylor,  Elizabeth,  her  legacy  loft  405. 
y/iaOTf  Bridewell  -  -       319. 

Thanet,  Earl  of.  Hereditary  Sheriff  43  3. 
Tketford  -  -       261. 

Thirjk  -  -        402. 

Thomfon     quoted     in    praife    of 

Gaol-Committee  -         28. 

Thornhill,  Mrs.  her  charity  401. 

Thynne,  Thomas,  Efq.  his  legacy  362. 

Tiffot, 


I      N      D 


X. 


Page 

Tiflbt,    Dr.    his   opinion   of  our 

Gaol-Diftemper  -        9^, 

Toes,  rotted  off  in  Gaol         '  -         39. 

Torture,  difufed         -  -       114. 

— — —     a  vile  engine  for        -       115. 

Tothill-fields  Bridewell  -       193. 

Toiver  Hamlets  Gaol  -        I91. 

Town-CIcrk  figns  Table  of  Fees     359. 

Town-Hall  u  fed  by  Debtors  214. 

Tranfports,  the   Contradlors  Pro- 
perty -  -       14S. 

■ — —     numerous  in  the  Savoy 

and  occafioning  difeafe  152. 

'  their  Fees  paid  by  the 

County  -  -       223. 

< ——     have    County    bread. 


and  King's  allowance      223,  288. 
'  from    Quarter  Sefiions 


allowed  by   County,  as  from 
Aflize  by  the  King     -     228,  331. 
not  the  King's  allow- 


ance     312,  416,  426,  431,  436, 

444.  468. 

almoft  ftifled  380. 

chained    to   the   floor 


for  attempting  efcape        -  417. 

'             ditto  for  fufpicion  426. 

kept  long  in  Prifon  ibid, 

— — cloathed  by  County  ibid. 

Truro                     -                      -  385. 

Tub,  inconvenient  to  bathe  in  288. 

Turfs,  part  of  Keeper's  pay  412. 
Turnkeys,  their  number  fhould  be 

increafed          -                -  29. 


Page 
Turnkeys  fliould  not  be  Prifbners     52, 

numerous     in     French 

Prifons  -  -         79. 

■  have  no  Fees  in  France   80. 


Turnftiles  and  low  gates  at  French 

Prifons  -  -         79. 


U. 


VJk  County  Bridewell 
Utrecht 


342- 
131. 


Vagrant   Acl    17  th    George    II. 

quoted  -  -         66. 

Varying  Towns  where  Affizes  are 

held,  a  grievance  -  29. 
Ventilators,  neceflary  in  Gaols  45. 
in  Gaols    178,  223,  244, 

322.  33»- 
Vermin,  a  Prifoner  disfigured  by  410. 
Verfes,  over  Debtors  grate  -  312. 
Vilain,  Count,  his  book  -  144. 
Vilforde,  large  Prifon  there  135. 

Vilitants,     keep     Prifoners    from 

Chapel  -  -         5'5. 

— — — —    a    number   at   fkittles 

159,  190. 
— — — —  not  admitted  on  Sunday  loi. 

W. 


I       N       D 


Page 


W. 


Wakefield  -       402. 

Jf ''ailing ford  -  -        314. 

Walter,    John   Rolle,    Efq.    Pro- 


prietor 

371- 

If^arrington  Bridewell 

•       4+'- 

Warwickshire 

269. 

Warnvick  County  Gaol 

.       ibid. 

Bridewell 

272. 

Wafhing  Wards   daily;    not  dan- 
gerous -  -         58. 

Water,  want  of  in  Prifons        -         12. 

three  pints  a  day  allowed   ibid. 

ftiould  be  freely  acceffible     59. 

paid  for  by  Keeper     iS6,   194. 

inftances  where  not  ac- 
ceffible 213,  214,  215,  220, 
221,  225,  226,  227,  230,  251, 
253,  261,  262,  266,  268,  279, 
285,  286,  300,  301,  304,  309, 
314,    319,    320,   329,    338,    346, 

347.   34^.   349'    358.   363.   365. 
370.   377.    380,   382,    385,   394, 

397.  403.  407.   409.   4'o.   4". 
412,  426,   429,   439,   451,  458, 

464,   466,   468,  469,  472,  475. 

none  but  in  a  flood      -       405. 

Weights,  leaden,    fattened  to  re- 

fraftory  Prifoncrs  -  451. 
Well,  grand  one  in  a  French  Prifon  92. 
Wells,  Affize,  no  Prifon  -  388. 
Westmorland  -  -  433. 
Weymouth,  Lord,  pays  a  legacy  362. 
White,  Sir  Thomas,  his  legacy  336. 
Aldcrm.ofYork,  hischarity  401. 


Page 

WhiUchapelVntorv         -  -        189. 

Whiteha'ven  Town  Gaol  -       432. 

JVhitc  Lien  Prifon,  an  ancient  name  234. 

Whitewafliing  &c.  before  late  A£l  392. 
■  neglefted   171,186,206. 

Wjckednefs  in  Prifons,  and  fpread 

from  them        -  -         20. 

Wild  beafts    drawing   a  waggon, 

has  relief  oi  -        108,    125. 

Williamfon,  Sir  Hedworth,  per- 
petual' Sheriff  by  Bifhop's 
Patent  -  -       417. 

Wiltshire  -  -       360. 

IVinchefter  County  Gaol  -       3,3. 

■  College  allowance  354. 
Prifon  for  Debtors  356. 

— ^— ^^  Bifhop  of.  Proprietor      ibid. 

■  Bridewell  -  ibid, 
Winchcomb  -  -  349. 
Windows,  high  ones  proper  183. 
• Gaoler's,    looking    to 

Felons  court  220,  283,  474. 

Window-tax,   one   caufe  of  dofe 

rooms  •  -         14. 

•  paid  by  Keepers        175, 

186,    189,    194,   209,    322,    325, 

361,    384,    386. 
^/»<^cr  Callle  -  -       314. 

. Town  Gaol  -      ibid. 

Wijheach  Bridewell  -  253. 
Witney  Bridewell  -  -  319. 
Wives  and  children  in  Prifons  33. 
in  no  German 

ones  -  •       iiS. 

Wives 


N      D 


X. 


Page 
Wives  and  children  in  no   Dutch 

Prifons  -  .       121. 

in  the  Fleet     160. 

in  the  King's 

Bench  -  -        ig8. 

Woluerhampton  Bridewell  -       3^9. 

Women-felons  Ihould  be  feparate 

from  Men         -  -         44, 

■ feparated  from.Men 

in  French  Prifons  -         82. 

— ^—  keep      Foreign      Prifons 

clean  -  -       108. 

■  modeft,    complain  of  had 
companions  -  -       206. 

feparated   from    Men    in 

Bridewell  -  178,    185, 

230,    236,    237. 

■  many,  yet  Prifon  dirty  376. 
■ debtors,  in  fepaiate  rooms  413. 

'   not  feparated  from 

Men  though  many  rooms         43  •• 

Woodlridge  Bridewell  -       266. 

Wooden  bars,  obftrudl  air  -  223. 
Wood-Jireet  Compter  -  -        174- 

Woollen  Manufafture    in    Dutch 

Houfes  of  Correiftion  -  121. 
'  Manufacturer   Keeper  of 

Bridewell  -       376,  428. 


Pase 


"Worcestershire 
Worccjier  Caftle 
■  Bridewell 

■ City  Gaol 


321. 
ibid. 

323- 

324- 

70. 


Work  in  Bridewells  neceflary 
— —    conftant,     yet    Prifon     not 
maintained  by  it       -       113,  12 


WorkinaBridewell  179,226,428,447. 
Work-houfe,  commended  279,  434. 
— — part  of  one  a  Town 


Gaol 


&c.  farmed 


432- 
3'9- 


Work-rooms,    two  for   men   in  a 

Bridewell  -  -       220, 

IS.  a  week  for  ufe  of  26.7. 

Work-fhop  in  Gaols  -         47, 

Worfted  Manufafture  at  Rotterdam  133, 

Wrexham  County  Bridewell      -       458. 

— — —  Great  Seffions,  Convey- 
ance to  at  Gaoler's  expenfe     457. 

Wymundham  Bridewell  -       260, 


y. 


Yarmouth  Gaol 

- 

26r. 

262. 

396- 

Yorkshire 

. 

York  Caftle 

. 

ibid. 

City  Gaol 

- 

404. 

——  Bridewell 

- 

- 

407. 

St.  Peter's 

Gaol 

- 

ibid. 

-  Archbifhop  of,  Prifon  for  his 
Manors  in  Nattinghamjhire        293. 
.^— ^—  Proprietor        408, 


Yorke,     Sir    Jofeph,     his    polite 

affiftance  -  -       128. 


Zdl 


mS. 


THE 


E     N    D. 


DIRECTIONS  to  the  BOOK-BINDER. 

The  Plates  are  to  be  inferted  as  follows : 

General  Plan  of  a  County  Gaol,  between  Pages  48  and    49. 
Plan  of  La  Maifon  de  Force,  Ghent,         -  140  and  141. 

Plan  of  Newgate,  -  -  152  and  153. 

Tab,  III.  being  continued  over  from  P.  480  to  481,  Care  is 
to  be  taken  that  the  Lines  coincide. 


^sm.     • 


X. 


ioL     '  fMV^' '  ^h 

Sl  .r    L 

1^  j^H^HJi^^^rxHSB      IBSL^     *    Tvv 

m 

k    ^yK^HHi^^^^l^^w          J«  -^v^^^^H^^  ^ 

kJ 

S®! 

1^ 


.1 


t3>- 


