'  \ 

y 


THE   WORKS 


OF 


ANNA    L^TITIA    BARBAULD. 


VOL.  I. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  RICHARD  TAYLOR,  SHOE-LANE. 


>  ^» 


'  ' 


i 


v 


•'  irj 


THE  WORKS 


OF 


ANNA    L^ETITIA    BARBAULD 

WITH  A   MEMOIR 
BY  LUCY  AIKIN. 


Bright-eyed  Fancy  hovering  o'er 

Scatters  from  her  pictured  urn 

Thoughts  that  breathe  and  words  that  burn. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 

LONDON: 

PRINTED    FOR 

LONGMAN,    HURST,    REES,    ORME,    BROWN,    AND    GREEN, 
PATERNOSTER- ROW. 

1825. 


14057 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I. 


Page 

Corsica        1 

The  Invitation.    To  Miss  B***** 12 

The  Groans  of  the  Tankard 23 

On  the  Backwardness  of  the  Spring  1771 29 

Verses  written  in  an  Alcove 31 

The  Mouse's  Petition 35 

To  Mrs.  p***»***»,  with  some  drawings  of  birds  and 

insects 39 

Characters \     ...  47 

An  Inventory  of  the  Furniture  in  Dr.  Priestley's  Study  .  55 

On  a  Lady's  Writing 59 

On  the  Deserted  Village 60 

Hymn  to  Content 61 

To  Wisdom 65 

The  Origin  of  Song- writing 67 

Songs 73 

Delia.      An  Elegy     . 87 

Ovid  to  his  Wife 93 

To  a  Lady,  with  some  painted  flowers 100 

Ode  to  Spring 102 

Epithalamium       .     .     .     .     • 106 

Verses  on  Mrs.  Rowe .108 


vi  CONTENTS. 

Page 

To  a  Dog Ill 

To  Miss  R****,  on  her  attendance  upon  her  mother  at 

Buxton 112 

On  the  Death  of  Mrs.  Jennings 115 

An  Address  to  the  Deity 117 

A  Summer  Evening's  Meditation 122 

The  Epiphany 129 

To  Mr.  Barbauld 134 

To  Mr.  Barbauld,  with  a  map  of  the  Land  of  Matrimony  137 

Love  and  Time  ' 140 

To  Miss  F.  B.,  on  her  asking  for  Mrs.  B.'s  "Love  and 

Time" 145 

Tomorrow 146 

Lines  placed  over  a  Chimney-piece 147 

Written  on  a  Marble 148 

A  School  Eclogue 149 

What  do  the  Futures  speak  of? — in  answer  to  a  question 

in  the  Greek  grammar       ..........  157 

Autumn.     A  fragment      ...........  159 

To  the  Baron  de  S  tonne,  who  had  wished  at  the  next 

transit  of  Mercury  to  find  himself  again  between  Mrs. 

La  Borde  and  Mrs.  B 161 

To  the  Baron  de  Stonne,  with  Aikin's  Essay  on  Song- 
writing 165 

To  the  Miss  Websters,  with  Dr.  Aikin's  "  Wish,"  which 

they  expressed  a  desire  to  have  a  copy  of  .  .  .  .166 
Epistle  to  Dr.  Enfield,  on  his  revisiting  Warrington  in 

1789 168 

Epistle  to  William  Wilberforce,  Esq.,  on  the  Rejection  of 

the  Bill  for  abolishing  the  Slave  Trade,  1791     .     .     .173 


CONTENTS.  vii 

Page 
On  the  expected  general  Rising  of  the  French  Nation  in 

1792 180 

To  Dr.  Priestley 183 

The  Rights  of  Woman 185 

Inscription  for  an  Ice-house 188 

An  Autumnal  Thought 190 

To  the  Poor 192 

Hymn 194 

To  a  little  Invisible  Being  who  is  expected  soon  to  be 
come  visible  199 

Washing-day 202 

Verses  inscribed  on  a  Pair  of  Screens      .     .  *.     .     .     .207 

To  Mr.  S.  T.  Coleridge 209 

Peace  and  Shepherd 212 

On  the  Death  of  Mrs.  Martineau  senior 215 

On  a  Portrait 218 

West  End  Fair 220 

Dirge ..    .' 224 

The  Unknown  God. 227 

Eternity 230 

Eighteen  Hundred  and  Eleven 232 

Ode  to  Remorse 251 

Life 261 

On  the  King's  Illness,  1811 263 

A  Thought  on  Death 266 

Stanzas, — in  the  manner  of  Spenser    . 268 

To  Miss  T 271 

The  First  Fire 273 

The  Caterpillar 278 

On  the  Death  of  the  Princess  Charlotte  .  .281 


viii  CONTENTS. 

Page 

The  Wake  of  the  King  of  Spain 283 

The  Baby-house 286 

Logogriph 290 

Riddle .     .  293 

Enigma 294 

Riddle 296 

Prologue  to  a  Drama,  performed  by  a  family  party  on 

the  anniversary  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.'s  marriage        .     .  298 
Lines  written  in  a  young  Lady's  Album  of  different-co 
loured  paper 302 

To  a  Friend       303 

Dejection 304 

To  Mrs.  Marissal .     .  306 

Epitaph  on  the  same 308 

To  Mr.  Bowring,  on  his  poetical  translations  from  various 

languages 309 

Fragment 311 

Octogenary  Reflections .313 

The  Death  of  the  Virtuous    . 315 

Hymns 317 

Sabbath  Hymns 343 


MEMOIR. 


ANNA  LJETITIA  BARBAULD,  aname  long 
dear  to  the  admirers  of  genius  and  the 
lovers  of  virtue,  was  born  at  the  village  of 
Kibworth  Harcourt,  in  Leicestershire,  on 
June  20th,  1743,  the  eldest  child  and  only 
daughter  of  John  Aikin,  D.D.  and  Jane 
his  wife,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  John  Jen 
nings  of  Kibworth,  and  descended  by  her 
mother  from  the  ancient  family  of  Win- 
gate,  of  Harlington  in  Bedfordshire. 

That  quickness  of  apprehension  by  which 
she  was  eminently  distinguished,  mani 
fested  itself  from  her  earliest  infancy.  Her 
mother  thus  writes  respecting  her  in  a  letter 

VOL.  i.  b 


VI 

which  is  still  preserved :  "I  once  indeed 
knew  a  little  girl  who  was  as  eager  to  learn 
as  her  instructors  could  be  to  teach  her, 
and  who,  at  two  years  old,  could  read  sen 
tences  and  little  stories  in  her  wise  book, 
roundly,  without  spelling,  and  in  half  a  year 
more  could  read  as  well  as  most  women ; 
but  I  never  knew  such  another,  and  I  be 
lieve  never  shall/' 

Her  education  was  entirely  domestic,  and 
principally  conducted  by  her  excellent 
mother,  a  lady  whose  manners  were  po 
lished  by  the  early  introduction  to  good 
company  which  her  family  connexions  had 
procured  her ;  whilst  her  mind  had  been 
cultivated  and  her  principles  formed,  partly 
by  the  instructions  of  religious  and  en 
lightened  parents,  partly  by  the  society  of 
the  celebrated  Dr.  Doddridge,  who  was 
for  some  years  domesticated  under  her  pa 
rental  roof. 


Vll 


In  the  middle  of  the  last  century  a  strong 
prejudice  still  existed  against  imparting  to 
females  any  tincture  of  classical  learning ; 
and  the  father  of  Miss  Aikin,  proud  as  he 
justly  was  of  her  uncommon  capacity,  long 
refused  to  gratify  her  earnest  desire  of 
being  initiated  in  this  kind  of  knowledge. 
At  length,  however,  she  in  some  degree 
overcame  his  scruples  ;  and  with  his  assist 
ance  she  enabled  herself  to  read  the  Latin 
authors  with  pleasure  and  advantage  ;  nor 
did  she  rest  satisfied  without  gaining  some 
acquaintance  with  the  Greek. 

The  obscure  village  of  Kibworth  was 
unable  to  afford  her  a  single  suitable  com 
panion  of  her  own  sex :  her  brother,  the  late 
Dr.  Aikin,  was  more  than  three  years  her 
junior  ;  and  as  her  father  was  at  this  period 
the  master  of  a  school  for  boys,  it  might 
have  been  apprehended  that  conformity  of 
pursuits,  as  well  as  age,  would  tend  too 
nearly  to  assimilate  her  with  the  youth  of 

b<2 


4 


Vlll 

the  ruder  sex  by  whom  she  found  herself 
encompassed.  But  maternal  vigilance  ef 
fectually  obviated  this  danger,  by  instilling 
into  her  a  double  portion  of  bashfulness 
and  maidenly  reserve ;  and  she  was  accus 
tomed  to  ascribe  an  uneasy  sense  of  con 
straint  in  mixed  society,  which  she  could 
never  entirely  shake  off,  to  the  strictness 
and  seclusion  in  which  it  had  thus  become 
her  fate  to  be  educated.  Her  recollections 
of  childhood  and  early  youth  were,  in  fact, 
not  associated  with  much  of  the  pleasure 
and  gaiety  usually  attendant  upon  that  pe 
riod  of  life  :  but  it  must  be  regarded  as  a 
circumstance  favourable,  rather  than  other 
wise,  to  the  unfolding  of  her  genius,  to 
have  been  thus  left  to  find,  or  make  in  so 
litude  her  own  objects  of  interest  and  pur 
suit.  The  love  of  rural  nature  sunk  deep 
into  her  heart ;  her  vivid  fancy  exerted 
itself  to  colour,  to  animate,  and  to  diversify 
all  the  objects  which  surrounded  her :  the 

few  but  choice  authors  of  her  father's  li- 
V 


IX 

brary,  which  she  read  and  re-read,  hud 
leisure  to  make  their  full  impression, — to 
mould  her  sentiments  and  to  form  her 

*"v 

taste ;  the  spirit  of  devotion,  early  incul 
cated  upon  her  as  a  duty,  opened  to  her 
by  degrees  an  exhaustless  source  of  tender 
and  sublime  delight ;  and  while  yet  a  child, 
she  was  surprised  to  find  herself  a  poet. 

Just  at  the  period  when  longer  seclusion 
might  have  proved  seriously  injurious  to 
her  spirits,  an  invitation  given  to  her 
learned  and  exemplary  father  to  undertake 
the  office  of  classical  tutor  in  a  highly  re 
spectable  dissenting  academy  at  Warring- 
ton  in  Lancashire,  was  the  fortunate  means 
of  transplanting  her  to  a  more  varied  and 
animating  scene.  This  removal  took  place 
in  1758,  when  Miss  Aikin  had  just  attained 
the  age  of  fifteen  ;  and  the  fifteen  succeed 
ing  years  passed  by  her  at  Warrington 
comprehended  probably  the  happiest,  as 
well  as  the  most  brilliant  portion  of  her  ex 
istence.  She  was  at  this  time  possessed  of 


great  beauty,  distinct  traces  of  which  she 
retained  to  the  latest  period  of  life.  Her 
person  was  slender,  her  complexion  ex 
quisitely  fair,  with  the  bloom  of  perfect 
health  ;  her  features  were  regular  and  ele 
gant,  and  her  dark  blue  eyes  beamed  with 
the  light  of  wit  and  fancy. 

A  solitary  education  had  not  produced 
on  her  its  most  frequent  ill  effects,  pride 
and  self-importance :  the  reserve  of  her 
manners  proceeded  solely  from  bashful- 
ness,  for  her  temper  inclined  her  strongly 
to  friendship  and  to  social  pleasures  ;  and 
her  active  imagination,  which  represented 
all  objects  tinged  with  hues  "  unborrowed 
of  the  sun/'  served  as  a  charm  against  that 
disgust  with  common  characters  and  daily 
incidents,  which  so  frequently  renders  the 
conscious  possessor  of  superior  talents  at 
once  unamiable  and  unhappy.  Nor  was 
she  now  in  want  of  congenial  associates. 
Warrington  academy  included  among  its 
tutors  names  eminent  both  in  science  and 


XI 

in  literature  :  with  several  of  these,  and 
especially  with  Dr.  Priestley  and  Dr.  Enfield 
and  their  families,  she  formed  sincere  and 
lasting  friendships.  The  elder  and  more 
accomplished  among  the  students  com 
posed  an  agreeable  part  of  the  same  so 
ciety  ;  and  its  animation  was  increased  by 
a  mixture  of  young  ladies,  either  residents 
in  the  town  or  occasional  visitors,  several  of 
whom  were  equally  distinguished  for  per 
sonal  charms,  for  amiable  manners,  and 
cultivated  minds.  The  rising  institution, 
which  flourished  for  several  years  in  high 
reputation,  diffused  a  classic  air  over 
all  connected  with  it.  Miss  Aikin,  as  was 
natural,  took  a  warm  interest  in  its  suc 
cess  ;  and  no  academic  has  ever  celebrated 
his  alma  mater  in  nobler  strains,  or  with 
a  more  filial  affection,  than  she  has  mani 
fested  in  that  portion  of  her  early  and 
beautiful  poem  The  Invitation,  where  her 
theme  is  this  "  nursery  of  men  for  future 
years/' 


Xll 


About  the  close  of  the  year  1771?  her 
brother,  after  several  years  of  absence,  re 
turned  to  establish  himself  in  his  profes 
sion  at  Warrington ;  an  event  equally  wel 
come  to  her  feelings  and  propitious  to  her 
literary  progress.  In  him  she  possessed 
a  friend  with  discernment  to  recognise  the 
stamp  of  genius  in  her  productions  and 
anticipate  their  fame,  combined  with  zeal 
and  courage  sufficient  to  vanquish  her  re 
luctance  to  appear  before  the  public  in  the 
character  of  an  author.  By  his  persuasion 
and  assistance  her  Poems  were  selected, 
revised,  and  arranged  for  publication :  and 
when  all  these  preparations  were  com 
pleted,  finding  that  she  still  hesitated  and 
lingered, — like  the  parent  bird  who  pushes 
off  its  young  to  their  first  flight,  he  pro 
cured  the  paper,  and  set  the  press  to  work 
on  his  own  authority.  The  result  more 
than  justified  his  confidence  of  her  success : 
four  editions  of  the  work  (the  first  in  4to, 
the  succeeding  ones  in  8vo,)  were  called  for 


Xlll 

within  the  year  of  publication,  1773 ;  com 
pliments  and  congratulations  poured  in 
from  all  quarters  ;  and  even  the  periodical 
critics  greeted  her  Muse  with  nearly  un 
mixed  applause. 

She  was  not  permitted  to  repose  upon 
her  laurels  :  her  brother,  who  possessed  all 
the  activity  and  spirit  of  literary  enterprise 
in  which  she  was  deficient,  now  urged  her 
to  collect  her  Prose  Pieces,  and  to  join  him 
in  forming  a  small  volume,  which  appeared, 
also  in  the  year  1773,  under  the  title  of 
"  Miscellaneous  Pieces,  in  Prose,  by  J.  and 
A.  L.  Aikin."  These  likewise  met  with 
much  notice  and  admiration,  and  have 
been  several  times  reprinted.  The  au 
thors  did  not  think  proper  to  distinguish 
their  respective  contributions,  and  several 
of  the  pieces  have  in  consequence  been 
generally  misappropriated.  The  fragment 
of  Sir  Bertrand  in  particular,  though  alien 
from  the  character  of  that  brilliant  and 


XIV 


airy  imagination  which  was  never  conver 
sant  with  terror,  and  rarely  with  pity,  has 
been  repeatedly  ascribed  to  Mrs.  Barbauld, 
even  in  print. 

Having  thus  laid  the  foundation  of  a 
lasting  reputation  in  literature.  Miss  Aikin 
might  have  been  expected  to  proceed  with 
vigour  in  rearing  the  superstructure ;  and 
the  world  awaited  with  impatience  the  re 
sult  of  her  further  efforts.  But  an  event, 
the  most  important  of  her  life,  was  about 


to    subject    her    to    new    influence,   new 

K  .  iMirr-'-r n-  nmiimm  --  mnimm  i      i 

duties, — to  alter  her  station,  her  course  of 
life,  and  to  modify  even  the  bent  of  her 
mind.  This  event  was  her  marriage, 
which  took  place  in  May  1774. 

IP*  The  Rev.  Rochemont  Barbauld,  whom 

J  she  honoured  with  her  hand,  was  descend 
ed  from  a  family  of  French  protestants. 
During  the  persecutions  of  Louis  XIV., 
his  grandfather,  then  a  boy,  was  carried 


XV 


on  board  a  ship  inclosed  in  a  cask,  and 
conveyed   to  England.     Here  he   settled 
and  had  a  son  who  became  a  clergyman  of 
the  Establishment,  and  on  the  marriage  of 
one   of  the   daughters   of  George  II.    to 
the  elector  of  Hesse  was  appointed  her 
chaplain,  and  attended  her  to  Cassel.     At 
\/    this  place  his  son  Rochemont  was  born  and 
passed  his  childhood  :  on  the  breaking  up 
of  the  household  of  the  electress  he  spent 
a  year  at  Paris,  and  then  accompanied  his 
father  to  England,  who  destined  him  for 
the  church,  but,   somewhat   unadvisedly, 
sent  him  for  previous  instruction  to   the 
dissenting  seminary  of  Warrington.     The 
principles  which  he  here  imbibed,  impelled 
him  to  renounce  all  his  expectations  from 
the  Establishment ;  though  by  such  a  renun 
ciation,  which  threw  him  upon  the  world 
without  a  profession  and  without  fortune, 
he  raised  obstacles  which  might  well  have 
appeared  insuperable,  to  the  completion 
of  that  union  on  which  he  had  long  rested 


XVI 


his  fondest  hopes  of  earthly  felicity.  Whilst 
the   prospects  of  the  young  couple  were 
still  full  of  uncertainty,  some  distinguished 
persons,  amongst  whom  was  Mrs.  Monta 
gue, — at  once  admirers  of  the  genius  of 
Miss  Aikin  and  patrons  of  a   more  en 
larged  system  of  female    education   than 
was  then  prevalent, — were  induced  to  pro 
pose  to  her  to  establish  under  their  au- 
\spices  what  might  almost  have  been  called 
a  College  for  young  ladies.     On   a  dis 
tant  view,  the  idea  had  something  noble 
and  striking,  but  it  was  not  calculated  to 
bear  a  close  examination :   and  it  called 
forth  from  her  the  following  remarks,  well 
worthy  of  preservation,  as  a  monument  of 
her  acuteness  and  good  sense,  and  of  the 
just  and  comprehensive  ideas  which,  at  a 
rather  early  age,  and  with  slender  oppor 
tunities   of  acquainting   herself  with  the 
great  world,  she  had  been  enabled  to  form 
of  the  habits  and  acquirements  most  im 
portant   to    females,  and   particularly   to 


xvii 

those  of  rank  and  fashion.  It  is  also  inter 
esting  as  an  instance  of  the  humility  with 
which  she  estimated  her  own  accomplish 
ments. 

"  A  kind  of  Literary  Academy  for  ladies 
(for  that  is  what  you  seem  to  propose), 
where  they  are  to  be  taught  in  a  regular 
systematic  manner  the  various  branches  of 
science,  appears  to  me  better  calculated  to 
form  such  characters  as  the  'Precieuses' 
or  the  'Fcmmes  scavantes'  of  Moliere,  than 
good  wives  or  agreeable  companions. 
Young  gentlemen,  who  are  to  display  their 
knowledge  to  the  world,  should  have  every 
motive  of  emulation,  should  be  formed  into 
regular  classes,  should  read  and  dispute 
together,  should  have  all  the  honours  and, 
if  one  may  so  say,  the  pomp  of  learning 
set  before  them,  to  call  up  their  ardour : — 
it  is  their  business,  and  they  should  apply 
to  it  as  such.  But  young  ladies,  who 
ought  only  to  have  such  a  general  tincture 


XV111 

of  knowledge  as  to  make  them  agreeable 
companions  to  a  man  of  sense,  and  to  en 
able  them  to  find  rational  entertainment  for 
a  solitary  hour,  should  gain  these  accom 
plishments  in  a  more  quiet  and  unobserved 
manner : — subject  to  a  regulation  like  that 
of  the  ancient  Spartans,  the  thefts  of  know 
ledge  in  our  sex  are  only  connived  at  while 
carefully  concealed,  and  if  displayed,  pu 
nished  with  disgrace.  The  best  way  for 
women  to  acquire  knowledge  is  from  con 
versation  with  a  father,  a  brother  or  friend, 
in  the  way  of  family  intercourse  and  easy 
conversation,  and  by  such  a  course  of  read 
ing  as  they  may  recommend.  If  you  add 
to  these  an  attendance  upon  those  masters 
which  are  usually  provided  in  schools,  and 
perhaps  such  a  set  of  lectures  as  Mr.  Fer 
guson's,  which  it  is  not  uncommon  for 
ladies  to  attend,  I  think  a  woman  will  be  in 
a  way  to  acquire  all  the  learning  that  can 
be  of  use  to  those  who  are  not  to  teach  or 
engage  in  any  learned  profession.  Per- 


XIX 


haps  you  may  think,  that  having  myself 
stepped  out  of  the  bounds  of  female 
reserve  in  becoming  an  author,  it  is  with 
an  ill  grace  I  offer  these  sentiments :  but 
though  this  circumstance  may  destroy  the 
grace,  it  does  not  the  justice  of  the  remark ; 
and  I  am  full  well  convinced  that  to  have  a 
too  great  fondness  for  books  is  little  favour 
able  to  the  happiness  of  a  woman,  espe 
cially  one  not  in  affluent  circumstances. 
My  situation  has  been  peculiar,  and  would 
be  no  rule  for  others. 

"  I  should  likewise  object  to  the  age 
proposed.  Their  knowledge  ought  to  be 
acquired  at  an  earlier  period, — geography, 
those  languages  it  may  be  proper  for  them 
to  learn,  grammar,  &c.,  are  best  learned 
from  about  nine  to  thirteen  or  fourteen, 
and  will  then  interfere  less  with  other  du 
ties.  I  should  have  little  hopes  of  culti 
vating  a  love  of  knowledge  in  a  young  lady 
of  fifteen,  who  came  to  me  ignorant  and  un- 


XX 

taught;  and  if  she  has  laid  a  foundation, 
she  will  be  able  to  pursue  her  studies  with 
out  a  master,  or  with  such  a  one  only  as 
Rousseau  gives  his  Sophie.  It  is  too  late 
then  to  begin  to  learn.  The  empire  of  the 
passions  is  coming  on  ;  a  new  world  opens 
to  the  youthful  eye  ;  those  attachments  be 
gin  to  be  formed  which  influence  the  hap 
piness  of  future  life ; — the  care  of  a  mo 
ther,  and  that  alone,  can  give  suitable  at 
tention  to  this  important  period.  At  this 
period  they  have  many  things  to  learn 
which  books  and  systems  never  taught. 
The  grace  and  ease  of  polished  society, 
with  the  established  modes  of  behaviour  to 
every  different  class  of  people ;  the  detail  of 
domestic  economy,  to  which  they  must  be 
gradually  introduced ;  the  duties,  the  pro 
prieties  of  behaviour  which  they  must  prac 
tise  in  their  own  family,  in  the  families 
where  they  visit,  to  their  friends,  to  their 
acquaintance  : — lastly,  their  behaviour  to 
the  other  half  of  their  species,  with  whom 


XXI 

before  they  were  hardly  acquainted,  and 
who  then  begin  to  court  their  notice ;  the 
choice  of  proper  acquaintance  of  that  sex, 
the  art  to  converse  with  them  with  a  hap 
py  mixture  of  easy  politeness  and  grace 
ful  reserve,  and  to  wear  off  by  degrees 
something  of  the  girlish  bashfulness  with 
out  injuring  virgin  delicacy.  These  are 
the  accomplishments  which  a  young  woman 
has  to  learn  from  fourteen  or  fifteen  till  she 
is  married,  or  fit  to  be  so ;  and  surely  these 
are  not  to  be  learned  in  a  school.  They 
must  be  learnecj.  partly  at  home,  and  partly 
by  visits  in  genteel  families :  they  cannot  be 
taught  where  a  number  are  together ;  they 
cannot  be  taught  without  the  most  intimate 
knowledge  of  a  young  lady's  temper,  con 
nexions,  and  views  in  life  ;  nor  without  an 
authority  and  influence  established  upon 
all  the  former  part  of  her  life.  For  all 
these  reasons,  it  is  my  full  opinion  that  the 
best  public  education  cannot  at  that  period 
VOL.  i.  c 


XX11 

be  equally  serviceable  with— I  had  almost 
said — an  indifferent  private  one. 

"  My  next  reason  is,  that  I  am  not  at  all 
qualified  for  the  task.  I  have  seen  a  good 
deal  of  the  manner  of  educating  boys,  and 
know  pretty  well  what  is  expected  in  the 
care  of  them;  but  in  a  girls'  boarding-school 
I  should  be  quite  a  novice  :  I  never  was  at 
one  myself,  have  not  even  the  advantage 
of  younger  sisters,  which  might  have  given 
me  some  notion  of  the  management  of 
girls  ;  indeed,  for  the  early  part  of  my  life 
I  conversed  little  with  my  own  sex.  In 
the  village  where  I  was,  there  were  none  to 
converse  with;  and  this,  I  am  very  sensible, 
has  given  me  an  awkwardness  in  many 
common  things,  which  would  make  me 
most  peculiarly  unfit  for  the  education  of 
my  own  sex.  But  suppose  I  were  tolerably 
qualified  to  instruct  those  of  my  own  rank ; 
—consider,  that  these  must  be  of  a  class  far 


XX111 


superior  to  those  I  have  lived  amongst  and 
conversed  with.  Young  ladies  of  that  rank 
ought  to  have  their  education  superintend 
ed  by  a  woman  perfectly  well-bred,  from 
whose  manner  they  may  catch  that  ease 
and  gracefulness  which  can  only  be  learned 
from  the  best  company  ;  and  she  should  be 
able  to  direct  them,  and  judge  of  their  pro 
gress  in  every  genteel  accomplishment.  I 
could  not  judge  of  their  music,  their  dan 
cing  ;  and  if  I  pretended  to  correct  their  air, 
they  might  be  tempted  to  smile  at  my  own ; 
for  I  know  myself  remarkably  deficient  in 
gracefulness  of  person,  in  my  air  and  man 
ner,  and  in  the  easy  graces  of  conversation. 
Indeed,  whatever  the  kind  partiality  of  my 
friends  may  think  of  me,  there  are  few 
things  I  know  well  enough  to  teach  them 
with  any  satisfaction,  and  many  I  never 
could  learn  myself.  These  deficiencies 
would  soon  be  remarked  when  I  was  intro 
duced  to  people  of  fashion ;  and  were  it 
possible  that,  notwithstanding,  I  should 

c  2 


XXIV 


meet  with  encouragement,  I  could  never 
prosecute  with  any  pleasure  an  undertaking 
to  which  I  should  know  myself  so  unequal : 
I  am  sensible  the  common  boarding-schools 
are  upon  a  very  bad  plan,  and  believe  I 
could  project  a  better,  but  I  could  not  ex 
ecute  it." 

The  arguments  thus  forcibly  urged,  ap 
pear  to  have  convinced  all  parties  con 
cerned,  that  she  was  right  in  declining  the 
proposal.  Mr.  Barbauld  soon  after  accept 
ed  the  charge  of  a  dissenting  congregation 
at  Palgrave  near  Diss,  and  immediately  be 
fore  his  marriage  announced  his  intention 
of  opening  a  boarding-school  at  the  neigh 
bouring  village  of  Palgrave  in  Suffolk. 

The  rapid  and  uninterrupted  success 
which  crowned  this  undertaking  was  doubt 
less  in  great  measure  owing  to  the  literary 
celebrity  attached  to  the  name  of  Mrs. 
Barbauld,  and  to  her  active  participation 


XXV 

with  her  husband  in  the  task  of  instruction. 
It  fortunately  happened,  that  two  of  the 
eight  pupils  with  which  Palgrave  school 
commenced,  were  endowed  with  abilities 
worthy  of  the  culture  which  such  an  in 
structress  could  alone  bestow.  One  of  these, 
William  Taylor,  Esq.  of  Norwich,  known 
by  his  English  Synonyms,   his  exquisite 
Iphigenia  in  Tauris  from  the  German,  his 
Leonora  from  Burger , and  many  other  fruits 
of  genius  and  extensive  learning,  has  con 
stantly  acknowledged  her,  with  pride  and 
affection,  for  the  "mother  of  his  mind;" 
and  in  a  biographical  notice  prefixed  to 
The  collective  worksof  Frank  Sayers,M.D. 
of  the  same  city,  author  of  the  Dramatic 
Sketches  of  Northern  Mythology,  he  has 
thus  recorded  the  congenial  sentiments  of  his 
friend.   "  Among  the  instructions  bestowed 
at  Palgrave,  Dr.  Sayers  has  repeatedly  ob 
served  to  me,  that  he  most  valued  the  les 
sons  of  English  composition  superintended 
by  Mrs.  Barbauld.     On  Wednesdays  and 


XXVI 

Saturdays  the  boys  were  called  in  separate 
classes  to  her  apartment :  she  read  a  fable, 
a  short  story,  or  a  moral  essay,  to  them 
aloud,  and  then  sent  them  back  into  the 
school-room  to  write  it  out  on  the  slates  in 
their  own  words.  Each  exercise  was  sepa 
rately  overlooked  by  her ;  the  faults  of 
grammar  were  obliterated,  the  vulgarisms 
were  chastised,  the  idle  epithets  were  can 
celled,  and  a  distinct  reason  was  always 
assigned  for  every  correction ;  so  that  the 
arts  of  enditing  and  of  criticizing  were  in 
some  degree  learnt  together.  Many  a  lad 
from  the  great  schools,  who  excels  in  Latin 
and  Greek,  cannot  write  properly  a  verna 
cular  letter,  for  want  of  some  such  disci 
pline." 

The  department  of  geography  was  also 
undertaken  by  Mrs.  Barbauld;  and  she  re 
lieved  the  dryness  of  a  study  seldom  ren 
dered  interesting  to  children,  by  so  many 
lively  strokes  of  description,  and  such  lu- 


xxvn 

minous  and  attractive  views  of  the  con 
nexion  of  this  branch  of  knowledge  with  the 
revolutions  of  empires,  with  national  man 
ners,  and  with  the  natural  history  of  ani 
mals,  that  these  impressive  lectures  were 
always  remembered  by  her  auditors  less 
among  their  tasks  than  their  pleasures. 

A  public  examination  of  the  boys  was 
always  held  at  the  close  of  the  winter  ses 
sion  :  at  the  termination  of  the  summer 
one  they  performed  a  play;  and  upon 
Mrs.  Barbauld  principally  devolved, — to 
gether  with  the  contrivance  of  dresses  and 
decorations,  and  the  composition  of  pro 
logues,  epilogues,  and  interludes — the  in 
struction  of  the  young  exhibitors  in  the  art 
of  declamation.  In  this  branch  she  like 
wise  excelled ;  and  the  neglected  though 
delightful  arts  of  good  reading  and  grace 
ful  speaking  were  nowhere  taught  with 
more  assiduity  and  success. 


XXV111 

In  1775  Mrs.  Barbauld  committed  to 
the  press  a  small  volume  entitled  Devo 
tional  Pieces  compiled  from  the  Psalms  of 
David,  with  Thoughts  on  the  Devotional 
Taste,  and  on  Sects  and  Establishments. 
As  a  selection  it  did  not  meet  with  great 
success  ;  nor  did  the  essay  escape  without 
some  animadversion.  It  was  afterwards 
separated  from  the  Psalms  and  reprinted 
with  the  Miscellaneous  Pieces,  and  will  be 
further  noticed  in  the  sequel. 

The  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barbauld 
proved  unfruitful,  and  they  sought  to  fill 
the  void,  of  which  in  the  midst  of  their 
busy  avocations  they  were  still  sensible, 
by  the  adoption  of  a  son  out  of  the  family 
of  Dr.  Aikin.  Several  particulars  rela 
tive  to  this  subject  will  be  found  in  the 
letters  of  Mrs.  Barbauld  to  her  brother : 
— it  is  sufficient  here  to  mention,  that 
they  received  the  child  when  somewhat 


XXIX 

under  two  years  of  age,  and  that  his  edu 
cation  became  thenceforth  a  leading  object 
of  Mrs.  Barbauld's  attention.  For  the 
use  of  her  little  Charles  she  composed 
those  Early  Lessons  which  have  justly 
gained  for  her  the  reverence  and  love  of 
both  parents  and  children ;  a  work  which 
may  safely  be  asserted  to  have  formed  an 
aera  in  the  art  of  early  instruction,  and  to 
stand  yet  unrivaled  amid  numberless  imi 
tations. 

The  solicitations  of  parents  anxious  to 
obtain  for  their  sons  what  they  regarded 
as  the  best  tuition,  now  induced  her  to  re 
ceive  as  her  own  peculiar  pupils  several 
little  boys,  to  whom  she  condescended  to 
teach  the  first  rudiments  of  literature. 
Thomas  Denman,  Esq.,  now  a  distinguish 
ed  member  of  the  legal  profession  and  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  was  committed  to 
her  care  before  he  had  accomplished  his 
fourth  year.  Sir  William  Cell,  the  zealous 


V 


XXX 

explorer  of  the  plain  of  Troy,  was  another 
of  her  almost  infant  scholars ;  and  it  was  for 
the  benefit  of  this  younger  class  that  her 
Hymns  in  Prose  for  Children  were  writ 
ten,  in  which  it  was  her  peculiar  object  (to 
use  her  own  words  in  the  preface)  "  to  im 
press  devotional  feelings  as  early  as  possi 
ble  on  the  infant  mind/' — "  to  impress 
them,  by  connecting  religion  with  a  varie 
ty  of  sensible  objects,  with  all  that  he  sees, 
all  he  hears,  all  that  affects  his  young 
mind  with  wonder  or  delight;  and  thus, 
by  deep,  strong  and  permanent  associa 
tions,  to  lay  the  best  foundation  for  prac 
tical  devotion  in  future  life." 

None  of  her  works  is  a  fairer  monument 
than  this,  of  the  elevation  of  her  soul  and 
the  brightness  of  her  genius.  While  dis 
carding  the  aid  of  verse,  she  everywhere 
bursts  forth  into  poetry  ; — while  stooping 
to  the  comprehension  of  infancy,  she  has 
produced  a  precious  manual  of  devotion, 


XXXI 


founded  on  the  contemplation  of  nature, 
fitted  to  delight  the  taste  and  warm  the 
piety  of  the  most  accomplished  minds  and 
finest  spirits. 

Meantime  Palgrave  school  was  progres 
sively  increasing  in  numbers  and  reputa 
tion,  and  several  sons  of  noble  families 
were  sent  to  share  in  its  advantages ;  of 
whom  may  be  named,  the  late  amiable  and 
lamented  Basil  Lord  Daer  (a  favourite  pu 
pil),  and  three  of  his  brothers,  including 
the  last  Earl  of  Selkirk  ;  two  sons  of  Lord 
Templetown,  Lord  More,Lord  Aghrim,  and 
the  Honourable  Augustus  Phipps  :  these, 
who  were  parlour-boarders,  enjoyed  most 
of  the  benefit  of  the  conversation  and  oc 
casional  instructions  of  Mrs.  Barbauld ; 
and  all,  it  is  believed,  quitted  the  school 
with  sentiments  towards  her  of  high  respect 
and  attachment. 

A  course  of  honourable  and  prosperous 


XXX11 


exertion  must  always  be  productive  of  sa 
tisfaction  to  a  well-constituted  mind ;  and 
in  this  view  Mrs.  Barbauld  might  regard 
with  complacency  her  situation  atPalgrave. 
Its  cares  and  its  monotony  were  also  relieved 
by  vacations,  which  she  and  Mr.  Barbauld 
usually  passed  either  in  agreeable  visits  to 
their  friends  in  different  parts  of  the  coun 
try,  or  in  the  more  animated  delights  of 
London  society.  As  their  connexions  were 
extensive,  they  were  now  enabled  to  pro 
cure  themselves  a  considerable  share  of  that 
amusing  and  instructive  variety  of  scenes 
and  characters   which  forms  the  peculiar 
charm  of  the  metropolis.     At  the  splendid 
mansion  of  her  early  and  constant  admirer 
Mrs.  Montague,  Mrs.  Barbauld  beheld  in 
perfection  the  imposing  union  of  literature 
and  fashion  ; — under  the  humbler  roof  of 
her  friend  and  publisher,  the  late  worthy 
Joseph  Johnson  of  St.  Paul's  Church-yard, 
she   tasted,    perhaps    with   higher    relish, 
"  the  feast  of  reason  and  the  flow  of  soul/' 


XXX111 

in  a  chosen  knot  of  lettered  equals.  Her 
own  connexions  introduced  her  to  leading 
characters  among  the  dissenters  and  per 
sons  of  opposition-politics  ; — those  of  Mr. 
Barbauld  led  her  among  courtiers  and  sup 
porters  of  the  establishment.  Her  own 
candid  spirit,  and  courteous  though  re 
tiring  manners,  with  the  varied  graces  of 
her  conversation,  recommended  her  alike 
to  all. 

The  business  of  tuition,  however,  to 
those  by  whom  it  is  faithfully  and  zea 
lously  exercised,  must  ever  be  fatiguing 
beyond  almost  any  other  occupation  ;  and 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barbauld  found  their  health 
and  spirits  so  much  impaired  by  their  ex 
ertions,  that  at  the  end  of  eleven  years 
they  determined  upon  quitting  Palgrave, 
and  allowing  themselves  an  interval  of 
complete  relaxation  before  they  should 
again  embark  in  any  scheme  of  active  life. 
Accordingly,  in  the  autumn  of  1785  they 
embarked  for  Calais  ;  and  after  extending 


XXXIV 

their  travels  as  far  as  Geneva,  returned  to 
winter  in  the  south  of  France.  In  the 
spring  they  again  bent  their  course  north 
wards,  and  after  a  leisurely  survey  of  Pa 
ris  returned  to  England  in  the  month  of 
June  1786.  The  remainder  of  that  year 
they  passed  chiefly  in  London,  undecided 
with  respect  to  a  future  place  of  residence ; 
but  early  in  the  following  one,  Mr.  Bar- 
bauld  having  been  elected  their  pastor  by 
a  small  dissenting  congregation  at  Hamp- 
stead,  they  fixed  themselves  in  that  agree 
able  village,  where  for  several  years  Mr. 
Barbauld  received  a  few  young  gentlemen 
as  his  pupils,  while  Mrs.  Barbauld  gave 
daily  instructions  to  a  young  lady  whose 
mother  took  up  her  residence  at  Hamp- 
stead  for  the  benefit  of  this  tuition  : — some 
years  after,  she  accepted  another  pupil  on 
a  similar  plan. 

Her  brother,  who  placed  no  small  part 
of  his  own  pride  in  the  efforts  of  her  genius 
and  the  extension  of  her  fame,  observed 


XXXV 

with  little  complacency  that  her  powers 
were  wasted  in  supineness  or  in  trivial  oc 
cupations  ;  and  early  in  1790  he  apostro 
phized  her  in  the  following  sonnet : 

Thus  speaks  the  Muse,  and  bends  her  brow  severe  : — 
"  Did  I,  Laetitia,  lend  my  choicest  lays, 
And  crown  thy  youthful  head  with  freshest  bays, 
That  all  the'  expectance  of  thy  full-grown  year 
Should  lie  inert  and  fruitless  ?     O  revere 
Those  sacred  gifts  whose  meed  is  deathless  praise, 
Whose  potent  charms  the*  enraptured  soul  can  raise 
Far  from  the  vapours  of  this  earthly  sphere ! 
Seize,  seize  the  lyre  !  resume  the  lofty  strain ! 
T  is  time,  't  is  time !  hark  how  the  nations  round 
With  jocund  notes  of  liberty  resound, — 
And  thy  own  Corsica  has  burst  her  chain ! 
O  let  the  song  to  Britain's  shores  rebound, 
WhereFreedom's  once-loved  voice  is  heard,  alas!  in  vain." 

This  animating  expostulation  conspiring 
with  the  events  of  the  spirit-stirring  times 
which  now  approached,  had  the  effect  of 
once  more  rousing  her  to  exertion.  In 
1790,  the  rejection  of  a  bill  for  the  repeal 
of  the  Corporation  and  Test  Acts  called 


XXXVI 


forth  her  eloquent  and  indignant  Address 
to  the  Opposers  of  this  repeal :  her  Poeti 
cal  Epistle  to  Mr.  Wilberforce  on  the  re 
jection  of  the  bill  for  abolishing  the  Slave 
Trade  was  written  in  1791-  The  next  year 
produced  her  Remarks  on  Mr.  Gilbert 
Wakefield's  Inquiry  into  the  expediency 
and  propriety  of  public  or  social  Worship  : 
and  her  Sins  of  Government  Sins  of  the  Na 
tion,  or  a  Discourse  for  the  Fast,  appeared 
in  1793.  She  also  supplied  some  valuable 
contributions  to  Dr.  Aikin's  popular  book 
for  children,  Evenings  at  Home,  the  first 
volume  of  which  appeared  in  1792  :  but 
her  share  in  this  work  has  generally  been 
supposed  much  greater  than  in  fact  it  was  : 
of  the  ninety-nine  pieces  of  which  it  con 
sisted,  fourteen  only  are  hers*. 


*  They  are  the  following: — The  Young  Mouse; 
The  Wasp  and  Bee ;  Alfred,  a  drama ;  Animals  and 
Countries  ;  Canute's  Reproof;  The  Masque  of  Nature; 
Things  by  their  right  Names  ;  The  Goose  and  Horse  ; 


XXXV11 

By  this  time,  the  effervescence  caused 
by  the  French  revolution  had  nearly  sub 
sided  ;  and  Mrs.  Barbauld,  who  could  sel 
dom  excite  herself  to  the  labour  of  compo 
sition,  except  on  the  spur  of  occasion,  gave 
nothing  more  to  the  public  for  a  consider 
able  number  of  years,  with  the  exception 
of  two  critical  essays ;  one  prefixed  to  an 
ornamented  edition  of  Akenside's  Pleasures 
of  Imagination,  the  other  to  a  similar  one 
of  the  Odes  of  Collins ;  of  which  the  first 
appeared  in  1795,  the  second  in  1797- 
Both  are  written  with  elegance,  taste  and 
acuteness ;  but,  on  the  whole,  they  are  less 
marked  with  the  peculiar  features  of  her 
style  than  perhaps  any  other  of  her  prose 
pieces. 

No  event  worthy  of  mention  occurred 

On  Manufactures ;    The  Flying-fish  ;    A  Lesson  in  the 
Art  of  Distinguishing ;      The  Phoenix  and  Dove  ;    The 
Manufacture  of  Paper  ;    The  Four  Sisters. — In  a  new 
edition  will  be  added,  Live  Dolls. 
VOL.  I.  d 


XXXV111 

till  1802,  when  Mr.  Barbauld  accepted 
an  invitation  to  become  pastor  of  the  con 
gregation  (formerly  Dr.  Price's)  at  New- 
ington  Green ;  and  quitting  Hampstead, 
they  took  up  their  abode  in  the  village  of 
Stoke  Newington.  The  sole  motive  for  this 
removal,  which  separated  them  from  a  re 
sidence  which  they  liked  and  friends  to 
whom  they  were  cordially  attached,  was 
the  mutual  desire  of  Dr.  Aikin  and  Mrs. 
Barbauld  to  pass  the  closing  period  of  their 
lives  in  that  near  neighbourhood  which 
admits  of  the  daily  and  almost  hourly  in 
tercourses  of  affection, — a  desire  which  was 
thus  affectingly  expressed  by  the  former  in 
an  epistle  addressed  to  his  sister  during 
her  visit  to  Geneva  in  1785: — 

"  Yet  one  dear  wish  still  struggles  in  my  breast, 
And  points  one  darling  object  unpossest : — 
How  many  years  have  whirled  their  rapid  course, 
Since  we,  sole  streamlets  from  one  honoured  source, 
In  fond  affection  as  in  blood  allied, 
Have  wandered  devious  from  each  other's  side ; 


XXXIX 

Allowed  to  catch  alone  some  transient  view, 
Scarce  long  enough  to  think  the  vision  true ! 
O  then,  while  yet  some  zest  of  life  remains, 
While  transport  yet  can  swell  the  beating  veins, 
While  sweet  remembrance  keeps  her  wonted  seat, 
And  fancy  still  retains  some  genial  heat ; 
When  evening  bids  each  busy  task  be  o'er, — 
Once  let  us  meet  again,  to  part  no  more  ! " 

The  evening  which  was  the  object  of 
these  earnest  aspirations  had  now  arrived ; 
and  it  proved  a  long,  though  by  no  means 
an  unclouded  one  ; — twenty  years  elapsed 
before  the  hand  of  death  sundered  this 
fraternal  pair. 

A  warm  attachment  to  the  authors  of 
what  has  been  called  the  Augustan  age  of 
English  literature, — on  whom  herown  taste 
and  style  were  formed, — was  observable  in 
the  conversation  of  Mrs.  Barbauld,  and 
often  in  her  writings  ;  and  she  gratified  this 
sentiment  by  offering  to  the  public,  in 
1804,  a  Selection  from  the  Spectator ,Tatler, 
Guardian  and  Freeholder,  with  a  Prelimi- 


xl 

nary  Essay,  to  which  she  gave  her  name*. 
This  delightful  piece  may  perhaps  be  re 
garded  as  the  most  successful  of  her  efforts 
in  literary  criticism  ;  and  that  it  should  be 
so,  is  easily  to  be  accounted  for.  There 
were  many  striking  points  of  resemblance 
between  her  genius  and  that  of  Addison. 
As  prose  writers,  both  were  remarkable  for 
uniting  wit  of  the  light  and  sportive  kind 
with  vividness  of  fancy,  and  a  style  at  once 
rich  and  lively,  flowing  and  full  of  idiom  : 
both  of  them  rather  avoided  the  pathetic : 
in  both,  "  the  sentiments  of  rational  and 
liberal  devotion  "  were  "  blended  with  the 
speculations  of  philosophy  and  the  paint 
ings  of  a  fine  imagination :"  both  were 
admirable  for  "  the  splendour  they  diffused 
over  a  serious,  the  grace  with  which  they 
touched  a  lighter  subject/'  The  humorous 
delineation  of  manners  and  characters  in 
deed,  in  which  Addison  so  conspicuously 
j  - , 

*  Three  vols.  12mo,  Johnson  1804. 


xli 

shone,  was  never  attempted  by  Mrs  Bar- 
bauld  : — in  poetry,  on  the  other  hand,  she 
surpassed  him  in  all  the  qualities  of  which 
excellence  in  that  style  is  composed.  Cer 
tainly  this  great  author  could  not  elsewhere 
have  found  a  critic  so  capable  of  entering, 
as  it  were,  into  the  soul  of  his  writings, 
culling  their  choicest  beauties,  and  draw 
ing  them  forth  for  the  admiration  of  a 
world  by  which  they  had  begun  to  be  neg 
lected.  Steele  and  the  other  contributors 
to  these  periodical  papers  are  also  ably, 
though  briefly,  characterized  by  her  ;  and 
such  pieces  of  theirs  are  included  in  the 
Selection  as  could  fairly  claim  enduring 
remembrance. 

The  essay  opens  with  the  observation, 
"  that  it  is  equally  true  of  books  as  of  their 
authors,  that  one  generation  passeth  away 
and  another  cometh."  The  mutual  influ 
ence  exerted  by  books  and  manners  on 
each  other  is  then  remarked  ;  and  the  si- 


xlii 

lent  and  gradual  declension  from  what 
might  be  called  the  active  life  of  an  ad 
mired  and  popular  book,  to  the  honourable 
retirement  of  a  classic,  is  lightly,  but  im 
pressively,  traced ;  closed  by  remarks  on 
the  mutations  and  improvements  which 
have  particularly  affected  the  works  in 
question.  To  young  persons  chiefly  the 
Selection  is  offered,  as  containing  the  "  es 
sence  "  of  a  celebrated  set  of  works.  An  in 
structive  account  is  added  of  each  of  these 
in  particular,  of  the  state  of  society  at 
the  time  of  their  appearance,  the  objects  at 
which  they  aimed,  and  their  effects.  This 
essay  will  not  be  found  in  the  present  vo 
lumes,  because  it  was  considered  that  to 
separate  it  from  the  Selection  which  it  was 
written  to  introduce,  would  be  to  defeat  its 
very  purpose. 

During  the  same  year  (1804)  Mrs.  Bar- 
bauld  was  prevailed  upon  to  undertake  the 
task  of  examining  and  making  a  selection 


xliii 

from  the  letters  of  Richardson  the  novelist 
and  his  correspondents,  of  which  a  vast 
collection  had  remained  in  the  hands  of 
his  last  surviving  daughter;  after  whose 
death  they  were  purchased  of  his  grand 
children.  It  must  be  confessed  that,  on  the 
whole,  these  letters  were  less  deserving  of 
public  attention  than  she  had  probably  ex 
pected  to  find  them  ;  and  very  good  judges 
have  valued  more  than  all  the  remaining 
contents  of  the  six  duodecimo  volumes 
which  they  occupy,  the  elegant  and  inter 
esting  life  of  Richardson,  and  the  finished 
reviewal  of  his  works  prefixed  by  the  editor. 

It  is  probable  that  Mrs.  Barbauld  con 
sented  to  employ  herself  in  these  humbler 
offices  of  literature,  chiefly  as  a  solace  un 
der  the  pressure  of  anxieties  and  apprehen 
sions  of  a  peculiar  and  most  distressing 
nature,  which  had  been  increasing  in  ur 
gency  during  a  long  course  of  time,  and 
which  found  their  final  completion  on  the 


xliv 

llth  of  November,  1808,  in  the  event  by 
which  she  became  a  widow.  She  has  touch- 
ingly  alluded,  in  her  poem  of  Eighteen 
Hundred  and  Eleven,  to 

• — "  that  sad  death  whence  most  affection  bleeds, 
Which  sickness,  only  of  the  soul,  precedes." 

And  though  the  escape  of  a  sufferer  from 
the  most  melancholy  of  human  maladies 
could  not  in  itself  be  a  subject  of  rational 
regret,  her  spirits  were  deeply  wounded, 
both  by  the  severe  trials  through  which  she 
had  previously  passed,  and  by  the  mourn 
ful  void  which  always  succeeds  the  removal 
of  an  object  of  long  and  deep,  however 
painful,  interest.  An  affecting  Dirge  will 
be  found  among  her  poems,  which  records 
her  feelings  on  this  occasion.  She  also  com 
municated  to  the  Monthly  Repository  of 
Theology  and  General  Literature,  a  memoir 
of  Mr.  Barbauld;  in  which  his  character  is 
thus  delineated. 


xlv 

"  The  scenes  of  life  Mr.  Barbauld  pass 
ed  through  were  common  ones,  but  his  cha 
racter  was  not  a  common  one.  His  rea 
soning  powers  were  acute,  and  sharpened 
by  exercise ;  for  he  was  early  accustom 
ed  to  discussion,  and  argued  with  great 
clearness ;  with  a  degree  of  warmth  in 
deed,  but  with  the  most  perfect  candour 
towards  his  opponent.  He  gave  the  most 
liberal  latitude  to  free  inquiry,  and  could 
bear  to  hear  those  truths  attacked  which 
he  most  steadfastly  believed ;  the  more 
because  he  steadfastly  believed  them  ;  for 
he  was  delighted  to  submit  to  the  test  of 
argument,  those  truths,  which  he  had  no 
doubt  could,  by  argument,  be  defended. 
He  had  an  uncommon  flow  of  conver 
sation  on  those  points  which  had  engaged 
his  attention,  and  delivered  himself  with 
a  warmth  and  animation  which  enlivened 
the  driest  subject.  He  was  equally  at 
home  in  French  and  English  literature  ; 
and  the  exquisite  sensibility  of  his  mind, 


xlvi 

with  the  early  culture  his  taste  had  received, 
rendered  him  an  excellent  judge  of  all  those 
works  which  appeal  to  the  heart  and  the 
imagination.  His  feelings  were  equally 
quick  and  vivid;  his  expressive  counte 
nance  was  the  index  of  his  mind,  and  of 
every  instantaneous  impression  made  upon 
it.  Children,  who  are  the  best  physiogno 
mists,  were  always  attracted  to  him,  and  he 
delighted  to  entertain  them  with  lively  nar 
ratives  suited  to  their  age,  in  which  he  had 
great  invention.  The  virtues  of  his  heart 
will  be  acknowledged  by  all  who  knew 
him.  His  benevolence  was  enlarged :  it 
was  the  spontaneous  propensity  of  his  na 
ture,  as  well  as  the  result  of  his  religious 
system.  He  was  temperate,  almost  to  ab 
stemiousness  ;  yet  without  any  tincture  of 
ascetic  rigour.  A  free,  undaunted  spirit, 
a  winning  simplicity,  a  tendency  to  enthu 
siasm,  but  of  the  gentle  and  liberal  kind, 
formed  the  prominent  lineaments  of  his 
character.  The  social  affections  were  all 


xlvii 

alive  and  active  in  him.  His  heart  over 
flowed  with  kindness  to  all, — the  lowest  that 
came  within  his  sphere.  There  never  was 
a  human  being  who  had  less  of  the  selfish 
and  worldly  feelings, — they  hardly  seemed 
to  form  a  part  of  his  nature.  His  was  truly 
the  charity  which  thinketh  no  ill.  Great 
singleness  of  heart,  and  a  candour  very  op 
posite  to  the  suspicious  temper  of  worldly 
sagacity,  made  him  slow  to  impute  un 
worthy  motives  to  the  actions  of  his  fellow- 
men  ;  yet  his  candour  by  no  means  sprung 
from  indifference  to  moral  rectitude,  for 
when  he  could  no  longer  resist  conviction, 
his  censure  was  decided  and  his  indigna 
tion  warm  and  warmly  expressed.  His 
standard  of  virtue  was  high,  and  he  felt  no 
propensities  which  disposed  him  to  lower 
it.  His  religious  sentiments  were  of  the 
most  pure  and  liberal  cast ;  and  his  pulpit 
services,  when  the  state  of  his  spirits  se- 
conded  the  ardour  of  his  mind,  were  cha 
racterized  by  the  rare  union  of  a  fervent 


xlviii 

spirit  of  devotion,  with  a  pure,  sublime 
philosophy,  supported  by  arguments  of 
metaphysical  acuteness.  He  did  not  speak 
the  language  of  any  party,  nor  exactly  co 
incide  with  the  systems  of  any.  He  was  a 
believer  in  the  pre-existence  of  Christ,  and, 
in  a  certain  modified  sense,  in  the  atone 
ment  ;  thinking  those  doctrines  most  con 
sonant  to  the  tenour  of  scripture  ;....but  he 
was  too  sensible  of  the  difficulties  which 
press  upon  every  system,  not  to  feel  indul 
gence  for  all,  and  he  was  not  zealous  for 
any  doctrine  which  did  not  affect  the  heart. 
Of  the  moral  perfections  of  the  Deity  he 
had  the  purest  and  most  exalted  ideas ;  on 
these  was  chiefly  founded  his  system  of  re 
ligion,  and  these  together  with  his  own  be 
nevolent  nature  led  him  to  embrace  so 
warmly,  his  favourite  doctrine  of  the  final 
salvation  of  all  the  human  race,  and  in 
deed,  the  gradual  rise  and  perfectibility  of 

all  created  existence His  latter  days 

were  oppressed  by  a  morbid  affection  of 


xlix 

his  spirits,  in  a  great  degree  hereditary, 
which  came  gradually  upon  him,  and  closed 
the  scene  of  his  earthly  usefulness  ;  yet  in 
the  midst  of  the  irritation  it  occasioned, 
the  kindness  of  his  nature  broke  forth,  and 
some  of  his  last  acts  were  acts  of  benevo 
lence/' 

Mrs.  Barbauld  had  the  fortitude  to  seek 
relief  from  dejection  in  literary  occupation  ; 
and  incapable  as  yet  of  any  stronger  effort, 
she  consented  to  edit  a  collection  of  the 
British  Novelists,  which  issued  from  the 
press  in  1810.  The  Introductory  Essay 
shows  extent  of  reading  combined  with  her 
usual  powers  of  style ;  and  the  Biographical 
and  Critical  Notices  prefixed  to  the  works 
of  each  author  are  judiciously  and  grace 
fully  executed. 

In  the  following  year  she  compiled  for 
the  use  of  young  ladies  an  agreeable  col 
lection  of  verse  and  prose,  in  one  volume 


1 

12mo,  entitled  The  Female  Speaker. 
Having  thus  braced  her  mind,  as  it  were, 
to  the  tone  of  original  composition,  she 
produced  that  beautiful  offspring  of  her 
genius, Eighteen  Hundred  and  Eleven, — the 
longest,  and  perhaps  the  most  highly  finish 
ed,  of  all  her  poems.  The  crisis  at  which 
this  piece  was  produced,  and  concerning 
which  it  treats,  was  confessedly  one  of  the 
most  distressful  within  the  memory  of  the 
present  generation,  and  the  author's  own 
state  of  spirits  deepened  the  gloom.  She, 
like  Cassandra,  was  the  prophetess  of  woe : 
at  the  time,  she  was  heard  perhaps  with 
less  incredulity,  but  the  event  has  happily 
discredited  her  vaticination  in  every  point. 
That  the  solemn  warning  which  she  here 
attempted  to  hold  forth  to  national  pride 
and  confidence,  should  cause  her  lines  to 
be  received  by  the  public  with  less  ap 
plause  than  their  intrinsic  merit  might  well 
have  claimed,  was  perhaps  in  some  degree 
to  be  expected ;  that  it  would  expose  its 


li 

author — its  venerable  and  female  author — 
to  contumely  and  insult,  could  only  have 
been  anticipated  by  those  thoroughly  ac 
quainted  with  the  instincts  of  the  hired 
assassin  of  reputation  shooting  from  his 
coward  ambush.  Can  any  one  read  the 
touching  apostrophe, 

Yet  O  my  country,  name  beloved,  revered  ! — 

the  proud  and  affectionate  enumeration  of 
the  names  which  encircle  the  brow  of 
Britain  with  the  halo  of  immortal  glory ; 
of  the  spots  consecrated  by  the  footsteps 
of  genius  and  virtue,  where  the  future  pil 
grim  from  the  West  would  kneel  with  beat 
ing  heart ;  the  splendid  description  of  Lon 
don  with  all  its  "  pomp  and  circumstance  " 
of  greatness, — the  complacent  allusion  to 
"angel  charities/'  and  "  the  book  of  life" 
held  out  "to  distant  lands/' — and  doubt 
for  a  moment  that  this  strain  was  dictated 
by  the  heart  of  a  true  patriot,  a  heart  which 
feared  because  it  fondly  loved  ? 


fit 

This  was  the  last  of  Mrs.  Barbauld's  se 
parate  publications. Who  indeed,  that  knew 
and  loved  her,  could  have  wished  her  to 
expose  again  that  honoured  head  to  the 
scorns  of  the  unmanly,  the  malignant,  and 
the  base?  Her  fancy  was  still  in  all  its 
brightness ;  her  spirits  might  have  been 
cheered  and  her  energy  revived,  by  the 
cordial  and  respectful  greetings,  the  thanks 
and  plaudits,  with  which  it  was  once  the 
generous  and  graceful  practice  of  contem 
porary  criticism  to  welcome  the  re-appear 
ance  of  a  well-deserving  veteran  in  the 
field  of  letters.  As  it  was,  though  still  vi 
sited  by 

....  the  thoughts  that  voluntary  move 
Harmonious  numbers, 

she  for  the  most  part  confined  to  a  few 
friends  all  participation  in  the  strains 
which  they  inspired.  She  even  laid  aside 
the  intention  which  she  had  entertained  of 
preparing  a  new  edition  of  her  Poems, 


liii 

long  out  of  print  and  often  inquired  for  in 
vain; — well  knowing  that  a  day  must  come 
when  the  sting  of  Envy  would  be  blunted, 
and  her  memory  would  have  its  fame. 

No  incident  worthy  of  mention  hence 
forth  occurred  to  break  the  uniformity  of 
her  existence.  She  gave  up  all  distant 
journeys ;  and  confined  at  home  to  a  nar 
row  circle  of  connexions  and  acquaint 
ance,  she  suffered  life  to  slide  away,  as  it 
were,  at  its  own  pace, 

Nor  shook  the  outhasting  sands,  nor  bid  them  stay. 

An  asthmatic  complaint,  which  was  slowly 
undermining  her  excellent  constitution, 
more  and  more  indisposed  her  for  any 
considerable  exertion  either  of  mind  or 
body :  but  the  arrival  of  a  visitor  had  al 
ways  the  power  to  rouse  her  from  a  state 
of  languor.  Her  powers  of  conversation 
suffered  little  declension  to  the  last,  al- 


VOL.  I. 


liv 

though  her  memory  of  recent  circumstances 
became  somewhat  impaired.  Her  disposi 
tion, — of  which  sensibility  was  not  in  earlier 
life  the  leading  feature, — now  mellowed 
into  softness,  pleasingly  exhibited 

Those  tender  tints  that  only  Time  can. give. 

Her  manners,  never  tainted  by  pride, — 
which,  with  the  baser  but  congenial  affec 
tion  of  envy,  was  a  total  stranger  to  her 
bosom, — were  now  remarkable  for  their 
extreme  humility  :  she  spoke  of  every  one 
not  merely  with  the  candour  and  forbear 
ance  which  she  had  long  practised;  but 
with  interest,  with  kindness,  with  an  in 
dulgence  which  sometimes  appeared  but 
too  comprehensive ;  she  seemed  reluctant 
to  allow,  or  believe,  that  any  of  her  fellow- 
creatures  had  a  failing,  while  she  gave  them 
credit  gratuitously  for  many  virtues.  This 
state  of  mind,  which,  with  her  native  acute- 
ness  of  discernment,  it  must  apparently  have 


Iv 

cost  her  some  struggles  to  attain,  had  at  least 
the  advantage  of  causing  her  easily  to  admit 
of  such  substitutes  as  occurred  for  those 
contemporary  and  truly  congenial  friend 
ships  which,  in  the  course  of  nature,  were 
now  fast  failing  her.  She  lost  her  early 
and  affectionate  friend  Mrs.  Kenrick  in 
1819.  In  December  1822  her  brother 
sunk  under  a  long  decline,  which  had 
served  as  a  painful  preparation  to  the  final 
parting.  A  few  months  later  she  lost,  in 
the  excellent  Mrs.  John  Taylor  of  Nor 
wich,  perhaps  the  most  intimate  and  most 
highly  valued  of  all  her  distant  friends ; 
to  whose  exalted  and  endearing  character 
she  bore  the  following  well-merited  testi 
mony  in  a  letter  addressed  to  one  of  her 
daughters. 

"  Receive  the  assurance  of  my  most  af 
fectionate  sympathy  in  those  feelings  with 
which  you  must  be  now  contemplating  the 
loss  of  that  dear  woman,  so  long  the  object 


Ivi 

of  your  respect  and  affection  ;  nor  indeed 
yours  only,  but  of  all  who  knew  her.  A 
prominent  part  of  those  feelings,  however, 
must  be,  that  the  dear  object  of  them  is 
released  from  suffering,  has  finished  her 

task,  and  entered  upon  her  reward 

Never  will  she  be  forgotten  by  those  who 
knew  her !  Her  strong  sense,  her  feeling, 
her  energy,  her  principle,  her  patriot  feel 
ings,  her  piety  rational  yet  ardent, — all 
these  mark  a  character  of  no  common  sort. 
When  to  these  high  claims  upon  general 
regard  are  added  those  of  relation  or 
friend,  the  feeling  must  be  such  as  no 
course  of  years  can  efface/' 

A  gentle  and  scarcely  perceptible  de 
cline  was  now  sloping  for  herself  the  pass 
age  to  the  tomb : — she  felt  and  hailed  its 
progress  as  a  release  from  languor  and 
infirmity, — a  passport  to  another  and  a 
higher  state  of  being.  Her  friends,  how 
ever,  flattered  themselves  that  they  might 


Ivii 

continue  to  enjoy  her  yet  a  little  longer ; 
and  she  had  consented  to  remove  under 
the  roof  of  her  adopted  son,  that  his  affec 
tionate  attentions  and  those  of  his  family 
might  be  the  solace  of  every  remaining 
hour.  But  Providence  had  ordained  it 
otherwise: — she  quitted  indeed  her  own 
house,  but  whilst  on  a  visit  at  the  neighbour 
ing  one  of  her  sister-in-law  Mrs.  Aikin,the 
constant  and  beloved  friend  of  nearly  her 
whole  life,  her  bodily  powers  gave  way 
almost  suddenly  ;  and  after  lingering  a  few 
days,  on  the  morning  of  March  the  9th, 
1825,  she  expired  without  a  struggle,  in  the 
eighty-second  year  of  her  age. 

To  claim  for  this  distinguished  woman 
the  praise  of  purity  and  elevation  of  mind 
may  well  appear  superfluous.  Her  educa 
tion  and  connexions,  the  course  of  her 
life,  the  whole  tenour  of  her  writings^  bear 
abundant  testimony  to  this  part  of  her  cha 
racter.  It  is  a  higher,  or  at  least  a  rarer  com- 


Iviii 

mendation  to  add,  that  no  one  ever  better 
loved  "  a  sister's  praise/'  even  that  of  such 
sisters  as  might  have  been  peculiarly  re 
garded  in  the  light  of  rivals.  She  was  ac 
quainted  with  almost  all  the  principal  fe 
male  writers  of  her  time ;  and  there  was 
not  one  of  the  number  whom  she  failed 
frequently  to  mention  in  terms  of  admira 
tion,  esteem  or  affection,  whether  in  con 
versation,  in.  letters  to  her  friends,  or  in 
print.  To  humbler  aspirants  in  the  career 
of  letters,  who  often  applied  to  her  for  ad 
vice  oi-  assistance,  she  was  invariably  cour 
teous,  and  in  many  instances  essentially 
serviceable.  The  sight  of  youth  and  beauty 
was  peculiarly  gratifying  to  her  fancy  and 
her  feelings  ;  and  children  and  young  per 
sons,  especially  females,  were  accordingly 
large  sharers  in  her  benevolence :  she 
loved  their  society,  and  would  often  invite 
them  to  pass  weeks  or  months  in  her  house, 
when  she  spared  no  pains  to  amuse  and 
instruct  them;  and  she  seldom  failed, 


lix 

after  they  had  quitted  her,  to  recall  herself 
from  time  to  time  to  their  recollection,  by 
affectionate  and  playful  letters,  or  welcome 
presents. 

In  the  conjugal  relation,  her  conduct 
was  guided  by  the  highest  principles  of 
love  and  duty.  As  a  sister,  the  uninter 
rupted  flow  of  her  affection,  manifested  by 
numberless  tokens  of  love, — not  alone  to 
her  brother,  but  to  every  member  of  his 
family, — will  ever  be  recalled  by  them 
with  emotions  of  tenderness,  respect,  and 
gratitude.  She  passed  through  a  long  life 
without  having  dropped,  it  is  believed,  a 
single  friendship,  and  without  having  drawn 
upon  herself  a  single  enmity  which  could 
properly  be  called  personal. 

We  now  proceed  to  offer  some  account 
of  the  contents  of  the  present  volumes, 
with  a  few  remarks  on  the  genius  of  their 
author.  The  small  bulk  of  the  writings  of 


Ix 

Mrs.  Barbauld,  compared  with  the  long 
course  of  years  during  which  she  exercised 
the  pen,  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  she  offered 
to  the  public  none  but  the  happiest  inspira 
tions  of  her  Muse,  and  not  even  these  till 
they  had  received  all  the  polish  of  which  she 
judged  them  susceptible.  To  a  friend  who 
had  expressed  his  surprise  at  not  finding 
inserted  in  her  volume  a  poem  which  he 
had  admired  in  manuscript,  she  well  and 
characteristically  replied  ;  "  I  had  rather  it 
should  be  asked  of  twenty  pieces  why  they 
are  not  here,  than  of  one  why  it  is."  Her 
representatives  have  in  the  present  in 
stance  followed,  to  the  best  of  their  judge 
ment,  a  similar  principle  of  selection.  Out 
of  a  considerable  number  of  pieces  which 
appear  from  their  dates  to  have  been  re 
jected  by  herself  from  her  first  publication, 
they  have  printed  only  two  :  that  agreeable 
jeu  tf  esprit  The  Inventory  of  the  Furniture 
of  Dr.  Priestley's  Study,  probably  omitted 
in  the  first  instance  for  reasons  which  no 


Ixi 

longer  exist;  and  the  elegant  Lines  on  The 
Deserted  Village,  which  are  given  partly 
for  the  sake  of  connecting  the  name  of 
their  author  as  a  contemporary  with  that 
of  a  poet  who  has  been  so  long  enrolled 
among  the  classics  of  his  country.  It  may 
also  be  mentioned,  that  Goldsmith,  whose 
envy  is  well  known,  bore  involuntary  testi 
mony  to  the  merit  of  these  lines,  by  exhi 
biting  no  sentiment  but  mortification  on 
hearing  them  read  with  applause  in  a  Lon 
don  circle. 

Of  the  pieces  composed  since  the  first 
publication  of  Mrs.  Barbauld's  Poems 
(which  form  the  larger  part  of  the  present 
collection);  the  two  longest,  the  Epistle  to 
Mr.  Wilberforce,  and  Eighteen  Hundred 
and  Eleven,  have  already  appeared  in  se 
parate  pamphlets ;  and  the  first  of  them  is 
added  to  the  last  edition  of  the  Poems : 
several  of  the  smaller  ones  have  also  been 
inserted  in  periodical  works.  Corrected 


Ixii 

copies  of  most  of  those  now  printed  for 
the  first  time  were  found  among  her  pa 
pers,  evidently  prepared  for  insertion  in 
the  enlarged  volume  which  she  long  medi 
tated,  but  never  completed. 

The  Poems  have  been  disposed,  with 
some  unimportant  exceptions,  in  chronolo 
gical  order,  as  nearly  as  it  could  be  ascer 
tained.  When  the  productions  of  a  writer 
extend  over  so  long  a  period  as  nearly  sixty 
years,  they  become  in  some  measure  the  re 
cord  of  an  age, — a  document  for  the  his 
torian  of  literature  and  opinions  ;  and  they 
ought  to  be  arranged  with  some  view  to 
this  secondary  object,  by  which  their  in 
terest  is  enhanced.  Tt  is  also  agreeable  to 
trace  the  author's  progress  from  youth  to 
age,  by  changes  of  style,  or  the  succession 
of  different  trains  of  thought.  In  the  wri 
tings  of  Mrs.  Barbauld,  however,  the  cha 
racter  of  the  style  varies  little  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end.  It  is  nowhere  to  be 


Ixiii 

found  in  an  unformed  state ;  for  so  relent 
lessly  did  she  destroy  all  her  juvenile 
essays,  that  the  editor  is  not  aware  of  the 
existence  of  a  single  piece  which  can  be 
ascertained  to  have  been  composed  before 
the  age  of  twenty :  the  printed  ones  are 
all,  it  is  believed,  of  a  considerably  later 
date.  Her  earliest  pieces  too,  as  well  as  her 
more  recent  ones,  exhibit  in  their  imagery 
and  allusions  the  fruits  of  extensive  and 
varied  reading.  In  youth,  the  power  of 
her  imagination  was  counterbalanced  by 
the  activity  of  her  intellect,  which  exer 
cised  itself  in  rapid,  but  not  unprofitable 
excursions  over  almost  every  field  of  know 
ledge.  In  age,  when  this  activity  abated, 
imagination  appeared  to  exert  over  her  an 
undiminished  sway. 

The  quality  which  principally  distin 
guishes  the  later  productions  of  her  Muse 
is  pathos.  In  some  tempers  sensibility  ap 
pears  an  instinct,  while  in  others  it  is  the 


Ixiv 

gradual  result  of  principle  and  reflection, 
of  the  events  and  the  experience  of  life.  It 
was  certainly  so  in  that  of  Mrs.  Barbauld. 
Her  Epistle  to  Dr.  Enfield,  on  his  revisit 
ing  Warrington  in  1789,  is  the  first  of  her 
poems  which  indicates  deep  feeling ;  and 
this  was  dictated  by  the  tender  recollections 
of  departed  youth,  and  the  memory  of  an 
honoured  parent,  the  first  near  connexion 
from  whom  she  had  been  parted  by  death. 
Her  other  pathetic  pieces,  The  Lines  on  the 
Death  of  Mrs.  Martineau — the  Dirge — the 
Thought  on  Death — the  Lines  on  the  Ill 
ness  of  the  late  King — those  on  the  Death 
of  the  Princess  Charlotte — the  Octogenary 
Reflections,  and  a  few  others,  may  easily 
be  traced  either  to  particular  afflictive  in 
cidents  of  her  life,  ,or  to  reflections  natu 
rally  arising  under  the  influence  of  decli 
ning  years  and  domestic  solitude.  By  the 
reader  of  taste  and  sentiment  these  will 
not  be  esteemed  the  least  interesting  por 
tion  of  the  collection. 


Ixv 

The  second  volume  of  the  present  work 
contains  a  selection  from  the  private  cor 
respondence  of  Mrs.  Barbauld,  her  entire 
share  of  the  Miscellaneous  Pieces  in  Prose 
written  by  herself  and  her  brother  con 
jointly,  her  three  pamphlets,  and  several 
occasional  pieces, — some  of  them  now  first 
given  to  the  world,  others  reprinted  from 
periodical  works  where  they  appeared  ano 
nymously. 

It  is  equally  true  of  the  style  of  Mrs. 
Barbauld  in  prose  as  in  verse,  that  it  was 
never  produced  to  the  public  till  it  had 
reached  its  perfect  stature :  the  early  vo 
lume  of  Miscellaneous  Pieces  contained 
specimens  in  various  kinds  which  she 
never  surpassed.  In  the  allegory  of  the 
Hill  of  Science  she  tried  her  strength  with 
Addison,  and  sustained  no  defeat.  The 
Essay  on  Romances  is  a  professed  imitation 
of  the  style  of  Dr.  Johnson ;  and  it  was  al 
lowed  by  that  celebrated  rhetorician  him- 


Ixvi 

self,  to  be  the  best  that  was  ever  attempt 
ed  ;  because  it  reflected  the  colour  of  his 
thoughts,  no  less  than  the  turn  of  his  ex 
pressions.  Here  it  appears  as  a  foil  to  the 
"  easy  and  inimitable  graces  "  of  her  own 
natural  manner.  Of  the  Essay  against  In 
consistency  in  our  Expectations,  the  editor 
feels  it  superfluous  to  speak :  it  has  long 
been  acknowledged  to  stand  at  the  head  of 
its  class. 

Of  a  different  character  are  her  Thoughts 
on  the  Devotional  Taste,  on  Sects  and 
on  Establishments.  This  piece  betrays, 
it  must  be  confessed,  that  propensity  to 
tread  on  dangerous  ground  which  some 
times  appears  an  instinct  of  genius.  It 
recommends  a  spirit  of  devotion  which 
yet  she  is  obliged  to  allow  to  be  in  some 
measure  incompatible  with  an  enlightened 
and  philosophical  theology.  That  part, 
however,  which  delineates  the  character 
istics  of  sects  and  of  establishments,  and 


Ixvii 

balances  their  respective  advantages  and 
inconveniences,  evinces  great  acuteness 
and  a  rare  impartiality ;  and  the  whole  must 
be  admired  as  eloquence,  if  it  cannot  be 
altogether  acquiesced  in  as  reason. 

Amongst  her  later  pieces,  two  which 
first  appeared  in  the  Monthly  Magazine, 
— the  Essay  on  Education,  and  that  on  Pre 
judice,  which  may  be  regarded  as  in  some 
measure  a  sequel  to  it, — have  justly  earned 
for  her  not  merely  applause,  but  gratitude. 
The  first  served  to  calm  the  apprehensions 
of  many  an  anxious  parent, — who  had  risen 
from  the  examination  of  the  numerous  con 
flicting  systems  of  education  then  fashion 
able,  alarmed  rather  than  edified, — by 
pointing  out,  that  the  success  of  the  great 
and  familiar  process  of  fitting  a  human 
creature  to  bear  well  his  part  in  life,  de 
pended  not  for  its  success  on  elaborate 
schemes  of  artificial  management,  such  as 


Ixviii 

few  have  leisure  to  attend  to  or  power  to 
execute  ;  but,  most  of  all,  on  circumstances 
which  no  parent  can  controul ;  and  next, 
on  examples  such  as  discreet  and  virtuous 
parents  in  any  situation  of  life  are  enabled 
to  give,  and  give  indeed  unconsciously. 
The  second  essay  encourages  the  parent  to 
use  without  scruple  the  power  of  influen 
cing  the  opinions  of  his  child  which  God 
and  nature  have  put  into  his  hands,  and 
not  to  believe  on  the  word  of  certain  spe- 
culatists,  that  it  is  either  necessary  or  de 
sirable  to  abstain  from  imbuing  his  off 
spring  with  what  he  conceives  to  be  im 
portant  and  salutary  truths,  from  the  dread 
of  instilling  prejudices  and  crippling  the 
efforts  of  his  infant  reason.  In  these  ex 
cellent  productions  we  are  uncertain  which 
most  to  admire,  the  sagacious  and  discri 
minating  intellect,  the  practical  good  sense 
and  acute  observation  of  life  which  sug 
gest  the  remarks,  or  the  spirited  and  ex- 


Ixix 

pressive  style  which  rouses  attention,  strikes 
the  imagination,  and  carries  them  with  con 
viction  to  the  heart. 

It  appears  from  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Bar- 
bauld's,  that  she  early  read  with  great  de 
light,  though  in  an  English  translation,  the 
Dialogues  of  Lucian.     Perhaps  we  may 
remotely  trace  to  the  impression  thus  pro 
duced,  the  origin  of  her  witty  and  inge 
nious  Dialogue  between  Madame  Cosmo- 
gunia  and  a  philosophical  Inquirer  of  the 
Eighteenth  Century,  as  well  as  of  her  Dia 
logue  in  the  Shades.  The  allegorical  or  enig 
matical  style,  however,  in  which  the  first 
of  these  pieces  is  composed,  seemed  pecu 
liarly  adapted  to  her  genius ;  and  the  skill 
and  elegance  with  which  she  composed  in 
this    difficult   manner  is  further   attested 
by  her  Letter  of  John  Bull,  by  the  Four 
Sisters,  (published  in  Evenings  at  Home,)  by 
many  entertaining  Riddles,  a  few  of  which 
are  now  included  among  her  Poems,  and 
VOL.  i.  f 


Ixx 

by  several  little  fancy  pieces  scattered 
among  her  familiar  letters.  Even  her  con 
versation  was  often  enlivened  with  these 
graceful  sports  of  wit  and  imagination. 

Of  the  three  Pamphlets  now  republished 
among  her  Prose  Works,  the  editor  has  only 
to  observe,  that  though  composed  on  par 
ticular  occasions,  these  pieces  were  not 
formed  to  pass  away  with  those  occasions : 
they  treat  of  subjects  permanently  inter 
esting  to  the  champion  of  religious  liberty, 
to  the  conscientious  patriot,  and  to  the  Chris 
tian  worshiper, — and  they  so  treat  of  them, 
that  while  English  eloquence  is  made  a 
study,  while  English  literature  is  not  for 
gotten,  their  praise  shall  live,  their  memory 
shall  flourish. 

It  only  remains  to  speak  of  her  familiar 
letters.  These  were  certainly  never  intend 
ed  by  herself  to  meet  the  public  eye.  She 
kept  no  copies  of  them  ;  and  it  is  solely  by 


Ixxi 

the  indulgence  of  her  correspondents  or 
their  representatives, — an  indulgence  for 
which  she  here  desires  to  offer  her  grateful 
acknowledgements, — that   the   editor   has 
been  enabled  to  give  them  to  the  world. 
She  flatters  herself  that  their  publication 
will  not  be  considered  as  a  trespass  either 
against  the  living  or  the  dead :    some  of 
them,  particularly  a  considerable  propor 
tion   of    those    addressed    to    Dr.  Aikin, 
seemed  to  claim  insertion  as  biographical 
records ;  and  those  written  during  her  re 
sidence  in  France,  in  the  years  1785  and 
1786,  appeared  no  less  curious  and  valua 
ble  at  the  present  day  for  the  matter  they 
contain,  than  entertaining  and  agreeable 
from  the  vivacity  with  which  they  are  writ 
ten.     But  it  was  impossible  not  to  be  in 
fluenced  also  by  the  desire  of  thus  commu 
nicating  to  those  admirers  of  Mrs.  Bar- 
bauld's  genius  who  did  not  enjoy  the  ad 
vantage   of  her  personal  acquaintance,  a 
just  idea  of  the  pointed  and  elegant  remark, 


Ixxii 

the  sportive  and  lambent  wit,  the  affec 
tionate  spirit  of  sympathy,  and  the  cour 
teous  expression  of  esteem  and  benevo 
lence,  which  united  to  form  at  once  the 
graces  of  her  epistolary  style  and  the  in 
expressible  charm  of  her  conversation. 

Mrs.  Barbauld  composed  at  different  pe 
riods  a  considerable  number  of  miscella 
neous  pieces  for  the  instruction  and  amuse 
ment  of  young  persons,  especially  females, 
which  will  appear  in  a  separate  form  about 
the  close  of  the  present  year. 


Hampstead,  June  20th,  1825. 


POEMS. 


CORSICA. 

WRITTEN  IN  THE  YEAR  1769. 


A  manly  race 

Of  unsubmitting  spirit,  wise  and  brave  ; 
Who  still  through  bleeding  ages  struggled  hard 
To  hold  a  generous  undiminished  state; 
Too  much  in  vain ! 

THOMSON. 


HAIL,  generous  Corsica  !  unconquered  isle  ! 
The  fort  of  freedom  ;  that  amidst  the  waves 
Stands  like  a  rock  of  adamant,  and  dares 
The  wildest  fury  of  the  beating  storm. 

•fe 

And  are  there  yet,  in  this  late  sickly  age, 
Unkindly  to  the  towering  growths  of  virtue, 

B 


2  CORSICA. 

Such  bold  exalted  spirits  ?     Men  whose  deeds, 

To  the  bright  annals  of  old  Greece  opposed, 

Would  throw  in  shades  her  yet  unrivaled  name, 

And  dim  the  lustre  of  her  fairest  page  ! 

And  glows  the  flame  of  Liberty  so  strong 

In  this  lone  speck  of  earth  !   this  spot  obscure, 

Shaggy  with  woods,  and  crusted  o'er  with  rock, 

By  slaves  surrounded,  and  by  slaves  oppressed ! 

What  then  should  Britons  feel? — should  they  not  catch 

The  warm  contagion  of  heroic  ardour, 

And  kindle  at  a  fire  so  like  their  own  ? 

Such  were  the  working  thoughts  which  swelled  the  breast 

Of  generous  Boswel ;  when  with  nobler  aim 

And  views  beyond  the  narrow  beaten  track 

By  trivial  fancy  trod,  he  turned  his  course 

From  polished  Gallia's  soft  delicious  vales, 

From  the  grey  reliques  of  imperial  Rome, 

From  her  long  galleries  of  laureled  stone, 

Her  chiseled  heroes  and  her  marble  gods, 


CORSICA. 

Whose  dumb  majestic  pomp  yet  awes  the  world, 
To  animated  forms  of  patriot  zeal ; 
Warm  in  the  living  majesty  of  virtue; 
Elate  with  fearless  spirit ;   firm  ;   resolved  ; 
By  fortune  nor  subdued,  nor  awed  by  power. 

How  raptured  fancy  burns,  while  warm  in  thought 
1  trace  the  pictured  landscape ;  while  I  kiss 
With  pilgrim  lips  devout  the  sacred  soil 
Stained  with  the  blood  of  heroes.      Cyrnus,  hail ! 
Hail  to  thy  rocky,  deep  indented  shores, 
And  pointed  cliffs,  which  hear  the  chafing  deep 
Incessant  foaming  round  their  shaggy  sides. 
Hail  to  thy  winding  bays,  thy  sheltering  ports 
And  ample  harbours,  which  inviting  stretch 
Their  hospitable  arms  to  every  sail : 
Thy  numerous  streams,  that  bursting  from  the  cliffs 
Down  the  steep  channeled  rock  impetuous  pour 
With  grateful  murmur  :   on  the  fearful  edge 
Of  the  rude  precipice,  thy  hamlets  brown 

B  2 


4  CORSICA. 

And  straw-roofed  cots,  which  from  the  level  vale 

Scarce  seen,  amongst  the  craggy  hanging  cliffs 

Seem  like  an  eagle's  nest  aerial  built. 

Thy  swelling  mountains,  brown  with  solemn  shade 

Of  various  trees,  that  wave  their  giant  arms 

O'er  the  rough  sons  of  freedom ;  lofty  pines, 

And  hardy  fir,  and  ilex  ever  green, 

And  spreading  chesnut,  with  each  humbler  plant, 

And  shrub  of  fragrant  leaf,  that  clothes  their  sides 

With  living  verdure  ;  whence  the  clustering  bee 

Extracts  her  golden  dews  :  the  shining  box, 

And  sweet-leaved  myrtle,  aromatic  thyme, 

The  prickly  juniper,  and  the  green  leaf 

Which  feeds  the  spinning  worm ;  while  glowing  bright 

Beneath  the  various  foliage,  wildly  spreads 

The  arbutus,  and  rears  his  scarlet  fruit 

Luxuriant,  mantling  o'er  the  craggy  steeps ; 

And  thy  own  native  laurel  crowns  the  scene. 

Hail  to  thy  savage  forests,  awful,  deep ; 

Thy  tangled  thickets,  and  thy  crowded  woods, 


CORSICA.  5 

The  haunt  of  herds  untamed  ;   which  sullen  bound 

From  rock  to  rock  with  fierce  unsocial  air, 

And  wilder  gaze,  as  conscious  of  the  power 

That  loves  to  reign  amid  the  lonely  scenes 

Of  unquelled  nature  :   precipices  huge, 

And  tumbling  torrents  ;  trackless  deserts,  plains 

Fenced  in  with  guardian  rocks,  whose  quarries  teem 

With  shining  steel,  that  to  the  cultured  fields 

And  sunny  hills  which  wave  with  bearded  grain 

Defends  their  homely  produce.     Liberty, 

The  mountain  Goddess,  loves  to  range  at  large 

Amid  such  scenes,  and  on  the  iron  soil 

Prints  her  majestic  step.     For  these  she  scorns 

The  green  enameled  vales,  the  velvet  lap    . 

Of  smooth  savannahs,  where  the  pillowed  head 

Of  Luxury  reposes  ;  balmy  gales, 

And  bowers  that  breathe  of  bliss.    For  these,  when  first 

This  isle  emerging  like  a  beauteous  gem 

From  the  dark  bosom  of  the  Tyrrhene  main 

Reared  its  fair  front,  she  marked  it  for  her  own, 


6  CORSICA. 

And  with  her  spirit  warmed.      Her  genuine  sons, 
A  broken  remnant,  from  the  generous  stock 
Of  ancient  Greece,  from  Sparta's  sad  remains, 
True  to  their  high  descent,  preserved  unquenched 
The  sacred  fire  through  many  a  barbarous  age : 
Whom,  nor  the  iron  rod  of  cruel  Carthage, 
Nor  the  dread  sceptre  of  imperial  Rome, 
Nor  bloody  Goth,  nor  grisly  Saracen, 
Nor  the  long  galling  yoke  of  proud  Liguria, 
Could  crush  into  subjection.      Still  unquelled 
They  rose  superior,  bursting  from  their  chains, 
And  claimed  man's  dearest  birthright,  liberty  : 
And  long,  through  many  a  hard  unequal  strife 
Maintained  the  glorious  conflict ;  long  withstood, 
With  single  arm,  the  whole  collected  force 
Of  haughty  Genoa,  and  ambitious  Gaul. 
And  shall  withstand  it — Trust  the  faithful  Muse  ! 
It  is  not  in  the  force  of  mortal  arm, 
Scarcely  in  fate,  to  bind  the  struggling  soul 
That  galled  by  wanton  power,  indignant  swells 


CORSICA. 

Against  oppression  ;   breathing  great  revenge, 

Careless  of  life,  determined  to  be  free. 

And  favouring  Heaven  approves  :  for  see  the  Man, 

Born  to  exalt  his  own,  and  give  mankind 

A  glimpse  of  higher  natures:  just,  as  great; 

The  soul  of  council,  and  the  nerve  of  war  ; 

Of  high  unshaken  spirit,  tempered  sweet 

With  soft  urbanity,  and  polished  grace, 

And  attic  wit,  and  gay  unstudied  smiles : 

Whom  Heaven  in  some  propitious  hour  endowed 

With  every  purer  virtue  :  gave  him  all 

That  lifts  the  herb,  or  adorns  the  man. 

Grave  him  the  eye  sublime ;  the  searching  glance, 

Keen,  scanning  deep,  that  smites  the  guilty  soul 

As  with  a  beam  from  heaven ;  on  his  brow 

Serene,  and  spacious  front,  set  the  broad  seal 

Of  dignity  and  rule ;   then  smiled  benign 

On  this  fair  pattern  of  a  God  below, 

High  wrought,  and  breathed  into  his  swelling  breast 

The  large  ambitious  wish  to  save  his  country. 


8  CORSICA. 

O  beauteous  title  to  immortal  fame ! 

The  man  devoted  to  the  public,  stands 

In  the  bright  records  of  superior  worth 

A  step  below  the  skies  :  if  he  succeed, 

The  first  fair  lot  which  earth  affords,  is  his  ; 

And  if  he  falls,  he  falls  above  a  throne. 

When  such  their  leader,  can  the  brave  despair  ? 

Freedom  the  cause,  and  Paoli  the  chief! 

Success  to  your  fair  hopes  !    A  British  Muse, 

Though  weak  and  powerless,  lifts  her  fervent  voice, 

And  breathes  a  prayer  for  your  success.      O  could 

She  scatter  blessings  as  the  morn  sheds  dews, 

To  drop  upon  your  heads  !    But  patient  hope 

Must  wait  the  appointed  hour  ;   secure  of  this, 

That  never  with  the  indolent  and  weak 

Will  Freedom  deign  to  dwell ;   she  must  be  seized 

By  that  bold  arm  that  wrestles  for  the  blessing  : 

Tis  Heaven's  best  prize,  and  must  be  bought  with  blood. 

When  the  storm  thickens,  when  the  combat  burns, 

And  pain  and  death  in  every  horrid  shape 


CORSICA. 

That  can  appal  the  feeble,  prowl  around, 
Then  Virtue  triumphs  ;   then  her  towering  form 
Dilates  with  kindling  majesty  ;   her  mien 
Breathes  a  diviner  spirit,  and  enlarged 
Each  spreading  feature,  with  an  ampler  port 

x 

• 

And  bolder  tone,  exulting,  rides  the  storm, 
And  joys  amidst  the  tempest.     Then  she  reaps 
Her  golden  harvest ;  fruits  of  nobler  growth 
And  higher  relish  than  meridian  suns 
Can  ever  ripen ;  fair,  heroic  deeds, 
And  godlike  action.     Tis  not  meats  and  drinks, 
And  balmy  airs,  and  vernal  suns  and  showers, 
That  feed  and  ripen  minds ;  'tis  toil  and  danger ; 
And  wrestling  with  the  stubborn  gripe  of  fate ; 
And  war,  and  sharp  distress,  and  paths  obscure 
And  dubious.     The  bold  swimmer  joys  not  so 
To  feel  the  proud  waves  under  him,  and  beat 
With  strong  repelling  arm  the  billowy  surge ; 
The  generous  courser  does  not  so  exult 
To  toss  his  floating  mane  against  the  wind, 


10  CORSICA. 

And  neigh  amidst  the  thunder  of  the  war, 

As  Virtue  to  oppose  her  swelling  breast 

Like  a  firm  shield  against  the  darts  of  fate. 

And  when  her  sons  in  that  rough  school  have  learned 

To  smile  at  danger,  then  the  hand  that  raised 

Shall  hush  the  storm,  and  lead  the  shining  train 

Of  peaceful  years  in  bright  procession  on. 

Then  shall  the  shepherd's  pipe,  the  Muse's  lyre, 

On  Cyrnus'  shores  be  heard  :  her  grateful  sons 

With  loud  acclaim  and  hymns  of  cordial  praise 

Shall  hail  their  high  deliverers ;   every  name 

To  Virtue  dear  be  from  oblivion  snatched 

Arid  placed  among  the  stars  :   but  chiefly  thine, 

Thine,  Paoli,  with  sweetest  sound  shall  dwell 

On  their  applauding  lips  ;   thy  sacred  name, 

Endeared  to  long  posterity,  some  Muse, 

More  worthy  of  the  theme,  shall  consecrate 

To  after-ages,  and  applauding  worlds 

Shall  bless  the  godlike  man  who  saved  his  country. 

*     ******;*.  *  ,  ft,    * 


CORSICA.  1 1 

So  vainly  wished,  so  fondly  hoped  the  Muse : 

Too  fondly  hoped.     The  iron  fates  prevail, 

And  Cyrnus  is  no  more.      Her  generous  sons, 

Less  vanquished  than  overwhelmed,  by  numbers  crushed, 

Admired,  unaided  fell.      So  strives  the  moon 

In  dubious  battle  with  the  gathering  clouds, 

And  strikes  a  splendour  through  them  ;   till  at  length 

Storms  rolled  on  storms  involve  the  face  of  heaven 

And  quench  her  struggling  fires.     Forgive  the  zeal 

That,  too  presumptuous,  whispered  better  things, 

And  read  the  book  of  destiny  amiss. 

Not  with  the  purple  colouring  of  success 

Is  virtue  best  adorned  :  the  attempt  is  praise. 

There  yet  remains  a  freedom,  nobler  far 

Than  kings  or  senates  can  destroy  or  give  ; 

Beyond  the  proud  oppressor's  cruel  grasp 

Seated  secure,  uninjured,  undestroyed  ; 

Worthy  of  Gods  :....the  freedom  of  the  mind. 


THE     INVITATION. 


TO    MISS    B*****. 


HEALTH  to  my  friend,  and  long  unbroken  years, 
By  storms  unruffled  and  unstained  by  tears  : 
Winged  by  new  joys  may  each  white  minute  fly ; 
Spring  on  her  cheek,  and  sunshine  in  her  eye : 
O'er  that  dear  breast,  where  love  and  pity  springs, 
May  peace  eternal  spread  her  downy  wings  : 
Sweet  beaming  hope  her  path  illumine  still, 
And  fair  ideas  all  her  fancy  fill ! 
From  glittering  scenes  which  strike  the  dazzled  sight 
With  mimic  grandeur  and  illusive  light, 
From  idle  hurry,  and  tumultuous  noise, 
From  hollow  friendships,  and  from  sickly  joys, 


THR  INVITATION.  IS 

Will  Delia,  at  the  Muse's  call,  retire 
To  the  pure  pleasures  rural  scenes  inspire  ? 
Will  she  from  crowds  and  busy  cities  fly, 
Where  wreaths  of  curling  smoke  involve  the  sky, 
To  taste  the  grateful  shade  of  spreading  trees, 
And  drink  the  spirit  of  the  mountain  breeze  ? 

When  winter's  hand  the  roughening  year  deforms, 
And  hollow  winds  foretell  approaching  storms, 
Then  Pleasure,  like  a  bird  of  passage,  flies 
To  brighter  climes,  and  more  indulgent  skies : 
Cities  and  courts  allure  her  sprightly  train, 
From  the  bleak  mountain  and  the  naked  plain  ; 
And  gold  and  gems  with  artificial  blaze 
Supply  the  sickly  sun's  declining  rays. 
But  soon,  returning  on  the  western  gale, 
She  seeks  the  bosom  of  the  grassy  vale : 
There,  wrapt  in  careless  ease,  attunes  her  lyre 
To  the  wild  warblings  of  the  woodland  quire :  ' 


14  THE  INVITATION. 

The  daisied  turf  her  humble  throne  supplies, 
And  early  primroses  around  her  rise. 
We  '11  follow  where  the  smiling  goddess  leads, 
Through  tangled  forests  or  enameled  meads  ; 
O'er  pathless  hills  her  airy  form  we  '11  chase, 
In  silent  glades  her  fairy  footsteps  trace  : 
Small  pains  there  needs  her  footsteps  to  pursue, 
She  cannot  fly  from  friendship,  and  from  you. 
Now  the  glad  earth  her  frozen  zone  unbinds, 
And  o'er  her  bosom  breathe  the  western  winds. 
Already  now  the  snow-drop  dares  appear, 
The  first  pale  blossom  of  the  unripened  year  ; 
As  Flora's  breath,  by  some  transforming  power, 
Had  changed  an  icicle  into  a  flower : 
Its  name  and  hue  the  scentless  plant  retains, 
And  winter  lingers  in  its  icy  veins. 
To  these  succeed  the  violet's  dusky  blue, 
And  each  inferior  flower  of  fainter  hue  ; 
Till  riper  months  the  perfect  year  disclose, 
And  Flora  cries  exulting,  See  my  Rose  ! 


THE  INVITATION.  15 

The  Muse  invites ;  my  Delia,  haste  away, 

And  let  us  sweetly  waste  the  careless  day. 

Here  gentle  summits  lift  their  airy  brow ; 

Down  the  green  slope  here  winds  the  labouring  plough ; 

Here,  bathed  by  frequent  showers  cool  vales  are  seen, 

Clothed  with  fresh  verdure  and  eternal  green ; 

Here  smooth  canals,  across  the  extended  plain, 

Stretch  their  long  arms  to  join  the  distant  main  *  : 

The  sons  of  toil  with  many  a  weary  stroke 

Scoop  the  hard  bosom  of  the  solid  rock ; 

Resistless,  through  the  stiff  opposing  clay, 

With  steady  patience  work  their  gradual  way ; 

Compel  the  genius  of  the  unwilling  flood 

Through  the  brown  horrors  of  the  aged  wood ; 


*  The  Duke  of  Bridgewater's  canal,  which  in  many  places  crosses 
the  road,  and  in  one  is  carried  by  an  aqueduct  over  the  river  Irwell. 
Its  head  is  at  Worsley,  where  it  is  conveyed  by  deep  tunnels  under 
the  coal  pits,  for  the  purpose  of  loading  the  boats. 


16  THE  INVITATION. 

'Cross  the  lone  waste  the  silver  urn  they  pour, 
And  cheer  the  barren  heath  or  sullen  moor. 
The  traveller  with  pleasing  wonder  sees 
The  white  sail  gleaming  through  the  dusky  trees  ; 
And  views  the  altered  landscape  with  surprise, 
And  doubts  the  magic  scenes  which  round  him  rise. 
Now,  like  a  flock  of  swans,  above  his  head 
Their  woven  wings  the  flying  vessels  spread ; 
Now  meeting  streams  in  artful  mazes  glide, 
While  each  unmingled  pours  a  separate  tide ; 
Now  through  the  hidden  veins  of  earth  they  flow, 
And  visit  sulphurous  mines  and  caves  below ; 
The  ductile  streams  obey  the  guiding  hand, 
And  social  plenty  circles  round  the  land. 

But  nobler  praise  awaits  our  green  retreats ; 
The  Muses  here  have  fixed  their  sacred  seats. 
Mark  where  its  simple  front  yon  mansion  rears, 
The  nursery  of  men  for  future  years  ! 


THE  INVITATION.  17 

Here  callow  chiefs  and  embryo  statesmen  lie, 
And  unfledged  poets  short  excursions  try  : 
While  Mersey's  gentle  current,  which  too  long, 
By  fame  neglected  and  unknown  to  song, 
Between  his  rushy  banks, — no  poet's  theme, — 
Had  crept  inglorious,  like  a  vulgar  stream, 
Reflects  the*  ascending  seats  with  conscious  pride, 
And  dares  to  emulate  a  classic  tide. 
Soft  music  breathes  along  each  opening  shade, 
And  soothes  the  dashing  of  his  rough  cascade. 
With  mystic  lines  his  sands  are  figured  o'er, 
And  circles  traced  upon  the  lettered  shore. 
Beneath  his  willows  rove  the'  inquiring  youth, 
And  court  the  fair  majestic  form  of  Truth. 
Here  Nature  opens  all  her  secret  springs, 
And  heaven-born  Science  plumes  her  eagle-wings. 
Too  long  had  bigot  rage,  with  malice  swelled, 
Crushed  her  strong  pinions,  and  her  flight  withheld  ; 
Too  long  to  check  her  ardent  progress  strove  : — 
So  writhes  the  serpent  round  the  bird  of  Jove ; 
VOL.  i.  c 


18  THE  INVITATION. 

Hangs  on  her  flight,  restrains  her  towering  wing, 

Twists  its  dark  folds,  and  points  its  venomed  sting. 

Yet  still, — if  aught  aright  the  Muse  divine, — 

Her  rising  pride  shall  mock  the  vain  design ; 

On  sounding  pinions  yet  aloft  shall  soar, 

And  through  the  azure  deep  un traveled  paths  explore. 

Where  science  smiles,  the  Muses  join  the  train ; 

And  gentlest  arts  and  purest  manners  reign. 

Ye  generous  youth  who  love  this  studious  shade, 

How  rich  a  field  is  to  your  hopes  displayed  ! 

Knowledge  to  you  unlocks  the  classic  page, 

And  virtue  blossoms  for  a  better  age. 

O  golden  days  !   O  bright  unvalued  hours  ! 

What  bliss — did  ye  but  know  that  bliss — were  yours  ! 

With  richest  stores  your  glowing  bosoms  fraught, 

Perception  quick,  and  luxury  of  thought ; 

The  high  designs  that  heave  the  labouring  soul, 

Panting  for  fame,  impatient  of  controul ; 

And  fond  enthusiastic  thought,  that  feeds 

On  pictured  tales  of  vast  heroic  deeds  ; 


THE  INVITATION.  19 

And  quick  affections,  kindling  into  flame 
At  virtue's  or  their  country's  honoured  name ; 
And  spirits  light,  to  every  joy  in  tune ; 
And  friendship,  ardent  as  a  summer's  noon ; 
And  generous  scorn  of  vice's  venal  tribe ; 
And  proud  disdain  of  interest's  sordid  bribe ; 
And  conscious  honour's  quick  instinctive  sense ; 
And  smiles  unforced  ;   and  easy  confidence ; 
And  vivid  fancy  ;  and  clear  simple  truth  ; 
And  all  the  mental  bloom  of  vernal  youth. 

t 

How  bright  the  scene  to  Fancy's  eye  appears, 
Through  the  long  perspective  of  distant  years, 
When  this,  this  little  group  their  country  calls 
From  academic  shades  and  learned  halls, 
To  fix  her  laws,  her  spirit  to  sustain, 
And  light  up  glory  through  her  wide  domain ! 
Their  various  tastes  in  different  arts  displayed, 
Like  tempered  harmony  of  light  and  shade, 

c  2 


20  THE  INVITATION. 

With  friendly  union  in  one  mass  shall  blend, — 

And  this  adorn  the  state,  and  that  defend. 

These  the  sequestered  shade  shall  cheaply  please, 

With  learned  labour  and  inglorious  ease  : 

While  those,  impelled  by  some  resistless  force, 

O'er  seas  and  rocks  shall  urge  their  venturous  course ; 

Rich  fruits  matured  by  glowing  suns  behold, 

And  China's  groves  of  vegetable  gold ; 

From  every  land  the  various  harvest  spoil, 

And  bear  the  tribute  to  their  native  soil  : 

But  tell  each  land, — while  every  toil  they  share, 

Firm  to  sustain,  and  resolute  to  dare, — 

MAN  is  the  nobler  growth  our  realms  supply, 

And  SOULS  are  ripened  in  our  northern  sky. 

Some  pensive  creep  along  the  shelly  shore ; 
Unfold  the  silky  texture  of  a  flower ; 
With  sharpened  eyes  inspect  an  hornet's  sting, 
And  all  the  wonders  of  an  insect's  wing. 


THE  INVITATION.  21 

Some  trace  with  curious  search  the  hidden  cause 

Of  Nature's  changes,  and  her  various  laws ; 

Untwist  her  beauteous  web,  disrobe  her  charms, 

And  hunt  her  to  her  elemental  forms  : 

Or  prove  what  hidden  powers  in  herbs  are  found, 

To  quench  disease  and  cool  the  burning  wound ; 

With  cordial  drops  the  fainting  head  sustain, 

Call  back  the  flitting  soul,  and  still  the  throbs  of  pain. 

The  patriot  passion,  this  shall  strongly  feel, 

Ardent,  and  glowing  with  undaunted  zeal, 

With  lips  of  fire  shall  plead  his  country's  cause, 

And  vindicate  the  majesty  of  laws  : 

This,  clothed  with  Britain's  thunder,  spread  alarms 

Through  the  wide  earth,  and  shake  the  pole  with  arms  : 

That,  to  the  sounding  lyre  his  deeds  rehearse, 

Enshrine  his  name  in  some  immortal  verse, 

To  long  posterity  his  praise  consign, 

And  pay  a  life  of  hardships  by  a  line. 


22  THE  INVITATION. 

While  others, — consecrate  to  higher  aims. 
Whose  hallowed  bosoms  glow  with  purer  flames, 
Love  in  their  heart,  persuasion  in  their  tongue, — 
With  words  of  peace  shall  charm  the  listening  throng, 
Draw  the  dread  veil  that  wraps  the'  eternal  throne, 
And  launch  our  souls  into  the  bright  unknown. 

Here  cease  my  song.      Such  arduous  themes  require 
A  master's  pencil  and  a  poet's  fire  : 
Unequal  far  such  bright  designs  to  paint, 
Too  weak  her  colours,  and  her  lines  too  faint, 
My  drooping  Muse  folds  up  her  fluttering  wing, 
And  hides  her  head  in  the  green  lap  of  Spring. 


THE  GROANS  OF  THE  TANKARD. 


Dulci  digne  inero !      HORAT. 


OF  strange  events  I  sing,  and  portents  dire ; 
The  wondrous  themes  a  reverent  ear  require : 
Though  strange  the  tale,  the  faithful  Muse  believe, 
And  what  she  says,  with  pious  awe  receive. 

T  was  at  the  solemn,  silent,  noon-tide  hour, 
When  hunger  rages  with  despotic  power, 
When  the  lean  student  quits  his  Hebrew  roots 
For  the  gross  nourishment  of  English  fruits, 
And  throws  unfinished  airy  systems  by 
For  solid  pudding  and  substantial  pie ; 


24  THE  GROANS  OF  THE  TANKARD. 

When  hungry  poets  the  glad  summons  own, 

And  leave  spare  Fast  to  dine  with  Gods  alone : 

Our  sober  meal  dispatched  with  silent  haste, 

The  decent  grace  concludes  the  short  repast : 

Then,  urged  by  thirst,  we  cast  impatient  eyes 

Where  deep,  capacious,  vast,  of  ample  size, 

The  Tankard  stood,  replenished  to  the  brink 

With  the  cold  beverage  blue-eyed  Naiads  drink. 

But  lo  !  a  sudden  prodigy  appears, 

And  our  chilled  hearts  recoil  with  startling  fears  : 

Its  yawning  mouth  disclosed  the  deep  profound, 

And  in  low  murmurs  breathed  a  sullen  sound ; 

Cold  drops  of  dew  did  on  the  sides  appear ; 

No  finger  touched  it,  and  no  hand  was  near. 

At  length  the7  indignant  vase  its  silence  broke, 

First  heaved  deep  hollow  groans,  and  then  distinctly  spoke. 

"  How  changed  the  scene! — for  what  unpardoned  crimes 
"  Have  I  survived  to  these  degenerate  times  ? 


TEIE  GROANS  OF  THE  TANKARD.  95 

"  I,  who  was  wont  the  festal  board  to  grace, 

"  And  'midst  the  circle  lift  my  honest  face 

"  White  o'er  with  froth,  like  Etna  crowned  with  snow, 

"  Which  mantled  o'er  the  brown  abyss  below, 

"  Where  Ceres  mingled  with  her  golden  store 

"  The  richer  spoils  of  either  India's  shore, 

"  The  dulcet  reed  the  Western  islands  boast, 

"  And  spicy  fruit  from  Banda's  fragrant  coast. 

"  At  solemn  feasts  the  nectared  draught  I  poured, 

"  And  often  journeyed  round  the  ample  board  : 

"  The  portly  Alderman,  the  stately  Mayor, 

"  And  all  the  furry  tribe  my  worth  declare  ; 

"  And  the  keen  Sportsman  oft,  his  labours  done, 

"  To  me  retreating  with  the  setting  sun, 

"  Deep  draughts  imbibed,  and  conquered  land  and  sea, 

"  And  overthrew  the  pride  of  France — by  me. 

"  Let  meaner  clay  contain  the  limpid  wave, 
"  The  clay  for  such  an  office  nature  gave ; 


26       THE  GROANS  OF  THE  TANKARD. 

"  Let  China's  earth,  enriched  with  coloured  stains, 

"  Penciled  with  gold,  and  streaked  with  azure  veins, 

"  The  grateful  flavour  of  the  Indian  leaf, 

"  Or  Mocho's  sunburnt  berry  glad  receive  : 

"  The  nobler  metal  claims  more  generous  use, 

"  And  mine  should  flow  with  more  exalted  juice. 

"  Did  I  for  this  my  native  bed  resign 

"  In  the  dark  bowels  of  Potosi's  mine  ? 

"  Was  I  for  this  with  violence  torn  away, 

"  And  dragged  to  regions  of  the  upper  day  ? 

"  For  this  the  rage  of  torturing  furnace  bore, 

"  From  foreign  dross  to  purge  the  brightening  ore  ? 

"  For  this  have  I  endured  the  fiery  test, 

"  And  was  I  stamped  for  this  with  Britain's  lofty  crest  ? 

"  Unblest  the  day,  and  luckless  was  the  hour, 
"  Which  doomed  me  to  a  Presbyterian's  power : 
"  Fated  to  serve  the  Puritanic  race, 
"  Whose  slender  meal  is  shorter  than  their  grace ; 


IHI.  GROANS  OF  T1IK  TANKARD.  27 

"  Whose  moping  sons  no  jovial  orgies  keep ; 

"  Where  evening  brings  no  summons — but  to  sleep ; 

"  No  Carnival  is  even  Christmas  here, 

"  And  one  long  Lent  involves  the  meagre  year. 

"  Bear  me,  ye  powers !  to  some  more  genial  scene, 

"  Where  on  soft  cushions  lolls  the  gouty  Dean, 

"  Or  rosy  Prebend  with  cherubic  face, 

"  With  double  chin,  and  paunch  of  portly  grace, 

"  Who  lulled  in  downy  slumbers  shall  agree 

"  To  own  no  inspiration  but  from  me. 

"  Or  to  some  spacious  mansion,  Gothic,  old, 

"  Where  Comus'  sprightly  train  their  vigils  hold ; 

"  There  oft  exhausted,  and  replenished  oft, 

"  O  let  me  still  supply  the'  eternal  draught, 

"  Till  Care  within  the  deep  abyss  be  drowned, 

"  And  Thought  grows  giddy  at  the  vast  profound !" 

More  had  the  goblet  spoke  ;  but  lo !  appears 
An  ancient  Sibyl,  furrowed  o'er  with  years. 


28       THE  GROANS  OF  THE  TANKARD. 

Her  aspect  sour  and  stern  ungracious  look 
With  sudden  damp  the  conscious  vessel  struck  : 
Chilled  at  her  touch  its  mouth  it  slowly  closed, 
And  in  long  silence  all  its  griefs  reposed : 
Yet  still  low  murmurs  creep  along  the  ground, 
And  the  air  vibrates  with  the  silver  sound. 


ON  THE  BACKWARDNESS  OF  THE 
SPRING  1771. 


JEstatem  increpitans  seram,  Zephyrosque  morantes. 

VIRGIL. 


IN  vain  the  sprightly  sun  renews  his  course, 
Climbs  up  the'  ascending  signs  and  leads  the  day, 
While  long  embattled  clouds  repel  his  force, 
And  lazy  vapours  choke  the  golden  ray. 

In  vain  the  Spring  proclaims  the  new-born  year ; 
No  flowers  beneath  her  lingering  footsteps  spring, 
No  rosy  garland  binds  her  flowing  hair, 
And  in  her  train  no  feathered  warblers  sing ; 

Her  opening  breast  is  stained  with  frequent  showers, 
Her  streaming  tresses  bathed  in  chilling  dews  ; 
And  sad  before  her  move  the  pensive  Hours, 
Whose  flagging  wings  no  breathing  sweets  diffuse. 


SO  ON  THE  BACKWARDNESS  OF  SPRING. 

Like  some  lone  pilgrim  clad  in  mournful  weed, 
Whose  wounded  bosom  drinks  her  falling  tears, 
On  whose  pale  cheek  relentless  sorrows  feed, 
Whose  dreary  way  no  sprightly  carol  cheers. 

Not  thus  she  breathed  on  Arno's  purple  shore, 
And  called  the  Tuscan  Muses  to  her  bowers  ; 
Not  this  the  robe  in  Enna's  vale  she  wore, 
When  Ceres'  daughter  filled  her  lap  with  flowers. 

Clouds  behind  clouds  in  long  succession  rise, 
And  heavy  snows  oppress  the  springing  green  ; 
The  dazzling  waste  fatigues  the  aching  eyes, 
And  Fancy  droops  beneath  the'  unvaried  scene. 


Indulgent  Nature,  loose  this  frozen  zone  ; 
Through  opening  skies  let  genial  sunbeams  play  ; 
Dissolving  snows  shall  their  glad  impulse  own, 
And  melt  upon  the  bosom  of  the  May. 


31 


VERSES  WRITTEN  IN  AN  ALCOVE. 


Jam  Cytherea  chores  ducit  Venus,  immincnte  Luna. 

HOBAT. 


Now  the  moonbeam's  trembling  lustre 

Silvers  o'er  the  dewy  green, 
And  in  soft  and  shadowy  colours 

Sweetly  paints  the  chequered  scene. 

* 

Here  between  the  opening  branches 
Streams  a  flood  of  softened  light ; 

There  the  thick  and  twisted  foliage 
Spreads  the  browner  gloom  of  night. 


32  VERSES  WRITTEN  IN  AN  ALCOVE. 

This  is  sure  the  haunt  of  fairies, 
In  yon  cool  alcove  they  play ; 

Care  can  never  cross  the  threshold, — 
Care  was  only  made  for  day.  % 

Far  from  hence  be  noisy  Clamour, 
Sick  Disgust  and  anxious  Fear ; 

Pining  Grief  and  wasting  Anguish 
Never  keep  their  vigils  here. 

Tell  no  tales  of  sheeted  spectres 
Rising  from  the  quiet  tomfy  ; 

Fairer  forms  this  cell  shall  visit, 
Brighter  visions  gild  the  gloom. 

Choral  songs  and  sprightly  voices 
Echo  from  her  cell  shall  call ; 

Sweeter,  sweeter  than  the  murmur 
Of  the  distant  waterfall. 


VERSES  WRITTEN  IN  AN  ALCO\  1 

Every  ruder  gust  of  passion 
Lulled  with  music  dies  away, 

Till  within  the  charmed  bosom 
None  but  soft  affections  play  : 

Soft  as  when  the  evening  breezes 
Gently  stir  the  poplar  grove ; 

Brighter  than  the  smile  of  Summer, 
Sweeter  than  the  breath  of  Love. 

Thee  the*  enchanted  Muse  shall  follow, 

Lissy !   to  the  rustic  cell ; 
And  each  careless  note  repeating, 

Tune  them  to  her  charming  shell. 

Not  the  Muse  who  wreathed  with  laurel 
Solemn  stalks  with  tragic  gait, 

And  in  clear  and  lofty  vision 
Sees  the  future  births  of  fate ; 

VOL.   I.  D 


34  VERSES  WRITTEN  IN  AN  ALCOVE. 

Not  the  maid  who  crowned  with  cypress 
Sweeps  along  in  sceptred  pall, 

And  in  sad  and  solemn  accents 
Mourns  the  crested  hero's  fall ; — 

But  that  other  smiling  sister, 

With  the  blue  and  laughing  eye, 

Singing,  in  a  lighter  measure, 
Strains  of  woodland  harmony  : 

All  unknown  to  fame  and  glory, 

Easy,  blithe  and  debonair, 
Crowned  with  flowers,  her  careless  tresses 

Loosely  floating  on  the  air. 

Then  when  next  the  star  of  evening 
Softly  sheds  the  silent  dew, 

Let  me  in  this  rustic  temple, 
Lissy  !  meet  the  Muse  and  you. 


THE  MOUSE'S  PETITION*. 


O  HEAR  a  pensive  prisoner's  prayer, 

For  liberty  that  sighs  ; 
And  never  let  thine  heart  be  shut 

Against  the  wretch's  cries! 

For  here  forlorn  and  sad  I  sit, 

Within  the  wiry  grate  ; 
And  tremble  at  the'  approaching  morn, 

Which  brings  impending  fate. 


*  Found  in  the  trap  where  he  had  been  confined  all  night  by 
Dr.  Priestley,  for  the  sake  of  making  experiments  with  different 
kinds  of  air. 

B  2 


56  THE  MOUSE'S  PETITION. 

If  e'er  thy  breast  with  freedom  glowed, 
And  spurned  a  tyrant's  chain, 

Let  not  thy  strong  oppressive  force 
A  free-borri  mouse  detain  ! 

O  do  not  stain  with  guiltless  blood 

Thy  hospitable  hearth ! 
Nor  triumph  that  thy  wiles  betrayed 

A  prize  so  little  worth. 

The  scattered  gleanings  of  a  feast 
My  frugal  meals  supply  ; 

But  if  thine  unrelenting  heart 
That  slender  boon  deny, — 

The  cheerful  light,  the  vital  air, 
Are  blessings  widely  given  ; 

Let  Nature's  commoners  enjoy 
The  common  gifts  of  Heaven. 


THE  MOUSE'S  PETITION.  37 

The  well-taught  philosophic  mind 

To  all  compassion  gives ; 
Casts  round  the  world  an  equal  eye, 

And  feels  for  all  that  lives. 

If  mind, — as  ancient  sages  taught, — 

A  never  dying  flame, 
Still  shifts  through  matter's  varying  forms, 

In  every  form  the  same ; 

Beware,  lest  in  the  worm  you  crush, 

A  brother's  soul  you  find ; 
And  tremble  lest  thy  luckless  hand 

Dislodge  a  kindred  mind. 

Or,  if  this  transient  gleam  of  day 

Be  all  of  life  we  share, 
Let  pity  plead  within  thy  breast 

That  little  all  to  spare. 


38  THE  MOUSE'S  PETITION. 

So  may  thy  hospitable  board 

With  health  and  peace  be  crowned ; 

And  every  charm  of  heartfelt  ease 
Beneath  thy  roof  be  found. 

So  when  destruction  lurks  unseen, 
Which  men,  like  mice,  may  share, 

May  some  kind  angel  clear  thy  path, 
And  break  the  hidden  snare. 


TO  MRS.  ?*#***#**, 

WITH  SOME  DRAWINGS  OF  BIRDS  AND  INSECTS. 


The  kindred  arts  to  please  tliee  shall  conspire, 
One  dip  the  pencil,  and  one  string  the  lyre. 

POPE. 


AMANDA  bids  ; — at  her  command  again 
I  seize  the  pencil,  or  resume  the  pen ; 
No  other  call  my  willing  hand  requires, 
And  Friendship,  better  than  a  Muse  inspires. 

Painting  and  Poetry  are  near  allied  ; 
The  kindred  arts  two  sister  Muses  guide  : 


40  TO  MRS.  p********? 

This  charms  the  eye,  that  steals  upon  the  ear ; 

There  sounds  are  tuned,  and  colours  blended  here : 

This  with  a  silent  touch  enchants  our  eyes, 

And  bids  a  gayer,  brighter  world  arise  : 

That,  less  allied  to  sense,  with  deeper  art 

Can  pierce  the  close  recesses  of  the  heart  \ 

By  well-set  syllables,  and  potent  sound, 

Can  rouse,  can  chill  the  breast,  can  soothe,  can  wound  ; 

To  life  adds  motion,  and  to  beauty  soul, 

And  breathes  a  spirit  through  the  finished  whole  : 

Each  perfects  each,  in  friendly  union  joined ; — 

This  gives  Amanda's  form,  and  that  her  mind . 

But  humbler  themes  my  artless  hand  requires, 
Nor  higher  than  the  feathered  tribe  aspires. 
Yet  who  the  various  nations  can  declare 
That  plough  with  busy  wing  the  peopled  air  ? 
These  cleave  the  crumbling  bark  for  insect  food ; 
Those  dip  their  crooked  beak  in  kindred  blood : 


WITH  DRAWINGS.  41 

Some  haunt  the  rushy  moor,  the  lonely  woods ; 
Some  bathe  their  silver  plumage  in  the  floods ; 
Some  fly  to  man,  his  household  gods  implore, 
And  gather  round  his  hospitable  door, 
Wait  the  known  call,  and  find  protection  there 
From  all  the  lesser  tyrants  of  the  air. 

The  tawny  Eagle  seats  his  callow  brood 
High  on  the  cliff,  and  feasts  his  young  with  blood. 
On  Snowdon's  rocks,  or  Orkney's  wide  domain, 
Whose  beetling  cliffs  o'erhang  the  Western  main, 
The  royal  bird  his  lonely  kingdom  forms 
Amidst  the  gathering  clouds  and  sullen  storms ; 
Through  the  wide  waste  of  air  he  darts  his  sight, 
And  holds  his  sounding  pinions  poised  for  flight ; 
With  cruel  eye  premeditates  the  war, 
And  marks  his  destined  victim  from  afar : 
Descending  in  a  whirlwind  to  the  ground, 
His  pinions  like  the  rush  of  waters  sound ; 


42  TO  MRS.  p********, 

The  fairest  of  the  fold  he  bears  away, 
And  to  his  nest  compels  the  struggling  prey ; 
He  scorns  the  game  by  meaner  hunters  tore, 
And  dips  his  talons  in  no  vulgar  gore. 

With  lovelier  pomp  along  the  grassy  plain 
The  Silver  Pheasant  draws  his  shining  train. 
On  Asia's  myrtle  shores,  by  Phasis'  stream, 
He  spreads  his  plumage  to  the  sunny  gleam ; 
But  when  the  wiry  net  his  flight  confines, 
He  lowers  his  purple  crest,  and  inly  pines : 
The  beauteous  captive  hangs  his  ruffled  wing, 
Opprest  by  bondage  and  our  chilly  spring. 
To  claim  the  verse  unnumbered  tribes  appear, 
That  swell  the  music  of  the  vernal  year : 
Seized  with  the  spirit  of  the  kindly  May, 
They  sleek  the  glossy  wing,  and  tune  the  lay ; 
With  emulative  strife  the  notes  prolong, 
And  pour  out  all  their  little  souls  in  song. 


WITH  DRAWINGS.  43 

When  winter  bites  upon  the  naked  plain, 

Nor  food  nor  shelter  in  the  groves  remain, 

By  instinct  led,  a  firm  united  band, 

As  marshaled  by  some  skillful  general's  hand. 

The  congregated  nations  wing  their  way 

In  dusky  columns  o'er  the  trackless  sea ; 

In  clouds  unnumbered  annual  hover  o'er 

The  craggy  Bass,  or  Kilda's  utmost  shore ; 

Thence  spread  their  sails  to  meet  the  southern  wind, 

And  leave  the  gathering  tempest  far  behind ; 

Pursue  the  circling  sun's  indulgent  ray, 

Course  the  swift  seasons,  and  o'ertake  the  day. 

Not  so  the  insect  race,  ordained  to  keep 
The  lazy  sabbath  of  a  half-year's  sleep  : 
Entombed  beneath  the  filmy  web  they  lie, 
And  wait  the  influence  of  a  kinder  sky. 
When  vernal  sunbeams  pierce  their  dark  retreat, 
The  heaving  tomb  distends  with  vital  heat ; 


44  TO  MRS.  p********, 

The  full-formed  brood,  impatient  of  their  cell, 

Start  from  their  trance,  and  burst  their  silken  shell ; — 

Trembling  awhile  they  stand,  and  scarcely  dare 

To  launch  at  once  upon  the  untried  air : 

At  length  assured,  they  catch  the  favouring  gale, 

And  leave  their  sordid  spoils,  and  high  in  ether  sail. 

So  when  brave  Tancred  struck  the  conscious  rind, 

He  found  a  nymph  in  every  trunk  confined ; 

The  forest  labours  with  convulsive  throes, 

The  bursting  trees  the  lovely  births  disclose, 

And  a  gay  troop  of  damsels  round  him  stood, 

Where  late  was  rugged  bark  and  lifeless  wood. 

Lo,  the  bright  train  their  radiant  wings  unfold  ! 

With  silver  fringed,  and  freckled  o'er  with  gold  : 

On  the  gay  bosom  of  some  fragrant  flower 

They  idly  fluttering  live  their  little  hour ; 

Their  life  all  pleasure,  and  their  task  all  play, 

All  spring  their  age,  and  sunshine  all  their  day. 

Not  so  the  child  of  sorrow,  wretched  Man, 

His  course  with  toil  concludes,  with  pain  began ; 


WITH  DRAWINGS.  45 

That  his  high  destiny  he  might  discern, 
And  in  misfortune's  school  this  lesson  learn.... 
Pleasure 's  the  portion  of  the  inferior  kind ; 
But  glory,  virtue,  Heaven  for  Man  designed. 

What  atom-forms  of  insect  life  appear ! 

And  who  can  follow  Nature's  pencil  here  ? 

Their  wings  with  azure,  green,  and  purple  glossed, 

Studded  with  coloured  eyes,  with  gems  embossed, 

Inlaid  with  pearl,  and  marked  with  various  stains 

Of  lively  crimson  through  their  dusky  veins. 

Some  shoot  like  living  stars  athwart  the  night, 

And  scatter  from  their  wings  a  vivid  light, 

To  guide  the  Indian  to  his  tawny  loves, 

As  through  the  woods  with  cautious  step  he  moves. 

See  the  proud  giant  of  the  beetle  race ; 

What  shining  arms  his  polished  limbs  enchase ! 

Like  some  stern  warrior  formidably  bright, 

His  steely  sides  reflect  a  gleaming  light : 


40          TO  MRS.  p********,  WITH  DRAWINGS. 

On  his  large  forehead  spreading  horns  he  wears, 
And  high  in  air  the  branching  antlers  bears  : 
O'er  many  an  inch  extends  his  wide  domain, 
And  his  rich  treasury  swells  with  hoarded  grain. 

Thy  friend  thus  strives  to  cheat  the  lonely  hour, 
With  song  or  paint,  an  insect  or  a  flower : — 
Yet  if  Amanda  praise  the  flowing  line, 
And  bend  delighted  o'er  the  gay  design, 
I  envy  not  nor  emulate  the  fame 
Or  of  the  painter's  or  the  poet's  name  : 
Could  I  to  both  with  equal  claim  pretend, 
Yet  far,  far  dearer  were  the  name  of  Friend. 


47 


CHARACTERS. 


O  BORN  to  soothe  distress  and  lighten  care, 
Lively  as  soft,  and  innocent  as  fair ! 
Blest  with  that  sweet  simplicity  of  thought 
So  rarely  found,  and  never  to  be  taught ; 
Of  winning  speech,  endearing,  artless,  kind, 
The  loveliest  pattern  of  a  female  mind ; 
Like  some  fair  spirit  from  the  realms  of  rest, 
With  all  her  native  heaven  within  her  breast ; 
So  pure,  so  good,  she  scarce  can  guess  at  sin, 
But  thinks  the  world  without  like  that  within ; 
Such  melting  tenderness,  so  fond  to  bless, 
Her  charity  almost  becomes  excess. 


48  CHARACTERS. 

Wealth  may  be  courted,  Wisdom  be  revered, 
And  Beauty  praised,  and  brutal  Strength  be  feared 
But  Goodness  only  can  affection  move, 
And  love  must  owe  its  origin  to  love. 


Illam  quicquid  agit,  quoquo  vestigia  flectit, 
Componit  furtim,  subsequiturque  decor. 

TIBUL. 


OF  gentle  manners,  and  of  taste  refined; 

With  all  the  graces  of  a  polished  mind ; 

Clear  sense  and  truth  still  shone  in  all  she  spoke, 

And  from  her  lips  no  idle  sentence  broke. 

Each  nicer  elegance  of  art  she  knew ; 

Correctly  fair,  and  regularly  true. 

Her  ready  fingers  plied  with  equal  skill 

The  pencil's  task,  the  needle,  or  the  quill ; 

So  poised  her  feelings,  so  composed  her  soul, 

So  subject  all  to  reason's  calm  controul/ — 


<  IIARACTERS.  I' 

One  only  passion,  strong  and  unconfined, 

Disturbed  the  balance  of  her  even  mind  : 

One  passion  ruled  despotic  in  her  breast, 

In  every  word,  and  look,  and  thought  confest : — 

But  that  was  love ;   and  love  delights  to  bless  • 

The  generous  transports  of  a  fond  excess. 


HAPPY  old  man!   who  stretched  beneath  the  shade 
Of  large  grown  trees,  or  in  the  rustic  porch 
With  woodbine  canopied,  where  linger  yet 
The  hospitable  virtues,  calm  enjoy 'st 
Nature  s  best  blessings  all ; — a  healthy  age 
Ruddy  and  vigorous,  native  cheerfulness, 
Plain-hearted  friendship,  simple  piety, 
The  rural  manners  and  the  rural  joys 
Friendly  to  life.      O  rude  of  speech,  yet  rich 
In  genuine  worth,  not  unobserved  shall  pass 

VOL.  I.  E 


50  CHARACTERS, 

Thy  bashful  virtues !  for  the  Muse  shall  mark, 

Detect  thy  charities,  and  call  to  light 

Thy  secret  deeds  of  mercy  ;  while  the  poor, 

The  desolate  and  friendless,  at  thy  gate, 

A  numerous  family,  with  better  praise 

Shall  hallow  in  their  hearts  thy  spotless  name. 


SUCH  were  the  dames  of  old  heroic  days, 
Which  faithful  story  yet  delights  to  praise ; 
Who,  great  in  useful  works,  hung  o'er  the  loom, 
The  mighty  mothers  of  immortal  Rome  : 
Obscure,  in  sober  dignity  retired, 
They  more  deserved  than  sought  to  be  admired ; 
The  household  virtues  o'er  their  honoured  head 
Their  simple  grace  and  modest  lustre  shed  : 
Chaste  their  attire,  their  feet  unused  to  roam, 
They  loved  the  sacred  threshold  of  their  home  ; 


CHARACTERS 

Yet  true  to  glory,  fanned  the  generous  flame, 
Bade  lovers,  brothers,  sons  aspire  to  fame  ; 
In  the  young  bosom  cherished  Virtue's  seed, 
The  secret  springs  of  many  a  godlike  deed. 
So  the  fair  stream  in  some  sequestered  glade 
With  lowly  state  glides  silent  through  the  shade ; 
Yet  by  the  smiling  meads  her  urn  is  blest, 
With  freshest  flowers  her  rising  banks  are  drest, 
And  groves  of  laurel,  by  her  sweetness  fed, 
High  o'er  the  forest  lift  their  verdant  head. 


Is  there  whom  genius  and  whom  taste  adorn 
With  rare  but  happy  union ;  in  whose  breast 
Calm,  philosophic,  thoughtful,  largely  fraught 
With  stores  of  various  knowledge,  dwell  the  powers 
That  trace  out  secret  causes,  and  unveil 
Great  Nature's  awful  face  ?   Is  there  whose  hours 

E2 


52  CHARACTERS. 

Of  still  domestic  leisure  breathe  the  soul 
Of  friendship,  peace,  and  elegant  delight 
Beneath  poetic  shades,  where  leads  the  Muse 
Through  walks  of  fragrance,  and  the  fairy  groves 
Where  young  ideas  blossom  ? — Is  there  one 
Whose  tender  hand,  lenient  of  human  woes, 
Wards  off  the  dart  of  death,  and  smooths  the  couch 
Of  torturing  anguish  ?   On  so  dear  a  name 
May  blessings  dwell,  honour,  and  cordial  praise ; 
Nor  need  he  be  a  brother  to  be  loved. 


CHAMPION  of  Truth,  alike  through  Nature's  field, 

And  where  in  sacred  leaves  she  shines  reveaFd, — 

Alike  in  both,  eccentric,  piercing,  bold, 

Like  his  own  lightnings,  which  no  chains  can  hold  ; 

Neglecting  caution,  and  disdaining  art, 

He  seeks  no  armour  for  a  naked  heart : — 


CHAi;  u  i  MKS.  i:; 

Pursue  the  track  thy  ardent  genius  shows, 

That  like  the  sun  illumines  where  it  goes ; 

Travel  the  various  map  of  Science  o'er, 

Record  past  wonders,  and  discover  more ; 

Pour  thy  free  spirit  o'er  the  breathing  page, 

And  wake  the  virtue  of  a  careless  age. 

But  O  forgive,  if  touched  with  fond  regret 

Fancy  recalls  the  scenes  she  can't  forget, 

Recalls  the  vacant  smile,  the  social  hours 

Which  charmed  us  once,  for  once  those  scenes  were  ours ! 

And  while  thy  praises  through  wide  realms  extend, 

We  sit  in  shades,  and  mourn  the  absent  friend. 

So  where  the'  impetuous  river  sweeps  the  plain, 

Itself  a  sea,  and  rushes  to  the  main ; 

While  its  firm  banks  repel  conflicting  tides, 

And  stately  on  its  breast  the  vessel  glides  ; 

Admiring  much  the  shepherd  stands  to  gaze, 

Awe-struck,  and  mingling  wonder  with  his  praise : 

Yet  more  he  loves  its  winding  path  to  trace 

Through  beds  of  flowers,  and  Nature's  rural  face, 


54  CHARACTERS. 

While  yet  a  stream  the  silent  vale  it  cheered, 
By  many  a  recollected  scene  endeared, 
Where  trembling  first  beneath  the  poplar  shade 
He  tuned  his  pipe,  to  suit  the  wild  cascade. 


AN  INVENTORY  OF  THE  FURNITURE 
IN  DR.  PRIESTLEY'S  STUDY. 


A  MAP  of  every  country  known, 

With  not  a  foot  of  land  his  own. 

A  list  of  folks  that  kicked  a  dust 

On  this  poor  globe,  from  Ptol.  the  First ; 

He  hopes, — indeed  it  is  but  fair, — 

Some  day  to  get  a  corner  there. 

A  group  of  all  the  British  kings, 

Fair  emblem  !  on  a  packthread  swings. 

The  Fathers,  ranged  in  goodly  row, 

A  decent,  venerable  show, 

Writ  a  great  while  ago,  they  tell  us, 

And  many  an  inch  o'ertop  their  fellows. 


56  AN  INVENTORY  OF  THE  FURNITURE 

A  Juvenal  to  hunt  for  mottos  ; 

And  Ovid's  tales  of  nymphs  and  grottos. 

The  meek- robed  lawyers,  all  in  white ; 

Pure  as  the  lamb, — at  least,  to  sight. 

A  shelf  of  bottles,  jar  and  phial, 

By  which  the  rogues  he  can  defy  all, — 

All  filled  with  lightning  keen  and  genuine, 

And  many  a  little  imp  he  '11  pen  you  in ; 

Which,  like  Le  Sage's  sprite,  let  out, 

Among  the  neighbours  makes  a  rout ; 

Brings  down  the  lightning  on  their  houses, 

And  kills  their  geese,  and  frights  their  spouses. 

A  rare  thermometer,  by  which 

He  settles,  to  the  nicest  pitch, 

The  just  degrees  of  heat,  to  raise 

Sermons,  or  politics,  or  plays. 

Papers  and  books,  a  strange  mixed  olio, 

From  shilling  touch  to  pompous  folio  ; 

Answer,  remark,  reply,  rejoinder, 

Fresh  from  the  mint,  all  stamped  and  coined  here ; 


IN  DR.  IMU1>TLEY'S  STUDY.  57 

Like  new-made  glass,  set  by  to  cool, 

Before  it  bears  the  workman's  tool. 

A  blotted  proof-sheet,  wet  from  Bowling. 

— "  How  can  a  man  his  anger  hold  in  ?  " — 
Forgotten  rimes,  and  college  themes, 
Worm-eaten  plans,  and  embryo  schemes ; — 
A  mass  of  heterogeneous  matter, 
A  chaos  dark,  nor  land  nor  water ; — 
New  books,  like  new-born  infants,  stand, 
'Waiting  the  printer's  clothing  hand  ; — 
Others,  a  motley  ragged  brood, 
Their  limbs  imfashioned  all,  and  rude, 
Like  Cadmus'  half-formed  men  appear; 
One  rears  a  helm,  one  lifts  a  spear, 
And  feet  were  lopped  and  fingers  torn 
Before  their  fellow  limbs  were  born  j 
A  leg  began  to  kick  and  sprawl 
Before  the  head  was  seen  at  all, 
Which  quiet  as  a  mushroom  lay 
Till  crumbling  hillocks  gave  it  way ; 


58        FURNITURE  IN  DR.  PRIESTLEY'S  STUDY. 

And  all,  like  controversial  writing, 

Were  born  with  teeth,  and  sprung  up  fighting. 

"  But  what  is  this,"  I  hear  you  cry, 
"  Which  saucily  provokes  my  eye?" — 
A  thing  unknown,  without  a  name, 
Born  of  the  air  and  doomed  to  flame. 


ON   A   LADY'S  WRITING. 

I       ""':::'  :U- 

HER  even  lines  her  steady  temper  show, 
Neat  as  her  dress,  and  polished  as  her  brow  j 
Strong  as  her  judgement,  easy  as  her  air; 
Correct  though  free,  and  regular  though  fair : 
And  the  same  graces  o'er  her  pen  preside, 
That  form  her  manners  and  her  footsteps  guide. 


60 


ON   THE  DESERTED   VILLAGE. 


IN  vain  fair  Auburn  weeps  her  desert  plains, 

She  moves  our  envy  who  so  well  complains ; 

In  vain  has  proud  oppression  laid  her  low, 

So  sweet  a  garland  on  her  faded  brow. 

Now,  Auburn,  now  absolve  impartial  fate, 

Which  if  it  made  thee  wretched,  makes  thee  great : 

So,  unobserved,  some  humble  plant  may  bloom, 

Till  crushed  it  fills  the  air  with  sweet  perfume ; 

So,  had  thy  swains  in  ease  and  plenty  slept, 

Thy  Poet  had  not  sung,  nor  Britain  wept. 

Nor  let  Britannia  mourn  her  drooping  bay, 

Unhonoured  genius,  and  her  swift  decay  ; 

O  Patron  of  the  poor !  it  cannot  be, 

While  one — one  Poet  yet  remains  like  thee  ! 

Nor  can  the  Muse  desert  our  favoured  isle, 

Till  thou  desert  the  Muse  and  scorn  her  smile. 


Gl 


HYMN  TO   CONTENT. 


natura  heat  is 

Omnibus  esse  dedit,  si  quis  cognoverit  uti. 

CLAUDIA  K. 


O  THOU,  the  Nymph  with  placid  eye  ! 
O  seldom  found,  yet  ever  nigh ! 

Receive  my  temperate  vow : 
Not  all  the  storms  that  shake  the  pole 
Can  e'er  disturb  thy  halcyon  soul, 

And  smooth  unaltered  brow. 

O  come,  in  simple  vest  arrayed, 
With  all  thy  sober  cheer  displayed, 

To  bless  my  longing  sight ; 
Thy  mien  composed,  thy  even  pace, 
Thy  meek  regard,  thy  matron  grace, 

And  chaste  subdued  delight. 


62  HYMN  TO  CONTENT. 

No  more  by  varying  passions  beat, 
O  gently  guide  my  pilgrim  feet 

To  find  thy  hermit  cell ; 
Where  in  some  pure  and  equal  sky, 
Beneath  thy  soft  indulgent  eye, 

The  modest  virtues  dwell. 

Simplicity  in  Attic  vest, 

And  Innocence  with  candid  breast, 

And  clear  undaunted  eye ; 
And  Hope,  who  points  to  distant  years, 
Fair  opening  through  this  vale  of  tears 

A  vista  to  the  sky. 

There  Health,  through  whose  calm  bosom  glide 
The  temperate  joys  in  even  tide, 

That  rarely  ebb  or  flow ; 
And  Patience  there,  thy  sister  meek, 
Presents  her  mild  unvarying  cheek 

To  meet  the  offered  blow. 


HYMN  TO  (OMKNT.  63 

Her  influence  taught  the  Phrygian  sage 
A  tyrant  master's  wanton  rage 

With  settled  smiles  to  meet : 
Inured  to  toil  and  bitter  bread, 
He  bowed  his  meek  submitted  head, 

And  kissed  thy  sainted  feet. 

But  thou,  O  Nymph  retired  and  coy ! 
In  what  brown  hamlet  dost  thou  joy 

To  tell  thy  tender  tale  ? 
The  lowliest  children  of  the  ground, 
Moss-rose,  and  violet  blossom  round, 

And  lily  of  the  vale. 

0  say  what  soft  propitious  hour 

1  best  may  choose  to  hail  thy  power, 

And  court  thy  gentle  sway  ? 
When  Autumn,  friendly  to  the  Muse, 
Shall  thy  own  modest  tints  diffuse, 

And  shed  thy  milder  day. 


(U  HYMN  TO  CONTENT. 

When  Eve,  her  dewy  star  beneath, 
Thy  balmy  spirit  loves  to  breathe, 

And  every  storm  is  laid  ; — 
If  such  an  hour  was  e'er  thy  choice, 
Oft  let  me  hear  thy  soothing  voice 

Low  whispering  through  the  shade. 


65 


TO  WISDOM. 


Dona  praesentis  rape  laetus  horse,  ac 
Linquesevera. 


O  WISDOM  !  if  thy  soft  controul 
Can  soothe  the  sickness  of  the  soul, 
Can  bid  the  warring  passions  cease, 
And  breathe  the  calm  of  tender  peace  ; — 
Wisdom !   I  bless  thy  gentle  sway, 
And  ever,  ever  will  obey. 

But  if  thou  com'st  with  frown  austere, 
To  nurse  the  brood  of  Care  and  Fear ; 
To  bid  our  sweetest  passions  die, 
And  leave  us  in  their  room  a  sigh  ; 
VOL^I.  F 


66  TO  WISDOM. 

O  if  thine  aspect  stern  have  power 

To  wither  each  poor  transient  flower 

That  cheers  this  pilgrimage  of  woe, 

And  dry  the  springs  whence  hope  should  flow 

Wisdom  !   thine  empire  I  disclaim, 

Thou  empty  boast  of  pompous  name  ! 

In  gloomy  shade  of  cloisters  dwell, 

But  never  haunt  my  cheerful  ce.ll. 

Hail  to  Pleasure's  frolic  train  ! 

Hail  to  Fancy's  golden  reign! 

Festive  Mirth,  and  Laughter  wild, 

Free  and  sportful  as  the  child  ! 

Hope  with  eager  sparkling  eyes, 

And  easy  faith,  and  fond  surprise  ! — 

Let  these,  in  fairy  colours  drest, 

For  ever  share  my  careless  breast : 

Then,  though  wise  I  may  not  be, 

The  wise  themselves  shall  envy  me. 


67 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SONG-WRITING 


II  lie  indocto  primum  se  exercuit  arcu; 

Hei  mihi  quam  doctas  nunc  habet  ille  manus ! 

TIBUL. 


WHEN  Cupid,  wanton  boy  !  was  young, 
His  wings  unfledged,  and  rude  his  tongue, 
He  loitered  in  Arcadian  bowers, 
And  hid  his  bow  in  wreaths  of  flowers ; 
Or  pierced  some  fond  unguarded  heart 
With  now  and  then  a  random  dart : 
But  heroes  scorned  the  idle  boy, 
And  .love  was  but  a  shepherd's  toy. 

*  Addressed  to  the  Author  of  Essays  on  Song- Writing. 

F  2 


68  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SONG-WRITING. 

When  Venus,  vexed  to  see  her  child 

Amid  the  forests  thus  run  wild, 

Would  point  him  out  some  nobler  game, — 

Gods,  and  godlike  men  to  tame. 

She  seized  the  boy's  reluctant  hand, 

And  led  him  to  the  virgin  band, 

Where  the  sister  Muses  round 

Swell  the  deep  majestic  sound ; 

And  in-  solemn  strains  unite, 

Breathing  chaste,  severe  delight ; 

Songs  of  chiefs  and  heroes  old, 

In  unsubmitting  virtue  bold  : 

Of  even  valour's  temperate  heat, 

And  toils,  to  stubborn  patience  sweet ; 

Of  nodding  plumes  and  burnished  arms, 

And  glory's  bright  terrific  charms. 

The  potent  sounds  like  lightning  dart 
Resistless  through  the  glowing  heart ; 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  SONG-WRITING.  69 

Of  power  to  lift  the  fixed  soul 
High  o'er  Fortune's  proud  controul ; 
Kindling  deep,  prophetic  musing  ; 
Love  of  beauteous  death  infusing ; 
Scorn,  and  unconquerable  hate 
Of  tyrant  pride's  unhallowed  state. 
The  boy  abashed,  and  half  afraid, 
Beheld  each  chaste  immortal  maid  : 
Pallas  spread  her  Egis  there  ; 
Mars  stood  by  with  threatening  air; 
And  stern  Diana's  icy  look 
With  sudden  chill  his  bosom  struck. 

"  Daughters  of  Jove,  receive  the  child," 
The  queen  of  beauty  said,  and  smiled  ; — 
Her  rosy  breath  perfumed  the  air, 
And  scattered  sweet  contagion  there ; 
Relenting  Nature  learned  to  languish, 
And  sickened  with  delightful  anguish :— 


70  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SONG-WRITING. 

"  Receive  him,  artless  yet  and  young ; 
Refine  his  air,  and  smooth  his  tongue : 
Conduct  him  through  your  favourite  bowers, 
Enriched  with  fair  perennial  flowers, 
To  solemn  shades  and  springs  that  lie 
Remote  from  each  unhallowed  eye ; 
Teach  him  to  spell  those  mystic  names 
That  kindle  bright  immortal  flames  ; 
And  guide  his  young  unpractised  feet 
To  reach  coy  Learning's  lofty  seat.'' 

Ah,  luckless  hour  !  mistaken  maids, 
When  Cupid  sought  the  Muse's  shades  ! 
Of  their  sweetest  notes  beguiled, 
By  the  sly  insidious  child  ; 
Now  of  power  his  darts  are  found 
Twice  ten  thousand  times  to  wound. 
Now  no  more  the  slackened  strings 
Breathe  of  high  immortal  things, 


II IK  ORIGIN  OF  SONG- WRITING.  71 

But  Cupid  tunes  the  Muse's  lyre 

To  languid  notes  of  soft  desire. 

In  every  clime,  in  every  tongue, 

Tis  love  inspires  the  poet's  song. 

Hence  Sappho's  soft  infectious  page  ; 

Monimia's  woe  ;  Othello's  rage ; 

Abandoned  Dido's  fruitless  prayer ; 

And  Eloisa's  long  despair ; 

The  garland,  blest  with  many  a  vow, 

For  haughty  Sacharissa's  brow  ; 

And,  washed  with  tears,  the  mournful  verae 

That  Petrarch  laid  on  Laura's  herse. 

But  more  than  all  the  sister  quire, 

Music  confessed  the  pleasing  fire.  v 

Here  sovereign  Cupid  reigned  alone ; 

Music  and  song  were  all  his  own. 

Sweet,  as  in  old  Arcadian  plains, 

The  British  pipe  has  caught  the  strains : 


72  THE  ORIGIN  OF  SONG-WRITING. 

And  where  the  Tweed's  pure  current  glides, 
Or  Liffy  rolls  her  limpid  tides ; 
Or  Thames  his  oozy  waters  leads 
Through  rural  bowers  or  yellow  meads, — 
With  many  an  old  romantic  tale 
Has  cheered  the  lone  sequestered  vale ; 
With  many  a  sweet  and  tender  lay 
Deceived  the  tiresome  summer  day. 

Tis  yours  to  cull  with  happy  art 

Each  meaning  verse  that  speaks  the  heart ; 

And  fair  arrayed,  in  order  meet, 

To  lay  the  wreath  at  Beauty's  feet. 


73 


SONGS. 


SONG   I. 

COME  here,  fond  youth,  whoe'er  thou  be, 

That  boasts  to  love  as  well  as  me  ; 
And  if  thy  breast  have  felt  so  wide  a  wound, 

Come  hither,  and  thy  flame  approve ; 

I  '11  teach  thee  what  it  is  to  love, 
And  by  what  marks  true  passion  may  be  found. 

It  is  to  be  all  bathed  in  tears  ; 

To  live  upon  a  smile  for  years ; 
To  lie  whole  ages  at  a  beauty's  feet : 

To  kneel,  to  languish,  and  implore  ; 

And  still,  though  she  disdain,  adore : — 
It  is  to  do  all  this,  and  think  thy  sufferings  sweet. 


74  SONGS. 

It  is  to  gaze  Upon  her  eyes 

With  eager  joy  and  fond  surprise  ; 
Yet  tempered  with  such  chaste  and  awful  fear 

As  wretches  feel  who  wait  their  doom  ; 

Nor  must  one  ruder  thought  presume, 
Though  but  in  whispers  breathed,  to  meet  her  ear, 

It  is  to  hope,  though  hope  were  lost ; 

Though  heaven  and  earth  thy  passion  crossed ; 
Though  she  were  bright  as  sainted  queens  above, 

And  thou  the  least  and  meanest  swain 

That  folds  his  flock  upon  the  plain, — 
Yet  if  thou  darest  not  hope,  thou  dost  not  love. 

It  is  to  quench  thy  joy  in  tears  ; 

To  nurse  strange  doubts  and  groundless  fears  : 
If  pangs  of  jealousy  thou  hast  not  proved, — 

Though  she  were  fonder  and  more  true 

Than*  any  nymph  old  poets  drew, — 
O  never  dream  again  that  thou  hast  loved  ! 


SONGS.  75 

If  when  the  darling  maid  is  gone, 

Thou  dost  not  seek  to  be  alone, 
Wrapt  in  a  pleasing  trance  of  tender  woe, 

And  muse,  and  fold  thy  languid  arms, 

Feeding  thy  fancy  on  her  charms, 
Thou  dost  not  love, — for  love  is  nourished  so. 

If  any  hopes  thy  bosom  share 

But  those  which  Love  has  planted  there, 
Or  any  cares  but  his  thy  breast  enthrall,- — 

Thou  never  yet  his  power  hast  known  ; 

Love  sits  on  a  despotic  throne, 
And  reigns  a  tyrant,  if  he  reigns  at  all. 

Now  if  thou  art  so  lost  a  thing, 

Here  all  thy  tender  sorrows  bring, 
And  prove  whose  patience  longest  can  endure : 

We  '11  strive  whose  fancy  shall  be  lost 

In  dreams  of  fondest  passion  most ; 
For  if  thou  thus  hast  loved,  O  never  hope  a  cure ! 


76  SONGS. 


SONG  II. 


IF  ever  thou  didst  joy  to  bind 
Two  hearts  in  equal  passion  joined, 
O  son  of  Venus !  hear  me  now, 
And  bid  Florella  bless  my  vow. 

If  any  bliss  reserved  for  me 
Thou  in  the  leaves  of  fate  shouldst  see  ; 
If  any  white  propitious  hour, 
Pregnant  with  hoarded  joys  in  store  ; 

Now,  now  the  mighty  treasure  give, 
In  her  for  whom  alone  I  live  ; 
In  sterling  love  pay  all  the  sum, 
And  I  '11  absolve  the  fates  to  come. 


SONGS.  77 

In  all  the  pride  of  full-blown  charms 
Yield  her,  relenting,  to  my  arms : 
Her  bosom  touch  with  soft  desires, 
And  let  her  feel  what  she  inspires. 

But,  Cupid,  if  thine  aid  be  vain 

The  dear  reluctant  maid  to  gain ; 

If  still  with  cold  averted  eyes 

She  dash  my  hopes,  and  scorn  my  sighs ; 

O  grant! — 'tis  all  I  ask  of  thee, — 
That  I  no  more  may  change  than  she ; 
But  still  with  duteous  zeal  love  on, 
When  every  gleam  of  hope  is  gone. 

Leave  me  then  alone  to  languish ; 
Think  not  time  can  heal  my  anguish ; 
Pity  the  woes  which  I  endure, — 
But  never,  never  grant  a  cure. 


78  SONGS. 


SONG  III. 


SYLVIA.     LEAVE  me,  simple  shepherd,  leave  me ; 

Drag  no  more  a  hopeless  chain  : 
I  cannot  like,  nor  would  deceive  thee  ; — 
Love  the  maid  that  loves  again. 

CORIN.      Though  more  gentle  nymphs  surround  me, 

Kindly  pitying  what  I  feel ; 
Only  you  have  power  to  wound  me  : 
Sylvia,  only  you  can  heal. 

SYLVIA.     Corin,  cease  this  idle  teasing  ; 

Love  that 's  forced  is  harsh  and  sour : 
If  the  lover  be  displeasing, 
To  persist  disgusts  the  more. 


SONGS.  79 

CORIN.       Tis  in  vain,  in  vain  to  fly  me, 
Sylvia,  I  will  still  pursue  ; 
Twenty  thousand  times  deny  me, 
I  will  kneel  and  weep  anew. 

SYLVIA.      Cupid  ne'er  shall  make  me  languish, 

I  was  born  averse  to  love ; 
Lovers'  sighs,  and  tears,  and  anguish, 
Mirth  and  pastime  to  me  prove. 

CORIN.     Still  I  vow  with  patient  duty 

Thus  to  meet  your  proudest  scorn  ; 
You  for  unrelenting  beauty, 
I  for  constant  love  was  born. 

But  the  Fates  had  not  consented, 
Since  they  both  did  fickle  prove  ; 

Of  her  scorn  the  maid  repented, 
And  the  shepherd — of  his  love. 


80  SONGS. 


SONG  IV. 


WHEN  gentle  Celia  first  I  knew, 
A  breast  so  good,  so  kind,  so  true, 

Reason  and  taste  approved  ; 
Pleased  to  indulge  so  pure  a  flame, 
I  called  it  by  too  soft  a  name, 

And  fondly  thought  I  loved. 

Till  Chloris  came  : — with  sad  surprise 
I  felt  the  lightning  of  her  eyes 

Through  all  my  senses  run ; 
All  glowing  with  resistless  charms, 
She  filled  my  breast  with  new  alarms,— 

I  saw,  and  was  undone. 


SONGS.  81 

0  Celia  !  dear  unhappy  maid, 
Forbear  the  weakness  to  upbraid 

Which  ought  your  scorn  to  move ; — 

1  know  this  beauty  false  and  vain, 
I  know  she  triumphs  in  my  pain, 

Yet  still  I  feel  I  love. 

Thy  gentle  smiles  no  more  can  please, 
Nor  can  thy  softest  friendship  ease 

The  torments  I  endure  : 
Think  what  that  wounded  breast  must  feel, 
Which  truth  and  kindness  cannot  heal, 

Nor  e'en  thy  pity  cure. 

Oft  shall  I  curse  my  iron  chain, 
And  wish  again  thy  milder  reign 

With  long  and  vain  regret : 
All  that  I  can,  to  thee  I  give ; 
And  could  I  still  to  reason  live, 

I  were  thy  captive  yet. 
VOL.  i.  G 


82  SONGS. 

But  Passion's  wild  impetuous  sea 
Hurries  me  far  from  peace  and  thee ; 

Twere  vain  to  struggle  more. 
Thus  the  poor  sailor  slumbering  lies, 
While  swelling  tides  around  him  rise, 

And  push  his  bark  from  shore  : 

In  vain  he  spreads  his  helpless  arms, 
His  pitying  friends  with  fond  alarms 

In  vain  deplore  his  state ; 
Still  far  and  farther  from  the  coast, 
On  the  high  surge  his  bark  is  tost, 

And  foundering  yields  to  fate. 


SONGS.  83 


SONG  V. 

As  near  a  weepingj  spring  reclined. 
The  beauteous  Araminta  pined, 
And  mourned  a  false  ungrateful  youth ; 
While  dying  echoes  caught  the  sound, 
And  spread  the  soft  complaints  around 
Of  broken  vows  and  altered  truth  ; — 

An  aged  shepherd  heard  her  moan, 
And  thus  in  pity's  kindest  tone 
Addressed  the  lost  despairing  maid  : 
"  Cease,  cease,  unhappy  fair,  to  grieve, 
For  sounds,  though  sweet,  can  ne'er  relieve 
A  breaking  heart  by  love  betrayed. 

"  Why  shouldst  thou  waste  such  precious  showers, 
That  fall  like  dew  on  withered  flowers, 
But  dying  passion  ne'er  restored  ? 


84  SONGS. 

In  Beauty's  empire  is  no  mean, — 
And  woman,  either  slave  or  queen, 
Is  quickly  scorned  when  not  adored. 

"  Those  liquid  pearls  from  either  eye, 
Which  might  an  Eastern  empire  buy, 
Unvalued  here  and  fruitless  fall : 
No  art  the  season  can  renew, 
When  love  was  young,  and  Damon  true  ; 
No  tears  a  wandering  heart  recall. 

"  Cease,  cease  to  grieve  ;  thy  tears  are  vain, 
Should  those  fair  orbs  in  drops  of  rain 
Vie  with  a  weeping  southern  sky  : 
For  hearts  overcome  with  love  and  grief 
All  nature  yields  but  one  relief; — 
Die  !  hapless  Araminta,  die  !" 


SONGS.  85 


SONG  VI. 


WHEN  first  upon  your  tender  cheek 
I  saw  the  morn  of  beauty  break 

With  mild  and  cheering  beam, 
I  bowed  before  your  infant  shrine ; 
The  earliest  sighs  you  had  were  mine, 

And  you  my  darling  theme. 

I  saw  you  in  that  opening  morn 
For  Beauty's  boundless  empire  born, 

And  first  confessed  your  sway ; 
And  ere  your  thoughts,  devoid  of  art, 
Could  learn  the  value  of  a  heart, 

I  gave  my  heart  away. 

I  watched  the  dawn  of  every  grace, 
And  gazed  upon  that  angel  face, 
While  yet  'twas  safe  to  gaze  ; 


86  SONGS. 

And  fondly  blessed  each  rising  charm, 
Nor  thought  such  innocence  could  harm 
The  peace  of  future  days. 

But  now  despotic  o'er  the  plains 
The  awful  noon  of  beauty  reigns, 

And  kneeling  crowds  adore ; 
Its  beams  arise  too  fiercely  bright, 
Danger  and  death  attend  the  sight, 

And  I  must  hope  no  more. 

Thus  to  the  rising  God  of  day 
Their  early  vows  the  Persians  pay, 

And  bless  the  spreading  fire ; 
Whose  glowing  chariot  mounting  soon 
Pours  on  their  heads  the  burning  noon  ; 

They  sicken,  and  expire. 


87 


DELIA. 


AN  ELEGY. 


tecum  ut  longae  sociarem  gaudia  vita?, 

Inquc  tuo  caderet  nostra  senccta  sinu. 

TIBUL. 


YES,  Delia  loves  !      My  fondest  vows  are  blest  : 
Farewell  the  memory  of  her  past  disdain  ; 
One  kind  relenting  glance  has  healed  my  breast, 
And  balanced  in  a  moment  years  of  pain. 

O'er  her  soft  cheek  consenting  blushes  move, 
And  with  kind  stealth  her  secret  soul  betray ; 
Blushes,  which  usher  in  the  morn  of  love, 
Sure  as  the  reddening  east  foretells  the  day. 


88  DELIA. 

Her  tender  smiles  shall  pay  me  with  delight 
For  many  a  bitter  pang  of  jealous  fear; 
For  many  an  anxious  day  arid  sleepless  night, 
For  many  a  stifled  sigh  and  silent  tear. 

Delia  shall  come  and  bless  my  lone  retreat : 
She  does  not  scorn  the  shepherd's  lowly  life  ; 
She  will  not  blush  to  leave  the  splendid  seat, 
And  own  the  title  of  a  poor  man's  wife. 

The  simple  knot  shall  bind  her  gathered  hair, 
The  russet  garment  clasp  her  lovely  breast ; 
Delia  shall  mix  among  the  rural  fair, 
By  charms  alone  distinguished  from  the  rest. 

And  meek  Simplicity,  neglected  maid, 
Shall  bid  my  fair  in  native  graces  shine ; 
She,  only  she,  shall  lend  her  modest  aid, 
Chaste,  sober  priestess,  at  sweet  Beauty's  shrine ! 


DELIA.  89 

How  sweet  to  muse  by  murmuring  springs  reclined ! 
Or  loitering  careless  in  the  shady  grove, 
Indulge  the  gentlest  feelings  of  the  mind, 
And  pity  those  who  live  to  aught  but  love  ! 

When  Delia's  hand  unlocks  her  shining  hair, 
And  o'er  her  shoulder  spreads  the  flowing  gold ; 
Base  were  the  man  who  one  bright  tress  would  spare 
For  all  the  ore  of  India's  coarser  mold. 

By  her  dear  side  with  what  content  I  'd  toil ! 
Patient  of  any  labour  in  her  sight ; — 
Guide  the  slow  plough,  or  turn  the  stubborn  soil, 
Till  the  last  lingering  beam  of  doubtful  light. 

But  softer  tasks  divide  my  Delia's  hours ; — 
To  watch  the  firstlings  at  their  harmless  play ; 
With  welcome  shade  to  screen  the  languid  flowers 
That  sicken  in  the  summer's  parching  ray. 


90  DELIA. 

Oft  will  she  stoop  amidst  her  evening  walk, 
With  tender  hand  each  bruised  plant  to  rear ; 
To  bind  the  drooping  lily's  broken  stalk, 
And  nurse  the  blossoms  of  the  infant  year. 

When  beating  rains  forbid  our  feet  to  roam, 
We  '11  sheltered  sit,  and  turn  the  storied  page ; 
There  see  what  passions  shake  the  lofty  dome 
With  mad  ambition  or  ungoverned  rage  : 

What  headlong  ruin  oft  involves  the  great ; 
What  conscious  terrors  guilty  bosoms  prove ; 
What  strange  and  sudden  turns  of  adverse  fate 
Tear  the  sad  virgin  from  her  plighted  love. 

Delia  shall  read,  and  drop  a  gentle  tear ; 
Then  cast  her  eyes  around  the  low-roofed  cot, 
And  own  the  Fates  have  dealt  more  kindly  here, 
That  blessed  with  only  love  our  little  lot. 


DELTA.  01 

For  Love  has  sworn, — I  heard  the  awful  vow, — 
The  wavering  heart  shall  never  be  his  care, 
That  stoops  at  any  baser  shrine  to  bow ; 
And  what  he  cannot  rule,  he  scorns  to  share. 

My  heart  in  Delia  is  so  fully  blest, 
It  has  no  room  to  lodge  another  joy ; 
My  peace  all  leans  upon  that  gentle  breast, 
And  only  there  misfortune  can  annoy. 

Our  silent  hours  shall  steal  unmarked  away, 
In  one  long  tender  calm  of  rural  peace, 
And  measure  many  a  fair  unblemished  day 
Of  cheerful  leisure  and  poetic  ease. 

The  proud  unfeeling  world  their  lot  shall  scorn, 
Who  'midst  inglorious  shades  can  poorly  dwell : — 
Yet  if  some  youth,  for  gentler  passions  born, 
Shall  chance  to  wander  near  our  lowly  cell, 


92  DELIA. 

His  feeling  breast  with  purer  flames  shall  glow  ;- 
And  leaving  pomp,  and  state,  and  cares  behind, 
Shall  own  the  world  has  little  to  bestow 
Where  two  fond  hearts  in  equal  love  are  joined. 


93 
<*  .^hrflcrfol 

OVID  TO  HIS  .WIFE. 

IMITATED  FROM  DIFFERENT  PARTS  OF  HIS  TRISTIA, 


Jam  mea  cygneas  imitantur  tempora  plumas, 
Inficit  et  nigras  alba  senecta  comas. 

TRIST.  Lib.  iv.  Eleg.  8. 


MY  aged  head  now  stoops  its  honours  low, 
Bowed  with  the  load  of  fifty  winters'  snow ; 
And  for  the  raven's  glossy  black  assumes 
The  downy  whiteness  of  the  cygnet's  plumes  : 
Loose  scattered  hairs  around  my  temples  stray, 
And  spread  the  mournful  shade  of  sickly  gray : 
I  bend  beneath  the  weight  of  broken  years, 
Averse  to  change,  and  chilled  with  causeless  fears. 
The  season  now  invites  me  to  retire 
To  the  dear  lares  of  my  household  fire ; 


94  OVID  TO  HIS  WIFE. 

To  homely  scenes  of  calm  domestic  peace, 

A  poet's  leisure,  and  an  old  man's  ease ; 

To  wear  the  remnant  of  uncertain  life 

In  the  fond  bosom  of  a  faithful  wife ; 

In  safe  repose  my  last  few  hours  to  spend, 

Nor  fearful  nor  impatient  of  their  end. 

Thus  a  safe  port  the  wave-worn  vessels  gain, 

Nor  tempt  again  the  dangers  of  the  main  : — 

Thus  the  proud  steed,  when  youthful  glory  fades, 

And  creeping  age  his  stiffening  limbs  invades, 

Lies  stretched  at  ease  on  the  luxuriant  plain, 

And  dreams  his  morning  triumphs  o'er  again  : — 

The  hardy  veteran  from  the  camp  retires, 

His  joints  unstrung,  and  feeds  his  household  fires  ; 

Satiate  with  fame,  enjoys  well-earned  repose, 

And  sees  his  stormy  day  serenely  close. 

Not  such  my  lot !    Severer  fates  decree 

My  shattered  bark  must  plough  an  unknown  sea. 


OVID  TO  HIS  WIFE. 

Forced  from  my  native  seats  and  sacred  home, 
Friendless,  alone,  through  Scythian  wilds  to  roam  ; 
With  trembling  knees  o'er  unknown  hills  I  go, 
Stiff  with  blue  ice  and  heaped  with  drifted  snow. 
Pale  suns  there  strike  their  feeble  rays  in  vain, 
Which  faintly  glance  against  the  marble  plain : 
Red  Ister  there,  which  madly  lashed  the  shore, 
His  idle  urn  sealed  up,  forgets  to  roar : 

Stern  Winter  in  eternal  triumph  reigns, 

% 

Shuts  up  the  bounteous  year  and  starves  the  plains. 

My  failing  eyes  the  weary  waste  explore, 

The  savage  mountains  and  the  dreary  shore, 

And  vainly  look  for  scenes  of  old  delight ; — 

No  loved  familiar  objects  meet  my  sight ; 

No  long-remembered  streams  nor  conscious  bowers 

Wake  the  gay  memory  of  youthful  hours. 

I  fondly  hoped,  content  with  learned  ease, 

To  walk  amidst  cotemporary  trees  ; 

In  every  scene  some  favourite  spot  to  trace, 

And  meet  in  all  some  kind  domestic  face ; 


96  OVID  TO  HIS  WIFE. 

To  stretch  my  limbs  upon  -my  native  soil, 

With  long  vacation  from  unquiet  toil ; 

Resign  my  breath  where  first  that  breath  I  drew, 

And  sink  into  the  spot  from  whence  I  grew. 

But  if  my  feeble  age  is  doomed  to  try 

Unusual  seasons  and  a  foreign  sky, 

To  some  more  genial  clime  let  me  repair, 

And  taste  the  healing  balm  of  milder  air ; 

Near  to  the  glowing  sun's  directer  ray, 

And  pitch  my  tent  beneath  the  eye  of  day. 

Could  not  the  winter  in  my  veins  suffice, 

Without  the  added  rage  of  Scythian  skies  ? 

The  snow  of  time  my  vital  heat  exhaust, 

And  hoary  age,  without  Sarmatian  frost  ? 

Yet  storm  and  tempest  are  of  ills  the  least 
Which  this  inhospitable  land  infest : 
Society  than  solitude  is  worse, 
And  man  to  man  is  still  the  greatest  curse. 


OVID  TO  HIS  WIFE.  97 

A  savage  race  my  fearful  steps  surround, 
Practised  in  blood  and  disciplined  to  wound  ; 
Unknown  alike  to  pity  as  to  fear, 
Hard  as  their  soil,  and  as  their  skies  severe. 
Skilled  in  each  mystery  of  direst  art, 
They  arm  with  double  death  the  poisoned  dart ; 
Uncombed  and  horrid  grows  their  spiky  hair ; 
Uncouth  their  vesture,  terrible  their  air ; 
The  lurking  dagger  at  their  side  hung  low, 
Leaps  in  quick  vengeance  on  the  hapless  foe. 
No  steadfast  faith  is  here,  no  sure  repose ; 
An  armed  truce  is  all  this  nation  knows : 
The  rage  of  battle  works,  when  battles  cease ; 
And  wars  are  brooding  in  the  lap  of  peace. 
Since  Caesar  wills,  and  I  a  wretch  must  be, 
Let  me  be  safe  at  least  in  misery ! 
To  my  sad  grave  in  calm  oblivion  steal, 
Nor  add  the  woes  of  fear  to  all  I  feel ! 
Ye  tuneful  maids !  who  once  in  happier  days 
Beneath  the  myrtle  grove  inspired  my  lays, 
VOL.  i.  H 


98  OVID  TO  HIS  WIFE. 

How  shall  I  now  your  wonted  aid  implore ; 
Where  seek  your  footsteps  on  this  savage  shore, 
Whose  ruder  echoes  ne'er  were  taught  to  bear 
The  poet's  numbers  or  the  lover's  care  ? 

Yet  here,  for  ever  here,  your  bard  must  dwell, 

Who  sung  of  sports  and  tender  loves  so  well. 

Here  must  he  live  :— But  when  he  yields  his  breath, 

O  let  him  not  be  exiled  even  in  death  ! 

Lest  mixed  with  Scythian  shades,  a  Roman  ghost 

Wander  on  this  inhospitable  coast. 

Caesar  no  more  shall  urge  a  wretch's  doom ; 

The  bolt  of  Jove  pursues  not  in  the  tomb. 

To  thee,  dear  wife,  some  friend  with  pious  care 

All  that  of  Ovid  then  remains  shall  bear ; 

Then  wilt  thou  weep  to  see  me  so  return, 

And  with  fond  passion  clasp  my  silent  urn. 

O  check  thy  grief,  that  tender  bosom  spare, 

Hurt  not  thy  cheeks,  nor  soil  thy  flowing  hair. 


OVID  TO  HIS  WIFE. 

Press  the  pale  marble  with  thy  lips,  and  give 
One  precious  tear,  and  bid  my  memory  live : 
The  silent  dust  shall  glow  at  thy  command, 
And  the  warm  ashes  feel  thy  pious  hand. 


99 


100 


TO    A    LADY. 

WITH  SOME  PAINTED  FLOWERS. 


tibi  lilia  plenis 

Ecce  ferunt  nymphae  calathis. 

VIRGIL. 


FLOWERS  to  the  fair :  To  you  these  flowers  I  bring, 

And  strive  to  greet  you  with  an  earlier  spring. 

Flowers,  sweet  and  gay  and  delicate  like  you, 

Emblems  of  innocence  and  beauty  too. 

With  flowers  the  Graces  bind  their  yellow  hair, 

And  flowery  wreaths  consenting  lovers  wear. 

Flowers,  the  sole  luxury  which  Nature  knew, 

In  Eden's  pure  and  guiltless  garden  grew. 

To  loftier  forms  are  rougher  tasks  assigned ; 

The  sheltering  oak  resists  the  stormy  wind, 


TO  A  LADY:— WITH  FLOWERS.  101 

The  tougher  yew  repels  invading  foes, 

And  the  tall  pine  for  future  navies  grows ; 

But  this  soft  family,  to  cares  unknown, 

Were  born  for  pleasure  and  delight  alone  : 

Gay  without  toil,  and  lovely  without  art, 

They  spring  to  cheer  the  sense,  and  glad  the  heart. 

Nor  blush,  my  fair,  to  own  you  copy  these , 

Your  best,  your  sweetest  empire  is — to  please. 


102 


ODE   TO    SPRING. 


SWEET  daughter  of  a  rough  and  stormy  sire, 
Hoar  Winter's  blooming  child  ;  delightful  Spring  ! 

Whose  unshorn  locks  with  leaves 

And  swelling  buds  are  crowned ; 

From  the  green  islands  of  eternal  youth, — 
Crowned  with  fresh  blooms  and  ever  springing  shade/ 

Turn,  hither  turn  thy  step, 

O  thou,  whose  powerful  voice 

More  sweet  than  softest  touch  of  Doric  reed, 

Or  Lydian  flute,  can  soothe  the  madding  winds, — 

And  through  the  stojmy  deep 

Breathe  thine  own  tender  calm. 


ODE  TO  SPRING.  103 

Thee,  best  beloved  !  the  virgin  train  await 
With  songs  and  festal  rites,  and  joy  to  rove 

Thy  blooming  wilds  among, 

And  vales  and  dewy  lawns, 

With  untired  feet ;  and  cull  thy  earliest  sweets 
To  weave  fresh  garlands  for  the  glowing  brow 

Of  him,  the  favoured  youth 

That  prompts  their  whispered  sigh. 

Unlock  thy  copious  stores, — those  tender  showers 
That  drop  their  sweetness  on  the  infant  buds ; 

And  silent  dews  that  swell 

The  milky  ear's  green  stem, 

And  feed  the  flowering  osier's  early  shoots ; 

And  call  those  winds  which  through  the  whispering  boughs 

With  warm  and  pleasant  breath 

Salute  the  blowing  flowers. 


104  ODE  TO  SPRING. 

Now  let  me  sit  beneath  the  whitening  thorn, 
And  mark  thy  spreading  tints  steal  o'er  the  dale ; 

And  watch  with  patient  eye 

Thy  fair  unfolding  charms. 

O  nymph,  approach !  while  yet  the  temperate  sun 
With  bashful  forehead  through  the  cool  moist  air 

Throws  his  young  maiden  beams, 

And  with  chaste  kisses  wooes 

The  earth's  fair  bosom  ;  while  the  streaming  veil 
Of  lucid  clouds  with  kind  and  frequent  shade 

Protects  thy  modest  blooms 

From  his  severer  blaze. 

Sweet  is  thy  reign,  but  short : — The  red  dog-star 
Shall  scorch  thy  tresses,  and  the  mower's  scythe 

Thy  greens,  thy  flowerets  all, 

Remorseless  shall  destroy. 


ODE  TO  SPRING.  105 

Reluctant  shall  I  bid  thee  then  farewell : 
For  O,  not  all  that  Autumn's  lap  contains, 

Nor  Summer's  ruddiest  fruits, 

Can  aught  for  thee  atone, 

Fair  Spring !  whose  simplest  promise  more  delights 
Than  all  their  largest  wealth,  and  through  the  heart 

Each  joy  and  new-born  hope 

With  softest  influence  breathes. 


106 


EPITHALAMIUM*. 


VIRGIN,  brighter  than  the  morning, 
Haste  and  finish  thy  adorning ! 
Hymen  claims  his  promised  day, — 
Come  from  thy  chamber,  come  away ! 

Roses  strew,  and  myrtles  bring, 
Till  you  drain  the  wasted  Spring ; — 
The  altars  are  already  drest, 
The  bower  is  fitted  for  its  guest, 
The  scattered  rose  begins  to  fade, — 
Come  away,  reluctant  maid  ! 

See  what  a  war  of  blushes  breaks 
O'er  the  pure  whiteness  of  her  cheeks  ; 

*  Designed  for  the  opening  of  a  Tragedy. 


EP1TIIALAMIUM.  107 

The  shifting  colours  prove  by  turns 
The  torch  of  Love  unsteady  burns. 
Pleading  now,  now  lingering,  fainting, 
Her  soft  heart  with  fear  is  panting ;  — 
Cling  not  to  thy  mother  so, 
Thy  mother  smiles,  and  bids  thee  go. 

Mind  not  what  thy  maidens  say ; 
Though  they  chide  the  cruel  day, 
Though  they  weep,  and  strive  to  hold  thee 
From  his  arms  that  would  enfold  thee ; 
Kiss,  and  take  a  short  farewell, — 
They  wish  the  chance  to  them  befell. 

Mighty  Love  demands  his  crown 
Now  for  all  his  sufferings  done ; 
For  all  Love's  tears,  for  all  his  sighs, 
Thyself  must  be  the  sacrifice. 
Virgin,  brighter  than  the  day, 
Haste  from  thy  chamber,  come  away ! 


108 


VERSES  ON  MRS.  ROWE. 


SUCH  were  the  notes  our  chaster  Sappho  sung, 
And  every  Muse  dropped  honey  on  her  tongue. 
Blest  shade  !  how  pure  a  breath  of  praise  was  thine, 
Whose  spotless  life  was  faultless  as  thy  line ; 
In  whom  each  worth  and  every  grace  conspire, — 
The  Christian's  meekness,  and  the  poet's  fire. 
Learn'd  without  pride,  a  woman  without  art ; 
The  sweetest  manners,  and  the  gentlest  heart. 
Smooth  like  her  verse  her  passions  learned  to  move, 
And  her  whole  soul  was  harmony  and  love. 
Virtue  that  breast  without  a  conflict  gained, 
And  easy,  like  a  native  monarch,  reigned. 
On  earth  still  favoured  as  by  Heaven  approved, 
The  world  applauded,  and  Alexis  loved. 


VERSES  ON  MRS.  ROWE.  109 

With  love,  with  health,  with  fame  and  friendship  blest, 

And  of  a  cheerful  heart  the  constant  feast, 

What  more  of  bliss*  sincere  could  earth  bestow  ? 

What  purer  heaven  could  angels  taste  below? 

But  bliss  from  earth's  vain  scenes  too  quickly  flies ; 

The  golden  cord  is  broke  ; — Alexis  dies ! 

Now  in  the  leafy  shade  and  widowed  grove 

Sad  Philomela  mourns  her  absent  love  ; 

Now  deep  retired  in  Frome's  enchanting  vale, 

She  pours  her  tuneful  sorrows  on  the  gale ; 

Without  one  fond  reserve  the  world  disclaims, 

And  gives  up  all  her  soul  to  heavenly  flames. 

Yet  in  no  useless  gloom  she  wore  her  days ; 

She  loved  the  work,  and  only  shunned  the  praise : 

Her  pious  hand  the  poor,  the  mourner  blest ; 

Her  image  lived  in  every  kindred  breast. 

Thynn,  Carteret,  Blackmore,  Orrery  approved, 

And  Prior  praised,  and  noble  Hertford  loved ; 

Seraphic  Kenn,  and  tuneful  Watts  were  thine, 

And  virtue's  noblest  champions  filled  the  line. 


110  VERSES  ON  MRS.  ROWE. 

Blest  in  thy  friendships !  in  thy  death,  too,  blest ! 
Received  without  a  pang  to  endless  rest. 
Heaven  called  the  saint  matured  by  length  of  days. 
And  her  pure  spirit  was  exhaled  in  praise. 
Bright  pattern  of  thy  sex,  be  thou  my  Muse ; 
Thy  gentle  sweetness  through  my  soul  diffuse  : 
Let  me  thy  palm,  though  not  thy  laurel  share, 
And  copy  thee  in  charity  and  prayer  : —      , 
Though  for  the  bard  my  lines  are  far  too  faint, 
Yet  in  my  life  let  me  transcribe  the  saint. 


Ill 


TO     A     DOG. 

DEAR  faithful  object  of  my  tender  care, 
Whom  but  my  partial  eyes  none  fancy  fair ; 
May  I  unblamed  display  thy  social  mirth, 
Thy  modest  virtues,  and  domestic  worth  : 
Thou  silent,  humble  flatterer,  yet  sincere, 
More  swayed  by  love  than  interest  or  fear ; 
Solely  to  please  thy  most  ambitious  view, 
As  lovers  fond,  and  more  than  lovers  true. 
Who  can  resist  those  dumb  beseeching  eyes, 
Where  genuine  eloquence  persuasive  lies  ? 
Those  eyes,  where  language  fails,  display  thy  heart 
Beyond  the  pomp  of  phrase  and  pride  of  art. 
Thou  safe  companion,  and  almost  a  friend, 
Whose  kind  attachment  but  with  life  shall  end, — 
Blest  were  mankind  if  many  a  prouder  name 
Could  boast  thy  grateful  truth  and  spotless  fame ! 


112 


TO  MISS  R****, 

ON  HER  ATTENDANCE  UPON  HER  MOTHER 
AT  BUXTON. 


WHEN  blooming  beauty  in  the  noon  of  power, 
While  offered  joys  demand  each  sprightly  hour, 
With  all  that  pomp  of  charms  and  winning  mien 
Which  sure  to  conquer  needs  but  to  be  seen ; 
When  she,  whose  name  the  softest  love  inspires, 
To  the  hushed  chamber  of  Disease  retires, 
To  watch  and  weep  beside  a  parent's  bed, 
Catch  the  faint  voice,  and  raise  the  languid  head, 
What  mixt  delight  each  feeling  heart  must  warm ! — 
An  angel's  office  suits  an  angel's  form. 
Thus  the  tall  column  graceful  rears  its  head 
To  prop  some  mouldering  tower  with  moss  overspread, 


TO  MISS  R***».  113 

Whose  stately  piles  and  arches  yet  display 

The  venerable  graces  of  decay  : 

Thus  round  the  withered  trunk  fresh  shoots  are  seen 

To  shade  their  parent  with  a  cheerful  green. 

More  health,  dear  maid !  thy  soothing  presence  brings 

Than  purest  skies,  or  salutary  springs. 

That  voice,  those  looks  such  healing  virtues  bear, 

Thy  sweet  reviving  smiles  might  cheer  despair ; 

On  the  pale  lips  detain  the  parting  breath, 

And  bid  hope  blossom  in  the  shades  of  death. 

Beauty,  like  thine,  could  never  reach  a  charm 

So  powerful  to  subdue,  so  sure  to  warm. 

On  her  loved  child  behold  the  mother  gaze, 

In  weakness  pleased,  and  smiling  through  decays, 

And  leaning  on  that  breast  her  cares  assuage ; — 

How  soft  a  pillow  for  declining  age ! 

For  this,  when  that  fair  frame  must  feel  decay, — 
Ye  Fates  protract  it  to  a  distant  day, — 

VOL.   I.  I 


114  TO  MISS  R****. 

When  thy  approach  no  tumults  shall  impart, 

Nor  that  commanding  glance  strike  through  the  heart, 

When  meaner  beauties  shall  have  leave  to  shine, 

And  crowds  divide  the  homage  lately  thine, 

Not  with  the  transient  praise  those  charms  can  boast 

Shall  thy  fair  fame  and  gentle  deeds  be  lost  : 

Some  pious  hand  shall  thy  weak  limbs  sustain, 

And  pay  thee  back  these  generous  cares  again  ; 

Thy  name  shall  flourish,  by  the  good  approved, 

Thy  memory  honoured,  and  thy  dust  beloved, 


115 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.  JENNINGS*. 


Est  tamen  quiete,  et  pure,  et  eleganter  actae  aetatis, 
placida  ac  lenis  senectus. 

CICERO  DK  SENECT. 


'T  is  past :  dear  venerable  shade,  farewell ! 
Thy  blameless  life  thy  peaceful  death  shall  tell. 
Clear  to  the  last  thy  setting  orb  has  run ; 
Pure,  bright,  and  healthy  like  a  frosty  sun : 
And  late  old  age  with  hand  indulgent  shed 
Its  mildest  winter  on  thy  favoured  head. 
For  Heaven  prolonged  her  life  to  spread  its  praise, 
And  blessed  her  with  a  patriarch's  length  of  days. 
The  truest  praise  was  hers,  a  cheerful  heart, 
Prone  to  enjoy,  and  ready  to  impart. 

*  The  Author's  Grandmother. 
i  2 


116          ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.  JENNINGS. 

An  Israelite  indeed,  and  free  from  guile, 

She  showed  that  piety  and  age  could  smile. 

Religion  had  her  heart,  her  cares,  her  voice ; 

'T  was  her  last  refuge,  as  her  earliest  choice. 

To  holy  Anna's  spirit  not  more  dear 

The  church  of  Israel,  and  the  house  of  prayer. 

Her  spreading  offspring  of  the  fourth  degree 

Filled  her  fond  arms,  and  clasped  her  trembling  knee. 

Matured  at  length  for  some  more  perfect  scene, 

Her  hopes  all  bright,  her  prospects  all  serene, 

Each  part  of  life  sustained  with  equal  worth, 

And  not  a  wish  left  unfulfilled  on  earth, 

Like  a  tired  traveller  with  sleep  opprest, 

Within  her  children's  arms  she  dropped  to  rest. 

Farewell !   thy  cherished  image,  ever  dear, 

Shall  many  a  heart  with  pious  love  revere  : 

Long,  long  shall  mine  her  honoured  memory  bless, 

Who  gave  the  dearest  blessing  I  possess. 


117 


AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEITY. 


GOD  of  my  life  !  and  author  of  my  days  ! 

Permit  my  feeble  voice  to  lisp  thy  praise ; 

And  trembling,  take  upon  a  mortal  tongue 

That  hallowed  name  to  harps  of  seraphs  sung. 

Yet  here  the  brightest  seraphs  could  no  more 

Than  veil  their  faces,  tremble,  and  adore. 

Worms,  angels,  men,  in  every  different  sphere 

Are  equal  all, — for  all  are  nothing  here. 

All  nature  faints  beneath  the  mighty  name, 

Which  nature's  works  though  all  their  parts  proclaim. 

I  feel  that  name  my  inmost  thoughts  controul, 

And  breathe  an  awful  stillness  through  my  soul ; 


118  AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEITY. 

As  by  a  charm,  the  waves  of  grief  subside ; 
Impetuous  Passion  stops  her  headlong  tide  : 
At  thy  felt  presence  all  emotions  cease, 
And  my  hushed  spirit  finds  a  sudden  peace, 
Till  every  worldly  thought  within  me  dies, 
And  earth's  gay  pageants  vanish  from  my  eyes ; 
Till  all  my  sense  is  lost  in  infinite, 
And  one  vast  object  fills  my  aching  sight. 

But  soon,  alas  !   this  holy  calm  is  broke ; 
My  soul  submits  to  wear  her  wonted  yoke ; 
With  shackled  pinions  strives  to  soar  in  vain, 
And  mingles  with  the  dross  of  earth  again. 
But  he,  our  gracious  Master,  kind  as  just, 
Knowing  our  frame,  remembers  man  is  dust. 
His  spirit,  ever  brooding  o'er  our  mind, 
Sees  the  first  wish  to  better  hopes  inclined ; 
Marks  the  young  dawn  of  every  virtuous  aim, 
And  fans  the  smoking  flax  into  a  flame. 


AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEITY.  11!) 

His  ears  are  open  to  the  softest  cry, 
His  grace  descends  to  meet  the  lifted  eye ; 
He  reads  the  language  of  a  silent  tear, 
And  sighs  are  incense  from  a  heart  sincere. 
Such  are  the  vows,  the  sacrifice  I  give ; 
Accept  the  vow,  and  bid  the  suppliant  live : 
From  each  terrestrial  bondage  set  me  free ; 
Still  every  wish  that  centres  not  in  thee ; 
Bid  my  fond  hopes,  my  vain  disquiets  cease, 
And  point  my  path  to  everlasting  peace. 

If  the  soft  hand  of  winning  Pleasure  leads 
By  living  waters,  and  through  flowery  meads, 
When  all  is  smiling,  tranquil,  and  serene, 
And  vernal  beauty  paints  the  flattering  scene, 
O  teach  me  to  elude  each  latent  snare, 
And  whisper  to  my  sliding  heart — Beware  ! 
With  caution  let  me  hear  the  syren's  voice, 
And  doubtful,  with  a  trembling  heart,  rejoice. 


120  AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEITY. 

If  friendless,  in  a  vale  of  tears  I  stray, 
Where  briars  wound,  and  thorns  perplex  my  way, 
Still  let  my  steady  soul  thy  goodness  see, 
And  with  strong  confidence  lay  hold  on  thee  ; 
With  equal  eye  my  various  lot  receive, 
Resigned  to  die,  or  resolute  to  live ; 
Prepared  to  kiss  the  sceptre  or  the  rod, 
While  God  is  seen  in  all,  and  all  in  God. 

I  read  his  awful  name,  emblazoned  high 

With  golden  letters  on  the  illumined  sky ; 

Nor  less  the  mystic  characters  I  see 

Wrought  in  each  flower,  inscribed  in  every  tree ; 

In  every  leaf  that  trembles  to  the  breeze 

I  hear  the  voice  of  God  among  the  trees ; 

With  thee  in  shady  solitudes  I  walk, 

With  thee  in  busy  crowded  cities  talk ; 

In  every  creature  own  thy  forming  power, 

In  each  event  thy  providence  adore. 


AN  ADDRESS  TO  THE  DEITY.  121 

Thy  hopes  shall  animate  my  drooping  soul, 
Thy  precepts  guide  me,  and  thy  fears  controul : 
Thus  shall  I  rest,  unmoved  by  all  alarms, 
Secure  within  the  temple  of  thine  arms  ; 
From  anxious  cares,  from  gloomy  terrors  free, 
And  feel  myself  omnipotent  in  thee. 

Then  when  the  last,  the  closing  hour  draws  nigh, 
And  earth  recedes  before  my  swimming  eye ; 
When  trembling  on  the  doubtful  edge  of  fate 
I  stand,  and  stretch  my  view  to  either  state  : 
Teach  me  to  quit  this  transitory  scene 
With  decent  triumph  and  a  look  serene  ; 
Teach  me  to  fix  my  ardent  hopes  on  high, 
And  having  lived  to  thee,  in  thee  to  die. 


A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION. 


'T  IS  past !     The  sultry  tyrant  of  the  south 

Has  spent  his  short-lived  rage ;  more  grateful  hours 

Move  silent  on  ;  the  skies  no  more  repell 

The  dazzled  sight,  but  with  mild  maiden  beams 

Of  tempered  lustre  court  the  cherished  eye 

To  wander  o'er  their  sphere ;  where  hung  aloft 

Dian's  bright  crescent,  like  a  silver  bow 

New  strung  in  heaven,  lifts  high  its  beamy  horns 

Impatient  for  the  night,  and  seems  to  push 

Her  brother  down  the  sky.     Fair  Venus  shines 

Even  in  the  eye  of  day ;  with  sweetest  beam 

Propitious  shines,  and  shakes  a  trembling  flood 


A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION.          123 

Of  softened  radiance  from  her  dewy  locks. 
The  shadows  spread  apace ;  while  meekened  Eve, 
Her  cheek  yet  warm  with  blushes,  slow  retires 
Through  the  Hesperian  gardens  of  the  west, 
And  shuts  the  gates  of  day.     T  is  now  the  hour 
When  Contemplation  from  her  sunless  haunts, 
The  cool  damp  grotto,  or  the  lonely  depth 
Of  unpierced  woods,  where  wrapt  in  solid  shade 
She  mused  away  the  gaudy  hours  of  noon, 
And  fed  on  thoughts  unripened  by  the  sun, 
Moves  forward ;  and  with  radiant  finger  points 
To  yon  blue  concave  swelled  by  breath  divine, 
Where,  one  by  one,  the  living  eyes  of  heaven 
Awake,  quick  kindling  o'er  the  face  of  ether 
One  boundless  blaze ;  ten  thousand  trembling  fires, 
And  dancing  lustres,  where  the  unsteady  eye, 
Restless  and  dazzled,  wanders  unconfined 
O'er  all  this  field  of  glories  ;  spacious  field, 
And  worthy  of  the  Master :  he,  whose  hand 
With  hieroglyphics  elder  than  the  Nile 


124          A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION. 

Inscribed  the  mystic  tablet,  hung  on  high 

To  public  gaze,  and  said,  "  Adore,  O  man ! 

The  finger  of  thy  God."      From  what  pure  wells 

Of  milky  light,  what  soft  overflowing  urn, 

Are  all  these  lamps  so  fill'd  ?  these  friendly  lamps, 

For  ever  streaming  o'er  the  azure  deep 

To  point  our  path,  and  light  us  to  our  home. 

How  soft  they  slide  along  their  lucid  spheres  ! 

And  silent  as  the  foot  of  Time,  fulfill 

Their  destined  courses  :    Nature's  self  is  hushed, 

And,  but  a  scattered  leaf,  which  rustles  through 

The  thick-wove  foliage,  not  a  sound  is  heard 

To  break  the  midnight  air ;  though  the  raised  ear, 

Intensely  listening,  drinks  in  every  breath. 

How  deep  the  silence,  yet  how  loud  the  praise  ! 

But  are  they  silent  all?  or  is  there  not 

A  tongue  in  every  star,  that  talks  with  man, 

And  woos  him  to  be  wise  ?  nor  woos  in  vain : 

This  dead  of  midnight  is  the  noon  of  thought, 

And  Wisdom  mounts  her  zenith  with  the  stars. 


A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION.          125 

At  this  still  hour  the  self-collected  soul 
Turns  inward,  and  beholds  a  stranger  there 
Of  high  descent,  and  more  than  mortal  rank ; 
An  embryo  God  ;   a  spark  of  fire  divine, 
Which  must  burn  on  for  ages,  when  the  sun, — 
Fair  transitory  creature  of  a  day  ! — 
Has  closed  his  golden  eye,  and  wrapt  in  shades 
Forgets  his  wonted  journey  through  the  east. 

Ye  citadels  of  light,  and  seats  of  Gods  ! 

Perhaps  my  future  home,  from  whence  the  soul, 

Revolving  periods  past,  may  oft  look  back 

With  recollected  tenderness  on  all 

The  various  busy  scenes  she  left  below, 

Its  deep-laid  projects  and  its  strange  events, 

As  on  some  fond  and  doting  tale  that  soothed 

Her  infant  hours — O  be  it  lawful  now 

To  tread  the  hallowed  circle  of  your  courts, 

And  with  mute  wonder  and  delighted  awe 

Approach  your  burning  confines.     Seized  in  thought, 


126          A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION. 

On  Fancy's  wild  and  roving  wing  I  sail, 
From  the  green  borders  of  the  peopled  Earth, 
And  the  pale  Moon,  her  duteous  fair  attendant ; 
From  solitary  Mars ;  from  the  vast  orb 
Of  Jupiter,  whose  huge  gigantic  bulk 
Dances  in  ether  like  the  lightest  leaf; 
To  the  dim  verge,  the  suburbs  of  the  system, 
Where  cheerless  Saturn  'midst  his  watery  moons 
Girt  with  a  lucid  zone,  in  gloomy  pomp, 
Sits  like  an  exiled  monarch :  fearless  thence 
I  launch  into  the  trackless  deeps  of  space, 
Where,  burning  round,  ten  thousand  suns  appear, 
Of  elder  beam,  which  ask  no  leave  to  shine 
Of  our  terrestrial  star,  nor  borrow  light 
From  the  proud  regent  of  our  scanty  day ; 
Sons  of  the  morning,  first-born  of  creation, 
And  only  less  than  Him  who  marks  their  track, 
And  guides  their  fiery  wheels.     Here  must  I  stop, 
Or  is  there  aught  beyond  ?     What  hand  unseen 
Impells  me  onward  through  the  glowing  orbs 


A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION. 

Of  habitable  nature,  far  remote, 
To  the  dread  confines  of  eternal  night, 
To  solitudes  of  vast  unpeopled  space, 
The  deserts  of  creation,  wide  and  wild ; 
Where  embryo  systems  and  unkindled  suns 
Sleep  in  the  womb  of  chaos  ?  fancy  droops, 
And  thought  astonished  stops  her  bold  career. 
But  0  thou  mighty  mind !  whose  powerful  word 
Said,  thus  let  all  things  be,  and  thus  they  were, 
Where  shall  I  seek  thy  presence  ?  how  unblamed 
Invoke  thy  dread  perfection  ? 
Have  the  broad  eyelids  of  the  morn  beheld  thee  ? 
Or  does  the  beamy  shoulder  of  Orion 
Support  thy  throne  ?     O  look  with  pity  down 
On  erring,  guilty  man !  not  in  thy  names 
Of  terror  clad  ;  not  with  those  thunders  armed 
That  conscious  Sinai  felt,  when  fear  appalled 
The  scattered  tribes ; — thou  hast  a  gentler  voice, 
That  whispers  comfort  to  the  swelling  heart, 
Abashed,  yet  longing  to  behold  her  Maker. 


127 


128          A  SUMMER  EVENING'S  MEDITATION. 

But  now  my  soul,  unused  to  stretch  her  powers 

In  flight  so  daring,  drops  her  weary  wing, 

And  seeks  again  the  known  accustomed  spot, 

Drest  up  with  sun,  and  shade,  and  lawns,  and  streams, 

A  mansion  fair,  and  spacious  for  its  guest, 

And  full  replete  with  wonders.     Let  me  here, 

Content  and  grateful,  wait  the  appointed  time, 

And  ripen  for  the  skies  :  the  hour  will  come 

When  all  these  splendours  bursting  on  my  sight 

Shall  stand  unveiled,  and  to  my  ravished  sense 

Unlock  the  glories  of  the  world  unknown. 


129 


THE    EPIPHANY. 


DEEP  in  Sabea's  fragrant  groves  retired, 
Long  had  the  Eastern  Sages  studious  dwelt, 
By  love  sublime  of  sacred  science  fired  : 

Long  had  they  trained  the'  inquiring  youth, 
With  liberal  hand  the  bread  of  wisdom  dealt, 
And  sung  in  solemn  verse  mysterious  truth. 
The  sacred  characters  they  knew  to  trace 

Derived  from  Egypt's  elder  race ; 
And  all  that  Greece,  with  copious  learning  fraught, 
Thro'  different  schools  by  various  masters  taught ; 

And  all  Arabia's  glowing  store 
Of  fabled  truths  and  rich  poetic  lore  : 
Stars,  plants  and  gems,  and  talismans  they  knew, 
And  far  was  spread  their  fame  and  wide  their  praises  grew, 

VOL.  I.  K 


ISO  THE  EPIPHANY, 

The7  admiring  East  their  praises  spread : 
But  with  uncheated  eyes  themselves  they  viewed  j 
Mourning  they  sat  with  dust  upon  their  head, 

And  oft  in  melancholy  strain 

The  fond  complaint  renewed, 
How  little  yet  they  knew,  how  much  was  learned  in  vain. 

For  human  guilt  and  mortal  woe 

Their  sympathizing  sorrows  flow  ; 
Their  hallowed  prayers  ascend  in  incense  pure ; 

They  mourned  the  narrow  bounds  assigned 
To  the  keen  glances  of  the  searching  mind, 

They  mourned  the  ills  they  could  not  cure, 

They  mourned  the  doubts  they  could  not  clear, 

They  mourned  that  prophet  yet,  nor  seer, 

The  great  Eternal  had  made  known, 
Or  reached  the  lowest  step  of  that  immortal  throne. 

And  oft  the  starry  cope  of  heaven  beneath, 

When  day's  tumultuous  sounds  had  ceased  to  breathe, 


THE  EPIPHANY.  131 


With  fixed  feet,  as  rooted  there, 
Through  the  long  night  they  drew  the  chilly  air ; 
While  sliding  o'er  their  head, 
In  solemn  silence  dread, 

The'  ethereal  orbs  their  shining  course  pursued, 
In  holy  trance  enwrapt  the  sages  stood, 
With  folded  arms  laid  on  their  reverend  breast, 
And  to  that  Heaven  they  knew,  their  orisons  addresst. 

A  Star  appears  ;  they  marked  its  kindling  beam 
O'er  night's  dark  breast  unusual  splendours  stream : 

The  lesser  lights  that  deck  the  sky, 
In  wondering  silence  softly  gliding  by, 

At  the  fair  stranger  seemed  to  gaze, 
Or  veiled  their  trembling  fires  and  half  withdrew  their  rays. 

The  blameless  men  the  wonder  saw, 
And  hailed  the  joyful  sign  with  pious  awe ; 

They  knew  't  was  none  of  all  the  train 
With  which  in  shadowy  forms  and  shapes  uncouth, 

K2 


132  THE  EPIPHANY. 

Monsters  of  earth  and  of  the  main, 

Remote  from  nature  as  from  truth, 
Their  learned  pens  the  sky  had  figured  o'er : 
No  star  with  such  kind  aspect  shone  before ; 
Nor  e'er  did  wandering  planet  stoop  so  low 
To  guide  benighted  pilgrims  through  this  vale  of  woe. 

The  heavenly  impulse  they  obey, 
The  new-born  light  directs  their  way ; 
Through  deserts  never  marked  by  human  tread, 
.  And  billowy  waves  of  loose,  unfaithful  sand, 
O'er  many  an  unknown  hill  and  foreign  strand 

The  silver  clue  unerring  led, 

And  peopled  towns  they  pass,  and  glittering  spires  ; 
No  cloud  could  veil  its  light,  no  sun  could  quench  its  fires. 

Thus  passed  the  venerable  pilgrims  on, 
Till  Salem's  stately  towers  before  them  shone, 
And  soon  their  feet  her  hallowed  pavements  presst ; 
Not  in  her  marble  courts  to  rest, — 


THE  EPIPHANY.  133 

From  pomp  and  royal  state  aloof, 

Their  shining  guide  its  beams  withdrew ; 

And  points  their  path,  and  points  their  view, 
To  Bethlehem's  rustic  cots,  to  Mary's  lowly  roof. 

There  the  bright  sentinel  kept  watch, 

While  other  stars  arose  and  set; 

For  there,  within  its  humble  thatch, 
Weakness  and  power,  and  heaven  and  earth  were  met. 

Now,  sages,  now  your  search  give  o'er, 

Believe,  fall  prostrate,  and  adore  ! 
Here  spread  your  spicy  gifts,  your  golden  offerings  here ; 

No  more  the  fond  complaint  renew, 

Of  human  guilt  and  mortal  woe, 
Of  knowledge  checked  by  doubt,  and  hope  with  fear : 

What  angels  wished  to  see,  ye  view  ; 

What  angels  wished  to  learn,  ye  know ; — 
Peace  is  proclaimed  to  man,  and  heaven  begun  below. 


TO     MR.     BARBAULD, 

NOVEMBER,  14,  1778. 


COME,  clear  thy  studious  looks  awhile, 
T  is  arrant  treason  now 
To  wear  that  moping  brow, 

When  I,  thy  empress,  bid  thee  smile. 

What  though  the  fading  year 
One  wreath  will  not  afford 
To  grace  the  poet's  hair, 
Or  deck  the  festal  board  ; 

A  thousand  pretty  ways  we  '11  find 
To  mock  old  Winter's  starving  reign  ; 
We  '11  bid  the  violets  spring  again, 


TO  MR.  BARBAULD.  135 

Bid  rich  poetic  roses  blow, 
Peeping  above  his  heaps  of  snow  ; 
We  '11  dress  his  withered  cheeks  in  flowers, 
And  on  his  smooth  bald  head 
Fantastic  garlands  bind  : 
Garlands,  which  we  will  get 
From  the  gay  blooms  of  that  immortal  year, 

Above  the  turning  seasons  set, 
Where  young  ideas  shoot  in  Fancy's  sunny  bowers. 

A  thousand  pleasant  arts  we  '11  have 
To  add  new  feathers  to  the  wings  of  Time, 
And  make  him  smoothly  haste  away : 

We'll  use  him  as  our  slave, 
And  when  we  please  we  '11  bid  him  stay, 
And  clip  his  wings,  and  make  him  stop  to  view 

Our  studies,  and  our  follies  too ; 
How  sweet  our  follies  are,  how  high  our  fancies  climb. 


136  TO  MR.  BARBAULD. 

We  '11  little  care  what  others  do, 
And  where  they  go,  and  what  they  say 
Our  bliss,  all  inward  and  our  own, 
Would  only  tarnished  be,  by  being  shown. 
The  talking  restless  world  shall  see, 
Spite  of  the  world  we  '11  happy  be  ; 
But  none  shall  know 
How  much  we  're  so, 
Save  only  Love,  and  we. 


137 


TO  MR.  BARBAULD, 

WITH  A  MAP  OF  THE  LAND  OF  MATRIMONY*. 


THE  sailor  worn  by  toil  and  wet  with  storms, 
As  in  the  wished-for  port  secure  he  rides, 
With  transport  numbers  o'er  the  dangers  past 
From  threatning  quicksands  and  from  adverse  tides. 

Joyous  he  tells  among  his  jocund  mates 

Of  loud  alarms  that  chased  his  broken  sleep, 

And  blesses  every  kinder  star  that  led 

His  favoured  vessel  though  the  raging  deep. 


*  The  Map  published  under  this  title  was  a   jeu-df esprit   of 
Mrs,  Barbauid's.— EDITOR. 


138  TO  MR.  BARBAULD. 

Thus  canst  thou,  Rochemont,  view  this  pictured  chart, 
And  trace  thy  voyage  to  the  promised  shore ; 
Thus  does  thy  faithful  bosom  beat  with  joy, 
To  think  the  tempest  past,  the  wanderings  o'er  ? 

Canst  thou  recall  the  days  when  jealous  Doubt, 
When  boding  Fears  thy  anxious  heart  oppresst, 
When  Hope,  our  star,  shone  faintly  through  the  gloom, 
And  the  pale  cheek  betrayed  the  tortured  breast  ? 

And  say ;- — the  land  through  Fancy's  glass  descried, 

The  bright  Elysian  fields  her  pencil  drew, — 

Has  time  the  dear  ideas  realized  ? 

Or  are  her  optics  false,  her  tints  untrue  ? 

O  say  they  are  not ! — Though  life's  ceaseless  cares, 
JLife's  ceaseless  toils  demand  thy  golden  hours, 
Tell  her  glad  heart  whose  hand  these  lines  confess, 
That  Peace  resides  in  Hymen's  happy  bowers. 


TO  MR.   lUHKAt'LD.  139 

But  soon  the  restless  seaman  longs  to  change 
His  bounded  view  and  tempt  the  deeps  again  ;   f 
Careless  he  breaks  from  weeping  Susan's  arms, 
To  fight  with  billows  and  to  plough  the  main. 

So  shalt  not  thou,  for  no  returning  prow 
E'er  cut  the  ocean  which  thy  bark  has  past ; 
Too  strong  relentless  Fate  has  fixed  her  bars, 
And  I  my  destined  captive  hold  too  fast. 


140 

LOVE  AND  TIME. 

TO  MRS.  MULSO. 


ON  Stella's  brow  as  lately  envious  Time 
His  crooked  lines  with  iron  pencil  traced, 
That  brow,  erewhile  like  ivory  tablets  smooth, 
With  Love's  high  trophies  hung,  and  victories  graced, 
Digging  him  little  caves  in  every  cell, 
And  every  dimple,  once  where  Love  was  wont  to  dwell ; 

He  spied  the  God :  and  wondered  still  to  spy, 
Who  higher  held  his  torch  in  Time's  despite  ; 
Nor  seemed  to  care  for  aught  that  he  could  do. 
Then  sternly  thus  he  sought  him  thence  to'  affright : 
The  sovereign  boy  entrenched  in  a  smile, 
At  his  sour  crabbed  speech  sat  mocking  all  the  while. 


LOVE  AND  TIME.  141 

"  What  dost  thou  here,  fond  boy  ?  Away,  for  shame ! 

Mine  is  this  field,  by  conquest  fairly  won ; 

Love  cannot  reap  his  joys  where  Time  has  ploughed, 

Thou  and  thy  light-winged  troop  should  now  begone. 

Go  revel  with  fresh  Youth  in  scenes  of  folly, 
Sage  Thought  I  bring,  and  Care,  and  pale-eyed  Melancholy. 

»"  Thy  streams  are  froze,  that  once  so  briskly  ran, 
Thy  bough  is  shaken  by  the  mellow  year  ; 
Boreas  and  Zephyr  dwell  not  in  one  cave, 
And  swallows  spread  their  wings  when  winter  's  near ; 
See  where  Florella's  cheeks  soft  bloom  disclose, 
Go  seek  the  springing  bud,  and  leave  the  faded  rose." 

Thus  spake  old  Time,  of  Love  the  deadliest  foe, — 
Ah  me,  that  gentle  Love  such  foes  should  meet ! 
But  nothing  daunted  he  returned  again, 
Tempering  with  looks  austere  his  native  sweet ; 
And,  "  Fool !  "  said  he,  "  to  think  I  e'er  shall  fly 
From  that  rich  palace  where  my  choicest  treasures  lie. 


142  LOVE  AND  TIME. 

"  Dost  thou  not  see, — or  art  thou  blind  with  age, — 
How  many  Graces  on  her  eyelids  sit, 
Linking  those  viewless  chains  that  bind  the  soul, 
And  sharpening  smooth  discourse  with  pointed  wit ; 
How  many  where  she  moves  attendant  wait, 
The  slow  smooth  step  inspire,  or  high  commanding  gait  ? 

"  Each  one  a  several  charm  around  her  throws, 
Some  to  attract,  some  powerful  to  repell, 
Some  mix  the  honeyed  speech  with  winning  smiles, 

Or  call  wild  Laughter  from  his  antic  cell ; 

i 

Severer  some,  to  strike  with  awful  fear 
Each  rude  licentious  tongue  that  wounds  the  virtuous  ear. 

"  Not  one  of  them  is  of  thy  scythe  in  dread, 
Or  for  thy  cankered  malice  careth  aught, 
Thy  shaking  fingers  never  can  untwist 
The  magic  caestus  by  their  cunning  wrought ; 
And  I,  their  knight,  their  bidding  must  obey, 

For  where  the  Graces  are,  will  Love  for  ever  stay. 


LOVE  AND  TIME.  H3 

"  In  my  rich  fields  now  boast  the  ravage  done, 
Those  lesser  spoils, — her  brow,  her  cheek,  her  hair, 
All  that  the  touches  of  decay  can  feel,  — 
Take  these,  she  has  enough  besides  to  spare ; 
I  cannot  thee  dislodge,  nor  shalt  thou  me, 
So  thou  and  I,  old  Time,  perforce  must  once  agree. 

"  Nor  is  the  boasted  ravage  all  thine  own, 
Nor  was  the  field  by  conquest  fairly  gained ; 
For  leagued  with  Sickness,  Life  and  Nature's  foe, 
That  fiend  accurst  thy  savage  wars  maintained ; 
His  hand  the  furrows  sunk  where  thou  didst  plough, 
[e  undermined  the  tree,  where  thou  didst  shake  the  bough. 

But  both  unite,  for  both  I  here  defy ; 
Spoil  ye  have  made,  but  have  no  triumphs  won  ; 
And  though  the  daffodil  more  freshly  blooms, 
Spreading  her  gay  leaves  to  the  morning  sun, 
Yet  never  will  I  leave  the  faded  rose, 
Whilst  the  pale  lovely  flower  such  sweetness  still  bestows." 


144  LOVE  AND  TIME. 

This  said,  exulting  Cupid  clapped  his  wings. 
The  sullen  power,  who  found  his  rage  restrained, 
And  felt  the  strong  controul  of  higher  charms, 
-  Shaking  his  glass,  vowed  while  the  sands  would  run 
For  many  a  year  the  strife  should  be  maintained  : 
But  Jove  decreed  no  force  should  Love  destroy, 
Nor  time  should  quell  the  might  of  that  immortal  boy. 


1  \:, 


TO  MISS  F.  B. 

ON  HER  ASKING  FOR  MRS.  B.'S  "LOVE  AND  TIME." 


OF  Love  and  Time  say  what  would  Fanny  know  ? 
That  Time  is  precious,  and  that  Love  is  sweet  ? 
That  both,  the  choicest  blessings  lent  below, 
With  gay  Sixteen  in  envied  union  meet  ? 

Time  without  Love  is  tasteless,  dull,  and  cold, 
Love  out  of  Time  will  fond  and  doting  prove  ; 
To  bright  sixteen  are  all  their  treasures  told, 
Love  suits  the  Time,  and  Time  then  favours  Love. 

No  longer  then  of  matron  brows  inquire 
For  sprightly  Love,  or  swiftly-wasting  Time; 
Look  but  at  home,  you  have  what  you  require, — 
With  gay  sixteen  they  both  are  in  their  prime. 

VOL.  I.  L 


146 


TOMORROW. 

SEE  where  the  falling  day 

In  silence  steals  away 
Behind  the  western  hills  withdrawn : 
Her  fires  are  quenched,  her  beauty  fled, 
While  blushes  all  her  face  overspread, 
As  conscious  she  had  ill  fulfilled 

The  promise  of  the  dawn. 

Another  morning  soon  shall  rise, 
Another  day  salute  our  eyes, 
As  smiling  and  as  fair  as  she, 
And  make  as  many  promises  : 

But  do  not  thou 

The  tale  believe, 

They're  sisters  all, 

And  all  deceive. 


147 

LINES 

PLACED  OVER  A  CHIMNEY-PIECE. 

SURLY  Winter,  come  not  here; 
Bluster  in  thy  proper  sphere  : 
Howl  along  the  naked  plain, 
There  exert  thy  joyless  reign  ; 
Triumph  o'er  the  withered  flower, 
The  leafless  shrub,  the  ruined  bower ; 
But  our  cottage  come  not  near; — 
Other  springs  inhabit  here, 
Other  sunshine  decks  our  board, 
Than  the  niggard  skies  afford. 
Gloomy  Winter,  hence  !  away  ! 
Love  and  Fancy  scorn  thy  sway ; 
Love  and  Joy,  and  friendly  Mirth, 
Shall  bless  this  roof,  these  walls,  this  hearth ; 
The  rigour  of  the  year  controul, 
And  thaw  the  winter  in  the  soul. 
L  2 


148 


WRITTEN  ON  A  MARBLE. 


THE  world's  something  bigger, 
But  just  of  this  figure 
And  speckled  with  mountains  and  seas ; 
Your  heroes  are  overgrown  schoolboys 
Who  scuffle  for  empires  and  toys, 
And  kick  the  poor  ball  as  they  please. 
Now  Caesar,  now  Pompey,  gives  law ; 
And  Pharsalia's  plain, 
Though  heaped  with  the  slain, 
Was  only  a  game  at  taw. 


149 


A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE. 


EDWARD. 

HIST,  William  !  hist !  what  means  that  air  so  gay  ? 
Thy  looks,  thy  dress,  bespeak  some  holiday  : 
Thy  hat  is  brushed ;  thy  hands,  with  wondrous  pains, 
Are  cleansed  from  garden  mould  and  inky  stains ; 
Thy  glossy  shoes  confess  the  lacquey's  care ; 
And  recent  from  the  comb  shines  thy  sleek  hair. 
What  god,  what  saint,  this  prodigy  has  wrought  *  ? 
Declare  the  cause,  and  ease  my  labouring  thought  ? 

WILLIAM. 

John,  faithful  John,  is  with  the  horses  come  ; 
Mamma  prevails,  and  I  am  sent  for  home. 

*  Sed  tamen,  ille  Deus  qui  sit,  da  Tityre  nobis. 


150  A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE. 

HARRY. 

Thrice  happy  whom  such  welcome  tidings  greet  *  ! 

Thrice  happy  who  reviews  his  native  seat ! 

For  him  the  matron  spreads  her  candied  hoard, 

And  early  strawberries  crown  the  smiling  board  ; 

For  him  crushed  gooseberries  with  rich  cream  combine, 

And  bending  boughs  their  fragrant  fruit  resign : 

Custards  and  sillabubs  his  taste  invite ; 

Sports  fill  the  day,  and  feasts  prolong  the  night. 

Think  not  I  envy,  1  admire  thy  fate  f  : 

Yet,  ah !  what  different  tasks  thy  comrades  wait ! 

Some  in  the  grammar's  thorny  maze  to  toil, 

Some  with  rude  strokes  the  snowy  paper  soil, 

Some  o'er  barbaric  climes  in  maps  to  roam, 

Far  from  their  mother-tongue,  and  dear  loved  home  J. 


*  Fortunate  senex,  hie  inter  flumina  nota. 
f  Non  equidem  invideo,  miror  magis. 

J  At  nos  hinc  alii  sitientes  ibimus  Afros, 

Pars  Scythiam,  et  rapidum  Crete  veniemus  Oaxem. 


A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE.  151 

Harsh  names,  of  uncouth  sound,  their  memories  load, 
And  oft  their  shoulders  feel  the'  unpleasant  goad. 

EDWARD. 

Doubt  not  our  turn  will  come  some  future  time. 
Now,  William,  hear  us  twain  contend  in  rime ; 
For  yet  thy  horses  have  not  eat  their  hay, 
And  unconsumed  as  yet  the*  allotted  hour  of  play. 

WILLIAM. 

Then  spout  alternate,  I  consent  to  hear*, — 
Let  no  false  rime  offend  my  critic  ear ; — 
But  say,  what  prizes  shall  the  victor  hold  ? 
I  guess  your  pockets  are  not  lined  with  gold ! 

HARRY. 

A  ship  these  hands  have  built,  in  every  part 
Carved,  rigged,  and  painted,  with  the  nicest  art ; 

*  Alternis  dicetis. 


152  A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE. 

The  ridgy  sides  are  black  with  pitchy  store, 
From  stem  to  stern  't  is  twice  ten  inches  o'er. 
The  lofty  mast,  a  straight  smooth  hazel  framed, 
The  tackling  silk,  the  Charming  Sally  named ; 
And, — but  take  heed  lest  thou  divulge  the  tale,- 
The  lappet  of  my  shirt  supplied  the  sail ; 
An  azure  ribband  for  a  pendant  flies  : — 
Now,  if  thy  verse  excell,  be  this  the  prize. 

EDWARD. 

For  me  at  home  the  careful  housewives  make, 
With  plums  and  almonds  rich,  an  ample  cake. 
Smooth  is  the  top,  a  plain  of  shining  ice, 
The  West  its  sweetness  gives,  the  East  its  spice 
From  soft  Ionian  isles,  well  known  to  fame, 
Ulysses*  once,  the  luscious  currant  came. 
The  green  transparent  citron  Spain  bestows, 
And  from  her  golden  groves  the  orange  glows. 
So  vast  the  heaving  mass,  it  scarce  has  room 
Within  the  oven's  dark  capacious  womb ; 


A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE.  153 

Twill  be  consigned  to  the  next  carrier's  care, 
I  cannot  yield  it  all, — be  half  thy  share. 

HARRY. 

Well  does  the  gift  thy  liquorish  palate  suit ; 
I  know  who  robbed  the  orchard  of  its  fruit*. 
When  all  were  wrapt  in  sleep,  one  early  morn, 
While  yet  the  dewdrop  trembled  on  the  thorn, 
I  marked  when  o'er  the  quickset  hedge  you  leapt, 
And,  sly,  beneath  the  gooseberry  bushes  creptf;    -  <» 
Then  shook  the  trees  ;  a  shower  of  apples  fell, — 
And  where  the  hoard  you  kept  I  know  full  well ; 
The  mellow  gooseberries  did  themselves  produce, 
For  through  thy  pocket  oozed  the  viscous  juice. 

EDWARD. 

I  scorn  a  telltale,  or  I  could  declare 
How,  leave  unasked,  you  sought  the  neighbouring  fair; 
Then  home  by  moonlight  spurred  your  jaded  steed, 
And  scarce  returned  before  the  hour  of  bed. 

*  Non  ego,  te  vidi,  Damonis — 
f Tn  post  carecta  latebas. 


154  A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE. 

Think  how  thy  trembling  heart  had  felt  affright, 
Had  not  our  master  supped  abroad  that  night. 

HARRY. 

On  the  smooth  whitewashed  ceiling  near  thy  bed, 
Mixed  with  thine  own,  is  Anna's  cypher  read ; 
From  wreaths  of  dusky  smoke  the  letters  flow ; — 
Whose  hand  the  waving  candle  held,  I  know. 
Fines  and  jobations  shall  thy  soul  appall, 
Whene'er  our  mistress  spies  the  sullied  wall. 

EDWARD. 

Unconned  her  lesson  once,  in  idle  mood, 
Trembling  before  the  master,  Anna  stood ; 
I  marked  what  prompter  near  her  took  his  place, 
And,  whispering,  saved  the  virgin  from  disgrace : 
Much  is  the  youth  belied,  and  much  the  maid, 
Or  more  than  words  the  whisper  soft  conveyed. 

HARRY. 

Think  not  I  blush  to  own  so  bright  a  flame, 
Even  boys  for  her  assume  the  lover's  name ; — 


A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE.  155 

As  far  as  alleys  beyond  taws  we  prize*, 

Or  venison  pasty  ranks  above  school  pies ; 

As  much  as  peaches  beyond  apples  please, 

Or  Parmesan  excells  a  Suffolk  cheese  ; 

Or  Palgrave  donkeys  lag  behind  a  steed, — 

So  far  do  Anna's  charms  all  other  charms  exceed. 

EDWARD. 

Tell,  if  thou  canst,  where  is  that  creature  bred, 
Whose  wide-stretched  mouth  is  larger  than  its  head : 
Guess,  and  my  great  Apollo  thou  shalt  bef, 
And  cake  and  ship  shall  both  remain  with  thee. 

HARRY. 

Explain  thou  first,  what  portent  late  was  seen, 
With  strides  impetuous,  posting  o'er  the  green  ; 
Three  heads,  like  Cerberus,  the  monster  bore, 
And  one  was  sidelong  fixed,  and  two  before ; 

*  Lenta  salix  quantum  pallenti  cedit  olivae. 

f  Die  quibus  in  terris,  et  eris  inihi  magnus  Apollo. 


156  A  SCHOOL  ECLOGUE. 

Eight  legs,  depending  from  his  ample  sides, 
Each  well-built  flank  unequally  divides ; 
For  five  on  this,  on  that  side  three  are  found, 
Four  swiftly  move,  and  four  not  touch  the  ground. 
Long  time  the  moving  prodigy  I  viewed, 
By  gazing  men,  and  barking  dogs  pursued. 

WILLIAM. 

Cease  !  cease  your  carols,  both  !  for  lo  the  bell, 
With  jarring  notes,  has  rung  out  Pleasure's  knell. 
Your  startled  comrades,  ere  the  game  be  done, 
Quit  their  unfinished  sports,  and  trembling  run. 
Haste  to  your  forms  before  the  master  call ! 
With  thoughtful  step  he  paces  o'er  the  hall, 
Does  with  stern  looks  each  playful  loiterer  greet, 
Counts  with  his  eye,  and  marks  each  vacant  seat ; 
Intense  the  buzzing  murmur  grows  around, 
Loud  through  the  dome  the  usher's  strokes  resound 
Sneak  off,  and  to  your  places  slily  steal, 
Before  the  prowess  of  his  arm  you  feel. 


WHAT  DO  THE  FUTURES  SPEAK  OF? 

IN  ANSWER  TO  A  QUESTION  IN  THE  GREEK 
GRAMMAR. 


TH  EY  speak  of  never-withering  shades, 
And  bowers  of  opening  joy ; 

They  promise  mines  of  fairy  gold, 
And  bliss  without  alloy. 

They  whisper  strange  enchanting  things 
Within  Hope's  greedy  ears  ; 

And  sure  this  tuneful  voice  exceeds 
The  music  of  the  spheres. 


158          WHAT  DO  THE  FUTURES  SPEAK  OF? 

They  speak  of  pleasure  to  the  gay, 

And  wisdom  to  the  wise  ; 
And  soothe  the  poet's  beating  heart 

With  fame  that  never  dies. 

To  virgins  languishing  in  love 
They  speak  the  minute  nigh ; 

And  warm  consenting  hearts  they  join, 
And  paint  the  rapture  high. 

In  every  language,  every  tongue, 
The  same  kind  things  they  say ; 

In  gentle  slumbers  speak  by  night, 
In  waking  dreams  by  day. 

Cassandra's  fate  reversed  is  theirs ; 

She  true,  no  faith  could  gain, — 
They  every  passing  hour  deceive, 

Yet  are  believed  again. 


159 


AUTUMN, 

A  FRAGMENT. 


FAREWELL  the  softer  hours,  Spring's  opening  blush 
And  Summer's  deeper  glow,  the  shepherd's  pipe 
Tuned  to  the  murmurs  of  a  weeping  spring, 
And  song  of  birds,  and  gay  enameled  fields, — 
Farewell !  'T  is  now  the  sickness  of  the  year, 
Not  to  be  medicined  by  the  skillful  hand. 
Pale  suns  arise  that  like  weak  kings  behold 
Their  predecessor's  empire  moulder  from  them ; 
While  swift-increasing  spreads  the  black  domain 
Of  melancholy  Night ; — no  more  content 
With  equal  sway,  her  stretching  shadows  gain 
On  the  bright  morn,  and  cloud  the  evening  sky. 
Farewell  the  careless  lingering  walk  at  eve, 


160  AUTUMN,  A  FRAGMENT. 

Sweet  with  the  breath  of  kine  and  new-spread  hay ; 
And  slumber  on  a  bank,  where  the  lulled  youth, 
His  head  on  flowers,  delicious  languor  feels 
Creep  in  the  blood.     A  different  season  now 
Invites  a  different  song.     The  naked  trees 
Admit  the  tempest ;  rent  is  Nature's  robe ; 
Fast,  fast,  the  blush  of  Summer  fades  away 
From  her  wan  cheek,  and  scarce  a  flower  remains 
To  deck  her  bosom ;  Winter  follows  close, 
Pressing  impatient  on,  and  with  rude  breath 
Fans  her  discoloured  tresses.     Yet  not  all 
Of  grace  and  beauty  from  the  falling  year 
Is  torn  ungenial.      Still  the  taper  fir 
Lifts  its  green  spire,  and  the  dark  holly  edged 
With  gold,  and  many  a  strong  perennial  plant, 
Yet  cheer  the  waste  :  nor  does  yon  knot  of  oaks 
Resign  its  honours  to  the  infant  blast. 
This  is  the  time,  and  these  the  solemn  walks, 
When  inspiration  rushes  o'er  the  soul 
Sudden,  as  through  the  grove  the  rustling  breeze. 


161 


TO  THE  BARON  DE  STONNE, 


WHO  HAD  WISHED  AT  THE  NEXT  TRANSIT  OF  MERCURY  TO  FIND 
HIMSELF  AGAIN  BETWEEN  MRS.  LA  BORDE  AND  MRS.  B. 


IN  twice  five  winters  more  and  one, 
Hermes  again  will  cross  the  Sun ; 
Again  a  dusky  spot  appear, 
Slow-journeying  o'er  his  splendid  sphere  : 
The  stars  shall  slide  into  their  places, 
Exhibiting  the  self-same  faces, 
And  in  the  like  position  fix 
As  Thursday  morning,  eighty-six. 
But  changing  mortals  hope  in  vain 
Their  lost  position  more  to  gain ; — 
VOL.  i.  M 


162  TO  THE  BARON  DE  STONNE. 

Once  more  between  La  Borde  and  me  !— 

Ah,  wish  not  what  will  never  be  ! 

For  wandering  planets  have  their  rules, 

Well  known  in  astronomic  schools  ; 

But  life's  swift  wheels  will  ne'er  turn  back, 

When  once  they've  measured  o'er  their  track, 

Eleven  years, — twice  five  and  one, — 

Is  a  long  hour  in  Beauty's  sun  : 

Those  years  will  pilfer  many  a  grace 

Which  decks  La  Borde's  enchanting  face  ; 

The  little  Loves  which  round  her  fly, 

Will  moult  the  wing,  and  droop,  and  die : 

And  I,  grown  dull,  my  lyre  unstrung 

In  some  old  chimney  corner  hung, 

Gay  scenes  of  Paris  all  forgot, 

Shall  rust  within  my  silent  cot : 

Life's  summer  ended,  and  life's  spring, 

Nor  she  shall  charm,  nor  I  shall  sing. 

Even  Cook,  upon  whose  blooming  brow 

The  youthful  graces  open  now, 


TO  TIIE  BARON  DE  STONNE.  163 

Eleven  years  may  vastly  change  : 
No  more  the  Provinces  he  '11  range  ; 
No  more  with  humid  eyes  entreat, 
And  wait  his  doom  at  Beauty's  feet ; 
Married  and  grave,  he  '11  spend  his  time 
Far  from  the  idleness  of  rime ; 
Forgetting  oranges  and  myrtle, 
Will  drink  his  port  and  eat  his  turtle  ; 
Perhaps  with  country  justice  sit, 
And  turn  his  back  on  thee  and  Wit. 

For  thee,  my  friend,  whose  copious  vein 
Pours  forth  at  will  the  polished  strain, 
With  every  talent  formed  to  please, 
Each  fair  idea  quick  to  seize  ; — 
Who  knows  within  so  long  a  space 
What  scenes  the  present  may  efface, 
What  course  thy  stream  of  life  may  take, 
What  winds  may  curl,  what  storms  may  shake, 
M  2 


164  TO  THE  BARON  DE  STONNE. 

What  varying  colours,  gay  or  grave, 
Shall  tinge  by  turns  the  passing  wave ; 
Of  objects  on  its  banks  what  swarms — 
The  loftier  or  the  fairer  forms — 
Shall  glide  before  the  liquid  glass, 
And  print  their  image  as  they  pass  ? 

Let  Fancy  then  and  Friendship  stray 
In  Pleasure's  flowery  walks  today, 
Today  improve  the  social  hours, 
And  build  today  the  Muse's  bowers ; 
And  when  life's  pageant  on  will  go, 
Try  not  to  stop  the  passing  show ; 
But  give  to  scenes  that  once  were  dear, 
A  sigh,  a  farewell,  and  a  tear. 


165 

TO  THE  BARON  DE  STONNE, 

WITH  AIKIN'S  ESSAY  ON  SONG-WRITING. 


To  Gallia's  gay  and  gallant  coast 
Haste,  little  volume,  speed  thy  flight ; 
And  proudly  there  go  make  thy  boast 
How  Britons  love — how  Britons  write. 

Say,  Love  can  hold  his  torch  as  high 
Beneath  our  heaven  deformed  with  showers, 
As  in  her  pure  and  brilliant  sky, 
By  vine-clad  hills  or  myrtle  bowers  : 

Ask  if  her  damsels  bloom  more  fair ; 
Ask  if  her  swains  can  love  as  true ; 
And  urge  her  poets'  tuneful  care 
To  sing  their  praise  in  numbers  due. 


166 


TO  THE  MISS  WEBSTERS, 

WITH  DR.  AIKIN'S  "WISH,"  WHICH  THEY  EXPRESSED 
A  DESIRE  TO  HAVE  A  COPY  OF. 


NOT  this  the  Wish  in  life's  first,  gayest  page, 
Becomes  your  opening  years  and  golden  prime ; 
Not  these  the  hopes  should  your  soft  thoughts  engage, 
Whose  buds  of  joy  are  yet  uncropt  by  Time. 

When  blood  begins  to  creep,  when  fled  is  youth, 
And  nature  verges  toward  lethargic  rest, 
Gardens  and  groves  the  languid  mind  may  soothe, 
And  fire-side  comforts  satisfy  the  breast. 


TO  THE  MISS  WEBSTERS.  107 

For  you,  quick  Fancy  spreads  her  brightest  stores, 
Paints  high  the  colour  of  each  opening  joy, 
Enthusiastic  hope  to  rapture  soars, 
And  untried  scenes  the  busy  thoughts  employ. 

O  may  her  soft  enchantment  late  prolong 
The  fond  romance  of  innocence  and  youth ! 
To  elder  life  no  happier  hours  belong, 
No  richer  cordial  dealt  by  hoary  Truth. 

Nor  fear,  while  you  the  gaudy  dream  pursue, 
Life's  serious  aim  and  sober  joys  to  miss  : 
While  fluttering  pulses  dance,  and  scenes  are  new, 
Your  Wish  is  transport,  and  your  Hopes  are  bliss. 


168 


EPISTLE  TO  DR.  ENFIELD, 

ON  HIS  REVISITING  WARRINGTON  IN  1789. 


FRiENDof  those  yearswhichfromYouth's  sparkling  fount 
With  silent  lapse  down  Time's  swift  gulf  have  run ! 
Friend  of  the  years,  whatever  be  their  amount, 
Which  yet  remain  beneath  life's  evening  sun ! 

O  when  thy  feet  retrace  that  western  shore 
Where  Mersey  winds  his  waters  to  the  main, 
When  thy  fond  eyes  familiar  haunts  explore, 
And  paths  well-nigh  effaced  are  tracked  again ; 

Will  not  thy  heart  with  mixed  emotions  thrill, 
As  scenes  succeeding  scenes  arise  to  view  ? 
While  joy  or  sorrow  past  alike  shall  fill 
Thy  glistening  eyes  with  Feeling's  tender  dew. 


EPISTLE  TO  DR.  ENEIELD.  1C9 

Shades  of  light  transient  Loves  shall  pass  thee  by, 
And  glowing  Hopes,  and  Sports  of  youthful  vein ; 
And  each  shall  claim  one  short,  half  pleasing  sigh, 
A  farewell  sigh  to  Love's  and  Fancy's  reign. 

Lo  there  the  seats  where  Science  loved  to  dwell, 
Where  Liberty  her  ardent  spirit  breathed ; 
While  each  glad  Naiad  from  her  secret  cell 
Her  native  sedge  with  classic  honours  wreathed. 

O  seats  beloved  in  vain !  Your  rising  dome 
With  what  fond  joy  my  youthful  eyes  surveyed ; 
Pleased  by  your  sacred  springs  to  find  my  home, 
And  tune  my  lyre  beneath  your  growing  shade ! 

Does  Desolation  spread  his  gloomy  veil 
Your  grass-grown  courts  and  silent  halls  along  ? 
Or  busy  hands  there  pile  the  cumbrous  sail, 
And  Trade's  harsh  din  succeed  the  Muse's  song  ? 


170  EPISTLE  TO  DR.  ENFIELD. 

Yet  still,  perhaps,  in  some  sequestered  walk 
Thine  ear  shall  catch  the  tales  of  other  times ; 
Still  in  faint  sounds  the  learned  echoes  talk, 
Where  unprofaned  as  yet  by  vulgar  chimes. 

Do  not  the  deeply-wounded  trees  still  bear 
The  dear  memorial  of  some  infant  flame  ? 
And  murmuring  sounds  yet  fill  the  hallowed  air, 
Once  vocal  to  the  youthful  poet's  fame  ? 

For  where  her  sacred  step  impressed  the  Muse, 
She  left  a  long  perfume  through  all  the  bowers ; 
Still  mayst  thou  gather  thence  Castalian  dews 
In  honeyed  sweetness  clinging  to  the  flowers. 

Shrowded  in  stolen  glance,  here  timorous  Love 
The  grave  rebuke  of  careful  Wisdom  drew, 
With  wholesome  frown  austere  who  vainly  strove 
To  shield  the  sliding  heart  from  Beauty's  view. 


EPISTLE  TO  DR.  ENFIELD.  I  ,  I 

Go  fling  this  garland  in  fair  Mersey's  stream, 
From  the  true  lovers  that  have  trod  his  banks ; 
Say,  Thames  to  Avon  still  repeats  his  theme  ; 
Say,  Hymen's  captives  send  their  votive  thanks. 

Visit  each  shade  and  trace  each  weeping  rill 
To  holy  Friendship  or  to  Fancy  known, 
And  climb  with  zealous  step  the  fir-crowned  hill, 
Where  purple  foxgloves  fringe  the  rugged  stone : 

And  if  thou  seest  on  some  neglected  spray 

The  lyre  which  soothed  my  careless  hours  so  much  ; 

The  shattered  relic  to  my  hands  convey, — 

The  murmuring  strings  shall  answer  to  thy  touch. 

Were  it,  like  thine,  my  lot  once  more  to  tread 
Plains  now  but  seen  in  distant  perspective, 
With  that  soft  hue,  that  dubious  gloom  o'erspread, 
That  tender  tint  which  only  time  can  give ; 


172  EPISTLE  TO  DR.  ENFIELD. 

How  would  it  open  every  secret  cell 
Where  cherished  thought  and  fond  remembrance  sleep ! 
How  many  a  tale  each  conscious  step  would  tell ! 
How  many  a  parted  friend  these  eyes  would  weep  ! 

But  O  the  chief! — If  in  thy  feeling  breast 
The  tender  charities  of  life  reside, 
If  there  domestic  love  have  built  her  nest, 
And  thy  fond  heart  a  parent's  cares  divide ; 

Go  seek  the  turf  where  worth,  where  wisdom  lies, 
Wisdom  and  worth,  ah,  never  to  return ! 
There,  kneeling,  weep  my  tears,  and  breathe  my  sighs, 
A  daughter's  sorrows  o'er  her  father's  urn ! 


173 


EPISTLE 
TO  WILLIAM  WILBERFORCE,  ESQ. 

ON  THE  REJECTION  OF  THE  BILL  FOR  ABOLISHING 
THE  SLAVE  TRADE,  1791. 

CEASE,  Wilberforce,  to  urge  thy  generous  aim  ! 
Thy  Country  knows  the  sin,  and  stands  the  shame ! 
The  Preacher,  Poet,  Senator  in  vain 
Has  rattled  in  her  sight  the  Negro's  chain ; 
With  his  deep  groans  assailed  her  startled  ear, 
And  rent  the  veil  that  hid  his  constant  tear ; 
Forced  her  averted  eyes  his  stripes  to  scan, 
Beneath  the  bloody  scourge  laid  bare  the  man, 
Claimed  Pity's  tear,  urged  Conscience*  strong  controul, 
And  flashed  conviction  on  her  shrinking  soul. 
The  Muse  too,  soon  awaked,  with  ready  tongue 
At  Mercy's  shrine  applausive  paeans  rung ; 


174  EPISTLE  TO  W.  WILBERFORCE,  ESQ. 

And  Freedom's  eager  sons  in  vain  foretold 

A  new  Astrean  reign,  an  age  of  gold  : 

She  knows  and  she  persists — Still  Afric  bleeds, 

Unchecked,  the  human  traffic  still  proceeds  ; 

She  stamps  her  infamy  to  future  time, 

And  on  her  hardened  forehead  seals  the  crime. 

In  vain,  to  thy  white  standard  gathering  round, 

Wit,  Worth,  and  Parts  and  Eloquence  are  found : 

In  vain,  to  push  to  birth  thy  great  design, 

Contending  chiefs,  and  hostile  virtues  join  ; 

All,  from  conflicting  ranks,  of  power  possesst 

To  rouse,  to  melt,  or  to  inform  the  breast. 

Where  seasoned  tools  of  Avarice  prevail, 

A  Nation's  eloquence,  combined,  must  fail : 

Each  flimsy  sophistry  by  turns  they  try ; 

The  plausive  argument,  the  daring  lie, 

The  artful  gloss,  that  moral  sense  confounds, 

The*  acknowledged  thirst  of  gain  that  honour  wounds 


EPISTLE  TO  W.  WILBERFORCE,  ESQ.  175 

Bane  of  ingenuous  minds  ! — the'  unfeeling  sneer, 
Which  sudden  turns  to  stone  the  falling  tear : 
They  search  assiduous,  with  inverted  skill, 
For  forms  of  wrong,  and  precedents  of  ill ; 
With  impious  mockery  wrest  the  sacred  page, 
And  glean  up  crimes  from  each  remoter  age  : 
Wrung  Nature's  tortures,  shuddering,  while  you  tell, 
From  scoffing  fiends  bursts  forth  the  laugh  of  hell ; 
In  Britain's  senate,  Misery's  pangs  give  birth 

To  jests  unseemly,  and  to  horrid  mirth 

Forbear  ! — thy  virtues  but  provoke  our  doom, 
And  swell  the'  account  of  vengeance  yet  to  come ; 
For,  not  unmarked  in  Heaven's  impartial  plan, 
Shall  man,  proud  worm,  contemn  his  fellow-man ! 
And  injured  Afric,  by  herself  redresst, 
Darts  her  own  serpents  at  her  tyrant's  breast. 
Each  vice,  to  minds  depraved  by  bondage  known, 
With  sure  contagion  fastens  on  his  own ; 
In  sickly  languors  melts  his  nerveless  frame, 
And  blows  to  rage  impetuous  Passion's  flame  : 


176  EPISTLE  TO  \v.  W1LBERFORCF 

Fermenting  swift,  the  fiery  venom  gains 

The  milky  innocence  of  infant  veins ; 

There  swells  the  stubborn  will,  damps  learning's  fire, 

The  whirlwind  wakes  of  uncontrouled  desire, 

Sears  the  young  heart  to  images  of  woe, 

And  blasts  the  buds  of  Virtue  as  they  blow. 

Lo !  where  reclined,  pale  Beauty  courts  the  breeze, 

Diffused  on  sofas  of  voluptuous  ease ; 

With  anxious  awe  her  menial  train  around 

Catch  her  faint  whispers  of  half-uttered  sound ; 

See  her,  in  monstrous  fellowship,  unite 

At  once  the  Scythian  and  the  Sybarite ! 

Blending  repugnant  vices,  misallied, 

Which  frugal  nature  purposed  to  divide ; 

See  her,  with  indolence  to  fierceness  joined, 

Of  body  delicate,  infirm  of  mind, 

With  languid  tones  imperious  mandates  urge ; 

With  arm  recumbent  wield  the  household  scourge ; 


EPISTLE  TO  W.  WILBERFORCE,  ESQ.  177 

And  with  unruffled  mien,  and  placid  sounds, 
Contriving  torture,  and  inflicting  wounds. 

Nor,  in  their  palmy  walks  and  spicy  groves, 
The  form  benign  of  rural  Pleasure  roves ; 
No  milk-maid's  song,  or  hum  of  village  talk, 
Soothes  the  lone  poet  in  his  evening  walk  : 
No  willing  arm  the  flail  unwearied  plies, 
Where  the  mixed  sounds  of  cheerful  labour  rise ; 
No  blooming  maids  and  frolic  swains  are  seen 
To  pay  gay  homage  to  their  harvest  queen : 
No  heart-expanding  scenes  their  eyes  must  prove 
Of  thriving  industry  and  faithful  love : 
But  shrieks  and  yells  disturb  the  balmy  air, 
Dumb  sullen  looks  of  woe  announce  despair 
And  angry  eyes  through  dusky  features  glare 
Far  from  the  sounding  lash  the  Muses  fly, 
And  sensual  riot  drowns  each  finer  joy. 

Nor  less  from  the  gay  East,  on  essenced  wings, 
Breathing  unnamed  perfumes,  Contagion  springs ; 
VOL.  i.  N 


-  } 

ire.  -/ 


178  EPISTLE  TO  W.  WILBERFORCE,  ESQ. 

The  soft  luxurious  plague  alike  pervades 
The  marble  palaces  and  rural  shades ; 
Hence  thronged  Augusta  builds  her  rosy  bowers, 
And  decks  in  summer  wreaths  her  smoky  towers ; 
And  hence,  in  summer  bowers,  Art's  costly  hand 
Pours  courtly  splendours  o'er  the  dazzled  land  : 
The  manners  melt ; — one  undistinguished  blaze 
Overwhelms  the  sober  pomp  of  elder  days  ; 
Corruption  follows  with  gigantic  stride, 
And  scarce  vouchsafes  his  shameless  front  to  hide 
The  spreading  leprosy  taints  every  part, 
Infects  each  limb,  and  sickens  at  the  heart. 
Simplicity,  most  dear  of  rural  maids, 
Weeping  resigns  her  violated  shades  : 
Stern  Independence  from  his  glebe  retires, 
And  anxious  Freedom  eyes  her  drooping  fires  ; 
By  foreign  wealth  are  British  morals  changed, 
And  Afric's  sons,  and  India's,  smile  avenged. 

For  you,  whose  tempered  ardour  long  has  borne 
Untired  the  labour,  and  unmoved  the  scorn ; 


EPISTLE  TO  W.  WILBERFORCE,  ESQ.  179 

In  Virtue's  fasti  be  inscribed  your  fame, 
And  uttered  yours  with  Howard's  honoured  name ; 
Friends  of  the  friendless — Hail,  ye  generous  band  ! 
Whose  efforts  yet  arrest  Heaven's  lifted  hand, 
Around  whose  steady  brows,  in  union  bright, 
The  civic  wreath  and  Christian's  palm  unite : 
Your  merit  stands,  no  greater  and  no  less, 
Without,  or  with  the  varnish  of  success  : 
But  seek  no  more  to  break  a  nation's  fall, 
For  ye  have  saved  yourselves — and  that  is  all. 
Succeeding  times  your  struggles,  and  their  fate, 
With  mingled  shame  and  triumph  shall  relate ; 
While  faithful  History,  in  her  various  page, 
Marking  the  features  of  this  motley  age, 
To  shed  a  glory,  and  to  fix  a  stain, 
Tells  how  you  strove,  and  that  you  strove  in  vain. 


N  2 


180 


ON  THE  EXPECTED 

GENERAL  RISING  OF  THE  FRENCH  NATION, 

IN  1792. 

RISE,  mighty  nation,  in  thy  strength, 
And  deal  thy  dreadful  vengeance  round ;  s 
Let  thy  great  spirit,  roused  at  length, 
Strike  hordes  of  despots  to  the  ground  ! 

Devoted  land  !  thy  mangled  breast 
Eager  the  royal  vultures  tear ; 
By  friends  betrayed,  by  foes  opprest, — 
And  Virtue  struggles  with  Despair. 

The  tocsin  sounds  !   arise,  arise  ! 
Stern  o'er  each  breast  let  Country  reign ; 
Nor  virgin's  plighted  hand  nor  sighs 
Must  now  the  ardent  youth  detain  : 


ON  THE  GENERAL  RISING  OF  THE  FRENCH.       181 

Nor  must  the  hind  who  tills  thy  soil 
The  ripened  vintage  stay  to  press, 
Till  Rapture  crown  the  flowing  bowl, 
And  Freedom  boast  of  full  success. 

Briareus-like  extend  thy  hands, 
That  every  hand  may  crush  a  foe  ; 
In  millions  pour  thy  generous  bands, 
And  end  a  warfare  by  a  blow ! 

Then  wash  with  sad  repentant  tears 
Each  deed  that  clouds  thy  glory's  page ; 
Each  phrensied  start  impelled  by  fears, 
Each  transient  burst  of  headlong  rage  : 

Then  fold  in  thy  relenting  arms 
Thy  wretched  outcasts  where  they  roam  ; 
From  pining  want  and  war's  alarms, 
O  call  the  child  of  misery  home  ! 


182      ON  THE  GENERAL  RISING  OF  THE  FRENCH. 

Then  build  the  tomb — O  not  alone 
Of  him  who  bled  in  Freedom's  cause ; 
With  equal  eye  the  martyr  own 
Of  faith  revered  and  ancient  laws. 

Then  be  thy  tide  of  glory  staid ; 
Then  be  thy  conquering  banners  furled ; 
Obey  the  laws  thyself  hast  made, 
And  rise  the  model  of  the  world  ! 


I  S3 


TO   DR.  PRIESTLEY, 

DECEMBER  29,  1792. 


STIRS  not  thy  spirit,  Priestley !   as  the  train 
With  low  obeisance,  and  with  servile  phrase, 
File  behind  file,  advance,  with  supple  knee, 
And  lay  their  necks  beneath  the  foot  of  power  ? 
Burns  not  thy  cheek  indignant,  when  thy  name, 
On  which  delighted  Science  loved  to  dwell, 
Becomes  the  bandied  theme  of  hooting  crowds  ? 
With  timid  caution,  or  with  cool  reserve, 
When  e'en  each  reverend  brother  keeps  aloof, 
Eyes  the  struck  deer,  and  leaves  thy  naked- side 
A  mark  for  Power  to  shoot  at?      Let  it  be. 
"  On  evil  days  though  fallen  and  evil  tongues," 


184  TO  DR.  PRIESTLEY. 

To  thee,  the  slander  of  a  passing  age 

Imports  not.     Scenes  like  these  hold  little  space 

In  his  large  mind,  whose  ample  stretch  of  thought 

Grasps  future  periods. — Well  canst  thou  afford 

To  give  large  credit  for  that  debt  of  fame 

Thy  country  owes  thee.     Calm  thou  canst  consign  it 

To  the  slow  payment  of  that  distant  day, — 

If  distant, — when  thy  name,  to  Freedom's  joined, 

Shall  meet  the  thanks  of  a  regenerate  land. 


185 


THE  RIGHTS  OF  WOMAN 


YES,  injured  Woman!   rise,  assert  thy  right! 
Woman  !   too  long  degraded,  scorned,  opprest ; 
O  born  to  rule  in  partial  Law's  despite, 
Resume  thy  native  empire  o'er  the  breast ! 

Go  forth  arrayed  in  panoply  divine ; 
That  angel  pureness  which  admits  no  stain ; 
Go,  bid  proud  Man  his  boasted  rule  resign, 
And  kiss  the  golden  sceptre  of  thy  reign. 

Go,  gird  thyself  with  grace  ;  collect  thy  store 
Of  bright  artillery  glancing  from  afar ; 
Soft  melting  tones  thy  thundering  cannon's  roar, 
Blushes  and  fears  thy  magazine  of  war. 


186  THE  RIGHTS  OF  WOMAN. 

Thy  rights  are  empire  :   urge  no  meaner  claim,— 
Felt,  not  defined,  and  if  debated,  lost ; 
Like  sacred  mysteries,  which  withheld  from  fame, 
Shunning  discussion,  are  revered  the  most. 

Try  all  that  wit  and  art  suggest  to  bend 

Of  thy  imperial  foe  the  stubborn  knee ; 

Make  treacherous  Man  thy  subject,  not  thy  friend ; 

Thou  mayst  command,  but  never  canst  be  free. 

Awe  the  licentious,  and  restrain  the  rude ; 
Soften  the  sullen,  clear  the  cloudy  brow : 
Be,  more  than  princes'  gifts,  thy  favours  sued ; — 
She  hazards  all,  who  will  the  least  allow. 

But  hope  not,  courted  idol  of  mankind, 
On  this  proud  eminence  secure  to  stay ; 
Subduing  and  subdued,  thou  soon  shalt  find 
Thy  coldness  soften,  and  thy  pride  give  way. 


THE  RIGHTS  OF  WOMAN.  187 

Then,  then,  abandon  each  ambitious  thought, 
Conquest  or  rule  thy  heart  shall  feebly  move, 
In  Nature's  school,  by  her  soft  maxims  taught. 
That  separate  rights  are  lost  in  mutual  love. 


188 


INSCRIPTION  FOR  AN  ICE-HOUSE. 


STRANGER,  approach !  within  this  iron  door 
Thrice  locked  and  bolted,  this  rude  arch  beneath 
That  vaults  with  ponderous  stone  the  cell ;   confined 
By  man,  the  great  magician,  who  controuls 
Fire,  earth  and  air,  and  genii  of  the  storm, 
And  bends  the  most  remote  and  opposite  things 
To  do  him  service  and  perform  his  will, — 
A  giant  sits  ;   stern  Winter ;  here  he  piles, 
While  summer  glows  around,  and  southern  gales 
Dissolve  the  fainting  world,  his  treasured  snows 
Within  the  rugged  cave. — Stranger,  approach ! 
He  will  not  cramp  thy  limbs  with  sudden  age, 
Nor  wither  with  his  touch  the  coyest  flower 
That  decks  thy  scented  hair.     Indignant  here, 


INSCRIPTION  FOR  AN  ICE-HOUSE.  189 

Like  fettered  Sampson  when  his  might  was  spent 

In  puny  feats  to  glad  the  festive  halls 

Of  Gaza's  wealthy  sons  ;  or  he  who  sat 

Midst  laughing  girls  submiss,  and  patient  twirled 

The  slender  spindle  in  his  sinewy  grasp ; 

The  rugged  power,  fair  Pleasure's  minister, 

Exerts  his  art  to  deck  the  genial  board ; 

Congeals  the  melting  peach,  the  nectarine  smooth, 

Burnished  and  glowing  from  the  sunny  wall : 

Darts  sudden  frost  into  the  crimson  veins 

Of  the  moist  berry ;  moulds  the  sugared  hail : 

Cools  with  his  icy  breath  our  flowing  cups ; 

Or  gives  to  the  fresh  dairy's  nectared  bowls 

A  quicker  zest.      Sullen  he  plies  his  task, 

And  on  his  shaking  fingers  counts  the  weeks 

Of  lingering  Summer,  mindful  of  his  hour 

To  rush  in  whirlwinds  forth,  and  rule  the  year. 


190 

AN  AUTUMNAL  THOUGHT 

1795. 


'Tis  past!  we  breathe  !   assuaged  at  length 

The  flames  that  drank  our  vital  strength ! 

Smote  with  intolerable  heat 

No  more  our  throbbing  temples  beat. 

How  clear  the  sky,  how  pure  the  air, 

The  heavens  how  bright,  the  earth  how  fair ! 

The  bosom  cool,  the  spirits  light, 

Active  the  day,  and  calm  the  night ! 

But  O,  the  swiftly  shortening  day  ! 
Low  in  the  west  the  sinking  ray ! 
With  rapid  pace  advancing  still 
"  The  morning  hoar,  the  evening  chill," 
The  falling  leaf,  the  fading  year, 
And  Winter  ambushed  in  the  rear ! 


AN  AUTUMNAL  THOUGHT.  191 

Thus,  when  the  fervid  Passions  cool, 
And  Judgement,  late,  begins  to  rule ; 
When  Reason  mounts  her  throne  serene, 
And  social  Friendship  gilds  the  scene ; 
When  man,  of  ripened  powers  possest, 
Broods  o'er  the  treasures  of  his  breast ; 
Exults,  in  conscious  worth  elate, 
Lord  of  himself — almost  of  fate ; 
Then,  then  declines  the'  unsteady  flame, 
Disease,  slow  mining,  saps  the  frame ; 
Cold  damps  of  age  around  are  shed, 
That  chill  the  heart,  and  cloud  the  head. 
The  failing  spirits  prompt  no  more, 
The  curtain  drops,  life's  day  is  o'er. 


192 


TO   THE   POOR. 


CHILD  of  distress,  who  meet'st  the  bitter  scorn 
Of  fellow-men  to  happier  prospects  born, 
Doomed  Art  and  Nature's  various  stores  to  see 
Flow  in  full  cups  of  joy — and  not  for  thee  ; 
Who  seest  the  rich,  to  heaven  and  fate  resigned, 
Bear  thy  afflictions  with  a  patient  mind ; 
Whose  bursting  heart  disdains  unjust  controul, 
Who  feel'st  oppression's  iron  in  thy  soul, 
Who  dragg'st  the  load  of  faint  and  feeble  years, 
Whose  bread  is  anguish,  and  whose  water  tears ; 
Bear,  bear  thy  wrongs — fulfill  thy  destined  hour, 
Bend  thy  meek  neck  beneath  the  foot  of  Power ; 
But  when  thou  feel'st  the  great  deliverer  nigh, 
And  thy  freed  spirit  mounting  seeks  the  sky, 


TO  THE  POOR.  193 

Let  no  vain  fears  thy  parting  hour  molest, 

No  whispered  terrors  shake  thy  quiet  breast : 

Think  not  their  threats  can  work  thy  future  woe, 

Nor  deem  the  Lord  above  like  lords  below  ; — 

Safe  in  the  bosom  of  that  love  repose 

By  whom  the  sun  gives  light,  the  ocean  flows; 

Prepare  to  meet  a  Father  undismayed, 

Nor  fear  the  God  whom  priests  and  kings  have  made.* 


*  These  lines,  written  in  1795,  were  described  by  Mrs.  B.,  on 
sending  them  to  a  friend,  as  "  inspired  by  indignation  on  hearing 
sermons  in  which  the  poor  are  addressed  in  a  manner  which 
evidently  shows  the  design  of  making  religion  an  engine  of  go 
vernment." 


VOL.  I.  O 


.    194 


HYMN. 


"  YE  ARE  THE  SALT  OF  THE  EARTH." 


SALT  of  the  earth,  ye  virtuous  few, 

Who  season  human-kind ; 
Light  of  the  world,  whose  cheering  ray 

Illumes  the  realms  of  mind  : 

Where  Misery  spreads  her  deepest  shade, 
Your  strong  compassion  glows ; 

From  your  blest  lips  the  balm  distils, 
That  softens  mortal  woes. 


HYMN.  195 

By  dying  beds,  in  prison  glooms, 

Your  frequent  steps  are  found  ; 
Angels  of  love  !  you  hover  near, 

To  bind  the  stranger's  wound. 

You  wash  with  tears  the  bloody  page 

Which  human  crimes  deform ; 
When  vengeance  threats,  your  prayers  ascend. 

And  break  the  gathering  storm. 

As  down  the  summer  stream  of  vice 

The  thoughtless  many  glide  ; 
Upward  you  steer  your  steady  bark, 

And  stem  the  rushing  tide. 

Where  guilt  her  foul  contagion  breathes, 

And  golden  spoils  allure  ; 
Unspotted  still  your  garments  shine — 

Your  hands  are  ever  pure. 
o  2 


196  HYMN. 

Whene'er  you  touch  the  poet's  lyre, 
A  loftier  strain  is  heard ; 

Each  ardent  thought  is  yours  alone, 
And  every  burning  word. 

Yours  is  the  large  expansive  thought, 

The  high  heroic  deed  ; 
Exile  and  chains  to  you  are  dear — 

To  you  'tis  sweet  to  bleed. 

You  lift  on  high  the  warning  voice, 
When  public  ills  prevail ; 

Yours  is  the  writing  on  the  wall 
That  turns  the  tyrant  pale. 

The  dogs  of  hell  your  steps  pursue, 
With  scoff,  and  shame,  and  loss ; 

The  hemlock  bowl  'tis  yours  to  drain, 
To  taste  the  bitter  cross. 


HYMN.  197 

E'en  yet  the  steaming  scaffolds  smoke, 

By  Seine's  polluted  stream ; 
With  your  rich  blood  the  fields  are  drenched, 

Where  Polish  sabres  gleam. 

E'en  now,  through  those  accursed  bars, 

In  vain  we  send  our  sighs ; 
Where,  deep  in  Olmutz'  dungeon  glooms, 

The  patriot  martyr  lies. 

Yet  yours  is  all  through  History's  rolls 

The  kindling  bosom  feels ; 
And  at  your  tomb,  with  throbbing  heart, 

The  fond  enthusiast  kneels. 

In  every  faith,  through  every  clime, 

Your  pilgrim  steps  we  trace ; 
And  shrines  are  dressed,  and  temples  rise, 

Each  hallowed  spot  to  grace ; 


19S  HYMN. 

And  paeans  loud,  in  every  tongue, 
And  choral  hymns  resound ; 

And  lengthening  honours  hand  your  name 
To  time's  remotest  bound. 

Proceed  !  your  race  of  glory  run, 

Your  virtuous  toils  endure  ! 
You  come,  commissioned  from  on  high, 

And  your  reward  is  sure. 


TO  A  LITTLE  INVISIBLE  BEING 

WHO   IS   EXPECTED    SOON   TO    BECOME   VISIBLE. 


GERM  of  new  life,  whose  powers  expanding  slow 
For  many  a  moon  their  full  perfection  wait, — 
| "  Haste,  precious  pledge  of  happy  love,  to  go 

Auspicious  borne  through  life's  mysterious  gate. 

What  powers  lie  folded  in  thy  curious  frame, — 
Senses  from  objects  locked,  and  mind  from  thought 
How  little  canst  thou  guess  thy  lofty  claim 
To  grasp  at  all  the  worlds  the  Almighty  wrought ! 


200          TO  A  LITTLE  INVISIBLE  BEING  WHO 

And  see,  the  genial  season's  warmth  to  share, 
Fresh  younglings  shoot,  and  opening  roses  glow ! 
Swarms  of  new  life  exulting  fill  the  air, — 
Haste,  infant  bud  of  being,  haste  to  blow  ! 

For  thee  the  nurse  prepares  her  lulling  songs, 
The  eager  matrons  count  the  lingering  day ; 
But  far  the  most  thy  anxious  parent  longs 
On  thy  soft  cheek  a  mother's  kiss  to  lay. 

She  only  asks  to  lay  her  burden  down, 
That  her  glad  arms  that  burden  may  resume ; 
And  nature's  sharpest  pangs  her  wishes  crown, 
That  free  thee  living  from  thy  living  tomb. 

She  longs  to  fold  to  her  maternal  breast 
Part  of  herself,  yet  to  herself  unknown ; 
To  see  and  to  salute  the  stranger  guest, 
Fed  with  her  life  through  many  a  tedious  moon. 


IS  EXPECTED  SOON  TO  BECOME  VISIBLE.     201 

Come,  reap  thy  rich  inheritance  of  love ! 
Bask  in  the  fondness  of  a  Mother's  eye  ! 
Nor  wit  nor  eloquence  her  heart  shall  move 
Like  the  first  accents  of  thy  feeble  cry. 

Haste,  little  captive,  burst  thy  prison  doors ! 
Launch  on  the  living  world,  and  spring  to  light ! 
Nature  for  thee  displays  her  various  stores, 
Opens  her  thousand  inlets  of  delight. 

If  charmed  verse  or  muttered  prayers  had  power, 
With  favouring  spells  to  speed  thee  on  thy  way, 
Anxious  I  'd  bid  my  beads  each  passing  hour, 
Till  thy  wished  smile  thy  mother's  pangs  o'erpay. 


WASHING-DAY. 


and  their  voice, 

Turning  again  towards  childish  treble,  pipes 
And  whistles  in  its  sound. 


THE  Muses  are  turned  gossips ;  they  have  lost 
The  buskined  step,  and  clear  high-sounding  phrase, 
Language  of  gods.     Come  then,  domestic  Muse, 
In  slipshod  measure  loosely  prattling  on 
Of  farm  or  orchard,  pleasant  curds  and  cream, 
Or  drowning  ^lies,  or  shoe  lost  in  the  mire 
By  little  whimpering  boy,  with  rueful  face ; 
Come,  Muse,  and  sing  the  dreaded  Washing-Day. 
Ye  who  beneath  the  yoke  of  wedlock  bend, 


WASHING-DAY.  203 

With  bowed  soul,  full  well  ye  ken  the  day 

Which  week,  smooth  sliding  after  week,  brings  on 

Too  soon  ; — for  to  that  day  nor  peace  belongs 

Nor  comfort ; — ere  the  first  gray  streak  of  dawn, 

The  red-armed  washers  come  and  chase  repose. 

Nor  pleasant  smile,  nor  quaint  device  of  mirth, 

E'er  visited  that  day :  the  very  cat, 

From  the  wet  kitchen  scared  and  reeking  hearth, 

Visits  the  parlour, — an  unwonted  guest. 

The  silent  breakfast-meal  is  soon  dispatched ; 

Uninterrupted,  save  by  anxious  looks 

Cast  at  the  lowering  sky,  if  sky  should  lower. 

From  that  last  evil,  O  preserve  us,  heavens ! 

For  should  the  skies  pour  down,  adieu  to  all 

Remains  of  quiet :  then  expect  to  hear 

Of  sad  disasters, — dirt  and  gravel  stains 

Hard  to  efface,  and  loaded  lines  at  once 

Snapped  short, — and  linen-horse  by  dog  thrown  down, 

And  all  the  petty  miseries  of  life. 

Saints  have  been  calm  while  stretched  upon  the  rack, 


204  WASHING-DAY. 

And  Guatimozin  smiled  on  burning  coals  ; 
But  never  yet  did  housewife  notable 
Greet  with  a  smile  a  rainy  washing-day. 
— But  grant  the  welkin  fair,  require  not  thou 
Who  call'st  thyself  perchance  the  master  there, 
Or  study  swept,  or  nicely  dusted  coat, 
Or  usual  'tendance ; — ask  not,  indiscreet, 
Thy  stockings  mended,  though  the  yawning  rents 
Gape  wide  as  Erebus ;  nor  hope  to  find 
Some  snug  recess  impervious  :  shouldst  thou  try 
The  'customed  garden  walks,  thine  eye  shall  rue 
The  budding  fragrance  of  thy  tender  shrubs, 
Myrtle  or  rose,  all  crushed  beneath  the  weight 
Of  coarse  checked  apron, — with  impatient  hand 
Twitched  off  when  showers  impend  :   or  crossing  lines 
Shall  mar  thy  musings,  as  the  wet  cold  sheet 
Flaps  in  thy  face  abrupt.     Woe  to  the  friend 
Whose  evil  stars  have  urged  him  forth  to  claim 
On  such  a  day  the  hospitable  rites  ! 
Looks,  blank  at  best,  and  stinted  courtesy, 


WASHING-DAY,  205 

Shall  he  receive.      Vainly  he  feeds  his  hopes 

With  dinner  of  roast  chicken,  savoury  pie, 

Or  tart  or  pudding  : — pudding  he  nor  tart 

That  day  shall  eat ;  nor,  though  the  husband  try, 

Mending  what  can't  be  helped,  to  kindle  mirth 

From  cheer  deficient,  shall  his  consort's  brow 

Clear  up  propitious : — the  unlucky  guest 

In  silence  dines,  and  early  slinks  away. 

I  well  remember,  when  a  child,  the  awe 

This  day  struck  into  me ;  for  then  the  maids, 

I  scarce  knew  why,  looked  cross,  and  drove  me  from  them : 

Nor  soft  caress  could  I  obtain,  nor  hope 

Usual  indulgencies  ;  jelly  or  creams, 

Relic  of  costly  suppers,  and  set  by 

For  me  their  petted  one ;  or  buttered  toast, 

When  butter  was  forbid ;  or  thrilling  tale 

Of  ghost  or  witch,  or  murder — so  I  went 

And  sheltered  me  beside  the  parlour  fire : 

There  my  dear  grandmother,  eldest  of  forms, 

Tended  the  little  ones,  and  watched  from  harm, 


206  WASHING-DAY. 

Anxiously  fond,  though  oft  her  spectacles 

With  elfin  cunning  hid,  and  oft  the  pins 

Drawn  from  her  ravelled  stocking,  might  have  soured 

One  less  indulgent.- — 

At  intervals  my  mother's  voice  was  heard, 

Urging  dispatch  :  briskly  the  work  went  on, 

All  hands  employed  to  wash,  to  rinse,  to  wring, 

To  fold,  and  starch,  and  clap,  and  iron,  and  plait. 

Then  would  I  sit  me  down,  and  ponder  much 

Why  washings  were.     Sometimes  through  hollow  bowl 

Of  pipe  amused  we  blew,  and  sent  aloft 

The  floating  bubbles  ;  little  dreaming  then 

To  see,  Mongolfier,  thy  silken  ball 

Ride  buoyant  through  the  clouds — so  near  approach 

The  sports  of  children  and  the  toils  of  men. 

Earth,  air,  and  sky,  and  ocean,  hath  its  bubbles, 

And  verse  is  one  of  them — this  most  of  all. 


207 


VERSES 

INSCRIBED  ON  A  PAIR  OF  SCREENS. 


TO  DR.  A. 

WITHIN  the  cot  the  Muses  love, 
May  Peace  reside,  that  household  dove ! 
Beneath  this  roof,  around  this  hearth, 
Mild  Wisdom  mix  with  social  Mirth ! 
May  Friendship  often  seek  the  door 
Where  Science  pours  her  varied  store ! 
Her  richest  dyes  may  Flora  spread, 
And  early  paint  the  garden's  bed ! 
May  Health  descend  with  healing  wing, 
Bright  days  and  balmy  nights  to  bring  ! 


208    VERSES  INSCRIBED  ON  A  PAIR  OF  SCREENS. 

And  tried  Affection  still  be  by, 
Love's  watchful  ear  and  anxious  eye ; 
And  Sport  and  Laughter  hither  move, 
To  bless  the  cot  the  Muses  love ! 


TO  MRS.  A. 

You  whose  clear  life,  one  fair,  well-ordered  day, 
In  useful  tenour  calmly  glides  away  ; 
In  whom  the  eye  of  Malice  never  spied 
Aught  she  could  wish  to  spread,  or  you  .to  hide, 
Whose  looks  with  words  accord,  and  word  with  deed, 
Receive  the  only  screen  you  e'er  can  need  ! 


209 


TO  MR.  S.  T.  COLERIDGE 

1T97. 


MIDWAY  the  hill  of  science,  after  steep 
And  rugged  paths  that  tire  the*  unpractised  feet, 
A  grove  extends ;  in  tangled  mazes  wrought, 
And  filled  with  strange  enchantment : — dubious  shapes 
Flit  through  dim  glades,  and  lure  the  eager  foot 
Of  youthful  ardour  to  eternal  chase. 
Dreams  hang  on  every  leaf:   unearthly  forms 
Glide  through  the  gloom ;  and  mystic  visions  swim 
Before  the  cheated  sense.     Athwart  the  mists, 
Far  into  vacant  space,  huge  shadows  stretch, 
And  seem  realities  ;  while  things  of  life, 
Obvious  to  sight  and  touch,  all  glowing  round, 
Fade  to  the  hue  of  shadows — Scruples  here, 
VOL.  i.  p 


210  TO  MR.  COLERIDGE. 

With  filmy  net,  most  like  the  autumnal  webs 

Of  floating  gossamer,  arrest  the  foot 

Of  generous  enterprise  ;  and  palsy  hope 

And  fair  ambition  with  the  chilling  touch 

Of  sickly  hesitation  and  blank  fear. 

Nor  seldom  Indolence  these  lawns  among 

Fixes  her  turf-built  seat ;  and  wears  the  garb 

Of  deep  philosophy,  and  museful  sits, 

In  dreamy  twilight  of  the  vacant  mind, 

Soothed  by  the  whispering  shade ;  for  soothing  soft 

The  shades ;  and  vistas  lengthening  into  air, 

With  moonbeam  rainbows  tinted. — Here  each  mind 

Of  finer  mould,  acute  and  delicate, 

In  its  high  progress  to  eternal  truth 

Rests  for  a  space,  in  fairy  bowers  entranced ; 

And  loves  the  softened  light  and  tender  gloom ; 

And,  pampered  with  most  unsubstantial  food, 

Looks  down  indignant  on  the  grosser  world, 

And  matter's  cumbrous  shapings.     Youth  beloved 

Of  Science — of  the  Muse  beloved, — not  here, 


TO  MR.  COLERIDGE.  211 

Not  in  the  maze  of  metaphysic  lore, 

Build  thou  thy  place  of  resting !   lightly  tread 

The  dangerous  ground,  on  noble  aims  intent ; 

And  be  this  Circe  of  the  studious  cell 

Enjoyed,  but  still  subservient.     Active  scenes 

Shall  soon  with  healthful  spirit  brace  thy  mind ; 

And  fair  exertion,  for  bright  fame  sustained, 

For  friends,  for  country,  chase  each  spleen-fed  fog 

That  blots  the  wide  creation. — 

Now  Heaven  conduct  thee  with  a  parent's  love ! 


p  2 


212 


PEACE  AND  SHEPHERD. 


Low  in  a  deep  sequestered  vale, 
Whence  Alpine  heights  ascend, 

A  beauteous  nymph,  in  pilgrim  garb, 
Is  seen  her  steps  to  bend. 

Her  olive  garland  drops  with  gore ; 

Her  scattered  tresses  torn, 
Her  bleeding  breast,  her  bruised  feet, 

Bespeak  a  maid  forlorn. 

From  bower,  and  hall,  and  palace  driven, 

To  these  lone  wilds  I  flee ; 
My  name  is  Peace, — I  love  the  cot ; 

O  Shepherd,  shelter  me  \" 


PEACE  AND  SHEPHERD.  .'1  ) 

"  O  beauteous  pilgrim,  why  dost  thou 

From  bower  and  palace  flee  ? 
So  soft  thy  voice,  so  sweet  thy  look, 
Sure  all  would  shelter  thee." 

"  Like  Noah's  dove,  no  rest  I  find ; 

The  din  of  battle  roars 
Where  once  my  steps  I  loved  to  print 
Along  the  myrtle  shores  : 

"  For  ever  in  my  frighted  ears 

The  savage  war-whoop  sounds ; 
And,  like  a  panting  hare,  I  fly 
Before  the  opening  hounds." 

"  Pilgrim,  those  spiry  groves  among, 

The  mansions  thou  mayst  see, 
Where  cloistered  saints  chaunt  holy  hymns, — 
Sure  such  would  shelter  thee !" 


PEACE  AND  SHEPHERD. 

"  Those  roofs  with  trophied  banners  stream, 

There  martial  hymns  resound ; — 
And,  shepherd,  oft  from  crosiered  hands 
This  breast  has  felt  a  wound." 

"  Ah  !  gentle  pilgrim,  glad  would  I 

Those  tones  for  ever  hear ! 
With  thee  to  share  my  scanty  lot, 
That  lot  to  me  were  dear. 

"  But  lo,  along  the  vine-clad  steep, 

The  gleam  of  armour  shines  ; 
His  scattered  flock,  his  straw-roofed  hut, 
The  helpless  swain  resigns. 

"  And  now  the  smouldering  flames  aspire ; 

Their  lurid  light  I  see ; 
I  hear  the  human  wolves  approach : 
J  cannot  shelter  thee." 


ON 

THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.  MARTINEAU,  SENR. 


YE  who  around  this  venerated  bier 

In  pious  anguish  pour  the  tender  tear, 

Mourn  not! — Tis  Virtue's  triumph,  Nature's  doom, 

When  honoured  Age,  slow  bending  to  the  tomb, 

Earth's  vain  enjoyments  past,  her  transient  woes, 

Tastes  the  long  sabbath  of  well-earned  repose. 

No  blossom  here,  in  vernal  beauty  shed. 

No  lover  lies,  warm  from  the  nuptial  bed ; 

Here  rests  "  the  full  of  days," — each  task  fulfilled, 

Each  wish  accomplished,  and  each  passion  stilled. 

You  raised  her  languid  head,  caught  her  last  breath, 

And  cheered  with  looks  of  love  the  couch  of  death. 


216  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.  MARTINEAU,  SENR. 

Yet  mourn  ! — for  sweet  the  filial  sorrows  flow, 
When  fond  affection  prompts  the  gush  of  woe ; 
No  bitter  drop,  'midst  nature's  kind  relief, 
Sheds  gall  into  the  fountain  of  your  grief; 
No  tears  you  shed  for  patient  love  abused, 
And  counsel  scorned,  and  kind  restraints  refused ; 
Not  yours  the  pang  the  conscious  bosom  wrings, 
When  late  Remorse  inflicts  her  fruitless  stings. 
Living  you  honoured  her,  you  mourn  for  dead  ; 
Her  God  you  worship,  and  her  path  you  tread  : 
Your  sighs  shall  aid  reflection's  serious  hour, 
And  cherished  virtues  bless  the  kindly  shower : 
On  the  loved  theme  your  lips  unblamed  shall  dwell ; 
Your  lives,  more  eloquent,  her  worth  shall  tell. — 
Long  may  that  worth,  fair  Virtue's  heritage, 
From  race  to  race  descend,  from  age  to  age ! 
Still  purer  with  transmitted  lustre  shine, 
The  treasured  birthright  of  the  spreading  line  ! 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.  MARTINEAU,  SENR.  217 

— For  me,  as  o'er  the  frequent  grave  I  bend, 

And  pensive  down  the  vale  of  years  descend  ; — 

Companions,  parents,  kindred  called  to  mourn, 

Dropt  from  my  side,  or  from  my  bosom  torn ; 

A  boding  voice,  methinks,  in  Fancy's  ear 

Speaks  from  the  tomb,  and  cries  "  Thy  friends  are  here !" 


218 


ON  A  PORTRAIT. 


BLEST  art!  What  magic  powers  with  thine  may  vie, 
That  brings  (too  seldom  seen)  a  Brother  nigh  ? 
That  gives,  by  colours  into  canvass  wrought, 
The  hue  of  sentiment,  and  tinge  of  thought  ? 
The  lips,  with  soft  affection's  smile  that  glow, 
And  the  mild  wisdom  of  the  studious  brow  ? 
I  look,  again  I  look,  and  still  't  is  there ; 
I  catch,  with  varying  lights,  a  happier  air ; 
Approach,  step  back,  the  favouring  distance  choose, 
And,  line  by  line,  the  well  known  face  peruse  : 
Almost  expect  the  opening  lips  to  pour 
With  usual  flow  the  treasured  mental  store, 
And  fondly  dream  our  meeting  glances  prove 
The'  accustomed  beamings  of  fraternal  love. 


ON  A  PORTRAIT.  219 

But  O !  should  fate  in  some  disastrous  day, — 
Avert  it  Heaven ! — the  living  form  decay ; 
Hide,  hide,  ye  pitying  friends,  the  mimic  light, 
Veil,  veil  the  image  from  my  tortured  sight ; 
The  shadow  of  past  joys  I  could  not  bear, 
Nor  would  it  speak  of  comfort,  but  despair. 


220 


WEST  END  FAIR. 


DAME  Charity  one  day  was  tired 
With  nursing  of  her  children  three, — 

So  might  you  be 
If  you  had  nursed  and  nursed  so  long 

A  little  squalling  throng ; — 
So  she,  like  any  earthly  lady, 
Resolved  for  once  she  'd  have^a  play-day. 

"  I  cannot  always  go  about 
To  hospitals  and  prisons  trudging, 
Or  fag  from  morn  to  night 
Teaching  to  spell  and  write 
A  barefoot  rout, 


WKVl   I-.ND  FAIK.  221 

Swept  from  the  streets  by  poor  Lancaster, 
My  sub-master. 

"  That  Howard  ran  me  out  of  breath, 

And  Thornton  and  a  hundred  more 
Will  be  my  death  : 

The  air  is  sweet,  the  month  is  gay, 
And  I,"  said  she,  "  must  have  a  holiday." 

So  said,  she  doffed  her  robes  of  brown 
In  which  she  commonly  is  seen, — 

Like  French  Beguine, — 
And  sent  for  ornaments  to  town : 
And  Taste  in  Flavians  form  stood  by, 
Penciled  her  eyebrows,  curled  her  hair, 
Disposed  each  ornament  with  care, 
And  hung  her  round  with  trinkets  rare, — 
She  scarcely,  looking  in  the  glass, 

Knew  her  own  face. 


222  WEST  END  FAIR. 

So  forth  she  sallied  blithe  and  gay, 
And  met  dame  Fashion  by  the  way ; 
And  many  a  kind  and  friendly  greeting 

Passed  on  their  meeting  : 
Nor  let  the  fact  your  wonder  move, 

Abroad,  and  on  a  gala-day, 
Fashion  and  she  are  hand  and  glove. 

So  on  they  walked  together, 

Bright  was  the  weather ; 
Dame  Charity  was  frank  and  warm  ; 
But  being  rather  apt  to  tire, 

She  leant  on  Fashion's  arm. 

And  now  away  for  West  End  fair, 
Where  whiskey,  chariot,  coach,  and  chair, 

Are  all  in  requisition. 

In  neat  attire  the  Graces 


WEST  END  FAIR. 

Behind  the  counters  take  their  places, 

And  humbly  do  petition 
To  dress  the  booths  with  flowers  and  sweets, 

As  fine  as  any  May- day, 
Where  Charity  with  Fashion  meets, 

And  keeps  her  play-day. 


DIRGE: 

WRITTEN  NOVEMBER  1808. 

PURE  spirit !   O  where  art  thou  now ! 

O  whisper  to  my  soul ! 
O  let  some  soothing  thought  of  thee, 

This  bitter  grief  controul ! 

Tis  not  for  thee  the  tears  I  shed, 

Thy  sufferings  now  are  o'er ; 
The  sea  is  calm,  the  tempest  past, 

On  that  eternal  shore. 

No  more  the  storms  that  wrecked  thy  peace 

Shall  tear  that  gentle  breast ; 
Nor  Summer's  rage,  nor  Winter's  cold, 

Thy  poor,  poor  frame  molest. 


DIRGE.  225 


Thy  peace  is  sealed,  thy  rest  is  sure, 
My  sorrows  are  to  come ; 

Awhile  I  weep  and  linger  here, 
Then  follow  to  the  tomb. 

And  is  the  awful  veil  withdrawn, 
That  shrouds  from  mortal  eyes, 

In  deep  impenetrable  gloom, 
The  secrets  of  the  skies  ? 

O,  in  some  dream  of  visioned  bliss, 
Some  trance  of  rapture,  show 

Where,  on  the  bosom  of  thy  God, 
Thou  rest'st  from  human  woe  ! 

Thence  may  thy  pure  devotion's  flame 

On  me,  on  me  descend ; 
To  me  thy  strong  aspiring  hopes, 

Thy  faith,  thy  fervours  lend. 
VOL.  i.  Q 


226  DIRGE. 

Let  these  my  lonely  path  illume, 
And  teach  my  weakened  mind 

To  welcome  all  that 's  left  of  good, 
To  all  that's  lost  resigned. 

Farewell !   With  honour,  peace,  and  love,   N 

Be  thy  dear  memory  blest ! 
Thou  hast  no  tears  for  me  to  shed, 

When  I  too  am  at  rest. 


227 


THE  UNKNOWN  GOD. 


To  learned  Athens,  led  by  fame, 
As  once  the  man  of  Tarsus  came, 

With  pity  and  surprise 
Midst  idol  altars  as  he  stood, 
O'er  sculptured  marble,  brass  and  wood, 

He  rolled  his  awful  eyes. 

But  one,  apart,  his  notice  caught, 

That  seemed  with  higher  meaning  fraught, 

Graved  on  the  wounded  stone ; 
Nor  form  nor  name  was  there  expressed ; 
Deep  reverence  filled  the  musing  breast, 

Perusing,  "  To  the  God  unknown." 


228  THE  UNKNOWN  GOD. 

Age  after  age  has  rolled  away, 
Altars  and  thrones  have  felt  decay, 

Sages  and  saints  have  risen ; 
And,  like  a  giant  roused  from  sleep, 
Man  has  explored  the  pathless  deep, 

And  lightnings  snatched  from  heaven, 

And  many  a  shrine  in  dust  is  laid, 
Where  kneeling  nations  homage  paid, 

By  rock,  or  fount,  or  grove  : 
Ephesian  Dian  sees  no  more 
Her  workmen  fuse  the  silver  ore, 

Nor  Capitolian  Jove. 

E'en  Salem's  hallowed  courts  have  ceased 
With  solemn  pomps  her  tribes  to  feast, 

No  more  the  victim  bleeds  ; 
To  censers  filled  with  rare  perfumes, 
And  vestments  from  Egyptian  looms, 

A  purer  rite  succeeds. 


THE  UNKNOWN  GOD.  229 

Yet  still,  where'er  presumptuous  man 
His  Maker's  essence  strives  to  scan, 

And  lifts  his  feeble  hands, 
Though  saint  and  sage  their  powers  unite, 
To  fathom  that  abyss  of  light, 

Ah  !   still  that  altar  stands. 


130 


ETERNITY. 


THE  year  has  run 

Its  round  of  seasons,  has  fulfilled  its  course, 

Absolved  its  destined  period,  and  is  borne, 

Silent  and  swift,  to  that  devouring  gulf, 

Their  womb  and  grave,  where  seasons,  months  and  years, 

Revolving  periods  of  uncounted  time, 

All  merge,  and  are  forgotten . — Thou  alone, 

In  thy  deep  bosom  burying  all  the  past, 

Still  art ;  and  still  from  thine  exhaustless  store 

New  periods  spring,  Eternity. — Thy  name 

Or  glad,  or  fearful,  we  pronounce,  as  thoughts 

Wandering  in  darkness  shape  thee.  Thou  strange  being, 

Which  art  and  must  be,  yet  which  contradict'st 

All  sense,  all  reasoning, — thou,  who  never  wast 


ETERNITY.  231 

Less  than  thyself,  and  who  still  art  thyself 

Entire,  though  the  deep  draught  which  Time  has  taken 

Equals  thy  present  store — No  line  can  reach 

To  thy  unfathomed  depths.     The  reasoning  sage 

Who  can  dissect  a  sunbeam,  count  the  stars, 

And  measure  distant  worlds,  is  here  a  child, 

And,  humbled,  drops  his  calculating  pen. 

On  and  still  onward  flows  the  ceaseless  tide, 

And  wrecks  of  empires  and  of  worlds  are  borne 

Like  atoms  on  its  bosom. — Still  thou  art 

And  he  who  does  inhabit  thee. 


232 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 


STILL  the  loud  death  drum,  thundering  from  afar, 

•Jr&uJ?/^ 

O'er  the  ^e^t  nations  pours  the  storm  of  war: 

hfl*d  /Severe 
To  the  stern  call  still  Britain  bends  her  ear, 

conf-lfcf 
Feeds  the  fiercejstnfe,  the'  alternate  hope  and  fear  ; 

Bravely,  though  vainly,  dares  to  strive  with  Fate, 

4e>  hc^?  u^/*£y>p0r-f* 
And  seeks  by  turns  to  prop  each  sinking  state. 

»      Colossal  power  with  overwhelming  force 

Bears  down  each  fort  of  Freedom  in  its  course  ; 

KuUr  ^    n\f-fcxtf-wc 
Prostrate  she  lies  beneath  the  Despot's  sway, 

While  the  hushed  nations  curse  him  —  and  obey. 


Bounteous  in  vain,  with  frantic  man  at  strife, 
Glad  Nature  pours  the  means  —  the  joys  of  life  ; 


-  s»     tv     ftti  *  ^        ' 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.  233 

In  vain  with  orange-blossoms  scents  the  gale, 

The  hills  with  olives  clothes,  with  corn  the  vale ; 

Man  calls  to  Famine,  nor  invokes  in  vain, 

Disease  and  Rapine  follow  in  her  train ; 

The  tramp  of  marching  hosts  disturbs  the  plough, 

The  sword,  not  sickle,  reaps  the  harvest  now, 

And  where  the  soldier  gleans  the  scant  supply, 

The  helpless  peasant  but  retires  to  die ; 

No  laws  his  hut  from  licensed  outrage  shield, 

And  war's  least  horror  is  the'  ensanguined  field. 

Fruitful  in  vain,  the  matron  counts  with  pride 
The  blooming  youths  that  grace  her  honoured  side ; 
No  son  returns  to  press  her  widowed  hand, 
Her  fallen  blossoms  strew  a  foreign  strand. 
— Fruitful  in  vain,  she  boasts  her  virgin  race, 
Whom  cultured  arts  adorn  and  gentlest  grace ; 
Defrauded  of  its  homage,  Beauty  mourns, 
And  the  rose  withers  on  its  virgin  thorns. 


234  EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

Frequent,  some  stream  obscure,  some  uncouth  name, 

By  deeds  of  blood  is  lifted  into  fame ; 

Oft  o'er  the  daily  page  some  soft  one  bends 

To  learn  the  fate  of  husband,  brothers,  friends, 

Or  the  spread  map  with  anxious  eye  explores, 

Its  dotted  boundaries  and  penciled  shores, 

Asks  where  the  spot  that  wrecked  her  bliss  is  found, 

And  learns  its  name  but  to  detest  the  sound. 

And  think'st  thou,  Britain,  still  to  sit  at  ease, 

An  island  queen  amidst  thy  subject  seas, 

While  the  vext  billows,  in  their  distant  roar, 

But  soothe  thy  slumbers,  and  but  kiss  thy  shore  ? 

To  sport  in  wars,  while  danger  keeps  aloof, 

Thy  grassy  turf  unbruised  by  hostile  hoof? 

So  sing  thy  flatterers  ; — but,  Britain,  know, 

Thou  who  hast  shared  the  guilt  must  share  the  woe. 

Nor  distant  is  the  hour ;  low  murmurs  spread, 

And  whispered  fears,  creating  what  they  dread ; 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          235 

Ruin,  as  with  an  earthquake  shock,  is  here, 
There,  the  heart-witherings  of  unuttered  fear, 
And  that  sad  death,  whence  most  affection  bleeds, 
Which  sickness,  only  of  the  soul,  precedes. 
Thy  baseless  wealth  dissolves  in  air  away, 
Like  mists  that  melt  before  the  morning  ray  : 
No  more  on  crowded  mart  or  busy  street 
Friends,  meeting  friends,  with  cheerful  hurry  greet ; 
Sad,  on  the  ground  thy  princely  merchants  bend 
Their  altered  looks,  and  evil  days  portend, 
And  fold  their  arms,  and  watch  with  anxious  breast 
The  tempest  blackening  in  the  distant  West. 

Yes,  thou  must  droop ;  thy  Midas  dream  is  o'er; 
The  golden  tide  of  Commerce  leaves  thy  shore, 
Leaves  thee  to  prove  the*  alternate  ills  that  haunt 
Enfeebling  Luxury  and  ghastly  Want ; 
Leaves  thee,  perhaps,  to  visit  distant  lands, 
And  deal  the  gifts  of  Heaven  with  equal  hands. 


236  EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

Yet,  O  my  Country,  name  beloved,  revered, 

By  every  tie  that  binds  the  soul  endeared, 

Whose  image  to  my  infant  senses  came 

Mixt  with  Religion's  light  and  Freedom's  holy  flame  ! 

If  prayers  may  not  avert,  if  'tis  thy  fate 

To  rank  amongst  the  names  that  once  were  great, 

Not  like  the  dim,  cold  Crescent  shalt  thou  fade, 

Thy  debt  to  Science  and  the  Muse  unpaid; 

Thine  are  the  laws  surrounding  states  revere, 

Thine  the  full  harvest  of  the  mental  year, 

Thine  the  bright  stars  in  Glory's  sky  that  shine, 

And  arts  that  make  it  life  to  live  are  thine. 

If  westward  streams  the  light  that  leaves  thy  shores, 

Still  from  thy  lamp  the  streaming  radiance  pours. 

Wide  spreads  thy  race  from  Ganges  to  the  pole, 

O'er  half  the  western  world  thy  accents  roll : 

Nations  beyond  the  Apalachian  hills 

Thy  hand  has  planted  and  thy  spirit  fills  : 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          237 

Soon  as  their  gradual  progress  shall  impart 

The  finer  sense  of  morals  and  of  art, 

Thy  stores  of  knowledge  the  new  states  shall  know, 

And  think  thy  thoughts,  and  with  thy  fancy  glow ; 

Thy  Lockes,  thy  Paleys  shall  instruct  their  youth, 

Thy  leading  star  direct  their  search  for  truth ; 

Beneath  the  spreading  platan's  tent-like  shade, 

Or  by  Missouri's  rushing  waters  laid, 

"  Old  father  Thames  "  shall  be  the  poet's  theme, 

Of  Hagley's  woods  the*  enamoured  virgin  dream, 

And  Milton's  tones  the  raptured  ear  enthrall, 

Mixt  with  the  roaring  of  Niagara's  fall ; 

In  Thomson's  glass  the'  ingenuous  youth  shall  learn 

A  fairer  face  of  Nature  to  discern ; 

Nor  of  the  bards  that  swept  the  British  lyre 

Shall  fade  one  laurel,  or  one  note  expire. 

Then,  loved  Joanna,  to  admiring  eyes 

Thy  storied  groups  in  scenic  pomp  shall  rise ; 

Their  high-souled  strains  and  Shakespear's  noble  rage 

Shall  with  alternate  passion  shake  the  stage. 


238  EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

Some  youthful  Basil  from  thy  moral  lay 
With  stricter  hand  his  fond  desires  shall  sway ; 
Some  Ethwald,  as  the  fleeting  shadows  pass, 
Start  at  his  likeness  in  the  mystic  glass ; 
The  tragic  Muse  resume  her  just  controul, 
With  pity  and  with  terror  purge  the  soul, 
While  wide  o'er  transatlantic  realms  thy  name 
Shall  live  in  light,  and  gather  all  its  fame. 

Where  wanders  Fancy  down  the  lapse  of  years 
Shedding  o'er  imaged  woes  untimely  tears  ? 
Fond  moody  power !  as  hopes — as  fears  prevail, 
She  longs,  or  dreads,  to  lift  the  awful  veil, 
On  visions  of  delight  now  loves  to  dwell, 
Now  hears  the  shriek  of  woe  or  Freedom's  knell : 
Perhaps,  she  says,  long  ages  past  away, 
And  set  in  western  waves  our  closing  day, 
Night,  Gothic  night,  again  may  shade  the  plains 
Where  Power  is  seated,  and  where  Science  reigns ; 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          239 

England,  the  seat  of  arts,  be  only  known 
By  the  grey  ruin  and  the  mouldering  stone ; 
That  Time  may  tear  the  garland  from  her  brow, 
And  Europe  sit  in  dust,  as  Asia  now. 

Yet  then  the*  ingenuous  youth  whom  Fancy  fires 

With  pictured  glories  of  illustrious  sires, 

With  duteous  zeal  their  pilgrimage  shall  take 

From  the  Blue  Mountains,  or  Ontario's  lake, 

With  fond  adoring  steps  to  press  the  sod 

By  statesmen,  sages,  poets,  heroes  trod ; 

On  Isis'  banks  to  draw  inspiring  air, 

From  Runnymede  to  send  the  patriot's  prayer ; 

In  pensive  thought,  where  Cam's  slow  waters  wind, 

To  meet  those  shades  that  ruled  the  realms  of  mind ; 

In  silent  halls  to  sculptured  marbles  bow, 

And  hang  fresh  wreaths  round  Newton's  awful  brow. 

Oft  shall  they  seek  some  peasant's  homely  shed, 

Who  toils,  unconscious  of  the  mighty  dead, 


240          EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

To  ask  where  Avon's  winding  waters  stray, 
And  thence  a  knot  of  wild  flowers  bear  away ; 
Anxious  inquire  where  Clarkson,  friend  of  man, 
Or  all-accomplished  Jones  his  race  began ; 
If  of  the  modest  mansion  aught  remains 
Where  Heaven  and  Nature  prompted  Cowper's  strains 
Where  Roscoe,  to  whose  patriot  breast  belong 
The  Roman  virtue  and  the  Tuscan  song, 
Led  Ceres  to  the  black  and  barren  moor 
Where  Ceres  never  gained  a  wreath  before  *  : 
With  curious  search  their  pilgrim  steps  shall  rove 
By  many  a  ruined  tower  and  proud  alcove, 
Shall  listen  for  those  strains  that  soothed  of  yore 
Thy  rock,  stern  Skiddaw,  and  thy  fall,  Lodore ; 
Feast  with  Dun  Edin's  classic  brow  their  sight, 
And  "  visit  Melross  by  the  pale  moonlight." 


• 

*  The  Historian  of  the  age  of  Leo  has  brought  into  cultivation 
the  extensive  tract  of  Chatmoss. 


EIGHTEEN   lHM)l(r.l)  AM)  \\L\\\ TA.         241 

But  who  their  mingled  feelings  shall  pursue 
When  London's  faded  glories  rise  to  view  ? 
The  mighty  city,  which  by  every  road, 
In  floods  of  people  poured  itself  abroad  ; 
Ungirt  by  walls,  irregularly  great, 
No  jealous  drawbridge,  and  no  closing  gate  ; 
Whose  merchants(such  the  state  which  commerce  brings) 
Sent  forth  their  mandates  to  dependent  kings ; 
Streets,  where  the  turban  Jd  Moslem,  bearded  Jew, 
And  woolly  Afric,  met  the  brown  Hindu ; 
Where  through  each  vein  spontaneous  plenty  flowed, 
Where  Wealth  enjoyed,  and  Charity  bestowed. 
Pensive  and  thoughtful  shall  the  wanderers  greet 
Each  splendid  square,  and  still,  untrodden  street; 
Or  of  some  crumbling  turret,  mined  by  time, 
The  broken  stairs  with  perilous  step  shall  climb, 
Thence  stretch  their  view  the  wide  horizon  round, 
By  scattered  hamlets  trace  its  ancient  bound, 
VOL.  i.  « 


242          EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

And,  choked  no  more  with  fleets,  fair  Thames  survey 
Through  reeds  and  sedge  pursue  his  idle  way. 

With  throbbing  bosoms  shall  the  wanderers  tread 
The  hallowed  mansions  of  the  silent  dead, 
Shall  enter  the  long  isle  and  vaulted  dome 
Where  Genius  and  where  Valour  find  a  home ; 
Awe- struck,  midst  chill  sepulchral  marbles  breathe, 
Where  all  above  is  still,  as  all  beneath  ; 
Bend  at  each  antique  shrine,  and  frequent  turn 
To  clasp  with  fond  delight  some  sculptured  urn, 
The  ponderous  mass  of  Johnson's  form  to  greet, 
Or  breathe  the  prayer  at  Howard's  sainted  feet. 

Perhaps  some  Briton,  in  whose  musing  mind 
Those  ages  live  which  Time  has  cast  behind, 
To  every  spot  shall  lead  his  wondering  guests 
On  whose  known  site  the  beam  of  glory  rests  : 
Here  Chatham's  eloquence  in  thunder  broke, 
Here  Fox  persuaded,  or  here  Garrick  spoke ; 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          243 

Shall  boast  how  Nelson,  fame  and  death  in  view, 
To  wonted  victory  led  his  ardent  crew, 
In  England's  name  enforced,  with  loftiest  tone*, 
Their  duty, — and  too  well  fulfilled  his  own : 
How  gallant  Moore  f,  as  ebbing  life  dissolved, 
But  hoped  his  country  had  his  fame  absolved. 
Or  call  up  sages  whose  capacious  mind 
Left  in  its  course  a  track  of  light  behind ; 
Point  where  mute  crowds  on  Davy's  lips  reposed, 
And  Nature's  coyest  secrets  were  disclosed ; 
Join  with  their  Franklin,  Priestley's  injured  name, 
Whom,  then,  each  continent  shall  proudly  claim. 

Oft  shall  the  strangers  turn  their  eager  feet 
The  rich  remains  of  ancient  art  to  greet, 


*  Every  reader  will  recollect  the  sublime  telegraphic  dispatch , 
"  England  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty." 

f  "  I  hope  England  will  be  satisfied,"  were  the  last  words  of 
General  Moore. 

R  2 


214          EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

The  pictured  walls  with  critic  eye  explore, 
And  Reynolds  be  what  Raphael  was  before. 
On  spoils  from  every  clime  their  eyes  shall  gaze, 
Egyptian  granites  and  the'  Etruscan  vase ; 
And  when  midst  fallen  London,  they  survey 
The  stone  where  Alexander's  ashes  lay, 
Shall  own  with  humbled  pride  the  lesson  just 
By  Time's  slow  finger  written  in  the  dust. 

There  walks  a  Spirit  o'er  the  peopled  earth, 
Secret  his  progress  is,  unknown  his  birth ; 
Moody  and  viewless  as  the  changing  wind, 
No  force  arrests  his  foot,  no  chains  can  bind ; 
Where'er  he  turns,  the  human  brute  awakes, 
And,  roused  to  better  life,  his  sordid  hut  forsakes 
He  thinks,  he  reasons,  glows  with  purer  fires, 
Feels  finer  wants,  and  burns  with  new  desires : 
Obedient  Nature  follows  where  he  leads ; 
The  steaming  marsh  is  changed  to  fruitful  meads 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          245 

The  beasts  retire  from  man's  asserted  reign, 
And  prove  his  kingdom  was  not  given  in  vain. 
Then  from  its  bed  is  drawn  the  ponderous  ore, 
Then  Commerce  pours  her  gifts  on  every  shore, 
Then  Babel's  towers  and  terraced  gardens  rise, 
And  pointed  obelisks  invade  the  skies ; 
The  prince  commands,  in  Tyrian  purple  drest, 
And  Egypt's  virgins  weave  the  linen  vest. 
Then  spans  the  graceful  arch  the  roaring  tide, 
And  stricter  bounds  the  cultured  fields  divide. 
Then  kindles  Fancy,  then  expands  the  heart, 
Then  blow  the  flowers  of  Genius  and  of  Art ; 
Saints,  heroes,  sages,  who  the  land  adorn, 
Seem  rather  to  descend  than  to  be  born ; 
Whilst  History,  midst  the  rolls  consigned  to  fame, 
With  pen  of  adamant  inscribes  their  name. 

The  Genius  now  forsakes  the  favoured  shore, 
And  hates,  capricious,  what  he  loved  before  ; 


246    EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

Then  empires  fall  to  dust,  then  arts  decay, 

And  wasted  realms  enfeebled  despots  sway ; 

Even  Nature's  changed ;  without  his  fostering  smile 

Ophir  no  gold,  no  plenty  yields  the  Nile ; 

The  thirsty  sand  absorbs  the  useless  rill, 

And  spotted  plagues  from  putrid  fens  distill. 

In  desert  solitudes  then  Tadmor  sleeps, 

Stern  Marius  then  o'er  fallen  Carthage  weeps ; 

Then  with  enthusiast  love  the  pilgrim  roves 

To  seek  his  footsteps  in  forsaken  groves, 

Explores  the  fractured  arch,  the  ruined  tower, 

Those  limbs  disjointed  of  gigantic  power; 

Still  at  each  step  he  dreads  the  adder's  sting, 

The  Arab's  javelin,  or  the  tiger's  spring ; 

With  doubtful  caution  treads  the  echoing  ground, 

And  asks  where  Troy  or  Babylon  is  found. 

And  now  the  vagrant  Power  no  more  detains 
The  vale  of  Tempe,  or  Ausonian  plains  ; 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          247 

Northward  he  throws  the  animating  ray, 
O'er  Celtic  nations  bursts  the  mental  day  : 
And,  as  some  playful  child  the  mirror  turns, 
Now  here  now  there  the  moving  lustre  burns ; 
Now  o'er  his  changeful  fancy  more  prevail 
Batavia's  dykes  than  Arno's  purple  vale, 
And  stinted  suns,  and  rivers  bound  with  frost, 
Than  Enna's  plains  or  Baia's  viny  coast ; 
Venice  the  Adriatic  weds  in  vain, 
And  Death  sits  brooding  o'er  Campania's  plain ; 
O'er  Baltic  shores  and  through  Hercynian  groves, 
Stirring  the  soul,  the  mighty  impulse  moves ; 
Art  plies  his  tools,  and  Commerce  spreads  her  sail, 
And  wealth  is  wafted  in  each  shifting  gale. 
The  sons  of  Odin  tread  on  Persian  looms, 
And  Odin's  daughters  breathe  distilled  perfumes 
Loud  minstrel  bards,  in  Gothic  halls,  rehearse 
The  Runic  rhyme,  and  "  build  the  lofty  verse  :" 
The  Muse,  whose  liquid  notes  were  wont  to  swell 
To  the  soft  breathings  of  the'  ^Eolian  shell, 


248        .  EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

Submits,  reluctant,  to  the  harsher  tone, 
And  scarce  believes  the  altered  voice  her  own. 
And  now,  where  Caesar  saw  with  proud  disdain 
The  wattled  hut  and  skin  of  azure  stain, 
Corinthian  columns  rear  their  graceful  forms, 
And  light  varandas  brave  .the  wintry  storms, 
While  British  tongues  the  fading  fame  prolong 
Of  Tully's  eloquence  and  Maro's  song. 
Where  once  Bonduca  whirled  the  scythed  car, 
And  the  fierce  matrons  raised  the  shriek  of  war, 
Light  forms  beneath  transparent  muslins  float, 
And  tutored  voices  swell  the  artful  note. 
Light-leaved  acacias  and  the  shady  plane 
And  spreading  cedar  grace  the  woodland  reign  ; 
While  crystal  walls  the  tenderer  plants  confine, 
The  fragrant  orange  and  the  nectared  pine ; 
The  Syrian  grape  there  hangs  her  rich  festoons, 
Nor  asks  for  purer  air,  or  brighter  noons  : 
Science  and  Art  urge  on  the  useful  toil, 
New  mould  a  climate  and  create  the  soil, 


EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN.          249 

Subdue  the  rigour  of  the  northern  Be.ar, 
O'er  polar  climes  shed  aromatic  air, 
On  yielding  Nature  urge  their  new  demands, 
And  ask  not  gifts  but  tribute  at  her  hands. 

London  exults  : — on  London  Art  bestows 
Her  summer  ices  and  her  winter  rose  ; 
Gems  of  the  East  her  mural  crown  adorn, 
And  Plenty  at  her  feet  pours  forth  her  horn ; 
While  even  the  exiles  her  just  laws  disclaim, 
People  a  continent,  and  build  a  name  : 
August  she  sits,  and  with  extended  hands 
Holds  forth  the  book  of  life  to  distant  lands. 

But  fairest  flowers  expand  but  to  decay ; 
The  worm  is  in  thy  core,  thy  glories  pass  away ; 
Arts,  arms  and  wealth  destroy  the  fruits  they  bring ; 
Commerce,  like  beauty,  knows  no  second  spring. 
Crime  walks  thy  streets,  Fraud  earns  her  unblest  bread, 
O'er  want  and  woe  thy  gorgeous  robe  is  spread, 


250          EIGHTEEN  HUNDRED  AND  ELEVEN. 

And  angel  charities  in  vain  oppose : 

With  grandeur's  growth  the  mass  of  misery  grows. 

For  see, — to  other  climes  the  Genius  soars, 

He  turns  from  Europe's  desolated  shores ; 

And  lo,  even  now,  midst  mountains  wrapt  in  storm, 

On  Andes'  heights  he  shrouds  his  awful  form ; 

On  Chimborazo's  summits  treads  sublime, 

Measuring  in  lofty  thought  the  march  of  Time ; 

Sudden  he  calls  : — "  'Tis  now  the  hour!"  he  cries, 

Spreads  his  broad  hand,  and  bids  the  nations  rise. 

La  Plata  hears  amidst  her  torrents'  roar  ; 

Potosi  hears  it,  as  she  digs  the  ore : 

Ardent,  the  Genius  fans  the  noble  strife, 

And  pours  through  feeble  souls  a  higher  life, 

Shouts  to  the  mingled  tribes  from  sea  to  sea, 

And  swears — Thy  world,  Columbus,  shall  be  free. 


251 


ODE  TO  REMORSE. 


DREAD  offspring  of  the  holy  light  within, 

Offspring  of  Conscience  and  of  Sin, 
Stern  as  thine  awful  sire,  and  fraught  with  woe 
From  bitter  springs  thy  mother  taught  to  flow, — 

Remorse  !  To  man  alone  't  is  given 

Of  all  on  earth,  or  all  in  heaven, 
To  wretched  man  thy  bitter  cup  to  drain, 
Feel  thy  awakening  stings,  and  taste  thy  wholesome  pain. 

Midst  Eden's  blissful  bowers, 
And  amaranthine  flowers, 


252  ODE  TO  REMORSE. 

Thy  birth  portentous  dimmed  the  orient  day, 
What  time  our  hapless  sire, 
Overcome  by  fond  desire, 
The  high  command  presumed  to  disobey ; 

Then  didst  thou  rear  thy  snaky  crest, 
And  raise  thy  scorpion  lash  to  tear  the  guilty  breast : 

And  never,  since  that  fatal  hour, 
May  man,  of  woman  born,  expect  to'  escape  thy  power. 

Thy  goading  stings  the  branded  Cain 
Cross  the'  untrodden  desert  drove, 
Ere  from  his  cradling  home  and  native  plain 
Domestic  man  had  learnt  to  rove. 
By  gloomy  shade  or  lonely  flood 
Of  vast  primeval  solitude, 
Thy  step  his  hurried  steps  pursued, 
Thy  voice  awoke  his  conscious  fears, 
For  ever  sounding  in  his  ears 
A  father's  curse,  a  brother's  blood  j 


ODE  TO  REMORSE.  ^J 

Till  life  was  misery  too  great  to  bear, 
And  torturing  thought  was  lost  in  sullen,  dumb  despair. 

The  king  who  sat  on  Judah's  throne, 

By  guilty  love  to  murder  wrought, 

Was  taught  thy  searching  power  to  own, 

When,  sent  of  Heaven,  the  seer  his  royal  presence  sought. 
As,  wrapt  in  artful  phrase,  with  sorrow  feigned, 
He  told  of  helpless,  meek  distress, 
And  wrongs  that  sought  from  power  redress, 
The  pity-moving  tale  his  ear  obtained, 
And  bade  his  better  feelings  wake  : 
Then,  sudden  as  the  trodden  snake 
On  the  scared  traveller  darts  his  fangs, 

The  prophet's  bold  rebuke  aroused  thy  keenest  pangs. 

And  O  that  look,  that  soft  upbraiding  look ! 
A  thousand  cutting,  tender  things  it  spoke,- — 
The  sword  so  lately  drawn  was  not  so  keen, — 
Which,  as  the  injured  Master  turned  him  round, 


254,  ODE  TO  REMORSE. 

In  the  strange  solemn  scene, 
And  the  shrill  clarion  gave  the'  appointed  sound, 
Pierced  sudden  through  the  reins, 
Awakening  all  thy  pains, 
And  drew  a  silent  shower  of  bitter  tears 
Down  Peter's  blushing  cheek,  late  pale  with  coward 
-    fears. 

Cruel  Remorse !  where  Youth  and  Pleasure  sport, 

And  thoughtless  Folly  keeps  her  court, — 
Crouching  midst  rosy  bowers  thou  lurk'st  unseen ; 

Slumbering  the  festal  hours  away, 
While  Youth  disports  in  that  enchanting  scene ; 

Till  on  some  fated  day 

Thou  with  a  tiger-spring  dost  leap  upon  thy  prey, 
And  tear  his  helpless  breast,  o'erwhelmed  with  wild 
dismay. 

Mark  that  poor  wretch  with  clasped  hands ! 
Pale  o'er  his  parent's  grave  he  stands, — 


ODE  TO  REMORSE.  255 

The  grave  by  his  ingratitude  prepared ; 

Ah  then,  where'er  he  rests  his  head, 
On  roses  pillowed  or  the  softest  down, 

Though  festal  wreaths  his  temples  crown, 
He  well  might  envy  Guatimozin's  bed, 

With  burning  coals  and  sulphur  spread, 
And  with  less  agony  his  torturing  hour  have  shared. 

For  Thou  art  by  to  point  the  keen  reproach  ; 
Thou  draw'st  the  curtains  of  his  nightly  couch, 
Bring'st  back  the  reverend  face  with  tears  bedewed, 

That  o'er  his  follies  yearned  ; 
The  warnings  oft  in  vain  renewed, 
The  looks  of  anguish  and  of  love, 
His  stubborn  breast  that  failed  to  move, 
When  in  the  scorner's  chair  he  sat,  and  wholesome 
counsel  spurned. 

Lives  there  a  man  whose  labouring  breast 
Is  with  some  dark  and  guilty  secret  prest, 


236  ODE  TO  REMORSE. 

Who  hides  within  its  inmost  fold 
Strange  crimes  to  mortal  ear  untold  ? 
In  vain  to  sad  Chartreuse  he  flies, 
Midst  savage  rocks  and  cloisters  dim  and  drear, 

And  there  to  shun  thee  tries : 
In  vain  untold  his  crime  to  mortal  ear, 
Silence  and  whispered  sounds  but  make  thy  voice  more 
clear. 

Lo,  where  the  cowled  monk  with  frantic  rage 
Lifts  high  the  sounding  scourge,  his  bleeding  shoulders 

smites ! 

Penance  and  fasts  his  anxious  thoughts  engage, 
Weary  his  days  and  j  oyless  are  his  nights, 
His  naked  feet  the  flinty  pavement  tears, 
His  knee  at  every  shrine  the  marble  wears  ; — 

Why  does  he  lift  the  cruel  scourge  ? 

The  restless  pilgrimage  why  urge  ? 

'Tis  all  to  quell  thy  fiercer  rage, 


ODE  TO  REMORSE.  257 

Tis  all  to  soothe  thy. deep  despair, 
He  courts  the  body's  pangs,  for  thine  he  cannot  bear. 

See  o'er  the  bleeding  corse  of  her  he  loved, 

The  jealous  murderer  bends  unmoved, 
Trembling  with  rage,  his  livid  lips  express 
His  frantic  passion's  wild  and  rash  excess. 
O  God,  she 's  innocent ! — transfixt  he  stands, 
Pierced  thro*  with  shafts  from  thine  avenging  hands ; 

Down  his  pale  cheek  no  tear  will  flow, 
Nor  can  he  shun,  nor  can  he  bear,  his  woe. 

Twas  phantoms  summoned  by  thy  power 
Round  Richard's  couch  at  midnight  hour, 
That  scared  the  tyrant  from  unblest  repose ; 
With  frantic  haste,  "To  horse!  to  horse!"  he  cries, 
While  on  his  crowned  brow  cold  sweat-drops  rise, 

And  fancied  spears  his  spear  oppose ; 
But  not  the  swiftest  steed  can  bear  away 
From  thy  firm  grasp  thine  agonizing  prey, 
VOL.  i.  s 


258  ODE  TO  REMORSE. 

Thou  wast  the  fiend,  and  thou  alone, 
That  stood'st  by  Beaufort's  mitred  head, 

With  upright  hair  and  visage  ghastly  pale : 
Thy  terrors  shook  his  dying  bed, 

Past  crimes  and  blood  his  sinking  heart  assail, 

His  hands  are  clasped, — hark  to  that  hollow  groan ! 

See  how  his  glazed,  dim  eye-balls  wildly  roll, 
'Tis  not  dissolving  Nature's  pains  ;  that  pang  is  of  the  so 

Where  guilty  souls  are  doomed  to  dwell, 
T  is  thou  that  mak'st  their  fiercest  hell, 
The  vulture  thou  that  on  their  liver  feeds, 
As  rise  to  view  their  past  unhallowed  deeds ; 
With  thee  condemned  to  stay, 
Till  time  has  rolled  away 
Long  aeras  of  uncounted  years, 
And  every  stain  is  washed  in  soft  repentant  tears. 

Servant  of  God — but  unbeloved — proceed, 

For  thou  must  live  and  ply  thy  scorpion  scourge ; 


ODE  TO  REMORSE.  :>:,<) 

Thy  sharp  upbraidings  urge 
Against  the 'unrighteous  deed, 
Till  thine  accursed  mother  shall  expire, 
And  a  new  world  spring  forth  from  renovating  fire. 

O !  when  the  glare  of  day  is  fled, 

And  calm,  beneath  the  evening  star, 

Reflection  leans  her  pensive  head, 
And  calls  the  passions  to  her  solemn  bar ; 
Reviews  the  censure  rash,  the  hasty  word, 

The  purposed  act  too  long  deferred, 

Of  time  the  wasted  treasures  lent, 
And  fair  occasions  lost  and  golden  hours  misspent : 

When  anxious  Memory  numbers  o'er 
Each  offered  prize  we  failed  to  seize ; 
Or  friends  laid  low,  whom  now  no  more 
Our  fondest  love  can  serve  or  please, 
And  thou,  dread  power !  bring'st  back  in  terrors  drest, 
The'  irrevocable  past,  to  sting  the  careless  breast ; — • 

s2 


2GO  ODE  TO  REMORSE. 

O !  in  that  hour  be  mine  to  know, 
While  fast  the  silent  sorrows  flow, 

And  wisdom  cherishes  the  wholesome  pain, 
No  heavier  guilt,  no  deeper  stain, 

Than  tears  of  meek  contrition  may  atone, 
Shed  at  the  mercy -seat  of  Heaven's  eternal  throne. 


LIFE. 


Animula,  vagula,  blandula. 


LIFE!   I  know  not  what  thou  art, 
But  know  that  thou  and  I  must  part ; 
And  when,  or  how,  or  where  we  met, 
I  own  to  me 's  a  secret  yet. 
But  this  I  know,  when  thou  art  fled, 
Where'er  they  lay  these  limbs,  this  head, 
No  clod  so  valueless  shall  be, 
As  all  that  then  remains  of  me. 
O  whither,  whither  dost  thou  fly, 
Where  bend  unseen  thy  trackless  course, 

And  in  this  strange  divorce, 
Ah  tell  where  I  must  seek  this  compound  I  ? 


262  L  I  F  E. 

To  the  vast  ocean  of  empyreal  flame, 
From  whence  thy  essence  came, 
Dost  thou  thy  flight  pursue,  when  freed 
From  matter's  base  encumbering  weed  ? 
Or  dost  thou,  hid  from  sight, 
Wait,  like  some  spell-bound  knight, 

Through  blank  oblivious  years  the'  appointed  hour, 

To  break  thy  trance  and  reassume  thy  power  ? 

Yet  canst  thou  without  thought  or  feeling  be  ? 

O  say  what  art  thou,  when  no  more  thou  'rt  thee  ? 

Life !  we  've  been  long  together, 
Through  pleasant  and  through  cloudy  weather ; 
'Tis  hard  to  part  when  friends  are  dear; 
Perhaps  'twill  cost  a  sigh,  a  tear; 
Then  steal  away,  give  little  warning, 

Choose  thine  own  time  ; 

Say  not  Good  night,  but  in  some  brighter  clime 
Bid  me  Good  morning. 


263 


ON  THE  KING'S  ILLNESS 

1811. 


REST,  rest,  afflicted  spirit,  quickly  pass 

Thine  hour  of  bitter  suffering  !  Rest  awaits  thee, 

There,  where,  the  load  of  weary  life  laid  down, 

The  peasant  and  the  king  repose  together  : 

There  peaceful  sleep,  thy  quiet  grave  bedewed 

With  tears  of  those  who  loved  thee.     Not  for  thee, 

In  the  dark  chambers  of  the  nether  world, 

Shall  spectre  kings  rise  from  their  burning  thrones 

And  point  the  vacant  seat,  and  scoffing  say, 

Art  thou  become  like  us  ? — O  not  for  thee  ! 

For  thou  hadst  human  feelings,  and  hast  lived 

A  man  with  men  ;  and  kindly  charities, 

Even  such  as  warm  the  cottage  hearth,  were  thine. 


264  ON  THE  KING'S  ILLNESS. 

And  therefore  falls  the  tear  from  eyes  not  used 

To  gaze  on  kings  with  admiration  fond. 

And  thou  hast  knelt  at  meek  Religion's  shrine 

With  no  mock  homage,  and  hast  owned  her  rights 

Sacred  in  every  breast :  and  therefore  rise, 

Affectionate,  for  thee,  the  orisons 

And  mingled  prayers,  alike  from  vaulted  domes 

Whence  the  loud  organ  peals,  and  raftered  roofs 

Of  humbler  worship.- — Still  remembering  this, 

A  nation's  pity  and  a  nation's  love 

Linger  beside  thy  couch,  in  this  the  day 

Of  thy  sad  visitation,  veiling  faults 

Of  erring  judgement,  and  not  will  perverse. 

Yet,  O  that  thou  hadst  closed  the  wounds  of  war ! 

That  had  been  praise  to  suit  a  higher  strain. 

Farewell  the  years  rolled  down  the  gulf  of  time ! 
Thy  name  has  chronicled  a  long  bright  page 
Of  England's  story  ;  and  perhaps  the  babe 
Who  opens,  as  thou  closest  thine,  his  eyes 


ON  THE  KING'S  ILLNESS.  2G.5 

Oil  this  eventful  world,  when  aged  grown, 
Musing  on  times  gone  by,  shall  sigh  and  say, 
Shaking  his  thin  grey  hairs,  whitened  with  grief, 
Our  fathers'  days  were  happy.      Fare  thee  well! 
My  thread  of  life  has  even  run  with  thine 
For  many  a  lustre ;  and  thy  closing  day 
I  contemplate,  not  mindless  of  my  own, 
Nor  to  its  call  reluctant. 


266 

A  THOUGHT  ON  DEATH 

NOVEMBER,  1814. 


WHEN  life  as  opening  buds  is  sweet, 
And  golden  hopes  the  fancy  greet, 
And  Youth  prepares  his  joys  to  meet, — 
Alas  !  how  hard  it  is  to  die  ! 

When  just  is  seized  some  valued  prize, 
And  duties  press,  and  tender  ties 
Forbid  the  soul  from  earth  to  rise, — 
How  awful  then  it  is  to  die ! 

When,  one  by  one,  those  ties  are  torn, 
And  friend  from  friend  is  snatched  forlorn, 

And  man  is  left  alone  to  mourn,— 

\ 
Ah  then,  how  easy  'tis  to  die ! 


A  THOUGHT  ON  DEATH.  267 

When  faith  is  firm,  and  conscience  clear, 
And  words  of  peace  the  spirit  cheer, 
And  visioned  glories  half  appear, — 
Tis  joy,  'tis  triumph  then  to  die. 

When  trembling  limbs  refuse  their  weight, 
And  films,  slow  gathering,  dim  the  sight, 
And  clouds  obscure  the  mental  light, — 
Tis  nature's  precious  boon  to  die. 


2G8 


STANZAS: 


IN  THE  MANNER  OF  SPENSER. 


So  long  estranged  from  every  Muse's  lyre, 
And  groveling  in  the  tangled  net  of  Care  ; 
What  powerful  breath  shall  kindle  up  that  fire 
Smothered  with  damps  of  most  unkindly  air  ? 
Ah,  how  is  quenched  the  lamp  that  burnt  so  fair ! 
Come,  sweet  seducers,  late  too  far  away, 
Once  more  to  my  deserted  cell  repair ; 
Your  rebel  courts  again  your  gentle  sway  ;— 
Come,  soothe  the  winter's  night,  and  charm  the  sum 
mer's  day. 


STANZAS.  269 

Come,  dear  companions  of  my  youthful  hour, 
Fill  my  fond  breast  with  your  majestic  themes ; 
Meet  me  again  on  hill,  by  stream,  or  bower, 
And  bathe  my  fancy  in  the  bliss  of  dreams. 
Vain  wish !   no  more  the  star  of  Fancy  gleams ; 
They  with  becoming  scorn  reject  thy  prayer : 
Nor  will  they  haunt  thy  bower,  or  bless  thy  streams, 
No  more  to  thy  deserted  cell  repair : — 
"  Go,  court  the  world,"  they  cry,  "  thou  art  not  worth 


Bustle  and  hurry,  noise  and  thrall  they  hate, 
And  plodding  Method  with  her  leaden  rule ; 
And  all  that  swells  the'  unwieldy  pomp  of  state, 
And  all  that  binds  to  earth  the  golden  fool ; 
And  creeping  Labour  with  his  patient  tool : 
Free  like  the  birds  they  wander  unconfined. 
Nor  dip  their  wings  in  Lucre's  muddy  pool ; 
Business  they  hate,  in  crowded  nook  enshrined. 
That  spins  her  dirty  web,  and  clouds  the*  ethereal  mind, 


270  STANZAS. 

Ah,  why  should  man,  in  hard  unsocial  strife, 
And  withering  care  whose  vigils  never  cease, 
Fretting  away  this  little  thread  of  life, 
Of  his  sad  birthright  reap  such  large  increase  ! 
Why  should  he  toil  for  aught  but  bread  and  peace  ? 
Why  rear  to  heaven  his  clay-built  pyramids  ? 
JSTor  from  his  tasks  himself,  poor  slave  !  release  ; 
With  anxious  thought,  which  wholesome  rest  forbids, 
Drying  the  balm  of  sleep  from  sorrow's  swollen  lids. 

Despising  cheap  delights,  he  loves  to  scoop 
His  marble  palace  from  the  rock's  hard  breast, 
And  in  close  dungeon  walls  himself  to  coop, 
On  golden  couches  wooing  pale  unrest ; 
With  foreign  looms  his  stately  halls  are  drest, 
And  grim-wrought  tapestry  clothes  the  darkened  room; 
While  in  the  flowery  vale  Peace  builds  her  nest, 
Amidst  the  purple  heath  or  yellow  broom, 
Or  where  midst  rustling  corn  the  nodding  poppies  bloom. 


271 


TO  MISS  T. 


SWEET  are  the  thoughts  that  stir  the  virgin's  breast 
When  love  first  enters  there,  a  timid  guest ; 
Before  her  dazzled  eyes  gay  visions  shine, 
And  laughing  Cupids  wreaths  of  roses  twine ; 
And  conscious  beauty  hastens  to  employ 
Her  span  of  empire  and  her  dream  of  joy. 

Sarah  !   not  thus  to  thee  his  power  is  shown ; 
More  stern  he  greets  thee  from  his  awful  throne. 
Thee,  called  to  bid  thy  cheering  converse  flow, 
And  shed  thy  sweetness  in  the  house  of  woe ; 
The  solemn  sympathies  of  grief  to  share, 
And,  sadly  smiling,  soothe  a  sister's  care. 


272  TO  MISS  T. 

O'er  her  young  hopes  the  sable  pall  is  spread ; 
Her  wedded  heart  holds  converse  with  the  dead ; 
To  ties,  no  longer  earthly,  fondly  true, 
Each  thought  that  breathes  of  love,  must  breathe  of 
heaven  too. 

.-- 

Thus,  Sarah,  love  thy  nobler  mind  prepares, 
Shows  thee  his  dangers,  duties,  sorrows,  cares ; 
Thus  with  severer  lessons  schools  thy  heart, 
And,  pleased  his  happiest  influence  to  impart, 
For  thee,  dismissing  from  his  chastened  train 
Each  motley  form  of  fickle,  light,  or  vain, 
Builds  the  strong  fabric  of  that  love  sublime 
Which  conquers  Death,  and  triumphs  over  Time. 


273 


THE    FIRST    FIRE. 

OCTOBER  1st,  1815. 


HA,  old  acquaintance !  many  a  month  has  past 
Since  last  I  viewed  thy  ruddy  face ;  and  I, 
Shame  on  me !  had  mean  time  well  nigh  forgot 
That  such  a  friend  existed.     Welcome  now  ! — 
When  summer  suns  ride  high,  and  tepid  airs 
Dissolve  in  pleasing  languor ;   then  indeed 
We  think  thee  needless,  and  in  wanton  pride 
Mock  at  thy  grim  attire  and  sooty  jaws, 
And  breath  sulphureous,  generating  spleen, — 
As  Frenchmen  say  ;   Frenchmen,  who  never  knew 
The  sober  comforts  of  a  good  coal  fire. 
— Let  me  imbibe  thy  warmth,  and  spread  myself 
Before  thy  shrine  adoring : — magnet  thou 
Of  strong  attraction,  daily  gathering  in 

VOL.  I.  T 


274  THE  FIRST  FIRE, 

Friends,  brethren,  kinsmen,  variously  dispersed, 

All  the  dear  charities  of  social  life, 

To  thy  close  circle.     Here  a  man  might  stand, 

And  say,  This  is  my  world  !  Who  would  not  bleed 

Rather  than  see  thy  violated  hearth 

Prest  by  a  hostile  foot  ?    The  winds  sing  shrill ; 

Heap  on  the  fuel !    Not  the  costly  board, 

Nor  sparkling  glass,  nor  wit,  nor  music,  cheer 

Without  thy  aid.      If  thrifty  thou  dispense 

Thy  gladdening  influence,  in  the  chill  saloon 

The  silent  shrug  declares  the'  unpleased  guest. 

— How  grateful  to  belated  traveller 

Homeward  returning,  to  behold  the  blaze 

From  cottage  window,  rendering  visible 

The  cheerful  scene  within  !     There  sits  the  sire, 

Whose  wicker  chair,  in  sunniest  nook  enshrined, 

His  age's  privilege, — a  privilege  for  which 

Age  gladly  yields  up  all  precedence  else 

In  gay  and  bustling  scenes, — supports  his  limbs. 

Cherished  by  thee,  he  feels  the  grateful  warmth 


THE  FIRST  FIRE.  275 

Creep  through  his  feeble  frame  and  thaw  the  ice 

Of  fourscore  years,  and  thoughts  of  youth  arise. 

— Nor  less  the  young  ones  press  within,  to  see 

Thy  face  delighted,  and  with  husk  of  nuts, 

Or  crackling  holly,  or  the  gummy  pine, 

Feed  thy  immortal  hunger  :   cheaply  pleased 

They  gaze  delighted,  while  the  leaping  flames 

Dart  like  an  adder's  tongue  upon  their  prey ; 

Or  touch  with  lighted  reed  thy  wreaths  of  smoke ; 

Or  listen,  while  the  matron  sage  remarks 

Thy  bright  blue  scorching  flame  and  aspect  clear, 

Denoting  frosty  skies.     Thus  pass  the  hours,          , 

While  Winter  spends  without  his  idle  rage. 

— Companion  of  the  solitary  man, 
From  gayer  scenes  withheld  !   With  thee  he  sits, 
Converses,  moralizes  ;   musing  asks 
How  many  aeras  of  uncounted  time 
Have  rolled  away  since  thy  black  unctuous  food 
Was  green  with  vegetative  life,  and  what 

T  2 


276  THE  FIRST  FIRE. 

This  planet  then  :  or  marks,  in  sprightlier  mood, 
Thy  flickering  smiles  play  round  the'  illumined  room, 
And  fancies  gay  discourse,  life,  motion,  mirth, 
And  half  forgets  he  is  a  lonely  creature. 

— Nor  less  the  bashful  poet  loves  to  sit 
Snug,  at  the  midnight  hour,  with  only  thee 
Of  his  lone  musings  conscious.      Oft  he  writes, 
And  blots,  and  writes  again ;   and  oft,  by  fits, 
Gazes  intent  with  eyes  of  vacancy 
On  thy  bright  face ;   and  still  at  intervals, 
Dreading  the  critic's  scorn,  to  thee  commits, 
Sole  confidant  and  safe,  his  fancies  crude. 

— O  wretched  he,  with  bolts  and  massy  bars 

In  narrow  cell  immured,  whose  green  damp  walls, 

That  weep  unwholesome  dews,  have  never  felt 

Thy  purifying  influence  !     Sad  he  sits 

Day  after  day,  till  in  his  youthful  limbs 

Life  stagnates,  and  the  hue  of  hope  is  fled 


THE  FIRST  FIRE.  277 

From  his  wan  cheek. — And  scarce  less  wretched  he — 
When  wintry  winds  blow  loud  and  frosts  bite  keen, — 
The  dweller  of  the  clay-built  tenement, 
Poverty-struck,  who,  heartless,  strives  to  raise 
From  sullen  turf,  or  stick  plucked  from  the  hedge, 
The  short-lived  blaze ;  while  chill  around  him  spreads 
The  dreary  fen,  and  Ague,  sallow-faced, 
Stares  through  the  broken  pane  ; — Assist  him,  ye 
On  whose  warm  roofs  the  sun  of  plenty  shines, 
And  feel  a  glow  beyond  material  fire  ! 


278 


THE  CATERPILLAR. 


No,  helpless  thing,  I  cannot  harm  thee  now  ; 

Depart  in  peace,  thy  little  life  is  safe, 

For  I  have  scanned  thy  form  with  curious  eye, 

Noted  the  silver  line  that  streaks  thy  back, 

The  azure  and  the  orange  that  divide 

Thy  velvet  sides ;   thee,  houseless  wanderer, 

My  garment  has  enfolded,  and  my  arm 

Felt  the  light  pressure  of  thy  hairy  feet ; 

Thou  hast  curled  round  my  ringer ;  from  its  tip, 

Precipitous  descent!  with  stretched  out  neck, 

Bending  thy  head  in  airy  vacancy, 

This  way  and  that,  inquiring,  thou  hast  seemed 

To  ask  protection ;  now,  I  cannot  kill  thee. 

Yet  I  have  sworn  perdition  to  thy  race, 


THE  CATERPILLAR.  279 

And  recent  from  the  slaughter  am  I  come 
Of  tribes  and  embryo  nations  :   I  have  sought 
With  sharpened  eye  and  persecuting  zeal, 
Where,  folded  in  their  silken  webs  they  lay 
Thriving  and  happy ;  swept  them  from  the  tree 
And  crushed  whole  families  beneath  my  foot ; 
Or,  sudden,  poured  on  their  devoted  heads 
The  vials  of  destruction. — This  I  Ve  done, 
Nor  felt  the  touch  of  pity  :   but  when  thou,-— 
A  single  wretch,  escaped  the  general  doom, 
Making  me  feel  and  clearly  recognise 
Thine  individual  existence,  life, 
And  fellowship  of  sense  with  all  that  breathes, — 

Present'st  thyself  before  me,  I  relent, 

f 

And  cannot  hurt  thy  weakness. — So  the  storm 
Of  horrid  war,  overwhelming  cities,  fields, 
And  peaceful  villages,  rolls  dreadful  on : 
The  victor  shouts  triumphant ;   he  enjoys 
The  roar  of  cannon  and  the  clang  of  arms, 
And  urges,  by  no  soft  relentings  stopped, 


280  THE  CATERPILLAR. 

The  work  of  death  and  carnage.     Yet  should  one, 
A  single  sufferer  from  the  field  escaped, 
Panting  and  pale,  and  bleeding  at  his  feet, 
Lift  his  imploring  eyes, — the  hero  weeps ; 
He  is  grown  human,  and  capricious  Pity, 
Which  would  not  stir  for  thousands,  melts  for  one 
With  sympathy  spontaneous  :  — T  is  not  Virtue, 
Yet  'tis  the  weakness  of  a  virtuous  mind. 


281 


ON  THE 

DEATH  OF  THE  PRINCESS  CHARLOTTE. 


YES,  Britain  mourns,  as  with  electric  touch, 

For  youth,  for  love,  for  happiness  destroyed, 

Her  universal  population  melts 

In  grief  spontaneous,  and  hard  hearts  are  moved, 

And  rough  unpolished  natures  learn  to  feel 

For  those  they  envied,  leveled  in  the  dust 

By  Fate's  impartial  stroke  ;  and  pulpits  sound 

With  vanity  and  woe  to  earthly  goods, 

And  urge  and  dry  the  tear. — Yet  one  there  is 

Who  midst  this  general  burst  of  grief  remains 

In  strange  tranquillity ;  whom  ;not  the  stir 

And  long-drawn  murmurs  of  the  gathering  crowd, 

That  by  his  very  windows  trail  the  pomp 

Of  hearse,  and  blazoned  arms,  and  long  array 


282   ON  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  PRINCESS  CHARLOTTE. 

Of  sad  funereal  rites,  nor  the  loud  groans 

And  deep-felt  anguish  of  a  husband's  heart, 

Can  move  to  mingle  with  this  flood  one  tear : 

In  careless  apathy,  perhaps  in  mirth, 

He  wears  the  day.      Yet  is  he  near  in  blood, 

The  very  stem  on  which  this  blossom  grew, 

And  at  his  knees  she  fondled  in  the  charm 

And  grace  spontaneous  which  alone  belongs 

To  untaught  infancy  : — Yet  O  forbear ! 

Nor  deem  him  hard  of  heart ;   for  awful,  struck 

By  Heaven's  severest  visitation,  sad, 

Like  a  scathed  oak  amidst  the  forest  trees, 

Lonely  he  stands  ; — leaves  bud,  and  shoot,  and  fall ; 

He  holds  no  sympathy  with  living  nature 

Or  time's  incessant  change.      Then  in  this  hour, 

While  pensive  thought  is  busy  with  the  woes 

And  restless  change  of  poor  humanity, 

Think  then,  O  think  of  him,  and  breathe  one  prayer, 

From  the  full  tide  of  sorrow  spare  one  tear, 

For  him  who  does  not  weep  ! 


THE  WAKE  OF  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN.* 


ARRAYED  in  robes  of  regal  state, 
But  stiff  and  cold,  the  monarch  sate ; 
In  gorgeous  vests,  his  chair  beside, 
Stood  prince  and  peer,  the  nation's  pride ; 
And  paladin  and  high-born  dame 
Their  place  amid  the  circle  claim : 
And  wands  of  office  lifted  high, 
And  arms  and  blazoned  heraldry, — 


*  The  kings  of  Spain  for  nine  days  after  death  are  placed  sitting 
in  robes  of  state  with  their  attendants  around  them,  and  solemnly 
summoned  by  the  proper  officers  to  their  meals  and  their  amuse 
ments  as  if  living. 


284,         THE  WAKE  OF  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN. 

All  mute  like  marble  statues  stand, 
Nor  raise  the  eye,  nor  move  the  hand  : 
No  voice,  no  sound  to  stir  the  air, 
The  silence  of  the  grave  is  there. 

The  portal  opens — hark,  a  voice  ! 
"  Come  forth,  O  king  !   O  king,  rejoice  ! 
The  bowl  is  filled,  the  feast  is  spread, 
Come  forth,  O  king  !" — The  king  is  dead, 
The  bowl,  the  feast,  he  tastes  no  more, 
The  feast  of  life  for  him  is  o'er. 

Again  the  sounding  portals  shake, 
And  speaks  again  the  voice  that  spake  : 
— "  The  sun  is  high,  the  sun  is  warm, 
Forth  to  the  field  the  gallants  swarm, 
The  foaming  bit  the  courser  champs, 
His  hoof  the  turf  impatient  stamps  ; 
Light  on  their  steeds  the  hunters  spring : 
The  sun  is  high — Come  forth,  O  king !" 


THE  WAKE  OF  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN. 

Along  these  melancholy  walls 

In  vain  the  voice  of  pleasure  calls  : 

The  horse  may  neigh,  and  bay  the  hound, — 

He  hears  no  more  ;  his  sleep  is  sound. 

Retire ; — once  more  the  portals  close ; 

Leave,  leave  him  to  his  dread  repose. 


286 


THE  BABY-HOUSE. 


DEAR  Agatha,  I  give  you  joy, 
And  much  admire  your  pretty  toy, 
A  mansion  in  itself  complete 
And  fitted  to  give  guests  a  treat ; 
With  couch  and  table,  chest  and  chair, 
The  bed  or  supper  to  prepare ; 
We  almost  wish  to  change  ourselves 
To  fairy  forms  of  tripping  elves, 
To  press  the  velvet  couch  and  eat 
From  tiny  cups  the  sugared  meat. 


THE  BABY-HOUSE.  287 

I  much  suspect  that  many  a  sprite 
Inhabits  it  at  dead  of  night ; 
That,  as  they  dance,  the  listening  ear 
The  pat  of  fairy  feet  might  hear ; 
That,  just  as  you  have  said  your  prayers, 
They  hurry-scurry  down  the  stairs  : 
And  you  '11  do  well  to  try  to  find 
Tester  or  ring  they  Ve  left  behind. 

But  think  not,  Agatha,  you  own 
That  toy,  a  Baby-house,  alone ; 
For  many  a  sumptuous  one  is  found 
To  press  an  ampler  space  of  ground. 
The  broad-based  Pyramid  that  stands 
Casting  its  shade  in  distant  lands, 
Which  asked  some  mighty  nation's  toil 
With  mountain-weight  to  press  the  soil, 
And  there  has  raised  its  head  sublime 
Through  aeras  of  uncounted  time, — 


THE  BABY-HOUSE. 

Its  use  if  asked,  'tis  only  said, 

A  Baby-house  to  lodge  the  dead. 

Nor  less  beneath  more  genial  skies 

The  domes  of  pomp  and  folly  rise, 

Whose  sun  through  diamond  windows  streams, 

While  gems  and  gold  reflect  his  beams ; 

Where  tapestry  clothes  the  storied  wall, 

And  fountains  spout  and  waters  fall ; 

The  peasant  faints  beneath  his  load, 

Nor  tastes  the  grain  his  hands  have  sowed, 

While  scarce  a  nation's  wealth  avails 

To  raise  thy  Baby-house,  Versailles. 

And  Baby-houses  oft  appear 

On  British  ground,  of  prince  or  peer ; 

Awhile  their  stately  heads  they  raise, 

The'  admiring  traveller  stops  to  gaze ; 

He  looks  again — where  are  they  now  ? 

Gone  to  the  hammer  or  the  plough : 

Then  trees,  the  pride  of  ages,  fall, 

And  naked  stands  the  pictured  wall; 


THE  BABY-HOUSE.  289 

And  treasured  coins  from  distant  lands 
Must  feel  the  touch  of  sordid  hands ; 
And  gems,  of  classic  stores  the  boast, 
Fall  to  the  cry  of — Who  bids  most? 
Then  do  not,  Agatha,  repine 
That  cheaper  Baby-house  is  thine. 


VOL. 


290 


LOGOGRIPH. 


FOR  man's  support  I  came  at  first  from  earth, 
But  man  perverts  the  purpose  of  my  birth  ; 
Beneath  his  plastic  hand  new  forms  I  take, 
And  either  sex  my  services  partake ; 
The  flowing  lawn  in  stricter  folds  I  hold, 
And  bind  in  chains  unseen  each  swelling  fold ; 
The  band  beneath  the  double  chin  I  grace, 
And  formal  plaits  that  edge  the  Quaker's  face : 
By  me  great  Bess,  who  used  her  maids  to  cuff, 
Shone  in  the  dignity  of  full-quilled  ruff. — 
Such  is  my  whole  ; — but,  parted  and  disjoined, 
New  wonders  in  my  varying  form  you'll  find. 
What  makes  the  cit  look  big  with  conscious  worth ; 
What  bursts  from  pale  surprise  or  boisterous  mirth ; 


The  sweep  Rialto  forms,  or  your  fair  brow — 
The  fault  to  youthful  valour  we  allow ; 
A  word  by  which  possession  we  denote, 
A  letter  high  in  place  and  first  in  note ; 
What  guards  the  beauty  from  the  scorching  ray  ; 
What  little  master  first  is  taught  to  say ; 
Great  Nature's  rival,  handmaid,  sometimes  foe ; 
The  most  pathetic  counterpart  of  "  Oh !" 
The  whiskered  pilferer  and  her  foe  demure ; 
The  lamps  unbought  which  light  the  houseless  poor ; 
What  bore  famed  heroes  through  the  ranks  of  war ; 
What's  heard  when  falls  from  high  the  ponderous  jar; 
What  holy  Paul  did  at  Gamaliel's  feet— 
What  Bavius  writes,  what  schoolboys  love  to  eat ; 
Of  eager  gamesters  what  decides  the  fate ; 
The  homely  rough  support  of  Britain's  state  ; 
What,  joined  to  "  been,"  is  fatal  to  a  toast ; 
What  guards  the  sailor  from  the  shelving  coast ; 
The  stage  whence  villains  make  their^last  harangue ; 
What  in  your  head  and  bones  gives  many  a  pang ; 

u  2 


292  LOGOGRIPH. 

What  introduces  long-tailed  similes  ; 
A  preposition  that  to  place  agrees ; 
A  stately  animal  in  forests  bred, 
A  tree  that  lifts  on  high  its  lofty  head ; 
What  best  unbinds  the  weary  student's  mind 
A  beauteous  fish  in  northern  lakes  we  find ; 
A  grateful  blemish  on  a  soldier's  breast : — 
All  these  are  in  my  single  name  exprest. 


293 


RIDDLE. 

FROM  rosy  bowers  we  issue  forth, 
From  east  to  west,  from  south  to  north, 
Unseen,  unfelt,  by  night,  by  day, 
Abroad  we  take  our  airy  way : 
We  foster  love  and  kindle  strife, 
The  bitter  and  the  sweet  of  life : 
Piercing  and  sharp,  we  wound  like  steel ; 
Now,  smooth  as  oil,  those  wounds  we  heal 
Not  strings  of  pearl  are  valued  more, 
Or  gems  enchased  in  golden  ore ; 
Yet  thousands  of  us  every  day, 
Worthless  and  vile,  are  thrown  away. 
Ye  wise,  secure  with  bars  of  brass 
The  double  doors  through  which  we  pass  ; 
For,  once  escaped,  back  to  our  cell 
No  human  art  can  us  compel. 


2JH 


ENIGMA. 

TO  THE  LADIES. 


HARD  is  my  stem  and  dry,  no  root  is  found 
To  draw  nutritious  juices  from  the  ground  ; 
Yet  of  your  ivory  fingers'  magic  touch 
The  quickening  power  and  strange  effect  is  such, 
My  shrivelled  trunk  a  sudden  shade  extends, 
And  from  rude  storms  your  tender  frame  defends ; 
A  hundred  times  a  day  my  head  is  seen 
Crowned  with  a  floating  canopy  of  green ; 
A  hundred  times,  as  struck  with  sudden  blight, 
The  spreading  verdure  withers  to  the  sight. 
Not  Jonah's  gourd  by  power  unseen  was  made 
So  soon  to  flourish,  and  so  soon  to  fade. 


ENIGMA.  295 

Unlike  the  Spring's  gay  race,  I  flourish  most 
When  groves  and  gardens  all  their  bloom  have  lost ; 
Lift  my  green  head  against  the  rattling  hail, 
And  brave  the  driving  snows  and  freezing  gale ; 
And  faithful  lovers  oft,  when  storms  impend, 
Beneath  my  friendly  shade  together  bend, 
There  join  their  heads  within  the  green  recess, 
And  in  the  close-wove  covert  nearer  press. 
But  lately  am  I  known  to  Britain's  isle, 
Enough — You  Ve  guessed — I  see  it  by  your  smile. 


206 


RIDDLE. 


THIS  creature,  though  extremely  thin, 
In  shape  is  almost  square  ; 

Has  many  heads,  on  which  ne'er  grew 
One  single  lock  of  hair. 

Yet  several  of  their  tribe  there  are, 
Whose  case  you  must  bewail, 

Of  whom  in  truth  it  may  be  said 
They  Ve  neither  head  nor  tail. 


In  purer  times,  ere  vice  prevailed, 
They  met  with  due  regard, 

The  wholesome  counsels  that  they 
With  reverence  were  heard. 


KIDDLE.  297 

To  marriages  and  funerals 

Their  presence  added  grace, 
And  though  the  king  himself  were  by, 

They  took  the  highest  place. 

Their  business  is  to  stir  up  men 

A  constant  watch  to  keep ; 
Instead  of  which, — O  sad  reverse,— 

They  make  them  fall  asleep. 

Not  so  in  former  times  it  was, 

Howe'er  it  came  to  pass  ; 
Though  they  their  company  ne'er  left 
„  Till  empty  was  the  glass. 

t  «  , 

The  moderns  can't  be  charged  with  this, 

But  may  their  foes  defy, 
To  prove  such  practices  on  them, 
Though  they  're  extremely  dry. 


298 


PROLOGUE  TO  A  DRAMA, 

PERFORMED  BY  A  FAMILY  PARTY  ON  THE  ANNI 
VERSARY  OF  MR.  AND  MRS.  C.'S  MARRIAGE 


"  To  wake  the  soul  by  tender  strokes  of  art, 
To  raise  the  genius,  and  to  mend  the  heart," — • 
Hold,  hold !  that 's  not  my  cue,  we  Ve  no  intention 
By  "  tender  strokes  "  to  sharpen  girls'  invention  : 
The  soul  will  waken  time  enough,  ne'er  fear ; 
No  lines  shall  rouse  the  slumbering  passions  here. 
O  !  ever  sacred  be  the  deep  repose 
Which  Youth,  on  Innocence'  pure  bosom,  knows ; 
Before  a  wish,  a  throb,  a  care,  have  taught 
The  pangs  of  feeling  or  the  lines  of  thought. 


PROLOGUE  TO  A  DRAMA.  29f) 

O  happy  period  !   soon  to  pass  aw.iv. 

Soon  will  the  swelling  gales  assert  their  sway, 

And  drive  the  vessel  from  the  sheltered  port, — - 

O  guide  it  Heaven  ! — of  winds  and  waves  the  sport. 

Nor  yet  "  to  raise  the  genius  "  is  our  aim, 

With  Shakespear's  high-wrought  scenes  and  words  of 

flame. 

A  little  story,  drawn  from  fairy  lore, 
A  nursery  tale,  this  evening  we  explore : 
"  To  mend  the  heart,"  indeed,  we  mean  to  try, 
And  show  what  poison  lurks  in  flattery. 
'T  is  true  our  hero  was  a  prince — what  then  ! 
Believe  me,  Flattery  stoops  to  common  men. 
A  little  dose,  made  up  with  skill  and  care, 
A  grain  or  two  of  incense,  all  can  bear : 
T  is  life's  first  rule,— by  complaisance  we  live  ; 
All  flatter  all,  and  to  receive  we  give. 
Myself,  for  instance,  am  sent  here  tonight 
With  soothing  speech  your  favour  to  invite  ; 


300  PROLOGUE  TO  A  DRAMA. 

And  when  our  piece  is  done,  perhaps  e'en  you, 

My  gentle  auditors,  may  flatter  too, 

And  make  us  boast  our  talents  and  our  skill, 

When  all  the  merit  is  in  your  good  will. 

But  there 's  a  theme  which  asks  a  verse  this  day, 

Where  Flattery  has  no  power  her  tints  to  lay ; 

This  hallowed  day,  in  Hymen's  golden  bands 

Which  joined  consenting  hearts  and  willing  hands. 

How  many  years  ago  should  any  ask, 

Look  round, — to  count  them  is  an  easy  task  ; 

Each  tiptoe  girl,  and  each  aspiring  boy, 

Date,  as  they  pass,  the  years  of  love  and  joy. 

O  happy  state  !   where  blessings  number  years, 

And  smiles  are  only  quenched  in  more  delicious  tears. 

Here,  should  my  willing  lips  the  theme  pursue, 

And  draw  the  lovely  scene  in  colours  due, 

Paint  the  well-ordered  home,  the  sacred  seat 

Where  social  joys  and  active  virtues  meet ; 

These  wield  in  love,  and  those  in  love  obey 

The  peaceful  sceptre  of  domestic  sway  ; 


PROLOGUE  TO  A  DRAMA.  301 

Where  sparkling  Fancy  weaves  her  airy  dream, 
And  Science  sheds  around  her  steady  beam, — 
Each  answering  heart  the  faithful  sketch  would  own, 
And  glow  with  feelings  raised  by  truth  alone. 


LINES 

WRITTEN  IN  A  YOUNG  LADY'S  ALBUM  OF  DIF 
FERENT-COLOURED  PAPER. 


LIFE'S  chequered  scenes  these  varied  leaves  display, 
Pure  white,  and  tenderest  blush,  and  fading  gray : — 
The  rosy  tints  of  morning  will  not  last, 
And  youth's  gay  flattering  season  soon  is  past. 
O  may  thy  gentle  breast  no  changes  know, 
But  such  as  from  time's  smoothest  current  flow ; 
No  cares,  but  those  whose  mellowing  influence  steals 
Mild  o'er  the'  expansive  heart  that  thinks  and  feels ; 
And  with  affection  tried,  experienced  truth 
Tint  the  white  page  of  innocence  and  youth  ! 
May  Love  for  thee  exert  his  fullest  power, 
And  gild  with  sunniest  gleams  life's  latest  hour ! 
And  friendship,  health,  and  pleasure  long  be  thine, 
When  cold  the  heart  that  pens  this  feeble  line ! 


TO   A    FRIEND. 


MAY  never  more  of  pensive  melancholy 

Within  thy  heart,  beneath  thy  roof  appear, 

Than  just  to  break  the  charm  of  idle  folly, 

And  prompt  for  others'  woes  the  melting  tear ; 

No  more  than  just  that  tender  gloom  to  spread 

Where  thy  beloved  Muses  wont  to  stray, 

To  lift  the  thought  from  this  low  earthy  bed, 

Or  bid  hope  languish  for  a  brighter  day ; 

And  deeper  sink  within  thy  feeling  heart 

Love's  pleasing  wounds,  or  friendship's  polished  dart ! 


304 


DEJECTION. 


WHEN  sickness  clouds  the  languid  eye, 
And  seeds  of  sharp  diseases  fly 

Swift  through  the  vital  frame  ; 
Rich  drugs  are  torn  from  earth  and  sea, 
And  balsam  drops  from  every  tree, 

To  quench  the  parching  flame. 

But  oh !  what  opiate  can  assuage 

The  throbbing  breast's  tumultuous  rage, 

Which  mingling  passions  tear ! 
What  art  the  wounds  of  grief  can  bind, 
Or  soothe  the  sick  impatient  mind 

Beneath  corroding  care  ! 


DEJECTION.  305 

Not  all  the  potent  herbs  that  grow 
On  purple  heath,  or  mountain's  brow, 

Can  banished  peace  restore ; 
In  vain  the  spring  of  tears  to  dry, 
For  purer  air  or  softer  sky 

We  quit  our  native  shore. 

Friendship,  the  richest  balm  that  flows, 
Was  meant  to  heal  our  sharpest  woes, 

But  runs  not  always  pure  ; 
And  Love — has  sorrows  of  his  own, 
Which  not  an  herb  beneath  the  moon 

Is  found  of  power  to  cure. 

Soft  Pity,  mild  dejected  maid, 
With  tenderest  hand  applies  her  aid 

To  dry  the  frequent  tear ; 
But  her  own  griefs,  of  finer  kind, 
Too  deeply  wound  the  feeling  mind 

With  anguish  more  severe. 


VOL.  i. 


306 


TO  MRS.  MARISSAL: 

1779. 


WHITHER,  whither,  wearied  dove, 
Wilt  thou  fly  to  seek  thy  rest? 
Beat  with  many  a  heavy  storm, 
Where  repose  thy  tender  breast  ? 

Hither,  hither,  gentle  dove, 
Bend  thy  flight  and  build  thy  home 
Here  repose  thy  tender  breast, 
Fix  thy  foot,  and  never  roam. 

Welcome,  welcome,  soft-eyed  dove, 
To  the  sheltering  low-roofed  cot, 
Leave  the  splendid  city's  throng, 
Meekly  kiss  thy  quiet  lot. 


TO  MRS.  MARISSAL.  307 

Low-roofed  cots  and  whispering  groves 
Suit  thy  pensive  sweetness  best ; 
Health  shall  bloom,  and  Peace  shall  smile 
Round  thy  small  but  downy  nest. 

Try  thy  thrilling  notes  once  more, 
Plume  again  thy  ruffled  wing  ; 
With  thy  sister  turtles  coo, 
Drink  at  Pleasure's  native  spring. 


x  2 


308 


EPITAPH  ON  THE  SAME. 


FA  RE  WELL,  mild  saint! — meek  child  of  love,  farewell ! 

Ill  can  this  stone  thy  finished  virtues  tell. 

Rest,  rest  in  peace  !  the  task  of  life  is  o'er  ; 

Sorrows  shall  sting,  and  sickness  waste  no  more. 

But  hard  our  task  from  one  so  loved  to  part, 

While  fond  remembrance  clings  round  every  heart, — 

Hard  to  resign  the  sister,  friend,  and  wife, 

And  all  that  cheers,  and  all  that  softens  life. 

Farewell !  for  thee  the  gates  of  bliss  unclose, . 

And  endless  joy  succeeds  to  transient  woes. 


509 


TO  MR.  BOWRING, 

ON  HIS  POETICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  VARIOUS 
LANGUAGES. 


BOWRING,  the  music  of  thy  polished  strains 
Through  every  tongue  its  equal  power  sustains. 
To  the  rude  Russ  it  gives  a  softer  touch, 
It  melts  to  mellower  sounds  the  homely  Dutch, 
With  bloodless  conquest  from  each  land  it  bears 
The  precious  spoil  of  long-recorded  years ; 
And,  pleased  its  holy  ardour  to  diffuse, 
With  thy  own  spirit  sanctifies  the  Muse. 
Thus,  in  some  window's  deep  recesses  laid, 
The  soft  ^Eolian  harp  its  power  displayed, 
From  the  shrill  east  wind  and  the  stormy  north 
It  drew  soft  airs  and  gentle  breathings  forth ; 


310  TO  MR.  BO  WRING. 

Subdued  to  harmony  each  passing  sound, 
Waked  with  unusual  notes  the  echoes  round, 
With  happy  magic  softened,  as  it  past, 
The  hollow  whistling  of  the  keenest  blast; 
And  each  rude  gust  that  swept  the  changing  sky 
Dissolved  to  strains  -of  liquid  harmony. 


311 


FRAGMENT. 


As  the  poor  schoolboy,  when  the  slow-paced  months 

Have  brought  vacation  times,  and  one  by  one 

His  playmates  and  companions  all  are  fled 

Or  ready ;  and  to  him — to  him  alone 

No  summons  comes  ;   he  left  of  all  the  train 

Paces  with  lingering  step  the  vacant  halls, 

No  longer  murmuring  with  the  Muse's  song, 

And  silent  play-ground  scattered  wide  around 

With  implements  of  sports,  resounding  once 

With  cheerful  shouts  ;  and  hears  no  sound  of  wheels 

To  bear  him  to  his  father's  bosom  home ; 

For,  conscious  though  he  be  of  time  misspent, 

And  heedless  faults  and  much  amiss,  yet  hopes 


312  FRAGMENT. 

A  father's  pardon  and  a  father's  smile 

Blessing  his  glad  return Thus  I 

Look  to  the  hour  when  I  shall  follow  those 
That  are  at  rest  before  me. 


si.-; 


OCTOGENARY  REFLECTIONS. 


SAY,  ye  who  through  this  round  of  eighty  years 
Have  proved  its  joys  and  sorrows,  hopes  and  fears,- 
Say,  what  is  life,  ye  veterans,  who  have  trod, 
Step  following  step,  its  flowery,  thorny  road  ? 
Enough  of  good  to  kindle  strong  desire, 
Enough  of  ill  to  damp  the  rising  fire, 
Enough  of  love  and  fancy,  joy  and  hope, 
To  fan  desire  and  give  the  passions  scope. 
Enough  of  disappointment,  sorrow,  pain, 
To  seal  the  wise  man's  sentence,  All  is  vain, — 
And  quench  the  wish  to  live  those  years  again. 
Science  for  man  unlocks  her  various  store, 
And  gives  enough  to  urge  the  wish  for  more ; 


314  OCTOGENARY  REFLECTIONS. 

Systems  and  suns  lie  open  to  his  gaze, 

Nature  invites  his  love,  and  God  his  praise ; 

Yet  doubt  and  ignorance  with  his  feelings  sport, 

And  Jacob's  ladder  is  some  rounds  too  short. 

Yet  still  to  humble  hope  enough  is  given 

Of  light  from  reason's  lamp,  and  light  from  heaven, 

To  teach  us  what  to  follow,  what  to  shun, 

To  bow  the  head  and  say  "  Thy  will  be  done!" 


315 


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS. 


SWEET  is  the  scene  when  Virtue  dies ! — 
When  sinks  a  righteous  soul  to  rest, 
How  mildly  beam  the  closing  eyes, 
How  gently  heaves  the'  expiring  breast ! 

So  fades  a  summer  cloud  away; 

So  sinks  the  gale  when  storms  are  o'er ; 

So  gently  shuts  the  eye  of  day ; 

So  dies  a  wave  along  the  shore. 

Triumphant  smiles  the  victor  brow, 
Fanned  by  some  angel's  purple  wing ; — 
Where  is,  O  Grave !  thy  victory  now  ? 
And  where,  insidious  Death  !  thy  sting  ? 


316  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS. 

Farewell,  conflicting  joys  and  fears, 
Where  light  and  shade  alternate  dwell ; 
How  bright  the'  unchanging  morn  appears  ! 
Farewell,  inconstant  world,  Farewell ! 

Its  duty  done, — as  sinks  the  clay, 
Light  from  its  load  the  spirit  flies ; 
While  heaven  and  earth  combine  to  say, 
"  Sweet  is  the  scene  when  Virtue  dies!" 


317 


HYMNS. 


HYMN    I. 

JEHOVAH  reigns  :   let  every  nation  hear, 
And  at  his  footstool  bow  with  holy  fear ; 
Let  heaven's  high  arches  echo  with  his  name, 
And  the  wide  peopled  earth  his  praise  proclaim ; 
Then  send  it  down  to  hell's  deep  glooms  resounding, 
Through  all  her  caves  in  dreadful  murmurs  sounding. 

He  rules  with  wide  and  absolute  command 
O'er  the  broad  ocean  and  the  steadfast  land  : 
Jehovah  reigns,  unbounded,  and  alone, 
And  all  creation  hangs  beneath  his  throne  : 
He  reigns  alone ;  let  no  inferior  nature 
Usurp,  or  share  the  throne  of  the  Creator. 


318  HYMNS. 

He  saw  the  struggling  beams  of  infant  light 
Shoot  through  the  massy  gloom  of  ancient  night ; 
His  spirit  hushed  the'  elemental  strife, 
And  brooded  o'er  the  kindling  seeds  of  life  : 
Seasons  and  months  began  their  long  procession, 
And  measured  o'er  the  year  in  bright  succession. 

The  joyful  sun  sprung  up  the'  ethereal  way, 
Strong  as  a  giant,  as  a  bridegroom  gay ; 
And  the  pale  moon  diffused  her  shadowy  light 
Superior  o'er  the  dusky  brow  of  night ; 
Ten  thousand  glittering  lamps  the  skies  adorning, 
Numerous  as  dew-drops  from  the  womb  of  morning. 

Earth's  blooming  face  with  rising  flowers  he  drest, 
And  spread  a  verdant  mantle  o'er  her  breast ; 
Then  from  the  hollow  of  his  hand  he  pours 
The  circling  water  round  her  winding  shores, 
The  new-born  world  in  their  cool  arms  embracing, 
And  with  soft  murmurs  still  her  banks  caressing. 


HYMNS.  319 

At  length  she  rose  complete  in  finished  pride, 
All  fair  and  spotless,  like  a  virgin  bride ; 
Fresh  with  untarnished  lustre  as  she  stood, 
Her  Maker  blessed  his  work,  and  called  it  good ; 
The  morning- stars  with  joyful  acclamation 
Exulting  sang,  and  hailed  the  new  creation. 

Yet  this  fair  world,  the  creature  of  a  day, 
Though  built  by  God's  right  hand,  must  pass  away ; 
And  long  oblivion  creep  o'er  mortal  things, 
The  fate  of  empires,  and  the  pride  of  kings  : 
Eternal  night  shall  veil  their  proudest  story, 
And  drop  the  curtain  o'er  all  human  glory. 

The  sun  himself,  with  weary  clouds  opprest, 

Shall  in  his  silent  dark  pavilion  rest ; 

His  golden  urn  shall  broke  and  useless  lie, 

Amidst  the  common  ruins  of  the  sky ; 
The  stars  rush  headlong  in  the  wild  commotion, 
And  bathe  their  glittering  foreheads  in  the  ocean. 


320  HYMN  S. 

But  fixed,  O  God  !  for  ever  stands  thy  throne ; 

Jehovah  reigns,  a  universe  alone ; 

The'  eternal  fire  that  feeds  each  vital  flame, 

Collected,  or  diffused,  is  still  the  same. 
He  dwells  within  his  own  unfathomed  essence, 
And  fills  all  space  with  his  unbounded  presence. 

But  oh  !  our  highest  notes  the  theme  debase, 
And  silence  is  our  least  injurious  praise  : 
Cease,  cease  your  songs,  the  daring  flight  controul, 
Revere  him  in  the  stillness  of  the  soul ; 
With  silent  duty  meekly  bend  before  him, 
And  deep  within  your  inmost  hearts  adore  him. 


HYMNS. 


HYMN  II. 

PRAISE  to  God,  immortal  praise,* 
For  the  love  that  crowns  our  days ; 
Bounteous  source  of  every  joy, 
Let  thy  praise  our  tongues  employ ; 

For  the  blessings  of  the  field, 
For  the  stores  the  gardens  yield, 
For  the  vine's  exalted  juice, 
For  the  generous  olive's  use  ; 


*  Although  the  fig-tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be 
in  the  vines,  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall 
yield  no  meat,  the  flocks  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there 
shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls :  Yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will 
joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation. — HABAKKUK  iii.  17,  18. 

VOL.  i.  Y 


HYMNS. 

Flocks  that  whiten  all  the  plain, 
Yellow  sheaves  of  ripened  grain ; 
Clouds  that  drop  their  fattening  dews, 
Suns  that  temperate  warmth  diffuse  : 

All  that  Spring  with  bounteous  hand 
Scatters  o'er  the  smiling  land  : 
All  that  liberal  Autumn  pours 
From  her  rich  overflowing  stores  : 

These  to  thee,  my  God,  we  owe ; 
Source  whence  all  our  blessings  flow  j 
And  for  these  my  soul  shall  raise 
Grateful  vows  and  solemn  praise. 

Yet  should  rising  whirlwinds  tear 
From  its  stem  the  ripening  ear ; 
Should  the  fig-tree's  blasted  shoot 
Drop  her  green  untimely  fruit ; 


HYMN  S.  323 

Should  the  vine  put  forth  no  more, 
Nor  the  olive  yield  her  store  ; 
Though  the  sickening  flocks  should  fall, 
And  the  herds  desert  the  stall ; 

Should  thine  altered  hand  restrain 
The  early  and  the  latter  rain ; 
Blast  each  opening  bud  of  joy, 
And  the  rising  year  destroy  : 

Yet  to  thee  my  soul  should  raise 
Grateful  vows,  and  solemn  praise  ; 
And,  when  every  blessing 's  flown, 
Love  thee — for  thyself  alone. 


324  HYMNS. 


HYMN  III. 

FOR  EASTER  SUNDAY. 

AGAIN  the  Lord  of  life  and  light 

Awakes  the  kindling  ray ; 
Unseals  the  eyelids  of  the  morn, 

And  pours  increasing  day. 

O  what  a  night  was  that,  which  wrapt 
The  heathen  world  in  gloom ! 

O  what  a  sun  which  broke  this  day, 
Triumphant  from  the  tomb  ! 

This  day  be  grateful  homage  paid, 

And  loud  hosannas  sung ; 
Let  gladness  dwell  in  every  heart, 

And  praise  on  every  tongue. 


HYMNS. 

Ten  thousand  differing  lips  shall  join 

To  hail  this  welcome  morn, 
Which  scatters  blessings  from  its  wings, 

To  nations  yet  unborn. 

Jesus,  the  friend  of  human  kind, 
With  strong  compassion  moved, 

Descended  like  a  pitying  God, 
To  save  the  souls  he  loved. 

The  powers  of  darkness  leagued  in  vain 

To  bind  his  soul  in  death ; 
He  shook  their  kingdom  when  he  fell, 

With  his  expiring  breath. 

Not  long  the  toils  of  hell  could  keep 

The  hope  of  Judah's  line ; 
Corruption  never  could  take  hold 

On  aught  so  much  divine. 


326  HYMNS. 

And  now  his  conquering  chariot-wheels 

Ascend  the  lofty  skies ; 
While  broke  beneath  his  powerful  cross, 

Death's  iron  sceptre  lies. 

Exalted  high  at  God's  right  hand, 

The  Lord  of  all  below, 
Through  him  is  pardoning  love  dispensed, 

And  boundless  blessings  flow. 

And  still  for  erring,  guilty  man, 

A  brother's  pity  flows  ; 
And  still  his  bleeding  heart  is  touched 

With  memory  of  our  woes. 

To  thee,  my  Saviour  and  my  King, 

Glad  homage  let  me  give ; 
And  stand  prepared  like  thee  to  die, 

With  thee  that  I  may  live. 


HYMNS.  327 


HYMN  IV. 

BEHOLD,  where  breathing  love  divine, 
Our  dying  Master  stands  ! 

His  weeping  followers  gathering  round 
Receive  his  last  commands. 

From  that  mild  teacher's  parting  lips 

What  tender  accents  fell ! 
The  gentle  precept  which  he  gave 

Became  its  author  well. 

"  Blest  is  the  man  whose  softening  heart 

Feels  all  another's  pain ; 

To  whom  the  supplicating  eye 

Was  never  raised  in  vain. 


328  HYMNS. 

"  Whose  breast  expands  with  generous  warmth 

A  stranger's  woes  to  feel ; 
And  bleeds  in  pity  o'er  the  wound 
He  wants  the  power  to  heal. 

"  He  spreads  his  kind  supporting  arms 

To  every  child  of  grief ; 
His  secret  bounty  largely  flows, 
And  brings  unasked  relief. 

"  To  gentle  offices  of  love 

His  feet  are  never  slow ; 
He  views  through  mercy's  melting  eye 
A  brother  in  a  foe. 

"  Peace  from  the  bosom  of  his  God, 

My  peace  to  him  I  give ; 
And  when  he  kneels  before  the  throne, 
His  trembling  soul  shall  live. 


HYMNS.  329 


To  him  protection  shall  be  shown, 
And  mercy  from  above 

Descend  on  those  who  thus  fulfill 
The  perfect  law  of  love." 


330  HYMNS. 


HYMN  V. 


AWAKE,  my  soul!  lift  up  thine  eyes, 
See  where  thy  foes  against  thee  rise, 
In  long  array,  a  numerous  host ; 
Awake,  my  soul !   or  thou  art  lost. 


Here  giant  Danger  threatening  stands 
Mustering  his  pale  terrific  bands ; 
There  Pleasure's  silken  banners  spread, 
And  willing  souls  are  captive  led. 

See  where  rebellious  passions  rage, 
And  fierce  desires  and  lusts  engage ; 
The  meanest  foe  of  all  the  train 
Has  thousands  and  ten  thousands  slain. 


HYMNS.  381 

Thou  tread'st  upon  enchanted  ground, 
Perils  and  snares  beset  thee  round  ; 
Beware  of  all,  guard  every  part, 
But  most,  the  traitor  in  thy  heart. 

"  Come  then,  my  soul,  now  learn  to  wield 
The  weight  of  thine  immortal  shield ; " 
Put  on  the  armour  from  above 
Of  heavenly  truth  and  heavenly  love. 

The  terror  and  the  charm  repell, 
And  powers  of  earth,  and  powers  of  hell ; 
The  Man  of  Calvary  triumphed  here ; 
Why  should  his  faithful  followers  fear? 


332  HYMNS. 


HYMN  VI. 

PIOUS  FRIENDSHIP. 

How  blest  the  sacred  tie  that  binds 

In  union  sweet  according  minds  ! 

How  swift  the  heavenly  course  they  run, 

Whose  hearts,  whose  faith,  whose  hopes  are  one ! 

To  each,  the  soul  of  each  how  dear, 
What  jealous  love,  what  holy  fear! 
How  doth  the  generous  flame  within 
Refine  from  earth  and  cleanse  from  sin ! 

Their  streaming  tears  together  flow 
For  human  guilt  and  mortal  woe ; 
Their  ardent  prayers  together  rise, 
Like  mingling  flames  in  sacrifice. 


HYMNS.  ;;.'};j 

Together  both  they  seek  the  place 
Where  God  reveals  his  awful  face ; 
How  high,  how  strong,  their  raptures  swell, 
There's  none  but  kindred  souls  can  tell. 

Nor  shall  the  glowing  flame  expire 
When  nature  droops  her  sickening  fire ; 
Then  shall  they  meet  in  realms  above, 
A  heaven  of  joy — because  of  love. 


334  HYMNS. 


HYMN  VII. 


Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest. 


COME,  said  Jesus'  sacred  voice, 
Come  and  make  my  paths  your  choice  : 
I  will  guide  you  to  your  home  ; 

Weary  pilgrim,  hither  come  ! 

• 

Thou,  who  houseless,  sole,  forlorn, 
Long  hast  borne  the  proud  world's  scorn, 
Long  hast  roamed  the  barren  waste,— 
Weary  pilgrim,  hither  haste  ! 

Ye  who  tossed  on  beds  of  pain, 
Seek  for  ease,  but  seek  in  vain, 
Ye  whose  swollen  and  sleepless  eyes 
Watch  to  see  the  morning  rise ; 


HYMNS  335 

Ye,  by  fiercer  anguish  torn, 

In  strong  remorse  for  guilt  who  mourn  ; 

Here  repose  your  heavy  care, 

A  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear ! 

Sinner,  come !  for  here  is  found 
Balm  that  flows  for  every  wound ; 
Peace,  that  ever  shall  endure, 
Rest  eternal,  sacred,  sure. 


336  -  HYMNS. 


HYMN    VIII. 

. 



The  world  is  not  their  friend,  nor  the  world's  law. 


Lo  where  a  crowd  of  pilgrims  toil 

Yon  craggy  steeps  among  ! 
Strange  their  attire,  and  strange  their  mien, 

As  wild  they  press  along. 

Their  eyes  with  bitter  streaming  tears 
Now  bend  towards  the  ground, 

Now  rapt,  to  heaven  their  looks  they  raise, 
And  bursts  of  song  resound. 

And  hark  !  a  voice  from  'midst  the  throng 
Cries,  "  Stranger,  wouldst  thou  know 

Our  name,  our  race,  our  destined  home, 
Our  cause  of  joy  or  woe,- — 


HYMNS. 

"  Our  country  is  Emanuel's  land, 
We  seek  that  promised  soil ; 
The  songs  of  Zion  cheer  our  hearts, 
While  strangers  here  we  toil. 

"  Oft  do  our  eyes  with  joy  overflow, 

And  oft  are  bathed  in  tears ; 
Yet  nought  but  heaven  our  hopes  can  raise, 
And  nought  but  sin  our  fears. 

"  The  flowers  that  spring  along  the  road 

We  scarcely  stoop  to  pluck  ; 

We  walk  o'er  beds  of  shining  ore, 

Nor  waste  one  wishful  look  : 

"  We  tread  the  path  our  Master  trod, 

We  bear  the  cross  he  bore ; 
And  every  thorn  that  wounds  our  feet 

His  temples  pierced  before  : 
VOL.  i.  z 


/ 

338  HYMNS. 

"  Our  powers  are  oft  dissolved  away 

In  ecstasies  of  love  ; 
And  while  our  bodies  wander  here, 
Our  souls  are  fixed  above  : 

"  We  purge  our  mortal  dross  away, 

Refining  as  we  run ; 
But  while  we  die  to  earth  and  sense, 
Our  heaven  is  begun." 


HYMN  S.  330 


HYMN    IX. 


JOY  to  the  followers  of  the  Lord ! 
Thus  saith  the  sure  the  eternal  word. 
Not  of  earth  the  joy  it  brings, 
Tempered  in  celestial  springs  : 

Tis  the  joy  of  pardoned  sin, 
When  conscience  cries,  'Tis  well  within ; 
Tis  the  joy  that  fills  the  breast 
When  the  passions  sink  to  rest  : 

T  is  a  joy  that,  seated  deep, 
Leaves  not  when  we  sigh  and  weep ; 
It  spreads  itself  in  virtuous  deeds, 
With  sorrow  sighs,  in  pity  bleeds. 
z  2 


340  HYMNS. 

Stern  and  awful  are  its  tones 
When  the  patriot  martyr  groans, 
And  the  throbbing  pulse  beats  high 
To  rapture,  mixed  with  agony. 

A  tenderer,  softer  form  it  wears, 
Dissolved  in  love,  dissolved  in  tears, 
When  humble  souls  a  Saviour  greet, 
And  sinners  clasp  the  mercy-seat. 

Tis  joy  e'en  here !  a  budding  flower, 
Struggling  with  snows  and  storm  and  shower, 
And  waits  the  moment  to  expand, 
Transplanted  to  its  native  land. 


HYMNS.  341 


HYMN  X. 
A  PASTORAL  HYMN. 

"  Gentle  pilgrim,  tell  me  why 
Dost  thou  fold  thine  arms  and  sigh, 
And  wistful  cast  thine  eyes  around  ? — 
Whither,  pilgrim,  art  thou  bound  ?" 

"  The  road  to  Zion's  gates  I  seek ; 
If  thou  canst  inform  me,  speak." 

"  Keep  yon  right-hand  path  with  care, 
Though  crags  obstruct,  and  brambles  tear ; 
You  just  discern  a  narrow  track, — 
Enter  there,  and  turn  not  back." 

"  Say  where  that  pleasant  path-way  leads, 
Winding  down  yon  flowery  meads? 
Song  and  dance  the  way  beguiles, 
Every  face  is  drest  in  smiles." 


342  HYMNS. 

"  Shun  with  care  that  flowery  way ; 

Twill  lead  thee,  pilgrim,  far  astray." 
"  Guide  or  counsel  do  I  need?" 
"  Pilgrim,  he  who  runs  may  read." 
"  Is  the  way  that  I  must  keep 

Crossed  by  waters  wide  and  deep  ?" 
"  Did  it  lead  through  flood  and  fire 

Thou  must  not  stop — thou  must  not  tire." 
''  Till  I  have  my  journey  past 

Tell  me  will  the  daylight  last? 

Will  the  sky  be  bright  and  clear 

Till  the  evening  shades  appear?" 
"  Though  the  sun  now  rides  so  high, 

Clouds  may  veil  the  evening  sky ; 

Fast  sinks  the  sun,  fast  wears  the  day, 

Thou  must  not  stop — thou  must  not 

God  speed  thee,  pilgrim,  on  thy  way 


"'     1 

stay :     > 
!"         J 


343 


SABBATH  HYMNS. 


HYMN   XI. 

SLEEP,  sleep  today,  tormenting  cares 

Of  earth  and  folly  born ! 
Ye  shall  not  dim  the  light  that  streams 

From  this  celestial  morn. 

Tomorrow  will  be  time  enough 
To  feel  your  harsh  controul ; 

Ye  shall  not  violate  this  day, 
The  sabbath  of  my  soul. 

Sleep,  sleep  for  ever,  guilty  thoughts  ! 

Let  fires  of  vengeance  die ; 
And,  purged  from  sin,  may  I  behold 

A  God  of  purity  ! 


344  SABBATH  HYMNS. 

HYMN   XII. 

WHEN,  as  returns  this  solemn  day, 
Man  comes  to  meet  his  maker  God, 
What  rites,  what  honours  shall  he  pay  ? 
How  spread  his  sovereign's  praise  abroad  ? 

From  marble  domes  and  gilded  spires 
Shall  curling  clouds  of  incense  rise  ? 
And  gems,  and  gold,  and  garlands  deck 
The  costly  pomp  of  sacrifice  ? 

Vain  sinful  man  !  Creation's  lord 
Thy  golden  offerings  well  may  spare ; 
But  give  thy  heart,  and  thou  shalt  find, 
Here  dwells  a  God  who  heareth  prayer. 

END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


Printed  by  Richard  Taylor, 
Shoe-Lane,  London. 


t  BINDING  SECT.  <|UL  11 1968 


PR  Barbauld,  Anna  Letitia 

4057  Uikin) 

B7  Works 

1825 

v.l 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND ELEVEN,
_A POEM_.

BY ANNA LÆTITIA BARBAULD.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON AND CO.,
ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD.

1812.

PRINTED BY
RICHARD TAYLOR AND CO., SHOE LANE.




EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND ELEVEN.

Still the loud death drum, thundering from afar,
O'er the vext nations pours the storm of war:
To the stern call still Britain bends her ear,
Feeds the fierce strife, the alternate hope and fear;
Bravely, though vainly, dares to strive with Fate,
And seeks by turns to prop each sinking state.
Colossal Power with overwhelming force                  [2]
Bears down each fort of Freedom in its course;
Prostrate she lies beneath the Despot's sway,
While the hushed nations curse him--and obey,

Bounteous in vain, with frantic man at strife,
Glad Nature pours the means--the joys of life;
In vain with orange blossoms scents the gale,
The hills with olives clothes, with corn the vale;
Man calls to Famine, nor invokes in vain,
Disease and Rapine follow in her train;
The tramp of marching hosts disturbs the plough,
The sword, not sickle, reaps the harvest now,
And where the Soldier gleans the scant supply.
The helpless Peasant but retires to die;
No laws his hut from licensed outrage shield,           [3]
And war's least horror is the ensanguined field.

Fruitful in vain, the matron counts with pride
The blooming youths that grace her honoured side;
No son returns to press her widow'd hand,
Her fallen blossoms strew a foreign strand.
--Fruitful in vain, she boasts her virgin race,
Whom cultured arts adorn and gentlest grace;
Defrauded of its homage, Beauty mourns,
And the rose withers on its virgin thorns.
Frequent, some stream obscure, some uncouth name
By deeds of blood is lifted into fame;
Oft o'er the daily page some soft-one bends
To learn the fate of husband, brothers, friends,
Or the spread map with anxious eye explores,            [4]
Its dotted boundaries and penciled shores,
Asks _where_ the spot that wrecked her bliss is found,
And learns its name but to detest the sound.

And thinks't thou, Britain, still to sit at ease,
An island Queen amidst thy subject seas,
While the vext billows, in their distant roar,
But soothe thy slumbers, and but kiss thy shore?
To sport in wars, while danger keeps aloof,
Thy grassy turf unbruised by hostile hoof?
So sing thy flatterers; but, Britain, know,
Thou who hast shared the guilt must share the woe.
Nor distant is the hour; low murmurs spread,
And whispered fears, creating what they dread;
Ruin, as with an earthquake shock, is here,             [5]
There, the heart-witherings of unuttered fear,
And that sad death, whence most affection bleeds,
Which sickness, only of the soul, precedes.
Thy baseless wealth dissolves in air away,
Like mists that melt before the morning ray:
No more on crowded mart or busy street
Friends, meeting friends, with cheerful hurry greet;
Sad, on the ground thy princely merchants bend
Their altered looks, and evil days portend,
And fold their arms, and watch with anxious breast
The tempest blackening in the distant West.

Yes, thou must droop; thy Midas dream is o'er;
The golden tide of Commerce leaves thy shore,
Leaves thee to prove the alternate ills that haunt      [6]
Enfeebling Luxury and ghastly Want;
Leaves thee, perhaps, to visit distant lands,
And deal the gifts of Heaven with equal hands.

Yet, O my Country, name beloved, revered,
By every tie that binds the soul endeared,
Whose image to my infant senses came
Mixt with Religion's light and Freedom's holy flame!
If prayers may not avert, if 'tis thy fate
To rank amongst the names that once were great,
Not like the dim cold Crescent shalt thou fade,
Thy debt to Science and the Muse unpaid;
Thine are the laws surrounding states revere,
Thine the full harvest of the mental year,
Thine the bright stars in Glory's sky that shine,       [7]
And arts that make it life to live are thine.
If westward streams the light that leaves thy shores,
Still from thy lamp the streaming radiance pours.
Wide spreads thy race from Ganges to the pole,
O'er half the western world thy accents roll:
Nations beyond the Apalachian hills
Thy hand has planted and thy spirit fills:
Soon as their gradual progress shall impart
The finer sense of morals and of art,
Thy stores of knowledge the new states shall know,
And think thy thoughts, and with thy fancy glow;
Thy Lockes, thy Paleys shall instruct their youth,
Thy leading star direct their search for truth;
Beneath the spreading Platan's tent-like shade,         [8]
Or by Missouri's rushing waters laid,
"Old father Thames" shall be the Poets' theme,
Of Hagley's woods the enamoured virgin dream,
And Milton's tones the raptured ear enthrall,
Mixt with the roar of Niagara's fall;
In Thomson's glass the ingenuous youth shall learn
A fairer face of Nature to discern;
Nor of the Bards that swept the British lyre
Shall fade one laurel, or one note expire.
Then, loved Joanna, to admiring eyes
Thy storied groups in scenic pomp shall rise;
Their high soul'd strains and Shakespear's noble rage
Shall with alternate passion shake the stage.
Some youthful Basil from thy moral lay                  [9]
With stricter hand his fond desires shall sway;
Some Ethwald, as the fleeting shadows pass,
Start at his likeness in the mystic glass;
The tragic Muse resume her just controul,
With pity and with terror purge the soul,
While wide o'er transatlantic realms thy name
Shall live in light, and gather _all_ its fame.

Where wanders Fancy down the lapse of years
Shedding o'er imaged woes untimely tears?
Fond moody Power! as hopes--as fears prevail,
She longs, or dreads, to lift the awful veil,
On visions of delight now loves to dwell,
Now hears the shriek of woe or Freedom's knell:
Perhaps, she says, long ages past away,                 [10]
And set in western waves our closing day,
Night, Gothic night, again may shade the plains
Where Power is seated, and where Science reigns;
England, the seat of arts, be only known
By the gray ruin and the mouldering stone;
That Time may tear the garland from her brow,
And Europe sit in dust, as Asia now.

Yet then the ingenuous youth whom Fancy fires
With pictured glories of illustrious sires,
With duteous zeal their pilgrimage shall take
From the blue mountains, or Ontario's lake,
With fond adoring steps to press the sod
By statesmen, sages, poets, heroes trod;
On Isis' banks to draw inspiring air,                   [11]
From Runnymede to send the patriot's prayer;
In pensive thought, where Cam's slow waters wind,
To meet those shades that ruled the realms of mind;
In silent halls to sculptured marbles bow,
And hang fresh wreaths round Newton's awful brow.
Oft shall they seek some peasant's homely shed,
Who toils, unconscious of the mighty dead,
To ask where Avon's winding waters stray,
And thence a knot of wild flowers bear away;
Anxious enquire where Clarkson, friend of man,
Or all-accomplished Jones his race began;
If of the modest mansion aught remains
Where Heaven and Nature prompted Cowper's strains;
Where Roscoe, to whose patriot breast belong            [12]
The Roman virtue and the Tuscan song,
Led Ceres to the black and barren moor
Where Ceres never gained a wreath before[1]:
With curious search their pilgrim steps shall rove
By many a ruined tower and proud alcove,
Shall listen for those strains that soothed of yore
Thy rock, stern Skiddaw, and thy fall, Lodore;
Feast with Dun Edin's classic brow their sight,
And visit "Melross by the pale moonlight."

But who their mingled feelings shall pursue
When London's faded glories rise to view?
The mighty city, which by every road,                   [13]
In floods of people poured itself abroad;
Ungirt by walls, irregularly great,
No jealous drawbridge, and no closing gate;
Whose merchants (such the state which commerce brings)
Sent forth their mandates to dependant kings:
Streets, where the turban'd Moslem, bearded Jew,
And woolly Afric, met the brown Hindu;
Where through each vein spontaneous plenty flowed,
Where Wealth enjoyed, and Charity bestowed.
Pensive and thoughtful shall the wanderers greet
Each splendid square, and still, untrodden street;
Or of some crumbling turret, mined by time,
The broken stair with perilous step shall climb,
Thence stretch their view the wide horizon round,       [14]
By scattered hamlets trace its antient bound,
And, choked no more with fleets, fair Thames survey
Through reeds and sedge pursue his idle way.

With throbbing bosoms shall the wanderers tread
The hallowed mansions of the silent dead,
Shall enter the long isle and vaulted dome
Where Genius and where Valour find a home;
Awe-struck, midst chill sepulchral marbles breathe,
Where all above is still, as all beneath;
Bend at each antique shrine, and frequent turn
To clasp with fond delight some sculptured urn,
The ponderous mass of Johnson's form to greet,
Or breathe the prayer at Howard's sainted feet.

Perhaps some Briton, in whose musing mind               [15]
Those ages live which Time has cast behind,
To every spot shall lead his wondering guests
On whose known site the beam of glory rests:
Here Chatham's eloquence in thunder broke,
Here Fox persuaded, or here Garrick spoke;
Shall boast how Nelson, fame and death in view,
To wonted victory led his ardent crew,
In England's name enforced, with loftiest tone[2],
Their duty,--and too well fulfilled his own:
How gallant Moore[3], as ebbing life dissolved,
_But_ hoped his country had his fame absolved.
Or call up sages whose capacious mind                   [16]
Left in its course a track of light behind;
Point where mute crowds on Davy's lips reposed,
And Nature's coyest secrets were disclosed;
Join with their Franklin, Priestley's injured name,
Whom, then, each continent shall proudly claim.

Oft shall the strangers turn their eager feet
The rich remains of antient art to greet,
The pictured walls with critic eye explore,
And Reynolds be what Raphael was before.
On spoils from every clime their eyes shall gaze,
Ægyptian granites and the Etruscan vase;
And when midst fallen London, they survey
The stone where Alexander's ashes lay,
Shall own with humbled pride the lesson just            [17]
By Time's slow finger written in the dust.

There walks a Spirit o'er the peopled earth,
Secret his progress is, unknown his birth;
Moody and viewless as the changing wind,
No force arrests his foot, no chains can bind;
Where'er he turns, the human brute awakes,
And, roused to better life, his sordid hut forsakes:
He thinks, he reasons, glows with purer fires,
Feels finer wants, and burns with new desires:
Obedient Nature follows where he leads;
The steaming marsh is changed to fruitful meads;
The beasts retire from man's asserted reign,
And prove his kingdom was not given in vain.
Then from its bed is drawn the ponderous ore,           [18]
Then Commerce pours her gifts on every shore,
Then Babel's towers and terrassed gardens rise,
And pointed obelisks invade the skies;
The prince commands, in Tyrian purple drest,
And Ægypt's virgins weave the linen vest.
Then spans the graceful arch the roaring tide,
And stricter bounds the cultured fields divide.
Then kindles Fancy, then expands the heart,
Then blow the flowers of Genius and of Art;
Saints, Heroes, Sages, who the land adorn,
Seem rather to descend than to be born;
Whilst History, midst the rolls consigned to fame,
With pen of adamant inscribes their name.

The Genius now forsakes the favoured shore,             [19]
And hates, capricious, what he loved before;
Then empires fall to dust, then arts decay,
And wasted realms enfeebled despots sway;
Even Nature's changed; without his fostering smile
Ophir no gold, no plenty yields the Nile;
The thirsty sand absorbs the useless rill,
And spotted plagues from putrid fens distill.
In desert solitudes then Tadmor sleeps,
Stern Marius then o'er fallen Carthage weeps;
Then with enthusiast love the pilgrim roves
To seek his footsteps in forsaken groves,
Explores the fractured arch, the ruined tower,
Those limbs disjointed of gigantic power;
Still at each step he dreads the adder's sting,         [20]
The Arab's javelin, or the tiger's spring;
With doubtful caution treads the echoing ground.
And asks where Troy or Babylon is found.

And now the vagrant Power no more detains
The vale of Tempe, or Ausonian plains;
Northward he throws the animating ray,
O'er Celtic nations bursts the mental day:
And, as some playful child the mirror turns,
Now here now there the moving lustre burns;
Now o'er his changeful fancy more prevail
Batavia's dykes than Arno's purple vale,
And stinted suns, and rivers bound with frost,
Than Enna's plains or Baia's viny coast;
Venice the Adriatic weds in vain,                       [21]
And Death sits brooding o'er Campania's plain;
O'er Baltic shores and through Hercynian groves,
Stirring the soul, the mighty impulse moves;
Art plies his tools, arid Commerce spreads her sail,
And wealth is wafted in each shifting gale.
The sons of Odin tread on Persian looms,
And Odin's daughters breathe distilled perfumes;
Loud minstrel Bards, in Gothic halls, rehearse
The Runic rhyme, and "build the lofty verse:"
The Muse, whose liquid notes were wont to swell
To the soft breathings of the' Æolian shell,
Submits, reluctant, to the harsher tone,
And scarce believes the altered voice her own.
And now, where Cæsar saw with proud disdain            [22]
The wattled hut and skin of azure stain,
Corinthian columns rear their graceful forms,
And light varandas brave the wintry storms,
While British tongues the fading fame prolong
Of Tully's eloquence and Maro's song.
Where once Bonduca whirled the scythed car,
And the fierce matrons raised the shriek of war,
Light forms beneath transparent muslins float,
And tutored voices swell the artful note.
Light-leaved acacias and the shady plane
And spreading cedar grace the woodland reign;
While crystal walls the tenderer plants confine,
The fragrant orange and the nectared pine;
The Syrian grape there hangs her rich festoons,         [23]
Nor asks for purer air, or brighter noons:
Science and Art urge on the useful toil,
New mould a climate and create the soil,
Subdue the rigour of the northern Bear,
O'er polar climes shed aromatic air,
On yielding Nature urge their new demands,
And ask not gifts but tribute at her hands.

London exults:--on London Art bestows
Her summer ices and her winter rose;
Gems of the East her mural crown adorn,
And Plenty at her feet pours forth her horn;
While even the exiles her just laws disclaim,
People a continent, and build a name:
August she sits, and with extended hands                [24]
Holds forth the book of life to distant lands.

But fairest flowers expand but to decay;
The worm is in thy core, thy glories pass away;
Arts, arms and wealth destroy the fruits they bring;
Commerce, like beauty, knows no second spring.
Crime walks thy streets, Fraud earns her unblest bread,
O'er want and woe thy gorgeous robe is spread,
And angel charities in vain oppose:
With grandeur's growth the mass of misery grows.
For see,--to other climes the Genius soars,
He turns from Europe's desolated shores;
And lo, even now, midst mountains wrapt in storm,
On Andes' heights he shrouds his awful form;
On Chimborazo's summits treads sublime,                 [25]
Measuring in lofty thought the march of Time;
Sudden he calls:--"'Tis now the hour!" he cries,
Spreads his broad hand, and bids the nations rise.
La Plata hears amidst her torrents' roar,
Potosi hears it, as she digs the ore:
Ardent, the Genius fans the noble strife,
And pours through feeble souls a higher life,
Shouts to the mingled tribes from sea to sea,
And swears--Thy world,  Columbus, shall be free.

THE END.

Footnotes:

[1] The Historian of the age of Leo has brought into cultivation
the extensive tract of Chatmoss.

[2] Every reader will recollect the sublime telegraphic dispatch,
"England expects every man to do his duty."


[3] "I hope England will be satisfied," were the last words of
General Moore.
