discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



I 



«®?$k 








■ /tin*. Hvd&n.jtfiimta'- -./*Ar,S»bw™ »•■/ ■ ?■«•*■ . 



"#~ 



ELEGIAC SONNETS, 



AND 



OTHER POEMS, 



By CHARLOTTE SMITH. 



VOL. II. 



SECOND EDITION. 



Non t' appreffar ovc fia rifo c canto 
Canzone mio, nd, ma pianto : 
Non fa per te di ftar con gentc allegra 
Vedova fcoofolata, in vefta nigra. 

PlTRARCHA. 



LONDON: 

PRINTXD FOE T. CADZLL, JUNIOR, AND W. DAVIE S, 
IN THI STRAND; BY R. NOBLE, SHIRR. LANS. 

l800. 



J). 



u , 



i ♦as lei* 



<&&**■ 



"J 



CONTENTS. 



SONNETS. 

Page 

lx. To an amiable Girl 1 

lxi. Suppofcd to have been written in Ame- 
rica 2 

lxi i . Written on patting by Moonlight through 
a Village, while the ground was covered 
with Snow 3 

Lxm. The Gofiamer 4 

1 
lxiv. Written at Briflol in the Summer of 

*794 5 

l x v. To Dr. Parry of Bath, with fome botanic 
Drawings which had been made fome 
years 6 



• 



CONTENTS. 



Page 
lxvi. Written in a tempeftuous Night, on the 

coaft of Suflex 7 

l x v 1 1 . On palling over a dreary tra& of country, 
and near the ruins of a dcfcrtcd Chapel, 
during a Temped 8 

lxvi 1 1. Written at Exmouth, Midfummer 1795 9 

tx ix« Written at the fame place, on feeing a. 
Seaman return who had been impri* 
foned at Rochfort 10 

lxx. On being cautioned againft walking on 
an Headland overlooking the Sea, be- 
caufe it was frequented by a Lunatic ... 11 

lxx i. Written at Weymouth in Winter 12 

lxx 1 1. To the Morning Star. Written near the 

Sea 13 

lxxiii. To a querulous Acquaintance 14 

lxxiv. The Winter Night 15 



CONTENTS* ' 



Page 

LXXV. • l6 

lxxvi. To a Young Man entering the World . 17 

lxxvi 1. To the Infcft of the Goflamer 18 

ixxvi 1 1. Snow-drops 19 

ixxi x. To the Goddefe of Botany 20 

lxxx* To the Invifible Moon 21 

LXXX I. -. 22 

lxxx 1 1. To the Shade of Burns 23 

lxxxi ii. The Sea View 24 

lxxxiv; TotheMufe... 25 

Lxxxv. 26 

lxxxvi. Written near a Port on a dark Evening 27 

lxxx vi I. Written in Oftober 28 

lxxxvi 11. Nepenthe 29 

lxxx ix. To the Sun 30 



contents; 



Page 
xc. ToOblivion * 31 

xci. Refle&ionson fomc Drawings of Plants 32 

xcu. Written at Bignor Park in Suffex, in 

Auguft, 1799 - 33 

The Dead Beggar 34 

The Female Exile 37 

Occafional Addrefs. Written for the Benefit of a 
diftreffed Player, detained at Brighthelmflone 
for Debt, November 1 792 41 

Infcription on a Stone in the Church- Yard at 
Boreham, in Eflex 46 

A defcriptive Ode • 47 

1 

s 

Verfes fuppofed to have been written in the New 
Foreft, in' early Spring 54 

Song. From the French 56 

Apoflrophe to an old Tree 58 

The Foreft Boy 62 



CONTENTS. 



Page 
Ode to the Poppy. Written by a deceafcd Friend 76 

Vcrfes written by the fame Lady on feeing her two 
Sons at play 80 

Vcrfes on the Death of the fame Lady, written 
in September 1794 82 

Fragment, defcriptive of the Miferies of War .... 86 

April 90 

Ode to Death 95 

Stanzas from the Novel of the Young Philofopher 98 

Tothe Winds 100 

ToVefper - 104 

Lydia 106 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



At". • 

SONNET LX. ». v> 




/;• 



TO AN AMIABLE GIRL, "« 



\ . ' 



iVXlRANDA ! mark where (hrinking from the gale, 

Its {ilken leaves yet moift with early dew, , 
That fair faint flower, the Lily of the Vale, 

Droops its meek head, and looks, methinks, like you f 
Wrapp'd in a fhadowy veil of tender green, 

Its fnowp bells a (oft perfume difpenie, 
And bending as reluftant to be feen, 

In (imple lovelinefs it fooths the fenfe. 
With boron bared to meet the garifli day, 

The glaring Tulip, gaudy, undifmay'd, 
Offends the eye of tafte ; that turns away 

To leek the Lily in her fragrant (hade. 
With fuch unconfcious beauty, penfive, mild, 
Miranda charms — Nature's foft modeft child. 

VOL. II. B 




ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXI. 



SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN IN AMERICA. 

XLL-omen'd bird ! whole cries portentous float 

O'er yon favannah with the mournful wind ; 
While, as the Indian hears your piercing note, 

Dark dread of future evil fills his mind ; 
Wherefore with early lamentation break 

The dear delufive vifions of repofe ? 
Why from fo fhort felicity awake 

My wounded fenfes to fubftantial woes ? 
O'er my fick foul thus rous'd from tranfient reft, 

Pale Superftition fheds her influence drear, 
And to my fh udder ing fancy would fuggeft 

Thou com* ft to fpeak of every woe I fear. 
Ah ! Reafon little o'er the foul prevails, 
When, from ideal ill, the enfeebled fpirit fails ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS* 3 



SONNET LXII. 

WRITTEN ON PASSING BY MOON-LIGHT THROUGH 

A VILLAGE, WHILE THE GROUND WAS 

COVERED WITH SNOW. 

VV HILE thus I wander, cheerlefs and unblcft, 

And End in change of place but change of pain; 
In tranquil Aeep the village labourers reft, 

And tafte that quiet I purfue in vain ! 
Hufh'd is the hamlet now, and faintly gleam 

The dying embers, from the cafement low 
Of the thatch'd cottage ; while the Moon's wan beam 

Lends a new luftre to the dazzling fnow* 
r O'er the cold wafte, amid the freezing night, 

Scarce heeding whither, defolate I ftray ; 
For me, pale Eye of Evening, thy foft light 

Leads to no happy home ; my weary way 
Ends but in fad viciflitudes of care : 
I only fly from doubt— to meet defpair ! 

b a 



BLBCIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXIII. 

THE GOSSAMER. 

vJ'ER faded heath-flowers fpun, or thorny furze, 

The filmy Goflamer is lightly fpread ; 
Waving in every fighing air that ftirs, 

As Fairy fingers had entwined the thread : 
A thoufand trembling orbs of lucid dew 

Spangle the texture of the fairy loom, 
As if foft Sylphs, lamenting as they flew, 

Had wept departed Summer's tranfient bloom : 
But the wind rifes, and the turf receives 

The glittering web : — So, evanefcent, fade 
Bright views that Youth with fanguine heart believes : 

So vanifh fchemes of blife, by Fancy made ; 
Which, fragile as the fleeting dews of morn, 
Leave but the withered heath, and barren thorn ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXIV. 

WRITTEN AT BRISTOL IN THE SUMMER OF 1794* 

XxERE from the reftlefs bed of lingering pain 
The languid fufferer fceks the tepid wave, 

And feels returning health and hope again 

i 

Difperfe " the gathering fhadows of the grave !'• 
And here romantic rocks that boldly fwell, 

Fringed with green woods, or ftain'd with veins of ore, 
Call'd native Genius forth, whofe Heav'n-taught (kill 

Charm'd the deep echos of the rifted ftiore. 
But tepid waves, wild fcenes, or fummer air, 

Reftore they palfied Fancy, woe-depreft ? 
Check they the torpid influence of Defpair, 

Or bid warm Health re-animate the bread ; 
Where Hope's loft vifions have no longer part, 
And whole fad inmate is— a broken heart ? 



O ELEGIAC SONNETS. 

i i "f 

SONNET LXV. 

TO DR. PARRY OF BATH, WITH SOME BOTANIC > 
DRAWINGS WHICH HAD BEEN MADE SOME 

YEARS. 

AN happier hours, ere yet fo keenly blew 
Adverfhy's cold blight, and bitter dorms, 
Luxuriant Summer's evanefcent forms, 

And Spring's foft blooms with pencil light I drew : 

But as the lovely family of flowers 

Shrink from the bleaknefs of the Northern blaft, 
So fail from prefent care and forrow pad 

The flight botanic pencil's mimic powers— 

Nor will kind Fancy even by Memory's aid, 
Her vifionary garlands now entwine ; 

Yet while the wreaths of Hope and Pleafure fade, 
Still is one flower of deathlefs bloflbm mine, 

That dares the lapfe of Time, and Temped rude, 

The unfading Amaranth of Gratitude. 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



S O N N E T LXVI. 

WRITTEN IN A TEMPESTUOUS NIGHT, ON THE 

COAST OF SUSSEX. 

JL HE night-flood rakes upon the flony fhore ; 

Along the rugged cliffs and chalky caves 
Mourns the hoarfe Ocean, feeming to deplore 

All that are buried in his reftlefs waves — 
Mined by corrofive tides, the hollow rock 

Falls prone, and ruining from its turfy height, 
Shakes the broad beach with long-refounding fhock, 

Loud thundering on the ear of fullen Night ; 
Above the defolate and flormy deep, 

Gleams the wan Moon, by floating mid oppreft ; 
Yet here while youth, and health, and labour deep, 

Alone I wander — Calm untroubled reft, 

" Nature's foft nurfe," deferts the figh-fwoln breaft, 
And fhuns the eyes, that only wake to weep ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXVII. 

ON PASSING OVER A DREARY TRACT OP COUNTRY, 
AND NEAR THE RUINS OP A DESERTED 
CHAPEL, DURING A TEMPEST. 

OWIFT fleet the billowy clouds along the fky, 

Earth feems to fhudder at the ftorm aghad ; 
While only beings as forlorn as I, 

Court the chill horrors of the howling blaft. 
Even round yon crumbling walls, ji fearch of food, 

The ravenous Owl foregoes his evening flight, 
And in his cave, within the deeped wood, 

The Fox eludes the temped of the night. 
But to my heart congenial is the gloom 

Which hides me from a World I wiih to fhun ; 
That fcene where Ruin faps the mouldering tomb, 

Suits with the fadnefs of a wretch undone. 
Nor is the deeped fliade, the keened air, 
Black as my fate, or cold as my defpair. 



ELEGIAC SONNETS* 



SONNET LXVIII. 

WRITTEN AT EXMOUTH, MIDSUMMER, 1795* 

Jl ALL, dews of Heaven, upon my burning breaft, 

Bathe with cool drops thefe ever-ftreaming eyes ; 
Ye gentle Winds, that fan the balmy Weft, - 

With the foft rippling tide of morning rife, 
And calm my burfting heart, as here I keep 

The vigil of the wretched ! — Now away 
Fade the pale ftars, as wavering o'er the deep 

Soft rofy tints announce another day, 
The day of Middle Summer !— Ah ! in vain 

To thofe who mourn like me, does radiant June 
Lead on her fragrant hours ; for hopelefs pain 

Darkens with fullen clouds the Sun of Noon, 
And veil'd in fhadows Nature's face appears 
To hearts o'crwhelm'd with grief, to eyes fuffiifed with 
tears. 



lO ELEGIAC SONNETS* 



SONNET LXIX. 

WRITTEN AT THE SAME PLACE, ON SEEING A 
SEAMAN RETURN WHO HAD BEEN 
IMPRISONED AT ROCHFORT. 

VsLOUDS, gold .and purple, o'er the weltering ray 
Threw a bright veil, and catching lights between. 
Fell on the glancing fail, that we had feen 

With foft, but adverfe winds, throughout the day 

Contending vainly : as the veflel nears, 
Encreaung numbers hail it from the fhore ; 

Lo ! on the deck a pallid form appears, 

Half wondering to behold himfelf once more 

Approach his home— And now" he can difcern 
His cottage thatch amid furrounding trees ; 
Yet, trembling, dreads left forrow or difeafe 

Await him there, embittering his return : 

But all he ! >ves are fafe ; with heart elate, 

Tho' poor and plundered, he abfolves his fate ! 



-■ " :- 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 11 

SONNET LXX. 

ON BEING CAUTIONED AGAINST* WALKING ON AN 
HEADLAND OVERLOOKING THE SEA, BECAUSE 
IT WAS FREQUENTED BY A LUNATIC. 

AS there a folitary wretch who hies 

To the tall cliff, with flailing pace or flow, 
And, meafuring, views with wild and hollow 'eyes 

Its diflancc from the waves that chide below ; 
Who, as the fea-born gale with frequent fighs 
Chills his cold bed upon the mountain turf, 
With hoarfe, half-utter'd lamentation, lies 

Murmuring refponfes to the dafhfng furf ? 
In moody fadnefc, on the giddy brink, 

I (be him more with envy than with fear ; 
He has no nice felicities that fhrink 

From giant horrors ; wildly wandering here, 
He feems (uncurfed with reafon) not to know 
The depth or the duration of his woe. 



1* ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXXI. 

WRITTEN AT WEYMOUTH % IN WINTER. 

J. HE chill waves whiten in the fliarp North*eaQ ; 

Cold, cold the night-blaft comes, with fullen found; 
And black and gloomy, like my cheerlefs breaft, 

Frowns the dark pier and lonely fea-view round. 
Yet a few months— and on the peopled ftrand 

Pleafure (hall all her varied forms difplay ; 
Nymphs lightly tread the bright reflecting fand, 

And proud fails whiten all the fummer bay : 
Then, for thefe winds that whittle keen and bleak, 

Mufic's delightful melodies (hall float 
O'er the blue waters ; but 'tis mine to feek 

Rather, fome unfrequented fhade, remote 

From fights and founds of gaiety 1 mourn 

All that gave me delight Ah ! never to return ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS* lg 

SONNET LXXIL 

TO THE MORNING STAR, 
WRITTEN NEAR THE SEA* 

JL HEE ! lucid arbiter 'twixt day and night, 
The Seaman greets, as on the Ocean flream 
Reflected, thy precurfive friendly beam 

Points out the long-fought haven to his fight. 

Watching for thee, the lover's ardent eyes 

Turn to the eaflern hill? ; and as above 
Thy brilliance trembles, hails the lights that rife 

To guide his footfteps to expecting love ! 

I mark thee too, as night's dark clouds retire, 
And thy bright radiance glances on the (ea ; 

But never more (hall thy heraldic fire 

Speak of approaching morn with joy to me 1 

Quench 'd in the gloom of death that heavenly ray 

Once lent to light me on my thorny way ! 



14 ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXXIIL 

TO A QUERULOUS ACQUAINTANCE. 

JL HOU ! whom Profperity has always led 
O'er level paths, with mofs and flow'rets ftrewn ; 

For whom (he ftill prepares a downy bed 

With rofcs fcatter'd, and to thorns unknown, 

Wilt thou yet murmur at a mif-placed leaf ? 
Think, ere thy irritable nerves repine, 
How many, born with feelings keen as thine, 

Tafte all the fed viciffitudes of grief ; 

How many fteep in tears their fcanty bread ; 
Or, loft to reafon, Sorrow's vi£Ums ! rave : 

How many know not where to lay their head ; 
While fome are driven by anguifh to the grave ! 

Think ; nor impatient at a feather's weight, 

Mar the uncommon bleffings of thy fate ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 15 



»» 



SONNET LXXIV. 

THE WINTER NIGHT. 

OLEEP, that knits up the raveird fleeve of care, 

Forfakes roe, while the chill and fallen blafl, 

As my fad foul recalls its forrows pad, 
Seems like a fummons, bidding me prepare 
For the lad fleep of death — Murmuring I hear 

The hollow wind around the ancient towers, 
While night and (llence reign ; and cold and drear 

The darkeft gloom of Middle Winter lours ; 
But wherefore fear exiftence fuch as mine, 

To change for long and undifturb'd repofe ? 
Ah ! when this fuffering being I refign, 

And o'er my miferies the tomb (hall dole, 
By her, whoie lofs in anguifh I deplore, 
I {hall be laid, and feel that lofs no more I 



t6 ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXXV. 



W HERE the wild woods and pathlefe forefls frown, 

The darkling Pilgrim feeks his unknown way, 
Till on the grals he throws him weary down, 

To wait in broken fleep the dawn of day : 
Thro' boughs juft waving in the filent air, 

With pale capricious light the Summer Moon 
Chequers his humid couch ; while Fancy there, 

That loves to wanton in the Night's deep noon, 
Calls from the moffy roots and fountain edge 

Fair vifionary Nymphs that haunt the {hade, 
Or Naiads rifing from the whifpering (edge ? * 

m 

And, 'mid the beauteous group, his dear loved maid 
Seems beckoning him with fmiles to join the train : 
Then, flarting from his dream, he feels his woes again I 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. 1J 



SONNET LXXVI. 



TO A YOUNG MAN ENTERING THE WORLD* 

VXO now, ingenuous Youth! — The trying hour 
Is come : The World demands that thou fhouldfl go 

To a&ive life : There titles, wealth and power 
May all be purchas'd- — Yet I joy to know 

Thou wilt not pay their price. Hie bafe controul 
Of petty defpots in their pedant reign 
Already hail thou felt ;— and high difdain 

Of Tyrants is imprinted on thy foul- 
Not, where miftaken Glory, in the field 

Rears her rod banner, be thou ever found ; 
But, againft proud Oppreflion raife the (hield 

Of Patriot daring So (halt thou renown'd 

For the beft virtues live ; or that denied 
May'ft die, as Hampden or as Sydney died f . 
vol. II c 



l£ ELEGIAC SONNET*. 



WIIUHH W IWHII I . pi _ m-mmgif^gt 



SONNET LXXVIL 

TO THB INJECT OF THE GOSSAMER, 

OMALL, viewlefe iEronaut, that by the line 

Of Gofiamer fufpended, in mid air 

Float'ft on a fun beam—»Living Atom, where 
Ends jhy breeze-guided voyage;— with what flefign 

In iEther doft thou launch thy form minute, 
Mocking the eye ?— -Alas ! before the veil 

Of denier clouds (hall hide thee, the purfuit 
Of the keen Swift may end thy fairy (ail I— 

Thus on the golden thread that Fancy weaves 
Buoyant, as Hope's illunve flattery breathes, 

The young and viuonary Poet leaves 
Life's dull realities, while fevenfold wreaths 

Of rainbow-light around his head revolve. 

Ah ! foon at Sorrow's touch the radiant dreams 
diffolve ! 



BL1GXAC SONNETS. 19 

S 9 JN N E T LXXVIIJ. 

lJfQWJ>ROrS» 

VV AN Heralds of the Sun and Summer gale! 

That fccm juft fallen from infant Zephyrs' wing ; 
Not now, as once, with heart revived I hail 

Your modeft buds, that for the brow of Spring 
Fonn the firft Ample garland— Now no more 

Efcaping for a moment all my cares, 
Shall I, with penfive, filent fiep, explore 

The woods yet leafiefs ; where to chilling airs 
Your green and pencil'd bloflbms, trembling, wave. 

Ah ! ye foft, transient children of the ground, 
More fair was (he on whole untimely grave 

Flow my unceafing tears ! Their varied round 
The Seafons go ; while I through all repine t 
For fixt regret, and hopelefs grief are mine. 

c 2 



20 ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXXIX. 

TO TH4 GODDESS OF BOTANY. 

VyF Folly weary, (hrinking from the view 
Of Violence and Fraud, allow'd to take 
All peace from humble life ; I would forfake 

Their haunts for ever, and, fweet Nymph ! with you 
Find fhelter ; where my tired, and tear*fwoln eyes, 

Among your filent fhades of Toothing hue, 

Your " bells and florets of unnumber'd dyes " 
Might reft— And learn the bright varieties 

That from your lovely hands are fed with dew ; 
And every veined leaf, that trembling fighs 

In mead or woodland ; or in wilds remote, 
Or lurk with modes in the humid caves, 

Mantle the cliffs, on dimpling rivers float, 

Or ftream from coral rocks beneath the Ocean waves. 



ELEGIAC SONNETS* 3 



F 



4 

SONNET LXXXr 

TO THE INVISIBLE MOON. 

jL/ ARK and conceal'd art thou, foft Evening's Queen, 

And Melancholy's votaries that delight 
To watch thee, gliding thro' the blue ferene, 

Now vainly feek thee on the brow of night—- 

* 

Mild Sorrow, fuch as Hope has not forfook, 

May love to mule beneath thy {ilent reign ; 
But I prefer from fome deep rock to look 

On the obfcure and fluctuating main, 
What time the martial ftar with lurid glare, 

Portentous, gleams above the troubled deep ; 
Or the red comet fhakes his blazing hair ; 

Or on the fire-tinged waves the lightnings leap ; 
While thy fair beams illume another fky, 
And fhine for beings lefs accurft than I. 



22 RL1CIAC SONNETS 



S' O N ft t t tXXXI. 



XxE may be envied, who with tranquil breaft 
Can wander in the wild and woodland fcehe, 

When Summer's glowing hands have newly dreft 
The ihadowy forefts, and the copies green ; 

Who, unpurfued by care, can pais his hours 
Where briony and woodbine fringe the trees, 
On thymy banks repofing, while the bees 

Murmur " their fairy tunes in praife of flowers ;" 
Or on the rock with ivy clad, and fern 

That overhangs the oner-whifpering bed 
Of feme clear current, bid his wifhes turn 

From this bad world ; and by calm reafon Jed, 
Knows, in refined retirement, to poflefs 
By friendfhip hallow'd— rural happinefs ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS* 23 



SONNET LXXXIL 

TO THE SHADE OF BURNS. « 

JVLUTE is thy wild harp, now, O Bard fublime ! 

Who, amid Scotia's mountain folitude, 
Great Nature taught to * build the lofty rhyme," 

And even beneath the daily preflure, rude, 
Of labouring Poverty, thy generous blood, 
Fired with the love of freedom— Not fubdued 

Wert thou by thy low fortune : But a time 

Like this we live in, when the abjc& chime 
Of echoing Parafite is befl approved, 

Was not for thee— Indignantly is fled 
Thy noble Spirit ; and no longer moved 

By all the ills o'er which thine heart has bled, 

Aflbciate worthy of the illuflrious dead, 
Enjoys with them " the Liberty it loved." 



24 ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



SONNET LXXXHI, 



THE SEA VIEW, 

X HE upland Shepherd, as reclined he lies 
On the foft turf that clothes the mountain brow* 

Marks the bright Sea-line mingling with the Ikies ; 
Or from his courfe ccleftial, finking flow, 
The Summer-Sun in purple radiance low, 

Blaze on the weftern waters ; the wide fcene 

• 

Magnificent, and tranquil, fecms to fpread 
Even o'er the Ru (lie's breafl a joy ferene, 

When, like dark plague-fpots by the Demons fhed, 
Charged deep with death, upon the waves, far feen, 

Move the war-freighted fhips ; and fierce and red, 

Flafh their deftru&ive fires— The mangled dead 
And dying victims then pollute the flood. 
Ah ! thus man fpoils Heaven's glorious works with blood! 



EXE G I AC S-ONNSTS* 2J 



SONNET LXXXIV. 



TO THE MUSE* 



W ILT thou for&ke me who in life's bright May 

Lent warmer luftre to the radiant morn ; 

And even o'er Summer fcenes by tempefts torn, 
Shed with illufive light the dewy ray 
Of penfive pleafure ?— Wilt thou, while the day 

Of faddcning Autumn clofes, as I mourn 
In languid, hopelefs forrow,. far away 

Bend thy foft ftep, and never more return ?~ 
Crufh'd to the earth, by bittercft anguifh preft, 
* From my faint eyes thy graceful form recedes ; 

Thou canft not heal an heart like mine that bleeds ; 
But, when in quiet earth that heart fhall reft, 

Haply may'ft thou one forrowing vigil keep. 

Where Kty and Remembrance bend and weep! 



26 ElfGlAC SONNETS. 



S CT tf tf E T LXXXV, 



JL HE faireft flowers are gone ! for tempefts fell, 
And with wild wing fwept fame unblown away, 

While on the upland lawn or rocky dell 
More faded* in the day-ftar's ardent ray ; 

And fcarrce the copfe, or hedge-row fhade beneath, 
Or by the runnel's grafiy courfe, appear 
Some lingering bloffoms of the earlier year. 

Mingling bright florets, in the yellow wreath 

That Autumn with his poppies and his corn 
Binds on his tawny temples So the fchemes 

Rais'd by fond Hope in youth's unclouded morn, 
While (anguine youth enjoys delufive dreams, 

Experience withers ; till fcarce one remains 

Flattering the languid heart, where only Rcafon reigns ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. If 

S K N E T LtfXXVI. 

WRITTEN NEAR A fORT ON A DARK EVENING* 

jLTLUGfe vapours brood above the clifted ihore, 

Night on the Ocean fettles, dark and mute, 
Save where is heard the repercuffive roar 

Of drowfy billows, on the rugged foot 
Of rocks remote ; or ftill more diftant tone 

Of feamen in the anchored bark that tell 
The watch reliev'd ; or one deep voice alone 

Singing the hour, and bidding " Strike the bell," 
All is black (hadow, but the lucid line 

Mark'd by the light furf on the level fond, 
Or where afar the fhip-lights faintly fhine 

Like wandering fairy fires, that ofl on land 

Miflead the Pilgrim Such the dubious ray 

That wavering Reafon lends, in life's long darkling way. 



28 ELEGIAC SONNETS* 

— ^" 

SONNET LXXXVII. 

WRITTEN IN OCTOBER* 

JL HE blafts of Autumn as they fcatter round 

The faded foliage of another year* 
And muttering many a fad and folemn found, 

Drive the pale fragments o'er the ftubble fere, 
Are well attuned to my deje&ed mood ; 

(Ah ! better far than airs that breathe of Spring !) 

While the high rooks* that hoarfely clamouring 
Seek in black phalanx the half-leaflets wood, 

I rather hear, than that enraptured lay 
Harmonious, and of Love and Pleafure born, 
Which from the golden furze, or flowering thorn 

Awakes the Shepherd in the ides of May ; , 
Nature delights me moil when moft (he mourns* 
For never more to me the Spring of Hope returns ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. ft£ 

' ■ '■' ■ • .«..■■ 

SONNET tXXXVIII. 

NEPENTHE. 

V/H ! for imperial Polydamna's art. 

Which to bright Helen was in Egypt taught, 

To mix with magic power the oblivious draught 
Of force to {launch the bleeding of the heart, 
And to Care's wan and hollow cheek impart 

The {mile of happy youth, uncurled with thought. 
Potent indeed the charm that could appeafe 

Affection's ceafelefe anguifh, doom'd to weep 
O'er the cold grave ; or yield even tranlient eafe 

By foothing bufy Memory to deep ! 
^-Around me thoie who furely muft have tried 

Some charm of equal power, I daily fee, 
But ftill to me Oblivion is denied, 

There's ,no Nepenthe, now, on earth for me. 



gO ELEGIAC SONNETS. 



H* 



SONNET LXXXIX. 

TO THE SUN. 

W HETHER awaken'd from unquiet reft 

I watch " the opening.eyelids of the Morn," > 
When thou, O Sun 1 from Ocean's filver'dbreaft 

Emerging, bidfl another day be bom— 
Or whether in thy path of cloudlets blue* 

Thy noontide .fires I mark with dazzled eyes ; 
Or to the Weft thy radiant court purfue, 

Veil'd in the gorgeous broidery of the ikies, 
Celeftial lamp ! thy influence bright and warm 

That renovates the world with life and light 
Shines not for me— for never more the form 

I loved— fo fondly loved, {hall blefs my fight ; 
And nought thy rays illumine, now can charm 

My mifery, or to day convert my night ! 



ELEGIAC SONNETS. £1 

S N N E T KC. 

TO OBLIVION. 

F ORGETFULNESS ! I would thy hand could clofe 

Thefe eyes that turn reluftant from the day ; 

So might this painful confcioufnefs decay, 
And, with my memory, end my curelefs woes. 

Sifter of Chaos and eternal Night ! 
Oblivion ! take me to thy quiet reign, 

Since robb'd of all that gave my foul delight, 
I only afk exemption from the pain 

Of knowing " fuch things were " — and are no more ; 
Of dwelling on the hours for ever fled, 

And heartleJs, helplefc, hopelds to deplore 
" Pale mifery living, joy and pleafure dead :" 
While dragging thus unwiftVd a length of days, 
" Death feems prepared to ftrike, yet ftili delays." 



32 ELEGIAC SONNETS. 

•■■• L - - ■"•■- ' ■■ "' - ' f 



SONNET XCI. 

REFLECTIONS ON SOME DRAWINGS OF PLANTS. 

A CAN in groups thefe mimic flowers compofe, 

Thefe bells and golden eyes, embathed in dew ; 
Catch the foft blufh that warms the early Role, 

Or the pale Iris cloud with veins of blue ; 
Copy the fcallop'd leaves, and downy items, 

And bid the pencil's varied (hades arreft 
Spring's humid buds, and Summer's mufky gems: 

But, fave the portrait on my bleeding bread, 

I have no femblance of that form adored. 

That form, expreflive of a foul divine, 
So early blighted j and while life is mine, 
With fond regret, and ceafelefs grief deplored— 
That grief, my angel ! with too faithful art 
Enihrines thy image in thy Mother's heart. 



ELEGIAC SONNETS* g$ 



SONNET XCII. 

WRITTEN AT BIGNOR PARK IN SUSSEX, 
IN AUGUST) 1799* 

JLrfOW mu rmurs creep along the woody vale, 
The tremulous Afpens fhudder in the breeze, 

Slow o'er the downs the leaden vapours fail, 
While I, beneath thefe old paternal trees, 

Mark the dark fhadows of the threatened ftorm, 
As gathering clouds o'erveil the morning fun ; 

They pais !— But oh ! ye vifions bright and warm 
With which even here my fanguine youth begun, 

Ye are obfcured for ever ! — And too late 
The poor Slave (hakes the unworthy bonds away 
Which crufh'd her ! — Lo ! the radiant ftar of day 

Lights up this lovely fcene anew — My fate 
Nor hope nor joy illumines — Nor for me 
Return thofe rofy hours which here I ufed to fee ! 

VOL* II. D 



34 THE DEAD BEGGAR. 

» 

THE DEAD BEGGAR. 

AN ELEGY, 

Addrefled to a Lady, who was afFeded at feeing the Funeral of a 
namelefs Pauper, buried at the Expence of the Pariih, in the 
Church- Yard at BrighthelmAone, in November 1792. 

l3 WELLS then thy feeling heart, and dreams thine eye 

O'er the deferted being, poor and old, 
Whom cold, relu&ant, Parifh Charity 

Configns to mingle with his kindred mold ? 



Mourn'ft thou, that here the time-worn fuflferer ends 
Thofe evil days ftill threatening woes to come ; 

Here, where the friendlefs feel no want of friends, 
Where even the houfelefs wanderer finds an home ? 



THE DEAD BEGGAR* 35 



What tho' no kindred croud in fable forth, 
And figh, or feem to ugh, around his bier ; 

Tho' o'er his coffin with the humid earth 
No children drop. the unavailing tear? 



Rather rejoice that here his forrows ceafe, 
Whom ficknefs, age, and poverty opprefs'd ; 

Where Death, the Leveller, reftores to peace 
The wretch who living knew not where to reft. 



Rejoice, that tho' an outcaft fpurn'd by Fate, 

Thro* penury's rugged path his race he ran ; 

In earth's cold bofom, equall'd with the great, 

Death vindicates the infulted rights of Man. 

i> 2 



36 THE DEAD BEGGAR. 

Rejoice, that tho' fevere his earthly doom, 

» 

And rude, and Town with thorns the way he trod, 
Now, (where unfeeling Fortune cannot come) 
He refts upon the mercies of his God, 



THE FEMALE EXILE* 37 



THE FEMALE EXILE. 



WRITTEN AT BRIGHTHELMSTONE IN NOV. I792.' 



IMovember's chill blaft on the rough beach is howling, 
The furge breaks afar, and then foams to the fhore, 

Dark clouds o'er the fea gather heavy and fcowling, 
And the white cliffs re-echo the wild wintry roar. 



Beneath that chalk rock, a fair ftranger reclining, 
Has found on damp fea- weed a cold lonely ieat ; 

Her eyes filPd with tears, and her heart with repining, 
She ftarts at the billows that burft at her feet. 



38 THE FEMALE EXILE. 

There, day after day, with an anxious heart heaving, 
She watches the waves where they mingle with air ; 

For the fail which, alas ! all her fond hopes deceiving, 
May bring only tidings to add to her care. 



Loofe ftream to wild winds thofe fair flowing trefles, 
Once woven with garlands of gay Summer flowers ; 

Her drefs unregarded, befpeaks her diftrefles, 
And beauty is blighted by grief's heavy hours. 



Her innocent children, unconfcious of forrow, 

To feek the glofs'd (hell, or the crimfon weed ftray ; 

Amufed with the prefent, they heed not to-morrow, 
Nor think of the ftorm that is gathering to day. 




'*»*. 



^;-,'/* 



• -"V 



* * . ->• ,,$ 








'■ 'y/< 7w '////-/ ' '/'^'/r' /*»' -rf//A ffiJA'-* '•* 'flw/jrty. . 



THE FEMALE EXILE* $$ 

S 



The gilt, fairy (hip, with its ribbon-fail fpreading, 
They launch on the fait pool the tide left behind ; 

Ah ! vi&ims— for whom their fad mother is dreading 
The multiplied miferies that wait on mankind ! 



To fair fortune born, (he beholds them with anguifh, 
Now wanderers with her on a once hoftile foil, 

Perhaps doom'd for life in chill penury to languifh, 
Or abject dependance, or foul-crufhing toil. 



But the fea-boat, her hopes and her terrors renewing, 
O'er the dim grey horizon now faintly appears ; 

She flies to the quay, dreading tidings of ruin, 
All breathlefs with hade, half expiring with fears. 



40 THE FEMALE EXILE. 

1 

Poor mourner !— I would that my fortune had left me 
The means to alleviate the woes I deplore ; 

But like thine my hard fate has of affluence bereft me, 
I can warm the cold heart of the wretched no more ! 



OCCASIONAL ADDRESS. 41 

■ I ■ ' — — 

WRITTEN FOR THE BENEFIT OF A DISTRESSED 

PLAYER, DETAINED AT BR IGHTHE LMSTONB 

FOR DEBT, NOVEMBER 1792* 

VV HEN in a thoufand fwarms, the Summer o'er, 
The birds of paflage quit our Englifh fhore, 
By various routs the feather'd myriad moves ; 
The Becca-jica fecks Italian groves, 
No more a Wheat-ear ; while the fearing files 
Of fea-fowl gather round the Hebrid-ifles* 



But if by bird-lime touch 'd, unplum'd, confined, 
Some poor ill-fated flraggler flays behind, 
Driven from his tranfient perch, beneath your eaves 
On his unfhelter'd head the temped raves, 
While drooping round, redoubling every pain, 
His Mate and Nefllings afk his help in vain. 



4* OCCASIONAL AODKE88. 

So we, the bufkin and the fock who wear, 
And " ftrut and fret/' our little feafon here, 
Difmifs'd at length, as Fortune bids divide- 
Some (lucky rogues !) fit down on Thames's fide ; 
Others to Liffy's weftern banks proceed, 
And feme— driven far a-field, acrofs the Tweed : 
But, pinion'd here, alas ! I cannot fly : 
The kapkfs, unplumcd, lingering ftraggler I ! 
Unlefs the healing pity you beflow, 
Shall imp my fhatter'd wings — and let me go. 



Hard is his fate, whom evil ftars have led 
To feek in fcenic art precarimis bread, 
While flill, thro' wild viciffitudes afloat, 
An Hero now, and now a Sans CvXottt f 
That eleemofinary bread he gains 
Mingling— with real diflrefles— -mimic pains. 



OCCASIONAL ADDKIIS. 43 



See in our group, a pale, lank Falftaff ftare ! 
Much needs he fluffing :— -while young Amnion there] 
Rehearfes— in a garret— ten feet fquare ! 
And as his foft Statira fighs confent, 
Roxana comes not— but a dun for rent ! 
Here fhivering Edgar, in his blanket roll'd, 
Exclaims— with too much reafon, " Tom's a-cold /'• 
And vainly tries his forrows to divert, 
While Gontril or Regan— wafti his fhirt I 



Lo ! frefh from Calais, Edward ! mighty king! 
Revolves— a mutton chop upon a firing ! 
And Hotfpur, plucking " honour from the moon, 
Feeds a fick infant with a pewter fpoon ! 



More bleft the Fifher, who undaunted braves 
In his (mail bark, the impetuous winds and waves ; 



44 OCCASIONAL ADDRESS. 

« 

For though he plough the fea when others fleep, 
He draws, like Glendower, fpirits from the deep 1 
And while the ftorm howls round, amidft his trouble, 
Bright moonjhine ftill illuminates the cobble ! 
> Pale with her fears for him, fome fair Poiffardz, 
Watches his nearing boat ; with fond regard 
Smiles when (he lees his little canvas handing, 
And clafps her dripping lover on his landing. 



More bleft the Pcafant, who, with nervous toil 
Hews the rough oak, or breaks the ftubborn foil : 
Weary, indeed, he fees the evening come. 
But then, the rude, yet tranquil hut, his home, 
Receives its ruflic inmate ; then are his, 
Secure repofe, and dear domeflic blifs I 
The orchard's blufhing fruit, the garden's ftore, 
The pendant hop, that mantles round the door, 



OCCASIONAL ADDRESS. 45 

Are his :— and while the cheerful faggots burn, 
" His lifping children hail their fire's return !" 



But wandering Players, " unhoufel'd, unanneal'd, 
And unappointed, fcour life's common field, 
A flying fquadron !— disappointments crofs 'em, 
And the campaign concludes, perhaps, at Horfham ! 



Oh ! ye, whofe timely bounty deigns to fhed 

1 
Companion's balm upon my lucklefs head, 

Benevolence, with warm and glowing breaft, 

And foft, celeflial mercy, doubly bled ! 

Smile on the generous aft {—-where means are given, 

To aid the wretched is— to merit Heaven. 



/ 



4& INSCRIPTION. 



INSCRIPTION 

On a Stone, in the Church- Yard at Boheham, in Essex ; raifedby 
the Honourable Elizabeth Olmivs, to the Memory of Ann 
Gardner, who died at New Hall, after a faithful Service of 
Forty Years. 

W H ATE'ER of praife, and of regret attend 
The grateful Servant, and the humble friend, 
Where Ariel integrity and worth unite 
To raife the lowly in their Maker's fight, 
Are her's ; whofe faithful fervice, long approved, 
Wept by the Miftrefs whom thro' life flie loved. 
Here ends her earthly tafk ; in joyful truft 
To (hare the eternal triumph of the Jufl. 



A DESCRIPTIVE ODE. 47 



DESCRIPTIVE ODE, 



Suppofed to have been written under the Ruins of Rufus's Cattle, 
among the remains of the ancient Church on the Ifle of 
Portland. 

VsHAOTIC pile of barren ftone, 
That Nature's hurrying hand has thrown, 

Half-flniuVd, from the troubled waves ; 
On whofe rude brow the rifted tower 
Has frown'd, thro' many a ftormy hour, 

On this drear fite of tempeft-beaten graves. 



48 A DESCRIPTIVE ODE* 

Sure Defolation loves to fhroud 
His giant form within the cloud 

That hovers round thy rugged head ; 
And as thro' broken vaults beneath, 
The future (forms low-muttering breathe. 

Hears the complaining voices of the dead. 



Here marks the Fiend with eager eyes, 
Far out at fea the fogs arife 

That dimly {hade the beacon'd ftrand, 
And liftens the portentous roar 
Of fullen waves, as on the fhore, 

Monotonous, they burft, and tell the ftorm at hand. 



A DSSCfclfTIVB OD*. 49 

Northward the Demon's eyes are caft 

t 

O'er yonder bare and fterile wafte, 
Where, bom to hew and heave the block, 

Man, loft in ignorance and toil, 

Becomes aflbciate to the foil, 
And his heart hardens like his native rock; 



On the bleak hills, with flint o'erfpread, 
No bloffoms rear the purple head ; 

No fhrub perfumes the Zephyrs' breath, 
But o'er the cold and cheerlefs down 
Grim Defolation feems to frown, 

Blafting the ungrateful foil with partial death. 

VOL* II. E 



50 A- DESCRIPTIVE ODE. 

-■ - — 



Here the fcathed trees with leaves half-dreft, 
Shade no foft fongfter's fccret neft, 

Whofe fpring-notes ibotho the penlive ear ; 
But high the croaking cormorant flies, 
And mews and awks with clamorous cries 

Tire the lone echos of thefe caverns drear. 



Perchance among the ruins grey 
Some widow'd mourner loves to ftray, 

Marking the melancholy main 
Where once, afar (he could difcern 
O'er the white waves his fail return 

Who never, never now, returns again ! 



A DESCRIPTIVE ODE. 51 



On thefe lone tombs, by ftorms up-torn, 
The hopelefi wretch may lingering mourn, 

Till from the ocean, riling red, 
The mifty Moon with lurid ray 
Lights her, relu&ant, on her way, 

To fleep in tears her folitary bed. 



Hence the dire Spirit oft furveys 
The fhip, that to the wcftern bays 

With favouring gales purfues its courfe ; 
Then calls the vapour dark that blinds 
The pilot—calls the felon winds 

That heave the billows with rcfifllcfs force. 



s 2 



52 A DESCRIPTIVE ODE. 



Commixing with the blotted Ikies, 
High and more high the wild waves rife, 

Till, as impetuous torrents urge, 
Driven on yon fatal bank accurft, 
The vcflel's mafly timbers burft, 

And the crew finks beneath the infuriate furge. 



There find the weak an early grave, 

While youthful flrength the whelming wave 

Repels ; and labouring for the land, 
With fhorten'd breath and upturn'd eyes, 
Sees the rough fhore above him rife, 

Nor dreams that rapine meets him on the firand. 



A DESCRIPTIVE ODE. 53 

And are there then in human- form 
Monfters more lavage than the ftorm, 

Who from the gafping fufferer tear 
The dripping weed ?— who dare to reap 
The inhuman harveft of the deep, 

From half-drown'd vi&ims whom the tempefts fpare ? 



Ah ! yes ! by avarice once poflcft, 
No pity moves the ruftic breaft ; 

Callous he proves— as thofe who haply wait 
Till I (a pilgrim weary worn) 
To my own native land return, 

With legal toils to drag me to my fate ! 



54 VERSES. 



VERSES 

SUPPOSED tO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN IN THE 
MEW fOREST, IN EARLY SPRING. 

,/jLS in the woods, where leathery lichen weaves 

Its wint'ry web among the fallow leaves. 

Which (thro 9 cold months in whirling eddies blown) 

r 

Decay beneath the branches once their own, J 

From the brown fhelter of their foliage fear, 

Spring the young blooms that lead the floral year : 

When, waked by vernal funs, the Pilewort dares 

Expand her fpotted leaves, and fhining ftars'; 

And (veins empurpling all her taflels pale) 

fiends the foft Wind-flower in the tepid gale ; 

Uncultured bells of azure Jacinths blow, 

And the breeze-fcenting Violet lurks below 



VERSES. 55 



So views the wanderer, with delighted eyes, 
Reviving hopes from black defpondence rife, 
When, blighted by Adverfity's chill breath, 
Thofe hopes had felt a temporary death ; 
Then with gay heart he looks to future hours, 
When Love (hall drefc for him the Summer bowers ! 
And, as delicious dreams enchant his mind, 
Forgets his forrows paft, or gives them to the wind. 



£6 SONG. 



SONG. 

FROM THE FRENCH. 
I. 

" A 

AH ! fay," the fair Louifa cried, 

" Say where the abode of Love is found ? 
Pervading Nature, I replied, 

His influence fpreads the world around. 
When Morning's arrowy beams arife, 

He (parities in the enlivening ray, 
And blufhes in the glowing ikies 

When rofy Evening fades away. 

II. 

The Summer winds that gently blow, 

The flocks that bleat along the glades, 
The nightingale, that foft and low, 
With mufic fills the liftening (hades : 



iong. 57 



/ 



The murmurs of the filver furf 
All echo -Love's enchanting notes, 

From Violets lurking in the turf, 
His balmy breath thro' aether floats. 

in. 

From perfumed flowers and dewy leaves 

Delicious fcents he bids exhale. 
He (miles amid Autumnal (heaves, 

* 

And clothes with green the grafly vale ; 
But when that throne the God aflumes 

Where his moft powerful influence lies, 
Tis on LouhVs cheek he blooms, 

And lightens from her radiant eyes ! 



58 APOSTROPHE. 



APOSTROPHE 

TO 

An OLD TREE. 

W HERE thy broad branches brave the bitter North," 
Like rugged, indigent, unheeded, worth, 
Lo ! Vegetation's guardian hands embofs 
Each giant limb with fronds of ftudded mofs, 
Clothing the bark with many a fringed fold 
Begemm'd with fcarlet (hields and cups of gold, 
Which, to the wildeft winds their webs oppofe, 
And mock the arrowy fleet, or weltering fnows. 
•—But to the warmer Weft the Woodbine fair 
With taflels that perfumed the Summer air, 



APOSTROPHE. 59 



The mantling Clematis, whofe feathery bowers 

Waved in feftoons with Nightfhade's purple flowers, 

The diver weed, whofe corded fillets wove 

Round thy pale rind, even as deceitful love 

Of mercenary beauty would engage 

The dotard fondnek of decrepit age ; 

All thcfe, that during Summer's halcyon days 

With their green canopies conceal'd thy fprays, 

Are gone for ever ; or disfigured, trail 

Their fallow relics in the Autumnal gale ; 

Or o'er thy roots, in faded fragments toft, 

But tell of happier hours, and fweetnds loft ! 

—Thus in Fate's trying hour, when furious ftorxns 

Strip facial life of Pleafure's fragile forms, 



€o APOSTROPHE. 



And aweful Jfujtice, as his rightful prey 

Tears Luxury's filk, andjewel'd robe, away, 

While reads Adverfity her leflbn ftern, 

And Fortune** minions tremble as they learn ; 

The crouds around her gilded car that hung, 

Bent the lithe knee, and troul'd the honey'd tongue, 

Defponding fall, or fly in pale defpair ; 

And Scorn alone remembers that they were. 

Not fo Integrity ; unchanged he lives 

In the rude armour confeious Honor gives, 

And dares with hardy front the troubled fky, 

In Honefty's uninjured panoply. 

Ne'er on Profperity's enfeebling bed 

Or rofy pillows, he repofed his head, 



APOSTROPHE. 6l 



But given to ufeful arts, hit ardent mind 
Has fought the general welfare of mankind ; 
To mitigate their ills his greatefl blifs, 
While ftudying them, has taught him what he is : 
He, when the human tempeft rages worft, 
And the earth fhudders as the thunders burft, 
Firm, as thy northern branch, is rooted faft, 
And if he can't avert, endures the blaft. 



6* THE FOREST BOY, 



THE 



FOREST BOY. 

X HE trees have now hid at the edge of the hurft 

The fpot where the ruins decay 
Of the cottage, where Will of the Woodlands was nurfcd 
And lived fo beloved, till the moment accurft 

When he went from the woodland away. 



Among all the lads of the plough or the fold. 

Bed efteem'd by the fober and good. 
Was Will of the Woodlands ; and often the old 
Would tell of his frolics, for a&ive and bold 
Was William the Boy of the wood. 



THE FOREST BOY. 6* 



Yet gentle was he, as the breath of the May, 

And when fick and declining was laid 
The Woodman his father, young William away 
Would go to the foreft to labour all day, 
And perform his hard talk in his dead, 



And when his poor father the forefter died, 

And his mother was fad, and alone, 
He toiPd from the dawn, and at evening he hied 
In ftorm or in fnow, or whate'er might betide, 
To fupply all her wants from the town. 



64 THE FOREST BOY, 



One neighbour they had oa the heath to the weft. 

And no other the cottage was near, 
But fhe would fend Phoebe, the child (he loved beft, 
To flay with the widow, thus fad and diftreft, 

Her hours of dejection to cheer. 



As the buds of wild rofes, the cheeks of the maid 

Were juft tinted with youth's lovely hue, 
Her form like the afpen, foft graces difplay'd, 
And the eyes, oyer which her luxuriant locks ftray'd, 
As the fkies of the Summer were blue ! 



THE FOREST BOY, 6$ 



Still labouring to live, yet refle&ing the while. 

Young William confider'd his lot ; 
'Twas hard, yet 'twas honed ; and one tender (mile 
From Phoebe at night overpaid ev'ry toil, 

And then all his fatigues were forgot. 



By the brook where it glides thro' the copfe of Arbeal, 

When to eat his cold fare he reclined, 
Then foft from her home his Iweet Phoebe would ftcal 
And bring him wood-ftrawberries to finifh his meal. 

And would (it by his fide while he dined. 



VOL. II. 



66 THE FOREST BOY. 



And tho' when employ M in the deep foreft glade, 

His days have feem'd (lowly to move, 
Yet Phoebe going home, thro' the wood-walk has ftray'd 
To bid him good night ! — and whatever (he (aid 

Was more fweet than the voice of the dove* 



Fair Hope, that the lover fo fondly believes, 

Then repeated each foul-foothing fpeech, 
And touch'd with illufion, that often deceives 
The future with light ; as the fun thro* the leaves 
Illumines the boughs of the beech. 



THE FOREST BOY. 67 



But once more the tempefts of chill Winter blow, 

To deprefs and disfigure the earth ; 
And now ere the dawn, the young Woodman rauft go 
To his work in the foreft, half buried in fhow, 

And at night bring home wood for the hearth* 



The bridge on the heath by the flood was wafh'd down. 

And fad, faft fell the fleet and the rain, 
The ftream to a wild rapid river was grown, 
And long might the widow fit flghing alone 
Ere fweet Phoebe could fee her again* 



? 2 



68 THE FOREST BOY. 



At the town was a market— and now for fupplies 

Such as needed their humble abode. 
Young William went forth ; and his mother with fighs 
Watch'd long at the window, with tears in her eyes, 

Till he turn'd thro' the fields, to the road. 



Then darknefs came on ; and (he heard with affright 

The wind rile every moment more high ; 
She look'd from the door ; not a ftar lent its light, 
But the temped redoubled the gloom of the night, 
And the rain fell in Roods from the iky. 



THE FOREST BOY. $9 



The clock in her cottage now mournfully told 

The hours that went heavily on ; 
'Twas midnight ; her fpirits funk hopclefs and cold, 
For the wind feem'd to fay as in loud gufts it roll'd, 

That long, long would her William be gone. 



Then heart-lick and faint to her fad bed fhe crept, 

Yet firft made up the fire in the room 
To guide his dark fleps ; but fhe liften'd and wept, 
Or if for a moment forgetful fhe flept, 

She foon ftarted !— and thought he was come. 



70 THE FOREST BOY, 



Twas mom ; and the wind with an hoarfe fallen moan 

Now feem'd dying away in the wood, ' 
When the poor wretched mother ftill drooping, alone, 
Beheld on the threfhold a figure unknown, 
In gorgeous apparel who flood. 



11 Your fon is a foldier," abruptly cried he, 
" And a place in our corps has obtain'd, 
" Nay, be not caft down ; you perhaps may foon fee 
11 Your William a captain ! he now fends by me 
" The purfe he already has gain'd." 



THE FOREST BOY* 71 



So William cntrapp'd 'twixt perfuafion and force, 

Is embark 'd for the ifles of the Weft, 
But he feem'd to begin with ill omens his courfc, 
And felt recollection, regret, and remorfe 
Continually weigh on his breafi. 



With ufelefs repentance he eagerly eyed 

The high coaft as it faded from view, 
And faw the green hills, on whofe northernmoft fide 
Was his own fylvan home : and he faltered and cried 

" Adieu ! ah ! for ever adieu ! 



7 9 THE FOREST BOY. 



" Who now, my poor mother, thy life (hall fuftain, 

" Since thy Ton has thus left thee forlorn ? 
" Ah ! canft thou forgive me ? And not in the pain 
" Of this cruel defertion, of William complain, 
" And lament that he ever was born ? 



" Sweet Phoebe I — if ever thy lover was dear, 

" Now for fake not the cottage of woe, 
" But comfort my mother ; and quiet her fear, 
• c And help her to dry up the vain fruitlefs tear 
" That too long for my abfence will flow. 



THE FOREST BOY. 73 

1 ' 



" Yet what if my Phoebe another fhould wed, 
" And lament her loft William no more ?" 
The thought was too cruel ; and anguiih foon fped 

The dart of difeafc With the brave numerous dead 

He has fall'n on the plague-tainted fhore. 



In the lone village church-yard, the chancel-wall near, 

The high grafs now waves over the fpot 
Where the mother of William, unable to bear 
His lofs, who to her widow'd heart was fo dear. 
Has both him and her forrows forgot* 



74 THE FOREST BOY. 



By the brook where it winds thro' the wood of Arbeai, 

Or amid the deep foreft, to moan, 
The poor wandering Phccbe will filently deal ; 
The pain of her bofom no reafon can heal, 

And fhe loves to indulge it alone. 



Her fenfes are injured ; her eyes dim with tears ; 

By the river fhe ponders^ and weaves 
Reed garlands, againft her dear William appears, 
Then breathlefsly liftens, and fancies fhe hears 

His light ftep in the half-witheroleaves. 



#»"-' X t v v , 



('• 






■I'i 



»... 







THE FOREST BOY. 75 



Ah ! fuch are the miferics to which ye give birth, 

Ye cold flatefmen ! unknowing a fear ; 
Who from pictured faloon, or the bright fculptured hearth, 
Difperfe defolation and death thro' the earth, 

When ye let loofe the demons of war. 



76 ODE* 



ODE 

TO THE POPPY. 



WRITTEN BY A DECEASED FRIEND. 

XN OT for the promife of the labour'd field, 
Not for the good the yellow harvefls yield, 

I bend at Ceres' fhrine ; 
For dull, to humid eyes, appear 
The golden glories of the year, 

A far more melancholy worfhip's mine. 



OBE, 



I hail the goddefs for her fcarlet flower ! 
Thou brilliant weed, 
That doft fo far exceed 
The richeft gifts gay Flora can beftow : 
Heedlefs I pafs'd thee in life's morning hour, 

(Thou comforter of woe) 
Till forrow taught me to confefs thy power. 



v . 



77 



"s 



« f 



>'■■' -jr. - - ts- / 



In early days, when Fancy cheats, ' 
A varied wreath I wove 

Of laughing Spring's luxuriant fweets,\ 'V^i'v \>- 

■'' ^ '■ . . ^~ 

To deck ungrateful Love : 
The rofe, or thorn, my labours crown'd, 
As Venus fmiled, or Venus frown'd ; 






-'}~ 



* *i 



7 



■% »■ 



?8 ODE. 



But Love, and Joy, and all their train, are flown ; 

E'en languid Hope no more is mine, 
And I will fing of thee alone, 
Unlefs, perchance, the attributes of Grief, 
The cyprefs bud, and willow leaf, 

Their pale funereal foliage blend with thine. 



Hail, lovely bloflbm !— thou canft cafe 

The wretched victims of Difeafe ; 

Canft clofe thofe weary eyes in gentle fleep, 

Which never open but to weep ; 

For, oh ! thy potent charm 

Can agonizing Pain difarm ; 

Expel imperious Memory from her feat, 

And bid the throbbing heart forget to beat. 




tTA/f* ftjw/r4 * tfitvr. fit// /r>,wr^r,- 



ode. 79 



Soul-foothing plant ! that can fuch blcflings give, 
By thee the mourner bears to live ! 

By thee the hopelefs die ! 
Oh ! ever " friendly to defpair," 
Might Sorrow's pallid votary dare, 
Without a crime, that remedy implore, 

Which bids the fpirit from its bondage fly, 
I'd court thy palliative aid no more ; 



No more I'd fuo lhat thou fliould'ft fhed 
A traniient calm upon my aching head, 
But rather would conjure thee to impart 
Thy fovereign balfam for a broken heart ; 
And by thy dear Lethean power, 
(Inestimable flower) 
Burft thefe terreftrial bonds, and other regions try. 



80 VERSES. 



WRITTEN BY THE SAME LADY ON SEEING HER. | 

TWO SONS AT PLAY* 

l!) WEET age of bleft delufion ! blooming boys, 
Ah ! revel long in childhood's thoughtlefs joys, 
With light and pliant fpirits that can (loop 
To follow, fportively, the rolling hoop ; 
To watch the fleeping top with gay delight, 
Or mark, with raptured gaze, the (ailing kite ; 
Or, eagerly purfuing Pleafure's call, 
Can find it centered in the bounding ball ! 
Alas ! the day will come, when fports like thefc 
Mud lofe their magic, and their power to pleafe ; 
Too fwiftly fled, the rofy hours of youth 
Shall yield their fairy-charms to mournful Truth ; 



VERSES* 



81 



Even now, a mother's fond prophetic fear 
Sees the dark train of human ills appear ; 
Views various fortune for each lovely child, 
Storms for the bold, and anguifh for the mild ; 
Beholds already thofe expreffive eyes ~ 
Beam a fad certainty of future fighs ; 
And dreads each fuffering thofe dear breafis may know 
In their long paffage through a world of woe ; 
Perchance predeflined every pang to prove, 
That treacherous friends inflift, or iaithlefs love ; 
For, ah ! how few have found exiftence fweet, 
Where grief is fare, but happinefs deceit ! 



vol* II* 



8a VERSES* 



VERSES, 

ON THE DEATH OF THE SAME LADY, WHTTEV 

IN SEPTEMBER, 1794. 

JLiIKE a poor ghoft the night I feck ; 

Its hollow winds repeat- my fighs ; 
The cold dews mingle on my cheek 

With tears that wander from mine eyes* 



The thorns that ftill my couch moleft, 
Have robb'd thcfe heavy eyes of deep ; 

But tho" deprived of tranquil reft, 
I here at lead am free to weep. 



VERSES. 85 



Twelve times the moon, that rifes red 
O'er yon tall wood of fhadowy pine, 

Has fill'd her orb, dace low was laid 
My Harriet ! that fweet form of thine 2 



While each fad month, as flow it pail, 
Brought fame new forrow to deplore ; 

Some grief more poignant than the laft, 
But thou canft calm thofe griefs no more. 



No more thy friendfhip Tooths to reft 
This wearied fpirit temp eft-toft ; 

The cares that weigh upon my bread 
Are doubly fell, fince thou art loft. 



g 1 



84 VERSES. 

Bright vifions of ideal grace 

That the young poet's dreams inflame, 
Were not more lovely than thy face ; 

Were not more perfect than thy frame. 



Wit, that no fufferings could impair, 
Was thine, and thine thofe mental powers 

Of force to chafe the fiends that tear 

From Fancy's hands her budding flowers* 



O'er what, my angel friend, thou wfert, 
Deje&ed Memory loves to mourn ; 

Regretting (till that tender heart, 
Now withering in a diftant urn ! 



V*KSES. 85 



But ere that wood of fhadowy pine 
Twelve times {hall yon full orb behold, 

This fickening heart, that bleeds for thine, 
My Harriet ! — may like thine be cold ! 



86 



FRAGMENT. 



FRAGMENT, 

DESCRIPTIVE OP THE MISERIES OF WAR; FROM 

A POEM CALLED " The EMIGRANTS," 

PRINTED IN 1793* 

A O a wild mountain, whofc bare fummit hides 
Its broken eminence in clouds ; whole deeps 
Are dark with woods ; where the receding rocks 
Are worn with torrents of diflblving fnow ; 
A wretched woman, pale and breathlefs, flies, 
And, gazing round her, liftens to the found 
Of hoftile footfteps : — No ! they die away— 
Nor noife remains, but of the cataract, 
Or furly breeze of night, that mutters low 

Among the thickets, where fhe trembling feeks 

A temporary (heher — Clafping clofe 

To her quick throbbing heart her deeping child, 



FRAGMENT. 87 



All {he could refcue of the innocent group 
That yefterday (unrounded her— -Efcaped 
Almoft by miracle !— Fear, frantic Fear, 
Wing'd her weak feet ; yet, half repenting now 
Her headlong hade, (he wifhes (he had ftaid 
To die with thole affrighted Fancy paints 
The lawlefs foldiers' viftims— Hark ! again 
The driving tempefl bears the cry of Death ; 
And with deep, fudden thunder, the dread found 
Of cannon vibrates on the tremulous earth ; 
While, bur ding in the air, the murderous bomb 
Glares o'er her manfion— Where the fplinters fall 
Like fcatter'd comets, its deftru&ive path 
Is mark'd by wreaths of flame !— Then, overwhelm *d 



8ft FRAGMENT, 



Beneath accumulated horror, (inks 
The defolate mourner ! 



The feudal Chief, whole Gothic battlements 

Frown on the plain beneath, returning home 

From diflant lands, alone, and in difguife, 

Cains at the fall of night his cattle walls ; 

But, at the Client gate no porter (its 

To wait his lord's admittance !— In the courts 

All is drear ftillnefs !— Gueffing but too well 

The fatal truth, he fhudders as he goes 

Thro' the mute hall ; where, by the blunted light 



FRAGMENT, 89 



That the dim Moon thro 9 painted cafemcnt lends, 

He fees that dev a Ration has been there ; 

Then, while each hideous image to his mind 

Rifes terrific, o'er a bleeding code 

Stumbling he falls ; another intercepts 

His daggering feet— All ! all who ufed to ruth 

With joy to meet him, all his family 

Lie murder'd in his way !— And the day dawns 

On a wild raving Maniac, whom a fate 

So fudden and calamitous has robb'd 

Of reafon ; and who round his vacant walls 

Screams unregarded, and reproaches Heaven ! 



90 APRIL. 






APRIL. 

vJ R £ £ N o'er the copfes Spring's foft hues are 
fpreading, 

High wave the Reeds in the tranfparent floods, 
The Oak its fear and fallow foliage (bedding, 

From their mofs'd cradles ftart its infant buds. 



Pale as the tranquil tide of Summer's ocean, 
The Willow now its {lender leaf unveils ; 

And thro' the iky with fwiftly fleeting motion, 
Driven by the wind, the rack of April fails* 



APRIL. 



9* 



Then, as the guft declines, the Healing (bowers 
Fall frefh and noifclcfs ; while at clofing day 

The low Sun gleams on moift and half-blown (lowers 
That promife garlands for approaching May. 

Bled are yon peafant children, (imply Tinging, 
Who thro' the new-fprung graft rejoicing rove ; 

More bleft ! to whom the Time, fond thought is bringing, 
Of friends expected, or returning love. 

The penfive wanderer bleft, to whom reflection 
Points out fome future views that footh his mind ; 

Me how unlike !— whom cruel recollection 
But tells of comfort I (hall never find ! 



9« 



APRIL* 



Hope, that on Nature's youth is ftill attending! 

No more' to me her fyrcn fong fhall fing ; 
Never to me her influence extending, 

Shall I again enjoy the days of Spring ! 

Yet, how I loved them once thefc fcenes remind me, 
When light of heart, in childhood's thoughtLefs mirth, 

I reck'd not that the cruel lot affign'd me 

Should make me curfe the hour that gave me birth ! 

Then, from thy wildWood banks, Aruna ! proving, 
Thy thymy downs with fportive ileps I (ought. 

And Nature's charms, with artlefs tranfport loving, 
Sung like the birds, unheeded and untaught* 



APRIL* 



98 

j 



But now the Springtide's pleafent hours returning, 
Serve to awaken me to (harper pain ; 

Recalling fcenes of agony and mourning, 
Of baffled hope and prayers prefcrr'd in vain. 

Thus (hone the Sun, his vernal rays difplaying, 
Thus did the woods in early verdure wave, 

While dire Difeafe on all I loved was preying, 
And flowers feem'd riling but to ftrew her grave ! 

Now, 'mid reviving blooms, I coldly languifh, 
Spring feems devoid of joy to me alone ; 

Each (bund of pleafure aggravates my anguifii, 
And fpeaks of beauty, youth, and fweetnefs gone ) 



94 APRIL. 



Yet, as ftern Duty bids, with feint endeavour 
I drag on life, contending with my woe, 

Tho' confcious Mifery ftill repeats, that never 
My foul one pleafureable hour fhall know. 

Loft in the tomb, when Hope no more appeafes 
The fefter'd wounds that prompt the eternal figh, 

Grief, the moil fatal of the heart's difeafes, 
Soon teaches, whom it fattens on, to die. 

The wretch undone, for pain alone exifling, 

4 

The abjeft dread of Death fhall fure fubdue, 
And far from his decifive hand refilling, 
Rejoice to bid a world like this adieu ! 



ODE TO DEATH. 95 



ODE TO DEATH. 

Jl RIEND of the wretched ! wherefore, fliould the eye 
Of blank Defpair, whence tears have ceafed to flow, 

Be turn'd from thee ?— Ah ! wherefore fears to die 
He, who compell'd each poignant grief to know, 
Drains to its loweft dregs the cup of woe ? 



Would Cowardice poftpone thy calm embrace, 
To linger out long years in torturing pain ? 

Or not prefer thee to the ills that chafe 

Him, who too much impoverifh'd to obtain 

From British Themis right , implores her aid in 



vain! 



96 ODE TO BEATH. 



Sharp goading Indigence who would not fly, 
That urges toil the exhaufted ftrcngth abotfe ? 

Or fhun the tnee fond friend's averted eye ? 
Or who to thy afylum not remove, 
To lofe the wafting pain of unrequited love ? 



Can then the wounded wretch who muft deplore 
What moft fhe loved, to thy cold arms confign'd, 

Who hears the voice that footh'd her foul no more, 
Fear thee, O Death (—-Or hug the chains that bind 
To joylefs, checrlefs life, her fick, relu&ant mind ? 



ODE TO DEATH. 97 



■e; 



Oh ! Mifery's Cure ; who e'er in pale difmay 

« 

Has watch'd the angel form they could not lave, 
And feen their dearefl blefling torn away, 
May well the terrors of thy triumph brave, 
Nor paufe in fearful dread before the opening grave ! 



VOL. II. H 



g8 STANZAS. 



STANZAS 

from th8 novel called 
" The Young Philosopher/' 

Jl\. H ! think'ft thou, Laura, then, that wealth 
Should make me thus my youth, and health, 

And freedom and repofe refign ?— 
Ah, no !— I toil to gain by fteaith 

One look, one tender glance of thine. 

Born where huge hills on hills are piled, 
In Caledonia's diftant wild, 

Unbounded Liberty was mine : 
But thou upon my hopes haft fmiled, 

And bade me be a (lave of thine ! 

Amid thefe gloomy haunts of gain, 
Of weary hours I not complain, 

While Hope forbids me to repine, 
And whifpering tells me I obtain 

Pity from that foft heart of thine. 



STANZAS. 



» 



Tho' far capricious Fortune flies, 
Yet Love will blefs the facrifice, 

And all his purer joys combine ; 
"While I my little world comprife 

In that fair form, and fairer foul of thine. 



K » 



lOO STANZAS. 



TO THE, WINDS. 

FIRST PRINTED IN " The YOUNG PHILOSOPHER." 

JL £ vagrant Winds ! yon clouds that bear 
Thro' the blue defart of the air, 

Soft failing in the Summer (ky, 
Do e'er your wandering breezes meet 
A wretch in mifery fo complete, 

So loft as I ? 

And yet, where'er your pinions wave 
O'er fome loft friend's — fome lover's grave, 

Surviving fufferers ftill complain ; 
Some parent of his hopes deprived, 
Some wretch who has himfelf furvived, 

Lament in vain. 



STANZAS. lOl 



Blow where ye lift on this fad earth, 
Some foul-corroding care has birth, 

» 

And Grief in all her accents fpeaks ; 
Here dark Dejection groans, and there 
Wild Phrenzy, daughter of Defpair, 

Unconfcious fhrieks. ' 

Ah 1 were it Death had torn apart 
The tie that bound him to my heart, 

Tho' fatal ftill the pang would prove ; 
Yet had it foothed this bleeding breaft 
To know, I had till then poffeft 

Hillario's love. 

And where his dear, dear allies flept, 
Long nights and days I then had wept, 

Till by flow-mining Grief oppreft 
As Memory fail'd, its vital heat 
This wayward heart had loft, and beat 

Itfelf to reft. 



102 STANZAS. 



But dill Hillario lives, to prove 
To fome more happy maid his love I 

Hillario at her feet I fee ! 
His voice ftill murmurs fond defire, 
Still beam his eyes with lambent fire, 

But not for me ! 

Ah ! words, my bofom's peace that flolc, 
Ah ! looks, that won my melting foul ; 

Who dares your dear delufion try, 
In dreams may all Elyfium fee, 
Then undecelv'd, awake, like me, 

Awake and die. 

Like me, who now abandon'd, loft, 
Roam wildly on the rocky coaft, 

With eager eyes the fea explore ; 
But hopelefs watch and Vainly rave, 
Hillario o'er the weftera wave 

Returns no more ! 



STANZAS. TO£ 



Yet, go forgiven, H Mario go, 
Such anguifh may you never know 

As that which checks my labouring breath ; 
Pain fo fevere not long endures, 
And I have ftill my choice of cures, 

Madnefs or death. 



104 STANZAS. 



TO VESPER. 

FROM THE SAME. 

X HOU ! who behold'ft with dewy eye 
The deeping leaves and folded flowers, 

And hear'ft the night-wind lingering ugh 
Thro' fhadowy woods and twilight bowers; 

Thou wad the fignal once that feem'd to fay, 

Hillario's beating heart reproved my long delay* 



I fee thy emerald luflre dream > 

O'er thefe rude cliffs and cavern'd fhore ; 

But here, orifons to thy beam 

The woodland chantrefs pours no more ; 

Nor I, as once, thy lamp propitious hail, 

Seen indiftintt thro 9 tears ; confus'd, and dim, and pale. 



STANZAS. IO5 



Soon (hall thy arrowy radiance fhinc 

On the broad ocean's refllefs wave, 
Where this poor cold fwoln form of mine 

Shall fhclter in its billowy grave, 
Safe from the fcorn the World's fad outcafts prove, 
Unconfcious of the pain of ill-requited Love* 



to6 



STANZAS* 



L Y D I A. 

V^J'ER the high down the night-wind blew, 
An4 as it chill and howling pad, 

The Juniper and (bathed Yew 
Shrunk from the bitter blaft. 

Yet on the tea-mark's chalky height, 

The rude memorial of the Dane, 
Thro' many a drear and ftormy night 

Had haplefs Lydia lain. 

When I a lonely wanderer too, 
Who loved to climb and gaze around, 

Even as the Autumnal Sun withdrew, 
The poor forlorn one found. 



STANZAS. IO7 



" Ah ! wherefore, maiden, fit you fo, 
" The cold wind raving round your breaft, 
" While in the villages below 
" All are retired to reft ? 

" The fires are out, no lights appear 
" But the red flames of burning lime, 

" None but the Horfeman's ghoft is here 
11 At this pale evening time." 

With wild yet vacant eye, the maid 
Gazed on me, and a mournful imile 

On her wan funken features play'd, 
As thus (he fpoke the while : 

" Yes, to their beds my friends are gone, 
u They have no grief ; they flumber loon ; 

" But 'tis for me to wait alone 
" To meet the midnight Moon. 



108 STANZAS. 



" The Moon will rife anon, and trace 
" Her diver pathway on the fea ; 

" I (aw it from this very place, 
" When Edward went from me. 

" Tho' like a mid the Horfeman's ghoft 
" From yon deep dell I often fee, 

" Glide o'er the mountain to the coaft, 
" It gives no fear to me. 

" I rather dread the clouds that rife 
" Like towers and turrets from afar, 

" And fwelling high, obfcure the fkies, 
" And every fhining ftar. 

" For then I can no longer trace 

" That long bright pathway in the fea, 

" Where Edward bade me mark the place 
" When laft he went from me ! 



STANZAS. 109 



CC 



'Twas here, when loth to go, he gave 
" To his poor Girl his laft adieu ; 
*' He mark'd the moonlight on the wave, 
" And bade me mark it too. 

■'* And, Lydia !— then he fighing cried, 
" When the tenth time that light fo clear 

" Shine on the Sea— -whate'er betide, 
" Thy Edward will be here. 

" Since then I watch with eager eyes., 
(" Nor feel I cold, or wind or rain,) 

" Till the tenth blefled moon arife, 
" And Edward comes again." 

$i Ah, wretched Girl ! M I would have cried, 

But why awaken her to pain ? 
.** Long (ince thy wandering Lover died, 

" The moon returns in vain ! 



HO STANZAS. 



•* Tho' with her wane, thy vifions fade, 

" Yet hopeft thou, till again (he fliine ?' 
■ The hopes of half the World, poor Maid ! 



in 



Are not more rational than thine 1 



QUOTATIONS, NOTES, 
and EXPLANATIONS. 



SONNET LXI. 

Line l. 
Ill-omen'd bird, whofe cries portentous float, 

This Sonnet, firft inlerted in the Novel called the 
Old Manor Houfe, is founded on a fuperftition attri- 
buted (vide Bertram's Travels in America) to the In- 
dians, who believe that the cry of this night-hawk 
(Caprimulgus Americanus) portends fomc evil, and 
when they are at war, aflert that it is never heard near 
their tents or habitations but to announce the death of 
fome brave warrior of their tribe, or fome other cala- 
mity. 



112 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 



SONNET LXII. 
Firft publifhed in the fame work. 

SONNET LXIII. 

Line 1. 
O'er faded heath-flowers fpun, or thorny furze. 

The web, charged with innumerable globules of 
bright dew, that is frequently on heaths and commons 
in autumnal mornings, can hardly have efcaped the 
obfervation of any lover of nature— The (lender web 
of the field fpider is again alluded .to in Sonnet Ixxvii. 

SONNET LXIV. 
Firft printed in the Novel of ■" The Banifhed Man." 

SONNET LXV. 

To the excellent friend and Phyfician to whom 
thefe lines are addreffed, I was obliged for the kindeft 



QUOTATIONS AMD NOTES. 11$ 

- _ ^ ■— — — i ■ 

attention, and for the recovery from one dangerous 
illnefs of that beloved child whom a few months after- 
wards his {kill and mod unremitted and difinterefted ' 
exertions could not fave ! 

SONNET LXVI. 
Written on the coaft of Suffex during very tem- 
peftuous weather in December 1791, butfirfl publifh- 
ed in the Novel of Montalbert. 

SONNET LXVII. 

» 

Printed in the fame work. 

SONNET LXX. 

Line 11. 
He has " no nice felicities that fhrink." 

" 'Tis delicate felicity that fhrinks 
" When rocking winds are loud." 

Walpolt. 

VOL. II. I 



114 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES* 

SONNET LXXII. 

Line 1. 
Thee ! " lucid arbiter 'twixt day and night." 

Milton, 

SONNET LXXIII. 

Line 5. 
" Wilt thou yet murmur at a mifplaced leaf ?" 

From a ftory (I know not where told) of a faflidious 
being, who on a bed of rofe leaves' complained that his 
or her red was deflroyed becaufe one of thofe leaves 
was doubled. 

SONNET LXXIV. 

Line 1. 
" Sleep, that knits up the ravell'd fleeve of care." 

Shakfpcare, 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. H5 



Line 5. 

Murmuring I hear 
The hollow wind around the ancient towers. 

Thefe lines were written in a refidence among an* 
cient public buildings. 

SONNET LXXV. 

Firft publifhed in the Novel of Marchmont. 

SONNET LXXVI. 
Line 5. 

The bafe controul 
Of petty defpots in their pedant reign 
Already haft thou felt ; — 

This was not addrefled to my fon, who fuffered with 
many others in an event which will long be remem- 
bered by thofe parents who had fons at a certain public 
fchool, in 17939 but to another young man, not com- 
pelled as he was, in confequence of that difmifiion, to 
abandon the faireft profpe&s of his future life. 

1 2 



lift QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 

■■ » I, ' , - 

SONNET LXXVII. 

Line i. 
Small viewlefc aeronaut, &c. &c. 

The almoft imperceptible threads floating in the air, 
towards the end of Summer or Autumn, in a ftill even- 
ing, fometimes are fo numerous as to be felt on the 
face and hands. It is on thefe that a minute fpecies 

> 

of fpider convey themfelves from place to place ; fome- 
times riling with the wind to a great height in the air. 
, Dr. Lifter, among other natural ids, remarked thefe in- 
fefts. " To fly they cannot ftri&ly be faid, they being 
" carried into the air by external force ; but they can, 
" in cafe the wind fuffer them, (leer their courfe, per- 
" haps mount and defcend at pleafure : and to the 
" purpofe of rowing themfelves along in the air, it is 
" obfervable that they ever take their flight backwards, 
" that is, their head looking a contrary way like a fcul- 
" ler upon the Thames. It is fcarcely credible to what 
" height they will mount ; which is yet precifely true. 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES, 117 

" and a thing eafily to be obferved by one that fhall 
" fix his eye fome time on any part of the heavens, 
" the white web, at a vaft diftance, very diftin&ly 
" appearing from the azure fky— But this is in Au- 
" tumn only, and that in very fair and calm weather." 

From the Encyclop. Brit* 

Dr. Darwin, whofe imagination fo happily applies 
every object of Natural Hiflory to the purpofes of 
Poetry, makes the Goddefs of Botany thus direft her 
Sylphs — 

" Thin clouds of Goflamer in air difplay, 

" And hide the vale's chafte lily from the ray." 

Thefe filmy threads form a part of the equipage of 
Mab : 

" Her waggon fpokes are made of fpiders legs, 
" The cover of the wings of grafshoppers, 
" The traces of the (mailed fpider's web." • 



tl8 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 

Juliet, too, in anxioufly waiting for the filent arrival 
of her lover, exclaims, 

Oh ! fo light of foot 

Will ne'er wear out the everlafting flint ; 
A lover may beflride the Goflamer 
That idles in the wanton Summer air, 
And yet not fall— 

SONNET LXXIX. 

TO THE GODDESS OP BOTANY. 

" Rightly to fpell," as Milton wifhes, in II Periferqfo, 
" Of every herb that fips the dew," 

Jeans to be a rcfource for the flck at heart — for thofe 
who from forrow or difguft may without affectation fay 

" Society is nothing to one not fociable !" 

and whole wearied eyes and languid fpirits find relief 
and repofe amid the (hades of vegetable nature*— 



QUOTATIONS AND MOTES. HO. 



I cannot now turn to any other purfuit that for a mo- 
ment fooths my wounded mind. 

" Je pris gout a cette recreation des yeux, qui dans 
<c l'infortune, repofe, amufe, diftrait Tefprit, et fuf- 
" pend le fentiment des peines." 

Thus fpeaks the fingular, the unhappy RoufTeau, 
when in his " Promenades " he enumerates the caufes 
that drove him from the fociety of men, and occafioned 
his purfuing with renewed avidity the ftudy of Botany, 
" I was," fays he, " Force de m'abftenir de penfer, de 
" peur de penfer a mes malheurs malgre moi ; force 
" de contenir les redes d'une imagination riante, mats 
u languiflante, que tant d'angoiffes pourroient effarou- 
" cher a la fin — " 

Without any pretenfions to thofe talents which 
were in him fo heavily taxed with that exceffive irri- 
tability, too often if not always the attendant on 



ISO QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 

T ___ m _l — -mt^— • — ■ — ^-rm-^ — 1 i i ■■■■-- _ i "~ " 

genius, it has been my misfortune to have endured 
real calamities that have difqualified me for finding 
any enjoyment in the pleafures and purfuits which 
occupy the generality of the world. I have been en- 
gaged in contending with perfons whofe cruelty has 
left fo painful an irapreflion on my mind, that I may 
well fay 

" Brillantes fleurs, email des pres ombrages frais, 
M bofquets, verdure, venez purifier mon imagination 
M de tous ces hideux objets !" 

Perhaps, if any Situation is more pitiable than that 
which compels us to wifh to efcape from the common 
bufinefs and forms of life, it is that where the fenti- 
ment is forcibly felt, while it cannot be indulged ; and 
where the fuflerer, chained down to the difcharge of 
duties from which the wearied fpirit recoils, feels like 
the wretched Lear, when Shakfpeare makes him ex- 
claim 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES* 121 

■ ' li 

" Oh ! I am bound upon a wheel of fire, 

" Which my own tears do fcald like melted lead." 

SONNET LXXX. 

TO THE INVISIBLE MOON. 

I know not whether this is corre&ly cxpreffed-^ 
1 fufpeft that it is not — What I mean, however, will 
furely be underftood — I addrefs the Moon when not 
vifible at night in our hemifphere. 

" The Sun to me is dark, 

*' And filent as the Moon 

" When (he defer ts the night, 

" Hid in her fecret interlunar cave." 

Milton. Samp/. Agon. 

SONNET LXXXI. 

Firft printed in a Publication for the ufe of Young 
. Perfons, called " Rambles Farther." 



122 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 



Line 6. 
Where briony and woodbine fringe the trees* 

Briony, Bryonia dioica, foliis palmatis, &c. White 
Briony, growing plentifully in woods and hedges, and 
twitting around taller plants. 

Line 8. 
" Murmur their fairy tunes in praife of flowers/' 

A line taken, I believe, from a Poem called " Vacuna," 
printed in Dodfley's colle6lion. 

SONNET LXXXII. 

TO THE SHADE OF BURNS. 

Whoever has t a fled the charm of original genius fo 
evident in the compofition of this genuine Poet, 

A Poet " of nature's own creation," 

cannot furely fail to lament his unhappy life, (latterly 
pafled, as I have underftood, in an employment to 
which fuch a mind as his mud have been averfe,) nor 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 123 

his premature death. For one, herfelf made the object 
of fubfcriptiorty is it proper to add, that whoever has 
thus been delighted with the wild notes of the Scot- 
tifh bard, mud have a melancholy pleafure in relieving 
by their benevolence the unfortunate family he has 
left? 

Line 14. 
" Enjoys the liberty it loved — " 

Pope. 

SONNET LXXXIII. 

Line 1. 
The upland fhepherd, as reclined he lies. 

Suggefled by the recolle&ion of having fcen, fome 
years fince, on a beautiful evening of Summer, an 
engagement between two armed (hips, from the high 
down called the Beacon Hill, near Brighthelmflone. 



124 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES* 



SONNET LXXXIV. 

Line 13. 
Haply may'ft thou one forrowing vigil keep, 
Where Pity and Remebrance bend and weep. 

16 Where melancholy friendfhip bends and weeps." 

Gray* 

SONNETS LXXXV, LXXXVI, 

LXXXVII. 

Firfl printed in a novel called " The Young Philo- 
fopher." 

SONNET LXXXVIII. 

NEPENTHE. 

Of what nature this Nepenthe was, has ever been a 
matter of doubt and difpute. See Wakefield's note to 
Pope's Odyfley, Book iv, verfe 302, 

But the paffage here alluded to runs thus : 
" Meanwhile with genial joy to warm the foul 
Bright Helen mix'd a mirth-infpiring bowl, 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 12£ 

Temper'd with drugs, of fovcrcign ufe t' afluage 

The boiling bofom of tumultuous rage ; 

To clear the cloudy front of wrinkled care, 

And dry the tearful fluices of defpair > 

Charm 'd with that virtuous draught, th' exalted mind 

All fenfe of woe delivers to the wind. 

Tho' on the blazing pile his father lay, 

Or a loved brother groan'd his life away, 

Or darling fon, opprefs'd by ruffian force, 

Fell breathlefs at his feet a manglecl corfe, 

From morn to eve, impaflive and ferene, 

The man entranced would view the death ful fcene : 

Thefe drugs fo friendly to the joys of life, 

Bright Helen learn'd from Thone's imperial wife." 

Milton thus fpeaks of it in Comus : 

" Behold this cordial julep here, 
That flames and dances in his cryftai bounds ! 
Not that Nepenthe, which the wife of Thone 
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena, 
Is of fuch power as this to ftir up joy, 
To life fo friendly, or fo cool to third. 



126 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 

SONNET LXXXIX. 

" I woke, fhe fled, and day brought back my night." 

Milton, 

SONNET XC. 

* 4 See mifery living, hope and plea Cure dead.'* 

•Sir Brook Boothby. 

" Death feems prepared, yet ftill delays to flrike." 

Thomas Warton. 

THE DEAD BEGGAR. 

I have been told that I have incurred blame for 
having ufed in this fhort compofition, terms that have 
become obnoxious to certain perfons. Such remarks 
are hardly worth notice ; and it is very little my am- 
bition to obtain the fuffrage of thofe who fuffer party 
prejudice to influence their tafte ; or of thofe who de- 
fire that becaufe they have themfclves done it, every 
one elfe fhould be willing to fell their befl birth-rights, 
the liberty of thought, and of exprefling thought, for 
the promife of a mefs of pottage. 



QUOTATIONS AMD NOTES. %2*J 

It is furcly not too much to fay, that in a country 
like ours, where fuch immenfe fums are annually raifed 
for the poor, there ought to be fome regulation which 
fibould prevent any miferable deferted being from pe- 
rifhing through want) as too often happens to fuch 
objefts as that on whofe interment thefe flanzas were 
written. 

It is fomewhat remarkable that a circumftance ex- 
actly fimilar is the fubjett of a fhort poem called the 
Pauper's Funeral, in a volume lately publifhed by 
Mr. Southey. 



THE FEMALE EXILE. 

This little Poem, of which a (ketch firft appeared in 
blank verfe in a Poem called " The Emigrants," was , 
fuggefted by the fight of the group it attempts to 
defcribe — a French lady and her children. The draw- 
ing from which the print is taken I owe to the tafte 



128 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES* 

and talents of a lady, whole pencil has bellowed the 
higheft honor this little book can boalL 



OCCASIONAL ADDRESS. 

WRITTEN FOR A PLAYER. 

Line 4. 
The Becca-fica fceks Italian groves, 
No more a Wheat-car— 

From an idea that the Wheat-ear is the Becca-fica 
of Italy, which I doubt. 

Page 34. Line 14. 
An hero now, and now a fans culottc. 

At that time little elfe was talked of. 

Page 36. Line 1 . 
For the' he plough the lea when others lleep, 
He draws like Clendower fpirits from the deep. 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES? 1 29 



G&». " I can call fpirits from the vafly deep." 
Hetfp. " But will they come when you do call for 
" them ?" 

Shakfpcart. 

The fpirits that, animate the night voyages of the 
Suflex fifhermen are often funk in their kegs on any 
alarm from the Cuftom-Houfe officers ; and being 
attached to a buoy, the adventurers go out when the 
danger of detection is over, and draw them up. A 
coarfe fort of white brandy which they call moonjhint, 
is a principal article of this illegal commerce. 

Page 45. Line 2. 
His lifping children hail their fire's return.- 

** No children run to lifp their fire's return." 

Gray, 

Page 45. Line 6. 
And the campaign concludes, perhaps, at Horfham ! 
At Horfham is the county jail. 

VOL. II. K 



*30 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 

■ ■ Bssasassagg 

Page 45. Line 10. 
And foft celeftial mercy, doubly blefL 

■ " It is twice bieued, 
" It bleffeth him that gives and him that takes* 99 

Shdk/pcare. 

DESCRIPTIVE ODE. 

The lingular fccnery here attempted to be defcribed, 
is almoft the only part of this rock of (tones worth 
feeing. On an high broken cliff hang the ruins of 
fome very ancient building, which the people of the 
ifland call Bow and Arrow Caftle, or Rufus' Caftle. 
Beneath, but ftill high above the fea, are the half-fallen 
arches and pillars of an old church, and around are 
fcattered the remains of tomb-ftones, and almoft obli- 
terated memorials of the dead. Thefe verfes were 
written for, and firft inferted in, a Novel, called 
Marchmont ; and the dole alludes to the circumftance 
of the ftory related in the Novel. 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 131 

I i 7 

VERSES 

Suppofed to have been written in the New Foreft, 

in early Spring. 

Thefe are from the Novel of Marchmont. 

Line 1. 
As in the woods where leathery lichen weaves 
Its wint'ry web among the fallow leaves. 

Modes and lichens are the firft efforts of Nature to 
clothe the earth: as they decay, they form an earth 
that affords nourifhment to the larger and more fuccu- 
lent vegetables : feveral fpecies of lichen are found in 
the woods, fpringing up among the dead leaves, under 
the drip of foreft trees : thefe, and the withered foliage 
of preceding' years, afford fhelter to the earlieft wild 
flowers about the Hurts of woods, and in hedge-rows 
and copfes. 

The Pile-wort (Ranuncula Ficaria) and the Wood * 
Anemone (Anemone Nemerofa) or Wind-flower, blow 

K 2 



13* QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 



in the woods and copies. Of this latter beautiful fpe- 
cies there is in Oxfordfhire a blue one, growing wild, 
(Anemone pratenfis pedunculo involucrato, petalis 

apice renews foliis bipinnatis Lin. Sp. PL 760.) 

It is found in Whichwood Foreft, near Cornbury 
quarry* (Vide Flora Oxonienfis). I do not mention 
this by way of exhibiting botanical knowledge (fo eafy 
to poffefs in appearance) but becaufe I never faw the 
Blue Anemone wild in any other place, and it is a 
flower of lingular beauty and elegance. 

Line 1 1 . 
Uncultured bells of azure Jacynths blow. 

Hyacinthus non fcriptus— a Hare-bell. 

Line 12. 
And the breeze-fcenting Violet lurks below. 

To the Violet there needs no note, it being like the 
Nightingale and the Role, in conjiant requijition by 
the poets. 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTE*. 1 33 



SONG. 

FROM THE FRENCH* 

A free tranflation of a favourite French fong. 

" Un jour me dcmandoit Hortenfe 
" Ou fe trouve le tondre amour ?" 

APOSTROPHE 

TO AN OLD TREE. 

The philofophy of thefe few lines may not be very 
correft, fince modes are known to injure the ftems 
and branches of trees to which they adhere ; but the 
images of Poetry cannot always be exactly adjufled to 
objects of Natural Hlftory, 



Line 4. 
fronds of ftudded mofs. 



t^—^h 



The foliage, if it may be fo called, of this race of 
plants, is termed fronds ; and their flowers, or fru&i- 



134 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 

fication, affume the fhapes of cups and fhields ; of thole 
of this dcfcription, more particularly adhering to trees, 
is Lichen Pulmonarius, Lungwort Lichen, vf'xth Jkulds ; 
the Lichen Caperatus, with red cups ; and many others 
which it would look like pedantry to enumerate* 

Line 9. 
The Woodbine and the Clematis are well known 
plants, ornamenting our hedge-rows in Summer with 
fragrant flowers. 

Line 12. 
Nightfhade, (Solanum Lignofum) Woody Nighfc- 
fhade, is one of the mofl beautiful of its tribe. 

Page 59. Line 1. 
The filver weed, whole corded fillets wove. 

The filver weed, Convolvulus Major (Raii Syn. 275) 
or greater Bind-weed, which, however the beauty of 
the flowers may enliven the garden or the wilds, is 
fo prejudicial to the gardener, and farmer, that it is 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 135 

rrr < " ■ ' — u 



fecn by them with diflike equal to the difficulty of ex- 
tirpating it from the foil* Its cord-like ftalks, plaited 
together, can hardly be forced from the branches round 
which they have twined themfelves* 

THE FOREST BOY. 

Late circumftances have given rife to many mourn- 
ful hiftories like this, which may well be faid to be 
founded irv truth !■ I, who have been fo fad a fuf- 
ferer in this miferable conteft, may well endeavour to 
affociate myfelf with thofe who apply what powers 
they have to deprecate the horrors of war* Gracious 
God! will mankind never be reafonable enough to 
underfland that all the miferies which our condition 
fubje&s us to, are light in companion of what we bring 
upon ourfelves by indulging the folly and wickednefs 
of thofe who make nations deflroy each other for 
their diverfion, or to adminifter to their fenfelefs am- 
bition* 



I36 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES, 



•If the ftroke of war 



Fell certain on the guilty head, none elfe— 
If they that make the caufe might tafte th'effe&, 
And drink themfelves the bitter cup they mix ; 
Then might the Bard (the child of peace) delight 
To twine frefh wreaths around the conqueror's brow ; 
Or haply ftrike his high-toned harp, to fwell 
The trumpets martial found, and bid them on 
When Jfujiice arms for vengeance ; but, alas ! 
That undiftinguifhing and deathful dorm 
Beats heavieft on the expofed and innocent ; 
And they that ftir its fury, while it raves, 
Safe and at diftance fend their mandates forth 
Unto the mortal minifters that wait 
To do their bidding !— Crowe. 

I have in thefe ftanzas, entitled the Foreft Boy, at- 
tempted the roeafure fo fuccefefully adopted in one of 
the poems of a popular novel, and fo happily imitated 
by Mr. Southey in " Poor, Mary .'• 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. 137 

1 ' " ■ i 



ODE TO THE POPPY. 

This and the following Poem were written (the firft 
of them at my requeft, for a Novel) by a lady whofe 
death in her thirty-fix th year was a fubjeft of the 
deepeft concern to all who knew her. 

Would to God the laft line which my regret on that 
lofs drew from me, had been prophetic — and that my 
heart had indeed been cold, inftead of having fuffered 
within the next twelve months after that line was 
written, a deprivation which has rendered my life a 
living death. 

APRIL, 

Line 4. 
From their mofs'd cradles, &c. 

The Oak, and, in flieltered (ituations, the Beech, 
retain the leaves of the preceding year till the new 
foliage appears. 



138 'quotations and notes* 

The return of the Spring, which awakens many to 
new fcntiments of pleafure, now lerves only to remind 
me. of paft mifery. 

This fenfation is common to the wretched—and too 
many Poets have felt it in all its force. 

" Zenro torno, el bel tempo rimena, 
" £ i fiori, e l'erbe, fua dolce famiglia ; &c &c* 
■ ■ . " Ma per me laflb !"— 

Petrarch on the Death of Laura* 

And thefe lines of Guarini have always been cele- 
brated. 

" Q primavera gioventu dell' annoj 

" Bella madre di fiori 

" D'erbe novelle e di novelli amori ; 

" Tu torni ben, ma teco 

** Non tornano i fereni 

C( £ fortunati di, delle mie gioje ; 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES, *%g 

** Tu torni ben, tu torni, 

** Ma teco altro non torna 

" Che del perduto mio caro teforo, 

" La rimembranza mifera e dolente," 

ODE TO DEATH. 

From tbe following fentence in Lord Bacon's 
Eflays. 

" Death is no fuch formidable enemy, fince a man 
" has fo many champions about him that can win the" 
u combat of him— Revenge triumphs over Death ; 
" Love flights it ; Honour courts it ; Dread of Dif- 
* : grace choofes it ; Grief flies to it ; Fear anticipates 
" it." 

L Y D I A. 

The Juniper and the Yew are almoft the only trees 
that grow fpontaneoufly on the higbeft chalky hills, 
and they are often ragged and Hunted by the violence 
of the wind* 



140 QUOTATIONS AND NOTES* 



Some of the mod elevated mounds of earth' on thefe 
hills are fea-marks, and have formerly furrounded bea- 
cons ; others are considered as memorials of the dead, 
and are called Saxon, Danifh, or Roman, according to 
the fyftems of different obfervers. 

Page 107. Line 6. 
But the red flames of burning lime. 

From eminences in thofe countries where lime is 
burnt as a manure, a chain of lime kilns for many 
miles may be fometimes feen, which blazing amid the 
doubtful darkneis of an extend ve landfcape, have a 
fine effect. 

. Page 107. Line 7. 
The Horfeman's ghoft. 

Some years ago a flrange notion prevailed among 
the people occafionally pafling over one of the higheft 
of the South Downs, that a man on horfeback was 
often feen coming towards thofe who were returning 
from market on Saturday evening. This appearance, 



QUOTATIONS AND NOTES. I4I 

1 

— — — — — — — — — ■ — — — — ^— « 1 ■ >— — — — — ■— m 

the noife of whofe horfe's feet they cjiftin&ly heard, 
vanifhed as foon as it came within an hundred yards 
of the paffengers who often tried to meet it. At other 
times it was fcen following them. They have flopped 
to let it approach, but it always melted into air. I 
have been prefent when a farmer not otherwife parti- 
cularly weak or ignorant, faid, that he had feen it, and 
diftin&ly heard the horfe galloping towards him. 

Page 108. Line 2. 

* 

Her (ilver pathway on the fea. 

The bright luftre of the moon refle&ed from the 
fea, is almoft as diftinttly viuble from the Downs as 
the moon itfelf ; forming a long line of radiance from 
the horizon to the fhore. 



THE END. 



Printed by R. No Bin, 
Shire. Lane, 



p-4 ? t ^y 




Directions for placing the Plates* 

The Portrait to face the Title Page* 

Plate I. 

Tlate II. 

Plate III. - - - 

Plate IV- 



Page ii 

— 39 

— 74 

— 78 



New Editions of the following Works, all writtea 
by Charlotte Smith, have been lately publifhed 
by T. Cad ell, jun. and W. Davies, in the Strand, 



l. Elegiac Sonnets, and other Poems. Vol. I. 
Elegantly printed in a pocket volume, and adorned 
with plates. 6s. in boards. 

2* The Emigrants, a Poem. 4to. 3s. in boards* 

■3. Rural Walks : in Dialogues, intended for the 
ufe of Young Perfons. 2 vols* 4s. half bound. 

4. Rambles Farther : a continuation of Rural 
Walks. 2 vols. 4s. half bound. 

5. Emmeline, The Orphan of the Castle. 
A Novel. 4 vols. 12s. fewed. 

•6. Ethelinde, The Rechjse of the Lake. 
A Novel. 5 vols. 1 5s. fewed. 

7. Celestina, a Novel. 4 vols. 12s. fewed. 

1 

*8. The Banished Man, a Novel. 4 vols. 14s, 
fewed. 

9. The Romance op Real Life. 3 vols. 9s. 
fewed. 

*o. The Young Philosopher, a Novel. 4 vols. 
i6s. fewed.
